
[Pageiv+ 17]
;
; TITLE
;
<H>A SANSKṚIT-ENGLISH
DICTIONARY
ETYMOLOGICALLY AND PHILOLOGICALLY ARRANGED
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO
GREEK, LATIN, GOTHIC, GERMAN, ANGLO-SAXON
AND OTHER COGNATE INDO-EUROPEAN LANGUAGES
BY
MONIER WILLIAMS, M.A.
BODEN PROFESSOR OF SANSKṚIT IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.
<H>{@Oxford:@}
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS.
SOLD BY MACMILLAN AND CO., PUBLISHERS TO THE UNIVERSITY,
29 AND 30, BEDFORD STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON;
AND BY W. H. ALLEN AND CO.
13, WATERLOO PLACE, LONDON.
M DCCC LXXII.
[{%All rights reserved%}]
;
; PREFACE
;
[Pagev+ 45]
<H>PREFACE.
<P>A WORK of the kind here submitted to the students of Sanskrit must be left to prove
its usefulness by actual experiment. Nevertheless the plan of the present Dictionary is so
novel that I must crave permission to introduce it with a longer explanation than might
otherwise be needed. To conduce to greater clearness I propose distributing my prefatory
statements under the following separate heads:
<P>1. Reasons for undertaking a New Sanskrit Dictionary.
<P>2. Plan and Arrangement of the Present Work.
<P>3. Extent of Sanskrit Literature comprehended.
<P>4. Alphabet and System of Transliteration employed.
<P>5. Principal Sources drawn upon in the Process of Compilation.
<P>6. Aids and Encouragements received.
<P>7. Defects and Inconsistencies acknowledged.
;
; PREFACE: Reasons for undertaking a New Sanskrit Dictionary.
;
<H>SECTION 1.
{%Reasons for undertaking a New Sanskrit Dictionary.%}
<P>In the forefront must be placed the growing importance assigned by philologists to the
oldest branch of the great Indo-European speech-stem, of which English is a modern offshoot.
An intricate language destined to occupy the foremost rank throughout Europe as an instrument
of linguistic training needs greater facilities for its acquisition. Some may smile at the idea of
any Oriental language acquiring greater weight as an instrument of training among Occidental
peoples whose vigorous mental faculties require a more suitable discipline for their development.
Be it remembered, however, that Sanskrit is, in one sense, the property of Europe as well as of
India. Its relationship to some of our own languages is as close as to some of the Hindū dialects.
It is a better guide than either Greek or Latin to the structure, historical connection, and correlation
of the whole Indo-European family. It is a more trustworthy authority in the solution of recondite
philological problems. Its study involves a mental discipline not to be surpassed.
<P>Not even the most superficial observe can possibly be blind to the educational movement
now spreading everywhere. Perhaps, however, some of us, trained under the old system, are
carcely yet alive to the forces which are at work for infusing new blood (if I may be allowed
the phrase) into the whole body of our teaching. Not only must Greek and Latin be taught
more thoroughly and scientifically, if they are to hold their own as the best trainers of thought
and enforcers of accuracy
<F>*) Thoroughness in our teaching of Greek and Latin will never
be effected until we lead our pupils to look more into the inti-
nate internal constitution of these languages in their correlation
to each other and to the other members of the Āryan family.
To this end Sanskrit is indispensable. French again will never
be taught as it ought to be till our boys are made to under-
stand its connection with Latin in every part of its grammatical
structure. I hail such an excellent work as the ‘Historical
Grammar of the French Tongue by Auguste Brachet,’ trans-
lated by the Rev. G.W. Kitchin, as an evidence that we are
beginning to realize the defects in our present system of linguistic
training.</F>, but modern languages and modern literature can no longer be thrust
aside or only employed to fill up the gaps in our system of instruction. All the nations of the
[Pagevi+ 55]
civilized world are being drawn into closer intercommunion. The rapid advance of science in
England, Germany, France, and Italy has forced natural science upon us as a neceassary element
of all mental culture, making also an interchange of thought between these countries indispensable.
Eastern languages too, both Semitic and Āryan, are pressing peremptorily on the attention of
our Universities
<F>*) See the notes on the Semitic and Āryan languages at pp. viii,
ix of this Preface. Cambridge is at this moment engaged in esta-
blishing both a Semitic and Indian languages Tripos. Although
our system of ‘Schools’ at Oxford is somewhat different, yet,
I hope, we shall not be behind the Sister University in our
encouragement of these languages.</F>. Hebrew and Armaic must now be studied by all our younger clergy, if they
are to hold their own in the conflict of theological parties or present a bold front towards sceptical
assailants. A knowledge of Arabic is essential to a right understanding of the literature, religion,
and social institutions of the millions of our Muslim fellow-subjects. Some of the dialects of India
must be mastered by all who have communication with the tens of millions of our Hindū brethren.
Lastly, all the branches of the two great stems of speech are now proved to be so closely inter-
dependent, and the permutations of sounds in passing through the varying organs of varying types
of the human family are shewn to obey such curiously definite laws, that a new science has been
established
<F>†) The debt which we English scholars owe to Professor Max
Müller for having first introduced us to this science by his well-
known lectures, is too universally acknowledged to require notice
here. I am not sure whether twelve lectures on the principles
of linguistic science by William Dwight Whitney, Professor of
Sanskṛti in Yale College, are quite so well known in this country.
If they are not, I here commend them to all interested in the
study of language, merely remarking that their excellence is too
obvious to require any praise from me.</F>. This science has for its field of investigation not any one particular language, but
the whole area of human speech, and as it inquires into the laws governing the living organs of
utterance as well as the living organic growth of the actual sounds themselves, may be said to
trench not only on Ethnology, but even on Biology. This ‘science of language’ might with more
propriety be called ‘Glossology’ than Philology. In its method of investigation it has much in
common with the natural sciences, and though its analogy to these ought not to be strained beyond
a mere analogy, yet as a veritable science dealing with one of the grandest distinctive attributes
of human nature, it can no more be left out of any modern educational programme than any of
the natural sciences properly so called. With the ‘Glossologist’ every spoken word is like a plant
or animal in the hands of a Biologist; its birth, growth, transformations, and decay must all be
accounted for: its whole structure dissected limb by limb; every appendage traced to its
appropriate use and function; its deepest internal constitution analyzed.
<P>Will it be denied, then, that Sanskrit is destined to increasing cultivation, as the one typical
scientific language whose structure is a master-key to the structure of all languages, whose very
name implies ‘Synthesis,’ and whose literature, commencing with the Ṛig-veda about 1500 B.C.,
extends in a continuous line for nearly 3000 years, throwing a flood of light on the operation
of linguistic laws?
<P>In point of fact the Hindūs may be said to be the original inventors of the ‘science of language.’
Like the Greeks, they are the only nation who have worked out for themselves the laws of thought
and of grammar independently. If their system of logic is inferior to that of Aristotle, they are
unequalled in their examination into the constitution of speech. The name Vyākaraṇ, which they
give to their grammar, implies ‘decomposition’ or ‘resolution of a compound into its parts,’ just as
Saṉskaraṇa implies the re-composition or re-construction of the same decomposed elements.
Every single word in their classical language is referred to a Dhātu or Root, which is also a name
for any constitutent elementary substance, whether of rocks or living organisms. In short, when we
follow out their grammatical system in all the detail of its curious subtleties and techincalities, we
seem to be engaged, like a Geologist, in splitting solid substances, or, like a Chemist, in some
elaborate process of analysis.
[Pagevii+ 61]
<P>Having said so much in support of an effort to facilitate and generlize the study of Sanskrit,
I have now to state my reasons for having addressed myself to a task like the present.
<P>It may not be generally known that the late Professor H.H. Wilson once intended the
compilation of a Dictionary not wholly dissimilar in character and plan to that here offered to
the students of Sanskrit and its cognate languages. This I have heard from himself was what he
intended by the last words of the Preface to his second edition, in which he stated that it
would be his wish as Boden Professor to offer to the cultivators of Sanskrit ‘other and better
assistance.’
<P>It is perhaps also not known that he actually made some progress in carrying out this
intention, though eventually debarred from its prosecution by his other numerous literary labours.
He therefore, about the year 1852, when I had completed the printing of the English-Sanskrit
Dictionary compiled by me for the East-India Company, made over a large manuscript volume,
containing the commencement of his new work, to me, with a request that I would continue it on
the plan sketched out by himself. At the same time he generously presented me with a copious
selection of examples and quotations made by Pandits at Calcutta, under his direction, from
a considerable range of Sanskrit literature. It has become necessary for me to state theses
circumstances at the risk of being charged with egotism, because the publication of the first part
of Professor Goldstücker's Dictionary has made Orientalists aware that Professor Wilson entrusted
the printing of a third edition of his Dictionary to that learned scholar, whose recent death is felt by
all Sanskritists to be an irreparable loss
<F>*) It is stated in a notice of the late Professor Goldstücker's
life, which appeared in a recent number of a well-known scientific
periodical, that many thousands of notes and references for the
new edition of Wilson's Sanskrit Dictionary and other works, the
result of an unremitting study of the MSS. treasures at the India
House &c., are left behind by Professor Goldstücker. With refer-
ence to this matter, I ought in justice to the present learned and
courteous librarian of the India Office, as well as in justice to my
own Dictionary, to put on record, that soon after his appoint-
ment, Dr. Rost offered to allow me also the use of any of these
MSS. treasures if I would name any likely to be useful to myself.
Knowing, however, that about eighty MSS., including those I
needed most, were doing good service at the house of Professor
Goldstücker, aiding him day by day in the elaboration of his
Dictionary, I did not feel justified in interrupting the prosecution
of so large a work for the sake of any advantage that might have
accrued to my own less weighty performance. Moreover, I felt
that I could not in justice interrupt the continuity of Professor
Goldstücker's labours, when I had the use of the Wilsonian Col-
lection belonging to the Bodleian, which, however inferior to
those at the India Office in the departments required by a lexi-
cographer, were still freely placed at my command by our own
learned and obliging librarian, the Rev. H. O. Coxe.</F>. From what I have now notified, however, it will, I trust,
be quite understood that the work committed to me by one who was first my master, and
afterwards my wisest guide and truest friend, was not a new edition of his Dictionary, but an
entire remodelling of his scheme of lexicography, consisting of a re-arrangement of all the words
under Roots, according to native principles of etymology, with addition of the examples collected
as above described. Having already completed the English-Sanskrit part of a Dictionary of my
own, I naturally undertook as a sequel the work thus assigned me, especially as the plan com-
mended itself to my own judgement and precdilections. Moreover, I actually carried on the task for
a considerable period between the intervals of other undertakings. Soon, however, it began to be
manifest that the third edition of Professor Wilson's Dictionary was assuming, under Professor
Goldstücker's editorship, almost interminable proportions, so as to become no longer a new edition
of a previous Lexicon, but rather a many-volumed Encyclopædia of Sanskrit learning, which no one
scholar, however persistent, could hope to carry beyond the letter A. At the same time the
Sanskrit-German Wörterbuch of Professors Böhtlingk and Roth, though conducted by two of the
most energetic scholars of the day, and put forth with singular perseverance, appeared to be
expanding into vast dimensions, so as to be quite beyond the compass of ordinary English
students. These circumstances having forced themselves upon my observation, I suddenly deter-
mined to abandon the design of a wholly Root-arranged Dictionary — which could only be useful,
like the works above-named, to the highest class of scholars — and to commence a work on a more
[Pageviii+ 149]
practical plan, which, although raised as far as my powers went, to the level of modern scholarship,
so as to be a sufficiently trustworthy aid in studying the chief departments of literature, including
the Veda, should yet be procurable at a moderate cost, and not extend beyond the limits of one
compact volume. This leads me therefore to
;
; PREFACE: Plan and Arrangement of the Present Work.
;
<H>SECTION 2.
<P>{%Plan and Arrangement of the Present Work.%}
<P>Those who appreciate the value of Sanskrit in its bearing on the philosophy of language will
understand my motive in endeavouring so to arrange this lexicon as to exhibit most effectively that
peculiarity of construction which distinguishes the highest type of the great Indo-European line of
speech. Such persons will comprehend without much explanation the plan pursued by me
throughout these pages in the collocation of words connected by mutual affinities. For the
benefit, however, of younger students, I now proceed briefly to point out the one grand distinctive
peculiarity of the Āryan dialects which the arrangement of the present Dictionary is intended to
demonstrate — a peculiarity separating them by a sharp line of demarcation from the other great
family of human speech usually called Semitic
<F>*) I use the term ‘Semitic’ out of deference to established
usage, though it leads to some confusion of ideas, because if
‘Semitic,’ or mroe properly ‘Shemitic,’ be used for the languages
of the descendants of Shem, then ‘Japhetic’ (instead of ‘Āryan’)
should be used for the descendants of Japhet. We cannot, how-
ever, give up the epithet Āryan (from the Sanskrit {%ārya,%} ‘noble’)
for our own Indo-European languages, suited as it certainly is to
that noblest of all families of speech. The Rev. F.W. Farrar
suggests adopting the term ‘Syro-Arabian’ as well as Semitic for
the other family. Still the name Semitic may well be applied
to Hebrew, Aramaic [including perhaps one set of cuneiform
inscriptions, Chaldee and Syriac], and Arabic, because in the tenth
chapter of Genesis, Shem is represented as father of Elam (who
peopled Elymais), Assur (Assyria), Lud (Lydia), Aram (Syria),
and of Arphaxad, grandfather of Eber, from whom came the
Hebrews — or Trans-Euphratian race, the name Hebrew really
meaning ‘one who lives beyond a river’ — and Joktan, father of
Sheba, father of Himyar, whence came the Arabians. Mr.
Farrar states in his useful lectures that the Semitic nations may
number about 40 millions, compared with about 400 millions of
the Indo-Europeans. Among Semitic races come the people of
Abyssinia. These have special languages of their own, viz. the
Ethiopic or Geez, which is their sacred and literary language
only, and the spoken dialects called Tigré, Tigriṅa, for the
north and north-east, and Amharic, for the centre and south;
the former being nearer to Ethiopic than the latter, and all being
connected with the Semitic, as derived through the ancient Him-
yaritic Arabic of South Arabia (Yaman).</F>.
<P>Happily it is now a familiar fact to most educated persons that the Indo-European or Aryan
languages (of which Sanskrit is the eldest sister
<F>†) Though the younger sisters sometimes preserve older forms.</F>, and English one of the youngest) proceeded from
a common but nameless and unknown parent, whose very home in Asia cannot be absolutely fixed,
though the locality may conjecturally be placed somewhere in the region of Bokhāra, near the
river Oxus. From this centre radiated, as it were, eight principal lines of speech; first, the two
Asiatic lines, 1. Indian, 2. Īrānian, (the former eventually comprising Sanskrit, Pāli, Prākrit, and the
modern Prākrits or spoken languages of the Hindūs, such as Hindī, Marāṭhī, Gujarātī, Bengālī, &c.;
the latter comprising ({%a%}) Zand, old Persian, Pahlavī, modern Persian, and Pushtū; ({%b%}) Armenian);
and then the six European lines, viz. 1. Keltic, 2. Hellenic, 3. Italic, 4. Teutonic, 5. Slavonic,
6. Lithuanian, each branching into various sub-lines or ramifications as exhibited in the present
languages of Europe
<F>‡) As this is the first Oriental Dictionary put forth by any
English scholar which attempts to introduce abundant com-
parisons between the various members of the Indo-European
family, I here append a brief account of the Āryan cognate
languages beginning with the Indian. 1. By Pāli or Pālī is meant
one of the oldest forms of the ancient provincial Hindū-ī lan-
guage of which Sanskrit is the learned form, (see p. xiii of
Preface.) It must have been spoken either in Magadha or in
some district not far from Oude, where Buddha flourished, and
being carried by the Buddhists into Ceylon became their sacred
language, and is preserved in their canonical scriptures called
Tri-piṭaka. Prākrit is the name given to other and later pro-
vincial forms of Sanskrit, which were the precursors and parents
of the present Hindū dialects, Hindī, Marāṭhī, &c., see note,
p. xvii. These latter may be called modern Prākrits. 2. Now
as to the Īrānian: ({%a%}) Zand or Zend (old Bactrian) is to old
Persian and Pahlavī what Sanskrit is to Pāli and Prākrit. It
is that ancient language of Persia in which the sacred books are
written, called Zand Avastā, belonging to the Pārsīs (or fugitives
from Persia scattered on the coast of India, and still believers in the
religion founded by Zardusht or Zoroaster). Old Persian is a name
given to the dialect preserved in one set of cuneiform inscriptions,
about contemporaneous with Zand. Pahlavī (sometimes written
Pehlevī) is a later Īrānian dialect, which once possessed an exten-
sive literature. A more recent Īrānian dialect is Pārsī or Pāzand,
leading to the modern Persian which sprang up in Perisia not long
after the Muhammadan conquest (about A.D. 1000), the earliest
form of which, as represented in the Shāh-nāmah of Firdausī, has
little admixture of Arbic, while the later is flooded with it. Pushtū
is the present language of Afghānistān. ({%b%}) Armenian is of course
the language of Armenia; it has two forms the old Armenian or
literary language, which is dead, and the modern Armenian, said
to be split into four dialects containing many Turkish words.
Connected with these is the Ossetic of the Ossetes, a Caucasian
tribe. We now come to the six European lines: 1. The Keltic or
Celtic (of the <lang n="greek">Κελτοί</lang> Herod. II. 33) is the oldest of the Āryan
family in Europe, and as it has had the longest life, so it presents
the greatest divergence from Sanskrit: it has been driven into
a corner of the continent, viz. Brittany, by Romanic French, and
into the extremities of Cornwall, Wales, Ireland, and the High-
lands of Scotland by Germanic English: it has two lines, ({%a%}) the
principal Keltic or Gaelic (of the Galli), comprising the Irish,
Highland-Scotch, and Manx, of which the Irish is most interest-
ing in relation to Sanskrit; ({%b%}) the Kymric form of Keltic, in-
cluding Welsh, Cornish (now extinct), and Armorican, which last
is the name given to the language of Brittany. 2. The Hellenic
comprises ancient Greek with its dialects (most interesting in its
close affinity to Sanskrit, and most important in its bearing on
the original of the New Testament, though far less remarkable
in its bearing on other European languages than Latin), and
modern Greek usually called Romanic (infinitely nearer to the
ancient Greek than the Romanic languages are to Latin). 3. The
Italic comprises, of course, Latin with its Romanic (or Roamance)
offspring, viz. Italian, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Wallachian,
and Provençal; and includes some old Italian diatlects, such as
the Oscan of the Samnites in southern Italy, Umbrian spoken in
north-eastern Italy and Sabine. 4. The Teutonic comprises ({%a%})
Gothic, which is the Sanskrit of the Teutonic languages, especially
of Low German; it was spoken by the ancient Gothic peoples who
belonged to the Germanic race, and were divided into eastern and
western Goths; a part of the latter being allowed by the Romans
to settle in the province of Mœsia, near the mouth of the Danube,
became converts to Christinity, and happily their bishop Ulfilas
fixed their language by translating nearly all the Bible; a remnant
of his translation has been preserved, otherwise this dialect,
sometimes called Mœso-Gothic, would have been lost, and with
it a most important key to Teutonic philology: ({%b%}) German,
divided into two branches, viz. 1st, Low German, which is subdi-
vided into four, viz. Saxon (sometimes called Old Saxon), leading
to Anglo-Saxon and English; Frisian, once largely spoken by the
Frisian tribes (Lat. {%Frisii%}) who dwelt on the north-west coast of
Germany, and closely connected with English; Dutch, current of
course in Holland; Flemish, spoken in that part of Belgium called
Flanders; 2ndly, High German, subdivided into old, middle, and
new, the last bringing us to modern German: ({%c%}) Scandinavian,
divided into four, viz. Norse, i. e. old and new Icelandic (nearly
alike and most valuable as preserving the original structure of the
whole Scandinavian group), Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish,
the two latter only differing in pronunciation. 5. The Slavonic
comprises ({%a%}) old Slavonic or old Bulgarian, being to the Slavonic
what Gothic is to the Teutonic, and similarly preserved in a trans-
lation of the Bible made by Cyril: ({%b%}) Russian, divided into
Russian proper, Little Russian: ({%c%}) Polish, with other less notice-
able Slavonic dialects, viz. Polabian, Bohemian, Sorbian, Servian,
Kroatian, and Slovenian. 6. The Lithuanian is sometimes regarded
as a branch of the Slavonic line, to which it is more nearly
related than to the Teutonic; it is interesting as coming nearer to
Sanskrit in some of its forms than any other member of the Āryan
family, and as having a dual, like the Gothic, and seven cases; it
is still spoken by a limited number in Russian and Prussian pro-
vinces on the coast of the Baltic, but is disappearing before
Russian and German; a more modern form of it is Lettish,
spoken in Livonia: another kindred dialect is Old Prussian, once
spoken in north-eastern Prussia, but now extinct.</F>. Now, if the question be asked, What most striking feature distinguishes all
[Pageix+ 27]
these languages from the Semitic? My answer is, that the main distinction lies in the character of
their roots or radical sounds; for although both Āryan and Semitic forms of speech are called
‘inflective
<F>*) As distinguished from ‘monosyllabic,’ like the Chinese;
and ‘agglutinative,’ like the Drāviḍian, Turkish, and other mem-
bers of an immense class of languages in which the termination
is easily separable from the body of the word. These are still
called by some Tūrānian (from Tūr, eldest, son of Farīdūn, to
whom he assigned Turkistān, thence called Tūrān).</F>,’ it should be well understood that the inflectiveness of the root in the two cases implies
two wholly different processes.
<P>Let me first briefly advert to the Semitic form. A Semitic root then may be described as a
kind of hard frame-work consisting generally of three consonants which resemble three sliding but
inflexible upright limbs, moveable hither and thither to admit on either side the intervenient vowels
and certain merely ancillary consonants, usually called ‘servile.’ These subservient letter are, it is
true, of the utmost importance to the diverse colouring of the radical idea, and the perfect precision
of their operation is noteworthy, but their presence within and without the rigid frame of the
root is, so to speak, almost overpowered by the ever prominent consonantal skeleton. In illustra-
tion of this we may take the Arabic triliteral root KTB, using capitals for these radical consonants
to indicate their prominence; the third pers. sing. past tense is KaTaBa, ‘he wrote,’ and from the
same three consonants, by means of various vowels and servile letters, are developed a number
of other forms, of which the following are specimens: KaTB, writing; KāTiB, a writer; maKTūB,
written; taKTīB, causing to write; muKāTaBat, corresponding by letter; iKTāB, dictating;
taKāTuB, writing to one another; mutaKāTiB, one who keeps up a correspondence; maKTaB,
the place of writing, a writing-school; KiTāB, a book; KiTBat or KiTāBat, inscription
<F>†) For a further insight into these Arabic formations, the student
is referred to a chapter on the use of Arabic words in my ‘Prac-
tical Hindūstānī Grammar,’ published by Longman & Co.</F>.
[Pagex+ 59]
<P>An Āryan root on the other hand, as best typified by a Sanskrit radical, is generally a single
monosyllable, which may be compared to a malleable substance capable of being drawn out to
express every modification of an original conception. And this malleability, as it were, arises
chiefly from the circumstance that the vowel is recognized as a constituent part of the radical,
blending with its very substance, and even sometimes standing alone as itself the only root.
Sanskrit exhibits better than any other member of the Aryan line of speech this characteristic
root-expansibility. More than this, it exemplifies better than any other that excessive {%root-%}
{%accretiveness%} (if I may use the term) by which not only terminations and prefixes are grafted upon
or welded into the original monosyllabic stock, but affix is affixed to affix, prefix is prefixed to
prefix, derivative is derived from derivative, compound is compounded with compound in an almost
interminable chain. In illustration of this the student is referred to such roots as 1. {%kṛ,%} p. 245;
1. {%bhū,%} p. 714; 1. {%śru,%} p. 1026; 1. {%sthā,%} p. 1145 of this volume.
<P>Hence it becomes evident that the original plan of Professor Wilson, by which every single
word would have been represented in regular sequence, growing, as it were, from its own parent stem,
would have realized the true conception of a perfect Sanskrit Dictionary. Verily if Greek
lexicography has been occasionally so treated, much more has Sanskrit, the great type of linguistic
constructiveness, a right so to be.
<P>I have now to show how far the present work satisfies this ideal. It is sometimes calculated,
that there are about two thousand distinct roots in this language. If it be supposed that there are
about eighty thousand distinct words growing out of these two thousand roots, a Dictionary on the
usual alphabetical plan must have consisted of a series of eighty thousand monographs, each
independent of the other; and, indeed, such a Dictionary might have been thought most agreeable
to the common notion of a really practical work. It seemed to me, however, that a Dictionary so
planned would have afforded little effective aid to the study of Sanskrit, in its connection with
comparative philology. On the other hand, it must be confessed that the idea of taking root by
root, and writing, as it were, two thousand biographies, each giving a connected history of a distinct
family allied together by a common pedigree was a philological dream too unpractical to be wholly
realized. Some middle course, therefore, satisfying the requirements both of philology and of
ordinary practice seemed most to be desired, and the following publication, though not answering
the perfect philological ideal, is intended as an attempt at combining a partial root-arrangement
with a convenient alphabetical order suited to ready reference.
<P>In unison with this design, the roots of the language — always brought prominently before the
eye by large Nāgarī type — will be found treated more exhaustively in the present work, both as
regards the meanings given and the forms exhibited, than in any other Sanskrit-English Dictionary
yet published
<F>*)I cannot sufficiently acknowledge my debt to Westergard's
Radices. The copy I have had for about thirty years tells
a tale of constant reference. Indeed we have to thank Danish,
quite as much as German scholars, for what they have done
towards promoting linguistic culture.</F>. It is evident that a great many of these roots, or Dhātus, as they are called by
native lexicographers, are not really elementary radicals, but compounds or developments of simpler
elements. I have not always ventured to pronounce categorically as to which of two or more roots
is the simplest form, but when roots are evidently allied, their connection is conspicuously indicated
in the following pages. Thus I hope to have drawn attention to a point which English scholars
have hitherto greatly overlooked
<F>†) The number of distinct radical forms in Wilkins' collection
is 1750, but as many forms having the same sound have different
meanings, and are conjugated differently, they are held to be
distinct roots, and the number is thereby swelled to 2490.
Probably, the real number of elementary radicals in Sanskrit
might be reduced to a comparatively small catalogue. Some
roots containing dentals have been cerebralized or vice versâ, and
both forms are allowed to co-exist, as {%bhan%} and {%bhaṇ, dhan%} and
{%dhaṇ;%} others whose initials are aspirated consonants have passed
into other aspirated consonants or retained only the aspirate; and
all forms co-exist in {%bhṛ, dhṛ, dhvṛ, hvṛ,%} &c. Again, such a
root as {%svad%} is probably nothing but a compound of {%su%} and root
{%ad,%} and such roots as {%stubh, stumbh, stambh%} are plainly mere modi-
fications of each other.</F>.
[Pagexi+ 52]
<P>Furthermore, the plan now first carried out of arranging all verbs formed from roots by prefixing
prepositions in their proper alphabetical order and at the head of their own deriviatives, will be
noted as a marked feature of originality and individuality. The labour entailed by the simple
process of thus re-arranging the verbs in a languages sor rich in prepositions, can only be understood
by other lexicographers
<F>*) Why should not Sanskrit lexicons have been brought into
harmony with Greek in this respect long ere this? Greek is
almost as free in its use of prepositions, e. g. <lang n="greek">συμπαραβἀλλω</lang>
<lang n="greek">συμπαρακαθἐζομαι</lang></F>. But even this re-arrangement has not caused so much difficulty as
the attempt to exhibit what may be termed {%the kinship of words,%} by distributing the greater part of
the vocabulary of the language in families, or rather, if I may so express myself, in family-groups
<F>†) Even in English this might advantageously be done, as, for
example, it would be very instructive to see such words as {%share,%}
{%shire, shore, shears,%} &c. arranged under ‘{%shear,%}’ to cut off, separate.
Richardson in his great Dictionary has to a certain extent carried
out this idea. See on this subject ‘Archbishop Trench on the
Study of Words.’</F>.
These groups are, as far as possible, collected under roots or leading words, which stand, as it were,
at the head of the family, and are always distinguished from the rest by Nāgarī type in the manner
more fully explained in the table of directions at the end of the Preface. Such a re-distribution of
the vocabulary has often necessitated the separation of roots and homonyms under two, three, or
more heads, each with its train of derivatives, subderivatives, and associated words, which in other
Dictionaries would be brought together under one article
<F>‡) See, for example, the roots 1. {%su,%} 2. {%su,%} 3. {%su,%} 4. {%su,%} at p. 1117,
and 1. {%kāla,%} 2. {%kāla,%} at pp. 224, 225.</F>. An abundant return, however, has been
reaped, if philological precision has been thus promoted, and facility afforded for viewing synoptically
and comparing together the etymological history of the words so collocated.
<P>Besides the obvious advantage of this arrangement to the philologically-minded student, great
saving of space has been thus effected; all necessity for repeating derivations under each head
being thus avoided, and the power gained of leaving many meanings to be inferred from one or
other member of a group, instead of constantly reiterating them. For it must be borne in mind
that all the series included under the same heading in Nāgarī type are to be regarded as cohering;
so that all derivatives, whether primary or secondary, and all compound words following in
regular sequence, may be studied in their mutual bearing and correlation both as illustrating each
other and as contributing to throw light on the modifications of meaning evolved from the radical
idea. These meanings, too, have not been thrown together in a heap, as they have been hitherto in
some Oriental Dictionaries, but an attempt has been made to set them forth according to their
logical development. The further advantage gained in space by the free use of Roman type
will be explained under Section 4.
<P>Conspicuously, again, in an enumeration of the more noteworthy features of the present publica-
tion, should certainly be placed the introduction of abundant comparisons from cognate languages,
which no other Lexicon published by English scholars has, I believe, hither to attemtpted to the
same extent. I must at once distinctly notify that for these comparisons I have not trusted to my
own judgment, but have followed the authority of the eminent German scholars whose names
will be mentioned subsequently.
<P>Another distinctive characteristic of this Dictionary consists in the articles on mythology,
literature, religion, and philosophy, which will be found scattered everywhere throughout its pages.
By consulting Professor Aufrecht's catalogues, Dr. Ballantyne's works, Dr. Fitz-Edward Hall's
writings, Dr. Muir's Sanskrit Texts, Professor M. Müller's Ancient Sanskrit Literature, Dr. Weber's
Indische Studien, Wilson's Viṣṇu-Purāṇa, some Oriental Articles in Chambers'Encyclopædia — written,
I believe, by the late Professor Goldstücker, — and my own collection of notes, I have been able to
furnish the student with much valuable information on many subjects not hitherto treated of in any
[Pagexii+ 45]
Dictionary. Let him observe, for instance, what is written under the words Viṣṇu, Śiva, Veda,
Manas, Sāman, Soma, Sāńkhya, Sauptika-parvan. It will be doubtless said that too many names
of persons, places, and books are introduced. In excuse I have to plead that greater liberty ought
to be allowed to a Sanskrit Dictionary in this respect than to Greek and Latin Lexicons, because
Oriental alphabets have no capital letters. As to the names of books, it may often be useful to
have attention drawn to works, still unprinted, ascertained to exist either in Europe or India.
<P>It may perhaps be objected that there are too many compound words; but again it may be
urged that a Sanskrit Dictionary must not be tried by ordinary laws in this respect, for here again
Sanskrit stands eminently forth as the grand typical representative of the whole Āryan line of
speech, which is throughout distinguished by its love of composition. To exclude compounds from
a Sanskrit Lexicon, would be, so to speak, to ‘Unsanskṛtize’ it. Not only are there certain com-
pounds quite peculiar to Sanskrit, but in the grammar composition almost takes the place of
syntax, and the various kinds of compound words are classified and defined with greater subtlety and
minuteness than would be possible in any other known language of the world. When a student is
in doubt whether to translate compounds like {%Indra-śatru%} as Bahuvrīhis or Tatpurushas, the
Dictionary is surely bound to aid in clearing up his perplexities. Moreover, as few examples are
given or passages quoted in the present work, a limited admission of compounds, under certain
restrictions, serves to illustrate the use of a leading word; for to such words, let it be observed,
they have always been subordinated. After I had formulated my plan, and a large portion of the
work was in type, the Sanskrit Dictionary of Professor Benfey appeared
<F>*) The Sanskrit-French Dictionary of M. Emile Burnouf, which also appeared after much of my work was in type, is an inde-
pendent working out of some ideas similar to my own.</F>, and I was glad to find
that, working independently, I had devised a system supported in some of these particulars by that
philologist. All must agree that as Sanskrit exceeds every other language in its infinite capacity for
composition, no Sanskrit Lexicon, if it admits compounds at all, ought to treat them as if they
were independent enties entitled to a separate existence of their own.
<P>Nevertheless I could never have followed Professor Benfey in placing compound words under
their last member. This method, however philosophical, seems to sacrifice at the shrine of logical
propriety what I have set before myself as a paramount consideration in arranging my own
Dictionary — {%facility of reference.%} For a further explanation of points of detail the student is
referred to the table of directions at the end of the Preface. I now therefore pass on to my
third point.
;
; PREFACE: Extent of Sanskrit Literature comprehended.
;
<H>SECTION 3.
<H>{%Extent of Sanskrit Literature comprehended.%}
<P>I have sometimes been gravely asked by men learned in all the classical lore of Europe,
Has Sanskrit any literature? Such a question proves the urgent need for a work like the present,
which aims at facilitating and making more general the study of a language closely allied
to our own, and still more closely connected with the spoken dialects of our great Indian
Empire — a language, therefore, about whose history every well-educated Englishman ought surely
to know something.
<P>Conscious, then, as my present office has made me of the gerneral ignorance prevalent on
Indian subjects, I may be excused if I preface this part of my Introduction by stating precisely
what I conceive to me implied by the words Sanskrit and Sanskrit literature. By Sanskrit, then,
is not meant any really spoken language of India or even, I hold, any once generally spoken
language. What the word Sanskrit properly represents is, I conceive, {%a certain form%} of the
[Pagexiii+ 64]
language brought by the Indian branch of the great Āryan race into India, the ancient spoken language
of the Hindūs being more suitably styled Hindū-ī, just as its principal later development is called
Hindī
<F>*) I use the word Hindū-ī as a convenient term for the ancient
Bhāshā of the Āryan settlers in the neighbourhood of the Sindhu or
rather of the Hapta Hendu = {%sapta sindhavas.%} It may be thought
that this Bhāshā was identical with the language of the Vedic
hymns. But even Vedic Sanskrit represents a considerable amount
of elaboration scarcely compatible with the notion of a vernacular
dialect (as, for example, in the use of complicated grammatical
forms like Intensives). Pāṇini, in distinguishing between the com-
mon language and the Vedic, uses the terms Bhāshā and Loka.</F>. For in fact that happened in India which has come to pass in all civilized countries. The
spoken vernacular of the people has separated into two lines, the one elaborated by the learned, the
other popularized and variously provincialized by the unlearned
<F>†) Of course the provincialized Prākrits, though not, as I
conceive, derived directly from the learned language, borrowed
largely from the Sanskrit after it was thus elaborated.</F>. In India, however, from the
greater exclusiveness of the educated few, the greater ignorance of the masses and the desire of
a bigoted priesthood to keep the key of knowledge in their own possession, this separation became
more marked, more diversified, and progressively intensified. Hence, the very grammar which with
other nations was regarded only as a means to an end, came to be treated by Indian Paṇḍits as
the end itself, and was subtilized into an intricate science, fenced round by a bristing barrier of
technicalities. The language, too, elaborated {%pari passu%} with the grammar, rejected the natural
name of Hindū-ī, or ‘the speech of the Hindūs,’ and adopted an artificial designation, viz. Sanskrita,
or ‘the perfectly constructed speech,’ to denote its complete severance from the common
tongue (called by contrast Prākrita), and its exclusive dedication to literary and religious purposes.
This of itself is a remarkable circumstance; for although something similar has happened in
Europe, yet we do not find that Latin and Greek ceased to be called Latin and Greek when they
became the language of the learned, any more than we have at present two names for the common
and literary languages of modern nations. These remarks will perhaps conduce to a right appre-
ciation of the nature of a literature which, although elaborated by a learned caste, is still the only
real literature of the Hindū race, the vernaculars having hitherto produced little worthy of
consideration.
<P>Sanskrit literature, it should be remembered, embraces two distinct periods, Vedic and post-
Vedic. The former, beginning with the Ṛig-veda, and extending through the other three Vedas
(viz. the Yajur-veda, Sāma-veda, and Atharva-veda), with their Brāhmaṇas, Upanishads, and Sūtras,
is most valuable to philologists as presenting them with the nearest approach to the original Āryan
language, its earlier works being composed in an ancient form of Sanskrit, which is to the later
what Chaucer's writings are to modern English. The latter commencing with the Code of Manu,
with its train of subsequent important law-books, and extending through the six systems of
philosophy
<F>‡) The systems of philosophy are properly only three: 1. the
Nyāya by Gautama, which is the most practical, and contains
the Hindū system of logic; 2. the Sāńkhya by Kapila, which is
dualistic, asserting the separate existence of soul and matter;
3. the Vedānta by Vyāsa or Bādarāyaṇa, which asserts the unity
of all being: but of each of these respectively there are branches,
viz. ({%a%}) the Vaiśeshika by Kaṇāda; ({%b%}) the Yoga by Pataṅjali;
({%c%}) the Pūrva-mīmāṉsā by Jaimini.</F>, the vast grammatical literature, the immense epics
<F>||) Some idea of the extent of Sanskrit literature may be gained
by comparing the two great epic or heroic poems called the
Mahā-bhārata and Rāmāyaṇa with the Iliad and Odyssey, as I
have attempted to do in the small volume called ‘Indian Epic
Poetry,’ published by Messrs. Williams and Norgate. The
Mahā-bhārata, printed at Calcutta, contains 107,389 verses, each
verse being supposed to consist of two lines. See also my edi-
tion of the ‘Story of Nala,’ published at the Clarendon Press.</F>, the lyric, erotic, and didactic poems,
the Nīti-śāstras, moral tales and apothegms, the dramas, the various treatises on mathematics, rhetoric,
prosody, music, medicine, &c., brings us at last to the eighteen Purāṇas with their succeeding Upa-
Purāṇas, and the more recent Tantras, all of which are worthy of study as the great repositories
of the modern mythologies and popular creeds of India. No one person, indeed, with the limited
powers of mind and body, can hope to master more than one or two departments of so vast a range,
in which scarcely a subject can be named, with the single exception of Historiography, not
furnishing a greater number of treatises than any other language of the ancient world. In some
[Pagexiv+ 55]
subjects too, especially in poetical descriptions of nature and domestic affection, Indian work do
not suffer by a comparison with the best specimens of Greece and Rome, while in the wisdom, depth,
and shrewdness of their moral apothegms they are unrivalled. More than this, the learned Hindūs
had probably made great advances in astronomy, algebra, arithmetic, botany, and medicine, not
to mention their admitted superiority in grammar, long before any of these sciences were cultivated
by the most ancient nations of Europe. Hence it has happened that I have been painfully
reminded during the progress of this Dictionary that a Sanskrit lexicographer ought to aim at
a kind of quasi omniscience. Nor will any previous classical education, such at least as has been
hitherto usual, enable him to explain correctly the scientific expressions which — not borrowed from
the Greeks — are liable to be brought before him. To pretend therefore that the present work,
although probably containing nearly three times as much matter as any other Sanskrit Dictionary
yet published (excepting of course the great Thesaurus of Professors Böhtlingk and Roth, and that of
Rādhākānta-deva), is competent to satisfy the student in every branch of Sanskrit literature, would
manifestly display either ignorance or conceit. Perhaps the departments in which it must be
admitted to be weakest are those of the Veda and philosophy with their respective native com-
mentaries. Still an attempt has been made to supply what has hitherto been almost entirely
neglected by English lexicographers.
<P>In truth, I have felt that no modern Lexicon ought to exclude Vedic words, important as
these are in their philological bearings. I must nevertheless plainly confess that the interpretation
of these words is often so doubtful — often so purely tentative — that I have been sorely perplexed
in my efforts to furnish the student with trustworthy renderings. Of course with the Veda, as with
every other profoundly obscure subject, there is a natural craving for an infallible guide. At the
same time no priestly infallibility is here thought to be attainable; for although the great Brāhman
and Āćārya, Sāyaṇa, lived about five hundred years ago at Vijaya-nagara, an ancient Indian
capital and seat of learning, yet this eminent authority has been altogether put out of court
by modern philological critics. When, however, it is found that modern scholars themselves
frequently differ as much from each other as they do from that once trusted and certainly most
learned Brāhman, it seems hopeless to expect security from error in any particular sect or section
of modern critics and philologists. Notwithstanding these perplexities, I cannot express too
strongly my appreciation of what German scholars have effected in this difficult field of research,
and my gratitude for the aid received from the interpretations of Professors Böhtlingk and Roth.
The authority of these scholars has been generally followed by me, though I have been careful
to give, in addition, the renderings of Sāyaṇa (according to Professor Max Müller's edition
<F>*) It should be mentioned, however, that for the latter part of
the Ṛig-veda I have not had the advantage of Professor Max
Müller's editorial skill. The first volume of his edition of this
work, with Sāyaṇa's commentary, was brought out under the
patronage of the East India Company in 1849. Three other
volumes have since appeared, completing as far as the end of the
eighth Maṇḍala. For the remainder I have been obliged to
trust to an imperfect MS. of Sāyaṇa's commentary in the
Wilsonian Collection belonging to the Bodleian Library. This
is the only Ṛig-veda MS. of any value that I have had it in my
power to employ, as I have not been able to consult the excellent
MSS. belonging to the India Office Library, which others had a
greater right to use than myself. I am informed that a fifth volume
of the Ṛig-veda is about to appear.</F>),
feeling, as I do, rather enthusiastically that this great native commentator, even if he occasionally
misleads, ought never to be ignored.
<P>The foregoing sketch of the nature of Sanskrit literature will, I trust, explain the impossibility
of covering its vast area by any Dictionary in one volume. It will also explain my non-admission
into my pages of the ample store of examples made over to me by my predecessor, the late Professor
H.H. Wilson. These would, at least, have swelled out my one compact volume to an inconvenient
size, if they had not expanded it into two. For the same reason I have been obliged, as a rule, to
forego authenticating my meanings by more than a few scattered references either to passages in
[Pagexv+ 59]
the literature or to the modern authorities on which I have depended for guidance. In this I had
better ground for abstention than my predecessor, seeing that the great work of Professors
Böhtlingk and Roth, the completion of which may be looked for in a few years, will provide
advanced scholars with abundant examples and references to every department of the literature.
I should and that as my main object has been to facilitate and generalize the study of a
difficult language, I have of course abstained from complicating the typography of this volume
by placing accents on Vedic words
<F>*) See the note on Vedic accents, p. xix of this Preface.</F> For a knowledge of these the scholar must again apply to
the great German Wörterbuch.
<P>I come in the next place to a feature in the present publication which, as the four Govern-
ments of Indian have liberally patronized this work, demands an ample explanation.
;
; PREFACE: Alphabet and System of Transliteration employed.
;
<H>SECTION 4.
<H>{%Alphabet and System of Transliteration employed.%}
<P>I fear the great Indian Paṇḍits, if they deem this Dictionary worthy of their notice, will be
somewhat surprised that a work intended as an aid to the study of their literature should exhibit
their venerable Sanskrit clothed in a modern European dress
<F>†) Though some Sanskrit books — such as Profiessor Aufrecht's
Ṛig-veda — printed in the Roman character are much used by
European scholars, it si doubtful whether these have obtained even
a limited circulation in India. I trust, therefore, that when this
volume falls into the hands of any great Paṇḍit, to whom one
of our Indian Governments may present it, he will not consider
that I am degrading Sanskrit like the man who pollutes cow's
milk by putting it into a dog's skin. {%Nahi pūtaṃ syād go-kshīraṃ%}
{%śva-dṛtau dhṛtam;%} cf. Muir's Sanskrit Texts, vol. ii. p. 53, note
97. Of course I know that many native books are printed in
which Sanskrit words are transliterated by Roman letters, but
my desire is to see some standard texts accurately printed in this
character and circulated throughout India. At present the loose
and careless way in which the Roman alphabet is applied tends
to bring the whole system into disrepute. This is exemplified
in writing the names of places and persons as well as in books. A
little work called the Durga-puja [sic] by Pratápachandra Ghosha
has just been received by me from Calcutta. It contains much
useful information, but here we have Sanskrit words transliterated
without any attempt at exactness, e. g. {%Devi, Durga, puja, Purana,%}
{%ashtami, Krshna, Savitri,%} and numberless others.</F>. Let me then crave leave to remind
them that the Romanized character employed in these pages will be found, if its history be inves-
tigated, to be neither modern nor European, and may possibly turn out to be even more ancient
than their sacred Nāgarī, and even more suited to the expression of their sacred Sanskrit.
<P>After all, we English are not only Eastern in our origin, but in many of our most important
surroundings. First, we have received our religion and our Bible through an Eastern people; next,
our language is certainly Asiatic in its affinities; thirdly, we are known to have derived our
invaluable decimal notation, commonly called the ten Arabic numerals, from India through the
Arabs; lastly, the written symbols which I am now employing, and by which this useful vernacular
of ours is, as it were, materialized and sent to the ends of the earth, are certainly Asiatic too.
<P>The East is, we must candidly own, the first source of all our light. We cannot, indeed,
localize in Asia the precise spot whence issued the springs of that grand flow of speech which
spread in successive waves — commencing with the Keltic — over the whole area of Europe; but the
local source of the first alphabet, without which each of these waves of speech must have been in
the end swallowed up and lost in its successor, is well known to have been Phœnicia. The great
centre of the commerce of antiquity naturally gave birth to what was felt to be indispensable to
the intercommunion of national as well as individual life. By the very necessities of trade Phœnicia
invented the first, so to speak, locomotive power which enabled language, embodied in a kind
of material form, to be in a manner exported to distant countries and bartered, like any other
commodity, for language imported in return.
<P>Probably the first Phœnician graphic signs were, like the Chinese, of an ideographic character,
but of this there is said to be no certain evidence. However that may be, it is tolerably clear that
the first Phœnician graphic system, about which we know anything, had not advanced beyond
[Pagexvi+ 55]
the second stage of alphabetic progress. It was, in fact, essentially syllabic, and even to this day the
Semitic alphabets coming immediately from it — viz. the Hebrew, Syriac, and Arabic — are very little
better than syllabic systems. Such an alphabet then, though well suited to Eastern calligraphic
tastes, was manifestly imperfect. It provided chiefly for consonants, as if they were the lords of
sound, instead of its dependents, and often its impediments. The real want for civilized nations,
eager for intercommunication, was a phonetic alphabet, by which neither ideas nor consonants, but
rather {%sounds%} should be symbolized. As therefore vowels are the only real representatives of
sound, and indeed the very life of the word which without them would be a mere hard and
helpless skeleton, it was essential to an effective phonetic system of graphic symbols that vowels
should have at least as prominent a position in a written word as their attendant consonants.
This was very soon felt by the Greeks, who no sooner received a consonantal alphabet from
Phœnicia than they began to remedy its defects, and forthwith invented a system by which the
vowel sounds were properly symbolized and distributed side by side with their consonantal fellows
 — not as mere appendages, but as close companions. The Greek expansion of the Phœnician
alphabet was still further developed by the more practical Romans, and by them spread every-
where throughout Europe
<F>*) The Romans, however, having no proper aspirated conso-
nantal sounds, rejected the Greek <lang n="greek">θ, ϕ, χ</lang> and to represent these
unhappily originated the clumsy {%th, ph, ch,%} writing also {%ps%} for <lang n="greek">ψ</lang></F>.
<P>Now, although the Semitic origin of Indian alphabets has not yet been satisfactorily proved,
it is still probable that the Eastern branch of the Āryan stock which settled down in India, derived
their first idea of symbolizing language by written marks indirectly from Phœnicia through some
neighbouring country whose system was borrowed from Semitic models
<F>†) According to Mr. Edward Thomas (Prinsep's Indian Anti-
quities, vol. ii. p. 42), the theory by which Professor Weber has
sought to establish a Phœnician origin for the Indian alphabets
is untenable. There are, however, two sets of Buddhist inscrip-
tions, and that of Kapurdigiri is decidedly traceable to a
Phœnician source. Those on the rock of Girnar (Giri-nagara)
in Kattywar, Gujarāt, which are said to be most important
in their relation to the present Indian alphabets, are not so
clearly traceable. Mr. Thomas appears to have good ground
for thinking that many of the Nāgarī letters were derived from
the Drāviḍians of the South.</F>. They appear also, like
the Greeks, to have felt the defects of a syllabic or merely consonantal method, and just as they
worked out for themselves their own theory of grammar, so they elaborated for themselves their
own ‘vowelized’ system of writing. Note, however, how the subtle-minded Hindūs, working out
their own ideas in their own philosophical way, have produced an alphabet, not only free from the
defects of the Semitic, but so overdone in its abundance of vowel symbols and its theory of
the mutual relationship of vowels and consonants, that this very elaboration becomes practically
a serious hindrance.
<P>Let me for the benefit of those who may use this Dictionary for philological purposes, without
having acquired a complete familiarity with the Nāgarī letters, briefly point out the most con-
spicuous merits and demerits of the European and Indian systems.
<P>From what I have before advanced, it will, I think, be clear that it ought to be a fixed rule in
all good alphabets, 1st, That every vowel, short and long, should be properly symbolized and
admitted to close companionship with its consonant, no vowel symbol being ever allowed to stand
for any other vowel sound but its own. For example, the ‘a’ sound of ‘ka’ should be properly
symbolized; it should not be supposed to inhere in ‘k;’ nor should it be represented by a mere dot
or stroke, above or below the ‘k,’ as if it were a simple appendage to the consonant, as in Semitic
alphabets. Nor should the symbol ‘a’ be allowed to stand for different vowel sound short and
long, as in ‘tape,’ ‘tap,’ ‘tall,’ ‘tar,’ ‘mortar,’ in every one of which the vowel ought to be variously
symbolized. 2ndly, That every simple consonant should have one single fixed symbol, and never
more than one. For example, the symbol ‘k’ should not be interchangeable with ‘c’ to express the
same consonantal power as in ‘cap’ and ‘keep.’ 3rdly, That modifications of any particular simple
[Pagexvii+ 47]
vowel or consonantal power should not be represented by two letters, but by some modification
of a single symbol. For example, the long form of the vowels {%a, i, u%} should not be denoted by
two letters, as in our word ‘hoop,’ but by some mark or stroke placed over these vowels (so that
‘hoop’ should be written ‘hūp’). Similarly, the aspiration of {%k, t, p,%} ought not to be represented
by two letters as in {%kh, th, ph,%} but by some mark attached to {%k, t, p;%} thus such a word as {%phala%}
should be written {%ṕala,%} and {%dhana, d́ana;%} or perhaps according to the Anglo-Saxon method with
a horizontal stroke above, as in đ for the {%dh%} sound of {%the.%}
<P>Tried by these rules, the Nāgarī alphabet shows itself in many respects superior to the old
Roman alphabet, and certainly to our use or {%abuse%} of the Roman symbols commonly called the
English alphabet. But tried by the same rules, it will be found, I believe, inferior to the Indo-
Romanic system, by which name I call the modification of Sir William Jones' method of
applying the Roman alphabet to the languages of India, adopted in the present Dictionary.
<P>The fact of the matter is, that Hindū grammarians have so overdone the true theory
of the necessary vocalization of consonants, that they declare it impossible for any consonant to
stand alone without its associated vowel, not only in a single word, but in a whole sentence, unless,
indeed, the consonant come at the end of all, when the mark, called a Virāma or stop, must be
employed. Moreover, the dependent position of a consonant is so insisted on that every simple
consonant must perforce possess an inherent vowel by a necessary condition of its own existence,
so that when it is written without vowel or stop the vowel ‘a’ must always be pronounced after
it. Hence, such a word as ‘bind,’ would have to be pronounced ‘binada,’ unless a conjunct
symbol be employed, compounding {%n%} and {%d%} into one letter, the use of the Virāma or stop, except at
the end of a sentence, being an infraction of orthographic laws. Thus it arises that an immense
assortment of conjunct consonants is needed. More than this, the excessive claboration of their
vowel-system by the Hindūs necessitates the introduction of two new vowels, {%ṛ%} and {%ḷ.%} Again, each
of the fourteen vowels (except {%ă%}) has two symbols, according as it is initial or non-initial, and the
form of some of these obliges them to be printed before the letter after which they are pronounced
and in various awkward places, thereby exposing them to fracture, and increasing the general
complication. So that with unusually numerous vowel-symbols, with thirty-five consonants and an
almost indefinite number of intricate conjunct consonants, the number of distinct types necessary
to equip a perfect Sanskrit fount amounts to about 500 (see the table opposite to page 1).
<P>Now will any one maintain, that in these days of railroads, electric telegraphs, cheap printing,
and the Suez canal, such an overstraining of alphabetical precision can be maintained much longer
for the expression of any language belonging to the same family as our own, and in any country
forming an integral part of the British Empire? Indeed Sanskrit ought to be made a potent
instrument for uniting England more closely with India, and a powerful means for exciting more
real sympathy and fellow-feeling between Englishmen and their Indian fellow-subjects; but on
this very account it requires every facility to be conceded to its acquisition, and every contrivance
to be adopted for harmonizing it with those kindred European tongues whose structure it is
above all capable of illustrating.
<P>Be it remebered that we are not expecting either absurdities or impossibilities. We are not
so foolish as to suppose that the Hindūs will ever abandon their own national forms of speech.
On the contrary, we expect that they will tenaciously adhere to them, even as their brethren of
Wales hold to their own separate and distinct branch of the same speech-stem. But because we
cannot change the organs of speech or fuse the twenty-two languages
<F>*)Viz. Sanskrit, with its kindred Hindī, Marāṭhī, Gujarātī, Bengālī, Uriya, Asamese, Panjābī, Gurumukhī, Sindhī, Nepalese,
Kaśmīrī, the Singhalese of Ceylon; the Pushtū of Afghānistān; the five Drāviḍian languages, Tamil, Malayālam, Telugu, Kanarese,
Tulu; the half Drāviḍian Brahū-ī; the composite Urdū or Hindūstānī current throughout India; and lastly Burmese.</F> of India into one common
[Pagexviii+ 55]
tongue, are we therefore not to do what we really can to promote intercourse and com-
munion between kindred races united under one government and descended from the same
ancestors? If our great Indian Paṇḍits are made familiar with our graphic systems, will they not
be more likely to study our language and literature, to benefit by our knowledge, and to use our
numerous appliances for economizing time, labour, and money? In short, is it fatuous to expect
our fellow-subjects to imitate us in adopting a common system of symbols for a common line of
cognate languages? — a system, be it thoroughly understood, not to be confounded with our
English ‘free and easy’ abandonment of all system in our treatment of the Roman alphabet — but
a system capable of complete adjustment to the expression of Āryan sounds, whether Roman,
Greek, Welsh, English, or Indian, and probably little more different in form from the present
Nāgarī than that Nāgarī is from the characters prevalent in India when Sanskrit was first
committed to writing
<F>*) It is certainly remarkable that the whole Vyākaraṇa of Pāṇini,
unlike the Greek grammar or <lang n="greek">γράμμα</lang> appears to ignore written
symbols, as if Sanskrit was never intended to have any peculiar
graphic system of its own. In South India Sanskrit is written in
different characters; and the first inscriptions found on rocks are
in Pāli and Prākrit, not in Sanskrit. They are referred to the
Buddhist sovereigns who possessed political power in India about
three centuries B.C. The present form of Nāgarī is thought to
be little older than the tenth or eleventh century of our era.</F> For since the fact is patent, that the further we go back, the more plainly
do the Indian alphabets point to a foreign origin, the power of ancient and sacred association
cannot certainly be pleaded for the maintenance of the present Nāgarī.
<P>Nor can our Indian brethren shelter themselves under any plea of impossibility, when all the
logic of historical facts is against them. Is any nation more tenacious of everything national than
the Jews? and yet have they not abandoned their ancient character for a more modern form? Have
not also the Arabs and Persians, not to mention the Keltic and Teutonic races, done the same?
Have not the Hindūs themselves renounced many of their most ancient usages, and allowed the
rigidity of caste to relax under the pressure of steam and other European forces. Even in the very
matter of alphabets the facts of their own history are also against them, for if they deny the
foreign origin of their venerated Nāgarī, they have confessedly adopted the modern Persianized
Arabic alphabet — a consonantal, if not a purely syllabic system — to express Hindūstānī. Now,
Hindūstānī, notwithstanding its flood of Arabic and Persian words, is as much a form of Hindī — the
language of ‘pakka’ Hindūstān — as English with its flood of Norman French is of Anglo-Saxon.
Surely then all must admit that Hindūstānī, at least, has a far better right to the Indo-Romanic
alphabet derived from kindred British rulers, than it has to be saddled with the consonantal system
of foreign Muslim invaders. For that system, be it noted, is wholly Semitic in its essential features,
and therefore quite unsuited to the fundamental Āryan structure of a Persianized Āryan dialect.
<P>If after what I have thus advanced, our great Indian Paṇḍits remain, as I fear some of them
will, unconvinced, let any ordinary scholar who consults the pages of this work say whether they do
not derive much of their typographical clearness from certain apparently trifling, but really
important contrivances, possible in our Indo-Romanic, impossible in the usual Nāgarī type. One
of these, of course, is the power of leaving spaces between the words of the Sanskrit examples given.
Will any student say that such an example as {%sādhu-mitrāṇy akuśalād vārayanti%} does not gain in
clearness by being properly spaced
<F>†) What should we think of an English Dictionary which, dis-
daining to aid our overtried vision by any typographical contri-
vances at the supposed sacrifice of euphonic propriety, should
insist on presenting the corresponding example in proper pho-
netic conjunction thus — ‘goodfriendsguardfromevil?’</F>? Again, the power of using capitals and what are called
italics (to say nothing of ‘Egyptian’ and other forms of European type) is manifestly an advantage
to be placed to the credit of Indo-Romanic typography. Who will deny the gain in clearness by
the ability to make a distinction between smith and Smith — brown and Brown — bath and Bath?
And will any one examine the pages of this Dictionary, and then compare those of the Śabda-kalpa-
druma, without admitting the advantage gained in the power of employing italic type? Lastly, the
[Pagexix+ 61]
power of applying the hyphen to separate long compounds in a language where compounds prevail
more than simple words
<F>*) Forster gives an example of one compound word consisting
of 152 syllables. I rather think this might be matched by even
longer specimens from Campū composition.</F> will surely be appreciated by all. I can only say, that without that
most useful little mark, the present volume must have lost much of its clearness, and probably half
its compactness, for besides the obvious advantage of being able to indicate the difference between
such compounds as {%su-tapa%} and {%suta-pa,%} which could not be done in Nāgarī type, it is manifest that
even the simplest compounds like {%sad-asad-viveka, sv-alpa-keśin,%} would have required without its
use an extra line to explain their analysis
<F>†) At any rate, it is to be hoped that the hyphen will not be
denied to Sanskrit for the better understanding of the more com-
plex words, such, for example, as {%vaidika-manu-ādi-praṇīta-smṛ-%}
{%titvāt, karma-phala-rūpa-śarīra-dhāri-jīva-nirmitatvābhāva-mātreṇa,%}
taken at hap-hazard from Dr. Muir's Texts. We may even express
a hope that German scholars and other Europeans, who speak
forms of Āryan speech, all of them equally delighting in compo-
sition, may condescend more frequently to the employment of the
hyphen for some of their own Sesquipedalia Verba, thereby imi-
tating the practical Englishman in his Parliamentary compounds,
such, for example, as habeas-corpus-suspension-act-continuance-
Ireland-bill.</F>
<P>Notwithstanding all my advocacy of the Indo-Romanic graphic system, it is still my duty
to point out that so long as the natives of India continue to use their own alphabets so long is
it incumbent upon us Englishmen who study Sanskrit in its bearing upon the Indian vernaculars,
to master the Nāgarī character. Under any circumstances there must be a long transition period
during which the Indian and Romanic systems will co-exist, and however the struggle between
them may terminate, the end is not likely to be witnessed by the existing generation. For this
reason the Nāgarī alphabet is by no means ignored in these pages. On the contrary, it is pressed
into the service of the Romanic, and made to minister to a most useful purpose, being employed
to distinguish the leading word of a group in a manner best calculated to strike the eye and
arrest the attention.
<P>Fairness, moreover, demands that a few of the obvious defects of the system of transliteration
adopted in this volume should be specified. In certain cases it confessedly offends against philo-
sophical exactness; nor does it always consistently observe the rules stated in a preceding
paragraph. The vowels {%ṛ%} and {%ṝ%} ought to be represented by some one symbol — such as that used
by many German scholars — though {%ṛ, ṝ%} seem to me somewhat unsuitable for vowel sounds. So
again the aspirated consonants ought not to be represented by a second letter attached to them.
In the case of {%ch%} employed by Sir W. Jones for {#c#} and {%ch%} for {#C#}, the inconvenience appeared
to me so great that in the third edition of my Sanskrit Grammar, I ventured to adopt {%ć%} for {#c#}, the
pronunciation, however, being the same as {%ch%} in {%church,%} which might therefore be written {%ćurć.%}
Had I dared to innovate further, I should have written {%ḱ%} for {%kh, t́%} for {%th, ṕ%} for {%ph;%} and so with
the other aspirated consonants, {%c%} being then employed for {#c.#} The fact, of course, is that an aspirated
consonant is merely a consonant pronounced with an emphatic emission of the breath, much as
an Irishman would pronounce {%p%} in {%penny,%} and to indicate this, a stroke placed on one side or over the
letter seems more appropriate than the mark of the Greek hard breathing adopted by Bopp, which
may well be used alone to utter a vowel, but is scarcely suitable to emphasize a consonant
<F>‡) A hint might be taken from Anglo-Saxon đ, as before
observed, especially if^ be used for long vowels. The mark is
perhaps too much like that required for accentuation. I hope,
however, that the system of accentuating classical Sanskrit will
never be allowed. Why complicate a subject already sufficiently
intricate by introducing another element of perplexity which
native scholars themselves do not sanction? Let accentuation
be kept for the Veda; and in Vedic words a more upright and
conspicuous stroke might, in my opinion, be used with advantage.</F>
<P>I also prefer the symbol {%ṣ%} for the cerebral sibilant. Should a second edition of this Dictionary
be ever called for, some of these improvements may possibly be adopted. With regard to the
letter {%w,%} I have discarded it, and retained only {%v,%} because the Nāgarī only possesses one character
for the labial semivowel, viz. {#va#}, and to transliterate this or any other single Oriental character by
two Roman representatives must certainly lead to confusion. As to the German method of using
[Pagexx+ 60]
{%ḱ, ḱh%} for {%ć, ćh,%} and {%ǵ, ǵh%} for {%j, jh,%} the philological advantage gained by thus exhibiting the phonetic
truth of the interchange of gutturals and palatals, appears to me outweighed by the disadvantage
of representing sounds differing so greatly in acutual pronunciation by similar symbols.
<P>Notwithstanding the shortcomings and inconsistencies thus fairly acknowledged, I have no
hesitation in asseting that the Romanic system expanded by the marks and signs now generally
agreed upon and still further to be improved hereafter, may be adapted to the Āryan, languages
of India quite as completely and appropriately as to the Āryan languages of Europe.
<P>Having felt obliged by the form in which this Dictionary is printed to dwell thus at length
on a point of vast importance both to the general cultivation of Sanskrit and the diffusion of
knowledge in our Eastern Empire, I must now be permission to record my sense of the great
assistance this cause has received from the energetic efforts of one who has ever been a true
friend to the natives of India, Sir Charles E. Trevelyan. He was the first Indian officer of
eminence who appreciated the real bearing of this matter upon native education, and the first
writer who in his able minute, dated Calcutta, January 1834
<F>*) This will be found at p. 3 of the ‘Original Papers illustra-
ting the History of the Application of the Roman Alphabet to the
Languages of India,’ edited by me at the request of Sir Charles
Trevelyan in 1859, and published by Messrs. Longman. I com-
mend this volume to every one interested in the diffusion of
education among the natives of our Indian Empire.</F>, cleared away the confusion of ideas
with which the subject was then perplexed by many prejudiced persons and even by some scholars.
He also was the first to awaken an interest in the question throughout England about thirteen
years ago, aided as he was by the able advocacy of ‘the Times’ newspaper. To him and to ‘the
Times’ I owe the first impressions which corrected my own prejudices. Since then, many Oriental
books printed on a plan substantially agreeing with Sir W. Jones' Indo-Romanic system have been
published, both by eminent scholars in Europe and by missionaries in India
<F>†) Amongst other publications the Ṛig-veda itself, edited by
Professor Aufrecht, has been printed and published in the Roman
character; also part of the Kathā-sarit-sāgara by Dr. Hermann
Brockhaus. Dr. Muir in his Sanskrit Texts has also extensively
used the Indo-Romanic system, as well as Dr. Weber in the
Indische Studien, where some of the Upanishads are so trans-
literated. Let any one compare Professor Aufrecht's one com-
pact and cheap octavo volume with the six massive quartos to
which the Ṛig-veda will extend, now being edited in the native
character. Even if the Romanized edition had the commentary,
it would probably not extend beyond two moderate octavo
volumes. With regard to the series of valuable Hindūstānī
works printed in the Anglo-Hindūstānī character by missionaries
in India, a full account of them will be found in Sir Charles
Trevelyan's ‘Original Papers’ referred to in a previous note.
The whole Bible has been beautifully printed in this form, and
carried through the press by the Rev. R. Cotton Mather; also
a glossary to part of the Bible by his son Mr. Cotton Mather.</F>, and the form in
which the present Sanskrit Dictionary is now put forth affords, I trust, another evidence of the
reality of the movement and of its gradual advance.
;
; PREFACE: Principal Sources
;
<H>SECTION 5.
<P>{%Principal Sources drawn upon in the Process of Compilation.%}
<P>I have now to enumerate the various works consulted by me in compilling this Dictionary.
My only reason for not indicating these authorities in the body of the various articles as they
have been written, has been that the volume — which even now has outgrown the dimensions
originally fixed — would have thereby lost much of its convenient compactness, and could not
have been produced at a moderate cost. The eye, too, would have been confused in passing
from one meaning to another. Justice, however, requires that before commencing my enumeration,
I should specially record my debt to particular authorities most frequently consulted and relied
upon. I do so with a deep consciousness that nothing I am about to state can add to the
celebrity of any one of the eminent scholars to whom I owe most. Indeed, it is impossible for
me to express adequately my sense of obligation to the great work of Professors Böhtlingk and
Roth. Although I have referred to every other dictionary, glossary, and vocabulary, including
those of Professor Benfey and Westergard and the eight-volumed Encyclopædia of Rādhākānta-
[Pagexxi-a+ 50]
deva, commonly called the Śabda-kalpa-druma
<F>*) A fine copy of this valuable work, now very difficult to procure in its perfect state, was searched for, some years ago, at
Calcutta and most kindly presented to me by my friend Mr. Walter Scott Seton-Karr, Foreign Secretary to the Governments
of Lord Lawrence and Lord Mayo, and Vice-Chancellor of the Calcutta University.</F>, and although I have striven to weigh and verify
for myself all the words and meanings given by my fellow lexicographers, yet I have always
considered an appeal to the St. Petersburg Wörterbuch as the most satisfactory available means
for deciding doubtful questions.
<P>Naturally, I have kept Professor H.H. Wilson's Dictionary on my working-table, and have
constantly had recourse to its pages. Indeed, I must own that I commenced by looking to my
predecessor's labours as my chief authority. And let me here assert most emphatically, not
only that, considering the condition of Sanskrit scholarship when it was compiled, Professor
Wilson's was a wonderful production, but that, like many other scholars, I could never have
learnt Sanskrit at all without its aid. Nevertheless, sincerity obliges me to confiess, what other lexi-
cographers may perhaps admit to be not without a parallel in their own mental history, that my
mind has had to pass through a kind of painful discipline involving a gradual weakening of
faith in the performances of my fellow men, not excepting those of my own venerated teacher.
I began, indeed, with much confidence in the thought that one man existed on whom I could
lean as an almost infallible guide; but as the work grew under my hands and my sensitiveness
to error sharpened, I discovered to my surprise that I was compelled to reject much of his
teaching as doubtful. Moreover, the truth must be told, that as I advanced further my trustful-
ness in others, besides my old master, began to experience occasional disagreeable and unexpected
shocks; till now that I am arrived at the end of my work, I find myself left with my confidence in
the accuracy of human beings generally — certainly not excepting myself — rather painfully disturbed.
Nevertheless, I am bound thankfully to acknowledge that my faith in the general scholarlike exact-
ness of the great German authorities already named has never been materially shaken. I ought also
to make particular mention of Dr. John Muir's ‘Sanskrit Texts,’ which have been constantly referred
to by me, and have been found by experience to be invaluable, both for their general accuracy and
for the judgment the author has displayed in his interpretation of Vedic words.
<P>To these acknowledgments of special obligations I now subjoin an alphabetical list of all
the principal works (not including of course all the mere texts and manuscripts) consulted by
me, or in any way drawn upon for information, during the progress of my labours.
<HI>Andrew's (E. A.) Latin-English Dic-
tionary.
<HI>Asiatic Researches.
<HI>Asiatic Society's (Royal) Journal.
<HI>Aufrecht's (Th.) Catalogue of Sanskrit
MSS. in the Bodleian Library,
Oxford.
<HI> — Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS. in the
Library of Trinity College, Cam-
bridge.
<HI> — Halāyudha's Vocabulary.
<HI> — Ṛig-veda-saṃhitā.
<HI> — Uṇādi-sūtras.
<HI>Ballantyne's (James) various lectures
on Hindū Philosophy, and transla-
tions of some of the Aphorisms.
<HI> — translation of the Sāhitya-darpaṇa.
<HI> — Laghu-kaumudī.
<HI>Banerjea's (K.M.) Hindū Philosophy.
[Pagexxi-b+ 20]
<HI>Banerjea's Kumāra-sambhava (with
notes).
<HI>Benfey's Chrestomathie (with vocabu-
lary).
<HI> — Sāma-veda (with vocabulary).
<HI> — Sanskrit-English Dictionary.
<HI> — Sanskrit Grammar.
<HI>Böhtlingk's (and Roth's) Sanskrit-
Wörterbuch.
<HI>Böhtlingk's Indische Sprüche.
<HI> — edition of Pāṇini's Grammar.
<HI> — edition of Vopa-deva's Grammar.
<HI> — (and Rieu's) Hemaćandra's Glossary.
<HI>Bombay edition of the Mahā-bhārata.
<HI> — of the Rāmāyaṇa.
<HI>Bopp's Glossary (first and second edi-
tions).
<HI> — Comparative Grammar (Eastwick).
<HI>Bosworth's (Dr. J.) Anglo-Saxon Dic-
tionary and Grammar.
[Pagexxi-c+ 18]
<HI>Brockhaus' (Hermann) Kathā-sarit-
sāgara.
<HI>Burgess' translation of the Sūrya-
siddhānta.
<HI>Burnouf's (Eugène) Bhāgavata-Purāṇa
(books I-III, translated by Bur-
nouf).
<HI>Burnouf's (Émile) Sanskrit-French
Dictionary.
<HI>Chambers' Encyclopædia.
<HI>Colebrooke's Amara-kosha.
<HI> — Indian Algebra.
<HI> — Essays on the Religion and Phi-
losophy of the Hindūs.
<HI> — Dāya-bhāga.
<HI> — Mitāksharā.
<HI>Cowell's (E. B.) Kusumāṅjali (with
translation).
[Pagexxii-a+ 38]
<HI>Cowell's (E. B.) translation of the Vi-
kramorvaśī.
<HI> — edition of Elphinstone's History of
India.
<HI>Curtius' (Georg) Grundzüge der
Griechischen Etymologie.
<HI>Farrar's (F. W.) Families of Speech.
<HI>Foucaux's (Ph. Ed.) Episodes of the
Mahā-bhārata.
<HI>Goldstücker's (Theodor) Sanskrit-
English Dictionary (parts I-VI).
<HI>Griffith's (Ralph T. H.) Specimens of
Old Indian Poetry.
<HI>Hall's (Fitz-Edward) edition of the
Sūrya-siddhānta.
<HI> — Contribution towards an Index to
the Bibliography of the Indian
Philosophical Systems.
<HI> — translation of Nīlakaṇṭha's Rational
Refutation of the Hindū Philoso-
phical Systems.
<HI> — Sāńkhya-pravaćana-bhāshya.
<HI> — edition of Wilson's Viṣṇu-Purāṇa.
<HI>Haughton's (Graves C.) Bengālī Dic-
tionary.
<HI>Haug's (Martin) Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa
(with translation.)
<HI>Hilpert's (J.D.) German Dictionary.
<HI>Johnson's (Francis) Hitopacdeśa (first
and second editions, with transla-
tion and vocabulary).
<HI> — Selections from the Mahā-bhārata
(with vocabulary).
<HI> — Megha-dūta (1st and 2nd editions,
with vocabulary).
<HI>Jones' (Sir William) translation of
Manu.
<HI>Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society.
[Pagexxii-b+ 39]
<HI>Lassen's Sanskrit Anthology (with glos-
sary).
<HI>Liddell's and Scott's Greek-English
Lexicon.
<HI>Ludvig's Infinitiv im Veda.
<HI>Molesworth's (James T.) Murathee
Dictionary.
<HI>Moor's Hindū Pantheon.
<HI>Müller's (Max) Ancient Sanskrit Litera-
ture.
<HI> — Chips from a German Workshop.
<HI> — Hymns to the Maruts.
<HI> — Lectures on the Science of Language.
<HI> — Ṛig-veda-saṃhitā.
<HI> — Ṛig-veda-prātiśākhya.
<HI> — Sanskrit Grammar.
<HI>Muir's (John) Original Sanskrit Texts
(five volumes).
<HI>Prinsep's (James) Indian Antiquities
(edited with notes and addenda by
Edward Thomas).
<HI>Rādhākānta-deva's Śabda-kalpa-
druma.
<HI>Rājendralāla-Mitra's notices of Sanskrit
MSS.
<HI>Regnier's Étude sur l'diome des Védas.
<HI> — Ṛigveda-prātiśākhya.
<HI>Rieu's (and Böhtlingk's) Hemaćandra.
<HI>Röer's (E.) Upanishads (with transla-
tions).
<HI> — (and Montriou's) Hindū Law.
<HI>Roth's (and Böhtlingk's) Sanskrit-Wör-
terbuch).
<HI>Roth's Nirukta.
<HI> — (and Whitney's) Atharva-veda-
saṃhitā.
<HI>Schlegel's (A.G.) Rāmāyaṇa.
<HI>Scott's and Liddell's Greek-English
Lexicon.
[Pagexxii-c+ 49]
<HI>Stenzler's edition of the Raghu-vaṉśa.
<HI> — Yājṅavalkya.
<HI>Tāranātha Tarkavāćaspati's Dhātu-
rūpādarśa.
<HI>Thompson's (J. C.) Bhagavad-gītā (with
translation).
<HI>Thornton's Gazetteer.
<HI>Troyer's Rāja-tarańgiṇī.
<HI>Vigfusson's (G.) Cleasby's Icelandic
Dictionary.
<HI>Weber's (Albrecht) Vājasaneyi-saṃ-
hitā.
<HI> — Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa.
<HI> — Kātyāyana-śrauta-sūtra.
<HI> — Indische Studien.
<HI> — Indische Streifen.
<HI>Westergaard's Radices Linguæ San-
scritæ.
<HI>Whitney's (W. D.) Atharva-veda-prā-
tiśākhya.
<HI> — (and Roth's) Atharva-veda-saṃhitā.
<HI> — Language and the Study of Language
(twelve lectures).
<HI>Wilson's (H.H.) Glossary of Indian
Terms.
<HI> — Sanskrit-English Dictionary.
<HI> — Sanskrit Grammar.
<HI> — Sāńkhya-kārikā.
<HI> — Theatre of the Hindūs.
<HI> — translation of the Ṛig-veda (vols.
I-IV).
<HI> — translation of the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa.
<HI>Yates' (W.) octavo edition of Wilson's
Sanskrit Dictionary with addenda
(partly edited by J. Wenger).
<HI>Zeitschrift der Deutschen morgenländ-
ischen Gesellschaft.
;
; PREFACE: Aids and Encouragements received.
;
<H>SECTION 6.
<P>{%Aids and Encouragements received.%}
<P>My first acknowledgements are due to the Delegates of the Clarendon Press, without
whose kind patronage this work could never have been published. It does not become me
to commend the efforts these gentlemen are making for the furtherance of education, except
so far as to say that they fitly represent the mind and wishes of the University of Ox-
ford. Nor does the Clarendon Press itself need any monument of my rearing. Let those
who desire proofs of its efficiency look around and note the series of valuable educational
books constantly issuing from its founts, models of clear and accurate typography, in almost
every department of science.
<P>Perhaps, however, I may be permitted to mention specially the name of one who has
recently left us, but who was a member of the Press-Delegacy when the publication of this
[Pagexxiii+ 45]
Dictionary was undertaken, the late Master of Balliol and now Dean of Rochester, Dr. Robert
Scott. He has been one of my kindest friends and wisest counsellors ever since the day
I went to him for advice during my first undergraduate days at Balliol, on receiving an
appointment in the Indian Civil Service. It is not too much, I think, to aver that without
his support, encouragement, and sympathy, — all the more prized as coming from an experienced
fellow-labourer, able to estimate the difficulties of a less experienced disciple, — I could not
have persevered in this work to it termination.
<P>My next acknowledgments must be tendered to the Representatives of the Governments
of Bengal, Madras, Bombay, and the North-West Provinces of India, as well as of the India
Office, for the substantial aid received from them in the patronage they have accorded to this
undertaking.
<P>I have in the third place to express in the most cordial manner my thanks to each and
all of the gentlemen who have aided me in the compilation of this Dictionary.
<P>No one but those who have taken part in similar labours can at all realize the amount
of tedious toil — I might almost say drudgery — involved in the daily routine of small details,
such as verifying references and meanings, making indices and lists of words, sorting and
sifting an ever-increasing store of materials, revising old work, arranging and re-arranging
new, correcting and re-correcting proofs, writing and re-writing and interlineating ‘copy,’ till
reams upon reams of paper have been filled, putting the eye-sight, patience, and temper of
compilers, readers, and compositors to a severe trial. I mention these matters, not to magnify
the labours undergone, but to show that I could not have prosecuted them persistently single-
handed. This statement may also give an idea of what I owe to the presevering co-operation
of my kind assitants, whose names in the chronological order of their services are as follow:
the Rev. J. Wenger, who is now I believe engaged in valuable literary work connected with the
Baptist Mission in Calcutta; Dr. Franz Kielhorn, who is now Superintendant of Sanskṛt Studies
in Deccan College, Poona; Dr. Hermann Brunnhofer (whose assitance was not of very long
duration); Mr. A. E. Gough, M. A., of Lincoln College, Oxford, now Professor of Sanskrit at
the Government College, Benares; lastly, Mr. E. L. Hogarth, M. A., of Brasenose College, and
formerly Head Master of the Government Provincial School at Calicut, who has been my
constant and painstaking assistant for about three years and a half, continuing with me to the
termination of the work. I must also thank my old friend Professor Francis Johnson, who
was one of my first instructors in Sanskrit when a student at Haileybury, and afterwards my
colleague as Professor, for the kind interest he has shown in my labours, and the aid I have
received from him at various times, including recently a list of words collected by himself in
preparing a new volume of Selections from the Mahā-bhārata, shortly to be published.
<P>Finally, I must express my gratitude for the extreme care with which the reading of my
often intricate manuscript has been conducted by the Oriental Reader, and the printing of the
whole book executed by the Managers of the Clarendon Press.
;
;
; PREFACE: Defects and Inconsistencies acknowledged.
<H>SECTION 7.
<H>{%Defects and Inconsistencies acknowledged.%}
<P>When some one pointed out to Dr. Johnson the imperfections of his great Dictionary, he
is said to have retorted on his critics that mere fault-finding was often an indication of ignorance.
His work was too large, he affirmed, not to take in errors, and the quicksightedness to these
was a symptom of the dulness which could not comprehend the merit of the performance as
a whole. Without imitating this convenient way of disposing of criticism in my own case,
[Pagexxiv+ 46]
I may yet request leave to inform any mere {%Ćhidrānveshin,%} of whom it may be said {%ćhidraṃ%}
{%nirūpya sahasā praviśati,%} that no one can be more keenly alive to the flaws and defects of this
volume than I am myself. No one, indeed, can be more desirous to criticize it, with a view
to its improvement in a future edition.
<P>If any real scholars — always considerate and temperate even if severe — having had practical
experience of lexicography, will aid me in my efforts to attain greater accuracy, I shall be
thankful. From them I do not fear but rather court criticism. Such critics will quite under-
stand how a compiler's sense of responsibility may grow with the growth of a work like this,
putting him out of conceit with his own performance, and filling him with earnest cravings
after an accuracy more than human. Such critics will appreciate the difficulties besetting the
production of so many closely printed pages abounding with countless dots and diacritical
marks. Nor will they be surprised at inequalities of execution and occasional inconsistencies
in a work representing efforts spread over numerous years. Nor will they need to be reminded
that occasional distractions, trials of health and weariness of spirit, are incident not only to
a human compiler but to his human assistants. Indeed it is no disparagement to those who
have contributed to the detail of this work to assume that a compilation which has passed
through many different hands must reflect the infirmities of all. No other apology will here
be attempted for its errors and inadvertencies; nor do I ask that the blame be laid at the
door of any one but myself, who alone am responsible. Some explanation, however, of a few
intentional inconsistencies and almost unavoidable defects is here appended.
<P>In the first place, there has not been absolute consistency in the collocation of words
connected by a common etymology. I have not bound myself in this respect by any fixed
rules. Hence some words are given in the usual alphabetical order of the Nāgarī type which
might be expected to fall under a previous classification in the Indo-Romanic order. Facility of
reference has been my only guide in this matter.
<P>Again, in the arranging of a whole chain of words etymologically allied, some formations
have been placed under compounds which ought properly to have a separate line assigned
to them. Others again have separate lines which ought more consistently to come under
compounds. For example, abstract nouns formed with the affixes {%tā%} and {%tva,%} and possessive
adjectives formed with {%vat, mat,%} &c. are placed in the order of the compounds, when they are
really not compounds at all. Still it is plain that such a word as {%svāmi-tā,%} ‘ownership,’ is
really equivalent to {%svāmi-bhāva,%} and such a word as {%śrī-mat,%} ‘possessed of fortune,’ to {%śrī-yukta.%}
In these cases my motive for sacrificing absolute consistency has rather been to gain space.
Other liberties indulged in with regard to the use of the hyphen are noticed in the table of
directions following the Preface.
<P>With regard to the nominative cases of adjectives and of a few participles — such as those
of Parasmai-pada Intensives — and even of a few substantives, I fear this Dictionary cannot
always be quite trusted; though it may perhaps be conceded that I have improved upon my
predecessor in this respect. In point of fact it has not been possible to settle with certainty
the nominative cases, especially in the feminine forms, of all adjectives. The German Wörterbuch
avoids exhibiting the nominative cases of adjectives and participles, and rarely gives their
feminines, leaving also the nominative cases of substantives to be inferred from their gender.
Although I studied Pāṇini's chapter on feminine formations with great care, I was unable to
discover either in his Grammar or in any other Grammar or Dictionary a solution of all my
difficulties. My rule has been to give the nominative cases both of substantives and adjectives
in all their genders wherever there was ground for certainty or for a reasonable inference,
[Pagexxv+ 35]
and in other rare cases to exhibit only the crude base. Sometimes I have merely given
the nominative case masculine of adjective, omitting the feminie when that alone appeared
doubtful, and leaving the neuter to be inferred; but throughout the Dictionary the omission
of a nominative case has been quite an exception. Thus I have endeavoured to increase the
usefulness of this publication even at the risk of occasionally misleading.
<P>Another point requires a few words of explanation. I shall probably be told that mean-
ings and synonyms are needlessly multiplied; but before the book is hastily censured on
this score, let it be fairly tested by a repeated and extended application to various branches
of the literature. I can with truth affirm that having myself constantly put these pages to
a trial during their progress through the press, so far from having to regret any superfluity
or surplusage, I have too often had to lament sins of omission, and have frequently discovered,
when too late, that some one meaning has been rejected, because thought to be a mere
synonym, when this very apparent synonym was really the precise word required to suit a
particular passage.
<P>With reference to the philological comparisons given throughout this work, I fear that occa-
sional inconsistencies and violations of orthography will be found. For indeed I do not pretend
to even a limited knowledge of some of the numerous languages compared, and my private
library has not furnished the means of verifying all the words. It should be noted that I have
not generally indicated the cognate English words with the Anglo-Saxon, because these are self-
evident, and will generally be found among the meanings. As to other comparisons, I can only say
that when I commenced my compilation, Bopp was considered the chief authority in comparative
philology. I have not generally adopted what more modern scholars substitute for his teaching,
because some of these later writers have themselves yet to undergo the full test of an extended
criticism, which may not always support their opinions. Besides trusting to Bopp, I have generally
followed Professors Benfey and Curtius, and I request that the comparisons given be accepted
on the authority of these three scholars, subject to the understanding that more recent views
have been propounded on many points.
<P>Most of the errors and omissions hitherto discovered, whether typographical or caused by
my own want of knowledge, have, I trust, been corrected and supplied in the supplementary
matter at the end of the volume.
<P>With these explanations I close my present labours, profoundly conscious of their imper-
fection, but full of thankfulness that my life has been spared to bring them, such as they are,
to a completion.
MONIER WILLIAMS.
OXFORD, {%May 1872.%}
;
; DIRECTIONS TO BE STUDIED BEFORE USING THIS DICTIONARY.
;
[Pagexxvi+ 51]
<H>DIRECTIONS TO BE STUDIED BEFORE USING THIS DICTIONARY.
<P>THERE are two alphabetical orders: 1. that in the Nāgarī; 2. that in the Indo-Romanic type.
<P>Roots are always in large Sanskrit type.
<P>Verbs formed by prefixing prepositions to roots are arranged in the alphabetical order of the prepositions so
affixed, e. g. {%anu-kṛ%} must {%not%} be looked for under the root {%kṛ,%} as in other Sanskrit Dictionaries, but in its own alphabetical
order, as in Greek lexicons, and at the head of its own group of derivatives. See p. 32, col. 1.
<P>All the Sanskrit words in Indo-Romanic type arranged in alphabetical order under a leading word — which
leading word is always either a root in large Nāgarī type or some other word in small Nāgarī type — must be regarded
as mutually connected. They must be supposed to form a family of words bound together by a common origin
or dependent on each other by some tie of relationship. The derivation or etymology is generally given in a parenthesis
after the leading word in Sanskrit type, and this etymology is supposed to apply to all the group which follows, until
a new classification of words in introduced by a {%new word in Nāgarī type.%} Other derivations are sometimes noticed
when authorities differ in explaining the etymology of particular words.
<P>The Nāgarī type is thus employed to strike they eye and direct it to the leading word in each group. By this
means also a repetition of the etymology is avoided.
<P>All the meanings of a word belonging to a group are not always given in full, if they may be manifestly
gathered from its other members; this applies especially to participles and participial formations, e. g. the meaning
‘charged with,’ which belongs to {%ā-ropita,%} p. 128, col. 3, may readily be inferred from {%ā-ropa,%} which stands above it in
the same classification.
<P>Again, all the derivatives from a Radical or Verb at the head of a family are not always given when they may
be readily supplied; this applies especially to participles, and occasionally to verbal nouns, e. g. under {%vi-hiṉs%} at the head
of a group, p. 952, it is easy to supply {%vi-hiṉsana, am,%} n. the act of injuring.
<P>Observe, that meanings which appear to be mere amplifications of preceding meanings are separated by a comma,
whereas those which do not clearly run into each other are divided by a semicolon. All remarks upon meanings and
all descriptive and explanatory statements are given between (); comparisons, between [].
<P>Compound words are always arranged in alphabetical order {%under the first word%} in the compounds, a hyphen marking
the division of each member of the compound, and when the final and initial vowel of two members of a compound
blend, the separation of these vowels is denoted by a hyphen in brackets, (see, for example, {%kṛtodaka%} for {%kṛta-udaka,%}
p. 248, col. 1, line 4.) For greater clearness, some words are thus treated, which are formed by Taddhita affixes, {%supposed%}
{%to be added to the whole word,%} and which therefore ought not strictly to have a hyphen at all.
<P>Compound words divided by a hyphen or hyphens have no etymology given because the employment of the
hyphen makes their several elements manifest at once, so that it is always easy to refer to the separate members
of the compound for the several etymologies, e. g. {%an-oka-śāyin%} is manifestly separable into {%an + oka + śāyin,%} to each of
which it is easy to refer for an explanation of the several etymologies.
<P>When no etymology of a simple word is exhibited its derivation is either unknown or too doubtful to deserve
recording.
<P>The nominative cases of all nouns, substantive and adjective, and of all participles, are given immediately after the
crude base, except in the cases explained at the end of the preceding Preface. Thus {%guru, us, vī, u,%} means that the
adjective {%guru%} makes in its nominative case masc. fem. and neut., {%gurus, guruvī, guru;%} similarly {%vividvas, ān, ushī, at%}
(P. 919, col. 2), stands for nom. masc. fem. and neut., {%vividvān, vividushī, vividvat.%}
<P>Under roots and verbs the 3rd pers. singular of the various tenses is given, other forms being noticed in parentheses.
The names of the tenses are generally left to be inferred, except when an unusual tense, like the Precative, is given,
and the form of the 1st Future can always be inferred from the Infinitive: thus the Infinitive being {%veditum,%} the
1st Future 3rd pers. sing. will be {%veditā;%} similarly from {%dagdhum%} will be inferred 1st Future 3rd pers. sing. {%dagdhā.%}
<P>When words really dissimilar appear similar either in Roman or Nāgarī type, the figures 1, 2, 3, &c. are placed before
them; see, for example, 1. {%sa,%} 2. {%sa,%} 3. {%sa,%} 4. {%sa,%} 5. {%sa;%} 1. {%suta-pa,%} 2. {%su-tapa;%} 1. {%sam-āna,%} 2. {%samāna;%} 1. {%saha,%} 2. {%saha;%}
1. {%sv-ap,%} 2. {%svap.%}
<P>It is believed that few common words or meanings likely to be met with in the classical literature have been
omitted in this work; nevertheless the Supplement at the end of the volume should occasionally be consulted: thus
in the two pages, 623, 624, one or two words and the common meaning ‘affix,’ belonging to {%praty-aya,%} have accidently
dropped out, but are supplied in the supplementary pages.
;
; ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS USED IN THE DICTIONARY.
;
[Pagexxvii-a+ 47]
<H>ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS USED IN THE DICTIONARY.
<P>[{%In the progress of a work extending over several years it has been found almost impossible to preserve uniformity in%}
{%the use of symbols, but it is hoped that most of the inconsistencies are noticed in the following table.%}]
<HI>A. = Ātmane-pada; the long
mark over the A. has been
omitted for convenience
in printing.
<HI>abl. {%or%} abl. c. = ablative case.
<HI>acc. {%or%} acc. c. = accusative
case.
<HI>accord. = according.
<HI>Ādi-p. = Ādi-parvan of the
Mahā-bhārata.
<HI>adj. = adjective.
<HI>Æol. = Æolic.
<HI>alg. = algebra.
<HI>Angl. Sax. = Anglo-Saxon.
<HI>anom. = anomalous, irregu-
lar.
<HI>Aor. = Aorist.
<HI>Arab. = Arabic.
<HI>arithm. = arithmetic.
<HI>Arm. {%or%} Armor. = Armorican
or the language of Brittany.
<HI>Armen. = Armenian.
<HI>astrol. = astrology.
<HI>astron. = astronomy.
<HI>Atharva-v. = Atharva-veda,
edited by Roth and Whit-
ney.
<HI>Bhāgavata-P. = Bhāgavata-
Purāṇa, Burnouf's edition,
or Bombay edition for the
later books.
<HI>Bhaṭṭi-k. = Bhaṭṭi-kāvya,
Calcutta edition.
<HI>Boh. {%or%} Bohem. = Bohemian.
<HI>B.R. = Böhtlingk and Roth.
<HI>Br. = Brāhmaṇa.
<HI>Bret. = Breton.
<HI>Buddh. = Buddhist.
<HI>c. = case.
<HI>Cambro-Brit. = the language
of Wales.
<HI>Caus. = Causal.
<HI>cf. = confer, compare.
<HI>chap. = chapter.
[Pagexxvii-b+ 44]
<HI>cl. = class.
<HI>Class. = Classical.
<HI>col., cols. = column, columns.
<HI>comm. = commentator or
commentary.
<HI>comp., comps. = compound,
compounds.
<HI>compar. = comparative de-
gree.
<HI>Cond. {%or%} Condit. = Condi-
tional.
<HI>cons. = consonant.
<HI>dat. {%or%} dat. c. = dative case.
<HI>defect. = defective.
<HI>Desid. = Desiderative.
<HI>dimin. = diminutive.
<HI>Dor. = Doric.
<HI>du. = dual number.
<HI>ed. {%or%} edit. = edition.
<HI>e. g. = exempli gratiâ.
<HI>Eng. = English.
<HI>Ep. {%or%} ep. = Epic, i. e. such
works as the Mahā-bhā-
rata, Rāmāyaṇa, &c.
<HI>epith. = epithet.
<HI>esp. = especially.
<HI>etym. = etymology.
<HI>explet. = expletive.
<HI>f. {%or%} fem. = feminine.
<HI>fr. = from.
<HI>Fut. = Future.
<HI>Gaël. = Gaëlic.
<HI>gen. {%or%} gen. c. = genitive case.
<HI>gend. = gender.
<HI>geom. = geometry.
<HI>Germ. = German or High-
German.
<HI>Goth. = Gothic.
<HI>Gr. = Greek.
<HI>Gram. = A Practical Sanskrit
Grammar by Monier Wil-
liams, third edition, pub-
lished at the Clarendon
Press.
[Pagexxvii-c+ 44]
<HI>gram. = grammar.
<HI>Hib. = Hibernian or Irish.
<HI>Hind. = Hindī.
<HI>Icel. = Icelandic.
<HI>i. e. = id est.
<HI>impers. = impersonal, i. e.
used impersonally.
<HI>Impf. = Imperfect tense.
<HI>Impv. = Imperative.
<HI>ind. = indeclinable, either an
indeclinable participle or
an adverb or a case used
adverbially.
<HI>Inf. {%or%} infin. = Infinitive
mood.
<HI>inst. {%or%} inst. c. = instrumental
case.
<HI>Intens. = Intensive.
<HI>Ion. = Ionic.
<HI>Island. = the German form
of Icelandic.
<HI>Kirāt. {%or%} Kirātārj. = Kirā-
tārjunīya.
<HI>Kumāra-s. = Kumāra-sam-
bhava.
<HI>Lat. = Latin.
<HI>lat. = latitude.
<HI>Lett. = Lettish.
<HI>lit. = literally.
<HI>Lith. = Lithuanian.
<HI>loc. {%or%} loc. c. = locative case.
<HI>long. = longitude.
<HI>m. {%or%} masc. = masculine gen-
der.
<HI>Mahā-bh. &c. = Mahā-bhā-
rata, Calcutta edition.
<HI>mathem. = mathematics.
<HI>medic. = medicine.
<HI>Megh. = Megha-dūta, John-
son's second edition.
<HI>Mod. = Modern.
<HI>MS., MSS. = manuscript,
manuscripts.
<HI>N. = Name.
[Pagexxvii-d+ 44]
<HI>n. {%or%} neut. = neuter gender.
<HI>Naigh. = Naighaṇṭuka.
<HI>neg. = negative.
<HI>Nir. = Nirukta.
<HI>Nom. {%or%} nom. = Nominal
verb.
<HI>nom. {%or%} nom. c. = nomina-
tive case.
<HI>num. {%or%} numb. = number.
<HI>obs. = obsolete.
<HI>occ. = occasionally.
<HI>Osc. {%or%} Osk. = Oscan or Os-
kan.
<HI>Osset. = Ossetic (see p. ix).
<HI>P. = Parasmai-pada.
<HI>p. = page.
<HI>-p. = parvan or section of
the Mahā-bhārata.
<HI>Pāṇ. = Pāṇini.
<HI>Part. {%or%} part. = Participle.
<HI>Pass. = Passive voice.
<HI>patron. = patronymic.
<HI>Perf. = Perfect tense.
<HI>Pers. = Persian.
<HI>Pers. = person.
<HI>phil. = philosophy.
<HI>pl. {%or%} plur. = plural number.
<HI>poet. = poetry, poetic license.
<HI>Pol. = Polish.
<HI>Pot. = Potential.
<HI>Pr. = proper.
<HI>Prāk. = Prākrit.
<HI>Prep. = Preposition.
<HI>Pres. = Present tense.
<HI>priv. = privative.
<HI>pronom. = pronominal.
<HI>Pruss. = Prussian.
<HI>q. v. = quod vide.
<HI>Raghu-v. = Raghu-vaṉśa.
<HI>Reflex. = Reflexive or used
reflexively.
<HI>Ṛig-v. = Ṛig-veda.
<HI>rt., rts. = root, roots.
<HI>Russ. = Russian.
[Pagexxvii-e+ 44]
<HI>Śabda-k. = Śabda-kalpa-
druma.
<HI>Sabin. = Sabine or Sabellian
(old Italic dialect).
<HI>Sāma-v. = Sāma-veda.
<HI>Sans. = Sanskrit.
<HI>Sax. = Saxon.
<HI>Sāy. = Sāyaṇa or according
to Sāyaṇa.
<HI>Schol. = Scholiast or Com-
mentator.
<HI>scil. = scilicet.
<HI>Scot. = Scotch or Highland-
Scotch.
<HI>sing. = singular number.
<HI>Slav. = Slavonic or Slavonian.
<HI>subst. = substantive.
<HI>superl. = superlative degree.
<HI>s.v. = sub voce.
<HI>Them. = Thema or base.
<HI>Umbr. = Umbrian.
<HI>Uṇādi-s. = Uṇādi-sutras (Au-
frecht's edition).
<HI>usu. = usually.
<HI>Vājasaneyi-s. = Vājasaneyi-
saṃhitā.
<HI>Vārt. {%or%} Vārtt. = Vārttika.
<HI>Ved. = Vedic or Veda.
<HI>Vish.-Pur. = Viṣṇu-Purāṇa.
<HI>voc. {%or%} voc. c. = vocative
case.
<HI>=, equal, equivalent to, the
same as, explained by.
<HI>+ plus.
<HI>&c. = et cetera.
<HI>˘ denotes that a vowel or
syllable is to be noted as
short.
<HI> — that a vowel or syllable is
long.
<HI>˚that the rest of a word is
to be supplied, e. g. {%˚ri-%}
{%in˚%} after {%karīndra%} is for
{%kari-indra.%}
;
; NAGARI LETTERS WITH THEIR INDO-ROMANIC EQUIVALENTS
;
[Pagexxviii-a+ 26]
<H>THE DICTIONARY ORDER OF THE NAGARI LETTERS
<P>WITH THEIR INDO-ROMANIC EQUIVALENTS AND THEIR PRONUNCIATION EXEMPLIFIED BY
ENGLISH WORDS.
VOWELS.
Initial. Medial. Equivalents and Pronunciation.
<HI>{#a#} — a {%in%} mica, rural.
<HI>{#A#} ā {%in%} tar, father (tār, fāther).
<HI>{#i I#} i {%in%} fill, lily.
<HI>{#I i#} ī {%in%} police (polīce).
<HI>{#u u#} {%in%} full, bush.
<HI>{#U U#} ū {%in%} rude (rūde).
<HI>{#f f#} ṛ {%in%} merrily (merṛly).
<HI>{#F F#} ṝ {%in%} marine (maṝne).
<HI>{#x x#} ḷ {%in%} revelry (reveḷ).
<HI>{#X X#} ḹ {%in%} the above prolonged.
<HI>{#e e#} e {%in%} prey, there.
<HI>{#E E#} {%in%} aisle.
<HI>{#o o#} {%in%} go, stone.
<HI>{#O O#} {%in%} Haus (German).
<HI>SIGNS OR SYMBOLS.
<HI>{#M#} ṉ or ṃ {either the true Anu-
svāra, sounded like {%n%}
in French {%mon,%} or the
symbol of any nasal.
<HI>{#H#} ḥ {symbol for the sibi-
lant called Visarga.
[Pagexxviii-b+ 20]
<H>CONSONANTS.
<H>Equivalents and Pronunciation.
<HI>{#k#} k {%in%} kill, seek.
<HI>{#K#} kh {%in%} ink-horn (inkhorn).
<HI>{#g#} g {%in%} gun, get, dog.
<HI>{#G#} gh {%in%} log-hut (loghut).
<HI>{#N#} ń {%in%} sing, king, sink (sińk).
<HI>{#c#} ć {%in%} dolće (in music).
<HI>{#C#} ćh {%in%} church-hill (ćurćhill).
<HI>{#j#} j {%in%} jet, jump.
<HI>{#J#}
<F>*)Sometimes printed in the form {#J#}, see pp. 147, 354.</F>
<HI>{#Y#} ṅ {%in%} single (siṅj).
<HI>{#w#} ṭ {%in%} true (ṭrue).
<HI>{#W#} ṭh {%in%} ant-hill (anṭhill).
<HI>{#q#} ḍ {%in%} drum (ḍrum).
<HI>{#Q#} ḍh {%in%} red-haired (reḍhaired).
<HI>{#R#} ṇ {%in%} none (ṇoṇe).
<HI>{#t#} t {%in%} water (in Ireland).
<HI>{#T#} th {%in%} nuthook (more dental).
[Pagexxviii-c+ 31]
<H>Equivalents and Pronunciation.
<HI>{#d#} d {%in%} dice (more like {%th%} in {%this%}).
<HI>{#D#} dh {%in%} adhere (but more dental).
<HI>{#n#} n {%in%} not, nut, in.
<HI>{#p#} p {%in%} put, sip.
<HI>{#P#} ph {%in%} uphill.
<HI>{#b#} b {%in%} bear, rub.
<HI>{#B#} bh {%in%} abhor.
<HI>{#m#} m {%in%} map, jam.
<HI>{#y#} y {%in%} yet, loyal.
<HI>{#r#} r {%in%} red, year.
<HI>{#l#} l {%in%} lull, lead.
<HI>{#L#} ḷ {%in%} (sometimes for {#q#} {%ḍ%} in Veda).
<HI>{#Lah#} ḷh {%in%} (sometimes for {#Q#} {%ḍh%} in Veda).
<HI>{#v#} v {%in%} ivy (but like {%w%} after cons.).
<HI>{#S#} ś {%in%} sure, session (śure, sesśion).
<HI>{#z#} sh {%in%} shun, bush.
<HI>{#s#} s {%in%} saint, sin, hiss.
<HI>{#h#} h {%in%} hear, hit.
<P>Note — The conjunct consonants are too numerous to be exhibited above, but the most common will be found at the end
of ‘A Practical Sanskrit Grammar by Monier Williams.’ published by the Delegates of the Clarendon Press, third edition.
For the correct pronunciation of the aspirated consonants, {%kh, ćh, ṭh, th, ph,%} &c., see p. xix of the preceding Preface.
<H>THE DICTIONARY ORDER OF THE INDO-ROMANIC LETTERS
WITHOUT THEIR NĀGARĪ EQUIVALENTS.
<P>a, ā; i, ī; u, ū; ṛ, ṝ; ḷ, ḹ; e, ai; o, au; — ṉ or ṃ, ḥ; — k, kh; g, gh; ń; — ć, ćh; j, jh;
ṅ; — ṭ, ṭh; ḍ, ḍh; ṇ; — t, th; d, dh; n; — p, ph; b, bh; m; — y, r, l, ḷ, ḷh, v; — ś, sh, s; — h.
<P>Observe — {%ṉ%} represents the true Anusvāra in the body of a word before the sibilants and {%h,%} as in {%aṉśa, aṉsa, aṉhati: ṃ%} as
the symbol of any nasal will often be found at the end of a word, as in {%dānaṃ ća;%} but may also represent Anusvāra, when
final {%m%} is followed by initial sibilants and {%h,%} and in words formed with preposition {%sam,%} like {%saṃ-śaya, saṃ-hata:%} in the word
Sanskrit the second {%s%} is not initial, but introduced into the body of the word, so that we might properly write Saṉskṛt. Visarga
as a substitute for final {%s%} is a distinctly audible aspirate, so that the {%ḥ%} at the end of {%devaḥ%} must be clearly heard.
[Page0001-a+ 70]
;
; ENTRIES
;
<H>{#A#} {%a.%}

<L>1<pc>0001-a<k1>a<k2>a<h>1
{#a#} 1¦. {%a,%} the first letter of the alphabet; the
first short vowel inherent in consonants. {%—A-kāra,%}
{%as,%} m. the letter or sound {%a.%}
<LEND>

<L>2<pc>0001-a<k1>a<k2>a<h>2
{#a#} 2¦. {%a,%} ind. an interjection of pity (Ah!).
<LEND>

<L>3<pc>0001-a<k1>a<k2>a<h>3
{#a#} 3¦. {%a%} (before a vowel {%an%}), a prefix cor-
responding to Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀ, ἀν</lang> Lat. <nsi>in,</nsi> Goth. and Germ. <nsi>un,</nsi>
Eng. <nsi>in</nsi> or <nsi>un,</nsi> and having a negative or privative or
depreciative sense; e. g. {%eka%} one, {%an-eka%} not one;
{%anta%} end, {%an-anta%} endless; {%paśyat%} seeing, {%a-paśyat%}
not seeing. Sometimes this prefix denotes com-
parison. It is occasionally an expletive.
<LEND>

<L>4<pc>0001-a<k1>a<k2>a<h>4
{#a#} 4¦. {%a,%} the base of some pronouns and pro-
nom. forms; (substituted for {%idam,%} in {%asya, atra,%} &c.)
<LEND>

<L>5<pc>0001-a<k1>a<k2>a<h>5
{#a#} 5¦. {%a,%} the augment prefixed to the root
in the formation of the imperfect, aorist, and con-
ditional tenses, by some considered as connected with
3. {%a,%} and by others as connected with 4. {%a.%}
<LEND>

<L>6<pc>0001-a<k1>a<k2>a<h>6
{#a#} 6¦. {%a, as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu (especially as the
first of the three sounds in the sacred syllable {%om%}), also
of Brahmā, Śiva, and Vaiśvānara; ({%am%}), n. Brahma.
<LEND>

<L>7<pc>0001-a<k1>afRin<k2>afRin
{#afRin#}¦ {%a-ṛṇin, ī, inī, i,%} free from debt.
<LEND>

<L>8<pc>0001-a<k1>aMS<k2>aMS
{#aMS#}¦ {%aṃś,%} cl. 10. P. {%aṃśayati, -yitum,%} to
divide, distribute; also occasionally A.
{%aṃśayate;%} also {%aṃśāpayati.%}
<LEND>

<L>9<pc>0001-a<k1>aMSa<k2>aMSa
{%Aṃśa, as,%}¦ m. a share, portion, part, party;
partition, inheritance; a share of booty; earnest
money; a fraction; the denominator of one; a
degree of lat. or long.; N. of an Āditya; the
shoulder or shoulder-blade, more usually spelt {%aṃsa,%}
q. v. [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>ahsala;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>achsel;</nsi>
Lat. <nsi>axilla.</nsi>]. {%—Aṃśa-karaṇa, am,%} n. act of dividing.
{%—Aṃśa-bhāj, k, k, k,%} one who has a share, an heir, a
co-heir. {%—Aṃśa-vat, ān,%} m. a species of the Soma plant.
{%—Aṃśa-savarṇana, am,%} n. reduction of fractions.
{%—Aṃśa-svara, as,%} m. the key-note. {%—Aṃśa-hara,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} or {%aṃśa-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} one who
takes a share, a sharer. {%—Aṃśāṃśa (˚śa-aṃ˚), as,%} m.
part of a portion (of a deity), a secondary incarnation.
{%—Aṃśāṃśi,%} ind. share by share. {%—Aṃśāvataraṇa%}
{%(˚śa-av˚), am,%} n. descent of parts of the deities;
partial incarnation; title of sections 64 — 67 of the
first book of the Mahā-bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>10<pc>0001-a<k1>aMSaka<k2>aMSaka
{%Aṃśaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} having a share; m. f. a
co-heir, a relative; m. a share; n. a day.
<LEND>

<L>11<pc>0001-a<k1>aMSana<k2>aMSana
{%Aṃśana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sharing or dividing.
<LEND>

<L>12<pc>0001-a<k1>aMSanIya<k2>aMSanIya
{%Aṃśanīya%}¦ or {%aṃśayitavya, as, ā, am,%} divisible.
<LEND>

<L>13<pc>0001-a<k1>aMSayitf<k2>aMSayitf
{%Aṃśayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a divider, sharer.
<LEND>

<L>14<pc>0001-a<k1>aMSala<k2>aMSala
{%Aṃśala.%}¦ See {%aṃsala%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>15<pc>0001-a<k1>aMSita<k2>aMSita
{%Aṃśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ divided, shared.
<LEND>

<L>16<pc>0001-a<k1>aMSin<k2>aMSin
{%Aṃśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ a sharer, co-heir.
<LEND>

<L>17<pc>0001-a<k1>aMSu<k2>aMSu
{%Aṃśu, us,%}¦ m. a filament, especially of the Soma
plant; end of a thread; a minute particle; a point or
end; a garment, decoration; a ray, light, the sun; N.
of a Ṛṣi or of a prince. {%—Aṃśu-jāla, am,%} n. a collec-
tion of rays, a blaze of light. {%—Aṃśu-dhara, as,%} m. the
bearer of rays, the sun. {%—Aṃśu-paṭṭa, am,%} n. a kind
of cloth. {%—Aṃśu-pati, is,%} or {%-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. the
lord of rays, the sun. {%—Aṃśu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} fibrous,
rich in filaments; radiant, luminous; pointed; ({%ān%}),
m. the sun, the moon; N. of various persons, especially
of a prince of the solar race, son of A-samañjas, grand-
son of Sagara; ({%tī%}), f. the celestial river Yamunā; a
plant, Hedysarum Gangeticum. {%—Aṃśumati-phalā,%} f.
a plant, Musa Paradisiaca. {%—Aṃśu-mālā,%} f. a garland
of light, halo. {%—Aṃśu-mālin, ī,%} m. the sun. {%—Aṃśu-%}
{%vāṇa, as,%} m. having rays for arrows, the sun. {%—Aṃśu-%}
{%hasta, as,%} m. having rays in his hand, the sun.
<LEND>

<L>18<pc>0001-a<k1>aMSuka<k2>aMSuka
{%Aṃśuka, am,%}¦ n. a leaf; cloth; fine or white cloth;
muslin, an upper garment; a mantle.
<LEND>
[Page0001-b+ 66]

<L>19<pc>0001-b<k1>aMSula<k2>aMSula
{%Aṃśula, as, ā, am,%}¦ radiant; ({%as%}), m., N. of the
sage Cāṇakya.
<LEND>

<L>20<pc>0001-b<k1>aMSya<k2>aMSya
{%Aṃśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ divisible.
<LEND>

<L>21<pc>0001-b<k1>aMs<k2>aMs
{#aMs#}¦ {%aṃs,%} cl. 10. P. {%aṃsayati,%} &c., = {%aṃś.%}
<LEND>

<L>22<pc>0001-b<k1>aMsa<k2>aMsa
{#aMsa#}¦ {%aṃsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%am%}), the shoulder,
shoulder-blade; N. of a king; a share, see {%aṃśa;%}
{%(au),%} m. du. the two shoulders or angles of an altar
[cf. Goth. <nsi>amsa;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄσιλλα</lang> Lat. <nsi>humerus,</nsi>
<nsi>ansa</nsi>]. {%—Aṃsa-kūṭa, as,%} m. a bull's hump, the pro-
tuberance between the shoulders of the Indian ox.
{%—Aṃsa-tra, am,%} n. armour to protect the shoulder;
a bow. {%—Aṃsa-dhrī,%} f. a cooking vessel(?). {%—Aṃsa-%}
{%phalaka, as,%} m. upper part of the spine. {%—Aṃsa-%}
{%bhāra%} or {%aṃse-bhāra, as,%} m. a yoke or burden put
upon the shoulder. {%—Aṃsa-bhārika%} or {%aṃse-bhārika,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} or {%aṃsa-bhārin%} or {%aṃse-bhārin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} bearing a yoke.
<LEND>

<L>23<pc>0001-b<k1>aMsala<k2>aMsala
{%Aṃsala, as, ā, am,%}¦ lusty, strong.
<LEND>

<L>24<pc>0001-b<k1>aMsya<k2>aMsya
{%Aṃsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the shoulder.
<LEND>

<L>25<pc>0001-b<k1>aMh<k2>aMh
{#aMh#}¦ {%aṃh%} (allied to {%aṅgh%}), cl. 1. A. {%aṃhate,%}
{%hitum,%} to go, set out, commence; to ap-
proach: cl. 10. P. {%aṃhayati,%} to send; to speak; to
shine. [The rt. {%aṃh%} seems to have had originally
another meaning, viz. to press together, strangle; =
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄγχω</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>26<pc>0001-b<k1>aMhati<k2>aMhati
{%Aṃhati, is,%}¦ f. (probably fr. the preceding rt., said
to be here a substitute for {%han%}), anxiety, distress,
trouble, illness [cf. Lat. <nsi>ango</nsi>]; a gift, (in this sense
also {%aṃhatī,%} f.)
<LEND>

<L>27<pc>0001-b<k1>aMhas<k2>aMhas
{%Aṃhas,%}¦ n. (said to be connected with rt. {%am%}),
anxiety, trouble; sin [cf. {%agha, āgas;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄχνυμαι</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἄχος, ἄγος</lang>]. {%—Aṃhasas-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of
the perplexity, i. e. an intercalary month. {%—Aṃhas-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} sinful. {%—Aṃho-muc, k, k, k,%} Ved.
delivering from distress.
<LEND>

<L>28<pc>0001-b<k1>aMhiti<k2>aMhiti
{%Aṃhiti, is,%}¦ f. a gift, donation. See {%aṃhati.%}
<LEND>

<L>29<pc>0001-b<k1>aMhu<k2>aMhu
{%Aṃhu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. strait, narrow; ({%us%}), m.,
N. of an Asura; ({%u%}), n. anxiety, distress; Pudendum
Muliebre [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐγγύς</lang> Goth. <nsi>aggvus;</nsi> Lat.
<nsi>angustus, anxius,</nsi> &c.]. {%—Aṃhu-bhedī,%} f. having
a narrow slit, having the pudendum divided.
<LEND>

<L>30<pc>0001-b<k1>aMhura<k2>aMhura
{%Aṃhura, as, ā, am,%}¦ straitened, distressed; sinful.
<LEND>

<L>31<pc>0001-b<k1>aMhUraRa<k2>aMhUraRa
{%Aṃhūraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ distressing, sinful; ({%am%}),
n. sin, distress.
<LEND>

<L>32<pc>0001-b<k1>aMhoyu<k2>aMhoyu
{%Aṃhoyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. troublesome; freed from sin.
<LEND>

<L>33<pc>0001-b<k1>aMhri<k2>aMhri
{%Aṃhri, is,%}¦ m. a foot, the root of a tree [cf.
{%aṅghri%}]. {%—Aṃhri-pa, as,%} m. a tree (foot-drinker).
{%—Aṃhri-skandha, as,%} m. a part of the foot between
the ancle and the heel.
<LEND>

<L>34<pc>0001-b<k1>ak<k2>ak
{#ak#}¦ {%ak,%} cl. 1. P. {%akati, akitum,%} to move
tortuously, like a snake [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀγκή</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀγκαί, ἀγκών</lang> Lat. <nsi>angulus</nsi>]. Compare rt. {%ag.%}
<LEND>

<L>35<pc>0001-b<k1>aka<k2>aka
{%Aka, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving tortuously; ({%am%}), n. pain,
trouble, sin (also derived from {%a,%} not {%+ ka,%} happiness).
<LEND>

<L>36<pc>0001-b<k1>akaca<k2>akaca
{#akaca#}¦ {%a-kaca, as, ā, am,%} destitute of hair,
bald; ({%as%}), m., N. of Ketu, the dragon's tail or descend-
ing node, the symbol of which is a headless trunk.
<LEND>

<L>37<pc>0001-b<k1>akaRwaka<k2>akaRwaka
{#akaRwaka#}¦ {%a-kaṇṭaka, as, ā, am,%} free from
thorns, troubles, difficulties, or enemies.
<LEND>

<L>38<pc>0001-b<k1>akatTana<k2>akatTana
{#akatTana#}¦ {%a-katthana, as, ā, am,%} not boastful.
<LEND>

<L>39<pc>0001-b<k1>akaTya<k2>akaTya
{#akaTya#}¦ {%a-kathya, as, ā, am,%} unspeakable;
not to be uttered or mentioned.
<LEND>

<L>40<pc>0001-b<k1>akanizWa<k2>akanizWa
{#akanizWa#}¦ {%a-kaniṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} not the
youngest; elder, superior; ({%as%}), m. a deified Buddhist
saint, Buddha. {%—Akaniṣṭha-ga, as,%} m. Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>41<pc>0001-b<k1>akanyA<k2>akanyA
{#akanyA#}¦ {%a-kanyā,%} f. no virgin.
<LEND>
[Page0001-c+ 62]

<L>42<pc>0001-c<k1>akapIvat<k2>akapIvat
{#akapIvat#}¦ {%akapīvat, ān,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>43<pc>0001-c<k1>akampita<k2>akampita
{#akampita#}¦ {%a-kampita, as, ā, am,%} unshaken,
firm; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Jaina saint, a pupil of the last
Tīrtha-kara.
<LEND>

<L>44<pc>0001-c<k1>akampya<k2>akampya
{%A-kampya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be shaken.
<LEND>

<L>45<pc>0001-c<k1>akara<k2>akara
{#akara#}¦ {%a-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} handless, maimed;
exempt from tax or duty, privileged; not acting; ({%ā%}),
f. Emblic Myrobalan, Phyllanthus Emblica.
<LEND>

<L>46<pc>0001-c<k1>akaraRa<k2>akaraRa
{#akaraRa#}¦ {%a-karaṇa, am,%} n. absence of action.
<LEND>

<L>47<pc>0001-c<k1>akaraRi<k2>akaraRi
{%A-karaṇi, is,%}¦ f. non-accomplishment, failure, disap-
pointment (used in imprecations, e. g. {%tasyākaraṇir%}
{%evāstu,%} may he experience a failure !).
<LEND>

<L>48<pc>0001-c<k1>akaraRIya<k2>akaraRIya
{%A-karaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be done.
<LEND>

<L>49<pc>0001-c<k1>akaruRa<k2>akaruRa
{#akaruRa#}¦ {%a-karuṇa, as, ā, am,%} merciless, re-
lentless. {%—Akaruṇa-tva, am,%} n. harshness, cruelty.
<LEND>

<L>50<pc>0001-c<k1>akarkaSa<k2>akarkaSa
{#akarkaSa#}¦ {%a-karkaśa, as, ā, am,%} not hard,
not rugged, soft, tender.
<LEND>

<L>51<pc>0001-c<k1>akarRa<k2>akarRa
{#akarRa#}¦ {%a-karṇa%} or {%a-karṇaka, as, ā, am,%}
without ears, deaf.
<LEND>

<L>52<pc>0001-c<k1>akarRya<k2>akarRya
{%A-karṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not fit for the ears; not in
the ears.
<LEND>

<L>53<pc>0001-c<k1>akarRaDAra<k2>akarRaDAra
{#akarRaDAra#}¦ {%a-karṇadhāra, as, ā, am,%} without
a helmsman, destitute of a pilot.
<LEND>

<L>54<pc>0001-c<k1>akartana<k2>akartana
{#akartana#}¦ {%a-kartana, as,%} m, a dwarf (?).
<LEND>

<L>55<pc>0001-c<k1>akartf<k2>akartf
{#akartf#}¦ {%a-kartṛ, tā,%} m. not an agent; an
inferior agent. {%—Akartṛ-tva, am,%} n. condition of an
inferior agent, a subordinate station.
<LEND>

<L>56<pc>0001-c<k1>akarman<k2>akarman
{#akarman#}¦ {%a-karman, ā, ā, a,%} without work,
idle; inefficient; disqualified for performing essential
rites, destitute of good works; (in grammar) intransitive;
({%a%}), n. absence of work; absence of essential observ-
ances; improper work, crime. {%—Akarma-bhoga, as,%} m.
renunciation of self-righteousness; enjoyment of free-
dom from the fruits of action. {%—Akarmānvita (˚ma-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} unoccupied, disqualified; criminal.
<LEND>

<L>57<pc>0001-c<k1>akarmaka<k2>akarmaka
{%A-karmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (in grammar) intransitive.
<LEND>

<L>58<pc>0001-c<k1>akarmaRya<k2>akarmaRya
{%A-karmaṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ improper to be done;
unfit for work; inefficient.
<LEND>

<L>59<pc>0001-c<k1>akala<k2>akala
{#akala#}¦ {%a-kala, as, ā, am,%} not in parts, entire.
<LEND>

<L>60<pc>0001-c<k1>akalka<k2>akalka
{#akalka#}¦ {%a-kalka, as, ā, am,%} free from sedi-
ment; pure; sinless; ({%ā%}), f. moonlight. {%—Akalka-%}
{%tā,%} f. honesty.
<LEND>

<L>61<pc>0001-c<k1>akalkana<k2>akalkana
{#akalkana#}¦ {%a-kalkana%} or {%a-kalkala, as, ā, am,%}
free from pride, modest, honest.
<LEND>

<L>62<pc>0001-c<k1>akalpa<k2>akalpa
{#akalpa#}¦ {%a-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} not subject to
rules, uncontrolled; incomparable; unable, weak.
<LEND>

<L>63<pc>0001-c<k1>akalpita<k2>akalpita
{%A-kalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not manufactured, not arti-
ficial, not pretended; natural, genuine.
<LEND>

<L>64<pc>0001-c<k1>akalmaza<k2>akalmaza
{#akalmaza#}¦ {%a-kalmaṣa, as, ā, am,%} sinless,
faultless.
<LEND>

<L>65<pc>0001-c<k1>akalmAza<k2>akalmAza
{#akalmAza#}¦ {%a-kalmāṣa, as,%} m., N. of a son
of the fourth Manu.
<LEND>

<L>66<pc>0001-c<k1>akalya<k2>akalya
{#akalya#}¦ {%a-kalya, as, ā, am,%} unwell, ill, sick.
<LEND>

<L>67<pc>0001-c<k1>akalyARa<k2>akalyARa
{%A-kalyāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ not prosperous, inauspicious;
({%am%}), n. adversity.
<LEND>

<L>68<pc>0001-c<k1>akava<k2>akava
{#akava#}¦ {%a-kava, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%ku,%} q. v.),
Ved. not contemptible, not bad. {%—A-kavāri (˚va-%}
{%ari), is, is, i,%} Ved. not contemptible as an enemy,
or to his enemies, or in his enemies; not having
weak enemies.
<LEND>

<L>69<pc>0001-c<k1>akavaca<k2>akavaca
{#akavaca#}¦ {%a-kavaca, as, ā, am,%} Ved. without
a coat of mail.
<LEND>
[Page0002-a+ 70]

<L>70<pc>0002-a<k1>akavi<k2>akavi
{#akavi#}¦ {%a-kavi, is, is, i,%} Ved. unwise.
<LEND>

<L>71<pc>0002-a<k1>akasmAt<k2>akasmAt
{#akasmAt#}¦ {%a-kasmāt,%} ind. without a why or
a wherefore, accidentally, suddenly.
<LEND>

<L>72<pc>0002-a<k1>akARqa<k2>akARqa
{#akARqa#}¦ {%a-kāṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} ‘without a trunk,’
causeless, unexpected. {%—Akāṇḍa-pāta-jāta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} dying as soon as born. {%—Akāṇḍa-śūla, am,%}
n. sudden attack of colic.
<LEND>

<L>73<pc>0002-a<k1>akARqe<k2>akARqe
{%A-kāṇḍe,%}¦ ind. causelessly, unexpectedly.
<LEND>

<L>74<pc>0002-a<k1>akAtara<k2>akAtara
{#akAtara#}¦ {%a-kātara, as, ā, am,%} not down-
hearted, cheerful, hearty.
<LEND>

<L>75<pc>0002-a<k1>akAma<k2>akAma
{#akAma#}¦ {%a-kāma, as, ā, am,%} without desire
or affection, without intention; unintentional, re-
luctant; (in grammar) the Sandhi which causes the
dropping of a final {%r%} before a succeeding {%r; (as),%} m.
absence of desire or affection. {%—A-kāma-karśana,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. not disappointing desires. {%—Akāma-tas,%}
ind. unintentionally, unwillingly. {%—Akāma-tā,%} f.
freedom from desire or affection or intention. {%—A-%}
{%kāma-hata, as, ā, am,%} not smitten with desire or
affection; free from desire, calm.
<LEND>

<L>76<pc>0002-a<k1>akAmin<k2>akAmin
{%A-kāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ the same as {%a-kāma.%}
<LEND>

<L>77<pc>0002-a<k1>akAya<k2>akAya
{#akAya#}¦ {%a-kāya, as, ā, am,%} incorporeal.
<LEND>

<L>78<pc>0002-a<k1>akAraRa<k2>akAraRa
{#akAraRa#}¦ {%a-kāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} causeless;
({%am%}), n. absence of a cause; ind. causelessly. {%—A-kā-%}
{%raṇotpanna (˚ṇa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} produced spon-
taneously.
<LEND>

<L>79<pc>0002-a<k1>akArin<k2>akArin
{%A-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ inactive, not performing.
<LEND>

<L>80<pc>0002-a<k1>akArRavezwakika<k2>akArRavezwakika
{#akArRavezwakika#}¦ {%a-kārṇaveṣṭakika, as, ī, am,%}
not adapted for ear-rings. See {%karṇa-veṣṭaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>81<pc>0002-a<k1>akArya<k2>akArya
{#akArya#}¦ {%a-kārya, as, ā, am,%} not to be done,
impracticable, improper; ({%am%}), n. a criminal action.
{%—Akārya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} an evil-doer; one who
neglects his duty.
<LEND>

<L>82<pc>0002-a<k1>akArzRya<k2>akArzRya
{#akArzRya#}¦ {%a-kārṣṇya, am,%} n. absence of
blackness.
<LEND>

<L>83<pc>0002-a<k1>akAla<k2>akAla
{#akAla#}¦ {%a-kāla, as,%} m. a wrong or bad or
inauspicious time; ({%as, ā, am%}), unseasonable. {%—A-%}
{%kāla-kuṣmāṇḍa, as,%} m. a pumpkin produced out
of season; a useless birth. {%—Akāla-kusuma, am,%}
n. a flower blossoming out of season. {%—Akāla-ja%} or
{%akāla-jāta%} or {%a-kālotpanna (˚la-ut˚), as, ā, am,%}
born or produced at a wrong time, unseasonable.
{%—Akāla-jaladodaya (˚da-ud˚)%} or {%akāla-megho-%}
{%daya (˚gha-ud˚), as,%} m. unseasonable rise or clouds; a
mist. {%—Akāla-velā,%} f. unseasonable or unusual time.
{%—Akāla-saha, as, ā, am,%} unable to bide one's time.
<LEND>

<L>84<pc>0002-a<k1>akAlya<k2>akAlya
{%A-kālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unseasonable.
<LEND>

<L>85<pc>0002-a<k1>akiYcana<k2>akiYcana
{#akiYcana#}¦ {%a-kiñcana, as, ā, am,%} without
anything, utterly destitute, poor; disinterested; ({%am%}),
n. that which is nothing, or worth nothing. {%—A-%}
{%kiñcana-tā,%} f. voluntary poverty (as the duty of a
Jaina ascetic).
<LEND>

<L>86<pc>0002-a<k1>akiYcaniman<k2>akiYcaniman
{%A-kiñcaniman, ā,%}¦ m. destitution, poverty.
<LEND>

<L>87<pc>0002-a<k1>akitava<k2>akitava
{#akitava#}¦ {%a-kitava, as,%} m. no gambler.
<LEND>

<L>88<pc>0002-a<k1>akilviza<k2>akilviza
{#akilviza#}¦ {%a-kilviṣa, as, ā, am,%} sinless,
faultless.
<LEND>

<L>89<pc>0002-a<k1>akIrtti<k2>akIrtti
{#akIrtti#}¦ {%a-kīrtti, is,%} f. bad repute. {%—Akīrtti-%}
{%kara, as, ā, am,%} disreputable.
<LEND>

<L>90<pc>0002-a<k1>akuRWa<k2>akuRWa
{#akuRWa#}¦ {%a-kuṇṭha, as, ā, am,%} not blunted
or worn out; fresh, vigorous, fixed. {%—A-kuṇṭha-%}
{%dhiṣṇya, am,%} n. heaven.
<LEND>

<L>91<pc>0002-a<k1>akuRWita<k2>akuRWita
{%A-kuṇṭhita, as, ā, am, = akuṇṭha%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>92<pc>0002-a<k1>akutas<k2>akutas
{#akutas#}¦ {%a-kutas,%} ind. (usually found in
composition), not from anywhere or any cause. {%—A-%}
{%kutaś-cala, as,%} m. not moveable from any cause;
a title of Śiva. {%—A-kuto-bhaya, as, ā, am,%} not afraid
or threatened from any quarter, secure.
<LEND>

<L>93<pc>0002-a<k1>akutra<k2>akutra
{%A-kutra%}¦ or {%a-kutrā,%} ind., Ved. nowhere, i. e. astray.
<LEND>

<L>94<pc>0002-a<k1>akutsita<k2>akutsita
{#akutsita#}¦ {%a-kutsita, as, ā, am,%} unreproached.
<LEND>

<L>95<pc>0002-a<k1>akuDryaYc<k2>akuDryaYc
{#akuDryaYc#}¦ {%a-kudhryañc, an, dhrīcī, ak (ku- %}
[Page0002-b+ 68]
{%dhri%} for {%kudha%} for {%kuha = kutra%}), Ved. going no-
where, coming to nothing; (Sāy.) fruitless, worthless.
<LEND>

<L>96<pc>0002-b<k1>akupya<k2>akupya
{#akupya#}¦ {%a-kupya, am,%} n. ‘not base metal,’
gold or silver; any base metal, (see 3. {%a%} at end.)
<LEND>

<L>97<pc>0002-b<k1>akumAra<k2>akumAra
{#akumAra#}¦ {%a-kumāra, as,%} m. not a boy; an
epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>98<pc>0002-b<k1>akula<k2>akula
{#akula#}¦ {%a-kula, as, ā, am,%} not of a good
family, low; ({%as%}), m., N. of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
Pārvatī. {%—Akula-tā,%} f. lowness of family.
<LEND>

<L>99<pc>0002-b<k1>akulIna<k2>akulIna
{%A-kulīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not of a good family.
<LEND>

<L>100<pc>0002-b<k1>akuSala<k2>akuSala
{#akuSala#}¦ {%a-kuśala, as, ā, am,%} inauspicious,
evil; not clever; ({%am%}), n. evil, an inauspicious or
evil word.
<LEND>

<L>101<pc>0002-b<k1>akusIda<k2>akusIda
{#akusIda#}¦ {%a-kusīda, as, ā, am,%} not wishing
for interest or gain; (also {%a-kuśīda.%})
<LEND>

<L>102<pc>0002-b<k1>akusuma<k2>akusuma
{#akusuma#}¦ {%a-kusuma, as, ā, am,%} destitute of
flowers or blossoms.
<LEND>

<L>103<pc>0002-b<k1>akuha<k2>akuha
{#akuha#}¦ {%a-kuha, as,%} m. no deceiver.
<LEND>

<L>104<pc>0002-b<k1>akUpAra<k2>akUpAra
{#akUpAra#}¦ {%a-kū-pāra, as, ā, am,%} (probably fr.
{%akū%} for {%a-ku,%} not bad, not contemptible, and {%pāra,%}
opposite shore or limit), having a good issue or effect;
unbounded; ({%as%}), m. the sea; the sun; the king of
tortoises, who upholds the world; any tortoise or turtle.
<LEND>

<L>105<pc>0002-b<k1>akUvAra<k2>akUvAra
{%A-kūvāra = a-kū-pāra%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>106<pc>0002-b<k1>akUrca<k2>akUrca
{#akUrca#}¦ {%a-kūrca, as, ā, am,%} guileless; ({%as%}),
m. Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>107<pc>0002-b<k1>akfcCra<k2>akfcCra
{#akfcCra#}¦ {%a-kṛcchra, as, am,%} m. n. absence
of difficulty; facility.
<LEND>

<L>108<pc>0002-b<k1>akfcCrin<k2>akfcCrin
{%A-kṛcchrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ free from trouble.
<LEND>

<L>109<pc>0002-b<k1>akfta<k2>akfta
{#akfta#}¦ {%a-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} undone, un-
performed; not made, uncreated; not prepared, not
ready, incomplete; one who has done no works;
({%am%}), n. an unperformed act; an unheard-of action
or crime; ({%ā%}), f. a daughter not placed on a level with
sons. {%—Akṛta-kāram,%} ind. as has not been done be-
fore. {%—Akṛta-jña, as, ā, am,%} ungrateful. {%—Akṛta-%}
{%jña-tā,%} f. ingratitude. {%—Akṛta-buddhi, is, is, i,%}
having an unformed mind. {%—Akṛtabuddhi-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. ignorance. {%—Akṛta-vraṇa, as,%} m., N. of
an expounder of the Purāṇas. {%—Akṛtātman (˚ta-%}
{%āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having an unformed mind; not yet identi-
fied with the supreme spirit. {%—Akṛtārtha (˚ta-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having one's object unaccomplished unsuc-
cessful. {%—A-kṛtāstra (˚ta-as˚), as, ā, am,%} unpractised
in arms. {%—A-kṛtainas (˚ta-en˚), ās, ās, as,%} innocent.
{%—Akṛtodvāha (˚ta-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} unmarried.
<LEND>

<L>110<pc>0002-b<k1>akftin<k2>akftin
{%A-kṛtin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ unfit for work, clumsy.
{%—Akṛti-tva, am,%} n. unfitness for work.
<LEND>

<L>111<pc>0002-b<k1>akftya<k2>akftya
{%A-kṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be done, criminal;
({%am%}), n. crime. {%—Akṛtya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} evil-doer.
<LEND>

<L>112<pc>0002-b<k1>akftta<k2>akftta
{#akftta#}¦ {%a-kṛtta, as, ā, am,%} uncut, unimpaired.
{%—Akṛtta-ruc, k, k, k,%} possessing unimpaired splendor.
<LEND>

<L>113<pc>0002-b<k1>akftrima<k2>akftrima
{#akftrima#}¦ {%a-kṛtrima, as, ā, am,%} inartificial,
unfeigned, natural.
<LEND>

<L>114<pc>0002-b<k1>akftsna<k2>akftsna
{#akftsna#}¦ {%a-kṛtsna, as, ā, am,%} incomplete.
<LEND>

<L>115<pc>0002-b<k1>akfpa<k2>akfpa
{#akfpa#}¦ {%a-kṛpa, as, ā, am,%} merciless, unkind.
<LEND>

<L>116<pc>0002-b<k1>akfpaRa<k2>akfpaRa
{#akfpaRa#}¦ {%a-kṛpaṇa, as, ā, am,%} not miserly.
<LEND>

<L>117<pc>0002-b<k1>akfSa<k2>akfSa
{#akfSa#}¦ {%a-kṛśa, as, ā, am,%} not slender or
emaciated; strong, full. {%—A-kṛśa-lakṣmī, īs, īs, i,%}
enjoying full prosperity. {%—A-kṛśāśva (˚śa-aś˚), as,%}
m., N. of a king of Ayodhyā.
<LEND>

<L>118<pc>0002-b<k1>akfzIvala<k2>akfzIvala
{#akfzIvala#}¦ {%a-kṛṣīvala, as, ā, am,%} not
agricultural.
<LEND>

<L>119<pc>0002-b<k1>akfzwa<k2>akfzwa
{#akfzwa#}¦ {%a-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} unploughed,
untilled; not drawn. {%—Akṛṣṭa-pacya, as, ā, am,%}
ripening in unploughed land, growing wild.
<LEND>

<L>120<pc>0002-b<k1>akfzRakarman<k2>akfzRakarman
{#akfzRakarman#}¦ {%a-kṛṣṇa-karman, ā, ā, a,%} free
from black deeds, guiltless, virtuous.
<LEND>
[Page0002-c+ 66]

<L>121<pc>0002-c<k1>aketana<k2>aketana
{#aketana#}¦ {%a-ketana, as, ā, am,%} houseless.
<LEND>

<L>122<pc>0002-c<k1>aketu<k2>aketu
{#aketu#}¦ {%a-ketu, us, us, u,%} Ved. shapeless,
unrecognisable; (Sāy.) unconscious.
<LEND>

<L>123<pc>0002-c<k1>akeSa<k2>akeSa
{#akeSa#}¦ {%a-keśa, as, ā, am,%} destitute of hair.
<LEND>

<L>124<pc>0002-c<k1>akowa<k2>akowa
{#akowa#}¦ {%a-koṭa, as,%} m. the Areca or Betel-
nut palm, (‘without a bend.’)
<LEND>

<L>125<pc>0002-c<k1>akopana<k2>akopana
{#akopana#}¦ {%a-kopana, as, ā, am,%} not irascible.
<LEND>

<L>126<pc>0002-c<k1>akovida<k2>akovida
{#akovida#}¦ {%a-kovida, as, ā, am,%} unwise, stupid,
ignorant.
<LEND>

<L>127<pc>0002-c<k1>akOSala<k2>akOSala
{#akOSala#}¦ {%a-kauśala, am,%} n. want of dexte-
rity or skill; evil [cf. {%a-kuśala%}].
<LEND>

<L>128<pc>0002-c<k1>akkA<k2>akkA
{#akkA#}¦ {%akkā,%} f. a mother. [Supposed to be
a term of foreign origin; cf. Lat. <nsi>Acca.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>129<pc>0002-c<k1>akta<k2>akta<h>1
{#akta#} 1¦. {%akta, as, ā, am%} (part. of rt. {%añc%} or {%añj%}
in the sense ‘to go’), gone.
<LEND>

<L>130<pc>0002-c<k1>akta<k2>akta<h>2
{#akta#} 2¦. {%akta, as, ā, am%} (part. of rt. {%añj%}),
smeared over; diffused; bedaubed, tinged, characterized.
It is often the last part of a compound word; as, {%raktākta,%}
tinged with red or blood; ({%am%}), n. oil, ointment.
<LEND>

<L>131<pc>0002-c<k1>aktA<k2>aktA
{%Aktā,%}¦ f., Ved. night.
<LEND>

<L>132<pc>0002-c<k1>aktu<k2>aktu
{%Aktu, us,%}¦ f. (m. ?), Ved. ointment; tinge, ray, light,
star (?); dark tinge, darkness, night.
<LEND>

<L>133<pc>0002-c<k1>aktos<k2>aktos
{%Aktos, aktubhis,%}¦ ind., Ved. at night.
<LEND>

<L>134<pc>0002-c<k1>aktvA<k2>aktvA
{%Aktvā%}¦ (ind. part. of rt. {%añj%}), having besmeared.
<LEND>

<L>135<pc>0002-c<k1>akna<k2>akna
{#akna#}¦ {%akna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%añc%}), bent.
<LEND>

<L>136<pc>0002-c<k1>akra<k2>akra<h>1
1. {%akra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. violent [Lat. <nsi>acer?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>137<pc>0002-c<k1>akra<k2>akra<h>2
{#akra#} 2¦. {%a-kra, as, ā, am%} (fr. 3. {%a%} and rt. 1.
{%kṛ ?%}), Ved. inactive, bootless.
<LEND>

<L>138<pc>0002-c<k1>akratu<k2>akratu
{#akratu#}¦ {%a-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved. destitute of will
or energy; powerless, foolish; (Sāy.) without sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>139<pc>0002-c<k1>akrama<k2>akrama
{#akrama#}¦ {%a-krama, as,%} m. want of order,
confusion.
<LEND>

<L>140<pc>0002-c<k1>akravihasta<k2>akravihasta
{#akravihasta#}¦ {%a-kravi-hasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not having bloody hands; (Sāy.) not having nig-
gardly hands, not close-fisted.
<LEND>

<L>141<pc>0002-c<k1>akravyAda<k2>akravyAda
{#akravyAda#}¦ {%a-kravyāda, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-kra-%}
{%vyād, t, t, t,%} not carnivorous, not eating flesh.
<LEND>

<L>142<pc>0002-c<k1>akrAnta<k2>akrAnta
{#akrAnta#}¦ {%a-krānta, as, ā, am,%} unpassed, un-
surpassed, unconquered; ({%ā%}), f. the Egg plant.
<LEND>

<L>143<pc>0002-c<k1>akriya<k2>akriya
{#akriya#}¦ {%a-kriya, as, ā, am,%} without works;
inactive, torpid; abstaining from religious rites; good
for nothing; ({%ā%}), f. inactivity; neglect of duty.
<LEND>

<L>144<pc>0002-c<k1>akrIqat<k2>akrIqat
{#akrIqat#}¦ {%a-krīḍat, an, antī, at,%} not playing.
<LEND>

<L>145<pc>0002-c<k1>akrUra<k2>akrUra
{#akrUra#}¦ {%a-krūra, as, ā, am,%} not cruel, gentle;
({%as%}), m., N. of Kṛṣṇa's paternal uncle and friend.
<LEND>

<L>146<pc>0002-c<k1>akroDa<k2>akroDa
{#akroDa#}¦ {%a-krodha, as,%} m. suppression of
anger, one of the chief virtues among Hindūs; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), free from anger.
<LEND>

<L>147<pc>0002-c<k1>akroDana<k2>akroDana
{%A-krodhana, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from anger; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a prince, son of Ayutāyu.
<LEND>

<L>148<pc>0002-c<k1>aklama<k2>aklama
{#aklama#}¦ {%a-klama, as,%} m. freedom from fatigue.
<LEND>

<L>149<pc>0002-c<k1>aklikA<k2>aklikA
{#aklikA#}¦ {%aklikā,%} f. the Indigo plant.
<LEND>

<L>150<pc>0002-c<k1>aklizwa<k2>aklizwa
{#aklizwa#}¦ {%a-kliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} untroubled;
undisturbed; unwearied. {%—Akliṣṭa-karman, ā, ā, a,%}
or {%akliṣṭa-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} unwearied in action.
{%—Akliṣṭa-vrata, as, ā, am,%} unwearied in keeping
religious vows.
<LEND>

<L>151<pc>0002-c<k1>akleSa<k2>akleSa
{%A-kleśa, as,%}¦ m. freedom from trouble.
<LEND>

<L>152<pc>0002-c<k1>akledya<k2>akledya
{#akledya#}¦ {%a-kledya, as, ā, am,%} incapable of
moisture, not to be wetted.
<LEND>

<L>153<pc>0002-c<k1>akz<k2>akz
{#akz#}¦ {%akṣ%} (probably not a simple rt.,
perhaps a kind of old Desid. form of rt.
1. {%aś%}), cl. 1. P. {%akṣati,%} cl. 5. {%akṣṇoti, ānakṣa,%}
{%akṣiṣyati, akṣyati, ākṣīt, akṣitum%} or {%aṣṭum,%}
to reach; to pass through, penetrate, pervade, embrace;
to accumulate (to form the cube ?): Caus. {%akṣayati, %}
[Page0003-a+ 79]
{%yitum, ācikṣat,%} to cause to pervade: Desid. {%aci-%}
{%kṣiṣati%} or {%acikṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>154<pc>0003-a<k1>akza<k2>akza<h>1
{#akza#} 1¦. {%akṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś%} or {%aj?%}),
an axle, axis, pivot, (in this sense also {%am,%} n.); a
wheel, car, cart; pole of a car; the beam of a balance
or string which holds the pivot of the beam; a snake;
terrestrial latitude; the lower part of the temples
[cf. Lat. <nsi>axis;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄξων</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>ahsa;</nsi> Mod.
Germ. <nsi>Achse;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>assis</nsi>]. {%—Akṣa-karṇa, as,%} m.
the hypotenuse, especially of the triangle formed with
the gnomon of a dial and its shadow; (in astronomy)
argument of the latitude. {%—Akṣa-ja, as,%} m. a dia-
mond; a thunderbolt; a N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Akṣa-dhur,%}
{%ūr,%} f. the yoke attached to the fore part of the pole of
a car. {%—Akṣa-dhūrtila, as,%} m. a bull, an ox, i. e.
yoked to the pole of a cart. {%—Akṣa-pīḍā,%} f.,
N. of a plant. {%—Akṣa-bhāga, as,%} m. a degree of
latitude. {%—Akṣa-bhāra, as,%} m. cart-load, carriage-
load. {%—Akṣāṃsa (˚ṣa-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a degree of
latitude. {%—Akṣāgra (˚ṣa-ag˚), am,%} n. the end of
an axle; the anterior end of the pole of a car; an
axle. {%—Akṣāgra-kīla%} or {%-kīlaka, as,%} m. a linch-
pin; the pin which fastens the yoke to the pole.
{%—Akṣā-nah, t, t, t,%} Ved. tied to a cart or its pole.
<LEND>

<L>155<pc>0003-a<k1>akza<k2>akza<h>2
{#akza#} 2¦. {%akṣa, as,%} m. (said to be from rt. 1.
{%aś,%} a die for playing with; a cube; a seed of which
rosaries are made (in compound words, like {%Indrā-%}
{%kṣa, Rudrākṣa%}); a shrub producing that seed (Eleo-
carpus Ganitrus); a weight called {%karṣa,%} equal to 16
māṣas; Beleric Myrobalan (Terminalia Belerica), the
seed of which is used as a die; ({%am%}), n. sochal salt;
blue vitriol (from its crystallized shape). {%—Akṣa-%}
{%kuśala, as, ā, am,%} skilled in dice. {%—Akṣa-glaha,%}
{%as,%} m. gambling, playing at dice. {%—Akṣa-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} skilled in gambling. {%—Akṣa-tattva, am,%} n.
science of dice. {%—Akṣatattva-vid, t, t, t,%} skilled in
the principles of gambling. {%—Akṣa-devana, am,%}
n. gambling, dice-playing. {%—Akṣa-devin, ī,%} m. a
gamester. {%—Akṣa-dyū, ūs,%} m. a gambler, a dice-
player. {%—Akṣa-dyūta, as,%} m. a gambler, a dice-
player; ({%am%}), n. gambling. {%—Akṣa-dyūtika, am,%}
n. dispute at play. {%—Akṣa-drugdha, as, ā, am,%}
hated by, i. e. unlucky at dice. {%—Akṣa-dhara, as, ā%}
or {%ī, am,%} one who has dice; ({%as%}), m. a plant, Trophis
Aspera; see {%sākhota%}. {%—Akṣa-dhūrta, as,%} m. a game-
ster, a gambler, i. e. a dice-rogue. {%—Akṣa-naipuṇa%} or
{%-naipuṇya, am,%} n. skill in gambling. {%—Akṣa-parā-%}
{%jaya, as,%} m. loss in gambling. {%—Akṣa-pāta, as,%} m.
cast of dice. {%—Akṣa-pātana, am,%} n. act of casting dice.
{%—Akṣa-priya, as, ā, am,%} fond of dice, or (perhaps)
favoured by the dice, lucky. {%—Akṣa-mada, as,%} m.
intoxicating passion for dice. {%—Akṣa-mātra, am,%} n.
dice, anything as big as dice; the twinkling of an eye, a
moment of time. {%—Akṣa-mālā,%} f. a rosary, a string
or necklace of beads, especially of the seeds of the
Eleocarpus; a N. of Arunḍhatī, wife of Vasiṣṭha,
from her wearing a rosary; ({%as, ā, am%}), or {%akṣa-%}
{%mālin, ī, inī, i,%} wearing a rosary of seeds. {%—Akṣa-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. the king of dice, the die called Kali.
{%—Akṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having dice, relating to
dice, gambling; ({%tī%}), f. a game of dice. {%—Akṣa-%}
{%vāma, as,%} m. an unfair gambler. {%—1. akṣa-vid,%}
{%t, t, t,%} skilful in gambling. {%—Akṣa-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}
what has occurred in gambling. {%—Akṣa-śauṇḍa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} fond of gambling. {%—Akṣa-sūtra, am,%} n. a
string or rosary of Eleocarpus seeds. {%—Akṣa-stuṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. Beleric Myrobalan. {%—Akṣa-hṛdaya, am,%} n.
innermost nature of dice, perfect skill in gambling.
{%—Akṣahṛdaya-jña, as, ā, am,%} perfectly skilled in
gambling. {%—Akṣāvapana (˚ṣa-āv˚), am,%} n. a dice-
beard. {%—Akṣāvāpa%} or {%akṣātivāpa (˚ṣa-at˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the keeper of the dice, or of a gambling table.
<LEND>

<L>156<pc>0003-a<k1>akzaka<k2>akzaka
{%Akṣaka%}¦ or {%akṣika, as,%} m. the tree Dalbergia
Oujeinensis.
<LEND>

<L>157<pc>0003-a<k1>akza<k2>akza<h>3
{#akza#} 3¦. {%akṣa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś?%}), an organ
of sense, an object of sense; ({%as%}), m. the soul; know-
ledge, religious knowledge; the law; a lawsuit;
a person born blind; N. of Garuḍa, of a son of
Rāvaṇa, of a son of Nara, &c. {%—Akṣa-darśaka, as,%}
[Page0003-b+ 76]
m. a judge, i. e. one who sees lawsuits; also {%akṣa-%}
{%dṛś, k%}. {%—Akṣa-paṭala, am,%} n. court of law; de-
pository of legal document. {%—Akṣa-pāṭa, as,%} m. an
arena, a wrestling ground, place of contest. {%—Akṣa-%}
{%pāṭaka%} or {%akṣa-pāṭika, as,%} m. a judge, i. e. ar-
ranger of a lawsuit. {%—Akṣa-pāda, as,%} m. a follower
of the Nyāya or logical system of philosophy; N. of
the Ṛṣi Gotama. {%—Akṣa-vāṭa,%} see {%akṣa-pāṭa.%}
 — 2. {%akṣa-vid, t, t, t,%} versed in law.
<LEND>

<L>158<pc>0003-b<k1>akza<k2>akza<h>4
{#akza#} 4¦. {%akṣa, am,%} n. the eye, especially
substituted for {%akṣi%} at the end of adjective com-
pounds, the fem. being {%akṣī%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὄσσο, ὄκκο</lang>
for <lang n="greek">ὄξο</lang> Lat. <nsi>oculus;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Auge;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>òko</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>159<pc>0003-b<k1>akzaRa<k2>akzaRa
{#akzaRa#}¦ {%a-kṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} inopportune.
<LEND>

<L>160<pc>0003-b<k1>akzata<k2>akzata
{#akzata#}¦ {%a-kṣata, as, ā, am,%} not crushed;
uninjured, unbroken, whole; ({%as%}), m. Śiva; thrashed
and winnowed rice which has been dried in the sun;
barley; ({%as, am%}), m. n. an eunuch; ({%ā%}), f. a virgin;
N. of a plant, Karkaṭaśriṅgī or Kankaḍaśriṅgī; ({%am%}),
n. and ({%ās%}), m. pl. whole grain, fried grain. {%—Akṣata-%}
{%yoni, is,%} f. a virgin, an unblemished maiden.
<LEND>

<L>161<pc>0003-b<k1>akzatra<k2>akzatra
{#akzatra#}¦ {%a-kṣatra, as, ā, am,%} destitute of the
Kṣatriya caste, apart from the Kṣatriya caste.
<LEND>

<L>162<pc>0003-b<k1>akzan<k2>akzan
{#akzan#}¦ {%akṣan,%} substituted for {%akṣi,%} the eye,
in the weakest cases, see Gram. 122 [cf. Goth. <nsi>augan</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>163<pc>0003-b<k1>akzaRvat<k2>akzaRvat
{%Akṣaṇ-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ having eyes.
<LEND>

<L>164<pc>0003-b<k1>akzama<k2>akzama
{#akzama#}¦ {%a-kṣama, as, ā, am,%} unable to en-
dure, impatient; incompetent. {%—A-kṣamā%} or {%akṣa-%}
{%ma-tā,%} f. impatience, envy; incompetence.
<LEND>

<L>165<pc>0003-b<k1>akzaya<k2>akzaya
{#akzaya#}¦ {%a-kṣaya, as, ā, am,%} exempt from
decay, undecaying; ({%as%}), m., N. of the twentieth year
in the cycle of Jupiter; ({%ā%}), f. the seventh day of
a lunar month, if it fall on Sunday or Monday; the
fourth, if it fall on Wednesday. {%—Akṣaya-guṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} possessing imperishable qualities; ({%as%}), m. Śiva.
{%—Akṣaya-tā,%} f. or {%akṣaya-tva, am,%} n. imperish-
ableness. {%—Akṣaya-tṛtīyā,%} f. a festival, the third
day of the bright half of Vaiśākha, which is the first
day of the Satya-yuga, and secures permanency to ac-
tions then performed. {%—Akṣaya-puruhūta, as,%} m.
Śiva. {%—Akṣaya-mati, is,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Akṣaya-loka, as,%} m. the undecaying world, hea-
ven. {%—Akṣayā-lalitā,%} f. festival observed by women
on the seventh day of the second half of Bhādra.
<LEND>

<L>166<pc>0003-b<k1>akzayin<k2>akzayin
{%A-kṣayin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ undecaying; ({%iṇī%}), f., N. of
Śiva's wife.
<LEND>

<L>167<pc>0003-b<k1>akzayya<k2>akzayya
{%A-kṣayya, as, ā, am,%}¦ undecaying.
<LEND>

<L>168<pc>0003-b<k1>akzara<k2>akzara
{#akzara#}¦ {%a-kṣara, as, ā, am,%} imperishable;
unalterable; ({%as%}), m. a sword; Śiva; Viṣṇu; ({%am%}),
n. a syllable; the syllable {%om;%} a letter; a vowel, a
sound; a word; speech; Brahma; final beatitude;
abiding merit, religious austerity; sacrifice; right,
justice; the sky; water; a plant (Achyranthes Aspera).
{%—Akṣara-cañcu%} or {%akṣara-cuñcu, us,%} or {%akṣa-%}
{%ra-caṇa%} or {%akṣara-cana, as,%} m. a writer, scribe.
{%—Akṣara-cchandas, as,%} n. metre regulated by the
number and quantity of syllables. {%—Akṣara-jananī,%}
f. a reed or pen. {%—Akṣara-jīvaka%} or {%akṣara-%}
{%jīvika, as,%} or {%akṣara-jīvin, ī,%} m. a scribe. {%—Akṣa-%}
{%ra-jur, ūr,%} m. a sage, one who knows and enjoys
Brahma. {%—Akṣara-tūlikā,%} f. a reed or pen.
{%—Akṣara-nyāsa%} or {%akṣara-vinyāsa, as,%} m. array
of syllables or letters, writing; scripture; the alphabet.
{%—Akṣara-paṅkti, is, is, i,%} containing five syllables;
({%is%}), f., N. of a metre of four lines, each containing
one dactyl and one spondee; also called {%paṅkti%} or
{%haṃsa%}. {%—Akṣara-bhāj, k, k, k,%} Ved. entitled to a
share in the syllables (of a prayer). {%—Akṣara-mukha,%}
{%as,%} m. having the mouth full of syllables, a student,
scholar. {%—Akṣara-vinyāsa,%} see {%akṣara-nyāsa.%}
{%—Akṣara-śas,%} ind. syllable by syllable. {%—Akṣa-%}
{%ra-śūnya, as, ā, am,%} inarticulate. {%—Akṣara-%}
{%saṃsthāna, am,%} n. scripture, writing. {%—Akṣarāṅga%}
{%(˚ra-aṅga), am,%} n. part of a syllable.
<LEND>

<L>169<pc>0003-b<k1>akzaraka<k2>akzaraka
{%Akṣaraka, am,%}¦ n. a vowel.
<LEND>

<L>170<pc>0003-b<k1>akzarya<k2>akzarya
{%Akṣarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to syllables or letters.
<LEND>
[Page0003-c+ 72]

<L>171<pc>0003-c<k1>akzAnti<k2>akzAnti
{#akzAnti#}¦ {%a-kṣānti, is,%} f. impatience,
jealousy, intolerance.
<LEND>

<L>172<pc>0003-c<k1>akzAra<k2>akzAra
{#akzAra#}¦ {%a-kṣāra, as, ā, am,%} free from facti-
tious salt; ({%as%}), m. natural salt. {%—Akṣāra-lavaṇa%} or
{%akṣārālavaṇa, am,%} n. natural salt; food that may be
eaten at a season unfit for performing religious duties.
<LEND>

<L>173<pc>0003-c<k1>akzi<k2>akzi
{#akzi#}¦ {%akṣi,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś%} or {%añj?%} Instr.
{%akṣṇā,%} Dat. {%akṣṇe%} &c., fr. {%akṣan,%} substituted for
{%akṣi%} in the weakest cases. At the end of comp.
{%akṣa%} is substituted, see 4. {%akṣa%}), the eye; the
number two; ({%ī%}), du., Ved. the sun and moon [cf.
Lith. <nsi>aki-s</nsi>]. {%—Akṣi-kūṭa%} or {%akṣi-kūṭaka, am,%} n.
the eyeball, the pupil of the eye. {%—Akṣi-gata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} visibly present, seen; hated. {%—Akṣi-gola,%}
{%as,%} m. the eyeball. {%—Akṣi-jāha, am,%} n. the root
of the eye. {%—Akṣi-tārā,%} f. the pupil of the eye.
{%—Akṣi-pakṣman, a,%} n. the eyelash. {%—Akṣi-%}
{%paṭala, am,%} n. a coat of the eye. {%—Akṣi-pat, t, t,%}
{%t,%} Ved. (falling into the eyes), hurtful; ({%t%}), ind. as
much as could fall into the eyes, a little. {%—Akṣi-%}
{%bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} visible, perceptible, manifest, present.
{%—Akṣi-bheṣaja, am,%} n. a medicament for the
eyes, collyrium, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a tree, Red Lodh.
{%—Akṣi-bhruva, am,%} n. the eyes and eyebrows to-
gether. {%—Akṣi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} provided with eyes.
{%—Akṣi-loman, a,%} n. the eyelash. {%—Akṣi-vikūṇita,%}
{%am,%} n. a glance, a look with the eyelids partially closed.
<LEND>

<L>174<pc>0003-c<k1>akzika<k2>akzika
{%Akṣika%}¦ or {%akṣīka, as,%} m. the tree Dalbergia
Oujeinensis. See {%akṣaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>175<pc>0003-c<k1>akziRI<k2>akziRI
{#akziRI#}¦ {%akṣiṇī,%} f. (fr. 3. {%akṣa ?%}), one of
the eight conditions or privileges attached to landed
property.
<LEND>

<L>176<pc>0003-c<k1>akzita<k2>akzita
{#akzita#}¦ {%a-kṣita, as, ā, am,%} undecayed, un-
injured; undecaying; ({%am%}), n. water. {%—Akṣitā-vasu,%}
{%us,%} m., Ved. epithet of Indra (possessed of undecaying
wealth). {%—Akṣitoti (˚ta-ūti), is,%} m., Ved. epithet of
Indra (granting permanent help).
<LEND>

<L>177<pc>0003-c<k1>akziti<k2>akziti
{%A-kṣiti, is,%}¦ f. imperishableness; ({%is, is, i%}), im-
perishable.
<LEND>

<L>178<pc>0003-c<k1>akziyat<k2>akziyat
{#akziyat#}¦ {%a-kṣiyat, an, atī, at,%} Ved. not
inhabiting, destitute of a dwelling, unsettled; (Sāy.)
not decreasing (in riches).
<LEND>

<L>179<pc>0003-c<k1>akziva<k2>akziva
{#akziva#}¦ {%akṣiva%} or {%akṣīva, as,%} m. a plant,
Guilandina or Hyperanthera Moringa; ({%am%}), n. sea salt.
<LEND>

<L>180<pc>0003-c<k1>akzIka<k2>akzIka
{#akzIka#}¦ {%akṣīka, as,%} m. See {%akṣika.%}
<LEND>

<L>181<pc>0003-c<k1>akzIva<k2>akzIva
{#akzIva#}¦ {%a-kṣīva, as, ā, am,%} not intoxicated,
sober. See also {%akṣiva.%}
<LEND>

<L>182<pc>0003-c<k1>akzu<k2>akzu
{#akzu#}¦ {%akṣu, us,%} m., Ved. a kind of net.
<LEND>

<L>183<pc>0003-c<k1>akzuRRa<k2>akzuRRa
{#akzuRRa#}¦ {%a-kṣuṇṇa, as, ā, am,%} unbroken, un-
curtailed, unconquered; inexperienced, inexpert. {%—A-%}
{%kṣuṇṇa-tā,%} f. uncurtailed condition; inexperience.
<LEND>

<L>184<pc>0003-c<k1>akzudra<k2>akzudra
{#akzudra#}¦ {%a-kṣudra, as, ā, am,%} not small.
<LEND>

<L>185<pc>0003-c<k1>akzuD<k2>akzuD
{#akzuD#}¦ {%a-kṣudh, t,%} f., Ved. satiety.
<LEND>

<L>186<pc>0003-c<k1>akzuDya<k2>akzuDya
{%A-kṣudhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not liable to hunger.
<LEND>

<L>187<pc>0003-c<k1>akzetra<k2>akzetra
{#akzetra#}¦ {%a-kṣetra, as, ā, am,%} destitute of
fields, uncultivated; ({%am%}), n. not a proper field, a bad
field; not a proper geometrical figure. {%—Akṣetra-%}
{%jña, as, ā, am%} or {%akṣetra-vid, t, t, t,%} destitute of
spiritual knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>188<pc>0003-c<k1>akzetrin<k2>akzetrin
{%A-kṣetrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having no fields.
<LEND>

<L>189<pc>0003-c<k1>akzEtrajYya<k2>akzEtrajYya
{%Akṣaitrajñya, am,%}¦ n. spiritual ignorance.
<LEND>

<L>190<pc>0003-c<k1>akzowa<k2>akzowa
{#akzowa#}¦ {%akṣoṭa, as,%} m. a walnut (Pistacio
nut ?); N. of a tree, Pīlu; of another tree, Aleurites
Triloba. Also spelt {%akṣoḍa, akṣoḍaka, ākṣoṭa,%}
{%ākṣoḍaka, ākhoṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>191<pc>0003-c<k1>akzoBa<k2>akzoBa
{#akzoBa#}¦ {%a-kṣobha, as, ā, am,%} unagitated,
unmoved; ({%as%}), m. the post to which an elephant is
tied; freedom from agitation, imperturbability.
<LEND>

<L>192<pc>0003-c<k1>akzoBya<k2>akzoBya
{%A-kṣobhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ immoveable, imperturba-
ble; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Buddha; an immense number,
said by Buddhists to be 100 vivaras.
<LEND>

<L>193<pc>0003-c<k1>akzOhiRI<k2>akzOhiRI
{#akzOhiRI#}¦ {%akṣauhiṇī,%} f. an army consisting
[Page0004-a+ 70]
of ten anīkinīs, or 21, 870 elephants, 21, 870 chariots,
65, 610 horse, and 109, 350 foot. (The anīkinī con-
sists of 27 vāhinīs; and 27 being the cube, {%akṣa,%}
of 3, it is probable that {%akṣauhiṇī%} is a compound
from {%akṣa%} and {%vāhinī.%})
<LEND>

<L>194<pc>0004-a<k1>akzRa<k2>akzRa
{#akzRa#}¦ {%akṣṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś%}), Ved.
time ({%= a-khaṇḍa%} Schol. to Uṇ-sūtras).
<LEND>

<L>195<pc>0004-a<k1>akzRayA<k2>akzRayA
{#akzRayA#}¦ {%akṣṇayā%} (probably the Instr. of
an obs. word {%akṣṇā,%} fr. {%añc%}), ind., Ved. circuitously
(like a wheel), in a tortuous way; wrongly. {%—Akṣṇa-%}
{%yā-druh, -dhruk, k, k,%} Ved. seeking to injure in a
tortuous manner. {%—Akṣṇa-yāvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved.
going across; (Sāy.) going through, penetrating.
<LEND>

<L>196<pc>0004-a<k1>aKawwa<k2>aKawwa
{#aKawwa#}¦ {%akhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a tree,
Buchanania Latifolia.
<LEND>

<L>197<pc>0004-a<k1>aKawwi<k2>aKawwi
{#aKawwi#}¦ {%akhaṭṭi, is,%} m. childish whim.
<LEND>

<L>198<pc>0004-a<k1>aKaRqa<k2>aKaRqa
{#aKaRqa#}¦ {%a-khaṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} not fragment-
ary, entire, whole; ({%am%}), n. time (?). {%A-khaṇḍā%}
{%dvādaśī%} is the twelfth day of the first half of the
lunar month Mārgaśirṣa.
<LEND>

<L>199<pc>0004-a<k1>aKaRqana<k2>aKaRqana
{%A-khaṇḍana, am,%}¦ n. not breaking; leaving entire;
non-refutation, admission; ({%as%}), m. time.
<LEND>

<L>200<pc>0004-a<k1>aKaRqita<k2>aKaRqita
{%A-khaṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not reduced to pieces, un-
broken, undivided, unimpaired; unrefuted. {%—Akhaṇ-%}
{%ḍitartu (˚ta-ṛtu), us, us, u,%} bearing fruit every season.
{%—Akhaṇḍitotsava (˚ta-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} ever festive.
<LEND>

<L>201<pc>0004-a<k1>aKara<k2>aKara
{#aKara#}¦ {%a-khara, as, ā, am,%} not hard, soft.
<LEND>

<L>202<pc>0004-a<k1>aKarva<k2>aKarva
{#aKarva#}¦ {%a-kharva, as, ā, am,%} not short, not
stunted, not small, not dwarfish.
<LEND>

<L>203<pc>0004-a<k1>aKAta<k2>aKAta
{#aKAta#}¦ {%a-khāta, as, ā, am,%} not dug (by
man); unburied; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a natural pond or
lake, a pool before a temple.
<LEND>

<L>204<pc>0004-a<k1>aKAdya<k2>aKAdya
{#aKAdya#}¦ {%a-khādya, as, ā, am,%} uneatable.
<LEND>

<L>205<pc>0004-a<k1>aKidra<k2>aKidra
{#aKidra#}¦ {%a-khidra, as, ā, am,%} unwearied. {%—A-%}
{%khidra-yāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. unwearied in course.
<LEND>

<L>206<pc>0004-a<k1>aKila<k2>aKila
{#aKila#}¦ {%a-khila, as, ā, am,%} without a gap,
complete, whole. {%—Akhilātman (˚la-āt˚), ā,%} m. the
universal spirit, Brahma.
<LEND>

<L>207<pc>0004-a<k1>aKilena<k2>aKilena
{%Akhilena,%}¦ ind. completely.
<LEND>

<L>208<pc>0004-a<k1>aKewika<k2>aKewika
{#aKewika#}¦ {%akheṭika%} or {%ākheṭika, as,%} m. a dog
trained to the chase.
<LEND>

<L>209<pc>0004-a<k1>aKedin<k2>aKedin
{#aKedin#}¦ {%a-khedin, ī, inī, i,%} not wearisome;
unwearied. {%—Akhedi-tva, am,%} n. continuous flow (of
speech); one of the vāgguṇas of the Jainas.
<LEND>

<L>210<pc>0004-a<k1>aKKala<k2>aKKala
{#aKKala#}¦ {%akhkhala,%} ind., Ved. an exclama-
tion of joy. {%—Akhkhalī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to utter the exclamation {%akhkhala.%}
<LEND>

<L>211<pc>0004-a<k1>aKyAta<k2>aKyAta
{#aKyAta#}¦ {%a-khyāta, as, ā, am,%} not famous,
unknown, obscure; infamous.
<LEND>

<L>212<pc>0004-a<k1>aKyAti<k2>aKyAti
{%A-khyāti, is,%}¦ f. want of fame; infamy, bad repute.
{%—Akhyāti-kara, as, ā, am,%} disreputable.
<LEND>

<L>213<pc>0004-a<k1>ag<k2>ag
{#ag#}¦ {%ag,%} cl. 1. P. {%agati, āga, agitum,%} to
move tortuously, wind: Caus. {%agayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cause to move tortuously [cf. rt. {%aṅg%}].
<LEND>

<L>214<pc>0004-a<k1>aga<k2>aga<h>1
1. {%aga, as,%}¦ m. a snake; the sun; a water-jar.
<LEND>

<L>215<pc>0004-a<k1>aga<k2>aga<h>2
{#aga#} 2¦. {%a-ga, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%gam%}), unable
to walk; unapproachable; ({%as%}), m. a mountain, a
tree; (in arithm.) seven. {%—Aga-ja, as, ā, am,%} pro-
duced on a mountain, or from a tree; ({%am%}), n.
bitumen. {%—Agātmajā (aga-āt˚),%} f., N. of Pārvatī,
the daughter of Himālaya. {%—Agāvaha (aga-āv˚), as,%}
m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa and of others. {%—Agaukas%}
{%(aga-ok˚), ās,%} m. a lion; a bird; the śarabha, a
fabulous animal with eight legs.
<LEND>

<L>216<pc>0004-a<k1>agacCa<k2>agacCa
{%A-gaccha, as, ā, am,%}¦ not going; ({%as%}), m. a tree.
<LEND>

<L>217<pc>0004-a<k1>agaRita<k2>agaRita
{#agaRita#}¦ {%a-gaṇita, as, ā, am,%} uncounted.
{%—Agaṇita-lajja, as, ā, am,%} disregarding shame.
<LEND>

<L>218<pc>0004-a<k1>agata<k2>agata
{#agata#}¦ {%a-gata, as, ā, am,%} not gone; unfre-
quented; ({%am%}), n., Ved. not coming, non-return (?).
<LEND>

<L>219<pc>0004-a<k1>agati<k2>agati
{%A-gati, is,%}¦ f. want of resort or resource, necessity.
<LEND>
[Page0004-b+ 72]

<L>220<pc>0004-b<k1>agatika<k2>agatika
{%A-gatika%}¦ or {%a-gatīka, as, ā, am,%} destitute of re-
sort or of resources. {%—Agatika-gati, is,%} f. the resort
of one who has no resort, a last resource.
<LEND>

<L>221<pc>0004-b<k1>agada<k2>agada
{#agada#}¦ {%a-gada, as, ā, am,%} free from disease,
healthy, salubrious; free from judicial affliction; ({%as%}),
m. freedom from disease, health; a medicine, medi-
cament, drug; the science of antidotes. {%—Agadaṅ-%}
{%kāra, as, ī,%} m. f. a physician, (‘who makes well.’)
<LEND>

<L>222<pc>0004-b<k1>agadya<k2>agadya
{%Agadya,%}¦ nom. P. {%agadyati,%} to have good health.
<LEND>

<L>223<pc>0004-b<k1>agadita<k2>agadita
{#agadita#}¦ {%a-gadita, as, ā, am,%} untold.
<LEND>

<L>224<pc>0004-b<k1>agama<k2>agama
{#agama#}¦ {%a-gama, as, ā, am,%} not going, unable
to go; ({%as%}), m. a mountain, a tree [cf. 2. {%a-ga%}].
<LEND>

<L>225<pc>0004-b<k1>agamya<k2>agamya
{%A-gamya%}¦ or {%a-gantavya, as, ā, am,%} unfit to
be walked in, or to be approached; inaccessible
(physically or metaphorically), inapproachable; un-
attainable, incomprehensible, unsurpassable. {%—Aga-%}
{%mya-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} of unsurpassed form, nature,
or beauty. {%—Agamyā-gamana, am,%} n. illicit sexual
intercourse. {%—Agamyāgamanīya, as, ā, am,%} relat-
ing to illicit intercourse. {%—Agamyā-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}
practising illicit intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>226<pc>0004-b<k1>agarI<k2>agarI
{#agarI#}¦ {%a-garī,%} f. a kind of grass, commonly
called Deotar, Andropogon Serratus [cf. {%garī%}].
<LEND>

<L>227<pc>0004-b<k1>agaru<k2>agaru
{#agaru#}¦ {%agaru, us, u,%} m. n. Agallochum,
Amyris Agallocha.
<LEND>

<L>228<pc>0004-b<k1>agarva<k2>agarva
{#agarva#}¦ {%a-garva, as, ā, am,%} free from pride.
<LEND>

<L>229<pc>0004-b<k1>agarhita<k2>agarhita
{#agarhita#}¦ {%a-garhita, as, ā, am,%} undespised,
unreproached, blameless.
<LEND>

<L>230<pc>0004-b<k1>agavyUti<k2>agavyUti
{#agavyUti#}¦ {%a-gavyūti, is, is, i,%} Ved. without
good pasturage for cattle, barren.
<LEND>

<L>231<pc>0004-b<k1>agasti<k2>agasti
{#agasti#}¦ {%agasti, is,%} m. (said to be fr. 2. {%a-ga,%}
a mountain, and {%asti,%} fr. rt. 2. {%as,%} thrower), N. of a
Ṛṣi, author of several Vedic hymns, (he is said to
have been the son of both Mitra and Varuṇa by
Urvasī; to have been born in a water-jar; to have
been of short stature; to have swallowed the ocean,
and compelled the Vindhya mountains to prostrate
themselves before him; to have conquered and civi-
lized the South; to have written on medicine, &c.);
the star Canopus, of which Agastya is the regent;
a plant, Sesbana (or Æschynomene) Grandiflora.
{%—Agasti-dru, us,%} f. a plant, Sesbana Grandiflora.
<LEND>

<L>232<pc>0004-b<k1>agastayas<k2>agastayas
{%Agastayas,%}¦ m. pl. the descendants of Agastya.
<LEND>

<L>233<pc>0004-b<k1>agastI<k2>agastI
{%Agastī,%}¦ f. a female descendant of Agastya.
<LEND>

<L>234<pc>0004-b<k1>agastIya<k2>agastIya
{%Agastīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to Agasti.
<LEND>

<L>235<pc>0004-b<k1>agastya<k2>agastya
{%Agastya, a,%}¦ m. {%= agasti,%} N. of Śiva. {%—Agastya-gītā,%}
{%ās,%} f. pl. Agastya's hymns, forming part of the Ādi-
vārāha-Purāṇa. {%—Agastya-cāra, as,%} m. the course of
Canopus. {%—Agastya-saṃhitā,%} f. Agastya's collection
(of law). {%—Agastyodaya (˚ya-ud˚), as,%} m. the rise of
Canopus; the seventh day of the second half of Bhādra.
<LEND>

<L>236<pc>0004-b<k1>agA<k2>agA
{#agA#}¦ {%a-gā, ās,%} m. f., Ved. not going.
<LEND>

<L>237<pc>0004-b<k1>agADa<k2>agADa
{#agADa#}¦ {%a-gādha, as, ā, am%} (see {%gādha%}),
very deep, unfathomable, bottomless; ({%as, am%}), m.
n. a hole, chasm; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the five fires
at the Svāhākāra [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀγαθός</lang> and Goth. <nsi>gôths,</nsi>
fr. the crude form <nsi>gôda</nsi>]. {%—Agādha-jala, as, ā, am,%}
having deep water; ({%as%}), m. a deep lake.
<LEND>

<L>238<pc>0004-b<k1>agAra<k2>agAra
{#agAra#}¦ {%a-gāra, as, am,%} m. n. house, apart-
ment [cf. {%ā-gāra%}].
<LEND>

<L>239<pc>0004-b<k1>agina<k2>agina
{#agina#}¦ {%agina, as,%} m. the sun (?). See {%agira.%}
<LEND>

<L>240<pc>0004-b<k1>agira<k2>agira
{#agira#}¦ {%agira, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ag%}), the sun;
fire; a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>241<pc>0004-b<k1>agirOkas<k2>agirOkas
{#agirOkas#}¦ {%a-giraukas, ās, ās, as%} (fr. {%a +%}
{%girā,%} Instr. of {%gir%} and {%okas%}), Ved. not to be stopped
by threatening shouts (lit. ‘having no station by
speech’), epithet of the Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>242<pc>0004-b<k1>agu<k2>agu
{#agu#}¦ {%a-gu, us, us, u%} (fr. {%go%} with {%a%}), Ved. desti-
tute of cows, or of rays; poor; destitute of hymns,
wicked; ({%us%}), m., N. of Rāhu or the ascending node.
<LEND>

<L>243<pc>0004-b<k1>ago<k2>ago
{%A-go, aus, aus, u,%}¦ Ved. destitute of cows. {%—Ago-tā,%}
f. want of cows.
<LEND>
[Page0004-c+ 73]

<L>244<pc>0004-c<k1>aguRa<k2>aguRa
{#aguRa#}¦ {%a-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} destitute of qua-
lities or attributes (sometimes said of the supreme
being); destitute of good qualities; ({%as%}), m. a fault.
{%—Aguṇa-tā,%} f. absence of good qualities. {%—Agu-%}
{%ṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} destitute of qualities, especially
of good qualities. {%—Aguṇa-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} fault-
finding, censorious. {%—Aguṇa-śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a
worthless character.
<LEND>

<L>245<pc>0004-c<k1>agupta<k2>agupta
{#agupta#}¦ {%a-gupta, as, ā, am,%} unhidden, uncon-
cealed; unprotected; not keeping a secret.
<LEND>

<L>246<pc>0004-c<k1>aguru<k2>aguru
{#aguru#}¦ {%a-guru, us, ū%} or {%vī, u,%} not heavy,
light; (in prosody) short as a short vowel alone or
before a single consonant; ({%us, u%}), m. n. the fragrant
Aloe wood and tree, Aquiluria Agallocha; the Śiśu
tree; the tree which yields Bdellium, Amyris Agallocha.
{%—Aguru-śiṃśapā,%} f. the Śiśu tree, (probably distinct
words, {%śiṃśapā%} being added to explain {%aguru.%})
<LEND>

<L>247<pc>0004-c<k1>agUQa<k2>agUQa
{#agUQa#}¦ {%a-gūḍha, as, ā, am,%} unconcealed,
manifest. {%—Agūḍha-gandha, as, ā, am,%} having an
unconcealed smell; ({%am%}), n. Asa Fœtida. {%—Agūḍha-%}
{%bhāva, as, ā, am,%} having a transparent disposition.
<LEND>

<L>248<pc>0004-c<k1>agfBIta<k2>agfBIta
{#agfBIta#}¦ {%a-gṛbhīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
seized or taken, unsubdued. {%—Agṛbhīta-śocis, is, is,%}
{%is,%} Ved. having inconceivable splendor; (Sāy.) of
unsubdued splendor.
<LEND>

<L>249<pc>0004-c<k1>agfha<k2>agfha
{#agfha#}¦ {%a-gṛha%} or {%a-graha, as,%} m. a houseless
man, a Vānaprastha or Brāhman of the third order.
<LEND>

<L>250<pc>0004-c<k1>agocara<k2>agocara
{#agocara#}¦ {%a-gocara, as, ā, am,%} not obvious,
imperceptible by the senses; ({%am%}), n. anything that
is beyond the cognizance of the senses; Brahma;
the not being seen, absence.
<LEND>

<L>251<pc>0004-c<k1>agopA<k2>agopA
{#agopA#}¦ {%a-gopā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. without a
cowhered, not tended by one.
<LEND>

<L>252<pc>0004-c<k1>agoruDa<k2>agoruDa
{#agoruDa#}¦ {%a-go-rudha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
repulsing the cow; (Sāy.) not repelling or disdaining
praise.
<LEND>

<L>253<pc>0004-c<k1>agohya<k2>agohya
{#agohya#}¦ {%a-gohya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. uncon-
cealable, not to be covered, bright.
<LEND>

<L>254<pc>0004-c<k1>agOkas<k2>agOkas
{#agOkas#}¦ {%agaukas.%} See 2. {%a-ga,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>255<pc>0004-c<k1>agnAyI<k2>agnAyI
{#agnAyI#}¦ {%agnāyī.%} See p. 6, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>256<pc>0004-c<k1>agni<k2>agni
{#agni#}¦ {%agni, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%aṅg%} or {%ag%} or {%añj?%}),
fire; sacrificial fire of three kinds, Gārhapatya, Āha-
vanīya, and Dakṣiṇa; the number three; the god of
fire; the fire of the stomach, the digestive faculty; the
gastric fluid; bile; gold; N. of various plants, Semi-
carpus Anacardium, Plumbago Zeylanica and Rosea,
Citrus Acida; mystical substitute for the letter {%r%}
[cf. Lat. <nsi>igni-s;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>ugni-s;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>ognj;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>auhn'-s;</nsi> <lang n="greek">ἄιγλη</lang> and <lang n="greek">ἀγλαός</lang> may be related to {%agni%}].
{%—Agnā-marutau,%} m. du. Agni and Marut. {%—Agnā-%}
{%viṣṇū,%} m. du. Agni and Viṣṇu. {%—Agni-kaṇa, as,%}
m. a spark. {%—Agni-karman, a,%} n. action of fire or
of Agni; cauterization. {%—Agni-kārikā,%} f. and {%agni-%}
{%kārya, am,%} n. kindling or feeding the sacrificial fire
with clarified butter, &c. {%—Agni-kāṣṭha, am,%} n.
Agallochum. {%—Agni-kukkuṭa, as,%} m. a lighted wisp of
straw, firebrand. {%—Agni-kuṇḍa, am,%} n. a hole or en-
closed space for the consecrated fire. {%—Agni-kumāra,%}
{%as,%} m. a particular preparation of various drugs.
{%—Agni-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made by fire, offered by fire.
{%—Agni-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a Rakṣas. {%—Agni-koṇa, as,%}
m. the south-east quarter, ruled over by Agni. {%—Agni-%}
{%kriyā,%} f. obsequies or any other religious act performed
by means of fire. {%—Agni-krīḍā,%} f. firework, illumina-
tion, &c. {%—Agni-garbha, as, ā, am,%} pregnant with fire;
({%as%}), m. a gem supposed to contain and give out solar
heat, sūryakānta; N. of a plant, Agnijāra; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
plant, Mahājyotiṣmatī. {%—Agni-gṛha, am,%} n. house
or place for keeping the sacred fire. {%—Agni-grantha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Agni-caya, as,%} m. a heap of
fire. {%—Agni-cayana, am,%} n. or {%agni-citi, is,%} f. or
{%agni-cityā,%} f. arranging or preparing the sacred or
sacrificial fire-place. {%—Agni-cit,%} ind., Ved. like Agni;
[Page0005-a+ 81]
({%t%}), m. one who has arranged a sacred fire-place.
{%—Agnicit-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having householders or in-
habitants that have prepared a sacred fire-place. {%—Agni-%}
{%ja%} or {%agni-jāta, as, ā, am,%} produced by fire, born
of or in fire; digestive; ({%as%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu; a
medicinal plant, Agnijāra. {%—Agni-janman, ā,%} m.
Skanda, the god of war. {%—Agni-jāra%} or {%agni-jāla, as,%}
m. a medicinal plant. {%—Agni-jihva, as, ā, am,%} having
a fiery tongue; ({%ā%}), f. a tongue or flame of fire; a
tongue of Agni (who is said to have seven tongues);
a medicinal plant, Lāngalī. {%—Agnijvalita-tejana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a point hardened in fire. {%—Agni-jvālā,%}
f. glow or flame of fire; a plant with red blossoms,
used by dyers, Grislea Tomentosa; another plant with
red blossoms, Jalapippalī. {%—Agni-tap, p,%} Ved. enjoy-
ing the warmth of a fire. {%—Agni-tapas, ās, ās, as,%}
hot as fire, glowing. {%—Agni-tapta, as, ā, am,%} heated
by fire, glowing. {%—Agni-tā,%} f. the state of fire. {%—Agni-%}
{%tejas, ās, ās, as,%} having the power of fire or of Agni;
({%ās%}), m., N. of one of the seven Ṛṣis of the eleventh
Manvantara. {%—Agni-traya, am,%} n. or {%agni-tretā,%} f.
the three sacred fires, called respectively Gārhapatya,
Āhavanīya, and Dakṣiṇa. {%—Agni-trā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
protected by Agni. {%—Agni-da%} or {%agni-dāyaka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} supplying with fire, stomachic, tonic, incen-
diary. {%—Agni-dagdha, as, ā, am,%} burnt with fire;
burnt on the funeral pile; burnt at once, without
having fire put into the mouth, because destitute of
issue; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of Pitṛs or those who on
earth maintained the sacred fire. {%—Agni-datta, as,%}
m., N. of a prince. {%—Agni-damanī,%} f. a narcotic
plant, Solanum Jacquini. {%—Agni-dāyaka,%} see {%agnida.%}
{%—Agni-dāha, as,%} m., N. of a disease. {%—Agni-diś,%}
{%k,%} f. Agni's quarter, i. e. the south-east. {%—Agni-%}
{%dīpana, as, ī, am,%} stimulating digestion. {%—Agni-%}
{%dīpta, as, ā, am,%} blazing, glowing; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
plant, Mahājyotiṣmatī. {%—Agni-dīpti, is,%} f. active
state of digestion. {%—Agni-dūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having Agni for a messenger. {%—Agni-dūṣita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} branded. {%—Agni-deva, as,%} m. Agni; a
worshipper of Agni; ({%ā%}), f. the third lunar mansion,
i. e. the Pleiades. {%—Agni-devatā,%} f. the deity Agni.
{%—Agni-devatya%} or {%agni-daivata%} or {%agni-daiva-%}
{%tya, as, ā, am,%} referring to Agni or to his divinity.
{%—Agnidh%} or {%agnīdh, t,%} m. (fr. {%agni-idh%}), Ved.
the priest who kindles the sacred fire. {%—Agni-dhāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the receptacle for keeping the sacred fire.
{%—Agni-nakṣatra, am,%} n. the third lunar mansion,
the Pleiades. {%—Agni-nayana%} or {%agni-praṇayana,%}
{%am,%} n. bringing out the sacrificial fire. {%—Agni-%}
{%niryāsa, as,%} m. a medicinal plant, Agnijāra.
{%—Agni-nunna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. struck by Agni or
lightning. {%—Agni-netra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
Agni for a guide. {%—Agni-pakva, as, ā, am,%} cooked
with fire. {%—Agni-pada, am,%} n., N. of a plant or a
man. {%—Agni-parikriyā,%} f. care of the sacred fire.
{%—Agni-paricchada, as,%} m. the whole apparatus
used in a sacrifice with fire. {%—Agni-paridhāna, am,%}
n. enclosing the sacrificial fire with a kind of screen.
{%—Agni-parīkṣā,%} f. ordeal by fire. {%—Agni-parvata,%}
{%as,%} m. a volcano. {%—Agni-puccha, as, am,%} m. n.
end or extinction of the fire, lit. tail of the fire.
{%—Agni-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa. {%—Agni-%}
{%purogama, as, ā, am,%} having Agni for a leader.
{%—Agni-praṇayana, am,%} n. bringing out the sacri-
ficial fire. {%—Agni-praṇayanīya, as, ā, am,%} re-
ferring to the bringing out that fire. {%—Agni-%}
{%pratiṣṭhā,%} f. consecration of fire, especially the
nuptial fire. {%—Agni-praveśa, as,%} m. or {%agni-%}
{%praveśana, am,%} n. entering the fire; self-immola-
tion of a widow on the funeral pile of her husband.
{%—Agni-prastara, as,%} m. stone producing fire; flint.
{%—Agni-bāhu%} or {%agni-vāhu, us,%} m. smoke; N. of
a son of the first Manu; N. of a son of Priyavrata
and Kāmyā. {%—Agni-bha, am,%} n. (shining like fire),
gold. {%—Agni-bhu, u,%} n. water. {%—Agni-bhū, ūs,%} m.
Skanda; N. of a teacher, Kāśyapa, who was taught
by Agni; (in arithm.) six. {%—Agni-bhūti, is,%} m., N.
of a pupil of the last Tīrthakara, being one of the
eleven chiefs of the Jaina Ṛṣis. {%—Agni-bhrājas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} Ved. possessing fiery splendour. {%—Agni-maṇi, %}
[Page0005-b+ 81]
{%is,%} m. the sun-stone or sūryakānta. {%—Agni-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having a fire, enjoying it; maintaining a
sacrificial fire, having a good digestion. {%—Agni-%}
{%mantha, as, ā, am,%} producing fire by friction; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a plant, Premna Spinosa. {%—Agni-manthana,%}
{%am,%} n. production of fire by friction. {%—Agniman-%}
{%thanīya, as, ā, am,%} referring to such friction. {%—Agni-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} fiery. {%—Agni-māṭhara, as,%} m.,
N. of an expounder of the Ṛg-veda. {%—Agni-māndya,%}
{%am,%} n. dyspepsia. {%—Agni-māruti, is,%} m., N. of
Agastya. {%—Agni-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a prince of the
Śunga dynasty. {%—Agnim-indha, as,%} m. the priest
who kindles the sacrificial fire. {%—Agni-mukha, as,%}
m. a deity; a Brāhmaṇa; a tonic medicine; N. of
two plants, Semicarpus Anacardium and Plumbago
Zeylanica. {%—Agni-mukhī,%} f. Semicarpus Anacardium;
Gloriosa Superba. {%—Agni-mūḍha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
made insane by Agni or lightning. {%—Agni-yuta, as,%}
m., N. of the author of a hymn in the Ṛg-veda.
{%—Agni-yojana, am,%} n. causing the sacrificial fire to
blaze up. {%—Agni-rakṣaṇa, am,%} n. preservation of
the sacred (especially the domestic) fire. {%—Agni-raja,%}
{%as,%} or {%agni-rajas, ās,%} m. a scarlet insect. {%—Agni-%}
{%rahasya, am,%} n. mystery of Agni, the title of the
tenth book of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa. {%—Agni-rāśi,%}
{%is,%} m. a heap of fire, a burning pile. {%—Agni-ruhā,%} f.
a plant, Māṃsarohiṇī. {%—Agni-rūpa, as, ī, am,%} fire-
shaped. {%—Agni-retasa, as, ā, am,%} sprung from the
seed of Agni. {%—Agni-rohiṇī,%} f. a hard inflammatory
swelling in the arm-pit. {%—Agni-loka, as,%} m. the
world of Agni. {%—Agni-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having or
enjoying a fire, maintaining a sacrificial fire, having a
good digestion; ({%vat%}), ind. like Agni, fire. {%—Agni-%}
{%varcas, ās,%} m., N. of a teacher of the Purāṇas.
{%—Agni-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} having the colour of
fire; closely related to fire, hot, fiery; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a prince, the son of Sudarśana; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
strong liquor. {%—Agni-vardhaka, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%}
feeding or exciting fire; tonic; ({%as%}), m. a tonic,
stomachic. {%—Agni-vallabha, as,%} m. a tree, Shorea
Robusta; the resinous juice of it. {%—Agni-vāṇa, as,%}
m. a fiery arrow, a rocket. {%—Agni-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%}
wearing a fiery or red garment. {%—Agni-vāha, as,%} m.
the vehicle of fire, i. e. smoke. {%—Agni-vāhu, us,%} m.
= preceding; N. of two men, see {%agni-bāhu%}. {%—Agni-%}
{%vimocana, am,%} m. the ceremony of lowering the
sacrificial fire. {%—Agni-visarpa, as,%} m. spread of in-
flammation, pain arising from an inflamed tumour.
{%—Agni-viharaṇa, am,%} n. removing the sacrificial
fire from the Agnīdhra to the Sadas Maṇḍapa.
{%—Agni-vīja%} or {%agni-vīrya, am,%} n. gold. {%—Agni-%}
{%vṛddhi, is,%} f. improved digestion. {%—Agni-veśa, as,%}
m., N. of an early medical authority. {%—Agnivaiśya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} descended from Agniveśa. {%—Agni-śaraṇa%}
or {%agni-śāla, am,%} n. or {%agni-śālā,%} f. house or place
for keeping the sacrificial fire. {%—Agni-śikha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a crest of fire, fiery; ({%as%}), m. a lamp;
a fiery arrow, rocket; an arrow; the Safflower plant;
saffron; N. of Vararuci's father; ({%am%}), n. saffron,
gold. {%—Agni-śikhā,%} f. a flame; N. of two plants,
Gloriosa Superba and Menispermum Cordifolium.
{%—Agni-śuśrūṣā,%} f. careful attention to the sacri-
ficial fire. {%—Agni-śekhara, am,%} n. saffron. {%—Agni-%}
{%śeṣa, as,%} m. appendix to the chapter on Agni in the
Taittirīya Saṃhitā. {%—Agni-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. visiting
Agni or fire. {%—Agni-ṣṭut, t,%} m. (laudatory of Agni),
the first day of the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice; one day of
the Sattra Pancadaśarātra. {%—Agni-ṣṭubh, p,%} m. son
of the sixth Manu, Cākṣuṣa, by Naḍvalā; see the
next. {%—Agni-ṣṭoma, as,%} m. (praise of Agni), N. of
a protracted ceremony or sacrifice, extending over
several days in spring, and forming an essential part of
the Jyotiṣṭoma; a passage of the Sāma-veda chanted
at the Agniṣṭoma; the first day of the Sattra Panca-
daśarātra; a species of the Soma plant; N. of the son
of the sixth Manu; see {%agniṣṭubh%}. {%—Agniṣṭoma-%}
{%yājin, ī, inī, i,%} one who has performed the Agni-
ṣṭoma. {%—Agni-ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} placed in, or over,
or near the fire; ({%as%}), m. an iron frying-pan; in the
Aśvamedha sacrifice, the eleventh Yūpa or sacrificial
post which, of all the twenty-one, is nearest the fire;
[Page0005-c+ 81]
({%ā%}), f. the corner of the sacrificial post which, of all
the eight, is nearest the fire. {%—Agni-ṣvātta%} or {%agni-%}
{%svātta, as, ā, am,%} tasted by the funeral fire; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. Manes, especially of those who on earth
neglected the sacrificial fire. {%—Agni-saṃskāra, as,%} m.
the consecration of fire; performance of any rite in
which the application of fire is essential, as the burning
of the dead body. {%—Agni-saṅkāśa, as, ā, am,%} re-
splendent like fire. {%—Agni-sañcaya, as,%} m. preparing
the sacrificial fire-place, see {%agnicayana%}. {%—Agni-%}
{%sakha, as,%} m. the wind. {%—Agni-sambhava, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} sprung from fire; ({%as%}), m. wild safflower; the
result of digestion, lymph. {%—Agni-sahāya, as,%} m.
the wind; a wild pigeon. {%—Agni-sākṣika, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} taking Agni, or the domestic or nuptial fire, for
a witness. {%—Agnisākṣika-maryāda, as, ā, am,%}
one who, taking Agni for a witness, gives a solemn
promise of conjugal fidelity. {%—Agni-sāra, am,%} n. a
medicine for the eyes, a collyrium. {%—Agni-sāvarṇi,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a Manu. {%—Agni-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of the
father of the seventh black Vāsudeva. {%—Agnisiṃha-%}
{%nandana, as,%} m. the son of Agnisiṃha. {%—Agni-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n. thread of fire; a girdle of sacrificial grass put
upon a young Brāhman at his investiture. {%—Agni-%}
{%stambha, as,%} m. the (magical) quenching of fire.
{%—Agni-stoka, as,%} m. a spark. {%—Agni-svātta,%} see
{%agni-ṣvātta%}. {%—Agni-hut, t, t, t,%} or {%agni-huta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} sacrificed by fire. {%—Agni-hotṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. sacri-
ficing to Agni, or having Agni for a priest; see {%agni-%}
{%hotrin.%} {%—Agni-hotra, as,%} m., Ved. oblation to Agni;
the sacred fire; ({%am%}), n. an oblation to Agni, chiefly
of milk, oil, and sour gruel; — there are two kinds of
Agnihotra, one is {%nitya,%} i. e. of constant obligation;
the other {%kāmya,%} i. e. optional; — the sacred fire; the
maintenance of it; the placing the sacrificial fire
on the ground prepared for it, see {%agny-ādhāna;%}
{%(as, ī, am),%} Ved. sacrificing to Agni; destined for
the Agnihotra, or connected with it. {%—Agnihotra-%}
{%havaṇī,%} f. a ladle used for sacrificial libations. {%—Agni-%}
{%hotra-hut, t,%} Ved. offering the Agnihotra. {%—Agni-%}
{%hotrāhuti (˚tra-āh˚), is,%} f. invocation connected
with the Agnihotra. {%—Agni-hotrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} prac-
tising the Agnihotra; maintaining the sacrificial fire;
one who has prepared the sacred fire-place, or con-
veyed the sacrificial fire to it. {%—Agnihotrocchiṣṭa%}
{%(˚tra-uc˚), am,%} n. that which is left of the Agni-
hotra. {%—Agnīdh (˚ni-idh), t,%} m. the priest who
kindles the fire. {%—Agnīdhra, as,%} m. = the preced-
ing; N. of two men, see {%agni-bāhu%}. {%—Agnīdhrī,%}
f. feeding the sacrificial fire. {%—Agnīndra (˚ni-in˚),%}
{%au,%} m. du., Ved. Agni and Indra. {%—Agnīndhana%}
{%(˚ni-indh˚), am,%} n. kindling or feeding the fire.
{%—Agnī-parjanya, au,%} m. du., Ved. Agni and
Parjanya. {%—Agnī-varuṇa, au,%} m. du., Ved. Agni
and Varuṇa. {%—Agnī-ṣoma, au,%} m. du. Agni and
Soma. {%—Agnīṣoma-praṇayana, am,%} n. bringing
out the fire and the Soma, a ceremony in the Jyoti-
ṣṭoma sacrifice. {%—Agnī-ṣomīya%} or {%agnī-ṣomya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating or sacred to Agni and Soma.
{%—Agnīṣomīya-nirvāpa, as,%} m. making libations
with the cake sacred to Agni and Soma, a ceremony
in the Darśapūrṇamāsa sacrifice. {%—Agnīṣomīya-%}
{%paśu, us,%} m. a victim, generally a sheep or goat,
sacred to Agni and Soma. {%—Agnīṣomīyapaśv-anu-%}
{%ṣṭhāna, am,%} n. the proceedings with that victim, at
the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice. {%—Agnīṣomīya-puroḍāśa,%}
{%as,%} m. cake sacred to Agni and Soma, which must be
baked in eleven bowls. {%—Agnīṣomīya-yāga, as,%} m.
one of the three sacrifices of the Pūrṇamāsa. {%—Agni-%}
{%ṣomīyaikādaśa-kapāla (˚ya-ek˚), as,%} m. cake sacred
to Agni and Soma, see above. {%—Agnī-ṣomya,%} see
{%agnī-ṣomīya%}. {%—Agny-agāra%} or {%agny-āgāra, as,%}
m. house or place for keeping the sacred fire. {%—Agny-%}
{%abhāva, as,%} m. lack or loss of the sacred fire; loss of
appetite. {%—Agny-astra, am,%} n. fire serving as a
weapon, a rocket, fire-arms (?). {%—Agny-āgāra,%} see
{%agny-agāra%}. {%—Agny-ātmaka, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having Agni's nature. {%—Agny-ādhāna%} or {%agny-%}
{%ādheya, am,%} n. or {%agny-āhiti, is,%} f. placing the fire
on the sacrificial fire-place or ground previously pre-
pared. {%—Agny-ālaya, as,%} m. a house or place for
[Page0006-a+ 79]
keeping the sacred fire; a cavity with several com-
partments, for the several sacred fires. {%—Agny-āhita,%}
{%as,%} m. one who has performed the Agnyādhāna.
{%—Agny-utpāta, as,%} m. a fiery portent, meteor, a
comet. {%—Agny-uddharaṇa, am,%} n. taking the sa-
cred fire from its usual place, previous to a sacrifice.
{%—Agny-upasthāna, am,%} n. worship of Agni, at the
conclusion of the Agnihotra, &c. {%—Agny-edha, as,%}
m. an incendiary.
<LEND>

<L>257<pc>0006-a<k1>agnAyI<k2>agnAyI
{%Agnāyī,%}¦ f. the wife of Agni, and goddess of fire;
the Tretā-yuga.
<LEND>

<L>258<pc>0006-a<k1>agnika<k2>agnika
{%Agnika, as,%}¦ m. an insect of scarlet colour, Coccinella.
<LEND>

<L>259<pc>0006-a<k1>agnisAt<k2>agnisAt
{%Agnisāt,%}¦ ind. to the state of fire, used in composi-
tion with {%kṛ%} and {%bhu,%} as {%agnisāt kṛ,%} to reduce to
fire, to subject to fire.
<LEND>

<L>260<pc>0006-a<k1>agnIya<k2>agnIya
{%Agnīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ referring to fire or to Agni,
fiery.
<LEND>

<L>261<pc>0006-a<k1>agman<k2>agman
{#agman#}¦ {%agman, a,%} n. conflict, battle; see
{%ajman,%} with which it is connected.
<LEND>

<L>262<pc>0006-a<k1>agra<k2>agra
{#agra#}¦ {%agra, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. {%aṅg,%}
the nasal being dropped), foremost; anterior, first;
chief; prominent, best; projecting, supernumerary,
excessive; much; ({%am%}), n. foremost point or part; tip;
front; uppermost part, top, summit, surface; point,
and hence, figuratively, sharpness; the nearest end, the
beginning; the climax or best part; goal, aim, resting-
place; multitude, assemblage; a weight, equal to a
pala; a measure of food given as alms; (in astronomy)
the sun's amplitude; ({%am%}), ind. in front, before, a-
head of, chiefly in answer to the question whither?
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄκρον</lang>]. {%—Agra-kara, as,%} m. the fore part
of the hand or arm; the right hand; the fore part of
rays, the focal point. {%—Agra-kāya, as,%} m. the fore
part of the body. {%—Agra-ga, as,%} m. a leader. {%—Agra-%}
{%gaṇya, as, ā, am,%} that should be counted or regarded
as the foremost, best, principal. {%—Agra-gāmin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} preceding, taking the lead. {%—Agra-ja, as, ā, am,%}
or {%agra-jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. born first or earlier;
({%as%}), m. the first-born; an elder brother; a Brāhman;
Viṣṇu; ({%ā%}), f. an elder sister. {%—Agra-jaṅghā,%} f.
the fore part of the thigh. {%—Agra-janman, ā,%} m.
the first-born; an elder brother; a Brāhman; a
member of one of the three highest castes; Brahmā.
{%—Agra-jātaka, as,%} or {%agra-jāti, is,%} m. a Brāhman.
{%—Agra-jihva, am,%} n. the tip of the tongue. {%—Agra-%}
{%jyā,%} f. (in astron.) the sine of the amplitude. {%—Agra-%}
{%ṇī, īs, īs, i,%} taking the lead, foremost, first.
{%—Agra-ṇīti, is,%} f., Ved. the first offering. {%—Agra-%}
{%dānin, ī,%} m. a degraded Brāhman who receives
presents from Śūdras, or takes things previously
offered to the dead. {%—Agra-nakha, as,%} m. the tip
of the nail. {%—Agra-nāsikā,%} f. the tip of the nose.
{%—Agra-nirūpaṇa, am,%} n. determining beforehand,
predestination, prophecy. {%—Agra-parṇī,%} f. cowage,
Carpopogon Pruriens. {%—Agra-pāṇi, is,%} or {%agra-hasta,%}
{%as,%} m. the fore part of the hand or arm; the right
hand. {%—Agra-pūjā,%} f. the first or highest mark or
act of reverence. {%—Agra-peya, am,%} n. precedence in
drinking. {%—Agra-bhāga%} or {%agrāṃśa (˚ra-aṃ˚), as,%}
m. part of the top, &c., fore part; (in astron.) degree
of amplitude. {%—Agra-bhuj, k, k, k,%} having the prece-
dence in eating. {%—Agra-bhūmi, is,%} f. the place
aimed at, goal, object. {%—Agra-mahiṣī,%} f. the prin-
cipal queen. {%—Agra-māṃsa, am,%} n. the heart;
morbid protuberance of the liver. {%—Agra-yāna, am,%}
n. stepping in front to defy the enemy. {%—Agra-%}
{%yāyin, ī, inī, i,%} going before, taking the lead; ({%ī%}),
m. a leader. {%—Agra-yāvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. going
before. {%—Agra-yodhin, ī,%} m. the foremost man or
leader in a fight; a champion. {%—Agra-lohitā,%} f. a
kind of pot-herb, red pepper (?). {%—Agra-vīja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} (said of a plant) propagating itself by means of
the top; ({%as%}), m. a viviparous plant, according to
Hindū notions. {%—Agra-vīra, as,%} m. the principal
hero. {%—Agra-sandhānī,%} f. the register of human
actions, kept by Yama. {%—Agra-sandhyā,%} f. early
dawn. {%—Agra-sara, as, ī, am,%} going in front, taking
the lead; (in Bengālī), going ahead, advancing.
{%—Agra-sānu, us,%} m. the front part of a table land.
[Page0006-b+ 78]
{%—Agra-sārā,%} f. a compendious method of counting
immense numbers. {%—Agra-sena, as,%} m., N. of Jana-
mejaya's son. {%—Agra-hasta, as,%} m. {%= agra-pāṇi,%}
the tip of an elephant's trunk. {%—Agra-hāyaṇa, as,%}
m. commencement of the year; N. of a Hindū month,
commencing about the 12th of November. {%—Agra-%}
{%hāra, as,%} m. royal donation of land to Brāhmans;
land thus given. {%—Agrāṃśa,%} see {%agra-bhāga%}. {%—Agrā-%}
{%ṃśu (˚ra-aṃ˚), us,%} m. the end of a ray of light, the
focal point. {%—Agrākṣan, a,%} or {%agrākṣi (˚ra-ak˚),%}
{%i,%} n. the fore part of the eye, sharpness of vision.
{%—Agrāṅguli (˚ra-aṅg˚), is,%} m. the tip of the
finger. {%—Agrādvan (˚ra-ad˚), ā, ā, a,%} having pre-
cedence in eating. {%—Agrānīka (˚ra-an˚), as, am,%}
m. n. the front of an army, vanguard. {%—Agrāyaṇīya,%}
{%(˚ra-ay˚), am,%} n. title of the second of the fourteen
oldest Jaina books. {%—Agropaharaṇa (˚ra-up˚), am,%}
n. first or principal supply. {%—Agropaharaṇīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} that which has to be first or principally supplied.
<LEND>

<L>263<pc>0006-b<k1>agratas<k2>agratas
{%Agratas,%}¦ ind. in front of, before, in the presence
of; at the head, first. {%—Agrataḥ-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A.
{%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to place in front or at
the head, to consider most important. {%—Agrataḥ-%}
{%sara, as, ī, am,%} going in front, taking the lead;
({%as%}), m. a leader.
<LEND>

<L>264<pc>0006-b<k1>agrima<k2>agrima
{%Agrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ foremost; prior, preceding;
elder, eldest; principal, best; furthest advanced, first
ripe; further; ({%ā%}), f. a fruit, Annona Reticulata.
<LEND>

<L>265<pc>0006-b<k1>agriya<k2>agriya
{%Agriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ foremost, oldest, best; ({%as%}), m.
elder brother; ({%am%}), n. the first fruits, the best part.
<LEND>

<L>266<pc>0006-b<k1>agrIya<k2>agrIya
{%Agrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. same as the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>267<pc>0006-b<k1>agre<k2>agre
{%Agre,%}¦ ind. (loc. of {%agra%}), in front; before; in the
presence of; at the head; first; ahead, beyond,
further on, i. e. subsequently to. {%—Agre-ga, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} going in front or before; ({%as%}), m. a leader.
{%—Agre-gā, ās,%} or {%agre-gū, ūs,%} or {%agre-ṇī, īs,%} m.
a leader. {%—Agretvan (˚gra-it˚), ā, arī, a,%} Ved. going
in front or before. {%—Agre-didhiṣu, us,%} m. a man
belonging to one of the first three classes, who at his
first marriage takes a wife that was married before;
({%us%} or {%ū, ūs%}), f. a married woman whose elder sister
is still unmarried. {%—Agre-pā, ās, ās,%} or {%agre-pū, ūs,%}
{%ūs,%} m. f. having the precedence in drinking. {%—Agre-%}
{%bhrū, ūs,%} m. roaming in front. {%—Agre-vaṇa, am,%} n.
the border of a forest. {%—Agre-vadha, as,%} m. hitting
or killing whatever is in front. {%—Agre-sara, as, ā%} or
{%ī, am,%} going in front, preceding, taking the lead.
{%—Agre-sara%} or {%agre-sarika, as,%} m. a leader.
<LEND>

<L>268<pc>0006-b<k1>agrya<k2>agrya
{%Agrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ foremost, topmost, principal,
best, proficient; pointed, i. e. intent, closely attentive;
({%as%}), m. an elder or eldest brother; ({%am%}), n. a roof.
<LEND>

<L>269<pc>0006-b<k1>agraBaRa<k2>agraBaRa
{#agraBaRa#}¦ {%a-grabhaṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%grabh,%}
old form of rt. {%grah%}), Ved. having nothing which
can be grasped.
<LEND>

<L>270<pc>0006-b<k1>agraha<k2>agraha
{%A-graha, as,%}¦ m. non-acceptance. {%—A-graha%} or
{%a-gṛha, as,%} m. a houseless man, i. e. a Vānaprastha,
a Brāhman of the third class.
<LEND>

<L>271<pc>0006-b<k1>agrAhin<k2>agrAhin
{%A-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ not taking, (said of a leech)
not holding.
<LEND>

<L>272<pc>0006-b<k1>agrAhya<k2>agrAhya
{%A-grāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfit or improper to be
received, accepted, perceived, obtained, admitted,
trusted; deserving to be rejected or refused.
<LEND>

<L>273<pc>0006-b<k1>agrAmya<k2>agrAmya
{#agrAmya#}¦ {%a-grāmya, as, ā, am,%} not rustic,
town-made; not tame, wild.
<LEND>

<L>274<pc>0006-b<k1>agru<k2>agru
{#agru#}¦ {%agru, us,%} m. unmarried; ({%ū%}), f. a
finger; a river [cf. Zend <nsi>aghru</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>275<pc>0006-b<k1>aG<k2>aG
{#aG#}¦ {%agh,%} cl. 10. P. {%aghayati, -yitum,%} to
go wrong, sin.
<LEND>

<L>276<pc>0006-b<k1>aGa<k2>aGa
{%Agha, am,%}¦ n. a going wrong; mishap, evil; mis-
deed, a fault; sin; passion; impurity; pain, suffering;
({%as, ā, am%}), evil, bad, sinful, subject to passion,
miserable, unclean; ({%as%}), m., N. of an Asura, the
general of Kaṃsa; ({%ā%}), f. the goddess of sin; ({%ās%}), f.
pl. the constellation usually called Maghā. {%—Agha-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} doing evil or harm, an evil-doer.
{%—Agha-dviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hated by the wicked.
{%—Agha-nāśaka, as, ā, am,%} or {%agha-ghna, as, ī, am,%}
or {%agha-nāśana, as, ī, am,%} sin-destroying, expiatory;
[Page0006-c+ 72]
({%as%}), m. an expiator; an epith. of Viṣṇu. {%—Agha-%}
{%niṣkṛta, as, ā, am,%} freed from guilt. {%—Agha-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} sinful. {%—Agha-marṣaṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} expiatory, usually applied to a particular prayer
daily offered by Brāhmans; ({%as%}), m., N. of the author
of that prayer, son of Madhucchandas. {%—Agha-ma-%}
{%lāpaha (˚la-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} removing the filth of
sin. {%—Agha-māra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. fearfully fatal.
{%—Agha-rud, t, t, t,%} fearfully howling. {%—Agha-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} sinful; [voc. {%aghavan%} or {%aghos,%} see s. v.]
{%—Agha-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. fearfully venomous.
{%—Agha-śaṃsa, as, ā, am,%} wicked; sin-destroying;
({%as%}), m. a wicked man. {%—Aghaśaṃsa-han, ā,%} m.
slaying the wicked. {%—Agha-śaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved.
reporting sin. {%—Agha-haraṇa, am,%} n. removal of
guilt. {%—Agha-hāra, as,%} m., Ved. remover of guilt,
pious (?); or, a wicked (notorious) robber (?). {%—Aghā-%}
{%śva (˚gha-aś˚), as,%} m. a bad or vicious horse; N. of
a snake. {%—Aghāsura (˚gha-as˚), as,%} m. Agha,
Kaṃsa's general, {%—Aghāha (˚gha-ah˚), as,%} m. an
inauspicious day, time of impurity from the death of a
relative, &c. {%—Aghaugha-marṣaṇa (˚gha-ogha-),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} destroying the mass or whole of sin.
<LEND>

<L>277<pc>0006-c<k1>aGala<k2>aGala
{%Aghala, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. evil, sinful.
<LEND>

<L>278<pc>0006-c<k1>aGAya<k2>aGAya
{%Aghāya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%aghāyati, yitum,%} to be
malicious, to sin, to threaten. {%—Aghāyu, us, us, u,%}
malicious, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>279<pc>0006-c<k1>aGawamAna<k2>aGawamAna
{#aGawamAna#}¦ {%a-ghaṭamāna, as, ā, am,%} incon-
gruous, incoherent.
<LEND>

<L>280<pc>0006-c<k1>aGana<k2>aGana
{#aGana#}¦ {%a-ghana, as, ā, am,%} not dense or
solid, liquid.
<LEND>

<L>281<pc>0006-c<k1>aGarma<k2>aGarma
{#aGarma#}¦ {%a-gharma, as, ā, am,%} not hot, cool.
{%—Agharma-dhāman, ā,%} m. the moon, whose light
is supposed to be cool.
<LEND>

<L>282<pc>0006-c<k1>aGAtin<k2>aGAtin
{#aGAtin#}¦ {%a-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%} not fatal, not
injurious, harmless.
<LEND>

<L>283<pc>0006-c<k1>aGArin<k2>aGArin
{#aGArin#}¦ {%a-ghārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} not anointing.
<LEND>

<L>284<pc>0006-c<k1>aGfRa<k2>aGfRa
{#aGfRa#}¦ {%a-ghṛṇa, as, ā, am,%} destitute of
compassion. {%—A-ghṛṇin, ī, inī, i,%} not contemptuous,
not disdainful.
<LEND>

<L>285<pc>0006-c<k1>aGora<k2>aGora
{#aGora#}¦ {%a-ghora, as, ā, am,%} not terrific;
({%as%}), m. a euphemistic title of Śiva; a worshipper
of Śiva and Durgā; ({%ā%}), f. the fourteenth day of the
dark half of Bhādra, which is sacred to Śiva. {%—Aghora-%}
{%ghora-rūpa, as,%} m. a name of Śiva (‘having a form
or nature both not terrific and terrific’). {%—Aghora-%}
{%pathin, -nthās,%} or {%aghora-mārga, as,%} m. a follower
of Śiva. {%—Aghora-pramāṇa, am,%} n. a terrific oath.
<LEND>

<L>286<pc>0006-c<k1>aGoza<k2>aGoza
{#aGoza#}¦ {%a-ghoṣa, as,%} m. (in grammar) the
hard sound of a consonant; ({%as, ā, am%}), hard-sound-
ing; destitute of cowherds.
<LEND>

<L>287<pc>0006-c<k1>aGos<k2>aGos
{#aGos#}¦ {%aghos,%} ind. a vocative particle;
properly another form for {%aghavan,%} voc. of {%agha-%}
{%vat,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>288<pc>0006-c<k1>aGnat<k2>aGnat
{#aGnat#}¦ {%a-ghnat, an, antī, at%} (fr. rt. {%han%}),
not killing, not injurious.
<LEND>

<L>289<pc>0006-c<k1>aGnya<k2>aGnya
{%A-ghnya, as, ā, am,%}¦ improper to be killed; ({%as%}),
m. Brahmā; a bull; ({%ā%}), f. a cow; a cloud (?).
<LEND>

<L>290<pc>0006-c<k1>aGreya<k2>aGreya
{#aGreya#}¦ {%a-ghreya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ghrā%}),
improper to be smelled at.
<LEND>

<L>291<pc>0006-c<k1>aNk<k2>aNk
{#aNk#}¦ {%aṅk,%} cl. 1. A. {%aṅkate, ānaṅke,%}
{%aṅkiṣyate, aṅkitum,%} to move in a
curve; to mark; cl. 10. P. {%aṅkayati, -yitum,%} to
move in a curve; to mark, stamp, brand; (this rt.
is related to {%añc.%})
<LEND>

<L>292<pc>0006-c<k1>aNka<k2>aNka
{#aNka#}¦ {%aṅka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%añc,%} but connected
with preceding rt. {%aṅk%}), a hook; a curve or bend; the
curve in the human, especially the female, figure above
the hip, where infants (sitting astride) are carried by
Hindū mothers or nurses (hence often equivalent to
the English breast or lap); the side or flank; the
body; proximity, place; the bend in the arm; any
hook or crooked instrument; a curved line; a nu-
[Page0007-a+ 77]
merical figure, cipher; a figure or mark branded on
an animal, &c.; any mark, line, stroke, ornament,
stigma; a number; the number nine; a coefficient;
an act of a drama; a drama; a military show or
sham-fight; a misdeed, a sin; moving in a curve [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ὄγκος</lang> and Lat. <nsi>uncus</nsi>]. {%—Aṅka-karaṇa, am,%}
n. the act of marking or stamping. {%—Aṅka-tantra,%}
{%am,%} n. title of a book treating of magical marks or
figures. {%—Aṅka-dhāraṇā,%} f. manner of holding the
body, figure. {%—Aṅka-parivartana, am,%} n. turning
the body, turning on the other side. {%—Aṅka-pāda-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n. title of a chapter in the Bhaviṣyot-
tara Purāṇa. {%—Aṅka-pāli, is,%} f. or {%āṅka-pālikā,%}
f. embracing, an embrace. {%—Aṅka-pālī,%} f. an em-
brace; a nurse; a plant, Piring or Medicago Escu-
lenta. {%—Aṅka-pāśa, as,%} m. a peculiar concatenation
of numerals or numbers. {%—Aṅkapāśa-vyavahāra,%}
{%as,%} m. the use of that concatenation. {%—Aṅkapāśā-%}
{%dhyāya (˚śa-adh˚), as,%} m. the study or use of that
concatenation. {%—Aṅka-bandha, as,%} m. branding with
a mark that resembles a headless body. {%—Aṅka-bhāj,%}
{%k, k, k,%} an infant carried on the hip; forced fruit,
nearly ripe, early ripe. {%—Aṅka-mukha, am,%} n.
the act of a drama which gives a clue to the whole
plot. {%—Aṅka-loḍya, as,%} m., N. of a plant or its
root, ginger, Ciñcoḍa or Ciñcoṭaka. {%—Aṅka-%}
{%vidyā,%} f. arithmetic. {%—Aṅkāṅka (˚ka-aṅ˚), am,%} n.,
Ved. water. {%—Aṅkāvatāra (˚ka-av˚), as,%} m. the
closing part of a dramatic scene.
<LEND>

<L>293<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkati<k2>aNkati
{%Aṅkati, is,%}¦ m. wind; fire; Brahmā; a Brāhman
who maintains the sacred fire.
<LEND>

<L>294<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkana<k2>aNkana
{%Aṅkana, am,%}¦ n. the act of marking, stamping,
branding, ciphering, writing; ({%as, ā, am%}), marking.
<LEND>

<L>295<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkas<k2>aNkas
{%Aṅkas, as,%}¦ n. tortuous motion, a mark; the body.
<LEND>

<L>296<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkasa<k2>aNkasa
{%Aṅkasa, am,%}¦ n. the flanks (?) or the trappings of
a horse.
<LEND>

<L>297<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkita<k2>aNkita
{%Aṅkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ marked, branded; numbered,
counted, calculated.
<LEND>

<L>298<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkin<k2>aNkin
{%Aṅkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having an {%aṅka,%} q. v.; ({%ī%}), m. a
small drum; ({%inī%}), f. a number of marks, &c.
<LEND>

<L>299<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkI<k2>aNkI
{%Aṅkī,%}¦ f. a small drum.
<LEND>

<L>300<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkuwa<k2>aNkuwa
{%Aṅkuṭa, as,%}¦ m. a key.
<LEND>

<L>301<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkupa<k2>aNkupa
{%Aṅkupa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. water.
<LEND>

<L>302<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkura<k2>aNkura
{%Aṅkura%}¦ or {%aṅkūra, as,%} m. a sprout, shoot, blade;
a hair; blood; water; a swelling, a tumour.
<LEND>

<L>303<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkuraka<k2>aNkuraka
{%Aṅkuraka, as,%}¦ m. a nest.
<LEND>

<L>304<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkurita<k2>aNkurita
{%Aṅkurita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprouted.
<LEND>

<L>305<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkuSa<k2>aNkuSa
{%Aṅkuśa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a hook, especially an
elephant-driver's hook; ({%ā%}) or ({%ī%}), f. one of the
twenty-four Jaina goddesses [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄγκσιτρον</lang> Germ.
<nsi>Angel</nsi>]. {%—Aṅkuśa-graha, as,%} m. an elephant-driver.
{%—Aṅkuśa-durdhara, as,%} m. a restive elephant.
{%Aṅkuśita, as, ā, am,%} urged on by the hook.
<LEND>

<L>306<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkuSin<k2>aNkuSin
{%Aṅkuśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a hook, laying hold of
with a hook.
<LEND>

<L>307<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkUyat<k2>aNkUyat
{%Aṅkūyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. (fr. a nom. {%aṅkūya,%}
related to {%aṅka%}), moving tortuously (to escape).
<LEND>

<L>308<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkUra<k2>aNkUra
{%Aṅkūra, as,%}¦ m. a sprout. See {%aṅkura.%}
<LEND>

<L>309<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkUza<k2>aNkUza
{%Aṅkūṣa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a hook; an ichneumon.
<LEND>

<L>310<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkya<k2>aNkya
{%Aṅkya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit or proper to be marked
or counted; ({%as%}), m. a small drum [cf. {%aṅkī%}].
<LEND>

<L>311<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkAra<k2>aNkAra
{#aNkAra#}¦ {%aṅkāra, as,%} m. diminution in music.
<LEND>

<L>312<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkowa<k2>aNkowa
{#aNkowa#}¦ {%aṅkoṭa%} or {%aṅkoṭha%} or {%aṅkola%} or
{%aṅkolaka, as,%} m. a plant, Alangium Hexapetalum.
{%—Aṅkolla-sāra, as,%} m. a poison, probably prepared
from the plant called Aṅkola, &c.
<LEND>

<L>313<pc>0007-a<k1>aNkolikA<k2>aNkolikA
{#aNkolikA#}¦ {%aṅkolikā,%} f. (a corruption of
{%aṅka-pālikā,%} q. v.), an embrace.
<LEND>

<L>314<pc>0007-a<k1>aNktvA<k2>aNktvA
{#aNktvA#}¦ {%aṅktvā,%} ind. (part. fr. rt. {%añj%}),
having besmeared.
<LEND>

<L>315<pc>0007-a<k1>aNK<k2>aNK
{#aNK#}¦ {%aṅkh,%} cl. 10. P. {%aṅkhayati, -yitum,%}
to move slowly, to crawl; to cling to, to
hold back.
<LEND>

<L>316<pc>0007-a<k1>aNg<k2>aNg
{#aNg#}¦ {%aṅg,%} cl. 1. P. {%aṅgati, ānaṅga,%}
{%aṅgitum,%} to walk, go round (connected
with rt. {%ag%}); cl. 10. P. {%aṅgayati, -yitum,%} to walk,
go round; to mark (in the last sense connected with
rt. {%aṅk%}); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐγγυς, ἐγγίζω</lang>?].
<LEND>
[Page0007-b+ 80]

<L>317<pc>0007-b<k1>aNgana<k2>aNgana
{%Aṅgana, am,%}¦ n. walking; place to walk in, yard;
see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>318<pc>0007-b<k1>aNga<k2>aNga<h>1
{#aNga#} 1¦. {%aṅga,%} ind. a particle implying at-
tention, assent or desire, and sometimes impatience;
it may be rendered by well; indeed, true; please;
rather; quick. It is often used (changed to {%aṅgī,%}
q. v.) to form compound words, as {%aṅgī-kartum,%} to
assent, promise; see under {%aṅgī%} [cf. <lang n="greek">ἄγχι</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>319<pc>0007-b<k1>aNga<k2>aNga<h>2
{#aNga#} 2¦. {%aṅga, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%am,%}
but rather fr. rt. {%aṅg%}), a round limb; a member;
the body; a division or department, especially of
a science, as the six Vedāṅgas; science; a subdi-
vision, a supplement; (in grammar) the base of a
word; (in rhetoric) an illustration; (in the drama)
the whole of the subordinate characters; an expedi-
ent; a mental organ, the mind; the number six;
({%as%}), m. sing. or ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of Bengal
proper, near Bhagalpur, or its inhabitants; in the
sing. it may denote the name of a king of Aṅga;
({%as, ā, am%}), having members or divisions, contiguous.
{%—Aṅga-kartana, am,%} n. cutting off a limb. {%—Aṅga-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. or {%aṅga-kriyā,%} f. a supplementary
sacrificial act. {%—Aṅga-graha, as,%} m. seizure of a
limb, i. e. spasm. {%—Aṅga-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced
from or on the body; ornamental; produced by a
supplementary ceremony; ({%as%}), m. a son; hair of
the head; love personified; intoxicating passion;
drunkenness; a disease; ({%ā%}), f. a daughter; ({%am%}), n.
blood. {%—Aṅga-janus, us,%} m. a son. {%—Aṅga-jāta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced from or on the body, ornamental, pro-
duced by a supplementary ceremony. {%—Aṅga-jvara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. causing fever. {%—Aṅga-dvīpa, as,%} m.
one of the six minor Dvīpas. {%—Aṅga-nyāsa, as,%} m.
ceremony of touching certain parts of the body. {%—Aṅga-%}
{%pāli, is,%} f. an embrace. {%—Aṅga-prāyaścitta, am,%}
n. expiation of bodily impurity, especially that arising
from death in a family. {%—Aṅga-bheda, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. causing rheumatism. {%—Aṅga-marda%} or {%aṅga-%}
{%mardaka, as,%} m. or {%aṅga-mardin, ī,%} m. a servant
who has to shampoo his master's body. {%—Aṅga-%}
{%marṣa, as,%} m. pain in the limbs, rheumatism.
{%—Aṅgamarṣa-praśamana, am,%} n. alleviation of,
or medicine for, rheumatism. {%—Aṅga-yāga, as,%} m.
a subordinate sacrificial act. {%—Aṅga-rakta, as,%} m. a
plant, Guṇḍārocanī. {%—Aṅga-rakṣaṇī%} or {%aṅga-%}
{%rakṣiṇī,%} f. a body-protector, i. e. a coat of mail,
cloak, garment. {%—Aṅga-rāga, as,%} m. application of
scented unguents or cosmetics to the body, especially after
bathing; scented cosmetic. {%—Aṅga-rāj, ṭ,%} or {%aṅga-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m., N. of Karṇa, the king of Aṅga. {%—Aṅga-%}
{%rājya, am,%} n. the kingdom of Aṅga. {%—Aṅga-ruha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} what grows on the body, as hair, wool, down,
&c. {%—Aṅga-lipi, is,%} f. written character of Aṅga.
{%—Aṅga-loka, as,%} m. the country called Aṅga.
{%—Aṅga-loḍya, as,%} m. a sort of grass, ginger, or
its root, commonly cencrā. {%—Aṅga-vāk-pāṇi-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessing mind (?), speech, and hands.
{%—Aṅga-vikṛti, is,%} f. change of bodily appearance,
collapse; fainting, apoplexy. {%—Aṅga-vikṣepa, as,%}
m. gesticulation; a kind of dance with movement of
the arms. {%—Aṅga-vidyā,%} f. knowledge of lucky or
unlucky marks on the body. {%—Aṅga-vaikṛta, am,%}
n. a wink, nod, sign. {%—Aṅga-saṃskāra, as,%} m. or
{%aṅga-saṃskriyā,%} f. embellishment of person, doing
what is needed to secure a fine personal appear-
ance, as bathing, perfuming, and adorning the body.
{%—Aṅga-saṃhati, is,%} f. compactness, symmetry or
strength of the body. {%—Aṅga-saṅga, as,%} m. bodily
contact, coition. {%—Aṅga-skandha, as,%} m. a subdi-
vision of a science. {%—Aṅga-sparśa, as,%} m. bodily
contact. {%—Aṅga-hāra, as,%} or {%aṅga-hāri, is,%} m.
gesticulation. {%—Aṅga-hīna, as, ā, am,%} mutilated;
incorporeal; ({%as%}), m. Kāmadeva. {%—Aṅgāṅgi (˚ga-%}
{%aṅ˚),%} ind. (lit. limb and limb), jointly or reciprocally,
in consequence of being related, as one limb to another
or to the body. {%—Aṅgāṅgi-tā,%} f. intimate relation,
as between the limbs, or a limb and the body, or
the subordinate and the principal. {%—Aṅgāṅgi-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. existence or working of such intimate relation.
{%—Aṅgādhipa (˚ga-adh˚), as,%} m. Karṇa, the king
[Page0007-c+ 75]
of Aṅga. {%—Aṅgānulepana (˚ga-an˚), am,%} n.
anointing the body. {%—Aṅgāpūrva (˚ga-ap˚), am,%}
n. effect of a secondary sacrificial act. {%—Aṅgeśvara%}
{%(˚ga-īś˚), as,%} m. the king of Aṅga. {%—Aṅge-ṣṭhā,%}
{%ās, ās, am,%} Ved. situated in a member or in the
body.
<LEND>

<L>320<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgaka<k2>aNgaka
{%Aṅgaka, am,%}¦ n. a limb, member, body; ({%ikā%}),
f. a bodice, a jacket.
<LEND>

<L>321<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgin<k2>aNgin
{%Aṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having limbs, corporeal, having
subordinate parts, principal; having expedients.
<LEND>

<L>322<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgIya<k2>aNgIya
{%Aṅgīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ referring to the Aṅga country.
{%—Aṅgya,%} see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>323<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgaRa<k2>aNgaRa
{#aNgaRa#}¦ {%aṅgaṇa, am,%} n. (a place to walk in),
a yard, court, area; see {%aṅgana%} below.
<LEND>

<L>324<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgati<k2>aNgati
{#aNgati#}¦ {%aṅgati, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ag%}), fire; a
Brāhman who maintains a sacred fire; Brahmā;
Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>325<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgada<k2>aNgada
{#aNgada#}¦ {%aṅga-da, as,%} m. (fr. {%aṅga + da%}),
N. of a brother of Rāma; of a son of Gada; of an
ape son of Bāli; ({%ā%}), f. the female elephant of the
south (or the north ?); ({%am%}), n. a bracelet worn on
the upper arm.
<LEND>

<L>326<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgana<k2>aNgana
{#aNgana#}¦ {%aṅgana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%aṅg,%} q. v.),
the act of walking; place to walk in, yard, court,
area; ({%ā%}), f. a woman with well-rounded limbs; any
woman or female; (in astronomy) Virgo; the fe-
male elephant of the north. {%—Aṅganā-gaṇa, as,%} m.
a number of women. {%—Aṅganā-jana, as,%} m. a fe-
male person. {%—Aṅganā-priya, as,%} m. (lit. dear to
women), N. of the tree Jonesia Asoca.
<LEND>

<L>327<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgava<k2>aNgava
{#aNgava#}¦ {%aṅgava, as,%} m. (fr. {%aṅgu?,%} a cor-
ruption of {%agni%}), dried or withered fruit.
<LEND>

<L>328<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgas<k2>aNgas
{#aNgas#}¦ {%aṅgas, as,%} n. (fr. rt. {%añj?%}), a bird.
<LEND>

<L>329<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgAra<k2>aNgAra
{#aNgAra#}¦ {%aṅgāra, as,%} m.; (rarely {%am%}), n.
(said to be fr. rt. {%ag%} or {%aṅg,%} cf. {%agni%}), charcoal, either
heated or not heated; ({%as%}), m. the planet Mars; N.
of a prince of the Maruts; a plant, Hitāvalī; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a people and country [cf. Lith. <nsi>angli-s;</nsi>
Russ. <nsi>ūgolj;</nsi> also Germ. <nsi>Kohle;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>col</nsi>
and <nsi>colo;</nsi> Engl. <nsi>coal</nsi>]. {%—Aṅgāra-kuṣṭhaka, as,%}
m. a plant, Hitāvalī. {%—Aṅgāra-dhānī%} or {%aṅgāra-%}
{%dhānikā,%} f. a portable fire-place. {%—Aṅgāra-pari-%}
{%pācita, am,%} n. roasted food. {%—Aṅgāra-parṇa, as,%}
m. an epith. of Citraratha, the chief of the Gandhar-
vas. {%—Aṅgāra-pātrī,%} f. a portable fire-place. {%—Aṅgā-%}
{%ra-puṣapa, as,%} m. a plant, Iṅgudī; Vulg. Ingua.
{%—Aṅgāra-mañjarī%} or {%aṅgāra-mañjī,%} f. a shrub,
Cesalpinia Banducella. {%—Aṅgāra-vallarī%} or {%aṅgāra-%}
{%vallī,%} f., N. of various plants; Galedupa Arborea;
Ovieda Verticallata; Bhārgī; Guñjā. {%—Aṅgāra-śakaṭī,%}
f. a portable fire-place or wheels. {%—Aṅgāra-setu, us,%}
m., N. of a prince, father of Gāndhāra. {%—Aṅgārā-%}
{%vakṣayaṇa (˚ra-av˚), am,%} n. vessel or receptacle
for extinguishing coals.
<LEND>

<L>330<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgAraka<k2>aNgAraka
{%Aṅgāraka, as,%}¦ m. charcoal; heated charcoal; the
planet Mars; Tuesday; N. of a prince of Sauvīra;
also of a Rudra; N. of two plants, Eclipta (or Verbe-
sina) Prostrata, and white or yellow Amaranth; ({%am%}),
n. a medicated oil in which turmeric and other
vegetable substances have been boiled. {%—Aṅgāraka-%}
{%dina, as, am,%} m. n. a festival of Mars on the fourteenth
of the latter half of Caitra. {%—Aṅgāraka-maṇi, is,%} m.
coral (amber). {%—Aṅgāraka-vāra, as,%} m. Tuesday.
<LEND>

<L>331<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgArakita<k2>aNgArakita
{%Aṅgārakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ charred, roasted, burnt.
<LEND>

<L>332<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgAri<k2>aNgAri
{%Aṅgāri, is,%}¦ f. a portable fire-place.
<LEND>

<L>333<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgArikA<k2>aNgArikA
{%Aṅgārikā,%}¦ f. the stalk of the sugar-cane; the bud
of the Kiṃśuka or Butea Frondosa.
<LEND>

<L>334<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgAriRI<k2>aNgAriRI
{%Aṅgāriṇī,%}¦ f. a small fire-place; the region heated
by the sun, though no longer exposed to its rays;
N. of a creeper.
<LEND>

<L>335<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgArita<k2>aNgArita
{%Aṅgārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ charred, roasted, burnt;
({%ā%}), f. a portable fire-place; a bud; N. of a creeper;
of a river; ({%am%}), n. the early blossom of the Kiṃśuka.
<LEND>

<L>336<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgArIya<k2>aNgArIya
{%Aṅgārīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for making charcoal of.
<LEND>

<L>337<pc>0007-c<k1>aNgAryA<k2>aNgAryA
{%Aṅgāryā,%}¦ f. a heap of charcoal.
<LEND>
[Page0008-a+ 77]

<L>338<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgikA<k2>aNgikA
{#aNgikA#}¦ {%aṅgikā,%} f. a bodice, a jacket. See
{%aṅgaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>339<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgir<k2>aNgir
{#aNgir#}¦ {%aṅgir, īr,%} m. (fr. rt. {%aṅg ?%}), N. of a
Ṛṣi, who received the Brahmavidyā from Athar-
van, and imparted it to Satyavāha, the teacher of
Aṅgiras.
<LEND>

<L>340<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgira<k2>aNgira
{%Aṅgira, as,%}¦ or usually {%aṅgiras, ās,%} m. (related to
<lang n="greek">ἄγγελος</lang> or <lang n="greek">ἄγγαρος</lang> ?), a celebrated mythological name,
usually ascribed to a Ṛṣi, the author of a number of
hymns in the Ṛg-veda, of a code of laws, and of a
treatise on astronomy; he is said by some to have
been born from Brahmā's mouth, and to have been
the husband of Smṛti, of Śraddhā, of two daughters
of Maitreya, of several daughters of Dakṣa, &c.; he
is considered as one of the seven Ṛṣis of the first
Manvantara, as a Prajāpati, as a teacher of the Brahma-
vidyā, which he had learnt from Satyavāha, a descend-
ant of Bharadvāja, &c. Among his sons, the chief is
Agni, others are Saṃvarta, Utathya, and Bṛhaspati;
among his daughters are mentioned Sinīvālī, Kuhū,
Rākā, and Anumati; but the Ṛcas (or Vedic hymns),
the manes of Haviṣmat, and mankind itself are
styled his offspring. In astronomy he is the planet
Jupiter, and a star in Ursa Major. ({%asas%}), m. pl. de-
scendants of Aṅgiras or of Agni, mostly personifications
of luminous objects; the hymns of the Atharva-veda;
priests who, by using the magical formulas of those
hymns, protect the sacrifice against the effects of
inauspicious accidents. {%—Aṅgiras-tama, as, ā, am,%}
very rapid, especially (like Agni) in devouring food.
{%—Aṅgiras-vat,%} ind. like Aṅgiras; ({%ān, atī, at%}),
connected with or accompanied by the Aṅgirasas.
<LEND>

<L>341<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgirasa<k2>aNgirasa
{%Aṅgirasa, as,%}¦ m. an enemy of Viṣṇu in his
incarnation of Paraśurāma.
<LEND>

<L>342<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgirasAmayana<k2>aNgirasAmayana
{%Aṅgirasām-ayana, am,%}¦ n. a Sattra sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>343<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgI<k2>aNgI
{#aNgI#}¦ {%aṅgī%} (substituted for {%aṅga%} in com-
pound words) implies assent.
<LEND>

<L>344<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgIkf<k2>aNgIkf
{%Aṅgī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to agree to, promise, confess.
<LEND>

<L>345<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgIkaraRa<k2>aNgIkaraRa
{%Aṅgī-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. act of assenting, agreeing,
promising.
<LEND>

<L>346<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgIkAra<k2>aNgIkAra
{%Aṅgī-kāra, as,%}¦ m. agreement, promise.
<LEND>

<L>347<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgIkfta<k2>aNgIkfta
{%Aṅgī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ agreed to, promised.
<LEND>

<L>348<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgIkfti<k2>aNgIkfti
{%Aṅgī-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. agreement, promise.
<LEND>

<L>349<pc>0008-a<k1>aNguri<k2>aNguri
{#aNguri#}¦ {%aṅguri, is,%} or {%aṅgurī,%} f. (for {%aṅguli,%}
q. v.), a finger; a toe. {%—Aṅgurīya%} or {%aṅgurīyaka,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a finger-ring; the ring-finger (?).
<LEND>

<L>350<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgula<k2>aNgula
{#aNgula#}¦ {%aṅgula, as,%} m. (for rt. {%ag%} or {%aṅg%}),
a finger; the thumb; a finger's breadth, a measure
equal to eight barley-corns, twelve aṅgulas making
a vitasti or span, and twenty-four a hasta or cubit;
(in astron.) a digit, or twelfth part; N. of the sage
Cāṇakya. {%—Aṅgula-pramāṇa%} or {%aṅgula-māna,%}
{%am,%} n. the measure or length of an aṅgula; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), having the length of an aṅgula.
<LEND>

<L>351<pc>0008-a<k1>aNgulaka<k2>aNgulaka
{%Aṅgulaka%}¦ at the end of compounds {%= aṅgula,%} i. e.
so many aṅgulas or fingers long.
<LEND>

<L>352<pc>0008-a<k1>aNguli<k2>aNguli
{%Aṅguli, is,%}¦ or {%aṅgulī,%} f. a finger; a toe; the
thumb; the great toe; the finger-like tip of an ele-
phant's trunk; the measure aṅgula. {%—Aṅguli-to-%}
{%raṇa, am,%} n. a sectarial mark on the forehead con-
sisting of three fingers or lines shaped like an arch or
doorway ({%toraṇa%}), drawn with sandal or the ashes of
cow-dung. {%—Aṅguli-tra, am,%} n. or {%aṅguli-trāṇa,%}
{%as, am,%} m. (?), n. a finger-protector, a contrivance
like a thimble, used by archers to protect the thumb
or finger from being injured by the bow-string.
{%—Aṅgulitra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} provided with such a
finger-protector. {%—Aṅguli-mukha%} or {%aṅguli-mukha,%}
{%am,%} n. the tip of the finger. {%—Aṅguli-mudrā%} or
{%aṅguli-mudrikā,%} f. a seal-ring. {%—Aṅguli-moṭana,%}
{%am,%} n. snapping or cracking the fingers. {%—Aṅguli-%}
{%ṣaṅga, as,%} m. contact of the fingers; act of finger-
ing; ({%as, ā, am%}), sticking to the fingers. {%—Aṅguli-%}
{%sandeśa, as,%} m. snapping or cracking the fingers as
a sign. {%—Aṅguli-sphoṭana, am,%} n. snapping or
cracking the fingers. {%—Aṅgulī-pañcaka, am,%} n. the
[Page0008-b+ 72]
five fingers. {%—Aṅgulī-parvan, a,%} n. a finger-joint.
{%—Aṅgulī-sambhūta, as,%} m. produced from or on
the finger, i. e. a finger nail.
<LEND>

<L>353<pc>0008-b<k1>aNgulIka<k2>aNgulIka
{%Aṅgulīka%}¦ or {%aṅgulīya%} or {%aṅgulīyaka, as, am,%}
m. n. a finger-ring.
<LEND>

<L>354<pc>0008-b<k1>aNguzWa<k2>aNguzWa
{#aNguzWa#}¦ {%aṅguṣṭha, as,%} m. (the smallest
{%aṅga%} or limb?), the thumb; the great toe; a thumb's
breadth, usually regarded as equal to an {%aṅgula.%}
{%—Aṅguṣṭha-mātra, as, ī, am,%} or {%aṅguṣṭha-%}
{%mātraka, as, ikā, am,%} having the length or size of
a thumb.
<LEND>

<L>355<pc>0008-b<k1>aNguzWya<k2>aNguzWya
{%Aṅguṣṭhya, as,%}¦ m. the thumb nail.
<LEND>

<L>356<pc>0008-b<k1>aNgUza<k2>aNgUza
{#aNgUza#}¦ {%aṅgūṣa, as,%} m. (rapid in motion,
fr. rt. {%aṅg%} or {%ag%}), an ichneumon; an arrow.
<LEND>

<L>357<pc>0008-b<k1>aNgozin<k2>aNgozin
{#aNgozin#}¦ {%aṅgoṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. re-
sonant (?), praiseworthy (?).
<LEND>

<L>358<pc>0008-b<k1>aNgya<k2>aNgya
{#aNgya#}¦ {%aṅgya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%aṅga%}), be-
longing to or connected with the limbs of the body,
corporeal, &c.
<LEND>

<L>359<pc>0008-b<k1>aNG<k2>aNG
{#aNG#}¦ {%aṅgh,%} cl. 1. A. {%aṅghate, ānaṅghe,%}
{%aṅghitum,%} to go, set out, set about, com-
mence; to hasten; to speak hastily, scold, blame.
<LEND>

<L>360<pc>0008-b<k1>aNGa<k2>aNGa
{%Aṅgha%}¦ (not in use, but equivalent to {%agha%}), evil,
sin. {%—Aṅghas, as,%} n. sin. {%—Aṅghāri (˚gha-ari), is,%}
m. (an enemy to sin or evil), epith. of Soma, and of
a particular altar.
<LEND>

<L>361<pc>0008-b<k1>aNGi<k2>aNGi
{%Aṅghi,%}¦ or better {%aṅghri, is,%} m. a foot; the root
of a tree [cf. {%aṃhri%}]. {%—Aṅghri-nāmaka, as,%} m.
or {%aṅghri-nāman, a,%} n. a synonym of {%aṅghri,%} a
root. {%—Aṅghri-pa, as,%} m. (drinking with the foot
or root), a tree. {%—Aṅghri-parṇī%} or {%aṅghri-valli,%}
{%is,%} or {%aṅghri-vallikā,%} f. a plant, Hedysarum Lago-
podioides. {%—Aṅghri-pāna, as, ā, am,%} sucking his
foot or toes (as an infant). {%—Aṅghri-skandha, as,%}
m. the ancle.
<LEND>

<L>362<pc>0008-b<k1>ac<k2>ac
{#ac#}¦ {%ac%} (connected with {%añc,%} q. v.), cl.
1. P. A. {%acati, añcati, -te, ānañca, -e,%}
{%añcitum,%} to go, move, tend; to honour; to make
round or carved; to request ask; to speak in-
distinctly. See 2. {%acita, aciṣṭu.%}
<LEND>

<L>363<pc>0008-b<k1>acakra<k2>acakra
{#acakra#}¦ {%a-cakra, as, ā, am,%} having no wheels;
immoveable; not vacillating; automatous (?).
<LEND>

<L>364<pc>0008-b<k1>acakzus<k2>acakzus
{#acakzus#}¦ {%a-cakṣus, us,%} n. a bad or miser-
able eye, no eye; ({%us, us, us%}), blind. {%—A-cakṣur-%}
{%viṣaya, as, ā, am,%} not or no longer within reach of
the eyes, invisible. {%—Acakṣuṣ-ṭva, am,%} n. blindness.
<LEND>

<L>365<pc>0008-b<k1>acakzuzka<k2>acakzuzka
{%A-cakṣuṣka, as, ā, am,%}¦ destitute of eyes, blind.
<LEND>

<L>366<pc>0008-b<k1>acaRqa<k2>acaRqa
{#acaRqa#}¦ {%a-caṇḍa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} not of a
hot temper, gentle, tractable; ({%ī%}), f. a tractable cow.
<LEND>

<L>367<pc>0008-b<k1>acatura<k2>acatura
{#acatura#}¦ {%a-catura, as, ā, am,%} destitute of
four, having less than four; not cunning, not dexterous.
<LEND>

<L>368<pc>0008-b<k1>acandra<k2>acandra
{#acandra#}¦ {%a-candra, as, ā, am,%} moonless.
<LEND>

<L>369<pc>0008-b<k1>acapala<k2>acapala
{#acapala#}¦ {%a-capala, as, ā, am,%} not oscillating
or vibrating; unmoveable, steady.
<LEND>

<L>370<pc>0008-b<k1>acApalya<k2>acApalya
{%A-cāpalya, am,%}¦ n. freedom from unsteadiness,
firmness.
<LEND>

<L>371<pc>0008-b<k1>acara<k2>acara
{#acara#}¦ {%a-cara, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-carat, an,%}
{%antī, at,%} immoveable.
<LEND>

<L>372<pc>0008-b<k1>acarama<k2>acarama
{#acarama#}¦ {%a-carama, as, ā, am,%} not last, not
least.
<LEND>

<L>373<pc>0008-b<k1>acala<k2>acala
{#acala#}¦ {%a-cala, as, ā, am,%} not staggering or
moving, immoveable; ({%as%}), m. a mountain or rock;
a bolt or pin; the number seven; N. of Śiva
and of the first of the nine deified persons, called
‘white Balas’ among the Jainas; ({%ā%}), f. the earth;
one of the ten earths of the Buddhists. {%—Acala-%}
{%kīlā,%} f. the earth. {%—Acala-tviṣ, ṭ,%} m. the Kokila or
Indian cuckoo. {%—Acala-dhṛti, is,%} f. a metre of four
lines, of sixteen short syllables each, also called
Gītyāryā. {%—Acala-bhrātṛ, tā,%} m., N. of a Brāhman
from Oude, who became one of the eleven heads of
Gaṇas among the Jainas. {%—Acala-mati, is,%} m., N.
[Page0008-c+ 72]
of a Rākṣasa. {%—Acala-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. chief of
mountains. {%—Acalādhipa (˚la-adh˚), as,%} m. (king
of mountains), the Himālaya. {%—Acalā-saptamī,%} f.
title of a book in the Bhaviṣyottara Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>374<pc>0008-c<k1>acAru<k2>acAru
{#acAru#}¦ {%a-cāru, us, vī, u,%} not pretty, in-
elegant.
<LEND>

<L>375<pc>0008-c<k1>acikkaRa<k2>acikkaRa
{#acikkaRa#}¦ {%a-cikkaṇa, as, ā, am,%} not smooth,
rough.
<LEND>

<L>376<pc>0008-c<k1>acit<k2>acit<h>1
{#acit#} 1¦. {%a-cit, t, t, t%} (fr. rt. {%cit%}), without
understanding.
<LEND>

<L>377<pc>0008-c<k1>acikitvas<k2>acikitvas
{%A-cikitvas, ān, uṣī, as,%}¦ Ved. not knowing,
ignorant of.
<LEND>

<L>378<pc>0008-c<k1>acitta<k2>acitta
{%A-citta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unnoticed, unexpected; not an
object of thought; inconceivable; destitute of intellect
or sense.
<LEND>

<L>379<pc>0008-c<k1>acitti<k2>acitti
{%A-citti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. want of sense, infatuation; an
infatuated man (?).
<LEND>

<L>380<pc>0008-c<k1>acit<k2>acit<h>2
{#acit#} 2¦. {%a-cit, t, t, t%} (fr. {%cit%} or {%citi,%} a pile;
rt. {%ci%}), neglecting the Agnicayana, irreligious.
<LEND>

<L>381<pc>0008-c<k1>acita<k2>acita<h>1
1. {%a-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not collected.
<LEND>

<L>382<pc>0008-c<k1>acita<k2>acita<h>2
{#acita#} 2¦. {%acita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ac%}), gone.
<LEND>

<L>383<pc>0008-c<k1>acizwu<k2>acizwu
{%Aciṣṭu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. going everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>384<pc>0008-c<k1>acitra<k2>acitra
{#acitra#}¦ {%a-citra, as, ā, am%} (not variegated),
undistinguishable, indistinct.
<LEND>

<L>385<pc>0008-c<k1>acintA<k2>acintA
{#acintA#}¦ {%a-cintā,%} f. thoughtlessness, dis-
regard.
<LEND>

<L>386<pc>0008-c<k1>acintita<k2>acintita
{%A-cintita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not thought of, unexpected,
disregarded.
<LEND>

<L>387<pc>0008-c<k1>acintya<k2>acintya
{%A-cintya, as, ā, am,%}¦ surpassing all thought or
conception; ({%as%}), m., N. of Śiva. {%—Acintya-kar-%}
{%man, ā, ā, a,%} having or performing inconceivable
actions. {%—Acintya-rūpa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} possessing
inconceivable beauty.
<LEND>

<L>388<pc>0008-c<k1>acira<k2>acira
{#acira#}¦ {%a-cira, as, ā, am,%} not of long dura-
tion, brief; not of long date, recent. {%—Acira-dyuti,%}
{%is,%} f. or {%acira-prabhā,%} f. lightning. {%—Acira-prasūtā,%}
f. (having recently brought forth), a cow that has
recently calved. {%—Acira-bhās, ās,%} f. lightning. {%—%}
{%Acira-mṛta, as, ā, am,%} recently deceased. {%—Acira-%}
{%rocis, is,%} f. or {%acirāṃśu (˚ra-aṃ˚), us,%} f. or {%acirābhā%}
{%(˚ra-ābhā%}), f. lightning.
<LEND>

<L>389<pc>0008-c<k1>aciram<k2>aciram
{%Aciram%}¦ or {%acirāt%} or {%acireṇa,%} ind. not long, not
for long; not long ago; soon, speedily.
<LEND>

<L>390<pc>0008-c<k1>acirA<k2>acirA
{%Acirā,%}¦ f. the mother of the Jaina-saint Śānti.
<LEND>

<L>391<pc>0008-c<k1>acizwu<k2>acizwu
{#acizwu#}¦ {%aciṣṭu,%} Ved. See under 2. {%acita.%}
<LEND>

<L>392<pc>0008-c<k1>acetana<k2>acetana
{#acetana#}¦ {%a-cetana, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-cetas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} destitute of consciousness, inanimate; (of men)
inconscious, insensible, senseless, fainting, &c.
<LEND>

<L>393<pc>0008-c<k1>acetAna<k2>acetAna
{%A-cetāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. thoughtless, infatuated.
<LEND>

<L>394<pc>0008-c<k1>acEtanya<k2>acEtanya
{%A-caitanya, am,%}¦ n. unconsciousness; insensibility;
senselessness, ignorance in spiritual things; that which
is destitute of consciousness, i. e. the material world;
matter.
<LEND>

<L>395<pc>0008-c<k1>acezwa<k2>acezwa
{#acezwa#}¦ {%a-ceṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} effortless, mo-
tionless. {%—Aceṣṭa-tā,%} f. loss of motion from faint-
ing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>396<pc>0008-c<k1>acodas<k2>acodas
{#acodas#}¦ {%a-codas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. free from
compulsion or external stimulus, spontaneous.
<LEND>

<L>397<pc>0008-c<k1>acCa<k2>acCa<h>1
{#acCa#} 1¦. {%a-ccha, as, ā, am%} (not shaded or
covered, fr. {%a + cha%} for {%chad%} or {%chāyā,%} rt. {%chad%}),
pellucid, transparent, clear; ({%as%}), m. a crystal.
{%—Acchoda (accha-uda), as, ā, am,%} having clear
water; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; a covering or garment
of Viṣṇu (?); ({%am%}), n., N. of a lake in the Himālaya
formed by the river Acchodā.
<LEND>

<L>398<pc>0008-c<k1>acCAya<k2>acCAya
{%A-cchāya, as, ā, am,%}¦ without shadow, casting no
shadow.
<LEND>

<L>399<pc>0008-c<k1>acCa<k2>acCa<h>2
{#acCa#} 2¦. {%accha, as,%} m. (corruption of {%ṛkṣa%}),
a bear. {%—Accha-bhalla, as,%} m. a bear; ({%bhalla%}
itself means ‘a bear.’)
<LEND>

<L>400<pc>0008-c<k1>acCa<k2>acCa<h>3
{#acCa#} 3¦. {%accha%} or usually {%accha,%} rarely {%accham,%}
ind., Ved. to, towards (governing the accusative and
[Page0009-a+ 78]
rarely the locative). It is a kind of separable pre-
position or prefix to verbs and verbal derivatives, as in
the following.
<LEND>

<L>401<pc>0009-a<k1>acCai<k2>acCai
{%Accha-i,%}¦ cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -tum,%} or {%acchā-gam,%} cl.
1. P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to attain, go towards.
<LEND>

<L>402<pc>0009-a<k1>acCanakz<k2>acCanakz
{%Accha-nakṣ,%}¦ cl. 1. P. A., Ved. {%-nakṣati, -te,%}
{%-kṣitum,%} to go towards, approach.
<LEND>

<L>403<pc>0009-a<k1>acCanaS<k2>acCanaS
{%Accha-naś,%}¦ cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-naśati, -śitum,%} to
come near.
<LEND>

<L>404<pc>0009-a<k1>acCanI<k2>acCanI
{%Accha-nī,%}¦ cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-nayati, -netum,%} to lead
towards or to.
<LEND>

<L>405<pc>0009-a<k1>acCanu<k2>acCanu
{%Accha-nu,%}¦ cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-nauti, -navitum%} or
{%-nuvitum,%} to call out to, to cheer.
<LEND>

<L>406<pc>0009-a<k1>acCapat<k2>acCapat
{%Accha-pat,%}¦ cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-patati, -titum,%} and
Caus. P. {%-patayati, -yitum,%} to fly towards.
<LEND>

<L>407<pc>0009-a<k1>acCavad<k2>acCavad
{%Accha-vad,%}¦ cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-vadati, -ditum,%} to salute.
<LEND>

<L>408<pc>0009-a<k1>acCAvac<k2>acCAvac
{%Acchā-vac,%}¦ cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-vakti, -ktum,%} to invite.
{%—Acchā-vāka, as,%} m. ‘the inviter’, title of a par-
ticular priest or Ṛtvij, one of the sixteen required to
perform the great sacrifices with the Soma juice.
{%—Acchāvākīya, as, ā, am,%} referring to the Acchā-
vāka; containing the word {%acchāvāka.%}
<LEND>

<L>409<pc>0009-a<k1>acCeta<k2>acCeta
{%Accheta (˚cha-ita), as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. approached,
attained.
<LEND>

<L>410<pc>0009-a<k1>acCokti<k2>acCokti
{%Acchokti (˚cha-uk˚), is,%}¦ f., Ved. invitation.
<LEND>

<L>411<pc>0009-a<k1>acCidra<k2>acCidra
{#acCidra#}¦ {%a-cchidra, as, ā, am%} (free from clefts
or flaws), unbroken, uninterrupted, uninjured; ({%am%}),
n. unbroken or uninjured condition, an action free
from defect or flaw; ({%eṇa%}), ind. uninterruptedly, from
first to last. {%—Acchidra-kāṇḍa, am,%} n. title of a
chapter of the Taittirīya-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Acchidroti%}
{%(˚dra-ūti), is, is, i,%} affording perfect protection.
{%—Acchidrodhnī (˚ra-ūdh˚),%} f., Ved. (a cow) having
a faultless udder.
<LEND>

<L>412<pc>0009-a<k1>acCidyamAna<k2>acCidyamAna
{%A-cchidyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ uncut, uncurtailed;
not fragile.
<LEND>

<L>413<pc>0009-a<k1>acCinna<k2>acCinna
{%A-cchinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ uncut, uncurtailed, uninjured;
undivided, inseparable. {%—Acchinna-pattra, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (of a bird, or, in the Vedas, of an altar shaped
like a bird), having the wings uncurtailed, uninjured;
having uninjured leaves. {%—Acchinna-parṇa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} having uninjured leaves.
<LEND>

<L>414<pc>0009-a<k1>acCedika<k2>acCedika
{%A-cchedika%}¦ or {%a-cchaidika, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} not
fit or needing to be cut.
<LEND>

<L>415<pc>0009-a<k1>acCedya<k2>acCedya
{%A-cchedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ improper or impossible to
be cut, indivisible.
<LEND>

<L>416<pc>0009-a<k1>acCuptA<k2>acCuptA
{#acCuptA#}¦ {%a-cchuptā,%} f. (not touched by sin),
N. of one of the sixteen Vidyādevīs of the Jainas.
<LEND>

<L>417<pc>0009-a<k1>acCowana<k2>acCowana
{#acCowana#}¦ {%acchoṭana, am,%} n. hunting.
<LEND>

<L>418<pc>0009-a<k1>acyuta<k2>acyuta
{#acyuta#}¦ {%a-cyuta, as, ā, am,%} what has not
given way or fallen; firm, solid; imperishable, per-
manent; not leaking or dripping; ({%as%}), m., N. of
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa; also of a physician; N. of a plant,
Morinda Tinctoria; N. of a gift to Agni. {%—Acyuta-%}
{%kṣit, t,%} m., Ved. having solid ground, an epithet of
Soma. {%—Acyuta-cyut, t, t, t,%} Ved. throwing down
that which is fixed. {%—Acyuta-ja, ās,%} m. pl. a class of
Jaina deities produced by Viṣṇu. {%—Acyuta-jallakin,%}
{%ī,%} m., N. of a commentator of the Amara-Koṣa.
{%—Acyuta-danta%} or {%acyutanta, as,%} m., N. of the
ancestor of a warrior tribe called Ācyutadanti or
Ācyutanti, though possibly the names refer to two
distinct persons and tribes. {%—Acyuta-mūrti, is,%} m.,
N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Acyuta-ruṣ, ṭ,%} f. inveterate hatred.
{%—Acyuta-vāsa, as,%} m. the sacred fig-tree, Ficus
Religiosa. {%—Acyuta-sthala, am,%} n., N. of a place
in the Pañjāb. {%—Acyutāgraja (˚ta-ag˚), as,%} m.
(Viṣṇu's elder brother), Balarāma; Indra. {%—Acyuto-%}
{%pādhyāya (˚ta-up˚), as,%} m. {%= acyuta-jallakin,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>419<pc>0009-a<k1>aj<k2>aj
{#aj#}¦ {%aj,%} cl. 1. P. (defect. verb, supple-
mented fr. rt. {%vī%}), {%ajati, ājīt, ajitum,%} to
go, to drive, propel, throw, cast: Desid. {%ajijiṣati,%} to
be desirous of driving [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄγω</lang> Lat. <nsi>ago</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>420<pc>0009-a<k1>aja<k2>aja<h>1
1. {%aja, as,%}¦ m. a drove; a driver, mover, instigator,
leader; epithet given in the Vedas to Indra. Rudra,
one of the Maruts, Agni, and the sun; in later works
to Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva, and Kāma (see also 2 {%a-ja%});
the leader of a flock; a he-goat or ram [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">αἴξ</lang>
[Page0009-b+ 81]
<lang n="greek">αἰγος</lang> Lith. ožys]; the sign Aries; the vehicle of
the sun; N. of a descendant of Viśvāmitra, and of
Daśaratha's or Dīrghabāhu's father; N. of a mineral
substance; of a kind of rice; of the moon; ({%as%}), m.
pl., N. of a class of Ṛṣis; of a people mentioned in
the Vedas; ({%ā%}), f., N. of Prakṛti or Nature, of Māyā
or Illusion; a she-goat; N. of a plant whose bulbs
resemble the udder of a goat. {%—Aja-karṇa, as,%} m.
a goat's ear; a plant or tree, Terminalia Alata
Tomentosa. {%—Aja-karṇaka, as,%} m. the Śāl-tree,
Shorea Robusta. {%—Aja-kūlā,%} f., N. of a town of the
Bodhis. {%—Aja-kṣīra, am,%} n., Ved. goat's milk.
{%—Aja-gandha, as,%} m. smell of a he-goat; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), smelling like a goat. {%—Aja-gandhā%} or {%aja-%}
{%gandhikā,%} f. shrubby basil, Ocymum Gratissimum.
{%—Aja-gandhinī,%} f. a plant, also called {%ajaśṛṅgī,%}
q. v. {%—Aja-gara, as,%} m. (that swallows a goat), a
huge serpent, probably boa constrictor; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
plant. {%—Aja-gallikā,%} f. ‘goat's cheek,’ an infantile
disease. {%—Aja-jīva%} or {%aja-jīvika, as,%} m. ‘who lives
by goats,’ a goat-herd. {%—Aja-tā,%} f. a multitude of
goats; the being a goat. {%—Aja-tva%} or {%ajā-tva, am,%}
n. the being a goat. {%—Aja-daṇḍī,%} f. a plant, also
called {%brahmadaṇḍī%}. {%—Aja-devatā, ās,%} f. pl. the
25th lunar mansion. {%—Aja-nāmaka, as,%} m. (named
Aja or Viṣṇu), a mineral substance. {%—Aja-pa, as,%}
m. a goat-herd. {%—Aja-patha, as,%} m. ‘goat's road,’
probably synonymous with {%aja-vīthī,%} q. v. {%—Aja-%}
{%pada%} or {%aja-pāda, as, ā, am,%} goat-footed. {%—Aja-%}
{%pād, t,%} m., Ved. epithet of the divinity called {%Aja.%}
{%—Aja-pārśva, as,%} m. (having black sides like a
goat), epithet of Śvetakarṇa's son Rājīvalocana.
{%—Aja-pāla, as,%} m. a goat-herd; N. of Daśaratha's
father. {%—Aja-bhakṣa, as,%} m. ‘goat's food,’ N. of a
plant, Varvūra. {%—Aja-māyu, us,%} m., Ved. bleating
like a goat. {%—Aja-māra, as,%} m., N. of a tribe or a
prince. {%—Aja-mīḍha%} or {%aja-mīḷha, as,%} m., N. of a
son of Suhotra, the author of some Vedic hymns; of
a grandson of Suhotra; surname of Yudhisṭhira.
{%—Aja-mukha, as, ī, am,%} goat-faced; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
a Rākṣasī. {%—Aja-meru,%} N. of a place, Ajmir (?).
{%—Aja-moda, as,%} m. or {%aja-modā%} or {%aja-modikā,%}
f. ‘goat's delight,’ N. of various plants, common
Carroway, the species called Ajwaen (Ligusticum
Ajwaen), and especially a species of Parsley, Apium
Involucratum. {%—Ajarṣabha (˚ja-ṛṣ˚), as,%} m. the
best goat. {%—Aja-lambana, am,%} n. antimony. {%—Aja-%}
{%loman, ā,%} m. or {%aja-lomī,%} f., N. of a plant, Cowage,
Carpopogon Pruriens; ({%a%}), n. goat's hair. {%—Aja-vasti,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a tribe; ({%ayas%}), m. pl. the members of
that tribe. {%—Aja-vāha, as,%} m., N. of a district.
{%—Aja-vīthī,%} f. ‘goat's road,’ N. of one of the three
divisions of the southern path, or one of the three
paths in which the sun, moon, and planets move,
comprehending the asterisms {%mūlā, pūrvāṣāḍha,%}
and {%uttarāṣāḍha%}. {%—Aja-śṛṅgī,%} f. ‘goat's horn,’
N. of a shrub, Odina Wodier, used as a charm and as
a remedy for sore eyes, — the fruit resembles a goat's
horn. {%—Aja-stunda, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Aja-hā,%}
f. Cowage, Carpopogon Pruriens. {%—Ajā-kṛpāṇīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} like the goat and shears in the fable.
{%—Ajā-kṣīra, am,%} n. goat's milk. {%—Ajā-gala, as,%}
m. goat's neck. {%—Ajāgala-stana, as,%} m. nipple or
fleshy protuberance on the neck of some Indian goats,
and an emblem of any useless or worthless object or
person. {%—Ajā-jīva, as,%} m. (who lives by goats), a
goat-herd. {%—Ajā-taulvali, is,%} m., N. of a Muni who
lived on the milk of goats; (given by grammarians as
an example of compounds in which the middle term
is left out). {%—Ajāda (aja-ada), as,%} m. ‘goat-eater,’
the ancestor of a warrior tribe. {%—Ajādanī (˚ja-ad˚),%}
f. a species of prickly night-shade. {%—Ajāntrī (˚ja-%}
{%an˚),%} f. a pot-herb, Convolvulus Argenteus. {%—Ajā-%}
{%payas, as,%} n. goat's milk. {%—Ajā-pālaka, as, ā, am,%}
tending goats; ({%as%}), m. a goat-herd. {%—Ajāvika (aja-%}
{%av˚), am,%} n. goats and sheep, small cattle. {%—Ajāśva%}
{%(aja-aś), am,%} n. goats and horses; ({%as%}), m. Pūṣan
or the Sun who has goats for horses. {%—Ajaikapād%}
{%(aja-ek˚), t,%} m. epithet of Viṣṇu; of one of the
eleven Rudras. {%—Ajaiḍaka (aja-eḍ˚), am,%} n. goats
and rams.
<LEND>
[Page0009-c+ 72]

<L>421<pc>0009-c<k1>ajaka<k2>ajaka
{%Ajaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a descendant of Purūravas;
also of a king of Magadha; {%ajakā%} or {%ajikā,%} f. a
young she-goat; a disease of the pupil of the eye,
small reddish tumours (compared to kids), protruding
through the transparent cornea and discharging pus.
{%—Ajakā-jāta, am,%} n. the same disease of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>422<pc>0009-c<k1>ajana<k2>ajana
{%Ajana, ajani, aji, ajma,%}¦ &c., see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>423<pc>0009-c<k1>aja<k2>aja<h>2
{#aja#} 2¦. {%a-ja, as, ā, am,%} not born, existing
from all eternity; ({%as%}), m. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva,
Kāma; ({%ā%}), f. Prakṛti or Nature, Māyā or Illusion
(see also 1. {%aja,%} s. v. {%aj%} and 1. {%ajana%}).
<LEND>

<L>424<pc>0009-c<k1>ajakava<k2>ajakava
{#ajakava#}¦ {%ajakava, as,%} m. (etymology un-
known), Śiva's bow. {%—Ajakāva, as, am,%} m. n. Śiva's
bow; ({%as%}), m. a venomous kind of vermin, cen-
tipede or scorpion; ({%am%}), n. sacrificial vessel dedicated
to Mitra and Varuṇa. {%—Ajagava%} or {%ajagāva, am,%}
n. Śiva's bow; the southern portion of the path of
the sun, moon, and planets; N. of a snake priest.
<LEND>

<L>425<pc>0009-c<k1>ajaGanya<k2>ajaGanya
{#ajaGanya#}¦ {%a-jaghanya, as, ā, am,%} not last;
not least.
<LEND>

<L>426<pc>0009-c<k1>ajaGnivas<k2>ajaGnivas
{#ajaGnivas#}¦ {%a-jaghnivas, ān, uṣī, at%} (perf.
part. fr. rt. {%han%}), not having killed.
<LEND>

<L>427<pc>0009-c<k1>ajawA<k2>ajawA
{#ajawA#}¦ {%a-jaṭā,%} f. a plant, Flacourtia Cata-
phracta; also {%ajaḍā%} and {%ajjhaṭā.%}
<LEND>

<L>428<pc>0009-c<k1>ajaqa<k2>ajaqa
{#ajaqa#}¦ {%a-jaḍa, as, ā, am,%} not torpid or
stupid; ({%ā%}), f., N. of two plants; see {%Ajaṭā%} and
{%Kapikacchu,%} Carpopogon Pruriens. {%—Ajaḍa-dhī, īs,%}
{%īs, i,%} of a vigorous mind, energetic, bold.
<LEND>

<L>429<pc>0009-c<k1>ajaTyA<k2>ajaTyA
{#ajaTyA#}¦ {%ajathyā,%} f. yellow jasmin (fit for
goats ?).
<LEND>

<L>430<pc>0009-c<k1>ajana<k2>ajana<h>1
{#ajana#} 1¦. {%ajana, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%aj.%}), Brahmā
‘the agitator;’ ({%am%}), n. act of instigating or mov-
ing. {%—Ajana-yoni-ja, as,%} m. (born fr. {%Ajana,%} i. e.
Brahmā); N. of Dakṣa.
<LEND>

<L>431<pc>0009-c<k1>ajani<k2>ajani
{%Ajani, is,%}¦ f. a path, road; see also {%aji.%}
<LEND>

<L>432<pc>0009-c<k1>ajana<k2>ajana<h>2
{#ajana#} 2¦. {%a-jana, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jan%}), desti-
tute of living beings, especially of men; desert; ({%as%}),
m. an insignificant person.
<LEND>

<L>433<pc>0009-c<k1>ajanani<k2>ajanani
{%A-janani, is,%}¦ f. privation of birth, cessation of exist-
ence; {%ajananir astu tasya,%} ‘may he cease to exist !’
<LEND>

<L>434<pc>0009-c<k1>ajanya<k2>ajanya
{%A-janya, as, ā, am,%}¦ improper to be produced or
born; unfit or unfavourable for mankind; ({%am%}), n.
any portent or natural phenomenon unfavourable to
mankind, as an earthquake.
<LEND>

<L>435<pc>0009-c<k1>ajapa<k2>ajapa<h>1
{#ajapa#} 1¦. {%a-japa, as,%} m. (rt. {%jap%}), one who
does not repeat prayers; a reader of heterodox works;
({%ā%}), f. the mantra or formula called haṃsa, which con-
sists only of a number of inhalations and exhalations.
<LEND>

<L>436<pc>0009-c<k1>ajapa<k2>ajapa<h>2
{#ajapa#} 2¦. {%aja-pa, as,%} m. a goat-herd. See
s. v. 1. {%aja.%}
<LEND>

<L>437<pc>0009-c<k1>ajamIQa<k2>ajamIQa
{#ajamIQa#}¦ {%aja-mīḍha, as,%} m. See s. v. 1. {%aja.%}
<LEND>

<L>438<pc>0009-c<k1>ajamBa<k2>ajamBa
{#ajamBa#}¦ {%a-jambha, as,%} m. (toothless), a frog.
<LEND>

<L>439<pc>0009-c<k1>ajaya<k2>ajaya
{#ajaya#}¦ {%a-jaya, as,%} m. non-victory, defeat;
({%as, ā, am%}), unconquered, unsurpassed, invincible; ({%as%}),
m., N. of Viṣṇu; of a lexicographer; of a river; ({%ā%}),
f. hemp; N. of a friend of Durgā; Māyā or Illusion.
<LEND>

<L>440<pc>0009-c<k1>ajayya<k2>ajayya
{%A-jayya, as, ā, am,%}¦ invincible, improper to be
won at play.
<LEND>

<L>441<pc>0009-c<k1>ajara<k2>ajara
{#ajara#}¦ {%a-jara, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jṝ%}), not subject
to old age, undecaying, ever young; ({%ā%}), f., N. of two
plants, Aloe Perfoliata and Jīrṇapañjhī. {%—Ajarāmara-%}
{%vat (˚ra-am˚),%} ind. as if undecaying and immortal.
<LEND>

<L>442<pc>0009-c<k1>ajarat<k2>ajarat
{%A-jarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ not suffering from old age,
not decaying.
<LEND>

<L>443<pc>0009-c<k1>ajarayu<k2>ajarayu
{%A-jarayu, us, us, u,%}¦ not subject to old age or
decay.
<LEND>

<L>444<pc>0009-c<k1>ajaras<k2>ajaras
{%A-jaras,%}¦ another form for {%ajara,%} used only in
some cases.
<LEND>

<L>445<pc>0009-c<k1>ajarya<k2>ajarya
{%A-jarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not friable, not digestible;
not subject to old age or decay; ({%am%}), n. friendship.
<LEND>

<L>446<pc>0009-c<k1>ajavas<k2>ajavas
{#ajavas#}¦ {%a-javas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. not quick,
inactive.
<LEND>
[Page0010-a+ 72]

<L>447<pc>0010-a<k1>ajasra<k2>ajasra
{#ajasra#}¦ {%a-jasra, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jas,%} ‘to injure’
not to be killed or interrupted), perpetual. {%—Ajasram%}
or {%ajasreṇa,%} ind. perpetually, for ever, ever.
<LEND>

<L>448<pc>0010-a<k1>ajahat<k2>ajahat
{#ajahat#}¦ {%a-jahat%} (pres. part. fr. rt. {%hā%} with
{%a%}), not dropping or losing (used in compounds).
{%—Ajahat-svārthā,%} f., N. of a rhetorical figure, an
elliptical use of words in which their original meaning
is not dropped, as “white ones” for “white horses,”
“lances” for “men with lances.” {%—Ajahal-liṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. (in grammar) said of a noun not dropping its
original gender, when used like an adjective.
<LEND>

<L>449<pc>0010-a<k1>ajA<k2>ajA
{#ajA#}¦ {%ajā,%} f. a goat; Prakṛti; Māyā. See s.v.
1. {%aja,%} where the compounds of {%ajā%} will also be found.
<LEND>

<L>450<pc>0010-a<k1>ajAgara<k2>ajAgara
{#ajAgara#}¦ {%a-jāgara, as, ā, am,%} not awake, not
wakeful; ({%as%}), a plant, Eclipta or Verbesina Prostrata.
<LEND>

<L>451<pc>0010-a<k1>ajAji<k2>ajAji
{#ajAji#}¦ {%ajā-ji, is,%} or {%ajā-jī,%} f. ({%ajā%} with rt.
{%ji?,%} that overcomes goats); Cumin seed, Cuminum
Cyminum; Ficus Oppositifolia; Nigella Indica.
<LEND>

<L>452<pc>0010-a<k1>ajAta<k2>ajAta
{#ajAta#}¦ {%a-jāta, as, ā, am,%} unborn, not yet
born, not yet developed. {%—Ajāta-kakud, t,%} m. a young
bull whose hump ({%kakud%}) is yet undeveloped. {%—Ajāta-%}
{%pakṣa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having undeveloped wings.
{%—Ajāta-vyañjana, as, ā, am,%} having an unde-
veloped beard. {%—Ajāta-vyavahāra, as,%} m. having
his majority unattained, a minor, a youth under fif-
teen. {%—Ajāta-śatru, us, us, u,%} having no enemy;
having no adversary of equal standing; ({%us%}), m., N. of
Śiva, of Yudhiṣṭhira, of a king of Kāśī, of a son of
Śamīka, of a son of Vidmisāra or Bimbisāra, and con-
temporary of Śākyamuni. {%—Ajātānuśaya (˚ta-anu˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having no regret. {%—Ajātāri (˚ta-ari), is,%}
m. (having no enemy), Yudhiṣṭhira.
<LEND>

<L>453<pc>0010-a<k1>ajAnat<k2>ajAnat
{#ajAnat#}¦ {%a-jānat, an, atī, at%} (pres. part. of
rt. {%jñā%} with {%a%}), not knowing, unaware.
<LEND>

<L>454<pc>0010-a<k1>ajAni<k2>ajAni
{#ajAni#}¦ {%a-jāni, is,%} or {%a-jānika, as,%} m.
having no wife.
<LEND>

<L>455<pc>0010-a<k1>ajAneya<k2>ajAneya
{#ajAneya#}¦ {%ajāneya,%} better {%ājāneya, as, ā, am%}
(from {%ājāna, ājāni,%} birth, descent), of high breed;
undaunted, fearless; ({%as%}), m. a horse of high breed.
<LEND>

<L>456<pc>0010-a<k1>ajAmi<k2>ajAmi
{#ajAmi#}¦ {%a-jāmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. not of kin,
not related; unfriendly; (in grammar) not corres-
ponding. {%—Ajāmi-tā,%} f., Ved. absence of connection,
friendliness, or similarity.
<LEND>

<L>457<pc>0010-a<k1>ajAyamAna<k2>ajAyamAna
{#ajAyamAna#}¦ {%a-jāyamāna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jan%}),
not being born, not subject to birth.
<LEND>

<L>458<pc>0010-a<k1>aji<k2>aji
{#aji#}¦ {%aji,%} f. (fr. {%aj,%} q. v.), a road.
<LEND>

<L>459<pc>0010-a<k1>ajikA<k2>ajikA
{#ajikA#}¦ {%ajikā,%} f. (fr. {%ajā%}), a young goat
[cf. 1. {%aja%}].
<LEND>

<L>460<pc>0010-a<k1>ajita<k2>ajita
{#ajita#}¦ {%a-jita, as, ā, am,%} not conquered,
unsubdued, unsurpassed, invincible, irresistible; ({%as%}),
m., N. of an antidote, a poisonous sort of rat; N. of
various persons, viz. Viṣṇu; Śiva; one of the Saptar-
shis of the fourteenth Manvantara; Maitreya or a future
Buddha; the second of the Arhats or saints of the
present (Jaina) Avasrapiṇī, a descendant of Ikṣvāku;
the attendant of Suvidhi, who is the ninth of those
Arhats; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of deified beings in the
first Manvantara. {%—Ajita-keśa-kambala, as,%} m., N.
of a Brāhman. {%—Ajita-balā,%} f., N. of a Jaina deity,
who acts under the direction of the Arhat Ajita.
{%—Ajita-vikrama, as,%} m. (having invincible power),
epithet of king Candragupta the second. {%—Ajitātman%}
{%(˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having an unsubdued self or spirit.
{%—Ajitāpīḍa (˚ta-āp˚), as,%} m. having an unsurpassed
crown; N. of a king. {%—Ajitendriya (˚ta-ind˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having an unsubdued sensuous nature, whose
passions are not controlled.
<LEND>

<L>461<pc>0010-a<k1>ajina<k2>ajina
{#ajina#}¦ {%ajina, am,%} n. (probably at first the
skin of a goat, {%aja,%} with the hair on, then any skin
which would answer the same purpose); the hairy
skin of an antelope, especially a black antelope,
which serves the religious student for a couch, seat,
[Page0010-b+ 73]
covering, &c.; the hairy skin of a tiger, &c.; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a descendant of Pṛthu. {%—Ajina-pattrā%} or
{%ajina-pattrī%} or {%ajina-pattrikā,%} f. a bat. {%—Ajina-%}
{%phalā,%} f., N. of a plant (?). {%—Ajina-yoni, is,%} m.
(origin of the skin), an antelope, deer. {%—Ajina-%}
{%vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} clad in a skin. {%—Ajina-sandha,%}
{%as,%} m. (who joins or prepares skins), a furrier.
<LEND>

<L>462<pc>0010-b<k1>ajira<k2>ajira
{#ajira#}¦ {%ajira, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%aj%}), agile,
quick, rapid; ({%as%}), m., N. of a snake priest; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of Durgā, and of a river; ({%am%}), n. place to run
or fight in, area, court [Lat. <nsi>ager?</nsi>]; the body; any
object of sense, air, wind; a frog; ({%am%}), ind. quickly.
{%—Ajira-vatī,%} f., N. of the river on which the town
Śrāvasti was situated. {%—Ajira-śocis, is,%} m., Ved.
having a quick light, glittering, epithet of Agni and
Soma. {%—Ajirādhirāja (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m., Ved. an
agile emperor, epithet of death.
<LEND>

<L>463<pc>0010-b<k1>ajirAya<k2>ajirAya
{%Ajirāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%ajirāyate, -yitum,%} Ved. to be
agile or quick.
<LEND>

<L>464<pc>0010-b<k1>ajirIya<k2>ajirIya
{%Ajirīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected (by proximity or
ownership &c.) with an ajira or court &c.
<LEND>

<L>465<pc>0010-b<k1>ajihma<k2>ajihma
{#ajihma#}¦ {%a-jihma, as, ā, am,%} not crooked,
straight, straightforward, upright; ({%as%}), m. a frog, a
fish; see {%a-jihva,%} of which this may be a corruption.
{%—Ajihma-ga, as, ā, am,%} going straight on; ({%as%}),
m. an arrow. {%—Ajihmāgra (˚hma-ag˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a straight point.
<LEND>

<L>466<pc>0010-b<k1>ajihva<k2>ajihva
{#ajihva#}¦ {%a-jihva, as, ā, am,%} tongueless;
({%as%}), m. a frog.
<LEND>

<L>467<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIkava<k2>ajIkava
{#ajIkava#}¦ {%ajīkava, am,%} n. Śiva's bow. See
{%ajakava.%}
<LEND>

<L>468<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIgarta<k2>ajIgarta
{#ajIgarta#}¦ {%a-jīgarta, as,%} m. (that has nothing
to swallow), N. of a Ṛṣi, Śunaḥśepha's father.
<LEND>

<L>469<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIta<k2>ajIta
{#ajIta#}¦ {%a-jīta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jyā%} usually
makes {%jīna%}), not faded, not faint. {%—Ajīta-punarva-%}
{%ṇya, am,%} n., Ved. (unfaded and recoverable), N. of a
twofold rite to be performed by Kṣatriyas.
<LEND>

<L>470<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIti<k2>ajIti
{%A-jīti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. unfadingness; freedom from decay,
prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>471<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIrRa<k2>ajIrRa
{#ajIrRa#}¦ {%a-jīrṇa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jṝ%}), not de-
composed; unimpaired; undigested; ({%am%}), n. free-
dom from decay, indigestion.
<LEND>

<L>472<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIrRi<k2>ajIrRi
{%A-jīrṇi, is,%}¦ f. indigestion.
<LEND>

<L>473<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIrRin<k2>ajIrRin
{%A-jīrṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ suffering from indigestion.
<LEND>

<L>474<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIva<k2>ajIva
{#ajIva#}¦ {%a-jīva, as,%} m. (non-life), non-ex-
istence, death; ({%as, ā, am%}), lifeless.
<LEND>

<L>475<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIvat<k2>ajIvat
{%A-jīvat, an, antī, at,%}¦ not living, destitute of a
livelihood.
<LEND>

<L>476<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIvana<k2>ajIvana
{%A-jīvana, am,%}¦ n. non-existence, death; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), destitute of a livelihood.
<LEND>

<L>477<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIvani<k2>ajIvani
{%A-jīvani, is,%}¦ f. non-existence, death; {%ajīvanis%}
{%tasya bhūyāt,%} ‘may death befal him!’
<LEND>

<L>478<pc>0010-b<k1>ajIvita<k2>ajIvita
{%A-jīvita, am,%}¦ n. non-existence, death.
<LEND>

<L>479<pc>0010-b<k1>ajugupsita<k2>ajugupsita
{#ajugupsita#}¦ {%a-jugupsita, as, ā, am,%} not
blamed.
<LEND>

<L>480<pc>0010-b<k1>ajura<k2>ajura
{#ajura#}¦ {%a-jura%} or {%a-jurya, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%jūr%}), Ved. not subject to old age or decay.
<LEND>

<L>481<pc>0010-b<k1>ajuzwa<k2>ajuzwa
{#ajuzwa#}¦ {%a-juṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not enjoyed,
unsatisfactory.
<LEND>

<L>482<pc>0010-b<k1>ajuzwi<k2>ajuzwi
{%A-juṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. non-enjoyment, feeling of dis-
appointment.
<LEND>

<L>483<pc>0010-b<k1>ajetavya<k2>ajetavya
{#ajetavya#}¦ {%a-jetavya, as, ā, am,%} invincible,
insuperable, irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>484<pc>0010-b<k1>ajeya<k2>ajeya
{%A-jeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ invincible; ({%am%}), n., N. of an
antidote.
<LEND>

<L>485<pc>0010-b<k1>ajEkapAd<k2>ajEkapAd
{#ajEkapAd#}¦ {%ajaikapād (aja-eka˚), t,%} or {%ajai-%}
{%kapāda, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of one
of the eleven Rudras.
<LEND>

<L>486<pc>0010-b<k1>ajEqaka<k2>ajEqaka
{#ajEqaka#}¦ {%ajaiḍaka ({{aja-eḍeka->aja-eḍaka||20161122|Jim Funderburk.|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/320|}}), am,%} n. goats
and sheep.
<LEND>

<L>487<pc>0010-b<k1>ajoza<k2>ajoza
{#ajoza#}¦ {%a-joṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not gratified,
not yet satisfied. {%—A-joṣya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
easily gratified, never satisfied.
<LEND>
[Page0010-c+ 75]

<L>488<pc>0010-c<k1>ajjukA<k2>ajjukA
{#ajjukA#}¦ {%ajjukā,%} f. (in the drama) a cour-
tezan; (corruption of {%arjukā.%})
<LEND>

<L>489<pc>0010-c<k1>ajJawA<k2>ajJawA
{#ajJawA#}¦ {%ajjhaṭā,%} f. a plant, Flacourtia
Cataphracta. (Also {%ajaṭā%} and {%ajaḍā.%})
<LEND>

<L>490<pc>0010-c<k1>ajJala<k2>ajJala
{#ajJala#}¦ {%ajjhala, as,%} m. (corruption of
{%ujjvala?%}), a burning coal; ({%am%}), n. a shield (?).
<LEND>

<L>491<pc>0010-c<k1>ajYa<k2>ajYa
{#ajYa#}¦ {%a-jña, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%a%} and rt. {%jñā%}),
not knowing; ignorant, inexperienced; unconscious;
unwise, stupid. {%—Ajña-tva, am,%} n. or {%ajña-tā,%} f.
ignorance.
<LEND>

<L>492<pc>0010-c<k1>ajYakA<k2>ajYakA
{%Ajñakā%}¦ or {%ajñikā,%} f. diminutive form for {%ajñā,%}
an ignorant woman.
<LEND>

<L>493<pc>0010-c<k1>ajYAta<k2>ajYAta
{%A-jñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unknown; unexpected; unaware.
{%—Ajñāta-kula-śīla, as, ā, am,%} whose lineage and
character are unknown. {%—Ajñāta-keta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having unknown or secret designs. {%—Ajñāta-%}
{%bhukta, as, ā, am,%} eaten unawares. {%—Ajñāta-%}
{%yakṣma, as,%} m., Ved. (insidious consumption?),
N. of a disease. {%—Ajñāta-vāsa, as, ā, am,%} whose
dwelling is unknown. {%—Ajñāta-śīla, as, ā, am,%}
whose character is unknown.
<LEND>

<L>494<pc>0010-c<k1>ajYAtaka<k2>ajYAtaka
{%Ajñātaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ unknown, unaware.
<LEND>

<L>495<pc>0010-c<k1>ajYAti<k2>ajYAti
{%A-jñāti, is,%}¦ m. not a kinsman, not related.
<LEND>

<L>496<pc>0010-c<k1>ajYAtvA<k2>ajYAtvA
{%A-jñātvā,%}¦ ind. not having known or ascertained.
<LEND>

<L>497<pc>0010-c<k1>ajYAna<k2>ajYAna
{#ajYAna#}¦ {%a-jñāna, am,%} n. non-cognisance;
ignorance, especially (in philosophy) spiritual ignor-
ance; not merely a negative, but an active principle,
which consisting of the three Guṇas (fetters or qualities)
{%sattva, rajas,%} and {%tamas,%} and preventing the soul
from realizing its identity with Brahma, causes self to
appear a distinct personality, and matter to appear a
reality; hence equivalent to Prakṛti or Nature, and
termed a divine Śakti (power), synonymous with Māyā,
Illusion; ({%as, ā, am%}), ignorant, unwise. {%—Ajñāna-tas%}
or {%ajñānāt,%} ind. unawares, ignorantly, inadvertently.
{%—Ajñāna-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done inadvertently.
{%—Ajñāna-tva, am,%} n. or {%ajñāna-tā,%} f. ignorance.
{%—Ajñāna-bandhana, am,%} n. the bond of ignorance.
<LEND>

<L>498<pc>0010-c<k1>ajYAnin<k2>ajYAnin
{%A-jñānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ ignorant, unwise.
<LEND>

<L>499<pc>0010-c<k1>ajYAs<k2>ajYAs
{%A-jñās, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. not a kinsman.
<LEND>

<L>500<pc>0010-c<k1>ajYeya<k2>ajYeya
{%A-jñeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ baffling or passing knowledge,
unfit to be known.
<LEND>

<L>501<pc>0010-c<k1>ajma<k2>ajma
{#ajma#}¦ {%ajma, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%aj%}), Ved. career,
march, battle [cf. <lang n="greek">ὄγμος</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>502<pc>0010-c<k1>ajman<k2>ajman
{%Ajman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. career, passage, battle; a house,
a habitation [Lat. <nsi>agmen</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>503<pc>0010-c<k1>ajyAni<k2>ajyAni
{#ajyAni#}¦ {%a-jyāni, is,%} f., Ved. undecaying
nature.
<LEND>

<L>504<pc>0010-c<k1>ajyezWa<k2>ajyezWa
{#ajyezWa#}¦ {%a-jyeṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} not the oldest
or best; having no elder brother. {%—Ajyeṣṭha-vṛtti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} not behaving as the eldest brother ought to
behave, or ({%ajyeṣṭha-vṛtti%}) behaving like one who
has no elder brother.
<LEND>

<L>505<pc>0010-c<k1>ajra<k2>ajra
{#ajra#}¦ {%ajra, as,%} m., Ved. a field, a plain;
({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. agile, quick [Lat. <nsi>ager;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀγρός</lang>
cf. {%ajira%}].
<LEND>

<L>506<pc>0010-c<k1>ajrya<k2>ajrya
{%Ajrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in or connected with
a field or plain.
<LEND>

<L>507<pc>0010-c<k1>ajvin<k2>ajvin
{#ajvin#}¦ {%ajvin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt. {%aj%}), Ved.
active, agile.
<LEND>

<L>508<pc>0010-c<k1>aYc<k2>aYc<h>1
{#aYc#} 1¦. {%añc%} (connected with {%ac,%} q. v.),
cl. 1. P. A. {%añcati, -te, ānañca, -e, añci-%}
{%ṣyati, -te, añcitum,%} to bend, curve, incline, curl;
to reverence (with inclined body), to honour; to tend,
move, go, wander about; to request: cl. 10. or Caus.
{%añcayati, -yitum,%} to unfold, make clear, produce:
Desid. P. A. {%añciciṣati, -te,%} to be desirous of bend-
ing: Pass. {%añcyate%} or {%acyate,%} to be bent.
<LEND>

<L>509<pc>0010-c<k1>aYc<k2>aYc<h>2
2. {%añc%}¦ (at the end of compounds), turned to, going
or directed towards; see {%akudhryañc, avāñc, udañc,%}
{%devadryañc,%} &c. It may also mean honouring, see
{%prāñc.%}
<LEND>

<L>510<pc>0010-c<k1>aYca<k2>aYca
{%Añca, as,%}¦ m. (only used as the last part of com-
pound words), curling, as in {%romāñca,%} sensation of
the hairs of the body curling, thrill of rapture.
<LEND>
[Page0011-a+ 79]

<L>511<pc>0011-a<k1>aYcati<k2>aYcati
{%Añcati, is,%}¦ m. or {%añcatī,%} f. wind; fire.
<LEND>

<L>512<pc>0011-a<k1>aYcana<k2>aYcana
{%Añcana, am,%}¦ n. act of bending or curving.
<LEND>

<L>513<pc>0011-a<k1>aYcala<k2>aYcala
{%Añcala, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps also {%am%}), n. the border or
corner of a garment, especially of a woman's garment,
of a veil, shawl. (In Bengālī, a strip of country,
district.)
<LEND>

<L>514<pc>0011-a<k1>aYcita<k2>aYcita
{%Añcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, curved, curled, arched,
handsome; gone, walked in; reverenced, honoured,
distinguished. {%—Añcita-pattra, as,%} m. lotus with
curved leaves. {%—Añcitapattrākṣa (˚ra-akṣa), as,%}
{%ī, am,%} having lotus eyes. {%—Añcita-bhrū, ūs,%} f. wo-
man with arched or handsome eyebrows. {%—Añcita-%}
{%lāṅgūla, as, ā, am,%} having a curved tail (as a
monkey).
<LEND>

<L>515<pc>0011-a<k1>aYj<k2>aYj
{#aYj#}¦ {%añj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%anakti, aṅkte,%}
{%ānañja, añjiṣyati%} or {%aṅkṣyati, āñjīt,%}
{%añjitum%} or {%aṅktum,%} to apply an ointment or pig-
ment, smear with, anoint; to decorate, prepare; to
honour, celebrate; to cause to appear, to make clear,
distinguish, represent; to be beautiful; to go: Caus.
{%añjayati, -yitum, āñjijat,%} to smear with; to speak,
shine, to cause to go [cf. Lat. <nsi>ungo</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>516<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjaka<k2>aYjaka
{%Añjaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Vipracitti; of a son
of Yadu.
<LEND>

<L>517<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjana<k2>aYjana
{%Añjana, as,%}¦ m. a kind of domestic lizard; N. of a
fabulous serpent; of a tree; of a mountain; of a king
of Mithilā; of the elephant of the west or south-west
quarter; ({%am%}), n. act of applying an ointment or pig-
ment, embellishing, &c.; black pigment or collyrium
applied to the eye-lashes or the inner coat of the eye-
lids; special kind or material of this pigment, as
lamp-black, Antimony, an extract of Ammonium,
Xanthorrhiza, &c.; paint, especially as a cosmetic;
magic ointment; ink; night; fire. (In rhetoric)
suggesting the special meaning alluded to in an ex-
pression, as in a pun, &c. {%—Añjana-keśī,%} f., N. of a
vegetable perfume. {%—Añjana-nāmikā,%} f. a swelling
of the eyelid, stye. {%—Añjana-vat,%} ind. like collyrium.
{%—Añjanādhikā (˚na-adh˚),%} f. a species of lizard.
{%—Añjanāmbhas (˚na-am˚), as,%} n. eye-water.
<LEND>

<L>518<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjanaka<k2>aYjanaka
{%Añjanaka, as,%}¦ m. portion of the Vedas containing
the word {%añjana%}. {%—Añjanakī,%} f., N. of a medicinal
plant.
<LEND>

<L>519<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjanA<k2>aYjanA
{%Añjanā,%}¦ f., N. of Hanumat's mother; of Pravara-
sena's mother. {%—Añjanā-giri, is,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain. {%—Añjanā-vatī,%} f. the female elephant of the
north-east (or the west ?) quarter.
<LEND>

<L>520<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjanika<k2>aYjanika
{%Añjanika, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected with collyrium;
({%ā%}), f. a species of lizard; a small mouse.
<LEND>

<L>521<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjanI<k2>aYjanI
{%Añjanī,%}¦ f. a woman fit for the application of oint-
ments, pigments, sandal, &c.; N. of two medicinal plants.
<LEND>

<L>522<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjala<k2>aYjala
{%Añjala, añjali,%}¦ see s. v. below.
<LEND>

<L>523<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjas<k2>aYjas
{%Añjas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. ointment, preparation (?);
smoothness, sliding, speed (?); a good fit, adaptation (?);
(according to others, {%ās, ās, as%}), level, straight,
right. {%—Añjas-pā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. drinking the Soma
preparation. {%—Añjaḥ-sava, as,%} m. rapid preparation
of Soma.
<LEND>

<L>524<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjasa<k2>aYjasa
{%Añjasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ straight, straightforward, honest;
({%ī%}), f., Ved., N. of a heavenly river.
<LEND>

<L>525<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjasA<k2>aYjasA
{%Añjasā%}¦ or {%añjas,%} ind. straight on, right, truly, justly;
quickly, soon, instantly.
<LEND>

<L>526<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjasAyana<k2>aYjasAyana
{%Añjasāyana (˚sā-ay˚), as, ī, am,%}¦ having a straight
course, going straight on.
<LEND>

<L>527<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjasIna<k2>aYjasIna
{%Añjasīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. going straight on,
straightforward.
<LEND>

<L>528<pc>0011-a<k1>aYji<k2>aYji
{%Añji, is, is, i,%}¦ applying an ointment or pigment;
ointment, brilliancy, unctuous, slimy; shining, bril-
liant; ({%is, i%}), m. n. the sexual organ, i. e. distinguishing
the sex; ({%is%}), m. a sender, commander. {%—Añji-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. coloured, bright, adorned. {%—Añji-%}
{%saktha, as,%} m. (a victim) that has coloured thighs.
<LEND>

<L>529<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjin<k2>aYjin
{%Añjin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. making clear or manifest.
<LEND>

<L>530<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjiva<k2>aYjiva
{%Añjiva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. slippery, smooth.
<LEND>

<L>531<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjizWa<k2>aYjizWa
{%Añjiṣṭha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (highly brilliant), the sun;
also {%añjiṣṇu, us,%} m.
<LEND>

<L>532<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjala<k2>aYjala
{#aYjala#}¦ {%añjala%} (only at the end of com-
pounds), another form for {%añjali,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>533<pc>0011-a<k1>aYjali<k2>aYjali
{#aYjali#}¦ {%añjali, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%añj%}), the open
[Page0011-b+ 76]
hands placed side by side and slightly hollowed, as if
by a beggar to receive food; hence when raised to the
forehead, a mark of supplication, reverence, salutation
or benediction; a libation; a measure of corn, sufficient
to fill both hands when placed side by side, equal to a
kuḍava. {%—Añjali-karman, a,%} n. making the {%añjali%}
or respectful salutation. {%—Añjali-kārikā,%} f. an earthen
doll, making the {%añjali;%} N. of a plant, probably
Mimosa Natans. {%—Añjali-puṭa, as, am,%} m. n. cavity
produced in making the {%añjali%}. {%—Añjali-bandhana,%}
{%am,%} n. salutation with the {%añjali%} raised to the fore-
head. {%—Añjalī-krita, as, ā, am,%} (hands) placed to-
gether to form the {%añjali.%}
<LEND>

<L>534<pc>0011-b<k1>aYjalika<k2>aYjalika
{%Añjalika, as, am,%}¦ m. n., N. of one of Arjuna's
arrows; see {%Karṇa-parva,%} 4788; ({%ā%}), a young mouse.
<LEND>

<L>535<pc>0011-b<k1>aYjika<k2>aYjika
{#aYjika#}¦ {%añjika, as,%} m., N. of a son of Yadu.
See {%añjaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>536<pc>0011-b<k1>aYjihizA<k2>aYjihizA
{#aYjihizA#}¦ {%añjihiṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt.
{%aṃh%}), desire of going.
<LEND>

<L>537<pc>0011-b<k1>aYjI<k2>aYjI
{#aYjI#}¦ {%añjī,%} f. a blessing (?).
<LEND>

<L>538<pc>0011-b<k1>aYjIra<k2>aYjIra
{#aYjIra#}¦ {%añjīra, am,%} n. a species of fig-tree
(Ficus Oppositifolia); a fig. (In Bengālī) a guava.
({%Añjīra%} is a Persian word.)
<LEND>

<L>539<pc>0011-b<k1>aw<k2>aw
{#aw#}¦ {%aṭ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%aṭati, -te, āṭa, aṭiṣyati,%}
{%āṭīt, aṭitum,%} to roam, wander about (some-
times with acc.), frequently used of religious mendicants:
Intens. {%aṭāṭyate,%} to roam or wander about zealously
or habitually, especially as a religious mendicant:
Desid. {%aṭiṭiṣati,%} to be desirous of roaming.
<LEND>

<L>540<pc>0011-b<k1>awa<k2>awa
{%Aṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ roaming, wandering; ({%ā%}), f. the
act or habit of roaming or wandering about, especially
as a religious mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>541<pc>0011-b<k1>awaka<k2>awaka
{%Aṭaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ roaming.
<LEND>

<L>542<pc>0011-b<k1>awana<k2>awana
{%Aṭana, am,%}¦ n. act or habit of wandering about.
<LEND>

<L>543<pc>0011-b<k1>awani<k2>awani
{%Aṭani, is,%}¦ f. or {%aṭanī,%} f. the notched extremity of
a bow.
<LEND>

<L>544<pc>0011-b<k1>awamAna<k2>awamAna
{%Aṭamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ roaming about, vagabond.
<LEND>

<L>545<pc>0011-b<k1>awavi<k2>awavi
{%Aṭavi, is,%}¦ or {%aṭavī,%} f. (place to roam in), a forest.
{%—Aṭavi-śikhara, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people or
country.
<LEND>

<L>546<pc>0011-b<k1>awavika<k2>awavika
{%Aṭavika,%}¦ better {%āṭavika, as,%} m. a woodman, forester.
<LEND>

<L>547<pc>0011-b<k1>awAwA<k2>awAwA
{%Aṭāṭā,%}¦ f. (habit of) roaming or wandering about.
<LEND>

<L>548<pc>0011-b<k1>awAwyamAna<k2>awAwyamAna
{%Aṭāṭyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ roaming excessively.
<LEND>

<L>549<pc>0011-b<k1>awAwyA<k2>awAwyA
{%Aṭāṭyā,%}¦ f. (habit of) roaming.
<LEND>

<L>550<pc>0011-b<k1>awAya<k2>awAya
{%Aṭāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%aṭāyate,%} to enter upon a roaming
life, to become a religious mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>551<pc>0011-b<k1>awyA<k2>awyA
{%Aṭyā,%}¦ f. act or habit of roaming about as a religious
mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>552<pc>0011-b<k1>awani<k2>awani
{#awani, awavi, awAwyA#}¦, &c., see under
{%aṭ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>553<pc>0011-b<k1>awaruza<k2>awaruza
{#awaruza#}¦ {%aṭaruṣa%} or {%aṭarūṣa%} or {%aṭarūṣaka,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the shrub Justicia Adhatoda.
<LEND>

<L>554<pc>0011-b<k1>awala<k2>awala
{#awala#}¦ {%a-ṭala, as, ā, am,%} not shaky, firm,
solid.
<LEND>

<L>555<pc>0011-b<k1>aww<k2>aww
{#aww#}¦ {%aṭṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%aṭṭate, ānaṭṭe, aṭṭitum,%}
to exceed, kill; cl. 10. P. {%aṭṭayati, -yitum,%}
to contemn, lessen diminish.
<LEND>

<L>556<pc>0011-b<k1>awwa<k2>awwa
{%Aṭṭa,%}¦ ind. high, lofty, loud; ({%as%}), m. top-heavy (?),
exceeding; shaking; injuring; N. of a Yakṣa; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. addition to a building, apartment on the
roof, upper story; tower, buttress, back of a building;
(corruption of {%haṭṭa%}), a market, a market-place;
({%ā%}), f. overbearing conduct ?; ({%am%}), n. (corruption of
{%anna ?%}), boiled rice, food; ({%as, ā, am%}), dried, dry.
{%—Aṭṭa-pati-bhāgākhya-gṛha-kṛtya (˚ga-ākh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. business of the house called the market-
master's department (an office in Kashmir). {%—Aṭṭa-%}
{%sthalī,%} f. (site of an {%aṭṭa%}), a name. {%—Aṭṭa-hasita,%}
{%am,%} n. loud laughter, a horse-laugh. {%—Aṭṭa-hāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. idem; a name of Śiva. {%—Aṭṭa-hāsaka, as,%}
m., N. of a shrub, Jasminum Multiflorum or Hirsutum.
{%—Aṭṭa-hāsin, ī,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Aṭṭa-hāsya,%}
{%am,%} n. loud laughter; a horse-laugh. {%—Aṭṭāṭṭa-hāsa%}
{%(˚ṭṭa-aṭṭ˚), as,%} m. very loud laughter.
<LEND>

<L>557<pc>0011-b<k1>awwaka<k2>awwaka
{%Aṭṭaka, as,%}¦ m. an apartment on the roof.
<LEND>

<L>558<pc>0011-b<k1>awwawwa<k2>awwawwa
{%Aṭṭaṭṭa,%}¦ ind. very high, very loud.
<LEND>
[Page0011-c+ 73]

<L>559<pc>0011-c<k1>awwana<k2>awwana
{%Aṭṭana, am,%}¦ n. a weapon shaped like a discus.
<LEND>

<L>560<pc>0011-c<k1>awwA<k2>awwA
{%Aṭṭā,%}¦ f. overbearing conduct (?), excess (?).
<LEND>

<L>561<pc>0011-c<k1>awwAya<k2>awwAya
{%Aṭṭāya%}¦ (nom. fr. {%aṭṭā%}), A. {%aṭṭāyate%} (meaning
doubtful), to be overbearing (?).
<LEND>

<L>562<pc>0011-c<k1>awwAla<k2>awwAla
{#awwAla#}¦ {%aṭṭāla, as,%} or {%aṭṭālaka, as,%} m. an
apartment on the roof, an upper story; ({%ikā%}), f.
a house of two or more stories, a lofty house, palace;
N. of a country. {%—Aṭṭālikā-kāra, as,%} m. a bricklayer,
mason. {%—Aṭṭālikā-bandha, as,%} m. (in architecture)
a kind of base.
<LEND>

<L>563<pc>0011-c<k1>awwilikA<k2>awwilikA
{#awwilikA#}¦ {%aṭṭilikā,%} f., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>564<pc>0011-c<k1>awRAra<k2>awRAra
{#awRAra#}¦ {%aṭṇāra, as,%} m. a king of Kośala.
<LEND>

<L>565<pc>0011-c<k1>awyA<k2>awyA
{#awyA#}¦ {%aṭyā,%} f.; see under rt. {%aṭ.%}
<LEND>

<L>566<pc>0011-c<k1>aW<k2>aW
{#aW#}¦ {%aṭh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%aṭhati, -te,%} to go.
<LEND>

<L>567<pc>0011-c<k1>aWillA<k2>aWillA
{#aWillA#}¦ {%aṭhillā,%} f., N. of a Prākṛt metre.
<LEND>

<L>568<pc>0011-c<k1>aq<k2>aq<h>1
{#aq#} 1¦. {%aḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%aḍati,%} to endeavour.
<LEND>

<L>569<pc>0011-c<k1>aq<k2>aq<h>2
{#aq#} 2¦. {%aḍ,%} cl. 5. P., Ved. {%aḍnoti,%} to per-
vade, attain; various reading for {%ah%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>570<pc>0011-c<k1>aqakavatI<k2>aqakavatI
{#aqakavatI#}¦ {%aḍakavatī,%} N. of a fabulous palace
on Meru; also of a city.
<LEND>

<L>571<pc>0011-c<k1>aqq<k2>aqq
{#aqq#}¦ {%aḍḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%aḍḍati, ānaḍḍa, aḍḍitum,%}
to join; to infer, argue, meditate, discern; to
attack.
<LEND>

<L>572<pc>0011-c<k1>aqqana<k2>aqqana
{%Aḍḍana, am,%}¦ n. a shield.
<LEND>

<L>573<pc>0011-c<k1>aR<k2>aR<h>1
{#aR#} 1¦. {%aṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%aṇati, āṇa, aṇitum,%} to
sound.
<LEND>

<L>574<pc>0011-c<k1>aR<k2>aR<h>2
{#aR#} 2¦. {%aṇ,%} cl. 4. A. {%aṇyate,%} to breathe;
another form of rt. {%an,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>575<pc>0011-c<k1>aRaka<k2>aRaka
{%Aṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ insignificant, small, contemptible.
<LEND>

<L>576<pc>0011-c<k1>aRakIya<k2>aRakIya
{%Aṇakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected with what is
insignificant, &c.
<LEND>

<L>577<pc>0011-c<k1>aRavya<k2>aRavya
{%Aṇavya, am,%}¦ n. a field of ({%aṇu%}) Panicum Milia-
ceum; see {%aṇu.%}
<LEND>

<L>578<pc>0011-c<k1>aRi<k2>aRi
{%Aṇi, is,%}¦ m. or {%aṇī,%} f. the point of a needle; the
linch-pin; the pin or bolt at the end of the pole of
a carriage; the corner or part of a house which serves
for slaughtering; a bound, boundary, limit. {%—Aṇī-%}
{%māṇḍavya, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi said to have been
impaled on an {%aṇi%} or linch-pin.
<LEND>

<L>579<pc>0011-c<k1>aRiman<k2>aRiman
{%Aṇiman, ā,%}¦ m. (fr. {%aṇu,%} q. v.), minuteness, fine-
ness, thinness; atomic nature; the superhuman power
of becoming as small as an atom; ({%a%}), n., Ved. the
smallest particle.
<LEND>

<L>580<pc>0011-c<k1>aRizWa<k2>aRizWa
{%Aṇiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%aṇu,%} q. v.), most minute.
<LEND>

<L>581<pc>0011-c<k1>aRIyas<k2>aRIyas
{%Aṇīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (fr. {%aṇu,%} q. v.), or {%aṇīyaska,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} more minute than usual.
<LEND>

<L>582<pc>0011-c<k1>aRu<k2>aRu
{%Aṇu, us, us%}¦ or {%vī, u,%} fine, minute, atomic; ({%us%}),
m. an atom of matter; an atom of time; the
54, 675, 000th part of a muhūrta (of 48 minutes);
N. of a grain, Panicum Miliaceum; N. of Śiva;
({%u%}), n. (in prosody) the fourth part of a mātrā.
{%—Aṇu-tara, as, ā, am,%} very fine or minute, gentle.
{%—Aṇu-taila, am,%} n., N. of a medical oil. {%—Aṇu-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. or {%aṇu-tā,%} f. minuteness, atomic nature.
{%—Aṇu-bhā,%} f. lightning. {%—Aṇu-madhya-vīja, am,%}
n. title of a hymn. {%—Aṇu-mātra, as, ī, am,%} having
the size of an atom. {%—Aṇu-mātrika, as, ā, am,%}
having the size of an atom; containing the atomic
elements ({%mātrā%}) of the body. {%—Aṇu-reṇu, us,%}
m. f. atomic dust (as seen in sun-beams). {%—Aṇu-reṇu-%}
{%jāla, am,%} n. an aggregate of such atomic dust.
{%—Aṇu-revatī%} f., N. of a plant, Croton Polyandrum.
{%—Aṇu-vedānta, am,%} n. title of a book. {%—Aṇu-%}
{%vrīhi, is,%} m., N. of a fine sort of rice. {%—Aṇu-śas,%}
ind. into or in minute particles. {%—Aṇū-bhū,%} cl. 1. P.
{%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to become minute or atomic.
{%—Aṇū-bhāva, as,%} m. the becoming an atom. {%—Aṇv-%}
{%anta, as,%} m. a hair-splitting question.
<LEND>

<L>583<pc>0011-c<k1>aRuka<k2>aRuka
{%Aṇuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ fine, minute, atomic; acute,
clever, subtle.
<LEND>

<L>584<pc>0011-c<k1>aRva<k2>aRva
{%Aṇva, am,%}¦ n., Ved. fine interstice or hole in the
strainer used for the Soma juice.
<LEND>

<L>585<pc>0011-c<k1>aRvI<k2>aRvI
{%Aṇvī,%}¦ f., Ved. a finger.
<LEND>
[Page0012-a+ 73]

<L>586<pc>0012-a<k1>aRuha<k2>aRuha
{#aRuha#}¦ {%aṇuha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Vibhrāja.
<LEND>

<L>587<pc>0012-a<k1>aRW<k2>aRW
{#aRW#}¦ {%aṇṭh%} or {%aṭh,%} cl. 1. A. {%aṇṭhate,%}
{%ānaṇṭhe, aṇṭhitum,%} to go, move, tend.
<LEND>

<L>588<pc>0012-a<k1>aRWita<k2>aRWita
{%Aṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone; pained.
<LEND>

<L>589<pc>0012-a<k1>aRqa<k2>aRqa
{#aRqa#}¦ {%aṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%am%}), an egg,
a testicle; the scrotum; the musk bag; Semen Virile;
epithet of Śiva, from his being identified with the
Brahmāṇḍa or mundane egg. {%—Aṇḍa-kaṭāha, as,%}
m. the shell of the mundane egg. {%—Aṇḍa-koṭara-%}
{%puṣpī,%} f., N. of a plant, Convolvulus Argenteus (?).
{%—Aṇḍa-kośa%} or {%aṇḍa-koṣa%} or {%aṇḍa-koṣaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the scrotum. {%—Aṇḍa-ja, as, ā, am,%} born
from an egg; ({%as%}), m. a bird; a fish; a snake;
a lizard; ({%ā%}), f. musk. {%—Aṇḍajeśvara (˚ja-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. Garuḍa, the king of birds. {%—Aṇḍa-dhara, as,%}
m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Aṇḍa-vardhana, am,%} n. or
{%aṇḍa-vṛddhi, is,%} f. swelling of the scrotum, hydro-
cele. {%—Aṇḍa-sū, ūs,%} f. oviparous. {%—Aṇḍākarṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ḍa-āk˚), am,%} n. castration. {%—Aṇḍākāra (˚ḍa-%}
{%āk˚), as, ā, am,%} egg-shaped, oval, elliptical; ({%as%}),
m. an ellipsis. {%—Aṇḍākṛti (˚ḍa-āk˚), is, is, i,%}
egg-shaped, oval, elliptical; ({%is%}), f. an ellipsis.
<LEND>

<L>590<pc>0012-a<k1>aRqaka<k2>aRqaka
{%Aṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. the scrotum; ({%am%}), n. a small
egg, an egg.
<LEND>

<L>591<pc>0012-a<k1>aRqara<k2>aRqara
{%Aṇḍara, as, ī, am,%}¦ N. or epithet of a tribe.
{%—Aṇḍarāya,%} nom. A. {%aṇḍarāyate, -yitum,%} to be-
have like an Aṇḍara.
<LEND>

<L>592<pc>0012-a<k1>aRqAlu<k2>aRqAlu
{%Aṇḍālu, us,%}¦ m. a fish (full of eggs).
<LEND>

<L>593<pc>0012-a<k1>aRqIra<k2>aRqIra
{%Aṇḍīra, as,%}¦ m. a full male, a man; strong.
<LEND>

<L>594<pc>0012-a<k1>at<k2>at<h>1
{#at#} 1¦. {%at,%} ind. a prefix said to imply ‘sur-
prise,’ probably a contraction of {%ati,%} meaning ‘extra-
ordinary.’ {%—Ad-bhuta, as, ā, am,%} extraordinary,
mysterious, wonderful; see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>595<pc>0012-a<k1>at<k2>at<h>2
{#at#} 2¦. {%at,%} cl. 1. P. {%atati, āta, atiṣyati,%}
{%ātīt, atitum,%} sometimes A. {%atate,%} &c., to
go constantly, walk, run; to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>596<pc>0012-a<k1>atana<k2>atana
{%Atana, as,%}¦ m. a passer on; ({%am%}), n. act of
passing on. {%—Atana-vat, ān,%} m. one who wanders.
<LEND>

<L>597<pc>0012-a<k1>atasi<k2>atasi
{%Atasi, atka,%}¦ see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>598<pc>0012-a<k1>atajjYa<k2>atajjYa
{#atajjYa#}¦ {%a-taj-jña%} (for {%a-tad-jña%}), {%as, ā, am,%}
ignorant of ({%tat%}) that, i. e. Brahma and the soul's
identity with it.
<LEND>

<L>599<pc>0012-a<k1>atawa<k2>atawa
{#atawa#}¦ {%a-taṭa, as, ā, am,%} having no beach
or shore, {{precipituous->precipitous||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}; ({%as%}), m. a precipice; the
third hell.
<LEND>

<L>600<pc>0012-a<k1>atattvavid<k2>atattvavid
{#atattvavid#}¦ {%a-tattva-vid, t, t, t,%} ignorant of
({%tattva%}) the soul's identity with Brahma.
<LEND>

<L>601<pc>0012-a<k1>atattvArTavat<k2>atattvArTavat
{%A-tattvārtha-vat (˚tva-ar˚), ān, atī, at,%}¦ not con-
formable with the nature of truth.
<LEND>

<L>602<pc>0012-a<k1>ataTA<k2>ataTA
{#ataTA#}¦ {%a-tathā, ās,%} m., Ved. not such,
different; saying {%a-tathā,%} ‘not so,’ ‘no,’ refusing;
careless. {%—A-tathocita (˚thā-uc˚), as, ā, am,%} not
deserving of such (a fate), not thus deserving, not
used to this (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>603<pc>0012-a<k1>ataTya<k2>ataTya
{%A-tathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ untrue, unreal, not really so.
<LEND>

<L>604<pc>0012-a<k1>atadarha<k2>atadarha
{#atadarha#}¦ {%a-tad-arha, as, ā, am,%} not deserv-
ing that; ({%am%}), ind. undeservedly, unjustly.
<LEND>

<L>605<pc>0012-a<k1>atadguRa<k2>atadguRa
{%A-tad-guṇa, as,%}¦ m. (in rhetoric) the use of pre-
dicates not descriptive of the essential nature of the
object.
<LEND>

<L>606<pc>0012-a<k1>atantra<k2>atantra
{#atantra#}¦ {%a-tantra, as, ī, am,%} having no ropes
or no (musical) strings; unrestrained; ({%am%}), n. not
the object of a rule or of the rule under consideration.
<LEND>

<L>607<pc>0012-a<k1>atandra<k2>atandra
{#atandra#}¦ {%a-tandra, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-tandrita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%a-tandrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} free from lassi-
tude, alert, unwearied.
<LEND>

<L>608<pc>0012-a<k1>atapa<k2>atapa
{#atapa#}¦ {%a-tapa, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%tap%}), not hot, not
excited, not eager; cool; impassible, unostentatious;
unemployed; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of deities among
the Buddhists.
<LEND>

<L>609<pc>0012-a<k1>atapas<k2>atapas
{%A-tapas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ or {%a-tapaska, as, ā, am,%} or
{%a-tapasya, as,%} m. one who neglects {%tapas%} or the prac-
tice of ascetic austerities; an irreligious character.
<LEND>
[Page0012-b+ 75]

<L>610<pc>0012-b<k1>atapta<k2>atapta
{%A-tapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not heated, cool. {%—Atapta-%}
{%tanū, ūs,%} m., Ved. whose body or mass is cool.
{%—Atapta-tapas, ās,%} m. whose ascetic austerity has
not been (fully or properly) endured.
<LEND>

<L>611<pc>0012-b<k1>atapyamAna<k2>atapyamAna
{%A-tapyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not suffering.
<LEND>

<L>612<pc>0012-b<k1>atamisra<k2>atamisra
{#atamisra#}¦ {%a-tamisra, as, ā, am,%} not dark,
not benighted.
<LEND>

<L>613<pc>0012-b<k1>atameru<k2>atameru
{#atameru#}¦ {%a-tameru, us, us, u,%} Ved. not languid.
<LEND>

<L>614<pc>0012-b<k1>atarka<k2>atarka
{#atarka#}¦ {%a-tarka, as,%} m. an illogical reasoner;
bad logic.
<LEND>

<L>615<pc>0012-b<k1>atarkita<k2>atarkita
{%A-tarkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unconsidered, unthought of;
unexpected; ({%am%}), ind. unexpectedly.
<LEND>

<L>616<pc>0012-b<k1>atarkya<k2>atarkya
{%A-tarkya, as, ā, am,%}¦ baffling or surpassing thought
or reasoning. {%—Atarkya-sahasra-śakti, is,%} m. in-
comprehensibly endowed with a thousand powers.
<LEND>

<L>617<pc>0012-b<k1>atala<k2>atala
{#atala#}¦ {%a-tala, am,%} n. bottomless; N. of
a hell beneath the earth; ({%as%}), m. Śiva. {%—Atala-%}
{%sparśa, as, ā, am,%} or {%atala-spṛś, k, k, k,%} touching
the {%atala;%} bottomless; (or it may be {%a-tala-sparśa,%}
whose bottom cannot be touched or reached.)
<LEND>

<L>618<pc>0012-b<k1>atavyas<k2>atavyas
{#atavyas#}¦ {%a-tavyas, ān, asī, as,%} Ved. not
stronger, not very strong.
<LEND>

<L>619<pc>0012-b<k1>atas<k2>atas
{#atas#}¦ {%atas,%} ind. (ablative of the pronom.
base {%a,%} synonymous with {%asmāt%}), from this, than this;
hence; henceforth, from that time; from this (or
from that) cause or reason. {%—Ata-ūrdhvam,%} ind.
henceforth, afterwards. {%—Ata-eva,%} ind. for this very
reason; therefore. {%—Ataḥ-param,%} ind. henceforth, fur-
ther on. {%—Ato-nimittam,%} ind. on this ground, for this
reason. {%—Ato-nya (tas-an), as, ā, at,%} differing from
this. {%—Ato-rham (˚tas-ar˚),%} ind. for this object.
<LEND>

<L>620<pc>0012-b<k1>atasa<k2>atasa
{#atasa#}¦ {%atasa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {#at#}), wind, air;
the soul; a (missile) weapon; a garment made of the
fibre of ({%atasī%}) flax; ({%am%}), n., Ved. shrubs.
<LEND>

<L>621<pc>0012-b<k1>atasI<k2>atasI
{%Atasī,%}¦ f. common flax, Linum Usitatissimum; Śaṇa,
Bengal sun used as hemp, Crotolaria Juncea.
<LEND>

<L>622<pc>0012-b<k1>atasi<k2>atasi
{#atasi#}¦ {%atasi, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {#at#}), Ved. a
wandering mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>623<pc>0012-b<k1>atasAyya<k2>atasAyya
{%Atasāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be got by begging.
<LEND>

<L>624<pc>0012-b<k1>ati<k2>ati
{#ati#}¦ {%ati,%} ind. [probably neut. of an obsolete
adj. {%atin,%} passing, going, beyond; see rt. {%at%} and cf.
Old Germ. <nsi>anti, unti, inti, unde, indi,</nsi> &c.; Eng.
<nsi>and;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>und;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔτι, ἀντί</lang> Lat. <nsi>ante;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>ant;</nsi> Arm. <nsi>ti;</nsi> Zend <nsi>aiti</nsi>]. As a prefix to verbs and
nouns, expresses beyond, over; too far past; as {%ati-%}
{%kramitum,%} to overstep. {%—Ati-krama,%} transgression.
<div n="P"/>When prefixed to nouns, not derived from verbs,
it expresses beyond, surpassing; as {%ati-kaśa,%} past the
whip; {%ati-mānuṣa,%} superhuman, &c.; see s. v.
<div n="P"/>As a separable adverb or preposition (with acc.),
Ved. beyond.
<LEND>

<L>625<pc>0012-b<k1>ati<k2>ati
{%Ati%}¦ is often prefixed to nouns and adjectives, and
rarely to verbs, in the sense excessive, extraordinary,
intense; excessively, too; exceedingly, very. {%—Ati-%}
{%kaṭhora, as, ā, am,%} very hard, too hard. {%—Ati-kathā,%}
f. an exaggerated tale; ({%as, ā, am,%}), exaggerated;
see also s. v. {%—Ati-karṣaṇa, am,%} n. excessive
exertion. {%—Ati-kalyam,%} ind. very early, too early.
{%—Ati-kānta, as, ā, am,%} excessively beloved.
{%—Ati-kāya, as, ā, am,%} of extraordinary body
or size, gigantic; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Rākṣasa.
{%—Ati-kutsita, as, ā, am,%} greatly despised. {%—Ati-%}
{%kulva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. too bald. {%—Ati-kṛcchra, as,%}
m. extraordinary pain or hardship; extraordinary
penance. {%—Ati-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} overdone, exagge-
rated. {%—Ati-kṛśa, as, ā, am,%} very thin, emaciated.
{%—Ati-kṛṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} very or too dark, very or
too deep blue. {%—Ati-kruddha, as, ā, am,%} excessively
angry. {%—Ati-kruṣṭa, am,%} n. extraordinary cry or
wailing. {%—Ati-khara, as, ā, am,%} very pungent or
piercing. {%—Ati-gaṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} having large
cheeks or temples; ({%as%}), m., N. of the {%yoga%} (or
index), star of the 6th lunar mansion. {%—Ati-gandha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having an overpowering smell; ({%as%}), m.
sulphur; lemon-grass (Andropogon Schænunthes);
[Page0012-c+ 81]
the Champac flower (Michelia Champaca); a kind of
jasmin. {%—Ati-gandhālu, us,%} m., N. of a creeper, Pu-
tradātrī. {%—Ati-garīyas, as,%} n. (compar. of {%ati-guru%}),
a higher price. {%—Ati-garvita, as, ā, am,%} very con-
ceited. {%—Ati-gahana, as, ā, am,%} very impenetrable.
{%—Ati-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} having extraordinary
qualities. {%—Ati-gupta, as, ā, am,%} closely concealed,
very mysterious. {%—Ati-guru, us, us%} or {%vī, u,%} very
heavy {%—Ati-go, aus,%} f. an excellent cow. {%—Ati-%}
{%grāhya, as, ā, am,%} very acceptable; ({%as%}), N. of
three successive libations made (or cups filled) at the
Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice. {%—Ati-caṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} very
violent. {%—Ati-caraṇa, am,%} n. excessive practice.
{%—Ati-cāpalya, am,%} n. extraordinary mobility or
unsteadiness. {%—Ati-chattra%} or {%ati-chattraka, as,%} m.
(extraordinary parasol), a mushroom; ({%ā%}), f. Anise,
principally Anisum or Anethum Sowa; another
plant, Barleria Longifolia. {%—Ati-jara, as, ā, am,%} or
(as a supplementary form) {%ati-jaras, ās, ās, as,%} very
aged. {%—Ati-jala, as, ā, am,%} well watered. {%—Ati-%}
{%java, as,%} m. extraordinary speed; ({%as, ā, am%}), very
fleet. {%—Ati-jāgara, as, ā, am,%} very wakeful; ({%as%}),
m. the black curlew. {%—Ati-jīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} very
aged. {%—Atijīrṇa-tā,%} f. extreme old age {%—Ati-jīva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} quite alive, very lively. {%—Ati-ḍīna, am,%}
n. extraordinary flight (of birds). {%—Ati-tapasvin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} very ascetic {%—Ati-tīkṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} very
sharp. {%—Ati-tīvra, as, ā, am,%} very sharp, pungent
or acid; ({%ā%}), f. dūb grass. {%—Ati-tṛṇṇas, as, ā, am,%}
seriously hurt. {%—Ati-tṛpti, is,%} f. too great satiety.
{%—Ati-tṛṣṇā,%} f. excessive thirst, rapacity; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), excessively thirsty, rapacious. {%—Ati-trasnu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} very timid, over timid. {%—Ati-dagdha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} badly burnt; ({%am%}), n. (in medicine) N.
of a bad kind of burn. {%—Ati-darpa, as,%} m. excessive
conceit; N. of a snake; ({%as, ā, am%}), excessively con-
ceited. {%—Ati-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} very far-sighted. {%—Ati-%}
{%dātṛ, tā,%} m. a very liberal man. {%—Ati-dāna, am,%} n.
munificence. {%—Ati-dāruṇa, as, ā, am,%} very terrible.
{%—Ati-dāha, as,%} m. great heat; violent inflamma-
tion. {%—Ati-dīrgha, as, ā, am,%} very long, too long.
{%—Ati-duḥkhita%} or {%ati-duṣkhita, as, ā, am,%}
greatly afflicted, very sad. {%—Ati-duḥsaha, as, ā, am,%}
very hard to bear, quite unbearable. {%—Ati-durgata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very badly off. {%—Ati-durdharṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very hard to approach, very haughty. {%—Ati-%}
{%durlambha, as, ā, am,%} very hard to attain or obtain.
{%—Ati-duṣkara, as, ā, am,%} very difficult. {%—Ati-%}
{%dūra, as, ā, am,%} very distant; ({%am%}), n. a great
distance. {%—Ati-doṣa, as,%} m. a great fault. {%—Ati-%}
{%dhavala, as, ā, am,%} very white. {%—Ati-dhenu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} distinguished for his cows. {%—Ati-nidrā,%} f.
excessive sleep; ({%as, ā, am%}), given to (or over-
powered by) excessive sleep; ({%am%}), ind. past (or
after) sleeping time. {%—Ati-nipuṇa, as, ā, am,%}
very able or skilful. {%—Ati-nīca, as, ā, am,%} exces-
sively low. {%—Ati-pathin, anthās,%} m. a better road
than common. {%—Ati-pada, as, ā, am,%} (in prosody)
too long by one {%pada%} or foot. {%—Ati-parokṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} far out of sight, i. e. no longer discernible.
{%—Atiparokṣa-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} (in grammar)
having a nature that is no longer discernible, i. e.
obsolete. {%—Ati-pātaka, am,%} n. a very heinous sin,
incest. {%—Ati-puruṣa%} or {%ati-pūruṣa, as,%} m. a first-
rate man or hero. {%—Ati-pūta, as, ā, am,%} quite
purified; refined to excess. {%—Ati-peśala, as, ā, am,%}
very dexterous or clever. {%—Ati-prakāśa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. very manifest, notorious. {%—Ati-prage,%} ind. very
early. {%—Ati-praṇaya, as,%} m. excessive kindness,
partiality. {%—Ati-praṇudya,%} ind. having pushed far
forward. {%—Ati-prabandha, as,%} m. complete con-
tinuity. {%—Ati-pravaraṇa, am,%} n. excess in choosing.
{%—Ati-pravṛtti, is,%} f. issuing abundantly or too
freely. {%—Ati-pravṛddha, as, ā, am,%} enlarged to
excess, overbearing. {%—Ati-praśna, as,%} m. an ex-
travagant question, a question regarding transcendental
objects. {%—Ati-praśnya, as, ā, am,%} fit to be asked
such an extravagant question. {%—Ati-prasakti, is,%} f.
or {%ati-prasaṅga, as,%} m. excessive attachment; un-
warrantable stretch of a rule or principle. {%—Ati-%}
{%prasiddha, as, ā, am,%} very famous, notorious.
[Page0013-a+ 81]
{%—Ati-prauḍha, as, ā, am,%} full-grown. {%—Ati-%}
{%prauḍha-yauvana, as, ā, am,%} being in the
full enjoyment of youth. {%—Ati-bala, as, ā, am,%} very
strong or powerful; ({%as%}), m. an active soldier; N. of
a king; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a medicinal plant (Sidonia
Cordifolia and Rhombifolia, or Annona Squamosa);
N. of a powerful charm; N. of one of Dakṣa's
daughters. {%—Ati-bālaka, as,%} m. an infant; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), childish. {%—Ati-bāhu, us,%} m. ‘having extraordi-
nary arms;’ N. of a Ṛṣi of the fourteenth Manvantara.
{%—Ati-bībhatsa, as,%} m. excessive aversion. {%—Ati-%}
{%brahmacarya, am,%} n. excessive abstinence or con-
tinence. {%—Ati-bhara,%} usually {%ati-bhāra, as,%} m. an
excessive burden; excessive obscurity (of a sentence);
N. of a king. {%—Atibhāra-ga, as,%} m. a mule. {%—Ati-%}
{%bhī, īs,%} m. (very terrific), lightning. {%—Ati-bhīṣaṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very terrific or formidable. {%—Ati-bhṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} well filled. {%—Ati-bhojana, am,%} n. eating
too much; morbid voracity. {%—Ati-bhrū, ūs, ūs, u,%}
having extraordinary eyebrows. {%—Ati-maṅgalya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} very auspicious; ({%as%}), m. a fruit, Ægle or
Cratæva Marmelos. {%—Ati-mati, is,%} f. haughtiness.
{%—Ati-madhyandina, am,%} n. the height of noon.
{%—Ati-marśa, as,%} m. close contact. {%—Ati-māna, as,%}
m. great haughtiness. {%—Ati-mānin, ī, inī, i,%} very
haughty. {%—Atimāni-tā,%} f. great haughtiness. {%—Ati-%}
{%māruta, as, ā, am,%} very windy; ({%as%}), m. a hurricane.
{%—Ati-mukta, as, ā, am,%} entirely liberated; quite
free from sensual or worldly desire; seedless, barren;
({%as%}), m., N. of a tree, Dalbergia Oujeinensis; of a
creeper, Gærtnera Racemosa. {%—Ati-muktaka, as,%} m.
= the preceding; mountain ebony; a tree called
Harimantha. {%—Ati-mukti, is,%} f. final liberation (from
death). {%—Ati-mūrti, is,%} f. ‘highest shape,’ N. of a
ceremony. {%—Ati-maithuna, am,%} n. excess of sexual
intercourse. {%—Ati-mokṣa, as,%} m. final liberation
(from death). {%—Ati-modā,%} f. extraordinary fragrance;
N. of a tree, Jasminum Arboreum. {%—Ati-yava, as,%} m.
a sort of barley. {%—Ati-yaśa, as, ā, am,%} or {%ati-yaśas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} very celebrated or illustrious. {%—Ati-yāja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘great sacrificer,’ N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Ati-yuvan,%}
{%vā, vatī,%} or {%ūnī, va,%} very youthful. {%—Ati-yoga,%}
{%as,%} m. (in medicine) excessive union, excess.
{%—Ati-raṃhas, ās, ās, as,%} extremely rapid. {%—Ati-%}
{%rakta, as, ā, am,%} very red; ({%ā%}), f. one of Agni's
seven tongues. {%—Ati-ratha, as,%} m. a very great
warrior fighting from a car. {%—Ati-rabhasa, as,%} m.
excessive or extraordinary speed. {%—Ati-rasā,%} f. (very
succulent); N. of various plants, as Mūrvā, Rāsnā,
Klītanaka. {%—Ati-rājan, ā,%} m. an extraordinary or
excellent king; one who surpasses a king [cf. also
s. v.]. {%—Ati-rucira, as, ā, am,%} very lovely; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of two metres, one a variety of the {%Ati-%}
{%jagatī,%} the other also called {%Cuḍikā%} or {%Culikā.%}
{%—Ati-ruṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} very angry. {%—Ati-rūpa, as, ā,%}
or {%ī, am,%} very beautiful; ({%am%}), n. extraordinary
beauty. {%—Ati-roga, as,%} m. consumption. {%—Ati-%}
{%romaśa, as, ā, am,%} very hairy, too hairy; ({%as%}), m.
a wild goat, or a kind of monkey. {%—Ati-lakṣmī,%}
{%īs, īs, i,%} very prosperous; ({%īs%}), f. extraordinary
prosperity. {%—Ati-laṅghana, am,%} n. excessive fasting.
{%—Ati-lamba, as, ā, am,%} very extensive. {%—Ati-%}
{%lubdha%} or {%ati-lobha, as, ā, am,%} very greedy or
covetous. {%—Ati-lulita, as, ā, am,%} closely attached
or adhering. {%—Ati-lobha, as,%} m. or {%atilobha-tā,%}
f. excessive greediness or covetousness. {%—Ati-loma%}
or {%ati-lomaśa, as, ā, am,%} very hairy, too hairy.
{%—Ati-lomaśā,%} f. a pot-herb, Convolvulus Argenteus.
{%—Ati-lohita, as, ā, am,%} very red. {%—Ati-laulya, am,%}
n. excessive eagerness or desire. {%—Ati-vaktṛ, ā, rī,%}
{%ṛ,%} very loquacious. {%—Ati-vakra, as, ā, am,%} very
crooked or curved; ({%ā%}), f. one of the eight descrip-
tions of planetary motion. {%—Ati-vartula, as, ā, am,%}
very or quite round; ({%as%}), m., N. of a grain or
pot-herb. {%—Ati-vāta, as,%} m. high wind, a storm.
{%—Ati-vāda, as,%} m. extraordinary, i. e. abusive lan-
guage; (reproof); N. of a Vedic verse recited on certain
occasions. {%—Ati-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} talkative. {%—Ati-%}
{%vālaka, as, ā, am,%} childish; ({%as%}), m. an infant.
{%—Ati-vāhana, am,%} n. excessive toiling. {%—Ati-%}
{%vikaṭa, as, ā, am,%} very fierce; ({%as%}), m. a vicious ele-
[Page0013-b+ 81]
phant. {%—Ati-vipina, as, ā, am,%} having many forests.
{%—Ati-vilambin, ī, inī, i,%} very dilatory. {%—Ati-%}
{%viśrabdha-navoḍhā (˚va-ūḍhā˚),%} f. a fond but pert
young wife. {%—Ati-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} exceedingly poi-
sonous; counteracting poison; ({%ā%}), f. a very poisonous
yet medicinal plant, Aconitum Ferox. {%—Ati-vṛddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. extraordinary growth or increase. {%—Ati-vṛṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} f. excessive rain. {%—Ativṛṣṭi-hata, as, ā, am,%}
injured by heavy rain. {%—Ati-vepathu, us,%} m. exces-
sive tremor; ({%us, us, u%}), or {%ativepathu-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} trembling excessively. {%—Ati-vaicakṣaṇya, am,%}
n. great proficiency. {%—Ati-vaiśasa, as, ā, am,%} very
adverse or destructive. {%—Ati-vyathana, am,%} n. in-
fliction of (or giving) excessive pain. {%—Ati-vyathā,%}
f. excessive pain. {%—Ati-vyaya, as,%} m. lavish expen-
diture. {%—Ati-vyāpta, as, ā, am,%} stretched too far
(as a rule or principle). {%—Ati-vyāpti, is,%} f. unwarrant-
able stretch (of a rule or principle). {%—Ati-śakta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} or {%ati-śakti, is, is, i,%} very powerful; ({%is%}), f.
or {%atiśakti-tā,%} f. great power or valour. {%—Atiśakti-%}
{%bhāj, k, k, k,%} possessing great power. {%—Ati-śaṅkā,%} f.
excessive timidity. {%—Ati-śarvara, am,%} n., Ved. the
dead of night. {%—Ati-śasta, as, ā, am,%} very excellent.
{%—Ati-śukra, as, ā, am,%} too bright. {%—Ati-śukla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very white, too white. {%—Ati-śobhana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very handsome, distinguished. {%—Ati-śrī,%}
{%īs, īs, i,%} very prosperous. {%—Ati-saṃskṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} highly finished or adorned or educated. {%—Ati-%}
{%sakti, is,%} f. excessive attachment. {%—Atisakti-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} excessively attached. {%—Ati-sañcaya, as,%}
m. excessive accumulation, a hoard. {%—Ati-santapta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} greatly afflicted. {%—Ati-sandheya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} easy to be settled or conciliated. {%—Ati-samartha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very competent. {%—Ati-samīpa, as, ā, am,%}
very near. {%—Ati-samparka, as,%} m. excessive sexual
intercourse. {%—Ati-sādhvasa, am,%} n. excessive fear
or alarm. {%—Ati-sāntapana, am,%} n. a species of severe
penance, inflicted especially for eating unclean animal
food. {%—Ati-sāyam,%} ind. very late or in the dusk. {%—Ati-%}
{%siddhi, is,%} f. great perfection or proficiency. {%—Ati-%}
{%sujana, as, ā, am,%} very moral, very friendly, very
respectable. {%—Ati-sundara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} very hand-
some, very beautiful; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a metre belonging
to the class {%Aṣṭi,%} also called {%Citra%} or {%Cañcalā.%}
{%—Ati-sulabha, as, ā, am,%} very easily obtainable.
{%—Ati-suhita, as, ā, am,%} excessively kind, over-
kind. {%—Ati-sṛṣṭi, is,%} f. an extraordinary or excel-
lent creation. {%—Ati-sevā,%} f. excessive indulgence (of a
habit). {%—Ati-saurabha, as, ā, am,%} very fragrant;
({%am%}), n. extraordinary fragrance. {%—Ati-sauhitya, am,%}
n. excessive fondness, or the effect of it, e. g. being
spoiled, stuffed with food, &c. {%—Ati-stuti, is,%} f. extra-
ordinary praise. {%—Ati-sthira, as, ā, am,%} very stable
or durable. {%—Ati-sthūla, as, ā, am,%} excessively thick,
or stout, or big, or clumsy; excessively stupid. {%—Ati-%}
{%snigdha, as, ā, am,%} very smooth, very nice, very
affectionate. {%—Ati-sparśa, as,%} m. too marked contact
(of the tongue and palate) in pronunciation. {%—Ati-%}
{%sphira, as, ā, am,%} very tremulous. {%—Ati-svapna,%}
{%as,%} m. excessive sleep; ({%am%}), n. excessive tendency
to dreaming. {%—Ati-svastha, as, ā, am,%} enjoying ex-
cellent health. {%—Ati-hasita, am,%} n. or {%ati-hāsa, as,%}
m. excessive laughter. {%—Ati-hrasva, as, ā, am,%} ex-
cessively short. {%—Aty-agni, is,%} m. morbidly rapid di-
gestion. {%—Aty-adbhuta, as, ā, am,%} very wonderful.
{%—Aty-adhvan, ā,%} m. a long way or journey, exces-
sive travelling. {%—Aty-amarṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} quite out
of temper. {%—Aty-amla, as, ā, am,%} very acid; ({%as%}),
m. a tree, Spondias Mangifera; ({%ā%}), f. a tree, a species
of citron. {%—Atyamla-parṇī,%} f. having very acid leaves,
N. of a medicinal plant or creeper. {%—Aty-alpa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very little. {%—Aty-aśana, am,%} n. immoderate
eating. {%—Aty-aśnat, an, atī, at,%} eating too much.
{%—Aty-asama, as, ā, am,%} very uneven, very rough.
{%—Aty-ādara, as,%} m. excessive deference. {%—Aty-%}
{%ādāna, am,%} n. taking away too much. {%—Aty-āpti, is,%} f.
complete attainment. {%—Aty-ārūḍhi, is,%} f. mounting too
high. {%—Aty-āśā,%} f. extravagant hope. {%—Aty-āhāra,%}
{%as,%} m. excess in eating. {%—Aty-āhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} eating
immoderately, gluttonous. {%—Aty-āhita, am,%} n. great
calamity; great danger; facing great danger; a daring
[Page0013-c+ 71]
action. {%—Aty-ukti, is,%} f. excessive talking; exaggera-
tion; hyperbole. {%—Aty-ugra, as, ā, am,%} very fierce;
very pungent; ({%am%}), n. Asa Fœtida. {%—Aty-uccais,%}
ind. very loudly. {%—Atyuccair-dhvani, is,%} m. a very
loud sound; a very high note. {%—Aty-utkaṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very imposing, immense, extraordinary. {%—Aty-%}
{%utsāha, as,%} m. (in medicine) excessive vigour or
activity. {%—Aty-udāra, as, ā, am,%} very liberal. {%—Aty-%}
{%ulbaṇa%} or {%aty-ulvaṇa, as, ā, am,%} very conspicuous,
immense, excessive. {%—Aty-uṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} very hot.
<LEND>

<L>626<pc>0013-c<k1>atikaTa<k2>atikaTa
{#atikaTa#}¦ {%ati-katha%} or {%iti-katha, as, ā, am,%}
past tradition or law, deviating from the rules of his
caste, lawless; (see also under {%ati.%})
<LEND>

<L>627<pc>0013-c<k1>atikandaka<k2>atikandaka
{#atikandaka#}¦ {%ati-kandaka, as,%} m., N. of a
plant or tree, Hastikanda.
<LEND>

<L>628<pc>0013-c<k1>atikaSa<k2>atikaSa
{#atikaSa#}¦ {%ati-kaśa, as, ā, am,%} past the whip,
i. e. unmanageable.
<LEND>

<L>629<pc>0013-c<k1>atikup<k2>atikup
{#atikup#}¦ {%ati-kup,%} cl. 4. P. {%-kupyati, -kopi-%}
{%tum,%} to become very angry.
<LEND>

<L>630<pc>0013-c<k1>atikUrd<k2>atikUrd
{#atikUrd#}¦ {%ati-kūrd,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kūrdati, -ditum,%}
to jump about.
<LEND>

<L>631<pc>0013-c<k1>atikfti<k2>atikfti
{#atikfti#}¦ {%ati-kṛti%} or {%abhikṛti, is,%} f., N. of a
metre of four lines, each containing twenty-five syllables.
<LEND>

<L>632<pc>0013-c<k1>atikfz<k2>atikfz
{#atikfz#}¦ {%ati-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-karṣati,%}
{%-karṣṭum%} or {%-kraṣṭum,%} to drag over or beyond.
<LEND>

<L>633<pc>0013-c<k1>atikeSara<k2>atikeSara
{#atikeSara#}¦ {%ati-keśara, as,%} m. an aquatic
plant, Trapa Bipinosa.
<LEND>

<L>634<pc>0013-c<k1>atikram<k2>atikram
{#atikram#}¦ {%ati-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A., 4. P. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-te, -krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to step or go or get
beyond or over or across; to pass, cross; to surpass,
excel, overcome; to pass by, neglect; to overstep,
transgress, violate; to pass on or away; to step out;
to part from, lose: Caus. {%-krāmayati%} or {%-kramayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to allow to pass, to leave unnoticed.
<LEND>

<L>635<pc>0013-c<k1>atikrama<k2>atikrama
{%Ati-krama, as,%}¦ m. act of passing or overstepping;
lapse (of time); overcoming, surpassing, conquering;
excess, imposition, transgression, violation; neglect;
determined onset.
<LEND>

<L>636<pc>0013-c<k1>atikramaRa<k2>atikramaRa
{%Ati-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. passing, surpassing, over-
stepping; excess; spending (time).
<LEND>

<L>637<pc>0013-c<k1>atikramaRIya<k2>atikramaRIya
{%Ati-kramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ proper or practicable
to be passed by or neglected or overcome.
<LEND>

<L>638<pc>0013-c<k1>atikramin<k2>atikramin
{%Ati-kramin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ exceeding, violating, &c.
<LEND>

<L>639<pc>0013-c<k1>atikramya<k2>atikramya
{%Ati-kramya,%}¦ ind. having passed beyond, behind,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>640<pc>0013-c<k1>atikrAnta<k2>atikrAnta
{%Ati-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ having passed or trans-
gressed; exceeded, surpassed, overcome. {%—Atikrānta-%}
{%niṣedha, as, ā, am,%} guilty of neglecting a prohibition.
<LEND>

<L>641<pc>0013-c<k1>atikrAmaka<k2>atikrAmaka
{%Ati-krāmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ exceeding, transgress-
ing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>642<pc>0013-c<k1>atikzar<k2>atikzar
{#atikzar#}¦ {%ati-kṣar,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-kṣarati,%}
{%-ritum,%} to overflow.
<LEND>

<L>643<pc>0013-c<k1>atikzip<k2>atikzip
{#atikzip#}¦ {%ati-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṣipati,%}
{%-kṣeptum,%} to throw beyond.
<LEND>

<L>644<pc>0013-c<k1>atikzipta<k2>atikzipta
{%Ati-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown beyond; ({%am%}), n.
(in medicine) sprain or dislocation of a particular kind.
<LEND>

<L>645<pc>0013-c<k1>atiKawva<k2>atiKawva
{#atiKawva#}¦ {%ati-khaṭva, as, ā, am,%} past the
bedstead, able to do without a bedstead.
<LEND>

<L>646<pc>0013-c<k1>atiKyA<k2>atiKyA
{#atiKyA#}¦ {%ati-khyā,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-khyāti,%}
{%-khyātum,%} to survey, overlook, neglect, abandon,
repudiate.
<LEND>

<L>647<pc>0013-c<k1>atigam<k2>atigam
{#atigam#}¦ {%ati-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} or {%ati-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to pass,
overcome, succeed; to escape; to pass by, pass over,
neglect; to pass away, die.
<LEND>

<L>648<pc>0013-c<k1>atiga<k2>atiga
{%Ati-ga, as, ā, am%}¦ (used at the close of compounds),
exceeding, overcoming, surpassing; as {%śokātiga (˚ka-%}
{%at˚),%} overcoming grief.
<LEND>

<L>649<pc>0013-c<k1>atigata<k2>atigata
{%Ati-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ having passed; being past.
<LEND>

<L>650<pc>0013-c<k1>atigava<k2>atigava
{#atigava#}¦ {%ati-gava, as, ā, am,%} having passed
or surpassed a cow.
<LEND>
[Page0014-a+ 70]

<L>651<pc>0014-a<k1>atigAh<k2>atigAh
{#atigAh#}¦ {%ati-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -hitum,%}
or {%-gāḍhum,%} to emerge over; to rise upon.
<LEND>

<L>652<pc>0014-a<k1>atigur<k2>atigur
{#atigur#}¦ {%ati-gur,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-gurati,%}
{%-ritum,%} to shout, exclaim (?).
<LEND>

<L>653<pc>0014-a<k1>atiguhA<k2>atiguhA
{#atiguhA#}¦ {%ati-guhā,%} f. a plant, Hemionites
Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>654<pc>0014-a<k1>atigrah<k2>atigrah
{#atigrah#}¦ {%ati-grah,%} cl. 9. P., Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti%}
or {%-gṛhṇāti, -grahītum,%} to take beyond or over
the usual measure; to overtake, surpass.
<LEND>

<L>655<pc>0014-a<k1>atigraha<k2>atigraha
{%Ati-graha, as,%}¦ m. act of overtaking or surpassing;
one who takes or seizes to an extraordinary extent;
(in philosophy) the same as {%atigrāha.%}
<LEND>

<L>656<pc>0014-a<k1>atigrAha<k2>atigrAha
{%Ati-grāha, as,%}¦ m. object of a {%graha,%} i. e. of an
apprehensive organ; there are eight such grahas, viz.
{%prāṇa,%} ‘inhaling or nose;’ {%vāc,%} ‘speech;’ {%jihvā,%}
‘tongue;’ {%cakṣus,%} ‘eye;’ {%śrotra,%} ‘ear;’ {%manas,%}
‘mind;’ {%hasta,%} ‘hand;’ {%tvac,%} ‘skin:’ these have
eight corresponding {%ati-grāhas%} or objects, viz.
{%apāna,%} ‘exhaling substance;’ {%nāman,%} ‘name;’ {%rasa,%}
‘sap or taste;’ {%rūpa,%} ‘form;’ {%śabda,%} ‘sound;’ {%kāma,%}
‘desire;’ {%karman,%} ‘action;’ and {%sparśa,%} ‘touch.’
<LEND>

<L>657<pc>0014-a<k1>atigrAhya<k2>atigrAhya
{%Ati-grāhya, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of three successive
libations made (or cups filled) at the Jyotiṣṭoma
sacrifice; (very acceptable; see under {%ati.%})
<LEND>

<L>658<pc>0014-a<k1>atiGa<k2>atiGa
{#atiGa#}¦ {%ati-gha, as,%} m. (fr. {%ati%} and rt. {%han,%}
‘very destructive’), a weapon, a bludgeon; wrath.
<LEND>

<L>659<pc>0014-a<k1>atiGna<k2>atiGna
{%Ati-ghna, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. very or utterly de-
structive; ({%ī%}), f., Ved. a happy state of utter oblivion
or profound sleep obliterating all that is disagreeable
in the past.
<LEND>

<L>660<pc>0014-a<k1>atiGnya<k2>atiGnya
{%Ati-ghnya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. overpowering, over-
coming (?).
<LEND>

<L>661<pc>0014-a<k1>aticamU<k2>aticamU
{#aticamU#}¦ {%ati-camū, ūs, ūs, u,%} victorious over
armies.
<LEND>

<L>662<pc>0014-a<k1>aticar<k2>aticar
{#aticar#}¦ {%ati-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -ritum,%} to
pass or pass by; to overtake, surpass; to transgress,
offend, be unfaithful to.
<LEND>

<L>663<pc>0014-a<k1>aticara<k2>aticara
{%Ati-cara, as, ā, am,%}¦ transient, changeable; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of the shrub Hibiscus Mutabilis.
<LEND>

<L>664<pc>0014-a<k1>aticaraRa<k2>aticaraRa
{%Ati-caraṇa.%}¦ See s. v. {%ati.%}
<LEND>

<L>665<pc>0014-a<k1>aticAra<k2>aticAra
{%Ati-cāra, as,%}¦ m. act of passing, overtaking, sur-
passing; accelerated motion, especially of planets.
<LEND>

<L>666<pc>0014-a<k1>aticArin<k2>aticArin
{%Ati-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ surpassing, transgressing.
<LEND>

<L>667<pc>0014-a<k1>aticft<k2>aticft
{#aticft#}¦ {%ati-cṛt,%} cl. 1. P. {%-cartati, -titum,%}
to stick on, fasten together.
<LEND>

<L>668<pc>0014-a<k1>aticezw<k2>aticezw
{#aticezw#}¦ {%ati-ceṣṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ceṣṭate, -ṭitum,%}
to make extraordinary or excessive efforts.
<LEND>

<L>669<pc>0014-a<k1>aticCanda<k2>aticCanda
{#aticCanda#}¦ {%ati-cchanda, as, ā, am,%} past
wordly desires, free from them.
<LEND>

<L>670<pc>0014-a<k1>aticCandas<k2>aticCandas
{%Ati-cchandas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. past worldly desires,
free from them; ({%ās, as%}), f. n., N. of two extensive
classes of metres; ({%as%}), n., N. of a particular brick in
the sacrificial fire-place.
<LEND>

<L>671<pc>0014-a<k1>atijagatI<k2>atijagatI
{#atijagatI#}¦ {%ati-jagatī,%} f., N. of a genus of
metres (belonging to the class {%Aticchandas%}), of four
lines, each containing thirteen syllables.
<LEND>

<L>672<pc>0014-a<k1>atijana<k2>atijana
{#atijana#}¦ {%ati-jana, as, ā, am%} (‘past men’),
uninhabited.
<LEND>

<L>673<pc>0014-a<k1>atijAta<k2>atijAta
{#atijAta#}¦ {%ati-jāta, as, ā, am,%} superior to
his parentage.
<LEND>

<L>674<pc>0014-a<k1>atiji<k2>atiji
{#atiji#}¦ {%ati-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%} to
conquer.
<LEND>

<L>675<pc>0014-a<k1>atijIv<k2>atijIv
{#atijIv#}¦ {%ati-jīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jīvati, -vitum,%}
to survive; to surpass in the mode of living.
<LEND>

<L>676<pc>0014-a<k1>atitata<k2>atitata
{#atitata#}¦ {%ati-tata, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%ati-tan%}), far-
stretched, making one's self very big, conceited.
<LEND>

<L>677<pc>0014-a<k1>atitap<k2>atitap
{#atitap#}¦ {%ati-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -taptum,%}
to be very hot; to heat; to affect greatly: Caus.
{%-tāpayati, -yitum,%} to heat much.
<LEND>

<L>678<pc>0014-a<k1>atitarAm<k2>atitarAm
{#atitarAm#}¦ {%ati-tarām,%} ind. (compar. of {%ati%}),
[Page0014-b+ 71]
above in rank (with acc.); better, higher, more (with
abl.); very much, exceedingly, excessively.
<LEND>

<L>679<pc>0014-b<k1>atitfd<k2>atitfd
{#atitfd#}¦ {%ati-tṛd,%} cl. 7. P. {%-tṛṇatti, -tarditum,%}
to pierce, penetrate.
<LEND>

<L>680<pc>0014-b<k1>atitfp<k2>atitfp
{#atitfp#}¦ {%ati-tṛp,%} cl. 4. P. {%-tṛpyati, -tarp-%}
{%tum%} or {%-traptum,%} to be or become satisfied, satiated
or glutted.
<LEND>

<L>681<pc>0014-b<k1>atitF<k2>atitF
{#atitF#}¦ {%ati-tṝ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati, -taritum%} or
{%-tarītum,%} to pass, cross, get over, overcome, escape;
to attain: Desid. {%-titīrṣati,%} to be desirous of crossing
or overcoming.
<LEND>

<L>682<pc>0014-b<k1>atitArin<k2>atitArin
{%Ati-tārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ crossing.
<LEND>

<L>683<pc>0014-b<k1>atitArya<k2>atitArya
{%Ati-tārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ proper or practicable to be
got over or overcome.
<LEND>

<L>684<pc>0014-b<k1>atityad<k2>atityad
{#atityad#}¦ {%ati-tyad,%} surpassing that; (a
fictitious compound coined by grammarians.)
<LEND>

<L>685<pc>0014-b<k1>atitvam<k2>atitvam
{#atitvam#}¦ {%ati-tvam,%} surpassing thee; (a
grammatical compound, see the last); {%atitvām, ati-%}
{%tvān%} (acc. sing. and pl.), him that surpasses thee,
them that surpass thee.
<LEND>

<L>686<pc>0014-b<k1>atitvar<k2>atitvar
{#atitvar#}¦ {%ati-tvar,%} cl. 1. A., occasionally P.,
{%tvarate, -ti, -ritum,%} to hasten greatly.
<LEND>

<L>687<pc>0014-b<k1>atiTi<k2>atiTi
{#atiTi#}¦ {%atithi, is, ī, i,%} m. f. n. (etymology
uncertain; if, according to native authorities, fr. rt. {%at,%}
it would then first mean ‘a traveller;’ if fr. {%a%} and
{%tithi,%} the first idea would be ‘one who has no fixed
time for coming or staying;’ if from {%ati%} and {%sthā,%}
‘one who has the pre-eminence over the members of
the household’), a guest, entitled to hospitality; ({%is%}),
m. wrath; N. of Agni or an attendant of Soma; N.
of Suhotra, king of Ayodhyā, and grandson of Rāma.
{%—Atithi-kriyā,%} f. hospitality, as (religiously) due to
a guest. {%—Atithi-gva, as,%} m. (‘to whom guests should
go’), an epithet of Divodāsa. {%—Atithi-tva, am,%} n.
condition of a guest, hospitality. {%—Atithi-deva, as,%}
{%ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} treating the guest as a divinity. {%—Atithi-%}
{%dveṣa, as,%} m. inhospitality. {%—Atithi-dharma, as,%}
m. title to hospitality. {%—Atithi-dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
entitled to hospitality. {%—Atithi-pati, is,%} m. the host
or entertainer of a guest. {%—Atithi-pūjana, am,%} n. or
{%atithi-pūjā,%} f. honourable and religious reception of
a guest. {%—Atithi-vat,%} ind. like a guest. {%—Atithi-%}
{%satkāra, as,%} m. honourable treatment of a guest.
{%—Atithi-sevā,%} f. attention paid to a guest.
<LEND>

<L>688<pc>0014-b<k1>atiTin<k2>atiTin
{%Atithin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. rt. {%at%}), Ved. travelling; ({%ī%}),
m., N. of a king, also called Suhotra and Atithi, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>689<pc>0014-b<k1>atidatta<k2>atidatta
{#atidatta#}¦ {%ati-datta, as,%} m., N. of a brother
of Datta and son of Rājādhideya.
<LEND>

<L>690<pc>0014-b<k1>atidah<k2>atidah
{#atidah#}¦ {%ati-dah,%} cl. 1. P., poet, also A.,
{%-dahati, -te, -dagdhum,%} to burn or blaze across; to
burn or distress greatly.
<LEND>

<L>691<pc>0014-b<k1>atidA<k2>atidA
{#atidA#}¦ {%ati-dā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadāti, -dātum,%} to
surpass in giving; to pass over or neglect in giving.
<LEND>

<L>692<pc>0014-b<k1>atidAnta<k2>atidAnta
{#atidAnta#}¦ {%ati-dānta, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>693<pc>0014-b<k1>atidiv<k2>atidiv
{#atidiv#}¦ {%ati-div,%} cl. 4. P. {%-dīvyati, -devitum,%}
to play high, lose at play.
<LEND>

<L>694<pc>0014-b<k1>atidiS<k2>atidiS
{#atidiS#}¦ {%ati-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%}
to assign, make over, transfer: Pass. {%-diśyate,%} (in
grammar) to be overruled or attracted or assimilated.
<LEND>

<L>695<pc>0014-b<k1>atidizwa<k2>atidizwa
{%Ati-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ overruled, attracted, in-
fluenced, inferred, substituted.
<LEND>

<L>696<pc>0014-b<k1>atideSa<k2>atideSa
{%Ati-deśa, as,%}¦ m. transfer, extended application,
inference, analogy, overruling influence, assimilation;
a rule providing for more than the usual rule; putting
one thing instead of another, substitution; {%rūpāti-%}
{%deśa,%} such a rule as affecting the form of a word;
({%as, ā, am,%}), overruling, previously stated.
<LEND>

<L>697<pc>0014-b<k1>atidIpya<k2>atidIpya
{#atidIpya#}¦ {%ati-dīpya, as,%} m. (very brilliant),
a plant, Plumbago Rosea.
<LEND>

<L>698<pc>0014-b<k1>atidfp<k2>atidfp
{#atidfp#}¦ {%ati-dṛp,%} cl. 4. P. {%-dṛpyati,%}
{%-darptum%} or {%-draptum,%} to be excessively conceited.
<LEND>
[Page0014-c+ 67]

<L>699<pc>0014-c<k1>atidfS<k2>atidfS
{#atidfS#}¦ {%ati-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-paśyati,%}
{%-draṣṭum,%} to look beyond, look through.
<LEND>

<L>700<pc>0014-c<k1>atideva<k2>atideva
{#atideva#}¦ {%ati-deva, as,%} m. a superior god;
surpassing the gods.
<LEND>

<L>701<pc>0014-c<k1>atiDanvan<k2>atiDanvan
{#atiDanvan#}¦ {%ati-dhanvan, ā,%} m., N. of a
descendant of Śunaka.
<LEND>

<L>702<pc>0014-c<k1>atiDAv<k2>atiDAv
{#atiDAv#}¦ {%ati-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhāvati, -vitum,%}
to run or rush over.
<LEND>

<L>703<pc>0014-c<k1>atiDfti<k2>atiDfti
{#atiDfti#}¦ {%ati-dhṛti, is,%} f., N. of a genus of
metres belonging to the class {%Aticchandas,%} and con-
sisting of four lines, each containing nineteen syllables;
(in arithm.) nineteen.
<LEND>

<L>704<pc>0014-c<k1>atinam<k2>atinam
{#atinam#}¦ {%ati-nam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-namati, -nantum,%}
to bend aside, keep on one side.
<LEND>

<L>705<pc>0014-c<k1>atinAman<k2>atinAman
{#atinAman#}¦ {%ati-nāman, ā,%} m., N. of a
Saptarṣi of the sixth Manvantara.
<LEND>

<L>706<pc>0014-c<k1>atinAzwra<k2>atinAzwra
{#atinAzwra#}¦ {%ati-nāṣṭra, as, ā, am,%} past danger,
out of danger.
<LEND>

<L>707<pc>0014-c<k1>atinicft<k2>atinicft
{#atinicft#}¦ {%ati-nicṛt%} or {%ati-nivṛt, t,%} f., N.
of a Vedic metre of three pādas, containing respec-
tively seven, six and seven syllables.
<LEND>

<L>708<pc>0014-c<k1>atinidram<k2>atinidram
{#atinidram#}¦ {%ati-nidram,%} ind. past sleeping
time. See s. v. {%ati.%}
<LEND>

<L>709<pc>0014-c<k1>atinizwan<k2>atinizwan
{#atinizwan#}¦ {%ati-niṣ-ṭan (-nis-tan),%} cl. 8. P.,
Ved. {%-tanoti, -nitum,%} to penetrate.
<LEND>

<L>710<pc>0014-c<k1>atinI<k2>atinI
{#atinI#}¦ {%ati-nī,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -netum,%} to
lead over or beyond, to help a person over anything;
to allow to pass away: Intens. A. {%-nenīyate,%} to bring
forward.
<LEND>

<L>711<pc>0014-c<k1>atinu<k2>atinu
{#atinu#}¦ {%ati-nu,%} Caus. {%-nāvayati, -yitum,%} to
turn away.
<LEND>

<L>712<pc>0014-c<k1>atinud<k2>atinud
{#atinud#}¦ {%ati-nud,%} cl. 6. P. A., Ved. {%-nudati,%}
{%-te, -nottum,%} to drive by.
<LEND>

<L>713<pc>0014-c<k1>atined<k2>atined
{#atined#}¦ {%ati-ned,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-nedati,%}
{%-ditum,%} to stream or flow over, to foam over.
<LEND>

<L>714<pc>0014-c<k1>atinO<k2>atinO
{#atinO#}¦ {%ati-nau, aus, aus, u,%} disembarked.
<LEND>

<L>715<pc>0014-c<k1>atipaYcA<k2>atipaYcA
{#atipaYcA#}¦ {%ati-pañcā,%} f. a girl who is past five.
<LEND>

<L>716<pc>0014-c<k1>atipawIkzepa<k2>atipawIkzepa
{#atipawIkzepa#}¦ {%ati-paṭīkṣepa%} or {%a-paṭīkṣepa,%}
{%as,%} m. omission of removing the theatrical curtain.
<LEND>

<L>717<pc>0014-c<k1>atipaW<k2>atipaW
{#atipaW#}¦ {%ati-paṭh,%} Pass, {%-paṭhyate,%} to be
proclaimed, named or celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>718<pc>0014-c<k1>atipat<k2>atipat
{#atipat#}¦ {%ati-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -titum,%}
to fall or fly by, past, beyond, over; to neglect: Caus.
{%-pātayati, -yitum,%} to cause to fly by; to drag
away; to make effectless.
<LEND>

<L>719<pc>0014-c<k1>atipatana<k2>atipatana
{%Ati-patana, am,%}¦ n. act of falling or flying beyond,
passing, missing, transgressing.
<LEND>

<L>720<pc>0014-c<k1>atipatita<k2>atipatita
{%Ati-patita, as, ā, am,%}¦ missed, transgressed, past.
<LEND>

<L>721<pc>0014-c<k1>atipAta<k2>atipAta
{%Ati-pāta, as,%}¦ m. passing away, lapse; neglect,
transgression; ill-usage, opposition, contrariety.
<LEND>

<L>722<pc>0014-c<k1>atipAtita<k2>atipAtita
{%Ati-pātita, as, ā, am,%}¦ quite displaced or broken;
({%am%}), n. (in medicine) complete fracture of a bone.
<LEND>

<L>723<pc>0014-c<k1>atipAtin<k2>atipAtin
{%Ati-pātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ overtaking, excelling in speed;
(in medicine) running a rapid course, acute.
<LEND>

<L>724<pc>0014-c<k1>atipAtya<k2>atipAtya
{%Ati-pātya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit or proper to be neglected.
<LEND>

<L>725<pc>0014-c<k1>atipattra<k2>atipattra
{#atipattra#}¦ {%ati-pattra, as,%} m. the Teak tree;
another tree, Hastikanda.
<LEND>

<L>726<pc>0014-c<k1>atipad<k2>atipad
{#atipad#}¦ {%ati-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, -pattum,%}
to go beyond (with acc.), jump over, neglect, trans-
gress: Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to allow to pass by.
<LEND>

<L>727<pc>0014-c<k1>atipatti<k2>atipatti
{%Ati-patti, is,%}¦ f. going beyond, passing, lapse;
{%kriyātipatti,%} the passing by of an action unaccom-
plished.
<LEND>

<L>728<pc>0014-c<k1>atipanna<k2>atipanna
{%Ati-panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone beyond, transgressed,
missed; past.
<LEND>

<L>729<pc>0014-c<k1>atipara<k2>atipara
{#atipara#}¦ {%ati-para, as, ā, am,%} having over-
come his enemy or enemies; ({%as%}), m. a great enemy.
<LEND>
[Page0015-a+ 64]

<L>730<pc>0015-a<k1>atipA<k2>atipA
{#atipA#}¦ {%ati-pā,%} Caus. P. {%-pāyayati, -yitum,%}
to give to drink in great quantity.
<LEND>

<L>731<pc>0015-a<k1>atipAdanicft<k2>atipAdanicft
{#atipAdanicft#}¦ {%ati-pādanicṛt%} or {%ati-pāda-%}
{%nivṛt, t,%} f., N. of a Vedic metre of three pādas, con-
taining respectively six, eight and seven syllables.
<LEND>

<L>732<pc>0015-a<k1>atipitf<k2>atipitf
{#atipitf#}¦ {%ati-pitṛ, -tā,%} m. surpassing his
own father. {%—Ati-pitāmaha, as,%} m. surpassing his
own paternal grandfather.
<LEND>

<L>733<pc>0015-a<k1>atipU<k2>atipU
{#atipU#}¦ {%ati-pū,%} cl. 9. P., Ved. {%-punāti,%}
{%-pavitum,%} to purify by overflowing.
<LEND>

<L>734<pc>0015-a<k1>atipF<k2>atipF
{#atipF#}¦ {%ati-pṝ,%} P., Ved. {%-pṛṇāti (?),%} Caus.
{%-pārayati, -yitum,%} to convey across.
<LEND>

<L>735<pc>0015-a<k1>atiprakit<k2>atiprakit
{#atiprakit#}¦ {%ati-pra-kit%} or {%-cit,%} cl. 3. A., Ved.
{%-cekite,%} to be distinct or distinguishable.
<LEND>

<L>736<pc>0015-a<k1>atipracyu<k2>atipracyu
{#atipracyu#}¦ {%ati-pra-cyu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-cyavate,%}
{%-cyotum,%} to pass by: Caus. {%-cyāvayati, -yitum,%} to
cause or allow to pass by.
<LEND>

<L>737<pc>0015-a<k1>atipraRaS<k2>atipraRaS
{#atipraRaS#}¦ {%ati-pra-ṇaś%} (rt. {%naś%}), cl. 4. P.
{%-ṇaśyati, -ṇaśitum%} or {%-ṇaṃṣṭum,%} to be deprived
of (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>738<pc>0015-a<k1>atipraRI<k2>atipraRI
{#atipraRI#}¦ {%ati-pra-ṇī%} (rt. {%nī%}), cl. 1. P. {%-ṇayati,%}
{%-ṇetum,%} to lead past.
<LEND>

<L>739<pc>0015-a<k1>atipraRud<k2>atipraRud
{#atipraRud#}¦ {%ati-pra-ṇud%} (rt. {%nud%}), cl. 6. P. A.
{%-ṇudati, -te, -ṇottum,%} to press a person very strongly.
<LEND>

<L>740<pc>0015-a<k1>atipramARa<k2>atipramARa
{#atipramARa#}¦ {%ati-pramāṇa, as, ā, am,%} past
measure, immense.
<LEND>

<L>741<pc>0015-a<k1>atiprARam<k2>atiprARam
{#atiprARam#}¦ {%ati-prāṇam,%} ind. above life.
{%—Atiprāṇa-priya, as, ā, am,%} dearer than life.
<LEND>

<L>742<pc>0015-a<k1>atiprezita<k2>atiprezita
{#atiprezita#}¦ {%ati-preṣita, am,%} n. the time
after the ceremony in which the Praiṣa Mantras are
used.
<LEND>

<L>743<pc>0015-a<k1>atibrahman<k2>atibrahman
{#atibrahman#}¦ {%ati-brahman, ā,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>744<pc>0015-a<k1>atibrU<k2>atibrU
{#atibrU#}¦ {%ati-brū,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bravīti, -vaktum,%}
to insult, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>745<pc>0015-a<k1>atiBU<k2>atiBU
{#atiBU#}¦ {%ati-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%}
to excel, overcome.
<LEND>

<L>746<pc>0015-a<k1>atiBAva<k2>atiBAva
{%Ati-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. superiority; overcoming.
<LEND>

<L>747<pc>0015-a<k1>atiBUmi<k2>atiBUmi
{#atiBUmi#}¦ {%ati-bhūmi, is,%} f. extensive land;
culmination, eminence, superiority; excess.
<LEND>

<L>748<pc>0015-a<k1>atiBUz<k2>atiBUz
{#atiBUz#}¦ {%ati-bhūṣ,%} cl. 10. A. {%-bhūṣayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to precede in adorning oneself.
<LEND>

<L>749<pc>0015-a<k1>atimanuzyabudDi<k2>atimanuzyabudDi
{#atimanuzyabudDi#}¦ {%ati-manuṣya-buddhi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} having a superhuman intellect.
<LEND>

<L>750<pc>0015-a<k1>atimartya<k2>atimartya
{#atimartya#}¦ {%ati-martya, as, ā, am,%} superhuman.
<LEND>

<L>751<pc>0015-a<k1>atimaryAda<k2>atimaryAda
{#atimaryAda#}¦ {%ati-maryāda, as, ā, am,%} exceeding
the proper limit; ({%am%}), ind. beyond bounds.
<LEND>

<L>752<pc>0015-a<k1>atimAtra<k2>atimAtra
{#atimAtra#}¦ {%ati-mātra, as, ā, am,%} exceeding
the proper measure; ({%am%}), ind. or {%atimātra-śas,%}
ind. beyond measure.
<LEND>

<L>753<pc>0015-a<k1>atimAnuza<k2>atimAnuza
{#atimAnuza#}¦ {%ati-mānuṣa, as, ī, am,%} super-
human, divine.
<LEND>

<L>754<pc>0015-a<k1>atimAm<k2>atimAm
{#atimAm#}¦ {%ati-mām%} (acc. of {%aty-aham,%} q. v.),
him or her that surpasses me.
<LEND>

<L>755<pc>0015-a<k1>atimAya<k2>atimAya
{#atimAya#}¦ {%ati-māya, as, ā, am,%} emancipated
from Māyā or Illusion; finally liberated.
<LEND>

<L>756<pc>0015-a<k1>atimAra<k2>atimAra
{#atimAra#}¦ {%ati-māra%} or {%ati-bhāra, as,%} m., N.
of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>757<pc>0015-a<k1>atimita<k2>atimita<h>1
{#atimita#} 1¦. {%ati-mita, as, ā, am,%} over mea-
sured, beyond measure, exceeding.
<LEND>

<L>758<pc>0015-a<k1>atimita<k2>atimita<h>2
{#atimita#} 2¦. {%a-timita, as, ā, am,%} not moist-
ened, not wet.
<LEND>

<L>759<pc>0015-a<k1>atimukta<k2>atimukta
{#atimukta#}¦ {%ati-mukta%} and {%ati-muktaka, as,%} m.
(rt. {%muc%}), N. of certain shrubs or trees; see under
{%ati%} (surpassing pearls in whiteness).
<LEND>
[Page0015-b+ 71]

<L>760<pc>0015-b<k1>atimukti<k2>atimukti
{%Ati-mukti, is,%}¦ f. final liberation. See under {%ati.%}
<LEND>

<L>761<pc>0015-b<k1>atimucya<k2>atimucya
{%Ati-mucya,%}¦ ind. part. having dismissed or given up.
<LEND>

<L>762<pc>0015-b<k1>atimftyu<k2>atimftyu
{#atimftyu#}¦ {%ati-mṛtyu, us, us, u,%} overcoming
death.
<LEND>

<L>763<pc>0015-b<k1>atiyA<k2>atiyA
{#atiyA#}¦ {%ati-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%} to
pass by.
<LEND>

<L>764<pc>0015-b<k1>atiyUyam<k2>atiyUyam
{#atiyUyam#}¦ {%ati-yūyam%} (nom. pl. of {%ati-tvam,%}
q. v.), persons surpassing thee.
<LEND>

<L>765<pc>0015-b<k1>atirAjan<k2>atirAjan
{#atirAjan#}¦ {%ati-rājan, ā,%} m. an extraordinary
king; superior to a king. {%—Ati-rājakumāri, is, is%}
or {%ī, i,%} superior to a princess.
<LEND>

<L>766<pc>0015-b<k1>atirAjaya<k2>atirAjaya
{%Atirājaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%atirājayati, -yitum,%} to sur-
pass a king.
<LEND>

<L>767<pc>0015-b<k1>atirAjYI<k2>atirAjYI
{%Ati-rājñī,%}¦ f. (a woman) superior to a king.
<LEND>

<L>768<pc>0015-b<k1>atirAtra<k2>atirAtra
{#atirAtra#}¦ {%ati-rātra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pre-
pared or performed over-night; ({%as%}), m. an optional
part of the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice; commencement
and conclusion of certain sacrificial acts; concluding
Vedic verse chanted on such occasions; N. of a son
of Cākṣuṣa the sixth Manu. {%—Atirātra-savanīya-%}
{%paśu, us,%} m. the victim sacrificed at the Atirātra.
<LEND>

<L>769<pc>0015-b<k1>atiri<k2>atiri
{#atiri#}¦ {%ati-ri,%} neut. of {%ati-rai,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>770<pc>0015-b<k1>atiric<k2>atiric
{#atiric#}¦ {%ati-ric,%} Pass. {%-ricyate,%} to be left
with a surplus, to surpass (in a good or bad sense
with abl. or acc.).
<LEND>

<L>771<pc>0015-b<k1>atirikta<k2>atirikta
{%Ati-rikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ left with or as a surplus, left
apart; redundant, unequalled. {%—Atirikata-tā,%} f. re-
dundancy, &c. {%—Atiriktāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a redundant limb or finger or toe; ({%am%}), n. a
redundant limb or finger or toe.
<LEND>

<L>772<pc>0015-b<k1>atireka<k2>atireka
{%Ati-reka%}¦ or {%atī-reka, as,%} m. surplus, excess; redun-
dancy; difference; ({%as, ā, am,%}), redundant.
<LEND>

<L>773<pc>0015-b<k1>atirekin<k2>atirekin
{%Ati-rekin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ surpassing.
<LEND>

<L>774<pc>0015-b<k1>atiruc<k2>atiruc
{#atiruc#}¦ {%ati-ruc,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rocati, -citum,%} to
outshine.
<LEND>

<L>775<pc>0015-b<k1>atiruc<k2>atiruc
{%Ati-ruc, k,%}¦ m. a horse's fetlock or knee.
<LEND>

<L>776<pc>0015-b<k1>atirE<k2>atirE
{#atirE#}¦ {%ati-rai, ās, ās, i%} (‘exceeding one's
income’), extravagant.
<LEND>

<L>777<pc>0015-b<k1>atilihA<k2>atilihA
{#atilihA#}¦ {%atilihā%} or {%aṭhillā,%} f. (etymology
uncertain), N. of a Prākṛt metre of four lines, each
containing sixteen Mātras.
<LEND>

<L>778<pc>0015-b<k1>ativayam<k2>ativayam
{#ativayam#}¦ {%ati-vayam%} (nom. pl. of {%aty-aham,%}
q. v.), persons surpassing me.
<LEND>

<L>779<pc>0015-b<k1>ativartana<k2>ativartana
{#ativartana#}¦ {%ati-vartana.%} See under {%ati-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>780<pc>0015-b<k1>ativalita<k2>ativalita
{#ativalita#}¦ {%ati-valita, as, ā, am,%} well sur-
rounded or covered (?), full of folds (?), well supplied (?).
<LEND>

<L>781<pc>0015-b<k1>ativah<k2>ativah
{#ativah#}¦ {%ati-vah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vahati, -voḍhum,%}
to carry over or across: Caus. {%-vāhayati, -yitum,%} to
let time pass, spend.
<LEND>

<L>782<pc>0015-b<k1>ativAhana<k2>ativAhana
{%Ati-vāhana, am,%}¦ n. excessive toiling or enduring.
<LEND>

<L>783<pc>0015-b<k1>ativAhita<k2>ativAhita
{%Ati-vāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ swifter than the wind;
(according to Colebrooke) an epithet of the Sūkṣma-
śarīra, also (according to Carey) of the Preta-śarīra, or
misery-enduring body, which is of the size of a
thumb; ({%as%}), m. an inhabitant of the lower world.
<LEND>

<L>784<pc>0015-b<k1>ativAhya<k2>ativAhya
{%Ati-vāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ practicable or proper to be
passed (as time, &c.); ({%am%}), n. the passing of time.
<LEND>

<L>785<pc>0015-b<k1>ativoQf<k2>ativoQf
{%Ati-voḍhṛ, ḍhā,%}¦ m. one who carries over or across.
<LEND>

<L>786<pc>0015-b<k1>ativAsa<k2>ativAsa
{#ativAsa#}¦ {%ati-vāsa, as,%} m. fast on the day
before performing the Śrāddha.
<LEND>

<L>787<pc>0015-b<k1>atividDa<k2>atividDa
{#atividDa#}¦ {%ati-viddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vyadh%}),
transfixed, badly wounded. {%—Atividdha-bheṣaja,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} curing deep wounds.
<LEND>

<L>788<pc>0015-b<k1>ativiSva<k2>ativiSva
{#ativiSva#}¦ {%ati-viśva, as,%} m. (‘superior to all
or to the universe’), N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>789<pc>0015-b<k1>ativft<k2>ativft
{#ativft#}¦ {%ati-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate, -titum,%}
to pass, surpass, cross; to get over, overcome; to
transgress, violate, offend, especially by unfaithfulness;
to pass away; to delay.
<LEND>

<L>790<pc>0015-b<k1>ativartana<k2>ativartana
{%Ati-vartana, am,%}¦ n. a pardonable offence or mis-
demeanour.
<LEND>
[Page0015-c+ 70]

<L>791<pc>0015-c<k1>ativartin<k2>ativartin
{%Ati-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crossing, passing; guilty of a
pardonable offence or of pardonable irregularity.
<LEND>

<L>792<pc>0015-c<k1>ativftti<k2>ativftti
{%Ati-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. surpassing; hyperbolical meaning;
(in medicine) excessive action.
<LEND>

<L>793<pc>0015-c<k1>ativela<k2>ativela
{#ativela#}¦ {%ati-vela, as, ā, am,%} passing its
proper boundary, excessive; ({%am%}), ind. excessively.
<LEND>

<L>794<pc>0015-c<k1>ativyADin<k2>ativyADin
{#ativyADin#}¦ {%ati-vyādhin, ī, inī, i%} (rt.
{%vyadh%}), piercing, wounding.
<LEND>

<L>795<pc>0015-c<k1>ativyADya<k2>ativyADya
{%Ati-vyādhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ vulnerable.
<LEND>

<L>796<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSakkarI<k2>atiSakkarI
{#atiSakkarI#}¦ {%ati-śakkarī%} or {%ati-śakvarī,%} f. a
class of metres of four lines, each containing fifteen
syllables. It has eighteen varieties.
<LEND>

<L>797<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSakra<k2>atiSakra
{#atiSakra#}¦ {%ati-śakra, as, ā, am,%} superior to
Indra.
<LEND>

<L>798<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSaNk<k2>atiSaNk
{#atiSaNk#}¦ {%ati-śaṅk,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śaṅkate, -kitum,%}
to suspect; to be concerned about.
<LEND>

<L>799<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSaya<k2>atiSaya
{#atiSaya#}¦ {%atiśaya,%} &c. See under {%ati-śī%}
below.
<LEND>

<L>800<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSastra<k2>atiSastra
{#atiSastra#}¦ {%ati-śastra, as, ā, am,%} superior to
weapons or missiles.
<LEND>

<L>801<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSAkvara<k2>atiSAkvara
{#atiSAkvara#}¦ {%atiśākvara, as, ā, am,%} written in
or connected with the Ati-śakvarī metre.
<LEND>

<L>802<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSI<k2>atiSI
{#atiSI#}¦ {%ati-śī,%} cl. 2. A. {%-śete, -śayitum,%} to
precede in lying down; to surpass, excel, exceed;
to act as an incubus, annoy.
<LEND>

<L>803<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSaya<k2>atiSaya
{%Ati-śaya, as,%}¦ m. pre-eminence, eminence; superi-
ority in quality or quantity or numbers; advantageous
result; one of the superhuman qualities attributed to
Jaina Arhats; ({%as, ā, am%}), pre-eminent, superior,
abundant. {%—Atiśayam%} or {%atiśayena,%} ind. eminently,
very. {%—Atiśayokti (˚ya-uk˚), is,%} f. hyperbolical lan-
guage; extreme assertion; verbosity.
<LEND>

<L>804<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSayana<k2>atiSayana
{%Ati-śayana, as, ā, am,%}¦ eminent, abundant; ({%am%}),
ind. excessively. {%—Ati-śayanī,%} f., N. of a metre of
four lines, also called {%Citralekhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>805<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSayita<k2>atiSayita
{%Ati-śayita, as, ā, am,%}¦ superior.
<LEND>

<L>806<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSayin<k2>atiSayin
{%Ati-śayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ excelling, abounding.
<LEND>

<L>807<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSAyana<k2>atiSAyana
{%Ati-śāyana, am,%}¦ n. act of excelling; excessiveness.
<LEND>

<L>808<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSAyin<k2>atiSAyin
{%Ati-śāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ excelling, abounding; excessive.
<LEND>

<L>809<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSeta<k2>atiSeta
{%Ati-śeta, as, ā, am,%}¦ excelling, exceeding; superior.
<LEND>

<L>810<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSItam<k2>atiSItam
{#atiSItam#}¦ {%ati-śītam,%} ind. past the cold,
after the winter.
<LEND>

<L>811<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSeza<k2>atiSeza
{#atiSeza#}¦ {%ati-śeṣa, as,%} m. remainder, rem-
nant, especially of time.
<LEND>

<L>812<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSrezWa<k2>atiSrezWa
{#atiSrezWa#}¦ {%ati-śreṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} superior
to the best, best of all. {%—Atiśreṣṭha-tva, am,%} n.
pre-eminence.
<LEND>

<L>813<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSreyasi<k2>atiSreyasi
{%Ati-śreyasi, is,%}¦ m. a man superior to the most
excellent woman.
<LEND>

<L>814<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSliz<k2>atiSliz
{#atiSliz#}¦ {%ati-śliṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śliṣyati,%}
{%-śleṣṭum,%} to fasten or tie over.
<LEND>

<L>815<pc>0015-c<k1>atiSva<k2>atiSva
{#atiSva#}¦ {%ati-śva, as, ī, am,%} superior to, or
worse than, a dog; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a tribe.
<LEND>

<L>816<pc>0015-c<k1>atizel<k2>atizel
{#atizel#}¦ {%ati-ṣel%} (rt. {%sel%} or {%śel%}), Caus. P.
{%-ṣelayati, -yitum,%} to make one go to a great
distance.
<LEND>

<L>817<pc>0015-c<k1>atizkadvarI<k2>atizkadvarI
{#atizkadvarI#}¦ {%ati-ṣkadvarī,%} f. (rt. {%skand%}),
(transgressor), a dissolute woman.
<LEND>

<L>818<pc>0015-c<k1>atizWat<k2>atizWat
{#atizWat#}¦ {%a-tiṣṭhat, an, antī, at,%} not stand-
ing, unstable.
<LEND>

<L>819<pc>0015-c<k1>atizWA<k2>atizWA
{#atizWA#}¦ {%ati-ṣṭhā%} (rt. {%sthā%}), cl. 1. P. {%-tiṣṭhati,%}
{%-ṣṭhātum,%} to excel.
<LEND>

<L>820<pc>0015-c<k1>atizWA<k2>atizWA
{%Ati-ṣṭhā,%}¦ f. precedence, superiority; ({%ās%}), m. f.,
Ved. or {%ati-ṣṭhāvan, ā,%} m. or {%atiṣṭhā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} superior in standing, surpassing.
<LEND>

<L>821<pc>0015-c<k1>atisanDA<k2>atisanDA
{#atisanDA#}¦ {%ati-san-dhā (-sam-dhā),%} cl. 3. P.
A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to overreach, de-
ceive.
<LEND>

<L>822<pc>0015-c<k1>atisanDam<k2>atisanDam
{%Ati-sandham,%}¦ ind. in violation of an agreement
or of the settled order.
<LEND>
[Page0016-a+ 69]

<L>823<pc>0016-a<k1>atisanDAna<k2>atisanDAna
{%Ati-san-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. overreaching, cheating.
<LEND>

<L>824<pc>0016-a<k1>atisanDita<k2>atisanDita
{%Ati-san-dhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ overreached, cheated.
<LEND>

<L>825<pc>0016-a<k1>atisanDeya<k2>atisanDeya
{%Ati-san-dheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ easy to be conciliated
or settled.
<LEND>

<L>826<pc>0016-a<k1>atisarva<k2>atisarva
{#atisarva#}¦ {%ati-sarva, as, ā, am,%} superior to
all; ({%as%}), m. the supreme.
<LEND>

<L>827<pc>0016-a<k1>atisAMvatsara<k2>atisAMvatsara
{#atisAMvatsara#}¦ {%ati-sāṃvatsara, as, ī, am,%}
extending over more than a year.
<LEND>

<L>828<pc>0016-a<k1>atisAmyA<k2>atisAmyA
{#atisAmyA#}¦ {%ati-sāmyā,%} f. the sweet juice of
the Bengal Madder, Rubia Manjith.
<LEND>

<L>829<pc>0016-a<k1>atisf<k2>atisf
{#atisf#}¦ {%ati-sṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-sārayati, -yitum,%}
to extend; to exert (?).
<LEND>

<L>830<pc>0016-a<k1>atisara<k2>atisara
{%Ati-sara, as,%}¦ m., Ved. effort, exertion.
<LEND>

<L>831<pc>0016-a<k1>atisAra<k2>atisAra
{%Ati-sāra%}¦ or {%atī-sāra, as,%} m. violent straining at
stool, dysentery.
<LEND>

<L>832<pc>0016-a<k1>atisArakin<k2>atisArakin
{%Ati-sārakin%}¦ or {%atī-sārakin%} or {%ati-sārin%} or {%atī-%}
{%sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} afflicted with dysentery.
<LEND>

<L>833<pc>0016-a<k1>atisfj<k2>atisfj
{#atisfj#}¦ {%ati-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati, -sraṣṭum,%}
to dismiss, abandon; to leave as a remnant; to remit,
forgive; to give away.
<LEND>

<L>834<pc>0016-a<k1>atisarga<k2>atisarga
{%Ati-sarga, as,%}¦ m. act of parting with, dismissal,
giving away, granting permission.
<LEND>

<L>835<pc>0016-a<k1>atisarjana<k2>atisarjana
{%Ati-sarjana, am,%}¦ n. liberality, granting, engaging,
a gift; sending out of the world, killing.
<LEND>

<L>836<pc>0016-a<k1>atisfjya<k2>atisfjya
{%Ati-sṛjya,%}¦ ind. part. having dismissed, &c.; ex-
cessively.
<LEND>

<L>837<pc>0016-a<k1>atisfp<k2>atisfp
{#atisfp#}¦ {%ati-sṛp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarpati, -sarptum%}
or {%-sraptum,%} to glide over, get over.
<LEND>

<L>838<pc>0016-a<k1>atisena<k2>atisena
{#atisena#}¦ {%ati-sena, as,%} m., N. of a prince,
a son of Śambara.
<LEND>

<L>839<pc>0016-a<k1>atisOparRa<k2>atisOparRa
{#atisOparRa#}¦ {%ati-sauparṇa, as, ī, am,%} superior
to Suparṇa's or Garuḍa's (vision, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>840<pc>0016-a<k1>atistri<k2>atistri
{#atistri#}¦ {%ati-stri, is, is%} or {%ī, i,%} surpassing a
woman; Gram. 123. b. The feminine may end in {%ī.%}
<LEND>

<L>841<pc>0016-a<k1>atihastaya<k2>atihastaya
{#atihastaya#}¦ {%ati-hastaya,%} Nom. (fr. {%ati-hasta%}),
P. {%atihastayati, -yitum,%} to stretch out the hands; (fr.
{%atihastin%}), to overtake on an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>842<pc>0016-a<k1>atihimam<k2>atihimam
{#atihimam#}¦ {%ati-himam,%} ind. after the cold
or the frost.
<LEND>

<L>843<pc>0016-a<k1>atI<k2>atI
{#atI#}¦ {%atī (ati-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%aty-eti, -tum,%}
to pass, elapse, pass over, overflow; to pass on; to
get over; to defer; to enter; to overcome, overtake,
outdo; to pass by, neglect; to overstep violate; to
be redundant; to die: Intens. {%atīyate,%} to overcome.
<LEND>

<L>844<pc>0016-a<k1>atIta<k2>atIta
{%Atīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone by, past, passed away,
dead; having gone through, having got over or be-
yond, having passed by, having neglected; negligent;
passed, left behind; excessive; ({%as%}), m. modern N.
of a particular Śaiva sect; ({%am%}), n. the past. {%—Atīta-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. the past time or tense. {%—Atīta-nauka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} landed.
<LEND>

<L>845<pc>0016-a<k1>atItvarI<k2>atItvarI
{%Atītvarī (˚ti-it˚),%}¦ f., Ved. (transgressor), a bad
woman. {%—Aty-aya, aty-āya,%} see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>846<pc>0016-a<k1>atIkzRa<k2>atIkzRa
{#atIkzRa#}¦ {%a-tīkṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} not sharp,
blunt, dull.
<LEND>

<L>847<pc>0016-a<k1>atIndriya<k2>atIndriya
{#atIndriya#}¦ {%atīndriya (ati-in˚), as, ā, am,%} be-
yond the congnisance of ({%indriya%}) the senses; ({%as%}), m.
in the Sānkhya phil. the soul or {%puruṣa; (am),%} n.
in the Sānkhya phil. nature or {%pradhāna;%} in the
Vedānta phil. the mind or {%manas.%}
<LEND>

<L>848<pc>0016-a<k1>atIreka<k2>atIreka
{#atIreka, atIsAra.#}¦ See under {%ati-ric,%}
{%ati-sṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>849<pc>0016-a<k1>atIva<k2>atIva
{#atIva#}¦ {%atīva (ati-iva),%} ind. exceedingly,
very; excessively, too; quite; surpassing (with the
acc.).
<LEND>

<L>850<pc>0016-a<k1>atIvra<k2>atIvra
{#atIvra#}¦ {%a-tīvra, as, ā, am,%} not sharp, blunt;
not pungent.
<LEND>

<L>851<pc>0016-a<k1>atuNga<k2>atuNga
{#atuNga#}¦ {%a-tuṅga, as, ā, am,%} not tall, short,
dwarfish.
<LEND>
[Page0016-b+ 68]

<L>852<pc>0016-b<k1>atunda<k2>atunda
{#atunda#}¦ {%a-tunda, as, ā, am,%} not stout, thin,
lank.
<LEND>

<L>853<pc>0016-b<k1>atura<k2>atura
{#atura#}¦ {%a-tura, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not liberal,
not rich.
<LEND>

<L>854<pc>0016-b<k1>atula<k2>atula
{#atula#}¦ {%a-tula, as, ā, am,%} unequalled; ({%as%}),
m. (destitute of weight), the Sesamum seed and plant.
{%—A-tulya, as, ā, am,%} unequalled.
<LEND>

<L>855<pc>0016-b<k1>atuza<k2>atuza
{#atuza#}¦ {%a-tuṣa, as, ā, am,%} without husks.
<LEND>

<L>856<pc>0016-b<k1>atuzArakara<k2>atuzArakara
{#atuzArakara#}¦ {%a-tuṣāra-kara, as,%} m. (having
not cold rays), the sun.
<LEND>

<L>857<pc>0016-b<k1>atuzwi<k2>atuzwi
{#atuzwi#}¦ {%a-tuṣṭi, is,%} f. displeasure, discontent.
<LEND>

<L>858<pc>0016-b<k1>atuhina<k2>atuhina
{#atuhina#}¦ {%a-tuhina,%} Ved. not cold; used in
compounds, thus {%atuhina-dhāman, ā,%} or {%atuhina-%}
{%raśmi, is,%} or {%atuhina-ruci, is,%} m. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>859<pc>0016-b<k1>atUtuji<k2>atUtuji
{#atUtuji#}¦ {%a-tūtuji, is, is, ī,%} Ved. not quick,
slow.
<LEND>

<L>860<pc>0016-b<k1>atUrta<k2>atUrta
{#atUrta#}¦ {%a-tūrta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not in a
hurry; not outrun or outdone or obstructed; unhurt;
({%am%}), n. illimited space. {%—Atūrta-dakṣa, as,%} m.,
Ved. having designs that cannot be obstructed (epithet
of the Aśvins). {%—Atūrta-pathin, anthās,%} m., Ved.
having a path that cannot be obstructed.
<LEND>

<L>861<pc>0016-b<k1>atfRAda<k2>atfRAda
{#atfRAda#}¦ {%a-tṛṇāda (˚ṇa-ada), as,%} m. (not an
eater of grass), a newly-born calf.
<LEND>

<L>862<pc>0016-b<k1>atfRyA<k2>atfRyA
{#atfRyA#}¦ {%a-tṛṇyā,%} f. a small quantity or
short supply of grass.
<LEND>

<L>863<pc>0016-b<k1>atfdila<k2>atfdila
{#atfdila#}¦ {%a-tṛdila, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
fragile, solid, or ‘having no holes.’
<LEND>

<L>864<pc>0016-b<k1>atfpa<k2>atfpa
{#atfpa#}¦ {%a-tṛpa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>865<pc>0016-b<k1>atfpRuvat<k2>atfpRuvat
{%Atṛpṇuvat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. insatiable.
<LEND>

<L>866<pc>0016-b<k1>atfpta<k2>atfpta
{%A-tṛpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unsatisfied, insatiable, eager.
{%—Atṛpta-dṛś, k, k, k,%} looking with eagerness.
<LEND>

<L>867<pc>0016-b<k1>atfpti<k2>atfpti
{%A-tṛpti, is,%}¦ f. unsatisfied condition, insatiability.
<LEND>

<L>868<pc>0016-b<k1>atfzita<k2>atfzita
{#atfzita#}¦ {%a-tṛṣita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
thirsty, not greedy.
<LEND>

<L>869<pc>0016-b<k1>atfzRaj<k2>atfzRaj
{%A-tṛṣṇaj, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. not thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>870<pc>0016-b<k1>atfzya<k2>atfzya
{%A-tṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. beyond the reach of
thirst.
<LEND>

<L>871<pc>0016-b<k1>atfzyat<k2>atfzyat
{%A-tṛṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. not thirsting after,
not greedy, not eager.
<LEND>

<L>872<pc>0016-b<k1>atejas<k2>atejas
{#atejas#}¦ {%a-tejas,%} n. absence of brightness
or vigour; dimness, shade, shadow; feebleness, dul-
ness, insignificance; ({%ās, ās, as%}), or {%a-tejaska, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%a-tejasvin ī, inī, i,%} not bright, dim, not
vigorous.
<LEND>

<L>873<pc>0016-b<k1>atozaRIya<k2>atozaRIya
{#atozaRIya#}¦ {%a-toṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} impossible
or improper to be pleased or appeased.
<LEND>

<L>874<pc>0016-b<k1>atka<k2>atka
{#atka#}¦ {%atka, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%at%}), travelling;
({%as%}), m. a traveller; a limb or member; (Ved.) water,
liquid; lightning; armour, mail; garment; N. of an
Asura.
<LEND>

<L>875<pc>0016-b<k1>atkIla<k2>atkIla
{#atkIla#}¦ {%atkīla%} or {%utkīla, as,%} m., N. of the
author of some Vedic hymns, a descendant of Viśvā-
mitra.
<LEND>

<L>876<pc>0016-b<k1>attali<k2>attali
{#attali#}¦ {%attali, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>877<pc>0016-b<k1>attavya<k2>attavya
{#attavya#}¦ {%attavya, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%ad%}), fit or
proper to be eaten.
<LEND>

<L>878<pc>0016-b<k1>atti<k2>atti
{%Atti, is,%}¦ m., Ved. an eater; f., see also s. v. {%attā.%}
<LEND>

<L>879<pc>0016-b<k1>attf<k2>attf
{%Attṛ, tā,%}¦ m. an eater.
<LEND>

<L>880<pc>0016-b<k1>attA<k2>attA
{#attA#}¦ {%attā,%} f. (etym. uncertain, probably
a word borrowed from the Deccan, occurring chiefly
in dramas); a mother; mother's sister; elder sister;
(in Prākṛt) a mother-in-law. See {%akkā.%}
<LEND>

<L>881<pc>0016-b<k1>atti<k2>atti
{%Atti, is,%}¦ or {%attikā,%} f. elder sister.
<LEND>

<L>882<pc>0016-b<k1>attra<k2>attra
{#attra, attri, attrin#}¦, {%attra,%} &c. See {#atra#},
{#atri, atrina.#}
<LEND>

<L>883<pc>0016-b<k1>atna<k2>atna
{#atna#}¦ {%atna, as,%} or {%atnu, us,%} m. (fr. {%at%}), the sun.
{%Atya, as,%} m., Ved. a courser, steed.
<LEND>
[Page0016-c+ 71]

<L>884<pc>0016-c<k1>atyaMhas<k2>atyaMhas
{#atyaMhas#}¦ {%aty-aṃhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. beyond
the reach of (or emancipated from) sin or evil.
<LEND>

<L>885<pc>0016-c<k1>atyagni<k2>atyagni
{#atyagni#}¦ {%aty-agni, is,%} m. morbidly rapid
digestion, see s. v. {%ati; (is, is, i),%} surpassing fire.
{%—Aty-agni-somārka (˚ma-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} brighter
than fire or the moon or the sun.
<LEND>

<L>886<pc>0016-c<k1>atyagnizwoma<k2>atyagnizwoma
{#atyagnizwoma#}¦ {%aty-agniṣṭoma, as,%} m., N. of
the optional second part of the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice;
the Vedic verse chanted at the close of that cere-
mony.
<LEND>

<L>887<pc>0016-c<k1>atyaNkuSa<k2>atyaNkuSa
{#atyaNkuSa#}¦ {%aty-aṅkuśa, as, ā, am,%} past the
(elephant-driver's) hook, unmanageable.
<LEND>

<L>888<pc>0016-c<k1>atyaNgula<k2>atyaNgula
{#atyaNgula#}¦ {%aty-aṅgula, as, ā, am,%} exceeding
an aṅgula (finger's breadth).
<LEND>

<L>889<pc>0016-c<k1>atyatikram<k2>atyatikram
{#atyatikram#}¦ {%aty-ati-kram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-kramitum,%} to approach for sexual intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>890<pc>0016-c<k1>atyanila<k2>atyanila
{#atyanila#}¦ {%aty-anila, as, ā, am,%} surpassing
the wind.
<LEND>

<L>891<pc>0016-c<k1>atyanta<k2>atyanta
{#atyanta#}¦ {%aty-anta, as, ā, am,%} past its proper
end or limit; excessive, very great or strong, &c.;
endless, unbroken, perpetual; absolute, perfect; ({%am%}),
ind. excessively, exceedingly; in perpetuity; absolutely,
completely; to the end. {%—Atyanta-kopana, as, ā,%}
{%ām,%} very passionate, outrageous. {%—Atyanta-ga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} going or walking very much or very fast.
{%—Atyanta-gata, as, ā, am,%} completely pertinent;
always applicable. {%—Atyanta-gati, is,%} f. complete ac-
complishment; (in grammar) the sense of ‘completely.’
{%—Atyanta-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going or walking very
much or very fast. {%—Atyanta-guṇin, ī, inī, i,%} having
extraordinary qualities. {%—Atyanta-tiraskṛta-vācya-%}
{%dhvani, is,%} f. (in rhetoric) a metaphoric or hyper-
bolical use of depreciating language. {%—Atyanta-%}
{%pīḍana, am,%} n. act of giving excessive pain. {%—Atyan-%}
{%ta-vāsin, ī,%} m. a Brāhman who perpetually lodges as a
student with his teacher. {%—Atyanta-saṃyoga, as,%} m.
(in grammar) immediate proximity. {%—Atyanta-sam-%}
{%parka, as,%} m. excessive sexual intercourse. {%—Atyanta-%}
{%sukumāra, as, ī, am,%} very tender; ({%as%}), m. a kind
of grain, Panicum Italicum. {%—Atyantābhāva (˚ta-%}
{%abh˚), as,%} m. absolute non-existence.
<LEND>

<L>892<pc>0016-c<k1>atyantika<k2>atyantika<h>1
1. {%atyantika%}¦ or {%atyantina, as, ā, am,%} going
much or fast or far.
<LEND>

<L>893<pc>0016-c<k1>atyantika<k2>atyantika<h>2
{#atyantika#} 2¦. {%aty-antika, as, ā, am,%} too close,
too near, very close; ({%am%}), n. too great nearness.
<LEND>

<L>894<pc>0016-c<k1>atyaya<k2>atyaya
{#atyaya#}¦ {%aty-aya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%i%} with {%ati,%} see
{%atī%}), passing, lapse, passage; passing away, perishing,
death; danger, risk, evil, suffering; transgression, guilt,
vice; getting at, attacking; overcoming, mastering
(mentally); a class.
<LEND>

<L>895<pc>0016-c<k1>atyayika<k2>atyayika
{%Atyayika%}¦ better {%ātyayika, as, ā, am,%} tempo-
rary, occasional.
<LEND>

<L>896<pc>0016-c<k1>atyayin<k2>atyayin
{%Atyayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ passing, surpassing.
<LEND>

<L>897<pc>0016-c<k1>atyarAti<k2>atyarAti
{#atyarAti#}¦ {%aty-arāti, is,%} m., N. of a son of
Janantapa.
<LEND>

<L>898<pc>0016-c<k1>atyarTa<k2>atyarTa
{#atyarTa#}¦ {%aty-artha, as, ā, am%} (beyond its
proper worth), exorbitant, excessive. {%—Atyartham,%}
ind. excessively, exceedingly.
<LEND>

<L>899<pc>0016-c<k1>atyard<k2>atyard
{#atyard#}¦ {%aty-ard,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ardati, -ditum,%} to
press hard, to distress greatly.
<LEND>

<L>900<pc>0016-c<k1>atyarh<k2>atyarh
{#atyarh#}¦ {%aty-arh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-arhati, -hitum,%} to
excel in worth.
<LEND>

<L>901<pc>0016-c<k1>atyavi<k2>atyavi
{#atyavi#}¦ {%aty-avi, is,%} m., Ved. passing over
or through the strainer, which consisted of sheep's
wool or a sheep's tail (an epithet of Soma).
<LEND>

<L>902<pc>0016-c<k1>atyaS<k2>atyaS
{#atyaS#}¦ {%aty-aś,%} cl. 9. P. {%-aśnāti, -aśitum,%} to
precede in eating.
<LEND>

<L>903<pc>0016-c<k1>atyazwi<k2>atyazwi
{#atyazwi#}¦ {%aty-aṣṭi, is,%} f. a metre of four
lines, each containing seventeen syllables; the number
seventeen. {%—Atyaṣṭi-sāmagrī,%} f. title of a particular
book.
<LEND>
[Page0017-a+ 63]

<L>904<pc>0017-a<k1>atyas<k2>atyas<h>1
{#atyas#} 1¦. {%aty-as (ati-as),%} cl. 2. P. {%-asti,%} to
excel, surpass.
<LEND>

<L>905<pc>0017-a<k1>atyas<k2>atyas<h>2
{#atyas#} 2¦. {%aty-as (ati-as),%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati,%}
{%-situm,%} to shoot beyond or at, overpower (with
arrows).
<LEND>

<L>906<pc>0017-a<k1>atyasta<k2>atyasta
{%Aty-asta, as, ā, am,%}¦ having shot beyond, having
surpassed.
<LEND>

<L>907<pc>0017-a<k1>atyaham<k2>atyaham
{#atyaham#}¦ {%aty-aham,%} surpassing me, (a ficti-
tious word coined by grammarians.)
<LEND>

<L>908<pc>0017-a<k1>atyahna<k2>atyahna
{#atyahna#}¦ {%aty-ahna, as, ā, am,%} exceeding a day
in duration.
<LEND>

<L>909<pc>0017-a<k1>atyAkAra<k2>atyAkAra
{#atyAkAra#}¦ {%aty-ā-kāra, as,%} m. (rt. {%kṛ%}), con-
tempt, blame.
<LEND>

<L>910<pc>0017-a<k1>atyAkram<k2>atyAkram
{#atyAkram#}¦ {%aty-ā-kram (ati-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-krāmati, -kramitum,%} to walk past.
<LEND>

<L>911<pc>0017-a<k1>atyAcAra<k2>atyAcAra
{#atyAcAra#}¦ {%aty-ācāra, as,%} m. performance of
works of supererogation; ({%as, ā, am,%}), negligent of
or departing from the established customs.
<LEND>

<L>912<pc>0017-a<k1>atyAditya<k2>atyAditya
{#atyAditya#}¦ {%aty-āditya, as, ā, am,%} surpassing
the sun.
<LEND>

<L>913<pc>0017-a<k1>atyADAna<k2>atyADAna
{#atyADAna#}¦ {%aty-ā-dhāna, am,%} n. act of im-
posing or placing upon; imposition, deception.
<LEND>

<L>914<pc>0017-a<k1>atyAnandA<k2>atyAnandA
{#atyAnandA#}¦ {%aty-ānandā,%} f. morbid indiffer-
ence (of a wife) to the pleasure of sexual intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>915<pc>0017-a<k1>atyAya<k2>atyAya
{#atyAya#}¦ {%aty-āya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%i%} with {%ati%}),
transgression, excess; ({%as, ā, am%}), going beyond,
transgressing.
<LEND>

<L>916<pc>0017-a<k1>atyAyat<k2>atyAyat
{#atyAyat#}¦ {%aty-ā-yat (ati-ā˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-yatate,%}
{%-titum,%} to make extraordinary efforts.
<LEND>

<L>917<pc>0017-a<k1>atyAla<k2>atyAla
{#atyAla#}¦ {%aty-āla, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
Plumbago Rosea.
<LEND>

<L>918<pc>0017-a<k1>atyASramin<k2>atyASramin
{#atyASramin#}¦ {%aty-āśramin, ī,%} m. (superior to
the four Āśramas), an ascetic of the highest degree.
<LEND>

<L>919<pc>0017-a<k1>atyAsa<k2>atyAsa
{#atyAsa#}¦ {%aty-āsa, as,%} m. act of allowing to
elapse; only used in the acc. as the concluding part of
compound words, thus {%dvyahātyāsam,%} after an in-
terval of two days.
<LEND>

<L>920<pc>0017-a<k1>atyuktA<k2>atyuktA
{#atyuktA#}¦ {%aty-uktā%} or {%aty-ukthā,%} f., N. of a
class of metres of four lines, each containing two
syllables.
<LEND>

<L>921<pc>0017-a<k1>atyukz<k2>atyukz
{#atyukz#}¦ {%aty-ukṣ (ati-ukṣ),%} cl. 1.P. {%-ukṣati,%}
{%-kṣitum,%} to surpass.
<LEND>

<L>922<pc>0017-a<k1>atyutkram<k2>atyutkram
{#atyutkram#}¦ {%aty-ut-kram (ati-ut˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-krāmati, -kramitum,%} to surpass, excel.
<LEND>

<L>923<pc>0017-a<k1>atyupaDa<k2>atyupaDa
{#atyupaDa#}¦ {%aty-upadha, as, ā, am,%} superior to
any test, tried, trustworthy.
<LEND>

<L>924<pc>0017-a<k1>atyuh<k2>atyuh
{#atyuh#}¦ {%aty-uh.%} See {%aty-ūh.%}
<LEND>

<L>925<pc>0017-a<k1>atyUmaSA<k2>atyUmaSA
{#atyUmaSA#}¦ {%aty-ūmaśā,%} ind. (etym. unknown),
particle of abuse, used in comp. with {%as, bhū, kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>926<pc>0017-a<k1>atyUrmi<k2>atyUrmi
{#atyUrmi#}¦ {%aty-ūrmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. overflowing,
bubbling over.
<LEND>

<L>927<pc>0017-a<k1>atyUh<k2>atyUh
{#atyUh#}¦ {%aty-ūh (ati-ūh),%} cl. 1. P. {%ūhati,%}
{%hitum,%} to convey across. Spelt {%aty-uh%} in some
forms.
<LEND>

<L>928<pc>0017-a<k1>atyUha<k2>atyUha
{#atyUha#}¦ {%aty-ūha, as,%} m. close meditation; a
gallinule, a peacock; ({%ā%}), f. a plant, Jasminum Vil-
losum or Nyctanthes Tristis.
<LEND>

<L>929<pc>0017-a<k1>atyfj<k2>atyfj
{#atyfj#}¦ {%aty-ṛj (ati-ṛj),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-arjati,%}
{%-te, -jitum,%} to convey across, admit; to remove.
<LEND>

<L>930<pc>0017-a<k1>atyez<k2>atyez
{#atyez#}¦ {%aty-eṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-eṣati, -ṣitum,%} to
glide over.
<LEND>

<L>931<pc>0017-a<k1>atra<k2>atra<h>1
{#atra#} 1¦. {%a-tra%} or Ved. {%a-trā,%} ind. (fr. pro-
nominal base {%a%} substituted for {%etad;%} the word {%atra%}
[Page0017-b+ 74]
being often used for the loc. case {%etasmin%}), in
this matter, in this respect; in this place, here; at
this time; there; then. {%—Atra-daghna, as, ī, am,%}
reaching so far up, having this (or that) stature.
{%—Atra-bhavat, ān, atī, at,%} honourable (used chiefly
in dramatic language, to indicate a person who is
present).
<LEND>

<L>932<pc>0017-b<k1>atratya<k2>atratya
{%Atratya, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected with this place,
produced or found here.
<LEND>

<L>933<pc>0017-b<k1>atra<k2>atra<h>2
{#atra#} 2¦. {%a-tra, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%trai%}), Ved. not
enjoying (or not affording) protection.
<LEND>

<L>934<pc>0017-b<k1>atra<k2>atra<h>3
{#atra#} 3¦. {%atra, as,%} m. (for {%at-tra,%} fr. rt. {%ad%}),
Ved. a devourer, demon; a Rākṣasa; ({%am%}), n.,
Ved. food.
<LEND>

<L>935<pc>0017-b<k1>atri<k2>atri
{%Atri, is,%}¦ m. (etymologically {%at-tri,%} fr. rt. {%ad%}), a de-
vourer; N. of a great Ṛṣi, author of a number of Vedic
hymns; (in astronomy) one of the seven stars of
the Great Bear. {%—Atrayas,%} pl. m. the descendants of
Atri. {%—Atri-caturaha, as,%} m. (the four days of Atri),
N. of a sacrifice. {%—Atri-jāta, as,%} m. the moon, said to
have been produced by Atri's look; for {%a-tri-jāta,%} see
below. {%—Atri-dṛg-ja, atri-netra-ja%} or {%atri-netra-%}
{%prasūta%} or {%atri-netra-prabhava%} or {%atri-netra-%}
{%sūta, as,%} or {%atri-netra-bhū, ūs,%} m. the moon; (in
arithm.) the number one. {%—Atri-bhāradvājikā,%} f.
marriage of Atri and Bhāradvājī. {%—Atri-vat,%} ind.
like Atri. {%—Atri-saṃhitā, ā,%} or {%atri-smṛti, is,%} f.
the code ascribed to Atri.
<LEND>

<L>936<pc>0017-b<k1>atrin<k2>atrin
{%Atrin, ī,%}¦ m. a devourer, demon; a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>937<pc>0017-b<k1>atrapa<k2>atrapa
{#atrapa#}¦ {%a-trapa, as, ā, am,%} destitute of shame.
<LEND>

<L>938<pc>0017-b<k1>atravas<k2>atravas
{#atravas#}¦ {%atravas,%} ind. (a doubtful word),
the year before last.
<LEND>

<L>939<pc>0017-b<k1>atrasnu<k2>atrasnu
{#atrasnu#}¦ {%a-trasnu, us, us, u,%} or {%a-trāsa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fearless.
<LEND>

<L>940<pc>0017-b<k1>atrijAta<k2>atrijAta
{#atrijAta#}¦ {%a-tri-jāta, as, ā, am,%} (not born
thrice, but twice); a man belonging to one of the
first three classes [for {%atri-jāta,%} see s. v. {%atri%}].
<LEND>

<L>941<pc>0017-b<k1>atrEva<k2>atrEva
{#atrEva#}¦ {%atraiva (atra-eva),%} ind. on this very
spot.
<LEND>

<L>942<pc>0017-b<k1>atvac<k2>atvac
{#atvac#}¦ {%a-tvac, k, k, k,%} skinless.
<LEND>

<L>943<pc>0017-b<k1>atvarA<k2>atvarA
{#atvarA#}¦ {%a-tvarā,%} f. freedom from or absence
of haste.
<LEND>

<L>944<pc>0017-b<k1>aTa<k2>aTa
{#aTa#}¦ {%atha%} or Ved. {%athā,%} ind. (probably fr.
pronom. base {%a%}), an auspicious an inceptive particle,
often not easily expressed in English; now; then;
moreover; rather; certainly; but; else; what? how
else ? &c. {%—Atha-kim,%} ind. how else? what else?
certainly, assuredly, sure enough. {%—Atha-kimu,%} ind.
how much more; so much the more. {%—Atha-ca,%} ind.
moreover, and likewise. {%—Atha-tu,%} ind. but, on the
contrary. {%—Atha-vā,%} ind. or; (when repeated) either
or; or rather; or perhaps; what? is it not so? &c.
{%—Athavāpi (˚vā-api),%} ind. or, rather. {%—Athātas%}
{%(˚tha-at˚),%} ind. now. {%—Athānantaram (˚tha-an˚),%}
ind. now. {%—Athāpi (˚tha-api),%} ind. so much the
more; moreover; therefore; thus.
<LEND>

<L>945<pc>0017-b<k1>aTo<k2>aTo
{%Atho,%}¦ ind. (has much the same meaning as {%atha,%} and
probably the same etymology), now; likewise; next;
therefore. {%—Atho-vā,%} ind. the same as {%atha-vā.%}
<LEND>

<L>946<pc>0017-b<k1>aTari<k2>aTari
{#aTari#}¦ {%athari, is,%} or {%atharī,%} f. (generally in
the plural; etymology doubtful; said to be fr. rt. {%at,%}
to go, or fr. an obsolete rt. {%ath%}), meaning doubtful,
probably spark or flame having a pointed shape;
(according to others) the point of a lance; (according
to others) a finger.
<LEND>

<L>947<pc>0017-b<k1>aTarya<k2>aTarya
{%Atharya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. lambent; moving con-
stantly; or (according to some) pointed like a lance;
or (according to some) shooting forth points like
those of a lance.
<LEND>

<L>948<pc>0017-b<k1>aTarya<k2>aTarya
{%Atharya,%}¦ nom. P. {%atharyati,%} Ved. to move con-
stántly.
<LEND>

<L>949<pc>0017-b<k1>aTaryu<k2>aTaryu
{%Atharyu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= atharya, as.%}
<LEND>

<L>950<pc>0017-b<k1>aTarvan<k2>aTarvan
{#aTarvan#}¦ {%atharvan, ā,%} m. (said to be fr. an
obsolete word {%athar,%} fire), a priest who has to do with
[Page0017-c+ 76]
fire and Soma; a Brāhman; N. of the priest who is said
to have been the first to obtain fire and offer Soma and
prayers: he is represented as a Prajāpati, as Brahmā's
eldest son, as the first learner and earliest teacher of
the Brahma-vidyā, as the author of the Atharva-veda,
as identical with Aṅgiras, as the father of Agni, &c.:
epithet of Śiva, Vaśiṣṭha, Soma, Prāṇa; ({%ā, a%}), m. n.
the fourth or Atharva-veda, consisting chiefly of for-
mulas intended to obviate the effects of any mistake
or untoward incident attending the performance of
a sacrifice. {%—Atharvāṇas,%} pl. m. descendants of
Atharvan, often coupled with those of Aṅgiras and
Bhṛgu; the hymns of the Atharva-veda. {%—Atharva-%}
{%bhūta, ās,%} m. pl. (who have become Atharvans),
epithet of the twelve Maharṣis. {%—Atharva-vat,%} ind.
like Atharvan or his descendants. {%—Atharva-vid, t,%} m.
one versed in the Atharva-veda (a qualification essen-
tial to the special class of priests called Brāhmaṇas).
{%—Atharva-veda, as,%} m., N. of the fourth Veda, which
strictly speaking is not a Veda at all, like the Ṛg,
Yajur, and Sāma-vedas, but a collection of formulas
to avert the consequences of mistakes or mishaps in
sacrifices. {%—Atharva-śikhā,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad.
{%—Atharva-śiras,%} n. = preceding; ({%ās%}), m. an epithet
of Mahāpuruṣa. {%—Atharva-hṛdaya, am,%} n. title of
a Pariśiṣṭa.
<LEND>

<L>951<pc>0017-c<k1>aTarva<k2>aTarva
{%Atharva, as,%}¦ m., N. of Brahmā's eldest son, to
whom he revealed the Brahma-vidyā. See {%atharvan.%}
<LEND>

<L>952<pc>0017-c<k1>aTarvaRa<k2>aTarvaRa
{%Atharvaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>953<pc>0017-c<k1>aTarvaRi<k2>aTarvaRi
{%Atharvaṇi, is,%}¦ better {%ātharvaṇi,%} m. a Brāhman
versed in the Atharva-veda; a family priest.
<LEND>

<L>954<pc>0017-c<k1>aTarvANgiras<k2>aTarvANgiras
{%Atharvāṅgiras (˚va-aṅ˚), ās,%}¦ m. a member of the
sacerdotal race or class called {%Atharvāṅgirasas,%} m.
pl., i. e. the descendants of Atharvan and of Aṅgiras;
this latter word is also a name of the hymns of the
Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>955<pc>0017-c<k1>aTarvANgirasa<k2>aTarvANgirasa
{%Atharvāṅgirasa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the preceding), con-
nected with the sacerdotal class called Atharvāṅgiras;
({%am%}), n. the work or office of the Atharvāṅgiras;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the hymns of the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>956<pc>0017-c<k1>aTarvARa<k2>aTarvARa
{%Atharvāṇa, am,%}¦ n. the work, i. e. ritual of the
Atharva-veda. {%—Atharvāṇa-vid, t,%} m. one versed in
that ritual.
<LEND>

<L>957<pc>0017-c<k1>aTarvI<k2>aTarvI
{%Atharvī,%}¦ f., Ved. (doubtful) not moving (?); pierced
by a lance (?); surrounded by fire (?).
<LEND>

<L>958<pc>0017-c<k1>ad<k2>ad
{#ad#}¦ {%ad,%} cl. 2. P. {%atti, āda, atsyati, attum,%}
to eat, devour; to destroy [cf. Lith. <nsi>edmi;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>jamj</nsi> for <nsi>jadmj;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔδω</lang> Lat. <nsi>edo;</nsi> Goth.
rt. <nsi>AT,</nsi> pres. <nsi>ita;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>essen;</nsi> Eng. to <nsi>eat;</nsi>
Arm. <nsi>utem</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>959<pc>0017-c<k1>ad<k2>ad
{%Ad, t, t, t,%}¦ at the end of compounds, eating; as
{%matsyād, t, t, t,%} eating fish.
<LEND>

<L>960<pc>0017-c<k1>ada<k2>ada
{%Ada%}¦ or {%adaka, as, ā, am,%} eating.
<LEND>

<L>961<pc>0017-c<k1>adat<k2>adat<h>1
1. {%adat, an, atī, at,%}¦ eating. (For {%a-dat,%} see below.)
<LEND>

<L>962<pc>0017-c<k1>adana<k2>adana
{%Adana, am,%}¦ n. act of eating; food.
<LEND>

<L>963<pc>0017-c<k1>adanIya<k2>adanIya
{%Adanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten, what may be eaten.
<LEND>

<L>964<pc>0017-c<k1>attavya<k2>attavya
{%Attavya, atti, attri, adman, adya, advan,%}¦ &c.,
see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>965<pc>0017-c<k1>adakza<k2>adakza
{#adakza#}¦ {%a-dakṣa, as, ā, am,%} not handy,
unskilful, awkward.
<LEND>

<L>966<pc>0017-c<k1>adakziRa<k2>adakziRa
{#adakziRa#}¦ {%a-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} not handy;
not right, left; not giving or bringing in a dakṣiṇā
or present to the priest. {%—Adakṣiṇa-tva, am,%} n.
awkwardness; peculiarity of not bringing in a dakṣiṇā.
{%—Adakṣiṇīya%} or {%adakṣiṇya, as, ā, am,%} not
entitled to a dakṣiṇā.
<LEND>

<L>967<pc>0017-c<k1>adagDa<k2>adagDa
{#adagDa#}¦ {%a-dagdha, as, ā, am,%} not burnt, not
scorched.
<LEND>

<L>968<pc>0017-c<k1>adaRqa<k2>adaRqa
{#adaRqa#}¦ {%a-daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} free from punish-
ment; ({%am%}), n. impunity.
<LEND>

<L>969<pc>0017-c<k1>adaRqya<k2>adaRqya
{%A-daṇḍya%}¦ or {%a-daṇḍanīya, as, ā, am,%} not
deserving punishment; exempt from it.
<LEND>

<L>970<pc>0017-c<k1>adat<k2>adat<h>2
{#adat#} 2¦. {%a-dat, an, atī, at,%} or {%adatka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} toothless. (For {%adat,%} see above.)
<LEND>

<L>971<pc>0017-c<k1>adatta<k2>adatta
{#adatta#}¦ {%a-datta, as, ā, am,%} not given; given
unjustly; not given in marriage; having given nothing;
[Page0018-a+ 72]
({%ā%}), f. an unmarried girl; ({%am%}), n. a donation which
is null and void.
<LEND>

<L>972<pc>0018-a<k1>adattvA<k2>adattvA
{%A-dattvā,%}¦ ind. not having given, without having
given.
<LEND>

<L>973<pc>0018-a<k1>adatrayA<k2>adatrayA
{%A-datrayā,%}¦ ind., Ved. not through a present.
<LEND>

<L>974<pc>0018-a<k1>adadryaYc<k2>adadryaYc
{#adadryaYc#}¦ {%adadry-añc, aṅ, īcī, ak%} (a word
coined by grammarians, fr. {%adas + añc%}), inclining or
going to that.
<LEND>

<L>975<pc>0018-a<k1>adana<k2>adana
{#adana#}¦ {%adana, adanīya.%} See under {%ad.%}
<LEND>

<L>976<pc>0018-a<k1>adanta<k2>adanta<h>1
{#adanta#} 1¦. {%a-danta%} or {%a-dantaka, as, ā, am,%}
toothless; ({%as%}), m. a leech.
<LEND>

<L>977<pc>0018-a<k1>adantya<k2>adantya
{%A-dantya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not suitable for the teeth;
not dental; injurious to the teeth; ({%am%}), n. tooth-
lessness.
<LEND>

<L>978<pc>0018-a<k1>adanta<k2>adanta<h>2
{#adanta#} 2¦. {%ad-anta, as, ā, am,%} (in gram.)
ending in {%at,%} i. e. in the short inherent vowel {%a.%}
<LEND>

<L>979<pc>0018-a<k1>adabDa<k2>adabDa
{#adabDa#}¦ {%a-dabdha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dambh%} or
{%dabh%}), Ved. not deceived or tampered with, unim-
paired, unbroken, pure. {%—Adabdha-dhīti, is, is, i,%}
Ved. whose works are unimpaired. {%—Adabdha-vrata,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. whose devotions or religious observances
are unbroken. {%—Adabdha-vrata-pramati, is,%} m.,
Ved. of unbroken observances and superior mind; of
superior mind from having unbroken observances.
{%—Adabdhāyu (˚dha-āyu), us,%} m., Ved. having un-
impaired vigour or pure food; leaving uninjured the
man who sacrifices. {%—Adabdhāsu (˚dha-asu), us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. having a pure life.
<LEND>

<L>980<pc>0018-a<k1>adaBa<k2>adaBa
{%A-dabha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. free from deceit, unim-
paired.
<LEND>

<L>981<pc>0018-a<k1>adaBra<k2>adaBra
{%A-dabhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ not scanty, plentiful.
<LEND>

<L>982<pc>0018-a<k1>adamBa<k2>adamBa
{%A-dambha, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from deceit, straight-
forward; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; freedom from
or absence of deceit; straightforwardness.
<LEND>

<L>983<pc>0018-a<k1>adamBitva<k2>adamBitva
{%A-dambhi-tva, am,%}¦ n. sincerity.
<LEND>

<L>984<pc>0018-a<k1>adamudryaYc<k2>adamudryaYc
{#adamudryaYc#}¦ {%adamudry-añc, aṅ, īcī, ak,%} in-
clining or going to that. (Like {%adadryañc,%} coined
by grammarians from {%adas + añc%}).
<LEND>

<L>985<pc>0018-a<k1>adamuyaYc<k2>adamuyaYc
{%Adamuy-añc%}¦ or {%adamūy-añc%} = the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>986<pc>0018-a<k1>adamya<k2>adamya
{#adamya#}¦ {%a-damya, as, ā, am,%} untameable.
<LEND>

<L>987<pc>0018-a<k1>adaya<k2>adaya
{#adaya#}¦ {%a-daya, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%day%}), merciless,
unkind; ({%am%}), ind. ardently.
<LEND>

<L>988<pc>0018-a<k1>adayAlu<k2>adayAlu
{%A-dayālu, us, us, u,%}¦ unkind.
<LEND>

<L>989<pc>0018-a<k1>adara<k2>adara
{#adara#}¦ {%a-dara, as, ā, am,%} not little, much.
{%—Adaraka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>990<pc>0018-a<k1>adarSa<k2>adarSa<h>1
{#adarSa#} 1¦. {%a-darśa%} (for {%ā-darśa), as,%} m. a mirror.
<LEND>

<L>991<pc>0018-a<k1>adarSa<k2>adarSa<h>2
{#adarSa#} 2¦. {%a-darśa, as,%} m. day of new moon.
<LEND>

<L>992<pc>0018-a<k1>adarSana<k2>adarSana
{%A-darśana, am,%}¦ n. non-vision, not seeing; dis-
regard, neglect; non-appearance, latent condition,
disappearance; ({%as, ā, am%}), invisible, latent. {%—%}
{%Adarśana-patha, am,%} n. a path beyond the reach
of vision.
<LEND>

<L>993<pc>0018-a<k1>adarSanIya<k2>adarSanIya
{%A-darśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ invisible; ({%am%}), n.
invisible condition.
<LEND>

<L>994<pc>0018-a<k1>adala<k2>adala
{#adala#}¦ {%a-dala, as, ā, am,%} leafless; ({%as%}), m.
a plant, Eugenia (or Barringtonia) Acutangula; ({%ā%}),
f. Socotorine Aloe, a Perfoliata or Indica.
<LEND>

<L>995<pc>0018-a<k1>adaSan<k2>adaSan
{#adaSan#}¦ {%a-daśan, a,%} not ten. {%—A-daśa-%}
{%māsya, as, ā, am,%} not ten months old.
<LEND>

<L>996<pc>0018-a<k1>adas<k2>adas<h>1
{#adas#} 1¦. {%adas,%} m. {%asau,%} f. {%asau,%} n. {%adas,%} pron.
that; a certain. {%—Adas,%} ind. thus, so; ever. {%—Adaḥ-%}
{%kṛtya,%} having done that. {%—Ado-bhavati,%} he becomes
that. {%—Ado-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of that, contain-
ing that. {%—Ado-mūla, as, ā, am,%} rooted in that.
<LEND>

<L>997<pc>0018-a<k1>adasya<k2>adasya
{%Adasya,%}¦ nom. P. {%adasyati,%} to become that.
<LEND>

<L>998<pc>0018-a<k1>adas<k2>adas<h>2
{#adas#} 2¦. {%adas,%} eating, (only at the close of
compound words.)
<LEND>

<L>999<pc>0018-a<k1>adAkziRya<k2>adAkziRya
{#adAkziRya#}¦ {%a-dākṣiṇya, am,%} n. unkindness,
rudeness.
<LEND>

<L>1000<pc>0018-a<k1>adAtf<k2>adAtf
{#adAtf#}¦ {%a-dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} not giving; not
liberal, miserly; not giving (a daughter) in marriage;
not paying, not liable to payment.
<LEND>
[Page0018-b+ 69]

<L>1001<pc>0018-b<k1>adAdi<k2>adAdi
{#adAdi#}¦ {%ad-ādi, is, is, i,%} having {%ad%} at the
head, i. e. belonging to the second class of roots headed
by {%ad.%}
<LEND>

<L>1002<pc>0018-b<k1>adAna<k2>adAna
{#adAna#}¦ {%a-dāna, am,%} n. (rt. {%dā%}), not giving,
act of withholding; ({%as, ā, am,%}), not giving.
<LEND>

<L>1003<pc>0018-b<k1>adAnya<k2>adAnya
{%A-dānya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not giving, miserly.
<LEND>

<L>1004<pc>0018-b<k1>adAman<k2>adAman
{%A-dāman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. not liberal, miserly.
<LEND>

<L>1005<pc>0018-b<k1>adAyin<k2>adAyin
{%A-dāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not giving.
<LEND>

<L>1006<pc>0018-b<k1>adASu<k2>adASu
{%A-dāśu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. or {%a-dāśuri, is,%} m. or
{%a-dāśvas, ān,%} m. not giving, not sacrificing, impious.
<LEND>

<L>1007<pc>0018-b<k1>aditi<k2>aditi<h>1
1. {%a-diti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. having nothing to give, desti-
tution; for 2. {%aditi,%} 3. {%a-diti,%} see below.
<LEND>

<L>1008<pc>0018-b<k1>adAnta<k2>adAnta
{#adAnta#}¦ {%a-dānta, as, ā, am,%} unsubdued.
<LEND>

<L>1009<pc>0018-b<k1>adABya<k2>adABya
{#adABya#}¦ {%a-dābhya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. free from
deceit, trusty; not to be trifled with; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a libation ({%graha%}) in the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>1010<pc>0018-b<k1>adAyAda<k2>adAyAda
{#adAyAda#}¦ {%a-dāyāda, as, ā, am,%} not entitled
to be an heir; destitute of heirs.
<LEND>

<L>1011<pc>0018-b<k1>adAyika<k2>adAyika
{%A-dāyika, as, ī, am,%}¦ unclaimed from want of
persons entitled to inherit; not relating to inheritance.
<LEND>

<L>1012<pc>0018-b<k1>adAra<k2>adAra<h>1
{#adAra#} 1¦. {%a-dāra, as,%} m. having no wife.
<LEND>

<L>1013<pc>0018-b<k1>adAra<k2>adAra<h>2
{#adAra#} 2¦. {%a-dāra, as,%} m. (rt. {%dṝ%}), non-in-
juring. {%—Adāra-sṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. escaping unhurt.
<LEND>

<L>1014<pc>0018-b<k1>adAsa<k2>adAsa
{#adAsa#}¦ {%a-dāsa, as,%} m. (not a slave), a free
man.
<LEND>

<L>1015<pc>0018-b<k1>adAhya<k2>adAhya
{#adAhya#}¦ {%a-dāhya, as, ā, am,%} incombustible.
<LEND>

<L>1016<pc>0018-b<k1>adikka<k2>adikka
{#adikka#}¦ {%a-dikka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having no
share in the horizon, banished from beneath the sky.
<LEND>

<L>1017<pc>0018-b<k1>aditi<k2>aditi<h>2
{#aditi#} 2¦. {%aditi, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ad%}), Ved.
devourer, i. e. death; for 1. {%a-diti,%} see above.
<LEND>

<L>1018<pc>0018-b<k1>aditi<k2>aditi<h>3
{#aditi#} 3¦. {%a-diti, is, is, i%} (rt. 4. {%dā%} or {%do,%}
{%dyati;%} for 1. {%a-diti,%} see above), not tied, free; bound-
less; unbroken, entire, unimpaired; happy; pious; ({%is%}),
f. freedom, security, safety; boundlessness, immensity;
inexhaustible abundance; unimpaired condition, per-
fection; creative power; {%Aditi,%} the mother of the
Ādityas, or of the gods; a cow; a wife; milk; the
earth; speech (as symbols of the above ideas). {%—Aditī,%}
du., Ved. heaven and earth. {%—Aditi-ja%} or {%aditi-%}
{%nandana, as,%} m. a son of Aditi, an Āditya, a divine
being. {%—Aditi-tva, am,%} n. the condition of Aditi, or
of freedom, unbrokenness, &c.
<LEND>

<L>1019<pc>0018-b<k1>aditsat<k2>aditsat
{#aditsat#}¦ {%a-ditsat, an, antī, at,%} or {%a-ditsu,%}
{%us, us, u%} (Desid. fr. rt. {%dā%}), not inclined to give.
<LEND>

<L>1020<pc>0018-b<k1>adipraBfti<k2>adipraBfti
{#adipraBfti#}¦ {%adi-prabhṛti, is,%} m., {%ad%} &c., i. e.
belonging to the second class of roots [cf. {%ad-ādi%}].
<LEND>

<L>1021<pc>0018-b<k1>adIkzita<k2>adIkzita
{#adIkzita#}¦ {%a-dīkṣita, as, ā, am,%} one who
has not performed the consecrating ceremony ({%dīkṣā%})
connected with the Soma sacrifice; one who is not
concerned in that ceremony; one who has not re-
ceived Brāhmanical consecration.
<LEND>

<L>1022<pc>0018-b<k1>adIna<k2>adIna
{#adIna#}¦ {%a-dīna, as, ā, am,%} not depressed;
not low; noble-minded; rich happy; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a prince, also called Ahīna. {%—Adīna-sattva, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} possessing undepressed (or unimpaired) goodness
or mettle. {%—Adīnātman (˚na-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} unde-
pressed in spirit; high-spirited.
<LEND>

<L>1023<pc>0018-b<k1>adIpita<k2>adIpita
{#adIpita#}¦ {%a-dīpita, as, ā, am,%} not illumin-
ated.
<LEND>

<L>1024<pc>0018-b<k1>adIrGa<k2>adIrGa
{#adIrGa#}¦ {%a-dīrgha, as, ā, am,%} not long.
{%—Adīrgha-sūtra, as, ā, am,%} not dilatory, not
tedious, prompt.
<LEND>

<L>1025<pc>0018-b<k1>aduHKa<k2>aduHKa
{#aduHKa#}¦ {%a-duḥkha, as, ā, am,%} (free from evil
or trouble), propitious. {%—Aduḥkha-navamī,%} f. the
propitious ninth day in the first fortnight of Bhādra-
pada, when the women worship Devī to avert evil for
the ensuing year.
<LEND>

<L>1026<pc>0018-b<k1>adugDa<k2>adugDa
{#adugDa#}¦ {%a-dugdha, as, ā, am,%} not milked
out, not sucked out.
<LEND>
[Page0018-c+ 72]

<L>1027<pc>0018-c<k1>aducCuna<k2>aducCuna
{#aducCuna#}¦ {%a-ducchuna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. free
from evil, propitious.
<LEND>

<L>1028<pc>0018-c<k1>adurga<k2>adurga
{#adurga#}¦ {%a-durga, as, ā, am,%} not difficult of
access; destitute of a strong hold or fort. {%—Adurga-%}
{%viṣaya, as,%} m. an unfortified country.
<LEND>

<L>1029<pc>0018-c<k1>adurmaKa<k2>adurmaKa
{#adurmaKa#}¦ {%a-durmakha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
reluctant, unremitting, cheerful.
<LEND>

<L>1030<pc>0018-c<k1>adurmaNgala<k2>adurmaNgala
{#adurmaNgala#}¦ {%a-durmaṅgala, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not inauspicious.
<LEND>

<L>1031<pc>0018-c<k1>adurvftta<k2>adurvftta
{#adurvftta#}¦ {%a-durvṛtta, as, ā, am,%} not of a
bad character or disposition.
<LEND>

<L>1032<pc>0018-c<k1>aduzwa<k2>aduzwa
{#aduzwa#}¦ {%a-duṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} not vitiated, not
bad, not guilty; innocent. {%—Aduṣṭa-tva, am,%} n.
the being not vitiated; innocence.
<LEND>

<L>1033<pc>0018-c<k1>adU<k2>adU
{#adU#}¦ {%a-dū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. dilatory, without
zeal, not worshipping.
<LEND>

<L>1034<pc>0018-c<k1>adUna<k2>adUna
{#adUna#}¦ {%a-dūna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%du%}), uninjured,
unimpaired.
<LEND>

<L>1035<pc>0018-c<k1>adUra<k2>adUra
{#adUra#}¦ {%a-dūra, as, ā, am,%} not distant, near;
({%am%}), n. vicinity. {%—Adūre%} or {%adūrāt%} or {%adūratas,%}
ind. (with abl. or gen.) not far, near; soon. {%—Adūra-%}
{%bhava, as, ā, am,%} situated at no great distance.
<LEND>

<L>1036<pc>0018-c<k1>adUzita<k2>adUzita
{#adUzita#}¦ {%a-dūṣita, as, ā, am,%} unvitiated;
unspotted, irreproachable. {%—Adūṣita-dhī, īs,%} m. pos-
sessing an uncorrupted mind.
<LEND>

<L>1037<pc>0018-c<k1>adfQa<k2>adfQa
{#adfQa#}¦ {%a-dṛḍha, as, ā, am,%} not firm; not
decided, irresolute.
<LEND>

<L>1038<pc>0018-c<k1>adfpita<k2>adfpita
{#adfpita#}¦ {%a-dṛpita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dṛp%}), Ved.
not treated haughtily (?), not thoughtless.
<LEND>

<L>1039<pc>0018-c<k1>adfpta<k2>adfpta
{%Adṛpta, as, a, am,%}¦ Ved. not conceited, not vain.
{%—Adṛpta-kratu, us, us, u,%} having not vain de-
signs; sober-minded.
<LEND>

<L>1040<pc>0018-c<k1>adfpyat<k2>adfpyat
{%Adṛpyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. not conceited.
<LEND>

<L>1041<pc>0018-c<k1>adfS<k2>adfS
{#adfS#}¦ {%a-dṛś, k, k, k%} (rt. {%dṛś%}), sightless,
blind.
<LEND>

<L>1042<pc>0018-c<k1>adfSya<k2>adfSya
{%A-dṛśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ invisible, latent; not fit to
be seen. {%—Adṛśya-karaṇa, am,%} n. act of rendering
invisible; title of a part of a treatise on magic.
<LEND>

<L>1043<pc>0018-c<k1>adfSyat<k2>adfSyat
{%A-dṛśyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ invisible; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
Vasiṣṭha's daughter-in-law.
<LEND>

<L>1044<pc>0018-c<k1>adfzwa<k2>adfzwa
{%A-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ unseen, unforeseen; invisible;
not experienced; unobserved, unknown; unsanction-
ed; ({%as%}), m., Ved., N. of some venomous substance or
vermin; ({%am%}), n. unforeseen danger or calamity; that
which is beyond the reach of observation or conscious-
ness; especially the merit or demerit attaching to a
man's conduct in one state of existence (such as a
former birth), and the corresponding (apparently arbi-
trary) reward or punishment with which he is visited
in another (which may be either the present life or a
future birth); destiny, fate; luck, bad luck. {%—Adṛṣṭa-%}
{%karman, ā, ā, a,%} one who has not seen practice.
{%—Adṛṣṭa-kāma, as,%} m. passionate attachment to
an object that has never been seen. {%—Adṛṣṭa-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced or resulting from fate. {%—Adṛṣṭa-%}
{%nara%} or {%adṛṣṭa-puruṣa, as,%} m. (no third person
or mediator being seen), a treaty concluded by the
parties personally. {%—Adṛṣṭa-para-sāmarthya, as,%}
m. one who has not experienced the power of an
enemy. {%—Adṛṣṭa-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} never seen
before. {%—Adṛṣṭa-phala, as, ā, am,%} having con-
sequences that are not yet visible; ({%am%}), n. result or
consequence which is not yet visible, i. e. hidden in
the future. {%—Adṛṣṭa-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} having an in-
visible shape. {%—Adṛṣṭa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} connected
with or coming from destiny; lucky or unlucky;
fortunate. {%—Adṛṣṭa-han, ā,%} m., Ved. destroyer
of venomous vermin. {%—Adṛṣṭārtha (˚ṭa-ar˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a transcendental object, metaphysical,
having an object not evident to the senses (as a
science). {%—Adṛṣṭāśruta-pūrvatva (˚ṭa-aś˚), am,%}
n. quality of never having been seen or heard before.
<LEND>
[Page0019-a+ 73]

<L>1045<pc>0019-a<k1>adfzwi<k2>adfzwi
{%A-dṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ or {%a-dṛṣṭikā,%} f. a displeased or
malicious look, an evil eye.
<LEND>

<L>1046<pc>0019-a<k1>adeya<k2>adeya
{#adeya#}¦ {%a-deya, as, ā, am,%} improper or unfit
to be given; ({%am%}), n. an object which, in law, it is
either not right or not necessary to give or surrender.
{%—Adeya-dāna, am,%} n. an illegal gift.
<LEND>

<L>1047<pc>0019-a<k1>adeva<k2>adeva
{#adeva#}¦ {%a-deva, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%div%}), not divine,
not of divine origin, not referring to any deity; godless,
impious; ({%as%}), m. one who is not a god. {%—Adeva-%}
{%mātṛka, as, ā, am,%} not having the gods as mothers,
not suckled by any deity, i. e. not rained upon.
<LEND>

<L>1048<pc>0019-a<k1>adevaka<k2>adevaka
{%A-devaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ not referring to or intended
for any deity.
<LEND>

<L>1049<pc>0019-a<k1>adevatA<k2>adevatA
{%A-devatā,%}¦ f. one who is not a deity.
<LEND>

<L>1050<pc>0019-a<k1>adevatra<k2>adevatra
{%A-devatra%}¦ or {%a-devatrā,%} ind., Ved. not towards
the gods.
<LEND>

<L>1051<pc>0019-a<k1>adevayat<k2>adevayat
{%A-devayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ or {%adevayu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. indifferent to the gods, irreligious.
<LEND>

<L>1052<pc>0019-a<k1>adEva<k2>adEva
{%A-daiva, as, ī, am,%}¦ not referring to or connected
with the gods or with their action; not predetermined
by them or by fate.
<LEND>

<L>1053<pc>0019-a<k1>adevfGnI<k2>adevfGnI
{#adevfGnI#}¦ {%a-devṛ-ghnī,%} f., Ved. not de-
structive to her brother-in-law.
<LEND>

<L>1054<pc>0019-a<k1>adeSa<k2>adeSa
{#adeSa#}¦ {%a-deśa, as,%} m. (rt. {%diś%}), a wrong place,
an improper place. {%—A-deśa-kāla, am,%} n. wrong
place and time. {%—Adeśa-ja, as, ā, am,%} grown in a
wrong place. {%—Adeśa-stha, as, ā, am,%} out of place,
in the wrong place, one absent from his country, an
absentee.
<LEND>

<L>1055<pc>0019-a<k1>adeSya<k2>adeSya
{%A-deśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ improper or unfit to be or-
dered or advised or indicated; not on the spot, not
present on the occasion referred to.
<LEND>

<L>1056<pc>0019-a<k1>adomada<k2>adomada
{#adomada#}¦ {%a-doma-da%} or {%a-doma-dha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. not occasioning inconvenience.
<LEND>

<L>1057<pc>0019-a<k1>adomaya<k2>adomaya
{#adomaya#}¦ {%ado-maya,%} &c. See {%adas.%}
<LEND>

<L>1058<pc>0019-a<k1>adoha<k2>adoha
{#adoha#}¦ {%a-doha, as,%} m. (rt. {%duh%}), season when
milking is impracticable.
<LEND>

<L>1059<pc>0019-a<k1>adogDf<k2>adogDf
{%A-dogdhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ%}¦ (not milking), not
exacting; considerate.
<LEND>

<L>1060<pc>0019-a<k1>adga<k2>adga
{#adga#}¦ {%adga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ad%}), a sacrificial
cake, also called {%puroḍāśa;%} (according to others) an
oblation of clarified butter.
<LEND>

<L>1061<pc>0019-a<k1>adw<k2>adw
{#adw#}¦ {%adṭ%} or {#adq#} {%adḍ.%} See. s. v. {%aṭṭ.%}
<LEND>

<L>1062<pc>0019-a<k1>adDA<k2>adDA
{#adDA#}¦ {%ad-dhā,%} ind. (fr. {%ad%} or {%a,%} this),
Ved. in this way; manifestly; certainly, truly. {%—Ad-%}
{%dhā-tamām,%} ind., Ved. most certainly. {%—Addhā-%}
{%puruṣa, as,%} m., Ved. a veritable or true man.
{%—Addhā-bodheya, ās,%} m. pl. adherents of a parti-
cular Śākhā or recension of the white Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>1063<pc>0019-a<k1>adDAti<k2>adDAti
{%Addhāti, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a wise man, a seer.
<LEND>

<L>1064<pc>0019-a<k1>adDyAlohakarRa<k2>adDyAlohakarRa
{#adDyAlohakarRa#}¦ {%addhyā-loha-karṇa, as, ā,%} or
{%ī, am,%} Ved. having ears quite red (?).
<LEND>

<L>1065<pc>0019-a<k1>adButa<k2>adButa
{#adButa#}¦ {%adbhuta, as, ā, am%} (perhaps cor-
rupted from {%ati-bhūta,%} ‘exceeding that which is;’
see 1. {%at%}), transcendental, supernatural, prodigious,
wonderful, marvellous; ({%as%}), m. the marvellous
(in style); surprise; N. of the Indra of the ninth
Manvantara; ({%am%}), n. a marvel, a wonder, a prodigy.
{%—Adbhuta-karman, ā, ā, a,%} performing wonderful
works; exhibiting wonderful workmanship. {%—Adbhu-%}
{%ta-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved. possessing wonderful in-
telligence. {%—Adbhuta-gandha, as, ā, am,%} having a
wonderful smell. {%—Adbhuta-tama, am,%} n. an extra-
ordinary wonder. {%—Adbhuta-tva, am,%} n. wonderful-
ness. {%—Adbhuta-darśana, as, ā, am,%} having a
wonderful aspect. {%—Adbhuta-dharma, as,%} m. a
system or series of marvels or prodigies. {%—Adbhuta-%}
{%brākmaṇa, am,%} title of a portion of a Brāhmaṇa
belonging to the Sāma-veda. {%—Adbhuta-bhīma-%}
{%karman, ā, ā, a,%} performing wonderful and fearful
works. {%—Adbhuta-rasa, as,%} m. the marvellous style
(of poetry). {%—Adbhuta-rāmāyaṇa, am,%} n. title of
a work ascribed to Vālmīki. {%—Adbhuta-rūpa, as, ā%}
[Page0019-b+ 76]
or {%ī, am,%} having a wonderful shape. {%—Adbhuta-%}
{%śānti, is,%} m. or f. (?), N. of the sixty-seventh Pariśiṣṭa
of the Atharva-veda. {%—Adbhuta-saṅkāśa, as, ā, am,%}
resembling a wonder. {%—Adbhuta-sāra, as,%} m. the
wonderful resin (of the Khadira tree, Mimosa
Catechu); title of a book on the “Essence of Prodi-
gies.” {%—Adbhuta-svana, as,%} m. (having a wonderful
sound or voice), a N. of Śiva. {%—Adbhutainas (˚ta-%}
{%en˚), ās, ās, as,%} Ved. one in whom no fault is visible.
{%—Adbhutottarakāṇḍa (˚ta-utt˚), am,%} n., N. of a
work, an appendix to or rather an imitation of the
Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Adbhutopama (˚ta-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
resembling a wonder.
<LEND>

<L>1066<pc>0019-b<k1>adman<k2>adman
{#adman#}¦ {%adman, a,%} n. (fr. rt. {%ad%}), Ved. eating;
a meal; a house. {%—Adma-sad, t,%} m., Ved. seated
(with others) at a meal (?); seated at or busy in the
preparation of a meal (?); a cook (?); a mother (?).
{%—Admasadya, am,%} n., Ved. the condition of an
{%admasad%}. {%—Admasadvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. fit to be
a companion at a meal.
<LEND>

<L>1067<pc>0019-b<k1>admani<k2>admani
{%Admani, is,%}¦ m. fire.
<LEND>

<L>1068<pc>0019-b<k1>admara<k2>admara
{%Admara, as, ā, am,%}¦ gluttonous.
<LEND>

<L>1069<pc>0019-b<k1>adya<k2>adya<h>1
1. {%adya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit or proper to be eaten;
({%am%}), n. food, anything eatable.
<LEND>

<L>1070<pc>0019-b<k1>adya<k2>adya<h>2
{#adya#} 2¦. {%a-dya%} or Ved. {%adyā,%} ind. (fr.
pronom. base {%a,%} this, with {%dya%} for {%dyu,%} Lat. <nsi>ho-die</nsi>),
to-day; now-a-days; now. {%—Adya-dina%} or {%adya-%}
{%divasa, as, am,%} m. n. the present day. {%—Adya-%}
{%pūrvam,%} ind. before now. {%—Adya-prabhṛti,%} ind.
from and after to-day. {%—Adya-śvīna, as, ā, am,%}
likely to happen to-day or ({%śvas%}) to-morrow; ({%ā%}), f.
a female near delivery. {%—Adya-sutyā,%} f. preparation
and consecration of the Soma on the same day.
{%—Adyāpi (˚ya-api%}). ind. even now, just now; to
this day; down to the present time; henceforth.
{%—Adyāvadhi (˚ya-av˚), is, is, i,%} beginning or
ending to-day; from or till to-day. {%—Adyaiva (adya-%}
{%eva),%} ind. this very day.
<LEND>

<L>1071<pc>0019-b<k1>adyatana<k2>adyatana
{%Adyatana, as, ī, am,%}¦ extending over or referring
to to-day; occurring or current to-day or now-a-days,
modern; ({%as%}), m. the period of a current day, either
from midnight to midnight, or from dawn to dark;
({%ī%}), f. (in gram.) the aorist tense from its relating
what has occurred on the same day. {%—Adyatana-%}
{%bhūta, as,%} m. the aorist.
<LEND>

<L>1072<pc>0019-b<k1>adyatanIya<k2>adyatanIya
{%Adyatanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ extending over or refer-
ring to to-day; current now-a-days.
<LEND>

<L>1073<pc>0019-b<k1>adyu<k2>adyu
{#adyu#}¦ {%a-dyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. blunt.
<LEND>

<L>1074<pc>0019-b<k1>adyut<k2>adyut
{#adyut#}¦ {%a-dyut, t, t, t,%} Ved. destitute of
brightness.
<LEND>

<L>1075<pc>0019-b<k1>adyUtya<k2>adyUtya
{#adyUtya#}¦ {%a-dyūtya, am,%} n., Ved. unlucky
gambling; (according to others) the watch just before
the dawn; ({%as, ā, am,%}), not derived from gambling,
honestly obtained.
<LEND>

<L>1076<pc>0019-b<k1>adrava<k2>adrava
{#adrava#}¦ {%a-drava, as, ā, am,%} not liquid.
<LEND>

<L>1077<pc>0019-b<k1>adravya<k2>adravya
{#adravya#}¦ {%a-dravya, am,%} n. a nothing, a
worthless thing.
<LEND>

<L>1078<pc>0019-b<k1>adri<k2>adri
{#adri#}¦ {%adri, is,%} m. (said to be fr, rt. {%ad,%} but
perhaps from {%a%} not, and {%dṝ,%} to split, not liable to be
split), a stone, a rock, a mountain; a stone for pound-
ing Soma with or grinding it on; a stone for a sling,
a thunderbolt; a mountain-shaped mass of clouds; a
cloud (the mountains are the clouds personified, and
regarded as the enemies of Indra); a tree; the sun;
N. of a measure; the number seven; N. of a grandson
of Pṛthu. {%—Adri-karṇī,%} f. a plant, Clitoria Ternatea
Lin. {%—Adri-kīlā,%} f. the earth. {%—Adri-kṛta-sthalī,%}
f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Adri-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced
from or found among rocks or mountains; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a plant, Saiṃhalī; N. of Pārvatī or Durgā;
({%am%}), n. red chalk. {%—Adri-jā, ās,%} m., Ved. produced
from (the friction of) stones. {%—Adri-jūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. excited by (the friction of) stones. {%—Adri-%}
{%tanayā,%} f. the mountain-daughter, i. e. Pārvatī; N.
of a metre of four lines, each containing twenty-three
syllables. {%—Adri-dugdha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. milked,
[Page0019-c+ 76]
i. e. expressed with stones. {%—Adri-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. the
enemy of mountains or clouds, i. e. Indra. {%—Adri-%}
{%nandinī,%} f., N. of Pārvatī. {%—Adri-pati, is,%} m. the
Himālaya as the lord of mountains. {%—Adri-barhas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. mountain-high. {%—Adri-budhna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. rooted in or produced on a rock or
mountain. {%—Adri-bhid, t, t, t,%} Ved. splitting mountains
or clouds; ({%t%}), m., N. of Indra. {%—Adri-bhū, ūs, ūs,%}
{%u,%} mountain-born, found or living among mountains;
({%ūs%}), f. a plant. probably Salvinia Cucullata. {%—Adri-%}
{%mātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} Ved. having a rock or moun-
tain for a mother. {%—Adri-mūrdhan, ā,%} m. the head
or summit of a mountain. {%—Adri-rāj, ṭ,%} or {%adri-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. Himālaya as the king of mountains.
{%—Adri-vat, ān,%} voc. {%as,%} m., Ved. armed with
stones or thunderbolts. {%—Adri-vahni, is,%} m. fire on
or in a mountain or rock. {%—Adri-śayya, as,%} m. having
the mountain for his couch, i. e. Śiva. {%—Adri-śṛṅga,%}
{%am,%} n. a mountain-peak. {%—Adri-ṣuta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. prepared with stones. {%—Adri-saṃhata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. expressed with stones. {%—Adri-sānu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. lingering on the mountains. {%—Adri-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m. essence of stones, i. e. iron. {%—Adri-%}
{%sāra-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of iron. {%—Adrīndra%}
{%(˚dri-in˚)%} or {%adrīsa (˚dri-īś˚), as,%} m. the lord of
mountains, i. e. Himālaya.
<LEND>

<L>1079<pc>0019-c<k1>adrikA<k2>adrikA
{%Adrikā,%}¦ f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>1080<pc>0019-c<k1>adruh<k2>adruh
{#adruh#}¦ {%a-druh, dhruk, k, k,%} or {%adruhvan, ā,%}
{%ā, a%} (rt. {%druh%}), Ved. free from malice or treachery.
<LEND>

<L>1081<pc>0019-c<k1>adroGa<k2>adroGa
{%A-drogha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. free from falsehood,
true; ({%am%}), ind. without falsehood. {%—Adrogha-vāc,%}
{%k, k, k,%} Ved. free from malice or treachery in speech.
{%—Adroghāvita (˚gha-av˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. loving
freedom from malice or treachery.
<LEND>

<L>1082<pc>0019-c<k1>adroha<k2>adroha
{%A-droha, as,%}¦ m. freedom from malice or treachery.
{%—Adroha-vṛtti, is,%} f. conduct free from malice or
treachery.
<LEND>

<L>1083<pc>0019-c<k1>adrohin<k2>adrohin
{%A-drohin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ free from malice or treachery.
<LEND>

<L>1084<pc>0019-c<k1>advan<k2>advan
{#advan#}¦ {%advan, ā, ā, a%} (fr. rt. {%ad%}), eating;
(used at the end of compound words.)
<LEND>

<L>1085<pc>0019-c<k1>advaya<k2>advaya
{#advaya#}¦ {%a-dvaya, as, ā, am,%} not two, without
a second, only, unique; ({%as%}), m., N. of Buddha;
({%am%}), n. non-duality, unity; identity, especially the
identity of Brahma with the universe or with the
soul, or of spirit and matter; the ultimate truth.
{%—Advaya-vādin%} or {%advaita-vādin, ī,%} m. Buddha;
a Jaina; one who teaches {%advaya%} or identity.
{%—Advayānanda (˚ya-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of an
author, and of a founder of the Vaiṣṇava sect in
Bengal, who lived at the close of the fifteenth century.
<LEND>

<L>1086<pc>0019-c<k1>advayat<k2>advayat
{%A-dvayat, an,%}¦ or {%a-dvayas, ās,%} m., Ved. free from
duplicity.
<LEND>

<L>1087<pc>0019-c<k1>advayAvin<k2>advayAvin
{%A-dvayāvin, ī,%}¦ or {%a-dvayu, us,%} m., Ved. free
from double dealing or duplicity.
<LEND>

<L>1088<pc>0019-c<k1>advAra<k2>advAra
{#advAra#}¦ {%a-dvāra, am,%} n. a place without a
door; an entrance which is not the proper door.
<LEND>

<L>1089<pc>0019-c<k1>advija<k2>advija
{#advija#}¦ {%a-dvija, as, ā, am,%} destitute of
Brāhmans.
<LEND>

<L>1090<pc>0019-c<k1>advitIya<k2>advitIya
{#advitIya#}¦ {%a-dvitīya, as, ā, am,%} without a
second, sole, unique; matchless.
<LEND>

<L>1091<pc>0019-c<k1>advizeRya<k2>advizeRya
{#advizeRya#}¦ {%a-dviṣeṇya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dviṣ%}),
Ved. not to be disliked; not malevolent.
<LEND>

<L>1092<pc>0019-c<k1>adveza<k2>adveza
{%A-dveṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not malevolent. {%—A-%}
{%dveṣa-rāgin, ī, iṇī, i,%} free from malevolence and
passionate desire.
<LEND>

<L>1093<pc>0019-c<k1>advezas<k2>advezas
{%Adveṣas,%}¦ ind., Ved. without malevolence, without
opposition.
<LEND>

<L>1094<pc>0019-c<k1>advezin<k2>advezin
{%Adveṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ free from malevolence.
<LEND>

<L>1095<pc>0019-c<k1>advezwf<k2>advezwf
{%Adveṣṭṛ, ā,%}¦ m. not an enemy; a friend.
<LEND>

<L>1096<pc>0019-c<k1>advEta<k2>advEta
{#advEta#}¦ {%a-dvaita, as, ā, am,%} destitute of
duality, having no duplicate; peerless; sole, unique;
epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n. non-duality; identity,
especially the identity of Brahma with the universe
or with the soul, or of spirit and matter; the
ultimate truth; title of an Upaniṣad. {%—Advaitena,%}
ind. solely. {%—Advaitānanada (˚ta-ān˚), as,%} m. {%= %}
[Page0020-a+ 76]
{%advayānanda,%} q. v. {%—Advaitopaniṣad (˚ta-up˚),%}
{%t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>1097<pc>0020-a<k1>aDa<k2>aDa
{#aDa#}¦ {%adha%} or {%adhā,%} ind., Ved. (much the
same as {%atha,%} used chiefly as an inceptive particle),
now; then, therefore; moreover, so much the more;
and, partly. {%—Adha-adha, as%} well as, partly-partly.
{%—Adha-priya, as, ā, am,%} or {%adha-prī, īs, īs, i,%}
Ved. pleased or glad then.
<LEND>

<L>1098<pc>0020-a<k1>aDaH<k2>aDaH
{#aDaH#}¦ {%adhaḥ,%} &c. See {#aDas.#}
<LEND>

<L>1099<pc>0020-a<k1>aDana<k2>aDana
{#aDana#}¦ {%a-dhana, as, ā, am,%} destitute of
wealth or property.
<LEND>

<L>1100<pc>0020-a<k1>aDanya<k2>aDanya
{%A-dhanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not richly supplied with corn
or other produce; not prosperous; unhappy, wretched.
<LEND>

<L>1101<pc>0020-a<k1>aDama<k2>aDama
{#aDama#}¦ {%adhama, as, ā, am%} (see etymology of
{%adhara%}), lowest, vilest, worst; very low or vile or
bad; often used at the close of comp., as in {%narā-%}
{%dhama,%} the vilest or worst of men; ({%as%}), an un-
blushing paramour; ({%ā%}), a low or bad mistress [cf. Lat.
<nsi>infimus</nsi>]. {%—Adhama-bhṛta%} or {%adhama-bhṛtaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a servant of the lowest class, a porter.
{%—Adhamarṇa (˚ma-ṛ˚), as,%} or {%adhamarṇika,%}
{%as,%} m. one reduced to inferiority by debt, a debtor.
{%—Adhama-śākha, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), N.
of a region. {%—Adhamāṅga (˚ma-aṅ˚), am,%} n. (the
lowest member), the foot. {%—Adhamācāra (˚ma-āc˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} guilty of vile conduct. {%—Adhamārdha%}
{%(˚ma-ar˚), am,%} n. the lower half, the lower part.
{%—Adhamārdhya, as, ā, am,%} connected with or
referring to the lower part.
<LEND>

<L>1102<pc>0020-a<k1>aDamarRA<k2>aDamarRA
{#aDamarRA, aDamarRika#}¦, &c. See above, under
{%adhama.%}
<LEND>

<L>1103<pc>0020-a<k1>aDara<k2>aDara
{#aDara#}¦ {%adhara, as, ā, am%} (said to come
from {%adhas%} or from a base {%adh,%} whence {%adhas%}
may be derived), lower, inferior; tending down-
wards; low, vile; worsted, silenced; prior; ({%as%}),
m. the lower lip, the lip; ({%ā%}), f. the lower re-
gion, nadir; ({%am%}), n. the lower part; a reply;
Pudendum Muliebre [Ossetic, {%dalag;%} Goth. <nsi>dala-</nsi>
<nsi>thrô;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>inferus</nsi>]. {%—Adhara-tas%} or {%adhara-%}
{%stāt%} or {%adharasmāt%} or {%adharāt%} or {%adhareṇa,%} ind.
below, beneath; in the lower region. {%—Adhara-%}
{%kaṇṭha, as, am,%} m. n. the lower neck. {%—Adhara-%}
{%kāya, as,%} m. the lower part of the body. {%—Adhara-%}
{%pāna, am,%} n. drinking the lower lip, kissing.
{%—Adhara-madhu, u,%} n. the moisture of the lips.
{%—Adhara-svastika, am,%} n. the nadir. {%—Adharā-%}
{%mṛta (˚ra-am˚), am,%} n. the nectar of the lips.
{%—Adharāraṇi (˚ra-ar˚), is,%} f., Ved. the lower of
the two pieces of wood used in producing fire by
friction. {%—Adharāvalopa (˚ra-av˚), as,%} m. biting
the lip. {%—Adharottara (˚ra-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} lower
and higher; worse and better; question and answer;
nearer and further; sooner and later; upside down,
topsy-turvy. {%—Adharoṣṭha%} or {%adharauṣṭha (˚ra-%}
{%oṣ˚), as,%} m. the lower lip; ({%am%}), n. the lower and
upper lip.
<LEND>

<L>1104<pc>0020-a<k1>aDarAk<k2>aDarAk
{%Adharāk,%}¦ ind. beneath, in the lower region.
<LEND>

<L>1105<pc>0020-a<k1>aDarAcIna<k2>aDarAcIna
{%Adharācīna%}¦ or {%adharācya, as, ā, am,%} or
{%adharāñc āṅ, ācī, āk,%} Ved. tending downwards, to
the nadir or the lower region, tending towards the
south (or west ?).
<LEND>

<L>1106<pc>0020-a<k1>aDarAttAt<k2>aDarAttAt
{%Adharāttāt,%}¦ ind., Ved. below, beneath.
<LEND>

<L>1107<pc>0020-a<k1>aDarIkfta<k2>aDarIkfta
{%Adharī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ worsted; invalidated.
<LEND>

<L>1108<pc>0020-a<k1>aDarIRa<k2>aDarIRa
{%Adharīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ vilified.
<LEND>

<L>1109<pc>0020-a<k1>aDarIBUta<k2>aDarIBUta
{%Adharī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ worsted; invalidated.
<LEND>

<L>1110<pc>0020-a<k1>aDaredyus<k2>aDaredyus
{%Adhare-dyus,%}¦ ind. the day before yesterday; on a
previous day.
<LEND>

<L>1111<pc>0020-a<k1>aDareya<k2>aDareya
{%Adhareya, as, ā, am,%}¦ inferior in quality or worth.
<LEND>

<L>1112<pc>0020-a<k1>aDarma<k2>aDarma
{#aDarma#}¦ {%a-dharma, as,%} m. unrighteousness,
injustice, irreligion, wickedness; demerit, guilt; N. of
a Prajāpati, son of Brahmā, husband of Hiṃsā or
Mṛṣā; N. of an attendant of the sun; ({%ā%}), f. un-
righteousness personified and represented as the bride
of death. {%—Adharma-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} practising
wickedness. {%—Adharma-tas,%} ind. unrighteously, un-
justly. {%—Adharma-daṇḍana, am,%} n. unjust punish-
[Page0020-b+ 80]
ment. {%—Adharma-maya, as, ī, am,%} made up of
wickedness; downright wicked. {%—Adharmātman%}
{%(˚ma-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having a wicked spirit or dis-
position. {%—Adharmāstikāya (˚ma-as˚), as,%} m. the
category ({%astikāya%}) of {%adharma.%}
<LEND>

<L>1113<pc>0020-b<k1>aDarmin<k2>aDarmin
{%Adharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ unrighteous, wicked, impious.
<LEND>

<L>1114<pc>0020-b<k1>aDarmizWa<k2>aDarmizWa
{%Adharmiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ most wicked, impious.
<LEND>

<L>1115<pc>0020-b<k1>aDarmya<k2>aDarmya
{%Adharmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unlawful, contrary to law
or religion, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>1116<pc>0020-b<k1>aDavA<k2>aDavA
{#aDavA#}¦ {%a-dhavā,%} f. a widow (usually {%vi-%}
{%dhavā,%} without a husband).
<LEND>

<L>1117<pc>0020-b<k1>aDas<k2>aDas
{#aDas#}¦ {%adhas,%} ind. (said to come from {%adh,%}
see {%adhara%}), below, down; in the lower region;
beneath, under; from under (with acc., gen., and abl.);
also applied to the lower region and to the Pudendum
Muliebre [cf. Lat. <nsi>infra</nsi>]. {%—Adhas-taram,%} ind. very
far down. {%—Adha-upāsana, am,%} n. sexual inter-
course. {%—Adhaḥ-kara, as,%} m. the lower part of the
hand. {%—Adhaḥ-kāya, as,%} m. the lower part of the body.
{%—Adhaḥ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} put down, cast down.
{%—Adhaḥ-kṛṣṇājinam (˚ṇa-aj˚),%} ind. under the
black skin. {%—Adhaḥ-khanana, am,%} n. undermin-
ing. {%—Adhaḥ-padma, am,%} n. (in architecture) a cer-
tain part of the cupola. {%—Adhaḥ-pāta, as,%} m. a down-
fall. {%—Adhaḥ-puṣpī,%} f. (having flowers looking
downwards), N. of two plants, Pimpinella Anisum
and Elephantopus Scaber (or Hieracium ?). {%—Adhaḥ-%}
{%pravāha, as,%} m. a downward current. {%—Adhaḥ-%}
{%prastara, as,%} m. seat or bed of turf or grass for
person in a state of impurity. {%—Adhaḥ-prāṅ-śāyin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} sleeping on the ground, towards the east.
{%—Adhaś-cara, as,%} m. a thief (‘creeping on the
ground’). {%—Adhaḥ-śaya, as, ā, am,%} sleeping on the
ground. {%—Adhaḥ-śayya, as, ā, am,%} having a pecu-
liar couch on the ground; ({%ā%}), f. act of sleeping on
the ground and on a peculiar couch. {%—Adhaḥ-śiras,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} holding the head downward; head fore-
most; ({%as%}), n., N. of a hell. {%—Adhas-tala, am,%} n.
the room below anything. {%—Adhas-pada, am,%} n.
the place under the feet. {%—Adhaspadam,%} ind. under
foot. {%—Adhaḥ-stha, as, ā, am,%} placed low or below;
inferior. {%—Adhaḥ-sthita, as, ā, am,%} standing below;
situated below. {%—Adhaḥ-svastika, am,%} n. the nadir.
{%—Adho-'ṃśuka, am,%} n. a lower garment. {%—Adho-%}
{%'kṣa%} or {%adho-akṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (situated) below
the axle or under a car; ({%am%}), ind. under the axle.
{%—Adho-'kṣa-ja, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu or
Kṛṣṇa; the sign Śravaṇā. {%—Adho-gaṇṭā,%} f. a plant,
Achyranthes Aspera. {%—Adho-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone
down, descended. {%—Adho-gati, is,%} f. or {%adho-gama, as,%}
m. or {%adho-gamana, am,%} n. descent, downward move-
ment, degradation. {%—Adho-gati, is, is, i,%} going down-
wards, descending. {%—Adho-gāmin, ī, inī, i%} = preced-
ing. {%—Adho-ghaṇṭā,%} f. a plant, Achyranthes Aspera.
{%—Adho-'ṅga, am,%} n. the anus, Pudendum Muli-
ebre. {%—Adho-jānu,%} ind. below the knee. {%—Adho-%}
{%jihvikā,%} f. the uvula. {%—Adho-dāru, u,%} n. the under
timber. {%—Adho-diś, k,%} f. the lower region, the nadir.
{%—Adho-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. a downcast look; ({%is, is, i%}),
having a downcast look. {%—Adho-deśa, as,%} m. the
lower or lowest part, especially of the body. {%—Adho-%}
{%dvāra, am,%} n. the anus, Pudendum Muliebre.
{%—Adho-nābham,%} ind. below the navel. {%—Adho-%}
{%'para, am,%} n. the anus. {%—Adhopahāsa (˚dhas-up˚),%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. sexual intercourse. {%—Adho-bandhana,%}
{%am,%} n. an under girth. {%—Adho-bhakta, am,%} n. a
dose of medicine to be taken after eating. {%—Adho-%}
{%bhava, as, ā, am,%} lower. {%—Adho-bhāga, as,%} m. the
lower or lowest part, especially of the body. {%—Adho-%}
{%bhāga-doṣa-hara, as, ā, am,%} curing or strengthen-
ing the lower part of the body. {%—Adho-bhuvana,%}
{%am,%} n. the lower world. {%—Adho-bhūmi, is,%} f. lower
ground; land at the foot of a hill. {%—Adho-marman,%}
{%a,%} n. the anus. {%—Adho-mukha, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} having
the face downwards; headlong; upside down; ({%as%}),
m. Viṣṇu; ({%ā%}), f. a plant, Premna Esculenta; ({%am%}),
n. a division of hell. {%—Adho-yantra, am,%} n. the
lower part of an apparatus; a still. {%—Adho-rakta-%}
{%pitta, am,%} n. discharge of blood from the anus and the
urethra. {%—Adho-rāma, as,%} m., Ved. (a goat) having
[Page0020-c+ 74]
peculiar white or black marks on the lower part of
the body. {%—Adho-lāmba, as,%} m. a plummet; the
perpendicular; ({%as%}), m. the lower world. {%—Adho-%}
{%vadana, as, ā, am,%} the same as {%adho-mukha.%}
{%—Adho-varcas, ās, ās, as,%} powerful in the lower
regions. {%—Adho-vaśa, as,%} m. the bottom, Pudendum
Muliebre. {%—Adho-vāyu, us,%} m. vital air passing down-
wards; flatulency. {%—Adho-'vekṣi (adhas + ava +%}
{%īkṣin),%} looking down. {%—Adho-'śra-pitta,%} see {%adho-%}
{%raktapitta%}. {%—Adho-'śvam,%} ind. under the horse.
<LEND>

<L>1118<pc>0020-c<k1>aDastana<k2>aDastana
{%Adhastana, as, ī, am,%}¦ lower, being underneath.
<LEND>

<L>1119<pc>0020-c<k1>aDastAt<k2>aDastAt
{%Adhastāt,%}¦ ind. the same as {%adhas,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>1120<pc>0020-c<k1>aDastAddiS<k2>aDastAddiS
{%Adhastād-diś, k,%}¦ f. the lower region, the nadir.
<LEND>

<L>1121<pc>0020-c<k1>aDA<k2>aDA
{#aDA#}¦ {%adhā,%} Ved. See {%adha.%}
<LEND>

<L>1122<pc>0020-c<k1>aDAmArgava<k2>aDAmArgava
{#aDAmArgava#}¦ {%adhāmārgava, as,%} m. a plant,
Achyranthes Aspera.
<LEND>

<L>1123<pc>0020-c<k1>aDAraRaka<k2>aDAraRaka
{#aDAraRaka#}¦ {%a-dhāraṇaka, as, ā, am,%} unable
to support, unremunerative.
<LEND>

<L>1124<pc>0020-c<k1>aDArmika<k2>aDArmika
{#aDArmika#}¦ {%a-dhārmika, as, ī, am,%} unjust,
unrighteous, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>1125<pc>0020-c<k1>aDArya<k2>aDArya
{#aDArya#}¦ {%a-dhārya, as, ā, am,%} unfit or improper
to be held or carried or kept up.
<LEND>

<L>1126<pc>0020-c<k1>aDi<k2>aDi<h>1
{#aDi#} 1¦. {%adhi, is,%} m. (better {#ADi#}, q. v.),
anxiety, perplexity; f. a woman in her courses.
<LEND>

<L>1127<pc>0020-c<k1>aDi<k2>aDi<h>2
{#aDi#} 2¦. {%adhi,%} ind., as a prefix to verbs and
nouns, expresses above, over and above, besides.
<div n="P"/>As a separable adverb or preposition; (with abl.)
Ved. over; from above; from; from the presence of;
for; (with gen.) Ved. among; (with loc.) Ved.
over; on; at; subject to; (with acc.) over, upon,
concerning. {%—Adhy-adhi,%} ind. on high, just above.
<LEND>

<L>1128<pc>0020-c<k1>aDika<k2>aDika
{%Adhika, as, ā, am,%}¦ additional; subsequent, later;
surpassing (in number or quantity or quality), superior,
more numerous; abundant; excellent; supernumerary,
redundant; secondary, inferior; intercalated; ({%am%}),
n. surplus; abundance; redundancy; hyperbole: ind.
exceedingly; too much; more. {%—Adhikaṃ-tu,%} more-
over. {%—Adhika-kṣaya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} causing
excessive waste. {%—Adhika-tā,%} f. or {%adhika-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. addition, excess, redundancy, preponderance.
{%—Adhika-tithi, is,%} m. f. an intercalary lunar day.
{%—Adhika-danta%} or {%adhi-danta, as,%} m. a redun-
dant tooth which grows over another. {%—Adhika-dina%}
or {%adhi-dina, am,%} n. an intercalated day. {%—Adhika-%}
{%māṃsārman (˚sa-ar˚), a,%} n. proud flesh in the eye;
see {%adhimāṃsa%}. {%—Adhika-māsa, as,%} m. an inter-
calated month. {%—Adhikarddhi (˚ka-ṛd˚), is, is, i,%}
abundantly prosperous. {%—Adhika-vākyokti (˚kya-%}
{%uk˚), is,%} f. exaggeration, hyperbole. {%—Adhika-ṣā-%}
{%ṣṭika, as, ī, am,%} (containing or costing) more than
sixty. {%—Adhika-saṃvatsara, as,%} m. an intercalated
month. {%—Adhika-sāptatika, as, ī, am%} (containing or
costing) more than seventy. {%—Adhikāṅga (˚ka-aṅ˚),%}
{%as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} having some redundant member or
members; ({%am%}), n. belt worn over the coat of mail.
{%—Adhikādhika (˚kha-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} outdoing
one another. {%—Adhikārtha (˚ka-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
exaggerated. {%—Adhikārtha-vacana, am,%} n. exagger-
ation, hyperbole,
<LEND>

<L>1129<pc>0020-c<k1>aDikarmakara<k2>aDikarmakara
{#aDikarmakara#}¦ {%adhi-karmakara, as,%} m. or
{%adhi-karmakṛt, t,%} m. an overseer of workmen.
<LEND>

<L>1130<pc>0020-c<k1>aDikalpin<k2>aDikalpin
{#aDikalpin#}¦ {%adhi-kalpin, ī,%} m., Ved. a
sharp gambler.
<LEND>

<L>1131<pc>0020-c<k1>aDikArma<k2>aDikArma
{#aDikArma#}¦ {%adhi-kārma, am,%} n., N. of some
place unknown.
<LEND>

<L>1132<pc>0020-c<k1>aDikf<k2>aDikf
{#aDikf#}¦ {%adhi-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%}
to place at the head, appoint; to aim at, regard;
to refer or allude to; to superintend, be at the head
of: A. {%-kurute,%} to be or become entitled to; to be
or become superior to.
<LEND>

<L>1133<pc>0020-c<k1>aDikaraRa<k2>aDikaraRa
{%Adhi-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of placing at the
head or of subordinating government, supremacy,
magistracy, court of justice; a receptacle, sup-
port; a claim; a topic, subject; (in philosophy) a
[Page0021-a+ 77]
substratum; a subject (e. g. {%ātmā%} is the {%adhi-karaṇa%}
of knowledge); a category; a relation; (in grammar)
regimen, government, comprehension, location, the
sense of the locative case; relationship of words in a
sentence, which agree together, either as adjective and
substantive, or as subject and predicate, or as two sub-
stantives in apposition; (in rhetoric) a topic; a para-
graph or minor section; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. one who has to
superintend. {%—Adhikaraṇa-bhojaka, as,%} m. a judge.
{%—Adhikaraṇa-maṇḍapa, as, am,%} m. n. the hall
of justice. {%—Adhikaraṇa-siddhānta, as,%} m. a syl-
logism or conclusion which involves others. {%—Adhi-%}
{%karaṇaitāvattva (˚ṇa-et˚), am,%} n. fixed quantity of
a substratum.
<LEND>

<L>1134<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikaraRika<k2>aDikaraRika
{%Adhi-karaṇika%}¦ or better {%ādhikaraṇika, as,%} m.
a government official; a judge or magistrate.
<LEND>

<L>1135<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikaraRya<k2>aDikaraRya
{%Adhi-karaṇya, am,%}¦ n. authority, power.
<LEND>

<L>1136<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikarman<k2>aDikarman
{%Adhi-karman, a,%}¦ n. superintendence. {%—Adhi-%}
{%karmakṛt%} or {%adhi-karmakara,%} see s. v. {%—Adhi-%}
{%karma-kṛta, as,%} m. person appointed to superin-
tend an establishment.
<LEND>

<L>1137<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikarmika<k2>aDikarmika
{%Adhikarmika, as,%}¦ m. the overseer of a market.
<LEND>

<L>1138<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikAra<k2>aDikAra
{%Adhi-kāra, as,%}¦ m. authority; office; government,
rule, administration, jurisdiction; royalty, prerogative;
title; rank; claim, right, especially to perform sacri-
fices with benefit; privilege; ownership; possession;
property; reference, relation; exertion, effort; a topic,
subject; a paragraph or minor section; (in grammar)
government; a heading-rule; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. having
much to superintend. {%—Adhikāra-stha, as, ā, am,%}
established in an office. {%—Adhikārāḍhya (˚ra-āḍha˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} invested with authority.
<LEND>

<L>1139<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikArin<k2>aDikArin
{%Adhi-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ possessing authority; en-
titled to; fit for; ({%ī%}), m. a superintendent, governor;
an official; a rightful claimant; a proprietor, master;
one possessing the right of sacrificing; a man pro-
ficient in the Vedānta; man as the lord of creation.
{%—Adhikāri-tva, am,%} n. or {%adhikāri-tā,%} f. author-
ity; rightful claim; ownership, &c.
<LEND>

<L>1140<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikfta<k2>aDikfta
{%Adhi-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed at the head of;
appointed; ruled, administered; claimed; ({%as%}), m.
a superintendent, especially a comptroller of public
accounts. {%—Adhikṛta-tva, am,%} n. the being engaged
in or occupied with.
<LEND>

<L>1141<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikfti<k2>aDikfti
{%Adhi-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. a right, privilege; possession.
<LEND>

<L>1142<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikftya<k2>aDikftya
{%Adhi-kṛtya,%}¦ ind. having placed at the head, having
made the chief subject; regarding; concerning; with
reference to.
<LEND>

<L>1143<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikram<k2>aDikram
{#aDikram#}¦ {%adhi-kram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-kramitum,%} to ascend, mount up to; to attack, scale.
<LEND>

<L>1144<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikrama<k2>aDikrama
{%Adhi-krama, as,%}¦ m. an invasion, attack.
<LEND>

<L>1145<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikramaRa<k2>aDikramaRa
{%Adhi-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. act of invading or scaling.
<LEND>

<L>1146<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikzi<k2>aDikzi
{#aDikzi#}¦ {%adhi-kṣi,%} cl. 6. or cl. 1. P., Ved.
{%-kṣiyati%} or {%-kṣeti, -kṣetum,%} to be settled in or
over, rest upon; to inhabit, to obtain; (occasionally
{%adhi-kṣip%} occurs for this rt. by mistake.)
<LEND>

<L>1147<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikzit<k2>aDikzit
{#aDikzit#}¦ {%adhi-kṣit, t,%} m., Ved. a lord,
ruler (fr. rt. 2. {%kṣi%} and not fr. {%adhi-kṣi%} above).
<LEND>

<L>1148<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikzip<k2>aDikzip
{#aDikzip#}¦ {%adhi-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṣipati,%}
{%-kṣeptum,%} to lay upon; to bespatter; to insult, abuse,
scold; to superinduce (disease); (occasionally this rt.
appears to be used by mistake for {%adhi-kṣi,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>1149<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikzipadabjanetra<k2>aDikzipadabjanetra
{%Adhikṣipad-abja-netra, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} having
eyes which eclipse the lotus.
<LEND>

<L>1150<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikzipta<k2>aDikzipta
{%Adhi-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ insulted; scolded;
thrown down; placed, fixed; despatched.
<LEND>

<L>1151<pc>0021-a<k1>aDikzepa<k2>aDikzepa
{%Adhi-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. abuse, contempt; dismissal.
<LEND>

<L>1152<pc>0021-a<k1>aDigaR<k2>aDigaR
{#aDigaR#}¦ {%adhi-gaṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-gaṇayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to enumerate, to value highly.
<LEND>

<L>1153<pc>0021-a<k1>aDigam<k2>aDigam
{#aDigam#}¦ {%adhi-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go up to, approach, overtake; to have
sexual intercourse with; to fall in with; to meet,
find, discover, obtain; to accomplish; to study, read:
Desid. P. {%adhi-jigamiṣati,%} to seek; A. {%adhi-%}
{%jigāṃsate,%} to be desirous of studying or reading.
<LEND>

<L>1154<pc>0021-a<k1>aDigata<k2>aDigata
{%Adhi-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ found, obtained, acquired;
gone, over, studied, learnt.
<LEND>
[Page0021-b+ 67]

<L>1155<pc>0021-b<k1>aDigantavya<k2>aDigantavya
{%Adhi-gantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ attainable.
<LEND>

<L>1156<pc>0021-b<k1>aDigantf<k2>aDigantf
{%Adhi-gantṛ, t, ā,%}¦ m. one who attains or acquires.
<LEND>

<L>1157<pc>0021-b<k1>aDigama<k2>aDigama
{%Adhi-gama, as,%}¦ m. the act of attaining, acquisi-
tion; acquirement, mastery, study, knowledge; mer-
cantile return, profit, &c.
<LEND>

<L>1158<pc>0021-b<k1>aDigamana<k2>aDigamana
{%Adhi-gamana, am,%}¦ n. acquisition; finding; ac-
quirement, reading, study; marriage, copulation.
<LEND>

<L>1159<pc>0021-b<k1>aDigamanIya<k2>aDigamanIya
{%Adhi-gamanīya%}¦ or {%adhi-gamya, as, ā, am,%}
attainable, practicable to be learnt.
<LEND>

<L>1160<pc>0021-b<k1>aDigartya<k2>aDigartya
{#aDigartya#}¦ {%adhi-gartya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
(found) on the driver's seat.
<LEND>

<L>1161<pc>0021-b<k1>aDigava<k2>aDigava
{#aDigava#}¦ {%adhi-gava, as, ī, am,%} Ved. (found)
on or in a cow, derived from a cow.
<LEND>

<L>1162<pc>0021-b<k1>aDigA<k2>aDigA
{#aDigA#}¦ {%adhi-gā,%} cl. 2. P. A. or cl. 3. P.
{%-gāti, -te, -jigāti, -gātum,%} to fall in with, obtain; to
notice, to go over, learn, read, study, remember;
to attempt, resolve: Caus. P. {%adhi-gāpayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to go over or teach: Desid. of the Caus.
{%adhi-jigāpayiṣati,%} to be desirous of teaching.
<LEND>

<L>1163<pc>0021-b<k1>aDiguRa<k2>aDiguRa
{#aDiguRa#}¦ {%adhi-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} possessing
superior qualities.
<LEND>

<L>1164<pc>0021-b<k1>aDigupta<k2>aDigupta
{#aDigupta#}¦ {%adhi-gupta, as, ā, am,%} protected,
guarded.
<LEND>

<L>1165<pc>0021-b<k1>aDicaNkrama<k2>aDicaNkrama
{#aDicaNkrama#}¦ {%adhi-caṅkrama, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
walking or creeping over something.
<LEND>

<L>1166<pc>0021-b<k1>aDicar<k2>aDicar
{#aDicar#}¦ {%adhi-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -ritum,%}
to walk or move on or over something.
<LEND>

<L>1167<pc>0021-b<k1>aDicaraRa<k2>aDicaraRa
{%Adhi-caraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of walking or mov-
ing or being on or over something.
<LEND>

<L>1168<pc>0021-b<k1>aDici<k2>aDici
{#aDici#}¦ {%adhi-ci,%} cl. 5. P. {%-cinoti, -cetum,%}
to pile or build upon.
<LEND>

<L>1169<pc>0021-b<k1>aDijan<k2>aDijan
{#aDijan#}¦ {%adhi-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate, -janitum,%}
to be born.
<LEND>

<L>1170<pc>0021-b<k1>aDija<k2>aDija
{%Adhi-ja, as, ā, am,%}¦ born, superior by birth.
<LEND>

<L>1171<pc>0021-b<k1>aDijanana<k2>aDijanana
{%Adhi-janana, am,%}¦ n. birth.
<LEND>

<L>1172<pc>0021-b<k1>aDijAnu<k2>aDijAnu
{#aDijAnu#}¦ {%adhi-jānu,%} ind. on the knees.
<LEND>

<L>1173<pc>0021-b<k1>aDiji<k2>aDiji
{#aDiji#}¦ {%adhi-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%} to
win in addition, conquer.
<LEND>

<L>1174<pc>0021-b<k1>aDijihva<k2>aDijihva
{#aDijihva#}¦ {%adhi-jihva, as,%} m. or {%adhi-%}
{%jihvikā,%} f. a peculiar swelling of the tongue or
epiglottis.
<LEND>

<L>1175<pc>0021-b<k1>aDijya<k2>aDijya
{#aDijya#}¦ {%adhi-jya, as, ā, am,%} having the
bowstring ({%jyā%}) up or stretched, i. e. strung.
<LEND>

<L>1176<pc>0021-b<k1>aDijyotizam<k2>aDijyotizam
{#aDijyotizam#}¦ {%adhi-jyotiṣam,%} ind. on the
subject of light or the mundane luminaries (a chapter
in the Upaniṣads).
<LEND>

<L>1177<pc>0021-b<k1>aDitizWati<k2>aDitizWati
{#aDitizWati#}¦ {%adhi-tiṣṭhati.%} See {#aDizWA.#}
<LEND>

<L>1178<pc>0021-b<k1>aDitya<k2>aDitya
{#aDitya#}¦ {%adhitya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%adhi%}), being
above.
<LEND>

<L>1179<pc>0021-b<k1>aDityakA<k2>aDityakA
{%Adhityakā,%}¦ f. land on the upper part of a moun-
tain, table land.
<LEND>

<L>1180<pc>0021-b<k1>aDidaRqanetf<k2>aDidaRqanetf
{#aDidaRqanetf#}¦ {%adhi-daṇḍa-netṛ, tā,%} m. (ruler
appointed to punish), epithet of Yama.
<LEND>

<L>1181<pc>0021-b<k1>aDidanta<k2>aDidanta
{#aDidanta#}¦ {%adhi-danta, as,%} m. a redundant
tooth which grows over another.
<LEND>

<L>1182<pc>0021-b<k1>aDidArva<k2>aDidArva
{#aDidArva#}¦ {%adhi-dārva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dāru%}),
wooden.
<LEND>

<L>1183<pc>0021-b<k1>aDidina<k2>aDidina
{#aDidina#}¦ {%adhi-dina, am,%} n. an intercalated
day.
<LEND>

<L>1184<pc>0021-b<k1>aDideva<k2>aDideva
{#aDideva#}¦ {%adhi-deva, as,%} m. or {%adhi-devatā,%}
f. a presiding or tutelary deity. {%—Adhi-devam%} or
{%adhi-devatam,%} ind. concerning the gods or the deity.
<LEND>

<L>1185<pc>0021-b<k1>aDidevana<k2>aDidevana
{#aDidevana#}¦ {%adhi-devana, am,%} n., Ved. part of
the house allotted to gambling; the table or board
for gambling.
<LEND>

<L>1186<pc>0021-b<k1>aDidEva<k2>aDidEva
{#aDidEva#}¦ {%adhi-daiva%} or {%adhi-daivata, am,%} n,
a presiding or tutelary deity; the supreme deity; the
[Page0021-c+ 67]
divine agent operating in material objects. {%—Adhi-%}
{%daivam%} or {%adhidaivatam,%} ind. on the subject of
the deity or the divine agent.
<LEND>

<L>1187<pc>0021-c<k1>aDidEvika<k2>aDidEvika
{%Adhi-daivika, as, ī, am,%}¦ spiritual.
<LEND>

<L>1188<pc>0021-c<k1>aDiDA<k2>aDiDA
{#aDiDA#}¦ {%adhi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadhāti, -dhātum,%}
to give, present; A. {%-dhatte,%} to acquire additionally.
<LEND>

<L>1189<pc>0021-c<k1>aDiDf<k2>aDiDf
{#aDiDf#}¦ {%adhi-dhṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-dhārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to carry over or across.
<LEND>

<L>1190<pc>0021-c<k1>aDinATa<k2>aDinATa
{#aDinATa#}¦ {%adhi-nātha, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the Kālayoga-śāstra.
<LEND>

<L>1191<pc>0021-c<k1>aDiniDA<k2>aDiniDA
{#aDiniDA#}¦ {%adhi-ni-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhātum,%} to deposit, impart.
<LEND>

<L>1192<pc>0021-c<k1>aDinirRij<k2>aDinirRij
{#aDinirRij#}¦ {%adhi-nirṇij, k, k, k,%} Ved. veiled.
<LEND>

<L>1193<pc>0021-c<k1>aDinivas<k2>aDinivas
{#aDinivas#}¦ {%adhi-ni-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati,%}
{%-vastum,%} to dwell.
<LEND>

<L>1194<pc>0021-c<k1>aDinI<k2>aDinI
{#aDinI#}¦ {%adhi-nī,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -netum,%}
to lead away from (with abl.); to raise above the
ordinary measure, enhance.
<LEND>

<L>1195<pc>0021-c<k1>aDinft<k2>aDinft
{#aDinft#}¦ {%adhi-nṛt,%} cl. 4. P. {%-nṛtyati,%}
{%-nartitum,%} to dance upon (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>1196<pc>0021-c<k1>aDipa<k2>aDipa
{#aDipa#}¦ {%adhi-pa, as,%} m. a ruler, commander,
regent, king.
<LEND>

<L>1197<pc>0021-c<k1>aDipati<k2>aDipati
{%Adhi-pati, is,%}¦ m. same as {%adhi-pa,%} (in medic.)
a particular part of the head, where a wound proves
instantly fatal. {%—Adhipati-vatī,%} f., Ved., N. given to
certain female divinities.
<LEND>

<L>1198<pc>0021-c<k1>aDipatnI<k2>aDipatnI
{%Adhi-patnī,%}¦ f. a female sovereign or ruler.
<LEND>

<L>1199<pc>0021-c<k1>aDipA<k2>aDipA
{%Adhi-pā, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. a ruler, king, sovereign.
<LEND>

<L>1200<pc>0021-c<k1>aDipaTam<k2>aDipaTam
{#aDipaTam#}¦ {%adhi-patham,%} ind. over or across
a road.
<LEND>

<L>1201<pc>0021-c<k1>aDipAMSula<k2>aDipAMSula
{#aDipAMSula#}¦ {%adhi-pāṃśula, as, ā, am,%} become
dusty from above; dusty. Also {%adhi-pāṃsula.%}
<LEND>

<L>1202<pc>0021-c<k1>aDipuruza<k2>aDipuruza
{#aDipuruza#}¦ {%adhi-puruṣa, as,%} m. the su-
preme spirit.
<LEND>

<L>1203<pc>0021-c<k1>aDipU<k2>aDipU
{#aDipU#}¦ {%adhi-pū,%} cl. 9. P., Ved. {%-punāti,%}
{%-pavitum,%} to besprinkle, to sprinkle.
<LEND>

<L>1204<pc>0021-c<k1>aDipUtaBftam<k2>aDipUtaBftam
{#aDipUtaBftam#}¦ {%adhi-pūta-bhṛtam,%} ind., Ved.
over the (vessel) full of purified Soma.
<LEND>

<L>1205<pc>0021-c<k1>aDipezaRa<k2>aDipezaRa
{#aDipezaRa#}¦ {%adhi-peṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} serving
to pound or grind upon.
<LEND>

<L>1206<pc>0021-c<k1>aDiprajam<k2>aDiprajam
{#aDiprajam#}¦ {%adhi-prajam,%} ind. on the subject
of procreation as a means of preserving the world (a
chapter in the Upaniṣads).
<LEND>

<L>1207<pc>0021-c<k1>aDiprazwiyuga<k2>aDiprazwiyuga
{#aDiprazwiyuga#}¦ {%adhi-praṣṭi-yuga, am,%} n. yoke
laid upon the {%praṣṭi%} or foremost of three horses,
used on certain sacrificial occasions, to which a fourth
horse could be attached; ({%as%}), m. the fourth horse
thus attached (?).
<LEND>

<L>1208<pc>0021-c<k1>aDibAD<k2>aDibAD
{#aDibAD#}¦ {%adhi-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate,%}
{%-dhitum,%} to vex, annoy.
<LEND>

<L>1209<pc>0021-c<k1>aDibrU<k2>aDibrU
{#aDibrU#}¦ {%adhi-brū,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bravīti, -vaktum,%}
to give orders to.
<LEND>

<L>1210<pc>0021-c<k1>aDiBuj<k2>aDiBuj
{#aDiBuj#}¦ {%adhi-bhuj,%} cl. 7. A. {%-bhuṅkte,%}
{%-bhoktum,%} to enjoy.
<LEND>

<L>1211<pc>0021-c<k1>aDiBU<k2>aDiBU
{#aDiBU#}¦ {%adhi-bhū, ūs,%} m. (rt. {%bhū%} with {%adhi%}),
a master, a superior.
<LEND>

<L>1212<pc>0021-c<k1>aDiBUta<k2>aDiBUta
{%Adhi-bhūta, am,%}¦ n. the spiritual or fine substratum
of material or gross objects; the all-penetrating in-
fluence of the supreme spirit; the supreme spirit
himself; nature. {%—Adhi-bhūtam,%} ind. on the subject
of material objects (a chapter in the Upainṣads).
<LEND>

<L>1213<pc>0021-c<k1>aDiBOtika<k2>aDiBOtika
{%Adhi-bhautika%}¦ (better {%ādhibhautika,%} q. v.), {%as,%}
{%ī, am,%} natural (?).
<LEND>

<L>1214<pc>0021-c<k1>aDiBojana<k2>aDiBojana
{#aDiBojana#}¦ {%adhi-bhojana, am,%} n. an addi-
tional gift.
<LEND>

<L>1215<pc>0021-c<k1>aDimanTa<k2>aDimanTa
{#aDimanTa#}¦ {%adhi-mantha%} or {%adhī-mantha, as,%}
m. (churning of the eyes), severe ophthalmia.
<LEND>
[Page0022-a+ 72]

<L>1216<pc>0022-a<k1>aDimanTana<k2>aDimanTana
{%Adhi-manthana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. friction for pro-
ducing fire; ({%as, ā, am%}), suitable for such friction
(as wood).
<LEND>

<L>1217<pc>0022-a<k1>aDimanTita<k2>aDimanTita
{%Adhi-manthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ suffering from oph-
thalmia.
<LEND>

<L>1218<pc>0022-a<k1>aDimAMsa<k2>aDimAMsa
{#aDimAMsa#}¦ {%adhi-māṃsa%} or {%adhi-māṃsaka, as,%}
m. proud flesh or cancer, especially in the eyes or
the back part of the gums. {%—Adhimāṃsārman (˚sa-%}
{%ar˚), a,%} n. ophthalmic disease produced by proud
flesh or cancer.
<LEND>

<L>1219<pc>0022-a<k1>aDimAtra<k2>aDimAtra
{#aDimAtra#}¦ {%adhi-mātra, as, ā, am,%} past or
above measure, excessive; ({%am%}), ind. on the subject
of prosody. {%—Adhimātra-kāruṇika, as,%} m. (ex-
ceedingly merciful), N. of a Mahā-brāhmaṇa among
the Buddhists.
<LEND>

<L>1220<pc>0022-a<k1>aDimAsa<k2>aDimAsa
{#aDimAsa#}¦ {%adhi-māsa, as,%} m. an intercalary
month.
<LEND>

<L>1221<pc>0022-a<k1>aDimukti<k2>aDimukti
{#aDimukti#}¦ {%adhi-mukti, is,%} f. (with Buddhists)
intuition (?); implicit faith (?). {%—Adhimukti-sāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} wholly given to intuition or to implicit
faith (?).
<LEND>

<L>1222<pc>0022-a<k1>aDimuktika<k2>aDimuktika
{%Adhi-muktika, as,%}¦ m. (with Buddhists) an epi-
thet of Mahā-kāla.
<LEND>

<L>1223<pc>0022-a<k1>aDimuhya<k2>aDimuhya
{#aDimuhya#}¦ {%adhi-muhya, as,%} m., N. of Śākya-
muni in one of his thirty-four former births.
<LEND>

<L>1224<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiyajYa<k2>aDiyajYa
{#aDiyajYa#}¦ {%adhi-yajña, as,%} m. the chief or
principal sacrifice; influence or agency affecting a
sacrifice; ({%as, ā, am%}), relating to a sacrifice; ({%am%}),
ind. on the subject of sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>1225<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiyat<k2>aDiyat
{#aDiyat#}¦ {%adhi-yat,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%-yatate,%}
{%-titum,%} to fasten, fix, stick.
<LEND>

<L>1226<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiyam<k2>aDiyam
{#aDiyam#}¦ {%adhi-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati,%}
{%-yantum,%} to give, present.
<LEND>

<L>1227<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiyA<k2>aDiyA
{#aDiyA#}¦ {%adhi-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%} to
escape.
<LEND>

<L>1228<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiyANga<k2>aDiyANga
{#aDiyANga#}¦ {%adhiyāṅga, am,%} n. a redundant
limb; (better {%adhikāṅga.%})
<LEND>

<L>1229<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiyoDa<k2>aDiyoDa
{#aDiyoDa#}¦ {%adhi-yodha, as,%} m. a warrior who
fights in the first lines (?).
<LEND>

<L>1230<pc>0022-a<k1>aDirajju<k2>aDirajju
{#aDirajju#}¦ {%adhi-rajju, us, us, u,%} Ved. carrying
a rope, fastening, fettering.
<LEND>

<L>1231<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiraTa<k2>aDiraTa
{#aDiraTa#}¦ {%adhi-ratha, as, ā, am,%} being upon
or over a car; ({%as%}), m. a charioteer; N. of a
charioteer who was a prince of Aṅga and Karṇa's
foster-father; ({%am%}), n. a cart-load.
<LEND>

<L>1232<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiraTi<k2>aDiraTi
{%Adhi-rathi, is,%}¦ m. (various reading for {%uda-rathi%}),
the sun (?); the sea (?).
<LEND>

<L>1233<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiraTyam<k2>aDiraTyam
{%Adhi-rathyam,%}¦ ind. on the high road.
<LEND>

<L>1234<pc>0022-a<k1>aDirAj<k2>aDirAj
{#aDirAj#}¦ {%adhi-rāj, ṭ,%} m. a supreme king,
emperor.
<LEND>

<L>1235<pc>0022-a<k1>aDirAja<k2>aDirAja
{%Adhi-rāja, as,%}¦ or {%adhi-rājan, ā,%} m. an emperor.
<LEND>

<L>1236<pc>0022-a<k1>aDirAjya<k2>aDirAjya
{%Adhi-rājya%}¦ or {%adhi-rāṣṭra, am,%} n. supremacy,
imperial dignity; an empire; N. of a country.
{%—Adhirājya-bhāj, k,%} m. possessor of imperial dig-
nity.
<LEND>

<L>1237<pc>0022-a<k1>aDirukma<k2>aDirukma
{#aDirukma#}¦ {%adhi-rukma, as, ā, am,%} wearing
gold.
<LEND>

<L>1238<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiruh<k2>aDiruh
{#aDiruh#}¦ {%adhi-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. or poet. A.
{%adhi-rohati, -te, -roḍhum,%} to rise above, to ascend,
mount: Caus. {%-ropayati, -yitum,%} to raise, place above.
<LEND>

<L>1239<pc>0022-a<k1>aDirUQa<k2>aDirUQa
{%Adhi-rūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ ascended, mounted.
{%—Adhirūḍha-samādhi-yoga, as, ā, am,%} engaged
in profound meditation.
<LEND>

<L>1240<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiropaRa<k2>aDiropaRa
{%Adhi-ropaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of raising or causing
to mount.
<LEND>

<L>1241<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiropita<k2>aDiropita
{%Adhi-ropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, placed above.
<LEND>

<L>1242<pc>0022-a<k1>aDiroha<k2>aDiroha
{%Adhi-roha, as,%}¦ m. ascent, mounting, overtopping.
<LEND>

<L>1243<pc>0022-a<k1>aDirohaRa<k2>aDirohaRa
{%Adhi-rohaṇa, am,%}¦ n. act of ascending or mounting
or rising above; ({%ī%}), f. a ladder, flight of steps.
<LEND>

<L>1244<pc>0022-a<k1>aDirohin<k2>aDirohin
{%Adhi-rohin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ rising above, ascending, &c.;
({%iṇī%}), f. a ladder, flight of steps.
<LEND>

<L>1245<pc>0022-a<k1>aDilokam<k2>aDilokam
{#aDilokam#}¦ {%adhi-lokam,%} ind. on the subject
[Page0022-b+ 73]
of the universe (a chapter in the Upaniṣads). {%—Adhi-%}
{%loka-nātha, as,%} m. lord of the universe.
<LEND>

<L>1246<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivac<k2>aDivac
{#aDivac#}¦ {%adhi-vac,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-vakti, -vak-%}
{%tum,%} to speak in favour of; to advocate; to side with.
<LEND>

<L>1247<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivaktf<k2>aDivaktf
{%Adhi-vaktṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. an advocate; a com-
forter; an orator.
<LEND>

<L>1248<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivacana<k2>aDivacana
{%Adhi-vacana, am,%}¦ n. advocacy; speaking in favour
of; an appellation, epithet.
<LEND>

<L>1249<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAka<k2>aDivAka
{%Adhi-vāka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. advocacy, protection.
<LEND>

<L>1250<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivap<k2>aDivap
{#aDivap#}¦ {%adhi-vap,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%-vapate,%}
{%-vaptum,%} to put on; to shatter.
<LEND>

<L>1251<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivas<k2>aDivas<h>1
{#aDivas#} 1¦. {%adhi-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati,%}
{%-vastum,%} to inhabit; to settle or perch upon.
<LEND>

<L>1252<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAsa<k2>aDivAsa<h>1
1. {%adhi-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. an inhabitant, a neighbour;
one who dwells above; a habitation, abode, settle-
ment, site; sitting before a person's house without
taking food till he ceases to oppose or refuse a demand,
commonly called ‘sitting in dharṇā;’ pertinacity; (for
2. 3. {%adhi-vāsa,%} see below.) {%—Adhivāsa-bhūmi, is,%}
f. a dwelling-place, settlement.
<LEND>

<L>1253<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAsana<k2>aDivAsana<h>1
1. {%adhi-vāsana, am,%}¦ n. act of causing the divinity
to take up its abode in an image; sitting in dharṇā
[cf. s. v. {%adhi-vāsa%} above]. (For 2. {%adhi-vāsana,%}
see below.)
<LEND>

<L>1254<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAsin<k2>aDivAsin
{%Adhi-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ inhabiting, settled in.
{%—Adhivāsi-tā,%} f. settled residence.
<LEND>

<L>1255<pc>0022-b<k1>aDyuzita<k2>aDyuzita
{%Adhy-uṣita,%}¦ see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>1256<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivas<k2>aDivas<h>2
{#aDivas#} 2¦. {%adhi-vas,%} cl. 2. A. {%-vaste,%}
{%-vasitum,%} to put on or over (as clothes &c.).
<LEND>

<L>1257<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivastra<k2>aDivastra
{%Adhi-vastra, as, ā, am,%}¦ clothed.
<LEND>

<L>1258<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAsa<k2>aDivAsa<h>2
2. {%adhi-vāsa%}¦ or {%adhī-vāsa, as,%} m. an upper gar-
ment, mantle.
<LEND>

<L>1259<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAsita<k2>aDivAsita<h>1
1. {%adhi-vāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ invested with, clothed
with; see also s. v. {%adhi-vās%} below.
<LEND>

<L>1260<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAjya<k2>aDivAjya
{#aDivAjya#}¦ {%adhi-vājya, am,%} n., N. of a
country; correctly {%adhi-rājya.%}
<LEND>

<L>1261<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAs<k2>aDivAs
{#aDivAs#}¦ {%adhi-vās,%} cl. 10. P. {%-vāsayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to scent, perfume.
<LEND>

<L>1262<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAsa<k2>aDivAsa<h>3
3. {%adhi-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. application of perfumes or
fragrant cosmetics. (For. 1. 2. {%adhi-vāsa,%} see above.)
<LEND>

<L>1263<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAsana<k2>aDivAsana<h>2
2. {%adhi-vāsana, am,%}¦ n. application of perfumes,
&c.; touching a vessel containing fragrant objects, that
have been presented to an idol, as a ceremony; pre-
liminary purification of the image.
<LEND>

<L>1264<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAsita<k2>aDivAsita<h>2
2. {%adhi-vāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ scented.
<LEND>

<L>1265<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivAhana<k2>aDivAhana
{#aDivAhana#}¦ {%adhi-vāhana, as,%} m., N. of a
man, said to be a son of Aṅga.
<LEND>

<L>1266<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivikartana<k2>aDivikartana
{#aDivikartana#}¦ {%adhi-vi-kartana, am,%} n. the
act of cutting off.
<LEND>

<L>1267<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivikram<k2>aDivikram
{#aDivikram#}¦ {%adhi-vi-kram,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kramate,%}
{%-mitum,%} to step forth towards or for some one.
<LEND>

<L>1268<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivid<k2>aDivid
{#aDivid#}¦ {%adhi-vid,%} cl. 6. P. {%-vindati,%}
{%-veditum,%} to obtain; to marry in addition to.
<LEND>

<L>1269<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivinnA<k2>aDivinnA
{%Adhi-vinnā,%}¦ f. a wife whose husband has married
again; a neglected or superseded wife.
<LEND>

<L>1270<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivettavyA<k2>aDivettavyA
{%Adhi-vettavyā%}¦ or {%adhi-vedanīyā%} or {%adhi-vedyā,%}
f. a wife in addition to whom it is proper to marry
another.
<LEND>

<L>1271<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivettf<k2>aDivettf
{%Adhi-vettṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a husband who marries an
additional wife.
<LEND>

<L>1272<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivedana<k2>aDivedana
{%Adhi-vedana, am,%}¦ n. marrying an additional wife.
<LEND>

<L>1273<pc>0022-b<k1>aDividyam<k2>aDividyam
{#aDividyam#}¦ {%adhi-vidyam,%} ind. on the sub-
ject of science (a chapter in the Upaniṣads).
<LEND>

<L>1274<pc>0022-b<k1>aDivedam<k2>aDivedam
{#aDivedam#}¦ {%adhi-vedam,%} ind. concerning the
Veda.
<LEND>

<L>1275<pc>0022-b<k1>aDiSI<k2>aDiSI
{#aDiSI#}¦ {%adhi-śī,%} cl. 2. A. {%-śete, -śayitum,%}
to lie down upon, to lie upon, to sleep upon.
<LEND>

<L>1276<pc>0022-b<k1>aDiSayana<k2>aDiSayana
{%Adhi-śayana, as, ā, am,%}¦ lying on, sleeping on.
<LEND>

<L>1277<pc>0022-b<k1>aDiSayita<k2>aDiSayita
{%Adhi-śayita, as, ā, am,%}¦ recumbent upon; used
for lying or sleeping upon.
<LEND>

<L>1278<pc>0022-b<k1>aDiSri<k2>aDiSri
{#aDiSri#}¦ {%adhi-śri,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śrayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. {%-śrayitavai,%} to ascend; to put on fire, make hot.
<LEND>

<L>1279<pc>0022-b<k1>aDiSraya<k2>aDiSraya
{%Adhi-śraya, as,%}¦ m. a receptacle.
<LEND>
[Page0022-c+ 74]

<L>1280<pc>0022-c<k1>aDiSrayaRa<k2>aDiSrayaRa
{%Adhi-śrayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. act or ceremony of putting
(a kettle) on the fire; ({%ī%}), f. a fire-place, oven.
{%—Adhi-śrayaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to or con-
nected with the Adhi-śrayaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>1281<pc>0022-c<k1>aDiSrita<k2>aDiSrita
{%Adhi-śrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ put on the fire (as a pot).
<LEND>

<L>1282<pc>0022-c<k1>aDizavaRa<k2>aDizavaRa
{#aDizavaRa#}¦ {%adhi-ṣavaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%su%}
with {%adhi%}), Ved. hand-press for extracting and strain-
ing the Soma juice; ({%as, ā, am%}), used for extracting
and straining the Soma juice.
<LEND>

<L>1283<pc>0022-c<k1>aDizWA<k2>aDizWA
{#aDizWA#}¦ {%adhi-ṣṭhā (adhi-sthā),%} cl. 1. P. or
poet. A. {%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -ṣṭhātum,%} to stand upon,
depend; to inhabit, abide; to be, stand; to super-
intend, govern; to step over or across; to overcome;
to ascend, mount.
<LEND>

<L>1284<pc>0022-c<k1>aDizWAtf<k2>aDizWAtf
{%Adhi-ṣṭhātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ superintending, presid-
ing, governing, tutelary; ({%ā%}), m. a ruler; especially
the supreme ruler, or Providence personified and
identified with one or another of the Hindū gods;
a chief; a protector.
<LEND>

<L>1285<pc>0022-c<k1>aDizWAna<k2>aDizWAna
{%Adhi-ṣṭhāna, am,%}¦ n. standing by, being at hand,
approach; standing or resting upon; a basis, base;
a wheel (as the basis of a car); a position, site, re-
sidence, abode, seat; a settlement, town; government,
authority, power, dominion; a precedent, rule; a
benediction. {%—Adhiṣṭhāna-śarīra, am,%} n. (in
Sāṅkhya phil.) a body which forms the medium
between the subtle and the gross body.
<LEND>

<L>1286<pc>0022-c<k1>aDizWAyaka<k2>aDizWAyaka
{%Adhi-ṣṭhāyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ governing, super-
intending, guarding.
<LEND>

<L>1287<pc>0022-c<k1>aDizWita<k2>aDizWita
{%Adhi-ṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ settled; inhabited; super-
intended; regulated; appointed; superintending.
<LEND>

<L>1288<pc>0022-c<k1>aDistri<k2>aDistri
{#aDistri#}¦ {%adhi-stri,%} ind. concerning a wo-
man or a wife. {%—Adhi-strī,%} f. a superior or distin-
guished woman.
<LEND>

<L>1289<pc>0022-c<k1>aDihari<k2>aDihari
{#aDihari#}¦ {%adhi-hari,%} ind. concerning Hari.
<LEND>

<L>1290<pc>0022-c<k1>aDI<k2>aDI
{#aDI#}¦ {%adhī (adhi-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%adhy-eti, -tum,%}
to meet with, attain, notice, observe, understand; to
mind, remember, care for, long for; to know, know
by heart; to go over; study, learn, read, recite, de-
clare; A. {%adhīte,%} to study, learn by heart, read,
recite, declare: Caus. P. {%adhy-āpayati, -yitum,%} to
make one read or study, teach, instruct; Desid. of the
Caus. {%adhy-āpipayiṣati,%} to be desirous of teaching:
Desid. {%adhīṣiṣati,%} to be desirous of teaching.
<LEND>

<L>1291<pc>0022-c<k1>aDIta<k2>aDIta
{%Adhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ attained; studied, read; well
read, learned. {%—Adhīta-veda, as,%} m. one who has
studied the Vedas or whose studies are finished.
<LEND>

<L>1292<pc>0022-c<k1>aDIti<k2>aDIti
{%Adhīti, is,%}¦ f. perusal, study; Ved. desire, recollection.
<LEND>

<L>1293<pc>0022-c<k1>aDItin<k2>aDItin
{%Adhītin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ well read, proficient.
<LEND>

<L>1294<pc>0022-c<k1>aDItya<k2>aDItya
{%Adhītya,%}¦ ind. having gone over, having studied.
<LEND>

<L>1295<pc>0022-c<k1>aDIyat<k2>aDIyat
{%Adhīyat, an, atī, at,%}¦ remembering, proficient study.
<LEND>

<L>1296<pc>0022-c<k1>aDIyAna<k2>aDIyAna
{%Adhīyāna, as,%}¦ m. a student; one who goes over
the Veda either as a student or a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>1297<pc>0022-c<k1>aDyayana<k2>aDyayana
{%Adhy-ayana, adhy-āpaka, adhy-āpana, adhy-%}¦
{%etavya, adhy-etṛ,%} &c., see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>1298<pc>0022-c<k1>aDIkAra<k2>aDIkAra
{#aDIkAra#}¦ {%adhī-kāra = adhi-kāra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>1299<pc>0022-c<k1>aDIkz<k2>aDIkz
{#aDIkz#}¦ {%adhīkṣ (adhi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%adhī-%}
{%kṣate, -kṣitum,%} to discover.
<LEND>

<L>1300<pc>0022-c<k1>aDIna<k2>aDIna
{#aDIna#}¦ {%adhīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%adhi%}), subject,
subservient (generally forming the last member of a
compound). {%—Adhīna-tā,%} f. or {%adhīna-tva, am,%} n.
subjection, dependence.
<LEND>

<L>1301<pc>0022-c<k1>aDImanTa<k2>aDImanTa
{#aDImanTa#}¦ {%adhī-mantha = adhi-mantha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>1302<pc>0022-c<k1>aDIra<k2>aDIra
{#aDIra#}¦ {%a-dhīra, as, ā, am,%} not fixed, move-
able; confused; deficient in calm self-command; ex-
cited, excitable; fitful, capricious; querulous; weak-
minded, foolish; ({%ā%}), f. lightning; a capricious or bel-
licose mistress. {%—Adhīra-tā,%} f. want of confidence.
<LEND>

<L>1303<pc>0022-c<k1>aDIvAsa<k2>aDIvAsa
{#aDIvAsa#}¦ {%adhī-vāsa = adhi-vāsa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>1304<pc>0022-c<k1>aDIvAsas<k2>aDIvAsas
{%Adhī-vāsas,%}¦ ind. over the garment.
<LEND>

<L>1305<pc>0022-c<k1>aDISa<k2>aDISa
{#aDISa#}¦ {%adhīśa (adhi-īśa), as,%} m. a lord,
a master over (others).
<LEND>

<L>1306<pc>0022-c<k1>aDISvara<k2>aDISvara
{%Adhīśvara (adhi-īś˚), as,%}¦ m. a supreme lord or
king, an emperor; (among the Jainas) an Arhat.
<LEND>
[Page0023-a+ 70]

<L>1307<pc>0023-a<k1>aDIzwa<k2>aDIzwa
{#aDIzwa#}¦ {%adhīṣṭa (adhi-iṣṭa), as, ā, am,%}
solicited, honorary; ({%am%}), n. solicitation; honorary
office.
<LEND>

<L>1308<pc>0023-a<k1>aDunA<k2>aDunA
{#aDunA#}¦ {%a-dhunā,%} ind. (fr. the pronom. base
{%a,%} substituted for {%idam%}), at this time, now.
<LEND>

<L>1309<pc>0023-a<k1>aDunAtana<k2>aDunAtana
{%Adhunātana, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to or extend-
ing over the present time.
<LEND>

<L>1310<pc>0023-a<k1>aDura<k2>aDura
{#aDura#}¦ {%a-dhura, as, ā, am,%} not laden.
<LEND>

<L>1311<pc>0023-a<k1>aDUmaka<k2>aDUmaka
{#aDUmaka#}¦ {%a-dhūmaka, as, ā, am,%} smokeless.
<LEND>

<L>1312<pc>0023-a<k1>aDfta<k2>aDfta
{#aDfta#}¦ {%a-dhṛta, as, ā, am,%} not held, un-
restrained, uncontrolled; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>1313<pc>0023-a<k1>aDfti<k2>aDfti
{%A-dhṛti, is,%}¦ f. want of firmness or fortitude; laxity,
absence of control or restraint; incontinence; ({%is, is,%}
{%i%}), unsteady.
<LEND>

<L>1314<pc>0023-a<k1>aDfzwa<k2>aDfzwa
{#aDfzwa#}¦ {%a-dhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%dhṛṣ%}), not
bold, modest; not put down, invincible, irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>1315<pc>0023-a<k1>aDfzya<k2>aDfzya
{%A-dhṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unassailable, invincible;
unapproachable; proud; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>1316<pc>0023-a<k1>aDenu<k2>aDenu
{#aDenu#}¦ {%a-dhenu, us, us, u,%} Ved. yielding no
milk or advantage; not nourishing.
<LEND>

<L>1317<pc>0023-a<k1>aDErya<k2>aDErya
{#aDErya#}¦ {%a-dhairya, am,%} n. want or loss of
calm self-command; paroxysm of excitement; excita-
bility; ({%as, ā, am%}), deficient in self-command;
swayed by excitement or violent feeling.
<LEND>

<L>1318<pc>0023-a<k1>aDo<k2>aDo
{#aDo#}¦ {%adho.%} See under {%adhas.%}
<LEND>

<L>1319<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyaMsa<k2>aDyaMsa
{#aDyaMsa#}¦ {%adhy-aṃsa, as, ā, am,%} (placed) on
the shoulder.
<LEND>

<L>1320<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyakta<k2>aDyakta
{#aDyakta#}¦ {%adhy-akta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%añj%}),
equipped, prepared.
<LEND>

<L>1321<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyakza<k2>aDyakza
{#aDyakza#}¦ {%adhy-akṣa, as, ā, am,%} observable;
exercising supervision; ({%as%}), m. an eye-witness; an
inspector, superintendent; N. of a plant, Mimusops
Kauki ({%Kṣīrikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>1322<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyakzaram<k2>aDyakzaram
{#aDyakzaram#}¦ {%adhy-akṣaram,%} ind. on the sub-
ject of syllables; above all syllables (as the mystic {%om%}).
<LEND>

<L>1323<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyagni<k2>aDyagni
{#aDyagni#}¦ {%adhy-agni,%} ind. over or by the
nuptial fire, property given to the bride. {%—Adhyagnī-%}
{%kṛta, am,%} n. property given to the wife at the
wedding. {%—Adhyagny-upāgata, am,%} n. property
received by a wife at the wedding.
<LEND>

<L>1324<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyaYc<k2>aDyaYc
{#aDyaYc#}¦ {%adhy-añc, aṅ, īcī, ak,%} tending up-
wards, eminent, superior.
<LEND>

<L>1325<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyaRqA<k2>aDyaRqA
{#aDyaRqA#}¦ {%adhyaṇḍā,%} f., N. of two plants,
Cowage (Carpopogon Pruriens) and Flacourtia Cata-
phracta.
<LEND>

<L>1326<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyaDikzepa<k2>aDyaDikzepa
{#aDyaDikzepa#}¦ {%adhy-adhikṣepa, as,%} m. ex-
cessive censure; gross abuse.
<LEND>

<L>1327<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyaDIna<k2>aDyaDIna
{#aDyaDIna#}¦ {%adhy-adhīna, as, ā, am,%} completely
subject or dependent, as a slave.
<LEND>

<L>1328<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyaya<k2>aDyaya
{#aDyaya#}¦ {%adhy-aya%} or better {%adhy-āya, as,%} m.
(fr. {%adhi-i,%} see {%adhī%}), a lesson, lecture, chapter.
<LEND>

<L>1329<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyayana<k2>aDyayana
{%Adhy-ayana, am,%}¦ n. reading, studying, especially
the Vedas (on of the six duties of a Brāhman).
{%—Adhyayana-tapasī,%} n. nom. du. study and penance.
{%—Adhyayana-puṇya, am,%} n. religious merit ac-
quired by studying.
<LEND>

<L>1330<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyayanIya<k2>aDyayanIya
{%Adhy-ayanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit or proper to be
read or studied.
<LEND>

<L>1331<pc>0023-a<k1>aDyarDa<k2>aDyarDa
{#aDyarDa#}¦ {%adhy-ardha, as, ā, am,%} having an
additional half, i. e. one and a half; (in compounds
synonymous with) {%adhy-ardhaka, as, ikā, am,%}
amounting to or worth one and a half. {%—Adhyardha-%}
{%kaṃsa, as, am,%} m. n. one and a half kaṃsa; ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), amounting to or worth one and a half kaṃsa.
{%—Adhyardha-kākiṇīka, as, ā, am,%} amounting to
or worth one and a half kākiṇī. {%—Adhyardha-%}
{%kārṣāpaṇa%} or {%adhyardha-kārṣāpaṇika, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} amounting to or worth one and a half kārṣā-
paṇa. {%—Adhyardha-khārīka, as, ā, am,%} amount-
ing to or worth one and a half khārī. {%—Adhyardha- %}
[Page0023-b+ 74]
{%paṇya, as, ā, am,%} amounting to or worth one and
a half paṇa. {%—Adhyardha-pādya, as, ā, am,%}
amounting to one foot and a half. {%—Adhyardha-%}
{%pratika, as, ī, am,%} amounting to one and a half
kārṣāpaṇa. {%—Adhyardha-māṣya, as, ā, am,%}
amounting to or worth one and a half māṣa. {%—Adhy-%}
{%ardha-viṃśatikīna, as, ā, am,%} amounting to or worth
one and a half score or thirty. {%—Adhyardha-śata%}
or {%adhyardha-śatya, as, ā, am,%} amounting to or
bought with one hundred and fifty. {%—Adhyardha-%}
{%śatamāna%} or {%adhyardha-śātamāna, as, ī, am,%}
amounting to or worth one and a half śatamāna.
{%—Adhyardha-śāṇa%} or {%adhyardha-śāṇya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} amounting to or worth one and a half śāṇa.
{%—Adhyardha-śūrpa, as, ī, am,%} amounting to or
worth one and a half śūrpa. {%—Adhyardha-sahasra%}
or {%adhyardha-sāhasra, as, ī, am,%} amounting to
or worth one thousand five hundred. {%—Adhyardha-%}
{%suvarṇa%} or {%adhyardha-sauvarṇika, as, ī, am,%}
amounting to or worth one and a half suvarṇa.
<LEND>

<L>1332<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyarbuda<k2>aDyarbuda
{#aDyarbuda#}¦ {%adhy-arbuda%} or {%adhy-arvuda, am,%}
n. a tumour, goitre (dating from the time of birth).
<LEND>

<L>1333<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyavaso<k2>aDyavaso
{#aDyavaso#}¦ {%adhy-ava-so,%} cl. 4. P. {%-syati,%}
{%sātum,%} to undertake, grapple with, attempt; to
determine, consider.
<LEND>

<L>1334<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyavasAna<k2>aDyavasAna
{%Adhy-ava-sāna, am,%}¦ n. determining; attempt,
effort, exertion; energy, perseverance; (in rhetoric)
concise and forcible language.
<LEND>

<L>1335<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyavasAya<k2>aDyavasAya
{%Adhy-ava-sāya, as,%}¦ m. = the preceding; (in phi-
losophy) mental effort, apprehension. {%—Adhyava-%}
{%sāya-yukta, as, ā, am,%} or {%adhyavasāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
resolute.
<LEND>

<L>1336<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyavasAyita<k2>aDyavasAyita
{%Adhy-ava-sāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ attempted.
<LEND>

<L>1337<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyavasita<k2>aDyavasita
{%Adhy-ava-sita, as, ā, am,%}¦ mentally apprehended,
ascertained, determined.
<LEND>

<L>1338<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyavahanana<k2>aDyavahanana
{#aDyavahanana#}¦ {%adhy-avahanana, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
serving as an implement on which anything is peeled.
<LEND>

<L>1339<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyaSana<k2>aDyaSana
{#aDyaSana#}¦ {%adhy-aśana, am,%} n. eating too
soon after a meal, before the last meal is digested.
<LEND>

<L>1340<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyas<k2>aDyas
{#aDyas#}¦ {%adhy-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati, -situm,%} to
throw or place over or upon.
<LEND>

<L>1341<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyasta<k2>aDyasta
{%Adhy-asta, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed over; disguised;
supposed.
<LEND>

<L>1342<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyasTi<k2>aDyasTi
{#aDyasTi#}¦ {%adhy-asthi, i,%} n. a bone growing
over another.
<LEND>

<L>1343<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyah<k2>aDyah
{#aDyah#}¦ {%adhy-ah,%} Defect. Perf. {%-āha,%} to
address; to bless.
<LEND>

<L>1344<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyAkram<k2>aDyAkram
{#aDyAkram#}¦ {%adhy-ā-kram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-kramitum,%} to attack; to fix upon, occupy.
<LEND>

<L>1345<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyAgam<k2>aDyAgam
{#aDyAgam#}¦ {%adhy-ā-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to fall in with, meet with.
<LEND>

<L>1346<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyAcar<k2>aDyAcar
{#aDyAcar#}¦ {%adhy-ā-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati,%}
{%-ritum,%} to bestride, occupy as a seat.
<LEND>

<L>1347<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyARqA<k2>aDyARqA
{#aDyARqA#}¦ {%adhy-āṇḍā,%} f., N. of a plant.
See {%adhyaṇḍā.%}
<LEND>

<L>1348<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyAtma<k2>aDyAtma
{#aDyAtma#}¦ {%adhy-ātma, am,%} n. the supreme
spirit; ({%as, ā, am%}), own, belonging to self; ({%am%}),
ind. concerning self or individual personality. {%—Adhy-%}
{%ātma-cetas, ās,%} m. one who meditates on the su-
preme spirit. {%—Adhy-ātma-jñāna, am,%} n. or {%adhy-%}
{%ātma-vidyā,%} f. knowledge of the supreme spirit or
of {%ātman%}. {%—Adhy-ātma-dṛś, k,%} or {%adhyātma-vid,%}
{%t,%} m. a sage proficient in that knowledge. {%—Adhy-%}
{%ātma-rati, is,%} m. a man delighting in the contem-
plation of the supreme spirits or of {%ātman%}. {%—Adhy-%}
{%ātma-rāmāyaṇa, am,%} n. a Rāmāyaṇa, in which every-
thing is referred to the universal spirit; it forms part of
the Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa. {%—Adhyātma-śāstra, am,%} n.,
N. of a work. {%—Adhyātmottara-kāṇḍa (˚ma-ut˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the last book of the Adhyātmarāmāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>1349<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyAtmika<k2>aDyAtmika
{%Adhy-ātmika%}¦ or better {%ādhyātmika, as, ī, am,%}
connected with or relating to the soul or the supreme
spirit.
<LEND>

<L>1350<pc>0023-b<k1>aDyApaka<k2>aDyApaka
{#aDyApaka#}¦ {%adhy-āpaka, as,%} m. (fr. {%adhi-i,%} see
[Page0023-c+ 74]
{%adhī%}), a teacher or professor, especially of sacred know-
ledge; N. of a priest (?). {%—Adhyāpakodita (˚ka-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. entitled an {%adhyāpaka,%} styled a professor.
<LEND>

<L>1351<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyApana<k2>aDyApana
{%Adhy-āpana, am,%}¦ n. instruction or lecturing.
especially on sacred knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>1352<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyApayitf<k2>aDyApayitf
{%Adhy-āpayitṛ, t, ā,%}¦ m. a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>1353<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyApita<k2>aDyApita
{%Adhy-āpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ instructed.
<LEND>

<L>1354<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyApya<k2>aDyApya
{%Adhy-āpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit or proper to be instructed.
<LEND>

<L>1355<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAya<k2>aDyAya
{%Adhy-āya, as,%}¦ m. a lesson, lecture, chapter; reading;
proper time for reading or for a lesson; (at the close
of comp. words) a reader, student, as {%Vedādhyāya,%} a
reader or student of the Vedas. {%—Adhyāya-śata-%}
{%pāṭha, as,%} m. an index of the One Hundred Chapters,
N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>1356<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAyin<k2>aDyAyin
{%Adhyāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ studious, engaged in reading
or study.
<LEND>

<L>1357<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAruh<k2>aDyAruh
{#aDyAruh#}¦ {%adhy-ā-ruh,%} cl. 1. P., poet. A.
{%-rohati, -te, -roḍhum,%} to ascend, mount: Caus.
{%-ropayati, -yitum,%} to cause or order to mount.
<LEND>

<L>1358<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyArUQa<k2>aDyArUQa
{%Adhy-ārūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ mounted, ascended;
(with the instr.) above, superior; (with the abl.)
below, inferior.
<LEND>

<L>1359<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAropa<k2>aDyAropa
{%Adhy-āropa, as,%}¦ m. or {%adhy-āropaṇa, am,%} n.
act of making one mount or of raising; act of
attributing, especially through mistake.
<LEND>

<L>1360<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAropita<k2>aDyAropita
{%Adhy-āropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ falsely attributed; hy-
perbolical.
<LEND>

<L>1361<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAvas<k2>aDyAvas
{#aDyAvas#}¦ {%adhy-ā-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati,%}
{%-vastum,%} to inhabit, dwell in (with acc. or loc.).
<LEND>

<L>1362<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAvApa<k2>aDyAvApa
{#aDyAvApa#}¦ {%adhy-ā-vāpa, as,%} m. (rt. {%vap%}), the
act of sowing or scattering upon.
<LEND>

<L>1363<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAvAhanika<k2>aDyAvAhanika
{#aDyAvAhanika#}¦ {%adhy-ā-vāhanika, am,%} n. that
part of a wife's property which she receives when on
a visit to her parents.
<LEND>

<L>1364<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAs<k2>aDyAs
{#aDyAs#}¦ {%adhy-ās,%} cl. 2. A. {%-āste, -situm,%}
to sit down or (of beasts) lie down upon, to settle
upon; to occupy as one's seat or habitation; to get
into, enter upon; to be directed to or upon; to
affect, concern; to influence, rule; to cohabit with:
Caus. P. {%adhy-āsayati, -yitum,%} to make (one)
sit down: Des. {%adhy-āsisiṣate,%} to be about to
get upon (a seat &c.).
<LEND>

<L>1365<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAsana<k2>aDyAsana
{%Adhy-āsana, am,%}¦ n. act of sitting down upon;
presiding over; a seat, settlement.
<LEND>

<L>1366<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAsayoga<k2>aDyAsayoga
{%Adhyāsa-yoga, as,%}¦ m. (with Buddhists) a kind of
meditation (?).
<LEND>

<L>1367<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAsita<k2>aDyAsita
{%Adhy-āsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ seated on; seated in the
presidential chair; settled, inhabited.
<LEND>

<L>1368<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAsin<k2>aDyAsin
{%Adhy-āsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sitting down or seated upon.
<LEND>

<L>1369<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAsIna<k2>aDyAsIna
{%Adhy-āsīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ seated upon.
<LEND>

<L>1370<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAsa<k2>aDyAsa
{#aDyAsa#}¦ {%adhy-āsa, as,%} m. (rt. 2. {%as%}), impos-
ing; erroneously attributing; an appendage.
<LEND>

<L>1371<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAharaRa<k2>aDyAharaRa
{#aDyAharaRa#}¦ {%adhy-ā-haraṇa, am,%} n. or {%adhy-%}
{%ā-hāra, as,%} m. (rt. {%hṛ%}), act of supplying (elliptical
language); supplement; act of inferring or arguing.
<LEND>

<L>1372<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAharaRIya<k2>aDyAharaRIya
{%Adhy-āharaṇīya%}¦ or {%adhy-āhartavya%} or {%adhy-%}
{%āhārya, as, ā, am,%} proper to be supplied; proper
to be argued.
<LEND>

<L>1373<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyAhfta<k2>aDyAhfta
{%Adhy-āhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ supplied, argued.
<LEND>

<L>1374<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyuzita<k2>aDyuzita
{#aDyuzita#}¦ {%adhy-uṣita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vas,%}
see 1. {%adhi-vas%}), inhabited; obtained (?). {%—Adhy-%}
{%uṣitāśva%} or {%adhyūṣitāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m., N.
of a prince descended from Daśaratha.
<LEND>

<L>1375<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyuzwa<k2>aDyuzwa
{#aDyuzwa#}¦ {%adhy-uṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%uṣ =%}
{%ucch ?%}), coiled up three and a half times. {%—Adhy-%}
{%uṣṭa-valaya, as,%} m. (snake) forming a ring coiled
up three and a half times.
<LEND>

<L>1376<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyuzwra<k2>aDyuzwra
{#aDyuzwra#}¦ {%adhy-uṣṭra, as,%} m. conveyance
borne or drawn by camels.
<LEND>

<L>1377<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyUQa<k2>aDyUQa
{#aDyUQa#}¦ {%adhy-ūḍha, as, ā, am%} (past pass.
part. fr. rt. {%vah%} with {%adhi%}), raised, exalted; affluent;
abundant; ({%as%}), m. Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. a wife whose hus-
band has married an additional wife.
<LEND>

<L>1378<pc>0023-c<k1>aDyUDnI<k2>aDyUDnI
{#aDyUDnI#}¦ {%adhy-ūdhnī,%} f. (fr. {%ūdhan%} or {%ūdhas,%}
[Page0024-a+ 74]
udder, with {%adhi%}), a tubular vessel above the udder,
or above the scrotum, i. e. urethra (?).
<LEND>

<L>1379<pc>0024-a<k1>aDyUzivas<k2>aDyUzivas
{#aDyUzivas#}¦ {%adhy-ūṣivas, ān, uṣī, as%} (perf.
part. of rt. {%vas%} with {%adhi%}), having inhabited.
<LEND>

<L>1380<pc>0024-a<k1>aDyUh<k2>aDyUh
{#aDyUh#}¦ {%adhy-ūh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ūhati, -hitum,%} to
lay on, overlay; to place upon, to raise above.
<LEND>

<L>1381<pc>0024-a<k1>aDyUhana<k2>aDyUhana
{%Adhy-ūhana, am,%}¦ n. putting on a layer (of ashes
or cinders).
<LEND>

<L>1382<pc>0024-a<k1>aDyfD<k2>aDyfD
{#aDyfD#}¦ {%adhy-ṛdh,%} cl. 5. P. {%-ṛdhnoti,%}
{%-ardhitum,%} to expand.
<LEND>

<L>1383<pc>0024-a<k1>aDyetavya<k2>aDyetavya
{#aDyetavya#}¦ {%adhy-etavya%} or {%adhy-eya, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (fr. rt. {%i%} with {%adhi,%} see {%adhī%}), fit or proper to
be studied or read.
<LEND>

<L>1384<pc>0024-a<k1>aDyetf<k2>aDyetf
{%Adhy-etṛ, t, ā,%}¦ m. a student, reader.
<LEND>

<L>1385<pc>0024-a<k1>aDyezyamARa<k2>aDyezyamARa
{%Adhy-eṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (fut. part.), intending
to study.
<LEND>

<L>1386<pc>0024-a<k1>aDyeD<k2>aDyeD
{#aDyeD#}¦ {%adhy-edh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-edhate, -dhitum,%}
to increase, prosper.
<LEND>

<L>1387<pc>0024-a<k1>aDyezaRa<k2>aDyezaRa
{#aDyezaRa#}¦ {%adhy-eṣaṇa, am, ā,%} n. f. (fr. rt.
3. {%iṣ%} with {%adhi%}), solicitation, entreaty.
<LEND>

<L>1388<pc>0024-a<k1>aDri<k2>aDri
{#aDri#}¦ {%a-dhri, is, is, i%} (rt. {%dhṛ%}), unrestrained,
irresistible. {%—Adhri-gu, us,%} plur. {%āvas,%} m., Ved.
irresistible; N. of a heavenly killer of victims; N. of
a formula concluding with an invocation of Agni.
{%—Adhri-ja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. irresistible. {%—Adhri-%}
{%puṣpalikā,%} f. a species of the Pāṇ plant, Piper Betel.
<LEND>

<L>1389<pc>0024-a<k1>aDriyamARa<k2>aDriyamARa
{%A-dhriyamāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (pres. pass. part. of rt.
{%dhṛ%} with {%a%}), not held; not to be got hold of, not
forthcoming, not surviving or existing, dead.
<LEND>

<L>1390<pc>0024-a<k1>aDruva<k2>aDruva
{#aDruva#}¦ {%a-dhruva, as, ā, am,%} not fixed, not
permanent; uncertain, doubtful; separable, admitting
of severance without disastrous effects.
<LEND>

<L>1391<pc>0024-a<k1>aDruza<k2>aDruza
{#aDruza#}¦ {%adhruṣa, as,%} m. quinsy, a kind of
sore throat (etymology doubtful).
<LEND>

<L>1392<pc>0024-a<k1>aDvan<k2>aDvan
{#aDvan#}¦ {%adhvan, ā,%} m. (said to be from {%ad,%}
‘to eat,’ {%d%} being changed to {%dh,%} or fr. rt. {%at%}), a
road, way, orbit; a journey, course; distance; time;
means, method, resource; the zodiac (?), sky, air;
a place; a recension of the Vedas and the school up-
holding it; assault (?). {%Adhvan%} becomes {%adhva, as,%}
at the end of some compounds. {%—Adhva-ga, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} travelling; ({%as%}), m. a traveller; a camel, a mule;
the sun; ({%ā%}), f. Gangā (the river). {%—Adhva-gat, t,%}
m. a traveller. {%—Adhva-gaty-anta%} or {%adhva-ganta-%}
{%vya, as,%} m. measure of length applicable to roads.
{%—Adhvaga-bhogya, as,%} m. (traveller's delight), N.
of a tree (Spondias Mangifera). {%—Adhva-gamana,%}
{%am,%} n. act of travelling. {%—Adhva-gāmin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} wayfaring. {%—Adhva-gā,%} f. a plant, also called
Svarṇulī. {%—Adhva-pati, is,%} m. (lord of the orbits or
of the zodiac), the sun. {%—Adhva-ratha, as,%} m. a
travelling car. {%—Adhva-śalya, as,%} m. a plant, Achy-
ranthes Aspera. {%—Adhvādhipa (˚va-adh˚%}) or {%adhveśa%}
{%(˚va-īś˚), as,%} m. officer in charge of the police on
the public roads.
<LEND>

<L>1393<pc>0024-a<k1>aDvanIna<k2>aDvanIna
{%Adhvanīna%}¦ or {%adhvanya, as, ā, am,%} speeding on
a journey; ({%as%}), a traveller.
<LEND>

<L>1394<pc>0024-a<k1>aDvayat<k2>aDvayat
{%Adhvayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. running, quick.
<LEND>

<L>1395<pc>0024-a<k1>aDvara<k2>aDvara
{#aDvara#}¦ {%a-dhvara, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%a,%} not, and
{%dhvara,%} crookedness, injury), Ved. not crooked,
unbroken, uninterrupted; durable; sound; intent;
({%as%}), m. a religious or liturgical service, a sacrifice,
especially the Soma sacrifice; N. of a Vasu; of the chief
of a family; ({%am%}), n. sky or air. {%—Adhvara-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. performance of the Adhvara or connected with
it. {%—Adhvara-kalpā,%} f., N. of an optional sacrifice
(Kāmyeṣṭi). {%—Adhvara-kāṇḍa, am,%} n. title of the
book in the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa which refers to
Adhvaras. {%—Adhvara-kṛt, t,%} m. performing an
Adhvara. {%—Adhvara-ga, as, ā, am,%} intended for
an Adhvara. {%—Adhvara-dīkṣaṇīyā,%} f. consecration
connected with the Adhvara. {%—Adhvara-prāyaścitti,%}
{%is,%} f. expiation connected with the Adhvara. {%—Adhva-%}
{%ra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing the word Adhvara.
[Page0024-b+ 73]
{%—Adhvara-śrī, īs,%} m., Ved. glory (i. e. patron) of the
Adhvara. {%—Adhvara-samiṣṭa-yajus, us,%} n., N. of
an aggregate of nine libations connected with the
Adhvara. {%—Adhvara-stha, as, ā, am,%} or {%adhvare-%}
{%ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. standing at (or engaged in)
an Adhvara.
<LEND>

<L>1396<pc>0024-b<k1>aDvarayu<k2>aDvarayu
{%Adhvarayu,%}¦ etymological substitute for {%adhvaru.%}
<LEND>

<L>1397<pc>0024-b<k1>aDvarIya<k2>aDvarIya
{%Adhvarīya%}¦ or {%adhvarya,%} nom. (fr. {%adhvara%}), P.
{%adhvarīyati%} or {%adhvaryati,%} P. to be desirous of
having an Adhvara performed; to institute one (?).
<LEND>

<L>1398<pc>0024-b<k1>aDvaryu<k2>aDvaryu
{%Adhvaryu, us,%}¦ m. one who institutes an Adhvara;
any officiating priest; technical name of a priest of a
particular class (as distinguished from the {%Hotṛ,%} the
{%Udgātṛ,%} and the <nsi>Brahman</nsi> classes). The Adhvarya-
vas “had to measure the ground, to build the altar,
to prepare the sacrificial vessels, to fetch wood and
water, to light the fire, to bring the animal and
immolate it.” Whilst engaged in these duties, they
had to repeat, without interruption or mistake, the
hymns of the Yajur-veda; hence that Veda itself is also
called Adhvaryu or Adhvaryavas, and the latter word
also means adherents of the Yajur-veda. {%—Adhvaryu-%}
{%kāṇḍa, am,%} n. title of a book of mantras or prayers
intended for Adhvaryavas. {%—Adhvaryu-kratu, us,%}
m. sacrificial act performed by the Adhvaryu.
{%—Adhvaryu-veda, as,%} m. the Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>1399<pc>0024-b<k1>aDvasman<k2>aDvasman
{#aDvasman#}¦ {%a-dhvasman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. im-
perishable (?); not causing to fall (?); unveiled, open
to the light (?).
<LEND>

<L>1400<pc>0024-b<k1>aDvAnta<k2>aDvAnta
{#aDvAnta#}¦ {%a-dhvānta, am,%} n. (not positive
darkness), twilight, gloom, shade. {%—Adhvānta-śā-%}
{%trava, as,%} m. a plant, Cassia Fistula or Bignonia
Indica (not an enemy to darkness, i. e. blossoming in
the shade).
<LEND>

<L>1401<pc>0024-b<k1>an<k2>an<h>1
{#an#} 1¦. {%an-,%} occasionally {#ana#} {%ana-,%} (before
a vowel) the substitute for 3. {%a,%} or {%a%} privative.
<div n="P"/>(Before terminations commencing with vowels) the
substitute for the pronominal base {%a,%} as in {%anena%}
{%(ana-ina).%}
<LEND>

<L>1402<pc>0024-b<k1>an<k2>an<h>2
{#an#} 2¦. {%an,%} cl. 2. P. {%aniti%} or Ved. {%anati,%}
{%āna, aniṣyati, ānīt, anitum,%} to breathe,
gasp, move, go, live [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄνεμος</lang> Lat. <nsi>animus</nsi>]:
Caus. {%ānayati, -yitum:%} Desid. {%aniniṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>1403<pc>0024-b<k1>ana<k2>ana
{%Ana, as,%}¦ m. breath, spiration.
<LEND>

<L>1404<pc>0024-b<k1>anana<k2>anana
{%Anana, am,%}¦ n. breathing, living.
<LEND>

<L>1405<pc>0024-b<k1>anaMSa<k2>anaMSa
{#anaMSa#}¦ {%an-aṃśa, as, ā, am,%} or {%an-aṃśin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} portionless; not entitled to a share in an
inheritance.
<LEND>

<L>1406<pc>0024-b<k1>anaMSumatPalA<k2>anaMSumatPalA
{#anaMSumatPalA#}¦ {%an-aṃśumat-phalā,%} f. a plan-
tain (the same as {%aṃśumat-phalā%}).
<LEND>

<L>1407<pc>0024-b<k1>anaka<k2>anaka
{#anaka#}¦ {%anaka, as, ā, am,%} inferior {%= aṇaka,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>1408<pc>0024-b<k1>anakadunduBa<k2>anakadunduBa
{#anakadunduBa#}¦ {%anaka-dundubha, as,%} m. a name
of Kṛṣṇa's grandfather. {%—Anaka-dundubhi%} or
better {%ānakadundubhi, is,%} m. a name given to
Kṛṣṇa's father, Vasudeva; (a name said to be derived
from the beating of drums at his birth.)
<LEND>

<L>1409<pc>0024-b<k1>anakasmAt<k2>anakasmAt
{#anakasmAt#}¦ {%an-akasmāt,%} ind. not without a
cause or an object; not accidentally, not suddenly.
<LEND>

<L>1410<pc>0024-b<k1>anakz<k2>anakz
{#anakz#}¦ {%an-akṣ, k, k, k,%} Ved. or {%an-akṣa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} sightless, blind.
<LEND>

<L>1411<pc>0024-b<k1>anakzi<k2>anakzi
{%An-akṣi,%}¦ n. a bad eye.
<LEND>

<L>1412<pc>0024-b<k1>anakzara<k2>anakzara
{#anakzara#}¦ {%an-akṣara, as, ā, am,%} unfit to be
uttered; unable to articulate.
<LEND>

<L>1413<pc>0024-b<k1>anakzastamBam<k2>anakzastamBam
{#anakzastamBam#}¦ {%an-akṣa-stambham,%} ind. so
as not to interfere with the axle-tree.
<LEND>

<L>1414<pc>0024-b<k1>anagAra<k2>anagAra
{#anagAra#}¦ {%an-agāra, as,%} m. (houseless), an
ascetic who has adopted a houseless or vagrant con-
dition.
<LEND>

<L>1415<pc>0024-b<k1>anagArikA<k2>anagArikA
{%An-agārikā,%}¦ f. the houseless life of such an ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>1416<pc>0024-b<k1>anagna<k2>anagna
{#anagna#}¦ {%a-nagna, as, ā, am,%} not naked.
{%—Anagna-tā,%} f. the not being naked.
<LEND>

<L>1417<pc>0024-b<k1>anagni<k2>anagni
{#anagni#}¦ {%an-agni, is,%} m. non-fire; substance
[Page0024-c+ 75]
differing from fire; absence of fire; ({%is, is, i%}), re-
quiring no fire or fire-place; not maintaining the
sacred fire, irreligious; unmarried; dispensing with
the use of fire; dyspeptic. {%—An-agni-tra, as, ā, am,%}
or {%an-agni-trā, ās, ās, am,%} not maintaining the
sacred fire, irreligious (?); not enjoying Agni's pro-
tection (?). {%—An-agni-dagdha, as, ā, am,%} not burnt
with fire; not burnt on the funeral pile (but buried);
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of manes. {%—Anagni-%}
{%ṣvātta, ās,%} m. pl. = preceding; see {%agni-dagdha%}
and {%agni-ṣvātta%} under {%agni.%}
<LEND>

<L>1418<pc>0024-c<k1>anaGa<k2>anaGa
{#anaGa#}¦ {%an-agha, as, ā, am,%} sinless, innocent;
faultless; handsome; ({%as%}), m. white mustard; N. or
epithet of various persons, especially Śiva. {%—Ana-%}
{%ghāṣṭamī (˚gha-aṣ˚),%} f., N. of the fifty-fifth
Adhyāya of the Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>1419<pc>0024-c<k1>anaNkuSa<k2>anaNkuSa
{#anaNkuSa#}¦ {%an-aṅkuśa, as, ā, am,%} unrestrained,
ungovernable.
<LEND>

<L>1420<pc>0024-c<k1>anaNga<k2>anaNga
{#anaNga#}¦ {%an-aṅga, as, ā, am,%} incorporeal;
({%as%}), m. Love, N. of Kāma, the god of love, so called
because he was reduced to ashes by a flash from the
eye of Śiva, for having attempted to disturb his penance
by filling him with love for Pārvatī; ({%am%}), n. the
ether, air, sky; the mind, {%manas;%} that which is not
the {%aṅga,%} q. v. {%—Anaṅga-krīḍā,%} f., N. of a metre
of two verses, the first containing sixteen long syllables,
the second thirty-two short ones. {%—Anaṅga-devī,%} f.,
N. of a queen-consort of Kaṣmīr. {%—Anaṅga-pāla,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king's chamberlain at Kaṣmīr.
{%—An-aṅgam-ejaya, as, ā, am,%} not shaking the
body (?). {%—Anaṅga-raṅga,%} N. of an erotic work.
{%—Anaṅga-lekhā,%} f. a love letter; N. of a queen of
Kaṣmīr. {%—Anaṅga-śekhara, as,%} m., N. of a metre
of four verses, each containing fifteen iambi. {%—An-%}
{%aṅga-senā,%} f., N. of a dramatic personage. {%—An-%}
{%aṅgāpīḍa (˚ga-āp˚) as,%} m., N. of a king of Kash-
mīr. {%—Anaṅgāsuhṛd (˚ga-as˚), t,%} m. Kāma's
enemy, i. e. Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>1421<pc>0024-c<k1>anaNgaka<k2>anaNgaka
{%An-aṅgaka, am,%}¦ n. the mind.
<LEND>

<L>1422<pc>0024-c<k1>anaNguri<k2>anaNguri
{#anaNguri#}¦ {%an-aṅguri, is, is, i,%} destitute of
fingers.
<LEND>

<L>1423<pc>0024-c<k1>anacCa<k2>anacCa
{#anacCa#}¦ {%an-accha, as, ā, am,%} not pellucid,
turbid.
<LEND>

<L>1424<pc>0024-c<k1>anajakA<k2>anajakA
{#anajakA#}¦ {%an-ajakā%} or {%an-ajikā,%} f. a miser-
able little goat.
<LEND>

<L>1425<pc>0024-c<k1>anaYjana<k2>anaYjana
{#anaYjana#}¦ {%an-añjana, as, ā, am,%} free from
collyrium or pigment or pain; ({%am%}), n. the sky,
atmosphere; Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>1426<pc>0024-c<k1>anaquh<k2>anaquh
{#anaquh#}¦ {%anaḍ-uh, ḍvān,%} m. (fr. {%anas,%} a
cart, q. v., and {%vah,%} to drag), an ox; bull; the sign
Taurus. {%—Anaḍuj-jihvā,%} f. a plant, also called Gojihvā,
Elephantopus Scaber. {%—Anaḍud-da, as,%} m. donor of
a bull or ox. {%—Anaḍuhī%} or {%anaḍvāhī,%} f. a cow.
<LEND>

<L>1427<pc>0024-c<k1>anaqutka<k2>anaqutka
{%Anaḍutka, as, ā, am,%}¦ having oxen (?).
<LEND>

<L>1428<pc>0024-c<k1>anaquha<k2>anaquha
{%Anaḍuha, as,%}¦ m., N. of the chief of a certain
Gotra.
<LEND>

<L>1429<pc>0024-c<k1>anaRu<k2>anaRu
{#anaRu#}¦ {%an-aṇu, us, us%} or {%vī, u,%} not minute
or fine, coarse; ({%us%}), m. coarse grain, peas, &c.
<LEND>

<L>1430<pc>0024-c<k1>anata<k2>anata
{#anata#}¦ {%a-nata, as, ā, am,%} not bent, not
bowed down; erect; stiff; haughty.
<LEND>

<L>1431<pc>0024-c<k1>anati<k2>anati
{#anati-#}¦ {%an-ati-,%} not very-, not too-, not
past-. (Words commencing with {%an-ati%} are so easily
analysed by referring to {%ati,%} &c., that few need be
enumerated). {%—An-ati-krama, as,%} m. moderation,
propriety. {%—An-atikramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} not to
be avoided, not to be transgressed, inviolable. {%—An-%}
{%atidṛśya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not transparent, opaque;
(or equivalent to {%aty-adṛśya%}), quite indiscernible.
{%—An-atidbhuta, as,%} m., Ved. unsurpassed. {%—An-%}
{%ativṛtti, is,%} f. congruity. {%—An-ativyādhya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. invulnerable. {%—An-atyanta-gati, is,%} f.
the sense of “not exceedingly,” sense of diminutive
words. {%—An-atyaya, as, ā, am,%} unperishable, un-
broken. {%—An-atyudya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (equivalent
to {%aty-an-udya%}), quite unfit to be mentioned.
<LEND>
[Page0025-a+ 68]

<L>1432<pc>0025-a<k1>anadat<k2>anadat
{#anadat#}¦ {%an-adat, an, atī, at,%} not eating, not
consuming.
<LEND>

<L>1433<pc>0025-a<k1>anadDA<k2>anadDA
{#anadDA#}¦ {%an-addhā%} or (with part. {%u%}) {%an-addho,%}
ind., Ved. not truly, not really; not clearly. {%—An-%}
{%addhā-puruṣa, as,%} m., Ved. one who is not a true
man, one who is of no use either to gods or men or
the manes.
<LEND>

<L>1434<pc>0025-a<k1>anadya<k2>anadya
{#anadya#}¦ {%an-adya, as, ā, am,%} not fit to be
eaten; ({%as%}), m. white mustard.
<LEND>

<L>1435<pc>0025-a<k1>anadyatana<k2>anadyatana
{#anadyatana#}¦ {%an-adyatana, as,%} m. tense which
is not applicable to the current day.
<LEND>

<L>1436<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDika<k2>anaDika
{#anaDika#}¦ {%an-adhika, as, ā, am,%} incapable of
being enlarged or excelled; boundless; perfect.
<LEND>

<L>1437<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDikAra<k2>anaDikAra
{#anaDikAra#}¦ {%an-adhikāra, as,%} m. absence of
authority or right or claim. {%—Anadhikāra-carcā,%} f.
intermeddling, officiousness.
<LEND>

<L>1438<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDikArin<k2>anaDikArin
{%An-adhikārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ not entitled to.
<LEND>

<L>1439<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDikfta<k2>anaDikfta
{%An-adhikṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not placed at the head
of, not appointed.
<LEND>

<L>1440<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDigata<k2>anaDigata
{#anaDigata#}¦ {%an-adhigata, as, ā, am,%} not ob-
tained, not acquired; not studied. {%—Anadhigata-%}
{%manoratha, as, ā, am,%} disappointed. {%—Anadhigata-%}
{%śāstra, as, ā, am,%} unacquainted with the Śāstras.
<LEND>

<L>1441<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDigamya<k2>anaDigamya
{%An-adhigamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unattainable.
<LEND>

<L>1442<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDizWAna<k2>anaDizWAna
{#anaDizWAna#}¦ {%an-adhiṣṭhāna, am,%} n. want of
superintendence.
<LEND>

<L>1443<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDizWita<k2>anaDizWita
{%An-adhiṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not appointed; not
present.
<LEND>

<L>1444<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDIna<k2>anaDIna
{#anaDIna#}¦ {%an-adhīna%} or {%an-adhīnaka, as, ā, am,%}
independent; ({%as%}), m. an independent carpenter who
works on his own account, see {%kauṭa-takṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>1445<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDyakza<k2>anaDyakza
{#anaDyakza#}¦ {%an-adhyakṣa, as, ā, am,%} not ob-
servable; destitute of a superintendent.
<LEND>

<L>1446<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDyayana<k2>anaDyayana
{#anaDyayana#}¦ {%an-adhyayana, am,%} n. not study-
ing; intermission of study.
<LEND>

<L>1447<pc>0025-a<k1>anaDyAya<k2>anaDyAya
{%An-adhyāya, as,%}¦ m. = the preceding; time when
there is or ought to be an intermission of study.
{%—Anadhyāya-divasa, as,%} m. a vacation day.
<LEND>

<L>1448<pc>0025-a<k1>anana<k2>anana
{#anana#}¦ {%anana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%an%}), breathing,
living.
<LEND>

<L>1449<pc>0025-a<k1>ananaNgamejaya<k2>ananaNgamejaya
{#ananaNgamejaya#}¦ {%an-anaṅgamejaya, as, ā, am,%}
not leaving the body unshaken; see under {%an-aṅga.%}
<LEND>

<L>1450<pc>0025-a<k1>ananujYAta<k2>ananujYAta
{#ananujYAta#}¦ {%an-anujñāta, as, ā, am,%} not
agreed to, not permitted, denied.
<LEND>

<L>1451<pc>0025-a<k1>ananuBAvaka<k2>ananuBAvaka
{#ananuBAvaka#}¦ {%an-anubhāvaka, as, ī, am,%} un-
able to comprehend. {%—Ananubhāvaka-tā,%} f. non-
comprehension; unintelligibility.
<LEND>

<L>1452<pc>0025-a<k1>ananuBAzaRa<k2>ananuBAzaRa
{#ananuBAzaRa#}¦ {%an-anubhāṣaṇa, am,%} n. not
repeating (for the sake of challenging) a proposition;
tacit assent.
<LEND>

<L>1453<pc>0025-a<k1>ananuBUta<k2>ananuBUta
{#ananuBUta#}¦ {%an-anubhūta, as, ā, am,%} not per-
ceived, not experienced, unknown.
<LEND>

<L>1454<pc>0025-a<k1>ananumata<k2>ananumata
{#ananumata#}¦ {%an-anumata, as, ā, am,%} not
honoured, not liked, disagreeable, unfit.
<LEND>

<L>1455<pc>0025-a<k1>ananuzaNgin<k2>ananuzaNgin
{#ananuzaNgin#}¦ {%an-anuṣaṅgin, ī, iṇī, i,%} not
attached to, indifferent to.
<LEND>

<L>1456<pc>0025-a<k1>ananuzWAna<k2>ananuzWAna
{#ananuzWAna#}¦ {%an-anuṣṭhāna, am,%} n. non-ob-
servance, neglect; impropriety.
<LEND>

<L>1457<pc>0025-a<k1>ananUkta<k2>ananUkta
{#ananUkta#}¦ {%an-anūkta, as, ā, am,%} not recited
or studied; not responded to.
<LEND>

<L>1458<pc>0025-a<k1>ananta<k2>ananta
{#ananta#}¦ {%an-anta, as, ā, am,%} endless, bound-
less, eternal, infinite; ({%as%}), m., N. of many person,
particularly of Viṣṇu; of Viṣṇu's couch, the snake
king Śeṣa; of Śeṣa's brother Vāsuki; of Kṛṣṇa;
of his brother Baladeva; of Śiva, Rudra, one of the
Viśva-devas, the 14th Arhat, &c.; a plant, Sinduvāra,
Vitex Trifolia; Talc; the 23rd lunar asterism, Śravaṇa;
a silken cord tied round the right arm at a particular
[Page0025-b+ 79]
festival; the letter {%ā;%} a periodic decimal fraction?; ({%ā%}),
f. the earth; the number one; N. of various females,
especially of Pārvatī; N. of various (perennial?)
plants, particularly one also called Śārivā, Periploca
Indica or Asclepias Pseudosarsa (or Asthmatica), the
root of which supplies a valuable medicine; ({%am%}), n.
the sky, atmosphere; Talc. {%—Ananta-kara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} rendering endless, magnifying indefinitely.
{%—Ananta-ga, as, ā, am,%} going or moving for ever
or indefinitely. {%—Ananta-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} having
boundless excellencies. {%—Ananta-caturdaśī,%} f. the
fourteenth lunar day (or full moon) of Bhādra, when
Ananta is worshipped. {%—Ananta-cāritra, as,%} m., N.
of a Bodhisattva. {%—Ananta-jit, t,%} m., N. of the
fourteenth Jaina Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī.
{%—Ananta-tā,%} f. or {%ananta-tva, am,%} n. eternity,
infinity. {%—Ananta-tāna, as, ā, am,%} extensive.
{%—Ananta-tīrtha, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Ananta-%}
{%tīrtha-kṛt, t,%} m. the same as Anantajit. {%—Ananta-%}
{%tṛtīyā,%} f. the third day of Bhādra, said to be sacred
to Viṣṇu. {%—Anantatṛtīya-vrata,%} the twenty-fourth
Adhyāya of the Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa. {%—Ananta-%}
{%dṛṣṭi, is,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Ananta-deva, as,%}
m., N. of various persons, especially of a king of
Kaṣmīr. {%—Ananta-nemi, is,%} m., N. of a king of
Mālava, a contemporary of Śākyamuni. {%—Ananta-%}
{%pāra, as, ā, am,%} of boundless width. {%—Ananta-pāla,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a warrior chief in Kaṣmīr. {%—Ananta-%}
{%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Ananta-mati, is,%}
m., N. of a Bodhisattva. {%—Ananta-māyin, ī, inī, i,%}
endlessly illusory or delusive or deceitful. {%—Ananta-%}
{%mūla, as,%} m. a medicinal plant, also called Śārivā.
{%—Ananta-rāma, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Ananta-%}
{%rāśi, is,%} m. (in arithm.) an infinite quantity; a
periodic decimal fraction (?). {%—Ananta-rūpa, as, ā,%}
or {%ī, am,%} having innumerable forms or shapes. {%—An-%}
{%anta-at, ān, atī, at,%} eternal, infinite; ({%ān%}), m.
(in the Upaniṣads) one of Brahmā's four feet, earth,
intermediate space, heaven, and ocean. {%—Ananta-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Ananta-vāta, as,%}
m. a disease of the head, somewhat like tetanus.
{%—Ananta-vikramin, ī,%} m., N. of a Bodhisattva.
{%—Ananta-vijaya, as,%} m., N. of Yudhiṣṭhira's conch-
shell. {%—Ananta-vīrya, as,%} m., N. of the twenty-third
Jaina Arhat of a future age. {%—Ananta-vrata, am,%} n.
ceremony or festival in honour of Ananta or Viṣṇu
on the day of the full moon in Bhādra; title of the
102nd Adhyāya of the Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa. {%—An-%}
{%anta-śakti, is, is, i,%} omnipotent; ({%is%}), m., N. of a
king. {%—Ananta-śayana, am,%} n. Travancore. {%—An-%}
{%anta-śīrṣā,%} f., N. of the snake king Vāsuki's wife.
{%—Ananta-śuṣma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. possessing bound-
less strength (?); endlessly blowing (?). {%—Anantātman%}
{%(˚ta-āt˚), ā,%} m. the infinite spirit. {%—Anantāśrama,%}
{%ananteśvara,%} &c., names of persons unknown.
<LEND>

<L>1459<pc>0025-b<k1>ananataka<k2>ananataka
{%Ananataka, as, ā, am,%}¦ endless, boundless, eternal,
infinite; ({%am%}), n. (among the Jainas) the eternal
(i. e. the aggregate of spirit and matter); the infinite
(i. e. infinite space).
<LEND>

<L>1460<pc>0025-b<k1>anantya<k2>anantya
{%Anantya, as, ā, am,%}¦ infinite, eternal; ({%am%}), n.
infinity, eternity.
<LEND>

<L>1461<pc>0025-b<k1>anantara<k2>anantara
{#anantara#}¦ {%an-antara, as, ā, am,%} having no
interior; having (or leaving) no interstice or interval
or pause; uninterrupted, unbroken; continuous;
immediately adjoining, contiguous; next of kin, &c.;
compact, close; ({%am%}), n. contiguousness; Brahma,
the supreme soul, as being of one entire essence; ({%am%}),
ind. immediately after; after; afterwards.
<LEND>

<L>1462<pc>0025-b<k1>anantaraja<k2>anantaraja
{%Anantara-ja, as,%}¦ m. (next-born), the son of a
Kṣatriyā or Vaiśyā mother by a father belonging to
the caste immediately above the mother's. {%—An-%}
{%antara-jāta, as,%} m. = preceding; also the son of a
Śudrā mother by a Vaiśya father.
<LEND>

<L>1463<pc>0025-b<k1>anantarAyam<k2>anantarAyam
{%An-antarāyam,%}¦ ind. without a break.
<LEND>

<L>1464<pc>0025-b<k1>anantarita<k2>anantarita
{%An-antarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not separated by any
interstice; unbroken.
<LEND>

<L>1465<pc>0025-b<k1>anantarIya<k2>anantarIya
{%Anantarīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ concerning (or belonging
to) the next of kin, &c.
<LEND>

<L>1466<pc>0025-b<k1>anantarhita<k2>anantarhita
{#anantarhita#}¦ {%an-antar-hita, as, ā, am,%} (past
[Page0025-c+ 73]
part. Pass. of {%antar-dhā,%} q. v., with {%an%}), not con-
cealed, manifest; not separated by a break.
<LEND>

<L>1467<pc>0025-c<k1>ananda<k2>ananda
{#ananda#}¦ {%a-nanda, as, ā, am,%} joyless, cheer-
less; ({%ās%}), m. pl., Ved., N. of a purgatory.
<LEND>

<L>1468<pc>0025-c<k1>ananna<k2>ananna
{#ananna#}¦ {%an-anna, am,%} n. rice or food unde-
serving of its name.
<LEND>

<L>1469<pc>0025-c<k1>ananya<k2>ananya
{#ananya#}¦ {%an-anya, as, ā, am,%} no other, not
another, not different, identical; self; not having a
second, unique; not more than one, sole; having
no other (object), undistracted. {%—Ananya-gati, is,%}
f. sole resort or resource. {%—Ananya-gati, is, is, i,%}
or {%ananya-gatika, as, ā, am,%} having only one (or
no other) resort or resource left. {%—Ananya-gāmin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} going to no other. {%—Ananya-cinta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} or {%ananya-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} giving one's
undivided thought to, (with loc.). {%—Ananya-codita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} self-impelled. {%—Ananya-ja, as,%} m. epi-
thet of Kāma or Love. {%—Ananya-tā,%} f. or {%ananya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. identity. {%—Ananya-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%}
gazing intently. {%—An-anya-deva, as, ā, am,%} having
no other god. {%—Ananya-niṣpādya, as, ā, am,%}
(requiring) to be accomplished by no other. {%—An-%}
{%anya-pūrvā,%} f. a female who never belonged to
another, a virgin. {%—Ananya-pratikriya, as, ā, am,%}
having no other means of resistance or redress.
{%—Ananya-bhava, as, ā, am,%} originating in or with
no other. {%—Ananya-bhāva, as, ā, am,%} thinking of
the only one, i. e. of the supreme spirit. {%—Ananya-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%ananya-manaska, as, ā, am,%}
or {%ananya-mānasa, as, ī, am,%} exercising undivided
attention. {%—Ananya-yoga, as,%} m. not suitable to any
others. {%—Ananya-viṣaya, as, ā, am,%} exclusively
applicable. {%—Ananya-viṣayātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} having the mind fixed upon one (or the sole)
object. {%—Ananya-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} closely attentive.
{%—An-anya-hṛta, as, ā, am,%} not carried off by
another, safe. {%—Ananyānubhava (˚ya-an˚), as,%} m.,
N. of the teacher of Prakāśātman. {%—Ananyārtha (˚ya-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} not subservient to another object;
principal. {%—Ananyāśrita (˚ya-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} not
having resorted to another; independent; ({%am%}), n.
(in law) unencumbered property.
<LEND>

<L>1470<pc>0025-c<k1>ananyAdfSa<k2>ananyAdfSa
{%An-anyādṛśa, as, ī, am,%}¦ not like others, singular.
<LEND>

<L>1471<pc>0025-c<k1>ananvaya<k2>ananvaya
{#ananvaya#}¦ {%an-anvaya, as,%} m. want of con-
nexion; (in rhetoric) comparison of an object with
its own ideal, (as, a lady-like lady.)
<LEND>

<L>1472<pc>0025-c<k1>ananvita<k2>ananvita
{%An-anvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unconnected, inconsecutive,
desultory, incoherent, irrelevant, irregular; not attended
with, destitute of.
<LEND>

<L>1473<pc>0025-c<k1>anapa<k2>anapa
{#anapa#}¦ {%an-apa, as, ā, am,%} destitute of water.
<LEND>

<L>1474<pc>0025-c<k1>anapakaraRa<k2>anapakaraRa
{#anapakaraRa#}¦ {%an-apakaraṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%kṛ%}),
not injuring; (in law) non-payment, non-de-
livery.
<LEND>

<L>1475<pc>0025-c<k1>anapakarman<k2>anapakarman
{%An-apakarman, a,%}¦ n. or {%anapakriyā,%} f. = pre-
ceding.
<LEND>

<L>1476<pc>0025-c<k1>anapakAra<k2>anapakAra
{%An-apakāra, as,%}¦ m. harmlessness.
<LEND>

<L>1477<pc>0025-c<k1>anapakArin<k2>anapakArin
{%An-apakārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ innocuous.
<LEND>

<L>1478<pc>0025-c<k1>anapakfta<k2>anapakfta
{%An-apakṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unharmed.
<LEND>

<L>1479<pc>0025-c<k1>anapakarza<k2>anapakarza
{#anapakarza#}¦ {%an-apakarṣa, as,%} m. (rt. {%kṛṣ%}),
m. non-degradation, superiority.
<LEND>

<L>1480<pc>0025-c<k1>anapaga<k2>anapaga
{#anapaga#}¦ {%an-apaga, as, ā, am,%} not departing
from.
<LEND>

<L>1481<pc>0025-c<k1>anapacyuta<k2>anapacyuta
{#anapacyuta#}¦ {%an-apacyuta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not fallen off, not declined; not displaced.
<LEND>

<L>1482<pc>0025-c<k1>anapajayya<k2>anapajayya
{#anapajayya#}¦ {%an-apajayya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ji%}),
Ved. impossible to have its victorious character re-
versed or neutralized.
<LEND>

<L>1483<pc>0025-c<k1>anapatya<k2>anapatya
{#anapatya#}¦ {%an-apatya, as, ā, am,%} childless;
Ved. causing childlessness, unpropitious; ({%am%}), n.
childlessness. {%—Anapatya-tā,%} f. childlessness. {%—An-%}
{%apatya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. childless.
<LEND>

<L>1484<pc>0025-c<k1>anapatyaka<k2>anapatyaka
{%Anapatyaka, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} childless.
<LEND>

<L>1485<pc>0025-c<k1>anapatrapa<k2>anapatrapa
{#anapatrapa#}¦ {%an-apatrapa, as, ā, am,%} shameless.
<LEND>
[Page0026-a+ 68]

<L>1486<pc>0026-a<k1>anapanihita<k2>anapanihita
{#anapanihita#}¦ {%an-apanihita, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not curtailed or mutilated.
<LEND>

<L>1487<pc>0026-a<k1>anapayati<k2>anapayati
{#anapayati#}¦ {%an-apayati,%} ind., Ved. (before the
sun makes a start); very early. ({%Apayati%} is said to
be fr. rt. {%i%} with {%apa,%} perhaps the loc. of the pres.
part.)
<LEND>

<L>1488<pc>0026-a<k1>anapara<k2>anapara
{#anapara#}¦ {%an-apara, as, ā, am,%} without an-
other; having no follower; sole (as an epithet of
Brahma).
<LEND>

<L>1489<pc>0026-a<k1>anaparAdDa<k2>anaparAdDa
{#anaparAdDa#}¦ {%an-aparāddha, as, ā, am,%} having
sustained no injury; ({%am%}), ind. without injury.
<LEND>

<L>1490<pc>0026-a<k1>anaparADa<k2>anaparADa
{%An-aparādha, as,%}¦ m. innocence, innocuousness;
({%as, ā, am%}), innocent, faultless; free from defects.
{%—Anaparādha-tva, am,%} n. freedom from fault.
<LEND>

<L>1491<pc>0026-a<k1>anaparADin<k2>anaparADin
{%Anaparādhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ innocent.
<LEND>

<L>1492<pc>0026-a<k1>anapalAzuka<k2>anapalAzuka
{#anapalAzuka#}¦ {%an-apalāṣuka, as, ā, am,%} not
thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>1493<pc>0026-a<k1>anapavAcana<k2>anapavAcana
{#anapavAcana#}¦ {%an-apavācana, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
impossible to be talked away or wished away.
<LEND>

<L>1494<pc>0026-a<k1>anapavfjya<k2>anapavfjya
{#anapavfjya#}¦ {%an-apavṛjya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
clear of objects that should be shunned as impure.
<LEND>

<L>1495<pc>0026-a<k1>anapavyayat<k2>anapavyayat
{#anapavyayat#}¦ {%an-apavyayat (apa-vy-ayat),%}
{%an, antī, at,%} Ved. unremitting, not letting go, able.
<LEND>

<L>1496<pc>0026-a<k1>anapasara<k2>anapasara
{#anapasara#}¦ {%an-apasara, as, ā, am%} (having no
hole to creep out of), inexcusable, unjustifiable; ({%as%}),
m. an usurper.
<LEND>

<L>1497<pc>0026-a<k1>anapasaraRa<k2>anapasaraRa
{%An-apasaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. absence of an outlet.
<LEND>

<L>1498<pc>0026-a<k1>anapaspfS<k2>anapaspfS
{#anapaspfS#}¦ {%an-apaspṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. not
refusing, not obstinate.
<LEND>

<L>1499<pc>0026-a<k1>anapasPur<k2>anapasPur
{#anapasPur#}¦ {%an-apasphur, ūs,%} or {%an-apasphura,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%an-apasphurat, an, antī, at,%} Ved.
(a cow) not withdrawing, i. e. not refusing to be
milked.
<LEND>

<L>1500<pc>0026-a<k1>anapahatapApman<k2>anapahatapApman
{#anapahatapApman#}¦ {%an-apahata-pāpman, ā, ā, a,%}
Ved. not freed from evil (epithet of the Pitṛs).
<LEND>

<L>1501<pc>0026-a<k1>anapahfta<k2>anapahfta
{#anapahfta#}¦ {%an-apahṛta, as, ā, am,%} not carried
off, not stolen.
<LEND>

<L>1502<pc>0026-a<k1>anapAkaraRa<k2>anapAkaraRa
{#anapAkaraRa#}¦ {%an-apākaraṇa, am,%} n. or {%an-%}
{%apākarman, a,%} n. (in law) non-payment, non-
delivery.
<LEND>

<L>1503<pc>0026-a<k1>anapAya<k2>anapAya
{#anapAya#}¦ {%an-apāya, as, ā, am,%} free from
loss, undiminished; not passing away, imperishable;
({%as%}), m. freedom from loss or from wear and tear;
permanence, imperishable nature; epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>1504<pc>0026-a<k1>anapAyin<k2>anapAyin
{%Anapāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not transient, imperishable;
unfailing.
<LEND>

<L>1505<pc>0026-a<k1>anapAvft<k2>anapAvft
{#anapAvft#}¦ {%an-apāvṛt,%} ind., Ved. not turned
away, unremittingly.
<LEND>

<L>1506<pc>0026-a<k1>anapASraya<k2>anapASraya
{#anapASraya#}¦ {%an-apāśraya, as, ā, am,%} not de-
pendent.
<LEND>

<L>1507<pc>0026-a<k1>anapuMsaka<k2>anapuMsaka
{#anapuMsaka#}¦ {%a-napuṃsaka, am,%} n. (in gram.)
not a neuter.
<LEND>

<L>1508<pc>0026-a<k1>anapUpIya<k2>anapUpIya
{#anapUpIya#}¦ {%an-apūpīya%} or {%an-apūpya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unfit for ({%apūpa%}) cakes. See {%apūpa.%}
<LEND>

<L>1509<pc>0026-a<k1>anapekza<k2>anapekza
{#anapekza#}¦ {%an-apekṣa, as, ā, am,%} regardless,
careless; indifferent; impartial; irrespective; irrele-
vant; ({%ā%}), f. disregard, carelessness, indifference; ({%am%}),
ind. without regard to; regardlessly, carelessly, acci-
dentally. {%—Anapekṣa-tva, am,%} n. disregard; irrele-
vance; irrespectiveness; ({%-tvāt%}), from having no refer-
ence to, since (it) has no reference to.
<LEND>

<L>1510<pc>0026-a<k1>anapekzita<k2>anapekzita
{%An-apekṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disregarded; unheeded;
unexpected.
<LEND>

<L>1511<pc>0026-a<k1>anapekzin<k2>anapekzin
{%An-apekṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ regardless, careless; in-
different, &c.
<LEND>

<L>1512<pc>0026-a<k1>anapekzya<k2>anapekzya
{%An-apekṣya,%}¦ ind. disregarding, irrespective of.
<LEND>

<L>1513<pc>0026-a<k1>anapeta<k2>anapeta
{#anapeta#}¦ {%an-apeta, as, ā, am,%} not gone off,
not past; not separated, faithful to, possessed of.
<LEND>
[Page0026-b+ 65]

<L>1514<pc>0026-b<k1>anapta<k2>anapta
{#anapta#}¦ {%an-apta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not watery.
<LEND>

<L>1515<pc>0026-b<k1>anapnas<k2>anapnas
{#anapnas#}¦ {%an-apnas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. destitute
of means (?), merit (?), shape (?), [cf. Lat. <nsi>inops.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>1516<pc>0026-b<k1>anapsaras<k2>anapsaras
{#anapsaras#}¦ {%an-apsaras, ās,%} f. unlike an
Apsaras, unworthy of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>1517<pc>0026-b<k1>anaPA<k2>anaPA
{#anaPA#}¦ {%anaphā,%} f. a particular configuration
of the planets. [Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀναφή</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>1518<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBijYa<k2>anaBijYa
{#anaBijYa#}¦ {%an-abhijña, as, ā, am,%} unac-
quainted with, ignorant.
<LEND>

<L>1519<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBidruh<k2>anaBidruh
{#anaBidruh#}¦ {%an-abhidruh, dhruk, k, k,%} Ved.
not malicious.
<LEND>

<L>1520<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBipreta<k2>anaBipreta
{#anaBipreta#}¦ {%an-abhipreta, am,%} n. something
different from (or the reverse of) what was intended.
<LEND>

<L>1521<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBiBUta<k2>anaBiBUta
{#anaBiBUta#}¦ {%an-abhibhūta, as, ā, am,%} not
overcome, unsurpassed; not beset, unobstructed.
<LEND>

<L>1522<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBimata<k2>anaBimata
{#anaBimata#}¦ {%an-abhimata, as, ā, am,%} not to
one's mind, disliked.
<LEND>

<L>1523<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBimlAta<k2>anaBimlAta
{#anaBimlAta#}¦ {%an-abhi-mlāta, as, ā, am,%} un-
faded. {%—Anabhimlāta-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. of
unfaded colour or brightness.
<LEND>

<L>1524<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBimlAna<k2>anaBimlAna
{%An-abhimlāna, as,%}¦ m. (non-fading), N. of the
chief of a Gotra.
<LEND>

<L>1525<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBirUpa<k2>anaBirUpa
{#anaBirUpa#}¦ {%an-abhirūpa, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} not
handsome, not pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>1526<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBilakzita<k2>anaBilakzita
{#anaBilakzita#}¦ {%an-abhilakṣita, as,%} m. desti-
tute of (masonic?) marks or symbols, an impostor.
<LEND>

<L>1527<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBilAza<k2>anaBilAza
{#anaBilAza#}¦ {%an-abhilāṣa, as,%} m. non-relish;
want of appetite; want of desire.
<LEND>

<L>1528<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBilAzin<k2>anaBilAzin
{%An-abhilāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ not desirous.
<LEND>

<L>1529<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBivyakta<k2>anaBivyakta
{#anaBivyakta#}¦ {%an-abhivyakta, as, ā, am,%} in-
distinct.
<LEND>

<L>1530<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBiSasta<k2>anaBiSasta
{#anaBiSasta#}¦ {%an-abhiśasta, as, ā, am,%} or {%an-%}
{%abhiśasti, is, is, i,%} or {%an-abhiśastya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. blameless, faultless. {%—Anabhiśaste-nī, īs, īs, i,%}
Ved. leading to perfection or to heaven.
<LEND>

<L>1531<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBizaNga<k2>anaBizaNga
{#anaBizaNga#}¦ {%an-abhiṣaṅga%} or {%an-abhi-%}
{%ṣvaṅga, as,%} m. absence of connection or attach-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>1532<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBisanDAna<k2>anaBisanDAna
{#anaBisanDAna#}¦ {%an-abhisandhāna, am,%} n. or
{%an-abhisandhi, is,%} m. absence of a (latent) design;
disinterestedness. {%—Anabhisandhi-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
done undesignedly.
<LEND>

<L>1533<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBisambanDa<k2>anaBisambanDa
{#anaBisambanDa#}¦ {%an-abhisambandha, as, ā, am,%}
unconnected.
<LEND>

<L>1534<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBisneha<k2>anaBisneha
{#anaBisneha#}¦ {%an-abhisneha, as, ā, am,%} not
affectionate, impassible.
<LEND>

<L>1535<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBihita<k2>anaBihita
{#anaBihita#}¦ {%an-abhihita, as, ā, am,%} not
named; (Ved.) not fastened; ({%as%}), m., N. of the
chief of a Gotra.
<LEND>

<L>1536<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBISu<k2>anaBISu
{#anaBISu#}¦ {%an-abhīśu, us, us, u,%} Ved. unbridled;
epithet of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>1537<pc>0026-b<k1>anaByanujYA<k2>anaByanujYA
{#anaByanujYA#}¦ {%an-abhyanujñā (abhy-anu-jñā),%}
f. non-permission.
<LEND>

<L>1538<pc>0026-b<k1>anaByArUQa<k2>anaByArUQa
{#anaByArUQa#}¦ {%an-abhyārūḍha, as, ā, am,%} not
ascended, not mounted.
<LEND>

<L>1539<pc>0026-b<k1>anaByASa<k2>anaByASa
{#anaByASa#}¦ {%an-abhyāśa%} or {%an-abhyāsa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} not near, distant. {%—Anabhyāsam-itya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} improper to be approached.
<LEND>

<L>1540<pc>0026-b<k1>anaByAsa<k2>anaByAsa
{#anaByAsa#}¦ {%an-abhyāsa, as,%} m. want of prac-
tice or skill.
<LEND>

<L>1541<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBraka<k2>anaBraka
{#anaBraka#}¦ {%an-abhraka, as,%} m. ‘cloudless;’
N. of a class of Bauddha divinities (generally in m.
pl.).
<LEND>

<L>1542<pc>0026-b<k1>anaBri<k2>anaBri
{#anaBri#}¦ {%an-abhri, is, is, i,%} Ved. (requiring)
no shovel or scraper; epithet of rain-water.
<LEND>
[Page0026-c+ 70]

<L>1543<pc>0026-c<k1>anama<k2>anama
{#anama#}¦ {%a-nama, as,%} m. one who needs not
make a salutation to others; a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>1544<pc>0026-c<k1>anamasya<k2>anamasya
{%A-namasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unworthy of a salutation.
<LEND>

<L>1545<pc>0026-c<k1>anamitampaca<k2>anamitampaca
{#anamitampaca#}¦ {%an-amitam-paca, as, ā, am,%}
(the same as {%mitam-paca%}), not cooking what has
not first been weighed, niggardly, miserly.
<LEND>

<L>1546<pc>0026-c<k1>anamitra<k2>anamitra
{#anamitra#}¦ {%an-amitra, as, ā, am,%} having no
enemies; ({%am%}), n. condition of having no enemies;
({%as%}), m., N. of various persons, particularly a king of
Ayodhyā.
<LEND>

<L>1547<pc>0026-c<k1>anamIva<k2>anamIva
{#anamIva#}¦ {%an-amīva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. free from
disease, well, comfortable; salubrious, salutary; sinless;
({%am%}), n. good health, happy state, comfort, pros-
perity.
<LEND>

<L>1548<pc>0026-c<k1>anambara<k2>anambara
{#anambara#}¦ {%an-ambara, as, ā, am,%} wearing no
clothing, naked; ({%as%}), m. a Buddhist mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>1549<pc>0026-c<k1>anaya<k2>anaya<h>1
{#anaya#} 1¦. {%a-naya, as,%} m. bad management;
bad conduct (gambling, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>1550<pc>0026-c<k1>anaya<k2>anaya<h>2
{#anaya#} 2¦. {%an-aya, as,%} m. evil course, ill
luck; misfortune, adversity. {%—Anayaṅ-gata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unfortunate.
<LEND>

<L>1551<pc>0026-c<k1>anaraRya<k2>anaraRya
{#anaraRya#}¦ {%an-araṇya, as,%} m., N. of a king of
Ayodhyā, said by some to have been Pṛthu's father.
<LEND>

<L>1552<pc>0026-c<k1>anarus<k2>anarus
{#anarus#}¦ {%an-arus, us, us, us,%} Ved. not sore
or wounded, healed, well, sound.
<LEND>

<L>1553<pc>0026-c<k1>anargala<k2>anargala
{#anargala#}¦ {%an-argala, as, ā, am,%} free from
bars, free, licentious.
<LEND>

<L>1554<pc>0026-c<k1>anarGa<k2>anarGa
{#anarGa#}¦ {%an-argha, as, ā, am,%} priceless, in-
valuable; ({%as%}), m. wrong value. {%—Anargha-rāghava,%}
{%am,%} n. title of a drama by Murāri, treating of Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>1555<pc>0026-c<k1>anarGya<k2>anarGya
{%An-arghya, as, ā, am,%}¦ priceless, not to be had at
any price; anything but valuable. {%—Anarghya-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. pricelessness.
<LEND>

<L>1556<pc>0026-c<k1>anarTa<k2>anarTa
{#anarTa#}¦ {%an-artha, as,%} m. non-value; a worth-
less or useless object; disappointing occurrence, reverse,
evil; nonsense; ({%as, ā, am%}), worthless, useless; un-
fortunate; having no meaning; having not that (but
another) meaning; nonsensical. {%—Anartha-kara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} doing what is useless or worthless; unprofit-
able; producing evil or misfortune. {%—Anartha-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. uselessness, &c. {%—Anartha-darśin, ī, inī, i,%}
minding useless or worthless things. {%—Anartha-nāśin,%}
{%ī,%} m. (destroyer of evil), Śiva. {%—Anartha-buddhi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} having a nonsensical intellect. {%—Anartha-%}
{%bhāva, as, ā, am,%} malicious. {%—Anartha-lupta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} freed from all that is worthless. {%—An-artha-%}
{%saṃśaya, as,%} m. not a risk of one's money; safety of
one's money or wealth.
<LEND>

<L>1557<pc>0026-c<k1>anarTaka<k2>anarTaka
{%An-arthaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ useless, vain, worthless;
meaningless, nonsensical.
<LEND>

<L>1558<pc>0026-c<k1>anarTya<k2>anarTya
{%An-arthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ worthless, useless.
<LEND>

<L>1559<pc>0026-c<k1>anarpaRa<k2>anarpaRa
{#anarpaRa#}¦ {%an-arpaṇa, am,%} n., Ved. non-sur-
rendering, not giving up.
<LEND>

<L>1560<pc>0026-c<k1>anarva<k2>anarva
{#anarva#}¦ {%an-arva, as, ā, am,%} or {%an-arvan, ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} Ved. not liable to be stayed or limited; unob-
structed; irresistible; permanent.
<LEND>

<L>1561<pc>0026-c<k1>anarviS<k2>anarviS<h>1
{#anarviS#} 1¦. {%anar-viś, ṭ,%} m., Ved. seated on
the car ({%anas%}) or cart; a driver.
<LEND>

<L>1562<pc>0026-c<k1>anarviS<k2>anarviS<h>2
{#anarviS#} 2¦. {%an-ar-viś, ṭ,%} m. ({%ar%} for {%aram,%}
rt. {%ṛ%}), one who fails to reach his destination.
<LEND>

<L>1563<pc>0026-c<k1>anarSani<k2>anarSani
{#anarSani#}¦ {%an-arśani, is,%} m., Ved. N. of a
demon slain by Indra; (etym. doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>1564<pc>0026-c<k1>anarSarAti<k2>anarSarAti
{#anarSarAti#}¦ {%an-arśa-rāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. giving
of uninjurious things, one whose gifts do not hurt.
<LEND>

<L>1565<pc>0026-c<k1>anarha<k2>anarha
{#anarha#}¦ {%an-arha, as, ā, am,%} or {%an-arhat, an,%}
{%antī, at,%} undeserving of punishment or of reward;
unworthy; inadequate, unsuitable.
<LEND>

<L>1566<pc>0026-c<k1>anarhyatA<k2>anarhyatA
{%Anarhya-tā,%}¦ f. condition of not being properly
estimated; inadequacy, unsuitableness.
<LEND>

<L>1567<pc>0026-c<k1>anala<k2>anala
{#anala#}¦ {%anala, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%an,%} q. v.), fire;
[Page0027-a+ 68]
Agni, the god of fire; digestive power, gastric juice,
bile; wind; N. or epithet of Vasudeva; of a certain
Muni; of one of the eight Vasus; of a certain monkey;
N. of various plants, as Plumbago Zeylanica and
Rosea, and Semicarpus Anacirdium; the letter {%r;%}
the number three; (in astron.) the fiftieth year of Bṛ-
haspati's cycle; the third lunar mansion or Kṛttikā (?).
{%—Anala-dīpana, as, ī, am,%} stomachic. {%—Anala-%}
{%prabhā,%} f. a plant, Halicacabum Cardiospermum.
{%—Anala-priyā,%} f. Agni's wife. {%—Anala-vāṭta, as,%}
m., N. of ancient Pattana. {%—Anala-sāda, as,%} m.
dyspepsia. {%—Analānanda (˚la-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of
a Vedantic writer, author of the Vedāntakalpataru.
<LEND>

<L>1568<pc>0027-a<k1>analaNkarizRu<k2>analaNkarizRu
{#analaNkarizRu#}¦ {%an-alaṅkariṣṇu, us, us, u,%}
not given to the use of ornaments; not ornamented.
<LEND>

<L>1569<pc>0027-a<k1>analam<k2>analam
{#analam#}¦ {%an-alam,%} ind. not enough; in-
sufficiently.
<LEND>

<L>1570<pc>0027-a<k1>analasa<k2>analasa
{#analasa#}¦ {%an-alasa, as, ā, am,%} not lazy, active.
<LEND>

<L>1571<pc>0027-a<k1>anali<k2>anali
{#anali#}¦ {%anali, is,%} m. a tree, Sesbana
Grandiflora.
<LEND>

<L>1572<pc>0027-a<k1>analpa<k2>analpa
{#analpa#}¦ {%an-alpa, as, ā, am,%} not a little,
much, numerous. {%—Analpa-ghoṣa, as, ā, am,%} very
clamorous, very noisy. {%—Analpa-manyu, us, us, u,%}
greatly enraged.
<LEND>

<L>1573<pc>0027-a<k1>anava<k2>anava
{#anava#}¦ {%anava, as,%} m., N. of a man or a
tribe, {%= anu.%}
<LEND>

<L>1574<pc>0027-a<k1>anavakASa<k2>anavakASa
{#anavakASa#}¦ {%an-avakāśa, as, ā, am,%} having
no opportunity; uncalled for (there being no “occa-
sion” for it), inapplicable.
<LEND>

<L>1575<pc>0027-a<k1>anavagAhin<k2>anavagAhin
{#anavagAhin#}¦ {%an-avagāhin, ī, inī, i%} (rt. {%gāh%}),
not dipping into, not studying.
<LEND>

<L>1576<pc>0027-a<k1>anavagAhya<k2>anavagAhya
{%An-avagāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfathomable.
<LEND>

<L>1577<pc>0027-a<k1>anavagIta<k2>anavagIta
{#anavagIta#}¦ {%an-avagīta, as, ā, am,%} not made
an object of a contemptuous song, not blamed.
<LEND>

<L>1578<pc>0027-a<k1>anavagraha<k2>anavagraha
{#anavagraha#}¦ {%an-avagraha, as, ā, am,%} resistless;
not to be intercepted.
<LEND>

<L>1579<pc>0027-a<k1>anavaglAyat<k2>anavaglAyat
{#anavaglAyat#}¦ {%an-avaglāyat, an, antī, at,%} Ved.
not growing remiss.
<LEND>

<L>1580<pc>0027-a<k1>anavacCinna<k2>anavacCinna
{#anavacCinna#}¦ {%an-avacchinna, as, ā, am,%} not
intersected, uninterrupted; not marked off, unbounded,
unlimited, immoderate; undefined, undiscriminated.
{%—Anavacchinna-hāsa, as,%} m. continuous or im-
moderate laughter.
<LEND>

<L>1581<pc>0027-a<k1>anavat<k2>anavat
{#anavat#}¦ {%ana-vat, ān, atī, at%} (fr. {%ana,%} see under
rt. {%an%}), endowed with breath or life. {%—Anavat-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. condition of being endowed with life.
<LEND>

<L>1582<pc>0027-a<k1>anavatapta<k2>anavatapta
{#anavatapta#}¦ {%an-avatapta, as,%} m. (among
Buddhists) N. of a serpent king; N. of a lake, =
Rāvaṇa-hrada.
<LEND>

<L>1583<pc>0027-a<k1>anavadya<k2>anavadya
{#anavadya#}¦ {%an-avadya, as, ā, am,%} irreproach-
able, faultless; unobjectionable; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an
Apsaras. {%—Anavadya-tā,%} f. or {%anavadya-tva, am,%}
n. faultlessness. {%—Anavadya-rūpa, as, ā%} or {%i, am,%}
of faultless form or beauty. {%—Anavadyāṅga (˚ya-%}
{%aṅ˚), as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} having faultless body or limbs.
<LEND>

<L>1584<pc>0027-a<k1>anavadrARa<k2>anavadrARa
{#anavadrARa#}¦ {%an-avadrāṇa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%drā%}),
Ved. not going to sleep, not sleepy.
<LEND>

<L>1585<pc>0027-a<k1>anavaDarzya<k2>anavaDarzya
{#anavaDarzya#}¦ {%an-avadharṣya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not to be defied.
<LEND>

<L>1586<pc>0027-a<k1>anavaDAna<k2>anavaDAna
{#anavaDAna#}¦ {%an-avadhāna, am,%} n. inattention,
inadvertence; ({%as, ā, am%}), inattentive, careless.
{%—Anavadhāna-tā,%} f. inadvertency.
<LEND>

<L>1587<pc>0027-a<k1>anavaDi<k2>anavaDi
{#anavaDi#}¦ {%an-avadhi, is, is, i,%} unlimited.
<LEND>

<L>1588<pc>0027-a<k1>anavaDfzya<k2>anavaDfzya
{#anavaDfzya#}¦ {%an-avadhṛṣya, as, ā, am,%} im-
possible to be put down or injured.
<LEND>

<L>1589<pc>0027-a<k1>anavana<k2>anavana
{#anavana#}¦ {%an-avana, as, ā, am,%} affording no
help or protection.
<LEND>

<L>1590<pc>0027-a<k1>anavanAmitavEjayanta<k2>anavanAmitavEjayanta
{#anavanAmitavEjayanta#}¦ {%an-avanāmita-vaijayan- %}
[Page0027-b+ 70]
{%ta, as,%} m. (having victorious banners unlowered, ever
prosperous; Buddhist term for) a future universe.
<LEND>

<L>1591<pc>0027-b<k1>anavapfgRa<k2>anavapfgRa
{#anavapfgRa#}¦ {%an-avapṛgṇa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%pṛc%}),
Ved. not closely united, but spreading all around.
<LEND>

<L>1592<pc>0027-b<k1>anavabuDyamAna<k2>anavabuDyamAna
{#anavabuDyamAna#}¦ {%an-avabudhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}
deranged.
<LEND>

<L>1593<pc>0027-b<k1>anavabrava<k2>anavabrava
{#anavabrava#}¦ {%an-avabrava, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
speaking without effect; speaking authoritatively; or
irreproachable (?).
<LEND>

<L>1594<pc>0027-b<k1>anavaBra<k2>anavaBra
{#anavaBra#}¦ {%an-avabhra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
carried off (?); undiminished (?); enduring (?). {%—An-%}
{%avabhra-rādhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having undi-
minished (or durable) wealth; able to give a lasting
reward.
<LEND>

<L>1595<pc>0027-b<k1>anavama<k2>anavama
{#anavama#}¦ {%an-avama, as, ā, am,%} not low;
exalted.
<LEND>

<L>1596<pc>0027-b<k1>anavamarSam<k2>anavamarSam
{#anavamarSam#}¦ {%an-avamarśam,%} ind. without
touching.
<LEND>

<L>1597<pc>0027-b<k1>anavara<k2>anavara
{#anavara#}¦ {%an-avara, as, ā, am,%} not inferior;
excellent.
<LEND>

<L>1598<pc>0027-b<k1>anavarata<k2>anavarata
{#anavarata#}¦ {%an-avarata, as, ā, am,%} incessant;
({%am%}), ind. incessantly.
<LEND>

<L>1599<pc>0027-b<k1>anavaraTa<k2>anavaraTa
{#anavaraTa#}¦ {%an-avaratha, as,%} m., N. of a son
of Madhu and father of Kuruvasta.
<LEND>

<L>1600<pc>0027-b<k1>anavarArDya<k2>anavarArDya
{#anavarArDya#}¦ {%an-avarārdhya, as, ā, am,%} chief,
principal.
<LEND>

<L>1601<pc>0027-b<k1>anavalamba<k2>anavalamba
{#anavalamba#}¦ {%an-avalamba, as, ā, am,%} having
no prop or support.
<LEND>

<L>1602<pc>0027-b<k1>anavalambana<k2>anavalambana
{%An-avalambana, am,%}¦ n. independence.
<LEND>

<L>1603<pc>0027-b<k1>anavalambita<k2>anavalambita
{%An-avalambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not propped up, not
supported, not dependent.
<LEND>

<L>1604<pc>0027-b<k1>anavalepa<k2>anavalepa
{#anavalepa#}¦ {%an-avalepa, as, ā, am,%} free from
(moral) veneer, unvarnished, unassuming.
<LEND>

<L>1605<pc>0027-b<k1>anavaloBana<k2>anavaloBana
{#anavaloBana#}¦ {%an-avalobhana, am,%} n. (‘non-
longing’). N. of ceremony to be observed by a
pregnant woman; title of a particular treatise in an
Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>1606<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasa<k2>anavasa
{#anavasa#}¦ {%an-avasa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
stopping to eat by the way.
<LEND>

<L>1607<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasara<k2>anavasara
{#anavasara#}¦ {%an-avasara, as, ā, am,%} having no
interval of leisure, busy; coming when there is no
such interval, inopportune; ({%as%}), m. absence of
leisure; unseasonableness.
<LEND>

<L>1608<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasAdya<k2>anavasAdya
{#anavasAdya#}¦ {%an-avasādya,%} ind. (part. of Caus.
of {%ava-sad%} with 3. {%a%}), without annoying.
<LEND>

<L>1609<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasAna<k2>anavasAna
{#anavasAna#}¦ {%an-avasāna, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%so%}),
having no setting, free from death; endless.
<LEND>

<L>1610<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasita<k2>anavasita
{%An-avasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not set, not terminated;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a species of the Triṣṭubh metre, con-
sisting of four lines with eleven feet in each.
<LEND>

<L>1611<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasyat<k2>anavasyat
{%An-avasyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ unceasing.
<LEND>

<L>1612<pc>0027-b<k1>anavaskara<k2>anavaskara
{#anavaskara#}¦ {%an-avaskara, as, ā, am,%} free from
dirt, dean, cleansed.
<LEND>

<L>1613<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasTa<k2>anavasTa
{#anavasTa#}¦ {%an-avastha, as, ā, am,%} unsettled,
unstable; ({%ā%}), f. unsettled condition or character;
instability, unsteady or loose conduct; (in phil.) non-
finality (of a proposition), endless series of statements,
<LEND>

<L>1614<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasTAna<k2>anavasTAna
{%An-avasthāna as, ā, am,%}¦ unstable, fickle; ({%as%}),
m. wind; ({%am%}), n. instability; unsteadiness or loose-
ness of conduct.
<LEND>

<L>1615<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasTAyin<k2>anavasTAyin
{%An-avasthāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ transient.
<LEND>

<L>1616<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasTita<k2>anavasTita
{%An-avasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unsettled, unsteady, loose
in conduct. {%—Anavasthita-citta, as, ā, am,%} or {%an-%}
{%avasthitātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} unsteady-minded.
{%—Anavasthitacitta-tva, am,%} n. unsteadiness of
mind. {%—Anavasthita-tva, am,%} n. unsteadiness, in-
stability.
<LEND>

<L>1617<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasTiti<k2>anavasTiti
{%An-avasthiti, is,%}¦ f. instability; unsteadiness; loose-
ness of character.
<LEND>

<L>1618<pc>0027-b<k1>anavasyat<k2>anavasyat
{#anavasyat#}¦ {%an-ava-syat.%} See {%an-avasāna.%}
<LEND>
[Page0027-c+ 69]

<L>1619<pc>0027-c<k1>anavahita<k2>anavahita
{#anavahita#}¦ {%an-avahita, as, ā, am,%} heedless,
inattentive.
<LEND>

<L>1620<pc>0027-c<k1>anavahvara<k2>anavahvara
{#anavahvara#}¦ {%an-avahvara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
crooked, straightforward.
<LEND>

<L>1621<pc>0027-c<k1>anavAc<k2>anavAc
{#anavAc#}¦ {%an-avāc, k, k, k,%} not speechless,
the reverse of speechless.
<LEND>

<L>1622<pc>0027-c<k1>anavAYc<k2>anavAYc
{#anavAYc#}¦ {%an-avāñc, āṅ, ācī, āk,%} not inclining
downwards, looking up or straightforward.
<LEND>

<L>1623<pc>0027-c<k1>anavAnam<k2>anavAnam
{#anavAnam#}¦ {%an-avānam,%} ind. without breath-
ing (between), in one breath, without interruption, {%uno%}
{%tenore%}. {%—Anavāna-tā,%} f. uninterruptedness, con-
tiguity.
<LEND>

<L>1624<pc>0027-c<k1>anavApta<k2>anavApta
{#anavApta#}¦ {%an-avāpta, as, ā, am,%} not obtained.
<LEND>

<L>1625<pc>0027-c<k1>anavApti<k2>anavApti
{%An-avāpti, is,%}¦ f. non-attainment.
<LEND>

<L>1626<pc>0027-c<k1>anavAyam<k2>anavAyam
{#anavAyam#}¦ {%an-avāyam,%} ind., Ved. uninter-
ruptedly, unyieldingly.
<LEND>

<L>1627<pc>0027-c<k1>anaviTya<k2>anaviTya
{#anaviTya#}¦ {%an-avithya, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%avi,%}
q. v.), not suited to sheep.
<LEND>

<L>1628<pc>0027-c<k1>anavekza<k2>anavekza
{#anavekza#}¦ {%an-avekṣa, as, ā, am,%} regardless;
({%am%}), ind. irrespectively; without regard to; ({%ā%}), f.
or {%an-avekṣaṇa, am,%} n. regardlessness.
<LEND>

<L>1629<pc>0027-c<k1>anavrata<k2>anavrata
{#anavrata#}¦ {%an-avrata, as, ā, am,%} not (wholly)
destitute of ascetic performances; ({%as%}), m. a Jaina
devotee of that description.
<LEND>

<L>1630<pc>0027-c<k1>anaSana<k2>anaSana
{#anaSana#}¦ {%an-aśana, am,%} n. abstinence from
food, fasting, especially as a form of suicide adopted
from vindictive motives; ({%as, ā, am%}), fasting.
{%—Anaśana-tā,%} f. not eating.
<LEND>

<L>1631<pc>0027-c<k1>anaSanAya<k2>anaSanAya
{%An-aśanāya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not hungry.
<LEND>

<L>1632<pc>0027-c<k1>anaSita<k2>anaSita
{%An-aśita, am,%}¦ n. condition of not having eaten,
fasting.
<LEND>

<L>1633<pc>0027-c<k1>anaSnat<k2>anaSnat
{%An-aśnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ not eating, not enjoying.
{%—Anaśnant-sāṅgamana, as,%} m., Ved. the sacrificial
fire in the Sabhā (which is approached before break-
fast).
<LEND>

<L>1634<pc>0027-c<k1>anaSnAna<k2>anaSnAna
{%An-aśnāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not eating.
<LEND>

<L>1635<pc>0027-c<k1>anaSru<k2>anaSru
{#anaSru#}¦ {%an-aśru, us, us, u,%} tearless.
<LEND>

<L>1636<pc>0027-c<k1>anaSva<k2>anaSva
{#anaSva#}¦ {%an-aśva, as, ā, am,%} having no horse
or horses; ({%as%}), m. something that is not a horse.
{%—An-aśva-dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. one who does
not give horses.
<LEND>

<L>1637<pc>0027-c<k1>anaSvan<k2>anaSvan
{#anaSvan#}¦ {%an-aśvan, ā,%} m., N. of Parīkṣit's
father.
<LEND>

<L>1638<pc>0027-c<k1>anaSvara<k2>anaSvara
{#anaSvara#}¦ {%a-naśvara, as, ī, am,%} imperishable.
<LEND>

<L>1639<pc>0027-c<k1>anazwa<k2>anazwa
{%A-naṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ undestroyed, unimpaired.
{%—Anaṣṭa-paśu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having his cattle
unimpaired. {%—Anaṣṭa-vedas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
having his property unimpaired.
<LEND>

<L>1640<pc>0027-c<k1>anas<k2>anas
{#anas#}¦ {%anas, as,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%an%}),
a cart; a mother; birth; offspring, living creature;
boiled rice. {%—Anas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. yoked to
a cart.
<LEND>

<L>1641<pc>0027-c<k1>anaquh<k2>anaquh
{%Anaḍ-uh, anar-viś,%}¦ see s. v. ({%s%} changed to {%ḍ%} and {%r%}).
<LEND>

<L>1642<pc>0027-c<k1>anasUya<k2>anasUya
{#anasUya#}¦ {%an-asūya, as, ā, am,%} not spiteful,
not envious; ({%ā%}), f. freedom from spite; absence of
ill-will or envy; N. of a daughter of Dakṣa, and of
one of Śakuntalā's friends.
<LEND>

<L>1643<pc>0027-c<k1>anasUyaka<k2>anasUyaka
{%An-asūyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%an-asūyu, us, us, u,%}
not spiteful or envious.
<LEND>

<L>1644<pc>0027-c<k1>anasUri<k2>anasUri
{#anasUri#}¦ {%an-a-sūri, is, is, i,%} Ved. not un-
wise, wise.
<LEND>

<L>1645<pc>0027-c<k1>anastamita<k2>anastamita
{#anastamita#}¦ {%an-astam-ita, as, ā, am,%} not
gone down; not subject to setting or declining.
<LEND>

<L>1646<pc>0027-c<k1>anasTa<k2>anasTa
{#anasTa#}¦ {%an-astha, as, ā, am,%} or {%an-asthi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} or {%anasthika, as, ā, am,%} or {%anasthi-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} boneless.
<LEND>

<L>1647<pc>0027-c<k1>anahaNkAra<k2>anahaNkAra
{#anahaNkAra#}¦ {%an-ahaṅkāra, as,%} m. (non-ego-
tism), absence of or freedom from self-conceit, or
the tendency to regard self as something distinct from
[Page0028-a+ 72]
the supreme spirit; freedom from pride; ({%as, ā, am%}),
free from self-conceit or pride.
<LEND>

<L>1648<pc>0028-a<k1>anahaNkfta<k2>anahaNkfta
{%An-ahaṅkṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%an-ahaṃ-vādin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} free from self-conceit or pride.
<LEND>

<L>1649<pc>0028-a<k1>anahaNkfti<k2>anahaNkfti
{%An-ahaṅkṛti, is,%}¦ f. {%= an-ahaṅkāra; (is, is, i),%}
free from self-conceit or pride.
<LEND>

<L>1650<pc>0028-a<k1>anahan<k2>anahan
{#anahan#}¦ {%an-ahan, as,%} n. a day which is no
day, an evil or unlucky day.
<LEND>

<L>1651<pc>0028-a<k1>anA<k2>anA
{#anA#}¦ {%anā,%} ind., Ved. (inst. of pronom. base
{%a%}), hereby, thus, indeed; also said to be a substitute
for {%an%} or {%ana,%} ‘not,’ in one or two words.
<LEND>

<L>1652<pc>0028-a<k1>anAkAra<k2>anAkAra
{#anAkAra#}¦ {%an-ākāra, as, ā, am,%} shapeless.
<LEND>

<L>1653<pc>0028-a<k1>anAkArita<k2>anAkArita
{#anAkArita#}¦ {%an-ākārita, as, ā, am,%} not
claimed, not exacted.
<LEND>

<L>1654<pc>0028-a<k1>anAkAla<k2>anAkAla
{#anAkAla#}¦ {%an-ākāla, as,%} m. unseasonable
time; famine. {%—Anākāla-bhṛta, as,%} m. a slave
who became one voluntarily to avoid starvation in a
time of scarcity; also spelt {%annākāla-bhṛta.%}
<LEND>

<L>1655<pc>0028-a<k1>anAkASa<k2>anAkASa
{#anAkASa#}¦ {%an-ākāśa, as, ā, am,%} having no
transparent atmosphere, differing from it; opaque,
dark; ({%as, am%}), m. n. air or atmosphere undeserving
of its name.
<LEND>

<L>1656<pc>0028-a<k1>anAkula<k2>anAkula
{#anAkula#}¦ {%an-ākula, as, ā, am,%} not beset;
not confused; unperplexed, calm, consistent, regular.
<LEND>

<L>1657<pc>0028-a<k1>anAkfta<k2>anAkfta
{#anAkfta#}¦ {%an-ākṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unre-
claimed, unreclaimable.
<LEND>

<L>1658<pc>0028-a<k1>anAkrAnta<k2>anAkrAnta
{#anAkrAnta#}¦ {%an-ākrānta, as, ā, am,%} unassailed,
unassailable; ({%ā%}), f. a plant, Prickly Nightshade, So-
lanum Jacquini.
<LEND>

<L>1659<pc>0028-a<k1>anAkzArita<k2>anAkzArita
{#anAkzArita#}¦ {%an-ākṣārita, as, ā, am,%} unre-
proached.
<LEND>

<L>1660<pc>0028-a<k1>anAkzit<k2>anAkzit
{#anAkzit#}¦ {%an-ākṣit, t, t, t,%} Ved. not re-
siding or resting.
<LEND>

<L>1661<pc>0028-a<k1>anAga<k2>anAga
{#anAga#}¦ {%an-āga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. sinless;
see {%an-āgas; (ā),%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>1662<pc>0028-a<k1>anAgata<k2>anAgata
{#anAgata#}¦ {%an-āgata, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%gam%}), not
come, not arrived; future; not attained, not learnt;
unknown; ({%am%}), n. the future. {%—Anāgata-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} connected with or relating to the future.
{%—Anāgata-vidhātṛ, ā,%} m. (disposer of the future),
provident; N. of a fish. {%—Anāgatābādha (˚ta-āb˚),%}
{%as,%} m. future trouble. {%—Anāgatārtavā (˚ta-ār˚),%} f.
a girl who has not yet attained to puberty. {%—An-%}
{%āgatāvekṣaṇa (˚ta-av˚), am,%} n. act of looking at
that which is to come next.
<LEND>

<L>1663<pc>0028-a<k1>anAgati<k2>anAgati
{%An-āgati, is,%}¦ f. non-arrival; non-attainment, non-
accession.
<LEND>

<L>1664<pc>0028-a<k1>anAgama<k2>anAgama
{%An-āgama, as,%}¦ m. non-arrival, non-attainment;
({%as, ā, am%}), not come, not present; (in law) not
constituting an accession to previous property, but
possessed from time immemorial, and therefore with-
out documentary proof. {%—Anāgamopabhoga (˚ma-%}
{%up˚), as,%} m. enjoyment of such property.
<LEND>

<L>1665<pc>0028-a<k1>anAgamizyat<k2>anAgamizyat
{%An-āgamiṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ one who will not
approach.
<LEND>

<L>1666<pc>0028-a<k1>anAgamya<k2>anAgamya
{%An-āgamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unapproachable, unattain-
able.
<LEND>

<L>1667<pc>0028-a<k1>anAgAmin<k2>anAgAmin
{%An-āgāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not coming, not arriving;
not future, not subject to returning; ({%ī%}), m. epithet
of the third among the four Buddhist orders.
<LEND>

<L>1668<pc>0028-a<k1>anAgAmuka<k2>anAgAmuka
{%An-āgāmuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ not in the habit of
coming, not likely to come.
<LEND>

<L>1669<pc>0028-a<k1>anAgas<k2>anAgas
{#anAgas#}¦ {%an-āgas, ā, ās, as,%} sinless, blame-
less; conferring sinlessness or bliss. {%—Anāgās-tva,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. sinlessness. {%—Anāgo-hatyā,%} f. murder
of an innocent person.
<LEND>

<L>1670<pc>0028-a<k1>anAcaraRa<k2>anAcaraRa
{#anAcaraRa#}¦ {%an-ācaraṇa, am,%} n. or better
{%an-ācāra, as,%} m. improper behaviour; departure from
that which is customary or right.
<LEND>

<L>1671<pc>0028-a<k1>anAcAra<k2>anAcAra
{%An-ācāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%anācārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
improper in behaviour; regardless of custom or pro-
priety or law; unprincipled.
<LEND>
[Page0028-b+ 70]

<L>1672<pc>0028-b<k1>anAcAryaBogIna<k2>anAcAryaBogIna
{#anAcAryaBogIna#}¦ {%an-ācārya-bhogīna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unfit or improper for a spiritual teacher to eat or
enjoy.
<LEND>

<L>1673<pc>0028-b<k1>anAjYapta<k2>anAjYapta
{#anAjYapta#}¦ {%an-ājñapta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jñā%}), not
commanded. {%—Anājñapta-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} doing
what has not been commanded.
<LEND>

<L>1674<pc>0028-b<k1>anAjYAta<k2>anAjYAta
{#anAjYAta#}¦ {%an-ājñāta, as, ā, am,%} unknown,
surpassing all that has ever been known.
<LEND>

<L>1675<pc>0028-b<k1>anAQya<k2>anAQya
{#anAQya#}¦ {%an-āḍhya, as, ā, am,%} not wealthy,
poor. {%—An-āḍhyam-bhaviṣṇu, us, us, u,%} not be-
coming wealthy; becoming poor (?).
<LEND>

<L>1676<pc>0028-b<k1>anAtata<k2>anAtata
{#anAtata#}¦ {%an-ātata, as, ā, am,%} not stretched
or strung (as a bow).
<LEND>

<L>1677<pc>0028-b<k1>anAtapa<k2>anAtapa
{#anAtapa#}¦ {%an-ātapa, as,%} m. freedom from the
blaze of the sun; shade; coolness.
<LEND>

<L>1678<pc>0028-b<k1>anAtura<k2>anAtura
{#anAtura#}¦ {%an-ātura, as, ā, am,%} Ved. free
from suffering or weariness; well.
<LEND>

<L>1679<pc>0028-b<k1>anAtman<k2>anAtman
{#anAtman#}¦ {%an-ātman, ā,%} m. not self, an-
other; something different from spirit or soul; ({%ā,%}
{%ā, a%}), not spiritual, corporeal; destitute of spirit or
mind. {%—An-ātma-jña, as, ā, am,%} destitute of spi-
ritual knowledge or true wisdom. {%—Anātma-pratya-%}
{%vekṣā,%} f. (with Buddhists) reflection that there is
no spirit or self. {%—An-ātma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} not
self-possessed; ({%vat%}), ind. unlike one's self.
<LEND>

<L>1680<pc>0028-b<k1>anAtmaka<k2>anAtmaka
{%An-ātmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (with Buddhists) unreal.
<LEND>

<L>1681<pc>0028-b<k1>anAtmanIna<k2>anAtmanIna
{%An-ātmanīna, ās, ā, am,%}¦ not adapted to self;
disinterested.
<LEND>

<L>1682<pc>0028-b<k1>anAtmya<k2>anAtmya
{%An-ātmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ impersonal; ({%am%}), n. want
of affection for one's own family.
<LEND>

<L>1683<pc>0028-b<k1>anAtyantika<k2>anAtyantika
{#anAtyantika#}¦ {%an-ātyantika, as, ī, am,%} not
perpetual, not final; intermittent, recurrent.
<LEND>

<L>1684<pc>0028-b<k1>anATa<k2>anATa
{#anATa#}¦ {%a-nātha, as, ā, am,%} having no
master or natural protector; widowed; fatherless;
helpless, poor; ({%am%}), n., Ved. want of a protec-
tor, helplessness. {%—Anātha-piṇḍa-da%} or {%a-nātha-%}
{%piṇḍika, as,%} m. (‘giver of cakes or food to the poor’),
N. of a merchant, in whose garden Śākyamuni used
to instruct his disciples. {%—Anātha-sabhā,%} f. a poor-
house.
<LEND>

<L>1685<pc>0028-b<k1>anAda<k2>anAda
{#anAda#}¦ {%a-nāda, as,%} m. absence of sound (in
pronouncing aspirated letters).
<LEND>

<L>1686<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdin<k2>anAdin
{%A-nādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not sounding.
<LEND>

<L>1687<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdadAna<k2>anAdadAna
{#anAdadAna#}¦ {%an-ādadāna, as, ā, am,%} not
accepting.
<LEND>

<L>1688<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdara<k2>anAdara
{#anAdara#}¦ {%an-ādara, as,%} m. disrespect, con-
temptuous neglect; ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. not awe-
struck, calm; indifferent.
<LEND>

<L>1689<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdaraRa<k2>anAdaraRa
{%An-ādaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. disrespectful behaviour, neglect.
<LEND>

<L>1690<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdarin<k2>anAdarin
{%An-ādarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ disrespectful, irreverent.
<LEND>

<L>1691<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdi<k2>anAdi
{#anAdi#}¦ {%an-ādi, is, is, i,%} having no begin-
ning, existing from eternity. {%—Anādi-tva, am,%} n.
state of having no beginning. {%—An-ādi-nidhana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having neither beginning nor end, eternal.
{%—Anādi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having no beginning.
{%—An-ādi-madhyānta (˚dhya-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
having no beginning, middle or end. {%—Anādy-%}
{%ananta, as, ā, am,%} without beginning and without
end. {%—An-ādyanta, as, ā, am,%} without beginning
and end; ({%as%}), m., N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>1692<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdizwa<k2>anAdizwa
{#anAdizwa#}¦ {%an-ādiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} not indi-
cated; not commanded or instructed; not allowed.
<LEND>

<L>1693<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdInava<k2>anAdInava
{#anAdInava#}¦ {%an-ādīnava, as, ā, am,%} faultless.
<LEND>

<L>1694<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdfta<k2>anAdfta
{#anAdfta#}¦ {%an-ādṛta, as, ā, am,%} not respected,
disrespected, despised.
<LEND>

<L>1695<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdftya<k2>anAdftya
{%An-ādṛtya,%}¦ ind. without respecting, regardless of.
<LEND>

<L>1696<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdeya<k2>anAdeya
{#anAdeya#}¦ {%an-ādeya, as, ā, am,%} unfit or
improper to be received, unacceptable, inadmissible.
<LEND>

<L>1697<pc>0028-b<k1>anAdeSakara<k2>anAdeSakara
{#anAdeSakara#}¦ {%anādeśa-kara, as, ā, am,%} doing
what is not commanded or not allowed.
<LEND>
[Page0028-c+ 68]

<L>1698<pc>0028-c<k1>anAdya<k2>anAdya<h>1
{#anAdya#} 1¦. {%an-ādya, as, ā, am, = an-ādi,%}
having no beginning.
<LEND>

<L>1699<pc>0028-c<k1>anAdya<k2>anAdya<h>2
{#anAdya#} 2¦. {%an-ādya, as, ā, am, = an-adya,%}
not eatable.
<LEND>

<L>1700<pc>0028-c<k1>anADfz<k2>anADfz
{#anADfz#}¦ {%an-ādhṛṣ, k, k, k%} (rt. {%dhṛṣ%}),
Ved. not checking.
<LEND>

<L>1701<pc>0028-c<k1>anADfzwa<k2>anADfzwa
{%An-ādhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. unchecked, unim-
paired, invincible, perfect.
<LEND>

<L>1702<pc>0028-c<k1>anADfzwi<k2>anADfzwi
{%An-ādhṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ m. (‘superior to any check’), N.
of a son of Śūra; also of a son of Ugraseana and
general of the Yādava.
<LEND>

<L>1703<pc>0028-c<k1>anADfzya<k2>anADfzya
{%An-ādhṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. invincible, not to
be meddled with.
<LEND>

<L>1704<pc>0028-c<k1>anAnata<k2>anAnata
{#anAnata#}¦ {%an-ānata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unbent,
not humbled; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>1705<pc>0028-c<k1>anAnukftya<k2>anAnukftya
{#anAnukftya#}¦ {%an-ānukṛtya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%kṛ%}
with {%ānu%} for {%anu%}), Ved. inimitable, unparalleled.
<LEND>

<L>1706<pc>0028-c<k1>anAnuda<k2>anAnuda
{#anAnuda#}¦ {%an-ānuda, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dā%} with
{%ānu%} for {%anu%}), Ved. not giving way, unyielding,
obstinate; unaided (?), unsurpassed in giving (?).
<LEND>

<L>1707<pc>0028-c<k1>anAnudizwa<k2>anAnudizwa
{#anAnudizwa#}¦ {%an-ānudiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%diś%}
with {%ānu%} for {%anu%}), Ved. unsolicited.
<LEND>

<L>1708<pc>0028-c<k1>anAnupUrvya<k2>anAnupUrvya
{#anAnupUrvya#}¦ {%an-ānupūrvya, am,%} n. separation
of the different parts of a compound word by the
intervention of others; the not coming in regular
order, tmesis. {%—An-ānupūrvya-saṃhitā,%} f. the
manner of constructing a sentence with the above
tmesis.
<LEND>

<L>1709<pc>0028-c<k1>anAnuBUti<k2>anAnuBUti
{#anAnuBUti#}¦ {%an-ānubhūti, is,%} f., Ved. inat-
tention, neglect; ({%tayas%}), pl. neglectful or irreligious
people.
<LEND>

<L>1710<pc>0028-c<k1>anApad<k2>anApad
{#anApad#}¦ {%an-āpad, t,%} f. absence of misfor-
tune or calamity.
<LEND>

<L>1711<pc>0028-c<k1>anApanna<k2>anApanna
{#anApanna#}¦ {%an-āpanna, as, ā, am,%} not realized,
unattained.
<LEND>

<L>1712<pc>0028-c<k1>anApAna<k2>anApAna
{#anApAna#}¦ {%an-āpāna, as,%} m., N. of a prince,
son of Aṅga.
<LEND>

<L>1713<pc>0028-c<k1>anApi<k2>anApi
{#anApi#}¦ {%an-āpi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having no
kindred or friends (epithet of Indra).
<LEND>

<L>1714<pc>0028-c<k1>anApUyita<k2>anApUyita
{#anApUyita#}¦ {%an-āpūyita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
stinking.
<LEND>

<L>1715<pc>0028-c<k1>anApta<k2>anApta
{#anApta#}¦ {%an-āpta, as, ā, am,%} unattained, un-
obtained; unsuccessful in the effort to attain or obtain;
not apt, unfit; ({%as%}), m. a stranger.
<LEND>

<L>1716<pc>0028-c<k1>anApti<k2>anApti
{%An-āpti, is,%}¦ f. non-attainment.
<LEND>

<L>1717<pc>0028-c<k1>anApya<k2>anApya
{%An-āpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unattainable, unobtainable.
<LEND>

<L>1718<pc>0028-c<k1>anApluta<k2>anApluta
{#anApluta#}¦ {%an-āpluta, as, ā, am,%} unbathed,
unwashed. {%—An-āplutaṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā,%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} having an {{unwashen body->unwashed body||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}.
<LEND>

<L>1719<pc>0028-c<k1>anAbADa<k2>anAbADa
{#anAbADa#}¦ {%an-ābādha, as, ā, am,%} free from
obstacles or troubles.
<LEND>

<L>1720<pc>0028-c<k1>anABayin<k2>anABayin
{#anABayin#}¦ {%an-ābhayin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. fear-
less (epithet of Indra).
<LEND>

<L>1721<pc>0028-c<k1>anABU<k2>anABU
{#anABU#}¦ {%an-ābhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. neglectful,
disobliging, irreligious.
<LEND>

<L>1722<pc>0028-c<k1>anAByudayika<k2>anAByudayika
{#anAByudayika#}¦ {%an-ābhyudayika, as, ī, am,%} in-
auspicious, ill-omened, unlucky.
<LEND>

<L>1723<pc>0028-c<k1>anAman<k2>anAman
{#anAman#}¦ {%a-nāman, ā, ā, a,%} nameless; in-
famous; ({%ā%}), m. the ring-finger. {%—Anāma-tva, am,%}
n. namelessness.
<LEND>

<L>1724<pc>0028-c<k1>anAmaka<k2>anAmaka
{%A-nāmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ nameless, infamous; ({%as%}),
m. the intercalary month; ({%am%}), n. piles, hæmorrhoids.
<LEND>

<L>1725<pc>0028-c<k1>anAmikA<k2>anAmikA
{%A-nāmikā,%}¦ f. the ring-finger.
<LEND>

<L>1726<pc>0028-c<k1>anAmaya<k2>anAmaya
{#anAmaya#}¦ {%an-āmaya, as, ā, am,%} free from
disease, healthy, salubrious; ({%as%}), m. Śiva; ({%am%}), n.
health.
<LEND>

<L>1727<pc>0028-c<k1>anAmayat<k2>anAmayat
{%An-āmayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. not causing pain,
not hurting; ({%t%}), n., Ved. health.
<LEND>
[Page0029-a+ 69]

<L>1728<pc>0029-a<k1>anAmayitnu<k2>anAmayitnu
{%An-āmayitnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. salubrious, curative.
<LEND>

<L>1729<pc>0029-a<k1>anAmin<k2>anAmin
{#anAmin#}¦ {%a-nāmin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. unbending.
<LEND>

<L>1730<pc>0029-a<k1>anAmya<k2>anAmya
{%A-nāmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ impossible to be bent.
<LEND>

<L>1731<pc>0029-a<k1>anAmiza<k2>anAmiza
{#anAmiza#}¦ {%an-āmiṣa, as, ā, am,%} without
flesh; bootless, profitless.
<LEND>

<L>1732<pc>0029-a<k1>anAmfRa<k2>anAmfRa
{#anAmfRa#}¦ {%an-āmṛṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
no enemy that can injure.
<LEND>

<L>1733<pc>0029-a<k1>anAmfta<k2>anAmfta
{#anAmfta#}¦ {%an-āmṛta, as, ā, am,%} immortal.
<LEND>

<L>1734<pc>0029-a<k1>anAyaka<k2>anAyaka
{#anAyaka#}¦ {%a-nāyaka, as, ā, am,%} having no
leader or ruler, disorderly.
<LEND>

<L>1735<pc>0029-a<k1>anAyata<k2>anAyata
{#anAyata#}¦ {%an-āyata, as, ā, am,%} unchecked,
unrestrained; not propped or supported; close, con-
tinuous, unseparated; unextended, having no length.
<LEND>

<L>1736<pc>0029-a<k1>anAyatana<k2>anAyatana
{#anAyatana#}¦ {%an-āyatana, am,%} n. that which
is not really a resting-place or an altar; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having no resting-place or altar. {%—Anāyatana-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} = the last.
<LEND>

<L>1737<pc>0029-a<k1>anAyatta<k2>anAyatta
{#anAyatta#}¦ {%an-āyatta, as, ā, am,%} independent,
uncontrolled. {%—Anāyatta-vṛtti, is is, i,%} having an
independent livelihood. {%—Anāyattavṛtti-tā,%} f. in-
dependence.
<LEND>

<L>1738<pc>0029-a<k1>anAyasAgra<k2>anAyasAgra
{#anAyasAgra#}¦ {%an-āyasāgra (˚sa-ag˚), as, ā, am,%}
having no iron point.
<LEND>

<L>1739<pc>0029-a<k1>anAyAsa<k2>anAyAsa
{#anAyAsa#}¦ {%an-āyāsa, as,%} m. absence of ex-
ertion, facility, ease, idleness, neglect; ({%as, ā, am%}),
easy, ready; ({%ena%}), ind. easily. {%—Anāyāsa-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} done readily or easily; ({%am%}), n. an infusion
prepared extemporaneously (in medicine).
<LEND>

<L>1740<pc>0029-a<k1>anAyuDa<k2>anAyuDa
{#anAyuDa#}¦ {%an-āyudha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. weapon-
less; having no implements (for sacrifice).
<LEND>

<L>1741<pc>0029-a<k1>anAyuzA<k2>anAyuzA
{#anAyuzA#}¦ {%an-āyuṣā,%} f. or {%an-āyus,%} f., N. of
the mother of Bala and Vṛtra.
<LEND>

<L>1742<pc>0029-a<k1>anAyuzya<k2>anAyuzya
{%An-āyuṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not imparting long life,
fatal to long life.
<LEND>

<L>1743<pc>0029-a<k1>anArata<k2>anArata
{#anArata#}¦ {%an-ārata, as, ā, am,%} eternal; ({%am%}),
ind. eternally.
<LEND>

<L>1744<pc>0029-a<k1>anAraBya<k2>anAraBya<h>1
{#anAraBya#} 1¦. {%an-ārabhya, as, ā, am,%} improper
or impracticable to be commenced or undertaken.
{%—Anārabhya-tva, am,%} n. impossibility of being
commenced.
<LEND>

<L>1745<pc>0029-a<k1>anAraBya<k2>anAraBya<h>2
2. {%an-ārabhya,%}¦ ind. without commencing: this is
used in compounds in the sense ‘detached;’ thus, {%an-%}
{%ārabhya-vāda, as,%} m. a detached remark (upon
sacrifices, &c.); {%anārabhyādhīta (˚ya-adh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} taught or studied or read as a detached subject
(not as part of regular or authoritative treatise).
<LEND>

<L>1746<pc>0029-a<k1>anAramBa<k2>anAramBa
{%An-ārambha, as,%}¦ m. absence of beginning, non-
commencement, not attempting or undertaking; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), having no commencement.
<LEND>

<L>1747<pc>0029-a<k1>anArambaRa<k2>anArambaRa
{#anArambaRa#}¦ {%an-ārambaṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
(for {%anālambana%}) having no support.
<LEND>

<L>1748<pc>0029-a<k1>anAramBaRa<k2>anAramBaRa
{#anAramBaRa#}¦ {%an-ārambhaṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
without support (?), or intangible (?).
<LEND>

<L>1749<pc>0029-a<k1>anAruhya<k2>anAruhya
{#anAruhya#}¦ {%an-āruhya,%} ind. not having sur-
mounted.
<LEND>

<L>1750<pc>0029-a<k1>anArogya<k2>anArogya
{#anArogya#}¦ {%an-ārogya, am,%} n. sickness; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), unhealthy. {%—Anārogya-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} unwholesome, unhealthy, causing sickness.
<LEND>

<L>1751<pc>0029-a<k1>anArjava<k2>anArjava
{#anArjava#}¦ {%an-ārjava, am,%} n. crookedness,
moral or physical; disease.
<LEND>

<L>1752<pc>0029-a<k1>anArtava<k2>anArtava
{#anArtava#}¦ {%an-ārtava, as, ī, am,%} unseasonable.
<LEND>

<L>1753<pc>0029-a<k1>anArtvijIna<k2>anArtvijIna
{#anArtvijIna#}¦ {%an-ārtvijīna, as, ā, am,%} unfit
or unsuitable for a priest.
<LEND>

<L>1754<pc>0029-a<k1>anArya<k2>anArya
{#anArya#}¦ {%an-ārya, as, ā, am,%} not respectable,
vulgar, unworthy, inferior, bad, vile; destitute of
Āryas; ({%as%}), m. not an Ārya. {%—Anārya-karmin,%}
{%ī,%} m. doing work unbecoming an Ārya or becoming
only a non-Ārya. {%—Anārya-ja, as, ā, am,%} of vile or
unworthy origin; ({%am%}), n. Agallochum being a pro-
[Page0029-b+ 69]
duce of the country of Mlecchas or barbarians. {%—An-%}
{%ārya-juṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} practised, observed, or pos-
sessed by men who are not Āryas. {%—Anārya-tā,%} f.
or {%anārya-tva, am,%} n. vileness, unworthiness, baseness.
{%—Anārya-tikta, as,%} m. a medicinal plant, a kind
of Gentian (Gentiana Cherayta Rox).
<LEND>

<L>1755<pc>0029-b<k1>anAryaka<k2>anAryaka
{%An-āryaka, am,%}¦ n. Agallochum or Aloe wood
(Aquila Agallocha Rox).
<LEND>

<L>1756<pc>0029-b<k1>anArza<k2>anArza
{#anArza#}¦ {%an-ārṣa, as, ī, am,%} not referring or
belonging to a Ṛṣi or to the genuine text of a Vedic
hymn; e. g. the word {%iti,%} added for grammatical
purposes in the Pada-pāṭha to certain words, which in
the Saṃhitā-pāṭha are not followed by {%iti;%} not applied
to a Ṛṣi, not added to his name, as an affix.
<LEND>

<L>1757<pc>0029-b<k1>anArzeya<k2>anArzeya
{%An-ārṣeya, as, ī, am,%}¦ the same as the last. [cf. <s>anArza</s>]
<LEND>

<L>1758<pc>0029-b<k1>anAlamba<k2>anAlamba
{#anAlamba#}¦ {%an-ālamba, as, ā, am,%} unsupported,
without stay or support; ({%as%}), m. want of support;
despondency.
<LEND>

<L>1759<pc>0029-b<k1>anAlambana<k2>anAlambana
{%An-ālambana, as, ā, am,%}¦ unsupported; desponding.
<LEND>

<L>1760<pc>0029-b<k1>anAlambI<k2>anAlambI
{%An-ālambī,%}¦ f. Śiva's lute.
<LEND>

<L>1761<pc>0029-b<k1>anAlambukA<k2>anAlambukA
{%An-ālambukā%}¦ or {%an-ālambhukā,%} f. a woman
during menstruation.
<LEND>

<L>1762<pc>0029-b<k1>anAlApa<k2>anAlApa
{#anAlApa#}¦ {%an-ālāpa, as, ā, am,%} reserved,
taciturn; ({%as%}), m. reserve, taciturnity.
<LEND>

<L>1763<pc>0029-b<k1>anAlocita<k2>anAlocita
{#anAlocita#}¦ {%an-ālocita, as, ā, am,%} unseen,
unbeheld; unweighed, unconsidered, rash, imprudent.
<LEND>

<L>1764<pc>0029-b<k1>anAlocya<k2>anAlocya
{%An-ālocya,%}¦ ind. not having considered.
<LEND>

<L>1765<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvayA<k2>anAvayA
{#anAvayA#}¦ {%an-āvayā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. un-
yielding, not desisting.
<LEND>

<L>1766<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvarti<k2>anAvarti
{#anAvarti#}¦ {%an-āvarti, is,%} f. non-return, i. e.
final emancipation. See {%an-āvṛt%} below.
<LEND>

<L>1767<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvidDa<k2>anAvidDa
{#anAvidDa#}¦ {%an-āviddha, as, ā, am,%} not
wounded, unhurt, unmoved by.
<LEND>

<L>1768<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvila<k2>anAvila
{#anAvila#}¦ {%an-āvila, as, ā, am,%} not turbid,
clear, pure, not marshy.
<LEND>

<L>1769<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvft<k2>anAvft
{#anAvft#}¦ {%an-āvṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. not returning.
<LEND>

<L>1770<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvftta<k2>anAvftta
{%An-āvṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not turned about or round; not
retreating; not frequented or approached; not chosen.
<LEND>

<L>1771<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvftti<k2>anAvftti
{%An-āvṛtti, is,%}¦ f. non-return; final emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>1772<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvfta<k2>anAvfta
{#anAvfta#}¦ {%an-āvṛta, as, ā, am,%} uncovered,
undressed, uninclosed, open.
<LEND>

<L>1773<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvfzwi<k2>anAvfzwi
{#anAvfzwi#}¦ {%an-āvṛṣṭi, is,%} f. want of rain,
drought.
<LEND>

<L>1774<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvedita<k2>anAvedita
{#anAvedita#}¦ {%an-āvedita, as, ā, am,%} not noti-
fied, not made known.
<LEND>

<L>1775<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvyADa<k2>anAvyADa
{#anAvyADa#}¦ {%an-āvyādha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
impossible to be broken or forced open.
<LEND>

<L>1776<pc>0029-b<k1>anAvraska<k2>anAvraska
{#anAvraska#}¦ {%an-āvraska, as,%} m. (rt. {%vraśc%}),
uninjured condition; ({%as, ā, am%}), not injurious.
<LEND>

<L>1777<pc>0029-b<k1>anASa<k2>anASa<h>1
{#anASa#} 1¦. {%an-āśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%āśā%}), hope-
less, despairing.
<LEND>

<L>1778<pc>0029-b<k1>anASa<k2>anASa<h>2
{#anASa#} 2¦. {%a-nāśa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%naś%}), un-
destroyed, living.
<LEND>

<L>1779<pc>0029-b<k1>anASin<k2>anASin
{%A-nāśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ imperishable.
<LEND>

<L>1780<pc>0029-b<k1>anASya<k2>anASya
{%A-nāśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ indestructible.
<LEND>

<L>1781<pc>0029-b<k1>anASaka<k2>anASaka
{#anASaka#}¦ {%an-āśaka, am,%} n. fasting, ab-
staining from food even to death. {%—Anāśaka-ni-%}
{%vṛtta, as,%} m. one who has abandoned the practice of
fasting. {%—Anāśakāyana (˚ka-ay˚), am,%} n. a course
of fasting (as a penance).
<LEND>

<L>1782<pc>0029-b<k1>anASasta<k2>anASasta
{#anASasta#}¦ {%an-āśasta, as, ā, am,%} not praised;
not commendable (?), inglorious (?), hopeless (?).
<LEND>

<L>1783<pc>0029-b<k1>anASIrdA<k2>anASIrdA
{#anASIrdA#}¦ {%an-āśīr-dā, ās,%} m. not giving
a blessing; ungrateful.
<LEND>

<L>1784<pc>0029-b<k1>anASu<k2>anASu<h>1
{#anASu#} 1¦. {%an-āśu, us, us, u,%} not quick, slow.
<LEND>

<L>1785<pc>0029-b<k1>anASu<k2>anASu<h>2
{#anASu#} 2¦. {%an-āśu, us, us, u%} (rt. {%aś%}), not
diffusive, not pervading.
<LEND>

<L>1786<pc>0029-b<k1>anASu<k2>anASu<h>3
{#anASu#} 3¦. {%a-nāśu, us, us, u,%} Ved. indestruc-
tible.
<LEND>
[Page0029-c+ 70]

<L>1787<pc>0029-c<k1>anAScarya<k2>anAScarya
{#anAScarya#}¦ {%an-āścarya, as, ā, am,%} not won-
derful.
<LEND>

<L>1788<pc>0029-c<k1>anASramin<k2>anASramin
{#anASramin#}¦ {%an-āśramin, ī,%} m. one who
does not belong to or follow any of the four Āśramas
or religious orders to which Brāhmans at different
periods of life are bound to attach themselves.
<LEND>

<L>1789<pc>0029-c<k1>anASramavAsa<k2>anASramavAsa
{%An-āśrama-vāsa%}¦ or {%an-āśrame-vāsa, as,%} m. one
who does not belong to the Āśramas; non-residence
in a religious retreat.
<LEND>

<L>1790<pc>0029-c<k1>anASraya<k2>anASraya
{#anASraya#}¦ {%an-āśraya, as,%} m. absence or want
of any person or thing to depend upon; defenceless-
ness, self-dependence, isolation; ({%as, ā, am%}), defence-
less; unprotected; isolated.
<LEND>

<L>1791<pc>0029-c<k1>anASrita<k2>anASrita
{%An-āśrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ detached; disengaged; un-
connected with, independent; non-inherent.
<LEND>

<L>1792<pc>0029-c<k1>anASvas<k2>anASvas
{#anASvas#}¦ {%an-āśvas, vān, uṣī, vat,%} not
having eaten, fasting.
<LEND>

<L>1793<pc>0029-c<k1>anAzwra<k2>anAzwra
{#anAzwra#}¦ {%a-nāṣṭra, as, ā, am,%} free from
dangers or dangerous opponents.
<LEND>

<L>1794<pc>0029-c<k1>anAs<k2>anAs
{#anAs#}¦ {%an-ās, ās,%} m. f. having no mouth or
face.
<LEND>

<L>1795<pc>0029-c<k1>anAsa<k2>anAsa
{#anAsa#}¦ {%a-nāsa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. without a
nose (epithet of demons).
<LEND>

<L>1796<pc>0029-c<k1>anAsika<k2>anAsika
{%A-nāsika, as, ā, am,%}¦ noseless.
<LEND>

<L>1797<pc>0029-c<k1>anAsAdita<k2>anAsAdita
{#anAsAdita#}¦ {%an-āsādita, as, ā, am,%} not met
with, not found or obtained, not encountered or attack-
ed; not occurred; not having happened; non-existent.
{%—Anāsādita-vigraha, as, ā, am,%} unused to war.
<LEND>

<L>1798<pc>0029-c<k1>anAsTA<k2>anAsTA
{#anAsTA#}¦ {%an-āsthā,%} f. unfixedness, want of
confidence; disrespect; want of consideration; want
of faith or devotedness; unconcern, indifference.
<LEND>

<L>1799<pc>0029-c<k1>anAsTAna<k2>anAsTAna
{%An-āsthāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ having or yielding no
basis or fulcrum; without a fixed seat or site.
<LEND>

<L>1800<pc>0029-c<k1>anAsvAda<k2>anAsvAda
{#anAsvAda#}¦ {%an-āsvāda, as,%} m. want of taste,
insipidity; ({%as, ā, am%}), without taste, insipid.
<LEND>

<L>1801<pc>0029-c<k1>anAsvAdita<k2>anAsvAdita
{%An-āsvādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ untasted.
<LEND>

<L>1802<pc>0029-c<k1>anAhata<k2>anAhata
{#anAhata#}¦ {%an-āhata, as, ā, am,%} unbeaten,
unwounded, intact; new and unbleached (as cloth);
produced otherwise than by beating; not multiplied;
({%as%}), m. the fourth of the mystical {%cakras%} or circles
of the body. {%—Anāhata-nāda, as,%} m. a sound pro-
duced otherwise than by beating; the sound {%om.%}
<LEND>

<L>1803<pc>0029-c<k1>anAhAra<k2>anAhAra
{#anAhAra#}¦ {%an-āhāra, as,%} m. abstinence, not
taking food; non-seizure; non-production; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), one who abstains from food.
<LEND>

<L>1804<pc>0029-c<k1>anAhArin<k2>anAhArin
{%An-āhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ not taking (food); fasting.
<LEND>

<L>1805<pc>0029-c<k1>anAhArya<k2>anAhArya
{%An-āhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be seized or taken,
not producible; not to be eaten.
<LEND>

<L>1806<pc>0029-c<k1>anAhitAgni<k2>anAhitAgni
{#anAhitAgni#}¦ {%an-āhitāgni (˚ta-ag˚), is,%} m.
a householder who has neglected to perform the
Agnyādhāna.
<LEND>

<L>1807<pc>0029-c<k1>anAhuti<k2>anAhuti
{#anAhuti#}¦ {%an-āhuti, is,%} f. non-sacrificing;
a sacrifice unworthy of its name.
<LEND>

<L>1808<pc>0029-c<k1>anAhUta<k2>anAhUta
{#anAhUta#}¦ {%an-āhūta, as, ā, am,%} uncalled,
uninvited. {%—Anāhūtopajalpin (˚ta-up˚), ī,%} m. an
uncalled-for boaster. {%—Anāhūtopaviṣṭa (˚ta-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} seated as an uninvited guest.
<LEND>

<L>1809<pc>0029-c<k1>anAhlAda<k2>anAhlAda
{#anAhlAda#}¦ {%an-āhlāda, as,%} m. absence of joy;
({%as, ā, am%}), gloomy, not cheerful.
<LEND>

<L>1810<pc>0029-c<k1>anAhlAdita<k2>anAhlAdita
{%An-āhlādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not exhilarated.
<LEND>

<L>1811<pc>0029-c<k1>aniHSasta<k2>aniHSasta
{#aniHSasta#}¦ {%a-niḥśasta, as, ā, am,%} unpraised.
<LEND>

<L>1812<pc>0029-c<k1>anikAmatas<k2>anikAmatas
{#anikAmatas#}¦ {%a-nikāmatas,%} ind. involun-
tarily, unintentionally.
<LEND>

<L>1813<pc>0029-c<k1>aniketa<k2>aniketa
{#aniketa#}¦ {%a-niketa%} or {%a-niketana, as, ā, am,%}
houseless.
<LEND>

<L>1814<pc>0029-c<k1>anikziptaDUra<k2>anikziptaDUra
{#anikziptaDUra#}¦ {%a-nikṣipta-dhūra, as,%} m., N.
of a Bodhisattva or deified Buddhist saint.
<LEND>

<L>1815<pc>0029-c<k1>anikzu<k2>anikzu
{#anikzu#}¦ {%an-ikṣu, us,%} m. not (true) sugar-
cane; a sort of long grass or reed, Saccharum Sponta-
neum. ({%An%} may here denote ‘comparison,’ see 3. {%a.%})
<LEND>
[Page0030-a+ 69]

<L>1816<pc>0030-a<k1>anigIrRa<k2>anigIrRa
{#anigIrRa#}¦ {%a-nigīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} not swal-
lowed, not supplied (as an ellipsis).
<LEND>

<L>1817<pc>0030-a<k1>anigraha<k2>anigraha
{#anigraha#}¦ {%a-nigraha, as, ā, am,%} unrestrained;
({%as%}), m. non-restraint; non-refutation; not owning
one's self refuted. {%—Anigraha-sthāna, am,%} n. (in
philosophy) occasion of non-refutation.
<LEND>

<L>1818<pc>0030-a<k1>aniGAtezu<k2>aniGAtezu
{#aniGAtezu#}¦ {%a-nighāteṣu (˚ta-iṣu), us,%} m.,
N. of a man (having arrows that strike no one).
<LEND>

<L>1819<pc>0030-a<k1>aniNgya<k2>aniNgya
{#aniNgya#}¦ {%an-iṅgya, as, ā, am,%} not divisible;
a word not divisible.
<LEND>

<L>1820<pc>0030-a<k1>anicCa<k2>anicCa
{#anicCa#}¦ {%an-iccha%} or {%an-icchaka, as, ā, am,%}
or {%an-icchat, an, antī%} or {%atī, at,%} or {%an-icchu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} or {%an-icchuka, as, ā, am,%} undesirous, averse,
unwilling; not intending.
<LEND>

<L>1821<pc>0030-a<k1>anicCA<k2>anicCA
{%An-icchā,%}¦ f. absence of wish or design, indifference.
<LEND>

<L>1822<pc>0030-a<k1>anijaka<k2>anijaka
{#anijaka#}¦ {%a-nijaka, as, ā, am,%} not one's
own, belonging to another.
<LEND>

<L>1823<pc>0030-a<k1>anita<k2>anita
{#anita#}¦ {%anita, as, ā, am%} (etym. doubtful),
destitute. of. {%—Anita-bhā,%} f., Ved. not endowed with
splendor, N. of a river (?).
<LEND>

<L>1824<pc>0030-a<k1>anitya<k2>anitya
{#anitya#}¦ {%a-nitya, as, ā, am,%} not everlasting,
transient; occasional, incidental; irregular, unusual;
unstable; uncertain; ({%am%}), ind. occasionally. {%—Ani-%}
{%tya-karman, a,%} n. or {%anitya-kriyā,%} f. an occasional
act of worship, sacrifice for a special purpose. {%—Ani-%}
{%tya-tā,%} f. or {%anitya-tva, am,%} n. transient or limited
existence. {%—Anitya-datta%} or {%anitya-dattaka%} or {%ani-%}
{%tya-datrima, as,%} m. a son surrendered by his parents
to another for temporary or preliminary adoption.
{%—Anitya-pratyavekṣā,%} f. (Buddhist) consciousness
that all is passing away. {%—Anitya-bhāva, as,%} m.
transitoriness. {%—Anitya-sama, as, ā,%} m. f. sophism,
consisting in generalizing what is exceptional (as perish-
ableness). {%—Anitya-sama-prakaraṇa, am,%} n. a sec-
tion in the Nyāya discussing that sophism. {%—Anitya-%}
{%samāsa, as,%} m. a compound, the sense of which may
be equally expressed by resolving it into its constituent
parts.
<LEND>

<L>1825<pc>0030-a<k1>anidAna<k2>anidAna
{#anidAna#}¦ {%a-nidāna, as, ā, am,%} causeless,
groundless.
<LEND>

<L>1826<pc>0030-a<k1>anidra<k2>anidra
{#anidra#}¦ {%a-nidra, as, ā, am,%} sleepless, awake;
({%ā%}), f. sleeplessness.
<LEND>

<L>1827<pc>0030-a<k1>anidrita<k2>anidrita
{%A-nidrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not asleep, awake.
<LEND>

<L>1828<pc>0030-a<k1>aniDfzwa<k2>aniDfzwa
{#aniDfzwa#}¦ {%a-nidhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} unchecked,
unsubdued.
<LEND>

<L>1829<pc>0030-a<k1>aniDma<k2>aniDma
{#aniDma#}¦ {%an-idhma, as, ā, am,%} having or
requiring no fuel.
<LEND>

<L>1830<pc>0030-a<k1>anina<k2>anina
{#anina#}¦ {%an-ina, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having no
master.
<LEND>

<L>1831<pc>0030-a<k1>anindita<k2>anindita
{#anindita#}¦ {%a-nindita, as, ā, am,%} irreproach-
able, not despised, pious, virtuous, free.
<LEND>

<L>1832<pc>0030-a<k1>anindya<k2>anindya
{%A-nindya%}¦ or {%a-nindanīya, as, ā, am,%} unblam-
able, faultless.
<LEND>

<L>1833<pc>0030-a<k1>anindra<k2>anindra
{#anindra#}¦ {%an-indra, as, ā, am,%} deprived of
Indra; dispensing with or disregarding Indra.
<LEND>

<L>1834<pc>0030-a<k1>anindriya<k2>anindriya
{#anindriya#}¦ {%an-indriya, am,%} n. that which
is not the senses, the soul, the reason.
<LEND>

<L>1835<pc>0030-a<k1>anipadyamAna<k2>anipadyamAna
{#anipadyamAna#}¦ {%a-nipadyamāna, as, ā, am,%} not
falling down (to sleep), untiring.
<LEND>

<L>1836<pc>0030-a<k1>anipAta<k2>anipAta
{#anipAta#}¦ {%a-nipāta, as,%} m. (not a fall), con-
tinuance of life.
<LEND>

<L>1837<pc>0030-a<k1>anipuRa<k2>anipuRa
{#anipuRa#}¦ {%a-nipuṇa, as, ā, am,%} unskilled,
not clever or conversant.
<LEND>

<L>1838<pc>0030-a<k1>anibadDa<k2>anibadDa
{#anibadDa#}¦ {%a-nibaddha, as, ā, am,%} not tied
down, not bound, unattached, incoherent, uncon-
nected. {%—Anibaddha-pralāpin, ī, inī, i,%} chattering
incoherently, talking at random.
<LEND>

<L>1839<pc>0030-a<k1>anibADa<k2>anibADa
{#anibADa#}¦ {%a-nibādha, as, ā, am,%} unob-
structed, unlimited; ({%as%}), m. liberty.
<LEND>
[Page0030-b+ 72]

<L>1840<pc>0030-b<k1>aniBfta<k2>aniBfta
{#aniBfta#}¦ {%a-nibhṛta, as, ā, am,%} not private,
not reserved, immodest, bold, public.
<LEND>

<L>1841<pc>0030-b<k1>aniBfzwa<k2>aniBfzwa
{#aniBfzwa#}¦ {%a-nibhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
unabated; unimpaired; undefeated. {%—Anibhṛṣṭa-%}
{%tavi hi, is,%} m., Ved. having unabated power.
<LEND>

<L>1842<pc>0030-b<k1>aniBya<k2>aniBya
{#aniBya#}¦ {%an-ibhya, as, ā, am,%} not wealthy.
<LEND>

<L>1843<pc>0030-b<k1>animan<k2>animan
{#animan#}¦ {%animan, ā,%} m. a mote. See {%aṇiman.%}
<LEND>

<L>1844<pc>0030-b<k1>animantrita<k2>animantrita
{#animantrita#}¦ {%a-nimantrita, as, ā, am,%} un-
invited. {%—A-nimantrita-bhojin, ī, inī, i,%} eating
without being invited.
<LEND>

<L>1845<pc>0030-b<k1>animAna<k2>animAna
{#animAna#}¦ {%a-nimāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. un-
bounded, immense.
<LEND>

<L>1846<pc>0030-b<k1>animitta<k2>animitta
{#animitta#}¦ {%a-nimitta, as, ā, am,%} having no
adequate occasion, causeless, groundless; ({%am%}), n. absence
of an adequate cause or occasion, groundlessness. {%—Ani-%}
{%mitta-tas,%} ind. groundlessly. {%—A-nimitta-nirākṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} groundlessly rejected. {%—Animitta-liṅga-%}
{%nāśa, as,%} m. (unaccountable loss of distinct vision);
N. of an ophthalmic disease, ending in total blindness,
perhaps amaurosis.
<LEND>

<L>1847<pc>0030-b<k1>animiz<k2>animiz
{#animiz#}¦ {%a-nimiṣ,%} f., Ved. absence of
winking (only used in acc. and inst. cases). {%—Ani-%}
{%miṣam%} or {%—animiṣā%} or {%animeṣam,%} ind., Ved.
without winking, i. e. vigilantly or incessantly.
<LEND>

<L>1848<pc>0030-b<k1>animiza<k2>animiza
{%A-nimiṣa%}¦ or {%a-nimeṣa, as, ā, am,%} not wink-
ing, looking steadily, vigilant; open as eyes or flowers;
({%as%}), m. not winking; a god; a fish. {%—Animiṣākṣa%}
{%(˚ṣa-ak˚), as, ī,%} m. f. one whose eyes are fixed.
{%—Animiṣācārya (˚ṣa-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of Vṛhas-
pati.
<LEND>

<L>1849<pc>0030-b<k1>animizIya<k2>animizIya
{%Animiṣīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to those who do
not wink (i. e. to the gods).
<LEND>

<L>1850<pc>0030-b<k1>aniyata<k2>aniyata
{#aniyata#}¦ {%a-niyata, as, ā, am,%} not regulated,
uncontrolled, not fixed, uncertain, unrestricted, irregu-
lar, casual. {%—A-niyata-puṃskā,%} f. a woman irregu-
lar or unchaste in conduct. {%—Aniyata-vṛtti, is, is,%}
{%i,%} having no fixed or regular employment or income.
{%—Aniyatāṅka (˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m. (in arithm.) an
indeterminate digit. {%—A-niyatātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā,%}
m. one whose self or spirit is not regulated or under
proper control.
<LEND>

<L>1851<pc>0030-b<k1>aniyama<k2>aniyama
{%A-niyama, as,%}¦ m. absence of control or rule or
fixed order or obligation, unsettledness; indecorous or
improper conduct; uncertainty, doubt; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having no rule, irregular.
<LEND>

<L>1852<pc>0030-b<k1>aniyamita<k2>aniyamita
{%A-niyamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no rule or law;
irregular.
<LEND>

<L>1853<pc>0030-b<k1>aniyukta<k2>aniyukta
{#aniyukta#}¦ {%a-niyukta, as, ā, am,%} not ap-
pointed, not authoritative; ({%as%}), m. an assessor at a
court who has not been formally appointed and is not
entitled to vote.
<LEND>

<L>1854<pc>0030-b<k1>aniyogin<k2>aniyogin
{%A-niyogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not attached or clinging to.
<LEND>

<L>1855<pc>0030-b<k1>anira<k2>anira
{#anira#}¦ {%an-ira, as, ā, am,%} Ved. destitute of
food (or vigour ?), or of a sacrificial offering; ({%ā%}), f.
want of food (languor?).
<LEND>

<L>1856<pc>0030-b<k1>anirAkarizRu<k2>anirAkarizRu
{#anirAkarizRu#}¦ {%a-nirākariṣṇu, us, us, u,%}
not obstructive, not censorious.
<LEND>

<L>1857<pc>0030-b<k1>anirAkfta<k2>anirAkfta
{%A-nirākṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unobstructed.
<LEND>

<L>1858<pc>0030-b<k1>anirukta<k2>anirukta
{#anirukta#}¦ {%a-nirukta, as, ā, am,%} unuttered,
not articulated, not clearly explained, unspeakable,
not plain, vague. {%—Anirukta-gāna, am,%} n. indistinct
singing; humming (of hymns), a particular mode of
chanting the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>1859<pc>0030-b<k1>anirudDa<k2>anirudDa
{#anirudDa#}¦ {%a-niruddha, as, ā, am,%} unob-
structed, ungovernable, self-willed; ({%as%}), m. a spy, a
secret emissary (?); the son of Pradyumna, a form of
Kāma, and husband of Uṣā; Śiva; N. of an Arhat
contemporary of Śākyamuni; N. of a descendant of
Vṛṣṇi; ({%am%}), n. the rope for fastening cattle. {%—A-%}
{%niruddha-patha, am,%} n. an unobstructed path; the
atmosphere, ether. {%—A-niruddha-bhāvinī,%} f. Ani-
ruddha's wife.
<LEND>
[Page0030-c+ 71]

<L>1860<pc>0030-c<k1>anirUpita<k2>anirUpita
{#anirUpita#}¦ {%a-nirūpita, as, ā, am,%} not de-
termined, undefined.
<LEND>

<L>1861<pc>0030-c<k1>anirjita<k2>anirjita
{#anirjita#}¦ {%a-nirjita, as, ā, am,%} unconquered,
unvanquished.
<LEND>

<L>1862<pc>0030-c<k1>anirRaya<k2>anirRaya
{#anirRaya#}¦ {%a-nirṇaya, as,%} m. uncertainty,
want of decision.
<LEND>

<L>1863<pc>0030-c<k1>anirRIta<k2>anirRIta
{%A-nirṇīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unascertained, undetermined.
<LEND>

<L>1864<pc>0030-c<k1>anirReya<k2>anirReya
{%A-nirṇeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be decided.
<LEND>

<L>1865<pc>0030-c<k1>anirdaSa<k2>anirdaSa
{#anirdaSa#}¦ {%a-nirdaśa%} or {%a-nir-daśāha (˚śa-%}
{%ah˚), as, ā, am,%} within the ten days of impurity
after childbirth or a death; ({%am%}), ind. = preceding,
used adverbially.
<LEND>

<L>1866<pc>0030-c<k1>anirdizwa<k2>anirdizwa
{#anirdizwa#}¦ {%a-nirdiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%diś%}),
unexplained, undefined.
<LEND>

<L>1867<pc>0030-c<k1>anirdeSa<k2>anirdeSa
{%A-nirdeśa, as,%}¦ m. absence or unsatisfactoriness of
rule or direction.
<LEND>

<L>1868<pc>0030-c<k1>anirdeSya<k2>anirdeSya
{%A-nir-deśya%}¦ or {%a-nirdiśya, as, ā, am,%} undefin-
able, inexplicable, incomparable.
<LEND>

<L>1869<pc>0030-c<k1>anirDArita<k2>anirDArita
{#anirDArita#}¦ {%a-nirdhārita, as, ā, am,%} unde-
termined, unascertained, undefined.
<LEND>

<L>1870<pc>0030-c<k1>anirDArya<k2>anirDArya
{%A-nirdhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ undeterminable, not to
be agreed upon.
<LEND>

<L>1871<pc>0030-c<k1>anirBara<k2>anirBara
{#anirBara#}¦ {%a-nirbhara, as, ā, am,%} little, slight,
light.
<LEND>

<L>1872<pc>0030-c<k1>anirBeda<k2>anirBeda
{#anirBeda#}¦ {%a-nirbheda, as,%} m. (the act of not
blurting out), not revealing.
<LEND>

<L>1873<pc>0030-c<k1>anirmala<k2>anirmala
{#anirmala#}¦ {%a-nirmala, as, ā, am,%} dirty, foul,
turbid.
<LEND>

<L>1874<pc>0030-c<k1>anirmAlyA<k2>anirmAlyA
{%A-nirmālyā,%}¦ f. a plant (Mendicago Esculenta, Rox).
<LEND>

<L>1875<pc>0030-c<k1>anirlocita<k2>anirlocita
{#anirlocita#}¦ {%a-nirlocita, as, ā, am,%} not
carefully looked at, not considered.
<LEND>

<L>1876<pc>0030-c<k1>anirvacanIya<k2>anirvacanIya
{#anirvacanIya#}¦ {%a-nirvacanīya%} or {%a-nirvācya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} unutterable, indescribable; improper to
be mentioned.
<LEND>

<L>1877<pc>0030-c<k1>anirvartyamAna<k2>anirvartyamAna
{#anirvartyamAna#}¦ {%a-nirvartyamāna, as, ā, am,%}
not being brought to a close.
<LEND>

<L>1878<pc>0030-c<k1>anirvARa<k2>anirvARa
{#anirvARa#}¦ {%a-nirvāṇa, as, ā, am,%} unextin-
guished.
<LEND>

<L>1879<pc>0030-c<k1>anirvAha<k2>anirvAha
{#anirvAha#}¦ {%a-nirvāha, as,%} m. non-accom-
plishment, non-completion; inconclusiveness; insuffi-
ciency of income, the state of being straitened in
means.
<LEND>

<L>1880<pc>0030-c<k1>anirvAhya<k2>anirvAhya
{%A-nirvāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ difficult to be managed.
<LEND>

<L>1881<pc>0030-c<k1>anirviRRa<k2>anirviRRa
{#anirviRRa#}¦ {%a-nirviṇṇa, as, ā, am,%} not down-
cast.
<LEND>

<L>1882<pc>0030-c<k1>anirvid<k2>anirvid
{%A-nirvid, t, t, t,%}¦ free from causes of depression.
<LEND>

<L>1883<pc>0030-c<k1>anirveda<k2>anirveda
{%A-nirveda, as,%}¦ m. non-depression, self-reliance.
<LEND>

<L>1884<pc>0030-c<k1>anirvfta<k2>anirvfta
{#anirvfta#}¦ {%a-nirvṛta%} or {%a-nirvṛtta, as, ā, am,%}
unaccomplished, unfulfilled; discontented; unhappy,
ill at ease, unquiet, discomposed.
<LEND>

<L>1885<pc>0030-c<k1>anirvfti<k2>anirvfti
{%A-nirvṛti%}¦ or {%a-nirvṛtti, is,%} f. incompleteness,
discontent, misery.
<LEND>

<L>1886<pc>0030-c<k1>anirveSa<k2>anirveSa
{#anirveSa#}¦ {%a-nirveśa, as, ā, am,%} destitute of
employment, wretched.
<LEND>

<L>1887<pc>0030-c<k1>anila<k2>anila
{#anila#}¦ {%anila, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%an,%} cf. Irish
<nsi>anal</nsi>), air or wind, considered also as a deity; one of
the subordinate deities, forty-nine of whom form the
class of Anilas or winds; one of the eight demi-gods,
called Vasus; wind, as one of the humors or {%rasas%} of
the body; rheumatism, paralysis, or any affection re-
ferred to disorder of the wind; N. of a Ṛṣi and
other persons; the letter {%y;%} the number forty-nine;
({%ī%}), f. the fifteenth Nakṣatra (?). {%—Anila-kumāra, ās,%}
m. pl. among the Jainas, a class of deities. {%—Anila-ghna,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} or {%anila-han, hā, -ghnī, ha,%} or {%anila-hṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} or {%anilāpaha (˚la-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} curing dis-
orders arising from wind. {%—Anila-ghnaka, as,%} m. a
large tree (Terminalia Belerica). {%—Anila-paryaya%} or
{%anila-paryāya, as,%} m. pain and swelling of the eye-
lids and outer parts of the eye. {%—Anila-prakṛti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} having an airy or windy nature. {%—Anila-vyādhi, %}
[Page0031-a+ 70]
{%is,%} m. derangement of the (internal) wind. {%—Anila-%}
{%sakha, as,%} m., N. of fire (the friend of wind).
{%—Anilātmaja (˚la-āt˚), as,%} m. the son of the wind,
Hanumat or Bhīma. {%—Anilāntaka (˚la-an˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a plant, Iṅgudī or Aṅgāra-puṣpa (wind-de-
stroying). {%—Anilāmaya (˚la-ām˚), as,%} m. morbid
affection of the wind, flatulence, rheumatism. {%—Anilā-%}
{%yana (˚la-ay˚), am,%} n. way or course of the wind.
{%—Anilāśin (˚la-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%} fasting, lit. feeding
on the wind.
<LEND>

<L>1888<pc>0031-a<k1>anilamBasamADi<k2>anilamBasamADi
{#anilamBasamADi#}¦ {%a-nilambha-samādhi, is,%} m.
(i. e. unpropped meditation), N. of a peculiar kind of
meditation among Buddhists.
<LEND>

<L>1889<pc>0031-a<k1>anilayana<k2>anilayana
{#anilayana#}¦ {%a-nilayana, as, ā, am,%} having no
(fixed) home.
<LEND>

<L>1890<pc>0031-a<k1>anilocita<k2>anilocita
{#anilocita#}¦ {%a-nilocita.%} See {%anirlocita.%}
<LEND>

<L>1891<pc>0031-a<k1>aniloqita<k2>aniloqita
{#aniloqita#}¦ {%a-niloḍita, as, ā, am,%} inex-
perienced.
<LEND>

<L>1892<pc>0031-a<k1>anivartana<k2>anivartana
{#anivartana#}¦ {%a-nivartana, as, ā, am,%} not turning
away, firm, steadfast; improper to be abandoned, right.
<LEND>

<L>1893<pc>0031-a<k1>anivartin<k2>anivartin
{%A-nivartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not turning back, brave, not
returning. {%—Anivarti-tva, am,%} n. not turning back,
brave resistance.
<LEND>

<L>1894<pc>0031-a<k1>anivArita<k2>anivArita
{#anivArita#}¦ {%a-nivārita, as, ā, am,%} unchecked,
unimpeded, unopposed, unforbidden.
<LEND>

<L>1895<pc>0031-a<k1>anivArya<k2>anivArya
{%A-nivārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be warded off, in-
avertible, unavoidable, irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>1896<pc>0031-a<k1>aniviSamAna<k2>aniviSamAna
{#aniviSamAna#}¦ {%a-niviśamāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not retiring to rest, restless.
<LEND>

<L>1897<pc>0031-a<k1>anivfta<k2>anivfta
{#anivfta#}¦ {%a-nivṛta, as, ā, am,%} unchecked,
not impeded.
<LEND>

<L>1898<pc>0031-a<k1>anivedita<k2>anivedita
{#anivedita#}¦ {%a-nivedita, as, ā, am,%} untold, un-
mentioned. {%—Anivedita-vijñāta, as, ā, am,%} known
without being told.
<LEND>

<L>1899<pc>0031-a<k1>anivedya<k2>anivedya
{%A-nivedya,%}¦ ind. not having announced.
<LEND>

<L>1900<pc>0031-a<k1>aniveSana<k2>aniveSana
{#aniveSana#}¦ {%a-niveśana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
no place of rest.
<LEND>

<L>1901<pc>0031-a<k1>aniSa<k2>aniSa
{#aniSa#}¦ {%a-niśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. nightless,
i. e. sleepless, uninterrupted, incessant. {%—Aniśam,%}
ind. incessantly.
<LEND>

<L>1902<pc>0031-a<k1>aniSita<k2>aniSita
{%A-niśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. incessant. {%—Aniśita-%}
{%sarga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having an incessant flow.
<LEND>

<L>1903<pc>0031-a<k1>aniScita<k2>aniScita
{#aniScita#}¦ {%a-niścita, as, ā, am,%} unascer-
tained, not certain.
<LEND>

<L>1904<pc>0031-a<k1>aniScitya<k2>aniScitya
{%A-niścitya,%}¦ ind. not having ascertained.
<LEND>

<L>1905<pc>0031-a<k1>aniScintya<k2>aniScintya
{#aniScintya#}¦ {%a-niścintya, as, ā, am,%} not to
be comprehended (by thought), inconceivable.
<LEND>

<L>1906<pc>0031-a<k1>anizaNga<k2>anizaNga
{#anizaNga#}¦ {%a-niṣaṅga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
no quiver, unarmed.
<LEND>

<L>1907<pc>0031-a<k1>anizavya<k2>anizavya
{#anizavya#}¦ {%a-niṣavya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not to
be killed.
<LEND>

<L>1908<pc>0031-a<k1>anizidDa<k2>anizidDa
{#anizidDa#}¦ {%a-niṣiddha, as, ā, am,%} unpro-
hibited, unforbidden.
<LEND>

<L>1909<pc>0031-a<k1>anizedDra<k2>anizedDra
{%A-niṣeddhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. unimpeded, un-
checked.
<LEND>

<L>1910<pc>0031-a<k1>anizu<k2>anizu
{#anizu#}¦ {%an-iṣu, us, us, u,%} having no arrows,
having bad arrows.
<LEND>

<L>1911<pc>0031-a<k1>anizkfta<k2>anizkfta
{#anizkfta#}¦ {%a-niṣkṛta, as, ā, am,%} not done
with, unfinished, not settled. {%—Aniṣkṛtainas (˚ta-%}
{%en˚), ās, ās, as,%} having one's guilt not settled, i. e.
unexpiated.
<LEND>

<L>1912<pc>0031-a<k1>anizwa<k2>anizwa<h>1
{#anizwa#} 1¦. {%an-iṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%iṣ%}), un-
wished, undesirable, disadvantageous, disagreeable, un-
favourable; bad, wrong, evil, unlucky, ominous; ({%ā%}),
f. a plant, Sida Alba; ({%am%}), n. evil, detriment, disad-
vantage, calamity, crime. {%—Aniṣṭa-graha, as,%} m. an
evil planet. {%—Aniṣṭa-duṣṭa-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} having an
evil and corrupt mind. {%—Aniṣṭa-prasaṅga, as,%} m.
connection with a wrong object or a wrong argument
or a wrong rule. {%—Aniṣṭa-phala, am,%} n. evil result.
[Page0031-b+ 71]
{%—Aniṣṭa-śaṅkā,%} f. foreboding or fear of evil or
misfortune. {%—Aniṣṭa-sūcaka, as, ikā, am,%} forebod-
ing evil, ominous. {%—Aniṣṭa-hetu, us,%} m. an evil
omen. {%—An-iṣṭāpādana (˚ṭa-āp˚), am,%} n. not ob-
taining what is desired or (fr. {%aniṣṭa%} and {%āpādana%})
obtaining what is not desired. {%—An-iṣṭāpti (˚ṭa-āp˚),%}
{%is,%} f. = preceding. {%—Aniṣṭāśaṃsin (˚ṭa-āś˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} indicating or boding evil. {%—Aniṣṭotprekṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ṭa-ut˚), am,%} n. expectation of evil.
<LEND>

<L>1913<pc>0031-b<k1>anizwa<k2>anizwa<h>2
{#anizwa#} 2¦. {%an-iṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%yaj%}), not
offered in sacrifice, not honoured with a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>1914<pc>0031-b<k1>anizwin<k2>anizwin
{%An-iṣṭin, ī,%}¦ m. one who does not sacrifice or
has not sacrificed.
<LEND>

<L>1915<pc>0031-b<k1>anizwfta<k2>anizwfta
{#anizwfta#}¦ {%a-niṣṭṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. un-
hurt, unchecked.
<LEND>

<L>1916<pc>0031-b<k1>anizWA<k2>anizWA
{#anizWA#}¦ {%a-niṣṭhā,%} f. unsteadfastness, un-
steadiness.
<LEND>

<L>1917<pc>0031-b<k1>anizWura<k2>anizWura
{#anizWura#}¦ {%a-niṣṭhura, as, ā, am,%} not harsh,
not scurrilous.
<LEND>

<L>1918<pc>0031-b<k1>anizRAta<k2>anizRAta
{#anizRAta#}¦ {%a-niṣṇāta, as, ā, am,%} unskilled.
<LEND>

<L>1919<pc>0031-b<k1>anizpatti<k2>anizpatti
{#anizpatti#}¦ {%a-niṣpatti, is,%} f. non-accom-
plishment, incompletion.
<LEND>

<L>1920<pc>0031-b<k1>anizpanna<k2>anizpanna
{%A-niṣpanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ imperfect, incomplete.
<LEND>

<L>1921<pc>0031-b<k1>anizpattram<k2>anizpattram
{#anizpattram#}¦ {%a-niṣ-pattram,%} ind. so that the
arrow does not come out (on the other side), i. e. not
with excessive force.
<LEND>

<L>1922<pc>0031-b<k1>anisarga<k2>anisarga
{#anisarga#}¦ {%a-nisarga, as, ā, am,%} unnatural,
unnaturally affected.
<LEND>

<L>1923<pc>0031-b<k1>anistabDa<k2>anistabDa
{#anistabDa#}¦ {%a-nistabdha, as, ā, am,%} not ren-
dered immoveable or stiff; not paralysed; not fixed.
<LEND>

<L>1924<pc>0031-b<k1>anistIrRa<k2>anistIrRa
{#anistIrRa#}¦ {%a-nistīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} not
crossed over; not set aside; not rid of; unanswered,
unrefuted. {%—Anistīrṇābhiyoga (˚ṇa-abh˚), as,%} m.
(a defendant) who has not yet (by refutation) got
rid of a charge.
<LEND>

<L>1925<pc>0031-b<k1>anIka<k2>anIka
{#anIka#}¦ {%anīka, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%an%}),
face; appearance, splendor; edge, point; front, row,
array, march; army, forces; war, combat. {%—Anīka-%}
{%vat, ān,%} m., Ved. having a face, or constituting the
face, or occupying the front or foremost rank (epithet
of Agni). {%—Anīka-vidāraṇa, as,%} m. (shatterer of
armies), N. of a man. {%—Anīka-śas,%} ind. in rows or
marching columns. {%—Anīka-stha, as,%} m. a warrior or
combatant; an armed or royal guard, a sentinel; the
trainer of an elephant, an elephant-driver; a mark,
a sing, signal; a military drum.
<LEND>

<L>1926<pc>0031-b<k1>anIkinI<k2>anIkinI
{%Anīkinī,%}¦ f. an army, a host, forces; a certain force;
three Camūs or one-tenth of an Akṣauhiṇī, i. e. a com-
plete army; 2187 elephants and as many cars, 6561
horses, and 10935 foot; a lotus.
<LEND>

<L>1927<pc>0031-b<k1>anIkzaRa<k2>anIkzaRa
{#anIkzaRa#}¦ {%an-īkṣaṇa, am,%} n. not seeing or
looking at.
<LEND>

<L>1928<pc>0031-b<k1>anIca<k2>anIca
{#anIca#}¦ {%a-nīca, as, ā, am,%} not low, decent,
respectable; not pronounced with the Anudātta accent.
{%—A-nīcānuvartin (˚ca-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} not keeping
low company; ({%ī%}), m. a faithful lover or husband.
<LEND>

<L>1929<pc>0031-b<k1>anIcidarSin<k2>anIcidarSin
{%A-nīci-darśin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a Bauddha saint (?).
<LEND>

<L>1930<pc>0031-b<k1>anIcEs<k2>anIcEs
{%Anīcais,%}¦ ind. not in a low voice, loudly.
<LEND>

<L>1931<pc>0031-b<k1>anIqa<k2>anIqa
{#anIqa#}¦ {%a-nīḍa, as, ā, am,%} having no nest
or settled abode, i. e. incorporeal; ({%as%}), m. an epithet
of Agni or fire.
<LEND>

<L>1932<pc>0031-b<k1>anIti<k2>anIti<h>1
{#anIti#} 1¦. {%a-nīti, is,%} f. impropriety, im-
morality, injustice; impolicy, foolish conduct, indis-
cretion. {%—Anīti-jña, as, ā, am,%} or {%anīti-vid, t, t, t,%}
clever in immoral conduct or (fr. {%a%} and {%nītijña%})
ignorant of morality or policy, not politic or discreet.
<LEND>

<L>1933<pc>0031-b<k1>anIti<k2>anIti<h>2
{#anIti#} 2¦. {%an-īti, is,%} f. freedom from a
calamitous season.
<LEND>

<L>1934<pc>0031-b<k1>anIdfSa<k2>anIdfSa
{#anIdfSa#}¦ {%an-īdṛśa, as, ī, am,%} unlike, dis-
similar.
<LEND>

<L>1935<pc>0031-b<k1>anIpsita<k2>anIpsita
{#anIpsita#}¦ {%an-īpsita, as, ā, am,%} undesired.
<LEND>
[Page0031-c+ 73]

<L>1936<pc>0031-c<k1>anIrasana<k2>anIrasana
{#anIrasana#}¦ {%a-nīrasana (a-nir-rasana), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} not destitute of a waistband.
<LEND>

<L>1937<pc>0031-c<k1>anISa<k2>anISa
{#anISa#}¦ {%an-īśa, as, ā, am,%} one who has not
a lord or superior, paramount; powerless, unable;
({%as%}), m. Viṣṇu; ({%ā%}), f. powerlessness, helplessness.
{%—Anīśa-tva, am,%} n. powerlessness.
<LEND>

<L>1938<pc>0031-c<k1>anISvara<k2>anISvara
{%An-īśvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ without a superior; un-
checked, uncontrolled, paramount; without power,
powerless, unable; not belonging to the deity; athe-
istical. {%—Anīśvara-tā,%} f. or {%anīśvara-tva, am,%} n.
absence of a supreme ruler. {%—An-īśvara-vādin, ī,%} m.
an atheist, one who denies a supreme ruler of the
universe.
<LEND>

<L>1939<pc>0031-c<k1>anIha<k2>anIha
{#anIha#}¦ {%an-īha, as, ā, am,%} listless, indifferent;
({%as%}), m., N. of a king of Ayodhyā.
<LEND>

<L>1940<pc>0031-c<k1>anIhA<k2>anIhA
{%An-īhā,%}¦ f. indifference, apathy, disinclination.
<LEND>

<L>1941<pc>0031-c<k1>anIhita<k2>anIhita
{%An-īhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disagreeable, displeasing, un-
wished; ({%am%}), n. displeasure.
<LEND>

<L>1942<pc>0031-c<k1>anILa<k2>anILa
{#anILa#}¦ {%a-nīḷa,%} Ved. See {%a-nīḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>1943<pc>0031-c<k1>anu<k2>anu<h>1
{#anu#} 1¦. {%anu, us, vī, u.%} See {%aṇu.%}
<LEND>

<L>1944<pc>0031-c<k1>anu<k2>anu<h>2
{#anu#} 2¦. {%anu, us,%} m., Ved. man; N. of a
king, one of Yayāti's sons; (possibly) N. of a non-
Āryan tribe.
<LEND>

<L>1945<pc>0031-c<k1>anu<k2>anu<h>3
{#anu#} 3¦. {%anu,%} ind. as a prefix to verbs and
nouns, expresses after, along, alongside, lengthwise,
near to, under, subordinate to, with.
<div n="P"/>(When prefixed to nouns, especially in adverbial
compounds) it implies repetition, according to, seve-
rally, each by each, orderly, methodically.
<div n="P"/>(As a separable preposition, with accusative) after,
along, over, near to, through, to, towards, at, according
to, in order, agreeably to, in regard to.
<div n="P"/>(As a separable adverb) after, afterwards, thereupon,
again, further, then, next.
<LEND>

<L>1946<pc>0031-c<k1>anuka<k2>anuka
{#anuka#}¦ {%anu-ka, as, ā, am,%} lustful (fr. {%anu-%}
{%kam,%} q. v.; or, according to others, fr. 3. {%anu%} with
affix {%ka%}).
<LEND>

<L>1947<pc>0031-c<k1>anukaT<k2>anukaT
{#anukaT#}¦ {%anu-kath,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kathayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to relate after (some one else); to repeat
(what has been heard).
<LEND>

<L>1948<pc>0031-c<k1>anukaTana<k2>anukaTana
{%Anu-kathana, am,%}¦ n. orderly narration, dis-
course, conversation.
<LEND>

<L>1949<pc>0031-c<k1>anukaTita<k2>anukaTita
{%Anu-kathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ related, repeated.
<LEND>

<L>1950<pc>0031-c<k1>anukanIyas<k2>anukanIyas
{#anukanIyas#}¦ {%anu-kanīyas, ān, asī, as,%} the
next youngest.
<LEND>

<L>1951<pc>0031-c<k1>anukam<k2>anukam
{#anukam#}¦ {%anu-kam,%} Caus. P. {%-kāmayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to desire.
<LEND>

<L>1952<pc>0031-c<k1>anuka<k2>anuka
{%Anu-ka, as, ā, am,%}¦ libidinous; see s. v. above.
<LEND>

<L>1953<pc>0031-c<k1>anukAma<k2>anukAma
{%Anu-kāma, as,%}¦ m., Ved. desire; ({%as, ā, am%}),
according to one's desire, agreeable; ({%am%}), ind. as
desired, at pleasure; wish after wish (?), after one's
wish (?). {%—Anukāma-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. fulfilling one's
desire.
<LEND>

<L>1954<pc>0031-c<k1>anukAmIna<k2>anukAmIna
{%Anukāmīna, as,%}¦ m. one who acts as he pleases.
<LEND>

<L>1955<pc>0031-c<k1>anukamp<k2>anukamp
{#anukamp#}¦ {%anu-kamp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kampate,%}
{%-pitum,%} to sympathize with, compassionate; Caus.
{%-kampayati, -yitum,%} = the same.
<LEND>

<L>1956<pc>0031-c<k1>anukampaka<k2>anukampaka
{%Anu-kampaka, as,%}¦ m. (sympathizer), N. of a king;
({%as, ā, am%}), (at the close of compounds) sympathizing
with, compassionating.
<LEND>

<L>1957<pc>0031-c<k1>anukampana<k2>anukampana
{%Anu-kampana, am,%}¦ n. or {%anu-kampā,%} f. sym-
pathy, compassion.
<LEND>

<L>1958<pc>0031-c<k1>anukampAyin<k2>anukampAyin
{%Anu-kampāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ condoling.
<LEND>

<L>1959<pc>0031-c<k1>anukampita<k2>anukampita
{%Anu-kampita, as, ā, am,%}¦ compassionate. {%—Anu-%}
{%kampitātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having a compas-
sionate spirit.
<LEND>

<L>1960<pc>0031-c<k1>anukampin<k2>anukampin
{%Anu-kampin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sympathizing with, com-
passionating.
<LEND>

<L>1961<pc>0031-c<k1>anukampya<k2>anukampya
{%Anu-kampya%}¦ or {%anu-kampanīya, as, ā, am,%}
pitiable, worthy of sympathy; ({%as%}), m. an ascetic; a
courier.
<LEND>

<L>1962<pc>0031-c<k1>anukarza<k2>anukarza
{#anukarza#}¦ {%anu-karṣa.%} See under {%anu-kṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>1963<pc>0031-c<k1>anukalpa<k2>anukalpa
{#anukalpa#}¦ {%anu-kalpa.%} See under {#anukxp.#}
<LEND>
[Page0032-a+ 73]

<L>1964<pc>0032-a<k1>anukANkz<k2>anukANkz
{#anukANkz#}¦ {%anu-kāṅkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-kāṅ-%}
{%kṣati, -te, -kṣitum,%} to long for, desire, seek.
<LEND>

<L>1965<pc>0032-a<k1>anukANkzA<k2>anukANkzA
{%Anu-kāṅkṣā,%}¦ f. desire after.
<LEND>

<L>1966<pc>0032-a<k1>anukANkzin<k2>anukANkzin
{%Anu-kāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ longing for.
<LEND>

<L>1967<pc>0032-a<k1>anukAla<k2>anukAla
{#anukAla#}¦ {%anu-kāla, as, ā, am,%} opportune,
occasional; ({%am%}), ind. opportunely, occasionally, on a
proper occasion.
<LEND>

<L>1968<pc>0032-a<k1>anukIrtana<k2>anukIrtana
{#anukIrtana#}¦ {%anu-kīrtana.%} See {%anu-kṝt.%}
<LEND>

<L>1969<pc>0032-a<k1>anukuYcita<k2>anukuYcita
{#anukuYcita#}¦ {%anu-kuñcita, as, ā, am,%} bent,
made crooked.
<LEND>

<L>1970<pc>0032-a<k1>anukuz<k2>anukuz
{#anukuz#}¦ {%anu-kuṣ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-kuṣṇāti,%}
{%-koṣitum,%} to pull or drag along (to lift ?).
<LEND>

<L>1971<pc>0032-a<k1>anukUj<k2>anukUj
{#anukUj#}¦ {%anu-kūj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kūjati, -jitum,%}
to follow in cooing or singing or groaning.
<LEND>

<L>1972<pc>0032-a<k1>anukUla<k2>anukUla
{#anukUla#}¦ {%anu-kūla, as, ā, am,%} following the
bank ({%kūla%}), slope or declivity, according to the current,
favourable, agreeable; conformable to; friendly, kind,
well-disposed; ({%as%}), m. a faithful or kind and obliging
husband; ({%ā%}), f. Croton Polyandrum; N. of a metre;
({%am%}), n. favour, kindness (often in an ironical sense).
{%—Anukūla-tā,%} f. concord, good-will, favour, con-
formity, consent; prosperity. {%—Anukūla-nāyaka, as,%}
m. a kind husband or lover. {%—Anukūla-vāyu, us,%}
m. a favourable wind.
<LEND>

<L>1973<pc>0032-a<k1>anukUlaya<k2>anukUlaya
{%Anukūlaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%anukūlayati, -yitum,%} to
act in a friendly way.
<LEND>

<L>1974<pc>0032-a<k1>anukf<k2>anukf
{#anukf#}¦ {%anu-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. or poet. A. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kurute, -kartum,%} to do afterwards, to follow in do-
ing, imitate, equal, requite, adopt: Caus. {%-kārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause one to imitate.
<LEND>

<L>1975<pc>0032-a<k1>anukara<k2>anukara
{%Anu-kara, as, ā, am,%}¦ imitating; ({%as%}), m. an
assistant.
<LEND>

<L>1976<pc>0032-a<k1>anukaraRa<k2>anukaraRa
{%Anu-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. imitation, following an ex-
ample; resemblance, similarity.
<LEND>

<L>1977<pc>0032-a<k1>anukartf<k2>anukartf
{%Anu-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an imitator, imitating;
({%tā%}), m. a mimic, actor, performer.
<LEND>

<L>1978<pc>0032-a<k1>anukarman<k2>anukarman
{%Anu-karman, a,%}¦ n. imitation; a subsequent rite
or ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>1979<pc>0032-a<k1>anukAra<k2>anukAra
{%Anu-kāra, as,%}¦ m. imitation, resemblance.
<LEND>

<L>1980<pc>0032-a<k1>anukArin<k2>anukArin
{%Anu-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ imitating, an imitator, acting,
{{mimicing->mimicking||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}.
<LEND>

<L>1981<pc>0032-a<k1>anukArya<k2>anukArya
{%Anu-kārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit to be imitated or
(dramatically) acted; ({%am%}), n. subsequent business;
subsequent day (?).
<LEND>

<L>1982<pc>0032-a<k1>anukfta<k2>anukfta
{%Anu-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ copied, imitated, made or
done like.
<LEND>

<L>1983<pc>0032-a<k1>anukfti<k2>anukfti
{%Anu-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. imitation, a copy, compliance.
<LEND>

<L>1984<pc>0032-a<k1>anukftya<k2>anukftya
{%Anu-kṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit to be imitated or
represented.
<LEND>

<L>1985<pc>0032-a<k1>anukriyA<k2>anukriyA
{%Anu-kriyā,%}¦ f. imitation, doing anything subse-
quently or in like manner; a subsequent rite.
<LEND>

<L>1986<pc>0032-a<k1>anukrI<k2>anukrI
{%Anu-krī,%}¦ f. a subsequent rite or ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>1987<pc>0032-a<k1>anukft<k2>anukft
{#anukft#}¦ {%anu-kṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛntati, -karti-%}
{%tum,%} to go on shattering or destroying.
<LEND>

<L>1988<pc>0032-a<k1>anukfp<k2>anukfp
{#anukfp#}¦ {%anu-kṛp,%} cl. 6. A., Ved. {%-kṛpate,%}
to mourn; nom. A. {%-kṛpāyate, -yitum,%} to com-
passionate, condole with.
<LEND>

<L>1989<pc>0032-a<k1>anukfz<k2>anukfz
{#anukfz#}¦ {%anu-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-karṣati,%}
{%-karṣṭum%} or {%-kraṣṭum,%} to drag after one's self,
attract: Caus. {%-karṣayati, -yitum,%} = the same; to
subject.
<LEND>

<L>1990<pc>0032-a<k1>anukarza<k2>anukarza
{%Anu-karṣa, as,%}¦ m. or {%anu-karṣaṇa, am,%} n.
attraction, drawing; invoking, summoning by incan-
tation; the bottom or the axle-tree of a carriage;
grammatical attraction; including a subsequent in a
preceding rule; lagging behind in a ceremony; de-
layed performance of a duty.
<LEND>

<L>1991<pc>0032-a<k1>anukarzan<k2>anukarzan
{%Anu-karṣan, ā,%}¦ m. the bottom of a carriage.
<LEND>

<L>1992<pc>0032-a<k1>anukfzwa<k2>anukfzwa
{%Anu-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ attracted; included or
implied in a subsequent rule.
<LEND>

<L>1993<pc>0032-a<k1>anukF<k2>anukF
{#anukF#}¦ {%anu-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -karitum,%}
{%rītum,%} to scatter along, to crowd: Pass. {%-kīryate,%}
to become crowded or filled.
<LEND>
[Page0032-b+ 68]

<L>1994<pc>0032-b<k1>anukIrRa<k2>anukIrRa
{%Anu-kīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crowded.
<LEND>

<L>1995<pc>0032-b<k1>anukFt<k2>anukFt
{#anukFt#}¦ {%anu-kṝt,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kīrtayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to relate after (or in order), to narrate.
<LEND>

<L>1996<pc>0032-b<k1>anukIrtana<k2>anukIrtana
{%Anu-kīrtana, am,%}¦ n. act of proclaiming or pub-
lishing.
<LEND>

<L>1997<pc>0032-b<k1>anukxp<k2>anukxp
{#anukxp#}¦ {%anu-kḷp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kalpate,%}
{%-kalpitum, -kalptum,%} to follow duly: Caus. {%-kalpa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to get (others) to follow or imitate
duly.
<LEND>

<L>1998<pc>0032-b<k1>anukalpa<k2>anukalpa
{%Anu-kalpa, as,%}¦ m. permission to adopt an alter-
native or substitute, as “instead of Kuśa grass you
may use Dūrbā.”
<LEND>

<L>1999<pc>0032-b<k1>anukalpita<k2>anukalpita
{%Anu-kalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ followed, attended.
<LEND>

<L>2000<pc>0032-b<k1>anukta<k2>anukta
{#anukta#}¦ {%an-ukta, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%vac%}), un-
uttered, unsaid, unheard of, extraordinary. {%—Anukta-%}
{%nirmitta, am,%} n. a reason which is unuttered or un-
heard of or extraordinary; ({%as, ā, am,%}), having such
a reason.
<LEND>

<L>2001<pc>0032-b<k1>anukti<k2>anukti
{%An-ukti, is,%}¦ f. the not speaking, improper speech.
<LEND>

<L>2002<pc>0032-b<k1>anukTa<k2>anukTa
{#anukTa#}¦ {%an-uktha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hymn-
less, not singing hymns.
<LEND>

<L>2003<pc>0032-b<k1>anukrakaca<k2>anukrakaca
{#anukrakaca#}¦ {%anu-krakaca, as, ā, am,%} serrated,
dentated like a saw.
<LEND>

<L>2004<pc>0032-b<k1>anukrand<k2>anukrand
{#anukrand#}¦ {%anu-krand,%} cl. 1. A. {%-krandate,%}
{%-ditum,%} to shout or cry after one.
<LEND>

<L>2005<pc>0032-b<k1>anukram<k2>anukram
{#anukram#}¦ {%anu-kram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-kramitum,%} to go on, go after, follow; to go through
in order, enumerate, supply with an abstract or index.
<LEND>

<L>2006<pc>0032-b<k1>anukrama<k2>anukrama
{%Anu-krama, as,%}¦ m. succession, arrangement, order,
method; an index showing the successive contents
of a book; ({%am%}), ind. in due order.
<LEND>

<L>2007<pc>0032-b<k1>anukramaRa<k2>anukramaRa
{%Anu-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. proceeding methodically or
in order; following.
<LEND>

<L>2008<pc>0032-b<k1>anukramaRikA<k2>anukramaRikA
{%Anu-kramaṇikā%}¦ or {%anu-kramaṇī,%} f. a table or
chapter of contents, especially of the collection of
hymns &c. in Vedic books.
<LEND>

<L>2009<pc>0032-b<k1>anukrAnta<k2>anukrAnta
{%Anu-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone over, read, or done
in due order.
<LEND>

<L>2010<pc>0032-b<k1>anukrIq<k2>anukrIq
{#anukrIq#}¦ {%anu-krīḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-krīḍate, -ḍitum,%}
to play.
<LEND>

<L>2011<pc>0032-b<k1>anukruS<k2>anukruS
{#anukruS#}¦ {%anu-kruś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati,%}
{%-kroṣṭum,%} to shout at: Caus. {%-krośayati, -yitum,%}
to join in lamenting, show sympathy.
<LEND>

<L>2012<pc>0032-b<k1>anukroSa<k2>anukroSa
{%Anu-krośa, as,%}¦ m. tenderness, compassion.
<LEND>

<L>2013<pc>0032-b<k1>anukzaRam<k2>anukzaRam
{#anukzaRam#}¦ {%anu-kṣaṇam,%} ind. momentarily,
perpetually, every instant.
<LEND>

<L>2014<pc>0032-b<k1>anukzattf<k2>anukzattf
{#anukzattf#}¦ {%anu-kṣattṛ, tā,%} m. the door-
keeper's or charioteer's mate or attendant.
<LEND>

<L>2015<pc>0032-b<k1>anukzapam<k2>anukzapam
{#anukzapam#}¦ {%anu-kṣapam,%} ind. night after
night.
<LEND>

<L>2016<pc>0032-b<k1>anukzar<k2>anukzar
{#anukzar#}¦ {%anu-kṣar,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kṣarati,%}
{%-ritum,%} to flow into or upon.
<LEND>

<L>2017<pc>0032-b<k1>anukzi<k2>anukzi
{#anukzi#}¦ {%anu-kṣi,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-kṣiyati,%}
{%-kṣetum,%} to overspread, reach: Pass. {%-kṣīyate,%} to
decay or vanish gradually.
<LEND>

<L>2018<pc>0032-b<k1>anukzetra<k2>anukzetra
{#anukzetra#}¦ {%anu-kṣetra, am,%} n. stipend (in
commutation probably of the proceeds of an endow-
ment) given to temple-servants in Orissa.
<LEND>

<L>2019<pc>0032-b<k1>anuKaYja<k2>anuKaYja
{#anuKaYja#}¦, {%anu-khañja, as,%} m., N. of a
country.
<LEND>

<L>2020<pc>0032-b<k1>anuKyA<k2>anuKyA
{#anuKyA#}¦ {%anu-khyā,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-khyāti,%}
{%-tum,%} to descry.
<LEND>

<L>2021<pc>0032-b<k1>anuKyAti<k2>anuKyAti
{%Anu-khyāti, is,%}¦ f. act of descrying or revealing or
reporting.
<LEND>

<L>2022<pc>0032-b<k1>anuKyAtf<k2>anuKyAtf
{%Anu-khyātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a discoverer, revealer, re-
porter.
<LEND>

<L>2023<pc>0032-b<k1>anugaNgam<k2>anugaNgam
{#anugaNgam#}¦ {%anu-gaṅgam,%} ind. along the
Ganges.
<LEND>
[Page0032-c+ 70]

<L>2024<pc>0032-c<k1>anugaR<k2>anugaR
{#anugaR#}¦ {%anu-gaṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-gaṇayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to count over.
<LEND>

<L>2025<pc>0032-c<k1>anugaRita<k2>anugaRita
{%Anu-gaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ counted over.
<LEND>

<L>2026<pc>0032-c<k1>anugaRitin<k2>anugaRitin
{%Anu-gaṇitin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who has counted over.
<LEND>

<L>2027<pc>0032-c<k1>anugam<k2>anugam
{#anugam#}¦ {%anu-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} to go after, follow, seek, approach, visit, arrive;
to practise, observe, obey, imitate; to enter into; to
die out, be extinguished: Caus. {%-gamayati, -yitum,%}
to imitate, cause to die out.
<LEND>

<L>2028<pc>0032-c<k1>anuga<k2>anuga
{%Anu-ga, as, ā, am,%}¦ going after, following, cor-
responding with, adapted to; a companion; a follower,
a servant; (at the close of compounds) having fol-
lowers, as {%balānuga,%} having a force following him,
i. e. leader of a force or army; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an
Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>2029<pc>0032-c<k1>anugata<k2>anugata
{%Anu-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ followed (lit. or fig.), as by
a dependant; covered (as by a dress hanging behind);
following; a follower; acquired; extinguished; tally-
ing with; ({%am%}), n. moderate time in music. {%—Anu-%}
{%gatārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having a corresponding
(easily discoverable) meaning.
<LEND>

<L>2030<pc>0032-c<k1>anugatika<k2>anugatika
{%Anu-gatika, as,%}¦ m. a follower, an imitator.
<LEND>

<L>2031<pc>0032-c<k1>anugantavya<k2>anugantavya
{%Anu-gantavya%}¦ or {%anu-gamya, as, ā, am,%} proper
to be followed (especially in death); worthy of being
imitated.
<LEND>

<L>2032<pc>0032-c<k1>anugama<k2>anugama
{%Anu-gama, as,%}¦ m. or {%anu-gamana, am,%} n. fol-
lowing, going after in life or death; postcremation of
a widow; imitating, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>2033<pc>0032-c<k1>anugamya<k2>anugamya
{%Anu-gamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be followed or imi-
tated.
<LEND>

<L>2034<pc>0032-c<k1>anugAmin<k2>anugAmin
{%Anu-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ following, a follower, a
companion.
<LEND>

<L>2035<pc>0032-c<k1>anugAmuka<k2>anugAmuka
{%Anu-gāmuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ habitually or constantly
following or attending.
<LEND>

<L>2036<pc>0032-c<k1>anugarj<k2>anugarj
{#anugarj#}¦ {%anu-garj,%} cl. 1. P. {%anu-garjati,%}
{%-jitum,%} to shout or roar after.
<LEND>

<L>2037<pc>0032-c<k1>anugarjita<k2>anugarjita
{%Anu-garjita, am,%}¦ n. roaring echo.
<LEND>

<L>2038<pc>0032-c<k1>anugavam<k2>anugavam
{#anugavam#}¦ {%anu-gavam,%} ind. so as to suit the
oxen.
<LEND>

<L>2039<pc>0032-c<k1>anugavIna<k2>anugavIna
{#anugavIna#}¦ {%anu-gavīna, as,%} m. a cowherd.
<LEND>

<L>2040<pc>0032-c<k1>anugA<k2>anugA
{#anugA#}¦ {%anu-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to
go after, follow, seek, be guided by.
<LEND>

<L>2041<pc>0032-c<k1>anugAdin<k2>anugAdin
{#anugAdin#}¦ {%anu-gādin, ī, inī, i,%} following
in speaking, echoing.
<LEND>

<L>2042<pc>0032-c<k1>anugAh<k2>anugAh
{#anugAh#}¦ {%anu-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -gāhitum,%}
{%gāḍhum,%} to plunge after, be immersed in.
<LEND>

<L>2043<pc>0032-c<k1>anugAQa<k2>anugAQa
{%Anu-gāḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ plunged, immersed.
<LEND>

<L>2044<pc>0032-c<k1>anugiram<k2>anugiram
{#anugiram#}¦ {%anu-giram,%} ind. on the moun-
tain.
<LEND>

<L>2045<pc>0032-c<k1>anugu<k2>anugu
{#anugu#}¦ {%anu-gu,%} ind. behind the oxen or
cows.
<LEND>

<L>2046<pc>0032-c<k1>anuguRa<k2>anuguRa
{#anuguRa#}¦ {%anu-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} having similar
qualities, congenial with; according or suitable to;
({%am%}), ind. naturally; ({%as%}), m. natural peculiarity.
<LEND>

<L>2047<pc>0032-c<k1>anugup<k2>anugup
{#anugup#}¦ {%anu-gup,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gopāyati, -gop-%}
{%tum,%} to protect.
<LEND>

<L>2048<pc>0032-c<k1>anugupta<k2>anugupta
{%Anu-gupta, as, ā, am,%}¦ protected, sheltered, con-
cealed.
<LEND>

<L>2049<pc>0032-c<k1>anugfD<k2>anugfD
{#anugfD#}¦ {%anu-gṛdh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-gṛdhyati,%}
{%-gardhitum,%} to be greedy after.
<LEND>

<L>2050<pc>0032-c<k1>anugF<k2>anugF
{#anugF#}¦ {%anu-gṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-gṛṇāti, -garitum,%}
{%rītum,%} Ved. to join in praising; to rejoin, answer,
repeat.
<LEND>

<L>2051<pc>0032-c<k1>anugE<k2>anugE
{#anugE#}¦ {%anu-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gātum,%} to
sing after or to (a person or a tune); to celebrate in
song: Caus. {%-gāpayati, -yitum,%} to make one sing
after or to.
<LEND>

<L>2052<pc>0032-c<k1>anugIti<k2>anugIti
{%Anu-gīti, is,%}¦ f., N. of a metre of two verses, the
first containing twenty-seven, the second thirty-two
mātrās.
<LEND>
[Page0033-a+ 71]

<L>2053<pc>0033-a<k1>anugra<k2>anugra
{#anugra#}¦ {%an-ugra, as, ā, am,%} not harsh or
violent, mild, gentle.
<LEND>

<L>2054<pc>0033-a<k1>anugrah<k2>anugrah
{#anugrah#}¦ {%anu-grah,%} cl. 9. P. {%-gṛhṇāti%} or Ved.
{%-gṛbhṇāti,%} or cl. 9. A. {%-gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} to
follow in taking or plundering; to support; uphold;
to receive, welcome; treat with kindness, favour,
oblige; foster.
<LEND>

<L>2055<pc>0033-a<k1>anugfhIta<k2>anugfhIta
{%Anu-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ favoured, obliged.
<LEND>

<L>2056<pc>0033-a<k1>anugraha<k2>anugraha
{%Anu-graha, as,%}¦ m. or {%anu-grahaṇa, am,%} n.
favour, kindness, showing favour, conferring benefits,
promoting or furthering a good object; assistance;
facilitating by incantation; rear-guard; (in the Purā-
ṇas) N. of the eighth or fifth creation. {%—Anugraha-%}
{%kātara, as, ā, am,%} anxious to please or for favour.
{%—Anugraha-sarga, as,%} m. (in Sāṅkhya phil.) crea-
tion of the feelings or mental conditions.
<LEND>

<L>2057<pc>0033-a<k1>anugrahin<k2>anugrahin
{%Anu-grahin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved. proficient in magic skill.
<LEND>

<L>2058<pc>0033-a<k1>anugrAhaka<k2>anugrAhaka
{%Anu-grāhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ favouring, furthering,
facilitating; favourable, kind, gracious.
<LEND>

<L>2059<pc>0033-a<k1>anugrAhita<k2>anugrAhita
{%Anu-grāhita%}¦ or {%anu-grahita (?), as, ā, am,%}
favoured.
<LEND>

<L>2060<pc>0033-a<k1>anugrAhin<k2>anugrAhin
{%Anu-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ gracious, favourable.
<LEND>

<L>2061<pc>0033-a<k1>anugrAhya<k2>anugrAhya
{%Anu-grāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit or deserving to be
favoured or furthered.
<LEND>

<L>2062<pc>0033-a<k1>anujiGfkzA<k2>anujiGfkzA
{%Anu-jighṛkṣā,%}¦ f. desire to show favour or kindness.
<LEND>

<L>2063<pc>0033-a<k1>anugrAmam<k2>anugrAmam
{#anugrAmam#}¦ {%anu-grāmam,%} ind. village after
village.
<LEND>

<L>2064<pc>0033-a<k1>anugrAsaka<k2>anugrAsaka
{#anugrAsaka#}¦ {%anu-grāsaka, as,%} m. a mouthful
(of boiled rice), the equivalent of a mouthful.
<LEND>

<L>2065<pc>0033-a<k1>anuGaww<k2>anuGaww
{#anuGaww#}¦ {%anu-ghaṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-ghaṭṭayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to stroke, rub lengthwise.
<LEND>

<L>2066<pc>0033-a<k1>anuGuz<k2>anuGuz
{#anuGuz#}¦ {%anu-ghuṣ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-ghoṣati,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to name aloud.
<LEND>

<L>2067<pc>0033-a<k1>anucakz<k2>anucakz
{#anucakz#}¦ {%anu-cakṣ%} cl. 2. A., Ved. {%-caṣṭe,%}
{%-caṣṭum,%} to look at or up to.
<LEND>

<L>2068<pc>0033-a<k1>anucar<k2>anucar
{#anucar#}¦ {%anu-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -ritum,%}
to walk or move after or along, to follow, pursue,
traverse, seek after; to follow out, adhere to, attend,
to behave: Caus. {%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to let or cause
to traverse.
<LEND>

<L>2069<pc>0033-a<k1>anucara<k2>anucara
{%Anu-cara, as, ī, am,%}¦ following, attending; ({%as%}),
m. companion, follower, servant; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a female
attendant.
<LEND>

<L>2070<pc>0033-a<k1>anucAraka<k2>anucAraka
{%Anu-cāraka, as,%}¦ m. a follower, attendant; ({%ā%}), f.
a female follower or attendant.
<LEND>

<L>2071<pc>0033-a<k1>anucArin<k2>anucArin
{%Anu-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ following, attending.
<LEND>

<L>2072<pc>0033-a<k1>anucarci<k2>anucarci
{#anucarci#}¦ {%anu-carci, is, is, i,%} Ved. reciting
or repeating (in a chorus).
<LEND>

<L>2073<pc>0033-a<k1>anuci<k2>anuci<h>1
{#anuci#} 1¦. {%anu-ci,%} cl. 5. P. {%-cinoti, -cetum,%}
to set or place along or in regular order.
<LEND>

<L>2074<pc>0033-a<k1>anucita<k2>anucita<h>1
1. {%anu-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set or placed along or
lengthwise or in rows.
<LEND>

<L>2075<pc>0033-a<k1>anuci<k2>anuci<h>2
{#anuci#} 2¦. {%anu-ci,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%-ciketi,%} to
remember.
<LEND>

<L>2076<pc>0033-a<k1>anucita<k2>anucita<h>2
{#anucita#} 2¦. {%an-ucita, as, ā, am,%} improper,
wrong, unusual, strange. {%—Anucitārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as,%}
m. an unusual meaning.
<LEND>

<L>2077<pc>0033-a<k1>anucint<k2>anucint
{#anucint#}¦ {%anu-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cintayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to meditate, consider, recal to mind: Caus.
to make to consider.
<LEND>

<L>2078<pc>0033-a<k1>anucintA<k2>anucintA
{%Anu-cintā,%}¦ f. or {%anu-cintana, am,%} n. thinking
of, meditating upon, recalling, recollecting; anxiety.
<LEND>

<L>2079<pc>0033-a<k1>anucintita<k2>anucintita
{%Anu-cintita, as, ā, am,%}¦ recollected, recalled,
thought of.
<LEND>

<L>2080<pc>0033-a<k1>anucca<k2>anucca
{#anucca#}¦ {%an-ucca, as, ā, am,%} not high, low,
humble.
<LEND>

<L>2081<pc>0033-a<k1>anuccEs<k2>anuccEs
{%An-uccais,%}¦ ind. not aloud, in a low voice.
<LEND>

<L>2082<pc>0033-a<k1>anuccAra<k2>anuccAra
{#anuccAra#}¦ {%an-uccāra,%} non-pronunciation,
skipping words. See {%uc-car.%}
<LEND>

<L>2083<pc>0033-a<k1>anucCAda<k2>anucCAda
{#anucCAda#}¦ {%anu-cchāda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%chad%}
with {%anu%}), a garment which hangs down, or probably
[Page0033-b+ 70]
that part of the lower garment which hangs down
in front from the waist to the feet.
<LEND>

<L>2084<pc>0033-b<k1>anucCitti<k2>anucCitti
{#anucCitti#}¦ {%an-uc-chitti, is,%} f. or {%an-uc-cheda,%}
{%as,%} m. (rt. {%chid%} with {%ud%}), not cutting off, non-ex-
tirpation, non-destruction, indestructibility. {%—Anuc-%}
{%chitti-dharman, ā, ā, a,%} possessing the virtue (or
law) of being indestructible.
<LEND>

<L>2085<pc>0033-b<k1>anucCindat<k2>anucCindat<h>1
1. {%an-uc-chindat, an, atī, at,%}¦ not destroying.
<LEND>

<L>2086<pc>0033-b<k1>anucCinna<k2>anucCinna
{%An-uc-chinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not cut off, unextirpated,
undestroyed.
<LEND>

<L>2087<pc>0033-b<k1>anucCedya<k2>anucCedya
{%An-uc-chedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ indestructible, not
severable.
<LEND>

<L>2088<pc>0033-b<k1>anucCid<k2>anucCid
{#anucCid#}¦ {%anu-cchid (anu-chid),%} cl. 7. P.
{%-cchinatti, -cchettum,%} to cut along or lengthwise.
<LEND>

<L>2089<pc>0033-b<k1>anucCindat<k2>anucCindat<h>2
2. {%anu-cchindat, an, atī, at,%}¦ cutting lengthwise.
<LEND>

<L>2090<pc>0033-b<k1>anucCizwa<k2>anucCizwa
{#anucCizwa#}¦ {%an-ucchiṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śiṣ%}
with {%ud%}), not rejected, pure (by austerity and devotion).
<LEND>

<L>2091<pc>0033-b<k1>anucCo<k2>anucCo
{#anucCo#}¦ {%anu-ccho (anu-cho),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-chyati, -chātum,%} to cut open or cut up.
<LEND>

<L>2092<pc>0033-b<k1>anujan<k2>anujan
{#anujan#}¦ {%anu-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate, -janitum,%}
to follow in being born or produced or arising; to
take after (one's parents).
<LEND>

<L>2093<pc>0033-b<k1>anuja<k2>anuja
{%Anu-ja, as, ā, am,%}¦ born after, later, younger; ({%as%}),
m. a younger brother, a cadet; N. of a plant, also
called Trāyamāṇa; ({%am%}), n., N. of a plant, also called
Prapauṇḍarīka; ({%ā%}), f. a younger sister.
<LEND>

<L>2094<pc>0033-b<k1>anujanman<k2>anujanman
{%Anu-janman, ā,%}¦ m. a younger brother, younger.
<LEND>

<L>2095<pc>0033-b<k1>anujAta<k2>anujAta
{%Anu-jāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ after-born, later, younger;
taking after (the parents); after teething (?); born
again, i. e. invested with the sacred cord; ({%as%}), m. a
younger brother; ({%ā%}), f. a younger sister.
<LEND>

<L>2096<pc>0033-b<k1>anujanam<k2>anujanam
{#anujanam#}¦ {%anu-janam,%} ind. according to
people, popularly.
<LEND>

<L>2097<pc>0033-b<k1>anujap<k2>anujap
{#anujap#}¦ {%anu-jap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-japati, -pitum,%}
to follow or imitate in muttering.
<LEND>

<L>2098<pc>0033-b<k1>anujalp<k2>anujalp
{#anujalp#}¦ {%anu-jalp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jalpati, -pitum,%}
to follow in talking; A. {%-jalpate,%} to entertain by
conversation.
<LEND>

<L>2099<pc>0033-b<k1>anujAgf<k2>anujAgf
{#anujAgf#}¦ {%anu-jāgṛ,%} cl. 2. P. {%-jāgarti,%}
{%-jāgaritum,%} to watch as an attendant.
<LEND>

<L>2100<pc>0033-b<k1>anuji<k2>anuji
{#anuji#}¦ {%anu-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%} to
subdue: Desid {%-jigīṣate,%} to be desirous of subduing.
<LEND>

<L>2101<pc>0033-b<k1>anujiGfkzA<k2>anujiGfkzA
{#anujiGfkzA#}¦ {%anu-jighṛkṣā.%} See under
{%anu-grah.%}
<LEND>

<L>2102<pc>0033-b<k1>anujIv<k2>anujIv
{#anujIv#}¦ {%anu-jīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jīvati, -vitum,%}
to follow or imitate in living; to live for any one; to
live by or upon something; to live submissively un-
der: Caus. {%-jīvayati, -yitum,%} to restore to life.
<LEND>

<L>2103<pc>0033-b<k1>anujIvin<k2>anujIvin
{%Anu-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ living by or upon; dependent;
({%ī%}), m. a dependent, follower. {%—Anujīvi-sāt-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} made wholly subservient.
<LEND>

<L>2104<pc>0033-b<k1>anujIvya<k2>anujIvya
{%Anu-jīvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be followed in living.
<LEND>

<L>2105<pc>0033-b<k1>anujuz<k2>anujuz
{#anujuz#}¦ {%anu-juṣ,%} cl. 6. A., Ved. {%-juṣate,%}
{%-joṣitum,%} to seek.
<LEND>

<L>2106<pc>0033-b<k1>anujF<k2>anujF
{#anujF#}¦ {%anu-jṝ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-jīryati,%} or cl. 1. P.,
Ved. {%-jarati, -jaritum, -rītum,%} to follow in getting
old or decaying.
<LEND>

<L>2107<pc>0033-b<k1>anujIrRa<k2>anujIrRa
{%Anu-jīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown old or decayed after
or in consequence of.
<LEND>

<L>2108<pc>0033-b<k1>anujJat<k2>anujJat
{#anujJat#}¦ {%an-ujjhat, an, antī%} or {%atī, at,%} not
quitting, not leaving.
<LEND>

<L>2109<pc>0033-b<k1>anujJita<k2>anujJita
{%An-ujjhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ undiminished, unimpaired,
not left or lost.
<LEND>

<L>2110<pc>0033-b<k1>anujYA<k2>anujYA<h>1
{#anujYA#} 1¦. {%anu-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. rarely A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to permit, grant, allow, consent;
to excuse, forgive; to authorize; to allow one to take
leave, dismiss, bid farewell; to entreat; to behave
kindly: Caus. {%-jñāpayati, -yitum,%} to request, ask
permission, ask for leave, to take leave: Desid.
{%-jijñāsati%} or {%-te,%} to be willing to grant.
<LEND>
[Page0033-c+ 69]

<L>2111<pc>0033-c<k1>anujYA<k2>anujYA<h>2
2. {%anu-jñā,%}¦ f. or {%anu-jñāna, am,%} n. assent, assent-
ing, permission; leave to depart; allowance made for
faults; an order or command. {%—Anujñā-prārthanā%}
or {%anujñaiṣaṇā (˚jñā-eṣ˚),%} f. asking permission,
taking leave.
<LEND>

<L>2112<pc>0033-c<k1>anujYAta<k2>anujYAta
{%Anu-jñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ assented to, permitted,
allowed; ordered, directed, instructed; accepted;
authorized, honoured; allowed to depart, dismissed.
<LEND>

<L>2113<pc>0033-c<k1>anujYApaka<k2>anujYApaka
{%Anu-jñāpaka, as,%}¦ m. one who commands or
enjoins.
<LEND>

<L>2114<pc>0033-c<k1>anujYApana<k2>anujYApana
{%Anu-jñāpana, am,%}¦ n. or {%anu-jñapti, is,%} f. author-
ization; issuing an order or permission.
<LEND>

<L>2115<pc>0033-c<k1>anujyezWa<k2>anujyezWa
{#anujyezWa#}¦ {%anu-jyeṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} next
eldest; ({%am%}), ind. after the eldest, according to
seniority.
<LEND>

<L>2116<pc>0033-c<k1>anutakz<k2>anutakz
{#anutakz#}¦ {%anu-takṣ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-takṣati,%}
{%-kṣitum, -taṣṭum,%} to sharpen or stimulate by
offerings.
<LEND>

<L>2117<pc>0033-c<k1>anutan<k2>anutan
{#anutan#}¦ {%anu-tan,%} cl. 8. P. {%-tanoti, -tanitum,%}
to extend along, to carry on, continue, develop.
<LEND>

<L>2118<pc>0033-c<k1>anutap<k2>anutap
{#anutap#}¦ {%anu-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -taptum,%}
to heat, to vex, annoy: Pass. {%-tapyate%} or poet.
{%-tapyati,%} to suffer afterwards, repent; to desiderate,
miss: Caus. {%-tāpayati, -yitum,%} to distress.
<LEND>

<L>2119<pc>0033-c<k1>anutapta<k2>anutapta
{%Anu-tapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ heated; filled with regret.
<LEND>

<L>2120<pc>0033-c<k1>anutApa<k2>anutApa
{%Anu-tāpa, as,%}¦ m. repentance, heat.
<LEND>

<L>2121<pc>0033-c<k1>anutApana<k2>anutApana
{%Anu-tāpana, as, ī, am,%}¦ occasioning remorse,
repentance or sorrow.
<LEND>

<L>2122<pc>0033-c<k1>anutApin<k2>anutApin
{%Anu-tāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ penitent, regretting.
<LEND>

<L>2123<pc>0033-c<k1>anutara<k2>anutara
{#anutara#}¦ {%anu-tara.%} See {%anu-tṝ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>2124<pc>0033-c<k1>anutark<k2>anutark
{#anutark#}¦ {%anu-tark,%} cl. 10. P. or poet. A.
{%-tarkayati, -te, -yitum,%} to follow in thought, to
regard as or take for.
<LEND>

<L>2125<pc>0033-c<k1>anutarza<k2>anutarza
{#anutarza#}¦ {%anu-tarṣa, as,%} m. thirst, wish,
desire; a drinking vessel, one used for drinking
spirituous liquors.
<LEND>

<L>2126<pc>0033-c<k1>anutarzaRa<k2>anutarzaRa
{%Anu-tarṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a vessel from which spi-
rituous liquor is drunk; distributing liquor.
<LEND>

<L>2127<pc>0033-c<k1>anutilam<k2>anutilam
{#anutilam#}¦ {%anu-tilam,%} ind. grain after grain
(of Sesamum), i. e. very minutely or by grains.
<LEND>

<L>2128<pc>0033-c<k1>anutizWamAna<k2>anutizWamAna
{#anutizWamAna#}¦ {%anu-tiṣṭhamāna.%} See {%anu-%}
{%ṣṭhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>2129<pc>0033-c<k1>anutunna<k2>anutunna
{#anutunna#}¦ {%anu-tunna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%tud%}),
Ved. depressed or repressed (in sound), muffled.
<LEND>

<L>2130<pc>0033-c<k1>anutUlaya<k2>anutUlaya
{#anutUlaya#}¦ {%anu-tūlaya,%} nom. P. {%-tūlayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to rub lengthwise (with a brush or cotton?).
<LEND>

<L>2131<pc>0033-c<k1>anutfd<k2>anutfd
{#anutfd#}¦ {%anu-tṛd,%} cl. 7. P. {%-tṛṇatti, -tardi-%}
{%tum,%} to let go, let out; split, sever, open.
<LEND>

<L>2132<pc>0033-c<k1>anutfp<k2>anutfp
{#anutfp#}¦ {%anu-tṛp,%} cl. 4. A. {%-tṛpyate, -tarpi-%}
{%tum, -tarptum, -traptum,%} to take one's fill (or
refreshment) after or later than another.
<LEND>

<L>2133<pc>0033-c<k1>anutF<k2>anutF
{#anutF#}¦ {%anu-tṝ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati, -ritum%} or
{%-rītum,%} to follow across or to the end; to stretch
lengthwise or prostrate: Pass. {%-tīryate,%} to be laid or
lay one's self lengthwise.
<LEND>

<L>2134<pc>0033-c<k1>anutara<k2>anutara
{%Anu-tara, am,%}¦ n. fare, freight.
<LEND>

<L>2135<pc>0033-c<k1>anutka<k2>anutka
{#anutka#}¦ {%an-utka, as, ā, am,%} free from regret,
not regretting, self-complacent, not repenting of.
<LEND>

<L>2136<pc>0033-c<k1>anutkarza<k2>anutkarza
{#anutkarza#}¦ {%an-utkarṣa, as,%} m. inferiority,
non-elevation.
<LEND>

<L>2137<pc>0033-c<k1>anutta<k2>anutta
{#anutta#}¦ {%a-nutta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not cast
down, invincible; (or, not moistened, {%= an-utta?%}).
{%—Anutta-manyu, us,%} m. of invincible wrath, i. e.
Indra.
<LEND>

<L>2138<pc>0033-c<k1>anuttama<k2>anuttama
{#anuttama#}¦ {%an-uttama, as, ā, am,%} unsurpassed,
incomparably the best or chief, excellent; not the
best; (in gram.) not used in the {%uttama%} or first
person. {%—An-uttamāmbhas (˚ma-am˚), as,%} n. (in
Sāṅkhya phil.) indifference to and consequent absti-
[Page0034-a+ 72]
nence from sensual enjoyment, as fatiguing. {%—An-%}
{%uttamāmbhasika, am,%} n. indifference to and absti-
nence from sensual enjoyment as involving injury to
external objects.
<LEND>

<L>2139<pc>0034-a<k1>anuttara<k2>anuttara
{#anuttara#}¦ {%an-uttara, as, ā, am,%} chief, principal;
best, excellent; without a reply, unable to answer,
silent; fixed, firm; low, inferior, base; south,
southern; ({%am%}), n. a reply which is coherent or
evasive and therefore held to be no answer; ({%as%}), m.
a class of gods among the Jainas. {%—Anuttara-yoga-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n. title of the last of the four Bauddha-
tantras. {%—An-uttaropapātika (˚ra-up˚), ās,%} m. pl.
the same class of gods. {%—Anuttaropapātika-daśā,%}
{%ās,%} f. pl. title of a book treating of those gods.
<LEND>

<L>2140<pc>0034-a<k1>anuttAna<k2>anuttAna
{#anuttAna#}¦ {%an-uttāna, as, ā, am,%} lying with
the face towards the ground; not supine.
<LEND>

<L>2141<pc>0034-a<k1>anutTAna<k2>anutTAna
{#anutTAna#}¦ {%an-utthāna, am,%} n. (rt. {%sthā%}), the
not rising, want of exertion.
<LEND>

<L>2142<pc>0034-a<k1>anutTita<k2>anutTita
{%An-utthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not risen, not grown up
(as grain).
<LEND>

<L>2143<pc>0034-a<k1>anutpatti<k2>anutpatti
{#anutpatti#}¦ {%an-utpatti, is,%} f. failure, non-pro-
duction; ({%is, is, i%}), or {%an-utpattika, as, ī, am,%} not
(yet) produced. {%—Anutpattika-dharma-kṣānti, is,%}
f. (with Buddhists) acquiescence in the state (and
moral condition) which is still future, preparation for
a future state. {%—Anutpatti-sama, as, ā,%} m. f. (in
Nyāya phil.) arguing against a thing by trying to
show that nothing exists from which it could
spring.
<LEND>

<L>2144<pc>0034-a<k1>anutpanna<k2>anutpanna
{%An-utpanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ unborn, unproduced;
uneffected, unaccomplished.
<LEND>

<L>2145<pc>0034-a<k1>anutpAda<k2>anutpAda
{%An-utpāda, as,%}¦ m. the not coming into existence;
the not taking effect. {%—Anutpāda-kṣānti, is,%} f.
acquiescence in not having to undergo another
birth.
<LEND>

<L>2146<pc>0034-a<k1>anutpAdana<k2>anutpAdana
{%An-utpādana, am,%}¦ n. not producing, non-pro-
duction.
<LEND>

<L>2147<pc>0034-a<k1>anutpAdya<k2>anutpAdya
{%An-utpādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be produced or
created, i. e. eternal.
<LEND>

<L>2148<pc>0034-a<k1>anutsAha<k2>anutsAha
{#anutsAha#}¦ {%an-utsāha, as,%} m. want of adequate
effort; want of energy or determination; listlessness;
({%as, ā, am%}), deficient in determination. {%—Anutsāha-%}
{%tā,%} f. want of determination.
<LEND>

<L>2149<pc>0034-a<k1>anutsuka<k2>anutsuka
{#anutsuka#}¦ {%an-utsuka, as, ā, am,%} not eager,
calm, retiring; moderate. {%—Anutsuka-tā,%} f. mode-
rateness.
<LEND>

<L>2150<pc>0034-a<k1>anutsUtra<k2>anutsUtra
{#anutsUtra#}¦ {%an-utsūtra, as, ā, am,%} not ano-
malous.
<LEND>

<L>2151<pc>0034-a<k1>anutseka<k2>anutseka
{#anutseka#}¦ {%an-utseka, as,%} m. absence of arro-
gance or highmindedness.
<LEND>

<L>2152<pc>0034-a<k1>anutsekin<k2>anutsekin
{%An-utsekin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not arrogant or puffed up.
<LEND>

<L>2153<pc>0034-a<k1>anudaka<k2>anudaka
{#anudaka#}¦ {%an-udaka, as, ā, am,%} waterless.
<LEND>

<L>2154<pc>0034-a<k1>anudagra<k2>anudagra
{#anudagra#}¦ {%an-udagra, as, ā, am,%} not lofty,
low; not projecting.
<LEND>

<L>2155<pc>0034-a<k1>anudaya<k2>anudaya
{#anudaya#}¦ {%an-udaya, as,%} m. non-rising, the
not rising (of a luminary).
<LEND>

<L>2156<pc>0034-a<k1>anudita<k2>anudita<h>1
1. {%an-udita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not risen, not appeared.
(For 2. {%an-udita,%} see next column.)
<LEND>

<L>2157<pc>0034-a<k1>anudara<k2>anudara
{#anudara#}¦ {%an-udara, as, ā, am,%} thin, lank.
<LEND>

<L>2158<pc>0034-a<k1>anudah<k2>anudah
{#anudah#}¦ {%anu-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dagdhum,%}
to burn over again, to burn up.
<LEND>

<L>2159<pc>0034-a<k1>anudA<k2>anudA
{#anudA#}¦ {%anu-dā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadāti, -dātum,%} to
give back, restore, give way, yield, grant, remit; to
pay one out (?).
<LEND>

<L>2160<pc>0034-a<k1>anuda<k2>anuda
{%Anu-da, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. yielding, emulating
others in giving, a follower.
<LEND>

<L>2161<pc>0034-a<k1>anudatta<k2>anudatta
{%Anu-datta, as, ā, am,%}¦ granted, remitted, given
back.
<LEND>

<L>2162<pc>0034-a<k1>anudeya<k2>anudeya
{%Anu-deya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given back or restored.
<LEND>

<L>2163<pc>0034-a<k1>anudeyI<k2>anudeyI
{%Anu-deyī,%}¦ f., Ved. restitution; a female follower
or companion.
<LEND>

<L>2164<pc>0034-a<k1>anudAtta<k2>anudAtta
{#anudAtta#}¦ {%an-udātta, as, ā, am,%} not raised,
[Page0034-b+ 72]
not elevated, not pronounced with the Udātta accent,
grave; accentless, having the neutral general tone
neither high nor low: the term {%Anudātta%} is used
by Pāṇini both for the grave or non-elevated accent
(explained by him as {%sannatara,%} q. v.) which im-
mediately precedes the Udātta, and also for the
general accentless, neutral tone, neither high nor low,
explained as {%eka-śruti,%} i. e. the one monotonous
ordinary intonation which belongs to the generality
of syllables in a sentence; ({%as%}), m. one of the three
accents to be observed in reading the Vedas, the
grave accent. {%—Anudātta-tara, as,%} m. more than
Anudātta, still lower in sound than Anudātta, i. e.
the <nsi>very</nsi> Anudātta accent (or a syllable having this
accent) which immediately precedes a syllable hav-
ing the Udātta or Svarita accent, and is therefore
more depressed than the ordinary Anudātta. {%—An-%}
{%udāttādi (˚ta-ād˚),%} n. (in gram.) a nominal base
of which the first syllable is Anudātta. {%—Anudāttet%}
{%(˚ta-it˚), t,%} m. a verbal root having for its Anubandha
the Anudātta accent to indicate that it takes the
Ātmane-pada terminations only; also {%anudāttopa-%}
{%deśa%}. {%—Anudāttodaya (˚ta-ud˚), am,%} n. a syllable
immediately preceding the Anudātta accent.
<LEND>

<L>2165<pc>0034-b<k1>anudAra<k2>anudAra<h>1
{#anudAra#} 1¦. {%an-udāra, as, ā, am,%} niggardly,
mean; liberal, munificent.
<LEND>

<L>2166<pc>0034-b<k1>anudAra<k2>anudAra<h>2
{#anudAra#} 2¦. {%anu-dāra, as, ā, am,%} adhered to
or followed by a wife.
<LEND>

<L>2167<pc>0034-b<k1>anudita<k2>anudita<h>2
{#anudita#} 2¦. {%an-udita, as, ā, am,%} unsaid, un-
uttered, interdicted (see 1. {%anu-udita%} under {%an-%}
{%udaya%}).
<LEND>

<L>2168<pc>0034-b<k1>anudinam<k2>anudinam
{#anudinam#}¦ {%anu-dinam%} or {%anu-divasam,%} ind.
daily, every day.
<LEND>

<L>2169<pc>0034-b<k1>anudiS<k2>anudiS
{#anudiS#}¦ {%anu-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%}
to point out, to assign.
<LEND>

<L>2170<pc>0034-b<k1>anudiSam<k2>anudiSam
{%Anu-diśam,%}¦ ind. in every quarter.
<LEND>

<L>2171<pc>0034-b<k1>anudeSa<k2>anudeSa
{%Anu-deśa, as,%}¦ m. a rule or injunction, especially
one that points back to a previous rule; reference to
something prior.
<LEND>

<L>2172<pc>0034-b<k1>anudeSin<k2>anudeSin
{%Anu-deśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ pointing back, referring back;
being the object of an Anudeśa.
<LEND>

<L>2173<pc>0034-b<k1>anudfB<k2>anudfB
{#anudfB#}¦ {%anu-dṛbh,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-dṛbhati,%}
{%-darbhitum,%} to make into bundles or chains.
<LEND>

<L>2174<pc>0034-b<k1>anudfS<k2>anudfS
{#anudfS#}¦ {%anu-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati, -dra-%}
{%ṣṭum,%} to survey, behold; to keep in view or in mind,
to foresee: Caus. P. {%-darśayati, -yitum,%} to show,
tell, teach: Pass. {%-dṛśyate,%} to become or be visible.
<LEND>

<L>2175<pc>0034-b<k1>anudarSana<k2>anudarSana
{%Anu-darśana, am,%}¦ n. consideration, regard, refer-
ence.
<LEND>

<L>2176<pc>0034-b<k1>anudarSin<k2>anudarSin
{%Anu-darśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ considering, foreseeing.
<LEND>

<L>2177<pc>0034-b<k1>anudfzwi<k2>anudfzwi
{%Anu-dṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., N. of the ancestress of Ānu-
dṛṣṭineya.
<LEND>

<L>2178<pc>0034-b<k1>anudrazwavya<k2>anudrazwavya
{%An-udraṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ capable of being ob-
served, visible.
<LEND>

<L>2179<pc>0034-b<k1>anudF<k2>anudF
{#anudF#}¦ {%anu-dṝ,%} Pass. {%-dīryate,%} to break
through after (another); to be scattered or confused
(in consequence of the confusion of others).
<LEND>

<L>2180<pc>0034-b<k1>anudeham<k2>anudeham
{#anudeham#}¦ {%anu-deham,%} ind. behind the body.
<LEND>

<L>2181<pc>0034-b<k1>anudErGya<k2>anudErGya
{#anudErGya#}¦ {%anu-dairghya, as, ā, am,%} longi-
tudinal.
<LEND>

<L>2182<pc>0034-b<k1>anudgIrRa<k2>anudgIrRa
{#anudgIrRa#}¦ {%an-udgīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} not vomited
forth, not disdained; not spurned.
<LEND>

<L>2183<pc>0034-b<k1>anudData<k2>anudData
{#anudData#}¦ {%an-uddhata, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%han%}), not
lifted up, humble, unsurpassed, unequalled, unopposed.
<LEND>

<L>2184<pc>0034-b<k1>anudDaraRa<k2>anudDaraRa
{#anudDaraRa#}¦ {%an-uddharaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%hṛ%}),
non-removal; not offering, not establishing or proving.
<LEND>

<L>2185<pc>0034-b<k1>anudDAra<k2>anudDAra
{%An-uddhāra, as,%}¦ m. non-partition, not taking a
share; non-removal.
<LEND>

<L>2186<pc>0034-b<k1>anudDfta<k2>anudDfta
{%An-uddhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ non-removed, not taken
away; uninjured, undestroyed; unoffered; undivided,
unpartitioned; unestablished, unproved. {%—An-ud-%}
{%dhṛtābhyastamaya (˚ta-abh˚), as,%} m. sunset ({%abhy- %}
[Page0034-c+ 70]
{%astamaya%}), taking place whilst the Āhavanīya fire
continues ({%an-uddhṛta%}) unremoved from the Gār-
hapatya.
<LEND>

<L>2187<pc>0034-c<k1>anudBawa<k2>anudBawa
{#anudBawa#}¦ {%an-udbhaṭa, as, ā, am,%} not exalted,
unassuming.
<LEND>

<L>2188<pc>0034-c<k1>anudya<k2>anudya
{#anudya#}¦ {%an-udya, as, ā, am,%} unutterable.
<LEND>

<L>2189<pc>0034-c<k1>anudyata<k2>anudyata
{#anudyata#}¦ {%an-udyata, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yam%}), in-
active, idle, destitute of perseverance.
<LEND>

<L>2190<pc>0034-c<k1>anudyoga<k2>anudyoga
{#anudyoga#}¦ {%an-udyoga, as,%} m. absence of ex-
ertion or effort, inactivity, laziness.
<LEND>

<L>2191<pc>0034-c<k1>anudyogin<k2>anudyogin
{%An-udyogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ inactive, lazy, indifferent.
<LEND>

<L>2192<pc>0034-c<k1>anudra<k2>anudra
{#anudra#}¦ {%an-udra, as, ā, am,%} waterless.
<LEND>

<L>2193<pc>0034-c<k1>anudru<k2>anudru
{#anudru#}¦ {%anu-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -drotum,%}
to run after, follow; accompany; to pursue.
<LEND>

<L>2194<pc>0034-c<k1>anudruta<k2>anudruta
{%Anu-druta, as, ā, am,%}¦ followed, pursued; ({%am%}),
n. a measure of time in music, half a Druta, or one-
fourth of a Mātrā or of the time taken to articulate a
short vowel.
<LEND>

<L>2195<pc>0034-c<k1>anudvAha<k2>anudvAha
{#anudvAha#}¦ {%an-udvāha, as,%} m. non-marriage,
celibacy.
<LEND>

<L>2196<pc>0034-c<k1>anudvigna<k2>anudvigna
{#anudvigna#}¦ {%an-udvigna, as, ā, am,%} free from
apprehension or perplexity, easy in mind.
<LEND>

<L>2197<pc>0034-c<k1>anudvega<k2>anudvega
{%An-udvega, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from anxiety; ({%as%}),
m. freedom from uneasiness. {%—An-udvega-kara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} not causing apprehension, not overawing.
<LEND>

<L>2198<pc>0034-c<k1>anuDA<k2>anuDA
{#anuDA#}¦ {%anu-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadhāti, -dhātum,%}
to welcome, receive kindly.
<LEND>

<L>2199<pc>0034-c<k1>anuDAv<k2>anuDAv<h>1
{#anuDAv#} 1¦. {%anu-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-vitum,%} to run after, to run up to.
<LEND>

<L>2200<pc>0034-c<k1>anuDAvat<k2>anuDAvat
{%Anu-dhāvat, an, antī, at,%}¦ running after.
<LEND>

<L>2201<pc>0034-c<k1>anuDAvana<k2>anuDAvana<h>1
1. {%anu-dhāvana, am,%}¦ n. chasing, pursuing, run-
ning after; close pursuit of any object, going after
a mistress.
<LEND>

<L>2202<pc>0034-c<k1>anuDAvita<k2>anuDAvita
{%Anu-dhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pursued, run after,
literally or figuratively.
<LEND>

<L>2203<pc>0034-c<k1>anuDAv<k2>anuDAv<h>2
{#anuDAv#} 2¦. {%anu-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhavati,%}
{%-te, -vitum,%} to cleanse.
<LEND>

<L>2204<pc>0034-c<k1>anuDAvana<k2>anuDAvana<h>2
2. {%anu-dhāvana, am,%}¦ n. cleansing, purification.
<LEND>

<L>2205<pc>0034-c<k1>anuDyE<k2>anuDyE
{#anuDyE#}¦ {%anu-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati,%}
{%-dhyātum,%} to consider attentively, to think of, to
muse, to be anxious.
<LEND>

<L>2206<pc>0034-c<k1>anuDyAna<k2>anuDyAna
{%Anu-dhyāna, am,%}¦ n. meditation, religious con-
templation, solicitude.
<LEND>

<L>2207<pc>0034-c<k1>anuDyAyin<k2>anuDyAyin
{%Anu-dhyāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ contemplating, meditating.
<LEND>

<L>2208<pc>0034-c<k1>anunad<k2>anunad
{#anunad#}¦ {%anu-nad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nadati, -ditum,%}
to sound towards, (with acc.): Caus. P. {%-nādayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to make resonant or musical.
<LEND>

<L>2209<pc>0034-c<k1>anunAda<k2>anunAda
{%Anu-nāda, as,%}¦ m. sound, vibration, reverberation,
echo.
<LEND>

<L>2210<pc>0034-c<k1>anunAdita<k2>anunAdita
{%Anu-nādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to resound.
<LEND>

<L>2211<pc>0034-c<k1>anunAdin<k2>anunAdin
{%Anu-nādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ resounding, echoing, resonant.
<LEND>

<L>2212<pc>0034-c<k1>anunam<k2>anunam
{#anunam#}¦ {%anu-nam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-namati, -nantum,%}
to incline to.
<LEND>

<L>2213<pc>0034-c<k1>anunaya<k2>anunaya
{#anunaya#}¦ {%anu-naya, anu-nayin,%} &c. See
{%anu-nī.%}
<LEND>

<L>2214<pc>0034-c<k1>anunAsika<k2>anunAsika
{#anunAsika#}¦ {%anu-nāsika, as, ā, am,%} nasal,
uttered through the nose (as one of the five nasal
consonants, or a vowel, or the three semivowels, {%y,%}
{%v, l,%} under certain circumstances; in the case of
vowels and semivowels, the mark {#~#} is used to denote
this nasalization); the nasal mark {#~#}; ({%am%}), n. a nasal
twang. {%—Anunāsika-tva, am,%} n. nasality. {%—Anunā-%}
{%sika-lopa, as,%} m. dropping of a nasal sound or letter.
{%—Anunāsikātva (˚ka-āt˚), am,%} n. nasal pronuncia-
tion of {%ā%}. {%—Anunāsikādi (˚ka-ādi), is,%} m. a com-
pound letter commencing with a nasal. {%—Anunā-%}
{%sikānta (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m. a radical ending in a nasal.
{%—Anunāsikopadha (˚ka-up˚), as, ā, am,%} having a
nasal penultimate; succeeding a syllable with a nasal
sound.
<LEND>
[Page0035-a+ 69]

<L>2215<pc>0035-a<k1>anunikram<k2>anunikram
{#anunikram#}¦ {%anu-ni-kram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-kramitum,%} to follow in the steps.
<LEND>

<L>2216<pc>0035-a<k1>anunikz<k2>anunikz
{#anunikz#}¦ {%anu-nikṣ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-nikṣati,%}
{%-kṣitum,%} to pierce along.
<LEND>

<L>2217<pc>0035-a<k1>anunitud<k2>anunitud
{#anunitud#}¦ {%anu-ni-tud,%} cl. 6. P. {%-tudati,%}
{%-tottum,%} to wound with a stab, to goad.
<LEND>

<L>2218<pc>0035-a<k1>anunipad<k2>anunipad
{#anunipad#}¦ {%anu-ni-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to lie down by the side of.
<LEND>

<L>2219<pc>0035-a<k1>anunirjahAna<k2>anunirjahAna
{#anunirjahAna#}¦ {%anu-nir-jahāna, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%hā%}), proceeding out of (?).
<LEND>

<L>2220<pc>0035-a<k1>anunirdah<k2>anunirdah
{#anunirdah#}¦ {%anu-nir-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati,%}
{%-dagdhum,%} to burn down in succession.
<LEND>

<L>2221<pc>0035-a<k1>anunirdeSa<k2>anunirdeSa
{#anunirdeSa#}¦ {%anu-nirdeśa, as,%} m. description
or relation following a previous model.
<LEND>

<L>2222<pc>0035-a<k1>anunirvApa<k2>anunirvApa
{#anunirvApa#}¦ {%anu-nirvāpa, as,%} m. subsequent
libation (with clarified butter).
<LEND>

<L>2223<pc>0035-a<k1>anunirvApyA<k2>anunirvApyA
{%Anu-nirvāpyā,%}¦ f. ceremony connected with this
subsequent libation.
<LEND>

<L>2224<pc>0035-a<k1>anunI<k2>anunI
{#anunI#}¦ {%anu-nī,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -netum,%}
to bring near, to lead after; to persuade, induce, win
over, conciliate, to coax, pacify, supplicate.
<LEND>

<L>2225<pc>0035-a<k1>anunaya<k2>anunaya
{%Anu-naya, as,%}¦ m. conciliation, salutation, courtesy,
civility, showing respect or adoration to a guest or a
deity; humble entreaty or supplication, reverential
deportment; regulation of conduct, discipline, tuition;
({%as, ā, am%}), conciliatory, kind; ({%am%}), ind. fitly,
becomingly. {%—Anunaya-pratigha-prahāṇa, am,%}
n. (with Buddhists) abandoning the obstacles to
conciliatory behaviour. {%—Anunayāmantraṇa (˚ya-%}
{%ām˚), am,%} n. conciliatory address.
<LEND>

<L>2226<pc>0035-a<k1>anunayamAna<k2>anunayamAna
{%Anu-nayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ conciliating, honour-
ing, showing respect.
<LEND>

<L>2227<pc>0035-a<k1>anunayin<k2>anunayin
{%Anu-nayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ courteous, humble, suppli-
cating.
<LEND>

<L>2228<pc>0035-a<k1>anunAyaka<k2>anunAyaka
{%Anu-nāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ submissive, humble.
<LEND>

<L>2229<pc>0035-a<k1>anunAyikA<k2>anunAyikA
{%Anu-nāyikā,%}¦ f. a female character, subordinate to
a {%nāyikā%} or leading female character in a drama.
<LEND>

<L>2230<pc>0035-a<k1>anuninIzu<k2>anuninIzu
{%Anu-ninīṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of conciliating
or gratifying.
<LEND>

<L>2231<pc>0035-a<k1>anunIta<k2>anunIta
{%Anu-nīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ trained, disciplined, obtained,
acquired, taught, respected; pleased, pacified, appeased,
humbly entreated.
<LEND>

<L>2232<pc>0035-a<k1>anunIti<k2>anunIti
{%Anu-nīti, is,%}¦ f. conciliation, courtesy, supplication.
<LEND>

<L>2233<pc>0035-a<k1>anuneya<k2>anuneya
{%Anu-neya, as, ā, am,%}¦ easily conciliated.
<LEND>

<L>2234<pc>0035-a<k1>anunu<k2>anunu
{#anunu#}¦ {%anu-nu%} or {%-nū,%} cl. 6. and cl. 2. P., Ved.
{%-nuvati%} or {%-nauti, -navitum%} or {%-nuvitum,%} to praise
again and again: Intens. {%-nonavīti,%} to cheer after.
<LEND>

<L>2235<pc>0035-a<k1>anunft<k2>anunft
{#anunft#}¦ {%anu-nṛt,%} cl. 4. P. {%-nṛtyati, -nartitum,%}
to dance after (with acc.); to dance before (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>2236<pc>0035-a<k1>anunnata<k2>anunnata
{#anunnata#}¦ {%an-unnata, as, ā, am,%} not elevated,
not lifted up. {%—Anunnata-gātra, as, ā, am,%} (with
Buddhists) having limbs that are not too stout, pro-
minent or protuberant. {%—Anunnatānata (˚ta-ān˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} not raised nor lowered, level.
<LEND>

<L>2237<pc>0035-a<k1>anunmatta<k2>anunmatta
{#anunmatta#}¦ {%an-unmatta%} or {%an-unmadita%} or {%an-%}
{%unmāda, as, ā, am,%} sane, sober, not wild, not mad.
<LEND>

<L>2238<pc>0035-a<k1>anupa<k2>anupa
{#anupa#}¦ {%anupa, as, ā, am,%} watery, marshy;
see {%anūpa%}. {%—Anupa-ja%} or better {%anūpa-ja, am,%} n.
ginger (in its undried state).
<LEND>

<L>2239<pc>0035-a<k1>anupakArin<k2>anupakArin
{#anupakArin#}¦ {%an-upakārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} not
assisting, disobliging, ungrateful, not making a return
for benefits received; unserviceable, useless.
<LEND>

<L>2240<pc>0035-a<k1>anupakfta<k2>anupakfta
{%An-upakṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unassisted.
<LEND>

<L>2241<pc>0035-a<k1>anupakzita<k2>anupakzita
{#anupakzita#}¦ {%an-upakṣita, as, ā, am,%} un-
injured, undestroyed.
<LEND>

<L>2242<pc>0035-a<k1>anupagIta<k2>anupagIta
{#anupagIta#}¦ {%an-upagīta, as, ā, am,%} not praised
or celebrated (?); not accompanied in singing (?);
({%am%}), ind. so that no other person accompanies in
singing.
<LEND>
[Page0035-b+ 72]

<L>2243<pc>0035-b<k1>anupaGAtArjita<k2>anupaGAtArjita
{#anupaGAtArjita#}¦ {%an-upaghātārjita (˚ta-arj˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} acquired without detriment (to the pater-
nal estate).
<LEND>

<L>2244<pc>0035-b<k1>anupaGnat<k2>anupaGnat
{%An-upaghnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ not detrimental (to the
paternal estate).
<LEND>

<L>2245<pc>0035-b<k1>anupac<k2>anupac
{#anupac#}¦ {%anu-pac,%} cl. 1. P. {%-pacati, -paktum,%}
to make ripe by degrees: Pass. {%-pacyate,%} to become
ripe by degrees.
<LEND>

<L>2246<pc>0035-b<k1>anupajIvanIya<k2>anupajIvanIya
{#anupajIvanIya#}¦ {%an-upajīvanīya, as, ā, am,%}
yielding (or granting) no livelihood; having no live-
lihood.
<LEND>

<L>2247<pc>0035-b<k1>anupaW<k2>anupaW
{#anupaW#}¦ {%anu-paṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paṭhati, -ṭhitum,%}
to say after, repeat.
<LEND>

<L>2248<pc>0035-b<k1>anupaWita<k2>anupaWita
{%Anu-paṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ read through (aloud),
recited.
<LEND>

<L>2249<pc>0035-b<k1>anupaWitin<k2>anupaWitin
{%Anu-paṭhitin, ī,%}¦ m. (one who has read through or
recited), proficient.
<LEND>

<L>2250<pc>0035-b<k1>anupat<k2>anupat
{#anupat#}¦ {%anu-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -titum,%}
to fly to (with acc.); fly after, run after, go after,
follow: Caus. {%-pātayati, -yitum,%} to fly to; to throw
a person down together with oneself.
<LEND>

<L>2251<pc>0035-b<k1>anupatana<k2>anupatana
{%Anu-patana, am,%}¦ n. falling on or upon; follow-
ing; (in mathem.) proportion.
<LEND>

<L>2252<pc>0035-b<k1>anupatita<k2>anupatita
{%Anu-patita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen, descended; fol-
lowed.
<LEND>

<L>2253<pc>0035-b<k1>anupAta<k2>anupAta
{%Anu-pāta,%}¦ see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>2254<pc>0035-b<k1>anupati<k2>anupati
{#anupati#}¦ {%anu-pati,%} ind. after the husband.
<LEND>

<L>2255<pc>0035-b<k1>anupaTa<k2>anupaTa
{#anupaTa#}¦ {%anu-patha, as, ā, am,%} following the
road; having favourable roads ?; ({%as%}), m. a road;
({%am%}), ind. along the road.
<LEND>

<L>2256<pc>0035-b<k1>anupad<k2>anupad<h>1
{#anupad#} 1¦. {%anu-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to follow, attend, be fond of; to enter; to
enter upon; to notice, understand; to handle.
<LEND>

<L>2257<pc>0035-b<k1>anupad<k2>anupad<h>2
2. {%anu-pad, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. coming to pass; or ({%t%}), f.
food (?).
<LEND>

<L>2258<pc>0035-b<k1>anupada<k2>anupada
{%Anu-pada, as, ā, am,%}¦ following closely; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a man or tribe; ({%am%}), n. a chorus, burden of
a song or words sung again after regular intervals;
({%am%}), ind. step by step, word for word; on the heels
of, close behind or after. {%—Anupada-sūtra, am,%}
n. title of a commentary explaining the text (of a
Brāhmaṇa) word for word.
<LEND>

<L>2259<pc>0035-b<k1>anupadavI<k2>anupadavI
{%Anu-padavī,%}¦ f. a way.
<LEND>

<L>2260<pc>0035-b<k1>anupadin<k2>anupadin
{%Anu-padin, ī,%}¦ m. a searcher, an inquirer, one who
follows or seeks for.
<LEND>

<L>2261<pc>0035-b<k1>anupadInA<k2>anupadInA
{%Anupadīnā,%}¦ f. a boot, a buskin.
<LEND>

<L>2262<pc>0035-b<k1>anupadasvat<k2>anupadasvat
{#anupadasvat#}¦ {%an-upadasvat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
not drying up, not decaying (?).
<LEND>

<L>2263<pc>0035-b<k1>anupadizwa<k2>anupadizwa
{#anupadizwa#}¦ {%an-upadiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} un-
taught, uninstructed.
<LEND>

<L>2264<pc>0035-b<k1>anupadezwf<k2>anupadezwf
{%An-upadeṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. one who does not point
out or teach.
<LEND>

<L>2265<pc>0035-b<k1>anupaDa<k2>anupaDa
{#anupaDa#}¦ {%an-upadha, as,%} m. (having no
penultimate), a letter or syllable (as a sibilant or {%h%})
when not preceded by another.
<LEND>

<L>2266<pc>0035-b<k1>anupaDiSeza<k2>anupaDiSeza
{#anupaDiSeza#}¦ {%an-upadhi-śeṣa, as,%} m. that
in which there is not longer a condition of indivi-
dulity (?).
<LEND>

<L>2267<pc>0035-b<k1>anupanAha<k2>anupanAha
{#anupanAha#}¦ {%an-upanāha, as,%} m. (with Bud-
dhists) want of close attachment or adherence (?).
<LEND>

<L>2268<pc>0035-b<k1>anupanyasta<k2>anupanyasta
{#anupanyasta#}¦ {%an-upanyasta, as, ā, am,%} not
laid down clearly, not established.
<LEND>

<L>2269<pc>0035-b<k1>anupanyAsa<k2>anupanyAsa
{%An-upanyāsa, as,%}¦ m. failure of proof or deter-
mination, uncertainty, doubt.
<LEND>

<L>2270<pc>0035-b<k1>anupapatti<k2>anupapatti
{#anupapatti#}¦ {%an-upapatti, is,%} f. non-accom-
plishment, failure, inconclusive argumentation; irre-
levancy, inapplicability, impossibility, insufficiency of
means, penury, adversity.
<LEND>

<L>2271<pc>0035-b<k1>anupapanna<k2>anupapanna
{%An-upapanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not done, unaccom-
plished, uneffected; unproved, undemonstrated; irre-
levant, inconclusive, inapplicable, impossible, inade-
quately supported.
<LEND>
[Page0035-c+ 68]

<L>2272<pc>0035-c<k1>anupapAdaka<k2>anupapAdaka
{%An-upapādaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (having no material
parent), N. of a class of Buddhas, called Dhyāni-
buddhas.
<LEND>

<L>2273<pc>0035-c<k1>anupaplava<k2>anupaplava
{#anupaplava#}¦ {%an-upaplava, as, ā, am,%} free from
any overwhelming calamity.
<LEND>

<L>2274<pc>0035-c<k1>anupapluta<k2>anupapluta
{%An-upapluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not overwhelmed (with
calamity).
<LEND>

<L>2275<pc>0035-c<k1>anupabADa<k2>anupabADa
{#anupabADa#}¦ {%an-upabādha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. un-
obstructed, unimpaired.
<LEND>

<L>2276<pc>0035-c<k1>anupaBukta<k2>anupaBukta
{#anupaBukta#}¦ {%an-upabhukta, as, ā, am,%} unen-
joyed, unpossessed.
<LEND>

<L>2277<pc>0035-c<k1>anupaBujyamAna<k2>anupaBujyamAna
{%An-upabhujyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not being en-
joyed.
<LEND>

<L>2278<pc>0035-c<k1>anupama<k2>anupama
{#anupama#}¦ {%an-upama, as, ā, am,%} incomparable,
matchless; excellent, best; ({%ā%}), f. the female elephant
of the south-east or of the north-east. {%—Anupama-%}
{%mati, is,%} m., N. of a contemporary of Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>2279<pc>0035-c<k1>anupamita<k2>anupamita
{%An-upamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ uncompared, matchless.
<LEND>

<L>2280<pc>0035-c<k1>anupameya<k2>anupameya
{%An-upameya, as, ā, am,%}¦ incomparable.
<LEND>

<L>2281<pc>0035-c<k1>anupamardana<k2>anupamardana
{#anupamardana#}¦ {%an-upamardana, am,%} n. non-
demolition or refutation of a charge.
<LEND>

<L>2282<pc>0035-c<k1>anupayukta<k2>anupayukta
{#anupayukta#}¦ {%an-upayukta, as, ā, am,%} unsuited,
unsuitable, improper; useless, unserviceable.
<LEND>

<L>2283<pc>0035-c<k1>anupayoga<k2>anupayoga
{%An-upayoga, as,%}¦ m. unserviceableness, uselessness.
<LEND>

<L>2284<pc>0035-c<k1>anupayogin<k2>anupayogin
{%An-upayogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ unsuitable, useless.
<LEND>

<L>2285<pc>0035-c<k1>anuparata<k2>anuparata
{#anuparata#}¦ {%an-uparata, as, ā, am,%} uninter-
rupted, not stopped.
<LEND>

<L>2286<pc>0035-c<k1>anuparApat<k2>anuparApat
{#anuparApat#}¦ {%anu-parā-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati,%}
{%-titum,%} to fly or hasten by the side of another.
<LEND>

<L>2287<pc>0035-c<k1>anuparikF<k2>anuparikF
{#anuparikF#}¦ {%anu-pari-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati,%}
{%-karitum, -rītum,%} to scatter alongside, to bestrew.
<LEND>

<L>2288<pc>0035-c<k1>anuparikram<k2>anuparikram
{#anuparikram#}¦ {%anu-pari-kram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krā-%}
{%mati, -kramitum,%} to walk round in order, to make
the circuit of, visit in a regular round.
<LEND>

<L>2289<pc>0035-c<k1>anuparigA<k2>anuparigA
{#anuparigA#}¦ {%anu-pari-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti,%}
{%gātum,%} to make the round of, traverse.
<LEND>

<L>2290<pc>0035-c<k1>anupariRI<k2>anupariRI
{#anupariRI#}¦ {%anu-pari-ṇī (-nī),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-ṇayati, -ṇetum,%} to lead or carry about.
<LEND>

<L>2291<pc>0035-c<k1>anupariDi<k2>anupariDi
{#anupariDi#}¦ {%anu-paridhi,%} ind. along or at
the three Paridhis of the sacrificial fire.
<LEND>

<L>2292<pc>0035-c<k1>anupariSrit<k2>anupariSrit
{#anupariSrit#}¦ {%anu-pariśrit,%} ind. along or at
the surrounding fence.
<LEND>

<L>2293<pc>0035-c<k1>anuparI<k2>anuparI
{#anuparI#}¦ {%anu-parī (-pari-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-pary-%}
{%eti, -tum,%} to follow in going round, to make the
round of.
<LEND>

<L>2294<pc>0035-c<k1>anupare<k2>anupare
{#anupare#}¦ {%anu-pare (-parā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-paraiti,%}
{%-tum,%} to follow in walking off.
<LEND>

<L>2295<pc>0035-c<k1>anuparyAgA<k2>anuparyAgA
{#anuparyAgA#}¦ {%anu-pary-ā-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti,%}
{%gātum,%} to revolve, accomplish a revolution.
<LEND>

<L>2296<pc>0035-c<k1>anuparye<k2>anuparye
{#anuparye#}¦ {%anu-parye (-pari-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-paryaiti, -tum,%} to make the whole round of.
<LEND>

<L>2297<pc>0035-c<k1>anupalakzita<k2>anupalakzita
{#anupalakzita#}¦ {%an-upalakṣita, as, ā, am,%} un-
traced, unperceived, unmarked, undiscriminated.
<LEND>

<L>2298<pc>0035-c<k1>anupalakzya<k2>anupalakzya
{%An-upalakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be traced.
{%—Anupalakṣya-vartman, ā, ā, a,%} having ways
(or a way) that cannot be traced.
<LEND>

<L>2299<pc>0035-c<k1>anupalabDa<k2>anupalabDa
{#anupalabDa#}¦ {%an-upalabdha, as, ā, am,%} unob-
tained, unperceived, unascertained.
<LEND>

<L>2300<pc>0035-c<k1>anupalabDi<k2>anupalabDi
{%An-upalabdhi, is,%}¦ f. non-perception, non-recogni-
tion. {%—Anupalabdhi-sama, as, ā,%} m. f. sophism,
trying to establish a fact (e. g. the reality and eternity
of sound) from the impossibility of perceiving the
non-perception of it.
<LEND>

<L>2301<pc>0035-c<k1>anupalaByamAna<k2>anupalaByamAna
{%An-upalabhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not being per-
ceived.
<LEND>

<L>2302<pc>0035-c<k1>anupalamBa<k2>anupalamBa
{%An-upalambha, as,%}¦ m. non-perception.
<LEND>

<L>2303<pc>0035-c<k1>anupalamBana<k2>anupalamBana
{%An-upalambhana, am,%}¦ n. want of apprehension
or knowledge.
<LEND>
[Page0036-a+ 70]

<L>2304<pc>0036-a<k1>anupavItin<k2>anupavItin
{#anupavItin#}¦ {%an-upavītin, ī,%} m. one who
does not wear the sacred cord, uninvested with the
sacrificial thread.
<LEND>

<L>2305<pc>0036-a<k1>anupaSaya<k2>anupaSaya
{#anupaSaya#}¦ {%an-upaśaya, as,%} m. any ag-
gravating thing or circumstance that increases a
disease.
<LEND>

<L>2306<pc>0036-a<k1>anupaSAnta<k2>anupaSAnta
{#anupaSAnta#}¦ {%an-upaśānta, as, ā, am,%} not
cilm; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Buddhist mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>2307<pc>0036-a<k1>anupaSya<k2>anupaSya
{#anupaSya#}¦ {%anu-paśya, as, ā, am,%} following
with his looks, keeping in view or in mind.
<LEND>

<L>2308<pc>0036-a<k1>anupasarga<k2>anupasarga
{#anupasarga#}¦ {%an-upasarga, as,%} m. a word that
is not an Upasarga, that has not the force of one,
that is destitute of one; that which needs no additions
or supplements (as a divine being).
<LEND>

<L>2309<pc>0036-a<k1>anupasecana<k2>anupasecana
{#anupasecana#}¦ {%an-upasecana, as, ā, am,%} having
nothing (e. g. no sauce) for moistening.
<LEND>

<L>2310<pc>0036-a<k1>anupaskfta<k2>anupaskfta
{#anupaskfta#}¦ {%an-upaskṛta, as, ā, am,%} un-
finished, unpolished; not cooked, i. e. genuine, blame-
less; unrequited.
<LEND>

<L>2311<pc>0036-a<k1>anupasTAna<k2>anupasTAna
{#anupasTAna#}¦ {%an-upasthāna, am,%} n. absence,
the not being at hand.
<LEND>

<L>2312<pc>0036-a<k1>anupasTApana<k2>anupasTApana
{%An-upasthāpana, am,%}¦ n. not producing, not
offering, not placing; not having ready or at hand.
<LEND>

<L>2313<pc>0036-a<k1>anupasTApayat<k2>anupasTApayat
{%An-upasthāpayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ not presenting,
not having at hand.
<LEND>

<L>2314<pc>0036-a<k1>anupasTApita<k2>anupasTApita
{%An-upasthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not ready, not at
hand, not offered or produced.
<LEND>

<L>2315<pc>0036-a<k1>anupasTAyin<k2>anupasTAyin
{%An-upasthāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ absent, distant.
<LEND>

<L>2316<pc>0036-a<k1>anupasTita<k2>anupasTita
{%An-upasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not come near, not
present, not at hand, not current; ({%am%}), n. a word
not {%upasthita%} (q. v.) in the grammatical sense of that
term.
<LEND>

<L>2317<pc>0036-a<k1>anupasTiti<k2>anupasTiti
{%An-upasthiti, is,%}¦ f. absence, not being at hand.
<LEND>

<L>2318<pc>0036-a<k1>anupahata<k2>anupahata
{#anupahata#}¦ {%an-upahata, as, ā, am,%} unim-
paired, unvitiated; not rendered impure. {%—An-upa-%}
{%hata-kruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} (with Buddhists) neither
affected by injury no by anger.
<LEND>

<L>2319<pc>0036-a<k1>anupahUta<k2>anupahUta
{#anupahUta#}¦ {%an-upahūta, as, ā, am,%} not called
upon or invited; not called upon aloud; not accom-
panied with invitations.
<LEND>

<L>2320<pc>0036-a<k1>anupA<k2>anupA<h>1
{#anupA#} 1¦. {%anu-pā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-pibati, -pātum,%}
to drink after or thereupon, follow in drinking, drink
at: Caus. {%-pāyayati, -yitum,%} to cause to drink after-
wards.
<LEND>

<L>2321<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAna<k2>anupAna
{%Anu-pāna, am,%}¦ n. a fluid vehicle in medicine;
drink taken with or after medicine; drink close at
hand.
<LEND>

<L>2322<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAnIya<k2>anupAnIya
{%Anu-pānīya, am,%}¦ n. drink close at hand; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), fit to be drunk after; serving as a liquid vehicle
of medicine.
<LEND>

<L>2323<pc>0036-a<k1>anupA<k2>anupA<h>2
{#anupA#} 2¦. {%anu-pā,%} Caus. P. A. {%-pālayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to preserve, keep.
<LEND>

<L>2324<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAlana<k2>anupAlana
{%Anu-pālana, am,%}¦ n. preserving, keeping up.
<LEND>

<L>2325<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAlayat<k2>anupAlayat
{%Anu-pālayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ keeping, maintaining.
<LEND>

<L>2326<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAlin<k2>anupAlin
{%Anu-pālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ preserving, keeping up.
<LEND>

<L>2327<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAlu<k2>anupAlu
{%Anu-pālu,%}¦ n., N. of a plant, wild Calladium (?).
<LEND>

<L>2328<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAkfta<k2>anupAkfta
{#anupAkfta#}¦ {%an-upākṛta, as, ā, am,%} not ren-
dered fit for sacrificial purposes. {%—Anupākṛta-māṃsa,%}
{%am,%} n. flesh of an animal not prepared for sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>2329<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAKya<k2>anupAKya
{#anupAKya#}¦ {%an-upākhya, as, ā, am,%} not
clearly discernible.
<LEND>

<L>2330<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAta<k2>anupAta
{#anupAta#}¦ {%anu-pāta, as,%} m. falling subse-
quently upon, alighting or descending upon in succes-
sion; following; going, proceeding in order, or as a
consequence; a degree of latitude opposite to one
given, the Antæci (?); proportion (in arithm.); arith-
metical progression, rule of three.
<LEND>

<L>2331<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAtaka<k2>anupAtaka
{%Anu-pātaka, am,%}¦ n. a heinous crime, as falsehood,
fraud, theft, adultery.
<LEND>

<L>2332<pc>0036-a<k1>anupAtam<k2>anupAtam
{%Anu-pātam,%}¦ ind. in succession.
<LEND>
[Page0036-b+ 66]

<L>2333<pc>0036-b<k1>anupAtin<k2>anupAtin
{%Anu-pātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ following as a consequence
or result.
<LEND>

<L>2334<pc>0036-b<k1>anupAna<k2>anupAna
{#anupAna#}¦ {%anu-pāna.%} See s. v. 1. {%anu-pā.%}
<LEND>

<L>2335<pc>0036-b<k1>anupAnatka<k2>anupAnatka
{#anupAnatka#}¦ {%an-upānatka, as, ā, am,%} shoeless.
<LEND>

<L>2336<pc>0036-b<k1>anupAyin<k2>anupAyin
{#anupAyin#}¦ {%an-upāyin, ī, inī, i,%} not using
means or expedients.
<LEND>

<L>2337<pc>0036-b<k1>anupArSva<k2>anupArSva
{#anupArSva#}¦ {%anu-pārśva, as, ā, am,%} lateral;
along or by the side.
<LEND>

<L>2338<pc>0036-b<k1>anupAvftta<k2>anupAvftta
{#anupAvftta#}¦ {%an-upāvṛtta, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people.
<LEND>

<L>2339<pc>0036-b<k1>anupAsana<k2>anupAsana
{#anupAsana#}¦ {%an-upāsana, am,%} n. want of
attention to.
<LEND>

<L>2340<pc>0036-b<k1>anupAsita<k2>anupAsita
{%An-upāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not attended to, neglected.
<LEND>

<L>2341<pc>0036-b<k1>anupuruza<k2>anupuruza
{#anupuruza#}¦ {%anu-puruṣa, as,%} m. the before-
mentioned man, a follower.
<LEND>

<L>2342<pc>0036-b<k1>anupuzpa<k2>anupuzpa
{#anupuzpa#}¦ {%anu-puṣpa, as,%} m. a kind of reed
(Saccharum Sara Roxb.).
<LEND>

<L>2343<pc>0036-b<k1>anupUrva<k2>anupUrva
{#anupUrva#}¦ {%anu-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} regular,
orderly, successive, from the preceding. {%Anupūrveṇa%}
or {%anupūrva-śas,%} ind. in regular order or succession,
from the first, from the beginning, from above down-
wards. {%—Anupūrva-keśa, as,%} m. one who has
regular hair. {%—Anupūrva-gātra, as,%} m. one who
has regularly shaped limbs. {%—Anupūrva-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} descended in a regular line. {%—Anupūrva-%}
{%daṃṣṭra, as, ā, am,%} having regular teeth. {%—Anu-%}
{%pūrva-nābhi, is,%} m. having a regularly shaped navel.
{%—Anupūrva-pāṇi-lekha, as, ā, am,%} having regular
lines in the hands. {%—Anupūrva-vatsā,%} f. a cow
which calves regularly.
<LEND>

<L>2344<pc>0036-b<k1>anupUrvya<k2>anupUrvya
{%Anupūrvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ regular, orderly, successive.
<LEND>

<L>2345<pc>0036-b<k1>anupfkta<k2>anupfkta
{#anupfkta#}¦ {%anu-pṛkta, as, ā, am,%} mixed with.
<LEND>

<L>2346<pc>0036-b<k1>anupfzWya<k2>anupfzWya
{#anupfzWya#}¦ {%anu-pṛṣṭhya, as, ā, am%} (held or
extended), lengthwise.
<LEND>

<L>2347<pc>0036-b<k1>anupF<k2>anupF
{#anupF#}¦ {%anu-pṝ,%} Caus. P. {%-pūrayati, -yitum,%}
to fill, to fulfil.
<LEND>

<L>2348<pc>0036-b<k1>anupeta<k2>anupeta
{#anupeta#}¦ {%an-upeta, as, ā, am,%} not endowed
with, not invested with (the sacred cord).
<LEND>

<L>2349<pc>0036-b<k1>anupozaRa<k2>anupozaRa
{#anupozaRa#}¦ {%an-upoṣaṇa, am,%} n. not fasting.
<LEND>

<L>2350<pc>0036-b<k1>anupta<k2>anupta
{#anupta#}¦ {%an-upta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vap%}), unsown
(as seed). {%—Anupta-śasya, as, ā, am,%} fallow,
meadow (ground, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>2351<pc>0036-b<k1>anuptrima<k2>anuptrima
{%An-uptrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown without being sown.
<LEND>

<L>2352<pc>0036-b<k1>anuprakamp<k2>anuprakamp
{#anuprakamp#}¦ {%anu-pra-kamp,%} Caus. A. {%-kamp-%}
{%ayate, -yitum,%} to follow in swinging or agitating.
<LEND>

<L>2353<pc>0036-b<k1>anupraC<k2>anupraC
{#anupraC#}¦ {%anu-prach,%} cl. 6. P. {%-pṛcchati,%}
{%-praṣṭum%} (with two acc. cases of the person and
thing), to ask, to inquire after.
<LEND>

<L>2354<pc>0036-b<k1>anupraSna<k2>anupraSna
{%Anupraśna,%}¦ see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>2355<pc>0036-b<k1>anuprajan<k2>anuprajan
{#anuprajan#}¦ {%anu-pra-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate,%}
{%-janitum,%} to be born after; to procreate again and
again: Caus. {%-janayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be born
subsequently.
<LEND>

<L>2356<pc>0036-b<k1>anuprajYA<k2>anuprajYA
{#anuprajYA#}¦ {%anu-pra-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jñātum,%} to track, trace, discover.
<LEND>

<L>2357<pc>0036-b<k1>anuprajYAna<k2>anuprajYAna
{%Anu-prajñāna, am,%}¦ n. tracking, tracing.
<LEND>

<L>2358<pc>0036-b<k1>anupraRud<k2>anupraRud
{#anupraRud#}¦ {%anu-pra-ṇud (-nud),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-ṇudati, -te, -ṇottum,%} to push away from one's self;
to frighten away, put to flight.
<LEND>

<L>2359<pc>0036-b<k1>anupratikram<k2>anupratikram
{#anupratikram#}¦ {%anu-prati-kram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krām-%}
{%ati, -kramitum,%} to return.
<LEND>

<L>2360<pc>0036-b<k1>anupraT<k2>anupraT
{#anupraT#}¦ {%anu-prath,%} cl. 1. A. {%-prathate,%}
{%-thitum,%} to praise, celebrate.
<LEND>

<L>2361<pc>0036-b<k1>anupradA<k2>anupradA
{#anupradA#}¦ {%anu-pra-dā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadāti,%}
{%dātum,%} to surrender, make over.
<LEND>

<L>2362<pc>0036-b<k1>anupradAna<k2>anupradAna
{%Anu-pradāna, am,%}¦ n. a gift, donation.
<LEND>
[Page0036-c+ 67]

<L>2363<pc>0036-c<k1>anupraDAv<k2>anupraDAv
{#anupraDAv#}¦ {%anu-pra-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-vitum,%} to rush after.
<LEND>

<L>2364<pc>0036-c<k1>anupraDAvita<k2>anupraDAvita
{%Anu-pradhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ hurried, eager.
<LEND>

<L>2365<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprapat<k2>anuprapat
{#anuprapat#}¦ {%anu-pra-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati,%}
{%-titum,%} to fly towards.
<LEND>

<L>2366<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprapAtam<k2>anuprapAtam
{%Anu-prapātam,%}¦ ind. going in succession.
<LEND>

<L>2367<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprapad<k2>anuprapad
{#anuprapad#}¦ {%anu-pra-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to follow.
<LEND>

<L>2368<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprapanna<k2>anuprapanna
{%Anu-prapanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ following after, con-
formed to.
<LEND>

<L>2369<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprapAdam<k2>anuprapAdam
{%Anu-prapādam,%}¦ ind. going in succession.
<LEND>

<L>2370<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprapA<k2>anuprapA
{#anuprapA#}¦ {%anu-pra-pā,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-pibati,%}
{%-te, -pātum;%} P. to drink one after the other; A. to
drink after another (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>2371<pc>0036-c<k1>anupramARa<k2>anupramARa
{#anupramARa#}¦ {%anu-pramāṇa, as, ā, am,%} having
a suitable size or length.
<LEND>

<L>2372<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprayuj<k2>anuprayuj
{#anuprayuj#}¦ {%anu-pra-yuj,%} cl. 7. A. {%-yuṅkte,%}
{%-yoktum,%} to employ, apply.
<LEND>

<L>2373<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprayujyamAna<k2>anuprayujyamAna
{%Anu-prayujyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ employed in
addition.
<LEND>

<L>2374<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprayoktavya<k2>anuprayoktavya
{%Anu-prayoktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ proper to be joined
or employed in addition.
<LEND>

<L>2375<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprayoga<k2>anuprayoga
{%Anu-prayoga, as,%}¦ m. additional use.
<LEND>

<L>2376<pc>0036-c<k1>anupraroha<k2>anupraroha
{#anupraroha#}¦ {%anu-praroha, as, ā, am,%} coming
up or growing in accordance with.
<LEND>

<L>2377<pc>0036-c<k1>anupravah<k2>anupravah
{#anupravah#}¦ {%anu-pra-vah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vahati,%}
{%-voḍhum,%} to drag (or carry) about.
<LEND>

<L>2378<pc>0036-c<k1>anupraviS<k2>anupraviS
{#anupraviS#}¦ {%anu-pra-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati,%}
{%-veṣṭum,%} to follow in entering, to attack, enter;
to sleep with.
<LEND>

<L>2379<pc>0036-c<k1>anupraviSya<k2>anupraviSya
{%Anu-praviśya,%}¦ ind. having entered.
<LEND>

<L>2380<pc>0036-c<k1>anupraveSa<k2>anupraveSa
{%Anu-praveśa, as,%}¦ m. or {%anu-praveśana, am,%} n.
return, entrance; imitation.
<LEND>

<L>2381<pc>0036-c<k1>anupraveSanIya<k2>anupraveSanIya
{%Anu-praveśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected with re-
turning or with entering.
<LEND>

<L>2382<pc>0036-c<k1>anupraSuc<k2>anupraSuc
{#anupraSuc#}¦ {%anu-pra-śuc,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śocati,%}
{%-citum,%} to regret or mourn deeply.
<LEND>

<L>2383<pc>0036-c<k1>anupraSna<k2>anupraSna
{#anupraSna#}¦ {%anu-praśna, as,%} m. (fr. {%anu-prach%}),
a subsequent question having reference to what has
been previously said by the teacher.
<LEND>

<L>2384<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprasakta<k2>anuprasakta
{#anuprasakta#}¦ {%anu-prasakta, as, ā, am,%} strongly
attached, closely connected.
<LEND>

<L>2385<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprasakti<k2>anuprasakti
{%Anu-prasakti, is,%}¦ f. close connection with.
<LEND>

<L>2386<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprasTa<k2>anuprasTa
{#anuprasTa#}¦ {%anu-prastha, as, ā, am,%} latitudinal;
according to width, following the breadth or latitude.
<LEND>

<L>2387<pc>0036-c<k1>anupraharaRa<k2>anupraharaRa
{#anupraharaRa#}¦ {%anu-praharaṇa, am,%} n. knock-
ing into or throwing into.
<LEND>

<L>2388<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprAR<k2>anuprAR
{#anuprAR#}¦ {%anu-prāṇ (-pra-an),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-prāṇiti, -ṇitum,%} to breathe after.
<LEND>

<L>2389<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprAp<k2>anuprAp
{#anuprAp#}¦ {%anu-prāp (-pra-āp),%} cl. 5. P.
{%-āpnoti, -āptum,%} to come or go up to, reach, attain,
overtake (?); to arrive, to get, obtain; to get back;
to imitate.
<LEND>

<L>2390<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprApta<k2>anuprApta
{%Anu-prāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ arrived, returned; ob-
tained; having reached, having got.
<LEND>

<L>2391<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprAs<k2>anuprAs
{#anuprAs#}¦ {%anu-prās (-pra-as),%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati,%}
{%-asitum,%} to throw or shoot after.
<LEND>

<L>2392<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprAsa<k2>anuprAsa
{%Anu-prāsa, as,%}¦ m. alliteration, repetition of similar
letters, syllables, and words.
<LEND>

<L>2393<pc>0036-c<k1>anupre<k2>anupre
{#anupre#}¦ {%anu-pre (-pra-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-praiti,%}
{%-tum,%} to follow; to follow in death; to seek after.
<LEND>

<L>2394<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprekz<k2>anuprekz
{#anuprekz#}¦ {%anu-prekṣ (-pra-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-prekṣate, -kṣitum,%} to follow with the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>2395<pc>0036-c<k1>anuprez<k2>anuprez
{#anuprez#}¦ {%anu-preṣ (-pra-iṣ),%} Caus. P.
{%-preṣayati, -yitum,%} to send forth after.
<LEND>

<L>2396<pc>0036-c<k1>anuplava<k2>anuplava
{#anuplava#}¦ {%anu-plava, as,%} m. (rt. {%plu%}), a com-
panion or follower.
<LEND>
[Page0037-a+ 74]

<L>2397<pc>0037-a<k1>anubanD<k2>anubanD
{#anubanD#}¦ {%anu-bandh,%} cl. 9. P. {%-badhnāti,%}
{%-banddhum,%} to attach, tie; to bind (by an obliga-
tion); to stick, adhere, follow, endure.
<LEND>

<L>2398<pc>0037-a<k1>anubadDa<k2>anubadDa
{%Anu-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound to, obliged to,
connected with, related to, belonging to.
<LEND>

<L>2399<pc>0037-a<k1>anubanDa<k2>anubanDa
{%Anu-bandha, as,%}¦ m. binding, connection, attach-
ment, the encumbrance or clog of a family; uninter-
rupted succession; sequence, consequence, result; in-
tention, design, motive or cause of an action; obstacle;
the inseparable adjunct or sign of anything, secondary
or symptomatic affection, supervening on the principal
disease; an indicatory letter or syllable, marking some
peculiarity in the inflection of the word to which it
is attached (for instance, an {%i%} attached to roots, de-
notes the insertion of a nasal before their final conso-
nant); a child or pupil, who imitates an example set
by the parent or preceptor; commencement, begin-
ning; anything small or little, a part, a small part;
(in arithm.) the junction of fractions; (in phil.)
an indispensable element of the Vedānta; ({%ī%}), f.
hiccup; thirst.
<LEND>

<L>2400<pc>0037-a<k1>anubanDaka<k2>anubanDaka
{%Anu-bandhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ connected, allied;
related.
<LEND>

<L>2401<pc>0037-a<k1>anubanDana<k2>anubanDana
{%Anu-bandhana, am,%}¦ n. binding, connection, suc-
cession, unbroken series.
<LEND>

<L>2402<pc>0037-a<k1>anubanDin<k2>anubanDin
{%Anu-bandhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ connected with, attached;
having in its train or as a consequence, resulting.
{%—Anubandhi-tva, am,%} n. the state of being accom-
panied.
<LEND>

<L>2403<pc>0037-a<k1>anubanDya<k2>anubanDya
{%Anu-bandhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ principal, primary, what
may receive an adjunct, as a root, a disease; ({%as%}), m.
one of the three principal sacrificial animals at the
Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>2404<pc>0037-a<k1>anubala<k2>anubala
{#anubala#}¦ {%anu-bala, am,%} n. rear-guard, or an
auxiliary army following another.
<LEND>

<L>2405<pc>0037-a<k1>anubAD<k2>anubAD
{#anubAD#}¦ {%anu-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate,%}
{%-dhitum,%} to press closely, pursue.
<LEND>

<L>2406<pc>0037-a<k1>anubuD<k2>anubuD
{#anubuD#}¦ {%anu-budh,%} cl. 4. A. {%-budhyate,%}
{%-bodhitum,%} to awake, to recollect, to learn (by in-
formation).
<LEND>

<L>2407<pc>0037-a<k1>anuboDa<k2>anuboDa
{%Anu-bodha, as,%}¦ m. reviving the scent of a faded
perfume, replacing perfumes removed by bathing; an
after-thought.
<LEND>

<L>2408<pc>0037-a<k1>anuboDana<k2>anuboDana
{%Anu-bodhana, am,%}¦ n. recollecting.
<LEND>

<L>2409<pc>0037-a<k1>anuboDita<k2>anuboDita
{%Anu-bodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ informed or convinced
by recollection.
<LEND>

<L>2410<pc>0037-a<k1>anubrAhmaRa<k2>anubrAhmaRa
{#anubrAhmaRa#}¦ {%anu-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n. a work
resembling a Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>2411<pc>0037-a<k1>anubrAhmaRika<k2>anubrAhmaRika
{%Anu-brāhmaṇika%}¦ (or perhaps more correctly {%ānu-%}
{%brāhmaṇika), as,%} or {%anu-brāhmaṇin, ī,%} m. a
knower of an {%anu-brāhmaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>2412<pc>0037-a<k1>anubrU<k2>anubrU
{#anubrU#}¦ {%anu-brū,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bravīti, -vaktum,%}
to pronounce, utter, vow.
<LEND>

<L>2413<pc>0037-a<k1>anuBAz<k2>anuBAz
{#anuBAz#}¦ {%anu-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to pronounce clearly, to confess.
<LEND>

<L>2414<pc>0037-a<k1>anuBAzaRa<k2>anuBAzaRa
{%Anu-bhāṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. repeating what has been
said; repeating a proposition in order to refute it.
<LEND>

<L>2415<pc>0037-a<k1>anuBAsa<k2>anuBAsa
{#anuBAsa#}¦ {%anu-bhāsa, as,%} m. a species of
crow.
<LEND>

<L>2416<pc>0037-a<k1>anuBid<k2>anuBid
{#anuBid#}¦ {%anu-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhettum,%} to split, break.
<LEND>

<L>2417<pc>0037-a<k1>anuBitti<k2>anuBitti
{%Anu-bhitti,%}¦ ind. along a cleft.
<LEND>

<L>2418<pc>0037-a<k1>anuBuj<k2>anuBuj
{#anuBuj#}¦ {%anu-bhuj,%} cl. 7. A. {%-bhuṅkte, -bhok-%}
{%tum,%} to suffer the due consequence of one's actions.
<LEND>

<L>2419<pc>0037-a<k1>anuBoga<k2>anuBoga
{%Anu-bhoga, as,%}¦ m. (in law) enjoyment, a grant of
hereditary land in return for service.
<LEND>

<L>2420<pc>0037-a<k1>anuBU<k2>anuBU
{#anuBU#}¦ {%anu-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%}
to be after, to notice, perceive, understand; to expe-
rience, to attempt.
<LEND>

<L>2421<pc>0037-a<k1>anuBava<k2>anuBava
{%Anu-bhava, as,%}¦ m. perception, apprehension, fru-
ition; understanding; impression on the mind not
derived from memory; experience, knowledge derived
from personal observation or experiment; result, con-
sequence. {%—Anubhava-siddha, as, ā, am,%} established
[Page0037-b+ 75]
by experience or perception. {%—Anubhavārūḍha (˚va-%}
{%ār˚), as, ā, am,%} subjected to trial or experiment.
<LEND>

<L>2422<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBAva<k2>anuBAva
{%Anu-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. a sign or indication of a feeling
({%bhāva%}) by look or gesture; dignity, authority, con-
sequence; firm opinion, ascertainment, good resolu-
tion, belief.
<LEND>

<L>2423<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBAvaka<k2>anuBAvaka
{%Anu-bhāvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to apprehend,
making to understand. {%—Anubhāvaka-tā,%} f. under-
standing.
<LEND>

<L>2424<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBAvana<k2>anuBAvana
{%Anu-bhāvana, am,%}¦ n. the act of indicating feelings
by sign or gesture.
<LEND>

<L>2425<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBAvin<k2>anuBAvin
{%Anu-bhāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ perceiving, knowing, an
eye-witness; showing signs of feeling.
<LEND>

<L>2426<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBU<k2>anuBU
{%Anu-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%}¦ perceiving, understanding.
<LEND>

<L>2427<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBUta<k2>anuBUta
{%Anu-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ perceived, understood,
judged, experienced, apprehended; resulted, followed
as a consequence; that has experienced, tasted, tried
or enjoyed.
<LEND>

<L>2428<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBUti<k2>anuBUti
{%Anu-bhūti, is,%}¦ f. perception, apprehension; know-
ledge from any source but memory; (in phil.) know-
ledge from four sources, viz. perception by the senses,
inference, comparison, and verbal knowledge; dignity,
consequence. {%—Anubhūti-prakāśa, as,%} m. title of a
metric paraphrase of the twelve principal Upaniṣads,
by Vidyāraṇya-muni. {%—Anubhūti-svarūpācārya%}
{%(˚pa-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of the author of the grammar
Sārasvatī-prakriyā.
<LEND>

<L>2429<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBUya<k2>anuBUya
{%Anu-bhūya,%}¦ ind. having perceived, having experi-
enced.
<LEND>

<L>2430<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBUyamAna<k2>anuBUyamAna
{%Anu-bhūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ under trial, under
enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>2431<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBf<k2>anuBf
{#anuBf#}¦ {%anu-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-bharati,%}
{%-bhartum,%} to praise conformably (?), to commit to,
throw into.
<LEND>

<L>2432<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBartf<k2>anuBartf
{%Anu-bhartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. praising conformably,
imitating.
<LEND>

<L>2433<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBrAj<k2>anuBrAj
{#anuBrAj#}¦ {%anu-bhrāj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhrājati,%}
{%-jitum,%} to illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>2434<pc>0037-b<k1>anuBrAtf<k2>anuBrAtf
{#anuBrAtf#}¦ {%anu-bhrātṛ, tā,%} m. a younger
brother.
<LEND>

<L>2435<pc>0037-b<k1>anumad<k2>anumad
{#anumad#}¦ {%anu-mad,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-madati,%}
{%-ditum,%} to rejoice over, to gladden, to praise.
<LEND>

<L>2436<pc>0037-b<k1>anumatta<k2>anumatta
{%Anu-matta, as, ā, am,%}¦ intoxicated (with joy,
&c.); recovered from intoxication (?).
<LEND>

<L>2437<pc>0037-b<k1>anumAdya<k2>anumAdya
{%Anu-mādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised in succession,
to be granted with acclamation or praise.
<LEND>

<L>2438<pc>0037-b<k1>anumaDyamam<k2>anumaDyamam
{#anumaDyamam#}¦ {%anu-madhyamam,%} ind. next
oldest to the middle.
<LEND>

<L>2439<pc>0037-b<k1>anuman<k2>anuman
{#anuman#}¦ {%anu-man,%} cl. 4. A. {%-manyate, -man-%}
{%tum,%} to approve, assent to, permit, grant: Caus. P.
{%-mānayati, -yitum,%} to ask for permission, to honour.
<LEND>

<L>2440<pc>0037-b<k1>anumata<k2>anumata
{%Anu-mata, as, ā, am,%}¦ approved, assented to, per-
mitted, allowed; agreeable, pleasant; loved, beloved;
concurred with, being of one opinion; ({%am%}), n. con-
sent, permission, approbation. {%Anumate,%} loc. c. with
consent of. {%—Anumata-karma-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} doing
what is allowed, acting according to an agreement.
<LEND>

<L>2441<pc>0037-b<k1>anumati<k2>anumati
{%Anu-mati, is,%}¦ f. assent, permission, approbation;
the fifteenth day of the moon's age, on which it
rises one digit less than full, when the gods or manes
receive oblations with favour; the former personified
as a goddess and worshipped especially in the Rājasūya
sacrifice; oblation made to this goddess. {%—Anumati-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. (in law) a deed expressing assent.
<LEND>

<L>2442<pc>0037-b<k1>anumanana<k2>anumanana
{%Anu-manana, am,%}¦ n. assenting; independance.
<LEND>

<L>2443<pc>0037-b<k1>anumantf<k2>anumantf
{%Anu-mantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ consenting to, permitting.
<LEND>

<L>2444<pc>0037-b<k1>anumanyamAna<k2>anumanyamAna
{%Anu-manyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ minding, assenting.
<LEND>

<L>2445<pc>0037-b<k1>anumantr<k2>anumantr
{#anumantr#}¦ {%anu-mantr,%} cl. 10. A. (P. ?) {%-mantr-%}
{%ayate, -ti, -yitum,%} to accompany with or consecrate
by magic formulas; to dismiss with a blessing.
<LEND>

<L>2446<pc>0037-b<k1>anumantraRa<k2>anumantraRa
{%Anu-mantraṇa, am,%}¦ n. consecration by hymns
and prayers. {%—Anumantraṇa-mantra, as,%} m. a
hymn used in consecrating.
<LEND>

<L>2447<pc>0037-b<k1>anumantrita<k2>anumantrita
{%Anu-mantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ so consecrated.
<LEND>

<L>2448<pc>0037-b<k1>anumaraRa<k2>anumaraRa
{#anumaraRa#}¦ {%anu-maraṇa.%} See {%anu-mṛ.%}
<LEND>
[Page0037-c+ 73]

<L>2449<pc>0037-c<k1>anumaru<k2>anumaru
{#anumaru#}¦ {%anu-maru, us,%} m. a country next
to a desert.
<LEND>

<L>2450<pc>0037-c<k1>anumA<k2>anumA<h>1
{#anumA#} 1¦. {%anu-mā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-mimīte, -mātum,%}
to infer, conclude, guess, conjecture; to reconcile, to
equal: Pass. {%-mīyate,%} to be inferred or supposed.
<LEND>

<L>2451<pc>0037-c<k1>anumA<k2>anumA<h>2
2. {%anu-mā,%}¦ f. inference, a conclusion from given
premises.
<LEND>

<L>2452<pc>0037-c<k1>anumAna<k2>anumAna
{%Anu-māna, am,%}¦ n. the act of inferring or drawing
a conclusion from given premises; inference, consi-
deration, reflection; guess, conjecture; one of the
means of obtaining knowledge ({%pramāṇa%}) according
to the Sāṅkhya or Nyāya systems, but not according
to the Vedānta. {%—Anumāna-khaṇḍa, am,%} n., N.
of a work on inference, by Cintāmaṇi. {%—Anumāna-%}
{%prakāśa, as,%} m. a similar work by Rucidatta.
{%—Anumāna-maṇi-dīdhiti, is,%} f. a similar work by
Raghunātha. {%—Anumānokti (˚na-uk˚), is,%} f. rea-
soning, logic.
<LEND>

<L>2453<pc>0037-c<k1>anumApaka<k2>anumApaka
{%Anu-māpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing an inference,
as an effect.
<LEND>

<L>2454<pc>0037-c<k1>anumita<k2>anumita
{%Anu-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ inferred, conjectured.
<LEND>

<L>2455<pc>0037-c<k1>anumiti<k2>anumiti
{%Anu-miti, is,%}¦ f. inference, conclusion from given
premises.
<LEND>

<L>2456<pc>0037-c<k1>anumimAna<k2>anumimAna
{%Anu-mimāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ concluding, inferring.
<LEND>

<L>2457<pc>0037-c<k1>anumIyamAna<k2>anumIyamAna
{%Anu-mīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being inferred.
<LEND>

<L>2458<pc>0037-c<k1>anumeya<k2>anumeya
{%Anu-meya, as, ā, am,%}¦ inferable, to be inferred,
proved or conjectured.
<LEND>

<L>2459<pc>0037-c<k1>anumAdya<k2>anumAdya
{#anumAdya#}¦ {%anu-mādya.%} See under {%anu-mad.%}
<LEND>

<L>2460<pc>0037-c<k1>anumAzam<k2>anumAzam
{#anumAzam#}¦ {%anu-māṣam,%} ind. like a kidney
bean.
<LEND>

<L>2461<pc>0037-c<k1>anumAsa<k2>anumAsa
{#anumAsa#}¦ {%anu-māsa, as,%} m. the following
month.
<LEND>

<L>2462<pc>0037-c<k1>anumud<k2>anumud
{#anumud#}¦ {%anu-mud,%} cl. 1. A. {%-modate, -ditum,%}
to join in rejoicing, to sympathize with, to rejoice; to
allow with pleasure, to express approval, applaud, permit.
<LEND>

<L>2463<pc>0037-c<k1>anumoda<k2>anumoda
{%Anu-moda, as,%}¦ m. a subsequent pleasure, the feel-
ing of pleasure from sympathy.
<LEND>

<L>2464<pc>0037-c<k1>anumodaka<k2>anumodaka
{%Anu-modaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ assenting, showing
sympathetic joy.
<LEND>

<L>2465<pc>0037-c<k1>anumodana<k2>anumodana
{%Anu-modana, am,%}¦ n. pleasing, causing pleasure,
applauding; assent, acceptance; sympathetic joy.
<LEND>

<L>2466<pc>0037-c<k1>anumodita<k2>anumodita
{%Anu-modita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, delighted, ap-
plauded; agreeable, acceptable.
<LEND>

<L>2467<pc>0037-c<k1>anumuh<k2>anumuh
{#anumuh#}¦ {%anu-muh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-muhyati, -mog-%}
{%dhum%} or {%-moḍhum,%} to feel distressed at, to be trou-
bled about.
<LEND>

<L>2468<pc>0037-c<k1>anumf<k2>anumf
{#anumf#}¦ {%anu-mṛ,%} cl. 6. A. {%-mriyate, -martum,%}
to follow in death.
<LEND>

<L>2469<pc>0037-c<k1>anumaraRa<k2>anumaraRa
{%Anu-maraṇa, am,%}¦ n. following in death; post-
cremation of a widow whose husband's corpse is not
on the spot, and with part of whose dress she there-
fore ascends the pile; this is prohibited to Brāhman
women: it is often synonymous with the opposite
term {%saha-maraṇa,%} con-cremation or burning with
the body.
<LEND>

<L>2470<pc>0037-c<k1>anumarizyat<k2>anumarizyat
{%Anu-mariṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to follow
in death.
<LEND>

<L>2471<pc>0037-c<k1>anumftA<k2>anumftA
{%Anu-mṛtā,%}¦ f. the woman who burns with a part
of her husband's dress.
<LEND>

<L>2472<pc>0037-c<k1>anumfgyadASu<k2>anumfgyadASu
{#anumfgyadASu#}¦ {%anumṛgya-dāśu, us,%} m. (rt.
{%mṛg%} and {%dā%}), granting all that is sought.
<LEND>

<L>2473<pc>0037-c<k1>anumfj<k2>anumfj
{#anumfj#}¦ {%anu-mṛj,%} cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi, -mārji-%}
{%tum%} or {%-mārṣṭum,%} to purify.
<LEND>

<L>2474<pc>0037-c<k1>anumfS<k2>anumfS
{#anumfS#}¦ {%anu-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati, -mar-%}
{%ṣṭum%} or {%-mraṣṭum,%} to consider, think of, reflect.
<LEND>

<L>2475<pc>0037-c<k1>anumarSam<k2>anumarSam
{%Anu-marśam,%}¦ ind. having repeatedly considered.
<LEND>

<L>2476<pc>0037-c<k1>anumlocA<k2>anumlocA
{#anumlocA#}¦ {%anu-mlocā%} or {%anu-mlocantī,%} f.,
N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>2477<pc>0037-c<k1>anuyajus<k2>anuyajus
{#anuyajus#}¦ {%anu-yajus,%} ind. (rt. {%yaj%}), accord-
ing to the Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>2478<pc>0037-c<k1>anuyAga<k2>anuyAga
{%Anu-yāga, as,%}¦ m. a subsequent or after-sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>2479<pc>0037-c<k1>anuyAja<k2>anuyAja
{%Anu-yāja, as,%}¦ m. a secondary or final sacrifice or
offering. {%—Anuyāja-prasava, as,%} m. permission to
[Page0038-a+ 75]
perform an Anuyāja. {%—Anuyāja-praiṣa, ās,%} m. pl.
the formulas belonging to the Anuyāja. {%—Anuyāja-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having secondary sacrifices. {%—Anu-%}
{%yājānumantraṇa (˚ja-an˚), am,%} n. reciting those
formulas. {%—Anuyājārtha (˚ja-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} be-
longing to or used at an Anuyāja.
<LEND>

<L>2480<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyam<k2>anuyam
{#anuyam#}¦ {%anu-yam,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-yacchati,%}
{%-yantum,%} to covet.
<LEND>

<L>2481<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyavam<k2>anuyavam
{#anuyavam#}¦ {%anu-yavam,%} ind. like barley.
<LEND>

<L>2482<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyA<k2>anuyA<h>1
{#anuyA#} 1¦. {%anu-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%} to
follow, attend; to take (off) seriatim.
<LEND>

<L>2483<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyA<k2>anuyA<h>2
2. {%anu-yā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ following; ({%ās%}), f., Ved. food.
<LEND>

<L>2484<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyata<k2>anuyata
{%Anu-yata, as, ā, am,%}¦ followed, pursued, practised.
<LEND>

<L>2485<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyAtavya<k2>anuyAtavya
{%Anu-yātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be followed.
<LEND>

<L>2486<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyAtf<k2>anuyAtf
{%Anu-yātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a follower, companion.
<LEND>

<L>2487<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyAtra<k2>anuyAtra
{%Anu-yātra, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. retinue, attendance, that
which is required for a journey.
<LEND>

<L>2488<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyAtrika<k2>anuyAtrika
{%Anu-yātrika, as, ā, am,%}¦ following as attendant.
<LEND>

<L>2489<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyAna<k2>anuyAna
{%Anu-yāna, am,%}¦ n. going after, following.
<LEND>

<L>2490<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyAyin<k2>anuyAyin
{%Anu-yāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ going after; a follower, a
dependant or attendant; following, consequent upon.
{%—Anuyāyi-tā,%} f. or {%anuyāyi-tva, am,%} n. the state
of being a follower, succession.
<LEND>

<L>2491<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyuj<k2>anuyuj
{#anuyuj#}¦ {%anu-yuj,%} cl. 7. A. {%-yuṅkte, -yoktum,%}
to examine, question, put upon trial; to order; en-
join; to select (a husband).
<LEND>

<L>2492<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyukta<k2>anuyukta
{%Anu-yukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ ordered, enjoined; asked,
inquired; examined, questioned, reprehended, cen-
sured.
<LEND>

<L>2493<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyuktin<k2>anuyuktin
{%Anu-yuktin, ī,%}¦ m. one who has enjoined, ex-
amined.
<LEND>

<L>2494<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyugam<k2>anuyugam
{%Anu-yugam,%}¦ ind. according to the Yugas or four
ages.
<LEND>

<L>2495<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyoktf<k2>anuyoktf
{%Anu-yoktṛ, tā,%}¦ m. an examiner, inquirer, teacher.
<LEND>

<L>2496<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyoga<k2>anuyoga
{%Anu-yoga, as,%}¦ m. a question, examination, asking,
solicitation; censure, reproof; religious meditation,
spiritual union. {%—Anuyoga-kṛt, t,%} m. an Ācārya or
spiritual teacher.
<LEND>

<L>2497<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyogin<k2>anuyogin
{%Anu-yogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ what combines or unites;
connected or combined with, situated in or on, ques-
tioning, examining.
<LEND>

<L>2498<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyojana<k2>anuyojana
{%Anu-yojana, am,%}¦ n. question, questioning, ex-
amining.
<LEND>

<L>2499<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyojya<k2>anuyojya
{%Anu-yojya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be examined or ques-
tioned; to be enjoined or ordered; censurable; a
servant, agent, delegate.
<LEND>

<L>2500<pc>0038-a<k1>anuyUpam<k2>anuyUpam
{#anuyUpam#}¦ {%anu-yūpam,%} ind. along the Yūpa
or sacrificial post.
<LEND>

<L>2501<pc>0038-a<k1>anurakz<k2>anurakz
{#anurakz#}¦ {%anu-rakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rakṣati,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to preserve.
<LEND>

<L>2502<pc>0038-a<k1>anurakzaRa<k2>anurakzaRa
{%Anu-rakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of preserving.
<LEND>

<L>2503<pc>0038-a<k1>anurajju<k2>anurajju
{#anurajju#}¦ {%anu-rajju,%} ind. along the rope.
<LEND>

<L>2504<pc>0038-a<k1>anuraYj<k2>anuraYj
{#anuraYj#}¦ {%anu-rañj,%} cl. 4. A. {%-rajyate, -raṅk-%}
{%tum,%} to be attached or devoted; P. {%-rajyati,%} to
blush, be deeply affected: Caus. P. {%-rañjayati, -yitum,%}
to win, conciliate, gratify.
<LEND>

<L>2505<pc>0038-a<k1>anurakta<k2>anurakta
{%Anu-rakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fond of, attached or devoted
to, pleased; beloved. {%—Anurakta-praja, as, ā, am,%}
beloved by his subjects. {%—Anurakta-loka, as,%} m. a
person to whom every one is attached.
<LEND>

<L>2506<pc>0038-a<k1>anurakti<k2>anurakti
{%Anu-rakti, is,%}¦ f. affection, attachment, love, de-
votion.
<LEND>

<L>2507<pc>0038-a<k1>anuraYjaka<k2>anuraYjaka
{%Anu-rañjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ attaching, conciliating,
causing affection, gratifying, pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>2508<pc>0038-a<k1>anuraYjana<k2>anuraYjana
{%Anu-rañjana, am,%}¦ n. attachment, the act of attach-
ing or conciliating affection, love; pleasing, giving
delight to.
<LEND>

<L>2509<pc>0038-a<k1>anuraYjita<k2>anuraYjita
{%Anu-rañjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ conciliated, inspired with
affection, pleased, delighted.
<LEND>

<L>2510<pc>0038-a<k1>anurAga<k2>anurAga
{%Anu-rāga, as,%}¦ m. attachment, affection, love, pas-
sion, goodwill. {%—Anurāga-vat, ān, atī, at,%} affec-
tionate, attached, in love with. {%—Anurāgeṅgita (˚ga-%}
{%iṅg˚), am,%} n. gesture expressive of passion.
<LEND>

<L>2511<pc>0038-a<k1>anurAgin<k2>anurAgin
{%Anu-rāgin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ impassioned, attached, ena-
moured, causing love; ({%iṇī%}), f. personification of a
[Page0038-b+ 70]
musical note. {%—Anurāgi-tā,%} f. the state of being in
love with.
<LEND>

<L>2512<pc>0038-b<k1>anuraRana<k2>anuraRana
{#anuraRana#}¦ {%anu-raṇana, am,%} n. sounding
conformably to.
<LEND>

<L>2513<pc>0038-b<k1>anurata<k2>anurata
{#anurata#}¦ {%anu-rata, as, ā, am,%} fond of, at-
tached, devoted to.
<LEND>

<L>2514<pc>0038-b<k1>anurati<k2>anurati
{%Anu-rati, is,%}¦ f. love, affection; attachment, good-
will.
<LEND>

<L>2515<pc>0038-b<k1>anuraTa<k2>anuraTa
{#anuraTa#}¦ {%anu-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Kuruvatsa and father of Puruhotra.
<LEND>

<L>2516<pc>0038-b<k1>anuraTyA<k2>anuraTyA
{%Anu-rathyā,%}¦ f. a path along the margin of a road;
a side road, the margin of a street.
<LEND>

<L>2517<pc>0038-b<k1>anurasa<k2>anurasa
{#anurasa#}¦ {%anu-rasa, as,%} m. (in poetry) a sub-
ordinate feeling or passion; (in medic.) a secondary
flavour, as a little sweetness in a sour fruit, &c.
<LEND>

<L>2518<pc>0038-b<k1>anurahasa<k2>anurahasa
{#anurahasa#}¦ {%anu-rahasa, as, ā, am,%} solitary,
private; ({%am%}), ind. in secret, apart.
<LEND>

<L>2519<pc>0038-b<k1>anurAtram<k2>anurAtram
{#anurAtram#}¦ {%anu-rātram,%} ind. every night.
<LEND>

<L>2520<pc>0038-b<k1>anurAdDa<k2>anurAdDa
{#anurAdDa#}¦ {%anu-rāddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%rādh%}),
effected, accomplished.
<LEND>

<L>2521<pc>0038-b<k1>anurADa<k2>anurADa
{%Anu-rādha, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing welfare; see {%anū-%}
{%rādha;%} born under the asterism Anurādhā; ({%ā%}), f.
the seventeenth of the twenty-eight Nakṣatras or
lunar mansion, a constellation described as a row
of oblation. {%—Anurādha-grāma, as,%} m. or {%anu-%}
{%rādha-pura, am,%} n. the ancient capital of Ceylon
founded by a man named Anurādha.
<LEND>

<L>2522<pc>0038-b<k1>anurI<k2>anurI
{#anurI#}¦ {%anu-rī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-rīyate, -retum,%} to
flow after.
<LEND>

<L>2523<pc>0038-b<k1>anuru<k2>anuru
{#anuru#}¦ {%an-uru, us, us%} or {%vī, u,%} not great,
not large.
<LEND>

<L>2524<pc>0038-b<k1>anuruc<k2>anuruc
{#anuruc#}¦ {%anu-ruc,%} Caus. P. {%-rocayati, -yitum,%}
to choose, prefer.
<LEND>

<L>2525<pc>0038-b<k1>anurud<k2>anurud
{#anurud#}¦ {%anu-rud,%} cl. 2. P. {%-roditi, -tum,%} to
lament.
<LEND>

<L>2526<pc>0038-b<k1>anuruD<k2>anuruD<h>1
{#anuruD#} 1¦. {%anu-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. {%-ruṇaddhi,%}
{%-roddhum,%} to retain, keep back; cl. 4. A. {%-rudhyate%}
or poet. P. {%-rudhyati,%} to love, to be fond of or to
spare; to coax, soothe, entreat (especially in Ben-
gālī).
<LEND>

<L>2527<pc>0038-b<k1>anurudDa<k2>anurudDa
{%Anu-ruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ checked, restrained, op-
posed; soothed, coaxed, pacified; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
cousin of Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>2528<pc>0038-b<k1>anuruD<k2>anuruD<h>2
2. {%anu-rudh, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. loving, adhering to,
favouring.
<LEND>

<L>2529<pc>0038-b<k1>anuroDa<k2>anuroDa
{%Anu-rodha, as,%}¦ m. or {%anu-rodhana, am,%} n.
obliging another or fulfilling his wishes; obligingness,
compliance, gratification, satisfaction, conformity, con-
sideration, respect; reference or bearing of a rule.
<LEND>

<L>2530<pc>0038-b<k1>anuroDaka<k2>anuroDaka
{%Anu-rodhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%anu-rodhin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} complying with, compliant, obliging, conform-
ing to, having respect or regard to. {%—Anurodhi-tā,%}
f. the state of being so.
<LEND>

<L>2531<pc>0038-b<k1>anuruhA<k2>anuruhA
{#anuruhA#}¦ {%anu-ruhā,%} f., N. of a grass
(Cyperus Pertenius).
<LEND>

<L>2532<pc>0038-b<k1>anurUpa<k2>anurUpa
{#anurUpa#}¦ {%anu-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} following the
form, conformable, corresponding, like, resembling;
fit, suitable; adapted to, agreeable to, according to;
({%as%}), m. the Antistrophe which has the same metre
as the Stotriya or Strophe (understand {%pragātha%} or
{%tṛca%}); the second of three verses recited together;
({%am%}), n. conformity, suitability. {%Anurūpam%} or {%anu-%}
{%rūpeṇa%} or {%anurūpatas,%} ind. conformably, agree-
ably to, according. {%—Anurūpa-ceṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
endeavouring to act becomingly.
<LEND>

<L>2533<pc>0038-b<k1>anurevatI<k2>anurevatI
{#anurevatI#}¦ {%anu-revatī,%} f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>2534<pc>0038-b<k1>anulagna<k2>anulagna
{#anulagna#}¦ {%anu-lagna, as, ā, am,%} attached to;
followed; intent on, pursuing after.
<LEND>

<L>2535<pc>0038-b<k1>anulA<k2>anulA
{#anulA#}¦ {%anulā,%} f., N. of a female Arhat or
Buddhist saint; also of a queen of Ceylon.
<LEND>
[Page0038-c+ 75]

<L>2536<pc>0038-c<k1>anulApa<k2>anulApa
{#anulApa#}¦ {%anu-lāpa, as,%} m. (rt. {%lap%}), repeti-
tion of what has been said, tautology.
<LEND>

<L>2537<pc>0038-c<k1>anulAsa<k2>anulAsa
{#anulAsa#}¦ {%anu-lāsa, as,%} m. or {%anu-lāsya, as,%}
m. a peacock.
<LEND>

<L>2538<pc>0038-c<k1>anulip<k2>anulip
{#anulip#}¦ {%anu-lip,%} cl. 6. P. {%-limpati, -leptum,%}
to anoint, besmear; cl. 6. A. {%-limpate,%} to anoint one's
self (previous to or after bathing); to bathe: Caus.
{%-lepayati, -yitum,%} to get one anointed.
<LEND>

<L>2539<pc>0038-c<k1>anulipta<k2>anulipta
{%Anu-lipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ smeared, anointed. {%—Anu-%}
{%liptāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} having the limbs
anointed.
<LEND>

<L>2540<pc>0038-c<k1>anulepa<k2>anulepa
{%Anu-lepa, as,%}¦ m. unction, anointing, smearing,
bedaubing.
<LEND>

<L>2541<pc>0038-c<k1>anulepaka<k2>anulepaka
{%Anu-lepaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%anu-lepin, ī, inī, i,%}
anointing the body with unguents, who or what anoints.
<LEND>

<L>2542<pc>0038-c<k1>anulepana<k2>anulepana
{%Anu-lepana, am,%}¦ n. anointing the body; unguent
so used; oily or emollient application.
<LEND>

<L>2543<pc>0038-c<k1>anuluB<k2>anuluB
{#anuluB#}¦ {%anu-lubh,%} Caus. {%-lobhayati, -yitum,%}
to entice; to go astray (?).
<LEND>

<L>2544<pc>0038-c<k1>anuloma<k2>anuloma
{#anuloma#}¦ {%anu-loma, as, ā, am,%} in a natural
direction, in regular order, regular, successive, with
the hair ({%loman%}) or grain (opposed to {%prati-loma%});
({%ā%}), f. a woman of a lower caste than that of the
man's with whom she is connected; ({%ās%}), pl. mixed
castes. {%—Anuloma-kalpa, as,%} m. the thirty-fourth of
the Pariśiṣṭas belonging to the Atharva-veda. {%—Anu-%}
{%loma-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} ploughed in the regular
direction (with the grain). {%—Anuloma-ja, as, ā, am,%}
produced or born in due gradation; applied especially
to the mixed tribes; or offspring of a mother inferior
in caste to the father, as the Mūrdhāvasikta of a
Brāhman father and Kṣatriyā mother, and so on
with the Ambaṣṭha, Niṣāda or Pāraśava, Māhiṣya,
Ugra, Karaṇa. {%—Anuloma-pariṇītā,%} f. married in
regular gradation. {%—Anulomāya (˚ma-aya), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having fortune favourable.
<LEND>

<L>2545<pc>0038-c<k1>anulomana<k2>anulomana
{%Anu-lomana, am,%}¦ n. due regulation, sending or
putting in the right direction; (in medicine) carrying
off by the right channels, purging.
<LEND>

<L>2546<pc>0038-c<k1>anulomaya<k2>anulomaya
{%Anu-lomaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%anu-lomayati, -yitum,%} to
stroke or rub with the hair or the grain, to go with
the grain, to send in the right direction or carrying
off by the right channels.
<LEND>

<L>2547<pc>0038-c<k1>anulbaRa<k2>anulbaRa
{#anulbaRa#}¦ {%an-ulbaṇa%} or {%an-ulvaṇa, as, ā, am,%}
not excessive, not prominent, smooth (?), free from
disturbing circumstances.
<LEND>

<L>2548<pc>0038-c<k1>anuvaMSa<k2>anuvaMSa
{#anuvaMSa#}¦ {%anu-vaṃśa, as,%} m. a genealogical
list or table; ({%am%}), ind. according to race or family,
a new family.
<LEND>

<L>2549<pc>0038-c<k1>anuvaMSya<k2>anuvaMSya
{%Anuvaṃśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to a genealogical
list or table.
<LEND>

<L>2550<pc>0038-c<k1>anuvakra<k2>anuvakra
{#anuvakra#}¦ {%anu-vakra, as, ā, am,%} somewhat
crooked or oblique. {%—Anuvakra-ga, as, ā, am,%} having
a somewhat oblique course (as a planet, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>2551<pc>0038-c<k1>anuvac<k2>anuvac
{#anuvac#}¦ {%anu-vac,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vakti, -tum,%} to
repeat, reiterate, recited, speak after, reply.
<LEND>

<L>2552<pc>0038-c<k1>anuvaktavya<k2>anuvaktavya
{%Anu-vaktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be repeated.
<LEND>

<L>2553<pc>0038-c<k1>anuvaktf<k2>anuvaktf
{%Anu-vaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ speaking after, repeating,
replying.
<LEND>

<L>2554<pc>0038-c<k1>anuvacana<k2>anuvacana
{%Anu-vacana, am,%}¦ n. or {%anu-vāc, k,%} f. speaking
after, repetition, reciting, reading; lecture; a chapter,
a section; recitation of certain texts ({%mantra%}) in
consequence of and in connection or conformity with
injunctions ({%praiṣa%}) spoken by other priests.
<LEND>

<L>2555<pc>0038-c<k1>anuvacanIya<k2>anuvacanIya
{%Anu-vacanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ referring to the {%anu-%}
{%vacana.%}
<LEND>

<L>2556<pc>0038-c<k1>anuvAka<k2>anuvAka
{%Anu-vāka, as,%}¦ m. saying after, reciting, repeating,
reading; a chapter of the Vedas, a subdivision or
section; a compilation from the Ṛg or Yajur-vedas.
{%—Anuvāka-saṅkhyā,%} the fourth of the eighteen
Pariśiṣṭas of the Yajur-veda. {%—Anuvākānukra-%}
{%maṇī (˚ka-an˚),%} f. a work referring to the Ṛg-veda,
attributed to Śaunaka.
<LEND>

<L>2557<pc>0038-c<k1>anuvAkyA<k2>anuvAkyA
{%Anu-vākyā,%}¦ f. the verse to be recited by the Hotṛ
priest, in which the god is invoked to partake of the
[Page0039-a+ 71]
offering intended for him. {%—Anuvākya-vat%} or {%anu-%}
{%vākyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished or accompanied with
an Anuvākyā.
<LEND>

<L>2558<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvAcana<k2>anuvAcana
{%Anu-vācana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to recite;
the recitation of mantras or passages of the Ṛg-veda
by the Hotṛ in obedience to the injunction ({%praiṣa%})
of the Adhvaryu priest. {%—Anuvācana-praiṣa, as,%}
m. an injunction to recite as above.
<LEND>

<L>2559<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvAcita<k2>anuvAcita
{%Anu-vācita, as, ā, am,%}¦ before-mentioned, before-
named.
<LEND>

<L>2560<pc>0039-a<k1>anUkta<k2>anUkta
{%Anūkta,%}¦ &c. See s. v., p. 42.
<LEND>

<L>2561<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvatsara<k2>anuvatsara
{#anuvatsara#}¦ {%anu-vatsara, as,%} m. a year; (in
astronomy) the fifth of five cycles of twelve years in
the Vṛhaspati cycle. {%—Anu-vataram,%} ind. every
year, yearly.
<LEND>

<L>2562<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvad<k2>anuvad
{#anuvad#}¦ {%anu-vad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vadati%} (with
acc.), or A. {%-vadate, -ditum%} (with gen.), to imitate
in speaking, to mock, to repeat.
<LEND>

<L>2563<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvAda<k2>anuvAda
{%Anu-vāda, as,%}¦ m. saying after or again, repeating
by way of explanation, explanatory repetition or reiter-
ation with corroboration or illustration, explanatory
reference to anything already said, translation; any
portion of the Brāhmaṇas which comments on, ex-
plains or illustrates an injunction ({%vidhi%}) previously
propounded, and which does not itself propound rules
(such a passage is sometimes called {%anuvāda-va-%}
{%cana%}); confirmation; report, rumour, {%on dit;%} slan-
der, reviling.
<LEND>

<L>2564<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvAdaka<k2>anuvAdaka
{%Anu-vādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%anu-vādin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} repeating with comment and explanation, corrobora-
tive, concurrent, conformable, in harmony with. The
masculine of the last is also the name of any one of
the three notes of the gamut.
<LEND>

<L>2565<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvAdya<k2>anuvAdya
{%Anu-vādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be explained by an
Anuvāda, to be made the subject of one; ({%am%}), n.
the subject of a predicate. {%—Anuvādya-tva, am,%} n.
the state of requiring to be explained by an Anu-
vāda.
<LEND>

<L>2566<pc>0039-a<k1>anUdita<k2>anUdita
{%Anūdita.%}¦ See. s. v., p. 42.
<LEND>

<L>2567<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvanam<k2>anuvanam
{#anuvanam#}¦ {%anu-vanam,%} ind. along side of
the wood.
<LEND>

<L>2568<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvarR<k2>anuvarR
{#anuvarR#}¦ {%anu-varṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-varṇayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to mention, describe, recount.
<LEND>

<L>2569<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvartana<k2>anuvartana
{#anuvartana, anuvartin#}¦, &c. See {%anu-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>2570<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvaSa<k2>anuvaSa
{#anuvaSa#}¦ {%anu-vaśa, as,%} m. obedience to the
will of another; ({%as, ā, am%}), obedient to the will of
another.
<LEND>

<L>2571<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvazawkAra<k2>anuvazawkAra
{#anuvazawkAra#}¦ {%anu-vaṣaṭkāra, as,%} m. or {%anu-%}
{%vaṣaṭkṛta, am,%} n. a secondary exclamation of
{%vaṣaṭ,%} on making an oblation to a deity.
<LEND>

<L>2572<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvas<k2>anuvas
{#anuvas#}¦ {%anu-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati, -vastum,%}
to dwell near to; to inhabit along with.
<LEND>

<L>2573<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvAsin<k2>anuvAsin
{%Anu-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ residing, resident.
<LEND>

<L>2574<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvasita<k2>anuvasita<h>1
{#anuvasita#} 1¦. {%anu-vasita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vas,%}
to put on), dressed up, wrapped.
<LEND>

<L>2575<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvasita<k2>anuvasita<h>2
{#anuvasita#} 2¦. {%anu-va-sita, as, ā, am,%} (for {%anv-%}
{%ava-sita,%} rt. {%si%}), fastened to, bound to, attached.
<LEND>

<L>2576<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvaha<k2>anuvaha
{#anuvaha#}¦ {%anu-vaha, as,%} m. (rt. {%vah%}), one of
the seven tongues of fire; (‘bearing after.’)
<LEND>

<L>2577<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvA<k2>anuvA
{#anuvA#}¦ {%anu-vā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vāti, -tum,%} to blow
upon, fan.
<LEND>

<L>2578<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvAte<k2>anuvAte
{%Anu-vāte,%}¦ ind. with the wind blowing in the sames
direction, with the wind from behind, to windward.
<LEND>

<L>2579<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvAka<k2>anuvAka
{#anuvAka#}¦ {%anu-vāka.%} See under {%anu-vac.%}
<LEND>

<L>2580<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvAram<k2>anuvAram
{#anuvAram#}¦ {%anu-vāram,%} ind. time after time,
repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>2581<pc>0039-a<k1>anuvAsa<k2>anuvAsa
{#anuvAsa#}¦ {%anu-vāsa, as,%} m. or {%anu-vāsana,%}
{%am,%} n. (rt. {%vās%}), perfuming the clothes, especially
dipping the ends of the clothes in perfumes; per-
fuming, scenting in general; an oily enema; ad-
ministering oily enemata.
<LEND>
[Page0039-b+ 64]

<L>2582<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvAsita<k2>anuvAsita
{%Anu-vāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ scented, perfumed, fumi-
gated; prepared or administered as an enema.
<LEND>

<L>2583<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvAsya<k2>anuvAsya
{%Anu-vāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%anu-vāsanīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} to be scented or fumigated, requiring an enema.
<LEND>

<L>2584<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvikas<k2>anuvikas
{#anuvikas#}¦ {%anu-vi-kas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kasati,%}
{%-situm,%} to blow, expand, as a flower.
<LEND>

<L>2585<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvikf<k2>anuvikf
{#anuvikf#}¦ {%anu-vi-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to follow in shaping.
<LEND>

<L>2586<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvikF<k2>anuvikF
{#anuvikF#}¦ {%anu-vi-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -kari-%}
{%tum, -rītum,%} to bestrew.
<LEND>

<L>2587<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvikram<k2>anuvikram
{#anuvikram#}¦ {%anu-vi-kram,%} cl. 1. A., Ved.
{%-kramate, -mitum,%} to walk after, follow.
<LEND>

<L>2588<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvicar<k2>anuvicar
{#anuvicar#}¦ {%anu-vi-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati,%}
{%-ritum,%} to walk or pass through, to walk up to.
<LEND>

<L>2589<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvical<k2>anuvical
{#anuvical#}¦ {%anu-vi-cal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-calati,%}
{%-litum,%} to follow in changing place.
<LEND>

<L>2590<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvicAkaS<k2>anuvicAkaS
{#anuvicAkaS#}¦ {%anu-vi-cākaś,%} Intens., Ved.
{%-cākaśīti,%} to penetrate with one's vision.
<LEND>

<L>2591<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvicint<k2>anuvicint
{#anuvicint#}¦ {%anu-vi-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cinta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to recal to mind.
<LEND>

<L>2592<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvitan<k2>anuvitan
{#anuvitan#}¦ {%anu-vi-tan,%} cl. 8. A. {%-tanute,%}
{%-nitum,%} to extend all along or all over.
<LEND>

<L>2593<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvid<k2>anuvid<h>1
{#anuvid#} 1¦. {%anu-vid,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-vetti,%}
{%-veditum,%} to know thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>2594<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvid<k2>anuvid<h>2
{#anuvid#} 2¦. {%anu-vid,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-vindati,%}
{%-te, -veditum,%} to find, discover; to deem; to marry.
<LEND>

<L>2595<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvitta<k2>anuvitta
{%Anu-vitta, as, ā, am,%}¦ found.
<LEND>

<L>2596<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvitti<k2>anuvitti
{%Anu-vitti, is,%}¦ f. finding, obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>2597<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvidfS<k2>anuvidfS
{#anuvidfS#}¦ {%anu-vi-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati,%}
{%-draṣṭum,%} to perceive, view.
<LEND>

<L>2598<pc>0039-b<k1>anuviDA<k2>anuviDA
{#anuviDA#}¦ {%anu-vi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhātum,%} to regulate, lay down a rule: Pass. {%-dhīyate,%}
to be trained to follow rules; to obey.
<LEND>

<L>2599<pc>0039-b<k1>anuviDAtavya<k2>anuviDAtavya
{%Anu-vidhātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be performed
according to an order.
<LEND>

<L>2600<pc>0039-b<k1>anuviDAna<k2>anuviDAna
{%Anu-vidhāna, am,%}¦ n. obedience, acting con-
formably to order.
<LEND>

<L>2601<pc>0039-b<k1>anuviDAyin<k2>anuviDAyin
{%Anu-vidhāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ conforming to, compliant,
obedient.
<LEND>

<L>2602<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvinad<k2>anuvinad
{#anuvinad#}¦ {%anu-vi-nad,%} Caus. P. {%-nādayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to make resonant or musical.
<LEND>

<L>2603<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvinard<k2>anuvinard
{#anuvinard#}¦ {%anu-vi-nard,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nardati,%}
{%-ditum,%} to answer with roars.
<LEND>

<L>2604<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvinaS<k2>anuvinaS
{#anuvinaS#}¦ {%anu-vi-naś,%} cl. 4. P. {%-naśyati,%}
{%-naśitum%} or {%-naṃṣṭum,%} to disappear, perish, vanish
after or with another.
<LEND>

<L>2605<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvinASa<k2>anuvinASa
{%Anu-vi-nāśa, as,%}¦ m. perishing after.
<LEND>

<L>2606<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvinda<k2>anuvinda
{#anuvinda#}¦ {%anu-vinda, as,%} m., N. of a king
of Oujein.
<LEND>

<L>2607<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvipat<k2>anuvipat
{#anuvipat#}¦ {%anu-vi-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati,%}
{%-titum,%} to fly away toward (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>2608<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvimfS<k2>anuvimfS
{#anuvimfS#}¦ {%anu-vi-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati,%}
{%-marṣṭum, -mraṣṭum,%} to consider, think over.
<LEND>

<L>2609<pc>0039-b<k1>anuviS<k2>anuviS
{#anuviS#}¦ {%anu-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati, -veṣṭum,%}
to follow.
<LEND>

<L>2610<pc>0039-b<k1>anuveSa<k2>anuveSa
{%Anu-veśa, as,%}¦ m. or {%anu-veśana, am,%} n. entering
after, following.
<LEND>

<L>2611<pc>0039-b<k1>anuviSva<k2>anuviSva
{#anuviSva#}¦ {%anu-viśva, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people in the north-east.
<LEND>

<L>2612<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvizwamBa<k2>anuvizwamBa
{#anuvizwamBa#}¦ {%anu-viṣṭambha, as,%} m. the being
impeded in consequence of.
<LEND>

<L>2613<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvizRu<k2>anuvizRu
{#anuvizRu#}¦ {%anu-viṣṇu,%} ind. after Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>2614<pc>0039-b<k1>anuvI<k2>anuvI
{#anuvI#}¦ {%anu-vī (-vi-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-vyeti, -tum,%}
to follow or join in going off or separating.
<LEND>
[Page0039-c+ 70]

<L>2615<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvIkz<k2>anuvIkz
{#anuvIkz#}¦ {%anu-vīkṣ (-vi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-vīkṣate, -kṣitum,%} to survey, examine.
<LEND>

<L>2616<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvIj<k2>anuvIj
{#anuvIj#}¦ {%anu-vīj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-vījayati, -yitum,%}
to fan.
<LEND>

<L>2617<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvft<k2>anuvft
{#anuvft#}¦ {%anu-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%} poet.
P. {%-vartati, -titum,%} to go after; to follow, pursue;
to attend; obey, respect, imitate; to resemble; to
assent, to expect: Caus. P. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to
roll after or forward; to follow up, carry out.
<LEND>

<L>2618<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvartana<k2>anuvartana
{%Anu-vartana, am,%}¦ n. obliging, serving or gratifying
another; compliance, obedience; following, attend-
ing; concurring; consequence, result; continuance;
supplying form a previous rule.
<LEND>

<L>2619<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvartanIya<k2>anuvartanIya
{%Anu-vartanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be supplied from a
previous rule.
<LEND>

<L>2620<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvartin<k2>anuvartin
{%Anu-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ following, compliant, obe-
dient, resembling. {%—Anuvarti-tva, am,%} n. the state
of being so.
<LEND>

<L>2621<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvartman<k2>anuvartman
{%Anu-vartman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ following, attending.
<LEND>

<L>2622<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvftta<k2>anuvftta
{%Anu-vṛtta, a, ā, am,%}¦ following, obeying, com-
plying; rounded off; ({%am%}), n. obedience, conformity,
compliance.
<LEND>

<L>2623<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvftti<k2>anuvftti
{%Anu-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. following, acting suitably to,
having regard or respect to, complying with, the act
of continuance, continued course or influence of a pre-
ceding rule or assertion on what follows; reverting
to; imitating, doing or acting in like manner.
<LEND>

<L>2624<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvfD<k2>anuvfD
{#anuvfD#}¦ {%anu-vṛdh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vardhate, -dhi-%}
{%tum,%} to grow, increase.
<LEND>

<L>2625<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvfdDi<k2>anuvfdDi
{%Anu-vṛddhi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. increasing (as in
clearness or emphasis) in regular ratio.
<LEND>

<L>2626<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvedi<k2>anuvedi
{#anuvedi#}¦ {%anu-vedi,%} ind. along the ground
prepared for sacrifice. {%—Anu-vedy-antam,%} ind. along
the edge of this sacrificial ground.
<LEND>

<L>2627<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvelam<k2>anuvelam
{#anuvelam#}¦ {%anu-velam,%} ind. constantly.
<LEND>

<L>2628<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvellita<k2>anuvellita
{#anuvellita#}¦ {%anu-vellita, am,%} n. (rt. {%vel%} or
{%vell%} or {%vehl%}), bandaging, securing with bandages (in
surgery); a kind of bandage applied to the extremi-
ties; ({%as, ā, am%}), bent in conformity with, bent
under.
<LEND>

<L>2629<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvEneya<k2>anuvEneya
{#anuvEneya#}¦ {%anuvaineya,%} N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>2630<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvyaYjana<k2>anuvyaYjana
{#anuvyaYjana#}¦ {%anu-vyañjana, am,%} n. a secon-
dary mark or token.
<LEND>

<L>2631<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvyaD<k2>anuvyaD
{#anuvyaD#}¦ {%anu-vyadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-vidhyati, -vyad-%}
{%dhum,%} to follow in striking; to hit again and again;
to wound.
<LEND>

<L>2632<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvidDa<k2>anuvidDa
{%Anu-viddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ pierced; obstructed,
checked, variegated; full of, abounding in; set (as a
jewel).
<LEND>

<L>2633<pc>0039-c<k1>anuveDa<k2>anuveDa
{%Anu-vedha%}¦ or {%anu-vyādha, as,%} m. piercing; ob-
structing; blending.
<LEND>

<L>2634<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvyam<k2>anuvyam
{#anuvyam#}¦ {%anu-vyam,%} ind. (rt. {%vī%} with {%anu%}),
Ved. behind, after, following.
<LEND>

<L>2635<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvyavagA<k2>anuvyavagA
{#anuvyavagA#}¦ {%anu-vy-ava-gā (-vi-ava-gā),%} cl.
3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to come between successively
or in succession to another.
<LEND>

<L>2636<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvyave<k2>anuvyave
{#anuvyave#}¦ {%anu-vy-ave (-vi-ava-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-avaiti, -tum,%} to follow in intervening or coming
between.
<LEND>

<L>2637<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvyaS<k2>anuvyaS
{#anuvyaS#}¦ {%anu-vy-aś (-vi-aś),%} cl. 3. A. {%-vyaś-%}
{%nute, -śitum,%} to overtake, reach.
<LEND>

<L>2638<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvyAKyA<k2>anuvyAKyA
{#anuvyAKyA#}¦ {%anu-vy-ā-khyā (-vi-ā-khyā),%} cl.
2. P. {%-khyāti, -tum,%} to explain further.
<LEND>

<L>2639<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvyAKyAna<k2>anuvyAKyAna
{%Anu-vyākhyāna, am,%}¦ n. that portion of a Brāh-
maṇa which explains or illustrates difficult Sūtras,
texts, or obscure statements occurring in another
position.
<LEND>

<L>2640<pc>0039-c<k1>anuvyAharaRa<k2>anuvyAharaRa
{#anuvyAharaRa#}¦ {%anu-vyāharaṇa (-vi-ā-haraṇa),%}
{%am,%} n. or {%anu-vyāhāra, as,%} m. cursing, execration;
repeating, repeated utterance.
<LEND>
[Page0040-a+ 71]

<L>2641<pc>0040-a<k1>anuvyAhArin<k2>anuvyAhArin
{%Anu-vyāhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ execrating, cursing.
<LEND>

<L>2642<pc>0040-a<k1>anuvyuccar<k2>anuvyuccar
{#anuvyuccar#}¦ {%anu-vy-uc-car (-vi-ud-car),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-carati, -ritum,%} to follow in going forth or step-
ping forward.
<LEND>

<L>2643<pc>0040-a<k1>anuvyUh<k2>anuvyUh
{#anuvyUh#}¦ {%anu-vy-ūh (-vi-ūh),%} cl. 1. P. {%-vy-%}
{%ūhati, -hitum,%} to distribute.
<LEND>

<L>2644<pc>0040-a<k1>anuvraj<k2>anuvraj
{#anuvraj#}¦ {%anu-vraj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vrajati%} or
poet. A. {%-vrajate, -jitum,%} to follow, especially a de-
parting guest, as a mark of respect; to visit seriatim;
to obey, do homage.
<LEND>

<L>2645<pc>0040-a<k1>anuvrajana<k2>anuvrajana
{%Anu-vrajana, am,%}¦ n. or {%anu-vrajyā,%} f. following
as above.
<LEND>

<L>2646<pc>0040-a<k1>anuvrAjya<k2>anuvrAjya
{%Anu-vrājya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be followed, as by the
relatives of a dead person to the cemetery.
<LEND>

<L>2647<pc>0040-a<k1>anuvrata<k2>anuvrata
{#anuvrata#}¦ {%anu-vrata, as, ā, am,%} devoted to,
faithful to, ardently attached to; ({%as%}), m. a particular
kind of Jaina devotee.
<LEND>

<L>2648<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSak<k2>anuSak
{#anuSak#}¦ {%anu-śak,%} Desid. Caus. P. {%-śikṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to teach, instruct.
<LEND>

<L>2649<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSikzin<k2>anuSikzin
{%anu-śikṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ exercising one's self in,
practising.
<LEND>

<L>2650<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSatika<k2>anuSatika
{#anuSatika#}¦ {%anu-śatika, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied with or bought for a hundred (the derivative
{%ānuśātika%} has Vṛddhi in both members).
<LEND>

<L>2651<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSaya<k2>anuSaya
{#anuSaya#}¦ {%anu-śaya,%} &c. See under {%anu-śī.%}
<LEND>

<L>2652<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSara<k2>anuSara
{#anuSara#}¦ {%anu-śara, as,%} m. (rt. {%śṝ%} with {%anu%}),
a Rākṣaa, a sort of demon.
<LEND>

<L>2653<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSastra<k2>anuSastra
{#anuSastra#}¦ {%anu-śastra, am,%} n. anything used
in place of a regular surgical instrument, as a finger-
nail or bambu; any subsidiary weapon or instrument.
<LEND>

<L>2654<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSAs<k2>anuSAs
{#anuSAs#}¦ {%anu-śās,%} cl. 2. P. or poet. A.
{%-śāsti, -te, -situm,%} to rule, govern; to order; to
teach, direct, advise, address; to punish, chastise,
correct.
<LEND>

<L>2655<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSAsaka<k2>anuSAsaka
{%Anu-śāsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%anu-śāsin, ī, inī, i,%}
or {%anu-śāstṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} one who governs, instructs,
directs or punishes.
<LEND>

<L>2656<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSAsat<k2>anuSAsat
{%Anu-śāsat, t, tī, t,%}¦ instructing, ruling.
<LEND>

<L>2657<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSAsana<k2>anuSAsana
{%Anu-śāsana, am,%}¦ n. instruction, direction, com-
mand, giving rules, order, precept, law. {%—Anuśāsana-%}
{%para, as, ā, am,%} obedient.
<LEND>

<L>2658<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSAsanIya<k2>anuSAsanIya
{%Anu-śāsanīya%}¦ or {%anu-śāsya, as, ā, am,%} to be
instructed.
<LEND>

<L>2659<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSAsita<k2>anuSAsita
{%Anu-śāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ directed, governed, defined
by rule.
<LEND>

<L>2660<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSAsitf<k2>anuSAsitf
{%Anu-śāsitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ ruling, governing, com-
manding, directing, a ruler.
<LEND>

<L>2661<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSizwa<k2>anuSizwa
{%Anu-śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ taught, revealed; adjudged,
done conformably to law.
<LEND>

<L>2662<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSizwi<k2>anuSizwi
{%Anu-śiṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. instruction, teaching, ordering.
<LEND>

<L>2663<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSizya<k2>anuSizya
{%Anu-śiṣya,%}¦ ind. part. having ruled or ordered.
<LEND>

<L>2664<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSikzin<k2>anuSikzin
{#anuSikzin#}¦ {%anu-śikṣin.%} See {%anu-śak.%}
<LEND>

<L>2665<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSiKa<k2>anuSiKa
{#anuSiKa#}¦ {%anu-śikha, as,%} m., N. of a serpent
which at a certain sacrifice officiated as Potṛ priest.
<LEND>

<L>2666<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSivam<k2>anuSivam
{#anuSivam#}¦ {%anu-śivam,%} ind. after Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>2667<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSiSu<k2>anuSiSu
{#anuSiSu#}¦ {%anu-śiśu, us,%} f. (an animal) fol-
lowed by its young (as by a foal, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>2668<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSI<k2>anuSI
{#anuSI#}¦ {%anu-śī,%} cl. 2. A. {%-śete, -śayitum,%} to
sleep or spend the night with, to lie along or close, to
adhere closely to.
<LEND>

<L>2669<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSaya<k2>anuSaya
{%Anu-śaya, as,%}¦ m. close connection as with a con-
sequence, close attachment to any object; (in phil.)
the consequence itself, the evil result of an act which
clings to it and causes the soul after enjoying the
temporary freedom from transmigration, which is the
reward of its good deeds, to enter other bodies;
repentance, regret; hatred; ancient or intense enmity;
({%ī%}), f. a disease of the feet, a boil or abscess on the
upper part; also one on the head. {%—Anuśaya-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at;%} see {%anu-śayin.%}
<LEND>

<L>2670<pc>0040-a<k1>anuSayAna<k2>anuSayAna
{%Anu-śayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ repenting, regretting;
[Page0040-b+ 74]
({%ā%}), f. a particular kind of heroine or female cha-
racter.
<LEND>

<L>2671<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSayitavya<k2>anuSayitavya
{%Anu-śayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be regretted.
<LEND>

<L>2672<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSayin<k2>anuSayin
{%Anu-śayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having the consequence of
an act, connected as with a consequence; devotedly
attached to, faithful; repentant, penitent, regretful,
sorry for; hating deeply.
<LEND>

<L>2673<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSAyin<k2>anuSAyin
{%Anu-śāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ adhering to, lying along or
upon.
<LEND>

<L>2674<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSIlana<k2>anuSIlana
{#anuSIlana#}¦ {%anu-śīlana, am,%} n. constant
study or pursuit (of a science, &c.), repeated and
devoted service.
<LEND>

<L>2675<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSIlita<k2>anuSIlita
{%Anu-śīlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ studied carefully, attended to.
<LEND>

<L>2676<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSuc<k2>anuSuc
{#anuSuc#}¦ {%anu-śuc,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śocati, -citum,%}
to mourn over, regret, bewail: Caus. P. {%-śocayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to mourn over.
<LEND>

<L>2677<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSucikA<k2>anuSucikA
{%Anu-śucikā,%}¦ f. any ceremony enjoined by the Ve-
das?. (This word, given by Wilson, is very doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>2678<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSoka<k2>anuSoka
{%Anu-śoka, as,%}¦ m. sorrow, repentance, regret.
<LEND>

<L>2679<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSocaka<k2>anuSocaka
{%Anu-śocaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ grieving, one who
repents; occasioning repentance.
<LEND>

<L>2680<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSocana<k2>anuSocana
{%Anu-śocana, am,%}¦ n. sorrow, repentance.
<LEND>

<L>2681<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSocita<k2>anuSocita
{%Anu-śocita, as, ā, am,%}¦ regretted, repented of.
<LEND>

<L>2682<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSocin<k2>anuSocin
{%Anu-śocin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ penitent, regretful, sorrowful.
<LEND>

<L>2683<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSoBin<k2>anuSoBin
{#anuSoBin#}¦ {%anu-śobhin, ī, inī, i,%} shining.
<LEND>

<L>2684<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSru<k2>anuSru
{#anuSru#}¦ {%anu-śru,%} cl. 5. P. {%-śṛṇoti, -śrotum,%}
to hear repeatedly, especially from a sacred authority:
Desid. A. {%-śuśrūṣate,%} to obey.
<LEND>

<L>2685<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSrava<k2>anuSrava
{%Anu-śrava, as,%}¦ m., Vedic tradition (acquired by
repeated hearing).
<LEND>

<L>2686<pc>0040-b<k1>anuSruta<k2>anuSruta
{%Anu-śruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ handed down by Vedic
tradition.
<LEND>

<L>2687<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzaYj<k2>anuzaYj
{#anuzaYj#}¦ {%anu-ṣañj (-sañj),%} cl. 1. A. or Pass.
{%-ṣajjate, -ṣajyate, -ṣaṅktum,%} to cling to, adhere,
be attached to.
<LEND>

<L>2688<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzak<k2>anuzak
{%Anu-ṣak%}¦ or {%anu-ṣaṭ,%} ind. in continuous or close
order; one after the other [cf. {%ānu-ṣak%}].
<LEND>

<L>2689<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzakta<k2>anuzakta
{%Anu-ṣakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ closely connected with,
supplied from something preceding.
<LEND>

<L>2690<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzaNga<k2>anuzaNga
{%Anu-ṣaṅga, as,%}¦ m. close adherence, connection,
association, conjunction, coalition, commixture; con-
nection of word with word, or effect with causes;
necessary consequence, the connection of a subsequent
with a previous act; the nasals connected with certain
roots ending in consonants (such as {%tṛmph%}); tender-
ness, compassion.
<LEND>

<L>2691<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzaNgika<k2>anuzaNgika
{%Anu-ṣaṅgika, as, ī, am,%}¦ consequent, following
as a necessary result; connected with, adhering to,
inherent, concomitant.
<LEND>

<L>2692<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzaNgin<k2>anuzaNgin
{%Anu-ṣaṅgin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ addicted or attached to;
connected with; common, prevailing.
<LEND>

<L>2693<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzaYjana<k2>anuzaYjana
{%Anu-ṣañjana, am,%}¦ n. connection with what
follows, concord; grammatical relation.
<LEND>

<L>2694<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzaYjanIya<k2>anuzaYjanIya
{%Anu-ṣañjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be connected,
supplied.
<LEND>

<L>2695<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzaRqa<k2>anuzaRqa
{#anuzaRqa#}¦ {%anuṣaṇḍa, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or
n. (?), N. of a place or country (?).
<LEND>

<L>2696<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzic<k2>anuzic
{#anuzic#}¦ {%anu-ṣic.%} See {%anu-sic.%}
<LEND>

<L>2697<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzikta<k2>anuzikta
{%Anu-ṣikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ re-watered or sprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>2698<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzeka<k2>anuzeka
{%Anu-ṣeka, as,%}¦ m. or {%anu-ṣecana, am,%} n. re-
watering or sprinkling over again.
<LEND>

<L>2699<pc>0040-b<k1>anuziD<k2>anuziD
{#anuziD#}¦ {%anu-ṣidh (-sidh),%} Ved., Intens.
{%-seṣidhīti,%} to bring back.
<LEND>

<L>2700<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzwuti<k2>anuzwuti
{#anuzwuti#}¦ {%anu-ṣṭuti, is,%} f. (rt. {%stu%}), praise.
<LEND>

<L>2701<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzwuB<k2>anuzwuB<h>1
{#anuzwuB#} 1¦. {%anu-ṣṭubh (-stubh),%} cl. 1. P.,
Ved. {%-ṣṭobhati, -bhitum,%} to praise after, to follow
in praising.
<LEND>

<L>2702<pc>0040-b<k1>anuzwuB<k2>anuzwuB<h>2
2. {%anu-ṣṭubh, p.%}¦ f. following in praise or invocation;
speech; Sarasvatī; a kind of metre consisting of four
Pādas or quarter-verses of eight syllables each (so
called because it {%anuṣṭobhati%} follows with its praise
the Gāyatrī, which consists of three Pādas); in later
metrical systems, the Anuṣṭubh constitutes a whole
class of metres, consisting of four times eight syllables.
[Page0040-c+ 73]
{%—Anuṣṭub-garbhā,%} f. a metre in the Vedas of the
class Uṣṇih.
<LEND>

<L>2703<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzwoBana<k2>anuzwoBana
{%Anu-ṣṭobhana, am,%}¦ n. praising after.
<LEND>

<L>2704<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzwra<k2>anuzwra
{#anuzwra#}¦ {%an-uṣṭra, as,%} m. no camel, i. e. a
bad camel.
<LEND>

<L>2705<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWA<k2>anuzWA
{#anuzWA#}¦ {%anu-ṣṭhā (-sthā),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tiṣṭhati,%}
{%-ṣṭhātum,%} to stand near or by, to follow out, to
carry out, attend to, perform, do, practise; to govern,
rule, superintend; to appoint: Pass. {%-ṣṭhīyate,%} to
be done, to be followed: Desid. {%-tiṣṭhāsati,%} to be
desirous of doing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>2706<pc>0040-c<k1>anutizWamAna<k2>anutizWamAna
{%Anu-tiṣṭhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ following, per-
forming, attending to.
<LEND>

<L>2707<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWa<k2>anuzWa
{%Anu-ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing after, i. e. in
succession.
<LEND>

<L>2708<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWAtavya<k2>anuzWAtavya
{%Anu-ṣṭhātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be done or ac-
complished.
<LEND>

<L>2709<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWAtf<k2>anuzWAtf
{%Anu-ṣṭhātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. the undertaker of any work.
<LEND>

<L>2710<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWAna<k2>anuzWAna
{%Anu-ṣṭhāna, am,%}¦ n. commencing, undertaking;
doing or engaging in any work, performance, religious
practice; acting in conformity to; ({%ī%}), f. performance,
action. {%—Anuṣṭhāna-krama, as,%} m. the order of
performing religious ceremonies. {%—Anuṣṭhāna-śa-%}
{%rīra, am,%} n. (in Sāṅkhya phil.) a body presumed
to be intermediate between the {%liṅga-śarīra%} or
{%sūkṣma-śarīra%} and the {%sthūla-śarīra%}. {%—Anu-%}
{%ṣṭhāna-smāraka, as, ikā, am,%} reminding of re-
ligious ceremonies.
<LEND>

<L>2711<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWApaka<k2>anuzWApaka
{%Anu-ṣṭhāpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to perform.
<LEND>

<L>2712<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWApana<k2>anuzWApana
{%Anu-ṣṭhāpana, am,%}¦ n. the causing to perform
an act.
<LEND>

<L>2713<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWAyin<k2>anuzWAyin
{%Anu-ṣṭhāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ doing, performing an
act.
<LEND>

<L>2714<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWi<k2>anuzWi
{%Anu-ṣṭhi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. proper order, succession;
only used in inst. {%anu-ṣṭhyā.%}
<LEND>

<L>2715<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWita<k2>anuzWita
{%Anu-ṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ done, practised; effected,
executed, accomplished; followed, observed; done
conformably.
<LEND>

<L>2716<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWu<k2>anuzWu
{%Anu-ṣṭhu, us,%}¦ f., Ved. proper order, succession;
only used in inst. {%anu-ṣṭhuyā; (u),%} ind. in proper
order, in regular succession, properly.
<LEND>

<L>2717<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzWeya<k2>anuzWeya
{%Anu-ṣṭheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be effected, done or
accomplished; to be observed; to be proved or es-
tablished.
<LEND>

<L>2718<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzRa<k2>anuzRa
{#anuzRa#}¦ {%an-uṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} not hot, cold,
chilly, apathetic; lazy, sluggish; ({%am%}), n. a blue
lotus, Nymphæa Cærulea; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
{%—Anuṣṇa-gu, us,%} m. (having cold rays), the moon.
{%—Anuṣṇa-vallikā,%} f., N. of a plant, Nīla-dūrbā.
{%—Anuṣṇāśīta (˚ṇa-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} neither hot
nor cold.
<LEND>

<L>2719<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzRaka<k2>anuzRaka
{%An-uṣṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ not hot, cold, chilly, &c.
<LEND>

<L>2720<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzyanda<k2>anuzyanda
{#anuzyanda#}¦ {%anu-ṣyanda, as,%} m. (rt. {%syand%}),
a hind-wheel.
<LEND>

<L>2721<pc>0040-c<k1>anuzvaDa<k2>anuzvaDa
{#anuzvaDa#}¦ {%anu-ṣvadha, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied by food; ({%am%}), ind. according to food, through
food; after food; after every sacrifice; according to
one's will, voluntary.
<LEND>

<L>2722<pc>0040-c<k1>anusaMyA<k2>anusaMyA
{#anusaMyA#}¦ {%anu-saṃ-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%}
to advance against seriatim, attack one after the other.
<LEND>

<L>2723<pc>0040-c<k1>anusaMrakta<k2>anusaMrakta
{#anusaMrakta#}¦ {%anu-saṃrakta, as, ā, am,%} attached
or devoted to.
<LEND>

<L>2724<pc>0040-c<k1>anusaMvatsaram<k2>anusaMvatsaram
{#anusaMvatsaram#}¦ {%anu-saṃvatsaram,%} ind. year
after year.
<LEND>

<L>2725<pc>0040-c<k1>anusaMvicar<k2>anusaMvicar
{#anusaMvicar#}¦ {%anu-saṃ-vi-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-car-%}
{%ati, -ritum,%} or Ved. {%-radhyai, -ritave, -rase,%} to visit
successively, make the round of.
<LEND>

<L>2726<pc>0040-c<k1>anusaMviS<k2>anusaMviS
{#anusaMviS#}¦ {%anu-saṃ-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati,%}
{%-veṣṭum,%} to follow in retiring for sleep.
<LEND>

<L>2727<pc>0040-c<k1>anusaMsarpam<k2>anusaMsarpam
{#anusaMsarpam#}¦, {%anu-saṃsarpam,%} ind. at each
occasion of approaching.
<LEND>

<L>2728<pc>0040-c<k1>anusaMsf<k2>anusaMsf
{#anusaMsf#}¦ {%anu-saṃ-sṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-sārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to dismiss.
<LEND>
[Page0041-a+ 68]

<L>2729<pc>0041-a<k1>anusaMsmf<k2>anusaMsmf
{#anusaMsmf#}¦ {%anu-saṃ-smṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-smarati,%}
{%-smartum,%} to remember, to long for (the dead or
absent).
<LEND>

<L>2730<pc>0041-a<k1>anusaMhitam<k2>anusaMhitam
{#anusaMhitam#}¦ {%anu-saṃhitam,%} ind. according
to the Saṃhitā text.
<LEND>

<L>2731<pc>0041-a<k1>anusaNkal<k2>anusaNkal
{#anusaNkal#}¦ {%anu-saṅ-kal (-sam-kal),%} cl. 10. P.
{%-kālayati, -yitum,%} to follow in driving.
<LEND>

<L>2732<pc>0041-a<k1>anusaNkram<k2>anusaNkram
{#anusaNkram#}¦ {%anu-saṅ-kram (-sam-kram),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-krāmati, -kramitum,%} to walk or go up to,
to reach.
<LEND>

<L>2733<pc>0041-a<k1>anusaNKyA<k2>anusaNKyA
{#anusaNKyA#}¦ {%anu-saṅ-khyā (-sam-khyā),%} Caus.
P., Ved. {%-khyāpayati, -yitum,%} to show, to cause
one to observe.
<LEND>

<L>2734<pc>0041-a<k1>anusaNgrah<k2>anusaNgrah
{#anusaNgrah#}¦ {%anu-saṅ-grah (-sam-grah),%} cl. 9.
P. {%-gṛhṇāti, -grahītum,%} to oblige, favour; to salute
one by laying hold of the feet.
<LEND>

<L>2735<pc>0041-a<k1>anusaYcar<k2>anusaYcar
{#anusaYcar#}¦ {%anu-sañ-car (-sam-car),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-carati, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-radhyai, -ritave, -rase,%} to
walk along side, to follow, join; to visit; to pursue,
seek after; to penetrate, traverse, cross; to become
assimilated: Caus. P. {%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to join,
become identified or assimilated with.
<LEND>

<L>2736<pc>0041-a<k1>anusaYcaraRam<k2>anusaYcaraRam
{%Anu-sañcaraṇam,%}¦ ind. at each occasion of coming.
<LEND>

<L>2737<pc>0041-a<k1>anusaYcint<k2>anusaYcint
{#anusaYcint#}¦ {%anu-sañ-cint (-sam-cint),%} cl. 10.
P. {%-cintayati, -yitum,%} to meditate.
<LEND>

<L>2738<pc>0041-a<k1>anusaYjvar<k2>anusaYjvar
{#anusaYjvar#}¦ {%anu-sañ-jvar (-sam-jvar),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-jvarati, -ritum,%} to take after (another) in feeling
distressed, to be troubled, become envious.
<LEND>

<L>2739<pc>0041-a<k1>anusantan<k2>anusantan
{#anusantan#}¦ {%anu-san-tan (-sam-tan),%} cl. 8. P.
{%-tanoti, -nitum,%} to overspread, diffuse, extend every-
where, to join on, continue.
<LEND>

<L>2740<pc>0041-a<k1>anusantF<k2>anusantF
{#anusantF#}¦ {%anu-san-tṝ (-sam-tṝ),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-tarati, -rītum,%} Ved. {%-taradhyai,%} to follow to the
end.
<LEND>

<L>2741<pc>0041-a<k1>anusandah<k2>anusandah
{#anusandah#}¦ {%anu-san-dah (-sam-dah),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-dahati, -dagdhum,%} to burn up along the whole
length.
<LEND>

<L>2742<pc>0041-a<k1>anusandiS<k2>anusandiS
{#anusandiS#}¦ {%anu-san-diś (-sam-diś),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%} to assign, to make over.
<LEND>

<L>2743<pc>0041-a<k1>anusandfS<k2>anusandfS
{#anusandfS#}¦ {%anu-san-dṛś (-sam-dṛś),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-paśyati, -draṣṭum,%} to consider successively.
<LEND>

<L>2744<pc>0041-a<k1>anusanDA<k2>anusanDA
{#anusanDA#}¦ {%anu-san-dhā (-sam-dhā),%} cl. 3. P.
A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to explore, ascertain,
inspect, plan, arrange, calm, compose, set in order,
aim at.
<LEND>

<L>2745<pc>0041-a<k1>anusanDAtavya<k2>anusanDAtavya
{%Anu-sandhātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be explored, to
be investigated, to be looked after, &c.
<LEND>

<L>2746<pc>0041-a<k1>anusanDAna<k2>anusanDAna
{%Anu-sandhāna, am,%}¦ n. investigation, inquiry,
searching into, close inspection, setting in order, ar-
ranging, planning, aiming at, plan, scheme, congruous
or suitable connection; (in the Vaiśeṣika phil.) the
fourth step in a syllogism, i. e. the application.
<LEND>

<L>2747<pc>0041-a<k1>anusanDAnin<k2>anusanDAnin
{%Anu-sandhānin%}¦ or {%anu-sandhāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
investigating, searching, skilful at concerting plans
or continuing schemes.
<LEND>

<L>2748<pc>0041-a<k1>anusanDeya<k2>anusanDeya
{%Anu-sandheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be investigated,
worthy of inquiry or scrutiny, &c.
<LEND>

<L>2749<pc>0041-a<k1>anusanDyam<k2>anusanDyam
{#anusanDyam#}¦ {%anu-sandhyam,%} ind. evening
after evening, every twilight.
<LEND>

<L>2750<pc>0041-a<k1>anusamaya<k2>anusamaya
{#anusamaya#}¦ {%anu-samaya.%} See under {%anu-%}
{%sam-i%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>2751<pc>0041-a<k1>anusamaS<k2>anusamaS
{#anusamaS#}¦ {%anu-sam-aś,%} cl. 5. A. {%-aśnute,%}
{%aśitum%} or {%-aṣṭum,%} to overtake, reach.
<LEND>

<L>2752<pc>0041-a<k1>anusamas<k2>anusamas
{#anusamas#}¦ {%anu-sam-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati,%}
{%-situm,%} to add further.
<LEND>

<L>2753<pc>0041-a<k1>anusamAcar<k2>anusamAcar
{#anusamAcar#}¦ {%anu-sam-ā-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati,%}
{%-ritum,%} Ved. {%-radhyai, -ritave, -rase,%} to carry
out, accomplish.
<LEND>
[Page0041-b+ 66]

<L>2754<pc>0041-b<k1>anusamADA<k2>anusamADA
{#anusamADA#}¦ {%anu-sam-ā-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A.
{%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to cilm, compose.
<LEND>

<L>2755<pc>0041-b<k1>anusamAp<k2>anusamAp
{#anusamAp#}¦ {%anu-sam-āp,%} Caus. P. {%-āpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to complete or accomplish further or sub-
sequently.
<LEND>

<L>2756<pc>0041-b<k1>anusamApana<k2>anusamApana
{%Anu-samāpana, am,%}¦ n. regular completion.
<LEND>

<L>2757<pc>0041-b<k1>anusami<k2>anusami
{#anusami#}¦ {%anu-sam-i,%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -tum,%} to
visit conjointly or successively; to join in following
or being guided by; to join, become assimilated
with.
<LEND>

<L>2758<pc>0041-b<k1>anusamaya<k2>anusamaya
{%Anu-samaya, as,%}¦ m. regular connection (as of
words).
<LEND>

<L>2759<pc>0041-b<k1>anusamIkz<k2>anusamIkz
{#anusamIkz#}¦ {%anu-sam-īkṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-īkṣate,%}
{%-kṣitum,%} to keep in view, have in view.
<LEND>

<L>2760<pc>0041-b<k1>anusamudram<k2>anusamudram
{#anusamudram#}¦ {%anu-samudram,%} ind. along the
sea.
<LEND>

<L>2761<pc>0041-b<k1>anusamprAp<k2>anusamprAp
{#anusamprAp#}¦ {%anu-sam-prāp (-pra-āp),%} cl. 5.
P. {%-prāpnoti, -prāptum,%} to arrive, reach, get.
<LEND>

<L>2762<pc>0041-b<k1>anusamprApta<k2>anusamprApta
{%Anu-samprāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ arrived, come.
<LEND>

<L>2763<pc>0041-b<k1>anusambadDa<k2>anusambadDa
{#anusambadDa#}¦ {%anu-sambaddha, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%bandh%}), connected with, accompanied by.
<LEND>

<L>2764<pc>0041-b<k1>anusavanam<k2>anusavanam
{#anusavanam#}¦ {%anu-savanam,%} ind., Ved. at every
sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>2765<pc>0041-b<k1>anusAtam<k2>anusAtam
{#anusAtam#}¦ {%anu-sātam,%} ind. according to
delight.
<LEND>

<L>2766<pc>0041-b<k1>anusAma<k2>anusAma
{#anusAma#}¦ {%anu-sāma, as, ā, am,%} conciliated,
appeased, friendly.
<LEND>

<L>2767<pc>0041-b<k1>anusAyam<k2>anusAyam
{#anusAyam#}¦ {%anu-sāyam,%} ind. evening after
evening, every evening.
<LEND>

<L>2768<pc>0041-b<k1>anusAra<k2>anusAra
{#anusAra#}¦ {%anu-sāra, anu-sārin,%} &c. See
under {%anu-sṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>2769<pc>0041-b<k1>anusic<k2>anusic
{#anusic#}¦ {%anu-sic,%} cl. 6. P. {%-siñcati, -sektum,%}
to water or sprinkle consecutively; (better spelt {%anu-%}
{%ṣic,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>2770<pc>0041-b<k1>anusItam<k2>anusItam
{#anusItam#}¦ {%anu-sītam,%} ind. along the furrow.
<LEND>

<L>2771<pc>0041-b<k1>anusIram<k2>anusIram
{#anusIram#}¦ {%anu-sīram,%} ind. along the plough.
<LEND>

<L>2772<pc>0041-b<k1>anusU<k2>anusU
{#anusU#}¦ {%anu-sū, ūs,%} m., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>2773<pc>0041-b<k1>anusUcaka<k2>anusUcaka
{#anusUcaka#}¦ {%anu-sūcaka, as, ikā, am%} (rt. {%sūc%}),
indicative of, pointing out.
<LEND>

<L>2774<pc>0041-b<k1>anusUcana<k2>anusUcana
{%Anu-sūcana, am,%}¦ n. pointing out, indication.
<LEND>

<L>2775<pc>0041-b<k1>anusUpam<k2>anusUpam
{#anusUpam#}¦ {%anu-sūpam,%} ind. in every con-
diment.
<LEND>

<L>2776<pc>0041-b<k1>anusf<k2>anusf
{#anusf#}¦ {%anu-sṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati, -sartum,%} to
follow: Caus. P. {%-sārayati, -yitum,%} to pursue.
<LEND>

<L>2777<pc>0041-b<k1>anusara<k2>anusara
{%Anu-sara, as,%}¦ m. a companion.
<LEND>

<L>2778<pc>0041-b<k1>anusaraRa<k2>anusaraRa
{%Anu-saraṇa, am,%}¦ n. following, going after; con-
formity to, consequence of; custom, habit, usage.
<LEND>

<L>2779<pc>0041-b<k1>anusAra<k2>anusAra
{%Anu-sāra, as,%}¦ m. going after, following; custom,
usage; nature, natural state or condition of anything;
prevalence, currency; received or established authority,
especially of codes of law; conformity to usage; con-
sequence, result. {%—Anusāra-tas%} or {%anusāreṇa,%} ind.
conformably to.
<LEND>

<L>2780<pc>0041-b<k1>anusAraka<k2>anusAraka
{%Anu-sāraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%anu-sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
following, attendant on, according or conformable to;
penetrating, scrutinizing, investigating.
<LEND>

<L>2781<pc>0041-b<k1>anusAryaka<k2>anusAryaka
{%Anu-sāryaka, am,%}¦ n. a fragrant substance.
<LEND>

<L>2782<pc>0041-b<k1>anusfta<k2>anusfta
{%Anu-sṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ followed, conformed to.
<LEND>

<L>2783<pc>0041-b<k1>anusfti<k2>anusfti
{%Anu-sṛti, is,%}¦ f. going after, following, conforming
to; N. of a woman (?).
<LEND>

<L>2784<pc>0041-b<k1>anusfp<k2>anusfp
{#anusfp#}¦ {%anu-sṛp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarpati, -sarp-%}
{%tum%} or {%-sraptum,%} to glide after or towards, to ap-
proach.
<LEND>

<L>2785<pc>0041-b<k1>anusarpa<k2>anusarpa
{%Anu-sarpa, as,%}¦ m. a serpent-like being.
<LEND>

<L>2786<pc>0041-b<k1>anusfzwa<k2>anusfzwa
{#anusfzwa#}¦ {%anu-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%sṛj%}),
Ved. created in succession.
<LEND>
[Page0041-c+ 68]

<L>2787<pc>0041-c<k1>anusev<k2>anusev
{#anusev#}¦ {%anu-sev,%} cl. 1. A. {%-sevate, -vitum,%}
to practise, observe.
<LEND>

<L>2788<pc>0041-c<k1>anusevin<k2>anusevin
{%Anu-sevin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ practising, observing, habitu-
ally addicted.
<LEND>

<L>2789<pc>0041-c<k1>anusEnya<k2>anusEnya
{#anusEnya#}¦ {%anu-sainya, am,%} n. the rear of an
army.
<LEND>

<L>2790<pc>0041-c<k1>anusomam<k2>anusomam
{#anusomam#}¦ {%anu-somam,%} ind. near the Soma,
as with the Soma.
<LEND>

<L>2791<pc>0041-c<k1>anuskandam<k2>anuskandam
{#anuskandam#}¦ {%anu-skandam,%} ind. having gone
into in succession.
<LEND>

<L>2792<pc>0041-c<k1>anustaraRa<k2>anustaraRa
{#anustaraRa#}¦ {%anu-staraṇa, as, ī, am%} (rt. {%stṛ%}),
strewing round; ({%ī%}), f. the cow sacrificed at the
funeral ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>2793<pc>0041-c<k1>anustotra<k2>anustotra
{#anustotra#}¦ {%anu-stotra, am,%} n. praising after;
N. of a treatise relating to the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>2794<pc>0041-c<k1>anusneham<k2>anusneham
{#anusneham#}¦ {%anu-sneham,%} ind. after (adding)
oil.
<LEND>

<L>2795<pc>0041-c<k1>anuspazwa<k2>anuspazwa
{#anuspazwa#}¦ {%anu-spaṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} plain,
manifest.
<LEND>

<L>2796<pc>0041-c<k1>anusPura<k2>anusPura
{#anusPura#}¦ {%anu-sphura, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
whizzing (as an arrow).
<LEND>

<L>2797<pc>0041-c<k1>anusmf<k2>anusmf
{#anusmf#}¦ {%anu-smṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-smarati, -smar-%}
{%tum,%} to remember, recollect: Caus. P. {%-smārayati%}
or {%-smarayati, -yitum,%} to remind (painfully).
<LEND>

<L>2798<pc>0041-c<k1>anusmaraRa<k2>anusmaraRa
{%Anu-smaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. remembering, repeated
recollection.
<LEND>

<L>2799<pc>0041-c<k1>anusmfta<k2>anusmfta
{%Anu-smṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ remembered.
<LEND>

<L>2800<pc>0041-c<k1>anusmfti<k2>anusmfti
{%Anu-smṛti, is,%}¦ f. cherished recollection, recalling
some idea to the exclusion of all others.
<LEND>

<L>2801<pc>0041-c<k1>anusyUta<k2>anusyUta
{#anusyUta#}¦ {%anu-syūta%} or {%anu-ṣyūta, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (rt. {%siv%}), sewed consecutively, strung together or
connected regularly and uninterruptedly.
<LEND>

<L>2802<pc>0041-c<k1>anusrayAman<k2>anusrayAman
{#anusrayAman#}¦ {%an-usra-yāman, ā,%} m., Ved.
not going (in a waggon drawn) by oxen.
<LEND>

<L>2803<pc>0041-c<k1>anusvAna<k2>anusvAna
{#anusvAna#}¦ {%anu-svāna, as,%} m. sounding con-
formably.
<LEND>

<L>2804<pc>0041-c<k1>anusvAra<k2>anusvAra
{#anusvAra#}¦ {%anu-svāra, as,%} m. (rt. {%svṛ%}), after-
sound, the nasal sound which is marked by a dot
above the line, and which always belongs to a preced-
ing vowel. {%—Anusvāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having the
Anusvāra. {%—Anusvāra-vyavāya, as,%} m. separation
between two sounds caused by an Anusvāra. {%—Anu-%}
{%svārāgama (˚ra-āg˚), as,%} m. an augment consisting
in the addition of an Anusvāra.
<LEND>

<L>2805<pc>0041-c<k1>anuha<k2>anuha
{#anuha#}¦ {%anuha, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Vibhrātra and father of Brahma-datta.
<LEND>

<L>2806<pc>0041-c<k1>anuhava<k2>anuhava
{#anuhava#}¦ {%anu-hava, as,%} m. (rt. {%hvā%} for {%hve%}),
Ved. inviting, stirring up.
<LEND>

<L>2807<pc>0041-c<k1>anuhA<k2>anuhA
{#anuhA#}¦ {%anu-hā,%} cl. 3. A., Ved. {%-jihīte,%}
{%hātum,%} to grant.
<LEND>

<L>2808<pc>0041-c<k1>anuhuNkf<k2>anuhuNkf
{#anuhuNkf#}¦ {%anu-huṅ-kṛ,%} cl. 8. A. {%-kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to roar in imitation of.
<LEND>

<L>2809<pc>0041-c<k1>anuhf<k2>anuhf
{#anuhf#}¦ {%anu-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-harati, -hartum,%}
to imitate, to exhibit; A. {%-harate,%} to take after (one's
parents).
<LEND>

<L>2810<pc>0041-c<k1>anuharaRa<k2>anuharaRa
{%Anu-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. or {%anu-hāra, as,%} m. imi-
tation; resemblance.
<LEND>

<L>2811<pc>0041-c<k1>anuharat<k2>anuharat
{%Anu-harat, an, antī, at,%}¦ imitating; ({%an%}), m., N.
of a man (?); (the deriv. {%ānuhārati%} takes Vṛddhi in
both members).
<LEND>

<L>2812<pc>0041-c<k1>anuharamARa<k2>anuharamARa
{%Anu-haramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ imitating.
<LEND>

<L>2813<pc>0041-c<k1>anuhAraka<k2>anuhAraka
{%Anu-hāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ imitating.
<LEND>

<L>2814<pc>0041-c<k1>anuhArya<k2>anuhArya
{%Anu-hārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be imitated; ({%as%}), m.
monthly obsequies on the day of the new moon.
<LEND>

<L>2815<pc>0041-c<k1>anuhoqa<k2>anuhoqa
{#anuhoqa#}¦ {%anu-hoḍa, as,%} m. a cart (?); (the
deriv. {%ānuhauḍika,%} takes Vṛddhi in both members.)
<LEND>

<L>2816<pc>0041-c<k1>anuhrAda<k2>anuhrAda
{#anuhrAda#}¦ {%anu-hrāda%} or {%anu-hlāda, as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Hiraṇya-kaśipu.
<LEND>
[Page0042-a+ 68]

<L>2817<pc>0042-a<k1>anUka<k2>anUka
{#anUka#}¦ {%anūka, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. {%añc%} with
{%anu%}), the backbone, spine; the back part of the
altar; a former state of existence; ({%am%}), n. race,
family; peculiarity of race, disposition, character; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>2818<pc>0042-a<k1>anUkya<k2>anUkya
{%Anūkya, am,%}¦ n. backbone; flesh on the skull.
<LEND>

<L>2819<pc>0042-a<k1>anUkASa<k2>anUkASa
{#anUkASa#}¦ {%anū-kāśa, as,%} m. (rt. {%kāś%}), re-
flection (of light), clearness; regard, reference.
<LEND>

<L>2820<pc>0042-a<k1>anUkz<k2>anUkz
{#anUkz#}¦ {%anūkṣ (anu-ukṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%anū-%}
{%kṣate, -kṣitum,%} to sprinkle, bedew.
<LEND>

<L>2821<pc>0042-a<k1>anUcIna<k2>anUcIna
{#anUcIna#}¦ {%anūcīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%anv-añc%}),
coming after, successive; {%anūcīnāham,%} on the fol-
lowing day. {%—Anūcīna-garbha, as, ā, am,%} born in
successive order.
<LEND>

<L>2822<pc>0042-a<k1>anUcya<k2>anUcya<h>1
1. {%anūcya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the board on the side of a
couch. (For 2. {%anūcya,%} see below.)
<LEND>

<L>2823<pc>0042-a<k1>anUcyate<k2>anUcyate
{#anUcyate#}¦ {%anūcyate (˚nu-uc˚),%} Pass. of {%anu-%}
{%vac,%} q. v., p. 38.
<LEND>

<L>2824<pc>0042-a<k1>anUkta<k2>anUkta
{%Anūkta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken after, recited after;
occurring in the (sacred) text; studied; ({%am%}), n. =
the next.
<LEND>

<L>2825<pc>0042-a<k1>anUkti<k2>anUkti
{%Anūkti, is,%}¦ f. mentioning after, repeated mention,
repetition by way of explanation; study of the Veda.
{%—Anūkti-tva, am,%} n. state of requiring repetition
or explanation.
<LEND>

<L>2826<pc>0042-a<k1>anUcAna<k2>anUcAna
{%Anūcāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ devoted to study; one so
well versed in the Vedas and Vedāṅgas as to be able
to repeat them; one who repeats his lesson after his
master; well-behaved.
<LEND>

<L>2827<pc>0042-a<k1>anUcya<k2>anUcya<h>2
2. {%anūcya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be studied.
<LEND>

<L>2828<pc>0042-a<k1>anUjji<k2>anUjji
{#anUjji#}¦ {%anūj-ji (anu-ud-ji),%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati,%}
{%-jetum,%} to follow in being victorious.
<LEND>

<L>2829<pc>0042-a<k1>anUQa<k2>anUQa
{#anUQa#}¦ {%an-ūḍha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vah%}), not
borne, not carried; unmarried; ({%ā%}), f. an unmar-
ried woman. {%—Anūḍha-māna, as, ā, am,%} bashful.
{%—Anūḍhā-gamana, am,%} n. fornication. {%—Anūḍhā-%}
{%bhrātṛ, tā,%} m. the brother of an unmarried woman;
the brother of the concubine of a king.
<LEND>

<L>2830<pc>0042-a<k1>anUti<k2>anUti
{#anUti#}¦ {%an-ūti, is,%} f., Ved. not helping, not
coming to aid.
<LEND>

<L>2831<pc>0042-a<k1>anUtkram<k2>anUtkram
{#anUtkram#}¦ {%anūt-kram (anu-ud-kram),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-krāmati, -kramitum,%} to follow in going up or out.
<LEND>

<L>2832<pc>0042-a<k1>anUtta<k2>anUtta
{#anUtta#}¦ {%anūtta, as, ā, am%} (for {%anu-datta,%} rt.
{%dā%}), given back.
<LEND>

<L>2833<pc>0042-a<k1>anUtTA<k2>anUtTA
{#anUtTA#}¦ {%anūtthā (anu-ud-sthā),%} cl. 1. P.
{%anūttiṣṭhat, anūtthātum,%} of follow in rising;
Ved. to approach.
<LEND>

<L>2834<pc>0042-a<k1>anUtpat<k2>anUtpat
{#anUtpat#}¦ {%anūt-pat (anu-ud-pat),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-patati, -titum,%} to fly up after another (with acc.),
raise one's self into the air, jump up afterwards.
<LEND>

<L>2835<pc>0042-a<k1>anUtpA<k2>anUtpA
{#anUtpA#}¦ {%anūt-pā (anu-ud-pā),%} cl. 1. P., Ved.
{%-pibati, -pātum,%} to empty by drinking after an-
other.
<LEND>

<L>2836<pc>0042-a<k1>anUdaka<k2>anUdaka
{#anUdaka#}¦ {%an-ūdaka, am,%} n. (for {%an-udaka%}),
want of water, aridity.
<LEND>

<L>2837<pc>0042-a<k1>anUdas<k2>anUdas
{#anUdas#}¦ {%anūd-as (anu-ud-as),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-asyati, -situm,%} to toss up behind or after.
<LEND>

<L>2838<pc>0042-a<k1>anUdi<k2>anUdi
{#anUdi#}¦ {%anūd-i (anu-ud-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -tum,%}
to follow in going up or out.
<LEND>

<L>2839<pc>0042-a<k1>anUdita<k2>anUdita
{#anUdita#}¦ {%anūdita (˚nu-ud˚), as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%vad%}), spoken after, spoken according to.
<LEND>

<L>2840<pc>0042-a<k1>anUdya<k2>anUdya<h>1
1. {%anūdya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken to afterwards
or in reply to.
<LEND>

<L>2841<pc>0042-a<k1>anUdya<k2>anUdya<h>2
2. {%anūdya,%}¦ ind. having said in reply.
<LEND>

<L>2842<pc>0042-a<k1>anUdyamAna<k2>anUdyamAna
{%Anūdyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken in reply to, ac-
cording to.
<LEND>

<L>2843<pc>0042-a<k1>anUde<k2>anUde
{#anUde#}¦ {%anūd-e (anu-ud-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%anūd-%}
{%aiti, -tum,%} to follow in coming up or rising.
<LEND>
[Page0042-b+ 65]

<L>2844<pc>0042-b<k1>anUddeSa<k2>anUddeSa
{#anUddeSa#}¦ {%anūddeśa (anu-ud˚), as,%} m. (rt. {%diś%}),
describing, mentioning according to or conformably
with.
<LEND>

<L>2845<pc>0042-b<k1>anUDas<k2>anUDas
{#anUDas#}¦ {%an-ūdhas, ās,%} f., Ved. udderless.
<LEND>

<L>2846<pc>0042-b<k1>anUna<k2>anUna
{#anUna#}¦ {%an-ūna%} or {%an-ūnaka, as, ā, am,%}
whole, entire; having full power; not less, not infe-
rior; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Anūna-guru, us,%}
{%us%} or {%vī, u,%} of undiminished weight, very heavy.
{%—Anūna-varcas, ās,%} m., Ved. having full splen-
dor.
<LEND>

<L>2847<pc>0042-b<k1>anUnnI<k2>anUnnI
{#anUnnI#}¦ {%anūn-nī (anu-ud-nī),%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati,%}
{%-netum,%} to take out and fill after another.
<LEND>

<L>2848<pc>0042-b<k1>anUpa<k2>anUpa<h>1
{#anUpa#} 1¦. {%anūpa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ap,%} q. v., with
{%anu%}), situated near the water, watery, wet, a watery
country; ({%as%}), m. pond, bank of a river; a buffalo;
N. of a king. {%—Anūpa-ja, am,%} n. moist ginger.
{%—Anūpa-deśa, as,%} m. a marshy country. {%—Anūpa-%}
{%prāya, as, ā, am,%} marshy. {%—Anūpa-vilāsa, as,%} m.
title of a work.
<LEND>

<L>2849<pc>0042-b<k1>anUpya<k2>anUpya
{%Anūpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in ponds or bogs (as
water).
<LEND>

<L>2850<pc>0042-b<k1>anUpa<k2>anUpa<h>2
{#anUpa#} 2¦. {%anūpa, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%anu-vap%}), Ved.
bestowing in order. (For. 1. {%anūpa,%} see above.)
<LEND>

<L>2851<pc>0042-b<k1>anUpadas<k2>anUpadas
{#anUpadas#}¦ {%anūpa-das (anu-upa-das),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-dasyati, -situm,%} to fail (or become extinct) in
consequence.
<LEND>

<L>2852<pc>0042-b<k1>anUpasadam<k2>anUpasadam
{#anUpasadam#}¦ {%anūpasadam (anu-up˚),%} ind. at
every Upasad (a kind of religious ceremony).
<LEND>

<L>2853<pc>0042-b<k1>anUbanDya<k2>anUbanDya
{#anUbanDya#}¦ {%anū-bandhya, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%bandh%}),
Ved. to be fastened (as a sacrificial animal); see also
{%anu-bandhya,%} p. 37.
<LEND>

<L>2854<pc>0042-b<k1>anUyAja<k2>anUyAja
{#anUyAja#}¦ {%anū-yāja.%} See {%anu-yāja,%} p. 37.
<LEND>

<L>2855<pc>0042-b<k1>anUrADa<k2>anUrADa
{#anUrADa#}¦ {%anū-rādha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. causing
welfare, happiness; ({%ā%}), f. {%=anu-rādhā,%} q. v., p. 38.
<LEND>

<L>2856<pc>0042-b<k1>anUru<k2>anUru
{#anUru#}¦ {%an-ūru, us, us, u,%} thighless; ({%us%}), m.
the charioteer of the sun, the dawn. {%—Anūru-sāra-%}
{%thi, is,%} m. whose charioteer is Anūru, i. e. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>2857<pc>0042-b<k1>anUrjita<k2>anUrjita
{#anUrjita#}¦ {%an-ūrjita, as, ā, am,%} not strong,
weak; not proud.
<LEND>

<L>2858<pc>0042-b<k1>anUrDva<k2>anUrDva
{#anUrDva#}¦ {%an-ūrdhva, as, ā, am,%} not high, low.
{%—Anūrdhva-bhās, ās,%} m., Ved. one whose splen-
dor does not rise, who lights no sacred fires.
<LEND>

<L>2859<pc>0042-b<k1>anUrmi<k2>anUrmi
{#anUrmi#}¦ {%an-ūrmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. not waving,
not fluctuating; inviolable.
<LEND>

<L>2860<pc>0042-b<k1>anUlA<k2>anUlA
{#anUlA#}¦ {%anūlā,%} f., N. of a river in Kāśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>2861<pc>0042-b<k1>anUvfj<k2>anUvfj
{#anUvfj#}¦ {%anū-vṛj, ṭ,%} m. f. (?), Ved. a part
of the body near the ribs.
<LEND>

<L>2862<pc>0042-b<k1>anUzara<k2>anUzara<h>1
{#anUzara#} 1¦. {%an-ūṣara, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%ūṣara%}
with 3. {%a%} as an expletive or denoting comparison),
saline.
<LEND>

<L>2863<pc>0042-b<k1>anUzara<k2>anUzara<h>2
{#anUzara#} 2¦. {%an-ūṣara, as, ā, am,%} not saline.
<LEND>

<L>2864<pc>0042-b<k1>anUzita<k2>anUzita
{#anUzita#}¦ {%anūṣita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vas%} with
{%anu%}), living near another.
<LEND>

<L>2865<pc>0042-b<k1>anUzmapara<k2>anUzmapara
{#anUzmapara#}¦ {%an-ūṣma-para, as, ā, am,%} (in
gram.) not followed by a sibilant.
<LEND>

<L>2866<pc>0042-b<k1>anUha<k2>anUha
{#anUha#}¦ {%an-ūha, as, ā, am,%} thoughtless,
careless.
<LEND>

<L>2867<pc>0042-b<k1>anfkka<k2>anfkka
{#anfkka#}¦ {%an-ṛkka.%} See {%an-ṛc%} below.
<LEND>

<L>2868<pc>0042-b<k1>anfkzara<k2>anfkzara
{#anfkzara#}¦ {%an-ṛkṣara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. thorn-
less (as a path or a couch).
<LEND>

<L>2869<pc>0042-b<k1>anfc<k2>anfc
{#anfc#}¦ {%an-ṛc, k, k, k,%} or {%an-ṛca, as, ā, am,%}
not containing a verse from the Ṛg-veda, hymnless,
not conversant with the Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>2870<pc>0042-b<k1>anfkka<k2>anfkka
{%An-ṛkka%}¦ or {%an-ṛcka, as, ā, am,%} containing no
Ṛc.
<LEND>
[Page0042-c+ 76]

<L>2871<pc>0042-c<k1>anfju<k2>anfju
{#anfju#}¦ {%an-ṛju, us, us, u,%} not straight,
crooked, perverse, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>2872<pc>0042-c<k1>anfRa<k2>anfRa
{#anfRa#}¦ {%an-ṛṇa, as, ā, am,%} free from debt.
{%—Anṛṇa-tā,%} f. or {%anṛṇa-tva, am,%} n. freedom
from debt.
<LEND>

<L>2873<pc>0042-c<k1>anfRin<k2>anfRin
{%An-ṛṇin ī, inī, i,%}¦ unindebted, free from debt.
<LEND>

<L>2874<pc>0042-c<k1>anfta<k2>anfta
{#anfta#}¦ {%an-ṛta, as, ā, am,%} not true, false;
({%am%}), n. falsehood, lying, cheating; agriculture.
{%—Anṛta-deva, as,%} m., Ved. one whose gods are
not true; playing unfairly (?). {%—Anṛta-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ,%}
{%ṭ,%} Ved. persecuting untruth. {%—Anṛta-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} full of untruth, false. {%—Anṛta-vadana, am,%} n.
or {%anṛta-bhāṣaṇa, am,%} n. or {%anṛtākhyāna (˚ta-%}
{%ākh˚), am,%} n. speaking falsehood, lying. {%—Anṛta-%}
{%vādin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%anṛta-vāc, k, k, k,%} speaking
untruth. {%—Anṛta-vrata, as, ā, am,%} false to vows or
engagements.
<LEND>

<L>2875<pc>0042-c<k1>anftin<k2>anftin
{%Anṛtin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who tells untruths, lying, a
liar.
<LEND>

<L>2876<pc>0042-c<k1>anftu<k2>anftu
{#anftu#}¦ {%an-ṛtu, us,%} m. unfit season. {%—Anṛtu-%}
{%kanyā,%} f. a girl before menstruation.
<LEND>

<L>2877<pc>0042-c<k1>anfSaMsa<k2>anfSaMsa
{#anfSaMsa#}¦ {%a-nṛśaṃsa, as, ā, am,%} not cruel,
mild. {%—Anṛśaṃsa-tā,%} f. mildness, kindness.
<LEND>

<L>2878<pc>0042-c<k1>aneka<k2>aneka
{#aneka#}¦ {%an-eka, as, ā, am,%} not one, many,
much; separated. {%—Aneka-kālam,%} ind. a long time,
for a long time. {%—Anekakālāvadhi (˚la-av˚),%} ind.
long since. {%—Aneka-kṛt, t,%} m. doing much, epithet
of Śiva. {%—Aneka-gotra, as,%} m. having more families
than one, i. e. two, belonging to two families (or to
one as an adopted son). {%—Aneka-cara, as, ā, am,%}
gregarious. {%—Aneka-citta-mantra, as,%} m. one whose
counsels are many-minded. {%—Aneka-ja, as, ā, am,%}
born more than once; ({%as%}), m. a bird. {%—Aneka-tā,%}
f. or {%aneka-tva, am,%} n. muchness, manifold condi-
tion. {%—Aneka-tra,%} ind. in many places. {%—Aneka-%}
{%dharma-kathā,%} f. different exposition of the law.
{%—Aneka-dhā,%} ind. in various ways, often. {%—Aneka-%}
{%dhā-prayoga, as,%} m. using several times. {%—Aneka-%}
{%pa, as, ā, am,%} drinking oftener than once; ({%as, ā%}),
m. f. an elephant, because he drinks with his trunk
and with his mouth. {%—Aneka-bhārya, as, ā, am,%}
having more wives than one. {%—Aneka-mukha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having several faces, having different ways.
{%—Aneka-yuddha-vijayin, ī,%} m. victorious in many
battles. {%—Aneka-randhra, as, ā, am,%} having many
holes, weaknesses or troubles. {%—Aneka-rūpa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} multiform; of various kinds or sorts; fickle, of
variable mind. {%—Aneka-locana, as,%} m. having seve-
ral (three) eyes, N. of Śiva. {%—Aneka-vacana, am,%}
n. the plural number. {%—Aneka-varṇa,%} (in arithmetic
compounded with various words to denote) many un-
known quantities (colours representing <nsi>x, y, z,</nsi> &c.),
e. g. {%aneka-varṇa-guṇana,%} multiplication of many
unknown quantities. (Similarly, if for {%guṇana%}
be substituted {%bhajana%} ‘division,’ {%madhyamāha-%}
{%raṇa%} ‘taking away the middle term,’ {%vyavakalana%}
‘subtraction,’ {%saṅkalana%} ‘addition,’ other algebraical
processes may be expressed). {%—Aneka-vāram,%} ind.
many times, repeatedly. {%—Aneka-vidha, as, ā, am,%}
of many kinds, in different ways, various. {%—Aneka-%}
{%śapha, as, ā, am,%} cloven-hoofed. {%—Aneka-śabda,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} expressed by several words, synonymous.
{%—Aneka-śas,%} ind. in great numbers, several times,
repeatedly, by large numbers or quantities. {%—Anekā-%}
{%kāra (˚ka-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} multiform. {%—Anekā-%}
{%kṣara (˚ka-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} polysyllabic, having
more than one syllable. {%—Anekāgra (˚ka-ag˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} engaged in various pursuits. {%—Anekāc (˚ka-%}
{%ac),%} having more than one vowel or syllable ({%ac%} in
gram. being the technical term for vowel). {%—Ane-%}
{%kārtha (˚ka-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having more than one
meaning (as a word). {%—Anekārtha-dhvani-mañ-%}
{%jarī,%} f. and {%anekārtha-saṅgraha, as,%} m. titles of
two works on such words. {%—Anekāl (˚ka-al),%} con-
sisting of more than one {%al%} or letter (in the technical
phras. of gram.). {%—Anekāśraya (˚ka-āś˚), as,%} m. or
[Page0043-a+ 69]
{%anekāśrita (˚ka-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} (in Vaiśeṣika
phil.) dwelling, abiding in more than one.
<LEND>

<L>2879<pc>0043-a<k1>anekAkin<k2>anekAkin
{%An-ekākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not alone, accompanied by.
<LEND>

<L>2880<pc>0043-a<k1>anekAnta<k2>anekAnta
{%An-ekānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not alone and excluding
every other, uncertain. {%—Anekānta-tva, am,%} n. un-
certainty. {%—Anekānta-vāda, as,%} m. scepticism.
{%—Anekānta-vādin, ī,%} m. a sceptic; a Jaina, an
Arhat of the Jainas.
<LEND>

<L>2881<pc>0043-a<k1>anekIkaraRa<k2>anekIkaraRa
{%Anekī-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. making manifold.
<LEND>

<L>2882<pc>0043-a<k1>anekIBavat<k2>anekIBavat
{%Anekī-bhavat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being manifold, i. e.
divided in two.
<LEND>

<L>2883<pc>0043-a<k1>anekIya<k2>anekIya
{%Anekīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ having several.
<LEND>

<L>2884<pc>0043-a<k1>anejat<k2>anejat
{#anejat#}¦ {%an-ejat, an, antī, at%} (rt. {%ej%} with
{%an%}), not moving, immoveable.
<LEND>

<L>2885<pc>0043-a<k1>aneqa<k2>aneqa
{#aneqa#}¦ {%an-eḍa, as,%} m. ({%an%} being an expletive
or denoting comparison), stupid, foolish.
<LEND>

<L>2886<pc>0043-a<k1>aneqamUka<k2>aneqamUka
{%An-eḍa-mūka, as, ā, am,%}¦ deaf and dumb; blind;
wicked, fraudulent.
<LEND>

<L>2887<pc>0043-a<k1>anedya<k2>anedya<h>1
{#anedya#} 1¦. {%a-nedya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%nid%}), Ved.
not to be blamed.
<LEND>

<L>2888<pc>0043-a<k1>anedya<k2>anedya<h>2
{#anedya#} 2¦. {%a-nedya, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%a%} and
{%nedyas,%} a contraction of {%nedīyas?%}), Ved. not near,
infinite.
<LEND>

<L>2889<pc>0043-a<k1>anena<k2>anena<h>1
{#anena#} 1¦. {%an-ena, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according
to native authorities) sinless, faultless; (according to
German scholars) without a variegated set (of horses).
See {%eta.%}
<LEND>

<L>2890<pc>0043-a<k1>anenas<k2>anenas
{%An-enas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ blameless, sinless, not liable
to error; N. of various personages.
<LEND>

<L>2891<pc>0043-a<k1>anenasya<k2>anenasya
{%An-enasya, am,%}¦ n. freedom from fault, sin.
<LEND>

<L>2892<pc>0043-a<k1>anena<k2>anena<h>2
{#anena#} 2¦. {%anena, as,%} m. (fr. {%ina%} and {%ana%}
for {%an%}); this doubtful word may signify one who has
no superior, ‘a sovereign or paramount lord;’ see {%ina%}
and {%ana%} for {%an.%}
<LEND>

<L>2893<pc>0043-a<k1>aneman<k2>aneman
{#aneman#}¦ {%a-neman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. to be praised.
<LEND>

<L>2894<pc>0043-a<k1>aneva<k2>aneva
{#aneva#}¦ {%an-eva,%} ind. otherwise (?), or (?).
<LEND>

<L>2895<pc>0043-a<k1>anehas<k2>anehas
{#anehas#}¦ {%an-ehas, ā, ā, as%} (fr. rt. {%īh%} with {%an%}),
Ved. without a rival, incomparable, unattainable; un-
menaced, unobstructed; ({%ā%}), m. time.
<LEND>

<L>2896<pc>0043-a<k1>anEkAnta<k2>anEkAnta
{#anEkAnta#}¦ {%an-aikānta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ekānta%}),
variable, unsteady; (in logic) occasional, as a cause
not invariably attended by the same effects.
<LEND>

<L>2897<pc>0043-a<k1>anEkAntika<k2>anEkAntika
{%An-aikāntika, as, ī, am,%}¦ unsteady, variable, hav-
ing many objects or purposes. {%—Anaikāntika-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. unsteadiness, uncertainty.
<LEND>

<L>2898<pc>0043-a<k1>anEkya<k2>anEkya
{#anEkya#}¦ {%an-aikya, am,%} n. ({%eka%}), want of
oneness, plurality, the existence of many; want of
union, anarchy.
<LEND>

<L>2899<pc>0043-a<k1>anEpuRa<k2>anEpuRa
{#anEpuRa#}¦ {%a-naipuṇa%} or {%a-naipuṇya, am,%} n.
unskilfulness. See {%ānaipuṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>2900<pc>0043-a<k1>anESvarya<k2>anESvarya
{#anESvarya#}¦ {%an-aiśvarya, am,%} n. weakness.
See {%ānaiśvarya.%}
<LEND>

<L>2901<pc>0043-a<k1>ano<k2>ano
{#ano#}¦ {%ano,%} ind. no, not. (An unusual
form of {%no.%})
<LEND>

<L>2902<pc>0043-a<k1>anokaSAyin<k2>anokaSAyin
{#anokaSAyin#}¦ {%an-oka-śāyin, ī,%} m. not sleep-
ing in a house (as a beggar).
<LEND>

<L>2903<pc>0043-a<k1>anokaha<k2>anokaha
{%An-oka-ha, as,%}¦ m. not quitting the house, a tree;
({%oka%} is for {%okas,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>2904<pc>0043-a<k1>anoNkfta<k2>anoNkfta
{#anoNkfta#}¦ {%an-oṅ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} not ac-
companied by the holy syllable {%om.%}
<LEND>

<L>2905<pc>0043-a<k1>anodita<k2>anodita
{#anodita#}¦ {%anodita (ana-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} un-
addressed (?).
<LEND>

<L>2906<pc>0043-a<k1>anovAhya<k2>anovAhya
{#anovAhya#}¦ {%ano-vāhya, as, ā, am,%} to be carried
on a carriage.
<LEND>

<L>2907<pc>0043-a<k1>anOcitya<k2>anOcitya
{#anOcitya#}¦ {%an-aucitya, am,%} n. unfitness.
<LEND>

<L>2908<pc>0043-a<k1>anOjasya<k2>anOjasya
{#anOjasya#}¦ {%an-aujasya, am,%} n. want of
vigour.
<LEND>

<L>2909<pc>0043-a<k1>anOdDatya<k2>anOdDatya
{#anOdDatya#}¦ {%an-auddhatya, am,%} n. freedom
from haughtiness.
<LEND>
[Page0043-b+ 79]

<L>2910<pc>0043-b<k1>anOpamya<k2>anOpamya
{#anOpamya#}¦ {%an-aupamya, as, ā, am,%} unpa-
ralleled.
<LEND>

<L>2911<pc>0043-b<k1>anOrasa<k2>anOrasa
{#anOrasa#}¦ {%an-aurasa, as,%} m. not one's own
son, adopted.
<LEND>

<L>2912<pc>0043-b<k1>ant<k2>ant
{#ant#}¦ {%ant,%} cl. 1. P. {%antati, -titum,%} to
bind [cf. {%and, īnt%}].
<LEND>

<L>2913<pc>0043-b<k1>anta<k2>anta
{#anta#}¦ {%anta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%am%} ?), end, limit,
boundary, term; end of a texture; end, conclusion;
end of life, death, destruction (in these latter senses
sometimes neut.); a final syllable, termination; last
word of a compound; pause, settlement, definite as-
certainment, certainty; whole amount; border; near-
ness, proximity, presence (e. g. {%grāmānte,%} in the
neighbourhood of the village); inner part, inside; con-
dition, nature; {%ante,%} loc. c. in the end, at last; in the
inside; {%antam%} at the end of a compound means
‘as far as,’ thus {%udakāntam,%} as far as the water;
({%as, ā, am%}), near, handsome, agreeable [cf. Goth.
<nsi>andeis,</nsi> Theme <nsi>andja;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Ende;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>end:</nsi>
with {%anta%} are also compared the Greek <lang n="greek">ἄντα, ἀντί</lang>
Lat. <nsi>ante;</nsi> the Goth. <nsi>anda</nsi> in <nsi>anda-vaurd,</nsi> &c.; and
the Germ. <nsi>ent,</nsi> e. g. in <nsi>entsagen</nsi>]. {%—Anta-kara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} or {%anta-karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} or {%anta-kārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} causing death, mortal, destructive. {%—Anta-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. time of death, death. {%—Anta-kṛt, t, t,%}
{%t,%} making an end; ({%t%}), m. death. {%—Antakṛd-daśā,%}
{%ās,%} f. pl. a sacred book of the Jainas, containing ten
chapters. {%—Anta-ga, as, ā, am,%} going to the end,
thoroughly conversant with. {%—Anta-gati, is, is, i,%}
or {%anta-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going to the end, pe-
rishing. {%—Anta-gamana, am,%} n. the going to the
end of something, finishing; the going to the end,
dying. {%—Anta-cara, as, ī, am,%} going to the fron-
tiers, walking about the frontiers. {%—Anta-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} last born. {%—Anta-jāti,%} see {%antya-jāti%}. {%—Anta-%}
{%tas,%} ind. from the end, from the term; lastly, finally;
in the lowest way; in part; within. {%—Anta-dīpaka,%}
{%am,%} n. a figure in rhetoric. {%—Anta-pāla, as,%} m. a
frontier-guard. {%—Anta-bhava, as, ā, am,%} being at
the end, last. {%—Anta-bhāj, k, k, k,%} standing at the
end (of a word). {%—Anta-rata, as, ā, am,%} delighting
in destruction. {%—Anta-līna, as, ā, am,%} hidden, con-
cealed. {%—Anta-lopa, as,%} m. the dropping of the final
of a word (in grammar). {%—Anta-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having an end or term, limited, perishable; ({%-vat%}),
ind. like the end. {%—Antavat-tva, am,%} n. limited
existence, perishableness. {%—Anta-vahni, is,%} m. the
fire of the end, by which the world is to be burnt.
{%—Anta-vāsin%} or {%ante-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling
near the boundaries, dwelling close by; ({%ī%}), m. a
pupil who dwells near or in the house of his teacher;
a Cāṇḍāla (who lives at the end of the town).
{%—Anta-velā,%} f. hour of death. {%—Anta-śayyā,%} f. a
bed or mat on the ground; death; the place for
burial or burning; bier. {%—Anta-satkriyā,%} f. the fu-
neral ceremonies. {%—Anta-sad, t,%} m. a pupil (who
dwells near his teacher). {%—Anta-stha, as, ā, am,%}
standing at the end; see also {%antaḥ-stha%}. {%—Anta-%}
{%svarita, as,%} m. the Svarita accent on the last syllable
of a word; ({%am%}), n. a word thus accentuated.
{%—Antādi (˚ta-ādi), ī,%} du. m. end and beginning.
{%—Antāvasāyin%} or {%antāvaśāyin (˚ta-av˚), ī,%} m. a
barber; a Cāṇḍāa; N. of a Muni or saint; see
{%antyāvasāyin%}. {%—Ante-vāsa, as,%} m. a neighbour, a
companion, a pupil. {%—Ante-vāsi,%} ind. in statu pupil-
lari; see {%anta-vāsin%} above. {%—Antodātta (˚ta-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the acute accent on the last syllable; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), having the acute accent on the last syllable.
<LEND>

<L>2914<pc>0043-b<k1>antaka<k2>antaka
{%Antaka, as,%}¦ m. border, boundary; ({%as, ā, am%}),
making an end, causing death; ({%as%}), m. death; Ya-
ma, king or lord of death. {%—Antaka-druh, -dhruk,%}
{%k, k,%} Ved. offending or provoking destructive demons,
or death, or Yama.
<LEND>

<L>2915<pc>0043-b<k1>antaki<k2>antaki
{%Antaki, is,%}¦ m. wind (?).
<LEND>

<L>2916<pc>0043-b<k1>antama<k2>antama
{%Antama, as, ā, am,%}¦ next, nearest, intimate (as a
friend); Ved. last.
<LEND>

<L>2917<pc>0043-b<k1>antaya<k2>antaya
{%Antaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%antayati, -yitum,%} to make an
end of.
<LEND>

<L>2918<pc>0043-b<k1>antika<k2>antika
{%Antika, antima, antya,%}¦ &c. See {%antika,%} p. 45.
<LEND>
[Page0043-c+ 79]

<L>2919<pc>0043-c<k1>antaH<k2>antaH
{#antaH#}¦ {%antaḥ.%} See {%antar%} below.
<LEND>

<L>2920<pc>0043-c<k1>antaHKyA<k2>antaHKyA
{#antaHKyA#}¦ {%antaḥ-khyā (antar-khyā),%} cl. 2. P.,
Ved. {%-khyāti, -tum,%} to deprive of, keep back, conceal.
<LEND>

<L>2921<pc>0043-c<k1>antama<k2>antama
{#antama#}¦ {%antama.%} See s. v. {%anta%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>2922<pc>0043-c<k1>antar<k2>antar
{#antar#}¦ {%antar,%} ind. within, between, amongst,
in the middle or interior; a particle of assent.
<div n="P"/>(As a prep. with loc.) in the middle, in, between, in-
to; (with acc.) between; (with gen.) in, in the middle.
<div n="P"/>(When used at the end of a compound) in, into,
in the middle of, between, out of the midst of [cf.
Zend <nsi>antarĕ;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>inter;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>undar</nsi>].
<div n="P"/>Sometimes {%antar%} is compounded with a following
word like an adjective, meaning interior, internal,
intermediate. {%—Antaḥ-karaṇa, am,%} n. the internal
and spiritual part of man, the seat of thought and
feeling, the mind, the thinking faculty, the heart,
the conscience, the soul. {%—Antaḥ-kalpa, as,%} m. a
certain number of years (in Buddhism). {%—Antaḥ-%}
{%kuṭila, as, ā, am,%} internally crooked; fraudulent;
({%as%}), m. a couch. {%—Antaḥ-kṛmi, is,%} m. a disease
caused by worms in the body. {%—Antaḥ-koṭara-puṣ-%}
{%pī,%} a various reading for {%aṇḍa-koṭara-puṣpī,%} q. v.
{%—Antaḥ-koṇa, as,%} m. the inner corner. {%—Antaḥ-%}
{%kopa, as,%} m. inward wrath. {%—Antaḥ-kośa, am,%} n.,
Ved. the interior of a store-room. {%—Antaḥ-paṭa, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a cloth held between two persons who
are to be united (as bride and bridegroom, or pupil
and teacher) until the right moment of union is
arrived. {%—Antaḥ-padam,%} ind. in the middle of an
inflected word. {%—Antaḥ-paridhāna, am,%} n. the in-
nermost garment. {%—Antaḥ-paridhi,%} ind. in the inside
of an enclosure. {%—Antaḥ-parśavya%} or {%antaḥ-pār-%}
{%śvya, as, ā, am,%} being between the ribs (as flesh).
{%—Antaḥ-pavitra,%} the Soma when in the straining-
vessel (?). {%—Antaḥ-paśu,%} ind. from evening till morn-
ing (while the cattle is in the stables). {%—Antaḥ-pāta%}
or {%antaḥ-pātya, as,%} m. (in gram.) insertion of a
letter; a post fixed in the middle of the place of
sacrifice. {%—Antaḥ-pātita, as, ā, am,%} or {%antaḥ-pātin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} inserted, included in. {%—Antaḥ-pātra, am,%}
n., Ved. the interior of a vessel. {%—Antaḥ-pādam,%}
ind. within the Pāda of a verse. {%—Antaḥ-pāla, as,%}
m. one who watches the inner apartments of a palace.
{%—Antaḥ-pura, am,%} n. the king's palace, the female
apartments, gynæceum; those who live in the female
apartments; a queen. {%—Antaḥpura-cara, as,%} m.
guardian of the women's apartments. {%—Antaḥpura-%}
{%jana, as,%} m. the women of the palace. {%—Antaḥpura-%}
{%pracāra, as,%} m. the gossip of the women's apart-
ments. {%—Antaḥpura-rakṣaka, as,%} m. or {%antaḥ-%}
{%pura-vartin, ī,%} m. or {%antaḥpurādhyakṣa (˚ra-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. superintendent of the gynæceum, cham-
berlain. {%—Antaḥ-pura-sahāya, as,%} m. belonging to
the gynæceum (as an eunuch, &c.). {%—Antaḥ-purika,%}
{%as,%} m. superintendent of the gynæceum; ({%ā%}), f. a
woman in the gynæceum. {%—Antaḥ-pūya, as, ā, am,%}
ulcerous. {%—Antaḥ-peya, am,%} n., Ved. supping up,
drinking. {%—Antaḥ-prakṛti, is,%} f. the heart, the
soul, the internal nature or constitution of a man.
{%—Antaḥ-prajña, as, ā, am,%} internally wise, know-
ing one's self. {%—Antaḥ-pratiṣṭhāna, am,%} n. resi-
dence in the interior. {%—Antaḥ-pratiṣṭhita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} residing inside. {%—Antaḥ-śara, as,%} m. an internal
arrow or disease. {%—Antaḥ-śarīra, am,%} n. the inter-
nal and spiritual part of man. {%—Antaḥ-śalya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a pin or extraneous body sticking in-
side. {%—Antaḥ-śilā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Antaḥ-śleṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. or {%antaḥ-śleṣaṇa, am,%} n., Ved. internal sup-
port. {%—Antaḥ-sañjña, as, ā, am,%} internally conscious.
{%—Antaḥ-sattvā,%} f. a pregnant woman; the mark-
ing nut (Semecarpus Anacardium L.). {%—Antaḥ-sada-%}
{%sam,%} ind. in the middle of the assembly. {%—Antaḥ-%}
{%sāra, as, ā, am,%} having internal essence; ({%as%}), m.
internal treasure, inner store or contents. {%—Antaḥ-%}
{%sukha, as, ā, am,%} internally happy. {%—Antaḥ-senam,%}
ind. into the midst of the armies. {%—Antaḥ-stha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} being in the midst or between; a term ap-
plied to the semivowels, as standing between the con-
sonants and vowels; ({%ā%}), f. the god of the vital
[Page0044-a+ 80]
organs; an epithet of one of the Ṛg-veda mantras.
{%—Antaḥstha-mudgara, as,%} m. (in anatomy) the
malleus of the ear. {%—Antaḥ-sveda, as,%} m. an ele-
phant. {%—Antar-aṃsa%} or {%antarāṃsa (˚rā-aṃ˚), as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. the part of the body between the shoul-
ders, the breast. {%—Antar-agni, is,%} m. the interior fire,
digestive force. {%—Antar-aṅga, as, ā, am,%} interior,
proximate, related, being essential to, or having refer-
ence to the essential part of the {%aṅga%} or base of a
word. {%—Antaraṅga-tara, as, ā, am,%} not essential
to the base of a word, lit. beyond or external to it.
{%—Antaraṅga-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition of
an Antaraṅga. {%—Antar-avayava, as,%} m. an inner
limb or part. {%—Antar-ākāśa, as,%} m. the sacred ether
or Brahma in the interior part or soul of man.
{%—Antar-ākūta, am,%} n. hidden intention. {%—Antar-%}
{%āgama, as,%} m. an additional augment between two
letters (in gram.). {%—Antar-āgāra, as,%} m. the interior
of a house {%—Antar-ātman, ā,%} m. the soul, the inhe-
rent supreme spirit; the internal feelings, the heart
or mind. {%—Antar-ātmeṣṭakam (˚man-iṣ˚),%} ind.
in the space between one's self and the (sacrificial)
bricks. {%—Antar-āpaṇa, as,%} m. a market inside (a
town). {%—Antarāya,%} see {%antar-i%}. {%—Antar-ārāma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} rejoicing in one's self (not in the exterior
world). {%—Antar-āla%} or {%antar-ālaka, am,%} n. inter-
mediate space; {%antarāle,%} in the midst, in midway;
({%āla%} is probably for {%ālaya%}). {%—Antar-indriya, am,%}
n. an internal organ, of which there are four, viz.
{%manas, buddhi, ahaṅkāra,%} and {%citta%}. {%—Antar-%}
{%īpa, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. {%ap%}), an island, a promontory.
{%—Antar-uṣya, am,%} n. (rt. {%vas%}), Ved. a secret abode.
{%—Antar-gaṅgā,%} f. the Ganges, as supposed to com-
municate under-ground with a sacred spring in Mysore.
{%—Antar-gaḍu, us, us, u,%} unprofitable, useless (filled
with worms). {%—Antar-gata,%} &c.; see under {%antar-%}
{%gam%}. {%—Antar-garbha, as, ā, am,%} inclosing young;
pregnant. {%—Antar-giram%} or {%antar-giri,%} ind. among
the mountains. {%—Antar-guda-valaya, as,%} m. (in
medicine) the sphincter muscle. {%—Antar-gūḍha-%}
{%viṣa, as, ā, am,%} having hidden poison within.
{%—Antar-gṛha, am,%} n. an inner apartment of the
house; {%antar-gṛham%} or {%antar-geham,%} ind. in the
interior of a house. {%—Antar-ghaṇa, as,%} or {%antar-%}
{%ghana, as,%} m. a place between the entrance-door and
the house; N. of a village. {%—Antar-ghāta, as,%} m.
striking in the middle. {%—Antar-ja, as, ā, am,%} bred
in the interior (of the body, as a worm). {%—Antar-%}
{%jaṭhara, am,%} n. the stomach. {%—Antar-janman, a,%}
n. inward birth. {%—Antar-jambha, as,%} m. the inner
part of the jaws. {%—Antar-jala-cara, as, ī, am,%} going
in the water. {%—Antar-jāta, as, ā, am,%} inborn, inbred,
innate. {%—Antar-jānu,%} ind. between the knees; ({%us,%}
{%us, u%}), being between the knees. {%—Antar-jñāna, am,%}
n. inward knowledge. {%—Antar-jyotis, is, is, is,%} having
the soul enlightened, illuminated. {%—Antar-jvalana,%}
{%am,%} n. internal heat, inflammation. {%—Antar-dagdha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} burnt inwardly. {%—Antar-dadhana, am,%}
n. the distillation of spirituous liquor, or a substance
used to cause fermentation. {%—Antar-dadhāna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} vanishing, disappearing, hiding one's self
[cf. {%antar-dhā%}]. {%—Antar-daśā,%} f. a technical term
in astrology. {%—Antar-daśāha, am,%} n. an interval of
ten days; so {%antar-daśāhāt,%} before the end of ten
days. {%—Antar-dāva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. containing
fire. {%—Antar-dāha, as,%} m. internal heat, or fever.
{%—Antar-duḥkha, as, ā, am,%} afflicted in mind, sad.
{%—Antar-duṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} internally bad, wicked,
vile. {%—Antar-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} looking into one's
own soul. {%—Antar-deśa, as,%} m., Ved. an interme-
diate region of the compass. {%—Antar-dvāra, am,%} n.
a private or secret door within the house. {%—Antar-%}
{%dhā,%} &c.; see. s. v. {%antar-dhā,%} p. 45. {%—Antar-dhyāna,%}
{%am,%} n. profound inward meditation. {%—Antar-nagara,%}
{%am,%} n. the palace of a king. {%—Antar-niviṣṭa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} gone within, being within. {%—Antar-niṣṭha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} engaged in internal reflection. {%—Antar-%}
{%bhavana, am,%} n. the interior of a house. {%—Antar-%}
{%bhāva,%} &c.; see {%antar-bhū,%} p. 45. {%—Antar-bhāvanā,%}
f. inward meditation or anxiety; a technical term in
arithmetic; rectification of numbers by the differences
[Page0044-b+ 80]
of the products. {%—Antar-bhūmi, is,%} f. the inner
part of the earth. {%—Antar-bhauma, as, ā, am,%} being
in the interior of the earth; subterranean. {%—Antar-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} sad, perplexed. {%—Antar-mukha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} going into the mouth; ({%am%}), n. a kind
of scissors used in surgery. {%—Antar-mudra%} (?), sealed
inside; N. of a certain form of devotion. {%—Antar-%}
{%mṛta, as, ā, am,%} still-born. {%—Antar-yāma, as,%} m.
the suppression of the breath and voice; a Soma liba-
tion during this act. {%—Antar-yāma-graha, as,%} m.
the Soma libation Antar-yāma; the performing of
such a libation. {%—Antar-yāmin, ī,%} m. checking or
regulating the internal feelings; the soul; providence;
the supreme spirit as regulating and guiding mankind;
Brahmā. {%—Antar-yoga, as,%} m. deep thought, ab-
straction. {%—Antar-lamba, as, ā, am,%} acute-angular;
({%as%}), m. a triangle in which the perpendicular falls
within, an acute-angled triangle. {%—Antar-līna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} inherent. {%—Antar-loma, as, ā, am,%} covered
with hair on the inner side. {%—Antar-vaṃśa, as,%} m.
the gynæceum; see {%antaḥ-pura%}. {%—Antar-vaṃśika,%}
{%as,%} m. superintendent of the women's apartments.
{%—Antar-vaṇa, as, ā, am,%} situated in a forest;
({%am%}), ind. within a forest. {%—Antar-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
being in the interior. {%—Antar-vatī,%} Ved. or {%antar-%}
{%vatnī,%} f. a pregnant woman. {%—Antar-vami, is,%} m.
flatulence, indigestion. {%—Antar-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} or
{%antar-vasat, an, antī, at,%} internal, included, dwelling
in. {%—Antar-vasu, us,%} m., N. of a Soma sacrifice.
{%—Antar-vastra, am,%} n. an under garment. {%—Antar-%}
{%vāṇi, is, is, i,%} skilled in sacred sciences. {%—Antar-%}
{%vāvat, ān, antī,%} or {%atī, at,%} Ved. abounding inter-
nally with precious things, hidden; ({%vat%}), ind. in-
wardly. {%—Antar-vāṣpa, as,%} m. suppressed tears;
({%as, ā, am%}), containing tears. {%—Antar-vāsas, as,%} n.
an inner or under garment. {%—Antar-vigāhana, am,%}
n. entering within. {%—Antar-vidvas, vān, uṣī,%}
{%vas,%} Ved. knowing (the paths) between (earth and
heaven); knowing exactly. {%—Antar-vega, as,%} m. in-
ternal uneasiness or anxiety; inward fever. {%—Antar-%}
{%vedi, is, is, i,%} belonging to the inside of the sacri-
ficial ground; ({%i%}), ind. within this ground; ({%is%} or {%ī%}),
f. the Doab or district between the Gaṅgā and Ya-
munā rivers. {%—Antar-veśman, a,%} n. the inner apart-
ments, the interior of a building. {%—Antar-veśmika,%}
{%as,%} m. superintendent of the women's apartments.
{%—Antar-haṇana, am,%} n. striking in the middle.
{%—Antar-hanana, as,%} m., N. of a village. {%—Antar-%}
{%hastam,%} ind. in the hand, within reach of the hand.
{%—Antar-hastīna, as, ā, am,%} being in the hand or
within reach. {%—Antar-hāsa, as,%} m. laughing inwardly;
suppressed laughter; ({%am%}), ind. with suppressed laugh.
{%—Antar-hita,%} see {%antar-dhā,%} p. 45. {%—Antar-hṛ-%}
{%daya, am,%} n. the interior of the heart. {%—Antas-tapta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} internally heated or harassed. {%—Antas-%}
{%tāpa, as,%} m. inward heat; ({%as, ā, am%}), burning
inwardly, burning with passion. {%—Antar-tuṣāra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having dew in the interior. {%—Antas-toya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} containing water. {%—Antas-patha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. going within the clefts or hollows (of moun-
tains), being on the way.
<LEND>

<L>2923<pc>0044-b<k1>antastya<k2>antastya
{%Antastya, am,%}¦ n. intestines, bowels, entrails.
<LEND>

<L>2924<pc>0044-b<k1>antara<k2>antara
{#antara#}¦ {%antara, as, ā, am,%} being in the in-
terior, interior; near, proximate, related, intimate;
lying adjacent to; distant; different from; exterior;
({%am%}), n. the interior; a hole, opening; the interior
part of a thing, the contents; soul, heart, supreme
soul; interval, intermediate space or time; period;
term; opportunity, occasion; distance, absence; dif-
ference, remainder; property, peculiarity; weakness,
weak side; representation; surety, guaranty; respect,
regard; (at the end of compounds) different, other,
another, e. g. {%deśāntaram,%} another country [cf.
Goth. <nsi>anthar,</nsi> Theme <nsi>anthara;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>antra-s,</nsi>
‘the second;’ Lat. <nsi>alter</nsi>]. {%Antaram%} or {%antara-tas,%}
ind. in the interior, within. {%—Antara-cakra, am,%} n.
a technical term in augury. {%—Antara-jña, as, ā, am,%}
knowing the interior, prudent, provident, foreseeing.
{%—Antara-tat, t, t, t%} (rt. {%tan%}), spreading death or
destruction. {%—Antara-tama, as, ā, am,%} nearest;
[Page0044-c+ 78]
immediate, intimate, internal; like, analogous; ({%as%}),
m. a congenial letter, one of the same class. {%—Antara-%}
{%tara, as, ā, am,%} nearer, more intimate. {%—Antara-%}
{%da, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dā%} for {%do%}), cutting or hurting the
interior or heart. {%—Antara-diśā,%} f. or {%antarā-diś,%}
{%k,%} f. or {%antar-deśa, as,%} m. an intermediate region or
quarter of the compass. {%—Antara-pūruṣa, as,%} m.
the internal man, the soul. {%—Antara-prabhava, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of mixed origin or caste. {%—Antara-praśna,%}
{%as,%} m. an inner question; a question which is contained
in and arises from what has been previously stated.
{%—Antara-stha, as, ā, am,%} or {%antara-sthāyin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} or {%antara-sthita, as, ā, am,%} interposed, in-
ternal, situated inside, inward; separate, apart. {%—An-%}
{%tarāpatyā (˚ra-ap˚),%} f. a pregnant woman. {%—Anta-%}
{%rābhara, as,%} m., Ved. (if fr. {%antara%} and {%ābhara%})
taking away intervals; (if fr. {%antarā%} and {%bhara%})
bringing into the midst or near; procuring.
<LEND>

<L>2925<pc>0044-c<k1>antarA<k2>antarA
{%Antarā,%}¦ ind. in the middle, in the interior, inside,
within, among, between; on the way, by the way;
in the neighbourhood, near, nearly, almost; in the
meantime, now and then; for some time; (with
acc. and loc.) between, during, without. {%—Antarāṃsa,%}
see under {%antar%}. {%—Antarā-bhava-deha, as,%} m. or
{%antarā-bhava-sattva, am,%} n. the soul in its middle
existence between death and regeneration. {%—Antarā-%}
{%vedi, is%} or {%ī,%} f. a veranda resting on columns.
{%—Antarā-śṛṅgam,%} ind. between the horns.
<LEND>

<L>2926<pc>0044-c<k1>antarIya<k2>antarIya
{%Antarīya, am,%}¦ n. an under or lower garment.
<LEND>

<L>2927<pc>0044-c<k1>antare<k2>antare
{%Antare,%}¦ ind. amidst, among, between.
<LEND>

<L>2928<pc>0044-c<k1>antareRa<k2>antareRa
{%Antareṇa,%}¦ ind. amidst, between; (with acc.) within,
between, amidst, during; except, without, with re-
gard to, with reference to, on account of.
<LEND>

<L>2929<pc>0044-c<k1>antarya<k2>antarya
{%Antarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ interior.
<LEND>

<L>2930<pc>0044-c<k1>antaraYj<k2>antaraYj
{#antaraYj#}¦ {%antar-añj,%} cl. 7. P., Ved. {%-anakti,%}
{%aṅktum, -añjitum,%} to assume, take upon one's self.
<LEND>

<L>2931<pc>0044-c<k1>antaraya<k2>antaraya
{#antaraya, antarAya#}¦, &c. See {%antar-i.%}
<LEND>

<L>2932<pc>0044-c<k1>antarAla<k2>antarAla
{#antarAla#}¦ {%antar-āla.%} See under {%antar.%}
<LEND>

<L>2933<pc>0044-c<k1>antari<k2>antari
{#antari#}¦ {%antar-i,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ayati, -etum,%} to
come between; cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -tum,%} to stand in any
one's way, to separate; to exclude from (with abl.);
to pass over, omit; to disappear: Ved., Intens. or Pass.
{%-īyate,%} to walk to and fro between (as a mediator).
<LEND>

<L>2934<pc>0044-c<k1>antaraya<k2>antaraya
{%Antar-aya, as,%}¦ m. impediment, hindrance.
<LEND>

<L>2935<pc>0044-c<k1>antarayaRa<k2>antarayaRa
{%Antar-ayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. going under, disappearing.
<LEND>

<L>2936<pc>0044-c<k1>antarAya<k2>antarAya
{%Antar-āya, as, ā, am,%}¦ going between; ({%as%}), m.
intervention, obstacle, impediment.
<LEND>

<L>2937<pc>0044-c<k1>antarita<k2>antarita
{%Antar-ita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone within, interior,
hidden, concealed, screened, shielded; departed, re-
tired, withdrawn, disappeared, vanished, perished, dead;
separated, detached; impeded, hindered; ({%am%}), n. (?)
remainder (in arithmetic); a technical term in archi-
tecture.
<LEND>

<L>2938<pc>0044-c<k1>antarikza<k2>antarikza
{#antarikza#}¦ {%antarikṣa%} or {%antarīkṣa, am,%} n.
(either fr. {%antar,%} ‘within,’ and {%īkṣ,%} ‘to see,’ or fr.
{%antari,%} loc., and {%kṣa,%} ‘dwelling within bodies;’
{%kṣa%} being fr. rt. {%kṣi%}), the intermediate space be-
tween heaven and earth; (in the Veda) the middle
of the three spheres or regions of life; the atmo-
sphere or sky; the air; talc. {%—Antarikṣa-kṣit, t,%}
{%t, t,%} dwelling in the atmosphere. {%—Antarikṣa-ga%} or
{%antarikṣa-cara, as,%} m. a bird. {%—Antarikṣa-prā,%}
{%ās, ās,%} m. f., Ved. filling the sky, irradiating the
firmament; travelling through the atmosphere (?).
{%—Antarikṣa-prut, t, t, t%} (rt. {%pru%} for {%plu%}), Ved.
floating over the atmosphere. {%—Antarikṣa-loka,%}
{%as,%} m. the intermediate region or sky as a peculiar
world. {%—Antarikṣa-saṃśita, as, ā, am,%} sharpened
in the atmosphere. {%—Antarikṣa-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved.
dwelling in the atmosphere. {%—Antarikṣa-sadya,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. residence in the atmosphere. {%—Antar-%}
{%ikṣodara (˚kṣa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} having an in-
terior as comprehensive as the atmosphere. {%—Antar-%}
{%īkṣa-ga, as, ā, am,%} going in the atmosphere; ({%as%}),
m. a bird. {%—Antarīkṣa-cara, as, ī, am,%} moving
through the atmosphere. {%—Antarīkṣa-jala%} or {%an-%}
{%tarikṣa-jala, am,%} n. the water of the atmosphere.
<LEND>

<L>2939<pc>0044-c<k1>antarikzya<k2>antarikzya
{%Antarikṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ atmospheric, aërial.
<LEND>
[Page0045-a+ 75]

<L>2940<pc>0045-a<k1>antarupAtI<k2>antarupAtI
{#antarupAtI#}¦ {%antar-upātī (-upa-ati-i),%} cl. 2.
P. {%-upātyeti, -tum,%} to enter over a threshold or
boundary.
<LEND>

<L>2941<pc>0045-a<k1>antargam<k2>antargam
{#antargam#}¦ {%antar-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go between (so as to exclude from, with
abl.); to disappear.
<LEND>

<L>2942<pc>0045-a<k1>antargata<k2>antargata
{%Antar-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%antar-gāmin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} gone between or into, being in, included in; being
in the interior, internal, hidden, secret; disappeared,
perished; slipped out of the memory, forgotten.
{%—Antargata-manas, ās, ās, as,%} whose mind is
turned inwards, engaged in deep thought, sad, per-
plexed. {%—Antargatopamā (˚ta-up˚),%} f. a concealed
simile (the particle of comparison being omitted).
<LEND>

<L>2943<pc>0045-a<k1>antargA<k2>antargA
{#antargA#}¦ {%antar-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%}
to go between, separate (so as to exclude from; with
abl.).
<LEND>

<L>2944<pc>0045-a<k1>antardfS<k2>antardfS
{#antardfS#}¦ {%antar-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-paśyati,%}
{%-draṣṭum,%} to look between or into.
<LEND>

<L>2945<pc>0045-a<k1>antarDA<k2>antarDA<h>1
{#antarDA#} 1¦. {%antar-dhā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-dhatte,%}
{%-dhātum,%} to place within, deposit; to receive within;
to hide, conceal, obscure; to hide one's self: Pass.
{%-dhīyate,%} to be received within, to be absorbed; to
be rendered invisible; to disappear, vanish; to cease:
Caus. {%-dhāpayati, -yitum,%} to render invisible, to
cause to disappear.
<LEND>

<L>2946<pc>0045-a<k1>antarDA<k2>antarDA<h>2
2. {%antar-dhā,%}¦ f. concealment, covering, disappearing.
<LEND>

<L>2947<pc>0045-a<k1>antarDAna<k2>antarDAna
{%Antar-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. disappearance, invisibility;
{%antardhānam i%} or {%gam,%} to disappear; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a son of Pṛthu. {%—Antardhāna-gata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} disappeared. {%—Antardhāna-cara, as, ī, am,%}
going invisibly.
<LEND>

<L>2948<pc>0045-a<k1>antarDApita<k2>antarDApita
{%Antar-dhāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rendered invisible.
<LEND>

<L>2949<pc>0045-a<k1>antarDAyaka<k2>antarDAyaka
{%Antar-dhāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ rendering invisible,
concealing.
<LEND>

<L>2950<pc>0045-a<k1>antarDi<k2>antarDi
{%Antar-dhi, is,%}¦ m. concealment, covering, disap-
pearance.
<LEND>

<L>2951<pc>0045-a<k1>antarhita<k2>antarhita
{%Antar-hita, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed between, separated;
covered, concealed, hidden, made invisible, vanished,
invisible; hidden from (with abl.). {%—Antar-hitāt-%}
{%man (˚ta-āt˚), ā,%} m. epithet of Śiva (‘of con-
cealed mind’).
<LEND>

<L>2952<pc>0045-a<k1>antarBU<k2>antarBU
{#antarBU#}¦ {%antar-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%}
to be (contained or inherent or implied) in.
<LEND>

<L>2953<pc>0045-a<k1>antarBava<k2>antarBava
{%Antar-bhava, as, ā, am,%}¦ being within, inward,
internal, generated internally.
<LEND>

<L>2954<pc>0045-a<k1>antarBavana<k2>antarBavana
{%Antar-bhavana, antar-bhāvanā,%}¦ See s. v. {%antar.%}
<LEND>

<L>2955<pc>0045-a<k1>antarBAva<k2>antarBAva
{%Antar-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. the being included by, in-
ternal or inherent nature or disposition.
<LEND>

<L>2956<pc>0045-a<k1>antarBAvita<k2>antarBAvita
{%Antar-bhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ included, involved, im-
plied.
<LEND>

<L>2957<pc>0045-a<k1>antarBUta<k2>antarBUta
{%Antar-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ being within, internal,
inner. {%—Antarbhūta-tva, am,%} n.; see {%antar-%}
{%bhāva.%}
<LEND>

<L>2958<pc>0045-a<k1>antarBUmi<k2>antarBUmi
{%Antar-bhūmi.%}¦ See under {%antar.%}
<LEND>

<L>2959<pc>0045-a<k1>antaScar<k2>antaScar
{#antaScar#}¦ {%antaś-car (antar-car),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-carati, -te, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-radhyai%} to move be-
tween, to move within.
<LEND>

<L>2960<pc>0045-a<k1>antaSCid<k2>antaSCid
{#antaSCid#}¦ {%antaś-chid (antar-chid),%} cl. 7. P.
{%-chinatti, -chettum,%} to cut off, to intercept.
<LEND>

<L>2961<pc>0045-a<k1>antas<k2>antas
{#antas#}¦ {%antas%} See {%antar.%}
<LEND>

<L>2962<pc>0045-a<k1>anti<k2>anti<h>1
{#anti#} 1¦. {%anti,%} ind. before, in the presence
of, near; (with gen.) within the proximity of, to
[cf. Lat. <nsi>ante,</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀντί</lang>]. {%—Anti-gṛha, am,%} n., Ved.
a house near one's own dwelling; a place before the
house, the neighbourhood of the house. {%—Anti-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very near. {%—Anti-tas,%} ind., Ved. from near.
{%—Anti-deva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being in the presence
of the gods, near the gods; playing against another,
an adversary (at dice). {%—Anti-mitra, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. near or at hand with friendship. {%—Anti-vāma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. near with wealth or loveliness.
{%—Anti-ṣad, t, t, t,%} Ved. sitting near. {%—Anti-%}
{%ṣumna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. near with happiness or
kindness. {%—Anty-ūti, is, is, i,%} Ved. near with help.
<LEND>
[Page0045-b+ 79]

<L>2963<pc>0045-b<k1>antika<k2>antika<h>1
1. {%antika, as, ā, am,%}¦ (with gen. or abl.) near, prox-
imate; compar. {%nedīyas,%} superl. {%nediṣṭha; (am),%} n.
vicinity, proximity, near, e. g. {%antika-stha,%} remaining
near; ({%am%}), ind. (with abl., gen., or as last member
of a compound) until, near to, into the presence of;
({%āt%}), ind. from the proximity; near, close by; within
the presence of; ({%e%}), ind. (with gen. or as last mem-
ber of a compound) near, close by, in the proximity
or presence of; ({%ena%}), ind. (with gen.) near.
{%—Antika-gati, is,%} f. going near. {%—Antika-tā,%} f.
nearness, vicinity, contiguity. {%—Antikāśraya (˚ka-%}
{%āś˚), as,%} m. contiguous support (as that given by a
tree to a creeper).
<LEND>

<L>2964<pc>0045-b<k1>antima<k2>antima<h>1
1. {%antima, as, ā, am,%}¦ immediately following (in
this sense a the last member of a compound, e. g.
{%daśāntima,%} ‘the eleventh’); very near.
<LEND>

<L>2965<pc>0045-b<k1>antiya<k2>antiya
{%Antiya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. near; ({%am%}), n. a proxi-
mate place.
<LEND>

<L>2966<pc>0045-b<k1>anti<k2>anti<h>2
{#anti#} 2¦. {%anti, is,%} f. an elder sister (in
theatrical language). For 1. {%anti,%} see last col.
<LEND>

<L>2967<pc>0045-b<k1>antikA<k2>antikA
{%Antikā,%}¦ f. an elder sister (in theatrical language;
perhaps a corruption of {%attikā%}); a fire-place; a plant,
Echites Scholaris.
<LEND>

<L>2968<pc>0045-b<k1>antI<k2>antI
{%Antī,%}¦ f. an oven.
<LEND>

<L>2969<pc>0045-b<k1>antika<k2>antika<h>2
{#antika#} 2¦. {%antika, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%anta%}),
reaching to the end of, reaching to (e. g. {%nāsāntika,%}
reaching to the nose), lasting till, until.
<LEND>

<L>2970<pc>0045-b<k1>antima<k2>antima<h>2
2. {%antima, as, ā, am,%}¦ final, ultimate, last. {%—Anti-%}
{%māṅka (˚ma-aṅ˚), as,%} m. the last unit, nine.
<LEND>

<L>2971<pc>0045-b<k1>antya<k2>antya
{%Antya, as, ā, am,%}¦ last in place, in time, or in
order; immediately following (used as the last mem-
ber of a compound, e. g. {%aṣṭamāntya,%} ‘the ninth’);
lowest in place or condition, undermost, inferior, be-
longing to the lowest caste; ({%as%}), m., N. of the plant
Cyperus Hexastachyus Communis; ({%am%}), n. the num-
ber 1000 billions; the twelfth sign of the zodiac;
the last member of a mathematical series. {%—Antya-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. or {%antya-kriyā,%} f. funeral rites.
{%—Antya-ja, as, ā, am,%} younger, latest born; of the
lowest caste; ({%as%}), m. a Śūdra; a man of one of
seven inferior tribes; a washerman, currier, mimic,
Varuḍa, fisherman, Meda or attendant on women, and
mountaineer or forester. {%—Antyaja-gamana, am,%}
n. intercourse (between a woman of the higher caste)
with a man of the lowest caste. {%—Antya-janman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} or {%antya-jāti, is, is, i,%} or {%antya-jātīya as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of the lowest caste. {%—Antyajā-gamana,%}
{%am,%} n. intercourse (between a man of the higher
caste) with a woman of the lowest caste. {%—Antya-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n. last member of an arithmetical series.
{%—Antya-pada%} or {%antya-mūla, am,%} n. (in arithm.)
the last or greatest root (in the square). {%—Antya-bha,%}
{%am,%} n. the last Nakṣatra (Revatī); the last sign of
the zodiac, the sign Pisces. {%—Antya-yuga, as,%} m.
the last or Kali age. {%—Antya-yoni, is,%} f. the lowest
source; ({%is, is, i%}), of the lowest origin. {%—Antya-%}
{%varṇa, as, ā,%} m. f. a man or woman of the last
tribe, a Śūdra. {%—Antya-vipulā,%} f., N. of a metre.
{%—Antyāvasāyin (˚ya-av˚), ī, inī,%} m. f. a man or
woman of low caste, the son of a Cāṇḍāla by a Ni-
ṣādī, especially one of the following classes: Cāṇ-
ḍāla, Śvapaca or executioner, Kṣattṛ, Sūta, Vaide-
haka, Māgadha or bard, and Āyogava. {%—Antyāhuti%}
{%(˚ya-āh˚), is,%} f. funeral oblation or sacrifice. {%—An-%}
{%tyeṣṭi (˚ya-iṣ˚), is,%} f. funeral sacrifice. {%—Anty-%}
{%eṣṭi-kriyā,%} f. funeral ceremonies.
<LEND>

<L>2972<pc>0045-b<k1>antyaka<k2>antyaka
{%Antyaka, as,%}¦ m. a man of the lowest tribe.
<LEND>

<L>2973<pc>0045-b<k1>antra<k2>antra
{#antra#}¦ {%antra, am,%} n. (contraction of {%antara;%}
or fr. rt. {%am?:%} Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔντερον</lang>), entrail, intestine; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a plant, either Convolvolus Argenteus or
Ipomœa Pes Capræ Roth (?). {%—Antara-kūja, as,%} m.
or {%antra-kūjana, am,%} n. or {%antra-vikūjana, am,%}
n. rumbling of the bowels. {%—Antran-dhami, is,%} f.
indigestion, inflation of the bowels from wind. {%—An-%}
{%tra-pācaka, as,%} m., N. of a plant, Æschynomene
Grandiflora. {%—Antra-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of
entrails. {%—Antra-vṛddhi, is,%} f. inguinal hernia,
rupture. {%—Antra-śilā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Antra-%}
{%sraj, k,%} f. a kind of garland worn by Nara-siṃha.
[Page0045-c+ 76]
{%—Antrāda (˚ra-ād˚), as,%} m. worms in the intes-
tines.
<LEND>

<L>2974<pc>0045-c<k1>and<k2>and
{#and#}¦ {%and,%} cl. 1. P. {%andati, -ditum,%} to
bind.
<LEND>

<L>2975<pc>0045-c<k1>anda<k2>anda
{%Anda, as,%}¦ m. binding.
<LEND>

<L>2976<pc>0045-c<k1>andu<k2>andu
{%Andu, us,%}¦ f. or {%andū, ūs,%} f. or {%anduka%} or {%an-%}
{%dūka, as,%} m. the chain for an elephant's feet; a ring
or chain worn on the ancle.
<LEND>

<L>2977<pc>0045-c<k1>andikA<k2>andikA
{#andikA#}¦ {%andikā,%} f. (for {%antikā,%} q. v.), fire-
place.
<LEND>

<L>2978<pc>0045-c<k1>andolaya<k2>andolaya
{#andolaya#}¦ {%andolaya,%} nom. P. {%andolayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to agitate, to swing.
<LEND>

<L>2979<pc>0045-c<k1>andolana<k2>andolana
{%Andolana, am,%}¦ n. swinging, oscillating.
<LEND>

<L>2980<pc>0045-c<k1>andolita<k2>andolita
{%Andolita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, swung.
<LEND>

<L>2981<pc>0045-c<k1>andraka<k2>andraka
{#andraka#}¦ {%andraka, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>2982<pc>0045-c<k1>anD<k2>anD
{#anD#}¦ {%andh,%} cl. 10. P. {%andhayati, -yitum,%}
to be or become blind.
<LEND>

<L>2983<pc>0045-c<k1>anDa<k2>anDa
{%Andha, as, ā, am,%}¦ blind; making blind, prevent-
ing the sight, dark; ({%am%}), n. darkness; turbid
water, water; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Andha-%}
{%kāra, as, am,%} m. n. darkness. {%—Andhakāra-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} dark. {%—Andhakāra-sañcaya, as,%} m.
intensity of darkness. {%—Andha-kārita, as, ā, am,%}
made dark, dark. {%—Andha-kūpa, as,%} m. a well of
which the mouth is hidden; a well over-grown with
plants, &c.; a particular hell. {%—Andhaṅ-karaṇa, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} making blind. {%—Andha-tamasa%} or {%andha-%}
{%tāmasa%} or {%andhā-tamasa, am,%} n. great darkness.
{%—Andha-tā,%} f. or {%andha-tva, am,%} n. blindness.
{%—Andha-tāmisra, as,%} m. complete darkness of
the soul; ({%am%}), n. a division of Tartarus, the second
or eighteenth of the twenty-one hells; doctrine of
annihilation after death. {%—Andha-dhī, īs, īs, i,%}
mentally blind. {%—Andha-pūtanā,%} f. a female demon
causing diseases in children. {%—Andha-mūṣā,%} f.
a small covered crucible with a hole in the side.
{%—Andha-mūṣikā,%} f., N. of a grass, Lepeocercis
Serrata. {%—Andham-bhāvuka, as, ā, am,%} or {%andha-%}
{%bhaviṣṇu, us, us, u,%} becoming blind. {%—Andha-%}
{%rātrī,%} f., Ved. dark night. {%—Andhālajī (˚dha-al˚),%}
f. a blind boil, one that does not suppurate. {%—An-%}
{%dhāhi (˚dha-ahi), is,%} or {%andhāhika, as,%} m. a blind
snake, not poisonous; ({%is, is%}), m. f., N. of a fish,
commonly called kucikā.
<LEND>

<L>2984<pc>0045-c<k1>anDaka<k2>anDaka
{%Andhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ blind; ({%as%}), m., N. of an
Asura, a son of Kaśyapa and Diti; N. of a descen-
dant of Yadu and ancestor of Kṛṣṇa and his descen-
dants; N. of a Muni. {%—Andhaka-ghātin, ī,%} m. or
{%andhaka-ripu, us,%} m. or {%andhakāri (˚ka-ari), is,%}
m. or {%andhakāsuhrid (˚ka-as˚),%} m. epithet of Śiva,
the slayer or enemy of the Asura Andhaka. {%—Andha-%}
{%ka-varta, as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Andhaka-%}
{%vṛṣṇi, ayas,%} pl. m. descendants of Andhaka and
Vṛṣṇi.
<LEND>

<L>2985<pc>0045-c<k1>anDas<k2>anDas<h>1
1. {%andhas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. darkness, obscurity.
<LEND>

<L>2986<pc>0045-c<k1>anDikA<k2>anDikA
{%Andhikā,%}¦ f. night; a kind of game, blindman's
buff; a woman of a particular character; one of the
classes of women; a disease of the eye; another dis-
ease; see {%sarṣapī.%}
<LEND>

<L>2987<pc>0045-c<k1>anDIkf<k2>anDIkf
{%Andhī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make
blind, to blind. {%—Andhī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made or
become blind. {%—Andhīkṛtātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} blinded in mind.
<LEND>

<L>2988<pc>0045-c<k1>anDIgu<k2>anDIgu
{%Andhī-gu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>2989<pc>0045-c<k1>anDIBU<k2>anDIBU
{%Andhī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to become
blind. {%—Andhī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become blind.
<LEND>

<L>2990<pc>0045-c<k1>anDas<k2>anDas<h>2
{#anDas#} 2¦. {%andha, as,%} n. (fr. rt. {%ad,%} to eat?;
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄνθος</lang>), food, Soma, ghee, boiled rice; herb in
general herb of the Soma plant, Soma juice, juice;
grassy ground. (For 1. {%andhas,%} see above.)
<LEND>

<L>2991<pc>0045-c<k1>anDu<k2>anDu
{#anDu#}¦ {%andhu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. {%am%} or {%andh?%}),
a well.
<LEND>

<L>2992<pc>0045-c<k1>anDula<k2>anDula
{#anDula#}¦ {%andhula, as,%} m., N. of a tree,
Acacia Sirissa.
<LEND>

<L>2993<pc>0045-c<k1>anDra<k2>anDra
{#anDra#}¦ {%andhra, as,%} m., N. of a people, pro-
bably modern Telingana; N. of a dynasty; a man of
[Page0046-a+ 80]
a low caste, the offspring of a Vaideha father and
Kārāvara mother, who lives by killing game. {%—An-%}
{%dhra-jāti, is,%} f. the Andhra tribe. {%—Andhra-jātīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} belonging to this tribe. {%—Andhra-%}
{%bhṛtya, ās,%} m. pl. a dynasty of the Andhras.
<LEND>

<L>2994<pc>0046-a<k1>anna<k2>anna<h>1
{#anna#} 1¦. {%anna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%at%} or {%am?%}),
the sun.
<LEND>

<L>2995<pc>0046-a<k1>anna<k2>anna<h>2
{#anna#} 2¦. {%anna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ad%}), eaten;
({%am%}), n. food or victual in general; food in a mys-
tical sense, or the lowest form in which the supreme
soul is manifested, the coarsest envelope of the su-
preme spirit; boiled rice; bread corn; Ved. water;
Viṣṇu; earth. {%—Anna-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desirous
of food. {%—Anna-kāla, as,%} m. meal-time, proper hour
for eating. {%—Anna-koṣṭhaka, as,%} m. cupboard,
granary; Viṣṇu; the sun. {%—Anna-gati, is,%} f.
the œsophagus, gullet. {%—Anna-gandhi, is,%} m. dy-
sentery, diarrhœa. {%—Anna-ja%} or {%anna-jāta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} springing from or occasioned by food as the
primitive substance. {%—Anna-jala, am,%} n. food and
water, bare subsistence. {%—Anna-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. ob-
taining food by conquest. {%—Anna-jīvana, as, ī (?),%}
{%am,%} living by food. {%—Anna-tejas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
having the vigour of food. {%—Anna-da, as, ā, am,%}
or {%anna-dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or {%anna-dāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
or {%anna-prada, as, ā, am,%} giving food; epithet of
Śiva and Durgā. {%—Anna-dāna, am,%} n. the giving
of food. {%—Anna-devatā,%} f. the divinity supposed to
preside over articles of food. {%—Anna-doṣa, as,%} m.
a fault committed by eating prohibited food. {%—Anna-%}
{%dveṣa, as,%} m. want of appetite, dislike of food.
{%—Anna-pati, is,%} m. possessor of food, an epithet of
Savitṛ, Agni, Śiva. {%—Anna-pū, ūs,%} m., Ved. puri-
fying food, epithet of the sun. {%—Anna-pūrṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} filled with or possessed of food; ({%ā%}), f. a goddess,
a form of Durgā. {%—Anna-pūrvā%} (?), f., N. of Durgā.
{%—Anna-peya, am,%} n., Ved. another name for the
Vāja-peya sacrifice. {%—Anna-pralaya, as, ā, am,%} be-
ing resolved into food or the primitive substance after
death. {%—Anna-prāśa, as,%} m. or {%anna-prāśana,%}
{%am,%} n. putting rice into a child's mouth for the first
time, after oblations to fire, a ceremony performed
between the fifth and eighth month: it is one of the
sixteen Saṃskāras mentioned in the second book of
Manu. {%—Anna-bubhukṣu, us, us, u,%} desirous of
eating food. {%—Anna-brahman, a,%} n. or {%annātman%}
{%(˚na-āt˚), ā,%} m. Brahma as represented by food.
{%—Anna-bhakṣa, as,%} m. or {%anna-bhakṣaṇa, am,%}
n. or {%anna-bhukti, is,%} f. eating of food. {%—Anna-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m., Ved. a share of food. {%—Anna-bhuj,%}
{%k, k, k,%} eating food; ({%k%}), m. an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Anna-maya, as, ī, am,%} made from food, com-
posed of food or of boiled rice; ({%am%}), n. plenty of
food. {%—Annamaya-kośa%} or {%annamaya-koṣa, as,%}
m. the gross material body, that which is sustained by
food (the sthūla-śarīra). {%—Anna-mala, am,%} n. ex-
crement; spirituous liquor. {%—Anna-rakṣā,%} f. caution
in eating food. {%—Anna-rasa, as,%} m. essence of food,
chyle; meat and drink, nutriment, taste in distin-
guishing food. {%—Anna-lipsā,%} f. desire for food, ap-
petite. {%—Anna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of food.
{%—Anna-vastra, am,%} n. food and clothing, the ne-
cessaries of life. {%—Anna-vāhi-srotas, as,%} n. the
œsophagus, gullet. {%—Anna-vikāra, as,%} m. transform-
ation of food; disorder of the stomach from indiges-
tion; the seminal secretion. {%—Anna-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved.
knowing food; possessed of food. {%—Anna-śeṣa, as,%}
m. leavings, offal. {%—Anna-saṃskāra, as,%} m. conse-
crating of food. {%—Anna-hartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} taking
away food. {%—Anna-homa, as,%} m. a sacrifice con-
nected with the Aśva-medha. {%—Annākāla,%} see
{%anākāla%}. {%—Annācchādana (˚na-ācch˚), am,%} n.
food and clothing. {%—Annāttṛ (˚na-at˚), tā,%} m. or
{%annādin (˚na-ād˚), ī, inī, i,%} eating food. {%—Annā-%}
{%da (˚na-ad˚), as, ā, am,%} eating food; ({%as%}), m., N.
of Viṣṇu. {%—Annādana (˚na-ad˚), am,%} n. eating
of food. {%—Annādya (˚na-ad˚), am,%} n. food in
general, proper food. {%—Annādya-kāma, as,%} m. de-
sirous of food. {%—Annāyu,%} or {%annāyus (˚na-āy˚), us,%}
m. living by food, desirous of food. {%—Annārthin %}
[Page0046-b+ 80]
{%(˚na-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} asking for food. {%—Annā-%}
{%vṛdh%} (final {%a%} lengthened), {%t, t, t,%} Ved. increasing
food. {%—Annāhārin (˚na-āh˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} eating food.
<LEND>

<L>2996<pc>0046-b<k1>annamBawwa<k2>annamBawwa
{#annamBawwa#}¦ {%annambhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the Tarka-saṅgraha, or compendium of the
Nyāya philosophy, especially the Vaiśeṣika branch.
<LEND>

<L>2997<pc>0046-b<k1>anya<k2>anya
{#anya#}¦ {%anya, as, ā, at%} (according to native
authorities fr. rt. {%an,%} but more probably from a pronom.
base {%a%} or {%an%}), other, different; (with abl. or as the
last member of a compound) other than, different
from opposed to; another; another person; one of
a number; {%anya anya%} or {%eka anya,%} the one, the
other [cf. Zend <nsi>anya;</nsi> Armen. <nsi>ail;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>alius;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>aljis,</nsi> Them. <nsi>alja;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄλλος</lang> for <lang n="greek">ἄλ-ϳος</lang> cf. also
<lang n="greek">ἔνιοι</lang>]. {%—Anya-kāma, as, ā, am,%} loving another.
{%—Anya-kārukā,%} f. a worm bred in excrement.
{%—Anya-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} or {%anya-kārita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} done by another. {%—Anya-kṣetra, am,%} n. an-
other territory or sphere. {%—Anya-ga, as, ā, am,%} or
{%anya-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going to another, adulterous.
{%—Anya-gotra, as, ā, am,%} of a different family.
{%—Anya-citta, as, ā, am,%} whose mind is fixed on
some one or something else. {%—Anya-codita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} moved by another. {%—Anyac-ca (˚yad-ca),%} ind.
and another, besides, moreover, on the contrary.
{%—Anya-ja%} or {%anya-jāta, as, ā, am,%} born of another
(family, &c.), of a different origin. {%—Anya-janman,%}
{%a,%} n. another birth, being born again, metempsy-
chosis. {%—Anya-tā,%} f. difference. {%—Anyat-kāma, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} desirous of something else. {%—Anyat-kṛ,%} to
make a mistake in reading, &c. {%—Anyad-artha%}
or {%anyārtha (˚ya-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having another
meaning, purpose, sense. {%—Anya-durvaha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} difficult to be borne by another. {%—Anya-devata%}
or {%anya-devatya%} or {%anya-daivata, as, ā, am,%}
having another divinity, i. e. addressed to another
divinity. {%—Anya-dharma, as,%} m. different character-
istic; characteristic of another; ({%as, ā, am,%}), having dif-
ferent characteristics. {%—Anya-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} one whose
mind is alienated (from God). {%—Anya-nābhi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} of another family. {%—Anya-para, as, ā, am,%} de-
voted to something else, zealous in something else.
{%—Anya-puṣṭa%} or {%anya-bhṛta as, ā,%} m. f. the
kokila or Indian cuckoo, supposed to be reared by
the crow. {%—Anya-pūrvā,%} f. a woman previously pro-
mised or betrothed to one and married to another.
{%—Anya-bhṛt, t,%} m. a crow (‘nourishing another;’
the crow being supposed to sit upon the eggs of the
kokila). {%—Anya-manas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%anya-ma-%}
{%naska%} or {%anya-mānasa, as, ā, am,%} one whose mind
is fixed on something else, absent, fickle, versatile;
having another mind in one's self, possessed by a
demon. {%—Anya-mātṛ-ja, as,%} m. a half-brother, who
has the same father but another mother. {%—Anya-%}
{%rājan, ā, ā, a,%} having another for king, subject to
another. {%—Anya-rāṣṭrīya, as, ā, am,%} from another
kingdom, belonging to another kingdom. {%—Anya-%}
{%rūpa, am,%} n. another form; ({%eṇa%}), in another form,
disguised; ({%as, ā, am%}), changed, altered. {%—Anya-%}
{%rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having another shape. {%—Anya-%}
{%liṅga%} or {%anya-liṅgaka, as, ā, am,%} having the
gender of another (word, viz. of the substantive), an
adjective. {%—Anya-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} having another
colour. {%—Anya-vāpa, as,%} m. the kokila or Indian
cuckoo (‘sowing for others,’ i. e. leaving his eggs in
the nests of other birds). {%—Anya-vīja-ja%} or {%anya-%}
{%vīja-samudbhava%} or {%anya-vījotpanna (˚ja-ut˚),%}
{%as,%} m. (‘born from the seed of another’), an adopted
son. {%—Anya-vrata, as,%} m., Ved. following other
(than Vedic) observances; devoted to other (gods),
infidel, unbelieving. {%—Anya-śākhaka, as,%} m. a
Brāhman who has left his school; an apostate.
{%—Anya-saṅgama, as,%} m. intercourse with another,
adulterous intercourse. {%—Anya-sādhāraṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} common to others. {%—Anya-strī-ga, as,%}
m. going to another's wife, an adulterer. {%—Anyā-%}
{%dṛkṣa, as, ā, am,%} or {%anya-dṛś, k, k, k,%} or {%anya-%}
{%dṛśa, as, ī, am,%} of another kind, like another.
{%—Anyādhīna (˚ya-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} subject to
others, dependent. {%—Anyāśrayaṇa (˚ya-āś˚), am,%}
[Page0046-c+ 81]
n. going to another (as an inheritance). {%—Anyā-%}
{%śrita (˚ya-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} gone to another.
{%—Anyāsakta (˚ya-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} intent on some-
thing else. {%—Anyāsādhāraṇa (˚ya-as˚), as, ī, am,%}
not common to another, peculiar. {%—Anyoḍhā (˚ya-%}
{%ūḍh˚),%} f. married to another, another's wife. {%—An-%}
{%yotpanna (˚ya-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} begotten by another.
{%—Anyodarya (˚ya-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} born from
another womb; ({%as%}), m. a step-mother's son.
<LEND>

<L>2998<pc>0046-c<k1>anyaka<k2>anyaka
{%Anyaka, as,%}¦ m. another, other.
<LEND>

<L>2999<pc>0046-c<k1>anyatama<k2>anyatama
{%Anya-tama, as, ā, am,%}¦ any one of many, either,
any.
<LEND>

<L>3000<pc>0046-c<k1>anyatara<k2>anyatara
{%Anya-tara, as, ā, at,%}¦ either of two, other, differ-
ent; {%anyatara anyatara,%} the one, the other;
{%anyatarasyām,%} loc. f. either way. {%—Anyatara-%}
{%tas,%} ind. on one of two sides. {%—Anyatarato-danta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having teeth on one side (only). {%—Anya-%}
{%tare-dyus,%} ind. on either of two days.
<LEND>

<L>3001<pc>0046-c<k1>anyatas<k2>anyatas
{%Anya-tas,%}¦ ind. from another; from another mo-
tive; on one side ({%anyataḥ anyataḥ,%} on the one,
on the other side); elsewhere; on the other side, on
the contrary, in one direction; towards some other
place. {%—Anyata-eta, etas, enī,%} m. f., Ved. variegated
on one side. {%—Anyataḥ-kṣṇut, t, t, t,%} Ved. sharp
on one side. {%—Anyataḥ-plakṣā,%} f., N. of a Lotus
pond in Kurukṣetra. {%—Anyato-ghātin, ī,%} m., Ved.
striking in one direction. {%—Anyato-'raṇya (˚tas-ar˚),%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. a land which is woody here and there,
or only on one side (?). {%—Anyato-vāta, as,%} m. a
certain disease of the eye.
<LEND>

<L>3002<pc>0046-c<k1>anyatastya<k2>anyatastya
{%Anyatastya, as,%}¦ m. opponent, adversary.
<LEND>

<L>3003<pc>0046-c<k1>anyatra<k2>anyatra
{%Anya-tra,%}¦ ind. (equivalent to {%anyasmin,%} loc.
of {%anya%}), elsewhere, in another place (with abl.);
on another occasion; (as last member of a comp.) at
another time than; otherwise, in another manner;
to another place; except, without [cf. Goth. <nsi>aljathrô</nsi>].
{%—Anyatra-manas, ās, ās, as,%} whose mind is di-
rected to something else, inattentive.
<LEND>

<L>3004<pc>0046-c<k1>anyaTA<k2>anyaTA
{%Anya-thā,%}¦ ind. otherwise, in a different manner
(with {%atas, itas%} or {%tatas%} = in a manner different
from this; {%anyathā anyathā,%} in one way, in another
way); inaccurately, untruly, falsely, erroneously; from
another motive; in the contrary case, otherwise [cf.
Lat. <nsi>aliuta</nsi>]. {%—Anyathā-kāra, as,%} m. doing other-
wise, changing; ({%am%}), ind. otherwise, in a different
manner. {%—Anyathā-kṛ,%} to act otherwise, alter, vio-
late (a law), destroy (a hope), &c. {%—Anyathā-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} changed. {%—Anyathā-khyāti, is,%} f. erro-
neous conception of spirit; title of a philosophical
work. {%—Anyathā-tva, am,%} n. an opposite state of the
case, difference. {%—Anyathā-bhāva, as,%} m. alteration,
difference. {%—Anyathā-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} changed.
{%—Anyathā-vādin%} or {%anya-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} speak-
ing differently; ({%ī%}), m. speaking inconsistently; (in
law) prevaricating or a prevaricator. {%—Anyathā-%}
{%vṛtti, is, is, i,%} altered, disturbed by strong emotion.
{%—Anyathā-siddha, as, ā, am,%} wrongly defined,
wrongly proved or established; effected otherwise, un-
essential. {%—Anyathāsiddha-tva, am,%} n. or {%anyathā-%}
{%siddhi, is,%} f. wrong arguing, wrong demonstration;
that demonstration in which arguments are referred
to which are not the true causes. {%—Anyathā-stotra,%}
{%am,%} n. irony. — (From {%anyathā%} comes the nom. verb
{%anyathaya,%} P. {%anyathayati, -yitum,%} to alter.)
<LEND>

<L>3005<pc>0046-c<k1>anyadA<k2>anyadA
{%Anya-dā,%}¦ ind. at another time; sometimes; one
day, once; in another case [cf. Old Slav. <nsi>inogda,</nsi>
<nsi>inŭda</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>3006<pc>0046-c<k1>anyadIya<k2>anyadIya
{%Anyadīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to another.
<LEND>

<L>3007<pc>0046-c<k1>anyarhi<k2>anyarhi
{%Anyarhi,%}¦ ind. at another time.
<LEND>

<L>3008<pc>0046-c<k1>anyedyus<k2>anyedyus
{%Anye-dyus,%}¦ ind. on the other day, on the following
day; the other day, once. {%—Anyedyuṣka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} occurring every other day, daily, diurnal; ({%as%}),
m. a quotidian fever.
<LEND>

<L>3009<pc>0046-c<k1>anyonya<k2>anyonya
{%Anyonya%}¦ or {%anyo-'nya, as, ā, am,%} one another,
mutual [this word is said to be fr. {%anyas,%} nom. sing.
m., and {%anya;%} cf. {%paraspara.%} In most cases, ac-
cordingly, it will be found that the first {%anya%} may be
regarded as the subject of the sentence, while the
latter assumes the acc., inst., gen., or loc. cases as re-
quired by the verb; there are many instances, however,
in which the first {%anya,%} originally a nominative, must
[Page0047-a+ 73]
be regarded as equivalent to an oblique case]; {%anyo-%}
{%nyam%} or {%anyonya-tas,%} ind. mutually. {%—Anyonya-%}
{%kalaha, as,%} m. mutual quarrel. {%—Anyonya-ghāta, as,%}
m. mutual conflict, killing one another. {%—Anyonya-%}
{%pakṣa-nayana, am,%} n. transposing (of numbers) from
one side to another. {%—Anyonya-bheda, as,%} m. mutual
division or enmity. {%—Anyonya-mithuna, am,%} n. mu-
tual union; ({%as%}), m. united mutually. {%—Anyonya-vi-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. mutual partition (of an inheritance). {%—A-%}
{%nyonya-vṛtti, is,%} m. mutual effect of one upon another.
{%—Anyonya-vyatikara, as,%} m. reciprocal action, re-
lation or influence. {%—Anyonya-saṃśraya, as,%} m.
reciprocal relation (of cause and effect). {%—Anyonya-%}
{%sāpekṣa, as, ā, am,%} mutually relating. {%—Anyonya-%}
{%hārābhihata (˚ra-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} (two quantities)
mutually multiplied by their denominators. {%—Anyo-%}
{%nyāpahṛta (˚ya-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} taken or secreted
from one another, taken secretly. {%—Anyonyābhāva%}
{%(˚ya-abh˚), as,%} m. mutual non-existence, mutual
negation, relative difference. {%—Anyonyāśraya (˚ya-%}
{%āś˚), as,%} m. mutual or reciprocal support, connec-
tion or dependance; mutually depending. {%—Anyo-%}
{%nyāśrita (˚ya-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} mutually supported
or depending. {%—Anyonyokti (˚ya-uk˚), is,%} f. con-
versation.
<LEND>

<L>3010<pc>0047-a<k1>anyaNga<k2>anyaNga
{#anyaNga#}¦ {%a-nyaṅga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. spotless.
{%—A-nyaṅga-śveta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. white and
without spot (as a sacrificial animal).
<LEND>

<L>3011<pc>0047-a<k1>anyacca<k2>anyacca
{#anyacca, anyatas, anyaTA, anyadA, anyonya.#}¦
See under {%anya.%}
<LEND>

<L>3012<pc>0047-a<k1>anyA<k2>anyA
{#anyA#}¦ {%a-nyā,%} f., Ved. ({%nyā%} contracted fr.
{%niyā ?%}), not drying up (as the milk of a cow ?); or
{%anyā,%} f. of {%anya,%} other (the accent being altered ?).
<LEND>

<L>3013<pc>0047-a<k1>anyAya<k2>anyAya
{#anyAya#}¦ {%a-nyāya, as,%} m. unjust or unlawful
action; impropriety, indecorum; irregularity, disor-
der. {%—Anyāya-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%anyāya-vṛtta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} acting unjustly; following evil courses.
<LEND>

<L>3014<pc>0047-a<k1>anyAyin<k2>anyAyin
{%A-nyāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ or {%a-nyāyya, as, ā, am,%} unjust,
improper, indecorous, unbecoming.
<LEND>

<L>3015<pc>0047-a<k1>anyUna<k2>anyUna
{#anyUna#}¦ {%a-nyūna, as, ā, am,%} not defective,
entire, complete. {%—A-nyūnādhika (˚na-adh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} not too little and not too much; neither de-
ficient nor excessive.
<LEND>

<L>3016<pc>0047-a<k1>anyokas<k2>anyokas
{#anyokas#}¦ {%a-ny-okas, ās, ās, as,%} not remaining
in one's own ({%okas%}) habitation.
<LEND>

<L>3017<pc>0047-a<k1>anvakza<k2>anvakza
{#anvakza#}¦ {%anv-akṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%akṣa,%}
the eye, with {%anu%}), following; ({%am%}), ind. afterwards;
immediately after; directly.
<LEND>

<L>3018<pc>0047-a<k1>anvakzarasanDi<k2>anvakzarasanDi
{#anvakzarasanDi#}¦ {%anv-akṣara-sandhi, is,%} m.
a kind of Sandhi in the Vedas, euphonic conjunction
of a vowel and consonant.
<LEND>

<L>3019<pc>0047-a<k1>anvaNgam<k2>anvaNgam
{#anvaNgam#}¦ {%anv-aṅgam,%} ind. after every
member or part.
<LEND>

<L>3020<pc>0047-a<k1>anvaYc<k2>anvaYc
{#anvaYc#}¦ {%anvañc, aṅ, ūcī, ak%} (fr. rt. {%añc%} with
{%anu%}), following the direction of another, going after,
following; lying lengthwise; {%anūci,%} loc. c. in the
rear, behind; ({%ak%}), ind. afterwards. {%—Anvag-bhā-%}
{%vam,%} ind. afterwards; friendly disposed. {%—Anvag-%}
{%bhūya,%} ind. becoming friendly disposed.
<LEND>

<L>3021<pc>0047-a<k1>anvatI<k2>anvatI
{#anvatI#}¦ {%anv-atī (anu-ati-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-atyeti,%}
{%-tum,%} to follow in crossing or passing.
<LEND>

<L>3022<pc>0047-a<k1>anvaDyAyam<k2>anvaDyAyam
{#anvaDyAyam#}¦ {%anv-adhyāyam,%} ind. according
to the chapters (especially of the Veda), according to
the sacred texts.
<LEND>

<L>3023<pc>0047-a<k1>anvaya<k2>anvaya
{#anvaya#}¦ {%anv-aya, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%i%} with
{%anu,%} see {%anv-i%}), following, succession; ({%as%}), m. con-
nection, association, being linked to or concerned
with; the natural order or connection of words in a
sentence, syntax, construing; logical connection of
words; logical connection of cause and effect, or pro-
position and conclusion; drift, tenor, purport; de-
scendants, race, lineage, family. {%—Anvaya-jña, as,%}
m. a genealogist. {%—Anvaya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
[Page0047-b+ 71]
a connection (as a consequence), following, agreeing
with; belonging to race or family. {%—Anvaya-vat,%}
ind. in connection with, in the sight of. {%—Anvaya-%}
{%vyatireka, am,%} n. a positive and negative proposition;
agreement and contrariety; species and difference;
rule and exception; logical connection and discon-
nection. {%—Anvaya-vyatirekin, ī, iṇī, i,%} (in phil.)
affirmative and negative. {%—Anvaya-vyāpti, is,%} f. an
affirmative argument.
<LEND>

<L>3024<pc>0047-b<k1>anvayin<k2>anvayin
{%Anvayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ connected (as a consequence).
{%—Anvayi-tva, am,%} n. the state of being a necessary
consequence.
<LEND>

<L>3025<pc>0047-b<k1>anvarc<k2>anvarc
{#anvarc#}¦ {%anv-arc (anu-arc),%} cl. 1. P. {%-arcati,%}
{%-citum,%} to honour with shouts or songs of jubilee.
<LEND>

<L>3026<pc>0047-b<k1>anvarj<k2>anvarj
{#anvarj#}¦ {%anv-arj (anu-arj),%} cl. 1. P. {%-arjati,%}
{%-jitum,%} to let go.
<LEND>

<L>3027<pc>0047-b<k1>anvartitf<k2>anvartitf
{#anvartitf#}¦ {%anv-artitṛ, tā,%} m. (fr. {%anu-art%}
for {%anu-arth%}), Ved. an inviter, one who allows to
take.
<LEND>

<L>3028<pc>0047-b<k1>anvarTa<k2>anvarTa
{#anvarTa#}¦ {%anv-artha, as, ā, am,%} having the
meaning obvious, intelligible, clear. {%—Anvartha-gra-%}
{%haṇa, am,%} n. the literal acceptation of the meaning
of a word (as opposed to the conventional). {%—Anvar-%}
{%tha-sañjñā,%} f. a term whose meaning is intelligible
in itself (opposed to such technical terms as {%bha,%}
{%ghu,%} &c.).
<LEND>

<L>3029<pc>0047-b<k1>anvav<k2>anvav
{#anvav#}¦ {%anv-av (anu-av),%} cl. 1. P. {%-avati,%}
{%-vitum,%} to encourage.
<LEND>

<L>3030<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavakF<k2>anvavakF
{#anvavakF#}¦ {%anv-ava-kṝ (anu-ava˚),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-kirati, -karitum%} or {%-rītum,%} to scatter or strew
about: Caus. P. {%-kīrayati, -yitum,%} to make one
scatter about.
<LEND>

<L>3031<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavakiraRa<k2>anvavakiraRa
{%Anv-avakiraṇa, am,%}¦ n. scattering about succes-
sively.
<LEND>

<L>3032<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavakram<k2>anvavakram
{#anvavakram#}¦ {%anv-ava-kram (anu-ava˚),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-krāmati, -kramitum,%} to descend or enter in
succession.
<LEND>

<L>3033<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavagA<k2>anvavagA
{#anvavagA#}¦ {%anv-ava-gā (anu-ava˚),%} cl. 3. P.
{%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to go and join another.
<LEND>

<L>3034<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavacar<k2>anvavacar
{#anvavacar#}¦ {%anv-ava-car (anu-ava˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-carati, -ritum,%} to insinuate one's self into, enter
stealthily.
<LEND>

<L>3035<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavacAra<k2>anvavacAra
{%Anv-avacāra, as,%}¦ m., Ved. descending and going
after.
<LEND>

<L>3036<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavapA<k2>anvavapA
{#anvavapA#}¦ {%anv-ava-pā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-pibati,%}
{%pātum,%} to drink after others.
<LEND>

<L>3037<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavasarga<k2>anvavasarga
{#anvavasarga#}¦ {%anv-avasarga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sṛj%}
with {%anu%} and {%ava%}), letting down, slackening;
friendly invitation; permission to do as one likes.
<LEND>

<L>3038<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavasita<k2>anvavasita
{#anvavasita#}¦ {%anv-avasita, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%si%}
with {%anu%} and {%ava%}), fastened to, bound to, attached;
see {%anuvasita.%}
<LEND>

<L>3039<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavArj<k2>anvavArj
{#anvavArj#}¦ {%anv-avārj (anu-ava-arj),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-avārjati, -jitum,%} to cause to go after or in a par-
ticular direction; to visit with anything.
<LEND>

<L>3040<pc>0047-b<k1>anvave<k2>anvave
{#anvave#}¦ {%anv-ave (anu-ava-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-avaiti,%}
{%-tum,%} to follow, walk up to or get into.
<LEND>

<L>3041<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavAya<k2>anvavAya
{%Anv-avāya, as,%}¦ m. race, lineage.
<LEND>

<L>3042<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavAyana<k2>anvavAyana
{%Anv-avāyana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. descending and going
after.
<LEND>

<L>3043<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavekz<k2>anvavekz
{#anvavekz#}¦ {%anv-avekṣ (anu-ava-īkṣ),%} cl. 1.
A. {%-avekṣate, -kṣitum,%} to look at, inspect.
<LEND>

<L>3044<pc>0047-b<k1>anvavekzA<k2>anvavekzA
{%Anv-avekṣā,%}¦ f. regard, consideration.
<LEND>

<L>3045<pc>0047-b<k1>anvaS<k2>anvaS
{#anvaS#}¦ {%anv-aś (anu-aś),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-aśnoti,%}
{%-nute, -aśitum%} or {%-aṣṭum,%} to reach, come up to,
equal.
<LEND>

<L>3046<pc>0047-b<k1>anvazwakA<k2>anvazwakA
{#anvazwakA#}¦ {%anv-aṣṭakā,%} f. the ninth day in
the latter half of the three months following the full
moon in Āgrahāyaṇa, Pauṣa, Māgha, Phālguna.
<LEND>

<L>3047<pc>0047-b<k1>anvazwakya<k2>anvazwakya
{%Anvaṣṭakya, am,%}¦ n. a Śrāddha or funeral cere-
mony performed on the Anvaṣṭakās.
<LEND>
[Page0047-c+ 69]

<L>3048<pc>0047-c<k1>anvas<k2>anvas
{#anvas#}¦ {%anv-as, (anu-as),%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-asti,%}
to be at hand, to reach.
<LEND>

<L>3049<pc>0047-c<k1>anvasta<k2>anvasta
{#anvasta#}¦ {%anv-asta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%as,%}
{%asyati%}), shot along, shot; interwoven (as in silk),
chequered.
<LEND>

<L>3050<pc>0047-c<k1>anvah<k2>anvah
{#anvah#}¦ {%anv-ah (anu-ah),%} perf. {%-āha,%} to pro-
nounce, especially a ceremonial formula (Gram. 384. <nsi>b</nsi>).
<LEND>

<L>3051<pc>0047-c<k1>anvaham<k2>anvaham
{#anvaham#}¦ {%anv-aham (anu-aham),%} ind. day
after day, every day.
<LEND>

<L>3052<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAkram<k2>anvAkram
{#anvAkram#}¦ {%anv-ā-kram (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-kramate, -mitum,%} to ascend towards or to; P.
{%-krāmati,%} to visit in succession.
<LEND>

<L>3053<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAKyA<k2>anvAKyA
{#anvAKyA#}¦ {%anv-ā-khyā (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-khyāti, -tum,%} to enumerate.
<LEND>

<L>3054<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAKyAna<k2>anvAKyAna
{%Anv-ākhyāna, am,%}¦ n. enumeration; section;
chapter.
<LEND>

<L>3055<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAgam<k2>anvAgam
{#anvAgam#}¦ {%anv-ā-gam (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to follow, come after: Desid.
{%-jigāṃsati,%} to wish or intend to follow.
<LEND>

<L>3056<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAgA<k2>anvAgA
{#anvAgA#}¦ {%anv-ā-gā (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 3. P., Ved.
{%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to follow.
<LEND>

<L>3057<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAcakz<k2>anvAcakz
{#anvAcakz#}¦ {%anv-ā-cakṣ (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 2. A.
{%-caṣṭe,%} Ved. Inf. {%-cakṣase,%} to name after.
<LEND>

<L>3058<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAcam<k2>anvAcam
{#anvAcam#}¦ {%anv-ā-cam (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-cāmati, -camitum,%} to follow in rinsing the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>3059<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAcaya<k2>anvAcaya
{#anvAcaya#}¦ {%anv-ācaya, as,%} m. (rt. {%ci%}), laying
down a rule of secondary importance after that which
is {%pradhāna%} or primary; connecting of a secondary
action with the main action (e. g. the conjunction {%ca%}
is sometimes used {%anvācaye.) — Anvācaya-śiṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} propounded as a rule or matter of secon-
dary importance.
<LEND>

<L>3060<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAcita<k2>anvAcita
{%Anv-ācita, as, ā, am,%}¦ secondary, inferior.
<LEND>

<L>3061<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAcar<k2>anvAcar
{#anvAcar#}¦ {%anv-ā-car (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-carati, -ritum,%} to follow or imitate in doing.
<LEND>

<L>3062<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAje<k2>anvAje
{#anvAje#}¦ {%anvāje%} (fr. {%anu%} and {%aj?%}), only used
in connection with rt. {%kṛ,%} e. g. {%anvāje kṛ,%} to sup-
port, aid, assist.
<LEND>

<L>3063<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAtan<k2>anvAtan
{#anvAtan#}¦ {%anv-ā-tan (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 8. P.
{%-tanoti, -nitum,%} to extend, spread; to overspread,
extend over.
<LEND>

<L>3064<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAdA<k2>anvAdA
{#anvAdA#}¦ {%anv-ā-dā (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 3. A. {%-datte,%}
{%dātum,%} to resume.
<LEND>

<L>3065<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAdiS<k2>anvAdiS
{#anvAdiS#}¦ {%anv-ā-diś (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%} to name or mention afresh; to
employ again.
<LEND>

<L>3066<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAdizwa<k2>anvAdizwa
{%Anv-ādiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ mentioned after or ac-
cording to, employed again; inferior.
<LEND>

<L>3067<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAdeSa<k2>anvAdeSa
{%Anv-ādeśa, as,%}¦ m. mentioning after, a repeated
mention, referring to what has been stated previously,
re-employment of the same word in a subsequent
part of a sentence, the employment again of the same
thing to perform a subsequent operation.
<LEND>

<L>3068<pc>0047-c<k1>anvADAna<k2>anvADAna
{#anvADAna#}¦ {%anv-ādhāna, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%dhā%}
with {%anu%} and {%ā%}), putting fuel (on the three sacred
fires), depositing.
<LEND>

<L>3069<pc>0047-c<k1>anvADi<k2>anvADi<h>1
1. {%anv-ādhi, is,%}¦ m. a bail or deposit delivered to
a third person, see {%anv-āhita%} below; a second deposit.
<LEND>

<L>3070<pc>0047-c<k1>anvADeya<k2>anvADeya
{%Anv-ādheya%}¦ or {%anv-ādheyaka, am,%} n. property
presented after marriage to the wife by her husband's
family.
<LEND>

<L>3071<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAhita<k2>anvAhita
{%Anv-āhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ deposited with a person to
be delivered ultimately to the right owner.
<LEND>

<L>3072<pc>0047-c<k1>anvADi<k2>anvADi<h>2
{#anvADi#} 2¦. {%anv-ādhi, is,%} m. (rt. {%dhyai%}),
repentance, remorse, melancholy reflection after (the
commission of a bad act).
<LEND>

<L>3073<pc>0047-c<k1>anvADya<k2>anvADya
{%Anv-ādhya, as,%}¦ m. a kind of divinity.
<LEND>

<L>3074<pc>0047-c<k1>anvAnI<k2>anvAnI
{#anvAnI#}¦ {%anv-ā-nī,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -netum,%}
to lead to, to lead along.
<LEND>
[Page0048-a+ 72]

<L>3075<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAnu<k2>anvAnu
{#anvAnu#}¦ {%anv-ā-nu,%} Intens., Ved. {%-nonavīti,%}
to sound through.
<LEND>

<L>3076<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAntrya<k2>anvAntrya
{#anvAntrya#}¦ {%anv-āntrya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being
in the entrails.
<LEND>

<L>3077<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAyatana<k2>anvAyatana
{#anvAyatana#}¦ {%anv-āyatana, as, ā, am,%} lati-
tudinal.
<LEND>

<L>3078<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAyatta<k2>anvAyatta
{#anvAyatta#}¦ {%anv-āyatta, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%yat%}
with {%ā%} and {%anu%}), Ved. following after, in accordance
with.
<LEND>

<L>3079<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAyAtyA<k2>anvAyAtyA
{#anvAyAtyA#}¦ {%anv-āyātyā,%} f. a deity invoked
by the verb {%anv-ā-yā.%}
<LEND>

<L>3080<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAraB<k2>anvAraB
{#anvAraB#}¦ {%anv-ā-rabh (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-rabhate, -rabdhum,%} to commence; to receive; to
touch.
<LEND>

<L>3081<pc>0048-a<k1>anvArabDa<k2>anvArabDa
{%Anv-ārabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ in contact with.
<LEND>

<L>3082<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAraBya<k2>anvAraBya
{%Anv-ārabhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be touched, tangible.
<LEND>

<L>3083<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAramBa<k2>anvAramBa
{%Anv-ārambha, as,%}¦ m. or {%anv-āramabhaṇa, am,%}
n. touching, contact.
<LEND>

<L>3084<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAramBaRIyA<k2>anvAramBaRIyA
{%Anv-ārambhaṇīyā,%}¦ f. an initiatory ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>3085<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAruh<k2>anvAruh
{#anvAruh#}¦ {%anv-ā-ruh (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-rohati, -roḍhum,%} to follow or join by ascending.
<LEND>

<L>3086<pc>0048-a<k1>anvArohaRa<k2>anvArohaRa
{%Anv-ārohaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (a widow's) ascending the
funeral pile after or with the body of a husband.
<LEND>

<L>3087<pc>0048-a<k1>anvArohaRIya<k2>anvArohaRIya
{%Anv-ārohaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the
Anvārohaṇa, or rite of cremation.
<LEND>

<L>3088<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAviS<k2>anvAviS
{#anvAviS#}¦ {%anv-ā-viś (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 6. P. {%-viś-%}
{%ati, -veṣṭum,%} to enter, occupy, possess, engross.
<LEND>

<L>3089<pc>0048-a<k1>anvASri<k2>anvASri
{#anvASri#}¦ {%anv-ā-śri (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-śrayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to resort to, repair, to go (or come) up to.
<LEND>

<L>3090<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAs<k2>anvAs
{#anvAs#}¦ {%anv-ās (anu-ās),%} cl. 2. A. {%-āste,%}
{%-situm,%} to follow in taking a seat; to be seated at or
near or round; to be engaged in (especially in a reli-
gious act).
<LEND>

<L>3091<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAsana<k2>anvAsana
{%Anv-āsana, am,%}¦ n. sitting down after (another),
service; regret, affliction; a place where work is done,
a manufactory, a house of industry; an unctuous or
cooling enema.
<LEND>

<L>3092<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAsita<k2>anvAsita
{%Anv-āsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to sit down after
or alongside.
<LEND>

<L>3093<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAsIna<k2>anvAsIna
{%Anv-āsīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sitting down after, seated
alongside of.
<LEND>

<L>3094<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAsyamAna<k2>anvAsyamAna
{%Anv-āsyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being accompanied by,
attended by.
<LEND>

<L>3095<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAsTA<k2>anvAsTA
{#anvAsTA#}¦ {%anv-ā-sthā (anu-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-tiṣṭhati, -sthātum,%} to go towards, to meet.
<LEND>

<L>3096<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAhArya<k2>anvAhArya
{#anvAhArya#}¦ {%anv-āhārya, as, am,%} m. n. or
{%anv-ahāryaka, am,%} n. (rt. {%hṛ%}), a certain gift
presented to the priests; ({%am%} or {%akam%}), n. the
monthly Śrāddha or funeral repast in honour of the
manes, held on the day of new moon; according
to Manu, it should be of meat eaten after the pre-
sentation of a Piṇḍa or ball or rice. {%—Anvāhārya-%}
{%pacana, as,%} m. the southern sacrificial fire, used in
the Anvāhārya sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>3097<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAhika<k2>anvAhika
{#anvAhika#}¦ {%anv-āhika, as, ī, am,%} daily, diurnal.
<LEND>

<L>3098<pc>0048-a<k1>anvAhita<k2>anvAhita
{#anvAhita#}¦ {%anv-āhita.%} See {%anv-ādhāna,%} p. 47.
<LEND>

<L>3099<pc>0048-a<k1>anvi<k2>anvi
{#anvi#}¦ {%anv-i (anu-i),%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-eti,%}
{%-tum, -tave, -tavai,%} to go after or alongside, to
follow; to seek; to be guided by; to fall to one's share.
<LEND>

<L>3100<pc>0048-a<k1>anvaya<k2>anvaya
{%Anv-aya.%}¦ See s. v., p. 47, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>3101<pc>0048-a<k1>anvita<k2>anvita
{%Anv-ita%}¦ or {%anv-īta, as, ā, am,%} joined, attended,
connected with, linked to; having as an essential or
inherent part, endowed with, possessed of, possessing;
acquired, reached by the mind, understood; follow-
ing; connected as in grammar or construction. {%—Anv-%}
{%itārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having a clear meaning
understood from the context, perspicuous.
<LEND>

<L>3102<pc>0048-a<k1>anviti<k2>anviti
{%Anv-iti, is,%}¦ f. following after; food (as the com-
panion of the body?).
<LEND>

<L>3103<pc>0048-a<k1>anvIyamAna<k2>anvIyamAna
{%Anv-īyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being followed.
<LEND>

<L>3104<pc>0048-a<k1>anviD<k2>anviD
{#anviD#}¦ {%anv-idh%} or {%anv-indh (anu-indh),%} cl.
7. or cl. 1. A. {%-inddhe%} or {%-indhate, -dhitum,%} to kindle.
<LEND>
[Page0048-b+ 73]

<L>3105<pc>0048-b<k1>anviz<k2>anviz<h>1
{#anviz#} 1¦. {%anv-iṣ (anu-iṣ),%} cl. 1. P. {%-icchati,%}
{%-eṣitum, -eṣṭum,%} to desire, seek, seek after, search,
aim at.
<LEND>

<L>3106<pc>0048-b<k1>anviz<k2>anviz<h>2
{#anviz#} 2¦. {%anv-iṣ (anu-iṣ),%} cl. 4. P. {%-iṣ-%}
{%yati, -eṣitum,%} to go after, seek, search: Caus.
{%-eṣayati, -yitum,%} to seek.
<LEND>

<L>3107<pc>0048-b<k1>anvizwa<k2>anvizwa
{%Anv-iṣṭa%}¦ or {%anv-iṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%} sought,
required.
<LEND>

<L>3108<pc>0048-b<k1>anveza<k2>anveza
{%Anv-eṣa, as,%}¦ m. or {%anv-eṣaṇa, am, ā,%} n. f.
seeking for, searching, investigating.
<LEND>

<L>3109<pc>0048-b<k1>anvezaka<k2>anvezaka
{%Anv-eṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%anv-eṣin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} or {%anv-eṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%} searching, enquiring.
<LEND>

<L>3110<pc>0048-b<k1>anvezwavya<k2>anvezwavya
{%Anv-eṣṭavya%}¦ or {%anv-eṣya, as, ā, am,%} to be
searched, to be investigated.
<LEND>

<L>3111<pc>0048-b<k1>anvIkz<k2>anvIkz
{#anvIkz#}¦ {%anv-īkṣ (anu-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%-īk-%}
{%ṣate, -ṣitum,%} to follow with one's looks, to keep
looking or gazing, to keep in view.
<LEND>

<L>3112<pc>0048-b<k1>anvIkzaRa<k2>anvIkzaRa
{%Anv-īkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. or {%anv-īkṣā,%} f. reflection,
meditation, searching.
<LEND>

<L>3113<pc>0048-b<k1>anvIpa<k2>anvIpa
{#anvIpa#}¦ {%anvīpa, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%ap,%} q. v., with
{%anu%}), near the water; or (fr. rt. {%āp%} with {%anu%}),
attainable; friendly (?).
<LEND>

<L>3114<pc>0048-b<k1>anvf<k2>anvf
{#anvf#}¦ {%anv-ṛ (anu-ṛ),%} cl. 3. P. {%-iyarti,%}
{%-artum%} or {%-aritum%} or {%-arītum%} (?), to follow; to
follow in rising.
<LEND>

<L>3115<pc>0048-b<k1>anvfcam<k2>anvfcam
{#anvfcam#}¦ {%anv-ṛcam,%} ind. verse after verse.
<LEND>

<L>3116<pc>0048-b<k1>anvfD<k2>anvfD
{#anvfD#}¦ {%anv-ṛdh (anu-ṛdh),%} cl. 6. P., Ved.
{%-ṛdhati, -ardhitum,%} to carry out, accomplish.
<LEND>

<L>3117<pc>0048-b<k1>anve<k2>anve
{#anve#}¦ {%anv-e (anu-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-aiti, -tum,%}
to come after, to follow as an adherent or attendant.
<LEND>

<L>3118<pc>0048-b<k1>ap<k2>ap
{#ap#}¦ {%ap%} (in the Vedas used in sing. and
plur., but in the classical language only in plur.), {%āpas,%}
f. water; air, the intermediate region; the star <lang n="greek">δ</lang> Virigi-
nis. Sometimes, particularly in the Vedas, the {%Āpaḥ%}
are considered as divinities. As the last member of a
compound, {%ap%} may become {%apa, īpa, ūpa.%} [Cf.
Lat. <nsi>aqua;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ahva,</nsi> ‘a river;’ Old Germ. <nsi>aha,</nsi>
and <nsi>affa</nsi> at the end of compounds; Lith. <nsi>uppê,</nsi> ‘a
river;’ perhaps Lat. <nsi>amnis,</nsi> ‘a river,’ for <nsi>apnis;</nsi> cf.
also <lang n="greek">ἀφρός</lang>]. {%—Apa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. watery.
{%—Apaḥ-saṃvarta, as,%} m. (Buddh.) destruction (of
the world) by water. {%—Apāṃ-vatsa, as,%} m., N. of a
star (‘calf of the waters’). {%—Apāṃ-napāt, t,%} or
{%apāṃ-naptṛ, tā,%} or {%apāṃ-garbha, as,%} or {%apān-%}
{%napāt,%} or {%apo-napāt, t,%} &c., m., Ved., N. of Agni
or fire as sprung from water. {%—Apāṃ-napatriya%} or
{%apāṃ-naptrīya%} or {%apo-napatriya%} or {%apo-naptrīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. relating to Agni. {%—Apāṃ-nātha,%}
{%as,%} m. the ocean. {%—Apāṃ-nidhi, is,%} m. the ocean.
{%—Apām-pati%} or {%ap-pati, is,%} m. the ocean; N. of
Varuṇa. {%—Apām-pitta%} or {%ap-pitta, am,%} n. fire; a
plant. {%—Ap-kṛtsna, am,%} n. deep meditation per-
formed by means of water. {%—Ap-cara, as,%} m. an
aquatic animal. {%—Ap-saras,%} see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>3119<pc>0048-b<k1>aptya<k2>aptya
{%Aptya, apya.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>3120<pc>0048-b<k1>apava<k2>apava
{%Apava, apsavya, apsā.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>3121<pc>0048-b<k1>apsu<k2>apsu
{%Apsu,%}¦ for words beginning thus. See {%apsu-.%}
<LEND>

<L>3122<pc>0048-b<k1>ab<k2>ab
{%Ab-,%}¦ for words beginning thus. See {%ab-indhana,%}
&c.
<LEND>

<L>3123<pc>0048-b<k1>apa<k2>apa
{#apa#}¦ {%apa,%} ind. (as a prefix to nouns and
verbs, expresses) away, off, back, (opposed to {%upa,%}
{%anu, sam, pra%}), down (opposed to {%ud%}).
<div n="P"/>When prefixed to nouns, it may sometimes = the
neg. particle {%a,%} e. g. {%apa-bhī,%} fearless; or may ex-
press deterioration, inferiority, &c., e. g. {%apa-pāṭha,%}
q. v.
<div n="P"/>(As a separable preposition or adverb, with abl.)
away from, on the outside of, without, with the ex-
ception of. It is separated only in the Vedas [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἀπό</lang> Lat. <nsi>ab;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>af;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>of</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>3124<pc>0048-b<k1>apakaruRa<k2>apakaruRa
{#apakaruRa#}¦ {%apa-karuṇa, as, ā, am,%} cruel.
<LEND>

<L>3125<pc>0048-b<k1>apakalaNka<k2>apakalaNka
{#apakalaNka#}¦ {%apa-kalaṅka, as,%} m. an indelible
disgrace, a deep stain.
<LEND>
[Page0048-c+ 75]

<L>3126<pc>0048-c<k1>apakalmaza<k2>apakalmaza
{#apakalmaza#}¦ {%apa-kalmaṣa, as, ā, am,%} stain-
less.
<LEND>

<L>3127<pc>0048-c<k1>apakaz<k2>apakaz
{#apakaz#}¦ {%apa-kaṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kaṣati, -ṣitum,%}
to scrape off.
<LEND>

<L>3128<pc>0048-c<k1>apakAma<k2>apakAma
{#apakAma#}¦ {%apa-kāma, as,%} m., Ved. aversion,
abhorrence; abominableness; deprivation of what is
dear; ({%am%}), ind. against one's liking, unwillingly.
<LEND>

<L>3129<pc>0048-c<k1>apakIrti<k2>apakIrti
{#apakIrti#}¦ {%apa-kīrti, is,%} f. infamy, disgrace.
<LEND>

<L>3130<pc>0048-c<k1>apakukzi<k2>apakukzi
{#apakukzi#}¦ {%apa-kukṣi, is,%} m. a bad or ill-
shaped belly (?). This word may also be used as a
{%Bahu-vrīhi%} and as an {%Avyayī-bhāva.%}
<LEND>

<L>3131<pc>0048-c<k1>apakuYja<k2>apakuYja
{#apakuYja#}¦ {%apa-kuñja, as,%} m., N. of a younger
brother of the serpent king Śeṣa.
<LEND>

<L>3132<pc>0048-c<k1>apakf<k2>apakf
{#apakf#}¦ {%apa-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to carry away, remove, drag away; (with
gen. or acc.) to hurt, wrong, injure (any one): Caus.
{%-kārayati, -yitum,%} to hurt, wrong.
<LEND>

<L>3133<pc>0048-c<k1>apakaraRa<k2>apakaraRa
{%Apa-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. acting improperly; doing
wrong; ill-treating, offending, injuring.
<LEND>

<L>3134<pc>0048-c<k1>apakartf<k2>apakartf
{%Apa-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ injurious, offensive, hos-
tile, inimical, an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>3135<pc>0048-c<k1>apakarman<k2>apakarman
{%Apa-karman, a,%}¦ n. discharge (of a debt); evil doing,
improper conduct, wickedness; oppression, violence;
laziness, incompetence; any impure or degrading act
or rite.
<LEND>

<L>3136<pc>0048-c<k1>apakAra<k2>apakAra
{%Apa-kāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ acting wrong, offending;
({%as%}), m. wrong, offence, injury, hurt; wickedness;
oppression, enmity. {%—Apakāra-gir, īs,%} f. or {%apa-%}
{%kāra-śabda, as,%} m. an offending or menacing speech.
{%—Apakāra-tā,%} f. wrong, offence. {%—Apakārārthin%}
{%(˚ra-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} malicious, malevolent.
<LEND>

<L>3137<pc>0048-c<k1>apakAraka<k2>apakAraka
{%Apa-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%apa-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
(with gen.) acting wrong, doing ill (to any one),
offending, injuring.
<LEND>

<L>3138<pc>0048-c<k1>apakfta<k2>apakfta
{%Apa-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ done wrong, maliciously,
offensively or wickedly committed; observed or
practised as a degrading or impure act, as servile
duties, funeral rites, &c.; ({%am%}), n. injury, offence.
<LEND>

<L>3139<pc>0048-c<k1>apakfti<k2>apakfti
{%Apa-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. oppression, wrong, injury; en-
mity, opposition; any degrading or impure act or
rite.
<LEND>

<L>3140<pc>0048-c<k1>apakftya<k2>apakftya
{%Apa-kṛtya, am,%}¦ n. damage, injury, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>3141<pc>0048-c<k1>apakriyA<k2>apakriyA
{%Apa-kriyā,%}¦ f. delivery, clearing off (debts); offence;
any impure act or rite.
<LEND>

<L>3142<pc>0048-c<k1>apakft<k2>apakft
{#apakft#}¦ {%apa-kṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛntati, -kar-%}
{%titum,%} to cut off.
<LEND>

<L>3143<pc>0048-c<k1>apakfz<k2>apakfz
{#apakfz#}¦ {%apa-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. and 6. P. A. {%-karṣ-%}
{%ati, -te, -kṛṣati, -te, -karṣṭum%} or {%-kraṣṭum,%}
to draw off or aside, drag down, carry away, take
away, remove; to omit, diminish; to put away; to
anticipate something which occurs later (as a word of
a sentence); to bend (a bow); to detract, debase,
dishonour: Caus. {%-karṣayati, -yitum,%} to remove,
diminish, detract.
<LEND>

<L>3144<pc>0048-c<k1>apakarza<k2>apakarza
{%Apa-karṣa, as,%}¦ m. drawing or dragging off or
down, detraction, deficiency, diminution, decay; low-
ering, deterioration, depression; decline, degradation,
inferiority, infamy; anticipated performance of a
duty; (in poetry) anticipation of a word occurring
later. {%—Apakarṣa-sama, as, ā,%} m. f. a sophism
in the Nyāya, e. g. ‘sound has not the quality of
shape as a jar has, therefore sound and a jar have no
qualities in common.’
<LEND>

<L>3145<pc>0048-c<k1>apakarzaka<k2>apakarzaka
{%Apa-karṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ drawing down, de-
tracting (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>3146<pc>0048-c<k1>apakarzaRa<k2>apakarzaRa
{%Apa-karṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ taking away, forcing
away, removing, diminishing; ({%am%}), n. taking
away, depriving of; drawing down; abolishing, de-
nying.
<LEND>

<L>3147<pc>0048-c<k1>apakfzwa<k2>apakfzwa
{%Apa-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn away, taken away,
removed, lost; dragged down, brought down, de-
pressed; low, vile, inferior; ({%as%}), m. a crow. {%—Apa-%}
{%kṛṣṭa-cetana, as, ā, am,%} mentally debased. {%—Apa-%}
{%kṛṣṭa-jāti, is, is, i,%} of a low tribe. {%—Apakṛṣṭa-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%apakṛṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. inferiority, vileness.
<LEND>
[Page0049-a+ 72]

<L>3148<pc>0049-a<k1>apakF<k2>apakF
{#apakF#}¦ {%apa-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -karitum,%}
{%rītum,%} to spout out, spurt, scatter; to throw down;
to scrape with the feet.
<LEND>

<L>3149<pc>0049-a<k1>apakOSalI<k2>apakOSalI
{#apakOSalI#}¦ {%apa-kauśalī,%} f. news, informa-
tion.
<LEND>

<L>3150<pc>0049-a<k1>apakti<k2>apakti
{#apakti#}¦ {%a-pakti, is,%} f. (rt. {%pac%}), immaturity;
indigestion.
<LEND>

<L>3151<pc>0049-a<k1>apakva<k2>apakva
{%A-pakva, as, ā, am,%}¦ unripe, immature; undi-
gested. {%—Apakva-tā,%} f. immaturity; incompleteness.
{%—Apakva-buddhi, is, is, i,%} of immature under-
standing. {%—Apakvāśin (˚va-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%} eating
raw, uncooked food.
<LEND>

<L>3152<pc>0049-a<k1>apakram<k2>apakram
{#apakram#}¦ {%apa-kram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krāmati,%} poet.
A. {%-kramate, -mitum,%} to go away, fly, retreat, re-
tire from; to glide away; to measure off by steps.
<LEND>

<L>3153<pc>0049-a<k1>apakrama<k2>apakrama
{%Apa-krama, as,%}¦ m. going away; passing off or
away; flight, retreat.
<LEND>

<L>3154<pc>0049-a<k1>apakramaRa<k2>apakramaRa
{%Apa-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. or {%apa-krāma, as,%} m.
passing off or away, retiring.
<LEND>

<L>3155<pc>0049-a<k1>apakramin<k2>apakramin
{%Apa-kramin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going away, retiring.
<LEND>

<L>3156<pc>0049-a<k1>apakrI<k2>apakrI
{#apakrI#}¦ {%apa-krī,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-krīṇāti, -ṇīte,%}
{%-kretum,%} to buy, purchase.
<LEND>

<L>3157<pc>0049-a<k1>apakruS<k2>apakruS
{#apakruS#}¦ {%apa-kruś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati, -kroṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to revile.
<LEND>

<L>3158<pc>0049-a<k1>apakroSa<k2>apakroSa
{%Apa-krośa, as,%}¦ m. reviling, abusing.
<LEND>

<L>3159<pc>0049-a<k1>apakza<k2>apakza
{#apakza#}¦ {%a-pakṣa, as, ā, am,%} without wings;
not on the same side or party; adverse, opposed to.
{%—Apakṣa-tā,%} f. opposition, hostility. {%—A-pakṣa-%}
{%pāta, as,%} m. impartiality.
<LEND>

<L>3160<pc>0049-a<k1>apakzi<k2>apakzi
{#apakzi#}¦ {%apa-kṣi,%} cl. 5. 9. or 1. P. {%-kṣiṇoti,%}
{%-kṣiṇāti, -kṣayati, -kṣetum,%} to destroy, anni-
hilate; bring to an end: Pass. {%-kṣīyate,%} to decline,
wane (as the moon).
<LEND>

<L>3161<pc>0049-a<k1>apakzaya<k2>apakzaya
{%Apa-kṣaya, as,%}¦ m. decline, decay, wane.
<LEND>

<L>3162<pc>0049-a<k1>apakzita<k2>apakzita
{%Apa-kṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ waned.
<LEND>

<L>3163<pc>0049-a<k1>apakzIRa<k2>apakzIRa
{%Apa-kṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ declined, decayed, di-
minished.
<LEND>

<L>3164<pc>0049-a<k1>apakzip<k2>apakzip
{#apakzip#}¦ {%apa-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣipati,%}
{%-te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw away or down, take away,
remove.
<LEND>

<L>3165<pc>0049-a<k1>apakzipta<k2>apakzipta
{%Apa-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or cast down or
away.
<LEND>

<L>3166<pc>0049-a<k1>apakzepaRa<k2>apakzepaRa
{%Apa-kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. casting away, throwing
down.
<LEND>

<L>3167<pc>0049-a<k1>apagam<k2>apagam
{#apagam#}¦ {%apa-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} to go away, depart; to give way, vanish.
<LEND>

<L>3168<pc>0049-a<k1>apaga<k2>apaga
{%Apa-ga, as, ā, am,%}¦ going away, turning away;
({%ā%}), f. a river.
<LEND>

<L>3169<pc>0049-a<k1>apagata<k2>apagata
{%Apa-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, departed, remote,
gone off; dead, diseased. {%—Apagata-vyādhi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} one who has recovered from a disease.
<LEND>

<L>3170<pc>0049-a<k1>apagama<k2>apagama
{%Apa-gama, as,%}¦ m. or {%apa-gamana, am,%} n. going
away; giving way; separation, departure, death.
<LEND>

<L>3171<pc>0049-a<k1>apagara<k2>apagara
{#apagara#}¦ {%apa-gara, as,%} m. (rt. {%gṝ%}), reviler.
<LEND>

<L>3172<pc>0049-a<k1>apagarjita<k2>apagarjita
{#apagarjita#}¦ {%apa-garjita, as, ā, am,%} thunder-
less (as a cloud).
<LEND>

<L>3173<pc>0049-a<k1>apagalBa<k2>apagalBa
{#apagalBa#}¦ {%apa-galbha, as,%} m., Ved. failing in
boldness; abortive; being on the side (not in the
middle ?); separated from the oldest by one.
<LEND>

<L>3174<pc>0049-a<k1>apagA<k2>apagA
{#apagA#}¦ {%apa-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to
go away, vanish, retire.
<LEND>

<L>3175<pc>0049-a<k1>apagur<k2>apagur
{#apagur#}¦ {%apa-gur,%} cl. 6. A. {%-gurate,%} some-
times P. {%-gurati, -ritum,%} to reject, disapprove,
threaten; to inveigh against any one; to deprive
of (?): part. of the Intens. {%apa-jargurāṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. rejecting, &c.
<LEND>

<L>3176<pc>0049-a<k1>apagAram<k2>apagAram
{%Apa-gāram%}¦ or {%apa-goram,%} ind. having raised.
<LEND>

<L>3177<pc>0049-a<k1>apaguh<k2>apaguh
{#apaguh#}¦ {%apa-guh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-gūhati, -te,%}
{%gūhitum, -goḍhum,%} to conceal, hide.
<LEND>

<L>3178<pc>0049-a<k1>apagoha<k2>apagoha
{%Apa-goha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. hiding place; secret.
<LEND>

<L>3179<pc>0049-a<k1>apagopura<k2>apagopura
{#apagopura#}¦ {%apa-gopura, as, ā, am,%} without
gates (as a town).
<LEND>
[Page0049-b+ 72]

<L>3180<pc>0049-b<k1>apagrah<k2>apagrah
{#apagrah#}¦ {%apa-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti,%}
{%-ṇīte, -grahītum,%} to take away, disjoin, tear off.
<LEND>

<L>3181<pc>0049-b<k1>apaGana<k2>apaGana
{#apaGana#}¦ {%apa-ghana, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%han%} with
{%apa%}), a limb or member, as a hand or foot.
<LEND>

<L>3182<pc>0049-b<k1>apaGAta<k2>apaGAta
{%Apa-ghāta, as,%}¦ m. striking or cutting off; ward-
ing off; killing; a violent death.
<LEND>

<L>3183<pc>0049-b<k1>apaGAtaka<k2>apaGAtaka
{%Apa-ghātaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ warding off.
<LEND>

<L>3184<pc>0049-b<k1>apaGAtin<k2>apaGAtin
{%Apa-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ murderous, killing. See
{%apa-han.%}
<LEND>

<L>3185<pc>0049-b<k1>apaNktya<k2>apaNktya
{#apaNktya#}¦ {%apaṅktya.%} See {%apāṅktya.%}
<LEND>

<L>3186<pc>0049-b<k1>apaca<k2>apaca
{#apaca#}¦ {%a-paca%} or {%a-pacamāna, as,%} m. not
cooking; not being able to cook; a bad cook.
<LEND>

<L>3187<pc>0049-b<k1>apacar<k2>apacar
{#apacar#}¦ {%apa-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -ritum,%}
to depart; to act wrongly.
<LEND>

<L>3188<pc>0049-b<k1>apacarita<k2>apacarita
{%Apa-carita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone away, departed,
dead; ({%am%}), n. fault, offence.
<LEND>

<L>3189<pc>0049-b<k1>apacAra<k2>apacAra
{%Apa-cāra, as,%}¦ m. want, absence; defect; fault,
improper conduct, offence; unwholesome or improper
regimen.
<LEND>

<L>3190<pc>0049-b<k1>apacArin<k2>apacArin
{%Apa-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ doing wrong, wicked, bad.
<LEND>

<L>3191<pc>0049-b<k1>apacAy<k2>apacAy
{#apacAy#}¦ {%apa-cāy,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-cāyati, -te,%}
{%-yitum,%} to fear; to respect, honour.
<LEND>

<L>3192<pc>0049-b<k1>apacAyita<k2>apacAyita
{%Apa-cāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured, respected.
<LEND>

<L>3193<pc>0049-b<k1>apaci<k2>apaci<h>1
{#apaci#} 1¦. {%apa-ci,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%-ciketi,%}
{%-cetum,%} to pay attention to, to respect; to invite
respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>3194<pc>0049-b<k1>apacita<k2>apacita<h>1
1. {%apa-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured, respected, sa-
luted; ({%am%}), n. honouring, esteeming.
<LEND>

<L>3195<pc>0049-b<k1>apaciti<k2>apaciti<h>1
1. {%apa-citi, is,%}¦ f. honouring, worship, reverence.
{%—Apaciti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} honoured.
<LEND>

<L>3196<pc>0049-b<k1>apaci<k2>apaci<h>2
{#apaci#} 2¦. {%apa-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -nute,%}
{%-cetum,%} to gather, collect: Pass. {%-cīyate,%} to be in-
jured in health or prosperity; to grow less; to wane;
(with abl.) to lose anything.
<LEND>

<L>3197<pc>0049-b<k1>apacaya<k2>apacaya
{%Apa-caya, as,%}¦ m. diminution, decay, decrease,
loss, privation, decline; N. of several planetary man-
sions.
<LEND>

<L>3198<pc>0049-b<k1>apacita<k2>apacita<h>2
2. {%apa-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ diminished, expended,
wasted; emaciated, thin.
<LEND>

<L>3199<pc>0049-b<k1>apaciti<k2>apaciti<h>2
2. {%apa-citi, is,%}¦ f. loss; expense; exclusion; com-
pensation; punishing; N. of a daughter of Marīci.
<LEND>

<L>3200<pc>0049-b<k1>apacI<k2>apacI
{%Apa-cī,%}¦ f. a disease consisting in an enlargement
of the glands of the neck.
<LEND>

<L>3201<pc>0049-b<k1>apacetf<k2>apacetf
{%Apa-cetṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a spendthrift.
<LEND>

<L>3202<pc>0049-b<k1>apacikIrzA<k2>apacikIrzA
{#apacikIrzA#}¦ {%apa-cikīrṣā,%} f. (rt. {%kṛ%} in
Desid.), desire of hurting any one.
<LEND>

<L>3203<pc>0049-b<k1>apacit<k2>apacit<h>1
{#apacit#} 1¦. {%apa-cit,%} Caus. P. A. {%-cetayati, -te,%}
or Ved. {%-citayati, -te, -yitum,%} to become faithless:
Desid. {%-cikitati, -te,%} to wish to leave or to abandon
any one.
<LEND>

<L>3204<pc>0049-b<k1>apacit<k2>apacit<h>2
2. {%apa-cit, t,%}¦ f., Ved. a noxious flying insect.
<LEND>

<L>3205<pc>0049-b<k1>apacCattra<k2>apacCattra
{#apacCattra#}¦ {%apa-cchattra, as, ā, am,%} not having
a parasol.
<LEND>

<L>3206<pc>0049-b<k1>apacCAya<k2>apacCAya
{#apacCAya#}¦ {%apa-cchāya, as, ā, am,%} shadowless,
having no shadow, as a deity or celestial being; hav-
ing a bad or unlucky shadow; ({%ā%}), f. an unlucky
shadow, a phantom, apparition.
<LEND>

<L>3207<pc>0049-b<k1>apacCeda<k2>apacCeda
{#apacCeda#}¦ {%apa-ccheda, as,%} m. or {%apa-cchedana,%}
{%am,%} n. (rt. {%chid%}), cutting off or away; loss; inter-
ruption.
<LEND>

<L>3208<pc>0049-b<k1>apacyu<k2>apacyu
{#apacyu#}¦ {%apa-cyu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-cyavate,%} poet. P.
{%-cyavati, -cyotum,%} to fall off, to perish, to go off,
desert, withdraw: Caus. {%-cyāvayati,%} to expel.
<LEND>

<L>3209<pc>0049-b<k1>apacyava<k2>apacyava
{%Apa-cyava, as,%}¦ m., Ved. going or coming out;
moving down (as a pestle ?).
<LEND>

<L>3210<pc>0049-b<k1>apacyuta<k2>apacyuta
{%Apa-cyuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen off, departed, gone
away, perished.
<LEND>

<L>3211<pc>0049-b<k1>apajAta<k2>apajAta
{#apajAta#}¦ {%apa-jāta, as,%} m. a bad son who
has turned out ill.
<LEND>

<L>3212<pc>0049-b<k1>apaji<k2>apaji
{#apaji#}¦ {%apa-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%} to
defeat, conquer, to ward, off, keep off or out.
<LEND>

<L>3213<pc>0049-b<k1>apajaya<k2>apajaya
{%Apa-jaya, as,%}¦ m. defeat, discomfiture, overthrow.
<LEND>
[Page0049-c+ 70]

<L>3214<pc>0049-c<k1>apajayya<k2>apajayya
{%Apa-jayya, as, ā, am,%}¦ conquerable, to be de-
feated.
<LEND>

<L>3215<pc>0049-c<k1>apajiGAMsu<k2>apajiGAMsu
{#apajiGAMsu#}¦ {%apa-jighāṃsu, us, us, u%} (fr. {%apa-%}
{%han%} in Desid.), desirous of keeping off, wishing to
avert.
<LEND>

<L>3216<pc>0049-c<k1>apajihIrzu<k2>apajihIrzu
{#apajihIrzu#}¦ {%apa-jihīrṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. {%apa-%}
{%hṛ,%} q. v., in Desid.), wishing to carry off or take away.
<LEND>

<L>3217<pc>0049-c<k1>apajYA<k2>apajYA
{#apajYA#}¦ {%apa-jñā,%} cl. 9. A. {%-jānīte, -jñātum,%}
to deny, repudiate; to dissemble, conceal; to cause
not to be recognized.
<LEND>

<L>3218<pc>0049-c<k1>apajAnAna<k2>apajAnAna
{%Apa-jānāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ denying, concealing.
<LEND>

<L>3219<pc>0049-c<k1>apaYcIkfta<k2>apaYcIkfta
{#apaYcIkfta#}¦ {%a-pañcī-kṛta, am,%} n. simple
elementary substance, not compounded of the five
({%pañcan%}) gross elements; the five subtle elements.
<LEND>

<L>3220<pc>0049-c<k1>apawAntara<k2>apawAntara
{#apawAntara#}¦ {%a-paṭāntara (˚ṭa-ant˚), as, ā, am,%}
not separated by a curtain; adjoining, contiguous.
<LEND>

<L>3221<pc>0049-c<k1>apawI<k2>apawI
{#apawI#}¦ {%apaṭī,%} f. a screen or wall of cloth,
especially the {%kanāt%} or screen surrounding a tent.
{%—Apaṭī-kṣepa%} or {%apaṭā-kṣepa, as,%} m. tossing
aside the curtain; {%apaṭī-kṣepeṇa,%} with a toss of
the curtain, precipitate entrance on the stage, indi-
cating hurry and agitation.
<LEND>

<L>3222<pc>0049-c<k1>apawu<k2>apawu
{#apawu#}¦ {%a-paṭu, us, us%} or {%vī, u,%} not clever,
awkward, uncouth; ineloquent; sick, diseased. {%—A-%}
{%paṭu-tā,%} f. or {%apaṭu-tva, am,%} n. awkwardness;
sickness.
<LEND>

<L>3223<pc>0049-c<k1>apaWa<k2>apaWa
{#apaWa#}¦ {%a-paṭha, as,%} m. unable to read, not
reading.
<LEND>

<L>3224<pc>0049-c<k1>apaRqita<k2>apaRqita
{#apaRqita#}¦ {%a-paṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} unlearned,
illiterate.
<LEND>

<L>3225<pc>0049-c<k1>apaRya<k2>apaRya
{#apaRya#}¦ {%a-paṇya, as, ā, am,%} unsaleable, un-
fit for sale.
<LEND>

<L>3226<pc>0049-c<k1>apatakz<k2>apatakz
{#apatakz#}¦ {%apa-takṣ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-takṣati,%}
{%-ṣitum%} or {%-taṣṭum,%} to chip off.
<LEND>

<L>3227<pc>0049-c<k1>apatantraka<k2>apatantraka
{#apatantraka#}¦ {%apa-tantraka, as,%} m. spasmodic
contraction of the body or stomach, emprosthotonos.
<LEND>

<L>3228<pc>0049-c<k1>apatAnaka<k2>apatAnaka
{#apatAnaka#}¦ {%apa-tānaka, as,%} m. spasmodic
contraction.
<LEND>

<L>3229<pc>0049-c<k1>apatAnakin<k2>apatAnakin
{%Apa-tānakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ affected with spasmodic
contraction.
<LEND>

<L>3230<pc>0049-c<k1>apati<k2>apati
{#apati#}¦ {%a-pati, is,%} m., Ved. not a husband
or master; ({%is, is, i%}), without a husband or master,
unmarried. {%—A-pati-ghnī,%} f. not killing the husband.
{%—Apati-tā,%} f. state of being without a husband.
{%—Apati-putra, as, ā, am,%} without a husband and
children. {%—A-pati-vratā,%} f. an unfaithful or unchaste
wife.
<LEND>

<L>3231<pc>0049-c<k1>apatika<k2>apatika
{%A-patika, as, ā, am,%}¦ without a husband.
<LEND>

<L>3232<pc>0049-c<k1>apatIrTa<k2>apatIrTa
{#apatIrTa#}¦ {%apa-tīrtha, as, am,%} m. n. a bad or
improper Tīrtha, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>3233<pc>0049-c<k1>apatfp<k2>apatfp
{#apatfp#}¦ {%apa-tṛp,%} Caus. P. {%-tarpayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to starve, cause to fast.
<LEND>

<L>3234<pc>0049-c<k1>apatarpaRa<k2>apatarpaRa
{%Apa-tarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. fasting (in sickness).
<LEND>

<L>3235<pc>0049-c<k1>apattra<k2>apattra
{#apattra#}¦ {%a-pattra, as, ā, am,%} leafless; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>3236<pc>0049-c<k1>apatnIka<k2>apatnIka
{#apatnIka#}¦ {%a-patnīka, as, ā, am,%} without a
wife.
<LEND>

<L>3237<pc>0049-c<k1>apatya<k2>apatya
{#apatya#}¦ {%apatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%apa%} or according
to native etym. fr. rt. {%pat%} with {%a,%} because a family is by
offspring prevented from falling into decay); offspring,
child, descendant; a patronymical affix. {%—Apatya-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} desirous of offspring. {%—Apatya-%}
{%jīva, as,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—Apatya-tā,%} f. state of
childhood. {%—Apatya-da, as, ā, am,%} giving offspring;
({%ā%}), f., N. of various plants. {%—Apatya-patha, as,%}
m. the vulva. {%—Apatya-prathyaya, as,%} m. a patro-
nymical affix. {%—Apatya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed
of offspring. {%—Apatya-vikrayin, ī,%} m. a seller of his
offspring; a father who receives a gratuity from his
son-in-law. {%—Apatya-śatru, us,%} m. ‘having his de-
[Page0050-a+ 73]
scendants for enemies,’ a crab (said to perish in
producing young). {%—Apatya-sāc, k, k, k,%} Ved. ac-
companied with offspring. {%—Apatyārtha-śabda (˚ya-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>3238<pc>0050-a<k1>apatrap<k2>apatrap
{#apatrap#}¦ {%apa-trap,%} cl. 1. A. or poet. P.
{%-trapate, -ti, -trapitum, -traptum,%} to be ashamed
or bashful, turn away the face.
<LEND>

<L>3239<pc>0050-a<k1>apatrapaRa<k2>apatrapaRa
{%Apa-trapaṇa, am,%}¦ n. or {%apa-trapā,%} f. bashful-
ness; embarrassment.
<LEND>

<L>3240<pc>0050-a<k1>apatrapizRu<k2>apatrapizRu
{%Apa-trapiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ bashful.
<LEND>

<L>3241<pc>0050-a<k1>apatras<k2>apatras
{#apatras#}¦ {%apa-tras,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-trasati, -syati,%}
{%-situm,%} to be deterred, to be afraid of, to flee from
in terror.
<LEND>

<L>3242<pc>0050-a<k1>apatrasta<k2>apatrasta
{%Apa-trasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ (with abl.) afraid of, flee-
ing or retiring from in terror.
<LEND>

<L>3243<pc>0050-a<k1>apaTa<k2>apaTa
{#apaTa#}¦ {%a-patha, am,%} n. not a way, absence
of a road, pathless state, irregularity, deviation;
heresy, heterodoxy; the vulva; ({%as, ā, am,%}), path-
less, roadless; ({%ā%}), f., N. of various plants. {%—Apatha-%}
{%gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going by a wrong road, pursuing
bad practices, heretical. {%—Apatha-prapanna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} out of place, in the wrong place, misapplied.
<LEND>

<L>3244<pc>0050-a<k1>apaTin<k2>apaTin
{%A-pathin, -nthās,%}¦ m. absence of road, pathless
state.
<LEND>

<L>3245<pc>0050-a<k1>apaTya<k2>apaTya
{%A-pathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfit; unsuitable; incon-
sistent; (in medic.) unwholesome as food or drink
in particular complaints. {%—Apathya-nimitta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} caused by unfit food or drink. {%—Apathya-bhuj,%}
{%k, k, k,%} eating what is forbidden.
<LEND>

<L>3246<pc>0050-a<k1>apad<k2>apad
{#apad#}¦ {%a-pad, t, t, t,%} or {%āt, āt%} or {%adī, āt,%}
Ved. footless, having no feet; going on a road which
does not exist or is unknown (?).
<LEND>

<L>3247<pc>0050-a<k1>apada<k2>apada
{%A-pada, as, ā, am,%}¦ footless; having no office;
({%as%}), m. a reptile; ({%am%}), n. no place, no abode;
the wrong place or time; ether. {%—A-pada-ruhā%}
or {%a-pada-rohiṇī,%} f., N. of a parasitical plant, Epi-
dendron Tesselloides. {%—A-pada-stha, as, ā, am,%}
out of office. {%—A-padāntara (˚da-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} not separated by a foot, adjoining, contiguous;
({%am%}), n. proximity.
<LEND>

<L>3248<pc>0050-a<k1>apadakziRam<k2>apadakziRam
{#apadakziRam#}¦ {%apa-dakṣiṇam,%} ind. away from
the right, to the left side.
<LEND>

<L>3249<pc>0050-a<k1>apadama<k2>apadama
{#apadama#}¦ {%apa-dama, as, ā, am,%} without self-
restraint; of wavering fortune.
<LEND>

<L>3250<pc>0050-a<k1>apadava<k2>apadava
{#apadava#}¦ {%apa-dava, as, ā, am,%} free from
forest-fire. {%—Apadavāpad (˚va-āp˚), t, t, t,%} free
from the calamity of fire.
<LEND>

<L>3251<pc>0050-a<k1>apadaSa<k2>apadaSa
{#apadaSa#}¦ {%apa-daśa, as, ā, am,%} (any number)
off ten.
<LEND>

<L>3252<pc>0050-a<k1>apadas<k2>apadas
{#apadas#}¦ {%apa-das,%} cl. 4. P., Ved. {%-dasyati,%}
{%-situm,%} to fail, i. e. become dry.
<LEND>

<L>3253<pc>0050-a<k1>apadah<k2>apadah
{#apadah#}¦ {%apa-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dagdhum,%}
to burn up, to burn out so as to drive out.
<LEND>

<L>3254<pc>0050-a<k1>apadAna<k2>apadAna
{#apadAna#}¦ {%apa-dāna%} or {%apa-dānaka, am,%} n.
(rt. {%dai%}), correct or pure conduct, approved occupa-
tion; a great or noble work; work well or com-
pletely done (for {%avadāna,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>3255<pc>0050-a<k1>apadArTa<k2>apadArTa
{#apadArTa#}¦ {%a-padārtha (˚da-ar˚), as,%} m. non-
entity, nothing.
<LEND>

<L>3256<pc>0050-a<k1>apadiS<k2>apadiS
{#apadiS#}¦ {%apa-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%}
to assign, to point out, indicate, betray, to pretend,
hold out as a pretext or disguise.
<LEND>

<L>3257<pc>0050-a<k1>apadiSam<k2>apadiSam
{%Apa-diśam,%}¦ ind. in an intermediate region (of
the compass), half a point.
<LEND>

<L>3258<pc>0050-a<k1>apadizwa<k2>apadizwa
{%Apa-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ assigned as a reason or
pretext.
<LEND>

<L>3259<pc>0050-a<k1>apadeSa<k2>apadeSa
{%Apa-deśa, as,%}¦ m. turning away, refusal; pretence,
feint, pretext, disguise, contrivance; the second step
in a syllogism, according to the Vaiśeṣikas, i. e. the
statement of the reason, adducing a reason or cause;
a butt or mark; place, quarter; fame, reputation.
<LEND>

<L>3260<pc>0050-a<k1>apadeSin<k2>apadeSin
{%Apa-deśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ assuming the appearance or
semblance of.
<LEND>
[Page0050-b+ 68]

<L>3261<pc>0050-b<k1>apadeSya<k2>apadeSya
{%Apa-deśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shown, to be stated.
<LEND>

<L>3262<pc>0050-b<k1>apadF<k2>apadF
{#apadF#}¦ {%apa-dṝ,%} used in part. of Intens., Ved.
{%apa-dardarat, at, atī, at,%} tearing open.
<LEND>

<L>3263<pc>0050-b<k1>apadevatA<k2>apadevatA
{#apadevatA#}¦ {%apa-devatā,%} f. an evil spirit, a
goblin.
<LEND>

<L>3264<pc>0050-b<k1>apadoza<k2>apadoza
{#apadoza#}¦ {%apa-doṣa, as, ā, am,%} free from
blame.
<LEND>

<L>3265<pc>0050-b<k1>apadravya<k2>apadravya
{#apadravya#}¦ {%apa-dravya, am,%} n. any bad thing.
<LEND>

<L>3266<pc>0050-b<k1>apadvAra<k2>apadvAra
{#apadvAra#}¦ {%apa-dvāra, am,%} n. a side-entrance
(not the regular door).
<LEND>

<L>3267<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDA<k2>apaDA
{#apaDA#}¦ {%apa-dhā,%} f., Ved. hiding, shutting up.
<LEND>

<L>3268<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDAv<k2>apaDAv
{#apaDAv#}¦ {%apa-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-vitum,%} to depart (from a previous statement), pre-
varicate.
<LEND>

<L>3269<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDUma<k2>apaDUma
{#apaDUma#}¦ {%apa-dhūma, as, ā, am,%} free from
smoke.
<LEND>

<L>3270<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDf<k2>apaDf
{#apaDf#}¦ {%apa-dhṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-dhārayati, -yitum,%}
to carry off.
<LEND>

<L>3271<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDmA<k2>apaDmA
{#apaDmA#}¦ {%apa-dhmā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhamati, -dhmā-%}
{%tum,%} to blow away or off.
<LEND>

<L>3272<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDyE<k2>apaDyE
{#apaDyE#}¦ {%apa-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati, -dhyā-%}
{%tum,%} to have a bad opinion of, to curse mentally.
<LEND>

<L>3273<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDyAna<k2>apaDyAna
{%Apa-dhyāna, am,%}¦ n. evil thoughts, wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>3274<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDvaMs<k2>apaDvaMs
{#apaDvaMs#}¦ {%apa-dhvaṃs,%} cl. 1. P., better A.,
{%-dhvaṃsati, -te, -situm,%} to scold, revile, repel; to
fall away, be degraded.
<LEND>

<L>3275<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDvaMsa<k2>apaDvaMsa
{%Apa-dhvaṃsa, as,%}¦ m. falling away, degradation,
disgrace; concealment. {%—Apadhvaṃsa-ja, as,%} m. a
man of a mixed or impure caste (whose father be-
longs to a lower caste than his mother's).
<LEND>

<L>3276<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDvaMsin<k2>apaDvaMsin
{%Apa-dhvaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ causing to fall, destroy-
ing, abolishing.
<LEND>

<L>3277<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDvasta<k2>apaDvasta
{%Apa-dhvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reviled, cursed; aban-
doned, pounded or pounded badly; ({%as%}), m. a vile
wretch lost to all sense of right.
<LEND>

<L>3278<pc>0050-b<k1>apaDvAnta<k2>apaDvAnta
{#apaDvAnta#}¦ {%apa-dhvānta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dhvan%}),
sounding wrong.
<LEND>

<L>3279<pc>0050-b<k1>apanata<k2>apanata
{#apanata#}¦ {%apa-nata, as, ā, am,%} bulging out.
<LEND>

<L>3280<pc>0050-b<k1>apanaS<k2>apanaS
{#apanaS#}¦ {%apa-naś,%} cl. 4. P. {%-naśyati, -naśi-%}
{%tum%} and {%-naṃṣṭum,%} to disappear, to away.
<LEND>

<L>3281<pc>0050-b<k1>apanasa<k2>apanasa
{#apanasa#}¦ {%apa-nasa, as, ā, am,%} without a nose.
<LEND>

<L>3282<pc>0050-b<k1>apanah<k2>apanah
{#apanah#}¦ {%apa-nah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-nahyati, -te,%}
{%-naddhum,%} to unbind; to loosen.
<LEND>

<L>3283<pc>0050-b<k1>apanAman<k2>apanAman
{#apanAman#}¦ {%apa-nāman, a,%} n. a bad name;
({%ā, ā, a%}), having a bad name.
<LEND>

<L>3284<pc>0050-b<k1>apanidra<k2>apanidra
{#apanidra#}¦ {%apa-nidra, as, ā, am,%} sleepless.
<LEND>

<L>3285<pc>0050-b<k1>apanirvARa<k2>apanirvARa
{#apanirvARa#}¦ {%apa-nirvāṇa, as, ā, am,%} not yet
extinct.
<LEND>

<L>3286<pc>0050-b<k1>apanI<k2>apanI
{#apanI#}¦ {%apa-nī,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -netum,%} to
lead away or off; to rob, steal, take or drag away;
to remove, frighten away; to put off or away (as
garments, ornaments, or fetters); to extract, take
from; to deny; to except, exclude from a rule: Desid.
{%-ninīṣati,%} to wish to remove.
<LEND>

<L>3287<pc>0050-b<k1>apanaya<k2>apanaya
{%Apa-naya, as,%}¦ m. leading away, taking away;
bad policy.
<LEND>

<L>3288<pc>0050-b<k1>apanayana<k2>apanayana
{%Apa-nayana, am,%}¦ n. taking away, withdrawing,
removing; destroying, healing; acquittance of a debt
or obligation.
<LEND>

<L>3289<pc>0050-b<k1>apanIta<k2>apanIta
{%Apa-nīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken away, removed; paid,
discharged; led away from, contradictory; badly
executed, spoiled; ({%am%}), n. imprudent or bad be-
haviour.
<LEND>

<L>3290<pc>0050-b<k1>apanetf<k2>apanetf
{%Apa-netṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a remover, taking away.
<LEND>

<L>3291<pc>0050-b<k1>apanud<k2>apanud
{#apanud#}¦ {%apa-nud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-nudati, -te,%}
{%-nottum,%} to remove.
<LEND>

<L>3292<pc>0050-b<k1>apanutti<k2>apanutti
{%Apa-nutti, is,%}¦ f. or {%apa-noda%} or {%apa-nodaka,%}
{%as,%} m. removing, taking or sending away; expiation.
<LEND>
[Page0050-c+ 67]

<L>3293<pc>0050-c<k1>apanuda<k2>apanuda
{%Apa-nuda, as, ā, am,%}¦ removing, driving away.
<LEND>

<L>3294<pc>0050-c<k1>apanunutsu<k2>apanunutsu
{%Apa-nunutsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of removing,
expiating.
<LEND>

<L>3295<pc>0050-c<k1>apanodana<k2>apanodana
{%Apa-nodana, as, ī, am,%}¦ removing, driving away;
({%am%}), n. removing, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>3296<pc>0050-c<k1>apanodya<k2>apanodya
{%Apa-nodya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be removed.
<LEND>

<L>3297<pc>0050-c<k1>apannagfha<k2>apannagfha
{#apannagfha#}¦ {%a-panna-gṛha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having an indestructible house.
<LEND>

<L>3298<pc>0050-c<k1>apapad<k2>apapad
{#apapad#}¦ {%apa-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, -pattum,%}
to escape, run away.
<LEND>

<L>3299<pc>0050-c<k1>apapAWa<k2>apapAWa
{#apapAWa#}¦ {%apa-pāṭha, as,%} m. a mistake in
reading; a wrong reading in a text.
<LEND>

<L>3300<pc>0050-c<k1>apapAtra<k2>apapAtra
{#apapAtra#}¦ {%apa-pātra, as, ā, am,%} using se-
parate vessels (from which no one else will eat); of
low caste.
<LEND>

<L>3301<pc>0050-c<k1>apapAtrita<k2>apapAtrita
{%Apa-pātrita, as,%}¦ m. a person not allowed by his
kindred to eat or drink from a common vessel; a
person who has lost his caste.
<LEND>

<L>3302<pc>0050-c<k1>apapAdatra<k2>apapAdatra
{#apapAdatra#}¦ {%apa-pādatra, as, ā, am,%} having
no protection for the feet, shoeless.
<LEND>

<L>3303<pc>0050-c<k1>apapAna<k2>apapAna
{#apapAna#}¦ {%apa-pāna, am,%} n. a bad or im-
proper drink.
<LEND>

<L>3304<pc>0050-c<k1>apapitva<k2>apapitva
{#apapitva#}¦ {%apa-pitva, am,%} n. (for {%apa-apitva,%}
fr. rt. {%āp%} or {%ap%} with {%apa%}), Ved. severance; turning
away, separation.
<LEND>

<L>3305<pc>0050-c<k1>apapUta<k2>apapUta
{#apapUta#}¦ {%apa-pūta, au,%} m. du. badly formed
buttocks; ({%as, ā, am%}), having badly formed but-
tocks.
<LEND>

<L>3306<pc>0050-c<k1>apapF<k2>apapF
{#apapF#}¦ {%apa-pṝ,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%-piparti,%} to
take away, remove.
<LEND>

<L>3307<pc>0050-c<k1>apaprajAtA<k2>apaprajAtA
{#apaprajAtA#}¦ {%apa-prajātā,%} f. a female that
has had a miscarriage.
<LEND>

<L>3308<pc>0050-c<k1>apapradAna<k2>apapradAna
{#apapradAna#}¦ {%apa-pradāna, am,%} n. a bribe.
<LEND>

<L>3309<pc>0050-c<k1>apapre<k2>apapre
{#apapre#}¦ {%apa-pre (-pra-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-praiti, -tum,%}
to go away, to withdraw.
<LEND>

<L>3310<pc>0050-c<k1>apaprozita<k2>apaprozita
{#apaprozita#}¦ {%apa-proṣita (-pra-uṣ˚,%} rt. {%vas%}),
{%am,%} n., Ved. the having departed, a wrong departure
or evil caused thereby.
<LEND>

<L>3311<pc>0050-c<k1>apabaD<k2>apabaD
{#apabaD#}¦ {%apa-badh%} or {%apa-vadh%} (defect.
verb), to repel, avert.
<LEND>

<L>3312<pc>0050-c<k1>apabarhis<k2>apabarhis
{#apabarhis#}¦ {%apa-barhis, is, is, is,%} not having
the portion constituting the Barhis.
<LEND>

<L>3313<pc>0050-c<k1>apabAD<k2>apabAD
{#apabAD#}¦ {%apa-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate,%}
{%-dhitum,%} to drive away, repel, remove.
<LEND>

<L>3314<pc>0050-c<k1>apabAhuka<k2>apabAhuka
{#apabAhuka#}¦ {%apa-bāhuka, as,%} m. a bad arm,
stiffness in the arm.
<LEND>

<L>3315<pc>0050-c<k1>apaBaya<k2>apaBaya
{#apaBaya#}¦ {%apa-bhaya, as, ā, am,%} or {%apa-bhī,%}
{%īs, īs, i,%} fearless, undaunted.
<LEND>

<L>3316<pc>0050-c<k1>apaBaraRI<k2>apaBaraRI
{#apaBaraRI#}¦ {%apa-bharaṇī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%bhṛ%} with
{%apa%}), the last lunar mansion.
<LEND>

<L>3317<pc>0050-c<k1>apaBartf<k2>apaBartf
{%Apa-bhartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. taking away, de-
stroying.
<LEND>

<L>3318<pc>0050-c<k1>apaBAz<k2>apaBAz
{#apaBAz#}¦ {%apa-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to revile.
<LEND>

<L>3319<pc>0050-c<k1>apaBAzaRa<k2>apaBAzaRa
{%Apa-bhāṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. abuse, bad words, vitu-
peration.
<LEND>

<L>3320<pc>0050-c<k1>apaBU<k2>apaBU
{#apaBU#}¦ {%apa-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%}
to be absent.
<LEND>

<L>3321<pc>0050-c<k1>apaBUti<k2>apaBUti
{%Apa-bhūti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. defect, damage.
<LEND>

<L>3322<pc>0050-c<k1>apaBraMSa<k2>apaBraMSa
{#apaBraMSa#}¦ {%apa-bhraṃśa%} or {%apa-bhraṃsa, as,%} m.
falling down or away; a bad fall; a corrupted word,
a corruption; ungrammatical language, the most
corrupt of the Prākṛt dialects. (The spelling {%apa-%}
{%bhraṃsa%} is incorrect according to some grammarians.)
<LEND>

<L>3323<pc>0050-c<k1>apaBrazwa<k2>apaBrazwa
{%Apa-bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen away, corrupted
(as a Prākṛt dialect).
<LEND>

<L>3324<pc>0050-c<k1>apama<k2>apama
{#apama#}¦ {%apama, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%apa%}), Ved. the
[Page0051-a+ 71]
most distant, the last; ({%as%}), m. the declination in
astronomy; the ecliptic. {%—Apama-kṣetra%}, see
{%krānti-kṣetra%}. {%—Apama-jyā,%} f. the sine of the
ecliptic. {%—Apama-maṇḍala%} or {%apa-maṇḍala%} or
{%apama-vṛtta, am,%} n. the ecliptic.
<LEND>

<L>3325<pc>0051-a<k1>apamanyu<k2>apamanyu
{#apamanyu#}¦ {%apa-manyu, us, us, u,%} free from
grief.
<LEND>

<L>3326<pc>0051-a<k1>apamarda<k2>apamarda
{#apamarda#}¦ {%apa-marda, as,%} m. (rt. {%mṛd%}), what
is swept away, dirt.
<LEND>

<L>3327<pc>0051-a<k1>apamarSa<k2>apamarSa
{#apamarSa#}¦ {%apa-marśa, as,%} m. (rt. {%mṛś%}), touch-
ing, grazing.
<LEND>

<L>3328<pc>0051-a<k1>apamAna<k2>apamAna
{#apamAna#}¦ {%apa-māna, as, am,%} m. n. (rt. {%man%}),
disrespect, contempt, disgrace.
<LEND>

<L>3329<pc>0051-a<k1>apamAnitra<k2>apamAnitra
{%Apa-mānitra, as, ā, am,%}¦ dishonoured, disgraced.
<LEND>

<L>3330<pc>0051-a<k1>apamAnin<k2>apamAnin
{%Apa-mānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ dishonouring, despising.
<LEND>

<L>3331<pc>0051-a<k1>apamAnya<k2>apamAnya
{%Apa-mānya, as, ā, am,%}¦ disreputable, dishonourable.
<LEND>

<L>3332<pc>0051-a<k1>apamArga<k2>apamArga
{#apamArga#}¦ {%apa-mārga, as,%} m. a by-way.
<LEND>

<L>3333<pc>0051-a<k1>apamitya<k2>apamitya<h>1
{#apamitya#} 1¦. {%apa-mitya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mi?%}),
Ved. to be thrown away; see under {%apa-me%} below.
<LEND>

<L>3334<pc>0051-a<k1>apamuKa<k2>apamuKa
{#apamuKa#}¦ {%apa-mukha, as, ā, am%} having the
face averted; having an ill-formed face or mouth;
({%am%}), ind. except or without the face, &c.
<LEND>

<L>3335<pc>0051-a<k1>apamUrDan<k2>apamUrDan
{#apamUrDan#}¦ {%apa-mūrdhan, ā, ā, a,%} headless.
<LEND>

<L>3336<pc>0051-a<k1>apamfj<k2>apamfj
{#apamfj#}¦ {%apa-mṛj,%} cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi, -mār-%}
{%jitum, -mārṣṭum,%} to wipe off, remove.
<LEND>

<L>3337<pc>0051-a<k1>apamArjana<k2>apamArjana
{%Apa-mārjana, am,%}¦ n. cleansing; shaving, paring,
chips.
<LEND>

<L>3338<pc>0051-a<k1>apamfzwa<k2>apamfzwa
{%Apa-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleansed.
<LEND>

<L>3339<pc>0051-a<k1>apamftyu<k2>apamftyu
{#apamftyu#}¦ {%apa-mṛtyu, us,%} m. sudden death,
dying by some accident, not of sickness or decay; a
great danger or illness, from which a person, contrary
to expectation, recovers.
<LEND>

<L>3340<pc>0051-a<k1>apamfzita<k2>apamfzita
{#apamfzita#}¦ {%apa-mṛṣita, as, ā, am,%} unin-
telligible (as a speech).
<LEND>

<L>3341<pc>0051-a<k1>apame<k2>apame
{#apame#}¦ {%apa-me,%} cl. 1. A. {%-mayate, -mātum,%}
to change.
<LEND>

<L>3342<pc>0051-a<k1>apamitya<k2>apamitya<h>2
2. {%apa-mitya%}¦ or {%apa-mityaka, am,%} n. debt.
<LEND>

<L>3343<pc>0051-a<k1>apayaSas<k2>apayaSas
{#apayaSas#}¦ {%apa-yaśas, as,%} n. disgrace, infamy.
{%—Apayaśas-kara, as, ī, am,%} occasioning infamy,
disgraceful.
<LEND>

<L>3344<pc>0051-a<k1>apayA<k2>apayA
{#apayA#}¦ {%apa-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%} to go
away, to depart, fall off, go over to.
<LEND>

<L>3345<pc>0051-a<k1>apayAta<k2>apayAta
{%Apa-yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone away, having retired.
<LEND>

<L>3346<pc>0051-a<k1>apayAtarvya<k2>apayAtarvya
{%Apa-yātarvya, am,%}¦ n. to be gone away (used im-
personally).
<LEND>

<L>3347<pc>0051-a<k1>apayAna<k2>apayAna
{%Apa-yāna, am,%}¦ n. retreat, flight.
<LEND>

<L>3348<pc>0051-a<k1>apayu<k2>apayu
{#apayu#}¦ {%apa-yu,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%-yuyoti,%} to
repel, disjoin.
<LEND>

<L>3349<pc>0051-a<k1>apara<k2>apara<h>1
{#apara#} 1¦. {%a-para, as, ā, am,%} having nothing
beyond or after, having no rival or superior. {%—A-%}
{%para-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having nothing following.
<LEND>

<L>3350<pc>0051-a<k1>apara<k2>apara<h>2
{#apara#} 2¦. {%apara, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%apa%}), posterior,
hinder, later, latter (opposed to {%pūrva%} and often
occuring as the first member of a comp.); following;
western; inferior, lower (opposed to {%para%}); other,
another (opposed to {%sva%}); different (with abl.); dis-
tant, opposite. Sometimes {%apara%} is used as a con-
junction to connect words or sentences, e. g. {%aparañca,%}
moreover. ({%as%}), m. the hind foot of an elephant;
({%ā%}), f. the west; the hind quarter of an elephant;
the womb; ({%ī%}), f., Ved. the future times, future;
({%am%}), n. the future; the hind quarter of an elephant;
({%am%}), ind. in future, for the future; again, more-
over; ({%eṇa%}), ind. (with acc.) behind, west, to the west
of [cf. Goth. and Old Germ. <nsi>afar;</nsi> and the Mod.
Germ. <nsi>aber,</nsi> in such words as <nsi>Aber-mal, Aber-</nsi>
<nsi>witz</nsi>]. {%—Apara-kānyakubja, as, ī, am,%} situated in
the western part of Kānyakubjā. {%—Apara-kāya, as,%}
m. the hind part of the body. {%—Apara-kāla, as,%}
m. another or later period. {%—Apara-godāna, am,%}
n. (in Buddhist cosmogony) a country west of
[Page0051-b+ 77]
the Mahā-meru. {%—Apara-ja, as,%} m., Ved. born
later, or at the end of the world (the destroying
fire). {%—Apara-jana, as,%} m. an inhabitant of the
west. {%—Apara-tā,%} f. or {%apara-tva, am,%} n. distance;
posteriority (in place or time); opposition, contra-
riety, relativeness; nearness. {%—Apara-tra,%} ind. in
another place; {%ekatra, aparatra,%} in one place, in
the other place. {%—Apara-dakṣiṇam,%} ind. south-
west. {%—Apara-nidāgha, as,%} m. the latter part of
the summer. {%—Apara-pakṣa, as,%} m. the latter half
of the month, the other or opposing side, the defend-
ant. {%—Apara-pakṣīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the
latter half of the month. {%—Apara-paricāla, ās,%} m. pl.
the western Pañcālas. {%—Apara-para, ās,%} or {%e, ās, āṇi,%}
pl. one and the other, various. {%—Apara-praṇeya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} easily led by others, tractable. {%—Apara-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. existing after, succession, continuation. {%—Apara-%}
{%rātra, as,%} m. the latter half of the night, the end of
the night, the last watch. {%—Apara-loka, am,%} n. an-
other world, paradise. {%—Apara-vaktrā,%} f. a kind of
metre of four lines, having every two lines the same.
{%—Apara-vat,%} ind. like what comes after. {%—Apara-%}
{%varṣā, ās,%} f. pl. the latter part of the rains. {%—Apara-%}
{%śarad, t,%} f. the latter part of the autumn. {%—Apara-%}
{%saktha, am,%} n. the hind thigh. {%—1. aparas-para,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one after another; continued, uniter-
rupted. {%—Apara-svastika, am,%} n. the western point
in the horizon. {%—Apara-hemanta, as, am,%} m. n.
the latter part of winter. {%—Apara-haimana, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} belonging to the latter half of the winter
season. {%—Aparāgni (˚ra-ag˚), ī,%} m. du. the {%dak-%}
{%ṣiṇa,%} i. e. southern, and gārhapatya, i. e. western
fire (of a sacrifice). {%—Aparānta (˚ra-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} living at the western border; ({%as%}), m. the west-
ern extremity, the country or the inhabitants of the
western border; the extreme end or term; death.
{%—Aparāntaka, as,%} m. the same as {%aparānta%}; N.
of a song; ({%ikā%}), f. a metre consisting of four times
sixteen mātrās. {%—Aparānta-jñāna, am,%} n. prescience
of one's latter end. {%—Aparāpara (˚ra-ap˚), ās,%} or {%e,%}
{%ās, āṇi,%} pl. another and another, various. {%—Apa-%}
{%rārka (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. the oldest known com-
mentator of Yājñavalkya's law-book. {%—Aparārka-%}
{%candrikā,%} f. the name of his comment. {%—Aparār-%}
{%dha (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. the latter, the second half.
<LEND>

<L>3351<pc>0051-b<k1>aparAhRa<k2>aparAhRa
{%Aparāhṇa (˚ra-ah˚), as,%}¦ m. afternoon, the last
watch of the day. {%—Aparāhṇatana%} or {%aparāh-%}
{%ṇetana, as, ī, am,%} belonging to or produced in the
close of the day.
<LEND>

<L>3352<pc>0051-b<k1>aparetarA<k2>aparetarA
{%Aparetarā (˚ra-it˚),%}¦ f. opposite to or other than
the west, the east.
<LEND>

<L>3353<pc>0051-b<k1>aparedyus<k2>aparedyus
{%Apare-dyus,%}¦ ind. on the following day.
<LEND>

<L>3354<pc>0051-b<k1>aparakta<k2>aparakta
{#aparakta#}¦ {%apa-rakta, as, ā, am,%} colourless,
bloodless, pale.
<LEND>

<L>3355<pc>0051-b<k1>aparati<k2>aparati
{#aparati#}¦ {%apa-rati, is,%} f. (rt. {%ram%}), stopping,
ceasing.
<LEND>

<L>3356<pc>0051-b<k1>aparava<k2>aparava
{#aparava#}¦ {%apa-rava, as,%} m. contest, dispute;
discord. {%—Aparavojjhita (˚va-uj˚), as, ā, am,%} free
from dispute, undisturbed, undisputed.
<LEND>

<L>3357<pc>0051-b<k1>aparaspara<k2>aparaspara<h>2
{#aparaspara#} 2¦. {%a-paraspara, as, ā, am,%} not re-
ciprocal, not one (by) the other. {%—A-paraspara-%}
{%sambhūta, as, ā, am,%} not produced one by the
other; or (fr. 1. {%aparas-para%} above), produced by
an uninterrupted series (?).
<LEND>

<L>3358<pc>0051-b<k1>aparAga<k2>aparAga
{#aparAga#}¦ {%apa-rāga, as,%} m. (rt. {%rañj%}), aver-
sion, antipathy, enmity.
<LEND>

<L>3359<pc>0051-b<k1>aparAc<k2>aparAc
{#aparAc#}¦ {%a-parāc, āṅ, ācī, āk,%} not averted,
i. e. fronting, in front. {%—A-parāṅ-mukha, as, ā,%} or
{%ī, am,%} with unaverted face, not turned away; pre-
senting a firm front.
<LEND>

<L>3360<pc>0051-b<k1>aparAjita<k2>aparAjita
{#aparAjita#}¦ {%a-parājita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ji%}),
unconquered, unsurpassed; ({%as%}), m. a poisonous in-
sect; Viṣṇu; Śiva; one of the eleven Rudras; a
class of divinities, constituting one portion of the so-
called Anuttara divinities of the Jainas; N. of a
sage; ({%ā%}), f. Durgā; a name applied to several
plants, Clitoria Ternatea, Marsilea Quadrifolia, Ses-
[Page0051-c+ 72]
bania Ægyptiaca; a species of the Śarkari metre of
four lines, each containing fourteen syllables. {%—Aparā-%}
{%jitā-diś, k,%} f. the north-east quarter.
<LEND>

<L>3361<pc>0051-c<k1>aparAjizRu<k2>aparAjizRu
{%A-parājiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ or {%a-parājeya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unconquerable, invincible.
<LEND>

<L>3362<pc>0051-c<k1>aparAD<k2>aparAD
{#aparAD#}¦ {%apa-rādh,%} cl. 4. or 5. P. {%-rādhyati,%}
{%rādhnoti, -rāddhum,%} to wrong (with gen.), to
offend, sin; to annoy, prohibit.
<LEND>

<L>3363<pc>0051-c<k1>aparAdDa<k2>aparAdDa
{%Apa-rāddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ sinned; criminal, guilty;
erring. {%—Aparāddha-pṛṣakta, as,%} or {%aparād-%}
{%dheṣu (˚dha-iṣ˚), us,%} m. an archer whose arrows
always miss the mark.
<LEND>

<L>3364<pc>0051-c<k1>aparAdDi<k2>aparAdDi
{%Apa-rāddhi, is,%}¦ f. wrong, mistake.
<LEND>

<L>3365<pc>0051-c<k1>aparAdDf<k2>aparAdDf
{%Apa-rāddhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ offending, an
offender.
<LEND>

<L>3366<pc>0051-c<k1>aparADa<k2>aparADa
{%Apa-rādha, as,%}¦ m. offence, transgression, fault; mis-
take; e. g. {%aparādhaṃ kṛ,%} (with gen.) to offend any
one. {%—Aparādha-bhañjana, as,%} m. the destroyer
of sin, epithet of Śiva. {%—Aparādhabhañjana-stotra,%}
{%am,%} n. a poem of Śaṅkarācārya, in praise of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>3367<pc>0051-c<k1>aparADin<k2>aparADin
{%Apa-rādhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ offending; criminal; guilty.
{%—Aparādhi-tā,%} f. or {%aparādhi-tva, am,%} n. crimi-
nality, guilt.
<LEND>

<L>3368<pc>0051-c<k1>aparAparaRa<k2>aparAparaRa
{#aparAparaRa#}¦ {%a-parāparaṇa, as,%} m. not having
descendants or offspring.
<LEND>

<L>3369<pc>0051-c<k1>aparAmfzwa<k2>aparAmfzwa
{#aparAmfzwa#}¦ {%a-parāmṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} not
touched.
<LEND>

<L>3370<pc>0051-c<k1>aparikalita<k2>aparikalita
{#aparikalita#}¦ {%a-parikalita, as, ā, am,%} un-
known, unseen.
<LEND>

<L>3371<pc>0051-c<k1>aparikrama<k2>aparikrama
{#aparikrama#}¦ {%a-parikrama, as, ā, am,%} unable
to walk round.
<LEND>

<L>3372<pc>0051-c<k1>aparikrAmam<k2>aparikrAmam
{%A-parikrāmam,%}¦ ind. without going about, standing
still.
<LEND>

<L>3373<pc>0051-c<k1>apariklinna<k2>apariklinna
{#apariklinna#}¦ {%a-pariklinna, as, ā, am,%} not
moist, not liquid, dry.
<LEND>

<L>3374<pc>0051-c<k1>aparigaRya<k2>aparigaRya
{#aparigaRya#}¦ {%a-parigaṇya, as, ā, am,%} in-
calculable.
<LEND>

<L>3375<pc>0051-c<k1>aparigata<k2>aparigata
{#aparigata#}¦ {%a-parigata, as, ā, am,%} unobtained,
unknown.
<LEND>

<L>3376<pc>0051-c<k1>aparigraha<k2>aparigraha
{#aparigraha#}¦ {%a-parigraha, as,%}  m. non-accept-
ance, renouncing; deprivation, destitution, poverty;
({%as, ā, am%}), destitute of or without attendants.
<LEND>

<L>3377<pc>0051-c<k1>aparigrAhya<k2>aparigrAhya
{%A-parigrāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfit or improper to
be accepted, not to be taken.
<LEND>

<L>3378<pc>0051-c<k1>aparicayin<k2>aparicayin
{#aparicayin#}¦ {%a-paricayin, ī, inī, i%} (rt. {%ci%}),
having no acquaintances, misanthropic.
<LEND>

<L>3379<pc>0051-c<k1>aparicita<k2>aparicita
{%A-paricita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unacquainted with, un-
known to.
<LEND>

<L>3380<pc>0051-c<k1>apariceya<k2>apariceya
{%A-pariceya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unsociable.
<LEND>

<L>3381<pc>0051-c<k1>aparicCada<k2>aparicCada
{#aparicCada#}¦ {%a-paricchada, as, ā, am,%} (rt.
{%chad%}), without retinue, not wealthy, poor.
<LEND>

<L>3382<pc>0051-c<k1>aparicCanna<k2>aparicCanna
{%A-paricchanna%}¦ or {%a-paricchādita, as, ā, am,%}
uncovered, unclothed.
<LEND>

<L>3383<pc>0051-c<k1>aparicCinna<k2>aparicCinna
{#aparicCinna#}¦ {%a-paricchinna, as, ā, am,%} with-
out interval or division, continuous, connected, un-
distinguished.
<LEND>

<L>3384<pc>0051-c<k1>aparicCeda<k2>aparicCeda
{%A-pariccheda, as,%}¦ m. want of distinction or
division; want of arrangement or order; want of
discrimination or discernment; want of judgment;
continuance.
<LEND>

<L>3385<pc>0051-c<k1>aparijyAni<k2>aparijyAni
{#aparijyAni#}¦ {%a-parijyāni, is,%} f. not growing
old; not losing; {%iṣṭāpūrtasyāparijyāni (˚ya-ap˚),%}
{%is,%} f., N. of a sacrificial ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>3386<pc>0051-c<k1>apariRayana<k2>apariRayana
{#apariRayana#}¦ {%a-pariṇayana, am,%} n. (rt. {%nī%}),
celibacy.
<LEND>

<L>3387<pc>0051-c<k1>apariRItA<k2>apariRItA
{%A-pariṇītā,%}¦ f. an unmarried woman.
<LEND>

<L>3388<pc>0051-c<k1>apariRAma<k2>apariRAma
{#apariRAma#}¦ {%a-pariṇāma, as,%} m. (rt. {%nam%}),
unchangeableness. {%—A-pariṇāma-darśin, ī, inī, i,%}
not providing for a change, improvident.
<LEND>

<L>3389<pc>0051-c<k1>apariRAmin<k2>apariRAmin
{%A-pariṇāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ unchanging.
<LEND>

<L>3390<pc>0051-c<k1>aparitoza<k2>aparitoza
{#aparitoza#}¦ {%a-paritoṣa, as, ā, am,%} unsatis-
fied, discontented.
<LEND>
[Page0052-a+ 66]

<L>3391<pc>0052-a<k1>aparipakva<k2>aparipakva
{#aparipakva#}¦ {%a-paripakva, as, ā, am,%} not quite
mature.
<LEND>

<L>3392<pc>0052-a<k1>aparipara<k2>aparipara
{#aparipara#}¦ {%a-paripara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
going by a tortuous course.
<LEND>

<L>3393<pc>0052-a<k1>aparimARa<k2>aparimARa
{#aparimARa#}¦ {%a-parimāṇa, as, ā, am,%} without
measure, immeasurable, immense.
<LEND>

<L>3394<pc>0052-a<k1>aparimita<k2>aparimita
{%A-parimita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unmeasured, unlimited,
unbounded. {%—Aparimita-guṇa-gaṇa, as, ā, am,%}
of unbounded excellences.
<LEND>

<L>3395<pc>0052-a<k1>aparimeya<k2>aparimeya
{%A-parimeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ immeasurable, illimitable.
<LEND>

<L>3396<pc>0052-a<k1>aparimlAna<k2>aparimlAna
{#aparimlAna#}¦ {%a-parimlāna, as, ā, am,%} not
withering, not decaying; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant,
Gompherena Globosa.
<LEND>

<L>3397<pc>0052-a<k1>apariyARi<k2>apariyARi
{#apariyARi#}¦ {%a-pariyāṇi, is,%} f. not walking
about (used in execrations only); a various reading
has {%a-paripāṇi.%}
<LEND>

<L>3398<pc>0052-a<k1>aparilopa<k2>aparilopa
{#aparilopa#}¦ {%a-parilopa, as,%} m. non-violation.
<LEND>

<L>3399<pc>0052-a<k1>aparivartanIya<k2>aparivartanIya
{#aparivartanIya#}¦ {%a-parivartanīya, as, ā, am,%}
not to be exchanged.
<LEND>

<L>3400<pc>0052-a<k1>aparivAdya<k2>aparivAdya
{#aparivAdya#}¦ {%a-parivādya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vad%}),
not to be reprimanded.
<LEND>

<L>3401<pc>0052-a<k1>aparivizwa<k2>aparivizwa
{#aparivizwa#}¦ {%a-pariviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
enclosed, unbounded.
<LEND>

<L>3402<pc>0052-a<k1>aparivfta<k2>aparivfta
{#aparivfta#}¦ {%a-parivṛta, as, ā, am,%} uninclosed,
unsurrounded.
<LEND>

<L>3403<pc>0052-a<k1>apariSeza<k2>apariSeza
{#apariSeza#}¦ {%a-pariśeṣa, as, ā, am,%} not leaving
a reminder, all-surrounding, all-enclosing.
<LEND>

<L>3404<pc>0052-a<k1>aparizkAra<k2>aparizkAra
{#aparizkAra#}¦ {%a-pariṣkāra, as,%} m. want of
polish or finish, moral or physical; coarseness, rude-
ness.
<LEND>

<L>3405<pc>0052-a<k1>aparizkfta<k2>aparizkfta
{%A-pariṣkṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unpolished, unadorned,
coarse, rude, morally or physically.
<LEND>

<L>3406<pc>0052-a<k1>aparisamAptika<k2>aparisamAptika
{#aparisamAptika#}¦ {%a-parisamāptika, as, ā, am%}
(rt. {%āp%} with {%pari%} and {%sam%}), not ending, endless.
<LEND>

<L>3407<pc>0052-a<k1>aparisara<k2>aparisara
{#aparisara#}¦ {%a-parisara, as, ā, am,%} non-con-
tiguous, distant.
<LEND>

<L>3408<pc>0052-a<k1>apariskanda<k2>apariskanda
{#apariskanda#}¦ {%a-pariskanda, as, ā, am,%} not
moving, motionless.
<LEND>

<L>3409<pc>0052-a<k1>apariharaRIya<k2>apariharaRIya
{#apariharaRIya#}¦ {%a-pariharaṇīya%} or {%a-pari-%}
{%hārya, as, ā, am,%} not to be avoided, inevitable;
not to be abandoned or lost; not to be degraded.
<LEND>

<L>3410<pc>0052-a<k1>aparihvfta<k2>aparihvfta
{#aparihvfta#}¦ {%a-parihvṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. un-
afflicted, not endangered; going straightforward.
<LEND>

<L>3411<pc>0052-a<k1>aparIkzita<k2>aparIkzita
{#aparIkzita#}¦ {%a-parīkṣita, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%īkṣ%}), inconsiderate; untried, unproved.
<LEND>

<L>3412<pc>0052-a<k1>aparIta<k2>aparIta
{#aparIta#}¦ {%a-parīta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%i%}), Ved.
unobstructed, irresistible; ({%as%}), m., N. of a nation.
<LEND>

<L>3413<pc>0052-a<k1>aparuza<k2>aparuza
{#aparuza#}¦ {%a-paruṣa, as, ā, am,%} not rough,
not harsh.
<LEND>

<L>3414<pc>0052-a<k1>aparUpa<k2>aparUpa
{#aparUpa#}¦ {%apa-rūpa, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} deformed,
ugly, ill-looking, ill-made, strange, odd-shaped; ({%am%}),
n. monstrosity, deformity.
<LEND>

<L>3415<pc>0052-a<k1>aparedyus<k2>aparedyus
{#aparedyus#}¦ {%aparedyus.%} See under {%apara.%}
<LEND>

<L>3416<pc>0052-a<k1>aparokza<k2>aparokza
{#aparokza#}¦ {%a-parokṣa, as, ā, am,%} not in-
visible; perceptible; ({%am%}), ind. (with gen.) in the
sight of; ({%āt%}), ind. perceptibly, manifestly.
<LEND>

<L>3417<pc>0052-a<k1>aparokzaya<k2>aparokzaya
{%Aparokṣaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%aparokṣayati, -yitum,%}
to make perceptible.
<LEND>

<L>3418<pc>0052-a<k1>aparoDa<k2>aparoDa
{#aparoDa#}¦ {%apa-rodha, as,%} m. (rt. {%rudh%}), ex-
clusion, prohibition.
<LEND>

<L>3419<pc>0052-a<k1>aparRa<k2>aparRa
{#aparRa#}¦ {%a-parṇa, as, ā, am,%} leafless; ({%ā%}), f.
N. of Durgā or Pārvatī; (the goddess not having
even leaves for food during her performance of reli-
gious austerities.)
<LEND>

<L>3420<pc>0052-a<k1>apartu<k2>apartu
{#apartu#}¦ {%apartu (apa-ṛtu), us, us, u,%} Ved.
untimely, unseasonable.
<LEND>
[Page0052-b+ 70]

<L>3421<pc>0052-b<k1>aparyanta<k2>aparyanta
{#aparyanta#}¦ {%a-paryanta, as, ā, am,%} unbounded,
unlimited.
<LEND>

<L>3422<pc>0052-b<k1>aparyApta<k2>aparyApta
{#aparyApta#}¦ {%a-paryāpta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%āp%}), in-
complete, unable, insufficient; not enough; unlimited,
unbounded.
<LEND>

<L>3423<pc>0052-b<k1>aparyAya<k2>aparyAya
{#aparyAya#}¦ {%a-paryāya, as,%} m. want of order or
method.
<LEND>

<L>3424<pc>0052-b<k1>aparvan<k2>aparvan
{#aparvan#}¦ {%a-parvan, a,%} n. no joint or point of
junction; a day which is not a {%parvan,%} i. e. a certain
day in the lunar month, as the full and change of
the moon, and the eighth and fourteenth of each
half month; ({%ā, ā, a%}), without a joint. {%—Aparva-%}
{%daṇḍa, as,%} m. a kind of sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>3425<pc>0052-b<k1>aparvaka<k2>aparvaka
{%A-parvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ jointless.
<LEND>

<L>3426<pc>0052-b<k1>apala<k2>apala<h>1
{#apala#} 1¦. {%apala, am,%} n. a pin or bolt.
<LEND>

<L>3427<pc>0052-b<k1>apala<k2>apala<h>2
{#apala#} 2¦. {%a-pala, as, ā, am,%} fleshless.
<LEND>

<L>3428<pc>0052-b<k1>apalap<k2>apalap
{#apalap#}¦ {%apa-lap,%} cl. 1. P. or poet. A.
{%-lapati, -te, -pitum,%} to explain away, to deny, re-
fuse, conceal; to detract from slander; Caus. A.
{%-lāpayate, -yitum,%} to outwit.
<LEND>

<L>3429<pc>0052-b<k1>apalapana<k2>apalapana
{%Apa-lapana, am,%}¦ n. or {%apa-lāpa, as,%} m. denial
or concealment of knowledge, evasion, turning off
the truth, detraction; concealing, hiding; affection,
regard; (in medic.) the part between the shoulder
and the ribs. {%—Apalāpa-daṇḍa, as,%} m. (in law) a
fine laid on one who denies his conviction.
<LEND>

<L>3430<pc>0052-b<k1>apalapita<k2>apalapita
{%Apa-lapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ denied, concealed.
<LEND>

<L>3431<pc>0052-b<k1>apalApin<k2>apalApin
{%Apa-lāpin. ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who denies, evades;
concealing (with the object in the gen. case).
<LEND>

<L>3432<pc>0052-b<k1>apalAla<k2>apalAla
{#apalAla#}¦ {%a-palāla, as,%} m., N. of a Rakṣas
or of a Nāga (‘not fond of flesh?’).
<LEND>

<L>3433<pc>0052-b<k1>apalASa<k2>apalASa
{#apalASa#}¦ {%a-palāśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. leafless.
<LEND>

<L>3434<pc>0052-b<k1>apalAzikA<k2>apalAzikA
{#apalAzikA#}¦ {%apa-lāṣikā%} or {%apa-lāsikā,%} f.
thirst.
<LEND>

<L>3435<pc>0052-b<k1>apalAzin<k2>apalAzin
{%Apa-lāṣin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ or {%apa-lāṣuka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} thirsty; free from desire.
<LEND>

<L>3436<pc>0052-b<k1>apalita<k2>apalita
{#apalita#}¦ {%a-palita, as, ā, am,%} not grey.
<LEND>

<L>3437<pc>0052-b<k1>apalup<k2>apalup
{#apalup#}¦ {%apa-lup,%} used in the acc. case
{%apa-lupam%} as Ved. inf. of the verb {%apa-lup,%} to
cut off.
<LEND>

<L>3438<pc>0052-b<k1>apalyUlanakfta<k2>apalyUlanakfta
{#apalyUlanakfta#}¦ {%a-palyūlana-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
not cleaned by cleansing substances. Some read
{%palpūlana.%}
<LEND>

<L>3439<pc>0052-b<k1>apavaktf<k2>apavaktf
{#apavaktf#}¦ {%apa-vaktṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. speaking
away, i. e. warning off, averting.
<LEND>

<L>3440<pc>0052-b<k1>apavAcana<k2>apavAcana
{%Apa-vācana, am,%}¦ n. the act of speaking away or
warning off, removing.
<LEND>

<L>3441<pc>0052-b<k1>apavad<k2>apavad
{#apavad#}¦ {%apa-vad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vadati, -te,%}
{%-ditum,%} to revile, abuse; (A. only) to disown, deny,
contradict: Caus. {%-vādayati, -yitum,%} to oppose as
unadvisable.
<LEND>

<L>3442<pc>0052-b<k1>apavadamAna<k2>apavadamAna
{%Apa-vadamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ (with dat.) reviling.
<LEND>

<L>3443<pc>0052-b<k1>apavaditf<k2>apavaditf
{%Apa-vaditṛ.%}¦ See {%apa-vaktṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>3444<pc>0052-b<k1>apavAda<k2>apavAda
{%Apa-vāda, as,%}¦ m. evil speaking, reviling, blam-
ing (with the gen.); denial, refutation, contradiction;
a special rule setting aside a general one; exception
(opposed to {%utsarga%}); order, command. {%—Apavāda-%}
{%pratyaya, as,%} m. an exceptional affix. {%—Apavāda-%}
{%sthala, am,%} n. case for a special rule or exception.
<LEND>

<L>3445<pc>0052-b<k1>apavAdaka<k2>apavAdaka
{%Apa-vādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%apa-vādin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} reviling, blaming, defaming; opposing, objecting
to; excepting, excluding.
<LEND>

<L>3446<pc>0052-b<k1>apavAdita<k2>apavAdita
{%Apa-vādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ blamed, censured; opposed,
objected to.
<LEND>

<L>3447<pc>0052-b<k1>apavAdya<k2>apavAdya
{%Apa-vādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be censured; to be
excepted.
<LEND>

<L>3448<pc>0052-b<k1>apavaD<k2>apavaD
{#apavaD#}¦ {%apa-vadh%} (defective in most of its
tenses, see {%vadh%}), to repel, avert.
<LEND>

<L>3449<pc>0052-b<k1>apavana<k2>apavana<h>1
{#apavana#} 1¦. {%a-pavana, as, ā, am,%} without air,
sheltered from wind.
<LEND>
[Page0052-c+ 70]

<L>3450<pc>0052-c<k1>apavana<k2>apavana<h>2
{#apavana#} 2¦. {%apa-vana, am,%} n. a grove.
<LEND>

<L>3451<pc>0052-c<k1>apavaraka<k2>apavaraka
{#apavaraka#}¦ {%apa-varaka, apa-varaṇa, apa-%}
{%vāraṇa.%} See {%apa-vṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>3452<pc>0052-c<k1>apavarga<k2>apavarga
{#apavarga#}¦ {%apa-varga, apa-varjita.%} See {%apa-%}
{%vṛji%} below.
<LEND>

<L>3453<pc>0052-c<k1>apavarta<k2>apavarta
{#apavarta#}¦ {%apa-varta,%} &c. See under {%apa-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>3454<pc>0052-c<k1>apavah<k2>apavah
{#apavah#}¦ {%apa-vah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vahati, -voḍhum,%}
to carry off; to deduct: Caus. P. {%-vāhayati, -yitum,%}
to have (something) carried off or taken away.
<LEND>

<L>3455<pc>0052-c<k1>apavAha<k2>apavAha
{%Apa-vāha, as,%}¦ m. or {%apa-vāhaṅa, am,%} n. de-
duction, subtraction (of fractions); N. of a metre;
N. of a people.
<div n="P"/>.{%Apa-vāhya, as, ā, am,%} to be carried away.
<LEND>

<L>3456<pc>0052-c<k1>apoQa<k2>apoQa
{%Apoḍha.%}¦ See s. v., p. 56.
<LEND>

<L>3457<pc>0052-c<k1>apavAda<k2>apavAda
{#apavAda#}¦ {%apa-vāda,%} &c. See {%apa-vad%} above.
<LEND>

<L>3458<pc>0052-c<k1>apavAsa<k2>apavAsa
{#apavAsa#}¦ {%apa-vāsa, as,%} m. (rt. {%vas%}), Ved. dis-
appearace, going away, vanishing; N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>3459<pc>0052-c<k1>apavikzata<k2>apavikzata
{#apavikzata#}¦ {%apa-vikṣata, as, ā, am,%} un-
wounded; unviolated.
<LEND>

<L>3460<pc>0052-c<k1>apaviGna<k2>apaviGna
{#apaviGna#}¦ {%apa-vighna, as, ā, am,%} unob-
structed, unimpeded; ({%am%}), ind. free from obstruc-
tion.
<LEND>

<L>3461<pc>0052-c<k1>apavitra<k2>apavitra
{#apavitra#}¦ {%a-pavitra, as, ā, am,%} impure, un-
clean.
<LEND>

<L>3462<pc>0052-c<k1>apavidDa<k2>apavidDa
{#apavidDa#}¦ {%apa-viddha%} and {%apa-vedha.%} See
{%apa-vyadh,%} p. 53.
<LEND>

<L>3463<pc>0052-c<k1>apaviza<k2>apaviza
{#apaviza#}¦ {%apa-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} free from
poison; ({%ā%}), f. a species of grass, Kyllingia Mono-
cephala.
<LEND>

<L>3464<pc>0052-c<k1>apavizRu<k2>apavizRu
{#apavizRu#}¦ {%apa-viṣṇu,%} ind. except or with-
out Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>3465<pc>0052-c<k1>apavIRa<k2>apavIRa
{#apavIRa#}¦ {%apa-vīṇa, as, ā, am,%} having a bad
or no lute; ({%ā%}), f. a bad lute; ({%am%}), ind. without
a lute.
<LEND>

<L>3466<pc>0052-c<k1>apavIravat<k2>apavIravat
{#apavIravat#}¦ {%a-pavīra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
not armed with a lance.
<LEND>

<L>3467<pc>0052-c<k1>apavf<k2>apavf
{#apavf#}¦ {%apa-vṛ,%} cl. 5. P. {%-vṛṇoti, -varitum,%}
{%rītum,%} to open, uncover, exhibit.
<LEND>

<L>3468<pc>0052-c<k1>apavaraka<k2>apavaraka
{%Apa-varaka, as,%}¦ m. an inner apartment, the lying-
in chamber.
<LEND>

<L>3469<pc>0052-c<k1>apavaraRa<k2>apavaraRa
{%Apa-varaṇa, am,%}¦ n. covering, screening; gar-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>3470<pc>0052-c<k1>apavAraRa<k2>apavAraRa
{%Apa-vāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. covering, concealment, dis-
appearance.
<LEND>

<L>3471<pc>0052-c<k1>apavArita<k2>apavArita
{%Apa-vārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, concealed, dis-
appeared.
<LEND>

<L>3472<pc>0052-c<k1>apavAritaka<k2>apavAritaka
{%Apa-vāritaka, am,%}¦ n. concealed, secret manner;
{%apavāritakena,%} (in theatrical language) apart, aside
(speaking so that only the addressed person may
hear; opposed to {%prakāśam%}).
<LEND>

<L>3473<pc>0052-c<k1>apavArya<k2>apavArya
{%Apa-vārya,%}¦ ind. apart, aside; having concealed.
<LEND>

<L>3474<pc>0052-c<k1>apavfta<k2>apavfta
{%Apa-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ uncovered, opened.
<LEND>

<L>3475<pc>0052-c<k1>apavfti<k2>apavfti
{%Apa-vṛti, is,%}¦ f. uncovering; concealing (?).
<LEND>

<L>3476<pc>0052-c<k1>apavfj<k2>apavfj
{#apavfj#}¦ {%apa-vṛj,%} Caus. P. {%-varjayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to quit, get rid of, to pay, to fulfil.
<LEND>

<L>3477<pc>0052-c<k1>apavarga<k2>apavarga
{%Apa-varga, as,%}¦ m. completion, end (e. g. {%pañcā-%}
{%pavarga,%} coming to an end in five days); exception
(to a rule); gift, donation; the emancipation of the
soul from the body and exemption from further
transmigration; final beatitude. {%—Apavarga-da, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} conferring final beatitude.
<LEND>

<L>3478<pc>0052-c<k1>apavarjana<k2>apavarjana
{%Apa-varjana, am,%}¦ n. abandoning, abandonment;
gift or donation, making good a promise, discharging
a debt or obligation; final emancipation or beati-
tude.
<LEND>

<L>3479<pc>0052-c<k1>apavarjanIya<k2>apavarjanIya
{%Apa-varjanīya,%}¦ or {%apa-vṛjya, as, ā, am,%} to be
abandoned, to be avoided.
<LEND>

<L>3480<pc>0052-c<k1>apavarjita<k2>apavarjita
{%Apa-varjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ abandoned, quitted, got
rid of, given or cast away; made good as a promise,
discharged as a debt.
<LEND>
[Page0053-a+ 71]

<L>3481<pc>0053-a<k1>apavarjya<k2>apavarjya
{%Apa-varjya,%}¦ ind. excepting, except.
<LEND>

<L>3482<pc>0053-a<k1>apavfkta<k2>apavfkta
{%Apa-vṛkta, as, ā, am,%}¦ finished, completed.
<LEND>

<L>3483<pc>0053-a<k1>apavfkti<k2>apavfkti
{%Apa-vṛkti, is,%}¦ f. fulfilment, completion.
<LEND>

<L>3484<pc>0053-a<k1>apavft<k2>apavft
{#apavft#}¦ {%apa-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate, -titum,%}
to turn away, depart; to turn back, to come to an
end.
<LEND>

<L>3485<pc>0053-a<k1>apavarta<k2>apavarta
{%Apa-varta, as,%}¦ m. taking away; (in arithmetic
or algebra) reduction to a common measure; the
divisor, which is applied to both or either of the
quantities of an equation.
<LEND>

<L>3486<pc>0053-a<k1>apavartaka<k2>apavartaka
{%Apa-vartaka, as,%}¦ m. a common measure.
<LEND>

<L>3487<pc>0053-a<k1>apavartana<k2>apavartana
{%Apa-vartana, am,%}¦ n. taking away; removal;
transferring from one place to another; abbreviation,
abridging; reduction of a fraction to its lowest terms;
division without remainder; divisor.
<LEND>

<L>3488<pc>0053-a<k1>apavartita<k2>apavartita
{%Apa-vartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken away; removed;
divided by a common measure without remainder.
<LEND>

<L>3489<pc>0053-a<k1>apavftta<k2>apavftta
{%Apa-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reversed, inverted, over-
turned; ended; ({%am%}), n. ecliptic (in astronomy).
<LEND>

<L>3490<pc>0053-a<k1>apavftti<k2>apavftti
{%Apa-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. end.
<LEND>

<L>3491<pc>0053-a<k1>apavyaD<k2>apavyaD
{#apavyaD#}¦ {%apa-vyadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-vidhyati,%}
{%-vyaddhum,%} to pierce badly, to throw away, to
neglect.
<LEND>

<L>3492<pc>0053-a<k1>apavidDa<k2>apavidDa
{%Apa-viddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ pierced; thrown away, re-
jected, dismissed, removed. {%—Apaviddha-putra, as,%}
m. a son rejected by his natural parents and adopted
by a stranger; one of the twelve objects of filiation in
law. {%—Apaviddha-loka, as, ā, am,%} dead.
<LEND>

<L>3493<pc>0053-a<k1>apaveDa<k2>apaveDa
{%Apa-vedha, as,%}¦ m. piercing anything in the wrong
direction or manner (spoiling a jewel by so piercing
it).
<LEND>

<L>3494<pc>0053-a<k1>apavyaya<k2>apavyaya
{#apavyaya#}¦ {%apa-vyaya, as,%} m. (rt. {%i%} with {%apa%}
and {%vi%}), prodigality.
<LEND>

<L>3495<pc>0053-a<k1>apavyayat<k2>apavyayat
{%Apa-vyayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going away.
<LEND>

<L>3496<pc>0053-a<k1>apavyayamAna<k2>apavyayamAna
{%Apa-vyayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ squandering; deny-
ing a debt.
<LEND>

<L>3497<pc>0053-a<k1>apavyayin<k2>apavyayin
{%Apa-vyayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ squandering, wasting, pro-
digal.
<LEND>

<L>3498<pc>0053-a<k1>apavyAdA<k2>apavyAdA
{#apavyAdA#}¦ {%apa-vy-ā-dā (-vi-ā-dā),%} cl. 3. P.
{%-dadāti, -dātum,%} to open.
<LEND>

<L>3499<pc>0053-a<k1>apavrata<k2>apavrata
{#apavrata#}¦ {%apa-vrata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. dis-
obedient, unfaithful; not performing holy acts, irre-
ligious; perverse.
<LEND>

<L>3500<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSakuna<k2>apaSakuna
{#apaSakuna#}¦ {%apa-śakuna, am,%} n. a bad omen.
<LEND>

<L>3501<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSaNka<k2>apaSaNka
{#apaSaNka#}¦ {%apa-śaṅka, as, ā, am,%} fearless,
having no fear or hesitation; ({%am%}), ind. fearlessly.
<LEND>

<L>3502<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSada<k2>apaSada
{#apaSada#}¦ {%apa-śada%} or {%apa-sada, as,%} m. a
low man.
<LEND>

<L>3503<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSabda<k2>apaSabda
{#apaSabda#}¦ {%apa-śabda, as,%} m. common or
vulgar speech; a bad word; any form of language
not {{Sanskṛit->Sanskrit||20180314|Jim Funderburk|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/Cologne/issues/215|Not a Sanskrit word}}; ungrammatical language. See {%apa-%}
{%bhraṃśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>3504<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSama<k2>apaSama
{#apaSama#}¦ {%apa-śama, as,%} m. cessation.
<LEND>

<L>3505<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSiras<k2>apaSiras
{#apaSiras#}¦ {%apa-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} or {%apa-śir-%}
{%ṣa, as, ā, am,%} or {%apa-śīrṣan, ā, ā, a,%} headless.
<LEND>

<L>3506<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSu<k2>apaSu
{#apaSu#}¦ {%a-paśu, us,%} m. not cattle; ({%us, us, u%}),
deprived of cattle, poor. {%—A-paśu-han, hā, ghnī, ha,%}
not killing cattle.
<LEND>

<L>3507<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSuc<k2>apaSuc<h>1
{#apaSuc#} 1¦. {%apa-śuc,%} Intens. P., Ved. {%-śo-%}
{%śokti,%} to disappear, vanish.
<LEND>

<L>3508<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSuc<k2>apaSuc<h>2
2. {%apa-śuc, k,%}¦ m. (without sorrow), the soul.
{%Apa — śoka, as, ā, am,%} sorrowless; ({%as%}), m. a tree,
Jonesia Aśoka.
<LEND>

<L>3509<pc>0053-a<k1>apaScAdaGvan<k2>apaScAdaGvan
{#apaScAdaGvan#}¦ {%a-paścā-daghvan%} or {%a-paścād-%}
{%daghvan, ā,%} m., Ved. not staying behind; not
coming short of, not being a loser.
<LEND>

<L>3510<pc>0053-a<k1>apaScima<k2>apaScima
{#apaScima#}¦ {%a-paścima, as, ā, am,%} not having
another in the rear, last; having no end.
<LEND>

<L>3511<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSya<k2>apaSya
{#apaSya#}¦ {%a-paśya, as, ā, am%} Ved., or {%a-paśyat,%}
{%-an, antī, at,%} not seeing.
<LEND>

<L>3512<pc>0053-a<k1>apaSyanA<k2>apaSyanA
{%A-paśyanā,%}¦ f. not seeing (?).
<LEND>
[Page0053-b+ 72]

<L>3513<pc>0053-b<k1>apaSraya<k2>apaSraya
{#apaSraya#}¦ {%apa-śraya, as,%} m., Ved. a bolster;
see {%upa-śraya.%}
<LEND>

<L>3514<pc>0053-b<k1>apaSrI<k2>apaSrI
{#apaSrI#}¦ {%apa-śrī, īs, i,%} deprived of beauty.
<LEND>

<L>3515<pc>0053-b<k1>apaSvAsa<k2>apaSvAsa
{#apaSvAsa#}¦ {%apa-śvāsa, as,%} m. one of the five
vital airs; see {%apāna.%}
<LEND>

<L>3516<pc>0053-b<k1>apazWa<k2>apazWa
{#apazWa#}¦ {%apa-ṣṭha, am,%} n. (rt. {%sthā%}), the end
or point of the hook for driving an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>3517<pc>0053-b<k1>apazWu<k2>apazWu
{%Apa-ṣṭhu, us, us, u,%}¦ contrary, opposite; per-
verse; left; ({%u%}), ind. contrary, perversely, badly;
well, properly; handsomely; ({%us%}), m. time.
<LEND>

<L>3518<pc>0053-b<k1>apazWura<k2>apazWura
{%Apa-ṣṭhura%}¦ or {%apa-ṣṭhula, as, ā, am,%} oppo-
site, contrary.
<LEND>

<L>3519<pc>0053-b<k1>apas<k2>apas
{#apas#}¦ {%apas, as,%} n. (fr. obs. rt. {%ap%}), Ved.
work, action; sacred act, sacrificial act; water; ({%ās%}),
m. f. ({%asas%}), m. f. pl., Ved. active, skilful in any art:
{%apasas%}, f. pl., is a name of the hands and fingers
which are busy in kindling the sacred fire and in
performing the sacrifices; also a name of the three
goddesses of sacred speech, or of the three divinities,
fire, wind, and sun; also of the active or running
waters [cf. Lat. <nsi>opus</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>3520<pc>0053-b<k1>apastama<k2>apastama
{%Apas-tama, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl.), Ved. most active
or rapid.
<LEND>

<L>3521<pc>0053-b<k1>apasya<k2>apasya<h>1
1. {%apasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ active, fit for an act, running
away; watery; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of brick (twenty are
used in building the sacrificial altar); activity; water.
<LEND>

<L>3522<pc>0053-b<k1>apasya<k2>apasya<h>2
2. {%apasya,%}¦ nom. P. {%apasyati,%} to be active.
<LEND>

<L>3523<pc>0053-b<k1>apasyu<k2>apasyu
{%Apasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. active.
<LEND>

<L>3524<pc>0053-b<k1>apasada<k2>apasada
{#apasada#}¦ {%apa-sada, as,%} m. the children of
six degrading connections, viz. of a Brāhman with
the women of the three lower classes, of a Kṣatriya
with women of the two lower, and of a Vaiśya with
one of the Sūdra; a low man; an outcast (in this
sense generally as last member of a comp., e. g.
{%brāhmaṇāpasada%}).
<LEND>

<L>3525<pc>0053-b<k1>apasamam<k2>apasamam
{#apasamam#}¦ {%apa-samam,%} ind. last year (?).
<LEND>

<L>3526<pc>0053-b<k1>apasarjana<k2>apasarjana
{#apasarjana#}¦ {%apa-sarjana, am,%} n. (rt. {%sṛj%}),
abandonment; gift or donation; final emancipation
of the soul [cf. {%apa-vṛj%}].
<LEND>

<L>3527<pc>0053-b<k1>apasalavi<k2>apasalavi
{#apasalavi#}¦ {%apa-salavi,%} ind., Ved. to the
left (opposed to {%pra-salavi%}); the space between the
thumb and the forefinger (sacred to the Manes).
<LEND>

<L>3528<pc>0053-b<k1>apasavya<k2>apasavya
{#apasavya#}¦ {%apa-savya, as, ā, am,%} or {%apa-%}
{%savyaka, as, ikā, am,%} not on the left side, right;
opposite, contrary; ({%am%}), ind. to the right; the
same as {%apa-salavi%}. {%—Apasavyaṃ kṛ = pradak-%}
{%ṣiṇaṃ kṛ,%} to circumambulate a person keeping
the right side towards him; to put the sacred cord
on the right shoulder. {%—Apasavya-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having the sacred thread worn on the right shoulder,
(as during a Śrāddha, &c.)
<LEND>

<L>3529<pc>0053-b<k1>apasidDAnta<k2>apasidDAnta
{#apasidDAnta#}¦ {%apa-siddhānta, as,%} m. (rt. 1.
{%sidh%}), an erroneous conclusion.
<LEND>

<L>3530<pc>0053-b<k1>apasiD<k2>apasiD
{#apasiD#}¦ {%apa-sidh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sedhati, -sed-%}
{%dhum, -sedhitum,%} to ward off, remove, drive away.
<LEND>

<L>3531<pc>0053-b<k1>apasf<k2>apasf
{#apasf#}¦ {%apa-sṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati, -sartum,%} to
walk off, go away: Caus. {%-sārayati, -yitum,%} to make
or let one go away, to remove.
<LEND>

<L>3532<pc>0053-b<k1>apasara<k2>apasara
{%Apa-sara, as,%}¦ m. excuse, apology.
<LEND>

<L>3533<pc>0053-b<k1>apasaraRa<k2>apasaraRa
{%Apa-saraṇa, am,%}¦ n. going away. retreating;
egress.
<LEND>

<L>3534<pc>0053-b<k1>apasAra<k2>apasAra
{%Apa-sāra, as,%}¦ m. going out; egress, passage for
going forth; escape.
<LEND>

<L>3535<pc>0053-b<k1>apasAraRa<k2>apasAraRa
{%Apa-sāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. removing to a distance.
<LEND>

<L>3536<pc>0053-b<k1>apasArita<k2>apasArita
{%Apa-sārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ removed, put away,
thrown aside.
<LEND>

<L>3537<pc>0053-b<k1>apasfp<k2>apasfp
{#apasfp#}¦ {%apa-sṛp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarpati, -sarp-%}
{%tum, -sraptum,%} to glide or move off.
<LEND>

<L>3538<pc>0053-b<k1>apasarpa<k2>apasarpa
{%Apa-sarpa%}¦ or {%apa-sarpaka, as,%} m. a secret emis-
sary or agent, spy.
<LEND>

<L>3539<pc>0053-b<k1>apasarpaRa<k2>apasarpaRa
{%Apa-sarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. going back, retreating.
<LEND>

<L>3540<pc>0053-b<k1>apasfpti<k2>apasfpti
{%Apa-sṛpti, is,%}¦ f. going away.
<LEND>
[Page0053-c+ 71]

<L>3541<pc>0053-c<k1>apaskamBa<k2>apaskamBa
{#apaskamBa#}¦ {%apa-skambha, as,%} m. Ved. fasten-
ing, making firm.
<LEND>

<L>3542<pc>0053-c<k1>apaskara<k2>apaskara
{#apaskara#}¦ {%apa-skara, as,%} m. any part of a
carriage, a wheel, &c.; fæces; anus; vulva.
<LEND>

<L>3543<pc>0053-c<k1>apaskAra<k2>apaskAra
{%Apa-skāra, as,%}¦ m. the root or under part of the
knee.
<LEND>

<L>3544<pc>0053-c<k1>apasKala<k2>apasKala
{#apasKala#}¦ {%apa-skhala, as,%} m. leaping off,
jumping off; outside of a threshing floor (?).
<LEND>

<L>3545<pc>0053-c<k1>apastama<k2>apastama
{#apastama#}¦ {%apas-tama.%} See under {%apas.%}
<LEND>

<L>3546<pc>0053-c<k1>apastamBa<k2>apastamBa
{#apastamBa#}¦ {%apa-stambha, as,%} m. a vessel in
the side of the breast containing vital air.
<LEND>

<L>3547<pc>0053-c<k1>apastamBinI<k2>apastamBinI
{%Apa-stambhinī,%}¦ f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>3548<pc>0053-c<k1>apasnAta<k2>apasnAta
{#apasnAta#}¦ {%apa-snāta, as, ā, am,%} bathed or
bathing after death or mourning, or upon the death of
a connection, preparatory to other ceremonies.
<LEND>

<L>3549<pc>0053-c<k1>apasnAna<k2>apasnAna
{%Apa-snāna, am,%}¦ n. funeral bathing, upon the
death of a connection, after mourning, &c.; impure
bathing, or bathing in water in which a person has
previously washed.
<LEND>

<L>3550<pc>0053-c<k1>apaspati<k2>apaspati
{#apaspati#}¦ {%apas-pati, is,%} m., N. of a son of
Uttānapāda.
<LEND>

<L>3551<pc>0053-c<k1>apaspfS<k2>apaspfS<h>1
{#apaspfS#} 1¦. {%apa-spṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-spṛśati,%}
{%-sparṣṭum, -spraṣṭum,%} to touch.
<LEND>

<L>3552<pc>0053-c<k1>apasparSa<k2>apasparSa
{%Apa-sparśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no touch, insen-
sible.
<LEND>

<L>3553<pc>0053-c<k1>apaspfS<k2>apaspfS<h>2
2. {%apa-spṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. not letting one's self
be touched.
<LEND>

<L>3554<pc>0053-c<k1>apaspfS<k2>apaspfS<h>3
{#apaspfS#} 3¦. {%a-paspṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. not
touching, not hurting.
<LEND>

<L>3555<pc>0053-c<k1>apasPiga<k2>apasPiga
{#apasPiga#}¦ {%apa-sphiga, as, ā, am,%} one who
has badly formed buttocks; ({%am%}), ind. except the
buttocks.
<LEND>

<L>3556<pc>0053-c<k1>apasPur<k2>apasPur
{#apasPur#}¦ {%apa-sphur, ūs, ūs, ūs,%} or {%apa-%}
{%sphura, as, ā, am,%} or {%apa-sphurat, an, antī, at%}
Ved. bounding or bursting forth, swelling, increasing.
According to native authorities, both {%apa-sphura%}
and {%apa-sphurat%} may mean ‘injured.’
<LEND>

<L>3557<pc>0053-c<k1>apasmAra<k2>apasmAra
{#apasmAra#}¦ {%apa-smāra, as,%} m. or {%apa-smṛti,%}
{%is,%} f. forgetfulness; epilepsy, falling sickness.
<LEND>

<L>3558<pc>0053-c<k1>apasmArin<k2>apasmArin
{%Apa-smārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ epileptic, convulsed.
<LEND>

<L>3559<pc>0053-c<k1>apasmfti<k2>apasmfti
{%Apa-smṛti, is, is, i,%}¦ forgetful.
<LEND>

<L>3560<pc>0053-c<k1>apasya<k2>apasya
{#apasya#}¦ {%apasya, apasyu%}. See under {%apas.%}
<LEND>

<L>3561<pc>0053-c<k1>apasvara<k2>apasvara
{#apasvara#}¦ {%apa-svara, as,%} m. an unmusical
note or sound.
<LEND>

<L>3562<pc>0053-c<k1>apahan<k2>apahan
{#apahan#}¦ {%apa-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -tum,%} to
beat off, ward off, repel, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>3563<pc>0053-c<k1>apaha<k2>apaha
{%Apa-ha, as, ā, am,%}¦ keeping back, repelling, re-
moving, destroying (e. g. {%śokāpaha, as, ā, am,%}
removing sorrow).
<LEND>

<L>3564<pc>0053-c<k1>apahata<k2>apahata
{%Apa-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroyed, warded off, killed.
<LEND>

<L>3565<pc>0053-c<k1>apahati<k2>apahati
{%Apa-hati, is,%}¦ f. removing, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>3566<pc>0053-c<k1>apahanana<k2>apahanana
{%Apa-hanana, am,%}¦ n. or {%apa-ghāta%} (q. v.), ward-
ing off.
<LEND>

<L>3567<pc>0053-c<k1>apahantf<k2>apahantf
{%Apa-hantṛ, tā,%}¦ m. beating off, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>3568<pc>0053-c<k1>apaGAtin<k2>apaGAtin
{%Apa-ghātin, apa-jighāṃsu.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>3569<pc>0053-c<k1>apahala<k2>apahala
{#apahala#}¦ {%apa-hala, as, ā, am,%} having a bad
plough.
<LEND>

<L>3570<pc>0053-c<k1>apahas<k2>apahas
{#apahas#}¦ {%apa-has,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hasati, -situm,%}
to deride: Caus. P. {%-hāsayati, -yitum,%} to deride,
ridicule.
<LEND>

<L>3571<pc>0053-c<k1>apahasita<k2>apahasita
{%Apa-hasita, am,%}¦ n. or {%apa-hāsa, as,%} m. silly or
causeless laughter.
<LEND>

<L>3572<pc>0053-c<k1>apahAsya<k2>apahAsya
{%Apa-hāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be laughed at.
<LEND>

<L>3573<pc>0053-c<k1>apahasta<k2>apahasta
{#apahasta#}¦ {%apa-hasta, am,%} n. taking or throw-
ing away or off; stealing, plundering.
<LEND>

<L>3574<pc>0053-c<k1>apahastaya<k2>apahastaya
{%Apa-hastaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%apa-hastayati, -yitum,%}
to throw away, lose.
<LEND>

<L>3575<pc>0053-c<k1>apahastita<k2>apahastita
{%Apa-hastita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown away, lost, parted
with.
<LEND>

<L>3576<pc>0053-c<k1>apahA<k2>apahA<h>1
{#apahA#} 1¦. {%apa-hā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-jihīte, -hātum,%}
to go off, come to an end.
<LEND>
[Page0054-a+ 75]

<L>3577<pc>0054-a<k1>apahA<k2>apahA<h>2
{#apahA#} 2¦. {%apa-hā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jahāti, -hātum,%}
to leave, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>3578<pc>0054-a<k1>apahAna<k2>apahAna
{%Apa-hāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (or fr. 1. {%apa-hā?%}), leaving,
abandoning; also written {%apa-hāyana.%}
<LEND>

<L>3579<pc>0054-a<k1>apahAni<k2>apahAni
{%Apa-hāni, is,%}¦ f. leaving; leaving off, abandonment,
stopping, vanishing; exception, exclusion.
<LEND>

<L>3580<pc>0054-a<k1>apahAya<k2>apahAya
{%Apa-hāya,%}¦ ind. leaving out of view, excepting,
except, besides.
<LEND>

<L>3581<pc>0054-a<k1>apahiNkAra<k2>apahiNkAra
{#apahiNkAra#}¦ {%apa-hiṅ-kāra, as, ā, am,%} without
the syllable {%him,%} which is pronounced in singing the
Sāma verses.
<LEND>

<L>3582<pc>0054-a<k1>apahf<k2>apahf
{#apahf#}¦ {%apa-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. (?) {%-harati, -te,%}
{%-hartum,%} to snatch away, carry off, plunder; to re-
move, to throw away: Caus. {%-hārayati, -yitum,%}
to have (anything) carried off.
<LEND>

<L>3583<pc>0054-a<k1>apaharaRa<k2>apaharaRa
{%Apa-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. taking away, carrying off;
stealing.
<LEND>

<L>3584<pc>0054-a<k1>apaharaRIya<k2>apaharaRIya
{%Apa-haraṇīya%}¦ or {%apa-hartavya%} or {%apa-hārya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} to be taken away, carried off, stolen, &c.;
to be taken back or resumed.
<LEND>

<L>3585<pc>0054-a<k1>apahartf<k2>apahartf
{%Apa-hartṛ, tā,%}¦ m. (with gen. or acc.) taking
away; expiating.
<LEND>

<L>3586<pc>0054-a<k1>apahAra<k2>apahAra
{%Apa-hāra, as,%}¦ m. taking away, stealing; spending
another person's property; secreting, concealment;
e. g. {%ātmāpahāraṃ kṛ,%} to conceal one's real cha-
racter.
<LEND>

<L>3587<pc>0054-a<k1>apahAraka<k2>apahAraka
{%Apa-hāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%apa-hārin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} one who takes away, seizes, steals, &c.; a plun-
derer, a thief.
<LEND>

<L>3588<pc>0054-a<k1>apahAraRa<k2>apahAraRa
{%Apa-hāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. causing to take away, spoiling.
<LEND>

<L>3589<pc>0054-a<k1>apahfta<k2>apahfta
{%Apa-hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken away, carried off,
stolen, &c.; taken back, resumed. {%—Apahṛta-vi-%}
{%jñāna, as, ā, am,%} bereft of sense.
<LEND>

<L>3590<pc>0054-a<k1>apahelA<k2>apahelA
{#apahelA#}¦ {%apa-helā,%} f. disrespect, contempt.
<LEND>

<L>3591<pc>0054-a<k1>apahnu<k2>apahnu
{#apahnu#}¦ {%apa-hnu,%} cl. 2. A. {%-hnute, -hnotum,%}
to conceal, disguise; to refuse, deny, disown.
<LEND>

<L>3592<pc>0054-a<k1>apahnava<k2>apahnava
{%Apa-hnava, as,%}¦ m. concealment of knowledge;
denial of or turning off of the truth; dissimulation;
appeasing, satisfying; affection, love.
<LEND>

<L>3593<pc>0054-a<k1>apahnuta<k2>apahnuta
{%Apa-hnuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ concealed, denied.
<LEND>

<L>3594<pc>0054-a<k1>apahnuti<k2>apahnuti
{%Apa-hnuti, is,%}¦ f. denial, concealment of know-
ledge; a figure of rhetoric, applying a description or
simile to other than its obvious application.
<LEND>

<L>3595<pc>0054-a<k1>apahnuvAna<k2>apahnuvAna
{%Apa-hnuvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ concealing, denying.
<LEND>

<L>3596<pc>0054-a<k1>apahnotf<k2>apahnotf
{%Apa-hnotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who conceals or
denies or disowns.
<LEND>

<L>3597<pc>0054-a<k1>apahrAsa<k2>apahrAsa
{#apahrAsa#}¦ {%apa-hrāsa, as,%} m. diminishing,
reducing.
<LEND>

<L>3598<pc>0054-a<k1>apAk<k2>apAk
{#apAk#}¦ {%apāk,%} ind. westward, southward;
see {%apāc%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>3599<pc>0054-a<k1>apAka<k2>apAka<h>1
{#apAka#} 1¦. {%apāka, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%apa%}), situated
aside or behind; distant; coming from a distant
place; incomparable. {%—Apāka-cakṣas, ās,%} m., Ved.
looking or shining far; of incomparable brightness.
<LEND>

<L>3600<pc>0054-a<k1>apAkA<k2>apAkA
{%Apākā%}¦ or {%apākāt,%} ind., Ved. aside, distant. {%—Apā-%}
{%ke-stha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. standing behind.
<LEND>

<L>3601<pc>0054-a<k1>apAktAt<k2>apAktAt
{%Apāktāt,%}¦ ind., Ved. from behind, from the west.
<LEND>

<L>3602<pc>0054-a<k1>apapAka<k2>apapAka<h>2
{#apapAka#} 2¦. {%a-pāka, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%pac%}), im-
mature, raw, unripe, undigested; ({%as%}), m. immaturity,
indigestion. {%—A-pāka-ja, as, ā, am,%} not produced
by cooking or ripening; original; natural. {%—Apāka-%}
{%śāka, am,%} n. ginger.
<LEND>

<L>3603<pc>0054-a<k1>apAkin<k2>apAkin
{%A-pākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ unripe, undigested.
<LEND>

<L>3604<pc>0054-a<k1>apAkf<k2>apAkf
{#apAkf#}¦ {%apā-kṛ (apa-ā˚%}), cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kurute, -kartum,%} or Ved. {%-kartos,%} to remove,
drive away, keep away; to take away; to reject (an
opinion); to cast off, reject; to desist from, to drop;
to free one's self from; to pay.
<LEND>

<L>3605<pc>0054-a<k1>apAkaraRa<k2>apAkaraRa
{%Apā-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. driving away, removal; pay-
ment, liquidation.
<LEND>

<L>3606<pc>0054-a<k1>apAkarizRu<k2>apAkarizRu
{%Apā-kariṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ driving away; excelling.
<LEND>

<L>3607<pc>0054-a<k1>apAkarman<k2>apAkarman
{%Apā-karman, a,%}¦ n. payment, liquidation.
<LEND>

<L>3608<pc>0054-a<k1>apAkfta<k2>apAkfta
{%Apā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken away, removed, de-
stroyed, void of; paid.
<LEND>

<L>3609<pc>0054-a<k1>apAkfti<k2>apAkfti
{%Apā-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. taking away, removal.
<LEND>
[Page0054-b+ 70]

<L>3610<pc>0054-b<k1>apAkfz<k2>apAkfz
{#apAkfz#}¦ {%apā-kṛṣ (apa-ā˚%}), cl. 1. 6. P. A.
{%-karṣati, -te, -kṛṣati, -te, -karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%}
to turn off or away, to avert.
<LEND>

<L>3611<pc>0054-b<k1>apAkF<k2>apAkF
{#apAkF#}¦ {%apā-kṝ (apa-ā˚),%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati,%}
{%-karitum, -rītum,%} to throw any one off; to abandon
to contemn.
<LEND>

<L>3612<pc>0054-b<k1>apAkram<k2>apAkram
{#apAkram#}¦ {%apā-kram (apa-ā˚%}), cl. 1. P. poet.
A. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to retire from.
<LEND>

<L>3613<pc>0054-b<k1>apAkza<k2>apAkza
{#apAkza#}¦ {%apākṣa (apa-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} pre-
sent, perceptible; ({%as, ī, am%}), eyeless, having bad
eyes.
<LEND>

<L>3614<pc>0054-b<k1>apANkta<k2>apANkta
{#apANkta#}¦ {%a-pāṅkta%} or {%a-pāṅkteya%} or {%a-%}
{%pāṅktya, as, ā, am,%} not in a line or row; not in
the same degree or class, unworthy, inadmissible into
society, ejected from caste, excluded, outcast. {%—A-%}
{%pāṅktyopahata (˚ya-up˚), as, ā, am,%} defiled or
contaminated by the presence of impure or improper
persons.
<LEND>

<L>3615<pc>0054-b<k1>apANga<k2>apANga
{#apANga#}¦ {%apāṅga (apa-aṅ˚)%} or {%apāṅgaka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} maimed, crippled; wanting or deformed in
some limb; ({%as%}), m. the outer corner of the eye
(sometimes as last member of a feminine comp. ending
in {%ā%} or {%ī%}); a sectarial mark or circlet on the forehead;
N. of Kāma, the god of love; a plant, Achyranthes
Aspera. {%—Apāṅga-darśana, am,%} n. a side glance, a
leer, a wink. {%—Apāṅga-deśa, as,%} m. the place round
the outer corner of the eye. {%—Apāṅga-netra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having eyes with beautiful outer angles.
<LEND>

<L>3616<pc>0054-b<k1>apAc<k2>apAc
{#apAc#}¦ {%apāc%} or {%apāñc, ṅ, cī, k%} (fr. {%añc%} with
{%apa%}), going or situated backwards, behind; western
(opposed to {%prāñc%}); southern (opposed to {%udañc);%}
{%(k),%} ind. behind, westward, southward.
<LEND>

<L>3617<pc>0054-b<k1>apAcI<k2>apAcI
{%Apācī,%}¦ f. the south. {%—Apācītarā (˚cī-it˚%}), f. the
north, i. e. other than the south.
<LEND>

<L>3618<pc>0054-b<k1>apAcIna<k2>apAcIna
{%Apācīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ situated backwards, behind;
western; turned back; southern.
<LEND>

<L>3619<pc>0054-b<k1>apAcya<k2>apAcya
{%Apācya, as, ā, am,%}¦ western, southern.
<LEND>

<L>3620<pc>0054-b<k1>apAj<k2>apAj
{#apAj#}¦ {%apāj (apa-aj),%} cl. 1. P. {%apājati,%}
{%jitum,%} to drive away.
<LEND>

<L>3621<pc>0054-b<k1>apAYc<k2>apAYc
{#apAYc#}¦ {%apāñc (apa-añc),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%apāñc-%}
{%ati, -te, -citum,%} to push away, to drive away.
<LEND>

<L>3622<pc>0054-b<k1>apAwava<k2>apAwava
{#apAwava#}¦ {%a-pāṭava, am,%} n. awkwardness,
inelegance; sickness, disease.
<LEND>

<L>3623<pc>0054-b<k1>apAWya<k2>apAWya
{#apAWya#}¦ {%a-pāṭhya, as, ā, am,%} illegible.
<LEND>

<L>3624<pc>0054-b<k1>apARigrahaRa<k2>apARigrahaRa
{#apARigrahaRa#}¦ {%a-pāṇigrahaṇa, am,%} n. ce-
libacy.
<LEND>

<L>3625<pc>0054-b<k1>apARipAda<k2>apARipAda
{%A-pāṇi-pāda, as, ā, am,%}¦ without hands and feet.
<LEND>

<L>3626<pc>0054-b<k1>apAtra<k2>apAtra
{#apAtra#}¦ {%a-pātra, am,%} n. a worthless or
common utensil; an inferior, undeserving or worthless
person, unfit as a recipient, unworthy to receive gifts.
{%—A-pātra-kṛtyā,%} f. or {%a-pātri-karaṇa, am,%} n.
acting unbecomingly, doing degrading offices (as for
a Brāhman to receive wealth improperly acquired,
to trade, to serve a Śūdra, and to utter an untruth);
excommunication, disqualification. {%—Apātra-dāyin,%}
{%ī, inī, i.%} giving to the undeserving. {%—Apātra-bhṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} supporting the unworthy, cherishing the un-
deserving.
<LEND>

<L>3627<pc>0054-b<k1>apAd<k2>apAd
{#apAd#}¦ {%a-pād,%} footless. See {%apad,%} p. 50.
<LEND>

<L>3628<pc>0054-b<k1>apAdya<k2>apAdya
{%A-pādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ anything (as water) unfit for
the feet.
<LEND>

<L>3629<pc>0054-b<k1>apAdA<k2>apAdA
{#apAdA#}¦ {%apā-dā (apa-ā˚%}), cl. 3. A. {%-datte,%}
{%dātum,%} to take off or away, to remove.
<LEND>

<L>3630<pc>0054-b<k1>apAdAna<k2>apAdAna
{%Apā-dāna, am,%}¦ n. taking away, removal, ablation;
a thing from which another thing is removed; the
sense of the fifth or ablative case.
<LEND>

<L>3631<pc>0054-b<k1>apAdAdiBAj<k2>apAdAdiBAj
{#apAdAdiBAj#}¦ {%a-pādādi-bhāj (˚da-ād˚), k,%}
{%k, k,%} not standing at the beginning of a Pāda.
<LEND>

<L>3632<pc>0054-b<k1>apAdAntIya<k2>apAdAntIya
{%A-pādāntīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not standing at the end
of a Pāda.
<LEND>
[Page0054-c+ 69]

<L>3633<pc>0054-c<k1>apADvan<k2>apADvan
{#apADvan#}¦ {%apādhvan (apa-adh˚), ā,%} m. a bad
road.
<LEND>

<L>3634<pc>0054-c<k1>apAn<k2>apAn
{#apAn#}¦ {%apān (apa-an),%} cl. 2. A. {%apāniti,%}
{%nitum,%} to breathe out or away, to expire, respire.
<LEND>

<L>3635<pc>0054-c<k1>apAna<k2>apAna
{%Apāna, as,%}¦ m. expiration, breathing out (opposed
to {%prāṇa%}); that of the five vital airs which goes
downwards and out at the anus; ({%am%}), n. the anus;
ventris crepitus. {%—Apāna-dā, ās,%} m. Ved. giving
the vital air Apāna. {%—Apana-dvāra, am,%} n. the
anus. {%—Apāna-pavana, as,%} m. the vital air Apāna.
{%—Apāna-pā, ās,%} m., Ved. protecting the Apāna.
{%—Apāna-bhṛt, t,%} f. cherishing the vital air, a sacri-
ficial brick. {%—apāna-vāyu, us,%} m. the air Apāna;
ventris crepitus.
<LEND>

<L>3636<pc>0054-c<k1>apAnud<k2>apAnud
{#apAnud#}¦ {%apā-nud (apa-ā˚),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-nudati, -te, -nottum,%} to remove, repel, repudiate.
<LEND>

<L>3637<pc>0054-c<k1>apAnfta<k2>apAnfta
{#apAnfta#}¦ {%apānṛta (˚pa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} free
from falsehood, true.
<LEND>

<L>3638<pc>0054-c<k1>apAnnapAt<k2>apAnnapAt
{#apAnnapAt#}¦ {%apān-napāt%} or {%apaṃ-napāt,%} &c.
See under {%ap,%} p. 48.
<LEND>

<L>3639<pc>0054-c<k1>apApa<k2>apApa
{#apApa#}¦ {%a-pāpa, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-pāpin, ī, inī, i,%}
sinless, virtuous, pure. {%—A-pāpa-kāśin, ī, inī, i,%} not
ill-looking; not revealing evil. {%—A-pāpa-kṛt, t, t, t,%}
not committing sin. {%—A-pāpa-vasyasa, am,%} n., Ved.
non-increase of evil; health, prosperity. {%—A-pāpa-%}
{%viddha, as, ā, am,%} not afflicted with evil.
<LEND>

<L>3640<pc>0054-c<k1>apAm<k2>apAm
{#apAm#}¦ {%apām.%} See under {%ap,%} p. 48.
<LEND>

<L>3641<pc>0054-c<k1>apAmArga<k2>apAmArga
{#apAmArga#}¦ {%apā-mārga, as,%} m. (rt. {%mṛj%}), N.
of a plant (Achyranthes Aspera), employed very often
in incantations, in medicine, in washing linen, and in
sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>3642<pc>0054-c<k1>apAmArjana<k2>apAmArjana
{%Apā-mārjana, am,%}¦ n. cleansing, keeping back,
removing (of diseases and other evils).
<LEND>

<L>3643<pc>0054-c<k1>apAmftyu<k2>apAmftyu
{#apAmftyu#}¦ {%apā-mṛtyu, us,%} m. sudden death;
see {%apa-mṛtyu.%}
<LEND>

<L>3644<pc>0054-c<k1>apAya<k2>apAya
{#apAya#}¦ {%apāya.%} See under {%ape.%}
<LEND>

<L>3645<pc>0054-c<k1>apAr<k2>apAr
{#apAr#}¦ {%apār (apa-ṛ),%} cl. 5. P. {%apārṇoti,%}
{%apārtum, -ritum%} or {%-rītum%} (?), to remove; to open.
<LEND>

<L>3646<pc>0054-c<k1>apAra<k2>apAra<h>1
{#apAra#} 1¦. {%apāra, am,%} n. the opposite bank
of a river; the same as {%pāra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>3647<pc>0054-c<k1>apAra<k2>apAra<h>2
{#apAra#} 2¦. {%a-pāra, am,%} n. (in the Sāṅkhya)
a bad shore, i. e. a kind of mental indifference or ac-
quiescence ({%tuṣṭi%}); it may also mean the reverse of
{%pāra%} or of {%pārapāra,%} i. e. the reverse of mental ac-
quiescence; ({%as, ā, am%}), shoreless, unbounded, bound-
less, interminable; an epithet of heaven and earth;
out of reach; inexhaustible. {%—A-pārapāra, am,%} n.
non-acquiescence.
<LEND>

<L>3648<pc>0054-c<k1>apAraka<k2>apAraka
{%A-pāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%a-pārayat, an, antī,%}
{%at,%} incompetent, impotent.
<LEND>

<L>3649<pc>0054-c<k1>apAraRIya<k2>apAraRIya
{%A-pāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ out of reach.
<LEND>

<L>3650<pc>0054-c<k1>apAramArTika<k2>apAramArTika
{#apAramArTika#}¦ {%a-pāramārthika, as, ī, am,%}
not concerned about the highest truth.
<LEND>

<L>3651<pc>0054-c<k1>apArC<k2>apArC
{#apArC#}¦ {%apārch (apa-ṛch),%} cl. 6. P. {%apārcch-%}
{%ati, -chitum,%} to go away, retire.
<LEND>

<L>3652<pc>0054-c<k1>apArjita<k2>apArjita
{#apArjita#}¦ {%apārjita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ṛj%} with
{%apa%}), flung away.
<LEND>

<L>3653<pc>0054-c<k1>apArRa<k2>apArRa
{#apArRa#}¦ {%apārṇa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ard%}), distant,
far.
<LEND>

<L>3654<pc>0054-c<k1>apArTa<k2>apArTa
{#apArTa#}¦ {%apārtha (apa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} or
{%apārthaka, as, ikā, am,%} without any object, useless,
unprofitable; unmeaning; ({%am%}), n. incoherent argu-
ment. {%—Apārtha-karaṇa, am,%} n. a false plea in a
lawsuit.
<LEND>

<L>3655<pc>0054-c<k1>apAla<k2>apAla
{#apAla#}¦ {%a-pāla%} or {%a-pālana%} or {%a-pālita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} unguarded, unprotected, undefended.
<LEND>

<L>3656<pc>0054-c<k1>apAlaNka<k2>apAlaNka
{#apAlaNka#}¦ {%apālaṅka, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
Cassia Fistula.
<LEND>

<L>3657<pc>0054-c<k1>apAlamba<k2>apAlamba
{#apAlamba#}¦ {%apā-lamba, as,%} m., Ved. the
[Page0055-a+ 72]
hinder part of a carriage; mechanism to stop a
carriage (?).
<LEND>

<L>3658<pc>0055-a<k1>apAli<k2>apAli
{#apAli#}¦ {%apāli (apa-ali˚), is, is, i,%} free from
{%ali%} or bees, &c.
<LEND>

<L>3659<pc>0055-a<k1>apAvf<k2>apAvf
{#apAvf#}¦ {%apā-vṛ (apa-ā˚),%} cl. 5. P., Ved.
{%-vṛṇoti, -varitum, -rītum,%} to open; to cover; (in the
first sense {%apāvṛ%} is said to be for {%apa-vṛ,%} the final
of {%apa%} being lengthened.)
<LEND>

<L>3660<pc>0055-a<k1>apAvfta<k2>apAvfta
{%Apā-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ open, laid open; covered,
concealed, enclosed; unrestrained, self-willed.
<LEND>

<L>3661<pc>0055-a<k1>apAvfti<k2>apAvfti
{%Apā-vṛti, is,%}¦ f. or {%apā-varaṇa, am,%} n. laying
open, enclosing, surrounding; covering, concealing,
screening.
<LEND>

<L>3662<pc>0055-a<k1>apAvft<k2>apAvft
{#apAvft#}¦ {%apā-vṛt (apa-ā˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
{%-titum,%} to turn away, to return, to abstain from, to
come to nought.
<LEND>

<L>3663<pc>0055-a<k1>apAvartana<k2>apAvartana
{%Apā-vartana, am,%}¦ n. turning away or from; re-
treat, returning; repulse.
<LEND>

<L>3664<pc>0055-a<k1>apAvft<k2>apAvft
{%Apā-vṛt, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. returning.
<LEND>

<L>3665<pc>0055-a<k1>apAvftta<k2>apAvftta
{%Apā-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ (with abl.) turned away
from; averted; abstaining from, rejecting, despising;
reversed, repelled; ({%am%}), n. the rolling on the ground
(of a horse).
<LEND>

<L>3666<pc>0055-a<k1>apAvftti<k2>apAvftti
{%Apā-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. retreat, returning; repulse.
<LEND>

<L>3667<pc>0055-a<k1>apASyA<k2>apASyA
{#apASyA#}¦ {%a-pāśyā,%} f. no great number of
noose or fetters (i. e. a few).
<LEND>

<L>3668<pc>0055-a<k1>apASraya<k2>apASraya<h>1
{#apASraya#} 1¦. {%apāśraya (˚apa-āś˚), as, ā, am,%}
helpless, destitute.
<LEND>

<L>3669<pc>0055-a<k1>apASri<k2>apASri
{#apASri#} 1¦. {%apā-śri (apa-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-śra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to resort to; to use, practice.
<LEND>

<L>3670<pc>0055-a<k1>apASraya<k2>apASraya<h>2
2. {%apā-śraya, as,%}¦ m. refuge, recourse, the person
or thing to which recourse is had for refuge; an awn-
ing spread over a court or yard.
<LEND>

<L>3671<pc>0055-a<k1>apASrita<k2>apASrita
{%Apā-śrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ resting on; resorting to.
<LEND>

<L>3672<pc>0055-a<k1>apAzwi<k2>apAzwi
{#apAzwi#}¦ {%apāṣṭi, is,%} f., Ved. the heel.
<LEND>

<L>3673<pc>0055-a<k1>apAzWa<k2>apAzWa
{#apAzWa#}¦ {%apā-ṣṭha, as,%} m., Ved. barb of an
arrow; ({%am%}), n. what remains of the Soma plant
after it has been pressed out. {%—Apāṣṭha-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. having barbs; ({%vat%}), ind. like the re-
mainder of the Soma plant (?).
<LEND>

<L>3674<pc>0055-a<k1>apAs<k2>apAs
{#apAs#}¦ {%apās (apa-as),%} cl. 4. P. {%apāsyati,%}
{%situm,%} to fling away, throw, away or off, to discard;
to scare, drive away; leave behind, leave in a deserted
condition; to desert, to take no notice of, disregard;
reject.
<LEND>

<L>3675<pc>0055-a<k1>apAsana<k2>apAsana
{%Apāsana, am,%}¦ n. throwing away; quitting, fore-
going, discarding; killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>3676<pc>0055-a<k1>apAsita<k2>apAsita
{%Apāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or cut down, injured,
destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>3677<pc>0055-a<k1>apAsta<k2>apAsta
{%Apāsta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown off, set aside; driven
away, expelled; abandoned, discarded; disregarded,
contemned.
<LEND>

<L>3678<pc>0055-a<k1>apAsya<k2>apAsya
{%Apāsya,%}¦ ind. having thrown away or discarded,
having left, having disregarded, having excepted.
<LEND>

<L>3679<pc>0055-a<k1>apAsyat<k2>apAsyat
{%Apāsyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ discarding, throwing off, &c.
<LEND>

<L>3680<pc>0055-a<k1>apAsaNga<k2>apAsaNga
{#apAsaNga#}¦ {%apā-saṅga, as,%} m. (rt. {%sañj%}), a
quiver; also {%upāsaṅga.%}
<LEND>

<L>3681<pc>0055-a<k1>apAsaraRa<k2>apAsaraRa
{#apAsaraRa#}¦ {%apā-saraṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%sṛ%}), de-
parting, departure, removal.
<LEND>

<L>3682<pc>0055-a<k1>apAsfta<k2>apAsfta
{%Apā-sṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, departed, gone away.
<LEND>

<L>3683<pc>0055-a<k1>apAsi<k2>apAsi
{#apAsi#}¦ {%apāsi (apa-asi), is, is, i,%} having a
bad or no sword.
<LEND>

<L>3684<pc>0055-a<k1>apAsu<k2>apAsu
{#apAsu#}¦ {%apāsu (apa-asu), us, us, u,%} lifeless.
<LEND>

<L>3685<pc>0055-a<k1>apAhA<k2>apAhA
{#apAhA#}¦ {%apā-hā (apa-ā˚),%} cl. 3. P. {%-jahāti,%}
{%hātum,%} to leave, omit, reject.
<LEND>

<L>3686<pc>0055-a<k1>apAhAya<k2>apAhAya
{%Apā-hāya,%}¦ ind. excepting; except.
<LEND>

<L>3687<pc>0055-a<k1>api<k2>api
{#api#}¦ {%api,%} or sometimes {%pi%} (as a particle or
preposition prefixed to verbs and nouns), expresses
placing near or over, uniting to, annexing, reaching
to, proximity, &c. [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐπί</lang> Zend <nsi>api</nsi>; Germ.
and Eng. prefix <nsi>be</nsi>]; in later Sanskrit its places seems
frequently supplied by {%abhi.%}
[Page0055-b+ 71]
<div n="P"/>(As a separable adv.) and, also moreover, besides,
assuredly, surely; {%api api%} or {%api-ca%}, as well as; {%na%}
{%vāpi%} or {%na apivā%} or {%na nacāpi,%} neither, nor; {%cāpi,%}
(and at the beginning of a sentence) {%api-ca,%} moreover.
<LEND>

<L>3688<pc>0055-b<k1>api<k2>api
{%Api%}¦ is often used to express emphasis, in the sense
of even, also, very; e. g. {%anyad api,%} also another,
something more; {%adyāpi,%} this very day, even now;
{%tathāpi,%} even thus, notwithstanding; {%yady api,%}
even if, although; {%yadyapi tathāpi,%} although,
nevertheless; {%na kadācid api,%} never at any time:
sometimes in the sense of but, only, at least, e. g.
{%muhūrtam api,%} only a moment.
<LEND>

<L>3689<pc>0055-b<k1>api<k2>api
{%Api%}¦ may be affixed to an interrogative to make it
indefinite. e. g. {%ko 'pi,%} any one; {%kutrāpi,%} anywhere.
<LEND>

<L>3690<pc>0055-b<k1>api<k2>api
{%Api%}¦ imparts to numerals the notion of totality, e. g.
{%caturṇām api varṇānām,%} of all the four castes.
<LEND>

<L>3691<pc>0055-b<k1>api<k2>api
{%Api%}¦ may be interrogative at the beginning of a
sentence.
<LEND>

<L>3692<pc>0055-b<k1>api<k2>api
{%Api%}¦ may strengthen the original force of the po-
tential. or may soften the imperative, like the English
‘be pleased to;’ sometimes it is a mere expletive.
<LEND>

<L>3693<pc>0055-b<k1>api<k2>api
{%Api tu,%}¦ but, but yet.
<LEND>

<L>3694<pc>0055-b<k1>apitva<k2>apitva
{%Api-tva, am,%}¦ n., Ved. having part, share. {%—Api-%}
{%tvin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. having part, sharing.
<LEND>

<L>3695<pc>0055-b<k1>apinAma<k2>apinAma
{%Api-nāma,%}¦ perhaps, in all probability.
<LEND>

<L>3696<pc>0055-b<k1>apikakza<k2>apikakza
{#apikakza#}¦ {%api-kakṣa, as,%} m., Ved. the re-
gion of the arm-pits and shoulder-blades, especially in
animals; N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants
of this man.
<LEND>

<L>3697<pc>0055-b<k1>apikakzya<k2>apikakzya
{%Api-kakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. connected with
the region of the arm-pits, or that which binds to the
{%kakṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>3698<pc>0055-b<k1>apikarRa<k2>apikarRa
{#apikarRa#}¦ {%api-karṇa, am,%} n., Ved. the region
of the ears.
<LEND>

<L>3699<pc>0055-b<k1>apikft<k2>apikft
{#apikft#}¦ {%api-kṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛntati, -kar-%}
{%titum,%} to cut off.
<LEND>

<L>3700<pc>0055-b<k1>apikzi<k2>apikzi
{#apikzi#}¦ {%api-kṣi,%} Caus. {%-kṣāpayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to annihilate, to make away with.
<LEND>

<L>3701<pc>0055-b<k1>apigam<k2>apigam
{#apigam#}¦ {%api-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} to go into, enter, approach, join; to approach
a woman.
<LEND>

<L>3702<pc>0055-b<k1>apigata<k2>apigata
{%Api-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone into, entered, come
near, approached, joined.
<LEND>

<L>3703<pc>0055-b<k1>apigA<k2>apigA
{#apigA#}¦ {%api-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to
enter, get into, mingle with.
<LEND>

<L>3704<pc>0055-b<k1>apigIrRa<k2>apigIrRa
{#apigIrRa#}¦ {%api-gīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} praised,
celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>3705<pc>0055-b<k1>apigrah<k2>apigrah
{#apigrah#}¦ {%api-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti,%}
{%-ṇīte, -grahītum,%} to receive; to stop; to close (the
mouth, nose, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>3706<pc>0055-b<k1>apigfhya<k2>apigfhya
{%Api-gṛhya%}¦ Ved., or {%api-grāhya, as, ā, am,%} to
be received.
<LEND>

<L>3707<pc>0055-b<k1>apiGas<k2>apiGas
{#apiGas#}¦ {%api-ghas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ghasati, -ghas-%}
{%tum,%} to eat off or away.
<LEND>

<L>3708<pc>0055-b<k1>apicCila<k2>apicCila
{#apicCila#}¦ {%a-picchila, as, ā, am,%} clear, free
from sediment or soil.
<LEND>

<L>3709<pc>0055-b<k1>apija<k2>apija
{#apija#}¦ {%api-ja, as,%} m. born after, born
again; epithet of several divinities.
<LEND>

<L>3710<pc>0055-b<k1>apiRqa<k2>apiRqa
{#apiRqa#}¦ {%a-piṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} without funeral
cakes.
<LEND>

<L>3711<pc>0055-b<k1>apit<k2>apit<h>1
{#apit#} 1¦. {%a-pit, t, t, t%} (rt. {%pi%}), Ved. not
swelling, dry; waterless.
<LEND>

<L>3712<pc>0055-b<k1>apit<k2>apit<h>2
{#apit#} 2¦. {%a-pit, t, t, t,%} (in gram.) not
having the {%it%} or Anu-bandha {%p.%}
<LEND>

<L>3713<pc>0055-b<k1>apitf<k2>apitf
{#apitf#}¦ {%a-pitṛ, tā,%} m. not a father.
<LEND>

<L>3714<pc>0055-b<k1>apitfka<k2>apitfka
{%A-pitṛka, as, ā, am,%}¦ not ancestral or paternal,
uninherited; fatherless.
<LEND>

<L>3715<pc>0055-b<k1>apitrya<k2>apitrya
{%A-pitrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ uninherited, not ancestral or
paternal.
<LEND>

<L>3716<pc>0055-b<k1>apidah<k2>apidah
{#apidah#}¦ {%api-dah,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-dahati,%}
{%-dagdhum,%} to singe.
<LEND>
[Page0055-c+ 66]

<L>3717<pc>0055-c<k1>apidfB<k2>apidfB
{#apidfB#}¦ {%api-dṛbh,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-dṛbhati%}
or {%-dṛmbhati, -darbhitum,%} to reply upon.
<LEND>

<L>3718<pc>0055-c<k1>apido<k2>apido
{#apido#}¦ {%api-do,%} cl. 4. P., Ved. {%-dyati, -dātum,%}
to cut off.
<LEND>

<L>3719<pc>0055-c<k1>apiDA<k2>apiDA
{#apiDA#}¦ {%api-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put to, shut, close, cover, con-
ceal.
<LEND>

<L>3720<pc>0055-c<k1>apiDAna<k2>apiDAna
{%Api-dhāna%}¦ or {%pi-dhāna, am,%} n. covering, con-
cealment; a cover, a lid, a cloth for covering. {%—Api-%}
{%dhāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a cover; con-
cealed.
<LEND>

<L>3721<pc>0055-c<k1>apiDi<k2>apiDi
{%Api-dhi, is,%}¦ m. concealment.
<LEND>

<L>3722<pc>0055-c<k1>apihita<k2>apihita
{%Api-hita%}¦ or {%pi-hita, as, ā, am,%} shut, covered,
concealed.
<LEND>

<L>3723<pc>0055-c<k1>apinah<k2>apinah
{#apinah#}¦ {%api-nah%} or {%pi-nah,%} cl. 4. P. {%-nahyati,%}
{%-naddhum,%} to tie on, fasten.
<LEND>

<L>3724<pc>0055-c<k1>apinadDa<k2>apinadDa
{%Api-naddha%}¦ or {%pi-naddha, as, ā, am,%} tied on;
clothed, accoutred.
<LEND>

<L>3725<pc>0055-c<k1>apinI<k2>apinI
{#apinI#}¦ {%api-nī,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -netum,%}
to lead towards or to, bring to a state or condition.
<LEND>

<L>3726<pc>0055-c<k1>apipad<k2>apipad
{#apipad#}¦ {%api-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, -pattum,%}
to go in, enter.
<LEND>

<L>3727<pc>0055-c<k1>apipAsa<k2>apipAsa
{#apipAsa#}¦ {%a-pipāsa, as, ā, am,%} free from
thirst; satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>3728<pc>0055-c<k1>apipfc<k2>apipfc
{#apipfc#}¦ {%api-pṛc,%} cl. 7. P. A., Ved. {%-pṛṇakti,%}
{%pṛṅkte, -parcitum,%} to mix with.
<LEND>

<L>3729<pc>0055-c<k1>apiprARa<k2>apiprARa
{#apiprARa#}¦ {%api-prāṇa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. breath-
ing upon, vivifying, animating (?).
<LEND>

<L>3730<pc>0055-c<k1>apibadDa<k2>apibadDa
{#apibadDa#}¦ {%api-baddha, as, ā, am,%} fastened;
connected with.
<LEND>

<L>3731<pc>0055-c<k1>apiBAga<k2>apiBAga
{#apiBAga#}¦ {%api-bhāga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
part in, sharing in.
<LEND>

<L>3732<pc>0055-c<k1>apimfz<k2>apimfz
{#apimfz#}¦ {%api-mṛṣ,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-mṛṣyati,%}
{%-te, -marṣitum,%} to forget, neglect.
<LEND>

<L>3733<pc>0055-c<k1>apivf<k2>apivf
{#apivf#}¦ {%api-vṛ,%} cl. 5. P. {%-vṛṇoti, -varitum,%}
{%rītum,%} to conceal.
<LEND>

<L>3734<pc>0055-c<k1>apivfta<k2>apivfta
{%Api-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ concealed, covered.
<LEND>

<L>3735<pc>0055-c<k1>apivrata<k2>apivrata
{#apivrata#}¦ {%api-vrata, as,%} m. sharing in the
same religious acts, related by blood.
<LEND>

<L>3736<pc>0055-c<k1>apiSarvara<k2>apiSarvara
{#apiSarvara#}¦ {%api-śarvara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. con-
tiguous to the night; being at the beginning or end
of the night; ({%am%}), n. evening-time or morning-
time.
<LEND>

<L>3737<pc>0055-c<k1>apiSala<k2>apiSala
{#apiSala#}¦ {%apiśala, as,%} m., N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of Apiśala.
<LEND>

<L>3738<pc>0055-c<k1>apiSas<k2>apiSas
{#apiSas#}¦ {%api-śas,%} f. (only used in abl.),
Ved. slitting, ripping up.
<LEND>

<L>3739<pc>0055-c<k1>apiSuna<k2>apiSuna
{#apiSuna#}¦ {%a-piśuna, as, ā, am,%} unmalicious,
upright, honest.
<LEND>

<L>3740<pc>0055-c<k1>apizwuta<k2>apizwuta
{#apizwuta#}¦ {%api-ṣṭuta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%stu%}),
praised.
<LEND>

<L>3741<pc>0055-c<k1>apisic<k2>apisic
{#apisic#}¦ {%api-sic,%} cl. 6. P. {%-siñcati, -sektum,%}
to sprinkle with.
<LEND>

<L>3742<pc>0055-c<k1>apihita<k2>apihita
{#apihita#}¦ {%api-hita.%} See {%api-dhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>3743<pc>0055-c<k1>apI<k2>apI
{#apI#}¦ {%apī (api-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%apy-eti, -tum,%}
to go in or near, to enter into or upon; to come near,
approach; to partake, have a share in; to suffer; to
join; to pour out (as a river); to dissolve; to enter
the other world, to die.
<LEND>

<L>3744<pc>0055-c<k1>apiyat<k2>apiyat
{%Api-yat, an, atī, at,%}¦ coming near.
<LEND>

<L>3745<pc>0055-c<k1>apIta<k2>apIta<h>1
1. {%apīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone into, entered, approached.
<LEND>

<L>3746<pc>0055-c<k1>apIti<k2>apIti
{%Apīti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. entering into, encountering, join-
ing battle, junction; dissolving.
<LEND>

<L>3747<pc>0055-c<k1>apyaya<k2>apyaya
{%Apy-aya,%}¦ coming near, union. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>3748<pc>0055-c<k1>apIcya<k2>apIcya
{#apIcya#}¦ {%apīcya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%api-añc%}), Ved.
secret, hidden (incorrectly for {%apīvya,%} q. v.).
<LEND>
[Page0056-a+ 68]

<L>3749<pc>0056-a<k1>apIjU<k2>apIjU
{#apIjU#}¦ {%apī-jū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. stirring up,
impelling.
<LEND>

<L>3750<pc>0056-a<k1>apIqana<k2>apIqana
{#apIqana#}¦ {%a-pīḍana, am,%} n. or {%a-pīḍā,%} f.
not giving pain, gentleness, kindness.
<LEND>

<L>3751<pc>0056-a<k1>apIqayat<k2>apIqayat
{%A-pīḍayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ without distressing, not
paining.
<LEND>

<L>3752<pc>0056-a<k1>apIta<k2>apIta<h>2
{#apIta#} 2¦. {%a-pīta, as, ā, am,%} not drunk.
<LEND>

<L>3753<pc>0056-a<k1>apItvA<k2>apItvA
{%A-pītvā,%}¦ ind. not having drank, without drinking.
<LEND>

<L>3754<pc>0056-a<k1>apInasa<k2>apInasa
{#apInasa#}¦ {%apī-nasa%} or {%pī-nasa, as,%} m. ({%apī%}
for {%api%} and {%nasa%} for {%nāsikā%}), dryness of the nose,
want of the pituitary secretion and loss of smell, cold.
<LEND>

<L>3755<pc>0056-a<k1>apIvfta<k2>apIvfta
{#apIvfta#}¦ {%apī-vṛta = api-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}
covered.
<LEND>

<L>3756<pc>0056-a<k1>apIvya<k2>apIvya
{#apIvya#}¦ {%apīvya, as, ā, am,%} very handsome,
most excellent (?).
<LEND>

<L>3757<pc>0056-a<k1>apuMs<k2>apuMs
{#apuMs#}¦ {%a-puṃs, -pumān,%} m. not a man, a
eunuch. {%—Apuṃs-tva, am,%} n. the state of a eunuch.
<LEND>

<L>3758<pc>0056-a<k1>apuMskA<k2>apuMskA
{%A-puṃskā,%}¦ f. without a husband.
<LEND>

<L>3759<pc>0056-a<k1>apucCa<k2>apucCa
{#apucCa#}¦ {%a-puccha, as, ā, am,%} tailless; ({%ā%}),
f. the tree Dalbergia Śiśu.
<LEND>

<L>3760<pc>0056-a<k1>apuRya<k2>apuRya
{#apuRya#}¦ {%a-puṇya, as, ā, am,%} unclean, im-
pure, wicked, bad. {%—Apuṇya-kṛt, t, t, t,%} acting
wickedly, wicked, bad.
<LEND>

<L>3761<pc>0056-a<k1>aputra<k2>aputra
{#aputra#}¦ {%a-putra, as,%} m. not a son; ({%as, ā, am%}),
or {%a-putraka, as, ikā, am,%} having no son, sonless.
<LEND>

<L>3762<pc>0056-a<k1>aputratA<k2>aputratA
{%—Aputra-tā,%}¦ f. sonlessness.
<LEND>

<L>3763<pc>0056-a<k1>aputrikA<k2>aputrikA
{%A-putrikā,%}¦ f. the daughter of a sonless father, who
herself has no male offspring; ({%as%}), m. the father of
such a daughter.
<LEND>

<L>3764<pc>0056-a<k1>apunar<k2>apunar
{#apunar#}¦ {%a-punar,%} ind. not again, once for
ever. {%—A-punaḥ-prāpya, as, ā, am,%} irrecoverable.
<LEND>

<L>3765<pc>0056-a<k1>apunaranvaya<k2>apunaranvaya
{%—A-punar-anvaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not returning, dead.
<LEND>

<L>3766<pc>0056-a<k1>apunarAvftti<k2>apunarAvftti
{%—A-punar-āvṛtti, is,%}¦ f. final exemption from life
or transmigration. {%—A-punar-dīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}
not being given back. {%—A-punar-bhava, as,%} m. not
being again; exemption of the soul from further
transmigration, final beatitude. {%—A-punar-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. not being born again.
<LEND>

<L>3767<pc>0056-a<k1>apurARa<k2>apurARa
{#apurARa#}¦ {%a-purāṇa, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-purātana,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} not old, modern, new.
<LEND>

<L>3768<pc>0056-a<k1>apuruza<k2>apuruza
{#apuruza#}¦ {%a-puruṣa, as, ā, am,%} unmanly.
{%—A-puruṣārtha (˚ṣa-ar˚) as,%} m. a rite which
is not for the benefit of the sacrificer; not the chief
object of the soul.
<LEND>

<L>3769<pc>0056-a<k1>apuronuvAkyaka<k2>apuronuvAkyaka
{#apuro'nuvAkyaka#}¦ {%a-puro-'nuvākyaka, as,%}
{%akā,%} or {%ikā, am,%} without a Puronuvākyā.
<LEND>

<L>3770<pc>0056-a<k1>apurorukka<k2>apurorukka
{%A-purorukka, as, ā, am,%}¦ without a Puroruc.
<LEND>

<L>3771<pc>0056-a<k1>apuzkala<k2>apuzkala
{#apuzkala#}¦ {%a-puṣkala, as, ā, am,%} not emi-
nent; mean, low.
<LEND>

<L>3772<pc>0056-a<k1>apuzwa<k2>apuzwa
{#apuzwa#}¦ {%a-puṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} unnourished,
lean; soft.
<LEND>

<L>3773<pc>0056-a<k1>apuzpa<k2>apuzpa
{#apuzpa#}¦ {%a-puṣpa, as, ā, am,%} not flowering;
({%as%}), m. the glomerous fig tree. {%—A-puṣpa-phala%}
or {%a-puṣpa-phala-da, as, ā, am,%} bearing fruits
without flowering; having neither flowers nor fruits;
({%as%}), m. the jack tree, Artocarpus Integrifolia, the
glomerous fig-tree.
<LEND>

<L>3774<pc>0056-a<k1>apus<k2>apus
{#apus#}¦ {%apus, us,%} n., Ved. shape; the same
as {%vapus,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>3775<pc>0056-a<k1>apUjaka<k2>apUjaka
{#apUjaka#}¦ {%a-pūjaka, as, ikā, am,%} irreverent,
irreligious.
<LEND>

<L>3776<pc>0056-a<k1>apUjA<k2>apUjA
{%A-pūjā,%}¦ f. irreverence, disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>3777<pc>0056-a<k1>apUjita<k2>apUjita
{%A-pūjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not reverenced or worshipped,
contemned, disregarded.
<LEND>

<L>3778<pc>0056-a<k1>apUjya<k2>apUjya
{%A-pūjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be worshipped or
revered.
<LEND>

<L>3779<pc>0056-a<k1>apUta<k2>apUta
{#apUta#}¦ {%a-pūta, as, ā, am,%} impure; not having
received the invocatory rite.
<LEND>
[Page0056-b+ 73]

<L>3780<pc>0056-b<k1>apUpa<k2>apUpa
{#apUpa#}¦ {%apūpa, as,%} m. cake of flour, meal, &c.;
a sort of bread; wheat; honey-comb (?). {%—Apūpa-%}
{%nābhi, is,%} m., Ved. having a navel which consists of
or is decorated with cake. {%—Apūpa-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of cake. {%—Apūpa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} accom-
panied with cake. {%—Apūpāpihita (˚pa-ap˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} covered with cake.
<LEND>

<L>3781<pc>0056-b<k1>apUpIya<k2>apUpIya
{%Apūpīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to cake.
<LEND>

<L>3782<pc>0056-b<k1>apUpya<k2>apUpya
{%Apūpya, am,%}¦ n. flour, meal.
<LEND>

<L>3783<pc>0056-b<k1>apUraRI<k2>apUraRI
{#apUraRI#}¦ {%apūraṇī%} f. the silk cotton tree,
Bombax Heptaphyllum.
<LEND>

<L>3784<pc>0056-b<k1>apUruza<k2>apUruza
{#apUruza#}¦ {%a-pūruṣa, as, ā, am,%} lifeless, in-
animate; soulless; unpeopled. {%—A-pūruṣa-ghna, as,%}
m., Ved. not killing men.
<LEND>

<L>3785<pc>0056-b<k1>apUrRa<k2>apUrRa
{#apUrRa#}¦ {%a-pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%} not full or entire,
imperfect, incomplete, deficient; ({%am%}), n. an incom-
plete number, a fraction. {%—Apūrṇa-kāla, as, ā, am,%}
premature; ({%as%}), m. incomplete time. {%—Apūrṇa-%}
{%kāla-ja, as, ā, am,%} born before the proper time, abor-
tive. {%—Apūrṇa-tā,%} f. incompleteness.
<LEND>

<L>3786<pc>0056-b<k1>apUryamARa<k2>apUryamARa
{%A-pūryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ not being full, incomplete.
<LEND>

<L>3787<pc>0056-b<k1>apUrva<k2>apUrva
{#apUrva#}¦ {%a-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} unpreceded, un-
precedented; not having existed before, quite new;
unparalleled, incomparable, wonderful, extraordinary;
not first; (in Pāṇini) preceded by {%a%} or {%ā; (am),%}
n. the remote or unforeseen consequence of an act,
as heaven of religious rites; a consequence not im-
mediately preceded by its cause. {%—Apūrva-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. a religious rite or sacrifice, the power of which
on the future is not before seen. {%—Apūrva-tā,%} f. or
{%apūrva-tva, am,%} n. the being unpreceded, not hav-
ing existed before, incomparableness, &c. {%—A-pūrva-%}
{%pati, is,%} f. one who has had no husband before.
<LEND>

<L>3788<pc>0056-b<k1>apUrvavat<k2>apUrvavat
{%—Apūrva-vat,%}¦ ind. singularly, unlike anything else.
<LEND>

<L>3789<pc>0056-b<k1>apUrveRa<k2>apUrveRa
{%—A-pūrveṇa,%}¦ ind. never before.
<LEND>

<L>3790<pc>0056-b<k1>apUrvIya<k2>apUrvIya
{%A-pūrvīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ referring to the remote or
unforeseen consequence of an act.
<LEND>

<L>3791<pc>0056-b<k1>apUrvya<k2>apUrvya
{%A-pūrvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. unpreceded, first;
having nothing similar before one's self, incompar-
able, unheard of.
<LEND>

<L>3792<pc>0056-b<k1>apfkta<k2>apfkta
{#apfkta#}¦ {%a-pṛkta, as, ā, am,%} unmixed, un-
combined; ({%as%}), m. (in Pāṇini) a word or an affix
consisting of a single letter, i. e. of one not combined
with another; (in the Prātiśākhyas) the preposition
{%ā%} and the particle {%u.%}
<LEND>

<L>3793<pc>0056-b<k1>apfRat<k2>apfRat
{#apfRat#}¦ {%a-pṛṇat, a, atī, at,%} Ved. not fill-
ing, not propitiating by gifts; stingy.
<LEND>

<L>3794<pc>0056-b<k1>apfTak<k2>apfTak
{#apfTak#}¦ {%a-pṛthak,%} ind. not separately,
with, together with, collectively. {%—Apṛthag-dharma-%}
{%sīla, as, ā, am,%} of the same religion. {%—Apṛthag-%}
{%dhī, īs, īs, i,%} regarding God in all things.
<LEND>

<L>3795<pc>0056-b<k1>apfzwa<k2>apfzwa
{#apfzwa#}¦ {%a-pṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} unasked, unad-
dressed, not spoken to.
<LEND>

<L>3796<pc>0056-b<k1>ape<k2>ape
{#ape#}¦ {%ape (apa-i),%} cl. 2. P., cl. 1. A. {%apaiti,%}
{%apāyate. apaitum,%} to go away, withdraw, retire, run
away, escape, vanish; to be wanting, to be omitted;
to start.
<LEND>

<L>3797<pc>0056-b<k1>apAya<k2>apAya
{%Apāya, as,%}¦ m. going away, departure; destruction,
death, annihilation; injury, detriment, loss; misfor-
tune, evil, ill, calamity, danger; end (of a word).
<LEND>

<L>3798<pc>0056-b<k1>apAyin<k2>apAyin
{%Apāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ going away, departing, vanish-
ing, perishable.
<LEND>

<L>3799<pc>0056-b<k1>apeta<k2>apeta
{%Apeta, as, ā, am,%}¦ escaped, departed, gone; having
retired from, free from (with abl. or as last mamber
of a comp.). {%—Apeta-bhī, īs, īs, i,%} one whose fear
is gone. {%—Apeta-rākṣasī,%} f., N. of a plant, Ocimum
Sanctum.
<LEND>

<L>3800<pc>0056-b<k1>apeya<k2>apeya
{%Apeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ removed (?).
<LEND>

<L>3801<pc>0056-b<k1>apehi<k2>apehi
{%Apehi.%}¦ See s. v. next col.
<LEND>

<L>3802<pc>0056-b<k1>apekz<k2>apekz
{#apekz#}¦ {%apekṣ (apa-īkṣ),%} cl. I. A. {%ape-%}
{%kṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look away, to look round, to
look about for something; to have some design; to
have regard to, to respect; to look for, wait for,
[Page0056-c+ 70]
except, hope; to require, to have an eye to; with
{%na,%} not to like.
<LEND>

<L>3803<pc>0056-c<k1>apekzaRa<k2>apekzaRa
{%Apekṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. or {%apekṣā,%} f. looking round
or about; (with the object either in loc. or as the
preceding member of a compound) consideration,
reference, regard; connection of cause with effect or
of individual with species; expectation, hope, desire,
need, requirement. {%—Apekṣayā,%} with reference to.
{%—Apekṣā-buddhi, is,%} f. a mental process in the
vaiśeṣika philosophy, the faculty of arranging and
methodising; clearness of understanding.
<LEND>

<L>3804<pc>0056-c<k1>apekzaRIya<k2>apekzaRIya
{%Apekṣaṇīya%}¦ or {%apekṣitavya%} or {%apekṣya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} to be considered or regarded, to be looked for
or expected, to be wished, desired, or required; desirable.
<LEND>

<L>3805<pc>0056-c<k1>apekzita<k2>apekzita
{%Apekṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ considered, regarded, refer-
red to, looked for, expected; wished, hoped, required;
({%am%}), n. consideration, reference, regard.
<LEND>

<L>3806<pc>0056-c<k1>apekzin<k2>apekzin
{%Apekṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ (with the object in gen. or as
the preceding member of a compound) considering,
respecting, regarding, looking to; looking for, expect-
ing, hoping, requiring.
<LEND>

<L>3807<pc>0056-c<k1>apekzya<k2>apekzya
{%Apekṣya,%}¦ ind. having considered, having regard
to, with regard or reference to.
<LEND>

<L>3808<pc>0056-c<k1>apej<k2>apej
{#apej#}¦ {%apej (apa-ej),%} cl. 1. A. {%apejate, -jitum,%}
to remove, drive away. (See Gram. 784. <nsi>a</nsi>)
<LEND>

<L>3809<pc>0056-c<k1>apendra<k2>apendra
{#apendra#}¦ {%apendra (˚pa-in˚), as, ā, am,%} without
Indra.
<LEND>

<L>3810<pc>0056-c<k1>apeya<k2>apeya
{#apeya#}¦ {%a-peya, as, ā, am,%} unfit for drinking,
undrinkable.
<LEND>

<L>3811<pc>0056-c<k1>apeSala<k2>apeSala
{#apeSala#}¦ {%a-peśala, as, ā, am,%} not clever, in-
expert.
<LEND>

<L>3812<pc>0056-c<k1>apeSala<k2>apeSas
{#apeSas#}¦ {%a-peśas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. formless,
shapeless.
<LEND>

<L>3813<pc>0056-c<k1>apez<k2>apez<h>1
{#apez#} 1¦. {%apeṣ (apa-iṣ),%} cl. 4. A. {%apeṣyate,%}
{%ṣitum,%} to strive after, aspire to.
<LEND>

<L>3814<pc>0056-c<k1>apez<k2>apez<h>2
{#apez#} 2¦. {%apeṣ (apa-īṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%apeṣate,%}
{%ṣitum,%} to withdraw from, to retire.
<LEND>

<L>3815<pc>0056-c<k1>apehi<k2>apehi
{#apehi#}¦ {%apehi%} (imperative of rt. {%i%} with {%apa%}),
at the beginning of several compounds, means exclud-
ing, expelling, denying admission; e. g. {%apehi-pra-%}
{%kasā,%} f. a. ceremony where people are not admitted.
{%—Apehi-bāṇijā,%} f. a. ceremony from which merchants
are excluded. {%—Apehi-vātā,%} f., N. of a plant useful
in expelling wind (Pœderia).
<LEND>

<L>3816<pc>0056-c<k1>apESuna<k2>apESuna
{#apESuna#}¦ {%a-paiśuna, am,%} n. integrity, honesty,
uprightness.
<LEND>

<L>3817<pc>0056-c<k1>apogaRqa<k2>apogaRqa
{#apogaRqa#}¦ {%a-pogaṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} not under
sixteen years of age; a child or infant; timid, fearful;
flaccid; having a limb too many or too few.
<LEND>

<L>3818<pc>0056-c<k1>apocCad<k2>apocCad
{#apocCad#}¦ {%apocchad (apa-ud-chad),%} cl. 10.
P. A. {%-chādayati, -te, -yitum,%} to uncover.
<LEND>

<L>3819<pc>0056-c<k1>apoQa<k2>apoQa
{#apoQa#}¦ {%apoḍha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vah%} with
{%apa%}), carried off, removed, taken away.
<LEND>

<L>3820<pc>0056-c<k1>apotkfz<k2>apotkfz
{#apotkfz#}¦ {%apot-kṛṣ (apa-ud-kṛṣ),%} cl. 1. 6.
P. A. {%-karṣati, -te, -kriṣati, -te, -karṣṭum,%}
{%-kraṣṭum,%} to separate, disjoin.
<LEND>

<L>3821<pc>0056-c<k1>apodaka<k2>apodaka
{#apodaka#}¦ {%apodaka (˚pa-ud˚) as, ā, am,%} water-
less, water-tight; not watery, not fluid; ({%ikā%}), f. a
pot-herb, Basella Rubra or Lucida.
<LEND>

<L>3822<pc>0056-c<k1>apodi<k2>apodi
{#apodi#}¦ {%apod-i (apa-ud-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti,%}
{%-tum,%} to go away altogether, to give way, to with-
draw.
<LEND>

<L>3823<pc>0056-c<k1>apoditya<k2>apoditya
{%Apod-itya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be completely gone
away from or left.
<LEND>

<L>3824<pc>0056-c<k1>apodDArya<k2>apodDArya
{#apodDArya#}¦ {%apod-dhārya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%hṛ%}
with {%apa%} and {%ud%}), liable to have something taken
away.
<LEND>

<L>3825<pc>0056-c<k1>aponapAt<k2>aponapAt
{#aponapAt#}¦ {%apo-napāt,%} &c. See under {%ap.%}
<LEND>

<L>3826<pc>0056-c<k1>apoB<k2>apoB
{#apoB#}¦ {%apobh (apa-ubh),%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%apo-%}
{%bhati, -ombhati, -bhitum,%} to bind, fetter.
<LEND>
[Page0057-a+ 71]

<L>3827<pc>0057-a<k1>aporRu<k2>aporRu
{#aporRu#}¦ {%aporṇu (apa-ūrṇu),%} cl. 2. P. A.
{%aporṇauti, -ṇoti, -ṇute, -ṇavitum, -ṇuvitum,%} to
uncover, to unveil, to open; A. to uncover one's self.
<LEND>

<L>3828<pc>0057-a<k1>apoz<k2>apoz
{#apoz#}¦ {%apoṣ (apa-uṣ),%} cl. 1. P., Ved.
{%apoṣati, apocchati,%} to dispel darkness (said of the
dawn).
<LEND>

<L>3829<pc>0057-a<k1>apoh<k2>apoh
{#apoh#}¦ {%apoh (apa-ūh),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%apohati,%}
{%-te, -hitum,%} to strip off, to push away, to frighten
away; to remove, to heal (sickness); A. to keep
away from one's self, to avoid, to give up; (in dis-
putation) to object, to deny, to reason, argue.
<LEND>

<L>3830<pc>0057-a<k1>apoha<k2>apoha
{%Apoha, as,%}¦ m. or {%apohana, am,%} n. pushing away,
removing; removal of doubt by the exercise of the
reasoning faculty; reasoning, arguing.
<LEND>

<L>3831<pc>0057-a<k1>apohanIya<k2>apohanIya
{%Apohanīya%}¦ or {%apohya, as, ā, am,%} to be taken
away, or removed, or expiated.
<LEND>

<L>3832<pc>0057-a<k1>apohita<k2>apohita
{%Apohita, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken away, removed; estab-
lished by reason.
<LEND>

<L>3833<pc>0057-a<k1>apOruza<k2>apOruza
{#apOruza#}¦ {%a-pauruṣa, am,%} n. unmanliness,
cowardice; superhuman power; {%(as, ā, am),%} unmanly,
cowardly; superhuman.
<LEND>

<L>3834<pc>0057-a<k1>apOzkalya<k2>apOzkalya
{#apOzkalya#}¦ {%a-pauṣkalya, am,%} n. immaturity.
<LEND>

<L>3835<pc>0057-a<k1>apta<k2>apta
{#apta#}¦ {%apta, as, ā, am%} (fr. obs. rt. {%ap%} for later
{%āp),%} Ved. obtained; watery (?).
<LEND>

<L>3836<pc>0057-a<k1>aptas<k2>aptas
{%Aptas, as,%}¦ n. a sacrificial act.
<LEND>

<L>3837<pc>0057-a<k1>aptu<k2>aptu
{%Aptu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. busy, active, diligent; the
body; Soma; a sacrificial animal.
<LEND>

<L>3838<pc>0057-a<k1>aptur<k2>aptur
{%Aptur, ūs,%}¦ m., Ved. active, busy; giving water;
running as water.
<LEND>

<L>3839<pc>0057-a<k1>aptUrya<k2>aptUrya
{%Aptūrya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. zeal, activity; the giving
of water.
<LEND>

<L>3840<pc>0057-a<k1>aptoryAma<k2>aptoryAma
{%Aptor-yāma, as,%}¦ or {%aptor-yāman, ā,%} m., Ved.,
N. of a sacrificial ceremony, and of a verse in the
Sāma-veda closing that ceremony [cf. {%vairāja%}].
<LEND>

<L>3841<pc>0057-a<k1>aptya<k2>aptya
{%Aptya, as, ā, am,%}¦ active, spacious; watery (?).
<LEND>

<L>3842<pc>0057-a<k1>apna<k2>apna
{%Apna, as,%}¦ m. or {%apnas, as,%} n., Ved. possession,
property; work, sacrificial act; progeny; shape [cf.
Lat. <nsi>ops</nsi>]. {%—Apnah-stha, as,%} m., Ved. superintending
work. {%—Apna-rāj, ṭ,%} m., Ved. possessing property;
illustrious through work. {%—Apnas-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. productive, having sacrificial acts or work.
<LEND>

<L>3843<pc>0057-a<k1>apnavAna<k2>apnavAna
{%Apnavāna, as%}¦ m., Ved. having progeny; the
arm; N. of a Ṛṣi; poor (?).
<LEND>

<L>3844<pc>0057-a<k1>apya<k2>apya
{%Apya, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtainable, to be reached;
active, belonging to or connected with work or sacri-
ficial acts, watery.
<LEND>

<L>3845<pc>0057-a<k1>appa<k2>appa
{#appa#}¦ {%appa, as,%} m., N. of an author of a
book on prosody.
<LEND>

<L>3846<pc>0057-a<k1>appati<k2>appati
{#appati#}¦ {%appati, is,%} m. See under {%ap.%}
<LEND>

<L>3847<pc>0057-a<k1>appadIkzita<k2>appadIkzita
{#appadIkzita#}¦ {%appadīkṣita%} or {%apyadīkṣita%}
or {%apyayadīkṣita, as,%} m., N. of an author of the
sixteenth century.
<LEND>

<L>3848<pc>0057-a<k1>appitta<k2>appitta
{#appitta#}¦ {%ap-pitta, am,%} n. fire; see under {%ap.%}
<LEND>

<L>3849<pc>0057-a<k1>apyac<k2>apyac
{#apyac#}¦ {%apy-ac, yaṅ, īcī, yak%} (rt. {%añc%}),
reaching, gone into, hidden.
<LEND>

<L>3850<pc>0057-a<k1>apyatyarj<k2>apyatyarj
{#apyatyarj#}¦ {%apy-aty-arj (api-ati˚),%} cl. 1. P.,
Ved. {%-arjati, -jitum,%} to add over and above.
<LEND>

<L>3851<pc>0057-a<k1>apyaya<k2>apyaya
{#apyaya#}¦ {%apy-aya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%i%} with {%api,%} see
{%apī%}), approach, meeting, joining; pouring out; enter-
ing, vanishing; junction; (e. g. {%svāpyaya,%} entering
into one's self, absorption.) {%—Apayaya-dīkṣita, as,%} m.,
N. of a Drāviḍa saint and writer, the author of various
works, celebrated as a Śaiva, and thought to be an
incarnation of Śiva; (also {%apyāya˚%} or {%apyai˚,%} &c.)
<LEND>

<L>3852<pc>0057-a<k1>apyayana<k2>apyayana
{%Apy-ayana, am,%}¦ n. union, joining; copulating.
<LEND>

<L>3853<pc>0057-a<k1>apyarDam<k2>apyarDam
{#apyarDam#}¦ {%apy-ardham,%} ind., Ved. within
proximity, near.
<LEND>

<L>3854<pc>0057-a<k1>apyas<k2>apyas
{#apyas#}¦ {%apy-as (api-as),%} cl. 2. P. {%-asti,%} (with
loc. or with an adv. of place) to be in anything; to
be closely connected with, to belong to.
<LEND>

<L>3855<pc>0057-a<k1>apyuta<k2>apyuta
{#apyuta#}¦ {%apy-uta = api%} and {%uta,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0057-b+ 69]

<L>3856<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakawa<k2>aprakawa
{#aprakawa#}¦ {%a-prakaṭa, as, ā, am,%} unmanifested,
unapparent, obscure.
<LEND>

<L>3857<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakampa<k2>aprakampa
{#aprakampa#}¦ {%a-prakampa, as, ā, am,%} unshaken,
literally and metaphorically; firm, steady; unanswer-
ed, unrefuted. {%—Aprakampa-tā,%} f. firmness, stability,
unanswerableness.
<LEND>

<L>3858<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakara<k2>aprakara
{#aprakara#}¦ {%a-prakara, as, ā, am,%} not acting
excellently.
<LEND>

<L>3859<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakaraRa<k2>aprakaraRa
{%A-prakaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. not the principal topic,
not relevant to the main subject.
<LEND>

<L>3860<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakfta<k2>aprakfta
{%A-prakṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not principal, not relevant
to the main topic under discussion, not chief; occa-
sional or incidental, not natural.
<LEND>

<L>3861<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakfti<k2>aprakfti
{%A-prakṛti, is,%}¦ f. not the inherent or inseparable
property, accidental property or nature; spiritual being.
<LEND>

<L>3862<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakarzita<k2>aprakarzita
{#aprakarzita#}¦ {%a-prakarṣita, as, ā, am,%} not ex-
ceeded, not more than; unsurpassed.
<LEND>

<L>3863<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakfzwa<k2>aprakfzwa
{%A-prakṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ low, vile; ({%as%}), m.
a crow.
<LEND>

<L>3864<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakalpaka<k2>aprakalpaka
{#aprakalpaka#}¦ {%a-prakalpaka, as, ikā, am,%} not
prescribing as obligatory.
<LEND>

<L>3865<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakxpta<k2>aprakxpta
{%A-prakḷpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not explicitly enjoined.
<LEND>

<L>3866<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakARqa<k2>aprakARqa
{#aprakARqa#}¦ {%a-prakāṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} stemless;
({%as%}), m. a bush, a shrub.
<LEND>

<L>3867<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakASa<k2>aprakASa
{#aprakASa#}¦ {%a-prakāśa, as, ā, am,%} not shining,
dark; self-illuminated; not visible, hidden, secret;
not manifest or evident; ({%am%}), ind. in secret; ({%as%}),
m. indistinctness, {{secresy->secrecy||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}, a secret.
<LEND>

<L>3868<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakASaka<k2>aprakASaka
{%A-prakāśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ not rendering bright;
making dark.
<LEND>

<L>3869<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakASamAna<k2>aprakASamAna
{%A-prakāśamāna%}¦ or {%a-prakāśita, as, ā, am,%} not
manifested, undivulged, unrevealed, not evident or
public.
<LEND>

<L>3870<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakASya<k2>aprakASya
{%A-prakāśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be manifested or
divulged.
<LEND>

<L>3871<pc>0057-b<k1>apraketa<k2>apraketa
{#apraketa#}¦ {%a-praketa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. indis-
criminate, unrecognizable.
<LEND>

<L>3872<pc>0057-b<k1>aprakzita<k2>aprakzita
{#aprakzita#}¦ {%a-prakṣita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. un-
diminished, undecayed.
<LEND>

<L>3873<pc>0057-b<k1>apraKara<k2>apraKara
{#apraKara#}¦ {%a-prakhara, as, ā, am,%} dull, obtuse;
bland, mild.
<LEND>

<L>3874<pc>0057-b<k1>apragama<k2>apragama
{#apragama#}¦ {%a-pragama, as, ā, am,%} going too
fast for others to follow, not to be surpassed.
<LEND>

<L>3875<pc>0057-b<k1>apragalBa<k2>apragalBa
{#apragalBa#}¦ {%a-pragalbha, as, ā, am,%} not arro-
gant, modest.
<LEND>

<L>3876<pc>0057-b<k1>apragIta<k2>apragIta
{#apragIta#}¦ {%a-pragīta, as, ā, am,%} not chaunted
aloud.
<LEND>

<L>3877<pc>0057-b<k1>apraguRa<k2>apraguRa
{#apraguRa#}¦ {%a-praguṇa, as, ā, am,%} confounded,
perplexed.
<LEND>

<L>3878<pc>0057-b<k1>apragrAha<k2>apragrAha
{#apragrAha#}¦ {%a-pragrāha, as, ā, am,%} unre-
strained, unbridled.
<LEND>

<L>3879<pc>0057-b<k1>apracaNkaSa<k2>apracaNkaSa
{#apracaNkaSa#}¦ {%a-pracaṅkaśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
without power of seeing; not beautiful (?).
<LEND>

<L>3880<pc>0057-b<k1>apracura<k2>apracura
{#apracura#}¦ {%a-pracura, as, ā, am,%} little, few.
<LEND>

<L>3881<pc>0057-b<k1>apracetas<k2>apracetas
{#apracetas#}¦ {%a-pracetas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. de-
ficient in understanding, foolish.
<LEND>

<L>3882<pc>0057-b<k1>apracetita<k2>apracetita
{%A-pracetita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unknown.
<LEND>

<L>3883<pc>0057-b<k1>apracodita<k2>apracodita
{#apracodita#}¦ {%a-pracodita, as, ā, am,%} unde-
sired, not bidden or commanded; undeclared, not
said; unasked.
<LEND>

<L>3884<pc>0057-b<k1>apracCedya<k2>apracCedya
{#apracCedya#}¦ {%a-pracchedya, as, ā, am,%} inscru-
table.
<LEND>

<L>3885<pc>0057-b<k1>apracyuta<k2>apracyuta
{#apracyuta#}¦ {%a-pracyuta, as, ā, am,%} unmoved;
(with abl.) not fallen or deviating from, observing,
following.
<LEND>

<L>3886<pc>0057-b<k1>apraja<k2>apraja
{#apraja#}¦ {%a-praja, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jan%}), without
progeny, childless; unborn; unpeopled; ({%ā%}), f. not
bearing, unprolific, having no child.
<LEND>

<L>3887<pc>0057-b<k1>aprajajYi<k2>aprajajYi<h>1
1. {%a-prajajñi, is, is, i%}¦ (rt {%jan%}), without progeny.
<LEND>
[Page0057-c+ 69]

<L>3888<pc>0057-c<k1>aprajas<k2>aprajas
{%A-prajas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ without progeny, childless.
{%—Aprajas-tā,%} f. or {%aprajas-tva%} or {%aprajās-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. childlessness.
<LEND>

<L>3889<pc>0057-c<k1>aprajAta<k2>aprajAta
{%A-prajāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ childless, having no progeny.
<LEND>

<L>3890<pc>0057-c<k1>aprajajYi<k2>aprajajYi<h>2
{#aprajajYi#} 2¦. {%a-prajajñi, is, is, i%} (rt. {%jñā%}), Ved.
inexperienced, inexpert.
<LEND>

<L>3891<pc>0057-c<k1>apraRIta<k2>apraRIta
{#apraRIta#}¦ {%a-praṇīta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%nī%}), un-
consecrated, profane, common; ({%am%}), n. the act of
frying clarified butter without consecrated water.
<LEND>

<L>3892<pc>0057-c<k1>apraRodya<k2>apraRodya
{#apraRodya#}¦ {%a-praṇodya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%nud%}), not
to be turned away.
<LEND>

<L>3893<pc>0057-c<k1>aprat<k2>aprat
{#aprat#}¦ {%a-prat, n, tī, t%} (rt. {%prā%}), Ved. not
affluent; {%apratā,%} inst. c. without wealth.
<LEND>

<L>3894<pc>0057-c<k1>apratarkya<k2>apratarkya
{#apratarkya#}¦ {%a-pratarkya, as, ā, am,%} not to be
discussed; incomprehensible by reason, undefinable.
<LEND>

<L>3895<pc>0057-c<k1>apratApa<k2>apratApa
{#apratApa#}¦ {%a-pratāpa, as,%} m. want of brilliancy,
dulness; meanness, want of dignity.
<LEND>

<L>3896<pc>0057-c<k1>aprati<k2>aprati
{#aprati#}¦ {%a-prati, is, is, i,%} Ved. without op-
ponents, irresistible; unequalled; {%(i),%} ind. irresistibly.
 — 1. {%aprati-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} of unequalled form,
incomparable [cf. 2. {%a-pratirūpa,%} p. 58]. {%—Aprati-%}
{%rūpa-kathā,%} f. incomparable or unanswerable discourse.
{%—Aprati-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} of irresistible power.
<LEND>

<L>3897<pc>0057-c<k1>apratikara<k2>apratikara
{#apratikara#}¦ {%a-pratikara, as, ā, am,%} trusted,
trusting, confidential.
<LEND>

<L>3898<pc>0057-c<k1>apratikarman<k2>apratikarman
{%A-pratikarman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ of unparalleled deeds.
<LEND>

<L>3899<pc>0057-c<k1>apratikAra<k2>apratikAra
{%A-pratikāra%}¦ or {%a-pratīkāra, as,%} m. not remedy-
ing, non-requital, non-retalination; {%(as, ā, am),%} irre-
mediable, helpless, defenceless.
<LEND>

<L>3900<pc>0057-c<k1>apratikArin<k2>apratikArin
{%A-pratikārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ not remedying, not
counteracting.
<LEND>

<L>3901<pc>0057-c<k1>apratigfhya<k2>apratigfhya
{#apratigfhya#}¦ {%a-pratigṛhya, as, ā, am,%} one
from whom one must not accept anything.
<LEND>

<L>3902<pc>0057-c<k1>apratigrAhaka<k2>apratigrAhaka
{%A-pratigrāhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ not accepting.
<LEND>

<L>3903<pc>0057-c<k1>apratigrAhya<k2>apratigrAhya
{%A-pratigrāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be taken, un-
acceptable.
<LEND>

<L>3904<pc>0057-c<k1>apratiGa<k2>apratiGa
{#apratiGa#}¦ {%a-pratigha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%han%}), not
to be kept off, not to be vanquished.
<LEND>

<L>3905<pc>0057-c<k1>apratidvandva<k2>apratidvandva
{#apratidvandva#}¦ {%a-pratidvandva, as, ā, am,%} not
having an adversary in battle; not to be vanquished;
irresistible. {%—Apratidvandva-tā,%} f. unrivalledness.
<LEND>

<L>3906<pc>0057-c<k1>apratiDura<k2>apratiDura
{#apratiDura#}¦ {%a-pratidhura, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
without a match in carrying burdens or the yoke
(said of a horse).
<LEND>

<L>3907<pc>0057-c<k1>apratiDfzwa<k2>apratiDfzwa
{#apratiDfzwa#}¦ {%a-pratidhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} not
to be opposed, irresistible. {%—Apratidhṛṣṭa-śavas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. of irresistible power.
<LEND>

<L>3908<pc>0057-c<k1>apratiDfzya<k2>apratiDfzya
{%A-pratidhṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>3909<pc>0057-c<k1>apratipakza<k2>apratipakza
{#apratipakza#}¦ {%a-pratipakṣa, as, ā, am,%} without
a rival or opponent.
<LEND>

<L>3910<pc>0057-c<k1>apratipaRya<k2>apratipaRya
{#apratipaRya#}¦ {%a-pratipaṇya, as, ā, am,%} not to
be bartered or exchanged.
<LEND>

<L>3911<pc>0057-c<k1>apratipatti<k2>apratipatti
{#apratipatti#}¦ {%a-pratipatti, is,%} f. non-ascertain-
ment; non-performance, failure; neglect, disregard.
<LEND>

<L>3912<pc>0057-c<k1>apratipad<k2>apratipad
{%A-pratipad, t, t, t,%}¦ not stopping; not to be
depended on.
<LEND>

<L>3913<pc>0057-c<k1>apratipanna<k2>apratipanna
{%A-pratipanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ unascertained, unac-
complished, neglected.
<LEND>

<L>3914<pc>0057-c<k1>apratibanDa<k2>apratibanDa
{#apratibanDa#}¦ {%a-pratibandha, as,%} m. absence
of obstruction; {%(as, ā, am),%} unimpeded, undisputed,
direct (inheritance), not collateral or presumptive.
<LEND>

<L>3915<pc>0057-c<k1>apratibala<k2>apratibala
{#apratibala#}¦ {%a-pratibala, as, ā, am,%} of un-
equalled power.
<LEND>

<L>3916<pc>0057-c<k1>apratiboDavat<k2>apratiboDavat
{#apratiboDavat#}¦ {%a-pratibodhavat, ān, atī, at,%}
without the sense of personal consciousness.
<LEND>

<L>3917<pc>0057-c<k1>apratibruvat<k2>apratibruvat
{#apratibruvat#}¦ {%a-pratibruvat, an, atī, at,%} Ved.
not speaking against, not contradicting.
<LEND>

<L>3918<pc>0057-c<k1>apratiBa<k2>apratiBa
{#apratiBa#}¦ {%a-pratibha, as, ā, am,%} modest,
bashful; ({%ā%}), f. shyness, timidity.
<LEND>
[Page0058-a+ 68]

<L>3919<pc>0058-a<k1>apratima<k2>apratima
{#apratima#}¦ {%a-pratima, as, ā, am,%} unequalled,
incomparable, without a match.
<LEND>

<L>3920<pc>0058-a<k1>apratimanyUyamAna<k2>apratimanyUyamAna
{#apratimanyUyamAna#}¦ {%a-pratimanyūyamāna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. being unable to show one's resentment
to another, or to retaliate anger for anger.
<LEND>

<L>3921<pc>0058-a<k1>apratiyatna<k2>apratiyatna
{#apratiyatna#}¦ {%a-pratiyatna, as,%} m. natural or
spontaneous state or condition.
<LEND>

<L>3922<pc>0058-a<k1>apratiyogin<k2>apratiyogin
{#apratiyogin#}¦ {%a-pratiyogin, ī, inī, i,%} with-
out adversary; not opposed (to one another), having
no opposite.
<LEND>

<L>3923<pc>0058-a<k1>apratiraTa<k2>apratiraTa
{#apratiraTa#}¦ {%a-pratiratha, as,%} m. having no
antagonist, an invincible warrior; N. of a Ṛṣi;
({%am%}), n., N. of a hymn composed by Apratiratha.
<LEND>

<L>3924<pc>0058-a<k1>apratirava<k2>apratirava
{#apratirava#}¦ {%a-pratirava, as, ā, am,%} uncon-
tested, undisputed.
<LEND>

<L>3925<pc>0058-a<k1>apratirUpa<k2>apratirUpa<h>2
{#apratirUpa#} 2¦. {%a-pratirūpa, as, ā, am,%} not
corresponding with, unfit. (For 1. see under {%a-prati.%})
<LEND>

<L>3926<pc>0058-a<k1>apratilabDakAma<k2>apratilabDakAma
{#apratilabDakAma#}¦ {%a-pratilabdha-kāma, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unsatiated in one's desires.
<LEND>

<L>3927<pc>0058-a<k1>apratizidDa<k2>apratizidDa
{#apratizidDa#}¦ {%a-pratiṣiddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. 2.
{%sidh%}), unprohibited, unforbidden.
<LEND>

<L>3928<pc>0058-a<k1>apratizeDa<k2>apratizeDa
{%A-pratiṣedha, as,%}¦ m. non-prohibition, non-ne-
gation.
<LEND>

<L>3929<pc>0058-a<k1>apratizkuta<k2>apratizkuta
{#apratizkuta#}¦ {%a-pratiṣkuta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not to be kept off, not to be resisted, not contradicted,
not refused.
<LEND>

<L>3930<pc>0058-a<k1>apratizWa<k2>apratizWa
{#apratizWa#}¦ {%a-pratiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} having no
solid ground, fluctuating; thrown away, unprofit-
able; infamous, disreputable; ({%as%}), m., N. of a hell;
({%ā%}), f. instability, absence of reputation, ill-fame, dis-
honour.
<LEND>

<L>3931<pc>0058-a<k1>apratizWAna<k2>apratizWAna
{%A-pratiṣṭhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. without solid or
firm ground; ({%am%}), n. instability.
<LEND>

<L>3932<pc>0058-a<k1>apratizWita<k2>apratizWita
{%A-pratiṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unsettled, unfixed;
unconsecrated; uncelebrated, obscure.
<LEND>

<L>3933<pc>0058-a<k1>apratisaNkrama<k2>apratisaNkrama
{#apratisaNkrama#}¦ {%a-pratisaṅkrama, as, ā, am,%}
having no intermixture.
<LEND>

<L>3934<pc>0058-a<k1>apratisaNKya<k2>apratisaNKya
{#apratisaNKya#}¦ {%a-pratisaṅkhya, as, ā, am,%} un-
observed. {%—Apratisaṅkhya-nirodha, as,%} m. the
unobserved nullity or annihilation of an object.
<LEND>

<L>3935<pc>0058-a<k1>apratihata<k2>apratihata
{#apratihata#}¦ {%a-pratihata, as, ā, am,%} uninter-
rupted, unobstructed, irresistible; unaffected, unim-
paired, indestructible, uninjured; not disappointed.
{%—Apratihata-netra, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist deity
(whose eyes are unimpeded).
<LEND>

<L>3936<pc>0058-a<k1>apratIkAra<k2>apratIkAra
{#apratIkAra#}¦ {%a-pratīkāra.%} See under {%a-pra-%}
{%tikara,%} p. 57.
<LEND>

<L>3937<pc>0058-a<k1>apratIkzam<k2>apratIkzam
{#apratIkzam#}¦ {%a-pratīkṣam,%} ind. without look-
ing backward.
<LEND>

<L>3938<pc>0058-a<k1>apratIta<k2>apratIta
{#apratIta#}¦ {%a-pratīta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%i%} with
{%prati%}), unapproached, unattackable; unopposed; un-
intelligible, not understood. {%—Apratīta-tā,%} f. unin-
telligibleness.
<LEND>

<L>3939<pc>0058-a<k1>apratIti<k2>apratIti
{%A-pratīti, is,%}¦ f. the state of not being understood;
mistrust, want of confidence.
<LEND>

<L>3940<pc>0058-a<k1>apratItta<k2>apratItta
{#apratItta#}¦ {%a-pratītta, as, ā, am%} (for {%a-pra-%}
{%tidatta,%} fr. rt. {%dā%} with {%prati%}), Ved. not given back.
<LEND>

<L>3941<pc>0058-a<k1>apratIpa<k2>apratIpa
{#apratIpa#}¦ {%a-pratīpa, as,%} m., N. of a king of
Magadha.
<LEND>

<L>3942<pc>0058-a<k1>apratula<k2>apratula
{#apratula#}¦ {%a-pratula, as,%} m. want of weight,
want, necessity.
<LEND>

<L>3943<pc>0058-a<k1>apratta<k2>apratta
{#apratta#}¦ {%a-pratta, as, ā, am%} (for {%a-pradatta,%}
fr. rt. {%dā%} with {%pra%}), not given away; ({%ā%}), f. not
given away in marriage, a girl.
<LEND>

<L>3944<pc>0058-a<k1>apratyakza<k2>apratyakza
{#apratyakza#}¦ {%a-pratyakṣa, as, ā, am,%} not pre-
sent to the sight, invisible, imperceptible; unknown.
{%—Apratyakṣa-tā,%} f. imperceptibility. {%—A-praty-%}
{%akṣa-śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} not distinctly taught.
<LEND>
[Page0058-b+ 69]

<L>3945<pc>0058-b<k1>apratyaya<k2>apratyaya
{#apratyaya#}¦ {%a-pratyaya, as,%} m. distrust, dis-
belief, doubt; not an affix; {%(as, ā, am),%} distrustful
(with loc.); having no affix. {%—A-pratyaya-stha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} (in gram.) not pertaining to an affix.
<LEND>

<L>3946<pc>0058-b<k1>apratyAKyAta<k2>apratyAKyAta
{#apratyAKyAta#}¦ {%a-pratyākhyāta, as, ā, am,%} un-
contradicted, unrefuted, assented to.
<LEND>

<L>3947<pc>0058-b<k1>apratyAKyAna<k2>apratyAKyAna
{%A-pratyākhyāna, am,%}¦ n. non-refutation.
<LEND>

<L>3948<pc>0058-b<k1>apratyAKyeya<k2>apratyAKyeya
{%A-pratyākhyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be contra-
dicted, undeniable.
<LEND>

<L>3949<pc>0058-b<k1>apratyfta<k2>apratyfta
{#apratyfta#}¦ {%a-pratyṛta, as, ā, am,%} not attacked.
<LEND>

<L>3950<pc>0058-b<k1>apraTita<k2>apraTita
{#apraTita#}¦ {%a-prathita, as, ā, am,%} unpublished;
unnoted, unknown, not celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>3951<pc>0058-b<k1>apradIptAgni<k2>apradIptAgni
{#apradIptAgni#}¦ {%a-pradīptāgni (˚ta-ag˚), is, is, i,%}
dyspeptic.
<LEND>

<L>3952<pc>0058-b<k1>apradugDa<k2>apradugDa
{#apradugDa#}¦ {%a-pradugdha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
milked to the end.
<LEND>

<L>3953<pc>0058-b<k1>apradfpita<k2>apradfpita
{#apradfpita#}¦ {%a-pradṛpita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
proud, not arrogant; not humbled, not careless (?).
<LEND>

<L>3954<pc>0058-b<k1>apraDAna<k2>apraDAna
{#apraDAna#}¦ {%a-pradhāna, as, ā, am,%} not princi-
pal, subordinate, secondary. {%—Apradhāna-tā,%} f. or
{%apradhāna-tva, am,%} n. subordination, inferiority.
<LEND>

<L>3955<pc>0058-b<k1>apraDfzya<k2>apraDfzya
{#apraDfzya#}¦ {%a-pradhṛṣya, as, ā, am,%} not to
be vanquished, invincible.
<LEND>

<L>3956<pc>0058-b<k1>aprapadana<k2>aprapadana
{#aprapadana#}¦ {%a-prapadana, am,%} n., Ved. a bad
place of refuge.
<LEND>

<L>3957<pc>0058-b<k1>aprabala<k2>aprabala
{#aprabala#}¦ {%a-prabala, as, ā, am,%} inefficacious,
weak.
<LEND>

<L>3958<pc>0058-b<k1>apraBa<k2>apraBa
{#apraBa#}¦ {%a-prabha, as, ā, am,%} without radiance,
obscure; dull; mean.
<LEND>

<L>3959<pc>0058-b<k1>apraBu<k2>apraBu
{#apraBu#}¦ {%a-prabhu, us, us, u,%} wanting power,
unable, incompetent (with loc.). {%—Aprabhu-tva, am,%}
n. want of power, insufficiently.
<LEND>

<L>3960<pc>0058-b<k1>apraBUta<k2>apraBUta
{%A-prabhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ insufficient, inadequate.
<LEND>

<L>3961<pc>0058-b<k1>apraBUti<k2>apraBUti
{%A-prabhūti, is,%}¦ f. little effort.
<LEND>

<L>3962<pc>0058-b<k1>apramatta<k2>apramatta
{#apramatta#}¦ {%a-pramatta, as, ā, am,%} not careless,
careful, attentive, vigilant, sober.
<LEND>

<L>3963<pc>0058-b<k1>apramAda<k2>apramAda
{%A-pramāda, as,%}¦ m. care, vigilance; {%(as, ā, am),%}
careful, cautious, steady; ({%am%}), ind. attentively,
carefully; without interruption.
<LEND>

<L>3964<pc>0058-b<k1>apramAdin<k2>apramAdin
{%A-pramādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ careful, attentive.
<LEND>

<L>3965<pc>0058-b<k1>apramada<k2>apramada
{#apramada#}¦ {%a-pramada, as, ā, am,%} without
pleasure, joyless.
<LEND>

<L>3966<pc>0058-b<k1>apramaya<k2>apramaya
{#apramaya#}¦ {%a-pramaya, as, a, am,%} Ved. un-
limited, imperishable.
<LEND>

<L>3967<pc>0058-b<k1>apramA<k2>apramA
{#apramA#}¦ {%a-pramā,%} f. a rule which is no
authority (see {%a-pramāṇa%}); incorrect knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>3968<pc>0058-b<k1>apramARa<k2>apramARa
{#apramARa#}¦ {%a-pramāṇa, as, ā, am,%} immeasur-
able, unlimited; without weight or proof, without au-
thority; ({%am%}), n. a rule which is no standard of action.
{%—A-pramāṇa-vid, t, t, t,%} incapable of weighing
evidence. {%—Apramāṇa-śubha, ās,%} m. pl. of immea-
surable virtue; N. of a class of Buddhist divinities.
{%—Apramāṇābha (˚ṇa-ābha), ās,%} m. pl. of unlimited
splendor; N. of a class of divinities in Buddhism.
<LEND>

<L>3969<pc>0058-b<k1>apramARika<k2>apramARika
{%A-pramāṇika, as, ā, am,%}¦ unauthorized; properly
{%a-prāmāṇika,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>3970<pc>0058-b<k1>apramita<k2>apramita
{%A-pramita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unbounded, unmeasured;
not proved, not established by authority.
<LEND>

<L>3971<pc>0058-b<k1>aprameya<k2>aprameya
{%A-prameya, as, ā, am,%}¦ immeasurable; unfathom-
able, inscrutable; not to be proved. {%—Aprame-%}
{%yātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā,%} m. of inscrutable spirit, an
epithet of Śiva. {%—Aprameyānubhāva (˚ya-an˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of unlimited energy.
<LEND>

<L>3972<pc>0058-b<k1>apramAyuka<k2>apramAyuka
{#apramAyuka#}¦ {%a-pramāyuka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
dying suddenly (?), immeasurably long (?).
<LEND>

<L>3973<pc>0058-b<k1>apramIya<k2>apramIya
{#apramIya#}¦ {%a-pramīya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not to
be killed.
<LEND>

<L>3974<pc>0058-b<k1>apramUra<k2>apramUra
{#apramUra#}¦ {%a-pramūra,%} Ved. or {%a-pramūrcchita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} not foolish, prudent.
<LEND>
[Page0058-c+ 70]

<L>3975<pc>0058-c<k1>apramfzya<k2>apramfzya
{#apramfzya#}¦ {%a-pramṛṣya, as, ā, am,%} not to
be destroyed, indestructible.
<LEND>

<L>3976<pc>0058-c<k1>apramoda<k2>apramoda
{#apramoda#}¦ {%a-pramoda, am,%} n. inability to re-
move pain.
<LEND>

<L>3977<pc>0058-c<k1>aprayatna<k2>aprayatna
{#aprayatna#}¦ {%a-prayatna, as,%} m. absence of
effort, indifference, laziness; {%(as, ā, am),%} not ener-
getic, indifferent, apathetic, not devoted to (with
loc.).
<LEND>

<L>3978<pc>0058-c<k1>aprayARi<k2>aprayARi
{#aprayARi#}¦ {%a-prayāṇi, is,%} f. not going, not
moving.
<LEND>

<L>3979<pc>0058-c<k1>aprayApaRi<k2>aprayApaRi
{%A-prayāpaṇi%}¦ or {%a-prayāpani, is,%} f. not causing
to go on; not allowing to progress.
<LEND>

<L>3980<pc>0058-c<k1>aprayAvam<k2>aprayAvam
{#aprayAvam#}¦ {%a-prayāvam,%} ind. (rt. {%yu%}), Ved.
without interruption, attentively.
<LEND>

<L>3981<pc>0058-c<k1>aprayucCat<k2>aprayucCat
{%A-prayucchat, an, antī, at%}¦ Ved. unceasing, care-
ful, attentive.
<LEND>

<L>3982<pc>0058-c<k1>aprayuta<k2>aprayuta
{%A-prayuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. unaltered, continual.
<LEND>

<L>3983<pc>0058-c<k1>aprayutvan<k2>aprayutvan
{%A-prayutvan, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. not separate, com-
bined, careful.
<LEND>

<L>3984<pc>0058-c<k1>aprayAsa<k2>aprayAsa
{#aprayAsa#}¦ {%a-prayāsa, as,%} m. ease, absence
of trouble.
<LEND>

<L>3985<pc>0058-c<k1>aprayoga<k2>aprayoga
{#aprayoga#}¦ {%a-prayoga, as,%} m. non-applica-
bility, bad application.
<LEND>

<L>3986<pc>0058-c<k1>aprayojaka<k2>aprayojaka
{%A-prayojaka, as, ikā%}¦ or {%akā, am,%} inapplicable,
causeless, irrelevant.
<LEND>

<L>3987<pc>0058-c<k1>apralamba<k2>apralamba
{#apralamba#}¦ {%a-pralamba, as, ā, am,%} not slow,
quick, expeditious.
<LEND>

<L>3988<pc>0058-c<k1>apravartaka<k2>apravartaka
{#apravartaka#}¦ {%a-pravartaka, as, ikā, am,%} ab-
staining from action, inert; not exciting to action.
<LEND>

<L>3989<pc>0058-c<k1>apravartana<k2>apravartana
{%A-pravartana, am,%}¦ n. the act of refraining from,
not engaging in; not exciting to any action.
<LEND>

<L>3990<pc>0058-c<k1>apravftta<k2>apravftta
{%A-pravṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not acting, not engaged
in, not commenced, not instigated.
<LEND>

<L>3991<pc>0058-c<k1>apravftti<k2>apravftti
{%A-pravṛtti, is,%}¦ f. not proceeding; abstaining
from action, inertion; non-excitement; (in medic.)
suppression of the natural evacuations, constipation,
ischury, &c.
<LEND>

<L>3992<pc>0058-c<k1>apravIRa<k2>apravIRa
{#apravIRa#}¦ {%a-pravīṇa, as, ā, am,%} unskilful.
<LEND>

<L>3993<pc>0058-c<k1>apravIta<k2>apravIta
{#apravIta#}¦ {%a-pravīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unap-
proached; not approaching (to impregnate); not im-
pregnated.
<LEND>

<L>3994<pc>0058-c<k1>apravfdDa<k2>apravfdDa
{#apravfdDa#}¦ {%a-pravṛddha, as, ā, am,%} not ex-
cessively grown.
<LEND>

<L>3995<pc>0058-c<k1>apraveda<k2>apraveda
{#apraveda#}¦ {%a-praveda, as, ā, am,%} Ved. difficult
to be found or obtained; silent (?).
<LEND>

<L>3996<pc>0058-c<k1>apraSakta<k2>apraSakta
{#apraSakta#}¦ {%a-praśakta, a-praśakti,%} probably
for {%a-prasakta, a-prasakti,%} q. v. below.
<LEND>

<L>3997<pc>0058-c<k1>apraSasta<k2>apraSasta
{#apraSasta#} 1¦. {%a-praśasta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śaṃs%}),
not praised, worthless, contemptible; not approved,
forbidden.
<LEND>

<L>3998<pc>0058-c<k1>apraSasya<k2>apraSasya
{%A-praśasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not praiseworthy, not
good.
<LEND>

<L>3999<pc>0058-c<k1>apraSasta<k2>apraSasta<h>2
{#apraSasta#} 2¦. {%a-praśasta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śās%}),
Ved. indocile, disobedient.
<LEND>

<L>4000<pc>0058-c<k1>aprasakta<k2>aprasakta
{#aprasakta#}¦ {%a-prasakta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%sañj%}), not
addicted, not attached to; moderate, temperate.
<LEND>

<L>4001<pc>0058-c<k1>aprasakti<k2>aprasakti
{%A-prasakti, is,%}¦ f. or {%a-prasaṅga, as,%} m. non-
addiction, non-attachment, moderation.
<LEND>

<L>4002<pc>0058-c<k1>aprasanna<k2>aprasanna
{#aprasanna#}¦ {%a-prasanna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%sad%}), not
quiet, not clear, turbid, muddy; displeased, dissatisfied,
unfavourable.
<LEND>

<L>4003<pc>0058-c<k1>aprasAda<k2>aprasAda
{%A-prasāda, as,%}¦ m. disfavour, disapprobation.
<LEND>

<L>4004<pc>0058-c<k1>aprasAdya<k2>aprasAdya
{%A-prasādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be propitiated;
unappeasable, implacable.
<LEND>

<L>4005<pc>0058-c<k1>aprasava<k2>aprasava
{#aprasava#}¦ {%a-prasava, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%su%} or {%sū%}),
not being prolific; ({%as%}), m. the not being born.
<LEND>

<L>4006<pc>0058-c<k1>aprasUta<k2>aprasUta
{%A-prasūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not having offspring, bar-
ren, childless.
<LEND>

<L>4007<pc>0058-c<k1>aprasahya<k2>aprasahya
{#aprasahya#}¦ {%a-prasahya, as, ā, am,%} intolerable,
insufferable.
<LEND>
[Page0059-a+ 72]

<L>4008<pc>0059-a<k1>aprasidDa<k2>aprasidDa
{#aprasidDa#}¦ {%a-prasiddha, as, ā, am,%} not settled
or established; unknown, uncelebrated; unusual, un-
common, of no real existence, not current or generally
known. {%—Aprasiddha-pada, am,%} n. an obsolete
word.
<LEND>

<L>4009<pc>0059-a<k1>aprastuta<k2>aprastuta
{#aprastuta#}¦ {%a-prastuta, as, ā, am,%} unconnected
with, irrelevant, unsuitable to the time or subject; not
principal, not being the chief subject-matter; acci-
dental or extraneous; not ready.
<LEND>

<L>4010<pc>0059-a<k1>aprastAvika<k2>aprastAvika
{%A-prastāvika, as, ī, am,%}¦ irrelevant to the subject-
matter.
<LEND>

<L>4011<pc>0059-a<k1>aprahata<k2>aprahata
{#aprahata#}¦ {%a-prahata, as, ā, am,%} unhurt, in-
tact; untilled, waste; uncultivated.
<LEND>

<L>4012<pc>0059-a<k1>aprahan<k2>aprahan
{%A-prahan, ā, ā, a,%}¦ or {%a-prahantṛ, tā, trī,%}
{%tṛ,%} not hurting.
<LEND>

<L>4013<pc>0059-a<k1>aprahita<k2>aprahita
{#aprahita#}¦ {%a-prahita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
stirred up, not sent out, unassailed (by foes).
<LEND>

<L>4014<pc>0059-a<k1>aprAkfta<k2>aprAkfta
{#aprAkfta#}¦ {%a-prākṛta, as, ā, am,%} not princi-
pal; not original; special, particular; not vulgar.
<LEND>

<L>4015<pc>0059-a<k1>aprAgrya<k2>aprAgrya
{#aprAgrya#}¦ {%a-prāgrya, as, ā, am,%} secondary,
subordinate.
<LEND>

<L>4016<pc>0059-a<k1>aprAcIna<k2>aprAcIna
{#aprAcIna#}¦ {%a-prācīna, as, ā, am,%} modern, re-
cent; not eastern, western.
<LEND>

<L>4017<pc>0059-a<k1>aprAjYa<k2>aprAjYa
{#aprAjYa#}¦ {%a-prājña, as, ā, am,%} unlearned,
ignorant; unconscious. {%—Aprājña-tā,%} f. ignorance,
unconsciousness.
<LEND>

<L>4018<pc>0059-a<k1>aprARa<k2>aprARa
{#aprARa#}¦ {%a-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-prāṇin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} inanimate, lifeless.
<LEND>

<L>4019<pc>0059-a<k1>aprADAnya<k2>aprADAnya
{#aprADAnya#}¦ {%a-prādhānya, am,%} n. inferiority,
subordination.
<LEND>

<L>4020<pc>0059-a<k1>aprApta<k2>aprApta
{#aprApta#}¦ {%a-prāpta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%āp%} with {%pra%}),
unobtained; unarrived; unproved. {%—Aprāpta-kāla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} out of season, inopportune, ill-timed; un-
der age; ({%am%}), n. an irregular debate. {%—Aprāpta-%}
{%yauvana, as, ā, am,%} not arrived at puberty. {%—A-%}
{%prāpta-vyavahāra%} or {%aprāpta-vayas, ās, ās, as,%}
a minor in law; under age, not of years to engage
in law or public business. {%—Aprāptāvasara (˚ta-%}
{%av˚), as, ā, am,%} unseasonable, inopportune.
<LEND>

<L>4021<pc>0059-a<k1>aprApti<k2>aprApti
{%A-prāpti, is,%}¦ f. non-attainment, non-acquisition,
scarcity.
<LEND>

<L>4022<pc>0059-a<k1>aprApya<k2>aprApya
{%A-prāpya,%}¦ ind. not having found; {%(as, ā, am),%}
unobtainable, unattainable, scarce.
<LEND>

<L>4023<pc>0059-a<k1>aprAmARika<k2>aprAmARika
{#aprAmARika#}¦ {%a-prāmāṇika, as, ī, am,%} un-
authentic, unwarranted, unauthoritative, unworthy of
being trusted or believed.
<LEND>

<L>4024<pc>0059-a<k1>aprAmARya<k2>aprAmARya
{%A-prāmāṇya, am,%}¦ n. absence or insufficiency of
proof or authority.
<LEND>

<L>4025<pc>0059-a<k1>aprAmisatya<k2>aprAmisatya
{#aprAmisatya#}¦ {%a-prāmi-satya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mī%}
with {%pra%}), Ved. of unimpaired truthfulness; unalter-
ably true.
<LEND>

<L>4026<pc>0059-a<k1>aprAyatya<k2>aprAyatya
{#aprAyatya#}¦ {%a-prāyatya, am,%} n. impurity, un-
governableness.
<LEND>

<L>4027<pc>0059-a<k1>aprAyu<k2>aprAyu
{#aprAyu#}¦ {%a-prāyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. assiduous,
unceasing, not going forth (?).
<LEND>

<L>4028<pc>0059-a<k1>aprAyus<k2>aprAyus
{%A-prāyus, us,%}¦ m., Ved. not ceasing; with unde-
parted life, with unimpaired or ever brilliant vigour.
<LEND>

<L>4029<pc>0059-a<k1>apriya<k2>apriya
{#apriya#}¦ {%a-priya, as, ā, am,%} disagreeable,
disliked; unkind, unfriendly; ({%as%}), m. a foe, an
enemy; N. of a Yakṣa; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of skeat fish,
Silurus Pungentissimus. {%—Apriya-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} or {%apriya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} doing an unkind-
ness; unfriendly, ill-disposed. {%—Apriya-bhāgin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} unfortunate. {%—Apriya-vādin, ī, inī, i%} or
{%apriyaṃ-vada, as, ā, am,%} speaking unkindly or
harshly.
<LEND>

<L>4030<pc>0059-a<k1>aprIti<k2>aprIti
{%A-prīti, is,%}¦ f. dislike, aversion, unfriendliness, en-
mity; pain. {%—Aprīti-kara, as, ī, am,%} unkind, ad-
verse; disagreeable, offensive. {%—Aprīty-ātmaka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} consisting of pain.
<LEND>

<L>4031<pc>0059-a<k1>apretarAkzasI<k2>apretarAkzasI
{#apretarAkzasI#}¦ {%apreta-rākṣasī,%} f., N. of a
plant, Ocimum Sanctum; see {%apeta-rākṣasī,%} p. 56.
<LEND>
[Page0059-b+ 71]

<L>4032<pc>0059-b<k1>apreman<k2>apreman
{#apreman#}¦ {%a-preman, a,%} n. dislike, aversion;
{%(ā, ā, a),%} unfriendly.
<LEND>

<L>4033<pc>0059-b<k1>aprEza<k2>aprEza
{#aprEza#}¦ {%a-praiṣa, as, ā, am,%} not invoked
with a {%praiṣa%} (q. v.) mantra.
<LEND>

<L>4034<pc>0059-b<k1>aprozivas<k2>aprozivas
{#aprozivas#}¦ {%a-proṣivas, -vān, -ṣuṣī, -vat%}
(rt. {%vas,%} perf. part.), Ved. not gone away, staying.
<LEND>

<L>4035<pc>0059-b<k1>aprOQa<k2>aprOQa
{#aprOQa#}¦ {%a-prauḍha, as, ā, am,%} not arrogant,
timid, gentle; ({%ā%}), f. an unmarried girl, or one very
recently married and not come to womanhood.
<LEND>

<L>4036<pc>0059-b<k1>aplava<k2>aplava
{#aplava#}¦ {%a-plava, as, ā, am,%} without a ship;
not swimming. {%—A-plaveśa (˚va-īśa), as, ā, am,%}
unable to swim.
<LEND>

<L>4037<pc>0059-b<k1>apvA<k2>apvA
{#apvA#}¦ {%apvā,%} f. (fr. {%apa%} or fr. obs. rt. {%ap?%}),
disease; danger; the region of the throat or neck.
<LEND>

<L>4038<pc>0059-b<k1>apsa<k2>apsa<h>1
{#apsa#} 1¦. {%ap-sa, as,%} m., Ved. giving or
yielding {%(ap%}) water [cf. {%ap-sā%} below].
<LEND>

<L>4039<pc>0059-b<k1>apsa<k2>apsa<h>2
{#apsa#} 2¦. {%a-psa, as,%} m., Ved. not destroying.
<LEND>

<L>4040<pc>0059-b<k1>apsara<k2>apsara
{#apsara#}¦ {%ap-sara, as,%} m. water-goer, any
aquatic animal (see etym. of next).
<LEND>

<L>4041<pc>0059-b<k1>apsaras<k2>apsaras
{#apsaras#}¦ {%apsaras, ās,%} or {%apsarā,%} f. (fr. {%ap,%}
q. v., and rt. {%sṛ,%} ‘going in the waters or between
the waters of the clouds’); certain female divinities,
who reside in the sky and are the wives of the Gan-
dharvas; they have the faculty of changing their
shapes, are very fond of bathing, and are said to have
been produced at the churning of the ocean. {%—Apsa-%}
{%raḥ-pati, is,%} m. Indra, lord of the Apsarasas. {%—Apsa-%}
{%ras-tīrtha, am,%} n. a pool in which the Apsarasas
bathe. {%—Apsarā-pati, is,%} m. lord of the Apsarasas;
N. of the Gandharva Śikhaṇḍin.
<LEND>

<L>4042<pc>0059-b<k1>apsarAya<k2>apsarAya
{%Apsarāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%apsarāyate, -yitum,%} to behave
like an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>4043<pc>0059-b<k1>apsava<k2>apsava
{#apsava#}¦ {%apsava, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (if from
{%apsas%}) possessed of form or shape; (if from {%ap%})
giving water.
<LEND>

<L>4044<pc>0059-b<k1>apsavya<k2>apsavya
{%Apsavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for water, being in the
water.
<LEND>

<L>4045<pc>0059-b<k1>apsas<k2>apsas
{#apsas#}¦ {%apsas, as,%} n. (fr. obs. rt. {%ap%}), Ved.
cheek; shape, beauty (?).
<LEND>

<L>4046<pc>0059-b<k1>apsA<k2>apsA
{#apsA#}¦ {%ap-sā, ās,%} m. (fr. {%ap%} and rt. {%san%}), Ved.
giving water.
<LEND>

<L>4047<pc>0059-b<k1>apsu<k2>apsu<h>1
{#apsu#} 1¦. {%a-psu, us, us, u,%} Ved. without food;
not beautiful (?).
<LEND>

<L>4048<pc>0059-b<k1>apsu<k2>apsu<h>2
{#apsu#} 2¦. {%apsu%} (loc. pl. of {%ap,%} q. v.), in the
water or waters. This word forms the first member
of various compounds, thus: {%—apsu-kṣit, t,%} m.,
Ved. dwelling within the clouds, in the region be-
tween heaven and earth. {%—Apsu-caru, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. going in the waters. {%—Apsu-ja, as, ā, am,%}
or {%apsu-jā, ās, ās,%} m. f., Ved. born in the waters.
{%—Apsu-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. vanquishing between the
waters or in the region of the clouds. {%—Apsu-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessed of what is in the waters; mot
losing one's nature in the water (e. g. the lightning
does not lose his fiery nature in the clouds); con-
taining the word {%apsu%}. {%—Apsu-yoga, as,%} m. the
connecting power in water. {%—Apsu-yoni, is,%} m.,
Ved. born from the waters. {%—Apsu-vāh, ṭ,%} m., Ved.
driving in water. {%—Apsu-ṣad, t, t, t,%} Ved. dwelling
in the waters. {%—Apsu-Soma, as,%} m. Soma in water;
a cup filled with water. {%—Apsu-saṃśita, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. raised or excited in the waters.
<LEND>

<L>4049<pc>0059-b<k1>aPala<k2>aPala
{#aPala#}¦ {%a-phala, as, ā, am,%} unfruitful,
barren; vain, unproductive; deprived of virility; ({%as%}),
m., N, of a plant, Tamarix Indica; ({%ā%}), f. the Aloe
plant, Aloes Perfoliata; another plant, Flacourtia Cata-
phracta. {%—A-phala-kāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} disinterested,
not looking to beneficial consequences. {%—Aphala-tā,%}
f. or {%aphala-tva, am,%} n. barreness, unprofitableness.
{%—A-phala-prepsu, us, us, u,%} one who desires no
recompense.
<LEND>
[Page0059-c+ 71]

<L>4050<pc>0059-c<k1>aPalgu<k2>aPalgu
{#aPalgu#}¦ {%a-phalgu, us, us, u,%} not vain, pro-
dictive, profitable.
<LEND>

<L>4051<pc>0059-c<k1>aPulla<k2>aPulla
{#aPulla#}¦ {%a-phulla, as, ā, am,%} unblown.
<LEND>

<L>4052<pc>0059-c<k1>aPena<k2>aPena<h>1
{#aPena#} 1¦. {%a-phena, as, ā, am,%} frothless,
without scum or foam.
<LEND>

<L>4053<pc>0059-c<k1>aPena<k2>aPena<h>2
{#aPena#} 2¦. {%a-phena, am,%} n. (corruption of
{%ahi-phena,%} foam of a snake?), opium.
<LEND>

<L>4054<pc>0059-c<k1>abadDa<k2>abadDa
{#abadDa#}¦ {%a-baddha, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-baddhaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am%} (rt. {%bandh%}), unbound, at liberty; un-
meaning, nonsensical. {%—Abaddha-mukha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} foul-mouthed, scurrilous; mendacious.
<div n="P"/>.1. {%a-badhya, as, ā, am,%} unmeaning, nonsensical.
<LEND>

<L>4055<pc>0059-c<k1>abanDaka<k2>abanDaka
{%A-bandhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ not binding; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of this
man.
<LEND>

<L>4056<pc>0059-c<k1>abanDana<k2>abanDana
{%A-bandhana, as, ā, am,%}¦ without fetters, free.
<LEND>

<L>4057<pc>0059-c<k1>abanDya<k2>abanDya
{%A-bandhya.%}¦ See s. v. below.
<LEND>

<L>4058<pc>0059-c<k1>abanDra<k2>abanDra
{%A-bandhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. without bonds or
ligatures, falling asunder.
<LEND>

<L>4059<pc>0059-c<k1>abaDa<k2>abaDa
{#abaDa#}¦ {%a-badha, as,%} m. (rt. {%badh%}), not killing;
({%ā%}), f. a segment of the base of a triangle, see {%a-%}
{%vadha%}. {%—Abadhārha (˚dha-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} not
worthy of death.
<LEND>

<L>4060<pc>0059-c<k1>abaDya<k2>abaDya<h>2
2. {%a-badhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be killed, invio-
lable; see also {%a-vadhya%}. {%—Abadhya-bhāva, as,%}
m. immunity, sacredness of character, as, that of an
ambassador.
<LEND>

<L>4061<pc>0059-c<k1>abanDu<k2>abanDu
{#abanDu#}¦ {%a-bandhu, us, us, u,%} without kindered,
without companions, friendless. {%—Abandhu-kṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} Ved. causing want of companions.
<LEND>

<L>4062<pc>0059-c<k1>abAnDava<k2>abAnDava
{%A-bāndhava, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no relation or
kindered, lone, unacknowledged, unowned.
<LEND>

<L>4063<pc>0059-c<k1>abanDya<k2>abanDya
{#abanDya#}¦ {%a-bandhya, as, ā, am,%} not barren,
not unfruitful, fruitful, productive.
<LEND>

<L>4064<pc>0059-c<k1>abala<k2>abala
{#abala#}¦ {%a-bala, as, ā, am,%} weak, feeble, in-
firm; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant, Tapia Cratæva; N. of
a king of Magadha; ({%ā%}), f. a woman; one of the
ten Buddhist earths; ({%am%}), n. want of strength,
weakness [with {%abala%} have been compared, Goth.
<nsi>ubils,</nsi> Them. <nsi>ubila</nsi>; Mod. Germ. <nsi>uebel</nsi>; Eng.
‘evil]. <nsi>— Abala-dhanvan, ā, ā, a,</nsi> possessing a weak
bow. {%—Abalābala (˚la-ab˚), as,%} m. ‘neither power-
ful nor powerless;’ an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>4065<pc>0059-c<k1>abalAsa<k2>abalAsa
{%A-balāsa, as, ā, am,%}¦ not consumptive.
<LEND>

<L>4066<pc>0059-c<k1>abalIyas<k2>abalIyas
{%Abalīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ weaker.
<LEND>

<L>4067<pc>0059-c<k1>abalya<k2>abalya
{%A-balya, am,%}¦ n. weakness, sickness.
<LEND>

<L>4068<pc>0059-c<k1>abahu<k2>abahu
{#abahu#}¦ {%a-bahu, us, us,%} or {%vī, u,%} not many,
few. {%—Abahv-akṣara, as, ā, am,%} or {%abahv-ac,%}
{%c, c, c,%} having not more than two syllables.
<LEND>

<L>4069<pc>0059-c<k1>abADa<k2>abADa
{#abADa#}¦ {%a-bādha, as, ā, am,%} unobstructed,
unrestrained; free from pain; {%(ā),%} f. segment of the
base of a triangle [cf. {%a-badhā%} under {%a-badha%} above].
<LEND>

<L>4070<pc>0059-c<k1>abADaka<k2>abADaka
{%A-bādhaka, as, aikā, am,%}¦ or {%a-bādhita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unimpeded, unobstructed; unrefuted.
<LEND>

<L>4071<pc>0059-c<k1>abADya<k2>abADya
{%A-bādhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ improper to be opposed or
pained.
<LEND>

<L>4072<pc>0059-c<k1>abAnDava<k2>abAnDava
{#abAnDava#}¦ {%a-bāndhava.%} See {%a-bandhu.%}
<LEND>

<L>4073<pc>0059-c<k1>abAliSa<k2>abAliSa
{#abAliSa#}¦ {%a-bāliśa, as, ā, am,%} not childish.
<LEND>

<L>4074<pc>0059-c<k1>abAlendu<k2>abAlendu
{#abAlendu#}¦ {%a-bālendu (˚la-in˚), us,%} m. full
moon.
<LEND>

<L>4075<pc>0059-c<k1>abAhya<k2>abAhya
{#abAhya#}¦ {%a-bāhya, as, ā, am,%} not exterior,
internal; without an exterior.
<LEND>

<L>4076<pc>0059-c<k1>abinDana<k2>abinDana
{#abinDana#}¦ {%ab-indhana, as,%} m. ‘having ({%ap%})
water for fuel,’ submarine fire.
<LEND>

<L>4077<pc>0059-c<k1>abiBIvas<k2>abiBIvas
{#abiBIvas#}¦ {%a-bibhīvas, ān, bhyuṣī, at,%} or
{%a-bibhyat, at, atī, at,%} Ved. fearless, confident.
<LEND>

<L>4078<pc>0059-c<k1>abudDa<k2>abudDa
{#abudDa#}¦ {%a-buddha, as, ā, am,%} unwise, foolish.
{%—A-buddha-tva, am,%} n. foolishness.
<LEND>

<L>4079<pc>0059-c<k1>abudDi<k2>abudDi
{%A-buddhi, is,%}¦ f. want of understanding; ignorance;
stupidity; ({%is, is, i%}), ignorant, stupid. {%—A-buddhi-%}
{%pūrva%} or {%a-buddhi-pūrvaka, as, ā, am,%} not
[Page0060-a+ 76]
preceded by intelligence; beginning with non-in-
telligence; ({%am%}), ind. ignorantly. {%—Abuddhi-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} unwise, ignorant, foolish.
<LEND>

<L>4080<pc>0060-a<k1>abuD<k2>abuD
{%A-budh, bhut, t, t,%}¦ or {%a-budha, as, ā, am,%} stu-
pid, foolish; ({%as%}), m. a fool.
<LEND>

<L>4081<pc>0060-a<k1>abuDya<k2>abuDya
{%A-budhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not to be perceived;
not to be awakened.
<LEND>

<L>4082<pc>0060-a<k1>abuDyamAna<k2>abuDyamAna
{%A-budhyamāna, as ,ā, am,%}¦ not being awake.
<LEND>

<L>4083<pc>0060-a<k1>aboDa<k2>aboDa
{%A-bodha, as,%}¦ m. ignorance, stupidity; {%(as, ā, am),%}
ignorant, stupid; puzzled, perplexed. {%—A-bodha-ga-%}
{%mya, as, ā, am,%} incomprehensible.
<LEND>

<L>4084<pc>0060-a<k1>aboDanIya<k2>aboDanIya
{%A-bodhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unintelligible; not to
be awakened or aroused.
<LEND>

<L>4085<pc>0060-a<k1>abuDna<k2>abuDna
{#abuDna#}¦ {%a-budhna, am,%} n., Ved. ‘having no-
bottom or root,’ the air or intermediate region.
<LEND>

<L>4086<pc>0060-a<k1>abja<k2>abja
{#abja#}¦ {%ab-ja, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ap%} and rt. {%jan%}),
born in water; ({%as%}), m. the conch; the moon; the
tree Barringtonia Acutangula; Dhanvantari, physician
of the gods, produced at the churning of the ocean;
N. of a son of Viśala; {%(am),%} n. a lotus; a large
number of millions. {%—Abja-ja, as,%} m. an epithet of
Brahmā (sprung at the creation from the lotus,
which arose from the navel of Viṣṇu). {%—Abja-dṛś,%}
{%k, k, k,%} or {%abja-nayana, as, ā, am,%} or {%abja-netra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} lotus-eyed, having large fine eyes. {%—Abja-%}
{%bāndhava, as,%} m. the sun (friend of the lotus).
{%—Abja-bhava, as,%} m. Brahmā, a Brāhman. {%—Abja-%}
{%bhoga, as,%} m. the root of a lotus. {%—Abja-yoni, is,%}
m. epithet of Brahmā [cf. {%abja-ja%}]. {%—Abja-vāhana,%}
{%as,%} m. epithet of Śiva, ‘carrying the moon’ on his
forehead. {%—Abja-hasta, as,%} m. the sun (represented
as holding a lotus in one hand).
<LEND>

<L>4087<pc>0060-a<k1>abjA<k2>abjA
{%Ab-jā, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. born in water.
<LEND>

<L>4088<pc>0060-a<k1>abjinI<k2>abjinI
{%Abjinī,%}¦ f. a multitude of lotus flowers. {%—Abjinī-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>4089<pc>0060-a<k1>abjas<k2>abjas
{#abjas#}¦ {%abjas, as,%} n. shape, beauty [cf.
{%apsas%}].
<LEND>

<L>4090<pc>0060-a<k1>abjit<k2>abjit
{#abjit#}¦ {%ab-jit, t, t, t%} (fr. {%ap%} and rt. {%ji%}),
Ved. conquering waters.
<LEND>

<L>4091<pc>0060-a<k1>abda<k2>abda
{#abda#}¦ {%ab-da, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%ap%} and rt. {%dā%}),
giving water; ({%as%}), m. a cloud; a year; the grass
Cyperus Rotundus; N. of a mountain. {%—Abda-tantra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of an astronomical work. {%—Abda-vāhana,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of Śiva (? borne on a cloud or bearing the
clouds). {%—Abda-śata, am,%} n. a century. {%—Abda-%}
{%sahasra, am,%} n. a thousand years. {%—Abda-sāra,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of camphor. {%—Abdārdha (˚da-ar˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a half year.
<LEND>

<L>4092<pc>0060-a<k1>abdayA<k2>abdayA
{%Abdayā,%}¦ ind., Ved. out of desire of giving water.
<LEND>

<L>4093<pc>0060-a<k1>abdi<k2>abdi
{%Ab-di, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a cloud. {%—Abdi-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of clouds, giving water, im-
pregnating (?).
<LEND>

<L>4094<pc>0060-a<k1>abdurga<k2>abdurga
{#abdurga#}¦ {%ab-durga, am,%} n. (see {%ap%}), a fortress
surrounded by a moat or lake.
<LEND>

<L>4095<pc>0060-a<k1>abdevatAka<k2>abdevatAka
{#abdevatAka#}¦ {%ab-devatāka%} or {%ab-daivata, as,%}
{%ā, am%} (see {%ap%}), having the waters as divinities, prais-
ing the waters.
<LEND>

<L>4096<pc>0060-a<k1>abDi<k2>abDi
{#abDi#}¦ {%ab-dhi, is,%} m. (fr. {%ap%} and rt. {%dhā%}), a
pond, lake; the ocean; sometimes used to denote the
numerals 4 or (?) 7. {%—Abdhi-kapha, as,%} m. cuttle
fish bone, being considered as the forth of the sea.
{%—Abdhi-ja, as, ā, am,%} born in the ocean; {%(au),%}
m. the {%Aśvins%}; ({%ā%}), f. spirituous liquor. {%—Abdhi-%}
{%jhaṣa, as,%} m. a sea-fish. {%—Abdhi-dvīpā,%} f, earth;
an island surrounded by the ocean. {%—Abdhi-nagarī,%}
f., N. of Dvārakā, the capital of Kriṣṇa. {%—Abdhi-na-%}
{%vanītaka, as,%} m. the moon. {%—Abdhi-phena, as,%} m.
cuttle fish bone. {%—Abdhi-maṇḍūkī,%} f. the pearl oyster.
{%—Abdhi-śayamna, as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu, sleeping
on the ocean at the periods of the destruction and
renovation of the world. {%—Abdhi-sāra, as,%} m. a
gem. {%—Abdhya-agni, is,%} m. submarine fire.
<LEND>

<L>4097<pc>0060-a<k1>abBakza<k2>abBakza
{#abBakza#}¦ {%ab-bhakṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ap%} and
rt. {%bhakṣ%}), living upon water; ({%as%}), m. a snake.
<LEND>

<L>4098<pc>0060-a<k1>abBakzaRa<k2>abBakzaRa
{%Ab-bhakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. living upon water, a kind
of fasting.
<LEND>
[Page0060-b+ 72]

<L>4099<pc>0060-b<k1>abBra<k2>abBra
{#abBra#}¦ {%ab-bhra.%} See {%abhra,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>4100<pc>0060-b<k1>abrahmacarya<k2>abrahmacarya
{#abrahmacarya#}¦ {%a-brahmacarya, as, ā, am,%} un-
chaste.
<LEND>

<L>4101<pc>0060-b<k1>abrahmacaryaka<k2>abrahmacaryaka
{%A-brahma-caryaka, am,%}¦ n. incontinence, coition.
<LEND>

<L>4102<pc>0060-b<k1>abrahmaRya<k2>abrahmaRya
{#abrahmaRya#}¦ {%a-brahmaṇya, am,%} n. act not
proper for a Brāhman; an unbrahmanical or sacri-
legious act; in theatrical language an exclamation,
meaning ‘help!’ ‘to the rescue!’ ‘a disgraceful deed
is perpetrated!’
<LEND>

<L>4103<pc>0060-b<k1>abrahman<k2>abrahman
{%A-brahman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. unaccompanied by de-
votion or devotional hymns, wanting in knowledge
or divine wisdom; separated from the Brāhmans.
{%—Abrahma-tā,%} f., Ved. want of devotion or true
divine knowledge. {%—A-brahma-vid, t, t, t,%} not
knowing Brahma or the supreme spirit.
<LEND>

<L>4104<pc>0060-b<k1>abrAhmaRa<k2>abrAhmaRa
{%A-brāhmaṇa, as,%}¦ m. not a Brāhman; {%(as, ā,%}
{%am),%} without Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>4105<pc>0060-b<k1>abrAhmaRya<k2>abrAhmaRya
{%A-brāhmaṇya, am,%}¦ n. violation of sanctity, or of
the duty of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>4106<pc>0060-b<k1>abruvat<k2>abruvat
{#abruvat#}¦ {%a-bruvat, an, atī, at,%} not speak-
ing, silent.
<LEND>

<L>4107<pc>0060-b<k1>abrUkfta<k2>abrUkfta
{#abrUkfta#}¦ {%abrū-kṛta, am,%} n. making {%(abrū%})
a growling; indistinctness of speech caused by shutting
the lips.
<LEND>

<L>4108<pc>0060-b<k1>abliNga<k2>abliNga
{#abliNga#}¦ {%ab-liṅga, am,%} n. (see {%ap%}), a {%Sūkta%}
or verse addressed to the waters.
<LEND>

<L>4109<pc>0060-b<k1>abvindu<k2>abvindu
{#abvindu#}¦ {%ab-vindu, us,%} m. (see {%ap%}), a tear.
<LEND>

<L>4110<pc>0060-b<k1>aB<k2>aB
{#aB#}¦ {%abh.%} See {%ambh.%}
<LEND>

<L>4111<pc>0060-b<k1>aBakta<k2>aBakta<h>1
{#aBakta#} 1¦. {%a-bhakta, as, ā, am,%} unbelieving,
not devoted, not worshipping; not attached to, de-
tached, unconnected with; not accepted.
<LEND>

<L>4112<pc>0060-b<k1>aBakti<k2>aBakti
{%A-bhakti, is,%}¦ f. want of devotion to, want of faith,
unbelief, incredulity. {%—Abhakti-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
undevoted to, unbelieving.
<LEND>

<L>4113<pc>0060-b<k1>aBakta<k2>aBakta<h>2
{#aBakta#} 2¦. {%a-bhakta, as, ā, am,%} not eaten.
<LEND>

<L>4114<pc>0060-b<k1>aBaktacCandas<k2>aBaktacCandas
{%—A-bhakta-cchandas, as,%}¦ n. or {%a-bhakta-ruc,%}
{%k,%} f. want of appetite.
<LEND>

<L>4115<pc>0060-b<k1>aBakza<k2>aBakza
{#aBakza#}¦ {%a-bhakṣa, as,%} m. or {%a-bhakṣaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. not eating anything, fasting.
<LEND>

<L>4116<pc>0060-b<k1>aBakzya<k2>aBakzya
{%A-bhakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be eaten. {%—A-%}
{%bhakṣya-bhakṣaṇa, am,%} n. eating of prohibited
food. {%—Abhakṣya-bhakṣin, īm, iṇī, i,%} eating for-
bidden food.
<LEND>

<L>4117<pc>0060-b<k1>aBaga<k2>aBaga
{#aBaga#}¦ {%a-bhaga, as, ā, am,%} without enjoy-
ment, unfortunate.
<LEND>

<L>4118<pc>0060-b<k1>aBagna<k2>aBagna
{#aBagna#}¦ {%a-bhagna, as, ā, am,%} unbroken,
entire; uniterrupted.
<LEND>

<L>4119<pc>0060-b<k1>aBaNgura<k2>aBaNgura
{%A-bhaṅgura, as, ā, am,%}¦ unbroken; firm; un-
disturbed.
<LEND>

<L>4120<pc>0060-b<k1>aBajyamAna<k2>aBajyamAna
{%A-bhajyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not being detached,
associated, attended with.
<LEND>

<L>4121<pc>0060-b<k1>aBadra<k2>aBadra
{#aBadra#}¦ {%a-bhadra, as, ā, am,%} not good, bad,
wicked; ({%am%}), n. badness, sin, wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>4122<pc>0060-b<k1>aBaya<k2>aBaya
{#aBaya#}¦ {%a-bhaya, as, ā, am,%} unfearful, not
dangerous, secure; fearless, undaunted; ({%as%}), m., N.
of Śiva; a son of Dharma; ({%ā%}), f. a plant, Termi-
nalia Citrina; ({%am%}), n, absence or removal of fear,
peace, safety, security; N. of a sacrificial hymn; the
root of a fragrant grass, Andropogon Muricatum.
{%—Abhaya-giri-vāsin, ī,%} m. dwelling on the moun-
tain of safety; N. of a division of Kātyāyana's pupils.
{%—Abhaya-giri-vihāra, as,%} m. Buddhist monastery
on the Abhayagiri. {%—Abhayaṅ-kara, as, ā, am,%}
or {%abhayaṅ-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing peace of safety.
{%—Abhaya-jāta, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Abhaya-%}
{%ḍiṇḍima, as,%} m. a war-drum. {%—A-bhaya-da%} or
{%abhayan-dada%} or {%abhayam-prada, as, ā, am,%}
giving fearlessness or safety; ({%as%}), m. an Arhat of
the Jainas; N. of a king, the son of Manusyu and
father of Su-dhanvan. {%—Abhaya-dakṣiṇā,%} f. promise
or present of protection from danger; a gift to a
Brāhman, which he may receive even from a Śūdra.
<LEND>
[Page0060-c+ 75]

<L>4123<pc>0060-c<k1>aBayadAna<k2>aBayadAna
{%—Abhaya-dāna%}¦ or {%abhaya-pradāna, am,%} n. giv-
ing assurance of safety or protection. {%—Abhaya-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. (a modern term), a written document
or paper granting assurance of safety, a safe conduct.
{%—Abhaya-vacana, am,%} n. or {%abhaya-vāc, k,%} f.
assurance of safety, encouragement. {%—Abhaya-sani,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. giving safety. {%—Abhayānanda (˚ya-%}
{%ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>4124<pc>0060-c<k1>aBartfkA<k2>aBartfkA
{#aBartfkA#}¦ {%a-bhartṛkā,%} f. an unmarried wo-
man; a widow.
<LEND>

<L>4125<pc>0060-c<k1>aBava<k2>aBava
{#aBava#}¦ {%a-bhava, as,%} m. non-existence; de-
struction, end of the world.
<LEND>

<L>4126<pc>0060-c<k1>aBavanIya<k2>aBavanIya
{%A-bhavanīya%}¦ or {%a-bhavitavya, as, ā, am,%} what
is not to be, what will not be.
<LEND>

<L>4127<pc>0060-c<k1>aBavanmatayoga<k2>aBavanmatayoga
{%A-bhavan-mata-yoga%}¦ or {%a-bhavan-mata-sam-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. (in rhetoric) a defect in composition;
want of harmony between the ideas, which are to be
expressed, and the words by which they are expressed.
<LEND>

<L>4128<pc>0060-c<k1>aBavya<k2>aBavya
{%A-bhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be, not predestined;
what ought not to be, improper, inauspicious.
<LEND>

<L>4129<pc>0060-c<k1>aBastra<k2>aBastra
{#aBastra#}¦ {%a-bhastra, as, ā, am,%} without bellows.
<LEND>

<L>4130<pc>0060-c<k1>aBastrakA<k2>aBastrakA
{%A-bhastrakā%}¦ or {%a-bhastrikā%} or {%a-bhastrākā,%} f.
a badly made or inferior pair of bellows. The former
two are said to mean also, ‘a small woman who has
no bellows.’
<LEND>

<L>4131<pc>0060-c<k1>aBAga<k2>aBAga
{#aBAga#}¦ {%a-bhāga, as, ā, am%} or {%a-bhāgin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} not sharing or dividing.
<LEND>

<L>4132<pc>0060-c<k1>aBAgya<k2>aBAgya
{%A-bhāgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfortunate, wretched.
<LEND>

<L>4133<pc>0060-c<k1>aBAva<k2>aBAva
{#aBAva#}¦ {%a-bhāva, as,%} m. non-existence, ab-
sence; non-entity, negation, nullity, the seventh cate-
gory in Kaṇāda's system; annihilation, death.
<LEND>

<L>4134<pc>0060-c<k1>aBAvanA<k2>aBAvanA
{%A-bhāvanā, am,%}¦ f. n. absence of judgment or
right perception; absence of religious meditation or
contemplation.
<LEND>

<L>4135<pc>0060-c<k1>aBAvanIya<k2>aBAvanIya
{%A-bhāvanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦  not to be inferred or
contemplated, inconceivable.
<LEND>

<L>4136<pc>0060-c<k1>aBAvayitf<k2>aBAvayitf
{%A-bhāvayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ not perceiving, not
inferring, not comprehending.
<LEND>

<L>4137<pc>0060-c<k1>aBAvin<k2>aBAvin
{%A-bhāvin, ī, inī, i%}¦ or {%a-bhāvya, as, ā, am,%}
what is not to be or will not be, not destined to be.
<LEND>

<L>4138<pc>0060-c<k1>aBAzaRa<k2>aBAzaRa
{#aBAzaRa#}¦ {%a-bhāṣaṇa, am,%} n. not speaking,
silence.
<LEND>

<L>4139<pc>0060-c<k1>aBi<k2>aBi
{#aBi#}¦ {%abhi,%} ind. (a prefix to verbs and
nouns, expressing) to, towards, into, over, upon.
<div n="P"/>.(As a prefix to verbs of motion) it expresses the
notion of moving or going towards, approaching, &c.
<div n="P"/>.(As a prefix to nouns not derived from verbs) it ex-
presses superiority, intensity, &c.; e. g. {%abhi-tāmra,%}
{%abhi-nava,%} q. v.
<div n="P"/>. (As a separable adverb or preposition) it expresses
(with acc.) to, towards, in the direction of, against;
in, into, to; for, for the sake of; on account of; on,
upon, with regard to; by, before, in front of; over.
It may even express one after the other, severally;
e. g. {%vṛkṣam vṛkṣam abhi,%} tree after tree [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀμφί</lang> Lat. <nsi>ob</nsi>; Zend <nsi>aibi</nsi>; Goth. <nsi>bi;</nsi> Old
High Germ. <nsi>bī</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>4140<pc>0060-c<k1>aBika<k2>aBika
{%Abhika, as, ā, am,%}¦ lustful, libidinous; ({%as%}), m. a
lover, a husband. Some regard this as derived from
{%abhi-kam%} [cf. {%anika%}].
<LEND>

<L>4141<pc>0060-c<k1>aBitarAm<k2>aBitarAm
{%Abhi-tarām, abhi-tas.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>4142<pc>0060-c<k1>aBikam<k2>aBikam
{#aBikam#}¦ {%abhi-kam,%} perf. {%-cakame, -kamitum,%}
to desire, love.
<LEND>

<L>4143<pc>0060-c<k1>aBikAma<k2>aBikAma
{%Abhi-kāma, as,%}¦ m. affection, desire; {%(as, ā, am),%}
affectionate, loving, desirous, with obj. in acc. or gen.;
({%am%}), ind. with desire.
<LEND>

<L>4144<pc>0060-c<k1>aBikAmika<k2>aBikAmika
{%Abhi-kāmika, as, ā, am,%}¦ voluntary.
<LEND>

<L>4145<pc>0060-c<k1>aBikamp<k2>aBikamp
{#aBikamp#}¦ {%abhi-kamp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kampate,%}
{%-pitum,%} to tremble vehemently, to shake: Caus.
{%-kampayati, -yitum,%} to stir, allure.
<LEND>

<L>4146<pc>0060-c<k1>aBikANkz<k2>aBikANkz
{#aBikANkz#}¦ {%abhi-kāṅkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kāṅkṣati,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to ask, request, long for, desire; to strive.
<LEND>

<L>4147<pc>0060-c<k1>aBikANkzA<k2>aBikANkzA
{%Abhi-kāṅkṣā,%}¦ f. longing, wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>4148<pc>0060-c<k1>aBikANkzita<k2>aBikANkzita
{%Abhi-kāṅkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ longed for, wished,
desired.
<LEND>
[Page0061-a+ 70]

<L>4149<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikANkzin<k2>aBikANkzin
{%Abhi-kāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ longing for, wishing,
desiring.
<LEND>

<L>4150<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikAla<k2>aBikAla
{#aBikAla#}¦ {%abhi-kāla, as,%} m., N. of a town;
see Rāmāyaṇa II. 68.
<LEND>

<L>4151<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikAS<k2>aBikAS
{#aBikAS#}¦ {%abhi-kāś,%} Intens., Ved. {%-cākaśīti,%}
{%-cākaśyate,%} to illuminate, irradiate; to look on, to
perceive.
<LEND>

<L>4152<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikuts<k2>aBikuts
{#aBikuts#}¦ {%abhi-kuts,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-kutsyati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to revile, to inveigh against.
<LEND>

<L>4153<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikuz<k2>aBikuz
{#aBikuz#}¦ {%abhi-kuṣ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-kuṣṇāti,%}
{%-koṣitum,%} to pull, to tear.
<LEND>

<L>4154<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikUj<k2>aBikUj
{#aBikUj#}¦ {%abhi-kūj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kūjati, -jitum,%}
to twitter, warble, coo.
<LEND>

<L>4155<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikf<k2>aBikf
{#aBikf#}¦ {%abhi-kṛ%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%}
to do with reference to or in behalf of; to procure,
effect; to render, make: Desid. {%-cikīrṣati,%} to wish
to do; to long for.
<LEND>

<L>4156<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikaraRa<k2>aBikaraRa
{%Abhi-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. effecting; incantation.
<LEND>

<L>4157<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikfti<k2>aBikfti
{%Abhi-kṛti, is,%}¦ f., N. of a metre, containing one
hundred syllables.
<LEND>

<L>4158<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikftvan<k2>aBikftvan
{%Abhi-kṛtvan, vā, vari,%}¦ m. f., Ved. magical; a
magician, a spirit (producing diseases?).
<LEND>

<L>4159<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikfz<k2>aBikfz
{#aBikfz#}¦ {%abhi-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. 6. P. A. {%-karṣati,%}
{%-te, -kṛṣati, -te, -karṣṭum%} or {%-kraṣṭum,%} to
overpower, to pull-down.
<LEND>

<L>4160<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikF<k2>aBikF
{#aBikF#}¦ {%abhi-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -karitum%}
or {%-rītum,%} to pour over, throw over, cover; to fill.
<LEND>

<L>4161<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikxp<k2>aBikxp
{#aBikxp#}¦ {%abhi-kḷp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kalpate,%}
{%-pitum%} or {%-ptum,%} to be adequate to, to answer; to
have the same meaning: Caus. {%-kalpayati, -yitum,%}
to put in order.
<LEND>

<L>4162<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikxpta<k2>aBikxpta
{%Abhi-kḷpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ prepared, produced.
<LEND>

<L>4163<pc>0061-a<k1>aBiknUy<k2>aBiknUy
{#aBiknUy#}¦ {%abhi-knūy,%} cl. 1. A. {%-knūyate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to bemoisten, bedew.
<LEND>

<L>4164<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikratu<k2>aBikratu
{#aBikratu#}¦ {%abhi-kratu, us,%} m., Ved. insolent,
haughty (as an enemy).
<LEND>

<L>4165<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikrand<k2>aBikrand
{#aBikrand#}¦ {%abhi-krand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kradati,%}
{%-ditum,%} to shout at, roar at, to neigh or whinny at.
<LEND>

<L>4166<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikranda<k2>aBikranda
{%Abhi-kranda, as,%}¦ m. a shout.
<LEND>

<L>4167<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikram<k2>aBikram
{#aBikram#}¦ {%abhi-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A., cl. 4. P.
{%-krāmati, -kramate, -krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to
step or go near to, approach; to fly at, attack; to
step upon; to undertake, begin: Caus. {%-kramayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to bring near.
<LEND>

<L>4168<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikrama<k2>aBikrama
{%Abhi-krama, as,%}¦ m. assault, attack; ascending,
mounting; undertaking, attempt, beginning. {%—Abhi-%}
{%krama-nāśa, as,%} m. unsuccessful effort.
<LEND>

<L>4169<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikramaRa<k2>aBikramaRa
{%Abhi-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. or {%abhi-krānti, is,%} f.
stepping near, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>4170<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikrAnta<k2>aBikrAnta
{%Abhi-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached; attacked,
begun.
<LEND>

<L>4171<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikrAntin<k2>aBikrAntin
{%Abhi-krāntin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who has undertaken;
conversant with (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>4172<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikrAmam<k2>aBikrAmam
{%Abhi-krāmam,%}¦ ind. having stepped near.
<LEND>

<L>4173<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikrI<k2>aBikrI
{#aBikrI#}¦ {%abhi-krī,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-krīṇāti, -ṇīte,%}
{%-kretum,%} to buy for a certain purpose.
<LEND>

<L>4174<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikruD<k2>aBikruD
{#aBikruD#}¦ {%abhi-krudh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-krudhyati,%}
{%-kroddhum,%} to be angry with (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>4175<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikruS<k2>aBikruS
{#aBikruS#}¦ {%abhi-kruś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krosati,%}
{%-kroṣṭum,%} to cry out at, call out to; to call to any
one in a scolding manner; to lament with tears, to
bemoan.
<LEND>

<L>4176<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikroSaka<k2>aBikroSaka
{%Abhi-krośaka, as,%}¦ m. a reviler, one who calls
out; a herald (?).
<LEND>

<L>4177<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikzattf<k2>aBikzattf
{#aBikzattf#}¦ {%abhi-kṣattṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. mur-
derer, destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>4178<pc>0061-a<k1>aBikzadA<k2>aBikzadA
{#aBikzadA#}¦ {%abhi-kṣadā,%} f., Ved. (according
to native interpretation) destroying, a destroyer. It
is better, perhaps, to divide thus, {%a-bhikṣa-dā, ās,%}
m. giving without having been asked.
<LEND>
[Page0061-b+ 72]

<L>4179<pc>0061-b<k1>aBikzam<k2>aBikzam
{#aBikzam#}¦ {%abhi-kṣam,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kṣamate,%}
{%-kṣantum,%} to be gracious, propitious, to allow, to
pardon.
<LEND>

<L>4180<pc>0061-b<k1>aBikzar<k2>aBikzar
{#aBikzar#}¦ {%abhi-kṣar,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-kṣarati,%}
{%-te, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-radhyai,%} to flow near or round,
to pour on.
<LEND>

<L>4181<pc>0061-b<k1>aBikzip<k2>aBikzip
{#aBikzip#}¦ {%abhi-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṣipati,%}
{%-kṣeptum,%} to fling at (as the lash of a whip at a
horse), to insult; to excel.
<LEND>

<L>4182<pc>0061-b<k1>aBikzipat<k2>aBikzipat
{%Abhi-kṣipat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} surpassing.
<LEND>

<L>4183<pc>0061-b<k1>aBiKan<k2>aBiKan
{#aBiKan#}¦ {%abhi-khan,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-khanati,%}
{%-te, -nitum,%} to dig up, to turn up (the soil).
<LEND>

<L>4184<pc>0061-b<k1>aBiKyA<k2>aBiKyA<h>1
{#aBiKyA#} 1¦. {%abhi-khyā,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-khyāti,%}
{%-tum,%} to see, view, perceive; to cast a kind or gracious
look upon any one, to be gracious: in later Sanskrit
the rt. {%khyā%} conveys the idea of telling, making
known: Caus. {%-khyāpayati, -yitum,%} to make known.
<div n="P"/>.2. {%abhi-khyā,%} f. look, view; splendor; beauty; fame,
glory; notoriety; telling; calling, addressing; a name,
appellation.
<LEND>

<L>4185<pc>0061-b<k1>aBiKyAta<k2>aBiKyAta
{%Abhi-khyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ become known, mani-
fested.
<LEND>

<L>4186<pc>0061-b<k1>aBiKyAtf<k2>aBiKyAtf
{%Abhi-khyātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. looking, super-
vising, superintending.
<LEND>

<L>4187<pc>0061-b<k1>aBiKyAna<k2>aBiKyAna
{%Abhi-khyāna, am,%}¦ n. fame, glory.
<LEND>

<L>4188<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigam<k2>aBigam
{#aBigam#}¦ {%abhi-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} to go near to, approach (with acc.); to follow;
to meet with, to find; to cohabit, have intercourse
with a woman; to undertake; to get, gain, obtain:
Caus. {%-gamayati, -yitum,%} to cause to obtain, to
cause to apprehend, to explain.
<LEND>

<L>4189<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigacCat<k2>aBigacCat
{%Abhi-gacchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ approaching, &c.
<LEND>

<L>4190<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigata<k2>aBigata
{%Abhi-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached, &c.
<LEND>

<L>4191<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigantf<k2>aBigantf
{%Abhi-gantṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who approaches, one who
has intercourse with a woman; one who understands.
<LEND>

<L>4192<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigama<k2>aBigama
{%Abhi-gama, as,%}¦ m. or {%abhi-gamana, am,%} n. ap-
proaching, visiting; sexual intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>4193<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigamya<k2>aBigamya<h>1
1. {%abhi-gamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be visited; accessi-
ble; inviting.
<LEND>

<L>4194<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigamya<k2>aBigamya<h>2
2. {%abhi-gamya,%}¦ ind. having approached.
<LEND>

<L>4195<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigAmin<k2>aBigAmin
{%Abhi-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having intercourse with.
<LEND>

<L>4196<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigara<k2>aBigara
{#aBigara#}¦ {%abhi-gara.%} See {%abhi-gṝ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>4197<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigarj<k2>aBigarj
{#aBigarj#}¦ {%abhi-garj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-garjati, -jitum,%}
to roar at, to bawl at; to raise savage or ferocious cries.
<LEND>

<L>4198<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigarjana<k2>aBigarjana
{%Abhi-garjana, am,%}¦ n. ferocious roaring, uproar.
<LEND>

<L>4199<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigarjita<k2>aBigarjita
{%Abhi-garjita, am,%}¦ n. a savage cry, uproar.
<LEND>

<L>4200<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigA<k2>aBigA
{#aBigA#}¦ {%abhi-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%}
to go near to, to approach, arrive at; to get, gain.
<LEND>

<L>4201<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigAh<k2>aBigAh
{#aBigAh#}¦ {%abhi-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -hitum,%}
{%gāḍhum,%} to penetrate into.
<LEND>

<L>4202<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigup<k2>aBigup
{#aBigup#}¦ {%abhi-gup,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gopāyati, -gop-%}
{%tum,%} or Caus. {%-gopayati, -yitum,%} to guard, protect.
<LEND>

<L>4203<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigupta<k2>aBigupta
{%Abhi-gupta, as, ā, am,%}¦ guarded, protected, hid-
den, concealed.
<LEND>

<L>4204<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigupti<k2>aBigupti
{%Abhi-gupti, is,%}¦ f. guarding, protecting.
<LEND>

<L>4205<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigoptf<k2>aBigoptf
{%Abhi-goptṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ guarding, protecting.
<LEND>

<L>4206<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigur<k2>aBigur
{#aBigur#}¦ {%abhi-gur,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-gurati, -te,%}
{%-ritum,%} to assent, agree, approve of.
<LEND>

<L>4207<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigUrta<k2>aBigUrta
{%Abhi-gūrta, as, ā, am,%}¦ approved of, destined for
(an offering, &c.), accompanied with applause (?).
<LEND>

<L>4208<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigUrti<k2>aBigUrti
{%Abhi-gūrti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. making resolution or effort,
song of praise, hymn (?).
<LEND>

<L>4209<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigF<k2>aBigF
{#aBigF#}¦ {%abhi-gṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A., Ved. {%-gṛṇāti,%}
{%-ṇīte, -garitum%} or {%-rītum,%} to call to or address with
approbation; to join in; to welcome, praise; to ap-
prove of, to accept propitiously, to allow.
<LEND>

<L>4210<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigara<k2>aBigara
{%Abhi-gara, as,%}¦ m., Ved. song of praise; praising.
<LEND>

<L>4211<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigE<k2>aBigE
{#aBigE#}¦ {%abhi-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gātum,%}
to call to, to sing to; to fill with song; to enchant;
to sing, celebrate in song.
<LEND>

<L>4212<pc>0061-b<k1>aBigras<k2>aBigras
{#aBigras#}¦ {%abhi-gras,%} cl. 1. A. {%-grasate, -si-%}
{%tum,%} to overcome.
<LEND>
[Page0061-c+ 77]

<L>4213<pc>0061-c<k1>aBigrasta<k2>aBigrasta
{%Abhi-grasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ subdued, overcome.
<LEND>

<L>4214<pc>0061-c<k1>aBigrah<k2>aBigrah
{#aBigrah#}¦ {%abhi-grah,%} Ved. {%-grabh,%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛhṇāti, -ṇīte,%} Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte, -grahītum,%}
to seize, catch, take hold of; accept; to set (as a blos-
som); to lay together, to fold; to receive (as a guest):
Caus. {%-grāhayati, -yitum,%} to catch, surprise in the
act; to let one's self be caught; e. g. {%rūpābhi-%}
{%grāhita, as, ā, am,%} taken in the very act.
<LEND>

<L>4215<pc>0061-c<k1>aBigfhIta<k2>aBigfhIta
{%Abhi-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ seized, taken hold of.
{%—Abhigṛhīta-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} having the hands
joined.
<LEND>

<L>4216<pc>0061-c<k1>aBigraDa<k2>aBigraDa
{%Abhi-gradha, as,%}¦ m. attack, onset; defiance, chal-
lenge; seizing, robbing, plundering; authority, weight.
<LEND>

<L>4217<pc>0061-c<k1>aBigrahaRa<k2>aBigrahaRa
{%Abhi-grahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. robbing, seizing anything
in presence of the owner.
<LEND>

<L>4218<pc>0061-c<k1>aBiGarzaRa<k2>aBiGarzaRa
{#aBiGarzaRa#}¦ {%abhi-gharṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt.
{%ghṛṣ%}), rubbing, friction; possession by an evil spirit.
<LEND>

<L>4219<pc>0061-c<k1>aBiGAta<k2>aBiGAta
{#aBiGAta#}¦ {%abhi-ghāta, as,%} m. (rt. {%han%}),
striking, attack, infliction of injury, damage; striking
back, driving away, warding off; abrupt or vehement
articulation of Vedic texts; ({%am%}), n. the combina-
tion of the fourth letter of any class with the first or
third letter; of the second with the first letter; and
of the third with the second letter of any class.
<LEND>

<L>4220<pc>0061-c<k1>aBiGAtaka<k2>aBiGAtaka
{%Abhi-ghātaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ keeping back, re-
moving.
<LEND>

<L>4221<pc>0061-c<k1>aBiGAtin<k2>aBiGAtin
{%Abhi-ghātin, ī, inī, i%}¦ striking, attacking, hurting;
inflicting injury; ({%ī%}), m. an assailant, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>4222<pc>0061-c<k1>aBiGf<k2>aBiGf
{#aBiGf#}¦ {%abhi-ghṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-ghārayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to trickle down; to sprinkle with.
<LEND>

<L>4223<pc>0061-c<k1>aBiGAra<k2>aBiGAra
{%Abhi-ghāra, as,%}¦ m. ghee or clarified butter, drop-
ping it on the oblation.
<LEND>

<L>4224<pc>0061-c<k1>aBiGAraRa<k2>aBiGAraRa
{%Abhi-ghāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of sprinkling ghee,
besprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>4225<pc>0061-c<k1>aBiGArita<k2>aBiGArita
{%Abhi-ghārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled (as ghee),
dropped upon.
<LEND>

<L>4226<pc>0061-c<k1>aBiGArya<k2>aBiGArya
{%Abhi-ghārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>4227<pc>0061-c<k1>aBiGrA<k2>aBiGrA
{#aBiGrA#}¦ {%abhi-ghrā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jighrati, -ghrā-%}
{%tum,%} to snuffle, smell at; to bring the nose close to
another's forehead in caressing, or as a taken of af-
fection.
<LEND>

<L>4228<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicakz<k2>aBicakz
{#aBicakz#}¦ {%abhi-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe,%}
{%-ṣṭum,%} to look at, view, perceive; to oversee; to
cast a kind or gracious look upon any one; to address,
to assail with harsh language; to call.
<LEND>

<L>4229<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicakzaRa<k2>aBicakzaRa
{%Abhi-cakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. caution, means of
defence; magic remedy; ({%ā%}), f., Ved. viewing, indi-
cating (?).
<LEND>

<L>4230<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicakzya<k2>aBicakzya
{%Abhi-cakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken of every-
where.
<LEND>

<L>4231<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicar<k2>aBicar
{#aBicar#}¦ {%abhi-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -ritum,%}
Ved. {%-ritave, -vai, -rase, -radhyai,%} to act wrongly
towards any one; to be faithless (as a wife); to
charm, enchant, exorcise; to possess.
<LEND>

<L>4232<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicara<k2>aBicara
{%Abhi-cara, as,%}¦ m. a servant.
<LEND>

<L>4233<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicaraRa<k2>aBicaraRa
{%Abhi-caraṇa, am,%}¦ n. enchanting, exorcising.
<LEND>

<L>4234<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicaraRIya<k2>aBicaraRIya
{%Abhi-caraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for enchanting or
exorcising.
<LEND>

<L>4235<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicarat<k2>aBicarat
{%Abhi-carat, an, antī, at,%}¦ employing spells or en-
chantments.
<LEND>

<L>4236<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicaritu<k2>aBicaritu
{%Abhi-caritu, us,%}¦ f., Ved. enchanting. {%—Abhi-cari-%}
{%tos,%} to enchant.
<LEND>

<L>4237<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicAra<k2>aBicAra
{%Abhi-cāra, as,%}¦ m. exorcising, incantation, employ-
ment of spells for a malevolent purpose; magic, one
of the Upapātakas or minor crimes. {%—Abhicāra-%}
{%kalpa, as,%} m. title of a work on incantations, belong-
ing to the Atharva-veda. {%—Abhicāra-jvara, as,%} m.
a fever caused by magical spells. {%—Abhicāra-mantra,%}
{%as,%} m. a formula or prayer for working a charm, an
incantation. {%—Abhicāra-yajña%} or {%abhicāra-homa,%}
{%as,%} m. a sacrifice for the same purpose.
<LEND>

<L>4238<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicAraka<k2>aBicAraka
{%Abhi-cāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%abhi-cārin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} enchanting, exorcising, conjuring; a conjurer, a
magician.
<LEND>

<L>4239<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicAraRIya<k2>aBicAraRIya
{%Abhi-cāraṇīya%}¦ or {%abhi-cārya, as, ā, am,%} to be
enchanted.
<LEND>

<L>4240<pc>0061-c<k1>aBicArita<k2>aBicArita
{%Abhi-cārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ enchanted, charmed.
<LEND>
[Page0062-a+ 70]

<L>4241<pc>0062-a<k1>aBicAkaSIti<k2>aBicAkaSIti
{#aBicAkaSIti#}¦ {%abhi-cākaśīti.%} See {%abhi-%}
{%kāś,%} p. 61, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>4242<pc>0062-a<k1>aBicint<k2>aBicint
{#aBicint#}¦ {%abhi-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cintayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to reflect on.
<LEND>

<L>4243<pc>0062-a<k1>aBicihnaya<k2>aBicihnaya
{#aBicihnaya#}¦ {%abhi-cihnaya,%} nom. P. {%-cihna-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to mark, characterize.
<LEND>

<L>4244<pc>0062-a<k1>aBicud<k2>aBicud
{#aBicud#}¦ {%abhi-cud,%} Caus. P. {%-codayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to impel, drive; to inflame, animate, embolden;
to invite; to fix, settle; to announce, inquire for.
<LEND>

<L>4245<pc>0062-a<k1>aBicEdya<k2>aBicEdya
{#aBicEdya#}¦ {%abhi-caidya, as,%} m., N. of Śiśupāla.
<LEND>

<L>4246<pc>0062-a<k1>aBicCad<k2>aBicCad
{#aBicCad#}¦ {%abhi-cchad (-chad),%} cl. 10. P.
{%-cchādayati%} or {%cchadayati, -yitum,%} to cover over.
<LEND>

<L>4247<pc>0062-a<k1>aBicCAyam<k2>aBicCAyam
{#aBicCAyam#}¦ {%abhi-cchāyam,%} ind., Ved. in
darkness.
<LEND>

<L>4248<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijagmivas<k2>aBijagmivas
{#aBijagmivas#}¦ {%abhi-jagmivas, vān, muṣī,%}
{%vat,%} perf. part. of {%abhi-gam,%} q. v., p. 61, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>4249<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijan<k2>aBijan
{#aBijan#}¦ {%abhi-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate, -jani-%}
{%tum,%} to be born for or to; to claim as one's birth-
right; to be born or produced; to be reproduced or
born again; to become.
<LEND>

<L>4250<pc>0062-a<k1>aBija<k2>aBija
{%Abhi-ja, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced all round.
<LEND>

<L>4251<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijana<k2>aBijana
{%Abhi-jana, as,%}¦ m. family, race; descendants; an-
cestors; noble descent; the head or ornament of a
family; native country; fame, notoriety. {%—Abhijana-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} of noble descent.
<LEND>

<L>4252<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijanitu<k2>aBijanitu
{%Abhi-janitu, us,%}¦ f., Ved. the being born or pro-
duced. {%—Abhi-janitos,%} to produce.
<LEND>

<L>4253<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijAta<k2>aBijAta
{%Abhi-jāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced all around; born
in consequence of; born, produced; noble, well-born;
obtained by birth, inbred; fit, proper; wise, learned;
handsome; ({%am%}), n. nativity. {%—Abhijāta-tā,%} f. high
birth, nobility.
<LEND>

<L>4254<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijAti<k2>aBijAti
{%Abhi-jāti, is,%}¦ f. descent, birth.
<LEND>

<L>4255<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijap<k2>aBijap
{#aBijap#}¦ {%abhi-jap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-japati, -pitum,%}
to mutter over or whiper to.
<LEND>

<L>4256<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijaB<k2>aBijaB
{#aBijaB#}¦ {%abhi-jabh,%} Intens., Ved. {%-jañjabh-%}
{%yate,%} to try to swallow, open the mouth to do so.
<LEND>

<L>4257<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijalp<k2>aBijalp
{#aBijalp#}¦ {%abhi-jalp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jalpati, -pi-%}
{%tum,%} to address, to accompany with remarks; to ad-
vocate, to settle by conversation.
<LEND>

<L>4258<pc>0062-a<k1>aBiji<k2>aBiji
{#aBiji#}¦ {%abhi-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%} to
conquer completely, to acquire by conquest: Desid.
{%-jigīṣati,%} to try to win, to attack.
<LEND>

<L>4259<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijaya<k2>aBijaya
{%Abhi-jaya, as%}¦ m. conquest, complete victory.
<LEND>

<L>4260<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijit<k2>aBijit
{%Abhi-jit, t, t, t,%}¦ victorious; born under the con-
stellation Abhijit; ({%t%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu; of a Soma
sacrifice, part of the great sacrifice Gavām-ayana;
N. of a son of Punarvasu, or of his father; ({%t%}), f.,
N. of a star ({%a%} Lyræ); one of the Nakṣatras or
lunar mansions; ({%t%}), n. the eighth Muhūrta of the
day; midday. {%—Abhijin-muhūrta, as,%} m. the
eighth Muhūrta, or period comprising twenty-four
minutes before and twenty-four after midday.
<LEND>

<L>4261<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijita<k2>aBijita
{%Abhi-jita, as,%}¦ m., N. of an asterism.
<LEND>

<L>4262<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijiti<k2>aBijiti
{%Abhi-jiti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. victory, conquest.
<LEND>

<L>4263<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijiGraRa<k2>aBijiGraRa
{#aBijiGraRa#}¦ {%abhi-jighraṇa, am,%} n. the act of
smelling at or touching the forehead of another with
the nose. See {%abhi-ghrā,%} p. 61, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>4264<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijuz<k2>aBijuz
{#aBijuz#}¦ {%abhi-juṣ,%} cl. 6. A., or Ved. P.
{%-juṣate, -ti, -joṣitum,%} to visit, to frequent, to be
pleased with, to be contented with, to like.
<LEND>

<L>4265<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijuzwa<k2>aBijuzwa
{%Abhi-juṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ visited, frequented, sur-
rounded by, possessed of.
<LEND>

<L>4266<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijfmB<k2>aBijfmB
{#aBijfmB#}¦ {%abhi-jṛmbh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-jṛmbhate,%}
{%-bhitum,%} to open the mouth wide (for swallowing).
<LEND>

<L>4267<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijYA<k2>aBijYA
{#aBijYA#}¦ {%abhi-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti, -nīte,%}
{%jñātum,%} to recognize, perceive, know, be or become
aware of; to acknowledge, agree to, own.
<LEND>

<L>4268<pc>0062-a<k1>aBijYa<k2>aBijYa
{%Abhi-jña, as, ā, am,%}¦ knowing, skilful, clever; (with
gen.) one who understands or is conversant with;
[Page0062-b+ 69]
<div n="P"/>({%ā%}), f. remembrance, recollection, recognition; super-
natural science or faculty, of which five are enume-
rated, viz. 1. taking any form at will; 2. hearing
to any distance; 3. seeing to any distance; 4. pene-
trating men's thoughts; 5. knowing their state and
antecedents.
<LEND>

<L>4269<pc>0062-b<k1>aBijYAna<k2>aBijYAna
{%Abhi-jñāna, am,%}¦ n. remembrance, recollection;
knowledge; ascertainment; a sign or token of re-
membrance. {%—Abhijñāna-pattra, am,%} n. certificate.
{%—Abhijñāna-śakuntala, am,%} n. title of a play of
Kālidāsa, i. e. (the {%nāṭaka%} or play) on the subject of
‘token-(recognized)-Śakuntalā.’
<LEND>

<L>4270<pc>0062-b<k1>aBijYApaka<k2>aBijYApaka
{%Abhi-jñāpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ making known, in-
forming.
<LEND>

<L>4271<pc>0062-b<k1>aBijYAya<k2>aBijYAya
{%Abhi-jñāya,%}¦ ind. having recognized.
<LEND>

<L>4272<pc>0062-b<k1>aBijYu<k2>aBijYu
{#aBijYu#}¦ {%abhi-jñu,%} ind., Ved. on the knees,
up to the knees.
<LEND>

<L>4273<pc>0062-b<k1>aBijval<k2>aBijval
{#aBijval#}¦ {%abhi-jval,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jvalati, -litum,%}
to blaze forth, burst into flame.
<LEND>

<L>4274<pc>0062-b<k1>aBiqIna<k2>aBiqIna
{#aBiqIna#}¦ {%abhi-ḍīna, am,%} n. (rt. {%ḍī%}), act of
flying towards.
<LEND>

<L>4275<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitaMs<k2>aBitaMs
{#aBitaMs#}¦ {%abhi-taṃs,%} cl. 1. 10. P., Ved. {%-taṃsati,%}
{%-situm, -sayati, -yitum,%} to shake out of, to rob.
<LEND>

<L>4276<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitaq<k2>aBitaq
{#aBitaq#}¦ {%abhi-taḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tāḍayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to thump, hit, knock, beat, wound, bruise; (in
astron.) to eclipse the greater part of a disk.
<LEND>

<L>4277<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitAqita<k2>aBitAqita
{%Abhi-tāḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ knocked, struck.
<LEND>

<L>4278<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitan<k2>aBitan
{#aBitan#}¦ {%abhi-tan,%} cl. 8. P. {%-tanoti, -nitum,%}
to stretch or spread in front of or across or over; to
place in front of.
<LEND>

<L>4279<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitap<k2>aBitap
{#aBitap#}¦ {%abhi-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -ptum,%}
to irradiate with heat, to heat; to pain, distress: Pass.
{%-tapyate,%}  to suffer intensely: Caus. {%-tāpayati, -yitum,%}
to distress.
<LEND>

<L>4280<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitapta<k2>aBitapta
{%Abhi-tapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ scorched, burnt, afflicted.
<LEND>

<L>4281<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitApa<k2>aBitApa
{%Abhi-tāpa, as,%}¦ m. extreme heat; agitation, afflic-
tion, emotion; great pain.
<LEND>

<L>4282<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitarAm<k2>aBitarAm
{#aBitarAm#}¦ {%abhi-tarām,%} ind. (compar. fr.
{%abhi%}), nearer to.
<LEND>

<L>4283<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitarj<k2>aBitarj
{#aBitarj#}¦ {%abhi-tarj,%} cl. 1. P. or poet. A. {%-tar-%}
{%jati, -te, -jitum%}; cl. 10. P. or poet. A. {%-tarjayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to scold, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>4284<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitas<k2>aBitas
{#aBitas#}¦ {%abhi-tas,%} ind. (Lat. <nsi>apud,</nsi> Eng.
<nsi>about</nsi>), near to, towards; near, in the proximity or
presence; (with acc.) on both sides; before and
after; on all sides, everywhere, about, round; quickly;
entirely. {%—Abhito-bhāva, as,%} m. the state of being
on both sides. {%—Abhito-rātram,%} ind., Ved. near the
night, i. e. either just at the beginning or end. {%—Abhi-%}
{%to-'sthi (˚tas-as˚), is, is, i,%} surrounded by bones.
<LEND>

<L>4285<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitAmra<k2>aBitAmra
{#aBitAmra#}¦ {%abhi-tāmra, as, ā, am,%} dark-red,
very red, murry-coloured.
<LEND>

<L>4286<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitigmaraSmi<k2>aBitigmaraSmi
{#aBitigmaraSmi#}¦ {%abhi-tigmaraśmi,%} ind. to-
wards the sun.
<LEND>

<L>4287<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitfd<k2>aBitfd
{#aBitfd#}¦ {%abhi-tṛd,%} cl. 7. P., Ved. {%-tṛṇatti,%}
{%-tarditum,%} to burst open; to let out; get at, procure.
<LEND>

<L>4288<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitfp<k2>aBitfp
{#aBitfp#}¦ {%abhi-tṛp,%} Caus. P. {%-tarpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to satiate, refresh.
<LEND>

<L>4289<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitfpta<k2>aBitfpta
{%Abhi-tṛpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ satiated, refreshed.
<LEND>

<L>4290<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitF<k2>aBitF
{#aBitF#}¦ {%abhi-tṝ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati, -ritum%} or
{%-rītum,%} to overtake, get up to.
<LEND>

<L>4291<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitti<k2>aBitti
{#aBitti#}¦ {%a-bhitti, is,%} f. not splintering or
breaking.
<LEND>

<L>4292<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitvar<k2>aBitvar
{#aBitvar#}¦ {%abhi-tvar,%} cl. 1. A. {%-tvarate, -ritum,%}
to be in haste.
<LEND>

<L>4293<pc>0062-b<k1>aBitsar<k2>aBitsar
{#aBitsar#}¦ {%abhi-tsar,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-tsarati,%}
{%-ritum,%} to catch, entrap.
<LEND>

<L>4294<pc>0062-b<k1>aBidakziRam<k2>aBidakziRam
{#aBidakziRam#}¦ {%abhi-dakṣiṇam,%} ind. to or
towards the right.
<LEND>
[Page0062-c+ 69]

<L>4295<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidaDat<k2>aBidaDat
{#aBidaDat#}¦ {%abhi-dadhat, at, atī, at,%} address-
ing. See 1. {%abhi-dhā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>4296<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidarSana<k2>aBidarSana
{#aBidarSana#}¦ {%abhi-darśana.%} See {%abhi-dṛś%}
below.
<LEND>

<L>4297<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidazwa<k2>aBidazwa
{#aBidazwa#}¦ {%abhi-daṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%daṃś%}),
bitten.
<LEND>

<L>4298<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidah<k2>aBidah
{#aBidah#}¦ {%abhi-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dag-%}
{%dhum,%} to singe, burn.
<LEND>

<L>4299<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidA<k2>aBidA
{#aBidA#}¦ {%abhi-dā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadāti, -dātum,%}
to give, bestow (for a purpose).
<LEND>

<L>4300<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidApana<k2>aBidApana
{%Abhi-dāpana, am,%}¦ n. the being trampled on by
elephants as a punishment (?).
<LEND>

<L>4301<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidAs<k2>aBidAs
{#aBidAs#}¦ {%abhi-dās,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-dāsati,%}
{%-situm%} to consider and treat as an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>4302<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidigDa<k2>aBidigDa
{#aBidigDa#}¦ {%abhi-digdha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dih%}),
besmeared, especially with poison.
<LEND>

<L>4303<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidipsu<k2>aBidipsu
{#aBidipsu#}¦ {%abhi-dipsu, us, us, u%} ({%dips,%} Desid.
of rt. {%dambh%}), Ved. wishing to deceive, inimical,
cunning.
<LEND>

<L>4304<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidiS<k2>aBidiS
{#aBidiS#}¦ {%abhi-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%}
to point out.
<LEND>

<L>4305<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidizwa<k2>aBidizwa
{%Abhi-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pointed out.
<LEND>

<L>4306<pc>0062-c<k1>aBiduz<k2>aBiduz
{#aBiduz#}¦ {%abhi-duṣ,%} cl. 10. or Caus. P.
{%-dūṣayati, -yitum,%} to contaminate, to wound.
<LEND>

<L>4307<pc>0062-c<k1>aBiduzwa<k2>aBiduzwa
{%Abhi-duṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ contaminated, polluted.
<LEND>

<L>4308<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidUzita<k2>aBidUzita
{%Abhi-dūṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wounded, injured.
<LEND>

<L>4309<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidUti<k2>aBidUti
{#aBidUti#}¦ {%abhi-dūti,%} ind. to or towards a
female messenger.
<LEND>

<L>4310<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidfS<k2>aBidfS
{#aBidfS#}¦ {%abhi-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati, -dra-%}
{%ṣṭum,%} to look at: Caus. P. {%-darśayati, -yitum,%}
to show, point out; to show one's self, i. e. appear:
Pass. {%-dṛśyate,%} to be visible, be in view, appear; to
be considered or thought.
<LEND>

<L>4311<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidarSana<k2>aBidarSana
{%Abhi-darśana, am,%}¦ n. seeing; becoming visible,
appearance.
<LEND>

<L>4312<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidyu<k2>aBidyu
{#aBidyu#}¦ {%abhi-dyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. directed
to heaven, tending or going to heaven; heavenly,
bright; ({%us%}), m. a half month.
<LEND>

<L>4313<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidyut<k2>aBidyut
{#aBidyut#}¦ {%abhi-dyut,%} cl. 1. A. {%-dyotate, -ti-%}
{%tum,%} to burn.
<LEND>

<L>4314<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidru<k2>aBidru
{#aBidru#}¦ {%abhi-dru,%} cl. 1. P. and poet. A.
{%-dravati, -te, -drotum,%} to run up to or near; to
attack, overrun, infest.
<LEND>

<L>4315<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidrutya<k2>aBidrutya
{%Abhi-drutya, as, ā, am,%}¦ run towards, attacked.
<LEND>

<L>4316<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidrutya<k2>aBidrutya
{%Abhi-drutya,%}¦ ind. having attacked.
<LEND>

<L>4317<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidruh<k2>aBidruh<h>1
{#aBidruh#} 1¦. {%abhi-druh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-druhyati,%}
{%-drogdhum, -droḍhum,%} to hate, seek to injure or
maliciously assail.
<LEND>

<L>4318<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidrugDa<k2>aBidrugDa
{%Abhi-drugdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured, oppressed.
2. {%abhi-druh, -dhruk, k, k,%} Ved. seeking to in-
jure, inimical, cunning.
<LEND>

<L>4319<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidruhyamARa<k2>aBidruhyamARa
{%Abhi-druhyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being injured or
oppressed.
<LEND>

<L>4320<pc>0062-c<k1>aBidroha<k2>aBidroha
{%Abhi-droha, as,%}¦ m. injuring, hurting, oppression,
cruelty.
<LEND>

<L>4321<pc>0062-c<k1>aBiDanv<k2>aBiDanv
{#aBiDanv#}¦ {%abhi-dhanv,%} cl. 1. P. A., Ved.
{%-dhanvati, -te, -vitum,%} to come up in haste.
<LEND>

<L>4322<pc>0062-c<k1>aBiDarma<k2>aBiDarma
{#aBiDarma#}¦ {%abhi-dharma, as,%} m. the supreme
truth according to the Buddhists, the dogmas of Bud-
dhist philosophy or metaphysics. {%—Abhidharma-kośa,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a work on the preceding. {%—Abhi-%}
{%dharma-piṭaka, as,%} m. ‘basket of metaphysics,’ title
of that section of Buddhist writings which contains
the {%abhi-dharma.%}
<LEND>

<L>4323<pc>0062-c<k1>aBiDarzaRa<k2>aBiDarzaRa
{#aBiDarzaRa#}¦ {%abhi-dharṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%dhṛṣ%}),
possession by demoniac spirits.
<LEND>

<L>4324<pc>0062-c<k1>aBiDfzRu<k2>aBiDfzRu
{%Abhi-dhṛṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. overpowering,
subduing (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>4325<pc>0062-c<k1>aBiDA<k2>aBiDA<h>1
{#aBiDA#} 1¦. {%abhi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti, %}
[Page0063-a+ 76]
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to set forth, explain, tell, speak to,
address, say, name; A., Ved. to receive; P. (corrup-
tion of {%abhi-dhāvati?%}), to assail: Pass. {%-dhīyate,%} to
be named or called.
<LEND>

<L>4326<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDA<k2>aBiDA<h>2
2. {%abhi-dhā,%}¦ f. name, appellation; the literal power
or sense of a word; a word, sound; {%(ās, ās),%} m. f.,
Ved. naming; praised; invoked (?). {%—Abhidhā-%}
{%dhvaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%} losing one's name. {%—Abhidhā-%}
{%mūla, as, ā, am,%} founded on the literal meaning of
a word.
<LEND>

<L>4327<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAtavya<k2>aBiDAtavya
{%Abhi-dhātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be told or named,
to be manifested.
<LEND>

<L>4328<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAna<k2>aBiDAna
{%Abhi-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. telling, naming, speaking,
speech, manifesting; {%(as, am),%} m. n. a name, title,
appellation, expression, word; a vocabulary, a diction-
ary. {%—Abhidhāna-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m. title of Hema-
candra's vocabulary of synonyms (the jewel that gives
every word that can be imagined). {%—Abhidhāna-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of being used as a name or ex-
pression. {%—Abhidhāna-mālā,%} f. a dictionary. {%—Abhi-%}
{%dhāna-ratnamālā,%} f. title of Halāyudha's vocabulary.
<LEND>

<L>4329<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAnaka<k2>aBiDAnaka
{%Abhi-dhānaka, am,%}¦ n. a sound, a noise.
<LEND>

<L>4330<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAnI<k2>aBiDAnI
{%Abhi-dhānī%}¦ f., Ved. a halter, a rope.
<LEND>

<L>4331<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAnIya<k2>aBiDAnIya
{%Abhi-dhānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be named.
<LEND>

<L>4332<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAnya<k2>aBiDAnya
{%Abhi-dhānya,%}¦ ind. having said, having called.
<LEND>

<L>4333<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAyaka<k2>aBiDAyaka
{%Abhi-dhāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%abhi-dhāyin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} naming, expressing, expressive of, denominat-
ing; telling, speaking. {%—Abhidhāyaka-tva, am,%} n.
the state of being expressive.
<LEND>

<L>4334<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAyam<k2>aBiDAyam
{%Abhi-dhāyam,%}¦ ind. expressing.
<LEND>

<L>4335<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDitsA<k2>aBiDitsA
{%Abhi-dhitsā,%}¦ f. desire of expressing or naming.
<LEND>

<L>4336<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDeya<k2>aBiDeya
{%Abhi-dheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be named or mention-
ed; to be expressed, to be spoken of; ({%am%}), n. sig-
nification, meaning. {%—Abhidheya-rahita, as, ā, am,%}
having no sense or meaning, unmeaning, nonsensical.
<LEND>

<L>4337<pc>0063-a<k1>aBihita<k2>aBihita
{%Abhi-hita, abhi-hiti.%}¦ See s. v. below.
<LEND>

<L>4338<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAv<k2>aBiDAv
{#aBiDAv#}¦ {%abhi-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-te, -vitum,%} to run up towards, to rush upon, attack.
<LEND>

<L>4339<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAvaka<k2>aBiDAvaka
{%Abhi-dhāvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ running up, hasten-
ing towards, assailing; an assailant.
<LEND>

<L>4340<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDAvana<k2>aBiDAvana
{%Abhi-dhāvana, am,%}¦ n. running up, pursuit, chase,
attack.
<LEND>

<L>4341<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDf<k2>aBiDf
{#aBiDf#}¦ {%abhi-dhṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-dhārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to uphold, maintain.
<LEND>

<L>4342<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDyE<k2>aBiDyE
{#aBiDyE#}¦ {%abhi-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati,%}
{%-dhyātum,%} to consider, reflect, mediate upon.
<LEND>

<L>4343<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDyA<k2>aBiDyA
{%Abhi-dhyā,%}¦ f. covering another's property; desire,
wish, longing for in general.
<LEND>

<L>4344<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDyAna<k2>aBiDyAna
{%Abhi-dhyāna, am,%}¦ n. desiring, longing for; wish;
meditation, profound thought.
<LEND>

<L>4345<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDyAyat<k2>aBiDyAyat
{%Abhi-dhyāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ covering, desiring.
<LEND>

<L>4346<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDyAyamAna<k2>aBiDyAyamAna
{%Abhi-dhyāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being meditated on.
<LEND>

<L>4347<pc>0063-a<k1>aBiDvan<k2>aBiDvan
{#aBiDvan#}¦ {%abhi-dhvan,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhvanati,%}
{%-nitum,%} to resound, shout.
<LEND>

<L>4348<pc>0063-a<k1>aBinakz<k2>aBinakz
{#aBinakz#}¦ {%abhi-nakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nakṣati,%}
{%-kṣitum,%} to encompass; Ved. to bring, to approach,
come to, arrive at.
<LEND>

<L>4349<pc>0063-a<k1>aBinad<k2>aBinad
{#aBinad#}¦ {%abhi-nad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nadati, -ditum,%}
to sound towards a person (with acc.); to sound,
raise a noise: Caus. {%-nādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
sound, fill with noise: Pass. to resound.
<LEND>

<L>4350<pc>0063-a<k1>aBinadDa<k2>aBinadDa
{#aBinadDa#}¦ {%abhi-naddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%nah%}),
bound, tied round, fastened on or upon. {%—Abhi-%}
{%naddhākṣa (˚dha-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} blindfold.
<LEND>

<L>4351<pc>0063-a<k1>aBinand<k2>aBinand
{#aBinand#}¦ {%abhi-nand,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nandati,%}
{%-te, -ditum,%} to rejoice at, salute, welcome, address,
congratulate; to praise, applaud, approve, respect, care
for; to acknowledge: Caus. {%-nandayati, -yitum,%}
to gladden.
<LEND>

<L>4352<pc>0063-a<k1>aBinanda<k2>aBinanda
{%Abhi-nanda, as,%}¦ m. rejoicing, delighting; ap-
plauding; wish, desire; N. of a commentator or com-
mentary on the Amara-koṣa; N. of another author;
({%ā%}), f. delight, wish.
<LEND>

<L>4353<pc>0063-a<k1>aBinandana<k2>aBinandana
{%Abhi-nandana, am,%}¦ n. delighting, rejoicing; prais-
ing, applauding, approving; wish, desire; ({%as%}), m.
the fourth Jaina Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī.
<LEND>
[Page0063-b+ 69]

<L>4354<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinandanIya<k2>aBinandanIya
{%Abhi-nandanīya%}¦ or 1. {%abhi-nandya, as, ā, am,%}
to be acknowledged or applauded.
<LEND>

<L>4355<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinandita<k2>aBinandita
{%Abhi-nandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ delighted, made happy,
saluted, applauded, &c.
<LEND>

<L>4356<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinandin<k2>aBinandin
{%Abhi-nandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ rejoicing at, wishing,
desiring, &c.
<LEND>

<L>4357<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinandya<k2>aBinandya<h>2
2. {%abhi-nandya,%}¦ ind. having rejoiced at, having
gladdened.
<LEND>

<L>4358<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinaByam<k2>aBinaByam
{#aBinaByam#}¦ {%abhi-nabhyam,%} ind., Ved. to-
wards the clouds or heaven.
<LEND>

<L>4359<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinam<k2>aBinam
{#aBinam#}¦ {%abhi-nam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-namati, -nan-%}
{%tum,%} to bow, bend, curve; to turn towards a person.
<LEND>

<L>4360<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinata<k2>aBinata
{%Abhi-nata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, inclined.
<LEND>

<L>4361<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinamra<k2>aBinamra
{%Abhi-namra, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, deeply bowed or
curved.
<LEND>

<L>4362<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinaya<k2>aBinaya
{#aBinaya#}¦ {%abhi-naya.%} See 1. {%abhi-nī,%} p. 64.
<LEND>

<L>4363<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinard<k2>aBinard
{#aBinard#}¦ {%abhi-nard,%} cl. 1. P., ep. also A.
{%-nardati, -te, -ditum,%} to roar towards.
<LEND>

<L>4364<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinava<k2>aBinava
{#aBinava#}¦ {%abhi-nava, as, ā, am,%} quite new or
young, very young, fresh; not having experience.
{%—Abhinava-candrārgha-vidhi (˚ra-ar˚), is,%} m.
a ceremony performed at the time of the new moon.
{%—Abhinava-yauvana, as, ā, am,%} youthful. {%—Abhi-%}
{%nava-vaiyākaraṇa, as,%} m. one who has just begun
grammar. {%—Abhinavodbhid (˚va-ud˚), t,%} m. a new bud.
<LEND>

<L>4365<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinavIBU<k2>aBinavIBU
{%Abhinavī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to be-
come new. {%—Abhinavī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} renewed.
<LEND>

<L>4366<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinaS<k2>aBinaS
{#aBinaS#}¦ {%abhi-naś,%} cl. 1. P. A., Ved. {%-naśati,%}
{%-te, -śitum,%} to attain, seize; to assail.
<LEND>

<L>4367<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinah<k2>aBinah
{#aBinah#}¦ {%abhi-nah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-nahyati, -te,%}
{%-naddhum,%} to bind up (as the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>4368<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinahana<k2>aBinahana
{%Abhi-nahana, am,%}¦ n. a bandage (especially over
the eyes.)
<LEND>

<L>4369<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinAsikAvivaram<k2>aBinAsikAvivaram
{#aBinAsikAvivaram#}¦ {%abhi-nāsikāvivaram,%}
ind. to the opening of the nose.
<LEND>

<L>4370<pc>0063-b<k1>aBiniHstan<k2>aBiniHstan
{#aBiniHstan#}¦ {%abhi-niḥ-stan (-nir-stan),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-stanati, -nitum,%} to sound.
<LEND>

<L>4371<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinizwAna<k2>aBinizwAna
{%Abhi-niṣṭāna, as,%}¦ m. a sound which dies away;
the Visarga; a letter of the alphabet.
<LEND>

<L>4372<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinikram<k2>aBinikram
{#aBinikram#}¦ {%abhi-ni-kram,%} cl. 1. P.A., cl. 4.
P. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to
tread down.
<LEND>

<L>4373<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinigad<k2>aBinigad
{#aBinigad#}¦ {%abhi-ni-gad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gadati,%}
{%-ditum,%} to speak to.
<LEND>

<L>4374<pc>0063-b<k1>aBiniDana<k2>aBiniDana
{#aBiniDana#}¦ {%abhi-nidhana, am,%} n., N. of cer-
tain verses of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>4375<pc>0063-b<k1>aBiniDAna<k2>aBiniDAna
{#aBiniDAna#}¦ {%abhi-nidhāna, am,%} n. putting
on; an euphonic suppression or weakening (in the
pronunciation of words), especially the suppression of
an initial {%a%} after {%e, o.%}
<LEND>

<L>4376<pc>0063-b<k1>aBiniDIyamAna<k2>aBiniDIyamAna
{%Abhi-nidhīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being suppressed.
<LEND>

<L>4377<pc>0063-b<k1>aBiniDyE<k2>aBiniDyE
{#aBiniDyE#}¦ {%abhi-ni-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati,%}
{%-dhyātum,%} to investigate.
<LEND>

<L>4378<pc>0063-b<k1>aBininI<k2>aBininI
{#aBininI#}¦ {%abhi-ni-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati,%}
{%-te. -netum,%} to pour out (water &c.) upon.
<LEND>

<L>4379<pc>0063-b<k1>aBininft<k2>aBininft
{#aBininft#}¦ {%abhi-ni-nṛt,%} cl. 4. P., Ved. {%-nṛt-%}
{%yati, -nartitum,%} to accomplish step by step, repeat
separately.
<LEND>

<L>4380<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinipat<k2>aBinipat
{#aBinipat#}¦ {%abhi-ni-pat,%} Caus. P. {%-pātayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to throw down.
<LEND>

<L>4381<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinipIq<k2>aBinipIq
{#aBinipIq#}¦ {%abhi-ni-pīḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pīḍayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to press, squeeze, trouble.
<LEND>

<L>4382<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinipIqita<k2>aBinipIqita
{%Abhi-nipīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ exceedingly pained,
tormented.
<LEND>

<L>4383<pc>0063-b<k1>aBinimluc<k2>aBinimluc
{#aBinimluc#}¦ {%abhi-ni-mluc,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mlocati,%}
{%-citum,%} to set (as the sun) upon a person (while some
act is being done by him).
<LEND>

<L>4384<pc>0063-b<k1>aBiniyukta<k2>aBiniyukta
{#aBiniyukta#}¦ {%abhi-niyukta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yuj%}),
occupied in.
<LEND>
[Page0063-c+ 71]

<L>4385<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinirgam<k2>aBinirgam
{#aBinirgam#}¦ {%abhi-nir-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go out, go away from.
<LEND>

<L>4386<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinirjita<k2>aBinirjita
{#aBinirjita#}¦ {%abhi-nirjita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ji%}),
conquered.
<LEND>

<L>4387<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinirRud<k2>aBinirRud
{#aBinirRud#}¦ {%abhi-nir-ṇud (-nir-nud),%} cl. 6.
P. A. {%-ṇudati, -te, -ṇottum,%} to drive out, frighten
away, remove.
<LEND>

<L>4388<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinirdiS<k2>aBinirdiS
{#aBinirdiS#}¦ {%abhi-nir-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to point out, indicate, appoint, characterize.
<LEND>

<L>4389<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinirBarts<k2>aBinirBarts
{#aBinirBarts#}¦ {%abhi-nir-bharts,%} cl. 10. A. or P.
{%-bhartsayate, -ti, -yitum,%} to scold, threaten.
<LEND>

<L>4390<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinirmita<k2>aBinirmita
{#aBinirmita#}¦ {%abhi-nirmita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mā%}),
made, created.
<LEND>

<L>4391<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinirmukta<k2>aBinirmukta
{#aBinirmukta#}¦ {%abhi-nirmukta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%muc%}),
left, quitted (by the sun when it sets), i.e one asleep
at sunset.
<LEND>

<L>4392<pc>0063-c<k1>aBiniryA<k2>aBiniryA
{#aBiniryA#}¦ {%abhi-nir-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%}
to march out.
<LEND>

<L>4393<pc>0063-c<k1>aBiniryARa<k2>aBiniryARa
{%Abhi-niryāṇa, am,%}¦ n. march of an assailant,
invasion.
<LEND>

<L>4394<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinirvftta<k2>aBinirvftta
{#aBinirvftta#}¦ {%abhi-nirvṛtta, as, ā, am,%} ac-
complished.
<LEND>

<L>4395<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinirvftti<k2>aBinirvftti
{%Abhi-nirvṛtti, is,%}¦ f. accomplishment.
<LEND>

<L>4396<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinivarta<k2>aBinivarta
{#aBinivarta#}¦ {%abhi-nivarta, as,%} m. turning to-
wards; {%(am),%} ind. having turned towards.
<LEND>

<L>4397<pc>0063-c<k1>aBiniviS<k2>aBiniviS
{#aBiniviS#}¦ {%abhi-ni-viś,%} cl. 1. A. {%-viśate,%}
{%-veṣṭum,%} to enter into possession of; to sit down in
or be settled in, to occupy: Caus. {%-veśayati, -yitum,%}
to make one enter into or sit down, apply, &c.
<LEND>

<L>4398<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinivizwa<k2>aBinivizwa
{%Abhi-niviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ well versed or profi-
cient in, conversant or familiar with; intent on;
attentive, engrossed; endowed with; determined;
({%am%}), n. persevering. {%—Abhiniviṣṭa-tā,%} f. state of
being so.
<LEND>

<L>4399<pc>0063-c<k1>aBiniveSa<k2>aBiniveSa
{%Abhi-niveśa, as,%}¦ m. application, perseverance, in-
tentness, study, affection, devotion; determination to
effect a purpose or attain an object; tenacity, adher-
ance; ignorant fear causing death (?).
<LEND>

<L>4400<pc>0063-c<k1>aBiniveSita<k2>aBiniveSita
{%Abhi-niveśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to enter into,
plunged into.
<LEND>

<L>4401<pc>0063-c<k1>aBiniveSin<k2>aBiniveSin
{%Abhi-niveśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ intent upon, devoted to,
determined.
<LEND>

<L>4402<pc>0063-c<k1>aBiniSam<k2>aBiniSam
{#aBiniSam#}¦ {%abhi-ni-śam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śāmyati,%}
{%-śamitum,%} or Caus. P. {%-śāmayati, -yitum,%} to ob-
serve, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>4403<pc>0063-c<k1>aBiniScita<k2>aBiniScita
{#aBiniScita#}¦ {%abhi-niścita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ci%}),
quite convinced of.
<LEND>

<L>4404<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinizkArin<k2>aBinizkArin
{#aBinizkArin#}¦ {%abhi-niṣ-kārin, ī, iṇī, i%}
(rt. {%kṛ%}), Ved. intending anything evil against, in-
juring.
<LEND>

<L>4405<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinizkfta<k2>aBinizkfta
{%Abhi-niṣkṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ directed against (as
an evil action).
<LEND>

<L>4406<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinizkram<k2>aBinizkram
{#aBinizkram#}¦ {%abhi-niṣ-kram (-nis-kram%}), cl.
1. P. A., cl. 4. P. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -krāmyati,%}
{%-kramitum,%} to go out or forth, to lead towards.
<LEND>

<L>4407<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinizkramaRa<k2>aBinizkramaRa
{%Abhi-niṣkramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. going forth; (with
Buddhists) leaving the house in order to become an
anchorite.
<LEND>

<L>4408<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinizkrAnta<k2>aBinizkrAnta
{%Abhi-niṣkrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone out or forth.
<LEND>

<L>4409<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinizwAna<k2>aBinizwAna
{#aBinizwAna#}¦ {%abhi-niṣṭāna.%} See {%abhi-niḥ-%}
{%stan%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>4410<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinizpat<k2>aBinizpat
{#aBinizpat#}¦ {%abhi-niṣ-pat (-nis-pat),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-patati, -titum,%} to fly away, rush out; to spring
forth, shoot forth.
<LEND>

<L>4411<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinizpatana<k2>aBinizpatana
{%Abhi-niṣpatana, am,%}¦ n. issuing, sallying.
<LEND>

<L>4412<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinizpad<k2>aBinizpad
{#aBinizpad#}¦ {%abhi-niṣ-pad (-nis-pad),%} cl. 4.
A. {%-padyate, -pattum,%} to come to; to enter into, be-
come (with acc.); to appear: Caus. {%-pādayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to bring to help to.
<LEND>

<L>4413<pc>0063-c<k1>aBinizpatti<k2>aBinizpatti
{%Abhi-niṣpatti, is,%}¦ f. completion, end, termina-
tion; appearance (?).
<LEND>
[Page0064-a+ 70]

<L>4414<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinizpanna<k2>aBinizpanna
{%Abhi-niṣpanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ finished, completed.
<LEND>

<L>4415<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinihnava<k2>aBinihnava
{#aBinihnava#}¦ {%abhi-nihnava, as,%} m. (rt. {%hnu%}),
denial.
<LEND>

<L>4416<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinI<k2>aBinI<h>1
{#aBinI#} 1¦. {%abhi-nī,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -netum,%}
to bring near, conduct towards, adduce, introduce,
quote; represent dramatically, act.
<LEND>

<L>4417<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinaya<k2>aBinaya
{%Abhi-naya, as,%}¦ m. indication of a passion or pur-
pose by look, gesture, &c.; acting, dramatic action
expressive of sentiment, dramatic personification.
<LEND>

<L>4418<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinIta<k2>aBinIta
{%Abhi-nīta, as ā, am,%}¦ brought near, adduced;
performed; highly finished or ornamented; fit, pro-
per; friendly, kind, patient; impatient, passionate (?).
<LEND>

<L>4419<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinIti<k2>aBinIti
{%Abhi-nīti, is,%}¦ f. gesture, expressive gesticulation;
friendship, civility, kindness.
<LEND>

<L>4420<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinIyamAna<k2>aBinIyamAna
{%Abhi-nīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being brought near,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>4421<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinetavya<k2>aBinetavya
{%Abhi-netavya%}¦ or {%abhi-neya, as, ā, am,%} to be re-
presented dramatically.
<LEND>

<L>4422<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinetf<k2>aBinetf
{%Abhi-netṛ, tā, trī,%}¦ m. f. an actor, an actress.
<LEND>

<L>4423<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinI<k2>aBinI<h>2
{#aBinI#} 2¦. {%abhi-nī (abhi-ni-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-nyeti, -tum,%} to go in to, to approach a woman.
<LEND>

<L>4424<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinIla<k2>aBinIla
{#aBinIla#}¦ {%abhi-nīla, as, ā, am,%} very black,
very dark.
<LEND>

<L>4425<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinu<k2>aBinu<h>1
{#aBinu#} 1¦. {%abhi-nu,%} cl. 2. 6. P. {%-nauti,%}
{%-nuvati, -navitum%} or {%-nuvitum,%} to extol, praise.
<LEND>

<L>4426<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinu<k2>aBinu<h>2
{#aBinu#} 2¦. {%abhi-nu,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%-navate,%}
to turn one's self towards.
<LEND>

<L>4427<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinud<k2>aBinud
{#aBinud#}¦ {%abhi-nud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-nudati, -te,%}
{%-nottum,%} to push, press: Caus. {%-nodayati, -yitum,%}
to excite, to spur or urge on.
<LEND>

<L>4428<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinna<k2>aBinna
{#aBinna#}¦ {%a-bhinna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%bhid%}), uncut,
unbroken; unchanged, unaltered, not different; un-
divided, one; same, identical; ({%as%}), m. an integer,
a whole number (in arithmetic). {%—Abhinna-tā,%} f.
wholeness identity. {%—Abhinna-parikarmāṣṭaka%}
{%(˚ma-aṣ˚), am,%} n. eight processes in working inte-
gers or whole numbers. {%—Abhinnātman (˚na-āt˚),%}
{%ā, ā, a,%}  of undaunted spirit, firm.
<LEND>

<L>4429<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinyas<k2>aBinyas
{#aBinyas#}¦ {%abhi-ny-as (-ni-as),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-asyati, -situm,%} to depress.
<LEND>

<L>4430<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinyAsa<k2>aBinyAsa
{%Abhi-nyāsa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fever.
<LEND>

<L>4431<pc>0064-a<k1>aBinyubj<k2>aBinyubj
{#aBinyubj#}¦ {%abhi-ny-ubj (-ni-ubj),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-ubjati, -jitum,%} to press down, to hold down.
<LEND>

<L>4432<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipac<k2>aBipac
{#aBipac#}¦ {%abhi-pac,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-pacati, -te,%}
{%-paktum,%} to boil up (as milk).
<LEND>

<L>4433<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipaWita<k2>aBipaWita
{#aBipaWita#}¦ {%abhi-paṭhita, as, ā, am,%} denomi-
nated, named.
<LEND>

<L>4434<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipat<k2>aBipat<h>1
{#aBipat#} 1¦. {%abhi-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -titum,%}
to fly near, hasten near; to assail; to fall down, fall;
to fall into, come into; to overtake in flying: Caus.
{%-pātayati, -yitum,%} to throw on or down.
<LEND>

<L>4435<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipatana<k2>aBipatana
{%Abhi-patana, am,%}¦ n. approaching, assailing, seiz-
ing; falling into.
<LEND>

<L>4436<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipat<k2>aBipat<h>2
{#aBipat#} 2¦. {%abhi-pat,%} cl. 4. A., Ved. {%-patyate,%}
to be master or lord over, to possess.
<LEND>

<L>4437<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipad<k2>aBipad
{#aBipad#}¦ {%abhi-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, -pat-%}
{%tum,%} to draw near, approach; to come up (as an
auxiliary), assist; to honour; to seize, catch, over-
power, master; to take possession of; to accept; to
undertake, devote one's self to anything.
<LEND>

<L>4438<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipatti<k2>aBipatti
{%Abhi-patti, is,%}¦ f. drawing near, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>4439<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipannam<k2>aBipannam
{%Abhi-pannam as, ā, am,%}¦ gone near; approached,
obtained; flown, fugitive; seeking refuge; subdued;
unfortunate, calamitous; guilty; removed to a dis-
tance, dead.
<LEND>

<L>4440<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipadma<k2>aBipadma
{#aBipadma#}¦ {%abhi-padma, as, ā, am,%} exceedingly
handsome (lit. superior to the lotus).
<LEND>

<L>4441<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipariglAna<k2>aBipariglAna
{#aBipariglAna#}¦ {%abhi-pariglāna, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%glai%}), tired, exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>4442<pc>0064-a<k1>aBipariplu<k2>aBipariplu
{#aBipariplu#}¦ {%abhi-pari-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, %}
[Page0064-b+ 68]
{%-plotum,%} to stream or flow so as to inundate, to
overflow.
<LEND>

<L>4443<pc>0064-b<k1>aBiparipluta<k2>aBiparipluta
{%Abhi-paripluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ overwhelmed, over-
flowed, filled with; shaken; attacked, affected by.
<LEND>

<L>4444<pc>0064-b<k1>aBiparizvaYj<k2>aBiparizvaYj
{#aBiparizvaYj#}¦ {%abhi-pari-ṣvañj (-svañj),%} cl.
1. A. {%-ṣvajate, -ṣvaṅktum,%} to embrace.
<LEND>

<L>4445<pc>0064-b<k1>aBiparIta<k2>aBiparIta
{#aBiparIta#}¦ {%abhi-parīta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%i%} with
{%abhi-pari%}), surrounded, overpowered by, over-
whelmed with.
<LEND>

<L>4446<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipare<k2>aBipare
{#aBipare#}¦ {%abhi-pare (-parā-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-paraiti, -tum,%} to go away towards.
<LEND>

<L>4447<pc>0064-b<k1>aBiparye<k2>aBiparye
{#aBiparye#}¦ {%abhi-pary-e (-pari-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-paryaiti, -tum,%} to go about; glide away, pass away.
<LEND>

<L>4448<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipA<k2>aBipA<h>1
{#aBipA#} 1¦. {%abhi-pā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-pibati, -pātum,%}
to drink of.
<LEND>

<L>4449<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipIta<k2>aBipIta
{%Abhi-pīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ watered (as cattle), filled
with drink.
<LEND>

<L>4450<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipA<k2>aBipA<h>2
{#aBipA#} 2¦. {%abhi-pā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-pāti, -tum,%} to
protect: Caus. P. {%-pālayati, -yitum,%} to protect, to
assist.
<LEND>

<L>4451<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipitva<k2>aBipitva
{#aBipitva#}¦ {%abhi-pitva, am,%} n. (for {%abhi-%}
{%apitva,%} fr. obs. rt. {%ap;%} see {%apa-pitva%}), Ved. ap-
proaching, visiting, putting up (for the night at an
inn), close or departure of day, evening; dawn; sacri-
fice.
<LEND>

<L>4452<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipIq<k2>aBipIq
{#aBipIq#}¦ {%abhi-pīḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pīḍayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to oppress, torment, afflict.
<LEND>

<L>4453<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipIqita<k2>aBipIqita
{%Abhi-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ harassed.
<LEND>

<L>4454<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipuT<k2>aBipuT
{#aBipuT#}¦ {%abhi-puth,%} Caus. P. {%-pothayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to throw with violence; dash against.
<LEND>

<L>4455<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipuzpa<k2>aBipuzpa
{#aBipuzpa#}¦ {%abhi-puṣpa, as, ā, am,%} covered
with flowers; ({%am%}), n. an excellent flower.
<LEND>

<L>4456<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipU<k2>aBipU
{#aBipU#}¦ {%abhi-pū,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%-pavate,%}
{%-vitum,%} to be cleared, to flow purified towards or for;
to blow against; to make bright, glorify.
<LEND>

<L>4457<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipUj<k2>aBipUj
{#aBipUj#}¦ {%abhi-pūj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pūjayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to honour, approve, assent to.
<LEND>

<L>4458<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipUjita<k2>aBipUjita
{%Abhi-pūjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured; approved.
<LEND>

<L>4459<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipUjyamAna<k2>aBipUjyamAna
{%Abhi-pūjyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being greatly rever-
enced.
<LEND>

<L>4460<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipUrvam<k2>aBipUrvam
{#aBipUrvam#}¦ {%abhi-pūrvam,%} ind. one after the
other.
<LEND>

<L>4461<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipfR<k2>aBipfR
{#aBipfR#}¦ {%abhi-pṛṇ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-pṛṇati, -par-%}
{%tum,%} to be filled; to be glad.
<LEND>

<L>4462<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipF<k2>aBipF
{#aBipF#}¦ {%abhi-pṝ,%} cl. 3. 9. P. {%-piparti, -pṛṇāti,%}
{%-paritum%} or {%-rītum,%} to fill: Pass. {%-pūryate,%} to fill
one's self, become full: Caus. {%-pūrayati, -yitum,%} to
fill, make full; to load with, cover with; to present
with; to master completely.
<LEND>

<L>4463<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipUraRa<k2>aBipUraRa
{%Abhi-pūraṇa, am,%}¦ n. filling.
<LEND>

<L>4464<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipUraRa<k2>aBipUraRa
{%Abhi-pūraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ full of (with inst. or
gen.); filled; fraught; laden.
<LEND>

<L>4465<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipyE<k2>aBipyE
{#aBipyE#}¦ {%abhi-pyai,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%-pyāyate,%}
{%-pyātum%} or {%-pyāyitum,%} to swell, to abound with.
<LEND>

<L>4466<pc>0064-b<k1>aBiprakamp<k2>aBiprakamp
{#aBiprakamp#}¦ {%abhi-pra-kamp,%} Caus. P. {%-kamp-%}
{%ayati, -yitum,%} to stir, allure.
<LEND>

<L>4467<pc>0064-b<k1>aBiprakAS<k2>aBiprakAS
{#aBiprakAS#}¦ {%abhi-pra-kāś,%} cl. 1. 4. A. {%-kāśate,%}
{%kāśyate, -śitum,%} to become visible, to show one's
self.
<LEND>

<L>4468<pc>0064-b<k1>aBiprakram<k2>aBiprakram
{#aBiprakram#}¦ {%abhi-pra-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A., cl. 4.
A. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to
go up to, approach.
<LEND>

<L>4469<pc>0064-b<k1>aBiprakzar<k2>aBiprakzar
{#aBiprakzar#}¦ {%abhi-pra-kṣar,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-kṣarati, -te, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-radhyai,%} to stream
towards a place.
<LEND>

<L>4470<pc>0064-b<k1>aBiprakzal<k2>aBiprakzal
{#aBiprakzal#}¦ {%abhi-pra-kṣal,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kṣāl-%}
{%ayati, -yitum,%} to clean thoroughly, polish up.
<LEND>

<L>4471<pc>0064-b<k1>aBipragAh<k2>aBipragAh
{#aBipragAh#}¦ {%abhi-pra-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, %}
[Page0064-c+ 64]
{%hitum, -gāḍhum,%} to penetrate, dip, or plunge into,
join: Caus. {%-gāhayati, -yitum,%} to immerse, dip.
<LEND>

<L>4472<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipragE<k2>aBipragE
{#aBipragE#}¦ {%abhi-pra-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati,%}
{%gātum,%} to begin to praise.
<LEND>

<L>4473<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipracakz<k2>aBipracakz
{#aBipracakz#}¦ {%abhi-pra-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A., Ved.
{%-caṣṭe, -ṣṭum,%} to throw light upon; to see (?).
<LEND>

<L>4474<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipracud<k2>aBipracud
{#aBipracud#}¦ {%abhi-pra-cud,%} Caus. P. {%-codayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to impel, induce, persuade.
<LEND>

<L>4475<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipracyu<k2>aBipracyu
{#aBipracyu#}¦ {%abhi-pra-cyu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-cyavate,%}
{%-cyotum,%} to move towards, arrive at.
<LEND>

<L>4476<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipraC<k2>aBipraC
{#aBipraC#}¦ {%abhi-prach,%} cl. 6. P. {%-pṛcchati,%}
{%-praṣṭum,%} to ask or inquire after.
<LEND>

<L>4477<pc>0064-c<k1>aBiprajan<k2>aBiprajan
{#aBiprajan#}¦ {%abhi-pra-jan,%} Caus. P. {%-janayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to beget for (a purpose).
<LEND>

<L>4478<pc>0064-c<k1>aBiprajval<k2>aBiprajval
{#aBiprajval#}¦ {%abhi-pra-jval,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jvalati,%}
{%-litum,%} to flare up.
<LEND>

<L>4479<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipraRakz<k2>aBipraRakz
{#aBipraRakz#}¦ {%abhi-pra-ṇakṣ (-nakṣ),%} cl. 1.
P., Ved. {%-ṇakṣati, -ṣitum,%} to overpower.
<LEND>

<L>4480<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipraRad<k2>aBipraRad
{#aBipraRad#}¦ {%abhi-pra-ṇad (-nad),%} cl. 1. P.A.
{%-ṇadati, -te, -ditum,%} to shout at, to scream; to
begin to roar or sound.
<LEND>

<L>4481<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipraRam<k2>aBipraRam
{#aBipraRam#}¦ {%abhi-pra-ṇam (-nam),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-ṇamati, -te, -ṇantum,%} to bow before (with dat. or
acc.).
<LEND>

<L>4482<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipraRata<k2>aBipraRata
{%Abhi-praṇata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, bowing before.
<LEND>

<L>4483<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipraRI<k2>aBipraRI
{#aBipraRI#}¦ {%abhi-pra-ṇī (-nī),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṇayati,%}
{%-ṇetum,%} to lead forth; bring towards.
<LEND>

<L>4484<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipraRaya<k2>aBipraRaya
{%Abhi-praṇaya, as,%}¦ m. propitiation; affection,
favour.
<LEND>

<L>4485<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipraRIta<k2>aBipraRIta
{%Abhi-praṇīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought, attracted;
consecrated; invoked, propitiated.
<LEND>

<L>4486<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipraRu<k2>aBipraRu
{#aBipraRu#}¦ {%abhi-pra-ṇu (-nu),%} cl. 2. 6. P., Ved.
{%-ṇauti, -ṇuvati, -ṇavitum%} or {%-ṇuvitum,%} to praise
highly, extol.
<LEND>

<L>4487<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipratapta<k2>aBipratapta
{#aBipratapta#}¦ {%abhi-pratapta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%tap%}),
intensely heated; dried up; exhausted with pain or
fever.
<LEND>

<L>4488<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipratArin<k2>aBipratArin
{#aBipratArin#}¦ {%abhi-pratārim, ī,%} m., N. of a
descendant of Kakṣa-sena.
<LEND>

<L>4489<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipratigF<k2>aBipratigF
{#aBipratigF#}¦ {%abhi-prati-gṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛṇāti, -ṇīte, -garitum%} or {%-rītum,%} to call out to;
to welcome; to answer in singing; to assent.
<LEND>

<L>4490<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipratipad<k2>aBipratipad
{#aBipratipad#}¦ {%abhi-prati-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-pad-%}
{%yate, -pattum,%} to begin with or at.
<LEND>

<L>4491<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipratipiz<k2>aBipratipiz
{#aBipratipiz#}¦ {%abhi-prati-piṣ,%} cl. 7. P., Ved.
{%-pinaṣṭi, -peṣṭum,%} to dash or crush out.
<LEND>

<L>4492<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipratyave<k2>aBipratyave
{#aBipratyave#}¦ {%abhi-praty-ave (-prati-ava-i),%} cl.
2. P. {%-pratyavaiti, -tum,%} to step down towards.
<LEND>

<L>4493<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipratye<k2>aBipratye
{#aBipratye#}¦ {%abhi-praty-e (-prati-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-pratyaiti, -tum,%} to come back towards, return.
<LEND>

<L>4494<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipraTana<k2>aBipraTana
{#aBipraTana#}¦ {%abhi-prathana, am,%} n. (rt. {%prath%}),
spreading or extending over.
<LEND>

<L>4495<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipradakziRam<k2>aBipradakziRam
{#aBipradakziRam#}¦ {%abhi-pra-dakṣiṇam,%} ind. to
the right; (e. g. with {%kṛ,%} to circumambulate keeping
the object on the right.)
<LEND>

<L>4496<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipradiS<k2>aBipradiS
{#aBipradiS#}¦ {%abhi-pra-diś,%} Caus. P. {%-deśayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to urge on.
<LEND>

<L>4497<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipradfS<k2>aBipradfS
{#aBipradfS#}¦ {%abhi-pra-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P., Ved.
{%-paśyati, -draṣṭum,%} to look at, look out for.
<LEND>

<L>4498<pc>0064-c<k1>aBipradF<k2>aBipradF
{#aBipradF#}¦ {%abhi-pra-dṝ,%} Pass. {%-dīryate,%} to be
scattered or divided asunder.
<LEND>

<L>4499<pc>0064-c<k1>aBiprapac<k2>aBiprapac
{#aBiprapac#}¦ {%abhi-pra-pac,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-pacati,%}
{%-te, -paktum,%} to cause to cook, ripen; to develope.
<LEND>

<L>4500<pc>0064-c<k1>aBiprapad<k2>aBiprapad
{#aBiprapad#}¦ {%abhi-pra-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, %}
[Page0065-a+ 66]
{%-pattum,%} to come towards, enter, hasten towards,
resort to (with acc.); to undertake.
<LEND>

<L>4501<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprapanna<k2>aBiprapanna
{%Abhi-prapanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached, attained.
<LEND>

<L>4502<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprapIq<k2>aBiprapIq
{#aBiprapIq#}¦ {%abhi-pra-pīḍ,%} Caus. P. {%-pīḍayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause pain, torture.
<LEND>

<L>4503<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprapF<k2>aBiprapF
{#aBiprapF#}¦ {%abhi-pra-pṝ,%} Pass. {%-pūryate,%} to be
filled, fill one's self completely.
<LEND>

<L>4504<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipraBaNgin<k2>aBipraBaNgin
{#aBipraBaNgin#}¦ {%abhi-pra-bhaṅgin, ī, iṇī, i%} (rt.
{%bhañj%}), Ved. breaking completely.
<LEND>

<L>4505<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipramand<k2>aBipramand
{#aBipramand#}¦ {%abhi-pra-mand,%} cl. 1. P., Ved.
{%-mandati, -ditum,%} to gladden.
<LEND>

<L>4506<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipramur<k2>aBipramur
{#aBipramur#}¦ {%abhi-pra-mur, ūr, ūr, ūr,%} Ved.
(if fr. rt. {%murch%} or {%mur%}) completely raised, sur-
rounded; (if fr. rt. {%mṛ%}) destroying (?).
<LEND>

<L>4507<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipramfS<k2>aBipramfS
{#aBipramfS#}¦ {%abhi-pra-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P., Ved.
{%-mṛśati, -marṣṭum, -mraṣṭum,%} to offer, grant.
<LEND>

<L>4508<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprayA<k2>aBiprayA
{#aBiprayA#}¦ {%abhi-pra-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%}
to march against.
<LEND>

<L>4509<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprayAyam<k2>aBiprayAyam
{%Abhi-prayāyam,%}¦ ind. by approaching, having ap-
proached.
<LEND>

<L>4510<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipravft<k2>aBipravft
{#aBipravft#}¦ {%abhi-pra-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
{%-titum,%} to advance up to; to flow or fall into; to
become conversant with.
<LEND>

<L>4511<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipravartana<k2>aBipravartana
{%abhi-pravartana, am,%}¦ n. coming forth, flowing;
advancing up to.
<LEND>

<L>4512<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipravftta<k2>aBipravftta
{%Abhi-pravṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ advancing; occuring;
occupied or engaged in.
<LEND>

<L>4513<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipravfD<k2>aBipravfD
{#aBipravfD#}¦ {%abhi-pra-vṛdh,%} Caus. P. {%-vardh-%}
{%ayati, -yitum,%} to enlarge, render prosperous.
<LEND>

<L>4514<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipravfz<k2>aBipravfz
{#aBipravfz#}¦ {%abhi-pra-vṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-varṣati,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to pour down rain.
<LEND>

<L>4515<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipraSaMs<k2>aBipraSaMs
{#aBipraSaMs#}¦ {%abhi-pra-śaṃs,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śaṃsati,%}
{%-situm,%} to praise highly.
<LEND>

<L>4516<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipraSnin<k2>aBipraSnin
{#aBipraSnin#}¦ {%abhi-praśnin, ī, inī, i%} (rt. {%prach%}),
desirous of asking many questions.
<LEND>

<L>4517<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprasad<k2>aBiprasad
{#aBiprasad#}¦ {%abhi-pra-sad,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-sīd-%}
{%ati, -sattum,%} to come near, approach: Caus. P. {%-sād-%}
{%ayati, -yitum,%} to propitiate, make happy, console.
<LEND>

<L>4518<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprasTA<k2>aBiprasTA
{#aBiprasTA#}¦ {%abhi-pra-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tiṣṭhati,%}
{%-sthātum,%} to step up towards.
<LEND>

<L>4519<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprahata<k2>aBiprahata
{#aBiprahata#}¦ {%abhi-prahata, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%han%}),
struck at, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>4520<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprAR<k2>aBiprAR
{#aBiprAR#}¦ {%abhi-prāṇ (-pra-an),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-prāṇiti, -ṇitum,%} to exhale, breathe forth.
<LEND>

<L>4521<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprARana<k2>aBiprARana
{%Abhi-prāṇana, am,%}¦ n. exhaling (opposed to
{%apānana,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>4522<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprAtar<k2>aBiprAtar
{#aBiprAtar#}¦ {%abhi-prātar,%} ind., Ved. towards
morning, early.
<LEND>

<L>4523<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprAp<k2>aBiprAp
{#aBiprAp#}¦ {%abhi-prāp (-pra-āp),%} cl. 5. P.
{%-prāpnoti, -ptum,%} to reach, obtain, arrive at.
<LEND>

<L>4524<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprApta<k2>aBiprApta
{%Abhi-prāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reached, obtained, arrived.
<LEND>

<L>4525<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprApti<k2>aBiprApti
{%Abhi-prāpti, is,%}¦ f. reaching, obtaining, arrival.
<LEND>

<L>4526<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprepsu<k2>aBiprepsu
{%Abhi-prepsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of gaining, &c.
<LEND>

<L>4527<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprAya<k2>aBiprAya
{#aBiprAya#}¦ {%abhi-prāya.%} See {%abhi-pre.%}
<LEND>

<L>4528<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprArc<k2>aBiprArc
{#aBiprArc#}¦ {%abhi-prārc (-pra-arc),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-prārcati, -citum,%} to celebrate in song.
<LEND>

<L>4529<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprArT<k2>aBiprArT
{#aBiprArT#}¦ {%abhi-prārth (-pra-arth),%} cl. 10. A.
{%-prārthayate, -yitum,%} to long for, desire.
<LEND>

<L>4530<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprAs<k2>aBiprAs
{#aBiprAs#}¦ {%abhi-prās (-pra-as),%} cl. 4. P. {%-prā-%}
{%syati, -prāsitum,%} to throw on or upon.
<LEND>

<L>4531<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprI<k2>aBiprI
{#aBiprI#}¦ {%abhi-prī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. gladdening,
pleasing, gaining.
<LEND>

<L>4532<pc>0065-a<k1>aBiprIti<k2>aBiprIti
{%Abhi-prīti, is,%}¦ f. rejoicing in; wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>4533<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipruz<k2>aBipruz
{#aBipruz#}¦ {%abhi-pruṣ,%} cl. 5. A., 1. P., Ved. {%-pru-%}
{%ṣṇute, -pruṣāyati, -proṣitum,%} to sprinkle with.
<LEND>

<L>4534<pc>0065-a<k1>aBipre<k2>aBipre
{#aBipre#}¦ {%abhi-pre (-pra-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-praiti, %}
[Page0065-b+ 71]
{%tum,%} to go near to, approach; to approach with
one's mind, to think of, aim at, intend.
<LEND>

<L>4535<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiprAya<k2>aBiprAya
{%Abhi-prāya, as, ā, am,%}¦ going near, approaching;
aiming at; ({%as%}), m. aim, purpose, intention, with,
desire; goal; meaning, sense, reference.
<LEND>

<L>4536<pc>0065-b<k1>aBipreta<k2>aBipreta
{%Abhi-preta, as, ā, am,%}¦ meant, intended; wished;
accepted, approved; wishing, desirous.
<LEND>

<L>4537<pc>0065-b<k1>aBipretya<k2>aBipretya
{%Abhi-pretya,%}¦ ind. aiming at, intending, meaning by.
<LEND>

<L>4538<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiprekz<k2>aBiprekz
{#aBiprekz#}¦ {%abhi-prekṣ (-pra-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-prekṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look at, to see, view.
<LEND>

<L>4539<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiprekzya<k2>aBiprekzya
{%Abhi-prekṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked at or towards.
<LEND>

<L>4540<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiprepsu<k2>aBiprepsu
{#aBiprepsu#}¦ {%abhi-prepsu.%} See {%abhi-prāp%} above.
<LEND>

<L>4541<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiprer<k2>aBiprer
{#aBiprer#}¦ {%abhi-prer (-pra-īr),%} Caus. {%-prera-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to drive forward, impel towards: Pass.
{%-preryate,%}  to be impelled towards.
<LEND>

<L>4542<pc>0065-b<k1>aBipreryamARa<k2>aBipreryamARa
{%Abhi-preryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being driven towards.
<LEND>

<L>4543<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiprez<k2>aBiprez
{#aBiprez#}¦ {%abhi-preṣ (-pra-iṣ),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-preṣyati, -ṣitum,%} to summon, command.
<LEND>

<L>4544<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiprokzaRa<k2>aBiprokzaRa
{#aBiprokzaRa#}¦ {%abhi-prokṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt.
{%ukṣ),%} sprinkling upon, affusion.
<LEND>

<L>4545<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiplu<k2>aBiplu
{#aBiplu#}¦ {%abhi-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, -plotum,%}
to overflow, to overwhelm.
<LEND>

<L>4546<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiplava<k2>aBiplava
{%Abhi-plava, as,%}¦ m., N. of a religious ceremony,
performed as part of the sacrifice Gavām-ayana.
<LEND>

<L>4547<pc>0065-b<k1>aBipluta<k2>aBipluta
{%Abhi-pluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ overflowed, overrun; filled
with; overwhelmed, affected by, labouring under.
<LEND>

<L>4548<pc>0065-b<k1>aBibala<k2>aBibala
{#aBibala#}¦ {%abhi-bala, am,%} n. an agreement
to meet at some place of rendezvous in disguise (the
technical name of a dramatic scene in rhetoric).
<LEND>

<L>4549<pc>0065-b<k1>aBibudDi<k2>aBibudDi
{#aBibudDi#}¦ {%abhi-buddhi, is,%} f. a Buddhīndriya
or organ of apprehension.
<LEND>

<L>4550<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBaNga<k2>aBiBaNga
{#aBiBaNga#}¦ {%abhi-bhaṅga, as,%} m. (rt. {%bhañj%}),
Ved. breaking down, one who destroys.
<LEND>

<L>4551<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBaYjat<k2>aBiBaYjat
{%Abhi-bhañjat, an, atī, at,%}¦ breaking down, &c.
<LEND>

<L>4552<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBartf<k2>aBiBartf
{#aBiBartf#}¦ {%abhi-bhartṛ,%} ind. to a lover, be-
fore a husband.
<LEND>

<L>4553<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBarts<k2>aBiBarts
{#aBiBarts#}¦ {%abhi-bharts,%} cl. 10. A. P. {%-bharts-%}
{%ayate, -ti, -yitum,%} to scold at, threaten so as to terrify.
<LEND>

<L>4554<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBava<k2>aBiBava
{#aBiBava#}¦ {%abhi-bhava.%} See {%abhi-bhū%} below.
<LEND>

<L>4555<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBA<k2>aBiBA<h>1
{#aBiBA#} 1¦. {%abhi-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -tum,%}
to glitter (around).
<LEND>

<L>4556<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBA<k2>aBiBA<h>2
2. {%abhi-bhā,%}¦ f., Ved. apparition, phenomenon, in-
auspicious omen; state of being overpowered, calamity;
act of overpowering, superiority. {%—Abhibhāyatana%}
{%(˚bhā-āy˚), am,%} n. abode of superiority; N. of the
eight sources of superiority with Buddhists.
<LEND>

<L>4557<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBAra<k2>aBiBAra
{#aBiBAra#}¦ {%abhi-bhāra, as, ā, am,%} very heavy.
<LEND>

<L>4558<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBAz<k2>aBiBAz
{#aBiBAz#}¦ {%abhi-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to address, converse with, speak to, confess.
<LEND>

<L>4559<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBAzaRa<k2>aBiBAzaRa
{%Abhi-bhāṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of addressing or
speaking to.
<LEND>

<L>4560<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBAzamARa<k2>aBiBAzamARa
{%Abhi-bhāṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking to.
<LEND>

<L>4561<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBAzita<k2>aBiBAzita
{%Abhi-bhāṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ addressed, spoken to.
<LEND>

<L>4562<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBAzin<k2>aBiBAzin
{%Abhi-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ addressing, speaking to.
<LEND>

<L>4563<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBAzya<k2>aBiBAzya
{%Abhi-bhāṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be addressed.
<LEND>

<L>4564<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBAzyamARa<k2>aBiBAzyamARa
{%Abhi-bhāṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being addressed.
<LEND>

<L>4565<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBU<k2>aBiBU<h>1
{#aBiBU#} 1¦. {%abhi-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%}
to overcome, overpower, predominate, conquer, sur-
pass, overspread; to attack, defeat, humiliate.
<LEND>

<L>4566<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBava<k2>aBiBava
{%Abhi-bhava, as, ā, am,%}¦ overpowering; ({%as%}), m.
addition; prevailing, overpowering, excessive power,
predominance; defeat, subjugation; disregard, disre-
spect; humiliation, mortification, disgrace.
<LEND>

<L>4567<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBavana<k2>aBiBavana
{%Abhi-bhavana, am,%}¦ n. overpowering, overcoming.
<LEND>

<L>4568<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBavanIya<k2>aBiBavanIya
{%Abhi-bhavanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be overcome or
surpassed.
<LEND>

<L>4569<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBAvaka<k2>aBiBAvaka
{%Abhi-bhāvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%abhi-bhāvin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} or {%abhi-bhāvuka, as, ā, am,%} overpowering,
surpassing, overspreading.
<LEND>

<L>4570<pc>0065-b<k1>aBiBAvana<k2>aBiBAvana
{%Abhi-bhāvana, am,%}¦ n. causing to overcome, mak-
ing victorious.
<LEND>
[Page0065-c+ 75]

<L>4571<pc>0065-c<k1>aBiBu<k2>aBiBu
{%Abhi-bhu, us,%}¦ or 2. {%abhi-bhū, ūs,%} m., Ved. one
who surpasses, a superior.
<LEND>

<L>4572<pc>0065-c<k1>aBiBUta<k2>aBiBUta
{%Abhi-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ surpassed, defeated, sub-
dued, humbled; overcome, aggrieved, injured.
<LEND>

<L>4573<pc>0065-c<k1>aBiBUti<k2>aBiBUti
{%Abhi-bhūti, is,%}¦ f. superior power, overpowering,
defeating; disrepect, disgrace, humiliation; {%(is, is,%}
{%i),%} Ved. overpowering, superior. {%—Abhibhūtya-ojas,%}
{%as,%} n., Ved. superior power; {%(ās, ās, as),%} having
superior power.
<LEND>

<L>4574<pc>0065-c<k1>aBiBUya<k2>aBiBUya
{%Abhi-bhūya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. superiority.
<LEND>

<L>4575<pc>0065-c<k1>aBiBUvan<k2>aBiBUvan
{%Abhi-bhūvan, vā, varī,%}¦ m. f., Ved. superior,
victorious over.
<LEND>

<L>4576<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimad<k2>aBimad
{#aBimad#}¦ {%abhi-mad,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-madati,%}
{%-ditum,%} to gladden, inebriate.
<LEND>

<L>4577<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimAda<k2>aBimAda
{%Abhi-māda, as,%}¦ m. intoxication, inebriety.
<LEND>

<L>4578<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimAdyat<k2>aBimAdyat
{%Abhi-mādyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being inebriated.
<LEND>

<L>4579<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimAdyatka<k2>aBimAdyatka
{%Abhi-mādyatka, as, ā, am,%}¦ partially intoxicated,
half-drunk, stammering.
<LEND>

<L>4580<pc>0065-c<k1>aBiman<k2>aBiman
{#aBiman#}¦ {%abhi-man,%} cl. 8. A. {%-manute, -ntum,%}
to think one's self equal to, to think of self; cl. 4.
A. and poet. P. {%-manyate, -ti,%} to assent to, approve
of; to covet, desire; to consider, imagine, fancy, think.
<LEND>

<L>4581<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimata<k2>aBimata
{%Abhi-mata, as, ā, am,%}¦ admitted, assented to;
agreed, accepted; wished, desired; honoured, re-
spected; ({%am%}), n. desire, wish. {%—Abhimata-tā,%} f.
agreeableness, desirableness; desire, love.
<LEND>

<L>4582<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimanas<k2>aBimanas
{%Abhi-manas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ having the mind directed
towards; desirous of, longing for.
<LEND>

<L>4583<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimanAya<k2>aBimanAya
{%Abhi-manāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%-nāyate, -yitum,%} to be
desirous of, to long for.
<LEND>

<L>4584<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimantavya<k2>aBimantavya
{%Abhi-mantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be considered; to
be desired.
<LEND>

<L>4585<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimantu<k2>aBimantu
{%Abhi-mantu, us,%}¦ f. injuring, destroying. {%—Abhi-%}
{%mantos,%} ind., Ved. to injure.
<LEND>

<L>4586<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimantf<k2>aBimantf
{%Abhi-mantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ admonishing, longing
for, referring all objects to self, self-conceited.
<LEND>

<L>4587<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimanyamAna<k2>aBimanyamAna
{%Abhi-manyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ conceiving, ima-
gining, regarding.
<LEND>

<L>4588<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimAna<k2>aBimAna
{%Abhi-māna, as,%}¦ m. high opinion of one's self,
self-conceit, pride, haughtiness, honourable feeling;
consciousness; referring all objects to self (as the
act of Ahaṅkāra or personality); conception, con-
ceit; affection, love, desire; laying claim to; injury,
hurting. {%—Abhimāna-tā,%} f. pride, arrogance. {%—Abhi-%}
{%māna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} conceiving or having ideas
about self; proud, arrogant. {%—Abhimāna-śūnya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} void of conceit, humble.
<LEND>

<L>4589<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimAnita<k2>aBimAnita
{%Abhi-mānita, am,%}¦ n. the condition of an egotist;
copulation, sexual intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>4590<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimAnin<k2>aBimAnin
{%Abhi-mānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ thinking of one's self, proud,
self-conceited, arrogant; imagining; {%(ī),%} m., N. of
a deity. {%—Abhimāni-tā,%} f. or {%abhimāni-tva, am,%}
n. the state of self-conceitedness.
<LEND>

<L>4591<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimAnuka<k2>aBimAnuka
{%Abhi-mānuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. striving to hurt.
<LEND>

<L>4592<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimantr<k2>aBimantr
{#aBimantr#}¦ {%abhi-mantr,%} cl. 10. A. {%-mantr-%}
{%ayate, -yitum,%} to consecrate or accompany with
Mantras or magic formulas; to address, invite.
<LEND>

<L>4593<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimantraRa<k2>aBimantraRa
{%Abhi-mantraṇa, am,%}¦ n. calling out to, addressing,
inviting; counselling; charming, consecrating; making
anything sacred by a special formula, called {%abhi-%}
{%mantraṇa-mantra.%}
<LEND>

<L>4594<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimantrita<k2>aBimantrita
{%Abhi-mantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ consecrated, charmed;
made sacred by a certain formula.
<LEND>

<L>4595<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimanTa<k2>aBimanTa
{#aBimanTa#}¦ {%abhi-mantha, as,%} m. ophthalmia,
disease of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>4596<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimanyu<k2>aBimanyu
{#aBimanyu#}¦ {%abhi-manyu, us,%} m., N. of a son
of Manu Cākṣuṣa; of a son of Arjuna by Subhadrā;
of two kings. {%—Abhimanyu-pura, am,%} n., N. of a
town. {%—Abhimanyu-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a temple.
<LEND>

<L>4597<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimara<k2>aBimara
{#aBimara#}¦ {%abhi-mara, as,%} m. (rt. {%mṛ%}), killing,
slaughter; war, combat; treachery, danger from one's
own party or friends; binding, confinement.
<LEND>

<L>4598<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimarda<k2>aBimarda
{#aBimarda#}¦ {%abhi-marda.%} See {%abhi-mṛd,%} p. 66.
<LEND>

<L>4599<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimarSana<k2>aBimarSana
{#aBimarSana#}¦ See {%abhi-mṛś%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>4600<pc>0065-c<k1>aBimAti<k2>aBimAti
{#aBimAti#}¦ {%abhi-māti, is, is, i%} (rt. {%mā = man%}),
[Page0066-a+ 72]
Ved. striving to injure, hurting, inimical; {%(is, is),%}
m. f. striving to injure, hurting, plotting against; an
enemy, foe. {%—Abhimāti-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. subduing
enemies. {%—Abhimāti-ṣāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. conquering
enemies. {%—Abhimāti-han, ā,%} m., Ved. striking, de-
stroying one's enemies.
<LEND>

<L>4601<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimAtin<k2>aBimAtin
{%Abhi-mātin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved. injuring; an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>4602<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimAda<k2>aBimAda
{#aBimAda#}¦ {%abhi-māda.%} See {%abhi-mad%} above.
<LEND>

<L>4603<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimAna<k2>aBimAna
{#aBimAna#}¦ {%abhi-māna.%} See {%abhi-man%} above.
<LEND>

<L>4604<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimAya<k2>aBimAya
{#aBimAya#}¦ {%abhi-māya, as, ā, am,%} perplexed,
bewildered, stupid, ignorant.
<LEND>

<L>4605<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimihya<k2>aBimihya
{#aBimihya#}¦ {%abhi-mihya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mih%}),
Ved. to be wetted (by urining upon).
<LEND>

<L>4606<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimIlita<k2>aBimIlita
{#aBimIlita#}¦ {%abhi-mīlita, as, ā, am,%} closed
(as the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>4607<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimuKa<k2>aBimuKa
{#aBimuKa#}¦ {%abhi-mukha, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} with
the face directed towards; turned towards, facing;
going near, approaching; disposed to, intending to,
ready for; taking one's part; nearly related to;
friendly disposed; ({%ī%}), f. one of the ten earths of
Buddhists; ({%am%}), ind. towards, in the direction of,
in front or presence of, near to. {%—Abhimukha-tā,%} f.
presence, proximity.
<LEND>

<L>4608<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimuKIkaraRa<k2>aBimuKIkaraRa
{%Abhimukhī-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. causing to turn the
face towards, addressing.
<LEND>

<L>4609<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimuKIBUta<k2>aBimuKIBUta
{%Abhimukhī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in presence
of or facing.
<LEND>

<L>4610<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimUrcCita<k2>aBimUrcCita
{#aBimUrcCita#}¦ {%abhi-mūrcchita, as, ā, am,%} dis-
tracted, utterly confused.
<LEND>

<L>4611<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimfd<k2>aBimfd
{#aBimfd#}¦ {%abhi-mṛd,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mardati, -di-%}
{%tum,%} to oppress, to devastate.
<LEND>

<L>4612<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimarDa<k2>aBimarDa
{%Abhi-mardha, as,%}¦ m. rubbing, friction; oppression,
devastation of a country &c. by an enemy; war,
battle; spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>4613<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimardana<k2>aBimardana
{%Abhi-mardana, as, ā, am,%}¦ oppressing; ({%am%}),
n. oppression.
<LEND>

<L>4614<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimardin<k2>aBimardin
{%Abhi-mardin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ oppressing, one who de-
vastates.
<LEND>

<L>4615<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimfS<k2>aBimfS
{#aBimfS#}¦ {%abhi-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati,%}
{%-marṣṭum%} or {%-mraṣṭum,%} to touch, stroke, come
in contact with.
<LEND>

<L>4616<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimarSa<k2>aBimarSa
{%Abhi-marśa, as,%}¦ m. or {%abhi-marśana, am,%} n.
(less correctly) {%abhi-marṣa, as,%} m. or {%abhi-mar-%}
{%ṣaṇa, am,%} n. touching, contact; {%(as, ā, am),%} rub-
bing, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>4617<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimarSaka<k2>aBimarSaka
{%Abhi-marśaka%}¦ or (less correctly) {%abhi-marṣaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} touching, coming in contact with.
<LEND>

<L>4618<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimfzwa<k2>aBimfzwa
{%Abhi-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ touched, rubbed, brought
close to, grazing.
<LEND>

<L>4619<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimeTikA<k2>aBimeTikA
{#aBimeTikA#}¦ {%abhi-methikā,%} f. (rt. {%meth%}),
Ved. insulting or injurious speech; obscene expression;
imprecation.
<LEND>

<L>4620<pc>0066-a<k1>aBimlAta<k2>aBimlAta
{#aBimlAta#}¦ {%abhi-mlāta%} or {%abhi-mlāna, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (rt. {%mlai%}), Ved. altogether withered, faded; de-
cayed.
<LEND>

<L>4621<pc>0066-a<k1>aBiyajYagATA<k2>aBiyajYagATA
{#aBiyajYagATA#}¦ {%abhi-yajña-gāthā,%} f. a sacri-
ficial verse.
<LEND>

<L>4622<pc>0066-a<k1>aBiyA<k2>aBiyA<h>1
{#aBiyA#} 1¦. {%abhi-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%} to
go up to, approach, encounter, attack, assail.
2. {%abhi-yā, ās, ās,%} m. f. going up to, approaching,
assailing.
<LEND>

<L>4623<pc>0066-a<k1>aBiyAt<k2>aBiyAt
{%Abhi-yāt, ān, ātī%}¦ or {%āntī, āt,%} assailing, an assailant.
<LEND>

<L>4624<pc>0066-a<k1>aBiyAta<k2>aBiyAta
{%Abhi-yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached, attacked.
<LEND>

<L>4625<pc>0066-a<k1>aBiyAti<k2>aBiyAti
{%Abhi-yāti, is,%}¦ m. or {%abhi-yātin, ī,%} m. or {%abhi-%}
{%yātṛ, tā,%} m. an assailant, foe, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>4626<pc>0066-a<k1>aBiyAna<k2>aBiyAna
{%Abhi-yāna, am,%}¦ n. coming near, approaching, at-
tacking.
<LEND>

<L>4627<pc>0066-a<k1>aBiyAyin<k2>aBiyAyin
{%Abhi-yāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ coming near, approaching,
attacking.
<LEND>

<L>4628<pc>0066-a<k1>aBiyAc<k2>aBiyAc
{#aBiyAc#}¦ {%abhi-yāc,%} cl. 1. A. or ep. P.
{%-yācate, -ti, -citum,%} to ask for, solicit, request.
<LEND>

<L>4629<pc>0066-a<k1>aBiyAcana<k2>aBiyAcana
{%Abhi-yācana, am,%}¦ n. or {%abhi-yācñā,%} f. asking for,
entreaty, request.
<LEND>
[Page0066-b+ 76]

<L>4630<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyAcita<k2>aBiyAcita
{%Abhi-yācita, as, ā, am,%}¦ asked for, requested.
<LEND>

<L>4631<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyuj<k2>aBiyuj<h>1
{#aBiyuj#} 1¦. {%abhi-yuj,%} cl. 7. A. {%-yuṅkte,%}
{%-yoktum,%} to apply to, exert effort, make one's self
ready; to encounter, attack, assail; to accuse; to hurt:
Pass. {%-yujyate,%} to be accused, &c.
<LEND>

<L>4632<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyukta<k2>aBiyukta
{%Abhi-yukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ applied, intent on, dili-
gent, absorbed in meditation, versed in; appointed;
said, spoken; attacked by an enemy, assaulted, as-
sailed; blamed, rebuked; (in law) charged, prose-
cuted, a defendant.
<LEND>

<L>4633<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyugvan<k2>aBiyugvan
{%Abhi-yugvan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. hurting, attacking; an
enemy.
<LEND>

<L>4634<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyuj<k2>aBiyuj<h>2
2. {%abhi-yuj, k,%}¦ f. attacking; an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>4635<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyujyamAna<k2>aBiyujyamAna
{%Abhi-yujyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being prosecuted
(as a defendant).
<LEND>

<L>4636<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyoktavya<k2>aBiyoktavya
{%Abhi-yoktavya%}¦ or {%abhi-yojya, as, ā, am,%} to be
reproved or rebuked; to be prosecuted, indictable;
assailable.
<LEND>

<L>4637<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyoktf<k2>aBiyoktf
{%Abhi-yoktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ assailing, attacking; {%(tā),%}
m. an enemy; a plaintiff, a claimant, a pretender, an
accuser; a stronger party.
<LEND>

<L>4638<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyoga<k2>aBiyoga
{%Abhi-yoga, as,%}¦ m. application; energetic effort,
exertion, perseverance, learning; attack, assault, chal-
lenging to fight, war, battle; (in law) a plaint, a
charge, an accusation. {%—Abhiyoga-pattra, am,%} n. a
petition or writing of complaint.
<LEND>

<L>4639<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyogin<k2>aBiyogin
{%Abhi-yogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ intent upon, absorbed (in
meditation); attacking; ({%ī%}), m. a plaintiff, a prose-
cutor.
<LEND>

<L>4640<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyogya<k2>aBiyogya
{%Abhi-yogya, as, ā, am,%}¦ assailable.
<LEND>

<L>4641<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyojana<k2>aBiyojana
{%Abhi-yojana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. harnessing (one horse)
on to another.
<LEND>

<L>4642<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiyuD<k2>aBiyuD
{#aBiyuD#}¦ {%abhi-yudh,%} cl. 4. A. P. {%-yudhyate,%}
{%-ti, -yoddhum,%} to fight against, to acquire by fight-
ing, to conquer for (another).
<LEND>

<L>4643<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirakz<k2>aBirakz
{#aBirakz#}¦ {%abhi-rakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. or ep. A.
{%-rakṣati, -te, -ṣitum,%} to succour, to protect, to
preserve; to govern or command.
<LEND>

<L>4644<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirakzA<k2>aBirakzA
{%Abhi-rakṣā,%}¦ f. universal protection, wide bene-
volence.
<LEND>

<L>4645<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirakzita<k2>aBirakzita
{%Abhi-rakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ protected, preserved,
guarded; governed.
<LEND>

<L>4646<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirakzitf<k2>aBirakzitf
{%Abhi-rakṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ preserving, protecting,
guarding.
<LEND>

<L>4647<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirakzya<k2>aBirakzya
{%Abhi-rakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be protected or go-
verned.
<LEND>

<L>4648<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiraYj<k2>aBiraYj
{#aBiraYj#}¦ {%abhi-rañj,%} cl. 4. A. or Pass.
{%-rajyate, -raṅktum,%} to be coloured, to be flushed
with pleasure: Caus. P. {%-rañjayati, -yitum,%} to
colour.
<LEND>

<L>4649<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiraYjita<k2>aBiraYjita
{%Abhi-rañjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ tinted, flushed, kindly
affected.
<LEND>

<L>4650<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiram<k2>aBiram
{#aBiram#}¦ {%abhi-ram,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ramate, -ran-%}
{%tum,%} to delight in, to be delighted.
<LEND>

<L>4651<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirata<k2>aBirata
{%Abhi-rata, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased or contented with,
satisfied; engaged in; attentive to; performing,
practising.
<LEND>

<L>4652<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirati<k2>aBirati
{%Abhi-rati, is,%}¦ f. pleasure, delighting in; occupation,
practice.
<LEND>

<L>4653<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiramaRa<k2>aBiramaRa
{%Abhi-ramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. delighting in, delighting.
<LEND>

<L>4654<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiramaRIya<k2>aBiramaRIya
{%Abhi-ramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be delighted in,
delightful.
<LEND>

<L>4655<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirAma<k2>aBirAma
{%Abhi-rāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleasing, delightful, agree-
able, beautiful; an epithet of Śiva; ({%am%}), ind., see
s. v. next col. {%—Abhirāma-tā,%} f. or {%abhirāma-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. loveliness, beauty, splendor.
<LEND>

<L>4656<pc>0066-b<k1>aBiramBita<k2>aBiramBita
{#aBiramBita#}¦ {%abhi-rambhita, as, ā, am,%} ob-
tained (?).
<LEND>

<L>4657<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirAj<k2>aBirAj<h>1
{#aBirAj#} 1¦. {%abhi-rāj,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rājate,%}
{%-jitum,%} to shine, be-brilliant.
2. {%abhi-rāj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} reigning everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>4658<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirAja<k2>aBirAja
{%Abhi-rāja, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Burmese king.
<LEND>

<L>4659<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirAzwra<k2>aBirAzwra
{%Abhi-rāṣṭra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. one who has gained
dominion.
<LEND>

<L>4660<pc>0066-b<k1>aBirAD<k2>aBirAD
{#aBirAD#}¦ {%abhi-rādh,%} Pass. {%-rādhyate,%} to be
rendered propitious.
<LEND>
[Page0066-c+ 70]

<L>4661<pc>0066-c<k1>aBirAmam<k2>aBirAmam
{#aBirAmam#}¦ {%abhi-rāmam,%} ind. referring to
Rāma (see also under {%abhi-ram%} last col.).
<LEND>

<L>4662<pc>0066-c<k1>aBiruc<k2>aBiruc
{#aBiruc#}¦ {%abhi-ruc,%} Caus. P. {%-rocayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to long for, desire, be inclined to, have a taste
for, to like.
<LEND>

<L>4663<pc>0066-c<k1>aBiruci<k2>aBiruci
{%Abhi-ruci, is,%}¦ f. desire, delight, taste, relish, plea-
sure; desire of fame, ambition; splendor.
<LEND>

<L>4664<pc>0066-c<k1>aBirucita<k2>aBirucita
{%Abhi-rucita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, delighted, de-
lighting in.
<LEND>

<L>4665<pc>0066-c<k1>aBirucira<k2>aBirucira
{%Abhi-rucira, as, ā, am,%}¦ very pleasant, desirable
or pretty.
<LEND>

<L>4666<pc>0066-c<k1>aBiruta<k2>aBiruta
{#aBiruta#}¦ {%abhi-ruta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ru%}),
sounded; cooed, vocal (as the voices of birds, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>4667<pc>0066-c<k1>aBiruh<k2>aBiruh
{#aBiruh#}¦ {%abhi-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati, -roḍhum,%}
to ascend, mount.
<LEND>

<L>4668<pc>0066-c<k1>aBiruhya<k2>aBiruhya
{%Abhi-ruhya,%}¦ ind. having ascended.
<LEND>

<L>4669<pc>0066-c<k1>aBirUpa<k2>aBirUpa
{#aBirUpa#}¦ {%abhi-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} corresponding
with; conformable to, congruous; in accordance with;
pleasing, handsome, desirable, well formed, beautiful;
wise, learned; ({%as%}), m. the moon; Śiva; Viṣṇu;
Kāmadeva. {%—Abhirūpa-pati, is,%} m. having an agree-
able master (a rite) to secure such a master in the
next world.
<LEND>

<L>4670<pc>0066-c<k1>aBirUpaka<k2>aBirUpaka
{%Abhi-rūpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ corresponding; pleasing,
handsome; learned.
<LEND>

<L>4671<pc>0066-c<k1>aBiroruda<k2>aBiroruda
{#aBiroruda#}¦ {%abhi-roruda, as, ā, am%} (Intens.
of rt. {%rud%}), Ved. causing tears (of earnest desire).
<LEND>

<L>4672<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilakzita<k2>aBilakzita
{#aBilakzita#}¦ {%abhi-lakṣita, as, ā, am,%} marked
with signs, bearing marks.
<LEND>

<L>4673<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilakzya<k2>aBilakzya
{%Abhi-lakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be marked or noted;
({%am%}), ind. towards a mark or aim.
<LEND>

<L>4674<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilaNG<k2>aBilaNG
{#aBilaNG#}¦ {%abhi-laṅgh,%} cl. 10. P. {%-laṅgha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to jump across or over.
<LEND>

<L>4675<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilaNGana<k2>aBilaNGana
{%Abhi-laṅghana, am,%}¦ n. jumping across or over.
<LEND>

<L>4676<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilaB<k2>aBilaB
{#aBilaB#}¦ {%abhi-labh,%} Desid. A. or poet. P.
{%-lipsate, -ti,%} to desire to obtain, covet.
<LEND>

<L>4677<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilamBana<k2>aBilamBana
{%Abhi-lambhana, am,%}¦ n. obtaining transition (?).
<LEND>

<L>4678<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilipsA<k2>aBilipsA
{%Abhi-lipsā,%}¦ f. desire of obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>4679<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilaz<k2>aBilaz
{#aBilaz#}¦ {%abhi-laṣ,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-laṣati,%}
{%-laṣyati, -ṣitum,%} to desire or wish for, covet, crave.
<LEND>

<L>4680<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilazaRa<k2>aBilazaRa
{%Abhi-laṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. craving after, desiring.
<LEND>

<L>4681<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilazaRIya<k2>aBilazaRIya
{%Abhi-laṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirable, to be coveted.
<LEND>

<L>4682<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilazita<k2>aBilazita
{%Abhi-laṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ desired, wished; ({%am%}),
n. desire, wish, will, pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>4683<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilAza<k2>aBilAza
{%Abhi-lāṣa%}¦ or (less correctly) {%abhi-lāsa, as,%} m.
desire, wish, covetousness, affection, love.
<LEND>

<L>4684<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilAzaka<k2>aBilAzaka
{%Abhi-lāṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%abhi-lāṣin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} or {%abhi-lāṣuka, as, ā, am,%} or (less cor-
rectly) {%abhi-lāsin, ī, inī, i,%} wishing, desiring, de-
sirous, covetous, greedy.
<LEND>

<L>4685<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilApa<k2>aBilApa
{#aBilApa#}¦ {%abhi-lāpa, as,%} m. (rt. {%lap%}), ex-
pression, word, speech; declaration of the object of
a vow or religious obligation.
<LEND>

<L>4686<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilAva<k2>aBilAva
{#aBilAva#}¦ {%abhi-lāva, as,%} m. (rt. {%lū%}), cutting,
reaping, mowing.
<LEND>

<L>4687<pc>0066-c<k1>aBiliKita<k2>aBiliKita
{#aBiliKita#}¦ {%abhi-likhita, as, ā, am,%} in-
scribed, inserted in writing.
<LEND>

<L>4688<pc>0066-c<k1>aBileKana<k2>aBileKana
{%Abhi-lekhana, am,%}¦ n. writing upon, inscribing.
<LEND>

<L>4689<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilIna<k2>aBilIna
{#aBilIna#}¦ {%abhi-līna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%lī%}), ad-
hering to, shrouding; embraced; embracing.
<LEND>

<L>4690<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilupta<k2>aBilupta
{#aBilupta#}¦ {%abhi-lupta, as, ā, am,%} disturbed,
injured.
<LEND>

<L>4691<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilulita<k2>aBilulita
{#aBilulita#}¦ {%abhi-lulita, as, ā, am,%} playful,
unsteady; agitated, disturbed, injured.
<LEND>

<L>4692<pc>0066-c<k1>aBilUtA<k2>aBilUtA
{#aBilUtA#}¦ {%abhi-lūtā,%} f. an insect, a kind of
spider.
<LEND>

<L>4693<pc>0066-c<k1>aBivac<k2>aBivac
{#aBivac#}¦ {%abhi-vac,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vakti, -ktum,%}
to speak to, address; to tell.
<LEND>

<L>4694<pc>0066-c<k1>aBivaYcita<k2>aBivaYcita
{#aBivaYcita#}¦ {%abhi-vañcita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vañc%}),
cheated, deceived.
<LEND>
[Page0067-a+ 69]

<L>4695<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivat<k2>aBivat
{#aBivat#}¦ {%abhi-vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing
the word {%abhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>4696<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivad<k2>aBivad
{#aBivad#}¦ {%abhi-vad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vadati, -te,%}
{%-ditum,%} to address or salute with reverence: Caus.
{%-vādayati, -te, -yitum,%} to address or salute rever-
entlty; to salute through another person; to play on
an instrument.
<LEND>

<L>4697<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivadana<k2>aBivadana
{%Abhi-vadana, am,%}¦ n. addressing, salutation.
<LEND>

<L>4698<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAda<k2>aBivAda
{%Abhi-vāda, as,%}¦ m. reverential salutation; (for {%ati-%}
{%vāda%}), opprobrious or unfriendly speech, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>4699<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAdaka<k2>aBivAdaka
{%Abhi-vādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ a saluter, saluting,
offering salutation; civil, polite.
<LEND>

<L>4700<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAdanam<k2>aBivAdanam
{%Abhi-vādanam, am,%}¦ n. respectful salutation, including
sometimes the name or title of the person so addressed
and followed by the mention of the person's own
name; salutation of a superior or elder by a junior
or inferior, and especially of a teacher by his disciple;
(in general it is merely lifting the joined hands to
the forehead and saying {%aham abhivādaye,%} I salute).
{%—Abhivādana-śīla, as, ā, am,%} one who habitu-
ally salutes, respectful.
<LEND>

<L>4701<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAdayitf<k2>aBivAdayitf
{%Abhi-vādayitṛ, tā, trī,%}¦ m. f. a respectful saluter.
<LEND>

<L>4702<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAdita<k2>aBivAdita
{%Abhi-vādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ saluted respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>4703<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAdin<k2>aBivAdin
{%Abhi-vādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ telling, enunciating, describing.
<LEND>

<L>4704<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAdya<k2>aBivAdya
{%Abhi-vādya%}¦ or {%abhi-vādanīya, as, ā, am,%} to be
respectfully saluted.
<LEND>

<L>4705<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivand<k2>aBivand
{#aBivand#}¦ {%abhi-vand,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vandate,%}
{%-ditum,%} to salute respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>4706<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivandana<k2>aBivandana
{%Abhi-vandana, am,%}¦ n. saluting respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>4707<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivap<k2>aBivap
{#aBivap#}¦ {%abhi-vap,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-vapati,%}
{%-ptum,%} to join, come together.
<LEND>

<L>4708<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivayas<k2>aBivayas
{#aBivayas#}¦ {%abhi-vayas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. very
youthful, fresh; possessed of food.
<LEND>

<L>4709<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivarta<k2>aBivarta
{#aBivarta#}¦ {%abhi-varta,%} &c. See {%abhi-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>4710<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivarzaRa<k2>aBivarzaRa
{#aBivarzaRa#}¦ {%abhi-varṣaṇa,%} &c. See {%abhi-%}
{%vṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>4711<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivas<k2>aBivas
{#aBivas#}¦ {%abhi-vas,%} Caus. P. {%-vāsayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to clothe, cover.
<LEND>

<L>4712<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAsa<k2>aBivAsa
{%Abhi-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. or {%abhi-vāsana, am,%} n. covering.
<LEND>

<L>4713<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAsa<k2>aBivAsa
{%Abhi-vāsa,%}¦ ind. over the cloth or covering.
<LEND>

<L>4714<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivaha<k2>aBivaha
{#aBivaha#}¦ {%abhi-vaha, as, ā, am,%} conveying
near or towards, driving near.
<LEND>

<L>4715<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivahana<k2>aBivahana
{%Abhi-vahana, am,%}¦ n. conveying towards or near.
<LEND>

<L>4716<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAhya<k2>aBivAhya
{%Abhi-vāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be carried near; ({%am%}),
n. conveyance, transmission; presentation, offering.
<LEND>

<L>4717<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivA<k2>aBivA
{#aBivA#}¦ {%abhi-vā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vāti, -tum,%} to
blow upon or towards.
<LEND>

<L>4718<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAtam<k2>aBivAtam
{%Abhi-vātam,%}¦ ind. towards the wind, windwards.
<LEND>

<L>4719<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAYC<k2>aBivAYC
{#aBivAYC#}¦ {%abhi-vāñch,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vāñchati,%}
{%-chitum,%} to long for, desire.
<LEND>

<L>4720<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivAnyA<k2>aBivAnyA
{#aBivAnyA#}¦ {%abhi-vānyā%} or {%abhivānya-vatsā,%}
f. (fr. {%abhivā,%} obtained?, and {%anya%}), Ved. a cow
who suckles an adopted calf.
<LEND>

<L>4721<pc>0067-a<k1>aBiviKyA<k2>aBiviKyA
{#aBiviKyA#}¦ {%abhi-vi-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti,%}
{%-tum,%} Ved. to look at, view. In later Sanskrit, to
tell, to call.
<LEND>

<L>4722<pc>0067-a<k1>aBiviKyAta<k2>aBiviKyAta
{%Abhi-vikhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ universally known, re-
nowned, known as, called.
<LEND>

<L>4723<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivicakz<k2>aBivicakz
{#aBivicakz#}¦ {%abhi-vi-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe,%}
Ved. to look towards. In later Sanskrit the idea of
speaking is usually inherent in {%cakṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>4724<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivicar<k2>aBivicar
{#aBivicar#}¦ {%abhi-vi-car,%} cl. 1. A. {%-carate,%}
{%-ritum,%} Ved. {%-tave, -tavai, -rase, -radhyai,%} to ap-
proach; cl. 10. P. {%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to discuss.
<LEND>

<L>4725<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivijaMh<k2>aBivijaMh
{#aBivijaMh#}¦ {%abhi-vi-jaṃh%} Ved., Intens. 3rd
sing. {%-jaṅgahe,%} to twitch convulsively.
<LEND>

<L>4726<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivijYA<k2>aBivijYA
{#aBivijYA#}¦ {%abhi-vi-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. {%-jānāti, -jñā-%}
{%tum,%} to be aware, to know, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>4727<pc>0067-a<k1>aBivijYapta<k2>aBivijYapta
{%Abhi-vijñapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ notified, made known.
<LEND>
[Page0067-b+ 66]

<L>4728<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivijval<k2>aBivijval
{#aBivijval#}¦ {%abhi-vi-jval,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jvalati,%}
{%-litum,%} to flame or blaze against or opposite to.
<LEND>

<L>4729<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivitan<k2>aBivitan
{#aBivitan#}¦ {%abhi-vi-tan,%} cl. 8. P. A., Ved.
{%-tanoti, -nute, -nitum,%} to stretch (the string) over
or across (the bow); to stretch over, cover.
<LEND>

<L>4730<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivid<k2>aBivid
{#aBivid#}¦ {%abhi-vid,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-vindati, -te,%}
{%-veditum,%} to find, obtain; to seek.
<LEND>

<L>4731<pc>0067-b<k1>aBividfS<k2>aBividfS
{#aBividfS#}¦ {%abhi-vi-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P., Ved.
{%-paśyati, -draṣṭum,%} to look at, behold.
<LEND>

<L>4732<pc>0067-b<k1>aBiviDi<k2>aBiviDi
{#aBiviDi#}¦ {%abhi-vidhi, is,%} m. complete co-
incidence, complete comprehension or inclusion,
<LEND>

<L>4733<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivinad<k2>aBivinad
{#aBivinad#}¦ {%abhi-vi-nad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nadati,%}
{%-ditum,%} to raise a loud noise.
<LEND>

<L>4734<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivinI<k2>aBivinI
{#aBivinI#}¦ {%abhi-vi-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati,%}
{%-te, -netum,%} to inform, instruct.
<LEND>

<L>4735<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivinIta<k2>aBivinIta
{%Abhi-vinīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well-behaved; well-disci-
plined; pious, pure, devout.
<LEND>

<L>4736<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivinud<k2>aBivinud
{#aBivinud#}¦ {%abhi-vi-nud,%} Caus. P. {%-nodayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to gladden, cause to rejoice.
<LEND>

<L>4737<pc>0067-b<k1>aBiviBA<k2>aBiviBA
{#aBiviBA#}¦ {%abhi-vi-bhā,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-bhāti,%}
{%-tum,%} to illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>4738<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivimAna<k2>aBivimAna
{#aBivimAna#}¦ {%abhi-vimāna, as, ā, am,%} of un-
limited dimensions.
<LEND>

<L>4739<pc>0067-b<k1>aBiviyA<k2>aBiviyA
{#aBiviyA#}¦ {%abhi-vi-yā,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-yāti,%}
{%-tum,%} to approach, visit.
<LEND>

<L>4740<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivirAj<k2>aBivirAj
{#aBivirAj#}¦ {%abhi-vi-rāj,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rājate,%}
{%-jitum,%} to shine, be radiant.
<LEND>

<L>4741<pc>0067-b<k1>aBiviSaNkin<k2>aBiviSaNkin
{#aBiviSaNkin#}¦ {%abhi-viśaṅkin, ī, inī, i,%} afraid.
<LEND>

<L>4742<pc>0067-b<k1>aBiviSruta<k2>aBiviSruta
{#aBiviSruta#}¦ {%abhi-viśruta, as, ā, am,%} widely
celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>4743<pc>0067-b<k1>aBiviSvas<k2>aBiviSvas
{#aBiviSvas#}¦ {%abhi-vi-śvas,%} Caus. P. {%-śvāsa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to render confident or secure.
<LEND>

<L>4744<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivI<k2>aBivI
{#aBivI#}¦ {%abhi-vī (-vi-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-vyeti, -tum,%}
to come together towards, meet together in.
<LEND>

<L>4745<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivIkz<k2>aBivIkz
{#aBivIkz#}¦ {%abhi-vīkṣ (-vi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-vīkṣate, -kṣitum,%} to look at, view, perceive; to
aim at, to examine; to be affected towards.
<LEND>

<L>4746<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivIkzita<k2>aBivIkzita
{%Abhi-vīkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen, perceived.
<LEND>

<L>4747<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivIkzya<k2>aBivIkzya
{%Abhi-vīkṣya,%}¦ ind. having seen or observed.
<LEND>

<L>4748<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivIra<k2>aBivIra
{#aBivIra#}¦ {%abhi-vīra, as,%} m., Ved. surrounded
by men or heroes.
<LEND>

<L>4749<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivft<k2>aBivft
{#aBivft#}¦ {%abhi-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate, -titum,%}
to go towards, to face, to approach, come up, attack,
to turn up, arise.
<LEND>

<L>4750<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivartin<k2>aBivartin
{%Abhi-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ going towards, approaching,
attacking.
<LEND>

<L>4751<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivftta<k2>aBivftta
{%Abhi-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone towards; turning
towards.
<LEND>

<L>4752<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivfta<k2>aBivfta
{#aBivfta#}¦ {%abhi-vṛta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vṛ%}),
chosen, selected.
<LEND>

<L>4753<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivfD<k2>aBivfD
{#aBivfD#}¦ {%abhi-vṛdh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vardhate,%}
{%-dhitum,%} to increase, prosper.
<LEND>

<L>4754<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivfdDa<k2>aBivfdDa
{%Abhi-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ increased, augmented.
<LEND>

<L>4755<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivfdDi<k2>aBivfdDi
{%Abhi-vṛddhi, is,%}¦ f. increase, addition, success.
<LEND>

<L>4756<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivfz<k2>aBivfz
{#aBivfz#}¦ {%abhi-vṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-varṣati, -ṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to rain upon, water, bedew, cover with a shower
(e. g. of blossoms); to shower down; to cause to rain.
<LEND>

<L>4757<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivarzaRa<k2>aBivarzaRa
{%Abhi-varṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. watering, bedewing; rain-
ing upon.
<LEND>

<L>4758<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivarzin<k2>aBivarzin
{%Abhi-varṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ bedewing; raining upon.
<LEND>

<L>4759<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivfzwa<k2>aBivfzwa
{%Abhi-vṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ bedewed; rained upon.
<LEND>

<L>4760<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivega<k2>aBivega
{#aBivega#}¦ {%abhi-vega, as,%} m. (rt. {%vij%}), con-
sideration, determination.
<LEND>

<L>4761<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivyaYj<k2>aBivyaYj
{#aBivyaYj#}¦ {%abhi-vy-añj (-vi-añj%}), cl. 7. P.
{%-anakti, -añjitum%} or {%aṅktum,%} to manifest, reveal.
<LEND>

<L>4762<pc>0067-b<k1>aBivyakta<k2>aBivyakta
{%Abhi-vyakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ manifest, evident, distinct,
[Page0067-c+ 74]
<div n="P"/>plain; declared, revealed; ({%am%}), ind. manifestly,
plainly.
<LEND>

<L>4763<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyakti<k2>aBivyakti
{%Abhi-vyakti, is,%}¦ f. manifestation, distinction; de-
claration, revelation.
<LEND>

<L>4764<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyaNgya<k2>aBivyaNgya
{%Abhi-vyaṅgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be manifested or
made clear.
<LEND>

<L>4765<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyajyamAna<k2>aBivyajyamAna
{%Abhi-vyajyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being manifested.
<LEND>

<L>4766<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyaYjaka<k2>aBivyaYjaka
{%Abhi-vyañjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ revealing, mani-
festing; indicative, showing.
<LEND>

<L>4767<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyaYjana<k2>aBivyaYjana
{%Abhi-vyañjana, am,%}¦ n. making manifest, act of
revealing.
<LEND>

<L>4768<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyan<k2>aBivyan
{#aBivyan#}¦ {%abhi-vy-an (-vi-an),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-aniti, -nitum,%} to breathe through, to fill with
breath.
<LEND>

<L>4769<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyAdA<k2>aBivyAdA
{#aBivyAdA#}¦ {%abhi-vy-ā-dā (-vi-ā-dā),%} cl. 3. P.
A. {%-dadāti, -datte, -dātum,%} to open one's mouth
(for swallowing).
<LEND>

<L>4770<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyAdAna<k2>aBivyAdAna
{%Abhi-vyādāna, am,%}¦ n. suppressed sound; repeti-
tion of the same sound.
<LEND>

<L>4771<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyADin<k2>aBivyADin
{#aBivyADin#}¦ {%abhi-vyādhin, ī, inī, i%} (rt.
{%vyadh%}), striking at, hurting much, injuring greatly.
<LEND>

<L>4772<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyAp<k2>aBivyAp
{#aBivyAp#}¦ {%abhi-vy-āp (-vi-āp),%} cl. 5. P.
{%-āpnoti, -āptum,%} to extend to, to comprehend, in-
clude, pervade, surround.
<LEND>

<L>4773<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyApaka<k2>aBivyApaka
{%Abhi-vyāpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%abhi-vyāpin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} including, comprehending.
<LEND>

<L>4774<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyApta<k2>aBivyApta
{%Abhi-vyāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ included, comprehended,
co-extended, &c.
<LEND>

<L>4775<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyApti<k2>aBivyApti
{%Abhi-vyāpti, is,%}¦ f. co-extending, universal perva-
sion, inclusion, comprehension.
<LEND>

<L>4776<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyApya<k2>aBivyApya<h>1
1. {%abhi-vyāpya,%}¦ ind. up to a certain point inclusive.
<LEND>

<L>4777<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyApya<k2>aBivyApya<h>2
2. {%abhi-vyāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be included; ({%am%}),
n. validity of a rule (?).
<LEND>

<L>4778<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyAhf<k2>aBivyAhf
{#aBivyAhf#}¦ {%abhi-vy-ā-hṛ (-vi-ā-hṛ),%} Caus.
P. {%-hārayati, -yitum,%} to utter, pronounce, tell,
explain.
<LEND>

<L>4779<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyAharaRa<k2>aBivyAharaRa
{%Abhi-vyāharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. or {%abhi-vyāhāra, as,%}
m. pronunciation, utterance; an articulate significant
word or phrase.
<LEND>

<L>4780<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyAhArin<k2>aBivyAhArin
{%Abhi-vyāhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ pronouncing, telling.
<LEND>

<L>4781<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyAhfta<k2>aBivyAhfta
{%Abhi-vyāhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ pronounced, spoken,
told.
<LEND>

<L>4782<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivyukz<k2>aBivyukz
{#aBivyukz#}¦ {%abhi-vy-ukṣ (-vi-ukṣ),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-ukṣati, -ṣitum,%} to sprinkle towards.
<LEND>

<L>4783<pc>0067-c<k1>aBivlaNga<k2>aBivlaNga
{#aBivlaNga#}¦ {%abhi-vlaṅga, as,%} m. (rt. {%vlaṅg%}),
Ved. assault, shaking off.
<LEND>

<L>4784<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSaMs<k2>aBiSaMs
{#aBiSaMs#}¦ {%abhi-śaṃs,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śaṃsati, -situm,%}
to accuse, blame, calumniate, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>4785<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSaMsaka<k2>aBiSaMsaka
{%Abhi-śaṃsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%abhi-śaṃsin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} accusing; insulting; abusive.
<LEND>

<L>4786<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSaMsana<k2>aBiSaMsana
{%Abhi-śaṃsana, am,%}¦ n. accusation; insult.
<LEND>

<L>4787<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSas<k2>aBiSas<h>1
1. {%abhi-śas, as,%}¦ f., Ved. accusation, imprecation,
solicitation (?). For 2. see next col.
<LEND>

<L>4788<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSasta<k2>aBiSasta<h>1
1. {%abhi-śasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ falsely accused, calumni-
ated; defamed, infamous; sinful, wicked. See next col.
<LEND>

<L>4789<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSataka<k2>aBiSataka
{%Abhi-śataka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ falsely accused, cursed;
caused by imprecation.
<LEND>

<L>4790<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSasti<k2>aBiSasti
{%Abhi-śasti, is,%}¦ f. imprecation; curse, damnation;
effect of imprecation, misfortune, evil; one who curses
or injures; calumny, defamation, scandal; asking,
begging. {%—Abhiśasti-cātana, as,%} m., Ved. keeping
off imprecation. {%—Abhiśasti-pā, ās,%} or {%abhiśasti-%}
{%pāvan, ā,%} m., Ved. defending from insults or impre-
cations.
<LEND>

<L>4791<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSak<k2>aBiSak
{#aBiSak#}¦ {%abhi-śak,%} Desid. Caus. {%-śikṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to teach.
<LEND>

<L>4792<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSaNk<k2>aBiSaNk
{#aBiSaNk#}¦ {%abhi-śaṅk,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śaṅkate,%}
{%-kitum,%} to doubt, suspect, be suspicious.
<LEND>

<L>4793<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSaNkA<k2>aBiSaNkA
{%Abhi-śaṅkā,%}¦ f. doubt, alarm, suspicion.
<LEND>

<L>4794<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSaNkita<k2>aBiSaNkita
{%Abhi-śaṅkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ doubtful, frightened,
alarmed.
<LEND>

<L>4795<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSap<k2>aBiSap
{#aBiSap#}¦ {%abhi-śap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-śapati, -te,%}
{%-śaptum,%} to execrate, curse.
<LEND>

<L>4796<pc>0067-c<k1>aBiSapana<k2>aBiSapana
{%Abhi-śapana, am,%}¦ n. or {%abhi-śāpa, as,%} m. curse,
[Page0068-a+ 72]
imprecation; charge, accusation; false accusation,
calumny. {%—Abhiśāpa-jvara, as,%} m. fever caused by
a curse.
<LEND>

<L>4797<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSapta<k2>aBiSapta
{%Abhi-śapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cursed, accursed; falsely
accused, calumniated; reviled.
<LEND>

<L>4798<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSApana<k2>aBiSApana
{%Abhi-śāpana, am,%}¦ n. pronouncing a curse or
malediction.
<LEND>

<L>4799<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSabdita<k2>aBiSabdita
{#aBiSabdita#}¦ {%abhi-śabdita, as, ā, am,%} de-
clared, announced.
<LEND>

<L>4800<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSas<k2>aBiSas<h>2
{#aBiSas#} 2¦. {%abhi-śas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śasati, -si-%}
{%tum,%} to hurt, injure, attack. (See under {%abhi-śaṃs.%})
3. {%abhi-śas,%} f., Ved. injuring (?). For 1. {%abhi-śas,%}
see under {%abhi-śaṃs,%} p. 67, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>4801<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSasta<k2>aBiSasta<h>2
2. {%abhi-śasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured, hurt, attacked.
<LEND>

<L>4802<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSastf<k2>aBiSastf
{%Abhi-śastṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an injurer, an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>4803<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSasta<k2>aBiSasta
{#aBiSasta, apaBiSasti.#}¦ See {%abhi-śaṃs%} and
{%abhi-śas.%}
<LEND>

<L>4804<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSAntv<k2>aBiSAntv
{#aBiSAntv#}¦ {%abhi-śāntv,%} cl. 10. P. {%-śāntva-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to pacify, appease, reconcile, comfort.
See {%abhi-sāntv.%}
<LEND>

<L>4805<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSantva<k2>aBiSantva
{%Abhi-śantva, am,%}¦ n. graciousness, complaisance.
<LEND>

<L>4806<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSIta<k2>aBiSIta
{#aBiSIta#}¦ {%abhi-śīta%} or {%abhi-śyāta, as, ā, am%}
(rt. {%śyai%}), cold, chilly.
<LEND>

<L>4807<pc>0068-a<k1>aBisIna<k2>aBisIna
{%Abhi-sīna%}¦ or {%abhi-śyāna, as, ā, am,%} coagulated,
congealed.
<LEND>

<L>4808<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSoka<k2>aBiSoka<h>1
{#aBiSoka#} 1¦. {%abhi-śoka, as,%} m. (rt. 1. {%śuc%}),
Ved. intense grief.
1. {%abhi-śoca, as, ā, am,%} Ved. causing great grief.
<LEND>

<L>4809<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSocana<k2>aBiSocana
{%Abhi-śocana, am,%}¦ n. great grief, pain; a torment-
ing spirit or demon.
<LEND>

<L>4810<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSocayizRu<k2>aBiSocayizRu<h>1
1. {%abhi-śocayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ tormenting.
<LEND>

<L>4811<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSoka<k2>aBiSoka<h>2
{#aBiSoka#} 2¦. {%abhi-śoka, as,%} m. (rt. 2. {%śuc%}),
Ved. ardour.
<LEND>

<L>4812<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSoca<k2>aBiSoca<h>2
2. {%abhi-śoca, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, glowing with
heat.
<LEND>

<L>4813<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSocayizRu<k2>aBiSocayizRu<h>2
2. {%abhi-śocayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ glowing with heat.
<LEND>

<L>4814<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSOri<k2>aBiSOri
{#aBiSOri#}¦ {%abhi-śauri,%} ind. towards Śauri
or Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>4815<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSravaRa<k2>aBiSravaRa
{#aBiSravaRa#}¦ {%abhi-śravaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%śru%}),
repeating Vedic texts, sitting down to a Śrāddha.
<LEND>

<L>4816<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSrAva<k2>aBiSrAva
{%Abhi-śrāva, as,%}¦ m. hearing, becoming renowned.
<LEND>

<L>4817<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSri<k2>aBiSri
{#aBiSri#}¦ {%abhi-śri,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śrayati, -yitum,%}
to resort to.
<LEND>

<L>4818<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSrI<k2>aBiSrI
{%Abhi-śrī, īs, īs,%}¦ m.f. (from {%śrī%} connected with {%śri%}),
Ved. joining, connecting one's self with, mixing;
combining, holding together, arranging, putting in
order, united, approaching; having recourse to,
worthy to be had recourse to; respected; shining;
powerful.
<LEND>

<L>4819<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSriz<k2>aBiSriz
{#aBiSriz#}¦ {%abhi-śriṣ%} or {%abhi-śliṣ, ṭ%} (rt.
{%śliṣ%}), Ved. a ligature.
<LEND>

<L>4820<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSlezaRa<k2>aBiSlezaRa
{%Abhi-śleṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a bandage, ligature.
<LEND>

<L>4821<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSvas<k2>aBiSvas
{#aBiSvas#}¦ {%abhi-śvas, as,%} m., Ved. one who
breathes upon or towards.
<LEND>

<L>4822<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSvasa<k2>aBiSvasa
{%Abhi-śvasa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. breathing forth or on,
eructation.
<LEND>

<L>4823<pc>0068-a<k1>aBiSvAsa<k2>aBiSvAsa
{%Abhi-śvāsa, as,%}¦ m. breathing upon or towards,
blowing into a flame.
<LEND>

<L>4824<pc>0068-a<k1>aBizaYj<k2>aBizaYj
{#aBizaYj#}¦ {%abhi-ṣañj (-sañj),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṣajati,%}
{%-ṣaṅktum,%} to be in contact with; to revile, curse.
<LEND>

<L>4825<pc>0068-a<k1>aBizakta<k2>aBizakta
{%Abhi-ṣakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessed by evil spirits,
humiliated, defeated, reviled, cursed.
<LEND>

<L>4826<pc>0068-a<k1>aBizaNga<k2>aBizaNga
{%Abhi-ṣaṅga, as,%}¦ m. or {%abhi-ṣañjana, am,%} n.
complete contact, union; connection, copulation, as-
sociation, company; embracing; possession by evil
spirits; oath; curse or imprecation; false accusation,
calumny; defeat, blow, shock, sudden affliction.
<LEND>

<L>4827<pc>0068-a<k1>aBizaNgajvara<k2>aBizaNgajvara
{%Abhiṣaṅga-jvara, as,%}¦ m. a fever supposed to be
caused by evil spirits.
<LEND>

<L>4828<pc>0068-a<k1>aBizava<k2>aBizava
{#aBizava#}¦ {%abhi-ṣava.%} See {%abhi-ṣu.%}
<LEND>

<L>4829<pc>0068-a<k1>aBizah<k2>aBizah
{#aBizah#}¦ {%abhi-ṣah (-sah),%} cl. 1. A. {%-ṣahate,%}
{%-hitum%} or {%-ṣoḍhum,%} to attack.
<LEND>
[Page0068-b+ 74]

<L>4830<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizahya<k2>aBizahya
{%Abhi-ṣahya,%}¦ ind. violently, by force, insolently.
<LEND>

<L>4831<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizAc<k2>aBizAc
{#aBizAc#}¦ {%abhi-ṣāc, k, k, k%} (rt. {%sac%}), Ved.
following; honouring, paying attention to, devoted;
defeating.
<LEND>

<L>4832<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizic<k2>aBizic
{#aBizic#}¦ {%abhi-ṣic (-sic),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-ṣiñcati, -te, -ṣektum,%} to sprinkle; to water, wet;
to consecrate, anoint, appoint by consecration; A. to
be consecrated or inaugurated: Desid. {%-ṣiṣikṣati,%}
to be desirous of watering, &c.: Caus. {%-ṣecayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to have (another) consecrated.
<LEND>

<L>4833<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizikta<k2>aBizikta
{%Abhi-ṣikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled; anointed, in-
stalled, inaugurated, enthroned.
<LEND>

<L>4834<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizizikzat<k2>aBizizikzat
{%Abhi-ṣiṣikṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ desiring to in-
augurate.
<LEND>

<L>4835<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizeka<k2>aBizeka
{%Abhi-ṣeka, as,%}¦ m. sprinkling, anointing; inaugu-
rating or consecrating by sprinkling water; inaugu-
ration of a king, royal unction; the water or liquid
used at an inauguration; religious bathing; ablution;
bathing of the divinity to whom worship is offered.
{%—Abhiṣeka-śālā,%} f. the hall of coronation. {%—Abhi-%}
{%ṣekārdra-śiras (˚ka-ār˚), ās, ās, as,%} wet on the
head with the royal unction. {%—Abhi-ṣekāha (˚ka-%}
{%ah˚), as,%} m. day of inauguration.
<LEND>

<L>4836<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizektf<k2>aBizektf
{%Abhi-ṣektṛ, tā,%}¦ m. an anointer, one who inau-
gurates.
<LEND>

<L>4837<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizecana<k2>aBizecana
{%Abhi-ṣecana, am,%}¦ n. sprinkling; initiation, in-
auguration.
<LEND>

<L>4838<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizecanIya<k2>aBizecanIya
{%Abhi-ṣecanīya%}¦ or {%abhi-ṣecya%} or {%abhi-ṣekya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} worthy of inauguration; belonging to in-
auguration; {%(-nīyas),%} m., N. of a sacrificial cere-
mony performed at the inauguration of a king.
<LEND>

<L>4839<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizecita<k2>aBizecita
{%Abhi-ṣecita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be sprinkled,
inaugurated.
<LEND>

<L>4840<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizu<k2>aBizu
{#aBizu#}¦ {%abhi-ṣu (-su),%} cl. 5. P. {%-ṣuṇoti,%}
{%-ṣotum,%} to express the Soma juice or any other
juice; to moisten.
<LEND>

<L>4841<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizava<k2>aBizava
{%Abhi-ṣava, as,%}¦ m. or {%abhi-ṣavaṇa, am,%} n.
pressing out the juice of the Soma plant; distillation;
religious bathing, ablution preparatory to religious
rites; drinking Soma juice, sacrifice; ferment, yeast,
any substance producing vinous fermentation; ({%am%}),
n. sour gruel.
<LEND>

<L>4842<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizavaRI<k2>aBizavaRI
{%Abhi-ṣavaṇī,%}¦ f. an apparatus for pressing the Soma.
<LEND>

<L>4843<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizavaRIya<k2>aBizavaRIya
{%Abhi-ṣavaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be expressed as
Soma juice.
<LEND>

<L>4844<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizAvaka<k2>aBizAvaka
{%Abhi-ṣāvaka, as,%}¦ or {%abhi-ṣotṛ, tā,%} m. the
priest or any one who expresses the Soma juice.
<LEND>

<L>4845<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizAvakIya<k2>aBizAvakIya
{%Abhi-ṣāvakīya,%}¦ nom. P. {%-yati, -yitum,%} to long
for such a priest.
<LEND>

<L>4846<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizuta<k2>aBizuta
{%Abhi-ṣuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ expressed as Soma juice;
({%am%}), n. sour gruel.
<LEND>

<L>4847<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizuka<k2>aBizuka
{#aBizuka#}¦ {%abhi-ṣuka, as,%} m., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>4848<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizeRa<k2>aBizeRa
{#aBizeRa#}¦ {%abhi-ṣeṇa, as,%} m., Ved. approach-
ing as an enemy with an army; directing arrows against.
<LEND>

<L>4849<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizeRana<k2>aBizeRana
{%Abhi-ṣeṇana, am,%}¦ n. march to attack or repel
an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>4850<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizeRaya<k2>aBizeRaya
{%Abhi-ṣeṇaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%-ṣeṇayati, -yitum,%} to
approach with an army, to march with an army
against the enemy. {%—Abhi-ṣiṣeṇayiṣu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} desirous of approaching with an army.
<LEND>

<L>4851<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizo<k2>aBizo
{#aBizo#}¦ {%abhi-ṣo (-so),%} cl. 4. P. {%-ṣyati,%}
{%-ṣātum,%} to put an end to, to destroy.
<LEND>

<L>4852<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizyat<k2>aBizyat
{%Abhi-ṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ destroying, killing.
<LEND>

<L>4853<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizwana<k2>aBizwana
{#aBizwana#}¦ {%abhi-ṣṭana, as,%} m. (rt. {%stan%}), Ved.
roaring, bawling, a shout.
<LEND>

<L>4854<pc>0068-b<k1>aBizwi<k2>aBizwi
{#aBizwi#}¦ {%abhi-ṣṭi, is,%} m. (fr. 1. {%abhy-as;%} ac-
cording to other authorities fr. {%abhīṣ%} or fr. {%abhi-ṣṭhā,%}
q. v.), Ved. an assistant, a protector; one who is to be
praised or worshipped (as a protector); one who ap-
proaches in order to assist, one who approaches to
attack; one who assails an enemy, one who overpowers
an enemy, one who approaches in order to obtain; de-
siring, desire; ({%is%}), f. assistance, protection; favour, help,
worshipping, praising; a sacrifice, a hymn; approach-
[Page0068-c+ 67]
ing in order to assist, approaching in general, access.
{%—Abhiṣṭi-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. assisting; granting
desires. {%—Abhiṣṭi-dyumna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving
happiness. {%—Abhiṣṭi-pā, ās,%} m., Ved. guarding from
enemies, keeping off enemies. {%—Abhiṣṭi-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. desirable, favourable. {%—Abhiṣṭi-śavas,%}
{%ās,%} m., Ved. rendering assistance, able to overcome
enemies.
<LEND>

<L>4855<pc>0068-c<k1>aBizwu<k2>aBizwu
{#aBizwu#}¦ {%abhi-ṣṭu (-stu),%} cl. 2. P. {%-ṣṭauti,%}
{%-ṣṭotum,%} to praise, extol.
<LEND>

<L>4856<pc>0068-c<k1>aBizwava<k2>aBizwava
{%Abhi-ṣṭava, as,%}¦ m. praise, eulogy.
<LEND>

<L>4857<pc>0068-c<k1>aBizwuta<k2>aBizwuta
{%Abhi-ṣṭuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised.
<LEND>

<L>4858<pc>0068-c<k1>aBizwuvat<k2>aBizwuvat
{%Abhi-ṣṭuvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ praising.
<LEND>

<L>4859<pc>0068-c<k1>aBizWA<k2>aBizWA
{#aBizWA#}¦ {%abhi-ṣṭhā (-sthā),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tiṣṭhati,%}
{%-ṣṭhātum,%} to trample upon, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>4860<pc>0068-c<k1>aBizyat<k2>aBizyat
{#aBizyat#}¦ {%abhi-ṣyat.%} See under {%abi-ṣo.%}
<LEND>

<L>4861<pc>0068-c<k1>aBizyanda<k2>aBizyanda
{#aBizyanda#}¦ {%abhi-ṣyanda%} or {%abhi-syanda, as,%}
m. (rt. {%syand%}), oozing or flowing; weakness of or
running at the eyes; great increase or enlargement.
<LEND>

<L>4862<pc>0068-c<k1>aBizyandin<k2>aBizyandin
{%Abhi-ṣyandin%}¦ or {%abhi-syandin, ī, inī, i,%} oozing,
trickling; laxative; causing defluxions or serous effu-
sion. {%—Abhiṣyandi-ramaṇa%} or {%abhisyandi-ra-%}
{%maṇa, am,%} n. a suburb, a smaller city appended to
a larger one.
<LEND>

<L>4863<pc>0068-c<k1>aBizvaNga<k2>aBizvaNga
{#aBizvaNga#}¦ {%abhi-ṣvaṅga, as,%} m. (rt. {%svañj%}),
intense attachment or affection.
<LEND>

<L>4864<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMyoga<k2>aBisaMyoga
{#aBisaMyoga#}¦ {%abhi-saṃyoga, as,%} m. intimate
union, close contact.
<LEND>

<L>4865<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMraB<k2>aBisaMraB
{#aBisaMraB#}¦ {%abhi-saṃ-rabh,%} cl. 1. A., Ved.
{%-rabhate, -rabdhum,%} to support one's self on.
<LEND>

<L>4866<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMruD<k2>aBisaMruD
{#aBisaMruD#}¦ {%abhi-saṃ-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. {%-ruṇaddhi,%}
{%-roddhum,%} to ward off.
<LEND>

<L>4867<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMvfta<k2>aBisaMvfta
{#aBisaMvfta#}¦ {%abhi-saṃvṛta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vṛ%}),
covered, clad, clothed.
<LEND>

<L>4868<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMSIna<k2>aBisaMSIna
{#aBisaMSIna#}¦ {%abhi-saṃśīna%} or {%abhi-saṃśyāna,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śyai%}), coagulated, congealed.
<LEND>

<L>4869<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMSraya<k2>aBisaMSraya
{#aBisaMSraya#}¦ {%abhi-saṃśraya, as,%} m. (rt. {%śri%}),
refuge.
<LEND>

<L>4870<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMsAra<k2>aBisaMsAra
{#aBisaMsAra#}¦ {%abhi-saṃsāra, as,%} m. (rt. {%śṛ%}),
approaching together or in multitudes; ({%am%}), ind.
having approached together.
<LEND>

<L>4871<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMskf<k2>aBisaMskf
{#aBisaMskf#}¦ {%abhi-saṃs-kṛ (-sam-kṛ),%} cl. 8. P.
{%-karoti, -kartum,%} to shape, form; to make, render;
to consecrate.
<LEND>

<L>4872<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMskAra<k2>aBisaMskAra
{%Abhi-saṃskāra, as,%}¦ m. imagination; vain or profit-
less performance.
<LEND>

<L>4873<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMstamB<k2>aBisaMstamB
{#aBisaMstamB#}¦ {%abhi-saṃ-stambh,%} cl. 5. P.
{%-stabhnoti, -stambhitum,%} to support, render firm.
<LEND>

<L>4874<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMstava<k2>aBisaMstava
{#aBisaMstava#}¦ {%abhi-saṃstava, as,%} m. (rt. {%stu%}),
praise, praising highly.
<LEND>

<L>4875<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMstuta<k2>aBisaMstuta
{%Abhi-saṃstuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ highly praised.
<LEND>

<L>4876<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMspfS<k2>aBisaMspfS
{#aBisaMspfS#}¦ {%abhi-saṃ-spṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-spṛś-%}
{%ati, -spraṣṭum, -sparṣṭum,%} to wash one's self.
<LEND>

<L>4877<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMsmf<k2>aBisaMsmf
{#aBisaMsmf#}¦ {%abhi-saṃ-smṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-smarati,%}
{%-smartum,%} to recollect.
<LEND>

<L>4878<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMhan<k2>aBisaMhan
{#aBisaMhan#}¦ {%abhi-saṃ-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti,%}
{%-tum,%} to surround, enclose.
<LEND>

<L>4879<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMhata<k2>aBisaMhata
{%Abhi-saṃhata, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined, united.
<LEND>

<L>4880<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaMhita<k2>aBisaMhita
{#aBisaMhita.#}¦ See under {%abhi-sandhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>4881<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaNkruD<k2>aBisaNkruD
{#{{aBisaMkruD->aBisaNkruD||20170913||https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/380|enforce homorganic nasal consistency}}#}¦ {%abhi-saṅ-krudh (-sam-krudh),%}
cl. 4. P. {%-krudhyati, -kroddhum,%} to be angry with.
<LEND>

<L>4882<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaNkrudDa<k2>aBisaNkrudDa
{%Abhi-saṅkruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ angry with (with
gen.).
<LEND>

<L>4883<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaNkruDyat<k2>aBisaNkruDyat
{%Abhi-saṅkrudhyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being angry
with (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>4884<pc>0068-c<k1>aBisaNkruS<k2>aBisaNkruS
{#{{aBisaMkruS->aBisaNkruS||20170913||https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/380|enforce homorganic nasal consistency}}#}¦ {%abhi-saṅ-kruś (-sam-kruś),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-krośati, -kroṣṭum,%} to call out to.
<LEND>
[Page0069-a+ 68]

<L>4885<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaNkzip<k2>aBisaNkzip
{#aBisaNkzip#}¦ {%abhi-saṅ-kṣip (-sam-kṣip),%} cl.
6. P. {%-kṣipati, -kṣeptum,%} to compress, to crowd
together in a small space.
<LEND>

<L>4886<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaNkzipta<k2>aBisaNkzipta
{%Abhi-saṅkṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown together or
at; casting, throwing, shooting, aiming or aimed at.
<LEND>

<L>4887<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaNkzepa<k2>aBisaNkzepa
{%Abhi-saṅkṣepa, as,%}¦ m. compressing, compre-
hending.
<LEND>

<L>4888<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaNKyA<k2>aBisaNKyA
{#aBisaNKyA#}¦ {%abhi-saṅ-khyā (-sam-khyā),%} cl.
2. P. {%-khyāti, -tum,%} to enumerate; infer.
<LEND>

<L>4889<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaNKya<k2>aBisaNKya
{%Abhi-saṅkhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ inferable, clearly ascer-
tainable.
<LEND>

<L>4890<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaNKyeya<k2>aBisaNKyeya
{%Abhi-saṅkhyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be enumerated.
<LEND>

<L>4891<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaNgam<k2>aBisaNgam
{#aBisaNgam#}¦ {%abhi-saṅ-gam (-sam-gam),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to approach together; to
join in welcoming; to meet with.
<LEND>

<L>4892<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaNgupta<k2>aBisaNgupta
{#aBisaNgupta#}¦ {%abhi-saṅgupta, as, ā, am,%} guarded,
protected.
<LEND>

<L>4893<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaNgF<k2>aBisaNgF
{#aBisaNgF#}¦ {%abhi-saṅ-gṝ (-sam-gṝ),%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛṇāti, -ṇīte, -garitum, -rītum,%} to promise.
<LEND>

<L>4894<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaNgrah<k2>aBisaNgrah
{#aBisaNgrah#}¦ {%abhi-saṅ-grah (-sam-grah),%} cl. 9.
P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti, -ṇīte, -grahītum,%} to grasp at once
with all the fingers.
<LEND>

<L>4895<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisac<k2>aBisac
{#aBisac#}¦ {%abhi-sac,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%-sacate,%}
{%-citum,%} to follow; to revere, favour.
<LEND>

<L>4896<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaYcar<k2>aBisaYcar
{#aBisaYcar#}¦ {%abhi-sañ-car (-sam-car),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-carati, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-ritave, -rase, -radhyai,%} to
go up to, to seek for, to move or wander about.
<LEND>

<L>4897<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaYcArin<k2>aBisaYcArin
{%Abhi-sañcārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ moving in every direction,
inconstant, changeable.
<LEND>

<L>4898<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaYci<k2>aBisaYci
{#aBisaYci#}¦ {%abhi-sañ-ci (-sam-ci),%} cl. 5. P. A.
{%-cinoti, -nute, -cetum,%} to arrange with reference to
(anything).
<LEND>

<L>4899<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaYcint<k2>aBisaYcint
{#aBisaYcint#}¦ {%abhi-sañ-cint (-sam-cint),%} cl.
10. P. {%-cintayati, -yitum,%} to remember.
<LEND>

<L>4900<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaYjAta<k2>aBisaYjAta
{#aBisaYjAta#}¦ {%abhi-sañjāta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jan%}),
produced, coming into existence.
<LEND>

<L>4901<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaYjYA<k2>aBisaYjYA
{#aBisaYjYA#}¦ {%abhi-sañ-jñā (-sam-jñā),%} cl. 9. A.
{%-jānīte, -jñātum,%} to allow, acquiesce in.
<LEND>

<L>4902<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaYjvar<k2>aBisaYjvar
{#aBisaYjvar#}¦ {%abhi-sañ-jvar (-sam-jvar),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-jvarati, -ritum,%} to envy, regard with spite.
<LEND>

<L>4903<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisatvan<k2>aBisatvan
{#aBisatvan#}¦ {%abhi-satvan, ā,%} m., Ved. sur-
rounded by brave beings or heroes.
<LEND>

<L>4904<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisantan<k2>aBisantan
{#aBisantan#}¦ {%abhi-san-tan (-sam-tan),%} cl. 8.
P., Ved. {%-tanoti, -nitum,%} to spread or stretch across,
to use for bridging over or stretching across.
<LEND>

<L>4905<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisantata<k2>aBisantata
{%Abhi-santata, as, ā, am,%}¦ stretched across, spread
over, covering.
<LEND>

<L>4906<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisantap<k2>aBisantap
{#aBisantap#}¦ {%abhi-san-tap (-sam-tap),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-tapati, -ptum,%} to press hard on all sides.
<LEND>

<L>4907<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisantapta<k2>aBisantapta
{%Abhi-santapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ tormented.
<LEND>

<L>4908<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisantApa<k2>aBisantApa
{%Abhi-santāpa, as,%}¦ m. war, battle.
<LEND>

<L>4909<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisantF<k2>aBisantF
{#aBisantF#}¦ {%abhi-san-tṝ (-sam-tṝ),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-tarati, -ritum, -ritum,%} to cross over towards.
<LEND>

<L>4910<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisantyaj<k2>aBisantyaj
{#aBisantyaj#}¦ {%abhi-san-tyaj (-sam-tyaj),%} cl.
1. P. {%-tyajati, -tyaktum,%} to abandon, give up, desist
from.
<LEND>

<L>4911<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisantrasta<k2>aBisantrasta
{#aBisantrasta#}¦ {%abhi-santrasta, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%tras%}), terrified, much alarmed.
<LEND>

<L>4912<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisandazwa<k2>aBisandazwa
{#aBisandazwa#}¦ {%abhi-sandaṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%daṃś%}), compressed, tightened.
<LEND>

<L>4913<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisandeha<k2>aBisandeha
{#aBisandeha#}¦ {%abhi-sandeha, as,%} m. (rt. {%dih%}), ex-
change; organ of generation. In the last sense also
written {%abhi-sandoha.%}
<LEND>

<L>4914<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisanDA<k2>aBisanDA<h>1
{#aBisanDA#} 1¦. {%abhi-san-dhā (-sam-dhā),%} cl.
3. P. {%-dadhāti, -dhātum,%} to aim at; overcome;
deceive; calumniate; declare; add; prefer.
<LEND>

<L>4915<pc>0069-a<k1>aBisaMhita<k2>aBisaMhita
{%Abhi-saṃhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agreed, contracted; at-
tached to, interested, following any object eagerly.
<LEND>
[Page0069-b+ 69]

<L>4916<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisanDa<k2>aBisanDa
{%Abhi-sandha%}¦ or {%abhi-sandhaka, as,%} m. a deceiver,
a calumniator.
2. {%abhi-sandhā,%} f. speech, declaration, promise.
<LEND>

<L>4917<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisanDAna<k2>aBisanDAna
{%Abhi-sandhāna, am,%}¦ n. speech, deliberate declara-
tion; attachment or interest in any object; special
agreement; cheating, deceiving; making peace or
alliance.
<LEND>

<L>4918<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisanDAya<k2>aBisanDAya
{%Abhi-sandhāya,%}¦ ind. having aimed at, shooting at.
<LEND>

<L>4919<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisanDi<k2>aBisanDi
{%Abhi-sandhi, is,%}¦ m. speaking or declaring deliber-
ately, purpose, intention, object, meaning; special
agreement; cheating, deceiving; making peace or
alliance; joint, junction. {%—Abhisandhi-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} done intentionally or on purpose.
<LEND>

<L>4920<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisannam<k2>aBisannam
{#aBisannam#}¦ {%abhi-san-nam (-sam-nam),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-namati, -nantum,%} to inflect.
<LEND>

<L>4921<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisannah<k2>aBisannah
{#aBisannah#}¦ {%abhi-san-nah (-sam-nah),%} cl. 4.
P. A. {%-nahyati, -te, -naddhum,%} to bind or string
together; to arm one's self against (?).
<LEND>

<L>4922<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisannadDa<k2>aBisannadDa
{%Abhi-sannaddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ accoutred, armed.
<LEND>

<L>4923<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisannI<k2>aBisannI
{#aBisannI#}¦ {%abhi-san-nī (-sam-nī),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-nayati, -te, -netum,%} to lead to or upon.
<LEND>

<L>4924<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisannu<k2>aBisannu
{#aBisannu#}¦ {%abhi-san-nu (-sam-ū),%} cl. 2. P.,
Ved. {%-nauti, -navitum, -nuvitum,%} to rejoice or cheer
together at or towards.
<LEND>

<L>4925<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisamavAya<k2>aBisamavAya
{#aBisamavAya#}¦ {%abhi-samavāya, as,%} m. (rt. {%i%}),
union, association.
<LEND>

<L>4926<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisamAgam<k2>aBisamAgam
{#aBisamAgam#}¦ {%abhi-sam-ā-gam,%} cl. 1. P.
{%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to approach together, come to.
<LEND>

<L>4927<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisamApad<k2>aBisamApad
{#aBisamApad#}¦ {%abhi-sam-ā-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-pad-%}
{%yate, -pattum,%} to approach, enter upon.
<LEND>

<L>4928<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisami<k2>aBisami
{#aBisami#}¦ {%abhi-sam-i,%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -tum,%} to
come together or meet at (a particular place); to
invade.
<LEND>

<L>4929<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisamIkz<k2>aBisamIkz
{#aBisamIkz#}¦ {%abhi-sam-īkṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-īkṣate,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to see, look, at, have in view; to compre-
hend, examine.
<LEND>

<L>4930<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisamIr<k2>aBisamIr
{#aBisamIr#}¦ {%abhi-sam-īr,%} Caus. P. {%-īrayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to put in motion.
<LEND>

<L>4931<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisamUh<k2>aBisamUh
{#aBisamUh#}¦ {%abhi-sam-ūh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ūhati,%}
{%-te, -hitum,%} to cover by bringing together.
<LEND>

<L>4932<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisamf<k2>aBisamf
{#aBisamf#}¦ {%abhi-sam-ṛ,%} cl. 5. A., Ved. {%-ṛṇute,%}
{%-artum, -ritum, -rītum,%} to reach, seize.
<LEND>

<L>4933<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisame<k2>aBisame
{#aBisame#}¦ {%abhi-sam-e (-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-aiti,%}
{%-tum,%} to join in coming near or approaching, to go
in quest of.
<LEND>

<L>4934<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisampac<k2>aBisampac
{#aBisampac#}¦ {%abhi-sam-pac,%} Pass. {%-pacyate,%}
to become ripe at a certain time (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>4935<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisampat<k2>aBisampat
{#aBisampat#}¦ {%abhi-sam-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati,%}
{%-titum,%} to fly to, hasten to, jump upon; to fly along.
<LEND>

<L>4936<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisampAta<k2>aBisampAta
{%Abhi-sampāta, as,%}¦ m. concourse, war, battle.
<LEND>

<L>4937<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisampad<k2>aBisampad<h>1
{#aBisampad#} 1¦. {%abhi-sam-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-pad-%}
{%yate, -pattum,%} to become anything, become similar
to, be changed to; to come to, arrive at; to obtain:
Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to make equal, change into.
<LEND>

<L>4938<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisampatti<k2>aBisampatti
{%Abhi-sampatti, is,%}¦ f. becoming or being effected
completely; transition.
<LEND>

<L>4939<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisampad<k2>aBisampad<h>2
2. {%abhi-sampad, t,%}¦ f. becoming complete, complete
number.
<LEND>

<L>4940<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisampanna<k2>aBisampanna
{%Abhi-sampanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ complete, completely
effected.
<LEND>

<L>4941<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisamparAya<k2>aBisamparAya
{#aBisamparAya#}¦ {%abhi-samparāya, as,%} m. (rt. {%i%}
with {%parā%} and {%sam%}), futurity.
<LEND>

<L>4942<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisampUj<k2>aBisampUj
{#aBisampUj#}¦ {%abhi-sam-pūj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pūja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to honour, revere greatly.
<LEND>

<L>4943<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisamprapad<k2>aBisamprapad
{#aBisamprapad#}¦ {%abhi-sam-pra-pad,%} cl. 4. A.
{%-padyate, -pattum,%} to come towards, share in.
<LEND>

<L>4944<pc>0069-b<k1>aBisamprAp<k2>aBisamprAp
{#aBisamprAp#}¦ {%abhi-sam-prāp (-pra-āp),%} cl. 5.
P. {%-āpnoti, -āptum,%} to reach, come to, arrive at,
get, obtain.
<LEND>
[Page0069-c+ 69]

<L>4945<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisamprekz<k2>aBisamprekz
{#aBisamprekz#}¦ {%abhi-sam-prekṣ (-pra-īkṣ),%}
cl. 1. A. {%-prekṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look at, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>4946<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisambanD<k2>aBisambanD
{#aBisambanD#}¦ {%abhi-sam-bandh,%} Pass. {%-badh-%}
{%yate,%} to be connected with, to relate or refer to.
<LEND>

<L>4947<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisambadDa<k2>aBisambadDa
{%Abhi-sambaddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected with, re-
ferring to.
<LEND>

<L>4948<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisambanDa<k2>aBisambanDa
{%Abhi-sambandha, as,%}¦ m. connection; contact,
conjunction, relation; sexual connection.
<LEND>

<L>4949<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisambADa<k2>aBisambADa
{#aBisambADa#}¦ {%abhi-sambādha, as, ā, am,%} very
confined or contracted.
<LEND>

<L>4950<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisamBU<k2>aBisamBU
{#aBisamBU#}¦ {%abhi-sam-bhū,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-bha-%}
{%vati, -vitum,%} to be near to, to enjoy.
<LEND>

<L>4951<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisammuKa<k2>aBisammuKa
{#aBisammuKa#}¦ {%abhi-sammukha, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%}
fronting, facing; looking respectfully towards.
<LEND>

<L>4952<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisara<k2>aBisara
{#aBisara#}¦ {%abhi-sara, abhi-sarga,%} &c. See
{%abhi-sṛ, abhi-sṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>4953<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisarpaRa<k2>aBisarpaRa
{#aBisarpaRa#}¦ {%abhi-sarpaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%sṛp%}),
coming near.
<LEND>

<L>4954<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisAntv<k2>aBisAntv
{#aBisAntv#}¦ {%abhi-sāntv%} or better {%abhi-śāntv,%}
cl. 10. P. {%-sāntvayati, -yitum,%} to conciliate, pacify,
comfort.
<LEND>

<L>4955<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisAntva<k2>aBisAntva
{%Abhi-sāntva%}¦ or {%abhi-śāntva, as,%} m. consolation,
conciliation.
<LEND>

<L>4956<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisAyam<k2>aBisAyam
{#aBisAyam#}¦ {%abhi-sāyam,%} ind. about evening,
at sunset.
<LEND>

<L>4957<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisAvaka<k2>aBisAvaka
{#aBisAvaka#}¦ {%abhi-sāvaka,%} &c. See {%abhi-ṣu.%}
<LEND>

<L>4958<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisusUz<k2>aBisusUz
{#aBisusUz#}¦ {%abhi-susūṣ, ūs, ūs, ūs,%} or {%abhi-%}
{%soṣyat, an, atī%} or {%antī, at,%} desirous of expressing
Soma juice. See {%abhi-ṣu.%}
<LEND>

<L>4959<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisUc<k2>aBisUc
{#aBisUc#}¦ {%abhi-sūc,%} cl. 10. P. {%-sūcayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to point out, show.
<LEND>

<L>4960<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisUcita<k2>aBisUcita
{%Abhi-sūcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pointed out.
<LEND>

<L>4961<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisUd<k2>aBisUd
{#aBisUd#}¦ {%abhi-sūd,%} cl. 10. P. {%-sūdayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to kill outright, destroy utterly.
<LEND>

<L>4962<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisf<k2>aBisf
{#aBisf#}¦ {%abhi-sṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati, -sartum,%}
to approach, go towards, advance in order to meet, to
attack: Caus. P. {%-sārayati, -yitum,%} to visit, approach.
<LEND>

<L>4963<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisara<k2>aBisara
{%Abhi-sara, as,%}¦ m. a companion, a follower; N.
of a people.
<LEND>

<L>4964<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisaraRa<k2>aBisaraRa
{%Abhi-saraṇa, am,%}¦ n. approaching, meeting, ren-
dezvous, going to meet.
<LEND>

<L>4965<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisarat<k2>aBisarat
{%Abhi-sarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going to meet, attacking.
<LEND>

<L>4966<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisartf<k2>aBisartf
{%Abhi-sartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ attacking, assailant.
<LEND>

<L>4967<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisAra<k2>aBisAra
{%Abhi-sāra, as,%}¦ m. attack, assault; meeting, rendez-
vous; companion, follower; war, battle; a purificatory
rite; going to meet a lover, an assignation, appoint-
ment; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>4968<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisArikA<k2>aBisArikA
{%Abhi-sārikā,%}¦ f. a. woman who goes to meet her
lover or keeps an assignation.
<LEND>

<L>4969<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisArin<k2>aBisArin
{%Abhi-sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going to meet, visiting,
attacking; {%(iṇī),%} f. a woman who keeps an assigna-
tion or goes to meet her lover; N. of a species of
the Triṣṭubh metre, in which two Pādas contain
twelve instead of eleven syllables, and which therefore
is said to <nsi>approach</nsi> another metre called Jagatī.
<LEND>

<L>4970<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisAryamARa<k2>aBisAryamARa
{%Abhi-sāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being approached.
<LEND>

<L>4971<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisftya<k2>aBisftya
{%Abhi-sṛtya,%}¦ ind. having gone near.
<LEND>

<L>4972<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisfj<k2>aBisfj
{#aBisfj#}¦ {%abhi-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati, -sra-%}
{%ṣṭum,%} to pour forth, to give.
<LEND>

<L>4973<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisarga<k2>aBisarga
{%Abhi-sarga, as,%}¦ m. creation.
<LEND>

<L>4974<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisarjana<k2>aBisarjana
{%Abhi-sarjana, am,%}¦ n. gift, donation; killing (?).
<LEND>

<L>4975<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisfzwa<k2>aBisfzwa
{%Abhi-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ given.
<LEND>

<L>4976<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisevana<k2>aBisevana
{#aBisevana#}¦ {%abhi-sevana, am,%} n. practising,
cultivating.
<LEND>

<L>4977<pc>0069-c<k1>aBiskanda<k2>aBiskanda
{#aBiskanda#}¦ {%abhi-skanda, as,%} m., Ved. as-
sault; an assailant; ({%am%}), ind. by assailing.
<LEND>

<L>4978<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisTiram<k2>aBisTiram
{#aBisTiram#}¦ {%abhi-sthiram,%} ind. very firmly.
<LEND>

<L>4979<pc>0069-c<k1>aBisneha<k2>aBisneha
{#aBisneha#}¦ {%abhi-sneha, as,%} m. attachment,
affection, desire.
<LEND>
[Page0070-a+ 73]

<L>4980<pc>0070-a<k1>aBisPurita<k2>aBisPurita
{#aBisPurita#}¦ {%abhi-sphurita, as, ā, am,%} ex-
panded to the full (as a blossom).
<LEND>

<L>4981<pc>0070-a<k1>aBismi<k2>aBismi
{#aBismi#}¦ {%abhi-smi,%} cl. 1. A., poet. P. {%-sma-%}
{%yate, -ti, -smetum,%} to smile upon.
<LEND>

<L>4982<pc>0070-a<k1>aBisyanda<k2>aBisyanda
{#aBisyanda#}¦ {%abhi-syanda,%} &c. See {%abhi-%}
{%ṣyanda,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>4983<pc>0070-a<k1>aBisvayamAtfRRam<k2>aBisvayamAtfRRam
{#aBisvayamAtfRRam#}¦ {%abhi-svayamātṛṇṇam,%} ind.,
Ved. on the brick (used in sacrifices and called) {%sva-%}
{%yam-ātṛṇṇa%} (perforated in itself, i. e. full of holes).
<LEND>

<L>4984<pc>0070-a<k1>aBisvf<k2>aBisvf
{#aBisvf#}¦ {%abhi-svṛ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-svarati,%}
{%-svartum, -ritum,%} to approve, praise, invoke.
<LEND>

<L>4985<pc>0070-a<k1>aBisvar<k2>aBisvar
{%Abhi-svar, ar,%}¦ f., Ved. invocation; calling into
(one's) presence; a hymn or song of praise.
<LEND>

<L>4986<pc>0070-a<k1>aBisvartf<k2>aBisvartf
{%Abhi-svartṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. invoking, praising, an
invoker.
<LEND>

<L>4987<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihan<k2>aBihan
{#aBihan#}¦ {%abhi-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -tum,%} to
thump at, strike, kill; to beat off, drive off.
<LEND>

<L>4988<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihata<k2>aBihata
{%Abhi-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck; beaten; smitten;
killed; humbled, subdued, broken down; obstructed;
multiplied.
<LEND>

<L>4989<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihati<k2>aBihati
{%Abhi-hati, is,%}¦ f. striking; (in arithm.) multiplication.
<LEND>

<L>4990<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihanyamAna<k2>aBihanyamAna
{%Abhi-hanyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being smitten, kill-
ed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>4991<pc>0070-a<k1>aBiGAta<k2>aBiGAta
{%Abhi-ghāta.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>4992<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihava<k2>aBihava<h>1
{#aBihava#} 1¦. {%abhi-hava, as,%} m. (rt. {%hve%}), in-
vocation; (for 2. see under {%abhi-hu%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>4993<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihUti<k2>aBihUti
{%Abhi-hūti, is,%}¦ f. invocation, worshipping.
<LEND>

<L>4994<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihasya<k2>aBihasya
{#aBihasya#}¦ {%abhi-hasya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%has%}),
Ved. ridiculous, laughable.
<LEND>

<L>4995<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihAsa<k2>aBihAsa
{%Abhi-hāsa, as,%}¦ m. jest, joke, mirth.
<LEND>

<L>4996<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihita<k2>aBihita
{#aBihita#}¦ {%abhi-hita, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%abhi-dhā,%}
q. v.), held forth, said, declared, spoken; determined;
spoken to, addressed, accosted; whispered, prompted
to say; placed upon; ({%as%}), m., N. of a chief; ({%am%}),
n. a name, expression, word. {%—Abhihita-tva, am,%} n.
the state of being said or spoken; a holding forth,
declaration; authority, test.
<LEND>

<L>4997<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihiti<k2>aBihiti
{%Abhi-hiti, is,%}¦ f. telling, manifesting, title. See
{%abhi-dhāna.%}
<LEND>

<L>4998<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihu<k2>aBihu
{#aBihu#}¦ {%abhi-hu,%} cl. 3. P. {%-juhoti, -hotum,%}
Ved. {%-hotavai,%} to make an oblation, sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>4999<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihava<k2>aBihava<h>2
2. {%abhi-hava, as,%}¦ m. oblation, sacrifice. See above.
<LEND>

<L>5000<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihoma<k2>aBihoma
{%Abhi-homa, as,%}¦ m. making the oblation of clarified
butter.
<LEND>

<L>5001<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihf<k2>aBihf
{#aBihf#}¦ {%abhi-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-harati, -hartum,%}
to snatch away, carry off; to bring: Caus. P. {%-hāra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to make a sudden attack.
<LEND>

<L>5002<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihara<k2>aBihara
{%Abhi-hara, as, ā, am,%}¦ carrying off, removing.
<LEND>

<L>5003<pc>0070-a<k1>aBiharaRa<k2>aBiharaRa
{%Abhi-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. bringing near, conveying,
robbing.
<LEND>

<L>5004<pc>0070-a<k1>aBiharaRIya<k2>aBiharaRIya
{%Abhi-haraṇīya%}¦ or {%abhi-hartavya%} or {%abhi-hārya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} to be brought near.
<LEND>

<L>5005<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihartf<k2>aBihartf
{%Abhi-hartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who snatches away,
seizes, takes by violence; a ravisher.
<LEND>

<L>5006<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihAra<k2>aBihAra
{%Abhi-hāra, as,%}¦ m. robbing, seizing anything in
the owner's presence; a brisk attack; effort; arming,
taking up arms; mingling together.
<LEND>

<L>5007<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihrut<k2>aBihrut
{#aBihrut#}¦ {%abhi-hrut, t, t, t%} (rt. {%hvṛ%}), Ved.
bending, causing crookedness, acting injuriously; ({%t%}),
f. fall, defeat, damage.
<LEND>

<L>5008<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihruti<k2>aBihruti
{%Abhi-hruti, is,%}¦ f. causing to fall; defeat, damage,
offence; offensive, injurious.
<LEND>

<L>5009<pc>0070-a<k1>aBihvara<k2>aBihvara
{%Abhi-hvara%}¦ or {%abhi-hvāra, as, ā, am,%} falling
off; crookedness, sin.
<LEND>

<L>5010<pc>0070-a<k1>aBI<k2>aBI<h>1
{#aBI#} 1¦. {%a-bhī, īs, īs, i,%} without fear, fearless.
<LEND>

<L>5011<pc>0070-a<k1>aBI<k2>aBI<h>2
{#aBI#} 2¦. {%abhī (abhi-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%abhy-eti,%}
{%-tum,%} to come near, approach; to go up to or
towards (with acc.); to go along, go after; to go into,
enter; to join; to go over to; to reach; to come
to, to fall to one's share (with acc.); to get; to fall
into: Ved. Intens. or Pass. {%-īyate,%} to ask, request;
{%sakāśam%} or {%samīpam abhī,%} to go near.
1. {%abhīti, is,%} f., Ved. approach, assault. See next col.
<LEND>
[Page0070-b+ 70]

<L>5012<pc>0070-b<k1>aBItvan<k2>aBItvan
{%Abhītvan, vā, varī,%}¦ m. f., Ved. approaching, at-
tacking: also written {%abhītvara, as, ī, am.%}
<LEND>

<L>5013<pc>0070-b<k1>aByaya<k2>aByaya
{%Abhy-aya.%}¦ See s. v., p. 71, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>5014<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIka<k2>aBIka<h>1
{#aBIka#} 1¦. {%abhīka, as, ā, am%} (= {%abhika,%} q. v.,
fr. {%abhi%}), longing after; lustful, libidinous; anxious,
desirous; ({%as%}), m. a lover, a husband, a master.
<LEND>

<L>5015<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIka<k2>aBIka<h>2
{#aBIka#} 2¦. {%abhīka, am,%} n. (fr. {%abhi-ac;%} cf.
{%anūka, apāka, pratīka%}), Ved. meeting together, close-
ness, nearness; collision, combat, opposition; {%abhīke,%}
ind. in the neighbourhood, at the same place or time,
at the right time, just in time; in a moment, instan-
taneously; (with abl.) from, out of; on account of,
with regard to; from (in connection with verbs ex-
pressing defending from, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>5016<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIka<k2>aBIka<h>3
{#aBIka#} 3¦. {%a-bhīka, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%bhī%}), fear-
less; ({%as%}), m. a poet; a master.
<LEND>

<L>5017<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIkz<k2>aBIkz
{#aBIkz#}¦ {%abhīkṣ (abhi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%-īk-%}
{%ṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look towards.
<LEND>

<L>5018<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIkzRa<k2>aBIkzRa
{#aBIkzRa#}¦ {%abhīkṣṇa, as, ā, am%} (contraction
of {%abhi-kṣaṇa%}), repeated, frequent; constant, per-
petual: ({%am%}), ind. repeatedly, again and again;
perpetually, constantly; very, exceedingly; quickly.
{%—Abhīkṣṇa-śas,%} ind. repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>5019<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIGAta<k2>aBIGAta
{#aBIGAta#}¦ {%abhī-ghāta.%} See {%abhi-ghāta.%}
<LEND>

<L>5020<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIjya<k2>aBIjya
{#aBIjya#}¦ {%abhījya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yaj%}), to be
sacrificed to, one to whom sacrifice is offered: ({%as%}),
m. a god.
<LEND>

<L>5021<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIta<k2>aBIta
{#aBIta#}¦ {%a-bhīta, as, ā, am,%} not terrified,
fearless. {%—Abhīta-vat,%} ind. as one not afraid, fear-
lessly.
<LEND>

<L>5022<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIti<k2>aBIti<h>2
2. {%a-bhīti, is,%}¦ f. fearlessness. See last line first col.
<LEND>

<L>5023<pc>0070-b<k1>aBInD<k2>aBInD
{#aBInD#}¦ {%abhīndh (abhi-indh),%} cl. 7. A.
{%-inddhe, -indhitum,%} to surround with flames, to in-
flame.
<LEND>

<L>5024<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIdDa<k2>aBIdDa
{%Abhīddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ inflamed, shining.
<LEND>

<L>5025<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIpat<k2>aBIpat
{#aBIpat#}¦ {%abhīpat,%} m. (fr. {%abhi%} and {%ap;%}
cf. {%anūpa%}), Ved. a pond or any spot in which water
collects; favour (?).
<LEND>

<L>5026<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIpatas<k2>aBIpatas
{#aBIpatas#}¦ {%abhīpatas,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%āp%} with
{%abhi%}), Ved. according to the event, at the right time (?).
<LEND>

<L>5027<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIpsita<k2>aBIpsita
{#aBIpsita#}¦ {%abhīpsita, as, ā, am%} ({%īps,%} Desid.
of rt. {%āp;%} see {%abhy-āp%}), desired, wished.
<LEND>

<L>5028<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIpsin<k2>aBIpsin
{%Abhīpsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ or {%abhīpsu, us, us, u,%} de-
sirous of obtaining, wishing.
<LEND>

<L>5029<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIma<k2>aBIma
{#aBIma#}¦ {%a-bhīma, as, ā, am,%} unterrific, causing
no fear; ({%as%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>5030<pc>0070-b<k1>aBImAna<k2>aBImAna
{#aBImAna#}¦ {%abhī-māna, as,%} m. (rt. {%man%}),
pride, &c. See {%abhi-māna%} under {%abhi-man.%}
<LEND>

<L>5031<pc>0070-b<k1>aBImoda<k2>aBImoda
{#aBImoda#}¦ {%abhī-moda, as,%} m. (rt. {%mud%}), joy.
{%—Abhīmoda-mud%} (only used in pl.), Ved. intense
joy and pleasure; or {%abhī-modamud,%} excessively
joyful (fr. irreg. intens. of rt. {%mud%}).
<LEND>

<L>5032<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIra<k2>aBIra
{#aBIra#}¦ {%abhīra, as,%} m. a cowherd; N. of a
people; {%(ī),%} f. the language of this people; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of a metre, containing four Pādas with eleven
Mātrās in each Pāda.
<LEND>

<L>5033<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIraRI<k2>aBIraRI
{#aBIraRI#}¦ {%abhīraṇī,%} f. (rt. {%īr?%}), a kind of
serpent.
<LEND>

<L>5034<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIrAjI<k2>aBIrAjI
{#aBIrAjI#}¦ {%abhīrājī,%} f. a kind of poisonous
insect.
<LEND>

<L>5035<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIru<k2>aBIru
{#aBIru#}¦ {%a-bhīru, us, us%} or {%ūs, u,%} unterrific;
fearless, undaunted; ({%us%}), m., N. of Bhairava or Śiva;
({%us%} or {%ūs%}), f., N. of a plant, Asparagus Racemosus.
{%—Abhīru-pattrī,%} f. a plant, the leaves of which are
like those of the plant Abhiru (see above); the plant
Abhīru.
<LEND>

<L>5036<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIruRa<k2>aBIruRa
{%A-bhīruṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ unterrific, fearless, innocent.
<LEND>

<L>5037<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIlu<k2>aBIlu
{%A-bhīlu, us, us, u%}¦ (for {%a-bhīru%}), or {%abhīluka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fearless.
<LEND>

<L>5038<pc>0070-b<k1>aBIruc<k2>aBIruc
{#aBIruc#}¦ {%abhī-ruc.%} See {%abhi-ruci.%}
<LEND>
[Page0070-c+ 70]

<L>5039<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIlApalap<k2>aBIlApalap
{#aBIlApalap#}¦ {%abhīlāpa-lap%} (only used in
pl.), Ved. discourse and talk; or {%abhī-lāpalap,%} talk-
ing excessively, whimpering (fr. irreg. intens. of rt.
{%lap,%} cf. {%abhī-modamud%} last col.).
<LEND>

<L>5040<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIvarga<k2>aBIvarga
{#aBIvarga#}¦ {%abhī-varga, as,%} m. (rt. {%vṛj%}), circuit,
compass.
<LEND>

<L>5041<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIvarta<k2>aBIvarta
{#aBIvarta#}¦ {%abhī-varta, as,%} m. (fr. {%abhi-vṛt,%}
q. v.), Ved. existing everywhere, going towards, ap-
proaching, attacking successfully; successful assault,
victory; a hymn recited in attacking the enemy.
<LEND>

<L>5042<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIvft<k2>aBIvft
{%Abhī-vṛt, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. abiding everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>5043<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIvfta<k2>aBIvfta
{#aBIvfta#}¦ {%abhī-vṛta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vṛ%}),
covered, surrounded.
<LEND>

<L>5044<pc>0070-c<k1>aBISApa<k2>aBISApa
{#aBISApa#}¦ {%abhī-śāpa, as,%} m. (rt. {%śap%}), curse,
imprecation. See {%abhi-śapana.%}
<LEND>

<L>5045<pc>0070-c<k1>aBISu<k2>aBISu
{#aBISu#}¦ {%abhīśu%} or less correctly {%abhīṣu, us,%}
m. (rt. {%īś%} or 1. {%aś%} with {%abhi?%}), Ved. rein, bridle; arm,
finger; ray of light. {%—1. abhīṣu-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
splendid, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>5046<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIz<k2>aBIz
{#aBIz#}¦ {%abhīṣ (abhi-iṣ),%} cl. 6. P. {%abhīc-%}
{%chati, abhy-eṣitum, -ṣṭum,%} to seek for, long for,
endeavour to gain.
<LEND>

<L>5047<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIcCat<k2>aBIcCat
{%Abhīcchat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} wishing, desiring.
<LEND>

<L>5048<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIzu<k2>aBIzu
{%Abhīṣu, us,%}¦ m. attachment, love, lust, passion
[cf. {%abhīśu%} above]. {%—2. abhīṣu-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
attached, enamoured.
<LEND>

<L>5049<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIzwa<k2>aBIzwa
{%Abhīṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished, desired; acceptable,
dear, favourite, darling; optional; ({%ā%}), f. a mistress;
betel. {%—Abhīṣṭa-tā,%} f. state of being desired.
{%—Abhīṣṭa-devatā,%} f. beloved goddess, favourite
deity. {%—Abhīṣṭa-lābha, as,%} m. or {%abhīṣṭa-sid-%}
{%dhi, is,%} f. the gaining a desired object.
<LEND>

<L>5050<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIzaNga<k2>aBIzaNga
{#aBIzaNga#}¦ {%abhī-ṣaṅga, as,%} m. curse, im-
precation. See {%abhi-ṣañj.%}
<LEND>

<L>5051<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIzayA<k2>aBIzayA
{#aBIzayA#}¦ {%a-bhīṣayā,%} ind. (inst. case of
{%abhīṣā%}), fearlessly.
<LEND>

<L>5052<pc>0070-c<k1>aBIzAh<k2>aBIzAh
{#aBIzAh#}¦ {%abhī-ṣāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. over-
powering; {%(ṭ),%} f. immense power.
<LEND>

<L>5053<pc>0070-c<k1>aBukta<k2>aBukta
{#aBukta#}¦ {%a-bhukta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%bhuj%}), un-
eaten; unenjoyed, unused, unexpended; one who
has not eaten, enjoyed or expended. {%—Abhukta-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has not eaten.
<LEND>

<L>5054<pc>0070-c<k1>aBuj<k2>aBuj
{%A-bhuj, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. one who has not experi-
enced or enjoyed, one who does not keep (a promise).
<LEND>

<L>5055<pc>0070-c<k1>aBuYjat<k2>aBuYjat
{%A-bhuñjat, an, atī, at,%}¦ not eating; Ved. not allow-
ing to enjoy; not protecting.
<LEND>

<L>5056<pc>0070-c<k1>aBugna<k2>aBugna
{#aBugna#}¦ {%a-bhugna, as, ā, am,%} not bent,
straight; well, free from disease.
<LEND>

<L>5057<pc>0070-c<k1>aBuja<k2>aBuja
{#aBuja#}¦ {%a-bhuja, as, ā, am,%} armless, maimed.
<LEND>

<L>5058<pc>0070-c<k1>aBujizya<k2>aBujizya
{#aBujizya#}¦ {%a-bhujiṣya, as, ā,%} m. f. not a
slave, not a servant.
<LEND>

<L>5059<pc>0070-c<k1>aBU<k2>aBU
{#aBU#}¦ {%a-bhū, ūs,%} m. unborn; an epithet of
Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>5060<pc>0070-c<k1>aBUta<k2>aBUta
{%A-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ non-existent, whatever is not
or has not been. {%—Abhūta-tadbhāva, as,%} m. the
coming into being of that which has not existed before.
{%—A-bhūta-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} unprecedented. {%—A-%}
{%bhūta-prādurbhāva, as,%} m. the becoming manifest
of what has not been before. {%—Abhūta-rajas, asas,%}
m. pl., N. of some deities supposed to have existed
in the fifth Manvantara. {%—A-bhūta-śatru, us, us, us, u,%}
having no enemy.
<LEND>

<L>5061<pc>0070-c<k1>aBUti<k2>aBUti
{%A-bhūti, is,%}¦ f. non-existence; want of power; poverty.
<LEND>

<L>5062<pc>0070-c<k1>aBUmi<k2>aBUmi
{#aBUmi#}¦ {%a-bhūmi, is,%} f. non-earth, anything
but earth; no proper object, unfit place or object.
<LEND>

<L>5063<pc>0070-c<k1>aBUmija<k2>aBUmija
{%—Abhūmi-ja, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced in unfit or un-
suitable ground.
<LEND>

<L>5064<pc>0070-c<k1>aBUyizWa<k2>aBUyizWa
{#aBUyizWa#}¦ {%a-bhūyiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} few,
scanty.
<LEND>

<L>5065<pc>0070-c<k1>aBUri<k2>aBUri
{#aBUri#}¦ {%a-bhūri, is, is, i,%} few, some, several.
<LEND>
[Page0071-a+ 71]

<L>5066<pc>0071-a<k1>aBUza<k2>aBUza
{#aBUza#}¦ {%a-bhūṣa%} or {%a-bhūṣita, as, ā, am,%}
unadorned.
<LEND>

<L>5067<pc>0071-a<k1>aBfta<k2>aBfta
{#aBfta#}¦ {%a-bhṛta%} or {%a-bhṛtrima, as, ā, am,%}
not receiving hire, not hired, not paid.
<LEND>

<L>5068<pc>0071-a<k1>aBfSa<k2>aBfSa
{#aBfSa#}¦ {%a-bhṛśa, as, ā, am,%} not much, little,
few.
<LEND>

<L>5069<pc>0071-a<k1>aBeda<k2>aBeda
{#aBeda#}¦ {%a-bheda, as,%} m. absence of difference
or distinction; identity; not breaking, compactness,
closeness of array; {%(as, ā, am),%} undivided, identical,
alike.
<LEND>

<L>5070<pc>0071-a<k1>aBedaka<k2>aBedaka
{%A-bhedaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ not dividing, not dis-
tinguishing.
<LEND>

<L>5071<pc>0071-a<k1>aBedya<k2>aBedya
{%A-bhedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%a-bhaidika, as, ī, am,%}
not to be divided or broken or pierced; indivisible;
{%(-yam),%} n. a diamond. {%—Abhedya-tā,%} f. indivisibility,
impenetrability.
<LEND>

<L>5072<pc>0071-a<k1>aBoktf<k2>aBoktf
{#aBoktf#}¦ {%a-bhoktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or {%a-bhogin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} not enjoying, not using, abstemious.
<LEND>

<L>5073<pc>0071-a<k1>aBoktavya<k2>aBoktavya
{%A-bhoktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be enjoyed or
used.
<LEND>

<L>5074<pc>0071-a<k1>aBoga<k2>aBoga
{%A-bhoga, as,%}¦ m. non-enjoyment, not making use of.
<LEND>

<L>5075<pc>0071-a<k1>aBogya<k2>aBogya
{%A-bhogya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be enjoyed.
<LEND>

<L>5076<pc>0071-a<k1>aBoj<k2>aBoj
{%A-bhoj, k,%}¦ m., Ved. not affording enjoyment (to
the gods, i. e. refusing to sacrifice). {%—Abhog-ghan,%}
{%ā,%} m., Ved. killing the stingy (who will not sacrifice).
<LEND>

<L>5077<pc>0071-a<k1>aBojana<k2>aBojana
{%A-bhojana, am,%}¦ n. not eating, fasting, abstinence.
<LEND>

<L>5078<pc>0071-a<k1>aBojita<k2>aBojita
{%A-bhojita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not fed, not feasted.
<LEND>

<L>5079<pc>0071-a<k1>aBojin<k2>aBojin
{%A-bhojin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not eating, fasting.
<LEND>

<L>5080<pc>0071-a<k1>aBojya<k2>aBojya
{%A-bhojya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be eaten, prohibited
as food, impure. {%—A-bhojyānna (˚ya-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one whose food is not allowed to be eaten.
<LEND>

<L>5081<pc>0071-a<k1>aBOtika<k2>aBOtika
{#aBOtika#}¦ {%a-bhautika, as, ī, am,%} not ele-
mental, not relating to or produced by the gross ele-
ments, mental.
<LEND>

<L>5082<pc>0071-a<k1>aByagni<k2>aByagni
{#aByagni#}¦ {%abhy-agni, is,%} m., N. of a son of
Etaśa or Aitaśa; {%(i),%} ind. towards the fire.
<LEND>

<L>5083<pc>0071-a<k1>aByagra<k2>aByagra
{#aByagra#}¦ {%abhy-agra, as, ā, am,%} near; fresh,
new; ({%am%}), n. proximity.
<LEND>

<L>5084<pc>0071-a<k1>aByaNka<k2>aByaNka
{#aByaNka#}¦ {%abhy-aṅka, as, ā, am,%} recently
marked.
<LEND>

<L>5085<pc>0071-a<k1>aByaj<k2>aByaj
{#aByaj#}¦ {%abhy-aj (abhi-aj),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ajati,%}
{%-jitum,%} to unite, join.
<LEND>

<L>5086<pc>0071-a<k1>aByaYj<k2>aByaYj
{#aByaYj#}¦ {%abhy-añj (abhi-añj),%} cl. 7. P. {%-anakti,%}
{%añjitum, -aṅktum,%} to smear, anoint; to decorate.
<LEND>

<L>5087<pc>0071-a<k1>aByakta<k2>aByakta
{%Abhy-akta, as, ā, am,%}¦ oiled, anointed.
<LEND>

<L>5088<pc>0071-a<k1>aByaNga<k2>aByaNga
{%Abhy-aṅga, as,%}¦ m. rubbing with unctuous sub-
stances, smearing the body with oil, inunction; un-
guent, liniment.
<LEND>

<L>5089<pc>0071-a<k1>aByaYjana<k2>aByaYjana
{%Abhy-añjana, am,%}¦ n. smearing the body with oil,
inunction; oil; applying collyrium to the eyelashes;
ornament; embellishment.
<LEND>

<L>5090<pc>0071-a<k1>aByat<k2>aByat
{#aByat#}¦ {%abhy-at (abhi-at),%} cl. 1. P. {%-atati,%}
{%-titum,%} to visit.
<LEND>

<L>5091<pc>0071-a<k1>aByatikram<k2>aByatikram
{#aByatikram#}¦ {%abhy-ati-kram (abhi-ati˚),%} cl. 1.
P. A., cl. 4. P. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -krāmyati,%}
{%-kramitum,%} to step over, to walk through; to
overpower; to transgress; to violate.
<LEND>

<L>5092<pc>0071-a<k1>aByatikzar<k2>aByatikzar
{#aByatikzar#}¦ {%abhy-ati-kṣar (abhi-ati˚),%} cl. 1.
P. A. {%-kṣarati, -te, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-radhyai,%} to flow
over to.
<LEND>

<L>5093<pc>0071-a<k1>aByatinI<k2>aByatinI
{#aByatinI#}¦ {%abhy-ati-nī (abhi-ati˚),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-nayati, -te, -netum,%} to mix with (?).
<LEND>

<L>5094<pc>0071-a<k1>aByatI<k2>aByatI
{#aByatI#}¦ {%abhy-atī (abhi-ati-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%abhy-%}
{%aty-eti, -tum,%} to go past, glide away; to pass over;
to get through.
<LEND>

<L>5095<pc>0071-a<k1>aByatIta<k2>aByatIta
{%Abhy-atīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dead, passed away.
<LEND>

<L>5096<pc>0071-a<k1>aByaDika<k2>aByaDika
{#aByaDika#}¦ {%abhy-adhika, as, ā, am,%} surpassing
(in number, power, kind); exceeding the common
measure, excellent; pre-eminent, extraordinary; su-
perior, more excellent, having more authority or
power; ({%am%}), ind. exceedingly.
<LEND>
[Page0071-b+ 71]

<L>5097<pc>0071-b<k1>aByaDvam<k2>aByaDvam
{#aByaDvam#}¦ {%abhy-adhvam,%} ind. towards the
way, on the way; ({%e%}), ind. on the way, near.
<LEND>

<L>5098<pc>0071-b<k1>aByanujYA<k2>aByanujYA<h>1
{#aByanujYA#} 1¦. {%abhy-anu-jñā (abhi-anu˚),%} cl. 9.
P. {%-jānāti, -jñātum,%} to allow, permit; to authorize,
direct; to allow one to depart, dismiss; to take leave:
Caus. {%-jñāpayati, -yitum,%} to ask for leave to depart,
to take leave.
<LEND>

<L>5099<pc>0071-b<k1>aByanujYA<k2>aByanujYA<h>2
2. {%abhy-anujñā,%}¦ f. or {%abhy-anujñāna, am,%} n.
assent, permission; granting leave of absence, dismiss-
ing; order, command.
<LEND>

<L>5100<pc>0071-b<k1>aByanujYAta<k2>aByanujYAta
{%Abhy-anujñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ allowed, permitted,
assented to, dismissed; ordered, commanded.
<LEND>

<L>5101<pc>0071-b<k1>aByanupraC<k2>aByanupraC
{#aByanupraC#}¦ {%abhy-anu-prach (abhi-anu˚),%} cl.
6. P. {%-pṛcchati, -praṣṭum,%} to inquire after, ask for.
<LEND>

<L>5102<pc>0071-b<k1>aByanumud<k2>aByanumud
{#aByanumud#}¦ {%abhy-anu-mud (abhi-anu˚),%} Caus.
P. {%-modayati, -yitum,%} to permit one to leave, to
dismiss.
<LEND>

<L>5103<pc>0071-b<k1>aByanUkta<k2>aByanUkta
{#aByanUkta#}¦ {%abhy-anūkta (-anu-uk˚), as, ā, am%}
(rt. {%vac%}), said conformably to what was declared before.
<LEND>

<L>5104<pc>0071-b<k1>aByantara<k2>aByantara
{#aByantara#}¦ {%abhy-antara, as, ā, am,%} interior,
being inside; initiated in, conversant with; next, nearly
related, intimate; ({%am%}), n. inner part, interior, in-
side, middle; included space; ({%am%} or {%atas%}), ind.
in the interior, inwards. {%—Abhyantara-karaṇa,%} see
{%antaḥkaraṇa%}. {%—Abhyantara-kalā,%} f. the secret art
or the art of coquetry. {%—Abhyantarāyāma (˚ra-āy˚),%}
{%as,%} m. curvature of the spine by spasm; emprosthonos.
<LEND>

<L>5105<pc>0071-b<k1>aByantaraka<k2>aByantaraka
{%Abhy-antaraka, as,%}¦ m. an intimate friend.
<LEND>

<L>5106<pc>0071-b<k1>aByantarIkf<k2>aByantarIkf
{%Abhyantarī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to
initiate, inaugurate; to make a near friend (of a per-
son); to familiarize. {%—Abhyantarī-karaṇa, am,%} n.
initiating in, inaugurating; making a near friend (of
a person). {%—Abhyantarī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} put be-
tween, made interior; initiated; made intimate or
familiar with.
<LEND>

<L>5107<pc>0071-b<k1>aByapakram<k2>aByapakram
{#aByapakram#}¦ {%abhy-apa-kram (abhi-apa˚),%} cl.
1. P. A., cl. 4. P. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -krāmyati,%}
{%-kramitum,%} to go away to, to go up to.
<LEND>

<L>5108<pc>0071-b<k1>aByapAn<k2>aByapAn
{#aByapAn#}¦ {%abhy-apān (abhi-apa-an),%} cl. 2. P.,
Ved. {%-apāniti, -nitum,%} to breathe on.
<LEND>

<L>5109<pc>0071-b<k1>aByam<k2>aByam
{#aByam#}¦ {%abhy-am (abhi-am),%} cl. 1. P., Ved.
{%-amati, -mitum,%} to advance violently against, to at-
tack, to pain, hurt; to be angry with; to overcome.
<LEND>

<L>5110<pc>0071-b<k1>aByamana<k2>aByamana
{%Abhy-amana, am,%}¦ n. attacking, assault, disease.
{%—Abhyamana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} with assaults or
attacks, with diseases.
<LEND>

<L>5111<pc>0071-b<k1>aByamita<k2>aByamita
{%Abhy-amita, as, ā, am,%}¦ diseased, sick.
<LEND>

<L>5112<pc>0071-b<k1>aByamin<k2>aByamin
{%Abhy-amin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ attacking, inclined to attack.
<LEND>

<L>5113<pc>0071-b<k1>aByAnta<k2>aByAnta
{%Abhy-ānta.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>5114<pc>0071-b<k1>aByamitra<k2>aByamitra
{#aByamitra#}¦ {%abhy-amitra, am,%} n. assault on
an enemy; ({%am%}), ind. towards or against the enemy.
<LEND>

<L>5115<pc>0071-b<k1>aByamitrIRa<k2>aByamitrIRa
{%Abhy-amitrīṇa%}¦ or {%abhy-amitrīya%} or {%abhy-ami-%}
{%trya, as,%} m. a soldier who faces the enemy valiantly.
<LEND>

<L>5116<pc>0071-b<k1>aByaya<k2>aByaya
{#aByaya#}¦ {%abhy-aya, as,%} m. (fr. {%abhi-i,%} see
{%abhī%}), going near, approaching, arriving; entering;
setting (of the sun).
<LEND>

<L>5117<pc>0071-b<k1>aByari<k2>aByari
{#aByari#}¦ {%abhy-ari,%} ind. towards or against
the enemy.
<LEND>

<L>5118<pc>0071-b<k1>aByarkabimbam<k2>aByarkabimbam
{#aByarkabimbam#}¦ {%abhy-arkabimbam,%} ind. to-
wards the disk of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>5119<pc>0071-b<k1>aByarc<k2>aByarc
{#aByarc#}¦ {%abhy-arc (abhi-arc),%} cl. 1. P. {%-arcati,%}
{%-citum,%} to praise, celebrate in song; to worship,
reverence: Pass. {%-arcyate,%} to be honoured.
<LEND>

<L>5120<pc>0071-b<k1>aByarcat<k2>aByarcat
{%Abhy-arcat, an, antī, at,%}¦ worshipping, reverencing.
<LEND>

<L>5121<pc>0071-b<k1>aByarcana<k2>aByarcana
{%Abhy-arcana, am,%}¦ n. or {%abhy-arcā,%} f. worship,
reverence.
<LEND>

<L>5122<pc>0071-b<k1>aByarcanIya<k2>aByarcanIya
{%Abhy-arcanīya%}¦ or {%abhy-arcya, as, ā, am,%} to be
worshipped, to be reverenced.
<LEND>

<L>5123<pc>0071-b<k1>aByarcita<k2>aByarcita
{%Abhy-arcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised, worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>5124<pc>0071-b<k1>aByarRa<k2>aByarRa
{#aByarRa#}¦ {%abhy-arṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ṛ%} or
{%ard%} with {%abhi?%}), near, proximate; ({%am%}), n. near-
ness, proximity.
<LEND>
[Page0071-c+ 67]

<L>5125<pc>0071-c<k1>aByarT<k2>aByarT
{#aByarT#}¦ {%abhy-arth (abhi-arth),%} cl. 10. A.
{%-arthayate, -yitum,%} to ask, request.
<LEND>

<L>5126<pc>0071-c<k1>aByarTana<k2>aByarTana
{%Abhy-arthana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. petition, request.
<LEND>

<L>5127<pc>0071-c<k1>aByarTanIya<k2>aByarTanIya
{%Abhy-arthanīya%}¦ or {%abhy-arthya, as, ā, am,%} to
be requested or asked. {%—Abhy-arthayamāna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} asking, one who asks.
<LEND>

<L>5128<pc>0071-c<k1>aByarTita<k2>aByarTita
{%Abhy-arthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ asked, invited.
<LEND>

<L>5129<pc>0071-c<k1>aByarTin<k2>aByarTin
{%Abhy-arthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ asking.
<LEND>

<L>5130<pc>0071-c<k1>aByard<k2>aByard
{#aByard#}¦ {%abhy-ard (abhi-ard),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ardati,%}
{%-ditum,%} to oppress, afflict, pain.
<LEND>

<L>5131<pc>0071-c<k1>aByardita<k2>aByardita
{%Abhy-ardita, as, ā, am,%}¦ distressed, oppressed.
<LEND>

<L>5132<pc>0071-c<k1>aByarDa<k2>aByarDa
{#aByarDa#}¦ {%abhy-ardha, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ardh%}
for {%ard%} with {%abhi,%} cf. {%abhy-arṇa%}), Ved. being on
this side; proximate, near; increasing; ({%am%}), n. the
being situated on this side, near. {%—Abhyardha-%}
{%yajvan, ā,%} m., Ved. granting gifts; increasing the
worshipper's prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>5133<pc>0071-c<k1>aByarz<k2>aByarz
{#aByarz#}¦ {%abhy-arṣ (abhi-arṣ),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ar-%}
{%ṣati, -ṣitum,%} to flow near, to run near (with acc.);
to cause to flow near.
<LEND>

<L>5134<pc>0071-c<k1>aByarhaRIya<k2>aByarhaRIya
{#aByarhaRIya#}¦ {%abhy-arhaṇīya, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%arh%}), to be greatly honoured, venerable. {%—Abhy-%}
{%arhaṇīya-tā,%} f. honourableness, honour.
<LEND>

<L>5135<pc>0071-c<k1>aByarhita<k2>aByarhita
{%Abhy-arhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly honoured, venera-
ble; fit, proper, becoming.
<LEND>

<L>5136<pc>0071-c<k1>aByalaNkf<k2>aByalaNkf
{#aByalaNkf#}¦ {%abhy-alaṅkṛ (abhi-alam-kṛ),%} cl.
8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to decorate.
<LEND>

<L>5137<pc>0071-c<k1>aByalaNkfta<k2>aByalaNkfta
{%Abhy-alaṅkṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ decorated.
<LEND>

<L>5138<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavakarzaRa<k2>aByavakarzaRa
{#aByavakarzaRa#}¦ {%abhy-avakarṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt.
{%kṛṣ%}), extraction, drawing out.
<LEND>

<L>5139<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavakASa<k2>aByavakASa
{#aByavakASa#}¦ {%abhy-avakāśa, as,%} m. (rt. {%kāś%}),
an open space.
<LEND>

<L>5140<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavakF<k2>aByavakF
{#aByavakF#}¦ {%abhy-ava-kṝ (abhi-ava˚),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-kirati, -karitum, -rītum,%} to throw or cast on, to
pour on, to cover.
<LEND>

<L>5141<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavacar<k2>aByavacar
{#aByavacar#}¦ {%abhy-ava-car (abhi-ava˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-carati, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-tave, -tavai, -rase, -radhyai,%}
to press on, penetrate: Caus. {%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to
send away.
<LEND>

<L>5142<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavatan<k2>aByavatan
{#aByavatan#}¦ {%abhy-ava-tan (abhi-ava˚),%} cl. 8.
P., Ved. {%-tanoti, -nitum,%} to extend along or to.
<LEND>

<L>5143<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavadAnya<k2>aByavadAnya
{#aByavadAnya#}¦ {%abhy-avadānya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
withholding gifts, not liberal.
<LEND>

<L>5144<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavado<k2>aByavado
{#aByavado#}¦ {%abhy-ava-do (abhi-ava˚),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-dyati, -dātum,%} to divide into pieces for any purpose.
<LEND>

<L>5145<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavaDA<k2>aByavaDA
{#aByavaDA#}¦ {%abhy-ava-dhā (abhi-ava˚),%} cl. 3.
P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to lay down on
all sides, overlay.
<LEND>

<L>5146<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavahita<k2>aByavahita
{%Abhy-avahita, as, ā, am,%}¦ allayed, laid, e. g. dust.
<LEND>

<L>5147<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavanam<k2>aByavanam
{#aByavanam#}¦ {%abhy-ava-nam (abhi-ava˚),%} Caus.
P. {%-nāmayati, -yitum,%} to bow, incline.
<LEND>

<L>5148<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavanij<k2>aByavanij
{#aByavanij#}¦ {%abhy-ava-nij (abhi-ava˚),%} cl. 3.
P. A. {%-nenekti, -nenikte, -nektum,%} to wipe or wash
off, clean: Caus. {%-nejayati, -yitum,%} to cause to wash
off.
<LEND>

<L>5149<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavanI<k2>aByavanI
{#aByavanI#}¦ {%abhy-ava-nī (abhi-ava˚),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-nayati, -te, -netum,%} to lead down, pour into.
<LEND>

<L>5150<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavapat<k2>aByavapat
{#aByavapat#}¦ {%abhy-ava-pat (abhi-ava˚),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-patati, -titum,%} to fly or fall down.
<LEND>

<L>5151<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavaman<k2>aByavaman
{#aByavaman#}¦ {%abhy-ava-man (abhi-ava˚),%} cl. 4.
A. {%-manyate, -mantum,%} to despise, scorn, reject.
<LEND>

<L>5152<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavaskand<k2>aByavaskand
{#aByavaskand#}¦ {%abhy-ava-skand (abhi-ava˚),%} cl.
1. P. {%-skandati, -skantum,%} to jump up (or out ?).
<LEND>

<L>5153<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavaskanda<k2>aByavaskanda
{%Abhy-avaskanda, as,%}¦ m. or {%abhy-avaskandana,%}
{%am,%} n. impetuous assault, facing an enemy; striking
so as to disable an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>5154<pc>0071-c<k1>aByavahf<k2>aByavahf
{#aByavahf#}¦ {%abhy-ava-hṛ (abhi-ava˚),%} Caus.
<LEND>
[Page0072-a+ 76]

<L>5155<pc>0072-a<k1>hArayati<k2>hArayati
{%-hārayati, -yitum,%}¦ to get one to oppose another; to
cause one to take or eat.
<LEND>

<L>5156<pc>0072-a<k1>aByavaharaRa<k2>aByavaharaRa
{%Abhy-avaharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. throwing away or down;
taking food, eating.
<LEND>

<L>5157<pc>0072-a<k1>aByavahAra<k2>aByavahAra
{%Abhy-avahāra, as,%}¦ m. taking food, eating, enjoy-
ing; food.
<LEND>

<L>5158<pc>0072-a<k1>aByavahArya<k2>aByavahArya
{%Abhy-avahārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ eatable, fit for eating;
({%am%}), n. food, eating.
<LEND>

<L>5159<pc>0072-a<k1>aByavahfta<k2>aByavahfta
{%Abhy-avahṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken (as food), de-
voured.
<LEND>

<L>5160<pc>0072-a<k1>aByavAs<k2>aByavAs
{#aByavAs#}¦ {%abhy-avās (abhi-ava-as),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-asyati, -situm,%} to throw upon.
<LEND>

<L>5161<pc>0072-a<k1>aByave<k2>aByave
{#aByave#}¦ {%abhy-ave (abhi-ava-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-avaiti, -tum,%} to go down; to descend; to get an
insight, to condescend; to perceive.
<LEND>

<L>5162<pc>0072-a<k1>aByavAyana<k2>aByavAyana
{%Abhy-avāyana, am,%}¦ n. going down, descending.
<LEND>

<L>5163<pc>0072-a<k1>aByaveta<k2>aByaveta
{%Abhy-aveta, as, ā, am,%}¦ descended, immersed.
<LEND>

<L>5164<pc>0072-a<k1>aByavekz<k2>aByavekz
{#aByavekz#}¦ {%abhy-avekṣ (abhi-ava-īkṣ),%} cl. 1.
A. {%-avekṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look at or upon.
<LEND>

<L>5165<pc>0072-a<k1>aByaS<k2>aByaS
{#aByaS#}¦ {%abhy-aś (abhi-aś),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-aś-%}
{%noti, -nute, -aśitum, -aṣṭum,%} to pervade, reach
to, gain; to make one's self master of.
<LEND>

<L>5166<pc>0072-a<k1>aByaSana<k2>aByaSana
{%Abhy-aśana, am,%}¦ n. reaching to, pervading,
gaining.
<LEND>

<L>5167<pc>0072-a<k1>aByASa<k2>aByASa
{%Abhy-āśa, as,%}¦ m. reaching to, pervading; prox-
imity, neighbourhood, result, consequence, prospect,
hope of gaining; {%(as, ā, am),%} near, proximate
(also written {%abhy-āsa%}). {%Abhy-āśam%} or {%abhy-āśe,%}
ind. near (also written {%abhy-āse%}). {%Abhyāśād-āgata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} arrived from near at hand.
<LEND>

<L>5168<pc>0072-a<k1>aByas<k2>aByas<h>1
{#aByas#} 1¦. {%abhy-as (abhi-as),%} cl. 2. P. {%-asti,%}
to fall to one's share; to be over; to excel; to reign
over, tyrannize over.
<LEND>

<L>5169<pc>0072-a<k1>aByas<k2>aByas<h>2
{#aByas#} 2¦. {%abhy-as (abhi-as),%} cl. 4. P. {%-as-%}
{%yati, -asitum,%} to throw down, throw to, heap one
on the other, accumulate, to shoot off at, to concen-
trate one's attention in one direction; to repeat,
practice, exercise; to study, read, recite; to learn by
heart.
<LEND>

<L>5170<pc>0072-a<k1>aByasana<k2>aByasana
{%Abhy-asana, am,%}¦ n. concentrating of the faculties
of the mind in one direction; practice, exercise;
repetition, study.
<LEND>

<L>5171<pc>0072-a<k1>aByasanIya<k2>aByasanIya
{%Abhy-asanīya%}¦ or {%abhy-asitavya%} or {%abhy-asya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} to be studied, to be repeated or redupli-
cated.
<LEND>

<L>5172<pc>0072-a<k1>aByasta<k2>aByasta
{%Abhy-asta, as, ā, am,%}¦ accumulated, practised,
exercised; learnt by heart, repeated, studied; multi-
plied; reduplicated in grammer; ({%am%}), n. the re-
duplicated base of a root.
<LEND>

<L>5173<pc>0072-a<k1>aByasyat<k2>aByasyat
{%Abhy-asyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ studying, practising.
<LEND>

<L>5174<pc>0072-a<k1>aByAsa<k2>aByAsa
{%Abhy-āsa, as,%}¦ m. repetition; practice, military
practice, permanent or repeated exercise, discipline,
use, habit, custom; repeated reading, reciting, study;
learning by heart; education; practising archery; (in
grammar) repeating twice, reduplication; the first
syllable of a reduplicated radical; (in poetry) repeti-
tion of the last verses of a stanza; (in arithmetic)
multiplication: see also under {%abhy-aś%}. {%—Abhyāsa-%}
{%gata, as, ā, am,%} approached, gone near (see {%abhy-āśa%}
above). {%—Abhyāsa-tā,%} f. constant practice, use, habit.
{%—Abhyāsa-nimitta, am,%} n. the cause of the redupli-
cation in grammar. {%—Abhyāsa-parivartin, ī, inī, i,%}
wandering about or near, for {%abhyāśa˚%}. {%—Abhyāsa-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. the practice of frequent and repeated
meditation on any deity or on abstract spirit, re-
peated recollection. {%—Abhyāsa-vyavāya, as,%} m. in-
terval caused by the reduplication-syllable.
<LEND>

<L>5175<pc>0072-a<k1>aByAsin<k2>aByAsin
{%Abhyāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ practising, repeating.
<LEND>

<L>5176<pc>0072-a<k1>aByAse<k2>aByAse
{%Abhyāse,%}¦ ind. near; more correctly written {%abhyāśe.%}
<LEND>

<L>5177<pc>0072-a<k1>aByasUya<k2>aByasUya
{#aByasUya#}¦ {%abhy-asūya,%} nom. P. A. {%-asūyati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to show indignation, to detract.
<LEND>

<L>5178<pc>0072-a<k1>aByasUya<k2>aByasUya
{%Abhy-asūya, as, ā, am,%}¦ angry, vexed, impatient.
<LEND>

<L>5179<pc>0072-a<k1>aByasUyaka<k2>aByasUyaka
{%Abhy-asūyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ detracting, a de-
tractor, calumniator; envious.
<LEND>

<L>5180<pc>0072-a<k1>aByasUyA<k2>aByasUyA
{%Abhy-asūyā,%}¦ f. detraction, envy, calumny.
<LEND>

<L>5181<pc>0072-a<k1>aByastami<k2>aByastami
{#aByastami#}¦ {%abhy-astam-i,%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -tum,%}
[Page0072-b+ 69]
or {%abhy-astaṅ-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to go
down or set (as the sun) during or with reference to
(some act).
<LEND>

<L>5182<pc>0072-b<k1>aByastamaya<k2>aByastamaya
{%Abhy-astamaya, as,%}¦ m. setting of the sun during
or with reference to.
<LEND>

<L>5183<pc>0072-b<k1>aByastamita<k2>aByastamita
{%Abhy-astamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ one on whom the sun
has gone down while asleep.
<LEND>

<L>5184<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAkarza<k2>aByAkarza
{#aByAkarza#}¦ {%abhy-ākarṣa, as,%} m. (rt. {%kṛṣ%}),
a striking of the flat of the hand upon the breast in
defiance (a practice common to wrestlers and pugilists).
<LEND>

<L>5185<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAkANkzita<k2>aByAkANkzita
{#aByAkANkzita#}¦ {%abhy-ākāṅkṣita, am,%} n. a
groundless complaint, a false accusation.
<LEND>

<L>5186<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAkf<k2>aByAkf
{#aByAkf#}¦ {%abhy-ā-kṛ (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 8. P. {%-ka-%}
{%roti, -kartum,%} to draw near to one's self, attract.
<LEND>

<L>5187<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAkAram<k2>aByAkAram
{%Abhy-ākāram,%}¦ ind. by or in drawing near to one's
self.
<LEND>

<L>5188<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAkram<k2>aByAkram
{#aByAkram#}¦ {%abhy-ā-kram (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
A., cl. 4. P. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -krāmyati, -kra-%}
{%mitum,%} to step near.
<LEND>

<L>5189<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAkrAmam<k2>aByAkrAmam
{%Abhy-ākrāmam,%}¦ ind. by or in stepping near or
mutually, in stepping rapidly.
<LEND>

<L>5190<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAkruS<k2>aByAkruS
{#aByAkruS#}¦ {%abhy-ā-kruś (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-kro-%}
{%śati, -kroṣṭum,%} to assail with harsh language, to revile.
<LEND>

<L>5191<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAKyAta<k2>aByAKyAta
{#aByAKyAta#}¦ {%abhy-ākhyāta, as, ā, am,%} accused
falsely, calumniated.
<LEND>

<L>5192<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAKyAna<k2>aByAKyAna
{%Abhy-ākhyāna, am,%}¦ n. a false or groundless ac-
cusation, calumny.
<LEND>

<L>5193<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAgam<k2>aByAgam
{#aByAgam#}¦ {%abhy-ā-gam (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to come near to, approach,
visit; to come to, fall into.
<LEND>

<L>5194<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAgata<k2>aByAgata
{%Abhy-āgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ come, arrived; ({%as%}), m.
a guest, a visitor.
<LEND>

<L>5195<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAgama<k2>aByAgama
{%Abhy-āgama, as,%}¦ m. or {%abhy-āgamana, am,%} n.
approaching, arrival, visit, visitation; neighbourhood;
arriving at or enjoying a result; rising, getting up;
war, battle; encountering, striking, killing; enmity.
<LEND>

<L>5196<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAgA<k2>aByAgA
{#aByAgA#}¦ {%abhy-ā-gā (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 3. P. {%-ji-%}
{%gāti, -gātum,%} to come to, approach, arrive.
<LEND>

<L>5197<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAgArika<k2>aByAgArika
{#aByAgArika#}¦ {%abhy-āgārika, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%āgāra,%} q. v., with {%abhi%}), diligent in supporting a
family.
<LEND>

<L>5198<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAGAta<k2>aByAGAta
{#aByAGAta#}¦ {%abhy-āghāta, as,%} m. (rt. {%han%}),
assault, attack.
<LEND>

<L>5199<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAGAtin<k2>aByAGAtin
{%Abhy-āghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ attacking, assailing.
<LEND>

<L>5200<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAcakz<k2>aByAcakz
{#aByAcakz#}¦ {%abhy-ā-cakṣ (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 2. A.
{%-caṣṭe, -ṣṭum,%} to look at; to speak.
<LEND>

<L>5201<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAcar<k2>aByAcar
{#aByAcar#}¦ {%abhy-ā-car (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-carati, -te, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-itave, -itavai, -rase,%}
{%-radhyai,%} to approach, practice.
<LEND>

<L>5202<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAcAra<k2>aByAcAra
{%Abhy-ācāra, as,%}¦ m., Ved. approaching (as an enemy),
disturbing.
<LEND>

<L>5203<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAj<k2>aByAj
{#aByAj#}¦ {%abhy-āj (abhi-ā-aj),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ājati,%}
{%-jitum,%} to drive near.
<LEND>

<L>5204<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAjYAya<k2>aByAjYAya
{#aByAjYAya#}¦ {%abhy-ājñāya, as,%} m. (rt. {%jñā),%} Ved.
order, command.
<LEND>

<L>5205<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAtan<k2>aByAtan
{#aByAtan#}¦ {%abhy-ā-tan (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 8. A.,
Ved. {%-tanute, -nitum,%} to take aim at, shoot.
<LEND>

<L>5206<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAtAna<k2>aByAtAna
{%Abhy-ātāna, as,%}¦ m. spreading over; expansion.
<LEND>

<L>5207<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAtap<k2>aByAtap
{#aByAtap#}¦ {%abhy-ā-tap (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-tapati, -ptum,%} to distress, torment.
<LEND>

<L>5208<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAtF<k2>aByAtF
{#aByAtF#}¦ {%abhy-ā-tṝ (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati,%}
{%-ritum, -rītum,%} to come up.
<LEND>

<L>5209<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAtma<k2>aByAtma
{#aByAtma#}¦ {%abhy-ātma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. directed
towards one's self; ({%am%}), ind. towards one's self.
<LEND>

<L>5210<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAtmataram<k2>aByAtmataram
{%—Abhyātma-taram,%}¦ ind. more towards one's self.
<LEND>

<L>5211<pc>0072-b<k1>aByAdA<k2>aByAdA
{#aByAdA#}¦ {%abhy-ā-dā (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 3. A.
{%-datte, -dātum,%} to seize, snatch away; to put on;
to take up the conversation, or commence speaking
after another.
<LEND>
[Page0072-c+ 71]

<L>5212<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAtta<k2>aByAtta
{%Abhy-ātta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for {%abhy-ādatta%}), obtained;
having gained, encompassing.
<LEND>

<L>5213<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAdAna<k2>aByAdAna
{%Abhy-ādāna, am,%}¦ n. beginning, commencement;
first beginning.
<LEND>

<L>5214<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAdiS<k2>aByAdiS
{#aByAdiS#}¦ {%abhy-ā-diś (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%} to aim at (in talk), to have in
view.
<LEND>

<L>5215<pc>0072-c<k1>aByADA<k2>aByADA
{#aByADA#}¦ {%abhy-ā-dhā (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 3. P.
{%-dadhāti, -dhātum,%} to lay on (fuel, &c.), to add,
apply.
<LEND>

<L>5216<pc>0072-c<k1>aByADAna<k2>aByADAna
{%Abhy-ādhāna, am,%}¦ n. laying or placing on, adding.
<LEND>

<L>5217<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAhita<k2>aByAhita
{%Abhy-āhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ laid on, put on. {%—Abhyā-%}
{%hita-paśu, us,%} m. a present usual in some districts of
India.
<LEND>

<L>5218<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAnI<k2>aByAnI
{#aByAnI#}¦ {%abhy-ā-nī (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-nayati, -te, -netum,%} to pour into, mix with.
<LEND>

<L>5219<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAnft<k2>aByAnft
{#aByAnft#}¦ {%abhy-ā-nṛt (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 4. P.,
Ved. {%-nṛtyati, -nartitum,%} to dance towards, to
hasten near.
<LEND>

<L>5220<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAnta<k2>aByAnta
{#aByAnta#}¦ {%abhy-ānta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%am%}
with {%abhi,%} see {%abhy-am%}), sick, diseased.
<LEND>

<L>5221<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAp<k2>aByAp
{#aByAp#}¦ {%abhy-āp (abhi-āp),%} cl. 5. P. {%-āpnoti,%}
{%-ptum,%} to reach to, to get, to obtain: Caus. {%-āpa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to bring to an end: Desid. {%-īpsati,%} to
strive to reach, to ask for, to desire.
<LEND>

<L>5222<pc>0072-c<k1>aBIpsita<k2>aBIpsita
{%Abhīpsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ desired, acceptable, dear.
<LEND>

<L>5223<pc>0072-c<k1>aByApat<k2>aByApat
{#aByApat#}¦ {%abhy-ā-pat (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-patati, -titum,%} to jump on, to hasten near to, rush
towards.
<LEND>

<L>5224<pc>0072-c<k1>aByApAta<k2>aByApAta
{%Abhy-āpāta, as,%}¦ m. calamity, misfortune.
<LEND>

<L>5225<pc>0072-c<k1>aByApad<k2>aByApad
{#aByApad#}¦ {%abhy-ā-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to come to, to approach.
<LEND>

<L>5226<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAmarda<k2>aByAmarda
{#aByAmarda#}¦ {%abhy-āmarda, as,%} m. or {%abhy-%}
{%āmardana, am,%} n. (rt. {%mṛd%}), war, battle, fighting.
<LEND>

<L>5227<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAyam<k2>aByAyam
{#aByAyam#}¦ {%abhy-ā-yam (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-yacchati, -yantum,%} to restrain.
<LEND>

<L>5228<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAyaMsenya<k2>aByAyaMsenya
{%Abhy-āyaṃsenya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. to be restrained;
to be made subject.
<LEND>

<L>5229<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAyA<k2>aByAyA
{#aByAyA#}¦ {%abhy-ā-yā (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti,%}
{%-tum,%} to come up to, attain.
<LEND>

<L>5230<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAraB<k2>aByAraB
{#aByAraB#}¦ {%abhy-ā-rabh (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. A. or
P. {%-rabhate, -ti, -rabdhum,%} to commence.
<LEND>

<L>5231<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAramBa<k2>aByAramBa
{%Abhy-ārambha, as,%}¦ m. beginning, commencement.
<LEND>

<L>5232<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAram<k2>aByAram
{#aByAram#}¦ {%abhy-āram,%} ind. (rt. {%ṛ%}), near, at
hand, by coming near.
<LEND>

<L>5233<pc>0072-c<k1>aByArUQa<k2>aByArUQa
{#aByArUQa#}¦ {%abhy-ārūḍha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ruh%}),
ascended; gone up to; surpassed.
<LEND>

<L>5234<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAroha<k2>aByAroha
{%Abhy-āroha, as,%}¦ m. or {%abhy-ārohaṇa, am,%} n.
going up to, ascending; transition from one place to
another; progress; ascending in devotion, praying.
<LEND>

<L>5235<pc>0072-c<k1>aByArohaRIya<k2>aByArohaRIya
{%Abhy-ārohaṇīya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a sacrificial cere-
mony.
<LEND>

<L>5236<pc>0072-c<k1>aByArohya<k2>aByArohya
{%Abhy-ā-rohya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be ascended, to be
gained.
<LEND>

<L>5237<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAvft<k2>aByAvft
{#aByAvft#}¦ {%abhy-ā-vṛt (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. A.,
Ved. P. {%-vartate, -ti, -titum,%} to come up to, come
towards, approach.
<LEND>

<L>5238<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAvarta<k2>aByAvarta
{%Abhy-āvarta, as,%}¦ m. repetition; a hymn, the
verses of which are repeated in singing; ({%am%}), ind.
repeatedly, by repeating.
<LEND>

<L>5239<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAvartin<k2>aByAvartin
{%Abhy-āvartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ repeatedly coming; ({%ī%}),
m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>5240<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAvftta<k2>aByAvftta
{%Abhy-āvṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come near to, approached,
repeated.
<LEND>

<L>5241<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAvftti<k2>aByAvftti
{%Abhy-āvṛtti, is,%}¦ f. repetition.
<LEND>

<L>5242<pc>0072-c<k1>aByASa<k2>aByASa
{#aByASa#}¦ {%abhy-āśa, as,%} m. See {%abhy-aś.%}
<LEND>

<L>5243<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAsa<k2>aByAsa
{#aByAsa#}¦ {%abhy-āsa.%} See 2. {%abhy-as.%}
<LEND>

<L>5244<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAsad<k2>aByAsad
{#aByAsad#}¦ {%abhy-ā-sad (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-sīdati, -sattum,%} to attain, obtain.
<LEND>

<L>5245<pc>0072-c<k1>aByAsAdana<k2>aByAsAdana
{%Abhy-āsādana, am,%}¦ n. striking so as to disable an
enemy, facing an enemy.
<LEND>
[Page0073-a+ 67]

<L>5246<pc>0073-a<k1>aByAhan<k2>aByAhan
{#aByAhan#}¦ {%abhy-ā-han (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-hanti, -tum,%} to strike, wound, smite, impede.
<LEND>

<L>5247<pc>0073-a<k1>aByAhata<k2>aByAhata
{%Abhy-āhata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck, wounded, impeded.
<LEND>

<L>5248<pc>0073-a<k1>aByAhanana<k2>aByAhanana
{%Abhy-āhanana, am,%}¦ n. striking, hurting, killing,
impeding.
<LEND>

<L>5249<pc>0073-a<k1>aByAhita<k2>aByAhita
{#aByAhita#}¦ {%abhy-āhita.%} See under {%abhy-%}
{%ā-dhā,%} p. 72, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>5250<pc>0073-a<k1>aByAhf<k2>aByAhf
{#aByAhf#}¦ {%abhy-ā-hṛ (abhi-ā˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-hara-%}
{%ti, -hartum,%} to bring towards, bring near; to give,
hand over.
<LEND>

<L>5251<pc>0073-a<k1>aByAhAra<k2>aByAhAra
{%Abhy-āhāra, as,%}¦ m. bringing near; robbery.
<LEND>

<L>5252<pc>0073-a<k1>aByAhArya<k2>aByAhArya
{%Abhy-āhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten.
<LEND>

<L>5253<pc>0073-a<k1>aByukta<k2>aByukta
{#aByukta#}¦ {%abhy-ukta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vac%}), de-
clared with reference to (some particular point).
<LEND>

<L>5254<pc>0073-a<k1>aByukz<k2>aByukz
{#aByukz#}¦ {%abhy-ukṣ (abhi-ukṣ),%} cl. 6. 1. P. A.
{%-ukṣati, -te, -ṣitum,%} to sprinkle over, besprinkle.
<LEND>

<L>5255<pc>0073-a<k1>aByukzaRa<k2>aByukzaRa
{%Abhy-ukṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. sprinkling over, wetting.
<LEND>

<L>5256<pc>0073-a<k1>aByukzita<k2>aByukzita
{%Abhy-ukṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ besprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>5257<pc>0073-a<k1>aByukzya<k2>aByukzya
{%Abhy-ukṣya,%}¦ ind. having sprinkled over.
<LEND>

<L>5258<pc>0073-a<k1>aByuc<k2>aByuc
{#aByuc#}¦ {%abhy-uc (abhi-uc),%} cl. 4. P. {%-ucyati,%}
{%-citum,%} to like, to take pleasure in visiting.
<LEND>

<L>5259<pc>0073-a<k1>aByucita<k2>aByucita
{#aByucita#}¦ {%abhy-ucita, as, ā, am,%} usual,
customary.
<LEND>

<L>5260<pc>0073-a<k1>aByuccagAmin<k2>aByuccagAmin
{#aByuccagAmin#}¦ {%abhy-ucca-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}
going exceedingly high; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>5261<pc>0073-a<k1>aByuccaya<k2>aByuccaya
{#aByuccaya#}¦ {%abhy-uccaya, as,%} m. (rt. {%ci%}), in-
crease, augmentation.
<LEND>

<L>5262<pc>0073-a<k1>aByuccita<k2>aByuccita
{%Abhy-uccita, as, ā, am,%}¦ increased, augmented.
<LEND>

<L>5263<pc>0073-a<k1>aByuccar<k2>aByuccar
{#aByuccar#}¦ {%abhy-uc-car (abhi-ud-car),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-carati, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-tave, -tavai, -rase, -radhyai,%}
to rise over.
<LEND>

<L>5264<pc>0073-a<k1>aByucCrita<k2>aByucCrita
{#aByucCrita#}¦ {%abhy-ucchrita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%śri%} with {%abhi%} and {%ud%}), raised aloft, elevated. {%—Abhy-%}
{%ucchrita-kara, as, ā, am,%} with uplifted proboscis.
<LEND>

<L>5265<pc>0073-a<k1>aByujjIv<k2>aByujjIv
{#aByujjIv#}¦ {%abhy-uj-jīv (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-jīvati, -vitum,%} to live for others.
<LEND>

<L>5266<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutkram<k2>aByutkram
{#aByutkram#}¦ {%abhy-ut-kram (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. P.
A., cl. 4. P. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -krāmyati, -kra-%}
{%mitum,%} to go up to: Caus. P. {%-kramayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to go up to, to cause to ascend.
<LEND>

<L>5267<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutkruS<k2>aByutkruS
{#aByutkruS#}¦ {%abhy-ut-kruś (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-krośati, -kroṣṭum,%} to raise loud acclamations.
<LEND>

<L>5268<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutkruzwa<k2>aByutkruzwa
{%Abhy-utkruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ applauded with loud
acclamations.
<LEND>

<L>5269<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutkroSana<k2>aByutkroSana
{%Abhy-utkrośana, am,%}¦ n. loud acclamation. {%—Abhy-%}
{%utkrośana-mantra, as,%} m. a hymn of applause.
<LEND>

<L>5270<pc>0073-a<k1>aByuttF<k2>aByuttF
{#aByuttF#}¦ {%abhy-ut-tṝ (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. P., Ved.
{%-tarati, -ritum, -rītum,%} to cross over towards, pene-
trate to.
<LEND>

<L>5271<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutTA<k2>aByutTA
{#aByutTA#}¦ {%abhy-ut-thā (abhi-ud-sthā),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-tiṣṭhati, -thātum,%} to rise, rise from a seat to do
any one honour.
<LEND>

<L>5272<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutTAna<k2>aByutTAna
{%Abhy-utthāna, am,%}¦ n. rising from a seat through
politeness; rising, elevation, obtaining a high position,
gaining authority, dignity, respectability; sunrise.
<LEND>

<L>5273<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutTAyin<k2>aByutTAyin
{%Abhy-utthāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ rising from a seat to
do any one honour.
<LEND>

<L>5274<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutTita<k2>aByutTita
{%Abhy-utthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen, arisen, elevated,
exalted. {%—Abhyutthitāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of
a prince descended from Daśaratha.
<LEND>

<L>5275<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutTeya<k2>aByutTeya
{%Abhy-uttheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be greeted reveren-
tially, i. e. by rising from one's seat.
<LEND>

<L>5276<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutpat<k2>aByutpat
{#aByutpat#}¦ {%abhy-ut-pat (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-patati, -titum,%} to fly up to, jump up to: Caus.
{%-pātayati, -yitum,%} to cause to fly up to (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>5277<pc>0073-a<k1>aByutpatana<k2>aByutpatana
{%Abhy-utpatana, am,%}¦ n. springing or leaping against
any one.
<LEND>
[Page0073-b+ 69]

<L>5278<pc>0073-b<k1>aByutsad<k2>aByutsad
{#aByutsad#}¦ {%abhy-ut-sad (abhi-ud˚),%} Caus. P.,
Ved. {%-sādayati, -yitum,%} to destroy (?).
<LEND>

<L>5279<pc>0073-b<k1>aByutsah<k2>aByutsah
{#aByutsah#}¦ {%abhy-ut-sah (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-sahate, -sahitum, -soḍhum,%} to feel competent, to
venture, to dare.
<LEND>

<L>5280<pc>0073-b<k1>aByutsmi<k2>aByutsmi
{#aByutsmi#}¦ {%abhy-ut-smi (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. A. or
poet. P. {%-smayate, -ti, -smetum,%} to smile.
<LEND>

<L>5281<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudan<k2>aByudan
{#aByudan#}¦ {%abhy-ud-an (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-aniti, -anati, -anitum,%} to breathe on or upon.
<LEND>

<L>5282<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudAharaRa<k2>aByudAharaRa
{#aByudAharaRa#}¦ {%abhy-udāharaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%hṛ%}),
an example or illustration of a thing by its reverse.
<LEND>

<L>5283<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudi<k2>aByudi
{#aByudi#}¦ {%abhy-ud-i (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti,%}
{%-tum,%} to go up; to rise over; to happen; to engage
in combat with.
<LEND>

<L>5284<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudaya<k2>aByudaya
{%Abhy-udaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ rising; ({%as%}), m. the rise
of luminaries (especially with reference to some other
occurence), sunrise; beginning, commencing; ele-
vation, increase, prosperity; happiness; good result;
a festival, any religious celebration; accident, occur-
rence. {%—Abhyudayeṣṭi (˚ya-iṣ˚), is,%} f., N. of a
particular expiatory sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>5285<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudayin<k2>aByudayin
{%Abhy-udayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ rising, arising.
<LEND>

<L>5286<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudita<k2>aByudita<h>1
1. {%abhy-udita, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen (as the sun);
arisen, happened; elevated, exalted; asleep at sun-
rise; celebrated as a festival; {%(ā),%} f., N. of a religious
ceremony; ({%am%}), n. rising, sunrise.
<LEND>

<L>5287<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudita<k2>aByudita<h>2
{#aByudita#} 2¦. {%abhy-udita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vad%}),
mentioned, referred to.
<LEND>

<L>5288<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudIkz<k2>aByudIkz
{#aByudIkz#}¦ {%abhy-ud-īkṣ (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-īkṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look towards.
<LEND>

<L>5289<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudIr<k2>aByudIr
{#aByudIr#}¦ {%abhy-ud-īr (abhi-ud˚),%} Caus. P.
{%-īrayati, -yitum,%} to raise (one's voice); to speak
aloud; to incite, stir up.
<LEND>

<L>5290<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudIrita<k2>aByudIrita
{%Abhy-udīrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown over or upon.
<LEND>

<L>5291<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudUh<k2>aByudUh
{#aByudUh#}¦ {%abhy-ud-ūh (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-ūhati, -te, -hitum,%} to move or push farther out.
<LEND>

<L>5292<pc>0073-b<k1>aByude<k2>aByude
{#aByude#}¦ {%abhy-ude (abhi-ud-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-aiti, -tum,%}  to go up to, approach.
<LEND>

<L>5293<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudgam<k2>aByudgam
{#aByudgam#}¦ {%abhy-ud-gam (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to extend; to go out to meet.
<LEND>

<L>5294<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudga<k2>aByudga
{%Abhy-udga, as, ā, am,%}¦ rising, uprisen.
<LEND>

<L>5295<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudgata<k2>aByudgata
{%Abhy-udgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ extended; gone out in
order to meet (another); risen, elevated. {%—Abhy-%}
{%udgata-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist Kalpa.
<LEND>

<L>5296<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudgama<k2>aByudgama
{%Abhy-udgama, as,%}¦ m. or {%abhy-udgamana, am,%}
n. rising from a seat to honour any one; setting out
to pay a visit.
<LEND>

<L>5297<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudgA<k2>aByudgA
{#aByudgA#}¦ {%abhy-ud-gā (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 3. P.
{%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to rise over or before.
<LEND>

<L>5298<pc>0073-b<k1>aByuddfzwa<k2>aByuddfzwa
{#aByuddfzwa#}¦ {%abhy-uddṛṣṭa, am,%} n. (rt. {%dṛś%}), the
becoming visible (of a star); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>5299<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudDf<k2>aByudDf
{#aByudDf#}¦ {%abhy-ud-dhṛ (abhi-ud-hṛ),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-uddharati, -rtum,%} to take up, take out; to destine,
set apart: Caus. {%-uddhārayati, -yitum,%} to snatch away.
<LEND>

<L>5300<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudDfta<k2>aByudDfta
{%Abhy-uddhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken out, taken up,
delivered.
<LEND>

<L>5301<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudyam<k2>aByudyam
{#aByudyam#}¦ {%abhy-ud-yam (abhi-ud˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-yacchati, -yantum,%} to bring, offer; to lift up.
<LEND>

<L>5302<pc>0073-b<k1>aByudyata<k2>aByudyata
{%Abhy-udyata, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought or given unsoli-
cited; prepared, exerting one's self, lifted up.
<LEND>

<L>5303<pc>0073-b<k1>aByund<k2>aByund
{#aByund#}¦ {%abhy-und (abhi-und),%} cl. 7. P. {%-unat-%}
{%ti, -unditum,%} to wet, bedew; flow over.
<LEND>

<L>5304<pc>0073-b<k1>aByundat<k2>aByundat
{%Abhy-undat, an, atī, at,%}¦ bedewing, wetting;
flowing over.
<LEND>

<L>5305<pc>0073-b<k1>aByunnata<k2>aByunnata
{#aByunnata#}¦ {%abhy-unnata, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%nam%}),
raised, elevated; projecting upwards, very high or full.
<LEND>

<L>5306<pc>0073-b<k1>aByunnati<k2>aByunnati
{%Abhy-unnati, is,%}¦ f. great elevation or prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>5307<pc>0073-b<k1>aByunnI<k2>aByunnI
{#aByunnI#}¦ {%abhy-un-nī (abhi-ud-nī),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-nayati, -te, -netum,%} to pour upon, scoop towards.
<LEND>
[Page0073-c+ 71]

<L>5308<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupagam<k2>aByupagam
{#aByupagam#}¦ {%abhy-upa-gam (abhi-upa˚),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to go near to, approach, ar-
rive at; to obtain; to assent, agree to, promise, be-
lieve: Caus. {%-gamayati, -yitum,%} to prevail on any
one to assent.
<LEND>

<L>5309<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupagata<k2>aByupagata
{%Abhy-upagata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone near to, ap-
proached, arrived at; promised, agreed, assented to;
admitted, implied; inferred, probable; similar, ana-
logous.
<LEND>

<L>5310<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupagantavya<k2>aByupagantavya
{%Abhy-upagantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be approached
or assented to, to be admitted.
<LEND>

<L>5311<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupagantf<k2>aByupagantf
{%Abhy-upagantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who approaches
or assents, &c.
<LEND>

<L>5312<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupagama<k2>aByupagama
{%Abhy-upagama, as,%}¦ m. going near to, approach-
ing, arriving at; a promise, an agreement, contract;
granting, allowing, admitting, believing; probable
ascertainment; supposition, inference, analogy, affin-
ity. {%—Abhyupagama-siddhānta, as,%} m. an admit-
ted axiom.
<LEND>

<L>5313<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupagamita<k2>aByupagamita
{%Abhy-upagamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to consent,
obtained by assent or free consent; ({%as%}), m. a slave
for a fixed term.
<LEND>

<L>5314<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupapad<k2>aByupapad
{#aByupapad#}¦ {%abhy-upa-pad (abhi-upa˚),%} cl. 4. A.
{%-padyate, -pattum,%} to approach in order to help;
to deliver; to honour, to comfort; to ask for help;
to furnish with.
<LEND>

<L>5315<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupapatti<k2>aByupapatti
{%Abhy-upapatti, is,%}¦ f. approaching in order to
assist, protection, defence; favour, the conferring of
a benefit or kindness, affection; agreement, assent;
impregnation of a woman (especially of a brother's
widow, as, an act of duty).
<LEND>

<L>5316<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupapanna<k2>aByupapanna
{%Abhy-upapanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ protected, rescued,
delivered, agreed to, agreeing to, proved, admitted.
<LEND>

<L>5317<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupayukta<k2>aByupayukta
{#aByupayukta#}¦ {%abhy-upayukta, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%yuj%}), employed, used.
<LEND>

<L>5318<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupaSAnta<k2>aByupaSAnta
{#aByupaSAnta#}¦ {%abhy-upaśānta, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%śam%}), allayed, calmed.
<LEND>

<L>5319<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupasev<k2>aByupasev
{#aByupasev#}¦ {%abhy-upa-sev (abhi-upa˚),%} cl. 1.
A. {%-sevate, -vitum,%} to observe religiously.
<LEND>

<L>5320<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupasTA<k2>aByupasTA
{#aByupasTA#}¦ {%abhy-upa-sthā (abhi-upa˚),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-tiṣṭhati, -sthātum,%} to accompany, attend, assist.
<LEND>

<L>5321<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupasTita<k2>aByupasTita
{%Abhy-upasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ accompanied, at-
tended, assisted by.
<LEND>

<L>5322<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupAkfta<k2>aByupAkfta
{#aByupAkfta#}¦ {%abhy-upākṛta, as, ā, am,%} sum-
moned to take part (in a ceremony?).
<LEND>

<L>5323<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupAgam<k2>aByupAgam
{#aByupAgam#}¦ {%abhy-upāgam (abhi-upa-ā-gam),%}
cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to come to.
<LEND>

<L>5324<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupAdA<k2>aByupAdA
{#aByupAdA#}¦ {%abhy-upādā (abhi-upa-ā-dā),%} cl.
3. A. {%-datte, -dātum,%} to pick up.
<LEND>

<L>5325<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupAvftta<k2>aByupAvftta
{#aByupAvftta#}¦ {%abhy-upāvṛtta, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%vṛt%}), approached, come to.
<LEND>

<L>5326<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupe<k2>aByupe<h>1
{#aByupe#} 1¦. {%abhy-upe (abhi-upa-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-upaiti, -tum,%} to go near, approach, arrive at, enter;
to enter a state or condition; to agree with, approve
of; to be faithful, obey, submit.
<LEND>

<L>5327<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupAya<k2>aByupAya
{%Abhy-upāya, as,%}¦ m. an agreement, a promise, an
engagement; a means, an expedient.
<LEND>

<L>5328<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupAyana<k2>aByupAyana
{%Abhy-upāyana, am,%}¦ n. a bribe, douceur, compli-
mentary gift, an inducement.
<LEND>

<L>5329<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupeta<k2>aByupeta
{%Abhy-upeta, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached; promised,
assented or agreed to (as by contract, &c.), admitted.
{%—Abhyupetārthakṛtya (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} pledged
to the performance of a required act.
<LEND>

<L>5330<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupetavya<k2>aByupetavya
{%Abhy-upetavya%}¦ or {%abhy-upeya, as, ā, am,%} to be
admitted or assented to.
<LEND>

<L>5331<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupetya<k2>aByupetya
{%Abhy-upetya,%}¦ ind. having arrived at, having as-
sented or agreed to. {%—Abhyupetyāśuśrūṣā (˚tya-%}
{%aś˚),%} f. a head or title of law, breach of engagement
or contract between master and servant.
<LEND>

<L>5332<pc>0073-c<k1>aByupeyivas<k2>aByupeyivas
{%Abhy-upeyivas, vān, yuṣī, vat,%}¦ (having) ar-
rived at.
<LEND>
[Page0074-a+ 71]

<L>5333<pc>0074-a<k1>aByupe<k2>aByupe<h>2
{#aByupe#} 2¦. {%abhy-upe (abhi-upa-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-upaiti, -tum,%} to go towards, approach.
<LEND>

<L>5334<pc>0074-a<k1>aByupekz<k2>aByupekz
{#aByupekz#}¦ {%abhy-upekṣ (abhi-upa-īkṣ),%} cl. 1.
A. {%-upekṣate, -ṣitum,%} to leave, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>5335<pc>0074-a<k1>aByuza<k2>aByuza
{#aByuza#}¦ {%abhy-uṣa%} or {%abhy-ūṣa%} or {%abhy-%}
{%oṣa, as,%} m. (rt. {%uṣ%}), a kind of cake of grain &c.
half dressed, slightly scorched, or parched so as to be
eaten from the hand; bread.
<LEND>

<L>5336<pc>0074-a<k1>aByuzIya<k2>aByuzIya
{%Abhyuṣīya%}¦ or {%abhyūṣīya%} or {%abhyuṣya%} or
{%abhyūṣya%} or {%abhy-oṣīya%} or {%abhy-oṣya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} consisting of, or belonging to, or fit for the above
cake or preparation of parched grain.
<LEND>

<L>5337<pc>0074-a<k1>aByuzita<k2>aByuzita
{#aByuzita#}¦ {%abhy-uṣita, as, ā, am%} (rt. 1. {%vas%}),
dwelling near to, dwelling with.
<LEND>

<L>5338<pc>0074-a<k1>aByUQa<k2>aByUQa<h>1
{#aByUQa#} 1¦. {%abhy-ūḍha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vah%}
with {%abhi%}), brought near.
<LEND>

<L>5339<pc>0074-a<k1>aByUrRu<k2>aByUrRu
{#aByUrRu#}¦ {%abhy-ūrṇu (abhi-ūrṇu),%} cl. 2. P. A.
{%-ūrṇoti, -ṇute, -ūrṇavitum%} or {%-ṇuvitum,%} to cover,
hide, conceal; to cover one's self (?).
<LEND>

<L>5340<pc>0074-a<k1>aByUh<k2>aByUh
{#aByUh#}¦ {%abhy-ūh (abhi-ūh),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ūh-%}
{%ati, -te, -ūhitum,%} to cover over, to clothe; A. {%-ūhate,%}
Ved. {%-ohate,%} to watch for, to form a plot against; to
infer, to guess.
<LEND>

<L>5341<pc>0074-a<k1>aByUQa<k2>aByUQa<h>2
2. {%abhy-ūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ reasoned upon, con-
cluded, inferred.
<LEND>

<L>5342<pc>0074-a<k1>aByUha<k2>aByUha
{%Abhy-ūha, as,%}¦ m. discussion, reasoning, deduction,
inference; supplying an ellipsis; understanding.
<LEND>

<L>5343<pc>0074-a<k1>aByUhitavya<k2>aByUhitavya
{%Abhy-ūhitavya%}¦ or {%abhy-ūhya, as, ā, am,%} to be
inferred or guessed.
<LEND>

<L>5344<pc>0074-a<k1>aByuhya<k2>aByuhya
{%Abhy-uhya%}¦ (the {%u%} being shortened after {%abhi%} be-
fore the {%ya%} of the ind. part., but sometimes wrongly
written with long {%ū%}), ind. having concluded or inferred,
having reasoned; having supplied an ellipsis.
<LEND>

<L>5345<pc>0074-a<k1>aByf<k2>aByf
{#aByf#}¦ {%abhy-ṛ (abhi-ṛ),%} cl. 3. 5. P. {%abhīyarti,%}
{%ṛṇoti, -artum, -ritum, -rītum,%} to go to, to pervade.
<LEND>

<L>5346<pc>0074-a<k1>aByarRa<k2>aByarRa
{%Abhy-arṇa.%}¦ See s. v., p. 71, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>5347<pc>0074-a<k1>aByfC<k2>aByfC
{#aByfC#}¦ {%abhy-ṛch (abhi-ṛch),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-ṛcchati, -chitum,%} to come to, to visit or afflict with;
to strive against, to strive to overpower.
<LEND>

<L>5348<pc>0074-a<k1>aByfYj<k2>aByfYj
{#aByfYj#}¦ {%abhy-ṛñj (abhi-ṛñj),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-ṛñjati, -te, -jitum,%} to stretch out the hand for, to
hasten to or towards.
<LEND>

<L>5349<pc>0074-a<k1>aByfz<k2>aByfz
{#aByfz#}¦ {%abhy-ṛṣ (abhi-ṛṣ),%} cl. 1. P. {%-arṣ-%}
{%ati, -ṣitum,%} to flow or run towards a place; to let
flow or run towards a place.
<LEND>

<L>5350<pc>0074-a<k1>aBye<k2>aBye
{#aBye#}¦ {%abhye (abhi-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-aiti, -tum,%}
to go near, to come to.
<LEND>

<L>5351<pc>0074-a<k1>aByetya<k2>aByetya
{%Abhy-etya,%}¦ ind. having approached, having come to.
<LEND>

<L>5352<pc>0074-a<k1>aByezaRa<k2>aByezaRa<h>1
{#aByezaRa#} 1¦. {%abhy-eṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. 3. {%iṣ%}),
desiring, wishing for.
<LEND>

<L>5353<pc>0074-a<k1>aByezaRIya<k2>aByezaRIya
{%Abhy-eṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be desired.
<LEND>

<L>5354<pc>0074-a<k1>aByezaRa<k2>aByezaRa<h>2
{#aByezaRa#} 2¦. {%abhy-eṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. 1. {%iṣ%}),
going towards, attacking.
<LEND>

<L>5355<pc>0074-a<k1>aBr<k2>aBr
{#aBr#}¦ {%abhr,%} cl. 1. P. {%abhrati, abhritum,%}
to go; to err or wander about.
<LEND>

<L>5356<pc>0074-a<k1>aBra<k2>aBra
{#aBra#}¦ {%abhra%} (sometimes spelt {%abbhra,%} ac-
cording to the derivation {%ab-bhra,%} ‘water-bearer’),
{%am,%} n. cloud; sky, atmosphere, ether, heaven;
dust (?); talc, mica; gold; camphor; the ratan (Ca-
lamus Rotang); Cyperus Rotundus; (in arithmetic) a
cypher; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὄμβρος</lang> and Lat. <nsi>imber.</nsi>] {%—Abhraṃ-%}
{%liha, as, ā, am,%} cloud-licking; what touches or
sweeps the clouds; sky-scraper; ({%as%}), m. wind. {%—A-%}
{%bhra-ghana, as, ā, am,%} thickly covered with clouds.
{%—Abhraṅ-kaṣa, as, ā, am,%} grazing (hurting) the
clouds, very high; ({%as%}), m. air, wind, a mountain.
{%—Abhra-jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. born from clouds,
caused by vapours. {%—Abhra-nāga, as,%} m. one of the
elephants supporting the globe. {%—Abhra-piśāca%} or
{%abhra-piśācaka, as,%} m. sky-demon, N. of Rāhu, the
descending node personified. {%—Abhra-puṣpa, as,%} m.,
[Page0074-b+ 75]
N. of a cane, Calamus Rotang; ({%am%}), n. water; a
flower in the clouds, castle in the air, anything im-
possible. {%—Abhra-pruṣ, ṭ,%} f., Ved. the sprinkling of
the clouds, rain. {%—Abhra-māṃsī,%} f., N. of a plant,
Valeriana Jaṭāmāṃsī. {%—Abhra-mātaṅga, as,%} m.
Airāvata, Indra's elephant. {%—Abhra-mālā,%} f. a line
or succession of clouds. {%—Abhra-roha, am,%} n. Lapis
Lazuli. {%—Abhra-lipta, as, ā, am,%} overspread with
clouds. {%—Abhra-varṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pouring
water from the clouds. {%—Abhra-vāṭika, as,%} m., N.
of a plant, Spondias Magnifera. {%—Abhra-śiras, as,%}
n. a head formed of the sky. {%—Abhrāvakāśa (˚ra-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. fall of rain, clouds as the only shelter.
{%—Abhrāvakāśika, as, ā, am,%} or {%abhrāvakāśin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} exposed to the rain (and so doing penance),
not seeking shelter from the rain, having the clouds
for shelter, open to the sky. {%—Abhrottha (˚ra-ut˚),%}
{%as,%} m. sky-born, i. e. Indra's thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>5357<pc>0074-b<k1>aBraka<k2>aBraka
{%Abhraka, am,%}¦ n. talc, mica; the same as {%abhra,%}
q. v. {%—Abhraka-bhasman, a,%} n. calx of talc. {%—A-%}
{%bhraka-sattva, am,%} n. steel.
<LEND>

<L>5358<pc>0074-b<k1>aBrAya<k2>aBrAya
{%Abhrāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%abhrāyate, -yitum,%} to create
clouds, make cloudy.
<LEND>

<L>5359<pc>0074-b<k1>aBrita<k2>aBrita
{%Abhrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ clouded, covered with clouds.
<LEND>

<L>5360<pc>0074-b<k1>aBriya<k2>aBriya
{%Abhriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to or produced
from clouds; ({%as%}), m. lightning; ({%am%}), n. a collec-
tion of thunder-clouds.
<LEND>

<L>5361<pc>0074-b<k1>aBrya<k2>aBrya
{%Abhrya, as,%}¦ m. a naked ascetic, who is clothed
only by the air.
<LEND>

<L>5362<pc>0074-b<k1>aBrama<k2>aBrama
{#aBrama#}¦ {%a-bhrama, as, ā, am,%} not blundering;
steady, clear; ({%as%}), m. steadiness, composure.
<LEND>

<L>5363<pc>0074-b<k1>aBramu<k2>aBramu
{%A-bhramu, us,%}¦ f. the female elephant of the east, the
mate of Airāvata. {%—Abhramu-priya%} or {%abhramu-%}
{%vallabha, as,%} m. the male elephant of the east or
Airāvata.
<LEND>

<L>5364<pc>0074-b<k1>aBrAtf<k2>aBrAtf
{#aBrAtf#}¦ {%a-bhrātṛ, tā, trī,%} Ved. or {%a-bhrātṛka,%}
{%as, ā,%} or {%a-bhrātṛ-mat, ān, atī,%} m. f. brotherless.
{%—A-bhrātṛ-han, hā, ghnī,%} m. f., Ved. not killing
a brother.
<LEND>

<L>5365<pc>0074-b<k1>aBrAtfvya<k2>aBrAtfvya
{#aBrAtfvya#}¦ {%a-bhrātṛvya, as, ā, am,%} having no
rival, without an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>5366<pc>0074-b<k1>aBrAnta<k2>aBrAnta
{#aBrAnta#}¦ {%a-bhrānta, as, ā, am,%} unperplexed,
not mistaken or in error, clear, composed.
<LEND>

<L>5367<pc>0074-b<k1>aBrAnti<k2>aBrAnti
{%A-bhrānti, is,%}¦ f. absence of perplexity or error.
<LEND>

<L>5368<pc>0074-b<k1>aBri<k2>aBri
{#aBri#}¦ {%abhri%} or {%abbhri, is,%} or {%abhrī,%} f. (fr. rt.
{%abhr%}), a wooden scraper or shovel for cleaning a boat,
a spatula, a spade, a pointed stick. {%—Abhri-khāta,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. dug up with the above instrument, as
a ploughed field.
<LEND>

<L>5369<pc>0074-b<k1>aBreza<k2>aBreza
{#aBreza#}¦ {%a-bhreṣa, as,%} m. non-deviation,
fitness, propriety.
<LEND>

<L>5370<pc>0074-b<k1>aBva<k2>aBva
{#aBva#}¦ {%a-bhva, as, ā, am%} (etymology doubt-
ful, {%bhva = bhava%} or {%bhuva?%}), Ved. huge, immense,
mighty; monstrous, terrible; ({%as%}), m. a powerful
man, applied to an enemy; ({%am%}), n. immense power,
monstrosity, the great pervading principle of the uni-
verse; embarrassed state, great calamity; sultriness (?);
a monster; offspring; water, a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>5371<pc>0074-b<k1>am<k2>am<h>1
{#am#} 1¦. {%am,%} ind. quickly, a little.
<LEND>

<L>5372<pc>0074-b<k1>am<k2>am<h>2
{#am#} 2¦. {%am,%} cl. 1. P. {%amati, -mitum,%} Ved.
{%amiti%} or {%amīti,%} to go; to go to or towards;
to serve or honour; to sound: Caus. {%āmayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to afflict with sickness or pain from disease; to
be afflicted or sick.
<LEND>

<L>5373<pc>0074-b<k1>ama<k2>ama<h>1
1. {%ama, as,%}¦ m., Ved. going, pressure, heavy weight,
violence, strength, power, depriving of sensation, fright,
terror; disease, sickness; a servant; companion; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), unripe; unfortunate (?). {%—Ama-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. impetuous, violent, strong; powerful, bold,
persevering, constant; attended by ministers, attended
by diseases, possessed of self; ({%vat%}), ind. impetuously.
<LEND>

<L>5374<pc>0074-b<k1>amahata<k2>amahata
{%—Ama-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured by disease, &c.
<LEND>

<L>5375<pc>0074-b<k1>amahan<k2>amahan
{%—Ama-han, hā, ghnī, ha,%}¦ destroying diseases, &c.
1. {%amata, as,%} m. sickness; disease; death; time.
1. {%amati, is,%} m. moon, time; ({%is%}), f., Ved. form,
[Page0074-c+ 70]
shape, a splendid shape; splendor, glitter; ({%is, is, i%}),
Ved. poor, indigent; ({%is%}), f. want, indigence.
<LEND>

<L>5376<pc>0074-c<k1>amatIvan<k2>amatIvan<h>1
1. {%amatī-van, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. poor, indigent.
<LEND>

<L>5377<pc>0074-c<k1>amatra<k2>amatra
{%Amatra, amani, amaviṣṇu.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>5378<pc>0074-c<k1>ama<k2>ama<h>2
{#ama#} 2¦. {%ama, as,%} m. (connected with {%amu%}),
this; self; ({%ā%}), f. soul.
<LEND>

<L>5379<pc>0074-c<k1>amA<k2>amA
{%Amā,%}¦ ind., Ved. at home, in the house; with;
together with; near: see also p. 75, col. 3. {%—Amā%}
{%kṛ,%} to take or carry with one's self.
<LEND>

<L>5380<pc>0074-c<k1>amAt<k2>amAt<h>1
1. {%amāt,%}¦ ind., Ved. from near at hand, from the
neighbourhood. (For 2. see p. 75, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>5381<pc>0074-c<k1>ama<k2>ama<h>3
{#ama#} 3¦. {%a-ma, as,%} m. or {%a-mā,%} f. (rt. {%mā%}),
unmeasured state.
<LEND>

<L>5382<pc>0074-c<k1>amati<k2>amati<h>2
2. {%a-mati, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. of unmeasured lustre
(the sun).
<LEND>

<L>5383<pc>0074-c<k1>amaNgala<k2>amaNgala
{#amaNgala#}¦ {%a-maṅgala%} or {%a-maṅgalya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} inauspicious, unlucky, evil; {%(las),%} m. the castor
oil tree, Ricinus Communis; ({%am%}), n. inauspicious-
ness, ill-luck.
<LEND>

<L>5384<pc>0074-c<k1>amaRqa<k2>amaRqa
{#amaRqa#}¦ {%amaṇḍa, as,%} m. the castor-oil tree,
Ricinus Communis.
<LEND>

<L>5385<pc>0074-c<k1>amaRqita<k2>amaRqita
{#amaRqita#}¦ {%a-maṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} unadorned.
<LEND>

<L>5386<pc>0074-c<k1>amata<k2>amata<h>2
{#amata#} 2¦. {%a-mata, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%man%}), not
felt, not perceptible by the mind; (for 1. {%amata,%} see
under 2. {%am.%}) {%—Amata-parārtha, as, ā, am,%} in-
compatible with the principal subject or subject-matter.
<LEND>

<L>5387<pc>0074-c<k1>amati<k2>amati<h>3
{#amati#} 3¦. {%a-mati, is,%} f. unconsciousness,
ignorance, feebleness of intellect, absence of fore-
thought, knowledge or intention; {%(is, is, i),%} evil-
minded, unworthy of credit, depraved. {%—Amati-%}
{%pūrva, as, ā, am,%} unconscious, unintentional, without
forethought.
<LEND>

<L>5388<pc>0074-c<k1>amatIvan<k2>amatIvan<h>2
2. {%amatī-van, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. evil-minded, weak-minded.
<LEND>

<L>5389<pc>0074-c<k1>amatra<k2>amatra
{#amatra#}¦ {%amatra, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%am%}), Ved. over-
powering, overcoming, strong, violent, impetuous;
({%am%}), n., Ved. strength, power; a vessel, a utensil.
<LEND>

<L>5390<pc>0074-c<k1>amatrin<k2>amatrin
{%Amatrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. strong, powerful; having
a drinking-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>5391<pc>0074-c<k1>amatsara<k2>amatsara
{#amatsara#}¦ {%a-matsara, as, ā, am,%} unenvious,
charitable.
<LEND>

<L>5392<pc>0074-c<k1>amada<k2>amada
{#amada#}¦ {%a-mada, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mad%}), cheerless,
grave, sorrowful.
<LEND>

<L>5393<pc>0074-c<k1>amatta<k2>amatta
{%A-matta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not inebriated, sober, sane,
not mad.
<LEND>

<L>5394<pc>0074-c<k1>amaDavya<k2>amaDavya
{#amaDavya#}¦ {%a-madhavya, as, ā, am,%} not worthy
of the sweetness (of the Soma).
<LEND>

<L>5395<pc>0074-c<k1>amaDuparkya<k2>amaDuparkya
{#amaDuparkya#}¦ {%a-madhuparkya, as, ā, am,%} not
worthy of the {%madhu-parka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>5396<pc>0074-c<k1>amaDyama<k2>amaDyama
{#amaDyama#}¦ {%a-madhyama, as, ā, am,%} non-cen-
tral, not being in the middle.
<LEND>

<L>5397<pc>0074-c<k1>amaDyasTa<k2>amaDyasTa
{#amaDyasTa#}¦ {%a-madhyastha, as, ā, am,%} not in-
different.
<LEND>

<L>5398<pc>0074-c<k1>amanas<k2>amanas
{#amanas#}¦ {%a-manas, as,%} n. not the organ of
desire, non-perception, want of perception; {%(ās, ās,%}
{%as),%} = the next.
<LEND>

<L>5399<pc>0074-c<k1>amanaska<k2>amanaska
{%A-manaska, as, ā, am,%}¦ without the organ of desire,
without perception; without intellect, unconscious.
<LEND>

<L>5400<pc>0074-c<k1>amanasvin<k2>amanasvin
{%A-manasvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ unintelligent, inhuman (as
a Rākṣasa).
<LEND>

<L>5401<pc>0074-c<k1>amanAk<k2>amanAk
{#amanAk#}¦ {%a-manāk,%} ind. not little, much,
greatly.
<LEND>

<L>5402<pc>0074-c<k1>amani<k2>amani
{#amani#}¦ {%amani, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%am%}), a road, a way.
<LEND>

<L>5403<pc>0074-c<k1>amanuzya<k2>amanuzya
{#amanuzya#}¦ {%a-manuṣya, as, ā, am,%} not human,
unfrequented by men; ({%as%}), m. not a man, a demon.
{%—Amanuṣya-tā,%} f. unmanliness. {%—A-manuṣya-%}
{%niṣevita, as, ā, am,%} not inhabited by men.
<LEND>

<L>5404<pc>0074-c<k1>amanogata<k2>amanogata
{#amanogata#}¦ {%a-manogata, as, ā, am,%} unthought
of, unknown.
<LEND>

<L>5405<pc>0074-c<k1>amanojYa<k2>amanojYa
{#amanojYa#}¦ {%a-manojña, as, ā, am,%} unwelcome
to the mind, disagreeable, disliked.
<LEND>
[Page0075-a+ 75]

<L>5406<pc>0075-a<k1>amanonIta<k2>amanonIta
{#amanonIta#}¦ {%a-manonīta, as, ā, am,%} disap-
proved; reprobate.
<LEND>

<L>5407<pc>0075-a<k1>amanoyoga<k2>amanoyoga
{#amanoyoga#}¦ {%a-manoyoga, as,%} m. inattention.
<LEND>

<L>5408<pc>0075-a<k1>amanoyogin<k2>amanoyogin
{%A-manoyogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ inattentive.
<LEND>

<L>5409<pc>0075-a<k1>amanohara<k2>amanohara
{#amanohara#}¦ {%a-manohara%} or {%a-manoramya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} or {%a-manohārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} disagreeable, dis-
pleasing, unattractive.
<LEND>

<L>5410<pc>0075-a<k1>amantavya<k2>amantavya
{#amantavya#}¦ {%a-mantavya%} or {%a-mananīya, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (rt. {%man%}), not to be regarded, inadmissible.
<LEND>

<L>5411<pc>0075-a<k1>amantu<k2>amantu
{%A-mantu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. unwise, foolish, indocile;
(for {%ava-mantu%}), despising.
<LEND>

<L>5412<pc>0075-a<k1>amantra<k2>amantra
{#amantra#}¦ {%a-mantra, as,%} m. not a Vedic verse
or text; ({%as, ā, am%}), or {%a-mantraka, as, ikā, am,%}
unaccompanied by Vedic verses or texts; unentitled
to or not knowing Vedic texts, as a Śūdra, a female,
&c. {%—A-mantra-vid, t, t, t,%} not knowing the for-
mulas or texts of the Veda; ({%t%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>5413<pc>0075-a<k1>amanda<k2>amanda
{#amanda#}¦ {%a-manda, as, ā, am,%} not slow, active,
violent; not stupid; not little, important; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>5414<pc>0075-a<k1>amanyamAna<k2>amanyamAna
{#amanyamAna#}¦ {%a-manyamāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not understanding, offering no homage; not expect-
ing, not being aware of.
<LEND>

<L>5415<pc>0075-a<k1>amanyuta<k2>amanyuta
{#amanyuta#}¦ {%a-manyuta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
affected with secret anger, not bearing ill-will against
a person.
<LEND>

<L>5416<pc>0075-a<k1>amama<k2>amama
{#amama#}¦ {%a-mama, as, ā, am,%} without egotism,
devoid of all selfish or wordly attachment or desire;
({%as%}), m. the twelfth Jaina saint of a future Utsarpiṇī.
{%—Amama-tā,%} f. or {%amama-tva, am,%} n. disinterest-
edness, indifference.
<LEND>

<L>5417<pc>0075-a<k1>amamri<k2>amamri
{#amamri#}¦ {%a-mamri, is, is, i%} (rt. {%mṛ%}), Ved. im-
mortal, undying.
<LEND>

<L>5418<pc>0075-a<k1>amara<k2>amara
{#amara#}¦ {%a-mara, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mṛ%}), undying,
immortal, imperishable; ({%as%}), m. a god, a deity;
N. of a Marut; a plant, Euphorbia Tirucalli; another
plant, Tiaridium Indicum; a species of pine; quick-
silver, gold; N. of Amara-siṃha; of a mountain;
mystical signification of the letter {%u%}; the number 33,
such being the number of gods according to the later
mythology; ({%ā%}), f. the residence of Indra; the umbi-
lical cord; the womb; a house-post; N. of several
plants, Panicum Dactylon, Cocculus Cordifolius, &c.;
({%ī%}), f. the same as {%amarā%} in many of its senses. {%—A-%}
{%mara-kaṇṭaka, am,%} n. ‘peak of the immortals,’ N.
of part of the Vindhya range near the source of the
Soṇā and Narmadā. {%—Amara-koṭa, as,%} m. the
fortress of immortals; N. of the capital of a Rājput
state. {%—Amara-koṣa, as,%} m., N. of the Sanskrit
dictionary of Amara or Amara-siṃha. {%—Amara-%}
{%koṣa-kaumudī,%} f. title of a commentary on Ama-
ra-siṃha's dictionary. {%—Amara-gaṇa, as,%} m. the as-
semblage of immortals. {%—Amara-candra, as,%} m.,
N. of the author of the Bāla-bhārata. {%—Amara-ja,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—Amara-taṭinī,%} f. river of
the gods; an epithet of the Ganges. {%—Amara-tā,%} f.
or {%amara-tva, am,%} n. immortality; the condition of
the gods. {%—Amara-datta, as,%} m., N. of a lexico-
grapher. {%—Amara-dāru, us,%} m., N. of a tree
(Pinus Deodaru Roxb.). {%—Amara-deva, as,%} m. a
N. of Amara-siṃha. {%—Amara-dvija, as,%} m. a Brāh-
man who lives by attending a temple or idol; super-
intending a temple. {%—Amara-pati, is,%} m. the lord of
the gods; an epithet of Indra. {%—Amara-pura, am,%}
n. the residence of the immortals, paradise; N. of vari-
ous towns. {%—Amara-puṣpa%} or {%amara-puṣpaka,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of several plants; a kind of grass, Saccha-
rum Spontaneum, Pandanus Odoratissimus, Magni-
fera Indica. {%—Amara-puṣpikā,%} f. a kind of anise,
Anethum Sowa Roxb. {%—Amara-prakhya%} or {%amara-%}
{%prabha, as, ā, am,%} like an immortal. {%—Amara-%}
{%prabhu, us,%} m. ‘lord of the immortals,’ one of the
thousand names of Viṣṇu. {%—Amara-bhartṛ, tā,%}
m. lord of the gods; an epithet of Indra. {%—Amara-%}
{%mālā,%} f. title of a dictionary, said to be by the same
[Page0075-b+ 75]
<div n="P"/>author as the Amara-koṣa. {%—Amara-ratna, am,%}
n. crystal. {%—Amara-rāja, as,%} m. king of the gods;
an epithet of Indra. {%—Amararāja-śatru, us,%} m. an
enemy of the king of the gods; an epithet of Rā-
vaṇa. {%—Amara-loka, as,%} m. the abode of the gods,
heaven. {%—Amaraloka-tā,%} f. the bliss of heaven.
{%—Amara-vat,%} ind. like an immortal. {%—Amara-%}
{%vallarī,%} f., N. of a plant, Cassyta Filiformis Lin.
{%—Amara-Śakti, is,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Amara-%}
{%sarit, t,%} f. the river of the gods; epithet of the
Ganges. {%—Amara-siṃha, as,%} m. ‘god-lion,’ N. of a
renowned lexicographer; he was a Buddhist, and is
supposed to have adorned the court of Vikramāditya,
being included among the nine gems. {%—Amara-strī,%}
f. an Apsaras or nymph of heaven. {%—Amarācārya%}
{%(˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m. Vṛhaspati, teacher of the gods.
{%—Amarāṅganā (˚ra-aṅg˚),%} f. a nymph of Indra's
heaven.{%—Amarādri (˚ra-ad˚), is%} m. the mountain
of the gods; an epithet of the mount Sumeru or
Meru. {%—Amarādhipa (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m. lord of
the gods; an epithet of Indra. {%—Amarāpagā (˚ra-%}
{%ap˚),%} f. the river of the gods; an epithet of the
Ganges. {%—Amarejya (˚ra-ij˚), as,%} m., N. of Vṛhaspati.
{%—Amareśa (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m. lord of the gods; an epi-
thet of Śiva or Indra. {%—Amareśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m.
an epithet of Viṣṇu, Śiva, or Indra. {%—Amarottama%}
{%(˚ra-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} best of the immortals. {%—A-%}
{%maropama (˚ra-up˚), as, ā, am,%} like an immortal.
<LEND>

<L>5419<pc>0075-b<k1>amaraRa<k2>amaraRa
{%A-maraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the not dying, immortality.
<LEND>

<L>5420<pc>0075-b<k1>amaraRIya<k2>amaraRIya
{%A-maraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ immortal. {%—Amaraṇīya-%}
{%tā,%} f. immortality.
<LEND>

<L>5421<pc>0075-b<k1>amarAvatI<k2>amarAvatI
{%Amarā-vatī,%}¦ f. the abode of the immortals, resi-
dence of Indra; N. of a town in Berar.
<LEND>

<L>5422<pc>0075-b<k1>amarizRu<k2>amarizRu
{%A-mariṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. immortal.
<LEND>

<L>5423<pc>0075-b<k1>amarta<k2>amarta
{%A-marta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. immortal.
<LEND>

<L>5424<pc>0075-b<k1>amartya<k2>amartya
{%A-martya, as, ā, am,%}¦ immortal, imperishable, di-
vine; ({%as%}), m. god. {%—Amartya-tā%} or {%amartya-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. immortality. {%—Amartya-bhuvana, am,%} n.
the world of the immortals, heaven.
<LEND>

<L>5425<pc>0075-b<k1>amaru<k2>amaru
{#amaru#}¦ {%amaru, us,%} m., N. of a king, the
author of the {%Amaru-śataka, am,%} n. or the hundred
verses of Amaru.
<LEND>

<L>5426<pc>0075-b<k1>amaruta<k2>amaruta
{#amaruta#}¦ {%a-maruta, as, ā, am,%} without wind,
calm.
<LEND>

<L>5427<pc>0075-b<k1>amardita<k2>amardita
{#amardita#}¦ {%a-mardita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mṛd%}), un-
threshed, unsubdued, not trodden down.
<LEND>

<L>5428<pc>0075-b<k1>amarDat<k2>amarDat
{#amarDat#}¦ {%a-mardhat, an, antī, at,%} Ved. not
injuring; indefatigable (?).
<LEND>

<L>5429<pc>0075-b<k1>amarman<k2>amarman
{#amarman#}¦ {%a-marman, ā,%} m., Ved. not a vital
part of the body, without a joint, having no joint,
having no vital part. {%—A-marma-jāta, as, ā, am,%}
not produced in a vital organ. {%—A-marma-vedhin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} not injuring vital organs, mild.
<LEND>

<L>5430<pc>0075-b<k1>amaryAda<k2>amaryAda
{#amaryAda#}¦ {%a-maryāda, as, ā, am,%} having no
limits, transgressing every bound; ({%ā%}), f. the transgress-
ing or overstepping due bounds; disrepect, impropriety
of conduct; violation of decorum or due reverence;
forwardness or pertness.
<LEND>

<L>5431<pc>0075-b<k1>amarza<k2>amarza
{#amarza#}¦ {%a-marṣa, as,%} m. (rt. {%mṛṣ%}), non-
endurance; impatience; impetuosity, determination
of purpose; anger, passion; {%(as, ā, am),%} unenduring,
not bearing; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince. {%—Amarṣa-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} springing from impatience or indig-
nation. {%—Amarṣa-hāsa, as,%} m. an angry laugh, a
sarcastic sneer.
<LEND>

<L>5432<pc>0075-b<k1>amarzaRa<k2>amarzaRa
{%A-marṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%amarṣa-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} or {%a-marṣita, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-marṣin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} not suffering, not bearing; impatient, in-
tolerant; passionate, wrathful, angry, impetuous, de-
termined.
<LEND>

<L>5433<pc>0075-b<k1>amala<k2>amala
{#amala#}¦ {%a-mala, as, ā, am,%} spotless, stainless,
clean, pure, shining, white; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the goddess
Lakṣmī; the umbilical cord; N. of a tree, Emblica
Officinalis Gærtn.; N. of a plant; ({%am%}), n. purity;
the supreme spirit; talc. {%—A-mala-garbha, as,%} m.,
N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Amala-patatrin, ī, iṇī,%} m.
[Page0075-c+ 69]
f. the wild goose. {%—Amala-ratna, am,%} n. or {%amala-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. f. crystal. {%—Amalātman (˚la-āt˚), ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} of undefiled mind.
<LEND>

<L>5434<pc>0075-c<k1>amalaya<k2>amalaya
{%Amalaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%amalayati, -yitum,%} to make
spotless.
<LEND>

<L>5435<pc>0075-c<k1>amalina<k2>amalina
{%A-malina, as, ā, am,%}¦ stainless, free from dirt,
clean.
<LEND>

<L>5436<pc>0075-c<k1>amalAnaka<k2>amalAnaka
{#amalAnaka#}¦ {%amalānaka, am,%} n. globe-ama-
ranth (Gomphræna Globosa). See {%amilātaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>5437<pc>0075-c<k1>amavat<k2>amavat
{#amavat#}¦ {%ama-vat, ān, atī, at.%} See under
1. {%ama.%}
<LEND>

<L>5438<pc>0075-c<k1>amavizRu<k2>amavizRu
{#amavizRu#}¦ {%amaviṣṇu, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. {%am%}),
going in different directions, up and down.
<LEND>

<L>5439<pc>0075-c<k1>amasa<k2>amasa
{%Amasa, as,%}¦ m. disease; stupidity, a fool, time.
<LEND>

<L>5440<pc>0075-c<k1>amasfRa<k2>amasfRa
{#amasfRa#}¦ {%a-masṛṇa, as, ā, am,%} not soft,
harsh, hard; violent, intense.
<LEND>

<L>5441<pc>0075-c<k1>amastaka<k2>amastaka
{#amastaka#}¦ {%a-mastaka, as, ā, am,%} headless.
<LEND>

<L>5442<pc>0075-c<k1>amastu<k2>amastu
{#amastu#}¦ {%a-mastu,%} n. curds. See {%mastu.%}
<LEND>

<L>5443<pc>0075-c<k1>amA<k2>amA<h>1
{#amA#} 1¦. {%amā,%} f. day of conjunction of sun
and moon or new moon; see {%amā-vasī,%} p. 76, col. 1.
{%—Amānta (amā-anta), as,%} m. the end of the day
of new moon.
<LEND>

<L>5444<pc>0075-c<k1>amA<k2>amA<h>2
{#amA#} 2¦. {%amā,%} ind. at home, in the house;
see also under 2. {%ama,%} p. 74. {%—Amākta (amā-akta),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. met, come together. {%—Amā-jur,%}
{%ūr,%} f., Ved. living at home during life, growing
old at home; being without husband in the same
dwelling with her parents (as a maiden).
<LEND>

<L>5445<pc>0075-c<k1>amAMsa<k2>amAMsa
{#amAMsa#}¦ {%a-māṃsa, am,%} n. not flesh, anything
but flesh; {%(as, ā, am),%} without flesh, feeble, thin.
{%—A-māṃsaudanika (˚sa-od˚), as, ī, am,%} not re-
lating to a preparation of rice with meat.
<LEND>

<L>5446<pc>0075-c<k1>amAt<k2>amAt<h>2
{#amAt#} 2¦. {%a-māt, ān, āti%} or {%ānti, āt,%} not
measuring. (For 1. see p. 74, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>5447<pc>0075-c<k1>amAtfka<k2>amAtfka
{#amAtfka#}¦ {%a-mātṛka, as, ā, am,%} without a
mother, motherless.
<LEND>

<L>5448<pc>0075-c<k1>amAtAputra<k2>amAtAputra
{%A-mātā-putra, as,%}¦ m. having neither mother nor
son.
<LEND>

<L>5449<pc>0075-c<k1>amAtfBogIRa<k2>amAtfBogIRa
{%A-mātṛbhogīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ not fit for the use
of a mother.
<LEND>

<L>5450<pc>0075-c<k1>amAtya<k2>amAtya
{#amAtya#}¦ {%amātya, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%amā%} above),
inmate of the same house, belonging to the same
house or family; a companion, follower, counsellor,
minister.
<LEND>

<L>5451<pc>0075-c<k1>amAtra<k2>amAtra
{#amAtra#}¦ {%a-mātra, am,%} n. non-measure, not
a measure or quantity (said of the universal spirit);
({%as, ā, am%}), boundless; not whole or entire; not
elementary; having the measure or quantity of the
letter {%a%}. {%—Amātravat-tva, am,%} n. deficiency, defect;
spirit, spiritual essence.
<LEND>

<L>5452<pc>0075-c<k1>amAnana<k2>amAnana
{#amAnana#}¦ {%a-mānana, am,%} n. disrespect, con-
tempt, disobedience.
<LEND>

<L>5453<pc>0075-c<k1>amAnava<k2>amAnava
{#amAnava#}¦ {%a-mānava, as, ā, am,%} not human,
animal; superhuman.
<LEND>

<L>5454<pc>0075-c<k1>amAnasya<k2>amAnasya
{#amAnasya#}¦ {%a-mānasya, am,%} n. pain.
<LEND>

<L>5455<pc>0075-c<k1>amAnitA<k2>amAnitA
{#amAnitA#}¦ {%a-mānitā,%} f. or {%a-mānitva, am,%}
n. (rt. {%man%}), modesty, humility.
<LEND>

<L>5456<pc>0075-c<k1>amAnin<k2>amAnin
{%A-mānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ humble, modest.
<LEND>

<L>5457<pc>0075-c<k1>amAnya<k2>amAnya
{%A-mānya%}¦ or {%a-mānitavya%} or {%a-mānanīya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} to be disrepected.
<LEND>

<L>5458<pc>0075-c<k1>amAnuza<k2>amAnuza
{#amAnuza#}¦ {%a-mānuṣa, as, ī, am,%} not human,
anything but man; supernatural, inhuman, a monster;
not well disposed towards man.
<LEND>

<L>5459<pc>0075-c<k1>amAnuzya<k2>amAnuzya
{%A-mānuṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not human, super-
human, &c.
<LEND>

<L>5460<pc>0075-c<k1>amAmasI<k2>amAmasI
{#amAmasI#}¦ {%amā-masī%} or {%amā-māsī%} for {%amā-%}
{%vasī,%} p. 76, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>5461<pc>0075-c<k1>amAya<k2>amAya
{#amAya#}¦ {%a-māya, as, ā, am,%} not cunning,
not sagacious; free from error or deceit, guileless,
[Page0076-a+ 73]
sincere; ({%ā%}), f. absence of delusion, deceit, or guile;
knowledge of the truth; sincerity, honesty.
<LEND>

<L>5462<pc>0076-a<k1>amAyika<k2>amAyika
{%A-māyika, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%a-māyin, ī, inī, i,%}
without illusion or deceit, void of trick or guile; true,
honest; real.
<LEND>

<L>5463<pc>0076-a<k1>amAra<k2>amAra
{#amAra#}¦ {%a-māra, as,%} m. not dying.
<LEND>

<L>5464<pc>0076-a<k1>amArga<k2>amArga
{#amArga#}¦ {%a-mārga, as,%} m. want of a road;
{%(as, ā, am),%} pathless, without a road.
<LEND>

<L>5465<pc>0076-a<k1>amArgita<k2>amArgita
{#amArgita#}¦ {%a-mārgita, as, ā, am,%} unsought,
not hunted after.
<LEND>

<L>5466<pc>0076-a<k1>amArjita<k2>amArjita
{#amArjita#}¦ {%a-mārjita, as, ā, am,%} uncleansed,
unwashed, unadorned.
<LEND>

<L>5467<pc>0076-a<k1>amAvasu<k2>amAvasu
{#amAvasu#}¦ {%amā-vasu, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Purūravas, of a son of Kuśa and others.
<LEND>

<L>5468<pc>0076-a<k1>amAvAsyA<k2>amAvAsyA
{#amAvAsyA#}¦ {%amā-vāsyā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%vas,%} ‘to
dwell,’ with {%amā,%} ‘together,’ i. e. {%rātri,%} night of new
moon), the first day of the first quarter on which the
moon is invisible; a sacrifice offered at that time; the
sacrificial cake ?; ({%as, ā, am%}), or {%amā-vāsyaka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced in a night of new moon.
<LEND>

<L>5469<pc>0076-a<k1>amAvasI<k2>amAvasI
{%Amā-vasī%}¦ or {%amā-vasyā%} or {%amā-vāsī,%} f. the night
of new moon; that night during which the moon
dwells together with or in the same quarter as the sun.
<LEND>

<L>5470<pc>0076-a<k1>amAza<k2>amAza
{#amAza#}¦ {%a-māṣa, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-māṣaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} having no kidney-beans.
<LEND>

<L>5471<pc>0076-a<k1>amita<k2>amita<h>1
{#amita#} 1¦. {%amita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%am%}), gone,
served, honoured, sounded.
<LEND>

<L>5472<pc>0076-a<k1>amita<k2>amita<h>2
{#amita#} 2¦. {%a-mita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mā%}), un-
measured, boundless, infinite; without a certain
measure; neglected; unpolished, unclean. {%—Amita-%}
{%kratu, us,%} m., Ved. of unbounded wisdom; of un-
bounded energy. {%—Amita-gati, is,%} m., N. of a Jaina
author. {%—Amita-tejas, ās, ās, as,%} of boundless
glory. {%—Amita-dyuti, is, is, i,%} of infinite splendor.
{%—Amita-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a son of Dharma-
dhvaja. {%—Amita-vikrama, as,%} m. of unbounded
valour, a N. of Visḥu. {%—Amita-vīrya, as,%} m. of
immense strength. {%—Amitākṣara (˚ta-ak˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} not containing a fixed number of syllables,
unbound, prosaic. {%—Amitābha (˚ta-ābh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of unmeasured splendour; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
deity; N. of a Dhyāni-buddha. {%—Amitāyus (˚ta-%}
{%āy˚), us,%} m., N. of a Dhyāni-buddha. {%—Amitaujas%}
{%(˚ta-oj˚), ās, ās, as,%} of unbounded energy, all-power-
ful, almighty.
<LEND>

<L>5473<pc>0076-a<k1>amitra<k2>amitra
{#amitra#}¦ {%a-mitra, as, ā,%} m. f. not a friend,
an enemy, adversary, foe. (According to some au-
thorities this is not derived from {%a%} and {%mitra,%} a
friend, but fr. rt. {%am,%} ‘to attack.’) {%—Amitra-khāda,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. swallowing or devouring his enemies;
an epithet of Indra. {%—Amitra-gaṇa-sūdana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} destroying the hosts of one's enemies. {%—A-%}
{%mitra-ghāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. killing enemies;
({%as%}), m. a N. of Vindusāra, the son of Candragupta.
{%—Amitra-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%amitra-ghna, as,%}
{%ā%} or {%ī, am,%} the same as the preceding. {%—Amitra-%}
{%jit, t,%} m. conquering one's enemies; a son of Suvarṇa.
{%—Amitra-tā,%} f. enmity. {%—Amitra-dambhana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. hurting enemies. {%—Amitra-sāha, as,%}
m., Ved. enduring or overcoming enemies; epithet of
Indra. {%—Amitra-senā,%} f. hostile arrow. {%—Amitra-%}
{%han, ā,%} m., Ved. killing enemies. {%—Amitrā-yudh,%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. subduing one's enemies.
<LEND>

<L>5474<pc>0076-a<k1>amitraya<k2>amitraya
{%Amitraya%}¦ or {%amitrāya,%} nom. {%amitrayati, -trā-%}
{%yate, -yitum,%} to act like an enemy, have hostile
intentions, to hate.
<LEND>

<L>5475<pc>0076-a<k1>amitrin<k2>amitrin
{%A-mitrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ hostile, an adversary, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>5476<pc>0076-a<k1>amitriya<k2>amitriya
{%A-mitriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%a-mitrya, as, ā, am,%}
hostile; inimical.
<LEND>

<L>5477<pc>0076-a<k1>amiTita<k2>amiTita
{#amiTita#}¦ {%a-mithita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not re-
viled; unprovoked.
<LEND>

<L>5478<pc>0076-a<k1>amiTyA<k2>amiTyA
{#amiTyA#}¦ {%a-mithyā,%} ind. not falsely, truth-
fully.
<LEND>
[Page0076-b+ 74]

<L>5479<pc>0076-b<k1>amin<k2>amin
{#amin#}¦ {%amin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. {%ama,%} see {%am%}),
sick, diseased.
<LEND>

<L>5480<pc>0076-b<k1>amina<k2>amina<h>1
1. {%amina, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr.rt. {%am%}), Ved. going every-
where, violent, tempestuous (?); loved by all (?) .
<LEND>

<L>5481<pc>0076-b<k1>amina<k2>amina<h>2
{#amina#} 2¦. {%a-mina, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unmea-
sured, unparalleled, inviolable.
<LEND>

<L>5482<pc>0076-b<k1>aminat<k2>aminat
{#aminat#}¦ {%a-minat, an, atī, at%} (rt. {%mī%}), Ved.
not hurting; unhurt.
<LEND>

<L>5483<pc>0076-b<k1>amilAtaka<k2>amilAtaka
{#amilAtaka#}¦ {%amilātaka, am,%} n. globe-ama-
ranth.
<LEND>

<L>5484<pc>0076-b<k1>amiSra<k2>amiSra
{#amiSra#}¦ {%a-miśra, as, ā, am,%} unmixed, un-
mixing; without participation of others.
<LEND>

<L>5485<pc>0076-b<k1>amiSraRIya<k2>amiSraRIya
{%A-miśraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ immiscible.
<LEND>

<L>5486<pc>0076-b<k1>amiSrita<k2>amiSrita
{%A-miśrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unmixed, unblended.
<LEND>

<L>5487<pc>0076-b<k1>amiza<k2>amiza<h>1
{#amiza#} 1¦. {%amiṣa, am,%} n. luxury, object of
enjoyment, flesh. See {%āmiṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>5488<pc>0076-b<k1>amiza<k2>amiza<h>2
{#amiza#} 2¦. {%a-miṣa, am,%} n. honesty, simpli-
city, absence of fraud; dishonesty (?).
<LEND>

<L>5489<pc>0076-b<k1>amItavarRa<k2>amItavarRa
{#amItavarRa#}¦ {%a-mīta-varṇa, as, ā, am (mīta%}
fr. rt. {%mī%}), Ved. of infinite hue; of unhurt or unex-
tinguishable colour.
<LEND>

<L>5490<pc>0076-b<k1>amImAMsA<k2>amImAMsA
{#amImAMsA#}¦ {%a-mīmāṃsā,%} f. (rt. {%man%}), absence
of reasoning or investigation.
<LEND>

<L>5491<pc>0076-b<k1>amImAMsya<k2>amImAMsya
{%A-mīmāṃsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be reasoned about
or discussed, not to be demonstrated by reason.
<LEND>

<L>5492<pc>0076-b<k1>amIvA<k2>amIvA
{#amIvA#}¦ {%amīvā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%am%}), pain, distress,
terror, fright; tormenting spirit, demon; affliction,
disease; ({%as%}), m. an enemy, one who afflicts; ({%am%}),
n. affliction, pain, grief. {%—Amīva-cātana, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. driving away pains, diseases, enemies, or tor-
menting spirits. {%—Amīva-han, ā,%} m., Ved. killing
evil spirits, destroying pains.
<LEND>

<L>5493<pc>0076-b<k1>amu<k2>amu
{#amu#}¦ {%amu,%} a pronominal base, used in the
declension of the pronom. {%adas.%}
<LEND>

<L>5494<pc>0076-b<k1>amuka<k2>amuka
{%Amuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ a certain person or thing, any-
thing or person referred to without a name.
<LEND>

<L>5495<pc>0076-b<k1>amutas<k2>amutas
{%Amutas,%}¦ ind. from there, there; from that place,
from above, i. e. from the other world, from heaven;
hereupon, upon this; henceforth.
<LEND>

<L>5496<pc>0076-b<k1>amutra<k2>amutra
{%Amutra,%}¦ ind. there; there, i. e. in what precedes
or has been said; there above, i. e. in the other world,
in the life to come; here. {%—Amutra-bhūya, am,%}
n., Ved. being there above or in the other world;
dying.
<LEND>

<L>5497<pc>0076-b<k1>amutratya<k2>amutratya
{%Amutratya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a future state,
being of the next world.
<LEND>

<L>5498<pc>0076-b<k1>amuTA<k2>amuTA
{%Amuthā,%}¦ ind. thus, in that manner, like that;
{%amuthā as,%} to be thus, a euphemistic expression used
in the sense of, to fare very ill.
<LEND>

<L>5499<pc>0076-b<k1>amuyA<k2>amuyA
{%Amuyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. in that manner, thus or thus;
(with rt. {%as%} or {%bhū%}) to be thus; to be gone, to be
lost.
<LEND>

<L>5500<pc>0076-b<k1>amurhi<k2>amurhi
{%Amurhi,%}¦ ind. at that time, then.
<LEND>

<L>5501<pc>0076-b<k1>amuvat<k2>amuvat
{%Amu-vat,%}¦ ind. like a person or thing referred to
without name.
<LEND>

<L>5502<pc>0076-b<k1>amuzmin<k2>amuzmin
{%Amuṣmin%}¦ (loc. sing. of {%adas%}), in the other world.
<LEND>

<L>5503<pc>0076-b<k1>amuzya<k2>amuzya
{%Amuṣya%}¦ (gen. sing. of {%adas%}), of such a one.
<LEND>

<L>5504<pc>0076-b<k1>amuzyakula<k2>amuzyakula
{%—Amuṣya-kula, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the
family of such a one. {%—Amuṣya-putra, as, ī,%} m.
f. the son or daughter of such a one; of a good family,
of known origin. {%—Amuṣyāyaṇa (˚ya-ay˚), as,%}
{%ā,%} m. f. offspring of such a one; of respectable birth,
of known origin.
<LEND>

<L>5505<pc>0076-b<k1>amUdfS<k2>amUdfS
{%Amū-dṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ or {%amū-dṛśa,%} or {%amū-dṛk-%}
{%ṣa, as, ā, am,%} like that, such like, such a one, of
such form or kind.
<LEND>

<L>5506<pc>0076-b<k1>amukta<k2>amukta
{#amukta#}¦ {%a-mukta, as, ā, am,%} not loosed, not
let go; not liberated from birth and death; ({%am%}),
n. a weapon that is always grasped and not thrown,
as a knife, a sword, &c. {%—Amukta-hasta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one whose hand is not open (to give); sparing;
stingy; frugal, prudent.
<LEND>

<L>5507<pc>0076-b<k1>amukti<k2>amukti
{%A-mukti, is,%}¦ f. non-liberation; want of freedom
or liberty.
<LEND>
[Page0076-c+ 74]

<L>5508<pc>0076-c<k1>amuc<k2>amuc
{%A-muc, k,%}¦ f., Ved. non-liberation.
<LEND>

<L>5509<pc>0076-c<k1>amucI<k2>amucI
{%A-mucī,%}¦ f., Ved. not unbinding, not setting at
liberty (epithet of an evil spirit).
<LEND>

<L>5510<pc>0076-c<k1>amuKa<k2>amuKa
{#amuKa#}¦ {%a-mukha, as, ā, am,%} having no
mouth.
<LEND>

<L>5511<pc>0076-c<k1>amuKya<k2>amuKya
{%A-mukhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not chief, inferior, or-
dinary.
<LEND>

<L>5512<pc>0076-c<k1>amugDa<k2>amugDa
{#amugDa#}¦ {%a-mugdha, as, ā, am,%} not con-
founded, not perplexed, not foolish.
<LEND>

<L>5513<pc>0076-c<k1>amUQa<k2>amUQa
{#amUQa#}¦ {%a-mūḍha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%muh%}), not
infatuated, wise; not perplexed.
<LEND>

<L>5514<pc>0076-c<k1>amUra<k2>amUra
{#amUra#}¦ {%a-mūra, as, ā, am%} (for {%a-mūḍha,%} q. v.),
Ved. without error or mistake, infallible, not ignorant,
not bewildered.
<LEND>

<L>5515<pc>0076-c<k1>amUrta<k2>amUrta
{#amUrta#}¦ {%a-mūrta, as, ā, am,%} formless, shape-
less, incorporeal, unembodied; ({%as%}), m., N. of Śiva.
{%—Amūrta-rajas, ās,%} or {%amūrta-rajasa, as,%} m.
a son of Kūśa by Vaidarbhī.
<LEND>

<L>5516<pc>0076-c<k1>amUrti<k2>amUrti
{%A-mūrti, is,%}¦ f. shapelessness, absence of shape or
form; {%(is, is, i),%} formless; ({%is%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu;
{%(-ayas),%} m. pl. a class of Manes, who have no defi-
nite form. {%—Amūrti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} formless.
<LEND>

<L>5517<pc>0076-c<k1>amUla<k2>amUla
{#amUla#}¦ {%a-mūla%} or {%a-mūlaka, as, ā, am,%} root-
less, baseless; without support; without authority;
without material cause or origin; not fixed in the
earth; having locomotive powers; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
plant, Methonica Superba Lam.
<LEND>

<L>5518<pc>0076-c<k1>amUlya<k2>amUlya
{#amUlya#}¦ {%a-mūlya, as, ā, am,%} invaluable, not
to be purchased, priceless.
<LEND>

<L>5519<pc>0076-c<k1>amfkta<k2>amfkta
{#amfkta#}¦ {%a-mṛkta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unhurt,
unharmed, safe.
<LEND>

<L>5520<pc>0076-c<k1>amfRAla<k2>amfRAla
{#amfRAla#}¦ {%a-mṛṇāla, am,%} n. the root of a
fragrant grass, used for taties or screens, &c., com-
monly called Kaskas, Andropogon Muricatus.
<LEND>

<L>5521<pc>0076-c<k1>amfta<k2>amfta
{#amfta#}¦ {%a-mṛta, as, ā, am,%} not dead; im-
mortal, imperishable, causing immortality; beautiful,
beloved, desired; ({%as%}), m. a god, an immortal; N.
of Indra, of the sun, of Prajāpati, of the soul, of Viṣṇu,
of Śiva, of Dhanvantari as physician of the gods, &c.;
N. of a plant, Phaseolus Trilobus Ait.; N. of the root
of a plant; ({%ā%}), f. spirituous liquor; N. of several
plants, Emblica Officinalis, Terminalia Citrina Roxb.,
Cocculus Cordifolius, Piper Longum, Ocymum Sanc-
tum, &c.; N. of the mother of Parīkṣit; ({%am%}), n.
immortality; the collective body of immortals; the
world of immortality, heaven, paradise, eternity; the
immortal light; the nectar conferring immortality,
ambrosia; the Soma juice; antidote against poison; a
drug; the residue of a sacrifice; unsolicited alms;
water; clarified butter; milk; food; boiled rice; any-
thing sweet, a sweetmeat; property; gold, quick-
silver; poison; splendour; final emancipation; N. of a
sacred place; N. of various conjunctions of planets sup-
posed to confer long life; the number ‘four.’ {%—Amṛ-%}
{%ta-kuṇḍa, am,%} n. the vessel containing the Amṛta
or nectar. {%—Amṛta-keśava, as,%} m., N. of a
temple, built by Amṛta-prabhā. {%—Amṛta-kṣāra,%}
{%am,%} n. sal ammoniac. {%—Amṛta-gati, is,%} f., N. of
a metre consisting of four times ten syllables. {%—A-%}
{%mṛta-garbha, as,%} m., Ved. the immortal fetus, i. e.
sleep; ({%as, ā, am%}), filled with nectar. {%—Amṛta-citi,%}
{%is,%} f. the accumulation or arrangement of sacrificial
bricks conferring immortality. {%—Amṛta-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} produced by the Amṛta; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant,
Yellow Myrobalan. {%—Amṛta-jaṭā,%} f., N. of a
plant, Valeriana Jaṭāmāṃsī. {%—Amṛta-taraṅgiṇī,%} f.
moonlight. {%—Amṛta-tā,%} f. or {%amṛta-tva, am,%} n.
immortality. {%—Amṛta-dīdhiti%} or {%amṛta-dyuti,%}
{%is,%} m. the moon. {%—Amṛta-drava, as, ā, am,%} shed-
ding ambrosia. {%—Amṛta-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} shed-
ding or distilling ambrosia; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a metre.
{%—Amṛta-nādopaniṣad (˚da-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an
Upaniṣed, lit. ‘the sound of immortality.’ {%—Amṛta-%}
{%pa, as, ā, am,%} drinking nectar; ({%as%}), m. a deity.
<LEND>
[Page0077-a+ 77]

<L>5522<pc>0077-a<k1>amftapakza<k2>amftapakza
{%—Amṛta-pakṣa, as,%}¦ m. the immortal or golden
wing (of sacrificial fire); having immortal or golden
wings. {%—Amṛta-prabhā,%} f., N. of several women.
{%—Amṛta-phala, as, am,%} m. n., N. of a plant, Tri-
chosanthes Diœca, Roxb.; ({%ā%}), f. a bunch of grapes;
the plant Emblica Officinalis Gærtn. {%—Amṛta-%}
{%bandhu, us,%} m., Ved. friend of immortality, keeper
of immortality; a horse (so called because a horse was
produced in the ocean along with the Amṛta). {%—Amṛ-%}
{%ta-bhavana, am,%} n., N. of a monastery. {%—Amṛta-%}
{%bhuj, k,%} m. an immortal, a deity. {%—Amṛta-bhū, ūs,%}
{%ūs, u,%} free from birth and death. {%—Amṛta-mati, is,%}
f., N. of the metre Amṛtangati. {%—Amṛta-manthana,%}
{%am,%} n. the churning for the Amṛta. {%—Amṛta-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} immortal; consisting of or full of Amṛta.
{%—Amṛtamālini,%} f., N. of Durgā. {%—Amṛta-rasa,%}
{%as,%} m. nectar, ambrosia; ({%ā%}), f. dark-coloured grapes.
{%—Amṛta-latā%} or {%amṛta-latikā,%} f. a nectar-giving
creeping plant. {%—Amṛta-vapus, us,%} m. of immortal
form, Śiva. {%—Amṛta-varṣa, as,%} m. a shower of nec-
tar. {%—Amṛta-vallarī%} or {%amṛta-vallī,%} f. a creep-
ing plant, Cocculus Cordifolius. {%—Amṛta-vākā,%} f. a
kind of bird. {%—Amṛta-vindūpaniṣad (˚du-up˚), t,%}
f., N. of an Upaniṣad of the Atharva-veda, lit. ‘drop
of nectar.’ {%—Amṛta-sambhavā,%} f. a creeping plant,
Cocculus Cordifolius. {%—Amṛta-sāra, as,%} m. essence
of ambrosia. {%—Amṛtasāra-ja, as,%} m. raw sugar,
molasses. {%—Amṛta-sū, ūs,%} m. the moon (as distilling
nectar). {%—Amṛta-sodara, as,%} m. a horse, lit. ‘bro-
ther of nectar,’ born together with the Amṛta at the
churning of the ocean. {%—Amṛta-sravā,%} f., N. of a
plant and tree. {%—Amṛta-srut, t, t, t,%} shedding nec-
tar. {%—Amṛtākara (˚ta-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘a mine of
nectar;’ N. of a man. {%—Amṛtākṣara (˚ta-ak˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} immortal and imperishable. {%—Amṛtā-%}
{%nanda (˚ta-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Amṛtān-%}
{%dhas (˚ta-an˚), ās,%} m. a deity, whose food is ambrosia.
{%—Amṛtā-phala, am,%} n. the fruit of the Tricho-
santhes. {%—Amṛtāśa, (˚ta-āśa), as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu.
{%—Amṛtāśana (˚ta-aś˚), as%} or {%amṛtāśin (˚ta-āś˚),%}
{%ī,%} m. eating ambrosia; a deity. {%—Amṛtāsaṅga (˚ta-%}
{%ās˚), am,%} n. a collyrium, extracted from the Amo-
mum Anthoriza. {%—Amṛtāsu (˚ta-asu), us, us, u,%}
whose soul is immortal. {%—Amṛtāharaṇa (˚ta-āh˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of Garuḍa, the bird of Viṣṇu, who upon
one occasion stole the Amṛta. {%—Amṛtāhva (˚ta-%}
{%āh˚), am,%} n. a kind of fruit. {%—Amṛteśa%} or {%amṛ-%}
{%teśvara (˚ta-īś˚), as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Amṛte-%}
{%śaya, as,%} m. sleeping on the Amṛta, epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Amṛteṣṭakā (˚ta-iṣ˚),%} f. a kind of sacrificial
brick, shaped like golden heads (of men, animals,
&c.). {%—Amṛtotpatti (˚ta-ut˚), is,%} f. the production
of the Amṛta. {%—Amṛtotpannā (˚ta-ut˚),%} f. a fly;
({%am%}), n. a kind of collyrium. {%—Amṛtodana (˚ta-%}
{%od˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of Siṃhahanu. {%—Amṛtod-%}
{%bhava (˚ta-ud˚), am,%} n. a kind of collyrium.
<LEND>

<L>5523<pc>0077-a<k1>amftaka<k2>amftaka
{%Amṛtaka, am,%}¦ n. the nectar of immortality.
<LEND>

<L>5524<pc>0077-a<k1>amftAya<k2>amftAya
{%Amṛtāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%amṛtāyate, -yitum,%} to be
like nectar.
<LEND>

<L>5525<pc>0077-a<k1>amftyu<k2>amftyu
{#amftyu#}¦ {%a-mṛtyu, us,%} m. not death, im-
mortality; ({%us, us, u%}), immortal, causing immortality.
<LEND>

<L>5526<pc>0077-a<k1>amfDra<k2>amfDra
{#amfDra#}¦ {%a-mṛdhra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. uninjured,
not to be impaired, invulnerable; unremitting, un-
ceasing, indefatigable (?).
<LEND>

<L>5527<pc>0077-a<k1>amfzA<k2>amfzA
{#amfzA#}¦ {%a-mṛṣā,%} ind. not falsely, certainly,
surely; rightly. {%—Amṛṣā-bāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} speak-
ing truly.
<LEND>

<L>5528<pc>0077-a<k1>amfzwa<k2>amfzwa
{#amfzwa#}¦ {%a-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mṛj%}), not
rubbed. {%—Amṛṣṭa-mṛja, as, ā, am,%} of unim-
paired purity.
<LEND>

<L>5529<pc>0077-a<k1>amfzya<k2>amfzya
{#amfzya#}¦ {%a-mṛṣya, as, ā, am%} unbearable,
insufferable.
<LEND>

<L>5530<pc>0077-a<k1>amfzyamARa<k2>amfzyamARa
{%A-mṛṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ not enduring, not
bearing or tolerating.
<LEND>

<L>5531<pc>0077-a<k1>amekzaRa<k2>amekzaRa
{#amekzaRa#}¦ {%a-mekṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} having no
{%mekṣaṇa%} or mixing-instrument.
<LEND>

<L>5532<pc>0077-a<k1>ameGa<k2>ameGa
{#ameGa#}¦ {%a-megha, as, ā, am,%} cloudless.
<LEND>
[Page0077-b+ 73]

<L>5533<pc>0077-b<k1>amedaska<k2>amedaska
{#amedaska#}¦ {%a-medaska, as, ā, am,%} without fat,
lean.
<LEND>

<L>5534<pc>0077-b<k1>ameDas<k2>ameDas
{#ameDas#}¦ {%a-medhas, ās, ās, as,%} foolish; an
idiot.
<LEND>

<L>5535<pc>0077-b<k1>ameDya<k2>ameDya
{#ameDya#}¦ {%a-medhya, as, ā, am,%} not able or not
allowed to sacrifice, not fit for sacrifice, impure, un-
holy, nefarious, foul; ({%am%}), n. fæces, excrement; an
unlucky omen. {%—Amedhya-kuṇapāśin (˚pa-āś˚),%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} feeding on carrion. {%—Amedhya-tā,%} f. or
{%amedhya-tva, am,%} n. impurity, foulness, filthiness.
{%—A-medhya-yukta, as, ā, am,%} filthy, foul. {%—A-%}
{%medhya-lipta, as, ā, am,%} smeared with ordure,
foul, defiled. {%—Amedhya-lepa, as,%} m. smearing with
ordure. {%—Amedhyākta (˚ya-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} soiled
by ordure.
<LEND>

<L>5536<pc>0077-b<k1>amena<k2>amena
{#amena#}¦ {%a-mena, as,%} m., Ved. having no wife,
a widower.
<LEND>

<L>5537<pc>0077-b<k1>ameni<k2>ameni
{#ameni#}¦ {%a-meni, is, is, i,%} Ved. not shooting,
not able to shoot, not injuring.
<LEND>

<L>5538<pc>0077-b<k1>ameya<k2>ameya
{#ameya#}¦ {%a-meya, as, ā, am,%} immeasurable.
{%—Ameyātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} possessing extra-
ordinary powers of mind, magnanimous; ({%ā%}), m. a
N. of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>5539<pc>0077-b<k1>amezwa<k2>amezwa
{#amezwa#}¦ {%ameṣṭa (˚mā-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
sacrificed at home. See 2. {%amā,%} p. 75.
<LEND>

<L>5540<pc>0077-b<k1>amokya<k2>amokya
{#amokya#}¦ {%a-mokya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%muc%}), Ved.
that cannot be unloosed.
<LEND>

<L>5541<pc>0077-b<k1>amocana<k2>amocana
{%A-mocana, am,%}¦ n. not loosening or letting go;
non-liberation.
<LEND>

<L>5542<pc>0077-b<k1>amocanIya<k2>amocanIya
{%A-mocanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be liberated, not
to be let go.
<LEND>

<L>5543<pc>0077-b<k1>amocita<k2>amocita
{%A-mocita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not liberated, confined.
<LEND>

<L>5544<pc>0077-b<k1>amokza<k2>amokza
{#amokza#}¦ {%a-mokṣa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mokṣ%}),
unliberated, unloosed; ({%as%}), m. want of freedom,
bondage, confinement; non-liberation from mundane
existence.
<LEND>

<L>5545<pc>0077-b<k1>amoGa<k2>amoGa
{#amoGa#}¦ {%a-mogha, as, ā, am,%} unerring, un-
failing, not vain, efficacious, succeeding, reaching the
mark; productive, fruitful; ({%as%}), m. the not erring,
the not failing; unerringness; N. of Śiva and Viṣṇu;
N. of a river; ({%ā%}), f. trumpet flower, Bignonia
Suaveolens, Roxb: a plant of which the seed is
used as a vermifuge, Erycibe Paniculata, Roxb.; Ter-
minalia Citrina, Roxb.; N. of a spear; N. of Śiva's
wife; mystical name of the double consonant {%kṣ.%}
{%—Amogha-daṇḍa, as,%} m. (unerring in punish-
ment), N. of Śiva. {%—Amogha-darśin, ī,%} m., N. of
a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Amogha-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} of un-
erring view or mind. {%—Amogha-bala, as, ā, am,%} of
never-failing strength. {%—Amogha-bhūti, is,%} m., N. of
a king of the Pañjāb. {%—Amogha-rāja, as,%} m., N. of
a Bhikṣu. {%—Amogha-vāc, k,%} f. words that are not
vain or idle. {%—Amogha-vāñchita, as, ā, am,%} never
disappointed. {%—Amogha-vikrama, as,%} m. of un-
erring valour; N. of Śiva. {%—Amogha-siddha, as,%}
m., N. of the fifth Dhyāni-buddha. {%—Amoghācārya%}
{%(˚gha-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>5546<pc>0077-b<k1>amota<k2>amota
{#amota#}¦ {%amota (amā-uta), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
woven at home, taken care of at home; see 2. {%amā.%}
{%—Amota-putrakā,%} f., Ved. a maiden protected at
home.
<LEND>

<L>5547<pc>0077-b<k1>amotaka<k2>amotaka
{%Amotaka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. protected at home (a
child); a weaver (?).
<LEND>

<L>5548<pc>0077-b<k1>amOtraDOta<k2>amOtraDOta
{#amOtraDOta#}¦ {%a-mautra-dhauta, as, ā, am,%} not
washed by a washerman.
<LEND>

<L>5549<pc>0077-b<k1>amOna<k2>amOna
{#amOna#}¦ {%a-mauna, am,%} n. non-silence; know-
ledge of soul.
<LEND>

<L>5550<pc>0077-b<k1>amnas<k2>amnas
{#amnas#}¦ {%amnas%} (liable to become {%amnar%}),
Ved. unawares, quickly; at present; a little. (The
etymology is doubtful, but cf. 1. {%am.%})
<LEND>

<L>5551<pc>0077-b<k1>amb<k2>amb
{#amb#}¦ {%amb,%} cl. 1. P. {%ambati, -bitum,%} to go;
cl. 1. A. {%ambate,%} to sound.
<LEND>

<L>5552<pc>0077-b<k1>amba<k2>amba
{%Amba, as,%}¦ m. a father; sound, the Veda, one who
[Page0077-c+ 78]
sounds; ({%ā%}), f. a mother, see {%ambā; (am),%} n. the
eye; water?; ({%a%}), ind. a particle of affirmation, well!
well now! {%—Amba-sthala, am,%} n., N. of a moun-
tain peak.
<LEND>

<L>5553<pc>0077-c<k1>ambaka<k2>ambaka
{%Ambaka, am,%}¦ n. a father (?), an eye [cf. {%try-amba-%}
{%ka%}]; copper?; ({%ikā,%} f.), see under {%amba.%}
<LEND>

<L>5554<pc>0077-c<k1>ambayA<k2>ambayA
{%Ambayā,%}¦ f., Ved. mother, good woman (as a re-
spectful title ?), conveying water (?).
<LEND>

<L>5555<pc>0077-c<k1>ambara<k2>ambara
{#ambara#}¦ {%ambara, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%amb?%} or rt.
{%vṛ,%} to surround, with {%am%} prefixed), circumference,
compass; surrounding country, neighbourhood; clothes,
apparel; cotton; sky, atmosphere, ether; saffron;
talc; a perfume (Ambergris); N. of a people.
{%—Ambara-ga, as, ā, am,%} sky-going. {%—Ambara-%}
{%da, am,%} n. cotton. {%—Ambara-yuga, am,%} n. the
two principal female garments, or upper and lower
cloths or mantles. {%—Ambara-śaila, as,%} m. a high
mountain touching the sky. {%—Ambara-sthalī,%} f. the
earth. {%—Ambarānta (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m. the end of a
garment; the horizon. {%—Ambaraukas (˚ra-ok˚),%}
{%ās,%} m. dwelling in heaven; a god.
<LEND>

<L>5556<pc>0077-c<k1>ambarya<k2>ambarya
{%Ambarya,%}¦ nom. p. {%ambaryati, -yitum,%} to bring
together.
<LEND>

<L>5557<pc>0077-c<k1>ambarIza<k2>ambarIza
{#ambarIza#}¦ {%ambarīṣa, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt.
{%amb?%}), a frying-pan (in this sense also written with
short {%i, ambariṣa%}); one of the hells; remorse,
war, battle; ({%as%}), m. a young animal, a colt; the
sun; the hog-plum plant, Spondias Magnifera; N.
of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of a king of the solar race,
celebrated as a worshipper of Viṣṇu. {%—Ambarīṣa-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. son of Ambarīṣa, whence the N. of
a country.
<LEND>

<L>5558<pc>0077-c<k1>ambazWa<k2>ambazWa
{#ambazWa#}¦ {%amba-ṣṭha, as,%} m. (fr. {%amba%} and
{%stha?%}), N. of a country and of its inhabitants; the
offspring of a man of the Brāhman and a woman of
the Vaiśya tribe, a man of the medical caste; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of several plants, Jasminum Auriculatum,
Clypea Hernandifolia, Oxalis Corniculata; {%(ā%}) or ({%ī%}),
f. an Ambaṣṭha woman.
<LEND>

<L>5559<pc>0077-c<k1>ambazWakI<k2>ambazWakI
{%Ambaṣṭhakī,%}¦ f. the plant Clypea Hernandifolia.
<LEND>

<L>5560<pc>0077-c<k1>ambazWikA<k2>ambazWikA
{%Ambaṣṭhikā,%}¦ f. the plant Clerodendrum Sipho-
nanthus.
<LEND>

<L>5561<pc>0077-c<k1>ambA<k2>ambA
{#ambA#}¦ {%ambā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%amb?%} the voc. case in
the Veda is {%ambe%} or {%amba;%} in later Sanskrit {%amba%}
only), a mother, good woman (as a title of respect);
N. of a plant: N. of Durgā, the wife of Śiva; N. of an
Apsaras; N. of a daughter of a king of Kāśi; a sister of
Pāṇḍu's mother; a term in astrology to denote the
fourth condition (?). In the South-Indian languages,
{%ambā%} is corrupted into {%ammā,%} and is often affixed
to the names of goddesses, and females in general
[with {%ambā%} has been compared the Germ. <nsi>Amme,</nsi>
‘a nurse;’ Old Germ. <nsi>amma,</nsi> Them. <nsi>ammôn, am-</nsi>
<nsi>mûn</nsi>]. {%—Ambā-gaṅgā,%} f. a river in Ceylon. {%—Ambā-%}
{%janman, a,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>5562<pc>0077-c<k1>ambAqA<k2>ambAqA
{%Ambāḍā%}¦ or {%ambālā%} or {%ambāyu, us,%} f. mother.
<LEND>

<L>5563<pc>0077-c<k1>ambAlikA<k2>ambAlikA
{%Ambālikā,%}¦ f. mother, good woman (as a term of
respect); N. of a plant; N. of a daughter of a king
of Kāśi, wife of Vicitra-vīrya, and mother of Pāṇḍu.
<LEND>

<L>5564<pc>0077-c<k1>ambi<k2>ambi
{%Ambi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. water; woman, mother, nurse.
<LEND>

<L>5565<pc>0077-c<k1>ambitamA<k2>ambitamA
{%—Ambi-tamā,%}¦ f., Ved. the best of waters or
mothers.
<LEND>

<L>5566<pc>0077-c<k1>ambikA<k2>ambikA
{%Ambikā,%}¦ f. mother, good woman (as a term of
respect); N. of the plant Wrightia Antidysenterica;
a sister of Rudra; N. of Pārvatī, the wife of Śiva;
the wife of Rudra Ugraretas; one of the female
domestic deities of the Jainas; daughter of a king
of Kāśi, wife of Vicitra-vīrya, and mother of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra; N. of a place in Bengal. {%—Ambikā-pati,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of Śiva. {%—Ambikā-putra, as,%} m., N. of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>5567<pc>0077-c<k1>ambikeya<k2>ambikeya
{%Ambikeya%}¦ or {%ambikeyaka, as,%} m., N. of Gaṇeśa,
Kārttikeya, and Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. See {%āmbikeya.%}
<LEND>

<L>5568<pc>0077-c<k1>ambu<k2>ambu
{#ambu#}¦ {%ambu,%} n. (fr. rt. {%amb?%}), water; the
watery element of the blood [cf. <lang n="greek">ὄμβρος</lang> <nsi>imber</nsi>];
the plant Andropogon Schœnanthus; N. of a metre;
a term in astrology {%= ambā%}. {%—Ambu-kaṇa, as,%} m. a
drop of water. {%—Ambu-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. the short-
[Page0078-a+ 79]
nosed alligator. {%—Ambu-kirāta, as,%} m. an alligator.
{%—Ambu-kīśa%} or {%ambu-kūrma, as,%} m. a porpoise,
especially the Gangetic, Delphinus Gangeticus. {%—Am-%}
{%bu-keśara, as,%} m. lemon tree. {%—Ambu-kriyā,%} f. a
funeral rite {%= jala-kriyā%}. {%—Ambu-ga, as, ā, am,%}
water-goer, living in water. {%—Ambu-ghana, as,%} m.
hail, frozen rain. {%—Ambu-cara, as, ī, am,%} moving in
the water, aquatic. {%—Ambu-cāmara, am,%} n. water-
chowrī, an aquatic plant, Valisneria. {%—Ambu-cārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} moving in water, as a fish, &c. {%—Am-%}
{%bu-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced in water, water-born,
aquatic; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant, Barringtonia
Acutangula Gærtn.; a lotus, Nymphæa Nelumbo; the
thunderbolt of Indra. {%—Ambu-janman, a,%} n. a lotus,
Nymphæa Nelumbo. {%—Ambuja-bhū, ūs,%} m. the god
Brahmā. {%—Ambuja-stha, as, ā, am,%} sitting on a
lotus. {%—Ambu-taskara, as,%} m. water-thief, the sun.
{%—Ambu-tāla, as,%} m. the plant Valisneria. {%—Ambu-%}
{%da, as, ā, am,%} shedding or giving water; ({%as%}), m. a
cloud; the plant Cyperus Hexastychius Communis.
{%—Ambu-dhara, as,%} m. a cloud. {%—Ambu-dhi, is,%}
m. (receptacle of waters), the ocean; the number
‘four.’ {%—Ambudhi-sravā,%} f., N. of a plant, Aloes
Perfoliata. {%—Ambu-nidhi, is,%} m. (treasury of waters),
the ocean. {%—Ambu-pa, as, ā, am,%} drinking or im-
bibing water; ({%as%}), m. a plant, Cassia Tora or Alata.
{%—Ambu-pattrā,%} f., N. of a plant, Cyperus Hexasty-
chius Communis Nees. {%—Ambu-paddhati, is,%} f. or
{%ambu-pāta, as,%} m. current, stream, flow of water.
{%—Ambu-prasāda, as,%} m. or {%ambu-prasādana,%}
{%am,%} n. the clearing nut tree, Strychnos Potatorum:
the nuts of this plant are generally used in India for
purifying water; they are rubbed upon the inner
surface of a vessel, and so precipitate the impurities
of the fluid it contains. {%—Ambu-bhṛt, t,%} m. a cloud;
the ocean (?); a grass, Cyperus Pertenuis; talc.
{%—Ambu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} watery, having or con-
taining water; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Ambu-mātra-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} produced only in water; ({%as%}), m. a
bivalve shell. {%—Ambu-muc, k,%} m. a cloud. {%—Ambu-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. the ocean; N. of Varuṇa. {%—Ambu-%}
{%rāśi, is,%} m. (heap of waters), the ocean. {%—Ambu-%}
{%ruha, am,%} n. the lotus; ({%ā%}), f. Hibiscus Mutabilis.
{%—Ambu-rohiṇī,%} f. the lotus. {%—Ambu-vācī,%} f. four
days in Āṣāḍha, the tenth to the thirteenth of the
dark half of the month, when the earth is supposed
to be unclean, and agriculture is prohibited. {%—Ambu-%}
{%vācī-tyāga,%} the thirteenth of the same. {%—Ambu-%}
{%vācī-prada, am,%} n. the tenth in the second half of
the month Āṣāḍha. {%—Ambu-vāsinī%} or {%ambu-vāsī,%}
f. the trumpet flower, Bignonia Suaveolens. {%—Ambu-%}
{%vāha, as,%} m. a cloud; the grass Cyperus Pertenuis; a
water-carrier; talc; the number ‘seventeen.’ {%—Ambu-%}
{%vāhin, ī, inī, i,%} carrying or conveying water; ({%inī%}),
f. a wooden baling vessel; N. of a river. {%—Ambu-%}
{%vetasa, as,%} m. a kind of cane or reed growing in
water. {%—Ambu-śirīṣikā,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Ambu-%}
{%sītā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Ambu-sarpiṇī,%} f. a leech.
{%—Ambu-secanī,%} f. a wooden baling vessel.
<LEND>

<L>5569<pc>0078-a<k1>ambUkfta<k2>ambUkfta
{%Ambū-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ pronounced indistinctly, so
that the words remain too much in the mouth; sput-
tered (as speech, accompanied with emission of saliva).
<LEND>

<L>5570<pc>0078-a<k1>ambya<k2>ambya
{#ambya#}¦ {%ambya, as,%} m., Ved. a chanter.
<LEND>

<L>5571<pc>0078-a<k1>amB<k2>amB
{#amB#}¦ {%ambh,%} cl. 1. A. {%ambhate, -bhitum,%}
to sound.
<LEND>

<L>5572<pc>0078-a<k1>amBas<k2>amBas<h>1
{#amBas#} 1¦. {%ambhas,%} n. also ind., power,
splendor, fruitfulness; a philos. term {%= tuṣṭi:%} (the
etymology is doubtful; perhaps connected with obs.
rt. {%ap,%} or fr. {%bhā,%} ‘to shine,’ with prefix {%am.%})
<LEND>

<L>5573<pc>0078-a<k1>amBas<k2>amBas<h>2
{#amBas#} 2¦. {%ambhas,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%āp;%}
perhaps connected with 1. {%ambhas%} or with {%ap, ab-%}
{%bhra, ambu%}), water; the sky; the fourth sign of the
zodiac; collective N. for gods, men, manes, and Asuras;
mystical name of the letter {%v%} [cf. <lang n="greek">ὄμβρος</lang> <nsi>imber</nsi>].
{%—Ambhaḥ-sāra, am,%} n. a pearl. {%—Ambhaḥ-sū, ūs,%}
m. smoke; cloudiness. {%—Ambhaḥ-stha, as, ā, am,%}
what holds or contains water; abiding in water.
{%—Ambhasā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done by water.
{%—Ambho-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced in water, water-
[Page0078-b+ 76]
born, aquatic; ({%as%}), m. the moon; the sārasa or
Indian crane; ({%am%}), n. the lotus. {%—Ambhoja-%}
{%khaṇḍa, am,%} n. a group of lotus flower. {%—Ambho-%}
{%ja-janman, ā,%} m. or {%ambhoja-jani, is,%} m. or
{%ambhoja-yoni, is,%} m. an epithet of Brahmā, being
born secondarily from a lotus. {%—Ambhojinī,%} f. an
assemblage of lotus flowers or a place where they
abound. {%—Ambho-da, as,%} m. a cloud; the plant
Cyperus Hexastychius Communis Nees. {%—Ambho-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m. a cloud. {%—Ambho-dhi, is,%} m. (re-
ceptacle of waters), the ocean. {%—Ambhodhi-vallabha,%}
{%as,%} m. coral. {%—Ambho-nidhi%} or {%ambho-rāśi, is,%}
m. a pool, the ocean. {%—Ambho-ruh, ṭ,%} n. or {%ambho-%}
{%ruha, am,%} n. the lotus; ({%as%}), m. the Indian crane.
<LEND>

<L>5574<pc>0078-b<k1>amBiRI<k2>amBiRI
{#amBiRI#}¦ {%ambhiṇī,%} f., Ved., N. of an in-
structress, who transmitted the white Yajur-veda to
Vāc (speech).
<LEND>

<L>5575<pc>0078-b<k1>amBfRa<k2>amBfRa<h>1
{#amBfRa#} 1¦. {%ambhṛṇa, as, ā, am%} (connected
with 1. {%ambhas%}), Ved. powerful, great, violent [cf.
<lang n="greek">ὄβριμος, ὄμβριμος</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>5576<pc>0078-b<k1>amBfRa<k2>amBfRa<h>2
{#amBfRa#} 2¦. {%ambhṛṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%bhraṇ?%}), crying violently, roaring terribly.
<LEND>

<L>5577<pc>0078-b<k1>amBfRa<k2>amBfRa<h>3
{#amBfRa#} 3¦. {%ambhṛṇa, as,%} m. (rt. {%bhṛ%} with
{%am?%}), Ved. a vessel used in preparing the Soma
juice; N. of a Ṛṣi, the father of Vāc. See {%ām-%}
{%bhṛṇī.%}
<LEND>

<L>5578<pc>0078-b<k1>ammaya<k2>ammaya
{#ammaya#}¦ {%am-maya, as, ī, am%} (for {%ap-maya%}),
formed from or consisting of water, watery.
<LEND>

<L>5579<pc>0078-b<k1>amyak<k2>amyak
{#amyak#}¦ {%amyak,%} ind., Ved. (rt. {%ac%} with {%am,%}
{%i%} being inserted), towards, here (?).
<LEND>

<L>5580<pc>0078-b<k1>amra<k2>amra
{#amra#}¦ {%amra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%am?%}), the mango
tree. See {%āmra.%}
<LEND>

<L>5581<pc>0078-b<k1>amrAta<k2>amrAta
{%Amrāta%}¦ or {%amrātaka, as,%} m. a species of Spondias
or hog-plum, Spondias Magnifera. See {%āmrāta.%}
<LEND>

<L>5582<pc>0078-b<k1>amla<k2>amla
{#amla#}¦ {%amla, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%am,%} to make
sick), sour, acid; ({%as%}), m. sourness; acidity; vinegar;
wood sorrel, Oxalis Corniculata; ({%ī%}), f. Oxalis Cor-
niculata; ({%am%}), n. sour curds. {%—Amla-kāṇḍa, am,%}
n., N. of a plant. {%—Amla-keśara, as,%} m. citron tree.
{%—Amla-cukrikā,%} f. or {%amla-cūḍa, as,%} m. a kind of
sorrel. {%—Amla-jambīra, as,%} m. lime tree. {%—Am-%}
{%la-tā,%} f. sourness. {%—Amla-nāyaka, as,%} m. sorrel.
{%—Amla-nimbūka, as,%} m. the lime. {%—Amla-niśā,%}
f., N. of a plant, Curcuma Zerumbet, Roxb. {%—Amla-%}
{%pañcaka%} or {%amla-pañca-phala, am,%} n. a collection
of five kinds of sour vegetables and fruits. {%—Amla-pat-%}
{%tra, as,%} m., N. of the plant Oxalis, and other plants.
{%—Amla-panasa, as,%} m. a tree, Artocarpus Lacucha,
Roxb. {%—Amla-pitta, am,%} n. acidity of stomach.
{%—Amla-phala, as,%} m. the tamarind tree, Magnifera
Indica; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of this tree. {%—Amla-bhe-%}
{%dana, as,%} m. sorrel. {%—Amla-meha, as,%} m. a urinary
disease. {%—Amla-rasa, as, ā, am,%} sour, having a
sour taste; ({%as%}), m. sourness, acidity. {%—Amla-ruhā,%}
f. a kind of betel. {%—Amla-loṇikā%} or {%amla-loṇī%} or
{%amla-lolikā,%} f. wood sorrel, Oxalis Corniculata. {%—Am-%}
{%la-varga, as,%} m. a class of plants with acid leaves
or fruits, as the lime, orange, pomegranate, tamarind,
sorrel, and others. {%—Amla-vallī,%} f., N. of a plant,
Pythonium Bulbiferum Schott. {%—Amla-vāṭaka, as,%}
m. hog-plum, Spondias Magnifera. {%—Amla-vāṭikā,%}
f. a sort of betel. {%—Amla-vāstūka, am,%} n. sor-
rel. {%—Amla-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the tamarind tree.
{%—Amla-vetasa, as,%} m. a kind of dock or sorrel,
Rumex Vesicarius. {%—Amla-śāka, as,%} m. a sort of
sorrel, commonly used as a pot-herb. {%—Amla-sāra,%}
{%as,%} m. the lime; a sort of sorrel; ({%am%}), n. rice water
after fermentation. {%—Amla-haridrā,%} f. the plant
Curcuma Zerumbet, Roxb. {%—Amlākta (˚la-ak˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} acidulated. {%—Amlāṅkuśa (˚la-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
a kind of sorrel. {%—Amlādhyuṣita (˚la-adh˚), am,%}
n. a disease of the eyes. {%—Amlodgāra (˚la-ud˚), as,%}
m. sour eructation.
<LEND>

<L>5583<pc>0078-b<k1>amlaka<k2>amlaka
{%Amlaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Artocarpus Lacucha.
<LEND>

<L>5584<pc>0078-b<k1>amlikA<k2>amlikA
{%Amlikā%}¦ or {%amlīkā,%} f. a sour taste in the mouth,
acidity of stomach; the tamarind tree; wood sorrel,
[Page0078-c+ 76]
Oxalis Corniculata. {%—Amlikā-vaṭaka, as,%} m. a sort
of cake.
<LEND>

<L>5585<pc>0078-c<k1>amliman<k2>amliman
{%Amliman, ā,%}¦ m. sourness.
<LEND>

<L>5586<pc>0078-c<k1>amlIBUta<k2>amlIBUta
{%Amlī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ become sour.
<LEND>

<L>5587<pc>0078-c<k1>amvla<k2>amvla
{%Amvla, as,%}¦ m. sourness.
<LEND>

<L>5588<pc>0078-c<k1>amlAna<k2>amlAna
{#amlAna#}¦ {%a-mlāna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mlai%}), not
withered, clean, clear; bright, unclouded; ({%as%}), m.
globe-amaranth, Gomphræna Globosa L.
<LEND>

<L>5589<pc>0078-c<k1>amlAni<k2>amlAni
{%A-mlāni, is,%}¦ f. vigour, freshness, verdure; {%(is, is,%}
{%i),%} vigorous, unfading.
<LEND>

<L>5590<pc>0078-c<k1>amlAnin<k2>amlAnin
{%A-mlānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ clean, clear; ({%inī%}), f. an assem-
blage of globe-amaranths.
<LEND>

<L>5591<pc>0078-c<k1>ay<k2>ay
{#ay#}¦ {%ay%} (connected with rt. {%i,%} q. v.), cl. 1.
<div n="P"/>.A. {%ayate, -yitum,%} to go.
<LEND>

<L>5592<pc>0078-c<k1>aya<k2>aya
{%Aya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. {%i%}), going; a move towards the
right at chess; good luck, favourable fortune; a die;
N. of a Prajāpati; {%(as, ā, am),%} going, moving. {%—Aya-%}
{%tā,%} f. good luck. {%—Aya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} happy.
{%—Aya-śobhin, ī, inī, i,%} bright with good fortune.
{%—Ayānvita (aya-an˚), as, ā, am,%} fortunate, lucky.
<LEND>

<L>5593<pc>0078-c<k1>ayaTa<k2>ayaTa
{%Ayatha, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a leg, foot (?).
<LEND>

<L>5594<pc>0078-c<k1>ayana<k2>ayana
{%Ayana, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. rt. {%i%}), going; especially
at the end of a compound, e. g. {%samudrāyaṇa,%} going
to the ocean; ({%am%}), n. going, walking, walk; a road,
a path; a place, a site (?); course, circulation,
period; final emancipation; a commentary, treatise;
N. of certain sacrificial performances; the sun's
road north and south of the equator, the half
year; the equinoctial and solstitial points; way,
progress, manner; a Śāstra or inspired writing.
{%—Ayana-kāla, as,%} m. the interval between the equi-
noxes. {%—Ayana-devatā,%} f. a deity or an idol placed
near a road (?). {%—Ayana-bhāga, as,%} m. or {%aya-%}
{%nāṃśa (˚na-aṃ˚), as,%} m. the arc between the vernal
equinoctial point and the beginning of the fixed
zodiac or first point in Aries. {%—Ayana-valana, am,%}
n. deviation of the ecliptic. {%—Ayana-vṛtta, am,%}
n. the ecliptic.
<LEND>

<L>5595<pc>0078-c<k1>ayakzma<k2>ayakzma
{#ayakzma#}¦ {%a-yakṣma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not con-
sumptive; not sick, healthy; causing health; ({%am%}),
n. health. {%—Ayakṣma-karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} Ved.
producing health. {%—Ayakṣma-tāti, is,%} f. or {%aya-%}
{%kṣma-tva, am,%} n., Ved. freedom from consump-
tion; health.
<LEND>

<L>5596<pc>0078-c<k1>ayakzyamARa<k2>ayakzyamARa
{#ayakzyamARa#}¦ {%a-yakṣyamāṇa, as,%} m. not
wishing or not about to sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>5597<pc>0078-c<k1>ayajuzka<k2>ayajuzka
{#ayajuzka#}¦ {%a-yajuṣka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. with-
out a sacrificial formula or verse.
<LEND>

<L>5598<pc>0078-c<k1>ayajYa<k2>ayajYa
{#ayajYa#}¦ {%a-yajña, as,%} m. no sacrifice; a bad
sacrifice; {%(as, ā, am),%} not offering sacrifice. {%—A-%}
{%yajña-sāc, k, k, k,%} Ved. not performing a sacrifice,
performing worthless sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>5599<pc>0078-c<k1>ayajYaka<k2>ayajYaka
{%A-yajñaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfit for sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>5600<pc>0078-c<k1>ayajYiya<k2>ayajYiya
{%A-yajñiya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not fit for sacrifice; not
worthy of sacrifice, profane, common.
<LEND>

<L>5601<pc>0078-c<k1>ayajyu<k2>ayajyu
{%A-yajyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. not sacrificing, impious,
profane, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>5602<pc>0078-c<k1>ayajvan<k2>ayajvan
{%A-yajvan, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. not offering sacrifice, profane.
<LEND>

<L>5603<pc>0078-c<k1>ayajYadatta<k2>ayajYadatta
{#ayajYadatta#}¦ {%a-yajñadatta, as,%} m. not Yajña-
datta, i. e. the vile Yajñadatta.
<LEND>

<L>5604<pc>0078-c<k1>ayat<k2>ayat
{#ayat#}¦ {%a-yat, t, t, t%} (rt. {%yam%}), not making
efforts.
<LEND>

<L>5605<pc>0078-c<k1>ayata<k2>ayata
{%A-yata, as, ā, am,%}¦ unrestrained, uncontrolled,
unchecked.
<LEND>

<L>5606<pc>0078-c<k1>ayatin<k2>ayatin
{%A-yatin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ of unsubdued appetite; incon-
tinent.
<LEND>

<L>5607<pc>0078-c<k1>ayatna<k2>ayatna
{%Ayatna, as,%}¦ m. absence of effort or exertion;
{%ayatnena%} or {%ayatnāt%} or {%ayatnatas,%} without effort
or exertion. {%—A-yatna-kārin, ī, inī, i,%} making no
exertion, indifferent, idle. {%—A-yatna-kṛta%} or {%a-%}
{%yatna-ja, as, ā, am,%} easily or readily produced,
spontaneous. {%—Ayatna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} inactive,
indifferent, idle.
<LEND>

<L>5608<pc>0078-c<k1>ayaTA<k2>ayaTA
{#ayaTA#}¦ {%a-yathā,%} ind. not as it should be,
unfitly, unsuitably. {%—A-yatham,%} Ved. without effort.
{%—A-yathā-tatha, as, ā, am,%} not so as it should be,
[Page0079-a+ 75]
unfit, unsuitable; useless, unprofitable, vain; ({%am%}),
ind. unfitly, unsuitably. {%—A-yathā-tathya, am,%} n.
unsuitableness, unprofitableness, incompatibility. {%—A-%}
{%yathā-dyotana, am,%} n. intimation of something
unexpected. {%—A-yathā-pūrva%} or {%a-yathā-pura, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} unprecedented. {%—A-yathā-balam,%} ind. not
according to one's power. {%—A-yathā-mātra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} not according to measure. {%—A-yathāmukhīna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the face turned away. {%—A-ya-%}
{%thārtha (˚thā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} not according to
the sense or object, incongruous, unmeaning, non-
sensical; improper, unfitting. {%—A-yathā-vat,%} ind.
inaccurately, erroneously. {%—A-yathāśāstra-kārin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} not acting in accordance with the scripture.
{%—A-yatheṣṭa (˚thā-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} not as
wished; disliked, disapproved of; insufficient, not
enough. {%—A-yathocita (˚thā-uc˚), as, ā, am,%} un-
worthily, unsuitably.
<LEND>

<L>5609<pc>0079-a<k1>ayadIkzita<k2>ayadIkzita
{#ayadIkzita#}¦ {%aya-dīkṣita, as,%} m., N. of an
author.
<LEND>

<L>5610<pc>0079-a<k1>ayana<k2>ayana
{#ayana#}¦ {%ayana,%} &c. See under {%ay,%} p. 78.
<LEND>

<L>5611<pc>0079-a<k1>ayantra<k2>ayantra
{#ayantra#}¦ {%a-yantra, am,%} n., Ved. non-restraint,
not a means of restraining; having no restraint; a
powerful weapon for restraining enemies.
<LEND>

<L>5612<pc>0079-a<k1>ayantrita<k2>ayantrita
{%A-yantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unhindered, unrestrained,
self-willed.
<LEND>

<L>5613<pc>0079-a<k1>ayamita<k2>ayamita
{#ayamita#}¦ {%a-yamita, as, ā, am,%} unchecked,
untrimmed, unpaired, unclipped.
<LEND>

<L>5614<pc>0079-a<k1>ayava<k2>ayava<h>1
{#ayava#} 1¦. {%ayava, as, ā, am,%} deficient; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a worm bred in the intestines.
<LEND>

<L>5615<pc>0079-a<k1>ayava<k2>ayava<h>2
{#ayava#} 2¦. {%a-yava, as,%} m. or {%a-yavan, ā,%} m.
or {%a-yavas, as,%} n. the dark half of the month.
<LEND>

<L>5616<pc>0079-a<k1>ayava<k2>ayava<h>3
{#ayava#} 3¦. {%a-yava, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-yavaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} having worthless or no barley.
<LEND>

<L>5617<pc>0079-a<k1>ayavaya<k2>ayavaya
{%A-yavaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfit for barley.
<LEND>

<L>5618<pc>0079-a<k1>ayaSas<k2>ayaSas
{#ayaSas#}¦ {%a-yaśas, as,%} n. infamy; {%(ās, ās,%}
{%as),%} infamous, disagreeable. {%—Ayaśas-kara, as, ā,%}
or {%ī, am,%} disgraceful, degrading.
<LEND>

<L>5619<pc>0079-a<k1>ayaSasya<k2>ayaSasya
{%A-yaśasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ infamous.
<LEND>

<L>5620<pc>0079-a<k1>ayas<k2>ayas
{#ayas#}¦ {%ayas, ās, ās, as%} (fr. rt. {%i%}), going,
nimble; ({%as%}), n. iron, steel, gold, metal [cf. Lat.
<nsi>œs, œr-is</nsi> for <nsi>œs-is;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ais,</nsi> Them. <nsi>aisa;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>êr,</nsi> ‘iron;’ Goth. <nsi>eisarn;</nsi> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>Eisen</nsi>]; ({%ās%}), m. fire. {%—Ayaḥ-pāna, am,%} n. a par-
ticular hell. {%—Ayaḥ-pratimā,%} f. iron image. {%—Ayaḥ-%}
{%śaṅku, us,%} m., N. of an Asura. {%—Ayaḥ-śaya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. lying in iron, made of iron (said of fire).
{%—Ayaḥ-śipra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having jaws or
a nose of iron. {%—Ayaḥ-śiras, ās,%} m., N. of an
Asura. {%—Ayaḥ-śīrṣan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having a
head of iron. {%—Ayaḥ-śūla, am,%} n. an iron lance;
fraudulent or cunning artifice. {%—Ayaḥ-sthūṇa%} or
{%ayas-sthūṇa%} or {%aya-sthūṇa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. having
iron pillars or spikes; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Ayaś-%}
{%cūrṇa, am,%} n. iron filings. {%—Ayas-kaṃsa, as, am,%}
m. n. an iron goblet. {%—Ayas-kāṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n.
an iron arrow. {%—Ayas-kānta, as,%} m. a precious stone,
the loadstone. {%—Ayas-kāra, as,%} m. a blacksmith;
the upper part of the thigh (?). {%—Ayas-kīṭa, am,%} n.
rust of iron. {%—Ayas-kumbha, as, ī,%} m. f. an iron
pot or boiler. {%—Ayas-kuśā,%} f. a rope partly consist-
ing of iron. {%—Ayas-kṛti, is,%} f. preparation of iron.
{%—Ayas-tāpa, as, ā, am,%} making iron red-hot.
{%—Ayas-pātra, am,%} n. an iron vessel. {%—Ayas-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} Ved. made of iron or of metal; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a son of Manu Svārociṣa; ({%ī%}), f., N. of one
of the three residences of the Asuras.
<div n="P"/>For compounds beginning {%ayo,%} see s.v. {%ayo-guḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>5621<pc>0079-a<k1>ayasa<k2>ayasa
{%Ayasa%}¦ may be used for {%ayas%} at the end of com-
pounds, as {%kṛṣṇāyasa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>5622<pc>0079-a<k1>ayA<k2>ayA
{#ayA#}¦ {%ayā,%} ind. (fr. pronominal base {%a =%}
{%anayā%}), Ved. in this manner, thus.
<LEND>

<L>5623<pc>0079-a<k1>ayAcaka<k2>ayAcaka
{#ayAcaka#}¦ {%a-yācaka, as, ikā, am%} (rt. {%yāc%}),
one who does not ask or solicit.
<LEND>

<L>5624<pc>0079-a<k1>ayacita<k2>ayacita
{%A-yacita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unasked, unsolicited; {%ayā- %}
[Page0079-b+ 72]
{%citam,%} ind. without being asked; ({%as%}), m., N. of
the Ṛṣi Upavarṣa. {%—Ayācita-vṛtti, is,%} f. or
{%ayācita-vrata, am,%} n. subsisting on alms without
begging.
<LEND>

<L>5625<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAcin<k2>ayAcin
{%A-yācin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not soliciting.
<LEND>

<L>5626<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAjya<k2>ayAjya
{#ayAjya#}¦ {%a-yājya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yaj%}), a person
or thing for whom or for which one must not offer
sacrifices; outcast, degraded; not competent to offer
sacrifice; incapable of or inadmissible to religious
ceremonies. {%—Ayājya-tva, am,%} n. the state of an
outcast. {%—Ayājya-yājana%} or {%ayājya-saṃyājya, am,%}
n. sacrificing for an outcast.
<LEND>

<L>5627<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAtapUrva<k2>ayAtapUrva
{#ayAtapUrva#}¦ {%a-yāta-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} follow-
ing, subsequent to, succeeding.
<LEND>

<L>5628<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAtayAma<k2>ayAtayAma
{#ayAtayAma#}¦ {%a-yātayāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
weak; not worn out by use; fresh; ({%am%}), n., N. of
certain texts of the Yajur-veda, revealed to Yājiñaval-
kya. {%—Ayātayāma-tā,%} f., Ved. unweakened strength,
freshness.
<LEND>

<L>5629<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAtayAman<k2>ayAtayAman
{%A-yātayāman, ā, mnī, a,%}¦ Ved. not weak, fresh.
<LEND>

<L>5630<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAtu<k2>ayAtu
{#ayAtu#}¦ {%a-yātu, us, us, u,%} Ved. not demoni-
acal; free from evil spirits; ({%us%}), m. not a demon,
the opposite of an evil spirit.
<LEND>

<L>5631<pc>0079-b<k1>ayATArTika<k2>ayATArTika
{#ayATArTika#}¦ {%a-yāthārthika, as, ī, am,%} impro-
per, unjust; not genuine, not real, incongruous, absurd.
<LEND>

<L>5632<pc>0079-b<k1>ayATArTya<k2>ayATArTya
{%A-yāthārthya, am,%}¦ n. impropriety, unfitness, ab-
surdity, nonsense.
<LEND>

<L>5633<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAna<k2>ayAna
{#ayAna#}¦ {%a-yāna, am,%} n. not moving, halting,
stopping; natural disposition or temperament: (in the
last sense the etymology is doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>5634<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAnaya<k2>ayAnaya
{#ayAnaya#}¦ {%ayānaya (˚ya-an˚), am,%} n. good
and bad luck; ({%as%}), m. a particular position of the
pieces on a chess or backgammon board.
<LEND>

<L>5635<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAnayIna<k2>ayAnayIna
{%Ayānayīna, as,%}¦ m. a piece at chess or backgam-
mon so moved.
<LEND>

<L>5636<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAvaka<k2>ayAvaka
{#ayAvaka#}¦ {%a-yāvaka, as, ā, am,%} unstained
with lac-dye, naturally red.
<LEND>

<L>5637<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAvana<k2>ayAvana
{#ayAvana#}¦ {%a-yāvana, am,%} n. not causing to
unite.
<LEND>

<L>5638<pc>0079-b<k1>ayASu<k2>ayASu
{#ayASu#}¦ {%a-yāśu, us, us, u,%} Ved. unfit for
copulation.
<LEND>

<L>5639<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAs<k2>ayAs
{#ayAs#}¦ {%a-yās (?), ās,%} m. (rt. {%yas%}), Ved. agile
(without effort), dexterous, nimble; ({%ās%}), ind. fire (?).
<LEND>

<L>5640<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAsya<k2>ayAsya
{%A-yāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not to be obtained by
effort, indefatigable; valiant; enterprising; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of an Aṅgiras; mystical name of the chief vital air.
<LEND>

<L>5641<pc>0079-b<k1>ayAsomIya<k2>ayAsomIya
{#ayAsomIya#}¦ {%ayāsomīya, am,%} n., N. of some
verses of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>5642<pc>0079-b<k1>ayi<k2>ayi
{#ayi#}¦ {%ayi,%} ind. a vocative particle; a par-
ticle of encouragement or introducing a kind enquiry.
<LEND>

<L>5643<pc>0079-b<k1>ayin<k2>ayin
{#ayin#}¦ {%ayin, ī, inī, i%} (rt. {%i%}), at the end of
compounds, going, e. g. {%atyayin,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>5644<pc>0079-b<k1>ayukta<k2>ayukta
{#ayukta#}¦ {%a-yukta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yuj%}), not
yoked, not joined, not united, not married; not
harnessed; not connected; not suited, unfit, unsuit-
able; not attentive, not devout; negligent, not dex-
terous, unpractised, untrue, wrong; indecent. {%—A-%}
{%yukta-kṛt, t, t, t,%} committing wrong acts. {%—Ayukta-%}
{%cāra, as,%} m. (a king &c.) who does not appoint
spies. {%—Ayukta-tā,%} f. or {%ayukta-tva, am,%} n. the not
being used. {%—Ayukta-padārtha, as,%} m. the sense
of a word to be supplied. {%—Ayukta-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
unfit, unsuitable.
<LEND>

<L>5645<pc>0079-b<k1>ayukti<k2>ayukti
{%A-yukti, is,%}¦ f. disunion, separation; unreasonable-
ness, want of conformity to correct principles or to
analogy; impropriety, unfitness.
<LEND>

<L>5646<pc>0079-b<k1>ayuga<k2>ayuga
{%A-yuga%}¦ or {%a-yugala, as, ā, am,%} separate, single,
odd. {%—Ayugārcis (˚ga-ar˚), is,%} m. fire.
<LEND>

<L>5647<pc>0079-b<k1>ayugapad<k2>ayugapad
{%A-yugapad,%}¦ ind. not at once, gradually, seriatim.
<LEND>

<L>5648<pc>0079-b<k1>ayugapadgrahaRa<k2>ayugapadgrahaRa
{%—Ayugapad-grahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. apprehending gra-
dually and not simultaneously. {%—Ayugapad-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. successiveness.
<LEND>
[Page0079-c+ 78]

<L>5649<pc>0079-c<k1>ayugma<k2>ayugma
{%A-yugma, as, ā, am,%}¦ not in couples, separate,
single; odd, uneven. {%—Ayugma-cchada, as,%} m.,
N. of the plant Alstonia Scholaris. {%—Ayugma-netra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of Śiva. {%—Ayugma-śara, as,%} m., N. of
the god of love (‘having an odd number of arrows’).
<LEND>

<L>5650<pc>0079-c<k1>ayuj<k2>ayuj
{%A-yuj, k, k, k,%}¦ not existing in couples; odd, un-
even. {%—Ayuk-chada, as,%} m., N. of a plant, Alstonia
Scholaris. {%—Ayuk-palāśa, as,%} m., N. of a tree.
{%—Ayuk-pāda-yamaka, am,%} n. a kind of alliteration,
viz. the same syllables in the first and third Pāda
of a word in a different sense. {%—Ayuk-śakti, is,%}
m., N. of Śiva. {%—Ayug-iṣu, us,%} m., N. of Kāma,
from his having five arrows; see {%pañceṣu%}. {%—Ayug-%}
{%dhātu, us, us, u,%} having an odd number of elements.
<LEND>

<L>5651<pc>0079-c<k1>ayugvARa<k2>ayugvARa
{%—Ayug-vāṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of Kāma.
<LEND>

<L>5652<pc>0079-c<k1>ayuNnetra<k2>ayuNnetra
{%—Ayuṅ-netra%}¦ or {%ayug-akṣa, as,%} m., N. of Śiva, from his having
three eyes; see {%tri-netra.%}
<LEND>

<L>5653<pc>0079-c<k1>ayuja<k2>ayuja
{%A-yuja, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. without a companion,
not having an equal; not existing by pairs, separate,
odd.
<LEND>

<L>5654<pc>0079-c<k1>ayoga<k2>ayoga
{%A-yoga, as,%}¦ m. separation, disjunction; interval;
unfitness, unsuitableness, unconformity; inefficacy of
a remedy; medical treatment counter to the symp-
toms; non-application or mis-application of re-
medies; vigorous effort, exertion; a widower, an
absent lover or husband; inauspicious conjunction of
the planets; a conjunction of two planets; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), unconnected with; indistinctly connected with;
making vigorous efforts. {%—Ayoga-vāha, as,%} m. a
term for Anusvāra, Visarjanīya, Upadhmānīya, and
Jihvāmūlīya, as standing between vowels and conso-
nants. (For {%ayo-ga,%} hammer, see {%ayo-'gra%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>5655<pc>0079-c<k1>ayogya<k2>ayogya
{%A-yogya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfit, unsuitable, useless;
immaterial; (in phil.) not ascertainable &c. by the
senses. {%—Ayogya-tā,%} f. or {%ayogya-tva, am,%} n. un-
fitness, unsuitableness.
<LEND>

<L>5656<pc>0079-c<k1>ayojana<k2>ayojana
{%A-yojana, am,%}¦ n. disunion, separation.
<LEND>

<L>5657<pc>0079-c<k1>ayOktika<k2>ayOktika
{%A-yauktika, as, ī, am,%}¦ not conformable to, in-
consistent with.
<LEND>

<L>5658<pc>0079-c<k1>ayOgapadya<k2>ayOgapadya
{%A-yaugapadya, am,%}¦ n. uncontemporaneous ex-
istence, unsimultaneousness.
<LEND>

<L>5659<pc>0079-c<k1>ayOgika<k2>ayOgika
{%A-yaugika, as, ī, am,%}¦ having no regular derivation.
<LEND>

<L>5660<pc>0079-c<k1>ayuNga<k2>ayuNga
{#ayuNga#}¦ {%a-yuṅga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not exist-
ing in couples; odd, uneven.
<LEND>

<L>5661<pc>0079-c<k1>ayuta<k2>ayuta<h>1
{#ayuta#} 1¦. {%a-yuta, as, ā, am%} (rt. 2. {%yu%}), Ved.
not disturbed or interrupted; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son
of Rādhika. {%—Ayuta-siddha, as, ā, am,%} proved to
be not separated or interrupted, proved to be inherent.
{%—Ayuta-siddhi, is,%} f. proof that certain things or
notions are not separable.
<LEND>

<L>5662<pc>0079-c<k1>ayuva<k2>ayuva
{%A-yuva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. undisturbed, unshaken.
<LEND>

<L>5663<pc>0079-c<k1>ayuta<k2>ayuta<h>2
{#ayuta#} 2¦. {%a-yuta, as, ā, am%} (rt. 1. {%yu,%} to
mix), disjoined, detached, not counted; ({%am%}), n. ten
thousand, a myriad. {%—Ayuta-jit, t,%} m., N. of a son
of Bhajamāna. {%—Ayuta-nāyin, ī,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Ayuta-śas,%} ind. by myriads. {%—Ayuta-homa, as,%}
m. a kind of sacrifice. {%—Ayutādhyāpaka (˚ta-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a good teacher. {%—Ayutāyus (˚ta-āy˚), us,%}
m., N. of a son of Jayasena Ārāvin; of a son of
Śrutavat. {%—Ayutāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a son
of Sindhu-dvīpa.
<LEND>

<L>5664<pc>0079-c<k1>ayudDa<k2>ayudDa
{#ayudDa#}¦ {%a-yuddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yudh%}), Ved.
unconquered; not fighting; ({%am%}), n. not war, absence
of war, peace. {%—A-yuddha-sena, as,%} m., Ved. whose
arrows or armies are unconquered, irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>5665<pc>0079-c<k1>ayudDvI<k2>ayudDvI
{%A-yuddhvī,%}¦ ind., Ved. without fighting.
<LEND>

<L>5666<pc>0079-c<k1>ayudDa<k2>ayudDa
{%A-yuddha, as,%}¦ m. a non-fighter.
<LEND>

<L>5667<pc>0079-c<k1>ayuDya<k2>ayuDya
{%A-yudhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unconquerable.
<LEND>

<L>5668<pc>0079-c<k1>ayuDvin<k2>ayuDvin
{%A-yudhvin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved. not conquering, not a
valiant warrior.
<LEND>

<L>5669<pc>0079-c<k1>ayodDf<k2>ayodDf
{%A-yoddhṛ, dhā,%}¦ m. no warrior, a bad fighter;
unmatched by other warriors.
<LEND>

<L>5670<pc>0079-c<k1>ayoDya<k2>ayoDya
{%A-yodhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not to be warred
against, irresistible; ({%ā%}), f. the capital of Rāma, the
modern Oude, on the river Sarayu. {%—Ayodhyādhi-%}
{%pati (˚yā-adh˚), is,%} m. the sovereign of Ayodhyā.
<LEND>

<L>5671<pc>0079-c<k1>ayoDyAvAsin<k2>ayoDyAvAsin
{%—Ayodhyā-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ inhabiting Ayodhyā.
<LEND>

<L>5672<pc>0079-c<k1>ayODika<k2>ayODika
{%A-yaudhika, as,%}¦ m. not a warrior.
<LEND>
[Page0080-a+ 75]

<L>5673<pc>0080-a<k1>ayUpa<k2>ayUpa
{#ayUpa#}¦ {%a-yūpa, as,%} m. no sacrificial post.
<LEND>

<L>5674<pc>0080-a<k1>aye<k2>aye
{#aye#}¦ {%aye,%} ind. a vocative particle, an inter-
jection of surprise, recollection, fatigue, fear, passion;
used also in the same meanings as {%ayi.%}
<LEND>

<L>5675<pc>0080-a<k1>ayogava<k2>ayogava
{#ayogava#}¦ {%ayogava, as, ā,%} or {%ī,%} m. f. or {%ayo-%}
{%gū?%} (etymology uncertain; perhaps connected with
{%ayas,%} iron, or fr. {%a-yoga%}), the offspring of a Śūdra
man and Vaiśya woman, whose business is carpentry.
See {%āyogava.%}
<LEND>

<L>5676<pc>0080-a<k1>ayoguqa<k2>ayoguqa
{#ayoguqa#}¦ {%ayo-guḍa, as,%} m. ({%ayo%} for {%ayas,%}
iron), a chalybeate pill, one made of some prepara-
tion of iron; an iron ball.
<LEND>

<L>5677<pc>0080-a<k1>ayogra<k2>ayogra
{%Ayo-'gra%}¦ or {%ayo-'graka (ayas-ag˚), am,%} n. a
hammer, a forge hammer; a mace or club tipped
with iron; a pestle for cleaning grain. (A form
{%ayo-ga, as,%} m., is also given in the sense ‘iron
hammer.’)
<LEND>

<L>5678<pc>0080-a<k1>ayoGana<k2>ayoGana
{%Ayo-ghana, as,%}¦ m. a hammer, a forge hammer.
<LEND>

<L>5679<pc>0080-a<k1>ayocCizwa<k2>ayocCizwa
{%Ayocchiṣṭa (ayas-uc˚?), am,%}¦ n. rust of iron.
<LEND>

<L>5680<pc>0080-a<k1>ayojAla<k2>ayojAla
{%Ayo-jāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with iron nets;
({%am%}), n. iron net-work.
<LEND>

<L>5681<pc>0080-a<k1>ayodaMzwra<k2>ayodaMzwra
{%Ayo-daṃṣṭra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved., or {%ayo-dat, at,%}
{%atī, at,%} iron-toothed, having iron weapons.
<LEND>

<L>5682<pc>0080-a<k1>ayodAha<k2>ayodAha
{%Ayo-dāha, as,%}¦ m. the burning quality of iron.
<LEND>

<L>5683<pc>0080-a<k1>ayopAzwi<k2>ayopAzwi
{%Ayo-'pāṣṭi (ayas-ap˚), is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. furnished
with iron claws or heels.
<LEND>

<L>5684<pc>0080-a<k1>ayomaya<k2>ayomaya
{%Ayo-maya, as, ī, am,%}¦ made of iron. See also
s.v. {%ayas.%}
<LEND>

<L>5685<pc>0080-a<k1>ayomala<k2>ayomala
{%Ayo-mala, am,%}¦ n. rust of iron.
<LEND>

<L>5686<pc>0080-a<k1>ayomuKa<k2>ayomuKa
{%Ayo-mukha, as, ā, am,%}¦ having an iron mouth,
face, or beak; tipped or pointed with iron; ({%as%}), m.
an arrow; N. of a Dānava; N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>5687<pc>0080-a<k1>ayoraja<k2>ayoraja
{%Ayo-raja, am,%}¦ n. or {%ayo-rajas, as,%} n. rust of iron.
<LEND>

<L>5688<pc>0080-a<k1>ayorasa<k2>ayorasa
{%Ayo-rasa, as,%}¦ m. iron rust or filings.
<LEND>

<L>5689<pc>0080-a<k1>ayovatsa<k2>ayovatsa
{%Ayo-vatsa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>5690<pc>0080-a<k1>ayovikAra<k2>ayovikAra
{%Ayo-vikāra, as,%}¦ m. iron-work, any iron fabric.
<LEND>

<L>5691<pc>0080-a<k1>ayohata<k2>ayohata
{%Ayo-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. embossed in iron-work;
made or performed by a priest &c. who wears a
golden ring on his finger.
<LEND>

<L>5692<pc>0080-a<k1>ayohanu<k2>ayohanu
{%Ayo-hanu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. iron-jawed.
<LEND>

<L>5693<pc>0080-a<k1>ayohfdaya<k2>ayohfdaya
{%Ayo-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ iron-hearted, stern, un-
relenting.
<LEND>

<L>5694<pc>0080-a<k1>ayodDf<k2>ayodDf
{#ayodDf, apayoDya#}¦ See {%a-yuddha,%} p. 79, last col.
<LEND>

<L>5695<pc>0080-a<k1>ayoni<k2>ayoni
{#ayoni#}¦ {%a-yoni, is,%} f. not the womb; any-
thing but the womb; not a particular verse of the
Sāma-veda; {%(is, is, i),%} without origin; not born
from the womb, born in a manner not approved by
law or religion; ({%is%}), m., N. of Brahmā and Śiva; a
pestle (for {%ayo-'gra%} above ?). {%—A-yoni-ja, as, ā, am,%}
not born from the womb, not produced in the or-
dinary course of generation, generated equivocally;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Ayonija-tva, am,%} n. the
state of not being born from a womb. {%-Ayonijeśa%}
{%(˚ja-īśa˚), as,%} m., N. of Śiva. {%—Ayonijeśvara (˚ja-%}
{%īś˚%}) or {%ayonijeśvara-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—A-yoni-sambhava, as, ā, am = ayonija,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>5696<pc>0080-a<k1>ayonika<k2>ayonika
{%A-yonika, as, ā, am,%}¦ without the verse containing
the word {%yoni.%}
<LEND>

<L>5697<pc>0080-a<k1>ara<k2>ara
{#ara#}¦ {%ara, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%ṛ%}), swift, speedy;
little; (at end of comp.) going; {%(as, am),%} m. n. the
spoke or radius of a wheel, see also {%aram,%} col. 3;
({%as%}), m. a spoke of the time-wheel, viz. a Jaina divi-
sion of time, the sixth of an Avasarpiṇī or Utsarpiṇī;
the eighteenth Jaina saint of the present Avasarpiṇī;
N. of an ocean in Brahmā's world. {%—Ara-ghaṭṭa%} or
{%ara-ghaṭṭaka, as,%} m. a wheel or machine for raising
water from a well (Hind. <lang n="arabic">أرهٿ</lang>); a deep well.
<LEND>

<L>5698<pc>0080-a<k1>aranemi<k2>aranemi
{%—Ara-nemi, is,%}¦ m., N. of Brahma-datta, king of
Kośala. {%—Arāntareṣu (˚ra-an˚),%} loc. pl. in the in-
tervals of the spokes.
<LEND>

<L>5699<pc>0080-a<k1>araka<k2>araka
{%Araka, as,%}¦ m. the spoke of a wheel; a Jaina
division of time [cf. {%ara%}]; the plant Blyxa Octandra;
another plant, Gardenia Enneandra.
<LEND>

<L>5700<pc>0080-a<k1>arakzas<k2>arakzas
{#arakzas#}¦ {%a-rakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. harm-
less, honest; not disturbed &c. by evil spirits.
<LEND>
[Page0080-b+ 73]

<L>5701<pc>0080-b<k1>arakzita<k2>arakzita
{#arakzita#}¦ {%a-rakṣita, as, ā, am,%} unprotected,
undefended; not preserved, not kept.
<LEND>

<L>5702<pc>0080-b<k1>aragarAwa<k2>aragarAwa
{#aragarAwa#}¦ {%aragarāṭa, as,%} m., Ved. a valley (?).
<LEND>

<L>5703<pc>0080-b<k1>araNkf<k2>araNkf
{#araNkf#}¦ {%araṅ-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P., Ved. {%-karoti, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to prepare, make ready; serve. See {%aram,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>5704<pc>0080-b<k1>araNkft<k2>araNkft
{%Araṅ-kṛt, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. acting satisfactorily; pre-
paring, serving as a worshipper.
<LEND>

<L>5705<pc>0080-b<k1>araNkfta<k2>araNkfta
{%Araṅ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. prepared, ready; gra-
tified.
<LEND>

<L>5706<pc>0080-b<k1>araNkfti<k2>araNkfti
{%Araṅkṛti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. service, gratification.
<LEND>

<L>5707<pc>0080-b<k1>araNgam<k2>araNgam
{#araNgam#}¦ {%araṅ-gam,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to be present, come near (in order to help),
become visible, appear. See {%aram,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>5708<pc>0080-b<k1>araNgama<k2>araNgama
{%Araṅ-gama, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. coming near or into
the presence, appearing (in order to help), becoming
visible.
<LEND>

<L>5709<pc>0080-b<k1>araNgara<k2>araNgara
{#araNgara#}¦ {%araṅ-gara, as,%} m., Ved. praising rea-
dily (?); factitious or made up poison. See {%aram.%}
<LEND>

<L>5710<pc>0080-b<k1>araNgin<k2>araNgin
{#araNgin#}¦ {%a-raṅ-gin, ī, iṇī, i,%} passionless.
{%—Araṅgi-sattva, as,%} m. a passionless being, a class
of gods with Buddhists.
<LEND>

<L>5711<pc>0080-b<k1>araNGuza<k2>araNGuza
{#araNGuza#}¦ {%araṅ-ghuṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. prais-
ing readily, sounding aloud. See {%aram,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>5712<pc>0080-b<k1>arajas<k2>arajas
{#arajas#}¦ {%a-rajas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%a-raja%} or
{%a-rajaska, as, ā, am,%} dustless; free from passion
or desire; clean, pure; not having the monthly
courses; {%(ās),%} f. a young girl.
<LEND>

<L>5713<pc>0080-b<k1>arajAya<k2>arajAya
{%Arajāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%arajāyate, -yitum,%} to become
dustless; to lose the monthly courses.
<LEND>

<L>5714<pc>0080-b<k1>arajju<k2>arajju
{#arajju#}¦ {%a-rajju, us, us, u,%} Ved. not consist-
ing of cords; not furnished with cords.
<LEND>

<L>5715<pc>0080-b<k1>arawu<k2>arawu
{#arawu#}¦ {%araṭu%} or {%araḍu, us,%} m., N. of the tree
Calosanthes Indica Bl.
<LEND>

<L>5716<pc>0080-b<k1>arawva<k2>arawva
{%Araṭva, as, ā, am,%}¦ made of the wood of the
above tree; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>5717<pc>0080-b<k1>araRa<k2>araRa<h>1
{#araRa#} 1¦. {%araṇa, as, ī, am%} (rt. {%ṛ%}), Ved. de-
parted, gone away; strange, foreign; distant; ({%am%}),
n. moving, entering; being inserted; a refuge.
<LEND>

<L>5718<pc>0080-b<k1>araRi<k2>araRi<h>1
1. {%araṇi, is, ī,%}¦ m. f. the wood of the Ficus Re-
ligiosa used for kindling fire by attrition; the lower
one {%(adharāraṇi%}) of the two Araṇis; ({%ī%}), du. the
two pieces of wood used in kindling the sacred fire;
({%is%}), m., N. of several plants, especially Premna
Integrifolia; the sun; fire; a flint?; ({%is%}), f. a
way, a path. {%—Araṇi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} related to
the two Araṇis; to be produced by the Araṇis.
{%—Araṇī-ketu, us,%} m. the Premna Integrifolia.
<LEND>

<L>5719<pc>0080-b<k1>araRa<k2>araRa<h>2
{#araRa#} 2¦. {%a-raṇa, as, ā, am,%} not fighting,
without fighting.
<LEND>

<L>5720<pc>0080-b<k1>araRi<k2>araRi<h>2
{#araRi#} 2¦. {%a-raṇi, is,%} f., Ved. stinginess.
<LEND>

<L>5721<pc>0080-b<k1>araRya<k2>araRya
{#araRya#}¦ {%araṇya, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%ṛ%}),
land neither cultivated nor grazed; a wilderness,
desert, forest; N. of a plant; N. of a Sādhya.
{%—Araṇya-kaṇā,%} f. wild cumin seed. {%—Araṇya-%}
{%kadalī,%} f. the wood or wild plantain. {%—Araṇya-%}
{%kāṇḍa (?), am,%} n. title of the third book of the
Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Araṇya-kārpāsī,%} f. the wild cotton.
{%—Araṇya-kulatthikā,%} f., N. of the plant Glycine
Labialis Lin. {%—Araṇya-kusumbha, as,%} m., N. of
the plant Carthamus Tinctorius. {%—Araṇya-gaja,%}
{%as,%} m. a wild elephant. {%—Araṇya-gata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} gone into a forest. {%—Araṇya-gāna (?), am,%}
n. one of the four Gānas or hymn-books of the
Sāma-veda. {%—Araṇya-gholī,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—A-%}
{%raṇya-caṭaka, as,%} m. a wild pigeon. {%—Araṇya-%}
{%cara, as, ī, am,%} living in forests, wild. {%—Araṇya-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} produced or born in a forest. {%—Araṇya-%}
{%jārdrakā (˚ja-ārd˚),%} f. wild ginger. {%—Araṇya-jīra,%}
{%as,%} m. wild cumin. {%—Araṇya-jīva, as, ā, am,%} living
in a forest. {%—Araṇya-damana, as,%} m. a wild plant,
called {%Dona%}. {%—Araṇya-dvādaśī,%} f. or {%araṇyadvā-%}
{%daśī-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a ceremony performed on
the twelfth day of the month Mārgaśīrṣa. {%—Araṇya- %}
[Page0080-c+ 76]
{%dharma, as,%} m. forest usage, wild or savage state.
{%—Araṇya-dhānya, am,%} n. wild rice. {%—Araṇya-%}
{%nṛpati, is,%} m. king of the forest. {%—Araṇya-%}
{%bhava, as, ā, am,%} growing in a forest, wild. {%—A-%}
{%raṇya-makṣikā,%} f. the gad-fly. {%—Araṇya-mār-%}
{%jāra, as,%} m. wild cat. {%—Araṇya-mudga, as,%} m.
a kind of bean. {%—Araṇya-yāna, am,%} n. going
into a forest. {%—Araṇya-rakṣaka, as,%} m. forest-
keeper, superintendent of a forest district. {%—Araṇya-%}
{%rāj, ṭ,%} m. king of the forest; epithet of a lion or tiger.
{%—Araṇya-rājya, am,%} n. the sovereignty of the
forest. {%—Araṇya-rudita, am,%} n. weeping in a forest,
i. e. weeping in vain, with no one to hear. {%—Araṇya-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like a wilderness. {%—Araṇya-vāyasa, as,%}
m. a raven. {%—Araṇya-vāsa, as,%} m. a hermitage.
{%—Araṇya-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living in a forest, wild;
({%ī%}), m. forest-dweller, a hermit, anchorite; {%(nī),%}
f., N. of a plant. {%—Araṇya-vāstuka%} or {%araṇya-vā-%}
{%stūka, as,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—Araṇya-śāli, is,%} m.
wild rice. {%—Araṇya-śūkara, as,%} m. a wild hog.
{%—Araṇya-śūraṇa, as,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—A-%}
{%raṇya-śvan, ā,%} m. a wolf. {%—Araṇya-ṣaṣṭhī,%} f.,
N. of a festival celebrated by females in the month
Jyaiṣṭha. {%—Araṇya-sabhā,%} f. a forest court. {%—A-%}
{%raṇyādhyakṣa (˚ya-adh˚), as,%} m. forest-keeper or
ranger, a head-man or superintendent of a forest dis-
trict. {%—Araṇyāyana (˚ya-ay˚), am,%} n. going into
the forest, becoming a hermit. {%—Araṇye-tilaka, as,%}
m. wild sesamum growing in a forest and containing
no oil; hence, anything which disappoints expectation.
{%—Araṇye-'nūcya (˚ye-an˚), as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
oblation. {%—Araṇyaukas (˚ya-ok˚), ās,%} m. living in
a forest, a Brāhman who has left his family and be-
come an anchorite.
<LEND>

<L>5722<pc>0080-c<k1>araRyaka<k2>araRyaka
{%Araṇyaka, am,%}¦ n. a forest, a desert; N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>5723<pc>0080-c<k1>araRyAni<k2>araRyAni
{%Araṇyāni, is,%}¦ or {%araṇyānī,%} f. a wilderness, desert,
large forest; the goddess of the wilderness and desert,
and mother of wild animals.
<LEND>

<L>5724<pc>0080-c<k1>araRIya<k2>araRIya
{%Araṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ containing a forest, near to
one.
<LEND>

<L>5725<pc>0080-c<k1>arata<k2>arata
{#arata#}¦ {%a-rata, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ram%}), dull,
languid, apathetic; disgusted, discontented; ({%am%}), n.
non-copulation. {%—A-rata-trapa, as, ā, am,%} not
ashamed of copulation; ({%as%}), m. a dog.
<LEND>

<L>5726<pc>0080-c<k1>arati<k2>arati<h>1
1. {%a-rati, is,%}¦ f. dissatisfaction, discontent; absence
of pleasure, pain; dulness, languor; anxiety, distress,
regret; a bilious disease; {%(is, is, i),%} discontented, un-
happy; dull, languid, restless. {%—Arati-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} dull, spiritless.
<LEND>

<L>5727<pc>0080-c<k1>arati<k2>arati<h>2
{#arati#} 2¦. {%arati, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ṛ,%} cf. {%ara,%}
{%aram%}), Ved. going, approaching; moving quickly;
moving flame; occupying; attacking; a servant, assist-
ant, manager, administrator; a master; an intelligent
being of all-piercing intellect; anger, passion; anxiety.
<LEND>

<L>5728<pc>0080-c<k1>aratni<k2>aratni
{#aratni#}¦ {%aratni, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%ṛ%}),
the elbow, a corner; a cubit of the middle length,
from the elbow to tip of the little finger, a fist.
<LEND>

<L>5729<pc>0080-c<k1>aratnimAntra<k2>aratnimAntra
{%—Aratni-māntra, as, ī, am,%}¦ one ell in length.
<LEND>

<L>5730<pc>0080-c<k1>aratnika<k2>aratnika
{%Aratnika, as,%}¦ m. the elbow.
<LEND>

<L>5731<pc>0080-c<k1>araTa<k2>araTa
{#araTa#}¦ {%a-ratha, as, ā, am,%} having no carriage.
<LEND>

<L>5732<pc>0080-c<k1>araTin<k2>araTin
{%A-rathin, ī,%}¦ m. a warrior who does not fight in a
car, or owns, no car.
<LEND>

<L>5733<pc>0080-c<k1>araTI<k2>araTI
{%A-rathī, īs,%}¦ m., Ved. not a charioteer.
<LEND>

<L>5734<pc>0080-c<k1>araDra<k2>araDra
{#araDra#}¦ {%a-radhra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not lazy;
not to be subdued; unprosperous.
<LEND>

<L>5735<pc>0080-c<k1>arantuka<k2>arantuka
{#arantuka#}¦ {%arantuka, as,%} m., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>5736<pc>0080-c<k1>arapa<k2>arapa
{#arapa#}¦ {%a-rapa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unhurt; sin-
less, pure.
<LEND>

<L>5737<pc>0080-c<k1>arapas<k2>arapas
{%A-rapas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. unhurt, safe; not hurt-
ing, beneficial, charitable; sinless, pure.
<LEND>

<L>5738<pc>0080-c<k1>arapacana<k2>arapacana
{#arapacana#}¦ {%arapacana, as,%} m. a mystical col-
lective N. of the five Buddhas, each being represented
by a letter.
<LEND>

<L>5739<pc>0080-c<k1>aram<k2>aram
{#aram#}¦ {%aram,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%ṛ,%} see {%ara%}), Ved.
swiftly, at hand, near, present; readily, fitly, suitably,
so as to answer a purpose; enough, sufficient [cf. {%alam%}
[Page0081-a+ 71]
and Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄρα</lang>]. {%—Araṅ-kṛ%} and {%araṅ-gam,%} see
p. 80, col. 2. {%—Aramaṇas, ās, ās, as%} (for {%aram-%}
{%m˚%}), Ved. ready to serve, obedient, devoted to the
worship of God; (according to native interpreta-
tion) having hostile intentions. {%—Aramati, is,%} f. (for
{%aram-m˚%}), Ved. readiness to serve, obedience, devo-
tion; a goddess, described in the Vedas as protecting
the worshippers of the gods and pious works in
general; (according to others) not resting, active,
going everywhere; splendor. {%—Aram-iṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}
Ved. hastening near (?).
<LEND>

<L>5740<pc>0081-a<k1>aramaRa<k2>aramaRa
{#aramaRa#}¦ {%a-ramaṇa, as, ī, am%} (rt. {%ram%}), not
gratifying, not pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>5741<pc>0081-a<k1>aramaRIya<k2>aramaRIya
{%A-ramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unpleasant, disagreeable.
{%—Aramaṇīya-tā,%} f. disagreeableness.
<LEND>

<L>5742<pc>0081-a<k1>aramamARa<k2>aramamARa
{%A-ramamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ not gratifying; Ved.
unremitting, unceasing.
<LEND>

<L>5743<pc>0081-a<k1>aramayitf<k2>aramayitf
{%A-ramayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ not causing gratification.
<LEND>

<L>5744<pc>0081-a<k1>aramuqi<k2>aramuqi
{#aramuqi#}¦ {%aramuḍi, is,%} m. a king of Nepāl.
<LEND>

<L>5745<pc>0081-a<k1>arara<k2>arara
{#arara#}¦ {%arara, am,%} n. a covering, a sheath;
{%(as, ī, am),%} m. f. n. the leaf of a door, a door; the
sheath of the shoot of a bamboo; ({%as%}), m. an awl;
a part of a sacrifice; fighting, war.
<LEND>

<L>5746<pc>0081-a<k1>arari<k2>arari
{%Arari, is, i,%}¦ m. n. a door; a door-leaf.
<LEND>

<L>5747<pc>0081-a<k1>ararakA<k2>ararakA
{#ararakA#}¦ {%ararakā,%} f., N. of the ancestress
of a celebrated Hindū family.
<LEND>

<L>5748<pc>0081-a<k1>ararakya<k2>ararakya
{%Ararakya, as,%}¦ m. a descendant of Ararakā.
<LEND>

<L>5749<pc>0081-a<k1>ararinda<k2>ararinda
{#ararinda#}¦ {%ararinda, am,%} n., Ved. water; a
vessel used in preparing the Soma juice (?).
<LEND>

<L>5750<pc>0081-a<k1>ararivas<k2>ararivas
{#ararivas#}¦ {%a-rarivas, vān, uṣī,%} m. f. (rt. {%rā%}),
Ved. not offering; envious, hard, cruel, unfriendly; an
epithet of evil spirits, who strive to disturb the happi-
ness of man; an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>5751<pc>0081-a<k1>araru<k2>araru<h>1
1. {%a-raru, us,%}¦ m. = the preceding; N. of an Asura;
({%us%}), m. f. (?) a weapon.
<LEND>

<L>5752<pc>0081-a<k1>araru<k2>araru<h>2
{#araru#} 2¦. {%araru, us, us, u%} (rt. {%ṛ%}), Ved. moving.
<LEND>

<L>5753<pc>0081-a<k1>arare<k2>arare
{#arare#}¦ {%arare,%} ind. a vocative particle, ex-
pressing haste.
<LEND>

<L>5754<pc>0081-a<k1>ararya<k2>ararya
{#ararya#}¦ {%ararya,%} nom. P. {%araryati, -yitum,%} to
work with an awl; to try, put to the proof (?).
<LEND>

<L>5755<pc>0081-a<k1>aralu<k2>aralu
{#aralu#}¦ {%aralu, us,%} or {%araluka, as,%} m. a plant,
Bignonia Indica.
<LEND>

<L>5756<pc>0081-a<k1>arava<k2>arava
{#arava#}¦ {%a-rava, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ru%}), noiseless.
<LEND>

<L>5757<pc>0081-a<k1>aravinda<k2>aravinda
{#aravinda#}¦ {%aravinda, am,%} n. (fr. {%a,%} ‘like,’ and
{%ravinda,%} q. v., for {%ravi-da?%}), a lotus, Nelumbium
Speciosum or Nymphæa Nelumbo; ({%as%}), m. the In-
dian crane; copper. {%—Aravinda-dala-prabha, am,%}
n. copper. {%—Aravinda-nābhi, is,%} m. Viṣṇu, from
whose navel sprung the lotus that bore Brahmā at
the creation. {%—Aravinda-sad, t,%} m., N. of Brahmā,
‘sitting on a lotus.’
<LEND>

<L>5758<pc>0081-a<k1>aravindinI<k2>aravindinI
{%Aravindinī,%}¦ f. an assemblage of lotus flowers.
<LEND>

<L>5759<pc>0081-a<k1>araSman<k2>araSman
{#araSman#}¦ {%a-raśman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having no
ropes or reins.
<LEND>

<L>5760<pc>0081-a<k1>arasa<k2>arasa
{#arasa#}¦ {%a-rasa, as, ā, am,%} sapless, tasteless;
weak, effectless, having no strength; dull, flat; insi-
pid; ({%as%}), m. no juice, absence of juice. {%—Arasāśa%}
{%(˚sa-āśa), as,%} m. the eating of sapless food; mace-
ration of the body. {%—Arasāśin (˚sa-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%}
eating sapless food; macerating the body.
<LEND>

<L>5761<pc>0081-a<k1>arasika<k2>arasika
{%A-rasika, as, ā, am,%}¦ devoid of taste, unfeeling,
dull; insipid, flavourless.
<LEND>

<L>5762<pc>0081-a<k1>arahas<k2>arahas
{#arahas#}¦ {%a-rahas, as,%} n. absence of secrecy.
<LEND>

<L>5763<pc>0081-a<k1>arahAya<k2>arahAya
{%Arahāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%-yate, -yitum,%} to become public.
<LEND>

<L>5764<pc>0081-a<k1>arahita<k2>arahita
{#arahita#}¦ {%a-rahita, as, ā, am,%} not deprived
of, possessed of, having.
<LEND>

<L>5765<pc>0081-a<k1>arAga<k2>arAga
{#arAga#}¦ {%a-rāga, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-rāgin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} unimpassioned, cool.
<LEND>

<L>5766<pc>0081-a<k1>arAjaka<k2>arAjaka
{#arAjaka#}¦ {%a-rājaka, as, ā, am,%} having no
king or governor, anarchical.
<LEND>

<L>5767<pc>0081-a<k1>arAjan<k2>arAjan
{%A-rājan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. not a king.
<LEND>
[Page0081-b+ 75]

<L>5768<pc>0081-b<k1>arAjaBogIna<k2>arAjaBogIna
{%A-rājabhogīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not fit for the enjoy-
ment or use of a king.
<LEND>

<L>5769<pc>0081-b<k1>arAjasTApita<k2>arAjasTApita
{%A-rājasthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not allowed or licensed
by government.
<LEND>

<L>5770<pc>0081-b<k1>arAjin<k2>arAjin
{%A-rājin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. having no splendor; un-
checked, uncontrolled.
<LEND>

<L>5771<pc>0081-b<k1>arAwakI<k2>arAwakI
{#arAwakI#}¦ {%arāṭakī,%} f., Ved., N. or epithet of
the plant Ajaśṛṅgī.
<LEND>

<L>5772<pc>0081-b<k1>arAti<k2>arAti
{#arAti#}¦ {%a-rāti, is,%} f. (rt. {%rā%}), Ved. the non-
offering (of sacrifice); stinginess, hardness, disfavour,
severity; malignity, malevolence; failure; adversity;
malignity personified; particular evil spirits, who frus-
trate the good intentions and disturb the happiness of
man; ({%is%}), m. an enemy; the number ‘six.’ {%—Arāti-%}
{%dūṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%} or {%arāti-dūṣi, is, is, i,%} or
{%arāti-ha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. destroying enemies or ad-
versity. {%—Arāti-bhaṅga, as,%} m. defeat of a foe.
<LEND>

<L>5773<pc>0081-b<k1>arAtiya<k2>arAtiya
{%Arātiya%}¦ or {%arātīya,%} nom. P., Ved. {%-yati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to desire not to offer; to act like an enemy.
{%—Arātīyat, an, antī, at,%} Ved. envious, unfriendly,
not offering; behaving like an enemy, striving to
cause adversity.
<LEND>

<L>5774<pc>0081-b<k1>arAtIyu<k2>arAtIyu
{%Arātīyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. not in the habit of offering.
<LEND>

<L>5775<pc>0081-b<k1>arAtIvan<k2>arAtIvan
{%Arātī-van, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. not offering, not giving;
unfriendly, malicious.
<LEND>

<L>5776<pc>0081-b<k1>arAdDi<k2>arAdDi
{#arAdDi#}¦ {%a-rāddhi, is,%} f., Ved. transgression,
sin, envy.
<LEND>

<L>5777<pc>0081-b<k1>arADas<k2>arADas
{#arADas#}¦ {%a-rādhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. too poor
to perform sacrifices, not making oblations, unkind,
hard, stringy, selfish.
<LEND>

<L>5778<pc>0081-b<k1>arAya<k2>arAya
{#arAya#}¦ {%a-rāya, as,%} m., Ved. too poor to make
oblations, obstructing a sacrifice; niggard, stingy;
{%(as, ī,)%} m. f. any evil spirit. {%—Arāya-kṣayaṇa, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} Ved. overpowering malignant spirits; ({%am%}), n.
destruction of malignant spirits. {%—Arāya-cātana, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} Ved. destroying evil spirits; ({%am%}), n. destruc-
tion of evil spirits.
<LEND>

<L>5779<pc>0081-b<k1>arAla<k2>arAla
{#arAla#}¦ {%arāla, as, ā, am%} (connected with {%ara,%}
fr. rt. {%ṛ;%} Intens. for {%arāra?%}), crooked, curved;
spreading like the spoke of a wheel; ({%as%}), m. a
bent or crooked arm; the resin of the plant Shorea
Robusta; an elephant in rut; ({%ā%}), f. a disloyal or un-
chaste woman; a modest woman. {%—Arāla-pakṣma-%}
{%nayana, as, ā, am,%} whose eyelashes are curved.
<LEND>

<L>5780<pc>0081-b<k1>arAvan<k2>arAvan
{#arAvan#}¦ {%a-rāvan, ā, vṇī, a,%} Ved. not offering,
envious, inimical, odious; an epithet of evil spirits.
<LEND>

<L>5781<pc>0081-b<k1>arAzwra<k2>arAzwra
{#arAzwra#}¦ {%a-rāṣṭra, am,%} n., Ved. loss of royal
power or of a kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>5782<pc>0081-b<k1>ari<k2>ari<h>1
{#ari#} 1¦. {%ari, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. {%ṛ%}), Ved. going,
moving; reaching, obtaining, making an effort to get;
aspiring after; desiring, sacrificing, devoted to; ({%is%}),
m. the wind; a lord, a master; a pious man. {%—Ari-%}
{%gūrta, as,%} m., Ved. praised by devoted men or
by worshippers; (according to others) ready for the
destruction of enemies. {%—Ari-dhāyas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. willingly yielding milk (as a cow); (according
to others) to be held by lords only, very precious.
{%—Ari-ṣṭuta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. praised with zeal.
<LEND>

<L>5783<pc>0081-b<k1>ari<k2>ari<h>2
{#ari#} 2¦. {%a-ri, is,%} m. (rt. {%rā;%} but by some
written {%ari,%} and identified with 1. {%ari%}), Ved. un-
generous, malicious; not worshipping; inimical, hos-
tile; an enemy; a species of Khadira or Mimosa;
N. of the numeral ‘six;’ N. of a condition in as-
tronomy. {%—Ari-karṣaṇa, as,%} m. tamer of enemies.
{%—Ari-kula, am,%} n. family of an enemy. {%—Ari-%}
{%kṣipa, as,%} m., N. of a son of Śvaphalka. {%—Ari-%}
{%ghna, as,%} m. a destroyer of enemies. {%—Ari-cintana,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%ari-cintā,%} f. a plot directed against an
enemy, administration of foreign affairs. {%—Ari-tā,%} f.
or {%ari-tva, am,%} n. enmity. {%—1. ari-tra, as, ā, am,%}
protecting from enemies (for 2. see next col.). {%—Ari-%}
{%dānta, as,%} m. enemy-subdued; N. of a man. {%—Ari-%}
{%nandana, as, ā, am,%} gratifying an enemy, affording
triumph to an enemy; an enemy's joy. {%—Ari-nipāta,%}
{%as,%} m. an invasion made by enemies. {%—Ari-nuta, %}
[Page0081-c+ 76]
{%as, ā, am,%} praised even by enemies. {%—Arin-dama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} conquering, victorious; ({%as%}), m. a con-
queror of enemies; N. of a man; N. of a Muni.
{%—Ari-pura, am,%} n. an enemy's town or country.
{%—Ari-marda, as,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—Ari-mardana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} foe-trampling, enemy-destroying; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of Śvaphalka. {%—Ari-mitra, as,%} m.
an ally or friend of an enemy. {%—Arim-ejaya, as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Kuru, or of Śvaphalka. {%—Ari-meda,%}
{%as,%} m. a fetid Mimosa, Vachellia Farnesiana; N. of
a country. {%—Ari-medaka, as,%} m., N. of an insect.
{%—Ari-rāṣṭra, am,%} n. an enemy's country. {%—Ari-%}
{%loka, as,%} m. a hostile tribe or an enemy's country.
{%—Ari-ṣṭhānaka, am,%} n. consternation, defeat. {%—A-%}
{%ri-sūdana%} or {%ari-hiṃsaka, as,%} m. destroyer of foes.
{%—Ari-ha, as,%} m. a son of Avācīna, a son of Devātithi.
<LEND>

<L>5784<pc>0081-c<k1>arikta<k2>arikta
{#arikta#}¦ {%a-rikta, as, ā, am,%} not empty.
<LEND>

<L>5785<pc>0081-c<k1>arikTaBAj<k2>arikTaBAj
{#arikTaBAj#}¦ {%a-riktha-bhāj, k, k, k,%} not en-
titled to a share of property, not an heir.
<LEND>

<L>5786<pc>0081-c<k1>arikTIya<k2>arikTIya
{%A-rikthīya, as, ā, am%}¦ = the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>5787<pc>0081-c<k1>ariRin<k2>ariRin
{#ariRin#}¦ {%ariṇin, ī,%} m. a cock.
<LEND>

<L>5788<pc>0081-c<k1>aritf<k2>aritf
{#aritf#}¦ {%aritṛ, tā,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ṛ%}), Ved. a
rower; a helmsman [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐρέτης, ἐρετμόν,</lang> &c.;
Lat. <nsi>ratis, remex,</nsi>  &c.].
<LEND>

<L>5789<pc>0081-c<k1>aritra<k2>aritra<h>2
2. {%aritra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. propelling, driving;
({%am%}), n. an oar; a rudder, helm; a ship, a boat;
a part of a carriage; a Soma vessel; ({%as%}), m. a Soma
vessel; N. of a person. [For 1. see under 2. {%a-ri;%} also
cf. Lat. <nsi>aratrum.</nsi>] {%—Aritra-gādha, as, ā, am,%}
oar-deep, shallow. {%—Aritra-paraṇa, as, ī, am,%} Ved.
passing over by means of oars.
<LEND>

<L>5790<pc>0081-c<k1>arin<k2>arin
{#arin#}¦ {%arin, i,%} n. a wheel, a discus.
<LEND>

<L>5791<pc>0081-c<k1>aripu<k2>aripu
{#aripu#}¦ {%a-ripu, us,%} m. the father of Nala.
<LEND>

<L>5792<pc>0081-c<k1>aripra<k2>aripra
{#aripra#}¦ {%a-ripra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. spotless,
clean, clear; faultless, blameless.
<LEND>

<L>5793<pc>0081-c<k1>ariPita<k2>ariPita
{#ariPita#}¦ {%a-riphita, as, ā, am,%} not changed
to {%r,%} said of Visarga.
<LEND>

<L>5794<pc>0081-c<k1>arePa<k2>arePa
{%A-repha, as, ā, am,%}¦ without the letter {%r.%}
<LEND>

<L>5795<pc>0081-c<k1>arizaRya<k2>arizaRya
{#arizaRya#}¦ {%a-riṣaṇya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%riṣ%}),
Ved. not hurting, defending from injury.
<LEND>

<L>5796<pc>0081-c<k1>arizaRyat<k2>arizaRyat
{%A-riṣaṇyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. not being hurt.
<LEND>

<L>5797<pc>0081-c<k1>arizwa<k2>arizwa
{%A-riṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ unhurt; unharmed; perfect;
secure, safe; ({%as%}), m. a heron; a crow; N. of several
plants, the soap-berry tree, Sapindus Detergens Roxb.;
Azadirachta Indica; garlic; a distilled mixture; N. of
an Asura, son of Bali, slain by Kṛṣṇa (Viṣṇu);
N. of a son of Manu Vaivasvata; ({%ā%}), f. a bandage; a
medical plant; N. of a daughter of Dakṣa and one of
the wives of Kaśyapa; ({%am%}), n. bad or ill-luck, mis-
fortune; a natural phenomenon boding misfortune;
sign or symptom of approaching death; good fortune,
happiness; buttermilk; vinous spirit; a woman's
apartment, the lying-in chamber. {%—Ariṣṭa-karman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a king of the Andhra dynasty. {%—A-%}
{%riṣṭa-gātu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having a secure residence.
{%—Ariṣṭa-gu, us, us, u,%} Ved. whose cattle are un-
hurt. {%—Ariṣṭa-gṛha, am,%} n. a lying-in chamber.
{%—Ariṣṭa-grāma, as,%} m., Ved. whose troop is com-
plete in number (said of the Maruts). {%—Ariṣṭa-%}
{%tāti, is,%} f., Ved. safeness, security; ({%is, is, i%}), auspi-
cious, making fortunate or happy. {%—Ariṣṭa-duṣṭa-%}
{%dhī, īs, īs, i,%} apprehensive of death, alarmed at its
approach. {%—Ariṣṭa-nemi, is, is, i,%} Ved. the felly
of whose wheel is unhurt; an epithet of Tārkṣya;
the twenty-second of the twenty-four Jaina Tīrtha-
kāras of the present Avasarpiṇī. {%—Ariṣṭa-pura, am,%}
n., N. of a town. {%—Ariṣṭa-bharman, ā,%} m., Ved.
yielding security. {%—Ariṣṭa-mathana, as,%} m. Viṣṇu
(Śiva?) as killer of the Asura. {%—Ariṣṭa-ratha, as,%}
m., Ved. whose carriage is unhurt. {%—Ariṣṭa-vīra, as,%}
m., Ved. whose heroes are unhurt. {%—Ariṣṭa-śayyā,%}
f. a lying-in couch. {%—Ariṣṭa-sūdana, as,%} m. or
{%ariṣṭa-han, ā,%} m. Viṣṇu as killer of the Asura.
{%—Ariṣṭā-śrita-pura (˚ṭa-āś˚), am,%} n., N. of a
town. {%—Ariṣṭāsu (˚ṭa-asu˚), us, us, u,%} Ved. whose
vital power is unhurt.
<LEND>
[Page0082-a+ 75]

<L>5798<pc>0082-a<k1>arizwaka<k2>arizwaka
{%A-riṣṭaka, as,%}¦ m. the same as {%ariṣṭa,%} m. above.
<LEND>

<L>5799<pc>0082-a<k1>arizwi<k2>arizwi
{%A-riṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. safeness, security.
<LEND>

<L>5800<pc>0082-a<k1>arizyat<k2>arizyat
{%A-riṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. not being hurt.
<LEND>

<L>5801<pc>0082-a<k1>arI|a<k2>arI|a
{#arI|a#}¦ {%a-rīḷha, as, ā, am%} (for {%a-rīḍha,%}
rt. {%rih = lih%}), Ved. not licked.
<LEND>

<L>5802<pc>0082-a<k1>aru<k2>aru
{#aru#}¦ {%aru, us,%} m. the sun; N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>5803<pc>0082-a<k1>aruMzikA<k2>aruMzikA
{#aruMzikA#}¦ {%aruṃṣikā,%} f. scab on the head.
<LEND>

<L>5804<pc>0082-a<k1>aruc<k2>aruc
{#aruc#}¦ {%a-ruc, k, k, k,%} Ved. having no light,
lightless.
<LEND>

<L>5805<pc>0082-a<k1>aruci<k2>aruci
{#aruci#}¦ {%a-ruci, is,%} f. aversion, dislike; want
of appetite, disrelish, disgust.
<LEND>

<L>5806<pc>0082-a<k1>arucya<k2>arucya
{%A-rucya, as, ā, am,%}¦ disagreeable, disgusting.
<LEND>

<L>5807<pc>0082-a<k1>arucya<k2>arucya
{%A-rucya, as, ā, am,%}¦ disagreeable.
<LEND>

<L>5808<pc>0082-a<k1>aruj<k2>aruj
{#aruj#}¦ {%a-ruj, k, k, k,%} not breaking, not sup-
purating, not festering; free from disease, sound,
healthy.
<LEND>

<L>5809<pc>0082-a<k1>arugRa<k2>arugRa
{%A-rugṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ not broken, not diseased.
<LEND>

<L>5810<pc>0082-a<k1>aruja<k2>aruja
{%A-ruja, as, ā, am,%}¦ not breaking; not suppurating;
sound; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant, Cassia Fistula; N. of
a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>5811<pc>0082-a<k1>aruRa<k2>aruRa
{#aruRa#}¦ {%aruṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (said to be fr.
rt. {%ṛ%}), reddish-brown, tawny, red; ruddy; the colour of
the morning opposed to the darkness of night; per-
plexed; dumb; ({%as%}), m. red colour, the colour of the
dawn; dawn; the dawn personified as the charioteer
of the sun; the sun; a kind of leprosy, with red
spots and insensibility of the skin; a little poisonous
animal; N. of a plant, Rottleria Tinctoria; molasses;
N. of several persons; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants; a
plant Betula; madder, Rubia Manjith; another plant,
commonly Téori; a black kind of the same; Colo-
cynth or bitter apple; the plant that yields the red
and black berry used for the jewellers’ weight,
called Retti; N. of a river; ({%ī%}), f. a red cow;
the dawn; ({%am%}), n. red colour; gold. {%—Aruṇa-%}
{%kamala, am,%} n. the red lotus. {%—Aruṇa-jyotis, is%}
m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Aruṇa-tā,%} f. red colour.
{%—Aruṇa-datta, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Aruṇa-%}
{%dūrvā,%} f. reddish fennel. {%—Aruṇa-priyā,%} f., N. of
an Apsaras. {%—Aruṇa-psu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having a
red shape. {%—Aruṇa-babhru, us, us, u,%} Ved. red-
dish-yellow. {%—Aruṇa-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. furnished
with red (rays of light), an epithet of the dawn.
{%—Aruṇa-locana, as, ā, am,%} red-eyed; ({%as%}), m.
a pigeon. {%—Aruṇa-sārathi, is,%} m. whose charioteer
is Aruṇa; epithet of the sun. {%—Aruṇāgra-ja (˚ṇa-%}
{%ag˚), as,%} m. Garuḍa, the bird of Viṣṇu. {%—Aruṇāt-%}
{%maja (˚ṇa-āt˚), as,%} m., N. of Jaṭāyu, a fabulous
bird, said by some to be the son of Aruṇa, but more
generally of Garuḍa. {%—Aruṇārcis (˚ṇa-ar˚), is,%} m.
the sun. {%—Aruṇāvara-ja (˚ṇa-av˚), as,%} m. the
younger brother of Aruṇa, a N. of Garuḍa. {%—Aru-%}
{%ṇāśva (˚ṇa-aś˚), as,%} m., Ved. driving with red
horses, an epithet of the Maruts. {%—Aruṇekṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ṇa-īk˚), as, ā, am,%} red-eyed. {%—Aruṇoda (˚ṇa-%}
{%ud˚), as, am,%} m. n., N. of a lake. {%—Aruṇodaya%}
{%(˚ṇa-ud˚), as,%} m. break of day, dawn, the period
preceding sunset. {%—Aruṇopala (˚ṇa-up˚), as,%} m.
a ruby.
<LEND>

<L>5812<pc>0082-a<k1>aruRita<k2>aruRita
{%Aruṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reddened, dyed red, im-
purpled.
<LEND>

<L>5813<pc>0082-a<k1>aruRiman<k2>aruRiman
{%Aruṇiman, ā,%}¦ m. redness, ruddiness.
<LEND>

<L>5814<pc>0082-a<k1>aruRIkfta<k2>aruRIkfta
{%Aruṇī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reddened, turned or be-
come red.
<LEND>

<L>5815<pc>0082-a<k1>aruRIya<k2>aruRIya
{%Aruṇīya%}¦ or {%aruṇīya-yoga, as,%} m. the twenty-fifth
Upaniṣad of the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>5816<pc>0082-a<k1>arutahanu<k2>arutahanu
{#arutahanu#}¦ {%a-ruta-hanu, us, us, u,%} Ved. whose
cheeks or jaws cannot be broken.
<LEND>

<L>5817<pc>0082-a<k1>arudDa<k2>arudDa
{#arudDa#}¦ {%a-ruddha, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%rudh%}), not
obstructed, not hindered.
<LEND>

<L>5818<pc>0082-a<k1>aruntuda<k2>aruntuda
{#aruntuda#}¦ {%arun-tuda, as, ā, am,%} inflicting
wounds, causing torments; sharp, corrosive; acri-
monious, sour (as disposition). {%—Aruntuda-tva, am,%}
n. infliction of pain; acrimoniousness, causticity.
<LEND>

<L>5819<pc>0082-a<k1>arunDatI<k2>arunDatI
{#arunDatI#}¦ {%a-rundhatī,%} f. (rt. {%rudh%}), a medi-
[Page0082-b+ 70]
cinal climbing plant; the wife of Vasiṣṭha; the wife
of Dharma; the morning star, personified as the wife
of Vasiṣṭha or of the seven Ṛṣis; also one of the
Pleiades. At marriage ceremonies Arundhatī is in-
voked as a pattern of conjugal excellence by the bride-
groom. {%—Arundhatī-jāni, is,%} or {%arundhatī-nātha,%}
{%as,%} m. Vasiṣṭha, one of the seven Ṛṣis or saints,
and stars in the great bear.
<LEND>

<L>5820<pc>0082-b<k1>arurmaGa<k2>arurmaGa
{#arurmaGa#}¦ {%arur-magha, as,%} m., Ved., N. of
certain miserly evil spirits (as the Paṇis, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>5821<pc>0082-b<k1>aruSahan<k2>aruSahan
{#aruSahan#}¦ {%aruśa-han, ā,%} m. ({%aruśa = aru-%}
{%ṣa?%}), Ved. striking the red (clouds), an epithet of
Indra.
<LEND>

<L>5822<pc>0082-b<k1>aruz<k2>aruz
{#aruz#}¦ {%a-ruṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} not angry, good-
tempered.
<LEND>

<L>5823<pc>0082-b<k1>aruzwa<k2>aruzwa
{%A-ruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ not angry, calm.
<LEND>

<L>5824<pc>0082-b<k1>aruza<k2>aruza
{#aruza#}¦ {%aruṣa, as, ī, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%ṛ%} and connected with {%aruṇa%}), Ved. red, reddish; the
colour of Agni and his horses; ({%as%}), m. the red horse of
Agni, flame; the sun, the day; the red storm-cloud;
({%ī%}), f. the dawn; a red horse; flame; N. of the wife
of Bhṛgu and the mother of Aurva. {%—Aruṣa-stūpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having brilliant masses of flame.
<LEND>

<L>5825<pc>0082-b<k1>aruza<k2>aruza
{%Aruṣa%}¦ or {%aruṣya,%} nom. P. {%aruṣati%} or {%aru-%}
{%ṣyati, -ṣitum, -yitum,%} to go.
<LEND>

<L>5826<pc>0082-b<k1>arus<k2>arus
{#arus#}¦ {%arus, us, us, us%} (fr. rt. {%ṛ%}), wounded,
sore; ({%us%}), n. a sore or wounded; ind. a joint. {%—Aruṣ-%}
{%kara, as, ā, am,%} causing wounds, wounding; ({%as%}),
m. the plant Semecarpus Anacardium; the nut of
this tree. {%—Aruṣ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} wounded. {%—A-%}
{%ruḥ-srāṇa, am,%} n., Ved. a kind of medical prepara-
tion for wounds.
<LEND>

<L>5827<pc>0082-b<k1>aruzka<k2>aruzka
{%Aruṣka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a tree, Semecarpus Ana-
cardium.
<LEND>

<L>5828<pc>0082-b<k1>arusikA<k2>arusikA
{%Arusikā,%}¦ f. eruptions on the scalp with acute pain (?).
<LEND>

<L>5829<pc>0082-b<k1>arUkf<k2>arUkf
{%Arū-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to wound.
<LEND>

<L>5830<pc>0082-b<k1>aruhA<k2>aruhA
{#aruhA#}¦ {%a-ruhā,%} f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>5831<pc>0082-b<k1>arUkza<k2>arUkza
{#arUkza#}¦ {%a-rūkṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. soft.
{%—Arūkṣa-tā,%} f., Ved. softness.
<LEND>

<L>5832<pc>0082-b<k1>arUkzita<k2>arUkzita
{%A-rūkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. soft, supple.
<LEND>

<L>5833<pc>0082-b<k1>arUkzRa<k2>arUkzRa
{%A-rūkṣṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. soft, tender.
<LEND>

<L>5834<pc>0082-b<k1>arUpa<k2>arUpa
{#arUpa#}¦ {%a-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} formless, shape-
less; ugly, ill-formed; dissimilar, unlike. {%—Arūpa-%}
{%tā,%} f. shapelessness, ugliness; dissimilarity. {%—Arūpa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} shapeless, ugly.
<LEND>

<L>5835<pc>0082-b<k1>arUpaka<k2>arUpaka
{%A-rūpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ without figure or metaphor,
not figurative, literal.
<LEND>

<L>5836<pc>0082-b<k1>arUpin<k2>arUpin
{%A-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ shapeless.
<LEND>

<L>5837<pc>0082-b<k1>arUza<k2>arUza
{#arUza#}¦ {%arūṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ṛ%}), the sun, a
kind of snake.
<LEND>

<L>5838<pc>0082-b<k1>are<k2>are
{#are#}¦ {%are,%} ind. interjection of calling.
<LEND>

<L>5839<pc>0082-b<k1>areRu<k2>areRu
{#areRu#}¦ {%a-reṇu, us, us, u,%} Ved. not dusty,
not touching the dust (of the earth); ({%u%}), n. what is
not dusty, the ether.
<LEND>

<L>5840<pc>0082-b<k1>aretas<k2>aretas
{#aretas#}¦ {%a-retas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%a-retaska, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} seedless, not receiving seed.
<LEND>

<L>5841<pc>0082-b<k1>arepas<k2>arepas
{#arepas#}¦ {%a-repas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. spotless,
clear, clean, shining.
<LEND>

<L>5842<pc>0082-b<k1>arere<k2>arere
{#arere#}¦ {%arere,%} ind. interjection of calling to
inferiors or of calling angrily.
<LEND>

<L>5843<pc>0082-b<k1>aroka<k2>aroka
{#aroka#}¦ {%a-roka, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ruc%}), darkened,
obscured, dimmed. {%—Aroka-dat, at, atī, at,%} or
{%aroka-danta, as, ā, am,%} having black or dis-
coloured teeth, having bad teeth.
<LEND>

<L>5844<pc>0082-b<k1>aroga<k2>aroga
{#aroga#}¦ {%a-roga, as, ā, am,%} free from disease,
healthy, well; ({%as%}), m. health.
<LEND>

<L>5845<pc>0082-b<k1>arogaRa<k2>arogaRa
{%A-rogaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not rendering sick,
freeing from disease.
<LEND>

<L>5846<pc>0082-b<k1>arogin<k2>arogin
{%A-rogin, ī, iṇi, i,%}¦ or {%a-rogya, as, ā, am,%} healthy.
{%—Arogi-tā%} or {%arogya-tā,%} f. healthiness, health.
<LEND>
[Page0082-c+ 77]

<L>5847<pc>0082-c<k1>arocaka<k2>arocaka
{#arocaka#}¦ {%a-rocaka, as, ikā, am%} (rt. {%ruc%}), not
shining; causing want of appetite or disgust; ({%as%}), m.
want or loss of appetite, disgust, indigestion.
<LEND>

<L>5848<pc>0082-c<k1>arocakin<k2>arocakin
{%A-rocakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ suffering from want of appe-
tite or indigestion.
<LEND>

<L>5849<pc>0082-c<k1>arocamAna<k2>arocamAna
{%A-rocamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not shining.
<LEND>

<L>5850<pc>0082-c<k1>arocizRu<k2>arocizRu
{%A-rociṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ dark, disagreeable, ugly.
<LEND>

<L>5851<pc>0082-c<k1>arodana<k2>arodana
{#arodana#}¦ {%a-rodana, am,%} n. (rt. {%rud%}), not
weeping.
<LEND>

<L>5852<pc>0082-c<k1>aroDya<k2>aroDya
{#aroDya#}¦ {%a-rodhya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%rudh%}), not
to be hindered or obstructed, unobstructed.
<LEND>

<L>5853<pc>0082-c<k1>aropaRa<k2>aropaRa
{#aropaRa#}¦ {%a-ropaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%ruh%}), not
planting or fixing.
<LEND>

<L>5854<pc>0082-c<k1>aroza<k2>aroza
{#aroza#}¦ {%a-roṣa, as,%} m. calmness, gentleness.
<LEND>

<L>5855<pc>0082-c<k1>arOdra<k2>arOdra
{#arOdra#}¦ {%a-raudra, as, ī, am,%} not formidable
or fierce.
<LEND>

<L>5856<pc>0082-c<k1>ark<k2>ark
{#ark#}¦ {%ark,%} cl. 10. P. {%arkayati, -yitum,%} to
heat or warm; to praise.
<LEND>

<L>5857<pc>0082-c<k1>arka<k2>arka
{#arka#}¦ {%arka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%arc%}), a ray, flash of
lightning; the sun; fire; crystal; copper; a N. of
Indra; Sunday; membrum virile; N. of the plant
Calotropis Gigantea; a religious ceremony; praise,
hymn; praising; a singer; a learned man; an elder
brother; food. {%—Arka-kāntā,%} f., N. of the plant
Polanisia Icosandra W. {%—Arka-kṣetra, am,%} n. ‘the
field of the sun,’ N. of a sacred place in Orissa.
{%—Arka-cikitsā,%} f. ‘the medical art of the sun,’ title
of a work on medicine. {%—Arka-ja, au,%} m. du. the
two sons of Sūrya or the sun and Aśvinī, and physi-
cians of Svarga or heaven. {%—Arka-tanaya, as,%} m.
offspring of the sun, an epithet of Karṇa, Manu
Vaivasvata, Manu Sāvarṇi, and Śani; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet
of the rivers Yamunā and Tapatī. {%—Arka-tva, am,%}
n. brightness, &c. {%—Arka-tviṣ, ṭ,%} f. a ray of light,
the light of the sun. {%—Arka-dina, am,%} n. a solar
day. {%—Arka-nandana, as,%} m. a son of the sun; a
N. of the planet Saturn; an epithet of Karṇa. {%—Arka-%}
{%nayana, as,%} m., N. of an Asura. {%—Arka-pattra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the plant Calotropis Gigantea; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of birth-wort, Aristolochia Indica; ({%am%}), n.
the leaf of the plant Calotropis Gigantea. {%—Arka-%}
{%parṇa, as,%} m. the plant Calotropis Gigantea; ({%am%}),
n. the leaf of this plant. {%—Arka-pādapa, as,%} m.,
N. of the tree Melia Azadirachta Lin. {%—Arka-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. the child of the sun, i. e. Karṇa. {%—Arka-%}
{%puṣpikā,%} f., N. of the plant Gynandropsis Penta-
phylla. {%—Arka-puṣpī,%} f., N. of the plant Kuṭumbinī.
{%—Arka-prakāśa, as,%} m. ‘the revelation of the
sun,’ title of a work on medicine and jurisprudence.
{%—Arka-priyā,%} f., N. of the plant Hibiscus Rosa
Sinensis L. {%—Arka-bandhu, us,%} or {%arka-bāndhava,%}
{%as,%} m. a N. of Buddha Śākya-muni. {%—Arka-bhaktā,%}
f., N. of the plant Polanisia Icosandra W. and A.
{%—Arka-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the disc of the sun.
{%—Arka-mūlā,%} f. a kind of birth-wort, Aristolochia
Indica. {%—Arka-reto-ja, as,%} m. Revanta, the son of
Sūrya. {%—Arka-lūṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Arka-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing flashes of lightning.
{%—Arka-varṣa, as,%} m. a solar year. {%—Arka-valla-%}
{%bha, as,%} m., N. of the plant Pentapetes Phœnicea
Lin. {%—Arka-vedha, as,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—Arka-%}
{%vrata, as,%} m. the rule or law of the sun; i. e. levy-
ing taxes, subjecting the people to imposts, or drawing
their wealth as imperceptibly as the sun evaporates
water. {%—Arka-śoka, as,%} m., Ved. brilliancy of rays.
{%—Arka-sāti, is,%} f., Ved. invention of hymns, poetical
inspiration. {%—Arka-sūnu, us,%} m. son of the sun, an
epithet of Yama. {%—Arka-sodara, as,%} m. Airāvata,
the elephant of Indra. {%—Arka-hitā,%} f., N. of the
plant Polanisia Icosandra W. {%—Arkāṃśa (˚ka-aṃ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a digit or the twelfth part of the sun's disc.
{%—Arkāśman (˚ka-aś˚), ā,%} m. heliotrope, girasol,
crystal. {%—Arkāhva (˚kā-āh˚) as,%} m. swallow wort.
{%—Arkendu-saṅgama (˚ka-in˚), as,%} m. the instant
of conjunction of the sun and moon. {%—Arkopala%}
{%(˚ka-up˚), as,%} m. the sun-stone, a ruby.
<LEND>

<L>5858<pc>0082-c<k1>arkin<k2>arkin
{%Arkin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. shining; praising.
<LEND>
[Page0083-a+ 77]

<L>5859<pc>0083-a<k1>arkIya<k2>arkIya
{%Arkīya%}¦ or {%arkya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to {%arka.%}
<LEND>

<L>5860<pc>0083-a<k1>argaqa<k2>argaqa
{#argaqa#}¦ {%argaḍa, as, ā,%} m. f. (for {%argala%}), an
impediment.
<LEND>

<L>5861<pc>0083-a<k1>argala<k2>argala
{#argala#}¦ {%argala, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} m. f. n. (said
to be fr. rt. {%arj%}), a wooden bolt or pin for fastening
a door or the cover of a vessel; a bar; a wave or billow.
<LEND>

<L>5862<pc>0083-a<k1>argalikA<k2>argalikA
{%Argalikā,%}¦ f. a small door pin, a bolt.
<LEND>

<L>5863<pc>0083-a<k1>argalita<k2>argalita
{%Argalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fastened by a bolt or pin.
<LEND>

<L>5864<pc>0083-a<k1>argalIya<k2>argalIya
{%Argalīya%}¦ or {%argalya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to
a bolt or pin.
<LEND>

<L>5865<pc>0083-a<k1>arG<k2>arG
{#arG#}¦ {%argh,%} cl. 1. P. {%arghati, -ghitum,%} to
be worth, to cost; to hurt ? [cf. Germ. <nsi>arg,</nsi>
<nsi>ārgern;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>arg, ark,</nsi> and with <nsi>a</nsi> inserted,
<nsi>arag, arak,</nsi> miserly, wicked, impious; <nsi>arg,</nsi> evil].
<LEND>

<L>5866<pc>0083-a<k1>arGa<k2>arGa
{#arGa#}¦ {%argha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%arh%}), worth,
value, price; a respectful offering of various ingre-
dients to a god or Brāhman. {%—Argha-dāna, am,%}
n. presentation of a respectful offering. {%—Argha-%}
{%balābala (˚la-ab˚), am,%} n. rate of price, proper
price, the cheapness or dearness of commodities.
{%—Argha-saṅkhyāpana, am,%} n. fixing the price of
commodities, appraising, assize: it is the act of the
king or ruler, in concert with the traders, and should
be done once a week or once a fortnight. {%—Arghārha%}
{%(˚gha-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy of or requiring a
respectful offering, a superior. {%—Arghāṣṭa-puraka%}
{%(˚gha-aṣ˚), am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Arghīśa%}
{%(˚gha-īśa?), as,%} m. a N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>5867<pc>0083-a<k1>arGya<k2>arGya
{%Arghya, as, ā, am,%}¦ valuable; venerable; deserving
a respectful oblation; ({%am%}), n. a respectful oblation
to gods or venerable men, of rice, dūrva-grass, flowers,
&c., with water; or of water only in a small boat-
shaped vessel; a kind of honey. {%—Arghya-tas,%} ind.
of true value.
<LEND>

<L>5868<pc>0083-a<k1>arGawa<k2>arGawa
{#arGawa#}¦ {%arghaṭa, am,%} n. ashes. See {%pārghaṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>5869<pc>0083-a<k1>arc<k2>arc
{#arc#}¦ {%arc,%} cl. 1. P. {%arcati, ānarca, arciṣ-%}
{%yati, ārcīt, arcitum,%} to shine; to praise;
to honour or treat with respect, to worship; to salute:
Caus. {%arcayati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to shine; to
praise; to honour; worship, salute: Desid. {%arciciṣati,%}
to wish to honour: Ved. Pass. {%ṛcyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>5870<pc>0083-a<k1>arca<k2>arca
{%Arca, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. shining. See also {%arcā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>5871<pc>0083-a<k1>arcaka<k2>arcaka
{%Arcaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ worshipping; ({%as%}), m. a wor-
shipper.
<LEND>

<L>5872<pc>0083-a<k1>arcatri<k2>arcatri
{%Arcatri, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. sounding, neighing, roaring.
<LEND>

<L>5873<pc>0083-a<k1>arcatrya<k2>arcatrya
{%Arcatrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be praised.
<LEND>

<L>5874<pc>0083-a<k1>arcadDUma<k2>arcadDUma
{%Arcad-dhūma, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. whose smoke is
shining.
<LEND>

<L>5875<pc>0083-a<k1>arcana<k2>arcana
{%Arcana, as, ī, am,%}¦ praising, celebrating with praise;
({%ā%} or {%am%}), f. n. worship, the homage paid to deities
and to superiors. {%—Arcanānas (˚na-an˚), ās,%} m.,
Ved., N. of a Ṛṣi (‘he who has a sounding carriage’).
<LEND>

<L>5876<pc>0083-a<k1>arcanIya<k2>arcanIya
{%Arcanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be worshipped, respect-
able, venerable, adorable.
<LEND>

<L>5877<pc>0083-a<k1>arcA<k2>arcA
{%Arcā,%}¦ f. worship, adoration; an image or idol
destined to be worshipped. {%—Arcā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
worshipped. {%—Arcā-viḍambana, am,%} n. false or
feigned worship.
<LEND>

<L>5878<pc>0083-a<k1>arci<k2>arci
{%Arci, is,%}¦ m. ray, flame (of fire or of the dawn, &c.).
{%—Arci-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Arci-netrā-%}
{%dhipati (˚ra-adh˚), is,%} m., N. of a Yakṣa. {%—Arci-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} shining, blazing; ({%ān%}), m., N. of
a man. {%—Arci-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. blazing.
<LEND>

<L>5879<pc>0083-a<k1>arcita<k2>arcita
{%Arcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured, worshipped, respected,
saluted; offered with reverence.
<LEND>

<L>5880<pc>0083-a<k1>arcitin<k2>arcitin
{%Arcitin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ honouring.
<LEND>

<L>5881<pc>0083-a<k1>arcitf<k2>arcitf
{%Arcitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a worshipper.
<LEND>

<L>5882<pc>0083-a<k1>arcin<k2>arcin
{%Arcin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. praising, honouring; shining
(as a ray of light), radiating; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a man;
a ray of light.
<LEND>

<L>5883<pc>0083-a<k1>arcis<k2>arcis
{%Arcis, is,%}¦ f. n. ray of light, flame; light, lustre;
({%is%}), f., N. of the wife of Kṛśāśva and mother of
Dhūmaketu. {%—Arciṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} brilliant,
resplendent; ({%ān%}), m. fire, the god of fire; ({%atī%}),
f. one of the ten earths with Buddhists.
<div n="P"/>.1. {%arcya, as, ā, am,%} to be honoured or worshipped.
<div n="P"/>.2. {%arcya,%} ind. having honoured or worshipped.
<LEND>
[Page0083-b+ 76]

<L>5884<pc>0083-b<k1>arj<k2>arj<h>1
{#arj#} 1¦. {%arj,%} cl. 1. P. {%arjati, ānarja, arjiṣ-%}
{%yati, -jitum,%} to procure; to acquire, reach,
gain, earn: Caus. {%arjayati, -yitum,%} to procure, ac-
quire; to work or manufacture; to make or prepare.
<LEND>

<L>5885<pc>0083-b<k1>arjaka<k2>arjaka
{%Arjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ procuring, acquiring; ({%as%}),
m., N. of several plants, Ocymum Gratissimum L.,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>5886<pc>0083-b<k1>arjana<k2>arjana
{%Arjana, am,%}¦ n. procuring; acquiring, gaining,
earning; gathering.
<LEND>

<L>5887<pc>0083-b<k1>arjita<k2>arjita
{%Arjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ acquired, gained, earned.
<LEND>

<L>5888<pc>0083-b<k1>arj<k2>arj<h>2
{#arj#} 2¦. {%arj%} (a doubtful root, probably
distinct from the last, and connected with
{%raj, rāj,%} and {%arc%}), to shine, to be white (?).
<LEND>

<L>5889<pc>0083-b<k1>arjuna<k2>arjuna
{%Arjuna, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} white, clear, the colour
of day; of silver; ({%as%}), m. the white colour; a
peacock; cutaneous disease; the tree Terminalia
Arjuna W. and A.; a N. of Indra; N. of the third
of the Pāṇḍava princes, who was a son of Indra and
Kuntī; N. of a son of Kṛtavīrya, who was slain by
Paraśurāma; N. of a Śākya; N. of a country; the
only son of his mother; ({%ī%}), f. a procuress, a bawd;
cow; a kind of serpent; Uṣā wife of Aniruddha; N.
of a river, more commonly called Bāhudā or Karatoyā;
({%nyau%} or {%nyas%}), du. or pl., N. of the constellation
Phalgunī; ({%am%}), n. silver; gold; slight inflammation
of the conjunctiva or white of the eye; grass; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. the descendants of Arjuna. {%—Arjuna-kāṇḍa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. having a white appendage. {%—Arjuna-%}
{%cchavi, is, is, i,%} of a white colour, white. {%—Arjuna-%}
{%tas,%} ind. on the side or party of Arjuna. {%—Arjuna-%}
{%dhvaja, as,%} m. having a white banner, an epithet of
Hanumat. {%—Arjuna-pākī,%} f., N. of a plant and its
fruits. {%—Arjunāriṣṭa-sañchanna (˚na-ar˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} covered with Arjuna and Nimb trees. {%—Arjuno-%}
{%pama (˚na-up˚), as,%} m. the teak tree, Tectona
Grandis L.
<LEND>

<L>5890<pc>0083-b<k1>arjunaka<k2>arjunaka
{%Arjunaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to Arjuna; ({%as%}),
m. a worshipper of Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>5891<pc>0083-b<k1>arjunasa<k2>arjunasa
{%Arjunasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ overgrown with Arjuna
plants.
<LEND>

<L>5892<pc>0083-b<k1>arRa<k2>arRa
{#arRa#}¦ {%arṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ṛ%}), being in
motion, agitated; foaming, effervescing; restless;
({%as%}), m. a wave, flood, stream; the teak tree, Tec-
tona Grandis L.; a letter; N. of a metre, comprising
ten feet, and belonging to the class called Daṇḍaka;
N. of a man; ({%am%}), n. tumult or din of battle.
{%—Arṇa-sāti, is,%} f., Ved. tumult of battle.
<LEND>

<L>5893<pc>0083-b<k1>arRava<k2>arRava
{%Arṇava, as, ā, am,%}¦ being agitated; foaming;
restless; ({%as%}), m. a wave, flood, stream; the foaming
sea, high water; the ocean of air; N. of a metre;
title of a work on jurisprudence. {%—Arṇava-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} sea-born, marine; {%(as, am),%} m. n. cuttle fish.
{%—Arṇava-pota, as,%} m. a boat or ship. {%—Arṇava-%}
{%mandira, as,%} m. an epithet of Varuṇa, regent of
the waters. {%—Arṇava-yāna, am,%} n. a boat or ship.
{%—Arṇavānta (˚va-an˚), as,%} m. the extremity of
the ocean. {%—Arṇavodhava (˚va-ud˚), as,%} m., N.
of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>5894<pc>0083-b<k1>arRas<k2>arRas
{%Arṇas, as,%}¦ n. a wave, flood, stream; the sea, ocean;
the ocean of air; river, water. {%—Arṇas-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. containing many waves. {%—Arṇo-da, as,%} m.
a cloud; N. of the plant Cyperus Rotundus. {%—Arṇo-%}
{%bhava, as,%} m. a shell. {%—Arṇo-vṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. in-
cluding the waters.
<LEND>

<L>5895<pc>0083-b<k1>artagala<k2>artagala
{#artagala#}¦ {%arta-gala, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
Barleria cærulea Roxb.
<LEND>

<L>5896<pc>0083-b<k1>artana<k2>artana
{#artana#}¦ {%artana, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ṛt%}), blaming,
reviling; ({%am%}), n. censure, approach, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>5897<pc>0083-b<k1>artuka<k2>artuka
{%Artuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. provoking, contentious,
quarrelsome.
<LEND>

<L>5898<pc>0083-b<k1>arti<k2>arti
{#arti#}¦ {%arti, is,%} f. (a weakened form of {%ārti,%}
fr. rt. {%ṛ%} with {%ā%}), pain; the end of a bow.
<LEND>

<L>5899<pc>0083-b<k1>artikA<k2>artikA
{#artikA#}¦ {%artikā,%} f. an elder sister (in theatri-
cal language), [cf. {%attikā%} and {%antikā%}].
<LEND>

<L>5900<pc>0083-b<k1>arT<k2>arT
{#arT#}¦ {%arth,%} cl. 10. A. {%arthayate, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%ārtithata,%} ep. cl. 1. A. {%arthate, %}
[Page0083-c+ 81]
{%thitum,%} to strive to obtain, to desire, wish, request;
to supplicate or entreat any one, to sue.
<LEND>

<L>5901<pc>0083-c<k1>arTa<k2>arTa
{%Artha, as, am,%}¦ m. n., in Ṛg-veda generally n.,
but in later Sanskrit only m. (said to be fr. rt. {%ṛ,%}
but connected with rt. {%arth%}), object; purpose; cause,
motive, reason; advantage, use, utility; thing; sub-
stance, wealth, property, opulence; affair, concern;
request, suit, petition; asking, begging, want, need;
sense, meaning, notion; manner, sort, kind; pro-
hibition, prevention, abolition; price; N. of a son
of Dharma. ({%Artha%} in some of its first senses
may govern an inst. case; e. g. {%ko me jīvitena%}
{%arthaḥ,%} ‘what concern have I with life?’). {%—Artha-%}
{%kara, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} producing or yielding
advantage or wealth; useful; enriching. {%—Artha-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. a principal or main action. {%—Artha-%}
{%kāma, au,%} m. du. utility and desire, wealth and plea-
sure; {%(as, ā, am%}), desirous of wealth. {%—Artha-%}
{%kṛcchra, am,%} n. a difficult matter. {%—Artha-kṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} causing profit, useful. {%—Artha-kṛtyā, am,%} f. n.
an action aiming at profit. {%—Artha-gata, as, ā, am%}
{%(= gatārtha),%} without an object, useless. {%—Artha-%}
{%garīyas, ān, asī, as,%} highly significant. {%—Artha-%}
{%ghna, as, ī, am,%} wasteful, extravagant. {%—Artha-%}
{%jāta, as, ā, am,%} significant, full of meaning;
worth the money. {%—Artha-jña, as, ā, am,%} under-
standing the meaning of anything. {%—Artha-tattva,%}
{%am,%} n. truth, the real object, nature or cause of any-
thing; the true state of the case, the fact of the matter.
{%—Artha-tas,%} ind. towards a particular object; with
reference to the meaning; in fact, really, truly;
namely, that is to say; on account of, (at the end
of a compound). {%—Artha-da, as, ā, am,%} conferring
advantage; profitable, useful, complaint, favourable;
liberal, munificent. {%—Artha-dūṣaṇa, am,%} n. spoil-
ing of another's property; unjust seizure of property,
or a withholding of what is due; waste, prodigality,
extravagance; finding fault with the meaning of
a passage. {%—Artha-nibandhana, as, ā, am,%} having
its cause in wealth, contingent on affluence and re-
spectability. {%—Artha-niścaya, as,%} m. determination,
decision. {%—Artha-pati, is,%} m. the lord of riches;
a king; an epithet of Kuvera; N. of a man. {%—Artha-%}
{%para, as, ā, am,%} intent on gaining wealth; parsi-
monious, niggardly. {%—Artha-prayoga, as,%} m. appli-
cation of wealth, as, to trade, usury, &c.; the profession
of usury. {%—Artha-prāpti, is,%} f. acquisition of wealth;
attainment of an object. {%—Artha-bandha, as,%} m. that
which binds together the sense; the text. {%—Artha-%}
{%buddhi, is, is, i,%} selfish. {%—Artha-bodha, as,%} m. in-
dication of the real import. {%—Artha-bhāj, k, k, k,%} en-
titled to a share in the division of property. {%—Artha-%}
{%bhṛta, as, ā, am,%} having high wages (as a servant).
{%—Artha-bheda, as,%} m. distinction, difference of mean-
ing. {%—Artha-mātra, ā, am,%} f. n. property, money.
{%—Artha-lābha, as,%} m. acquisition of wealth. {%—Artha-%}
{%lubdha, as, ā, am,%} greedy of wealth, covetous, nig-
gardly. {%—Artha-leśa, as,%} m. a little wealth. {%—Artha-%}
{%lobha, as,%} m. desire of wealth, avarice. {%—Artha-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} wealthy, rich; significant, full of
sense or meaning; ({%ān%}), m. a man; {%(-vat),%} ind.
according to a purpose. {%—Arthavat-tva, am,%} n. sig-
nificance, importance. {%—Arthavargīya, as, ā, am,%}
concerning the category of objects. {%—Artha-vāda,%}
{%as,%} m. explanation of an affair, explanatory remark,
exegesis; affirmation or narrative; declaration of
purpose or object; speech or expression having a
certain object; sentence; praise, eulogium. {%—Artha-%}
{%vijñāna, am,%} n. comprehension of meaning, one of
the six exercises of the understanding. {%—Artha-vid, t,%}
{%t, t,%} sagacious, sensible, wise. {%—Artha-viniścaya, as,%}
m. title of a Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Artha-vṛddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. accumulation of wealth. {%—Artha-vaikalpa, am%}
n. deviation from truth, perversion or disguise of fact;
prevarication. {%—Artha-vyaya, as,%} m. expenditure.
{%—Artha-vyaya-jña, as, ā, am,%} liberal in giving
and using. {%—Artha-vyaya-saha, as, ā, am,%} prodigal.
{%—Artha-śāstra, am,%} n. institutes of the science of
what is useful in life; science of polity or moral
and political government. {%—Artha-śauca, am,%} n.
purity, honesty in money matters. {%—Artha-saṃ- %}
[Page0084-a+ 80]
{%thāna, am,%} n. accumulation of wealth; treasury.
{%—Artha-saṅgraha, as,%} m. accumulation of wealth;
treasure. {%—Artha-sañcaya, as,%} m. acquisition of
wealth; wealth, property. {%—Artha-sambandha, as,%}
m. connection of the sense with the word or sentence.
{%—Artha-sādhaka, as,%} m. bringing any matter to
a conclusion; N. of a minister of king Daśaratha.
{%—Artha-sāra, as,%} m. a considerable property.
{%—Artha-siddhaka, as,%} m., N. of the plant Vitex
Negundo L. {%—Artha-siddhi, is,%} f. success. {%—Artha-%}
{%hara, as, ā, am,%} inheriting or taking wealth. {%—Ar-%}
{%tha-hīna, as, ā, am,%} unmeaning, nonsensical; poor,
deprived of wealth; failing. {%—Arthāgama (˚tha-āg˚),%}
{%as,%} m. receipt or collection of property; income, ac-
quisition of wealth. {%—Arthādhikāra (˚tha-adh˚), as,%}
m. office of treasurer, charge of money or property.
{%—Arthādhikārin (˚tha-adh˚), ī,%} m. a treasurer,
a paymaster. {%—Arthāntara (˚tha-an˚), am,%} n. an-
other matter, a different or new circumstance, a new
affair; a different meaning; opposite or antithetical
meaning, difference of meaning or purport. {%—Ar-%}
{%thāntara-nyāsa, as,%} m. antithesis. {%—Arthānvita%}
{%(˚tha-an˚), as, ā, am,%} possessed of wealth, rich;
significant. {%—Arthāpatti (˚tha-āp˚), is,%} f. an infer-
ence from circumstances; one of the five arguments
of the Mīmāṃsakas; presumption, supposition. {%—Ar-%}
{%thārthin (˚tha-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} one who solicits wealth,
or endeavours to gain any object. {%—Arthet (˚tha-it),%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. active, industrious; hasty. {%—Arthepsu%}
{%(˚tha-īp˚), us, us, u,%} desirous of wealth. {%—Arthepsu-%}
{%tā,%} f. desire of wealth. {%—Arthehā (˚tha-īhā˚),%} f. desire
of wealth. {%—Arthopama (˚tha-up˚), am,%} n. a simile
in which the object of comparision, is stated without any
particle of comparison, e. g. ‘he is a dog.’ {%—Artho-%}
{%pārjana (˚tha-up˚), am,%} n. acquisition of wealth
or property. {%—Arthoṣman (˚tha-uṣ˚), a,%} n. wealth,
the glow or pride of wealth, the condition of being
wealthy; (so, Anglice, ‘a warm man’). {%—Arthaugha%}
{%(˚tha-ogh˚), as,%} m. a treasure.
<LEND>

<L>5902<pc>0084-a<k1>arTanA<k2>arTanA
{%Arthanā,%}¦ f. request, begging, asking, entreaty.
<LEND>

<L>5903<pc>0084-a<k1>arTanIya<k2>arTanIya
{%Arthanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be requested, asked, &c.
<LEND>

<L>5904<pc>0084-a<k1>arTam<k2>arTam
{%Artham%}¦ or {%arthe,%} ind. (generally at the end of com-
pounds) on account of, in behalf of, for the sake of.
<LEND>

<L>5905<pc>0084-a<k1>arTAt<k2>arTAt
{%Arthāt,%}¦ ind. according to the state of the case, ac-
cording to the circumstances, as a matter of fact; in
fact; that is to say.
<LEND>

<L>5906<pc>0084-a<k1>arTApaya<k2>arTApaya
{%Arthāpaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%arthāpayati, -yitum.%} See
rt. {%arth.%}
<LEND>

<L>5907<pc>0084-a<k1>arTAya<k2>arTAya
{%Arthāya,%}¦ ind. on account of, for the sake of.
<LEND>

<L>5908<pc>0084-a<k1>arTika<k2>arTika
{%Arthika, as,%}¦ m. a crier, a watchman, a minstrel,
a servant, whose duty it is to announce, by song or
music, fixed periods of the day, such as the hours of
rising and going to rest.
<LEND>

<L>5909<pc>0084-a<k1>arTita<k2>arTita
{%Arthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ asked, desired, requested;
{%(am),%} n. wish, desire, supplication, petition.
<LEND>

<L>5910<pc>0084-a<k1>arTitavya<k2>arTitavya
{%Arthitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be asked, requested.
<LEND>

<L>5911<pc>0084-a<k1>arTin<k2>arTin
{%Arthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who seeks to effect or gain
a purpose or object; one who asks or begs for any-
thing (with inst.); desirous of (with inst.); sup-
plicating or entreating any one (with gen.); a beg-
gar, a petitioner, suitor; a plaintiff, a prosecutor; a
servant; a follower, a companion or partizan. {%—Ar-%}
{%thi-tā,%} f. the condition of a beggar, asking, wishing;
begging. {%—Arthi-tva, am,%} n. the condition of a sup-
pliant. {%—Arthi-sāt,%} ind. with {%kṛ,%} to dispose of any-
thing in favour of one who asks or begs for it.
<LEND>

<L>5912<pc>0084-a<k1>arTIya<k2>arTIya
{%Arthīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (as last member of a com-
pound) destined for; relating to.
<LEND>

<L>5913<pc>0084-a<k1>arTe<k2>arTe
{%Arthe,%}¦ ind. on account of; see {%artham%}. {%—Arthe-%}
{%kṛ,%} to act on behalf of (?).
<LEND>

<L>5914<pc>0084-a<k1>arTya<k2>arTya
{%Arthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ proper, fit; rich; to be asked
or sought for; intelligent, wise; ({%am%}), n. red chalk.
<LEND>

<L>5915<pc>0084-a<k1>ard<k2>ard
{#ard#}¦ {%ard%} cl. 1. P. {%ardati, ānarda, ārdi-%}
{%ṣyati, ārdīt, arditum,%} Ved. 3. pl. impv.
{%ṛantu%} and cl. 7. P. {%ṛṇatti,%} to move; to be moved;
to be scattered as dust; to dissolve; to go; to ask,
beg; to torment, hurt, kill: Caus. {%ardayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to make agitated or restless; to stir up, shake
vehemently; to distort; to torment, distress; to strike,
hurt, kill: Desid. {%ardidiṣati%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>ardeo</nsi>].
<LEND>
[Page0084-b+ 80]

<L>5916<pc>0084-b<k1>ardana<k2>ardana
{%Ardana, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving restlessly; disturbing,
distressing; ({%ā%}), f. going; asking, begging, giving
pain, killing; ({%am%}), n. pain, trouble, excitement, dis-
turbance.
<LEND>

<L>5917<pc>0084-b<k1>ardani<k2>ardani
{%Ardani, is,%}¦ m. sickness, disease; asking, begging;
fire.
<LEND>

<L>5918<pc>0084-b<k1>ardita<k2>ardita
{%Ardita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone; asked, requested, beg-
ged; killed, injured, pained, afflicted; ({%am%}), n. a
disease, spasm of the jaw-bones; trismus, tetanus;
or hemiplegia, i. e. paralysis of the muscles on one
side of the face and neck.
<LEND>

<L>5919<pc>0084-b<k1>arditin<k2>arditin
{%Arditin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having spasms of the jaw-bones.
<LEND>

<L>5920<pc>0084-b<k1>ardyamAna<k2>ardyamAna
{%Ardyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being distressed.
<LEND>

<L>5921<pc>0084-b<k1>arDa<k2>arDa<h>1
{#arDa#} 1¦. {%ardha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%ṛdh%}),
Ved. side, part; place, region, country [cf. Lat. <nsi>ordo,</nsi>
Germ. <nsi>ort</nsi>]. The accent is on the first syllable.
<LEND>

<L>5922<pc>0084-b<k1>arDa<k2>arDa<h>2
2. {%ardha, as, ā, am,%}¦ half, halved, forming a half
[cf. Osset. <nsi>ardag</nsi>]; {%ardha ardha,%} one part, the other
part; ({%as, am%}), m. n. the half; one part of two, a
part, a party; half; a short syllable. The accent is
on the last syllable. ({%Ardha%} may be compounded in
a peculiar way with an ordinal, e. g. {%ardha-tṛtīya,%}
containing (two and) the third (only) half, i. e. two
and a half; {%ardha-caturtha,%} three and a half, &c.)
{%—Ardha-kāla%} or {%ardha-kūṭa, as,%} m. an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Ardha-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} half-done, half-
performed. {%—Ardha-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a Rudra.
{%—Ardha-koṭī,%} f. half a crore, five millions. {%—Ar-%}
{%dha-koṣa, as,%} m. a moiety of one's treasure.
{%—Ardha-krośa, as,%} m. half a league. {%—Ardha-%}
{%khāra, am, ī,%} n. f. a measure, half a khārī. {%—Ardha-%}
{%gaṅgā,%} f., N. of the river Kāverī. {%—Ardha-garbha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. in the middle of the womb. {%—Ar-%}
{%dha-guccha, as,%} m. a necklace of twenty-four
strings. {%—Ardha-gola, as,%} m. a hemisphere. {%—Ar-%}
{%dha-cakravartin%} or {%ardha-cakrin, ī,%} m. half a
cakravartin; N. of the nine black Vāsudevas and the
nine enemies of Viṣṇu. {%—Ardha-candra, as,%} m.
half-moon; the semicircular marks on a peacock's
tail; the semicircular scratch of the finger nail; an
arrow, the head of which is like a half-moon; the
hand bent into a semicircle or the shape of a claw, as
for the purpose of seizing or clutching anything; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of the plant Convolvulus Torpethum; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), crescent-shaped, of a semilunar form. {%—Ardha-%}
{%candrākāra (˚ra-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} or {%ardha-%}
{%candrākṛti, is, is, i,%} half-moon-shaped, crescent-
shaped; ({%as%}), m. or ({%is%}), f. a meniscus. {%—Ardha-%}
{%candrikā,%} f., N. of a climbing plant. {%—Ardha-%}
{%colaka, as,%} m. a short bodice. {%—Ardha-jāhnavī,%} f.,
N. of the river Kāverī. {%—Ardha-tanu, us,%} f. half a
body. {%—Ardha-tikta, as,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—Ar-%}
{%dha-tūra, as,%} m. a particular kind of musical instru-
ment. {%—Ardha-dagdha, as, ā, am,%} half-burnt.
{%—Ardha-divasa, as,%} m. half a day, midday; a
day containing one half of a whole day, a day of
twelve hours. {%—Ardha-deva, as,%} m., Ved. demi-god.
{%—Ardha-dhāra, am,%} n. a knife or lancet with a
single edge, the blade two inches long, the handle six.
{%—Ardha-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m. a form of Viṣṇu.
{%—Ardha-nārīśa (˚rī-īśa), as,%} m. one of the forms
of Śiva (half male and half female). {%—Ardha-nāva,%}
{%am,%} n. half a boat. {%—Ardha-niśā,%} f. midnight. {%—Ar-%}
{%dha-pañcāśat,%} f. twenty-five. {%—Ardha-paṇa, am,%}
n. a measure containing half a paṇa. {%—Ardha-patha,%}
{%am,%} n. half-way; ({%e%}), ind. midway. {%—Ardha-pādika,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having only half a foot. {%—Ardha-pārā-%}
{%vata, as,%} m. a kind of pigeon. {%—Ardha-pulāyita, am,%}
n. a half-gallop, canter. {%—Ardha-pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}
half-full. {%—Ardha-prahara, as,%} m. half a watch, one
hour and a half. {%—Ardha-bṛhatī,%} f., Ved. half the
usual breadth. {%—Ardha-bhāga, as,%} m. a half; a
part. {%—Ardha-bhāgika, as, ī, am,%} or {%ardha-bhā-%}
{%gin, ī, inī, i,%} taking or sharing half. {%—Ardha-bhāj,%}
{%k, k, k,%} taking or sharing half; ({%k%}), m. a sharer,
companion. {%—Ardha-bhāskara, as,%} m. midday.
{%—Ardha-bhoṭika,%} f. a kind of cake. {%—Ardha-mā-%}
{%gadhī,%} f. a variety of the Māgadhī dialect. {%—Ardha-%}
{%māṇava%} or {%ardha-māṇavaka, as,%} m. a necklace of
twelve strings. {%—Ardha-mātrā,%} f. half a short sylla-
[Page0084-c+ 79]
ble. {%—Ardha-mārge,%} ind. half-way, midway. {%—Ar-%}
{%dha-māsa, as,%} m. half a month; {%ardhamāsa-śas,%}
ind. every half month, or fortnight. {%—Ardhamāsa-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} or {%ardhamāsika, as, ā, am,%}
done or happening every half month; lasting half
a month, or a fortnight. {%—Ardha-muṣṭi, is,%} m. f.
a half-clenched hand. {%—Ardha-yāma, as,%} m. half a
watch, an hour and a half. {%—Ardha-ratha, as,%} m.
a warrior who fights on a car along with another.
{%—Ardha-rātra, as,%} m. midnight; a night contain-
ing half a whole day of twenty-four hours. {%—Ardha-%}
{%rātra-samaya, as,%} m. the time of midnight. {%—Ar-%}
{%dharātrārdhadivasa (˚rātra-ardha˚), am,%} n. the
equinox. {%—Ardharca (˚dha-ṛca), as, am,%} m. n.
half a verse or hemistich. {%—Ardharca-śas,%} ind. in
every hemistich. {%—Ardha-vastra-saṃvīta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} clothed or enveloped in half-garments. {%—Ardha-%}
{%visarga, as,%} m. the sound Visarga before {%k, kh, p,%}
{%ph,%} so called because its sign ({#Z#}) is the half of that
of Visarga ({#H#}). {%—Ardha-vīkṣaṇa, am,%} n. a side-
look, a glance, a leer. {%—Ardha-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%}
middle-aged. {%—Ardha-vaināśika, as,%} m., N. of the
followers of Kaṇāda (‘arguing half-perishableness’).
{%—Ardha-vyāsa, as,%} m. the radius of a circle.
{%—Ardha-śata, am,%} n. fifty; one hundred and
fifty. {%—Ardhaśana, am,%} for {%ardhāśana (˚dha-%}
{%aś˚), am,%} n. half a meal. {%—Ardha-śaphara, as,%}
m. a kind of fish. {%—Ardha-śabda, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing a low voice. {%—Ardha-śeṣa%} or {%ardhāvaśeṣa%}
{%(˚dha-av˚), as, ā, am,%} having only half left. {%—Ar-%}
{%dhāśyāma, as, ā, am,%} half-clouded. {%—Ardha-%}
{%śloka, as,%} m. half a Śloka. {%—Ardha-sañjāta-śasya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having its crops half-grown. {%—Ardha-%}
{%sīrin, ī,%} m. a cultivator, a ploughman, who takes
half the crop for his labour. {%—Ardha-hāra, as,%}
m. a necklace of sixty-four or of forty strings. {%—Ar-%}
{%dha-hrasva, am,%} n. half a short syllable. {%—Ar-%}
{%dhāṃśa (˚dha-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a half, the half. {%—Ar-%}
{%dhāṃśin (˚dha-aṃ˚),ī, inī, i,%} sharing a half. {%—Ardhā-%}
{%kāra (˚dha-a˚), as,%} m. half the letter {%a;%} another
name for {%avagraha,%} q. v. {%—Ardhāṅga (˚dha-aṅ˚),%}
{%am,%} n. half the body. {%—Ardhārdha (˚dha-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. half of a half, a quarter; half and half. {%—Ar-%}
{%dhāvabhedaka (˚dha-av˚), as,%} m. pain in half the
head, hemicrania; ({%am%}), n. dividing in equal parts.
{%—Ardhāvaśeṣa (˚dha-av˚), as, ā, am,%} having
only one half left. {%—Ardhāśana (˚dha-aś˚), am,%}
n. half a meal. {%—Ardhāsana (˚dha-ās˚), am,%} n.
half a seat (it is considered a mark of high respect to
make room for a guest on the same seat with one's
self); greeting kindly or with respect; exemption
from censure. {%—Ardhendu (˚dha-in˚), us,%} m. a half-
moon or crescent; the semicircular impression of a
finger nail; an arrow with a crescent-shaped head;
the hand expanded in a semicircular from like a claw.
{%—Ardhendu-mauli (˚dha-in˚), is,%} m. Śiva, whose
diadem is a half-moon. {%—Ardhendra (˚dha-in˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} that of which a half belongs to Indra.
{%—Ardhokta (˚dha-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} half-uttered, said
imperfectly or indistinctly. {%—Ardhokti (˚dha-uk˚),%}
{%is,%} f. speaking indistinctly or incompletely, broken
or interrupted speech. {%—Ardhodaya (˚dha-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the rising of the half-moon. {%—Ardhodita%}
{%(˚dha-ud˚), as, ā, am%} (rt. {%i%} with {%ud%}), half-risen;
(rt. {%vad%}), half-uttered. {%—Ardhoruka (˚dha-ūru),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} reaching to the middle of the thighs;
({%am%}), n. a short petticoat.
<LEND>

<L>5923<pc>0084-c<k1>arDaka<k2>arDaka
{%Ardhaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the same as {%ardha.%}
{%—Ardhaka-ghātin, ī,%} m., N. of Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>5924<pc>0084-c<k1>arDaNkf<k2>arDaNkf
{%Ardhaṅ-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P., Ved. {%-karoti, -kartum,%}
to prefer, to favour.
<LEND>

<L>5925<pc>0084-c<k1>arDika<k2>arDika
{%Ardhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ measuring a half, relating to
a half.
<LEND>

<L>5926<pc>0084-c<k1>arDin<k2>arDin
{%Ardhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ entitled to half or sharing a half.
<LEND>

<L>5927<pc>0084-c<k1>arDuka<k2>arDuka
{#arDuka#}¦ {%ardhuka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ṛdh%}), Ved.
succeeding, prospering.
<LEND>

<L>5928<pc>0084-c<k1>arDya<k2>arDya
{%Ardhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accomplished; to be
obtained.
<LEND>

<L>5929<pc>0084-c<k1>arpaya<k2>arpaya
{#arpaya#}¦ {%arpaya,%} Caus. of rt. {%ṛ; arpayati, %}
[Page0085-a+ 75]
{%-yitum,%} to throw, cast; insert, fix; pierce, place in
or upon; offer, deliver, consign, entrust, give back.
<LEND>

<L>5930<pc>0085-a<k1>arpaRa<k2>arpaRa
{%Arpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. throwing, casting; inserting, fix-
ing; piercing; placing in or upon; offering, delivering,
consigning, entrusting; giving back.
<LEND>

<L>5931<pc>0085-a<k1>arpaRa<k2>arpaRa
{%Arpaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be delivered, to be placed.
<LEND>

<L>5932<pc>0085-a<k1>arpita<k2>arpita
{%Arpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ delivered, consigned; placed
in or upon. {%—Arpita-kara, as, ī, am,%} extending or
giving the hand; married.
<LEND>

<L>5933<pc>0085-a<k1>arpisa<k2>arpisa
{%Arpisa, as,%}¦ m. the heart.
<LEND>

<L>5934<pc>0085-a<k1>arpya<k2>arpya
{%Arpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be delivered, consignable.
<LEND>

<L>5935<pc>0085-a<k1>arb<k2>arb
{#arb#}¦ {%arb,%} cl. 1. P. {%arbati, ānarba, arbitum,%}
to go, to go to or towards; to hurt or kill.
<LEND>

<L>5936<pc>0085-a<k1>arbuda<k2>arbuda
{#arbuda#}¦ {%arbuda, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
the preceding rt.), a serpent; a serpent-like demon
conquered by Indra; a long round mass; a swelling,
a tumour, a polypus; a hundred millions; N. of a
mountain in the west of India, commonly called Abū,
a place of pilgrimage, especially of the Jainas; N. of
a people; N. of a hell.
<LEND>

<L>5937<pc>0085-a<k1>arbudi<k2>arbudi
{%Arbudi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a serpent-like demon con-
quered by Indra.
<LEND>

<L>5938<pc>0085-a<k1>arbudin<k2>arbudin
{%Arbudin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ afflicted with swelling or tumour.
<LEND>

<L>5939<pc>0085-a<k1>arBa<k2>arBa
{#arBa#}¦ {%arbha, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. {%ṛ%}),
little, small, unimportant; ({%as%}), m. child, pupil [cf.
Lat. <nsi>orbus;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀρφανός</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>5940<pc>0085-a<k1>arBaka<k2>arBaka
{%Arbhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ small, minute; weak, little;
emaciated; young, childish; like, similar; ({%as%}), m.
a boy, a child, the young of any animal; a fool,
an idiot.
<LEND>

<L>5941<pc>0085-a<k1>arBaga<k2>arBaga
{%Arbhaga, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. youthful.
<LEND>

<L>5942<pc>0085-a<k1>arma<k2>arma
{#arma#}¦ {%arma, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%ṛ%}), a disease of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>5943<pc>0085-a<k1>armaka<k2>armaka
{%Armaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ narrow, thin; ({%am%}), n. nar-
rowness.
<LEND>

<L>5944<pc>0085-a<k1>armaRa<k2>armaRa
{%Armaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a measure of one droṇa.
<LEND>

<L>5945<pc>0085-a<k1>arman<k2>arman
{%Arman, a%}¦ n. a disease of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>5946<pc>0085-a<k1>arya<k2>arya
{#arya#}¦ {%arya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ṛ%}), attached to,
true, devoted, dear; kind; excellent; ({%as%}), m. a master,
lord; an Āryan; a man of the third tribe, a Vaiśya;
({%ā%}), f. a woman of the third tribe, the wife of a
Vaiśya. {%—Arya-jārā,%} f., Ved. the mistress of an Ār-
yan. {%—Arya-patnī,%} f., Ved. wife of a true, legitimate
husband. {%—Arya-varya, as,%} m. a Vaiśya of rank.
{%—Arya-śveta, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>5947<pc>0085-a<k1>aryaman<k2>aryaman
{%Aryaman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. a bosom friend, play-fellow,
companion, especially a friend who asks a woman in
marriage for another; N. of an Āditya, who is com-
monly invoked together with Varuṇa and Mitra; N.
of the chief of the manes; the sun; the Asclepias
plant. {%—Aryama-datta, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Aryama-devā,%} f., N. of the twelfth lunar mansion.
<LEND>

<L>5948<pc>0085-a<k1>aryamya<k2>aryamya
{%Aryamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. intimate, very friendly;
({%as%}), m. bosom friend, companion.
<LEND>

<L>5949<pc>0085-a<k1>aryayARI<k2>aryayARI
{%Aryayāṇī,%}¦ f. a multitude of women of the Vaiśya
tribe (?).
<LEND>

<L>5950<pc>0085-a<k1>aryARI<k2>aryARI
{%Aryāṇī,%}¦ f. a mistress; a woman of the third or
Vaiśya tribe.
<LEND>

<L>5951<pc>0085-a<k1>arv<k2>arv
{#arv#}¦ {%arv,%} cl. 1. P. {%arvati, ānarva, arvi-%}
{%tum,%} to hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>5952<pc>0085-a<k1>arva<k2>arva
{#arva#}¦ {%arva,%} (in comp.) hither, towards, near
to. {%—Arva-vasu, us,%} m. one of the seven principal
rays of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>5953<pc>0085-a<k1>arvawa<k2>arvawa
{#arvawa#}¦ {%arvaṭa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%arv%}),
ashes.
<LEND>

<L>5954<pc>0085-a<k1>arvan<k2>arvan
{#arvan#}¦ {%arvan, ā,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ṛ%}), going, run-
ning; epithet of a horse or its driver; a horse;
one of the ten horses of the moon; epithet of Indra;
a short span; ({%tī%}), f. a mare; a bawd, a procuress;
{%(ā, atī, at),%} low, contemptible, inferior, vile. {%—Arva-%}
{%nas, ās, ās, as,%} whose nose is like that of a horse.
<LEND>

<L>5955<pc>0085-a<k1>arvaSa<k2>arvaSa
{%Arvaśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. possessed of coursers, quick.
<LEND>

<L>5956<pc>0085-a<k1>arvAc<k2>arvAc
{#arvAc#}¦ {%arvāc, vāṅ, vācī, vāk%} (fr. rt. {%añc%}
with {%arva;%} cf. {%arvan%}), coming hitherward; turned
towards, coming to meet any one; being on this side
[Page0085-b+ 77]
(as the bank of a river); being below or behind,
turned down or downwards; following, subsequent.
<LEND>

<L>5957<pc>0085-b<k1>arvAk<k2>arvAk
{%Arvāk,%}¦ ind. (with abl.) hitherward; on this side;
from a certain point; before, after; on the lower side
of, behind, downwards; (with loc.) within; near.
{%—Arvākkālika, as, ā, am,%} belonging to proxi-
mate time, modern. {%—Arvākkālika-tā,%} f. modern-
ness, posteriority of time. {%—Arvāk-kūla, am,%} n. the
near bank of a river. {%—Arvāk-sāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved.
epithet of three days, during which a Soma sacrifice
is performed. {%—Arvāk-srotas, ās, ās, as,%} N. of a
creation of beings in which the current of nutriment
tends downwards. {%—Arvāg-bila, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having the mouth hitherward. {%—Arvāg-vasu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} Ved. offering riches.
<LEND>

<L>5958<pc>0085-b<k1>arvAke<k2>arvAke
{%Arvāke,%}¦ ind., Ved. in the proximity of, near to.
<LEND>

<L>5959<pc>0085-b<k1>arvAcIna<k2>arvAcIna
{%Arvācīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned towards; favouring;
being on this side or below (with abl.); born after-
wards, posterior, recent, modern; reverse, contrary.
{%—Arvācīna-tā,%} f. or {%arvācīna-tva, am,%} n. state of
being posterior, recent or contrary.
<LEND>

<L>5960<pc>0085-b<k1>arvAcInam<k2>arvAcInam
{%Arvācīnam,%}¦ ind. (with abl.) on this side of;
thenceforward, thence onward; less than.
<LEND>

<L>5961<pc>0085-b<k1>arvAvat<k2>arvAvat
{#arvAvat#}¦ {%arvā-vat, t,%} f., Ved. proximity [cf.
{%parā-vat%}]; being near.
<LEND>

<L>5962<pc>0085-b<k1>arvAvasu<k2>arvAvasu
{#arvAvasu#}¦ {%arvā-vasu, us,%} m., Ved. N. of the
Hotṛ; N. of the Brahman of the gods.
<LEND>

<L>5963<pc>0085-b<k1>arvuka<k2>arvuka
{#arvuka#}¦ {%arvuka, as,%} m., N. of a tribe or peo-
ple in the Mahā-bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>5964<pc>0085-b<k1>arSa<k2>arSa
{#arSa#}¦ {%arśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ṛś%}), damage,
hurt; hemorrhoids, piles.
<LEND>

<L>5965<pc>0085-b<k1>arSas<k2>arSas
{%Arśas, as,%}¦ n. piles, hemorrhoids. {%—Arśo-ghna,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} destroying the hemorrhoids; ({%as%}), m., N.
of the plant Amorphophallus Campanulatus Blume;
one part of buttermilk with three parts of water;
({%ī%}), f., N. of the plant Curculigo Archioides Lin.
{%—Arśo-yuj, k, k, k,%} afflicted with hemorrhoids.
{%—Arśo-roga, as,%} m. the hemorrhoids. {%—Arśoroga-%}
{%yuta as, ā, am,%} or {%arśorogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} afflicted
with hemorrhoids, having hemorrhoids. {%—Arśo-hita,%}
{%as,%} m. the marking nut plant, Semecarpus Anacardium.
<LEND>

<L>5966<pc>0085-b<k1>arSasa<k2>arSasa
{%Arśasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ afflicted with hemorrhoids.
<LEND>

<L>5967<pc>0085-b<k1>arSAna<k2>arSAna
{%Arśāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. striving to hurt, ma-
licious; ({%as%}), m. fire.
<LEND>

<L>5968<pc>0085-b<k1>arSin<k2>arSin
{%Arśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ afflicted with hemorrhoids.
<LEND>

<L>5969<pc>0085-b<k1>arzaRa<k2>arzaRa
{#arzaRa#}¦ {%arṣaṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ṛṣ%}),
flowing, movable.
<LEND>

<L>5970<pc>0085-b<k1>arzaRI<k2>arzaRI
{%Arṣaṇī,%}¦ f., Ved. a pricking or piercing pain.
<LEND>

<L>5971<pc>0085-b<k1>arsas<k2>arsas
{#arsas#}¦ {%arsas, as,%} n. hemorrhoids. See
{%arśas%} above.
<LEND>

<L>5972<pc>0085-b<k1>arh<k2>arh
{#arh#}¦ {%arh,%} cl. 1. P., ep. A. {%arhati, -te,%}
{%ānarha, arhiṣyati, ārhīt, arhitum,%}
Ved. {%arhase,%} to deserve, merit, be worthy; to have
a claim to anything, to be entitled to (with acc.);
to be allowed to do anything (with inf.); to be
obliged or required to do anything (with acc.); to be
worthy; to be worth; to counterbalance; to be able;
(the 2nd pers. pres. of {%arh%} with an infinitive is often
used as a softened form of imperative; e. g. {%dātum%}
{%arhasi,%} ‘be pleased to give;’ {%śrotum arhasi,%} ‘deign
to listen,’ for {%śṛṇu%}): Caus. {%arhayati%} (aor. {%ārjihat%}),
{%-yitum,%} to honour: Desid. {%arjihiṣati%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄρχω</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>5973<pc>0085-b<k1>arha<k2>arha
{%Arha, as, ā, am,%}¦ meriting, deserving, worthy of,
having a claim or being entitled to (with acc. or
inf.); being required, obliged, or allowed (with
inf.); becoming, proper, fit; worth (in money),
costing; ({%as%}), m. a N. of Indra; ({%ā%}), f. worship;
{%(āṇi),%} Ved. n. pl. worship.
<LEND>

<L>5974<pc>0085-b<k1>arhaRa<k2>arhaRa
{%Arhaṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. worship, adoration, honour,
treating with veneration or respect; ({%ā%}), ind., Ved.
according to what is due; according to one's means.
<LEND>

<L>5975<pc>0085-b<k1>arhat<k2>arhat
{%Arhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ deserving, entitled to; able,
allowed to; worthy; venerable, respectable; praised,
celebrated; ({%an%}), m. a Buddha; the highest rank in
the Buddhist hierarchy; an Arhat or superior divinity
with the Jainas. {%—Arhat-tama, as, ā, am,%} most
worthy, best, most venerable.
<LEND>
[Page0085-c+ 73]

<L>5976<pc>0085-c<k1>arhanta<k2>arhanta
{%Arhanta, as, ā, am,%}¦ worthy; ({%as%}), m. a Buddha;
a Buddhist mendicant; N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>5977<pc>0085-c<k1>arhita<k2>arhita
{%Arhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured, worshipped, saluted.
<LEND>

<L>5978<pc>0085-c<k1>arhya<k2>arhya
{%Arhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ worthy; respectable; right, fit.
<LEND>

<L>5979<pc>0085-c<k1>arharizvaRi<k2>arharizvaRi
{#arharizvaRi#}¦ {%arhari-ṣvaṇi, is, is, i,%} Ved.
making enemies {%(arhari%}) cry aloud; (if formed by
redupl. of {%hṛṣ%} with affix {%vani%}) exultant.
<LEND>

<L>5980<pc>0085-c<k1>al<k2>al
{#al#}¦ {%al,%} cl. 1. P. {%alati, alitum,%} to adorn;
to be competent or able; to prevent.
See {%alam.%}
<LEND>

<L>5981<pc>0085-c<k1>ala<k2>ala
{#ala#}¦ {%ala, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%al%}), the
sting in the tail of a scorpion; yellow orpiment. See {%āla.%}
<LEND>

<L>5982<pc>0085-c<k1>alaka<k2>alaka
{#alaka#}¦ {%alaka, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%al%}), a curl, lock; ({%as%}), m. a mad dog [cf. {%alarka%}];
({%ā%}), f. a girl from eight to ten years of age; N. of the
capital of Kuvera, situated on a peak of the Himālaya
inhabited also by Śiva. {%—Alaka-tva, am,%} n. the state
of a curl or tress. {%—Alaka-nandā,%} f. a young girl
from eight to ten years old; N. of the Gaṅgā river;
N. of a river that runs from the Himālaya moun-
tains and falls into the Gaṅgā. {%—Alaka-prabhā,%}
f. the capital of Kuvera. {%—Alaka-priya, as,%} m., N.
of the plant Terminalia Tomentosa W. and A.
{%—Alaka-saṃhati, is,%} f. rows of curls. {%—Alakā-%}
{%dhipa (˚kā-adh˚), as,%} m. or {%alakādhipati (˚kā-%}
{%adh˚), is,%} m. a N. of Kuvera. {%—Alakānta (˚ka-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the end of a curl, a ringlet. {%—Alakeśvara%}
{%(˚kā-īś˚), as,%} m. a N. of Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>5983<pc>0085-c<k1>alakam<k2>alakam
{#alakam#}¦ {%alakam,%} ind., Ved. in vain, for
nothing.
<LEND>

<L>5984<pc>0085-c<k1>alakta<k2>alakta
{#alakta#}¦ {%alakta%} or {%alaktaka, as,%} m. (said to
be for {%a-rakta%}), the red resin of certain trees; or
perhaps the cochineal or its red sap. {%—Alakta-rasa,%}
{%as,%} m. the Alakta juice [cf. the preceding].
<LEND>

<L>5985<pc>0085-c<k1>alakzaRa<k2>alakzaRa
{#alakzaRa#}¦ {%a-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%lakṣ%}), a
bad, inauspicious sign; {%(as, ā, am),%} having no signs
or marks; without characteristic, having no good
marks, inauspicious, unfortunate.
<LEND>

<L>5986<pc>0085-c<k1>alakzita<k2>alakzita
{%A-lakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unseen, unperceived, un-
observed, unlooked for; uncharacterized, having no
particular mark. {%—Alakṣitāntaka (˚ta-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} suddenly dead. {%—Alakṣitopasthita (˚ta-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has approached unobserved.
<LEND>

<L>5987<pc>0085-c<k1>alakzya<k2>alakzya
{%A-lakṣya%}¦ or {%a-lakṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} invisible;
unmarked, not indicated; having no particular marks,
insignificant in appearance; ({%as%}), m., N. of a certain
weapon. {%—Alakṣya-gati, is, is, i,%} moving invisibly.
{%—Alakṣya-liṅga, as, ā, am,%} disguised, incognito.
<LEND>

<L>5988<pc>0085-c<k1>alakzmI<k2>alakzmI
{#alakzmI#}¦ {%a-lakṣmī, īs,%} f. evil fortune, bad
luck, distress, poverty.
<LEND>

<L>5989<pc>0085-c<k1>alaKAna<k2>alaKAna
{#alaKAna#}¦ {%alakhāna, as,%} m., N. of a king
of Gurjara.
<LEND>

<L>5990<pc>0085-c<k1>alagarda<k2>alagarda
{#alagarda#}¦ {%alagarda%} or {%alagardha, as,%} m. a
water-serpent, the black variety of the Cobra de Capello
(Coluber Nāga); ({%ā%}), f. a large poisonous leech;
(etymology doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>5991<pc>0085-c<k1>alagna<k2>alagna
{#alagna#}¦ {%a-lagna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%lag%}), not
joined or connected.
<LEND>

<L>5992<pc>0085-c<k1>alagla<k2>alagla
{#alagla#}¦ {%a-lagla, as, ā, am,%} speaking uncon-
nectedly; stammering.
<LEND>

<L>5993<pc>0085-c<k1>alaGu<k2>alaGu
{#alaGu#}¦ {%a-laghu, us, vī, u,%} not light, heavy;
not short, long; weighty; serious, solemn; intense,
violent. {%—Alaghu-pratijña, as, ā, am,%} solemnly
pledged or promised. {%—Alaghūpala (˚ghu-up˚), as,%}
m. a rock. {%—Alaghūṣman (˚ghu-uṣ˚), ā,%} m. in-
tense heat.
<LEND>

<L>5994<pc>0085-c<k1>alaNkaraRa<k2>alaNkaraRa
{#alaNkaraRa#}¦ {%alaṅkaraṇa, alaṅkāra.%} See un-
der {%alam,%} p. 86, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>5995<pc>0085-c<k1>alaNGana<k2>alaNGana
{#alaNGana#}¦ {%a-laṅghana, am,%} n. (rt. {%laṅgh%}),
not surmounting, not transgressing, not passing over
or beyond.
<LEND>

<L>5996<pc>0085-c<k1>alaNGanIya<k2>alaNGanIya
{%A-laṅghanīya%}¦ or {%a-laṅghya, as, ā, am,%} insur-
mountable, impassable, not to be crossed; not to be
[Page0086-a+ 75]
transgressed, inviolable, venerable. {%—Alaṅghanīya-%}
{%tā%} or {%alaṅghya-tā,%} f. impassableness, insurmount-
ableness, inaccessibility; inviolability; respectability;
authoritative or absolute rule; superiority.
<LEND>

<L>5997<pc>0086-a<k1>alaja<k2>alaja
{#alaja#}¦ {%alaja, as,%} m. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>5998<pc>0086-a<k1>alajI<k2>alajI
{#alajI#}¦ {%alajī,%} f. inflammation of the eye,
at the edge of the cornea.
<LEND>

<L>5999<pc>0086-a<k1>alajja<k2>alajja
{#alajja#}¦ {%a-lajja, as, ā, am,%} shameless.
<LEND>

<L>6000<pc>0086-a<k1>alaYjara<k2>alaYjara
{#alaYjara#}¦ {%alañjara, as,%} m. an earthen water-
jar. See {%aliñjara.%}
<LEND>

<L>6001<pc>0086-a<k1>alati<k2>alati
{#alati#}¦ {%alati, is,%} m. a kind of song.
<LEND>

<L>6002<pc>0086-a<k1>alapat<k2>alapat
{#alapat#}¦ {%a-lapat, an, antī, at,%} not speaking.
<LEND>

<L>6003<pc>0086-a<k1>alabDa<k2>alabDa
{#alabDa#}¦ {%a-labdha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%labh%}), un-
obtained. {%—Alabdha-nātha, as, ā, am,%} friendless,
without a patron. {%—Alabdhābhīpsita (˚dha-abh˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} disappointed in one's desire.
<LEND>

<L>6004<pc>0086-a<k1>alaBamAna<k2>alaBamAna
{%A-labhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not gaining, &c.
<LEND>

<L>6005<pc>0086-a<k1>alaBya<k2>alaBya
{%A-labhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unobtainable, unattainable.
<LEND>

<L>6006<pc>0086-a<k1>alam<k2>alam
{#alam#}¦ {%alam,%} ind. (said to be fr. rt. {%al%}),
enough, sufficient, adequate, equal to, competent, able.
({%Alam%} may govern a dat., e. g. {%alaṃ jīvanāya,%}
sufficient for living; also a loc. or inf., e. g. {%alaṃ%}
{%vijñāne%} or {%vijñātum,%} able to conceive; also inst.,
e. g. {%alaṃ śaṅkayā,%} enough, i. e. away with fear!
It may be used with the future tense, e. g. {%alaṃ%}
{%haniṣyati,%} he will be able to kill; or with an indecl.
part., e. g. {%alam bhuktvā,%} enough of eating, i. e. do
not eat more; {%alaṃ vicārya,%} enough of consider-
ation.)
<LEND>

<L>6007<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNkf<k2>alaNkf
{%Alaṅ-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to prepare,
make ready; to ornament, decorate; to prevent from,
impede (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>6008<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNkaraRa<k2>alaNkaraRa
{%Alaṅ-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. preparation, the act of de-
corating, decoration; ornament.
<LEND>

<L>6009<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNkarizRu<k2>alaNkarizRu
{%Alaṅ-kariṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ fond of ornament;
decorating, skilled in decorating; ornamented; ({%us%}),
m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>6010<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNkartf<k2>alaNkartf
{%Alaṅ-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ decorating, skilled in
decoration, a decorator.
<LEND>

<L>6011<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNkarmIRa<k2>alaNkarmIRa
{%Alaṅkarmīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ competent to any act,
skilful, clever.
<LEND>

<L>6012<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNkAra<k2>alaNkAra
{%Alaṅ-kāra, as,%}¦ m. the act of decorating; ornament,
decoration; a figure or rhetorical expression. {%—Alaṅ-%}
{%kāra-candrikā,%} f. title of a commentary on Kuvala-
yānanda. {%—Alaṅkāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} decorated,
ornamented; ({%tī%}), f. title of the ninth Lambaka in
the Kathāsaritsāgara; ({%vat%}), ind. like an ornament.
{%—Alaṅkāra-śāstra, am,%} n. a manual or text-book
of rhetoric. {%—Alaṅkāra-suvarṇa, am,%} n. gold used
for ornaments. {%—Alaṅkāra-sūra, as,%} m., N. of a
kind of meditation in Buddhism. {%—Alaṅkāra-hīna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} unadorned.
<LEND>

<L>6013<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNkAraka<k2>alaNkAraka
{%Alaṅkāraka, as,%}¦ m. ornament, decoration.
<LEND>

<L>6014<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNkfta<k2>alaNkfta
{%Alaṅ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ prepared, made ready;
ornamented, adorned.
<LEND>

<L>6015<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNkfti<k2>alaNkfti
{%Alaṅ-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. ornament; rhetorical ornament,
figure or rhetorical expression.
<LEND>

<L>6016<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNkriyA<k2>alaNkriyA
{%Alaṅ-kriyā,%}¦ f. adorning, ornamenting.
<LEND>

<L>6017<pc>0086-a<k1>alaNgAmin<k2>alaNgAmin
{%Alaṅ-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ going after or following
in due or proper manner.
<LEND>

<L>6018<pc>0086-a<k1>alaYjIvika<k2>alaYjIvika
{%Alañ-jīvika, as, ā, am,%}¦ sufficient for livelihood.
<LEND>

<L>6019<pc>0086-a<k1>alaYjuza<k2>alaYjuza
{%Alañ-juṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sufficient, adequate to.
<LEND>

<L>6020<pc>0086-a<k1>alantama<k2>alantama
{%Alan-tama, as, ā, am,%}¦ able, sufficient, having power.
<LEND>

<L>6021<pc>0086-a<k1>alanDana<k2>alanDana
{%Alan-dhana, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessing sufficient wealth.
<LEND>

<L>6022<pc>0086-a<k1>alanDUma<k2>alanDUma
{%Alan-dhūma, as,%}¦ m. thick smoke, smoke enough.
<LEND>

<L>6023<pc>0086-a<k1>alampawa<k2>alampawa<h>1
1. {%alam-paṭa, as,%}¦ m. the interior of a house;
woman's apartment.
<LEND>

<L>6024<pc>0086-a<k1>alampaSu<k2>alampaSu
{%Alam-paśu, us, us, u,%}¦ able to keep cattle.
<LEND>

<L>6025<pc>0086-a<k1>alampuruzIRa<k2>alampuruzIRa
{%Alampuruṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for a man, be-
coming a man; sufficient for a man.
<LEND>

<L>6026<pc>0086-a<k1>alambala<k2>alambala
{%Alam-bala, as,%}¦ m. strong enough, having sufficient
power; an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>6027<pc>0086-a<k1>alamBUzRu<k2>alamBUzRu
{%Alam-bhūṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ able, competent.
<LEND>

<L>6028<pc>0086-a<k1>alampawa<k2>alampawa<h>2
{#alampawa#} 2¦. {%a-lampaṭa, as, ā, am,%} not libi-
dinous, chaste.
<LEND>
[Page0086-b+ 69]

<L>6029<pc>0086-b<k1>alambuza<k2>alambuza
{#alambuza#}¦ {%alambuṣa, as,%} m. (etymology
doubtful, though connected with {%alam%} above), the
palm of the hand with the fingers extended; vomiting;
N. of a Rākṣasa or evil spirit; ({%ā%}), f. a barrier, a
line or anything not to be crossed; a sort of sensitive
plant; N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>6030<pc>0086-b<k1>alaya<k2>alaya
{#alaya#}¦ {%a-laya, as,%} m. (rt. {%lī,%} to be dissolved,
or to rest, cling to), non-dissolution, permanence;
{%(as, ā, am),%} houseless, homeless; vagrant.
<LEND>

<L>6031<pc>0086-b<k1>alarka<k2>alarka
{#alarka#}¦ {%alarka, as,%} m. (etymology doubt-
ful), a mad dog or one rendered furious; a fabulous
animal, like a hog with eight legs; N. of the plant
Calatropis Gigantea Alba; N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>6032<pc>0086-b<k1>alarzi<k2>alarzi
{#alarzi#}¦ {%alarṣi.%} See s. v. {%ṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>6033<pc>0086-b<k1>alarzirAti<k2>alarzirAti
{%Alarṣi-rāti, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. eager to bestow, ready
to grant gifts, one whose gifts are granted quickly.
<LEND>

<L>6034<pc>0086-b<k1>alalABavat<k2>alalABavat
{#alalABavat#}¦ {%alalā-bhavat, an, antī, at,%}
Ved. becoming active or lively.
<LEND>

<L>6035<pc>0086-b<k1>alale<k2>alale
{#alale#}¦ {%alale,%} ind. a word of no import
occuring in the dialect or gibberish of the Piśācas, a
class of imps or goblins, introduced in plays, &c.
<LEND>

<L>6036<pc>0086-b<k1>alavAla<k2>alavAla
{#alavAla#}¦ {%a-lavāla%} or {%alavālaka, am,%} n. a
basin for water at the root of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>6037<pc>0086-b<k1>alas<k2>alas
{#alas#}¦ {%a-las, as, as, as%} (rt. {%las,%} to shine),
not shining.
<LEND>

<L>6038<pc>0086-b<k1>alasa<k2>alasa
{#alasa#}¦ {%a-lasa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%las,%} to labour),
inactive, without energy, lazy, idle, indolent, tired,
faint; ({%as%}), m. sore or ulcer between the toes; N. of
a small poisonous animal; N. of a plant; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of the climbing plant Vitis Pedata Wall. {%—Alasa-tā,%}
f. or {%alasa-tva, am,%} n. idleness. {%—Alasekṣaṇā (˚sa-%}
{%īk˚),%} f. a woman with languishing looks.
<LEND>

<L>6039<pc>0086-b<k1>alasaka<k2>alasaka
{%A-lasaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ indolent; ({%as%}), m. tympa-
nitis, flatulence, intumescence of the abdomen, with
constipation and wind.
<LEND>

<L>6040<pc>0086-b<k1>alAsya<k2>alAsya
{%A-lāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ idle, lazy.
<LEND>

<L>6041<pc>0086-b<k1>alARqu<k2>alARqu
{#alARqu#}¦ {%alāṇḍu, us,%} m., N. of a small
noxious insect or other animal.
<LEND>

<L>6042<pc>0086-b<k1>alAta<k2>alAta
{#alAta#}¦ {%alāta, am,%} n. a fire-brand, coal.
<LEND>

<L>6043<pc>0086-b<k1>alAtfRa<k2>alAtfRa
{#alAtfRa#}¦ {%a-lātṛṇa, as,%} m. (rt. {%lā = rā?%}),
Ved. not granting anything; a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>6044<pc>0086-b<k1>alAbu<k2>alAbu
{#alAbu#}¦ {%a-lābu, us%} or {%ū, ūs,%} f. (fr. {%a,%} ‘not,’
and {%lab,%} ‘to sink?’), the bottle-gourd, Lagernaria
Vulgaris Ser; ({%us, u%}), m. n. a vessel made of the
preceding. {%—Alābu-pātra, am,%} n. a jar made of the
bottle-gourd. {%—Alābu-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of a
bottle-gourd. {%—Alābū-kaṭa, am,%} n. the down of the
bottle-gourd.
<LEND>

<L>6045<pc>0086-b<k1>alABa<k2>alABa
{#alABa#}¦ {%a-lābha, as,%} m. (rt. {%labh%}), non-
acquirement; loss.
<LEND>

<L>6046<pc>0086-b<k1>alAyya<k2>alAyya
{#alAyya#}¦ {%alāyya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ṛ?%}), Ved.
epithet of Indra or N. of a man; an assailant.
<LEND>

<L>6047<pc>0086-b<k1>alAra<k2>alAra
{#alAra#}¦ {%alāra, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%ṛ%}),
a door.
<LEND>

<L>6048<pc>0086-b<k1>alAsa<k2>alAsa
{#alAsa#}¦ {%a-lāsa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. {%a +%}
{%lāsa,%} saliva), inflammation and abscess at the root
of the tongue.
<LEND>

<L>6049<pc>0086-b<k1>alAsya<k2>alAsya
{#alAsya#}¦ {%a-lāsya.%} See {%a-lasa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>6050<pc>0086-b<k1>ali<k2>ali
{#ali#}¦ {%ali, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%al?%}), a crow; the
Indian cuckoo; a scorpion; a large black bee; spi-
rituous liquor. {%—Ali-kula, am,%} n. a flight or number
of bees. {%—Alikula-saṅkula, as,%} m. the water plant
Trapa Bispinosa. {%—Ali-jihvā%} or {%ali-jihvikā,%} f. the
uvula or soft palate. {%—Ali-dūrvā,%} f., N. of a plant.
{%—Ali-pattrikā,%} f., N. of a shrub. {%—Ali-parnī,%} f.,
N. of the plant Tragia Involucrata Lin. {%—Ali-priya,%}
{%am,%} n. the red lotus, Nymphæa Rubra; ({%ā%}), f. the
trumpet flower, Bignonia Suaveolens. {%—Ali-mālā,%} f.
a flight of bees. {%—Ali-modā,%} f., N. of a plant, Premna
[Page0086-c+ 69]
Spinosa. {%—Ali-virāva, as,%} m. or {%ali-viruta, am,%} n.
song or hum of the bee.
<LEND>

<L>6051<pc>0086-c<k1>alin<k2>alin
{%Alin, ī,%}¦ m. a scorpion; a large black bee.
<LEND>

<L>6052<pc>0086-c<k1>alinI<k2>alinI
{%Alinī,%}¦ f. a swarm of bees.
<LEND>

<L>6053<pc>0086-c<k1>aliMSa<k2>aliMSa
{#aliMSa#}¦ {%aliṃśa, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
demon.
<LEND>

<L>6054<pc>0086-c<k1>alika<k2>alika
{#alika#}¦ {%alika, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%al?%}), the fore-
head.
<LEND>

<L>6055<pc>0086-c<k1>aliklava<k2>aliklava
{#aliklava#}¦ {%aliklava, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
carrion bird.
<LEND>

<L>6056<pc>0086-c<k1>aligarda<k2>aligarda
{#aligarda#}¦ {%aligarda, as,%} m. a snake. See
{%alagarda.%}
<LEND>

<L>6057<pc>0086-c<k1>aliNga<k2>aliNga
{#aliNga#}¦ {%a-liṅga, am,%} n. absence of marks;
{%(as, ā, am),%} having no marks; (in gram.) having
no gender.
<LEND>

<L>6058<pc>0086-c<k1>aliNgin<k2>aliNgin
{%A-liṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ an impostor, a pretended ascetic
or student, one wearing the usual frontal marks, skin,
staff, &c., without belonging to a religious order.
<LEND>

<L>6059<pc>0086-c<k1>aliYjara<k2>aliYjara
{#aliYjara#}¦ {%aliñjara, as,%} m. a small earthen
water-jar.
<LEND>

<L>6060<pc>0086-c<k1>alina<k2>alina
{#alina#}¦ {%alina, as,%} m., Ved. N. of a tribe (?).
<LEND>

<L>6061<pc>0086-c<k1>alinda<k2>alinda
{#alinda#}¦ {%alinda%} or {%alindaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt.
{%al?%}), a terrace before a house-door; ({%ās%}), pl., N. of
a people.
<LEND>

<L>6062<pc>0086-c<k1>alipaka<k2>alipaka
{#alipaka#}¦ {%alipaka, as,%} m. a dog; the Indian
cuckoo; a bee.
<LEND>

<L>6063<pc>0086-c<k1>alipsA<k2>alipsA
{#alipsA#}¦ {%a-lipsā,%} f. (Desid. of rt. {%labh%}),
freedom from desire or cupidity.
<LEND>

<L>6064<pc>0086-c<k1>alimaka<k2>alimaka
{#alimaka#}¦ {%alimaka%} or {%alimpaka%} or {%alimbaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the Indian cuckoo; a frog; a bee; N. of the
plant Bassia Latifolia; the filaments of the lotus.
<LEND>

<L>6065<pc>0086-c<k1>alIka<k2>alIka
{#alIka#}¦ {%alīka, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%al,%} ‘to adorn,’ i. e. dress out in false colour; perhaps
fr. {%a,%} ‘not,’ and {%līka,%} but the latter does not occur), un-
pleasing, disagreeable; untrue, false; small, little;
({%am%}), n. anything displeasing; falsehood, untruth;
the forehead; heaven. {%—Alīka-tā,%} f. falsehood, vanity.
{%—Alīka-matsya, as,%} m. a kind of dish resembling
the taste of fish (‘mock-fish’), made of the flour of
a sort of bean fried with Seamum oil.
<LEND>

<L>6066<pc>0086-c<k1>alIkayu<k2>alIkayu
{%Alīkayu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>6067<pc>0086-c<k1>alIkAya<k2>alIkAya
{%Alīkāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%alīkāyate, -yitum,%} to be de-
ceived.
<LEND>

<L>6068<pc>0086-c<k1>alIkin<k2>alIkin
{%Alīkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ disagreeable; false, deceiving.
<LEND>

<L>6069<pc>0086-c<k1>alIkya<k2>alIkya
{%Alīkya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to falsehood, false.
<LEND>

<L>6070<pc>0086-c<k1>alIgarda<k2>alIgarda
{#alIgarda#}¦ {%alīgarda, as,%} m. a snake. See
{%aligarda.%}
<LEND>

<L>6071<pc>0086-c<k1>alu<k2>alu
{#alu#}¦ {%alu, us,%} f. a small water-pot. See {%ālu.%}
<LEND>

<L>6072<pc>0086-c<k1>alupta<k2>alupta
{#alupta#}¦ {%a-lupta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%lup%}), not cut
off, undiminished. {%—Alupta-mahiman, ā, ā, a,%} of
undiminished glory.
<LEND>

<L>6073<pc>0086-c<k1>alubDa<k2>alubDa
{#alubDa#}¦ {%a-lubdha, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-lubhyat,%}
{%an, antī, at%} (rt. {%lubh%}), Ved. moderate, content, not
covetous. {%—Alubdha-tva, am,%} n. freedom from co-
vetousness, moderation, contentment.
<LEND>

<L>6074<pc>0086-c<k1>aloBa<k2>aloBa
{%A-lobha, as,%}¦ m. non-confusion; right process (?);
absence of cupidity, moderation.
<LEND>

<L>6075<pc>0086-c<k1>aloBin<k2>aloBin
{%A-lobhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not wanting or desiring anything.
<LEND>

<L>6076<pc>0086-c<k1>alUkza<k2>alUkza
{#alUkza#}¦ {%a-lūkṣa, as, ā, am,%} soft. See
{%a-rūkṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>6077<pc>0086-c<k1>alUna<k2>alUna
{#alUna#}¦ {%a-lūna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%lū%}), uncut,
unshorn.
<LEND>

<L>6078<pc>0086-c<k1>ale<k2>ale
{#ale#}¦ {%ale%} or {%alele,%} ind. unmeaning words
in the dialect of the demons or Piśācas, intro-
duced in plays, &c.
<LEND>

<L>6079<pc>0086-c<k1>alepaka<k2>alepaka
{#alepaka#}¦ {%a-lepaka, as, ikā, am,%} stainless.
<LEND>

<L>6080<pc>0086-c<k1>aleSa<k2>aleSa
{#aleSa#}¦ {%a-leśa, as, ā, am,%} not little, much,
large; ({%am%}), ind. not at all. {%—A-leśaija (˚śa-ej˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} firm, steady.
<LEND>
[Page0087-a+ 75]

<L>6081<pc>0087-a<k1>aloka<k2>aloka
{#aloka#}¦ {%a-loka, as,%} m. (rt. {%lok%}), not the
world; the end of the world; the immaterial or
spiritual world; not the people; ({%as, ā, am%}), not
having space, finding no place.
<LEND>

<L>6082<pc>0087-a<k1>alokana<k2>alokana
{%A-lokana, am,%}¦ n. invisibility, disappearance.
<LEND>

<L>6083<pc>0087-a<k1>alokanIya<k2>alokanIya
{%A-lokanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ invisible, imperceptible.
<LEND>

<L>6084<pc>0087-a<k1>alokita<k2>alokita
{%A-lokita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unseen.
<LEND>

<L>6085<pc>0087-a<k1>alokya<k2>alokya
{%A-lokya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unusual, unallowed. {%—Alokya-%}
{%tā,%} f. unfitness for heaven.
<LEND>

<L>6086<pc>0087-a<k1>alOkika<k2>alOkika
{%A-laukika, as, ī, am,%}¦ not current in the world,
not relating to this world, uncommon, supernatural;
(in gram.) not current in the usual language; un-
usual, rare; theoretical; Vedic (as opposed to the
later usage of a word). {%—Alaukika-tva, am,%} n. rare
occurence of a word.
<LEND>

<L>6087<pc>0087-a<k1>alopANga<k2>alopANga
{#alopANga#}¦ {%a-lopāṅga (˚pa-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%}
Ved. not defective in a single limb.
<LEND>

<L>6088<pc>0087-a<k1>alomaharzaRa<k2>alomaharzaRa
{#alomaharzaRa#}¦ {%a-lomaharṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} not
causing erection of the hair of the body (from joy).
<LEND>

<L>6089<pc>0087-a<k1>alola<k2>alola
{#alola#}¦ {%a-lola, as, ā, am,%} unagitated, firm,
steady, tranquil; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a metre containing four
lines, each of fourteen syllables. See {%lolā.%}
<LEND>

<L>6090<pc>0087-a<k1>alolu<k2>alolu
{%A-lolu, us, us, u,%}¦ indifferent to sensual objects.
<LEND>

<L>6091<pc>0087-a<k1>alolutva<k2>alolutva
{%—Alolu-tva, am,%}¦ n. indifference to sensual objects.
<LEND>

<L>6092<pc>0087-a<k1>alolupa<k2>alolupa
{#alolupa#}¦ {%a-lolupa, as, ā, am,%} free from
desire; not greedy or covetous, apathetic.
<LEND>

<L>6093<pc>0087-a<k1>aloha<k2>aloha
{#aloha#}¦ {%aloha, as,%} m., N. of a person?
(Gaṇa to Pāṇini IV. 2, 97).
<LEND>

<L>6094<pc>0087-a<k1>alohita<k2>alohita
{#alohita#}¦ {%a-lohita, as, ā, am,%} bloodless,
{%(am),%} n. Nymphæa Rubra.
<LEND>

<L>6095<pc>0087-a<k1>alOkika<k2>alOkika
{#alOkika#}¦ {%a-laukika.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>6096<pc>0087-a<k1>alka<k2>alka
{#alka#}¦ {%alka, as,%} m. (a doubtful word), a
tree; a member of the body.
<LEND>

<L>6097<pc>0087-a<k1>alpa<k2>alpa
{#alpa#}¦ {%alpa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%al?%}) perhaps
connected with {%arbha%}), small, minute, trifling; little;
seldom, rare; of short existence. {%Alpam,%} ind. little;
{%alpāt,%} ind. without much trouble, easily; {%alpena,%}
ind. easily [cf. Lith. <nsi>alpstu, ap-alpstu,</nsi> ‘to faint’].
{%—Alpa-kārya, am,%} n. small matter. {%—Alpa-keśī,%}
f., N. of a plant; or perhaps the root of sweet flag.
{%—Alpa-krīta, as, ā, am,%} bought for little money,
cheap. {%—Alpa-gandha, am,%} n. the red lotus.
{%—Alpa-ceṣṭita, as, ā, am,%} inert. {%—Alpa-cchada,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} scantily clad. {%—Alpa-jña, as, ā, am,%}
knowing little, ignorant, shallow, superficial. {%—Alpa-%}
{%tanu, us, us, u,%} small-bodied; short, thin. {%—Alpa-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%alpa-tva, am,%} n. smallness, minuteness;
inferiority, insignificance. {%—Alpa-dakṣiṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} defective in presents (as a ceremony). {%—Alpa-%}
{%dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} of confined views, narrow-minded.
{%—Alpa-dhana, as, ā, am,%} of little wealth, not afflu-
ent. {%—Alpa-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} weak-minded, having lit-
tle sense, foolish. {%—Alpa-pattra, as,%} m., N. of a
plant, a species of the Tulasi. {%—Alpa-padma, am,%}
n. the red lotus. {%—Alpa-parīvāra, as, ā, am,%}
having a small train or retinue. {%—Alpa-paśu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} Ved. having a small number of cattle. {%—Alpa-%}
{%puṇya, as, ā, am,%} whose religious merits are small.
{%—Alpa-prajas, ās, ās, as,%} having few descendants
or few subjects. {%—Alpa-prabhāva, as, ā, am,%} of
little weight or consequence, insignificant. {%—Alpa-%}
{%prabhāva-tva, am,%} n. insignificance. {%—Alpa-pra-%}
{%māṇa%} or {%alpapramāṇaka, as, ā, am,%} of little
weight or measure; of little authority, resting on
little evidence; ({%as%}), m. common cucumber, Cucu-
mis Sativus. {%—Alpa-prayoga, as, ā, am,%} of rare ap-
plication or use. {%—Alpa-prāṇa, as,%} m. (in gram.)
slight breathing or weak aspiration; the effort in
uttering the vowels, the semivowels {%y, r, l, v,%} the
consonants {%k, c, ṭ, t, p, g, j, ḍ, d, b,%} and the nasals,
is said to be accompanied with slight aspiration, but
practically {%alpa-prāṇa%} is here equivalent to unas-
pirated, as opposed to {%mahā-prāṇa,%} q. v.; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), having little or short breath, asthmatic. {%—Alpa-%}
{%bala, as, ā, am,%} of little strength, feeble. {%—Alpa- %}
[Page0087-b+ 79]
{%bādha, as, ā, am,%} causing little annoyance or incon-
venience. {%—Alpa-buddhi, is, is, i,%} weak-minded,
unwise, ignorant, silly. {%—Alpa-bhāgya, as, ā, am,%}
having little fortune. {%—Alpa-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} speak-
ing little, taciturn. {%—Alpa-madhyama, as, ā, am,%}
thin-waisted. {%—Alpa-mātra, am,%} n. a little, a little
merely; a short time, a few moments. {%—Alpa-mā-%}
{%riṣa, as,%}  m. a kind of amaranth, Amaranthus Poly-
gamus. {%—Alpa-mūrti, is, is, i,%} small-bodied, dimi-
nutive; ({%is%}), f. a small figure or object. {%—Alpa-%}
{%mūlya, as, ā, am,%} of small value. {%—Alpa-medhas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} of little understanding, ignorant, silly.
{%—Alpam-paca, as, ā, am,%} cooking little, stingy.
{%—Alpa-vayas, ās, ās, as,%} young in age. {%—Alpa-%}
{%vādin, ī, inī, i,%} speaking little, taciturn. {%—Alpa-%}
{%vidya, as, ā, am,%} ignorant, ill-taught, uneducated.
{%—Alpa-viṣaya, as, ā, am,%} of limited range or
capacity, engaged in trifling matters. {%—Alpaśaḥ-%}
{%paṅkti, is,%} f., N. of a metre. {%—Alpa-śakti, is, is,%}
{%i,%} of little strength, weak, feeble. {%—Alpa-śas,%} ind.
in a low degree, a little; separately; seldom, now
and then. {%—Alpa-saras, as,%} n. a basin, a small
pond, one which is shallow or dry in the hot season.
{%—Alpa-snāyu, us, us, u,%} having few sinews.
{%—Alpākāṅkṣin (˚pa-āk˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} desiring little,
contented or satisfied with little. {%—Alpāñji (˚pa-añ˚),%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. covered with minute spots. {%—Alpā-%}
{%yus (˚pa-āy˚), us, us, us,%} short-lived; young, of
few years; ({%us%}), m. a goat. {%—Alpārambha (˚pa-%}
{%ār˚), as,%} m. a gradual beginning. {%—Alpālpa (˚pa-%}
{%al˚), as, ā, am,%} very little, minute; little by little.
{%—Alpāhāra (˚pa-āh˚), as,%} m. the taking little
food; moderation, abstinence; {%(as, ā, am),%} absti-
nent. {%—Alpāhārin (˚pa-āh˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} eating little,
moderate, abstemious. {%—Alpecchu (˚pa-ic˚), us, us,%}
{%u,%} moderate in wishes, seeking little. {%—Alpetara%}
{%(˚pa-it˚), as, ā, am,%} large, lit. other than small.
{%—Alpeśākhya (alpa-īśa-ākhya), as, ā, am,%} named
after an insignificant chief or master, of low origin.
{%—Alpona (˚pa-ūn˚), as, ā, am,%} slightly defective,
not quite complete or not finished. {%—Alpopāya%}
{%(˚pa-up˚), as,%} m. small means.
<LEND>

<L>6098<pc>0087-b<k1>alpaka<k2>alpaka
{%Alpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ small, minute, trifling;
({%am%}), ind. little; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant, Hedysarum
Alhagi.
<LEND>

<L>6099<pc>0087-b<k1>alpita<k2>alpita
{%Alpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ diminished.
<LEND>

<L>6100<pc>0087-b<k1>alpizWa<k2>alpizWa
{%Alpiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ least, smallest, very small.
{%—Alpiṣṭha-kīrti, is, is, i,%} of little note.
<LEND>

<L>6101<pc>0087-b<k1>alpIkf<k2>alpIkf
{%Alpī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make
small.
<LEND>

<L>6102<pc>0087-b<k1>alpIkfta<k2>alpIkfta
{%Alpī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made small; comminuted;
reduced in number.
<LEND>

<L>6103<pc>0087-b<k1>alpIBUta<k2>alpIBUta
{%Alpī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ become small; diminished,
reduced in number.
<LEND>

<L>6104<pc>0087-b<k1>alpIyas<k2>alpIyas
{%Alpīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ smaller, less, very small.
<LEND>

<L>6105<pc>0087-b<k1>allA<k2>allA
{#allA#}¦ {%allā,%} f. a mother; voc. {%alla.%}
<LEND>

<L>6106<pc>0087-b<k1>av<k2>av
{#av#}¦ {%av,%} cl. 1. P. {%avati, āva, āvīt, avi-%}
{%ṣyati, avitum,%} to be glad, to enjoy one's
self, to satisfy one's self with (with loc.); to do good to
any one; to satisfy, to fill; to like, wish, desire, love;
to be pleased with, to bestow great care upon; to
favour, promote, animate; to help, guard, defend,
protect. (The following meanings are doubtful); to
move; to know or apprehend; to enter; to be
near; to have a right; to obey; to shine; to
embrace; to kill or hurt; to take; to be; to grow,
to burn, to divide: Caus. P. {%āvayati, -yitum,%} to
consume, devour [cf. Lat. <nsi>aveo;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄω</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>6107<pc>0087-b<k1>ava<k2>ava<h>1
1. {%ava, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. desiring, loving.
<LEND>

<L>6108<pc>0087-b<k1>avana<k2>avana
{%Avana, avani,%}¦ &c. See s.v.
<LEND>

<L>6109<pc>0087-b<k1>ava<k2>ava<h>2
{#ava#} 2¦. {%ava%} or sometimes {%va,%} ind. (as a pre-
fix to verbs and nouns expresses) off, away, down;
implying sometimes depreciation, disrepect, diminu-
tion, &c.
<div n="P"/>. (As a separable adverb or preposition with abl.)
away, off, away from or down [cf. the Zend pron.
<nsi>ava,</nsi> to which corresponds the Slav. <nsi>ovo, ova,</nsi> ‘this,
that:’ cf. also the syllable <lang n="greek">αὐ</lang> in <lang n="greek">αὐ-τός, αὖ, αὖθι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">αὖθις, αὖτις, αὖτε, αὐτάρ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>au-t, au-tem,</nsi> &c.].
<LEND>
[Page0087-c+ 72]

<L>6110<pc>0087-c<k1>avakawa<k2>avakawa
{%Avakaṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ opposite, contrary; back-
wards, downwards; ({%am%}), n. opposition, contrariety,
reverse.
<LEND>

<L>6111<pc>0087-c<k1>avakawikA<k2>avakawikA
{%Avakaṭikā,%}¦ f. dissimulation.
<LEND>

<L>6112<pc>0087-c<k1>avakuwAra<k2>avakuwAra
{%Avakuṭāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ opposite, contrary; back-
wards, downwards; ({%am%}), n. reverse, contrariety.
<LEND>

<L>6113<pc>0087-c<k1>avakuwArikA<k2>avakuwArikA
{%Avakuṭārikā,%}¦ f. dissimulation.
<LEND>

<L>6114<pc>0087-c<k1>avaMSa<k2>avaMSa
{#avaMSa#}¦ {%a-vaṃśa, as,%} m. a low or despised
family; ({%am%}), n., Ved. that which has no beams or
support, the ether.
<LEND>

<L>6115<pc>0087-c<k1>avakawa<k2>avakawa
{#avakawa, avakuwAra.#}¦ See above.
<LEND>

<L>6116<pc>0087-c<k1>avakalita<k2>avakalita
{#avakalita#}¦ {%ava-kalita, as, ā, am,%} Seen, ob-
served; wicked, perverse (?).
<LEND>

<L>6117<pc>0087-c<k1>avakA<k2>avakA
{#avakA#}¦ {%avakā,%} f. a grassy plant growing in
marshy land, Blyxa Octandra Rich; otherwise called
Śaivāla. {%—Avakāda (˚kā-ada), as, ā, am,%} Ved. eat-
ing the plant Blyxa Oct. R. {%—Avakolba (˚kā-ul˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} covered or surrounded with Avakā plants.
<LEND>

<L>6118<pc>0087-c<k1>avakAS<k2>avakAS
{#avakAS#}¦ {%ava-kāś,%} cl. 1. 4. A. {%-kāśate, -kāś-%}
{%yate, -śitum,%} to be visible, to be manifest: Caus.
P. {%-kāśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to look at: Intens.
part. {%-cākaśat, at, atī, at,%} shining; seeing.
<LEND>

<L>6119<pc>0087-c<k1>avakASa<k2>avakASa
{%Ava-kāśa, as,%}¦ m. a glance cast on anything; N.
of certain verses, during the recitation of which the
eyes must be fixed on certain objects; place, space,
open or wide space, room, occasion, opportunity;
interval, aperture; intermediate time; {%avakāśaṃ%}
{%kṛ%} or {%dā,%} to make room, to give way, to admit;
{%avakāśaṃ labh,%} to get a footing; to obtain a favour-
able opportunity; to find scope, happen, take place;
{%avakāśaṃ rudh,%} not to give way; to hinder, im-
pede. {%—Avakāśa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} spacious.
<LEND>

<L>6120<pc>0087-c<k1>avakASya<k2>avakASya
{%Avakāśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ admitted in the recitation
of the Avakāśa verses.
<LEND>

<L>6121<pc>0087-c<k1>avakuYcana<k2>avakuYcana
{#avakuYcana#}¦ {%ava-kuñcana, am,%} n. bending,
curving, flexure, contraction.
<LEND>

<L>6122<pc>0087-c<k1>avakuwwita<k2>avakuwwita
{#avakuwwita#}¦ {%ava-kuṭṭita, as, ā, am,%} vexed,
inflamed; cut off.
<LEND>

<L>6123<pc>0087-c<k1>avakuRWana<k2>avakuRWana
{#avakuRWana#}¦ {%ava-kuṇṭhana, am,%} n. investing,
surrounding; attracting.
<LEND>

<L>6124<pc>0087-c<k1>avakuRWita<k2>avakuRWita
{%Ava-kuṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ invested, surrounded,
attracted.
<LEND>

<L>6125<pc>0087-c<k1>avakuts<k2>avakuts
{#avakuts#}¦ {%ava-kuts,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-kutsayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to blame, revile, contemn.
<LEND>

<L>6126<pc>0087-c<k1>avakutsita<k2>avakutsita
{%Ava-kutsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reviled, despised; ({%am%}),
n. blame, censure.
<LEND>

<L>6127<pc>0087-c<k1>avakuz<k2>avakuz
{#avakuz#}¦ {%ava-kuṣ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-kuṣṇāti, -koṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to draw or rub downwards; to prove (?); to
display (?).
<LEND>

<L>6128<pc>0087-c<k1>avakUl<k2>avakUl
{#avakUl#}¦ {%ava-kūl,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kūlayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to singe, burn.
<LEND>

<L>6129<pc>0087-c<k1>avakft<k2>avakft
{#avakft#}¦ {%ava-kṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛntati, -karti-%}
{%tum,%} to cut off or away: Caus. P. {%-kartayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to cut off.
<LEND>

<L>6130<pc>0087-c<k1>avakarta<k2>avakarta
{%Ava-karta, as,%}¦ m. a part cut off, a strip.
<LEND>

<L>6131<pc>0087-c<k1>avakartana<k2>avakartana
{%Ava-kartana, am,%}¦ n. cutting off, excision.
<LEND>

<L>6132<pc>0087-c<k1>avakartin<k2>avakartin
{%Ava-kartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ cutting off, cutting out.
<LEND>

<L>6133<pc>0087-c<k1>avakfS<k2>avakfS
{#avakfS#}¦ {%ava-kṛś,%} Caus. {%-karśayati, -yitum,%}
to emaciate, make lean or meagre or mean-looking;
to deform.
<LEND>

<L>6134<pc>0087-c<k1>avakfz<k2>avakfz
{#avakfz#}¦ {%ava-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-karṣati,%}
{%-karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to draw off or away, to pull
off or out, to extract, to take off; to drag down.
<LEND>

<L>6135<pc>0087-c<k1>avakarzaRa<k2>avakarzaRa
{%Ava-karṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. taking or pulling out, off
or down, extraction; expulsion.
<LEND>

<L>6136<pc>0087-c<k1>avakfzwa<k2>avakfzwa
{%Ava-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn away or down,
sent away, removed, dropped; expelled, turned out;
dragged down; being below; inferior, low; degraded,
outcast; ({%as%}), m. a servent who performs the lowest
office, a sweeper, a waterman, &c.
<LEND>

<L>6137<pc>0087-c<k1>avakfzya<k2>avakfzya
{%Ava-kṛṣya,%}¦ ind. having drawn away or down.
<LEND>

<L>6138<pc>0087-c<k1>avakF<k2>avakF
{#avakF#}¦ {%ava-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -karitum, %}
[Page0088-a+ 72]
{%-rītum,%} to pour out or down, to spread, to scatter;
to shake off, throw off, leave; to bestrew, pour upon,
cover with, fill: A. {%-kirate,%} to extend; to fall asunder;
to pass away, fall off, become faithless.
<LEND>

<L>6139<pc>0088-a<k1>avakara<k2>avakara
{%Ava-kara, as,%}¦ m. dust or sweepings.
<LEND>

<L>6140<pc>0088-a<k1>avakIrRa<k2>avakIrRa
{%Ava-kīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown off, left; scattered,
disregarded, violated, coarsely pounded.
<LEND>

<L>6141<pc>0088-a<k1>avakIrRin<k2>avakIrRin
{%Ava-kīrṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ violating a vow or engage-
ment of chastity, continence, temperance, &c.; ({%ī%}),
m. a religious student who has committed an act of
incontinency. {%—Avakīrṇi-vrata, am,%} n. penance for
an act of incontinency.
<LEND>

<L>6142<pc>0088-a<k1>avakIryamARa<k2>avakIryamARa
{%Ava-kīryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being scattered or
strewed.
<LEND>

<L>6143<pc>0088-a<k1>avakxp<k2>avakxp
{#avakxp#}¦ {%ava-kḷp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kalpate, -pitum,%}
{%-ptum,%} to correspond with, to answer; to be right;
to be fit; to help to, to serve: Caus. {%-kalpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to put in order; to prepare, make ready;
to employ becomingly; to consider as possible:
Desid. of Caus. {%-cikalpayiṣati,%} to wish to prepare
or to make ready.
<LEND>

<L>6144<pc>0088-a<k1>avakalpita<k2>avakalpita
{%Ava-kalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ corresponding with, right,
fit.
<LEND>

<L>6145<pc>0088-a<k1>avakxpti<k2>avakxpti
{%Ava-kḷpti, is,%}¦ f. considering as possible; possi-
bility, suitableness.
<LEND>

<L>6146<pc>0088-a<k1>avakeSa<k2>avakeSa
{#avakeSa#}¦ {%ava-keśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
the hair hanging down.
<LEND>

<L>6147<pc>0088-a<k1>avakeSin<k2>avakeSin
{%Ava-keśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ unfruitful, barren; ({%ī%}), m. a
tree without fruit.
<LEND>

<L>6148<pc>0088-a<k1>avakokila<k2>avakokila
{#avakokila#}¦ {%ava-kokila, as, ā, am,%} called
down to by the koïl (singing in a tree above?).
<LEND>

<L>6149<pc>0088-a<k1>avakolba<k2>avakolba
{#avakolba#}¦ {%avakolba.%} See s. v. {%avakā.%}
<LEND>

<L>6150<pc>0088-a<k1>avaktavya<k2>avaktavya
{#avaktavya#}¦ {%a-vaktavya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vac%}),
not to be said, improper; indescribable.
<LEND>

<L>6151<pc>0088-a<k1>avaktra<k2>avaktra
{#avaktra#}¦ {%a-vaktra, as, ā, am,%} having no mouth
(as a vessel).
<LEND>

<L>6152<pc>0088-a<k1>avakra<k2>avakra
{#avakra#}¦ {%a-vakra, as, ā, am,%} not crooked,
straight, upright, honest.
<LEND>

<L>6153<pc>0088-a<k1>avakrakzin<k2>avakrakzin
{#avakrakzin#}¦ {%ava-krakṣin, ī, iṇī, i%} (rt. {%krakṣ%}
connected with {%kṛṣ?%}), Ved. dashing down, over-
coming.
<LEND>

<L>6154<pc>0088-a<k1>avakrand<k2>avakrand
{#avakrand#}¦ {%ava-krand,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krandati,%}
{%-te, -ditum,%} or Caus. P. {%-krandayati, -yitum,%} to
cry out, roar.
<LEND>

<L>6155<pc>0088-a<k1>avakranda<k2>avakranda
{%Ava-kranda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. roaring, neighing.
<LEND>

<L>6156<pc>0088-a<k1>avakrandana<k2>avakrandana
{%Ava-krandana, am,%}¦ n. crying out, weeping aloud.
<LEND>

<L>6157<pc>0088-a<k1>avakram<k2>avakram
{#avakram#}¦ {%ava-kram,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to step down or away, run
away, escape; to tread down, overcome; to descend:
Caus. P. {%-kramayati, -yitum,%} to cause to go down.
<LEND>

<L>6158<pc>0088-a<k1>avakrAnti<k2>avakrAnti
{%Ava-krānti, is,%}¦ f. descending, descent; approach.
<LEND>

<L>6159<pc>0088-a<k1>avakrAmin<k2>avakrAmin
{%Ava-krāmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. running away, escaping.
<LEND>

<L>6160<pc>0088-a<k1>avakriyA<k2>avakriyA
{#avakriyA#}¦ {%ava-kriyā,%} f. neglect, omission,
non-performance of prescribed acts.
<LEND>

<L>6161<pc>0088-a<k1>avakrI<k2>avakrI
{#avakrI#}¦ {%ava-krī,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-krīṇāti, -ṇīte,%}
{%-kretum,%} to purchase; to let out to hire; to bribe.
<LEND>

<L>6162<pc>0088-a<k1>avakraya<k2>avakraya
{%Ava-kraya, as,%}¦ m. letting out to hire; rent; re-
venue; price.
<LEND>

<L>6163<pc>0088-a<k1>avakrIq<k2>avakrIq
{#avakrIq#}¦ {%ava-krīḍ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krīḍati, -te,%}
{%-ḍitum,%} to play (?).
<LEND>

<L>6164<pc>0088-a<k1>avakruS<k2>avakruS
{#avakruS#}¦ {%ava-kruś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati, -kroṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to call down to; to revile.
<LEND>

<L>6165<pc>0088-a<k1>avakruzwa<k2>avakruzwa
{%Ava-kruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded ill or badly; re-
viled, abused.
<LEND>

<L>6166<pc>0088-a<k1>avakroSa<k2>avakroSa
{%Ava-krośa, as,%}¦ m. a discordant noise; a curse, an
imprecation; abuse.
<LEND>

<L>6167<pc>0088-a<k1>avaklam<k2>avaklam
{#avaklam#}¦ {%ava-klam, ?%} Caus. P. {%-klamayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to bring water for washing; (this word, given
by Westergaard, is doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>6168<pc>0088-a<k1>avakleda<k2>avakleda
{#avakleda#}¦ {%ava-kleda, as,%} m. (rt. {%klid%}), trick-
ling, descent of moisture; ichor, malignant or fetid
discharge.
<LEND>
[Page0088-b+ 70]

<L>6169<pc>0088-b<k1>avakledana<k2>avakledana
{%Ava-kledana, am,%}¦ n. trickling, falling as dew or
moisture.
<LEND>

<L>6170<pc>0088-b<k1>avakvaRa<k2>avakvaRa
{#avakvaRa#}¦ {%ava-kvaṇa, as,%} m. a discordant or
false note.
<LEND>

<L>6171<pc>0088-b<k1>avakvATa<k2>avakvATa
{#avakvATa#}¦ {%ava-kvātha, as,%} m. imperfect di-
gestion or decoction.
<LEND>

<L>6172<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzar<k2>avakzar
{#avakzar#}¦ {%ava-kṣar,%} Caus. P. {%-kṣārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to flow down upon.
<LEND>

<L>6173<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzal<k2>avakzal
{#avakzal#}¦ {%ava-kṣal,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kṣālayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to wash by dipping in.
<LEND>

<L>6174<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzAma<k2>avakzAma
{#avakzAma#}¦ {%ava-kṣāma, as,%} m., Ved. pro-
pitiatory offering, satisfaction of claims, compensation.
<LEND>

<L>6175<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzi<k2>avakzi
{#avakzi#}¦ {%ava-kṣi,%} cl. 9. 5. 1. P. {%-kṣiṇāti,%}
{%-ṇoti, -kṣayati, -kṣetum,%} to remove: Pass. {%-kṣī-%}
{%yate,%} to waste away.
<LEND>

<L>6176<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzaya<k2>avakzaya
{%Ava-kṣaya, as,%}¦ m. destruction, waste, loss.
<LEND>

<L>6177<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzayaRa<k2>avakzayaRa
{%Ava-kṣayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a means for extinguishing
(a fire, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>6178<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzIRa<k2>avakzIRa
{%Ava-kṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wasted, emaciated.
<LEND>

<L>6179<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzip<k2>avakzip
{#avakzip#}¦ {%ava-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣipati,%}
{%-te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw down; to cause to fly down
or away; to hurl; to reprimand, revile any one;
to grant, yield: Caus. P. {%-kṣepayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to fall down.
<LEND>

<L>6180<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzipta<k2>avakzipta
{%Ava-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown down, badly
thrown; said sarcastically, imputed, insinuated; blamed,
reviled.
<LEND>

<L>6181<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzepa<k2>avakzepa
{%Ava-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. blaming, reviling, scolding.
<LEND>

<L>6182<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzepaRa<k2>avakzepaRa
{%Ava-kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. throwing down, overcom-
ing; censure, blame; despising; {%(ṇī),%} f. rein, bridle.
<LEND>

<L>6183<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzu<k2>avakzu
{#avakzu#}¦ {%ava-kṣu,%} cl. 2. P. {%-kṣauti, -kṣavi-%}
{%tum,%} to sneeze upon.
<LEND>

<L>6184<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzuta<k2>avakzuta
{%Ava-kṣuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sneezed upon.
<LEND>

<L>6185<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzud<k2>avakzud
{#avakzud#}¦ {%ava-kṣud,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kṣodati, -di-%}
{%tum,%} to stamp or pound; to rub to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>6186<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzE<k2>avakzE
{#avakzE#}¦ {%ava-kṣai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kṣāyati, -kṣā-%}
{%tum,%} to burn down or to the end.
<LEND>

<L>6187<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzARa<k2>avakzARa
{%Ava-kṣāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ burnt down.
<LEND>

<L>6188<pc>0088-b<k1>avakzRu<k2>avakzRu
{#avakzRu#}¦ {%ava-kṣṇu,%} cl. 2. P. {%-kṣṇauti,%}
{%-kṣṇavitum,%} to rub to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>6189<pc>0088-b<k1>avaKaRq<k2>avaKaRq
{#avaKaRq#}¦ {%ava-khaṇḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-khaṇḍayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to divide, annihilate, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>6190<pc>0088-b<k1>avaKaRqana<k2>avaKaRqana
{%Ava-khaṇḍana, am,%}¦ n. dividing, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>6191<pc>0088-b<k1>avaKAda<k2>avaKAda
{#avaKAda#}¦ {%ava-khāda, as,%} m., Ved. a bad or
contemptible meal, eating to no purpose, an unworthy
oblation.
<LEND>

<L>6192<pc>0088-b<k1>avaKyA<k2>avaKyA
{#avaKyA#}¦ {%ava-khyā,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-khyāti,%}
{%-khyātum,%} to look down, perceive: Caus. P. {%-khyā-%}
{%payati, -yitum,%} to cause to look at.
<LEND>

<L>6193<pc>0088-b<k1>avagaR<k2>avagaR
{#avagaR#}¦ {%ava-gaṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-gaṇayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to disregard, disrepect, pay no attention; to
despise.
<LEND>

<L>6194<pc>0088-b<k1>avagaRana<k2>avagaRana
{%Ava-gaṇana, am,%}¦ n. contempt, disregard.
<LEND>

<L>6195<pc>0088-b<k1>avagaRita<k2>avagaRita
{%Ava-gaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disregarded, despised.
<LEND>

<L>6196<pc>0088-b<k1>avagaRa<k2>avagaRa
{#avagaRa#}¦ {%ava-gaṇa, as, ā, am,%} separated from
one's companions, isolated, alone.
<LEND>

<L>6197<pc>0088-b<k1>avagaRqa<k2>avagaRqa
{#avagaRqa#}¦ {%ava-gaṇḍa, as,%} m. a boil or pimple
upon the face.
<LEND>

<L>6198<pc>0088-b<k1>avagaTa<k2>avagaTa
{#avagaTa#}¦ {%ava-gatha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%gā,%} to go),
bathing or bathed early in the morning.
<LEND>

<L>6199<pc>0088-b<k1>avagadita<k2>avagadita
{#avagadita#}¦ {%ava-gadita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%gad%}),
unsaid, unuttered.
<LEND>

<L>6200<pc>0088-b<k1>avagam<k2>avagam
{#avagam#}¦ {%ava-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} to go down, descend; to come to, visit; to go
near, undertake; to reach, obtain; to hit upon,
think of, conceive; to learn, understand, assure one's
self, be convinced; to recognize, consider: Caus. P.
{%-gamayati, -yitum,%} to bring near, procure; to cause
to know, teach.
<LEND>

<L>6201<pc>0088-b<k1>avagata<k2>avagata
{%Ava-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, gone away; obtained,
[Page0088-c+ 73]
conceived, known, learnt, understood, comprehended;
assented, promised.
<LEND>

<L>6202<pc>0088-c<k1>avagati<k2>avagati
{%Ava-gati, is,%}¦ f. perception, knowledge, compre-
hension.
<LEND>

<L>6203<pc>0088-c<k1>avagantavya<k2>avagantavya
{%Ava-gantavya%}¦ or {%ava-gamya, as, ā, am,%} to be
known or understood, to be judged, intended to be
understood, meant.
<LEND>

<L>6204<pc>0088-c<k1>avagama<k2>avagama
{%Ava-gama, as,%}¦ m. or {%ava-gamana, am,%} n. going
near, descending, understanding, comprehension, in-
telligence; knowledge, getting acquainted with.
<LEND>

<L>6205<pc>0088-c<k1>avagarhita<k2>avagarhita
{#avagarhita#}¦ {%ava-garhita, as, ā, am,%} despised.
<LEND>

<L>6206<pc>0088-c<k1>avagal<k2>avagal
{#avagal#}¦ {%ava-gal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-galati, -litum,%}
to fall down, slip down.
<LEND>

<L>6207<pc>0088-c<k1>avagalB<k2>avagalB
{#avagalB#}¦ {%ava-galbh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-galbhate,%}
{%-bhitum,%} to be brave, valiant.
<LEND>

<L>6208<pc>0088-c<k1>avagAda<k2>avagAda
{#avagAda#}¦ {%avagāda, as,%} m. a small wooden
bason for baling water out of a boat; (etym. doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>6209<pc>0088-c<k1>avagAh<k2>avagAh
{#avagAh#}¦ {%ava-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -gāhi-%}
{%tum, -gāḍhum,%} to plunge into; to go deep into, to
be absorbed in (with loc. or acc.).
<LEND>

<L>6210<pc>0088-c<k1>avagAQa<k2>avagAQa
{%Ava-gāḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ immersed, bathed, plunged
into; that in which one bathes; deepened, low;
concealed, curdling (as blood). {%—Avagāḍha-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} bathing, plunging, diving.
<LEND>

<L>6211<pc>0088-c<k1>avagAha<k2>avagAha
{%Ava-gāha, as,%}¦ m. plunging, bathing; a bucket (?).
<LEND>

<L>6212<pc>0088-c<k1>avagAhana<k2>avagAhana
{%Ava-gāhana, am,%}¦ n. immersion, plunging, diving,
bathing.
<LEND>

<L>6213<pc>0088-c<k1>avagAhita<k2>avagAhita
{%Ava-gāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bathed, immersed.
<LEND>

<L>6214<pc>0088-c<k1>avaguRW<k2>avaguRW
{#avaguRW#}¦ {%ava-guṇṭh,%} cl. 10. P. {%-guṇṭhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cover with; to draw over, conceal.
<LEND>

<L>6215<pc>0088-c<k1>avaguRWana<k2>avaguRWana
{%Ava-guṇṭhana, am,%}¦ n. hiding, veiling, a veil; a
peculiar joining of the fingers in certain religious
ceremonies; sweeping. {%—Avaguṇṭhana-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} covered with a veil.
<LEND>

<L>6216<pc>0088-c<k1>avaguRWikA<k2>avaguRWikA
{%Ava-guṇṭhikā,%}¦ f. a veil.
<LEND>

<L>6217<pc>0088-c<k1>avaguRWita<k2>avaguRWita
{%Ava-guṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, concealed,
veiled, screened. {%—Avaguṇṭhita-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
having the face veiled.
<LEND>

<L>6218<pc>0088-c<k1>avaguRqita<k2>avaguRqita
{#avaguRqita#}¦ {%ava-guṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} pounded,
ground, pulverulent.
<LEND>

<L>6219<pc>0088-c<k1>avagur<k2>avagur
{#avagur#}¦ {%ava-gur,%} cl. 6. A. {%-gurate, -ritum,%}
to assail with threats, to attack, to raise a weapon for
the purpose of striking a blow.
<LEND>

<L>6220<pc>0088-c<k1>avagoraRa<k2>avagoraRa
{%Ava-goraṇa, am,%}¦ n. menacing, assaulting with in-
tent to kill, assailing with weapons.
<LEND>

<L>6221<pc>0088-c<k1>avaguh<k2>avaguh
{#avaguh#}¦ {%ava-guh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-gūhati, -te,%}
{%gūhitum, -goḍhum,%} to cover; to hide, conceal; to
put into or inside; to embrace.
<LEND>

<L>6222<pc>0088-c<k1>avagUhana<k2>avagUhana
{%Ava-gūhana, am,%}¦ n. hiding, concealing, embracing.
<LEND>

<L>6223<pc>0088-c<k1>avagF<k2>avagF
{#avagF#}¦ {%ava-gṝ,%} cl. 6. A. {%-girate%} or {%-gilate,%}
{%-garitum%} or {%-galitum, -garītum%} or {%-galītum,%} to
swallow up.
<LEND>

<L>6224<pc>0088-c<k1>avagIrRa<k2>avagIrRa
{%Ava-gīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ swallowed up.
<LEND>

<L>6225<pc>0088-c<k1>avagE<k2>avagE
{#avagE#}¦ {%ava-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gātum,%}
to sing in a discordant tone, sing depreciatingly, sa-
tirize in song, reproach, revile.
<LEND>

<L>6226<pc>0088-c<k1>avagIta<k2>avagIta
{%Ava-gīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sung in a discordant tone,
sung badly; sung depreciatingly, satirized in song,
destroyed by incantation; reproached, abused, cen-
sured; wicked, vile; seen frequently ({%= muhur-%}
{%dṛṣṭa%}), sung of frequently, well known, ‘decan-
tatus;’ ({%am%}), n. satire in song; reproach, blame, bad
or discordant singing.
<LEND>

<L>6227<pc>0088-c<k1>avagrah<k2>avagrah
{#avagrah#}¦ {%ava-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti,%}
{%-ṇīte,%} or Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte, -grahītum,%} to let
loose, to let go; to divide; (in gram.) to break off,
separate, discontinue; to distinguish: Caus. P. {%-grā-%}
{%hayati, -yitum,%} to knead, make dough.
<LEND>

<L>6228<pc>0088-c<k1>avagfhIta<k2>avagfhIta
{%Ava-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ obstructed, impeded, re-
strained.
<LEND>

<L>6229<pc>0088-c<k1>avagfhya<k2>avagfhya<h>1
1. {%ava-gṛhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (in gram.) separable.
<div n="P"/>.2. {%ava-gṛhya,%} ind. having separated, laying hold
with the feet, leaning against with force or violence.
<LEND>
[Page0089-a+ 74]

<L>6230<pc>0089-a<k1>avagraha<k2>avagraha
{%Ava-graha, as,%}¦ m. separation of the component
parts of a compound, or of other grammatical forms,
occurring in some Pāṭhas, e. g. in the Pada-text of
the Vedas; the mark or the interval of such a separa-
tion; the syllable or letter after which the separation
occurs; the chief member of a word so separated;
obstacle, impediment, restraint; drought; nature,
original temperament; a sort of knowledge, a false
idea (?); an imprecation or term of abuse; an ele-
phant's forehead; a herd of elephants; an iron hook
with which elephants are driven.
<LEND>

<L>6231<pc>0089-a<k1>avagrahaRa<k2>avagrahaRa
{%Ava-grahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. obstacle, impediment, re-
straint, disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>6232<pc>0089-a<k1>avagrAha<k2>avagrAha
{%Ava-grāha, as,%}¦ m. breaking off, discontinuing;
obstacle, impediment, imprecation; drought; the
forehead of an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>6233<pc>0089-a<k1>avagrAham<k2>avagrAham
{%Ava-grāham,%}¦ ind. in breaking off or discontinuing.
<LEND>

<L>6234<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGaww<k2>avaGaww
{#avaGaww#}¦ {%ava-ghaṭṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ghaṭṭate, -ṭṭitum,%}
cl. 10. P. {%-ghaṭṭayati, -yitum,%} to push or brush
away or off; to touch, feel, rub; to stir up.
<LEND>

<L>6235<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGawwa<k2>avaGawwa
{%Ava-ghaṭṭa, as,%}¦ m. a hole in the ground, a cave,
a cavern.
<LEND>

<L>6236<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGawwana<k2>avaGawwana
{%Ava-ghaṭṭana, am,%}¦ n. rubbing away or off.
<LEND>

<L>6237<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGawwita<k2>avaGawwita
{%Ava-ghaṭṭita, am,%}¦ n. pushing or rubbing toge-
ther; rubbing off.
<LEND>

<L>6238<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGAta<k2>avaGAta
{#avaGAta#}¦ {%ava-ghāta, as,%} m. (rt. {%han%}), strik-
ing, hurting, killing; a violent or fatal blow; threshing
corn by bruising it with a wooden pestle in a mortar
of the same material.
<LEND>

<L>6239<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGAtin<k2>avaGAtin
{%Ava-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ striking, killing.
<LEND>

<L>6240<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGuz<k2>avaGuz
{#avaGuz#}¦ {%ava-ghuṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ghoṣati, -ṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to proclaim aloud; to convoke, send for, sum-
mon; to fill with cries or clamour.
<LEND>

<L>6241<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGuzwa<k2>avaGuzwa
{%Ava-ghuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ proclaimed, summoned.
<LEND>

<L>6242<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGozaRa<k2>avaGozaRa
{%Ava-ghoṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. crying, proclaiming, de-
nouncing.
<LEND>

<L>6243<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGUrR<k2>avaGUrR
{#avaGUrR#}¦ {%ava-ghūrṇ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ghūrṇati, -te,%}
{%-ṇitum,%} to whirl round, brandish, move to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>6244<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGUrRa<k2>avaGUrRa
{%Ava-ghūrṇa, as,%}¦ m. a whirling round; a whirlpool.
<LEND>

<L>6245<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGUrRana<k2>avaGUrRana
{%Ava-ghūrṇana, am,%}¦ n. rolling or whirling round.
<LEND>

<L>6246<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGUrRita<k2>avaGUrRita
{%Ava-ghūrṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ whirled round.
<LEND>

<L>6247<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGfz<k2>avaGfz
{#avaGfz#}¦ {%ava-ghṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-gharṣati,%}
{%-te, -ṣitum,%} to rub off, rub to pieces: Caus. {%-ghar-%}
{%ṣayati, -yitum,%} to rub off, scratch off.
<LEND>

<L>6248<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGarzaRa<k2>avaGarzaRa
{%Ava-gharṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. rubbing off, scrubbing.
<LEND>

<L>6249<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGarzita<k2>avaGarzita
{%Ava-gharṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed off, scrubbed.
<LEND>

<L>6250<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGowita<k2>avaGowita
{#avaGowita#}¦ {%ava-ghoṭita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ghuṭ,%}
cf. rt. {%guṇṭh%} with {%ava%}), covered, concealed.
<LEND>

<L>6251<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGrA<k2>avaGrA
{#avaGrA#}¦ {%ava-ghrā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jighrati, -ghrā-%}
{%tum,%} to smell at, to touch with the mouth; to kiss:
Caus. {%-ghrāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to smell at.
<LEND>

<L>6252<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGrARa<k2>avaGrARa
{%Ava-ghrāṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of smelling at.
<LEND>

<L>6253<pc>0089-a<k1>avaGrAta<k2>avaGrAta
{%Ava-ghrāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ smelled, smelled at; kissed.
<LEND>

<L>6254<pc>0089-a<k1>avaca<k2>avaca
{#avaca#}¦ {%avaca,%} lower. This word is con-
nected with {%ava%} as {%ucca%} is with {%ud,%} but only found
in {%uccāvaca,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>6255<pc>0089-a<k1>avacakz<k2>avacakz
{#avacakz#}¦ {%ava-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe, -caṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to look down upon, to perceive.
<LEND>

<L>6256<pc>0089-a<k1>avacakzaRa<k2>avacakzaRa
{%Ava-cakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking down upon?
(Gaṇa to Pāṇini VIII. 1. 27, 57).
<LEND>

<L>6257<pc>0089-a<k1>avacana<k2>avacana
{#avacana#}¦ {%a-vacana, am,%} n. absence of asser-
tion, silence, taciturnity; ({%as, ā, am%}), not speaking,
silent. {%—A-vacana-kara, as, ā, am,%} not doing what
one is bid, disobedient.
<LEND>

<L>6258<pc>0089-a<k1>avacanIya<k2>avacanIya
{%A-vacanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be spoken, im-
proper. {%—Avacanīya-tā,%} f. or {%avacanīya-tva, am,%}
n. impropriety of speech.
<LEND>

<L>6259<pc>0089-a<k1>avacaskara<k2>avacaskara
{%A-vacas-kara, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} silent, not speak-
ing, taciturn.
<LEND>

<L>6260<pc>0089-a<k1>avacandramasa<k2>avacandramasa
{#avacandramasa#}¦ {%ava-candramasa, am,%} n., Ved.
the looking down of the moon.
<LEND>

<L>6261<pc>0089-a<k1>avacar<k2>avacar
{#avacar#}¦ {%ava-car,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-carati, -te,%}
{%-ritum,%} Ved. {%-ritave%} or {%-vai, -rase, -radhyai,%} to
move or come down; to go down towards: Caus.
[Page0089-b+ 74]
{%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to move or descend
upon; to employ.
<LEND>

<L>6262<pc>0089-b<k1>avacara<k2>avacara
{%Ava-cara, as, ā, am,%}¦ going or moving down or
in or upon; ({%as%}), m. place of descent, road, field of
action.
<LEND>

<L>6263<pc>0089-b<k1>avacAraRa<k2>avacAraRa
{%Ava-cāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. employing, application, mode
of proceeding.
<LEND>

<L>6264<pc>0089-b<k1>avacArya<k2>avacArya
{%Ava-cārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cast down, to be
given, to be put on or applied.
<LEND>

<L>6265<pc>0089-b<k1>avaci<k2>avaci<h>1
{#avaci#} 1¦. {%ava-ci,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%-ciketi,%}
{%-cetum,%} to worship, honour, respect.
<LEND>

<L>6266<pc>0089-b<k1>avaci<k2>avaci<h>2
{#avaci#} 2¦. {%ava-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -nute,%}
{%-cetum,%} to gather, pick off; to take off; to let
down (one's cloak) behind, to open (one's cloak).
<LEND>

<L>6267<pc>0089-b<k1>avacaya<k2>avacaya
{%Ava-caya, as,%}¦ m. gathering, especially flowers,
fruits, &c.
<LEND>

<L>6268<pc>0089-b<k1>avacAyin<k2>avacAyin
{%Ava-cāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ gathering, picking off.
<LEND>

<L>6269<pc>0089-b<k1>avacita<k2>avacita
{%Ava-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gathered; filled, inhabited.
<LEND>

<L>6270<pc>0089-b<k1>avacUqa<k2>avacUqa
{#avacUqa#}¦ {%ava-cūḍa, as,%} m. the pendent crest
or streamer of a standard. See {%ava-cūla.%}
<LEND>

<L>6271<pc>0089-b<k1>avacUrR<k2>avacUrR
{#avacUrR#}¦ {%ava-cūrṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cūrṇayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to sprinkle with meal, dust, &c.; to cover.
<LEND>

<L>6272<pc>0089-b<k1>avacUrRana<k2>avacUrRana
{%Ava-cūrṇana, am,%}¦ n. sprinkling with powder;
pounding, reducing to powder.
<LEND>

<L>6273<pc>0089-b<k1>avacUrRana<k2>avacUrRana
{%Ava-cūrṇana, am,%}¦ n. sprinkled with powder;
coarsely pounded, ground, crushed.
<LEND>

<L>6274<pc>0089-b<k1>avacUla<k2>avacUla
{#avacUla#}¦ {%ava-cūla, as,%} m. (fr. {%cūla%} for {%cūḍa%}),
an ornament hanging downwards from the top of a
banner, the top ornaments (such as streamers, peacocks'
tails, &c.) of a standard hanging downward; a chowrī.
<LEND>

<L>6275<pc>0089-b<k1>avacUlaka<k2>avacUlaka
{%Ava-cūlaka, as,%}¦ m. a chowrī or brush, formed of
a cow's tail, peacock's feathers, &c., for fanning off
flies.
<LEND>

<L>6276<pc>0089-b<k1>avacft<k2>avacft
{#avacft#}¦ {%ava-cṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-cṛtati, -carti-%}
{%tum,%} to let loose.
<LEND>

<L>6277<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCad<k2>avacCad
{#avacCad#}¦ {%ava-cchad (-chad),%} cl. 10. P. {%-cchā-%}
{%dayati, -yitum,%} to cover over, overspread; to con-
ceal, to obscure, leave in darkness.
<LEND>

<L>6278<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCada<k2>avacCada
{%Ava-cchada, as,%}¦ m. a cover, covering.
<LEND>

<L>6279<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCamma<k2>avacCamma
{%Ava-cchamma, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered over, over-
spread, filled.
<LEND>

<L>6280<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCAdya<k2>avacCAdya
{%Ava-cchādya,%}¦ ind. having covered over; having
obscured.
<LEND>

<L>6281<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCid<k2>avacCid
{#avacCid#}¦ {%ava-cchid (-chid),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-cchinatti, -cchinte, -cchettum,%} to cut off, detach,
separate, to tear in pieces, break asunder; to excerpt,
distinguish, discriminate; to interrupt.
<LEND>

<L>6282<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCinna<k2>avacCinna
{%Ava-cchinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off, separated, divided,
detached, excerpted; broken; (in logic) predicated,
i. e. separated from everything else by the properties
predicated; bounded.
<LEND>

<L>6283<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCeda<k2>avacCeda
{%Ava-ccheda, as,%}¦ m. anything cut off; part, portion;
separation, distinction; discrimination; distinguish-
ing; boundary, limit; a predicate, the property of
a thing by which it is distinguished from everything
else. {%—Avacchedāvaccheda (˚da-av˚), as,%} m. gene-
ralising, removing distinctions.
<LEND>

<L>6284<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCedaka<k2>avacCedaka
{%Ava-cchedaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ separating, distin-
guishing, particularising, determining; bounding, se-
parating one thing from another; peculiar; ({%as%}), m.
that which distinguishes, &c.; a predicate, character-
istic, property; boundary, limit.
<LEND>

<L>6285<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCedana<k2>avacCedana
{%Ava-cchedana, am,%}¦ n. cutting off; separating, di-
viding; discriminating, distinguishing.
<LEND>

<L>6286<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCedya<k2>avacCedya
{%Ava-cchedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut off, separated, &c.
<LEND>

<L>6287<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCurita<k2>avacCurita
{#avacCurita#}¦ {%ava-cchurita%} or {%ava-cchuritaka,%}
{%am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%chur,%} ‘to split,’ with {%ava,%} ‘that which
splits one's sides?’), a horse-laugh.
<LEND>

<L>6288<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCo<k2>avacCo
{#avacCo#}¦ {%ava-ccho (-cho),%} cl. 4. P. {%-cchyati,%}
{%-cchātum,%} to cut off or away, to flay, to skin, to reap.
<LEND>

<L>6289<pc>0089-b<k1>avacCAta<k2>avacCAta
{%Ava-cchāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off, flayed, emaciated
by abstinence; reaped.
<LEND>

<L>6290<pc>0089-b<k1>avajanita<k2>avajanita
{#avajanita#}¦ {%ava-janita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jan%}),
born, brought forth.
<LEND>
[Page0089-c+ 72]

<L>6291<pc>0089-c<k1>avaji<k2>avaji
{#avaji#}¦ {%ava-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%} to
spoil (i. e. deprive by conquest), to win; recover;
to ward off; conquer: Desid. {%-jigīṣati,%} to wish to
win or recover.
<LEND>

<L>6292<pc>0089-c<k1>avajaya<k2>avajaya
{%Ava-jaya, as,%}¦ m. the act of overcoming, victory.
<LEND>

<L>6293<pc>0089-c<k1>avajita<k2>avajita
{%Ava-jita, as, ā, am,%}¦ conquered; contemned, dis-
regarded.
<LEND>

<L>6294<pc>0089-c<k1>avajuzwa<k2>avajuzwa
{#avajuzwa#}¦ {%ava-juṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%juṣ%}),
visited.
<LEND>

<L>6295<pc>0089-c<k1>avajYA<k2>avajYA<h>1
{#avajYA#} 1¦. {%ava-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. {%-jānāti, -jñātum,%}
to disesteem, have a low opinion of, despise, treat
with contempt.
<LEND>

<L>6296<pc>0089-c<k1>avajYA<k2>avajYA<h>2
2. {%ava-jñā,%}¦ f. or {%ava-jñāna, am,%} n. contempt, dis-
esteem, disrepect (with obj. in loc. or gen.). {%—Ava-%}
{%jñopahata (˚jñā-up˚), as, ā, am,%} treated with con-
tempt, humiliated, degraded.
<LEND>

<L>6297<pc>0089-c<k1>avajYAta<k2>avajYAta
{%Ava-jñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ despised, disrespected.
<LEND>

<L>6298<pc>0089-c<k1>avajYeya<k2>avajYeya
{%Ava-jñeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ contemptible, to be treated
with disrespect, disreputable.
<LEND>

<L>6299<pc>0089-c<k1>avajyut<k2>avajyut
{#avajyut#}¦ {%ava-jyut%} (rt. {%jyut%} for {%dyut%}), Caus.
{%-jyotayati, -yitum,%} to light up or bring a light to
bear upon, to illumine.
<LEND>

<L>6300<pc>0089-c<k1>avajyotya<k2>avajyotya
{%Ava-jyotya,%}¦ ind. having lighted (a lamp.)
<LEND>

<L>6301<pc>0089-c<k1>avajval<k2>avajval
{#avajval#}¦ {%ava-jval,%} Caus. {%-jvālayati, -yitum,%}
to set on fire.
<LEND>

<L>6302<pc>0089-c<k1>avawa<k2>avawa
{#avawa#}¦ {%avaṭa, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%ava,%} q. v.), a hole,
a vacuity; a hole in the ground, a chasm, a pit; any
depressed part of the body, a cavity, a fosse, a sinus;
a well; a juggler; N. of a man. {%—Avaṭa-kacchapa,%}
{%as,%} m. a tortoise in a hole (said of an inexperienced
man, who has seen nothing of the world). {%—Avaṭa-%}
{%virodhana, am,%} n. a particular hell.
<LEND>

<L>6303<pc>0089-c<k1>avati<k2>avati
{%Avati, is,%}¦ m. a hole in the ground; a sinus; a
hollow, a cavity.
<LEND>

<L>6304<pc>0089-c<k1>avawIwa<k2>avawIwa
{%Avaṭīṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ flat-nosed.
<LEND>

<L>6305<pc>0089-c<k1>avawu<k2>avawu
{%Avaṭu, us,%}¦ m. f. the back or nape of the neck;
a hole in the ground; a well; N. of a tree; ({%u%}), n.
a hole, a rent. {%—Avaṭu-ja, as,%} m. a hind curl, the
hair on the back of the head.
<LEND>

<L>6306<pc>0089-c<k1>avawya<k2>avawya
{%Avaṭya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in a hole.
<LEND>

<L>6307<pc>0089-c<k1>avata<k2>avata
{%Avata, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a well, a cistern.
<LEND>

<L>6308<pc>0089-c<k1>avaqaNga<k2>avaqaNga
{#avaqaNga#}¦ {%avaḍaṅga%} or {%avaḍraṅga%} or {%ava-%}
{%ṭaṅka%} (?) or {%avaṭaṅga (?), as,%} m. a market, a mart.
<LEND>

<L>6309<pc>0089-c<k1>avaqIna<k2>avaqIna
{#avaqIna#}¦ {%ava-ḍīna, am,%} n. (rt. {%ḍī%}), the flight
of a bird, flying downwards.
<LEND>

<L>6310<pc>0089-c<k1>avaRqa<k2>avaRqa
{#avaRqa#}¦ {%a-vaṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not with-
out a tail.
<LEND>

<L>6311<pc>0089-c<k1>avataMsa<k2>avataMsa
{#avataMsa#}¦ {%ava-taṃsa%} or {%ava-taṃsaka, as, am,%}
m. n. (rt. {%taṃs%}), a garland; a ring-shaped ornament,
ear-ring, crest.
<LEND>

<L>6312<pc>0089-c<k1>avataMsita<k2>avataMsita
{%Ava-taṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a garland or ear-
ring, crested.
<LEND>

<L>6313<pc>0089-c<k1>avatakzaRa<k2>avatakzaRa
{#avatakzaRa#}¦ {%ava-takṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%takṣ%}),
anything cut in pieces; chopped straw.
<LEND>

<L>6314<pc>0089-c<k1>avataq<k2>avataq
{#avataq#}¦ {%ava-taḍ,%} Caus. P. {%-tāḍayati, -yitum,%}
to strike downwards.
<LEND>

<L>6315<pc>0089-c<k1>avatan<k2>avatan
{#avatan#}¦ {%ava-tan,%} cl. 8. P. {%-tanoti, -nitum,%}
to stretch or extend downwards; to overspread, cover;
to loosen, undo, especially a bowstring.
<LEND>

<L>6316<pc>0089-c<k1>avatata<k2>avatata
{%Ava-tata, as, ā, am,%}¦ overspread, canopied, covered;
loosened. {%—Avatata-dhanvan, ā,%} m., Ved. whose
bow is unbent.
<LEND>

<L>6317<pc>0089-c<k1>avatati<k2>avatati
{%Ava-tati, is,%}¦ f. stretching, extending,
<LEND>

<L>6318<pc>0089-c<k1>avatAna<k2>avatAna
{%Ava-tāna, as,%}¦ f. stretching, extending; unbend-
ing of a bow; cover; awning.
<LEND>

<L>6319<pc>0089-c<k1>avatap<k2>avatap
{#avatap#}¦ {%ava-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -taptum,%}
to radiate heat (or light) downwards: Caus. {%-tāpa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to irradiate; to heat; to illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>6320<pc>0089-c<k1>avatapta<k2>avatapta
{%Ava-tapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ heated. {%—Avatapte-na-%}
{%kula-sthita, am,%} n. an ichneumon's standing on hot
ground (metaphorically said of the inconstancy of
man).
<LEND>
[Page0090-a+ 74]

<L>6321<pc>0090-a<k1>avatApin<k2>avatApin
{%Ava-tāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ a place where the sun strikes
vertically down.
<LEND>

<L>6322<pc>0090-a<k1>avatamasa<k2>avatamasa
{#avatamasa#}¦ {%ava-tamasa, am,%} n. slight dark-
ness, obscurity.
<LEND>

<L>6323<pc>0090-a<k1>avataram<k2>avataram
{#avataram#}¦ {%ava-taram,%} ind. (fr. {%ava%} with
compar. affix), Ved. farther away, more distantly.
<LEND>

<L>6324<pc>0090-a<k1>avatas<k2>avatas
{%Ava-tas,%}¦ ind. below, in the lower world.
<LEND>

<L>6325<pc>0090-a<k1>avatarpaRa<k2>avatarpaRa
{#avatarpaRa#}¦ {%ava-tarpaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%tṛp%}),
soothing remedy.
<LEND>

<L>6326<pc>0090-a<k1>avatfd<k2>avatfd
{#avatfd#}¦ {%ava-tṛd,%} cl. 7. P., Ved. {%-tṛṇatti,%}
{%-tarditum,%} to chip off, sever; to silence.
<LEND>

<L>6327<pc>0090-a<k1>avatF<k2>avatF
{#avatF#}¦ {%ava-tṝ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati, -taritum%} or
{%-rītum,%} to descend (especially as a deity in becoming
incarnate); to alight; to betake one's self to; to
make one's appearance; to undertake, overcome:
Caus. {%-tārayati, -yitum,%} to make or let one descend,
to bring or fetch down; to pour down, take down,
take off, remove; to bring down towards; to intro-
duce, set a-going, render current; to descend (?).
<LEND>

<L>6328<pc>0090-a<k1>avataraRa<k2>avataraRa
{%Ava-taraṇa, am,%}¦ n. descending, alighting; rush-
ing along, sudden disappearance; crossing; trans-
lating.
<LEND>

<L>6329<pc>0090-a<k1>avataraRikA<k2>avataraRikA
{%Ava-taraṇikā,%}¦ f. the short prayer (e. g. {%gaṇeśāya%}
{%namaḥ%}) at the beginning of a work, which causes the
divinity so addressed to descend from heaven.
<LEND>

<L>6330<pc>0090-a<k1>avataritavya<k2>avataritavya
{%Ava-taritavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be descended.
<LEND>

<L>6331<pc>0090-a<k1>avatAra<k2>avatAra
{%Ava-tāra, as,%}¦ m. descent (especially of a deity
from heaven), the appearance of any deity upon earth,
but more particularly the incarnations of Viṣṇu in ten
principal forms, viz. the fish, tortoise, boar, man-lion,
dwarf, the two Rāmas, Kṛṣṇa, Buddha, and Kalki;
any new and unexpected appearance; (any distin-
guished person in the language of respect is called an
Avatār or incarnation of a deity); aiming at an object
(with gen.); a landing-place, a Tīrtha or sacred
place; a pond; translation, translating, crossing; {%ava-%}
{%tāraṃ labh,%} to gain one's aim or object with regard
to anything (with gen.). {%—Avatāra-kathā,%} f. ac-
count of an Avatāra; N. of a chapter in the work
entitled ‘Śaṅkara-vijaya,’ supposed to have been com-
posed by Anantānanda-giri. {%—Avatāra-dvādaśa-%}
{%kīrtana, am,%} n. title of a chapter of the work
‘Ūrdhvāmnāya-saṃhitā.’ {%—Avatāra-mantra, as,%}
m. a prayer causing the descent of a deity. {%—Ava-%}
{%tāra-vādāvalī,%} f., N. of a controversial work by
Puruṣottama.
<LEND>

<L>6332<pc>0090-a<k1>avatAraka<k2>avatAraka
{%Ava-tāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ making one's appear-
ance; making a descent.
<LEND>

<L>6333<pc>0090-a<k1>avatAraRa<k2>avatAraRa
{%Ava-tāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. causing to descend; transla-
tion; worship, adoration; possession by an evil
spirit; the ends or border of a garment.
<LEND>

<L>6334<pc>0090-a<k1>avatArita<k2>avatArita
{%Ava-tārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken off or out, laid down
or aside; descended; translated.
<LEND>

<L>6335<pc>0090-a<k1>avatArin<k2>avatArin
{%Ava-tārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ making one's appearance;
making a descent.
<LEND>

<L>6336<pc>0090-a<k1>avatArya<k2>avatArya
{%Ava-tārya,%}¦ ind. having caused to alight.
<LEND>

<L>6337<pc>0090-a<k1>avatIrRa<k2>avatIrRa
{%Ava-tīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ descended, alighted;
crossed, passed over; translated. {%—Avatīrṇarṇa%}
{%(˚ṇa-ṛṇa), as, ā, am,%} freed from debt.
<LEND>

<L>6338<pc>0090-a<k1>avatIrya<k2>avatIrya
{%Ava-tīrya,%}¦ ind. having alighted or descended.
<LEND>

<L>6339<pc>0090-a<k1>avatokA<k2>avatokA
{#avatokA#}¦ {%ava-tokā,%} f. a woman or a cow
miscarrying from accident.
<LEND>

<L>6340<pc>0090-a<k1>avatka<k2>avatka
{#avatka#}¦ {%avatka, am,%} n. (fr. {%avata,%} q. v.),
Ved. a small well.
<LEND>

<L>6341<pc>0090-a<k1>avatta<k2>avatta
{#avatta, avattin#}¦, See under {%ava-do.%}
<LEND>

<L>6342<pc>0090-a<k1>avatrasta<k2>avatrasta
{#avatrasta#}¦ {%ava-trasta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%tras%}),
terrified.
<LEND>

<L>6343<pc>0090-a<k1>avatviz<k2>avatviz
{#avatviz#}¦ {%ava-tviṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tveṣati, -tveṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to glitter, shine; to move (?); to take (?).
<LEND>

<L>6344<pc>0090-a<k1>avatsar<k2>avatsar
{#avatsar#}¦ {%ava-tsar,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tsarati, -ritum,%}
to fly away.
<LEND>

<L>6345<pc>0090-a<k1>avatsAra<k2>avatsAra
{%Ava-tsāra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a descendant of Kaśyapa.
<LEND>

<L>6346<pc>0090-a<k1>avatsIya<k2>avatsIya
{#avatsIya#}¦ {%a-vatsīya, as, ā, am,%} not suitable
for a calf.
<LEND>
[Page0090-b+ 70]

<L>6347<pc>0090-b<k1>avadaMSa<k2>avadaMSa
{#avadaMSa#}¦ {%ava-daṃśa, as,%} m. any pungent
food which excites thirst; a stimulant.
<LEND>

<L>6348<pc>0090-b<k1>avadatta<k2>avadatta
{#avadatta#}¦ {%ava-datta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dā%} with
{%ava%}), given away; finished, accomplished.
<LEND>

<L>6349<pc>0090-b<k1>avaday<k2>avaday
{#avaday#}¦ {%ava-day,%} cl. 1. A. {%-dayate, -yitum,%}
to give or pay an instalment (for the purpose of
silencing or keeping one off).
<LEND>

<L>6350<pc>0090-b<k1>avadal<k2>avadal
{#avadal#}¦ {%ava-dal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dalati, -litum,%}
to burst, to crack asunder.
<LEND>

<L>6351<pc>0090-b<k1>avadalita<k2>avadalita
{%Ava-dalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ burst, cracked, destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>6352<pc>0090-b<k1>avadah<k2>avadah
{#avadah#}¦ {%ava-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dagdhum,%}
to burn down, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>6353<pc>0090-b<k1>avadAGa<k2>avadAGa
{%Ava-dāgha, as,%}¦ m. (Gaṇa to Pāṇini VII. 1. 3, 53.)
<LEND>

<L>6354<pc>0090-b<k1>avadAha<k2>avadAha
{%Ava-dāha, as,%}¦ m. burning down, the root of the
fragrant grass Andropogon Muricatus. {%—Avadā-%}
{%heṣṭa (˚ha-iṣ˚), am,%} n. = the last.
<LEND>

<L>6355<pc>0090-b<k1>avadAta<k2>avadAta
{#avadAta#}¦ {%ava-dāta, as, ā, am,%} or {%ava-dātaka,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dai%} with {%ava%}), clean, clear;
white; yellow; beautiful; ({%as%}), m. white colour.
<LEND>

<L>6356<pc>0090-b<k1>avadAna<k2>avadAna<h>1
1. {%ava-dāna, am,%}¦ n. a pure or approved occupa-
tion; an act accomplished; a great or glorious act,
achievement; object of a legend.
<LEND>

<L>6357<pc>0090-b<k1>avadAna<k2>avadAna<h>2
{#avadAna#} 2¦. {%ava-dāna, am,%} n. See under
{%ava-do.%}
<LEND>

<L>6358<pc>0090-b<k1>avadAnya<k2>avadAnya
{#avadAnya#}¦ {%a-vadānya, as, ā, am,%} niggardly,
stingy [cf. {%abhy-avadānya%}].
<LEND>

<L>6359<pc>0090-b<k1>avadAvada<k2>avadAvada
{#avadAvada#}¦ {%a-vadāvada, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having no bad reputation.
<LEND>

<L>6360<pc>0090-b<k1>avadiS<k2>avadiS
{#avadiS#}¦ {%ava-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%}
to show or practice (kindness &c.): Caus. {%-deśayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to inform.
<LEND>

<L>6361<pc>0090-b<k1>avadih<k2>avadih
{#avadih#}¦ {%ava-dih,%} cl. 2. P. {%-degdhi, -dhum,%}
to besmear.
<LEND>

<L>6362<pc>0090-b<k1>avadfS<k2>avadfS
{#avadfS#}¦ {%ava-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-paśyati, -te,%}
{%-draṣṭum,%} P. to look at, observe; A. to see, live
to see: Pass. {%-dṛśyate,%} to be inferred or inferrible.
<LEND>

<L>6363<pc>0090-b<k1>avadF<k2>avadF
{#avadF#}¦ {%ava-dṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-dṛṇāti, -daritum%}
or {%-rītum,%} to split or force open, to rend or tear
asunder: Caus. {%-dārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to burst,
to rend or split: Pass. {%-dīryate,%} to be split, to burst.
<LEND>

<L>6364<pc>0090-b<k1>avadaraRa<k2>avadaraRa
{%Ava-daraṇa, am,%}¦ n. breaking (as a boil &c.).
bursting, separating.
<LEND>

<L>6365<pc>0090-b<k1>avadAraRa<k2>avadAraRa
{%Ava-dāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. tearing, dividing; a spade
or hoe.
<LEND>

<L>6366<pc>0090-b<k1>avadArita<k2>avadArita
{%Ava-dārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn off or away, rent.
<LEND>

<L>6367<pc>0090-b<k1>avadIrRa<k2>avadIrRa
{%Ava-dīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn, rent; melted, fused,
liquefied; bewildered.
<LEND>

<L>6368<pc>0090-b<k1>avado<k2>avado
{#avado#}¦ {%ava-do,%} cl. 4. P. {%-dyati, -dātum,%} to
cut off, divide; Ved. A. to take away (anger),
pacify.
<LEND>

<L>6369<pc>0090-b<k1>avatta<k2>avatta
{%Ava-tta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off, divided.
<LEND>

<L>6370<pc>0090-b<k1>avattin<k2>avattin
{%Avattin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (after a cardinal num.) dividing
into so many parts; e. g. {%pañcāvattin,%} dividing into
five parts.
<LEND>

<L>6371<pc>0090-b<k1>avadAna<k2>avadAna<h>2
2. {%ava-dāna, am,%}¦ n. cutting or dividing into pieces,
a part, portion; the root of a fragrant grass, see {%ava-%}
{%dāha.%} (For 1. {%ava-dāna,%} see under {%ava-dāta.%})
<LEND>

<L>6372<pc>0090-b<k1>avadoha<k2>avadoha
{#avadoha#}¦ {%ava-doha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%duh%} with
{%ava%}) , milk.
<LEND>

<L>6373<pc>0090-b<k1>avadya<k2>avadya
{#avadya#}¦ {%a-vadya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vad%}), not
to be praised; low, inferior; disagreeable, blamable,
disliked; ({%am%}), n. anything blamable, or not to be
spoken of with praise; want, imperfection, vice, sin;
blame, censure; shame, reproach. {%—Avadya-gohana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. concealing or keeping off want.
{%—Avadya-bhī, īs,%} f., Ved. fear of vices or sin.
{%—Avadya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. disgraceful, la-
mentable.
<LEND>

<L>6374<pc>0090-b<k1>avadyotin<k2>avadyotin
{#avadyotin#}¦ {%ava-dyotin, ī, inī, i%} (rt. {%dyut%}),
shining down upon, illuminating [cf. {%ava-jyut%}].
<LEND>
[Page0090-c+ 74]

<L>6375<pc>0090-c<k1>avadraNga<k2>avadraNga
{#avadraNga#}¦ {%avadraṅga, as,%} m. a market. See
{%avaḍan.ga.%}
<LEND>

<L>6376<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDa<k2>avaDa
{#avaDa#}¦ {%a-vadha, as,%} m. (rt. {%vadh%} or {%badh%}),
no murder; {%(as, ā, am),%} Ved. inviolable, invulner-
able; see {%a-badha%}. {%—A-vadhārha (˚dha-ar˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} not worthy of death.
<LEND>

<L>6377<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDya<k2>avaDya
{%A-vadhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be killed, inviolable.
{%—Avadhya-tā,%} f. or {%avadhya-tva, am,%} n. inviola-
bility.
<LEND>

<L>6378<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDarzya<k2>avaDarzya
{#avaDarzya#}¦ {%ava-dharṣya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dhṛṣ%}),
to be defied.
<LEND>

<L>6379<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDA<k2>avaDA
{#avaDA#}¦ {%ava-dhā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-dhatte, -dhātum,%}
to place down, deposit, apply (as the mind &c.);
to be attentive: Pass. {%-dhīyate,%} to be placed, applied
or directed (as the mind).
<LEND>

<L>6380<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDAtavya<k2>avaDAtavya
{%Ava-dhātavya%}¦ or {%ava-dhānīya%} or {%ava-dheya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} to be attended to, deserving attention and care.
<LEND>

<L>6381<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDAna<k2>avaDAna
{%Ava-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. attention, attentiveness, intent-
ness; care, carefulness, devotion. {%—Avadhāna-tā,%} f.
or {%avadhāna-tva, am,%} n. attentiveness.
<LEND>

<L>6382<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDAnin<k2>avaDAnin
{%Ava-dhānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ attentive.
<LEND>

<L>6383<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDi<k2>avaDi
{%Ava-dhi, is,%}¦ m. application, attention, care; a term,
a limit, conclusion, termination; a district, division,
department; period, time; agreement, engagement;
a hole, a pit. {%—Avadhi-tā,%} f. or {%avadhi-tva, am,%} n.
limit, limitation. {%—Avadhi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} limited,
bounded.
<LEND>

<L>6384<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDIyamAna<k2>avaDIyamAna
{%Ava-dhīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being placed down
or in, deposited.
<LEND>

<L>6385<pc>0090-c<k1>avahita<k2>avahita
{%Ava-hita, as, ā, am,%}¦ deposited, applied; attentive,
careful, done with care; celebrated, known. {%—Ava-%}
{%hita-karaṇa-kalāpa, as, ā, am,%} having all the
senses at rest, imperturbable. {%—Avahita-tā,%} f. ap-
plication, attention. {%—Avahitāñjali (˚ta-añj˚), is,%}
{%is, i,%} with joined hands.
<LEND>

<L>6386<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDAv<k2>avaDAv
{#avaDAv#}¦ {%ava-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati, -te,%}
{%-vitum,%} to run down, drop down; to run after.
<LEND>

<L>6387<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDAvana<k2>avaDAvana<h>1
1. {%ava-dhāvana, am,%}¦ n. running after, pursuing;
seizure.
<LEND>

<L>6388<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDAvanIya<k2>avaDAvanIya
{%Ava-dhāvanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be run after.
<div n="P"/>.1. {%ava-dhāvita, as, ā, am,%} chased, pursued.
<LEND>

<L>6389<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDAvana<k2>avaDAvana<h>2
{#avaDAvana#} 2¦. {%ava-dhāvana, am,%} n. (rt. 2.
{%dhāv%}), cleaning, washing.
<div n="P"/>.2. {%ava-dhāvita, as, ā, am,%} cleaned, cleansed.
<LEND>

<L>6390<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDIr<k2>avaDIr
{#avaDIr#}¦ {%avadhīr,%} cl. 10. P. {%-dhīrayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to disregard, disrepect; to despise, repudiate.
<LEND>

<L>6391<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDIraRa<k2>avaDIraRa
{%Avadhīraṇa, am,%}¦ n. treating with disrespect,
despising, repudiating.
<LEND>

<L>6392<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDIrita<k2>avaDIrita
{%Avadhīrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disrepected, disregarded,
despised.
<LEND>

<L>6393<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDIrin<k2>avaDIrin
{%Avadhīrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ despising, scorning, excelling.
<LEND>

<L>6394<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDU<k2>avaDU
{#avaDU#}¦ {%ava-dhū,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-dhūnoti, -dhū-%}
{%nute, -dhavitum%} or {%-dhotum,%} to shake off or out,
shake, toss; to discard; to lie down (?): Caus.
{%-dhūnayati, -yitum,%} to shake.
<LEND>

<L>6395<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDUta<k2>avaDUta
{%Ava-dhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken off, removed,
shaken, tossed, compelled; discarded, rejected, spurned;
trodden upon; separated from wordly feeling and
obligation. {%—Avadhūta-praṇipāta, as, ā, am,%} re-
jecting an act of homage. {%—Avadhūta-veśa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} undressed, naked.
<LEND>

<L>6396<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDUnana<k2>avaDUnana
{%Ava-dhūnana, am,%}¦ n. shaking, causing to shake;
expelling; agitation, trembling; trampling on, tread-
ing on.
<LEND>

<L>6397<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDUka<k2>avaDUka
{#avaDUka#}¦ {%a-vadhūka, as,%} m. having no wife.
<LEND>

<L>6398<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDUpita<k2>avaDUpita
{#avaDUpita#}¦ {%ava-dhūpita, as, ā, am,%} perfumed
with incense.
<LEND>

<L>6399<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDf<k2>avaDf
{#avaDf#}¦ {%ava-dhṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-dhārayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to consider, ascertain, determine accurately, make
out, limit, restrict.
<LEND>

<L>6400<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDAra<k2>avaDAra
{%Ava-dhāra, as,%}¦ m. accurate determination, limit-
ation.
<LEND>

<L>6401<pc>0090-c<k1>avaDAraka<k2>avaDAraka
{%Ava-dhāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ determining accurately,
restricting one's self to anything.
<LEND>
[Page0091-a+ 73]

<L>6402<pc>0091-a<k1>avaDAraRa<k2>avaDAraRa
{%Ava-dhāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. ascertainment, affirmation,
emphasis; stating or holding with positiveness or assur-
ance, accurate determination, limitation (of the sense of
words); restriction to a certain instance or instances
with exclusion of any other; ({%as, ā, am%}), restrictive.
<LEND>

<L>6403<pc>0091-a<k1>avaDAraRIya<k2>avaDAraRIya
{%Ava-dhāraṇīya%}¦ or {%ava-dhārya, as, ā, am,%} to
be ascertained, determined or known.
<LEND>

<L>6404<pc>0091-a<k1>avaDArita<k2>avaDArita
{%Ava-dhārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ascertained, known, cer-
tain.
<LEND>

<L>6405<pc>0091-a<k1>avaDya<k2>avaDya
{#avaDya#}¦ {%a-vadhya.%} See {%a-vadha.%}
<LEND>

<L>6406<pc>0091-a<k1>avaDyE<k2>avaDyE
{#avaDyE#}¦ {%ava-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. (A. ?) {%-dhyāyati,%}
{%-te, -dhyātum,%} to think ill of, despise.
<LEND>

<L>6407<pc>0091-a<k1>avaDyAta<k2>avaDyAta
{%Ava-dhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spurned, disdained.
<LEND>

<L>6408<pc>0091-a<k1>avaDra<k2>avaDra
{#avaDra#}¦ {%a-vadhra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. innoxious,
beneficent.
<LEND>

<L>6409<pc>0091-a<k1>avaDvaMs<k2>avaDvaMs
{#avaDvaMs#}¦ {%ava-dhvaṃs,%} Caus. P. {%-dhvaṃsayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cast down.
<LEND>

<L>6410<pc>0091-a<k1>avaDvaMsa<k2>avaDvaMsa
{%Ava-dhvaṃsa, as,%}¦ m. falling off or from; sprink-
ling; meal, dust; abandoning, quitting; disrespect,
censure, blame.
<LEND>

<L>6411<pc>0091-a<k1>avaDvasta<k2>avaDvasta
{%Ava-dhvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled; pounded
coarsely; abandoned, quitted; censured; scattered.
<LEND>

<L>6412<pc>0091-a<k1>avana<k2>avana
{#avana#}¦ {%avana, am,%} n. (rt. {%av%}), satisfaction;
joy, happiness; desire; favour, preserving, protection,
defence; speed; going, obtaining, asking; seizing,
killing; power; increase; existence; adorning; em-
bracing; bearing; entrance.
<LEND>

<L>6413<pc>0091-a<k1>avani<k2>avani
{%Avani, is,%}¦ f. (said to be fr. rt. {%av,%} but rather
connected with ? {%ava,%} down), course, bed of a
river; stream, river; the earth; a finger. {%—Avaniṅ-%}
{%gata, as, ā, am,%} prostrate on the ground. {%—Avani-%}
{%cara, as, ā, am,%} roving over the earth, vagabond.
{%—Avani-pati, is,%} m. lord of the earth, a king;
Viṣṇu; Yudhiṣṭhira. {%—Avani-pāla, as,%} m. pro-
tector of the earth, a king. {%—Avani-maṇḍala, am,%}
n. the globe. {%—Avani-ruh, ṭ,%} m. a tree.
<LEND>

<L>6414<pc>0091-a<k1>avanI<k2>avanI<h>1
1. {%avanī,%}¦ f. the earth; N. of a plant. {%—Avanī-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. or {%avanīśa%} or {%avanīśvara (˚nī-īś˚), as,%}
m. lord of the earth, a king. (For 2. see next col.)
<LEND>

<L>6415<pc>0091-a<k1>avanakz<k2>avanakz
{#avanakz#}¦ {%ava-nakṣ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-nak-%}
{%ṣati, -ṣitum,%} (with gen.) to overtake (a person).
<LEND>

<L>6416<pc>0091-a<k1>avanakzatra<k2>avanakzatra
{%Ava-nakṣatra, am,%}¦ n. the disappearance of the
stars.
<LEND>

<L>6417<pc>0091-a<k1>avanam<k2>avanam
{#avanam#}¦ {%ava-nam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-namati, -nan-%}
{%tum,%} to bow down, to bend down, bend: Caus.
{%-nāmayati, -yitum,%} to bend down, bend.
<LEND>

<L>6418<pc>0091-a<k1>avanata<k2>avanata
{%Ava-nata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bowed; bent down, down-
cast; bending, stooping, deepened, not projecting.
{%—Avanata-kāya, as, ā, am,%} bending the body,
crouching down. {%—Avanata-mukha, as, ī, am,%} with
downcast countenance. {%—Avanata-sīrṣan, ā, ā, a,%}
bowing the head.
<LEND>

<L>6419<pc>0091-a<k1>avanati<k2>avanati
{%Ava-nati, is,%}¦ f. bowing down, stooping; setting.
<LEND>

<L>6420<pc>0091-a<k1>avanamra<k2>avanamra
{%Ava-namra, as, ā, am,%}¦ bowed, bent.
<LEND>

<L>6421<pc>0091-a<k1>avanAma<k2>avanAma
{%Ava-nāma, as,%}¦ m. causing to bend down, bending,
bowing.
<LEND>

<L>6422<pc>0091-a<k1>avanAmaka<k2>avanAmaka
{%Ava-nāmaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ what depresses or
causes to bow or bend.
<LEND>

<L>6423<pc>0091-a<k1>avanAmin<k2>avanAmin
{%Ava-nāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ bending or bowing down.
<LEND>

<L>6424<pc>0091-a<k1>avanard<k2>avanard
{#avanard#}¦ {%ava-nard,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nardati, -ditum%}
(a technical term applicable to chanting in the Hindū
ritual), to slur or trill, &c.
<LEND>

<L>6425<pc>0091-a<k1>avanaS<k2>avanaS
{#avanaS#}¦ {%ava-naś,%} cl. 4. P. {%-naśyati, -naśi-%}
{%tum%} and {%-naṃṣṭum,%} to disappear, perish.
<LEND>

<L>6426<pc>0091-a<k1>avanah<k2>avanah
{#avanah#}¦ {%ava-nah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-nahyati, -te,%}
{%-naddhum,%} to bind on, tie on, put over, cover with.
<LEND>

<L>6427<pc>0091-a<k1>avanadDa<k2>avanadDa
{%Ava-naddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound on, tied, covered;
({%am%}), n. a drum.
<LEND>

<L>6428<pc>0091-a<k1>avanAha<k2>avanAha
{%Ava-nāha, as,%}¦ m. binding, girding, putting on.
<LEND>

<L>6429<pc>0091-a<k1>avanAwa<k2>avanAwa
{#avanAwa#}¦ {%ava-nāṭa, as, ā, am,%} flat-nosed;
({%am%}), n. the condition of having a flat nose.
<LEND>

<L>6430<pc>0091-a<k1>avani<k2>avani
{#avani#}¦ {%avani.%} See {%avana.%}
<LEND>

<L>6431<pc>0091-a<k1>avanij<k2>avanij
{#avanij#}¦ {%ava-nij,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-nenekti, %}
[Page0091-b+ 72]
{%-nenikte, -nektum,%} to wipe or wash off, purify, clean;
A. to wash one's self: Caus. {%-nejayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to wash off.
<LEND>

<L>6432<pc>0091-b<k1>avanegya<k2>avanegya
{%Ava-negya, as, ā, am,%}¦ used for washing off.
<LEND>

<L>6433<pc>0091-b<k1>avanejana<k2>avanejana
{%Ava-nejana, am,%}¦ n. washing, washing off, ablution;
water for washing, foot-bath.
<LEND>

<L>6434<pc>0091-b<k1>avaninI<k2>avaninI
{#avaninI#}¦ {%ava-ni-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati,%}
{%-te, -netum,%} to put or bring into (water); to pour
down.
<LEND>

<L>6435<pc>0091-b<k1>avaniScaya<k2>avaniScaya
{#avaniScaya#}¦ {%ava-niścaya, as,%} m. deduction,
ascertainment.
<LEND>

<L>6436<pc>0091-b<k1>avanizWiv<k2>avanizWiv
{#avanizWiv#}¦ {%ava-ni-ṣṭhiv%} (or {%-ṣṭhīv%}), cl. 1.
P. {%-ṣṭhīvati, -ṣṭhevitum,%} to spit upon.
<LEND>

<L>6437<pc>0091-b<k1>avanizWIvana<k2>avanizWIvana
{%Ava-niṣṭhīvana, am,%}¦ n. spitting upon.
<LEND>

<L>6438<pc>0091-b<k1>avanI<k2>avanI<h>2
{#avanI#} 2¦. {%ava-nī,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -netum,%}
to lead or bring down, to push into, to cause to descend
or to flow; to lead away; to pour down or over.
<LEND>

<L>6439<pc>0091-b<k1>avanaya<k2>avanaya
{%Ava-naya%}¦ or {%ava-nāya, as,%} m. causing to descend;
throwing down, precipitating.
<LEND>

<L>6440<pc>0091-b<k1>avanayana<k2>avanayana
{%Ava-nayana, am,%}¦ n. leading down, pouring down.
<LEND>

<L>6441<pc>0091-b<k1>avanAyaka<k2>avanAyaka
{%Ava-nāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to descend.
<LEND>

<L>6442<pc>0091-b<k1>avanu<k2>avanu
{#avanu#}¦ {%ava-nu,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%-navate,%} to
move or go towards.
<LEND>

<L>6443<pc>0091-b<k1>avanud<k2>avanud
{#avanud#}¦ {%ava-nud,%} Caus. {%-nodayati, -yitum,%}
(with two acc.) to cause a person to drive away another.
<LEND>

<L>6444<pc>0091-b<k1>avanti<k2>avanti
{#avanti#}¦ {%avanti, is,%} m., N. of a country and
its inhabitants; N. of a city, the modern Oujein (one
of the seven sacred cities of the Hindūs, to die at
which secures eternal happiness); N. of a river.
{%—Avanti-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. a portion of the Skanda-
purāṇa. {%—Avanti-deva, as,%} m. = {%avanti-varman,%}
q. v. {%—Avanti-pura, am,%} n. the city of the Avantis,
Oujein; N. of a town in Kāśmīra, built by Avanti-
varman; ({%ī%}), f. Oujein. {%—Avanti-brahma, as,%} m.,
N. of a district inhabited by Brāhmans. {%—Avanti-%}
{%bhūpāla, as,%} m. the king of Avanti, i. e. Bhoja.
{%—Avanti-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a king; also of a
poet. {%—Avanti-soma, as,%} m. sour gruel, prepared
from the fermentation of rice-water.
<LEND>

<L>6445<pc>0091-b<k1>avantikA<k2>avantikA
{%Avantikā,%}¦ f. the modern Oujein.
<LEND>

<L>6446<pc>0091-b<k1>avantI<k2>avantI
{%Avantī,%}¦ f. Oujein; the queen of Oujein; N. of a
river. {%—Avantī-deśa, as,%} m. the region of Avantī
{%—Avantīśvara (˚tī-īś˚), as%} m., N. of a sanctuary
built by Avanti-varman.
<LEND>

<L>6447<pc>0091-b<k1>avanDya<k2>avanDya
{#avanDya#}¦ {%avandhya, as (?%}) or ({%ā%}), m. f., N.
of a place.
<LEND>

<L>6448<pc>0091-b<k1>avapaw<k2>avapaw
{#avapaw#}¦ {%ava-paṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pāṭayati, -yitum,%}
to split: Pass. {%-pāṭyate,%} to split one's self; to be split.
<LEND>

<L>6449<pc>0091-b<k1>avapAwikA<k2>avapAwikA
{%Ava-pāṭikā,%}¦ f. laceration of the prepuce.
<LEND>

<L>6450<pc>0091-b<k1>avapat<k2>avapat
{#avapat#}¦ {%ava-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -titum,%} to
fly down, jump down, fall down, alight: Caus. {%-pāta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to throw down.
<LEND>

<L>6451<pc>0091-b<k1>avapatana<k2>avapatana
{%Ava-patana, am,%}¦ n. alighting, descending.
<LEND>

<L>6452<pc>0091-b<k1>avapAta<k2>avapAta
{%Ava-pāta, as,%}¦ m. falling down; descent, descend-
ing; flying down; a hole or pit for catching game in.
<LEND>

<L>6453<pc>0091-b<k1>avapAtana<k2>avapAtana
{%Ava-pātana, am,%}¦ n. felling, knocking or throwing
down.
<LEND>

<L>6454<pc>0091-b<k1>avapad<k2>avapad
{#avapad#}¦ {%ava-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, -pattum,%}
to go down, glide down, descend; to be deprived of
(with abl.); to fall, meet with an accident: Caus.
{%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to glide or go down.
<LEND>

<L>6455<pc>0091-b<k1>avapanna<k2>avapanna
{%Ava-panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen on or into; de-
scended, alighted; thrown down.
<LEND>

<L>6456<pc>0091-b<k1>avapAka<k2>avapAka
{#avapAka#}¦ {%a-vapāka, as, ā, am,%} without a net.
<LEND>

<L>6457<pc>0091-b<k1>avapAtrita<k2>avapAtrita
{#avapAtrita#}¦ {%ava-pātrita, as, ā, am,%} a person
not allowed by his kindered to eat or drink from a
common vessel; one who has lost his caste [cf.
{%apa-pātrita%}].
<LEND>

<L>6458<pc>0091-b<k1>avapAna<k2>avapAna
{#avapAna#}¦ {%ava-pāna, am,%} n., Ved. drinking,
giving to drink; a pond or pool for watering.
<LEND>

<L>6459<pc>0091-b<k1>avapAlita<k2>avapAlita
{#avapAlita#}¦ {%ava-pālita, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pāl,%}
Caus. of rt. 3. {%pā%} with {%ava%}), unprotected, neglected.
<LEND>
[Page0091-c+ 69]

<L>6460<pc>0091-c<k1>avapASita<k2>avapASita
{#avapASita#}¦ {%ava-pāśita, as, ā, am,%} snared,
having a snare laid over.
<LEND>

<L>6461<pc>0091-c<k1>avapIq<k2>avapIq
{#avapIq#}¦ {%ava-pīḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pīḍayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to press down, compress.
<LEND>

<L>6462<pc>0091-c<k1>avapIqa<k2>avapIqa
{%Ava-pīḍa, as,%}¦ m. pressing down; a sternutatory;
any drug producing sneezing.
<LEND>

<L>6463<pc>0091-c<k1>avapIqana<k2>avapIqana
{%Ava-pīḍana, am,%}¦ n. the act of pressing down; a
sternutatory; ({%ā%}), f. damage, violation.
<LEND>

<L>6464<pc>0091-c<k1>avapUrRa<k2>avapUrRa
{#avapUrRa#}¦ {%ava-pūrṇa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%pṝ%}), full
of, filled.
<LEND>

<L>6465<pc>0091-c<k1>avaprajjana<k2>avaprajjana
{#avaprajjana#}¦ {%ava-prajjana, as,%} m. (rt. {%pṛj%}),
the end of the warp of a web.
<LEND>

<L>6466<pc>0091-c<k1>avaplu<k2>avaplu
{#avaplu#}¦ {%ava-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, -plotum,%}
to jump down or off.
<LEND>

<L>6467<pc>0091-c<k1>avaplutya<k2>avaplutya
{%Ava-plutya,%}¦ ind. having jumped down.
<LEND>

<L>6468<pc>0091-c<k1>avaPa<k2>avaPa
{#avaPa#}¦ {%ava-pha, as,%} m. flatulence, wind from
the bowels.
<LEND>

<L>6469<pc>0091-c<k1>avabaDA<k2>avabaDA
{#avabaDA#}¦ {%ava-badhā,%} f. segment of the base
of a triangle [cf. {%a-badhā%} and {%ā-bādhā%}].
<LEND>

<L>6470<pc>0091-c<k1>avabanDa<k2>avabanDa
{#avabanDa#}¦ {%ava-bandha, as,%} m. falling or palsy
of the eyelids, Blepharoptosis.
<LEND>

<L>6471<pc>0091-c<k1>avabAhuka<k2>avabAhuka
{#avabAhuka#}¦ {%ava-bāhuka, as,%} m. spasm in the
arm.
<LEND>

<L>6472<pc>0091-c<k1>avabuD<k2>avabuD
{#avabuD#}¦ {%ava-budh,%} cl. 4. A. {%-budhyate,%}
{%-boddhum,%} to awake, become sensible or aware of,
perceive, know: Caus. {%-bodhayati, -yitum,%} to make
one aware of, inform, explain.
<LEND>

<L>6473<pc>0091-c<k1>avaboDa<k2>avaboDa
{%Ava-bodha, as,%}¦ m. waking, being awake; percep-
tion, knowledge; discrimination, judgment; teaching.
<LEND>

<L>6474<pc>0091-c<k1>avaboDaka<k2>avaboDaka
{%Ava-bodhaka, as,%}¦ m. an awakener, a teacher.
{%—Avabodhaka-tva, am,%} n. instruction, guidance,
explanation.
<LEND>

<L>6475<pc>0091-c<k1>avaboDana<k2>avaboDana
{%Ava-bodhana, am,%}¦ n. perception, knowledge, &c.
<LEND>

<L>6476<pc>0091-c<k1>avabrava<k2>avabrava
{#avabrava#}¦ {%ava-brava, as,%} m. (rt. {%brū%} with
{%ava%}), ill report, defamation.
<LEND>

<L>6477<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBaYj<k2>avaBaYj
{#avaBaYj#}¦ {%ava-bhañj,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhanakti,%}
{%-bhaṅktum,%} to break off, smash.
<LEND>

<L>6478<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBajya<k2>avaBajya
{%Ava-bhajya,%}¦ ind. having broken off.
<LEND>

<L>6479<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBaYjana<k2>avaBaYjana
{%Ava-bhañjana, am,%}¦ n. breaking off, tearing.
<LEND>

<L>6480<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBarts<k2>avaBarts
{#avaBarts#}¦ {%ava-bharts,%} cl. 10. P. (or A. ?)
{%-bhartsayati, -yitum,%} to deter by scolding or
threatening, to menace.
<LEND>

<L>6481<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBA<k2>avaBA
{#avaBA#}¦ {%ava-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -tum,%} to
shine downwards.
<LEND>

<L>6482<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBAzaRa<k2>avaBAzaRa
{#avaBAzaRa#}¦ {%ava-bhāṣaṇa, am,%} n. speaking.
<LEND>

<L>6483<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBAs<k2>avaBAs
{#avaBAs#}¦ {%ava-bhās,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāsate, -si-%}
{%tum,%} to shine forth, become manifest: Caus. {%-bhāsa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>6484<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBAsa<k2>avaBAsa
{%Ava-bhāsa, as,%}¦ m. splendor, lustre, light; appear-
ance, manifestation; space, reach, compass. {%—Ava-%}
{%bhāsa-kara, as,%} m., N. of a divinity. {%—Avabhāsa-%}
{%prabha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a whole class of deities.
{%—Avabhāsa-prāpta,%} N. of a world.
<LEND>

<L>6485<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBAsaka<k2>avaBAsaka
{%Ava-bhāsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ irradiating, luminous.
{%—Avabhāsaka-tva, am,%} n. luminousness.
<LEND>

<L>6486<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBAsita<k2>avaBAsita
{%—Avabhāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ illumined, lighted, radi-
ant; evident, manifest.
<LEND>

<L>6487<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBAsin<k2>avaBAsin
{%Ava-bhāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ shining, bright; {%(nī),%} f. the
outer skin or cuticle.
<LEND>

<L>6488<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBid<k2>avaBid
{#avaBid#}¦ {%ava-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhinatti, -bhet-%}
{%tum,%} to break off, shatter.
<LEND>

<L>6489<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBinna<k2>avaBinna
{%Ava-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken off, pierced, di-
vided.
<LEND>

<L>6490<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBedin<k2>avaBedin
{%Ava-bhedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ breaking off, shattering,
dividing.
<LEND>

<L>6491<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBuj<k2>avaBuj
{#avaBuj#}¦ {%ava-bhuj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-bhujati, -bhok-%}
{%tum,%} to bend down, curve.
<LEND>

<L>6492<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBugna<k2>avaBugna
{%Ava-bhugna, as, ā, am,%}¦ contracted, bent.
<LEND>

<L>6493<pc>0091-c<k1>avaBfTa<k2>avaBfTa
{#avaBfTa#}¦ {%ava-bhṛtha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%bhṛ%} with
[Page0092-a+ 74]
{%ava%}), carrying off, removing; purification by bathing
of the sacrificer and the sacrificial vessels after a sacri-
fice; the water of purification; a supplementary
sacrifice to atone for defects in a principal and pre-
ceding one. {%—Avabhṛtha-snāna, am,%} n. bathing
or ablution after a sacrificial ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>6494<pc>0092-a<k1>avaBra<k2>avaBra
{%Ava-bhra, as,%}¦ m. abduction, carrying off.
<LEND>

<L>6495<pc>0092-a<k1>avaBrawa<k2>avaBrawa
{#avaBrawa#}¦ {%ava-bhraṭa, as, ā, am,%} flat-nosed;
({%am%}), n. state of having a flat nose.
<LEND>

<L>6496<pc>0092-a<k1>avama<k2>avama
{#avama#}¦ {%avama, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%ava%}), under-
most, inferior, lowest, base; next, intimate; last,
youngest; growing less, decreasing; ({%am%}), n. a lunar
day exactly coinciding with a solar one.
<LEND>

<L>6497<pc>0092-a<k1>avaman<k2>avaman
{#avaman#}¦ {%ava-man,%} cl. 4. A. or poet. P.
{%-manyate, -ti, -mantum,%} to despise, treat con-
temptuously: Caus. {%-mānayati, -yitum,%} to despise,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>6498<pc>0092-a<k1>avamata<k2>avamata
{%Ava-mata, as, ā, am,%}¦ despised, disregarded, con-
temned. {%—Avamatāṅkuśa (˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a restive
elephant that disdains the hook, one in rut.
<LEND>

<L>6499<pc>0092-a<k1>avamati<k2>avamati
{%Ava-mati, is,%}¦ m. a master, an owner; ({%is%}), f.
aversion, dislike; disregard, contempt.
<LEND>

<L>6500<pc>0092-a<k1>avamatya<k2>avamatya
{%Ava-matya,%}¦ ind. having scorned, despising.
<LEND>

<L>6501<pc>0092-a<k1>avamantavya<k2>avamantavya
{%Ava-mantavya%}¦ or {%ava-manya, as, ā, am,%} con-
temptible, to be treated with disrepect.
<LEND>

<L>6502<pc>0092-a<k1>avamantf<k2>avamantf
{%Ava-mantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ despising; contemptuous,
disrespectful; arrogant.
<LEND>

<L>6503<pc>0092-a<k1>avamAna<k2>avamAna
{%Ava-māna, as,%}¦ m. disrespect, contempt. {%—Ava-%}
{%māna-tā,%} f. or {%avamāna-tva, am,%} n. dishonour-
ableness, contempt.
<LEND>

<L>6504<pc>0092-a<k1>avamAnana<k2>avamAnana
{%Ava-mānana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>6505<pc>0092-a<k1>avamAnanIya<k2>avamAnanIya
{%Ava-mānanīya%}¦ or {%ava-mānya, as, ā, am,%} to be
disrepected, contemptible, despicable.
<LEND>

<L>6506<pc>0092-a<k1>avamAnita<k2>avamAnita
{%Ava-mānita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disrepected, despised.
<LEND>

<L>6507<pc>0092-a<k1>avamAnin<k2>avamAnin
{%Ava-mānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ contemning, despising, be-
having disrespectfully. {%—Avamāni-tā,%} f. or {%ava-%}
{%māni-tva, am,%} n. disrespectfulness.
<LEND>

<L>6508<pc>0092-a<k1>avamanTa<k2>avamanTa
{#avamanTa#}¦ {%ava-mantha%} or {%ava-manthaka, as,%}
m. (rt. {%manth%}), swellings caused by boils or con-
tusions.
<LEND>

<L>6509<pc>0092-a<k1>avamarSa<k2>avamarSa
{#avamarSa#}¦ {%ava-marśa, as,%} m. See {%ava-mṛś.%}
<LEND>

<L>6510<pc>0092-a<k1>avamarzaRa<k2>avamarzaRa
{#avamarzaRa#}¦ {%ava-marṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%mṛṣ%}),
intolerance, impatience; effacing, obliterating, banish-
ing from recollection.
<LEND>

<L>6511<pc>0092-a<k1>avamuc<k2>avamuc
{#avamuc#}¦ {%ava-muc,%} cl. 6. P. {%-muñcati, -mok-%}
{%tum,%} to loosen; to let go; to take off (a garment,
&c.); to unharness.
<LEND>

<L>6512<pc>0092-a<k1>avamucya<k2>avamucya
{%Ava-mucya,%}¦ ind. having unloosed or unharnessed.
<LEND>

<L>6513<pc>0092-a<k1>avamocana<k2>avamocana
{%Ava-mocana, am,%}¦ n. letting go, loosening; setting
at liberty.
<LEND>

<L>6514<pc>0092-a<k1>avamUtr<k2>avamUtr
{#avamUtr#}¦ {%ava-mūtr,%} cl. 10. P. {%-mūtrayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to urine upon.
<LEND>

<L>6515<pc>0092-a<k1>avamUtrayat<k2>avamUtrayat
{%Ava-mūtrayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ urining upon.
<LEND>

<L>6516<pc>0092-a<k1>avamUrDaSaya<k2>avamUrDaSaya
{#avamUrDaSaya#}¦ {%ava-mūrdha-śaya, as, ā, am,%}
lying with the head hanging down.
<LEND>

<L>6517<pc>0092-a<k1>avamfj<k2>avamfj
{#avamfj#}¦ {%ava-mṛj,%} cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi, -mārji-%}
{%tum%} or {%-mārṣṭum,%} to wipe or rub off, to strip off,
remove; to efface.
<LEND>

<L>6518<pc>0092-a<k1>avamArjana<k2>avamArjana
{%Ava-mārjana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. what is stripped or
rubbed off.
<LEND>

<L>6519<pc>0092-a<k1>avamfjya<k2>avamfjya
{%Ava-mṛjya,%}¦ ind. having stripped, having pulled
off; having wiped away.
<LEND>

<L>6520<pc>0092-a<k1>avamfd<k2>avamfd
{#avamfd#}¦ {%ava-mṛd,%} cl. 9. P. {%-mṛdnāti, -mardi-%}
{%tum,%} to grind down, to reduce by friction (or other-
wise); to crush, to tread down; to rub.
<LEND>

<L>6521<pc>0092-a<k1>avamarda<k2>avamarda
{%Ava-marda, as,%}¦ m. trampling, oppression, driving
one into straits; giving pain; devastation, inflicting
pain or punishment on an enemy by laying his
country waste, &c.
<LEND>

<L>6522<pc>0092-a<k1>avamardana<k2>avamardana
{%Ava-mardana, as, ā, am,%}¦ treading down, grind-
ing, crushing, oppressing; ({%am%}), n. rubbing, washing;
oppression.
<LEND>

<L>6523<pc>0092-a<k1>avamardita<k2>avamardita
{%Ava-mardita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ground, rubbed, crushed,
oppressed.
<LEND>
[Page0092-b+ 73]

<L>6524<pc>0092-b<k1>avamfS<k2>avamfS
{#avamfS#}¦ {%ava-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati, -marṣ-%}
{%ṭum, -mraṣṭum,%} to touch.
<LEND>

<L>6525<pc>0092-b<k1>avamarSa<k2>avamarSa
{%Ava-marśa, as,%}¦ m. touch, contact.
<LEND>

<L>6526<pc>0092-b<k1>avamfSya<k2>avamfSya
{%Ava-mṛśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be touched.
<LEND>

<L>6527<pc>0092-b<k1>avaya<k2>avaya
{#avaya#}¦ {%avaya.%} See {%śatāvaya.%}
<LEND>

<L>6528<pc>0092-b<k1>avayaj<k2>avayaj
{#avayaj#}¦ {%ava-yaj,%} cl. 1. A. {%-yajate, -yaṣṭum,%}
to expiate; not to worship, to abandon.
<LEND>

<L>6529<pc>0092-b<k1>avayajana<k2>avayajana
{%Ava-yajana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. expiating; purification.
<LEND>

<L>6530<pc>0092-b<k1>avayAj<k2>avayAj
{%Ava-yāj, ās,%}¦ f., Ved. a particular portion of a sacri-
fice; m. a kind of priest. Gram. 176. <nsi>f.</nsi>
<LEND>

<L>6531<pc>0092-b<k1>avayava<k2>avayava
{#avayava#}¦ {%ava-yava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%yu%} with
{%ava%}), a limb, a member; a part, a portion; a mem-
ber or component part of a logical argument or
syllogism. {%—Avayava-śas,%} ind. part by part, seve-
rally. {%—Avayavārtha (˚va-ar˚), as,%} m. the meaning
of the component parts of a word.
<LEND>

<L>6532<pc>0092-b<k1>avayavin<k2>avayavin
{%Avayavin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ limbed, having limbs; having
portions or subdivisions; a whole; ({%ī%}), m. a syl-
logism, a logical argument.
<LEND>

<L>6533<pc>0092-b<k1>avayA<k2>avayA<h>1
{#avayA#} 1¦. {%ava-yā,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-yāti, -te, -yā-%}
{%tum,%} to go down, to give way, desist; to remove.
<LEND>

<L>6534<pc>0092-b<k1>avayA<k2>avayA<h>2
2. {%ava-yā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ Ved. giving way, desisting,
ceasing.
<LEND>

<L>6535<pc>0092-b<k1>avayAtaheLas<k2>avayAtaheLas
{%Avayāta-heḷas, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. one whose anger is
appeased.
<LEND>

<L>6536<pc>0092-b<k1>avayAtf<k2>avayAtf
{%Ava-yātṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. turning away; appeasing,
one who appeases.
<LEND>

<L>6537<pc>0092-b<k1>avayAna<k2>avayAna
{%Ava-yāna, am,%}¦ n. going down, retreat; appeasing,
expiation.
<LEND>

<L>6538<pc>0092-b<k1>avayuna<k2>avayuna
{#avayuna#}¦ {%a-vayuna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not to be
recognized; indistinct, confused.
<LEND>

<L>6539<pc>0092-b<k1>avara<k2>avara
{#avara#}¦ {%avara, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%ava%}), below,
inferior; low, mean, unimportant, of small value;
posterior, hinder, later, last, younger; western; nearer;
(at the end of a compound signifying quantity) the
least, the lowest degree, lowest value; ({%ā%}), f. the
hind thigh of an elephant; a N. of Durgā; ({%am%}), n.
the hind thigh of an elephant; [with {%avara%} have been
compared Gr. <lang n="greek">οὐρά, οὖρος, οὖρον, ὅρος, ὄρρος;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>eurus;</nsi> also the Lat. <nsi>aver-nus</nsi>]. {%—Avara-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of low birth, inferior; younger, junior; ({%as%}), m.
a Śūdra; a younger brother; ({%ā%}), f. a younger sister.
{%—Avara-tas,%} ind. behind, afterwards, hinder, poste-
rior, downwards. {%—Avara-param,%} ind., Ved. one
after another. {%—Avara-puruṣa, ās,%} m. pl. the de-
scendants. {%—Avara-varṇa, as,%} m. a low or despised
tribe; {%(as, ā, am),%} belonging to a low caste or
tribe; a Śūdra, a man or woman of the fourth tribe.
{%—Avara-varṇaka%} or {%avara-varṇa-ja, as, ā, am,%}
belonging to or born in a low tribe. {%—Avara-vrata,%}
{%as,%} m. the sun [cf. {%arkh-vrata%}]. {%—Avara-śilā%}
f., N. of a Buddhist monastery. {%—Avara-śaila, ās,%}
m. pl., N. of a Buddhist school. {%—Avaras-para, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. having the last first, or the hindermost
foremost; inverted, confused. {%—Avarārdha (˚ra-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the least part, the minimum; the last half;
({%am%}), ind. in a certain succession of parts; succes-
sively. {%—Avarārdha-tas,%} ind. from below. {%—Avarār-%}
{%dhya, as, ā, am,%} being on the lower or nearer side;
beginning from below; belonging to the last half; ({%am%}),
n. the least or smallest part, the minimum. {%—Ava-%}
{%rāvara (˚ra-av˚), as, ā, am,%} lowest, most inferior
of all. {%—Avarokta (˚ra-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} named last.
<LEND>

<L>6540<pc>0092-b<k1>avarastAt<k2>avarastAt
{%Avarastāt,%}¦ ind. behind, hinder, posterior; below,
downwards.
<LEND>

<L>6541<pc>0092-b<k1>avarIRa<k2>avarIRa
{%Avarīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ degraded, debased; censured,
blamed.
<LEND>

<L>6542<pc>0092-b<k1>avareRa<k2>avareRa
{%Avareṇa,%}¦ ind. (with acc.) below.
<LEND>

<L>6543<pc>0092-b<k1>avarya<k2>avarya
{%Avarya,%}¦ nom. P. {%avaryati, -yitum,%} to become
lower.
<LEND>

<L>6544<pc>0092-b<k1>avaraNgasAha<k2>avaraNgasAha
{#avaraNgasAha#}¦ {%avaraṅga-sāha,%} the Saṃskṛt
from of the Muhammedan name Aurungzeb. {%Sāha%}
= the Persian <lang n="arabic">شاه</lang>).
<LEND>

<L>6545<pc>0092-b<k1>avaram<k2>avaram
{#avaram#}¦ {%ava-ram,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ramate, -rantum,%}
to leave off, cease.
<LEND>
[Page0092-c+ 76]

<L>6546<pc>0092-c<k1>avarata<k2>avarata
{%Ava-rata, as, ā, am,%}¦ stopped, ceased, desisted from.
<LEND>

<L>6547<pc>0092-c<k1>avarati<k2>avarati
{%Ava-rati, is,%}¦ f. stopping, ceasing, cessation, relaxa-
tion, repose, end.
<LEND>

<L>6548<pc>0092-c<k1>avarIyas<k2>avarIyas
{#avarIyas#}¦ {%a-varīyas, ān,%} m., N. of a son of
Manu Sāvarṇa.
<LEND>

<L>6549<pc>0092-c<k1>avaruj<k2>avaruj
{#avaruj#}¦ {%ava-ruj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-rujati, -roktum,%}
to break off, to break.
<LEND>

<L>6550<pc>0092-c<k1>avarugRa<k2>avarugRa
{%Ava-rugṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken off, torn; diseased.
<LEND>

<L>6551<pc>0092-c<k1>avarujya<k2>avarujya
{%Ava-rujya,%}¦ ind. having broken off.
<LEND>

<L>6552<pc>0092-c<k1>avaruD<k2>avaruD
{#avaruD#}¦ {%ava-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ruṇaddhi,%}
{%-runadhe, -rodhum,%} to obstruct, restrain, hinder,
shut up, besiege; to keep back: Pass. {%-rudhyate:%}
Intens. P. {%-raroddhi,%} to injure, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>6553<pc>0092-c<k1>avarudDa<k2>avarudDa
{%Ava-ruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ checked, stopped, hin-
dered; shut up or in, enclosed; imprisoned, secluded,
as in the inner apartments. {%—Avaruddha-deha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} incarcerated.
<LEND>

<L>6554<pc>0092-c<k1>avarudDi<k2>avarudDi
{%Ava-ruddhi, is,%}¦ f. restraint, besieging; gaining.
<LEND>

<L>6555<pc>0092-c<k1>avaruDyamAna<k2>avaruDyamAna
{%Ava-rudhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being enclosed or
surrounded.
<LEND>

<L>6556<pc>0092-c<k1>avaroDa<k2>avaroDa<h>1
1. {%ava-rodha, as,%}¦ m. hindrance, obstruction; re-
straint; an enclosure, confinement, besieging, a siege;
a covering, lid; a fence, a pen; a watchman; the
inner apartments of a palace, the queen's or women's
apartments; a palace; pl. the wives of a king. (For
2. {%ava-rodha,%} see below under {%ava-ruh.%}) {%—Ava-%}
{%rodhāyana (˚dha-ay˚), am,%} n. a seraglio.
<LEND>

<L>6557<pc>0092-c<k1>avaroDaka<k2>avaroDaka
{%Ava-rodhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ obstructive, hindering,
impending; ({%as%}), m. a guard; ({%ikā%}), f. a female of
the inner apartments; ({%am%}), n. a barrier, a fence.
<LEND>

<L>6558<pc>0092-c<k1>avaroDana<k2>avaroDana<h>1
1. {%ava-rodhana, am,%}¦ n. siege, blockade; hinder-
ing, obstructing; obstacle, impediment; a closed or
private place, the innermost part of anything; the
inner or women's apartments in a royal palace. (For
2. {%ava-rodhana,%} see below under {%ava-ruh.%})
<LEND>

<L>6559<pc>0092-c<k1>avaroDika<k2>avaroDika
{%Ava-rodhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ obstructive, impeding;
({%as%}), m. a guard of the queen's apartments.
<LEND>

<L>6560<pc>0092-c<k1>avaroDin<k2>avaroDin
{%Ava-rodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ obstructing, hindering.
<LEND>

<L>6561<pc>0092-c<k1>avaruh<k2>avaruh
{#avaruh#}¦ {%ava-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati, -roḍhum,%}
to descend, alight, dismount: Caus. {%-ropayati%} or
{%-rohayati, -yitum,%} to cause to descend; to bring
down; to lower, lessen.
<LEND>

<L>6562<pc>0092-c<k1>avarUQa<k2>avarUQa
{%Ava-rūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ descended, dismounted,
alighted.
<LEND>

<L>6563<pc>0092-c<k1>avaroDa<k2>avaroDa<h>2
2. {%ava-rodha, as,%}¦ m. (rt. {%rudh%} for {%ruh%}), Ved.
moving down, descending; a shoot sent out by the
root of a plant, a slip (for planting), the pendent
shoots of the Indian fig tree.
<LEND>

<L>6564<pc>0092-c<k1>avaroDana<k2>avaroDana<h>2
2. {%ava-rodhana, am,%}¦ n. (rt. {%rudh%} for {%ruh%}), Ved.
descending motion, descending.
<LEND>

<L>6565<pc>0092-c<k1>avaropaRa<k2>avaropaRa
{%Ava-ropaṇa, am,%}¦ n. causing to descend; uprrot-
ing; taking away, depriving, diminishing; descend-
ing; setting (as of the sun).
<LEND>

<L>6566<pc>0092-c<k1>avaropita<k2>avaropita
{%Ava-ropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to descend; up-
rooted, deprived of, curtailed, diminished, lost.
<LEND>

<L>6567<pc>0092-c<k1>avaropya<k2>avaropya
{%Ava-ropya,%}¦ ind. having made to descend; rooting
up.
<LEND>

<L>6568<pc>0092-c<k1>avaroDa<k2>avaroDa
{%Ava-rodha, as,%}¦ m. descent, passing from or over;
mounting, ascending (?); a shoot sent out by a plant;
a pendent branch, one that strikes fresh root into the
earth, as those of the Indian fig tree; the growth of a
creeping plant or vine; a creeping plant climbing up
to the top of a tree; heaven or Svarga. {%—Avaroha-%}
{%vat, ān,%} or {%avaroha-śāyin, ī,%} m. the Indian fig tree.
<LEND>

<L>6569<pc>0092-c<k1>avarohaRa<k2>avarohaRa
{%Ava-rohaṇa, am,%}¦ n. alighting, descending, dis-
mounting; ascending.
<LEND>

<L>6570<pc>0092-c<k1>avarohikA<k2>avarohikA
{%Ava-rohikā,%}¦ f., N. of the plant Physalis Flexuosa L.
<LEND>

<L>6571<pc>0092-c<k1>avarohin<k2>avarohin
{%Ava-rohin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ descending, what descends,
what ascends; ({%ī%}), m. the Indian fig tree.
<LEND>

<L>6572<pc>0092-c<k1>avarUpa<k2>avarUpa
{#avarUpa#}¦ {%ava-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} mis-shapen,
deformed; degenerated.
<LEND>

<L>6573<pc>0092-c<k1>avarokin<k2>avarokin
{#avarokin#}¦ {%ava-rokin, ī, iṇī, i%} (fr. rt. {%ruc%}
with {%ava%}), Ved. shining, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>6574<pc>0092-c<k1>avarocaka<k2>avarocaka
{%Ava-rocaka, as,%}¦ m. want of appetite.
<LEND>

<L>6575<pc>0092-c<k1>avarcas<k2>avarcas
{#avarcas#}¦ {%a-varcas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. without
splendor, insignificant in form, mean-looking.
<LEND>
[Page0093-a+ 72]

<L>6576<pc>0093-a<k1>avarjivas<k2>avarjivas
{#avarjivas#}¦ {%a-varjivas, ān, juṣī, at,%} Ved.
not hindering, not being able to prevent.
<LEND>

<L>6577<pc>0093-a<k1>avarRa<k2>avarRa
{#avarRa#}¦ {%a-varṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} colourless;
having no marks; bad, low, destitute of good quali-
ties; ({%as%}), m. blame, censure. {%—Avarṇa-vāda, as,%}
m. censure, blame, reproach.
<LEND>

<L>6578<pc>0093-a<k1>avartana<k2>avartana
{#avartana#}¦ {%avartana,%} N. of an {%upa-dvīpa%} or
island, mentioned in the Purāṇic descriptions of the
earth.
<LEND>

<L>6579<pc>0093-a<k1>avartamAna<k2>avartamAna
{#avartamAna#}¦ {%avartamāna, as, ā, am,%} non-ex-
istent, not present, absent.
<LEND>

<L>6580<pc>0093-a<k1>avarti<k2>avarti
{#avarti#}¦ {%avarti, is,%} f. ({%ava-ṛti,%} fr. rt. {%ṛ%} with
{%ava%}), Ved. bad fortune, poverty, distress, want.
<LEND>

<L>6581<pc>0093-a<k1>avartra<k2>avartra
{#avartra#}¦ {%a-vartra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (rt. {%vṛt%}), not
turning back; (if fr. rt. {%vṛ%}) not to be kept back.
<LEND>

<L>6582<pc>0093-a<k1>avarDamAna<k2>avarDamAna
{#avarDamAna#}¦ {%a-vardhamāna, as, ā, am,%} not in-
creasing, not growing, not thriving.
<LEND>

<L>6583<pc>0093-a<k1>avarman<k2>avarman
{#avarman#}¦ {%a-varman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having no
armour.
<LEND>

<L>6584<pc>0093-a<k1>avarza<k2>avarza
{#avarza#}¦ {%a-varṣa, as,%} m. or {%a-varṣaṇa, am,%}
n. want of rain, drought.
<LEND>

<L>6585<pc>0093-a<k1>avarzuka<k2>avarzuka
{%A-varṣuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not raining.
<LEND>

<L>6586<pc>0093-a<k1>avarzya<k2>avarzya
{%Avarṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being active in rain-
less bright weather.
<LEND>

<L>6587<pc>0093-a<k1>avalakza<k2>avalakza
{#avalakza#}¦ {%avalakṣa%} or {%valakṣa, as, ā, am,%}
white; ({%as%}), m. the white colour.
<LEND>

<L>6588<pc>0093-a<k1>avalagna<k2>avalagna
{#avalagna#}¦ {%ava-lagna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%lag%}),
hanging down; placed contiguously, impressed, at-
tached, &c.; {%(as, am),%} m. n. the waist.
<LEND>

<L>6589<pc>0093-a<k1>avalaNG<k2>avalaNG
{#avalaNG#}¦ {%ava-laṅgh,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-laṅgha-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} to pass (time), spend.
<LEND>

<L>6590<pc>0093-a<k1>avalamb<k2>avalamb
{#avalamb#}¦ {%ava-lamb,%} cl. 1. A. or poet. P.
{%lambate, -ti, -bitum,%} to hang, glide or slip down,
descend; to catch hold of, cling to, hang to, hold on
or support one's self by; rest upon as a support, to
depend upon: Caus. {%-lambayati, -yitum,%} to make
one rest upon or catch hold of.
<LEND>

<L>6591<pc>0093-a<k1>avalamba<k2>avalamba
{%Ava-lamba, as,%}¦ m. hanging down; hanging on or
from; depending; resting upon; asylum, depend-
ance, support; a prop, a stay; suspender; an ap-
pendage; a perpendicular.
<LEND>

<L>6592<pc>0093-a<k1>avalambaka<k2>avalambaka
{%Ava-lambaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a metre.
<LEND>

<L>6593<pc>0093-a<k1>avalambana<k2>avalambana
{%Ava-lambana, am,%}¦ n. depending upon, depend-
ance; hanging on or from; a prop.
<LEND>

<L>6594<pc>0093-a<k1>avalambita<k2>avalambita
{%Ava-lambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ hanging on or upon,
suspended from, clinging to; depending upon, trusting
to, supported by, protected, cherished; alighting, de-
scending; expeditious (?).
<LEND>

<L>6595<pc>0093-a<k1>avalambitavya<k2>avalambitavya
{%Ava-lambitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caught hold
of or grasped, to be clung to; expeditious, quick.
<LEND>

<L>6596<pc>0093-a<k1>avalambin<k2>avalambin
{%Ava-lambin, ī, inī, ī,%}¦ hanging down so as to rest
upon, hanging on or from, depending on; clinging
to, reclining, resting upon.
<LEND>

<L>6597<pc>0093-a<k1>avalambya<k2>avalambya
{%Ava-lambya,%}¦ ind. leaning on, having depended or
relied on, supporting one's self; trusting to; waiting.
<LEND>

<L>6598<pc>0093-a<k1>avalipta<k2>avalipta
{#avalipta#}¦ {%ava-lipta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%lip%}),
anointed, plastered, smeared; proud, arrogant, vain.
<LEND>

<L>6599<pc>0093-a<k1>avaliptatA<k2>avaliptatA
{%—Avalipta-tā,%}¦ f. or {%avalipta-tva, am,%} n. unction;
pride, arrogance, vanity.
<LEND>

<L>6600<pc>0093-a<k1>avalepa<k2>avalepa
{%Ava-lepa, as,%}¦ m. smearing, anointing; ornament;
union, association; pride, haughtiness.
<LEND>

<L>6601<pc>0093-a<k1>avalepana<k2>avalepana
{%Ava-lepana, am,%}¦ n. anointing; proud behaviour;
daring, proud or arrogant purpose.
<LEND>

<L>6602<pc>0093-a<k1>avalih<k2>avalih
{#avalih#}¦ {%ava-lih,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-leḍhi, -līḍhe,%}
{%-leḍhum,%} to lick off, to lick, to lap: Intens. {%-leleḍhi,%}
to lick again and again.
<LEND>

<L>6603<pc>0093-a<k1>avalIQa<k2>avalIQa
{%Ava-līḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ licked, lapped; devoured,
destroyed; ({%ā%}), f. disregard. contempt.
<LEND>

<L>6604<pc>0093-a<k1>avaleha<k2>avaleha
{%Ava-leha, as,%}¦ m. or {%ava-lehikā,%} f. licking, lap-
ping; an extract, an electuary, confection.
<LEND>

<L>6605<pc>0093-a<k1>avalehana<k2>avalehana
{%Ava-lehana, am,%}¦ n. licking with the tongue,
lapping.
<LEND>
[Page0093-b+ 69]

<L>6606<pc>0093-b<k1>avalehya<k2>avalehya
{%Ava-lehya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be licked; thick, viscid.
<LEND>

<L>6607<pc>0093-b<k1>avalI<k2>avalI
{#avalI#}¦ {%ava-lī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate, -letum%} or
{%-lātum,%} to stick to, hang to.
<LEND>

<L>6608<pc>0093-b<k1>avalIna<k2>avalIna
{%Ava-līna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sticking to, cleaving to.
<LEND>

<L>6609<pc>0093-b<k1>avalIlA<k2>avalIlA
{#avalIlA#}¦ {%ava-līlā,%} f. sport, paly, mirth.
<LEND>

<L>6610<pc>0093-b<k1>avaluYc<k2>avaluYc
{#avaluYc#}¦ {%ava-luñc,%} cl. 1. P. {%-luñcati, -citum,%}
to pull down or out.
<LEND>

<L>6611<pc>0093-b<k1>avaluYcana<k2>avaluYcana
{%Ava-luñcana, am,%}¦ n. tearing or cutting off, pull-
ing out.
<LEND>

<L>6612<pc>0093-b<k1>avaluRWana<k2>avaluRWana
{#avaluRWana#}¦ {%ava-luṇṭhana, am,%} n. (rt. {%luṇṭh%}),
robbing; rolling or wallowing on the ground.
<LEND>

<L>6613<pc>0093-b<k1>avaluRWita<k2>avaluRWita
{%Ava-luṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ robbed; rolled on the
ground.
<LEND>

<L>6614<pc>0093-b<k1>avalup<k2>avalup
{#avalup#}¦ {%ava-lup,%} cl. 6. A. or P. {%-lumpate,%}
{%-ti, -loptum,%} to rush or dash upon as a wild beast on
its prey, to burst or break in upon.
<LEND>

<L>6615<pc>0093-b<k1>avalumpana<k2>avalumpana
{%Ava-lumpana, am,%}¦ n. leaping on suddenly.
<LEND>

<L>6616<pc>0093-b<k1>avalopya<k2>avalopya
{%Ava-lopya, as, ā, am,%}¦ that can be broken in upon
or assailed with a sudden rush.
<LEND>

<L>6617<pc>0093-b<k1>avalUna<k2>avalUna
{#avalUna#}¦ {%ava-lūna, as, ā, am,%} cut off.
<LEND>

<L>6618<pc>0093-b<k1>avaleKa<k2>avaleKa
{#avaleKa#}¦ {%ava-lekha, as,%} m. (rt. {%likh%}), any-
thing scraped off.
<LEND>

<L>6619<pc>0093-b<k1>avaleKana<k2>avaleKana
{%Ava-lekhana, am, ī,%}¦ n. f. scraping off.
<LEND>

<L>6620<pc>0093-b<k1>avaleKA<k2>avaleKA
{%Ava-lekhā,%}¦ f. rubbing; adorning the person.
<LEND>

<L>6621<pc>0093-b<k1>avalepa<k2>avalepa
{#avalepa#}¦ {%ava-lepa.%} See under {%ava-lipta%}
last col.
<LEND>

<L>6622<pc>0093-b<k1>avalok<k2>avalok
{#avalok#}¦ {%ava-lok,%} cl. 1. A. {%-lokate, -kitum,%}
or cl. 10. P. {%-lokayati, -yitum,%} to look down upon,
look at, view, behold, see, consider.
<LEND>

<L>6623<pc>0093-b<k1>avaloka<k2>avaloka
{%Ava-loka, as,%}¦ m. sight, seeing; looking down
upon with compassion.
<LEND>

<L>6624<pc>0093-b<k1>avalokaka<k2>avalokaka
{%Ava-lokaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ looking at, wishing to see.
<LEND>

<L>6625<pc>0093-b<k1>avalokana<k2>avalokana
{%Ava-lokana, am,%}¦ n. act of looking at; beholding;
sight; seeing; review.
<LEND>

<L>6626<pc>0093-b<k1>avalokayitf<k2>avalokayitf
{%Ava-lokayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ looking upon, con-
sidering.
<LEND>

<L>6627<pc>0093-b<k1>avalokita<k2>avalokita
{%Ava-lokita, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Bodhi-sattva; ({%am%}), n. a look, a glance. {%—Ava-%}
{%lokiteśvara (˚ta-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva,
worshipped by the northern Buddhists.
<LEND>

<L>6628<pc>0093-b<k1>avalokin<k2>avalokin
{%Ava-lokin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ looking at, beholding; con-
sidering.
<LEND>

<L>6629<pc>0093-b<k1>avaloBana<k2>avaloBana
{#avaloBana#}¦ {%ava-lobhana, am,%} n. (rt. {%lubh%}),
sensual desire.
<LEND>

<L>6630<pc>0093-b<k1>avalguja<k2>avalguja
{#avalguja#}¦ {%a-valgu-ja, as,%} m., N. of the plant
Vernonia Anthelmintica.
<LEND>

<L>6631<pc>0093-b<k1>avalgulI<k2>avalgulI
{#avalgulI#}¦ {%avalgulī,%} f., N. of a poisonous
insect.
<LEND>

<L>6632<pc>0093-b<k1>avavada<k2>avavada
{#avavada#}¦ {%ava-vada, as,%} m. or {%ava-vadana,%}
{%am,%} n. (rt. {%vad%}), evil report or reputation.
<LEND>

<L>6633<pc>0093-b<k1>avavaditf<k2>avavaditf
{%Ava-vaditṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who speaks finally
or decisively (?), an adjudicator.
<LEND>

<L>6634<pc>0093-b<k1>avavAda<k2>avavAda
{%Ava-vāda, as,%}¦ m. evil report or reputation; cen-
sure, reproach; a command, an order; trust, confi-
dence; information.
<LEND>

<L>6635<pc>0093-b<k1>avavarzaRa<k2>avavarzaRa
{#avavarzaRa#}¦ {%ava-varṣaṇa, am,%} n. raining
upon.
<LEND>

<L>6636<pc>0093-b<k1>avavA<k2>avavA
{#avavA#}¦ {%ava-vā,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-vāti, -tum,%}
to radiate (?), to prevail (?), to rage (as fire?).
<LEND>

<L>6637<pc>0093-b<k1>avavidDa<k2>avavidDa
{#avavidDa#}¦ {%ava-viddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vyadh%}),
cast down.
<LEND>

<L>6638<pc>0093-b<k1>avavraSc<k2>avavraSc
{#avavraSc#}¦ {%ava-vraśc,%} cl. 6. P. {%-vṛścati, -vra-%}
{%ścitum, -vraṣṭum,%} to splinter, cut off.
<LEND>

<L>6639<pc>0093-b<k1>avavraSca<k2>avavraSca
{%Ava-vraśca, as,%}¦ m. splinter, chip.
<LEND>

<L>6640<pc>0093-b<k1>avaSa<k2>avaSa
{#avaSa#}¦ {%a-vaśa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vaś%}), unsub-
missive to another's will; independent, unrestrained,
free; not having one's own free will; doing some-
thing against one's liking or unwillingly; necessary,
certain. {%—Avaśaṅ-gama, as, ā, am,%} not submitting
to another's will. {%—Avaśendriya-citta (˚śa-in), as, %}
[Page0093-c+ 73]
{%ā, am,%} whose mind and senses are not held in sub-
jection.
<LEND>

<L>6641<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSIBUta<k2>avaSIBUta
{%A-vaśī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unrestrained, independ-
ent; uninfluenced by magic.
<LEND>

<L>6642<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSya<k2>avaSya
{%A-vaśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ untameable, ungovernable,
inevitable; ({%am%}), ind. necessarily, inevitably, certainly,
at all events, by all means; {%avaśyam eva,%} most
surely. If compounded with a fut. pass. part. the
final nasal is dropped; e. g. {%avaśya-pācya,%} to be
necessarily cooked; {%avaśya-kārya,%} to be necessarily
done: but retained in {%avaśyaṅ-kārin,%} doing what
is necessary; {%avaśyam-bhāvin,%} necessarily being.
<LEND>

<L>6643<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSyaka<k2>avaSyaka
{%A-vaśyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ necessary, inevitable, in-
dispensable. {%—Avaśyaka-tā,%} f. or {%avaśyaka-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. necessity, obligation, certainty.
<LEND>

<L>6644<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSakTikA<k2>avaSakTikA
{#avaSakTikA#}¦ {%ava-śakthikā,%} f. a cloth tied
round the legs and knees of a person sitting on his
hams. [cf. {%ava-sakthikā%}].
<LEND>

<L>6645<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSas<k2>avaSas
{#avaSas#}¦ {%ava-śas, as,%} f. (rt. {%śaṃs%}), Ved. wrong
desire.
<LEND>

<L>6646<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSA<k2>avaSA
{#avaSA#}¦ {%a-vaśā,%} f., Ved. not a cow, a bad cow.
<LEND>

<L>6647<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSAtana<k2>avaSAtana
{#avaSAtana#}¦ {%ava-śātana, am,%} n. (Caus. of rt.
{%śad%}), withering, drying up.
<LEND>

<L>6648<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSiras<k2>avaSiras
{#avaSiras#}¦ {%ava-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} or {%ava-%}
{%śīrṣaka, as, ā, am,%} having the head turned down.
<LEND>

<L>6649<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSiz<k2>avaSiz
{#avaSiz#}¦ {%ava-śiṣ,%} Pass. {%-śiṣyate,%} to be
left last or as a remnant, to remain over.
<LEND>

<L>6650<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSizwa<k2>avaSizwa
{%Ava-śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, remaining; ({%am%}),
n. or {%ava-śiṣṭaka, am,%} n. rest, remainder.
<LEND>

<L>6651<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSeza<k2>avaSeza
{%Ava-śeṣa, as, (am?),%}¦ m. (n. ?) leavings, remainder;
end, close, termination. Frequently as the last mem-
ber of a compound; thus, {%ardhāvaśeṣa,%} having
only one half left; {%kathāvaśeṣa-tā,%} the condition
of one who survives only in narrations.
<LEND>

<L>6652<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSezita<k2>avaSezita
{%Ava-śeṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ left remaining.
<LEND>

<L>6653<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSF<k2>avaSF
{#avaSF#}¦ {%ava-śṝ,%} Pass. {%-śīryate,%} to be ṣat-
tered.
<LEND>

<L>6654<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSyA<k2>avaSyA
{#avaSyA#}¦ {%ava-śyā,%} f. (rt. {%śyai%} with {%ava%}),
hoar-frost; a fog or mist.
<LEND>

<L>6655<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSIna<k2>avaSIna
{%Ava-śīna, as,%}¦ m. a scorpion.
<LEND>

<L>6656<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSyAya<k2>avaSyAya
{%Ava-śyāya, as,%}¦ m. hoar-frost; white dew; pride.
<LEND>

<L>6657<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSrayaRa<k2>avaSrayaRa
{#avaSrayaRa#}¦ {%ava-śrayaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%śrī%}),
taking (anything) from off the fire (opposed to {%adhi-%}
{%śrayaṇa,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>6658<pc>0093-c<k1>avaSvasam<k2>avaSvasam
{#avaSvasam#}¦ {%ava-śvasam,%} ind. (rt. {%śvas%}), Ved.
as if blown away.
<LEND>

<L>6659<pc>0093-c<k1>avazkayaRI<k2>avazkayaRI
{#avazkayaRI#}¦ {%avaṣkayaṇī,%} f. ({%= vaṣkayaṇī%}),
a cow that bears a calf after a long interval.
<LEND>

<L>6660<pc>0093-c<k1>avazwamB<k2>avazwamB
{#avazwamB#}¦ {%ava-ṣṭambh (-stambh),%} cl. 5. 9. P.
{%-ṣṭabhnoti%} or {%-nāti, -ṣṭambhitum,%} to lean or rest
upon; to be contiguous or near; to be astounded or
bewildered.
<LEND>

<L>6661<pc>0093-c<k1>avazwabDa<k2>avazwabDa
{%Ava-ṣṭabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ supported, rested on,
protected; hanging from or upon; stopped, ob-
structed, stayed; paralysed; bound, tied, attached;
wrapped up, enfolded; opposed; surpassed, over-
come; near.
<LEND>

<L>6662<pc>0093-c<k1>avazwaBya<k2>avazwaBya
{%Ava-ṣṭabhya,%}¦ ind. leaning upon, resting on,
holding; stopping, arresting.
<LEND>

<L>6663<pc>0093-c<k1>avazwamBa<k2>avazwamBa
{%Ava-ṣṭambha, as,%}¦ m. leaning or resting upon,
having recourse to any one; stopping, standing still,
staying; self-confidence, resoluteness; commencement,
beginning; excellence; obstruction, impediment; sup-
port, stay; paralysis; a post or pillar; gold. {%—Ava-%}
{%ṣṭambha-maya, as, ī, am,%} golden, made of gold.
<LEND>

<L>6664<pc>0093-c<k1>avazwamBana<k2>avazwamBana
{%Ava-ṣṭambhana, am,%}¦ n. resting upon, having
recourse to; supporting, protecting; stopping, stay-
ing; paralysing; a pillar or post.
<LEND>

<L>6665<pc>0093-c<k1>avazvan<k2>avazvan
{#avazvan#}¦ {%ava-ṣvan (-svan),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṣva-%}
{%ṇati, -ṇitum,%} to smack (one's lips) or otherwise make
a noise in eating.
<LEND>

<L>6666<pc>0093-c<k1>avazvARa<k2>avazvARa
{%Ava-ṣvāṇa, as,%}¦ m. noisy eating, smacking.
<LEND>

<L>6667<pc>0093-c<k1>avas<k2>avas<h>1
{#avas#} 1¦. {%avas,%} n. (fr. rt. {%av%}), Ved. satisfac-
[Page0094-a+ 73]
tion, pleasure, enjoyment; wish, desire, aspiring;
favour, furtherance, protection, assistance. {%—Avas-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. striving, desirous.
<LEND>

<L>6668<pc>0094-a<k1>avasa<k2>avasa
{%Avasa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. refreshment, food, provisions,
viaticum; preserving, protecting; ({%as%}), m. a king;
the sun.
<LEND>

<L>6669<pc>0094-a<k1>avas<k2>avas<h>2
{#avas#} 2¦. {%avas,%} ind. (fr. 2. {%ava%}), Ved. adv.
below, downwards, hitherward.
<div n="P"/>.(As a prep. with inst. or abl. it expresses) below, at
the lowest place of; without, on the outside.
<LEND>

<L>6670<pc>0094-a<k1>avastAt<k2>avastAt
{%Avastāt.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>6671<pc>0094-a<k1>avasakTikA<k2>avasakTikA
{#avasakTikA#}¦ {%ava-sakthikā%} or {%ava-saktikā,%}
f. a cloth tied round the legs and knees of a person
sitting on his hams; a wrapper; a girth or band [cf.
{%ava-śakthikā%}].
<LEND>

<L>6672<pc>0094-a<k1>avasaYj<k2>avasaYj
{#avasaYj#}¦ {%ava-sañj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sajati, -saṅktum,%}
to suspend, attach, cling to.
<LEND>

<L>6673<pc>0094-a<k1>avasakta<k2>avasakta
{%Ava-sakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ suspended from, attached
to or by, in contact with, bound round, begirt; en-
gaged in, intent on, eager, placed upon.
<LEND>

<L>6674<pc>0094-a<k1>avasaYjana<k2>avasaYjana
{%Ava-sañjana%}¦ or {%ava-sajjana, am,%} n. embracing,
clinging.
<LEND>

<L>6675<pc>0094-a<k1>avasaRqIna<k2>avasaRqIna
{#avasaRqIna#}¦ {%ava-saṇḍīna, am,%} n. (rt. {%ḍī%}), the
united downward flight of birds.
<LEND>

<L>6676<pc>0094-a<k1>avasaTa<k2>avasaTa
{#avasaTa#}¦ {%a-vasatha, as,%} m. (for {%ā-vasatha,%}
q. v.), habitation; a village; a college, a school; ({%am%}),
n. a house. See {%ā-vasatha.%}
<LEND>

<L>6677<pc>0094-a<k1>avasaTya<k2>avasaTya
{%Avasathya, as,%}¦ m. a college, a school.
<LEND>

<L>6678<pc>0094-a<k1>avasad<k2>avasad
{#avasad#}¦ {%ava-sad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sīdati, -sattum,%}
to sink down, to faint; become disheartened, be ex-
hausted, perish, come to an end: Caus. {%-sādayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to sink, dispirit, render downhearted,
to ruin.
<LEND>

<L>6679<pc>0094-a<k1>avasanna<k2>avasanna
{%Ava-sanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sunk down, bowed, bent;
languid, enervated; melancholy, dispirited, unhappy;
ended, terminated, separated; non-suited. {%—Ava-%}
{%sanna-tā,%} f. or {%avasanna-tva, am,%} n. affliction,
low spirits; dejection; termination, completion.
<LEND>

<L>6680<pc>0094-a<k1>avasAda<k2>avasAda
{%Ava-sāda, as,%}¦ m. sitting down; sinking, fainting;
exhaustion, fatigue, lassitude, want of energy or spirit,
especially as proceeding from doubtful or unsuccessful
love; (in law) badness of a cause; end, termination.
<LEND>

<L>6681<pc>0094-a<k1>avasAdaka<k2>avasAdaka
{%Ava-sādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to sink, frustrat-
ing; exhausting, tiresome, wearisome; ending, finish-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>6682<pc>0094-a<k1>avasAdana<k2>avasAdana
{%Ava-sādana, am,%}¦ n. oppressing, disheartening;
finishing; an escharotic; removing proud flesh by
escharotic applications.
<LEND>

<L>6683<pc>0094-a<k1>avasAdita<k2>avasAdita
{%Ava-sādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to sink, exhausted,
faint, languid.
<LEND>

<L>6684<pc>0094-a<k1>avasaBa<k2>avasaBa
{#avasaBa#}¦ {%ava-sabha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. excluded
from society.
<LEND>

<L>6685<pc>0094-a<k1>avasara<k2>avasara
{#avasara#}¦ {%ava-sara, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sṛ%} with
{%ava%}), descent, place of descent; descent of water;
rain, raining; occasion, moment, favourable opportu-
nity; leisure, advantageous situation; consultation in
private; a year. {%—Avasara-kāle,%} at a favourable
opportunity, at a time of leisure.
<LEND>

<L>6686<pc>0094-a<k1>avasAraRa<k2>avasAraRa
{%Ava-sāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. removing, causing to move.
<LEND>

<L>6687<pc>0094-a<k1>avasarga<k2>avasarga
{#avasarga#}¦ {%ava-sarga.%} See {%ava-sṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>6688<pc>0094-a<k1>avasarpa<k2>avasarpa
{#avasarpa#}¦ {%ava-sarpa, as,%} m. (rt. {%sṛp%}), a spy,
a secret emissary.
<LEND>

<L>6689<pc>0094-a<k1>avasarpaRa<k2>avasarpaRa
{%Ava-sarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. stepping down.
<LEND>

<L>6690<pc>0094-a<k1>avasarpin<k2>avasarpin
{%Ava-sarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ stepping down; {%(iṇī),%} f. a
long period of time with the Jainas.
<LEND>

<L>6691<pc>0094-a<k1>avasavya<k2>avasavya
{#avasavya#}¦ {%ava-savya, as, ā, am,%} not left, right.
<LEND>

<L>6692<pc>0094-a<k1>avasAna<k2>avasAna<h>1
{#avasAna#} 1¦. {%a-vasāna, as, ā, am%} (rt. 2. {%vas%}),
Ved. not dressing. (For 2. {%ava-sāna,%} see under {%ava-%}
{%so%} next col.)
<LEND>

<L>6693<pc>0094-a<k1>avasic<k2>avasic
{#avasic#}¦ {%ava-sic,%} cl. 6. P. {%-siñcati, -sektum,%}
to sprinkle, bedew, bespatter.
<LEND>

<L>6694<pc>0094-a<k1>avasikta<k2>avasikta
{%Ava-sikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled. {%—Avasiktāṅga%}
{%(˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having the limbs sprinkled.
<LEND>
[Page0094-b+ 74]

<L>6695<pc>0094-b<k1>avaseka<k2>avaseka
{%Ava-seka, as,%}¦ m. sprinkling, irrigating, bedewing.
<LEND>

<L>6696<pc>0094-b<k1>avasekima<k2>avasekima
{%Avasekima, as,%}¦ m. a kind of cake, pulse ground
and fried with oil or butter.
<LEND>

<L>6697<pc>0094-b<k1>avasecana<k2>avasecana
{%Ava-secana, am,%}¦ n. sprinkling, water used for
sprinkling; bleeding.
<LEND>

<L>6698<pc>0094-b<k1>avasupta<k2>avasupta
{#avasupta#}¦ {%ava-supta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%svap%}),
asleep.
<LEND>

<L>6699<pc>0094-b<k1>avasfj<k2>avasfj
{#avasfj#}¦ {%ava-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati, -sraṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to let off, to let loose, let go, fling down, pour
out, dismiss, remit, liberate.
<LEND>

<L>6700<pc>0094-b<k1>avasarga<k2>avasarga
{%Ava-sarga, as,%}¦ m. letting off, letting go, emission,
remission, laxity, relaxation, following one's own in-
clinations, independence.
<LEND>

<L>6701<pc>0094-b<k1>avasarjana<k2>avasarjana
{%Ava-sarjana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. liberation.
<LEND>

<L>6702<pc>0094-b<k1>avasfzwa<k2>avasfzwa
{%Ava-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ dismissed, let go.
<LEND>

<L>6703<pc>0094-b<k1>avaso<k2>avaso
{#avaso#}¦ {%ava-so,%} cl. 4. P. {%-syati, -sātum,%}
to finish, accomplish; to destroy: Caus. {%-sāyayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to destroy; to cause to be completed.
<LEND>

<L>6704<pc>0094-b<k1>avasA<k2>avasA
{%Ava-sā,%}¦ f., Ved. liberation, setting free, deliverance.
<LEND>

<L>6705<pc>0094-b<k1>avasAtf<k2>avasAtf
{%Ava-sātṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. a deliverer, liberator.
<LEND>

<L>6706<pc>0094-b<k1>avasAna<k2>avasAna<h>2
2. {%ava-sāna, am,%}¦ n. place of dismounting from a
horse or alighting from a carriage, stopping, resting-
place, residence; conclusion, termination, cessation;
death; boundary, limit; (in gram.) the last part of a
word or period, disjunction of letters; a pause; the
end of a verse or the verse itself: (for 1. {%a-vasāna,%}
see last col.) {%—Avasāna-darśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. look-
ing at one's place of destination or residence.
<LEND>

<L>6707<pc>0094-b<k1>avasAnaka<k2>avasAnaka
{%Ava-sānaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ coming to an end,
perishing.
<LEND>

<L>6708<pc>0094-b<k1>avasAnya<k2>avasAnya
{%Avasānya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to the end
of a verse.
<LEND>

<L>6709<pc>0094-b<k1>avasAya<k2>avasAya<h>1
1. {%ava-sāya, as,%}¦ m. conclusion, end; termination,
completion; remainder; determination, ascertain-
ment, certainty.
<LEND>

<L>6710<pc>0094-b<k1>avasAya<k2>avasAya<h>2
2. {%ava-sāya,%}¦ ind. having finished; having loosened,
having set free.
<LEND>

<L>6711<pc>0094-b<k1>avasAyin<k2>avasAyin
{%Ava-sāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ residing, dwelling in.
<LEND>

<L>6712<pc>0094-b<k1>avasAyya<k2>avasAyya
{%Ava-sāyya,%}¦ ind. having caused to be completed,
<LEND>

<L>6713<pc>0094-b<k1>avasita<k2>avasita
{%Ava-sita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having settled in a place,
residing; ended, terminated; finished, completed;
standing in a pause; known, understood; stored (as
grain, &c.); gone; ({%am%}), n. a dwelling-place. {%—Ava-%}
{%sita-mati, is, is, i,%} frustrated, disappointed.
<LEND>

<L>6714<pc>0094-b<k1>avaseya<k2>avaseya
{%Ava-seya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be destroyed, destructible,
perishable.
<LEND>

<L>6715<pc>0094-b<k1>avaskand<k2>avaskand
{#avaskand#}¦ {%ava-skand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-skandati,%}
{%-skantum,%} to storm, to assault.
<LEND>

<L>6716<pc>0094-b<k1>avaskanda<k2>avaskanda
{%Ava-skanda, as,%}¦ m. assault, attack, storm; a
camp; descending, bathing.
<LEND>

<L>6717<pc>0094-b<k1>avaskandana<k2>avaskandana
{%Ava-skandana, am,%}¦ n. attacking, assaulting, storm;
refutation; descending; bathing.
<LEND>

<L>6718<pc>0094-b<k1>avaskandita<k2>avaskandita
{%Ava-skandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ attacked; gone down;
refuted; bathed, bathing.
<LEND>

<L>6719<pc>0094-b<k1>avaskandin<k2>avaskandin
{%Ava-skandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ leaping upon, covering;
attacking, assaulting.
<LEND>

<L>6720<pc>0094-b<k1>avaskara<k2>avaskara
{#avaskara#}¦ {%avas-kara, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kṝ%} with
{%avas%}), something to be concealed or swept away;
a privity; ordure, fæces, &c. {%—Avasakara-man-%}
{%dira, am,%} n. a privy, water-closet.
<LEND>

<L>6721<pc>0094-b<k1>avaskaraka<k2>avaskaraka
{%Avas-karaka, as,%}¦ m. existing in the fæces, an, in-
sect; a sweeper; a brush, broom, &c.
<LEND>

<L>6722<pc>0094-b<k1>avaskava<k2>avaskava
{#avaskava#}¦ {%ava-skava, as,%} m. a kind of worm.
<LEND>

<L>6723<pc>0094-b<k1>avastAt<k2>avastAt
{#avastAt#}¦ {%avastāt,%} ind. (fr. 2. {%avas,%} q. v.),
below, from below, downwards, hitherwards; (with
gen.) below. {%—Avastāt-prapadana, as, ā, am,%}
(anything) attained from below (as heaven, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>6724<pc>0094-b<k1>avastu<k2>avastu
{#avastu#}¦ {%a-vastu, u,%} n. a worthless thing;
nothing; insubstantiality, the unreality of matter.
{%—Avastu-tā,%} f. or {%avastu-tva, am,%} n. insubstan-
tiality, unreality.
<LEND>

<L>6725<pc>0094-b<k1>avastf<k2>avastf
{#avastf#}¦ {%ava-stṛ,%} cl. 9. P., Ved. {%-stṛṇāti,%}
{%-startum, -staritum%} or {%-rītum,%} to cover; to spread
or lay down a covering.
<LEND>
[Page0094-c+ 72]

<L>6726<pc>0094-c<k1>avastaraRa<k2>avastaraRa
{%Ava-staraṇa, am,%}¦ n. spreading out or laying down
a covering.
<LEND>

<L>6727<pc>0094-c<k1>avastAra<k2>avastAra
{%Ava-stāra, as,%}¦ m. a screen or wall of cloth sur-
rounding a tent.
<LEND>

<L>6728<pc>0094-c<k1>avastra<k2>avastra
{#avastra#}¦ {%a-vastra, as, ā, am,%} without clothes,
garmentless, naked. {%—Avastra-tā,%} f. nakedness.
<LEND>

<L>6729<pc>0094-c<k1>avasTA<k2>avasTA
{#avasTA#}¦ {%ava-sthā,%} cl. 1. A. {%-tiṣṭhate,-sthā-%}
{%tum,%} to take one's stand, remain standing; to stay,
abide, stop, stand apart, stand by or near; Ved. to
place: Caus. {%-sthāpayati%} or {%-te, -yitum,%} to cause to
stand or stop, to place, fix, settle, set, array.
<LEND>

<L>6730<pc>0094-c<k1>avasTa<k2>avasTa
{%Ava-stha, as,%}¦ m. membrum virile, see {%upa-stha;%}
{%(ā),%} f. appearance (in a court of justice); stability,
consistence; state, condition, situation, circumstance
of age or position; degree, proportion; the female
organ of generation. {%—Avasthā-catuṣṭaya, am,%} n.
the four periods or states of human life, viz. child-
hood, youth, manhood, and old age. {%—Avasthā-%}
{%traya, am,%} n. the three states, or waking, dreaming,
and sound sleep. {%—Avasthā-dvaya, am,%} n. the two
states of life, viz. happiness and misery.
<LEND>

<L>6731<pc>0094-c<k1>avasTAna<k2>avasTAna
{%Ava-sthāna, am,%}¦ n. standing on or placing one's
self on (anything), residing, abiding, dwelling; re-
sidence, abode; place or period of abiding or staying;
situation, station.
<LEND>

<L>6732<pc>0094-c<k1>avasTApana<k2>avasTApana
{%Ava-sthāpana, am,%}¦ n. fixing, settling.
<LEND>

<L>6733<pc>0094-c<k1>avasTApita<k2>avasTApita
{%Ava-sthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed.
<LEND>

<L>6734<pc>0094-c<k1>avasTApya<k2>avasTApya
{%Ava-sthāpya,%}¦ ind. having fixed, placed, set or put.
<LEND>

<L>6735<pc>0094-c<k1>avasTAya<k2>avasTAya
{%Ava-sthāya,%}¦ ind. having stayed or remained.
<LEND>

<L>6736<pc>0094-c<k1>avasTAyin<k2>avasTAyin
{%Ava-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ staying, residing in; placed.
<LEND>

<L>6737<pc>0094-c<k1>avasTita<k2>avasTita
{%Ava-sthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing on or in, remain-
ing, staying, abiding, residing, lasting, remaining firm
or fixed, &c.; firm of purpose, steady; engaged in,
prosecuting, following. {%—Avasthita-mati, is, is, i,%}
of fixed mind.
<LEND>

<L>6738<pc>0094-c<k1>avasTiti<k2>avasTiti
{%Ava-sthiti, is,%}¦ f. abiding; residence; following,
practising.
<LEND>

<L>6739<pc>0094-c<k1>avaspf<k2>avaspf
{#avaspf#}¦ {%ava-spṛ,%} cl. 5. P., Ved. {%-spṛṇoti,%}
{%-spartum,%} to defend, preserve from.
<LEND>

<L>6740<pc>0094-c<k1>avaspartf<k2>avaspartf
{%Ava-spartṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. a preserver, saviour.
<LEND>

<L>6741<pc>0094-c<k1>avasya<k2>avasya
{#avasya#}¦ {%avasya%} (fr. 1. {%avas%}), nom. P. {%ava-%}
{%syati,%} Ved. to seek favour or assistance.
<LEND>

<L>6742<pc>0094-c<k1>avasyu<k2>avasyu
{%Avasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desiring favour or assistance.
<LEND>

<L>6743<pc>0094-c<k1>avasraMsana<k2>avasraMsana
{#avasraMsana#}¦ {%ava-sraṃsana, am,%} n. falling off
or down.
<LEND>

<L>6744<pc>0094-c<k1>avasvan<k2>avasvan
{#avasvan#}¦ {%ava-svan,%} cl. 1. P. {%-svanati, -ni-%}
{%tum,%} to sound, to smack (the lips) or otherwise make
a noise in eating. See {%ava-ṣvan.%}
<LEND>

<L>6745<pc>0094-c<k1>avasvanya<k2>avasvanya
{%Ava-svanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. roaring, boisterous.
<LEND>

<L>6746<pc>0094-c<k1>avahan<k2>avahan
{#avahan#}¦ {%ava-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -tum,%} to
strike, hit, beat off.
<LEND>

<L>6747<pc>0094-c<k1>avahata<k2>avahata
{%Ava-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ beaten, bruised; threshed,
winnowed.
<LEND>

<L>6748<pc>0094-c<k1>avahanana<k2>avahanana
{%Ava-hanana, am,%}¦ n. threshing, pounding of rice,
winnowing; the lungs.
<LEND>

<L>6749<pc>0094-c<k1>avahas<k2>avahas
{#avahas#}¦ {%ava-has,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hasati, -situm,%}
to smile at, laugh at, deride.
<LEND>

<L>6750<pc>0094-c<k1>avahAsa<k2>avahAsa
{%Ava-hāsa, as,%}¦ m. jest, joke.
<LEND>

<L>6751<pc>0094-c<k1>avahAsya<k2>avahAsya
{%Ava-hāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be derided, exposed to
jest, ridiculous.
<LEND>

<L>6752<pc>0094-c<k1>avahasta<k2>avahasta
{#avahasta#}¦ {%ava-hasta, as,%} m. the back of the
hand.
<LEND>

<L>6753<pc>0094-c<k1>avahA<k2>avahA
{#avahA#}¦ {%ava-hā,%} Pass. {%-hīyate,%} to be left
remaining.
<LEND>

<L>6754<pc>0094-c<k1>avahAlikA<k2>avahAlikA
{#avahAlikA#}¦ {%avahālikā,%} f. (rt. {%hal%}), a wall,
a bound hedge.
<LEND>

<L>6755<pc>0094-c<k1>avahita<k2>avahita
{#avahita#}¦ {%ava-hita.%} See under {%ava-dhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>6756<pc>0094-c<k1>avahitTA<k2>avahitTA
{#avahitTA#}¦ {%a-vahi-tthā,%} f., {%am,%} n. (corrupted
fr. {%a-vahiḥ-sthā%}), dissimulation.
<LEND>

<L>6757<pc>0094-c<k1>avahf<k2>avahf
{#avahf#}¦ {%ava-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hurati, -hartum,%}
to lay aside, throw away, take away; Ved. to throw
or knock down (?).
<LEND>
[Page0095-a+ 73]

<L>6758<pc>0095-a<k1>avaharaRa<k2>avaharaRa
{%Ava-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. throwing away; taking away;
stealing, plundering; taking back, redeeming; fining,
mulcting.
<LEND>

<L>6759<pc>0095-a<k1>avahAra<k2>avahAra
{%Ava-hāra, as,%}¦ m. truce, suspension of arms, ces-
sation of gambling, fighting, &c.; a thief; a shark;
a water elephant; summoning, inviting; any object
fit or able to be brought near; apostacy, abandoning
a sect or cast; re-delivery.
<LEND>

<L>6760<pc>0095-a<k1>avahAraka<k2>avahAraka
{%Ava-hāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who stops fighting,
&c.; ({%as%}), m. a shark, a marine monster.
<LEND>

<L>6761<pc>0095-a<k1>avahArya<k2>avahArya
{%Ava-hārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made to restore or
compensate; finable, punishable; recoverable, re-
deemable; (anything) which one is compelled to re-
store.
<LEND>

<L>6762<pc>0095-a<k1>avahfta<k2>avahfta
{%Ava-hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken off, back, or away;
seized; stolen; fined.
<LEND>

<L>6763<pc>0095-a<k1>avahela<k2>avahela
{#avahela#}¦ {%ava-hela, am, ā,%} n. f. or {%ava-helana,%}
{%am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%hel%} for {%heḍ%} with {%ava%}), disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>6764<pc>0095-a<k1>avahelita<k2>avahelita
{%Ava-helita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disrespected; ({%am%}), n.
disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>6765<pc>0095-a<k1>avahvara<k2>avahvara
{#avahvara#}¦ {%ava-hvara, as,%} m. (rt. {%hvṛ%}), a
crooked way; trick; deceit.
<LEND>

<L>6766<pc>0095-a<k1>avAkin<k2>avAkin
{#avAkin#}¦ {%a-vākin, ī, inī, i%} (rt. {%vac%}), not
speaking.
<LEND>

<L>6767<pc>0095-a<k1>avAkka<k2>avAkka<h>1
1. {%a-vākka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. speechless.
<LEND>

<L>6768<pc>0095-a<k1>avAc<k2>avAc<h>1
1. {%a-vāc, k, k, k,%}¦ speechless, dumb. {%—Avāk-śruti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} deaf and dumb.
<LEND>

<L>6769<pc>0095-a<k1>avAcya<k2>avAcya<h>1
1. {%a-vācya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be addressed; im-
proper to be uttered; vile, bad; not distinctly
expressed. {%—Avācya-tā,%} f. or {%avācya-tva, am,%} n.
impropriety; reproach, calumny. {%—Avācya-deśa, as,%}
m. unmentionable region, the vulva.
<LEND>

<L>6770<pc>0095-a<k1>avAkf<k2>avAkf
{#avAkf#}¦ {%avā-kṛ (ava-ā-kṛ),%} cl. 8. 5. P.
{%-karoti, -kṛṇoti, -kartum,%} to remove.
<LEND>

<L>6771<pc>0095-a<k1>avAkF<k2>avAkF
{#avAkF#}¦ {%avā-kṝ (ava-ā-kṝ),%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati,%}
{%-karitum, -rītum,%} to strew, pour upon.
<LEND>

<L>6772<pc>0095-a<k1>avAkara<k2>avAkara
{%Avā-kara, as,%}¦ m. a mint (?).
<LEND>

<L>6773<pc>0095-a<k1>avAkza<k2>avAkza
{#avAkza#}¦ {%avākṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%akṣa%} for
{%akṣi%} with {%ava%}), who or what looks down upon or
defends, a guardian, a keeper.
<LEND>

<L>6774<pc>0095-a<k1>avAgra<k2>avAgra
{#avAgra#}¦ {%avāgra (ava-ag˚), as, ā, am,%} having
a bent top; stooping, bending, bowed.
<LEND>

<L>6775<pc>0095-a<k1>avAc<k2>avAc<h>2
{#avAc#} 2¦. {%avāc, āṅ, ācī, āk%} (fr. 2. {%ava%} and
{%añc%}), turned downwards, being or situated below,
lower than (with abl.); looking downwards, headlong;
south; ({%ī%}), f. the south quarter, the lower regions
[with {%avāc%} has been compared the Lat. <nsi>au-ster</nsi> for
<nsi>ava-ster</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>6776<pc>0095-a<k1>avAk<k2>avAk
{%Avāk,%}¦ ind. downwards; south, southward, southern.
{%—Avāk-puṣpī,%} f., N. of the plant Anethum Sowa
Roxb. {%—Avāk-śākha, as, ā, am,%} having the branches
turned downwards; epithet of the Ficus Religiosa. {%—A-%}
{%vāk-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} having the head downwards,
headlong. {%—Avāg-bhāga, as,%} m. the part below.
{%—Avāṅ-mukha, as, ī, am,%} looking down or away,
having the face turned downwards, headlong; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a weapon. {%—Avāñ-jñāna, am,%} n. disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>6777<pc>0095-a<k1>avAkka<k2>avAkka<h>2
2. {%avākka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. a word formed for
the etymology of {%avakā.%}
<LEND>

<L>6778<pc>0095-a<k1>avAcIna<k2>avAcIna
{%Avācīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ down-looked, headlong;
south, southern; descended, gone down; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>6779<pc>0095-a<k1>avAcya<k2>avAcya<h>2
2. {%avācya, as, ā, am,%}¦ southern, southerly.
<LEND>

<L>6780<pc>0095-a<k1>avAci<k2>avAci
{#avAci#}¦ {%avā-ci (ava-ā-ci),%} cl. 5. P. A.
{%-cinoti, -nute, -cetum,%} to heap up, accumulate,
gather.
<LEND>

<L>6781<pc>0095-a<k1>avAcCid<k2>avAcCid
{#avAcCid#}¦ {%avā-cchid (ava-ā-chid),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-cchinatti, -cchinte, -cchettum,%} to tear or snatch
away.
<LEND>

<L>6782<pc>0095-a<k1>avAcCidya<k2>avAcCidya
{%Avā-cchidya,%}¦ ind. having snatched away.
<LEND>

<L>6783<pc>0095-a<k1>avAj<k2>avAj
{#avAj#}¦ {%avāj (ava-aj),%} cl. 1. P. {%avājati, -ji-%}
{%tum,%} to drive down, to throw down.
<LEND>

<L>6784<pc>0095-a<k1>avAjin<k2>avAjin
{#avAjin#}¦ {%a-vājin, ī,%} m., Ved. a bad horse.
<LEND>
[Page0095-b+ 71]

<L>6785<pc>0095-b<k1>avAt<k2>avAt
{#avAt#}¦ {%avāt (ava-at),%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%avātati,%}
{%titum,%} to go down; (formed for the etym. of {%avata,%}
q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>6786<pc>0095-b<k1>avAtita<k2>avAtita
{%Avātita (ava-at˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ gone down.
<LEND>

<L>6787<pc>0095-b<k1>avAta<k2>avAta<h>1
{#avAta#} 1¦. {%a-vāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. windless,
not moved by wind, calm.
<LEND>

<L>6788<pc>0095-b<k1>avAta<k2>avAta<h>1
{#avAta#} 1¦. {%a-vāta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%van,%} whence
the part. pass. {%vāta%}), Ved. unattacked, untroubled,
untouched; unconquered.
<LEND>

<L>6789<pc>0095-b<k1>avAtula<k2>avAtula
{#avAtula#}¦ {%a-vātula, as, ā, am,%} not flatulent.
<LEND>

<L>6790<pc>0095-b<k1>avAd<k2>avAd
{#avAd#}¦ {%avād (ava-ad),%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%avātti,%}
{%ttum,%} to cause to eat food.
<LEND>

<L>6791<pc>0095-b<k1>avAdin<k2>avAdin
{#avAdin#}¦ {%a-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} no speaker, no
disputer, one who does not prosecute or bring an
action, peaceable.
<LEND>

<L>6792<pc>0095-b<k1>avAn<k2>avAn
{#avAn#}¦ {%avān (ava-an%}), cl. 2. P. {%avāniti,%}
{%nitum,%} to breathe or inhale.
<LEND>

<L>6793<pc>0095-b<k1>avAna<k2>avAna<h>1
1. {%avāna, as,%}¦ m. breathing, inhaling.
<LEND>

<L>6794<pc>0095-b<k1>avAna<k2>avAna<h>2
{#avAna#} 2¦. {%a-vāna, as, ā, am%} (for {%an-avāna ?),%}
dried, dry. See {%vāna.%}
<LEND>

<L>6795<pc>0095-b<k1>avAntara<k2>avAntara
{#avAntara#}¦ {%avāntara (ava-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
situated between; included, involved. {%—Avāntara-%}
{%diś, k,%} or {%avāntara-diśā,%} f. an intermediate region
of the compass. {%—Avāntara-deśa, as,%} m. a place
situated in an intermediate region.
<LEND>

<L>6796<pc>0095-b<k1>avAntarAm<k2>avAntarAm
{%Avāntarām,%}¦ ind., Ved. between.
<LEND>

<L>6797<pc>0095-b<k1>avAp<k2>avAp
{#avAp#}¦ {%avāp (ava-āp),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-āpnoti,%}
{%-nute, -āptum,%} to reach, enter; to receive; to attain,
obtain, gain; to get, suffer.
<LEND>

<L>6798<pc>0095-b<k1>avApta<k2>avApta
{%Avāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reached, received, obtained,
got. {%—Avāpta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} reaching, obtaining,
receiving, taking; entertaining (as a belief).
<LEND>

<L>6799<pc>0095-b<k1>avAptavya<k2>avAptavya
{%Avāptavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be obtained or gained.
<LEND>

<L>6800<pc>0095-b<k1>avApti<k2>avApti
{%Avāpti, is,%}¦ f. obtaining, getting, receiving.
<LEND>

<L>6801<pc>0095-b<k1>avApya<k2>avApya<h>1
1. {%avāpya,%}¦ ind. having obtained.
<LEND>

<L>6802<pc>0095-b<k1>avApya<k2>avApya<h>2
2. {%avāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be obtained or gained;
unattainable, unobtainable (?).
<LEND>

<L>6803<pc>0095-b<k1>avApita<k2>avApita
{#avApita#}¦ {%a-vāpita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vap%}), not
sown (as grain) but planted.
<LEND>

<L>6804<pc>0095-b<k1>avApoh<k2>avApoh
{#avApoh#}¦ {%avāpoh (ava-apa-ūh),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%avāpohati, -te, -hitum,%} to remove.
<LEND>

<L>6805<pc>0095-b<k1>avAya<k2>avAya
{#avAya#}¦ {%avāya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%i%} with {%ava%}),
giving way, yielding, complying.
<LEND>

<L>6806<pc>0095-b<k1>avAra<k2>avAra
{#avAra#}¦ {%avāra, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. 2. {%ava%} or 2.
{%avas,%} as {%pāra%} fr. {%para%} or {%paras,%} q. v.), this side,
the near bank of a river. {%—Avāra-tas,%} ind., Ved. to
this side. {%—Avāra-pāra, as,%} m. the ocean. {%—Avāra-%}
{%pārīṇa, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the ocean; crossing
a river.
<LEND>

<L>6807<pc>0095-b<k1>avArIRa<k2>avArIRa
{%Avārīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crossing a river.
<LEND>

<L>6808<pc>0095-b<k1>avArya<k2>avArya<h>1
1. {%avārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being on the near side of a
river.
<LEND>

<L>6809<pc>0095-b<k1>avAraRa<k2>avAraRa
{#avAraRa#}¦ {%a-vāraṇa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vṛ%}), in-
curable, not to be remedied.
<LEND>

<L>6810<pc>0095-b<k1>avAraRIya<k2>avAraRIya<h>1
1. {%avāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ treating of incurable
sicknesses.
<LEND>

<L>6811<pc>0095-b<k1>avAraRIya<k2>avAraRIya<h>2
2. {%a-vāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be warded off.
<LEND>

<L>6812<pc>0095-b<k1>avArikA<k2>avArikA
{%Avārikā,%}¦ f., N. of the plant Coriandrum Sativum.
<LEND>

<L>6813<pc>0095-b<k1>avArita<k2>avArita
{%A-vārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unimpeded, unobstructed;
innumerable. {%—Avārita-dvāra, as, ā, am,%} having
open doors.
<LEND>

<L>6814<pc>0095-b<k1>avAritavya<k2>avAritavya
{%A-vāritavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be impeded or
hindered, not to be kept off.
<LEND>

<L>6815<pc>0095-b<k1>avArya<k2>avArya<h>2
2. {%a-vārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unrestrainable, irresistible;
not to be warded off; incurable. {%—A-vārya-kratu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. of irresistible courage. {%—Avārya-tā,%}
f. incurableness
<LEND>

<L>6816<pc>0095-b<k1>avArC<k2>avArC
{#avArC#}¦ {%avārch (ava-ṛch),%} cl. 6. P., Ved.
{%avārcchati, -cchitum,%} to unharness, to fall down.
<LEND>

<L>6817<pc>0095-b<k1>avArj<k2>avArj
{#avArj#}¦ {%avārj (ava-arj),%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%avār-%}
{%jati, -jitum,%} to dismiss.
<LEND>
[Page0095-c+ 70]

<L>6818<pc>0095-c<k1>avAloc<k2>avAloc
{#avAloc#}¦ {%avā-loc (ava-ā-loc),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-locate, -citum,%} to consider.
<LEND>

<L>6819<pc>0095-c<k1>avAvawa<k2>avAvawa
{#avAvawa#}¦ {%avāvaṭa, as,%} m. the son of a
woman by any other man than her first husband.
<LEND>

<L>6820<pc>0095-c<k1>avAvan<k2>avAvan
{#avAvan#}¦ {%avāvan, ā,%} m. (fr. rt. {%oṇ%}), a thief.
<LEND>

<L>6821<pc>0095-c<k1>avASya<k2>avASya
{#avASya#}¦ {%a-vāśya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vaś%}), un-
desirable.
<LEND>

<L>6822<pc>0095-c<k1>avAs<k2>avAs
{#avAs#}¦ {%avās (ava-as),%} cl. 4. P. {%avāsyati,%}
{%situm,%} to throw down.
<LEND>

<L>6823<pc>0095-c<k1>avAsas<k2>avAsas
{#avAsas#}¦ {%a-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%} unclothed,
naked.
<LEND>

<L>6824<pc>0095-c<k1>avAstava<k2>avAstava
{#avAstava#}¦ {%a-vāstava%} or {%a-vāstavika, as, ī, am,%}
unsubstantial, unreal; fictitious; unfounded, irrational
(as an argument).
<LEND>

<L>6825<pc>0095-c<k1>avAstu<k2>avAstu
{#avAstu#}¦ {%a-vāstu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having no
dwelling, homeless.
<LEND>

<L>6826<pc>0095-c<k1>avAhana<k2>avAhana
{#avAhana#}¦ {%a-vāhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having no
no team or carriage, not driving in a carriage.
<LEND>

<L>6827<pc>0095-c<k1>avi<k2>avi
{#avi#}¦ {%avi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. {%av%}), Ved. favour-
able, attached to, kindly disposed; ({%is%}), m. f. a sheep;
the woollen Soma strainer; ({%is%}), m. a master; the
sun; air, wind; a mountain; a wall or enclosure; a
cover made of the skin of mice; a rat; a blanket;
the shawl goat; ({%is%}), f. an ewe; a woman in her
courses [cf. Lith. <nsi>awi-s;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>ovjza;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>ovi-s;</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">ὄϊς</lang> Goth. <nsi>avistr</nsi>]. {%—Avi-kaṭoraṇa, as,%} m. a
kind of tribute (perhaps consisting of sheep). {%—Avi-%}
{%gandhikā,%} f., N. of a plant {%= Aja-gandhā%}. {%—Avi-%}
{%dugdha%} or {%avi-dūsa%} or {%avi-marīsa%} or {%avi-soḍha,%}
{%am,%} n. the milk of an ewe. {%—Avi-paṭa, as,%} m.
sheep's skin, woollen cloth. {%—Avi-pāla, as,%} m. a
shepherd. {%—Avi-priya, as,%} m. ‘liked by sheep,’ N.
of the grass Oplismenus Frumentaceus; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
another plant. {%—Avi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessing
sheep. {%—Avi-sthala, am,%} n. ‘sheep-place,’ N. of a
town.
<LEND>

<L>6828<pc>0095-c<k1>avika<k2>avika
{%Avika, as,%}¦ m. a sheep; ({%ā%}), f. an ewe; ({%am%}), n.
a diamond.
<LEND>

<L>6829<pc>0095-c<k1>avikawa<k2>avikawa
{%Avikaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a flock of sheep.
<LEND>

<L>6830<pc>0095-c<k1>avitA<k2>avitA
{%Avitā,%}¦ f. an ewe, a sheep.
<LEND>

<L>6831<pc>0095-c<k1>aviTya<k2>aviTya
{%Avithya.%}¦ See below, s. v.
<LEND>

<L>6832<pc>0095-c<k1>avikaca<k2>avikaca
{#avikaca#}¦ {%a-vikaca, as, ā, am,%} closed, shut
(as a flower).
<LEND>

<L>6833<pc>0095-c<k1>avikacita<k2>avikacita
{%A-vikacita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unblown.
<LEND>

<L>6834<pc>0095-c<k1>avikaTa<k2>avikaTa
{#avikaTa#}¦ {%a-vikatha, as, ā, am,%} not boasting,
not talking vainly or idly.
<LEND>

<L>6835<pc>0095-c<k1>avikaTana<k2>avikaTana
{%A-vikathana, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who does not boast;
({%am%}), n. not boasting.
<LEND>

<L>6836<pc>0095-c<k1>avikarza<k2>avikarza
{#avikarza#}¦ {%a-vikarṣa, as,%} m. absence of
separation.
<LEND>

<L>6837<pc>0095-c<k1>avikfzwa<k2>avikfzwa
{%A-vikṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ not drawn apart, not
separated.
<LEND>

<L>6838<pc>0095-c<k1>avikala<k2>avikala
{#avikala#}¦ {%a-vikala, as, ā, am,%} unimpaired,
perfect, entire; regular, orderly, consistent.
<LEND>

<L>6839<pc>0095-c<k1>avikalpa<k2>avikalpa
{#avikalpa#}¦ {%a-vikalpa, as,%} m. absence of
doubt or alternative, positive act or precept; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), unchangeable; ({%am%}), ind. without any doubt.
<LEND>

<L>6840<pc>0095-c<k1>avikAra<k2>avikAra
{#avikAra#}¦ {%a-vikāra, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-vikārya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} immutable, unchangeable; permanent;
({%am%}), n. unchangeableness.
<LEND>

<L>6841<pc>0095-c<k1>avikfta<k2>avikfta
{%A-vikṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unchanged, permanent.
<LEND>

<L>6842<pc>0095-c<k1>avikriya<k2>avikriya
{%A-vikriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ showing no alteration or
difference, unchangeable, always alike.
<LEND>

<L>6843<pc>0095-c<k1>avikrama<k2>avikrama
{#avikrama#}¦ {%a-vikrama, as, ā, am,%} powerless,
feeble, without courage; ({%as%}), m. cowardice.
<LEND>

<L>6844<pc>0095-c<k1>avikrAnta<k2>avikrAnta
{%A-vikrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unsurpassed; feeble, power-
less.
<LEND>

<L>6845<pc>0095-c<k1>avikraya<k2>avikraya
{#avikraya#}¦ {%a-vikraya, as,%} m. (rt. {%krī%}), non-sale.
<LEND>

<L>6846<pc>0095-c<k1>avikrIta<k2>avikrIta
{%A-vikrīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unsold; one who has not
sold.
<LEND>
[Page0096-a+ 68]

<L>6847<pc>0096-a<k1>avikreya<k2>avikreya
{%A-vikreya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unsaleable, not to be sold.
<LEND>

<L>6848<pc>0096-a<k1>aviklama<k2>aviklama
{#aviklama#}¦ {%a-viklama, as,%} m. vigour, fresh-
ness, absence of fatigue.
<LEND>

<L>6849<pc>0096-a<k1>aviklAnta<k2>aviklAnta
{%A-viklānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unwearied, vigorous.
<LEND>

<L>6850<pc>0096-a<k1>aviklava<k2>aviklava
{#aviklava#}¦ {%a-viklava, as, ā, am,%} calm, com-
posed, firm.
<LEND>

<L>6851<pc>0096-a<k1>avikzata<k2>avikzata
{#avikzata#}¦ {%a-vikṣata, as, ā, am,%} undimi-
nished, entire; unhurt.
<LEND>

<L>6852<pc>0096-a<k1>avikzit<k2>avikzit
{#avikzit#}¦ {%a-vikṣit, t,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>6853<pc>0096-a<k1>avikzita<k2>avikzita
{%A-vikṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. undiminished, unhurt.
<LEND>

<L>6854<pc>0096-a<k1>avikzipa<k2>avikzipa
{#avikzipa#}¦ {%a-vikṣipa, as,%} m. unable to dis-
tribute, dispense, &c.; distributing badly; different
from one who distributes; one who is no distributer.
<LEND>

<L>6855<pc>0096-a<k1>avikzipta<k2>avikzipta
{%A-vikṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not thrown away, re-
tained; attentive, composed.
<LEND>

<L>6856<pc>0096-a<k1>avikzoBa<k2>avikzoBa
{#avikzoBa#}¦ {%a-vikṣobha, as,%} m. (rt. {%kṣubh%}),
quiet, quiescence.
<LEND>

<L>6857<pc>0096-a<k1>avikzoBita<k2>avikzoBita
{%A-vikṣobhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ undisturbed, tranquil.
<LEND>

<L>6858<pc>0096-a<k1>aviKaRqita<k2>aviKaRqita
{#aviKaRqita#}¦ {%a-vikhaṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} un-
disturbed. {%—Avikhaṇḍita-manas, ās, ās, as,%} im-
perturbable.
<LEND>

<L>6859<pc>0096-a<k1>avigata<k2>avigata
{#avigata#}¦ {%a-vigata, as, ā, am,%} unseparated,
retained, present.
<LEND>

<L>6860<pc>0096-a<k1>avigama<k2>avigama
{%A-vigama, as, ā, am,%}¦ unseparated, unremoved;
({%as%}), m. non-separation, association, inherence, pre-
sence.
<LEND>

<L>6861<pc>0096-a<k1>avigarhita<k2>avigarhita
{#avigarhita#}¦ {%a-vigarhita, as, ā, am,%} unre-
proached.
<LEND>

<L>6862<pc>0096-a<k1>avigIta<k2>avigIta
{#avigIta#}¦ {%a-vigīta, as, ā, am,%} uncensured,
unreproached.
<LEND>

<L>6863<pc>0096-a<k1>aviguRa<k2>aviguRa
{#aviguRa#}¦ {%a-viguṇa, as, ā, am,%} compatible,
consistent with, not contrary to.
<LEND>

<L>6864<pc>0096-a<k1>avigna<k2>avigna
{#avigna#}¦ {%a-vigna, as,%} m., N. of the fruit
tree Carissa Carandas L.
<LEND>

<L>6865<pc>0096-a<k1>avigraha<k2>avigraha
{#avigraha#}¦ {%a-vigraha, as, ā, am,%} bodiless, in-
corporeal.
<LEND>

<L>6866<pc>0096-a<k1>aviGAta<k2>aviGAta
{#aviGAta#}¦ {%a-vighāta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%han%}), un-
impended, having no obstacle. {%—Avighāta-gati, is,%}
{%is, i,%} unimpeded or unobstructed in (its) course.
<LEND>

<L>6867<pc>0096-a<k1>aviGna<k2>aviGna
{%A-vighna, as, ā, am,%}¦ uninterrupted, unimpeded;
({%am%}), n. undisturbedness, want of obstacle; {%avi-%}
{%ghnena,%} ind. without obstacle, uninterruptedly.
<LEND>

<L>6868<pc>0096-a<k1>avicakzaRa<k2>avicakzaRa
{#avicakzaRa#}¦ {%a-vicakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} un-
learned, ignorant.
<LEND>

<L>6869<pc>0096-a<k1>avicala<k2>avicala
{#avicala#}¦ {%a-vicala, as, ā, am,%} immoveable.
<LEND>

<L>6870<pc>0096-a<k1>avicAcala<k2>avicAcala
{#avicAcala#}¦ {%a-vicācala, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-vi-%}
{%cācalat, at, atī, at,%} or {%a-vicācali, is, is, i,%} Ved.
not staggering or fluctuating, standing firmly.
<LEND>

<L>6871<pc>0096-a<k1>avicAra<k2>avicAra
{#avicAra#}¦ {%a-vicāra, as, ā, am,%} undiscrimi-
nating, ill-judging, unwise; unhesitating, prompt;
({%as%}), m. want of judgement or discrimination, error,
folly; promptitude.
<LEND>

<L>6872<pc>0096-a<k1>avicArita<k2>avicArita
{%A-vicārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ill-judged, badly investi-
gated, unconsidered; determined, certain, clear, not
requiring deliberation. {%—Avicārita-niraṇaya, as,%} m.
prejudice.
<LEND>

<L>6873<pc>0096-a<k1>avicArin<k2>avicArin
{%A-vicārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ unthinking, inconsiderate.
<LEND>

<L>6874<pc>0096-a<k1>avicArya<k2>avicArya
{%A-vicārya,%}¦ ind. without considering, inconsider-
ately, unreflectingly.
<LEND>

<L>6875<pc>0096-a<k1>avicAlita<k2>avicAlita
{#avicAlita#}¦ {%a-vicālita, as, ā, am,%} unmoved;
unshaken; victorious.
<LEND>

<L>6876<pc>0096-a<k1>avicftya<k2>avicftya
{#avicftya#}¦ {%a-vicṛtya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not to
be loosened.
<LEND>

<L>6877<pc>0096-a<k1>avicetana<k2>avicetana
{#avicetana#}¦ {%a-vicetana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. un-
intelligible.
<LEND>

<L>6878<pc>0096-a<k1>avicCinna<k2>avicCinna
{#avicCinna#}¦ {%a-vicchinna, as, ā, am,%} unsepa-
rated, undivided, uninterrupted. {%—A-vicchinna-pā-%}
{%tam,%} ind. fallen on one's knees.
<LEND>
[Page0096-b+ 69]

<L>6879<pc>0096-b<k1>avicCeda<k2>avicCeda
{%A-viccheda, as, ā, am,%}¦ uninterrupted; undivided,
entire, whole; {%(as),%} m. the not being separated, en-
tireness; connection, continuity. {%—Avicchedena,%} ind.
uninterruptedly.
<LEND>

<L>6880<pc>0096-b<k1>avicyuta<k2>avicyuta
{#avicyuta#}¦ {%a-vicyuta, as, ā, am,%} not deviated
from, observed, followed; eternal, permanent.
<LEND>

<L>6881<pc>0096-b<k1>avijAta<k2>avijAta
{#avijAta#}¦ {%a-vijāta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jan%}), Ved.
not having brought forth, not having offspring.
<LEND>

<L>6882<pc>0096-b<k1>avijAtIya<k2>avijAtIya
{%A-vijātīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ of the same species.
<LEND>

<L>6883<pc>0096-b<k1>avijAnat<k2>avijAnat
{#avijAnat#}¦ {%a-vijānat, an, atī, at%} (rt. {%jñā%}),
Ved. not understanding.
<LEND>

<L>6884<pc>0096-b<k1>avijYa<k2>avijYa
{%A-vijña, as, ā, am,%}¦ ignorant, untaught; clumsy,
stupid. {%—Avijña-tā,%} f. or {%avijña-tva, am,%} n. igno-
rance, folly.
<LEND>

<L>6885<pc>0096-b<k1>avijYAta<k2>avijYAta
{%A-vijñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unknown; undistinguished,
unintelligible, indistinct, doubtful. {%—Avijñāta-gati,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a son of Anila and Śivā. {%—Avijñāta-%}
{%gada, as, ā, am,%} Ved. speaking in an unintelligible
manner.
<LEND>

<L>6886<pc>0096-b<k1>avijYAya<k2>avijYAya
{%A-vijñāya,%}¦ ind. not having understood, without
distinguishing.
<LEND>

<L>6887<pc>0096-b<k1>avijYeya<k2>avijYeya
{%A-vijñeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ undistinguishable, undiscern-
ible, unintelligible, not to be recognized or known.
<LEND>

<L>6888<pc>0096-b<k1>avijitya<k2>avijitya
{#avijitya#}¦ {%a-vijitya,%} ind. not having con-
quered.
<LEND>

<L>6889<pc>0096-b<k1>aviqIna<k2>aviqIna
{#aviqIna#}¦ {%a-viḍīna, am,%} n. a direct flight.
<LEND>

<L>6890<pc>0096-b<k1>avita<k2>avita
{#avita#}¦ {%avita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%av%}), preserved,
protected.
<LEND>

<L>6891<pc>0096-b<k1>avitf<k2>avitf
{%Avitṛ, tā, trī,%}¦ m. f., Ved. a favourer, patron, pro-
tector.
<LEND>

<L>6892<pc>0096-b<k1>avitaTa<k2>avitaTa
{#avitaTa#}¦ {%a-vitatha, as, ā, am,%} not untrue,
true; not vain, not false or futile; effective; ({%am%}),
n. truth; a species of the Atyaṣṭi metre; ({%am%}), ind.
not falsely, according to truth.
<LEND>

<L>6893<pc>0096-b<k1>avitArin<k2>avitArin
{#avitArin#}¦ {%a-vitārin, ī, iṇī, i%} (rt. {%tṝ%}), Ved.
not passing away, not departing, remaining.
<LEND>

<L>6894<pc>0096-b<k1>avitfpta<k2>avitfpta
{#avitfpta#}¦ {%a-vitṛpta, as, ā, am,%} unsatisfied.
<LEND>

<L>6895<pc>0096-b<k1>avitfptakAma<k2>avitfptakAma
{%—Avitṛpta-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ having the desires
unsatisfied.
<LEND>

<L>6896<pc>0096-b<k1>avitta<k2>avitta
{#avitta#}¦ {%a-vitta, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%vid,%} to find),
not found; unknown, poor.
<LEND>

<L>6897<pc>0096-b<k1>avitti<k2>avitti
{%A-vitti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. the not finding, the not pos-
sessing, poverty.
<LEND>

<L>6898<pc>0096-b<k1>avityaja<k2>avityaja
{#avityaja#}¦ {%a-vityaja, as, am,%} m. n. quick-
silver.
<LEND>

<L>6899<pc>0096-b<k1>aviTura<k2>aviTura
{#aviTura#}¦ {%a-vithura, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
staggering; not fragile.
<LEND>

<L>6900<pc>0096-b<k1>aviTya<k2>aviTya
{#aviTya#}¦ {%avithya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%avi%}), fit or
suited to a sheep.
<LEND>

<L>6901<pc>0096-b<k1>avidagDa<k2>avidagDa
{#avidagDa#}¦ {%a-vidagdha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dah%}),
unlearned, inexperienced, stupid; undigested.
<LEND>

<L>6902<pc>0096-b<k1>avidAhin<k2>avidAhin
{%A-vidāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ imperfectly digested, pro-
ducing heartburn.
<LEND>

<L>6903<pc>0096-b<k1>avidasya<k2>avidasya
{#avidasya#}¦ {%a-vidasya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%das%}), Ved.
not ceasing, inexhaustible.
<LEND>

<L>6904<pc>0096-b<k1>avidAsin<k2>avidAsin
{%A-vidāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ perennial, perpetual.
<LEND>

<L>6905<pc>0096-b<k1>avidita<k2>avidita
{#avidita#}¦ {%a-vidita, as, ā, am,%} unknown.
<LEND>

<L>6906<pc>0096-b<k1>aviditvA<k2>aviditvA
{%A-viditvā,%}¦ ind. not knowing, without having ascer-
tained.
<LEND>

<L>6907<pc>0096-b<k1>avidIDayu<k2>avidIDayu
{#avidIDayu#}¦ {%a-vidīdhayu, us, us, u%} (rt. {%dhī%}),
Ved. not deliberating, not delaying; shining, re-
splendent.
<LEND>

<L>6908<pc>0096-b<k1>avidUra<k2>avidUra
{#avidUra#}¦ {%a-vidūra, as, ā, am,%} not very dis-
tant, near, contiguous; ({%am%}), n. proximity; ({%am%}),
ind. near to. {%—Avidūrāt%} or {%avidūra-tas%} or {%avi-%}
{%dūre,%} ind. near, not far off (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>6909<pc>0096-b<k1>avidDa<k2>avidDa
{#avidDa#}¦ {%a-viddha, as, ā, am,%} unpierced.
{%—Aviddha-karṇā%} or {%aviddha-karṇī%} (also {%viddha-%}
{%karṇī%}), f., N. of the plant Cissampelos Hexandra.
<LEND>
[Page0096-c+ 70]

<L>6910<pc>0096-c<k1>avidDadfS<k2>avidDadfS
{%—Aviddha-dṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ all-seeing. {%—Aviddha-%}
{%varcas, ās, ās, as,%} of unimpaired glory.
<LEND>

<L>6911<pc>0096-c<k1>avidya<k2>avidya
{#avidya#}¦ {%a-vidya, as, ā, am%} (rt. 1. {%vid,%} to know),
unlearned, unwise, foolish; not relating to know-
ledge; ({%ā%}), f. ignorance, spiritual ignorance, illusion,
personified illusion or Māyā; (with Buddhists) igno-
rance together with non-existence. {%—Avidyā-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} caused by ignorance or illusion.
<LEND>

<L>6912<pc>0096-c<k1>avidvas<k2>avidvas
{%A-vidvas, ān, uṣī, as,%}¦ unwise, unlearned.
<LEND>

<L>6913<pc>0096-c<k1>avidyamAna<k2>avidyamAna
{#avidyamAna#}¦ {%a-vidyamāna, as, ā, am%} (rt. 2.
{%vid,%} to find), not present, absent; non-existent.
<LEND>

<L>6914<pc>0096-c<k1>avidriya<k2>avidriya
{#avidriya#}¦ {%a-vidriya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dṝ%}), Ved.
without a rent; impenetrable, solid, dense.
<LEND>

<L>6915<pc>0096-c<k1>avidviz<k2>avidviz
{#avidviz#}¦ {%a-vidviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} (rt. {%dviṣ%}), not
hating, not an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>6916<pc>0096-c<k1>avidveza<k2>avidveza
{%A-vidveṣa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. absence of hatred or
hostility.
<LEND>

<L>6917<pc>0096-c<k1>aviDavA<k2>aviDavA
{#aviDavA#}¦ {%a-vidhavā,%} f. not a widow.
<LEND>

<L>6918<pc>0096-c<k1>aviDA<k2>aviDA
{#aviDA#}¦ {%avidhā,%} ind. an interjection cor-
responding to the prākṛt {%avihā%} or {%aviha,%} used in
calling for help in danger.
<LEND>

<L>6919<pc>0096-c<k1>aviDAna<k2>aviDAna
{#aviDAna#}¦ {%a-vidhāna, am,%} n. (rt. {%dhā%}), devi-
ation from or absence of fixed rule, irregularity.
{%—Avidhāna-tas,%} ind. irregularly.
<LEND>

<L>6920<pc>0096-c<k1>aviDi<k2>aviDi
{%A-vidhi, is, is, i,%}¦ void of or contrary to rule;
({%is%}), f. irregularity. {%—A-vidhi-pūrvaka, as, ā, am,%}
not according to rule.
<LEND>

<L>6921<pc>0096-c<k1>avina<k2>avina
{#avina#}¦ {%avina, as,%} m. (rt. {%av%}), a sacrificer,
one who performs a sacrifice or causes it to be per-
formed; an officiating priest at a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>6922<pc>0096-c<k1>avinaya<k2>avinaya
{#avinaya#}¦ {%a-vinaya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%nī%}), with-
out proper training, ill-behaved, indecorous; ({%as%}), m.
want of good manners or modesty; bad training;
rude behaviour; indecorum, impropriety, fault; in-
civility, disrespect; offence, crime.
<LEND>

<L>6923<pc>0096-c<k1>avinIta<k2>avinIta
{%A-vinīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ badly trained, badly brought
up, ill-mannered, misbehaving, acting ill or impro-
perly, wicked, vile; ({%ā%}), f. an immodest, unchaste, or
disloyal woman.
<LEND>

<L>6924<pc>0096-c<k1>avinaSvara<k2>avinaSvara
{#avinaSvara#}¦ {%a-vinaśvara, as, ī, am,%} or {%a-vi-%}
{%nāśya, as, ā, am,%} indestructible.
<LEND>

<L>6925<pc>0096-c<k1>avinaSyat<k2>avinaSyat
{%A-vinaśyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ not perishing.
<LEND>

<L>6926<pc>0096-c<k1>avinASa<k2>avinASa
{%A-vināśa, as,%}¦ m. non-destruction, preservation.
<LEND>

<L>6927<pc>0096-c<k1>avinASin<k2>avinASin
{%A-vināśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ indestructible.
<LEND>

<L>6928<pc>0096-c<k1>avinABAva<k2>avinABAva
{#avinABAva#}¦ {%a-vinābhāva, as,%} m. inherent
and essential character.
<LEND>

<L>6929<pc>0096-c<k1>avinigama<k2>avinigama
{#avinigama#}¦ {%a-vinigama, as,%} m. an illogical
conclusion.
<LEND>

<L>6930<pc>0096-c<k1>avinirmoka<k2>avinirmoka
{#avinirmoka#}¦ {%a-vinirmoka, as, ā, am,%} without
an exception.
<LEND>

<L>6931<pc>0096-c<k1>avinivartin<k2>avinivartin
{#avinivartin#}¦ {%a-vinivartin, ī, inī, i,%} not
turning back, holding on, advancing.
<LEND>

<L>6932<pc>0096-c<k1>avinDya<k2>avinDya
{#avinDya#}¦ {%avindhya, as,%} m., N. of a minister
of Rāvaṇa; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>6933<pc>0096-c<k1>avipakva<k2>avipakva
{#avipakva#}¦ {%a-vipakva, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%pac%}), not
ripe, immature, undigested. {%—Avipakva-buddhi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} inexperienced.
<LEND>

<L>6934<pc>0096-c<k1>avipAka<k2>avipAka
{%A-vipāka, as,%}¦ m. indigestion; immaturity; not
suffering the consequence of actions in a former life;
{%(as, ā, am),%} suffering from indigestion.
<LEND>

<L>6935<pc>0096-c<k1>avipakza<k2>avipakza
{#avipakza#}¦ {%a-vipakṣa, as, ā, am,%} having no
adversary, unopposed.
<LEND>

<L>6936<pc>0096-c<k1>avipad<k2>avipad
{#avipad#}¦ {%a-vipad, t,%} f. (rt. {%pad%}), prosperity,
ease.
<LEND>

<L>6937<pc>0096-c<k1>avipanna<k2>avipanna
{%A-vipanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ uninjured, unhurt; not
soiled or contaminated, pure, clean.
<LEND>

<L>6938<pc>0096-c<k1>avipaScit<k2>avipaScit
{#avipaScit#}¦ {%a-vipaścit, t, t, t,%} unwise, ig-
norant.
<LEND>

<L>6939<pc>0096-c<k1>avipula<k2>avipula
{#avipula#}¦ {%a-vipula, as, ā, am,%} small, insigni-
ficant, slender.
<LEND>
[Page0097-a+ 70]

<L>6940<pc>0097-a<k1>avipra<k2>avipra
{#avipra#}¦ {%a-vipra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not spiritually
excited, not inspired; not a worshipper, not a praiser.
<LEND>

<L>6941<pc>0097-a<k1>aviprakfzwa<k2>aviprakfzwa
{#aviprakfzwa#}¦ {%a-viprakṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} not
remote, near.
<LEND>

<L>6942<pc>0097-a<k1>avipriya<k2>avipriya
{#avipriya#}¦ {%avi-priya.%} See under {%avi.%}
<LEND>

<L>6943<pc>0097-a<k1>avipluta<k2>avipluta
{#avipluta#}¦ {%a-vipluta, as, ā, am,%} undeviating,
steadily observing; unviolated, observed without de-
viation.
<LEND>

<L>6944<pc>0097-a<k1>aviPala<k2>aviPala
{#aviPala#}¦ {%a-viphala, as, ā, am,%} fruitful, pro-
ductive.
<LEND>

<L>6945<pc>0097-a<k1>aviPulla<k2>aviPulla
{#aviPulla#}¦ {%a-viphulla, as, ā, am,%} unblown.
<LEND>

<L>6946<pc>0097-a<k1>aviBakta<k2>aviBakta
{#aviBakta#}¦ {%a-vibhakta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%bhaj%}),
undivided, unpartitioned; unseparated, joint, not
sharing (applied to co-heirs who have not divided
their inheritance.)
<LEND>

<L>6947<pc>0097-a<k1>aviBAga<k2>aviBAga
{%A-vibhāga, as, ā, am,%}¦ unpartitioned, unportioned;
({%as%}), m. undivided inheritance.
<LEND>

<L>6948<pc>0097-a<k1>aviBAgin<k2>aviBAgin
{%A-vibhāgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who does not share;
not sharing, not dividing.
<LEND>

<L>6949<pc>0097-a<k1>aviBAjya<k2>aviBAjya
{%A-vibhājya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be divided, not to
be partitioned. {%—Avibhājya-tā,%} f. or {%avibhājya-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. indivisibility, unfitness for partition.
<LEND>

<L>6950<pc>0097-a<k1>aviBAvanA<k2>aviBAvanA
{#aviBAvanA#}¦ {%a-vibhāvanā,%} f. or {%a-vibhāvana,%}
{%am,%} n. (rt. {%bhū%}), non-perception, non-discrimination,
imperceptibility, disappearance.
<LEND>

<L>6951<pc>0097-a<k1>aviBAvanIya<k2>aviBAvanIya
{%A-vibhāvanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ imperceptible, undis-
tinguishable.
<LEND>

<L>6952<pc>0097-a<k1>aviBAvita<k2>aviBAvita
{%A-vibhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unperceived, unobserved.
<LEND>

<L>6953<pc>0097-a<k1>aviBAvya<k2>aviBAvya
{%A-vibhāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ undistinguishable, imper-
ceptible.
<LEND>

<L>6954<pc>0097-a<k1>aviBrAnta<k2>aviBrAnta
{#aviBrAnta#}¦ {%a-vibhrānta, as, ā, am,%} uninter-
rupted.
<LEND>

<L>6955<pc>0097-a<k1>avimatta<k2>avimatta
{#avimatta#}¦ {%a-vimatta, as,%} m., N. of a man (?).
<LEND>

<L>6956<pc>0097-a<k1>avimala<k2>avimala
{#avimala#}¦ {%a-vimala, as, ā, am,%} not clear,
foul, turbid.
<LEND>

<L>6957<pc>0097-a<k1>avimukta<k2>avimukta
{#avimukta#}¦ {%a-vimukta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%muc%}), un-
loosed, not quitted; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Tīrtha near
Benares. {%—Avimuktāpīḍa (˚ta-āp˚), as,%} m., N. of
a king. {%—Avimukteśvara (˚ta-īś˚), as,%} m. a cele-
brated Śiva-liṅga at Benares.
<LEND>

<L>6958<pc>0097-a<k1>avimokya<k2>avimokya
{%A-vimokya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not to be loosened.
<LEND>

<L>6959<pc>0097-a<k1>aviyukta<k2>aviyukta
{#aviyukta#}¦ {%a-viyukta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yuj%}), un-
divided, conjoined; not separated or absent.
<LEND>

<L>6960<pc>0097-a<k1>aviyoga<k2>aviyoga
{%A-viyoga, as,%}¦ m. conjunction, association; the not
being parted or absent, presence. {%—Aviyoga-tṛtīyā,%}
f., N. of a certain festival or holiday. {%—Aviyogatṛ-%}
{%tīyā-vrata,%} N. of the sixteenth Adhyāya of the
Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>6961<pc>0097-a<k1>avirakta<k2>avirakta
{#avirakta#}¦ {%a-virakta, as, ā, am,%} not indifferent
or estranged; attached to, interested in.
<LEND>

<L>6962<pc>0097-a<k1>aviraRa<k2>aviraRa
{#aviraRa#}¦ {%a-viraṇa, as,%} m., Ved. continuation.
<LEND>

<L>6963<pc>0097-a<k1>avirata<k2>avirata
{#avirata#}¦ {%a-virata, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ram%}), not
desisting from (with abl.); uninterrupted, continual,
eternal; abandoned; ({%am%}), ind. eternally, continually.
<LEND>

<L>6964<pc>0097-a<k1>avirati<k2>avirati
{%A-virati, is,%}¦ f. incontinence, intemperance.
<LEND>

<L>6965<pc>0097-a<k1>avirAma<k2>avirAma
{%A-virāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ uninterrupted, continuous;
({%as%}), m. uninterrupted succession, continuance; ({%am%}),
ind. uninterruptedly.
<LEND>

<L>6966<pc>0097-a<k1>avirala<k2>avirala
{#avirala#}¦ {%a-virala, as, ā, am,%} contiguous,
close; coarse, gross, substantial; uninterrupted; ({%am%}),
ind. contiguously, closely. {%—Avirala-dhārāsāra, as,%}
m. incessant down-pour of heavy rain.
<LEND>

<L>6967<pc>0097-a<k1>avirahita<k2>avirahita
{#avirahita#}¦ {%a-virahita, as, ā, am,%} not sepa-
rated from, abounding in.
<LEND>

<L>6968<pc>0097-a<k1>avirADayat<k2>avirADayat
{#avirADayat#}¦ {%a-virādhayat, an, antī, at,%}  Ved.
not withdrawing one's self, not avoiding; not de-
sisting.
<LEND>

<L>6969<pc>0097-a<k1>avirudDa<k2>avirudDa
{#avirudDa#}¦ {%a-viruddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%rudh%}),
unobstructed, unimpeded; allowed, permitted, proper;
compatible, consistent with.
<LEND>
[Page0097-b+ 71]

<L>6970<pc>0097-b<k1>aviroDa<k2>aviroDa
{%A-virodha, as,%}¦ m. absence of impediment; assent,
concurrence, non-opposition; consistency, compati-
bility.
<LEND>

<L>6971<pc>0097-b<k1>aviroDita<k2>aviroDita
{%A-virodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unimpeded, unobstructed.
<LEND>

<L>6972<pc>0097-b<k1>avirecana<k2>avirecana
{#avirecana#}¦ {%a-virecana, am,%} n. anything
which constipates or stops the passage of the food.
<LEND>

<L>6973<pc>0097-b<k1>avirecya<k2>avirecya
{%A-virecya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be purged.
<LEND>

<L>6974<pc>0097-b<k1>avilakzita<k2>avilakzita
{#avilakzita#}¦ {%a-vilakṣita, as, ā, am,%} con-
cealed, veiled.
<LEND>

<L>6975<pc>0097-b<k1>avilaNGana<k2>avilaNGana
{#avilaNGana#}¦ {%a-vilaṅghana, am,%} n. non-trans-
gression, not exceeding, not trespassing.
<LEND>

<L>6976<pc>0097-b<k1>avilaNGanIya<k2>avilaNGanIya
{%A-vilaṅghanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be exceeded
or transgressed; prescribed, fixed.
<LEND>

<L>6977<pc>0097-b<k1>avilamba<k2>avilamba
{#avilamba#}¦ {%a-vilamba%} or {%a-vilambana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} not delaying, prompt, quick, expeditions; {%(bas),%}
m. non-delay. {%—A-vilambam%} or {%a-vilambena,%} ind.
without delay, quickly.
<LEND>

<L>6978<pc>0097-b<k1>avilambita<k2>avilambita
{%A-vilambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not delaying, not slow,
quick, expeditious; ({%am%}), ind. going quickly, a swift
pace.
<LEND>

<L>6979<pc>0097-b<k1>avilA<k2>avilA
{#avilA#}¦ {%avilā,%} f. an ewe. See under {%avi.%}
<LEND>

<L>6980<pc>0097-b<k1>avilAsa<k2>avilAsa
{#avilAsa#}¦ {%a-vilāsa, as, ā, am,%} free from
caprice, faithful, constant.
<LEND>

<L>6981<pc>0097-b<k1>aviliKa<k2>aviliKa
{#aviliKa#}¦ {%a-vilikha, as,%} m. unable to write
or paint, writing or painting badly; different from
one who writes or paints; one who is not a writer
or painter.
<LEND>

<L>6982<pc>0097-b<k1>avilupta<k2>avilupta
{#avilupta#}¦ {%a-vilupta, as, ā, am,%} uninterrupted.
<LEND>

<L>6983<pc>0097-b<k1>avivakzita<k2>avivakzita
{#avivakzita#}¦ {%a-vivakṣita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vac%}),
not intended to be said, unasserted, undeclared.
<LEND>

<L>6984<pc>0097-b<k1>avivAkya<k2>avivAkya
{%A-vivākya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not admitting censure or
correction; N. of the tenth day of a certain Soma
sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>6985<pc>0097-b<k1>avivAda<k2>avivAda
{#avivAda#}¦ {%a-vivāda, as,%} m. non-disagree-
ment, concurrence, consent.
<LEND>

<L>6986<pc>0097-b<k1>avivAdin<k2>avivAdin
{%A-vivādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ uncontentious, quiet, peace-
able.
<LEND>

<L>6987<pc>0097-b<k1>avivAhita<k2>avivAhita
{#avivAhita#}¦ {%a-vivāhita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vah%}),
unmarried,
<LEND>

<L>6988<pc>0097-b<k1>avivAhin<k2>avivAhin
{%A-vivāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not marrying, single; not
relating to marriage; interdicted as to marriage.
<LEND>

<L>6989<pc>0097-b<k1>avivikta<k2>avivikta
{#avivikta#}¦ {%a-vivikta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vic%}), un-
discriminated, uninvestigated; indiscriminate, con-
founded; common, public. {%—A-vivikta-dṛś, k, k,%}
{%k,%} viewing all as one with God.
<LEND>

<L>6990<pc>0097-b<k1>aviveka<k2>aviveka
{%A-viveka, as, ā, am,%}¦ without judgment or dis-
crimination; ({%as%}), m. absence of discrimination or
judgment, ignorance. {%—Aviveka-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
done thoughtlessly. {%—Aviveka-tā,%} f. or {%aviveka-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. want of judgment, inconsiderateness, impru-
dence.
<LEND>

<L>6991<pc>0097-b<k1>avivekin<k2>avivekin
{%A-vivekin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ or {%a-vivecaka, as, ikā, am,%}
undiscriminating, ignorant, having no judgment, su-
perficial, short-sighted.
<LEND>

<L>6992<pc>0097-b<k1>avivecanA<k2>avivecanA
{%A-vivecanā,%}¦ f. want of judgement or discrimination.
<LEND>

<L>6993<pc>0097-b<k1>avivena<k2>avivena
{#avivena#}¦ {%a-vivena, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not dis-
affected; ({%am%}), ind., Ved. not disaffectedly, favourably.
<LEND>

<L>6994<pc>0097-b<k1>aviSaNka<k2>aviSaNka
{#aviSaNka#}¦ {%a-viśaṅka, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śaṅk%}),
having no fears or doubts, fearless; ({%ā%}), f. unappre-
hensiveness, confidence, certainty. {%—A-viśaṅkena,%}
ind. undoubtingly, without hesitation.
<LEND>

<L>6995<pc>0097-b<k1>aviSaNkita<k2>aviSaNkita
{%A-viśaṅkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unapprehensive, con-
fiding, trusting.
<LEND>

<L>6996<pc>0097-b<k1>aviSastf<k2>aviSastf
{#aviSastf#}¦ {%a-viśastṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. an un-
skilful cutter up or killer (of animals at a sacrifice).
<LEND>

<L>6997<pc>0097-b<k1>aviSudDa<k2>aviSudDa
{#aviSudDa#}¦ {%a-viśuddha, as, ā, am,%} pure, clear,
free from fault or defect; valid, perfect, unimpeached.
<LEND>

<L>6998<pc>0097-b<k1>aviSeza<k2>aviSeza
{#aviSeza#}¦ {%a-viśeṣa, as, ā, am,%} uniform,
alike, without any difference; ({%am%}), n. equability,
uniformity. {%—A-viśeṣa-jña, as, ā, am,%} not per-
ceiving the difference in things, undiscriminating.
<LEND>
[Page0097-c+ 67]

<L>6999<pc>0097-c<k1>aviSrAnta<k2>aviSrAnta
{#aviSrAnta#}¦ {%a-viśrānta, as, ā, am,%} unwearied.
<LEND>

<L>7000<pc>0097-c<k1>aviSvaminva<k2>aviSvaminva
{#aviSvaminva#}¦ {%a-viśvam-inva, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not all-embracing, not pervading everything.
<LEND>

<L>7001<pc>0097-c<k1>aviSvavinna<k2>aviSvavinna
{#aviSvavinna#}¦ {%a-viśva-vinna, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not perceived everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>7002<pc>0097-c<k1>aviSvAsa<k2>aviSvAsa
{#aviSvAsa#}¦ {%a-viśvāsa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śvas%}),
not causing confidence, mistrusted; ({%as%}), m. mis-
trust, suspicion; ({%ā%}), f. a cow calving after long
intervals.
<LEND>

<L>7003<pc>0097-c<k1>aviSvasta<k2>aviSvasta
{%A-viśvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not trusted, suspected,
doubted.
<LEND>

<L>7004<pc>0097-c<k1>aviSvAsin<k2>aviSvAsin
{%A-viśvāsin, ī, inī, ī,%}¦ mistrustful, unbelieving.
<LEND>

<L>7005<pc>0097-c<k1>aviza<k2>aviza
{#aviza#}¦ {%a-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} not poisonous,
anti-venomous, antidote; ({%as%}), m. the ocean; sky;
({%ā%}), f., N. of the plant Curcuma Zedoaria; ({%ī%}), f. a
river; the earth; heaven.
<LEND>

<L>7006<pc>0097-c<k1>avizakta<k2>avizakta
{#avizakta#}¦ {%a-viṣakta, as, ā, am,%} unimpeded,
unrestrained, unchecked.
<LEND>

<L>7007<pc>0097-c<k1>avizaya<k2>avizaya
{#avizaya#}¦ {%a-viṣaya, as, ā, am,%} unperceived,
invisible; insensible; disregarding objects of sense;
({%as%}), m. disappearance; absence; disregard of objects
of sense. {%—A-viṣayī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the not
making anything an object.
<LEND>

<L>7008<pc>0097-c<k1>avizAda<k2>avizAda
{#avizAda#}¦ {%a-viṣāda, as, ā, am,%} not dejected,
unwearied, persevering; ({%as%}), m. cheerfulness.
<LEND>

<L>7009<pc>0097-c<k1>avizWa<k2>avizWa
{#avizWa#}¦ {%aviṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (superl. of rt. {%av%}),
Ved. gladly accepting; very attentive.
<LEND>

<L>7010<pc>0097-c<k1>avizyA<k2>avizyA
{#avizyA#}¦ {%aviṣyā,%} f. (fr. {%avi%}), Ved. wish, de-
sire, ardour; wish to go.
<LEND>

<L>7011<pc>0097-c<k1>avizyu<k2>avizyu
{%Aviṣyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. assailing; desirous, vehe-
ment, violent; wishing to eat; wishing to protect.
<LEND>

<L>7012<pc>0097-c<k1>avis<k2>avis
{#avis#}¦ {%avis, is,%} m. an extender, enlarger (?).
<LEND>

<L>7013<pc>0097-c<k1>avisaMvAdin<k2>avisaMvAdin
{#avisaMvAdin#}¦ {%a-visaṃvādin, ī, inī, i,%} not
contradictory.
<LEND>

<L>7014<pc>0097-c<k1>avisargin<k2>avisargin
{#avisargin#}¦ {%a-visargin, ī, iṇī, i,%} not quitting,
retaining, adhering to; ({%ī%}), m. an unintermittent fever.
<LEND>

<L>7015<pc>0097-c<k1>avisoQa<k2>avisoQa
{#avisoQa#}¦ {%avi-soḍha.%} See under {%avi.%}
<LEND>

<L>7016<pc>0097-c<k1>avistara<k2>avistara
{#avistara#}¦ {%a-vistara, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%stṝ%}), of
small extent or circuit.
<LEND>

<L>7017<pc>0097-c<k1>avistAra<k2>avistAra
{%A-vistāra, as,%}¦ m. absence of amplification.
<LEND>

<L>7018<pc>0097-c<k1>avistIraRa<k2>avistIraRa
{%A-vistīraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ not extended, not ampli-
fied, contracted.
<LEND>

<L>7019<pc>0097-c<k1>avistfta<k2>avistfta
{%A-vistṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ compact, compressed, close.
<LEND>

<L>7020<pc>0097-c<k1>avispazwa<k2>avispazwa
{#avispazwa#}¦ {%a-vispaṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} not clear
or plain, indistinct, obscure; ({%am%}), n. indistinct
speech.
<LEND>

<L>7021<pc>0097-c<k1>avismaraRa<k2>avismaraRa
{#avismaraRa#}¦ {%a-vismaraṇa, am,%} n. or {%a-vismṛti,%}
{%is,%} f. not forgetting, remembering, recollection.
<LEND>

<L>7022<pc>0097-c<k1>avihata<k2>avihata
{#avihata#}¦ {%a-vihata, as, ā, am,%} unobstructed,
unimpeded. {%—Avihata-gati, is, is, i,%} one whose
course is unobstructed.
<LEND>

<L>7023<pc>0097-c<k1>aviharyatakratu<k2>aviharyatakratu
{#aviharyatakratu#}¦ {%a-viharyata-kratu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. whose will cannot be averted; ({%Sāy.%}) doer of
acts undesired (by his foes).
<LEND>

<L>7024<pc>0097-c<k1>avihita<k2>avihita
{#avihita#}¦ {%a-vihita, as, ā, am,%} undone, un-
effected; unprescribed, not directed or ruled.
<LEND>

<L>7025<pc>0097-c<k1>avihruta<k2>avihruta
{#avihruta#}¦ {%a-vihruta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%hvṛ%}), Ved.
unbent, unbroken; not curved.
<LEND>

<L>7026<pc>0097-c<k1>avihvarat<k2>avihvarat
{%A-vihvarat, an, antī, at%}¦ Ved. not slipping, not
falling; undeviating.
<LEND>

<L>7027<pc>0097-c<k1>avihvala<k2>avihvala
{#avihvala#}¦ {%a-vihvala, as, ā, am,%} unagitated,
composed, calm.
<LEND>

<L>7028<pc>0097-c<k1>avI<k2>avI<h>1
{#avI#} 1¦. {%avī,%} wrong reading for {%ambya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>7029<pc>0097-c<k1>avI<k2>avI<h>2
{#avI#} 2¦. {%a-vī, īs,%} f. (fr. rt. {%vī%} with {%a%}), a woman
in her courses.
<LEND>

<L>7030<pc>0097-c<k1>avIkzaRa<k2>avIkzaRa
{#avIkzaRa#}¦ {%a-vīkṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%īkṣ%}), not
looking at, not regarding.
<LEND>
[Page0098-a+ 71]

<L>7031<pc>0098-a<k1>avIkzita<k2>avIkzita
{%A-vīkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unseen, unbeheld.
<LEND>

<L>7032<pc>0098-a<k1>avIci<k2>avIci
{#avIci#}¦ {%a-vīci, is, is, i,%} waveless; ({%is%}), m.
a particular hell. {%—Avīci-maya, as,%} m. a hell, the
place of punishment for liars.
<LEND>

<L>7033<pc>0098-a<k1>avIja<k2>avIja
{#avIja#}¦ {%a-vīja, as, ā, am,%} seedless, impotent;
({%am%}), n. bad seed, bad grain; absence of seed.
<LEND>

<L>7034<pc>0098-a<k1>avIjaka<k2>avIjaka
{%A-vījaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ seedless; unsown.
<LEND>

<L>7035<pc>0098-a<k1>avIra<k2>avIra
{#avIra#}¦ {%a-vīra, as, ā, am,%} unmanly, effemi-
nate, weak; helpless; having no sons; destitute of
men; ({%ā%}), f. a woman who has neither husband nor
son. {%—Avīra-tā,%} f., Ved. want of sons. {%—A-vīra-han,%}
{%ā, ghnī, a,%} Ved. not killing men, not pernicious to
men.
<LEND>

<L>7036<pc>0098-a<k1>avIrya<k2>avIrya
{%A-vīrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. weak, ineffective.
<LEND>

<L>7037<pc>0098-a<k1>avfka<k2>avfka
{#avfka#}¦ {%a-vṛka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not hurting,
inoffensive, true; unendangered, safe; free from one
who obscures; {%(am),%} n. safety, peace; quiet.
<LEND>

<L>7038<pc>0098-a<k1>avfkza<k2>avfkza
{#avfkza#}¦ {%a-vṛkṣa%} or {%a-vṛkṣaka, as, ā, am,%}
treeless; destitute of trees.
<LEND>

<L>7039<pc>0098-a<k1>avfjina<k2>avfjina
{#avfjina#}¦ {%a-vṛjina, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
intriguing, straightforward, sincere, not deserting
(friends), an epithet of the Ādityas.
<LEND>

<L>7040<pc>0098-a<k1>avfta<k2>avfta
{#avfta#}¦ {%a-vṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unchecked,
unimpeded; unsubdued; unselected; uncovered, un-
protected.
<LEND>

<L>7041<pc>0098-a<k1>avftti<k2>avftti
{#avftti#}¦ {%a-vṛtti, is,%} f. inadequate support,
absence of subsistence or allowance; want; {%(is, is, i),%}
not existing, not present. {%—Avṛtti-tva, am,%} n. non-
existence.
<LEND>

<L>7042<pc>0098-a<k1>avfTA<k2>avfTA
{#avfTA#}¦ {%a-vṛthā,%} ind. not in vain, success-
fully, profitably. {%—Avṛthārtha (˚thā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
successful, gaining one's object.
<LEND>

<L>7043<pc>0098-a<k1>avfdDika<k2>avfdDika
{#avfdDika#}¦ {%a-vṛddhika, as, ī, am%} (rt. {%vṛdh%}),
not augmentative; not bearing interest.
<LEND>

<L>7044<pc>0098-a<k1>avfDa<k2>avfDa
{%A-vṛdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not promoting, not
honouring.
<LEND>

<L>7045<pc>0098-a<k1>avfzwi<k2>avfzwi
{#avfzwi#}¦ {%a-vṛṣṭi, is,%} f. want of rain, drought;
famine.
<LEND>

<L>7046<pc>0098-a<k1>avfha<k2>avfha
{#avfha#}¦ {%a-vṛha%} or {%a-bṛha, ās,%} m. pl. (rt.
{%vṛh%}), a class of Buddhist divinities.
<LEND>

<L>7047<pc>0098-a<k1>avfhita<k2>avfhita
{%A-vṛhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ few, not much or large.
<LEND>

<L>7048<pc>0098-a<k1>ave<k2>ave
{#ave#}¦ {%ave (ava-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%avaiti, -tum,%} to
go away, to move away; to go to (with acc.); to
come down upon, rush upon; to look upon, consider;
perceive, conceive, understand, learn, know: Intens.
or Pass. {%aveyate,%} to beg pardon for, conciliate.
<LEND>

<L>7049<pc>0098-a<k1>aveta<k2>aveta
{%Aveta, as, ā, am,%}¦ elapsed, past; one who has
gained, obtained, attained; joined with.
<LEND>

<L>7050<pc>0098-a<k1>avekz<k2>avekz
{#avekz#}¦ {%avekṣ (ava-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%avek-%}
{%ṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look towards, look at, consider;
to perceive, observe, experience; to have in view,
aim at; to have regard to, respect; to expect, hope
for: Caus. {%avekṣayati, -yitum,%} to cause to look at.
<LEND>

<L>7051<pc>0098-a<k1>avekzaRa<k2>avekzaRa
{%Avekṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking towards or at; the
act of considering, attention, observation.
<LEND>

<L>7052<pc>0098-a<k1>avekzaRIya<k2>avekzaRIya
{%Avekṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked at, to be
respected.
<LEND>

<L>7053<pc>0098-a<k1>avekzamARa<k2>avekzamARa
{%Avekṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking at, inspecting,
examining.
<LEND>

<L>7054<pc>0098-a<k1>avekzA<k2>avekzA
{%Avekṣā,%}¦ f. seeing, looking at; observation, care,
regard, attention to (with loc.); agreement, engage-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>7055<pc>0098-a<k1>avekzita<k2>avekzita
{%Avekṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ looked at, perceived, re-
garded.
<LEND>

<L>7056<pc>0098-a<k1>avekzin<k2>avekzin
{%Avekṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ observing, seeing, looking at.
<LEND>

<L>7057<pc>0098-a<k1>avekzya<k2>avekzya<h>1
1. {%avekṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be regarded, to be re-
spected.
<LEND>

<L>7058<pc>0098-a<k1>avekzya<k2>avekzya<h>2
2. {%avekṣya,%}¦ ind. having beheld, having regarded.
<LEND>

<L>7059<pc>0098-a<k1>aveRi<k2>aveRi
{#aveRi#}¦ {%a-veṇi, is, is, i,%} not braided, having
no braid of hair; not commingled (as the waters of
rivers).
<LEND>
[Page0098-b+ 71]

<L>7060<pc>0098-b<k1>avedayAna<k2>avedayAna
{#avedayAna#}¦ {%a-vedayāna, as, ā, am%} (rt. 1. {%vid%}),
not knowing, not ascertaining.
<LEND>

<L>7061<pc>0098-b<k1>avedavid<k2>avedavid
{%A-veda-vid, t,%}¦ m. a Brāhman who has not studied
the Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>7062<pc>0098-b<k1>avedavihita<k2>avedavihita
{%A-veda-vihita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not enjoined in the
Vedas, unscriptural.
<LEND>

<L>7063<pc>0098-b<k1>avedya<k2>avedya<h>1
1. {%a-vedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be known; un-
ascertainable, secret.
<LEND>

<L>7064<pc>0098-b<k1>avedya<k2>avedya<h>2
{#avedya#} 2¦. {%a-vedya, as, ā, am%} (rt. 2. {%vid%}),
not to be married; ({%as%}), m. a calf.
<LEND>

<L>7065<pc>0098-b<k1>avenat<k2>avenat
{#avenat#}¦ {%a-venat, an, antī, at,%} Ved. un-
conscious, not perceiving.
<LEND>

<L>7066<pc>0098-b<k1>avenv<k2>avenv
{#avenv#}¦ {%avenv (ava-inv),%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%aven-%}
{%vati, -vitum,%} to send away.
<LEND>

<L>7067<pc>0098-b<k1>avela<k2>avela
{#avela#}¦ {%avela (ava-ilā?), as,%} m. denial or
concealment of knowledge; ({%ā%}), f. chewed betel.
<LEND>

<L>7068<pc>0098-b<k1>avezwi<k2>avezwi
{#avezwi#}¦ {%aveṣṭi, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%yaj%} with {%ava%}),
Ved. appeasing or expiation by sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>7069<pc>0098-b<k1>avEdika<k2>avEdika
{#avEdika#}¦ {%a-vaidika, as, ī, am,%} not Vedic,
not belonging to the Veda.
<LEND>

<L>7070<pc>0098-b<k1>avEDa<k2>avEDa
{#avEDa#}¦ {%a-vaidha, as, ī, am,%} irregular, hete-
rodox, contrary or not conformable to rule.
<LEND>

<L>7071<pc>0098-b<k1>avEDavya<k2>avEDavya
{#avEDavya#}¦ {%a-vaidhavya, as, ā, am,%} free from
widowhood.
<LEND>

<L>7072<pc>0098-b<k1>avErahatya<k2>avErahatya
{#avErahatya#}¦ {%a-vairahatya, am,%} n., Ved. the
non-destruction of men, security from slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>7073<pc>0098-b<k1>avokzaRa<k2>avokzaRa
{#avokzaRa#}¦ {%avokṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%ukṣ%}
with {%ava%}), Ved. besprinkling, bedewing.
<LEND>

<L>7074<pc>0098-b<k1>avoda<k2>avoda
{#avoda#}¦ {%avoda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ud%} with {%ava%}),
dripping down, sprinkling, moistening; ({%as, ā, am%}),
wet, moist.
<LEND>

<L>7075<pc>0098-b<k1>avodeva<k2>avodeva
{#avodeva#}¦ {%avo-deva, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%avas,%}
q. v.), Ved. bringing down the gods.
<LEND>

<L>7076<pc>0098-b<k1>avoh<k2>avoh
{#avoh#}¦ {%avoh (ava-ūh),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%avohati,%}
{%-te, -hitum,%} to push down.
<LEND>

<L>7077<pc>0098-b<k1>avda<k2>avda
{#avda#}¦ {%avda, as,%} m. ({%= abda%}), a cloud; a
year.
<LEND>

<L>7078<pc>0098-b<k1>avya<k2>avya
{#avya#}¦ {%avya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%avi%}), Ved. coming
from or belonging to sheep.
<LEND>

<L>7079<pc>0098-b<k1>avyakta<k2>avyakta
{#avyakta#}¦ {%a-vyakta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%añj%}), unap-
parent, indistinct, not manifest, not to be discerned, in-
visible, imperceptible, unperceived, undetermined; (in
algebra) unknown as quantity or number; ({%as%}), m. a
fool; primary matter which has not yet entered into
real existence; N. of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of Kāma
or Kandarpa; ({%am%}), n. the supreme being or uni-
versal spirit; (in Sāṅkhya phil.) ‘the undiscrete,’
the primary germ of nature, the primordial element
or productive principle whence all the phenomena of
the material world are developed; the soul; nature,
temperament; ({%am%}), ind. imperceptibly, indistinctly,
secretly. {%—Avyakta-kriyā,%} f. algebraic calculation;
any act of an indistinct character or aim. {%—Avyakta-%}
{%gati, is, is, i,%} going imperceptibly. {%—Avyakta-%}
{%pada, as, ā, am,%} inarticulate. {%—Avyakta-mūrti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} whose form is incomprehensible. {%—A-%}
{%vyakta-rāga, as,%} m. dark-red, the colour of the
dawn. {%—Avyakta-rāśi, is,%} f. an unknown number
or indistinct quantity (in algebra). {%—Avyakta-%}
{%lakṣaṇa%} or {%avyakta-vyakta, as,%} m. epithet of
Śiva, whose qualities are not perceptible. {%—Avya-%}
{%kta-vartman, ā, ā, a,%} or {%—avyakta-mārga, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} mysterious in his ways. {%—Avyakta-vāc, k, k,%}
{%k,%} speaking indistinctly. {%—Avyakta-sāmya, am,%} n.
equation of unknown quantities. {%—Avyaktādi (˚ta-%}
{%ādi), is, is, i,%} whose beginning is inscrutable. {%—A-%}
{%vyaktānukaraṇa (˚ta-an˚), am,%} n. the imitating of
unarticulated or unmeaning sound.
<LEND>

<L>7080<pc>0098-b<k1>avyaYjana<k2>avyaYjana
{%A-vyañjana, as, ā, am,%}¦ indistinct; plain, not figu-
rative; ({%as%}), m. an animal without horns, though of
an age to have them.
<LEND>
[Page0098-c+ 71]

<L>7081<pc>0098-c<k1>avyagra<k2>avyagra
{#avyagra#}¦ {%a-vyagra, as, ā, am,%} steady, cool,
deliberate; indifferent, undisturbed; attentive.
<LEND>

<L>7082<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaNga<k2>avyaNga
{#avyaNga#}¦ {%a-vyaṅga, as, ā, am,%} not mutilated,
sound, perfect; not figurative, plain; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
the plant Carpopogon Pruriens Roxb. [cf. Zend
<nsi>aiwyâṃhanem</nsi>]. {%—Avyaṅgāṅga (˚ga-aṅga), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} well made, symmetrical, perfect, entire.
<LEND>

<L>7083<pc>0098-c<k1>avyacas<k2>avyacas
{#avyacas#}¦ {%a-vyacas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. not
spacious.
<LEND>

<L>7084<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaRqA<k2>avyaRqA
{#avyaRqA#}¦ {%avyaṇḍā,%} f. (for {%adhy-aṇḍā?%}), N.
of the plant Carpopogon Pruriens Roxb.
<LEND>

<L>7085<pc>0098-c<k1>avyati<k2>avyati
{#avyati#}¦ {%avyati, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%av%}), Ved. the
act of satiating, satisfaction; desire.
<LEND>

<L>7086<pc>0098-c<k1>avyatikIrRa<k2>avyatikIrRa
{#avyatikIrRa#}¦ {%a-vyatikīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} un-
mixed, unblended, distinct, specific, separate.
<LEND>

<L>7087<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaTa<k2>avyaTa
{#avyaTa#}¦ {%a-vyatha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vyath%}), free
from pain; not inflicting pain, merciful; ({%as%}), m. a
snake; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the plant Terminalia Citrina
Roxb., and of the plant Hibiscus Mutabilis L.; Ved.
firmness, steadiness, absence of tremor.
<LEND>

<L>7088<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaTamAna<k2>avyaTamAna
{%A-vyathamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not moving un-
steadily, not trembling.
<LEND>

<L>7089<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaTi<k2>avyaTi
{%A-vyathi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. not tremulous, not tottering;
not unsteady, stepping firmly and safely, sure-footed,
undaunted; epithet of the horses of the Aśvins; ({%is%}),
f. a firm step, sure-footedness; undauntedness. {%—A-%}
{%vyathi-dhī, īs,%} f. the earth; night.
<LEND>

<L>7090<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaTin<k2>avyaTin
{%A-vyathin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ free from pain, not inflicting
pain.
<LEND>

<L>7091<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaTiza<k2>avyaTiza
{%A-vyathiṣa, as,%}¦ m. the ocean; the sun; ({%ī%}), f.
the earth; midnight.
<LEND>

<L>7092<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaTya<k2>avyaTya
{%A-vyathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from pain, not giving
pain, not paining.
<LEND>

<L>7093<pc>0098-c<k1>avyanat<k2>avyanat
{#avyanat#}¦ {%a-vyanat, an, atī, at%} (rt. {%an%}), Ved.
not breathing, lifeless.
<LEND>

<L>7094<pc>0098-c<k1>avyapadeSya<k2>avyapadeSya
{#avyapadeSya#}¦ {%a-vyapadeśya, as, ā, am,%} not to
be defined.
<LEND>

<L>7095<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaBicAra<k2>avyaBicAra
{#avyaBicAra#}¦ {%a-vyabhicāra, as,%} m. steadiness,
consistency, constancy.
<LEND>

<L>7096<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaBicArin<k2>avyaBicArin
{%A-vyabhicārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ not going astray, con-
stant; virtuous, moral; steady, steadfast, permanent,
faithful.
<LEND>

<L>7097<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaya<k2>avyaya<h>1
{#avyaya#} 1¦. {%avyaya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%avi,%} q. v.),
Ved. coming from sheep, made of sheep's skin.
<LEND>

<L>7098<pc>0098-c<k1>avyaya<k2>avyaya<h>2
{#avyaya#} 2¦. {%a-vyaya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%i%} with {%a%}
and {%vi%}), not liable to change, imperishable, unde-
caying, immutable, eternal; unexpended, unwasted;
economical, parsimonious; ({%as%}), m. a N. of Viṣṇu
or of Śiva; N. of a son of Manu Raivata; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. an indeclinable word, a particle; ({%am%}), n. (in
the Vedānta) a member or corporeal part of an
organized body. {%—Avyaya-tva, am,%} n. imperishable-
ness. {%—Avyaya-varga, as,%} m. the class of indeclin-
ables. {%—Avyayātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} imperish-
able, eternal; ({%ā%}), m. soul, spirit.
<LEND>

<L>7099<pc>0098-c<k1>avyayIBAva<k2>avyayIBAva
{%Avyayī-bhāva, as,%}¦  m. unchangeable state, im-
perishableness; an indeclinable compound.
<LEND>

<L>7100<pc>0098-c<k1>avyarTa<k2>avyarTa
{#avyarTa#}¦ {%a-vyartha, as, ā, am,%} not useless,
profitable, fruitful; effectual, efficacious.
<LEND>

<L>7101<pc>0098-c<k1>avyalIka<k2>avyalIka
{#avyalIka#}¦ {%a-vyalīka, as, ā, am,%} not false,
true, veracious, not disagreeable.
<LEND>

<L>7102<pc>0098-c<k1>avyavaDAna<k2>avyavaDAna
{#avyavaDAna#}¦ {%a-vyavadhāna, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%dhā%}), close, contiguous, immediate; not screened, not
concealed, open, careless. {%—Avyavadhāna-tā,%} f. or
{%avyavadhāna-tva, am,%} n. contiguity, carelessness.
<LEND>

<L>7103<pc>0098-c<k1>avyavahita<k2>avyavahita
{%A-vyavahita, as, ā, am,%}¦ adjoining, contiguous.
<LEND>

<L>7104<pc>0098-c<k1>avyavasAya<k2>avyavasAya
{#avyavasAya#}¦ {%a-vyavasāya, as,%} m. (rt. {%so%}),
negligence, inactivity. {%—Avyavasāya-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} negligent, inactive, remiss.
<LEND>

<L>7105<pc>0098-c<k1>avyavasAyin<k2>avyavasAyin
{%A-vyavasāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ negligent, inactive, remiss.
<LEND>

<L>7106<pc>0098-c<k1>avyavasTA<k2>avyavasTA
{#avyavasTA#}¦ {%a-vyavasthā,%} f. (rt. {%sthā%}), irre-
[Page0099-a+ 71]
gularity, deviation from established rule; incorrect
legal opinion.
<LEND>

<L>7107<pc>0099-a<k1>avyavasTita<k2>avyavasTita
{%A-vyavasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not conformable to law
or practice; unacquainted with the law or custom;
ill-regulated; displaced, disordered, not in due order,
unmethodical.
<LEND>

<L>7108<pc>0099-a<k1>avyavahArya<k2>avyavahArya
{#avyavahArya#}¦ {%a-vyavahārya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%hṛ%}),
unactionable, not to be discussed in law.
<LEND>

<L>7109<pc>0099-a<k1>avyavahfta<k2>avyavahfta
{%A-vyavahṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not determined or in-
vestigated by law; not spoken.
<LEND>

<L>7110<pc>0099-a<k1>avyavAya<k2>avyavAya
{#avyavAya#}¦ {%a-vyavāya, as,%} m. absence of in-
terval, non-separation.
<LEND>

<L>7111<pc>0099-a<k1>avyasana<k2>avyasana
{#avyasana#}¦ {%a-vyasana, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-vyasanin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} free from evil practices, not vicious, moral,
correct, steady.
<LEND>

<L>7112<pc>0099-a<k1>avyasta<k2>avyasta
{#avyasta#}¦ {%a-vyasta, as, ā, am,%} undecomposed,
simple; not separated, undispersed, collected.
<LEND>

<L>7113<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAkula<k2>avyAkula
{#avyAkula#}¦ {%a-vyākula, as, ā, am,%} not dis-
turbed, composed, calm, firm.
<LEND>

<L>7114<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAkfta<k2>avyAkfta
{#avyAkfta#}¦ {%a-vyākṛta, as, ā, am,%} undecom-
posed, simple; ({%am%}), n. elementary substance from
which all things were created, considered as one with
the substance of Brahma.
<LEND>

<L>7115<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAKyA<k2>avyAKyA
{#avyAKyA#}¦ {%a-vyākhyā,%} f. (rt. {%khyā%}), want of
clearness of explanation, obscurity.
<LEND>

<L>7116<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAKyAta<k2>avyAKyAta
{%A-vyākhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unexplained, obscure.
<LEND>

<L>7117<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAKyAna<k2>avyAKyAna
{%A-vyākhyāna, am,%}¦ n. non-explanation, absence of
explicitness.
<LEND>

<L>7118<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAKyeya<k2>avyAKyeya
{%A-vyākhyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ inexplicable, unintelligible;
not requiring to be explained, easy.
<LEND>

<L>7119<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAja<k2>avyAja
{#avyAja#}¦ {%a-vyāja, as,%} m. absence of fraud,
simplicity, honesty.
<LEND>

<L>7120<pc>0099-a<k1>avyApaka<k2>avyApaka
{#avyApaka#}¦ {%a-vyāpaka, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%āp%}), not
spread over or pervading the whole, not an invariable
concomitant, special, individual, peculiar. {%—Avyā-%}
{%paka-tā,%} f. or {%avyāpaka-tva, am,%} n. non-compre-
hensiveness or generalization, speciality, individuality.
<LEND>

<L>7121<pc>0099-a<k1>avyApin<k2>avyApin
{%A-vyāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not pervading, not compre-
hensive, not invariably concomitant, special, indivi-
dual; partial, limited. {%—Avyāpi-tā,%} f. or {%avyāpi-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. non-generalization, speciality.
<LEND>

<L>7122<pc>0099-a<k1>avyApta<k2>avyApta
{%A-vyāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not pervaded with, peculiar,
individual, limited.
<LEND>

<L>7123<pc>0099-a<k1>avyApti<k2>avyApti
{%A-vyāpti, is,%}¦ f. inadequate pervasion or extent (of
a definition); e. g. ‘man is a cooking animal,’ which
does not extend to savages who eat raw food.
<LEND>

<L>7124<pc>0099-a<k1>avyApya<k2>avyApya
{%A-vyāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be pervaded generally,
not extending to the whole circumstances, peculiar;
({%a%}), ind. not pervading. {%—A-vyāpya-vṛtti, is, is, i,%}
(in logic) a category of limited application, partial in-
herence, with reference to place and time, as pain,
pleasure, love, hatred, virtue, vice, &c.
<LEND>

<L>7125<pc>0099-a<k1>avyApanna<k2>avyApanna
{#avyApanna#}¦ {%a-vyāpanna, as, ā, am,%} not dead,
not quite extinct, just alive.
<LEND>

<L>7126<pc>0099-a<k1>avyApAra<k2>avyApAra
{#avyApAra#}¦ {%a-vyāpāra, as,%} m. vacation from
work, state of being unemployed; a business not
practised or understood, not one's own business.
<LEND>

<L>7127<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAyAma<k2>avyAyAma
{#avyAyAma#}¦ {%a-vyāyāma, as,%} m. (rt. {%yam%}),
non-exertion, absence of lassitude or of fatigue from
exertion.
<LEND>

<L>7128<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAyata<k2>avyAyata
{%A-vyāyata, as, ā, am,%}¦ not occupied, not detached,
holding firm (?).
<LEND>

<L>7129<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAvartana<k2>avyAvartana
{#avyAvartana#}¦ {%a-vyāvartana, am,%} n. not re-
turning, not coming back, not circulating.
<LEND>

<L>7130<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAhata<k2>avyAhata
{#avyAhata#}¦ {%a-vyāhata, as, ā, am,%} unresisted,
unimpeded; not disappointed.
<LEND>

<L>7131<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAhArin<k2>avyAhArin
{#avyAhArin#}¦ {%a-vyāhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} not utter-
ing (?).
<LEND>

<L>7132<pc>0099-a<k1>avyAhita<k2>avyAhita
{#avyAhita#}¦ {%a-vyāhita, as, ā, am,%} undisputed.
<LEND>

<L>7133<pc>0099-a<k1>avyucCinna<k2>avyucCinna
{#avyucCinna#}¦ {%a-vy-ucchinna, as, ā, am,%} not
interrupted.
<LEND>
[Page0099-b+ 74]

<L>7134<pc>0099-b<k1>avyutpanna<k2>avyutpanna
{#avyutpanna#}¦ {%a-vyutpanna, as, ā, am,%} not ac-
complished, not proficient, inexperienced.
<LEND>

<L>7135<pc>0099-b<k1>avyuzwa<k2>avyuzwa
{#avyuzwa#}¦ {%a-vyuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not yet
shining (as the dawn).
<LEND>

<L>7136<pc>0099-b<k1>avyfdDi<k2>avyfdDi
{#avyfdDi#}¦ {%a-vyṛddhi, is,%} f., Ved. not failing.
<LEND>

<L>7137<pc>0099-b<k1>avyezyat<k2>avyezyat
{#avyezyat#}¦ {%a-vyeṣyat, an, atī%} or {%antī, at%} (rt.
{%i%}), Ved. not disappearing, not vanishing.
<LEND>

<L>7138<pc>0099-b<k1>avraRa<k2>avraRa
{#avraRa#}¦ {%a-vraṇa, as, ā, am,%} without rents or
scars, without splinters; unhurt, unscarred, sound;
{%avraṇaṃ śukram,%} a peculiar disease of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>7139<pc>0099-b<k1>avrata<k2>avrata
{#avrata#}¦ {%a-vrata%} or {%a-vratika, as, ā, am,%} law-
less, disobedient, wicked; not observing religious rites
or obligations, uninitiated.
<LEND>

<L>7140<pc>0099-b<k1>avratya<k2>avratya
{%Avratya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. offence against the rule of
an ascetic, violation of a religious obligation.
<LEND>

<L>7141<pc>0099-b<k1>avrAtya<k2>avrAtya
{%A-vrātya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who is not a Vrātya.
<LEND>

<L>7142<pc>0099-b<k1>avrAjin<k2>avrAjin
{#avrAjin#}¦ {%a-vrājin, ī, inī, i,%} not wandering
or travelling as a mendicant (?).
<LEND>

<L>7143<pc>0099-b<k1>aS<k2>aS<h>1
{#aS#} 1¦. {%aś,%} cl. 5. P. A. (in classical
Sanskrit A. only), {%aśnoti, -nute, āśa,%}
{%ānaṃśa, ānaśe, aśiṣyate%} or {%akṣyate, āśiṣṭa%}
and {%āṣṭa, aśitum,%} to reach, come to, arrive at; to
get, gain, obtain; to become master of, to master, to
be able; to pervade, penetrate, pierce through, fill;
to heap, accumulate: Caus. {%āśayati, āśiśat:%} Desid.
{%aśiśiṣate:%} Intens. {%aśāśyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>7144<pc>0099-b<k1>aSan<k2>aSan
{%Aśan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. a missile-stone, or stone for
slinging, stone, rock; a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>7145<pc>0099-b<k1>aSana<k2>aSana<h>1
1. {%aśana, as, ā, am,%}¦ reaching, reaching across.
<LEND>

<L>7146<pc>0099-b<k1>aSani<k2>aSani
{%Aśani, is,%}¦ m. f. a missile, especially the thunder-
bolt and flash of lightning; the tip of a missile; N.
of a warrior-tribe. {%—Aśani-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a
Rākṣasa. {%—Aśani-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. throwing
the thunderbolt, endowed with it.
<LEND>

<L>7147<pc>0099-b<k1>aSitra<k2>aSitra<h>1
1. {%aśitra, as,%}¦ m. a thief.
<LEND>

<L>7148<pc>0099-b<k1>aSin<k2>aSin
{%Aśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ reaching far, enduring; Vedic
superlative {%aśītama%} and {%aśiṣṭha.%}
<LEND>

<L>7149<pc>0099-b<k1>aS<k2>aS<h>2
{#aS#} 2¦. {%aś,%} cl. 9. P. {%aśnāti, āśa, aśi-%}
{%ṣyati, āśīt, aśitum,%} to eat, consume; to
taste, enjoy: Caus. {%āśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to eat,
to give to eat, to feed: Desid. {%aśiśiṣati,%} to wish to
eat: Intens. {%aśāśyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>7150<pc>0099-b<k1>aSana<k2>aSana<h>2
2. {%aśana, am,%}¦ n. eating, feeding; food (often at the
end of compounds, e. g. {%mūla-phalāśana, as, ā, am,%}
having roots and fruit for food). {%—Aśana-kṛt, t, t, t,%}
Ved. preparing food. {%—Aśana-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord
of food. {%—Aśana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed
of food.
<LEND>

<L>7151<pc>0099-b<k1>aSanAya<k2>aSanAya
{%Aśanāya,%}¦ nom. P. {%-yati, -yitum,%} to desire food,
to be hungry.
<LEND>

<L>7152<pc>0099-b<k1>aSanAyA<k2>aSanAyA
{%Aśanāyā,%}¦ f. hunger.
<LEND>

<L>7153<pc>0099-b<k1>aSanAyita<k2>aSanAyita
{%Aśanāyita%}¦ or {%aśanāyuka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hungry.
<LEND>

<L>7154<pc>0099-b<k1>aSita<k2>aSita
{%Aśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ eaten, satisfied. {%—Aśitaṅ-gavīna%}
or {%āśitaṅ-gavīna, as, ā, am,%} formerly grazed by
cattle.
<LEND>

<L>7155<pc>0099-b<k1>aSitavya<k2>aSitavya
{%Aśitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten.
<LEND>

<L>7156<pc>0099-b<k1>aSitf<k2>aSitf
{%Aśitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. eating, an eater.
<div n="P"/>.2. {%aśitra, am,%} n. an oblation of rice, &c.
<LEND>

<L>7157<pc>0099-b<k1>aSita<k2>aSita
{%Aśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fed, satiated, satiate; given to
eat; ({%am%}), n. food.
<LEND>

<L>7158<pc>0099-b<k1>aSakuna<k2>aSakuna
{#aSakuna#}¦ {%a-śakuna, am,%} n. an inauspicious
omen.
<LEND>

<L>7159<pc>0099-b<k1>aSakumBI<k2>aSakumBI
{#aSakumBI#}¦ {%aśa-kumbhī,%} f., N. of the aquatic
plant Pistia Stratiotes Lin.
<LEND>

<L>7160<pc>0099-b<k1>aSakta<k2>aSakta
{#aSakta#}¦ {%a-śakta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śak%}), unable,
incompetent. {%—Aśakta-tā,%} f. or {%aśakta-tva, am,%} n.
weakness, inability.
<LEND>

<L>7161<pc>0099-b<k1>aSakti<k2>aSakti
{%A-śakti, is,%}¦ f. inability, incapability, weakness,
impotence.
<LEND>

<L>7162<pc>0099-b<k1>aSakya<k2>aSakya
{%A-śakya, as, ā, am,%}¦ impossible, impracticable;
not to be done. {%—Aśakyārtha (˚ya-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
unavailing.
<LEND>

<L>7163<pc>0099-b<k1>aSaga<k2>aSaga
{#aSaga#}¦ {%aśaga, as,%} m., N. of the author of
the Śāntipurāṇa.
<LEND>
[Page0099-c+ 68]

<L>7164<pc>0099-c<k1>aSaNka<k2>aSaNka
{#aSaNka#}¦ {%a-śaṅka, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śaṅk%}), fear-
less, undaunted; secure, certain.
<LEND>

<L>7165<pc>0099-c<k1>aSaNkita<k2>aSaNkita
{%A-śaṅkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ certain, undoubted; fearless.
<LEND>

<L>7166<pc>0099-c<k1>aSaWa<k2>aSaWa
{#aSaWa#}¦ {%a-śaṭha, as, ā, am,%} virtuous, sincere.
<LEND>

<L>7167<pc>0099-c<k1>aSatru<k2>aSatru
{#aSatru#}¦ {%a-śatru, us, us, u,%} Ved. one who has
no adversary; one whom no enemy defies; without
opposition from enemies; ({%us%}), m. the moon; ({%u%}),
n. condition of having no enemy.
<LEND>

<L>7168<pc>0099-c<k1>aSana<k2>aSana<h>3
{#aSana#} 3¦. {%aśana, as,%} m. {%= asana,%} N. of the
tree Terminalia Tomentosa W. and A. {%—Aśana-%}
{%parṇī%} or {%asana-parṇī,%} f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>7169<pc>0099-c<k1>aSana<k2>aSana
{#aSana, aSani.#}¦ See under 1. {%aś,%} 2. {%aś.%}
<LEND>

<L>7170<pc>0099-c<k1>aSapat<k2>aSapat
{#aSapat#}¦ {%a-śapat, an, antī, at,%} Ved. not curs-
ing, not imprecating.
<LEND>

<L>7171<pc>0099-c<k1>aSam<k2>aSam
{#aSam#}¦ {%a-śam,%} ind. (rt. {%śam%}), Ved. non-wel-
fare, harm, mischief.
<LEND>

<L>7172<pc>0099-c<k1>aSama<k2>aSama
{%A-śama, as,%}¦ m. disquietude, uneasiness.
<LEND>

<L>7173<pc>0099-c<k1>aSAnta<k2>aSAnta
{%A-śānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unappeased, indomitable,
violent, wild; restless, anxious, unresigned; uncon-
secrated, not sacred, irreligious, profane. {%—Aśānta-%}
{%tā,%} f. want of tranquillity, passionateness.
<LEND>

<L>7174<pc>0099-c<k1>aSAnti<k2>aSAnti
{%A-śānti, is,%}¦ f. restlessness, anxiety. {%—Aśānti-kara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} causing anxiety.
<LEND>

<L>7175<pc>0099-c<k1>aSAmya<k2>aSAmya
{%A-śāmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unappeasable.
<LEND>

<L>7176<pc>0099-c<k1>aSaraRa<k2>aSaraRa
{#aSaraRa#}¦ {%a-śaraṇa, as, ā, am,%} destitute of
refuge, defenceless.
<LEND>

<L>7177<pc>0099-c<k1>aSarIra<k2>aSarIra
{#aSarIra#}¦ {%a-śarīra, as, ā, am,%} bodiless, in-
corporeal; ({%as%}), m. a N. of Kāma, the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>7178<pc>0099-c<k1>aSarIrin<k2>aSarIrin
{%A-śarīrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ incorporeal.
<LEND>

<L>7179<pc>0099-c<k1>aSarman<k2>aSarman
{#aSarman#}¦ {%a-śarman, a,%} n. unhappiness, pain,
affliction; {%(ā, ā, a),%} unhappy, afflicted.
<LEND>

<L>7180<pc>0099-c<k1>aSas<k2>aSas
{#aSas#}¦ {%a-śas, as, as, as%} (rt. {%śas%} for {%saṃs%}),
Ved. not blessing, not wishing well, not praising,
cursing, hating.
<LEND>

<L>7181<pc>0099-c<k1>aSasta<k2>aSasta
{%A-śasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. inexpressible, ineffable,
not esteemed, hated, ill-starred. {%—Aśasta-vāra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. having indescribable treasures; (Sāy.)
who is not asked for wealth, i. e. who grants it of his
own accord.
<LEND>

<L>7182<pc>0099-c<k1>aSasti<k2>aSasti
{%A-śasti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. not wishing well, imprecation,
evil design, curse; a curser, hater. {%—Aśasti-han, ā,%}
{%ghnī, a,%} Ved. averting imprecations or curses.
<LEND>

<L>7183<pc>0099-c<k1>aSastra<k2>aSastra
{#aSastra#}¦ {%a-śastra, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śas,%} to hurt),
weaponless, unarmed.
<LEND>

<L>7184<pc>0099-c<k1>aSAKA<k2>aSAKA
{#aSAKA#}¦ {%a-śākhā,%} f., N. of a grass.
<LEND>

<L>7185<pc>0099-c<k1>aSArIrika<k2>aSArIrika
{#aSArIrika#}¦ {%a-śārīrika, as, ī, am,%} not re-
lating to or endowed with body, incorporeal.
<LEND>

<L>7186<pc>0099-c<k1>aSASvata<k2>aSASvata
{#aSASvata#}¦ {%a-śāśvata, as, ī, am,%} perishable,
transient, temporary.
<LEND>

<L>7187<pc>0099-c<k1>aSAsana<k2>aSAsana
{#aSAsana#}¦ {%a-śāsana, am,%} n. (rt. {%śās%}), want of
government, anarchy, disorder.
<LEND>

<L>7188<pc>0099-c<k1>aSAsanIya<k2>aSAsanIya
{%A-śāsanīya%}¦ or {%a-śāsya, as, ā, am,%} ungovernable.
<LEND>

<L>7189<pc>0099-c<k1>aSAsita<k2>aSAsita
{%A-śāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ungoverned, undisciplined.
<LEND>

<L>7190<pc>0099-c<k1>aSAstra<k2>aSAstra
{%A-śāstra, as, ā, am,%}¦ unscriptural, not conformable to
sacred authority, heterodox. {%—A-śāstra-vihita%} or {%a-%}
{%śāstra-siddha, as, ā, am,%} not enjoined by the Śāstras.
<LEND>

<L>7191<pc>0099-c<k1>aSAstrIya<k2>aSAstrIya
{%A-śāstrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unscriptural, heterodox,
illegal, immoral, irreligious.
<LEND>

<L>7192<pc>0099-c<k1>aSikzita<k2>aSikzita
{#aSikzita#}¦ {%a-śikṣita, as, ā, am,%} untaught.
<LEND>

<L>7193<pc>0099-c<k1>aSita<k2>aSita
{#aSita#}¦ {%aśita, aśitavya,%} &c. See under 2. {%aś.%}
<LEND>

<L>7194<pc>0099-c<k1>aSitra<k2>aSitra
{#aSitra#}¦ {%aśitra.%} See under 1. {%aś,%} 2. {%aś.%}
<LEND>

<L>7195<pc>0099-c<k1>aSiTila<k2>aSiTila
{#aSiTila#}¦ {%a-śithila, as, ā, am,%} not loose,
firm, tight, hard.
<LEND>

<L>7196<pc>0099-c<k1>aSin<k2>aSin
{#aSin#}¦ {%aśin.%} See under 1. {%aś.%}
<LEND>

<L>7197<pc>0099-c<k1>aSipada<k2>aSipada
{#aSipada#}¦ {%a-śipada, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
causing the sickness called śipada.
<LEND>

<L>7198<pc>0099-c<k1>aSimida<k2>aSimida
{#aSimida#}¦ {%a-śimida, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not de-
structive like a Śimidā.
<LEND>
[Page0100-a+ 70]

<L>7199<pc>0100-a<k1>aSimividviz<k2>aSimividviz
{#aSimividviz#}¦ {%aśimi-vidviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved.
epithet of the seven Parjanyas or rain-clouds (perhaps
the true reading may be {%Śimi-vidviṣ,%} ‘hater of
the Śimis’).
<LEND>

<L>7200<pc>0100-a<k1>aSira<k2>aSira
{#aSira#}¦ {%aśira, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%aś%}), fire; a
N. of the sun, ‘consumer or devourer;’ N. of a
Rākṣasa or goblin; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of this
Rākṣasa; ({%am%}), n. a diamond.
<LEND>

<L>7201<pc>0100-a<k1>aSiras<k2>aSiras
{#aSiras#}¦ {%a-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} or {%a-śiraska,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} headless. [cf. <lang n="greek">ἀκάρηνος</lang>]. {%—A-śiraḥ-snāna,%}
{%am,%} n. bathing the whole body except the head.
<LEND>

<L>7202<pc>0100-a<k1>aSiva<k2>aSiva
{#aSiva#}¦ {%a-śiva, as, ā, am,%} unfriendly, un-
kind, envious; pernicious, dangerous; causing or
threatening mischief; unlucky, unfortunate; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a certain divine being; ({%ī%}), f. a female demon
or goblin; ({%am%}), n. ill-luck, evil fortune, mischief.
<LEND>

<L>7203<pc>0100-a<k1>aSiSira<k2>aSiSira
{#aSiSira#}¦ {%a-śiśira, as, ā, am,%} not cold,
warm. {%—Aśiśira-tā,%} f. heat, warmth.
<LEND>

<L>7204<pc>0100-a<k1>aSiSizu<k2>aSiSizu
{#aSiSizu#}¦ {%aśiśiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. 2. {%aś,%}
in Desid.), hungry.
<LEND>

<L>7205<pc>0100-a<k1>aSiSu<k2>aSiSu
{#aSiSu#}¦ {%a-śiśu, us, vī, u,%} childless, without
young ones. {%—Aśiśvī%} or {%aśiśvikā,%} f. a childless
woman.
<LEND>

<L>7206<pc>0100-a<k1>aSizwa<k2>aSizwa
{#aSizwa#}¦ {%a-śiṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śās%}), untrained,
badly trained, ill-regulated, ill-behaved, rude, barba-
rous, profligate. {%—Aśiṣṭa-tā,%} f. or {%aśiṣṭa-tva, am,%}
n. rudeness. {%—Aśiṣṭācāra (˚ṭa-āc˚), as,%} m. bad be-
haviour, rudeness, profligacy.
<LEND>

<L>7207<pc>0100-a<k1>aSizya<k2>aSizya
{%A-śiṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be taught, not to be
informed.
<LEND>

<L>7208<pc>0100-a<k1>aSizWa<k2>aSizWa
{#aSizWa#}¦ {%aśiṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (superl. of {%aśin,%}
see 1. {%aś%}), Ved. reaching very far.
<LEND>

<L>7209<pc>0100-a<k1>aSIta<k2>aSIta<h>1
{#aSIta#} 1¦. {%aśīta, as, ī, am,%} the eightieth.
<LEND>

<L>7210<pc>0100-a<k1>aSIti<k2>aSIti
{%Aśīti, is,%}¦ f. eighty. {%—Aśīti-bhāga, as,%} m. the
eightieth part, one part out of eighty.
<LEND>

<L>7211<pc>0100-a<k1>aSItika<k2>aSItika
{%Aśītika, as, ā, am,%}¦ an octogenarian, one eighty
years of age.
<LEND>

<L>7212<pc>0100-a<k1>aSIta<k2>aSIta<h>2
{#aSIta#} 2¦. {%a-śīta, as, ā, am,%} not cold, warm,
hot. {%—Aśīta-kara, as,%} or {%aśīta-ruc, k,%} m. the sun,
‘having hot rays.’
<LEND>

<L>7213<pc>0100-a<k1>aSItala<k2>aSItala
{%A-śītala, as, ā, am,%}¦ hot.
<LEND>

<L>7214<pc>0100-a<k1>aSIrRa<k2>aSIrRa
{#aSIrRa#}¦ {%a-śīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} undecayed, un-
impaired.
<LEND>

<L>7215<pc>0100-a<k1>aSIrzan<k2>aSIrzan
{#aSIrzan#}¦ {%a-śīrṣan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. or {%a-śīr-%}
{%ṣika, as, ā, am,%} headless.
<LEND>

<L>7216<pc>0100-a<k1>aSIla<k2>aSIla
{#aSIla#}¦ {%a-śīla, as, ā, am,%} ill-behaved, vulgar,
offensive; indifferent; ({%am%}), n. bad manners, bad
conduct, depravity.
<LEND>

<L>7217<pc>0100-a<k1>aSuci<k2>aSuci
{#aSuci#}¦ {%a-śuci, is, is, i%} (rt. 2. {%śuc%}), foul,
impure; ({%is%}), f. impurity, disgrace, degradation.
{%—Aśuci-tā,%} f. or {%aśuci-tva, am,%} n. impurity.
<LEND>

<L>7218<pc>0100-a<k1>aSOca<k2>aSOca
{%A-śauca, am,%}¦ n. impurity, foulness; legal impurity,
contamination, defilement contracted by the death of
a relation, or by the commission of prohibited acts,
&c. {%—Aśauca-tva, am,%} n. impure or abandoned
nature or disposition; defilement, contamination.
<LEND>

<L>7219<pc>0100-a<k1>aSudDa<k2>aSudDa
{#aSudDa#}¦ {%a-śuddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śudh%}), im-
pure; inaccurate; unknown, unascertained. {%—Aśud-%}
{%dha-vāsaka, as,%} m. a vagrant, a suspicious cha-
racter.
<LEND>

<L>7220<pc>0100-a<k1>aSudDi<k2>aSudDi
{%A-śuddhi, is, is, i,%}¦ impure; ({%is%}), f. impurity.
<LEND>

<L>7221<pc>0100-a<k1>aSoDana<k2>aSoDana
{%A-śodhana, am,%}¦ n. uncleanness; inaccuracy.
<LEND>

<L>7222<pc>0100-a<k1>aSoDita<k2>aSoDita
{%A-śodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ uncleansed, unclean; in-
accurate, uncorrected, unrevised.
<LEND>

<L>7223<pc>0100-a<k1>aSuBa<k2>aSuBa
{#aSuBa#}¦ {%a-śubha, as, ā, am,%} unlucky, in-
auspicious; ({%am%}), n. sin, a shameful deed, misfortune.
<LEND>

<L>7224<pc>0100-a<k1>aSuBodaya<k2>aSuBodaya
{%—Aśubhodaya (˚bha-ud˚), as,%}¦ m. inauspicious
omen.
<LEND>

<L>7225<pc>0100-a<k1>aSuSrUzA<k2>aSuSrUzA
{#aSuSrUzA#}¦ {%a-śuśrūṣā,%} f. inattention, neglect
of service or respect.
<LEND>
[Page0100-b+ 70]

<L>7226<pc>0100-b<k1>aSuza<k2>aSuza
{#aSuza#}¦ {%aśuṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%aś%}), Ved.
eating, consuming, voracious; (Sāy.) not causing to
dry up, not extinguished (as if fr. rt. {%śuṣ%}).
<LEND>

<L>7227<pc>0100-b<k1>aSuzka<k2>aSuzka
{#aSuzka#}¦ {%a-śuṣka, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śuṣ%}), not
dry, moist, fresh, green.
<LEND>

<L>7228<pc>0100-b<k1>aSozaRIya<k2>aSozaRIya
{%A-śoṣaṇīya%}¦ or {%a-śoṣya, as, ā, am,%} not to be
dried up.
<LEND>

<L>7229<pc>0100-b<k1>aSUdra<k2>aSUdra
{#aSUdra#}¦ {%a-śūdra, as,%} m. one who is not a
Śūdra.
<LEND>

<L>7230<pc>0100-b<k1>aSUnya<k2>aSUnya
{#aSUnya#}¦ {%a-śūnya, as, ā, am,%} not empty.
<LEND>

<L>7231<pc>0100-b<k1>aSUnyaSayana<k2>aSUnyaSayana
{%—Aśūnya-śayana, am,%}¦ n., {%aśūnyaśayana-dvitīyā,%}
f., {%aśūnyaśayana-vrata, am,%} n., N. of certain cere-
monies.
<LEND>

<L>7232<pc>0100-b<k1>aSUlA<k2>aSUlA
{#aSUlA#}¦ {%a-śūlā,%} f. the tree Vitex Alata.
<LEND>

<L>7233<pc>0100-b<k1>aSfNga<k2>aSfNga
{#aSfNga#}¦ {%a-śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} having no horn
or top.
<LEND>

<L>7234<pc>0100-b<k1>aSfRya<k2>aSfRya
{#aSfRya#}¦ {%a-śṛṇya, as, ā, am,%} untameable,
unbridled.
<LEND>

<L>7235<pc>0100-b<k1>aSfta<k2>aSfta
{#aSfta#}¦ {%a-śṛta, as, ā, am,%} not cooked, un-
ripe.
<LEND>

<L>7236<pc>0100-b<k1>aSfTita<k2>aSfTita
{#aSfTita#}¦ {%a-śṛthita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śrath%}),
Ved. not loosened.
<LEND>

<L>7237<pc>0100-b<k1>aSeva<k2>aSeva
{#aSeva#}¦ {%a-śeva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pernicious,
dangerous, not causing pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>7238<pc>0100-b<k1>aSeza<k2>aSeza
{#aSeza#}¦ {%a-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%} without remainder,
entire, perfect, all, whole, every; infinite, endless; ({%as%}),
m. non-remainder; {%aśeṣam%} or {%aśeṣeṇa%} or {%aśeṣa-%}
{%tas,%} ind. entirely, wholly. {%—Aśeṣa-tā,%} f. totality.
{%—Aśeṣa-sāmrājya, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>7239<pc>0100-b<k1>aSezaya<k2>aSezaya
{%Aśeṣaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%aśeṣayati, -yitum,%} to finish
entirely.
<LEND>

<L>7240<pc>0100-b<k1>aSezas<k2>aSezas
{%A-śeṣas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. without offspring or de-
scendants.
<LEND>

<L>7241<pc>0100-b<k1>aSEkza<k2>aSEkza
{#aSEkza#}¦ {%a-śaikṣa, as,%} m. an Arhat (lit. ‘no
longer a pupil’).
<LEND>

<L>7242<pc>0100-b<k1>aSoka<k2>aSoka<h>1
{#aSoka#} 1¦. {%a-śoka, as, ā, am%} (rt. 2. {%śuc%}),
Ved. without heat.
<LEND>

<L>7243<pc>0100-b<k1>aSoka<k2>aSoka<h>2
{#aSoka#} 2¦. {%a-śoka, as, ā, am%} (rt. 1. {%śuc%}), with-
out sorrow, not feeling or not causing sorrow; ({%as%}),
m., N. of the tree Jonesia Aśoka Roxb. (it is a tree
of moderate size, belonging to the leguminous class,
with magnificent red flowers); N. of a minister of
king Daśaratha; N. of a king in Pāṭaliputra; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a medicinal plant; one of the female domestic
deities of the Jainas; ({%am%}), n. the blossom of the
Aśoka plant; quicksilver. {%—Aśoka-taru, us,%} m. or
{%aśoka-naga, as,%} m. or {%aśoka-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. an
Aśoka tree. {%—Aśoka-trirātra, as,%} m., N. of a feast
which lasts during three nights. {%—Aśoka-datta%} or
{%aśoka-vega, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Aśoka-pūrṇimā,%}
f., N. of a certain holiday. {%—Aśoka-mañjarī,%} f., N.
of a metre. {%—Aśoka-rohiṇī,%} f., N. of a medicinal
plant. {%—Aśoka-vardhana, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Aśoka-ṣaṣṭhī,%} f., N. of a certain holiday. {%—A-%}
{%śokāri (˚ka-ari), is,%} m., N. of the plant Nauclea
Kadamba Roxb. {%—Aśokāṣṭamī (˚ka-aṣ˚),%} f. the
eighth day in the first half of the month Caitra.
<LEND>

<L>7244<pc>0100-b<k1>aSoca<k2>aSoca
{%A-śoca, as,%}¦ m. absence of care or vanity; content,
tranquillity, modesty.
<LEND>

<L>7245<pc>0100-b<k1>aSocya<k2>aSocya
{%A-śocya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be sorrowed for.
<LEND>

<L>7246<pc>0100-b<k1>aSoDana<k2>aSoDana
{#aSoDana#}¦ {%a-śodhana.%} See under {%a-śuddha.%}
<LEND>

<L>7247<pc>0100-b<k1>aSozaRIya<k2>aSozaRIya
{#aSozaRIya, aSozya.#}¦ See under {%a-śuṣka.%}
<LEND>

<L>7248<pc>0100-b<k1>aSOca<k2>aSOca
{#aSOca#}¦ {%a-śauca.%} See under {%a-śuci.%}
<LEND>

<L>7249<pc>0100-b<k1>aSOrya<k2>aSOrya
{#aSOrya#}¦ {%a-śaurya, am,%} n. want of heroism,
cowardice.
<LEND>

<L>7250<pc>0100-b<k1>aSna<k2>aSna<h>1
{#aSna#} 1¦. {%aśna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%aś%}), Ved.
voracious; ({%as%}), m., N. of a demon.
<LEND>

<L>7251<pc>0100-b<k1>aSnayA<k2>aSnayA
{%Aśnayā,%}¦ f., Ved. hunger.
<LEND>

<L>7252<pc>0100-b<k1>aSnItapibatA<k2>aSnItapibatA
{%Aśnīta-pibatā,%}¦ f. invitation to eat and to drink.
{%—Aśnītapibatīyati,%} nom. he invites to eat and drink.
<LEND>
[Page0100-c+ 77]

<L>7253<pc>0100-c<k1>aSman<k2>aSman<h>1
1. {%aśman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. eating.
<LEND>

<L>7254<pc>0100-c<k1>aSna<k2>aSna<h>2
{#aSna#} 2¦. {%aśna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś ?%}), Ved.
a stone; a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>7255<pc>0100-c<k1>aSma<k2>aSma
{%Aśma, as,%}¦ m. a mountain, a rock; Ved. a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>7256<pc>0100-c<k1>aSmaka<k2>aSmaka
{%Aśmaka, as, ī,%}¦ m. f., N. of several persons.
<LEND>

<L>7257<pc>0100-c<k1>aSman<k2>aSman<h>2
2. {%aśman, ā,%}¦ m. a stone, especially one fit for
slinging; flint; hard stone, rock; a cloud; thunder-
bolt; sky (?); N. of a Brāhman [cf. Zend <nsi>aśman;</nsi>
Pers. <nsi>asmān;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>akmu˚,</nsi> Them. <nsi>akmen;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>kamy,</nsi> Them. <nsi>kamen</nsi>]. {%—Aśma-kadalī,%} f., N. of a
plant. {%—Aśma-kuṭṭa%} or {%aśma-kuṭṭaka, as, ā, am,%}
breaking or brushing anything with a stone, bruised or
broken by stones. {%—Aśma-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a plant.
{%—Aśma-gandhā,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Aśma-garbha,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%aśmagarbha-ja, am,%} n. an emerald.
{%—Aśma-ghna, as,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—Aśma-%}
{%cakra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. furnished with a disk of
stone. {%—Aśma-ja, am,%} n. red chalk; iron. {%—Aśma-%}
{%jatuka, am,%} n. bitumen. {%—Aśma-dāraṇa, as,%} m.
an axe or crow for breaking stones; ({%am%}), n. splitting
stones or rocks. {%—Aśma-didyu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
throwing rocks or thunderbolts; (Sāy.) one who has
obtained a weapon, having adamantine weapons.
{%—Aśman-maya, as, ī, am,%} Ved. made of stone.
{%—Aśman-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. of stone, stony.
{%—Aśma-puṣpa, am,%} n. benzoin (styrax). {%—Aśma-%}
{%bhāla, am,%} n. a mortar of stone or iron. {%—Aśma-%}
{%bhid, t,%} m. the plant Coleus Scutellarioides, supposed
to dissolve stone in the bladder. {%—Aśma-bheda%} or
{%aśma-bhedaka, as,%} m. the same. {%—Aśma-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} made or consisting of stone, stony. {%—Aśma-%}
{%yoni, is,%} m. an emerald. {%—Aśma-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
stony, of stone. {%—Aśma-varman, a,%} n., Ved. a wall
or shield of stone. {%—Aśma-vraja, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
included in rocks. {%—Aśma-sāra, as, am,%} m. n. iron;
sapphire. {%—Aśmasāra-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or
consisting of iron. {%—Aśma-hanman, a,%} n., Ved. a
stroke of the thunderbolt. {%—Aśmāsya (˚man-ās˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a stone-mouth or stone-source,
i. e. flowing from a rock. {%—Aśmottha (˚man-ut˚),%}
{%am,%} n. asphalt, bitumen.
<LEND>

<L>7258<pc>0100-c<k1>aSmara<k2>aSmara
{%Aśmara, as, ā, am,%}¦ stony, rocky, appertaining to
stone or rock; ({%ī%}), f. strangury, stone or gravel (the
disease). {%—Aśmarī-ghna, as,%} m., N. of the tree
Cratæva Roxburghii R. Br., used as a lithontriptic.
{%—Aśmarī-bhedana, am,%} n. a lithontriptic. {%—Aśma-%}
{%rī-hara, as,%} m., N. of the tree Pentaptera Arjuna,
used as a lithontriptic.
<LEND>

<L>7259<pc>0100-c<k1>aSmIra<k2>aSmIra
{%Aśmīra, as, am,%}¦ m. n. stone or gravel (the disease).
<LEND>

<L>7260<pc>0100-c<k1>aSmanta<k2>aSmanta
{#aSmanta#}¦ {%aśmanta, am,%} n. (fr. 2. {%aśman ?%}), a
fire-place; a field, a plain; death; {%(as, ā, am),%} un-
auspicious, unlucky; unbounded, unlimited; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a Marut; [with this word compare Gr. <lang n="greek">κάμινος</lang>
and Lat. <nsi>caminus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>7261<pc>0100-c<k1>aSmantaka<k2>aSmantaka
{%Aśmantaka, am,%}¦ n. a fire-place; a shade for a
lamp; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant, from the fibres of
which a Brāhman's girdle may be made.
<LEND>

<L>7262<pc>0100-c<k1>aSra<k2>aSra<h>1
{#aSra#} 1¦. {%aśra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś,%} wrongly
spelt {%asra%}), a corner [cf. {%aśri%}].
<LEND>

<L>7263<pc>0100-c<k1>aSra<k2>aSra<h>2
{#aSra#} 2¦. {%aśra, am,%} n. {%= aśru,%} a tear, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>7264<pc>0100-c<k1>aSrAya<k2>aSrAya
{%Aśrāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%aśrāyate, -yitum,%} to shed tears.
<LEND>

<L>7265<pc>0100-c<k1>aSrin<k2>aSrin
{%Aśrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having tears, in tears.
<LEND>

<L>7266<pc>0100-c<k1>aSra<k2>aSra<h>3
{#aSra#} 3¦. {%aśra, am,%} n. {%= asra,%} blood, q. v.
{%—Aśra-pa, as,%} m. fiend, a cannibal, ‘a blood-drinker.’
<LEND>

<L>7267<pc>0100-c<k1>aSradDa<k2>aSradDa
{#aSradDa#}¦ {%a-śraddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dhā%} with
{%śrad%}), not trusting in (with loc. c.); unbelieving;
({%ā%}), f. want of trust, unbelief.
<LEND>

<L>7268<pc>0100-c<k1>aSraddaDAna<k2>aSraddaDAna
{%A-śraddadhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ unbelieving, incre-
dulous, having no faith.
<LEND>

<L>7269<pc>0100-c<k1>aSradDeya<k2>aSradDeya
{%A-śraddheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be believed, in-
credible.
<LEND>

<L>7270<pc>0100-c<k1>aSrAdDa<k2>aSrAdDa
{%A-śrāddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ not performing funeral
rites, not entitled to them, not belonging or relating
to them; ({%as%}), m. non-performance of funeral rites.
{%—A-śrāddha-bhojin, ī, inī, i,%} one who has taken
the vow not to eat during the performance of the
Śrāddha ceremonies.
<LEND>
[Page0101-a+ 71]

<L>7271<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrama<k2>aSrama
{#aSrama#}¦ {%a-śrama, as,%} m. (rt. {%śram%}), freedom
from fatigue, freshness; absence of toil, laziness;
({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. indefatigable.
<LEND>

<L>7272<pc>0101-a<k1>aSramaRa<k2>aSramaRa
{%A-śramaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. indefatigable; ({%as%}),
m. one who is not an ascetic or Buddhist mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>7273<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrAnta<k2>aSrAnta
{%A-śrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ untired, unwearied, eternal,
continual; ({%am%}), ind. unweariedly, continually, unin-
terruptedly.
<LEND>

<L>7274<pc>0101-a<k1>aSravaRa<k2>aSravaRa
{#aSravaRa#}¦ {%a-śravaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%śru%}), loss of
hearing, deafness.
<LEND>

<L>7275<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrAvya<k2>aSrAvya
{%A-śrāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be heard, unfit to be
heard, not to be spoken of.
<LEND>

<L>7276<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrAtas<k2>aSrAtas
{#aSrAtas#}¦ {%a-śrātas,%} ind. (rt. {%śrā%}), Ved. in
an uncooked manner, raw.
<LEND>

<L>7277<pc>0101-a<k1>aSri<k2>aSri
{#aSri#}¦ {%aśri, is,%} or {%aśrī,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś?%}),
the sharp side of anything, a corner, angle of a room
or house; the edge of a sword [cf. Lat. <nsi>acies, acer;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>assmu˚</nsi>]. {%—Aśri-mat, ān, atī, at,%} cornered.
<LEND>

<L>7278<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrita<k2>aSrita
{#aSrita#}¦ {%a-śrita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unap-
proached, difficult of access; not stopping (?).
<LEND>

<L>7279<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrin<k2>aSrin
{#aSrin#}¦ {%aśrin.%} See under 2. {%aśra.%}
<LEND>

<L>7280<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrIka<k2>aSrIka
{#aSrIka#}¦ {%a-śrīka, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%śrī,%} q. v.),
unlucky, unpropitious.
<LEND>

<L>7281<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrImat<k2>aSrImat
{%A-śrīmat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ unfortunate, inglorious.
<LEND>

<L>7282<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrIra<k2>aSrIra
{%A-śrīra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. unpleasant, ugly.
<LEND>

<L>7283<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrIla<k2>aSrIla
{%A-śrīla, as, ā, am,%}¦ unprosperous, unlucky.
<LEND>

<L>7284<pc>0101-a<k1>aSlIka<k2>aSlIka
{%A-ślīka, as, ā, am%}¦ ({%ślī%} substituted for {%śrī%}), un-
lucky, unpropitious.
<LEND>

<L>7285<pc>0101-a<k1>aSlIla<k2>aSlIla
{%A-ślīla, as, ā, am,%}¦ unpleasant, ugly; coarse, vul-
gar; abusive, blackguard; ({%am%}), n. rustic language,
untruth, low abuse.
<LEND>

<L>7286<pc>0101-a<k1>aSru<k2>aSru
{#aSru#}¦ {%aśru, u,%} n. a tear [supposed to stand
for {%daśru%} fr. rt. {%daṃś;%} cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δάκρυ</lang> Lat. <nsi>lacryma</nsi>
for <nsi>dacryma;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>tagrs,</nsi> Them. <nsi>tagra;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>tear;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>Zähre;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>aszara</nsi>]. {%—Aśru-kalā,%}
f. a tear-drop. {%—Aśru-nālī,%} f. Fistula Lachrymalis.
{%—Aśru-paripūrṇākṣa(˚ṇa-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} whose
eyes are filled with tears. {%—Aśru-paripluta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} bathed in tears. {%—Aśru-pāta, as,%} m. flow of
tears. {%—Aśru-pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%} filled with tears.
{%—Aśru-pūrṇākula (˚ṇa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} troubled
and filled with tears. {%—Aśru-pūrṇākṣa(˚ṇa-ak˚),%}
{%as, ī, am,%} whose eyes are filled with tears. {%—Aśru-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} having tears on the face. {%—Aśru-%}
{%locana, as, ā, am,%} having tears in the eyes. {%—Aśrū-%}
{%pahata (˚ru-up˚), as, ā, am,%} affected by tears.
<LEND>

<L>7287<pc>0101-a<k1>aSruta<k2>aSruta
{#aSruta#}¦ {%a-śruta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%śru%}), unheard,
inaudible; contrary to the Vedas; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
son of Kṛṣṇa, also of Dyutimat. {%—Aśruta-vat,%} ind.
as if it were not heard. {%—Aśruta-vraṇa, as,%} m., N.
of a man.
<LEND>

<L>7288<pc>0101-a<k1>aSruti<k2>aSruti
{%A-śruti, is,%}¦ f. not hearing, forgetfulness; not being
directed by the Vedas. {%—A-śruti-dhara, as, ā, am,%}
not striking the hearing; not knowing the Veda.
<LEND>

<L>7289<pc>0101-a<k1>aSreyas<k2>aSreyas
{#aSreyas#}¦ {%a-śreyas, ān, asī, as,%} not the better,
inferior, worse; worthless, useless, unprofitable, bad;
({%as%}), n. mischief, unhappiness.
<LEND>

<L>7290<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrezWa<k2>aSrezWa
{%A-śreṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ not the best, inferior,
worse; bad, vile.
<LEND>

<L>7291<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrezman<k2>aSrezman
{#aSrezman#}¦ {%a-śreṣman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. without
bands (?).
<LEND>

<L>7292<pc>0101-a<k1>aSrotriya<k2>aSrotriya
{#aSrotriya#}¦ {%a-śrotriya, as,%} m. a Brāhman
who has not read the Vedas; not a theologian.
<LEND>

<L>7293<pc>0101-a<k1>aSlAGA<k2>aSlAGA
{#aSlAGA#}¦ {%a-ślāghā,%} f. (rt. {%ślāgh%}), absence of
self-applause, modesty, reserve.
<LEND>

<L>7294<pc>0101-a<k1>aSlAGya<k2>aSlAGya
{%A-ślāghya%}¦ or {%a-ślāghanīya, as, ā, am,%} unde-
serving of honour or praise, worthless; base, mean.
<LEND>

<L>7295<pc>0101-a<k1>aSlezA<k2>aSlezA
{#aSlezA#}¦ {%a-śleṣā,%} f. (rt. {%śliṣ%}), the ninth
Nakṣatra or lunar mansion, containing five stars;
disunion, disjunction. {%—Aśleṣā-bhava, as,%} or {%aśle-%}
{%ṣā-bhū, ūs,%} m. a N. of Ketu, i. e. the descending
[Page0101-b+ 80]
node or dragon's tail; (as formed of the lower ex-
tremities of the Daitya Saiṃhika, who was cut in two
by Viṣṇu at the churning of the ocean.)
<LEND>

<L>7296<pc>0101-b<k1>aSlona<k2>aSlona
{#aSlona#}¦ {%a-ślona, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not lame,
not crippled.
<LEND>

<L>7297<pc>0101-b<k1>aSva<k2>aSva<h>1
{#aSva#} 1¦. {%aśva, as,%} m. (rt. 1. {%aś?%}), a horse,
especially a stallion; the number ‘seven’ (that being
the number of the horses of the sun); a race of men
horse-like in strength; N. of a son of Citraka, also
of a Dānava; ({%ā%}), f. a mare; ({%au%}), du. a horse and
a mare [cf. Zend <nsi>aśpa;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>equus;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἵππος</lang>
Lith. <nsi>aszwa;</nsi> Old Sax. <nsi>ehuscalc</nsi>]. {%—Aśva-kandikā,%}
f., N. of the plant Physalis Flexuosa. {%—Aśva-karṇa, as,%}
m. the ear of a horse; N. of the tree Vatica Robusta
W. and A., so called from the shape of its leaves;
a term in surgery for a particular fracture of the
bones; N. of a mountain. {%—Aśva-karṇaka, as,%} m. =
the preceding in all but its last sense. {%—Aśva-kuṭī,%} f.
a stable for horses. {%—Aśva-kuśala%} or {%aśva-kovida,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} skilled in horses. {%—Aśva-kranda, as,%}
m., N. of a bird. {%—Aśva-khura, as,%} m. a horse's
hoof; a perfume, apparently a dried shell-fish; ({%ā%} or
{%ī%}), f. the plant Clitoria Ternatea Lin. {%—Aśva-gati,%}
{%is,%} f. the pace of a horse; N. of a metre containing
four verses of sixteen syllables each. {%—Aśva-gandhā,%}
f. the plant Physalis Flexuosa Lin. {%—Aśva-goyuga,%}
{%am,%} n. a pair of horses. {%—Aśva-goṣṭha, am,%} n. a
stable. {%—Aśva-grīva, as,%} m. ‘horse-neck,’ N. of a
demon, a foe of Viṣṇu, more commonly called Haya-
grīva. {%—Aśva-ghāma, as,%} m., N. of a place. {%—Aśva-%}
{%ghāsa, as,%} m. pasture for horses. {%—Aśva-ghoṣa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist. {%—Aśva-ghna, as,%} m.
‘horse-bane,’ N. of a kind of Oleander, Nerium
Odorum Ait. {%—Aśva-calana-śālā,%} f. a riding-house.
{%—Aśva-cikitsaka, as,%} m. a farrier, a veterinary sur-
geon. {%—Aśva-cikitsā,%} f. farriery. {%—Aśva-jaghana,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of centaur, a being with lower limbs like
those of a horse. {%—Aśva-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. gaining
horses by conquest; ({%t%}), m., N. of a Buddhist
Bhikṣu. {%—Aśva-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place of
pilgrimage near Kānyakubja on the Gaṅgā. {%—Aśva-%}
{%da, as, ā, am,%} giving horses. {%—Aśva-daṃṣṭrā,%} f.
the plant Tribulus Lanuginosus Lin. {%—Aśva-dā, ās,%}
m., Ved. or {%aśva-dāvan, ā,%} m., Ved. giving horses.
{%—Aśva-dūta, as,%} m. a riding messenger. {%—Aśva-%}
{%nadī,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Aśva-nāya, as,%} m. a horse-
herd, i. e. one who has the charge of a drove of
grazing horses. {%—Aśva-nibandhika, as,%} m. lit. ‘a
horse-fastener,’ a groom. {%—Aśva-nirṇij, k, k, k,%} Ved.
decorated or embellished with horses. {%—Aśva-pa, as,%}
m., Ved. a groom. {%—Aśva-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord
of horses; N. of several persons, of a king of Madra
and father of Sāvitrī; and of an Asura. {%—Aśva-%}
{%parṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having horses for wings.
{%—Aśva-pastya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having horses for
(its) home or seat or source, consisting in horses (?),
depending on horses (?). {%—Aśva-pāda, as, ā, am,%}
horse-footed. {%—Aśva-pāla, as,%} m. a groom. {%—Aśva-%}
{%pucchī,%} f. the plant Glycine Debilis Ait. {%—Aśva-%}
{%pṛṣṭha, am,%} n. horseback. {%—Aśva-peśas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. decorated or embellished with horses.
{%—Aśva-baḍava%} or {%aśva-vaḍava, am,%} n. horses.
and mares; ({%au%}), m. du. a horse and a mare.
{%—Aśva-bandha, as,%} m. lit. ‘a horse-fastener,’ a
groom, an ostler. {%—Aśva-bandhana, am,%} n. fasten-
ing of horses; ({%as, ī, am%}), used for fastening horses.
{%—Aśva-balā,%} f., N. of a vegetable. {%—Aśva-bāla%} or
{%aśva-vāla, as,%} m. tail or hair of a horse; a kind
of reed, Saccharum Spontaneum Lin. {%—Aśva-bāhu,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of a son of Citraka. {%—Aśva-budhna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. based on horses, having its origin in
horses, standing on horses, i. e. on a carriage drawn
by horses. {%—Aśva-budhya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. based
on horses, having its origin in horses (as wealth),
distinguished by horses. {%—Aśva-bhā,%} f. lightning.
{%—Aśva-mahiṣikā,%} f. the natural enmity of a
horse and a buffalo. {%—Aśva-māra%} or {%aśva-māraka,%}
{%as,%} or {%aśva-hantṛ, tā,%} m. ‘horse-destroying,’ a
kind of Oleander, Nerium Odorum. {%—Aśva-māla,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of serpent. {%—Aśvam-iṣṭi, is, is, i,%}
[Page0101-c+ 81]
Ved. seeking or wishing for horses; procuring
horses, an epithet of Agni; (Sāy.) whose rites are
pervasive, or who desires quick worship. {%—Aśva-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} having the head or countenance
of a horse; ({%as%}), m. a Kinnara or celestial chorister
(so represented); according to others, a kind of
demi-god distinct from the preceding; N. of a pe-
culiar race of people. {%—Aśva-muc, k,%} m. a horse-
stealer. {%—Aśva-medha, as,%} m. the horse-sacrifice;
(a celebrated ceremony, the antiquity of which
reaches back to the Vedic period. For example,
hymns 162 and 163 in the first Maṇḍala of the
Ṛg-veda were used at this sacrifice. In later times
its efficacy was so exaggerated, that a hundred such
sacrifices entitled the sacrificer to displace Indra from
the dominion of Svarga; kings who engaged in it
spent enormous sums in gifts to the Brāhmans. It
is said that the horse was sometimes not immolated,
but kept bound during the ceremony); N. of a son of
Bharata. {%—Aśvamedha-kāṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of the
thirteenth book of the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Aśva-%}
{%medha-datta, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Aśvamedhika%}
or {%aśvamedhīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to the horse-
sacrifice; ({%as%}), m. a horse fit for the sacrifice, called
Aśva-medha. {%—Aśva-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. harnessing
horses; having horses put to (as a carriage); ({%k%}), f.,
N. of a constellation, the head of Aries; the first
lunar mansion; m. the month Āśvina (Sept. — Oct.);
({%k, k, k%}), born under the constellation Aśvayuj. {%—A-%}
{%śva-yuja, as,%} m. the month Āśvina. {%—Aśva-yūpa,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. the post to which the sacrificial horse
was bound. {%—Aśva-yoga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. causing
the yoking of horses, joining or reaching as quickly
as horses. {%—Aśva-rakṣa, as,%} m. the keeper or rider
of a horse, a groom. {%—Aśva-ratha, as,%} m. a carriage
drawn by horses; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Aśva-%}
{%rādhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. furnishing horses. {%—Aśva-%}
{%rodhaka, as,%} m., N. of the plant Nerium Odorum
Ait. {%—Aśva-lalita,%} N. of a species of the Vikṛti
metre. {%—Aśva-lālā,%} f. a kind of snake. {%—Aśva-%}
{%loman, ā,%} m. horse-hair; a kind of snake. {%—Aśva-%}
{%vaktra, as,%} m. a Kinnara or Gandharba. {%—Aśva-%}
{%vaḍava, am,%} n. a stud of horses and mares;
({%au%}), m. du. a horse and a mare; ({%ās%}), m. horses
and mares, see {%aśva-baḍava.%} — 1. {%aśva-vat,%} ind. like
a horse. {%—2. aśva-vat,%} or Ved. {%aśvā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessed of horses, consisting of horses. {%—Aśva-%}
{%vadana, as,%} m., N. of a people. {%—Aśva-vaha, as,%}
m. a horseman. {%—Aśva-vāra%} or {%aśva-vāla, as,%} m.
a horseman, a groom. {%—Aśva-vāraka, as,%} m. a
horseman, a groom. {%—Aśva-vāraṇa, as,%} m., N. of
the Bos Gavæus. {%—Aśva-vāha%} or {%aśva-vāhaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a horseman. {%—Aśva-vikrayin, ī,%} m. a
horse-dealer. {%—Aśva-vid, t, t, t,%} skilled in taming
horses, an epithet of Nala; a jockey; Ved. procuring
horses. {%—Aśva-vṛṣa, as,%} m., Ved. a stallion.
{%—Aśva-vaidya, as,%} m. a farrier, a veterinary surgeon.
{%—Aśva-śaka, am,%} n., Ved. excrements of a horse.
{%—Aśva-śakṛt, t,%} n. excrements of a horse, horse-
dung; N. of a river. {%—Aśva-śaṅku, us,%} m., N. of
a Dānava. {%—Aśva-śālā,%} f. a stable. {%—Aśva-śāva, as,%}
m. a foal, a colt. {%—Aśva-śāstra, am,%} n. a manual
or text-book of veterinary science. {%—Aśva-śiras,%}
{%as,%} n. a horse's head; ({%ās, ās, as%}), having the head
of a horse, an epithet of Nārāyaṇa; ({%ās%}), m., N. of
a Dānava. {%—Aśva-śṛgālikā,%} f. the natural enmity
between the horse and the jackal. {%—Aśva-ścandra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. causing joy (by means of) horses;
brilliant with horses. {%—Aśva-ṣaṅgava, am,%} n. a set
or team of six horses. {%—Aśva-sani, is, is, i,%} Ved. or
{%aśva-sā%} or {%aśva-ṣā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. gaining or
procuring horses. {%—Aśva-sāda, as,%} or {%aśva-sādin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a horseman, a rider, a horse-soldier. {%—Aśva-%}
{%sārathya, am,%} n. management of horses and cars,
horsemanship and driving, coachmanship, charioteer-
ship. {%—Aśva-sūkti, is,%} m., N. of an author of Vedic
hymns. {%—Aśva-sūnṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. praised
sincerely for (the gift of) horses; whose praise for
(giving) horses is agreeable and true. {%—Aśva-sena,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Nāga. {%—Aśvasena-nṛpa-nandana,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king and saint, also Sanatkumāra.
[Page0102-a+ 81]
{%—Aśvastomīya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. relating to the
praise of the sacrificial horse. {%—Aśva-sthāna, am,%}
n. a stable or stall for horses; ({%as, ā, am%}),
born in a stable. {%—Aśva-haya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
driving or spurring a horse. {%—Aśva-hāraka, as,%}
m. a horse-stealer. {%—Aśva-hṛdaya, am,%} n. horse-
manship. {%—Aśvākṣa (˚va-ak˚), as,%} m., N. of
a plant. {%—Aśvājanī (˚va-aj˚),%} f. a whip. {%—Aśva-%}
{%dhika (˚va-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} strong in cavalry,
superior in horses. {%—Aśvādhyakṣa (˚va-adh˚), as,%}
m. a guardian of horses. {%—Aśvā-magha, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. rich in horses. {%—Aśvāyur-veda (˚va-āy˚), as,%}
m. veterinary science. {%—Aśvāri (˚va-ari), is,%} m. a
buffalo. {%—Aśvārūḍha (˚va-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} mounted,
sitting on horseback. {%—Aśvāroha (˚va-ā˚), as, ā, am,%}
riding or mounted on a horse; ({%as%}), m. a horseman;
({%ā%}), f., N. of the plant Aśvagandhā. {%—Aśvārohaka%}
{%(˚va-ār˚), as,%} m., N. of the plant Aśvagandhā.
{%—Aśvārohin (˚va-ār˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} mounted or
riding on horseback. {%—Aśvā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} fur-
nished with horses. {%—Aśvāvarohaka (˚va-av˚), as,%}
m., N. of the plant Aśvagandhā. {%—Aśveṣita (˚va-%}
{%iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} hurried along by horse. {%—Aśvorasa%}
{%(˚va-ur˚), as, ī, am,%} broad-chested like a horse.
<LEND>

<L>7298<pc>0102-a<k1>aSva<k2>aSva<h>2
2. {%aśva,%}¦ nom. P. {%aśvati,%} to behave like a horse.
<LEND>

<L>7299<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvaka<k2>aSvaka
{%Aśvaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ horse-like, acting like a horse,
&c.; ({%as%}), m. a small horse; a bad horse, a hack; a
stray horse, one whose owner is not known; any horse.
<LEND>

<L>7300<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvakinI<k2>aSvakinI
{%Aśvakinī,%}¦ f. the first Nakṣatra or lunar mansion.
<LEND>

<L>7301<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvatara<k2>aSvatara
{%Aśvatara, as, ā, am,%}¦ swift, speedy; ({%as, ī%}), m.
f. a mule; ({%as%}), m. a male calf; N. of a Gandharva;
one of the chiefs of the Nāgas or serpent-race, inha-
biting the regions under the earth.
<LEND>

<L>7302<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvatTa<k2>aSvatTa
{%Aśvattha, as,%}¦ m. the holy fig tree, Ficus Religiosa
L. (under which horses stand; {%ttha = stha%}); Ved. a
vessel made of its wood; N. of another tree ({%= garda-%}
{%bhāṇḍa%}); the fruit of the Ficus Religiosa; the time at
which it bears; an epithet of the sun; N. of a man;
N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. day of full moon in the month
Āśvina, in which month the fruits of the Ficus Re-
ligiosa generally become ripe; day of full moon; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a plant. {%—Aśvattha-kuṇa, as,%} m. the fruit
season of the holy fig tree. {%—Aśvattha-bheda, as,%}
m., N. of a tree, Bignonia Suaveolens.
<LEND>

<L>7303<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvatTaka<k2>aSvatTaka
{%Aśvatthaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given or to be done
&c. when the Aśvattha tree bears; ({%am%}), n. the pe-
tals of the Arabian jasmine.
<LEND>

<L>7304<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvatTAman<k2>aSvatTAman
{%Aśvatthāman, ā,%}¦ m. ({%tthāman%} for {%sthāman ?%}),
N. of a saint and warrior, the son of Droṇa and one
of the chiefs of the Kurus.
<LEND>

<L>7305<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvatTikA<k2>aSvatTikA
{%Aśvatthikā,%}¦ f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>7306<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvaya<k2>aSvaya
{%Aśvaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%aśvayati, -yitum,%} to wish for
horses.
<LEND>

<L>7307<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvayA<k2>aSvayA
{%Aśvayā,%}¦ f., Ved. desire to get horses.
<LEND>

<L>7308<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvayu<k2>aSvayu
{%Aśvayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desiring horses.
<LEND>

<L>7309<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvala<k2>aSvala
{%Aśvala, as,%}¦ m., N. of the Hotṛ-priest of Janaka,
king of Videha.
<LEND>

<L>7310<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvasya<k2>aSvasya
{%Aśvasya,%}¦ nom. P. {%aśvasyati, -yitum,%} to wish for
the stallion.
<LEND>

<L>7311<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvAya<k2>aSvAya
{%Aśvāya,%}¦ nom. P. {%aśvāyati, -yitum,%} Ved. to wish
for horses.
<LEND>

<L>7312<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvika<k2>aSvika
{%Aśvika, as, ī, am,%}¦ drawn by horses, carried by
horses.
<LEND>

<L>7313<pc>0102-a<k1>aSvin<k2>aSvin
{%Aśvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. possessed of horses, consist-
ing of horses; ({%ī%}), m. a cavalier, a horse-tamer;
({%nau%}), m. du. the two charioteers; N. of two divini-
ties, who appear in the sky before the dawn in a
golden carriage drawn by horses or birds; they bring
treasures to men and avert misfortune and sickness;
in later times they are considered as the physicians of
Svarga or heaven; (in astronomy) they are the twins
of the zodiac; ({%inī%}), f. a nymph, considered in later
times as the mother of the Aśvins; she was the wife of
Sūrya or the sun, who concealed herself in the form of
a mare; (in astronomy) the head of Aries or the first
of the twenty-eight Nakṣatras or lunar mansions;
({%i%}), n., Ved. richness in horses. {%—Aśvi-devatāka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} whose divinities are the Aśvins. {%—Aśvinī-%}
{%kumāra%} or {%aśvinī-putra%} or {%aśvinī-suta, au,%} m. du.
the twin sons of Sañjñā, the sun's wife, in the form
of Aśvinī, commonly called the Aśvins. {%—Aśvi-mat, %}
[Page0102-b+ 77]
{%ān, atī, at,%} (any Mantra &c.) containing the word
Aśvin. {%—Aśvi-sālokya, am,%} n. the heaven or station
of the Aśvins, to which the giver of a horse is raised.
<LEND>

<L>7314<pc>0102-b<k1>aSviya<k2>aSviya
{%Aśviya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. referring to horses; ({%ā%}),
Ved. neut. pl. a troop of horses.
<LEND>

<L>7315<pc>0102-b<k1>aSvIna<k2>aSvIna
{%Aśvīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ distant a day's journey for a
horse; more usually {%Āśvīna.%}
<LEND>

<L>7316<pc>0102-b<k1>aSvIya<k2>aSvIya
{%Aśvīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
horse, conducive to horses; ({%am%}), n. a number of
horses.
<LEND>

<L>7317<pc>0102-b<k1>aSvya<k2>aSvya
{%Aśvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to or coming
from horses; consisting of horses; ({%am%}), n., Ved. a
number of horses, possession of horses; ({%as%}), m., N.
of Vaśa, the son of Aśva.
<LEND>

<L>7318<pc>0102-b<k1>aSvanta<k2>aSvanta
{#aSvanta#}¦ {%aśvanta, am,%} n. (connected with
{%aśmanta,%} q. v.), death; a field; a fire-place; ter-
mination, limit; ({%as, ā, am%}), unlucky, inauspicious,
unbounded, unlimited. [In the first sense {%aśvanta%}
may be for {%asu-anta,%} ‘end of life.’]
<LEND>

<L>7319<pc>0102-b<k1>aSvastana<k2>aSvastana
{#aSvastana#}¦ {%a-śvastana, as, ī, am,%} or {%a-śvasta-%}
{%nika, as, ā, am,%} of to-day, not of or not for to-mor-
row; one who makes no provision for to-morrow.
{%—A-śvastana-vid, t, t, t,%} ignorant of the future.
<LEND>

<L>7320<pc>0102-b<k1>az<k2>az
{#az#}¦ {%aṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%aṣati, -te, -ṣitum,%}
to go or move; to take or receive; to
shine.
<LEND>

<L>7321<pc>0102-b<k1>azaqakzIRa<k2>azaqakzIRa
{#azaqakzIRa#}¦ {%aṣaḍakṣīṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%a,%}
{%ṣaṣ, akṣi%}), anything not seen by six eyes, i. e.
known or determined by two persons to the ex-
clusion of a third; a secret.
<LEND>

<L>7322<pc>0102-b<k1>azatara<k2>azatara
{#azatara#}¦ {%aṣatara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (fr. a
positive, which is not preserved, but may be referred
to rt. 1. {%aś%}), more accessible or acceptable.
<LEND>

<L>7323<pc>0102-b<k1>azAQa<k2>azAQa
{#azAQa#}¦ {%a-ṣāḍha,%} or Ved. {%a-ṣāḷha, as, ā, am,%}
not to be overcome, invincible; born under the
constellation Aṣāḍhā; ({%as%}), m. the month Aṣāḍha
(or Āṣāḍha), commencing with the sun's entrance
into Gemini (June-July); a staff made of the wood
of Palāśa, carried by a student during the performance
of certain vows; N. of a teacher; N. of the Malaya
mountain; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a sacred brick; N. of a
constellation; pl. the eighteenth and nineteenth or
twentieth and twenty-first lunar mansions.
<LEND>

<L>7324<pc>0102-b<k1>azAQaka<k2>azAQaka
{%Aṣāḍhaka, as,%}¦ m. the month Aṣāḍha (or
Āṣāḍha).
<LEND>

<L>7325<pc>0102-b<k1>azwan<k2>azwan
{#azwan#}¦ {%aṣṭan, a%} or {%au%} (but {%aṣṭau%} is more
common for nom., acc., and voc. cases), pl. eight
[cf. Lat. <nsi>octo;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀκτώ</lang> Goth. <nsi>ahtau;</nsi> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>acht;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>eight;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>aszt˚uni;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>osmj</nsi>]; in
comp. with other numerals often {%aṣṭā,%} e. g. {%aṣṭā-%}
{%daśan,%} eighteen; {%aṣṭādaśa, as, ī, am,%} the eigh-
teenth, divided into eighteen parts; {%aṣṭādaśa-dhā,%}
eighteen-fold; {%aṣṭā-viṃśati,%} twenty-eight; {%aṣṭā-%}
{%viṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the twenty-eighth, divided in-
to twenty-eight parts; {%aṣṭātriṃśa, as, ī, am,%}
the thirty-eighth, containing thirty-eight; {%aṣṭā-%}
{%catvāriṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the forty-eighth. {%—Aṣṭa-%}
{%karṇa, as, ā, am,%} one who has the number eight
as a mark burnt in his ear; ({%as%}), m. eight-eared,
an epithet of Brahmā, who is supposed to have four
heads; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Aṣṭa-kṛtvas,%} ind.
eight times. {%—Aṣṭa-koṇa, as,%} m. an octagon.
{%—Aṣṭa-khaṇḍa, as,%} m. title of a collection of
several sections of the Ṛg-veda. {%—Aṣṭa-gava, am,%}
n. a flock of eight cows. {%—Aṣṭa-gādh (?), t,%} m. a
fabulous animal (called Śarabha), supposed to have
eight legs; a spider (?). {%—Aṣṭa-guṇa, as, ā, am,%}
eight-fold; ({%am%}), n. the eight qualities. {%—Aṣṭa-%}
{%guṇāśraya (˚ṇa-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} endowed with the
eight qualities, epithet of a king. {%—Aṣṭa-tva, am,%}
n. condition of eight. {%—Aṣṭa-daṃṣṭra, as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Virūpa, author of a hymn of the
Ṛg-veda; N. of a Dānava. {%—Aṣṭa-dala,%} an octa-
gon. {%—Aṣṭa-dik-pāla, ās,%} m. pl. the regents of
the cardinal points, as Indra of the East, Agni or
Vahni of the S. E., Yama of the South, Nairṛta of
the S. W., Varuṇa of the West, Marut of the N. W.,
[Page0102-c+ 81]
Kuvera of the North, and Īśa or Śiva of the N. E.
{%—Aṣṭa-diś, k,%} f. the eight cardinal points of the
compass collectively. {%—Aṣṭa-dhā,%} ind. eight-fold,
eight times, in eight parts or sections. {%—Aṣṭa-%}
{%dhātu, u,%} n. the eight metals collectively, as gold,
silver, copper, tin, lead, brass, iron, and steel. {%—Aṣṭa-%}
{%pada, as,%} m. a Vedic metre of eight Padas. {%—Aṣṭa-%}
{%pād, t, t, t,%} having eight legs; ({%t%}), m. a spider;
a fabulous animal with eight legs. {%—Aṣṭa-pāda, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having eight legs; ({%as%}), m. a kind of spider
with a small body and long legs. {%—Aṣṭa-pādikā,%}
f., N. of the plant Vallaris Dichotomus Wall. {%—Aṣṭa-%}
{%maṅgala, as,%} m. a horse with a white face, tail,
mane, breast, and hoofs; ({%am%}), n. a collection of
eight lucky things to be assembled on certain occa-
sions (such as a coronation &c.), e. g. a lion, a bull, an
elephant, a water-jar, a fan, a flag, a trumpet, and a
lamp; or, according to others, a Brāhman, a cow,
fire, gold, ghee, the sun, water, and a king. {%—Aṣṭa-%}
{%māna, am,%} n. a measure, one kuḍava. {%—Aṣṭa-%}
{%māsika, as, ā, am,%} occurring once in eight months.
{%—Aṣṭa-mūrti, is,%} m. eight-formed, an epithet of
Śiva (as identified with the five elements, mind,
egotism, and matter; or, according to the opening of
the Śakuntalā, with the five elements, the sun and
moon and the sacrificing priest). {%—Aṣṭamūrti-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m. possessing eight forms, an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Aṣṭa-ratna, am,%} n. the eight jewels,
title of a collection of eight Ślokas on ethics. {%—Aṣṭa-%}
{%rasāśraya (˚sa-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} endowed or furnished
with the eight rasas or sentiments of poetry. {%—Aṣ-%}
{%ṭarca (˚ṭan-ṛc), as,%} m. a psalm or hymn consisting
of eight verses. {%—Aṣṭa-lohaka, am,%} n. a class of
eight metals, gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, the magnet,
muṇḍaloha (?), and tīkṣṇaloha or steel (?). {%—Aṣṭa-%}
{%varga, as,%} m. a class of three principal medicaments
(mostly the roots of plants from the hills), named
Ṛṣabha, Jīvaka, Medā, Mahāmedā, Ṛddhi, Vṛd-
dhi, Kākolī, and Kṣīrakākolī. {%—Aṣṭa-vidha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} eight-fold, of eight kinds. {%—Aṣṭa-śata,%}
{%am,%} n. eight hundred. {%—Aṣṭa-śravaṇa, as,%} or
{%aṣṭa-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of Brahmā (eight-eared,
see {%aṣṭa-karṇa%}). {%—Aṣṭasāhasrika, as, ā, am,%}
consisting of eight thousand. {%—Aṣṭā-kapāla, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} (an oblation) prepared or offered in eight pans;
({%as%}), m. a sacrifice in which ghee or clarified butter
is offered in eight pans. {%—Aṣṭākṣara (˚ṭan-ak˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} containing eight syllables; ({%as%}), m., N.
of an author. {%—Aṣṭā-gava, am,%} n. a car or wain, one
drawn by eight oxen. {%—Aṣṭāṅga (˚ṭan-aṅ˚), am,%}
n. eight parts of the body with which very profound
obeisance is performed (viz. the hands, breast, fore-
head, eyes, throat, and middle of the back; or the
first four, with the knees and feet; or these six, with
the speech and mind); the eight parts of a court, or
the law, the judge, assessors, scribe, and astrologer,
gold, fire, and water; any whole consisting of eight
parts or members; a die, dice; ({%as, ā, am%}), con-
sisting of eight parts or members. {%—Aṣṭāṅga-%}
{%naya, as,%} m. {%= aṣṭāṅga%}. {%—Aṣṭāṅga-pāta%} or
{%aṣṭāṅga-praṇāma, as,%} m. prostration of the eight
parts of the body as in reverence. {%—Aṣṭāṅga-%}
{%hṛdaya, am,%} n. title of a medicinal work. {%—Aṣ-%}
{%ṭāṅgārghya (˚ga-ar˚), as,%} m. an offering of eight
articles, water, milk, kuśa grass, curds, ghee, rice,
barley, and mustard; or honey, red oleander flow-
ers, and sandal are substituted for the last three.
{%—Aṣṭā-daṃṣṭra = aṣṭa-daṃṣṭra,%} q. v. {%—Aṣ-%}
{%ṭādaśa-bhujā,%} f., N. of the wife of Śiva. {%—Aṣṭā-%}
{%daśāṅga (˚śan-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a decoction of eighteen
ingredients. {%—Aṣṭādhyāyī (˚ṭan-adh˚),%} f. title of
the eleventh Kāṇḍa of the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa, con-
sisting of eight lectures. {%—Aṣṭānavata, as, ī, am,%}
the ninety-eighth. {%—Aṣṭā-pada, as,%} m. a spider;
a worm; a fabulous animal with eight legs, the Śa-
rabha; a wild sort of jasmin; a pin or bolt; the
mountain Kailāsa or abode of Kuvera; ({%as, am%}), m.
n. a kind of chequered cloth or board for drafts, dice,
&c.; gold. {%—Aṣṭā-pada-pattra, am,%} n. gold-leaf;
a sheet of gold. {%—Aṣṭā-pād, t, -padī,%} m. f., Ved.
having eight legs, consisting of eight members; (in
[Page0103-a+ 77]
ritual language) a term for a pregnant animal; ({%padī%}),
f. a wild sort of jasmin. {%—Aṣṭā-pāda, as, ā, am,%}
quartered by eight, having eight for the root. {%—Aṣ-%}
{%ṭā-pādya, as, ā, am,%} eight-fold. {%—Aṣṭāra-cakra-%}
{%vat (˚ṭan-ar˚), ān,%} m. having a wheel with eight
spokes, an epithet of Mañju-śrī, a Jaina saint and
ruler. {%—Aṣṭā-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Bhīma-
ratha. {%—Aṣṭā-vakra, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman, a
son of Kahoḍa. {%—Aṣṭāsra (˚ṭan-as˚), am,%} n. an oc-
tagon. {%—Aṣṭāsraya (˚ṭan-as˚), as, ā, am,%} octan-
gular. {%—Aṣṭāha (˚ṭan-ah˚), as, ā, am,%} lasting eight
days.
<LEND>

<L>7326<pc>0103-a<k1>azwaka<k2>azwaka
{%Aṣṭaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ consisting of eight parts,
eight-fold; one who studies or is acquainted with the
eight books of Pāṇini's grammar or the formulas of
the Veda; ({%as%}), m. the eighth part, e. g. of the Ṛg-
veda; N. of a son of Viśvāmitra; ({%ā%}), f. the eighth
day after full moon; especially the eighth day of
three months, on which the progenitors or manes are
worshipped; worship of the progenitors or manes on
certain days, vegetables, flesh, and cake being seve-
rally offered upon these occasions, and the Brāhmans
feasted; ({%am%}), n. a whole consisting of eight parts,
e. g. the eight sections of Pāṇini's grammar. {%—Aṣ-%}
{%ṭakāṅga (˚ka-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a kind of board or cloth
for playing with dice on, having eight divisions.
<LEND>

<L>7327<pc>0103-a<k1>azwakin<k2>azwakin
{%Aṣṭakin, ī,%}¦ m. one who performs an Aṣṭakā.
<LEND>

<L>7328<pc>0103-a<k1>azwataya<k2>azwataya
{%Aṣṭataya, am,%}¦ n. a conjunction or aggregate of
eight.
<LEND>

<L>7329<pc>0103-a<k1>azwama<k2>azwama
{%Aṣṭama, as, ī, am,%}¦ the eighth; ({%as%}), m. the
eighth part; ({%ī%}), f. (scil. {%rātri%}), the eighth day
(night) in a half-month; N. of the medicinal plant
Kṣīrakākolī, the last of a class of eight medicinal
plants. {%—Aṣṭama-kālika, as, ā, am,%} one who
omitting seven meals partakes only of the eighth.
{%—Aṣṭamāṃśa (˚ma-aṃ˚),%} an eighth part.
<LEND>

<L>7330<pc>0103-a<k1>azwamaka<k2>azwamaka
{%Aṣṭamaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ the eighth.
<LEND>

<L>7331<pc>0103-a<k1>azwamikA<k2>azwamikA
{%Aṣṭamikā,%}¦ f. a śukti or weight of four tolas.
<LEND>

<L>7332<pc>0103-a<k1>azwAtaya<k2>azwAtaya
{%Aṣṭātaya, as, ī, am,%}¦ consisting of eight parts;
({%am%}), n. collection of eight things.
<LEND>

<L>7333<pc>0103-a<k1>azwi<k2>azwi<h>1
1. {%aṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., N. of a metre consisting of sixty-
four syllables.
<LEND>

<L>7334<pc>0103-a<k1>azwin<k2>azwin
{%Aṣṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ consisting of eight members or
syllables.
<LEND>

<L>7335<pc>0103-a<k1>azwi<k2>azwi<h>2
{#azwi#} 2¦. {%aṣṭi, is,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%as%}), Ved. reaching.
<LEND>

<L>7336<pc>0103-a<k1>azwrA<k2>azwrA
{#azwrA#}¦ {%aṣṭrā,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś?%}), Ved. a
prick or goad for driving cattle; (sometimes regarded
as the badge of the agriculturist, as the staff is of the
Brāhman); [cf. Zend <nsi>astrâ;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>akstinas.</nsi>]. {%—Aṣ-%}
{%ṭrā-vin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. obeying the goad.
<LEND>

<L>7337<pc>0103-a<k1>azWi<k2>azWi
{#azWi#}¦ {%aṣṭhi, is,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś?%} connected
with {%aśan%} and {%aśman%}), seed; a kernel, a stone.
<LEND>

<L>7338<pc>0103-a<k1>azWIlA<k2>azWIlA
{%Aṣṭhīlā,%}¦ f. a globular body; a round pebble or
stone; kernel; seed-corn; a globular swelling below
the navel, produced by wind; contusion.
<LEND>

<L>7339<pc>0103-a<k1>azWIlikA<k2>azWIlikA
{%Aṣṭhīlikā,%}¦ f. a kind of abscess; a pebble.
<LEND>

<L>7340<pc>0103-a<k1>azWIvat<k2>azWIvat
{%Aṣṭhī-vat, vān, vat,%}¦ m. n. the knee, knee-bone;
(by native grammarians derived fr. {%asthi.%})
<LEND>

<L>7341<pc>0103-a<k1>as<k2>as<h>1
{#as#} 1¦. {%as,%} cl. 2. P. {%asti,%} (2nd sing. {%asi,%}
Impf. {%āsīt,%} Pot. {%syāt,%} Impv. {%astu,%} 2nd
sing. {%edhi,%} Perf. {%āsa%}), to be, live, exist, be present;
to take place, happen; to belong to, be in the pos-
session of (e. g. {%tasya na kiñcit svam asti,%} there
is no property belonging to him); to fall to the share
of, to happen to any one (with gen.); to abide,
dwell, stay; to turn out, tend towards any result,
prove (with dat.); to be sufficient for (with dat.);
to become: {%na as,%} to be lost, to perish; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἐσ-τί</lang> Lat. <nsi>es-t;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>is-t;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>es-ti;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>jes-tj.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>7342<pc>0103-a<k1>as<k2>as<h>2
{#as#} 2¦. {%as,%} cl. 4. P. {%asyati, āsa, asiṣyati,%}
{%āsthat, asitum,%} to throw, cast, shoot at
(with dat., loc., or gen. of the mark); to drive or
frighten away; to throw away, take away, let go, leave.
<LEND>

<L>7343<pc>0103-a<k1>asana<k2>asana
{%Asana, am,%}¦ n. the act of throwing, &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>7344<pc>0103-a<k1>as<k2>as<h>3
{#as#} 3¦. {%as,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%asati, -te, -situm,%}
to go; to shine; to take.
<LEND>
[Page0103-b+ 67]

<L>7345<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMyat<k2>asaMyat
{#asaMyat#}¦ {%a-saṃyat, an, atī, at%} (rt. {%i%}), Ved.
not entering, not pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>7346<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMyatta<k2>asaMyatta
{#asaMyatta#}¦ {%a-saṃyatta, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%yat%}), Ved.
undisturbed, (various reading for {%a-saṃyata.%})
<LEND>

<L>7347<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMyama<k2>asaMyama
{#asaMyama#}¦ {%a-saṃyama, as,%} m. (rt. {%yam%}), ab-
sence of check or restraint, especially of the senses.
<LEND>

<L>7348<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMyata<k2>asaMyata
{%A-saṃyata, as, ā, am,%}¦ unrestrained, unassailed.
{%—Asaṃyatātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having the
soul uncontrolled.
<LEND>

<L>7349<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMyukta<k2>asaMyukta
{#asaMyukta#}¦ {%a-saṃyukta, am,%} n. (rt. {%yuj%}), non-
combination, hiatus (in Vedic grammar).
<LEND>

<L>7350<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMyoga<k2>asaMyoga
{%A-saṃyoga, as,%}¦ m. absence of union or connec-
tion.
<LEND>

<L>7351<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMyuta<k2>asaMyuta
{#asaMyuta#}¦ {%a-saṃyuta, as,%} m. unmixed, un-
blended; an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>7352<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMrudDa<k2>asaMrudDa
{#asaMrudDa#}¦ {%a-saṃruddha, as, ā, am,%} unob-
structed.
<LEND>

<L>7353<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMlagna<k2>asaMlagna
{#asaMlagna#}¦ {%a-saṃlagna, as, ā, am,%} disjoined,
detached, separate.
<LEND>

<L>7354<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMvatsaraBfta<k2>asaMvatsaraBfta
{#asaMvatsaraBfta#}¦ {%a-saṃvatsara-bhṛta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. not supported a whole year (as a sacred fire).
<LEND>

<L>7355<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMvatsaraBftin<k2>asaMvatsaraBftin
{%A-saṃvatsarabhṛtin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. one who
does not support (a fire) a whole year.
<LEND>

<L>7356<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMvidAna<k2>asaMvidAna
{#asaMvidAna#}¦ {%a-saṃvidāna, as, ā, am,%} ignorant,
unwise; not promising or covenanting.
<LEND>

<L>7357<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMvfta<k2>asaMvfta
{#asaMvfta#}¦ {%a-saṃvṛta, as, ā, am,%} uncovered,
exposed; imperfectly or scarcely covered.
<LEND>

<L>7358<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMvyavahitam<k2>asaMvyavahitam
{#asaMvyavahitam#}¦ {%a-saṃvyavahitam,%} ind. im-
mediately, without interval.
<LEND>

<L>7359<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMSaya<k2>asaMSaya
{#asaMSaya#}¦ {%a-saṃśaya, as,%} m. absence of
doubt; ({%as, ā, am%}), free from doubt, certain. {%—A-%}
{%saṃśayam,%} ind. without doubt, certainly, verily.
<LEND>

<L>7360<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMSrava<k2>asaMSrava
{#asaMSrava#}¦ {%a-saṃśrava, as,%} m. (rt. {%śru%}), the
being out of hearing; ({%e%}), ind. out of the hearing of;
({%as, ā, am%}), out of hearing, inaudible.
<LEND>

<L>7361<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMSrAvam<k2>asaMSrAvam
{%A-saṃśrāvam,%}¦ ind. inaudibly, out of the hearing
of (with gen. of the person).
<LEND>

<L>7362<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMSlizwa<k2>asaMSlizwa
{#asaMSlizwa#}¦ {%a-saṃśliṣṭa, as,%} m. not joined,
not in contact, an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>7363<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMsakta<k2>asaMsakta
{#asaMsakta#}¦ {%a-saṃsakta, as, ā, am,%} not attached
to, not joined together, disunited, indifferent to.
<LEND>

<L>7364<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMsidDa<k2>asaMsidDa
{#asaMsidDa#}¦ {%a-saṃsiddha, as, ā, am,%} unac-
complished, incomplete.
<LEND>

<L>7365<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMsUktagila<k2>asaMsUktagila
{#asaMsUktagila#}¦ {%a-saṃsūkta-gila, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. swallowing whole or without chewing (said of
Rudra's dogs).
<LEND>

<L>7366<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMsfti<k2>asaMsfti
{#asaMsfti#}¦ {%a-saṃsṛti, is,%} f. not returning to
a new course of existence, absorption into the supreme
spirit.
<LEND>

<L>7367<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMsfzwa<k2>asaMsfzwa
{#asaMsfzwa#}¦ {%a-saṃsṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} unmixed
with, separate, not living in common.
<LEND>

<L>7368<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMskfta<k2>asaMskfta
{#asaMskfta#}¦ {%a-saṃskṛta, as, ā, am,%} not perfect,
unpolished, rude, common; uninitiated, not having
gone through the proper rites of caste, state, sex, or
age.
<LEND>

<L>7369<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMstuta<k2>asaMstuta
{#asaMstuta#}¦ {%a-saṃstuta, as, ā, am,%} unknown,
unacquainted, not known as acquaintances; not on
terms of friendship.
<LEND>

<L>7370<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMsTAna<k2>asaMsTAna
{#asaMsTAna#}¦ {%a-saṃsthāna, am,%} n. (rt. {%sthā%}),
absence of cohesion or configuration; disorder, confu-
sion; want, destitution.
<LEND>

<L>7371<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMsTita<k2>asaMsTita
{%A-saṃsthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not arranged or arrayed,
disordered, irregular; not collected; not finished, not
accomplished; not ceasing, not stopping; destitute.
<LEND>

<L>7372<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMsTiti<k2>asaMsTiti
{%A-saṃsthiti, is,%}¦ f. disorder, confusion; want, desti-
tution.
<LEND>

<L>7373<pc>0103-b<k1>asaMhata<k2>asaMhata
{#asaMhata#}¦ {%a-saṃhata, as, ā, am,%} not joined;
[Page0103-c+ 70]
scattered, loose, straggling, uncompressed; ({%am%}), n.
a form of array, loose or open order of troops.
<LEND>

<L>7374<pc>0103-c<k1>asaMhArya<k2>asaMhArya
{#asaMhArya#}¦ {%a-saṃhārya, as, ā, am,%} irresistible,
insuperable.
<LEND>

<L>7375<pc>0103-c<k1>asaMhita<k2>asaMhita
{#asaMhita#}¦ {%a-saṃhita, as, ā, am,%} not included
in the {%Saṃhitā%} of the Veda.
<LEND>

<L>7376<pc>0103-c<k1>asakala<k2>asakala
{#asakala#}¦ {%a-sakala, as, ā, am,%} not all, not
entire, a part.
<LEND>

<L>7377<pc>0103-c<k1>asakft<k2>asakft
{#asakft#}¦ {%a-sakṛt,%} ind. not once, oftener
than once, again and again, repeatedly. {%—Asakṛt-%}
{%samādhi, is,%} m. repeated meditation. {%—Asakṛd-%}
{%garbha-vāsa, as,%} m. repeated birth.
<LEND>

<L>7378<pc>0103-c<k1>asakta<k2>asakta
{#asakta#}¦ {%a-sakta, as, ā, am,%} detached, dis-
united; detached from worldly feelings or passions;
not interested in, unattached to, indifferent to.
<LEND>

<L>7379<pc>0103-c<k1>asakTa<k2>asakTa
{#asakTa#}¦ {%a-saktha, as, ā, am,%} without thighs,
thighless.
<LEND>

<L>7380<pc>0103-c<k1>asakra<k2>asakra
{#asakra#}¦ {%a-sakra, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%saśc%}), Ved. not
ceasing to flow, not drying up; not going elsewhere.
<LEND>

<L>7381<pc>0103-c<k1>asaKi<k2>asaKi
{#asaKi#}¦ {%a-sakhi, ā,%} m. an untrustworthy
friend.
<LEND>

<L>7382<pc>0103-c<k1>asaKin<k2>asaKin
{%A-sakhin, ā,%}¦ m. an enemy, an adversary.
<LEND>

<L>7383<pc>0103-c<k1>asagotra<k2>asagotra
{#asagotra#}¦ {%a-sagotra, as, ā, am,%} of a different
family.
<LEND>

<L>7384<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNkalpa<k2>asaNkalpa
{#asaNkalpa#}¦ {%a-saṅkalpa, as, am,%} m. n. absence
of predetermination, absence of interested purpose,
sincerity.
<LEND>

<L>7385<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNkalpita<k2>asaNkalpita
{%A-saṅkalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not purposed, not re-
solved or determined on.
<LEND>

<L>7386<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNkasuka<k2>asaNkasuka
{#asaNkasuka#}¦ {%a-saṅkasuka, as, ā, am,%} not fickle,
unfluctuating, firm, steady.
<LEND>

<L>7387<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNkIrRa<k2>asaNkIrRa
{#asaNkIrRa#}¦ {%a-saṅkīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} unmixed,
uncompounded, uncollected.
<LEND>

<L>7388<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNkula<k2>asaNkula
{#asaNkula#}¦ {%a-saṅkula, as, ā, am,%} not crowded,
open, clear, broad; ({%as%}), m. a broad road.
<LEND>

<L>7389<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNketa<k2>asaNketa
{#asaNketa#}¦ {%a-saṅketa, as, ā, am,%} not appointed,
not agreed upon.
<LEND>

<L>7390<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNketita<k2>asaNketita
{%A-saṅketita, as, ā, am,%}¦ uninvited.
<LEND>

<L>7391<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNKya<k2>asaNKya
{#asaNKya#}¦ {%a-saṅkhya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%khyā%}),
without number, innumerable, exceedingly numerous.
{%—Asaṅkhya-tā,%} f. or {%asaṅkhya-tva, am,%} n. innu-
merableness, immensity, infinity.
<LEND>

<L>7392<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNKyAta<k2>asaNKyAta
{%A-saṅkhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ uncounted, innumerable.
<LEND>

<L>7393<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNKyeya<k2>asaNKyeya
{%A-saṅkhyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ innumerable; ({%as%}), m.
an epithet of Śiva; ({%am%}), n., Ved. an innumerable
multitude; an exceedingly large number. {%—Asaṅ-%}
{%khyeya-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} innumerable, unnumbered.
{%—Asaṅkhyeya-tā,%} f. innumerableness.
<LEND>

<L>7394<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNga<k2>asaNga<h>1
{#asaNga#} 1¦. {%a-saṅga, as,%} m. (rt. {%sañj%}), non-
attachment; ({%as, ā, am%}), not attached, having no
attachment or inclination for or interest in, inde-
pendent, free from ties, not hindered, moving without
hindrance. {%—Asaṅga-vat, ān, atī, at,%} not attached
to.
<LEND>

<L>7395<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNgin<k2>asaNgin
{%A-saṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not attached to the world.
<LEND>

<L>7396<pc>0103-c<k1>asajjitAtman<k2>asajjitAtman
{%Asajjitātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%}¦ having a soul
free from attachments.
<LEND>

<L>7397<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNga<k2>asaNga<h>2
{#asaNga#} 2¦. {%a-saṅga, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%gam%} with
{%sam%} and {%a%} prefixed), not united, unassociated, soli-
tary; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Yuyudhāna.
<LEND>

<L>7398<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNgata<k2>asaNgata
{%A-saṅgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ ununited, unaccompanied,
unassociated with; uneven, unequal; improbable, in-
consistent; unpreferred, disesteemed; unbecoming,
unseemly; rude, ill-mannered, unpolished, clownish.
{%—Asaṅgatācaraṇa (˚ta-āc˚), am,%} n. inconsistent
conduct.
<LEND>

<L>7399<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNgati<k2>asaNgati
{%A-saṅgati, is,%}¦ f. not associating; incongruity, im-
probability.
<LEND>

<L>7400<pc>0103-c<k1>asaNgama<k2>asaNgama
{%A-saṅgama, as,%}¦ m. not associating with; separa-
tion, disunion; incongruity; inequality.
<LEND>
[Page0104-a+ 77]

<L>7401<pc>0104-a<k1>asacadviz<k2>asacadviz
{#asacadviz#}¦ {%a-saca-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. per-
secuting those who are not (his) worshippers; having
no enemies.
<LEND>

<L>7402<pc>0104-a<k1>asacCAKA<k2>asacCAKA
{#asacCAKA#}¦ {%asac-chākhā, asaj-jana,%} &c. See
under {%asat.%}
<LEND>

<L>7403<pc>0104-a<k1>asajAta<k2>asajAta
{#asajAta#}¦ {%a-sajāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not re-
lated by blood.
<LEND>

<L>7404<pc>0104-a<k1>asajAtya<k2>asajAtya
{%A-sajātya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. without consan-
guinity.
<LEND>

<L>7405<pc>0104-a<k1>asaMjYa<k2>asaMjYa
{#asaMjYa#}¦ {%a-sañjña, as, ā, am,%} insensible; ({%ā%}),
f., Ved. disunion, disagreement, discord.
<LEND>

<L>7406<pc>0104-a<k1>asaYjYisattva<k2>asaYjYisattva
{%A-sañjñi-sattva, ās,%}¦ m. pl. a class of Buddhist
divinities (otherwise {%a-raṅgi-sattva%}).
<LEND>

<L>7407<pc>0104-a<k1>asat<k2>asat
{#asat#}¦ {%a-sat, an, atī, at,%} not being, not ex-
isting, unreal; not as it should be, not answering its
purpose, untrue, wrong, wicked, bad, vile; ({%ī%}), f. an
unfaithful or unchaste wife; ({%n%}), m. Indra; ({%t%}), n.
non-existence, non-entity; untruth, falsehood, a lie;
evil. {%—Asac-chākhā (asat-śākhā),%} f., Ved. an un-
real branch, a seeming member (?). {%—Asac-chāstra%}
{%(asat-śāstra), am,%} n. heretical or heterodox doc-
trine. {%—Asaj-jana, as,%} m. a bad, wicked, or con-
temptible man. {%—Asaj-jāti-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a
person. {%—Asat-kalpanā,%} f. an untrue action, or one
which never took place; fabrication of falsehood.
{%—Asat-tā,%} f. non-existence; untruth; wickedness.
1. {%asat-tva, am,%} n. non-existence; untruth; wick-
edness. {%—Asat-patha, as,%} m. a bad road; evil prac-
tice or doctrine. {%—Asat-parigraha, as,%} m. receiving
unfit presents, or from improper persons. {%—Asat-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. a childless man; a wicked or disre-
putable son. {%—Asat-saṃsarga, as,%} m. evil company.
{%—Asat-saṅga, as, ā, am,%} attached to evil; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a doorkeeper or porter in the Prabodha-
candrodaya. {%—Asad-adhyetṛ, tā,%} m. a Brāhman
who reads heterodox works; a heterodox student.
{%—Asad-ācāra, as, ā, am,%} following evil practices,
wicked; ({%as%}), m. evil practice. {%—Asad-ācārin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} one who follows bad or heterodox practices,
wicked, vile. {%—Asad-graha%} or {%asad-grāha, as,%} m.
mischievous or wicked trick; caprice, idle or childish
desire. {%—Asadgrahin, ī, iṇī, i,%} performing mis-
chievous or malicious tricks. {%—Asad-dṛś, k, k, k,%}
evil-eyed. {%—Asad-bhāva, as,%} m. non-existence, ab-
sence; an evil temperament or disposition. {%—Asad-%}
{%vṛtti, is,%} f. low or degrading occupation or profes-
sion; wickedness. {%—Asad-vyavahāra, as, ā, am,%}
following evil practices; ({%as%}), m. evil practices.
{%—Asadvyavahārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} following evil courses.
{%—Asan-mantra, as,%} m., Ved. untrue or false
counsel or speech.
<LEND>

<L>7408<pc>0104-a<k1>asatAyI<k2>asatAyI
{%A-satāyī,%}¦ f. wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>7409<pc>0104-a<k1>asatI<k2>asatI
{%A-satī,%}¦ f. an unfaithful or unchaste wife. See above.
{%—Asatī-suta, as,%} m. the son of an unchaste wife,
a bastard.
<LEND>

<L>7410<pc>0104-a<k1>asatkf<k2>asatkf
{%Asat-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to do no
good, to harm, injure, dishonour.
<LEND>

<L>7411<pc>0104-a<k1>asatkarman<k2>asatkarman
{%Asat-karman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ wicked; ({%a%}), n. wicked-
ness.
<LEND>

<L>7412<pc>0104-a<k1>asatkAra<k2>asatkAra
{%Asat-kāra, as,%}¦ m. offence, doing injury; ({%a-sat-%}
{%kāra%}), not honouring.
<LEND>

<L>7413<pc>0104-a<k1>asatkfta<k2>asatkfta
{%Asat-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ ill-done, done from im-
proper motives or in an unbecoming manner; ({%a-%}
{%satkṛta%}), not honoured; ({%am%}), n. wicked deed.
<LEND>

<L>7414<pc>0104-a<k1>asatkftya<k2>asatkftya
{%Asat-kṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has done evil
or wicked actions.
<LEND>

<L>7415<pc>0104-a<k1>asattva<k2>asattva<h>2
2. {%a-sattva, as, ā, am,%}¦ strengthless, without energy;
(for 1. {%asat-tva,%} see under {%a-sat%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>7416<pc>0104-a<k1>asatya<k2>asatya
{%A-satya, as, ā, am,%}¦ false, untrue; lying, a liar;
({%am%}), n. untruth, falsehood. {%—Asatya-vādin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} speaking falsely, giving false evidence, a liar.
{%—Asatya-sandha, as, ā, am,%} treacherous, base,
wicked. {%—A-satya-sannibha, as, ā, am,%} improba-
ble, unlikely.
<LEND>

<L>7417<pc>0104-a<k1>asadfSa<k2>asadfSa
{#asadfSa#}¦ {%a-sadṛśa, as, ī, am,%} unlike, dis-
similar. {%—Asadṛśa-vyavahārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} behaving
improperly.
<LEND>
[Page0104-b+ 69]

<L>7418<pc>0104-b<k1>asadyas<k2>asadyas
{#asadyas#}¦ {%a-sadyas,%} ind. not on the same
day, not immediately.
<LEND>

<L>7419<pc>0104-b<k1>asan<k2>asan
{#asan#}¦ {%asan,%} the base of some of the cases
of {%asṛj,%} blood, q. v.; thus, inst. {%asnā,%} gen. {%asnas,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>7420<pc>0104-b<k1>asana<k2>asana
{#asana#}¦ {%asana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 2. {%as%}), throwing,
sending; a shot; ({%as%}), m., N. of the tree Termi-
nalia Tomentosa, see {%aśana%}. {%—Asana-parṇī,%} f., N.
of the plant Marsilea Quadrifolia, see {%aśana-parṇī.%}
<LEND>

<L>7421<pc>0104-b<k1>asanA<k2>asanA
{%Asanā,%}¦ f., Ved. a missile, an arrow.
<LEND>

<L>7422<pc>0104-b<k1>asantati<k2>asantati
{#asantati#}¦ {%a-santati, is, is, i%} (rt. {%tan%}), child-
less, having no posterity; ({%is%}), f. want of posterity.
<LEND>

<L>7423<pc>0104-b<k1>asantAna<k2>asantAna
{%A-santāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ childless; ({%as%}), m. want
of posterity.
<LEND>

<L>7424<pc>0104-b<k1>asantApa<k2>asantApa
{#asantApa#}¦ {%a-santāpa, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%tap%}), Ved.
not suffering pain or sorrow; not causing pain or
sorrow.
<LEND>

<L>7425<pc>0104-b<k1>asantuzwa<k2>asantuzwa
{#asantuzwa#}¦ {%a-santuṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%tuṣ%}),
discontented, displeased.
<LEND>

<L>7426<pc>0104-b<k1>asantoza<k2>asantoza
{%A-santoṣa, as,%}¦ m. displeasure.
<LEND>

<L>7427<pc>0104-b<k1>asandigDa<k2>asandigDa
{#asandigDa#}¦ {%a-sandigdha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dih%}),
not indistinct; not vanished; certain, confident; un-
doubted, unsuspected; ({%am%}), ind. without any doubt,
certainly.
<LEND>

<L>7428<pc>0104-b<k1>asandita<k2>asandita
{#asandita#}¦ {%a-sandita%} or {%a-sandina, as, ā, am%}
(rt. 4. {%dā,%} to bind), Ved. unbound, unrestrained.
<LEND>

<L>7429<pc>0104-b<k1>asandizwa<k2>asandizwa
{#asandizwa#}¦ {%a-sandiṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%diś%}),
unapprised, uncommunicated.
<LEND>

<L>7430<pc>0104-b<k1>asanDAna<k2>asanDAna
{#asanDAna#}¦ {%a-sandhāna, am,%} n. (rt. {%dhā%}), want
of aim or object, disjunction.
<LEND>

<L>7431<pc>0104-b<k1>asanDi<k2>asanDi
{%A-sandhi, is,%}¦ m. want of union or connection.
<LEND>

<L>7432<pc>0104-b<k1>asanDita<k2>asanDita
{%A-sandhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ untied, unbound, at
liberty, loose.
<LEND>

<L>7433<pc>0104-b<k1>asanDeya<k2>asanDeya
{%A-sandheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be made peace
with.
<LEND>

<L>7434<pc>0104-b<k1>asanna<k2>asanna
{#asanna#}¦ {%a-sanna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. restless,
without rest or repose.
<LEND>

<L>7435<pc>0104-b<k1>asannadDa<k2>asannadDa
{#asannadDa#}¦ {%a-sannaddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%nah%}),
unarmed; born, produced; pretending to knowledge,
conceited as a Paṇḍit or teacher; proud.
<LEND>

<L>7436<pc>0104-b<k1>asannikarza<k2>asannikarza
{#asannikarza#}¦ {%a-sannikarṣa, as,%} m. (rt. {%kṛṣ%}),
non-perception of objects, not bringing them to the
mind, remoteness.
<LEND>

<L>7437<pc>0104-b<k1>asannikfzwa<k2>asannikfzwa
{%A-sannikṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ unperceived, undis-
tinguished; not near, remote.
<LEND>

<L>7438<pc>0104-b<k1>asanniDi<k2>asanniDi
{#asanniDi#}¦ {%a-sannidhi, is,%} m. or {%a-sanni-%}
{%dhāna, am,%} n. (rt. {%dhā%}), absence, distance; confi-
dence, absence of doubt.
<LEND>

<L>7439<pc>0104-b<k1>asannihita<k2>asannihita
{%A-sannihita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not near, far.
<LEND>

<L>7440<pc>0104-b<k1>asannyasta<k2>asannyasta
{#asannyasta#}¦ {%a-sannyasta, as, ā, am,%} one who
has not renounced the world.
<LEND>

<L>7441<pc>0104-b<k1>asanmAna<k2>asanmAna
{#asanmAna#}¦ {%a-sanmāna, am,%} n. disrespect,
impropriety.
<LEND>

<L>7442<pc>0104-b<k1>asapatna<k2>asapatna
{#asapatna#}¦ {%a-sapatna, as, ī, am,%} Ved. without
another wife, without a rival; not attacked; without
an adversary; not rivalling; ({%am%}), n. undisturbed
condition, peace.
<LEND>

<L>7443<pc>0104-b<k1>asapiRqa<k2>asapiRqa
{#asapiRqa#}¦ {%a-sapiṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} unconnected
by funeral offerings.
<LEND>

<L>7444<pc>0104-b<k1>asabanDu<k2>asabanDu
{#asabanDu#}¦ {%a-sabandhu, us, us, u,%} Ved. not
related.
<LEND>

<L>7445<pc>0104-b<k1>asaBya<k2>asaBya
{#asaBya#}¦ {%a-sabhya, as, ā, am,%} unfit for an
assembly, vulgar, low.
<LEND>

<L>7446<pc>0104-b<k1>asama<k2>asama
{#asama#}¦ {%a-sama, as, ā, am,%} uneven, unequal
either in surface or number; odd; unequalled, indi-
vidual, without a fellow or equal; ({%as%}), m. a N. of
Buddha or a Buddha. {%—Asama-ratha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. possessed of an unequalled chariot. {%—Asama-%}
{%vāṇa%} or {%asama-sāyaka, as,%} m. or {%asameṣu (˚ma-%}
{%iṣ˚), us,%} m. having an odd number of arrows, i. e.
[Page0104-c+ 70]
the five-arrowed, an epithet of Kāma. {%—Asamaujas%}
{%(˚ma-oj˚), ās,%} m., N. of a person.
<LEND>

<L>7447<pc>0104-c<k1>asamana<k2>asamana
{%A-samana, as, ā, am,%}¦ going asunder or in
different directions; uneven, unequal; (if, according
to Sāy., derived fr. {%manas%}), of different minds, of
different colours.
<LEND>

<L>7448<pc>0104-c<k1>asamAna<k2>asamAna
{%A-samāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ not the same, not homo-
geneous, not of equal birth; unlike, unequal, differ-
ent. {%—Asamāna-kāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} not having
the same cause.
<LEND>

<L>7449<pc>0104-c<k1>asamakza<k2>asamakza
{#asamakza#}¦ {%a-samakṣa, as, ā, am,%} not visible,
not present, absent.
<LEND>

<L>7450<pc>0104-c<k1>asamagra<k2>asamagra
{#asamagra#}¦ {%a-samagra, as, ā, am,%} incomplete,
unentire, partial, part.
<LEND>

<L>7451<pc>0104-c<k1>asamaYja<k2>asamaYja
{#asamaYja#}¦ {%a-samañja, as,%} or {%a-samañjas, ās,%}
m., N. of a descendant of Ikṣvāku, a son of Sagara
by Keśinī and father of Aṃśumat.
<LEND>

<L>7452<pc>0104-c<k1>asamaYjasa<k2>asamaYjasa
{%A-samañjasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ unequal, unlike; ({%am%}),
n. unconformity, disparity, difference; ({%am%}), ind.
unfitly, unbecomingly; in a fluctuating or confused
manner.
<LEND>

<L>7453<pc>0104-c<k1>asamad<k2>asamad
{#asamad#}¦ {%a-samad, t,%} f., Ved. non-conflict,
harmony, concord.
<LEND>

<L>7454<pc>0104-c<k1>asamaya<k2>asamaya
{#asamaya#}¦ {%a-samaya, as,%} m. unseasonable-
ness; unfit or unfavourable time.
<LEND>

<L>7455<pc>0104-c<k1>asamarTa<k2>asamarTa
{#asamarTa#}¦ {%a-samartha, as, ā, am,%} unable, in-
competent; feeble, weak.
<LEND>

<L>7456<pc>0104-c<k1>asamarpaRa<k2>asamarpaRa
{#asamarpaRa#}¦ {%a-samarpaṇa, am,%} n. non-de-
livery, not committing or intrusting anything to
another.
<LEND>

<L>7457<pc>0104-c<k1>asamarpita<k2>asamarpita
{%A-samarpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unconsigned, unin-
trusted, undelivered.
<LEND>

<L>7458<pc>0104-c<k1>asamavAyin<k2>asamavAyin
{#asamavAyin#}¦ {%a-samavāyin, ī, inī, i%} (rt. {%i%} with
{%sam%} and {%ava%}), accidental, not inherent, not intimate
and inseparable. {%—Asamavāyi-kāraṇa, am,%} n. (in
logic) accidental cause, not intimate or inherent rela-
tion (e. g. the separable conjunction of two different
objects). {%—Asamavāyi-tva, am,%} n. the condition of
something that is not inherent and inseparable.
<LEND>

<L>7459<pc>0104-c<k1>asamaveta<k2>asamaveta
{%A-samaveta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not classed together, not
connected, incoherent. {%—Asamaveta-rūpam,%} ind. in-
coherently.
<LEND>

<L>7460<pc>0104-c<k1>asamazwakAvya<k2>asamazwakAvya
{#asamazwakAvya#}¦ {%a-samaṣṭa-kāvya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. of unattainable wisdom.
<LEND>

<L>7461<pc>0104-c<k1>asamasta<k2>asamasta
{#asamasta#}¦ {%a-samasta, as, ā, am,%} uncom-
pounded, separate, several; uncollected; incomplete,
imperfect.
<LEND>

<L>7462<pc>0104-c<k1>asamAti<k2>asamAti
{#asamAti#}¦ {%a-samāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. having
nothing equal, unparalleled; ({%is%}), m., N. of a king.
{%—Asamāty-ojas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. of unequalled
strength.
<LEND>

<L>7463<pc>0104-c<k1>asamAna<k2>asamAna
{#asamAna#}¦ {%a-samāna.%} See {%a-sama%} above.
<LEND>

<L>7464<pc>0104-c<k1>asamApita<k2>asamApita
{#asamApita#}¦ {%a-samāpita%} or {%a-samāpta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unfinished, unaccomplished, incomplete.
<LEND>

<L>7465<pc>0104-c<k1>asamApti<k2>asamApti
{%A-samāpti, is,%}¦ f. incompleteness.
<LEND>

<L>7466<pc>0104-c<k1>asamAvartaka<k2>asamAvartaka
{#asamAvartaka#}¦ {%a-samāvartaka, as,%} or {%a-samā-%}
{%vṛttika, as,%} m. a religious student who has not com-
pleted the period of his residence with his teacher.
<LEND>

<L>7467<pc>0104-c<k1>asamAhAra<k2>asamAhAra
{#asamAhAra#}¦ {%a-samāhāra, as,%} m. non-recovery
of anything; disjunction, disconnection.
<LEND>

<L>7468<pc>0104-c<k1>asamAhArya<k2>asamAhArya
{%A-samāhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ irrecoverable, not to
be combined or united.
<LEND>

<L>7469<pc>0104-c<k1>asamIkzya<k2>asamIkzya
{#asamIkzya#}¦ {%a-samīkṣya,%} ind. not having
considered. {%—Asamīkṣya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} acting
inconsiderately.
<LEND>

<L>7470<pc>0104-c<k1>asamIcIna<k2>asamIcIna
{#asamIcIna#}¦ {%a-samīcīna, as, ā, am,%} improper,
incorrect.
<LEND>

<L>7471<pc>0104-c<k1>asamfdDa<k2>asamfdDa
{#asamfdDa#}¦ {%a-samṛddha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
increased, not prosperous; one whose wishes are
frustrated.
<LEND>
[Page0105-a+ 71]

<L>7472<pc>0105-a<k1>asamfdDi<k2>asamfdDi
{%A-samṛddhi, is,%}¦ f. non-increase; failing, perish-
ing; ({%is, is, i%}), unfortunate.
<LEND>

<L>7473<pc>0105-a<k1>asampatti<k2>asampatti
{#asampatti#}¦ {%a-sampatti, is,%} f. (rt. {%pad%}), ill-
luck, want of success; non-accomplishment, failure.
<LEND>

<L>7474<pc>0105-a<k1>asampanna<k2>asampanna
{%A-sampanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ uneffected, unaccom-
plished.
<LEND>

<L>7475<pc>0105-a<k1>asamparka<k2>asamparka
{#asamparka#}¦ {%a-samparka, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%pṛc%}),
destitute of contact, without connection or relation.
<LEND>

<L>7476<pc>0105-a<k1>asamparkIya<k2>asamparkIya
{%A-samparkīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unconnected with,
not belonging to.
<LEND>

<L>7477<pc>0105-a<k1>asampUrRa<k2>asampUrRa
{#asampUrRa#}¦ {%a-sampūrṇa, as, ā, am,%} incom-
plete, not entire.
<LEND>

<L>7478<pc>0105-a<k1>asamprati<k2>asamprati
{#asamprati#}¦ {%a-samprati,%} ind., Ved. not accord-
ing to the moment or to present circumstances.
<LEND>

<L>7479<pc>0105-a<k1>asamprApya<k2>asamprApya
{#asamprApya#}¦ {%a-samprāpya,%} ind. without reach-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>7480<pc>0105-a<k1>asambadDa<k2>asambadDa
{#asambadDa#}¦ {%a-sambaddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%bandh%}),
not closely associated, distant, not related; uncon-
nected, incoherent, unmeaning; improper, wrong;
speaking unconnectedly or unmeaningly.
<LEND>

<L>7481<pc>0105-a<k1>asambanDa<k2>asambanDa
{%A-sambandha, as, ā, am,%}¦ unconnected, not re-
lating or belonging to; ({%as%}), m. non-connection.
<LEND>

<L>7482<pc>0105-a<k1>asambADa<k2>asambADa
{#asambADa#}¦ {%a-sambādha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%bādh%}),
unconfined, spacious, wide, large; open, accessible;
({%ā%}), f. a species of the Śarkarī metre, consisting of
fifty-six syllables; ({%am%}), n., Ved. non-confinement,
open space.
<LEND>

<L>7483<pc>0105-a<k1>asamBava<k2>asamBava
{#asamBava#}¦ {%a-sambhava, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%bhū%}),
inconsistent, improbable, unlikely; non-existent; ({%am,%}
{%ā%}), n. f. any extraordinary event; non-existence.
<LEND>

<L>7484<pc>0105-a<k1>asamBavyam<k2>asamBavyam
{%A-sambhavyam,%}¦ ind., Ved. in an incomprehensible
or extraordinary manner.
<LEND>

<L>7485<pc>0105-a<k1>asamBAvanA<k2>asamBAvanA
{%A-sambhāvanā,%}¦ f. difficulty or impossibility of
conceiving or comprehending.
<LEND>

<L>7486<pc>0105-a<k1>asamBAvanIya<k2>asamBAvanIya
{%A-sambhāvanīya%}¦ or {%a-sambhāvya, as, ā, am,%}
inconceivable, incomprehensible, impossible. {%—Asam-%}
{%bhāvyam,%} ind. in an incomprehensible or impossible
manner.
<LEND>

<L>7487<pc>0105-a<k1>asamBUta<k2>asamBUta
{%A-sambhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ unproduced.
<LEND>

<L>7488<pc>0105-a<k1>asamBUti<k2>asamBUti
{%A-sambhūti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. non-existence, the not
being born again.
<LEND>

<L>7489<pc>0105-a<k1>asamBoga<k2>asamBoga
{#asamBoga#}¦ {%a-sambhoga, as,%} m. non-enjoy-
ment, not using or enjoying.
<LEND>

<L>7490<pc>0105-a<k1>asamBrama<k2>asamBrama
{#asamBrama#}¦ {%a-sambhrama, as, ā, am,%} free from
flurry, composed, cool; ({%as%}), m. calmness, steadiness.
<LEND>

<L>7491<pc>0105-a<k1>asammata<k2>asammata
{#asammata#}¦ {%a-sammata, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%man%}),
disapproved, despised; dissentient, differing from;
averse, contrary. {%—Asammatādāyin (˚ta-ād˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} taking without the consent of the possessor;
a thief.
<LEND>

<L>7492<pc>0105-a<k1>asammati<k2>asammati
{%A-sammati, is,%}¦ f. dissent, difference of opinion;
dislike, aversion.
<LEND>

<L>7493<pc>0105-a<k1>asammAna<k2>asammAna
{%A-sammāna, am,%}¦ n. disrespect, disgrace.
<LEND>

<L>7494<pc>0105-a<k1>asammita<k2>asammita
{#asammita#}¦ {%a-sammita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
measured, immeasurable.
<LEND>

<L>7495<pc>0105-a<k1>asammUQa<k2>asammUQa
{#asammUQa#}¦ {%a-sammūḍha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%muh%}),
calm, deliberate, cool, clear seeing, judging well.
<LEND>

<L>7496<pc>0105-a<k1>asammoha<k2>asammoha
{%A-sammoha, as,%}¦ m. steadiness, calmness, com-
posure.
<LEND>

<L>7497<pc>0105-a<k1>asammfzwa<k2>asammfzwa
{#asammfzwa#}¦ {%a-sammṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. un-
purified, uncleansed.
<LEND>

<L>7498<pc>0105-a<k1>asammoza<k2>asammoza
{#asammoza#}¦ {%a-sammoṣa, as,%} m. the allowing
nothing to escape (one's cognizance ?).
<LEND>

<L>7499<pc>0105-a<k1>asamyaYc<k2>asamyaYc
{#asamyaYc#}¦ {%a-samyañc, myaṅ, mīcī, myak,%} im-
proper, incorrect; imperfect, incomplete. {%—Asamyak-%}
{%kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} acting unskilfully, inexpert, incom-
petent; acting improperly, ill-conducted, profligate.
<LEND>

<L>7500<pc>0105-a<k1>asaru<k2>asaru
{#asaru#}¦ {%asaru, us,%} m. (rt. 2. {%as%}), the medi-
cinal plant Blumea Lacera.
<LEND>

<L>7501<pc>0105-a<k1>asarvajYa<k2>asarvajYa
{#asarvajYa#}¦ {%a-sarva-jña, as, ā, am,%} not knowing
everything.
<LEND>
[Page0105-b+ 71]

<L>7502<pc>0105-b<k1>asarvavIra<k2>asarvavIra
{#asarvavIra#}¦ {%a-sarva-vīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
having all one's men collected round.
<LEND>

<L>7503<pc>0105-b<k1>asala<k2>asala
{#asala#}¦ {%asala, am,%} n. iron; arms; a mantra.
<LEND>

<L>7504<pc>0105-b<k1>asavarRa<k2>asavarRa
{#asavarRa#}¦ {%a-savarṇa, as, ā, am,%} of a different
caste, of a different colour.
<LEND>

<L>7505<pc>0105-b<k1>asavas<k2>asavas
{#asavas#}¦ {%asavas,%} m. pl. (of {%asu,%} q. v.), the
vital airs or breath.
<LEND>

<L>7506<pc>0105-b<k1>asaScat<k2>asaScat
{#asaScat#}¦ {%a-saścat, an, antī, at%} (rt. {%saśc%}), Ved.
not ceasing, not sticking, not closed up, not drying
up, untouched (as by any one attempting to enter
a door). {%—Asaścatas,%} f. pl. (i. e. {%dhārās%}), inexhaust-
ible streams. {%—Asaścatā,%} ind. in an inexhaustible
manner.
<LEND>

<L>7507<pc>0105-b<k1>asaScivas<k2>asaScivas
{%A-saścivas, ān, cuṣī, as,%}¦ Ved. not ceasing, not
drying up.
<LEND>

<L>7508<pc>0105-b<k1>asasat<k2>asasat
{#asasat#}¦ {%a-sasat, an, atī, at,%} Ved. not
sleeping.
<LEND>

<L>7509<pc>0105-b<k1>asaha<k2>asaha
{#asaha#}¦ {%a-saha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%sah%}), not bear-
ing, not enduring, intolerant, impatient; ({%am%}), n.
the middle of the breast.
<LEND>

<L>7510<pc>0105-b<k1>asahana<k2>asahana
{%A-sahana, as, ā, am,%}¦ unenduring, envious, jealous;
({%as%}), m. an enemy; ({%am%}), n. intolerance, impatience.
<LEND>

<L>7511<pc>0105-b<k1>asahanIya<k2>asahanIya
{%A-sahanīya%}¦ or {%a-sahitavya%} or {%a-sahya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unbearable, insufferable, insuperable. {%—Asahya-%}
{%pīḍa, as, ā, am,%} causing intolerable pain.
<LEND>

<L>7512<pc>0105-b<k1>asahamAna<k2>asahamAna
{%A-sahamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ impatient, not bearing,
not enduring.
<LEND>

<L>7513<pc>0105-b<k1>asahizRu<k2>asahizRu
{%A-sahiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ impatient, unenduring,
envious; quarrelsome. {%—Asahiṣṇu-tā,%} f. impatience,
envy.
<LEND>

<L>7514<pc>0105-b<k1>asahAya<k2>asahAya
{#asahAya#}¦ {%a-sahāya, as, ā, am,%} without com-
panions, friendless, lonely, solitary. {%—Asahāya-tā,%} f.
or {%asahāya-tva, am,%} n. loneliness, solitude, the life
of a hermit; friendlessness, being without a friend or
patron. {%—A-sahāya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} without com-
panions, friendless.
<LEND>

<L>7515<pc>0105-b<k1>asahita<k2>asahita
{%A-sahita, as, ā, am,%}¦  unassociated, unaccompanied.
<LEND>

<L>7516<pc>0105-b<k1>asAkzAt<k2>asAkzAt
{#asAkzAt#}¦ {%a-sākṣāt,%} ind. [cf. 2. {%akṣa%} and
{%akṣi,%} the eye], not before the eyes, invisible, im-
perceptible; not present.
<LEND>

<L>7517<pc>0105-b<k1>asAkzika<k2>asAkzika
{%A-sākṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ unattested, unwitnessed.
<LEND>

<L>7518<pc>0105-b<k1>asAkzin<k2>asAkzin
{%A-sākṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ incompetent as a witness,
not an eye-witness.
<LEND>

<L>7519<pc>0105-b<k1>asAkzya<k2>asAkzya
{%A-sākṣya, am,%}¦ n. want of evidence.
<LEND>

<L>7520<pc>0105-b<k1>asAtmya<k2>asAtmya
{#asAtmya#}¦ {%a-sātmya, as, ā, am,%} unwholesome,
disagreeing (as food ?).
<LEND>

<L>7521<pc>0105-b<k1>asAda<k2>asAda
{#asAda#}¦ {%a-sāda, as, ā, am,%} Ved. seatless, not
sitting.
<LEND>

<L>7522<pc>0105-b<k1>asADana<k2>asADana
{#asADana#}¦ {%a-sādhana, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%sādh%}),
without means, destitute of means, resources, mate-
rials, instruments or implements; ({%am%}), n. non-ac-
complishment, not proving or establishing.
<LEND>

<L>7523<pc>0105-b<k1>asADanIya<k2>asADanIya
{%A-sādhanīya%}¦ or {%a-sādhya, as, ā, am,%} not to be
effected or completed, not proper or able to be
accomplished; incurable, irremediable, not susceptible
of proof.
<LEND>

<L>7524<pc>0105-b<k1>asADita<k2>asADita
{%A-sādhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unaccomplished.
<LEND>

<L>7525<pc>0105-b<k1>asADAraRa<k2>asADAraRa
{#asADAraRa#}¦ {%a-sādhāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} not
common, special, specific; ({%am%}), n. speciality, species,
special property.
<LEND>

<L>7526<pc>0105-b<k1>asADu<k2>asADu
{#asADu#}¦ {%a-sādhu, us, us%} or {%vī, u,%} not good,
wicked, bad; ({%vī%}), f. an unchaste wife. {%—Asādhu-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%asādhu-tva, am,%} n. wickedness. {%—Asādhu-%}
{%vṛttā,%} f. an unchaste woman.
<LEND>

<L>7527<pc>0105-b<k1>asAndra<k2>asAndra
{#asAndra#}¦ {%a-sāndra, as, ā, am,%} not close, fine,
delicate but with interstices, transparent.
<LEND>

<L>7528<pc>0105-b<k1>asAnniDya<k2>asAnniDya
{#asAnniDya#}¦ {%a-sānnidhya, am,%} n. non-prox-
imity, distance.
<LEND>

<L>7529<pc>0105-b<k1>asAmayika<k2>asAmayika
{#asAmayika#}¦ {%a-sāmayika, as, ī, am,%} unsea-
sonable.
<LEND>

<L>7530<pc>0105-b<k1>asAmarTya<k2>asAmarTya
{#asAmarTya#}¦ {%a-sāmarthya, am,%} n. weakness.
<LEND>
[Page0105-c+ 74]

<L>7531<pc>0105-c<k1>asAmAnya<k2>asAmAnya
{#asAmAnya#}¦ {%a-sāmānya, as, ā, am,%} peculiar,
not common; ({%am%}), n. peculiar or special property.
<LEND>

<L>7532<pc>0105-c<k1>asAmi<k2>asAmi
{#asAmi#}¦ {%a-sāmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. not half, en-
tire, whole, complete; ({%i%}), ind. completely. {%—Asāmi-%}
{%śavas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having complete strength.
<LEND>

<L>7533<pc>0105-c<k1>asAmprata<k2>asAmprata
{#asAmprata#}¦ {%a-sāmprata, as, ī, am,%} not fit,
not becoming, improper. {%—A-sāmpratam,%} ind. un-
fitly, improperly, inopportunely.
<LEND>

<L>7534<pc>0105-c<k1>asAmya<k2>asAmya
{#asAmya#}¦ {%a-sāmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-sama%}), dif-
ference, dissimilarity; unsuitableness (in medicine or
diet), unwholesomeness; disagreeableness.
<LEND>

<L>7535<pc>0105-c<k1>asAra<k2>asAra
{#asAra#}¦ {%a-sāra, as, ā, am,%} sapless; with-
out genuine strength and value; without vigour,
spoiled, unfit, vain, unprofitable; weak, feeble, infirm,
fragile; ({%as%}), m., N. of the plant Ricinus Communis
or castor-oil tree; ({%am%}), n. Agallochum. {%—Asāra-tā,%}
f. saplessness; unfitness, fragility.
<LEND>

<L>7536<pc>0105-c<k1>asAvaDAna<k2>asAvaDAna
{#asAvaDAna#}¦ {%a-sāvadhāna, as, ā, am,%} careless,
inadvertent. {%—Asāvadhāna-tā,%} f. or {%asāvadhāna-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. carelessness.
<LEND>

<L>7537<pc>0105-c<k1>asAhasa<k2>asAhasa
{#asAhasa#}¦ {%a-sāhasa, am,%} n. absence of vio-
lence, gentleness.
<LEND>

<L>7538<pc>0105-c<k1>asAhasika<k2>asAhasika
{%A-sāhasika, as, ī, am,%}¦ not violent, peaceable,
gentle.
<LEND>

<L>7539<pc>0105-c<k1>asAhAyya<k2>asAhAyya
{#asAhAyya#}¦ {%a-sāhāyya, am,%} n. want of assist-
tance or co-operation.
<LEND>

<L>7540<pc>0105-c<k1>asi<k2>asi
{#asi#}¦ {%asi, is,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%as%}), a sword, a
cimeter, a knife used for killing animals. {%—Asi-gaṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. a small pillow for the cheek. {%—Asi-daṃṣ-%}
{%ṭra%} or {%asi-daṃṣṭraka, as,%} m. the marine monster
Makara, painted on the banner of Kāmadeva.
{%—Asi-danta, as,%} m. a crocodile. {%—Asi-dhārā,%} f.
the edge of a sword. {%—Asidhārā-vrata, am,%} n. a
vow of standing on the edge of a sword, used figura-
tively for any hopelessly difficult task. {%—Asi-dhāva%}
or {%asi-dhāvaka, as,%} m. an armourer, a furbisher, a
sword or tool cleaner. {%—Asi-dhenu, us,%} or {%asi-dhe-%}
{%nukā,%} f. a knife. {%—Asi-pattra, as, am,%} m. n. the
blade of a sword; a sheath, a scabbard; ({%as, ā, am%}),
whose leaves are swords, having sword-shaped leaves;
({%as%}), m. the sugar-cane, Scirpus Kysoor Roxb.; a
kind of tree which grows in the lower world; a hell
paved with swords. {%—Asi-pattraka, as,%} m. sugar-
cane. {%—Asipattra-vana, am,%} n. a hell where the
trees have leaves as sharp as swords. {%—Asi-patha,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. the course of a sacrificial knife (?).
{%—Asi-pucchaka, as,%} m. the Gaṅgetic porpoise, Del-
phinus Gangeticus. {%—Asi-putrikā%} or {%asi-putrī,%} f. a
knife, lit. daughter of a sword. {%—Asi-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. furnished with knives or daggers. {%—Asi-%}
{%meda, as,%} m. the fetid Mimosa Vachellia Farnesiana
W. and A. {%—Asi-loman, ā,%} m., N. of a Dānava.
{%—Asi-hatya, am,%} n. fighting with knives or swords.
{%—Asi-heti, is,%} m. a swordsman or soldier armed
with a sword. {%—Asy-asi,%} ind. sword to sword, sword
against sword.
<LEND>

<L>7541<pc>0105-c<k1>asika<k2>asika
{%Asika, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%asi ?%}), the part of the face be-
tween the underlip and the chin.
<LEND>

<L>7542<pc>0105-c<k1>asiknI<k2>asiknI
{#asiknI#}¦ {%asiknī.%} See 2. {%asita.%}
<LEND>

<L>7543<pc>0105-c<k1>asita<k2>asita<h>1
{#asita#} 1¦. {%a-sita, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%si%}), Ved.
unbound.
<LEND>

<L>7544<pc>0105-c<k1>asita<k2>asita<h>2
{#asita#} 2¦. {%asita, as,%} f. {%asitā%} or Ved. f. {%asi-%}
{%knī, am,%} ({%sita,%} ‘white,’ appears to have been formed
from this word, which is probably original, and not a
compound of {%a%} and {%sita;%} cf. the formation of {%sura%}
fr. {%asura%}), dark-coloured, black, dark-blue; ({%as%}), m.
the black colour; N. of the planet Saturn; the dark
fortnight of a lunar month; N. of a being presiding
over darkness and magic; N. of a descendant of Kāś-
yapa and several other persons; N. of a mountain;
a black snake; ({%tā%}), f. the indigo plant; N. of an
Apsaras; ({%asiknī%}), f., Ved. ‘the dark one,’ the night;
a girl attending upon the inner or women's apart-
ments (whose hair is not whitened by age); N. of a
[Page0106-a+ 77]
daughter of Vīraṇa and wife of Dakṣa; N. of the
river Akesines (afterwards Candra-bhāga) in the Pañ-
jāb. {%—Asita-keśānta, as, ā, am,%} having black locks.
{%—Asita-grīva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a black
neck. {%—Asita-jñu, us, ūs, u,%} Ved. having black
knees. {%—Asita-nayana, as, ā, am,%} black-eyed.
{%—Asita-bhrū, ūs, ūs, u,%} having black eyelids.
{%—Asita-mṛga, as,%} m., N. of a family. {%—Asitābhra-%}
{%śekhara (˚ta-abh˚), as,%} m., N. of Buddha. {%—Asi-%}
{%tāmburuha (˚ta-am˚), as,%} m. the blue lotus.
{%—Asitārcis (˚ta-ar˚), is,%} m. fire. {%—Asitālu (˚ta-%}
{%āl˚), us,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—Asitāśman (˚ta-aś˚),%}
{%ā,%} m. the lapis lazuli; any black or dark-blue stone.
{%—Asitotpala (˚ta-ut˚), am,%} n. the blue lotus, Nym-
phæa Cærulea. {%—Asitopala (˚ta-up˚), am,%} n. lapis
lazuli.
<LEND>

<L>7545<pc>0106-a<k1>asiknikA<k2>asiknikA
{%Asiknikā,%}¦ f. a woman-servant [cf. {%asiknī%}].
<LEND>

<L>7546<pc>0106-a<k1>asitakI<k2>asitakI
{%Asitakī,%}¦ f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>7547<pc>0106-a<k1>asidDa<k2>asidDa
{#asidDa#}¦ {%a-siddha, as, ā, am,%} imperfect, in-
complete; unaccomplished, uneffected; unproved;
unripe.
<LEND>

<L>7548<pc>0106-a<k1>asidDi<k2>asidDi
{%A-siddhi, is,%}¦ f. imperfect or incomplete accom-
plishment, failure; (in logic) want of proof, con-
clusion not warranted by the premises.
<LEND>

<L>7549<pc>0106-a<k1>asinva<k2>asinva
{#asinva#}¦ {%a-sinva, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-sinvat, an,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. insatiable.
<LEND>

<L>7550<pc>0106-a<k1>asira<k2>asira
{#asira#}¦ {%asira, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%as,%} to throw),
Ved. a beam, a ray; an arrow, a bolt.
<LEND>

<L>7551<pc>0106-a<k1>asizWa<k2>asizWa
{%Asiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (superl.) Ved. most skilful
in shooting (arrows &c.).
<LEND>

<L>7552<pc>0106-a<k1>asI<k2>asI
{#asI#}¦ {%asī,%} f., N. of a river, {%= asi.%}
<LEND>

<L>7553<pc>0106-a<k1>asImakfzRa<k2>asImakfzRa
{#asImakfzRa#}¦ {%asīma-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
prince.
<LEND>

<L>7554<pc>0106-a<k1>asu<k2>asu
{#asu#}¦ {%asu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%as,%} to be), breath,
life, spiritual life; life of the spiritual world or departed
spirits; water ?; [cf. <lang n="greek">ἀάζω, ἄσθμα</lang>]; ({%asavas%}),
nom. pl. the five vital breaths or airs of the body;
animal life; ({%u%}), n. reflection, thought or the heart as
the seat of it; grief. {%—Asu-dhāraṇa, am,%} n. life,
existence. {%—Asu-nīta, am,%} n., Ved. the world of
spirits, or ({%as%}), m. the lord of the spirits. {%—Asu-nīti,%}
{%is,%} f., Ved. the life or the world of spirits; that life
personified as a female deity invoked for the preserva-
tion of life, or as Yama, lord of the dead. {%—Asu-%}
{%bhaṅga, as,%} m. breaking of life; fear about life;
danger of life. {%—Asu-bhṛt, t,%} m. breathing, living, a
creature. {%—Asu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} living, breathing;
({%mān%}), m. life, the principle of vitality, the portion of
spirit connected with the attributes of existence. {%—Asu-%}
{%sama, as, ā, am,%} dearly loved, as dear as life; ({%as%}),
m. a husband, a lover.
<LEND>

<L>7555<pc>0106-a<k1>asura<k2>asura
{%Asura, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. living, alive, spiritual; an
epithet of the supreme spirit; Varuṇa; incorporeal, super-
human, divine; ({%as%}), m. spirit; an incorporeal being
of an evil kind; an evil spirit, a demon; a ghost or
spectre; a general name for the chief of the Asuras
[these Asuras are often regarded as the children of
Diti by Kaśyapa, see {%daitya;%} as such they are
demons of the first order in perpetual hostility with
the gods, and must not be confounded with the
Rākṣasas or imps who animate dead bodies and
disturb sacrifices]; the sun; Rāhu; an elephant; N.
of a warrior-tribe; (according to Sāy.) a cloud ?;
({%ā%}), f. night; a zodiacal sign; a prostitute; ({%ī%}), f. a
female demon, the wife of an Asura; N. of the plant
Sinapis Racemosa Roxb. [Observe, in later San-
skṛt, {%sura%} has been formed from {%asura,%} as {%sita%}
from {%asita,%} q. v.] {%—Asura-kumāra, ās,%} m. pl. a
class of deities belonging to the Bhavanādhīśas.
{%—Asura-kṣayaṇa, as, ā, am,%} or {%asura-kṣiti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. destroying the Asuras. {%—Asura-tva,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. spirituality, supernatural or divine dig-
nity. {%—Asura-māyā,%} f., Ved. demoniacal magic.
{%—Asura-rakṣasa, āni,%} n. pl., Ved. the Asuras
and Rākṣasas; ({%am%}), n. sing. a demoniacal being,
partaking of the qualities of both the classes of
evil spirits. {%—Asura-rāj, ṭ,%} m. king of the Asuras,
[Page0106-b+ 69]
epithet of the Asura Baka. {%—Asura-ripu, us,%} m.
enemy of the Asuras, epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Asura-%}
{%sūdana, as,%} m. destroyer of the Asuras, epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Asura-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} Ved. destroying
the Asuras, epithet of Agni, Indra, &c. {%—Asurā-%}
{%cārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m. teacher of the Asuras;
epithet of the regent of the planet Venus. {%—Asurā-%}
{%dhipa (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m. lord of the Asuras; N. of
Bali Vairocani and of Māyādhara. {%—Asurāhva (˚ra-%}
{%āh˚), am,%} n. bell-metal, named after an Asura.
<LEND>

<L>7556<pc>0106-b<k1>asurya<k2>asurya
{%Asurya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. incorporeal, spiritual,
divine; demoniacal, belonging to the Asuras; ({%am%}),
n. spirituality, divine nature; the incorporeal, the
collective body of spiritual beings; (according to
Sāy.) the water of the clouds.
<LEND>

<L>7557<pc>0106-b<k1>asukara<k2>asukara
{#asukara#}¦ {%a-sukara, as, ā, am,%} not easy to
be done, difficult, arduous.
<LEND>

<L>7558<pc>0106-b<k1>asukzaRa<k2>asukzaRa
{#asukzaRa#}¦ {%asukṣaṇa,%} a various reading for
{%asūkṣaṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>7559<pc>0106-b<k1>asuKa<k2>asuKa
{#asuKa#}¦ {%a-sukha, as, ā, am,%} unhappy, sorrow-
ful, melancholic; ({%am%}), n. sorrow, pain, affliction.
{%—Asukha-jīvikā,%} f. a joyless life. {%—Asukha-pīḍita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} pained with grief. {%—Asukhāvaha (˚kha-%}
{%āv˚), as, ā, am,%} producing unhappiness. {%—Asukhā-%}
{%viṣṭa (˚kha-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} afflicted with grief,
pain, or unhappiness. {%—Asukhodaya (˚kha-ud˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} causing or ending in unhappiness. {%—Asukho-%}
{%darka (˚kha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} productive of or
ending in unhappiness.
<LEND>

<L>7560<pc>0106-b<k1>asuKin<k2>asuKin
{%A-sukhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ unhappy, sorrowful, afflicted.
<LEND>

<L>7561<pc>0106-b<k1>asugama<k2>asugama
{#asugama#}¦ {%a-sugama, as, ā, am,%} difficult of
attainment or accomplishment, hard, unattainable;
difficult to be understood.
<LEND>

<L>7562<pc>0106-b<k1>asuta<k2>asuta<h>1
{#asuta#} 1¦. {%a-suta, as, ā, am%} (rt. 2. {%su%}), Ved. not
pressed out, not cleared or purified, not ready (as
the Soma juice).
<LEND>

<L>7563<pc>0106-b<k1>asunva<k2>asunva
{%A-sunva, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%a-sunvat, an, atī, at,%}
or {%a-suṣvi, is, is, i,%} Ved. not pressing out the
Soma juice, not worshipping the gods, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>7564<pc>0106-b<k1>asuta<k2>asuta<h>2
{#asuta#} 2¦. {%a-suta, as, ā, am%} (rt. 1. {%su%}), child-
less. See {%a-sū.%}
<LEND>

<L>7565<pc>0106-b<k1>asutara<k2>asutara
{#asutara#}¦ {%a-sutara, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%tṛ%}), not to
be easily passed.
<LEND>

<L>7566<pc>0106-b<k1>asutfp<k2>asutfp
{#asutfp#}¦ {%a-sutṛp, p, p, p,%} Ved. insatiable,
not easily satiated.
<LEND>

<L>7567<pc>0106-b<k1>asunirasa<k2>asunirasa
{#asunirasa#}¦ {%a-sunirasa, as, ā, am,%} disagree-
able, unpleasant, offensive.
<LEND>

<L>7568<pc>0106-b<k1>asundara<k2>asundara
{#asundara#}¦ {%a-sundara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} plain,
ugly; improper, unbecoming.
<LEND>

<L>7569<pc>0106-b<k1>asupta<k2>asupta
{#asupta#}¦ {%a-supta, as, ā, am,%} not asleep. {%—A-%}
{%supta-dṛś, k, k, k,%} never closing the eyes in sleep,
ever-seeing.
<LEND>

<L>7570<pc>0106-b<k1>asumna<k2>asumna
{#asumna#}¦ {%a-sumna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. contrary,
adverse.
<LEND>

<L>7571<pc>0106-b<k1>asura<k2>asura
{#asura#}¦ {%asura.%} See under {%asu.%}
<LEND>

<L>7572<pc>0106-b<k1>asurakza<k2>asurakza
{#asurakza#}¦ {%a-surakṣa, as, ā, am,%} perishable,
volatile, transitory.
<LEND>

<L>7573<pc>0106-b<k1>asurakzya<k2>asurakzya
{%A-surakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ difficult of retention or
preservation.
<LEND>

<L>7574<pc>0106-b<k1>asurasA<k2>asurasA
{#asurasA#}¦ {%a-surasā,%} f. the plant Basilicum
Pilosum Benth.
<LEND>

<L>7575<pc>0106-b<k1>asulaBa<k2>asulaBa
{#asulaBa#}¦ {%a-sulabha, as, ā, am,%} difficult of
attainment.
<LEND>

<L>7576<pc>0106-b<k1>asuzvi<k2>asuzvi
{#asuzvi#}¦ {%a-suṣvi.%} See under. 1. {%a-suta.%}
<LEND>

<L>7577<pc>0106-b<k1>asusTa<k2>asusTa
{#asusTa#}¦ {%a-sustha, as, ā, am,%} unwell, indis-
posed, not well placed, uncomfortable. {%—Asustha-tā,%}
f. indisposition, sickness.
<LEND>

<L>7578<pc>0106-b<k1>asuhfd<k2>asuhfd
{#asuhfd#}¦ {%a-suhṛd, t,%} m. not a friend, an
enemy.
<LEND>
[Page0106-c+ 72]

<L>7579<pc>0106-c<k1>asU<k2>asU
{#asU#}¦ {%a-sū, ūs, ūs,%} m. f. (rt. 1. {%su,%} to bring
forth), Ved. not bringing forth, barren.
<LEND>

<L>7580<pc>0106-c<k1>asUta<k2>asUta
{%A-sūta%}¦ or {%a-sūtika, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one who
has not brought forth, barren.
<LEND>

<L>7581<pc>0106-c<k1>asUti<k2>asUti
{%A-sūti, is,%}¦ f. non-production; obstruction, removal;
barrenness.
<LEND>

<L>7582<pc>0106-c<k1>asUsu<k2>asUsu
{%A-sūsu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. not bringing forth, barren.
<LEND>

<L>7583<pc>0106-c<k1>asUkzaRa<k2>asUkzaRa
{#asUkzaRa#}¦ {%asūkṣaṇa%} or {%asukṣaṇa%} or {%asur-%}
{%kṣaṇa%} or {%asūrkṣaṇa%} or {%astarkṣaṇa, am,%} n.
(etymology doubtful), disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>7584<pc>0106-c<k1>asUkzma<k2>asUkzma
{#asUkzma#}¦ {%a-sūkṣma, as, ā, am,%} not fine, not
minute, large, thick, gross.
<LEND>

<L>7585<pc>0106-c<k1>asUya<k2>asUya
{#asUya#}¦ {%asūya%} (fr. {%asu%}), nom. P. A. {%asūyati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to murmur at, to detract from, depre-
ciate; to envy, scorn, be displeased or discontented
with, or grumble at (with dat. or acc.): Caus. {%asū-%}
{%yayati, -yitum,%} to cause to murmur or be displeased
or discontented.
<LEND>

<L>7586<pc>0106-c<k1>asUyaka<k2>asUyaka
{%Asūyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ detracting, envious, calum-
nious, discontented, displeased; (by some written
{%asūka ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>7587<pc>0106-c<k1>asUyana<k2>asUyana
{%Asūyana, am,%}¦ n. calumny, detraction.
<LEND>

<L>7588<pc>0106-c<k1>asUyayitvA<k2>asUyayitvA
{%Asūyayitvā,%}¦ ind. having scorned, having cursed.
<LEND>

<L>7589<pc>0106-c<k1>asUyA<k2>asUyA
{%Asūyā,%}¦ f. displeasure, indignation, especially at the
merits or the happiness of another, envy, jealousy;
calumny, detraction; aversion; N. of the wife of Atri.
<LEND>

<L>7590<pc>0106-c<k1>asUyitf<k2>asUyitf
{%Asūyitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ murmuring, detracting, dis-
pleased.
<LEND>

<L>7591<pc>0106-c<k1>asUyu<k2>asUyu
{%Asūyu, us, us, u,%}¦ envious, displeased; ({%us%}), m.
calumny.
<LEND>

<L>7592<pc>0106-c<k1>asUra<k2>asUra
{#asUra#}¦ {%a-sūra, am,%} n., Ved. absence of a
person to press out the Soma juice; (Sāy.) a place
or country devoid of praise or worship.
<LEND>

<L>7593<pc>0106-c<k1>asUrkzaRa<k2>asUrkzaRa
{#asUrkzaRa#}¦ {%asūrkṣaṇa, am,%} n. disrespect.
See {%asūkṣaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>7594<pc>0106-c<k1>asUrta<k2>asUrta
{#asUrta#}¦ {%a-sūrta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not moving,
remote (?).
<LEND>

<L>7595<pc>0106-c<k1>asUrya<k2>asUrya
{#asUrya#}¦ {%a-sūrya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. sunless.
<LEND>

<L>7596<pc>0106-c<k1>asUryampaSyA<k2>asUryampaSyA
{%A-sūryam-paśyā,%}¦ f. the wife of a king who being
shut up in the inner apartments never sees the sun,
a chaste and loyal wife.
<LEND>

<L>7597<pc>0106-c<k1>asfj<k2>asfj
{#asfj#}¦ {%asṛj, k,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%sṛj%} with
{%a,%} which may stand for {%ava%} or {%ā%}), blood; saffron;
({%k%}), m. a kind of religious abstraction; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>sanguis.</nsi>] {%—Asṛk-kara, as,%} m. the essence of the
body, lymph, serum, &c. {%—Asṛk-pa, as,%} m. a Rāk-
ṣasa or imp of malicious propensities, who drinks blood.
{%—Asṛk-pāta, as,%} m. the falling of blood; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. drops of blood, as from a wound. {%—Asṛk-pāvan,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} Ved. drinking blood. {%—Asṛk-śrāva, as,%} m.
bleeding, letting blood. {%—Asṛk-śrāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
bleeding, who or what takes away blood. {%—Asṛg-%}
{%dara, as,%} m. irregular or excessive menstruation,
mœnorrhagia. {%—Asṛg-doha, as, ā, am,%} shedding
blood, bleeding. {%—Asṛg-dharā,%} f. the skin. {%—As-%}
{%ṛg-dhārā,%} f. a stream of blood; the skin. {%—Asṛg-%}
{%vahā,%} f. a blood-vessel. {%—Asṛg-vimokṣaṇa, am,%} n.
blood-letting, bleeding. {%—Asṛṅ-miśra, as, ā, am,%}
mixed or covered with blood. {%—Asṛṅ-mukha, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} Ved. whose face is bloody. {%—Asṛ-pāṭa, as, ī,%}
m. f. (for {%asṛk-pāta%}), a stream of blood.
<LEND>

<L>7598<pc>0106-c<k1>asfRi<k2>asfRi
{#asfRi#}¦ {%a-sṛṇi, is, is, i,%} unrestrained.
<LEND>

<L>7599<pc>0106-c<k1>asfzwa<k2>asfzwa
{#asfzwa#}¦ {%a-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%sṛj%}), un-
created; undistributed, not presented; continued.
{%—Asṛṣṭānna (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} one who does
not distribute food.
<LEND>

<L>7600<pc>0106-c<k1>asecana<k2>asecana
{#asecana#}¦ {%a-secana%} or {%a-secanaka, as, ā, am,%}
that on which one cannot look enough; charming,
lovely [cf. {%ā-secanaka%}].
<LEND>

<L>7601<pc>0106-c<k1>asenya<k2>asenya
{#asenya#}¦ {%a-senya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not worthy
of an army; not striking, not wounding (?).
<LEND>

<L>7602<pc>0106-c<k1>asevana<k2>asevana
{#asevana#}¦ {%a-sevana, am,%} n. or {%a-sevā,%} f. (rt.
[Page0107-a+ 75]
{%sev%}), disregarding, neglecting; not following or prac-
tising, shunning; disregard, inattention, disobedience.
<LEND>

<L>7603<pc>0107-a<k1>asevita<k2>asevita
{%A-sevita, as, ā, am,%}¦ neglected, unattended to, dis-
obeyed; abstained from, disused. {%—A-seviteśvara-%}
{%dvāra (˚ta-īś˚), as, ā, am,%} not waiting at the
doors of the great.
<LEND>

<L>7604<pc>0107-a<k1>asevya<k2>asevya
{%A-sevya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be served or attended
to; not to be used or practised, not to be eaten,
drank, &c.
<LEND>

<L>7605<pc>0107-a<k1>asOkf<k2>asOkf
{#asOkf#}¦ {%asau-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%}
to do such and such a thing.
<LEND>

<L>7606<pc>0107-a<k1>asOnAman<k2>asOnAman
{%Asau-nāman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. having such and such a
name.
<LEND>

<L>7607<pc>0107-a<k1>asOndarya<k2>asOndarya
{#asOndarya#}¦ {%a-saundarya, am,%} n. ugliness.
<LEND>

<L>7608<pc>0107-a<k1>asOmya<k2>asOmya
{#asOmya#}¦ {%a-saumya, as, ā, am,%} ugly, un-
lovely; disagreeable, displeasing. {%—Asaumya-svara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a bad or croaking voice.
<LEND>

<L>7609<pc>0107-a<k1>asOzWava<k2>asOzWava
{#asOzWava#}¦ {%a-sauṣṭhava, am,%} n. ugliness, de-
formity; demerit, worthlessness.
<LEND>

<L>7610<pc>0107-a<k1>askanna<k2>askanna
{#askanna#}¦ {%a-skanna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%skand%}), Ved.
not spilt, not effused, not fallen; not sprinkled, not
covered; permanent, durable.
<LEND>

<L>7611<pc>0107-a<k1>askandita<k2>askandita
{%A-skandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not spilt, not fallen, not
gone, not attacked. {%—Askandita-vrata, as, ā, am,%}
true to vows.
<LEND>

<L>7612<pc>0107-a<k1>askamBana<k2>askamBana
{#askamBana#}¦ {%a-skambhana, am,%} n., Ved. want
of a pillar or support.
<LEND>

<L>7613<pc>0107-a<k1>askfDoyu<k2>askfDoyu
{#askfDoyu#}¦ {%a-skṛdhoyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. not
narrow or deficient, abundant.
<LEND>

<L>7614<pc>0107-a<k1>asKalita<k2>asKalita
{#asKalita#}¦ {%a-skhalita, as, ā, am,%} unshaken,
unyielding, firm, permanent; not stumbling or slip-
ping, undeviating. {%—A-skhalita-prayāṇa, as, ā, am,%}
not stumbling in progress, with unfaltering step.
<LEND>

<L>7615<pc>0107-a<k1>asta<k2>asta<h>1
{#asta#} 1¦. {%asta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%as%}), thrown,
cast; expelled, sent away; sent, despatched; removed,
laid or set aside; finished; ({%ā%}), f., Ved. a missile,
an arrow. {%—Asta-kopa, as, ā, am,%} whose anger is
laid aside. {%—Asta-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} foolish. {%—Asta-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} obstructed (?). {%—Asta-vyasta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} scattered hither and thither, confused, disordered,
irrelevant. {%—Asta-saṅkhya, as, ā, am,%} innumerable.
<LEND>

<L>7616<pc>0107-a<k1>astf<k2>astf
{%Astṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. throwing, a shooter.
<LEND>

<L>7617<pc>0107-a<k1>asta<k2>asta<h>2
{#asta#} 2¦. {%asta, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%as ?%}), Ved.
home; death, end; ({%as%}), m. the western mountain,
behind which the sun is supposed to set; sunset;
(in astronomy) the seventh lunar mansion. {%—Astam,%}
ind. at home, home. {%—Astam i%} or {%gam%} or {%yā,%} to
go home; to go down, to set; {%astaṃ nī%} or {%vah,%}
to conduct or lead home; to lead to setting, to cause
to set; {%astaṃ gam%} or {%i%} or {%prāp,%} to go to one's eter-
nal home, to cease, to vanish, to die. {%—Asta-gata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} set (as the sun). {%—Asta-gamana, am,%}
n. setting. {%—Asta-giri, is,%} m. the western mountain.
{%—Astam-aya, as,%} m. or {%astam-ayana, am,%} n.
disappearance, setting. {%—Astam-ita, as, ā, am,%} set
(as the sun). {%—Astācala (˚ta-ac˚), as,%} m. the west-
ern mountain. {%—Astācalāvalambin (˚la-av˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} reclining on the western mountain, about to
set. {%—Astādri (˚ta-ad˚), is,%} m. the western moun-
tain. {%—Astāvalambana (˚ta-av˚), am,%} n. the resting
of a heavenly body on the western part of the
horizon. {%—Astāvalambin, ī, inī, i,%} setting as the
sun, on the point of setting.
<LEND>

<L>7618<pc>0107-a<k1>astaka<k2>astaka
{%Astaka, am,%}¦ n., Ved. home; ({%as%}), m. going to
one's eternal home, beatitude, eternal felicity.
<LEND>

<L>7619<pc>0107-a<k1>astatAti<k2>astatAti
{%Astatāti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. home.
<LEND>

<L>7620<pc>0107-a<k1>astamatI<k2>astamatI
{%Astamatī,%}¦ f. (perhaps a corruption of {%aṃśu-matī%}),
the plant Desmodium Gangeticum.
<LEND>

<L>7621<pc>0107-a<k1>astamana<k2>astamana
{%Astamana, am,%}¦ n. corruption of ({%astam-ayana%}),
setting.
<LEND>

<L>7622<pc>0107-a<k1>astamIke<k2>astamIke
{%Astamīke,%}¦ ind., Ved. at home, near.
<LEND>

<L>7623<pc>0107-a<k1>astA<k2>astA
{%Astā,%}¦ ind., Ved. at home.
<LEND>

<L>7624<pc>0107-a<k1>astabDa<k2>astabDa
{#astabDa#}¦ {%a-stabdha, as, ā, am,%} not firm or
self-possessed, confounded. {%—Astabdha-tva, am,%} n.
being confused or confounded, want of self-possession.
<LEND>
[Page0107-b+ 73]

<L>7625<pc>0107-b<k1>astarkzaRa<k2>astarkzaRa
{#astarkzaRa#}¦ {%astarkṣaṇa, am,%} n. disrespect.
See {%asūkṣaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>7626<pc>0107-b<k1>astAga<k2>astAga
{#astAga#}¦ {%astāga, as,%} m., N. of the fifteenth
Arhat of the past Utsarpiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>7627<pc>0107-b<k1>astAGa<k2>astAGa
{#astAGa#}¦ {%astāgha, as, ā, am,%} very deep. See
{%asthāgha.%}
<LEND>

<L>7628<pc>0107-b<k1>asti<k2>asti
{#asti#}¦ {%asti,%} ind. (3rd sing. pres. of rt. I. {%as%}),
being, existent, present; ({%is%}), f., N. of a sister of
Prāpti, daughter of Jarāsandhas and wife of Kaṃsa.
{%—Asti-kāya, as,%} m. a category or predicament.
{%—Asti-kṣīra, as, ā, am,%} having milk. {%—Asti-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. existence. {%—Asti-nāsti (˚na-as˚),%} ind. doubt-
ful, partly true and partly not. {%—Astināsti-tva, am,%}
n. or {%astināsti-tā,%} f. uncertain or doubtful existence;
partial existence. {%—Asti-pravāda, am,%} n. title of the
fourth of the fourteen Pūrvas or older writings of the
Jainas. {%—Asti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of property,
wealthy, opulent.
<LEND>

<L>7629<pc>0107-b<k1>astu<k2>astu
{%Astu%}¦ (3rd sing. impv. of rt. 1. {%as%}), let it be, be
it so, implying assent, also reluctance and pain.
{%—Astuṅ-kāra, as, ā, am,%} efficacious, as a medica-
ment; ({%astum%} is here the acc. of {%astu,%} ‘producing
that which the physician promises shall be.’) {%—Astv-%}
{%evam,%} ind. be it so.
<LEND>

<L>7630<pc>0107-b<k1>astuta<k2>astuta
{#astuta#}¦ {%a-stuta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%stu%}), Ved. not
praised, not deserving praise; not recited in prayer.
<LEND>

<L>7631<pc>0107-b<k1>astuti<k2>astuti
{%A-stuti, is,%}¦ m. the absence of praise.
<LEND>

<L>7632<pc>0107-b<k1>astfta<k2>astfta
{#astfta#}¦ {%a-stṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not over-
come, invincible, indestructible. {%—Astṛta-yajvan, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} Ved. sacrificing indefatigably or invincibly.
<LEND>

<L>7633<pc>0107-b<k1>astena<k2>astena
{#astena#}¦ {%a-stena, am,%} or {%a-steya, am,%} n. ab-
sence of theft, honesty.
<LEND>

<L>7634<pc>0107-b<k1>astya<k2>astya
{#astya#}¦ {%astya, am,%} n., Ved. a house. See 2. {%asta.%}
<LEND>

<L>7635<pc>0107-b<k1>astyAna<k2>astyAna
{#astyAna#}¦ {%a-styāna, am,%} n. reproach, blame.
<LEND>

<L>7636<pc>0107-b<k1>astra<k2>astra
{#astra#}¦ {%astra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 2. {%as%}), a missile
weapon, bolt, arrow; bow; a weapon in general, a
sword; [with {%astra%} cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄστρον</lang> and <lang n="greek">ἀστήρ</lang> per-
haps that which throws out or emits rays of light.]
{%—Astra-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. an arrow. {%—Astra-kāraka%}
or {%astra-kāra, as,%} or {%astra-kārin, ī,%} m. an armourer,
maker of weapons. {%—Astra-kṣepaka, as, ā, am,%}
shooting arrows. {%—Astra-cikitsaka, as,%} m. a surgeon.
{%—Astra-cikitsā,%} f. surgery. {%—Astra-jit, t,%} n., N.
of a plant. {%—Astra-jīva, as,%} m. a soldier, a warrior.
{%—Astra-dhāraṇa, am,%} n. the bearing of arms.
{%—Astra-dhārin, ī,%} m. one who bears arms, a
soldier. {%—Astra-nivāraṇa, am,%} n. warding off a
blow. {%—Astra-mārja%} or {%astramārjaka, as,%} m. an
armourer, a sword-polisher or tool-cleaner, furbisher.
{%—Astra-yuddha, as,%} m. fighting with weapons.
{%—Astra-lāghava, am,%} n. dexterity in arms. {%—Astra-%}
{%vid, t, t, t,%} skilled in the science of arms or war.
{%—Astra-vidyā,%} f. the military science. {%—Astra-%}
{%vidvas, ān, uṣī, as,%} skilled in the use of arms.
{%—Astra-vṛṣṭi, is,%} f. shower of arrows. {%—Astra-%}
{%veda, as,%} m. the science of arms and war. {%—Astra-%}
{%śastra, am,%} n. all sorts of arms (as arrows and
swords). {%—Astra-śikṣā,%} f. military exercise, passage
of arms. {%—Astra-sāyaka, as,%} m. an iron arrow.
{%—Astra-hīna, as, ā, am,%} unarmed, defenceless.
{%—Astrāgāra (˚tra-āg˚), as,%} m. an arsenal, an
armoury. {%—Astrāghāta (˚tra-āgh˚), as,%} m. a wound,
a cut. {%—Astrāhata (˚tra-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} struck,
wounded, killed.
<LEND>

<L>7637<pc>0107-b<k1>astrin<k2>astrin
{%Astrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ fighting with a missile weapon,
an archer.
<LEND>

<L>7638<pc>0107-b<k1>astrI<k2>astrI
{#astrI#}¦ {%a-strī,%} f. not a woman; (in gram.)
the masculine and neuter genders.
<LEND>

<L>7639<pc>0107-b<k1>astrIka<k2>astrIka
{%A-strīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no wife, without a
woman.
<LEND>

<L>7640<pc>0107-b<k1>astrERa<k2>astrERa
{%A-straiṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. without a wife.
<LEND>

<L>7641<pc>0107-b<k1>asTan<k2>asTan
{#asTan#}¦ {%asthan,%} the base of some of the
cases of {%asthi,%} ‘a bone,’ q. v.; thus, inst. {%asthnā,%} &c.
<LEND>
[Page0107-c+ 77]

<L>7642<pc>0107-c<k1>asTa<k2>asTa
{%Astha = asthi%}¦ at the end of some compounds.
<LEND>

<L>7643<pc>0107-c<k1>asTalA<k2>asTalA
{#asTalA#}¦ {%a-sthalā,%} f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>7644<pc>0107-c<k1>asTA<k2>asTA
{#asTA#}¦ {%asthā,%} f. (?), Ved. a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>7645<pc>0107-c<k1>asTAga<k2>asTAga
{#asTAga#}¦ {%asthāga, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%sthā%} with {%a?%}),
very deep; also written {%astāga, asthāgha, asthāna,%}
{%asthāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>7646<pc>0107-c<k1>asTAna<k2>asTAna
{#asTAna#}¦ {%a-sthāna, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%sthā%}), very
deep; ({%am%}), n. no place, a place where there is no
firm footing, a bad or wrong place; ({%am%}), ind. un-
suitably, unseasonably; {%a-sthāne,%} ind. unseasonably,
inopportunely.
<LEND>

<L>7647<pc>0107-c<k1>asTAyin<k2>asTAyin
{%A-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ not {{permanant->permanent||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}, perishable,
transient.
<LEND>

<L>7648<pc>0107-c<k1>asTAvara<k2>asTAvara
{%A-sthāvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ moveable, moving, not
fixed; (in law) personal, as property, money, cattle,
&c., opposed to land.
<LEND>

<L>7649<pc>0107-c<k1>asTita<k2>asTita
{%A-sthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not standing still, not fixed.
<LEND>

<L>7650<pc>0107-c<k1>asTiti<k2>asTiti
{%A-sthiti, is,%}¦ f. want of place or condition, want of
firm continuance.
<LEND>

<L>7651<pc>0107-c<k1>asTi<k2>asTi
{#asTi#}¦ {%asthi, i,%} Ved. {%asthan, a,%} n. (said to be
fr. rt. 2. {%as;%} perhaps fr. {%a-sthā%} for {%ā-sthā%}), a bone;
the kernel or stone of a fruit. At end of compounds
{%astha%} is found, e. g. {%an-astha,%} q. v. The weakest
cases of {%asthi%} are derived from {%asthan,%} q. v.; the
Veda has also {%asthāni, asthabhis,%} &c. [cf. Lat. <nsi>os,</nsi>
<nsi>ossis,</nsi> assimilated fr. <nsi>ostis;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀστέον</lang> Slav. <nsi>kosti,</nsi>
with <nsi>k</nsi> prefixed]. {%—Asthan-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
having bones, bony. {%—Asthi-kṛt, t, t, t,%} m. f. n. mar-
row. {%—Asthi-cchallita, am,%} n. a particular fracture
of the bones. {%—Asthi-ja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. produced in
the bones; ({%as%}), m. marrow; the thunderbolt; in
the last sense a various reading for {%akṣa-ja%}. {%—Asthi-%}
{%jña, as,%} m. marrow. {%—Asthi-tuṇḍa, as, ā,%} m. f. a
bird (whose mouth or beak consists of bone). {%—As-%}
{%thi-tejas, as,%} n. marrow. {%—Asthi-toda, as,%} m. pain
in the bones. {%—Asthi-tvac, k,%} f. the periosteum.
{%—Asthi-dhanvan, ā,%} m. a N. of Śiva. {%—Asthi-%}
{%pañjara, as,%} m. a skeleton; lit. a cage of bones.
{%—Asthi-bhakṣa, as,%} m. a dog (eating bones).
{%—Asthi-bhaṅga, as,%} m. fracture of the bones; N.
of the plant Vitis Quadrangularis. {%—Asthi-bhuj, k,%}
m. a bone-eater, a dog. {%—Asthi-bhūyas, ān, asī,%}
{%as,%} Ved. consisting chiefly of bones, dried up. {%—As-%}
{%thi-bheda, as,%} m. fracturing, breaking or wounding
a bone; a sort of bone, a bone. {%—Asthi-bhedaka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} a bone-breaker, who or what breaks
bones. {%—Asthi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having bones, verte-
brated. {%—Asthi-maya, as, ī, am,%} bony, consisting of
bones. {%—Asthi-mālā,%} f. a necklace of bones. {%—Asthi-%}
{%mālin, ī,%} m. an epithet of Śiva (this deity being
commonly represented with a necklace of skulls).
{%—Asthi-yoga, as,%} m. the joining of a broken bone.
{%—Asthi-vat, ān, atī, at,%} bony, osseous. {%—Asthi-%}
{%vigraha, as,%} m. a N. of Bhṛṅgin, one of Śiva's at-
tendants. {%—Asthi-śṛṅkhalā,%} f. or {%asthi-saṃhāra,%}
{%as, ī,%} m. f., N. of the plant Heliotropium Indicum.
{%—Asthi-śoṣa, as,%} m. dryness and decay of the
bones. {%—Asthi-saṃhāraka, as,%} m. ‘bone-seizer,’
the adjutant bird. {%—Asthi-sañcaya, as,%} m. collecting
the bones or their ashes after burning a corpse.
{%—Asthi-sandhi, is,%} m. a joint, an articulation;
uniting of a broken bone. {%—Asthi-samarpaṇa, am,%}
n. throwing the bones of a dead body into the Gan-
ges. {%—Asthi-sāra, as,%} m. marrow. {%—Asthi-sthūṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. the body, ‘having the bones for its pillars.’
{%—Asthi-sneha, as,%} m. marrow. {%—Asthi-sraṃsa, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} Ved. causing the bones to fall asunder.
<LEND>

<L>7652<pc>0107-c<k1>asTika<k2>asTika
{%Asthika, am,%}¦ n. a bone; used at the end of com-
pounds, e. g. {%an-asthika, as, ā, am,%} boneless.
<LEND>

<L>7653<pc>0107-c<k1>asTira<k2>asTira
{#asTira#}¦ {%a-sthira, as, ā, am,%} unsteady;
trembling, shaking; uncertain, unascertained; un-
worthy of confidence. {%—Asthira-tā,%} f. or {%asthira-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. unsteadiness, fickleness, mutability.
<LEND>

<L>7654<pc>0107-c<k1>asTeyas<k2>asTeyas
{%A-stheyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ unsteady, not firm.
<LEND>

<L>7655<pc>0107-c<k1>asTErya<k2>asTErya
{%A-sthairya, am,%}¦ n. instability, unsteadiness.
<LEND>

<L>7656<pc>0107-c<k1>asTUri<k2>asTUri
{#asTUri#}¦ {%a-sthūri, is, is, i,%} Ved. furnished
with more than one horse; not one-sided.
<LEND>
[Page0108-a+ 73]

<L>7657<pc>0108-a<k1>asTUla<k2>asTUla
{#asTUla#}¦ {%a-sthūla, as, ā, am,%} not bulky, de-
licate.
<LEND>

<L>7658<pc>0108-a<k1>asnAtf<k2>asnAtf
{#asnAtf#}¦ {%a-snātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} Ved. not fond
of bathing, not a bather.
<LEND>

<L>7659<pc>0108-a<k1>asnAvira<k2>asnAvira
{#asnAvira#}¦ {%a-snāvira, as, ā, am,%} Ved. with-
out sinews, without bands.
<LEND>

<L>7660<pc>0108-a<k1>asnigDa<k2>asnigDa
{#asnigDa#}¦ {%a-snigdha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%snih%}), not
smooth, harsh, hard, dry; unkind. {%—Asnigdha-dāru,%}
{%u,%} n. a kind of pine tree.
<LEND>

<L>7661<pc>0108-a<k1>asneha<k2>asneha
{%A-sneha, as, ā, am,%}¦ unkind; harsh, hard, dry;
({%as%}), m. unkindness, want of affection; absence of
oiliness.
<LEND>

<L>7662<pc>0108-a<k1>aspanda<k2>aspanda
{#aspanda#}¦ {%a-spanda, as, ā, am,%} not trembling,
not moving, fixed, unchangeable.
<LEND>

<L>7663<pc>0108-a<k1>asparSa<k2>asparSa
{#asparSa#}¦ {%a-sparśa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%spṛś%}), not
touching, not in contact; ({%as%}), m. not touching, non-
contact.
<LEND>

<L>7664<pc>0108-a<k1>asparSana<k2>asparSana
{%A-sparśana, am,%}¦ n. non-contact, avoiding the con-
tact of anything, especially of one who is impure.
<LEND>

<L>7665<pc>0108-a<k1>asparSanIya<k2>asparSanIya
{%A-sparśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be touched,
impure.
<LEND>

<L>7666<pc>0108-a<k1>asparSita<k2>asparSita
{%A-sparśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ untouched.
<LEND>

<L>7667<pc>0108-a<k1>aspfSya<k2>aspfSya
{%A-spṛśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be touched, intan-
gible.
<LEND>

<L>7668<pc>0108-a<k1>aspfzwa<k2>aspfzwa
{%A-spṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ untouched. {%—Aspṛṣṭa-%}
{%rajas-tamaska, as, ā, am,%} perfectly pure. {%—Aspṛ-%}
{%ṣṭa-vahni, is, is, i,%} unscathed by fire.
<LEND>

<L>7669<pc>0108-a<k1>aspfzwi<k2>aspfzwi
{%A-spṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. not touching, avoiding contact.
<LEND>

<L>7670<pc>0108-a<k1>aspazwa<k2>aspazwa
{#aspazwa#}¦ {%a-spaṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} indistinct.
<LEND>

<L>7671<pc>0108-a<k1>aspfta<k2>aspfta
{#aspfta#}¦ {%a-spṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. uncon-
quered, irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>7672<pc>0108-a<k1>aspfha<k2>aspfha
{#aspfha#}¦ {%a-spṛha, as, ā, am,%} undesirous,
content; indifferent.
<LEND>

<L>7673<pc>0108-a<k1>aspfhaRIya<k2>aspfhaRIya
{%A-spṛhaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ undesirable.
<LEND>

<L>7674<pc>0108-a<k1>asPuwa<k2>asPuwa
{#asPuwa#}¦ {%a-sphuṭa, am,%} n. indistinct speech;
({%as, ā, am%}), indistinct, obscure, invisible, unblown.
{%—Asphuṭa-phala, am,%} n. indistinct result; (in
geom.) gross area of a triangle, &c. {%—A-sphuṭa-%}
{%vāc, k, k, k,%} lisping, speaking indistinctly.
<LEND>

<L>7675<pc>0108-a<k1>asma<k2>asma
{#asma#}¦ {%a-sma,%} a pronominal base (supposed
to be compounded fr. {%a%} and {%sma%}) from which several
cases of the pronoun of the 1st person plur. and of
the 3rd sing. are derived. See also the next.
<LEND>

<L>7676<pc>0108-a<k1>asmad<k2>asmad
{#asmad#}¦ {%asmad,%} the plural base of the 1st
personal pronoun (said to be fr. 2. {%as,%} ‘to throw’,
Uṇ-sūt. I. 138; or fr. 1. {%as,%} ‘to be’), nom. sing.
{%aham,%} ‘I,’ du. {%āvām,%} ‘we two,’ pl. {%vayam,%} ‘we;’
acc. pl. {%asmān,%} inst. {%asmābhis,%} dat. {%asmabhyam,%}
abl. {%asmat%} or {%asmattas,%} gen. {%asmākam,%} loc. {%as-%}
{%māsu.%} Native grammarians derive the sing. as well
as plur. from the base, {%asmad.%} The form {%asme,%}
common to all oblique cases of the plur., is confined
to the Vedas; and sometimes a form {%asmāka%} is
used for the gen. {%asmākam.%} The form {%nas%} for
acc., dat., and gen. is enclitic. The form {%asma%}
is met with in the Vedas as well as the {%asmad%} of
the classical language, especially at the beginning of
compounds [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄμμες</lang> fr. <lang n="greek">ἄσμες</lang> Goth. <nsi>unsa</nsi>
for <nsi>usna;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>unser</nsi>]. {%—Asma-trā,%} ind.,
Ved. to us, with us, among us. {%—Asmatrāñc, āṅ,%}
{%ācī, āk,%} Ved. turned towards us. {%—Asmad-rāta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. given by us. {%—Asma-druh, -dhruk,%}
{%k, k,%} Ved. forming a plot against us or me, inimical.
{%—Asmad-vidha, as, ā, am,%} or {%asmādṛśa, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} or {%asmādṛś, k, k, k,%} similar, or like us or
me; one of us. {%—Asme-hiti, is,%} f., Ved. errand or
message for us.
<LEND>

<L>7677<pc>0108-a<k1>asmadIya<k2>asmadIya
{%Asmadīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ our, ours.
<LEND>

<L>7678<pc>0108-a<k1>asmadryaYc<k2>asmadryaYc
{%Asmadryañc, āṅ, drīcī, ak,%}¦ Ved. turned towards
us; ({%k%}), ind. towards us.
<LEND>

<L>7679<pc>0108-a<k1>asmayu<k2>asmayu
{%Asmayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. endeavouring to attain
us, desiring us, favourable to us.
<LEND>

<L>7680<pc>0108-a<k1>asmAka<k2>asmAka
{%Asmāka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. our, ours.
<LEND>
[Page0108-b+ 69]

<L>7681<pc>0108-b<k1>asmanta<k2>asmanta
{#asmanta#}¦ {%asmanta, am,%} n. a furnace or fire-
place. See {%aśmanta.%}
<LEND>

<L>7682<pc>0108-b<k1>asmaraRa<k2>asmaraRa
{#asmaraRa#}¦ {%a-smaraṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%smṛ%}), for-
getfulness, forgetting.
<LEND>

<L>7683<pc>0108-b<k1>asmaraRIya<k2>asmaraRIya
{%A-smaraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be recollected.
<LEND>

<L>7684<pc>0108-b<k1>asmArta<k2>asmArta
{%A-smārta, as, ī, am,%}¦ immemorial, not within
memory; illegal, not according to law; not belonging
to the Hindū institutes.
<LEND>

<L>7685<pc>0108-b<k1>asmfta<k2>asmfta
{%A-smṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not remembered, forgotten.
<LEND>

<L>7686<pc>0108-b<k1>asmfti<k2>asmfti
{%A-smṛti, is,%}¦ f. want of memory, forgetfulness;
the not being part of the institutes of law; ({%i%}), ind.,
Ved. inattentively.
<LEND>

<L>7687<pc>0108-b<k1>asmitA<k2>asmitA
{#asmitA#}¦ {%asmi-tā,%} f. (abstract noun formed
fr. {%asmi,%} 1st pers. sing. pres. of 1. {%as,%} ‘I am’),
egotism.
<LEND>

<L>7688<pc>0108-b<k1>asmera<k2>asmera
{#asmera#}¦ {%a-smera, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%smi%}), Ved. not
sullen, confiding.
<LEND>

<L>7689<pc>0108-b<k1>asyandamAna<k2>asyandamAna
{#asyandamAna#}¦ {%a-syandamāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
not gliding away.
<LEND>

<L>7690<pc>0108-b<k1>asyavAmIya<k2>asyavAmIya
{#asyavAmIya#}¦ {%asyavāmīya, am,%} n. the hymn
beginning with the words {%asya vām%} (Ṛg-veda 1. 164).
<LEND>

<L>7691<pc>0108-b<k1>asyahatya<k2>asyahatya
{#asyahatya#}¦ {%asya-hatya,%} {#asyaheti#} {%asya-heti.%}
See Gaṇa Anuśatikādi to Pāṇini VII. 3, 20.
<LEND>

<L>7692<pc>0108-b<k1>asyudyata<k2>asyudyata
{#asyudyata#}¦ {%asy-udyata, as, ā, am%} (for {%udya-%}
{%tāsi%}), having the sword raised.
<LEND>

<L>7693<pc>0108-b<k1>asra<k2>asra
{#asra#}¦ {%asra, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 2. {%as%}), hair
of the head; a corner, an angle, see {%aśra; (am),%}
n. blood; a tear, see {%asṛj%} and {%asan%}. {%—Asra-%}
{%kaṇṭha, as,%} m. an arrow; (perhaps a variation from
{%astra-kaṇṭha ?%}). {%—Asra-khadira, as,%} m. a red Mi-
mosa. {%—Asra-ja, am,%} n. flesh. {%—Asra-jit, t,%} m. a
plant; see {%astra-jit%}. {%—Asra-pa, as,%} m. a Rākṣasa
or goblin; ({%ā%}), f. a leech; a Dākinī or female imp.
{%—Asra-pattraka, as,%} m., N. of a plant, Rubia
Cordifolia L. (?). {%—Asra-pitta, am,%} n. plethora,
hemorrhage, epistaxis, involuntary discharge of blood
from the mouth, nostrils, anus, &c. {%—Asra-phalā,%} f.
the plant Boswellia Thurifera Roxb. {%—Asra-mātṛkā,%}
f. chyle, chyme. {%—Asra-rodhinī,%} f. the plant Mi-
mosa Pudica. {%—Asra-vindu-cchadā,%} f., N. of a tu-
berous plant. {%—Asrārjaka (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. the
white Tulasī plant.
<LEND>

<L>7694<pc>0108-b<k1>asrAya<k2>asrAya
{%Asrāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%asrāyate, -yitum,%} to shed tears.
<LEND>

<L>7695<pc>0108-b<k1>asravat<k2>asravat
{#asravat#}¦ {%a-sravat, an, antī, at%} (rt. {%sru%}), not
flowing; Ved. not leaky (as a ship).
<LEND>

<L>7696<pc>0108-b<k1>asruva<k2>asruva
{%A-sruva, am,%}¦ n. granulation (of a running sore).
<LEND>

<L>7697<pc>0108-b<k1>asrAma<k2>asrAma
{#asrAma#}¦ {%a-srāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not stiff,
not lame.
<LEND>

<L>7698<pc>0108-b<k1>asri<k2>asri
{#asri#}¦ {%asri, is,%} f. an angle; ten millions.
See {%aśri.%}
<LEND>

<L>7699<pc>0108-b<k1>asriD<k2>asriD
{#asriD#}¦ {%a-sridh, t, t, t,%} or {%a-sridhāna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%a-sredhat, an, antī, at,%} Ved. not doing
harm; uninjured, unfatigued; pious, peaceable.
<LEND>

<L>7700<pc>0108-b<k1>asrIvayas<k2>asrIvayas
{#asrIvayas#}¦ {%asrī-vayas,%} Ved. having food
which falls or drops down (?).
<LEND>

<L>7701<pc>0108-b<k1>asru<k2>asru
{#asru#}¦ {%asru,%} n. a tear, &c. See {%aśru.%}
<LEND>

<L>7702<pc>0108-b<k1>asreman<k2>asreman
{#asreman#}¦ {%asreman, ā,%} m., Ved. praiseworthy,
to be praised; (if fr. rt. {%sriv%}) undecaying, immortal.
<LEND>

<L>7703<pc>0108-b<k1>asva<k2>asva
{#asva#}¦ {%a-sva, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-svaka, as, akā%}
or {%ikā, am,%} or {%a-svakīya, as, ā, am,%} not one's
own, belonging to another. {%—A-sva-ga, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. not going to one's own home, homeless. {%—A-%}
{%svaga-tā,%} f., Ved. homelessness. {%—A-sva-jāti, is, is,%}
{%i,%} of a different caste, of a different species. {%—Asva-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. or {%asva-tā,%} f. want of claim or right to
anything, having no indefeasible property in it, ab-
sence of ownership.
<LEND>

<L>7704<pc>0108-b<k1>asvacCanda<k2>asvacCanda
{%A-svacchanda, as, ā, am,%}¦ docile; not self-willed,
dependant.
<LEND>
[Page0108-c+ 72]

<L>7705<pc>0108-c<k1>asvatantra<k2>asvatantra
{%A-svatantra, as, ā, am,%}¦ not self-willed, dependant,
subject; docile, humble.
<LEND>

<L>7706<pc>0108-c<k1>asvaBAva<k2>asvaBAva
{%A-svabhāva, as,%}¦ m. unnatural or unusual character
or temperament; ({%as, ā, am%}), of a different nature.
<LEND>

<L>7707<pc>0108-c<k1>asvarUpa<k2>asvarUpa
{%A-svarūpa, as, ā, am,%}¦ essentially different or
unlike.
<LEND>

<L>7708<pc>0108-c<k1>asvaveSa<k2>asvaveSa
{%A-svaveśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. having no home of
one's own, expelled from home.
<LEND>

<L>7709<pc>0108-c<k1>asvADyAya<k2>asvADyAya
{%A-svādhyāya (˚sva-adh˚), as,%}¦ m. a Brāhman
who has not performed his studies, who has not read
the Vedas previously to his investiture; interruption
or interval of study, prohibited on certain days of the
moon, at eclipses, &c.
<LEND>

<L>7710<pc>0108-c<k1>asvArTa<k2>asvArTa
{%A-svārtha (˚sva-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ not for one's
self; not for a proper object; having a different
meaning.
<LEND>

<L>7711<pc>0108-c<k1>asvIkAra<k2>asvIkAra
{%A-svīkāra, as,%}¦ m. non-acquiescence, dissent.
<LEND>

<L>7712<pc>0108-c<k1>asvIkfta<k2>asvIkfta
{%A-svīkṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dissented from, refused,
not promised.
<LEND>

<L>7713<pc>0108-c<k1>asvacCa<k2>asvacCa
{#asvacCa#}¦ {%a-svaccha, as, ā, am,%} not clear,
opaque.
<LEND>

<L>7714<pc>0108-c<k1>asvanta<k2>asvanta
{#asvanta#}¦ {%a-svanta (a-su-anta), as, ā, am,%}
ending ill, leading to or having an unfavourable issue;
(fr. {%asu-anta ?%}) approaching the end of life; a fire-
place, see {%aśvanta.%}
<LEND>

<L>7715<pc>0108-c<k1>asvapna<k2>asvapna
{#asvapna#}¦ {%a-svapna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. sleepless,
awake; ({%as%}), m. sleeplessness, the being awake; a
god, a deity [cf. <lang n="greek">ἄϋπνος</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>7716<pc>0108-c<k1>asvapnaj<k2>asvapnaj
{%A-svapnaj, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. not sleepy, sleepless.
<LEND>

<L>7717<pc>0108-c<k1>asvara<k2>asvara
{#asvara#}¦ {%a-svara, as, ā, am,%} not aloud,
speaking in an under tone, indistinct; having a bad
or croaking voice; ({%am%}), ind. not aloud, in a low
tone, indistinctly.
<LEND>

<L>7718<pc>0108-c<k1>asvargya<k2>asvargya
{#asvargya#}¦ {%a-svargya, as, ā, am,%} not leading
to heaven, unheavenly.
<LEND>

<L>7719<pc>0108-c<k1>asvasTa<k2>asvasTa
{#asvasTa#}¦ {%a-sva-stha, as, ā, am,%} not in good
health, not one's self, sick. {%—Asvastha-tā,%} f. want of
firmness; weakness, illness.
<LEND>

<L>7720<pc>0108-c<k1>asvAsTya<k2>asvAsTya
{%A-svāsthya, am,%}¦ n. indisposition, sickness, dis-
comfort, indigence.
<LEND>

<L>7721<pc>0108-c<k1>asvAdu<k2>asvAdu
{#asvAdu#}¦ {%a-svādu, us, us, u,%} tasteless, insipid.
<LEND>

<L>7722<pc>0108-c<k1>asvAmika<k2>asvAmika
{#asvAmika#}¦ {%a-svāmika, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} un-
owned, unclaimed.
<LEND>

<L>7723<pc>0108-c<k1>asvAmin<k2>asvAmin
{%A-svāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having no right or title to
anything, not being master of it; that which has no
master or owner. {%—A-svāmi-vikraya, as,%} m. sale
without ownership.
<LEND>

<L>7724<pc>0108-c<k1>asvAmya<k2>asvAmya
{%A-svāmya, am,%}¦ n. absence of right or title to pro-
perty.
<LEND>

<L>7725<pc>0108-c<k1>asvArTa<k2>asvArTa
{#asvArTa#}¦ {%a-svārtha, as, ā, am,%} unselfish,
disinterested.
<LEND>

<L>7726<pc>0108-c<k1>asveda<k2>asveda
{#asveda#}¦ {%a-sveda, as,%} m. suppressed perspira-
tion; ({%as, ā, am%}), not perspiring.
<LEND>

<L>7727<pc>0108-c<k1>ah<k2>ah<h>1
{#ah#} 1¦. {%ah%} (connected with rt. {%nah%}), cl. 1.
P., Ved. {%ahati,%} 2nd pl. perf. {%anāha,%} to string toge-
ther (?), to compose, to celebrate, to prepare, to in-
crease.
<LEND>

<L>7728<pc>0108-c<k1>ah<k2>ah<h>2
{#ah#} 2¦. {%ah,%} cl. 5. P., Ved. {%ahnoti%} or {%aḍnoti,%}
to pervade or occupy; to go or move; cl. 10 (?) to
cause to shine (?).
<LEND>

<L>7729<pc>0108-c<k1>ahana<k2>ahana
{%Ahana, as, ā, am,%}¦ illuminating, spreading light
(epithet of the dawn).
<LEND>

<L>7730<pc>0108-c<k1>ah<k2>ah<h>3
{#ah#} 3¦. {%ah%} (defect. verb, preserved only in
five persons of the perfect, viz. {%āttha, āha, āhathus,%}
{%āhatus, āhus,%} which may have a present significa-
tion), to say, speak; to acknowledge, accept, state;
to declare, express, signify; to call; to attribute; to
call (with two acc.); to hold, consider, regard; to
adjudge anything (acc.) to any one (gen.). [To
this rt. are referred, Hib. <nsi>ag-all,</nsi> ‘speech;’ <nsi>ag-aill,</nsi>
‘to speak;’ <nsi>eigh-im,</nsi> ‘I call:’ Goth. <nsi>af-aika,</nsi> ‘I
deny:' Lat. <nsi>nego</nsi> for {%n' — ego,%} 'to say no:' also <nsi>ajo.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page0109-a+ 78]

<L>7731<pc>0109-a<k1>aha<k2>aha
{#aha#}¦ {%aha,%} ind. (as a particle implying
ascertainment, affirmation, certainty, &c.) surely, cer-
tainly, yes, well; (as explaining, defining, admitting,
limiting, &c.) namely; I grant you, granted, indeed,
of course; at least. This particle is also said to im-
ply rejecting, sending; deviation from custom, im-
propriety.
<LEND>

<L>7732<pc>0109-a<k1>ahaMyAti<k2>ahaMyAti
{#ahaMyAti, ahaMyu#}¦, &c. See under {%aham.%}
<LEND>

<L>7733<pc>0109-a<k1>ahata<k2>ahata
{#ahata#}¦ {%a-hata, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%han%}), unhurt,
uninjured, not struck, not killed; unbeaten (as clothes
in washing); unwashed, new; unblemished, un-
soiled; not disappointed; ({%am%}), n. unwashed or new
clothes.
<LEND>

<L>7734<pc>0109-a<k1>ahati<k2>ahati
{%A-hati%}¦ or {%a-hanti, is,%} f., Ved. safeness.
<LEND>

<L>7735<pc>0109-a<k1>ahatvA<k2>ahatvA
{%A-hatvā,%}¦ ind. not having killed.
<LEND>

<L>7736<pc>0109-a<k1>ahananIya<k2>ahananIya
{%A-hananīya%}¦ or {%a-hantavya, as, ā, am,%} not to be
killed.
<LEND>

<L>7737<pc>0109-a<k1>ahantya<k2>ahantya
{%A-hantya%}¦ or {%a-hantra%} or {%a-hanya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. indestructible, invincible.
<LEND>

<L>7738<pc>0109-a<k1>ahan<k2>ahan
{#ahan#}¦ {%ahan%} and {%ahas,%} n. (said to be fr. 2.
{%hā%} with {%a,%} ‘not;’ according to others, who compare
the Goth. <nsi>daya,</nsi> Germ. <nsi>tag,</nsi> Eng. <nsi>day,</nsi> a corruption
of {%dahan%} fr. rt. {%dah;%} the nom. acc. voc. sing. and
the middle cases come fr. {%ahas,%} the others fr. {%ahan;%}
in the Vedas the middle cases also are sometimes
formed fr. {%ahan,%} e. g. {%ahabhyas, ahabhis%}); a day;
a sacrificial or festival day; a day's work; a portion
of a book appointed for one day's reading; day per-
sonified as one of the eight Vasus; N. of a Tīrtha;
{%ahany-ahani%} or {%ahar-ahaḥ,%} day by day, daily;
{%ahanī,%} du. day and night; {%tad ahas,%} on that very
day; {%yad ahas,%} on which day. (As the last mem-
ber of a compound {%ahan%} generally appears in the
form {%aha,%} m., rarely n., but sometimes also in the
form {%ahan,%} e. g. {%puṇyāha, ekāhan,%} q. v. As the
first member of a compound {%ahas%} and {%ahar%} are the
usual forms; as in the following examples.) {%—Ahaḥ-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. lord of the day, the sun; see {%ahar-%}
{%pati%}. {%—Ahaḥ-śeṣa, am,%} n. evening. {%—Ahar-āgama,%}
{%as,%} m. the approach of day. {%—Ahar-gaṇa, as,%} m. a
series of sacrificial days; a month; any calculated
term. {%—Ahar-jara, as,%} m., Ved. the year (as making
days become old). {%—Ahar-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
born in the day or from day, not belonging to night
or to the spirits of darkness. {%—Ahar-diva, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. existing every day; ({%am%}), ind. daily, day by day.
{%—Ahar-divi,%} ind., Ved. day by day, every day, con-
stantly. {%—Ahar-dṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. beholding the day,
living. {%—Ahar-niśa, am,%} n. day and night, a whole
day; ({%am%}), ind. day and night, during the whole
day, continually. {%—Ahar-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of the
day; the sun; epithet of Śiva; also written {%ahaḥ-%}
{%pati%}. {%—Ahar-bāndhava, as,%} m. the sun. {%—Ahar-%}
{%bhāj, k, k, k,%} Ved. partaking of the day. {%—Ahar-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. the sun. {%—Ahar-mukha, am,%} n. com-
mencement of the day, morning, dawn. {%—Ahar-%}
{%loka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. taking the place of day.
{%—Ahar-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. existing (many) days;
known long ago; knowing the (fit) time or season.
{%—Ahaś-śas,%} ind., Ved. every day. {%—Ahas-kara,%}
{%as,%} m. the sun. {%—Ahas-pati, is,%} m. the sun; swallow
wort.
<LEND>

<L>7739<pc>0109-a<k1>ahorAtra<k2>ahorAtra
{%Aho-rātra,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>7740<pc>0109-a<k1>ahana<k2>ahana
{#ahana#}¦ {%ahana.%} See 2. {%ah.%}
<LEND>

<L>7741<pc>0109-a<k1>aham<k2>aham
{#aham#}¦ {%aham,%} nom. sing. ‘I.’ The supposed
base of this 1st personal pronoun is {%asmad,%} q. v. [cf.
Zend <nsi>azem;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐγών, ἐγώ, ἱών;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ego;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>ik;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>ich;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>asz;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>az;</nsi> Cambro-
brit. <nsi>ym;</nsi> Bret. <nsi>am, em</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>7742<pc>0109-a<k1>ahaMyAti<k2>ahaMyAti
{%Ahaṃ-yāti, is,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Saṃyāti.
<LEND>

<L>7743<pc>0109-a<k1>ahaMyu<k2>ahaMyu
{%Ahaṃyu, us, us, u,%}¦ selfish, proud, haughty; ({%us%}),
m. a warrior.
<LEND>

<L>7744<pc>0109-a<k1>ahaMvAdin<k2>ahaMvAdin
{%Ahaṃ-vādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ speaking only of one's self,
presumptuous, haughty.
<LEND>

<L>7745<pc>0109-a<k1>ahaMSreyas<k2>ahaMSreyas
{%Ahaṃ-śreyas, as,%}¦ or {%ahaṃ-śreyasa, am,%} n. claim-
ing superiority for one's self.
<LEND>

<L>7746<pc>0109-a<k1>ahaMsana<k2>ahaMsana
{%Ahaṃ-sana, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. gaining for one's
self, obtaining for one's self.
<LEND>
[Page0109-b+ 75]

<L>7747<pc>0109-b<k1>ahaNkartavya<k2>ahaNkartavya
{%Ahaṅ-kartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be referred to self;
({%am%}), n. the object of Ahaṅkāra.
<LEND>

<L>7748<pc>0109-b<k1>ahaNkAra<k2>ahaNkAra
{%Ahaṅ-kāra, as,%}¦ m. the making of self, sense of
self, thinking of self, egotism, individuality; self-con-
sciousness, pride, haughtiness; (in the Sāṅkhya phil.)
the third of the eight producers or elements of crea-
tion, viz. the conceit or conception of individuality,
individualization. {%—Ahaṅkāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} con-
scious, selfish, proud.
<LEND>

<L>7749<pc>0109-b<k1>ahaNkArin<k2>ahaNkArin
{%Ahaṅ-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ self-important, proud.
<LEND>

<L>7750<pc>0109-b<k1>ahaNkArya<k2>ahaNkArya
{%Ahaṅ-kārya, am,%}¦ n. that which is to be done by
one's self, any personal object, business or matter.
<LEND>

<L>7751<pc>0109-b<k1>ahaNkfta<k2>ahaNkfta
{%Ahaṅ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ egotistic; proud, haughty;
conscious.
<LEND>

<L>7752<pc>0109-b<k1>ahaNkfti<k2>ahaNkfti
{%Ahaṅ-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. egotism, high opinion of one's
self, pride.
<LEND>

<L>7753<pc>0109-b<k1>ahamagrikA<k2>ahamagrikA
{%Aham-agrikā,%}¦ f. or {%aham-uttara, am,%} n. a contest
for superiority, rivalry.
<LEND>

<L>7754<pc>0109-b<k1>ahamahamikA<k2>ahamahamikA
{%Aham-ahamikā,%}¦ f. assertion or conceit of superi-
ority, boasting, egotism; military vaunting.
<LEND>

<L>7755<pc>0109-b<k1>ahampUrva<k2>ahampUrva
{%Aham-pūrva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. desirous of being
first.
<LEND>

<L>7756<pc>0109-b<k1>ahampUrvikA<k2>ahampUrvikA
{%Aham-pūrvikā,%}¦ f. or {%aham-prathamikā,%} f. emu-
lative onset, the running forward of soldiers with
emulation; conceit, vaunting.
<LEND>

<L>7757<pc>0109-b<k1>ahamBadra<k2>ahamBadra
{%Aham-bhadra, am,%}¦ n. self-conceit, a high notion
of one's own superiority.
<LEND>

<L>7758<pc>0109-b<k1>ahammati<k2>ahammati
{%Aham-mati, is,%}¦ f. or {%aham-māna, am,%} n. self-
illusion, spiritual ignorance, conceit, self-love.
<LEND>

<L>7759<pc>0109-b<k1>ahara<k2>ahara
{#ahara#}¦ {%a-hara, as,%} m. (rt. {%hṛ%}), N. of the
twelfth Manu; a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>7760<pc>0109-b<k1>aharaRIya<k2>aharaRIya
{%A-haraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be taken away.
<LEND>

<L>7761<pc>0109-b<k1>ahArin<k2>ahArin
{%A-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ not taking (?).
<LEND>

<L>7762<pc>0109-b<k1>ahArya<k2>ahArya
{%A-hārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be stolen, not to be
removed; ({%as%}), m. a mountain. {%—Ahārya-tā,%} f. or
{%ahārya-tva, am,%} n. the state of not being liable to
be taken away, security.
<LEND>

<L>7763<pc>0109-b<k1>aharita<k2>aharita
{#aharita#}¦ {%a-harita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not yellow.
<LEND>

<L>7764<pc>0109-b<k1>aharza<k2>aharza
{#aharza#}¦ {%a-harṣa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%hṛṣ%}), un-
happy, gloomy, sorrowful.
<LEND>

<L>7765<pc>0109-b<k1>aharzita<k2>aharzita
{%A-harṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unhappy, sorrowful.
<LEND>

<L>7766<pc>0109-b<k1>ahala<k2>ahala
{#ahala#}¦ {%a-hala, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-hali, is, is, i,%}
unploughed, unfurrowed.
<LEND>

<L>7767<pc>0109-b<k1>ahalya<k2>ahalya
{%A-halya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not arable, unploughed;
({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras; N. of the wife of Gautama
or Śaradvat; N. of a sea.
<LEND>

<L>7768<pc>0109-b<k1>ahallika<k2>ahallika
{#ahallika#}¦ {%ahallika, as,%} m., Ved. a talker,
tattler (?).
<LEND>

<L>7769<pc>0109-b<k1>ahavanIya<k2>ahavanIya
{#ahavanIya#}¦ {%a-havanīya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%hu%}),
not to be offered as an oblation, not fit or proper to
be sacrificed.
<LEND>

<L>7770<pc>0109-b<k1>ahavis<k2>ahavis
{%A-havis, is, is, is,%}¦ Ved. without oblations, sacri-
ficeless.
<LEND>

<L>7771<pc>0109-b<k1>ahasta<k2>ahasta
{#ahasta#}¦ {%a-hasta, as, ā, am,%} handless.
<LEND>

<L>7772<pc>0109-b<k1>ahaha<k2>ahaha
{#ahaha#}¦ {%ahaha%} or {%ahahā,%} ind. a particle or
interjection, as Ah! Aha! &c., implying surprise,
fatigue, pain, sorrow, pleasure, calling.
<LEND>

<L>7773<pc>0109-b<k1>ahArya<k2>ahArya
{#ahArya#}¦ {%a-hārya,%} &c. See under {%a-hara.%}
<LEND>

<L>7774<pc>0109-b<k1>ahAvas<k2>ahAvas
{#ahAvas#}¦ {%ahāvas,%} Ved., said to be a sound
like a flourish at the end of a hymn.
<LEND>

<L>7775<pc>0109-b<k1>ahi<k2>ahi
{#ahi#}¦ {%ahi, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%aṃh;%} according to
Sāy. fr. rt. {%han%} with {%ā%} prefixed and shortened, ‘one
that destroys on all sides’), a snake; the serpent of
the sky, the demon Vṛtra; a cloud; water; lead;
a traveller; the sun; a N. of Rāhu, the ascending
node; the navel; [cf. {%agha%} and {%aṃhu,%} pp. 1, 6; Lat.
<nsi>anguis;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔχι-ς, ἔχιδνα, ἔγχε-λυς</lang> and <lang n="greek">ὄφις</lang>
Lith. <nsi>ungury-s;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>ûgorj;</nsi> Armen. <nsi>ôz;</nsi> Germ.
<nsi>unc;</nsi> Mod. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀχέλι</lang>] {%—Ahi-kānta, as,%} m. air,
wind; (snakes being supposed to feed upon air.)
{%—Ahi-koṣa, as,%} m. the slough or cast skin of a
snake. {%—Ahi-kṣatra%} and {%ahi-kṣetra, as,%} m., N.
of a country. {%—Ahi-gopa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. guarded
by a serpent. {%—Ahi-ghna, am,%} n., Ved. the
slaying of the serpent or demon (Vṛtra) who ob-
[Page0109-c+ 79]
structs the heavenly waters. {%—Ahi-ghnī, īs,%} m., Ved.
killing snakes. {%—Ahi-cchatra, as,%} m. a kind of
vegetable poison; the plant Gymnema Sylvestre (?);
N. of a country; ({%ā%}), f. sugar; the city of Ahi-
cchatra. {%—Ahi-cchatraka, am,%} n. a mushroom.
{%—Ahi-jit, t,%} m., N. of Kṛṣṇa, also of Indra.
{%—Ahi-tuṇḍika, as,%} m. a snake-catcher or ex-
hibiter; see {%āhituṇḍika%}. {%—Ahi-dat, an, atī, at,%}
or {%ahi-danta, as, ī, am,%} having the teeth of a ser-
pent. {%—Ahi-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} enemy of the serpents or
of Vṛtra; ({%ṭ%}), m. an ichneumon; a peacock; Garuḍa,
the bird of Viṣṇu; Indra. {%—Ahi-nakulikā,%} f. the
natural enmity between a snake and an ichneumon.
{%—Ahi-nāma-bhṛt, t,%} m., N. of Baladeva (as identi-
fied with Śeṣa). {%—Ahi-nirmoka, as,%} m. or {%ahi-%}
{%nirvlayanī,%} f. the cast off skin of a snake. {%—Ahi-%}
{%patāka, as,%} m. a kind of snake, not venomous.
{%—Ahi-pati, is,%} m., N. of Śeṣa, sovereign of
the snakes, also of Vāsuki and others; any large
serpent. {%—Ahi-putraka, as,%} m. a kind of boat.
{%—Ahi-pūtana, as, ā,%} m. f. sores on the hinder
part of the body (of children). {%—Ahi-phena, am,%}
n. opium, the saliva or venom of a snake [cf. 2.
{%a-phena%}]. {%—Ahi-bradhna, as,%} m., N. of Śiva; one
of the Rudras; corrupted fr. {%ahir-budhnyas%}. {%—Ahi-%}
{%bradhna-devatā,%} f. the twenty-sixth lunar mansion.
{%—Ahi-bhaya, as,%} m. fear of a lurking snake;
apprehension of treachery. {%—Ahibhaya-dā,%} f., N.
of the plant Flacourtia Cataphracta Roxb. {%—Ahi-%}
{%bhānu, us, us, u,%} Ved. shining like serpents; epithet
of the Maruts. {%—Ahi-bhuj, k,%} m. Garuḍa, the bird
of Viṣṇu; a peacock; N. of a plant. {%—Ahi-bhṛt,%}
{%t,%} m. ‘carrying serpents,’ N. of Śiva. {%—Ahi-manyu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. enraged like serpents, epithet of the
Maruts; (Sāy.) ‘endowed with destructive anger,’
or ‘with unimpaired knowledge.’ {%—Ahi-mardanī,%}
f., N. of a plant. {%—Ahi-māya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
multiform or versatile like a snake, showing the same
variety of colour and shape. {%—Ahi-māra%} or {%ahi-%}
{%medaka, as,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—Ahi-ripu, us,%} m.
a peacock. {%—Ahir-budhna, as,%} m., N. of Śiva; cor-
rupted fr. {%ahir-budhnyas%}. {%—Ahirbudhna-devatā,%}
{%ās,%} f. pl. the twenty-sixth lunar mansion. {%—Ahir-%}
{%bradhna, as,%} m., N. of a Rudra. {%—Ahi-latā,%} f., the
plant Betel; another plant. {%—Ahi-locana, as,%} m., N.
of a servant of Śiva. {%—Ahi-vidaṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
snake-bitten. {%—Ahi-vidviṣ, ṭ,%} m. Garuḍa; Indra.
{%—Ahi-śuṣmasattvan, ā,%} m., Ved. one whose men
(the Maruts) hiss like serpents; epithet of Indra; (ac-
cording to Sāy. {%ahi-śuṣma%} means ‘of all-pervading
strength,’ and is to be separated from {%sattvan.%}) {%—Ahi-%}
{%hatya, am,%} n. the slaying of the serpent or demon
(Vṛtra) who obstructs the heavenly waters. {%—Ahi-han,%}
{%ā,%} m., Ved. killing serpents or Vṛtra. {%—Ahy-arṣu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. gliding like a snake.
<LEND>

<L>7776<pc>0109-c<k1>ahika<k2>ahika<h>1
1. {%ahika, as,%}¦ m. a blind snake, not venomous,
see {%andhāhika; (ā),%} f., N. of the silk-cotton tree,
Bombax Heptaphyllum Salmalia Malabarica. (For 2.
{%ahika,%} see below.)
<LEND>

<L>7777<pc>0109-c<k1>ahiMsaka<k2>ahiMsaka
{#ahiMsaka#}¦ {%a-hiṃsaka, as, ā, am,%} or {%a-hiṃsat,%}
{%an, antī, at,%} or {%a-hiṃsāna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%hiṃs%}),
Ved. not hurting, harmless, innocuous.
<LEND>

<L>7778<pc>0109-c<k1>ahiMsA<k2>ahiMsA
{%A-hiṃsā,%}¦ f. harmlessness, not injuring anything,
one of the cardinal virtues of most Hindū sects, but
particularly of the Buddhists and Jainas; security,
safeness. {%—Ahiṃsā-nirata, as, ā, am,%} devoted to
harmlessness or gentleness.
<LEND>

<L>7779<pc>0109-c<k1>ahiMsita<k2>ahiMsita
{%A-hiṃsita%}¦ or {%a-hiṃsyamāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. un-
injured, being unharmed.
<LEND>

<L>7780<pc>0109-c<k1>ahiMsra<k2>ahiMsra
{%A-hiṃsra, as, ā, am,%}¦ innocuous, innocent, harm-
less; ({%am%}), n. harmless behaviour; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the
plant Momordica Cochinchinensis, Spreng, (commonly
called Kūrkavāli.)
<LEND>

<L>7781<pc>0109-c<k1>ahika<k2>ahika<h>2
{#ahika#} 2¦. {%ahika, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ahan,%} q. v.),
is found at the end of a few compounds in the sense
of lasting a certain number of days, e. g. {%daśāhika,%}
lasting for ten days. See 1. {%ahika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>7782<pc>0109-c<k1>ahiRqukA<k2>ahiRqukA
{#ahiRqukA#}¦ {%ahiṇḍukā,%} f. a kind of small poi-
sonous animal.
<LEND>
[Page0110-a+ 70]

<L>7783<pc>0110-a<k1>ahita<k2>ahita
{#ahita#}¦ {%a-hita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dhā%}), not placed,
not put, not fixed; unfit, improper; unadvantageous,
noxious; hurtful, prejudicial; hostile, inimical; ({%as%}),
m. an enemy; ({%am%}), n. damage; food &c. contra-
indicated in a disease. {%—Ahita-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} ad-
verse, inimical, acting unkindly. {%—A-hita-nāman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having as yet no name. {%—A-hita-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} not friendly-minded, hating, ad-
verse, inimical. {%—Ahita-hita-vicāra-śūnya-buddhi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} whose intellect is incapable of discriminating
between good and evil. {%—Ahitecchu (˚ta-ic˚), us, us,%}
{%u,%} not wishing well, malevolent.
<LEND>

<L>7784<pc>0110-a<k1>ahimakara<k2>ahimakara
{#ahimakara#}¦ {%a-hima-kara, as,%} or {%a-hima-tejas,%}
{%ās,%} or {%a-hima-ruci, is,%} or {%a-himāṃśu (˚ma-aṃ˚),%}
{%us,%} m. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>7785<pc>0110-a<k1>ahI<k2>ahI
{#ahI#}¦ {%ahī, īs,%} m., Ved., N. of a demon con-
quered by Indra and his companions; a serpent (see
{%ahi%}); a cow; ({%ī%}), du. heaven and earth.
<LEND>

<L>7786<pc>0110-a<k1>ahIna<k2>ahIna<h>1
{#ahIna#} 1¦. {%ahīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ahan%}), lasting
several days; ({%as%}), m. a sacrifice lasting several days;
one lasting twelve days (i. e. {%stoma%} or {%yajña%}).
<LEND>

<L>7787<pc>0110-a<k1>ahIna<k2>ahIna<h>2
{#ahIna#} 2¦. {%ahīna, as,%} m. (fr. {%ahi,%} q. v.), a
large snake (?).
<LEND>

<L>7788<pc>0110-a<k1>ahIna<k2>ahIna<h>3
{#ahIna#} 3¦. {%a-hīna, as, ā, am%} (rt. 2. {%hā%}), un-
impaired, whole, entire; full, luxurious; not deprived
of, not withdrawing; possessed of; not outcast or
vile. {%—A-hīna-gu, us,%} m., N. of a prince, son of
Devānīka. {%—A-hīna-vādin, ī,%} m. a witness capable
of giving evidence.
<LEND>

<L>7789<pc>0110-a<k1>ahIra<k2>ahIra
{#ahIra#}¦ {%ahīra, as,%} m. a cowherd. See {%abhīra.%}
<LEND>

<L>7790<pc>0110-a<k1>ahIraRi<k2>ahIraRi
{#ahIraRi#}¦ {%ahīraṇi, is,%} or {%ahīraṇin, ī,%} m. a
kind of snake, said to be two-headed.
<LEND>

<L>7791<pc>0110-a<k1>ahISuva<k2>ahISuva
{#ahISuva#}¦ {%ahīśuva, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
demon conquered by Indra.
<LEND>

<L>7792<pc>0110-a<k1>ahu<k2>ahu
{#ahu#}¦ {%ahu, us, vī, u,%} (in compounds) narrow.
See {%aṃhu.%}
<LEND>

<L>7793<pc>0110-a<k1>ahuta<k2>ahuta
{#ahuta#}¦ {%a-huta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%hu%}), unsacri-
ficed, unoffered, not yet sacrificed; one who has
not received any sacrifice; not gained or obtained by
sacrifice; ({%as%}), m. religious meditation, prayer, and
study of the Veda, considered as one of the five great
sacraments, otherwise called Brahma-yajña. {%—A-hutād%}
{%(˚ta-ad), t, t, t,%} Ved. not eating of a sacrifice; not
allowed to partake of a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>7794<pc>0110-a<k1>ahUta<k2>ahUta
{#ahUta#}¦ {%a-hūta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%hve%}), uncalled, un-
summoned, unchallenged. (The form {%a-huta%} with the
sense ‘uncalled,’ given by Wilson, is very questionable.)
<LEND>

<L>7795<pc>0110-a<k1>ahfRAna<k2>ahfRAna
{#ahfRAna#}¦ {%a-hṛṇāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
being angry, friendly.
<LEND>

<L>7796<pc>0110-a<k1>ahfRIyamAna<k2>ahfRIyamAna
{%A-hṛṇīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. not being angry,
jealous, or envious; not discontented, willing; that
which is bestowed willingly.
<LEND>

<L>7797<pc>0110-a<k1>ahfdya<k2>ahfdya
{#ahfdya#}¦ {%a-hṛdya, as, ā, am,%} not desired, not
agreeable. {%—Ahṛdya-kṛt, t, t, t,%} disagreeable, caus-
ing disgust.
<LEND>

<L>7798<pc>0110-a<k1>ahe<k2>ahe
{#ahe#}¦ {%ahe,%} ind. a particle implying reproach,
rejection, separation.
<LEND>

<L>7799<pc>0110-a<k1>ahetu<k2>ahetu
{#ahetu#}¦ {%a-hetu, us,%} m. absence of cause or
reason. {%—Ahetu-tā,%} f. or {%ahetu-tva, am,%} n. absence
of cause, reason, or necessity.
<LEND>

<L>7800<pc>0110-a<k1>ahetuka<k2>ahetuka
{%A-hetuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ causeless, groundless.
<LEND>

<L>7801<pc>0110-a<k1>ahEtuka<k2>ahEtuka
{%A-haituka, as, ī, am,%}¦ having no reason or founda-
tion; causeless, having no motive, disinterested.
<LEND>

<L>7802<pc>0110-a<k1>aheru<k2>aheru
{#aheru#}¦ {%aheru, us,%} f. the plant Asparagus
Racemosus.
<LEND>

<L>7803<pc>0110-a<k1>aheLat<k2>aheLat
{#aheLat#}¦ {%a-heḷat, an, antī, at,%} or {%a-heḷamāna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%a-heḷayat, an, antī, at%} (rt. {%heḍ,%} Ved.
{%hel%} with {%a%}), Ved. not angry, not displeased, favour-
able.
<LEND>

<L>7804<pc>0110-a<k1>aho<k2>aho
{#aho#}¦ {%aho,%} ind. (as a particle and inter-
[Page0110-b+ 71]
jection of joyful or painful surprise) Ah! (of enjoy-
ment or satisfaction) Oh! (of fatigue, discontent,
compassion, sorrow, regret) Alas! Ah! (of praise)
Bravo! (of reproach) Fie! (of calling) Ho! Halo!
(of doubt, deliberation) either, or; (of contempt)
Pshaw! It is also sometimes an expletive.
<LEND>

<L>7805<pc>0110-b<k1>ahopuruzikA<k2>ahopuruzikA
{%Aho-puruṣikā,%}¦ f. self-confidence; boasting.
<LEND>

<L>7806<pc>0110-b<k1>ahotf<k2>ahotf
{#ahotf#}¦ {%a-hotṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. not sacrificing;
not competent to sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>7807<pc>0110-b<k1>ahorAtra<k2>ahorAtra
{#ahorAtra#}¦ {%aho-rātra, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. {%ahan,%}
q. v. {%+ rātri,%} q. v.), a day and night, <lang n="greek">νυχθήμερον</lang> a
day of twenty-four hours or thirty Muhūrtas, from
sunrise to sunrise; a day and night of the Pitṛs = a
month of the gods = a year of Brahmā = 2000 Yugas
of the gods; ({%am%}), ind. day and night, continually,
always.
<LEND>

<L>7808<pc>0110-b<k1>ahorUpa<k2>ahorUpa
{%Aho-rūpa, am,%}¦ n. the appearance of day.
<LEND>

<L>7809<pc>0110-b<k1>ahovata<k2>ahovata
{#ahovata#}¦ {%ahovata,%} ind. a particle of calling,
of compassion, of fatigue.
<LEND>

<L>7810<pc>0110-b<k1>ahohI<k2>ahohI
{#ahohI#}¦ {%ahohī,%} ind. in a variegated or
wonderful manner (?).
<LEND>

<L>7811<pc>0110-b<k1>ahna<k2>ahna
{#ahna#}¦ {%ahna, as,%} m. as last member of a
compound {%= ahan,%} a day, q. v.; e. g. {%madhyāhna,%}
midday; {%aparāhṇa,%} afternoon.
<LEND>

<L>7812<pc>0110-b<k1>ahnAya<k2>ahnAya
{%Ahnāya,%}¦ ind. formerly; instantly; soon, speedily.
<LEND>

<L>7813<pc>0110-b<k1>ahnika<k2>ahnika
{%Ahnika, as, ā, am,%}¦ as last member of a compound
{%= ahan;%} e. g. {%dvy-ahnika, as, ā, am,%} lasting two
days.
<LEND>

<L>7814<pc>0110-b<k1>ahnI<k2>ahnI
{%Ahnī,%}¦ f. and {%ahnīya, as, ā, am,%} or {%ahnya, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (all fr. {%ahan%}), used at the end of compounds;
e. g. {%rathāhnya, am,%} n. the daily journey of a
chariot.
<LEND>

<L>7815<pc>0110-b<k1>ahnavAyya<k2>ahnavAyya
{#ahnavAyya#}¦ {%a-hnavāyya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%hnu%}),
Ved. not to be denied or set aside; ({%as%}), m. accord-
ing to Sāy. the N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>7816<pc>0110-b<k1>ahyarzu<k2>ahyarzu
{#ahyarzu#}¦ {%ahy-arṣu.%} See under {%ahi.%}
<LEND>

<L>7817<pc>0110-b<k1>ahraya<k2>ahraya
{#ahraya#}¦ {%a-hraya%} or {%a-hrayāṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%hrī,%} shame, q. v.), Ved. luxurious, proud, bold, con-
scious of one's own power.
<LEND>

<L>7818<pc>0110-b<k1>ahri<k2>ahri
{%A-hri, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. luxurious, fat.
<LEND>

<L>7819<pc>0110-b<k1>ahrI<k2>ahrI
{%A-hrī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ Ved. shameless, importunate.
<LEND>

<L>7820<pc>0110-b<k1>ahrIka<k2>ahrIka
{%A-hrīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ shameless; ({%as%}), m. a Bud-
dhist mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>7821<pc>0110-b<k1>ahruta<k2>ahruta
{#ahruta#}¦ {%a-hruta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%hvṛ%}), Ved.
not fluctuating, not stumbling; going in a straight
line; not crooked, straight. {%—Ahruta-psu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} Ved. of straight or upright appearance.
<LEND>

<L>7822<pc>0110-b<k1>ahvalA<k2>ahvalA
{#ahvalA#}¦ {%a-hvalā,%} f., Ved. not fluctuating,
not stumbling, firmness; the plant Semecarpus Ana-
cardium.
<LEND>
<H>{#A#}

<L>7823<pc>0110-b<k1>A<k2>A<h>1
{#A#} 1¦. {%ā,%} the second letter of the alphabet,
corresponding to {%a%} long, as in <nsi>far.</nsi>
<LEND>

<L>7824<pc>0110-b<k1>A<k2>A<h>2
{#A#} 2¦. {%ā,%} (as a particle or interjection of as-
sent) yes, verily; (of compassion or pain) Ah!
Alas! in the latter sense it is more correctly written
{%ās;%} (of reminiscence) Ah! Oh! (a conjunction dis-
junctive) but; (a conjunction copulative) and. This
particle remains unaltered in orthography even before
vowels.
<LEND>

<L>7825<pc>0110-b<k1>A<k2>A<h>3
{#A#} 3¦. {%ā%} a prefix to verbs and nouns, (ex-
pressing) near, near to, towards, from all sides, all
around; and sometimes redundant. As a prefix to verbs
of motion it expresses the notion of moving or going
towards; e. g. {%ā-krāmati,%} he goes towards. When
prefixed to roots like {%gam, yā,%} and {%i,%} to go, and {%dā,%}
to give, it reverses the action; e. g. {%ā-gacchati,%} he
comes; {%ā-datte,%} he takes.
<div n="P"/>As unconnected with verbs and prefixed to nouns it
forms with them either compound adverbs or adjectives,
implying the limit conclusive (until, unto, as far as),
[Page0110-c+ 65]
or the limit inceptive (from, from thence or that
time); e. g. {%ā-maraṇam,%} till death; {%ā-kumāram,%}
from childhood [cf. <nsi>a puero</nsi>]; {%ā-gopālā dvijātayaḥ,%}
the twice-born including the cowherds.
<div n="P"/>(Prefixed to adjectives &c. it implies) diminution;
e. g. {%ā-pāṇḍu,%} a little pale; {%ā-pakva,%} half-cooked.
<div n="P"/>(As a separable adverb {%ā%} implies) near, near to,
towards; thereto, further, also, and; especially, even.
In many places in the Vedas {%ā%} gives force to the
word which precedes it (e. g. {%mahimā vām In-%}
{%drāgnī paniṣṭha ā,%}  ‘your greatness, O Indra and
Agni, is praiseworthy indeed’); and in a similar man-
ner we find it in the Veda placed after prepositions,
the sense of which is strengthened by it.
<div n="P"/>(As a separable preposition with acc. or abl.) near
to, up to, to, as far as; e. g. {%śatam ā jātīs,%} as
far as a hundred births; {%ā samudrāt,%} as far as the
ocean: (with abl.) away from, from; out of, of, from
among; e. g. {%ā mūlāt,%} from the beginning; {%bahubhya%}
{%ā,%} from among many: (with loc.) in, at; e. g.
{%dama ā,%} in a house.
<LEND>

<L>7826<pc>0110-c<k1>A<k2>A<h>4
{#A#} 4¦. {%ā, ās,%} m., N. of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
Lakṣmī.
<LEND>

<L>7827<pc>0110-c<k1>Ai<k2>Ai
{#A-i#}¦ {%ā-i.%} See {%e.%}
<LEND>

<L>7828<pc>0110-c<k1>AinD<k2>AinD
{#A-inD#}¦ {%ā-indh.%} See {%endh.%}
<LEND>

<L>7829<pc>0110-c<k1>Ainv<k2>Ainv
{#A-inv#}¦ {%ā-inv.%} See {%env.%}
<LEND>

<L>7830<pc>0110-c<k1>Aiz<k2>Aiz
{#A-iz#}¦ {%ā-iṣ.%} See {%eṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>7831<pc>0110-c<k1>AIkz<k2>AIkz
{#A-Ikz#}¦ {%ā-īkṣ.%} See {%ekṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>7832<pc>0110-c<k1>AIr<k2>AIr
{#A-Ir#}¦ {%ā-īr.%} See {%er.%}
<LEND>

<L>7833<pc>0110-c<k1>AIz<k2>AIz
{#A-Iz#}¦ {%ā-īṣ.%} See {%eṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>7834<pc>0110-c<k1>Au<k2>Au
{#A-u#}¦ {%ā-u.%} See {%o.%}
<LEND>

<L>7835<pc>0110-c<k1>Aukz<k2>Aukz
{#A-ukz#}¦ {%ā-ukṣ.%} See {%okṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>7836<pc>0110-c<k1>AUrRu<k2>AUrRu
{#A-UrRu#}¦ {%ā-ūrṇu.%} See {%orṇu.%}
<LEND>

<L>7837<pc>0110-c<k1>AUh<k2>AUh
{#A-Uh#}¦ {%ā-ūh.%} See {%oh.%}
<LEND>

<L>7838<pc>0110-c<k1>Af<k2>Af
{#A-f#}¦ {%ā-ṛ.%} See {%ār.%}
<LEND>

<L>7839<pc>0110-c<k1>AfC<k2>AfC
{#A-fC#}¦ {%ā-ṛch.%} See {%ārch.%}
<LEND>

<L>7840<pc>0110-c<k1>AfYj<k2>AfYj
{#A-fYj#}¦ {%ā-ṛñj.%} See {%ārñj.%}
<LEND>

<L>7841<pc>0110-c<k1>AfD<k2>AfD
{#A-fD#}¦ {%ā-ṛdh.%} See {%ārdh.%}
<LEND>

<L>7842<pc>0110-c<k1>Akac<k2>Akac
{#Akac#}¦ {%ā-kac,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kacate, -citum,%} to
tie on, to fasten on.
<LEND>

<L>7843<pc>0110-c<k1>AkatTana<k2>AkatTana
{#AkatTana#}¦ {%ā-katthana, as, ā, am,%} boasting,
swaggering.
<LEND>

<L>7844<pc>0110-c<k1>Akan<k2>Akan
{#Akan#}¦ {%ā-kan,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kanati, -nitum,%} or
Intens. {%-cākanti,%} to be pleased with (with loc.); to
endeavour to obtain; to love, to desire, solicit, praise.
<LEND>

<L>7845<pc>0110-c<k1>Akamp<k2>Akamp
{#Akamp#}¦ {%ā-kamp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kampate, -pitum,%}
to tremble: Caus. {%-kampayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
tremble.
<LEND>

<L>7846<pc>0110-c<k1>Akampa<k2>Akampa
{%Ā-kampa, as,%}¦ m. or {%ā-kampana, am,%} n. trem-
bling motion, shaking, trembling.
<LEND>

<L>7847<pc>0110-c<k1>Akampita<k2>Akampita
{%Ā-kampita%}¦ or {%ā-kampra, as, ā, am,%} shaken,
trembling; moved, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>7848<pc>0110-c<k1>Akara<k2>Akara
{#Akara#}¦ {%ā-kara, ākarin,%} &c. See under {%ā-kṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>7849<pc>0110-c<k1>AkaraRa<k2>AkaraRa
{#AkaraRa#}¦ {%ā-karaṇa.%} See under {%ā-kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>7850<pc>0110-c<k1>AkarR<k2>AkarR
{#AkarR#}¦ {%ā-karṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-karṇayati, -yitum,%}
to give ear to, listen to, hear.
<LEND>

<L>7851<pc>0110-c<k1>AkarRa<k2>AkarRa
{%Ā-karṇa,%}¦ up to the ear, (occurs at the commence-
ment of several compounds to denote the end of an
arrow reaching to the ear in drawing a bow.)
<LEND>

<L>7852<pc>0110-c<k1>AkarRana<k2>AkarRana
{%Ā-karṇana, am,%}¦ n. hearing, listening.
<LEND>

<L>7853<pc>0110-c<k1>AkarRita<k2>AkarRita
{%Ā-karṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heard, listened to; over-
heard.
<LEND>

<L>7854<pc>0110-c<k1>AkarRya<k2>AkarRya
{%Ā-karṇya,%}¦ ind. having heard or listened to.
<LEND>

<L>7855<pc>0110-c<k1>Akarza<k2>Akarza
{#Akarza#}¦ {%ā-karṣa, ā-karṣin,%} &c. See under
{%ā-kṛṣ.%}
<LEND>
[Page0111-a+ 73]

<L>7856<pc>0111-a<k1>Akal<k2>Akal
{#Akal#}¦ {%ā-kal,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kalayati, -yitum,%}
to shake, agitate, throw, cast; to lay hold of, seize;
to tie, fasten; to surrender, transfer; to observe, take
into consideration; to consider [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀκέλλω</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>7857<pc>0111-a<k1>Akalana<k2>Akalana
{%Ā-kalana, am,%}¦ n. binding, confinement; counting,
reckoning; laying hold of; wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>7858<pc>0111-a<k1>Akalita<k2>Akalita
{%Ā-kalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound; counted, reckoned;
seized, held.
<LEND>

<L>7859<pc>0111-a<k1>Akalpa<k2>Akalpa
{#Akalpa#}¦ {%ā-kalpa, as,%} m. (rt. {%kḷp%} with {%ā%}),
adding to, improving, increasing; ornament, decora-
tion; sickness, disease.
<LEND>

<L>7860<pc>0111-a<k1>Akalpaka<k2>Akalpaka
{%Ā-kalpaka, as,%}¦ m. remembering with regret, miss-
ing; joy; fainting, loss of sense or perception; dark-
ness; a knot or joint.
<LEND>

<L>7861<pc>0111-a<k1>Akalpam<k2>Akalpam
{%Ā-kalpam,%}¦ ind. till the end of a kalpa.
<LEND>

<L>7862<pc>0111-a<k1>Akalya<k2>Akalya
{#Akalya#}¦ {%ākalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-kalya%}), sick-
ness, disease.
<LEND>

<L>7863<pc>0111-a<k1>Akaza<k2>Akaza
{#Akaza#}¦ {%ā-kaṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kaṣ,%} ‘to rub,’
with {%ā%}), a touchstone.
<LEND>

<L>7864<pc>0111-a<k1>Akazaka<k2>Akazaka
{%Ā-kaṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ cutting, rubbing, or test-
ing with a touchstone, touching, assaying.
<LEND>

<L>7865<pc>0111-a<k1>Akazika<k2>Akazika
{%Ā-kaṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ touching, testing.
<LEND>

<L>7866<pc>0111-a<k1>Akasmika<k2>Akasmika
{#Akasmika#}¦ {%ākasmika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%a-kasmāt%}),
causeless, unforeseen, unexpected, sudden. {%—Ākasmi-%}
{%ka-tva, am,%} n. suddenness, &c.
<LEND>

<L>7867<pc>0111-a<k1>AkANkz<k2>AkANkz
{#AkANkz#}¦ {%ā-kāṅkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-kāṅkṣati,%}
{%-te, -ṣitum,%} to desire, long for, hope for, endeavour
to gain, expect (with acc.); to endeavour to reach a
place, turn to; (in gram.) to require some word or
words to be supplied for the completion of the sense.
<LEND>

<L>7868<pc>0111-a<k1>AkANkza<k2>AkANkza
{%Ā-kāṅkṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ desiring, wishing; (in
gram.) requiring a word or words to complete the
sense; ({%ā%}), f. desire, wish; (in gram.) the requiring
of a word or period for the completion of the sense;
looking at or towards; purpose, intention; enquiry,
asking; the significancy of a word.
<LEND>

<L>7869<pc>0111-a<k1>AkANkzaRIya<k2>AkANkzaRIya
{%Ā-kāṅkṣaṇīya%}¦ or {%ā-kāṅkṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}
to be desired or expected, desirable.
<LEND>

<L>7870<pc>0111-a<k1>AkANkzat<k2>AkANkzat
{%Ā-kāṅkṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing, expecting;
looking at, looking to or towards.
<LEND>

<L>7871<pc>0111-a<k1>AkANkzita<k2>AkANkzita
{%Ā-kāṅkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished, desired; asked,
enquired; regarded, looked at; wanted, necessary.
<LEND>

<L>7872<pc>0111-a<k1>AkANkzin<k2>AkANkzin
{%Ā-kāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ wishing, desirous, wishful,
hopeful; asking, enquiring, expectant.
<LEND>

<L>7873<pc>0111-a<k1>AkANkzya<k2>AkANkzya
{%Ā-kāṅkṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirable; ({%am%}), n. need
of supplying a word or words for the completion of
the sense.
<LEND>

<L>7874<pc>0111-a<k1>AkAya<k2>AkAya
{#AkAya#}¦ {%ā-kāya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ci%} with {%ā%}), a
funeral pile; abode, residence.
<LEND>

<L>7875<pc>0111-a<k1>AkAyya<k2>AkAyya
{#AkAyya#}¦ {%ā-kāyya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ki%} with
{%ā%}), Ved. desirable; in every way praiseworthy or
commendable.
<LEND>

<L>7876<pc>0111-a<k1>AkAra<k2>AkAra
{#AkAra#}¦ {%ā-kāra.%} See under {%ā-kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>7877<pc>0111-a<k1>AkAla<k2>AkAla
{#AkAla#}¦ {%ā-kāla, as,%} m. the right time; (for
{%a-kāla%}) wrong or inauspicious time.
<LEND>

<L>7878<pc>0111-a<k1>AkAlika<k2>AkAlika
{%Ākālika, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} not filling a space of
time, momentary, instantaneous; unseasonable; ({%ī%}),
f. lightning. {%—Ākālika-tva, am,%} n. unseasonableness,
suddenness.
<LEND>

<L>7879<pc>0111-a<k1>AkAS<k2>AkAS
{#AkAS#}¦ {%ā-kāś,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kāśate, -śitum,%} to
shine, be bright; to view, recognize.
<LEND>

<L>7880<pc>0111-a<k1>AkASa<k2>AkASa
{%Ā-kāśa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (in Ved. m.) light, clear-
ness; a free space, vacuity; the ether, the sky or
atmosphere considered as the fifth element; Brahma
as identical with ether. {%Ākāśa%} is the subtle and
ethereal fluid, supposed to fill and pervade the uni-
verse and to be the peculiar vehicle of life and of
sound. {%Ākāśe,%} ind. in the air; a stage direction
implying something said by or to a person out of
sight. {%—Ākāśa-kakṣā,%} f. the horizon, ‘girdle of the
sky.’ {%—Ākāśa-ga, as, ā, am,%} going through the
atmosphere. {%—Ākāśa-garbha, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-
sattva. {%—Ākāśa-camasa, as,%} m. the moon, (‘a cup
[Page0111-b+ 75]
or vessel with ether.’) {%—Ākāśa-ja, as, ā, am,%} pro-
duced in the sky. {%—Ākāśa-jananin, ī,%} m. a loop-
hole, a casement, an embrasure. {%—Ākāśa-dīpa%} or
{%ākāśa-pradīpa, as,%} m. a lamp or torch lighted in
honour of Lakṣmī or Viṣṇu and elevated on a pole
in the air at the Dīvāli (Dīpāli) festival, in the month
Kārttika; a beacon, a lantern on a pole. {%—Ākāśa-%}
{%pratiṣṭhita, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Ākāśa-%}
{%buddha-lakṣa, as,%} m. (in theatrical language) fixing
the gaze on some object out of sight of the audience.
{%—Ākāśa-bhāṣita, am,%} n. (in dramatic language)
speaking outside or off the stage; a supposed speech,
which is replied to as if it had been spoken; a voice
or sound in the air. {%—Ākāśa-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the
celestial sphere; the atmosphere. {%—Ākāśa-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} consisting of ether. {%—Ākāśa-māṃsī,%} f. the
plant Nardostachys Jaṭāmāṃsī. {%—Ākāśa-mūlī,%} f. the
aquatic plant Pistia Stratiotes. {%—Ākāśa-yāna, am,%} n.
a heavenly car, one moving through the air. {%—Ākāśa-%}
{%rakṣin, ī,%} m. a warder, a watchman on the outer
battlements. {%—Ākāśa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} filling a cer-
tain place, spacious, extensive. {%—Ākāśa-vartman, a,%}
n. the atmosphere, the firmament, the air. {%—Ākāśa-%}
{%vallī,%} f. a sort of creeper, a parasite, Cassyta Filiformis.
{%—Ākāśa-vāṇī,%} f. a voice from heaven; m., N.
of the author of a Hanumat-stotra. {%—Ākāśa-salila,%}
{%am,%} n. rain. {%—Ākāśa-stha, as, ā, am,%} abiding in
the sky, aerial. {%—Ākāśa-sphaṭika, as,%} m. a kind of
crystal supposed to be formed in the atmosphere. It is
of two kinds, Sūrya-kānta and Candra-kānta, q. v.
{%—Ākāśānantyāyatana (˚śa-anantya-āy˚), am,%} n.
abode of infinity or of infinite space; N. of a world
with Buddhists. {%—Ākāśeśa (˚śa-īś˚), as,%} m. epithet
of Indra, as ruler of the firmament; (in law) any
helpless person, as a child, a woman, a pauper or in-
valid (who has no other possession than the air).
<LEND>

<L>7881<pc>0111-b<k1>AkASIya<k2>AkASIya
{%Ākāśīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%ākāśin, ī, inī, i,%} atmo-
spherical.
<LEND>

<L>7882<pc>0111-b<k1>AkASya<k2>AkASya
{%Ākāśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in the atmosphere.
<LEND>

<L>7883<pc>0111-b<k1>AkiYcana<k2>AkiYcana
{#AkiYcana#}¦ {%ākiñcana%} or {%ākiñcanya, am,%} n.
(fr. {%a-kiñcana%}), want of any possession, poverty.
<LEND>

<L>7884<pc>0111-b<k1>Akidanti<k2>Akidanti
{#Akidanti#}¦ {%ākidanti, is,%} and {%ākidantīya, as,%}
m., N. of a warrior-tribe and its chief.
<LEND>

<L>7885<pc>0111-b<k1>AkIm<k2>AkIm
{#AkIm#}¦ {%ā-kīm,%} ind., Ved. (with abl.) from.
<LEND>

<L>7886<pc>0111-b<k1>AkuYc<k2>AkuYc
{#AkuYc#}¦ {%ā-kuñc,%} cl. 6. P., 1. A. {%-kucati,%}
{%-kuñcate, -citum,%} to bend: Caus. {%-kuñcayati, -yitum,%}
to draw together, contort, contract; to bend inwards,
shorten.
<LEND>

<L>7887<pc>0111-b<k1>AkuYcana<k2>AkuYcana
{%Ā-kuñcana, am,%}¦ n. compression, contraction,
shrinking; collecting, heaping; curving, flexure;
contortion.
<LEND>

<L>7888<pc>0111-b<k1>AkuYcita<k2>AkuYcita
{%Ā-kuñcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, contorted, contracted;
twisted, crooked.
<LEND>

<L>7889<pc>0111-b<k1>AkuRWita<k2>AkuRWita
{#AkuRWita#}¦ {%ā-kuṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%} con-
founded, abashed.
<LEND>

<L>7890<pc>0111-b<k1>AkurvatI<k2>AkurvatI
{#AkurvatI#}¦ {%ā-kurvatī.%} See under {%ā-kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>7891<pc>0111-b<k1>Akula<k2>Akula
{#Akula#}¦ {%ā-kula, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%kul,%} to com-
pact or compress together), filled, full, overburdened
with (with inst.); confounded, confused, agitated,
flurried; confused (in order), disordered; taken out
of one's natural condition; incoherent, contradic-
tory; ({%am%}), n. an inhabited place. {%—Ākula-tā,%} f. or
{%ākula-tva, am,%} n. accumulation, multitude; perplexity,
confusion, bewilderment. {%—Ākulendriya (˚la-in˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} confused in mind.
<LEND>

<L>7892<pc>0111-b<k1>Akulaya<k2>Akulaya
{%Ākulaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%ākulayati, -yitum,%} to con-
found, make disordered.
<LEND>

<L>7893<pc>0111-b<k1>Akuli<k2>Akuli
{%Ākuli, is,%}¦ m., N. of an Asura priest.
<LEND>

<L>7894<pc>0111-b<k1>Akulita<k2>Akulita
{%Ākulita, as, ā, am,%}¦ confounded; bewildered, flur-
ried, agitated; distressed.
<LEND>

<L>7895<pc>0111-b<k1>AkulIkf<k2>AkulIkf
{%Ākulī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to fill with;
to confound. {%—Ākulī-karaṇa, am,%} n. confounding.
{%—Ākulī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} confounded; perplexed,
bewildered.
<LEND>

<L>7896<pc>0111-b<k1>AkulIBU<k2>AkulIBU
{%Ākulī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to become
[Page0111-c+ 77]
perplexed. {%—Ākulī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} perplexed, con-
founded.
<LEND>

<L>7897<pc>0111-c<k1>Akuzwa<k2>Akuzwa
{#Akuzwa#}¦ {%ā-kuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} expelled, ex-
tracted.
<LEND>

<L>7898<pc>0111-c<k1>AkUj<k2>AkUj
{#AkUj#}¦ {%ā-kūj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kūjati, -jitum,%} to
twitter, warble, coo.
<LEND>

<L>7899<pc>0111-c<k1>AkUta<k2>AkUta
{#AkUta#}¦ {%ā-kūta, am,%} n. (rt. {%kū%} or {%ku,%} to
sound), meaning, intention, purpose; wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>7900<pc>0111-c<k1>AkUti<k2>AkUti
{%Ā-kūti, is,%}¦ f. intention, wish, desire; N. of a
daughter of Manu Svāyambhuva and of Śatarūpā.
{%—Ākūti-pra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. accomplishing one's
intentions.
<LEND>

<L>7901<pc>0111-c<k1>AkUvAra<k2>AkUvAra
{#AkUvAra#}¦ {%ākūvāra, as,%} m. {%= a-kū-pāra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>7902<pc>0111-c<k1>Akf<k2>Akf
{#Akf#}¦ {%ā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. 5. P. {%-karoti, -kṛṇoti,%}
{%-kartum,%} to bring near or towards, to bring down,
to make or form wholly; to drive near to or together:
Caus. P. {%-kārayati, -yitum,%} to ask any one (acc.)
for anything (acc.); to invite to a place, to call into
existence, to cause to appear: Desid. {%-cikīrṣati,%}
to intend to accomplish: Intens. {%-karikrati,%} 3rd pl.,
Ved. to attract repeatedly towards one's self.
<LEND>

<L>7903<pc>0111-c<k1>AkAra<k2>AkAra
{%Ā-kāra, as,%}¦ m. form, figure, shape, stature, appear-
ance, aspect, behaviour, external gesture or aspect of
the body, the expression of the face, as furnishing
a clue to the disposition of mind; hint, sign, token;
the letter {%ā%}. {%—Ākāra-gupti, is,%} f. or {%ākāra-gopana,%}
{%am,%} n. dissimulation, suppressing all sign or inclina-
tion of the feelings. {%—Ākāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
a shape, embodied, symmetrical, handsome, well-
formed. {%—Ākāra-varṇa-suślakṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} de-
licate in shape and colour.
<LEND>

<L>7904<pc>0111-c<k1>AkAraRa<k2>AkAraRa
{%Ā-kāraṇa%}¦ or {%ā-karaṇa, am, ā,%} n. f. calling, in-
viting, a call or summons; challenging, a challenge.
<LEND>

<L>7905<pc>0111-c<k1>AkAraRIya<k2>AkAraRIya
{%Ā-kāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be called.
<LEND>

<L>7906<pc>0111-c<k1>AkArita<k2>AkArita
{%Ā-kārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ called, summoned; stipulated,
agreed; demanded, exacted.
<LEND>

<L>7907<pc>0111-c<k1>AkurvatI<k2>AkurvatI
{%Ā-kurvatī,%}¦ f., N. of a certain rocky hill. (Rām. II.
71. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>7908<pc>0111-c<k1>Akfta<k2>Akfta
{%Ā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. brought near to; being
near.
<LEND>

<L>7909<pc>0111-c<k1>Akfti<k2>Akfti
{%Ā-kṛti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. a constituent part; form, figure,
shape, appearance, aspect; character, specimen; the
body; tribe, species; a metre consisting of four lines
with twenty-two syllables to each line. {%—Ākṛti-gaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. a list of specimens, a collection of words belong-
ing to a certain grammatical rule, which does not ex-
hibit every word belonging to that rule, but only speci-
mens; whereas a simple Gaṇa exhibits every word;
(explained by native authorities to mean a list of words,
the fact of a word belonging to which can only be
determined by observing the forms used by classical
authors.) {%—Ākṛti-cchatrā,%} f. the plant Achyranthes
Aspera. {%—Ākṛti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having shape, em-
bodied.
<LEND>

<L>7910<pc>0111-c<k1>Akfz<k2>Akfz
{#Akfz#}¦ {%ā-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P., 6. P. A. {%-karṣati,%}
{%kṛṣati, -te, -karṣṭum%} or {%-kraṣṭum,%} to draw
towards, attract, put on, draw away; to bend (e. g.
{%cāpam,%} a bow); to draw or tear off, draw out of;
to withdraw, deprive of, take away; to borrow: Caus.
{%-karṣayati, -yitum,%} to draw near to one's self.
<LEND>

<L>7911<pc>0111-c<k1>Akarza<k2>Akarza
{%Ā-karṣa, as,%}¦ m. drawing or attracting towards
one's self, pulling to or towards, dragging, attracting,
hawling; drawing the bow; attraction, fascination;
spasm; playing with dice; a die or dice; a board for
such a game; an organ of sense; magnetic attrac-
tion; a magnet, a loadstone; N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>7912<pc>0111-c<k1>Akarzaka<k2>Akarzaka
{%Ā-karṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ attractive, what draws
or attracts; ({%as%}), m. a magnet or loadstone; ({%ikā%}),
f., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>7913<pc>0111-c<k1>AkarzaRa<k2>AkarzaRa
{%Ā-karṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. pulling, drawing, attracting;
({%ī%}), f. a crooked stick for pulling down fruit, &c.; any
instrument for pulling.
<LEND>

<L>7914<pc>0111-c<k1>Akarzika<k2>Akarzika
{%Ā-karṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ magnetic, attractive.
<LEND>

<L>7915<pc>0111-c<k1>Akarzita<k2>Akarzita
{%Ā-karṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn, attracted.
<LEND>

<L>7916<pc>0111-c<k1>Akarzin<k2>Akarzin
{%Ā-karṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ attractive; ({%ṇī%}), f. a rod with
a hook at the end for pulling down boughs in order
to gather fruit.
<LEND>
[Page0112-a+ 76]

<L>7917<pc>0112-a<k1>Akfzwa<k2>Akfzwa
{%Ā-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn, pulled, attracted.
{%—Ākṛṣṭa-mānasa, as, ā, am,%} distracted in mind.
{%—Ākṛṣṭa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pulling, dragging, pull-
ing up or out; pulling to, attracting; charming,
fascinating.
<LEND>

<L>7918<pc>0112-a<k1>Akfzwi<k2>Akfzwi
{%Ā-kṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. attracting, drawing near, bending
of a bow. {%—Ākṛṣṭi-mantra, as,%} m. an incantation
by which another person is attracted.
<LEND>

<L>7919<pc>0112-a<k1>Akfzya<k2>Akfzya
{%Ā-kṛṣya,%}¦ ind. having drawn, extracted, pulled or
dragged.
<LEND>

<L>7920<pc>0112-a<k1>AkfzyamARa<k2>AkfzyamARa
{%Ā-kṛṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being drawn or at-
tracted.
<LEND>

<L>7921<pc>0112-a<k1>AkF<k2>AkF
{#AkF#}¦ {%ā-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -karitum%} or
{%-rītum,%} to scatter or sprinkle over, fill, fill up, give
abundantly, cover, replenish, heap up, accumulate.
<LEND>

<L>7922<pc>0112-a<k1>Akara<k2>Akara
{%Ā-kara, as,%}¦ m. one who scatters over or fills; ac-
cumulation, collection, plenty, multitude; a mine, a
rich source of anything; best, excellent; N. of a
country; N. of the Mahā-bhāṣya.
<LEND>

<L>7923<pc>0112-a<k1>Akarin<k2>Akarin
{%Ākarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ produced in a mine, mineral.
<LEND>

<L>7924<pc>0112-a<k1>AkIrRa<k2>AkIrRa
{%Ā-kīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ scattered, spread; overspread,
filled; crowded, impervious; covered, surrounded.
{%—Ākīrṇa-tā,%} f. or {%ākīrṇa-tva, am,%} n. fulness, crowd,
multitude.
<LEND>

<L>7925<pc>0112-a<k1>Ake<k2>Ake
{#Ake#}¦ {%āke,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%añc%} with {%ā%}), Ved.
hitherward, near, in the neighbourhood. {%—Āke-nipa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. considering or regarding from a near
place; wise; (Sāy.) falling down near at hand, ad-
vancing near (as rays of light).
<LEND>

<L>7926<pc>0112-a<k1>AkE<k2>AkE
{#AkE#}¦ {%ā-kai,%} cl. 1. P. A., Ved. {%-kāyati, -te,%}
{%kātum,%} to implore, appeal to, solicit; praise.
<LEND>

<L>7927<pc>0112-a<k1>Akokera<k2>Akokera
{#Akokera#}¦ {%ākokera, as,%} m. the constellation
Capricornus (<lang n="greek">Αἰγόκερως</lang>).
<LEND>

<L>7928<pc>0112-a<k1>AkOSala<k2>AkOSala
{#AkOSala#}¦ {%ākauśala, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-kuśala%}),
inexpertness, want of skill or practice.
<LEND>

<L>7929<pc>0112-a<k1>Akna<k2>Akna
{#Akna#}¦ {%ākna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ac%} or {%añc%}), bent,
curved.
<LEND>

<L>7930<pc>0112-a<k1>Akrand<k2>Akrand
{#Akrand#}¦ {%ā-krand,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krandati, -te,%}
{%-ditum,%} to shout at, roar at; to invoke; to cry with
sorrow, lament, weep: Caus. P. {%-krandayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to weep or cry; inspire courage by its sound
(as a drum ?); to shout at, roar at; to cry without
interruption.
<LEND>

<L>7931<pc>0112-a<k1>Akranda<k2>Akranda
{%Ā-kranda, as,%}¦ m. calling, crying, crying out;
shouting; weeping, sobbing; sound; war-cry; furious
or violent combat; war, battle; violence; a friend;
a brother; a king, a lord; usurper; a king who
prevents an ally from aiding another; ({%as, ā, am%}),
one who checks or restrains.
<LEND>

<L>7932<pc>0112-a<k1>Akrandana<k2>Akrandana
{%Ā-krandana, am,%}¦ n. lamentation, weeping.
<LEND>

<L>7933<pc>0112-a<k1>Akrandika<k2>Akrandika
{%Ākrandika, as, ī, am,%}¦ going to where cries of
distress are heard.
<LEND>

<L>7934<pc>0112-a<k1>Akrandita<k2>Akrandita
{%Ā-krandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ roaring, crying wofully;
invoked; ({%am%}), n. a cry, a roar; lamentation.
<LEND>

<L>7935<pc>0112-a<k1>Akrandin<k2>Akrandin
{%Ā-krandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ shouting at; invoking in a
weeping tone, weeping.
<LEND>

<L>7936<pc>0112-a<k1>Akram<k2>Akram
{#Akram#}¦ {%ā-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A., cl. 4. P. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-kramate, -krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to step near
to; to come towards, approach; to enter; to
visit; arrive at; to step or tread upon, to lie heavily
on, to press; to hold fast with the hands, seize; to
attack, invade, take possession of, become master of,
conquer, overcome; to undertake, begin; to rise,
mount, ascend; to cover: Caus. P. {%-kramayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to come or step near: Desid.
{%-cikraṃsate,%} to wish to ascend.
<LEND>

<L>7937<pc>0112-a<k1>Akrama<k2>Akrama
{%Ā-krama, as,%}¦ m. coming near, approaching, arriv-
ing, attaining; overcoming, obtaining; invading, at-
tacking, falling upon, an attack; spreading or going
over or upon, surpassing, overloading; might, valour.
<LEND>

<L>7938<pc>0112-a<k1>AkramaRa<k2>AkramaRa
{%Ā-kramaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. coming near, ap-
proaching, stepping upon; ({%am%}), n. attacking,
marching against, invading; overpowering, subduing;
spreading or extending over or upon; going over or
beyond; attacking.
<LEND>

<L>7939<pc>0112-a<k1>Akramya<k2>Akramya<h>1
1. {%ā-kramya%}¦ or {%ā-kramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} to be
[Page0112-b+ 72]
approached; to be attacked; to be ascended or sur-
passed or overcome, to be seized.
<LEND>

<L>7940<pc>0112-b<k1>Akramya<k2>Akramya<h>2
2. {%ā-kramya,%}¦ ind. having attacked, invaded, seized
upon, overrun or encroached.
<LEND>

<L>7941<pc>0112-b<k1>AkrAnta<k2>AkrAnta
{%Ā-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come near; obtained; pos-
sessed; overspread; overcome, overrun; attacked;
surpassed, surmounted; accompanied, attended; agi-
tated or overcome by (any feeling); pained, distressed.
{%—Ākrānta-mati, is, is, i,%} mentally overcome or
overpowered; having the mind engrossed or deeply
impressed.
<LEND>

<L>7942<pc>0112-b<k1>AkrAnti<k2>AkrAnti
{%Ā-krānti, is,%}¦ f. ascending, rising; stepping upon;
going over or beyond; overpowering; might, valour.
<LEND>

<L>7943<pc>0112-b<k1>AkrAmaka<k2>AkrAmaka
{%Ā-krāmaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ an invader, attacker.
<LEND>

<L>7944<pc>0112-b<k1>AkrI<k2>AkrI
{#AkrI#}¦ {%ā-krī,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-krīṇāti, -ṇīte,%}
{%-kretum,%} to purchase.
<LEND>

<L>7945<pc>0112-b<k1>Akraya<k2>Akraya
{%Ā-kraya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a dealer, small trader,
pedlar.
<LEND>

<L>7946<pc>0112-b<k1>AkrIq<k2>AkrIq
{#AkrIq#}¦ {%ā-krīḍ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krīḍati, -te,%}
{%-ḍitum,%} to play, sport, take one's pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>7947<pc>0112-b<k1>AkrIqa<k2>AkrIqa
{%Ā-krīḍa, as,%}¦ m. a play, sport, pleasure; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. a playing-place, pleasure-grove, garden, royal
garden; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Karutthāma.
<LEND>

<L>7948<pc>0112-b<k1>AkrIqana<k2>AkrIqana
{%Ā-krīḍana, am,%}¦ n. sporting, taking pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>7949<pc>0112-b<k1>AkrIqin<k2>AkrIqin
{%Ā-krīḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sporting, playing.
<LEND>

<L>7950<pc>0112-b<k1>AkruS<k2>AkruS
{#AkruS#}¦ {%ā-kruś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati, -kroṣṭum,%}
to cry out at, call out aloud to; to call to any one in
an abusive manner, to assail with angry and menacing
words; to scold at any one; to curse, revile, express
displeasure.
<LEND>

<L>7951<pc>0112-b<k1>Akruzwa<k2>Akruzwa
{%Ā-kruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ scolded, reviled; vociferated;
abused, calumniated, accused; cursed; ({%am%}), n. call-
ing out.
<LEND>

<L>7952<pc>0112-b<k1>AkroSa<k2>AkroSa
{%Ā-krośa, as,%}¦ m. calling or crying out, vociferation;
scolding, reviling, blaming, censuring, abuse; a curse
or oath.
<LEND>

<L>7953<pc>0112-b<k1>AkroSaka<k2>AkroSaka
{%Ā-krośaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ vociferous, abusing, abusive.
<LEND>

<L>7954<pc>0112-b<k1>AkroSana<k2>AkroSana
{%Ā-krośana, am,%}¦ n. assailing with harsh language,
scolding, censuring; imprecation, curse.
<LEND>

<L>7955<pc>0112-b<k1>AkroSanIya<k2>AkroSanIya
{%Ā-krośanīya%}¦ or {%ā-krośitavya%} or {%ā-krośya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} censurable, to be reviled or cursed.
<LEND>

<L>7956<pc>0112-b<k1>AkroSita<k2>AkroSita
{%Ā-krośita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cursed, abused.
<LEND>

<L>7957<pc>0112-b<k1>Akrozwf<k2>Akrozwf
{%Ā-kroṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. a reviler; one who vociferates.
<LEND>

<L>7958<pc>0112-b<k1>AklI<k2>AklI
{#AklI#}¦ {%ā-klī,%} an undeclinable word joined
to the roots {%as, kṛ,%} and {%bhū.%} See Gaṇa to Pāṇini
I. 4, 61.
<LEND>

<L>7959<pc>0112-b<k1>Akleda<k2>Akleda
{#Akleda#}¦ {%ā-kleda, as,%} m. moistening, sprink-
ling.
<LEND>

<L>7960<pc>0112-b<k1>AkzadyUtika<k2>AkzadyUtika
{#AkzadyUtika#}¦ {%ākṣadyūtika, as, ī, am,%} effected
or completed by gambling. See {%akṣa-dyūta%} under
3. {%akṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>7961<pc>0112-b<k1>AkzapaRa<k2>AkzapaRa
{#AkzapaRa#}¦ {%ā-kṣapaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. 1. {%kṣap%}),
fasting, purification by fasting, abstinence.
<LEND>

<L>7962<pc>0112-b<k1>AkzapAwika<k2>AkzapAwika
{#AkzapAwika#}¦ {%ākṣapāṭika, as,%} m. a judge.
See {%akṣa-pāṭaka%} under 2. {%akṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>7963<pc>0112-b<k1>AkzapAda<k2>AkzapAda
{#AkzapAda#}¦ {%ākṣapāda, as,%} m. a follower of
the Nyāya doctrine; a logician. See under 2. {%akṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>7964<pc>0112-b<k1>AkzaBArika<k2>AkzaBArika
{#AkzaBArika#}¦ {%ākṣabhārika.%} See Gaṇa to
Pāṇini V. 1. 50.
<LEND>

<L>7965<pc>0112-b<k1>Akzar<k2>Akzar
{#Akzar#}¦ {%ā-kṣar,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kṣārayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to abuse, revile, accuse, punish. (Sometimes
regarded as a nom. fr. the next.)
<LEND>

<L>7966<pc>0112-b<k1>AkzAra<k2>AkzAra
{%Ā-kṣāra, as,%}¦ m. calumny, accusation.
<LEND>

<L>7967<pc>0112-b<k1>AkzAraRa<k2>AkzAraRa
{%Ā-kṣāraṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. abuse; calumnious ac-
cusation (especially of adultery).
<LEND>

<L>7968<pc>0112-b<k1>AkzArita<k2>AkzArita
{%Ā-kṣārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ calumniated, falsely ac-
cused; accused of adultery or fornication; guilty,
criminal; reviled, abused.
<LEND>

<L>7969<pc>0112-b<k1>Akzi<k2>Akzi
{#Akzi#}¦ {%ā-kṣi,%} cl. 2. 6. P. {%-kṣeti, -kṣiyati,%}
{%-kṣetum,%}  to abide, dwell in, stay at (with acc.);
to inhabit; to exist; to possess, take possession of
(with acc.).
<LEND>
[Page0112-c+ 74]

<L>7970<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzit<k2>Akzit
{%Ā-kṣit, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. abiding, dwelling in, stay-
ing at.
<LEND>

<L>7971<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzika<k2>Akzika
{#Akzika#}¦ {%ākṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr. 3. {%akṣa%}),
relating or belonging to a die or to gambling, &c.;
won at dice; ({%am%}), n. a gambling debt, money lost
at play; ({%as%}), m., N. of the tree Morinda Tinc-
toria. {%—Ākṣika-paṇa, as,%} m. a stake, a wager, a
bet.
<LEND>

<L>7972<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzip<k2>Akzip
{#Akzip#}¦ {%ā-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣipati, -te,%}
{%-kṣeptum,%} to cast or throw at or down; to strike
with a bolt; to draw near or together, to contract,
convulse, cause to tremble; to draw or take off or
away, withdraw; to chase or drive out of a place;
to hang out or expose to view; put into; point to,
apply to, refer to, hint, indicate; to refuse, not to
have regard to, refuse as wrong; to insult, deride;
to say or state ironically: Caus. P. {%-kṣepayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to throw down.
<LEND>

<L>7973<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzipat<k2>Akzipat
{%Ā-kṣipat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} casting, striking,
tossing, sending; reviling, abusing; excelling so as
to reproach or put to shame.
<LEND>

<L>7974<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzipta<k2>Akzipta
{%Ā-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cast, thrown, tossed;
thrown down or away; taken away; borne, carried;
insulted, reviled, abused, blamed, ridiculed; equal or
equivalent to.
<LEND>

<L>7975<pc>0112-c<k1>AkziptikA<k2>AkziptikA
{%Ā-kṣiptikā,%}¦ f. a particular air or song which is
sung by a person approaching the stage.
<LEND>

<L>7976<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzipya<k2>Akzipya
{%Ā-kṣipya,%}¦ ind. having spurned, having insulted.
<LEND>

<L>7977<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzepa<k2>Akzepa
{%Ā-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. throw, toss, drawing together or
near to one's self, attraction, convulsion, palpitation;
hinting; applying, laying on (as a colour); throwing
away, giving up; sustaining (as a sound); reviling,
abuse, censure, blame, reproach; objection; doubt,
irony (as a figure in rhetoric).
<LEND>

<L>7978<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzepaka<k2>Akzepaka
{%Ā-kṣepaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ blaming, censuring, re-
viling; ({%as%}), m. a thrower, a detractor, a calumniator
or accuser; sickness, disease; convulsion, spasm.
<LEND>

<L>7979<pc>0112-c<k1>AkzepaRa<k2>AkzepaRa
{%Ā-kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. throwing, tossing.
<LEND>

<L>7980<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzepin<k2>Akzepin
{%Ā-kṣepin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ applying to, concerning; (also
{%= ā-kṣepaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>7981<pc>0112-c<k1>AkzIva<k2>AkzIva
{#AkzIva#}¦ {%ākṣīva, as,%} m., N. of the plant
Morunga Guilandina and Hyperanthera. See
{%akṣiva.%}
<LEND>

<L>7982<pc>0112-c<k1>AkzEtrajYya<k2>AkzEtrajYya
{#AkzEtrajYya#}¦ {%ākṣaitrajñya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-kṣe-%}
{%trajña,%} q. v.), spiritual ignorance.
<LEND>

<L>7983<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzowa<k2>Akzowa
{#Akzowa#}¦ {%ākṣoṭa%} or {%ākṣoḍa, as%} or {%am%} (?),
m. or n. (?) a walnut (Pistacio nut ?); N. of a tree,
Pīlu; also of another tree, Aleurites Triloba. See
{%akṣoṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>7984<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzodana<k2>Akzodana
{#Akzodana#}¦ {%ākṣodana, am,%} n. hunting (also
{%ācchodana%}).
<LEND>

<L>7985<pc>0112-c<k1>AkzRu<k2>AkzRu
{#AkzRu#}¦ {%ā-kṣṇu,%} cl. 2. P. {%-kṣṇauti, -kṣṇa-%}
{%vitum,%} to rub, polish up; sharpen.
<LEND>

<L>7986<pc>0112-c<k1>Akzyat<k2>Akzyat
{#Akzyat#}¦ {%ā-kṣyat, an, antī, at%} (fut. part. fr.
{%akṣ%} or {%aś%} with {%ā ?%}); {%ākṣyanti ahāni,%} days leading
to completion, complemental days; the N. of certain
days on which the ceremony Ayana, performed for
the Ādityās and Aṅgirasas, is finished.
<LEND>

<L>7987<pc>0112-c<k1>AKaRa<k2>AKaRa
{#AKaRa#}¦ {%ākhaṇa, as, ā, am,%} hard.
<LEND>

<L>7988<pc>0112-c<k1>AKaRqayitf<k2>AKaRqayitf
{#AKaRqayitf#}¦ {%ā-khaṇḍayitṛ, tā,%} m. (rt.
{%khaṇḍ%}), a breaker, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>7989<pc>0112-c<k1>AKaRqala<k2>AKaRqala
{%Ā-khaṇḍala, as, ā, am,%}¦ breaking, destroying;
destroying enemies; ({%as%}), m. a N. of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>7990<pc>0112-c<k1>AKan<k2>AKan
{#AKan#}¦ {%ā-khan,%} cl. 1. P. {%-khanati, -nitum,%}
to dig. (It is doubtful whether {%ā-khan%} is used as a
verb, but the nouns which follow are all derived
from it.)
<LEND>

<L>7991<pc>0112-c<k1>AKa<k2>AKa
{%Ā-kha, as,%}¦ m. a spade, a hoe.
<LEND>

<L>7992<pc>0112-c<k1>AKana<k2>AKana
{%Ā-khana, as,%}¦ m. a digger, a spade.
<LEND>

<L>7993<pc>0112-c<k1>AKanika<k2>AKanika
{%Ā-khanika, as,%}¦ m. a digger, a ditcher, a miner; a
thief; a hog; a rat; a mouse; a spade. {%—Ākhanika-%}
{%baka%} or {%ākhanika-vaka, as,%} m. a stork in relation
to a mouse; (metaphorically) a man who behaves as
an hero towards a weak person; a digger, a spade.
<LEND>
[Page0113-a+ 75]

<L>7994<pc>0113-a<k1>AKara<k2>AKara
{%Ā-khara, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the hole or cover of any
animal; a stable; a spade, a digger. {%—Ākhare-ṣṭha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. abiding or dwelling in a hole.
<LEND>

<L>7995<pc>0113-a<k1>AKAta<k2>AKAta
{%Ā-khāta, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a natural pond. See
{%a-khāta.%}
<LEND>

<L>7996<pc>0113-a<k1>AKAna<k2>AKAna
{%Ā-khāna, as,%}¦ m. a spade, a digger.
<LEND>

<L>7997<pc>0113-a<k1>AKu<k2>AKu
{%Ā-khu, us,%}¦ m. a mouse, a rat, a mole; the grass
Lipeocercis Serrata; a thief; a hog; a digger, a
spade. {%—Ākhu-karīṣa, am,%} n., Ved. a mole-hill.
{%—Ākhu-karṇī,%} f., N. of the plant Salvinia Cucul-
lata. {%—Ākhu-ga, as,%} m. (riding on a rat), an epithet
of Gaṇeśa and of Kārttikeya. {%—Ākhu-ghāta, as,%} m.
a Śūdra or man of low caste and profession, lit. ‘a rat-
catcher.’ {%—Ākhu-parṇikā%} or {%ākhu-parṇī,%} f., N. of
the plant Salvinia Cucullata Roxb. (?). {%—Ākhu-pā-%}
{%ṣāṇa, as,%} m. a kind of mineral, a loadstone.
{%—Ākhu-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘a mouse-eater,’ a cat. {%—Ākhu-%}
{%ratha, as,%} m. a N. of Gaṇeśa, ‘having a rat for his
vehicle.’ {%—Ākhu-viṣa-hā,%} f. a kind of grass, Andro-
pogon Serratum, considered as a remedy for a rat's
bite. {%—Ākhūtkara (˚khu-ut˚), as,%} m. a mole-hill.
{%—Ākhūttha (˚khu-ut˚), as,%} m. the rising up or appear-
ance of rats or moles, a swarm of rats or moles.
<LEND>

<L>7998<pc>0113-a<k1>AKAd<k2>AKAd
{#AKAd#}¦ {%ā-khād,%} cl. 1. P. {%-khādati, -ditum,%}
to chew, to bite into pieces; to eat, consume.
<LEND>

<L>7999<pc>0113-a<k1>AKid<k2>AKid
{#AKid#}¦ {%ā-khid,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-khidati,%}
Class. {%-khindati, -khettum,%} to take away and appro-
priate to one's self, to draw to one's self.
<LEND>

<L>8000<pc>0113-a<k1>AKilya<k2>AKilya
{#AKilya#}¦ {%ākhilya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-khila%}), the
whole.
<LEND>

<L>8001<pc>0113-a<k1>AKewa<k2>AKewa
{#AKewa#}¦ {%ā-kheṭa, as,%} m. (rt. {%khiṭ ?%}), chase,
hunting; terror, fright. {%—Ākheṭa-śīrṣaka, am,%} n.
a cavern, a mine.
<LEND>

<L>8002<pc>0113-a<k1>AKewaka<k2>AKewaka
{%Ā-kheṭaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ hunting, a hunter; fright-
ening, frightful; ({%am%}), n. hunting, chase.
<LEND>

<L>8003<pc>0113-a<k1>AKewika<k2>AKewika
{%Ākheṭika, as, ī, am,%}¦ who or what hunts; terrible,
frightful; ({%as%}), m. a hound; a hunter.
<LEND>

<L>8004<pc>0113-a<k1>AKowa<k2>AKowa
{#AKowa#}¦ {%ākhoṭa, as,%} m. the walnut tree.
See {%akṣoṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>8005<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyA<k2>AKyA
{#AKyA#}¦ {%ā-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti, -tum,%}
Ved. to look at; to count, number; to recite; to
tell, notify; inform, communicate, declare, make
known; to announce; to call, signify (with two acc.);
Caus. P. {%-khyāpayati, -yitum,%} to make known, de-
clare; A. to cause to tell.
<LEND>

<L>8006<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyas<k2>AKyas
{%Ā-khyas, ās,%}¦ m., N. of Prajāpati, the lord of creation.
<LEND>

<L>8007<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyA<k2>AKyA<h>2
2. {%ā-khyā,%}¦ f. appellation, name; ({%as, ā, am%}), often
at the end of a compound in the sense of ‘named,’
‘called.’
<LEND>

<L>8008<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyAta<k2>AKyAta
{%Ā-khyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ counted, recited; said, spoken;
called; declared, made known; inflected, declined,
conjugated; ({%am%}), n. a verb.
<LEND>

<L>8009<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyAtavya<k2>AKyAtavya
{%Ā-khyātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be told; to be de-
clared, to be made known.
<LEND>

<L>8010<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyAti<k2>AKyAti
{%Ā-khyāti, is,%}¦ f. telling, communication, publication
of a report; fame; name, appellation.
<LEND>

<L>8011<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyAtika<k2>AKyAtika
{%Ākhyātika,%}¦ adj. fr. {%ā-khyāta.%} Pāṇini IV. 3, 72.
<LEND>

<L>8012<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyAtf<k2>AKyAtf
{%Ā-khyātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who tells or speaks.
<LEND>

<L>8013<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyAna<k2>AKyAna
{%Ā-khyāna, am,%}¦ n. saying, declaring; speech; a
tale, story, legend.
<LEND>

<L>8014<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyAnaka<k2>AKyAnaka
{%Ākhyānaka, am,%}¦ n. a tale, a short narrative; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a metre, being a combination of the Indravajrā
and Upendravajrā.
<LEND>

<L>8015<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyApana<k2>AKyApana
{%Ā-khyāpana, am,%}¦ n. causing one to tell, making
known.
<LEND>

<L>8016<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyAyaka<k2>AKyAyaka
{%Ā-khyāyaka, as,%}¦ m. a messenger, a teller, an
announcer or relater; ({%ikā%}), f. a tale or short narra-
tive; a true or probable story.
<LEND>

<L>8017<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyAyin<k2>AKyAyin
{%Ā-khyāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ telling, declaring, informing.
<LEND>

<L>8018<pc>0113-a<k1>AKyeya<k2>AKyeya
{%Ā-khyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be told or related; fit or
proper to be said.
<LEND>

<L>8019<pc>0113-a<k1>Aga<k2>Aga<h>1
{#Aga#} 1¦. {%āga = āgas%} in {%an-āga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8020<pc>0113-a<k1>Agam<k2>Agam
{#Agam#}¦ {%ā-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%}
to come; to make one's appearance; to come near,
go towards or to or into; to arrive at, attain, reach,
[Page0113-b+ 80]
strike; to return; to fall into (any state of mind);
have recourse to: Caus. P. {%-gamayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to come near; to lead towards; to convey; to
announce the arrival (of any one); to obtain inform-
ation about anything, ascertain (with acc.); A. to
wait for, to have patience: Intens. Ved. {%-ganīganti,%}
to approach repeatedly: Desid. {%-jigamiṣati,%} to be
about to come.
<LEND>

<L>8021<pc>0113-b<k1>Aga<k2>Aga<h>2
2. {%ā-ga, as, ā, am,%}¦ accidental; happening acci-
dentally. {%—Āga-tva, am,%} n. accident, chance.
<LEND>

<L>8022<pc>0113-b<k1>Agata<k2>Agata
{%Ā-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ come, arrived; occurred, hap-
pened; living or residing in; returned; fallen to one's
share; fallen into; received, obtained; passed; ({%am%}),
n. occurrence, event [cf. {%an-āgata, sv-āgata%}].
{%—Āgata-kṣobha, as, ā, am,%} confounded, perplexed.
{%—Āgata-sādhvasa, as, ā, am,%} terrified, afraid.
<LEND>

<L>8023<pc>0113-b<k1>Agati<k2>Agati
{%Ā-gati, is,%}¦ f. arrival, coming; return; origin; ac-
cident, chance.
<LEND>

<L>8024<pc>0113-b<k1>Agatya<k2>Agatya
{%Ā-gatya,%}¦ ind. having come, having arrived.
<LEND>

<L>8025<pc>0113-b<k1>Agantavya<k2>Agantavya
{%Ā-gantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be arrived, what is
likely to arrive; to be come to (with acc. or loc.
of the place); obliged to come.
<LEND>

<L>8026<pc>0113-b<k1>Agantu<k2>Agantu
{%Ā-gantu, us, us, u,%}¦ coming, arriving; what is
added, adhering; coming from the outside, external;
adventitious, incidental; ({%us%}), m. a new comer, a
stranger, a guest; an accident, any accidental hurt or
wound {%—Āgantu-ja, as, ā, am,%} arising accidentally.
<LEND>

<L>8027<pc>0113-b<k1>Agantuka<k2>Agantuka
{%Āgantuka, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} coming, arriving; ar-
riving of one's own accord; stray; incidental, acci-
dental, adventitious (as pleasure, pain, ornament, &c.);
({%as%}), m. a new comer, a stranger, a guest; an inter-
polated {%pāṭha%} or various reading (which has crept
in without authority).
<LEND>

<L>8028<pc>0113-b<k1>Agama<k2>Agama
{%Ā-gama, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming near, approaching,
supplying; ({%as%}), m. arrival, appearance; coming,
approach; addition; course; the mouth of a river;
supply of money, income, revenue; increase of pro-
perty (especially in the compound {%arthāgama%}), lawful
acquisition of anything; increase of knowledge (espe-
cially in the compound {%vidyāgama%}); knowledge,
science, intelligence; a traditional doctrine or precept,
a collection of such doctrines or precepts, a sacred
work, scripture; a manual; an affix; the interpola-
tion of a letter in grammar, a grammatical augment,
a meaningless syllable or letter inserted in any part of
the radical word; record, title-deed, legal title, a
voucher or written testimony; ({%am%}), n. a Tantra or
any work inculcating the mystical worship of Śiva
and Śakti. {%—Āgama-nirapekṣa, as, ā, am,%} inde-
pendent of a written voucher or title. {%—Āgama-nīta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} studied, read, examined. {%—Āgama-rahita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} devoid of a written title or a voucher;
without a Śāstra. {%—Āgama-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having an
augment or addition of any kind; having approached
for sexual intercourse. {%—Āgama-sāpekṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} with or supported by legal vouchers. {%—Āgamā-%}
{%pāyin (˚ma-ap˚), ī, inī, i,%} transient, of short dura-
tion. {%—Āgamāvartā (˚ma-āv˚),%} f., N. of the plant
Tragia Involucrata Lin.
<LEND>

<L>8029<pc>0113-b<k1>Agamana<k2>Agamana
{%Ā-gamana, am,%}¦ n. coming, approaching, arriving;
returning; arising; approaching a woman for sexual
intercourse. {%—Āgamana-kāraṇa, am,%} n. reason of
one's coming. {%—Āgamana-tas,%} ind. on account of
an arrival.
<LEND>

<L>8030<pc>0113-b<k1>Agamayya<k2>Agamayya
{%Ā-gamayya,%}¦ ind. having explored or discovered.
<LEND>

<L>8031<pc>0113-b<k1>Agamita<k2>Agamita
{%Ā-gamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ read over, perused, studied;
understood, ascertained.
<LEND>

<L>8032<pc>0113-b<k1>Agamin<k2>Agamin
{%Āgamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (in gram.) receiving an augment.
<LEND>

<L>8033<pc>0113-b<k1>AgamizWa<k2>AgamizWa
{%Ā-gamiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl.), Ved. coming
with pleasure or very quickly.
<LEND>

<L>8034<pc>0113-b<k1>Agamya<k2>Agamya<h>1
1. {%ā-gamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be approached, accessi-
ble; to be acquired.
<LEND>

<L>8035<pc>0113-b<k1>Agamya<k2>Agamya<h>2
2. {%ā-gamya,%}¦ ind. having arrived or come.
<LEND>

<L>8036<pc>0113-b<k1>AgAntu<k2>AgAntu
{%Ā-gāntu, us,%}¦ m. a guest. See {%ā-gantu.%}
<LEND>

<L>8037<pc>0113-b<k1>AgAmika<k2>AgAmika
{%Āgāmika, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to the
future.
<LEND>

<L>8038<pc>0113-b<k1>AgAmin<k2>AgAmin
{%Ā-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ coming, about to come, ar-
riving, impending; future. {%—Āgāmi-kāla, as,%} m.
future time.
<LEND>

<L>8039<pc>0113-b<k1>AgAmuka<k2>AgAmuka
{%Ā-gāmuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming, arriving; future.
<LEND>
[Page0113-c+ 71]

<L>8040<pc>0113-c<k1>Agara<k2>Agara
{#Agara#}¦ {%āgara,%} Ved. {%= ā-gāra%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>8041<pc>0113-c<k1>Agalita<k2>Agalita
{#Agalita#}¦ {%ā-galita, as, ā, am,%} drooping,
languishing, dejected.
<LEND>

<L>8042<pc>0113-c<k1>AgavizWa<k2>AgavizWa
{#AgavizWa#}¦ {%ā-gaviṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (either a
false reading for {%ā-gamiṣṭha%} or fr. an adj. {%ā-gu%}),
Ved. coming near (?).
<LEND>

<L>8043<pc>0113-c<k1>AgavIna<k2>AgavIna
{#AgavIna#}¦ {%ā-gavīna, as, ā, am,%} occupied with
any business till the return of the cows.
<LEND>

<L>8044<pc>0113-c<k1>Agas<k2>Agas
{#Agas#}¦ {%āgas, as,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%i%} with
{%āga%} substituted), transgression, offence, sin, fault [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄγος</lang>]. {%—Āgas-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} offending;
offended.
<LEND>

<L>8045<pc>0113-c<k1>Agastya<k2>Agastya
{#Agastya#}¦ {%āgastya, as, ā, am,%} referring to the
sage Agasti, q. v.; originating from the plant Agasti
Grandiflorum.
<LEND>

<L>8046<pc>0113-c<k1>AgastIya<k2>AgastIya
{%Āgastīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or tending to the
advantage of Agasti.
<LEND>

<L>8047<pc>0113-c<k1>AgA<k2>AgA<h>1
{#AgA#} 1¦. {%ā-gā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-gāti, -tum,%} to come
towards or into; to approach, make one's appearance;
to meet with; to visit.
<LEND>

<L>8048<pc>0113-c<k1>AgA<k2>AgA<h>2
2. {%ā-gā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ coming towards, &c.
<LEND>

<L>8049<pc>0113-c<k1>AgADa<k2>AgADa
{#AgADa#}¦ {%āgādha = a-gādha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8050<pc>0113-c<k1>AgAra<k2>AgAra
{#AgAra#}¦ {%ā-gāra, am,%} n. (probably fr. {%ā-gṝ,%}
‘to swallow down,’ and denoting first any inner re-
ceptacle), room, covered place, dwelling, house, recep-
tacle [cf. {%a-gāra%}]. {%—Āgāra-godhikā,%} f. a lizard (?).
{%—Āgāra-dāha, as,%} m. arson, setting a house on
fire. {%—Āgāra-dāhin, ī,%} m. an incendiary. {%—Āgāra-%}
{%dhūma, as,%} m., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>8051<pc>0113-c<k1>Agur<k2>Agur<h>1
{#Agur#} 1¦. {%ā-gur,%} cl. 6. A. {%-gurate, -ritum%}
({%gur%} = rt. {%gṝ,%} see {%ā-gṝ%}), to approve, to agree or
assent to, to promise, to pronounce the Āgur.
<LEND>

<L>8052<pc>0113-c<k1>Agur<k2>Agur<h>2
2. {%ā-gur, ūr,%}¦ f., Ved., N. of a class of plauditory or
approving exclamations or formularies used by the
priests in sacrificial rites; assent, an agreement.
<LEND>

<L>8053<pc>0113-c<k1>AguraRa<k2>AguraRa
{%Ā-guraṇa%}¦ or {%ā-gūraṇa%} or {%ā-gūrṇa, am,%} n. recita-
tion of the Āgur.
<LEND>

<L>8054<pc>0113-c<k1>AgU<k2>AgU
{%Ā-gū, ūs,%}¦ f. an agreement (?).
<LEND>

<L>8055<pc>0113-c<k1>AgUrtin<k2>AgUrtin
{%Ā-gūrtin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. performing or pronounc-
ing the Āgur.
<LEND>

<L>8056<pc>0113-c<k1>Agurava<k2>Agurava
{#Agurava#}¦ {%āgurava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%a-guru%}),
originating from or formed of Agallochum. See
{%a-guru.%}
<LEND>

<L>8057<pc>0113-c<k1>AgF<k2>AgF
{#AgF#}¦ {%ā-gṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A., Ved. {%-gṛṇāti, -ṇīte,%}
{%-garitum%} or {%-rītum,%} to approve, to praise.
<LEND>

<L>8058<pc>0113-c<k1>AgE<k2>AgE
{#AgE#}¦ {%ā-gai,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-gāyati, -gātum,%}
to sing to, to obtain by singing.
<LEND>

<L>8059<pc>0113-c<k1>AgAtf<k2>AgAtf
{%Ā-gātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ obtaining by singing.
<LEND>

<L>8060<pc>0113-c<k1>AgAna<k2>AgAna
{%Ā-gāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of obtaining by song.
<LEND>

<L>8061<pc>0113-c<k1>AgnApOzRa<k2>AgnApOzRa
{#AgnApOzRa#}¦ {%āgnāpauṣṇa, as, ī, am,%} Ved.
belonging or referring to Agni and Pūṣan.
<LEND>

<L>8062<pc>0113-c<k1>AgnAvEzRava<k2>AgnAvEzRava
{%Āgnāvaiṣṇava, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging or
referring to Agni and Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>8063<pc>0113-c<k1>Agnika<k2>Agnika
{#Agnika#}¦ {%āgnika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%agni%}), fiery,
belonging to fire or to a sacrifice performed with fire.
<LEND>

<L>8064<pc>0113-c<k1>AgnimAruta<k2>AgnimAruta
{%Āgnimāruta, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or referring to
Agni and the Maruts; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Agastya;
({%am%}), n. a hymn praising Agni and the Maruts [cf.
Pāṇini VII. 3, 21; VI. 3, 28].
<LEND>

<L>8065<pc>0113-c<k1>AgnivAruRa<k2>AgnivAruRa
{%Āgnivāruṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or referring to
Agni and Varuṇa.
<LEND>

<L>8066<pc>0113-c<k1>AgniveSya<k2>AgniveSya
{%Āgniveśya%}¦ and {%āgniveśyāyana, as,%} m., N. of
two teachers.
<LEND>
<L>8066.1<pc>0113-c<k1>AgniveSyAyana<k2>AgniveSyAyana
{{Lbody=8066}}
<LEND>

<L>8067<pc>0113-c<k1>Agnizwomika<k2>Agnizwomika
{%Āgniṣṭomika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the Ag-
niṣṭoma; one who recites or is conversant with the
Agniṣṭoma.
<LEND>

<L>8068<pc>0113-c<k1>Agnihotra<k2>Agnihotra
{%Āgnihotra, as, ī, am,%}¦ fit for the Agnihotra.
<LEND>

<L>8069<pc>0113-c<k1>AgnIDra<k2>AgnIDra
{%Āgnīdhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. originating from or
belonging to the Agnīdh, i. e. to the priest who kindles
the fire; ({%as%}), m. the priest who kindles the fire;
({%ā%}), f. care of the sacred fire; ({%am%}), n. the place
[Page0114-a+ 76]
where a sacrificial fire is kindled; the function of the
priest who kindles the sacred fire.
<LEND>

<L>8070<pc>0114-a<k1>AgnIDrIya<k2>AgnIDrIya
{%Āgnīdhrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being within the Āgnī-
dhra or the place where a sacrificial fire is kindled;
({%as%}), m. the fire ({%agni%}) within the Āgnīdhra; the
fire-place ({%dhiṣṇya%}) within the Āgnīdhra.
<LEND>

<L>8071<pc>0114-a<k1>AgnIDrya<k2>AgnIDrya
{%Āgnīdhrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the Āgnīdhra
or the priest who kindles the sacred fire.
<LEND>

<L>8072<pc>0114-a<k1>Agnendra<k2>Agnendra
{%Āgnendra, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. consecrated to Agni
and Indra.
<LEND>

<L>8073<pc>0114-a<k1>Agneya<k2>Agneya
{%Āgneya, as, ī, am,%}¦ fiery, belonging or relating or
consecrated to fire or its deity Agni; similar to fire or
Agni; belonging to Agnāyī, wife of Agni; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of Skanda; of Agastya; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people; ({%ī%}), f., N. of Agnāyī, wife of Agni; the wife of
Ūru and daughter of Agni (?); the south-east quarter,
of which Agni is the regent; ({%am%}), n. blood; ghee
or boiled butter; gold; N. of a region. {%—Āgneya-%}
{%kīṭa, as,%} m. an insect ({%kīṭa%}) which flies into the fire
(applied to a thief who breaks into a room and
extinguishes the lamp). {%—Āgneya-purāṇa, am,%} n.
the same as the {%agni-purāṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8074<pc>0114-a<k1>AgnyADeyika<k2>AgnyADeyika
{%Āgnyādheyika, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the Agny-
ādheya. See under {%agni.%}
<LEND>

<L>8075<pc>0114-a<k1>AgranT<k2>AgranT
{#AgranT#}¦ {%ā-granth,%} cl. 9. 1. P. {%-grathnāti,%}
{%-granthati, -thitum,%} to wind round, to intwine.
<LEND>

<L>8076<pc>0114-a<k1>AgraBojanika<k2>AgraBojanika
{#AgraBojanika#}¦ {%āgrabhojanika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%agra-bhojana%}), one to whom food is first offered.
<LEND>

<L>8077<pc>0114-a<k1>AgrayaRa<k2>AgrayaRa
{#AgrayaRa#}¦ {%āgrayaṇa, as,%} m. (fr. {%agra%}), the
first Soma libation at the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice (see
{%graha%}); a form of Agni; ({%ī%}), f. an oblation consisting
of first-fruits or firstling; ({%am%}), n. oblation consisting
of first-fruits at the end of the rainy season.
<LEND>

<L>8078<pc>0114-a<k1>Agrasta<k2>Agrasta
{#Agrasta#}¦ {%ā-grasta, as, ā, am,%} bored, per-
forated.
<LEND>

<L>8079<pc>0114-a<k1>Agrah<k2>Agrah
{#Agrah#}¦ {%ā-grah,%} Ved. {%-grabh,%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛhṇāti, -ṇīte,%} Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte, -grahī-%}
{%tum,%} to seize, take hold of; to draw tight (as reins).
<LEND>

<L>8080<pc>0114-a<k1>Agraha<k2>Agraha
{%Ā-graha, as,%}¦ m. seizing, taking; attack; surpass-
ing, surmounting; favour; patronage; power, ability;
moral power, courage.
<LEND>

<L>8081<pc>0114-a<k1>AgrahikA<k2>AgrahikA
{%Āgrahikā,%}¦ f. favour, patronage, help.
<LEND>

<L>8082<pc>0114-a<k1>AgrahayaRa<k2>AgrahayaRa
{#AgrahayaRa#}¦ {%āgrahayaṇa, as, ī, am,%} belonging
to the month Agra-hayaṇa ({%= agra-hāyaṇa,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>8083<pc>0114-a<k1>AgrahAyaRa<k2>AgrahAyaRa
{%Āgrahāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. ‘commencement of the year,’
N. of a Hindū month commencing about the 12th
of November, see {%agra-hāyaṇa; (ī),%} f. the day of
full moon ({%paurṇamāsī%}) in the month Agra-hāyaṇa;
a particular kind of Pāka-yajña, q. v.; N. of a con-
stellation consisting of three stars, one of which is <lang n="greek">λ</lang>
Orionis, figured by an antelope's head, hence also
called Mṛga-śiras.
<LEND>

<L>8084<pc>0114-a<k1>AgrahAyaRaka<k2>AgrahAyaRaka
{%Āgrahāyaṇaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ to be paid (as a debt
&c.) on the day of full moon in the month Agra-
hāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>8085<pc>0114-a<k1>AgrahAyaRika<k2>AgrahAyaRika
{%Āgrahāyaṇika, as,%}¦ m. the month Agra-hāyaṇa;
({%as, ī, am%}), to be paid on the day of full moon in
the month Agra-hāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>8086<pc>0114-a<k1>AgrahArika<k2>AgrahArika
{#AgrahArika#}¦ {%āgrahārika, as, ī, am,%} one who
appropriates to himself an Agra-hāra, viz. an endow-
ment of lands or villages conferred upon Brāhmans.
<LEND>

<L>8087<pc>0114-a<k1>AgrAyaRa<k2>AgrAyaRa
{#AgrAyaRa#}¦ {%āgrāyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a gram-
marian; a sacrifice offered when the new rice or wheat
ripens; (see {%āgrayaṇa,%} which is the correct reading.)
{%—Āgrāyaṇeṣṭi (˚ṇa-iṣ˚), is,%} f. the ceremony
Āgrāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>8088<pc>0114-a<k1>AGawwaka<k2>AGawwaka
{#AGawwaka#}¦ {%ā-ghaṭṭaka, as,%} m. (rt. {%ghaṭṭ%} or
{%ghaṭ%}), a rubber; anything which causes friction;
the plant Desmochæta Atropurpurea.
<LEND>

<L>8089<pc>0114-a<k1>AGawwana<k2>AGawwana
{%Ā-ghaṭṭana, am,%}¦ n. friction, rubbing, contact,
shaking.
<LEND>

<L>8090<pc>0114-a<k1>aGawwita<k2>aGawwita
{%A-ghaṭṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed, touched, shaken.
<LEND>

<L>8091<pc>0114-a<k1>AGAwa<k2>AGAwa
{%Ā-ghāṭa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a musical instrument used
for accompanying a dance; a cymbal or rattle; boun-
dary, limit; the plant Achyranthes Aspera; (at the
end of some compounds) {%= ā-ghāta,%} see next col.
<LEND>
[Page0114-b+ 73]

<L>8092<pc>0114-b<k1>AGAwi<k2>AGAwi
{%Ā-ghāṭi, is, is,%}¦ m. f, Ved. a musical instrument
which sounds on being shaken, a cymbal or rattle.
<LEND>

<L>8093<pc>0114-b<k1>AGarza<k2>AGarza
{#AGarza#}¦ {%ā-gharṣa, as,%} m. (rt. {%ghṛṣ%}),
rubbing, friction.
<LEND>

<L>8094<pc>0114-b<k1>AGarzaRa<k2>AGarzaRa
{%Ā-gharṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ scratching, rubbing;
({%am%}), n. rubbing, friction; ({%ī%}), f. a brush, a rubber.
<LEND>

<L>8095<pc>0114-b<k1>AGarzita<k2>AGarzita
{%Ā-gharṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed, brushed.
<LEND>

<L>8096<pc>0114-b<k1>AGAta<k2>AGAta
{#AGAta#}¦ {%ā-ghāta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%han%} with {%ā%}),
striking, a blow, a wound; killing; a beater, striker;
retention of urine; misfortune, pain; a slaughter-house,
a place for killing animals or victims.
<LEND>

<L>8097<pc>0114-b<k1>AGAtana<k2>AGAtana
{%Ā-ghātana, am,%}¦ n. striking, killing; a slaughter-
house.
<LEND>

<L>8098<pc>0114-b<k1>AGnat<k2>AGnat
{%Ā-ghnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ striking, beating.
<LEND>

<L>8099<pc>0114-b<k1>AGAra<k2>AGAra
{#AGAra#}¦ {%ā-ghāra.%} See under {%ā-ghṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>8100<pc>0114-b<k1>AGuz<k2>AGuz
{#AGuz#}¦ {%ā-ghuṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ghoṣati, -gho-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to make one's self audible; to cry aloud, to
proclaim; to praise; to listen to: Caus. {%-ghoṣayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to make a noise, to cause to sound; to pro-
claim or cause to proclaim aloud; to complain con-
tinually.
<LEND>

<L>8101<pc>0114-b<k1>AGoza<k2>AGoza
{%Ā-ghoṣa, as,%}¦ m. calling out to, invocation.
<LEND>

<L>8102<pc>0114-b<k1>AGozaRa<k2>AGozaRa
{%Ā-ghoṣaṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. a crying or proclaiming,
public announcement.
<LEND>

<L>8103<pc>0114-b<k1>AGUrR<k2>AGUrR
{#AGUrR#}¦ {%ā-ghūrṇ,%} cl. 6. P., 1. A. {%-ghūrṇati,%}
{%-ghūrṇate, -ṇitum,%} to fluctuate, stagger; to roll,
whirl.
<LEND>

<L>8104<pc>0114-b<k1>AGUrRana<k2>AGUrRana
{%Ā-ghūrṇana, am,%}¦ n. rolling, tossing; fluctuating,
whirling round.
<LEND>

<L>8105<pc>0114-b<k1>AGUrRita<k2>AGUrRita
{%Ā-ghūrṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rolled, rolling; whirled
round, fluctuating.
<LEND>

<L>8106<pc>0114-b<k1>AGf<k2>AGf
{#AGf#}¦ {%ā-ghṛ,%} cl. 1., and Ved. cl. 3. P.
{%-gharati, -jigharti, -ghartum,%} to sprinkle towards
or upon: Caus. {%-ghārayati, -yitum,%} to sprinkle.
<LEND>

<L>8107<pc>0114-b<k1>AGAra<k2>AGAra
{%Ā-ghāra, as,%}¦ m. sprinkling, sprinkling clarified
butter upon the fire at certain sacrifices; ghee or
clarified butter.
<LEND>

<L>8108<pc>0114-b<k1>AGfRi<k2>AGfRi
{#AGfRi#}¦ {%ā-ghṛṇi, is, is, i,%} Ved. glowing
with heat; endowed with {{spendor->splendor||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}; epithet of the
god Pūṣan. {%—Āghṛṇī-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. rich
with heat, epithet of Agni; (Sāy.) having splendid
wealth.
<LEND>

<L>8109<pc>0114-b<k1>AGrA<k2>AGrA
{#AGrA#}¦ {%ā-ghrā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jighrati, -ghrātum,%}
to smell, smell at; to kiss: Caus. {%-ghrāpayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to smell at.
<LEND>

<L>8110<pc>0114-b<k1>AGrARa<k2>AGrARa
{%Ā-ghrāṇa, am,%}¦ n. smelling; satisfaction, satiety;
({%as, ā, am%}), satisfied, satiated.
<LEND>

<L>8111<pc>0114-b<k1>AGrAta<k2>AGrAta
{%Ā-ghrāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ smelled, scented; satisfied,
satiated; surmounted, surpassed.
<LEND>

<L>8112<pc>0114-b<k1>AGreya<k2>AGreya
{%Ā-ghreya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be smelled at.
<LEND>

<L>8113<pc>0114-b<k1>ANkuSAyana<k2>ANkuSAyana
{#ANkuSAyana#}¦ {%āṅkuśāyana,%} adj. formed fr.
{%aṅkuśa.%} See Gaṇa to Pāṇini IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>8114<pc>0114-b<k1>ANkfti<k2>ANkfti
{#ANkfti#}¦ {%āṅkṛti, is,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>8115<pc>0114-b<k1>ANkzI<k2>ANkzI
{#ANkzI#}¦ {%āṅkṣī,%} f. a musical instrument, a
tabor.
<LEND>

<L>8116<pc>0114-b<k1>ANga<k2>ANga
{#ANga#}¦ {%āṅga, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%aṅga%}), re-
lating to the base ({%aṅga%}), of a word in grammar;
bodily, corporeal; having limbs or parts or relating
to them; relating to the inferior persons of a drama,
to a portion of the Vedas, &c.; ({%am%}), n. a soft deli-
cate form or body; ({%as, ī, am,%} pl. {%ăṅgās%}), produced or
born in the country Aṅga; a prince of that country.
<LEND>

<L>8117<pc>0114-b<k1>ANgaka<k2>ANgaka
{%Āṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. the ruler of the country Aṅga;
an inhabitant of the same.
<LEND>

<L>8118<pc>0114-b<k1>ANgavidya<k2>ANgavidya
{%Āṅgavidya, as, ī, am,%}¦ occurring in or being fami-
liar with chiromancy or the knowledge of lucky and
unlucky marks on the body. See {%aṅga-vidyā.%}
<LEND>

<L>8119<pc>0114-b<k1>ANgika<k2>ANgika
{%Āṅgika, as, ī, am,%}¦ bodily, corporeal; gesticulated,
expressed by bodily action (dramatic sentiment, pas-
sion &c., exhibited by attitude, gesture &c.); ({%as%}),
m. a player on a tabor or drum.
<LEND>

<L>8120<pc>0114-b<k1>ANgadI<k2>ANgadI
{#ANgadI#}¦ {%āṅgadī,%} f., N. of the capital of
Aṅgada's kingdom.
<LEND>
[Page0114-c+ 71]

<L>8121<pc>0114-c<k1>ANgAra<k2>ANgAra
{#ANgAra#}¦ {%āṅgāra, am,%} n. (fr. {%aṅgāra%}), a mul-
titude of firebrands.
<LEND>

<L>8122<pc>0114-c<k1>ANgirasa<k2>ANgirasa
{#ANgirasa#}¦ {%āṅgirasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%aṅgiras%}),
descended from or belonging to or referring to the
Aṅgirasas or to Aṅgiras; ({%as%}), m. a descendant of
Aṅgiras; especially a N. of Vṛhaspati, the preceptor
of the gods; a Kṣatriya by will of Brahmā and by
profession.
<LEND>

<L>8123<pc>0114-c<k1>ANgulika<k2>ANgulika
{#ANgulika#}¦ {%āṅgulika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%aṅguli,%}
q. v.), like a finger.
<LEND>

<L>8124<pc>0114-c<k1>ANgUza<k2>ANgUza
{#ANgUza#}¦ {%āṅgūṣa, as,%} m., Ved. praising aloud,
a hymn [cf. {%aṅgūṣa, aṅgoṣin%}].
<LEND>

<L>8125<pc>0114-c<k1>ANgUzya<k2>ANgUzya
{%Āṅgūṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. praising aloud, sound-
ing; fit for praise.
<LEND>

<L>8126<pc>0114-c<k1>ANgeyI<k2>ANgeyI
{#ANgeyI#}¦ {%āṅgeyī%} probably {%= āṅgī.%} See
{%āṅga.%}
<LEND>

<L>8127<pc>0114-c<k1>ANgya<k2>ANgya
{%Āṅgya,%}¦ adj. fr. {%aṅga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8128<pc>0114-c<k1>Aca<k2>Aca<h>1
{#Aca#} 1¦. {%āca, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>8129<pc>0114-c<k1>Aca<k2>Aca<h>2
{#Aca#} 2¦. {%āca,%} in the words {%āca-parāca%} and
{%ācopaca,%} ‘turned towards and away from’ (?).
<LEND>

<L>8130<pc>0114-c<k1>Acakz<k2>Acakz
{#Acakz#}¦ {%ā-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe, -ṣṭum,%} to
look at, inspect; to tell, relate, make a communication
about anything (with acc.); to announce, declare; to
make known, confess; to acquaint, introduce to; to
address any one (with acc.); to call, name.
<LEND>

<L>8131<pc>0114-c<k1>AcakzamARa<k2>AcakzamARa
{%Ā-cakṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ saying, declaring.
<LEND>

<L>8132<pc>0114-c<k1>Acakzus<k2>Acakzus
{%Ā-cakṣus, us,%}¦ m. a learned man, a Paṇḍit.
<LEND>

<L>8133<pc>0114-c<k1>Acaturam<k2>Acaturam
{#Acaturam#}¦ {%ā-caturam,%} ind. till the fourth
generation.
<LEND>

<L>8134<pc>0114-c<k1>Acaturya<k2>Acaturya
{#Acaturya#}¦ {%ācaturya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-catura%}),
clumsiness, stupidity.
<LEND>

<L>8135<pc>0114-c<k1>Acam<k2>Acam
{#Acam#}¦ {%ā-cam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-cāmati, -camitum,%}
to sip; to rinse the mouth (with inst. of the thing);
to lap up, lick up, to cause to disappear (as the wind
licks up moisture): Caus. {%-cāmayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to sip water.
<LEND>

<L>8136<pc>0114-c<k1>Acama<k2>Acama
{%Ā-cama, as,%}¦ m. rinsing the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>8137<pc>0114-c<k1>Acamana<k2>Acamana
{%Ā-camana, am,%}¦ n. rinsing the mouth, sipping
water (before religious ceremonies, before meals &c.,
from the palm of the hand. It is usual to spit the
water out again; the ceremony also includes touching
the body in various parts); gargling the throat; the
water used for rinsing the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>8138<pc>0114-c<k1>Acamanaka<k2>Acamanaka
{%Ā-camanaka, as,%}¦ m. a spitting pot.
<LEND>

<L>8139<pc>0114-c<k1>AcamanIya<k2>AcamanIya
{%Ācamanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ used for rinsing the
mouth; ({%am%}), n. water for rinsing the mouth, a
gargle.
<LEND>

<L>8140<pc>0114-c<k1>Acamya<k2>Acamya
{%Ā-camya,%}¦ ind. having rinsed the mouth, having
sipped and ejected a little water.
<LEND>

<L>8141<pc>0114-c<k1>AcAnta<k2>AcAnta
{%Ā-cānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sipped and ejected (as water);
one who has rinsed his mouth.
<LEND>

<L>8142<pc>0114-c<k1>AcAma<k2>AcAma
{%Ā-cāma, as,%}¦ m. sipping water, rinsing the mouth;
the water or foam of boiled rice.
<LEND>

<L>8143<pc>0114-c<k1>AcAmaka<k2>AcAmaka
{%Ā-cāmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ rinsing the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>8144<pc>0114-c<k1>AcAmanaka<k2>AcAmanaka
{%Ā-cāmanaka, as,%}¦ m. a spitting pot.
<LEND>

<L>8145<pc>0114-c<k1>AcAmya<k2>AcAmya
{%Ā-cāmya, am,%}¦ n. rinsing the mouth, water so
used, a gargle; ({%as, ā, am%}), to be rinsed.
<LEND>

<L>8146<pc>0114-c<k1>Acaya<k2>Acaya
{#Acaya#}¦ {%ā-caya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ci%} with {%ā%}),
collection, plenty.
<LEND>

<L>8147<pc>0114-c<k1>Acayaka<k2>Acayaka
{%Ācayaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ collecting, skilful in col-
lecting.
<LEND>

<L>8148<pc>0114-c<k1>Acar<k2>Acar
{#Acar#}¦ {%ā-car,%} cl. 1. P. ep. A. {%-carati, -te,%}
{%-ritum,%} Ved. {%-radhyai, -ritave, -rase,%} to come near
to, approach; to step upon, pass through; to pro-
ceed, manage, behave one's self towards (with loc.);
to treat; to have intercourse with, frequent; to act,
undertake, do, exercise, practice, perform; to devour,
eat into; to help forward, put into.
<LEND>

<L>8149<pc>0114-c<k1>AcaraRa<k2>AcaraRa
{%Ā-caraṇa, am,%}¦ n. approaching, arrival; following,
observing, conduct, usage, practice; an institute, rite
or rule of conduct; a cart, carriage.
<LEND>
[Page0115-a+ 77]

<L>8150<pc>0115-a<k1>AcaraRIya<k2>AcaraRIya
{%Ā-caraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be done or performed;
to be followed or observed, right, proper.
<LEND>

<L>8151<pc>0115-a<k1>Acarat<k2>Acarat
{%Ā-carat, an, antī, at,%}¦ following, practising, ob-
serving.
<LEND>

<L>8152<pc>0115-a<k1>Acarita<k2>Acarita
{%Ā-carita, as, ā, am,%}¦ observed, practised, as a rite
or usage; usual, customary; enjoined, fixed by rule.
<LEND>

<L>8153<pc>0115-a<k1>Acaritavya<k2>Acaritavya
{%Ā-caritavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be performed in a
customary manner; to be done or performed.
<LEND>

<L>8154<pc>0115-a<k1>Acarya<k2>Acarya
{%Ā-carya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone to or approached;
to be done or performed.
<LEND>

<L>8155<pc>0115-a<k1>AcAra<k2>AcAra
{%Ā-cāra, as,%}¦ m. conduct, manner of action; beha-
viour; good conduct, good behaviour; custom, prac-
tice, usage; an established rule of conduct, an ordi-
nance, an institute, a precept; manner of conducting
one's self, diet; rule; [cf. Hib. <nsi>acara,</nsi> ‘convenience,
conveniency, use.’] {%—Ācāra-candrikā,%} f. title of a
work on the religious customs of the Śūdras. {%—Ācāra-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n. one of the four classes of Tantras
with Buddhists. {%—Ācāra-dīpa, as,%} m. ‘lamp of re-
ligious customs,’ title of a work. {%—Ācāra-bhraṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fallen from established usage, apostate.
{%—Ācāra-mayūkha, as,%} m. ‘ray of religious cus-
toms,’ title of a work. {%—Ācāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} well-
conducted, virtuous. {%—Ācāra-varijita, as, ā, am,%}
irregular, out of rule; outcast. {%—Ācāra-viruddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} contrary to custom. {%—Ācāra-vedī,%} f.
‘altar of religious customs,’ a N. of Āryāvarta. {%—Ā-%}
{%cāra-hīna, as, ā, am,%} deprived of established ordi-
nances, outcast. {%—Ācārāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), am,%} n. title
of the first of the twelve sacred books of the Jainas.
{%—Ācārādarśa (˚ra-ād˚), as,%} m. ‘looking-glass
of religious customs,’ title of a work. {%—Ācārārka%}
{%(˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘sun of religious customs,’ title of
a work. {%—Ācārollāsa (˚ra-ull˚), as,%} m. ‘light of
religious customs,’ title of a work.
<LEND>

<L>8156<pc>0115-a<k1>AcArika<k2>AcArika
{%Ācārika, as, ī, am,%}¦ conformable to rule or prac-
tice, prescriptive, authorized; ({%am%}), n. rules for the
preservation of health, habit of life, regimen, diet.
<LEND>

<L>8157<pc>0115-a<k1>AcArin<k2>AcArin
{%Ācārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ following established rites or
practice.
<LEND>

<L>8158<pc>0115-a<k1>AcArI<k2>AcArI
{%Ā-cārī,%}¦ f. the plant Hingtsha Repens, also called
Hilamocikā.
<LEND>

<L>8159<pc>0115-a<k1>AcArya<k2>AcArya
{%Ā-cārya, as,%}¦ m. lit. ‘one to whom one must have
recourse’ or ‘one who is to be attended to or waited
on’ or ‘one whose precepts are to be followed’ or
‘one who knows the {%ācāra%} or rules;’ a spiritual guide
or teacher, especially one who invests the student
with the sacrificial thread, and instructs him in the
Vedas, in the law of sacrifice and religious mysteries
(Manu 2. 140, 171); an epithet of Droṇa the teacher
of the Pāṇḍus; ({%ā%}), f. a spiritual preceptress. The
title {%ācārya%} affixed to names of learned men is
rather like our Dr.; e. g. {%Rāghavācārya,%} &c.
{%—Ācārya-karaṇa, am,%} n. acting as teacher. {%—Ā-%}
{%cārya-tā,%} f. or {%ācārya-tva, am,%} n. the office or pro-
ficiency of a holy teacher. {%—Ācārya-deva, as,%} m.
one whose preceptor is his god. {%—Ācārya-bho-%}
{%gīna, as, ā, am,%} delighting the holy teacher.
{%—Ācārya-miśra, as, ā, am,%} venerable, honourable.
{%—Ācārya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has a teacher.
{%—Ācāryopāsana (˚ya-up˚), am,%} n. waiting upon
or serving the spiritual preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>8160<pc>0115-a<k1>AcAryaka<k2>AcAryaka
{%Ācāryaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ originating from a spiritual
teacher; ({%am%}), n. the proficiency of a holy teacher.
<LEND>

<L>8161<pc>0115-a<k1>AcAryAnI<k2>AcAryAnI
{%Ācāryānī,%}¦ f. (with dental {%n,%} Pāṇini IV. 1, 49.
Vārt. 6), the wife of an Ācārya or holy teacher.
<LEND>

<L>8162<pc>0115-a<k1>AcIrRa<k2>AcIrRa
{%Ā-cīrṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (anom. past pass. part.), de-
voured, eaten into.
<LEND>

<L>8163<pc>0115-a<k1>AcaraRya<k2>AcaraRya
{#AcaraRya#}¦ {%ā-caraṇya%} (nom. fr. {%caraṇa%}), P.
{%-caraṇyati, -yitum,%} to move one's self, to move or
extend towards.
<LEND>

<L>8164<pc>0115-a<k1>Acal<k2>Acal
{#Acal#}¦ {%ā-cal,%} Caus. P. {%-cālayati, -yitum,%} to
move, draw away from one's place, stir up.
<LEND>

<L>8165<pc>0115-a<k1>AcAnta<k2>AcAnta
{#AcAnta, AcAma.#}¦ See under {%ā-cam.%}
<LEND>

<L>8166<pc>0115-a<k1>Aci<k2>Aci
{#Aci#}¦ {%ā-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -nute, -cetum,%}
to accumulate; to collect; to heap up, load with;
to cover.
<LEND>
[Page0115-b+ 72]

<L>8167<pc>0115-b<k1>Acita<k2>Acita
{%Ā-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ collected, accumulated, heaped;
filled, loaded with, covered; spread, diffused; inlaid,
set (e. g. {%ardhācitā rasanā,%} a girdle half set with
gems); larded; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a cart-load; a mea-
sure of ten bhāras or cart-loads.
<LEND>

<L>8168<pc>0115-b<k1>Acitika<k2>Acitika
{%Ācitika, as, ī, am,%}¦ or {%ācitīna, as, ā, am,%} holding
or being equal to or cooking a quantity equal to the
preceding measure; (a numeral may be placed be-
fore these forms, e. g. {%dvyācitika,%} &c.).
<LEND>

<L>8169<pc>0115-b<k1>AciKyAsA<k2>AciKyAsA
{#AciKyAsA#}¦ {%ā-cikhyāsā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt.
{%khyā%} with {%ā%}), desire or intention of expressing or
denoting something.
<LEND>

<L>8170<pc>0115-b<k1>Acit<k2>Acit<h>1
{#Acit#} 1¦. {%ā-cit,%} cl. 1. 3. P. {%-cetati, -ciketti,%}
A. {%-cikite, -cettum,%} to attend to, to keep in mind;
to comprehend, understand, know; to invent; to ap-
pear, become visible, distinguish one's self: Desid.
{%-cikitsati, -te,%} to wait for, watch clandestinely, lurk.
<LEND>

<L>8171<pc>0115-b<k1>Acit<k2>Acit<h>2
2. {%ā-cit, t,%}¦ f., Ved. taking notice or cognizance,
attention to; (according to Sāy. the form {%ā-citā%} may
stand for {%ā-cite%} fr. {%ā-cita%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>8172<pc>0115-b<k1>AcIrRa<k2>AcIrRa
{#AcIrRa#}¦ {%ā-cīrṇa, as, ā, am.%} See under
{%ā-car%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>8173<pc>0115-b<k1>AcUzaRa<k2>AcUzaRa
{#AcUzaRa#}¦ {%ā-cūṣaṇa, am,%} n. suction; suck-
ing out; application of cupping-glasses to the skin.
<LEND>

<L>8174<pc>0115-b<k1>Acft<k2>Acft
{#Acft#}¦ {%ā-cṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-cṛtati, -cartitum,%}
to fasten, tie, affix.
<LEND>

<L>8175<pc>0115-b<k1>AceSvara<k2>AceSvara
{#AceSvara#}¦ {%āceśvara (˚ca-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a
sanctuary built by Āca.
<LEND>

<L>8176<pc>0115-b<k1>Acezw<k2>Acezw
{#Acezw#}¦ {%ā-ceṣṭ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ceṣṭati, -te,%}
{%-ṭitum,%} to undertake; to do.
<LEND>

<L>8177<pc>0115-b<k1>Acopaca<k2>Acopaca
{#Acopaca#}¦ {%ācopaca.%} See 2. {%āca.%}
<LEND>

<L>8178<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCad<k2>AcCad<h>1
{#AcCad#} 1¦. {%ā-cchad (-chad),%} cl. 10. P. {%-ccha-%}
{%dayati%} or {%-cchādayati, -yitum,%} to cover, hide; to
clothe, to dress, put on clothes; to conceal.
<LEND>

<L>8179<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCad<k2>AcCad<h>2
2. {%ā-cchad, t,%}¦ f., Ved. a cover, covering; a sheath.
{%—Ācchad-vidhāna, am,%} n., Ved. an arrangement
made for defence, a means of covering; or ({%as, ā, am%}),
one who has such means.
<LEND>

<L>8180<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCanna<k2>AcCanna
{%Ā-cchanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, concealed, clothed.
<LEND>

<L>8181<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCAda<k2>AcCAda
{%Ā-cchāda, as,%}¦ m. cloth, clothes.
<LEND>

<L>8182<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCAdaka<k2>AcCAdaka
{%Ā-cchādaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ concealing, hiding.
<LEND>

<L>8183<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCAdana<k2>AcCAdana
{%Ā-cchādana, am,%}¦ n. covering, concealing, hiding;
disappearance; a covering, a sheath; cloth, clothes;
mantle, cloak, &c.; the wooden frame of a roof.
<LEND>

<L>8184<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCAdita<k2>AcCAdita
{%Ā-cchādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, clothed.
<LEND>

<L>8185<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCAdin<k2>AcCAdin
{%Ā-cchādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ covering, concealing.
<LEND>

<L>8186<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCAdya<k2>AcCAdya<h>1
1. {%ā-cchādya,%}¦ ind. having clothed or put on.
<LEND>

<L>8187<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCAdya<k2>AcCAdya<h>2
2. {%ā-cchādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be covered or clothed.
<LEND>

<L>8188<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCAka<k2>AcCAka
{#AcCAka#}¦ {%ācchāka, as,%} m., N. of the tree
Morinda Tinctoria; (better {%ācchuka,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>8189<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCid<k2>AcCid
{#AcCid#}¦ {%ā-cchid (-chid),%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-cchi-%}
{%natti, -cchinte, -cchettum,%} to tear or cut off; to cut or
break in pieces; to take out of; to draw off; remove;
to cut off, exclude; to snatch away, to tear from, to
rob; to disregard, not to take notice of.
<LEND>

<L>8190<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCidya<k2>AcCidya
{%Ā-cchidya,%}¦ ind. cutting off; cutting, excluding, dis-
regarding; setting aside, in spite of, notwithstanding.
<LEND>

<L>8191<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCinna<k2>AcCinna
{%Ā-cchinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, cut off.
<LEND>

<L>8192<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCeda<k2>AcCeda
{%Ā-ccheda, as,%}¦ m. cutting, cutting off, excision.
<LEND>

<L>8193<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCedana<k2>AcCedana
{%Ā-cchedana, am,%}¦ n. excision, cutting off, exclusion.
<LEND>

<L>8194<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCuka<k2>AcCuka
{#AcCuka#}¦ {%ācchuka, as,%} m., N. of the plant
Morinda Tinctoria. See {%ākṣika%} and {%ācchāka.%}
<LEND>

<L>8195<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCurita<k2>AcCurita
{#AcCurita#}¦ {%ā-cchurita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%chur%}
with {%ā%}), scratched; irritated; ({%am%}), n. making a
noise with the finger-nails by rubbing them on one
another; a horse-laugh.
<LEND>

<L>8196<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCuritaka<k2>AcCuritaka
{%Ācchuritaka, am,%}¦ n. a scratch with a finger-nail;
a horse-laugh.
<LEND>

<L>8197<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCfd<k2>AcCfd
{#AcCfd#}¦ {%ā-cchṛd (-chṛd),%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-cchṛ-%}
{%ṇatti, -cchṛnte, -ccharditum,%} to pour upon, to fill.
<LEND>

<L>8198<pc>0115-b<k1>AcCo<k2>AcCo
{#AcCo#}¦ {%ā-ccho (-cho),%} cl. 4. P. {%-cchyati,%}
{%-cchātum,%} to skin, to flay.
<LEND>
[Page0115-c+ 69]

<L>8199<pc>0115-c<k1>AcCodana<k2>AcCodana
{#AcCodana#}¦ {%ā-cchodana, am,%} n. (rt. {%chud%} for
{%cud ?%}), hunting, the chase. See {%acchoṭana, ākṣodana.%}
<LEND>

<L>8200<pc>0115-c<k1>Acyu<k2>Acyu
{#Acyu#}¦ {%ā-cyu,%} Caus. P. A. {%-cyāvayati, -te,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to flow over, pour out; to draw or
bring near; to induce (any one) to come near.
<LEND>

<L>8201<pc>0115-c<k1>Acyutadanti<k2>Acyutadanti
{#Acyutadanti#}¦ {%ācyutadanti%} (fr. {%acyutadanta%})
or {%ācyutanti%} (fr. {%acyutanta%}), {%ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a
warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>8202<pc>0115-c<k1>Aj<k2>Aj
{#Aj#}¦ {%āj (ā-aj),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%ājati, -te, -jitum,%}
to drive or bring towards; to procure; to drive near,
i. e. to come near in a carriage.
<LEND>

<L>8203<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajani<k2>Ajani
{%Ājani, is,%}¦ f., Ved. a stick for driving.
<LEND>

<L>8204<pc>0115-c<k1>Aji<k2>Aji<h>1
1. {%āji, is,%}¦ m. f. (Ved. m.), a running-match; ({%ājim%}
{%aj%} or {%i%} or {%dhāv%} or {%sṛ,%} to run with or against any
one for the prize); a fighting-match, fighting, combat,
battle, war; place for running, course, level ground;
abuse, invective; an instant; [cf. Scot. <nsi>àgh,</nsi> ‘fight;’
Hib. <nsi>agh.</nsi>] {%—Āji-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. running or fight-
ing for a prize; making war. {%—Āji-kriyā,%} f. fighting,
making war. {%—Āji-tur, ūr, ūr, ūr,%} Ved. victorious
in battles. {%—Āji-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of the battle.
{%—Ājy-anta, as,%} m. the goal in a race-course.
<LEND>

<L>8205<pc>0115-c<k1>Aja<k2>Aja
{#Aja#}¦ {%āja, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%aja%}), coming
from goats, belonging to goats, produced by goats;
({%as%}), m. a vulture; ({%am%}), n. boiled or clarified butter;
ghee.
<LEND>

<L>8206<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajaka<k2>Ajaka
{%Ājaka, am,%}¦ n. a flock of goats.
<LEND>

<L>8207<pc>0115-c<k1>AjakAra<k2>AjakAra
{#AjakAra#}¦ {%ājakāra, as,%} m. Śiva's bull.
<LEND>

<L>8208<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajagara<k2>Ajagara
{#Ajagara#}¦ {%ājagara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%aja-gara%}),
treating of the boa or large serpent; (a chapter in
the Mahā-bhārata.)
<LEND>

<L>8209<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajagava<k2>Ajagava
{#Ajagava#}¦ {%ājagava, as,%} m. the bow of Śiva
[cf. {%ajakāva%}].
<LEND>

<L>8210<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajan<k2>Ajan
{#Ajan#}¦ {%ā-jan,%} cl. 4. A., Ved. {%-jāyate, -jani-%}
{%tum,%} to be born or come into existence, to be pro-
duced or born from; to beget, cause to be born,
render prolific.
<LEND>

<L>8211<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajanana<k2>Ajanana
{%Ā-janana, am,%}¦ n. birth, origin.
<LEND>

<L>8212<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajanma<k2>Ajanma
{%Ā-janma,%}¦ ind. from birth, since birth. {%—Ājanma-%}
{%surabhi-pattra, as,%} m., N. of a plant (the leaves of
which are fragrant from their first appearance).
<LEND>

<L>8213<pc>0115-c<k1>AjAti<k2>AjAti
{%Ā-jāti, is,%}¦ f. birth, origin.
<LEND>

<L>8214<pc>0115-c<k1>AjAna<k2>AjAna
{%Ā-jāna, am,%}¦ n. birth, descent, species; birth-place.
<LEND>

<L>8215<pc>0115-c<k1>AjAni<k2>AjAni
{%Ā-jāni, is,%}¦ f., Ved. birth, descent; noble birth;
(Sāy.) a mother.
<LEND>

<L>8216<pc>0115-c<k1>AjAneya<k2>AjAneya
{%Ājāneya, as, ī, am,%}¦ of noble origin, of good breed
(as a horse), fearless, undaunted; ({%as%}), m. a well-
bred horse.
<LEND>

<L>8217<pc>0115-c<k1>AjAneyya<k2>AjAneyya
{%Ājāneyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. of good breed, well-
bred.
<LEND>

<L>8218<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajap<k2>Ajap
{#Ajap#}¦ {%ā-jap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-japati, -pitum,%} to
mutter or whisper to.
<LEND>

<L>8219<pc>0115-c<k1>AjamIQa<k2>AjamIQa
{#AjamIQa#}¦ {%ājamīḍha, as,%} m., N. of a king in
the Mahā-bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>8220<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajarasam<k2>Ajarasam
{#Ajarasam#}¦ {%ā-jarasam%} or {%ā-jarasāya,%} ind.,
Ved. till old age.
<LEND>

<L>8221<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajavana<k2>Ajavana
{#Ajavana#}¦ {%ā-javana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%ju%} with {%ā%}),
rushing at, attacking, fighting.
<LEND>

<L>8222<pc>0115-c<k1>Ajavasteya<k2>Ajavasteya
{#Ajavasteya#}¦ {%ājavasteya%} (patronymic fr. {%aja-%}
{%vasti%} Pāṇini IV. 1, 136).
<LEND>

<L>8223<pc>0115-c<k1>AjavAha<k2>AjavAha
{#AjavAha#}¦ {%ājavāha%} or {%ājavāhaka%} fr. {%aja-vāha%}
Pāṇini IV. 2, 133.
<LEND>

<L>8224<pc>0115-c<k1>AjAtaSatrava<k2>AjAtaSatrava
{#AjAtaSatrava#}¦ {%ājātaśatrava, as,%} m. (fr. {%ajā-%}
{%ta-śatru%}), epithet of Bhadrasena in the Śatapatha-
Brāhmaṇa V. 5. 5, 14.
<LEND>

<L>8225<pc>0115-c<k1>AjAdya<k2>AjAdya
{#AjAdya#}¦ {%ājādya, as, ā, am,%} originating from
the warrior-tribe called Ajādas or a chief of that tribe.
<LEND>

<L>8226<pc>0115-c<k1>AjAna<k2>AjAna
{#AjAna#}¦ {%ā-jāna, ājāneya.%} See under {%ājan.%}
<LEND>

<L>8227<pc>0115-c<k1>Aji<k2>Aji<h>1
{#Aji#} 1¦. {%āji.%} See under {%āj%} above.
<LEND>
[Page0116-a+ 75]

<L>8228<pc>0116-a<k1>Aji<k2>Aji<h>2
{#Aji#} 2¦. {%ā-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%} to
conquer, win, acquire: Desid. {%-jigīṣati,%} to try or
desire to conquer or win.
<LEND>

<L>8229<pc>0116-a<k1>Ajayana<k2>Ajayana
{%Ā-jayana, am,%}¦ n. conquering.
<LEND>

<L>8230<pc>0116-a<k1>AjigIzu<k2>AjigIzu
{%Ā-jigīṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ ambitious, wishing to excel
or overcome.
<LEND>

<L>8231<pc>0116-a<k1>Ajigraha<k2>Ajigraha
{#Ajigraha#}¦ {%ā-jigraha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%grah%}),
who or what takes or seizes.
<LEND>

<L>8232<pc>0116-a<k1>AjijYAsenya<k2>AjijYAsenya
{#AjijYAsenya#}¦ {%ā-jijñāsenya, as, ā, am%} (fr.
Desid. of rt. {%jñā%} with {%ā%}), Ved. liable to investigation;
({%ās%}), f. pl., N. of a short section of the Kuntāpa
hymns in the Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa; (the word {%ṛcas%}
must be supplied.)
<LEND>

<L>8233<pc>0116-a<k1>AjihIrzu<k2>AjihIrzu
{#AjihIrzu#}¦ {%ā-jihīrṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid.
of rt. {%hṛ%} with {%ā%}), about to bring towards (with acc.);
wishing to take.
<LEND>

<L>8234<pc>0116-a<k1>AjIkUla<k2>AjIkUla
{#AjIkUla#}¦ {%ājīkūla,%} N. of a region.
<LEND>

<L>8235<pc>0116-a<k1>AjIgarti<k2>AjIgarti
{#AjIgarti#}¦ {%ājīgarti,%} a patronymic fr. {%ajī-%}
{%garta.%}
<LEND>

<L>8236<pc>0116-a<k1>AjIv<k2>AjIv
{#AjIv#}¦ {%ā-jīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jīvati, -vitum,%} to
live by; to have the use or enjoyment of; to subsist.
<LEND>

<L>8237<pc>0116-a<k1>AjIva<k2>AjIva
{%Ā-jīva, as,%}¦ m. livelihood, subsistence; a Jaina
beggar.
<LEND>

<L>8238<pc>0116-a<k1>AjIvaka<k2>AjIvaka
{%Ā-jīvaka, as,%}¦ m. a beggar, one who obtains his
livelihood everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>8239<pc>0116-a<k1>AjIvana<k2>AjIvana
{%Ā-jīvana, am,%}¦ n. livelihood, subsistence. {%—Ājīva-%}
{%nārtha (˚na-ar˚), as,%} m. ({%am,%} n. ?) means of live-
lihood or subsistence, business, profession.
<LEND>

<L>8240<pc>0116-a<k1>AjIvin<k2>AjIvin
{%Ā-jīvin, ī,%}¦ m. having a livelihood; a peculiar kind
of beggar.
<LEND>

<L>8241<pc>0116-a<k1>AjIvya<k2>AjIvya
{%Ā-jīvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be practised as a means of
living; fit for or affording a livelihood; habitable,
fertile; fruitful; ({%am%}), n. means of living.
<LEND>

<L>8242<pc>0116-a<k1>Ajur<k2>Ajur
{#Ajur#}¦ {%ā-jur, ūr,%} f. or {%ā-jū, ūs,%} f. (fr. rt. {%jṝ%}
with {%ā ?%}), unpaid labour, working without wages;
consigning to hell; infirm age (?).
<LEND>

<L>8243<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYA<k2>AjYA<h>1
{#AjYA#} 1¦. {%ā-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. {%-jānāti, -jñātum,%}
to know, understand, learn, obtain information, ascer-
tain, notice, perceive: Caus. {%-jñāpayati, -yitum,%} to
publish, order, command, direct; to assure.
<LEND>

<L>8244<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYapta<k2>AjYapta
{%Ā-jñapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ ordered, commanded.
<LEND>

<L>8245<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYapti<k2>AjYapti
{%Ā-jñapti, is,%}¦ f. order, injunction, command.
<LEND>

<L>8246<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYA<k2>AjYA<h>2
2. {%ā-jñā,%}¦ f. an order, a command; allowance, per-
mission; [cf. Hib. <nsi>agna,</nsi> ‘wisdom.’] {%—Ājñā-kara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} executing an order, obeying, obedient;
({%as%}), m. a servant. {%—Ājñā-karaṇa, am,%} n. execu-
tion of orders, obedience. {%—Ājñākara-tva, am,%}
n. the office of a servant. {%—Ājñā-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
one who obeys or executes orders, obedient, minis-
trant. {%—Ājñā-cakra, am,%} n. a mystical circle or dia-
gram, one of six described by the Tantras. {%—Ājñā-%}
{%nuyāyin%} or {%ājñānuvartin (˚jñā-an˚), ī, inī, i,%}
obeying or executing orders, obedient. {%—Ājñānu-%}
{%sārin (˚jñā-an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} executing orders, obe-
dient. {%—Ājñā-pattra, am,%} n. an edict, written
order. {%—Ājñā-pratighāta as,%} m. disobedience, re-
bellion. {%—Ājñā-bhaṅga, as,%} m. disobedience, insub-
ordination, disloyalty. {%—Ājñā-vaha, as, ā, am,%} obe-
dient, subject, ministrant. {%—Ājñā-sampādin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} executing an order, obedient, submissive.
<LEND>

<L>8247<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYAta<k2>AjYAta
{%Ā-jñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ ordered, commanded; ({%as%}),
m., N. of one of the first five pupils of Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>8248<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYAtf<k2>AjYAtf
{%Ā-jñātṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who orders or directs.
<LEND>

<L>8249<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYAna<k2>AjYAna
{%Ā-jñāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of noticing, perceiving.
<LEND>

<L>8250<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYApaka<k2>AjYApaka
{%Ā-jñāpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ giving orders, commanding,
a commander.
<LEND>

<L>8251<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYApana<k2>AjYApana
{%Ā-jñāpana, am,%}¦ n. ordering, commanding, making
known.
<LEND>

<L>8252<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYApita<k2>AjYApita
{%Ā-jñāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ordered, commanded.
<LEND>

<L>8253<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYApya<k2>AjYApya
{%Ā-jñāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be directed or commanded.
<LEND>

<L>8254<pc>0116-a<k1>AjYAyin<k2>AjYAyin
{%Ā-jñāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ perceiving, understanding.
<LEND>

<L>8255<pc>0116-a<k1>Ajya<k2>Ajya
{#Ajya#}¦ {%ājya, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%añj%} with {%ā%}),
melted or clarified butter used for oblations, or for
pouring into the holy fire at the sacrifice, or for
anointing anything sacrificed or offered; (in a wider
[Page0116-b+ 71]
sense) oil and milk used instead of clarified butter
at a sacrifice; N. of a sort of chant or religious
service; turpentine. {%—Ājya-pa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
drinking the clarified butter; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of
Manes who are the sons of Pulastya and the ancestors
of the Vaiśya order. {%—Ājya-pātra, am,%} n. a vessel
or dish to hold clarified butter. {%—Ājya-bhāga, as,%}
m. a portion of clarified butter; ({%au%}), m. du. the
two portions of clarified butter belonging to Agni
and Soma; ({%as, ā, am%}), partaking of the clarified
butter; offering clarified butter at certain ceremonies.
{%—Ājya-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘consumer of clarified butter,’
epithet of Agni. {%—Ājya-vāri, is,%} m. ‘sea of clarified
butter,’ one of the seven seas. {%—Ājya-sthālī,%} f.,
see {%ājya-pātra.%}
<LEND>

<L>8256<pc>0116-b<k1>AYc<k2>AYc
{#AYc#}¦ {%āñc (ā-añc),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%āñcati, -te,%}
{%-citum,%} to bend, crook, curve.
<LEND>

<L>8257<pc>0116-b<k1>AYcana<k2>AYcana
{%Āñcana, am,%}¦ n. partial extraction of thorns or
arrows and the like from the body.
<LEND>

<L>8258<pc>0116-b<k1>AYC<k2>AYC
{#AYC#}¦ {%āñch,%} cl. 1. P. {%āñchati, āñcha%} or
{%ānāñcha, āñchitum,%} to make straight;
to lengthen or stretch; to regulate, draw into the
right position; to set (a bone or leg).
<LEND>

<L>8259<pc>0116-b<k1>AYCana<k2>AYCana
{%Āñchana, am,%}¦ n. setting (a bone or leg), bringing
back into the right place by stretching, bending, or
drawing.
<LEND>

<L>8260<pc>0116-b<k1>AYj<k2>AYj
{#AYj#}¦ {%āñj (ā-añj),%} cl. 7. P. {%ānakti, āñji-%}
{%tum%} or {%āṅktum,%} to anoint; to smooth, polish, pre-
pare; to honour, receive respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>8261<pc>0116-b<k1>AYjana<k2>AYjana
{%Āñjana, am, ī,%}¦ n. f. ointment, especially for the
eyes; fat. {%—Āñjanābhyañjanīya (˚na-abhy˚), am,%}
{%ā,%} n. f., N. of a certain ceremony. {%—Āñjanī-kārī,%} f.
a woman who anoints or makes ointments.
<LEND>

<L>8262<pc>0116-b<k1>AYjaneya<k2>AYjaneya
{#AYjaneya#}¦ {%āñjaneya, as,%} m. (fr. {%añjanā,%} his
mother), N. of the monkey Hanumat.
<LEND>

<L>8263<pc>0116-b<k1>AYjalikya<k2>AYjalikya
{#AYjalikya#}¦ {%āñjalikya%} (fr. {%añjalika%}). See
Gaṇa to Pāṇini V. 1. 128.
<LEND>

<L>8264<pc>0116-b<k1>AYjika<k2>AYjika
{#AYjika#}¦ {%āñjika, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>8265<pc>0116-b<k1>AYjineya<k2>AYjineya
{#AYjineya#}¦ {%āñjineya, as,%} m. an insect, a kind
of lizard, Lacerta Unjinensis. See {%añjana%} and {%añ-%}
{%janikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>8266<pc>0116-b<k1>Awa<k2>Awa
{#Awa#}¦ {%āṭa, as,%} m., N. of a serpent.
<LEND>

<L>8267<pc>0116-b<k1>AwarUza<k2>AwarUza
{#AwarUza#}¦ {%āṭarūṣa, as,%} m., N. of the tree
Justicia Adhenatoda. See {%aṭarūṣa%} or {%aṭarūṣaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>8268<pc>0116-b<k1>Awavika<k2>Awavika
{#Awavika#}¦ {%āṭavika, as,%} m. (fr. {%aṭavī%}), the
inhabitant of a forest; a woodman, a pioneer.
<LEND>

<L>8269<pc>0116-b<k1>AwavI<k2>AwavI
{%Āṭavī,%}¦ f., N. of a town in the Mahā-bhārata (2.
1175).
<LEND>

<L>8270<pc>0116-b<k1>Awavya<k2>Awavya
{#Awavya#}¦ {%āṭavya, as,%} m., N. of a teacher in
the Vāyu-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>8271<pc>0116-b<k1>Awi<k2>Awi
{#Awi#}¦ {%āṭi, is,%} f. (rt. {%aṭ,%} to wander), N. of
the bird Turdus Ginginianus [cf. {%āḍi%} and {%āti%}].
{%—Āṭī-mukha, as%} or {%am ?,%} m. or n. ? a surgical in-
strument employed in blood-letting, the top of which
is like the beak of the bird {%āṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>8272<pc>0116-b<k1>Awika<k2>Awika
{%Āṭika, as, ī, am,%}¦ able to wander; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
the wife of Uṣasti.
<LEND>

<L>8273<pc>0116-b<k1>Awikya<k2>Awikya
{%Āṭikya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being on a voyage.
<LEND>

<L>8274<pc>0116-b<k1>AwIkana<k2>AwIkana
{#AwIkana#}¦ {%ā-ṭīkana%} or {%ā-ṭīlaka, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%ṭīk%} with {%ā%}), the leaping motion of a calf [cf. {%āḍhī-%}
{%laka%} and {%ālīḍhaka%}].
<LEND>

<L>8275<pc>0116-b<k1>Awikara<k2>Awikara
{%Ā-ṭikara, as,%}¦ m. a bull (etym. probably the same
as the last).
<LEND>

<L>8276<pc>0116-b<k1>Awopa<k2>Awopa
{#Awopa#}¦ {%āṭopa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. a
Sautra rt. {%ṭup%} with {%ā%}), puffing, swelling; flatulence,
borborygmi; pride, self-conceit.
<LEND>

<L>8277<pc>0116-b<k1>AwwasTalaka<k2>AwwasTalaka
{#AwwasTalaka#}¦ {%āṭṭasthalaka%} (fr. {%aṭṭa-sthalī%})
Gaṇa to Pāṇini IV. 2, 127.
<LEND>

<L>8278<pc>0116-b<k1>AwRAra<k2>AwRAra
{#AwRAra#}¦ {%āṭṇāra, as,%} m. (fr. {%aṭṇāra%}), Ved.,
N. of Para in the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa; ({%as, ā, am%}),
fond of wandering (?).
<LEND>
[Page0116-c+ 75]

<L>8279<pc>0116-c<k1>Aqambara<k2>Aqambara
{#Aqambara#}¦ {%āḍambara, as,%} m. (etym. doubtful,
probably rt. {%ḍamb%} with {%ā%}), a drum used in battle;
charge sounded by musical instruments; the sounding
of a trumpet as a sign of attack; the roaring of
elephants; pride, arrogance (in this sense perhaps
connected with {%saṃrambha?%}); commencement (in
this sense perhaps connected with {%ārambha?%}); anger,
passion; happiness, pleasure; the eyelid; ({%am%}), n.
rubbing and kneading the body; (sometimes this
word is written {%āḍampara.%}) {%—Āḍambarāghāta%}
{%(˚ra-āgh˚), as,%} m., Ved. one who beats a drum.
<LEND>

<L>8280<pc>0116-c<k1>Aqambarin<k2>Aqambarin
{%Āḍambarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ arrogant, proud.
<LEND>

<L>8281<pc>0116-c<k1>Aqi<k2>Aqi
{#Aqi#}¦ {%āḍi, is,%} f. a bird, the Śarāli (Turdus
Ginginianus); a kind of fish. See {%āṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>8282<pc>0116-c<k1>Aqu<k2>Aqu
{#Aqu#}¦ {%āḍu, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. {%aḍ%}), striving to
obtain anything.
<LEND>

<L>8283<pc>0116-c<k1>AqU<k2>AqU
{#AqU#}¦ {%āḍū, ūs,%} m. (or f. ?) a raft, a float.
See {%ātu.%}
<LEND>

<L>8284<pc>0116-c<k1>AQaka<k2>AQaka
{#AQaka#}¦ {%āḍhaka, as, am,%} m. n. (etym. doubt-
ful), a measure of grain, the 4th of a droṇa and equal
to 4 prasthas = 16 kuḍavas = 64 palas = 256 karṣas =
4096 māṣas; or containing nearly 7 lbs. 11 ozs. avoir-
dupois. In Bengal an {%āḍhaka%} is equal to two mans or
164 lbs. avds.; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of pulse, Cajanus Indicus
Spreng.; a kind of fragrant earth. {%—Āḍhaka-jambu,%}
N. of a country. {%—Āḍhakajambuka, as, ī, am,%}
relating to that country.
<LEND>

<L>8285<pc>0116-c<k1>AQakika<k2>AQakika
{%Āḍhakika, as, ī, am,%}¦ or {%āḍhakīna, as, ā, am,%}
holding or containing an āḍhaka; sown with an
āḍhaka of seed, as a field &c.
<LEND>

<L>8286<pc>0116-c<k1>AQIlaka<k2>AQIlaka
{#AQIlaka#}¦ {%āḍhīlaka,%} a various reading for
{%ā-ṭīlaka.%} See {%ā-ṭīkana.%}
<LEND>

<L>8287<pc>0116-c<k1>AQya<k2>AQya
{#AQya#}¦ {%āḍhya, as, ā, am%} (etym. doubtful,
perhaps for {%ārdhya%} fr. {%ṛdh%}), opulent, wealthy, rich;
(with an inst. or as last member of a comp.) rich in,
abounding in, productive; possessing abundantly; mixed
with, watered with; abundant, existing in abundance.
{%—Āḍhyakulīna, as, ā, am,%} descended from a rich
family. {%—Āḍhyaṅ-karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} enriching;
({%am%}), n. the means of enriching, wealth, prosperity.
{%—Āḍhya-cara, as, ī, am,%} once opulent (?). {%—Āḍhya-%}
{%tā,%} f. opulence, wealth. {%—Āḍhyam-bhaviṣṇu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} or {%āḍhyam-bhāvuka, as, ī, am,%} becoming
rich or eminent. {%—Āḍhya-vāta, as,%} m. (abundant
wind), a convulsive or rheumatic palsy of the loins.
{%—Āḍhyāḍu (˚ḍhya-āḍu), us, us, u,%} striving to get
wealth.
<LEND>

<L>8288<pc>0116-c<k1>AQyaka<k2>AQyaka
{%Āḍhyaka, am,%}¦ n. wealth, opulence, abundance.
<LEND>

<L>8289<pc>0116-c<k1>ARaka<k2>ARaka
{#ARaka#}¦ {%āṇaka, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%aṇu,%} q. v.), low,
inferior. See {%aṇaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>8290<pc>0116-c<k1>ARava<k2>ARava
{%Āṇava, am,%}¦ n. exceeding smallness; ({%as, ī, am%}),
very small, fine (?).
<LEND>

<L>8291<pc>0116-c<k1>ARavIna<k2>ARavIna
{%Āṇavīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ bearing or fit to bear Pani-
cum Miliaceum.
<LEND>

<L>8292<pc>0116-c<k1>ARi<k2>ARi
{#ARi#}¦ {%āṇi, is,%} m. f. [cf. {%aṇi%}], the pin of the
axle of a cart, the linch-pin; the part of the leg just
above the knee; the corner of a house; a limit, a
boundary; the edge of a sword.
<LEND>

<L>8293<pc>0116-c<k1>ARqa<k2>ARqa
{#ARqa#}¦ {%āṇḍa, am,%} n. (fr. {%aṇḍa,%} q. v.), an egg;
a multitude of eggs, a brood; ({%au%}), m. du., Ved. the
testicles [cf. {%aṇḍa%}]. {%—Āṇḍa-ja, as, ā, am,%} born from
an egg. {%—Āṇḍa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of eggs or
testicles. {%—Āṇḍād (˚ḍa-ad), t,%} m., Ved. one who eats
eggs, N. of a demon.
<LEND>

<L>8294<pc>0116-c<k1>ARqI<k2>ARqI
{%Āṇḍī,%}¦ f., Ved. a testicle.
<LEND>

<L>8295<pc>0116-c<k1>ARqIka<k2>ARqIka
{%Āṇḍīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. bearing eggs, as a plant
with egg-shaped fruits or bulbs.
<LEND>

<L>8296<pc>0116-c<k1>ARqIra<k2>ARqIra
{%Āṇḍīra, as, ā, am,%}¦ having many eggs.
<LEND>

<L>8297<pc>0116-c<k1>At<k2>At
{#At#}¦ {%āt,%} ind. (fr. 4. {%a%}), Ved. afterwards,
then; (in which senses it is often used in a concluding
paragraph antithetically to {%yad, yadā, yadi,%} being
then sometimes strengthened by the particles {%aha, id,%}
{%īm, u;%} e. g. {%yaded ayukta haritaḥ sadhasthād%}
{%ād rātrī vāsas tanute simasmai,%} ‘at the very time
when he has unyoked his coursers from his car, then
[Page0117-a+ 76]
night extends the veiling darkness over all;’ {%Vṛtraṃ%}
{%yad Indra śavasāvadhīr ahim ād it sūryaṃ%}
{%divy ārohayo dṛśe,%} ‘when, O Indra, thou didst slay
with thy power the dragon Vṛtra, then indeed thou
didst raise the sun in the sky, that it might be seen.’
In other passages {%āt%} is simply used like a conjunc-
tion, equivalent to ‘then, further, also, and.’ Sometimes
it only serves to strengthen the meaning of another
word, or to give emphasis to an interrogative pronoun,
in the same way as {%u, nu, aṅga,%} &c.; e. g. {%ya eka%}
{%id apratir manyamāna ād asmād anyo aja-%}
{%niṣṭa tavyān,%} ‘he who considered himself alone
irresistible, another was born mightier even than he;’
{%Kim āt pra bravāma,%} ‘How can we at all pro-
claim ?’
<LEND>

<L>8298<pc>0117-a<k1>Ata<k2>Ata
{#Ata#}¦ {%āta, as, ā,%} m. f. (fr. {%ā-tan%} below ?),
Ved. a scaffold; the frame of a door; (Sāy.) a quarter
of the sky.
<LEND>

<L>8299<pc>0117-a<k1>AtaMs<k2>AtaMs
{#AtaMs#}¦ {%ā-taṃs,%} Caus. A., Ved. {%-taṃsayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to shake out; (Sāy) to decorate from all
sides.
<LEND>

<L>8300<pc>0117-a<k1>Ataka<k2>Ataka
{#Ataka#}¦ {%ātaka, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>8301<pc>0117-a<k1>Atakz<k2>Atakz
{#Atakz#}¦ {%ā-takṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A., Ved. {%-takṣati,%}
{%-te, -kṣitum, -taṣṭum,%} to bring from all sides, to
procure.
<LEND>

<L>8302<pc>0117-a<k1>AtaYc<k2>AtaYc
{#AtaYc#}¦ {%ā-tañc,%} cl. 7. P. {%-tanakti, -taṅktum%}
or {%-tañcitum,%} to cause to shrink or contract, to
coagulate.
<LEND>

<L>8303<pc>0117-a<k1>AtaNka<k2>AtaNka
{%Ā-taṅka, as,%}¦ m. (this word may also be connected
with rt. {%taṅk,%} q. v.), disease or sickness of the body;
pain or affliction of mind, disquietude, apprehension,
fear; fever; the sound of a drum or tabor.
<LEND>

<L>8304<pc>0117-a<k1>AtaYcana<k2>AtaYcana
{%Ā-tañcana, am,%}¦ n. casting one thing into another
to effect some change, as butter-milk into fresh milk
to turn it; the act of causing to contract; that which
causes coagulation; runnet; curdled milk; a sort of
whey; calcining, adding a powder or flux to metals
in fusion; the flux so used; casting away, destroying;
danger, calamity (as a pestilence or epidemic); speed,
velocity; gratifying, satisfying; making fat.
<LEND>

<L>8305<pc>0117-a<k1>Ataq<k2>Ataq
{#Ataq#}¦ {%ā-taḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tāḍayati, -yitum,%}
to thump, strike.
<LEND>

<L>8306<pc>0117-a<k1>Atan<k2>Atan
{#Atan#}¦ {%ā-tan,%} cl. 8. P. {%-tanoti, -nitum,%} to
extend over, stretch over, penetrate, to spread, over-
spread; to illuminate; to take hold of, seek to attain,
assume a (hostile) attitude; to stretch (as a bow for
shooting); to diffuse; to bring to pass, effect: Caus.
{%-tānayati, -yitum,%} to stretch (a bow); [cf. rt. {%tāy,%}
with which some of the following forms are connected.]
<LEND>

<L>8307<pc>0117-a<k1>Atata<k2>Atata
{%Ā-tata, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread, extended, stretched (as
2 bow), &c.
<LEND>

<L>8308<pc>0117-a<k1>AtatAyin<k2>AtatAyin
{%Ātatāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one whose bow is stretched to
take another's life; endeavouring to kill some one;
2 felon, a thief, a murderer, incendiary, ravisher.
{%—Ātatāyi-tā,%} f. or {%ātatāyi-tva, am,%} n. persecuting,
murdering, destroying, stealing.
<LEND>

<L>8309<pc>0117-a<k1>AtatAvin<k2>AtatAvin
{%Ātatā-vin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. one whose bow is
stretched. See {%ātatāyin.%}
<LEND>

<L>8310<pc>0117-a<k1>Atana<k2>Atana
{%Ā-tana, am,%}¦ n. spreading, expanding; sight, view.
<LEND>

<L>8311<pc>0117-a<k1>Atani<k2>Atani
{%Ā-tani, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. spreading, penetrating.
<LEND>

<L>8312<pc>0117-a<k1>AtAna<k2>AtAna
{%Ā-tāna, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an extended cord, string, &c.
<LEND>

<L>8313<pc>0117-a<k1>AtAyin<k2>AtAyin
{%Ā-tāyin, ī,%}¦ m. a falcon, a kite. See {%ātāpin.%}
<LEND>

<L>8314<pc>0117-a<k1>Atap<k2>Atap<h>1
{#Atap#} 1¦. {%ā-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -taptum,%}
to radiate heat; to blaze, to heat; to cause to glow:
Pass. {%-tapyate,%} to suffer pain, be afflicted; to inflict
(austerities) upon one's self.
<LEND>

<L>8315<pc>0117-a<k1>Atap<k2>Atap<h>2
2. {%ā-tap, p,%}¦ f., Ved. heat.
<LEND>

<L>8316<pc>0117-a<k1>Atapa<k2>Atapa
{%Ā-tapa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. causing pain or affliction;
({%as%}), m. heat of the sun, sunshine. {%—Ātapa-tra, am,%}
n. a large umbrella of silk or leaves used in the East
as a parasol. {%—Ātapatraka, am,%} n. a small um-
brella, a mat or basket carried on the head as one.
{%—Ātapa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} irradiated by the sun.
{%—Ātapa-varṣya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (water &c.)
produced by rain during sunshine. {%—Ātapa-vāraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a parasol. {%—Ātapa-śuṣka, as, ā, am,%} dried in
[Page0117-b+ 66]
the sun, evaporated by the solar heat. {%—Ātapābhāva%}
{%(˚pa-abh˚), as,%} m. non-existence of sunshine, shadow.
<LEND>

<L>8317<pc>0117-b<k1>Atapana<k2>Atapana
{%Ā-tapana, as,%}¦ m. causing heat, an epithet of
Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>8318<pc>0117-b<k1>AtapIya<k2>AtapIya
{%Ātapīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (adj. fr. {%ā-tapa%}), sunshiny (?).
<LEND>

<L>8319<pc>0117-b<k1>Atapya<k2>Atapya
{%Ātapya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in the sunshine.
<LEND>

<L>8320<pc>0117-b<k1>Atam<k2>Atam
{#Atam#}¦ {%ā-tam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-tāmyati, -tamitum,%}
to faint, to swoon, to become senseless; to despond,
to languish, fade away.
<LEND>

<L>8321<pc>0117-b<k1>AtamAm<k2>AtamAm
{#AtamAm#}¦ {%ā-tamām ?%} (a superlative form fr.
3. {%ā ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>8322<pc>0117-b<k1>Atara<k2>Atara
{#Atara#}¦ {%ā-tara.%} See under {%ā-tṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>8323<pc>0117-b<k1>Atarj<k2>Atarj
{#Atarj#}¦ {%ā-tarj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tarjayati, -yitum,%}
to scold, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>8324<pc>0117-b<k1>Atardana<k2>Atardana
{#Atardana#}¦ {%ā-tardana.%} See under {%ā-tṛd.%}
<LEND>

<L>8325<pc>0117-b<k1>AtarpaRa<k2>AtarpaRa
{#AtarpaRa#}¦ {%ā-tarpaṇa.%} See under {%ā-tṛp.%}
<LEND>

<L>8326<pc>0117-b<k1>Atava<k2>Atava
{#Atava#}¦ {%ātava,%} a proper N. (whence the
patron. {%ātavāyana%} Pāṇini IV. 1, 110. Gaṇa.)
<LEND>

<L>8327<pc>0117-b<k1>AtAna<k2>AtAna
{#AtAna#}¦ {%ā-tāna.%} See under {%ā-tan.%}
<LEND>

<L>8328<pc>0117-b<k1>AtApin<k2>AtApin
{#AtApin#}¦ {%ātāpin%} or {%ātāyin, ī,%} m., N. of the
bird Falco Cheela. See under {%ā-tan.%}
<LEND>

<L>8329<pc>0117-b<k1>AtAra<k2>AtAra
{#AtAra#}¦ {%ā-tāra, ā-tārya.%} See under {%ā-tṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>8330<pc>0117-b<k1>AtAlI<k2>AtAlI
{#AtAlI#}¦ {%ātālī,%} an indeclinable word com-
pounded with {%as, bhū,%} and {%kṛ%} (see Pāṇini I. 4, 61).
<LEND>

<L>8331<pc>0117-b<k1>Ati<k2>Ati
{#Ati#}¦ {%āti, is,%} m. f. (fr. rt. {%at%}), Ved. a kind
of water-bird; the bird Turdus Ginginianus (see
{%āṭi%}); going.
<LEND>

<L>8332<pc>0117-b<k1>AtiTeya<k2>AtiTeya
{#AtiTeya#}¦ {%ātitheya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%atithi,%} q. v.),
proper for a guest, hospitable, attentive to a guest;
({%ī%} or {%am%}), f. n. hospitality.
<LEND>

<L>8333<pc>0117-b<k1>AtiTya<k2>AtiTya
{%Ātithya, as, ā, am,%}¦ proper for a guest, hospitable,
attentive to a guest; ({%as%}), m. a guest; ({%am%}), n. hos-
pitable reception; hospitality; a particular rite, the
reception of the Soma when it is brought to the
place of sacrifice, also called {%ātithyeṣṭi%}. {%—Ātithya-%}
{%rūpa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being in the place of the
Ātithya rite. {%—Ātithya-satkāra, as,%} m. the rites of
hospitality.
<LEND>

<L>8334<pc>0117-b<k1>AtideSika<k2>AtideSika
{#AtideSika#}¦ {%ātideśika, as, ī, am,%} (in gram.)
connected with an {%ati-deśa,%} q. v.; having reference to
substitution or putting one thing for another.
<LEND>

<L>8335<pc>0117-b<k1>AtiraScIna<k2>AtiraScIna
{#AtiraScIna#}¦ {%ā-tiraścīna, as, ā, am,%} a little
transverse or across.
<LEND>

<L>8336<pc>0117-b<k1>AtirEkya<k2>AtirEkya
{#AtirEkya#}¦ {%ātiraikya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ati-reka%}),
superfluity, excess.
<LEND>

<L>8337<pc>0117-b<k1>AtivijYAnya<k2>AtivijYAnya
{#AtivijYAnya#}¦ {%ātivijñānya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ati-%}
{%vijñāna%}), surpassing the perception or understanding.
<LEND>

<L>8338<pc>0117-b<k1>AtiSayya<k2>AtiSayya
{#AtiSayya#}¦ {%ātiśayya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ati-śaya%}),
excess, quantity.
<LEND>

<L>8339<pc>0117-b<k1>AtizWa<k2>AtizWa
{#AtizWa#}¦ {%ātiṣṭha, am,%} n. (fr. {%ati-ṣṭha%}), Ved.
the being placed at the head of something, being a
universal ruler.
<LEND>

<L>8340<pc>0117-b<k1>Atu<k2>Atu
{#Atu#}¦ {%ātu, us,%} m. (said to come fr. {%ā-tṝ%}
next col.; but probably fr. rt. {%at%}), a raft, a float.
See {%āḍū.%}
<LEND>

<L>8341<pc>0117-b<k1>Atuc<k2>Atuc
{#Atuc#}¦ {%ā-tuc, k,%} f., Ved. growing dusk,
evening.
<LEND>

<L>8342<pc>0117-b<k1>Atuj<k2>Atuj<h>1
{#Atuj#} 1¦. {%ā-tuj,%} cl. 1. 6. P., Ved. {%-tojati,%}
{%-tujati, -tojitum,%} to bring near, to procure.
<LEND>

<L>8343<pc>0117-b<k1>Atuj<k2>Atuj<h>2
2. {%ā-tuj,%}¦ m. (Sāy.) destroyer of enemies, or giver
of wealth.
<LEND>

<L>8344<pc>0117-b<k1>Atuji<k2>Atuji
{%Ā-tuji, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. rushing on, hastening towards;
carrying off (as booty), injuring.
<LEND>

<L>8345<pc>0117-b<k1>Atud<k2>Atud
{#Atud#}¦ {%ā-tud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-tudati, -te, -tot-%}
{%tum,%} to strike, to push, spur on, stir up.
<LEND>

<L>8346<pc>0117-b<k1>Atodin<k2>Atodin
{%Ā-todin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. striking, pushing, pricking.
<LEND>
[Page0117-c+ 75]

<L>8347<pc>0117-c<k1>Atodya<k2>Atodya
{%Ā-todya, am,%}¦ n. ‘to be struck,’ a musical instru-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>8348<pc>0117-c<k1>Atura<k2>Atura
{#Atura#}¦ {%ā-tura, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%turv%} with {%ā%}),
hurt, injured; suffering; sick in body or mind, dis-
abled, diseased; feeble, weak, incapable of doing
anything (with inf.).
<LEND>

<L>8349<pc>0117-c<k1>Atul<k2>Atul
{#Atul#}¦ {%ā-tul,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tolayati, -yitum,%}
to lift up, raise, elevate.
<LEND>

<L>8350<pc>0117-c<k1>Atfd<k2>Atfd
{#Atfd#}¦ {%ā-tṛd,%} cl. 7. P. {%-tṛṇatti, -tarditum,%}
to split, sever, pierce; to push open, open; A.
{%-tṛnte,%} to become split or severed, to sever one's
self.
<LEND>

<L>8351<pc>0117-c<k1>Atardana<k2>Atardana
{%Ā-tardana, am,%}¦ n. pushing open, opening.
<LEND>

<L>8352<pc>0117-c<k1>AtfRRa<k2>AtfRRa
{%Ā-tṛṇṇa, am,%}¦ n. an opening, hole; an open
wound.
<LEND>

<L>8353<pc>0117-c<k1>Atfp<k2>Atfp
{#Atfp#}¦ {%ā-tṛp,%} cl. 4. 5. 6. P. {%-tṛpyati,%}
{%tṛpnoti, -tṛmpati, -tarptum%} or {%-traptum,%} to be
satisfied: Caus. {%-tarpayati, -yitum,%} to satisfy.
<LEND>

<L>8354<pc>0117-c<k1>AtarpaRa<k2>AtarpaRa
{%Ā-tarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. satisfying, gratification, satis-
faction; whitening the wall, floor or seat on festive
occasions; the pigment used for that purpose.
<LEND>

<L>8355<pc>0117-c<k1>Atfpya<k2>Atfpya
{%Ā-tṛpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfiable, to be satisfied;
({%as%}), m. the custard apple tree Annona Reticulata;
({%am%}), n. the fruit of this tree.
<LEND>

<L>8356<pc>0117-c<k1>AtF<k2>AtF
{#AtF#}¦ {%ā-tṝ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-tarati, -taritum%}
or {%-rītum,%} to pass through or over; to cross over;
to overcome; to enlarge, increase.
<LEND>

<L>8357<pc>0117-c<k1>Atara<k2>Atara
{%Ā-tara, as,%}¦ m. fare for being ferried over a river,
passage money, freight.
<LEND>

<L>8358<pc>0117-c<k1>AtAra<k2>AtAra
{%Ā-tāra, as,%}¦ m. landing, coming to shore, fare,
freight.
<LEND>

<L>8359<pc>0117-c<k1>AtArya<k2>AtArya
{%Ā-tārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be crossed; (Ved.) land-
ing, coming to shore, relating to landing.
<LEND>

<L>8360<pc>0117-c<k1>Atta<k2>Atta
{#Atta#}¦ {%ā-tta, as, ā, am%} (contracted fr. {%ā-datta,%}
part. pass. of {%ā-dā,%} q. v.), taken, accepted; assumed;
attracted. {%—Ātta-gandha, as, ā, am,%} one whose
smell is taken away, one who is throttled; hence one
whose pride is humbled, insulted. {%—Ātta-garva, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} whose pride has been taken down, humiliated,
degraded. {%—Ātta-manaska, as, ā, am,%} whose mind
is transported or carried away (with joy). {%—Ātta-%}
{%lakṣmī, īs, īs, i,%} stripped of wealth. {%—Ātta-vacas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. destitute of speech.
<LEND>

<L>8361<pc>0117-c<k1>AtTa<k2>AtTa
{#AtTa#}¦ {%āttha,%} thou saidst. See under rt. 3. {%ah.%}
<LEND>

<L>8362<pc>0117-c<k1>Atman<k2>Atman
{#Atman#}¦ {%ātman, ā,%} m. (fr. rt. {%an,%} to breathe,
or {%at,%} to go; or, according to some, fr. rt. {%ah%} and
connected with {%aham,%} I; or, according to others, a
contraction of {%avatman%} fr. rt. {%av = vā;%} but the ex-
istence of the old Vedic form {%tman%} makes all these
etymologies doubtful); the breath, soul, the principle
of life and sensation, the individual soul, the self, the
abstract individual (e. g. {%ātman%} Ved. loc. {%dhatte,%}
‘he places in himself, he makes his own;’ {%ātmanā%}
{%vi-yuj,%} ‘to lose one's life;’ {%ātmanā saptamas,%} ‘made
the seventh by one's self,’ i. e. ‘being one's self the
seventh with six others’); self, one's self, used as a
reflexive pronoun for all three persons (e. g. {%ātmā-%}
{%naṃ sā hanti,%} ‘she strikes herself’); and used in the
singular even when it refers to a dual or plural (e. g.
{%putram ātmanaḥ spṛṣṭvā nipetatuḥ,%} ‘they two
having touched their son fell down’); the natural tem-
perament or disposition; essence, nature, character,
peculiarity; the person or whole body considered
as one and opposed to the separate members of the
body; the body; the understanding, intellect, the
mind, the faculty of thought or reason, the thinking
faculty; the highest personal principle of life, Brahma,
the supreme deity and soul of the universe (but {%para-%}
{%mātman%} is more usual in this latter sense); care,
effort, pains; firmness; the sun; fire; wind; air; a son;
[cf. Goth. <nsi>ahma;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>ātum,</nsi> Them. <nsi>ātuma;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>œdhm;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>Athem, Odem;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>adhm,</nsi> ‘knowledge,’ and <nsi>adhma,</nsi> ‘knowing;’
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀϋτμήν, ἀϋτμή (?); ἀτμός, ἀτμή (?):</lang> cf. also
rt. <lang n="greek">ἄω</lang> &c. = rt. {%vā.%}] {%—Ātma%} is used at the end of
[Page0118-a+ 81]
some compounds for {%ātman;%} e. g. {%pratyayātma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} whose natural disposition is confidence.
{%—Ātma-karman, a,%} n. one's own act. {%—Ātma-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} loving one's self, possessed of
self-conceit; loving Brahma, the supreme spirit.
{%—Ātma-kāmeya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Ātma-%}
{%kāmeyaka, as, ā, am,%} inhabited by the Ātmakāme-
yas. {%—Ātma-kārya, am,%} n. one's own business, pri-
vate affairs. {%—Ātma-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} self-executed,
done of one's self; done against one's self. {%—Ātma-%}
{%gatam,%} ind. lit. ‘gone to one's self,’ aside (used in
theatrical language, like the English ‘aside,’ to denote
that the words which follow are supposed to be
spoken privately, as if to the speaker's self and not in
the hearing of any one but the audience). {%—Ātma-%}
{%gati, is,%} f. course of the soul's existence, life of the
spirit; one's own course. {%—Ātma-gatyā,%} ind. by
one's own act (without the intervention of another).
{%—Ātma-guptā,%} f., N. of the plant Mucuna Pruritus
Hook.; (according to others) Cowach or Cowhage.
{%—Ātma-gupti, is,%} f. a cave, the hiding-place of an
animal. {%—Ātma-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} selfish, greedy,
taking care of one's self, appropriating, taking for
one's self. {%—Ātma-ghāta, as,%} m. suicide; heresy,
schism. {%—Ātma-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%} a suicide, a here-
tic, a schismatic, one who disregards moral or religious
institutions. {%—Ātma-ghoṣa, as,%} m. a crow; a cock
(‘one who calls out to himself’). {%—Ātma-ja, as,%} m.
a son; ({%ā%}), f. a daughter; a descendant; the reason-
ing faculty, understanding. {%—Ātma-janman, a,%} n.
the birth of one's self, i. e. the birth of a son; ({%ā%}),
m. a son. {%—Ātma-jaya, as,%} m. one's own victory;
victory over one's self. {%—Ātma-jña, as,%} m. a sage,
one who knows his own nature and that of spirit, self-
knowing. {%—Ātma-jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge of the
soul or supreme spirit, spiritual knowledge, philoso-
phical knowledge of the spiritual principle in creation;
self-knowledge, true wisdom. {%—Ātma-tattva, am,%} n.
the true nature of the soul or of the supreme spirit.
{%—Ātmatattva-jña, as,%} m. a sage versed in the Ve-
dānta doctrines. {%—Ātma-tā,%} f. or {%ātma-tva, am,%} n.
identity with self, spirituality. {%—Ātma-tyāga, as,%} m.
self-sacrifice, giving up one's own life, suicide. {%—Āt-%}
{%ma-tyāgin, ī,%} m. one who gives up his own life, a
suicide; a heretic, an unbeliever. {%—Ātma-trāṇa, am,%}
n. self-preservation, a body-guard. {%—Ātma-darśa, as,%}
m. ‘self-shower,’ a mirror. {%—Ātma-darśana, am,%}
n. seeing one's self; knowledge of man's real nature,
spiritual knowledge. {%—Ātma-dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
granting personal existence or life. {%—Ātma-dāna,%}
{%am,%} n. gift of self, self-sacrifice, resignation. {%—Ātma-%}
{%dūṣi, is, is, i,%} Ved. corrupting the soul, soul-destroy-
ing. {%—Ātma-devatā,%} f. a tutelary deity. {%—Ātma-%}
{%drohin, ī, iṇī, i,%} self-tormenting, fretful, miserable.
{%—Ātma-nitya, as, ā, am,%} constantly in the heart,
greatly endeared to one's self. {%—Ātma-nindā,%} f.
self-reproach. {%—Ātma-nivedana, am,%} n. offering
one's self as a living sacrifice to the deity. {%—Ātman-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a soul, animated, alive,
personal. {%—Ātman-vin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. animated,
having a soul. {%—Ātma-parājita, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
one who has lost himself. {%—Ātma-parityāga, as,%}
m. self-sacrifice. {%—Ātma-prabodha, as,%} m. cognition
of soul or supreme spirit; title of an Upaniṣad.
{%—Ātma-prabha, as, ā, am,%} shining by one's own
light. self-illuminated. {%—Ātma-pravāda, as,%} m. con-
versation about the soul or supreme spirit; N. of the
seventh of the fourteen Pūrvas or most ancient sacred
writings of the Jainas. {%—Ātma-praśaṃsā,%} f. self-
applause. {%—Ātma-prīti, is,%} f. self-enjoyment, self-
indulgence. {%—Ātma-badha,%} see {%ātma-vadha.%}
{%—Ātma-bandhu, us,%} m. one's own kinsman, a
first cousin or father's sister's son, mother's brother's
son, mother's sister's son. {%—Ātma-buddhi, is,%} f. self-
knowledge. {%—Ātma-bodha, as,%} m. knowledge of soul
or supreme spirit; self-knowledge; N. of a work of
Śaṅkarācārya; N. of one of the Upaniṣads of the
Atharva-veda; ({%as, ā, am%}), possessed of a knowledge
of soul or the supreme spirit. {%—Ātma-bhava, as,%}
m. becoming or existing of one's self; ({%as, ā, am%}),
produced in one's self, caused by one's self. {%—Ātma- %}
[Page0118-b+ 81]
{%bhāva, as,%} m. existence of the soul; the self, proper
or peculiar nature; the body. {%—Ātma-bhū, ūs,%} m.
self-born, self-existent; an epithet of Brahmā, Viṣṇu,
Śiva, and Kāmadeva, the god of love. {%—Ātma-bhūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} self-produced, become one's self, own,
peculiar, belonging to; attached to, faithful. {%—Ātma-%}
{%bhūya, am,%} n. peculiarity, own nature. {%—Ātma-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} spiritual. {%—Ātma-mātrā,%} f. a particle of
the supreme spirit. {%—Ātma-mānin, ī, inī, i,%} self-
honouring, self-respecting, decorous, respectable. {%—Āt-%}
{%ma-mūla, as, ā, am,%} self-existent; ({%ī%}), f., the plant
Alhagi Maurorum (‘striking root in self’). {%—Ātmam-%}
{%bhari, is, is, i,%} self-nourishing, one who takes care only
of his own person, selfish, greedy. {%—Ātma-yājin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} sacrificing for one's self; one who sacrifices himself;
({%ī%}), m. a wise or learned man, one who studies his own
nature and that of the soul. {%—Ātma-yoni, is,%} m. one
whose birth-place is self; an epithet of Brahmā,
Viṣṇu, Śiva, and Kāmadeva, the god of love.
{%—Ātma-rakṣā,%} f. the plant Cucumis Colocynthis
or Trichosanthes Bracteata (a creeper with a poisonous
fruit). {%—Ātma-rāma-yogendra (˚ga-in˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Ātma-loman, a,%} n. the hair of the
body; the beard. {%—Ātma-vañcaka, as, ā, am,%} self-
deceiver. {%—Ātma-vañcanā,%} f. self-delusion. {%—Ātma-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} self-possessed, composed, prudent;
knowing spirit; ({%t%}), ind. like one's self. {%—Ātma-%}
{%vat-tā,%} f. self-possession, self-regard, prudence; self-
resemblance, proportion, analogy. {%—Ātma-vadha, as,%}
m. or {%ātma-vadhyā,%} f. suicide. {%—Ātma-vaśa, as,%}
m. subjection of the mind, self-control, self-govern-
ment; ({%as, ā, am%}), depending on one's own will.
{%—Ātma-vikraya, as,%} m. sale of one's self, sale of
one's liberty. {%—Ātma-vid, t,%} m. a wise man, a sage,
one who knows the nature of the soul or spirit;
a sensible man, one who knows himself; a N. of Śiva.
{%—Ātma-vidyā,%} f. knowledge of soul or the supreme
spirit; spiritual knowledge. {%—Ātma-vivṛddhi%} or
{%ātma-vṛddhi, is,%} f. self-advantage. {%—Ātma-vīra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} existent, sentient; appropriate, good for
one's self, suitable as diet &c.; ({%as%}), m. a mighty
man; a son; a wife's brother; the jester or Vidū-
shaka in a play. {%—Ātma-vṛttānta, as,%} m. one's own
story, account of one's self, autobiography. {%—Ātma-%}
{%vṛtti, is,%} f. one's own circumstances; practising one's
own duties or occupation. {%—Ātma-śakti, is,%} f. inhe-
rent or own power or effort. {%—Ātma-śalyā,%} f. the
plant Asparagus Racemosus Willd. {%—Ātma-śuddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. self-purification. {%—Ātma-ślāghā,%} f. self-praise,
boasting. {%—Ātma-saṃyama, as,%} m. self-restraint,
stoicism. {%—Ātma-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. dwelling in self.
{%—Ātma-sani, is, is, i,%} Ved. granting the breath of
life. {%—Ātma-sandeha, as,%} m. internal doubt, personal
risk. {%—Ātma-sambhava, as,%} m. a son; ({%ā%}), f. a
daughter. {%—Ātma-sāt,%} ind. one's own; (used in con-
nection with rt. {%kṛ,%} see {%ātmasāt-kṛ%} next col.) {%—Āt-%}
{%ma-siddhi, is,%} f. personal aggrandizement, self-ad-
vantage. {%—Ātma-sukha, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Āt-%}
{%ma-stuti, is,%} f. self-praise. {%—Ātma-hatyā,%} f. self-
destruction, suicide. {%—Ātma-han, ā,%} m. one who
kills his soul, or does not concern himself about the
welfare of his soul; a heretic, an unbeliever; a self-
murderer, a suicide; a priest in a temple, a servant
or attendant upon an idol; (the priest subsisting by
appropriating to himself offerings to deities, for which
future punishment is assigned.) {%—Ātma-hanana, am,%}
n. suicide. {%—Ātma-hita, as, ā, am,%} beneficial to one's
self; ({%am%}), n. one's own profit or advantage. {%—Ātmā-%}
{%diṣṭa (˚ma-ād˚), as, ā, am,%} self-counselled; ({%as%}),
m. a treaty dictated by the party wishing it himself.
{%—Ātmādhīna (˚ma-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} depending
on self, independent; sentient, existent; ({%as%}), m. a
son; a wife's brother; the jester or Vidūṣaka in a
play, see {%ātmanīna%} and {%ātma-vīra%}. {%—Ātmāparādha%}
{%(˚ma-ap˚), as,%} m. own offence, personal transgression.
{%—Ātmāpahāraka (˚ma-ap˚), as,%} m. an impostor,
one who pretends to belong to a higher class than his
own. {%—Ātmābhilāṣa (˚ma-abh˚), as,%} m. the soul's
desire. {%—Ātmārtha (˚ma-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} for one's
own sake, for the sake of one's self. {%—Ātmāśin%}
{%(˚ma-āś˚), ī,%} m. a fish, supposed to eat its young.
[Page0118-c+ 78]
{%—Ātmāśraya (˚ma-āś˚), as,%} m. self-dependance;
innate idea, abstract knowledge which is independant
of the thing to be known. {%—Ātmeśvara (˚ma-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. master of one's self, self-possessed; God. {%—Āt-%}
{%modaya (˚ma-ud˚), as,%} m. self-advantage or elevation.
{%—Ātmodbhava (˚ma-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} born or pro-
duced from one's self; ({%as%}), m. a son; ({%ā%}), f. a
daughter; N. of the plant Glycine Debilis Roxb.
{%—Ātmopajīvin (˚ma-up˚), ī, inī, i,%} one who lives
by his own labour; one who lives by his wife;
a public performer, actor, singer, dancer, &c.; a day-
labourer. {%—Ātmopaniṣad (˚ma-up˚), t,%} f. title of
an Upaniṣad which treats of the supreme spirit.
{%—Ātmopama (˚ma-up˚), as, ā, am,%} like one's self.
{%—Ātmaupamya (˚ma-aup˚), am,%} n. likeness to
self, analogy to one's own self.
<LEND>

<L>8363<pc>0118-c<k1>Atmaka<k2>Atmaka
{%Ātmaka, as, ikā,%}¦ m. f. {%= ātman,%} essence, nature,
character, property, peculiarity; ({%as, ā, am%}), belong-
ing to the nature or essence of a thing, of the same
nature as. {%Ātmaka%} often occurs as the last member
of a compound; e. g. {%saṅkalpātmaka,%} whose charac-
teristic is {%saṅkalpa; pañcātmaka,%} five-fold, com-
posed of five; {%viṣātmaka,%} poisonous; {%Ṛg-ātmaka,%}
belonging to the Rig-veda.
<LEND>

<L>8364<pc>0118-c<k1>AtmakIya<k2>AtmakIya
{%Ātmakīya%}¦ or {%ātmīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to
one's self, one's own, own; cognate, related of kin.
Used reflexively for all three persons.
<LEND>

<L>8365<pc>0118-c<k1>AtmanIna<k2>AtmanIna
{%Ātmanīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to self, own;
appropriate, good for, fit for, suitable (as diet &c.),
existent, sentient; ({%as%}), m. a son; any living being;
a wife's brother; the jester or Vidūṣaka (q. v.) in a
drama.
<LEND>

<L>8366<pc>0118-c<k1>Atmanepada<k2>Atmanepada
{%Ātmane-pada, am,%}¦ n. ‘word to one's self,’ form
for one's self; that form of the verb which implies
an action belonging or reverting to self; that voice
which corresponds to the Greek middle; the ter-
minations of that voice.
<LEND>

<L>8367<pc>0118-c<k1>Atmanepadin<k2>Atmanepadin
{%Ātmanepadin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ taking the terminations
of the middle voice, inflected in this voice.
<LEND>

<L>8368<pc>0118-c<k1>AtmaneBAzA<k2>AtmaneBAzA
{%Ātmane-bhāṣā,%}¦ f. the Sanskrit middle voice.
<LEND>

<L>8369<pc>0118-c<k1>AtmasAtkf<k2>AtmasAtkf
{%Ātmasāt-kṛ,%}¦ to make one's own, to acquire or
gain for one's self, to place upon one's self.
<LEND>

<L>8370<pc>0118-c<k1>AtmasAtkfta<k2>AtmasAtkfta
{%Ātmasāt-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made one's own, ap-
propriated.
<LEND>

<L>8371<pc>0118-c<k1>AtmIBAva<k2>AtmIBAva
{%Ātmī-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. becoming part of the supreme
spirit.
<LEND>

<L>8372<pc>0118-c<k1>Atmya<k2>Atmya
{%Ātmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to self, personal;
(at the end of a comp.) having the nature of.
<LEND>

<L>8373<pc>0118-c<k1>Atyantika<k2>Atyantika
{#Atyantika#}¦ {%ātyantika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%aty-anta%}),
continual, uninterrupted, infinite, endless; excessive, su-
perlative, abundant; supreme. {%—Ātyantika-pralaya,%}
{%as,%} m. the grand or universal destruction of the world.
<LEND>

<L>8374<pc>0118-c<k1>Atyayika<k2>Atyayika
{#Atyayika#}¦ {%ātyayika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%aty-aya%}),
having a rapid course, rushing quickly to a termination,
not suffering delay, pressing, urgent; destructive, dis-
astrous, distressing, painful, ill-omened, unpropitious.
<LEND>

<L>8375<pc>0118-c<k1>AtyUha<k2>AtyUha
{#AtyUha#}¦ {%ātyūha, as,%} m. a gallinule. See
{%dātyūha.%}
<LEND>

<L>8376<pc>0118-c<k1>Atreya<k2>Atreya
{#Atreya#}¦ {%ātreya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%atri%}), origin-
ating from Atri; ({%as%}), m. a descendant of Atri;
a priest who is closely related to the Sadasya
(perhaps because this office was generally held by a
descendant of Atri); an epithet of Śiva; an essential
humor or juice of the body; ({%ī%}), f. a female descend-
ant of Atri; a woman in her courses; any woman of
the Brāhmanical order; N. of a river in the north of
Bengal, otherwise called Tistā. {%—Ātreyī-putra, as,%}
m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>8377<pc>0118-c<k1>AtreyikA<k2>AtreyikA
{%Ātreyikā,%}¦ f. a woman in her courses.
<LEND>

<L>8378<pc>0118-c<k1>ATarvaRa<k2>ATarvaRa
{#ATarvaRa#}¦ {%ātharvaṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%atharvan%}),
originating from, or belonging or relating to Atharvan
or the Atharvans; ({%as%}), m. a descendant of Atharvan;
a priest whose ritual is comprised in the Atharva-veda;
a Brāhman versed in the Atharva-veda; a house-
priest; the Atharva-veda; ({%am%}), n. a private apartment
in which, after a sacrifice, the sacrificer is informed of
the happy event of the sacrifice by the officiating
Brāhman.
<LEND>
[Page0119-a+ 74]

<L>8379<pc>0119-a<k1>ATarvaRika<k2>ATarvaRika
{%Ātharvaṇika, as,%}¦ m. a Brāhman who has studied
the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>8380<pc>0119-a<k1>ATarvaRIyarudropanizad<k2>ATarvaRIyarudropanizad
{%Ātharvaṇīya-rudropaniṣad (˚ra-up˚), t,%}¦ f., N.
of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>8381<pc>0119-a<k1>Ad<k2>Ad
{#Ad#}¦ {%ād (ā-ad),%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%ātti, āttum,%}
to eat.
<LEND>

<L>8382<pc>0119-a<k1>AdaMS<k2>AdaMS
{#AdaMS#}¦ {%ā-daṃś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-daṃśati, -daṃṣṭum,%}
to nibble, bite or peck at.
<LEND>

<L>8383<pc>0119-a<k1>AdaMSa<k2>AdaMSa
{%Ā-daṃśa, as,%}¦ m. a bite, a wound caused by biting.
<LEND>

<L>8384<pc>0119-a<k1>Adazwa<k2>Adazwa
{%Ā-daṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ nibbled, pecked at.
<LEND>

<L>8385<pc>0119-a<k1>AdaGna<k2>AdaGna
{#AdaGna#}¦ {%ā-daghna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ās-d˚%}), Ved.
reaching up to the mouth (as water).
<LEND>

<L>8386<pc>0119-a<k1>AdamB<k2>AdamB
{#AdamB#}¦ {%ā-dambh,%} cl. 5. P., Ved. {%-dabhnoti,%}
{%-dambhitum,%} to harm, hurt, injure, treat injuriously.
<LEND>

<L>8387<pc>0119-a<k1>Adara<k2>Adara
{#Adara#}¦ {%ā-dara.%} See under {%ā-dṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>8388<pc>0119-a<k1>AdarSa<k2>AdarSa
{#AdarSa#}¦ {%ā-darśa.%} See under {%ā-dṛś.%}
<LEND>

<L>8389<pc>0119-a<k1>Adah<k2>Adah
{#Adah#}¦ {%ā-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dagdhum,%}
to burn, burn up: Caus. {%-dāhayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to burn: Caus. Pass. {%-dāhyate,%} to be burnt.
<LEND>

<L>8390<pc>0119-a<k1>Adahana<k2>Adahana
{%Ā-dahana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a place where anything
is burnt.
<LEND>

<L>8391<pc>0119-a<k1>AdA<k2>AdA<h>1
{#AdA#} 1¦. {%ā-dā,%} cl. 3. A. (Ved. sometimes P.)
{%-datte, -dadāti, -dātum,%} to give to one's self, ap-
propriate to one's self, take, receive, accept, seize,
take away, separate; to carry off, to put on (as
clothes), to perceive, comprehend; to agree to; to
undertake, begin; to begin to speak; to repeat (with
{%punar%}): Caus. {%-dāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause one
to take: Desid. A. {%-ditsate,%} to desire to take, to be
on the point of taking or seizing.
<LEND>

<L>8392<pc>0119-a<k1>Ada<k2>Ada
{%Ā-da, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of some compounds)
taking, receiving.
<LEND>

<L>8393<pc>0119-a<k1>Adatta<k2>Adatta
{%Ā-datta, as, ā, am%}¦ (sometimes contracted to
{%ātta,%} q. v.), taken, seized, put on; agreed to, under-
taken, begun.
<LEND>

<L>8394<pc>0119-a<k1>AdadAna<k2>AdadAna
{%Ā-dadāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ taking, accepting, under-
taking, beginning.
<LEND>

<L>8395<pc>0119-a<k1>Adadi<k2>Adadi
{%Ā-dadi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. procuring, gaining; taking
or carrying away or off.
<LEND>

<L>8396<pc>0119-a<k1>AdAtavya<k2>AdAtavya
{%Ā-dātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or received.
<LEND>

<L>8397<pc>0119-a<k1>AdAtf<k2>AdAtf
{%Ā-dātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a receiver.
<LEND>

<L>8398<pc>0119-a<k1>AdAna<k2>AdAna<h>1
1. {%ā-dāna, am,%}¦ n. taking, seizing; receipt, accept-
ance; taking for one's self, drawing near to one's
self; receiving; taking away or off; a symptom:
(for 2. {%ā-dāna%} see below under 2. {%ā-dā.%}) {%—Ādāna-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who receives something.
<LEND>

<L>8399<pc>0119-a<k1>AdAnI<k2>AdAnI
{%Ā-dānī,%}¦ f., N. of a plant, commonly called {%hasti-%}
{%ghoṣā.%}
<LEND>

<L>8400<pc>0119-a<k1>AdApana<k2>AdApana
{%Ā-dāpana, am,%}¦ n. inviting or causing another to
accept something.
<LEND>

<L>8401<pc>0119-a<k1>AdAya<k2>AdAya<h>1
1. {%ā-dāya, as, ā, am,%}¦ receiving, taking.
<LEND>

<L>8402<pc>0119-a<k1>AdAya<k2>AdAya<h>2
2. {%ā-dāya,%}¦ ind. having taken. {%—Ādāya-cara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who goes away after having taken any-
thing.
<LEND>

<L>8403<pc>0119-a<k1>AdAyamAna<k2>AdAyamAna
{%Ā-dāyamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (epic form for {%ā-dadāna%}),
taking, seizing.
<LEND>

<L>8404<pc>0119-a<k1>AdAyin<k2>AdAyin
{%Ā-dāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ receiving, inclined to receive
(gifts), taking gifts for one's self.
<LEND>

<L>8405<pc>0119-a<k1>Adeya<k2>Adeya
{%Ā-deya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or received, re-
ceivable, leviable.
<LEND>

<L>8406<pc>0119-a<k1>AdA<k2>AdA<h>2
{#AdA#} 2¦. {%ā-dā,%} cl. 2. 4. P. {%-dāti, -dyati,%}
{%dātum,%} to bind, fasten.
<LEND>

<L>8407<pc>0119-a<k1>AdAna<k2>AdAna<h>2
2. {%ā-dāna, am,%}¦ n., Ved. binding, fettering; a horse's
trappings. (For 1. {%ā-dāna%} see under 1. {%ā-dā.%})
<LEND>

<L>8408<pc>0119-a<k1>AdAdika<k2>AdAdika
{#AdAdika#}¦ {%ādādika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ad-ādi%}),
belonging to that class of roots of which the first is
{%ad,%} i. e. to the second class.
<LEND>

<L>8409<pc>0119-a<k1>Adi<k2>Adi
{#Adi#}¦ {%ādi, is,%} m. (fr. 1. {%ā-dā ?%}), beginning,
commencement; a firstling, first-fruits; first, prior,
prime, pre-eminent; (very often at the end or in the
middle of a compound in the sense) beginning with,
et cætera, and so on (e. g. {%Indrādayaḥ surāḥ,%} the
gods beginning with Indra, i. e. Indra &c.; {%gṛhādi-%}
{%yukta,%} possessed of houses, &c.; {%evam-ādīni vas- %}
[Page0119-b+ 81]
{%tūni,%} such and similar things; {%śayyā khaṭvādiḥ,%}
the word {%śayyā%} means a bed &c.); {%ādau,%} ind. in the
commencement or beginning, at first; [with this
word has been compared the Slav. <nsi>jedin,</nsi> ‘one.’]
{%—Ādi-kara, as,%} m. the creator; an epithet of
Brahmā. {%—Ādi-kartṛ, tā,%} m. the creator; an epi-
thet of Brahmā, Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. {%—Ādi-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. (in gram.) the beginning or commencement of
an action (as in the example {%sūryaḥ pradyotitaḥ,%}
‘the sun has begun to shine;’ see Gram. 895. <nsi>a</nsi>).
{%—Ādi-kavi, is,%} m. the first poet; an epithet of
Brahmā, or of Vālmīki. {%—Ādi-kāṇḍa, am,%} n. first
part or chapter; title of the first book of the Rāmā-
yaṇa. {%—Ādi-kāraṇa, am,%} n. a primary cause; ana-
lysis, algebra. {%—Ādi-kāla, as,%} m. primitive time,
remote antiquity. {%—Ādi-kāvya, am,%} n. the first poem,
an epithet of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Ādi-krit, t,%} m. the
creator; see {%ādi-kartṛ%} above. {%—Ādi-keśava, as,%}
m. the first keśava, an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Ādi-tas,%}
ind. from the beginning, from the first, in the be-
ginning, at first, at the head of (with gen.). {%—Ādi-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%ādi-tva, am,%} n. priority, precedence.
{%—Ādi-deva, as,%} m. the first god, the creator; N. of
Brahmā, Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa, or Nārāyaṇa; the sun.
{%—Ādi-daitya, as,%} m. epithet of Hiraṇyakaśipu.
{%—Ādi-nātha, as,%} m., N. of Ādi-buddha; N. of an
author. {%—Ādi-parvan, a,%} n. first section or chapter,
title of the first book of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Ādi-%}
{%purāṇa, am,%} n. the primitive Purāṇa, N. of the
Brahma-Purāṇa. {%—Ādi-puruṣa%} or {%ādi-pūruṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. the first male or progenitor, usually applied to
Viṣṇu; the primeval spirit. {%—Ādi-bala, am,%} n.
generative power (first vigour). {%—Ādi-buddha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} perceived in the beginning; ({%as%}), m. the
primitive Buddha, the chief deity of the northern
Buddhists. {%—Ādi-bhava, as, ā, am,%} produced at first;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Brahmā. {%—Ādi-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
first-born or existent; ({%as%}), m., a N. of Brahmā.
{%—Ādi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having a beginning {%—Ādi-%}
{%mūla, am,%} n. primitive foundation, primeval cause.
{%—Ādi-yogācārya (˚ga-āc˚), as,%} m. primitive
teacher of devotion; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Ādi-%}
{%rasa, as,%} m. the first or chief of the eight rasas, the
principal sentiment or emotion, i. e. sṛṅgāra or love.
{%—Ādirasa-śloka, as,%} m., N. of a poem supposed to
be written by Kālidāsa. {%—Ādi-rāja, as,%} m. the first
king; an epithet of Manu; of a son of Kuru; of
Pṛthu. {%—Ādi-vaṃśa, as,%} m. primeval race, primitive
family. {%—Ādi-varāha, as,%} m. the first boar; N. of
Viṣṇu, alluding to his incarnation in that form.
{%—Ādivārāha, as, ī, am,%} relating to the first boar.
{%—Ādi-vipulā,%} f., N. of a metre. {%—Ādi-śarīra, am,%}
n. the primitive body. {%—Ādi-sarga, as,%} m. primitive
creation. {%—Ādi-sūra, as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Ādī-%}
{%śvara (˚di-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Ādy-anta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having beginning and end; from the be-
ginning to the end; ({%am%}), n. beginning and end,
first and last. {%—Ādyanta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
beginning and end, finite. {%—Ādy-antāntara-vartin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} containing beginning, end, and middle;
being all in all. {%—Ādy-udātta, as, ā, am,%} having
the acute accent on the first syllable. {%—Ādyudāt-%}
{%ta-tva, am,%} n. the condition of having the acute
accent on the first syllable. {%—Ādyopāntam (˚dya-%}
{%up˚),%} ind. from first to last.
<LEND>

<L>8410<pc>0119-b<k1>Adika<k2>Adika
{%Ādika, as, ā, am,%}¦ (used like {%ādi,%} q. v., at the end
of compounds) beginning with, et cætera, and so on.
<LEND>

<L>8411<pc>0119-b<k1>Adima<k2>Adima
{%Ādima, as, ā, am,%}¦ first, prior, primitive, original.
<LEND>

<L>8412<pc>0119-b<k1>Adya<k2>Adya<h>1
1. {%ādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being at the beginning, first,
primitive; beginning with (used in this sense like
{%ādi;%} e. g. {%Indrādyāḥ surāḥ,%} the gods beginning
with Indra, i. e. Indra &c.); immediately preceding
(e. g. {%ekādaśādya,%} immediately before the eleventh,
i. e. the tenth; {%saṃyuktādya,%} immediately pre-
ceding a double consonant); being at the head, un-
paralleled, unprecedented, excellent; ({%am%}), n. the
beginning; {%ādye,%} in the beginning; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a class of deities; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Durgā.
{%—Ādya-kavi, is,%} m. the first poet, a N. of Vālmīki,
the author of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Ādya-māṣaka, as,%}
m. a māṣa, a weight equal to five guñja or retti
[Page0119-c+ 77]
seeds, about 17(1/2) grains troy. {%—Ādya-vīja, am,%} n.
a primary cause.
<LEND>

<L>8413<pc>0119-c<k1>AdigDa<k2>AdigDa
{#AdigDa#}¦ {%ā-digdha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dih%}), be-
smeared.
<LEND>

<L>8414<pc>0119-c<k1>Aditeya<k2>Aditeya
{#Aditeya#}¦ {%āditeya, as,%} m. (fr. {%aditi%}), a son
of Aditi; a god, a deity, a divinity.
<LEND>

<L>8415<pc>0119-c<k1>Aditya<k2>Aditya
{%Āditya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or devoted to, or
originating from Aditi; belonging or relating to, or
originating from the Ādityas; ({%as%}), m. a son of
Aditi. In the earliest times this is the N. of seven
deities of the heavenly sphere, of whom Varuṇa is
the chief and to whom therefore especially belongs
the title Āditya. The names of six of the seven are
Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman, Bhaga, Dakṣa, and Aṃśa; that
of the seventh is not clearly ascertained. Sometimes their
number is supposed to be eight; and in the period of
the Brāhmaṇas twelve, as representing the sun in
the twelve months of the year. The name Āditya
was afterwards applied to any god, though especially
applicable to Sūrya, the sun; N. of Viṣṇu in his
Vāmana or dwarf avatār, as son of Kaśyapa and Aditi
and younger brother of Indra; the plant Calotropis
Gigantea; N. of a man; ({%au%}), m. du., N. of a constel-
lation, the seventh lunar mansion. {%—Āditya-ketu, us,%}
m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Āditya-garbha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Āditya-candrau,%}
m. du. sun and moon. {%—Āditya-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Āditya-pattra, as,%} m. a plant {%= arka-%}
{%pattra%}. {%—Āditya-parṇinī,%} f. a creeping plant with
gold-coloured flowers, growing near the banks of
water. {%—Āditya-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of an Upa-
purāṇa. {%—Āditya-puṣpikā,%} f. red swallow wort.
{%—Āditya-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Āditya-%}
{%bhaktā,%} f. {%= arka-bhaktā,%} q. v. {%—Āditya-maṇḍala,%}
{%am,%} n. the disc or orb of the sun. {%—Āditya-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} surrounded by the Ādityas. {%—Āditya-vani,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. winning the (favour of the) Ādityas.
{%—Āditya-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} having the colour of
the sun; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Āditya-varman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Āditya-vrata, am,%} n. {%= arka-%}
{%vrata,%} q. v. {%—Āditya-sadṛśa, as, ī, am,%} like the
sun. {%—Āditya-sūnu, us,%} m., son of the sun; N. of
Sugrīva, the monkey-king; of Yama, Saturn, Sāvarṇi
Manu, and Vaivasvata Manu. {%—Āditya-sena, as,%} m.,
N. of a king of Ujjayinī. {%—Ādityācārya (˚tya-āc),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>8416<pc>0119-c<k1>AditsA<k2>AditsA
{#AditsA#}¦ {%ā-ditsā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of 1. {%ā-dā%}),
desire to seize or take.
<LEND>

<L>8417<pc>0119-c<k1>Aditsu<k2>Aditsu
{%Ā-ditsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to take or have (with
acc.).
<LEND>

<L>8418<pc>0119-c<k1>Adin<k2>Adin
{#Adin#}¦ {%ādin, ī, inī, i%} (rt. {%ad%}), eating (used
at the end of compounds; cf. {%annādin%} &c.).
<LEND>

<L>8419<pc>0119-c<k1>Adinava<k2>Adinava
{#Adinava#}¦ {%ādinava, am,%} n. (?), Ved. misfor-
tune, hinderance, want of luck (in dice); see {%ādīnava.%}
{%—Ādinava-darśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having evil
designs towards a fellow-player at dice.
<LEND>

<L>8420<pc>0119-c<k1>AdiS<k2>AdiS<h>1
{#AdiS#} 1¦. {%ā-diś,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-dīśati, -te,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to aim at, to assign; to point out, indicate,
report, announce, teach, determine, specify, foretel;
to order, direct, command; to provoke, challenge; to
undertake, try; to profess as one's purpose or duty:
Caus. {%-deśayati, -yitum,%} to indicate, announce.
<LEND>

<L>8421<pc>0119-c<k1>AdiS<k2>AdiS<h>2
2. {%ā-diś, k,%}¦ f., Ved. aiming at, design, intention;
project, proposition; proposal, declaration; region,
quarter; (Sāy.) a sacrifice offered or assigned (to a
particular deity).
<LEND>

<L>8422<pc>0119-c<k1>AdiSya<k2>AdiSya
{%Ā-diśya,%}¦ ind. announcing, apprising, aiming at.
<LEND>

<L>8423<pc>0119-c<k1>Adizwa<k2>Adizwa
{%Ā-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ advised, enjoined; directed,
commanded; said; ({%am%}), n. command, order; frag-
ments or leavings of a meal.
<LEND>

<L>8424<pc>0119-c<k1>Adizwin<k2>Adizwin
{%Ādiṣṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ or ({%ī%}), m. one who receives
instruction, a pupil, a student, a Brāhman in the first
order or quarter of his life; a penitent, one engaged
in any expiatory rite.
<LEND>

<L>8425<pc>0119-c<k1>AdeSa<k2>AdeSa
{%Ā-deśa, as,%}¦ m. account, information; advice, in-
struction, precept, rule; an order, command; fore-
telling; (in gram.) a substitute, substituted form or
[Page0120-a+ 76]
letter, &c.; (in astrology) event, result, consequence
of stellar conjunctions. {%—Ādeśa-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} obe-
dient.
<LEND>

<L>8426<pc>0120-a<k1>AdeSana<k2>AdeSana
{%Ā-deśana, am,%}¦ n. the act of instructing, command-
ing or prescribing.
<LEND>

<L>8427<pc>0120-a<k1>AdeSin<k2>AdeSin
{%Ā-deśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ ordering, commanding, insti-
gating, exciting (e. g. {%kapola-pāṭalādeśin,%} exciting
a glow on the cheek); ({%ī%}), m. a commander, a
director; an astrologer, a fortune-teller.
<LEND>

<L>8428<pc>0120-a<k1>AdeSya<k2>AdeSya
{%Ā-deśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be ordered or commanded.
<LEND>

<L>8429<pc>0120-a<k1>Adezwf<k2>Adezwf
{%Ā-deṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. an adviser, a director, a com-
mander; an employer of priests.
<LEND>

<L>8430<pc>0120-a<k1>AdInava<k2>AdInava
{#AdInava#}¦ {%ādīnava, as,%} m. distress, pain, un-
easiness; fault, transgression; an afflicter of distress.
<LEND>

<L>8431<pc>0120-a<k1>AdIp<k2>AdIp
{#AdIp#}¦ {%ā-dīp,%} Caus. P. {%-dīpayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to blaze, kindle, set on fire, illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>8432<pc>0120-a<k1>AdIpana<k2>AdIpana
{%Ā-dīpana, am,%}¦ n. setting on fire, inflaming, ex-
citing, embellishing; whitening the wall, floor or
seat &c. upon festival occasions.
<LEND>

<L>8433<pc>0120-a<k1>AdIpita<k2>AdIpita
{%Ā-dīpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ illuminated, inflamed.
<LEND>

<L>8434<pc>0120-a<k1>AdIpta<k2>AdIpta
{%Ā-dīpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ set on fire, blazing up.
<LEND>

<L>8435<pc>0120-a<k1>Adu<k2>Adu
{#Adu#}¦ {%ā-du,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-dunoti, -te, -dotum,%}
to feel pain.
<LEND>

<L>8436<pc>0120-a<k1>Adf<k2>Adf
{#Adf#}¦ {%ā-dṛ,%} cl. 6. A. or poet. P. {%-driyate,%}
{%-ti, -dartum,%} to feel timid from veneration; to re-
spect, mind; to honour, reverence; to enjoy honour,
be honoured.
<LEND>

<L>8437<pc>0120-a<k1>Adara<k2>Adara
{%Ā-dara, as,%}¦ m. respect shown to a person or thing,
notice, care; reverence; commencement, beginning;
[cf. Hib. <nsi>adharadh,</nsi> ‘adoration;’ <nsi>adharach,</nsi> ‘one
who adores.’]
<LEND>

<L>8438<pc>0120-a<k1>AdaraRa<k2>AdaraRa
{%Ā-daraṇa, am,%}¦ n. notice, respect.
<LEND>

<L>8439<pc>0120-a<k1>AdaraRIya<k2>AdaraRIya
{%Ā-daraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ venerable, respectable;
to be attended to.
<LEND>

<L>8440<pc>0120-a<k1>Adartavya<k2>Adartavya
{%Ā-dartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be respected or regarded.
<LEND>

<L>8441<pc>0120-a<k1>Adarya<k2>Adarya
{%Ā-darya, as, ā, am,%}¦ venerable, respectable.
<LEND>

<L>8442<pc>0120-a<k1>AdAra<k2>AdAra
{%Ā-dāra, as,%}¦ m., Ved. allurement, attraction; (Sāy.)
an instigator; N. of a plant used instead of the Soma
plant, if this cannot be had. {%—Ādāra-bimbī,%} f., N. of
a plant.
<LEND>

<L>8443<pc>0120-a<k1>AdArin<k2>AdArin<h>1
1. {%ā-dārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. attracting, alluring; (Sāy.)
destroying (as if fr. {%ā-dṝ%}).
<LEND>

<L>8444<pc>0120-a<k1>Aduri<k2>Aduri<h>1
1. {%ā-duri, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. careful, attentive. (For
2. {%ā-duri%} see under {%ā-dṝ%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>8445<pc>0120-a<k1>Adfta<k2>Adfta
{%Ā-dṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ respected, honoured, worship-
ped; zealous, diligent; respectful.
<LEND>

<L>8446<pc>0120-a<k1>Adftya<k2>Adftya<h>1
1. {%ā-dṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ venerable, respectable.
<LEND>

<L>8447<pc>0120-a<k1>Adftya<k2>Adftya<h>2
2. {%ā-dṛtya,%}¦ ind. having respected, having honoured.
<LEND>

<L>8448<pc>0120-a<k1>AdfS<k2>AdfS
{#AdfS#}¦ {%ā-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-paśyati,%}
{%-draṣṭum,%} to look at: Caus. P. {%-darśayati, -yitum,%}
to show, exhibit.
<LEND>

<L>8449<pc>0120-a<k1>AdarSa<k2>AdarSa
{%Ā-darśa, as,%}¦ m. a looking-glass, a mirror; copy
of a work; the original manuscript from which a
copy is taken; a commentary; N. of a son of the
eleventh Manu; N. of a country. {%—Ādarśa-maṇḍala,%}
having mirror-like spots; N. of a snake.
<LEND>

<L>8450<pc>0120-a<k1>AdarSaka<k2>AdarSaka
{%Ā-darśaka, as,%}¦ m. a mirror.
<LEND>

<L>8451<pc>0120-a<k1>AdarSana<k2>AdarSana
{%Ā-darśana, am,%}¦ n. showing, making apparent or
seen; a mirror.
<LEND>

<L>8452<pc>0120-a<k1>AdarSita<k2>AdarSita
{%Ā-darśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shown, made apparent.
<LEND>

<L>8453<pc>0120-a<k1>Adfzwi<k2>Adfzwi
{%Ā-dṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. looking at, power of looking.
<LEND>

<L>8454<pc>0120-a<k1>AdF<k2>AdF
{#AdF#}¦ {%ā-dṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-dṛṇāti, -ṇīte, -dari-%}
{%tum%} or {%-rītum,%} to crush, to force or split open, make
accessible, bring to light: Intens. {%-dardarīti,%} to crush.
<LEND>

<L>8455<pc>0120-a<k1>Adardari<k2>Adardari
{%Ā-dardari, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. crushing, splitting.
<LEND>

<L>8456<pc>0120-a<k1>AdArin<k2>AdArin<h>2
2. {%ā-dārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ crushing, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>8457<pc>0120-a<k1>AdIrya<k2>AdIrya
{%Ā-dīrya,%}¦ ind. having split, showing fissures.
<LEND>

<L>8458<pc>0120-a<k1>Aduri<k2>Aduri<h>2
2. {%ā-duri, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. crushing, bruising.
<LEND>

<L>8459<pc>0120-a<k1>Adeya<k2>Adeya
{#Adeya#}¦ {%ā-deya.%} See under 1. {%ā-dā%} last page.
<LEND>

<L>8460<pc>0120-a<k1>Adevaka<k2>Adevaka
{#Adevaka#}¦ {%ā-devaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%div%} with
{%ā%}), one who sports or plays.
<LEND>

<L>8461<pc>0120-a<k1>Adevana<k2>Adevana
{%Ā-devana, am,%}¦ n. a place for playing.
<LEND>

<L>8462<pc>0120-a<k1>AdyUna<k2>AdyUna<h>1
1. {%ā-dyūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shamelessly voracious (said
to come fr. {%ā-div,%} but the connection of this meaning
with rt. {%div%} is not very apparent). For 2. {%ādy-ūna%}
see next col.
<LEND>
[Page0120-b+ 73]

<L>8463<pc>0120-b<k1>Ado<k2>Ado
{#Ado#}¦ {%ā-do,%} cl. 4. P. {%-dyati, -dātum,%} to re-
duce to pieces or fragments; to tie, fetter. (In this
last sense, the rt. is better written {%dā;%} see 2. {%ā-dā.%})
<LEND>

<L>8464<pc>0120-b<k1>Adya<k2>Adya<h>2
{#Adya#} 2¦. {%ādya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ad%}), to be
eaten edible; ({%am%}), n. grain, food. (For 1. {%ādya%} see
s. v. {%ādi%} last page, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>8465<pc>0120-b<k1>AdyUna<k2>AdyUna<h>2
{#AdyUna#} 2¦. {%ādy-ūna, as, ā, am,%} without be-
ginning. (For 1. {%ā-dyūna%} see last col.)
<LEND>

<L>8466<pc>0120-b<k1>Adyota<k2>Adyota
{#Adyota#}¦ {%ā-dyota, as,%} m. (rt. {%dyut%}), light,
brilliance.
<LEND>

<L>8467<pc>0120-b<k1>AdrisAra<k2>AdrisAra
{#AdrisAra#}¦ {%ādrisāra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%adri-sāra%}),
made of iron, iron.
<LEND>

<L>8468<pc>0120-b<k1>Adru<k2>Adru
{#Adru#}¦ {%ā-dru,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. A. {%-dravati, -te,%}
{%-drotum,%} to run towards, to hasten towards, to ap-
proach running; to bring running.
<LEND>

<L>8469<pc>0120-b<k1>AdvAdaSam<k2>AdvAdaSam
{#AdvAdaSam#}¦ {%ā-dvādaśam,%} ind., Ved. up to
twelve.
<LEND>

<L>8470<pc>0120-b<k1>ADamana<k2>ADamana
{#ADamana#}¦ {%ā-dhamana, am,%} n. (fr. {%ā-dhā%} be-
low or fr. {%ā-dham%} for {%ā-dhmā?%}), a deposit, pledge;
fraudulent puffing of goods at a sale (?).
<LEND>

<L>8471<pc>0120-b<k1>ADamarRya<k2>ADamarRya
{#ADamarRya#}¦ {%ādhamarṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%adha-%}
{%marṇa%}), the state of being indebted.
<LEND>

<L>8472<pc>0120-b<k1>ADarmika<k2>ADarmika
{#ADarmika#}¦ {%ādharmika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%a-dharma%}),
unjust, unrighteous.
<LEND>

<L>8473<pc>0120-b<k1>ADarzaRa<k2>ADarzaRa
{#ADarzaRa#}¦ {%ā-dharṣaṇa.%} See {%ā-dhṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>8474<pc>0120-b<k1>ADA<k2>ADA
{#ADA#}¦ {%ā-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte,%}
{%-dhātum,%} to place, deposit, apply, appoint, direct,
propose, supply, give, make, constitute; (only A.) to
appropriate to one's self, hold, possess, take.
<LEND>

<L>8475<pc>0120-b<k1>AdaDAna<k2>AdaDAna
{%Ā-dadhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ having, possessing.
<LEND>

<L>8476<pc>0120-b<k1>ADAna<k2>ADAna
{%Ā-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. putting near or upon, placing;
taking, having; receiving, recovering; the containing
anything, the being in possession of a thing; a cere-
mony performed with consecrated fire (see {%agnyā-%}
{%dhāna%}); a ceremony performed previous to concep-
tion (see {%garbhādhāna%}); a pledge, a deposit; a
surety; assigning, attributing, employing; the place
in which anything is deposited or rests; a receptacle;
enclosure, circuit.
<LEND>

<L>8477<pc>0120-b<k1>ADAnika<k2>ADAnika
{%Ādhānika, am,%}¦ n. a ceremony performed after
cohabitation to procure or favour conception.
<LEND>

<L>8478<pc>0120-b<k1>ADAya<k2>ADAya
{%Ā-dhāya,%}¦ ind. having deposited or placed.
<LEND>

<L>8479<pc>0120-b<k1>ADAyaka<k2>ADAyaka
{%Ā-dhāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ placing, assigning, attri-
buting, applying.
<LEND>

<L>8480<pc>0120-b<k1>ADi<k2>ADi<h>1
1. {%ā-dhi, is,%}¦ m. (for 2. {%ā-dhi%} see under {%ā-dhyai%}),
place, situation; a pledge, deposit; a pawn, a mort-
gage; location fixing, site; definition, epithet. {%—Ā-%}
{%dhi-tva, am,%} n. the nature or circumstance of a
pledge. {%—Ādhitvopādhi (˚tva-up˚), is,%} m. the ob-
ject or purpose with which a pledge is given, the
conditions or terms of a mortgage. {%—Ādhi-bhoga,%}
{%as,%} m. enjoyment or use of a deposit, use of a horse,
cow, &c., when pledged.
<LEND>

<L>8481<pc>0120-b<k1>ADIkf<k2>ADIkf
{%Ādhī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to pledge,
mortgage. pawn, make a deposit.
<LEND>

<L>8482<pc>0120-b<k1>ADIkaraRa<k2>ADIkaraRa
{%Ādhī-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. pledging, mortgaging, a pledge.
<LEND>

<L>8483<pc>0120-b<k1>ADIkfta<k2>ADIkfta
{%Ādhī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ pledged. pawned, mortgaged.
<LEND>

<L>8484<pc>0120-b<k1>ADIkftya<k2>ADIkftya
{%Ādhī-kṛtya,%}¦ ind. having pledged, mortgaged, &c.
<LEND>

<L>8485<pc>0120-b<k1>ADIyamAna<k2>ADIyamAna
{%Ā-dhīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being placed, being de-
posited. {%—Ādhīyamāna-citta, as, ā, am,%} having the
heart applied or intent on.
<LEND>

<L>8486<pc>0120-b<k1>ADeya<k2>ADeya
{%Ā-dheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be deposited or placed;
to be pledged or mortgaged; what is put down or has
a place assigned to it; to be assigned, attributed or
given; to be received, held or supported; ({%am%}), n.
{%= ā-dhāna,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8487<pc>0120-b<k1>ADAra<k2>ADAra
{#ADAra#}¦ {%ā-dhāra.%} See under {%ā-dhṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>8488<pc>0120-b<k1>ADAv<k2>ADAv
{#ADAv#}¦ {%ā-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhāvati, -vitum,%}
to come running, to run towards.
<LEND>

<L>8489<pc>0120-b<k1>ADAvamAna<k2>ADAvamAna
{%Ā-dhāvamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ running, rushing on-
wards or at.
<LEND>

<L>8490<pc>0120-b<k1>ADi<k2>ADi
{#ADi#}¦ {%ā-dhi.%} See under {%ā-dhā%} above for
1. {%ā-dhi,%} and under {%ā-dhyai%} for 2. {%ā-dhi.%}
<LEND>
[Page0120-c+ 71]

<L>8491<pc>0120-c<k1>ADikAraRya<k2>ADikAraRya
{#ADikAraRya#}¦ {%ādhikāraṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%adhi-%}
{%karaṇya%}), possession, location.
<LEND>

<L>8492<pc>0120-c<k1>ADikArika<k2>ADikArika
{%Ādhikārika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%adhi-kāra%}), supreme,
superior, relating or belonging to anything or person
in authority; official, relating to any office or duty.
<LEND>

<L>8493<pc>0120-c<k1>ADikya<k2>ADikya
{#ADikya#}¦ {%ādhikya, am,%} n. (fr. {%adhika%}), ex-
cess, abundance, superabundance, high degree, over-
weight, preponderance; superiority.
<LEND>

<L>8494<pc>0120-c<k1>ADidEvika<k2>ADidEvika
{#ADidEvika#}¦ {%ādhidaivika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%adhi-%}
{%deva%}), relating to a tutelary or presiding deity.
<LEND>

<L>8495<pc>0120-c<k1>ADipatya<k2>ADipatya
{#ADipatya#}¦ {%ādhipatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%adhi-pati%}),
supremacy, sovereignty, power.
<LEND>

<L>8496<pc>0120-c<k1>ADiBOtika<k2>ADiBOtika
{#ADiBOtika#}¦ {%ādhibhautika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%adhi-bhūta%}), relating to beings; elementary, derived
or produced from the primitive elements, material.
<LEND>

<L>8497<pc>0120-c<k1>ADirAjya<k2>ADirAjya
{#ADirAjya#}¦ {%ādhirājya, am,%} n. (fr. {%adhi-rājan%}),
royalty, royal government, supreme sway.
<LEND>

<L>8498<pc>0120-c<k1>ADivedanika<k2>ADivedanika
{#ADivedanika#}¦ {%ādhivedanika, am,%} n. (fr. {%adhi-%}
{%vedana%}), property, gifts &c. given to a first wife
upon marrying a second.
<LEND>

<L>8499<pc>0120-c<k1>ADu<k2>ADu
{#ADu#}¦ {%ā-dhu%} or {%-dhū,%} cl. 5. 9. P. {%-dhunoti,%}
{%-dhunāti%} or {%-dhūnoti, -nāti, -dhavitum%} or {%-dho-%}
{%tum,%} to stir, agitate.
<LEND>

<L>8500<pc>0120-c<k1>ADava<k2>ADava
{%Ā-dhava, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who stirs up or agitates;
that which is agitated, mixture; throwing; also =
{%ā-dhavanīya%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>8501<pc>0120-c<k1>ADavana<k2>ADavana
{%Ā-dhavana, am,%}¦ n. agitating, moving.
<LEND>

<L>8502<pc>0120-c<k1>ADavanIya<k2>ADavanIya
{%Ā-dhavanīya, as,%}¦ m. a vessel in which the Soma
plant is shaken and cleansed.
<LEND>

<L>8503<pc>0120-c<k1>ADAva<k2>ADAva
{%Ā-dhāva, as,%}¦ m., Ved. that which is shaken or
cleansed by shaking.
<LEND>

<L>8504<pc>0120-c<k1>ADuta<k2>ADuta
{%Ā-dhuta%}¦ or {%ā-dhūta, as, ā, am,%} shaken, agitated,
trembling.
<LEND>

<L>8505<pc>0120-c<k1>ADunika<k2>ADunika
{#ADunika#}¦ {%ādhunika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%adhunā%}),
new, recent, of the present moment.
<LEND>

<L>8506<pc>0120-c<k1>ADUrya<k2>ADUrya
{#ADUrya#}¦ {%ādhūrya, am,%} n. weakness (?).
<LEND>

<L>8507<pc>0120-c<k1>ADf<k2>ADf
{#ADf#}¦ {%ā-dhṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dharati, -dhartum,%}
to hold, keep, support: Caus. P. {%-dhārayati, -yitum,%}
to bring, supply: Pass. {%-dhriyate,%} to be brought.
<LEND>

<L>8508<pc>0120-c<k1>ADAra<k2>ADAra
{%Ā-dhāra, as,%}¦ m. support, prop, stay; the power of
sustaining, or the support given, aid, patronage, as-
sistance; that which contains; a vessel or receptacle;
a dike, dam; a canal; a basin round the foot of a
tree; comprehension, location, the sense of the loca-
tive case; relation. {%—Ādhārādheya-bhāva (˚ra-%}
{%ādh˚), as,%} m. the influence or action of the support
or recipient upon the thing received or supported.
<LEND>

<L>8509<pc>0120-c<k1>ADAraka<k2>ADAraka
{%Ā-dhāraka, as,%}¦ m. foundation.
<LEND>

<L>8510<pc>0120-c<k1>ADAraRa<k2>ADAraRa
{%Ā-dhāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. bearing, holding, supporting.
<LEND>

<L>8511<pc>0120-c<k1>ADArya<k2>ADArya
{%Ā-dhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be located, that to which
a location is to be assigned. {%—Ādhāryādhāra-sam-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. the relation of the recipient or recep-
tacle and the thing to be received or located.
<LEND>

<L>8512<pc>0120-c<k1>ADfta<k2>ADfta
{%Ā-dhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. contained, supported.
<LEND>

<L>8513<pc>0120-c<k1>ADfz<k2>ADfz
{#ADfz#}¦ {%ā-dhṛṣ,%} cl. 5. P., Ved. {%-dhṛṣṇoti,%}
{%-dharṣitum,%} to assail, defy, injure, overcome; cl.
10. P. {%-dharṣayati, -yitum,%} to injure, hurt, over-
come, defy; refute, convict: Intens. Ved. {%-dadhar-%}
{%ṣati%} or Leṭ of Caus. to overcome.
<LEND>

<L>8514<pc>0120-c<k1>ADarzaRa<k2>ADarzaRa
{%Ā-dharṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. conviction of crime or error;
sentence, refutation; injuring, annoying.
<LEND>

<L>8515<pc>0120-c<k1>ADarzita<k2>ADarzita
{%Ā-dharṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ convicted, sentenced;
refuted in argument, disproved, injured, aggrieved.
<LEND>

<L>8516<pc>0120-c<k1>ADfzwa<k2>ADfzwa
{%Ā-dhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ checked, overcome.
<LEND>

<L>8517<pc>0120-c<k1>ADfzwi<k2>ADfzwi
{%Ā-dhṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. assailing, attacking.
<LEND>

<L>8518<pc>0120-c<k1>ADenava<k2>ADenava
{#ADenava#}¦ {%ādhenava, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-dhenu%}),
want of cows.
<LEND>

<L>8519<pc>0120-c<k1>ADoraRa<k2>ADoraRa
{#ADoraRa#}¦ {%ādhoraṇa, as,%} m. the rider or
driver of an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>8520<pc>0120-c<k1>ADmA<k2>ADmA
{#ADmA#}¦ {%ā-dhmā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhamati, -dhmātum,%}
to inflate, puff up; to sound.
<LEND>
[Page0121-a+ 71]

<L>8521<pc>0121-a<k1>ADmAta<k2>ADmAta
{%Ā-dhmāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, sounding; inflated,
burnt; ({%as%}), m. flatulence, borborygmi, swelling of
the abdomen with noise, war, battle.
<LEND>

<L>8522<pc>0121-a<k1>ADmAna<k2>ADmAna
{%Ā-dhmāna, am,%}¦ n. blowing, inflation; boasting;
a bellows; intumescence, swelling of the body, dropsy.
<LEND>

<L>8523<pc>0121-a<k1>ADmApana<k2>ADmApana
{%Ā-dhmāpana, am,%}¦ n. a means of inflating.
<LEND>

<L>8524<pc>0121-a<k1>ADyakzya<k2>ADyakzya
{#ADyakzya#}¦ {%ādhyakṣya, am,%} n. (fr. {%adhy-akṣa%}),
Ved. superintendence.
<LEND>

<L>8525<pc>0121-a<k1>ADyaSvi<k2>ADyaSvi
{#ADyaSvi#}¦ {%ādhyaśvi,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>8526<pc>0121-a<k1>ADyAtmika<k2>ADyAtmika
{#ADyAtmika#}¦ {%ādhyātmika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%adhy-%}
{%ātman%}), relating to self (as {%ādhyātmikī ṛc,%} a hymn
sung by any deity or other personage in praise of him-
self); relating to the supreme spirit; spiritual, holy.
<LEND>

<L>8527<pc>0121-a<k1>ADyAna<k2>ADyAna
{#ADyAna#}¦ {%ā-dhyāna.%} See under {%ā-dhyai.%}
<LEND>

<L>8528<pc>0121-a<k1>ADyApaka<k2>ADyApaka
{#ADyApaka#}¦ {%ādhyāpaka, as,%} m. a teacher, a
scriptural preceptor; {%= adhy-āpaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8529<pc>0121-a<k1>ADyAyika<k2>ADyAyika
{#ADyAyika#}¦ {%ādhyāyika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%adhy-%}
{%āya,%} q. v.), occupied or employed with reading or
studying.
<LEND>

<L>8530<pc>0121-a<k1>ADyE<k2>ADyE
{#ADyE#}¦ {%ā-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati, -dhyātum,%}
to think on, meditate on, remember.
<LEND>

<L>8531<pc>0121-a<k1>ADi<k2>ADi<h>2
2. {%ā-dhi, is,%}¦ m. (for 1. see under {%ā-dhā%}), thought,
care, anxious reflection, mental agony, anxiety, pain;
misfortune; reflection on religion or duty; hope, ex-
pectation; a man solicitous for his family's livelihood.
{%—Ādhi-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by pain, &c. {%—Ādhi-%}
{%jña, as, ā, am,%} suffering pain, distressed; crooked.
{%—Ādhi-manyu, avas,%} m. pl. feverish heat or burning.
{%—Ādhi-mlāna, as, ā, am,%} withered with anxiety.
<LEND>

<L>8532<pc>0121-a<k1>ADI<k2>ADI
{%Ā-dhī,%}¦ f., Ved. thinking, longing, care. {%—Ādhī-%}
{%parṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. winged with longing or
hope.
<LEND>

<L>8533<pc>0121-a<k1>ADIta<k2>ADIta
{%Ā-dhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. reflected or meditated
upon; ({%am%}), n. the object or subject of one's thoughts,
anything intended or hoped for.
<LEND>

<L>8534<pc>0121-a<k1>ADyA<k2>ADyA
{%Ā-dhyā,%}¦ f. recollection, remembering especially
with regret.
<LEND>

<L>8535<pc>0121-a<k1>ADyAna<k2>ADyAna
{%Ā-dhyāna, am,%}¦ n. remembering with regret, pen-
sive or sorrowful recollection, dwelling or meditating
upon, &c.
<LEND>

<L>8536<pc>0121-a<k1>ADra<k2>ADra
{#ADra#}¦ {%ādhra, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%dhrai?%}), Ved.
poor, destitute, indigent, weak.
<LEND>

<L>8537<pc>0121-a<k1>ADvanika<k2>ADvanika
{#ADvanika#}¦ {%ādhvanika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%adhvan%}),
being on a journey.
<LEND>

<L>8538<pc>0121-a<k1>ADvarika<k2>ADvarika
{#ADvarika#}¦ {%ādhvarika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%a-dhvara%}),
belonging to a Soma sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>8539<pc>0121-a<k1>ADvaryava<k2>ADvaryava
{#ADvaryava#}¦ {%ādhvaryava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%adh-%}
{%varyu%}), belonging to the Adhvaryu or to the Yajur-
veda; ({%am%}), n. service at a sacrifice, especially the
office of an Adhvaryu priest.
<LEND>

<L>8540<pc>0121-a<k1>Ana<k2>Ana
{#Ana#}¦ {%āna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%an%}), inhalation,
breath inspired; Ved. mouth, nose; breathing, blowing.
<LEND>

<L>8541<pc>0121-a<k1>Anana<k2>Anana
{%Ānana, am,%}¦ n. the mouth, the face. {%—Ānanābja%}
{%(˚na-ab˚), am,%} n. face-lotus (i. e. lotus-like face).
<LEND>

<L>8542<pc>0121-a<k1>Anaka<k2>Anaka
{#Anaka#}¦ {%ānaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%an?%}), a large
military drum beaten at one end, a double drum, a
small drum or tabor; the thunder-cloud or a cloud to
which the noise of the thunder is ascribed. {%—Ānaka-%}
{%dundubhi, is,%} m. (a patronymic fr. {%anaka-dundubha,%}
q. v.), an epithet of Vasudeva the father of Kṛṣṇa;
({%is, ī%}), m. f. a large drum beaten at one end, a large
{%d'hol,%} a kettle-drum. {%—Ānaka-sthalī,%} f., N. of a
country.
<LEND>

<L>8543<pc>0121-a<k1>Anakya<k2>Anakya
{#Anakya#}¦ {%ānakya, as,%} m. (?), N. of a sage
(for Cāṇakya ?).
<LEND>

<L>8544<pc>0121-a<k1>Anakz<k2>Anakz
{#Anakz#}¦ {%ā-nakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nakṣati, -ṣitum,%}
to approach, obtain, reach, present.
<LEND>

<L>8545<pc>0121-a<k1>Anaquha<k2>Anaquha
{#Anaquha#}¦ {%ānaḍuha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anaḍ-uh%}),
originating from a bull; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>8546<pc>0121-a<k1>Anad<k2>Anad
{#Anad#}¦ {%ā-nad,%} Caus. P. {%-nādayati, -yitum,%}
to make resonant, cause to sound.
<LEND>
[Page0121-b+ 75]

<L>8547<pc>0121-b<k1>AnAdayat<k2>AnAdayat
{%Ā-nādayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to sound, mak-
ing to ring.
<LEND>

<L>8548<pc>0121-b<k1>AnadDa<k2>AnadDa
{#AnadDa#}¦ {%ā-naddha.%} See under {%ā-nah.%}
<LEND>

<L>8549<pc>0121-b<k1>Anana<k2>Anana
{#Anana#}¦ {%ānana.%} See s. v. {%āna%} above.
<LEND>

<L>8550<pc>0121-b<k1>Anantarya<k2>Anantarya
{#Anantarya#}¦ {%ānantarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%an-antara%}),
immediate consequence or succession; proximity,
absence of interval.
<LEND>

<L>8551<pc>0121-b<k1>Anantya<k2>Anantya
{#Anantya#}¦ {%ānantya, am,%} n. (fr. {%an-anta%}), in-
finity; immortality, future happiness.
<LEND>

<L>8552<pc>0121-b<k1>Anand<k2>Anand
{#Anand#}¦ {%ā-nand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nandati, -ditum,%}
to rejoice: Caus. P. {%-nandayati, -yitum,%} to gladden;
A. to amuse one's self.
<LEND>

<L>8553<pc>0121-b<k1>Ananda<k2>Ananda
{%Ā-nanda, as,%}¦ m. happiness, joy, enjoyment, sen-
sual pleasure; N. of the forty-eighth year of the
cycle of Jupiter; an epithet of Śiva; N. of a Bala-rāma
according to the Jaina doctrine of many Kṛṣṇas and
many Bala-rāmas; N. of a cousin and a zealous follower
and favourite disciple of Buddha Śākya-muni, compiler
of the Sūtras; ({%ā%} and {%ī%}), f., N. of two plants; ({%am%}),
n. God, the supreme spirit according to the Vedānta.
{%—Ānanda-giri, is,%} or {%ānanda-jñāna, as,%} or {%ānanda-%}
{%jñāna-giri, is,%} m., N. of an annotator on Śaṅka-
rācārya. {%—Ānanda-tā,%} f. joyfulness, joy. {%—Ānanda-%}
{%tīrtha, as,%} m., N. of a scholiast. {%—Ānanda-da%} or
{%ānanda-kara, as, ā, am,%} exhilarating, delighting.
{%—Ānanda-datta, as,%} m. membrum virile. {%—Ā-%}
{%nanda-paṭa, am,%} n. a bridal garment. {%—Ānanda-%}
{%pūrṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Ānanda-prabhava,%}
{%am,%} n. the seminal fluid. {%—Ānanda-bodhendra%}
{%(˚dha-in˚), as,%} m., N. of a scholiast. {%—Ānanda-%}
{%bhairava, as, ā, am,%} causing both enjoyment and
fear. {%—Ānanda-maya, as, ī, am,%} blissful, made up
or consisting or happiness; ({%am%}), n. the supreme
spirit. {%—Ānandamaya-koṣa, as,%} m. the innermost
case of the body, or causal frame enshrining the soul.
{%—Ānanda-rāma, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Ānanda-%}
{%lahari, is%} or {%ī,%} f. ‘wave of enjoyment,’ title of a
hymn by Śaṅkarācārya, addressed to Pārvatī. {%—Ā-%}
{%nanda-vana, as,%} m., N. of a scholiast. {%—Ānanda-%}
{%vardhana, as, ā, am,%} enhancing enjoyment; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a poet. {%—Ānanda-vallī,%} f. title of the
second part of the Taittirīya-Upaniṣad. {%—Ānanda-%}
{%veda, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Ānandānandana%}
{%(˚da-ān˚), as,%} m. a king. {%—Ānandāśrama (˚da-āś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a scholiast.
<LEND>

<L>8554<pc>0121-b<k1>Anandaka<k2>Anandaka
{%Ā-nandaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ gladdening, rejoicing.
<LEND>

<L>8555<pc>0121-b<k1>AnandaTu<k2>AnandaTu
{%Ā-nandathu, us, us, u,%}¦ happy, joyful; ({%us%}), m.
happiness, joy.
<LEND>

<L>8556<pc>0121-b<k1>Anandana<k2>Anandana
{%Ā-nandana, am,%}¦ n. delighting, making happy;
civility, courtesy, courteous treatment of a friend or
guest at meeting and parting; what gives or occasions
delight.
<LEND>

<L>8557<pc>0121-b<k1>Anandayitavya<k2>Anandayitavya
{%Ā-nandayitavya, am,%}¦ n. the object of enjoyment
or sensual pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>8558<pc>0121-b<k1>Anandayitf<k2>Anandayitf
{%Ā-nandayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who gladdens or makes
joyful.
<LEND>

<L>8559<pc>0121-b<k1>Anandi<k2>Anandi
{%Ā-nandi, is, ī,%}¦ m. f. happiness, enjoyment, pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>8560<pc>0121-b<k1>Anandita<k2>Anandita
{%Ā-nandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rejoiced, delighted, happy;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>8561<pc>0121-b<k1>Anandin<k2>Anandin
{%Ā-nandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ happy, joyful.
<LEND>

<L>8562<pc>0121-b<k1>Anapatya<k2>Anapatya
{#Anapatya#}¦ {%ānapatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%an-apatya%}),
childlessness.
<LEND>

<L>8563<pc>0121-b<k1>AnaBimlAta<k2>AnaBimlAta
{#AnaBimlAta#}¦ {%ānabhimlāta, as,%} m. a descend-
ant of An-abhimlāta.
<LEND>

<L>8564<pc>0121-b<k1>Anam<k2>Anam
{#Anam#}¦ {%ā-nam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-namati, -nantum,%}
to bend, bend down, bow, incline; to humble; to
salute reverently: Caus. P. {%-nāmayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to bend.
<LEND>

<L>8565<pc>0121-b<k1>Anata<k2>Anata
{%Ā-nata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bending, stooping, bowed;
pacified, conciliated; humbled; submissive, obedient;
saluted reverently. {%—Ānata-ja, ās,%} m. pl. a class of
divine beings.
<LEND>

<L>8566<pc>0121-b<k1>Anati<k2>Anati
{%Ā-nati, is,%}¦ f. bending, bowing, stooping; saluting.
<LEND>

<L>8567<pc>0121-b<k1>Anama<k2>Anama
{%Ā-nama, as,%}¦ m. bending, stretching (a bow).
<LEND>

<L>8568<pc>0121-b<k1>Anamita<k2>Anamita
{%Ā-namita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, bowed down.
<LEND>
[Page0121-c+ 73]

<L>8569<pc>0121-c<k1>Anamya<k2>Anamya<h>1
1. {%ā-namya%}¦ or {%ā-nāmya, as, ā, am,%} to be bent.
<LEND>

<L>8570<pc>0121-c<k1>Anamya<k2>Anamya<h>2
2. {%ā-namya%}¦ or {%ā-natya,%} ind. having bent.
<LEND>

<L>8571<pc>0121-c<k1>Anamra<k2>Anamra
{%Ā-namra, as, ā, am,%}¦ (3. {%ā%} prefixed in the sense of di-
minution), a little bent, bowing, stooping, bowed down.
<LEND>

<L>8572<pc>0121-c<k1>Anaya<k2>Anaya
{#Anaya#}¦ {%ā-naya,%} &c. See under {%ā-nī.%}
<LEND>

<L>8573<pc>0121-c<k1>Anarta<k2>Anarta
{#Anarta#}¦ {%ā-narta, as,%} m. (fr. {%ā-nṛt,%} q. v.), a
stage, a theatre; war; N. of a country and its in-
habitants in the peninsula Gujarat with its capital
Dvārakā or Kuśasthalī. {%—Ānarta-nagarī,%} f. the
capital of Ānarta.
<LEND>

<L>8574<pc>0121-c<k1>AnartIya<k2>AnartIya
{%Ānartīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to or coming
from Ānarta; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>8575<pc>0121-c<k1>AnarTakya<k2>AnarTakya
{#AnarTakya#}¦ {%ānarthakya, am,%} n. (fr. {%an-%}
{%arthaka%}), unfitness, impropriety; uselessness, un-
profitableness.
<LEND>

<L>8576<pc>0121-c<k1>Analavi<k2>Analavi
{#Analavi#}¦ {%ānalavi, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>8577<pc>0121-c<k1>Anava<k2>Anava
{#Anava#}¦ {%ānava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anu%}), Ved. kind
to men, benevolent (?); human; ({%as%}), m. men,
people; foreign men or people.
<LEND>

<L>8578<pc>0121-c<k1>Anasa<k2>Anasa
{#Anasa#}¦ {%ānasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anas%}), Ved. be-
longing to a waggon.
<LEND>

<L>8579<pc>0121-c<k1>Anah<k2>Anah
{#Anah#}¦ {%ā-nah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-nahyati, -te,%}
{%-naddhum,%} to bind to; A. to be stopped up.
<LEND>

<L>8580<pc>0121-c<k1>AnadDa<k2>AnadDa
{%Ā-naddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound, tied, costive; ({%am%}),
n. a drum in general, dressing, putting on clothes or
ornaments. {%—Ānaddha-vasti-tā,%} f. retention of urine.
<LEND>

<L>8581<pc>0121-c<k1>AnAha<k2>AnAha
{%Ā-nāha, as,%}¦ m. epistasis, suppression of urine, or
constipation; length, especially of cloth.
<LEND>

<L>8582<pc>0121-c<k1>AnAhika<k2>AnAhika
{%Ānāhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ to be used in cases of epistasis.
<LEND>

<L>8583<pc>0121-c<k1>AnATya<k2>AnATya
{#AnATya#}¦ {%ānāthya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-nātha%}), state
of being unprotected or without a guardian, orphanism.
<LEND>

<L>8584<pc>0121-c<k1>Anirhata<k2>Anirhata
{#Anirhata#}¦ {%ānirhata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%a-nirhata%}),
Ved. indestructible nature; (according to Mahī-dhara)
wholly gone out of the world.
<LEND>

<L>8585<pc>0121-c<k1>Anila<k2>Anila
{#Anila#}¦ {%ānila, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anila%}), pro-
ceeding from or produced by wind, windy; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of Hanumat and Bhīma; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the fifteenth
lunar mansion.
<LEND>

<L>8586<pc>0121-c<k1>Anili<k2>Anili
{%Ānili, is,%}¦ m., N. of Hanumat and Bhīma.
<LEND>

<L>8587<pc>0121-c<k1>AnI<k2>AnI
{#AnI#}¦ {%ā-nī,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -netum,%} to
lead towards or near; to bring, fetch, bring back or
take back: Caus. P. {%-nāyayati, -yitum,%} to have
anything brought, to cause to be fetched: Pass.
{%-nīyate,%} to be brought or fetched.
<LEND>

<L>8588<pc>0121-c<k1>Anaya<k2>Anaya
{%Ā-naya, as,%}¦ m. bringing, investiture with the
sacred thread.
<LEND>

<L>8589<pc>0121-c<k1>Anayana<k2>Anayana
{%Ā-nayana, am,%}¦ n. bringing or leading near to;
investiture with the sacred thread.
<LEND>

<L>8590<pc>0121-c<k1>Anayitavya<k2>Anayitavya
{%Ā-nayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought or led near.
<LEND>

<L>8591<pc>0121-c<k1>AnAya<k2>AnAya<h>1
1. {%ā-nāya, as,%}¦ m. a net.
<LEND>

<L>8592<pc>0121-c<k1>AnAya<k2>AnAya<h>2
2. {%ā-nāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%ānāyate, -yitum,%} to form or
represent a net.
<LEND>

<L>8593<pc>0121-c<k1>AnAyin<k2>AnAyin
{%Ānāyin, ī,%}¦ m. a fisherman, a fisher.
<LEND>

<L>8594<pc>0121-c<k1>AnAyya<k2>AnAyya<h>1
1. {%ā-nāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought near; ({%as%}),
m. consecrated fire, taken from the Gārhapatya or
household fire, and placed on the south side, whence
it is called Dakṣiṇāgni.
<LEND>

<L>8595<pc>0121-c<k1>AnAyya<k2>AnAyya<h>2
2. {%ā-nāyya,%}¦ ind. having caused to be brought,
having caused to be introduced, having brought to-
gether, having convened.
<LEND>

<L>8596<pc>0121-c<k1>AnIta<k2>AnIta
{%Ā-nīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken, brought, obtained.
<LEND>

<L>8597<pc>0121-c<k1>AnIti<k2>AnIti
{%Ā-nīti, is,%}¦ f. leading near.
<LEND>

<L>8598<pc>0121-c<k1>AnIya<k2>AnIya
{%Ā-nīya,%}¦ ind. having taken, having brought.
<LEND>

<L>8599<pc>0121-c<k1>Anetavya<k2>Anetavya
{%Ā-netavya%}¦ or {%ā-neya, as, ā, am,%} to be brought,
to be fetched.
<LEND>

<L>8600<pc>0121-c<k1>Anetf<k2>Anetf
{%Ā-netṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a bringer, bringing.
<LEND>

<L>8601<pc>0121-c<k1>AnIla<k2>AnIla
{#AnIla#}¦ {%ā-nīla, as, ā, am,%} darkish; slightly
black or blue; ({%as%}), m. a black horse.
<LEND>

<L>8602<pc>0121-c<k1>Anu<k2>Anu
{#Anu#}¦ {%ā-nu,%} cl. 2. P. {%-nauti, -navitum%} or
{%-nuvitum,%} Ved. 1. A. {%-navate,%} to sound, scream,
warble: Intens. Ved. {%-navīnoti,%} to sound through.
<LEND>

<L>8603<pc>0121-c<k1>Anukalpika<k2>Anukalpika
{#Anukalpika#}¦ {%ānukalpika, as,%} m. one who
knows the {%anu-kalpa,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0122-a+ 66]

<L>8604<pc>0122-a<k1>AnukUlika<k2>AnukUlika
{#AnukUlika#}¦ {%ānukūlika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anu-%}
{%kūla%}), favourable, conformable.
<LEND>

<L>8605<pc>0122-a<k1>AnukUlya<k2>AnukUlya
{%Ānukūlya, am,%}¦ n. conformity, suitableness; favour,
kindness.
<LEND>

<L>8606<pc>0122-a<k1>Anukfzwa<k2>Anukfzwa
{#Anukfzwa#}¦ {%ānukṛṣṭa = anu-kṛṣṭa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8607<pc>0122-a<k1>Anugatya<k2>Anugatya
{#Anugatya#}¦ {%ānugatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%anu-gata%}),
acquaintance, familiarity.
<LEND>

<L>8608<pc>0122-a<k1>Anugatika<k2>Anugatika
{%Ānugatika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to a follower.
<LEND>

<L>8609<pc>0122-a<k1>AnugAdika<k2>AnugAdika
{#AnugAdika#}¦ {%ānugādika = anu-gādin,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8610<pc>0122-a<k1>AnugrAmika<k2>AnugrAmika
{#AnugrAmika#}¦ {%ānugrāmika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anu-%}
{%grāma%}), about or belonging to a village, rustic,
rural.
<LEND>

<L>8611<pc>0122-a<k1>AnujAvara<k2>AnujAvara
{#AnujAvara#}¦ {%ānujāvara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anu-%}
{%jāvara,%} rt. {%jan%}), Ved. posthumous.
<LEND>

<L>8612<pc>0122-a<k1>Anudfzwineya<k2>Anudfzwineya
{#Anudfzwineya#}¦ {%ānudṛṣṭineya, as,%} m. a pa-
tronymic from {%anu-dṛṣṭi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8613<pc>0122-a<k1>AnunAsikya<k2>AnunAsikya
{#AnunAsikya#}¦ {%ānunāsikya, am,%} n. (fr. {%anu-%}
{%nāsika%}), nasality (of a sound).
<LEND>

<L>8614<pc>0122-a<k1>Anupadika<k2>Anupadika
{#Anupadika#}¦ {%ānupadika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anu-%}
{%pada%}), following, pursuing, tracking.
<LEND>

<L>8615<pc>0122-a<k1>AnupUrva<k2>AnupUrva
{#AnupUrva#}¦ {%ānupūrva, am, ī,%} n. f. (fr. {%anu-%}
{%pūrva%}), order, series, succession; (in law) direct
order of the castes; (in logic) a conclusion, regularly
or syllogistically deduced. {%—Ānupūrveṇa%} or {%ānupūr-%}
{%vyā,%} ind. one after the other, in due order.
<LEND>

<L>8616<pc>0122-a<k1>AnupUrvya<k2>AnupUrvya
{%Ānupūrvya, am,%}¦ n. order, series, succession.
<LEND>

<L>8617<pc>0122-a<k1>Anumata<k2>Anumata
{#Anumata#}¦ {%ānumata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anu-mata,%}
rt. {%man%}), relating to the consent or favour (of
another).
<LEND>

<L>8618<pc>0122-a<k1>AnumAnika<k2>AnumAnika
{#AnumAnika#}¦ {%ānumānika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anu-%}
{%māna,%} rt. {%mā%}), relating to a conclusion; derived
from inference, subject to inference, inferable, inferred.
{%—Ānumānika-tva, am,%} n. the state of being infer-
able.
<LEND>

<L>8619<pc>0122-a<k1>Anurakti<k2>Anurakti
{#Anurakti#}¦ {%ānurakti, is,%} f. passion, affection;
the same as {%anu-rakti,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8620<pc>0122-a<k1>Anulomya<k2>Anulomya
{#Anulomya#}¦ {%ānulomya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anu-%}
{%loma%}), in the direction of the hair, produced in
natural or direct order; ({%am%}), n. a direction similar
to that of the hairs, natural or direct order; favour-
able direction, fit disposition, favourableness; regular
series or succession; bringing to one's right place.
<LEND>

<L>8621<pc>0122-a<k1>Anulomika<k2>Anulomika
{%Ānulomika, as, ī, am,%}¦ regular, orderly, in due
course or series; favourable.
<LEND>

<L>8622<pc>0122-a<k1>AnuviDitsA<k2>AnuviDitsA
{#AnuviDitsA#}¦ {%ānuvidhitsā,%} f. (corrupted fr.
{%an-anuvidhitsā%} fr. rt. {%dhā?%}), ingratitude.
<LEND>

<L>8623<pc>0122-a<k1>AnuveSya<k2>AnuveSya
{#AnuveSya#}¦ {%ānuveśya, as,%} m. (fr. {%anu-veśa%}), a
neighbour who lives in the same house.
<LEND>

<L>8624<pc>0122-a<k1>AnuSAsanika<k2>AnuSAsanika
{#AnuSAsanika#}¦ {%ānuśāsanika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%anu-śāsana%}), relating to or treating of instruction.
<LEND>

<L>8625<pc>0122-a<k1>AnuSUka<k2>AnuSUka
{#AnuSUka#}¦ {%ānuśūka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anu-śūka%}),
being with or within the awns (as rice).
<LEND>

<L>8626<pc>0122-a<k1>AnuSravika<k2>AnuSravika
{#AnuSravika#}¦ {%ānuśravika%} or {%ānuśrāvika, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%anu-śrava%}), according to hearing, resting on
tradition.
<LEND>

<L>8627<pc>0122-a<k1>Anuzak<k2>Anuzak
{#Anuzak#}¦ {%ānuṣak,%} ind. (fr. {%anu-sañj,%} q. v.),
Ved. in continuous order, uninterruptedly, one after
the other.
<LEND>

<L>8628<pc>0122-a<k1>AnuzaNgika<k2>AnuzaNgika
{%Ānuṣaṅgika, as, ī, am,%}¦ connected with, con-
comitant, necessarily following, adherent, inherent,
implied; proportionate, like, analogous, relative;
necessary as a result or consequence, inevitable; (in
gram.) elliptical, including or agreeing with words not
comprised in the sentence.
<LEND>

<L>8629<pc>0122-a<k1>AnuzaRqa<k2>AnuzaRqa
{#AnuzaRqa#}¦ {%ānuṣaṇḍa%} or {%ānuṣaṇḍaka, as, ī,%}
{%am.%} See Gaṇa to Pāṇini IV. 2, 133. 134.
<LEND>
[Page0122-b+ 67]

<L>8630<pc>0122-b<k1>AnuzUka<k2>AnuzUka
{#AnuzUka#}¦ {%ānuṣūka, as, ī, am%} (either {%= ānu-%}
{%śūka%} or fr. rt. {%sū%} ?), promoting, driving forward.
<LEND>

<L>8631<pc>0122-b<k1>AnuzwuBa<k2>AnuzwuBa
{#AnuzwuBa#}¦ {%ānuṣṭubha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anu-%}
{%ṣṭubh%}), consisting of Anuṣṭubhs, formed like the
Anuṣṭubh metre (e. g. composed of four divisions).
<LEND>

<L>8632<pc>0122-b<k1>AnusUya<k2>AnusUya
{#AnusUya#}¦ {%ānusūya, as, ī, am,%} coming from
Anusūyā.
<LEND>

<L>8633<pc>0122-b<k1>AnUkam<k2>AnUkam
{#AnUkam#}¦ {%ānūkam,%} ind. (fr. {%ā-anūkam ?%}), Ved.
in abundance.
<LEND>

<L>8634<pc>0122-b<k1>AnUpa<k2>AnUpa
{#AnUpa#}¦ {%ānūpa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anūpa%}), wet,
watery, marshy; ({%as%}), m. any animal frequenting
watery or marshy places, as a buffalo, &c. {%—Ānūpa-%}
{%māṃsa, as,%} m. the flesh or meat of animals fre-
quenting marshes.
<LEND>

<L>8635<pc>0122-b<k1>AnUpaka<k2>AnUpaka
{%Ānūpaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ living or happening in
marshy places.
<LEND>

<L>8636<pc>0122-b<k1>AnfRya<k2>AnfRya
{#AnfRya#}¦ {%ānṛṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%an-ṛṇa%}), ac-
quittance of debt or obligation, the not being indebted
to (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>8637<pc>0122-b<k1>Anft<k2>Anft
{#Anft#}¦ {%ā-nṛt,%} cl. 4. P. {%-nṛtyati, -nartitum,%}
to dance towards, hasten near, dance: Caus. P. {%-nar-%}
{%tayati, -yitum,%} to agitate gently.
<LEND>

<L>8638<pc>0122-b<k1>Anarta<k2>Anarta
{%Ā-narta, as,%}¦ m. a stage, theatre; war. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>8639<pc>0122-b<k1>Anfta<k2>Anfta
{#Anfta#}¦ {%ānṛta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%an-ṛta%}), un-
truthful; ({%as%}), m., N. of a people (?).
<LEND>

<L>8640<pc>0122-b<k1>Anftaka<k2>Anftaka
{%Ānṛtaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ inhabited by the Ānṛtas.
<LEND>

<L>8641<pc>0122-b<k1>AnfSaMsa<k2>AnfSaMsa
{#AnfSaMsa#}¦ {%ānṛśaṃsa%} or {%ānṛśaṃsya, am,%} n.
(fr. {%a-nṛśaṃsa%}), mildness, kindness, mercy, com-
passion; cruelty (?).
<LEND>

<L>8642<pc>0122-b<k1>Anetavya<k2>Anetavya
{#Anetavya#}¦ {%ā-netavya, ā-neya.%} See under {%ā-nī.%}
<LEND>

<L>8643<pc>0122-b<k1>AnEpuRa<k2>AnEpuRa
{#AnEpuRa#}¦ {%ānaipuṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-nipuṇa%}),
clumsiness, stupidity; {%= a-naipuṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8644<pc>0122-b<k1>AnESvarya<k2>AnESvarya
{#AnESvarya#}¦ {%ānaiśvarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%an-īśvara%}),
absence of power or supremacy. See {%an-aiśvarya.%}
<LEND>

<L>8645<pc>0122-b<k1>Anta<k2>Anta<h>1
{#Anta#} 1¦. {%ānta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%am%}), gone.
<LEND>

<L>8646<pc>0122-b<k1>Anta<k2>Anta<h>2
{#Anta#} 2¦. {%ānta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anta%}), final,
terminal, relating to the end.
<LEND>

<L>8647<pc>0122-b<k1>Antya<k2>Antya
{%Āntya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who finishes; personified
as Bhauvana.
<LEND>

<L>8648<pc>0122-b<k1>Antam<k2>Antam
{#Antam#}¦ {%āntam,%} ind. (fr. {%ā + antam%}), to the
end, completely, from head to foot.
<LEND>

<L>8649<pc>0122-b<k1>Antaratamya<k2>Antaratamya
{#Antaratamya#}¦ {%āntaratamya, am,%} n. (fr. {%anta-%}
{%ratama%}), nearest or closest relationship (as of two
letters).
<LEND>

<L>8650<pc>0122-b<k1>Antarya<k2>Antarya
{%Āntarya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%antara%}), near relationship
(of two letters).
<LEND>

<L>8651<pc>0122-b<k1>Antarikza<k2>Antarikza
{#Antarikza#}¦ {%āntarikṣa%} or {%āntarīkṣa, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%antarikṣa%}), belonging to the intermediate
space between earth and heaven, atmospherical, hea-
venly, celestial, produced in the atmosphere; ({%am%}),
n. the firmament, the intermediate region between
earth and sky.
<LEND>

<L>8652<pc>0122-b<k1>AntargaRika<k2>AntargaRika
{#AntargaRika#}¦ {%āntargaṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%antar-%}
{%gaṇa%}), included, comprehended (as in a class or troop).
<LEND>

<L>8653<pc>0122-b<k1>Antargehika<k2>Antargehika
{#Antargehika#}¦ {%āntargehika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%antar-%}
{%geha%}), being inside a house.
<LEND>

<L>8654<pc>0122-b<k1>AntarveSmika<k2>AntarveSmika
{#AntarveSmika#}¦ {%āntarveśmika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%antar-veśman%}), produced or occurring within a house.
<LEND>

<L>8655<pc>0122-b<k1>AntikA<k2>AntikA
{#AntikA#}¦ {%āntikā,%} f. an elder sister. See
{%antikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>8656<pc>0122-b<k1>Antra<k2>Antra
{#Antra#}¦ {%āntra, am,%} n., Ved. the bowels, entrails.
<LEND>

<L>8657<pc>0122-b<k1>Antrika<k2>Antrika
{%Āntrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ visceral, within, or relating
to the bowels.
<LEND>

<L>8658<pc>0122-b<k1>Anda<k2>Anda
{#Anda#}¦ {%ānda, as,%} m., N. of a despised class
of men.
<LEND>

<L>8659<pc>0122-b<k1>Andolay<k2>Andolay
{#Andolay#}¦ {%āndolay,%} cl. 10. P. {%āndolayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to swing. See {%andolay.%}
<LEND>
[Page0122-c+ 75]

<L>8660<pc>0122-c<k1>Andola<k2>Andola
{%Āndola, as,%}¦ m. swinging.
<LEND>

<L>8661<pc>0122-c<k1>Andolana<k2>Andolana
{%Āndolana, am,%}¦ n. swinging, a swing; trembling,
oscillation.
<LEND>

<L>8662<pc>0122-c<k1>Andolita<k2>Andolita
{%Āndolita, as, ā, am,%}¦ swung, shaken.
<LEND>

<L>8663<pc>0122-c<k1>AnDasa<k2>AnDasa
{#AnDasa#}¦ {%āndhasa, as,%} m. (fr. {%andhas,%} q. v.),
the scum of boiled rice.
<LEND>

<L>8664<pc>0122-c<k1>AnDasika<k2>AnDasika
{%Āndhasika, as,%}¦ m. a cook.
<LEND>

<L>8665<pc>0122-c<k1>AnDya<k2>AnDya
{#AnDya#}¦ {%āndhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%andha%}), blindness.
<LEND>

<L>8666<pc>0122-c<k1>AnDra<k2>AnDra
{#AnDra#}¦ {%āndhra, ās,%} m. pl. the Telugu country,
Telingana, see {%andhra; (as, ā, am),%} anything re-
lating to this country (as the Telugu language).
<LEND>

<L>8667<pc>0122-c<k1>Anna<k2>Anna
{#Anna#}¦ {%ānna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anna%}), fed, having
food; relating to food, derived from it, &c.
<LEND>

<L>8668<pc>0122-c<k1>Anyatareya<k2>Anyatareya
{#Anyatareya#}¦ {%ānyatareya, as,%} m., N. of a
grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>8669<pc>0122-c<k1>Anvayika<k2>Anvayika
{#Anvayika#}¦ {%ānvayika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anv-aya%}),
of a good family, well born; orderly, according to
order or arrangement.
<LEND>

<L>8670<pc>0122-c<k1>AnvAhika<k2>AnvAhika
{#AnvAhika#}¦ {%ānvāhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%anv-%}
{%aham%}), daily.
<LEND>

<L>8671<pc>0122-c<k1>AnvIkzikI<k2>AnvIkzikI
{#AnvIkzikI#}¦ {%ānvīkṣikī,%} f. (fr. {%anv-īkṣā%}),
logic, logical philosophy, metaphysics.
<LEND>

<L>8672<pc>0122-c<k1>Ap<k2>Ap
{#Ap#}¦ {%āp,%} cl. 5. 1. P. {%āpnoti%} or {%āpati, āpa,%}
{%āpsyati, āpat, āptum,%} to reach, over-
take, meet with, fall upon; to obtain, gain, take
possession of, undergo, suffer; to enter, pervade,
occupy, to equal: Pass. {%āpyate,%} to be reached, found,
met with, obtained; to arrive at one's aim or end,
become filled: Caus. P. {%āpayati, -yitum,%} aor. {%āpipat,%}
to cause to reach or obtain or gain; to cause any
one to feel; to hit: Desid. P. {%īpsati,%} to strive to
reach or obtain: Desid. of the Caus. {%āpipayiṣati,%}
to strive to reach; [cf. Lat. <nsi>apio, aptus; adipiscor:</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>uoban:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>üben.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>8673<pc>0122-c<k1>Apa<k2>Apa<h>1
1. {%āpa, as, ā, am,%}¦ at the end of compounds; e. g.
{%dur-āpa,%} difficult to be obtained.
<LEND>

<L>8674<pc>0122-c<k1>Apana<k2>Apana
{%Āpana, am,%}¦ n. reaching, obtaining; pepper.
<LEND>

<L>8675<pc>0122-c<k1>Apaneya<k2>Apaneya
{%Āpaneya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be reached or obtained.
<LEND>

<L>8676<pc>0122-c<k1>Apayitf<k2>Apayitf
{%Āpayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who procures, procuring.
<LEND>

<L>8677<pc>0122-c<k1>Api<k2>Api
{%Āpi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. an ally, a friend, an acquaintance.
{%—Āpi-tva, am,%} n., Ved. confederation, friendship.
<LEND>

<L>8678<pc>0122-c<k1>Apta<k2>Apta
{%Āpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reached, overtaken, equalled;
got, gained, obtained; reaching to, extending; abun-
dant, full; apt, fit, true, exact, clever, trusted, trust-
worthy, confidential; intimate, related, acquainted;
appointed; generally received; commonly used; au-
thentic; accused, prosecuted; ({%as%}), m. a fit person,
a credible person, a warranter, guarantee; a friend;
an Arhat; N. of a Nāga; ({%ā%}), f. a twisted band or
lock of hair; ({%am%}), n. a quotient; equation of a
degree. {%—Āpta-kāma, as, ā, am,%} one who has
gained his wish, satisfied. {%—Āpta-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
managing things in a fit or confidential manner; ({%ī%}),
m. a trusty agent, a confidential servant. {%—Āpta-%}
{%garbhā,%} f. a pregnant woman. {%—Āpta-garva, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} proud, arrogant. {%—Āpta-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%}
having proper gifts, or furnished with gifts. {%—Āpta-%}
{%vacana, am,%} n. received text, revelation, authority.
{%—Āpta-vajra-sūci, is,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
{%—Āpta-vākya, am,%} n. a correct sentence. {%—Āpta-%}
{%vāc, k,%} f. the evidence of a credible person; ({%k%}), m.
one whose evidence is credible. {%—Āptokti (˚ta-uk˚),%}
{%is,%} f. augment or affix; a word of received acceptation
and established by usage only.
<LEND>

<L>8679<pc>0122-c<k1>Aptavya<k2>Aptavya
{%Āptavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be reached, obtainable.
<LEND>

<L>8680<pc>0122-c<k1>Apti<k2>Apti
{%Āpti, is,%}¦ f. reaching, meeting with; obtaining,
gain, acquisition; binding, connection, relation, fit-
ness, aptitude; ({%ayas%}), f. pl., N. of twelve sacrificial
verses beginning with {%āpaye%} (dat. case of {%āpi%}).
<LEND>

<L>8681<pc>0122-c<k1>Apya<k2>Apya<h>1
1. {%āpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtainable. See {%āptavya.%}
<LEND>

<L>8682<pc>0122-c<k1>Apya<k2>Apya<h>2
2. {%āpya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. confederation, alliance, re-
lationship, friendship.
<LEND>

<L>8683<pc>0122-c<k1>Apa<k2>Apa<h>2
{#Apa#} 2¦. {%āpa, as,%} m. (probably connected
with {%ap, āpas,%} q. v.), N. of one of the eight demi-
gods called Vasus. (For 1. {%āpa%} see above.)
<LEND>
[Page0123-a+ 75]

<L>8684<pc>0123-a<k1>Apakara<k2>Apakara
{#Apakara#}¦ {%āpakara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%apa-kara%}),
offensive, mischievous, unfriendly.
<LEND>

<L>8685<pc>0123-a<k1>Apakva<k2>Apakva
{#Apakva#}¦ {%ā-pakva, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%pac%} with 3. {%ā,%}
implying diminution), half-baked, crude, raw; nearly
ripe, not quite ripe; undressed, what is eaten without
further preparation (as bread &c.).
<LEND>

<L>8686<pc>0123-a<k1>ApagA<k2>ApagA
{#ApagA#}¦ {%āpagā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%gā%} with {%apa ?%}), a
river, a stream; N. of a stream.
<LEND>

<L>8687<pc>0123-a<k1>Apageya<k2>Apageya
{%Āpageya, as,%}¦ m. the son of a river; an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa or Bhīma.
<LEND>

<L>8688<pc>0123-a<k1>Apaw<k2>Apaw
{#Apaw#}¦ {%ā-paṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pāṭayati, -yitum,%}
to split; to sever.
<LEND>

<L>8689<pc>0123-a<k1>ApaRa<k2>ApaRa
{#ApaRa#}¦ {%ā-paṇa, as,%} m. (rt. {%paṇ%} with {%ā%}), a
market, a shop.
<LEND>

<L>8690<pc>0123-a<k1>ApaRika<k2>ApaRika
{%Āpaṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ mercantile, relating to traffic,
to a market &c.; ({%as%}), m. a merchant, a dealer, a
shop-keeper; tax on markets or shops; assize, market-
rate.
<LEND>

<L>8691<pc>0123-a<k1>Apat<k2>Apat
{#Apat#}¦ {%ā-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -titum,%} to fly
towards, to come flying, to come in haste, to rush
in or on; to assail; to approach; to fall to one's
share, to befal, happen: Caus. P. {%-pātayati, -yitum,%}
to throw down, let fall, shed; {%-patayati, -yitum,%}
to go towards, approach.
<LEND>

<L>8692<pc>0123-a<k1>Apatat<k2>Apatat
{%Ā-patat, an, antī, at,%}¦ approaching, preparing to
assail.
<LEND>

<L>8693<pc>0123-a<k1>Apatana<k2>Apatana
{%Ā-patana, am,%}¦ n. coming, approaching; descend-
ing, alighting, happening.
<LEND>

<L>8694<pc>0123-a<k1>Apati<k2>Apati
{%Ā-pati, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. coming in haste, rushing on.
<LEND>

<L>8695<pc>0123-a<k1>Apatika<k2>Apatika
{%Ā-patika, as, ī, am,%}¦ accidental, unforeseen, sent
from heaven; ({%as%}), m. a hawk. a falcon.
<LEND>

<L>8696<pc>0123-a<k1>Apatita<k2>Apatita
{%Ā-patita, as, ā, am,%}¦ happened, befallen; alighted,
descended.
<LEND>

<L>8697<pc>0123-a<k1>ApAta<k2>ApAta
{%Ā-pāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ rushing upon, attacking, ap-
proaching; ({%as%}), m. rushing upon, pressing against,
falling, descending; throwing down; causing to de-
scend; happening, becoming apparent, appearance;
the instant, the current moment; ({%atas%}), ind. at the
first attack, instantly, immediately.
<LEND>

<L>8698<pc>0123-a<k1>ApAtin<k2>ApAtin
{%Ā-pātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling on, descending, happening.
<LEND>

<L>8699<pc>0123-a<k1>ApatAlikA<k2>ApatAlikA
{#ApatAlikA#}¦ {%āpatālikā,%} f. (fr. {%apa-tāla?%}),
N. of a metre.
<LEND>

<L>8700<pc>0123-a<k1>Apatya<k2>Apatya
{#Apatya#}¦ {%āpatya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%apatya%}), relat-
ing to offspring; (in gram.) relating to the formation
of patronymic nouns.
<LEND>

<L>8701<pc>0123-a<k1>ApaTi<k2>ApaTi
{#ApaTi#}¦ {%ā-pathi, is, is, i%} (fr. {%pathin%} with {%ā%}),
Ved. being on the way or on a voyage.
<LEND>

<L>8702<pc>0123-a<k1>ApaTI<k2>ApaTI
{%Ā-pathī, īs,%}¦ or {%ā-pathya, as,%} m., Ved. a traveller,
wanderer.
<LEND>

<L>8703<pc>0123-a<k1>Apad<k2>Apad<h>1
{#Apad#} 1¦. {%ā-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, -pattum,%}
to come, walk towards; to enter into, attain; to get
into trouble, fall into misfortune; to happen: Caus.
P. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to bring on, bring to pass.
<LEND>

<L>8704<pc>0123-a<k1>Apatti<k2>Apatti
{%Ā-patti, is,%}¦ f. entering into a state or condition,
entering into relationship with anything, changing
into; obtaining, procuring; misfortune, calamity,
fault, transgression; remonstrance, expostulation.
<LEND>

<L>8705<pc>0123-a<k1>Apad<k2>Apad<h>2
2. {%ā-pad, t,%}¦ f. misfortune, calamity; [cf. Hib.
<nsi>âpadh,</nsi> ‘death;’ <nsi>âpthach,</nsi> ‘mortal.’] {%—Āpat-kāla,%}
{%as,%} m. season of distress. {%—Āpatkālika, as, ā%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} occurring in a time of calamity, belonging to
such a time. {%—Āpat-prāpta, as, ā, am,%} unfortunate,
unhappy, afflicted. {%—Āpad-gata, as, ā, am,%} fallen
into misfortune. {%—Āpad-grasta, as, ā, am,%} seized
by misfortune, unfortunate, unhappy, in misfortune.
{%—Āpad-dharma, as,%} m. practice or profession
other than that proper to caste, but allowable in time
of distress.
<LEND>

<L>8706<pc>0123-a<k1>ApadA<k2>ApadA
{%Ā-padā,%}¦ f. misfortune, calamity.
<LEND>

<L>8707<pc>0123-a<k1>Apanna<k2>Apanna
{%Ā-panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gained, obtained, acquired;
afflicted, unfortunate. {%—Āpanna-sattva, as, ā, am,%}
impregnated, pregnant; ({%ā%}), f. a pregnant woman.
{%—Āpannārti-praśamana-phala (˚na-ār˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fruitful in the relieving of the pains of the
afflicted.
<LEND>
[Page0123-b+ 65]

<L>8708<pc>0123-b<k1>ApAda<k2>ApAda
{%Ā-pāda, as,%}¦ m. reward, remuneration.
<LEND>

<L>8709<pc>0123-b<k1>ApAdana<k2>ApAdana
{%Ā-pādana, am,%}¦ n. causing to arrive at, leading to.
<LEND>

<L>8710<pc>0123-b<k1>Apana<k2>Apana
{#Apana#}¦ {%āpana, āpaneya.%} See under rt. {%āp.%}
<LEND>

<L>8711<pc>0123-b<k1>Apanika<k2>Apanika
{#Apanika#}¦ {%āpanika, as,%} m. an emerald; a
kirāta or barbarian.
<LEND>

<L>8712<pc>0123-b<k1>Apamityaka<k2>Apamityaka
{#Apamityaka#}¦ {%āpamityaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%apa-%}
{%mitya,%} rt. {%mā%} with {%apa;%} cf. {%apa-mityaka%}), received
by barter; ({%am%}), n. property &c. obtained by barter.
<LEND>

<L>8713<pc>0123-b<k1>ApayA<k2>ApayA
{#ApayA#}¦ {%āpayā,%} f., Ved., N. of a river near
the Sarasvatī.
<LEND>

<L>8714<pc>0123-b<k1>Apayitf<k2>Apayitf
{#Apayitf#}¦ {%āpayitṛ.%} See under rt. {%āp.%}
<LEND>

<L>8715<pc>0123-b<k1>AparAhRika<k2>AparAhRika
{#AparAhRika#}¦ {%āparāhṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%aparāhṇa%}), occurring in the afternoon.
<LEND>

<L>8716<pc>0123-b<k1>Apartuka<k2>Apartuka
{#Apartuka#}¦ {%āpartuka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%apa-ṛtu%}),
not bound to fixed times, not restricted to particular
seasons.
<LEND>

<L>8717<pc>0123-b<k1>Apava<k2>Apava
{#Apava#}¦ {%āpava, as,%} m. an epithet of Vaśiṣṭha.
<LEND>

<L>8718<pc>0123-b<k1>Apavargya<k2>Apavargya
{#Apavargya#}¦ {%āpavargya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%apa-%}
{%varga%}), conferring final beatitude.
<LEND>

<L>8719<pc>0123-b<k1>Apas<k2>Apas
{#Apas#}¦ {%āpas,%} n. a religious ceremony;
water (see {%ap%}); sin [cf. {%apas%}].
<LEND>

<L>8720<pc>0123-b<k1>ApaskAra<k2>ApaskAra
{#ApaskAra#}¦ {%āpaskāra, am,%} n. (fr. {%apa-skara%}),
the root or extremity of the trunk or body.
<LEND>

<L>8721<pc>0123-b<k1>Apastamba<k2>Apastamba
{#Apastamba#}¦ {%āpastamba, as,%} m., N. of a re-
nowned sage and writer on ritual.
<LEND>

<L>8722<pc>0123-b<k1>Apastambi<k2>Apastambi
{%Āpastambi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from the pre-
ceding.
<LEND>

<L>8723<pc>0123-b<k1>ApastamBinI<k2>ApastamBinI
{#ApastamBinI#}¦ {%āpastambhinī,%} f., N. of a plant,
perhaps Eriocaulon Quinquangulare Lin.
<LEND>

<L>8724<pc>0123-b<k1>ApA<k2>ApA
{#ApA#}¦ {%ā-pā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-pibati%} or {%-pivati,%}
{%pātum,%} to drink up, to drink out of or at; to drink
with the ears or eyes, hear, see: Caus. {%-pāyayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to drink.
<LEND>

<L>8725<pc>0123-b<k1>ApAna<k2>ApAna
{%Ā-pāna, am,%}¦ n. a drinking-party, a banquet; a
tavern, a liquor shop, a place for drinking in company.
<LEND>

<L>8726<pc>0123-b<k1>ApAntamanyu<k2>ApAntamanyu
{%Āpānta-manyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. giving zeal or
courage when drunk (said of the Soma juice).
<LEND>

<L>8727<pc>0123-b<k1>ApAyin<k2>ApAyin
{%Ā-pāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fond of drinking.
<LEND>

<L>8728<pc>0123-b<k1>ApIta<k2>ApIta<h>1
1. {%ā-pīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ drunk up, exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>8729<pc>0123-b<k1>ApAka<k2>ApAka
{#ApAka#}¦ {%ā-pāka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%pac%} with {%ā%}),
a baking oven, a potter's kiln. {%—Āpāke-stha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. standing in an oven.
<LEND>

<L>8730<pc>0123-b<k1>ApANgya<k2>ApANgya
{#ApANgya#}¦ {%āpāṅgya, am,%} n. (fr. {%apāṅga%}),
anointing the corners of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>8731<pc>0123-b<k1>ApARqura<k2>ApARqura
{#ApARqura#}¦ {%ā-pāṇḍura, as, ā, am,%} slightly
pale, palish.
<LEND>

<L>8732<pc>0123-b<k1>ApAta<k2>ApAta
{#ApAta#}¦ {%ā-pāta.%} See under {%ā-pat.%}
<LEND>

<L>8733<pc>0123-b<k1>ApAda<k2>ApAda
{#ApAda#}¦ {%ā-pāda, ā-pādana.%} See under {%ā-pad.%}
<LEND>

<L>8734<pc>0123-b<k1>ApAli<k2>ApAli
{#ApAli#}¦ {%ā-pāli, is,%} m. a louse.
<LEND>

<L>8735<pc>0123-b<k1>Api<k2>Api
{#Api#}¦ {%āpi.%} See under rt. {%āp.%}
<LEND>

<L>8736<pc>0123-b<k1>ApiYjara<k2>ApiYjara
{#ApiYjara#}¦ {%ā-piñjara, as, ā, am,%} somewhat
red, reddish.
<LEND>

<L>8737<pc>0123-b<k1>ApiS<k2>ApiS
{#ApiS#}¦ {%ā-piś,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-piṃśati, -peśi-%}
{%tum,%} to shape, configurate; to decorate, ornament.
<LEND>

<L>8738<pc>0123-b<k1>ApiSali<k2>ApiSali
{#ApiSali#}¦ {%āpiśali, is,%} m., N. of an old
grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>8739<pc>0123-b<k1>ApiSala<k2>ApiSala
{%Āpiśala, as, ī, am,%}¦ originating from Āpiśali; ({%as%}),
m. a pupil of Āpiśali.
<LEND>

<L>8740<pc>0123-b<k1>Apiz<k2>Apiz
{#Apiz#}¦ {%ā-piṣ,%} cl. 7. P., Ved. {%-pinaṣṭi,%}
{%-peṣṭum,%} to press, touch.
<LEND>

<L>8741<pc>0123-b<k1>ApI<k2>ApI
{#ApI#}¦ {%āpī,%} {#ApIna#} {%ā-pīna.%} See {%ā-pyai.%}
<LEND>

<L>8742<pc>0123-b<k1>ApIq<k2>ApIq
{#ApIq#}¦ {%ā-pīḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pīḍayati, -yitum,%}
to press, weigh down; to press hard, give pain, per-
plex.
<LEND>

<L>8743<pc>0123-b<k1>ApIqa<k2>ApIqa
{%Ā-pīḍa, as,%}¦ m. compressing, squeezing; giving
[Page0123-c+ 69]
pain, hurting; a chaplet tied on the crown of the
head; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a metre.
<LEND>

<L>8744<pc>0123-c<k1>ApIqana<k2>ApIqana
{%Ā-pīḍana, am,%}¦ n. compressing, squeezing, tying
or drawing tightly; embracing, clasping; giving pain,
hurting.
<LEND>

<L>8745<pc>0123-c<k1>ApIqita<k2>ApIqita
{%Ā-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ compressed, squeezed;
bound tightly, embraced; hurt; decorated with
chaplets.
<LEND>

<L>8746<pc>0123-c<k1>ApIta<k2>ApIta<h>2
{#ApIta#} 2¦. {%ā-pīta, as, ā, am,%} yellowish;
({%am%}), n. a pyritic mineral. (For 1. {%ā-pīta%} see under
{%ā-pā.%})
<LEND>

<L>8747<pc>0123-c<k1>ApU<k2>ApU
{#ApU#}¦ {%ā-pū,%} cl. 1. A. {%-pavate, -vitum,%} to be
pure; to flow towards after purification; to carry
towards in its course (said of a stream).
<LEND>

<L>8748<pc>0123-c<k1>ApUpika<k2>ApUpika
{#ApUpika#}¦ {%āpūpika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%apūpa%}),
selling cakes; accustomed to eat cakes; fond of cakes,
eating cakes (with benefit); a good maker of cake;
({%as%}), m. a baker; a confectioner; ({%am%}), n. a mul-
titude of cakes.
<LEND>

<L>8749<pc>0123-c<k1>ApUpya<k2>ApUpya
{%Āpūpya, am,%}¦ n. flour, meal.
<LEND>

<L>8750<pc>0123-c<k1>ApUy<k2>ApUy
{#ApUy#}¦ {%ā-pūy,%} cl. 1. P. {%-pūyati, -yitum,%} to
be putrescent, putrify.
<LEND>

<L>8751<pc>0123-c<k1>ApUza<k2>ApUza
{#ApUza#}¦ {%āpūṣa, am,%} n. tin.
<LEND>

<L>8752<pc>0123-c<k1>Apfc<k2>Apfc
{#Apfc#}¦ {%ā-pṛc,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-pṛṇakti, -pṛṅkte,%}
{%-parcitum,%} to fill, pervade; A. to satiate one's self; to
mix with.
<LEND>

<L>8753<pc>0123-c<k1>Apfk<k2>Apfk
{%Ā-pṛk,%}¦ ind., Ved. in a mixed manner, confusedly.
<LEND>

<L>8754<pc>0123-c<k1>ApfcCA<k2>ApfcCA
{#ApfcCA#}¦ {%ā-pṛcchā,%} &c. See under {%ā-prach.%}
<LEND>

<L>8755<pc>0123-c<k1>ApF<k2>ApF
{#ApF#}¦ {%ā-pṝ,%} Caus. P. {%-pūrayati, -yitum,%} to
fill, fulfil: Pass. {%-pūryate,%} to be filled, become full.
<LEND>

<L>8756<pc>0123-c<k1>ApUra<k2>ApUra
{%Ā-pūra, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming full.
<LEND>

<L>8757<pc>0123-c<k1>ApUraRa<k2>ApUraRa
{%Ā-pūraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming full; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a Nāga; ({%am%}), n. filling, making full.
<LEND>

<L>8758<pc>0123-c<k1>ApUrti<k2>ApUrti
{%Ā-pūrti, is,%}¦ f. filling; fulness, satisfaction.
<LEND>

<L>8759<pc>0123-c<k1>ApUrya<k2>ApUrya
{%Ā-pūrya,%}¦ ind. filling, having filled.
<LEND>

<L>8760<pc>0123-c<k1>ApUryamARa<k2>ApUryamARa
{%Ā-pūryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming full, being
filled. {%—Āpūryamāṇa-pakṣa, as,%} m. the crescent
or waxing moon.
<LEND>

<L>8761<pc>0123-c<k1>Apekzika<k2>Apekzika
{#Apekzika#}¦ {%āpekṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%apekṣā%}),
raising expectations.
<LEND>

<L>8762<pc>0123-c<k1>Apoklima<k2>Apoklima
{#Apoklima#}¦ {%āpoklima, as,%} m., in astronomy
= Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀπόκλιμα</lang>
<LEND>

<L>8763<pc>0123-c<k1>Apomaya<k2>Apomaya
{#Apomaya#}¦ {%āpo-maya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%āpas,%} nom.
pl. of {%ap,%} q. v.), consisting of water. {%—Āpo-mātrā,%}
f. the subtle elementary principle of water. {%—Āpo-%}
{%mūrti, is,%} m., N. of a deity under Manu Svārociṣa,
one of the seven Ṛṣis of the tenth Manvantara.
<LEND>

<L>8764<pc>0123-c<k1>ApoSAna<k2>ApoSAna
{#ApoSAna#}¦ {%āpośāna, as,%} m., N. of a kind of
prayer spoken before and after eating; perhaps con-
tracted from {%āpo 'śāna,%} ‘drink the water,’ with
which words the prayer began.
<LEND>

<L>8765<pc>0123-c<k1>Apta<k2>Apta
{#Apta, Apti, Aptokti#}¦, &c. See under rt. {%āp.%}
<LEND>

<L>8766<pc>0123-c<k1>AptoryAman<k2>AptoryAman
{#AptoryAman#}¦ {%āptor-yāman.%} See {%aptor-yāma.%}
<LEND>

<L>8767<pc>0123-c<k1>Aptya<k2>Aptya
{#Aptya#}¦ {%āptya, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a class of
deities, and especially of the deity Trita, as one of
that class.
<LEND>

<L>8768<pc>0123-c<k1>Apya<k2>Apya<h>3
{#Apya#} 3¦. {%āpya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ap%}), belonging
or relating to water; watery; consisting of water;
living in water. (For 1. 2. {%āpya%} see under rt. {%āp.%})
<LEND>

<L>8769<pc>0123-c<k1>Apya<k2>Apya<h>4
{#Apya#} 4¦. {%āpya, as,%} m. (for {%āptya%}), N. of a
class of deities in the sixth Manvantara.
<LEND>

<L>8770<pc>0123-c<k1>Apya<k2>Apya<h>5
{#Apya#} 5¦. {%āpya, am,%} n., N. of a plant, a kind
of Costus. See {%vāpya.%}
<LEND>

<L>8771<pc>0123-c<k1>ApyE<k2>ApyE
{#ApyE#}¦ {%ā-pyai,%} cl. 1. A. {%-pyāyate, -pyātum,%}
to grow fat or comfortable, to increase, become full,
enlarge: Caus. P. {%-pyāyayati, -yitum,%} to make fat
or comfortable; to enlarge.
<LEND>

<L>8772<pc>0123-c<k1>ApI<k2>ApI
{%Āpī, īs,%}¦ f. the twentieth Nakṣatra or lunar mansion.
<LEND>

<L>8773<pc>0123-c<k1>ApIna<k2>ApIna
{%Ā-pīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ stout, fat; ({%as%}), m. a well;
[Page0124-a+ 76]
({%am%}), n. an udder. {%—Āpīna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
containing the rt. {%pyai%} with {%ā%} (said of a {%ṛc%} or
verse).
<LEND>

<L>8774<pc>0124-a<k1>ApyAna<k2>ApyAna
{%Ā-pyāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ stout, robust.
<LEND>

<L>8775<pc>0124-a<k1>ApyAya<k2>ApyAya
{%Ā-pyāya, as,%}¦ m. becoming full or fat.
<LEND>

<L>8776<pc>0124-a<k1>ApyAyana<k2>ApyAyana
{%Āpyāyana, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing fulness or stout-
ness, increasing welfare; ({%am%}), n. the act of making
full or fat; satisfying, refreshing, pleasing; satiety,
satisfaction; advancing; anything which causes cor-
pulency or good condition; strengthening medicine;
corpulency, growing or being fat or stout; (in certain
ceremonies) the act of pouring water &c. on the
Soma and so causing it to swell. {%—Āpyāyana-śīla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} satisfying.
<LEND>

<L>8777<pc>0124-a<k1>ApyAyita<k2>ApyAyita
{%Ā-pyāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfied, increased, im-
proved, pleased, gratified; stout, fat.
<LEND>

<L>8778<pc>0124-a<k1>Apra<k2>Apra
{#Apra#}¦ {%āpra, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%pṝ%} with {%ā ?%}),
Ved. busy, zealous; (Sāy.) able to reach.
<LEND>

<L>8779<pc>0124-a<k1>ApraC<k2>ApraC
{#ApraC#}¦ {%ā-prach,%} cl. 6. A. or poet. P. {%-pṛc-%}
{%chate, -ti, -praṣṭum,%} to bid farewell; to salute on
receiving or parting with a visitor; to extol.
<LEND>

<L>8780<pc>0124-a<k1>ApfcCA<k2>ApfcCA
{%Ā-pṛcchā,%}¦ f. conversation, speaking to or with;
bidding farewell.
<LEND>

<L>8781<pc>0124-a<k1>ApfcCya<k2>ApfcCya<h>1
1. {%ā-pṛcchya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be saluted, to
be welcomed, to be honoured; laudable, commendable,
beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>8782<pc>0124-a<k1>ApfcCya<k2>ApfcCya<h>2
2. {%ā-pṛcchya,%}¦ ind. having saluted, having bid adieu.
(In Rāmāyaṇa I. 72, 20, a form {%ā-pṛṣṭvā%} occurs.)
<LEND>

<L>8783<pc>0124-a<k1>ApracCana<k2>ApracCana
{%Ā-pracchana, am,%}¦ n. expressions of civility on re-
ceiving or parting with a visitor, welcome, bidding
adieu, &c.
<LEND>

<L>8784<pc>0124-a<k1>Apratinivftta<k2>Apratinivftta
{#Apratinivftta#}¦ {%ā-pratinivṛtta, as, ā, am,%} pre-
vented, turned back (?).
<LEND>

<L>8785<pc>0124-a<k1>Apradivam<k2>Apradivam
{#Apradivam#}¦ {%ā-pradivam,%} ind., Ved. for ever.
<LEND>

<L>8786<pc>0124-a<k1>Aprapada<k2>Aprapada
{#Aprapada#}¦ {%ā-prapada, am,%} n. a dress reaching
to the feet; ({%am%}), ind. to the end of the foot,
reaching to the feet.
<LEND>

<L>8787<pc>0124-a<k1>AprapadIna<k2>AprapadIna
{%Āprapadīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ reaching from the shoulders
to the feet (as a dress).
<LEND>

<L>8788<pc>0124-a<k1>AprapadInaka<k2>AprapadInaka
{%Āprapadīnaka, am,%}¦ n. a dress reaching to the feet.
<LEND>

<L>8789<pc>0124-a<k1>AprAvfzam<k2>AprAvfzam
{#AprAvfzam#}¦ {%ā-prāvṛṣam,%} ind. until the
rainy season.
<LEND>

<L>8790<pc>0124-a<k1>AprI<k2>AprI
{#AprI#}¦ {%ā-prī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%prī%} with {%ā%}), Ved.
gaining one's favour, conciliation, propitiation; ({%ā-pri-%}
{%yas%}), propitiatory verses; N. of certain invocations
addressed to a series of deified objects in order, and
said to be introductory to the animal sacrifice. Accord-
ing to others, the objects propitiated by these hymns
are the real āprīs or {%āpriyas;%} whence the hymns
themselves are called {%āprī%} hymns. The objects in-
voked are in a series of twelve verses, as follows:
1. Su-samiddha (or the fuel); 2. and 3. Tanūnapāt
and Narāśaṃsa (these are sometimes invoked in one
verse as mystic names of fire); 4. The divine being
who bears the invocations to the gods (see under {%iḍ%});
5. Barhis (or the sacred grass); 6. The doors of the
chambers in which the sacrifice is offered; 7. Night
and dawn; 8. The two divine beings, sometimes
called Pracetasas, who preside over and protect the
sacrificial rite; 9. The three goddesses, Ilā (see under
{%iḍā%}), Sarasvatī (goddess of eloquence), and Mahī (a
form of Bhāratī or speech); 10. Tvaṣṭṛ (the maker
or creator); 11. Vanas-pati (the tree or wooden column
to which the victim is tied); 12. Svāhā (the exclama-
tion used in inviting the gods to the sacrifice when
finally offered in the fire). All these are by Sāy. re-
garded as forms of Agni. See Ṛg-veda I. 13.
<LEND>

<L>8791<pc>0124-a<k1>AprItapA<k2>AprItapA
{%Ā-prīta-pā, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. epithet of Viṣṇu, ‘guard-
ing those who have appeased his anger.’
<LEND>

<L>8792<pc>0124-a<k1>Aplu<k2>Aplu
{#Aplu#}¦ {%ā-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, -plotum,%} to
bathe, wash, immerse one's self; to jump up, dance:
Caus. P. {%-plāvayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be bathed
or washed; to wash or wet; to overflow, overwhelm;
to set in commotion; A. {%-plāvayate,%} to bathe.
<LEND>

<L>8793<pc>0124-a<k1>Aplava<k2>Aplava
{%Ā-plava, as,%}¦ m. bathing, sprinkling with water.
{%—Āplava-vratin, ī,%} m. an initiated householder,
[Page0124-b+ 71]
who has passed through the first order (Brahma-cārin),
and is admitted into the second. See {%snātaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>8794<pc>0124-b<k1>Aplavana<k2>Aplavana
{%Ā-plavana, am,%}¦ n. immersing, bathing, sprinkling
with water.
<LEND>

<L>8795<pc>0124-b<k1>AplAva<k2>AplAva
{%Ā-plāva, as,%}¦ m. bathing, sprinkling, wetting; a
submerging; a flood, an inundation.
<LEND>

<L>8796<pc>0124-b<k1>AplAvita<k2>AplAvita
{%Ā-plāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ inundated, overflowed.
<LEND>

<L>8797<pc>0124-b<k1>AplAvya<k2>AplAvya
{%Ā-plāvya,%}¦ ind. having wetted or sprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>8798<pc>0124-b<k1>Apluta<k2>Apluta
{%Ā-pluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ bathed; wetted, sprinkled.
In comp. sometimes used figuratively (e. g. {%snehā-%}
{%pluta,%} overflowing with affection); ({%as%}), m. an ini-
tiated householder, see {%āplava-vratin; (am),%} n.
bathing. {%—Āpluta-vratin, ī,%} m. an initiated house-
holder; see {%āplava-vratin%}. {%—Āplutāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚),%}
{%as, ī, am,%} bathed all over.
<LEND>

<L>8799<pc>0124-b<k1>Aplutya<k2>Aplutya
{%Ā-plutya,%}¦ ind. having bathed, having washed;
having jumped up.
<LEND>

<L>8800<pc>0124-b<k1>Apvan<k2>Apvan
{#Apvan#}¦ {%āpvan, ā,%} m. (fr. rt. {%āp%}), air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>8801<pc>0124-b<k1>ApvA<k2>ApvA
{%Āpvā,%}¦ f. the neck.
<LEND>

<L>8802<pc>0124-b<k1>Apsava<k2>Apsava
{#Apsava#}¦ {%āpsava, as,%} m. (fr. {%apsu,%} loc. pl. of
{%ap%}), epithet of a Manu.
<LEND>

<L>8803<pc>0124-b<k1>APUka<k2>APUka
{#APUka#}¦ {%āphūka, am,%} n. opium. See 2.
{%a-phena.%}
<LEND>

<L>8804<pc>0124-b<k1>AbanD<k2>AbanD
{#AbanD#}¦ {%ā-bandh,%} cl. 9. P. {%-badhnāti, -band-%}
{%dhum,%} to bind or tie on.
<LEND>

<L>8805<pc>0124-b<k1>AbadDa<k2>AbadDa
{%Ā-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ tied, bound, joined; ({%as%}),
m. a binding, a yoke; ornament; affection. {%—Ābad-%}
{%dha-māla, as, ā, am,%} forming a wreath.
<LEND>

<L>8806<pc>0124-b<k1>AbaDa<k2>AbaDa
{%Ā-badha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. binding.
<LEND>

<L>8807<pc>0124-b<k1>AbanDa<k2>AbanDa
{%Ā-bandha, as,%}¦ m. a tie or bond; the tie of a
yoke, that which fastens the ox to the yoke, or the
latter to the plough; ornament, decoration; affection.
<LEND>

<L>8808<pc>0124-b<k1>AbanDana<k2>AbanDana
{%Ā-bandhana, am,%}¦ n. tying, binding on or round.
<LEND>

<L>8809<pc>0124-b<k1>Abayu<k2>Abayu
{#Abayu#}¦ {%ābayu, us,%} Ved., perhaps the N. of
a plant.
<LEND>

<L>8810<pc>0124-b<k1>Abarha<k2>Abarha
{#Abarha#}¦ {%ā-barha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%vṛh%} or {%bṛh%}
with {%ā%}), having the property or power of tearing or
pulling out; ({%as%}), m. tearing out.
<LEND>

<L>8811<pc>0124-b<k1>AbarhaRa<k2>AbarhaRa
{%Ā-barhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of tearing out.
<LEND>

<L>8812<pc>0124-b<k1>Abarhin<k2>Abarhin
{%Ā-barhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ fit for tearing out.
<LEND>

<L>8813<pc>0124-b<k1>Abalya<k2>Abalya
{#Abalya#}¦ {%ābalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-bala%}), weakness.
<LEND>

<L>8814<pc>0124-b<k1>AbAD<k2>AbAD
{#AbAD#}¦ {%ā-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate, -dhitum,%}
to check, rein in, restrain; to interrupt, molest, attack.
<LEND>

<L>8815<pc>0124-b<k1>AbADa<k2>AbADa
{%Ā-bādha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. attack; molestation, trouble,
interruption, damage; ({%ā%}), f. pain, distress, segment
of the base of a triangle.
<LEND>

<L>8816<pc>0124-b<k1>AbAlya<k2>AbAlya
{#AbAlya#}¦ {%ā-bālya, am,%} n. age ending with
infancy.
<LEND>

<L>8817<pc>0124-b<k1>Abilam<k2>Abilam
{#Abilam#}¦ {%ā-bilam,%} ind., Ved. to the hole or
aperture [cf. {%vila%}].
<LEND>

<L>8818<pc>0124-b<k1>Abutta<k2>Abutta
{#Abutta#}¦ {%ābutta, as,%} m. (perhaps corrupted
fr. {%ārya-putra%}), a sister's husband (in theatrical lan-
guage).
<LEND>

<L>8819<pc>0124-b<k1>AbuD<k2>AbuD
{#AbuD#}¦ {%ā-budh,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-bodhati,%}
{%-boddhum,%} to perceive, notice, understand.
<LEND>

<L>8820<pc>0124-b<k1>AboDana<k2>AboDana
{%Ā-bodhana, am,%}¦ n. knowledge, understanding;
instructing, informing.
<LEND>

<L>8821<pc>0124-b<k1>Abdika<k2>Abdika
{#Abdika#}¦ {%ābdika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%abda%}), annual,
yearly.
<LEND>

<L>8822<pc>0124-b<k1>ABaj<k2>ABaj
{#ABaj#}¦ {%ā-bhaj,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-bhajati, -bhak-%}
{%tum,%} to make one share, cause one to partake.
<LEND>

<L>8823<pc>0124-b<k1>ABaga<k2>ABaga
{%Ā-bhaga, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a partaker of (with loc.);
(Sāy.) to be shared in.
<LEND>

<L>8824<pc>0124-b<k1>ABaraRa<k2>ABaraRa
{#ABaraRa#}¦ {%ā-bharaṇa, am,%} n. See under
{%ā-bhṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>8825<pc>0124-b<k1>ABA<k2>ABA<h>1
{#ABA#} 1¦. {%ā-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -tum,%} to
shine, blaze; to irradiate; to outshine; to appear, to
look like.
<LEND>

<L>8826<pc>0124-b<k1>ABA<k2>ABA<h>2
2. {%ā-bhā,%}¦ f. splendor, light; a flash; colour, appear-
ance, beauty; a reflected image, shade; likeness,
resemblance: ({%as, ā, am,%} at the end of compounds)
[Page0124-c+ 72]
like, resembling, appearing; e. g. {%hemābha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} shining like gold; [cf. Hib. <nsi>aoibh,</nsi> ‘likeness,
similitude;’ <nsi>aoibe,</nsi> ‘neatness, elegance;’ <nsi>aoibheal,</nsi>
‘a spark of fire.’]
<LEND>

<L>8827<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAti<k2>ABAti
{%Ā-bhāti, is,%}¦ f. splendor, light; shade.
<LEND>

<L>8828<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAz<k2>ABAz
{#ABAz#}¦ {%ā-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate, -ṣitum,%}
to address, speak to; to talk, shout.
<LEND>

<L>8829<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAza<k2>ABAza
{%Ā-bhāṣa, as,%}¦ m. addressing; introduction, preface.
<LEND>

<L>8830<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAzaRa<k2>ABAzaRa
{%Ā-bhāṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. addressing, speaking to.
<LEND>

<L>8831<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAzya<k2>ABAzya<h>1
1. {%ā-bhāṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be addressed, worthy
of being spoken to.
<LEND>

<L>8832<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAzya<k2>ABAzya<h>2
2. {%ā-bhāṣya,%}¦ ind. having addressed, having
spoken to.
<LEND>

<L>8833<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAs<k2>ABAs<h>1
{#ABAs#} 1¦. {%ā-bhās,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāsate, -situm,%}
to shine, blaze; to be bright: Caus. {%-bhāsayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>8834<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAs<k2>ABAs<h>2
2. {%ā-bhās,%}¦ f. splendor, lustre, light.
<LEND>

<L>8835<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAsa<k2>ABAsa
{%Ā-bhāsa, as,%}¦ m. splendor, light, colour, appear-
ance; semblance, phantom; mere appearance; falla-
cious appearance; reflection; intention, purpose; (in
logic) fallacy, semblance of a reason, sophism, an erro-
neous though plausible argument (regarded by logi-
cians as of various kinds).
<LEND>

<L>8836<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAsana<k2>ABAsana
{%Ā-bhāsana, am,%}¦ n. illuminating, making apparent
or clear.
<LEND>

<L>8837<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAsura<k2>ABAsura
{%Ā-bhāsura, as,%}¦ m., N. of a class of deities or demi-
gods, sixty in number.
<LEND>

<L>8838<pc>0124-c<k1>ABAsvara<k2>ABAsvara
{%Ā-bhāsvara, as,%}¦ m. a demi-god, of a class consist-
ing of sixty-four.
<LEND>

<L>8839<pc>0124-c<k1>ABicaraRika<k2>ABicaraRika
{#ABicaraRika#}¦ {%ābhicaraṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%abhi-caraṇa%}), maledictory, imprecatory, serving for
malediction or cursing.
<LEND>

<L>8840<pc>0124-c<k1>ABicArika<k2>ABicArika
{%Ābhicārika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%abhi-cāra%}), magical,
relating to magic; ({%am%}), n. incantation, magic.
<LEND>

<L>8841<pc>0124-c<k1>ABijana<k2>ABijana
{#ABijana#}¦ {%ābhijana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%abhi-jana,%}
rt. {%jan%}), relating to descent; ({%am%}), n. loftiness of
birth.
<LEND>

<L>8842<pc>0124-c<k1>ABijAtya<k2>ABijAtya
{%Ābhijātya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%abhi-jāta,%} rt. {%jan%}), the
nature or state of a man of noble birth, nobility;
birth, family, rank, learning.
<LEND>

<L>8843<pc>0124-c<k1>ABijita<k2>ABijita
{#ABijita#}¦ {%ābhijita, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%abhi-jit%}),
born under the constellation Abhijit.
<LEND>

<L>8844<pc>0124-c<k1>ABiDA<k2>ABiDA
{#ABiDA#}¦ {%ābhidhā,%} f. or {%ābhidhātaka, am,%} n.
a sound, a word, a name. See {%abhi-dhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>8845<pc>0124-c<k1>ABiDAnika<k2>ABiDAnika
{%Ābhidhānika, as, ī, am,%}¦ contained in a dictionary,
lexicographical; ({%as%}), m. a lexicographer.
<LEND>

<L>8846<pc>0124-c<k1>ABiDAnIyaka<k2>ABiDAnIyaka
{%Ābhidhānīyaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%abhi-dhāna%}), re-
lating or belonging to a name or word; ({%am%}), n. the
property of a name.
<LEND>

<L>8847<pc>0124-c<k1>ABiplavika<k2>ABiplavika
{#ABiplavika#}¦ {%ābhiplavika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%abhi-%}
{%plava%}), relating to the religious ceremony called
Abhi-plava.
<LEND>

<L>8848<pc>0124-c<k1>ABimuKya<k2>ABimuKya
{#ABimuKya#}¦ {%ābhimukhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%abhi-%}
{%mukha%}), direction towards anything; wish or desire
directed towards anything; presence, being in front
of or face to face.
<LEND>

<L>8849<pc>0124-c<k1>ABizecanika<k2>ABizecanika
{#ABizecanika#}¦ {%ābhiṣecanika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%abhi-ṣecana%}), relating to the inauguration of a king;
serving for it.
<LEND>

<L>8850<pc>0124-c<k1>ABihArika<k2>ABihArika
{#ABihArika#}¦ {%ābhihārika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%abhi-%}
{%hāra%}), taken by force or fraud; ({%am%}), n. a room.
<LEND>

<L>8851<pc>0124-c<k1>ABIka<k2>ABIka
{#ABIka#}¦ {%ābhīka, am,%} n., N. of a Sāma
melody.
<LEND>

<L>8852<pc>0124-c<k1>ABIkzRa<k2>ABIkzRa
{#ABIkzRa#}¦ {%ābhīkṣṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%abhīkṣṇa%}),
much, exceeding, eternal; ({%am%}), ind. exceedingly,
eternally.
<LEND>

<L>8853<pc>0124-c<k1>ABIkzRya<k2>ABIkzRya
{%Ābhīkṣṇya, am,%}¦ n. continued repetition.
<LEND>

<L>8854<pc>0124-c<k1>ABIya<k2>ABIya
{#ABIya#}¦ {%ābhīya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ā-bhāt,%} ‘up
to {%bha%}’), contained in a chapter of Pāṇini which
ends with {%bha.%}
<LEND>

<L>8855<pc>0124-c<k1>ABIra<k2>ABIra
{#ABIra#}¦ {%ābhīra, as,%} m., N. of a people; a
cowherd sprung from a Brāhman and female of the
[Page0125-a+ 71]
Ambaṣṭha or medical tribe; N. of a metre; ({%ī%}),
f. a cowherd's wife or woman of the Ābhīra tribe;
the language of the Ābhīra. {%—Ābhīra-palli, is%} or {%ī%}
or {%ikā,%} f. a station of herdsmen, a village inhabited
by cowherds only, an abode of cowherds &c.
<LEND>

<L>8856<pc>0125-a<k1>ABIla<k2>ABIla
{#ABIla#}¦ {%ā-bhīla, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%bhī%} with
{%ā%}), formidable, fearful; suffering pain; ({%am%}), n.
bodily pain; [cf. Hib. <nsi>abhéil,</nsi> ‘terrible, dreadful.’]
<LEND>

<L>8857<pc>0125-a<k1>ABu<k2>ABu
{#ABu#}¦ {%ābhu, us, us, u,%} Ved. empty; one
whose hands are empty; stingy; (Sāy.) pervading,
reaching.
<LEND>

<L>8858<pc>0125-a<k1>ABUka<k2>ABUka
{%Ābhūka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. empty, having no con-
tents, powerless.
<LEND>

<L>8859<pc>0125-a<k1>ABugna<k2>ABugna
{#ABugna#}¦ {%ā-bhugna, as, ā, am%} (rt. 1. {%bhuj%} with
3. {%ā%} implying diminution), a little curved or bent.
<LEND>

<L>8860<pc>0125-a<k1>ABU<k2>ABU<h>1
{#ABU#} 1¦. {%ā-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%}
to be present, continue one's existence.
<LEND>

<L>8861<pc>0125-a<k1>ABU<k2>ABU<h>2
2. {%ā-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%}¦ Ved. strong, sufficient, effica-
cious; (Sāy.) approaching (as a praiser); a prison, a
place of confinement; applied according to rule (as a
hymn); very prosperous.
<LEND>

<L>8862<pc>0125-a<k1>ABUti<k2>ABUti
{%Ā-bhūti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. capability, efficiency; (Sāy.)
overpowering strength; ({%is%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>8863<pc>0125-a<k1>ABUzeRya<k2>ABUzeRya
{%Ā-bhūṣeṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be obeyed;
(Sāy.) praiseworthy.
<LEND>

<L>8864<pc>0125-a<k1>ABUz<k2>ABUz
{#ABUz#}¦ {%ā-bhūṣ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-bhūṣati,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to adorn, to adorn with one's presence, i. e.
to come.
<LEND>

<L>8865<pc>0125-a<k1>ABf<k2>ABf
{#ABf#}¦ {%ā-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-bharati, -bhar-%}
{%tum,%} to bring; to carry; to bear; to support.
<LEND>

<L>8866<pc>0125-a<k1>ABaraRa<k2>ABaraRa
{%Ā-bharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. ornament, decoration (as jewels
&c.); act of nourishing; title of several works.
<LEND>

<L>8867<pc>0125-a<k1>ABarat<k2>ABarat
{%Ā-bharat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bringing. {%—Ābharad-%}
{%vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. bringing property, goods, &c.;
({%us%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>8868<pc>0125-a<k1>ABerI<k2>ABerI
{#ABerI#}¦ {%ābherī,%} f. one of the Rāgiṇīs or
modes of music, personified as a female.
<LEND>

<L>8869<pc>0125-a<k1>ABoga<k2>ABoga<h>1
{#ABoga#} 1¦. {%ā-bhoga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%bhuj,%}
to curve, bend, with prep. {%ā%}), winding, curving,
curve, crease; crumpling; circuit, circumference, en-
virons, extension, fulness, expanse; a serpent; the
expanded hood of the Cobra Capella (used by Varuṇa
as his umbrella); effort, pains.
<LEND>

<L>8870<pc>0125-a<k1>ABoga<k2>ABoga<h>2
{#ABoga#} 2¦. {%ā-bhoga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%bhuj,%}
to eat, enjoy), enjoyment, satiety, fulness, comple-
tion.
<LEND>

<L>8871<pc>0125-a<k1>ABogaya<k2>ABogaya
{%Ā-bhogaya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. means of supporting life,
livelihood; (Sāy.) to be enjoyed (as Soma juice).
<LEND>

<L>8872<pc>0125-a<k1>ABogi<k2>ABogi
{%Ā-bhogi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. living, supporting life; (Sāy.)
enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>8873<pc>0125-a<k1>AByantara<k2>AByantara
{#AByantara#}¦ {%ābhyantara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%abhy-%}
{%antara%}), being inside, interior, inner.
<LEND>

<L>8874<pc>0125-a<k1>AByavakASika<k2>AByavakASika
{#AByavakASika#}¦ {%ābhyavakāśika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%abhy-avakāśa%}), living in the open air.
<LEND>

<L>8875<pc>0125-a<k1>AByASika<k2>AByASika
{#AByASika#}¦ {%ābhyāśika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%abhy-%}
{%āśa%}), being near to each other, neighbouring; (less
correctly in this sense written {%ābhyāsika.%})
<LEND>

<L>8876<pc>0125-a<k1>AByAsika<k2>AByAsika
{#AByAsika#}¦ {%ābhyāsika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%abhy-%}
{%āsa%}), resulting from practice, practising, repeating.
<LEND>

<L>8877<pc>0125-a<k1>AByudayika<k2>AByudayika
{#AByudayika#}¦ {%ābhyudayika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%abhy-udaya%}), connected with the rising or begin-
ning of anything; relating to or granting prosperity;
high, exalted, important; ({%am%}), n. a Śrāddha or offer-
ing to ancestors on occasions of rejoicing.
<LEND>

<L>8878<pc>0125-a<k1>ABrika<k2>ABrika
{#ABrika#}¦ {%ābhrika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%abhri%}), one
who digs with a spade or a hoe.
<LEND>

<L>8879<pc>0125-a<k1>Am<k2>Am
{#Am#}¦ {%ām,%} ind. an interjection of assent or
recollection, (a vocative following this particle is {%anu-%}
{%dātta.%})
<LEND>

<L>8880<pc>0125-a<k1>Ama<k2>Ama<h>1
{#Ama#} 1¦. {%āma, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%am?%}), raw,
uncooked (the opposite to {%pakva,%} q. v.; in the Veda
[Page0125-b+ 75]
often an epithet of the cow considered as the raw
material which produces the milk); unbaked, unan-
nealed; undressed; unripe, immature; undigested;
({%am%}), n. condition of being raw; constipation, pass-
ing hard and unhealthy excretions; grain freed from
chaff; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὠμό-ς</lang> Hib. <nsi>amh,</nsi> ‘raw, unsodden,
crude, unripe.’] {%—Āma-kumbha, as,%} m. a water-jar
of unbaked clay. {%—Āma-gandhi,%} n. smell of raw
meat or of a burning corpse. {%—Āma-gandhika, am,%}
n. the smell of raw meat. {%—Āma-tā,%} f. rawness, un-
readiness. {%—Āma-tvac, k, k, k,%} tender-skinned.
{%—Āma-pātra, am,%} n. an unannealed vessel. {%—Āma-%}
{%pīnasa, am,%} n. running at the nose, defluxion.
{%—Āma-māṃsa, as,%} m. raw flesh. {%—Āmamāṃsāśin%}
{%(˚sa-āś˚), ī,%} m. a cannibal, eater of raw flesh.
{%—Āma-rakta, as,%} m. dysentery. {%—Āma-rasa, as,%}
m. imperfect chyme. {%—Āma-vāta, as,%} m. constipa-
tion or torpor of the bowels with flatulence and intu-
mescence. {%—Āma-śūla, as,%} m. the cholic, pain
arising from indigestion. {%—Āmātisāra (˚ma-at˚),%}
{%as,%} m. dysentery or diarrhœa produced by vitiated
mucus in the abdomen; the excretion being mixed
with hard and fetid matter. {%—Āmād (˚ma-ad), t, t,%}
{%t,%} eating raw flesh or food. {%—Āmānna (˚ma-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. undressed rice. {%—Āmāśaya (˚ma-āś˚), as,%}
m. the receptacle of the undigested food, the upper
part of the belly to the navel, the stomach.
<LEND>

<L>8881<pc>0125-b<k1>Amaka<k2>Amaka
{%Āmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ raw, uncooked, &c. See
1. {%āma.%}
<LEND>

<L>8882<pc>0125-b<k1>Amiza<k2>Amiza
{%Āmiṣa, am,%}¦ n. flesh. See s. v. next col.
<LEND>

<L>8883<pc>0125-b<k1>Ama<k2>Ama<h>2
{#Ama#} 2¦. {%āma, as,%} m. or {%āmana, am,%} n. (fr.
rt. 2. {%am%}), sickness, disease.
<LEND>

<L>8884<pc>0125-b<k1>Amaya<k2>Amaya
{%Āmaya, as,%}¦ m. damage, hurt; disease, sickness;
indigestion; ({%am%}), n., N. of the medical plant Cos-
tus Speciosus.
<LEND>

<L>8885<pc>0125-b<k1>AmayAvin<k2>AmayAvin
{%Āmayāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sick, diseased, affected with
indigestion, dyspeptic. {%—Āmayāvi-tva, am,%} n. indi-
gestion, dyspepsia.
<LEND>

<L>8886<pc>0125-b<k1>AmaRqa<k2>AmaRqa
{#AmaRqa#}¦ {%āmaṇḍa, as,%} m. the castor-oil plant
[cf. {%amaṇḍa%} and {%maṇḍa%}].
<LEND>

<L>8887<pc>0125-b<k1>Amana<k2>Amana
{#Amana#}¦ {%ā-mana, am,%} n. (rt. {%man%}), Ved.
friendly disposition, inclination, affection.
<LEND>

<L>8888<pc>0125-b<k1>Amanas<k2>Amanas
{%Ā-manas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ friendly disposed, kind,
favourable.
<LEND>

<L>8889<pc>0125-b<k1>Amanasya<k2>Amanasya
{#Amanasya#}¦ {%āmanasya%} or {%āmānasya, am,%} n. (fr.
{%a-manas%}), pain.
<LEND>

<L>8890<pc>0125-b<k1>Amantr<k2>Amantr
{#Amantr#}¦ {%ā-mantr,%} cl. 10. A. {%-mantrayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to address, especially in saluting and in bid-
ding farewell; to ask, invite.
<LEND>

<L>8891<pc>0125-b<k1>AmantraRa<k2>AmantraRa
{%Ā-mantraṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. addressing, speaking to,
calling or calling to; greeting, courtesy, welcome,
bidding adieu, taking leave; inviting, invitation; de-
liberation, interrogation; the vocative case.
<LEND>

<L>8892<pc>0125-b<k1>AmantraRIya<k2>AmantraRIya
{%Ā-mantraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be addressed
or asked, to be asked for advice or consulted.
<LEND>

<L>8893<pc>0125-b<k1>Amantrayitf<k2>Amantrayitf
{%Ā-mantrayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ asking, inviting, call-
ing; ({%tā%}), m. an inviter, entertainer, especially of
Brāhmans.
<LEND>

<L>8894<pc>0125-b<k1>Amantrita<k2>Amantrita
{%Ā-mantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ invited, summoned,
called; ({%am%}), n. addressing; the vocative case.
<LEND>

<L>8895<pc>0125-b<k1>Amantrya<k2>Amantrya<h>1
1. {%ā-mantrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be addressed or called
to; to be invited; ({%am%}), n. a word standing in the
vocative case.
<LEND>

<L>8896<pc>0125-b<k1>Amantrya<k2>Amantrya<h>2
2. {%ā-mantrya,%}¦ ind. having taken leave, bidding
farewell.
<LEND>

<L>8897<pc>0125-b<k1>AmanT<k2>AmanT
{#AmanT#}¦ {%ā-manth%} or {%ā-math,%} cl. 1. P. {%-man-%}
{%thati, -thitum,%} to agitate.
<LEND>

<L>8898<pc>0125-b<k1>Amandra<k2>Amandra
{#Amandra#}¦ {%ā-mandra, as, ā, am,%} having a slightly
deep tone, making a low muttering sound (like thunder).
<LEND>

<L>8899<pc>0125-b<k1>AmaraRAnta<k2>AmaraRAnta
{#AmaraRAnta#}¦ {%ā-maraṇānta, as, ā, am,%} or {%ā-ma-%}
{%raṇāntika (˚ṇa-ant˚), as, ī, am,%} having death as
the limit, continuing till death, lasting for life.
<LEND>

<L>8900<pc>0125-b<k1>Amaritf<k2>Amaritf
{#Amaritf#}¦ {%ā-maritṛ, tā,%} m. (rt. {%mṛ%} or {%mṛṇ%}
with {%ā%}), Ved. one who hurts or destroys; a de-
stroyer.
<LEND>
[Page0125-c+ 68]

<L>8901<pc>0125-c<k1>Amarda<k2>Amarda
{#Amarda, Amardin.#}¦ See under {%ā-mṛd.%}
<LEND>

<L>8902<pc>0125-c<k1>Amarza<k2>Amarza
{#Amarza#}¦ {%ā-marṣa, as,%} m. (for {%a-marṣa,%}
q. v.), impatience, anger, wrath. (For {%ā-marśa%} see
under {%ā-mṛś.%})
<LEND>

<L>8903<pc>0125-c<k1>AmarzaRa<k2>AmarzaRa
{%Ā-marṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. anger.
<LEND>

<L>8904<pc>0125-c<k1>Amalaka<k2>Amalaka
{#Amalaka#}¦ {%āmalaka, as, ī, am,%} m. f. n. the plant
Emblic Myrobalan, Emblica Officinalis Gærtn.; ({%as%}),
m. another plant, Gendarussa Adhatoda; ({%am%}), n.
the fruit of the Emblic Myrobalan.
<LEND>

<L>8905<pc>0125-c<k1>AmahIyA<k2>AmahIyA
{#AmahIyA#}¦ {%āmahīyā,%} f. designation of a
particular ({%ṛc%}) verse of the Ṛg-veda (viz. Ṛg-veda
VIII. 48, 3).
<LEND>

<L>8906<pc>0125-c<k1>AmahIyava<k2>AmahIyava
{%Āmahīyava, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>8907<pc>0125-c<k1>AmA<k2>AmA
{#AmA#}¦ {%ā-mā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-mimīte, -mātum,%} to
effect, accomplish.
<LEND>

<L>8908<pc>0125-c<k1>AmAtya<k2>AmAtya
{#AmAtya#}¦ {%āmātya, as,%} m. a minister, a coun-
sellor, an adviser; a general. See {%amātya.%}
<LEND>

<L>8909<pc>0125-c<k1>AmAlaka<k2>AmAlaka
{#AmAlaka#}¦ {%āmālaka, as, am,%} m. n. land near
a mountain (?).
<LEND>

<L>8910<pc>0125-c<k1>AmAvAsya<k2>AmAvAsya
{#AmAvAsya#}¦ {%āmāvāsya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%amā-%}
{%vāsyā%}), belonging to the new moon or its festival;
born at the time of new moon; occurring on the
day of conjunction; ({%am%}), n. the new moon oblation.
<LEND>

<L>8911<pc>0125-c<k1>AmikzA<k2>AmikzA
{#AmikzA#}¦ {%āmikṣā,%} f. curd of two-milk whey,
a mixture of boiled and coagulated milk.
<LEND>

<L>8912<pc>0125-c<k1>Amikzya<k2>Amikzya
{%Āmikṣya%}¦ or {%āmikṣīya, as, ā, am,%} suitable for
the preparation of Āmikṣā; made of curds.
<LEND>

<L>8913<pc>0125-c<k1>Amitra<k2>Amitra
{#Amitra#}¦ {%āmitra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%a-mitra%}), pro-
duced by an enemy, inimical, odious.
<LEND>

<L>8914<pc>0125-c<k1>AmiSla<k2>AmiSla
{#AmiSla#}¦ {%ā-miśla, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a
tendency to mix, readily mixing.
<LEND>

<L>8915<pc>0125-c<k1>Amiza<k2>Amiza
{#Amiza#}¦ {%āmiṣa, am,%} n. (connected with 1.
{%āma%}), flesh, enjoyment; an object of enjoyment, a
pleasing or beautiful object &c.; a bribe; coveting,
longing for; lust, desire; food; form. {%—Āmiṣa-%}
{%priya, as, ā, am,%} fond of flesh-meat, carnivorous;
({%as%}), m. a heron. {%—Āmiṣa-bhuj, k, k, k,%} carni-
vorous. {%—Āmiṣāśin (˚ṣa-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%} carni-
vorous, eating flesh and fish.
<LEND>

<L>8916<pc>0125-c<k1>Amis<k2>Amis
{%Āmis,%}¦ m. (occurring in loc. c. {%āmiṣi%}), Ved. raw
flesh, meat; a dead body.
<LEND>

<L>8917<pc>0125-c<k1>AmI<k2>AmI
{#AmI#}¦ {%ā-mī,%} cl. 9. P., Ved. {%-mināti, -mātum,%}
to destroy, neutralize, curtail; A. {%-minīte,%} to destroy
or neutralize mutually.
<LEND>

<L>8918<pc>0125-c<k1>AmIkzA<k2>AmIkzA
{#AmIkzA#}¦ {%āmīkṣā,%} f. {%= āmikṣā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>8919<pc>0125-c<k1>AmIl<k2>AmIl
{#AmIl#}¦ {%ā-mīl,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mīlati, -litum,%} to
close the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>8920<pc>0125-c<k1>AmIlana<k2>AmIlana
{%Ā-mīlana, am,%}¦ n. closing of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>8921<pc>0125-c<k1>AmIvat<k2>AmIvat
{#AmIvat#}¦ {%ā-mīvat, an, antī, at,%} or {%āmīvatka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. attacking, pressing.
<LEND>

<L>8922<pc>0125-c<k1>AmuKa<k2>AmuKa
{#AmuKa#}¦ {%ā-mukha, am,%} n. commencement;
prelude, prologue; ({%am%}), ind. to the face.
<LEND>

<L>8923<pc>0125-c<k1>Amuc<k2>Amuc
{#Amuc#}¦ {%ā-muc,%} cl. 6. P. {%-muñcati, -moktum,%}
to loosen, let go; to put on a garment.
<LEND>

<L>8924<pc>0125-c<k1>Amukta<k2>Amukta
{%Ā-mukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ loosed, let go; liberated;
discharged, cast, shot off; put on as clothes or armour;
dressed, accoutred.
<LEND>

<L>8925<pc>0125-c<k1>Amukti<k2>Amukti
{%Ā-mukti, is,%}¦ f. liberation, the being let loose;
final liberation; ({%i%}), ind. to the end of existence.
<LEND>

<L>8926<pc>0125-c<k1>Amocana<k2>Amocana
{%Ā-mocana, am,%}¦ n. the act of loosing, liberating;
emitting, shedding, letting forth, putting or tying on.
<LEND>

<L>8927<pc>0125-c<k1>Amupa<k2>Amupa
{#Amupa#}¦ {%āmupa, as,%} m. the cane Bambusa
Spinosa Hamilt. Roxb.
<LEND>

<L>8928<pc>0125-c<k1>Amur<k2>Amur
{#Amur#}¦ {%ā-mur, ūr,%} or {%ā-muri, is,%} m. (fr. rt.
{%mṛ%} with {%ā%}), Ved. destroying, hurting.
<LEND>

<L>8929<pc>0125-c<k1>Amuzmika<k2>Amuzmika
{#Amuzmika#}¦ {%āmuṣmika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%amuṣ-%}
{%min,%} loc. of 1. {%adas%}), of that state, being there,
belonging to the other world.
<LEND>
[Page0126-a+ 71]

<L>8930<pc>0126-a<k1>Amuzyakulaka<k2>Amuzyakulaka
{%Āmuṣyakulaka, am,%}¦ n., {%āmuṣyaputraka, am,%}
n., Gaṇa to Pāṇini V. 1. 133.
<LEND>

<L>8931<pc>0126-a<k1>AmuzyAyaRa<k2>AmuzyAyaRa
{%Āmuṣyāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%amuṣya,%} gen. of
1. {%adas%}), son or descendant of such a one, son or
descendant of an illustrious person; ({%as, ī, am%}), well-
born, well descended.
<LEND>

<L>8932<pc>0126-a<k1>AmUlam<k2>AmUlam
{#AmUlam#}¦ {%ā-mūlam,%} ind. to the root, by the
root, entirely, radically.
<LEND>

<L>8933<pc>0126-a<k1>Amfj<k2>Amfj
{#Amfj#}¦ {%ā-mṛj,%} cl. 1. 2. P. {%-mārjati, -mārṣṭi,%}
{%mārjitum, -mārṣṭum,%} to wipe, rub.
<LEND>

<L>8934<pc>0126-a<k1>Amfjya<k2>Amfjya
{%Ā-mṛjya,%}¦ ind. having wiped or rubbed.
<LEND>

<L>8935<pc>0126-a<k1>Amfzwa<k2>Amfzwa
{%Ā-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wiped, rubbed.
<LEND>

<L>8936<pc>0126-a<k1>AmfRa<k2>AmfRa
{#AmfRa#}¦ {%ā-mṛṇa, as, ā, am,%} vulnerable. See
{%an-āmṛṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>8937<pc>0126-a<k1>Amfta<k2>Amfta
{#Amfta#}¦ {%ā-mṛta, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%mṛ%} with
{%ā%}), mortal.
<LEND>

<L>8938<pc>0126-a<k1>Amftyos<k2>Amftyos
{#Amftyos#}¦ {%ā-mṛtyos,%} ind. until death.
<LEND>

<L>8939<pc>0126-a<k1>Amfd<k2>Amfd
{#Amfd#}¦ {%ā-mṛd,%} cl. 9. P. {%-mṛdnāti, -mardi-%}
{%tum,%} to crush by rubbing; to crumple; to press, to
squeeze.
<LEND>

<L>8940<pc>0126-a<k1>Amarda<k2>Amarda
{%Ā-marda, as,%}¦ m. crushing, handling roughly; press-
ing, squeezing; N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>8941<pc>0126-a<k1>Amardin<k2>Amardin
{%Ā-mardin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crushing; pressing.
<LEND>

<L>8942<pc>0126-a<k1>AmfS<k2>AmfS
{#AmfS#}¦ {%ā-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati, -marṣṭum%}
or {%-mraṣṭum,%} to touch, handle roughly, rub, injure.
<LEND>

<L>8943<pc>0126-a<k1>AmarSa<k2>AmarSa
{%Ā-marśa, as,%}¦ m. advice, counsel.
<LEND>

<L>8944<pc>0126-a<k1>AmarSana<k2>AmarSana
{%Ā-marśana,%}¦ or less correctly {%ā-marṣaṇa, am,%}
n. rubbing, wiping.
<LEND>

<L>8945<pc>0126-a<k1>Amenya<k2>Amenya
{#Amenya#}¦ {%ā-menya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%meni%} with
{%ā%}), Ved. to be reached with an arrow or bolt; (Sāy.)
to be measured from all sides.
<LEND>

<L>8946<pc>0126-a<k1>AmokzaRa<k2>AmokzaRa
{#AmokzaRa#}¦ {%ā-mokṣaṇa, am,%} n. the act of
fixing or tying on or to.
<LEND>

<L>8947<pc>0126-a<k1>Amocana<k2>Amocana
{#Amocana#}¦ {%ā-mocana.%} See under {%ā-muc.%}
<LEND>

<L>8948<pc>0126-a<k1>Amoda<k2>Amoda
{#Amoda#}¦ {%ā-moda, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%mud%} with
{%ā%}), gladdening, cheering up; ({%as%}), m. joy, serenity,
pleasure; fragrancy, a diffusive perfume; strong smell.
<LEND>

<L>8949<pc>0126-a<k1>Amodana<k2>Amodana
{%Ā-modana, am,%}¦ n. rejoicing, delighting.
<LEND>

<L>8950<pc>0126-a<k1>Amodita<k2>Amodita
{%Ā-modita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, delighted, fragrant.
<LEND>

<L>8951<pc>0126-a<k1>Amodin<k2>Amodin
{%Ā-modin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fragrant; happy, delighted;
(at the end of compounds) fragrant or perfumed with,
e. g. {%kadambāmodin,%} perfumed with kadambas;
({%ī%}), m. a perfume for the mouth made up in the
form of a pill or bolus of camphor &c.
<LEND>

<L>8952<pc>0126-a<k1>Amoza<k2>Amoza
{#Amoza#}¦ {%ā-moṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%muṣ%} with
{%ā%}), robbing, stealing.
<LEND>

<L>8953<pc>0126-a<k1>Amozin<k2>Amozin
{%Ā-moṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ who or what steals, a thief.
<LEND>

<L>8954<pc>0126-a<k1>AmohanikA<k2>AmohanikA
{#AmohanikA#}¦ {%ā-mohanikā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%muh%} with
{%ā%}), a particular fragrant odour.
<LEND>

<L>8955<pc>0126-a<k1>AmnA<k2>AmnA
{#AmnA#}¦ {%ā-mnā,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-manati, -mnā-%}
{%tum,%} to keep in mind, to repeat, commit to memory,
hand down in sacred texts; to celebrate, to hail.
<LEND>

<L>8956<pc>0126-a<k1>AmnAta<k2>AmnAta
{%Ā-mnāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ kept in mind, remembered,
committed to memory, learnt by heart, repeated,
handed down in sacred texts, celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>8957<pc>0126-a<k1>AmnAna<k2>AmnAna
{%Ā-mnāna, am,%}¦ n. mention, repetition, handing
down by sacred texts.
<LEND>

<L>8958<pc>0126-a<k1>AmnAya<k2>AmnAya
{%Ā-mnāya, as,%}¦ m. sacred tradition, sacred texts
handed down by repetition; that which is to be re-
membered, studied or learnt by heart; a Veda or the
Vedas in the aggregate; received doctrine; traditional
usage, family or national customs; advice, instruction
in past and present usage; a Tantra; an element of
being, a property of substance (?); a family, series of
families. {%—Āmnāya-sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} observing the
Vedas and traditional customs, pious; containing the
essence of the Veda.
<LEND>

<L>8959<pc>0126-a<k1>Ampratyaya<k2>Ampratyaya
{#Ampratyaya#}¦ {%ām-pratyaya, as, ā, am,%} having
{%ām%} for its affix (e. g. a root like {%īś%}).
<LEND>

<L>8960<pc>0126-a<k1>AmbarIzaputraka<k2>AmbarIzaputraka
{#AmbarIzaputraka#}¦ {%āmbarīṣaputraka, as,%} m. a
country inhabited by the Ambarīṣa-putras.
<LEND>
[Page0126-b+ 74]

<L>8961<pc>0126-b<k1>AmbazWa<k2>AmbazWa
{#AmbazWa#}¦ {%āmbaṣṭha, as,%} m. an inhabitant of
Ambaṣṭha.
<LEND>

<L>8962<pc>0126-b<k1>Ambikeya<k2>Ambikeya
{#Ambikeya#}¦ {%āmbikeya, as,%} m. (fr. {%ambikā%}), an
epithet of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; also of Kārttikeya.
<LEND>

<L>8963<pc>0126-b<k1>AmBasa<k2>AmBasa
{#AmBasa#}¦ {%āmbhasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%ambhas%}),
watery, fluid.
<LEND>

<L>8964<pc>0126-b<k1>AmBasika<k2>AmBasika
{%Āmbhasika, as, ī, am,%}¦ living in water, aquatic;
({%as%}), m. a fish.
<LEND>

<L>8965<pc>0126-b<k1>AmBfRI<k2>AmBfRI
{#AmBfRI#}¦ {%āmbhṛṇī,%} f. a N. of Vāc, the
daughter of the Ṛṣi Ambhṛṇa. See 3. {%ambhṛṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>8966<pc>0126-b<k1>Amra<k2>Amra
{#Amra#}¦ {%āmra, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%am%}),
the mango tree, Mangifera Indica; ({%am%}), n. the fruit
of the mango tree. {%—Āmra-kūṭa, as,%} m., N. of
a mountain. {%—Āmra-gandhaka, as,%} m., N. of a
plant. {%—Āmra-gupta, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Āmra-%}
{%pālī,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Āmra-peśī,%} f. a portion
of dried mango fruit. {%—Āmra-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made of mangoes (as sauce). {%—Āmra-vaṇa, am,%} n.
a mango forest. {%—Āmrāvarta (˚ra-āv˚), as,%} m. in-
spissated mango juice.
<LEND>

<L>8967<pc>0126-b<k1>AmrAta<k2>AmrAta
{%Āmrāta, as,%}¦ m. the hog-plum, Spondias Mangi-
fera.
<LEND>

<L>8968<pc>0126-b<k1>AmrAtaka<k2>AmrAtaka
{%Āmrātaka, as,%}¦ m. the hog-plum, Spondias Mangi-
fera; inspissated mango juice; N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>8969<pc>0126-b<k1>AmrAvatI<k2>AmrAvatI
{%Āmrāvatī,%}¦ f., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>8970<pc>0126-b<k1>Amriman<k2>Amriman
{%Āmriman, ā,%}¦ m., Gaṇa to Pāṇini V. 1, 123.
<LEND>

<L>8971<pc>0126-b<k1>Amreqana<k2>Amreqana
{#Amreqana#}¦ {%ā-mreḍana, am,%} n. tautology, re-
iteration of words or sounds.
<LEND>

<L>8972<pc>0126-b<k1>Amreqita<k2>Amreqita
{%Ā-mreḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reiterated, repeated; ({%am%}),
n. repetition of a sound or word; (in gram.) redu-
plication, the second word in reduplications.
<LEND>

<L>8973<pc>0126-b<k1>Amla<k2>Amla
{#Amla#}¦ {%āmla, as, ā,%} m. f. (fr. {%amla%}), the
tamarind tree, Tamarindus Indica; ({%am%}), n. sour-
ness, acidity. {%—Āmla-vetasa, as,%} m. the plant Rumex
Vesicatorius.
<LEND>

<L>8974<pc>0126-b<k1>AmlikA<k2>AmlikA
{%Āmlikā,%}¦ f. the tamarind tree; sourness in the
mouth, acidity of stomach.
<LEND>

<L>8975<pc>0126-b<k1>AmlIkA<k2>AmlIkA
{%Āmlīkā,%}¦ f. the tamarind tree.
<LEND>

<L>8976<pc>0126-b<k1>Aya<k2>Aya
{#Aya#}¦ {%āya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%i%} with {%ā%}), arrival,
approach; income, revenue; gain, profit; the guard
of the women's apartments; the eleventh lunar man-
sion. {%—Āya-vyaya, am%} or {%au,%} n. or m. du. receipt
and disbursement, income and expenditure. {%—Āya-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. a place where revenues are collected.
<LEND>

<L>8977<pc>0126-b<k1>Ayat<k2>Ayat<h>1
1. {%ā-yat, an, atī, at,%}¦ coming, approaching. {%—Āyatī-%}
{%gavam,%} ind. at the time when the cows come home.
{%—Āyad-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. one to whom goods
come.
<LEND>

<L>8978<pc>0126-b<k1>Ayana<k2>Ayana
{%Āyana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. coming.
<LEND>

<L>8979<pc>0126-b<k1>Ayin<k2>Ayin
{%Āyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. driving near.
<LEND>

<L>8980<pc>0126-b<k1>AyaHSUlika<k2>AyaHSUlika
{#AyaHSUlika#}¦ {%āyaḥśūlika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ayaḥ-%}
{%śūla%}), active, diligent, indefatigable; ({%as%}), m. a
man who, in order to obtain an object, uses forcible
instead of gentle means; as, for instance, a beggar who
holds a lance to your breast in asking for alms.
<LEND>

<L>8981<pc>0126-b<k1>Ayaj<k2>Ayaj
{#Ayaj#}¦ {%ā-yaj,%} cl. 1. A. {%-yajate, -yaṣṭum,%}
to honour (the gods); to give, present.
<LEND>

<L>8982<pc>0126-b<k1>Ayaji<k2>Ayaji
{%Ā-yaji, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. procuring, granting; (Sāy.)
accomplishing sacrifices from all sides.
<LEND>

<L>8983<pc>0126-b<k1>AyajizWa<k2>AyajizWa
{%Ā-yajiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. procuring most or
best; (Sāy.) sacrificing best.
<LEND>

<L>8984<pc>0126-b<k1>Ayajyu<k2>Ayajyu
{%Ā-yajyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. endeavouring to gain;
inclined to sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>8985<pc>0126-b<k1>AyAga<k2>AyAga
{%Ā-yāga, as,%}¦ m. a gift given at a sacrifice. {%—Āyā-%}
{%ga-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} obtained by sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>8986<pc>0126-b<k1>Ayat<k2>Ayat<h>2
{#Ayat#} 2¦. {%ā-yat,%} cl. 1. A. {%-yatate, -titum,%} to
make effort; to rest on, to depend on, to have the
upper hand (?).
<LEND>

<L>8987<pc>0126-b<k1>Ayatana<k2>Ayatana
{%Ā-yatana, am,%}¦ n. resting-place, support, seat,
place, home, house, abode; the place of the sacred
fire, an altar, a shed for sacrifices; a sanctuary; a
ground-plot, the site of a house; a barn; (with Bud-
dhists) an inner seat (the five senses and Manas are
considered as the six inner seats or āyatanas); the
[Page0126-c+ 75]
cause of disease. {%—Āyatana-tva, am,%} n. state of
being an altar or seat. {%—Āyatana-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. having a certain seat or home; ({%ān%}), m., N.
of the fourth foot of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>8988<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayatta<k2>Ayatta
{%Ā-yatta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dependant, tractable, docile.
{%—Ayatta-tā,%} f. or {%āyatta-tva, am,%} n. dependence,
humility, tractableness, docility.
<LEND>

<L>8989<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayatti<k2>Ayatti
{%Ā-yatti, is,%}¦ f. dependence, subjection, subjecting;
affection; power, strength; day; boundary, limit;
sleeping; length (? for {%ā-yati%} below); majesty,
dignity; future time (? for {%ā-yati%}); continuance in
the right way, steadiness of conduct.
<LEND>

<L>8990<pc>0126-c<k1>AyaTAtaTya<k2>AyaTAtaTya
{#AyaTAtaTya#}¦ {%āyathātathya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-ya-%}
{%thātatha%}), unsuitableness, unfitness, incompatibility.
<LEND>

<L>8991<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayam<k2>Ayam
{#Ayam#}¦ {%ā-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati, -yantum,%}
to stretch, lengthen out, extend, restrain; A. {%-yac-%}
{%chate,%} to stretch one's self or be stretched, to grow
long; to grasp, possess: Caus. {%-yāmayati, -te, -yitum,%}
to lengthen, &c.
<LEND>

<L>8992<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayata<k2>Ayata
{%Ā-yata, as, ā, am,%}¦ long; diffuse, prolix; ({%as%}), m.
an oblong figure (in geometry). {%—Āyata-cchadā,%} f.
the plantain tree Musa Paradisiaca Lin. {%—Āyata-%}
{%stū, ūs,%} m. a panegyrist. {%—Āyatākṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as,%}
{%ī, am,%} having large eyes or long eyelids. {%—Āyatā-%}
{%pāṅga (˚ta-ap˚), as, ī, am,%} having a long-cornered
eye. {%—Āyatāyati (˚ta-āy˚), is,%} f. long continu-
ance, remote futurity. {%—Āyatārdha (˚ta-ardh˚), as,%}
m. (in geometry) half an oblong. {%—Āyatekṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ta-īk˚), as, ā, am,%} long-eyed, having long or
large eyes.
<LEND>

<L>8993<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayati<k2>Ayati
{%Ā-yati, is,%}¦ f. extension, length; stretching the
hand, accepting, obtaining; connection, junction;
meeting; following or future time; the future, ‘the
long run;’ majesty, dignity; restraint of mind; N.
of a daughter of Meru. {%—Āyati-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
long, extended; stately, dignified; self-restrained.
<LEND>

<L>8994<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayantf<k2>Ayantf
{%Ā-yantṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who fastens or raises;
(Sāy.) one who approaches.
<LEND>

<L>8995<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayamana<k2>Ayamana
{%Ā-yamana, am,%}¦ n. stretching (as a bow).
<LEND>

<L>8996<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayamya<k2>Ayamya<h>1
1. {%ā-yamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be stretched; to be
restrained.
<LEND>

<L>8997<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayamya<k2>Ayamya<h>2
2. {%ā-yamya%}¦ or {%ā-yatya,%} ind. having restrained,
suppressed or stretched.
<LEND>

<L>8998<pc>0126-c<k1>AyAma<k2>AyAma
{%Ā-yāma, as,%}¦ m. stretching, extending; restraining,
restraint, stopping; expansion, length (either in space
or time), breadth (in mensuration). {%—Āyāma-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} extended, long.
<LEND>

<L>8999<pc>0126-c<k1>AyAmita<k2>AyAmita
{%Ā-yāmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lengthened out, extended.
<LEND>

<L>9000<pc>0126-c<k1>AyAmin<k2>AyAmin
{%Ā-yāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who restrains, long in
space or time.
<LEND>

<L>9001<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayallaka<k2>Ayallaka
{#Ayallaka#}¦ {%āyallaka, am,%} n. impatience, long-
ing for, missing, regretting (etym. doubtful).
<LEND>

<L>9002<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayavana<k2>Ayavana
{#Ayavana#}¦ {%ā-yavana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%yu%} with
{%ā%}), Ved. a spoon for stirring, any similar implement.
<LEND>

<L>9003<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayavasa<k2>Ayavasa
{#Ayavasa#}¦ {%ā-yavasa, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. n., Ved.
pasture-ground, place for feeding; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
man (?).
<LEND>

<L>9004<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayas<k2>Ayas
{#Ayas#}¦ {%ā-yas,%} cl. 4. P. {%-yasyati, -situm,%} to
exert one's self, to weary one's self, become exhausted:
Caus. {%-yāsayati, -te, -yitum,%} to weary, worry.
<LEND>

<L>9005<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayasta<k2>Ayasta
{%Ā-yasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ pained, distressed; vexed,
angry; hurt, killed; managed or effected with diffi-
culty; labouring, toiling, making effort or exertion;
sharpened, whetted; thrown, cast, sent.
<LEND>

<L>9006<pc>0126-c<k1>AyAsa<k2>AyAsa
{%Ā-yāsa, as,%}¦ m. effort, exertion (of bodily or mental
power), trouble, labour; fatigue, weariness.
<LEND>

<L>9007<pc>0126-c<k1>AyAsaka<k2>AyAsaka
{%Ā-yāsaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing effort, fatigue or
weariness.
<LEND>

<L>9008<pc>0126-c<k1>AyAsin<k2>AyAsin
{%Ā-yāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ making exertion, active, labo-
rious; exhausted by labour, wearied.
<LEND>

<L>9009<pc>0126-c<k1>Ayasa<k2>Ayasa
{#Ayasa#}¦ {%āyasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ayas%}), of iron,
made of iron or metal, metallic; armed with an iron
weapon; zealous ?; ({%ī%}), f. armour for the body, a
breastplate, a coat of mail; ({%am%}), n. iron; anything
made of iron; a weapon; a wind-instrument.
<LEND>
[Page0127-a+ 78]

<L>9010<pc>0127-a<k1>AyaskAra<k2>AyaskAra
{#AyaskAra#}¦ {%āyaskāra, as,%} m. the upper part
of the thigh of an elephant. See {%ayas-kāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>9011<pc>0127-a<k1>AyA<k2>AyA
{#AyA#}¦ {%ā-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%} to come,
arrive, approach, reach, attain; Ved. to bring.
<LEND>

<L>9012<pc>0127-a<k1>AyAta<k2>AyAta
{%Ā-yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come; ({%am%}), n. excess, super-
abundance.
<LEND>

<L>9013<pc>0127-a<k1>AyAti<k2>AyAti
{%Ā-yāti, is,%}¦ f. coming near, arrival; ({%is%}), m., N. of
a son of Nahuṣa.
<LEND>

<L>9014<pc>0127-a<k1>AyAna<k2>AyAna
{%Ā-yāna, am,%}¦ n. coming, arrival; the natural tem-
perament or disposition.
<LEND>

<L>9015<pc>0127-a<k1>AyApana<k2>AyApana
{%Ā-yāpana, am,%}¦ n. causing to come, inviting.
<LEND>

<L>9016<pc>0127-a<k1>AyAcita<k2>AyAcita
{#AyAcita#}¦ {%ā-yācita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yāc%}),
urgently requested or desired.
<LEND>

<L>9017<pc>0127-a<k1>Ayu<k2>Ayu
{#Ayu#}¦ {%āyu, us, us, u%} (perhaps fr. rt. {%an,%} but
said to be fr. rt. {%ay,%} to go), Ved. living, movable;
({%us%}), m. a living being, man; living beings collectively;
mankind; the human race; the first man; life, du-
ration of life; wind; a son, descendant, offspring;
the son of Purūravas and Urvaśī; N. of a man per-
secuted by Indra, also of one protected by him;
N. of a Riṣi; of a son of Hrada; of a king of
frogs. {%—Āyu-ṣak,%} ind. ({%ṣak%} fr. rt. {%sac%}), Ved.
joined with men, with the co-operation of men;
(Sāy.) attached to.
<LEND>

<L>9018<pc>0127-a<k1>Ayus<k2>Ayus
{%Āyus,%}¦ n. life, vital power, health, duration of life,
long life, vital power; N. of a ceremony, commonly
called Āyuṣṭoma, performed to obtain longevity and
forming part together with the Go and Jyotis of the
Abhi-plava ceremony; food; [cf. Dor. <lang n="greek">αἰές</lang> perhaps
also <lang n="greek">αἰών</lang>]; ({%us%}), m. the son of Purūravas and Urvaśī.
{%—Āyuḥ-śeṣa, as,%} m. end of life, death. {%—Āyuḥ-%}
{%śeṣa-tā,%} f. the state of having nothing left but life.
{%—Āyur-dad, t, t, t,%} or {%āyur-dā, ās, ās, am,%} or
{%āyur-dāvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. giving life. {%—Āyur-%}
{%dravya, am,%} n. a medicament. {%—Āyur-veda, as,%}
m. the science of health or medicine; it is classed
among sacred sciences, and considered as a supplement
of the Atharva-veda; it contains eight departments:
1. Śalya, surgery; 2. Śālākya, inquiry into diseases
of the head and its organs; 3. Kāya-cikitsā, treatment
of diseases affecting the whole body; 4. Bhūta-vidyā,
treatment of diseases of the mind supposed to be pro-
duced by demoniacal influence; 5. Kaumāra-bhṛtya,
treatment of children; 6. Agada-tantra, doctrine of
antidotes; 7. Rāsāyana-tantra, doctrine of elixirs; 8.
Vājīkaraṇa-tantra, rules for increasing generative power.
{%—Āyurveda-dṛś, k,%} m. a physician. {%—Āyurveda-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} acquainted with medical science.
{%—Āyurvedika, as,%} m. acquainted or familiar with
medical science, a physician. {%—Āyurvedin, ī, inī, i,%}
belonging to medicine, of the medical profession,
medical, medicinal, &c.; ({%ī%}), m. a practiser of physic,
a physician or surgeon. {%—Āyuṣ-kāma, as, ā, am,%}
wishing for life or health. {%—Āyuṣ-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
producing or creating life. {%—Ayuṣṭoma, as,%} m. (fr.
{%āyus-stoma%}), a sacrifice to obtain longevity. {%—Āyuṣ-%}
{%pā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. preserving life. {%—Āyuṣ-%}
{%prataraṇa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. prolonging life. {%—Āyuṣ-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of vital power, healthy,
long-lived; alive, living; lasting; old; ({%ān%}), m. the
third of the twenty-seven Yogas or divisions of the
ecliptic; the Yoga star in the third lunar mansion;
N. of a son of Uttānapāda, also of Saṃhrāda. {%—Āyus-%}
{%kara, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} promoting longevity, supporting
life. {%—Āyus-tejas, ās,%} m., N. of a Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>9019<pc>0127-a<k1>Ayuza<k2>Ayuza
{%Āyuṣa, am,%}¦ n. (at the end of some compounds)
{%= āyus,%} life.
<LEND>

<L>9020<pc>0127-a<k1>Ayuzka<k2>Ayuzka
{%Āyuṣka,%}¦ (with Jainas) union or connection with
the body or person; that which proclaims ({%kāyate%})
age ({%āyus%}) or duration of life.
<LEND>

<L>9021<pc>0127-a<k1>Ayuzya<k2>Ayuzya
{%Āyuṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ giving long life, vital, preserv-
ative of life, for the sake of life, relating or belong-
ing to it; ({%am%}), n. vital power, abundance of life;
‘vivifying,’ N. of a ceremony performed after a child's
birth.
<LEND>

<L>9022<pc>0127-a<k1>Ayuj<k2>Ayuj<h>1
{#Ayuj#} 1¦. {%ā-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti,%}
{%-yuṅkte, -yoktum,%} to yoke to (anything); to join;
to appoint.
<LEND>
[Page0127-b+ 74]

<L>9023<pc>0127-b<k1>Ayukta<k2>Ayukta
{%Ā-yukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ appointed, charged with;
united, joined, obtained; ({%as%}), m. a minister, an
agent or deputy.
<LEND>

<L>9024<pc>0127-b<k1>Ayuj<k2>Ayuj<h>2
2. {%ā-yuj, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. uniting, joining.
<LEND>

<L>9025<pc>0127-b<k1>Ayoga<k2>Ayoga
{%Ā-yoga, as,%}¦ m. appointment; action, the perform-
ance of an act; presenting or offering flowers, per-
fumes, &c.; a shore or bank, a quay to which boats
are attached.
<LEND>

<L>9026<pc>0127-b<k1>Ayojana<k2>Ayojana
{%Ā-yojana, am,%}¦ n. effort, exertion; taking, seizing;
collecting.
<LEND>

<L>9027<pc>0127-b<k1>Ayojita<k2>Ayojita
{%Ā-yojita, as, ā, am,%}¦ collected together.
<LEND>

<L>9028<pc>0127-b<k1>Ayuta<k2>Ayuta
{#Ayuta#}¦ {%ā-yuta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yu%}), melted,
mixed, mingled; ({%am%}), n. (with {%ā%} implying diminu-
tion), half-melted butter.
<LEND>

<L>9029<pc>0127-b<k1>AyuvamAna<k2>AyuvamAna
{%Ā-yuvamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. mixing, mingling.
<LEND>

<L>9030<pc>0127-b<k1>AyuD<k2>AyuD
{#AyuD#}¦ {%ā-yudh,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-yudhyati, -te,%}
{%-yoddhum,%} to war against, attack, oppose: Caus.
{%-yodhayati, -te, -yitum,%} to attack, oppose.
<LEND>

<L>9031<pc>0127-b<k1>AyuDa<k2>AyuDa
{%Ā-yudha, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a weapon; Ved. a vessel;
({%āni%}), n. pl., Ved. water; ({%am%}), n. gold used for
ornaments. {%—Āyudha-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%} living by one's
weapon; ({%ī%}), m. a warrior. {%—Āyudha-dharmiṇī,%} f.
the plant Sesbania Ægyptiaca, commonly called
Jayantī. {%—Āyudhāgāra (˚dha-āg˚), am,%} n. an ar-
moury, arsenal.
<LEND>

<L>9032<pc>0127-b<k1>AyuDika<k2>AyuDika
{%Āyudhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to arms; ({%as%}), m.
a soldier, warrior.
<LEND>

<L>9033<pc>0127-b<k1>AyuDin<k2>AyuDin
{%Āyudhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ bearing weapons; ({%ī%}), m. a
warrior.
<LEND>

<L>9034<pc>0127-b<k1>AyuDIya<k2>AyuDIya
{%Āyudhīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or connected
with arms; ({%as%}), m. a warrior.
<LEND>

<L>9035<pc>0127-b<k1>AyoDana<k2>AyoDana
{%Ā-yodhana, am,%}¦ n. war, battle; slaughter, killing;
battle-field.
<LEND>

<L>9036<pc>0127-b<k1>Aye<k2>Aye
{#Aye#}¦ {%āye,%} ind. an interjection of calling,
expressive of affection.
<LEND>

<L>9037<pc>0127-b<k1>Ayogava<k2>Ayogava
{#Ayogava#}¦ {%āyogava, as,%} m. a man belonging
to the tribe of Ayogu; a man of a mixed tribe sprung
from a Śūdra man and Vaiśya woman; his business
is carpentry &c.; ({%ī%}), f. a woman of this tribe.
<LEND>

<L>9038<pc>0127-b<k1>Ayoda<k2>Ayoda
{#Ayoda#}¦ {%āyoda, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>9039<pc>0127-b<k1>Ar<k2>Ar<h>1
{#Ar#} 1¦. {%ār, āryati%} Ved. to praise; (Sāy.)
to approach or to make master of.
<LEND>

<L>9040<pc>0127-b<k1>Ar<k2>Ar<h>2
{#Ar#} 2¦. {%ār (ā-ṛ),%} cl. 3. P. {%eyarti,%} or cl. 5. P.
{%ārṇoti, ārtum, āritum%} or {%ārītum,%} to come; to
reach, obtain, fall into; to inflict; to insert, place
in: Caus. {%ārpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to partake of;
to fix, settle, annex; to ordain.
<LEND>

<L>9041<pc>0127-b<k1>Ara<k2>Ara<h>1
1. {%āra, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (? fr. rt. {%ṛ%}), an angle, a
corner; N. of a tree; N. of a lake; brass; oxide of
iron; ({%as%}), m. the planet Mars, <lang n="greek">Ἄρης</lang> the planet
Saturn; ({%ā%}), f. a shoemaker's awl or knife, a bore,
a probe, a spoke. {%—Āra-kūṭa, as, am,%} m. n. brass.
{%—Ārāgra (˚rā-ag˚), am,%} n. the point of an awl;
the iron thong at the end (of a whip); the edge of
a semicircular arrow-head; ({%as, ā, am%}), sharpened,
sharp at the top and broad at the bottom like an awl.
{%—Ārāvalī (˚rā-āv˚),%} f., N. of a chain of mountains,
a spur of the Vindhya.
<LEND>

<L>9042<pc>0127-b<k1>Arta<k2>Arta
{%Ārta, as, ā, am,%}¦ afflicted, pained. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>9043<pc>0127-b<k1>Arpita<k2>Arpita
{%Ārpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fastened to, annexed; depend-
ing on.
<LEND>

<L>9044<pc>0127-b<k1>Ara<k2>Ara<h>2
{#Ara#} 2¦. {%āra%} (contained in {%ārāt, āre,%} q. v.),
distance; proximity (?).
<LEND>

<L>9045<pc>0127-b<k1>ArakAt<k2>ArakAt
{%Ārakāt,%}¦ ind., Ved. (with abl.) far from.
<LEND>

<L>9046<pc>0127-b<k1>Ara<k2>Ara<h>3
{#Ara#} 3¦. {%āra,%} probably a wrong reading for
{%ara,%} a spoke, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>9047<pc>0127-b<k1>Arakta<k2>Arakta
{#Arakta#}¦ {%ā-rakta, as, ā, am,%} (see 3. {%ā%}), reddish.
<LEND>

<L>9048<pc>0127-b<k1>Arakza<k2>Arakza
{#Arakza#}¦ {%ā-rakṣa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%rakṣ%}), pre-
served, defended, proper or worthy to be preserved;
({%as%}), m. protection, guard, preservation; the junction
of the frontal sinuses of an elephant; the part of the
forehead below this junction.
<LEND>

<L>9049<pc>0127-b<k1>Arakzaka<k2>Arakzaka
{%Ā-rakṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what guards or
protects; ({%as%}), m. a watchman; see the next.
<LEND>
[Page0127-c+ 73]

<L>9050<pc>0127-c<k1>Arakzika<k2>Arakzika
{%Ā-rakṣika, as,%}¦ m. a watchman, a patrol; a vil-
lage or police magistrate.
<LEND>

<L>9051<pc>0127-c<k1>Arakzya<k2>Arakzya
{%Ā-rakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be preserved or guarded.
<LEND>

<L>9052<pc>0127-c<k1>AragbaDa<k2>AragbaDa
{#AragbaDa#}¦ {%ārag-badha, as,%} m. the tree Ca-
thartocarpus (Cassia) Fistula; ({%am%}), n. its fruit.
<LEND>

<L>9053<pc>0127-c<k1>AraNgara<k2>AraNgara
{#AraNgara#}¦ {%āraṅgara, as,%} m., Ved. epithet of
a bee.
<LEND>

<L>9054<pc>0127-c<k1>Aracita<k2>Aracita
{#Aracita#}¦ {%ā-racita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%rac%}), ar-
ranged, prepared.
<LEND>

<L>9055<pc>0127-c<k1>Arawa<k2>Arawa
{#Arawa#}¦ {%āraṭa, am,%} n. flesh. (This word is
also one of the Gaṇa {%gaurādi%} Pāṇini IV. 1. 41.)
<LEND>

<L>9056<pc>0127-c<k1>Arawwa<k2>Arawwa
{#Arawwa#}¦ {%āraṭṭa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
and country in Pañca-nada or the Pañjāb. {%—Āraṭṭa-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} born in Āraṭṭa; ({%as%}), m. an inhabitant
of this country; a horse from it.
<LEND>

<L>9057<pc>0127-c<k1>Araqava<k2>Araqava
{#Araqava#}¦ {%āraḍava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%araḍu%}),
Pāṇini IV. 2, 71.
<LEND>

<L>9058<pc>0127-c<k1>AraRa<k2>AraRa
{#AraRa#}¦ {%āraṇa, am,%} n. (probably related to
1. {%araṇa%}), Ved. depth, abyss, precipice.
<LEND>

<L>9059<pc>0127-c<k1>AraRaja<k2>AraRaja
{#AraRaja#}¦ {%āraṇaja, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a class
of deities forming part of the Kalpa-bhavas.
<LEND>

<L>9060<pc>0127-c<k1>AraRi<k2>AraRi
{#AraRi#}¦ {%āraṇi, is,%} m. an eddy.
<LEND>

<L>9061<pc>0127-c<k1>AraReya<k2>AraReya
{#AraReya#}¦ {%āraṇeya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%araṇi,%} q. v.),
relating to the Araṇis or two pieces of wood by the
attrition of which sacred fire is kindled; ({%am%}), n.
or {%āraṇeya-parvan, a,%} n. title of the last section of
the third book of the Mahā-bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>9062<pc>0127-c<k1>AraRya<k2>AraRya
{#AraRya#}¦ {%āraṇya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%araṇya%}),
forest, relating to a forest, forest-born, wild; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. wild animals. {%—Āraṇya-gāna, am,%} n. one of the
four Gānas or psalm-books of the Sāma-veda. {%—Ā-%}
{%raṇya-parvan, a,%} n., N. of the third book of the
Mahā-bhārata, more usually called {%vana-parvan.%}
{%—Āraṇya-paśu, us,%} m. a wild or forest animal (as a
buffalo, monkey, &c.). {%—Āraṇya-mudgā,%} f. a kind
of bean, Phaseolus Trilobus Ait. {%—Āraṇya-rāśi, is,%}
m. (in the zodiac) the sign Leo; Aries and Taurus;
the former half of Capricorn.
<LEND>

<L>9063<pc>0127-c<k1>AraRyaka<k2>AraRyaka
{%Āraṇyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ forest, wild, forest-born,
produced in a forest, relating to a forest; the {%āra-%}
{%ṇyakam parva%} of the Mahā-bhārata is either the
whole third book or only the first section of it; ({%as%}),
m. a forester, an inhabitant of the woods; ({%am%}), n.
an {%āraṇyaka,%} i. e. one of a class of religious and phi-
losophical writings (closely connected with the Brāh-
maṇas) which are either composed in forests or must
be studied there; the Upaniṣads are considered to
be attached to them. {%—Āraṇyaka-kāṇḍa, am,%} n.
title of the third book of the Rāmāyaṇa and of the
fourteenth book of the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>9064<pc>0127-c<k1>AradDa<k2>AradDa
{#AradDa#}¦ {%āraddha, as,%} or {%āradvat, ān,%} m., N.
of a son of Setu.
<LEND>

<L>9065<pc>0127-c<k1>AranAla<k2>AranAla
{#AranAla#}¦ {%āranāla%} or {%āranālaka, am,%} n. sour
gruel made from the fermentation of boiled rice.
<LEND>

<L>9066<pc>0127-c<k1>AraB<k2>AraB
{#AraB#}¦ {%ā-rabh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rabhate, -rabdhum,%}
to commence, begin, undertake; to be active or ener-
getic; to rely, obtain.
<LEND>

<L>9067<pc>0127-c<k1>ArabDa<k2>ArabDa
{%Ā-rabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ begun, commenced.
<LEND>

<L>9068<pc>0127-c<k1>ArabDi<k2>ArabDi
{%Ā-rabdhi, is,%}¦ f. beginning, commencement.
<LEND>

<L>9069<pc>0127-c<k1>AraBawa<k2>AraBawa
{%Ā-rabhaṭa, as,%}¦ m. an enterprising, courageous
man; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. boldness, confidence; ({%ī%}), f. a
branch of the dramatic art, the machinery of the
drama, the representation of supernatural and horrible
events on the stage.
<LEND>

<L>9070<pc>0127-c<k1>AraBamARa<k2>AraBamARa
{%Ā-rabhamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ beginning, commencing
resolutely with a determination to finish.
<LEND>

<L>9071<pc>0127-c<k1>AraBya<k2>AraBya
{%Ā-rabhya,%}¦ ind. having begun, beginning from.
<LEND>

<L>9072<pc>0127-c<k1>AraByamARa<k2>AraByamARa
{%Ā-rabhyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being commenced.
<LEND>

<L>9073<pc>0127-c<k1>AramBa<k2>AramBa
{%Ā-rambha, as,%}¦ m. undertaking, beginning; a
thing begun; commencement; haste, speed; effort,
exertion; pride; killing, slaughter; an introduction,
a prologue, &c. {%—Ārambha-tā,%} f. beginning.
<LEND>

<L>9074<pc>0127-c<k1>AramBaka<k2>AramBaka
{%Ā-rambhaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ undertaking, beginning.
<LEND>
[Page0128-a+ 72]

<L>9075<pc>0128-a<k1>AramBaRa<k2>AramBaRa
{%Ā-rambhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. taking hold of, seizing,
using; the place of seizing, a handle. {%—Ārambhaṇa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} seizable.
<LEND>

<L>9076<pc>0128-a<k1>AramBaRIya<k2>AramBaRIya
{%Ā-rambhaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ that with which one
must begin, forming the commencement.
<LEND>

<L>9077<pc>0128-a<k1>AramBin<k2>AramBin
{%Ā-rambhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ enterprising, one who makes
many new projects.
<LEND>

<L>9078<pc>0128-a<k1>Aram<k2>Aram
{#Aram#}¦ {%ā-ram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ramati, -rantum,%} to
delight in; to rest; to leave off.
<LEND>

<L>9079<pc>0128-a<k1>Arata<k2>Arata
{%Ā-rata, as, ā, am,%}¦ quiet, gentle.
<LEND>

<L>9080<pc>0128-a<k1>Arati<k2>Arati
{%Ā-rati, is,%}¦ f. stopping, ceasing; waving lights be-
fore an image.
<LEND>

<L>9081<pc>0128-a<k1>AramaRa<k2>AramaRa
{%Ā-ramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. taking delight; cessation, pause;
resting-place.
<LEND>

<L>9082<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAma<k2>ArAma
{%Ā-rāma, as,%}¦ m. delight, pleasure; place of pleasure,
a garden, a grove; [with this word cf. <lang n="greek">ἠμέρα</lang> and
<lang n="greek">ἔρημος</lang>] {%—Ārāma-śītalā,%} f., N. of a fragrant plant.
<LEND>

<L>9083<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAmika<k2>ArAmika
{%Ārāmika, as,%}¦ m. a gardener.
<LEND>

<L>9084<pc>0128-a<k1>ArambaRa<k2>ArambaRa
{#ArambaRa#}¦ {%ā-rambaṇa, am,%} n. ({%= ā-lambana%}),
support.
<LEND>

<L>9085<pc>0128-a<k1>Arava<k2>Arava
{#Arava, ArAva#}¦ See under 1. {%ā-ru.%}
<LEND>

<L>9086<pc>0128-a<k1>Aras<k2>Aras
{#Aras#}¦ {%ā-ras,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rasati, -situm,%} to
bewail, to lament.
<LEND>

<L>9087<pc>0128-a<k1>Arasya<k2>Arasya
{#Arasya#}¦ {%ārasya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-rasa%}), insi-
pidity, want of flavour or spirit.
<LEND>

<L>9088<pc>0128-a<k1>ArA<k2>ArA
{#ArA#}¦ {%ārā,%} f. a probe, an awl. See under
2. {%ār.%}
<LEND>

<L>9089<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAga<k2>ArAga
{#ArAga#}¦ {%ā-rāga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%rañj%} with {%ā%}),
one of the seven suns at the end of a period of the
world.
<LEND>

<L>9090<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAjYI<k2>ArAjYI
{#ArAjYI#}¦ {%ā-rājñī,%} f. (fr. {%rājan%} with 3. {%a%}), N.
of a region.
<LEND>

<L>9091<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAqa<k2>ArAqa
{#ArAqa#}¦ {%ārāḍa, as,%} m. with the epithet
{%kālāpa,%} N. of a teacher of Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>9092<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAQi<k2>ArAQi
{#ArAQi#}¦ {%ārāḍhi, is,%} m. a patronymic of a
teacher named Saugata in the Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>9093<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAt<k2>ArAt
{#ArAt#}¦ {%ārāt,%} ind. (see 2. {%āra%}), from a dis-
tant place; distant; to a distant place; far from (with
abl.); near; directly, immediately.
<LEND>

<L>9094<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAtIya<k2>ArAtIya
{%Ārātīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ remote; near, proximate.
<LEND>

<L>9095<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAttAt<k2>ArAttAt
{%Ārāttāt,%}¦ ind., Ved. from a distant place.
<LEND>

<L>9096<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAti<k2>ArAti
{#ArAti#}¦ {%ārāti, is,%} m. an enemy. See {%a-rāti.%}
<LEND>

<L>9097<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAtrika<k2>ArAtrika
{#ArAtrika#}¦ {%ā-rātrika, am,%} n. the light or the
vessel containing it which is waved at night before
an idol; N. of this ceremony; N. of another cere-
mony.
<LEND>

<L>9098<pc>0128-a<k1>ArAD<k2>ArAD
{#ArAD#}¦ {%ā-rādh,%} cl. 5. P. {%-rādhnoti, -rāddhum,%}
or Caus. P. {%-rādhayati, -yitum,%} to conciliate, pro-
pitiate; strive to obtain the favour of; to honour,
worship; to deserve, merit: Pass. {%-rādhyate,%} to be
effected or accomplished.
<LEND>

<L>9099<pc>0128-a<k1>ArADaka<k2>ArADaka
{%Ā-rādhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what worships,
a worshipper.
<LEND>

<L>9100<pc>0128-a<k1>ArADana<k2>ArADana
{%Ā-rādhana, am,%}¦ n. propitiating, rendering favour-
able to one's self; ({%am%}), n. accomplishment, under-
taking; cooking; acquirement, attainment; grati-
fying, propitiating, worshipping; ({%ā%}), f. service; ({%ī%}),
f. worship, adoration, propitiation of the deities.
<LEND>

<L>9101<pc>0128-a<k1>ArADanIya<k2>ArADanIya
{%Ā-rādhanīya%}¦ or {%ā-rādhitavya, as, ā, am,%} to be
worshipped or adored, to be conciliated or propitiated.
<LEND>

<L>9102<pc>0128-a<k1>ArADayitf<k2>ArADayitf
{%Ā-rādhayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ endeavouring to conci-
liate or propitiate.
<LEND>

<L>9103<pc>0128-a<k1>ArADayizRu<k2>ArADayizRu
{%Ā-rādhayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ propitiatory; = the
preceding.
<LEND>

<L>9104<pc>0128-a<k1>ArADita<k2>ArADita
{%Ā-rādhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ accomplished, effected;
propitiated, pleased; worshipped, honoured, rever-
enced.
<LEND>

<L>9105<pc>0128-a<k1>ArADya<k2>ArADya
{%Ā-rādhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made favourable, to
be worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>9106<pc>0128-a<k1>ArADyamAna<k2>ArADyamAna
{%Ā-rādhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in course of
fulfilment, being accomplished; being worshipped,
receiving worship.
<LEND>
[Page0128-b+ 70]

<L>9107<pc>0128-b<k1>ArirADayizu<k2>ArirADayizu
{%Ā-rirādhayiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ endeavouring to gain
one's favour, desirous of worshipping.
<LEND>

<L>9108<pc>0128-b<k1>ArAlika<k2>ArAlika
{#ArAlika#}¦ {%ārālika, as, ī,%} m. f. a cook,
(etymology doubtful, said to be fr. {%arāla,%} i. e. bend-
ing over dishes.)
<LEND>

<L>9109<pc>0128-b<k1>ArAvalI<k2>ArAvalI
{#ArAvalI#}¦ {%ārāvalī,%} f. See under 2. {%ār.%}
<LEND>

<L>9110<pc>0128-b<k1>Aric<k2>Aric
{#Aric#}¦ {%ā-ric,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-riṇakti, -riṅkte,%}
{%-rektum,%} to empty.
<LEND>

<L>9111<pc>0128-b<k1>Areka<k2>Areka
{%Ā-reka, as,%}¦ m. emptying, doubt.
<LEND>

<L>9112<pc>0128-b<k1>Arecita<k2>Arecita
{%Ā-recita, as, ā, am,%}¦ emptied, contracted, mixed.
<LEND>

<L>9113<pc>0128-b<k1>Aritrika<k2>Aritrika
{#Aritrika#}¦ {%āritrika,%} adj. fr. {%aritra.%} Pāṇini
IV. 2, 116.
<LEND>

<L>9114<pc>0128-b<k1>Arindama<k2>Arindama
{#Arindama#}¦ {%ārindama, as,%} m. patronymic of
the prince Sana-śruta.
<LEND>

<L>9115<pc>0128-b<k1>ArI<k2>ArI
{#ArI#}¦ {%ā-rī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-rīyate, -retum,%} to
trickle or flow upon, to flow over, water.
<LEND>

<L>9116<pc>0128-b<k1>Aru<k2>Aru<h>1
{#Aru#} 1¦. {%ā-ru,%} cl. 2. P. {%-rauti%} or {%-ravīti, -ravi-%}
{%tum,%} to shout, to cry out; to praise.
<LEND>

<L>9117<pc>0128-b<k1>Arava<k2>Arava
{%Ā-rava, as,%}¦ m. cry, crying, howling, crash, sound;
N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>9118<pc>0128-b<k1>ArAva<k2>ArAva
{%Ā-rāva, as,%}¦ m. cry, crying; humming (of bees
&c.); sound.
<LEND>

<L>9119<pc>0128-b<k1>ArAvin<k2>ArAvin
{%Ā-rāvin, ī,%}¦ m. epithet of Jayasena.
<LEND>

<L>9120<pc>0128-b<k1>Aru<k2>Aru<h>2
{#Aru#} 2¦. {%āru, us,%} m. a hog; a crab; the tree
Lagerstrœmia Regina; ({%us%}), f. a pitcher.
<LEND>

<L>9121<pc>0128-b<k1>Aruka<k2>Aruka
{#Aruka#}¦ {%āruka, am,%} n. a medicinal plant of
cooling properties growing on the Himālaya moun-
tains.
<LEND>

<L>9122<pc>0128-b<k1>Aruc<k2>Aruc
{#Aruc#}¦ {%ā-ruc,%} Caus. {%-rocayati, -yitum,%} to
regard as pleasant, to choose.
<LEND>

<L>9123<pc>0128-b<k1>Aroka<k2>Aroka
{%Ā-roka, as,%}¦ m. shining through; small points of
light between the threads of a web.
<LEND>

<L>9124<pc>0128-b<k1>Arocana<k2>Arocana
{%Ā-rocana, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining.
<LEND>

<L>9125<pc>0128-b<k1>Aruj<k2>Aruj
{#Aruj#}¦ {%ā-ruj, k, k, k%} (rt. {%ruj%}), breaking.
<LEND>

<L>9126<pc>0128-b<k1>Aruja<k2>Aruja
{%Ā-ruja, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. breaking, destroying; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a Rakṣas attendant on Rāvaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>9127<pc>0128-b<k1>Arujatnu<k2>Arujatnu
{%Ā-rujatnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. breaking.
<LEND>

<L>9128<pc>0128-b<k1>Aroga<k2>Aroga
{%Ā-roga, as,%}¦ m., N. of a sun [cf. {%ā-rāga%}].
<LEND>

<L>9129<pc>0128-b<k1>AruRaparAjin<k2>AruRaparAjin
{#AruRaparAjin#}¦ {%āruṇaparājin, ī,%} m., N. of
an ancient Kalpa work on the ritual of the Brāhmaṇas.
<LEND>

<L>9130<pc>0128-b<k1>AruRi<k2>AruRi
{#AruRi#}¦ {%āruṇi, is,%} m. (fr. {%aruṇa%}), N. of
Uddālaka, a renowned Brāhmaṇa teacher, son of Aruṇa
Aupaveśi and father of Śvetaketu; N. of Auddālaki,
i. e. of Śvetaketu; of Suparṇeya, son of Prajāpati;
of Vainateya, son of Vinatā.
<LEND>

<L>9131<pc>0128-b<k1>AruReya<k2>AruReya
{%Āruṇeya, as,%}¦ m. epithet of Śvetaketu.
<LEND>

<L>9132<pc>0128-b<k1>AruRin<k2>AruRin
{#AruRin#}¦ {%āruṇin, inas,%} m. pl., N. of a school
derived from Vaiśāmpāyana Āruṇi.
<LEND>

<L>9133<pc>0128-b<k1>AruRI<k2>AruRI
{#AruRI#}¦ {%āruṇī,%} f., Ved. ‘the red one,’ a N.
given to the horses of the Maruts, which are females.
See {%aruṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>9134<pc>0128-b<k1>AruD<k2>AruD
{#AruD#}¦ {%ā-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. {%-ruṇaddhi, -roddhum,%}
to keep off: Caus. {%-rodhayati, -yitum,%} to obstruct,
impede.
<LEND>

<L>9135<pc>0128-b<k1>AroDana<k2>AroDana
{%Ā-rodhana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. secret place, innermost part.
<LEND>

<L>9136<pc>0128-b<k1>AruzI<k2>AruzI
{#AruzI#}¦ {%āruṣī,%} f. (fr. {%aruṣa%}), N. of a
daughter of Manu and mother of Aurva.
<LEND>

<L>9137<pc>0128-b<k1>Aruzkara<k2>Aruzkara
{#Aruzkara#}¦ {%āruṣ-kara, am,%} n. the fruit of
the Semecarpus Anacardium.
<LEND>

<L>9138<pc>0128-b<k1>Aruh<k2>Aruh<h>1
{#Aruh#} 1¦. {%ā-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati, -roḍhum,%}
to ascend, mount, bestride; to venture upon, under-
take; to attain, gain: Caus. {%-rohayati%} or {%-ropayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to mount or ascend, raise; to cause
to grow; to plant; to place, fasten; to attribute.
<LEND>

<L>9139<pc>0128-b<k1>ArurukzamARa<k2>ArurukzamARa
{%Ā-rurukṣamāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (Desid.), wishing to
ascend.
<LEND>

<L>9140<pc>0128-b<k1>Arurukzu<k2>Arurukzu
{%Ā-rurukṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous to rise or ascend
or advance, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9141<pc>0128-b<k1>Aruh<k2>Aruh<h>2
2. {%ā-ruh, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. ascending; ({%k%}), f. excrescence,
shoot (of a plant).
<LEND>
[Page0128-c+ 74]

<L>9142<pc>0128-c<k1>Aruha<k2>Aruha
{%Ā-ruha, as, ā, am,%}¦ leaping up, mounting, ascend-
ing; ({%as%}), m. ascent.
<LEND>

<L>9143<pc>0128-c<k1>Aruhya<k2>Aruhya
{%Ā-ruhya,%}¦ ind. having mounted, having ascended.
<LEND>

<L>9144<pc>0128-c<k1>ArUQa<k2>ArUQa
{%Ā-rūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ mounted, ascended, risen;
raised up, elevated on high; often used in compounds,
e. g. {%indriyārūḍha,%} brought under the cognizance
of the senses, perceived. {%—Ārūḍha-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
mounting, rising.
<LEND>

<L>9145<pc>0128-c<k1>ArUQi<k2>ArUQi
{%Ā-rūḍhi, is,%}¦ f. ascent, mounting, ascending.
<LEND>

<L>9146<pc>0128-c<k1>AroQavya<k2>AroQavya
{%Ā-roḍhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be ascended or mounted.
<LEND>

<L>9147<pc>0128-c<k1>AroQf<k2>AroQf
{%Ā-roḍhṛ, ḍhā, ḍhrī, ḍhṛ,%}¦ who or what mounts
or rides, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9148<pc>0128-c<k1>Aropa<k2>Aropa
{%Ā-ropa, as,%}¦ m. imposing (as a burden), burdening
with, charging with; placing in or on; assigning or
attributing to; relating to; superior position.
<LEND>

<L>9149<pc>0128-c<k1>Aropaka<k2>Aropaka
{%Ā-ropaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ planting, fixing, causing to
ascend.
<LEND>

<L>9150<pc>0128-c<k1>AropaRa<k2>AropaRa
{%Ā-ropaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of placing or fixing in
or on; causing to mount or ascend, raising to heaven;
planting; trusting, delivering; the stringing of a bow.
<LEND>

<L>9151<pc>0128-c<k1>AropaRIya<k2>AropaRIya
{%Ā-ropaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made to ascend; to
be raised, placed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9152<pc>0128-c<k1>Aropita<k2>Aropita
{%Ā-ropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, elevated; fixed, placed,
made; strung (as a bow); deposited, intrusted; conse-
crated; accidental, adventitious.
<LEND>

<L>9153<pc>0128-c<k1>Aropya<k2>Aropya<h>1
1. {%ā-ropya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be placed or fixed on or in.
<LEND>

<L>9154<pc>0128-c<k1>Aropya<k2>Aropya<h>2
2. {%ā-ropya,%}¦ ind. having made to ascend, having
caused to mount, having placed upon.
<LEND>

<L>9155<pc>0128-c<k1>AropyamARa<k2>AropyamARa
{%Ā-ropyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being strung, being tried
to be strung.
<LEND>

<L>9156<pc>0128-c<k1>Aroha<k2>Aroha
{%Ā-roha, as,%}¦ m. one who mounts or ascends, a rider
(on a horse &c.), one who is seated in a carriage;
ascent, rising, creeping up, mounting, riding; haughti-
ness, pride; elevation, elevated place, altitude; a heap,
mountain; a woman's waist, the buttocks; length;
measure; descending ({%= ava-roha%}?); a mine.
<LEND>

<L>9157<pc>0128-c<k1>Arohaka<k2>Arohaka
{%Ā-rohaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ ascending; rising; raising
up; ({%as%}), m. a rider; a tree.
<LEND>

<L>9158<pc>0128-c<k1>ArohaRa<k2>ArohaRa
{%Ā-rohaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of rising, ascending; the
rising or growing of new shoots, growing (of plants);
Ved. a carriage; an elevated stage for dancing; a
ladder, a staircase; riding on (a horse &c.).
<LEND>

<L>9159<pc>0128-c<k1>ArohaRika<k2>ArohaRika
{%Ārohaṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to ascent or
mounting.
<LEND>

<L>9160<pc>0128-c<k1>Arohin<k2>Arohin
{%Ā-rohin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ ascending, mounting; one who
mounts or rides.
<LEND>

<L>9161<pc>0128-c<k1>ArU<k2>ArU
{#ArU#}¦ {%ārū, ūs, ūs, u,%} of a tawny colour;
({%ūs%}), m. tawny (the colour).
<LEND>

<L>9162<pc>0128-c<k1>Are<k2>Are
{#Are#}¦ {%āre,%} ind. (see 2. {%āra%}), Ved. far, far
from (with abl.); near. {%—Āre-agha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having evil far removed. {%—Āre-avadya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. one from whom blame or insult is far removed.
{%—Āre-śatru, us, us, u,%} Ved. one whose enemies
are driven far away.
<LEND>

<L>9163<pc>0128-c<k1>Arevata<k2>Arevata
{#Arevata#}¦ {%ārevata, as,%} m. a tree, {%= ārag-%}
{%badha,%} q. v.; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of this tree.
<LEND>

<L>9164<pc>0128-c<k1>ArehaRa<k2>ArehaRa
{#ArehaRa#}¦ {%ā-rehaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%rih%} for {%lih%}
with {%ā%}), Ved. licking, kissing.
<LEND>

<L>9165<pc>0128-c<k1>Arogya<k2>Arogya
{#Arogya#}¦ {%ārogya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-roga%}), free-
dom from disease, health.
<LEND>

<L>9166<pc>0128-c<k1>Arki<k2>Arki
{#Arki#}¦ {%ārki, is,%} m. a son of Arka or the
sun; epithet of the planet Saturn.
<LEND>

<L>9167<pc>0128-c<k1>Arkza<k2>Arkza
{#Arkza#}¦ {%ārkṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ṛkṣa%}), stellar,
regulated by the stars or constellations; ({%as%}), m. a
son or descendant of Ṛkṣa; epithet of Āśvamedha,
of Śrutarvan, of Saṃvaraṇa. {%—Ārkṣa-varṣa, as,%}
m. a stellar year or revolution of a constellation.
<LEND>

<L>9168<pc>0128-c<k1>Arkzya<k2>Arkzya
{%Ārkṣya,%}¦ patronymic of {%ṛkṣa%} Pāṇini IV. 1, 105.
<LEND>

<L>9169<pc>0128-c<k1>Arkzoda<k2>Arkzoda
{#Arkzoda#}¦ {%ārkṣoda, as, ī, am,%} inhabiting the
mountain Ṛkṣoda.
<LEND>

<L>9170<pc>0128-c<k1>Argala<k2>Argala
{#Argala#}¦ {%ārgala, as, ī,%} m. f. a bolt or bar.
See {%argala.%}
<LEND>

<L>9171<pc>0128-c<k1>ArgbaDa<k2>ArgbaDa
{#ArgbaDa#}¦ {%ārgbadha, as,%} m. {%= ārag-badha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>9172<pc>0128-c<k1>ArGA<k2>ArGA
{#ArGA#}¦ {%ārghā,%} f. a sort of yellow bee.
<LEND>
[Page0129-a+ 72]

<L>9173<pc>0129-a<k1>ArGya<k2>ArGya
{%Ārghya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to this bee; ({%am%}),
n. its honey.
<LEND>

<L>9174<pc>0129-a<k1>Arca<k2>Arca
{#Arca#}¦ {%ārca, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%arcā%} or fr. {%ṛc%}),
devout, worshipping; relating to the Ṛc or Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>9175<pc>0129-a<k1>Arcika<k2>Arcika
{%Ārcika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the Ṛg-veda; ({%am%}),
n. an epithet of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>9176<pc>0129-a<k1>Arcatka<k2>Arcatka
{#Arcatka#}¦ {%ārcatka, as,%} m. a patronymic of
Śara.
<LEND>

<L>9177<pc>0129-a<k1>ArcABin<k2>ArcABin
{#ArcABin#}¦ {%ārcābhin, inas,%} m. pl., N. of a
school, founded by a pupil of Vaiśampāyana.
<LEND>

<L>9178<pc>0129-a<k1>ArC<k2>ArC
{#ArC#}¦ {%ārch (ā-ṛch),%} cl. 6. P. {%ārcchati, -chi-%}
{%tum,%} to fall into (mischief); to obtain; to partake of.
<LEND>

<L>9179<pc>0129-a<k1>Arjava<k2>Arjava
{#Arjava#}¦ {%ārjava, am,%} n. (fr. {%ṛju%}), straight-
ness, straight direction; rectitude, propriety of act or
observance; honesty, open behaviour; sincerity.
<LEND>

<L>9180<pc>0129-a<k1>ArjIka<k2>ArjIka
{#ArjIka#}¦ {%ārjīka, as,%} m. (cf. {%ṛjīka%}), Ved.
originally perhaps a milk-vessel. This word probably
denotes a celestial vessel, in which the heavenly Soma
is purified, or one of the rivers which it forms in
the sky; (Sāy.) a lake in the country Ṛjīkā.
<LEND>

<L>9181<pc>0129-a<k1>ArjIkIya<k2>ArjIkIya
{%Ārjīkīya, as,%}¦ m. = the preceding; ({%ā%}), f. a terres-
trial river; N. of the river Vipāśā.
<LEND>

<L>9182<pc>0129-a<k1>ArjunAyana<k2>ArjunAyana
{#ArjunAyana#}¦ {%ārjunāyana, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%ar-%}
{%juna%}), N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>9183<pc>0129-a<k1>ArjunAyanaka<k2>ArjunAyanaka
{%Ārjunāyanaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ inhabited by the Ārju-
nāyanas.
<LEND>

<L>9184<pc>0129-a<k1>Arjuni<k2>Arjuni
{#Arjuni#}¦ {%ārjuni, is,%} m. a patronymic from
Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>9185<pc>0129-a<k1>Arjuneya<k2>Arjuneya
{%Ārjuneya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Kutsa.
<LEND>

<L>9186<pc>0129-a<k1>ArYj<k2>ArYj
{#ArYj#}¦ {%ārñj (ā-ṛñj),%} cl. 1. A. {%ārñjate, -jitum,%}
to strive after, to endeavour to obtain, to wish to
possess.
<LEND>

<L>9187<pc>0129-a<k1>Arta<k2>Arta
{#Arta#}¦ {%ārta, as, ā, am%} (probably past pass.
part. of rt. {%ṛ%} with prep. {%ā,%} but according to some fr.
rt. {%ṛt,%} and according to others an irreg. formation
fr. rt. {%ard,%} which ought to form {%arṇa%} with prep.
{%sam, ni%} and {%vi,%} and {%ardita%} in other cases), struck
by calamity, afflicted, pained, disturbed; injured; op-
pressed, suffering, sick, unhappy. {%—Ārta-gala, as,%}
m., N. of the plant Barleria Cærulea. {%—Ārta-tara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} extremely pained, disturbed, confounded.
{%—Ārta-tā,%} f. state of affliction, pain. {%—Ārta-nāda%}
or {%ārta-svara, as,%} m. a cry of pain. {%—Ārta-bandhu,%}
{%us,%} m. friend of the distressed.
<LEND>

<L>9188<pc>0129-a<k1>Arti<k2>Arti
{%Ārti, is,%}¦ f. painful occurrence, pain, injury, mischief,
evil; sickness; the end of a bow [cf. {%arti%} and
{%ārtnī%}]. {%—Ārti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having or suffering
pain; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a serpent. {%—Ārti-han, ā, ā, a,%}
or {%ārti-hara, as, ā, am,%} destroying pain. {%—Ārty-%}
{%apaharaṇa, am,%} n. the relieving of distress, pain, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9189<pc>0129-a<k1>ArtanA<k2>ArtanA
{#ArtanA#}¦ {%ārtanā,%} f. (according to Sāy. de-
rived fr. {%ārta%} above), Ved. a destructive combat;
(as an adj. ?) uncultivated, wild ground (? connected
with {%āra, araṇa, araṇya,%} &c.).
<LEND>

<L>9190<pc>0129-a<k1>ArtaparRi<k2>ArtaparRi
{#ArtaparRi#}¦ {%ārtaparṇi, is,%} m. the son of Ṛta-
parṇa, a patronymic of Sudāsa.
<LEND>

<L>9191<pc>0129-a<k1>ArtaBAga<k2>ArtaBAga
{#ArtaBAga#}¦ {%ārtabhāga, as,%} m. son of Ṛta-
bhāga, a patronymic of Jarat-kārava.
<LEND>

<L>9192<pc>0129-a<k1>Artava<k2>Artava
{#Artava#}¦ {%ārtava, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%ṛtu%}), be-
longing or conforming to the seasons or periods of
time, seasonable; menstrual, relating to or produced
by this discharge; ({%as%}), m. a section of the year, a
combination of several seasons; ({%ī%}), f. a mare; ({%am%}),
n. the menstrual discharge, certain days after the men-
strual discharge fit for generation; fluid discharged
by the female of an animal at the time of rut; a
flower.
<LEND>

<L>9193<pc>0129-a<k1>ArtveyI<k2>ArtveyI
{%Ārtveyī,%}¦ f. a woman during her courses.
<LEND>

<L>9194<pc>0129-a<k1>ArtnI<k2>ArtnI
{#ArtnI#}¦ {%ārtnī,%} f., Ved. the end of a bow, the
place where the string or sinew is fastened; (<lang n="greek">κορώνη</lang>)
<LEND>

<L>9195<pc>0129-a<k1>ArtvijIna<k2>ArtvijIna
{#ArtvijIna#}¦ {%ārtvijīna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ṛtvij%}),
fit for the office of a priest.
<LEND>
[Page0129-b+ 75]

<L>9196<pc>0129-b<k1>Artvijya<k2>Artvijya
{%Ārtvijya, am,%}¦ n. the office or business of a sacri-
ficing priest, his rank or order.
<LEND>

<L>9197<pc>0129-b<k1>Artvya<k2>Artvya
{#Artvya#}¦ {%ārtvya, as,%} m. a patronymic of
Dvi-mūrdhan, a kind of Asura.
<LEND>

<L>9198<pc>0129-b<k1>ArTa<k2>ArTa
{#ArTa#}¦ {%ārtha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%artha%}), relating
to a thing or object; material, significant (opposed to
{%śābda,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>9199<pc>0129-b<k1>ArTapatya<k2>ArTapatya
{%Ārthapatya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%artha-pati%}), power over
or possession of a thing.
<LEND>

<L>9200<pc>0129-b<k1>ArTika<k2>ArTika
{%Ārthika, as, ī, am,%}¦ significant, wise, rich; substan-
tial, real, pertaining to the true substance of a thing.
<LEND>

<L>9201<pc>0129-b<k1>Ardra<k2>Ardra
{#Ardra#}¦ {%ārdra, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%ard%}), wet, moist, damp; fresh, not dry, succulent,
green (as a plant), living; fresh, new; soft, tender,
full of feeling, warm; loose, flaccid; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a grandson of Pṛthu; ({%ā%}), f. the fourth or sixth
Nakṣatra or lunar mansion. {%—Ārdra-kāṣṭha, am,%}
n. green wood, timber not dry. {%—Ārdra-tā,%} f. or
{%ārdra-tva, am,%} n. wetness, moisture; freshness,
greenness; softness, tenderness. {%—Ārdra-dānu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. granting moisture. {%—Ārdra-nayana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} moist-eyed, weeping, suffused with tears.
{%—Ārdra-pavi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having moist or drip-
ping fellies (said of a carriage). {%—Ārdra-pavitra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a wet strainer; epithet of
the Soma. {%—Ārdra-māṣā,%} f. a leguminous shrub,
Glycine Debilis. {%—Ārdra-śāka, am,%} n. fresh ginger.
{%—Ārdra-hasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. moist-handed.
{%—Ārdrā-lubdhaka, as,%} m. the dragon's tail or de-
scending node.
<LEND>

<L>9202<pc>0129-b<k1>Ardraka<k2>Ardraka
{%Ārdraka, am,%}¦ n. ginger in its undried state; ({%as,%}
{%ī, am%}), born under the constellation Ārdrā; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of Vasumitra.
<LEND>

<L>9203<pc>0129-b<k1>Ardraya<k2>Ardraya
{%Ārdraya,%}¦ nom. P. {%ārdrayati, -yitum,%} to make
wet, moisten.
<LEND>

<L>9204<pc>0129-b<k1>ArD<k2>ArD
{#ArD#}¦ {%ārdh (ā-ṛdh),%} Desid. A. {%ertsate,%} to
wish to obtain or to collect.
<LEND>

<L>9205<pc>0129-b<k1>ArDa<k2>ArDa
{#ArDa#}¦ {%ārdha%} (fr. {%ardha%}), used at the begin-
ning of compounds to express ‘half.’
<LEND>

<L>9206<pc>0129-b<k1>ArDadrORika<k2>ArDadrORika
{%Ārdhadrauṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ bought with half a
drona, containing it, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9207<pc>0129-b<k1>ArDaDAtuka<k2>ArDaDAtuka
{%Ārdhadhātuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ applicable to half the
root or to the shorter form of the verbal base; this
is the name of those terminations and affixes which
belong to the six non-conjugational or general tenses.
These terminations are supposed to be affixed im-
mediately to the root or with the interposition only
of an augment, such as the inserted {%i.%}
<LEND>

<L>9208<pc>0129-b<k1>ArDaprasTika<k2>ArDaprasTika
{%Ārdhaprasthika, as, ī, am,%}¦ bought &c. with
half a prastha.
<LEND>

<L>9209<pc>0129-b<k1>ArDamAsika<k2>ArDamAsika
{%Ārdhamāsika, as, ī, am,%}¦ lasting &c. for half a
month; observing or practising (continence &c.) for
a fortnight.
<LEND>

<L>9210<pc>0129-b<k1>ArDarAtrika<k2>ArDarAtrika
{%Ārdharātrika, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%ardha-rātra%}), N.
of an astronomical school who reckoned the begin-
ning of the motions of the planets from midnight.
<LEND>

<L>9211<pc>0129-b<k1>ArDika<k2>ArDika
{%Ārdhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ sharing half, an equal partner;
relating to half; ({%as%}), m. one who ploughs the
ground for half the crop.
<LEND>

<L>9212<pc>0129-b<k1>ArDuka<k2>ArDuka
{#ArDuka#}¦ {%ārdhuka, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%ṛdh%}), Ved.
conducive to success, useful, beneficial.
<LEND>

<L>9213<pc>0129-b<k1>Arpay<k2>Arpay
{#Arpay#}¦ {%ārpay,%} Caus. fr. rt. {%ṛ%} with {%ā.%} See 2. {%ār.%}
<LEND>

<L>9214<pc>0129-b<k1>Arpayitf<k2>Arpayitf
{%Ārpayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who injures or hurts.
<LEND>

<L>9215<pc>0129-b<k1>ArBava<k2>ArBava
{#ArBava#}¦ {%ārbhava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ṛbhu%}), be-
longing or sacred to the Ṛbhus.
<LEND>

<L>9216<pc>0129-b<k1>Arya<k2>Arya
{#Arya#}¦ {%ārya, as, ā,%} m. f. (fr. {%arya,%} rt. {%ṛ%}), a
loyal or faithful man, a man of one's own race; one
who is faithful to the deities of his country; N. of
the Hindū and Iranian people (opposed to {%an-ārya,%}
{%dasyu, dāsa%}); in later times N. of the first three
castes (opposed to {%śūdra%}); a man highly esteemed,
a respectable, honourable man; a master, an owner; a
friend; a Vaiśya; Buddha; (with Buddhists) a man who
has thought on the four chief principles of Buddhism
and lives according to them; a son of Manu Sāvarṇa;
[Page0129-c+ 79]
({%as, ā,%} or {%ī, am%}), Āryan, favourable to the Āryan
people; behaving like an Āryan, worthy of one,
honourable, respectable, noble; of a good family;
excellent; wise; suitable; ({%ā%}), f. a name of Pārvatī;
a kind of metre of two lines, each, line consisting of
seven and a half feet; each foot containing four in-
stants, except the sixth of the second line, which con-
tains only one, and is therefore a single short syllable;
hence there are thirty instants in the first line and
twenty-seven in the second; [with {%ārya%} cf. the Old
Germ. <nsi>êra</nsi> and Mod. Germ. <nsi>Ehre.</nsi>] {%—Ārya-gṛhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} easily to be got by honourable men, to
be received with honour by noble men; decorous,
respectable, right. {%—Ārya-tā,%} f. or {%ārya-tva, am,%} n.
honourable behaviour. {%—Ārya-deva, as,%} m., N. of a
pupil of Nāgārjuna. {%—Ārya-deśa, as,%} m. a region
inhabited by Āryans or followers of the Āryan laws.
{%—Āryadeśya, as, ā, am,%} originating from such a
region. {%—Ārya-putra, as,%} m. son of an Āryan or
honourable man; the son of a spiritual preceptor;
honorific designation of the son of an elder brother;
of a husband by his wife; of a prince by a general;
a husband (in theatrical language). {%—Ārya-prāya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} inhabited by Āryan people; abound-
ing with respectable persons. {%—Ārya-bhaṭṭa, as,%}
m., N. of a renowned astronomer, the inventor of
algebra, among the Hindūs. {%—Ārya-bhāva, as,%}
m. honourable character or behaviour. {%—Ārya-%}
{%mārga, as,%} m. the way of the honourable, the
respectable way. {%—Ārya-miśra, ās,%} m. pl. an as-
sembly of respectable or honourable men; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), distinguished, respectable; ({%as%}), m. a gentleman,
a man of consequence. {%—Ārya-yuvan, ā,%} m. an Āryan
youth. {%—Ārya-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Ārya-%}
{%rūpa, as, ā, am,%} one who has only the form of an
Āryan; a hypocrite, an impostor. {%—Āryaliṅgin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} one who bears the external semblance of an Āryan
or honourable man, an impostor. {%—Ārya-varman, ā,%}
m., N. of a king. {%—Ārya-vṛtta, am,%} n. the behaviour
of an Āryan or noble man; ({%as, ā, am%}), behaving
like an Āryan; virtuous, good, pious. {%—Ārya-veśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} dressed like an Āryan, well clothed, fine.
{%—Ārya-vrata, as, ā, am,%} one who observes the
laws and ordinances of the Āryans or honourable men.
{%—Ārya-saṅgha, as,%} m. the whole body of the
Āryans, the collective body of noblemen; N. of a
renowned philosopher, founder of the school of the
Yogākāras. {%—Ārya-satya, am,%} n. a noble or sublime
truth; four such truths form the four chief principles
of Buddhism. {%—Ārya-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
patriarch. {%—Ārya-hṛdya, as, ā, am,%} beloved by the
noble. {%—Āryā-gīti, is,%} f. a variety of the Āryā metre,
containing eight equal feet or thirty-two syllabic in-
stants in each verse of the couplet. {%—Āryāvarta (˚ya-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m. abode of the noble or excellent; the
sacred land or place of residence of the Āryans; N.
of the land extending from the eastern to the western
sea, and bounded on the north and south by the
Himālaya and Vindhya mountains. {%—Āryā-vilāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a work. {%—Āryāṣṭaśata (˚ya-aṣṭa-%}
{%śa˚), am,%} n. title of a work of Ārya-bhaṭṭa's, consisting
of eight hundred distichs.
<LEND>

<L>9217<pc>0129-c<k1>Aryaka<k2>Aryaka
{%Āryaka, as,%}¦ m. an honourable, respectable man; a
grandfather; N. of a cowherd who became king; of
a Nāga. {%—Āryakā%} or {%āryikā,%} f. a respectable woman;
({%ikā%}), f., N. of a Nakṣatra; ({%akam%}), n. a ceremony
performed to the manes, the vessel &c. used in sacri-
fices made to the manes.
<LEND>

<L>9218<pc>0129-c<k1>AryARaka<k2>AryARaka
{%Āryāṇaka,%}¦ N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>9219<pc>0129-c<k1>ArvAk<k2>ArvAk
{#ArvAk#}¦ {%ārvāk,%} ind. after, afterwards, be-
hind. See {%arvāk.%}
<LEND>

<L>9220<pc>0129-c<k1>ArSa<k2>ArSa
{#ArSa#}¦ {%ārśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ṛśya%}), Ved. belong-
ing to the antelope.
<LEND>

<L>9221<pc>0129-c<k1>Arza<k2>Arza
{#Arza#}¦ {%ārṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ṛṣi%}), relating or
belonging to or derived from Ṛṣis, i. e. the poets
of the Vedic and other old hymns, archaistic; ({%as%}), m.
a form of marriage derived from the Ṛṣis, the
father of the bride receiving one or two pairs of kine
from the bridegroom; ({%am%}), n. the speech of a
[Page0130-a+ 75]
Ṛṣi, the holy text, the Vedas; sacred descent; the
derivation (of a poem) from a Ṛṣi author; ({%ā%}),
f. a class of Vedic metres. {%—Ārṣoḍhā (˚ṣa-ūḍh˚),%}
f. a wife married according to the Ārṣa form.
<LEND>

<L>9222<pc>0130-a<k1>Arzeya<k2>Arzeya
{%Ārṣeya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to or
derived from a Ṛṣi, of sacred descent; venerable,
respectable; ({%am%}), n. sacred descent. {%—Ārṣeya-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. connected with sacred descent.
<LEND>

<L>9223<pc>0130-a<k1>ArzaBa<k2>ArzaBa
{#ArzaBa#}¦ {%ārṣabha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ṛṣabha%}),
derived from a bull, produced by one.
<LEND>

<L>9224<pc>0130-a<k1>ArzaBi<k2>ArzaBi
{%Ārṣabhi, is,%}¦ m., N. of the first Cakravartin in
Bhārata; a son of the first Tīrthakṛt Ṛṣabha.
<LEND>

<L>9225<pc>0130-a<k1>ArzaBya<k2>ArzaBya
{%Ārṣabhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ a steer sufficiently full-grown
to be used or one fit to be castrated.
<LEND>

<L>9226<pc>0130-a<k1>ArzwizeRa<k2>ArzwizeRa
{#ArzwizeRa#}¦ {%ārṣṭiṣeṇa, as,%} m. a patronymic
of Devāpi.
<LEND>

<L>9227<pc>0130-a<k1>Arhata<k2>Arhata
{#Arhata#}¦ {%ārhata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%arhat%}), belong-
ing to the doctrine of Jina or the Jains; ({%as%}), m. a
Jaina, a follower of the doctrines of Jina.
<LEND>

<L>9228<pc>0130-a<k1>Arhatya<k2>Arhatya
{%Ārhatya, am,%}¦ n. the quality or practice of an
Arhat or Jain saint.
<LEND>

<L>9229<pc>0130-a<k1>Ala<k2>Ala
{#Ala#}¦ {%āla, am,%} n. spawn, any discharge of
venomous matter from poisonous animals; yellow
arsenic, orpiment; ({%as, ā, am%}), not small, large, ex-
tensive. {%—Ālākta (˚la-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. anointed
with poison (as an arrow).
<LEND>

<L>9230<pc>0130-a<k1>Alakz<k2>Alakz
{#Alakz#}¦ {%ā-lakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-lakṣayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to descry, behold.
<LEND>

<L>9231<pc>0130-a<k1>Alakzya<k2>Alakzya<h>1
1. {%ā-lakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be observed, visible,
apparent.
<LEND>

<L>9232<pc>0130-a<k1>AlakzaRya<k2>AlakzaRya
{#AlakzaRya#}¦ {%ālakṣaṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-la-%}
{%kṣaṇa%}), misfortune, crime.
<LEND>

<L>9233<pc>0130-a<k1>Alakzya<k2>Alakzya<h>2
{#Alakzya#} 2¦. {%ā-lakṣya, as, ā, am%} (3. {%ā%} pre-
prefixed in the sense of diminution), scarcely visible.
<LEND>

<L>9234<pc>0130-a<k1>Alagarda<k2>Alagarda
{#Alagarda#}¦ {%ālagarda, as,%} m. a species of
Cobra. See {%alagarda.%}
<LEND>

<L>9235<pc>0130-a<k1>Alap<k2>Alap
{#Alap#}¦ {%ā-lap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-lapati, -pitum,%} to
address, speak to, converse: Caus. {%-lāpayati, -yitum,%}
to engage (another) in conversation, to question.
<LEND>

<L>9236<pc>0130-a<k1>AlApa<k2>AlApa
{%Ā-lāpa, as,%}¦ m. speaking to, addressing, speech,
conversation, communication; statement of the ques-
tion in an arithmetical or algebraic sum; a question.
{%—Ālāpa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} speaking, addressing.
<LEND>

<L>9237<pc>0130-a<k1>AlApana<k2>AlApana
{%Ā-lāpana, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to speak or converse
about; ({%am%}), n. speaking to, conversing with.
<LEND>

<L>9238<pc>0130-a<k1>AlApanIya<k2>AlApanIya
{%Ā-lāpanīya%}¦ or {%ā-lāpya, as, ā, am,%} to be said or
spoken, to be spoken to or addressed.
<LEND>

<L>9239<pc>0130-a<k1>AlApin<k2>AlApin
{%Ā-lāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ speaking or conversing with;
({%inī%}), f. a lute made of a gourd.
<LEND>

<L>9240<pc>0130-a<k1>AlaB<k2>AlaB
{#AlaB#}¦ {%ā-labh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-labhate, -labdhum,%}
to take hold of, touch, handle.
<LEND>

<L>9241<pc>0130-a<k1>AlaBana<k2>AlaBana
{%Ā-labhana, am,%}¦ n. taking hold of, bringing (?).
<LEND>

<L>9242<pc>0130-a<k1>AlaBya<k2>AlaBya<h>1
1. {%ā-labhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. fit to be killed or
sacrificed.
<LEND>

<L>9243<pc>0130-a<k1>AlaBya<k2>AlaBya<h>2
2. {%ā-labhya,%}¦ ind. having received or obtained.
<LEND>

<L>9244<pc>0130-a<k1>AlamBa<k2>AlamBa
{%Ā-lambha, as,%}¦ m. taking hold of, seizing, touching;
tearing off, rooting out (of plants); the killing of the
animal at a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>9245<pc>0130-a<k1>AlamBana<k2>AlamBana
{%Ā-lambhana, am,%}¦ n. taking hold of, touching;
killing.
<LEND>

<L>9246<pc>0130-a<k1>AlamBanIya<k2>AlamBanIya
{%Ā-lambhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken hold of or
handled, to be touched.
<LEND>

<L>9247<pc>0130-a<k1>AlamBin<k2>AlamBin
{%Ā-lambhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ touching, taking hold of.
<LEND>

<L>9248<pc>0130-a<k1>AlamBya<k2>AlamBya
{%Ā-lambhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtainable, to be obtained;
fit or proper to be killed.
<LEND>

<L>9249<pc>0130-a<k1>Alamb<k2>Alamb
{#Alamb#}¦ {%ā-lamb,%} cl. 1. A. {%-lambate, -bitum,%}
to rest or lean upon; to hang from; to depend; to
lay hold of, support, seize; to strike up (a tune or
note).
<LEND>

<L>9250<pc>0130-a<k1>Alamba<k2>Alamba
{%Ā-lamba, as, ā, am,%}¦ hanging down; ({%as%}), m.
that on which one rests or leans; support; receptacle;
a prop; an asylum; depending on or from; a per-
pendicular; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant with poisonous
leaves.
<LEND>

<L>9251<pc>0130-a<k1>Alambana<k2>Alambana
{%Ā-lambana, am,%}¦ n. depending on or resting upon,
[Page0130-b+ 71]
hanging from; supporting, sustaining; fundament,
base; reason, cause; (in rhetoric) the natural and
necessary connection of feeling with the cause which
excites it; the mental exercise practised by the Yogin
in endeavouring to realize the gross form of the
eternal; silent repetition of a prayer; (with Bud-
dhists) the five attributes of things corresponding to the
five senses, viz. form, sound, smell, taste, and touch;
also {%dharma%} or law corresponding to {%manas.%}
<LEND>

<L>9252<pc>0130-b<k1>AlambAyana<k2>AlambAyana
{%Ālambāyana%}¦ or {%ālambāyanī-putra, as,%} m., N.
of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>9253<pc>0130-b<k1>Alambi<k2>Alambi
{%Ā-lambi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a pupil of Vaiśampāyana.
<LEND>

<L>9254<pc>0130-b<k1>Alambita<k2>Alambita
{%Ā-lambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pendent, suspended, hang-
ing from or on; supported, upheld; protected.
<LEND>

<L>9255<pc>0130-b<k1>Alambin<k2>Alambin
{%Ā-lambin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hanging from, resting or
leaning upon; depending on or from; laying hold
of, supporting, maintaining; wearing; ({%inas%}), m. pl.
N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>9256<pc>0130-b<k1>Alambya<k2>Alambya
{%Ā-lambya,%}¦ ind. having supported; supporting,
sustaining; taking by the hand.
<LEND>

<L>9257<pc>0130-b<k1>Alaya<k2>Alaya
{#Alaya#}¦ {%ā-laya.%} See under 2. {%ā-lī.%}
<LEND>

<L>9258<pc>0130-b<k1>Alarka<k2>Alarka
{#Alarka#}¦ {%ālarka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%alarka%}), caused
by or relating to a mad dog.
<LEND>

<L>9259<pc>0130-b<k1>AlavaRya<k2>AlavaRya
{#AlavaRya#}¦ {%ālavaṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-lavaṇa%}),
ugliness, insipidity.
<LEND>

<L>9260<pc>0130-b<k1>AlavAla<k2>AlavAla
{#AlavAla#}¦ {%ālavāla, am,%} n. a basin for water
round the root of a tree. See {%alavāla, āvāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>9261<pc>0130-b<k1>Alasa<k2>Alasa
{#Alasa#}¦ {%ālasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%a-lasa%}), idle,
slothful, lazy.
<LEND>

<L>9262<pc>0130-b<k1>Alasya<k2>Alasya
{%Ālasya, as, ī, am,%}¦ idle, slothful, apathetic; ({%am%}),
n. idleness, sloth, want of energy. {%—Ālasya-niban-%}
{%dhana, as, ā, am,%} originating in indolence.
<LEND>

<L>9263<pc>0130-b<k1>AlAkta<k2>AlAkta
{#AlAkta#}¦ {%ālākta.%} See under {%āla.%}
<LEND>

<L>9264<pc>0130-b<k1>AlAwya<k2>AlAwya
{#AlAwya#}¦ {%ālāṭya, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%laṭ%} for {%raṭ%}),
Ved. being amongst the breakers of the sea (?).
<LEND>

<L>9265<pc>0130-b<k1>AlAta<k2>AlAta
{#AlAta#}¦ {%ālāta, am,%} n. a firebrand; a coal
burning or extinguished. See {%alāta.%}
<LEND>

<L>9266<pc>0130-b<k1>AlAna<k2>AlAna
{#AlAna#}¦ {%ālāna, am,%} n. (etym. doubtful), the
post to which an elephant is tied; the rope that ties
him; a fetter, a tie; a rope or string; tying, binding;
({%as%}), m., N. of a minister of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>9267<pc>0130-b<k1>AlAnika<k2>AlAnika
{%Ālānika, as, ā, am,%}¦ serving as a post to which an
elephant is tied.
<LEND>

<L>9268<pc>0130-b<k1>AlApa<k2>AlApa
{#AlApa#}¦ {%ā-lāpa,%} &c. See under {%ā-lap.%}
<LEND>

<L>9269<pc>0130-b<k1>AlAbu<k2>AlAbu
{#AlAbu#}¦ {%ālābu, us,%} or {%ālābū, ūs,%} f. a pump-
kin gourd. See {%a-lābu.%}
<LEND>

<L>9270<pc>0130-b<k1>AlAvarta<k2>AlAvarta
{#AlAvarta#}¦ {%ālāvarta (˚la-āv˚?), am,%} n. a fan
made of cloth.
<LEND>

<L>9271<pc>0130-b<k1>AlAsya<k2>AlAsya
{#AlAsya#}¦ {%ālāsya (˚la-ās˚), as,%} m. a croco-
dile (‘poison-mouthed;’ see {%āla%}).
<LEND>

<L>9272<pc>0130-b<k1>Ali<k2>Ali
{#Ali#}¦ {%āli, is,%} m. (see {%ali%}), a scorpion; a
bee; ({%is%}), f. a woman's female friend; a row, range,
continuous line [cf. {%āvali%}]; a ridge or mound of
earth crossing ditches, dividing fields, &c.; a dike;
a line, a race, family; ({%is, is, i%}), useless, idle, un-
meaning; pure, honest, sincere.
<LEND>

<L>9273<pc>0130-b<k1>Alin<k2>Alin
{%Ālin, ī,%}¦ m. a scorpion [cf. {%alin%}].
<LEND>

<L>9274<pc>0130-b<k1>AlI<k2>AlI
{%Ālī,%}¦ f. a female friend, row, range, line, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9275<pc>0130-b<k1>AliK<k2>AliK
{#AliK#}¦ {%ā-likh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-likhati, -lekhitum,%}
to write, delineate.
<LEND>

<L>9276<pc>0130-b<k1>AliKat<k2>AliKat
{%Ā-likhat, an,%}¦ m. scratching; N. of an evil spirit.
<LEND>

<L>9277<pc>0130-b<k1>AliKya<k2>AliKya
{%Ā-likhya,%}¦ ind. pourtraying, delineating, sketching.
<LEND>

<L>9278<pc>0130-b<k1>AleKana<k2>AleKana
{%Ā-lekhana, as, ā, am,%}¦ scratching, painting; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a teacher; ({%ī%}), f. a brush, a pencil; ({%am%}),
n. scratching, writing, painting.
<LEND>

<L>9279<pc>0130-b<k1>AleKya<k2>AleKya
{%Ā-lekhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be written, to be deline-
ated or painted; ({%am%}), n. a painting, writing. {%—Āle-%}
{%khya-lekhā,%} f. painting. {%—Ālekhya-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%}
having nothing left but a painting, deceased.
<LEND>

<L>9280<pc>0130-b<k1>AligI<k2>AligI
{#AligI#}¦ {%āligī,%} f., Ved., N. of a serpent.
<LEND>

<L>9281<pc>0130-b<k1>AliNg<k2>AliNg
{#AliNg#}¦ {%ā-liṅg,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-liṅgati, -te, %}
[Page0130-c+ 73]
{%gitum,%} or cl. 10. P. {%-liṅgayati, -yitum,%} to clasp,
join the limbs closely; to encircle, embrace.
<LEND>

<L>9282<pc>0130-c<k1>AliNga<k2>AliNga
{%Ā-liṅga, as,%}¦ m. embracing; a kind of drum.
<LEND>

<L>9283<pc>0130-c<k1>AliNgana<k2>AliNgana
{%Ā-liṅgana, am,%}¦ n. clasping, embracing, an em-
brace.
<LEND>

<L>9284<pc>0130-c<k1>AliNgita<k2>AliNgita
{%Ā-liṅgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ embraced; ({%am%}), n. an
embrace. {%—Āliṅgita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has
embraced.
<LEND>

<L>9285<pc>0130-c<k1>AliNgin<k2>AliNgin
{%Ā-liṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ embracing; ({%ī%}), m. a small
drum, shaped like a barley corn and carried upon the
breast.
<LEND>

<L>9286<pc>0130-c<k1>AliNgya<k2>AliNgya<h>1
1. {%ā-liṅgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be embraced; ({%as%}), m.
a small drum.
<LEND>

<L>9287<pc>0130-c<k1>AliNgya<k2>AliNgya<h>2
2. {%ā-liṅgya,%}¦ ind. having embraced.
<LEND>

<L>9288<pc>0130-c<k1>AliYjara<k2>AliYjara
{#AliYjara#}¦ {%āliñjara, as,%} m. a large clay
water-jar.
<LEND>

<L>9289<pc>0130-c<k1>Alinda<k2>Alinda
{#Alinda#}¦ {%ālinda%} or {%ālindaka, as,%} m. a terrace
before a house, a raised place or terrace for sleeping
upon. See {%alinda.%}
<LEND>

<L>9290<pc>0130-c<k1>Alip<k2>Alip
{#Alip#}¦ {%ā-lip,%} cl. 6. P. {%-limpati, -leptum,%}
to anoint, besmear.
<LEND>

<L>9291<pc>0130-c<k1>Alipta<k2>Alipta
{%Ā-lipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ anointed, smeared, plastered.
<LEND>

<L>9292<pc>0130-c<k1>Alimpana<k2>Alimpana
{%Ā-limpana, am,%}¦ n. whitening or painting the
floor, wall, &c., on festival occasions.
<LEND>

<L>9293<pc>0130-c<k1>Alepa<k2>Alepa
{%Ā-lepa, as,%}¦ m. smearing, plastering, anointing;
liniment.
<LEND>

<L>9294<pc>0130-c<k1>Alepana<k2>Alepana
{%Ā-lepana, am,%}¦ n. smearing, plastering; liniment.
<LEND>

<L>9295<pc>0130-c<k1>AlI<k2>AlI<h>1
{#AlI#} 1¦. {%ālī,%} f. See under {%āli%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>9296<pc>0130-c<k1>AlI<k2>AlI<h>2
{#AlI#} 2¦. {%ā-lī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate, -letum%} or
{%-lātum,%} to settle down upon; to melt; faint.
<LEND>

<L>9297<pc>0130-c<k1>Alaya<k2>Alaya
{%Ā-laya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a house, a dwelling, a re-
ceptacle, an asylum; (frequently at the end of a com-
pound, e. g. {%himālaya,%} the abode of snow.)
<LEND>

<L>9298<pc>0130-c<k1>AlIna<k2>AlIna
{%Ā-līna, as, ā, am,%}¦ melted, fused.
<LEND>

<L>9299<pc>0130-c<k1>AlInaka<k2>AlInaka
{%Ālīnaka, am,%}¦ n. tin; lead (from its melting easily).
<LEND>

<L>9300<pc>0130-c<k1>AlIQa<k2>AlIQa
{#AlIQa#}¦ {%ā-līḍha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%lih%}), eaten,
licked, lapped by the tongue, scraped; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a man; ({%am%}), n. an attitude in shooting, the right
knee advanced, the left leg retracted.
<LEND>

<L>9301<pc>0130-c<k1>AlIQaka<k2>AlIQaka
{#AlIQaka#}¦ {%ālīḍhaka, am,%} n. the {{frolicing->frolicking||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}
of a calf; (etym. doubtful, perhaps for {%āḍhīlaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>9302<pc>0130-c<k1>Alu<k2>Alu
{#Alu#}¦ {%ālu, us,%} m. (said to be for {%āru%} fr. rt.
{%ṛ%}), an owl; an esculent root, Arum Campanulatum;
in the modern dialects this name is applied to the
yam, potatoe, &c.; ebony, black ebony; ({%us%} or {%ūs%}),
f. a pitcher, a small water-jar; ({%u%}), n. a raft, a float.
<LEND>

<L>9303<pc>0130-c<k1>Aluka<k2>Aluka
{%Āluka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of ebony; an epithet of Śe-
sha, the chief of the Nāgas or serpent race; ({%am%}), n.
the esculent root of Amorphophallus Campanulatus.
<LEND>

<L>9304<pc>0130-c<k1>AluYcana<k2>AluYcana
{#AluYcana#}¦ {%ā-luñcana, am,%} n. (rt. {%luñc%}), tear-
ing in pieces, rending.
<LEND>

<L>9305<pc>0130-c<k1>Aluq<k2>Aluq
{#Aluq#}¦ {%ā-luḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-loḍati, -loḍitum,%} to
stir up, mix, agitate.
<LEND>

<L>9306<pc>0130-c<k1>Aloqana<k2>Aloqana
{%Ā-loḍana, am,%}¦ n. mixing, blending; stirring,
shaking, agitating.
<LEND>

<L>9307<pc>0130-c<k1>Aloqita<k2>Aloqita
{%Ā-loḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ mixed, blended, shaken,
agitated.
<LEND>

<L>9308<pc>0130-c<k1>AlUna<k2>AlUna
{#AlUna#}¦ {%ā-lūna, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%lū%}), cut, cut off.
<LEND>

<L>9309<pc>0130-c<k1>AleKana<k2>AleKana
{#AleKana#}¦ {%ā-lekhana,%} &c. See under {%ā-likh.%}
<LEND>

<L>9310<pc>0130-c<k1>Alok<k2>Alok
{#Alok#}¦ {%ā-lok,%} cl. 1. A., 10. P. {%-lokate, -ki-%}
{%tum, -lokayati, -yitum,%} to look forth; to behold;
to consider, contemplate, regard.
<LEND>

<L>9311<pc>0130-c<k1>Aloka<k2>Aloka
{%Ā-loka, as,%}¦ m. looking, seeing, beholding, sight,
aspect; light, lustre splendor; flattery, praise, com-
plimentary language, panegyric; section, chapter.
<LEND>

<L>9312<pc>0130-c<k1>Alokana<k2>Alokana
{%Ā-lokana, am,%}¦ n. seeing, looking, sight, beholding.
<LEND>

<L>9313<pc>0130-c<k1>AlokanIya<k2>AlokanIya
{%Ā-lokanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ visible; to be considered,
regarded. {%—Ālokanīya-tā,%} f. the being visible.
<LEND>

<L>9314<pc>0130-c<k1>Alokita<k2>Alokita
{%Ā-lokita, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen, beheld.
<LEND>

<L>9315<pc>0130-c<k1>Alokin<k2>Alokin
{%Ā-lokin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ seeing, beholding.
<LEND>

<L>9316<pc>0130-c<k1>Alokya<k2>Alokya
{%Ā-lokya,%}¦ ind. having seen or looked at, beholding.
<LEND>

<L>9317<pc>0130-c<k1>Aloc<k2>Aloc
{#Aloc#}¦ {%ā-loc,%} cl. 1. A. {%-locate, -citum,%} to
behold, view, perceive, consider, reflect.
<LEND>
[Page0131-a+ 71]

<L>9318<pc>0131-a<k1>Alocaka<k2>Alocaka
{%Ā-locaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ beholding; causing to see;
({%am%}), n. the faculty of vision or the cause of sight.
<LEND>

<L>9319<pc>0131-a<k1>Alocana<k2>Alocana
{%Ā-locana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. seeing, perceiving; con-
sidering, reflecting.
<LEND>

<L>9320<pc>0131-a<k1>Alocita<k2>Alocita
{%Ā-locita, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen, beheld, considered.
<LEND>

<L>9321<pc>0131-a<k1>Alocya<k2>Alocya<h>1
1. {%ā-locya%}¦ or {%ā-locanīya, as, ā, am,%} to be seen,
thought of or considered.
<LEND>

<L>9322<pc>0131-a<k1>Alocya<k2>Alocya<h>2
2. {%ā-locya,%}¦ ind. having considered, having reflected.
<LEND>

<L>9323<pc>0131-a<k1>Alola<k2>Alola
{#Alola#}¦ {%ā-lola, as, ā, am,%} trembling slightly,
rolling (as an eye); shaken, agitated; ({%as%}), m. trem-
bling, agitation.
<LEND>

<L>9324<pc>0131-a<k1>Alolita<k2>Alolita
{%Ā-lolita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>9325<pc>0131-a<k1>Ava<k2>Ava
{#Ava#}¦ {%āva,%} the base of the dual cases of the
pronoun of the 1st person; Nom. Acc. {%āvām%} (Ved.
{%āvam%}); Inst. Dat. Abl. {%āvābhyām;%} Gen. Loc. {%āvayos.%}
<LEND>

<L>9326<pc>0131-a<k1>Avac<k2>Avac
{#Avac#}¦ {%ā-vac,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%-vivakti, -vak-%}
{%tum,%} to invoke.
<LEND>

<L>9327<pc>0131-a<k1>Avat<k2>Avat
{#Avat#}¦ {%ā-vat, t,%} f. (fr. 3. {%ā%}), Ved. proximity,
(opposed to {%parā-vat.%})
<LEND>

<L>9328<pc>0131-a<k1>Avad<k2>Avad
{#Avad#}¦ {%ā-vad,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-vadati, -ditum,%}
to shout at, invoke, celebrate.
<LEND>

<L>9329<pc>0131-a<k1>Avaneya<k2>Avaneya
{#Avaneya#}¦ {%āvaneya, as,%} m. (fr. {%avani%}), son of
the earth; epithet of the planet Mars.
<LEND>

<L>9330<pc>0131-a<k1>Avantika<k2>Avantika
{#Avantika#}¦ {%āvantika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%avanti%}),
coming from or belonging to Avanti or the district of
Oujein; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a Buddhist school; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of the daughter of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>9331<pc>0131-a<k1>Avantya<k2>Avantya
{%Āvantya, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming from or being in the
country Avanti; ({%as%}), m. a prince or an inhabitant
of Avanti or of Oujein; the offspring of a degraded
Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>9332<pc>0131-a<k1>Avap<k2>Avap
{#Avap#}¦ {%ā-vap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vapati, -te, -vap-%}
{%tum,%} to sow, scatter; to pour out; to offer: Caus. P.
{%-vāpayati, -yitum,%} to shave, cut off, trim.
<LEND>

<L>9333<pc>0131-a<k1>Avapana<k2>Avapana
{%Ā-vapana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sowing, throwing,
scattering, placing upon; instilling, inserting; capa-
city, a vessel, a jar, a ewer; sowing seed, weaving;
({%ī%}), f., Ved. a vessel, a jar.
<LEND>

<L>9334<pc>0131-a<k1>Avapantika<k2>Avapantika
{%Ā-vapantika, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. scattering.
<LEND>

<L>9335<pc>0131-a<k1>AvApa<k2>AvApa
{%Ā-vāpa, as, ā, am,%}¦ scattering, throwing; ({%as%}), m.
scattering, throwing; sowing seed; casting, directing;
(in pharmacy) throwing additional ingredients into
any compound in course of preparation; mixing, in-
serting; setting out or arranging vessels, jars, &c.;
a kind of drink; a bracelet; a basin for water round
the root of a tree; uneven ground; hostile purpose,
intention of going to war; a vessel; principal oblation
to fire.
<LEND>

<L>9336<pc>0131-a<k1>AvApaka<k2>AvApaka
{%Āvāpaka, as,%}¦ m. a bracelet of gold, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9337<pc>0131-a<k1>AvApana<k2>AvApana
{%Ā-vāpana, am,%}¦ n. a loom, an implement for
weaving; a reel or frame for winding thread.
<LEND>

<L>9338<pc>0131-a<k1>AvApika<k2>AvApika
{%Āvāpika, as, ā, am,%}¦ additional, inserted, supple-
mentary.
<LEND>

<L>9339<pc>0131-a<k1>Avaya<k2>Avaya<h>1
{#Avaya#} 1¦. {%āvaya, am,%} n. (fr. 2. {%a-vī%}), Ved.
non-conception, barrenness.
<LEND>

<L>9340<pc>0131-a<k1>Avaya<k2>Avaya<h>2
{#Avaya#} 2¦. {%āvaya, as, ā,%} m. f. water.
<LEND>

<L>9341<pc>0131-a<k1>AvayAj<k2>AvayAj
{#AvayAj#}¦ {%āvayāj, s,%} m. (fr. {%ava-yāj%}), Ved.
one who expiates or averts by means of sacrifice;
(Sāy. as if from rt. {%vī%} with {%ā%}) one who causes the
sacrifice to go to the gods.
<LEND>

<L>9342<pc>0131-a<k1>Avarasamaka<k2>Avarasamaka
{#Avarasamaka#}¦ {%āvarasamaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%avara-%}
{%sama%}), to be paid in the following year.
<LEND>

<L>9343<pc>0131-a<k1>Avarjita<k2>Avarjita
{#Avarjita#}¦ {%ā-varjita.%} See under {%ā-vṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>9344<pc>0131-a<k1>Avarta<k2>Avarta
{#Avarta#}¦ {%ā-varta,%} &c. See under {%ā-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>9345<pc>0131-a<k1>Avarhita<k2>Avarhita
{#Avarhita#}¦ {%ā-varhita, as, ā, am,%} eradicated,
plucked up by the roots.
<LEND>

<L>9346<pc>0131-a<k1>Avali<k2>Avali
{#Avali#}¦ {%āvali, is%} or {%ī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%val%} with {%ā ?%}),
a row, a range, a continuous line; a series, dynasty,
a lineage.
<LEND>

<L>9347<pc>0131-a<k1>Avalg<k2>Avalg
{#Avalg#}¦ {%ā-valg,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-valgati, -te,%}
{%-gitum,%} to spring, to jump, to leap up.
<LEND>
[Page0131-b+ 72]

<L>9348<pc>0131-b<k1>Avalguja<k2>Avalguja
{#Avalguja#}¦ {%āvalguja, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%a-valgu-ja%}),
produced from the plant Vernonia Anthelminthica.
<LEND>

<L>9349<pc>0131-b<k1>AvaSIra<k2>AvaSIra
{#AvaSIra#}¦ {%āvaśīra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>9350<pc>0131-b<k1>AvaSya<k2>AvaSya
{#AvaSya#}¦ {%āvaśya, am,%} n. (fr. {%avaśya%}), neces-
sity, inevitable act or conclusion.
<LEND>

<L>9351<pc>0131-b<k1>AvaSyaka<k2>AvaSyaka
{%Āvaśyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ necessary, inevitable; ({%am%}),
n. necessity, inevitable act or conclusion; ({%āvaśya-%}
{%kaṃ kṛ,%} to do what nature makes necessary.) {%—Ā-%}
{%vaśyaka-tva, am,%} n. or {%āvaśyaka-tā,%} f. necessity,
inevitability.
<LEND>

<L>9352<pc>0131-b<k1>Avas<k2>Avas
{#Avas#}¦ {%ā-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati, -vastum,%} to
inhabit, be occupied or engaged in (with acc.): Caus.
P. {%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause or allow one to
dwell, receive hospitably; to inhabit, settle in a place.
<LEND>

<L>9353<pc>0131-b<k1>Avasati<k2>Avasati
{%Ā-vasati, is,%}¦ f. the night, i. e. the time during
which one rests.
<LEND>

<L>9354<pc>0131-b<k1>AvasaTa<k2>AvasaTa
{%Ā-vasatha, as,%}¦ m. a dwelling-place, habitation; a
house; a fire-temple or place where sacrificial fire is
preserved; a dwelling for pupils and ascetics; a par-
ticular religious observance; a treatise on the Āryā
metre.
<LEND>

<L>9355<pc>0131-b<k1>AvasaTika<k2>AvasaTika
{%Āvasathika, as, ī, am,%}¦ inhabiting a house, house-
hold, domestic; keeping a sacred fire in one's house.
<LEND>

<L>9356<pc>0131-b<k1>AvasaTya<k2>AvasaTya
{%Āvasathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in a house; ({%as%}),
m. the sacred fire kept in a house; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
a dwelling for pupils and ascetics; ({%am%}), n. placing
a sacred fire within a house.
<LEND>

<L>9357<pc>0131-b<k1>AvAsa<k2>AvAsa
{%Ā-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. abode, residence, dwelling, house.
<LEND>

<L>9358<pc>0131-b<k1>AvasAyin<k2>AvasAyin
{#AvasAyin#}¦ {%āvasāyin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. {%avasa-%}
{%āyin%}), Ved. going after a livelihood or provisions.
<LEND>

<L>9359<pc>0131-b<k1>Avasita<k2>Avasita
{#Avasita#}¦ {%āvasita, as, ā, am,%} stored (as
grain), winnowed; ripe, full-grown. See {%ava-sita.%}
<LEND>

<L>9360<pc>0131-b<k1>AvasTika<k2>AvasTika
{#AvasTika#}¦ {%āvasthika, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%ava-%}
{%sthā%}), founded on circumstances, suitable, adapted to.
<LEND>

<L>9361<pc>0131-b<k1>Avah<k2>Avah
{#Avah#}¦ {%ā-vah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vahati, -voḍhum,%} to
bring, to bring to pass: Caus. P. {%-vāhayati, -yitum,%}
to have brought, cause to be brought, send for; to
make one bring.
<LEND>

<L>9362<pc>0131-b<k1>Avaha<k2>Avaha
{%Ā-vaha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bringing, bringing to pass,
producing; what bears or conveys; ({%as%}), m., N. of
one of the seven winds or bands of air, that which is
usually assigned to the {%bhuvar-loka%} or atmospheric
region between the {%bhūr-loka%} and {%svar-loka;%} one
of the seven tongues of fire.
<LEND>

<L>9363<pc>0131-b<k1>Avahat<k2>Avahat
{%Ā-vahat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bringing, receiving.
<LEND>

<L>9364<pc>0131-b<k1>Avahana<k2>Avahana
{%Ā-vahana, am,%}¦ n. bringing near.
<LEND>

<L>9365<pc>0131-b<k1>AvahamAna<k2>AvahamAna
{%Ā-vahamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ bearing along, bringing
near, followed by, succeeded, bringing in succession.
<LEND>

<L>9366<pc>0131-b<k1>AvAha<k2>AvAha
{%Ā-vāha, as,%}¦ m. marrying; N. of a son of Śvaphalka.
<LEND>

<L>9367<pc>0131-b<k1>AvAhana<k2>AvAhana
{%Ā-vāhana, am,%}¦ n. sending for, inviting, calling;
offering oblations with fire; ({%ī%}), f. a particular position
of the hands, the palms being placed together, and
the thumbs turned towards the root of the ring-finger.
<LEND>

<L>9368<pc>0131-b<k1>AvAhita<k2>AvAhita
{%Ā-vāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ invoked, invited.
<LEND>

<L>9369<pc>0131-b<k1>AvA<k2>AvA
{#AvA#}¦ {%ā-vā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vāti, -tum,%} to blow
from all quarters, to blow upon; Desid. P. A.
{%-vivāsati, -te,%} to care for, be attentive to, favour.
<LEND>

<L>9370<pc>0131-b<k1>AvAt<k2>AvAt
{%Ā-vāt, ān, ātī%}¦ or {%āntī, āt,%} blowing.
<LEND>

<L>9371<pc>0131-b<k1>AvADA<k2>AvADA
{#AvADA#}¦ {%ā-vādhā,%} f. (see {%ā-bādhā%}), pain,
distress; segment of the base of a triangle.
<LEND>

<L>9372<pc>0131-b<k1>AvApa<k2>AvApa
{#AvApa#}¦ {%āvāpa,%} &c. See under {%ā-vap.%}
<LEND>

<L>9373<pc>0131-b<k1>AvAla<k2>AvAla
{#AvAla#}¦ {%āvāla, am,%} n. a basin of water
round the foot of a tree. See {%ālavāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>9374<pc>0131-b<k1>AvAsa<k2>AvAsa
{#AvAsa#}¦ {%ā-vāsa.%} See under {%ā-vas.%}
<LEND>

<L>9375<pc>0131-b<k1>Avika<k2>Avika
{#Avika#}¦ {%āvika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%avi%}), relating
to or derived from sheep; woollen; ({%am%}), n. a
woollen cloth, blanket. {%—Āvika-sautrika, as, ī, am,%}
made of woollen thread.
<LEND>

<L>9376<pc>0131-b<k1>Avikzita<k2>Avikzita
{#Avikzita#}¦ {%āvikṣita, as,%} m. (fr. {%a-vikṣit%}),
a patronymic of Marutta.
<LEND>

<L>9377<pc>0131-b<k1>Avigna<k2>Avigna
{#Avigna#}¦ {%āvigna, as,%} m. the fruit tree Carissa
Carandas L. See {%a-vigna.%}
<LEND>
[Page0131-c+ 74]

<L>9378<pc>0131-c<k1>AvijYAnya<k2>AvijYAnya
{#AvijYAnya#}¦ {%āvijñānya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%a-vijñā-%}
{%na%}), Ved. undistinguishable.
<LEND>

<L>9379<pc>0131-c<k1>Avitan<k2>Avitan
{#Avitan#}¦ {%ā-vi-tan,%} cl. 8. A. {%-tanute, -nitum,%}
to diffuse light over, illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>9380<pc>0131-c<k1>Avid<k2>Avid<h>1
{#Avid#} 1¦. {%ā-vid,%} Caus. P. {%-vedayati, -yitum,%}
to make known, report, declare, announce.
<LEND>

<L>9381<pc>0131-c<k1>Avid<k2>Avid<h>2
2. {%ā-vid, t,%}¦ f., Ved. knowledge, the being or be-
coming known; technical designation of the Vedic
formulas beginning with {%āvis%} and {%āvitta.%}
<LEND>

<L>9382<pc>0131-c<k1>Avidvas<k2>Avidvas
{%Ā-vidvas, ān, uṣī, as,%}¦ Ved. acquainted with,
knowing thoroughly, skilled in.
<LEND>

<L>9383<pc>0131-c<k1>Avedaka<k2>Avedaka
{%Ā-vedaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ making known, reporting,
announcing; ({%as%}), m. an appellant, a suitor; one who
makes known, an informer.
<LEND>

<L>9384<pc>0131-c<k1>Avedana<k2>Avedana
{%Ā-vedana, am,%}¦ n. representation, stating a com-
plaint, addressing or apprising respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>9385<pc>0131-c<k1>AvedanIya<k2>AvedanIya
{%Ā-vedanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be declared or reported
or announced.
<LEND>

<L>9386<pc>0131-c<k1>Avedita<k2>Avedita
{%Ā-vedita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made known, communicated,
represented.
<LEND>

<L>9387<pc>0131-c<k1>Avedin<k2>Avedin
{%Ā-vedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ announcing, declaring.
<LEND>

<L>9388<pc>0131-c<k1>Avedya<k2>Avedya<h>1
1. {%ā-vedya,%}¦ ind. having made known.
<LEND>

<L>9389<pc>0131-c<k1>Avedya<k2>Avedya<h>2
2. {%ā-vedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be represented or made
known.
<LEND>

<L>9390<pc>0131-c<k1>AvedyamAna<k2>AvedyamAna
{%Ā-vedyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being made known,
stated or represented.
<LEND>

<L>9391<pc>0131-c<k1>AvidUrya<k2>AvidUrya
{#AvidUrya#}¦ {%āvidūrya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-vidūra%}),
proximity.
<LEND>

<L>9392<pc>0131-c<k1>AviBA<k2>AviBA
{#AviBA#}¦ {%ā-vi-bhā,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-bhāti,%}
{%-tum,%} to kindle on all sides (with dat. of the thing
kindled, Ṛg-veda I. 71, 6).
<LEND>

<L>9393<pc>0131-c<k1>AvirBAva<k2>AvirBAva
{#AvirBAva#}¦ {%āvir-bhāva.%} See under {%āvis.%}
<LEND>

<L>9394<pc>0131-c<k1>Avila<k2>Avila
{#Avila#}¦ {%āvila, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. {%vil%}
with {%ā%}), turbid (as a fluid), foul, not clear. {%—Āvila-%}
{%kanda, as,%} m., N. of a root.
<LEND>

<L>9395<pc>0131-c<k1>Avilaya<k2>Avilaya
{%Āvilaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%āvilayati, -yitum,%} to make
turbid, to blot.
<LEND>

<L>9396<pc>0131-c<k1>AviS<k2>AviS
{#AviS#}¦ {%ā-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati, -veṣṭum,%} to
go towards, approach; to enter; to take possession of;
to arise; Caus. {%-veśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to enter.
<LEND>

<L>9397<pc>0131-c<k1>AviSat<k2>AviSat
{%Ā-viśat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} approaching, entering.
<LEND>

<L>9398<pc>0131-c<k1>Avizwa<k2>Avizwa
{%Ā-viṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ entered; possessed (by a
demon &c.); possessed, engrossed, filled (by any
sentiment or feeling), intent. {%—Āviṣṭa-liṅga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} (a noun) which possesses or has the force of
all three genders (or which in every relationship pre-
serves its own gender, e. g. {%pradhānam, upa-%}
{%sarjanam,%} &c.).
<LEND>

<L>9399<pc>0131-c<k1>AveSa<k2>AveSa
{%Ā-veśa, as,%}¦ m. joining one's self; entering, entrance,
taking possession of; absorption of the faculties in
one wish or idea, intentness, devotedness to an object;
demoniacal frenzy, possession, &c.; pride, arrogance;
indistinctness of idea, apoplectic or epileptic giddiness.
<LEND>

<L>9400<pc>0131-c<k1>AveSana<k2>AveSana
{%Ā-veśana, am,%}¦ n. entering, entrance; possession by
devils, &c.; passion, anger, fury; a house in which
work is carried on, a workshop, a manufactory, &c.;
the disk of the sun or moon.
<LEND>

<L>9401<pc>0131-c<k1>AveSika<k2>AveSika
{%Āveśika, as, ī, am,%}¦ own, peculiar; inherent; ({%as,%}
{%ī, am%}), m. f. n. a guest, a visitor; ({%am%}), n. entering
into; hospitable reception, hospitality.
<LEND>

<L>9402<pc>0131-c<k1>Aviz<k2>Aviz
{#Aviz#}¦ {%ā-viṣ,%} cl. 3. P. A., Ved. {%-veveṣṭi,%}
{%-veviṣṭe, -veṣṭum,%} to pervade, penetrate, visit, go
through.
<LEND>

<L>9403<pc>0131-c<k1>Avis<k2>Avis
{#Avis#}¦ {%āvis,%} ind. (said to be connected
with {%vahis%} and {%ava;%} or, according to others, fr.
{%ā-vid:%} cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐξ</lang> Lat. <nsi>ex?</nsi>), before the eyes,
openly, manifestly, evidently; (very often joined to
the roots {%as, bhū,%} and {%kṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>9404<pc>0131-c<k1>AvirBU<k2>AvirBU
{%Āvir-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to be or
become apparent or visible, to appear, become mani-
fest, be present before the eyes. {%—Āvir-bhāva, as,%}
m. manifestation, becoming visible, presence. {%—Āvir-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} manifest, become visible, appeared.
<LEND>

<L>9405<pc>0131-c<k1>Avizkf<k2>Avizkf
{%Āviṣ-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make
[Page0132-a+ 78]
apparent, reveal, uncover, show. {%—Āviṣ-karaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%āviṣ-kāra, as,%} m. making visible, mani-
festation. {%—Āviṣ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made visible,
revealed, uncovered, evident, manifest, known.
<LEND>

<L>9406<pc>0132-a<k1>Avizwya<k2>Avizwya
{%Āviṣṭya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. apparent, manifest.
<LEND>

<L>9407<pc>0132-a<k1>AvistarAm<k2>AvistarAm
{%Āvis-tarām,%}¦ ind., Ved. in a more manifest way.
<LEND>

<L>9408<pc>0132-a<k1>AvI<k2>AvI<h>1
{#AvI#} 1¦. {%ā-vī,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-veti, -tum,%} to
go towards, approach, enter.
<LEND>

<L>9409<pc>0132-a<k1>AvI<k2>AvI<h>2
2. {%ā-vī,%}¦ f. the pangs of child-birth. (For {%āvī,%} f. of
{%āvya,%} see {%āvya%} next col.)
<LEND>

<L>9410<pc>0132-a<k1>AvIta<k2>AvIta
{%Ā-vīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ entered, passed, gone; placed,
hung; ({%as%}), m. the sacrificial cord worn in a parti-
cular manner.
<LEND>

<L>9411<pc>0132-a<k1>AvItin<k2>AvItin
{%Āvītin, ī,%}¦ m. a Brāhman who wears the sacrificial
cord in a particular manner, especially on the right
shoulder.
<LEND>

<L>9412<pc>0132-a<k1>Avuka<k2>Avuka
{#Avuka#}¦ {%āvuka, as,%} m. a father (in theatrical
language).
<LEND>

<L>9413<pc>0132-a<k1>Avf<k2>Avf
{#Avf#}¦ {%ā-vṛ,%} cl. 5. 9. P. A. {%-vṛṇoti, -vṛṇute,%}
{%vṛṇāti, -ṇīte, -varitum%} or {%-rītum,%} to choose, de-
sire; to cover, hide, conceal; fill, surround; to enclose,
comprehend, shut, hem in; to keep off: Caus. P.
{%-vārayati, -yitum,%} to cover, enclose, ward off, keep
off.
<LEND>

<L>9414<pc>0132-a<k1>Avaraka<k2>Avaraka
{%Ā-varaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ what covers or conceals, a
cover, a veil.
<LEND>

<L>9415<pc>0132-a<k1>AvaraRa<k2>AvaraRa
{%Ā-varaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ covering, hiding, concealing;
({%am%}), n. covering, concealing, hiding; shutting, en-
closing; an obstruction, interruption; a covering, a
garment, cloth; anything that protects, an outer bar
or a fence, a wall; a shield; a bolt, lock; mental
blindness. {%—Āvaraṇa-śakti, is,%} f. the power of illu-
sion, that which veils the real nature of things.
<LEND>

<L>9416<pc>0132-a<k1>AvAra<k2>AvAra
{%Ā-vāra,%}¦ enclosing, keeping off, in the words {%dur-%}
{%āvāra, skandhāvāra,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>9417<pc>0132-a<k1>AvAri<k2>AvAri
{%Ā-vāri, is,%}¦ m. a shop, a stall.
<LEND>

<L>9418<pc>0132-a<k1>AvArya<k2>AvArya
{%Ā-vārya,%}¦ ind. having enclosed, having covered;
concealing; warding off.
<LEND>

<L>9419<pc>0132-a<k1>Avfta<k2>Avfta
{%Ā-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ enclosed, encompassed, sur-
rounded (by a ditch, wall, &c.); covered, screened, con-
cealed; invested, involved; spread, overspread, over-
cast; filled with, abounding with; ({%as%}), m. a man of
mixed origin, the son of a Brāhman by a woman of
the Ugra caste.
<LEND>

<L>9420<pc>0132-a<k1>Avfti<k2>Avfti
{%Ā-vṛti, is,%}¦ f. covering, enclosing, hiding.
<LEND>

<L>9421<pc>0132-a<k1>Avfj<k2>Avfj
{#Avfj#}¦ {%ā-vṛj,%} cl. 1. A. {%-varjate, -jitum,%} to
bestow, give: Caus. P. {%-varjayati, -yitum,%} to turn
over, incline, bend, pour out, to cause to yield, over-
come.
<LEND>

<L>9422<pc>0132-a<k1>Avarjita<k2>Avarjita
{%Ā-varjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ inclined, poured down,
made to flow downwards.
<LEND>

<L>9423<pc>0132-a<k1>Avarjya<k2>Avarjya
{%Ā-varjya,%}¦ ind. turning down slantwise, inclining,
pouring out.
<LEND>

<L>9424<pc>0132-a<k1>Avft<k2>Avft<h>1
{#Avft#} 1¦. {%ā-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate, -titum,%}
to turn or go towards, to turn round, turn back,
revolve, return: Caus. P. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to turn; to roll; to cause to roll down, shed;
to attract; A. {%-vartayate,%} to turn round or back.
<LEND>

<L>9425<pc>0132-a<k1>Avarta<k2>Avarta
{%Ā-varta, as,%}¦ m. turning, winding, turning round,
revolving; whirl, gulf, whirlpool; deliberation, revolv-
ing (in the mind); a lock of hair that curls backwards,
especially on a horse; the two depressions of the fore-
head above the eyebrows; a crowded place where
many men live close together; a kind of jewel; N. of
a form of cloud personified; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river;
({%am%}), n. a mineral substance, pyrites, marcasite.
<LEND>

<L>9426<pc>0132-a<k1>Avartaka<k2>Avartaka
{%Ā-vartaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of poisonous insect; N.
of a form of cloud personified; depression above the
frontal ridge or over the eyebrows; whirlpool; revo-
lution; revolution of the mind from the influence of
the senses; a curl of hair; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a creeping
plant.
<LEND>

<L>9427<pc>0132-a<k1>Avartana<k2>Avartana
{%Ā-vartana, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. turning round or
towards; revolving; ({%am%}), n. turning, turning round,
returning; circular motion, gyration, churning, stirring
anything in fusion; melting metals together, alli-
gation; the time when the sun begins to cast shadows
towards the east or when shadows are cast in an
[Page0132-b+ 74]
opposite direction; repeating, doing over again; study,
practising; ({%ī%}), f. a crucible. {%—Āvartana-maṇi, is,%}
m. a gem of secondary order, generally known as
Rājāvarta.
<LEND>

<L>9428<pc>0132-b<k1>AvartanIya<k2>AvartanIya
{%Ā-vartanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be turned round or
whirled; to be reversed; to be repeated.
<LEND>

<L>9429<pc>0132-b<k1>AvartamAna<k2>AvartamAna
{%Ā-vartamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ going round, revolving;
advancing, proceeding.
<LEND>

<L>9430<pc>0132-b<k1>Avartita<k2>Avartita
{%Ā-vartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned round, stirred round.
<LEND>

<L>9431<pc>0132-b<k1>Avartin<k2>Avartin
{%Ā-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ what whirls or turns upon itself;
returning; ({%ī%}), m. a horse having curls of hair on
various parts of his body, considered as a lucky
mark; ({%inī%}), f. a whirlpool; N. of the plant Odina
Pinnata.
<LEND>

<L>9432<pc>0132-b<k1>Avft<k2>Avft<h>2
2. {%ā-vṛt, t,%}¦ f. turning towards or round, entering;
(Sāy.) causing to turn towards; turn of a path or
way, course, process, direction; progress of an action,
occurrence, a series of actions, order, method. {%—Āvṛt-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. turned or turning towards.
<LEND>

<L>9433<pc>0132-b<k1>Avftta<k2>Avftta
{%Ā-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned round, stirred, whirled;
reverted, averted; retreated, fled.
<LEND>

<L>9434<pc>0132-b<k1>Avftti<k2>Avftti
{%Ā-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. turning towards, entering, turning
back or from, reversion, retreat, flight; recurrence to
the same point; repetition; turn of a way, course,
direction; occurrence; revolving, going round; worldly
existence, the revolution of births; use, employment,
application. {%—Āvṛtti-dīpaka, am,%} n. (in rhetoric)
laying stress upon a word by repeating it.
<LEND>

<L>9435<pc>0132-b<k1>Avftya<k2>Avftya
{%Ā-vṛtya,%}¦ ind. having turned, turning towards.
<LEND>

<L>9436<pc>0132-b<k1>AvfD<k2>AvfD
{#AvfD#}¦ {%ā-vṛdh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vardhate, -dhitum,%}
to increase.
<LEND>

<L>9437<pc>0132-b<k1>Avfz<k2>Avfz
{#Avfz#}¦ {%ā-vṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A., Ved. {%-varṣati,%}
{%-te, -ṣitum,%} to rain, to pour out (a libation).
<LEND>

<L>9438<pc>0132-b<k1>Avfzwi<k2>Avfzwi
{%Ā-vṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. raining, pouring.
<LEND>

<L>9439<pc>0132-b<k1>Avega<k2>Avega
{#Avega#}¦ {%ā-vega, as,%} m. (rt. {%vij%}), hurry, haste
produced by excitement; flurry, agitation; ({%ī%}), f. the
plant Convolvolus Argenteus.
<LEND>

<L>9440<pc>0132-b<k1>AveRika<k2>AveRika
{#AveRika#}¦ {%āveṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%a-veṇi%}), not
connected with anything else; independant.
<LEND>

<L>9441<pc>0132-b<k1>Avedaka<k2>Avedaka
{#Avedaka, Avedana#}¦, &c. See under 1. {%ā-vid.%}
<LEND>

<L>9442<pc>0132-b<k1>AveSa<k2>AveSa
{#AveSa#}¦ {%ā-veśa,%} &c. See under {%ā-viś.%}
<LEND>

<L>9443<pc>0132-b<k1>Avezwa<k2>Avezwa
{#Avezwa#}¦ {%ā-veṣṭa, as,%} m. (rt. {%veṣṭ%}), sur-
rounding, covering with.
<LEND>

<L>9444<pc>0132-b<k1>Avezwaka<k2>Avezwaka
{%Ā-veṣṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a wall, a fence, an enclosure.
<LEND>

<L>9445<pc>0132-b<k1>Avezwana<k2>Avezwana
{%Ā-veṣṭana, am,%}¦ n. wrapping round, binding, ty-
ing; a wrapper, an envelope, a bandage; an en-
closure.
<LEND>

<L>9446<pc>0132-b<k1>Avezwita<k2>Avezwita
{%Ā-veṣṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, enveloped, in-
closed, bound or tied.
<LEND>

<L>9447<pc>0132-b<k1>Avya<k2>Avya
{#Avya#}¦ {%āvya, as,%} f. {%āvī, am,%} Ved. belonging
to sheep; woollen.
<LEND>

<L>9448<pc>0132-b<k1>AvyaD<k2>AvyaD
{#AvyaD#}¦ {%ā-vyadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-vidhyati, -vyad-%}
{%dhum,%} poet. {%-veddhum,%} to shoot at, to throw; to
hit, pierce, wound; to pin on.
<LEND>

<L>9449<pc>0132-b<k1>AvidDa<k2>AvidDa
{%Ā-viddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ cast, thrown, sent; pierced,
wounded; disappointed; crooked; false, fallacious;
stupid, foolish. {%—Āviddha-karṇī%} or {%āviddha-kar-%}
{%ṇikā,%} f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>9450<pc>0132-b<k1>AviDa<k2>AviDa
{%Ā-vidha, as,%}¦ m. an awl, a drill, a kind of gimlet
worked by a string.
<LEND>

<L>9451<pc>0132-b<k1>AveDya<k2>AveDya
{%Ā-vedhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pierced, pinned on,
put on.
<LEND>

<L>9452<pc>0132-b<k1>AvyADin<k2>AvyADin
{%Ā-vyādhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. wounding, attacking;
({%inī%}), f. a band of robbers.
<LEND>

<L>9453<pc>0132-b<k1>Avyuzam<k2>Avyuzam
{#Avyuzam#}¦ {%ā-vyuṣam%} Ved., ind. till the
dawn.
<LEND>

<L>9454<pc>0132-b<k1>Avraj<k2>Avraj
{#Avraj#}¦ {%ā-vraj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vrajati, -te,%}
{%-jitum,%} to walk towards or up to; to return.
<LEND>

<L>9455<pc>0132-b<k1>AvraSc<k2>AvraSc
{#AvraSc#}¦ {%ā-vraśc,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-vṛścati,%}
{%-vraścitum%} or {%-vraṣṭum,%} to tear off, cut off, tear
in pieces, interrupt.
<LEND>

<L>9456<pc>0132-b<k1>AvraScana<k2>AvraScana
{%Ā-vraścana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the stump of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>9457<pc>0132-b<k1>Avraska<k2>Avraska
{%Ā-vraska, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the being torn off or tear-
ing itself off.
<LEND>
[Page0132-c+ 75]

<L>9458<pc>0132-c<k1>AS<k2>AS<h>1
{#AS#} 1¦. {%āś (ā-aś),%} cl. 5. P. A. (Class. only
A.) {%āśnoti, -nute, āśitum,%} to reach to; to obtain,
gain; to addict one's self to.
<LEND>

<L>9459<pc>0132-c<k1>AS<k2>AS<h>2
{#AS#} 2¦. {%āś (ā-aś),%} cl. 9. P. {%āśnāti, āśitum,%}
to eat: Caus. {%āśayati, -yitum,%} to give to eat.
<LEND>

<L>9460<pc>0132-c<k1>ASa<k2>ASa
{#ASa#}¦ {%āśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%aś%}), an eater,
eating; often in this sense at the end of compounds;
({%as%}), m. eating.
<LEND>

<L>9461<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaka<k2>ASaka
{%Āśaka, am,%}¦ n. eating.
<LEND>

<L>9462<pc>0132-c<k1>ASayitf<k2>ASayitf
{%Āśayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ feeding, a feeder, one who
gives food; protecting, a protector.
<LEND>

<L>9463<pc>0132-c<k1>ASi<k2>ASi<h>1
1. {%āśi, is,%}¦ f. the act of eating food.
<LEND>

<L>9464<pc>0132-c<k1>ASita<k2>ASita
{%Āśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ eaten; given to eat; voracious.
{%—Āśitaṅ-gavīna, as, ā, am,%} formerly grazed by
cattle. {%—Āśitam-bhava, as, ā, am,%} satiating; ({%am%}),
n. food, victuals; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. n. satisfaction,
satiety.
<LEND>

<L>9465<pc>0132-c<k1>ASitf<k2>ASitf
{%Āśitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ voracious, gluttonous, eating
excessively.
<LEND>

<L>9466<pc>0132-c<k1>ASin<k2>ASin
{%Āśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ eating.
<LEND>

<L>9467<pc>0132-c<k1>ASira<k2>ASira<h>1
1. {%āśira, as, ā, am,%}¦ voracious; ({%as%}), m. fire; a
Rakṣas. (For 2. {%āśira%} see under {%āśir.%})
<LEND>

<L>9468<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaMs<k2>ASaMs
{#ASaMs#}¦ {%ā-śaṃs,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śaṃsati, -situm,%} to
tell; A. or ep. P. {%-śaṃsate,%} to hope for, desire, be-
lieve: Caus. P. Ved. {%-śaṃsayati, -yitum,%} to render
famous or celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>9469<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaMsana<k2>ASaMsana
{%Ā-śaṃsana, am,%}¦ n. expecting, wishing; declaring,
asserting.
<LEND>

<L>9470<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaMsA<k2>ASaMsA
{%Ā-śaṃsā,%}¦ f. wish, desire, hope; speech, declaration.
<LEND>

<L>9471<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaMsita<k2>ASaMsita
{%Ā-śaṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished, hoped, expected;
declared, said.
<LEND>

<L>9472<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaMsitf<k2>ASaMsitf
{%Ā-śaṃsitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ wishing, desiring; as-
serting.
<LEND>

<L>9473<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaMsin<k2>ASaMsin
{%Ā-śaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ declaring, announcing.
<LEND>

<L>9474<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaMsu<k2>ASaMsu
{%Ā-śaṃsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing, hoping, desiring.
<LEND>

<L>9475<pc>0132-c<k1>ASas<k2>ASas
{%Ā-śas, as,%}¦ f., Ved. wish, desire, hope; (Say.) praise.
<LEND>

<L>9476<pc>0132-c<k1>ASA<k2>ASA<h>1
1. {%ā-śā,%}¦ f. wish, desire, hope, expectation, pros-
pect; hope personified as the wife of a Vasu: (for 2.
{%āśā%} see next page.) {%—Āśā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} lit.
‘made expectation,’ attended with the expectation (of
being gratified) or hope of success. {%—Āśānvita (˚śā-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} having hope. {%—Āśā-piśācikā,%} f.
fallacious hopes. {%—Āśā-prāpta, as, ā, am,%} success-
ful, possessing the object hoped for. {%—Āśā-bandha,%}
{%as,%} m. band of hope, confidence, trust, expectation;
a spider's web. {%—Āśā-bhaṅga, as,%} m. disappointment.
{%—Āśā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} hoping, having hope, trust-
ing. {%—Āśā-vaha, as,%} m. bringing hope; N. of a son
of heaven; of a Vṛṣṇi. {%—Āśā-vibhinna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} disappointed in expectation. {%—Āśā-hīna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has lost all hope, desponding,
despairing.
<LEND>

<L>9477<pc>0132-c<k1>ASak<k2>ASak
{#ASak#}¦ {%ā-śak,%} cl. 5. P., Ved. {%-śaknoti, -śak-%}
{%tum,%} to render one capable, to make one master
or possessor of: Desid. Ved. {%-śikṣati,%} to render one
master of, impart.
<LEND>

<L>9478<pc>0132-c<k1>ASakta<k2>ASakta
{%Ā-śakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ able, powerful, capable.
<LEND>

<L>9479<pc>0132-c<k1>ASakti<k2>ASakti
{%Ā-śakti, is,%}¦ f. power, ability, might.
<LEND>

<L>9480<pc>0132-c<k1>ASikzA<k2>ASikzA
{%Ā-śikṣā,%}¦ f., Ved. desire of learning.
<LEND>

<L>9481<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaNk<k2>ASaNk
{#ASaNk#}¦ {%ā-śaṅk,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śaṅkate, -kitum,%}
to fear, suspect, doubt, hesitate.
<LEND>

<L>9482<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaNkanIya<k2>ASaNkanIya
{%Ā-śaṅkanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be doubted; to be
apprehended; questionable.
<LEND>

<L>9483<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaNkamAna<k2>ASaNkamAna
{%Ā-śaṅkamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fearing, apprehending.
<LEND>

<L>9484<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaNkA<k2>ASaNkA
{%Ā-śaṅkā,%}¦ f. fear, apprehension; doubt, uncertainty;
distrust, suspicion. {%—Āśaṅkānvita (˚kā-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} apprehensive, doubting, uncertain; afraid.
<LEND>

<L>9485<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaNkita<k2>ASaNkita
{%Ā-śaṅkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ feared, dreaded; doubted.
<LEND>

<L>9486<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaNkin<k2>ASaNkin
{%Ā-śaṅkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fearing, doubting, hesitating.
<LEND>

<L>9487<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaNkya<k2>ASaNkya
{%Ā-śaṅkya,%}¦ ind. having suspected, fearing, appre-
hending, doubting.
<LEND>

<L>9488<pc>0132-c<k1>ASad<k2>ASad
{#ASad#}¦ {%ā-śad,%} cl. 6. A. {%-śīyate, -śattum,%} to go.
<LEND>

<L>9489<pc>0132-c<k1>ASana<k2>ASana
{#ASana#}¦ {%āśana, as,%} m., N. of the tree
Pentaptera Tomentosa. See 3. {%aśana.%}
<LEND>

<L>9490<pc>0132-c<k1>ASaya<k2>ASaya
{#ASaya#}¦ {%āśaya.%} See under 3. {%ā-śī.%}
<LEND>
[Page0133-a+ 70]

<L>9491<pc>0133-a<k1>ASayASa<k2>ASayASa
{#ASayASa#}¦ {%āśayāśa.%} See under {%ā-śaya%} below.
<LEND>

<L>9492<pc>0133-a<k1>ASara<k2>ASara
{#ASara#}¦ {%ā-śara, as,%} m. (rt. {%śṝ%}), fire; a
Rakṣas, a goblin; the wind ? [cf. 1. {%āśira%}].
<LEND>

<L>9493<pc>0133-a<k1>ASarIka<k2>ASarIka
{%Ā-śarīka, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a disease, violent and
acute pain in the limbs.
<LEND>

<L>9494<pc>0133-a<k1>ASala<k2>ASala
{#ASala#}¦ {%āśala, as,%} m. a tree. See {%jīvaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>9495<pc>0133-a<k1>ASava<k2>ASava
{#ASava#}¦ {%āśava, am,%} n. (fr. {%āśu%}), speed, quick-
ness; (for {%ā-sava,%} q. v.) a spirit distilled from molasses.
<LEND>

<L>9496<pc>0133-a<k1>ASasana<k2>ASasana
{#ASasana#}¦ {%ā-śasana, am,%} n. (rt. {%śas%}), Ved.
cutting up an animal when killed.
<LEND>

<L>9497<pc>0133-a<k1>ASA<k2>ASA<h>2
{#ASA#} 2¦. {%āśā,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś;%} for 1. {%ā-śā%} see
last page under {%ā-śaṃs%}), space, region, quarter of the
compass, an intermediate region. {%—Āśā-gaja, as,%} m.
an elephant of a quarter or point of the compass, sup-
porting one division of the globe. {%—Āśā-dāman, ā,%}
m., N. of a king. {%—Āśāditya (˚śā-ād˚)%} or {%āśārka%}
{%(˚śā-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a commentator. {%—Āśā-pāla,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. a defender or guardian of the regions or
quarters. {%—Āśā-pura, ām,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Āśā-%}
{%pura-guggulu, us,%} or {%āśāpura-sambhava, as,%} m.
a kind of Bdellium.
<LEND>

<L>9498<pc>0133-a<k1>ASAQa<k2>ASAQa
{#ASAQa#}¦ {%āśāḍha%} for {%āṣāḍha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>9499<pc>0133-a<k1>ASAra<k2>ASAra
{#ASAra#}¦ {%ā-śāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śri%} with {%ā%}),
shelter. {%—Āśāraiṣin (˚ra-eṣ˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. seek-
ing shelter.
<LEND>

<L>9500<pc>0133-a<k1>ASAs<k2>ASAs
{#ASAs#}¦ {%ā-śās,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śāsti, -śāsitum,%} to
order, command, relate; A. {%-śāste,%} to wish well
towards, pray for; to praise; to desire.
<LEND>

<L>9501<pc>0133-a<k1>ASAsya<k2>ASAsya
{%Ā-śāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be wished, desirable; ({%am%}),
n. wish, benediction.
<LEND>

<L>9502<pc>0133-a<k1>ASis<k2>ASis<h>1
1. {%ā-śis, īs,%}¦ f. asking for, prayer, wish; blessing,
benediction; bestowing or praying for a blessing upon
others; one of the eight chief medicaments. {%—Āśir-%}
{%vāda%} or {%āśīr-vāda, as,%} m. expression of a prayer or
wish, benediction. {%—Āśīr-geya, am,%} n. a song ac-
companied with benedictions. {%—Āśīr-dā,%} f., Ved. the
offering of a prayer. {%—Āśīr-vacana, am,%} n. a bless-
ing, a benediction.
<LEND>

<L>9503<pc>0133-a<k1>ASI<k2>ASI<h>1
1. {%ā-śī,%}¦ f. wishing or bestowing a blessing.
<LEND>

<L>9504<pc>0133-a<k1>ASi<k2>ASi<h>2
{#ASi#} 2¦. {%ā-śi,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%-śiśeti, -śetum,%}
to incite. (For 1. {%āśi%} see under {%āśa%} last page.)
<LEND>

<L>9505<pc>0133-a<k1>ASikzA<k2>ASikzA
{#ASikzA#}¦ {%ā-śikṣā.%} See under {%ā-śak.%}
<LEND>

<L>9506<pc>0133-a<k1>ASiYjita<k2>ASiYjita
{#ASiYjita#}¦ {%ā-śiñjita, as, ā, am,%} tinkling (as
of the ornaments worn on the hands and feet).
<LEND>

<L>9507<pc>0133-a<k1>ASita<k2>ASita
{#ASita, ASin, ASira.#}¦ See under {%āśa%}
last page.
<LEND>

<L>9508<pc>0133-a<k1>ASina<k2>ASina
{#ASina#}¦ {%āśina, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%aś%}), Ved.
aged; (reaching to many years.)
<LEND>

<L>9509<pc>0133-a<k1>ASiman<k2>ASiman
{#ASiman#}¦ {%āśiman.%} See under {%āśu%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>9510<pc>0133-a<k1>ASir<k2>ASir
{#ASir#}¦ {%āśir, īs,%} f. (fr. rt. {%śṝ%} for {%śrī%} with {%ā%}),
Ved. the milk which is mixed with the Soma juice to
purify it (e. g. {%dadhyāśiraḥ Somāsaḥ%} = Soma offer-
ings purified by mixture with thickened milk). {%—Āśīr-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. mixed with milk (as Soma).
<LEND>

<L>9511<pc>0133-a<k1>ASira<k2>ASira<h>2
2. {%āśira,%}¦ a form sometimes used for {%āśir.%} See also
under {%āśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>9512<pc>0133-a<k1>ASiraHpAdam<k2>ASiraHpAdam
{#ASiraHpAdam#}¦ {%ā-śiraḥ-pādam,%} ind. from
head to foot.
<LEND>

<L>9513<pc>0133-a<k1>ASis<k2>ASis<h>2
{#ASis#} 2¦. {%āśis, īs,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś%}), a ser-
pent's fang: (for 1. {%ā-śis%} see above.) {%—Āśir-viṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. a snake (having venom in its fang).
<LEND>

<L>9514<pc>0133-a<k1>ASI<k2>ASI<h>2
2. {%āśī,%}¦ f. a serpent's fang; a kind of venom, the
venom of a snake. {%—Āśī-viṣa,%} see {%āśir-viṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>9515<pc>0133-a<k1>ASI<k2>ASI<h>3
{#ASI#} 3¦. {%ā-śī,%} cl. 2. A. {%-śete, -śayitum,%} to
lie or sleep on, pass (the night) in sleep; to inhabit,
have for one's home.
<LEND>

<L>9516<pc>0133-a<k1>ASaya<k2>ASaya
{%Ā-śaya, as,%}¦ m. bed-chamber, resting-place, seat,
place, an asylum, an abode or retreat; a receptacle;
any recipient, any vessel or viscus of the body (e. g.
{%raktāśaya,%} the heart; {%āmāśaya,%} the stomach, &c.);
[Page0133-b+ 76]
the stomach in particular; the seat of feelings and
thoughts, the mind, heart; the thought lying in the
mind, meaning, intention; disposition of mind, mode
of thinking; will or pleasure; virtue, vice; fate, for-
tune; property, possessions; a miser, a niggard; N.
of the plant Artocarpus Integrifolia. {%—Āśayāśa (˚ya-%}
{%āśa), as,%} m. fire; [cf. {%āśrayāśa%} under 1. {%ā-śri.%}]
<LEND>

<L>9517<pc>0133-b<k1>ASu<k2>ASu
{#ASu#}¦ {%āśu, us, us, u%} (said to be fr. 1. {%aś%}),
fast, quick, going quickly; ({%u%}), ind. quickly, quick,
immediately, directly; ({%us%}), m., Ved. the quick one,
a horse; ({%us%} or {%u%}), m. n. rice ripening quickly in the
rainy season; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὠκύς, ὤκιστος</lang> Lat. <nsi>acu</nsi> in
<nsi>acupedeus, ôcissimus:</nsi> of the same origin may be
the Lat. <nsi>aquila</nsi> and <nsi>accipiter.</nsi>] {%—Āśu-kārin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} doing anything quickly, smart, active; (in medic.)
operating speedily. {%—Āśu-kopin, ī, inī, i,%} easily pro-
voked, irritable. {%—Āśu-kriyā,%} f. quick procedure.
{%—Āśu-ga, as, ā, am,%} going or moving quickly,
swift, fleet; ({%as%}), m. the wind; the sun; an arrow;
N. of one of the first five followers of Śākya-muni.
{%—Āśu-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going or moving quickly;
({%ī%}), m. an epithet of the sun. {%—Āśuṅ-ga, as,%} m., Ved.
N. of an animal, perhaps a bird; going to the horse (?).
{%—Āśu-toṣa, as, ā, am,%} easily pleased or appeased;
({%as%}), m., N. of Śiva. {%—Āśu-tva, am,%} n. quickness.
{%—Āśu-pattrī,%} f. a tree which yields frankincense,
Boswellia Serrata. {%—Āśu-patvan, ā,%} m., Ved. flying
quickly. {%—Āśu-phala, as,%} m. a kind of weapon.
{%—Āśu-bodha,%} ‘easily understood,’ ‘teaching quickly,’
title of a grammar. {%—Āśu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. quick;
({%at%}), ind. quickly. {%—1. āśu-yā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. (Sāy.)
going quickly. {%—Āśu-ratha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pos-
sessing a fast chariot. {%—Āśu-vrīhi, is,%} m. rice ripen-
ing quickly in the rainy season. {%—Āśu-ṣeṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having swift arrows. {%—Āśu-heman, ā,%} m.,
Ved. urged to fast course, running on quickly; inciting
his horses (as an epithet of Agni, especially when
regarded as Apāṃ-napāt). {%—Āśu-heṣas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. having neighing horses; (Sāy.) having quick
horses or quickly praised; epithet of the Aśvins. {%—Āśv-%}
{%apas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. acting quickly. {%—Āśv-aśva, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. possessed of quick horses; an epithet of
the Maruts. {%—Āśvaśvya, am,%} n., Ved. possession of
quick horses.
<LEND>

<L>9518<pc>0133-b<k1>ASiman<k2>ASiman
{%Āśiman, ā,%}¦ m. quickness, rapidity; {%= āśava,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>9519<pc>0133-b<k1>ASuyA<k2>ASuyA<h>2
2. {%āśuyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. quickly, rapidly.
<LEND>

<L>9520<pc>0133-b<k1>ASuSukzaRi<k2>ASuSukzaRi
{#ASuSukzaRi#}¦ {%ā-śuśukṣaṇi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt.
{%śuc%} with {%ā%}), Ved. shining forth; (Sāy.) ‘being
worshipped on account of shining very quickly’ or
‘causing sorrow (to one's enemies’); ({%is%}), m. fire,
wind; air.
<LEND>

<L>9521<pc>0133-b<k1>ASekuwin<k2>ASekuwin
{#ASekuwin#}¦ {%āśekuṭin, ī,%} m. a mountain
(etymology doubtful).
<LEND>

<L>9522<pc>0133-b<k1>ASozaRa<k2>ASozaRa
{#ASozaRa#}¦ {%ā-śoṣaṇa, am,%} n. the act of drying.
<LEND>

<L>9523<pc>0133-b<k1>ASOca<k2>ASOca
{#ASOca#}¦ {%āśauca, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-śuci%}), impurity.
<LEND>

<L>9524<pc>0133-b<k1>AScarya<k2>AScarya<h>1
{#AScarya#} 1¦. {%āścarya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%car%} with
{%ā,%} with a sibilant inserted), appearing rarely, curious,
marvellous, astonishing, wonderful, extraordinary;
({%am%}), ind. rarely, wonderfully; ({%am%}), n. strange ap-
pearance; a wonder, miracle, marvel, prodigy; won-
der, surprise; astonishment. {%—Āścarya-tā,%} f. or {%āś-%}
{%carya-tva, am,%} n. wonderfulness, wonder, astonish-
ment. {%—Āścarya-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} having a mar-
vellous appearance, wonderful. {%—Āścarya-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} wonderful, marvellous, miraculous.
<LEND>

<L>9525<pc>0133-b<k1>AScarya<k2>AScarya<h>2
2. {%āścarya,%}¦ nom. P. (?) {%-yati, -yitum,%} to be won-
derful.
<LEND>

<L>9526<pc>0133-b<k1>AScotana<k2>AScotana
{#AScotana#}¦ {%ā-ścotana%} or {%ā-ścyotana, am,%} n.
(fr. rt. {%ścut%} or {%ścyut%} with {%ā%}), aspersion, sprinkling;
applying ghee &c. to the eyelids.
<LEND>

<L>9527<pc>0133-b<k1>ASma<k2>ASma
{#ASma#}¦ {%āśma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%aśman%}), stony,
made of stone. {%—Āśmabhārika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%aśma-%}
{%bhāra%}), having a mass of stones. {%—Āśmarathya, as,%}
m., N. of a teacher of ritual.
<LEND>

<L>9528<pc>0133-b<k1>ASmana<k2>ASmana
{%Āśmana, as, ī, am,%}¦ stony, made of stone; ({%as%}),
m., N. of Aruṇa, the charioteer of the sun.
<LEND>
[Page0133-c+ 78]

<L>9529<pc>0133-c<k1>ASmarika<k2>ASmarika
{%Āśmarika, as, ī, am,%}¦ suffering from stone in the
bladder.
<LEND>

<L>9530<pc>0133-c<k1>ASmika<k2>ASmika
{%Āśmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ made of stone, consisting of
stone, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9531<pc>0133-c<k1>ASyE<k2>ASyE
{#ASyE#}¦ {%ā-śyai,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śyāyate, -śyātum,%}
to become coagulated or congealed, to congeal, to
become dry.
<LEND>

<L>9532<pc>0133-c<k1>ASyAna<k2>ASyAna<h>1
1. {%ā-śyāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ consolidated, coagulated,
congealed.
<LEND>

<L>9533<pc>0133-c<k1>ASyAna<k2>ASyAna<h>2
2. {%ā-śyāna, as, ā, am%}¦ ({%ā%} implying diminution),
partially dried.
<LEND>

<L>9534<pc>0133-c<k1>ASrapaRa<k2>ASrapaRa
{#ASrapaRa#}¦ {%ā-śrapaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%śrī%} with {%ā%}),
the act of cooking slightly.
<LEND>

<L>9535<pc>0133-c<k1>ASrama<k2>ASrama
{#ASrama#}¦ {%ā-śrama, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%śram%}
with {%ā%}), a hermitage, the abode of ascetics, the
cell of a hermit or of retired saints or sages; a period
in the religious life of a Brāhman, of which there are
four referable to the different periods of life (viz. 1st,
that of the Brahma-cārin or student; 2nd, that of the
Gṛha-stha or householder; 3rd, that of the Vāna-
prastha or anchorite; and 4th, that of the Bhikṣu or
beggar: in some places the law-givers mention only
three such periods of religious life, the first period
being then omitted); a college, a school; a wood or
thicket. {%—Āśrama-guru, us,%} m. the head of a re-
ligious order, a preceptor, a principal. {%—Āśrama-%}
{%dharma, as,%} m. the special duty or duties of each
order or period of life. {%—Āśrama-pada, am,%} n. a
hermitage; a period in the religious life of a Brāhman.
{%—Āśrama-parvan, a,%} n. the first section of the fif-
teenth book of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Āśrama-bhra-%}
{%ṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} fallen or apostatising from an {%āśrama%}
or religious order. {%—Āśrama-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the
circle of a hermitage, a hermitage. {%—Āśramavāsika,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} relating to residence in a hermitage;
{%āśramavāsikam parva,%} title of the fifteenth book of
the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Āśrama-vāsin, ī,%} or {%āśrama-%}
{%sad, t,%} m. an inhabitant of a hermitage, an ascetic.
{%—Āśrama-sthāna, am,%} n. the abode of hermits, a
hermitage. {%—Āśramālaya (˚ma-āl˚), as,%} m. an in-
habitant of a hermitage, an ascetic. {%—Āśramopani-%}
{%ṣad (˚ma-up˚), t,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>9536<pc>0133-c<k1>ASramika<k2>ASramika
{%Āśramika, as, ī, am,%}¦ or {%āśramin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
belonging to one of the four orders or periods of
religious life; belonging to a hermitage, a hermit,
an anchorite, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9537<pc>0133-c<k1>ASrava<k2>ASrava<h>1
{#ASrava#} 1¦. {%ā-śrava, as,%} m. (more correctly
written {%ā-srava,%} q. v.), stream, flow, river; distress,
fatigue; fault, transgression. (For 2. {%ā-śrava%} see
under {%ā-śru%} next page.)
<LEND>

<L>9538<pc>0133-c<k1>ASri<k2>ASri<h>1
{#ASri#} 1¦. {%ā-śri,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-śrayati, -te,%}
{%-yitum,%} to resort to, betake one's self to; seek refuge
in, enter, inhabit; depend on, choose, prefer; to
assist, adhere to, be subject to, keep in mind.
<LEND>

<L>9539<pc>0133-c<k1>ASraya<k2>ASraya
{%Ā-śraya, as,%}¦ m. that to which anything is annexed,
or with which anything is closely connected, or on
which anything depends or rests; a recipient, the per-
son or thing in which any quality or article is inherent
or retained or received; seat, resting-place; dwelling,
asylum, place of refuge, shelter; depending on, having
recourse to; help, assistance, protection; authority,
sanction, warrant; a plea, an excuse; being inclined
or addicted to, following, practising; attaching to,
choosing, taking; joining, union, attachment; de-
pendance, contiguity, vicinity; relation; connection;
appropriate act or one consistent with the character
of the agent; (in gram.) the subject, that to which
the predicate is annexed; (with Buddhists) the five
organs of sense with {%manas%} or mind (the six together
being the recipients of the {%āśrita%} or objects which enter
them by way of their {%ālambana%} or qualities); source,
origin. {%Āśraya%} may occur at the end of compounds
in the sense of ‘depending on, resting on, endowed
or furnished with’ (e. g. {%aṣṭa-guṇāśraya,%} see under
{%aṣṭa%}). {%—Āśraya-tas,%} ind. in consequence of the
proximity. {%—Āśraya-tva, am,%} n. the state of {%ā-śraya%}
above. {%—Āśraya-bhuj, k,%} m. fire; see {%āśrayāśa.%}
{%—Āśraya-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} one who is the refuge
[Page0134-a+ 78]
or support of another person, protecting, supporting.
{%—Āśraya-liṅga, as, ā, am,%} a word the gender of
which must agree with the gender of the word to
which it is referred, an adjective. {%—Āśraya-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having help or support. {%—Āśrayāśa (˚ya-%}
{%āśa), as, ā, am,%} consuming everything with which
(it) comes in contact; ({%as%}), m. fire; a forfeiter of
an asylum, one who by misconduct &c. loses patronage
or protection.
<LEND>

<L>9540<pc>0134-a<k1>ASrayaRa<k2>ASrayaRa
{%Ā-śrayaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ resorting to, seeking refuge
in; relating to; ({%am%}), n. betaking one's self to;
joining, accepting, choosing; refuge, asylum, means
of protection or security.
<LEND>

<L>9541<pc>0134-a<k1>ASrayaRIya<k2>ASrayaRIya
{%Ā-śrayaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be had recourse to,
to be practised or followed.
<LEND>

<L>9542<pc>0134-a<k1>ASrita<k2>ASrita
{%Ā-śrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ inhabiting, dwelling in, resort-
ing to as a retreat or asylum; having recourse to;
following, practising, observing; using, employing;
receiving anything as an inherent or integral part;
taking one's station at a window or seat &c.; depend-
ant on, a dependant; ({%āni%}), n. pl. the objects perceived
by the senses and {%manas%} or mind. {%—Āśrita-tva, am,%}
n. dependance.
<LEND>

<L>9543<pc>0134-a<k1>ASritya<k2>ASritya
{%Ā-śritya,%}¦ ind. having sought or obtained an asylum;
having recourse to, employing, practising.
<LEND>

<L>9544<pc>0134-a<k1>ASri<k2>ASri<h>2
{#ASri#} 2¦. {%āśri, is,%} f. the edge of a sword.
See {%aśri.%}
<LEND>

<L>9545<pc>0134-a<k1>ASru<k2>ASru
{#ASru#}¦ {%ā-śru,%} cl. 5. P. {%-śṛṇoti, -śrotum,%} to
listen to, to hear; to accept, promise: Caus. {%-śrāva-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to hear, to call, to tell: Desid.
{%-śuśrūṣati,%} to wish to hear; to listen.
<LEND>

<L>9546<pc>0134-a<k1>ASrava<k2>ASrava<h>2
2. {%ā-śrava, as, ā, am,%}¦ obedient, compliant; ({%as%}),
m. a promise, an engagement. (For 1. {%ā-śrava%} see
last page.)
<LEND>

<L>9547<pc>0134-a<k1>ASrAvaRa<k2>ASrAvaRa
{%Ā-śrāvaṇa, am,%}¦ n. calling out so as to make one
listen; designation of certain short words uttered at
ceremonies.
<LEND>

<L>9548<pc>0134-a<k1>ASrAvya<k2>ASrAvya
{%Ā-śrāvya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>9549<pc>0134-a<k1>ASruta<k2>ASruta
{%Ā-śruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ heard, promised, agreed; ({%am%}),
n. calling so as to make one listen.
<LEND>

<L>9550<pc>0134-a<k1>ASruti<k2>ASruti
{%Ā-śruti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. hearing; range of hearing.
<LEND>

<L>9551<pc>0134-a<k1>ASrutkarRa<k2>ASrutkarRa
{%Āśrut-karṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. one whose ears
listen all around.
<LEND>

<L>9552<pc>0134-a<k1>ASliz<k2>ASliz
{#ASliz#}¦ {%ā-śliṣ,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-śliṣyati, -te,%}
{%-śleṣṭum,%} to embrace.
<LEND>

<L>9553<pc>0134-a<k1>ASreza<k2>ASreza
{%Ā-śreṣa, as,%}¦ m. (for {%ā-śleṣa%}), Ved. one who
embraces; N. of an evil spirit or goblin; ({%ās%}), f. pl.,
N. of the seventh Nakṣatra or lunar mansion.
<LEND>

<L>9554<pc>0134-a<k1>ASlizwa<k2>ASlizwa
{%Ā-śliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ embraced; embracing, who
or what embraces; connected, interwoven, blended;
attaching to, joining, who or what adheres to; in-
vested, spread; connected as a consequence, deduced,
concluded.
<LEND>

<L>9555<pc>0134-a<k1>ASleza<k2>ASleza
{%Ā-śleṣa, as,%}¦ m. embracing, embrace, intwining;
intimate connection, contact; site of any act; ({%ās%}),
f. pl., N. of the seventh Nakṣatra.
<LEND>

<L>9556<pc>0134-a<k1>ASva<k2>ASva
{#ASva#}¦ {%āśva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%aśva%}), relating or
belonging to a horse, equestrian, coming from a horse
(e. g. {%āśvam mūtram,%} ‘the urine of a horse’); drawn
by horses (e. g. {%āśvo rathaḥ,%} ‘a chariot drawn by
horses’); ({%am%}), n. a number of horses, a chariot
drawn by horses; the state or action of a horse.
{%—Āśva-ghna, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>9557<pc>0134-a<k1>ASvatara<k2>ASvatara
{%Āśvatara, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%aśva-tara%}), patronymic of
Buḍila (Bulila); a descendant of Aśvatara, son of
Aśva.
<LEND>

<L>9558<pc>0134-a<k1>ASvatTa<k2>ASvatTa
{%Āśvattha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%aśvattha%}), taken from
or made of the tree Ficus Religiosa; relating to the
fruit-bearing season of this tree; ({%am%}), n. the fruit
of the holy fig tree.
<LEND>

<L>9559<pc>0134-a<k1>ASvatTika<k2>ASvatTika
{%Āśvatthika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or produced by
the Aśvattha tree; relating to its fruit-bearing season.
<LEND>

<L>9560<pc>0134-a<k1>ASvapejin<k2>ASvapejin
{%Āśvapejin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%aśva-peja%}), the pupils
or followers of Aśva-peja.
<LEND>

<L>9561<pc>0134-a<k1>ASvabala<k2>ASvabala
{%Āśvabala, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%aśva-balā%}), produced
by the plant Aśva-balā.
<LEND>

<L>9562<pc>0134-a<k1>ASvabAla<k2>ASvabAla
{%Āśvabāla%}¦ or {%āśvavāla, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%aśva-bāla%}),
made of the cane Aśva-bāla.
<LEND>
[Page0134-b+ 77]

<L>9563<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvameDika<k2>ASvameDika
{%Āśvamedhika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%aśva-medha%}), be-
longing to the horse-sacrifice; ({%āśvamedhikam%}
{%parva%} is the N. of the fourteenth book of the Mahā-
bhārata.)
<LEND>

<L>9564<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvayuja<k2>ASvayuja
{%Āśvayuja, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%aśva-yuj%}), born under
the constellation Aśvayuj, belonging to or occurring
in the month Āśvina; ({%as%}), m. the month Āśvina;
({%ī%}), f. the day of full moon in Āśvina.
<LEND>

<L>9565<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvayujaka<k2>ASvayujaka
{%Āśvayujaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ sown at the day of full
moon in the month Āśvina.
<LEND>

<L>9566<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvaraTa<k2>ASvaraTa
{%Āśvaratha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%aśva-ratha%}), belonging
to a chariot drawn by horses.
<LEND>

<L>9567<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvalakzaRika<k2>ASvalakzaRika
{%Āśvalakṣaṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%aśva-lakṣaṇa%}),
knowing the marks of horses; ({%as%}), m. a farrier,
a groom.
<LEND>

<L>9568<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvAyana<k2>ASvAyana
{%Āśvāyana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%aśva + ayana%}), a descendant
of Aśva.
<LEND>

<L>9569<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvika<k2>ASvika
{%Āśvika, as, ī, am,%}¦ equestrian, cavalier, relating to
a horse, drawn by horses.
<LEND>

<L>9570<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvina<k2>ASvina
{%Āśvina, as, ī, am,%}¦ (if fr. 1. {%aśvin%}) Ved. like
riders; belonging to or devoted to the Aśvins; (if fr.
rt. 1. {%aś,%} to pervade), pervading, penetrating; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a month of the rainy season, during which
the moon is near to the constellation Aśvinī; ({%ī%}), f.,
N. of certain ({%iṣṭakā%}), bricks; ({%am%}), n. a day's
journey for a horse or rider.
<LEND>

<L>9571<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvineya<k2>ASvineya
{%Āśvineya, as,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%aśvinau,%} the
fathers of the twins Nakula and Sahadeva), N. of
Sahadeva, the youngest of the Pāṇḍava princes; (fr.
their mother {%Aśvinī%}), an epithet of either of the two
Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>9572<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvIna<k2>ASvIna
{%Āśvīna, as, ī, am,%}¦ passed over by a horse in one
day; ({%am%}), n. a day's journey for a horse.
<LEND>

<L>9573<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvIya<k2>ASvIya
{%Āśvīya, am,%}¦ n. a number of horses.
<LEND>

<L>9574<pc>0134-b<k1>ASveya<k2>ASveya
{%Āśveya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Aśva.
<LEND>

<L>9575<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvapas<k2>ASvapas
{#ASvapas#}¦ {%āśv-apas,%} &c. See under {%āśu.%}
<LEND>

<L>9576<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvalAyana<k2>ASvalAyana
{#ASvalAyana#}¦ {%āśvalāyana, as,%} m. (patronymic
fr. {%aśvala%}), N. of the author of a ritual work, called
the Āśvalāyana Sūtras; he was a disciple of Śaunaka;
({%as, ī, am%}), belonging to Āśvalāyana.
<LEND>

<L>9577<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvas<k2>ASvas
{#ASvas#}¦ {%ā-śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śvasiti, -situm,%} to
breathe, breathe again, breathe freely, take breath,
recover breath, take heart or courage; to revive:
Caus. P. {%-śvāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause one to take
breath; to encourage, comfort, cheer up; to con-
ciliate.
<LEND>

<L>9578<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvasat<k2>ASvasat
{%Ā-śvasat, an, atī, at,%}¦ taking breath, breathing
anew; reviving; recovering.
<LEND>

<L>9579<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvasita<k2>ASvasita
{%Ā-śvasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ encouraged, cheered, con-
soled.
<LEND>

<L>9580<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvAsa<k2>ASvAsa
{%Ā-śvāsa, as,%}¦ m. breathing again, taking breath,
breathing freely, recovery; cheering up, consolation;
a chapter or section, the division of a book; a pro-
bable story; cessation, completion.
<LEND>

<L>9581<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvAsaka<k2>ASvAsaka
{%Ā-śvāsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ consolatory, consoling,
comforting; ({%as%}), m. clothing.
<LEND>

<L>9582<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvAsana<k2>ASvAsana
{%Ā-śvāsana, am,%}¦ n. making or letting one take
breath, consoling, encouraging, reviving; cheering up.
<LEND>

<L>9583<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvAsayat<k2>ASvAsayat
{%Ā-śvāsayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ encouraging, animating.
<LEND>

<L>9584<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvAsita<k2>ASvAsita
{%Ā-śvāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ encouraged, animated, com-
forted, consoled.
<LEND>

<L>9585<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvAsin<k2>ASvAsin
{%Ā-śvāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ breathing freely, reviving, be-
coming cheerful; consoling.
<LEND>

<L>9586<pc>0134-b<k1>ASvAsya<k2>ASvAsya
{%Ā-śvāsya,%}¦ ind. having consoled, having cherished;
having recovered or revived.
<LEND>

<L>9587<pc>0134-b<k1>AzAQa<k2>AzAQa
{#AzAQa#}¦ {%āṣāḍha, as,%} m. (fr. {%a-ṣāḍhā%}), N.
of a month, corresponding to part of June and July,
in which the full moon is near the constellation
Aṣāḍhā; a staff of the wood of the Palāśa, carried
by an ascetic during certain vows in the month
Āṣāḍha; N. of a prince; the Malaya mountain;
({%ā%}), f. the twenty-first and twenty-second lunar
mansions, commonly compounded with {%pūrva%} and
{%uttara; (ī),%} f. the day of full moon in the month
Āṣāḍha. {%—Āṣāḍha-bhava, as, ā, am,%} produced
in the month Āṣāḍha; ({%as%}), m. the planet Mars.
{%—Āṣāḍha-bhūti, is,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Āṣāḍhā- %}
[Page0134-c+ 74]
{%bhū, ūs,%} m. produced in the month Āṣāḍha; the
planet Mars.
<LEND>

<L>9588<pc>0134-c<k1>AzAQaka<k2>AzAQaka
{%Āṣāḍhaka, as,%}¦ m. the month Āṣāḍha; N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>9589<pc>0134-c<k1>AzAQikA<k2>AzAQikA
{%Āṣāḍhikā,%}¦ f., N. of a Rākṣasī.
<LEND>

<L>9590<pc>0134-c<k1>AzAQIya<k2>AzAQIya
{%Āṣāḍhīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ born under the constella-
tion Aṣāḍhā.
<LEND>

<L>9591<pc>0134-c<k1>Azwaka<k2>Azwaka
{#Azwaka#}¦ {%āṣṭaka,%} N. of a region.
<LEND>

<L>9592<pc>0134-c<k1>Azwama<k2>Azwama
{#Azwama#}¦ {%āṣṭama, as,%} m. (fr. {%aṣṭama%}), the
eighth part.
<LEND>

<L>9593<pc>0134-c<k1>Azwra<k2>Azwra
{#Azwra#}¦ {%āṣṭra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%aś%}), ether,
sky, atmosphere.
<LEND>

<L>9594<pc>0134-c<k1>AzwrI<k2>AzwrI
{#AzwrI#}¦ {%āṣṭrī,%} f., Ved. kitchen, fire-place;
(if fr. rt. 1. {%aś,%} according to Sāy.) an extensive forest.
<LEND>

<L>9595<pc>0134-c<k1>AzWA<k2>AzWA
{#AzWA#}¦ {%āṣṭhā,%} f. [cf. 2. {%āśā%}], region, quarter.
<LEND>

<L>9596<pc>0134-c<k1>As<k2>As<h>1
{#As#} 1¦. {%ās,%} ind. (an interjection implying
joy, anger, menace, pain, affliction, recollection) Ah!
Oh! &c.
<LEND>

<L>9597<pc>0134-c<k1>As<k2>As<h>2
{#As#} 2¦. {%ās (ā-as),%} cl. 4. P., Ved. {%āsyati,%}
{%situm,%} to enclose, border; to admit (as water) into.
<LEND>

<L>9598<pc>0134-c<k1>As<k2>As<h>3
3. {%ās%}¦ (fr. 2. {%ās%} above ? or fr. rt. 2. {%as;%} cf. Lat. <nsi>os</nsi>),
mouth, face; only used in two forms, as follows: {%āsas,%}
abl., Ved. from mouth to mouth, in close proximity;
{%āsā,%} inst., Ved. before one's eyes; by word of mouth,
personally; present; in one's own person; immedi-
ately. {%—Ās-pātra, am,%} n., Ved. a vessel which is as
it were the mouth of the gods.
<LEND>

<L>9599<pc>0134-c<k1>As<k2>As<h>4
{#As#} 4¦. {%ās,%} cl. 2. A. {%āste%} (Ved. and poet.
also cl. 1. A. {%āsate%}), {%āsāñ-cakre, āsiṣyate,%}
{%-āsiṣṭa, -situm,%} to sit, sit down, rest, lie; to be
present, to exist, to inhabit, dwell in; to make one's
abode in; to sit quietly, abide, remain, continue; to
cease, have an end; to solemnize, celebrate; to do
anything without interruption, to continue doing any-
thing, to continue in any situation, to last. It is used
in the sense of ‘continuing,’ with a participle, adj., or
subst. (e. g. {%etat sāma gāyann āste,%} ‘he continues
singing this verse’); with an indeclinable participle in
{%tvā, ya,%} or {%am%} (e. g. {%uparudhya arim āsīta,%} ‘he
should continue blockading the foe’); with an adverb
(e. g. {%tūṣṇīm āste,%} ‘he continues quiet;’ {%sukham%}
{%āsva,%} ‘continue well’); with an inst. case (e. g.
{%sukhena āste,%} ‘he continues well’); with a dat. case
(e. g. {%āstāṃ tuṣṭaye,%} ‘may it be to your satisfac-
tion’): Caus. {%āsayati, -yitum,%} to cause any one to
sit down: Desid. {%āsisiṣate;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἧ(σ)-μαι, ἧσ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">ται</lang> Lat. <nsi>âsa</nsi> changed to <nsi>âra; â-nus</nsi> for <nsi>âs-nus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>9600<pc>0134-c<k1>Asa<k2>Asa<h>1
1. {%āsa,%}¦ seat (e. g. in the compound {%svāsa-stha,%}
‘staying in one's own seat’); ({%am%}), n. the seat or
lower part of the body; proximity.
<LEND>

<L>9601<pc>0134-c<k1>Asana<k2>Asana<h>1
1. {%āsana, am,%}¦ n. sitting, sitting down; sitting in
peculiar postures, according to the custom of devotees,
(five or, in other places, even eighty-four postures are
enumerated; see {%padmāsana, bhadrāsana, vajrā-%}
{%sana, vīrāsana, svastikāsana:%} the manner of
sitting forming part of the eight-fold observances of
ascetics); halting, stopping, encamping; abiding,
dwelling; seat, place, stool; the withers of an ele-
phant, the part where the driver sits; maintaining a
post against an enemy; ({%ā%}), f. stay, abiding; ({%ī%}), f.
stay, abiding, sitting; a shop, a stall; a small seat, a
stool.
<LEND>

<L>9602<pc>0134-c<k1>Asita<k2>Asita
{%Āsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ seated, at rest, one who has sat
down, one who is seated or dwells; ({%am%}), n. sitting,
sitting down; a seat; place where one has lived,
place of abode, a city; {%dur-āsitam,%} an improper
way of sitting.
<LEND>

<L>9603<pc>0134-c<k1>AsIna<k2>AsIna
{%Āsīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sitting, seated. {%—Āsīna-praca-%}
{%lāyita, am,%} n. nodding, nodding when seated, falling
asleep.
<LEND>

<L>9604<pc>0134-c<k1>AsyA<k2>AsyA
{%Āsyā,%}¦ f. sitting, abiding, abode, state of rest.
<LEND>

<L>9605<pc>0134-c<k1>As<k2>As<h>5
{#As#} 5¦. {%ās (ā-ās),%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%āste, -si-%}
{%tum,%} to sit down upon.
<LEND>

<L>9606<pc>0134-c<k1>Asa<k2>Asa<h>2
{#Asa#} 2¦. {%āsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%as,%} to throw),
[Page0135-a+ 77]
Ved. ashes, dust which easily flies away; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. a bow. (For 1. {%āsa%} see under 4. {%ās.%})
<LEND>

<L>9607<pc>0135-a<k1>Asana<k2>Asana<h>2
2. {%āsana, am,%}¦ n. throwing; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
tree. See {%asana.%}
<LEND>

<L>9608<pc>0135-a<k1>AsaMsAra<k2>AsaMsAra
{#AsaMsAra#}¦ {%ā-saṃsāra, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%sṛ%}), liable
to continuous flow, progress or alteration; ({%am%}), ind.
as long as the world goes on, till the end of the
world.
<LEND>

<L>9609<pc>0135-a<k1>AsaNgatya<k2>AsaNgatya
{#AsaNgatya#}¦ {%āsaṅgatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%a-saṅgata%}),
detachment, disunion.
<LEND>

<L>9610<pc>0135-a<k1>AsaYj<k2>AsaYj
{#AsaYj#}¦ {%ā-sañj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sajati, -saṅktum,%}
to fasten on, attach, fix; to fasten on one's self, put
on (as dress, armour, &c.); to take up: Caus. {%-sañja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to attach, have (anything)
fastened or put on: Pass. {%-sajyate,%} to adhere, cohere,
to be attached.
<LEND>

<L>9611<pc>0135-a<k1>Asakta<k2>Asakta
{%Ā-sakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached strongly to or intent
on; zealously following or pursuing; trusting to,
confiding in, eternal; ({%am%}), ind. eternally. {%—Āsakta-%}
{%citta, as, ā, am,%} having the mind deeply engaged
in, intent on, devoted to, absorbed in. {%—Āsakta-%}
{%cetas, ās, ās, as,%} having the mind fixed or intent on
any object. {%—Āsakta-manas, ās, ās, as,%} having the
mind fixed upon any object.
<LEND>

<L>9612<pc>0135-a<k1>Asakti<k2>Asakti
{%Ā-sakti, is,%}¦ f. devotedness or attachment (as to
one object or pursuit), diligence, application; Ved.
lying wait for, way-laying; ({%i%}), ind., Ved. purposely,
intentionally.
<LEND>

<L>9613<pc>0135-a<k1>AsaNga<k2>AsaNga
{%Ā-saṅga, as,%}¦ m. fastening to, fixing; association,
connection; attachment to any object; proximity,
contact; Ved. way-laying; N. of a man; ({%am%}), n.
a kind of fragrant earth; ({%as, ā, am%}), uninterrupted,
eternal; ({%am%}), ind. without interruption; eternally.
<LEND>

<L>9614<pc>0135-a<k1>AsaNginI<k2>AsaNginI
{%Ā-saṅginī,%}¦ f. a whirlwind.
<LEND>

<L>9615<pc>0135-a<k1>AsaNgima<k2>AsaNgima
{%Āsaṅgima, as,%}¦ m. (in surgery) a kind of bandage.
<LEND>

<L>9616<pc>0135-a<k1>AsaYjana<k2>AsaYjana
{%Ā-sañjana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. putting on (dress, armour,
ornaments, &c.); fastening to, fixing; a handle, a
hook. {%—Āsañjana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a handle,
hook, loop, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9617<pc>0135-a<k1>Asad<k2>Asad
{#Asad#}¦ {%ā-sad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sīdati, -sattum,%} to
sit down, sit near; to place; to approach, meet with,
find; encounter, attack, commence, undertake; cl.
10. P. {%-sādayati, -yitum,%} to approach, meet with,
find; encounter, attack; commence, undertake; Ved.
to make one sit down.
<LEND>

<L>9618<pc>0135-a<k1>Asatti<k2>Asatti
{%Ā-satti, is,%}¦ f. intimate union, meeting, junction;
gain, profit, acquirement; (in logic) connection or
relation between two or more proximate terms and
the sense they convey.
<LEND>

<L>9619<pc>0135-a<k1>Asadana<k2>Asadana
{%Ā-sadana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sitting down; a seat.
<LEND>

<L>9620<pc>0135-a<k1>Asanna<k2>Asanna
{%Ā-sanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ near, proximate; ({%as%}), m.
the setting sun. {%—Āsanna-kāla, as,%} m. the hour of
death; one whose last hour is at hand. {%—Āsanna-%}
{%tara, as, ā, am,%} nearer. {%—Āsannatara-tā,%} f. greater
nearness. {%—Āsanna-prasava, as, ā, am,%} near par-
turition, about to bring forth or to lay eggs.
<LEND>

<L>9621<pc>0135-a<k1>AsAda<k2>AsAda
{%Ā-sāda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a cushion.
<LEND>

<L>9622<pc>0135-a<k1>AsAdana<k2>AsAdana
{%Ā-sādana, am,%}¦ n. putting or laying down; attack-
ing, making war upon; going to or towards; meeting
with; obtaining, attaining; accomplishing.
<LEND>

<L>9623<pc>0135-a<k1>AsAdayitavya<k2>AsAdayitavya
{%Ā-sādayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attacked, to be
encountered; attainable.
<LEND>

<L>9624<pc>0135-a<k1>AsAdita<k2>AsAdita
{%Ā-sādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtained, acquired, gained,
reached, gone to; spread, extended, overspread;
effected, completed; met with, attacked.
<LEND>

<L>9625<pc>0135-a<k1>AsAdya<k2>AsAdya<h>1
1. {%ā-sādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ attainable, obtainable.
<LEND>

<L>9626<pc>0135-a<k1>AsAdya<k2>AsAdya<h>2
2. {%ā-sādya,%}¦ ind. having attained or reached; hav-
ing obtained, according to.
<LEND>

<L>9627<pc>0135-a<k1>AsisAdayizu<k2>AsisAdayizu
{%Ā-sisādayiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ about to attack; wishing
to attack.
<LEND>

<L>9628<pc>0135-a<k1>Asan<k2>Asan
{#Asan#}¦ {%āsan,%} n. [cf. 2. {%ās%} and {%āsya%}], Ved.
the mouth, the jaws; (this word occurs in inst.,
dat., abl., loc. sing., and inst. plur.) {%—Āsann-iṣu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. one who has arrows in his mouth.
<LEND>

<L>9629<pc>0135-a<k1>Asanya<k2>Asanya
{%Āsanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>9630<pc>0135-a<k1>Asana<k2>Asana
{#Asana#}¦ {%āsana,%} See under 4. {%ās%} and 2. {%āsa.%}
<LEND>

<L>9631<pc>0135-a<k1>Asanda<k2>Asanda
{#Asanda#}¦ {%āsanda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sad%} with {%ā ?%}),
[Page0135-b+ 71]
an epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%ī%}), f. a small couch or oblong
chair, the seat of which is made of basket work;
a chair, arm-chair. {%—Āsandī-vat, ān,%} m., N. of a
country.
<LEND>

<L>9632<pc>0135-b<k1>Asanvat<k2>Asanvat
{#Asanvat#}¦ {%āsanvat, ān, atī, at%} (fr. rt. 1. {%as?%}),
Ved. what exists or is present (?).
<LEND>

<L>9633<pc>0135-b<k1>AsamudrAt<k2>AsamudrAt
{#AsamudrAt#}¦ {%ā-samudrāt,%} ind. as far as the
ocean.
<LEND>

<L>9634<pc>0135-b<k1>AsambADa<k2>AsambADa
{#AsambADa#}¦ {%ā-sambādha, as, ā, am,%} blocked
up, obstructed, confined.
<LEND>

<L>9635<pc>0135-b<k1>AsayA<k2>AsayA
{#AsayA#}¦ {%āsayā,%} ind. (irreg. inst. case fr.
3. {%ās,%} q. v.), Ved. together with, from mouth to
mouth, near to, in the presence of.
<LEND>

<L>9636<pc>0135-b<k1>Asava<k2>Asava
{#Asava#}¦ {%ā-sava.%} See under {%ā-su.%}
<LEND>

<L>9637<pc>0135-b<k1>AsAt<k2>AsAt
{#AsAt#}¦ {%āsāt,%} ind. (fr. 1. {%āsa%}), Ved. from or
in the proximity, near.
<LEND>

<L>9638<pc>0135-b<k1>AsADana<k2>AsADana
{#AsADana#}¦ {%ā-sādhana, am,%} n. (rt. 1. {%sidh%}),
accomplishment, attainment.
<LEND>

<L>9639<pc>0135-b<k1>AsidDa<k2>AsidDa<h>1
1. {%ā-siddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ accomplished, effected.
(For 2. {%ā-siddha%} see below.)
<LEND>

<L>9640<pc>0135-b<k1>AsAra<k2>AsAra
{#AsAra#}¦ {%ā-sāra, as,%} m. (rt. {%sṛ%}), surrounding
an enemy; incursion; attack; a hard shower; the
army of an ally or of a king, whose dominions are
separated by other intervening states; provision, food.
<LEND>

<L>9641<pc>0135-b<k1>AsAvya<k2>AsAvya
{#AsAvya#}¦ {%ā-sāvya.%} See under 2. {%ā-su.%}
<LEND>

<L>9642<pc>0135-b<k1>Asika<k2>Asika
{#Asika#}¦ {%āsika, as,%} m. (fr. {%asi%}), a swordsman.
<LEND>

<L>9643<pc>0135-b<k1>AsikA<k2>AsikA
{#AsikA#}¦ {%āsikā,%} f. (fr. rt. 4. {%ās%}), turn or
order of sitting; sitting; ({%as, ā, am%}), one who sits.
<LEND>

<L>9644<pc>0135-b<k1>Asic<k2>Asic<h>1
{#Asic#} 1¦. {%ā-sic,%} cl. 6. P. {%-siñcati, -sektum,%}
to pour in or on, besprinkle, wet, water: Caus.
{%-secayati, -yitum,%} to have (anything) poured in.
<LEND>

<L>9645<pc>0135-b<k1>Asikta<k2>Asikta
{%Ā-sikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ poured in or on; sprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>9646<pc>0135-b<k1>Asic<k2>Asic<h>2
2. {%ā-sic, k,%}¦ f., Ved. a dish, vessel; (Say.) an oblation
which is poured out.
<LEND>

<L>9647<pc>0135-b<k1>Aseka<k2>Aseka
{%Ā-seka, as,%}¦ m. wetting, sprinkling, pouring in.
<LEND>

<L>9648<pc>0135-b<k1>Asecana<k2>Asecana
{%Ā-secana, am,%}¦ n. the act of pouring into, wetting,
sprinkling; Ved. a reservoir or vessel for fluids;
({%as, ī, am%}), charming, lovely, beloved [cf. {%a-secana,%}
for which it may be a substitute]. {%—Āsecana-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} containing a reservoir or cavity, hollow,
concave.
<LEND>

<L>9649<pc>0135-b<k1>Asecanaka<k2>Asecanaka
{%Āsecanaka, as, ā, am%}¦ (?), beloved, desired, charm-
ing [cf. {%a-secana%}].
<LEND>

<L>9650<pc>0135-b<k1>AsidDa<k2>AsidDa<h>2
{#AsidDa#} 2¦. {%ā-siddha, as, ā, am%} (rt. 2. {%sidh%}),
put under restraint, imprisoned. (For 1. see above.)
<LEND>

<L>9651<pc>0135-b<k1>AsedDf<k2>AsedDf
{%Ā-seddhṛ, dhā,%}¦ m. one who confines or arrests
another.
<LEND>

<L>9652<pc>0135-b<k1>AseDa<k2>AseDa
{%Ā-sedha, as,%}¦ m. arrest, custody, legal restraint of
four kinds, viz. {%kālāsedha,%} limitation of time; {%sthā-%}
{%nāsedha,%} confinement to a place; {%pravāsāsedha,%}
prohibition against removal or departure; {%karmā-%}
{%sedha,%} restriction from employment.
<LEND>

<L>9653<pc>0135-b<k1>AseDaka<k2>AseDaka
{%Ā-sedhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ restraining, confining.
<LEND>

<L>9654<pc>0135-b<k1>AseDanIya<k2>AseDanIya
{%Ā-sedhanīya%}¦ or {%ā-sedhya, as, ā, am,%} to be placed
in custody, restrained, confined, prohibited, interrupted.
<LEND>

<L>9655<pc>0135-b<k1>Asu<k2>Asu<h>1
{#Asu#} 1¦. {%ā-su,%} cl. 5. P., Ved. {%-sunoti, -sotum,%}
to press out Soma juice, to distil.
<LEND>

<L>9656<pc>0135-b<k1>Asava<k2>Asava<h>1
1. {%ā-sava, as,%}¦ m. distilling, distillation; decoction;
rum, spirit distilled from sugar or molasses, spirituous
liquor in general: (for 2. {%ā-sava%} see next col.)
{%—Āsava-dru, us,%} m., N. of the Palmyra tree, Bo-
rassus Flabellifornis; (its juice on fermenting afford-
ing a spirituous liquor.)
<LEND>

<L>9657<pc>0135-b<k1>AsAva<k2>AsAva
{%Ā-sāva, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who presses out the
Soma juice; (Sāy.) a praiser (?).
<LEND>

<L>9658<pc>0135-b<k1>Asuti<k2>Asuti<h>1
1. {%ā-suti, is,%}¦ f. distilling; decoction; a draught so
prepared; distillation: (for 2. {%ā-suti%} see next col.)
{%—Āsutī-vala, as,%} m. a sacrificing priest; a sacrificer
at the full and change of the moon; one who pre-
pares or sells spirituous liquors, a distiller; one who
sells female slaves (?).
<LEND>
[Page0135-c+ 72]

<L>9659<pc>0135-c<k1>Asu<k2>Asu<h>2
{#Asu#} 2¦. {%ā-su,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-sauti, -sotum,%}
to bring forth, excite.
<LEND>

<L>9660<pc>0135-c<k1>Asava<k2>Asava<h>2
2. {%ā-sava, as,%}¦ m., Ved. exciting, enlivening.
<LEND>

<L>9661<pc>0135-c<k1>Asavitf<k2>Asavitf
{%Ā-savitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. exciting, an exciter.
<LEND>

<L>9662<pc>0135-c<k1>AsAvya<k2>AsAvya
{%Ā-sāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be born.
<LEND>

<L>9663<pc>0135-c<k1>Asuti<k2>Asuti<h>2
2. {%ā-suti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. exciting, enlivening.
<LEND>

<L>9664<pc>0135-c<k1>Asura<k2>Asura
{#Asura#}¦ {%āsura, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%asura%}), spiritual,
divine; belonging to or devoted to evil spirits; be-
longing or relating to the Asuras; infernal, demoni-
acal; ({%as%}), m. an Asura or demon; a form of mar-
riage in which the bridegroom purchases the bride
from her father and paternal kinsmen; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the stars of the southern hemisphere; a prince of the
warrior-tribe Asura; ({%ī%}), f. a division of medicine,
surgery, curing by cutting with instruments, applying
the actual cautery; N. of the plant Sinapis Ramosa;
({%am%}), n. blood; black salt.
<LEND>

<L>9665<pc>0135-c<k1>AsurAyaRa<k2>AsurAyaRa
{%Āsurāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>9666<pc>0135-c<k1>Asuri<k2>Asuri
{%Āsuri, is,%}¦ m. (patron. fr. {%asura%}), N. of a teacher.
{%—Āsuri-vāsin, ī,%} m. an epithet of Prāśnīputra.
<LEND>

<L>9667<pc>0135-c<k1>AsurIya<k2>AsurIya
{%Āsurīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to or coming from
Āsuri.
<LEND>

<L>9668<pc>0135-c<k1>AsU<k2>AsU
{#AsU#}¦ {%ā-sū,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-suvati, -savitum,%}
to bring or send quickly, yield, grant.
<LEND>

<L>9669<pc>0135-c<k1>AsUtrita<k2>AsUtrita
{#AsUtrita#}¦ {%ā-sūtrita, as, ā, am,%} tied on or
round, forming or wearing a garland.
<LEND>

<L>9670<pc>0135-c<k1>Asfj<k2>Asfj
{#Asfj#}¦ {%ā-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-sṛjati, -sraṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to pour out upon, pour in.
<LEND>

<L>9671<pc>0135-c<k1>AseDa<k2>AseDa
{#AseDa#}¦ {%ā-sedha.%} See 2. {%ā-siddha%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>9672<pc>0135-c<k1>Asev<k2>Asev
{#Asev#}¦ {%ā-sev,%} cl. 1. A. or poet. P. {%-sevate,%}
{%-ti, -vitum,%} to attend to, accomplish; carry out,
practice, perform assiduously; to indulge in, enjoy.
<LEND>

<L>9673<pc>0135-c<k1>Asevana<k2>Asevana
{%Ā-sevana, am,%}¦ n. assiduous practice or performance
of any action.
<LEND>

<L>9674<pc>0135-c<k1>AsevA<k2>AsevA
{%Ā-sevā,%}¦ f. zealous cultivation of any pursuit; com-
merce, intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>9675<pc>0135-c<k1>Asevin<k2>Asevin
{%Ā-sevin, ī, inī, i,%}¦  performing assiduously, acting.
<LEND>

<L>9676<pc>0135-c<k1>Askand<k2>Askand
{#Askand#}¦ {%ā-skand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-skandati, -skan-%}
{%tum,%} to invade, attack.
<LEND>

<L>9677<pc>0135-c<k1>Askanda<k2>Askanda
{%Ā-skanda, as,%}¦ m. ascending, mounting; assault,
attack; an assailant.
<LEND>

<L>9678<pc>0135-c<k1>Askandana<k2>Askandana
{%Ā-skandana, am,%}¦ n. going towards, assailing, at-
tack; battle, war; reproach, abuse; effacing, destroy-
ing; drying (?).
<LEND>

<L>9679<pc>0135-c<k1>Askandita<k2>Askandita
{%Ā-skandita%}¦ or {%ā-skanditaka, am,%} n. the walk of
an horse.
<LEND>

<L>9680<pc>0135-c<k1>Askandin<k2>Askandin
{%Ā-skandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ jumping upon, assailing;
causing to flow; granting.
<LEND>

<L>9681<pc>0135-c<k1>Asku<k2>Asku
{#Asku#}¦ {%ā-sku,%} cl. 5. P., Ved. {%-skunoti, -sko-%}
{%tum,%} to snatch up.
<LEND>

<L>9682<pc>0135-c<k1>Askra<k2>Askra
{#Askra#}¦ {%ā-skra, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%skṛ%} = rt. {%kṛ?%}),
Ved. joined, united; (Sāy.) attacking, assailing ene-
mies, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>9683<pc>0135-c<k1>Astara<k2>Astara
{#Astara, AstaraRa#}¦, &c. See under {%ā-stṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>9684<pc>0135-c<k1>AstAva<k2>AstAva
{#AstAva#}¦ {%ā-stāva, as,%} m. (rt. {%stu%}), Ved. the
place of reciting a particular hymn.
<LEND>

<L>9685<pc>0135-c<k1>Astika<k2>Astika
{#Astika#}¦ {%āstika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%asti,%} 3rd pers.
sing. of rt. 1. {%as%}), a believer in sacred tradition; one
who believes in God and another world; believing,
pious, faithful; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Muni or saint,
more correctly written {%āstīka,%} q. v. {%—Āstika-tā,%} f.
or {%āstika-tva, am,%} n. belief in God.
<LEND>

<L>9686<pc>0135-c<k1>AstikArTada<k2>AstikArTada
{%Āstikārthada%}¦ or {%āstīkārthada (˚ka-artha-da),%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of king Janam-ejaya (who granted
the request of the sage Āstika, and spared the Nāga
Takṣaka from the destruction to which he had
doomed the serpent-race).
<LEND>

<L>9687<pc>0135-c<k1>Astikya<k2>Astikya
{%Āstikya, am,%}¦ n. belief in God, piety, faithfulness,
a believing nature or disposition.
<LEND>

<L>9688<pc>0135-c<k1>AstIka<k2>AstIka
{%Āstīka, as,%}¦ m., N. of an old saint, the son of
Jarat-kāru; ({%as, ī, am%}), relating to or treating of
that saint; {%āstīkam parva,%} a section of the first
[Page0136-a+ 74]
book of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Āstīka-jananī,%} f. the
wife of Jarat-kāru and mother of Āstīka.
<LEND>

<L>9689<pc>0136-a<k1>AstIkya<k2>AstIkya
{%Āstīkya, am,%}¦ n. (? error for {%āstikya%}), belief.
<LEND>

<L>9690<pc>0136-a<k1>Astf<k2>Astf
{#Astf#}¦ {%ā-stṛ%} or {%ā-stṝ,%} cl. 5. 9. P. A. {%-stṛ-%}
{%ṇoti, -ṇute, -ṇāti, -ṇīte, -startum, -ritum, -rītum,%}
to spread (as a carpet &c.), deck, bestrew, scatter
over, cover.
<LEND>

<L>9691<pc>0136-a<k1>Astara<k2>Astara
{%Ā-stara, as,%}¦ m. a covering, coverlet, blanket
thrown over the back of a horse or elephant; a carpet,
bed; spreading (clothes &c.); N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>9692<pc>0136-a<k1>AstaraRa<k2>AstaraRa
{%Ā-staraṇa, am, ī,%}¦ n. f. the act of spreading; a
carpet, a rug, a cushion, a quilt, bed-clothes; a bed;
a layer of sacred grass spread out at a sacrifice;
an elephant's housings, a painted cloth or blanket
worn on his back. {%—Āstaraṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
covered with a cloth or carpet.
<LEND>

<L>9693<pc>0136-a<k1>AstaraRika<k2>AstaraRika
{%Āstaraṇika, as, ā, am,%}¦ resting on a cloth or
carpet.
<LEND>

<L>9694<pc>0136-a<k1>AstAra<k2>AstAra
{%Ā-stāra, as,%}¦ m. spreading, strewing, scattering.
{%—Āstāra-paṅkti, is,%} f., N. of a metre, the first
verse of which consists of two Pādas of eight syllables
each, the second of two Pādas of twelve syllables
each.
<LEND>

<L>9695<pc>0136-a<k1>AstIrRa<k2>AstIrRa
{%Ā-stīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread, strewed, scattered.
<LEND>

<L>9696<pc>0136-a<k1>Astfta<k2>Astfta
{%Ā-stṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread, covered, strewed.
<LEND>

<L>9697<pc>0136-a<k1>AstrabuDna<k2>AstrabuDna
{#AstrabuDna#}¦ {%āstrabudhna, as,%} m., Ved., N. of
a man.
<LEND>

<L>9698<pc>0136-a<k1>AsTA<k2>AsTA<h>1
{#AsTA#} 1¦. {%ā-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. or poet. A.
{%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -sthātum,%} to stand or remain on or
by; to stay near, go towards, resort to; to ascend,
mount; to undertake, perform, do, carry out, practise,
use; to behave; to exhibit, aim at; to undertake,
i. e. promise.
<LEND>

<L>9699<pc>0136-a<k1>AsTA<k2>AsTA<h>2
2. {%ā-sthā,%}¦ f. consideration, regard, care, care for
(with loc., e. g. {%mayi āsthā,%} care for me); assent,
promise; confidence, hope; prop, stay, support;
place or means of abiding; an assembly; state, con-
dition.
<LEND>

<L>9700<pc>0136-a<k1>AsTAtf<k2>AsTAtf
{%Ā-sthātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. standing on, mount-
ing on.
<LEND>

<L>9701<pc>0136-a<k1>AsTAna<k2>AsTAna
{%Ā-sthāna, am,%}¦ n. place, site, ground, base; an
assembly; a hall of audience; ({%ī%}), f. an assembly.
{%—Āsthāna-gṛha, am,%} n. an assembly-room.
<LEND>

<L>9702<pc>0136-a<k1>AsTApana<k2>AsTApana
{%Ā-sthāpana, am,%}¦ n. placing, fixing, causing to stay
or remain; a strengthening remedy; an enema of oil,
ghee, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9703<pc>0136-a<k1>AsTApita<k2>AsTApita
{%Ā-sthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed, fixed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9704<pc>0136-a<k1>AsTAya<k2>AsTAya
{%Ā-sthāya,%}¦ ind. having recourse to, using, employ-
ing; having ascended; standing, standing by.
<LEND>

<L>9705<pc>0136-a<k1>AsTAyikA<k2>AsTAyikA
{%Ā-sthāyikā,%}¦ f. audience; (e. g. {%āsthāyikāṃ dā,%}
to give an audience.)
<LEND>

<L>9706<pc>0136-a<k1>AsTita<k2>AsTita
{%Ā-sthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stayed, dwelt, abiding, abode;
having recourse to; applied to; occupied, engrossed
by, engaged in; spread, overspread; obtained; ob-
serving, adhering to, following, practising.
<LEND>

<L>9707<pc>0136-a<k1>AsTeya<k2>AsTeya
{%Ā-stheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be approached, to be
seized, to be applied or practised.
<LEND>

<L>9708<pc>0136-a<k1>AsnAna<k2>AsnAna
{#AsnAna#}¦ {%ā-snāna, am,%} n. (rt. {%snā%}), Ved.
water for washing, a bath.
<LEND>

<L>9709<pc>0136-a<k1>Asneya<k2>Asneya
{#Asneya#}¦ {%āsneya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%asan%}), Ved.
bloody, being in blood.
<LEND>

<L>9710<pc>0136-a<k1>Aspada<k2>Aspada
{#Aspada#}¦ {%āspada, am,%} n. (fr. {%pada%} with {%ā%}
prefixed, {%s%} being inserted), place, site, seat, office;
rank, station; dignity, authority; business, affair.
Often used in comp.; e. g. {%ahaṅkārāspadam,%} the
seat of consciousness.
<LEND>

<L>9711<pc>0136-a<k1>Aspandana<k2>Aspandana
{#Aspandana#}¦ {%ā-spandana, am,%} n. trembling,
throbbing.
<LEND>

<L>9712<pc>0136-a<k1>AsparDA<k2>AsparDA
{#AsparDA#}¦ {%ā-spardhā,%} f. emulation, rivalry,
endeavour after.
<LEND>

<L>9713<pc>0136-a<k1>AsparDin<k2>AsparDin
{%Ā-spardhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ emulous, striving after.
<LEND>

<L>9714<pc>0136-a<k1>AsparSa<k2>AsparSa
{#AsparSa#}¦ {%ā-sparśa, as,%} m. (rt. {%spṛś%}), contact;
{%āsparśa-tas,%} by the contact.
<LEND>

<L>9715<pc>0136-a<k1>AspAtra<k2>AspAtra
{#AspAtra#}¦ {%ās-pātra.%} See 3. {%ās.%}
<LEND>
[Page0136-b+ 73]

<L>9716<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPal<k2>AsPal
{#AsPal#}¦ {%ā-sphal%} or {%ā-sphul,%} Caus. {%-sphāla-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to flap, rock or shake.
<LEND>

<L>9717<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPAla<k2>AsPAla
{%Ā-sphāla, as,%}¦ m. striking, rubbing, causing to
move gently; flapping, clapping; the flapping mo-
tion of an elephant's ear.
<LEND>

<L>9718<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPAlana<k2>AsPAlana
{%Ā-sphālana, am,%}¦ n. rubbing, stirring, flapping,
moving gently; striking; pride, arrogance.
<LEND>

<L>9719<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPAlita<k2>AsPAlita
{%Ā-sphālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck gently, rubbed,
touched, stirred; flapped, clapped, struck together.
<LEND>

<L>9720<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPAy<k2>AsPAy
{#AsPAy#}¦ {%ā-sphāy,%} cl. 1. A. {%-sphāyate, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to grow, increase.
<LEND>

<L>9721<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPujit<k2>AsPujit
{#AsPujit#}¦ {%āsphujit%} = <lang n="greek">Ἀφροδίτη</lang> N. of the
planet Venus.
<LEND>

<L>9722<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPul<k2>AsPul
{#AsPul#}¦ {%ā-sphul.%} See {%ā-sphal%} above.
<LEND>

<L>9723<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPowa<k2>AsPowa
{#AsPowa#}¦ {%ā-sphoṭa, as,%} m. (rt. {%sphuṭ%}), moving
or flapping to and fro, quivering, trembling, shaking,
the sound of clapping or striking on the arms as
made by combatants, wrestlers, &c.; a plant, see
{%ā-sphota; (ā),%} f. a wild variety of Jasmin.
<LEND>

<L>9724<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPowaka<k2>AsPowaka
{%Ā-sphoṭaka, as,%}¦ m., the plant Careya Arborea.
<LEND>

<L>9725<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPowana<k2>AsPowana
{%Ā-sphoṭana, am,%}¦ n. moving to and fro, flapping,
trembling; shaking; blowing, expanding; contracting,
closing, sealing; slapping or clapping the arms, or
the noise made by it; ({%ī%}), f. a gimlet or auger.
<LEND>

<L>9726<pc>0136-b<k1>AsPota<k2>AsPota
{%Ā-sphota%}¦ or {%ā-sphotaka, as,%} m. (probably an in-
correct form of {%ā-sphoṭa%}), N. of several plants, Ca-
lotropis Gigantea, Bahinia Variegata L., Echites Di-
chotoma Roxb.; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants, Jasmi-
num Sambac, Clitoria Terneata, Echites Frutescens
or Echites Dichotoma.
<LEND>

<L>9727<pc>0136-b<k1>AsmAka<k2>AsmAka
{#AsmAka#}¦ {%āsmāka, as, ī, am,%} or {%āsmākīna,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (fr. {%asmākam%}), our, ours.
<LEND>

<L>9728<pc>0136-b<k1>Asya<k2>Asya
{#Asya#}¦ {%āsya, am,%} n. (see 3. {%ās%}), mouth,
jaws; face; a part of the mouth as the organ of
pronouncing letters; mouth, opening; ({%as, ā, am%}),
belonging or relating to the mouth or face. {%—Āsyan-%}
{%dhaya, as, ī, am,%} drinking the mouth, kissing.
{%—Āsya-pattra, am,%} n. a lotus. {%—Āsya-lāṅgala,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘whose face is a plough;’ a hog, a boar.
{%—Āsya-loman, a,%} n. the hair of the face, the beard.
{%—Āsyāsava (˚ya-ās˚), as,%} m. spittle, saliva.
<LEND>

<L>9729<pc>0136-b<k1>Asyandana<k2>Asyandana
{#Asyandana#}¦ {%ā-syandana, am,%} n. flowing near.
{%—Āsyandana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} flowing near.
<LEND>

<L>9730<pc>0136-b<k1>AsyahAtya<k2>AsyahAtya
{#AsyahAtya#}¦ {%āsyahātya, as, ā, am,%} containing
the word {%asyahatya%} (a chapter).
<LEND>

<L>9731<pc>0136-b<k1>AsyA<k2>AsyA
{#AsyA#}¦ {%āsyā,%} f. See under 4. {%ās.%}
<LEND>

<L>9732<pc>0136-b<k1>Asrapa<k2>Asrapa
{#Asrapa#}¦ {%āsrapa, as,%} m. (fr. {%asra-pa%}), the
nineteenth lunar mansion.
<LEND>

<L>9733<pc>0136-b<k1>Asrava<k2>Asrava
{#Asrava#}¦ {%ā-srava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sru%} with
prep. {%ā%}), the foam on boiling rice; flowing, running,
discharge; distress, pain, affliction; (with Jainas) that
which directs the embodied spirit towards eternal
objects, (viz. the occupation or employment of the
senses or organs on sensible objects; or the association
or connection of body with right and wrong deeds.)
<LEND>

<L>9734<pc>0136-b<k1>AsrAva<k2>AsrAva
{%Ā-srāva, as,%}¦ m. flow, issue, running, discharge;
pain, affliction; a disease of the body. {%—Āsrāva-%}
{%bheṣaja, am,%} n., Ved. a medicament, medicine.
<LEND>

<L>9735<pc>0136-b<k1>AsrAvin<k2>AsrAvin
{%Āsrāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ flowing, emitting fluid, dis-
charging humor; an epithet of the elephant (a fluid
issuing from its temples during the rutting-time).
<LEND>

<L>9736<pc>0136-b<k1>Asrasta<k2>Asrasta
{#Asrasta#}¦ {%ā-srasta, as, ā, am,%} fallen off,
loose.
<LEND>

<L>9737<pc>0136-b<k1>Asvad<k2>Asvad
{#Asvad#}¦ {%ā-svad%} or {%-svād,%} cl. 1. A. {%-svadate%}
or {%-svādate, -ditum,%} to taste, eat.
<LEND>

<L>9738<pc>0136-b<k1>AsvAda<k2>AsvAda
{%Ā-svāda, as, ā, am,%}¦ tasting, eating; ({%as%}), m.
tasting, enjoying, eating; flavour. {%—Āsvāda-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having a good taste, palatable; delicious in
flavour.
<LEND>

<L>9739<pc>0136-b<k1>AsvAdaka<k2>AsvAdaka
{%Ā-svādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ tasting, enjoying.
<LEND>

<L>9740<pc>0136-b<k1>AsvAdana<k2>AsvAdana
{%Ā-svādana, am,%}¦ n. tasting, enjoying, eating.
<LEND>

<L>9741<pc>0136-b<k1>AsvAdita<k2>AsvAdita
{%Ā-svādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ tasted, enjoyed, possessed;
eaten.
<LEND>
[Page0136-c+ 70]

<L>9742<pc>0136-c<k1>AsvAdya<k2>AsvAdya
{%Ā-svādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be tasted or enjoyed,
to be eaten; having a good taste, palatable, delicious.
{%—Āsvādya-toya, as, ā, am,%} having sweet or palata-
ble water.
<LEND>

<L>9743<pc>0136-c<k1>Asvan<k2>Asvan
{#Asvan#}¦ {%ā-svan,%} cl. 1. P. {%-svanati, -nitum,%}
to sound.
<LEND>

<L>9744<pc>0136-c<k1>Asvanita<k2>Asvanita
{%Ā-svanita%}¦ or {%ā-svānta, as, ā, am,%} sounded.
<LEND>

<L>9745<pc>0136-c<k1>Aha<k2>Aha<h>1
{#Aha#} 1¦. {%āha,%} ind. (an interjection implying
reproof, severity, command, casting, sending) Ah!
Aha! &c.
<LEND>

<L>9746<pc>0136-c<k1>Aha<k2>Aha<h>2
{#Aha#} 2¦. {%āha.%} See rt. 3. {%ah.%}
<LEND>

<L>9747<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahaka<k2>Ahaka
{#Ahaka#}¦ {%āhaka, as,%} m. a peculiar disease of
the nose, inflammation of the Schneiderian membrane.
<LEND>

<L>9748<pc>0136-c<k1>AhaNkArya<k2>AhaNkArya
{#AhaNkArya#}¦ {%āhaṅkārya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ahaṅ-kāra%}),
conceitedness.
<LEND>

<L>9749<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahan<k2>Ahan
{#Ahan#}¦ {%ā-han,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-hanti, -hate,%}
{%-hantum,%} to strike at, hit, beat, kill; commit
slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>9750<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahata<k2>Ahata
{%Ā-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck, beaten; injured, killed;
multiplied; known, understood; uttered falsely; ({%as%}),
m. a drum; ({%am%}), n. old cloth or raiment; new cloth
or clothes; assertion of an impossibility. {%—Āhata-%}
{%lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} noted for good qualities.
<LEND>

<L>9751<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahati<k2>Ahati
{%Ā-hati, is,%}¦ f. hitting, striking, a blow, a hit;
killing.
<LEND>

<L>9752<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahanana<k2>Ahanana
{%Ā-hanana, am,%}¦ n. the act of striking at, beating;
killing of an animal.
<LEND>

<L>9753<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahananya<k2>Ahananya
{%Āhananya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. making one's self
known by beating (a drum &c.).
<LEND>

<L>9754<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahanas<k2>Ahanas
{#Ahanas#}¦ {%āhanas, ās, ās, as%} (fr. rt. {%han ?%}),
Ved. swelling, tumid, crammed full; fat, luxuriant,
lascivious; (Sāy.) to be beaten or pressed out (as
Soma).
<LEND>

<L>9755<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahanasya<k2>Ahanasya
{%Āhanasya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. luxuriancy, lasciviousness;
({%ās%}), f. pl. verses ({%ṛcas%}) of a lascivious character.
{%—Āhanasya-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. uttering las-
civious words.
<LEND>

<L>9756<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahalak<k2>Ahalak
{#Ahalak#}¦ {%āhalak,%} ind., Ved. a smacking
sound.
<LEND>

<L>9757<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahava<k2>Ahava
{#Ahava, Ahavana, Ahva#}¦, &c. See under
{%ā-hu%} and {%ā-hve.%}
<LEND>

<L>9758<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahika<k2>Ahika
{#Ahika#}¦ {%āhika, as,%} m. (fr. {%ahi%}), the descend-
ing node; an epithet of the grammarian Pāṇini.
<LEND>

<L>9759<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahikam<k2>Ahikam
{#Ahikam#}¦ {%āhikam,%} a particle {%= āhi kam%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>9760<pc>0136-c<k1>AhiRq<k2>AhiRq
{#AhiRq#}¦ {%ā-hiṇḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-hiṇḍate, -ḍitum,%}
to roam about.
<LEND>

<L>9761<pc>0136-c<k1>AhiRqika<k2>AhiRqika
{#AhiRqika#}¦ {%āhiṇḍika, as,%} m. a man of mixed
origin, the son of a Niṣāda father and a Vaidehī mother,
employed as a watchman on the outside of gaols &c.
<LEND>

<L>9762<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahita<k2>Ahita
{#Ahita#}¦ {%ā-hita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhā%} with
prep. {%ā%}), placed, deposited; entertained, felt; com-
prising, containing; performed, done. {%—Āhita-klama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} exhausted. {%—Āhita-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}
noted or known for good qualities; [cf. {%āhata-%}
{%lakṣaṇa.%}] {%—Āhita-vyatha, as, ā, am,%} pained,
grieved. {%—Āhita-svana, as, ā, am,%} uttering or
making a sound noisy. {%—Āhitāgni (˚ta-ag˚), is, is,%}
{%i,%} one who has placed the sacred fire upon the altar,
a sacrificer; a Brāhman who has kept alive a sacred
fire perpetually in a family &c. {%—Āhitāṅka (˚ta-aṅ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} marked, spotted, stained.
<LEND>

<L>9763<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahiti<k2>Ahiti
{%Ā-hiti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. placing on; anything placed on.
<LEND>

<L>9764<pc>0136-c<k1>AhituRqika<k2>AhituRqika
{#AhituRqika#}¦ {%āhituṇḍika%} or {%ahituṇḍika, as,%}
m. (fr. {%ahi-tuṇḍa%}), a snake-catcher, a juggler.
<LEND>

<L>9765<pc>0136-c<k1>AhIraRin<k2>AhIraRin
{#AhIraRin#}¦ {%āhīraṇin, ī,%} m. a two-headed
snake.
<LEND>

<L>9766<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahu<k2>Ahu
{#Ahu#}¦ {%ā-hu,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-juhote, -juhute, -ho-%}
{%tum,%} to sacrifice, to offer an oblation, to worship.
<LEND>

<L>9767<pc>0136-c<k1>Ahava<k2>Ahava<h>1
1. {%ā-hava, as,%}¦ m. sacrificing, sacrifice. (For 2.
{%ā-hava%} see under {%ā-hve.%})
<LEND>
[Page0137-a+ 78]

<L>9768<pc>0137-a<k1>Ahavana<k2>Ahavana
{%Ā-havana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. offering an oblation,
offering sacrifice, sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>9769<pc>0137-a<k1>AhavanIya<k2>AhavanIya
{%Ā-havanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be offered as an obla-
tion; ({%as%}), m. a consecrated fire taken from the
householder's perpetual fire and prepared for receiving
oblations; the eastern of the three fires burning at
a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>9770<pc>0137-a<k1>AhavanIyaka<k2>AhavanIyaka
{%Āhavanīyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for a burnt offering;
({%as%}), m. a consecrated fire.
<LEND>

<L>9771<pc>0137-a<k1>AhAva<k2>AhAva<h>1
1. {%ā-hāva, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a trough, a pail, a vessel;
a trough near a well for watering cattle.
<LEND>

<L>9772<pc>0137-a<k1>Ahuta<k2>Ahuta
{%Ā-huta, am,%}¦ n. an offering made to men, hospi-
tality; the nourishment of all created beings con-
sidered as one of the five sacraments or principal
sacrifices of the Hindūs.
<LEND>

<L>9773<pc>0137-a<k1>Ahuti<k2>Ahuti<h>1
1. {%ā-huti, is,%}¦ f. offering oblations with fire to the
deities; any solemn rite accompanied with oblations:
(for 2. {%ā-huti%} see under {%ā-hve.%}) {%—Āhutī-vṛdh, t,%}
{%t, t,%} Ved. delighting in sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>9774<pc>0137-a<k1>Ahuka<k2>Ahuka
{#Ahuka#}¦ {%āhuka, as,%} m., N. of a prince, great-
grandfather of Kṛṣṇa, a son or grandson of Abhi-
jit; ({%ī%}), f. a sister of this prince; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people.
<LEND>

<L>9775<pc>0137-a<k1>Ahulya<k2>Ahulya
{#Ahulya#}¦ {%āhulya, am,%} n., N. of the legumi-
nous shrub Tabernæmontana Coronaria.
<LEND>

<L>9776<pc>0137-a<k1>Ahf<k2>Ahf
{#Ahf#}¦ {%ā-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te, -hartum,%}
to fetch, bring, bring near, give; to recover, bring
back; to get, take; to offer in sacrifice: Caus. P.
{%-hārayati, -yitum,%} to make one pay or give or
fetch or bring; to exact; to exert, exhibit: Desid.
A. {%-jihīrṣate,%} to seek to recover or get back.
<LEND>

<L>9777<pc>0137-a<k1>Ahara<k2>Ahara
{%Ā-hara, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of compounds)
bringing, fetching; ({%as%}), m. taking, seizing; accom-
plishing, offering of a sacrifice; drawing in breath,
inhaling, inhaled air; breath inspired, inspiration.
<LEND>

<L>9778<pc>0137-a<k1>AharaRa<k2>AharaRa
{%Ā-haraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ taking away, robbing; ({%am%}),
n. taking, seizing, bringing near; extracting, remov-
ing; accomplishing, offering at a sacrifice; causing,
inducing.
<LEND>

<L>9779<pc>0137-a<k1>AharaRIkf<k2>AharaRIkf
{%Āharaṇī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to give
as a present.
<LEND>

<L>9780<pc>0137-a<k1>Ahartf<k2>Ahartf
{%Ā-hartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who takes, seizes, brings
or procures; inducing, causing; offering; ({%tā%}), m.
a copy holder (in law).
<LEND>

<L>9781<pc>0137-a<k1>AhAra<k2>AhAra
{%Ā-hāra, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} bringing near, procuring;
going to fetch; ({%as%}), m. taking, fetching, bringing
near; employing; taking food, food (e. g. {%āhāraṃ%}
{%kṛ,%} to take food, eat). {%—Āhāra-viraha, as,%} m.
want of food. {%—Āhāra-sambhava, as,%} m. the juice
of the body, chyle, lymph, serum. {%—Āhārārthin%}
{%(˚ra-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} begging or seeking for food.
<LEND>

<L>9782<pc>0137-a<k1>AhAraka<k2>AhAraka
{%Ā-hāraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ going to fetch.
<LEND>

<L>9783<pc>0137-a<k1>AhArika<k2>AhArika
{%Ā-hārika,%}¦ (with Jainas) one of the five bodies
belonging to the soul; described by Colebrooke as a
minute form, issuing from the head of a meditative
sage to consult an omniscient saint and returning with
the desired information.
<LEND>

<L>9784<pc>0137-a<k1>AhArya<k2>AhArya
{%Ā-hārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or seized; to be
fetched or brought near; to be extracted or removed;
what may be removed, adventitious, accessary, inci-
dental; to be eaten; ({%as%}), m. a kind of bandage;
({%am%}), n. any disease to be treated by the operation of
extracting; extraction; a vessel; the ornamentative
part of the drama, the dress, decorations, &c. {%—Āhārya-%}
{%śobhā,%} f. adventitious beauty, beauty not natural but
the effect of paints, ornaments, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9785<pc>0137-a<k1>Ahfta<k2>Ahfta
{%Ā-hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought, taken, collected.
{%—Āhṛta-yajña-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved. intending
(to offer) a prepared sacrifice; preparing a sacrificial
act (?).
<LEND>

<L>9786<pc>0137-a<k1>Ahftya<k2>Ahftya
{%Ā-hṛtya,%}¦ ind. having taken or received, having
brought.
<LEND>

<L>9787<pc>0137-a<k1>Aheya<k2>Aheya
{#Aheya#}¦ {%āheya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ahi%}), belonging
or relating to a snake.
<LEND>

<L>9788<pc>0137-a<k1>Aho<k2>Aho
{#Aho#}¦ {%āho,%} ind. (an interjection of doubt
and of asking) or, or perhaps. {%—Āho-puruṣikā,%} f.
great self-conceit, boasting, military vaunting; a vain
determination to accomplish an object, vaunting of
[Page0137-b+ 78]
one's power. {%—Āho-svit,%} ind. a particle implying
doubt.
<LEND>

<L>9789<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahna<k2>Ahna
{#Ahna#}¦ {%āhna, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. {%ahan%}), a series
of days, many days.
<LEND>

<L>9790<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahnika<k2>Ahnika
{%Āhnika, as, ī, am,%}¦ daily, diurnal, performed on a
day, performed every day; ({%am%}), n. a religious cere-
mony to be performed every day at a fixed hour; a
day's work, what may be read on one day, the division
or section of a book; constant occupation, daily work;
daily food, &c. {%—Āhnikācāra (˚ka-āc˚), as,%} m. daily
observance, the prayers and practices necessary for
bodily and mental purification.
<LEND>

<L>9791<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahneya<k2>Ahneya
{%Āhneya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Śauca.
<LEND>

<L>9792<pc>0137-b<k1>AhlAd<k2>AhlAd
{#AhlAd#}¦ {%ā-hlād,%} Caus. P. {%-hlādayati, -yitum,%}
to gladden.
<LEND>

<L>9793<pc>0137-b<k1>AhlAda<k2>AhlAda
{%Ā-hlāda, as,%}¦ m. joy, delight. {%—Āhlāda-dugha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} conferring delight.
<LEND>

<L>9794<pc>0137-b<k1>AhlAdana<k2>AhlAdana
{%Ā-hlādana, am,%}¦ n. gladdening.
<LEND>

<L>9795<pc>0137-b<k1>AhlAdi<k2>AhlAdi
{%Ā-hlādi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Babhru.
<LEND>

<L>9796<pc>0137-b<k1>AhlAdita<k2>AhlAdita
{%Ā-hlādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ delighted, rejoiced.
<LEND>

<L>9797<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahvf<k2>Ahvf
{#Ahvf#}¦ {%ā-hvṛ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-hvarati, -hvar-%}
{%tum,%} to make crooked, to injure.
<LEND>

<L>9798<pc>0137-b<k1>AhUrya<k2>AhUrya
{%Ā-hūrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be bent down or
brought near; to be made favourable, one towards
whom one must bow; (Sāy.) to be invoked (fr. rt.
{%hve%}).
<LEND>

<L>9799<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahruta<k2>Ahruta
{%Ā-hruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured. {%—Āhruta-bheṣaja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. curing what is bent or injured.
<LEND>

<L>9800<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahvara<k2>Ahvara
{%Ā-hvara, as,%}¦ m., N. of a fortress of the Uśīnaras.
<LEND>

<L>9801<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahvaraka<k2>Ahvaraka
{%Ā-hvaraka, as,%}¦ m. a low or expelled man who,
after having offered a sacrifice to the manes, takes
the sacrificial food for himself.
<LEND>

<L>9802<pc>0137-b<k1>AhvAraka<k2>AhvAraka
{%Āhvāraka, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the Āhvārakas, a recension
of the black Yajur-veda (distinct from the Taittirīya)
named from Ahvāra or Āhvāra.
<LEND>

<L>9803<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahvfti<k2>Ahvfti
{%Ā-hvṛti, is,%}¦ m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>9804<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahve<k2>Ahve
{#Ahve#}¦ {%ā-hve,%} cl. 1. P. or poet. A. {%-hvayati,%}
{%-te, -hvātum,%} to call near; to summon; to invite,
ask; A. to provoke, challenge, emulate: Caus.
{%-hvāyayati, -yitum,%} to send for; to cause to invite
or summon or challenge; provoked: Desid. {%-juhū-%}
{%ṣati,%} to wish to call near or invite: Intens. {%-johavīti,%}
to call.
<LEND>

<L>9805<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahava<k2>Ahava<h>2
2. {%ā-hava, as,%}¦ m. challenge, provoking, calling;
war, battle. {%—Āhava-kāmyā,%} f. desire of war: (for
1. {%ā-hava%} see under {%ā-hu,%} page 136, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>9806<pc>0137-b<k1>AhAva<k2>AhAva<h>2
2. {%ā-hāva, as,%}¦ m. calling, invoking; battle, war.
<LEND>

<L>9807<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahuti<k2>Ahuti<h>2
2. {%ā-huti,%}¦ calling, invoking. (This word may
sometimes have this sense in the oldest Vedic texts,
but see the more correct form {%ā-hūti.%} For 1. {%ā-%}
{%huti%} see under {%ā-hu%} last col.)
<LEND>

<L>9808<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahuva<k2>Ahuva
{%Ā-huva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (Sāy.) to be invoked.
<LEND>

<L>9809<pc>0137-b<k1>AhU<k2>AhU
{%Ā-hū,%}¦ f., Ved. calling, invoking.
<LEND>

<L>9810<pc>0137-b<k1>AhUta<k2>AhUta<h>2
2. {%ā-hūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ called, summoned, invoked,
invited. {%—Āhūta-prapalāyin, ī,%} m. a defendant or
witness absconding or not appearing when summoned.
<LEND>

<L>9811<pc>0137-b<k1>AhUti<k2>AhUti
{%Ā-hūti, is,%}¦ f. calling, invoking.
<LEND>

<L>9812<pc>0137-b<k1>AhUya<k2>AhUya
{%Ā-hūya,%}¦ ind. having invited.
<LEND>

<L>9813<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahva<k2>Ahva
{%Ā-hva, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what calls, a crier;
named, called; ({%ā%}), f. a name, appellation.
<LEND>

<L>9814<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahvaya<k2>Ahvaya
{%Ā-hvaya, as,%}¦ m. a lawsuit arising from a dispute
about games with animals, as cock-fighting &c.; ap-
pellation, name (generally as last member of a com-
pound, the first member of which, though commonly
an appellative noun, is used as a proper name).
<LEND>

<L>9815<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahvayat<k2>Ahvayat
{%Ā-hvayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ calling, challenging.
<LEND>

<L>9816<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahvayana<k2>Ahvayana
{%Ā-hvayana, am,%}¦ n. appellation, name.
<LEND>

<L>9817<pc>0137-b<k1>Ahvayitavya<k2>Ahvayitavya
{%Ā-hvayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be summoned or
invited.
<LEND>

<L>9818<pc>0137-b<k1>AhvAna<k2>AhvAna
{%Ā-hvāna, am,%}¦ n. calling, invitation, a call or sum-
mons; invocation of a deity; challenge; legal sum-
mons; an appellation, a name; designation of a
liturgical formula. {%—Āhvāna-darśana, am,%} n. day
of trial.
<LEND>

<L>9819<pc>0137-b<k1>AhvAnaya<k2>AhvAnaya
{%Āhvānaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%āhvānayati, -yitum,%} (in law)
to summon.
<LEND>

<L>9820<pc>0137-b<k1>AhvAya<k2>AhvAya
{%Ā-hvāya, as,%}¦ m. a summons, a name.
<LEND>

<L>9821<pc>0137-b<k1>AhvAyaka<k2>AhvAyaka
{%Ā-hvāyaka, as,%}¦ m. a messenger, a courier.
<LEND>
[Page0137-c+ 74]

<L>9822<pc>0137-c<k1>AhvAyayitavya<k2>AhvAyayitavya
{%Ā-hvāyayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be called before
a tribunal.
<LEND>
<H>{#i#}

<L>9823<pc>0137-c<k1>i<k2>i<h>1
{#i#} 1¦. {%i,%} the third vowel of the alphabet,
corresponding to {%i%} short, and pronounced as that letter
in <nsi>kill</nsi> &c. {%—I-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%i.%}
<LEND>

<L>9824<pc>0137-c<k1>i<k2>i<h>2
{#i#} 2¦. {%i,%} ind. an interjection of anger, calling,
sorrow, distress, compassion, &c.
<LEND>

<L>9825<pc>0137-c<k1>i<k2>i<h>3
{#i#} 3¦. {%i,%} pronominal base of the 3rd person;
[cf. {%itara, itas, iti, id, idam, idā, iyat, iva, iha:%}
cf. also Lat. <nsi>id;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ita;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>it;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>iz;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>es.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>9826<pc>0137-c<k1>i<k2>i<h>4
{#i#} 4¦. {%i, is,%} m. a N. of Kāmadeva.
<LEND>

<L>9827<pc>0137-c<k1>i<k2>i<h>5
{#i#} 5¦. {%i,%} cl. 2. P., 1. P. A. {%eti, ayati, -te,%}
{%iyāya, eṣyati, etum,%} Ved. {%etave, etavai, etos,%}
to go; to go to or towards (with acc.); to come; to
go away, escape, pass, retire; to return; to arrive at,
reach, obtain; to fall into; to arise from, come
from; to approach with prayers, ask; to undertake
anything (with acc.); to appear, to be; to go on
well, to prosper (e. g. {%tasmin yuktasya eti preta-%}
{%kṛtyā,%} ‘the funeral ceremony of one engaged in that
goes on well or prospers’); to be employed in, go on
with, be in any condition or relation (with a part. or
inst., e. g. {%Asura-rakṣasāni mṛdyamānāni yanti,%}
‘the Asuras and Rakṣas are being trampled upon;’
{%Gavāmayanena īyuḥ,%} ‘they were engaged in the
Gavāmayana’): Intens. or cl. 4. A. {%īyate,%} inf., Ved.
{%īyadhyai,%} to go quickly or repeatedly; to come,
wander, run; to appear, make one's appearance; to
approach any one with requests (with two acc.), ask,
request; to be asked or requested: Caus. {%āyayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cause to come; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">εἶ-μι, ἴ-μεν;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>eo, îmus;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>ei-mi,</nsi> ‘I go;’ Slav. <nsi>i-dû,</nsi>
‘I go,’ <nsi>i-ti,</nsi> ‘to go;’ Goth. <nsi>i-ddja.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>9828<pc>0137-c<k1>it<k2>it
{%It,%}¦ (at the end of a few compounds) going; cf.
{%arthet.%}
<LEND>

<L>9829<pc>0137-c<k1>ita<k2>ita
{%Ita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone; returned; obtained; re-
membered; ({%am%}), n. way. {%—Itāsu (˚ta-as˚), us, us,%}
{%u,%} Ved. whose vital spirits have departed.
<LEND>

<L>9830<pc>0137-c<k1>iti<k2>iti<h>1
1. {%iti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. going, moving.
<LEND>

<L>9831<pc>0137-c<k1>itya<k2>itya
{%Itya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone to or towards.
<LEND>

<L>9832<pc>0137-c<k1>ityA<k2>ityA
{%Ityā,%}¦ f., Ved. going, a way; a litter, a palanquin.
<LEND>

<L>9833<pc>0137-c<k1>itvan<k2>itvan
{%Itvan, ā, ā, a,%}¦ going.
<LEND>

<L>9834<pc>0137-c<k1>itvara<k2>itvara
{%Itvara, as, ī, am,%}¦ going, travelling, a traveller;
cruel, harsh; poor, indigent; low, vile; contemned;
({%ī%}), f. a disloyal or unchaste woman.
<LEND>

<L>9835<pc>0137-c<k1>ikkawa<k2>ikkawa
{#ikkawa#}¦ {%ikkaṭa, as,%} m. a kind of reed. See
{%itkaṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>9836<pc>0137-c<k1>ikkavAla<k2>ikkavAla
{#ikkavAla#}¦ {%ikkavāla%} in astrology = <lang n="arabic">إِقْبال</lang>
<nsi>iqbâl,</nsi> good fortune, prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>9837<pc>0137-c<k1>ikzu<k2>ikzu
{#ikzu#}¦ {%ikṣu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%iṣ?%}), the sugar-
cane (twelve species of it are enumerated); N. of a
river. {%—Ikṣu-kāṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. the stem or
cane of the Saccharum Officinale, the sugar-cane;
({%as%}), m., N. of two different species of sugar-cane,
viz. Saccharum Munja Roxb. and Saccharum Spon-
taneum L. {%—Ikṣu-kuṭṭaka, as,%} m. a gatherer or
reaper of sugar-cane. {%—Ikṣu-gandha, as,%} m. Sac-
charum Spontaneum; a kind of Asteracantha Longi-
folia; ({%ā%}), f. Saccharum Spontaneum, Asteracantha
Longifolia, Capparis Spinosa, Batatas Paniculata.
{%—Ikṣu-gandhikā,%} f. Batatas Paniculata. {%—Ikṣu-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} coming from sugar-cane. {%—Ikṣu-%}
{%tulyā,%} f. Saccharum Spontaneum. {%—Ikṣu-daṇḍa,%}
{%am,%} n. the stem or cane of the Saccharum Officinale.
{%—Ikṣu-darbhā,%} f. a kind of grass or sugar-cane.
{%—Ikṣu-dā,%} f., N. of a river; see {%ikṣulā, ikṣu-%}
{%mālinī, ikṣu-mālavī%}. {%—Ikṣu-netra, am,%} n. a
kind of sugar-cane. {%—Ikṣu-pattra, as,%} m. the grain
Penicillaria Spicata. {%—Ikṣu-pāka, as,%} m. molasses.
{%—Ikṣu-pra, as,%} m. the plant Saccharum Sara.
{%—Ikṣu-bālikā,%} f. Saccharum Spontaneum, {%= ikṣu-%}
{%tulyā%}. {%—Ikṣu-bhakṣikā,%} f. a meal of sugar or
[Page0138-a+ 78]
molasses. {%—Ikṣu-matī,%} f., N. of a river in Kuru-
kṣetra. {%—Ikṣu-mālavī%} or {%ikṣu-mālinī,%} f., N. of
a river; see {%ikṣu-dā%}. {%—Ikṣu-mūla, am,%} n. a kind
of sugar-cane; the root of sugar-cane. {%—Ikṣu-meha,%}
{%as,%} m. diabetes or diabetes mellitus; see {%madhu-%}
{%meha.%} {%—Ikṣumehin, ī, inī, i,%} diabetic. {%—Ikṣu-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n. a sugar-mill. {%—Ikṣu-yoni, is,%} m.
Saccharum Officinarum. {%—Ikṣu-rasa, as,%} m. the
juice of the sugar-cane; molasses, unrefined sugar;
the cane Saccharum Spontaneum. {%—Ikṣurasa-%}
{%kvātha, as,%} m. raw or unrefined sugar, molasses.
{%—Ikṣurasoda (˚sa-ud˚), as,%} m. the sea of syrup.
{%—Ikṣu-vaṇa, am,%} n. a sugar-cane wood. {%—Ikṣu-%}
{%vallarī%} and {%ikṣu-vallī,%} f. Batatas Paniculata.
{%—Ikṣu-vāṭikā%} or {%ikṣu-vāṭī,%} f. Saccharum Offici-
narum, the common yellow cane. {%—Ikṣu-vāri,%} n.
the sea of syrup, one of the seven seas. {%—Ikṣu-%}
{%vikāra, as,%} m. sugar, molasses; any sweetmeat.
{%—Ikṣu-veṣṭana, as,%} m. a kind of sugar-cane.
{%—Ikṣu-śākaṭa%} or {%ikṣu-śākina, am,%} n. a kind
of sugar-cane. {%—Ikṣu-samudra, as,%} m. the sea of
syrup, one of the seven seas. {%—Ikṣu-sāra, as,%} m.
molasses, raw or unrefined sugar. {%—Ikṣvāri, is,%} m.
(for {%ikṣu-vāri%} ?), Saccharum Spontaneum. {%—Ikṣ-%}
{%vālika, as,%} m. (for {%ikṣu-bālika%}), Saccharum Spon-
taneum; ({%ā%}), f. another sort, Saccharum Fuscum,
(native reed-pens are made from its stem.)
<LEND>

<L>9838<pc>0138-a<k1>ikzuka<k2>ikzuka
{%Ikṣuka, as,%}¦ m. sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>9839<pc>0138-a<k1>ikzukIyA<k2>ikzukIyA
{%Ikṣukīyā,%}¦ f. a region abounding in sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>9840<pc>0138-a<k1>ikzura<k2>ikzura
{%Ikṣura, as,%}¦ m. Capparis Spinosa; Asteracantha
Longifolia; Saccharum Spontaneum.
<LEND>

<L>9841<pc>0138-a<k1>ikzuraka<k2>ikzuraka
{%Ikṣuraka, as,%}¦ m. Capparis Spinosa; Saccharum
Spontaneum.
<LEND>

<L>9842<pc>0138-a<k1>ikzulA<k2>ikzulA
{%Ikṣulā,%}¦ f., N. of a river. See {%ikṣu-dā.%}
<LEND>

<L>9843<pc>0138-a<k1>ikzvAku<k2>ikzvAku
{#ikzvAku#}¦ {%ikṣvāku, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Manu Vaivasvata, father of Kukṣi and first king of
the solar dynasty in Ayodhyā; a descendant of
Ikṣvāku; the Jainas derive their Cakravartins and
many of their Arhats from Ikṣvāku; ({%ās%}), m., N.
of a warrior-tribe derived from Ikṣvāku; ({%us%}), f. a
bitter gourd; according to some, the Coloquintida
(Citrillus Colocynthis), the fruit of a wild species of
Lagenaria Vulgaris. {%—Ikṣvāku-kula-ja, as, ā, am,%}
born in the family of Ikṣvāku.
<LEND>

<L>9844<pc>0138-a<k1>iK<k2>iK
{#iK#}¦ {%ikh,%} cl. 1. P. {%ekhati, iyekha, ekhiṣ-%}
{%yati, ekhitum,%} to go, move; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">εἴκω</lang>
<lang n="greek">οἴχομαι</lang> ?].
<LEND>

<L>9845<pc>0138-a<k1>iNkAra<k2>iNkAra
{#iNkAra#}¦ {%iṅ-kāra%} and {%iṅ-kṛta = hiṅ-kāra,%}
{%hiṅ-kṛta,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>9846<pc>0138-a<k1>iNK<k2>iNK
{#iNK#}¦ {%iṅkh,%} cl. 1. P. {%iṅkhati, iṅkhāñ-cakāra,%}
{%iṅkhiṣyati, iṅkhitum,%} to go, move; [cf.
Hib. <nsi>imchim,</nsi> ‘I go on, proceed, march.’]
<LEND>

<L>9847<pc>0138-a<k1>iNg<k2>iNg
{#iNg#}¦ {%iṅg,%} cl. 1. P., ep. A. {%iṅgati, -te,%}
{%iṅgāñ-cakāra, iṅgiṣyati, iṅgitum,%} to
go, go to or towards; to move or agitate: Caus.
P. {%iṅgayati, -yitum,%} to move, agitate, shake; (in
gram.) to divide or separate the members of a com-
pound word, to use a word or bring it into such a
grammatical relation that it is considered {%iṅgya;%} see
below; [cf. Hib. <nsi>ing,</nsi> ‘a stir, a move.’]
<LEND>

<L>9848<pc>0138-a<k1>iNga<k2>iNga
{%Iṅga, as, ā, am,%}¦ movable, locomotive; surprising,
wonderful; ({%as%}), m. a hint or sign, an indication of
sentiment by gesture, knowledge; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
counting.
<LEND>

<L>9849<pc>0138-a<k1>iNgana<k2>iNgana
{%Iṅgana, am,%}¦ n. shaking; (in gram.) the operation
by which one member of a compound is separated
from another, as by the {%ava-graha%} or mark of tmesis.
<LEND>

<L>9850<pc>0138-a<k1>iNgita<k2>iNgita
{%Iṅgita, am,%}¦ n. palpitation, change of the voice,
internal motion, motion of various parts of the body
as indicating the intentions; hint, sign, gesture;
aim, intention, real but covert purpose. {%—Iṅgita-%}
{%kovida%} or {%iṅgita-jña, as, ā, am,%} understanding
signs, acquainted with the gesture of another, skilled
in the expression or interpretation of the internal
sentiments by the external gesture.
<LEND>

<L>9851<pc>0138-a<k1>iNgya<k2>iNgya
{%Iṅgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ movable from its place; in the
Prātiśākhyas a term for those words or rather parts
of a compound word which in certain grammatical
[Page0138-b+ 73]
operations may be separated from the preceding parts,
a word which in the Pada-pātḥa is divided by the
{%ava-graha%} or mark of tmesis.
<LEND>

<L>9852<pc>0138-b<k1>iNgiqa<k2>iNgiqa
{#iNgiqa#}¦ {%iṅgiḍa,%} N. of a plant, {%= iṅguda%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>9853<pc>0138-b<k1>iNguda<k2>iNguda
{#iNguda#}¦ {%iṅguda, as, ī,%} m. f., N. of a medicinal
tree, Terminalia Catappa; in Bengal confounded with
Putrañjīva Roxburghii Wall.; ({%am%}), n. the nut of
the tree Terminalia Catappa.
<LEND>

<L>9854<pc>0138-b<k1>iNgula<k2>iNgula
{%Iṅgula, as, ī,%}¦ m. f., N. of the tree Terminalia
Catappa.
<LEND>

<L>9855<pc>0138-b<k1>icikila<k2>icikila
{#icikila#}¦ {%icikila, as,%} m. a pond, mud, mire.
<LEND>

<L>9856<pc>0138-b<k1>icCaka<k2>icCaka<h>1
{#icCaka#} 1¦. {%icchaka, as,%} m. the citron, Citrus
Medica L.
<LEND>

<L>9857<pc>0138-b<k1>icCaka<k2>icCaka<h>2
{#icCaka#} 2¦. {%icchaka,%} {#icCA#} {%icchā,%} &c. See
under 3. {%iṣ%} at page 142.
<LEND>

<L>9858<pc>0138-b<k1>ijjala<k2>ijjala
{#ijjala#}¦ {%ijjala, as,%} m. a small tree growing
in wet and saline soil, or on low grounds near the
sea, Barringtonia Acutangula Gærtn.
<LEND>

<L>9859<pc>0138-b<k1>ijya<k2>ijya
{#ijya#}¦ {%ijya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%yaj%}), a teacher; an
epithet of Bṛhaspati the teacher or Guru of the gods;
({%ā%}), f. a sacrifice, making offerings to the gods or
manes; a gift, a donation; worship, reverence; meet-
ing, union; a cow; a bawd or procuress. {%—Ijyā-%}
{%śīla, as,%} m. a frequent sacrificer.
<LEND>

<L>9860<pc>0138-b<k1>iYcAka<k2>iYcAka
{#iYcAka#}¦ {%iñcāka, as,%} m. a shrimp or prawn.
<LEND>

<L>9861<pc>0138-b<k1>iw<k2>iw
{#iw#}¦ {%iṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%eṭati, eṭitum,%} to go, to go
to or towards; Ved. to make haste, to err.
<LEND>

<L>9862<pc>0138-b<k1>iwa<k2>iwa
{#iwa#}¦ {%iṭa, as,%} m., Ved. cane or grass; a web
made of it, a mat. {%—Iṭa-sūna, am,%} n., Ved. a tex-
ture of reed, a mat.
<LEND>

<L>9863<pc>0138-b<k1>iwata<k2>iwata
{#iwata#}¦ {%iṭata, as,%} m., N. of a Bhārgava, author
of a hymn of the Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>9864<pc>0138-b<k1>iwcara<k2>iwcara
{#iwcara#}¦ {%iṭ-cara, as,%} m. (fr. 4. {%iṣ%} and {%cara%}),
a bull or steer allowed to go at liberty.
<LEND>

<L>9865<pc>0138-b<k1>iWimikA<k2>iWimikA
{#iWimikA#}¦ {%iṭhimikā,%} f. title of a section of
the Kāṭhaka recension of the Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>9866<pc>0138-b<k1>iq<k2>iq
{#iq#}¦ {%iḍ,%} Ved. (only in inst., gen., abl. sing.,
and acc. pl. {%iḍā%} and {%iḍas;%} or, according to the spell-
ing of the Ṛg-veda, {%iḷā%} and {%iḷas%}), a refreshing draught,
refreshment, libation offered to the gods; the flow of
speech, the stream of sacred words and worship,
prayer; (Sāy.) the earth, food; ({%iḍas%} or {%iḷas%}), pl.
the object of devotion, addressed in the third or
fourth verses of the Āprī hymns, (so used only in
Ṛg-veda 3, 4. 3; but also erroneously referred to in
the Brāhmaṇas &c. as if etymologically connected
with the words {%īḍya, īḍita, īḷita,%} ‘the praiseworthy,’
‘the praised,’ which are used in the third or fourth
verses of the other Āprīs as the designation of the same
object of worship.) {%—Iḍas-pati, is,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu.
{%—Iḍ-devatā,%} f. deity of the libation. {%—Iḷas-pati, is,%}
m., Ved. a N. of Pūṣan. {%—Iḷas-pade,%} in the place of
sacred libation, i. e. at the altar or place of offering.
<LEND>

<L>9867<pc>0138-b<k1>iqa<k2>iqa
{%Iḍa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. This word occurs only in one
sacred formula as an epithet of Agni, who is to be
addressed with prayers, or invoked with the stream
or flow of praise.
<LEND>

<L>9868<pc>0138-b<k1>iqA<k2>iqA
{%Iḍā,%}¦ f. or (in Ṛg-veda) {%iḷā,%} (not to be confounded
with the inst. case of {%iḍ%} above), refreshing draught,
refreshment, animation, recreation, comfort, vital
spirit; food; offering, libation, especially a holy liba-
tion, coming between the Prayāga and Anuyāga, and
consisting of four preparations of milk, poured into
a vessel containing water, and then partially drank
by the priest and sacrificers; (metaphorically cf. {%iḍ%})
stream or flow of praise and worship, personified as
the goddess of sacred speech and action, invoked toge-
ther with Aditi and other deities, but especially in
the Āprī hymns together with Sarasvatī and Mahī or
Bhāratī; (Sāy.) the earth, food; ({%iḍā,%} as the libation
and offering of milk is personified in the cow, the
symbol of feeding and giving, whence the word {%iḍā%}
is given as a synonym of ‘cow.’ The goddess {%Iḍā%} or
[Page0138-c+ 76]
{%Ilā%} is the daughter of Manu or of man thinking on
and worshipping the gods; she is the wife of Budha
and mother of Purū-ravas; in another aspect she is
called Maitrāvaruṇi as daughter of Mitra-Varuṇa, two
gods who were objects of the highest and most
spiritual devotion. {%Ilā%} is also a N. of Durgā, of a
daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa, of a wife of
Vasudeva and of the Rudra, Rita-dhvaja); heaven;
a tubular vessel, one of the principal channels of the
vital spirit, that which is on the right side of the
body. {%Iḷāyās-pade,%} at the place of Iḍā, i. e. of
worship and libation, earth. {%—Iḍā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. refreshing, granting fresh vital spirits; possessed
of refreshment, refreshed; (Sāy.) possessed of sacri-
ficial food.
<LEND>

<L>9869<pc>0138-c<k1>iqAcikA<k2>iqAcikA
{%Iḍācikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%iḍā%} ?), a wasp.
<LEND>

<L>9870<pc>0138-c<k1>iqikA<k2>iqikA
{%Iḍikā,%}¦ f. the earth.
<LEND>

<L>9871<pc>0138-c<k1>iqikka<k2>iqikka
{#iqikka#}¦ {%iḍikka, as,%} m. a wild goat.
<LEND>

<L>9872<pc>0138-c<k1>iqvara<k2>iqvara
{#iqvara#}¦ {%iḍvara, as,%} m. a bull fit to be set at
liberty. See {%iṭ-cara.%}
<LEND>

<L>9873<pc>0138-c<k1>iRqInTa<k2>iRqInTa
{#iRqInTa#}¦ {%iṇḍīntha, as,%} m. a knife (?).
<LEND>

<L>9874<pc>0138-c<k1>iRqva<k2>iRqva
{#iRqva#}¦ {%iṇḍva, am,%} n., Ved. (used in du.) two
round small plates made of Muñja reed, used as cover-
ings for the hands in taking the fire-pans from the fire.
<LEND>

<L>9875<pc>0138-c<k1>iRvIndu<k2>iRvIndu
{#iRvIndu#}¦ {%iṇvīndu, us,%} m. the tree Trochis
Aspera (?).
<LEND>

<L>9876<pc>0138-c<k1>iRverikA<k2>iRverikA
{#iRverikA#}¦ {%iṇverikā,%} f. a kind of cake.
<LEND>

<L>9877<pc>0138-c<k1>itara<k2>itara
{#itara#}¦ {%i-tara, as, ā, at,%} Ved. {%am%} (comparative
form of pronom. base 3. {%i;%} cf. Lat. <nsi>iterum;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>iter</nsi>),
the other (of two), another; (pl.) the rest; (with
abl.) different from; low, vile; expelled, rejected;
{%itara itara,%} the one — the other, this — that. ({%Itara%}
connected antithetically with a preceding word often
signifies the contrary idea, e. g. {%vijayāya itarāya%}
{%vā,%} to victory or defeat; so in Dvandva compounds,
{%sukhetareṣu,%} in happiness and distress. It some-
times, however, forms a Tat-puruṣa compound with
another word to express the one idea implied in the
contrary of that word, e. g. {%dakṣiṇetara,%} the left
hand.) {%—Itara-jana, ās,%} m. pl. other men; a euphe-
mistic title of certain beings who appear to be consi-
dered as spirits of darkness; Kuvera belongs to them.
{%—Itara-tas,%} ind. otherwise than, different from;
{%itaścetarataśca,%} hither and thither. {%—Itara-thā,%}
ind. in another manner, in a contrary manner; per-
versely; on the other hand, else.
<LEND>

<L>9878<pc>0138-c<k1>itarA<k2>itarA
{%Itarā,%}¦ f., N. of the mother of Aitareya.
<LEND>

<L>9879<pc>0138-c<k1>itaretara<k2>itaretara
{%Itaretara, as, ā, am%}¦ (occurring chiefly in oblique
cases of sing. and in comp.; fr. {%itara-itara,%} which
may be for {%itaras-itara,%} cf. {%anyo'nya, paras-%}
{%para%}), one another, one with another, mutual, re-
spective, several; ({%am%}), n. or adv. mutually, &c.
{%—Itaretara-kāmyā,%} f. respective or several fancies
or inclinations. {%—Itaretarāśraya (˚ra-āś˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} affecting or concerning mutually.
<LEND>

<L>9880<pc>0138-c<k1>itaredyus<k2>itaredyus
{%Itare-dyus,%}¦ ind. at another or different day.
<LEND>

<L>9881<pc>0138-c<k1>itama<k2>itama
{%I-tama, as, ā, at%}¦ (superlative form of 3. {%i%}), another
(of many ?).
<LEND>

<L>9882<pc>0138-c<k1>itas<k2>itas
{#itas#}¦ {%i-tas,%} ind. (fr. 3. {%i%} with affix {%tas,%} used
like the abl. case of the pronoun {%idam%}), from hence,
hence, here (opposed to {%amu-tas%} and {%amu-tra%});
from this point; from this world, in this world; {%itas%}
{%itas,%} here — there; {%itaścetaśca,%} hence and thence,
hither and thither, here and there, to and fro; from
this time, now; therefore. {%—Ita-ūti, is, is, i,%} Ved.
extending or reaching from hence; existing or lasting
longer than the present time, future; (Sāy.) one who
has obtained help. {%—Itas-tatas,%} ind. here and there,
hither and thither.
<LEND>

<L>9883<pc>0138-c<k1>iti<k2>iti<h>2
{#iti#} 2¦. {%iti,%} ind. (fr. pronominal base 3. {%i%}),
in this manner, thus. In its original signification {%iti%}
refers to something that has been said or thought, or
lays stress on what precedes. In the Brāhmaṇas it is
often equivalent to ‘as you know,’ reminding the
hearer or reader of certain customs, conditions, &c.,
supposed to be known to him.
[Page0139-a+ 75]
<div n="P"/>In quotations of every kind {%iti%} means that the pre-
ceding words are the very words which some person
has or might have spoken, and placed thus at the end
of a speech it serves the purpose of inverted commas
(e. g. {%ity uktvā,%} having so said; {%iti kṛtvā,%} having so
considered, having so decided). It may often have
reference merely to what is passing in the mind, e. g.
{%bālo'pi nāvamantavyo manuṣya iti bhūmipaḥ,%}
a king, though a child, is not to be despised, saying
to one's self, ‘he is a mortal,’ (Gram. 928.) In
theatrical language {%iti tathā karoti%} = after these
words he acts so.
<div n="P"/>Sometimes {%iti%} is used to include under one head
a number of separate objects aggregated together
(e. g. {%ijyādhyayanadānāni tapaḥ satyaṃ kṣamā%}
{%damaḥ alobha iti mārgo'yam,%} ‘sacrificing, study-
ing, liberality, penance, truth, patience, self-restraint,
absence of desire,’ this course of conduct, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>9884<pc>0139-a<k1>iti<k2>iti
{%Iti%}¦ is sometimes followed by {%evam, iva,%} or a
demonstrative pronoun pleonastically (e. g. {%tām%}
{%brūyād bhavatīty evam,%} her he may call ‘lady,’
thus).
<LEND>

<L>9885<pc>0139-a<k1>iti<k2>iti
{%Iti%}¦ may form an adverbial compound with the name
of an author (e. g. {%itipāṇini,%} thus according to Pāṇini).
It may also express manifestation (lo! behold!), some-
thing additional (as in {%ity-ādi,%} et cetera), order, ar-
rangement specific or distinctive, and identity. It is
used by native commentators after quoting a rule to
express ‘according to such a rule’ (e. g. {%anudātta-%}
{%ṅita ity Ātmanepadam bhavati,%} according to the
rule of Pāṇini 1. 3, 12, the Ātmane-pada takes place).
{%Kim iti = kim,%} wherefore, why ? (In the Śata-
patha-Brāhmaṇa {%ti%} occurs for {%iti;%} cf. Prākṛt {%ti%} and
{%tti.%}) {%—Iti-katha, as, ā, am,%} unworthy of trust, not
fit to be credited; wicked, lost; ({%ā%}), f. unmeaning or
nonsensical discourse; (? for {%ati-katha,%} q. v.) {%—Iti-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. or {%iti-kāra, as,%} m. the word {%iti.%}
{%—Iti-kartavya, as, ā, am,%} proper or necessary to be
done according to certain conditions; ({%am%}), n. duty,
obligation. {%—Itikartavya-tā,%} f. or {%itikārya-tā%} or {%iti-%}
{%kṛtya-tā,%} f. any proper or necessary measure, obliga-
tion. {%—Itikartavyatā-mūḍha, as, ā, am,%} embar-
rassed, dumbfounded, wholly at a loss what to do. {%—Iti-%}
{%tha, as, ī, am,%} Ved. such a one, such, e. g. {%pureti-%}
{%thyai%} ({%? rātryai%} dat. sing.) {%mariṣyasi,%} before
such and such a day thou wilt die. {%—Iti-mātra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of such extent or quality. {%—Iti-vat,%} ind. in
the same manner. {%—Iti-vṛtta, am,%} n. occurrence,
event. {%—Ity-artham,%} ind. for this purpose. {%—Ity-ādi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} having such (thing or things) at the begin-
ning, thus beginning, and so forth, et cetera. {%—Ity-%}
{%ukta, am,%} n. information, report, narrative.
<LEND>

<L>9886<pc>0139-a<k1>itiha<k2>itiha
{%Iti-ha,%}¦ ind. thus indeed, (according to tradition.)
<LEND>

<L>9887<pc>0139-a<k1>itihAsa<k2>itihAsa
{%Iti-hāsa, as,%}¦ m. ({%iti-ha-āsa,%} ‘so indeed it was’),
talk, legend, tradition, history, traditional accounts of
former events, heroic history, as the Mahā-bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>9888<pc>0139-a<k1>itihAsa<k2>itihAsa
{#itihAsa#}¦ {%iti-hāsa.%} See under 2. {%iti%} above.
<LEND>

<L>9889<pc>0139-a<k1>itIka<k2>itIka
{#itIka#}¦ {%itīka, as,%} m., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>9890<pc>0139-a<k1>itkawa<k2>itkawa
{#itkawa#}¦ {%itkaṭa, as,%} m. a kind of reed or grass.
See {%ikkaṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>9891<pc>0139-a<k1>itkilA<k2>itkilA
{#itkilA#}¦ {%itkilā,%} f., N. of a perfume. See
{%rocanā.%}
<LEND>

<L>9892<pc>0139-a<k1>itTa<k2>itTa
{#itTa#}¦ {%ittha, am,%} n. in astronomy = <lang n="greek">ἰχθύς</lang>
<LEND>

<L>9893<pc>0139-a<k1>itTam<k2>itTam
{#itTam#}¦ {%ittham,%} ind. (fr. {%id,%} q. v.), thus, in
this manner; [cf. Lat. <nsi>item.</nsi>] {%—Itthaṃ-vidha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of such a kind, endowed with such qualities.
{%—Itthaṅ-kāram,%} ind. in this manner. {%—Ittham-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. the being thus endowed. {%—Ittham-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become thus, being thus or in
such manner; so circumstanced.
<LEND>

<L>9894<pc>0139-a<k1>itTaSAla<k2>itTaSAla
{#itTaSAla#}¦ {%itthaśāla,%} (in astrology) N. of the
third Yoga, = Arabic <lang n="arabic">إِتِّصال</lang>
<LEND>

<L>9895<pc>0139-a<k1>itTA<k2>itTA
{#itTA#}¦ {%itthā,%} ind., Ved. thus; (often used
in the Ṛg-veda, and sometimes only to lay stress on
a following word; therefore by native etymologists
[Page0139-b+ 77]
considered as a particle of affirmation.) {%Itthā%} is
often connected with words expressing devotion to
the gods &c. in the sense of thus, truly, really;
especially with {%dhī%} as an adjective. Hence {%itthā-%}
{%dhī%} = such, i. e. true ({%satyā%}) or real worship. Simi-
larly, {%itthā-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} so devout, so pious, i. e.
very devout; (Sāy.) performing such or true works.
<LEND>

<L>9896<pc>0139-b<k1>itTAt<k2>itTAt
{#itTAt#}¦ {%itthāt,%} ind. ({%= ittham%}), Ved. thus,
in this way.
<LEND>

<L>9897<pc>0139-b<k1>id<k2>id
{#id#}¦ {%id,%} ind., Ved. (probably the neut. form
of the pronom. base {%i,%} see 3. {%i;%} a particle of affirma-
tion), even, just, only; (especially in strengthening
an antithesis, e. g. {%yathā vaśanti devās tathā id%}
{%asat,%} as the gods wish it, thus indeed it will be; {%dip-%}
{%santa id ripavo nāha debhuḥ,%} the enemies wishing
indeed to hurt were in nowise able to hurt.)
<LEND>

<L>9898<pc>0139-b<k1>id<k2>id
{%Id%}¦ is often added to words expressing excess or
exclusion (e. g. {%viśva it,%} everyone indeed; {%śaśvad%}
{%it,%} constantly indeed; {%eka it,%} one only). At the be-
ginning of sentences it often adds emphasis to pro-
nouns, prepositions, particles (e. g. {%tvam it,%} thou
indeed; {%yadi it,%} if indeed, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>9899<pc>0139-b<k1>id<k2>id
{%Id%}¦ occurs often in the Ṛg-veda, seldom in the
Brāhmaṇas, and its place is taken in classical Sanskrit
by {%eva%} and other particles.
<LEND>

<L>9900<pc>0139-b<k1>idam<k2>idam
{#idam#}¦ {%idam, ayam, iyam, idam%} (fr. {%id,%} a kind
of neut. of the pronom. base 3. {%i%} with {%am;%} cf. Lat. <nsi>is,</nsi>
<nsi>ea, id,</nsi> and <nsi>idem;</nsi> the regular forms are partly de-
rived from the pronom. base {%a;%} see Gram. 224.
The Veda exhibits various irregular formations, e. g.
fr. pronom. base {%a,%} an inst. {%enā, ayā,%} and gen. loc.
du. {%ayos;%} fr. the base {%ima,%} a gen. sing. {%imasya,%}
&c.; the forms derived fr. {%a%} are used enclitically if
they take the place of the third personal pronoun, do
not stand at the beginning of a verse or period, and
have no peculiar stress laid upon them), this, this here,
referring to something near the speaker; known, pre-
sent; (opposed to {%adas,%} e. g. {%ayaṃ lokaḥ%} or {%idaṃ%}
{%viśvam%} or {%idaṃ sarvam,%} this earthly world, this
universe; {%ayam agniḥ,%} this fire which burns on the
earth; but {%asāv agniḥ,%} that fire in the sky, i. e. the
lightning: so also {%idam%} or {%iyam%} alone signifies ‘this
earth;’ {%ime smaḥ,%} here we are.)
<LEND>

<L>9901<pc>0139-b<k1>idam<k2>idam
{%Idam%}¦ often refers to something immediately fol-
lowing, whereas {%etad%} points to what precedes (e. g.
{%śrutvā etad idam ūcuḥ,%} having heard that they
said this).
<LEND>

<L>9902<pc>0139-b<k1>idam<k2>idam
{%Idam%}¦ occurs connected with {%yad, tad, etad, kim,%}
and a personal pronoun, partly to point out anything
more distinctly and emphatically, partly pleonastically
(e. g. {%tad idam vākyam,%} this speech here following;
{%so'yaṃ Vidūṣakaḥ,%} this Vidūṣaka here).
<LEND>

<L>9903<pc>0139-b<k1>idam<k2>idam
{%Idam,%}¦ ind., Ved. here, to this place; now, even,
just; there; with these words. {%—Idaṃ-rūpa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having this shape. {%—Idaṃ-vid, t, t, t,%}
knowing this or conversant with this. {%—Idaṅ-kāryā,%}
f. the plant Hedysarum Alhagi. {%—Idad-vasu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. rich in this and that. {%—Idan-tā,%} f. iden-
tity. {%—Idam-prakāram,%} ind. in this manner.
{%—Idam-prathama, as, ā, am,%} doing anything for
the first time. {%—Idam-maya, as, ī, am,%} Ved. made
or consisting of this.
<LEND>

<L>9904<pc>0139-b<k1>idaMyu<k2>idaMyu
{%Idaṃyu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing this.
<LEND>

<L>9905<pc>0139-b<k1>idA<k2>idA
{#idA#}¦ {%i-dā,%} ind. (fr. pronom. base 3. {%i%}), Ved.
now, at this moment; (often connected with a gen.
of {%ahan,%} e. g. {%idā ahnaḥ%} or {%ahna idā,%} this present
day, ‘now-a-days;’ and with {%hyas,%} e. g. {%idā hyaḥ,%}
only yesterday.) {%—Idā-vatsara, as,%} m. originally
perhaps ‘the present or current year;’ then one of the
names given to the single years of a period of five
years; one of the five years in which gifts of clothes
and food are productive of great rewards. {%—Idā-%}
{%vatsarīya, as, ī, am,%} belonging to such a year. {%—Idu-%}
{%vatsara%} and {%id-vatsara = idā-vatsara%} above. {%—Id-%}
{%vatsarīya = idāvatsarīya%} above.
<LEND>

<L>9906<pc>0139-b<k1>idAnIm<k2>idAnIm
{%I-dānīm,%}¦ ind. now, at this moment, in this case,
just, even; (with gen. of {%ahan,%} e. g. {%idānīm ahnaḥ,%}
[Page0139-c+ 74]
this present day, ‘now-a-days;’ {%idānīm eva,%} just
now; immediately; {%idānīm api,%} in this case too;
{%tata idānīm,%} thereupon, then.) In rare cases it is
an expletive, affecting but slightly the sense. {%Idānīm%}
as a measure of time is the fifteenth part of an {%etarhi,%}
and is then declinable (e. g. {%yāvanty Etarhīṇi tāva-%}
{%nti pañcadaśakṛtva Idānīni,%} as many Etarhis, so
many Idānīms fifteen times repeated). {%—Idānīn-%}
{%tana, as, ī, am,%} present, momentary, of the present
moment.
<LEND>

<L>9907<pc>0139-c<k1>idDa<k2>idDa
{#idDa, iDma#}¦, &c. See under {%indh.%}
<LEND>

<L>9908<pc>0139-c<k1>in<k2>in
{#in#}¦ {%in,%} cl. 8. P., Ved. {%inoti, ainot,%} 2nd
sing. impv. {%inuhi%} or {%inu,%} cl. 9. P., 1st pl.
{%inīmasi,%} cl. 6. P. (fr. {%inv%}) {%invati,%} perf. 3rd pl.
{%invire,%} to advance upon, press upon, drive; to infuse
strength, invigorate; to use force, to force; drive away,
keep back, remove; to have in one's power, to take
possession of, pervade; dispose; to be lord or master
of a thing or an art. See {%inv.%}
<LEND>

<L>9909<pc>0139-c<k1>ina<k2>ina
{%Ina, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. able, strong, energetic, de-
termined, bold; powerful, mighty, wild; glorious;
({%as%}), m. a lord, a master; a king; the sun; the
lunar mansion Hasta. {%—Ina-sabha, am,%} n. a royal
court or assembly.
<LEND>

<L>9910<pc>0139-c<k1>inakz<k2>inakz
{#inakz#}¦ {%inakṣ, inakṣati%} (a Ved. Desid. of
{%nakṣ%}), to endeavour to reach, strive to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>9911<pc>0139-c<k1>inAnI<k2>inAnI
{#inAnI#}¦ {%inānī,%} f., N. of a plant (= Vaṭapattrī).
<LEND>

<L>9912<pc>0139-c<k1>inu<k2>inu
{#inu#}¦ {%inu, us,%} m., N. of a Gandharva.
<LEND>

<L>9913<pc>0139-c<k1>inTihA<k2>inTihA
{#inTihA#}¦ {%inthihā,%} f., an astrological term
taken from the Arabic.
<LEND>

<L>9914<pc>0139-c<k1>ind<k2>ind
{#ind#}¦ {%ind,%} cl. 1. P. {%indati, aindat, indām-%}
{%babhūva, inditum,%} to be powerful; (this
root seems to be formed merely for the etymology of
the word {%indra,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>9915<pc>0139-c<k1>indambara<k2>indambara
{#indambara#}¦ {%indambara, am,%} n. the blue lotus,
Nymphæa Cærulea. See {%indī-vara.%}
<LEND>

<L>9916<pc>0139-c<k1>indindira<k2>indindira
{#indindira#}¦ {%indindira, as,%} m. a large bee.
<LEND>

<L>9917<pc>0139-c<k1>indirA<k2>indirA
{#indirA#}¦ {%indirā,%} f. epithet of Lakṣmī, wife
of Viṣṇu. {%—Indirā-mandira, as,%} m. epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Indirālaya (˚rā-āl˚), am,%} n. (lit. ‘the
abode of {%Indirā%} or Lakṣmī’), the blue lotus, Nym-
phæa Stellata and Cyanea. (The goddess {%Indirā%}
issued at the creation from the petals of the flower.)
{%—Indirā-vara, am,%} n. = preceding.
<LEND>

<L>9918<pc>0139-c<k1>indIvara<k2>indIvara
{#indIvara#}¦ {%indī-vara%} or {%indī-vāra%} or {%indi-vara,%}
{%am,%} m. (contracted fr. {%indirā-vara%}), the blue lotus,
Nymphæa Stellata and Cyanea, see {%indirā; (ī),%} f. the
plant Asparagus Racemosus; ({%ā%}), f., N. of another
plant.
<LEND>

<L>9919<pc>0139-c<k1>indIvariRI<k2>indIvariRI
{%Indīvariṇī,%}¦ f. a group of blue lotuses.
<LEND>

<L>9920<pc>0139-c<k1>indu<k2>indu
{#indu#}¦ {%indu, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%und;%} per-
haps connected with {%vindu,%} which last is unknown in
the Ṛg-veda), Ved. a drop, especially of Soma, Soma;
a bright drop, a spark; the moon; ({%avas%}), m. pl.
the moons, i. e. the periodic changes of the moon;
time of moonlight, night; ({%us%}), m. camphor. (In
the Brāhmaṇas {%indu%} is used only for the moon; but
the connection between the senses ‘Soma juice’ and
‘moon’ in the word {%indu%} has led to the same two
ideas being transferred in classical Sanskrit to the
word {%Soma,%} although the latter has properly only
the sense ‘Soma juice.’) {%—Indu-kamala, am,%} n. the
white lotus. {%—Indu-kalā,%} f. a digit of the moon;
N. of several plants, Cocculus Cordifolius, Sarcostema
Viminale, Ligusticum Ajowan. {%—Indu-kalikā,%} f. the
plant Pandanus Odoratissimus. {%—Indu-kānta, as,%}
m. the lunar gem, the moon-stone; ({%ā%}), f. night.
{%—Indu-ja, as,%} m. epithet of the planet mercury,
‘son of the moon;’ ({%ā%}), f., N. of the river Revā or
Narmadā in the Dekhan. {%—Indu-janaka, as,%} m. the
ocean, lit. ‘father of the moon,’ (the moon being
produced amongst other things at the churning of
the ocean.) {%—Indu-dala, as,%} m. a portion of the
moon, a digit, crescent. {%—Indu-putra, as,%} m. epithet
[Page0140-a+ 79]
of the planet Mercury. {%—Indu-puṣpikā,%} f. the plant
Methonica Superba. {%—Indu-bhṛt, t,%} m. epithet of
Śiva. ‘bearing the crescent on his forehead.’ {%—Indu-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. the moon-stone. {%—Indu-maṇḍala,%}
{%am,%} n. the orb or disc of the moon. {%—Indu-mat,%}
{%ān,%} m., Ved. (in liturgical language) an epithet of
Agni, because in the verses in which he is addressed
the word {%indu%} occurs; ({%tī%}), f. day of full moon; N.
of the sister of Bhoja and wife of Aja; N. of a river.
{%—Indu-mauli, is,%} m. epithet of Śiva; see {%indu-%}
{%bhṛt%}. {%—Indu-ratna, am,%} n. a pearl. {%—Indu-rāj, ṭ,%}
m. the moon, king of the stars. {%—Indu-rekhā,%} f. a
digit of the moon. {%—Indu-lekhā,%} f. a digit of
the moon; the plant Menispermum Glabrum;
the moon-plant Asclepias Acida; a kind of lovage,
Ligusticum Ajwæn. {%—Indu-lohaka, am,%} n. silver.
{%—Indu-vadanā,%} f. a metre of four verses of which
each contains fourteen syllables. {%—Indu-vallī,%} f. the
plant Sarcostemma Viminale. {%—Induvāra%} in astrology
= the Arabic <lang n="arabic">إِدْبار</lang> {%—Indu-vrata, am,%} n. a reli-
gious observance depending on the age of the moon;
diminishing the quantity of food by a certain portion
daily, for a fortnight or a month, &c. {%—Indu-śekhara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘moon-crested,’ an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>9921<pc>0140-a<k1>induka<k2>induka
{%Induka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant, {%= aśmantaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>9922<pc>0140-a<k1>indUra<k2>indUra
{#indUra#}¦ {%indūra, as,%} m. a rat, a mouse [cf.
{%undura, unduru%}].
<LEND>

<L>9923<pc>0140-a<k1>indra<k2>indra
{#indra#}¦ {%indra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%in%} or {%ind%} or ob-
solete rt. {%id%} ?), the god who in Vedic mythology
reigns over the deities of the intermediate region or
atmosphere; he fights against and conquers with his
thunderbolt ({%vajra%}) the demons of darkness, and is
in general a symbol of generous heroism; ({%Indra%} was
not originally lord of the gods of the sky, but his
deeds were most useful to mankind, and he was there-
fore addressed in prayers and hymns more than any
other deity, and ultimately superseded the more lofty
and spiritual Varuṇa. In the later mythology {%Indra%} is
subordinated to the triad Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva,
but remained the chief of all other deities in the
popular mind; he is also regent of the east quarter,
and considered one of the twelve Ādityas: in the
Vedānta he is identified with the supreme being);
the first, the chief (of any class of objects); a prince;
the pupil of the right eye (that of the left being called
Indrāṇī or Indra's wife); N. of the plant Wrightia
Antidysenterica, &c. (see {%kuṭaja%}); a vegetable poi-
son; N. of the twenty-sixth Yoga or division of a
circle on the plane of the ecliptic; the Yoga star in
the twenty-sixth Nakṣatra, <lang n="greek">γ</lang> Pegasi; the human or
animal soul, the portion of spirit residing in the body;
night; one of the nine divisions of Jambu-dvīpa or
the known continent; best, excellent (in compounds);
({%ā%}), f. the wife of Indra, see {%indrāṇī;%} N. of a
plant, Marjoram (?), see {%phaṇijjhava%}. {%—Indra-%}
{%ṛṣabha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having Indra as a bull,
or impregnated by Indra, epithet of the earth.
{%—Indra-karman, ā,%} m. epithet of Viṣṇu, ‘per-
forming Indra's deeds.’ {%—Indra-kīla, as,%} m., N. of
a mountain; a rock. {%—Indra-kuñjara, as,%} m.
Indra's elephant; see {%airāvata%}. {%—Indra-kūṭa, as,%}
m., N. of a mountain. {%—Indra-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
ploughed by Indra, growing in a wild state. {%—Indra-%}
{%ketu, us,%} m. Indra's banner; N. of a man. {%—Indra-%}
{%kośa%} or {%indra-koṣa%} or {%indrakoṣaka, as,%} m. a
platform, a scaffold; a projection of the roof of a
house, forming a kind of balcony or terrace; a pin or
bracket projecting from the wall. {%—Indra-giri, is,%}
m., N. of a mountain. {%—Indra-gupta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. guarded or protected by Indra; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a Brāhman. {%—Indra-guru, us,%} m. teacher of Indra;
an epithet of Kaśyapa. {%—Indra-gopa, as,%} or {%ā, ās,%}
m., Ved. having Indra as one's protector; ({%as%}), m.
the insect cochineal of various kinds; in this sense
also {%indragopaka%}. {%—Indra-ghoṣa, as,%} m., Ved.
noise of Indra personified; having the name Indra.
{%—Indra-candana, am,%} n. {%= hari-candana%}. {%—In-%}
{%dra-cāpa, as,%} m. Indra's bow, a rainbow. {%—Indra-%}
{%cirbhiṭī,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Indra-cchandas,%} n. a
[Page0140-b+ 81]
necklace consisting of 1008 strings. {%—Indra-janana,%}
{%am,%} n. Indra's birth. {%—Indrajananīya, as, ā, am,%}
treating of Indra's birth. {%—Indra-jā, ās, ās, am,%}
Ved. originating from Indra. {%—Indra-jānu, us,%} m.,
N. of a monkey. {%—Indra-jāla, am,%} n., Ved. the net
of Indra; a weapon employed by Arjuna, stratagem
or trick in war; deception, cheating; conjuring,
juggling. {%—Indrajālika, as, ī, am,%} a juggler, a
conjurer; deceptive, unreal. {%—Indrajālin, ī,%} m.,
N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Indra-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror
of Indra,’ N. of the son of Rāvaṇa; of a Dānava; of
the father of Rāvaṇa and king of Kāśmīra; an author
of the seventeenth century. {%—Indrajid-vijayin, ī,%} m.
‘conqueror of Indrajit,’ an epithet of Lakṣmaṇa.
{%—Indra-jūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. promoted, excited, or
procured by Indra. {%—Indra-jyeṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
whose chief is Indra, led by Indra. {%—Indra-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. most Indra-like, mighty, powerful.
{%—Indra-tā,%} f. power and dignity of Indra. {%—Indra-%}
{%tāpana, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Indra-tūla%} or
{%indratūlaka, am,%} n. a flock of cotton, a flocculent
seed &c. blown about in the air. {%—Indra-toyā,%} f.,
N. of a river. {%—Indra-tva, am,%} n. Indra's power and
dignity; kingship. {%—Indra-tvota, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%indra-tvā-ūta%}), Ved. favoured or protected by thee,
O Indra. {%—Indra-datta, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
{%—Indra-dāru, us,%} m., the tree Pinus Devadāru.
{%—Indra-devī,%} f., N. of the wife of king Meghavā-
hana, who built a monastery called {%indradevī-bha-%}
{%vana%}. {%—Indra-dyumna, as,%} m., N. of a man with
the patronymic Bhāllaveya; ({%am%}), n., N. of a lake.
{%—Indra-dru, us,%} m. the plants Terminalia Arjuna
and Wrightia Antidysenterica. {%—Indra-druma, as,%}
m. the plant Terminalia Arjuna. {%—Indra-dvīpa, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. one of the nine dvīpas or divisions of the
known continent. {%—Indra-dhanus, us,%} n. Indra's
bow, the rainbow. {%—Indra-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a
Tathāgata or of a Nāga. {%—Indra-nakṣatra, am,%} n.,
Ved., Indra's lunar mansion; an epithet of Phalgunī.
{%—Indra-nīla, as,%} m. a sapphire. {%—Indranīlaka,%}
{%as,%} m. an emerald. {%—Indra-patnī,%} f., Ved. the wife
of Indra. {%—Indra-parṇī,%} f., N. of a plant, perhaps
Methonica Superba. {%—Indra-parvata, as,%} m., N. of
a mountain. {%—Indra-pātama, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
drunk by Indra with more pleasure than by any one
else. {%—Indra-pāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. drunk by Indra
(anything which serves as his drink). {%—Indra-pālita,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘protected by Indra,’ N. of a king; also of a
Vaiśya. {%—Indra-pīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. drunk by
Indra. {%—Indra-putrā,%} f., Ved. daughter of Indra.
{%—Indra-purogama, as, ā, am,%} preceded or led on
by Indra, having Indra as leader. {%—Indra-purohitā,%}
f. the asterism Puṣya. {%—Indra-puṣpā%} or {%indra-%}
{%puṣpikā%} or {%indra-puṣpī,%} f. the medicinal plant
Methonica Superba. {%—Indra-pramati, is,%} m. a de-
scendant of Vasiṣṭha, author of some verses of the
Ṛg-veda. {%—Indra-pramada, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Indra-prasūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. caused or im-
pelled by Indra. {%—Indra-prastha, as, am,%} m. n.,
N. of a city on the Yamunā (now Delhi), the resi-
dence of the Pāṇḍavas. {%—Indra-praharaṇa, am,%}
n. Indra's weapon, the thunderbolt. {%—Indra-brāh-%}
{%maṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Indra-bhaginī,%} f.
‘Indra's sister,’ epithet of the wife of Śiva. {%—Indra-%}
{%bhūti, is,%} m., N. of one of the eleven Gaṇādhipas
of the Jainas. {%—Indra-bheṣaja, am,%} n. dried ginger.
{%—Indramaha, am,%} n., N. of a ceremony beginning
with the words {%indram aham%}. {%—Indramaha-kā-%}
{%muka, as,%} m. a dog. {%—Indra-mādana, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. animating or delighting Indra. {%—Indra-mārga,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Indra-medin, ī, inī, i,%}
Ved. whose friend or ally is Indra. {%—Indra-yava,%}
{%am,%} n. Indra-grain; the seed of the Wrightia Anti-
dysenterica. {%—Indra-yoga, as,%} m., Ved., Indra's union
or uniting power. {%—Indra-lupta, as, am,%} m. n. or
{%indra-luptaka, am,%} n. morbid baldness of the head;
loss of beard. {%—Indra-loka, as,%} m. Indra's world;
Svarga or paradise. {%—Indralokāgamana (˚ka-āg˚),%}
{%am,%} n. (Arjuna's) approach to Indra's world. {%—Indra-%}
{%lokeśa (˚ka-īś˚), as,%} m. the lord of Indra's world,
i. e. Indra; a guest (as conferring paradise on his
[Page0140-c+ 81]
host). {%—Indra-vaṃśā,%} f. a metre of four lines, each
of which contains twelve syllables. {%—Indra-vajrā,%} f.
a metre of four lines occurring frequently in epic
poetry; each line contains eleven syllables. {%—Indra-%}
{%vat,%} or in some cases {%indrā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
associated with or accompanied by Indra. {%—Indra-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m., N. of a warrior. {%—Indra-vallarī%} or
{%indra-vallī,%} f. the plant Cucumis Colocynthis (?).
{%—Indra-vasti, is,%} m. f. (?) the calf (of the leg).
{%—Indra-vātatama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. much desired
by Indra. {%—Indra-vāyu, ū,%} m. du. Indra and Vāyu.
{%—Indra-vāruṇikā%} or {%indra-vāruṇī,%} f. Colocynth,
a wild bitter gourd, Cucumis Colocynthis; the favourite
plant of Indra and Varuṇa. {%—Indra-vāh, ṭ,%} m., Ved.
carrying Indra. {%—Indra-vīja, am,%} n. the seed of the
Wrightia Antidysenterica. {%—Indra-vṛkṣa, as,%} m.
{%= indra-dāru%}. {%—Indra-vṛddhā,%} f. a kind of ab-
scess. {%—Indra-vṛddhika, as,%} m. a kind of horse.
{%—Indra-vaidūrya, am,%} n. a kind of precious stone.
{%—Indra-vrata, am,%} n. ‘Indra's rule of conduct,’
one of the duties of a king, viz. to distribute benefits,
as Indra pours down rain. {%—Indra-śakti, is,%} f. In-
drāṇī the wife or personified energy of Indra. {%—Indra-%}
{%śatru, us, us, u,%} Ved. whose enemy or conquerer is
Indra, conquered by Indra (with the Udātta on the first
syllable; differently accented the word might mean
‘an enemy of Indra’); ({%us%}), m. ‘Indra's enemy,’
epithet of Prahlāda. {%—Indra-śalabha, as,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Indra-śaila, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Indra-śreṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having Indra
as chief, led by Indra; see {%indra-jyeṣṭha%}. {%—Indra-%}
{%sakhi, ā,%} m., Ved. one whose ally or companion is
Indra. {%—Indra-sandhā,%} f. connection or alliance with
Indra. {%—Indra-sārathi, is, is, i,%} Ved. driving in
the same carriage with Indra, an epithet of Vāyu.
{%—Indra-sāvarṇi, is,%} m., N. of the fourteenth
Manu. {%—Indra-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of Indra,’ N. of
the monkey-king Bali; also an epithet of Arjuna and
Jayanta. {%—Indra-surasa, as,%} m. a shrub, the leaves
of which are used in discutient applications, Vitex
Negundo. {%—Indra-surā,%} f. or {%indra-surisa, as,%} m.,
N. of the same plant (?). {%—Indra-sūnu, us,%} m. ‘the
son of Indra,’ epithet of the monkey-king Bali.
{%—Indra-sena, as,%} m., N. of several men; N. of a
Nāga; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several women. {%—Indrasena-%}
{%dvitīya, as, ā, am,%} attended by Indrasena. {%—Indra-%}
{%senā,%} f., Ved., Indra's missile. {%—Indra-stut, t,%} m. or
{%indra-stoma, as,%} m. ‘praise of Indra;’ N. of particular
hymns to Indra in certain ceremonies. {%—Indras-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. similar to Indra; (Sāy.) accompanied
by Indra, possessed of power (?). {%—Indra-hava, as,%}
m., Ved. invocation of Indra. {%—Indra-hasta, as,%} m.
a kind of medicament. {%—Indrāgni-devatā (˚ra-ag˚),%}
f. the sixteenth lunar mansion. {%—Indrāgni-dhūma,%}
{%as,%} m. frost, snow. {%—Indrānuja (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m.
‘the younger brother of Indra,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu
or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Indrābha (˚ra-ābh˚), as,%} m., N. of a
grandson (?) of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Indrāyudha (˚ra-%}
{%āy˚), am,%} n. Indra's weapon, the rainbow; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a horse; a horse marked with black about the
eyes; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of leech having rainbow tints on
the back. {%—Indrāyudha-śikhin, ī,%} m., N. of a
Nāga. {%—Indrāri (˚ra-ar˚), is,%} m. Indra's enemy,
an Asura or demon. {%—Indrāvaraja (˚ra-av˚), as,%}
m. ‘the younger brother of Indra,’ an epithet of
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Indrāśana (˚ra-aś˚), as,%} m.
hemp, dried and chewed; the shrub which bears the
seed used as a jeweller's weight, Albus Precatorius.
{%—Indrāsana (˚ra-ās˚), am,%} n. the throne of Indra,
any throne; a foot of five short syllables. {%—Indrejya%}
{%(˚ra-ij˚), as,%} m., N. of Vṛhaspati, the preceptor of the
gods. {%—Indreṣita (˚ra-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. sent or
driven or instigated by Indra. {%—Indrota (˚ra-ūta), as,%}
m., N. of a son of Ṛkṣa and of Devāpi. {%—Indro-%}
{%tsava (˚ra-ut˚), as,%} m. a festival honouring Indra.
<LEND>

<L>9924<pc>0140-c<k1>indraka<k2>indraka
{%Indraka, am,%}¦ n. an assembly-room, a hall.
<LEND>

<L>9925<pc>0140-c<k1>indraya<k2>indraya
{%Indraya,%}¦ nom. A., Ved. {%indrayate, -yitum,%} to
behave like Indra.
<LEND>

<L>9926<pc>0140-c<k1>indrayu<k2>indrayu
{%Indrayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. longing for or wishing
to approach Indra.
<LEND>

<L>9927<pc>0140-c<k1>indrARikA<k2>indrARikA
{%Indrāṇikā,%}¦ f. the plant Vitex Negundo.
<LEND>
[Page0141-a+ 80]

<L>9928<pc>0141-a<k1>indrARI<k2>indrARI
{%Indrāṇī,%}¦ f. the wife of Indra; N. of Durgā,
reckoned as one of the eight mothers ({%mātṛkā%}) or
divine energies; a kind of coitus; the plant Vitex
Negundo.
<LEND>

<L>9929<pc>0141-a<k1>indriya<k2>indriya
{%Indriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for or belonging to or
agreeable to Indra; ({%as%}), m. a companion of Indra;
({%am%}), n. power, force, the quality which belongs
especially to the mighty Indra; exhibition of power,
powerful act; bodily power, power of the senses;
virile power; semen virile; faculty of sense, sense,
organ of sense; the number five as symbolical of the
five senses. (In addition to the five organs of per-
ception, {%buddhīndriyāṇi%} or {%jñānendriyāṇi,%} i. e.
eye, ear, nose, tongue, and skin, the Hindūs enu-
merate five organs of action, {%karmendriyāṇi,%} i. e.
larynx, hand, foot, anus, and parts of generation; be-
tween these ten organs and the soul or {%ātman%} stands
{%manas%} or mind, considered as an eleventh organ.
In the Vedānta, {%manas, buddhi, ahaṅkāra,%} and
{%citta%} form the four inner or internal organs, {%antar-%}
{%indriyāṇi,%} so that according to this reckoning the
organs are fourteen in number, each being presided
over by its own ruler or {%niyantṛ;%} thus, the eye by
the Sun, the ear by the Quarters of the world, the
nose by the two Aśvins, the tongue by Pracetas, the
skin by the Wind, the voice by Fire, the hand by
Indra, the foot by Viṣṇu, the anus by Mitra, the
parts of generation by Prajāpati, manas by the Moon,
buddhi by Brahman, ahaṅkāra by Śiva, citta by
Viṣṇu as Acyuta. In the Nyāya philosophy each
organ is connected with its own peculiar element,
the nose with the Earth, the tongue with Water, the
eye with Light or Fire, the skin with Air, the ear with
Ether. The Jainas divide the whole creation into
five sections, according to the number of organs
attributed to each being.) {%—Indriya-kāma, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. desiring or endeavouring to obtain power.
{%—Indri-yagocara, as, ā, am,%} perceptible, capable
of being ascertained by the senses. {%—Indriya-grāma,%}
{%as,%} m. the assemblage of the organs, the senses or
organs of sense collectively. {%—Indriya-jñāna, am,%}
n. the faculty of perception, sense, consciousness.
{%—Indriya-nigraha, as,%} m. restraint of the organs
of sense. {%—Indriya-buddhi, is,%} f. perception by the
senses, the exercise of any sense, the faculty of any
organ. {%—Indriya-bodhana, as, ā, am,%} exciting
power, arousing or sharpening the senses; ({%am%}), n.
any excitement of sense, an object of perception, a
stimulus, &c. {%—Indriya-varga, as,%} m. the assem-
blage of organs, the organs of sense collectively.
{%—Indriya-vipratipatti, is,%} f. perversion of the
organs, erroneous or perverted perception. {%—Indriya-%}
{%svāpa, as,%} m. sleep of the senses, unconsciousness,
insensibility; the end of the world. {%—Indriyāgocara%}
{%(˚ya-a-goc˚), as, ā, am,%} imperceptible. {%—Indri-%}
{%yātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Indriyāyatana (˚ya-āy˚), am,%} n. the residence
of the senses; the body. {%—Indriyārtha (˚ya-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an object of sense (as sound, smell, &c.),
anything exciting the senses. {%—Indriyā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} or {%indriyā-vin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. powerful,
mighty; sometimes also {%indriya-vat%}. {%—Indriyā-%}
{%saṅga (˚ya-a-s˚), as,%} m. non-attachment to sensual
objects, stoicism, philosophy.
<LEND>

<L>9930<pc>0141-a<k1>indriya<k2>indriya
{#indriya#}¦ {%indriya.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>9931<pc>0141-a<k1>inD<k2>inD
{#inD#}¦ {%indh,%} cl. 7. A. {%inddhe, indhāñ-cakre%}
or {%īdhe, indhiṣyate, aindhiṣṭa, indhi-%}
{%tum,%} to kindle, light, set on fire: Pass. {%indhyate,%}
to be lighted; to blaze, flame; [with {%indh%} cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">αἴθω, ἰθαρός; αἰθήρ, Αἴτνη; Ἥφ-αισ-τας</lang> Lat.
<nsi>œs-tus, œs-tas:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>eit,</nsi> ‘fire.’]
<LEND>

<L>9932<pc>0141-a<k1>idDa<k2>idDa
{%Iddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ kindled, lighted, alight; shin-
ing, glowing, blazing; clean, clear, bright; wonder-
ful; obeyed, unresisted ?; ({%am%}), n. sunshine, light,
heat; a wonder. {%—Iddha-manyu, us, us, u,%} having
the anger excited or kindled. {%—Iddhāgni (˚dha-%}
{%ag˚), is, is, i,%} Ved. one whose fire burns.
<LEND>

<L>9933<pc>0141-a<k1>iD<k2>iD
{%Idh,%}¦ (at the end of compounds) lighting; [cf.
{%agnīdh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>9934<pc>0141-a<k1>iDma<k2>iDma
{%Idhma, as, am,%}¦ m. n. fuel, especially that which
[Page0141-b+ 74]
is used for the sacred fire; [cf. Hib. <nsi>adhmad;</nsi>
Zend <nsi>aiśma.</nsi>] {%—Idhma-jihva, as,%} m., N. of a son
of Priya-vrata. {%—Idhma-pravraścana, as,%} m. a
hatchet, an axe. {%—Idhma-bhṛti, is, is, i,%} Ved.
bringing fuel. {%—Idhma-vāha, as,%} m. epithet of
Dṛḍhasyu or Dṛḍhadasyu.
<LEND>

<L>9935<pc>0141-b<k1>iDyA<k2>iDyA
{%Idhyā,%}¦ f. kindling, lighting. See {%vājedhyā.%}
<LEND>

<L>9936<pc>0141-b<k1>inDa<k2>inDa
{%Indha, as, ā, am,%}¦ lighting, kindling.
<LEND>

<L>9937<pc>0141-b<k1>inDana<k2>inDana
{%Indhana, am,%}¦ n. kindling, lighting; [cf. {%agnīn-%}
{%dhana%}]; fuel; wood, grass &c. used for this purpose.
{%—Indhana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of fuel.
{%—Indhan-van, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. possessed of fuel;
flaming.
<LEND>

<L>9938<pc>0141-b<k1>inv<k2>inv
{#inv#}¦ {%inv,%} cl. 6. P. {%invati, invāñ-cakāra,%}
{%inviṣyati, ainvīt, invitum,%} to pervade,
surround, embrace, seize, take possession of; to invi-
gorate, gladden. See {%in.%}
<LEND>

<L>9939<pc>0141-b<k1>inva<k2>inva
{%Inva, as, ā, am,%}¦ pervading (in {%viśvam-inva%}).
<LEND>

<L>9940<pc>0141-b<k1>invakA<k2>invakA
{#invakA#}¦ {%invakā, ās,%} f. pl. stars in the head
of Orion.
<LEND>

<L>9941<pc>0141-b<k1>iBa<k2>iBa
{#iBa#}¦ {%ibha, as%} or {%am?,%} m. or n. ? (said to be
fr. rt. {%i,%} to go), Ved. servants, dependants, domestics,
household, family; (Sāy.) fearless power; ({%as, ā, am%}),
followed by attendants; ({%as%}), m. an elephant; ({%ī%}),
f. a female elephant; [with this word cf. the Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἐλ-έφας</lang> and the Lat. <nsi>ebur.</nsi>] {%—Ibha-kaṇā,%} f. a plant
with an aromatic seed, Scindapsus Officinalis. {%—Ibha-%}
{%keśara, as,%} m. the tree Mesua Roxburghii. {%—Ibha-%}
{%gandhā,%} f., N. of a poisonous fruit. {%—Ibha-dantā,%}
f. the plant Tiaridium Indicum. {%—Ibha-nimīlikā,%} f.
smartness, shrewdness, sagacity (like that of an ele-
phant). {%—Ibha-pālaka, as,%} m. the driver or keeper
of an elephant. {%—Ibha-poṭā,%} f. a young elephant, a
cub. {%—Ibham-ācala, as,%} m. a lion. {%—Ibha-yuvati,%}
{%is,%} f. an elephant's cub. {%—Ibhākhya (˚bha-ākh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the plant Mesua Roxburghii. {%—Ibhāri (˚bha-%}
{%ar˚), is,%} m. a lion (‘enemy of the elephant’). {%—Ibho-%}
{%ṣaṇā (˚bha-uṣ˚),%} f. a kind of aromatic plant.
<LEND>

<L>9942<pc>0141-b<k1>iBya<k2>iBya
{%Ibhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to one's servants
or attendants; wealthy, opulent, having many attend-
ants; (Sāy.) ({%as%}), m. an enemy; ({%ā%}), f. a female
elephant; N. of the Olibanum tree, Boswellia Serrata.
{%—Ibhya-tilvala, as, ā, am,%} Ved. abundantly pos-
sessed of household requisites.
<LEND>

<L>9943<pc>0141-b<k1>ima<k2>ima
{#ima#}¦ {%ima,%} a pronominal base. See {%idam.%}
<LEND>

<L>9944<pc>0141-b<k1>imaka<k2>imaka
{%Imaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ diminutive of {%ima.%}
<LEND>

<L>9945<pc>0141-b<k1>imaTA<k2>imaTA
{%Imathā,%}¦ ind., Ved. as in this place, as here, as now.
<LEND>

<L>9946<pc>0141-b<k1>iyakz<k2>iyakz
{#iyakz#}¦ {%iyakṣ%} (Anomalous Desid. of rt. {%yaj%}),
Ved. occurring only in the part. pres. {%iyakṣat%} and
{%iyakṣamāṇa,%} and in impf. subj. {%iyakṣān,%} to go
towards, approach; to request, endeavour to gain; to
long for, seek.
<LEND>

<L>9947<pc>0141-b<k1>iyakzu<k2>iyakzu
{%Iyakṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. longing for, seeking to gain.
<LEND>

<L>9948<pc>0141-b<k1>iyat<k2>iyat
{#iyat#}¦ {%iyat, ān, atī, at%} (fr. pronominal base
3. {%i%}), so large, only so large; so much, only so
much; [with {%iyat%} cf. the syllable <nsi>iens</nsi> or <nsi>ies</nsi> in such
Lat. words as <nsi>totiens, toties, quotiens, quoties,</nsi> and
in numeral adverbs as <nsi>quinquies.</nsi>] {%—Iyat-tā,%} f. or
{%iyat-tva, am,%} n. quantity, fixed measure or quantity,
so much.
<LEND>

<L>9949<pc>0141-b<k1>iyattaka<k2>iyattaka
{%Iyattaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ Ved. so small, very small,
wee.
<LEND>

<L>9950<pc>0141-b<k1>iyasya<k2>iyasya
{#iyasya#}¦ {%iyasya%} (Anomalous Intens. of rt.
{%yas%}), A., Ved. {%iyasyate,%} to relax, weaken; to vanish.
<LEND>

<L>9951<pc>0141-b<k1>iyasA<k2>iyasA
{%Iyasā,%}¦ f., Ved. lassitude, dejection, low spirits.
<LEND>

<L>9952<pc>0141-b<k1>ir<k2>ir
{#ir#}¦ {%ir,%} cl. 6. P. {%irati,%} to go; [cf. {%il.%}]
<LEND>

<L>9953<pc>0141-b<k1>irajya<k2>irajya
{#irajya#}¦ {%irajya%} (Anomalous Intens. of {%raj,%}
{%rāj%}), P. rarely A., Ved. {%irajyati, -te,%} to order, pre-
pare, arrange; to lead; to dispose, be master of;
(Sāy.) to grow.
<LEND>

<L>9954<pc>0141-b<k1>irajyu<k2>irajyu
{%Irajyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. busy with preparations for
the sacrificial rite.
<LEND>

<L>9955<pc>0141-b<k1>iraRa<k2>iraRa
{#iraRa#}¦ {%iraṇa,%} desert; salt or barren (soil);
{%= iriṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0141-c+ 73]

<L>9956<pc>0141-c<k1>iraD<k2>iraD
{#iraD#}¦ {%iradh%} (Anomalous Intens. of {%rādh%}),
{%iradhate%} and {%iradhyati,%} Ved. to endeavour to gain;
(Sāy.) to worship. The inf. {%iradhyai%} is by some
referred to this form, and regarded as a shortened
form of {%iradhadhyai;%} but Sāy. refers it to rt. {%īr.%}
<LEND>

<L>9957<pc>0141-c<k1>iraMmada<k2>iraMmada
{#iraMmada#}¦ {%iraṃ-mada, as,%} m., Ved. delighting
in drink; an epithet of Agni, in the form of light-
ning and Apāṃ-napāt; a flash of lightning or the
fire attending the fall of a thunderbolt; submarine
fire.
<LEND>

<L>9958<pc>0141-c<k1>irasya<k2>irasya
{#irasya#}¦ {%irasya,%} P., Ved. {%irasyati,%} to behave
insolently, be angry; (with dat.) to be ill-affected
towards; [cf. Lat. <nsi>ira, irasci.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>9959<pc>0141-c<k1>irasyA<k2>irasyA
{%Irasyā,%}¦ f., Ved. ill-will, malevolence; (Sāy.) wish
for food.
<LEND>

<L>9960<pc>0141-c<k1>irA<k2>irA
{#irA#}¦ {%irā,%} f. (closely allied to {%iḍā%} and {%iḷā%}),
Ved. any drinkable fluid; a draught (especially of
milk); refreshment, comfort, enjoyment; N. of an
Apsaras, a daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa;
water; ardent spirits; the earth; speech; the god-
dess of speech, Sarasvatī; [cf. {%iḍā.%}] {%—Irā-kṣīra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. whose milk is a refreshment or enjoy-
ment. {%—Irā-cara, am,%} n. hail; ({%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}),
earth-born, terrestrial, aquatic. {%—Irā-ja, as,%} m. a
N. of Kāma, god of love, ‘born from water.’ {%—Irā-%}
{%mukha, am,%} n., N. of an Asura-town near Meru.
{%—Irā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. granting drink or re-
freshment, satiating, giving enjoyment; endowed with
provisions; comfortable; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a son of
Arjuna; the ocean, a cloud; a king; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
a plant; N. of Durgā, the wife of Rudra, daughter of
the Nāga Suśravas; N. of a river in the Pañjāb, now
called Rāvī. {%—Irā-vellikā,%} f. pimples or pustules on
the head. {%—Ireśa (˚rā-īś˚), as,%} m. a N. of Viṣṇu;
a king, a sovereign; Varuṇa.
<LEND>

<L>9961<pc>0141-c<k1>irikA<k2>irikA
{#irikA#}¦ {%irikā,%} f., N. of a plant or tree.
{%—Irikā-vana, am,%} n. a grove of such trees.
<LEND>

<L>9962<pc>0141-c<k1>iriRa<k2>iriRa
{#iriRa#}¦ {%iriṇa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%ṛ,%}
to go; connected with {%irā%}), Ved. a water-course, a
rivulet, a well; any incision in the ground, a hollow,
hole; a desert, an inhospitable region; a bare plain,
barren soil; salt soil.
<LEND>

<L>9963<pc>0141-c<k1>iriRya<k2>iriRya
{%Iriṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging or relating to
a desert &c.
<LEND>

<L>9964<pc>0141-c<k1>irin<k2>irin
{#irin#}¦ {%irin, ī, iṇī, i%} (connected with {%ina ?%}),
Ved. powerful, violent; an overbearing fellow; (Sāy.)
an instigator; [cf. {%irasya%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>9965<pc>0141-c<k1>irimeda<k2>irimeda
{#irimeda#}¦ {%irimeda, as,%} m., N. of a plant, =
{%ari-meda.%}
<LEND>

<L>9966<pc>0141-c<k1>irimbiWi<k2>irimbiWi
{#irimbiWi#}¦ {%irimbiṭhi, is,%} m., N. of a man of
the family of Kāṇva, author of several hymns of the
Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>9967<pc>0141-c<k1>irivillA<k2>irivillA
{#irivillA#}¦ {%irivillā%} or {%irivellikā,%} f. pimples
or pustules on the head.
<LEND>

<L>9968<pc>0141-c<k1>irya<k2>irya
{#irya#}¦ {%irya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. active, powerful,
energetical; epithet of Pūṣan and of the Aśvins;
(Sāy.) instigating; destroying enemies; a lord.
<LEND>

<L>9969<pc>0141-c<k1>irvAru<k2>irvAru
{#irvAru#}¦ {%irvāru, us,%} m. f., N. of an eatable
cucumber, Cucumis Utilissimus; of another kind,
Cucumis Colocynthis; see {%irvālu, īrvāru, urvāru,%}
{%ervāru%}. {%—Irvāru-śuktikā,%} f. a kind of melon, com-
monly Sphuti or Sphut, Cucumis Momordica.
<LEND>

<L>9970<pc>0141-c<k1>irvAruka<k2>irvAruka
{%Irvāruka, as,%}¦ m. an animal living in caves.
<LEND>

<L>9971<pc>0141-c<k1>irvAlu<k2>irvAlu
{%Irvālu, us,%}¦ m. f. Cucumis Utilissimus Roxb. or
Cucumis Colocynthis.
<LEND>

<L>9972<pc>0141-c<k1>il<k2>il
{#il#}¦ {%il,%} cl. 6. P. {%ilati, iyela, eliṣyati,%}
{%ailīt, elitum,%} or cl. 10. P. {%ilayati%} or
{%elayati, -yitum,%} aor. {%aililat%} or {%ailayīt,%} to keep
still, not to move; to become quiet; to send, to
cast; to sleep; to move, to go; [a various reading
has the form {%iḷ:%} cf. Old Germ. <nsi>îllu, îllo,</nsi> for <nsi>îlju;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>Eile;</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>il,</nsi> ‘progress, mo-
tion;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐλάω</lang>]
<LEND>
[Page0142-a+ 71]

<L>9973<pc>0142-a<k1>ilaya<k2>ilaya
{%Ilaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. resting, motionless.
<LEND>

<L>9974<pc>0142-a<k1>ilava<k2>ilava
{#ilava#}¦ {%ilava, as, ā, am,%} Ved. sounding, noisy,
loud; [cf. {%ailaba.%}]
<LEND>

<L>9975<pc>0142-a<k1>ilavila<k2>ilavila
{#ilavila#}¦ {%ilavila, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Daśaratha; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter of Tṛṇavindu,
wife of Viśravas and mother of Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>9976<pc>0142-a<k1>ilA<k2>ilA
{#ilA#}¦ {%ilā,%} f. flow, speech, the earth, &c.; see
{%iḍā%}. {%—Ilā-gola, am,%} n. the earth, the globe. {%—Ilā-%}
{%tala, am,%} n. the fourth place in the circle of the
zodiac; the surface of the earth. {%—Ilā-dadha, as,%}
m., N. of a certain sacrifice. {%—Ilān-da, am,%} n.
‘granting refreshment or food,’ N. of a ceremony or
of a verse; N. of a Sāman. {%—Ilā-vṛta, as,%} m., N. of
a son of Agnīdhra, who received the Varṣa {%ilā-vṛta%}
as his kingdom; ({%am%}), n. one of the nine Varṣas or
divisions of the known world, comprehending the
highest and most central part of the old continent.
<LEND>

<L>9977<pc>0142-a<k1>ilikA<k2>ilikA
{%Ilikā,%}¦ f. the earth.
<LEND>

<L>9978<pc>0142-a<k1>ilinI<k2>ilinI
{#ilinI#}¦ {%ilinī,%} f., N. of a daughter of
Medhātithi.
<LEND>

<L>9979<pc>0142-a<k1>ilI<k2>ilI
{#ilI#}¦ {%ilī,%} f. a cudgel, a stick shaped like a
sword or a short sword. See {%īlī.%}
<LEND>

<L>9980<pc>0142-a<k1>ilIbiSa<k2>ilIbiSa
{#ilIbiSa#}¦ {%ilībiśa, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
demon conquered by Indra.
<LEND>

<L>9981<pc>0142-a<k1>ilISa<k2>ilISa
{#ilISa#}¦ {%ilīśa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. {%il,%} to
go), a fish, commonly the hilsa or sable, Clupea Alosa;
the fish being one of high flavour, and very abundant
at certain seasons, is generally eaten both by the
natives of Bengal and by Europeans residing there;
[cf. {%illiśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>9982<pc>0142-a<k1>ilUza<k2>ilUza
{#ilUza#}¦ {%ilūṣa, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Kavasha. See {%ailūṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>9983<pc>0142-a<k1>ilpa<k2>ilpa
{#ilpa#}¦ {%ilpa, as,%} m., N. of a wonderful tree
in the other world.
<LEND>

<L>9984<pc>0142-a<k1>illaka<k2>illaka
{#illaka#}¦ {%illaka, as,%} m., N. of a merchant's son.
<LEND>

<L>9985<pc>0142-a<k1>illala<k2>illala
{#illala#}¦ {%illala, as,%} m., N. of a bird.
<LEND>

<L>9986<pc>0142-a<k1>illiSa<k2>illiSa
{#illiSa#}¦ {%illiśa, as,%} m. the fish Clupea Alosa;
[cf. {%ilīśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>9987<pc>0142-a<k1>ilvakA<k2>ilvakA
{#ilvakA#}¦ {%ilvakā, ās,%} f. pl. the five stars in
Orion's head. See {%ilvala.%}
<LEND>

<L>9988<pc>0142-a<k1>ilvala<k2>ilvala
{#ilvala#}¦ {%ilvala, as,%} m. a kind of fish; N. of
a Daitya, the brother of Vātāpi; ({%ās%}), f. pl., N. of
the five stars in Orion's head.
<LEND>

<L>9989<pc>0142-a<k1>iva<k2>iva
{#iva#}¦ {%iva,%} ind. (fr. pronominal base 3. {%i%}),
like, in the same manner as (in this sense {%= yathā,%}
and used correlatively to {%tathā%}); as it were (after a
metaphorical expression, e. g. {%pathā iva yantau,%}
on a path going as it were); in a certain manner, in
some measure, a little, perhaps (in qualification or
mitigation of a strong assertion); nearly, almost, about
(e. g. {%muhūrtam iva,%} almost an hour); so, just so,
just, exactly, indeed, very (especially after words
which involve some restriction, e. g. {%īṣad iva,%} just
a little; {%kiñcid iva,%} just a little bit: and after a nega-
tion, e. g. {%nacirād iva,%} very soon). {%Iva%} is connected
vaguely, and somewhat pleonastically, with an inter-
rogative pronoun or adverb (e. g. {%kim iva,%} what ?
{%katham iva,%} how could that possibly be ? {%kveva,%}
where, I should like to know ?). In the Pada texts
of the Ṛg, Yajur, and Atharva-veda, and by native
grammarians, {%iva%} is considered to be compounded
with the word after which it stands, and is therefore
enclitic.
<LEND>

<L>9990<pc>0142-a<k1>ivIlaka<k2>ivIlaka
{#ivIlaka#}¦ {%ivīlaka, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Lambodara.
<LEND>

<L>9991<pc>0142-a<k1>iSIkA<k2>iSIkA
{#iSIkA#}¦ {%iśīkā,%} f. an elephant's eyeball.
See {%iṣīkā.%}
<LEND>

<L>9992<pc>0142-a<k1>iz<k2>iz<h>1
{#iz#} 1¦. {%iṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%iṣyati, iyeṣa, eṣiṣ-%}
{%yati, aiṣīt, eṣitum,%} to move, to cause to
move; to let fly, to throw, cast; to raise (as one's
voice); to sprinkle; cl. 9. P. {%iṣṇāti,%} to cause to
[Page0142-b+ 80]
move quickly, to cast, let fly, swing; to strike; to
fly off, escape; to impel, incite, animate, promote:
Caus. P. {%eṣayati, -yitum,%} to bring, offer: Desid.
{%eṣiṣiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>9993<pc>0142-b<k1>iz<k2>iz<h>2
2. {%iṣ,%}¦ (at the end of some compounds) moving
quickly, speedy. See {%aram-iṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>9994<pc>0142-b<k1>izaRaya<k2>izaRaya
{%Iṣaṇaya,%}¦ nom. (from the next) A., Ved. {%iṣa-%}
{%ṇayate, -yitum,%} to move, excite.
<LEND>

<L>9995<pc>0142-b<k1>izaRi<k2>izaRi<h>1
1. {%iṣaṇi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. impulse, desire. (For 2. see
under 3. {%iṣ.%})
<LEND>

<L>9996<pc>0142-b<k1>izaRya<k2>izaRya
{%Iṣaṇya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%iṣaṇyati, -yitum,%} to
cause to make haste, to excite, drive.
<LEND>

<L>9997<pc>0142-b<k1>izaRyA<k2>izaRyA
{%Iṣaṇyā,%}¦ f., Ved. impulse, desire.
<LEND>

<L>9998<pc>0142-b<k1>izavya<k2>izavya
{%Iṣavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%iṣu%} below), Ved. skilled
in archery.
<LEND>

<L>9999<pc>0142-b<k1>izikA<k2>izikA
{%Iṣikā = iṣīkā%}¦ and {%īṣikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>10000<pc>0142-b<k1>izita<k2>izita
{%Iṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved, driven, tossed, sent;
caused, excited, animated; quick. {%—Iṣita-tvatā,%} ind.,
Ved. by impulse or excitement.
<LEND>

<L>10001<pc>0142-b<k1>izIka<k2>izIka
{%Iṣīka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a people, {%= aiṣīka; (ā),%}
f. reed, rush, stem or stalk of grasses; an arrow; a
sort of sugar-cane, Saccharum Spontaneum; a brush;
a small stick of wood or iron used for trying whether
or not the gold in a crucible is melted; the eyeball
of an elephant; see {%iṣikā, īṣikā, īṣīkā, iśīkā.%}
{%—Iṣīka-tūla, am,%} n. the point or upper part of
a reed.
<LEND>

<L>10002<pc>0142-b<k1>izu<k2>izu
{%Iṣu, us,%}¦ m. f. an arrow; (in mathematics) a
versed sine; N. of a Soma ceremony. {%—Iṣu-kāra,%}
{%as,%} or {%iṣu-kṛt, t,%} m., Ved. an arrow-maker. {%—Iṣu-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m. an archer. {%—Iṣu-dhi,%} see s. v. below.
{%—Iṣu-pa, as,%} m., N. of an Asura, who appeared
on earth as king Magna-jit. {%—Iṣu-patha, as,%} m.
the range of an arrow. {%—Iṣu-puṣpā,%} f., N. of a
plant. {%—Iṣu-bala, as, ā, am,%} Ved. powerful by
arrows. {%—Iṣu-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} carrying arrows, an
archer. {%—Iṣu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of
arrows. {%—Iṣu-mātra, as, ī, am,%} having the length
of an arrow, i. e. about five short spans or three
feet; ({%am%}), ind. as far as the range of an arrow.
{%—Iṣus-trikāṇḍā,%} f. the threefold arrow, N. of a
constellation, perhaps the girdle of Orion. {%—Iṣu-%}
{%hasta, as, ā, am,%} ‘arrow-handed,’ carrying arrows
in the hand. {%—Iṣv-agra, am,%} n. the point of an
arrow. {%—Iṣv-anīka, am,%} n. the point of an arrow.
{%—Iṣvarga, as,%} m. (for {%iṣu-varga%}), Ved. one who
averts arrows, a shield-bearer. {%—Iṣv-asana%} or
{%iṣv-astra, am,%} n. a bow (‘arrow-thrower’). {%—Iṣv-%}
{%āyudha, am,%} n., Ved. arrow and weapons. {%—Iṣv-%}
{%āsa, as, ā, am,%} throwing arrows; ({%as%}), m. a bow;
an archer, a warrior.
<LEND>

<L>10003<pc>0142-b<k1>izuka<k2>izuka
{%Iṣuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ arrow-like; ({%ā%}), f., Ved. an
arrow.
<LEND>

<L>10004<pc>0142-b<k1>izuDi<k2>izuDi
{%Iṣu-dhi, is,%}¦ m. f. (rt. {%dhā%}), a quiver. {%—Iṣudhi-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of a quiver.
<LEND>

<L>10005<pc>0142-b<k1>izuDya<k2>izuDya
{%Iṣudhya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%-dhyati, -yitum,%} to be
a quiver, to contain arrows; to implore, request;
(Sāy.) to desire oblations.
<LEND>

<L>10006<pc>0142-b<k1>izuDyA<k2>izuDyA
{%Iṣudhyā,%}¦ f., Ved. imploring, request.
<LEND>

<L>10007<pc>0142-b<k1>izuDyu<k2>izuDyu
{%Iṣudhyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. imploring, requesting;
(Sāy.) going.
<LEND>

<L>10008<pc>0142-b<k1>izwi<k2>izwi<h>1
1. {%iṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. impulse, acceleration, hurry; invita-
tion, order, despatch.
<LEND>

<L>10009<pc>0142-b<k1>izmin<k2>izmin
{%Iṣmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. going quickly, speedy, im-
petuous; an epithet of the winds.
<LEND>

<L>10010<pc>0142-b<k1>iz<k2>iz<h>3
{#iz#} 3¦. {%iṣ,%} cl. 6. P., ep. also A. {%icchati,%}
{%-te, iyeṣa, eṣiṣyati, aiṣīt, eṣitum%} or
{%eṣṭum,%} to endeavour to obtain, strive, seek for; to
endeavour to make favourable; desire, wish, long for;
to request; to be willing, to be about to do anything,
to intend; to strive to obtain anything (acc.) from
any one (abl. or loc.); to expect anything from any
one; to assent; to be favourable; to ask anything
(acc.) from any one (loc.); to acknowledge, to regard:
Pass. {%iṣyate,%} to be wished or liked; to be asked,
requested, prescribed; to be approved, acknowledged,
accepted, regarded as; to be worth; to be wanted as a
desideratum, see 2. {%iṣṭi:%} Caus. P. {%eṣayati, -yitum,%}
{%aiṣiṣat:%} Desid. {%eṣiṣiṣati;%} [with {%iṣ%} cf. Old
Germ. <nsi>eiscôm,</nsi> ‘I ask;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>heische:</nsi> cf.
[Page0142-c+ 80]
also Gr. <lang n="greek">προΐσσομαι, πρα-ΐκτης, προ-ΐξ;</lang> and per-
haps Gr. <lang n="greek">ἰό-της</lang> and <lang n="greek">ἵ-μερος</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>10011<pc>0142-c<k1>icCaka<k2>icCaka
{%Icchaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ wishing, desirous of; ({%as%}),
m. demand, the sum sought (in arithmetic).
<LEND>

<L>10012<pc>0142-c<k1>icCat<k2>icCat
{%Icchat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} wishing, wishful, de-
sirous.
<LEND>

<L>10013<pc>0142-c<k1>icCatA<k2>icCatA
{%Iccha-tā,%}¦ f. or {%iccha-tva, am,%} n. desire, wishfulness.
<LEND>

<L>10014<pc>0142-c<k1>icCA<k2>icCA
{%Icchā,%}¦ f. wish, desire, inclination; (in mathematics)
a question or problem; (in gram.) the desiderative
form; {%icchayā,%} according to one's wish or desire;
{%icchāṃ ni-grah,%} to suppress one's desire. {%—Icchā-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. the granting or gratification of a wish.
{%—Icchā-nivṛtti, is,%} f. suppression of desire. {%—Ic-%}
{%chānvita (˚chā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} having a desire,
wishing, wishful. {%—Icchā-phala, as,%} m. (in mathe-
matics) the solution of a question or problem. {%—Icchā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} wishing, wishful, desirous; ({%tī%}), f. a
woman desirous of anything. {%—Icchā-vasu, us,%} m. an
epithet of Kuvera (‘possessing wealth according to
wish’). {%—Icchā-sampad, t,%} f. fulfilment or attain-
ment of wishes.
<LEND>

<L>10015<pc>0142-c<k1>icCu<k2>icCu
{%Icchu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing, desiring (with acc. or
inf.).
<LEND>

<L>10016<pc>0142-c<k1>icCuka<k2>icCuka
{%Icchuka, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} wishing, desirous.
<LEND>

<L>10017<pc>0142-c<k1>iz<k2>iz<h>4
4. {%iṣ, ṭ,%}¦ f. wish; [cf. {%iṭ-cara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>10018<pc>0142-c<k1>izaRi<k2>izaRi<h>2
2. {%iṣaṇi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. wish, desire. (For 1. see
under 1. {%iṣ.%})
<LEND>

<L>10019<pc>0142-c<k1>izUya<k2>izUya
{%Iṣūya,%}¦ P., Ved. {%iṣūyati, -yitum,%} to request,
ask; (Sāy.) to wish for food, wish to approach.
<LEND>

<L>10020<pc>0142-c<k1>izwa<k2>izwa<h>1
1. {%iṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see next page), sought;
wished, desired; liked, beloved; agreeable; cherished;
worshipped, reverenced, respected; regarded as good,
approved; valid; ({%as%}), m. a lover, a husband; the
plant Ricinus Communis; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant;
({%am%}), n. wish, desire; ({%am%}), ind. voluntarily. {%—Iṣ-%}
{%ṭa-karman, a,%} n. (in arithmetic) rule of supposition,
operation with an assumed number. {%—Iṣṭa-kāpa-%}
{%tha, as,%} m. the root of the fragrant grass Andropo-
gon Muricatus. {%—Iṣṭa-kāma-duh, dhuk,%} f. ‘grant-
ing the wished-for desires,’ epithet of the cow of
plenty. {%—Iṣṭa-gandha, as, ā, am,%} fragrant; ({%as%}),
m. any fragrant substance; ({%am%}), n. sand. {%—Iṣṭa-%}
{%jana, as,%} m. a beloved person, man or woman; a
loved one. {%—Iṣṭa-tama, as, ā, am,%} most desired,
best beloved, beloved, dearest. {%—Iṣṭa-tara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} more desired, more dear, dearer. {%—Iṣṭa-tas,%}
ind. according to one's wish or desire. {%—Iṣṭa-tā,%} f.
or {%iṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. desirableness, the state of being
beloved or reverenced. {%—Iṣṭa-deva, as,%} m. or
{%iṣṭa-devatā,%} f. a chosen or tutelary deity, a
favourite god, one particularly worshipped. {%—Iṣṭa-%}
{%yāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. going according to one's de-
sire. {%—Iṣṭa-raśmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having desired
or best reins or bridles. {%—Iṣṭa-vrata, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. obeying one's wish; (Say.) that by which good
works succeed. {%—Iṣṭā-kṛta, am,%} n., Ved. wish and
deed, i. e. accomplishment of a wish (?); N. of a
certain sacrificial ceremony. {%—Iṣṭā-pūrta, am,%} n.,
Ved. wish and fulfilment, i. e. fulfilment of one's
wishes; any religious duty or pious act, as oblation,
sacrifice, penance, holy study, digging a well, plant-
ing a tree, &c. {%—Iṣṭārtha (˚ṭa-ar˚), as,%} m. any-
thing desired or agreeable. {%—Iṣṭārthodyukta (˚tha-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} zealously active, diligent for a
desired object. {%—Iṣṭāśva (˚ṭa-aś˚), as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having desired or best horses.
<LEND>

<L>10021<pc>0142-c<k1>izwi<k2>izwi<h>2
2. {%iṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. seeking, endeavouring to obtain;
wish, request, desire; any desired object, a desired
rule, a desideratum (a term applied to Patañjali's ad-
ditions to Pāṇini's rules); ({%is%}), m., Ved. seeking,
going after, guarding.
<LEND>

<L>10022<pc>0142-c<k1>izwu<k2>izwu
{%Iṣṭu, us,%}¦ f. wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>10023<pc>0142-c<k1>izma<k2>izma
{%Iṣma, as,%}¦ m. the spring; love or the deity Kāma.
<LEND>

<L>10024<pc>0142-c<k1>izya<k2>izya
{%Iṣya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the spring season.
<LEND>

<L>10025<pc>0142-c<k1>izva<k2>izva
{%Iṣva, as,%}¦ m. a spiritual teacher. See {%īṣva.%}
<LEND>

<L>10026<pc>0142-c<k1>iz<k2>iz<h>5
{#iz#} 5¦. {%iṣ, ṭ,%} f., Ved. that which is drunk,
a draught, refreshment, enjoyment; libation; the
refreshing waters of the sky; sap, strength, freshness,
comfort, increase; good condition, affluence.
<LEND>

<L>10027<pc>0142-c<k1>iza<k2>iza
{%Iṣa, as,%}¦ m. one who possesses sap and strength;
[Page0143-a+ 74]
the month Āśvina (September-October); strength,
vigour (?). {%—Iṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. vigorous.
{%—Iṣa-stut, t,%} m., Ved. a praiser of the desired
(Sun); ({%t%}), f. praise of comfort.
<LEND>

<L>10028<pc>0143-a<k1>izaya<k2>izaya
{%Iṣaya,%}¦ nom. P. A., Ved. {%iṣayati, -te, -yitum,%}
to be succulent, swell; to be fresh, active, powerful;
to refresh, strengthen, animate.
<LEND>

<L>10029<pc>0143-a<k1>izira<k2>izira
{%Iṣira, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. succulent, refreshing, fresh,
flourishing; vigorous, active, quick; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἱερός</lang>];
({%as%}), m. fire ?; ({%am%}), ind. quick.
<LEND>

<L>10030<pc>0143-a<k1>izetvAka<k2>izetvAka
{%Iṣetvāka, as, ā, am%}¦ (an Adhyāya or Anuvāka),
containing the words {%iṣe tvā,%} ‘for rain thee.’
<LEND>

<L>10031<pc>0143-a<k1>izu<k2>izu
{#izu#}¦ {%iṣu, iṣu-dhi,%} &c. See 1. {%iṣ%} last page.
<LEND>

<L>10032<pc>0143-a<k1>izkf<k2>izkf
{#izkf#}¦ {%iṣ-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P., Ved. {%-karoti, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to arrange, set in order, prepare.
<LEND>

<L>10033<pc>0143-a<k1>izkartf<k2>izkartf
{%Iṣ-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. arranging, preparing,
setting in order.
<LEND>

<L>10034<pc>0143-a<k1>izkfta<k2>izkfta
{%Iṣ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. arranged. {%—Iṣkṛtā-%}
{%hāva (˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. whose Soma vessel
is prepared or ready.
<LEND>

<L>10035<pc>0143-a<k1>izwa<k2>izwa<h>2
{#izwa#} 2¦. {%iṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%yaj;%} for 1. {%iṣṭa%}
see last page), sacrificed, worshipped with sacrifices;
({%as%}), m. sacrifice; ({%am%}), n. sacrificing; sacred rite,
sacrament. {%—Iṣṭa-yajus, us, us, us,%} Ved. one to
whom sacrificial verses have been offered or addressed.
{%—Iṣṭā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>10036<pc>0143-a<k1>izwakA<k2>izwakA
{%Iṣṭakā,%}¦ f. a brick, especially one used in building
the altar of a sacrifice. {%—Iṣṭakā-gṛha, am,%} n. a
brick house. {%—Iṣṭakā-cita, as, ā, am,%} built of bricks.
{%—Iṣṭakā-nyāsa, as,%} m. laying the foundation of a
house. {%—Iṣṭakā-rāśi, is,%} m. a pile of bricks.
<LEND>

<L>10037<pc>0143-a<k1>izwi<k2>izwi<h>3
3. {%iṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. sacrificing, sacrifice; oblation con-
sisting of butter, fruits, &c., opposed to the sacrifice
of an animal or of Soma. {%—Iṣṭi-paca, as,%} or {%iṣṭi-%}
{%muṣ, ṭ,%} m. an Asura, a demon. {%—Iṣṭy-ayana, am,%}
n. a series of oblations, a sacrifice lasting a long time.
<LEND>

<L>10038<pc>0143-a<k1>izwikA<k2>izwikA
{%Iṣṭikā,%}¦ f. a brick, especially one used in building
the sacrificial altar. See {%iṣṭakā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>10039<pc>0143-a<k1>izwin<k2>izwin
{%Iṣṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who has sacrificed.
<LEND>

<L>10040<pc>0143-a<k1>izwvA<k2>izwvA
{%Iṣṭvā,%}¦ ind. having sacrificed or worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>10041<pc>0143-a<k1>izwani<k2>izwani
{#izwani#}¦ {%iṣṭani, is, is, i,%} Ved. (if fr. rt. {%yaj%}),
to be worshipped; (if instead of {%ni-ṣṭani,%} fr. rt.
{%stan%}), rustling, rushing.
<LEND>

<L>10042<pc>0143-a<k1>is<k2>is
{#is#}¦ {%is,%} ind. an interjection of anger, pain,
or sorrow.
<LEND>

<L>10043<pc>0143-a<k1>iha<k2>iha
{#iha#}¦ {%iha,%} ind. (fr. pronom. base 3. {%i%}), in this
place, here; to this place; in this world; in this
book or system; in this case (e. g. {%tena iha na,%}
‘therefore not in this case,’ i. e. the rule does not
apply here); now, at this time; [cf. Zend <nsi>idha,</nsi>
‘here;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἰθᾱ</lang> or <lang n="greek">ἰθαι</lang> in <lang n="greek">ἰθα-γενής</lang> and <lang n="greek">ἰθαι-γενής</lang>;
Goth. <nsi>ith;</nsi> perhaps Lat. <nsi>igi-tur.</nsi>] {%—Iha-kāla, as,%}
m. this life. {%—Iha-kratu, us, us, u,%} or {%iha-citta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. whose intentions or thoughts are
in this world or place. {%—Iha-tra,%} ind. here, in this
world. {%—Iha-bhojana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. whose goods
and gifts come hither. {%—Iha-loka, as,%} m. this world,
this life; ({%e%}), ind. in this world. {%—Iha-samaye,%} ind.
here, now, on the present occasion, at such a time as
this. {%—Iha-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing here. {%—Iha-%}
{%sthāna, as, ā, am,%} whose place or residence is on
the earth; ({%e%}), ind. in this place. {%—Ihāgata (˚ha-%}
{%āg˚), as, ā, am,%} come or arrived hither. {%—Ihāmutra%}
{%(˚ha-am˚),%} ind. here and there, in this world and in
the next. {%—Iheha (iha-iha),%} ind. here and there, now
and then, repeatedly. {%—Iheha-mātṛ, tā,%} m., Ved.
of whose mothers one is here and one there; (Say.)
whose mother is here and there, i. e. everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>10044<pc>0143-a<k1>ihatya<k2>ihatya
{%Ihatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%ihatyaka, as, ikā, am,%}
being here.
<LEND>
<H>{#I#}

<L>10045<pc>0143-a<k1>I<k2>I<h>1
{#I#} 1¦. {%ī,%} the fourth letter of the alphabet,
corresponding to {%i%} long, and having the sound of {%ee%}
in <nsi>feel.</nsi>
<LEND>
[Page0143-b+ 73]

<L>10046<pc>0143-b<k1>I<k2>I<h>2
{#I#} 2¦. {%ī, īs,%} m., N. of Kandarpa, the god of
love; {%ī%} or {%īs,%} f., N. of Lakṣmī.
<LEND>

<L>10047<pc>0143-b<k1>I<k2>I<h>3
{#I#} 3¦. {%ī,%} ind. an interjection of pain, anger,
consciousness or perception, consideration, compassion.
<LEND>

<L>10048<pc>0143-b<k1>I<k2>I<h>4
{#I#} 4¦. {%ī%} for rt. {%i.%} See under 5. {%i.%}
<LEND>

<L>10049<pc>0143-b<k1>Ikz<k2>Ikz
{#Ikz#}¦ {%īkṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%īkṣate, īkṣāñ-cakre,%}
{%īkṣiṣyate, aikṣiṣṭa, īkṣitum,%} to see,
look, view, behold, look at, gaze at (with acc. or
rarely loc.); to see in one's mind, think, have a
thought, regard, consider; to look to the welfare of
any one (with dat.): Caus. {%īkṣayati, -yitum,%} to
make one look at (with acc.). (This root is per-
haps connected with {%akṣi,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>10050<pc>0143-b<k1>Ikzaka<k2>Ikzaka
{%Īkṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a spectator, a beholder.
<LEND>

<L>10051<pc>0143-b<k1>IkzaRa<k2>IkzaRa
{%Īkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a look, view, aspect, sight; re-
garding, looking after, caring for; an eye.
<LEND>

<L>10052<pc>0143-b<k1>IkzaRika<k2>IkzaRika
{%Īkṣaṇika, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a looker into the future,
a fortune-teller.
<LEND>

<L>10053<pc>0143-b<k1>IkzamARa<k2>IkzamARa
{%Īkṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking at, surveying.
<LEND>

<L>10054<pc>0143-b<k1>IkzA<k2>IkzA
{%Īkṣā,%}¦ f. sight, viewing, considering.
<LEND>

<L>10055<pc>0143-b<k1>Ikzita<k2>Ikzita
{%Īkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen, beheld, regarded.
<LEND>

<L>10056<pc>0143-b<k1>Ikzitf<k2>Ikzitf
{%Īkṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ seeing, beholding, a beholder.
<LEND>

<L>10057<pc>0143-b<k1>IkzeRya<k2>IkzeRya
{%Īkṣeṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. deserving to be seen,
curious.
<LEND>

<L>10058<pc>0143-b<k1>IkzyamARa<k2>IkzyamARa
{%Īkṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being beheld, being
viewed.
<LEND>

<L>10059<pc>0143-b<k1>IK<k2>IK
{#IK#}¦ {%īkh%} or {%ikh,%} cl. 1. P. {%ekhati, iyekha,%} or
{%īkhati, īkhāñ-cakāra, ekhitum%} or {%īkhi-%}
{%tum,%} to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>10060<pc>0143-b<k1>INK<k2>INK
{#INK#}¦ {%īṅkh%} or {%iṅkh,%} cl. 1. P. {%iṅkhati, iṅkhāñ-%}
{%cakāra,%} or {%īṅkhati, īṅkhāñ-cakāra, iṅkhi-%}
{%tum%} or {%īṅkhitum,%} to go, move; Caus. {%īṅkhayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to move backwards and forwards, to move
up and down, to swing.
<LEND>

<L>10061<pc>0143-b<k1>Ij<k2>Ij
{#Ij#}¦ {%īj%} or {%īñj,%} cl. 1. P. {%ījati, ījāñ-cakāra,%}
{%ījitum%} or {%īñjati,%} &c., to go; to blame or
censure.
<LEND>

<L>10062<pc>0143-b<k1>Ijika<k2>Ijika
{#Ijika#}¦ {%ījika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>10063<pc>0143-b<k1>Iq<k2>Iq<h>1
{#Iq#} 1¦. {%īḍ,%} cl. 2. A. {%īṭṭe%} (2nd sing. pres.
{%īḍiṣe,%} Ved. {%īḷiṣe%}), {%{{īdāñ->īḍāñ||20161130|Jim Funderburk.|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 303|confirm VCP}}-cakre, īḍiṣyate,%}
{%aiḍiṣṭa, īḍitum,%} Ved. {%īḷe,%} &c., to implore, request,
ask for (with two acc.); to praise: Caus. P. {%īḍayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to ask; to praise.
<LEND>

<L>10064<pc>0143-b<k1>Iqana<k2>Iqana
{%Īḍana, am,%}¦ n. the act of praising.
<LEND>

<L>10065<pc>0143-b<k1>IqA<k2>IqA
{%Īḍā,%}¦ f. praise, commendation.
<LEND>

<L>10066<pc>0143-b<k1>Iqita<k2>Iqita
{%Īḍita%}¦ or {%īḷita, as, ā, am,%} praised, commended.
<LEND>

<L>10067<pc>0143-b<k1>Iqenya<k2>Iqenya
{%Īḍenya%}¦ or {%īḷenya%} or {%īḍya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. to be
invoked or implored, to be praised or glorified, praise-
worthy, laudable.
<LEND>

<L>10068<pc>0143-b<k1>IqyamAna<k2>IqyamAna
{%Īḍyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being praised.
<LEND>

<L>10069<pc>0143-b<k1>Iq<k2>Iq<h>2
{#Iq#} 2¦. {%īḍ, īṭ,%} f., Ved. {%= iḍ,%} refreshment,
libation.
<LEND>

<L>10070<pc>0143-b<k1>IQa<k2>IQa
{#IQa#}¦ {%īḍha, as, ā, am%} (? fr. {%īh%}), sought (?).
<LEND>

<L>10071<pc>0143-b<k1>Iti<k2>Iti
{#Iti#}¦ {%īti, is,%} f. (fr. 4. {%ī?%}), plague, distress,
any calamity of the season (as drought, excessive
rain, swarm of rats, foreign invasion, &c.); infectious
disease; an affray; travelling in foreign countries,
sojourning.
<LEND>

<L>10072<pc>0143-b<k1>Idfkza<k2>Idfkza
{#Idfkza#}¦ {%īdṛkṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%id,%} neut. of pro-
nom. base 3. {%i,%} and {%dṛkṣa,%} rt. {%dṛś,%} dropping one
{%d%} and lengthening the preceding {%i,%} as in {%tādṛkṣa%}
from {%tad,%} &c.), of this aspect, of such a kind,
endowed with such qualities, such like.
<LEND>

<L>10073<pc>0143-b<k1>IdfS<k2>IdfS
{%Ī-dṛś, k,%}¦ Ved. {%ṅ,%} endowed with such qualities,
such; ({%k%}), n., Ved. such a condition, such occasion.
{%—Īdṛk-tā,%} f. quality.
<LEND>

<L>10074<pc>0143-b<k1>IdfSa<k2>IdfSa
{%Īdṛśa, as, ī, am,%}¦ or {%īdṛśaka, as, ikā, am,%}
endowed with such qualities, such; [with the final
syllables {%dṛś%} and {%dṛśa%} of these words cf. the Gr.
<lang n="greek">λικ</lang> in <lang n="greek">δμῆλιξ, λικο</lang> in <lang n="greek">τηλίκο-ς,</lang> &c.; Goth. <nsi>leika</nsi>
in <nsi>hvêleiks,</nsi> ‘welcher,’ <nsi>svaleik-s,</nsi> ‘such;’ Mod.
Germ. <nsi>solcher;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>liko,</nsi> nom. <nsi>lik,</nsi> e. g. <nsi>tolik,</nsi>
‘such;’ Lat. <nsi>li</nsi> in <nsi>tâlis, quâlis.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page0143-c+ 73]

<L>10075<pc>0143-c<k1>Int<k2>Int
{#Int#}¦ {%īnt,%} cl. 1. P. {%īntati, -titum,%} to bind;
[cf. {%ant%} and {%and.%}]
<LEND>

<L>10076<pc>0143-c<k1>Ips<k2>Ips
{#Ips#}¦ {%īps%} (Desid. of rt. {%āp,%} q. v.), to wish
to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>10077<pc>0143-c<k1>Ipsana<k2>Ipsana
{%Īpsana, am,%}¦ n. desiring, wishing to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>10078<pc>0143-c<k1>IpsA<k2>IpsA
{%Īpsā,%}¦ f. asking, desire, wish to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>10079<pc>0143-c<k1>Ipsita<k2>Ipsita
{%Īpsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished, desired.
<LEND>

<L>10080<pc>0143-c<k1>Ipsu<k2>Ipsu
{%Īpsu, us, us, u,%}¦ striving to obtain; wishing to get
or obtain, desirous of (with acc.). {%—Īpsu-yajña, as,%}
m. a particular Soma sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>10081<pc>0143-c<k1>Im<k2>Im
{#Im#}¦ {%īm,%} ind. (fr. pronominal base 3. {%i%}), Ved.
a particle of affirmation and restriction, generally after
short words at the beginning of a period, or after the re-
lative pronouns, the conjunction {%yad,%} prepositions and
particles such as {%āt, uta, atha,%} &c. {%Īm%} has also the
sense ‘now’ ({%= idānīm%}), and is by Sāy. sometimes
considered as an acc. case for {%enam.%}
<LEND>

<L>10082<pc>0143-c<k1>Iyacakzas<k2>Iyacakzas
{#Iyacakzas#}¦ {%īya-cakṣas, ās, ās, as%} ({%īya%} fr. rt.
{%i%}), Ved. one whose eyes go or look about everywhere;
(Sāy.) of pervading sight.
<LEND>

<L>10083<pc>0143-c<k1>Iyivas<k2>Iyivas
{%Īyivas, ān, -yuṣī, as,%}¦ gone, having gone, having
obtained.
<LEND>

<L>10084<pc>0143-c<k1>Ir<k2>Ir
{#Ir#}¦ {%īr,%} cl. 2. A. {%īrte, īrāñ-cakre, īriṣyati,%}
{%airiṣṭa, īritum,%} Ved. inf. {%iradhyai,%} to go,
move, rise, arise from; to go away, retire; to agitate,
elevate, raise (one's voice): Caus. P. {%īrayati, -yitum,%}
to agitate, throw, cast; to excite; to cause to rise;
to bring to life; to raise one's voice, utter, pronounce,
proclaim, cite; to elevate; A. to raise one's self.
<LEND>

<L>10085<pc>0143-c<k1>IraRa<k2>IraRa
{%Īraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitating, driving; ({%as%}), m.
the wind.
<LEND>

<L>10086<pc>0143-c<k1>Irita<k2>Irita
{%Īrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sent, despatched; said, uttered.
{%—Īritākūta (˚ta-āk˚), am,%} n. declared purpose or
intention.
<LEND>

<L>10087<pc>0143-c<k1>Irya<k2>Irya
{%Īrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be excited. {%—Īrya-tā,%} f., Ved.
the condition of one who is to be excited.
<LEND>

<L>10088<pc>0143-c<k1>IryA<k2>IryA
{%Īryā,%}¦ f. wandering about as a religious mendicant.
{%—Īryā-patha, as,%} m. the observances of a religious
mendicant; the four positions of the body, viz.
going, standing upright, sitting and lying down.
<LEND>

<L>10089<pc>0143-c<k1>IrAmA<k2>IrAmA
{#IrAmA#}¦ {%īrāmā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>10090<pc>0143-c<k1>IriRa<k2>IriRa
{#IriRa#}¦ {%īriṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%īr ?%}), desert;
({%am%}), n. salt and barren soil. See {%iriṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>10091<pc>0143-c<k1>Irin<k2>Irin
{#Irin#}¦ {%īrin, ī,%} m., N. of a man; ({%iṇas%}), m.
pl. the descendants of this man.
<LEND>

<L>10092<pc>0143-c<k1>Irkzy<k2>Irkzy
{#Irkzy#}¦ {%īrkṣy.%} See {%īrṣy.%}
<LEND>

<L>10093<pc>0143-c<k1>Irma<k2>Irma<h>1
{#Irma#} 1¦. {%īrma,%} ind., Ved. in this place, here,
to this place; (Sāy.) going constantly, or instigating
everything.
<LEND>

<L>10094<pc>0143-c<k1>Irma<k2>Irma<h>2
{#Irma#} 2¦. {%īrma, as,%} m., Ved. the arm, the fore-
quarter of an animal; ({%am%}), n. a sore or wound.
<LEND>

<L>10095<pc>0143-c<k1>IrmAnta<k2>IrmAnta
{#IrmAnta#}¦ {%īrmānta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. epithet of a
team of horses or of the horses of the sun's car; full-
haunched (lit. full-ended); thin-haunched; (perhaps)
having the biggest horses on both sides of the team.
<LEND>

<L>10096<pc>0143-c<k1>IrvAru<k2>IrvAru
{#IrvAru#}¦ {%īrvāru, us,%} m. a cucumber, Cucumis
Utilissimus. See {%irvāru.%}
<LEND>

<L>10097<pc>0143-c<k1>Irzy<k2>Irzy
{#Irzy#}¦ {%īrṣy%} or {%īrkṣy,%} cl. 1. P. {%īrṣyati,%}
{%īrṣyāñ-cakāra, īrṣyitum,%} or {%īrkṣyati,%}
&c., to envy, to feel impatient at another's prosperity
(with dat.): Desid. {%īrṣyiṣiṣati%} or {%īrṣyiyiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>10098<pc>0143-c<k1>IrzA<k2>IrzA
{%Īrṣā,%}¦ f. impatience, envy of another's success;
more properly read {%īrṣyā.%}
<LEND>

<L>10099<pc>0143-c<k1>IrzAlu<k2>IrzAlu
{%Īrṣālu, us, us, u,%}¦ impatient of another's success,
envious.
<LEND>

<L>10100<pc>0143-c<k1>Irzita<k2>Irzita
{%Īrṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ envied; ({%am%}), n. envy.
<LEND>

<L>10101<pc>0143-c<k1>Irzitavya<k2>Irzitavya
{%Īrṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be envied.
<LEND>

<L>10102<pc>0143-c<k1>Irzu<k2>Irzu
{%Īrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ envious, jealous.
<LEND>

<L>10103<pc>0143-c<k1>Irzya<k2>Irzya
{%Īrṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ envious, envying; ({%ā%}), f. envy
or impatience of another's success; spite, malice.
{%—Īrṣyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} or {%īrṣyā-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} envious, spiteful, {%—Īrṣyā-vaśa, as, ā, am,%}
overcome with envy.
<LEND>
[Page0144-a+ 78]

<L>10104<pc>0144-a<k1>Irzyaka<k2>Irzyaka
{%Īrṣyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ envious, envying.
<LEND>

<L>10105<pc>0144-a<k1>IrzyamARa<k2>IrzyamARa
{%Īrṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ envying, envious.
<LEND>

<L>10106<pc>0144-a<k1>IrzyAlu<k2>IrzyAlu
{%Īrṣyālu, us, us, u,%}¦ envious, jealous.
<LEND>

<L>10107<pc>0144-a<k1>Irzyin<k2>Irzyin
{%Īrṣyin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ envious, spiteful.
<LEND>

<L>10108<pc>0144-a<k1>Irzyu<k2>Irzyu
{%Īrṣyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. zealous.
<LEND>

<L>10109<pc>0144-a<k1>Ilina<k2>Ilina
{#Ilina#}¦ {%īlina, as,%} m., N. of a son of Taṃsu
and father of Dushyanta.
<LEND>

<L>10110<pc>0144-a<k1>IlI<k2>IlI
{#IlI#}¦ {%īlī%} or {%īli, is,%} f. a weapon, sometimes
considered as a cudgel and sometimes as a short sword
or stick shaped like a sword.
<LEND>

<L>10111<pc>0144-a<k1>IL<k2>IL
{#IL#}¦ {%īḷ, īḷā,%} &c. See under {%īḍ.%}
<LEND>

<L>10112<pc>0144-a<k1>Ivat<k2>Ivat
{#Ivat#}¦ {%ī-vat, ān, atī, at%} (fr. pronominal base
3. {%i%}), Ved. so large, so stately, so magnificent, so much.
<LEND>

<L>10113<pc>0144-a<k1>IS<k2>IS<h>1
{#IS#} 1¦. {%īś,%} cl. 2. A. {%īṣṭe,%} or Ved. {%īśe, īśañ-%}
{%cakre, īśiṣyati, īśitum,%} to own, possess;
to belong to; to dispose of, be valid or powerful, to
be master of (with gen., or Ved. with gen. of an inf.,
or with a common inf., or the loc. of an abstract
noun); to command; to rule, reign; to behave like
a master, allow; [with this word are perhaps con-
nected Goth. <nsi>aigan,</nsi> ‘to have;’ Old Germ. <nsi>eigan,</nsi>
adj. <nsi>eigan,</nsi> ‘own;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>eigen.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>10114<pc>0144-a<k1>IS<k2>IS<h>2
2. {%īś, ṭ,%}¦ m., Ved. master, lord, the supreme spirit.
{%—Īśā-vāsya, am,%} n. ‘to be clothed or pervaded by
the supreme,’ a title of the Īśa-upaniṣad, which com-
mences with that expression.
<LEND>

<L>10115<pc>0144-a<k1>ISa<k2>ISa
{%Īśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ owning, possessing, sharing; one
who is completely master of anything; capable of
(with gen.); powerful, supreme; a ruler, a master,
a lord; ({%as%}), m. a husband; a Rudra; the number
‘eleven’ (as there are eleven Rudras); N. of Śiva
as regent of the north-east quarter; ({%ā%}), f. faculty,
power, dominion. {%—Īśa-tva, am,%} n. supremacy, supe-
riority. {%—Īśa-sakhi, ā,%} m. Śiva's friend, an epithet of
Kuvera. {%—Īśādhyāya (˚śa-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of the
Īśa-upaniṣad. {%—Īśopaniṣad (˚śa-up˚), t,%} f., N. of
an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>10116<pc>0144-a<k1>ISana<k2>ISana
{%Īśana, am,%}¦ n. commanding, reigning.
<LEND>

<L>10117<pc>0144-a<k1>ISAna<k2>ISAna
{%Īśāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ owning, possessing, wealthy;
reigning; ({%as%}), m. a ruler, master, one of the older
names of Śiva-Rudra; one of the Rudras; the sun
as a form of Śiva; a Sādhya; epithet of Viṣṇu; N.
of a man; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā; ({%as%} or {%ī%}), m.
or f. the silk-cotton tree, Bombax Heptaphyllum;
({%am%}), n. light, splendor. {%—Īśāna-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
acting like a competent person, making use of one's
possessions or faculties; (Sāy.) rendering one a master
or able. {%—Īśāna-candra, as,%} m., N. of a physician.
{%—Īśāna-ja, ās,%} m. pl. a class of deities forming a
section of the Kalpa-bhavas. {%—Īśāna-devī,%} f., N. of a
woman.
<LEND>

<L>10118<pc>0144-a<k1>ISitf<k2>ISitf
{%Īśitṛ, tā,%}¦  m. a master, an owner or proprietor; a
king.
<LEND>

<L>10119<pc>0144-a<k1>ISin<k2>ISin
{%Īśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ commanding, reigning; ({%inī%}), f.
supremacy. {%—Īśi-tā,%} f. or {%īśi-tva, am,%} n. superiority,
supremacy, one of the eight attributes of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>10120<pc>0144-a<k1>ISvara<k2>ISvara
{%Īśvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ able to do, capable of (with
gen. of Vedic inf., or with common inf.), liable, ex-
posed to; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. master, lord, prince, king, mis-
tress, queen; ({%as%}), m. a husband; god, the supreme,
especially Śiva, one of the Rudras, the god of love,
the soul or supreme soul ({%ātman%}), N. of a prince;
({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f., N. of Durgā; of Lakṣmī or of any
other of the Śaktis or female energies of the deities.
{%—Īśvara-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Sāṅkhya-kārikā. {%—Īśvara-gītā,%} f. pl. a section of the
Kūrma-Purāṇa. {%—Īśvara-tā,%} f. or {%īśvara-tva, am,%}
n. superiority, supremacy. {%—Īśvara-datta, as,%} m.,
N. of a prince. {%—Īśvara-niṣedha, as,%} m. atheism.
{%—Īśvara-niṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} trusting in God.
{%—Īśvara-pūjaka, as, ā, am,%} pious. {%—Īśvara-pūjā,%}
f. worship of God. {%—Īśvara-prasāda, as,%} m. divine
grace. {%—Īśvara-bhāva, as,%} m. royal or imperial state.
{%—Īśvara-sadman, a,%} n. a temple. {%—Īśvara-sabha,%}
{%am,%} n. a royal court or assembly. {%—Īśvara-sevā,%} f.
the worship of God. {%—Īśvarādhīna (˚ra-adh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} subject to a king, dependant on a master or
on God. {%—Īśvarādhīna-tā,%} f. or {%īśvarādhīna-tva, %}
[Page0144-b+ 72]
{%am,%} n. dependance upon God, subjection to a ruler.
{%—Īśvarānanda. (˚ra-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a scholiast.
<LEND>

<L>10121<pc>0144-b<k1>Iz<k2>Iz
{#Iz#}¦ {%īṣ,%} cl. 1. A. (with prep. also P.)
{%īṣate, -ti, īṣāñ-cakre%} or {%-cakāra,%} and
Ved. {%īṣe, īṣitum,%} to go, to fly away, escape; to
attack, to hurt; to glean, to collect a few grains;
to look.
<LEND>

<L>10122<pc>0144-b<k1>IzaRa<k2>IzaRa
{%Īṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ hastening; ({%ā%}), f. haste.
<LEND>

<L>10123<pc>0144-b<k1>IzaRini<k2>IzaRini
{%Īṣaṇini, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hastening.
<LEND>

<L>10124<pc>0144-b<k1>Iza<k2>Iza
{#Iza#}¦ {%īṣa, as,%} m. the month Āśvina; see
{%iṣa;%} a son of the third Manu; a servant of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>10125<pc>0144-b<k1>Izat<k2>Izat
{#Izat#}¦ {%īṣat,%} ind. (said to be a pres. part. fr.
rt. {%īṣ%}), little, a little, slightly. {%—Īṣac-chvāsa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} slightly resounding. {%—Īṣaj-jala, am,%} n. shallow
water, a little water. {%—Īṣat-kara, as, ī, am,%} doing
little; easy to be accomplished. {%—Īṣat-kārya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} connected with slight effort. {%—Īṣat-pāṇḍu,%}
{%us,%} m. a pale or light brown colour. {%—Īṣat-pāna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} that of which a little is drunk; ({%am%}),
n. a little draught. {%—Īṣat-puruṣa, as,%} m. a mean
man. {%—Īṣat-pralambha, as, ā, am,%} to be gained
for little. {%—Īṣat-spṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} slightly touched
(applied to the semivowels). {%—Īṣad-uṣṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} tepid, slightly warm. {%—Īṣad-ūna, as, ā, am,%}
not quite complete or entire. {%—Īṣad-guṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of little merit. {%—Īṣad-darśana, am,%} n. a glance,
a slight inspection. {%—Īṣad-dhāsa (īṣat-hāsa), as,%}
m. slight laughter, a smile. {%—Īṣad-rakta, as, ā, am,%}
pale red. {%—Īṣad-vivṛta, as, ā, am,%} slightly open.
{%—Īṣan-nāda, as, ā, am,%} slightly sounding (applied
to unaspirated soft consonants). {%—Īṣan-nimaya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} exchanged for a little. {%—Īṣal-labha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} to be obtained for a little.
<LEND>

<L>10126<pc>0144-b<k1>IzA<k2>IzA
{#IzA#}¦ {%īṣā,%} f. (said to be fr. {%īṣ%}), the pole or
the shafts of a carriage or plough; ({%e%}), du. the double
or fork-shaped pole. {%—Īṣā-daṇḍa, as,%} m. the handle
of a plough. {%—Īṣā-danta, as,%} m. an elephant with
a large tusk or tooth, the tusk of an elephant.
{%—Īṣādhāra (˚ṣā-ādh˚), as,%} m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>10127<pc>0144-b<k1>IzikA<k2>IzikA
{#IzikA#}¦ {%īṣikā,%} f. an elephant's eyeball; a
painter's brush, &c.; a weapon, a dart or arrow. See
{%iṣīkā%} and {%īṣīkā.%}
<LEND>

<L>10128<pc>0144-b<k1>Izira<k2>Izira
{#Izira#}¦ {%īṣira, as,%} m. fire. See {%iṣira.%}
<LEND>

<L>10129<pc>0144-b<k1>IzIkA<k2>IzIkA
{#IzIkA#}¦ {%īṣīkā,%} f. a painter's brush, a fibrous
stick used as one; an ingot-mould; a dipping rod or
something cast into a crucible to examine if the
metal it contains is in fusion. See {%īkṣikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>10130<pc>0144-b<k1>Izma<k2>Izma
{#Izma#}¦ {%īṣma%} and {%īṣva, as,%} m. Kāmadeva;
spring. See {%iṣma%} and {%iṣva.%}
<LEND>

<L>10131<pc>0144-b<k1>Izva<k2>Izva
{#Izva#}¦ {%īṣva, as,%} m. a spiritual teacher.
<LEND>

<L>10132<pc>0144-b<k1>Ih<k2>Ih
{#Ih#}¦ {%īh,%} cl. 1. A. {%īhate, īhāñ-cakre, īhiṣ-%}
{%yate, īhitum,%} rarely P. {%īhati,%} &c., to en-
deavour to obtain; to aim at or attempt; to long for,
desire; to take care of; to have in mind, think of
(with acc.): Caus. {%īhayati, -yitum,%} to impel.
<LEND>

<L>10133<pc>0144-b<k1>Iha<k2>Iha
{%Īha, as,%}¦ m. attempt (e. g. {%ūrdhveha,%} attempt to rise).
<LEND>

<L>10134<pc>0144-b<k1>IhamAna<k2>IhamAna
{%Īhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ attempting, undertaking,
performing.
<LEND>

<L>10135<pc>0144-b<k1>IhA<k2>IhA
{%Īhā,%}¦ f. effort, exertion, activity; request, desire,
wish. {%—Īhā-tas,%} ind. diligently, energetically, by or
with labour or exertion. {%—Īhā-mṛga, as,%} m. a wolf;
a division of the drama. {%—Īhārthin (īhā-ar˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} aiming at any object, seeking wealth. {%—Īhā-%}
{%vṛka, as,%} m. a wolf.
<LEND>

<L>10136<pc>0144-b<k1>Ihita<k2>Ihita
{%Īhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sought, attempted, striven for;
wished, desired; ({%am%}), n. desire, request, wish, effort.
<LEND>
<H>{#u#}

<L>10137<pc>0144-b<k1>u<k2>u<h>1
{#u#} 1¦. {%u,%} the fifth letter and third short
vowel of the alphabet, pronounced as the {%u%} in <nsi>full.</nsi>
{%—U-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%u.%}
<LEND>

<L>10138<pc>0144-b<k1>u<k2>u<h>2
{#u#} 2¦. {%u,%} ind. an interjection of assent, call-
ing, compassion, anger, and command.
<LEND>
[Page0144-c+ 77]

<L>10139<pc>0144-c<k1>u<k2>u<h>3
{#u#} 3¦. {%u,%} ind. an enclitic copula, used fre-
quently in the Vedas; (as a particle implying re-
striction and antithesis, generally after pronominals,
prepositions, particles, and before {%nu%} and {%su,%} equiva-
lent to) and, also, further; on the other hand (espe-
cially in connection with a relative, e. g. {%ya u,%} he on
the contrary who &c.).
<div n="P"/>This particle may serve to give emphasis, like {%id%}
and {%eva,%} especially after prepositions or demonstrative
pronouns, in conjunction with {%nu, vai, hi, cid,%} &c.
(e. g. {%ayam u vām purutamo johavīmi,%} I this very
person invoke you constantly). It is especially used in
the figure of speech called Anaphora, and particularly
when the pronouns are repeated (e. g. {%tam u stuṣa%}
{%Indram tam gṛṇīṣe,%} him I praise, Indra, him
I sing). It may be used in drawing a conclusion, like
the English ‘now’ (e. g. {%tad u tathā na kuryāt,%}
that now he should not do in such a manner), and
is frequently found in interrogative sentences (e. g. {%ka%}
{%u tac ciketa,%} who, I ask, should know that ?).
<div n="P"/>Pāṇini calls this particle {%uñ%} to distinguish it from
the interrogative {%u.%} In the Pada-pāṭha it is written
{%ūṃ.%}
<div n="P"/>In the classical language {%u%} occurs only after {%atha,%}
{%na,%} and {%kim,%} with a slight modification of the sense,
and often only as an expletive (see {%kim%}); {%u-u%} or
{%u-uta,%} on the one hand — on the other hand; partly — 
partly; as well — as.
<LEND>

<L>10140<pc>0144-c<k1>u<k2>u<h>4
{#u#} 4¦. {%u,%} cl. 1. A. {%avate, ūve, oṣyate, auṣṭa,%}
{%otum,%} to sound, to make a noise; to roar, bel-
low: Caus. P. {%āvayati, -yitum,%} to cause to sound.
<LEND>

<L>10141<pc>0144-c<k1>u<k2>u<h>5
{#u#} 5¦. {%u,%} cl. 5. P., Ved. {%unoti, otum,%} to
animate, ask, demand.
<LEND>

<L>10142<pc>0144-c<k1>u<k2>u<h>6
{#u#} 6¦. {%u, us,%} m., N. of Śiva; also of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>10143<pc>0144-c<k1>ukanAha<k2>ukanAha
{#ukanAha#}¦ {%ukanāha, as,%} m. a horse of a red
and yellow or red and black colour, a bay or chesnut
horse.
<LEND>

<L>10144<pc>0144-c<k1>ukuRa<k2>ukuRa
{#ukuRa#}¦ {%ukuṇa, as,%} m. a bug; also {%utkuṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>10145<pc>0144-c<k1>ukta<k2>ukta
{#ukta#}¦ {%ukta, as, ā, am%} (past pass. part.
of rt. {%vac%}), uttered, said, spoken; ({%am%}), n. word,
sentence; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. a stanza of four lines with
one syllabic instant, one long or two short syllables
in each; [cf. Zend <nsi>ukhta.</nsi>] {%—Ukta-tva, am,%} n. the
being spoken or uttered. {%—Ukta-nirvāha, as,%} m.
maintaining an assertion. {%—Ukta-puṃska,%} a (femi-
nine or neuter) word, of which also a masculine is
mentioned or exists, and whose meaning only differs
from that of the masculine by the notion of gender
(e. g. the word {%Gaṅgā%} is not {%ukta-puṃska,%} whereas
the word {%śobhanā%} is so; cf. {%bhāṣita-puṃska%}).
{%—Ukta-pratyukta, am,%} n. speech and reply, dis-
course, conversation. {%—Ukta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one
who has spoken. {%—Ukta-varjam,%} ind. except the
cases mentioned. {%—Ukta-vākya, as, ā, am,%} one who
has given an opinion; ({%am%}), n. a dictum, a decree.
{%—Uktānukta (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} spoken and not
spoken. {%—Uktopasaṃhāra (˚ta-up˚), as,%} m. any
brief or compendious phrase or description.
<LEND>

<L>10146<pc>0144-c<k1>ukti<k2>ukti
{%Ukti, is,%}¦ f. sentence, proclamation, speech, expres-
sion, word.
<LEND>

<L>10147<pc>0144-c<k1>uktvA<k2>uktvA
{%Uktvā,%}¦ ind. having spoken or said.
<LEND>

<L>10148<pc>0144-c<k1>ukTa<k2>ukTa
{%Uktha, am,%}¦ n. a saying, sentence, verse, eulogy, praise;
(in the ritual) a kind of recitation or certain recited
verses forming a subdivision of the Śăstras. They
generally form a series, and are spoken or recited in
opposition to those verses which are sung ({%Sāman%})
and to the muttered sacrificial formulas ({%Yajus%}).
The great {%Uktha%} ({%Mahad-uktham%} or {%Bṛhad-uk-%}
{%tham%}) forms a series of verses, in three sections, each
containing eighty threefold verses ({%Tṛca%}), recited at
the end of the Agnicayana; a N. of the Sāma-veda;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of metre, a stanza of four lines having
one long or two short syllables in each; ({%as%}), m. a
form of Agni; N. of a prince. {%—Uktha-pattra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. having verses as wings. {%—Uktha-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. vessels or libations offered during the recita-
tion of an uktha. {%—Uktha-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. offering
[Page0145-a+ 77]
ukthas. {%—Uktha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. connected
with an uktha. {%—Uktha-vardhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
strengthening one's self by or delighting in praise;
(Sāy.) to be celebrated in praise. {%—Uktha-vāhas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} Ved. offering verses; one to whom verses
are offered. {%—Uktha-śaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. praising;
uttering the ukthas. {%—Uktha-śas, as, as,%} or {%uktha-%}
{%śās, ās, ās,%} m. f. or {%uktha-śasa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. utter-
ing a verse, praising. {%—Uktha-śuṣma, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. loudly resonant with verses, moving on with the
sound of verses (as with the roaring of waters), ac-
companied by sounding verses; (Sāy.) whose strength
is praise. {%—Ukthā-mada, am,%} n., Ved. praise and re-
joicing. {%—Ukthārka (˚tha-ar˚), am,%} n., Ved. recitation
and hymn. {%—Ukthā-vī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. fond of verses.
{%—Ukthā-śastra, am,%} n., Ved. recitation and praise.
<LEND>

<L>10149<pc>0145-a<k1>ukTin<k2>ukTin
{%Ukthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. uttering verses, praising,
lauding; accompanied by praise, or (in ritual) by
ukthas.
<LEND>

<L>10150<pc>0145-a<k1>ukTya<k2>ukTya
{%Ukthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. accompanied by verse or
praise, consisting of praise, deserving praise, skilled in
praising; accompanied by ukthas; ({%as%}), m. a liba-
tion ({%graha%}) at the morning and midday sacrifice;
(scil. {%kratu%}) N. of a liturgical ceremony, forming
part e. g. of the Jyotiṣṭoma; a Soma-yajña.
<LEND>

<L>10151<pc>0145-a<k1>ukz<k2>ukz<h>1
{#ukz#} 1¦. {%ukṣ,%} cl. 1. 6. P. A. {%ukṣati, -te,%}
{%ukṣāñ-cakāra%} (Ved. {%vavakṣa, -ṣe%}),
{%ukṣitum,%} to sprinkle, moisten, wet; to sprinkle or
scatter in small drops, to emit; to throw out, scatter
(as sparks); to clean; [cf. Lith. <nsi>ûkana:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>uisg,</nsi>
<nsi>uisge,</nsi> ‘water, a river;’ <nsi>uisgeach,</nsi> ‘aquatic, watery,
fluid, moist, pluvial.’]
<LEND>

<L>10152<pc>0145-a<k1>ukza<k2>ukza<h>1
1. {%ukṣa, as,%}¦ m. (at the end of some compounds)
{%= ukṣan%} below; ({%as, ā, am%}), clean (?).
<LEND>

<L>10153<pc>0145-a<k1>ukzaRa<k2>ukzaRa
{%Ukṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. sprinkling, consecrating.
<LEND>

<L>10154<pc>0145-a<k1>ukzaRya<k2>ukzaRya
{%Ukṣaṇya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%ukṣaṇyati,%} to do or
behave like Ukṣan; (Sāy.) to desire one who pours
down riches &c.
<LEND>

<L>10155<pc>0145-a<k1>ukzaRyAyana<k2>ukzaRyAyana
{%Ukṣaṇyāyana, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic from
Ukṣaṇya.
<LEND>

<L>10156<pc>0145-a<k1>ukzaRyu<k2>ukzaRyu
{%Ukṣaṇyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. behaving or doing like
Ukṣan; (Sāy.) desirous of one who pours down
riches &c.
<LEND>

<L>10157<pc>0145-a<k1>ukzan<k2>ukzan
{%Ukṣan, ā,%}¦ m. an ox or bull (especially as drawing
the chariot of Uṣas or dawn); epithet of the Soma
(as sprinkling or scattering small drops); of the
Maruts; of the sun and Agni; one of the eight chief
medicaments ({%ṛṣabha%}); N. of a man; ({%ā, ā, a%}),
large (?); [cf. Zend <nsi>ukhṣan;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>auhsa</nsi> and
<nsi>auhsu;</nsi> Armen. <nsi>eṣn.</nsi>] {%—Ukṣa-tara, as,%} m. a small
bull or ox; a large bull. {%—Ukṣa-vaśa, as,%} m., Ved.
a bull-calf, male calf. {%—Ukṣa-vehat, at,%} m., Ved. an
impotent bull (?). {%—Ukṣānna (˚kṣa-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. one whose food is oxen.
<LEND>

<L>10158<pc>0145-a<k1>ukzita<k2>ukzita<h>1
1. {%ukṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled, moistened,
cleansed, perfumed.
<LEND>

<L>10159<pc>0145-a<k1>ukz<k2>ukz<h>2
{#ukz#} 2¦. {%ukṣ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%ukṣati,%}
{%vavakṣa,%} and A. {%vavakṣe, ukṣitum,%}
to grow up, to grow strong; A. to strengthen one's
self; become strong: Caus. {%ukṣayate, -yitum,%} to
strengthen.
<LEND>

<L>10160<pc>0145-a<k1>ukza<k2>ukza<h>2
2. {%ukṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ large.
<LEND>

<L>10161<pc>0145-a<k1>ukzAla<k2>ukzAla
{%Ukṣāla, as, ā, am (?),%}¦ swift, excellent, terrible,
high, much; ({%as%}), m. a monkey (?).
<LEND>

<L>10162<pc>0145-a<k1>ukzita<k2>ukzita<h>2
2. {%ukṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ adult, of full growth, strong;
old.
<LEND>

<L>10163<pc>0145-a<k1>uK<k2>uK
{#uK#}¦ {%ukh,%} cl. 1. P. {%okhati, uvokha, okhi-%}
{%tum,%} to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>10164<pc>0145-a<k1>uKa<k2>uKa
{#uKa#}¦ {%ukha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%khan%} with {%ud ?%}),
Ved. a boiler, a pot, a vessel; N. of a pupil of Tittiri;
({%ā%}), f. a boiler, any saucepan, a pot or vessel which
can be put on the fire; a part of the body. {%—Ukha-%}
{%cchid, t, t, t,%} Ved. breaking the pot.
<LEND>

<L>10165<pc>0145-a<k1>uKya<k2>uKya
{%Ukhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in a dish; boiled,
dressed in a pot (flesh, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>10166<pc>0145-a<k1>uKarvala<k2>uKarvala
{#uKarvala#}¦ {%ukharvala%} or {%ukhala, as,%} m. a kind
of grass, a sort of Andropogon.
<LEND>
[Page0145-b+ 78]

<L>10167<pc>0145-b<k1>uKulI<k2>uKulI
{#uKulI#}¦ {%ukhulī,%} f., N. of a deity.
<LEND>

<L>10168<pc>0145-b<k1>ugaRa<k2>ugaRa
{#ugaRa#}¦ {%ugaṇa, as, ā, am%} (corrupted fr. {%ud-%}
{%gaṇa%} or {%uru-gaṇa ?%}), Ved. consisting of extended
troops (used as an epithet of {%senā,%} an army).
<LEND>

<L>10169<pc>0145-b<k1>ugra<k2>ugra
{#ugra#}¦ {%ugra, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. {%uc,%}
but probably fr. a rt. {%uj%} or {%vaj,%} fr. which also {%ojas,%}
{%vāja, vajra,%} may be derived; comparative {%ugra-%}
{%tara%} and {%ojiyas;%} superl. {%ugratama%} and {%ojiṣṭha%}),
powerful, violent, mighty, strong beyond measure,
huge, formidable, terrible; high, noble; cruel, fierce,
ferocious, savage; angry, passionate, wrathful; hot,
sharp, pungent, acrid; ({%as%}), m., N. of Rudra or Śiva;
N. of a mixed tribe, from a Kṣatriya father and
Śūdra mother, (the employment of this caste, accord-
ing to Manu, is the killing or catching of animals
that live in holes, as of snakes &c.; but according to
the Tantras the Ugra is an encomiast or bard); the
tree Hyperanthera Moringa; N. of a Dānava; a son
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; the Guru of Narendrāditya, who
built a temple called Ugreśa; a group of asterisms
(viz. {%pūrvaphālgunī, pūrvāṣāḍhā, pūrvabhādra-%}
{%pada, maghā, bharaṇī%}); N. of the Malabar country;
({%ā%}), N. of different plants, Artemisia Sternutatoria,
Coriandrum Sativum, &c.; ({%ī%}), f. a being belonging
to the class of demons; ({%am%}), n. a certain poison,
the root of Aconitum Ferox; wrath, anger; [cf.
Zend <nsi>ughra.</nsi>] {%—Ugra-karman, ā, ā, a,%} fierce in
action, violent, cruel. {%—Ugra-kāṇḍa, as,%} m. a sort
of gourd, Momordica Charantia. {%—Ugra-gandha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} strong-smelling; ({%as%}), m. the plant
Michelia Champaca; garlic; ({%ā%}), f. orris root; a
medicinal plant; Artemisia Sternutatoria; Pimpinella
Involucrata; the common carraway (Carum Carui,
&c.); Ligusticum Ajowan; ({%am%}), n. Asa Fœtida.
{%—Ugragandhin, ī, inī, i,%} strong-smelling. {%—Ugra-%}
{%caya, as,%} m. strong desire. {%—Ugra-cāriṇī,%} f., N. of
Durgā. {%—Ugra-jāti, is, is, i,%} base-born. {%—Ugra-jit,%}
{%t,%} f., Ved., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Ugra-tā,%} f. or {%ugra-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. violence, passion, anger; pungency,
acrimony. {%—Ugra-tejas, ās, ās, as,%} endowed with
great or terrible energy; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a Nāga; of a
Buddha; of another divine being. {%—Ugra-daṃṣṭra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having terrific teeth. {%—Ugra-daṇḍa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} lit. ‘stern-sceptred’ or holding a terrible rod;
relentless, remorseless. {%—Ugra-darśana, as, ā, am,%}
of a frightful appearance, frightful, terrible. {%—Ugra-%}
{%duhitṛ, tā,%} f. daughter of a powerful man. {%—Ugra-%}
{%dhanvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having a powerful bow,
epithet of Indra. {%—Ugra-nāsika, as, ā, am,%} large-
nosed. {%—Ugra-putra, as,%} m. son of a powerful
man; ({%as, ā, am%}), having mighty sons. {%—Ugra-%}
{%bāhu, us, us, u,%} Ved. whose arms are large or power-
ful. {%—Ugram-paśya, as, ā, am,%} frightful, hideous,
fierce looking; malignant, wicked; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an
Apsaras. {%—Ugra-retas, ās,%} m. a form of Rudra.
{%—Ugra-vīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having powerful men.
{%—Ugra-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} terrible in might. {%—Ugra-%}
{%vega, as, ā, am,%} of terrible velocity. {%—Ugra-vyagra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Ugra-śakti, is,%} m., N. of
a son of king Amara-śakti. {%—Ugra-śāsana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} severe in command, strict in orders. {%—Ugra-%}
{%śekharā,%} f. ‘crest of Śiva,’ N. of the Gaṅgā.
{%—Ugra-śoka, as, ā, am,%} sorely grieving. {%—Ugra-%}
{%śravaṇa-darśana, as, ā, am,%} terrible to hear and
see. {%—Ugra-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Ugra-%}
{%sena, as,%} m., N. of several princes, e. g. of a brother
of Janam-ejaya; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of Akrūra.
{%—Ugrasena-ja, as,%} m. a N. of Kaṃsa, the uncle and
enemy of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Ugrācārya (˚gra-āc˚), as,%} m.,
N. of an author. {%—Ugrā-deva, as,%} m., Ved. having
mighty deities, N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Ugrāyudha (˚gra-%}
{%āy˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. having powerful weapons;
({%as%}), m., N. of a prince. {%—Ugreśa (˚gra-īś˚), as,%}
m. the mighty or terrible lord, an epithet of Śiva;
N. of a sanctuary built by Ugra.
<LEND>

<L>10170<pc>0145-b<k1>ugraka<k2>ugraka
{%Ugraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>10171<pc>0145-b<k1>uNkAra<k2>uNkAra
{#uNkAra#}¦ {%uṅ-kāra, as,%} m., N. of a companion
of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>
[Page0145-c+ 77]

<L>10172<pc>0145-c<k1>uNkuRa<k2>uNkuRa
{#uNkuRa#}¦ {%uṅkuṇa, as,%} m. a bug. See {%ut-kuṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>10173<pc>0145-c<k1>uc<k2>uc
{#uc#}¦ {%uc,%} cl. 4. P. {%ucyati, uvoca, uciṣyati,%}
{%ucitum,%} to take pleasure in; to delight in,
to be fond of; to be accustomed, to be suitable, to
suit, to fit.
<LEND>

<L>10174<pc>0145-c<k1>ucita<k2>ucita
{%Ucita, as, ā, am,%}¦ delightful, pleasurable, agreeable;
customary, usual; proper, suitable, convenient; ac-
ceptable, fit or right to be taken; known, under-
stood; intrusted, deposited; measured, adjusted,
accurate; delighting in, used to.
<LEND>

<L>10175<pc>0145-c<k1>ucaTa<k2>ucaTa
{#ucaTa#}¦ {%ucatha, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%vac%}), Ved.
verse, praise.
<LEND>

<L>10176<pc>0145-c<k1>ucaTya<k2>ucaTya
{%Ucathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. deserving praise; ({%as%}),
m., N. of an Āṅgirasa, author of some hymns of the
Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>10177<pc>0145-c<k1>ucca<k2>ucca
{#ucca#}¦ {%ucca, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. 1. {%ud%} with
{%ca%} fr. rt. {%añc%}), high, lofty, elevated; tall; deep; high-
sounding, loud, pronounced with the Udātta accent;
intense, violent; ({%as%}), m. the apex of the orbit of a
planet; [cf. Hib. <nsi>uchdan,</nsi> ‘a hillock;’ Cambro-Brit.
<nsi>uched,</nsi> ‘cleve.’] {%—Ucca-tama, as, ā, am,%} highest.
{%—Ucca-tara, as, ā, am,%} higher, more lofty. {%—Ucca-%}
{%taru, us,%} m. the cocoa-nut tree; any lofty tree.
{%—Ucca-tā,%} f. or {%ucca-tva, am,%} n. height, superi-
ority. {%—Ucca-tāla, am,%} n. music and dancing at
feasts, drinking parties, &c. {%—Ucca-deva, as,%} m. an
epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Ucca-devatā,%} f. time
personified, chronos. {%—Ucca-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of
Śākya-muni as teacher of the gods among the Tuṣitas,
q. v. {%—Ucca-nīca, as, ā, am,%} high and low, varie-
gated, heterogeneous; ({%am%}), n. the upper and lower
station of the planets; change of accent. {%—Ucca-%}
{%pada, am,%} n. a high situation, a high office. {%—Uc-%}
{%ca-bhāṣaṇa, am,%} n. speaking aloud. {%—Ucca-bhā-%}
{%ṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} speaking with a loud voice, shouting,
brawling. {%—Ucca-lalāṭā%} or {%-ikā,%} f. a woman with a
high or projecting forehead. {%—Uccāvaca, as, ā, am%}
(fr. {%ucca = ud + ca%} and {%ava + ca?%}), high and low,
great and small, variegated, heterogeneous; various,
multiform; uneven, irregular, undulating.
<LEND>

<L>10178<pc>0145-c<k1>uccakEs<k2>uccakEs
{%Uccakais,%}¦ ind. excessively lofty; tall; loud.
<LEND>

<L>10179<pc>0145-c<k1>uccA<k2>uccA
{%Uccā,%}¦ ind., Ved. above (in heaven), from above,
upwards; {%uccā kṛ,%} to carry upwards. {%—Uccā-cakra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a wheel above (epithet of a
well). {%—Uccā-budhna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the
bottom upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10180<pc>0145-c<k1>uccEs<k2>uccEs
{%Uccais,%}¦ ind. (used adjectively in comp.) aloft, high,
above, upwards, from above; loud, accentuated; in-
tensely, much, powerfully. {%—Uccaiḥ-kara, as, ā, am,%}
making acutely accented. {%—Uccaiḥ-kula, am,%} n. a
high family; ({%as, ā, am%}), of high family. {%—Uccair-%}
{%ghuṣṭa, am,%} n. making a loud noise, clamour.
{%—Uccair-ghoṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. sounding aloud,
crying, neighing, roaring, rattling. {%—Uccair-bhuja-%}
{%taru, us, us, u,%} having trees like outstretched arms.
{%—Uccaiḥ-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} carrying one's head high,
a man of high rank. {%—Uccaiḥ-śravas, ās,%} m. long-
eared or neighing aloud; epithet of the horse of
Indra, produced at the churning of the ocean, (re-
garded as the prototype and king of horses.) {%—Uccaiḥ-%}
{%śravasa, as,%} m. = the same. {%—Uccaiḥ-svara, as,%} m.
a loud sound or voice; ({%as, ā, am%}), making a loud
sound. {%—Uccais-tama, as, ā, am,%} very high, tall or
lofty; very loud. {%—Uccais-tamām,%} ind. exceedingly
high; on high; loudly, aloud. {%—Uccais-tara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} higher, very high, loftier, louder; pronounced
with a higher accent. {%—Uccaistara-tva, am,%} n. state
of being too high. {%—Uccais-tva, am,%} n. height.
{%—Uccaiḥ-sthāna, am,%} n. a high place; ({%as, ā, am%}),
of high rank or family. {%—Uccaiḥ-stheya, am,%} n.
lofty, firmness (of character).
<LEND>

<L>10181<pc>0145-c<k1>uccak<k2>uccak
{#uccak#}¦ {%uc-cak (ud-cak),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%cakati,%}
{%-te, -kitum,%} to look up at, behold.
<LEND>

<L>10182<pc>0145-c<k1>uccakzus<k2>uccakzus
{#uccakzus#}¦ {%uc-cakṣus (ud-ca˚), us, us, us,%}
whose eyes are directed upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10183<pc>0145-c<k1>uccaGana<k2>uccaGana
{#uccaGana#}¦ {%uccaghana, am,%} n. laughter in the
mind not expressed in the countenance.
<LEND>
[Page0146-a+ 75]

<L>10184<pc>0146-a<k1>uccaw<k2>uccaw
{#uccaw#}¦ {%uc-caṭ (ud-caṭ),%} cl. 1. P. {%-caṭati, -ṭi-%}
{%tum,%} to go away, disappear; Caus. P. {%-cāṭayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to drive away, expel, scare.
<LEND>

<L>10185<pc>0146-a<k1>uccAwana<k2>uccAwana
{%Uc-cāṭana, am,%}¦ n. eradicating (as a plant), ex-
pulsion; ruining (an adversary), causing a person to
quit his occupation by means of magical incantations,
exciting disgust for one's profession.
<LEND>

<L>10186<pc>0146-a<k1>uccAwanIya<k2>uccAwanIya
{%Uc-cāṭanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be driven away.
<LEND>

<L>10187<pc>0146-a<k1>uccAwita<k2>uccAwita
{%Uc-cāṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven away.
<LEND>

<L>10188<pc>0146-a<k1>uccawA<k2>uccawA
{#uccawA#}¦ {%uccaṭā,%} f. (perhaps connected with
{%ucca%} or in some sense fr. {%uc-caṭ%} above), pride,
arrogance; habit, usage; N. of different plants, a
species of cyperus, a kind of garlic, Abrus Precatorius,
Flacourtia Cataphracta.
<LEND>

<L>10189<pc>0146-a<k1>uccaRqa<k2>uccaRqa
{#uccaRqa#}¦ {%uc-caṇḍa (ud-ca˚), as, ā, am,%} quick,
expeditious; passionate, violent; hanging down.
<LEND>

<L>10190<pc>0146-a<k1>uccandra<k2>uccandra
{#uccandra#}¦ {%uc-candra (ud-ca˚), as,%} m. the moon-
less period of the night, the last watch of the night.
<LEND>

<L>10191<pc>0146-a<k1>uccar<k2>uccar
{#uccar#}¦ {%uc-car (ud-car),%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -ri-%}
{%tum%} (ep. sometimes {%-cartum%}), Ved. {%-ritave%} or {%-vai,%}
{%-rase, -radhyai,%} to go upwards, ascend, rise (as the
sun), issue forth, go forth; to rise (as the voice); to
let the contents (of anything) issue out, to empty the
body by evacuations; to emit (sounds), utter, pro-
nounce; to quit, leave; to sin against, to be unfaith-
ful to a husband; to transgress against: Caus. {%-cāra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to go forth, to evacuate the
body by excretion, to discharge feces, to emit, to
cause to sound, utter, pronounce, declare.
<LEND>

<L>10192<pc>0146-a<k1>uccaraRa<k2>uccaraRa
{%Uc-caraṇa, am,%}¦ n. going up or out, uttering,
articulating.
<LEND>

<L>10193<pc>0146-a<k1>uccaraRya<k2>uccaraRya
{%Uc-caraṇya,%}¦ nom. P. {%-caraṇyati, -yitum,%} to move
out, stretch out to.
<LEND>

<L>10194<pc>0146-a<k1>uccarita<k2>uccarita
{%Uc-carita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone up or out, risen;
uttered, articulated; ({%am%}), n. excrement, dung.
<LEND>

<L>10195<pc>0146-a<k1>uccAra<k2>uccAra
{%Uc-cāra, as,%}¦ m. feces, excrement; discharge; pro-
nunciation, utterance.
<LEND>

<L>10196<pc>0146-a<k1>uccAraka<k2>uccAraka
{%Uc-cāraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ pronouncing, making audible.
<LEND>

<L>10197<pc>0146-a<k1>uccAraRa<k2>uccAraRa
{%Uc-cāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. pronunciation, articulation, enun-
ciation; making audible. {%—Uccāraṇa-jña, as,%} m. a
linguist, one skilled in utterances or sounds. {%—Uc-%}
{%cāraṇa-sthāna, am,%} n. the part of the throat whence
certain sounds such as nasals, gutturals &c. proceed.
{%—Uccāraṇārtha (˚ṇa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} useful for pro-
nunciation; necessary for pronunciation, a redundant
letter &c. only used to make pronunciation easy.
<LEND>

<L>10198<pc>0146-a<k1>uccAraRIya<k2>uccAraRIya
{%Uc-cāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pronounced.
<LEND>

<L>10199<pc>0146-a<k1>uccArita<k2>uccArita
{%Uc-cārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pronounced, uttered, arti-
culated; having excrements.
<LEND>

<L>10200<pc>0146-a<k1>uccArya<k2>uccArya<h>1
1. {%uc-cārya,%}¦ ind. having spoken, uttered.
<LEND>

<L>10201<pc>0146-a<k1>uccArya<k2>uccArya<h>2
2. {%uc-cārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken, to be pro-
nounced.
<LEND>

<L>10202<pc>0146-a<k1>uccAryamARa<k2>uccAryamARa
{%Uc-cāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being uttered or pro-
nounced.
<LEND>

<L>10203<pc>0146-a<k1>uccal<k2>uccal
{#uccal#}¦ {%uc-cal (ud-cal),%} cl. 1. P. {%-calati, -li-%}
{%tum,%} to go or move away from; to free one's self
from, loosen one's self from.
<LEND>

<L>10204<pc>0146-a<k1>uccala<k2>uccala
{%Uc-cala, am,%}¦ n. the mind, the understanding.
<LEND>

<L>10205<pc>0146-a<k1>uccalana<k2>uccalana
{%Uc-calana, am,%}¦ n. going off or out, moving away.
<LEND>

<L>10206<pc>0146-a<k1>uccalita<k2>uccalita
{%Uc-calita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone up or out, winnowed.
<LEND>

<L>10207<pc>0146-a<k1>ucci<k2>ucci
{#ucci#}¦ {%uc-ci (ud-ci),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -nute,%}
{%-cetum,%} to gather, collect.
<LEND>

<L>10208<pc>0146-a<k1>uccaya<k2>uccaya
{%Uc-caya, as,%}¦ m. gathering, picking up from the
ground; adding to, annumeration; collection, heap,
plenty, multitude; the knot of the string or cloth
which fastens the lower garments round the loins tied
in front; the opposite side of a triangle. {%—Uccayā-%}
{%pacaya (˚ya-ap˚), au,%} m. du. prosperity and decline,
rise and fall.
<LEND>

<L>10209<pc>0146-a<k1>ucciNgawa<k2>ucciNgawa
{#ucciNgawa#}¦ {%ucciṅgaṭa, as,%} m. a passionate or
angry man; a kind of crab; a sort of cricket. See
{%ucciṭiṅga, ciṅgaṭa, cicciṭiṅga.%}
<LEND>

<L>10210<pc>0146-a<k1>ucciwiNga<k2>ucciwiNga
{#ucciwiNga#}¦ {%ucciṭiṅga, as,%} m. a small poison-
ous animal living in water, a crab; [cf. the last.]
<LEND>

<L>10211<pc>0146-a<k1>uccUqa<k2>uccUqa
{#uccUqa#}¦ {%uc-cūḍa%} or {%uc-cūla, as,%} m. (fr. {%ud + %}
[Page0146-b+ 74]
{%cūḍā%}), the flag or pennon of a banner; an ornament
tied on the top of a banner.
<LEND>

<L>10212<pc>0146-b<k1>uccyu<k2>uccyu
{#uccyu#}¦ {%uc-cyu (ud-cyu),%} Caus. P. {%-cyāvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to loosen, make free from, emancipate.
<LEND>

<L>10213<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCad<k2>ucCad
{#ucCad#}¦ {%uc-chad (ud-chad),%} cl. 10. P. {%-chāda-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to uncover (one's body), undress.
<LEND>

<L>10214<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCAdya<k2>ucCAdya
{%Uc-chādya,%}¦ ind. having undressed.
<LEND>

<L>10215<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCanna<k2>ucCanna
{#ucCanna#}¦ {%ucchanna, as, ā, am%} (for {%ut-sanna%} by
a Prākṛt corruption?), destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>10216<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCAdana<k2>ucCAdana
{%Uc-chādana, am,%}¦ n. (for {%ut-sādana%}), cleaning or
rubbing the body with perfumes.
<LEND>

<L>10217<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCal<k2>ucCal
{#ucCal#}¦ {%uc-chal (ud-śal),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-chalati,%}
{%-te, -litum,%} to fly upwards or away, to move onwards.
<LEND>

<L>10218<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCalat<k2>ucCalat
{%Uc-chalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flying up or away; going
or moving on or against.
<LEND>

<L>10219<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCalana<k2>ucCalana
{%Uc-chalana, am,%}¦ n. moving upwards, going on or
against.
<LEND>

<L>10220<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCAlita<k2>ucCAlita
{%Uc-chālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved, waved, waved
above; gone; shaken.
<LEND>

<L>10221<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCAs<k2>ucCAs
{#ucCAs#}¦ {%uc-chās (ud-śās),%} cl. 2. P., Ved.
{%-chāsti, -situm,%} to clean or purify thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>10222<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCAstravartin<k2>ucCAstravartin
{#ucCAstravartin#}¦ {%uc-chāstra-vartin (ud-śāstra-%}
{%va˚), ī, inī, i,%} deviating from the law-books, trans-
gressing the ritual-books.
<LEND>

<L>10223<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCiKa<k2>ucCiKa
{#ucCiKa#}¦ {%uc-chikha, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ud + śikhā%}),
having the flame pointed upwards; flaming, blazing
up; radiant; high-crested; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga
(‘with erected crest’).
<LEND>

<L>10224<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCiNGana<k2>ucCiNGana
{#ucCiNGana#}¦ {%uc-chiṅghana, am,%} n. (fr. {%ud-śiṅgh%}),
breathing through the nostrils, snuffing, snoring; (the
word is also written {%ucchiṃhana.%})
<LEND>

<L>10225<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCid<k2>ucCid
{#ucCid#}¦ {%uc-chid (ud-chid),%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-chi-%}
{%natti, -chinte, -chettum,%} to cut out or off, extirpate,
destroy; to interfere, interrupt, stop: Caus. P.
{%-chedayati, -yitum,%} to cause to extirpate or destroy:
Pass. {%-chidyate,%} to be cut off, stopped, or inter-
rupted; to cease, be deficient, fail.
<LEND>

<L>10226<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCitti<k2>ucCitti
{%Uc-chitti, is,%}¦ f. extirpation, destroying, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>10227<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCidya<k2>ucCidya
{%Uc-chidya,%}¦ ind. having cut off, destroyed, killed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>10228<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCinna<k2>ucCinna
{%Uc-chinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut out or off; destroyed,
killed; abject, vile; ({%as%}), m. peace obtained by
ceding valuable lands.
<LEND>

<L>10229<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCettf<k2>ucCettf
{%Uc-chettṛ, tā,%}¦ m. an extirpator, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>10230<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCeda<k2>ucCeda
{%Uc-cheda, as,%}¦ m. cutting off or out; extirpation;
destruction; cutting short, putting an end to; excision.
<LEND>

<L>10231<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCedana<k2>ucCedana
{%Uc-chedana, am,%}¦ n. cutting off, extirpating, de-
stroying, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>10232<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCedanIya<k2>ucCedanIya
{%Uc-chedanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut off.
<LEND>

<L>10233<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCedin<k2>ucCedin
{%Uc-chedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ destroying.
<LEND>

<L>10234<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCedya<k2>ucCedya
{%Uc-chedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut off, to be de-
stroyed.
<LEND>

<L>10235<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCiras<k2>ucCiras
{#ucCiras#}¦ {%uc-chiras (ud-śi˚), ās, ās, as,%} hav-
ing the head elevated, with upraised head, N. of a
mountain also called Urumuṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>10236<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCilIndra<k2>ucCilIndra
{#ucCilIndra#}¦ {%uc-chilīndra (ud-śi˚), am,%} n. a
mushroom.
<LEND>

<L>10237<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCiz<k2>ucCiz
{#ucCiz#}¦ {%uc-chiṣ (ud-śiṣ),%} cl. 7. P. {%-chi-%}
{%naṣṭi, -cheṣṭum,%} to leave (as a remainder), to
reject: Pass. {%-chiṣyate,%} to be left remaining.
<LEND>

<L>10238<pc>0146-b<k1>ucCizwa<k2>ucCizwa
{%Uc-chiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, rejected, stale; having
the remains of food on the mouth or hands, one
who has not washed his hands and mouth and there-
fore is considered impure; ({%am%}), n. leavings, frag-
ments, remainder (especially of a sacrifice or of food).
{%—Ucchiṣṭa-kalpanā,%} f. a stale invention. {%—Uc-%}
{%chiṣṭa-gaṇapati, is,%} m. (opposed to {%śuddha-ga-%}
{%ṇapati%}), Gaṇeśa as worshipped by the Ucchiṣṭas
or men who leave the remains of food in their mouth
during prayer. {%—Ucchiṣṭa-tā,%} f. the being left, state
of being a remnant or remainder. {%—Ucchiṣṭa-bho-%}
{%jana, am,%} n. eating the leavings of another man;
({%as%}), m. one who eats another's leavings; the
attendant upon an idol, whose food is the leavings of
offerings. {%—Ucchiṣṭa-bhojin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%ucchiṣṭa- %}
[Page0146-c+ 73]
{%bhoktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} an eater of leavings, a mean
person. {%—Ucchiṣṭa-modana, am,%} n. wax. {%—Ucchi-%}
{%ṣṭānna (˚ṭa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} leavings, offal.
<LEND>

<L>10239<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCeza<k2>ucCeza
{%Uc-cheṣa, as,%}¦ m. or {%uc-cheṣaṇa, am,%} n. rest,
remainder; leavings.
<LEND>

<L>10240<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCIrzaka<k2>ucCIrzaka
{#ucCIrzaka#}¦ {%uc-chīrṣaka (ud-śī˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the head raised; ({%am%}), n. a pillow (‘that
which raises the head’).
<LEND>

<L>10241<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCuz<k2>ucCuz
{#ucCuz#}¦ {%uc-chuṣ (ud-śuṣ),%} Caus. {%-choṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to dry up, make dry.
<LEND>

<L>10242<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCuzka<k2>ucCuzka
{%Uc-chuṣka, as, ā, am,%}¦ dry, dried up, withered.
<LEND>

<L>10243<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCozaRa<k2>ucCozaRa
{%Uc-choṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drying up, making dry;
({%am%}), n. drying up, parching.
<LEND>

<L>10244<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCozuka<k2>ucCozuka
{%Uc-choṣuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ drying up, making dry.
<LEND>

<L>10245<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCuzma<k2>ucCuzma
{#ucCuzma#}¦ {%uc-chuṣma, am,%} n. or {%uc-chuṣman,%}
{%a,%} n. (fr. rt. {%śvas%} with {%ud%} ?), confusion.
<LEND>

<L>10246<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCUqA<k2>ucCUqA
{#ucCUqA#}¦ {%uc-chūḍā,%} f. (see the more correct
{%uc-cūḍa%}), the head of a banner or part above the flag.
<LEND>

<L>10247<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCUna<k2>ucCUna
{#ucCUna#}¦ {%uc-chūna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śvi%} with
{%ud%}), swollen, turgid; lofty, high; fat, bulky.
<LEND>

<L>10248<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCfNKala<k2>ucCfNKala
{#ucCfNKala#}¦ {%uc-chṛṅkhala (ud-śṛ˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unbridled, uncurbed, unrestrained, perverse, self-
willed; irregular, desultory, unmethodical.
<LEND>

<L>10249<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCocana<k2>ucCocana
{#ucCocana#}¦ {%uc-chocana, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ud-śuc%}),
Ved. burning.
<LEND>

<L>10250<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCozaRa<k2>ucCozaRa
{#ucCozaRa#}¦ {%uc-choṣaṇa.%} See {%uc-chuṣ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>10251<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCri<k2>ucCri
{#ucCri#}¦ {%uc-chri (ud-śri),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-chra-%}
{%yati, -te, -chrayitum,%} P. to raise, erect, extol; A.
to rise, be erected.
<LEND>

<L>10252<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCraya<k2>ucCraya
{%Uc-chraya, as,%}¦ m. rising, raising, erecting; eleva-
tion of a tree, mountain, &c.; rising of a planet, &c.;
height; growth, increase, intensity; the upright side
of a triangle. {%—Ucchrayopeta (˚ya-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
possessing height, high, lofty, elevated.
<LEND>

<L>10253<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCrayaRa<k2>ucCrayaRa
{%Uc-chrayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. raising, erecting.
<LEND>

<L>10254<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCrAya<k2>ucCrAya
{%Uc-chrāya, as,%}¦ m. rising upwards, elevation,
height; growth, increase, intensity; ({%ī%}), f. an up-
raised piece of wood, plank.
<LEND>

<L>10255<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCrAyin<k2>ucCrAyin
{%Uc-chrāyin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ high, raised, lofty.
<LEND>

<L>10256<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCrita<k2>ucCrita
{%Uc-chrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, lifted up; high, tall;
advancing, increasing, prosperous; born, produced;
increased in size or bulk, grown. {%—Ucchrita-pāṇi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} with outstretched hand.
<LEND>

<L>10257<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCriti<k2>ucCriti
{%Uc-chriti, is,%}¦ f. rising upwards, elevation, increase;
the upright side of a triangle; the upright elevation
or height of a figure.
<LEND>

<L>10258<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCreya<k2>ucCreya
{%Uc-chreya, as, ā, am,%}¦ high, lofty.
<LEND>

<L>10259<pc>0146-c<k1>ucClaka<k2>ucClaka
{#ucClaka#}¦ {%ucchlaka, as,%} m., Ved. a part of the
human body, (used only in du.)
<LEND>

<L>10260<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCvaNka<k2>ucCvaNka
{#ucCvaNka#}¦ {%ucchvaṅka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śvañc%} with
{%ud%}), Ved. gaping, cleaving open, forming a fissure.
<LEND>

<L>10261<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCvas<k2>ucCvas
{#ucCvas#}¦ {%uc-chvas (ud-śvas),%} cl. 2. P. {%-chva-%}
{%siti, -situm,%} to breathe, take a deep breath, sigh,
pant, respire.
<LEND>

<L>10262<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCvasat<k2>ucCvasat
{%Uc-chvasat, an, atī, at,%}¦ breathing hard, panting.
<LEND>

<L>10263<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCvasana<k2>ucCvasana
{%Uc-chvasana, am,%}¦ n. breathing, sighing; taking a
deep breath.
<LEND>

<L>10264<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCvasita<k2>ucCvasita
{%Uc-chvasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heaving, beating, breathed,
inspired, blown, expanded; blooming, enlivened,
gladdened; ({%am%}), n. sighing.
<LEND>

<L>10265<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCvAsa<k2>ucCvAsa
{%Uc-chvāsa, as,%}¦ m. breath, breathing, deep inspira-
tion; sigh; breathing out, expiring, dying; consolation,
encouragement; division of a book, pause in a narra-
tion; an air-hole.
<LEND>

<L>10266<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCvAsita<k2>ucCvAsita
{%Uc-chvāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ breathless, out of breath,
much, excessive, loosened, released, desisted from,
disjointed, divided.
<LEND>

<L>10267<pc>0146-c<k1>ucCvAsin<k2>ucCvAsin
{%Uc-chvāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ breathing, inhaling air;
sighing, breathing out, expiring; pausing; rising,
coming forward.
<LEND>

<L>10268<pc>0146-c<k1>uC<k2>uC
{#uC#}¦ {%uch,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%ucchati, ucchāñ-%}
{%cakāra, ucchitum,%} to finish; to bind; to
abandon, transgress.
<LEND>
[Page0147-a+ 73]

<L>10269<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjan<k2>ujjan
{#ujjan#}¦ {%uj-jan (ud-jan),%} cl. 3. P. {%-jajanti,%}
{%-janitum,%} to beget, produce; cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate,%} to
be born, originate.
<LEND>

<L>10270<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjayana<k2>ujjayana
{#ujjayana#}¦ {%uj-jayana,%} &c. See s. v. {%uj-ji%} below.
<LEND>

<L>10271<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjas<k2>ujjas
{#ujjas#}¦ {%uj-jas (ud-jas),%} Caus. {%-jāsayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to destroy, extirpate (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>10272<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjAsana<k2>ujjAsana
{%Uj-jāsana, am,%}¦ n. killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>10273<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjAnaka<k2>ujjAnaka
{#ujjAnaka#}¦ {%ujjānaka, as,%} m., N. of a Tīrtha;
also spelt {%ujjālaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>10274<pc>0147-a<k1>ujji<k2>ujji
{#ujji#}¦ {%uj-ji (ud-ji),%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%}
to win, conquer, acquire by conquest; to be victorious:
Caus. {%-jāpayati, -yitum,%} to assist any one to win;
to cause to conquer (with two acc.): Desid. {%-jigīṣati,%}
to wish to conquer.
<LEND>

<L>10275<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjayana<k2>ujjayana
{%Uj-jayana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f. Ujjayinī
or Oujein, the Gr. <lang n="greek">Οζήνη</lang> a city so called in Avanti
(Mālava), formerly the capital of Vikramāditya; it
is one of the seven sacred cities of the Hindūs, and
the first meridian of their geographers, from which
they calculate longitude; the modern Oujein is about
a mile south of the ancient city.
<LEND>

<L>10276<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjayanta<k2>ujjayanta
{%Uj-jayanta, as,%}¦ m., N. of a mountain in Surāṣṭra
in the west of India, part of the Vindhya range. See
{%raivata.%}
<LEND>

<L>10277<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjayinI<k2>ujjayinI
{%Uj-jayinī,%}¦ f. the city Oujein. See {%uj-jayanī.%}
<LEND>

<L>10278<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjiti<k2>ujjiti
{%Uj-jiti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. victory; N. of certain verses in
the Vājasaneyi-Saṃhitā, so called because the words
{%udajayat tam ujjeṣam%} occurs in them.
<LEND>

<L>10279<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjeza<k2>ujjeza
{%Uj-jeṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. victorious. {%—Ujjeṣa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing the word {%ujjeṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>10280<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjihAna<k2>ujjihAna
{#ujjihAna#}¦ {%ujjihāna,%} N. of a region.
<LEND>

<L>10281<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjihIrzA<k2>ujjihIrzA
{#ujjihIrzA#}¦ {%uj-jihīrṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt.
{%hṛ%} with {%ud%}), wishing to take or seize.
<LEND>

<L>10282<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjIv<k2>ujjIv
{#ujjIv#}¦ {%uj-jīv (ud-jīv),%} cl. 1. P. {%-jīvati, -vi-%}
{%tum,%} to revive, return to life: Caus. P. {%-jīvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to restore to life, animate.
<LEND>

<L>10283<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjIvin<k2>ujjIvin
{%Uj-jīvin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a counsellor of Meghavarṇa,
the king of the crows.
<LEND>

<L>10284<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjfmB<k2>ujjfmB
{#ujjfmB#}¦ {%uj-jṛmbh (ud-jṛmbh),%} cl. 1. A.,
poet. P. {%-jṛmbhate, -ti, -bhitum,%} to gape, to open;
to part asunder; to show one's self, become visible,
come forth, break forth, expand, arise.
<LEND>

<L>10285<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjfmBa<k2>ujjfmBa
{%Uj-jṛmbha, as, ā, am,%}¦ gaping, parting asunder,
open, apart; blown, expanded.
<LEND>

<L>10286<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjfmBaRa<k2>ujjfmBaRa
{%Uj-jṛmbhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of gaping, opening
the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>10287<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjfmBita<k2>ujjfmBita
{%Uj-jṛmbhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ opened, stretched; ex-
panded, blown; ({%am%}), n. effort, exertion.
<LEND>

<L>10288<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjya<k2>ujjya
{#ujjya#}¦ {%uj-jya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ud + jyā%}), having
the bow-sinew loosened.
<LEND>

<L>10289<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjval<k2>ujjval
{#ujjval#}¦ {%uj-jval (ud-jval),%} cl. 1. P., ep. A.
{%-jvalati, -te, -litum,%} to blaze up, flame, shine: Caus.
P. {%-jvalayati, -yitum,%} to light up, cause to shine,
illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>10290<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjvala<k2>ujjvala
{%Uj-jvala, as, ā, am,%}¦ blazing up, luminous, splendid,
light; burning; clean, clear; lovely, beautiful; blown,
expanded; ({%as%}), m. love, passion; ({%am%}), n. gold;
({%ā%}), f. splendor, clearness, brightness; a form of the
Jagatī metre. {%—Ujjvala-tā,%} f. or {%ujjvala-tva, am,%}
n. splendor, radiance; beauty. {%—Ujjvala-datta, as,%}
m., N. of the author of a commentary on the
Uṇādi-sūtras.
<LEND>

<L>10291<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjvalana<k2>ujjvalana
{%Uj-jvalana, am,%}¦ n. burning, shining; fire, gold (?).
<LEND>

<L>10292<pc>0147-a<k1>ujjvalita<k2>ujjvalita
{%Uj-jvalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lighted, shining, flaming, &c.
<LEND>

<L>10293<pc>0147-a<k1>ujJ<k2>ujJ
{#ujJ#}¦ {%ujjh,%} cl. 6. P. {%ujjhati, ujjhāñ-ca-%}
{%kāra, ujjhitum,%} &c., to leave, abandon,
quit; to avoid, escape.
<LEND>

<L>10294<pc>0147-a<k1>ujJa<k2>ujJa
{%Ujjha, as, ā, am,%}¦ quitting, forgetting.
<LEND>

<L>10295<pc>0147-a<k1>ujJaka<k2>ujJaka
{%Ujjhaka, as,%}¦ m. a cloud, a devotee.
<LEND>

<L>10296<pc>0147-a<k1>ujJana<k2>ujJana
{%Ujjhana, am,%}¦ n. abandoning, removing.
<LEND>

<L>10297<pc>0147-a<k1>ujJita<k2>ujJita
{%Ujjhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, abandoned; left off, dis-
continued.
<LEND>

<L>10298<pc>0147-a<k1>ujJitf<k2>ujJitf
{%Ujjhitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what leaves.
<LEND>
[Page0147-b+ 72]

<L>10299<pc>0147-b<k1>ujJawita<k2>ujJawita
{#ujJawita#}¦ {%uj-jhaṭita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%jhaṭ%}),
perplexed, bewildered.
<LEND>

<L>10300<pc>0147-b<k1>uYC<k2>uYC
{#uYC#}¦ {%uñch,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%uñchati%} (cl. 1. and
6. differing only in the accent), {%uñchi-%}
{%tum,%} to gather, glean.
<LEND>

<L>10301<pc>0147-b<k1>uYCa<k2>uYCa
{%Uñcha, am,%}¦ n. gleaning, gathering grains. {%—Uñcha-%}
{%vṛtti, is, is, i,%} one who lives by gleaning, a gleaner.
{%—Uñcha-śila, am,%} n. gleaning corn or grains.
{%—Uñcha-śīla, as, ā, am,%} one who lives by glean-
ing &c.
<LEND>

<L>10302<pc>0147-b<k1>uYCana<k2>uYCana
{%Uñchana, am,%}¦ n. gleaning, gathering grains of
corn in market-places &c.
<LEND>

<L>10303<pc>0147-b<k1>uwa<k2>uwa
{#uwa#}¦ {%uṭa, as,%} m. leaves, grass, &c., used in
making huts, thatches, &c. {%—Uṭa-ja, as, am,%} m. n.
a hut made of leaves, the residence of hermits or
saints; a house in general.
<LEND>

<L>10304<pc>0147-b<k1>uW<k2>uW
{#uW#}¦ {%uṭh%} or {%ūṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%oṭhati%} or {%ūṭhati,%}
{%ṭhitum,%} to strike or knock down.
<LEND>

<L>10305<pc>0147-b<k1>uqu<k2>uqu
{#uqu#}¦ {%uḍu, us, u,%} f. n. a lunar mansion or
constellation in the moon's path; ({%u%}), n. water.
{%—Uḍu-pa, as, am,%} m. n. a raft or float; ({%as%}), m.
the moon, (the half-moon being formed like a boat.)
{%—Uḍu-pati, is,%} m. or {%uḍu-rāj, ṭ,%} m. the moon;
the Soma. {%—Uḍu-patha, as,%} m. the ether, firma-
ment (the path of the stars). {%—Uḍu-rāj, ṭ,%} m. the
moon. {%—Uḍu-loman, ā,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Uḍū-%}
{%pa, as, am,%} m. n. a raft, a float; ({%as%}), m. the moon.
<LEND>

<L>10306<pc>0147-b<k1>uqumbara<k2>uqumbara
{#uqumbara#}¦ {%uḍumbara, as,%} m. (in Ved. written
with {%d,%} in Class. generally with {%ḍ%}), the tree Ficus
Glomerata; a species of leprosy with coppery spots;
the threshold of a house; a eunuch; a kind of worm
supposed to be generated in the blood and to produce
leprosy; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of the tree Ficus Glo-
merata; copper; a karṣa, a measure of two tolas.
{%—Uḍumbara-dalā%} or {%uḍumbara-parṇī,%} f. the
plant Croton Polyandra. {%—Uḍumbarā-vatī,%} f., N. of
a river; see also {%udumbara.%}
<LEND>

<L>10307<pc>0147-b<k1>uqqAmara<k2>uqqAmara
{#uqqAmara#}¦ {%uḍḍāmara, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ud-ḍā˚ ?%}),
excellent, respectable, of high rank or consequence.
<LEND>

<L>10308<pc>0147-b<k1>uqqI<k2>uqqI
{#uqqI#}¦ {%uḍ-ḍī (ud-ḍī),%} cl. 1. 4. A. {%-ḍayate%} or
{%-ḍīyate, -ḍayitum,%} to fly up: Caus. {%-ḍapayati (-ḍā-%}
{%payati?),%} to scare.
<LEND>

<L>10309<pc>0147-b<k1>uqqayana<k2>uqqayana
{%Uḍ-ḍayana, am,%}¦ n. flying up, flying, soaring.
<LEND>

<L>10310<pc>0147-b<k1>uqqIna<k2>uqqIna
{%Uḍ-ḍīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ flown up, flying up; ({%am%}),
n. flying as a bird; flying up, soaring.
<LEND>

<L>10311<pc>0147-b<k1>uqqIyana<k2>uqqIyana
{%Uḍ-ḍīyana, am,%}¦ n. flying up, soaring.
<LEND>

<L>10312<pc>0147-b<k1>uqqIyamAna<k2>uqqIyamAna
{%Uḍ-ḍīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ flying up, soaring, one
who flies or soars.
<LEND>

<L>10313<pc>0147-b<k1>uqqISa<k2>uqqISa
{#uqqISa#}¦ {%uḍḍīśa, as,%} m. a work so called,
containing charms and incantations; a N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>10314<pc>0147-b<k1>uqra<k2>uqra
{#uqra#}¦ {%uḍra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>10315<pc>0147-b<k1>uRquka<k2>uRquka
{#uRquka#}¦ {%uṇḍuka, as,%} m. a texture, a net;
a part of the body, the peritoneum ?; (this word is
perhaps connected with {%uḍupa.%})
<LEND>

<L>10316<pc>0147-b<k1>uRqeraka<k2>uRqeraka
{#uRqeraka#}¦ {%uṇḍeraka, as,%} m. a ball of flour,
a roll, a loaf. {%—Uṇḍeraka-sraj, k,%} f. a string of rolls,
balls of meal or flour upon a string.
<LEND>

<L>10317<pc>0147-b<k1>ut<k2>ut
{#ut#}¦ {%ut,%} ind. a particle of doubt or delibera-
tion = how, what (?), either, or; see 2. {%uta.%} (For
the prep. {%ud%} see 1. {%ud,%} page 153.)
<LEND>

<L>10318<pc>0147-b<k1>uta<k2>uta<h>1
{#uta#} 1¦. {%uta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ve%}), sewn,
woven.
<LEND>

<L>10319<pc>0147-b<k1>uta<k2>uta<h>2
{#uta#} 2¦. {%uta,%} ind. (as a particle of doubt or
deliberation) and, also, even, or. Often used for the
sake of emphasis, especially at the end of a line after
{%iti%} or a verb (e. g. {%sarva-bhūtāni tam pārtha sadā%}
{%paribhavanty uta,%} all creatures, O king, certainly
always despise him).
<div n="P"/>(As an interrogative particle, generally at the begin-
ning of the second or following part of a double in-
terrogation) or, utrum-an (e. g. {%katham nirṇīyate%}
{%kiṃ syān niṣkāraṇo bandhur uta viśvāsa-ghā- %}
[Page0147-c+ 73]
{%takaḥ,%} how can it be decided whether he be a friend
without a motive or a violator of confidence ?). In
this sense it may be strengthened by {%āho%} (e. g. {%kaccit%}
{%tvam asi mānuṣī utāho surāṅganā,%} art thou a
mortal woman or divine ?), or by {%āho-svit%} (e. g.
{%Śālihotraḥ kiṃ nu syād utāhosvid rājā Nalaḥ,%}
can it be Śālihotra or king Nala ?). Rarely {%kim%} is
repeated before {%uta%} used in this sense (e. g. {%kiṃ nu%}
{%svargāt prāptā tasyā rūpeṇa kimuta anyā āgatā,%}
has she arrived from heaven or has another come in
her form ?).
<div n="P"/>(As a particle of wishing, especially at the beginning
of a sentence followed by a potential) would that!
utinam! (e. g. {%uta adhīyīta,%} would that he would
read!).
<div n="P"/>({%Uta%} preceded by {%kim%}) on the contrary, how
much more, how much less (e. g. {%samartho 'si sa-%}
{%hasram api jetuṃ kimuta ekam,%} thou art able to
conquer even a thousand, how much more one ?).
<div n="P"/>({%Uta%} preceded by {%prati%}) on the contrary, rather
(e. g. {%eṣa pṛṣṭo 'smābhir na jalpati hanti%}
{%pratyuta pāṣāṇaiḥ,%} this one questioned by us does
not speak, but rather throws stones at us). {%Uta vā,%}
or else, and (e. g. {%samudrād uta vā purīṣāt,%} from
the sea or from the moisture in the air); {%vā-uta%}
{%vā%} or {%utāho vāpi-vā,%} either — or; {%uta-uta,%} both — 
and (e. g. {%uta balavān uta abalaḥ,%} both the strong
and the weak); {%kim-uta vā,%} whether — or else.
<LEND>

<L>10320<pc>0147-c<k1>utaNka<k2>utaNka
{#utaNka#}¦ {%utaṅka, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
{%—Utaṅka-megha, as,%} m. a kind of cloud named
after that Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>10321<pc>0147-c<k1>utaTya<k2>utaTya
{#utaTya#}¦ {%utathya, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Aṅgiras and elder brother of Bṛhaspati. {%—Utathya-%}
{%tanaya, as,%} m. an epithet of Gautama. {%—Utathyā-%}
{%nuja, as,%} m. or {%utathyānujanman (˚ya-anu-ja˚),%}
{%ā,%} m. a N. of Bṛhaspati, regent of the planet Jupiter
(younger brother of Utathya).
<LEND>

<L>10322<pc>0147-c<k1>utAho<k2>utAho
{#utAho#}¦ {%utāho,%} ind. (fr. 2. {%uta + āho%}), a par-
ticle of doubt or deliberation = either, or; see under
2. {%uta%} above. {%—Utāho-svit,%} see under 2. {%uta.%}
<LEND>

<L>10323<pc>0147-c<k1>utUla<k2>utUla
{#utUla#}¦ {%utūla, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
also {%kulūṭa%} or {%ulūṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>10324<pc>0147-c<k1>utka<k2>utka
{#utka#}¦ {%utka, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%ud%}), excited by
the desire of obtaining anything; wishing for (with
inf.), desirous of, longing for; regretting, sad, sor-
rowful; absent, thinking of something else; ({%as%}), m.
desire; opportunity, occasion. {%—Utka-tā,%} f. a state of
longing or regret; the plant Pothos Officinalis having
aromatic seeds.
<LEND>

<L>10325<pc>0147-c<k1>utkAya<k2>utkAya
{%Utkāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%-yate, -yitum,%} to long for.
<LEND>

<L>10326<pc>0147-c<k1>utkaca<k2>utkaca
{#utkaca#}¦ {%ut-kaca, as, ā, am,%} having the hairs
erect.
<LEND>

<L>10327<pc>0147-c<k1>utkacCA<k2>utkacCA
{#utkacCA#}¦ {%ut-kacchā,%} f. a metre of six verses,
each verse containing eleven syllabic instants.
<LEND>

<L>10328<pc>0147-c<k1>utkaYcuka<k2>utkaYcuka
{#utkaYcuka#}¦ {%ut-kañcuka, as, ā, am,%} having no
coat of mail, without bodice or jacket.
<LEND>

<L>10329<pc>0147-c<k1>utkawa<k2>utkawa
{#utkawa#}¦ {%ut-kaṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%ud%}), ex-
ceeding the usual measure, important; richly endowed
with, abounding in; drunk, mad, furious; excessive,
much; superior, high, proud, haughty; uneven;
difficult; ({%as%}), m. fluid dropping from the temples
of an elephant in rut; the plant Saccharum Sara, or
a similar kind of grass; intoxication, pride; ({%ā%}), f.
the plant Laurus Cassia; N. of a town; ({%am%}), n. the
fragrant bark of Laurus Cassia.
<LEND>

<L>10330<pc>0147-c<k1>utkawukAsana<k2>utkawukAsana
{#utkawukAsana#}¦ {%utkaṭukāsana, am,%} n. sitting
on the hams, squatting.
<LEND>

<L>10331<pc>0147-c<k1>utkaRikA<k2>utkaRikA
{#utkaRikA#}¦ {%ut-kaṇikā,%} f. a raised particle.
<LEND>

<L>10332<pc>0147-c<k1>utkaRWa<k2>utkaRWa<h>1
{#utkaRWa#} 1¦. {%ut-kaṇṭha, as, ā, am,%} having the
neck uplifted, on the point of doing anything; ({%as%}
or {%ā%}), m. f. longing for a beloved person or thing;
regretting, missing anything or person.
<LEND>

<L>10333<pc>0147-c<k1>utkaRWa<k2>utkaRWa<h>2
2. {%utkaṇṭha,%}¦ nom. A. {%utkaṇṭhate, -ṭhitum,%} to long
[Page0148-a+ 67]
for, regret, sorrow, for: Caus. {%utkaṇṭhayati, -yitum,%}
to excite longing, inspire with tender emotions.
<LEND>

<L>10334<pc>0148-a<k1>utkaRWita<k2>utkaRWita
{%Utkaṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ regretting, wishing or sor-
rowing for, distressed, sorrowful; ({%ā%}), f. a woman
longing after her absent lover or husband.
<LEND>

<L>10335<pc>0148-a<k1>utkand<k2>utkand
{#utkand#}¦ {%ut-kand (ud-skand),%} cl. 1. P. {%-kan-%}
{%dati, -kantum,%} to leap, jump over.
<LEND>

<L>10336<pc>0148-a<k1>utkandaka<k2>utkandaka
{%Ut-kandaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of disease.
<LEND>

<L>10337<pc>0148-a<k1>utkanDara<k2>utkanDara
{#utkanDara#}¦ {%ut-kandhara, as, ā, am,%} having
the neck erect or uplifted; ({%am%}), n. bending back
the neck.
<LEND>

<L>10338<pc>0148-a<k1>utkamp<k2>utkamp
{#utkamp#}¦ {%ut-kamp (ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-kampate,%}
{%-pitum,%} to tremble: Caus. P. {%-kampayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to tremble; to cause to swing upwards,
agitate, shake.
<LEND>

<L>10339<pc>0148-a<k1>utkampa<k2>utkampa
{%Ut-kampa, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, tremor, agita-
tion; ({%as%}), m. trembling.
<LEND>

<L>10340<pc>0148-a<k1>utkampana<k2>utkampana
{%Ut-kampana, am,%}¦ n. the act of trembling, agitation.
<LEND>

<L>10341<pc>0148-a<k1>utkampin<k2>utkampin
{%Ut-kampin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ trembling, agitating, causing
to tremble.
<LEND>

<L>10342<pc>0148-a<k1>utkara<k2>utkara
{#utkara#}¦ {%ut-kara.%} See under {%ut-kṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>10343<pc>0148-a<k1>utkarkara<k2>utkarkara
{#utkarkara#}¦ {%ut-karkara, as,%} m. a kind of mu-
sical instrument.
<LEND>

<L>10344<pc>0148-a<k1>utkarRa<k2>utkarRa
{#utkarRa#}¦ {%ut-karṇa, as, ā, am,%} having the ears
erect; ({%as%}), m. an erect ear.
<LEND>

<L>10345<pc>0148-a<k1>utkarza<k2>utkarza
{#utkarza#}¦ {%ut-karṣa,%} &c. See under {%ut-kṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>10346<pc>0148-a<k1>utkal<k2>utkal<h>1
{#utkal#} 1¦. {%ut-kal (ud-k˚),%} cl. 10. P. {%-kala-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to unbind, loosen.
<LEND>

<L>10347<pc>0148-a<k1>utkalita<k2>utkalita
{%Ut-kalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ unbound, loosened; opened,
blossoming; prosperous, rising, increasing; regretting,
grieving for.
<LEND>

<L>10348<pc>0148-a<k1>utkal<k2>utkal<h>2
{#utkal#} 2¦. {%ut-kal (ud-k˚),%} cl. 10. P. {%-kāla-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to drive out, expel.
<LEND>

<L>10349<pc>0148-a<k1>utkala<k2>utkala
{#utkala#}¦ {%utkala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of the inhabit-
ants of Orissa, in the south of India; a subdivision of
Brāhmans, derived from {%Utkala,%} a son of Sudyumna;
({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. a porter, one who travels with
a burden or load; ({%as%}), m. a fowler, a bird-catcher.
<LEND>

<L>10350<pc>0148-a<k1>utkalApa<k2>utkalApa
{#utkalApa#}¦ {%ut-kalāpa, as, ā, am,%} having the
tail erect and expanded.
<LEND>

<L>10351<pc>0148-a<k1>utkalApaya<k2>utkalApaya
{%Utkalāpaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%-payati, -yitum,%} to cause
the peacock to spread its tail, to cause any one to be
proud; to inspire conceit by an acknowledgment of
merit; to return thanks (?) .
<LEND>

<L>10352<pc>0148-a<k1>utkali<k2>utkali
{#utkali#}¦ {%utkali, is,%} m., N. of a deity; (a
various reading has {%utkharin.%})
<LEND>

<L>10353<pc>0148-a<k1>utkalikA<k2>utkalikA
{#utkalikA#}¦ {%utkalikā,%} f. (fr. 1. {%ut-kal ?%}),
longing for, regretting, missing anything or person;
wanton sportfulness, dalliance; a bud, an unblown
flower; a wave. {%—Utkalikā-prāya,%} (prose) abound-
ing in compound words.
<LEND>

<L>10354<pc>0148-a<k1>utkazaRa<k2>utkazaRa
{#utkazaRa#}¦ {%ut-kaṣaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%kaṣ%}), tear-
ing or pulling up, drawing through (as a plough).
<LEND>

<L>10355<pc>0148-a<k1>utkas<k2>utkas
{#utkas#}¦ {%ut-kas (ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-ka-%}
{%sati, -situm,%} to gape, to open.
<LEND>

<L>10356<pc>0148-a<k1>utkAkA<k2>utkAkA
{#utkAkA#}¦ {%ut-kākā,%} f. a cow calving every
year.
<LEND>

<L>10357<pc>0148-a<k1>utkAS<k2>utkAS
{#utkAS#}¦ {%ut-kāś (ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-kāśate,%}
{%-śitum,%} to flash upwards, shine.
<LEND>

<L>10358<pc>0148-a<k1>utkASana<k2>utkASana
{%Utkāśana, am,%}¦ n. giving orders, commanding.
<LEND>

<L>10359<pc>0148-a<k1>utkAsa<k2>utkAsa
{#utkAsa#}¦ {%utkāsa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>10360<pc>0148-a<k1>utkAsana<k2>utkAsana
{#utkAsana#}¦ {%ut-kāsana, am,%} n. (rt. {%kās%}), hem-
ming, clearing the throat of mucus.
<LEND>

<L>10361<pc>0148-a<k1>utkIrRa<k2>utkIrRa
{#utkIrRa#}¦ {%ut-kīrṇa.%} See under {%ut-kṝ%} 3rd col.
<LEND>

<L>10362<pc>0148-a<k1>utkIrt<k2>utkIrt
{#utkIrt#}¦ {%ut-kīrt.%} See {%ut-kṝt%} 3rd col.
<LEND>

<L>10363<pc>0148-a<k1>utkIrtana<k2>utkIrtana
{#utkIrtana#}¦ {%ut-kīrtana,%} &c. See {%ut-kṝt.%}
<LEND>

<L>10364<pc>0148-a<k1>utkIla<k2>utkIla
{#utkIla#}¦ {%utkīla, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>
[Page0148-b+ 73]

<L>10365<pc>0148-b<k1>utkuc<k2>utkuc
{#utkuc#}¦ {%ut-kuc%} or {%ut-kuñc (ud-k˚),%} cl. 6. P.,
1. A. {%-kucati, -kuñcate, -kuñcitum,%} to bend upwards;
to bend aside, to bend from the right course, to go
or lead any one astray, to corrupt.
<LEND>

<L>10366<pc>0148-b<k1>utkuYcikA<k2>utkuYcikA
{%Ut-kuñcikā%}¦ or {%ut-kuñcitā,%} f. the plant Nigella
Indica.
<LEND>

<L>10367<pc>0148-b<k1>utkoca<k2>utkoca
{%Ut-koca, as,%}¦ m. a bribe.
<LEND>

<L>10368<pc>0148-b<k1>utkocaka<k2>utkocaka
{%Utkocaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ corrupted with bribes;
({%as%}), m. the receiver of a bribe, a bribe; N. of a
Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>10369<pc>0148-b<k1>utkuw<k2>utkuw
{#utkuw#}¦ {%ut-kuṭ (ud-k˚),%} Caus. {%-koṭayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to bend upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10370<pc>0148-b<k1>utkuwa<k2>utkuwa
{%Ut-kuṭa, am,%}¦ n. lying stretched out on the back,
lying with the face upwards, sleeping with the head
erect.
<LEND>

<L>10371<pc>0148-b<k1>utkuwaka<k2>utkuwaka
{%Ut-kuṭaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ stretched out on the back
with the face upwards, erect. {%—Utkuṭaka-prahāna,%}
{%am,%} n. avoiding the above position. {%—Utkuṭakāsana%}
{%(˚ka-ās˚), am,%} n. a position like that just described.
<LEND>

<L>10372<pc>0148-b<k1>utkuRa<k2>utkuRa
{#utkuRa#}¦ {%ut-kuṇa, as,%} m. a bug; a louse.
<LEND>

<L>10373<pc>0148-b<k1>utkula<k2>utkula
{#utkula#}¦ {%ut-kula, as, ā, am,%} degenerating,
dishonouring one's family.
<LEND>

<L>10374<pc>0148-b<k1>utkUj<k2>utkUj
{#utkUj#}¦ {%ut-kūj (ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-kūjati,%}
{%-jitum,%} to utter monotonous sounds.
<LEND>

<L>10375<pc>0148-b<k1>utkUja<k2>utkUja
{%Ut-kūja, as,%}¦ m. the singing of the kokila.
<LEND>

<L>10376<pc>0148-b<k1>utkUwa<k2>utkUwa
{#utkUwa#}¦ {%ut-kūṭa, as,%} m. an umbrella or parasol.
<LEND>

<L>10377<pc>0148-b<k1>utkUrd<k2>utkUrd
{#utkUrd#}¦ {%ut-kūrd (ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-kūr-%}
{%dati, -te, -ditum,%} to jump up, spring upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10378<pc>0148-b<k1>utkUrdana<k2>utkUrdana
{%Ut-kūrdana, am,%}¦ n. jumping up, springing upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10379<pc>0148-b<k1>utkUla<k2>utkUla
{#utkUla#}¦ {%ut-kūla, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being on
an elevation, going up-hill; ({%am%}), ind. up-hill.
<LEND>

<L>10380<pc>0148-b<k1>utkUlita<k2>utkUlita
{%Ut-kūlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought to the bank or
shore.
<LEND>

<L>10381<pc>0148-b<k1>utkf<k2>utkf
{#utkf#}¦ {%ut-kṛ (ud-k˚),%} cl. 8. A. {%-kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to inform against.
<LEND>

<L>10382<pc>0148-b<k1>utkfti<k2>utkfti
{%Ut-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. a metre of four times twenty-six
syllables.
<LEND>

<L>10383<pc>0148-b<k1>utkft<k2>utkft
{#utkft#}¦ {%ut-kṛt (ud-k˚),%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛntati,%}
{%-kartitum,%} to cut out or off, to tear out or off; to
cut up, cut in pieces, carve, butcher.
<LEND>

<L>10384<pc>0148-b<k1>utkartana<k2>utkartana
{%Ut-kartana, am,%}¦ n. cutting up, cutting to pieces,
cutting off.
<LEND>

<L>10385<pc>0148-b<k1>utkftya<k2>utkftya
{%Ut-kṛtya,%}¦ ind. having cut off or up, having cut out.
<LEND>

<L>10386<pc>0148-b<k1>utkftyamAna<k2>utkftyamAna
{%Ut-kṛtyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being cut to pieces,
being cut up.
<LEND>

<L>10387<pc>0148-b<k1>utkfz<k2>utkfz
{#utkfz#}¦ {%ut-kṛṣ (ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. P. sometimes
A. {%-karṣati, -te, -karṣṭum%} or {%-kraṣṭum,%} to draw
or drag or pull up; to raise; to draw or take out,
to extract; to pull or put off; to bend (as a bow);
to tear asunder: Caus. {%-karṣayati, -yitum,%} to
elevate, raise, increase: Pass. {%-kṛṣyate,%} to be
lifted or drawn up, to be raised, to rise, become
powerful, become eminent.
<LEND>

<L>10388<pc>0148-b<k1>utkarza<k2>utkarza
{%Ut-karṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ superior, eminent; much,
excessive; exaggerated, boastful; attractive; ({%as%}), m.
pulling upwards, drawing, pulling; elevation, increase,
rising to something better, prosperity; excellence,
eminence; excess, abundance; self-conceit; boasting;
joy, pleasure (?).
<LEND>

<L>10389<pc>0148-b<k1>utkarzaka<k2>utkarzaka
{%Ut-karṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ drawing upwards, raising.
<LEND>

<L>10390<pc>0148-b<k1>utkarzaRa<k2>utkarzaRa
{%Ut-karṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. drawing upwards, taking off.
<LEND>

<L>10391<pc>0148-b<k1>utkarzita<k2>utkarzita
{%Ut-karṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn upwards, elevated.
<LEND>

<L>10392<pc>0148-b<k1>utkfzwa<k2>utkfzwa
{%Ut-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (opposed to {%apa-kṛṣṭa%}
and {%ava-kṛṣṭa%}), drawn up or out; attracted; ex-
tracted; taking a high position; excellent, eminent;
superior, best; much, most, excessive; {%jñānotkṛṣṭa%}
{%(˚na-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} eminent through knowledge.
{%—Utkṛṣṭa-tā,%} f. or {%utkṛṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. ex-
cellence, superiority, eminence. {%—Utkṛṣṭa-bhūma,%}
{%as,%} m. a good soil. {%—Utkṛṣṭa-vedana, am,%} n.
marrying a man of a higher caste; the best or most
respectable form of marriage (?). {%—Utkṛṣṭopādhitā%}
{%(˚ṭa-up˚),%} f. state of high illusion.
<LEND>
[Page0148-c+ 75]

<L>10393<pc>0148-c<k1>utkF<k2>utkF
{#utkF#}¦ {%ut-kṝ (ud-k˚),%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kirati, -te,%}
{%-karitum%} or {%-rītum,%} to scatter upwards, pile up,
heap up; to dig up or out, excavate; to engrave.
<LEND>

<L>10394<pc>0148-c<k1>utkara<k2>utkara
{%Ut-kara, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} what piles or heaps,
what makes up or raises; ({%as%}), m. what is dug out,
rubbish; heap, multitude; a pile, a stack.
<LEND>

<L>10395<pc>0148-c<k1>utkarikA<k2>utkarikA
{%Ut-karikā,%}¦ f. a sort of sweetmeat made with milk,
treacle, and ghee.
<LEND>

<L>10396<pc>0148-c<k1>utkarIya<k2>utkarIya
{%Utkarīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to a
heap &c.
<LEND>

<L>10397<pc>0148-c<k1>utkAra<k2>utkAra
{%Ut-kāra, as,%}¦ m. winnowing corn; piling it up.
<LEND>

<L>10398<pc>0148-c<k1>utkArikA<k2>utkArikA
{%Ut-kārikā,%}¦ f. a poultice.
<LEND>

<L>10399<pc>0148-c<k1>utkIrRa<k2>utkIrRa
{%Ut-kīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ heaped up, scattered, dug
out, perforated.
<LEND>

<L>10400<pc>0148-c<k1>utkFt<k2>utkFt
{#utkFt#}¦ {%ut-kṝt (ud-k˚),%} cl. 10. P. {%-kīrtayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to proclaim, celebrate, praise, promulgate.
<LEND>

<L>10401<pc>0148-c<k1>utkIrtana<k2>utkIrtana
{%Ut-kīrtana, am,%}¦ n. crying out, proclaiming; prais-
ing, celebrating.
<LEND>

<L>10402<pc>0148-c<k1>utkIrtita<k2>utkIrtita
{%Ut-kīrtita, as, ā, am,%}¦ proclaimed, promulgated;
praised, celebrated, renowned.
<LEND>

<L>10403<pc>0148-c<k1>utkxp<k2>utkxp
{#utkxp#}¦ {%ut-kḷp (ud-k˚),%} Caus. P. {%-kalpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to form, fashion, create.
<LEND>

<L>10404<pc>0148-c<k1>utkoca<k2>utkoca
{#utkoca#}¦ {%ut-koca.%} See under {%ut-kuc.%}
<LEND>

<L>10405<pc>0148-c<k1>utkram<k2>utkram
{#utkram#}¦ {%ut-kram (ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. P. A., 4. P.
{%-krāmati, -kramate, -krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to
step up, go up, ascend; to step out, go out or away;
to pass away, die; to go over; pass over; omit; not to
notice; to neglect, transgress: Caus. P. {%-kramayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to go up or ascend: Desid. Ved.
{%-cikramiṣati%} or {%-cikramiṣyati,%} to wish to go up
or out.
<LEND>

<L>10406<pc>0148-c<k1>utkrama<k2>utkrama
{%Ut-krama, as,%}¦ m. going up or out; progressive
increase; going astray, acting improperly, deviation,
transgression.
<LEND>

<L>10407<pc>0148-c<k1>utkramaRa<k2>utkramaRa
{%Ut-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. going up or out, soaring
aloft, stepping out; surpassing, exceeding; ({%prāṇot-%}
{%kramaṇa, am,%} n. the flight of the soul.)
<LEND>

<L>10408<pc>0148-c<k1>utkramaRIya<k2>utkramaRIya
{%Ut-kramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be abandoned, to
be given up.
<LEND>

<L>10409<pc>0148-c<k1>utkrAnta<k2>utkrAnta
{%Ut-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forth or out, gone over
or beyond, passed, surpassed; trespassing, exceeding.
<LEND>

<L>10410<pc>0148-c<k1>utkrAnti<k2>utkrAnti
{%Ut-krānti, is,%}¦ f. stepping up to, going out.
<LEND>

<L>10411<pc>0148-c<k1>utkrAntin<k2>utkrAntin
{%Utkrāntin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ passing, passing away, gone,
departed.
<LEND>

<L>10412<pc>0148-c<k1>utkrAma<k2>utkrAma
{%Ut-krāma, as,%}¦ m. going from or out, going above,
surpassing, deviating from propriety, transgression;
opposition, contrariety.
<LEND>

<L>10413<pc>0148-c<k1>utkrAmat<k2>utkrAmat
{%Ut-krāmat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going out, going over
or above, surpassing.
<LEND>

<L>10414<pc>0148-c<k1>utkruS<k2>utkruS
{#utkruS#}¦ {%ut-kruś (ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati,%}
{%-kroṣṭum,%} to cry out, to call to (with acc.), ex-
claim; proclaim.
<LEND>

<L>10415<pc>0148-c<k1>utkruzwa<k2>utkruzwa
{%Ut-kruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crying, speaking out or
aloud; ({%am%}), n. crying out, calling, exclaiming, con-
versation.
<LEND>

<L>10416<pc>0148-c<k1>utkroSa<k2>utkroSa
{%Ut-krośa, as,%}¦ m. clamour, outcry, proclamation;
an osprey.
<LEND>

<L>10417<pc>0148-c<k1>utkroda<k2>utkroda
{#utkroda#}¦ {%ut-kroda, as,%} m. (fr. {%krud = kurd%}
with {%ud%} ?), Ved. exultation (?); cf. {%ut-kūrd.%}
<LEND>

<L>10418<pc>0148-c<k1>utkliS<k2>utkliS
{#utkliS#}¦ {%ut-kliś (ud-k˚),%} cl. 9. P. {%-kliśnāti,%}
{%-kleśitum%} or {%-kleṣṭum,%} to feel uneasy, to be uncom-
fortable or distressed: Caus. P. {%-kleśayati, -yitum,%}
to excite, stir up, expel.
<LEND>

<L>10419<pc>0148-c<k1>utkleSa<k2>utkleSa
{%Ut-kleśa, as,%}¦ m. excitement, disquietude; disorder
or corruption of the humors (of the body); sickness,
nausea.
<LEND>

<L>10420<pc>0148-c<k1>utkleSaka<k2>utkleSaka
{%Ut-kleśaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of poisonous insect.
<LEND>

<L>10421<pc>0148-c<k1>utkleSana<k2>utkleSana
{%Ut-kleśana, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%ut-kleśin, ī, inī, i,%}
exciting, stirring up, causing disorder (e. g. {%kaphot-%}
{%kleśin,%} exciting phlegm).
<LEND>

<L>10422<pc>0148-c<k1>utkleda<k2>utkleda
{#utkleda#}¦ {%ut-kleda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%klid%} with
{%ud%}), the becoming wet or moist.
<LEND>

<L>10423<pc>0148-c<k1>utkledin<k2>utkledin
{%Ut-kledin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wet, becoming moist.
<LEND>

<L>10424<pc>0148-c<k1>utkvaT<k2>utkvaT
{#utkvaT#}¦ {%ut-kvath (ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-kvathati,%}
{%-thitum,%} to boil out, extract by boiling &c.
<LEND>
[Page0149-a+ 72]

<L>10425<pc>0149-a<k1>utkzip<k2>utkzip
{#utkzip#}¦ {%ut-kṣip (ud-k˚),%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣi-%}
{%pati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw up, raise, set up, erect;
to throw away, reject, get rid of, vomit up.
<LEND>

<L>10426<pc>0149-a<k1>utkzipta<k2>utkzipta
{%Ut-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown upwards, tossed,
raised; thrown out, ejected; vomited; rejected, dis-
missed; ({%as%}), m. the thorn apple (Datura Metel and
Fastuosa).
<LEND>

<L>10427<pc>0149-a<k1>utkziptikA<k2>utkziptikA
{%Utkṣiptikā,%}¦ f. an ornament in the shape of a
crescent worn in the upper part of the ear.
<LEND>

<L>10428<pc>0149-a<k1>utkzepa<k2>utkzepa
{%Ut-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. throwing or tossing up; throw-
ing away; sending, despatching; bringing up, vomit-
ing; the region above the temples; N. of a country;
also of a man.
<LEND>

<L>10429<pc>0149-a<k1>utkzepaka<k2>utkzepaka
{%Ut-kṣepaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ throwing, a thrower, who
or what elevates or raises; one who sends or orders;
({%as%}), m. a stealer of clothes &c.
<LEND>

<L>10430<pc>0149-a<k1>utkzepaRa<k2>utkzepaRa
{%Ut-kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. throwing upwards, tossing;
sending, sending away; vomiting, taking up; a kind
of basket or bowl used for cleaning corn; a fan; a
measure of sixteen panas.
<LEND>

<L>10431<pc>0149-a<k1>utKacita<k2>utKacita
{#utKacita#}¦ {%ut-khacita, as, ā, am,%} intermixed
with.
<LEND>

<L>10432<pc>0149-a<k1>utKan<k2>utKan
{#utKan#}¦ {%ut-khan (ud-kh˚),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-kha-%}
{%nati, -te, -nitum,%} to dig up or out, to excavate; to
tear out by the roots, root up; to draw or tear out;
to destroy entirely.
<LEND>

<L>10433<pc>0149-a<k1>utKAta<k2>utKAta
{%Ut-khāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dug up; excavated, eradicated,
pulled up by the roots; destroyed, annihilated; ({%am%}),
n. a hole, a cavity, a deepening, uneven ground.
<LEND>

<L>10434<pc>0149-a<k1>utKAtin<k2>utKAtin
{%Utkhātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having cavities or holes, un-
even; destructive.
<LEND>

<L>10435<pc>0149-a<k1>utKarin<k2>utKarin
{#utKarin#}¦ {%ut-kharin, ī,%} m., N. of a deity;
(a various reading has {%utkali.%})
<LEND>

<L>10436<pc>0149-a<k1>utKalA<k2>utKalA
{#utKalA#}¦ {%utkhalā,%} f. (fr. {%ud%} and {%khala?%}), a
kind of perfume.
<LEND>

<L>10437<pc>0149-a<k1>utKid<k2>utKid
{#utKid#}¦ {%ut-khid (ud-kh˚),%} cl. 6. P. {%-khindati%}
(Ved. {%-khidati%}), {%-khettum,%} to draw out, extract.
<LEND>

<L>10438<pc>0149-a<k1>utta<k2>utta
{#utta#}¦ {%utta, as, ā, am,%} wet, moistened. See
2. {%ud,%} page 153.
<LEND>

<L>10439<pc>0149-a<k1>uttaMsa<k2>uttaMsa
{#uttaMsa#}¦ {%ut-taṃsa, as, am,%} m. n. (rt. {%taṃs%}), an
earring; a crest, a chaplet, a wreath worn on the
crown of the head.
<LEND>

<L>10440<pc>0149-a<k1>uttaMsika<k2>uttaMsika
{%Uttaṃsika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>10441<pc>0149-a<k1>uttaMsita<k2>uttaMsita
{%Uttaṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having earrings, crested.
<LEND>

<L>10442<pc>0149-a<k1>uttakz<k2>uttakz
{#uttakz#}¦ {%ut-takṣ (ud-t˚),%} cl. 1. 5. P., Ved.
{%-takṣati, -kṣṇoti, -kṣitum%} or {%-taṣṭum,%} to form
(anything) out of any other thing; (Sāy.) to take
(anything) out of any other thing.
<LEND>

<L>10443<pc>0149-a<k1>uttaNga<k2>uttaNga
{#uttaNga#}¦ {%uttaṅga, as,%} m., N. of a servant of
Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>10444<pc>0149-a<k1>uttawa<k2>uttawa
{#uttawa#}¦ {%ut-taṭa, as, ā, am,%} overflowing its
banks (as a river).
<LEND>

<L>10445<pc>0149-a<k1>uttan<k2>uttan
{#uttan#}¦ {%ut-tan (ud-t˚),%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-tanoti,%}
{%-nute, -nitum,%} to stretch upwards, stretch out; en-
deavour to rise.
<LEND>

<L>10446<pc>0149-a<k1>uttAna<k2>uttAna
{%Ut-tāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ stretched out, spread out,
lying on the back, sleeping supinely or with the face
upwards; upright; turned so that the mouth or
opening is uppermost (as a vessel), concave; spread-
ing out over the surface; shallow; open. {%—Uttāna-%}
{%kūrmaka, am,%} n. a particular posture in sitting. {%—Ut-%}
{%tāna-pattraka, as,%} m. a species of Ricinus. {%—Ut-%}
{%tāna-pad,%} f., Ved. one whose legs are extended (in
parturition or creation); epithet of a peculiar creative
agency described in Ṛg-veda X. 72; (Sāy.) vegetation,
the whole creation of upward-germinating plants. {%—Ut-%}
{%tāna-parṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having extended leaves.
{%—Uttāna-pāda, as,%} m. the star ß in the little bear,
personified as son of Vīra or Manu Svāyambhuva and
father of Dhruva, the polar-star. {%—Uttānapāda-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. a N. of Dhruva or the polar-star. {%—Uttāna-%}
{%barhis, is,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Uttāna-śaya, as, %}
[Page0149-b+ 78]
{%ā, am,%} lying on the back, sleeping with the face up-
wards; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a little child. {%—Uttāna-śīvan,%}
{%ā, arī, a,%} Ved. lying extended, stagnant. {%—Uttāna-%}
{%hasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the hands extended,
extending them in prayer; ({%au%}), m. du. the two
hands with the fingers stretched out, but with the
backs towards the ground.
<LEND>

<L>10447<pc>0149-b<k1>uttAnaka<k2>uttAnaka
{%Uttānaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of Cyperus grass.
<LEND>

<L>10448<pc>0149-b<k1>uttAnikA<k2>uttAnikA
{%Uttānikā,%}¦ f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>10449<pc>0149-b<k1>uttap<k2>uttap
{#uttap#}¦ {%ut-tap (ud-t˚),%} cl. 1. P. rarely A.
{%-tapati, -te, -ptum,%} to make warm or hot, to heat
thoroughly; to pain, torment; to excite, urge on,
press hard: Caus. P. {%-tāpayati, -yitum,%} to warm
up, heat.
<LEND>

<L>10450<pc>0149-b<k1>uttapta<k2>uttapta
{%Ut-tapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ burnt, seared; bathed, washed;
anxious, excited; ({%am%}), n. dried flesh.
<LEND>

<L>10451<pc>0149-b<k1>uttApa<k2>uttApa
{%Ut-tāpa, as,%}¦ m. great heat, affliction, distress,
anxiety, excitement, ardour, effort, energy.
<LEND>

<L>10452<pc>0149-b<k1>uttApita<k2>uttApita
{%Ut-tāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heated, made hot, pained,
distressed, roused, excited.
<LEND>

<L>10453<pc>0149-b<k1>uttam<k2>uttam
{#uttam#}¦ {%ut-tam (ud-t˚),%} cl. 4. P. {%-tāmyati,%}
{%-tamitum,%} to be distressed, to lose heart, to faint.
<LEND>

<L>10454<pc>0149-b<k1>uttama<k2>uttama
{#uttama#}¦ {%ut-tama, as, ā, am%} (superlative fr. 1. {%ud;%}
opposed to {%avama, adhama,%} &c.; cf. {%an-uttama%}),
uppermost, highest, chief; most elevated, principal;
best, excellent (often at the end of compounds, e. g.
{%dvijottamas,%} best of the twice-born); first, greatest;
the highest (tone); the most removed or last in place,
order, or time; ({%am%}), ind. most, in the highest de-
gree; ({%as%}), m. the last person (= in European gram-
mars the first person); N. of a brother of Dhruva,
son of Uttāna-pāda and nephew of Priya-vrata; a
son of Priya-vrata and third Manu; the twenty-first
Vyāsa; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a kind
of piḍakā or pustule; the plant Oxystelma Esculentum
(Asclepias Rosea Roxb.); an excellent woman, one
who is handsome, healthy, and affectionate. {%—Ut-%}
{%tama-gandhāḍhya (˚dha-āḍh˚), as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessing abundantly the most delicate scent or delicious
fragrance. {%—Uttama-tā,%} f. or {%uttama-tva, am,%} n.
excellence, superiority; goodness, good quality. {%—Ut-%}
{%tama-pada, am,%} n. a high office. {%—Uttama-puru-%}
{%ṣa%} or {%uttama-pūruṣa, as,%} m. the last person in
verbal conjugation, i. e. I, we two, we (= in European
grammars the first person, our third person being re-
garded in Hindū grammars as the {%prathama-puruṣa,%}
q. v.; cf. also {%madhyama-puruṣa%}); the supreme
spirit; an excellent man. {%—Uttama-phalinī,%} f. the
plant Oxystelma Esculentum (Asclepias Rosea Roxb.).
{%—Uttamarṇa (˚ma-ṛṇa), as,%} m. a creditor; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Uttamarṇika, as,%} m. a
creditor. {%—Uttamarṇin, ī,%} m. a creditor. {%—Uttama-%}
{%lābha, as,%} m. great profit, a double return. {%—Ut-%}
{%tama-veśa, as,%} m. ‘having the most excellent dress,’
N. of Śiva. {%—Uttama-śākha, as,%} m., N. of a region.
{%—Uttama-saṅgraha, as,%} m. intriguing with another
man's wife, addressing her privately, casting amorous
looks &c. {%—Uttama-sāhasa, am,%} n. the highest of
the three fixed mulcts or fines; a fine of 1000 or of
80,000 paṇas; capital punishment, branding, banish-
ment, confiscation, mutilation, and death. {%—Uttama-%}
{%sukha, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Uttamāṅga (˚ma-%}
{%aṅ˚), am,%} n. the highest or chief part of the body,
the head. {%—Uttamādhama (˚ma-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
high and low. {%—Uttamādhama-madhyama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} good, bad, and indifferent; high, low, and
middling. {%—Uttamāraṇī (˚ma-ar˚),%} f. the plant As-
paragus Racemosus. {%—Uttamārdha (˚ma-ar˚), as,%} m.
the last half or part; the best half. {%—Uttamārdhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating to or connected with the last part
or the best half. {%—Uttamāha (˚ma-ah˚), as,%} m. the
last or latest day, a fine day (?), a lucky day (?). {%—Ut-%}
{%tamopapada (˚ma-up˚), as, ā, am,%} one to whom
the best term is applicable, best, good. {%—Uttamaujas%}
{%(˚ma-oj˚), ās,%} m. ‘of excellent valour,’ N. of one of
the warriors of the Mahā-bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>10455<pc>0149-b<k1>uttamAyya<k2>uttamAyya
{%Uttamāyya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fut. pass. part. fr. a nom.
{%uttamāya%} ?), Ved. to be raised or celebrated.
<LEND>
[Page0149-c+ 81]

<L>10456<pc>0149-c<k1>uttamIya<k2>uttamIya
{%Uttamīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ uppermost, highest, chief,
best.
<LEND>

<L>10457<pc>0149-c<k1>uttara<k2>uttara<h>1
1. {%ut-tara, as, ā, am%}¦ (comparative fr. 1. {%ud;%} opposed
to {%adhara;%} declined Gram. 238. <nsi>a</nsi>), upper, higher,
superior (e. g. {%uttare dantās,%} the upper teeth);
northern (because the northern part of India is high);
left (opposed to {%dakṣiṇa%} or right, because in pray-
ing the face being turned to the east the north would
be on the left-hand); later, following, subsequent,
latter, concluding, posterior, future (opposed to {%pūrva,%}
&c., e. g. {%uttaraḥ kālaḥ,%} future time; {%uttaraṃ%}
{%vākyam,%} a following speech, answer, reply; {%phalam%}
{%uttaram,%} subsequent result, future consequence;
{%varṣottareṣu,%} in future years); superior, chief,
excellent, dominant, predominant, more powerful;
better, more excellent; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of
Virāṭa; a king of the Nāgas; N. of a mountain;
({%ā%}), f. the north (i. e. the northern {%diś%} or quarter);
N. of a daughter of Virāṭa and daughter-in-law of
Arjuna; ({%am%}), n. upper surface or cover; the north;
the following member, the last part of a compound;
answer, reply; (in law) a defence, a rejoinder; (in
the Mimāṃsā philosophy) the answer, the fourth
member of an adhikaraṇa or case; superiority, ex-
cellence, competency; result, the chief or prevalent
result or characteristic, what remains or is left, con-
clusion, remainder, excess, over and above, (often
at the end of a compound, e. g. {%ṣaṣṭyuttaraṃ%}
{%sahasram,%} one thousand with an excess of sixty, i. e.
1060; {%saptottaraṃ śatam,%} 107; {%bhayottara,%} at-
tended with danger, having danger as the result;
{%dharmottara,%} chiefly characterized by virtue); re-
mainder, difference (in arithmetic); N. of a song;
({%am%}), ind. at the conclusion, at the end, e. g. {%bhavad-%}
{%uttaram,%} with the word ‘bhavad’ at the end; {%asrot-%}
{%taram īkṣitā,%} looked at with tears at the end, i. e.
with a glance ending in tears; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὕστερος</lang>.]
{%—Uttara-kāṇḍa, am,%} n. following or concluding
book; the seventh book of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Uttara-%}
{%kāya, as,%} m. the upper part of the body. {%—Uttara-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. future time; time reckoned from full
moon to full moon. {%—Uttara-kuru, us%} or {%u,%} m. n. one
of the nine divisions of the world, the country of the
northern Kurus, situated in the north of India, and
described as the country of eternal beatitude. {%—Ut-%}
{%tara-kośalā,%} f. the city Ayodhyā, the modern Oude.
{%—Uttara-kriyā,%} f. the last sacred action, funeral
rites, obsequies. {%—Uttara-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. last section;
the concluding book of the Padma-purāṇa, also of the
Śiva-purāṇa. {%—Uttara-khaṇḍana, am,%} n. cutting off
a reply, refutation. {%—Uttara-grantha, as,%} m. title of
a supplement of the Yoni-grantha. {%—1. uttaraṅ-ga,%}
{%am,%} n. a wooden arch surmounting the door frame.
{%—Uttara-cchada, as,%} m. a cover, what is thrown
over anything. {%—Uttara-ja, as, ā, am,%} born in the
latter (or last-mentioned kind of wedlock); born
subsequently or afterwards, posterity. {%—Uttara-jyā,%}
f. the versed sine of an arc, or rather the second half
of the chord halved by the versed sine. {%—Uttara-%}
{%jyotiṣa, am,%} n., N. of a country. {%—Uttara-tantra,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘concluding doctrine,’ N. of a supplementary
section in the medical manual of Suśruta. {%—Uttara-%}
{%tara, as, ā, am%} (compar. fr. {%uttara%}), still further
removed, still more distant, still higher. {%—Uttara-%}
{%tas,%} ind. at the top, above, from the north, north-
ward, to the left (opposed to {%dakṣiṇa-tas%}); after-
wards; behind. {%—Uttarataḥ-paścāt,%} ind. north-
westward (with gen.). {%—Uttara-tāpanīya,%} title of
the second part of the Nṛsiṃha-tāpanīyopaniṣad.
{%—Uttara-tra,%} ind. in what follows, after, subse-
quently, later, further on, beyond, below (in a work),
northward; ({%pūrvatra uttaratra,%} in the first case or
place — in the second.) {%—Uttara-dāyaka, as, ā, am,%}
replying, giving an answer, impertinent. {%—Uttaradik-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} situated in the north, northern.
{%—Uttara-diś, k,%} f. the north quarter. {%—Uttara-%}
{%deśa, as,%} m. the country towards the north, the up-
country. {%—Uttara-dheya, as, ā, am,%} to be done
subsequently. {%—Uttara-pakṣa, as,%} m. the northern
or left wing (side); second or following part of an
argument, the reason {%pro,%} the reply, refutation;
[Page0150-a+ 81]
the answer to the first or objectionable argument, the
right argument, demonstrated truth, or conclusion; the
minor proposition in a syllogism. {%—Uttarapakṣa-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%uttarapakṣa-tva, am,%} n. conclusion, de-
monstration, reply. {%—Uttara-paṭa, as,%} m. an upper
garment. {%—Uttara-patha, as,%} m. the northern way,
the way leading to the north. {%—Uttarapathika,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} inhabiting the northern country. {%—Ut-%}
{%tara-pada, am,%} n. the last member of a com-
pound word. {%—Uttarapadika, as, ī, am,%} or {%uttara-%}
{%padakīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to or studying the
last word or term. {%—Uttara-parvata, as,%} m. the
northern mountain. {%—Uttara-paścārdha (˚ca-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the north-western half. {%—Uttara-paścima,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} north-western; ({%ā%}), f. the north-west
(scil. {%diś%}). {%—Uttara-pāda, as,%} m. a division of legal
practice, that part which relates to the reply or de-
fence, four divisions being admitted in every suit.
{%—Uttara-purastāt,%} ind. north-eastward (with gen.).
{%—Uttara-puruṣa, as,%} m. {%= uttama-puruṣa%} (?).
{%—Uttara-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} north-eastward; one who
takes the north for the east. {%—Uttara-pracchada,%}
{%as,%} m. a coverlid, a quilt. {%—Uttara-pratyuttara,%}
{%am,%} n. a dispute, an altercation, a discussion; the
pleadings in a law-suit. {%—Uttara-phalgunī%} or {%utta-%}
{%ra-phālgunī,%} f. the twelfth lunar mansion, containing
two stars, figured by a bed. {%—Uttara-bhādrapad, t,%}
f. or {%uttara-bhādrapadā,%} f. the twenty-sixth lunar
mansion, figured by a couch, and comprehending two
stars, of which one is {%a%} Andromedæ. {%—Uttara-mati,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Uttara-mandrā,%} f. a loud but
slow manner of singing. {%—Uttara-mātra, am,%} n. a
mere reply, even a reply. {%—Uttara-mānasa, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Uttara-mīmāṃsā,%} f. the Vedānta
philosophy, an inquiry into the Jñāna-kāṇḍa or second
portion of the Veda (opposed to {%pūrva-mīmāṃsā;%}
see {%mīmāṃsā%}). {%—Uttara-rahita, as, ā, am,%} devoid
of reply, having no answer. {%—Uttara-rāma-carita%} or
{%-caritra, am,%} n. ‘the further or later deeds of Rāma,’
title of a drama of Bhavabhūti. {%—Uttara-lakṣaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the indication of an actual reply; ({%as, ā, am%}),
marked on the left side. {%—Uttara-loman, ā, ā, a,%}
having the hairs turned upwards or outwards. {%—Uttara-%}
{%vayasa, am,%} n. the latter or declining years of life.
{%—Uttara-vallī,%} f. title of the second section of the
Kāṭhakopaniṣad when divided into two Adhyāyas.
{%—Uttara-vasti, is,%} f. a small syringe, a urethra
injection pipe. {%—Uttara-vastra, am,%} n. an upper
garment. {%—Uttara-vādin, ī,%} m. a replicant; a de-
fendant; one whose claims are of later date than
another's. {%—Uttara-vāsas, as,%} n. an upper garment.
{%—Uttara-vedi, is%} or {%ī,%} f., Ved. the northern altar
made for the sacred fire. {%—Uttara-saktha, am,%} n.
the left thigh. {%—Uttara-sañjñita, as, ā, am,%} desig-
nated in the reply (a witness &c.); hear-say evidence,
see the next. {%—Uttara-sākṣin, ī,%} m. witness for the
defence; a witness testifying from the report of others.
{%—Uttara-sādhaka, as, ā, am,%} finishing what re-
mains or follows, assisting at a ceremony, befriending;
an assistant, a helper, a friend; who or what establishes
a reply. {%—Uttara-hanu, us,%} m., Ved. the upper jaw-
bone. {%—Uttarādhara (˚ra-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} superior
and inferior, higher and lower; ({%am%}), n. the upper
and under lip; the lips; see {%adharottara%}. {%—Uttarā-%}
{%dhikāra (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m. right to property &c.
in succession to another person, heirship, inheritance.
{%—Uttarādhikāri-tā,%} f. or {%uttarādhikāri-tva, am,%}
n. right of succession. {%—Uttarādhikārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
an heir or claimant subsequent to the death of the
original owner, an heir who claims as the second
in succession. {%—Uttarānvita (˚rā-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
accompanied by Uttarā. {%—Uttarā-patha, am,%} n. the
northern road or direction, the northern country,
north. {%—Uttarābhāsa (˚ra-ābh˚), as,%} m. a false,
indirect or prevaricating reply. {%—Uttarābhāsa-tā,%} f.
or {%uttarābhāsa-tva, am,%} n. inadequacy of a reply,
the semblance without the reality. {%—Uttarāyaṇa%}
{%(˚ra-ay˚), am,%} n. the progress (of the sun) to the
north; the period of the sun's progress to the north
of the equator, the summer solstice. {%—Uttarāraṇi%}
{%(˚ra-ar˚), is%} or {%ī,%} m. f. the upper {%araṇi%} (q. v.) which
[Page0150-b+ 75]
by cutting becomes the {%pramantha%} or churner. {%—Ut-%}
{%tarārtha (˚ra-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} for the sake of what
follows. {%—Uttarārdha (˚ra-ar˚), am,%} n. the upper
part (of the body); the northern part; the latter
half; the further end. {%—Uttarārdhya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. being on the northern side. {%—Uttarā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. victorious, overpowering. {%—Uttarāśā%}
{%(˚ra-āśā),%} f. the northern quarter, the north. {%—Ut-%}
{%tarāśādhipati (˚śā-adh˚)%} or {%uttarāśā-pati, is,%}
m. the regent of the northern quarter, an epithet of
Kuvera. {%—Uttarāśman (˚ra-aś˚), ā,%} m., N. of a
rocky river in the north. {%—Uttarāṣāḍhā (˚ra-aṣ˚),%}
f. the twenty-first of the lunar mansions, figured by
an elephant's tooth or a bed, and containing two stars,
one of which is ß in Sagittarius. {%—Uttarāsaṅga%}
{%(˚ra-ās˚), as,%} m. an upper or outer garment. {%—Ut-%}
{%tarāha (˚ra-ah˚), as,%} m. the following day. {%—Ut-%}
{%taretarā (˚ra-it˚),%} f. the southern quarter. {%—Ut-%}
{%tarottara (˚ra-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} more and more,
higher and higher, further and further; always in-
creasing, always following; ({%am%}), ind. higher and
higher, more and more, in constant continuation,
one on the other; ({%am%}), n. reply to an answer, reply
on reply; conversation; a rejoinder; excess, exceed-
ing quantity or degree; succession, gradation; de-
scending. {%—Uttarottarin, ī, iṇī, i,%} constantly in-
creasing; one following the other. {%—Uttaroṣṭha%} or
{%uttarauṣṭha (˚ra-oṣ˚), as,%} m. the upper lip.
<LEND>

<L>10458<pc>0150-b<k1>uttaram<k2>uttaram
{%Uttaram,%}¦ ind. further on, forward; hereafter, in
the following part (of a book).
<LEND>

<L>10459<pc>0150-b<k1>uttarA<k2>uttarA
{%Uttarā,%}¦ ind. north, northerly, northward (with
gen. or abl.). {%—Uttarā-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. seated north-
ward or on the left.
<LEND>

<L>10460<pc>0150-b<k1>uttarAt<k2>uttarAt
{%Uttarāt,%}¦ ind. from the left, from the north, north-
ward.
<LEND>

<L>10461<pc>0150-b<k1>uttarAttAt<k2>uttarAttAt
{%Uttarāttāt,%}¦ ind., Ved. from the north.
<LEND>

<L>10462<pc>0150-b<k1>uttarAhi<k2>uttarAhi
{%Uttarāhi,%}¦ ind. northerly, from the north (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>10463<pc>0150-b<k1>uttarin<k2>uttarin
{%Uttarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ superior.
<LEND>

<L>10464<pc>0150-b<k1>uttarIya<k2>uttarIya
{%Uttarīya%}¦ or {%uttarīyaka, am,%} n. an upper or outer
garment.
<LEND>

<L>10465<pc>0150-b<k1>uttareRa<k2>uttareRa
{%Uttareṇa,%}¦ ind. (with gen., abl., acc., or at the
end of a compound) northward, on the left side of;
posterior, subsequent.
<LEND>

<L>10466<pc>0150-b<k1>uttaredyus<k2>uttaredyus
{%Uttare-dyus,%}¦ ind. a subsequent day, a day following,
to-morrow.
<LEND>

<L>10467<pc>0150-b<k1>uttamarRa<k2>uttamarRa
{#uttamarRa#}¦ {%uttamarṇa.%} See under {%ut-tama.%}
<LEND>

<L>10468<pc>0150-b<k1>uttamB<k2>uttamB
{#uttamB#}¦ {%ut-tambh (ud-stambh),%} cl. 5. 9. P.
{%-tabhnoti, -nāti, -tambhitum,%} to stay, prop, support.
<LEND>

<L>10469<pc>0150-b<k1>uttamBana<k2>uttamBana
{%Ut-tambhana, am,%}¦ n. upholding, staying, support-
ing; stopping, arresting; a prop, a stay.
<LEND>

<L>10470<pc>0150-b<k1>uttamBita<k2>uttamBita
{%Ut-tambhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ upheld, supported; stopped,
arrested; erect (as the hair of the head), standing on end.
<LEND>

<L>10471<pc>0150-b<k1>uttamBitavya<k2>uttamBitavya
{%Ut-tambhitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be upheld.
<LEND>

<L>10472<pc>0150-b<k1>uttara<k2>uttara
{#uttara#}¦ {%ut-tara.%} See above and under {%ut-tṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>10473<pc>0150-b<k1>uttaraNga<k2>uttaraNga<h>2
{#uttaraNga#} 2¦. {%ut-taraṅga, as, ā, am%} (for 1. see
under 1. {%ut-tara,%} p. 149), flooded, inundated, washed
over by waves.
<LEND>

<L>10474<pc>0150-b<k1>uttarjana<k2>uttarjana
{#uttarjana#}¦ {%ut-tarjana, am,%} n. violent threat-
ening.
<LEND>

<L>10475<pc>0150-b<k1>uttAna<k2>uttAna
{#uttAna#}¦ {%ut-tāna.%} See under {%ut-tan,%} p. 149.
<LEND>

<L>10476<pc>0150-b<k1>uttApa<k2>uttApa
{#uttApa#}¦ {%ut-tāpa.%} See under {%ut-tap,%} p. 149.
<LEND>

<L>10477<pc>0150-b<k1>uttAra<k2>uttAra
{#uttAra#}¦ {%ut-tāra.%} See under {%ut-tṝ%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>10478<pc>0150-b<k1>uttAla<k2>uttAla
{#uttAla#}¦ {%ut-tāla, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ud%} and {%tāla?%}),
great, strong; formidable; arduous, difficult; speedy,
swift, best, excellent; elevated, lofty, tall, loud; ({%as%}),
m. an ape; ({%am%}), n. a particular number.
<LEND>

<L>10479<pc>0150-b<k1>uttij<k2>uttij
{#uttij#}¦ {%ut-tij (ud-t˚),%} Caus. P. {%-tejayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to excite, stimulate, incite, instigate, urge
on, stir up, animate.
<LEND>

<L>10480<pc>0150-b<k1>uttejaka<k2>uttejaka
{%Ut-tejaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ instigating, stimulating.
<LEND>

<L>10481<pc>0150-b<k1>uttejana<k2>uttejana
{%Ut-tejana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. incitement, instigation, excit-
ing, animating; sending, despatching; urging, driving;
whetting, sharpening, furbishing, polishing; an in-
spiring or exciting speech; an incentive, inducement,
stimulant.
<LEND>
[Page0150-c+ 74]

<L>10482<pc>0150-c<k1>uttejita<k2>uttejita
{%Ut-tejita, as, ā, am,%}¦ incited, animated, excited,
urged; sent, despatched; whetted, sharpened, fur-
bished, polished; ({%am%}), n. an incentive, inducement;
sidling, one of a horse's five paces; moderate velocity
in a horse's pace.
<LEND>

<L>10483<pc>0150-c<k1>uttu<k2>uttu
{#uttu#}¦ {%ut-tu (ud-tu),%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-tavīti%} or
{%-tauti, -totum%} or {%-tavitum,%} to effect, bring about;
(Sāy.) to increase, prosper.
<LEND>

<L>10484<pc>0150-c<k1>uttuNga<k2>uttuNga
{#uttuNga#}¦ {%ut-tuṅga, as, ā, am,%} lofty, high, tall,
swollen (as a stream). {%—Uttuṅga-tā,%} f. or {%uttuṅga-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. height, loftiness, elevation.
<LEND>

<L>10485<pc>0150-c<k1>uttuRqita<k2>uttuRqita
{#uttuRqita#}¦ {%ut-tuṇḍita, am,%} n. the head of a
thorn &c. which has entered the skin.
<LEND>

<L>10486<pc>0150-c<k1>uttud<k2>uttud
{#uttud#}¦ {%ut-tud (ud-t˚),%} cl. 6. P. A., Ved.
{%-tudati, -te, -tottum,%} to push up, tear up, stir up,
push open.
<LEND>

<L>10487<pc>0150-c<k1>uttuda<k2>uttuda
{%Ut-tuda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who stirs up.
<LEND>

<L>10488<pc>0150-c<k1>uttul<k2>uttul
{#uttul#}¦ {%ut-tul (ud-t˚),%} cl. 10. P. {%-tolayati%}
or {%-tulayati, -yitum,%} to raise up (by means of a
counterpoise), to erect, set up; to weigh.
<LEND>

<L>10489<pc>0150-c<k1>uttolana<k2>uttolana
{%Ut-tolana, am,%}¦ n. lifting up, raising, elevating (by
means of a counterpoise or balance).
<LEND>

<L>10490<pc>0150-c<k1>uttolita<k2>uttolita
{%Ut-tolita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, lifted up.
<LEND>

<L>10491<pc>0150-c<k1>uttuza<k2>uttuza
{#uttuza#}¦ {%ut-tuṣa, as,%} m. fried grain; (freed
from the husks.)
<LEND>

<L>10492<pc>0150-c<k1>uttfd<k2>uttfd
{#uttfd#}¦ {%ut-tṛd (ud-t˚),%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-tṛṇatti,%}
{%tṛnte, -tarditum,%} to split, cut through.
<LEND>

<L>10493<pc>0150-c<k1>uttF<k2>uttF
{#uttF#}¦ {%ut-tṝ (ud-t˚),%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%-tarati,%}
{%-tirati, -taritum%} or {%-rītum,%} to pass out of (especially
{%jalāt,%} the water &c., with abl. c.), to disembark, to
come out of; to escape from (a misfortune, affliction,
&c.); to come down, descend, alight, put up at; to
pass over; to cross (as a river, with acc.), to vanquish;
to give up, leave; to elevate, strengthen, increase:
Caus. {%-tārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to come out, to
deliver, assist, rescue; to make any one alight, take
down, take off; to cause to pass over, to convey or
transport across, land, disembark; to vomit up: Desid.
{%-titīrṣati,%} to wish to cross.
<LEND>

<L>10494<pc>0150-c<k1>uttara<k2>uttara<h>2
2. {%ut-tara, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 149, col. 3),
crossing over; to be crossed (in the word {%dur-uttara,%}
difficult to be come out of or escaped from).
<LEND>

<L>10495<pc>0150-c<k1>uttaraRa<k2>uttaraRa
{%Ut-taraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming out of, crossing
over; ({%am%}), n. coming forth or out of (especially out
of water), landing, disembarking; crossing rivers &c.
<LEND>

<L>10496<pc>0150-c<k1>uttarat<k2>uttarat
{%Ut-tarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ coming out of (water &c.),
crossing, going over.
<LEND>

<L>10497<pc>0150-c<k1>uttarikA<k2>uttarikA
{%Ut-tarikā,%}¦ f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>10498<pc>0150-c<k1>uttAra<k2>uttAra
{%Ut-tāra, as,%}¦ m. transporting over; landing; deli-
vering, rescuing; ejecting, getting rid of; vomiting;
passing away, instability; ({%as, ā, am%}), surpassing
others, excellent, pre-eminent. {%—Uttāra-locana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the eyes turned up.
<LEND>

<L>10499<pc>0150-c<k1>uttAraka<k2>uttAraka
{%Ut-tāraka, as,%}¦ m. a deliverer, epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>10500<pc>0150-c<k1>uttAraRa<k2>uttAraRa
{%Ut-tāraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ transporting over, bringing
over, rescuing; ({%am%}), n. the act of landing, delivering,
rescuing, helping to cross over or escape, transportation.
<LEND>

<L>10501<pc>0150-c<k1>uttArin<k2>uttArin
{%Ut-tārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ transporting across; unsteady;
inconstant, changeable, tremulous, sick.
<LEND>

<L>10502<pc>0150-c<k1>uttArya<k2>uttArya
{%Ut-tārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made to land, to be
ejected, to be thrown up by vomiting.
<LEND>

<L>10503<pc>0150-c<k1>uttitIrzu<k2>uttitIrzu
{%Ut-titīrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ about to pass out of (water),
wishing to land.
<LEND>

<L>10504<pc>0150-c<k1>uttIram<k2>uttIram
{%Ut-tīram,%}¦ ind. on the bank, on land, ashore.
<LEND>

<L>10505<pc>0150-c<k1>uttIrRa<k2>uttIrRa
{%Ut-tīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ landed, crossed, traversed;
rescued, liberated, escaped; released from obligation;
thrown off; one who has completed his studies, ex-
perienced, clever.
<LEND>

<L>10506<pc>0150-c<k1>uttIrya<k2>uttIrya
{%Ut-tīrya,%}¦ ind. having crossed, having landed.
<LEND>

<L>10507<pc>0150-c<k1>utterita<k2>utterita
{#utterita#}¦ {%utterita, am,%} n. (said to be fr. {%ut-%}
{%tṝ,%} but perhaps connected with rt. {%īr%}), one of the
five paces of a horse in Hindū jockeyship.
<LEND>

<L>10508<pc>0150-c<k1>uttoraRa<k2>uttoraRa
{#uttoraRa#}¦ {%ut-toraṇa, as, ā, am,%} decorated
with raised or upright arches.
<LEND>
[Page0151-a+ 76]

<L>10509<pc>0151-a<k1>uttolana<k2>uttolana
{#uttolana#}¦ {%ut-tolana.%} See under {%ut-tul.%}
<LEND>

<L>10510<pc>0151-a<k1>uttyakta<k2>uttyakta
{#uttyakta#}¦ {%ut-tyakta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%tyaj%} with
{%ud%}), abandoned, left; thrown, tossed; free from
passion or affection.
<LEND>

<L>10511<pc>0151-a<k1>uttyAga<k2>uttyAga
{%Ut-tyāga, as,%}¦ m. abandonment, quitting; throwing,
throwing up; secession from worldly attachments.
<LEND>

<L>10512<pc>0151-a<k1>uttras<k2>uttras
{#uttras#}¦ {%ut-tras (ud-t˚),%} Caus. P. {%-trāsayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to frighten, alarm.
<LEND>

<L>10513<pc>0151-a<k1>uttrasta<k2>uttrasta
{%Ut-trasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ frightened.
<LEND>

<L>10514<pc>0151-a<k1>uttrAsa<k2>uttrAsa
{%Ut-trāsa, as,%}¦ m. fear, terror.
<LEND>

<L>10515<pc>0151-a<k1>uttripada<k2>uttripada
{#uttripada#}¦ {%ut-tripada, am,%} n. an upright tripod.
<LEND>

<L>10516<pc>0151-a<k1>utTA<k2>utTA
{#utTA#}¦ {%ut-thā (ud-sthā),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-tiṣṭhati,%}
{%-te, -thātum,%} to stand up, rise, raise one's self; come
forth, arise, originate from; to rise (from the dead);
to become animated; to be active or brave; to make
efforts, take pains with, to excel: Caus. {%-thāpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to stand up, raise, set up, erect; to
lift up; to arouse, awaken, raise to life, make alive.
<LEND>

<L>10517<pc>0151-a<k1>uttizWamAna<k2>uttizWamAna
{%Ut-tiṣṭhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing up, rising;
increasing, augmenting.
<LEND>

<L>10518<pc>0151-a<k1>utTa<k2>utTa
{%Ut-tha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (generally at the end of a com-
pound) rising, arising; coming forth, originating,
derived from; standing up; ({%as%}), m. arising, coming
forth; [cf. Zend <nsi>usta.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>10519<pc>0151-a<k1>utTAtf<k2>utTAtf
{%Ut-thātṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who rises; resolving.
<LEND>

<L>10520<pc>0151-a<k1>utTAna<k2>utTAna
{%Ut-thāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of standing up or rising;
rising (of the moon &c.); resurrection; rising up
to depart; leaving off; starting on a warlike expedi-
tion; rise, origin; effort, exertion; manly exertion,
manhood; evacuating (by stool &c.); an army; joy,
pleasure; a book; a court-yard; a shed where sacri-
fices are offered; a term, a limit; business of a family
or realm, the care of subjects or dependants; reflection;
proximate cause of disease; ({%as, ā, am%}), causing to
arise or originate. {%—Utthāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} ready
for action. {%—Utthānaikādasī (˚na-ek˚),%} f. the eleventh
day in the light or former half of the month Kārttikā,
when Viṣṇu rises from his sleep.
<LEND>

<L>10521<pc>0151-a<k1>utTApaka<k2>utTApaka
{%Ut-thāpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ lifting up, causing to get
up, who or what raises &c.; exciting, animating.
<LEND>

<L>10522<pc>0151-a<k1>utTApana<k2>utTApana
{%Ut-thāpana, am,%}¦ n. causing to rise or get up;
raising, elevating; causing to leave (a house &c.,
with acc. of the person made to leave); causing to
come forth, bringing forth; exciting, instigating;
bringing about; causing to cease, finishing; (in
mathem.) the finding of the quantity sought, answer
to the question, substitution of a value; ({%ī%}), f. a con-
cluding verse ({%ṛc%}).
<LEND>

<L>10523<pc>0151-a<k1>utTApita<k2>utTApita
{%Ut-thāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, lifted up, elevated;
made to get up (from a seat, bed, &c.); aroused,
instigated.
<LEND>

<L>10524<pc>0151-a<k1>utTApya<k2>utTApya<h>1
1. {%ut-thāpya,%}¦ ind. having raised or caused to rise,
having roused or instigated.
<LEND>

<L>10525<pc>0151-a<k1>utTApya<k2>utTApya<h>2
2. {%ut-thāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be raised; Ved. to be
sent away.
<LEND>

<L>10526<pc>0151-a<k1>utTAya<k2>utTAya
{%Ut-thāya,%}¦ ind. having risen (from a seat &c.);
having risen (in rank &c.). {%—Utthāyotthāya (˚ya-%}
{%ut˚),%} every time one rises (from one's bed).
<LEND>

<L>10527<pc>0151-a<k1>utTAyin<k2>utTAyin
{%Ut-thāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ rising, coming forth, becom-
ing visible.
<LEND>

<L>10528<pc>0151-a<k1>utTita<k2>utTita
{%Ut-thita, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen or rising (as from a
seat &c.); arisen, born, produced; happened, occur-
ring; endeavouring, striving; advancing, increasing;
high, lofty, eminent; extended; N. of a Pragātha
consisting of ten Pādas. {%—Utthita-tā,%} f. state of
activity or of readiness to serve others. {%—Utthitān-%}
{%guli (˚ta-an˚), is,%} m. the palm of the hand with
the fingers extended.
<LEND>

<L>10529<pc>0151-a<k1>utTiti<k2>utTiti
{%Ut-thiti, is,%}¦ f. elevation, rising up.
<LEND>

<L>10530<pc>0151-a<k1>utpakzman<k2>utpakzman
{#utpakzman#}¦ {%ut-pakṣman, ā, ā, a,%} or {%ut-%}
{%pakṣmala, as, ā, am,%} with upraised eyelids.
<LEND>

<L>10531<pc>0151-a<k1>utpacizRu<k2>utpacizRu
{#utpacizRu#}¦ {%ut-paciṣṇu, us, us, u,%} apt to ripen
or cook.
<LEND>

<L>10532<pc>0151-a<k1>utpaw<k2>utpaw
{#utpaw#}¦ {%ut-paṭ (ud-p˚),%} Caus. {%-pāṭayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to tear up or out, root up, eradicate, extirpate.
<LEND>

<L>10533<pc>0151-a<k1>utpawa<k2>utpawa
{%Ut-paṭa, as,%}¦ m. sap issuing from the cleft of a tree.
<LEND>
[Page0151-b+ 77]

<L>10534<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAwa<k2>utpAwa
{%Ut-pāṭa, as,%}¦ m. pulling up by the roots, destroy-
ing; a disease of the external ear.
<LEND>

<L>10535<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAwaka<k2>utpAwaka
{%Ut-pāṭaka, as,%}¦ m. the above disease; ({%ikā%}), f. the
external bark of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>10536<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAwana<k2>utpAwana
{%Ut-pāṭana, am,%}¦ n. pulling up by the roots, eradi-
cating; destroying, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>10537<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAwita<k2>utpAwita
{%Ut-pāṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pulled up by the roots,
eradicated, torn out.
<LEND>

<L>10538<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAwin<k2>utpAwin
{%Ut-pāṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (often at the end of compounds)
eradicating, extirpating.
<LEND>

<L>10539<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAwya<k2>utpAwya
{%Ut-pāṭya,%}¦ ind. having plucked up.
<LEND>

<L>10540<pc>0151-b<k1>utpat<k2>utpat
{#utpat#}¦ {%ut-pat (ud-p˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -ti-%}
{%tum,%} to fly or jump up, to rise, to be produced, ori-
ginate: Caus. {%-pātayati, -yitum,%} to cause to fly up.
<LEND>

<L>10541<pc>0151-b<k1>utpata<k2>utpata
{%Ut-pata, as,%}¦ m. a bird; going upwards or up.
{%—Utpata-nipatā,%} f. flying up and down.
<LEND>

<L>10542<pc>0151-b<k1>utpatat<k2>utpatat
{%Ut-patat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flying upwards or onwards.
<LEND>

<L>10543<pc>0151-b<k1>utpatana<k2>utpatana
{%Ut-patana, am,%}¦ n. rising, ascending, going up;
birth, production.
<LEND>

<L>10544<pc>0151-b<k1>utpatita<k2>utpatita
{%Ut-patita, as, ā, am,%}¦ springing up, risen, ascended.
<LEND>

<L>10545<pc>0151-b<k1>utpatitavya<k2>utpatitavya
{%Ut-patitavya as, ā, am,%}¦ to be flown upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10546<pc>0151-b<k1>utpatitf<k2>utpatitf
{%Ut-patitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ rising, jumping up, going
upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10547<pc>0151-b<k1>utpatizRu<k2>utpatizRu
{%Ut-patiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ rising, jumping up.
<LEND>

<L>10548<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAta<k2>utpAta
{%Ut-pāta, as,%}¦ m. flying up, a spring, jump; an
unusual or startling event boding calamity, a portent,
prodigy, phenomenon; any public calamity, as an
eclipse, meteor, earthquake. {%—Utpāta-vāta, as,%} m. a
whirlwind, a hurricane.
<LEND>

<L>10549<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAtaka<k2>utpAtaka
{%Ut-pātaka, as,%}¦ m. a fabulous animal with eight
legs, (written also {%ut-pādaka,%} q. v.); N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>10550<pc>0151-b<k1>utpatAka<k2>utpatAka
{#utpatAka#}¦ {%ut-patāka, as, ā, am,%} with raised
flags; with uplifted banners; ({%ā%}), f. a raised banner
or flag. {%—Ut-patāka-dhvaja, as, ā, am,%} with raised
banners and flags.
<LEND>

<L>10551<pc>0151-b<k1>utpaTa<k2>utpaTa
{#utpaTa#}¦ {%ut-patha, as,%} m. wrong road, bad
way, error, evil; ({%am%}), ind. astray, on the wrong
road.
<LEND>

<L>10552<pc>0151-b<k1>utpad<k2>utpad
{#utpad#}¦ {%ut-pad (ud-p˚),%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to arise, rise, originate, be produced:
Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to produce, beget, gene-
rate, cause, effect; to cause to issue or come forth,
bring forward.
<LEND>

<L>10553<pc>0151-b<k1>utpatti<k2>utpatti
{%Ut-patti, is,%}¦ f. arising, birth, production, origin;
becoming visible, coming into existence; production
in general, profit, productiveness; producing as an
effect or result, giving rise to or generating as a con-
sequence; resurrection. {%—Utpatti-kālīa, as, ā, am,%}
taking place at the time of birth. {%—Utpatti-prayoga,%}
{%as,%} m. production by the joint operation of cause and
effect; purport, meaning. {%—Utpatti-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
produced, born. {%—Utpatti-vyañjaka, as,%} m. a type
of birth (as investiture); a mark of the twice-born.
<LEND>

<L>10554<pc>0151-b<k1>utpanna<k2>utpanna
{%Ut-panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen, gone up; arisen, born,
produced; produced unexpectedly; acquired, gained;
occurred, happened; effected, accomplished; known,
ascertained. {%—Utpanna-tantu, us, us, u,%} having a
line of descendants. {%—Utpanna-tva, am,%} n. origin,
production. {%—Utpanna-bhakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} living
from hand to mouth. {%—Utpanna-vināśin, ī, inī, i,%}
perishing as soon as produced.
<LEND>

<L>10555<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAda<k2>utpAda
{%Ut-pāda, as,%}¦ m. coming forth, birth, production.
{%—Utpāda-pūrva, am,%} n. title of the first of the
fourteen Pūrvas or older sacred writings of the Jainas.
{%—Ut-pāda-śayana,%} see s. v. next col.
<LEND>

<L>10556<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAdaka<k2>utpAdaka
{%Ut-pādaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ bringing forth, producing,
productive, effective; ({%as%}), m. a producer, a genera-
tor; a fabulous animal, called Śarabha, with eight
legs; written also {%utpātaka; (ikā),%} f. a certain
insect, perhaps the white ant (termes); N. of the
pot-herb Enhydra Hingtsha, also of Basilla Rubra or
Lucida; ({%am%}), n. origin, cause.
<LEND>

<L>10557<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAdana<k2>utpAdana
{%Ut-pādana, as, ā, am,%}¦ bringing forth, producing,
productive; ({%am%}), n. producing, generating, beget-
ting, causing.
<LEND>

<L>10558<pc>0151-b<k1>utpAdita<k2>utpAdita
{%Ut-pādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced, effected; gene-
rated, begotten.
<LEND>
[Page0151-c+ 73]

<L>10559<pc>0151-c<k1>utpAdin<k2>utpAdin
{%Ut-pādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ produced, born; (at the end
of compounds) bringing forth, producing.
<LEND>

<L>10560<pc>0151-c<k1>utpAdya<k2>utpAdya
{%Ut-pādya,%}¦ ind. having produced; having begotten;
having inspired.
<LEND>

<L>10561<pc>0151-c<k1>utpAdyamAna<k2>utpAdyamAna
{%Ut-pādyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being produced or
generated.
<LEND>

<L>10562<pc>0151-c<k1>utpala<k2>utpala<h>1
{#utpala#} 1¦. {%utpala, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%pal%} for
{%paṭ%} with {%ud,%} to burst upwards as a blossom?), the
blue lotus, Nymphæa Cærulea, a seed of the Nym-
phæa; the plant Costus Speciosus; any water-lily; a
plant in general; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man who built a
sanctuary, of an astronomer; N. of a lexicographer;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of cake made
with unwinnowed corn. {%—Utpala-gandhika, am,%} n.
a species of sandal of the colour of brass and very
fragrant. {%—Utpala-cakṣus, us, us, us,%} lotus-eyed,
fine-eyed. {%—Utpala-pattra, am,%} n. the leaf of a
Nymphæa; a wound caused by the finger-nail of a
woman; a Tīlaka or mark on the forehead, made
with sandal &c. by the Hindūs; a broad-bladed
knife or lancet. {%—Utpala-pattraka, am,%} n. a broad-
bladed knife or lancet used by surgeons. {%—Utpala-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town built by Utpala. {%—Ut-%}
{%pala-bhedyaka, as,%} m. a kind of bandage. {%—Utpala-%}
{%mālā,%} f., N. of a lexicon. {%—Utpala-rāja, as,%} m., N.
of a poet. {%—Utpala-vatī,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Utpala-%}
{%varṇā,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Utpala-śāka, as,%} m.,
N. of a plant. {%—Utpala-śārivā,%} f. the plant Ichno-
carpus Frutescens. {%—Utpalākṣa (˚la-ak˚), as,%} m.,
and {%utpalāpīḍa (˚la-āp˚), as,%} m., N. of two princes.
{%—Utpalābha (˚la-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} lotus-like, re-
sembling a lotus. {%—Utpalā-vana, am,%} n., N. of a
region in Pañcāla.
<LEND>

<L>10563<pc>0151-c<k1>utpalaka<k2>utpalaka
{%Utpalaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; of a king of
the Nāgas.
<LEND>

<L>10564<pc>0151-c<k1>utpalin<k2>utpalin
{%Utpalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ abounding in lotus flowers;
({%inī%}), f. an assemblage of lotus flowers; a species of
the Atijagatī metre, the same as Candrikā; N. of a
river; title of a dictionary.
<LEND>

<L>10565<pc>0151-c<k1>utpala<k2>utpala<h>2
{#utpala#} 2¦. {%ut-pala, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ud%} and
{%pala,%} flesh), fleshless, emaciated; ({%am%}), n., N. of
a hell.
<LEND>

<L>10566<pc>0151-c<k1>utpavana<k2>utpavana
{#utpavana#}¦ {%ut-pavana.%} See under {%ut-pū.%}
<LEND>

<L>10567<pc>0151-c<k1>utpaSya<k2>utpaSya
{#utpaSya#}¦ {%ut-paśya, as, ā, am,%} looking up or
upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10568<pc>0151-c<k1>utpAdaSayana<k2>utpAdaSayana
{#utpAdaSayana#}¦ {%ut-pāda-śayana, as,%} m. a kind
of partridge, Parra Jacana or Gœnsis, (sleeping with
legs erect.)
<LEND>

<L>10569<pc>0151-c<k1>utpAraRa<k2>utpAraRa
{#utpAraRa#}¦ {%ut-pāraṇa, am,%} n., Ved. transport-
ing over, transportation.
<LEND>

<L>10570<pc>0151-c<k1>utpAlI<k2>utpAlI
{#utpAlI#}¦ {%utpālī,%} f. health (etym. doubtful).
<LEND>

<L>10571<pc>0151-c<k1>utpiYjara<k2>utpiYjara
{#utpiYjara#}¦ {%ut-piñjara, as, ā, am,%} uncaged,
unconfined.
<LEND>

<L>10572<pc>0151-c<k1>utpiYjala<k2>utpiYjala
{%Ut-piñjala, as, ā, am%}¦ ({%l%} substituted for {%r%}), out of
order, disordered, excessively confused; uncaged.
<LEND>

<L>10573<pc>0151-c<k1>utpitsu<k2>utpitsu
{#utpitsu#}¦ {%ut-pitsu, us, us, u%} (Desid. of {%ut-%}
{%pat,%} q. v.), desirous of rising or flying away or pro-
ceeding.
<LEND>

<L>10574<pc>0151-c<k1>utpiz<k2>utpiz
{#utpiz#}¦ {%ut-piṣ (ud-p˚),%} cl. 7. P. {%-pinaṣṭi,%}
{%-peṣṭum,%} to rub together; to crush, grind.
<LEND>

<L>10575<pc>0151-c<k1>utpizwa<k2>utpizwa
{%Ut-piṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed, ground; ({%am%}), n.
a disease, a grating of the bones or of the joints upon
each other.
<LEND>

<L>10576<pc>0151-c<k1>utpIq<k2>utpIq
{#utpIq#}¦ {%ut-pīḍ (ud-p˚),%} cl. 10. P. {%-pīḍayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to press upwards, to press out of.
<LEND>

<L>10577<pc>0151-c<k1>utpIqa<k2>utpIqa
{%Ut-pīḍa, as,%}¦ m. pressing out, pressure; foam,
froth, a gush.
<LEND>

<L>10578<pc>0151-c<k1>utpIqana<k2>utpIqana
{%Ut-pīḍana, am,%}¦ n. the act of pressing out.
<LEND>

<L>10579<pc>0151-c<k1>utpucCaya<k2>utpucCaya
{#utpucCaya#}¦ {%ut-pucchaya,%} nom. (fr. {%ud-puccha%})
A. {%utpucchayate,%} to raise or cock the tail; P. {%-yati,%}
to make one raise the tail.
<LEND>

<L>10580<pc>0151-c<k1>utpuwaka<k2>utpuwaka
{#utpuwaka#}¦ {%ut-puṭaka, as,%} m. a disease of the
external ear; [cf. {%ut-pāṭa.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0152-a+ 73]

<L>10581<pc>0152-a<k1>utpulaka<k2>utpulaka
{#utpulaka#}¦ {%ut-pulaka, as, ā, am,%} joyful, de-
lighted.
<LEND>

<L>10582<pc>0152-a<k1>utpU<k2>utpU
{#utpU#}¦ {%ut-pū (ud-pū),%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-punāti,%}
{%-punīte, -pavitum,%} to cleanse, purify; to extract
anything that has been purified.
<LEND>

<L>10583<pc>0152-a<k1>utpavana<k2>utpavana
{%Ut-pavana, am,%}¦ n. cleaning, cleansing; straining
liquids for domestic or religious uses; any implement
for cleaning; the act of sprinkling clarified butter or
other fluids on the sacrificial fire with two blades of
Kuśa grass, the ends of which are held in either hand
and the centre dipped into the liquid.
<LEND>

<L>10584<pc>0152-a<k1>utpavitf<k2>utpavitf
{%Ut-pavitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ purifying; a purifier.
<LEND>

<L>10585<pc>0152-a<k1>utpAva<k2>utpAva
{%Ut-pāva, as,%}¦ m. purifying ghee &c.
<LEND>

<L>10586<pc>0152-a<k1>utpozaDa<k2>utpozaDa
{#utpozaDa#}¦ {%ut-poṣadha, as,%} m., N. of an old
king.
<LEND>

<L>10587<pc>0152-a<k1>utpraBa<k2>utpraBa
{#utpraBa#}¦ {%ut-prabha, as, ā, am,%} flashing forth
or diffusing light, shining.
<LEND>

<L>10588<pc>0152-a<k1>utprasava<k2>utprasava
{#utprasava#}¦ {%ut-prasava, as,%} m. abortion.
<LEND>

<L>10589<pc>0152-a<k1>utprAsa<k2>utprAsa
{#utprAsa#}¦ {%ut-prāsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%as%} with
{%pra%} and {%ud%}), hurling, throwing afar; violent burst
of laughter; ridicule, derision; excess.
<LEND>

<L>10590<pc>0152-a<k1>utprAsana<k2>utprAsana
{%Ut-prāsana, am,%}¦ n. = the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>10591<pc>0152-a<k1>utpruz<k2>utpruz
{#utpruz#}¦ {%ut-pruṣ, ṭ,%} f., Ved. that which bub-
bles up, a bubble.
<LEND>

<L>10592<pc>0152-a<k1>utprekz<k2>utprekz
{#utprekz#}¦ {%ut-prekṣ (ud-pra-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-prekṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look up to with attention
(as a pupil to his teacher); to perceive; to transfer
(with loc.); to compare one thing with another,
illustrate by a simile.
<LEND>

<L>10593<pc>0152-a<k1>utprekzaRa<k2>utprekzaRa
{%Ut-prekṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking into, perceiving,
foreseeing, comparing.
<LEND>

<L>10594<pc>0152-a<k1>utprekzA<k2>utprekzA
{%Ut-prekṣā,%}¦ f. overlooking, disregarding, careless-
ness, indifference; (in rhetoric) comparison in general,
simile, illustration, metaphor; a parable; an ironical
comparison. {%—Utprekṣā-vallabha, as,%} m., N. of a
poet.
<LEND>

<L>10595<pc>0152-a<k1>utprekzita<k2>utprekzita
{%Ut-prekṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ compared (as in a simile).
<LEND>

<L>10596<pc>0152-a<k1>utprekzya<k2>utprekzya
{%Ut-prekṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ that with which anything
is compared.
<LEND>

<L>10597<pc>0152-a<k1>utplu<k2>utplu
{#utplu#}¦ {%ut-plu (ud-p˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate,%}
{%-plotum,%} to jump up, leap up; to bound; to spring
or jump upon; to float upon.
<LEND>

<L>10598<pc>0152-a<k1>utplava<k2>utplava
{%Ut-plava, as,%}¦ m. a jump, leap, bound; ({%ā%}), f. a boat.
<LEND>

<L>10599<pc>0152-a<k1>utplavana<k2>utplavana
{%Ut-plavana, am,%}¦ n. jumping or leaping up, spring-
ing upon; skimming off impure oil or ghee, or any
dirt floating on a fluid, by passing a blade of Kuśa
grass over it.
<LEND>

<L>10600<pc>0152-a<k1>utpluta<k2>utpluta
{%Ut-pluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ jumped up or upon, sprung
upon suddenly.
<LEND>

<L>10601<pc>0152-a<k1>utplutya<k2>utplutya
{%Ut-plutya,%}¦ ind. having sprung up or jumped upon.
<LEND>

<L>10602<pc>0152-a<k1>utPal<k2>utPal
{#utPal#}¦ {%ut-phal (ud-ph˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-phalati,%}
{%-litum,%} to spring; to part asunder, to expand (as a
flower): Caus. P. {%-phālayati, -yitum,%} to open,
open wide, cause to expand.
<LEND>

<L>10603<pc>0152-a<k1>utPAla<k2>utPAla
{%Ut-phāla, as,%}¦ m. a jump, a spring, leaping up or
out of, moving or shuffling of feet.
<LEND>

<L>10604<pc>0152-a<k1>utPulla<k2>utPulla
{%Ut-phulla, as, ā, am%}¦ ({%phulla%} pass. part. of rt.
{%phal%}), widely opened (as the eyes); blown as a
flower; swollen, increased in bulk; sleeping supinely;
({%am%}), n. a kind of coitus.
<LEND>

<L>10605<pc>0152-a<k1>utPala<k2>utPala
{#utPala#}¦ {%ut-phala, am,%} n. excellent fruit.
<LEND>

<L>10606<pc>0152-a<k1>utsa<k2>utsa
{#utsa#}¦ {%utsa, as,%} m. (fr. 2 {%ud%}), Ved. a spring,
a fountain (metaphorically applied to the clouds).
{%—Utsa-dhi, is,%} m., Ved. the receptacle of a spring, a
well.
<LEND>

<L>10607<pc>0152-a<k1>utsakTa<k2>utsakTa
{#utsakTa#}¦ {%ut-saktha, as, ī, am,%} Ved. opening
the thighs.
<LEND>

<L>10608<pc>0152-a<k1>utsaNga<k2>utsaNga
{#utsaNga#}¦ {%ut-saṅga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sañj%} with
{%ud%}), embrace, association, union; slope, side; the
haunch or part above the hip; the lap; the acclivity
or edge of a hill; the roof of a house; the bottom
or deep part of an ulcer; a high number = 100
Vivāhas.
<LEND>
[Page0152-b+ 76]

<L>10609<pc>0152-b<k1>utsaNgita<k2>utsaNgita
{%Ut-saṅgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ associated, combined, joined.
<LEND>

<L>10610<pc>0152-b<k1>utsaNgin<k2>utsaNgin
{%Ut-saṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ associating or combining with,
an associate, a partner; deep-seated, as an ulcer; ({%ī%}),
m. an ulcer, a deep sore; ({%inī%}), f. pimples on the
inner edge of the eyelids.
<LEND>

<L>10611<pc>0152-b<k1>utsaYjana<k2>utsaYjana
{%Ut-sañjana, am,%}¦ n. leading upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10612<pc>0152-b<k1>utsad<k2>utsad
{#utsad#}¦ {%ut-sad (ud-s˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-sīdati, -sat-%}
{%tum,%} to sink, settle down, fall into ruin or decay; to
leave off; to rise up: Caus. P. {%-sādayati, -yitum,%}
to destroy, overturn.
<LEND>

<L>10613<pc>0152-b<k1>utsanna<k2>utsanna
{%Ut-sanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ decayed, in ruins; destroyed,
overturned; disused, fallen into disuse; risen, in-
creased. {%—Utsanna-dharma, as,%} or {%utsanna-yajña,%}
{%as,%} m. an interrupted or suspended sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>10614<pc>0152-b<k1>utsAda<k2>utsAda
{%Ut-sāda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a particular part of the
sacrificial animal.
<LEND>

<L>10615<pc>0152-b<k1>utsAdaka<k2>utsAdaka
{%Ut-sādaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroying, overturning.
<LEND>

<L>10616<pc>0152-b<k1>utsAdana<k2>utsAdana
{%Ut-sādana, am,%}¦ n. destroying, overturning; sus-
pending, interrupting, omitting; cleaning the person
with perfumes, rubbing or chafing the limbs; healing
a sore, causing it to fill up; going up, ascending,
rising; raising, elevating; ploughing a field twice or
thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>10617<pc>0152-b<k1>utsAdanIya<k2>utsAdanIya
{%Ut-sādanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be destroyed; to be
effected; to be gone up or ascended; ({%am%}), n. any
application to a sore producing granulations.
<LEND>

<L>10618<pc>0152-b<k1>utsAdita<k2>utsAdita
{%Ut-sādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroyed, overturned;
cleansed, purified with oil, perfumes, &c.; risen, as-
cended; raised, elevated.
<LEND>

<L>10619<pc>0152-b<k1>utsAditavya<k2>utsAditavya
{%Ut-sāditavya%}¦ or {%ut-sādya, as, ā, am,%} to be de-
stroyed.
<LEND>

<L>10620<pc>0152-b<k1>utsara<k2>utsara
{#utsara, utsAraka#}¦, &c. See under {%ut-sṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>10621<pc>0152-b<k1>utsarga<k2>utsarga
{#utsarga#}¦ {%ut-sarga.%} See under {%ut-sṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>10622<pc>0152-b<k1>utsava<k2>utsava
{#utsava#}¦ {%utsava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%su%} with {%ud?%}),
enterprise, beginning; a festival, a jubilee; joy, glad-
ness; merry-making; height, elevation, insolence;
passion, wrath; wish; rising of a wish; a section of a
book. {%—Utsava-saṅketa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>10623<pc>0152-b<k1>utsah<k2>utsah
{#utsah#}¦ {%ut-sah (ud-s˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-sahate,%}
{%-sahitum%} or {%-soḍhum,%} to be able, to be adequate,
to have power (with inf., or with dat. of an abstract
noun); to act with courage or energy: Caus. {%-sāha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to animate, encourage, excite; Desid.
of the Caus. {%-sisāhayiṣati,%} to wish to excite.
<LEND>

<L>10624<pc>0152-b<k1>utsAha<k2>utsAha
{%Ut-sāha, as,%}¦ m. power, strength, strength of will,
resolution; effort, perseverance, strenuous and con-
tinued exertion, energy; firmness, fortitude; hap-
piness; a thread. {%—Utsāha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} active,
energetic, persevering. {%—Utsāha-vardhana, as,%} m. the
heroic {%rasa%} or feeling; ({%am%}), n. increase of energy,
heroism. {%—Utsāha-sampanna, as, ā, am,%} active,
persevering.
<LEND>

<L>10625<pc>0152-b<k1>utsAhana<k2>utsAhana
{%Ut-sāhana, am,%}¦ n. effort, perseverance.
<LEND>

<L>10626<pc>0152-b<k1>utsAhin<k2>utsAhin
{%Utsāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ active, persevering.
<LEND>

<L>10627<pc>0152-b<k1>utsic<k2>utsic
{#utsic#}¦ {%ut-sic (ud-s˚),%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-siñcati,%}
{%-te, -sektum,%} to sprinkle, pour, to spread; to make
proud: Pass. {%-sicyate,%} to spout or foam up or over;
to be puffed up; to overflow, increase.
<LEND>

<L>10628<pc>0152-b<k1>utsikta<k2>utsikta
{%Ut-sikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled; flooded, abun-
dantly furnished; elevated, raised, haughty, proud,
rude; enlarged, increased; disordered, disturbed in
mind &c.
<LEND>

<L>10629<pc>0152-b<k1>utsicyamAna<k2>utsicyamAna
{%Ut-sicyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ foaming or spouting
up, showering; increasing, overflowing, growing.
<LEND>

<L>10630<pc>0152-b<k1>utseka<k2>utseka
{%Ut-seka, as,%}¦ m. sprinkling, pouring; foaming up-
wards, spouting out or over, showering; overflow,
increase, enlargement; haughtiness, pride.
<LEND>

<L>10631<pc>0152-b<k1>utsekin<k2>utsekin
{%Utsekin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ overflowing; proud, haughty,
puffed up.
<LEND>

<L>10632<pc>0152-b<k1>utsecana<k2>utsecana
{%Ut-secana, am,%}¦ n. the act of showering or spout-
ing upwards, boiling or foaming over.
<LEND>

<L>10633<pc>0152-b<k1>utsuka<k2>utsuka
{#utsuka#}¦ {%utsuka, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%ud%} and {%suka;%}
the latter does not exist separately, but may be derived
from the particle {%su,%} as {%anuka%} fr. {%anu, abhika%}
fr. {%abhi;%} cf. also {%utka%}), restless, uneasy, unquiet,
anxious; anxiously desirous, zealously active, striving
[Page0152-c+ 76]
or making exertions for any object (e. g. {%jayotsuka,%}
anxiously striving for victory); eager for, fond of, at-
tached to; regretting, repining, missing, sorrowing
for; ({%as%}), m. (?) longing for. {%—Utsuka-tā,%} f. or
{%utsuka-tva, am,%} n. restlessness, uneasiness, unquiet-
ness, zeal; attachment, affection; sorrow, regret.
<LEND>

<L>10634<pc>0152-c<k1>utsukAya<k2>utsukAya
{%Utsukāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%utsukāyate,%} to become un-
quiet &c.
<LEND>

<L>10635<pc>0152-c<k1>utsUtra<k2>utsUtra
{#utsUtra#}¦ {%ut-sūtra, as, ā, am,%} unstrung; irre-
gular, out of rule, loose, detached.
<LEND>

<L>10636<pc>0152-c<k1>utsUra<k2>utsUra
{#utsUra#}¦ {%ut-sūra, as,%} m. evening, twilight
(when the sun sets).
<LEND>

<L>10637<pc>0152-c<k1>utsUrya<k2>utsUrya
{%Utsūrya.%}¦ See under {%otsūryam.%}
<LEND>

<L>10638<pc>0152-c<k1>utsf<k2>utsf
{#utsf#}¦ {%ut-sṛ (ud-sṛ),%} Caus. P. {%-sārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to expel, turn out, drive away.
<LEND>

<L>10639<pc>0152-c<k1>utsara<k2>utsara
{%Ut-sara, as,%}¦ m. a species of the Ati-śakvarī metre,
consisting of four verses of fifteen syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>10640<pc>0152-c<k1>utsaryA<k2>utsaryA
{%Ut-saryā,%}¦ f. a cow when grown up and fit to take
the bull.
<LEND>

<L>10641<pc>0152-c<k1>utsAraka<k2>utsAraka
{%Ut-sāraka, as,%}¦ m. one who drives away the mob
from a person of rank, a policeman; a guard, a
guardian.
<LEND>

<L>10642<pc>0152-c<k1>utsAraRa<k2>utsAraRa
{%Ut-sāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. moving, causing to move, re-
moving, keeping at a distance, driving out of the
way; assisting any one to step out (of a palanquin
&c.); reception of a guest.
<LEND>

<L>10643<pc>0152-c<k1>utsfj<k2>utsfj
{#utsfj#}¦ {%ut-sṛj (ud-s˚),%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati,%}
{%-sraṣṭum,%} to pour out, emit, send forth; to let
loose; to cast forth or away; to lay aside, quit, leave,
abandon, avoid, eschew; to abolish (a rule &c.).
<LEND>

<L>10644<pc>0152-c<k1>utsarga<k2>utsarga
{%Ut-sarga, as,%}¦ m. pouring out, pouring forth, emis-
sion, dejection, excretion, voiding by stool &c.;
laying aside, abandoning, resigning, quitting, retiring
from, suspending; loosening, delivering; oblation,
libation; presentation of anything promised to a
god or Brāhman with suitable ceremonies; giving,
donation; a particular ceremony on suspending a
Vedic lecture; (in gram.) any general precept or
rule (opposed to {%apavāda,%} special rule or exception,
and so called because only abolished in express cases
by a substitute). {%—Utsarga-tas,%} ind. generally, i. e.
without any special limitation.
<LEND>

<L>10645<pc>0152-c<k1>utsargin<k2>utsargin
{%Utsargin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ leaving out or off; omitting,
abandoning, quitting.
<LEND>

<L>10646<pc>0152-c<k1>utsarjana<k2>utsarjana
{%Ut-sarjana, am,%}¦ n. letting loose, abandoning,
leaving, &c.; gift, donation, oblation; suspending (a
lecture in the Veda), a ceremony connected with it.
<LEND>

<L>10647<pc>0152-c<k1>utsisfkzu<k2>utsisfkzu
{%Ut-sisṛkṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to create.
<LEND>

<L>10648<pc>0152-c<k1>utsfjya<k2>utsfjya
{%Ut-sṛjya,%}¦ ind. having abandoned, having quitted.
<LEND>

<L>10649<pc>0152-c<k1>utsfzwa<k2>utsfzwa
{%Ut-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, abandoned; given
up, given, presented; poured forth, cast into or upon.
{%—Utsṛṣṭa-paśu, us,%} m. a bull set at liberty upon
particular occasions, as on a marriage &c., and allowed
to go about at will. {%—Utsṛṣṭa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one
who has let fall, who has shed (a tear &c.).
<LEND>

<L>10650<pc>0152-c<k1>utsfzwi<k2>utsfzwi
{%Ut-sṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. abandonment, letting go, emission.
<LEND>

<L>10651<pc>0152-c<k1>utsrazwukAma<k2>utsrazwukAma
{%Utsraṣṭu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to let go or
put down.
<LEND>

<L>10652<pc>0152-c<k1>utsfp<k2>utsfp
{#utsfp#}¦ {%ut-sṛp (ud-s˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarpati,%}
{%-sarptum%} or {%-sraptum,%} to go, glide or soar upwards,
to spread out.
<LEND>

<L>10653<pc>0152-c<k1>utsarpa<k2>utsarpa
{%Ut-sarpa, as,%}¦ m. going or gliding upwards; swell-
ing, heaving.
<LEND>

<L>10654<pc>0152-c<k1>utsarpaRa<k2>utsarpaRa
{%Ut-sarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. gliding upwards; swelling,
heaving.
<LEND>

<L>10655<pc>0152-c<k1>utsarpita<k2>utsarpita
{%Ut-sarpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gliding or going upwards;
heaving, heaved, undulating.
<LEND>

<L>10656<pc>0152-c<k1>utsarpin<k2>utsarpin
{%Ut-sarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ moving or gliding upwards;
rising; soaring; ({%iṇī%}), f. a Jaina division of time, a
long period described as ten crores of crores of oceans
of years; this period alternates with one of similar
duration. See {%ava-sarpiṇī.%}
<LEND>

<L>10657<pc>0152-c<k1>utseDa<k2>utseDa
{#utseDa#}¦ {%ut-sedha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%sidh%} with
{%ud%}), height, elevation; thickness, fatness, obesity;
intumescence; excelling, sublimity; the body; ({%am%}),
n. killing, slaughter.
<LEND>
[Page0153-a+ 78]

<L>10658<pc>0153-a<k1>utsTala<k2>utsTala
{#utsTala#}¦ {%ut-sthala, am,%} n., N. of an island.
<LEND>

<L>10659<pc>0153-a<k1>utsmi<k2>utsmi
{#utsmi#}¦ {%ut-smi (ud-s˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-smayate,%}
{%-smetum,%} to smile at, deride: Caus. P. {%-smāyayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to make a fool of one.
<LEND>

<L>10660<pc>0153-a<k1>utsmaya<k2>utsmaya
{%Ut-smaya, as,%}¦ m. a smile.
<LEND>

<L>10661<pc>0153-a<k1>utsmayat<k2>utsmayat
{%Ut-smayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ smiling.
<LEND>

<L>10662<pc>0153-a<k1>utsya<k2>utsya
{#utsya#}¦ {%utsya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%utsa%}), Ved. coming
from a well or fountain (as water).
<LEND>

<L>10663<pc>0153-a<k1>utsvapnAya<k2>utsvapnAya
{#utsvapnAya#}¦ {%utsvapnāya,%} nom. (fr. {%ud-svapna%})
A. {%utsvapnāyate,%} to talk in one's sleep; to dream
uneasily.
<LEND>

<L>10664<pc>0153-a<k1>ud<k2>ud<h>1
{#ud#} 1¦. {%ud,%} a particle and prefix to verbs
and nouns. (As implying superiority in place, rank,
station, or power) up, upwards; upon, on; over,
above. (As implying separation and disjunction)
out, out of, from, off, away from, apart. (According
to native authorities {%ud%} may also imply publicity,
pride, indisposition, weakness, helplessness, binding,
loosing, existence, acquisition.)
<LEND>

<L>10665<pc>0153-a<k1>ud<k2>ud
{%Ud%}¦ is not used as a separable adverb or preposition;
in those rare cases, in which it appears in the Veda
uncompounded with a verb, the latter has to be sup-
plied from the context (e. g. {%ud utsam śatadhāram,%}
out (pour) a fountain of a hundred streams).
<LEND>

<L>10666<pc>0153-a<k1>ud<k2>ud
{%Ud%}¦ is sometimes repeated in the Veda to fill out
the verse (e. g. {%kiṃ na ud ud u harṣase%}).
<div n="P"/>[Cf. Zend {%uś;%} Hib. <nsi>uas</nsi> and in composition <nsi>os,</nsi>
<nsi>ois,</nsi> e. g. <nsi>os-car,</nsi> ‘a leap, bound,’ &c. See also {%ut-%}
{%tama,%} 1. {%ut-tara,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>10667<pc>0153-a<k1>ud<k2>ud<h>2
{#ud#} 2¦. {%ud%} or {%und,%} cl. 7. P. {%unatti, undāñ-%}
{%cakāra, undiṣyati, aundīt, unditum,%} to
flow or issue out, to spring (said of water); to wet,
bathe: Caus. {%undayati,%} aor. {%aundidat:%} Desid. {%undi-%}
{%diṣati;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὕδωρ</lang> Lat. <nsi>unda;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vato;</nsi>
Lit. <nsi>wandū́.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>10668<pc>0153-a<k1>uda<k2>uda
{%Uda, am,%}¦ n. (only at the beginning or end of a
compound) water. {%—Uda-kīrṇa%} or {%uda-kīrya, as,%}
m. the tree Galedupa Piscidia, the bark of which is
rubbed and scattered into water to stun the fishes.
{%—Uda-kumbha, as,%} m. a water-jar, a jar with water.
{%—Uda-grābha, as,%} m., Ved. holding water. {%—Uda-%}
{%camasa, as,%} m. a cup containing water. {%—1. uda-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (for 2. see {%ud-aj%} 3rd col.), aquatic, watery,
produced in or by water. {%—Uda-jña, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Uda-dhāna, as, ā, am,%} containing water.
{%—Udha-dhi, is, is, i,%} Ved. containing water; ({%is%}),
m. a water-jar, a reservoir for water; a cloud; a
lake; the ocean. {%—Udadhi-kumāra, ās,%} m. pl. a
class of divinities, belonging to the Bhavanādhīśās.
{%—Udadhi-krama, as,%} m. or {%udadhi-krā, ās,%} m.,
Ved. a voyager, a mariner. {%—Udadhi-mala, as,%} m.
cuttle-fish bone. {%—Udadhi-mekhalā,%} f. the earth
(girdled by the ocean). {%—Udadhi-rāja, as,%} m. the
king of the waters, the ocean. {%—Udadhi-sutā,%} f. the
daughter of the ocean; an epithet of Lakṣmī; and
of Dvārakā, the capital of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Uda-pa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} crossing the water, as a boat. {%—Uda-pātra,%}
{%am, ī,%} n. f. a water-jug, a ewer. {%—Uda-pāna, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a well. {%—Udapāna-maṇḍūka, as,%} m. a
frog in a well; (metaphorically) an inexperienced man
of limited ideas who knows only his own neighbour-
hood. {%—Uda-pū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. cleansing one's self
with water, purified with water. {%—Uda-peṣa, am,%}
n. a paste, anything ground with water; ({%am%}), ind.
by grinding in water. {%—Uda-prut, t, t, t,%} Ved. swim-
ming or splashing in water; (Say.) causing water to
flow. {%—Uda-pluta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. swimming in
water. {%—Uda-bhāra, as,%} m. a water-carrier, a cloud.
{%—Uda-bhṛjja%} and {%uda-majja, as,%} m., N. of two
men. {%—Uda-mantha, as,%} m. barley-water. {%—Uda-%}
{%megha, as,%} m. a watery cloud; a shower of rain.
{%—Uda-lāvaṇika, as, ī, am,%} salted, prepared with
brine. {%—Uda-vajra, as,%} m. a thunder-shower, a water-
spout. {%—Uda-vāpa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Uda-%}
{%vāsa, as,%} m. residence in water; ({%am%}), n. a house
on the margin of a stream or pond, a marine grotto
&c. {%—Uda-vāha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bringing water;
epithet of the Maruts. {%—Uda-vāhana, am,%} n. any
[Page0153-b+ 81]
water-vessel; a cloud. {%—Uda-vindu, us,%} m. a drop
of water. {%—Uda-vīvadha, as,%} m. a yoke for carrying
water. {%—Uda-vraja, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Uda-%}
{%śarāva, as,%} m. a jar filled with water. {%—Uda-śuddha,%}
{%as,%} m. a water-jar. {%—Uda-śvit, t,%} n. two portions of
buttermilk and one portion of water. {%—Uda-sthālī,%}
f. a caldron, a kettle. {%—Uda-haraṇa, as,%} m. a vessel
for drawing water. {%—Uda-hāra, as, ī, am,%} Ved.
fetching or carrying water; ({%as%}), m. a water-carrier,
a cloud. {%—Udaudana,%} see {%udakaudana.%}
<LEND>

<L>10669<pc>0153-b<k1>udaka<k2>udaka
{%Udaka, am,%}¦ n. water; {%udakaṃ dā%} or {%pradā%} or
{%kṛ,%} to offer a libation of water to a dead person
(with gen. or dat. of the person); {%udakam upa-%}
{%spṛś,%} to touch certain parts of the body with water,
as prescribed by law; (the word {%udaka%} may be used
alone to express this ceremony, e. g. {%udakārtham,%}
for the sake of the {%udaka%} ceremony.) {%—Udaka-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. or {%udaka-kriyā,%} f. presentation of
water to dead ancestors as far as the fourteenth de-
gree. {%—Udaka-kārya, am,%} n. a religious ceremony
performed with water; ablution of the body; obla-
tions to the dead. {%—Udaka-kumbha, as,%} m. a
water-jar. {%—Udaka-krīḍana, am,%} n. sporting about
in water. {%—Udaka-gāha%} or {%uda-gāha, as,%} m. enter-
ing the water. {%—Udaka-giri, is,%} m. a mountain
abounding in streams of water. {%—Udaka-candra,%} a
kind of magic. {%—Udaka-da, as, ā, am,%} a giver of
water, yielding water, offering water to the manes;
({%as%}), m. an heir, a near kinsman. {%—Udaka-dātṛ,%}
{%tā,%} or {%udaka-dāyin, ī,%} m. one who presents liba-
tions of water to the manes, an heir or kinsman.
{%—Udaka-dāna, am,%} n. gift of water, especially to
the manes, as a religious or obsequial rite. {%—Udaka-%}
{%dānika, as, ā, am,%} referring to the above obsequial
rite. {%—Udaka-dhara, as,%} m. ‘water-holder,’ a cloud.
{%—Udaka-parvata, as,%} m.; see {%udaka-giri%}. {%—Uda-%}
{%ka-pūrvakam,%} ind. preceded by the water-rite, i. e. by
pouring water on the hand as preparatory to or con-
firmatory of a gift or promise. {%—Udaka-pratīkāśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} like water, watery, fluid. {%—Udaka-bhāra,%}
{%as,%} m. a yoke for carrying water. {%—Udaka-bhūma,%}
{%as,%} m. humid soil. {%—Udaka-mañjarī,%} f. title of a
work on medicine. {%—Udaka-maṇḍalu, us,%} m., Ved.
a water-pitcher. {%—Udaka-mantha%} or {%uda-mantha,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of peeled grain. {%—Udaka-meha, as,%} m.
a sort of diabetes, passing watery urine. {%—Udakame-%}
{%hin, ī, inī, i,%} suffering from this disease. {%—Udaka-%}
{%vajra, as,%} m. a thunder-shower, a thunderstorm with
rain; [cf. {%uda-vajra.%}] {%—Udaka-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
furnished with water. {%—Udaka-vindu, us,%} m. a drop
of water. {%—Udaka-vīvadha, as,%} m. a yoke for carry-
ing water; [cf. {%uda-vīvadha.%}] {%—Udaka-śāka, am,%}
n. any aquatic herb. {%—Udaka-śānti, is,%} f. sprinkling
consecrated water over a sick person to allay fever.
{%—Udaka-saktu, us,%} m. ground rice moistened with
water. {%—Udaka-sparśa, as, ā, am,%} touching different
parts of the body with water; touching water in con-
firmation of a promise. {%—Udaka-hāra, as,%} m. a
water-carrier. {%—Udakātman (˚ka-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} chiefly
consisting of water, whose chief substance is water.
{%—Udakādhāra (˚ka-ādh˚), as,%} m. a reservoir, a
cistern, a well. {%—Udakānta (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m. margin
of water, bank, shore. {%—Udakārthin (˚ka-ar˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} desirous of water, thirsty. {%—Udakāhāra (˚ka-%}
{%āh˚), as,%} m. the drawing up of water. {%—Udake-cara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} moving or living in or inhabiting water.
{%—Udake-viśīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} dried in water, (a
metaphorical expression for anything unheard of or
impossible.) {%—Udakodañjana (˚ka-ud˚), as,%} m. a
water-jar. {%—Udakodara (˚ka-ud˚), am,%} n. dropsy.
{%—Udakodarin, ī, iṇī, i,%} dropsical. {%—Udakaudana%}
{%(˚ka-od˚), as,%} m. rice boiled with water.
<LEND>

<L>10670<pc>0153-b<k1>udakala<k2>udakala
{%Udakala, as, ā, am,%}¦ watery, containing water.
<LEND>

<L>10671<pc>0153-b<k1>udakila<k2>udakila
{%Udakila, as, ā, am,%}¦ watery, containing water.
<LEND>

<L>10672<pc>0153-b<k1>udakya<k2>udakya
{%Udakya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in water; ({%ā%}), f. a woman
in her courses (requiring water for purification).
<LEND>

<L>10673<pc>0153-b<k1>udan<k2>udan<h>1
1. {%udan,%}¦ n. (not used in the nom. sing. du. plur.
and the acc. sing. and du.), Ved. a wave, water.
{%—Udan-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. wavy, watery,
abounding in water; ({%ān%}), m. the ocean; N. of a
Ṛṣi.
<LEND>
[Page0153-c+ 75]

<L>10674<pc>0153-c<k1>udanimat<k2>udanimat
{%Udani-mat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. abounding in waves
or water.
<LEND>

<L>10675<pc>0153-c<k1>udanya<k2>udanya<h>1
1. {%udanya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%udanyati,%} to irrigate;
to thirst, be thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>10676<pc>0153-c<k1>udanya<k2>udanya<h>2
2. {%udanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. watery; ({%ā%}), f. thirst.
{%—Udanya-ja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. born in or living in
water.
<LEND>

<L>10677<pc>0153-c<k1>udanyu<k2>udanyu
{%Udanyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. liking or seeking water,
walking in water.
<LEND>

<L>10678<pc>0153-c<k1>undana<k2>undana
{%Undana, unna,%}¦ &c. See under {%und,%} p. 159.
<LEND>

<L>10679<pc>0153-c<k1>udak<k2>udak
{#udak#}¦ {%udak.%} See under 2. {%ud-añc.%}
<LEND>

<L>10680<pc>0153-c<k1>udagra<k2>udagra
{#udagra#}¦ {%ud-agra, as, ā, am,%} with elevated top,
having the top upwards, over-topping, towering or
pointing upwards; projecting; high, tall, long; ad-
vanced (in age); increased, large, vast, fierce, intense;
excited, enraptured. {%—Udagra-dat, an, atī, at,%} hav-
ing projecting teeth, large-toothed; ({%an%}), m. an ele-
phant with a large tusk.
<LEND>

<L>10681<pc>0153-c<k1>udaj<k2>udaj
{#udaj#}¦ {%ud-aj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ajati, -te, -ajitum,%}
to drive out, expel, pull off.
<LEND>

<L>10682<pc>0153-c<k1>udaja<k2>udaja<h>2
2. {%ud-aja, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see under {%uda%} 1st col.),
the driving out or forth (of cattle &c.).
<LEND>

<L>10683<pc>0153-c<k1>udAja<k2>udAja
{%Ud-āja, as,%}¦ m. leading up or out.
<LEND>

<L>10684<pc>0153-c<k1>udajalaka<k2>udajalaka
{#udajalaka#}¦ {%udajalaka, as,%} m., N. of a wheel-
wright in the Pañca-tantra.
<LEND>

<L>10685<pc>0153-c<k1>udaYc<k2>udaYc<h>1
{#udaYc#} 1¦. {%ud-añc%} or {%ud-ac,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-añ-%}
{%cati, -te, -citum,%} to elevate, raise up, lift up, throw
up; to send forth, utter, cause to resound.
<LEND>

<L>10686<pc>0153-c<k1>udakta<k2>udakta
{%Ud-akta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone up, raised up, risen,
ascended; sent forth; uttered.
<LEND>

<L>10687<pc>0153-c<k1>udaNka<k2>udaNka
{%Ud-aṅka, as,%}¦ m. a vessel or bucket (for oil &c.,
but not for water); Pāṇini III. 3, 123, N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>10688<pc>0153-c<k1>udaYc<k2>udaYc<h>2
2. {%ud-añc%}¦ or {%ud-ac, aṅ, īcī, ak,%} turned or going
upwards; upper, upwards; turned to the north, north-
ern (opposed to {%adharāñc%} and {%dakṣiṇa%}); subse-
quent, posterior; ({%k%}), ind. above; northward; subse-
quently; {%udīcī,%} the northern {%diś%} or quarter, the
north. {%—Udaktāt,%} ind., Ved. towards the north,
northward. {%—Udak-patha, as,%} m. the northern coun-
try. {%—Udak-pravaṇa, as, ā, am,%} sloping towards
the north; proceeding well (as a sacrifice?). {%—Udak-%}
{%sena, as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Udag-adri, is,%} m.
the northern mountain; the Himālaya mountain to
the north of Hindūstan. {%—Udag-ayana, am,%} n. the
sun's progress north of the equator, the half-year from
the winter to the summer solstice. {%—Udag-daśa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the border turned upwards or to the
north. {%—Udag-bhūma, as,%} m. fertile soil (turned up-
wards or towards the north). {%—Udag-bhūmi, is,%} m.
good or fertile soil. {%—Udaṅ-mukha, as, ī, am,%} facing
the north.
<LEND>

<L>10689<pc>0153-c<k1>udaYcana<k2>udaYcana
{%Ud-añcana, am,%}¦ n. a bucket, a pail for drawing
water out of a well; ({%am%}), n. directing or throwing
upwards; rising, ascending; a cover or lid.
<LEND>

<L>10690<pc>0153-c<k1>udaYcita<k2>udaYcita
{%Ud-añcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised up, thrown up,
tossed; worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>10691<pc>0153-c<k1>udaYcu<k2>udaYcu
{%Ud-añcu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>10692<pc>0153-c<k1>udaYjali<k2>udaYjali
{#udaYjali#}¦ {%ud-añjali, is, is, i,%} hollowing the
palms and then raising them.
<LEND>

<L>10693<pc>0153-c<k1>udaRqapAla<k2>udaRqapAla
{#udaRqapAla#}¦ {%ud-aṇḍa-pāla, as,%} m. a kind of
fish; a sort of snake.
<LEND>

<L>10694<pc>0153-c<k1>udaDi<k2>udaDi
{#udaDi#}¦ {%uda-dhi.%} See under {%uda.%}
<LEND>

<L>10695<pc>0153-c<k1>udan<k2>udan
{%Udan%}¦ 2. {%ud-an,%} cl. 2. P. {%-aniti, -nitum,%} to
breathe upwards, emit the breath in an upward direc-
tion; to breathe.
<LEND>

<L>10696<pc>0153-c<k1>udAna<k2>udAna
{%Ud-āna, as,%}¦ m. breathing upwards, breathing,
breath; one of the three or five vital airs, that which
rises up the throat and passes into the head; (with
Buddhists) an expression of joy or praise; the navel;
an eyelash; a kind of snake.
<LEND>

<L>10697<pc>0153-c<k1>udanta<k2>udanta
{#udanta#}¦ {%ud-anta, as, ā, am,%} reaching to the
end or border of anything; ({%as%}), m. ‘telling to the
end,’ full tidings, intelligence; news; a pure and
virtuous man; supporting one's self by sacrificing for
others; one who gets a livelihood by a trade &c.
<LEND>
[Page0154-a+ 72]

<L>10698<pc>0154-a<k1>udantaka<k2>udantaka
{%Udantaka, as,%}¦ m. news, tidings, intelligence.
<LEND>

<L>10699<pc>0154-a<k1>udantikA<k2>udantikA
{%Ud-antikā,%}¦ f. satisfaction, satiety.
<LEND>

<L>10700<pc>0154-a<k1>udantya<k2>udantya
{%Udantya, as, ā, am,%}¦ living beyond a limit or
boundary.
<LEND>

<L>10701<pc>0154-a<k1>udanya<k2>udanya
{#udanya#}¦ {%udanya.%} See under 2. {%ud.%}
<LEND>

<L>10702<pc>0154-a<k1>udaya<k2>udaya
{#udaya#}¦ {%ud-aya,%} &c. See under {%ud-i%} 3rd col.
<LEND>

<L>10703<pc>0154-a<k1>udara<k2>udara
{#udara#}¦ {%udara, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%ṛ%} with {%ud?%}),
the belly; a cavity, the interior or inside of anything
(e. g. {%udare,%} inside, in the interior); enlargement of
the abdomen from dropsy or flatulence, any mor-
bid abdominal affection, as liver, spleen, &c., a class
of eight different diseases; the thick, inner side of
the {%anguṣṭha%} or thumb; slaughter; [cf. Lat. <nsi>uterus.</nsi>]
{%—Udara-granthi, is,%} m. disease of the spleen, lit.
‘knot of the belly’ (a chronic affection of this organ
not uncommon in India). {%—Udara-trāṇa, am,%} n. a
cuirass, armour covering the front of the body; a
girth, a belly-band. {%—Udara-dāra, as,%} m., Ved. a
particular disease of the belly. {%—Udara-piśāca, as,%}
m. a glutton, voracious, one who devours everything,
flesh, fish, &c. {%—Udara-pūram,%} ind. till the belly is
full. {%—Udara-poṣaṇa, am,%} n. feeding the belly, sup-
porting life. {%—Udara-bharaṇa-mātra-kevalecchu%}
{%(˚la-ic˚), us, us, u,%} desirous only of the mere filing
of the belly. {%—Udaram-bhari, is, is, i,%} nourishing
only one's own belly, selfishly voracious, gluttonous.
{%—Udara-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a large belly,
corpulent. {%—Udara-śaya, as, ā, am,%} sleeping on the
face or belly. {%—Udara-śāṇḍilya, as,%} m., N. of a
sage. {%—Udara-sarvasva, as,%} m. an epicure, a glutton.
{%—Udarādhmāna (˚ra-ādh˚), am,%} n. flatulence of
the body. {%—Udarāmaya (˚ra-ām˚), as,%} m. disease
of the belly, dysentery, diarrhœa. {%—Udarāmayin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} suffering from dysentery or diarrhœa. {%—Uda-%}
{%rāvarta (˚ra-āv˚), as,%} m. the navel. {%—Udarāveṣṭa%}
{%(˚ra-āv˚), as,%} m. tape worm.
<LEND>

<L>10704<pc>0154-a<k1>udaraka<k2>udaraka
{%Udaraka, as, ī, am,%}¦ abdominal.
<LEND>

<L>10705<pc>0154-a<k1>udarika<k2>udarika
{%Udarika, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a large belly.
<LEND>

<L>10706<pc>0154-a<k1>udarin<k2>udarin
{%Udarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having a large belly, fat, corpu-
lent; abdominal; ({%iṇī%}), f. a pregnant woman.
<LEND>

<L>10707<pc>0154-a<k1>udarila<k2>udarila
{%Udarila, as, ā, am,%}¦ fat, corpulent.
<LEND>

<L>10708<pc>0154-a<k1>udarya<k2>udarya
{%Udarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the belly; ({%am%}),
n., Ved. contents of the belly or what forms the
belly.
<LEND>

<L>10709<pc>0154-a<k1>udaraTi<k2>udaraTi
{#udaraTi#}¦ {%ud-arathi, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ṛ%} with {%ud?%}),
the sun; the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>10710<pc>0154-a<k1>udarka<k2>udarka
{#udarka#}¦ {%ud-arka.%} See under {%ud-ṛc%} at p. 155.
<LEND>

<L>10711<pc>0154-a<k1>udarcis<k2>udarcis
{#udarcis#}¦ {%ud-arcis, is, is, is,%} shining or blaz-
ing upwards, luminous; ({%is%}), m. a N. of fire; of
Śiva, of Kandarpa.
<LEND>

<L>10712<pc>0154-a<k1>udarj<k2>udarj
{#udarj#}¦ {%ud-arj,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-arjati, -jitum,%}
to drive out, remove.
<LEND>

<L>10713<pc>0154-a<k1>udard<k2>udard
{#udard#}¦ {%ud-ard,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ardati, -ditum,%} to
strike or beat upon.
<LEND>

<L>10714<pc>0154-a<k1>udarda<k2>udarda
{%Ud-arda, as,%}¦ m. (in medic.) erysipelas.
<LEND>

<L>10715<pc>0154-a<k1>udardDa<k2>udardDa
{#udardDa#}¦ {%ud-arddha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ṛdh%} with
{%ud%}), scarlet fever.
<LEND>

<L>10716<pc>0154-a<k1>udala<k2>udala
{#udala#}¦ {%udala, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>10717<pc>0154-a<k1>udav<k2>udav
{#udav#}¦ {%ud-av,%} cl. 1. P. {%-avati, -vitum,%} to re-
gard, attend to; to wait for; to promote, impel.
<LEND>

<L>10718<pc>0154-a<k1>udavagraha<k2>udavagraha
{#udavagraha#}¦ {%ud-avagraha, as,%} m. a Svarita
accent depending on an Udātta which stands in the
{%ava-graha%} (q. v.). See {%tairovirāma.%}
<LEND>

<L>10719<pc>0154-a<k1>udavasAnIya<k2>udavasAnIya
{#udavasAnIya#}¦ {%ud-avasānīya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%so%} with {%ava%} and {%ud%}), Ved. concluding, final.
<LEND>

<L>10720<pc>0154-a<k1>udavasita<k2>udavasita
{%Ud-avasita, am,%}¦ n. a house, dwelling.
<LEND>

<L>10721<pc>0154-a<k1>udaS<k2>udaS
{#udaS#}¦ {%ud-aś,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-aśnoti, -nute,%}
{%aśitum%} or {%-aṣṭum,%} to reach to the top of, reach,
attain; to be able, be master of.
<LEND>

<L>10722<pc>0154-a<k1>udaSru<k2>udaSru
{#udaSru#}¦ {%ud-aśru, us, us, u,%} one whose tears
gush forth, weeping.
<LEND>

<L>10723<pc>0154-a<k1>udas<k2>udas
{#udas#}¦ {%ud-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati, -situm,%} to cast
[Page0154-b+ 70]
or throw up; to raise, erect, elevate; to throw out,
expel.
<LEND>

<L>10724<pc>0154-b<k1>udasana<k2>udasana
{%Ud-asana, am,%}¦ n. throwing up, raising, erecting.
<LEND>

<L>10725<pc>0154-b<k1>udasta<k2>udasta
{%Ud-asta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or cast up, raised,
thrown; cast out, expelled; removed, scattered, hum-
bled, shamed.
<LEND>

<L>10726<pc>0154-b<k1>udasya<k2>udasya
{%Ud-asya,%}¦ ind. having cast up, having tossed upwards,
having thrown; having expelled, having scattered;
having made efforts, having taken pains.
<LEND>

<L>10727<pc>0154-b<k1>udAsa<k2>udAsa<h>1
1. {%ud-āsa, as,%}¦ m. throwing or directing upwards,
elevation.
<LEND>

<L>10728<pc>0154-b<k1>udAkf<k2>udAkf
{#udAkf#}¦ {%ud-ā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. 5. P. A. {%-kṛṇoti,%}
{%-ṇute, -karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to expel; to fetch
out of; to select; A. to overpower.
<LEND>

<L>10729<pc>0154-b<k1>udAKyA<k2>udAKyA
{#udAKyA#}¦ {%ud-ā-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti, -tum,%}
to relate aloud; enunciate.
<LEND>

<L>10730<pc>0154-b<k1>udAgA<k2>udAgA
{#udAgA#}¦ {%ud-ā-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to
come up or out towards.
<LEND>

<L>10731<pc>0154-b<k1>udAcakz<k2>udAcakz
{#udAcakz#}¦ {%ud-ā-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe,%} to
declare aloud.
<LEND>

<L>10732<pc>0154-b<k1>udAcar<k2>udAcar
{#udAcar#}¦ {%ud-ā-car,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-carati,%}
{%-ritum, -rtum,%} Ved. {%-ritave, -tavai, -rase, -radh-%}
{%yai,%} to rise from or out of.
<LEND>

<L>10733<pc>0154-b<k1>udAjan<k2>udAjan
{#udAjan#}¦ {%ud-ā-jan,%} cl. 4. A., Ved. {%-jāyate,%}
{%-janitum,%} to arise from; to become visible above.
<LEND>

<L>10734<pc>0154-b<k1>udAtan<k2>udAtan
{#udAtan#}¦ {%ud-ā-tan,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-tanoti, -nute,%}
{%-nitum,%} to erect one's self, to rise.
<LEND>

<L>10735<pc>0154-b<k1>udAdA<k2>udAdA
{#udAdA#}¦ {%ud-ā-dā,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%-dadāti, -dā-%}
{%tum,%} to lift up, elevate.
<LEND>

<L>10736<pc>0154-b<k1>udAtta<k2>udAtta
{%Ud-ātta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for {%ud-ā-datta%}), elevated,
high, upraised, lofty; highly or acutely accented;
great, illustrious; generous, gentle, and bountiful;
giving, a donor; dear, beloved; ({%as%}), m. the acute
accent, a high or sharp tone; a gift, donation; a
kind of musical instrument, a large drum; an orna-
ment or figure of speech in rhetoric; work, business;
({%am%}), n. an ornament or figure in rhetoric. {%—Udātta-%}
{%tara, as, ā, am,%} more elevated, more acute. {%—Udāt-%}
{%ta-tva, am,%} n. the state of having the acute accent.
{%—Udātta-maya, as, ī, am,%} similar to the high
tone or accent. {%—Udātta-rāghava, am,%} n. title of a
drama. {%—Udātta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pronounced with
the acute accent. {%—Udātta-śruti, is, is, i,%} pronounced
with the Udātta accent. {%—Udāttaśruti-tā,%} f. the state
of being pronounced with the acute accent.
<LEND>

<L>10737<pc>0154-b<k1>udAdyanta<k2>udAdyanta
{#udAdyanta#}¦ {%ud-ādy-anta, as, ā, am,%} preceded
and followed by an Udātta.
<LEND>

<L>10738<pc>0154-b<k1>udAna<k2>udAna
{#udAna#}¦ {%ud-āna.%} See under 2. {%ud-an,%} p. 153.
<LEND>

<L>10739<pc>0154-b<k1>udAnI<k2>udAnI
{#udAnI#}¦ {%ud-ā-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati, -te,%}
{%-netum,%} to lead up (out of water); to elevate.
<LEND>

<L>10740<pc>0154-b<k1>udAp<k2>udAp
{#udAp#}¦ {%ud-āp,%} cl. 5. P., Ved. {%-āpnoti, -āptum,%}
to reach up to, reach, attain.
<LEND>

<L>10741<pc>0154-b<k1>udApi<k2>udApi
{#udApi#}¦ {%ud-āpi, is,%} m., N. of a son of Sahadeva.
<LEND>

<L>10742<pc>0154-b<k1>udApyam<k2>udApyam
{#udApyam#}¦ {%ud-āpyam,%} ind., Ved. up the stream,
against stream.
<LEND>

<L>10743<pc>0154-b<k1>udAyam<k2>udAyam
{#udAyam#}¦ {%ud-ā-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati, -yan-%}
{%tum,%} to show, to make known.
<LEND>

<L>10744<pc>0154-b<k1>udAyasa<k2>udAyasa
{#udAyasa#}¦ {%ud-āyasa, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>10745<pc>0154-b<k1>udAyuDa<k2>udAyuDa
{#udAyuDa#}¦ {%ud-āyudha, as, ā, am,%} with uplifted
weapon, upraising weapons.
<LEND>

<L>10746<pc>0154-b<k1>udAra<k2>udAra
{#udAra#}¦ {%ud-āra, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%ṛ%} with
{%ud%}), high, lofty, exalted, noble, illustrious, generous,
liberal, gentle, munificent, great, best; upright, honest,
sincere; proper, right; eloquent; unperplexed; Ved.
causing to rise, exciting, driving forth; ({%am%}), ind.
aloud; ({%as%}), m., Ved. a rising fog or vapour; a sort
of grain with long stalks; a figure in rhetoric, attri-
buting nobleness to an inanimate object; ({%ās%}), pl.
nebulous forms, spirits (?). {%—Udāra-carita, as, ā, am,%}
of a generous disposition, noble-minded. {%—Udāra- %}
[Page0154-c+ 75]
{%cetas, ās, ās, as,%} high-minded, magnanimous. {%—Udā-%}
{%ra-tā,%} f. liberality, generosity. {%—Udāra-dhī, īs, īs,%}
{%i,%} highly intelligent, wise, sagacious, noble-minded.
{%—Udāra-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} of great power. {%—Udāra-%}
{%sattva, as, ā, am,%} generous-minded.
<LEND>

<L>10747<pc>0154-c<k1>udAraka<k2>udAraka
{%Udāraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>10748<pc>0154-c<k1>udAraTi<k2>udAraTi
{#udAraTi#}¦ {%ud-ārathi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. {%ṛ%} with
{%ud?%}), Ved. steaming (as a hot dish); (Sāy.) rising,
or enlightening the organs of sense; ({%is%}), m. an
epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>10749<pc>0154-c<k1>udAvatsara<k2>udAvatsara
{#udAvatsara#}¦ {%udāvatsara, as,%} m. a year, one of
the five years forming a period. See {%idāvatsara.%}
<LEND>

<L>10750<pc>0154-c<k1>udAvarta<k2>udAvarta
{#udAvarta#}¦ {%ud-āvarta, as,%} m. a class of diseases,
marked by the retention of the excrements; disease
of the bowels, iliac passion; ({%ā%}), f. painful menstrua-
tion with foamy blood.
<LEND>

<L>10751<pc>0154-c<k1>udAvartin<k2>udAvartin
{%Udāvartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ suffering from such diseases.
<LEND>

<L>10752<pc>0154-c<k1>udAvasu<k2>udAvasu
{#udAvasu#}¦ {%udāvasu, us,%} m., N. of a king of
Videha, a son of Janaka; [cf. {%upāvasu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>10753<pc>0154-c<k1>udAvah<k2>udAvah
{#udAvah#}¦ {%ud-ā-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vahati, -te,%}
{%-voḍhum,%} to extol, to praise; to draw, lead along;
to marry.
<LEND>

<L>10754<pc>0154-c<k1>udAs<k2>udAs
{#udAs#}¦ {%ud-ās,%} cl. 2. A. {%-āste, -āsitum,%} to sit
separate or away from, to sit on one side or apart,
not to share in, not to show interest in; to be un-
concerned about, to be indifferent or passive.
<LEND>

<L>10755<pc>0154-c<k1>udAsa<k2>udAsa<h>2
2. {%ud-āsa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see under {%ud-as%}),
indifferent, unconcerned, apathetic; ({%as%}), m. a stoic,
a philosopher; indifference, apathy, stoicism.
<LEND>

<L>10756<pc>0154-c<k1>udAsitf<k2>udAsitf
{%Ud-āsitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ indifferent, disregarding,
stoical, one void of concern or affection.
<LEND>

<L>10757<pc>0154-c<k1>udAsin<k2>udAsin
{%Ud-āsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ indifferent, disregarding; ({%ī%}),
m. a stoic, a philosopher; one who has no passion
nor affection for anything; in popular acceptation, a
religious mendicant in general, or one of a particular
order.
<LEND>

<L>10758<pc>0154-c<k1>udAsIna<k2>udAsIna
{%Ud-āsīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sitting apart, indifferent,
free from affection; (in law) not involved in the
dispute; ({%as%}), m. a stranger, a neutral, a common
acquaintance, a person neither a friend nor a foe.
{%—Udāsīna-tā,%} f. indifference, apathy.
<LEND>

<L>10759<pc>0154-c<k1>udAsTita<k2>udAsTita
{#udAsTita#}¦ {%ud-āsthita, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sthā%}
with {%ā%} and {%ud%}), a superintendent, a doorkeeper; a
spy, an emissary; an ascetic who has given up his
vow; ({%as, ā, am%}), set over.
<LEND>

<L>10760<pc>0154-c<k1>udAhita<k2>udAhita
{#udAhita#}¦ {%ud-āhita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhā%} with
{%ā%} and {%ud%}), elevated, raised.
<LEND>

<L>10761<pc>0154-c<k1>udAhf<k2>udAhf
{#udAhf#}¦ {%ud-ā-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te,%}
{%-hartum,%} to relate, declare, announce; illustrate.
<LEND>

<L>10762<pc>0154-c<k1>udAharaRa<k2>udAharaRa
{%Ud-āharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. relating, saying, declaring,
declaration; referring a general rule to a special case,
an example or illustration; an apposite argument, the
third of the five premises of rhetorical reasoning; the
example or third member in a fivefold syllogism.
<LEND>

<L>10763<pc>0154-c<k1>udAhAra<k2>udAhAra
{%Ud-āhāra, as,%}¦ m. an example or illustration; the
beginning of a speech.
<LEND>

<L>10764<pc>0154-c<k1>udAhArya<k2>udAhArya
{%Ud-āhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be referred as a general
rule to a special case.
<LEND>

<L>10765<pc>0154-c<k1>udAhfta<k2>udAhfta
{%Ud-āhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ said, illustrated, called,
named, entitled.
<LEND>

<L>10766<pc>0154-c<k1>udAhfti<k2>udAhfti
{%Ud-ā-hṛti, is,%}¦ f. an example, an illustration.
<LEND>

<L>10767<pc>0154-c<k1>udi<k2>udi
{#udi#}¦ {%ud-i,%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -etum,%} to go up or
proceed; to rise (e. g. as a star), to come up (as a
cloud); to go out of; to come out or arise from; to
escape; to start up; to rise up against.
<LEND>

<L>10768<pc>0154-c<k1>udaya<k2>udaya
{%Ud-aya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (in gram.) following, coming
after or upon (as one letter, accent &c. upon another);
({%as%}), m. going upwards; rising (of the sun or planets
or of a cloud); the eastern mountain behind which
the sun is supposed to rise; coming forth, creation,
production, becoming visible, appearance, develop-
ment; light, splendor; conclusion, result, conse-
quence; rising, reaching one's aim, elevation; profit,
advantage, income, revenue, interest; outlet, exit; N.
of the seventh Arhat of the future Utsarpiṇi, = Udayā-
[Page0155-a+ 76]
śva; a son of Yājñika; a follower of Śākya-muni.
{%—Udaya-gupta, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Udaya-jit,%}
{%t,%} m., N. of a son of Guṇala. {%—Udaya-dhavala, as,%}
m., N. of a prince. {%—Udaya-parvata, as,%} m. or
{%udaya-giri, is,%} m. or {%udaya-śaila, as,%} m. or
{%udayācala (˚ya-ac˚), as,%} m. or {%udayādri (˚ya-%}
{%ad˚), is,%} m. the eastern mountain behind which the
sun rises. {%—Udaya-pura, am,%} n., N. of the capital
of Marvar. {%—Udaya-prastha, as,%} m. the plateau of
the mountain behind which the sun rises. {%—Udaya-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Udaya-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
risen. {%—Udaya-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Udayā-%}
{%ditya (˚ya-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Udayāśva%}
{%(˚ya-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a grandson of Ajāta-śatru.
<LEND>

<L>10769<pc>0155-a<k1>udayat<k2>udayat
{%Ud-ayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going upwards, rising.
<LEND>

<L>10770<pc>0155-a<k1>udayana<k2>udayana
{%Ud-ayana, am,%}¦ n. rising, ascending (of the sun);
exit, result; conclusion, end; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Agastya; N. of a king of Vatsa; N. of a Purohita of
king Śuddhodana. {%—Udayana%} or {%Udayanācārya, as,%}
m. a philosopher and violent persecutor of the Bud-
dhists. {%—Udayana-carita, am,%} n. title of a play.
<LEND>

<L>10771<pc>0155-a<k1>udayanIya<k2>udayanIya
{%Udayanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to an end or
conclusion, finishing (as a ceremony).
<LEND>

<L>10772<pc>0155-a<k1>udayin<k2>udayin
{%Ud-ayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ rising, ascending, prosperous,
flourishing; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Udayi-bhadra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Ajāta-śatru.
<LEND>

<L>10773<pc>0155-a<k1>udAya<k2>udAya
{%Ud-āya.%}¦ See s. v. {%try-udāya.%}
<LEND>

<L>10774<pc>0155-a<k1>udita<k2>udita<h>1
1. {%ud-ita, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen, ascended, being above;
high, tall, lofty; grown, augmented, born, produced;
incurred, experienced. {%—Udita-homin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved.
sacrificing after sunrise.
<LEND>

<L>10775<pc>0155-a<k1>uditi<k2>uditi<h>1
1. {%ud-iti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. ascending, rising (of the
sun); going away or down, setting (of the sun).
<LEND>

<L>10776<pc>0155-a<k1>udIyamAna<k2>udIyamAna
{%Ud-īyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ rising.
<LEND>

<L>10777<pc>0155-a<k1>udiNg<k2>udiNg
{#udiNg#}¦ {%ud-iṅg,%} Caus. P. {%-iṅgayati, -yitum,%}
to impart a tremulous motion, to vibrate; to utter
with a whirring or vibratory sound; to cause to whir
(said of the pronunciation of certain letters).
<LEND>

<L>10778<pc>0155-a<k1>udita<k2>udita<h>2
{#udita#} 2¦. {%udita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vad%}), said,
spoken. {%—Uditodita, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%udita%} with
1. {%ud-ita%}), well-grounded in the Śāstras.
<LEND>

<L>10779<pc>0155-a<k1>uditi<k2>uditi<h>2
2. {%uditi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. speech.
<LEND>

<L>10780<pc>0155-a<k1>udita<k2>udita<h>3
{#udita#} 3¦. {%udita, as, ā, am%} (incorrectly spelt
for {%ud-dita,%} see 4. {%dā%}), bound, tied.
<LEND>

<L>10781<pc>0155-a<k1>udinakz<k2>udinakz
{#udinakz#}¦ {%ud-inakṣ%} (irreg. Desid. of rt.
{%nakṣ%}), Ved. {%-inakṣati,%} to attain, obtain, reach; to
wish to gain, to pretend to.
<LEND>

<L>10782<pc>0155-a<k1>udIkz<k2>udIkz
{#udIkz#}¦ {%ud-īkṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-īkṣate, -ṣitum,%}
to look up to; to look at, regard, view, behold; to
wait, to delay, to expect: Caus. {%-īkṣayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to look up.
<LEND>

<L>10783<pc>0155-a<k1>udIkzaRa<k2>udIkzaRa
{%Ud-īkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking up, seeing, beholding.
<LEND>

<L>10784<pc>0155-a<k1>udIkzya<k2>udIkzya
{%Ud-īkṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked up at, having seen.
<LEND>

<L>10785<pc>0155-a<k1>udIcIna<k2>udIcIna
{#udIcIna#}¦ {%udīcīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%ud-añc%}),
turned towards the north, northern.
<LEND>

<L>10786<pc>0155-a<k1>udIcya<k2>udIcya
{%Udīcya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being or living in the north;
({%as%}), m. the country to the north and west of the
river Sarasvatī, the northern region; ({%ās%}), m. the
inhabitants of this country; ({%am%}), n. a kind of per-
fume. {%—Udīcya-vṛtta, am,%} n. the metre of the
inhabitants of the northern country, a species of the
Vaitālīya metre.
<LEND>

<L>10787<pc>0155-a<k1>udIpa<k2>udIpa
{#udIpa#}¦ {%ud-īpa, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%ud%} and {%ap,%} water),
high water, an inundation; ({%as, ā, am%}), flooded.
<LEND>

<L>10788<pc>0155-a<k1>udIr<k2>udIr
{#udIr#}¦ {%ud-īr,%} cl. 2. A. {%-īrte, -īritum,%} to rise;
to start (in order to go or to come); to move up-
wards, ascend; to arise, originate: Caus. {%-īrayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to rise or move; to throw or cast
upwards, to cast, throw, discharge, to drive forward;
to rouse up, excite; to raise one's voice; to utter,
speak; to effect; to make visible: Pass. {%-īryate,%} to be
cast or thrown upwards; to be excited; to be uttered,
announced, enunciated; to sound; to issue forth.
<LEND>

<L>10789<pc>0155-a<k1>udIraRa<k2>udIraRa
{%Ud-īraṇa, aṃ,%}¦ n. throwing, casting, discharging
(a missile); speaking, saying.
<LEND>

<L>10790<pc>0155-a<k1>udIrita<k2>udIrita
{%Ud-īrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ said, uttered; excited, ani-
[Page0155-b+ 70]
mated. {%—Udīrita-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} whose mind is active,
acute-minded.
<LEND>

<L>10791<pc>0155-b<k1>udIrRa<k2>udIrRa
{%Ud-īrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ issued out, excited, increased,
intense; generous, great, excellent. {%—Udīrṇa-tā,%} f.
excitement, activity, agility. {%—Udīrṇa-dīdhiti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} intensely bright. {%—Udīrṇa-vega, as, ā, am,%}
impetuous in its course (as a torrent), violent.
<LEND>

<L>10792<pc>0155-b<k1>udIrya<k2>udIrya<h>1
1. {%ud-īrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be raised, uttered, spoken.
<LEND>

<L>10793<pc>0155-b<k1>udIrya<k2>udIrya<h>2
2. {%ud-īrya,%}¦ ind. having uttered, having spoken.
<LEND>

<L>10794<pc>0155-b<k1>udIryamARa<k2>udIryamARa
{%Ud-īryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being cast or discharged;
being spoken or uttered.
<LEND>

<L>10795<pc>0155-b<k1>udIz<k2>udIz
{#udIz#}¦ {%ud-īṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-īṣate, -īṣitum,%} to
rise.
<LEND>

<L>10796<pc>0155-b<k1>udIzita<k2>udIzita
{%Ud-īṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen, elevated.
<LEND>

<L>10797<pc>0155-b<k1>udukz<k2>udukz
{#udukz#}¦ {%ud-ukṣ,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-ukṣati,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to sprinkle upwards or outwards.
<LEND>

<L>10798<pc>0155-b<k1>udubj<k2>udubj
{#udubj#}¦ {%ud-ubj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-ubjati, -jitum,%} to
cleave asunder (?); to set up, erect.
<LEND>

<L>10799<pc>0155-b<k1>udumbara<k2>udumbara
{#udumbara#}¦ {%udumbara, as,%} m. (Ved. written with
{%d,%} in later books generally with {%ḍ%}), the glomerous
fig tree, Ficus Glomerata; a kind of leprosy; a thres-
hold; a eunuch; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of the glomerous
fig tree; copper; the weight karṣa. {%—Udumbara-%}
{%parṇī%} or {%udumbara-dalā,%} f., N. of the plant Croton
Polyandra. {%—Udumbarā-vatī,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>10800<pc>0155-b<k1>udumbala<k2>udumbala
{%Udumbala, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. copper-coloured?;
(Say.) of extended power (for {%uru-bala;%} said of the
two dogs, the messengers of Yama).
<LEND>

<L>10801<pc>0155-b<k1>udumBara<k2>udumBara
{%Udumbhara,%}¦ a word coined for the etymological
explanation of {%udumbara.%}
<LEND>

<L>10802<pc>0155-b<k1>uduz<k2>uduz
{#uduz#}¦ {%ud-uṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-oṣati, -ṣitum,%} to
expel by heat.
<LEND>

<L>10803<pc>0155-b<k1>uduzwamuKa<k2>uduzwamuKa
{%Uduṣṭa-mukha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. having a red
mouth (as a horse).
<LEND>

<L>10804<pc>0155-b<k1>udUKala<k2>udUKala
{#udUKala#}¦ {%udūkhala, as, am,%} m. n. a wooden
mortar used for pounding rice and separating the
husk; any mortar; bdellium; a mortar-shaped joint.
<LEND>

<L>10805<pc>0155-b<k1>udUQa<k2>udUQa
{#udUQa#}¦ {%ud-ūḍha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vah%} with
{%ud%}), married; coarse, gross, heavy, fat; material,
substantial; much, exceeding.
<LEND>

<L>10806<pc>0155-b<k1>udUh<k2>udUh
{#udUh#}¦ {%ud-ūh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ūhati, -te, -hitum,%}
to push or press upwards, move or bear upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10807<pc>0155-b<k1>udf<k2>udf
{#udf#}¦ {%ud-ṛ,%} cl. 3. P. {%-iyarti%} (Ved. aor. A.
{%-ārta%}), {%-artum, -aritum,%} or {%-rītum,%} to start up,
rise; to move up, raise, excite: Caus. {%-arpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to rise.
<LEND>

<L>10808<pc>0155-b<k1>udfc<k2>udfc
{#udfc#}¦ {%ud-ṛc, k,%} f. (fr. rt. {%ric%} with {%ud%}), Ved.
that which reaches beyond (the present time) or
what follows, future time; remainder, conclusion, end,
aim; concluding part or hymn (?).
<LEND>

<L>10809<pc>0155-b<k1>udarka<k2>udarka
{%Ud-arka, as,%}¦ m. reaching or extending beyond,
surpassing; the future result of actions; consequence,
futurity, future time; a remote consequence, reward;
conclusion, end; elevation of a building, a tower,
look-out place; the plant Vanguiera Spinosa.
<LEND>

<L>10810<pc>0155-b<k1>udfz<k2>udfz
{#udfz#}¦ {%ud-ṛṣ,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-ṛṣati,%}
{%-arṣitum,%} to split, pierce through.
<LEND>

<L>10811<pc>0155-b<k1>ude<k2>ude
{#ude#}¦ {%ud-e (ud-ā-i), -aiti, -tum,%} to come up,
come out of, arise from; to step up (to an altar),
to go out.
<LEND>

<L>10812<pc>0155-b<k1>udej<k2>udej
{#udej#}¦ {%ud-ej,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ejati, -ejitum,%} to
move, rise, shake, tremble.
<LEND>

<L>10813<pc>0155-b<k1>udejaya<k2>udejaya
{%Ud-ejaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking, making tremble.
<LEND>

<L>10814<pc>0155-b<k1>udojas<k2>udojas
{#udojas#}¦ {%ud-ojas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. exceedingly
powerful or violent.
<LEND>

<L>10815<pc>0155-b<k1>udganDi<k2>udganDi
{#udganDi#}¦ {%ud-gandhi, is, is, i,%} fragrant.
<LEND>

<L>10816<pc>0155-b<k1>udgam<k2>udgam
{#udgam#}¦ {%ud-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%}
to go up, rise, ascend; to shoot up; to go out, come
from, break out, depart; to spread.
<LEND>

<L>10817<pc>0155-b<k1>udgata<k2>udgata
{%Ud-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone up, risen, ascended;
[Page0155-c+ 75]
gone, departed; proceeded forth or from; vomited,
cast up; ({%ā%}), f. a stanza of four lines, with ten sylla-
bles in the first three and thirteen in the last. {%—Ud-%}
{%gata-śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} (a calf) whose horns are
just appearing. {%—Udgatāsu (˚ta-asu), us, us, u,%} de-
ceased, dead.
<LEND>

<L>10818<pc>0155-c<k1>udgati<k2>udgati
{%Ud-gati, is,%}¦ f. going up, rising, ascent; coming
forth; bringing up, vomiting.
<LEND>

<L>10819<pc>0155-c<k1>udgama<k2>udgama
{%Ud-gama, as,%}¦ m. going up, rising, ascending,
elevation (as of a mountain); rising (of the stars);
going out or away; coming forth, becoming visible,
production, creation; shoot (of a plant); bringing
up, vomiting.
<LEND>

<L>10820<pc>0155-c<k1>udgamana<k2>udgamana
{%Ud-gamana, am,%}¦ n. rising, ascending; coming
forth, becoming visible.
<LEND>

<L>10821<pc>0155-c<k1>udgamanIya<k2>udgamanIya
{%Ud-gamanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone up or ascended;
({%am%}), n. a pair of bleached cloths or sheets.
<LEND>

<L>10822<pc>0155-c<k1>udgal<k2>udgal
{#udgal#}¦ {%ud-gal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-galati, -litum,%} to
trickle out, ooze out; issue in drops.
<LEND>

<L>10823<pc>0155-c<k1>udgA<k2>udgA
{#udgA#}¦ {%ud-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to rise
(as the sun &c.); to come forward, to begin.
<LEND>

<L>10824<pc>0155-c<k1>udgAtf<k2>udgAtf
{#udgAtf#}¦ {%ud-gātṛ,%} &c. See {%ud-gai%} below.
<LEND>

<L>10825<pc>0155-c<k1>udgAra<k2>udgAra
{#udgAra#}¦ {%ud-gāra,%} &c. See {%ud-gṝ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>10826<pc>0155-c<k1>udgAh<k2>udgAh
{#udgAh#}¦ {%ud-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -gāhitum%}
or {%-gāḍhum,%} to emerge.
<LEND>

<L>10827<pc>0155-c<k1>udgAQa<k2>udgAQa
{%Ud-gāḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ excessive, violent, much;
({%am%}), ind. excessively, much.
<LEND>

<L>10828<pc>0155-c<k1>udgur<k2>udgur
{#udgur#}¦ {%ud-gur,%} cl. 6. A. {%-gurate, -ritum,%} to
raise the voice in a threatening manner.
<LEND>

<L>10829<pc>0155-c<k1>udgUrRa<k2>udgUrRa
{%Ud-gūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, lifted, held up;
erected, excited.
<LEND>

<L>10830<pc>0155-c<k1>udguh<k2>udguh
{#udguh#}¦ {%ud-guh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-gūhati, -te, -gūhi-%}
{%tum%} or {%-goḍhum,%} to pierce through and through, to
twist through.
<LEND>

<L>10831<pc>0155-c<k1>udgF<k2>udgF
{#udgF#}¦ {%ud-gṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-girati%} or {%-gilati, -gari-%}
{%tum%} or {%-litum,%} or {%-garītum%} or {%-lītum,%} to eject (from
the mouth), spit out, vomit out or up, belch out, pour
out, discharge; breathe out; to rise from: Caus. P.
{%-girayati, -yitum,%} to cause to pour forth, to raise (a
sound), to cause to utter sounds.
<LEND>

<L>10832<pc>0155-c<k1>udgAra<k2>udgAra
{%Ud-gāra, as,%}¦ m. spitting out, ejecting anything
from the mouth, vomiting; belching, eructation; re-
lating repeatedly; spittle, saliva; speaking in the
throat, sound, roaring, hissing.
<LEND>

<L>10833<pc>0155-c<k1>udgArin<k2>udgArin
{%Ud-gārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ ejecting, spitting, vomiting.
<LEND>

<L>10834<pc>0155-c<k1>udgiraRa<k2>udgiraRa
{%Ud-giraṇa, am,%}¦ n. vomiting; ejecting anything
(as saliva &c.) from the mouth, slavering.
<LEND>

<L>10835<pc>0155-c<k1>udgIrRa<k2>udgIrRa
{%Ud-gīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ vomited forth, ejected, cast
forth, breathed out, exhaled, disdained.
<LEND>

<L>10836<pc>0155-c<k1>udgE<k2>udgE
{#udgE#}¦ {%ud-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gātum,%} to be-
gin to sing; to sing or chant (applied especially to
the singing or chanting of the Sāma-veda, from which
one order of priests take the name of Udgātṛ); to
announce, to celebrate in song; to sing before any
one (with acc.); to fill with song.
<LEND>

<L>10837<pc>0155-c<k1>udgAtukAma<k2>udgAtukAma
{%Udgātu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to sing.
<LEND>

<L>10838<pc>0155-c<k1>udgAtf<k2>udgAtf
{%Ud-gātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one of the four chief-priests, viz.
the one who chants the hymns of the Sāma-veda;
a chanter.
<LEND>

<L>10839<pc>0155-c<k1>udgATA<k2>udgATA
{%Ud-gāthā,%}¦ f. a variety of the Āryā measure, the
same as the Gīti, a stanza of four half-lines, contain-
ing alternately twelve and eighteen instants.
<LEND>

<L>10840<pc>0155-c<k1>udgIti<k2>udgIti
{%Ud-gīti, is,%}¦ f. singing; chanting of the Sāma-
veda; a variety of the Āryā metre, a verse of four
half-lines, containing twelve, fifteen, twelve, eighteen
instants.
<LEND>

<L>10841<pc>0155-c<k1>udgITa<k2>udgITa
{%Ud-gītha, as,%}¦ m. chanting of the Sāma-veda, the
office of the Udgātṛ; the second part of the Sāma-
veda; N. of a son of Bhava; N. of a commentator
of Vedic texts; designation of {%Om%} or the triliteral
name of God.
<LEND>

<L>10842<pc>0155-c<k1>udgranT<k2>udgranT
{#udgranT#}¦ {%ud-granth,%} cl. 9. 1. P. A. {%-grathnāti,%}
{%nīte,%} or {%-granthati, -te, -granthitum,%} to bind up,
tie into bundles; to tie up, truss; to fasten, wind; to
unbind, loosen.
<LEND>
[Page0156-a+ 77]

<L>10843<pc>0156-a<k1>udgraTita<k2>udgraTita
{%Ud-grathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ interlaced; unbound,
loosened.
<LEND>

<L>10844<pc>0156-a<k1>udgranTa<k2>udgranTa
{%Ud-grantha, as,%}¦ m. a section, chapter.
<LEND>

<L>10845<pc>0156-a<k1>udgranTi<k2>udgranTi
{%Ud-granthi, is, is, i,%}¦ untied, free from worldly ties.
<LEND>

<L>10846<pc>0156-a<k1>udgrah<k2>udgrah
{#udgrah#}¦ {%ud-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti%} or
Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte, -grahītum,%} to take or lift up;
to set up, erect, elevate; to take out, draw out, take
away; to take away from, to preserve; to cease,
especially to cease to rain; to break off, discontinue
(speaking); A. to raise one's self: Caus. {%-grāhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to take up or out, to cause to pay;
to extol, extol with praise.
<LEND>

<L>10847<pc>0156-a<k1>udgfhIta<k2>udgfhIta
{%Ud-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken up, turned up, up-
raised.
<LEND>

<L>10848<pc>0156-a<k1>udgraBaRa<k2>udgraBaRa
{%Ud-grabhaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. taking up, raising.
<LEND>

<L>10849<pc>0156-a<k1>udgraha<k2>udgraha
{%Ud-graha, as,%}¦ m. taking up; any object that may
be accomplished by religious or other acts.
<LEND>

<L>10850<pc>0156-a<k1>udgrahaRa<k2>udgrahaRa
{%Ud-grahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. taking up, lifting up, taking
away or out.
<LEND>

<L>10851<pc>0156-a<k1>udgrABa<k2>udgrABa
{%Ud-grābha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. raising, elevating.
<LEND>

<L>10852<pc>0156-a<k1>udgrAha<k2>udgrAha
{%Ud-grāha, as,%}¦ m. taking up or away; (in the Prā-
tiśākhyas) the rule of Sandhi which causes the change
of the terminations {%aḥ, e,%} and {%o,%} to {%a%} before a follow-
ing vowel; replying in argument; objection. {%—Ud-%}
{%grāha-padavṛtti, is,%} f. the Sandhi called Udgrāha
before a long vowel. {%—Udgrāha-vat,%} ind. (in the
Prātiśākhyas) ‘like the Udgrāha,’ a term applied to
that kind of Sandhi by which final {%a%} and {%ā%} appear as
{%aMM%} before {%ṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>10853<pc>0156-a<k1>udgrAhaRikA<k2>udgrAhaRikA
{%Udgrāhaṇikā,%}¦ f. replying in argument.
<LEND>

<L>10854<pc>0156-a<k1>udgrAhita<k2>udgrAhita
{%Ud-grāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken away, lifted up; de-
posited, delivered; seized; bound, tied; excellent,
exalted; recalled, remembered.
<LEND>

<L>10855<pc>0156-a<k1>udgrIva<k2>udgrIva
{#udgrIva#}¦ {%ud-grīva, as, ā, am,%} or {%ud-grīvin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} one who lifts up or raises the neck (in trying
to see anything).
<LEND>

<L>10856<pc>0156-a<k1>udGa<k2>udGa
{#udGa#}¦ {%ud-gha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%han%} with {%ud%}),
excellence, happiness; the hollow hand; fire; a model,
a pattern; organic air in the body.
<LEND>

<L>10857<pc>0156-a<k1>udGana<k2>udGana
{%Ud-ghana, as,%}¦ m. a carpenter's bench, a plank on
which he works.
<LEND>

<L>10858<pc>0156-a<k1>udGAta<k2>udGAta
{%Ud-ghāta, as,%}¦ m. striking, wounding, inflicting a
hurt; a wound, a blow; slipping, tripping; raising,
elevation; a beginning, a thing begun; breathing
through the nostrils as a religious exercise; a club, a
mallet, a weapon; the division of a book, a chapter,
a section.
<LEND>

<L>10859<pc>0156-a<k1>udGAtin<k2>udGAtin
{%Udghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ uneven, having elevations,
rough.
<LEND>

<L>10860<pc>0156-a<k1>udGaw<k2>udGaw
{#udGaw#}¦ {%ud-ghaṭ,%} Caus. {%-ghāṭayati, -yitum,%} to
open, unlock, unfasten; to peel, shell; to reveal, ex-
pose; to undertake, commence; to rub over, stroke,
tickle.
<LEND>

<L>10861<pc>0156-a<k1>udGAwa<k2>udGAwa
{%Ud-ghāṭa, as,%}¦ m. a watch or guard-house.
<LEND>

<L>10862<pc>0156-a<k1>udGAwaka<k2>udGAwaka
{%Ud-ghāṭaka, as,%}¦ m. an opener, the instrument or
implement for opening anything, a key; ({%am%}), n.
the rope and bucket of a well, a leather bucket used
for drawing water.
<LEND>

<L>10863<pc>0156-a<k1>udGAwana<k2>udGAwana
{%Ud-ghāṭana, am,%}¦ n. opening, unlocking; an
opener, the instrument or means of opening, a key,
&c.; the rope and bucket of a well, a leather bucket
used for drawing water; hoisting, raising, lifting up.
<LEND>

<L>10864<pc>0156-a<k1>udGAwanIya<k2>udGAwanIya
{%Ud-ghāṭanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be opened.
<LEND>

<L>10865<pc>0156-a<k1>udGAwita<k2>udGAwita
{%Ud-ghāṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ opened, manifested; un-
dertaken, commenced; raised, hoisted or lifted up;
done with effort, exerted. {%—Udghāṭita-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} wise, intelligent. {%—Udghāṭitāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} naked; intelligent, wise.
<LEND>

<L>10866<pc>0156-a<k1>udGAwin<k2>udGAwin
{%Ud-ghāṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ opening, commencing.
<LEND>

<L>10867<pc>0156-a<k1>udGawwaka<k2>udGawwaka
{#udGawwaka#}¦ {%ud-ghaṭṭaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ghaṭṭ%}
with {%ud%}), a kind of time (in music).
<LEND>

<L>10868<pc>0156-a<k1>udGawwana<k2>udGawwana
{%Ud-ghaṭṭana, am,%}¦ n. kicking of a horse (?);
friction; opening, opening upwards as a lid.
<LEND>

<L>10869<pc>0156-a<k1>udGawwita<k2>udGawwita
{%Ud-ghaṭṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ opened, unlocked.
<LEND>

<L>10870<pc>0156-a<k1>udGasa<k2>udGasa
{#udGasa#}¦ {%ud-ghasa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ghas%}), flesh.
<LEND>

<L>10871<pc>0156-a<k1>udGuz<k2>udGuz
{#udGuz#}¦ {%ud-ghuṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ghoṣati, -ṣitum,%}
to sound, cry out, fill with cries: Caus. {%-ghoṣayati, %}
[Page0156-b+ 75]
{%yitum,%} to cause to sound aloud, to declare aloud;
proclaim, noise abroad.
<LEND>

<L>10872<pc>0156-b<k1>udGuzwa<k2>udGuzwa
{%Ud-ghuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded out; proclaimed;
({%am%}), n. sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>10873<pc>0156-b<k1>udGoza<k2>udGoza
{%Ud-ghoṣa, as,%}¦ m. announcing or proclaiming
aloud; popular talk, general report.
<LEND>

<L>10874<pc>0156-b<k1>udGfz<k2>udGfz
{#udGfz#}¦ {%ud-ghṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gharṣati, -ṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to rub, comminute by rubbing; to rub over,
strike against.
<LEND>

<L>10875<pc>0156-b<k1>udGarzaRa<k2>udGarzaRa
{%Ud-gharṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. rubbing, rubbing up; rub-
bing the skin with hard substances, as vitrified brick
&c.; a cudgel.
<LEND>

<L>10876<pc>0156-b<k1>udGfzwa<k2>udGfzwa
{%Ud-ghṛṣṭa, am,%}¦ n. a peculiar fault in pronun-
ciation.
<LEND>

<L>10877<pc>0156-b<k1>uddaMSa<k2>uddaMSa
{#uddaMSa#}¦ {%ud-daṃśa, as,%} m. (rt. {%daṃś%}), a bug;
a mosquito, a gadfly.
<LEND>

<L>10878<pc>0156-b<k1>uddaRqa<k2>uddaRqa
{#uddaRqa#}¦ {%ud-daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} whose staff is
raised, whose stalk is erect; raised on a staff or pole.
{%—Uddaṇḍa-pāla, as,%} m. a punisher, whether king
or magistrate; a sort of snake, a kind of fish; [cf.
{%ud-aṇḍa-pāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>10879<pc>0156-b<k1>uddantura<k2>uddantura
{#uddantura#}¦ {%ud-dantura, as, ā, am,%} large-toothed,
having projecting teeth; high, tall; {{terriffic->terrific||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}, for-
midable.
<LEND>

<L>10880<pc>0156-b<k1>uddam<k2>uddam
{#uddam#}¦ {%ud-dam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-dāmyati, -damitum,%}
cl. 10. P. {%-damayati, -yitum,%} to subdue, to over-
power, become master of.
<LEND>

<L>10881<pc>0156-b<k1>uddama<k2>uddama
{%Ud-dama, as,%}¦ m. subduing, overpowering.
<LEND>

<L>10882<pc>0156-b<k1>uddAnta<k2>uddAnta
{%Ud-dānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ energetic, humble, elevated;
(? for {%ud-vānta%}), vomited by an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>10883<pc>0156-b<k1>uddA<k2>uddA
{#uddA#}¦ {%ud-dā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadāti, -dātum,%} to
take away, snatch away.
<LEND>

<L>10884<pc>0156-b<k1>uddAna<k2>uddAna
{#uddAna#}¦ {%ud-dāna, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 4. {%dā,%} to
bind, with {%ud%}), binding, confinement; taming, subdu-
ing; the middle, the waist; a fire-place; submarine
fire; entrance of the sun into a sign of the zodiac.
<LEND>

<L>10885<pc>0156-b<k1>uddAma<k2>uddAma
{%Ud-dāma, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%ud%} and {%dāman,%} a bond),
unrestrained, unbound, set free; self-willed; unlimited,
extraordinary; proud, haughty; large, great; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Yama (‘whose noose is raised’); an
epithet of Varuṇa; ({%am%}), ind. in an unrestrained
manner, without any limits.
<LEND>

<L>10886<pc>0156-b<k1>uddita<k2>uddita
{%Ud-dita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound, tied.
<LEND>

<L>10887<pc>0156-b<k1>uddAla<k2>uddAla
{#uddAla#}¦ {%ud-dāla, as,%} m. (fr. {%dṝ%} with {%ud ?%}),
the plant Cordia Myxa or Latifolia; also Paspalum
Frumentaceum. {%—Uddāla-vat, ān,%} m., N. of a Gan-
dharba.
<LEND>

<L>10888<pc>0156-b<k1>uddAlaka<k2>uddAlaka
{%Uddālaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of the above plants; N. of
a teacher; ({%am%}), n. a kind of honey. {%—Uddālaka-%}
{%puṣpa-bhañjikā,%} f. ‘breaking of Uddālaka flowers,’
a sort of game played by people in the eastern districts.
<LEND>

<L>10889<pc>0156-b<k1>uddAlin<k2>uddAlin
{%Uddālin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>10890<pc>0156-b<k1>uddiDIrzA<k2>uddiDIrzA
{#uddiDIrzA#}¦ {%ud-didhīrṣā.%} See under 1. {%ud-%}
{%dhṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>10891<pc>0156-b<k1>uddina<k2>uddina
{#uddina#}¦ {%ud-dina, am,%} n. midday.
<LEND>

<L>10892<pc>0156-b<k1>uddiS<k2>uddiS<h>1
{#uddiS#} 1¦. {%ud-diś,%} cl. 6. P. A., 3. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-te, -dideṣṭi, -deṣṭum,%} to show or direct towards;
to point out, signify, declare, determine; to enunciate,
prophesy; to mean; to aim at, intend, destine; to
explain, instruct, teach.
<LEND>

<L>10893<pc>0156-b<k1>uddiS<k2>uddiS<h>2
2. {%ud-diś, k,%}¦ f., Ved. a particular direction or quarter
of the sky.
<LEND>

<L>10894<pc>0156-b<k1>uddiSya<k2>uddiSya
{%Ud-diśya,%}¦ ind. having shown or explained; stipu-
lating for, demanding; aiming at, in the direction of,
with reference to; towards; with regard to, for, for
the sake of, in the name of.
<LEND>

<L>10895<pc>0156-b<k1>uddizwa<k2>uddizwa
{%Ud-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ mentioned, particularized,
described, promised.
<LEND>

<L>10896<pc>0156-b<k1>uddeSa<k2>uddeSa
{%Ud-deśa, as,%}¦ m. pointing to or at, direction; ascer-
tainment; brief statement; exemplification, illustra-
tion, explanation; mentioning a thing by name;
assignment, prescription; stipulation, bargain; quarter,
spot, region, place; an object, a motive; upper region,
high situation; (in Nyāya phil.) the enunciation of
a thing that is to be further discussed and elucidated;
[Page0156-c+ 74]
(at the end of compounds) relative to. {%—Uddeśa-tas,%}
ind. pointedly, distinctly; by way of explanation.
<LEND>

<L>10897<pc>0156-c<k1>uddeSaka<k2>uddeSaka
{%Ud-deśaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ illustrative, explanatory;
({%as%}), m. an illustration, an example; an illustrator,
a guide; (in mathematics) a question, problem.
<LEND>

<L>10898<pc>0156-c<k1>uddeSya<k2>uddeSya
{%Ud-deśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be illustrated or explained;
anything to which one refers or which one has in
view; ({%am%}), n. the end in view, an incentive.
<LEND>

<L>10899<pc>0156-c<k1>uddezwF<k2>uddezwF
{%Ud-deṣṭṝ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ pointing out &c.; one
who acts with a certain scope or design.
<LEND>

<L>10900<pc>0156-c<k1>uddih<k2>uddih
{#uddih#}¦ {%ud-dih,%} cl. 2. P. A., Ved. {%-degdhi,%}
{%-digdhe, -degdhum,%} to throw or heap up.
<LEND>

<L>10901<pc>0156-c<k1>uddehika<k2>uddehika
{%Ud-dehika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. the
white ant.
<LEND>

<L>10902<pc>0156-c<k1>uddIp<k2>uddIp
{#uddIp#}¦ {%ud-dīp,%} cl. 4. A. {%-dīpyate, -dīpitum,%}
to flame, blaze up, be kindled: Caus. {%-dīpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to light up, inflame, illuminate, excite, ani-
mate.
<LEND>

<L>10903<pc>0156-c<k1>uddIpa<k2>uddIpa
{%Ud-dīpa, as,%}¦ m. inflaming, lighting; an inflamer;
animating, who or what animates; ({%am%}), n. a gummy
and resinous substance, bdellium.
<LEND>

<L>10904<pc>0156-c<k1>uddIpaka<k2>uddIpaka
{%Ud-dīpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ inflaming, exciting, ren-
dering more intense; lighting, setting alight.
<LEND>

<L>10905<pc>0156-c<k1>uddIpana<k2>uddIpana
{%Ud-dīpana, am,%}¦ n. inflaming (as passion), exciting,
animating; illuminating; burning of a body &c.;
any aggravating thing or circumstance, giving poig-
nancy to feeling or passion.
<LEND>

<L>10906<pc>0156-c<k1>uddIpamAna<k2>uddIpamAna
{%Ud-dīpamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ lighting up, brighten-
ing, becoming light.
<LEND>

<L>10907<pc>0156-c<k1>uddIpta<k2>uddIpta
{%Ud-dīpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ lighted, set on fire or alight;
shining; inflamed, aggravated (as passion).
<LEND>

<L>10908<pc>0156-c<k1>uddIpra<k2>uddIpra
{%Ud-dīpra, am,%}¦ n. bdellium.
<LEND>

<L>10909<pc>0156-c<k1>uddfS<k2>uddfS
{#uddfS#}¦ {%ud-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati, -draṣṭum,%}
to see above (in the sky), to look upwards; to look
into the future, expect; to become aware of; to doubt:
Caus. {%-darśayati, -yitum,%} to make visible, cause to
appear.
<LEND>

<L>10910<pc>0156-c<k1>uddarSana<k2>uddarSana
{%Ud-darśana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king of the Nāgas.
<LEND>

<L>10911<pc>0156-c<k1>uddF<k2>uddF
{#uddF#}¦ {%ud-dṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-dṛṇāti, -daritum%} or
{%-rītum,%} to tear out.
<LEND>

<L>10912<pc>0156-c<k1>uddyut<k2>uddyut
{#uddyut#}¦ {%ud-dyut,%} cl. 1. A. {%-dyotate, -titum,%}
to blaze up, shine: Caus. {%-dyotayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to shine: Intens. Ved. {%-davidyutīti,%} to shine
intensely.
<LEND>

<L>10913<pc>0156-c<k1>uddyota<k2>uddyota
{%Ud-dyota, as, ā, am,%}¦ flashing up, shining; ({%as%}),
m. light, lustre; revelation.
<LEND>

<L>10914<pc>0156-c<k1>uddyotita<k2>uddyotita
{%Ud-dyotita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lighted up, emblazoned.
<LEND>

<L>10915<pc>0156-c<k1>uddrAva<k2>uddrAva
{#uddrAva#}¦ {%ud-drāva, as,%} m. (rt. {%dru%}), flight,
retreat, going upwards; ({%as, ā, am%}), running away.
<LEND>

<L>10916<pc>0156-c<k1>uddruta<k2>uddruta
{%Ud-druta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fled, retreated, run away;
ascended; gone up or upwards.
<LEND>

<L>10917<pc>0156-c<k1>udDan<k2>udDan
{#udDan#}¦ {%ud-dhan (ud-han),%} cl. 2. P. {%-dhanti%}
(Ved. cl. 1. P. {%-dhanati%}), {%-dhantum,%} to raise up,
elevate.
<LEND>

<L>10918<pc>0156-c<k1>udData<k2>udData
{%Ud-dhata, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, elevated; exceeding,
excessive; haughty, vain, puffed up; excited, intense;
rude, ill-behaved; ({%as%}), m. a king's wrestler. {%—Ud-%}
{%dhata-manas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%uddhata-manaska,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} high-minded, haughty, proud. {%—Uddhata-%}
{%manaska-tva, am,%} n. pride, arrogance. {%—Uddhatār-%}
{%ṇava-nisvana (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} raising a noise
like the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>10919<pc>0156-c<k1>udDati<k2>udDati
{%Ud-dhati, is,%}¦ f. elevation; pride, haughtiness; a
stroke, shaking.
<LEND>

<L>10920<pc>0156-c<k1>udDama<k2>udDama
{#udDama#}¦ {%ud-dhama.%} See under {%ud-dhmā.%}
<LEND>

<L>10921<pc>0156-c<k1>udDaya<k2>udDaya
{#udDaya#}¦ {%ud-dhaya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhe%} with
{%ud%}), who or what drinks.
<LEND>

<L>10922<pc>0156-c<k1>udDara<k2>udDara
{#udDara#}¦ {%ud-dhara,%} &c. See 2. {%ud-dhṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>10923<pc>0156-c<k1>udDarza<k2>udDarza<h>1
{#udDarza#} 1¦. {%ud-dharṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%dhṛṣ%}
with {%ud%}), courage to undertake a thing.
<LEND>

<L>10924<pc>0156-c<k1>udDarzaRa<k2>udDarzaRa<h>1
1. {%ud-dharṣaṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (or fr. next ?), animat-
ing, encouraging; ({%am%}), n. animating, encouraging.
<LEND>

<L>10925<pc>0156-c<k1>udDarza<k2>udDarza<h>2
{#udDarza#} 2¦. {%ud-dharṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hṛṣ%} with
{%ud%}), great joy; a festival (especially a religious one).
<LEND>
[Page0157-a+ 72]

<L>10926<pc>0157-a<k1>udDarzaRa<k2>udDarzaRa<h>2
2. {%ud-dharṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. erection of the hair of
the body, occasioned by great pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>10927<pc>0157-a<k1>udDarzin<k2>udDarzin
{%Ud-dharṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. whose hair is erected;
({%iṇī%}), f., N. of a metre of four verses, of fourteen
syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>10928<pc>0157-a<k1>udDava<k2>udDava
{#udDava#}¦ {%ud-dhava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hu%} with {%ud%}),
a sacrificial fire; a festival, a holiday; N. of a Yādava,
the friend and counsellor of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Uddhava-dūta%}
and {%uddhava-sandeśa, as,%} m. title of two poems.
{%—Uddhava-brāhmaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a copyist.
<LEND>

<L>10929<pc>0157-a<k1>udDasta<k2>udDasta
{#udDasta#}¦ {%ud-dhasta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%hasta%} and
{%ud%}), extending the hands, raising the hands.
<LEND>

<L>10930<pc>0157-a<k1>udDA<k2>udDA<h>1
{#udDA#} 1¦. {%ud-dhā,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhātum,%} to abandon or expose (an infant); to set
up, erect, build up.
<LEND>

<L>10931<pc>0157-a<k1>udDi<k2>udDi
{%Ud-dhi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a particular part of a carriage,
perhaps the part which rests on the axles; an earthen
stand on which the Ukhā rests.
<LEND>

<L>10932<pc>0157-a<k1>udDita<k2>udDita
{%Ud-dhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set up, erected.
<LEND>

<L>10933<pc>0157-a<k1>udDA<k2>udDA<h>2
{#udDA#} 2¦. {%ud-dhā (ud-hā),%} cl. 3. A. {%uj-jihīte,%}
{%ud-dhātum,%} to go upwards, move upwards; to raise;
to go away from.
<LEND>

<L>10934<pc>0157-a<k1>udDAna<k2>udDAna<h>1
1. {%ud-dhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone up, ascended.
<LEND>

<L>10935<pc>0157-a<k1>udDAna<k2>udDAna<h>2
{#udDAna#} 2¦. {%uddhāna, as, ā, am%} (for {%ud-vānta,%}
{%ud-dhmāta,%} and {%ud-dhmāna?%}), ejected, vomited;
inflated, corpulent; ({%am%}), n. ejecting, vomiting; a
fire-place.
<LEND>

<L>10936<pc>0157-a<k1>udDAnta<k2>udDAnta
{#udDAnta#}¦ {%uddhānta, as, ā, am%} (for {%ud-vānta?%}),
ejected, vomited; ({%as%}), m. an elephant out of rut
(from whose temples the juice ceases to flow).
<LEND>

<L>10937<pc>0157-a<k1>udDura<k2>udDura
{#udDura#}¦ {%ud-dhura, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ud%} and {%dhur%}),
freed from a yoke or burden; ceasing from, leaving
off; unrestrained, lively, cheerful; heavy, thick, gross,
firm; high.
<LEND>

<L>10938<pc>0157-a<k1>udDuzaRa<k2>udDuzaRa
{#udDuzaRa#}¦ {%uddhuṣaṇa,%} a corruption of 2. {%ud-%}
{%dharṣaṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>10939<pc>0157-a<k1>udDU<k2>udDU
{#udDU#}¦ {%ud-dhū,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-dhūnoti%} or {%-dhu-%}
{%noti, -nute, -dhavitum%} or {%-dhotum,%} to rouse up,
shake up, move; to disturb, excite; to shake off,
throw off; to expel.
<LEND>

<L>10940<pc>0157-a<k1>udDUta<k2>udDUta
{%Ud-dhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken off, fallen from or
off; tossed up, scattered above; exalted; high, loud.
{%—Uddhūta-pāpa, as, ā, am,%} one who has shaken
off (his) sins.
<LEND>

<L>10941<pc>0157-a<k1>udDUpana<k2>udDUpana
{#udDUpana#}¦ {%ud-dhūpana, am,%} n. fumigating.
<LEND>

<L>10942<pc>0157-a<k1>udDUlaya<k2>udDUlaya
{#udDUlaya#}¦ {%uddhūlaya,%} nom. P. {%-dhūlayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to powder, sprinkle with dust or powder.
<LEND>

<L>10943<pc>0157-a<k1>udDUzaRa<k2>udDUzaRa
{#udDUzaRa#}¦ {%uddhūṣaṇa, am,%} n. horripilation;
also {%uddhuṣaṇa.%} See 2. {%ud-dharṣaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>10944<pc>0157-a<k1>udDUzita<k2>udDUzita
{%Uddhūṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having the hairs erected.
<LEND>

<L>10945<pc>0157-a<k1>udDf<k2>udDf<h>1
{#udDf#} 1¦. {%ud-dhṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dharati, -te,%}
{%-dhartum,%} to draw out, raise up, make honoured.
<LEND>

<L>10946<pc>0157-a<k1>uddiDIrzA<k2>uddiDIrzA
{%Ud-didhīrṣā,%}¦ f. wish to remove.
<LEND>

<L>10947<pc>0157-a<k1>udDf<k2>udDf<h>2
{#udDf#} 2¦. {%ud-dhṛ (ud-hṛ),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dha-%}
{%rati, -te, -dhartum,%} to draw out, take out, to extri-
cate, deliver; to tear out, pull out, eradicate; to
extend, elevate, raise: Caus. {%-dhārayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to draw out; to raise: Desid. {%uj-jihīrṣati,%}
to wish to elevate or draw out, to elevate.
<LEND>

<L>10948<pc>0157-a<k1>udDara<k2>udDara
{%Ud-dhara, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Rakṣas; {%(as, ā, am)%}
{%= ud-dhura (?).%}
<LEND>

<L>10949<pc>0157-a<k1>udDaraRa<k2>udDaraRa
{%Ud-dharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of drawing out, taking
out, tearing out; taking off (clothes); extricating, de-
livering, rescuing; raising, lifting; eradication; ex-
termination; act of destroying; taking a part or
share; taking from the Gārhapatya fire to supply the
other sacred fires; vomiting, bringing up; vomited
food; final emancipation; ({%as%}), m., N. of the father
of king Śantanu, the author of a commentary on a
portion of the Mārkaṇḍeya-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>10950<pc>0157-a<k1>udDaraRIya<k2>udDaraRIya
{%Ud-dharaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be raised or taken
up, to be extracted.
<LEND>
[Page0157-b+ 75]

<L>10951<pc>0157-b<k1>udDartavya<k2>udDartavya
{%Ud-dhartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be drawn out.
<LEND>

<L>10952<pc>0157-b<k1>udDartf<k2>udDartf
{%Ud-dhartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who raises or lifts up;
a sharer, a coheir; one who recovers property; ({%tā%}),
m. a destroyer, exterminator; redeemer, deliverer.
<LEND>

<L>10953<pc>0157-b<k1>udDAra<k2>udDAra
{%Ud-dhāra, as,%}¦ m. raising, elevating, lifting up;
drawing out, extraction, deliverance, redemption, ex-
trication; taking away; deduction, a part to be set
aside, selected part; a portion, share, a surplus given
by the Hindū law to the eldest son beyond the shares
of the younger ones; the first division of a patrimony;
the sixth part of booty taken in war which belongs
to the prince; debt, especially a debt not bearing
interest, obligation; recovering property; selecting
(a passage), quoting; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Cocculus Cor-
difolius; ({%am%}), n. a fire-place. {%—Uddhāra-vibhāga,%}
{%as,%} m. division of shares, partition.
<LEND>

<L>10954<pc>0157-b<k1>udDAraka<k2>udDAraka
{%Ud-dhāraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what raises or
lifts, drawing out.
<LEND>

<L>10955<pc>0157-b<k1>udDAraRa<k2>udDAraRa
{%Ud-dhāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. raising, elevating; drawing
out of (a danger), delivering; sharing, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>10956<pc>0157-b<k1>udDArita<k2>udDArita
{%Ud-dhārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken out, drawn forth,
extricated, released.
<LEND>

<L>10957<pc>0157-b<k1>udDfta<k2>udDfta
{%Ud-dhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn up or out as water
from a well &c., raised, elevated; lifted up, thrown
up or upwards; extracted, pulled up or out, eradicated
or broken off; separated, set apart; divided, parti-
tioned; selected, taken from or out of, recovered;
uncovered; dispersed, scattered; holding, containing;
vomited. {%—Uddhṛta-sneha, as, ā, am,%} skimmed
(as milk). {%—Uddhṛtāri (˚ta-ari), is is, i,%} destroy-
ing an enemy. {%—Uddhṛtoddhāra (˚ta-ud˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has received his share; that from
which a share has been deducted.
<LEND>

<L>10958<pc>0157-b<k1>udDfti<k2>udDfti
{%Ud-dhṛti, is,%}¦ f. drawing out; extraction, an ex-
tract; delivering, rescue.
<LEND>

<L>10959<pc>0157-b<k1>udDftya<k2>udDftya
{%Ud-dhṛtya,%}¦ ind. having raised up or drawn out.
<LEND>

<L>10960<pc>0157-b<k1>udDmA<k2>udDmA
{#udDmA#}¦ {%ud-dhmā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhamati, -dhmā-%}
{%tum,%} to breathe out, to puff, to pant, to blow; to
inflate, to make known by blowing (a trumpet &c.).
<LEND>

<L>10961<pc>0157-b<k1>udDama<k2>udDama
{%Ud-dhama, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what blows; ({%as%}),
m. breathing hard, panting; blowing, sounding.
<LEND>

<L>10962<pc>0157-b<k1>udDmAna<k2>udDmAna
{%Ud-dhmāna, am,%}¦ n. a stove.
<LEND>

<L>10963<pc>0157-b<k1>udDmAya<k2>udDmAya
{%Ud-dhmāya,%}¦ ind. breathing out &c.
<LEND>

<L>10964<pc>0157-b<k1>udDya<k2>udDya
{#udDya#}¦ {%uddhya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ujjh?%}), a river;
N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>10965<pc>0157-b<k1>udDvaMsa<k2>udDvaMsa
{#udDvaMsa#}¦ {%ud-dhvaṃsa, as,%} m. (rt. {%dhvaṃs%}),
hoarseness.
<LEND>

<L>10966<pc>0157-b<k1>udbanD<k2>udbanD
{#udbanD#}¦ {%ud-bandh,%} cl. 9. P. {%-badhnāti, -ban-%}
{%dhum,%} to tie up, hang.
<LEND>

<L>10967<pc>0157-b<k1>udbadDa<k2>udbadDa
{%Ud-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ tied up, hung.
<LEND>

<L>10968<pc>0157-b<k1>udbanDa<k2>udbanDa
{%Ud-bandha, as,%}¦ m. or {%ud-bandhana, am,%} n. tying
up, hanging; hanging one's self.
<LEND>

<L>10969<pc>0157-b<k1>udbanDuka<k2>udbanDuka
{%Ud-bandhuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. one who hangs up.
<LEND>

<L>10970<pc>0157-b<k1>udbala<k2>udbala
{#udbala#}¦ {%ud-bala, as, ā, am,%} strong, powerful.
<LEND>

<L>10971<pc>0157-b<k1>udbAhu<k2>udbAhu
{#udbAhu#}¦ {%ud-bāhu, us, us, u,%} having the arms
raised; extending the arms; having the trunk up-
raised (as an elephant).
<LEND>

<L>10972<pc>0157-b<k1>udbila<k2>udbila
{#udbila#}¦ {%ud-bila, as, ā, am,%} out of the hole,
(an animal) that has quitted its hole.
<LEND>

<L>10973<pc>0157-b<k1>udbuD<k2>udbuD
{#udbuD#}¦ {%ud-budh,%} cl. 1. P. A., Ved. {%-bodhati,%}
{%-te, -bodhitum,%} to awaken, arouse, excite, remind.
<LEND>

<L>10974<pc>0157-b<k1>udbudDa<k2>udbudDa
{%Ud-buddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ awakened, excited, re-
minded, made to think of, recalled; blown, budded.
{%—Udbuddha-saṃskāra, as,%} m. association of ideas,
recalling anything to remembrance.
<LEND>

<L>10975<pc>0157-b<k1>udboDa<k2>udboDa
{%Ud-bodha, as,%}¦ m. awaking, reminding, incipient
knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>10976<pc>0157-b<k1>udboDaka<k2>udboDaka
{%Ud-bodhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ exciting; reminding,
what reminds or calls to remembrance; discovering,
exhibiting.
<LEND>

<L>10977<pc>0157-b<k1>udboDana<k2>udboDana
{%Ud-bodhana, am,%}¦ n. awaking, arousing; recalling,
reminding.
<LEND>

<L>10978<pc>0157-b<k1>udBawa<k2>udBawa
{#udBawa#}¦ {%udbhaṭa, as, ā, am,%} excellent; exalted,
magnanimous; ({%as%}), m. a tortoise; a fan for win-
nowing corn; the sun (?).
<LEND>
[Page0157-c+ 73]

<L>10979<pc>0157-c<k1>udBava<k2>udBava
{#udBava#}¦ {%ud-bhava.%} See 1. {%ud-bhū%} below.
<LEND>

<L>10980<pc>0157-c<k1>udBA<k2>udBA
{#udBA#}¦ {%ud-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -tum,%} to be-
come visible, appear.
<LEND>

<L>10981<pc>0157-c<k1>udBAs<k2>udBAs
{#udBAs#}¦ {%ud-bhās,%} Caus. P. {%-bhāsayati, -yitum,%}
to illuminate, render beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>10982<pc>0157-c<k1>udBAsa<k2>udBAsa
{%Ud-bhāsa, as,%}¦ m. radiance, splendor. {%—Udbhāsa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} shining, radiant.
<LEND>

<L>10983<pc>0157-c<k1>udBAsayat<k2>udBAsayat
{%Ud-bhāsayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ lighting up, irradiating.
<LEND>

<L>10984<pc>0157-c<k1>udBAsita<k2>udBAsita
{%Ud-bhāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lighted up, illuminated,
splendid; ornamented, graced, beautified.
<LEND>

<L>10985<pc>0157-c<k1>udBAsin<k2>udBAsin
{%Ud-bhāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ or {%ud-bhāsura, as, ā, am,%}
shining, radiant.
<LEND>

<L>10986<pc>0157-c<k1>udBid<k2>udBid<h>1
{#udBid#} 1¦. {%ud-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhinte, -bhettum,%} to break out, burst forth.
<LEND>

<L>10987<pc>0157-c<k1>udBid<k2>udBid<h>2
2. {%ud-bhid, t, t, t,%}¦ breaking forth, sprouting, ger-
minating; penetrating, coming to the top, destroying;
(Sāy.) causing to come forth; ({%t%}), m. a sprout or
shoot of a plant, a plant; a spring, a fountain; a kind
of sacrifice. {%—Udbhij-ja (˚bhid-ja), as, ā, am%} (less
correctly {%udbhija%}), sprouting, germinating (as a plant
or some lower animals). {%—Udbhid-vidyā,%} f. the science
of plants, botany.
<LEND>

<L>10988<pc>0157-c<k1>udBida<k2>udBida
{%Ud-bhida, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprouting, germinating;
({%am%}), n. culinary salt.
<LEND>

<L>10989<pc>0157-c<k1>udBinna<k2>udBinna
{%Ud-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ opened, burst, budded.
<LEND>

<L>10990<pc>0157-c<k1>udBeda<k2>udBeda
{%Ud-bheda, as,%}¦ m. breaking through or out, be-
coming visible; a spring of water; treason.
<LEND>

<L>10991<pc>0157-c<k1>udBedana<k2>udBedana
{%Ud-bhedana, am,%}¦ n. a spring of water, fountain.
<LEND>

<L>10992<pc>0157-c<k1>udBU<k2>udBU<h>1
{#udBU#} 1¦. {%ud-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to
exist, spring from, arise: Caus. {%-bhāvayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to exist; to produce; to use, employ.
<LEND>

<L>10993<pc>0157-c<k1>udBava<k2>udBava
{%Ud-bhava, as,%}¦ m. existence, generation, produc-
tion, birth, springing from, growing. (Often at the
end of adj. compounds, e. g. {%medhya-vṛkṣodbha-%}
{%vāni phalāni,%} fruits produced by pure trees.) {%—Ud-%}
{%bhava-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} productive.
<LEND>

<L>10994<pc>0157-c<k1>udBAva<k2>udBAva
{%Ud-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. production, generation; mag-
nanimity.
<LEND>

<L>10995<pc>0157-c<k1>udBAvana<k2>udBAvana
{%Ud-bhāvana, am,%}¦ n. passing over, inattention,
neglect, disregard; saying, speaking.
<LEND>

<L>10996<pc>0157-c<k1>udBAvayitf<k2>udBAvayitf
{%Ud-bhāvayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ raising upwards, exalt-
ing, lifting up.
<LEND>

<L>10997<pc>0157-c<k1>udBAvita<k2>udBAvita
{%Ud-bhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ neglected, disregarded;
said, declared.
<LEND>

<L>10998<pc>0157-c<k1>udBU<k2>udBU<h>2
2. {%ud-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%}¦ Ved. having persistency,
lasting.
<LEND>

<L>10999<pc>0157-c<k1>udBUta<k2>udBUta
{%Ud-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ born, produced; lofty, lite-
rally or figuratively; visible, perceptible, present. {%—Ud-%}
{%bhūta-rūpa, am,%} n. visible shape or form.
<LEND>

<L>11000<pc>0157-c<k1>udBUti<k2>udBUti
{%Ud-bhūti, is,%}¦ f. elevation, increase.
<LEND>

<L>11001<pc>0157-c<k1>udBf<k2>udBf
{#udBf#}¦ {%ud-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. 3. P. A. {%-bharati, -te,%}
{%-bibharti, -bibhṛte, -bhartum,%} to carry off, bear
away.
<LEND>

<L>11002<pc>0157-c<k1>udByasa<k2>udByasa
{#udByasa#}¦ {%ud-bhyasa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. raising,
elevating.
<LEND>

<L>11003<pc>0157-c<k1>udBram<k2>udBram
{#udBram#}¦ {%ud-bhram,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-bhramati,%}
{%-bhrāmyati, -bhramitum,%} to move about in a wide
space, wander, err.
<LEND>

<L>11004<pc>0157-c<k1>udBrama<k2>udBrama
{%Ud-bhrama, as,%}¦ m. whirling, flourishing; regret;
N. of a class of beings attending on Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>11005<pc>0157-c<k1>udBramaRa<k2>udBramaRa
{%Ud-bhramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. moving or wandering
about, ascending, rising.
<LEND>

<L>11006<pc>0157-c<k1>udBrAnta<k2>udBrAnta
{%Ud-bhrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, bewildered, dis-
tressed; whirled, flourished, waved (as a sword);
({%am%}), n. waving a sword.
<LEND>

<L>11007<pc>0157-c<k1>udBrAntaka<k2>udBrAntaka
{%Udbhrāntaka, am,%}¦ n. rising into the air.
<LEND>

<L>11008<pc>0157-c<k1>udman<k2>udman
{#udman#}¦ {%udman, a,%} n. (fr. rt. {%ud%}), Ved. surg-
ing, flooding.
<LEND>

<L>11009<pc>0157-c<k1>udya<k2>udya
{#udya#}¦ {%udya, as,%} m. a river; [cf. {%uddhya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>11010<pc>0157-c<k1>udyat<k2>udyat
{#udyat#}¦ {%ud-yat, an, atī, at%} (fr. {%ud-i,%} q. v.),
rising; ({%an%}), m. a star; N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>11011<pc>0157-c<k1>udyam<k2>udyam
{#udyam#}¦ {%ud-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati, -yantum,%}
to raise, elevate, uplift, raise in a menacing manner;
[Page0158-a+ 76]
to offer; to strive, be diligent; Intens. Ved. {%-yamya-%}
{%mīti,%} to raise.
<LEND>

<L>11012<pc>0158-a<k1>udyata<k2>udyata
{%Ud-yata, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, held up; active, per-
severing, labouring diligently and incessantly; trained,
exercised, disciplined; eager, prepared, ready; ({%as%}),
m. time (in music); a section, a chapter, the division
of a book. {%—Udyata-kārmuka, as, ā, am,%} with raised
bow. {%—Udyata-gada, as, ā, am,%} with uplifted mace.
{%—Udyata-śūla, as, ā, am,%} with raised spear. {%—Ud-%}
{%yata-sruc, k, k, k,%} Ved. raising the ladle to offer a
libation. {%—Udyatāyudha (˚ta-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} with
uplifted weapon or weapons.
<LEND>

<L>11013<pc>0158-a<k1>udyati<k2>udyati
{%Ud-yati, is,%}¦ f., Ved. raising, elevation.
<LEND>

<L>11014<pc>0158-a<k1>udyantf<k2>udyantf
{%Ud-yantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ raising, elevating.
<LEND>

<L>11015<pc>0158-a<k1>udyama<k2>udyama
{%Ud-yama, as,%}¦ m. raising or lifting up, elevation;
raising the hands for work, undertaking anything;
strenuous and continued effort, exertion, perseverance.
{%—Udyama-bhaṅga, as,%} m. breaking the efforts,
discouragement, dissuasion; desisting. {%—Udyama-%}
{%bhṛt, t, t, t,%} bearing or undergoing exertions.
<LEND>

<L>11016<pc>0158-a<k1>udyamana<k2>udyamana
{%Ud-yamana, am,%}¦ n. raising, elevation.
<LEND>

<L>11017<pc>0158-a<k1>udyamin<k2>udyamin
{%Ud-yamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ undertaking, persevering, mak-
ing effort, active.
<LEND>

<L>11018<pc>0158-a<k1>udyamIyas<k2>udyamIyas
{%Ud-yamīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. extending more
widely; (Sāy.) excessively raising.
<LEND>

<L>11019<pc>0158-a<k1>udyamya<k2>udyamya<h>1
1. {%ud-yamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ requiring exertion.
<LEND>

<L>11020<pc>0158-a<k1>udyamya<k2>udyamya<h>2
2. {%ud-yamya,%}¦ ind. having lifted or taken up, hav-
ing made exertion.
<LEND>

<L>11021<pc>0158-a<k1>udyAma<k2>udyAma
{%Ud-yāma, as,%}¦ m. erecting, stretching out; a rope,
cord.
<LEND>

<L>11022<pc>0158-a<k1>udyA<k2>udyA
{#udyA#}¦ {%ud-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%} to go up
or out, to rise, originate.
<LEND>

<L>11023<pc>0158-a<k1>udyAna<k2>udyAna
{%Ud-yāna, am,%}¦ n. going out; walking out; a gar-
den, a royal garden, a park; purpose, motive; N. of
a country to the north of India. {%—Udyāna-pāla, as,%}
m. a gardener; the master or owner or keeper of a
garden. {%—Udyāna-pālaka, as, ikā,%} m. f. a gardener;
superintendent or keeper of a garden. {%—Udyāna-rak-%}
{%ṣaka, as,%} m. a keeper of a garden; a gardener.
<LEND>

<L>11024<pc>0158-a<k1>udyAnaka<k2>udyAnaka
{%Udyānaka, am,%}¦ n. a garden, a park.
<LEND>

<L>11025<pc>0158-a<k1>udyApana<k2>udyApana
{%Ud-yāpana, am,%}¦ n. bringing to a conclusion, finish-
ing, performing, accomplishing.
<LEND>

<L>11026<pc>0158-a<k1>udyApita<k2>udyApita
{%Ud-yāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought to a conclusion,
finished, accomplished.
<LEND>

<L>11027<pc>0158-a<k1>udyAva<k2>udyAva
{#udyAva#}¦ {%ud-yāva, as,%} m. (rt. 1. {%yu%}), mixing,
joining.
<LEND>

<L>11028<pc>0158-a<k1>udyAsa<k2>udyAsa
{#udyAsa#}¦ {%ud-yāsa, as,%} m. (rt. {%yas%}), Ved. exer-
tion, effort.
<LEND>

<L>11029<pc>0158-a<k1>udyuj<k2>udyuj
{#udyuj#}¦ {%ud-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti, -yuṅkte,%}
{%-yoktum,%} to excite, incite, make active or quick,
stimulate to exertion.
<LEND>

<L>11030<pc>0158-a<k1>udyukta<k2>udyukta
{%Ud-yukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ zealously active, labouring
for some desired end.
<LEND>

<L>11031<pc>0158-a<k1>udyoga<k2>udyoga
{%Ud-yoga, as,%}¦ m. undertaking anything, exertion,
perseverance, strenuous and continuous endeavour;
active preparation. {%—Udyoga-parvan, a,%} n. title of
the fifth book of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Udyoga-sa-%}
{%martha, as, ā, am,%} capable of exertion.
<LEND>

<L>11032<pc>0158-a<k1>udyogin<k2>udyogin
{%Ud-yogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ active, laborious, persevering,
energetic, one who makes effort.
<LEND>

<L>11033<pc>0158-a<k1>udra<k2>udra
{#udra#}¦ {%udra, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%ud%}), a kind of
aquatic animal, perhaps a crab, or an otter; (at the
end of some compounds = {%udaka%}) water; see {%an-%}
{%udra%}. {%—Udra-pāraka, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>11034<pc>0158-a<k1>udraka<k2>udraka
{%Udraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>11035<pc>0158-a<k1>udrin<k2>udrin
{%Udrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. springing (said of water),
abounding in water.
<LEND>

<L>11036<pc>0158-a<k1>udraNka<k2>udraNka
{#udraNka#}¦ {%udraṅka%} or {%udraṅga, as,%} m., N. of
the town of Hariścandra, floating in the air; a town
in general, = {%draṅga.%}
<LEND>

<L>11037<pc>0158-a<k1>udraTa<k2>udraTa
{#udraTa#}¦ {%ud-ratha, as,%} m. the pin of the axle
of a carriage; a cock.
<LEND>

<L>11038<pc>0158-a<k1>udrAva<k2>udrAva
{#udrAva#}¦ {%ud-rāva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ru%}), aloud noise.
<LEND>

<L>11039<pc>0158-a<k1>udric<k2>udric
{#udric#}¦ {%ud-ric,%} Pass. {%-ricyate,%} to excel, in-
crease, exceed, preponderate; to abound in: Caus.
{%-recayati, -yitum,%} to cause to excel, augment.
<LEND>
[Page0158-b+ 74]

<L>11040<pc>0158-b<k1>udrikta<k2>udrikta
{%Ud-rikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ increased, augmented; dis-
tinct; evident.
<LEND>

<L>11041<pc>0158-b<k1>udreka<k2>udreka
{%Ud-reka, as,%}¦ m. excess, preponderance, increase,
overplus, abundance, commencement; ({%ā%}), f. the plant
Melia Sempervirens. {%—Udreka-bhaṅga, as,%} m. the
stifling or discouraging a thing at the outset.
<LEND>

<L>11042<pc>0158-b<k1>udrekin<k2>udrekin
{%Udrekin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ (at the end of compounds)
abounding in, giving preponderance.
<LEND>

<L>11043<pc>0158-b<k1>udruja<k2>udruja
{#udruja#}¦ {%ud-ruja, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%ruj%}), destroy-
ing, breaking down; undermining, rooting up.
<LEND>

<L>11044<pc>0158-b<k1>udroDana<k2>udroDana
{#udroDana#}¦ {%ud-rodhana, am,%} n. (rt. {%rudh = ruh%}),
rising, growing.
<LEND>

<L>11045<pc>0158-b<k1>udvat<k2>udvat
{#udvat#}¦ {%ud-vat, t,%} f. (fr. 1. {%ud%}), Ved. elevation,
a hill.
<LEND>

<L>11046<pc>0158-b<k1>udvatsara<k2>udvatsara
{#udvatsara#}¦ {%ud-vatsara, as,%} m. a year; (a wrong
reading for {%id-vatsara,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>11047<pc>0158-b<k1>udvap<k2>udvap
{#udvap#}¦ {%ud-vap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vapati, -te, -vap-%}
{%tum,%} to pour out; to raise, elevate.
<LEND>

<L>11048<pc>0158-b<k1>udvapana<k2>udvapana
{%Ud-vapana, am,%}¦ n. pouring out, shaking out.
<LEND>

<L>11049<pc>0158-b<k1>udvApa<k2>udvApa
{%Ud-vāpa, as,%}¦ m. ejection; (in logic) non-existence
of a subsequent resulting from the absence of an
antecedent.
<LEND>

<L>11050<pc>0158-b<k1>udvam<k2>udvam
{#udvam#}¦ {%ud-vam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vamati, -mitum,%} to
throw up, eject, vomit.
<LEND>

<L>11051<pc>0158-b<k1>udvamat<k2>udvamat
{%Ud-vamat, an, antī, at,%}¦ casting up, vomiting.
<LEND>

<L>11052<pc>0158-b<k1>udvamana<k2>udvamana
{%Ud-vamana, am,%}¦ n. ejecting, emitting, vomiting.
<LEND>

<L>11053<pc>0158-b<k1>udvAnta<k2>udvAnta
{%Ud-vānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ vomited; ({%as%}), m. an ele-
phant out of rut.
<LEND>

<L>11054<pc>0158-b<k1>udvAnti<k2>udvAnti
{%Ud-vānti, is,%}¦ f. ejecting, vomiting.
<LEND>

<L>11055<pc>0158-b<k1>udvayas<k2>udvayas
{#udvayas#}¦ {%ud-vayas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. (perhaps)
exciting or increasing the strength.
<LEND>

<L>11056<pc>0158-b<k1>udvarta<k2>udvarta
{#udvarta#}¦ {%ud-varta,%} &c. See {%ud-vṛt%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>11057<pc>0158-b<k1>udvarDana<k2>udvarDana
{#udvarDana#}¦ {%ud-vardhana, am,%} n. sly or sup-
pressed laughter.
<LEND>

<L>11058<pc>0158-b<k1>udvarhita<k2>udvarhita
{#udvarhita#}¦ {%ud-varhita.%} See under {%ud-vṛh.%}
<LEND>

<L>11059<pc>0158-b<k1>udvas<k2>udvas
{#udvas#}¦ {%ud-vas,%} Caus. P. {%-vāsayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to live away, to banish, expel.
<LEND>

<L>11060<pc>0158-b<k1>udvAsa<k2>udvAsa<h>1
1. {%ud-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see next col.), banishment,
exile; abandonment, setting free; carrying out for
slaughter, killing.
<LEND>

<L>11061<pc>0158-b<k1>udvAsana<k2>udvAsana
{%Ud-vāsana, am,%}¦ n. taking out of or away (from
the fire); expelling, banishing; quitting, abandoning;
taking out in order to kill, killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>11062<pc>0158-b<k1>udvAsya<k2>udvAsya
{%Udvāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the killing of a
sacrificial animal.
<LEND>

<L>11063<pc>0158-b<k1>udvah<k2>udvah
{#udvah#}¦ {%ud-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vahati, -te, -vo-%}
{%ḍhum,%} to carry out or away, elevate; to take or lead
away; to bear up, raise up, elevate; to marry; to
vomit (?): Caus. P. {%-vāhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
marry, to allow any one to expel his wife.
<LEND>

<L>11064<pc>0158-b<k1>udvaha<k2>udvaha
{%Ud-vaha, as, ā, am,%}¦ carrying or leading up, carry-
ing away, taking up or away; continuing, propagat-
ing; eminent, superior, best; ({%as%}), m. son, offspring;
the fourth of the seven winds or courses of air, viz.
that of the Nakṣatras supporting these lunar con-
stellations and causing their revolution; the vital air
that conveys nourishment upwards; one of the seven
tongues of fire; N. of a prince; ({%ā%}), f. a daughter.
<LEND>

<L>11065<pc>0158-b<k1>udvahat<k2>udvahat
{%Ud-vahat, an, antī, at,%}¦ upholding, supporting, bear-
ing, containing; having, possessing, assuming.
<LEND>

<L>11066<pc>0158-b<k1>udvahana<k2>udvahana
{%Ud-vahana, am,%}¦ n. lifting or bringing up; carry-
ing, drawing; being carried on, riding; possessing;
leading home, marrying.
<LEND>

<L>11067<pc>0158-b<k1>udvAha<k2>udvAha
{%Ud-vāha, as,%}¦ m. bearing up, supporting, marriage,
wedding. {%—Udvāha-karman, a,%} n. the marriage
ceremony. {%—Udvāha-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a work of
Raghunandana on marriage ceremonies; [cf. {%vivāha-%}
{%tattva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>11068<pc>0158-b<k1>udvAhana<k2>udvAhana
{%Ud-vāhana, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawing up, that which
raises or draws up; ({%am%}), n. lifting up; ploughing a
field twice; anxiety, anxious regret; marriage; ({%ī%}), f.
a cord, rope; the small shell used as a coin, a cowri.
<LEND>

<L>11069<pc>0158-b<k1>udvAhika<k2>udvAhika
{%Udvāhika, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to marriage, matri-
monial.
<LEND>
[Page0158-c+ 74]

<L>11070<pc>0158-c<k1>udvAhita<k2>udvAhita
{%Ud-vāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, lifted or pulled up;
eradicated.
<LEND>

<L>11071<pc>0158-c<k1>udvAhin<k2>udvAhin
{%Ud-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ what raises or draws up; who or
what marries, relating to marriage; ({%inī%}), f. a rope.
<LEND>

<L>11072<pc>0158-c<k1>udvoQukAma<k2>udvoQukAma
{%Udvoḍhu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirous of marrying.
<LEND>

<L>11073<pc>0158-c<k1>udvAcana<k2>udvAcana
{#udvAcana#}¦ {%ud-vācana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. crying
out (?).
<LEND>

<L>11074<pc>0158-c<k1>udvAdana<k2>udvAdana
{#udvAdana#}¦ {%ud-vādana, am,%} n. crying aloud.
<LEND>

<L>11075<pc>0158-c<k1>udvAna<k2>udvAna
{#udvAna#}¦ {%udvāna, as, ā, am%} (probably a cor-
rupt form), ejected, vomited; ({%am%}), n. ejecting, vo-
miting; a stove; [cf. {%uddhāna, ud-dhmāna, ud-%}
{%vānta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>11076<pc>0158-c<k1>udvAzpa<k2>udvAzpa
{#udvAzpa#}¦ {%ud-vāṣpa, as, ā, am,%} shedding tears.
{%—Udvāṣpa-tva, am,%} n. the act of shedding tears.
<LEND>

<L>11077<pc>0158-c<k1>udvAsa<k2>udvAsa<h>2
{#udvAsa#} 2¦. {%ud-vāsa, as, ā, am,%} or {%ud-vāsas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} one who has put off his clothes. (For 1.
{%ud-vāsa%} see under {%ud-vas.%})
<LEND>

<L>11078<pc>0158-c<k1>udviGuz<k2>udviGuz
{#udviGuz#}¦ {%ud-vi-ghuṣ,%} Caus. P. {%-ghoṣayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to declare or proclaim aloud, to cause to de-
clare aloud.
<LEND>

<L>11079<pc>0158-c<k1>udvij<k2>udvij
{#udvij#}¦ {%ud-vij,%} cl. 6. A. (ep. also cl. 6. P. and
cl. 1. P. A.) {%-vijate, -ti, -vejati, -te, -vejitum,%} to
tremble, shake; to be agitated, grieved, or afflicted;
to fear, be afraid of (with abl. or gen.); to grieve,
afflict, frighten: Caus. P. {%-vejayati, -yitum,%} to ter-
rify, frighten.
<LEND>

<L>11080<pc>0158-c<k1>udvigna<k2>udvigna
{%Ud-vigna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sorrowful, anxious, grieving
for an absent lover. {%—Udvigna-citta, as, ā, am,%} or
{%udvigna-manas, ās, ās, as,%} depressed in mind,
sorrowful, anxious, distressed.
<LEND>

<L>11081<pc>0158-c<k1>udvijamAna<k2>udvijamAna
{%Ud-vijamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, afraid.
<LEND>

<L>11082<pc>0158-c<k1>udvega<k2>udvega
{%Ud-vega, as, ā, am,%}¦ going swiftly, an express
messenger, a runner, a courier, &c.; steady, com-
posed, tranquil; ascending, mounting, going up or
upwards; an ascetic whose arms by long habit con-
tinue always raised above the head; ({%as%}), m. trem-
bling, waving, shaking; agitation, anxiety; regret,
fear, distress occasioned by separation from a beloved
object; admiration, astonishment; {%udvegaṃ kṛ,%} to
disturb, to be disturbed in mind; ({%am%}), n. the fruit
of the Areca Faufel; the Areca nut, called betel nut
because eaten with the betel leaf.
<LEND>

<L>11083<pc>0158-c<k1>udvegin<k2>udvegin
{%Udvegin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ causing anxiety or agitation of
mind; suffering distress, anxious, unhappy.
<LEND>

<L>11084<pc>0158-c<k1>udvejaka<k2>udvejaka
{%Ud-vejaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitating, distressing, annoy-
ing, causing pain or sorrow.
<LEND>

<L>11085<pc>0158-c<k1>udvejana<k2>udvejana
{%Ud-vejana, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to shake with
terror, hurting the feelings; ({%am%}), n. shaking with
terror, agitation, anxiety, affliction; infliction of pain,
torture; regret, sorrowing for one absent. {%—Udvejana-%}
{%kara, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} inflicting pain, punishing,
torturing, painful.
<LEND>

<L>11086<pc>0158-c<k1>udvejanIya<k2>udvejanIya
{%Udvejanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing terror or shaking
(with gen. of the person).
<LEND>

<L>11087<pc>0158-c<k1>udvejita<k2>udvejita
{%Ud-vejita, as, ā, am,%}¦ grieved, pained, afflicted.
<LEND>

<L>11088<pc>0158-c<k1>udvIkz<k2>udvIkz
{#udvIkz#}¦ {%ud-vīkṣ (udd-vi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%-vīk-%}
{%ṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look up or upwards, view, look at,
perceive; to examine, consider.
<LEND>

<L>11089<pc>0158-c<k1>udvIkzaRa<k2>udvIkzaRa
{%Ud-vīkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking up or upwards;
seeing, looking at.
<LEND>

<L>11090<pc>0158-c<k1>udvIkzya<k2>udvIkzya
{%Ud-vīkṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked upwards.
<LEND>

<L>11091<pc>0158-c<k1>udvIj<k2>udvIj
{#udvIj#}¦ {%ud-vīj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-vījayati, -yitum,%}
to blow upon, blow towards; to fan upon.
<LEND>

<L>11092<pc>0158-c<k1>udvf<k2>udvf
{#udvf#}¦ {%ud-vṛ,%} cl. 5. 9. 1. P. A. {%-vṛṇoti, -ṇute,%}
{%vṛṇāti, -ṇīte, -varati, -te, -varitum%} or {%-rītum,%}
to elect, select, choose.
<LEND>

<L>11093<pc>0158-c<k1>udvfMhaRa<k2>udvfMhaRa
{#udvfMhaRa#}¦ {%ud-vṛṃhaṇa, am,%} n. increase.
<LEND>

<L>11094<pc>0158-c<k1>udvft<k2>udvft
{#udvft#}¦ {%ud-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate, -titum,%} to
go upwards, rise, ascend, swell; to be puffed up with
pride, to be haughty: Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to come out, extirpate, eradicate, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>11095<pc>0158-c<k1>udvarta<k2>udvarta
{%Ud-varta, as, ā, am,%}¦ superfluous, redundant,
plentiful; left over as a remainder; ({%as%}), m. a re-
mainder, a surplus.
<LEND>
[Page0159-a+ 70]

<L>11096<pc>0159-a<k1>udvartaka<k2>udvartaka
{%Ud-vartaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to rise, increasing;
rubbing and cleaning the body, who or what does
so; ({%as%}), m. a mathematical term, the quantity
assumed for the purpose of the operation.
<LEND>

<L>11097<pc>0159-a<k1>udvartana<k2>udvartana
{%Ud-vartana, am,%}¦ n. going up, rising, ascending;
prosperity, elevation; springing up of plants or
grain &c.; drawing out metal, laminating, wire draw-
ing; grinding, pounding; rubbing or kneading
the body; rubbing and cleaning it with fragrant
unguents; the unguents used for that purpose or to
relieve pains in the limbs &c.; bad behaviour, bad
conduct.
<LEND>

<L>11098<pc>0159-a<k1>udvartita<k2>udvartita
{%Ud-vartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen, elevated; sprung up,
drawn out; perfumed, scented, rubbed, kneaded,
shampooed.
<LEND>

<L>11099<pc>0159-a<k1>udvftta<k2>udvftta
{%Ud-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, elevated; exalted,
prosperous; vomited up; left as a remainder; ill-
conducted, ill-mannered.
<LEND>

<L>11100<pc>0159-a<k1>udvfh<k2>udvfh
{#udvfh#}¦ {%ud-vṛh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-vṛhati, -varhitum%}
or {%-varḍhum,%} to raise up, elevate; to draw up, pull
out by the roots, eradicate.
<LEND>

<L>11101<pc>0159-a<k1>udvarhita<k2>udvarhita
{%Ud-varhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, drawn or lifted up,
eradicated.
<LEND>

<L>11102<pc>0159-a<k1>udvega<k2>udvega
{#udvega#}¦ {%ud-vega.%} See under {%ud-vij,%} p. 158.
<LEND>

<L>11103<pc>0159-a<k1>udvedi<k2>udvedi
{#udvedi#}¦ {%ud-vedi, is, is, i,%} furnished with an
elevated altar.
<LEND>

<L>11104<pc>0159-a<k1>udvep<k2>udvep
{#udvep#}¦ {%ud-vep,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vepate, -pitum,%} to
tremble, to be agitated.
<LEND>

<L>11105<pc>0159-a<k1>udvela<k2>udvela
{#udvela#}¦ {%ud-vela, as, ā, am,%} overflowing its
banks (as a river).
<LEND>

<L>11106<pc>0159-a<k1>udvellita<k2>udvellita
{#udvellita#}¦ {%ud-vellita, as, ā, am,%} tossed up.
<LEND>

<L>11107<pc>0159-a<k1>udvezwa<k2>udvezwa
{#udvezwa#}¦ {%ud-veṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} investing, en-
veloping, surrounding; ({%as%}), m. surrounding, enclos-
ing; investing a town, besieging or surrounding it.
<LEND>

<L>11108<pc>0159-a<k1>udvezwana<k2>udvezwana
{%Ud-veṣṭana, am,%}¦ n. the act of surrounding;
oppressing; an enclosure; pain in the back of the
body; ({%hṛdayodveṣṭana,%} convulsive pain in the
heart); ({%as, ā, am%}), unbound, unfettered, freed from
bonds or ties.
<LEND>

<L>11109<pc>0159-a<k1>udvezwanIya<k2>udvezwanIya
{%Ud-veṣṭanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be unbound or un-
fastened.
<LEND>

<L>11110<pc>0159-a<k1>udvezwita<k2>udvezwita
{%Ud-veṣṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, invested, en-
closed.
<LEND>

<L>11111<pc>0159-a<k1>uDas<k2>uDas
{#uDas#}¦ {%udhas, as,%} n. an udder. See {%ūdhas.%}
<LEND>

<L>11112<pc>0159-a<k1>uDya<k2>uDya
{#uDya#}¦ {%udhya, as,%} m., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>11113<pc>0159-a<k1>uDras<k2>uDras
{#uDras#}¦ {%udhras%} (another form of rt. {%dhras,%}
q. v.), cl. 9. 10. P. {%udhrasnāti, udhrāsa-%}
{%yati,%} to glean or gather by little at a time; to throw
or cast upwards.
<LEND>

<L>11114<pc>0159-a<k1>und<k2>und
{#und#}¦ {%und.%} See 2. {%ud,%} p. 153.
<LEND>

<L>11115<pc>0159-a<k1>undana<k2>undana
{%Undana, am,%}¦ n. moistening.
<LEND>

<L>11116<pc>0159-a<k1>unna<k2>unna
{%Unna, as, ā, am,%}¦ wetted, wet, moist; kind, hu-
mane.
<LEND>

<L>11117<pc>0159-a<k1>undaru<k2>undaru
{#undaru#}¦ {%undaru, us,%} or {%undura, as,%} or {%unduru,%}
{%us,%} m. a rat. {%—Unduru-karṇikā%} or {%unduru-karṇī,%}
f. the plant Salvinia Cuccullata.
<LEND>

<L>11118<pc>0159-a<k1>unnaw<k2>unnaw
{#unnaw#}¦ {%un-naṭ (ud-naṭ),%} Caus. P. {%-nāṭayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to play a trick upon (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>11119<pc>0159-a<k1>unnata<k2>unnata
{#unnata#}¦ {%un-nata.%} See {%un-nam%} below.
<LEND>

<L>11120<pc>0159-a<k1>unnad<k2>unnad
{#unnad#}¦ {%un-nad (ud-nad),%} cl. 1. P. {%-nadati,%}
{%-ditum,%} to cry out, sound, roar.
<LEND>

<L>11121<pc>0159-a<k1>unnAda<k2>unnAda
{%Un-nāda, as,%}¦ m. crying out, humming, chirping.
<LEND>

<L>11122<pc>0159-a<k1>unnam<k2>unnam
{#unnam#}¦ {%un-nam (ud-nam),%} cl. 1. P. {%-namati,%}
{%-nantum,%} to rise, ascend; to bend up, raise, elevate,
erect: Caus. P. {%-namayati, -yitum,%} to bend up-
wards, raise, erect.
<LEND>

<L>11123<pc>0159-a<k1>unnata<k2>unnata
{%Un-nata, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, held or lifted up;
high, tall; projecting, plump, full; great, eminent;
({%as%}), m. a boa ({%aja-gara%}); N. of a Buddha; ({%am%}),
n. elevation, ascension. {%—Unnata-caraṇa, as, ā, am,%}
[Page0159-b+ 74]
with uplifted paws, rampant. {%—Unnata-tva, am,%} n.
height, sublimity, majesty. {%—Unnata-nābhi, is, is, i,%}
having a projecting navel, i. e. corpulent. {%—Unnata-%}
{%śiras, ās, ās, as,%} holding up the head, carrying the
head high; with head upraised. {%—Unnatānata (˚ta-%}
{%ān˚), as, ā, am,%} elevated and depressed, uneven, un-
dulating, wavy.
<LEND>

<L>11124<pc>0159-b<k1>unnati<k2>unnati
{%Un-nati, is,%}¦ f. elevation, height; rising, ascending;
increase, advancement, prosperity; N. of a daughter
of Dakṣa and wife of Dharma; the wife of Garuḍa.
{%—Unnati-mat, ān, atī, at,%} elevated, projecting,
plump; high, sublime. {%—Unnatīśa (˚ti-īśa), as,%} m.
a N. of Garuḍa.
<LEND>

<L>11125<pc>0159-b<k1>unnamana<k2>unnamana
{%Un-namana, am,%}¦ n. bending upwards, raising,
lifting up.
<LEND>

<L>11126<pc>0159-b<k1>unnamayya<k2>unnamayya
{%Un-namayya,%}¦ ind. having raised.
<LEND>

<L>11127<pc>0159-b<k1>unnamita<k2>unnamita
{%Un-namita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised, elevated, lifted or
pulled up; heightened, increased.
<LEND>

<L>11128<pc>0159-b<k1>unnamra<k2>unnamra
{%Un-namra, as, ā, am,%}¦ erect, upright, elevated,
lofty, high. {%—Unnamra-tā,%} f. erectness, uprightness
(of the body).
<LEND>

<L>11129<pc>0159-b<k1>unnAma<k2>unnAma
{%Un-nāma, as,%}¦ m. bending upwards, raising, lift-
ing up.
<LEND>

<L>11130<pc>0159-b<k1>unnaya<k2>unnaya
{#unnaya#}¦ {%un-naya.%} See under 1. {%un-nī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>11131<pc>0159-b<k1>unnayanapaNkti<k2>unnayanapaNkti
{#unnayanapaNkti#}¦ {%un-nayana-paṅkti, is, is, i,%} hav-
ing the line of the eyelids uplifted.
<LEND>

<L>11132<pc>0159-b<k1>unnasa<k2>unnasa
{#unnasa#}¦ {%un-nasa (ud-nas), as, ā, am,%} having
a prominent nose.
<LEND>

<L>11133<pc>0159-b<k1>unnah<k2>unnah
{#unnah#}¦ {%un-nah (ud-nah),%} cl. 4. P. {%-nahyati,%}
{%-naddhum,%} to tie up, bind up.
<LEND>

<L>11134<pc>0159-b<k1>unnadDa<k2>unnadDa
{%Un-naddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ tied up; swelled, in-
creased; unbound.
<LEND>

<L>11135<pc>0159-b<k1>unnAha<k2>unnAha
{%Un-nāha, as,%}¦ m. sour gruel made from the fer-
mentation of rice.
<LEND>

<L>11136<pc>0159-b<k1>unnABa<k2>unnABa
{#unnABa#}¦ {%un-nābha, as,%} m. (fr. {%ud + nābhi%}),
N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>11137<pc>0159-b<k1>unnidra<k2>unnidra
{#unnidra#}¦ {%un-nidra (ud-n˚), as, ā, am,%} sleep-
less, awake; expanded as a flower; budded, blown;
shining (as the moon, supposed to be awake when
others are asleep). {%—Unnidra-tā,%} f. sleeplessness.
<LEND>

<L>11138<pc>0159-b<k1>unnI<k2>unnI<h>1
{#unnI#} 1¦. {%un-nī (ud-nī),%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -ne-%}
{%tum,%} to lead upwards or up to, bring up; to set up,
erect; to bring out of, free from, help, rescue, re-
deem; to draw up (as water); to lead away; to stroke,
smooth; to lead out; press out, extract; to find out,
ascertain by inference, infer; lead off (in singing):
Desid. A. {%-ninīṣate,%} to intend or wish to lead out &c.
<LEND>

<L>11139<pc>0159-b<k1>unnaya<k2>unnaya
{%Un-naya, as,%}¦ m. raising, elevating, hoisting, lead-
ing upwards; analogy, resemblance, consequence.
<LEND>

<L>11140<pc>0159-b<k1>unnayana<k2>unnayana
{%Un-nayana, am,%}¦ n. raising, elevating, lifting up;
taking out of, drawing water; the vessel out of which
a fluid is taken; leading away; making straight,
smoothing; deliberation, discussion, logic, reasoning,
inference.
<LEND>

<L>11141<pc>0159-b<k1>unnAya<k2>unnAya
{%Un-nāya, as,%}¦ m. raising, elevating.
<LEND>

<L>11142<pc>0159-b<k1>unnAyaka<k2>unnAyaka
{%Un-nāyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ what raises; what leads to
an inference or conclusion.
<LEND>

<L>11143<pc>0159-b<k1>unnI<k2>unnI<h>2
2. {%un-nī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ bringing or leading upwards.
<LEND>

<L>11144<pc>0159-b<k1>unnIta<k2>unnIta
{%Un-nīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ led up, led away, inferred.
<LEND>

<L>11145<pc>0159-b<k1>unnetf<k2>unnetf
{%Un-netṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who pours a fluid out of one
vessel into another, especially the priest who pours
the Soma juice into the cups.
<LEND>

<L>11146<pc>0159-b<k1>unnetra<k2>unnetra
{%Unnetra, am,%}¦ n. the office of the Unnetṛ.
<LEND>

<L>11147<pc>0159-b<k1>unneya<k2>unneya
{%Un-neya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be inferred, to be ascer-
tained by analogy.
<LEND>

<L>11148<pc>0159-b<k1>unmajj<k2>unmajj
{#unmajj#}¦ {%un-majj (ud-m˚),%} cl. 6. P. {%-majjati,%}
{%-maṅktum,%} to emerge: Caus. {%-majjayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to emerge.
<LEND>

<L>11149<pc>0159-b<k1>unmajjana<k2>unmajjana
{%Un-majjana, as,%}¦ m., N. of an attendant of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>11150<pc>0159-b<k1>unmatta<k2>unmatta
{#unmatta#}¦ {%un-matta.%} See {%un-mad%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>11151<pc>0159-b<k1>unmaT<k2>unmaT
{#unmaT#}¦ {%un-math%} or {%un-manth (ud-m˚),%} cl. 1.
9. P. {%-mathati%} or {%-manthati, -mathnāti, -manthi-%}
{%tum,%} to shake up, disturb, excite; to shake, tear, or
cut off; to strike, kill.
<LEND>
[Page0159-c+ 77]

<L>11152<pc>0159-c<k1>unmaTana<k2>unmaTana
{%Un-mathana, am,%}¦ n. shaking off, throwing off or
down, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>11153<pc>0159-c<k1>unmaTita<k2>unmaTita
{%Un-mathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>11154<pc>0159-c<k1>unmanTa<k2>unmanTa
{%Un-mantha, as,%}¦ m. agitation; killing, slaughter;
a disease of the outer ear.
<LEND>

<L>11155<pc>0159-c<k1>unmanTaka<k2>unmanTaka
{%Un-manthaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking up or off,
agitating, stirring; throbbing, beating; ({%as%}), m. in-
flammation of the outer ear.
<LEND>

<L>11156<pc>0159-c<k1>unmanTana<k2>unmanTana
{%Un-manthana, am,%}¦ n. the act of shaking or agi-
tating; hurting, killing; probing, stirring a weapon
&c. lodged in the body.
<LEND>

<L>11157<pc>0159-c<k1>unmanTita<k2>unmanTita
{%Un-manthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken up, moved,
agitated, distressed.
<LEND>

<L>11158<pc>0159-c<k1>unmATa<k2>unmATa
{%Un-mātha, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroying, killing; ({%as%}),
m. shaking; killing, slaughter; a snare or trap.
<LEND>

<L>11159<pc>0159-c<k1>unmATin<k2>unmATin
{%Un-māthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ shaking, agitating.
<LEND>

<L>11160<pc>0159-c<k1>unmad<k2>unmad
{#unmad#}¦ {%un-mad (ud-m˚),%} cl. 4. P. {%-mādyati,%}
{%-maditum,%} to be or become mad: Caus. P. {%-mada-%}
{%yati%} or {%-mādayati, -yitum,%} to madden, inebriate,
render drunk.
<LEND>

<L>11161<pc>0159-c<k1>unmatta<k2>unmatta
{%Un-matta, as, ā, am,%}¦ insane, frantic, mad; drunk,
intoxicated; ({%as%}), m. the thorn-apple, Datura Metel
and Fastuosa; another tree, Pterospermum Aceri-
folium; N. of a Rakṣas. {%—Unmatta-kīrti, is,%} m.
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Unmatta-gaṅga, am,%} n., N. of
a region (‘where the Gaṅgā roars’). {%—Unmatta-tā,%}
f. or {%unmatta-tva, am,%} n. insanity, intoxication.
{%—Unmatta-darśana%} or {%unmatta-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
maniac-like, mad. {%—Unmatta-pralapita, as, ā, am,%}
spoken in drunkenness or madness. {%—Unmatta-bhai-%}
{%rava-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Unmatta-%}
{%liṅgin, ī, inī, i,%} feigning madness. {%—Unmatta-vat,%}
ind. like one mad, as if mad, like a maniac. {%—Un-%}
{%matta-veśa, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Unmattā-%}
{%vanti (˚ta-av˚), is,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>11162<pc>0159-c<k1>unmattaka<k2>unmattaka
{%Unmattaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ insane, mad; drunk.
<LEND>

<L>11163<pc>0159-c<k1>unmada<k2>unmada
{%Un-mada, as, ā, am,%}¦ mad, furious, extravagant;
drunk, intoxicated; ({%as%}), m. insanity, either morbid
or as the effect of temporary excitement, intoxication,
ecstacy.
<LEND>

<L>11164<pc>0159-c<k1>unmadana<k2>unmadana
{%Un-madana, as, ā, am,%}¦ inflamed with love.
<LEND>

<L>11165<pc>0159-c<k1>unmadizRu<k2>unmadizRu
{%Un-madiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ mad, insane, crazed, in-
toxicated; in rut (as an elephant).
<LEND>

<L>11166<pc>0159-c<k1>unmAda<k2>unmAda
{%Un-māda, as, ā, am,%}¦ mad, insane, extravagant;
({%as%}), m. madness, extravagance; (in medicine) mania.
{%—Unmāda-vat, ān, atī, at,%} mad, insane, wild, ex-
travagant.
<LEND>

<L>11167<pc>0159-c<k1>unmAdana<k2>unmAdana
{%Un-mādana, as, ā, am,%}¦ maddening, exciting, in-
toxicating; ({%as%}), m. one of the five arrows of the
god of love.
<LEND>

<L>11168<pc>0159-c<k1>unmAdin<k2>unmAdin
{%Unmādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ mad, intoxicated; ({%nī%}), f., N.
of a princess.
<LEND>

<L>11169<pc>0159-c<k1>unmAduka<k2>unmAduka
{%Un-māduka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. fond of drinking.
<LEND>

<L>11170<pc>0159-c<k1>unmanas<k2>unmanas
{#unmanas#}¦ {%un-manas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%un-manaska%}
{%(ud-ma˚), as, ā, am,%} excited or disturbed in mind,
perplexed, disturbed; regretting, missing, repining for
a lost or departed friend.
<LEND>

<L>11171<pc>0159-c<k1>unmanAya<k2>unmanAya
{%Unmanāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%unmanāyate, -yitum,%} to
become excited or disturbed in mind, to repine.
<LEND>

<L>11172<pc>0159-c<k1>unmanIkf<k2>unmanIkf
{%Unmanī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make
excited, to excite, disturb.
<LEND>

<L>11173<pc>0159-c<k1>unmanIBU<k2>unmanIBU
{%Unmanī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to be-
come disturbed in mind, to repine.
<LEND>

<L>11174<pc>0159-c<k1>unmayUKa<k2>unmayUKa
{#unmayUKa#}¦ {%un-mayūkha (ud-m˚), as, ā, am,%}
shining, radiant.
<LEND>

<L>11175<pc>0159-c<k1>unmardana<k2>unmardana
{#unmardana#}¦ {%un-mardana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%mṛd%}
with {%ud%}), rubbing off, rubbing; a fragrant essence
used for this purpose.
<LEND>

<L>11176<pc>0159-c<k1>unmA<k2>unmA
{#unmA#}¦ {%un-mā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%mā%} with {%ud%}), Ved. a
measure.
<LEND>

<L>11177<pc>0159-c<k1>unmAna<k2>unmAna
{%Un-māna, am,%}¦ n. a measure of size or quantity;
price.
<LEND>

<L>11178<pc>0159-c<k1>unmita<k2>unmita
{%Un-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ meted, measured.
<LEND>

<L>11179<pc>0159-c<k1>unmiti<k2>unmiti
{%Un-miti, is,%}¦ f. measure, price.
<LEND>

<L>11180<pc>0159-c<k1>unmeya<k2>unmeya
{%Un-meya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be weighed, what is
weighed; ({%am%}), n. weight.
<LEND>

<L>11181<pc>0159-c<k1>unmArga<k2>unmArga
{#unmArga#}¦ {%un-mārga (ud-m˚), as, ā, am,%} m. f. n.
[Page0160-a+ 73]
a wrong road, deviation from the right way, improper
conduct, an evil course, error. {%—Unmārga-gata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} erred, erring, going wrong. {%—Unmārga-%}
{%gamana, am,%} n. going on a wrong road, following
evil courses. {%—Unmārga-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%un-%}
{%mārga-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} going wrong, erring, follow-
ing evil courses; taking a wrong road. {%—Unmārga-%}
{%jala-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%} carrying its waters on a wrong
way.
<LEND>

<L>11182<pc>0160-a<k1>unmArgin<k2>unmArgin
{%Unmārgin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going astray, finding an outlet.
<LEND>

<L>11183<pc>0160-a<k1>unmArjana<k2>unmArjana
{#unmArjana#}¦ {%un-mārjana.%} See {%un-mṛj%} below.
<LEND>

<L>11184<pc>0160-a<k1>unmiSra<k2>unmiSra
{#unmiSra#}¦ {%un-miśra (ud-m˚), as, ā, am,%} mixed
with, variegated.
<LEND>

<L>11185<pc>0160-a<k1>unmiz<k2>unmiz
{#unmiz#}¦ {%un-miṣ (ud-miṣ),%} cl. 6. P. {%-miṣati,%}
{%-meṣitum,%} to open the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>11186<pc>0160-a<k1>unmiza<k2>unmiza
{%Un-miṣa, as,%}¦ m. opening the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>11187<pc>0160-a<k1>unmizat<k2>unmizat
{%Un-miṣat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} opening the eyes,
drawing up the eyelids, looking at, seeing.
<LEND>

<L>11188<pc>0160-a<k1>unmizita<k2>unmizita
{%Un-miṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ opened (as the eye);
blown as a flower.
<LEND>

<L>11189<pc>0160-a<k1>unmeza<k2>unmeza
{%Un-meṣa, as,%}¦ m. opening the eyes, looking at;
winking, twinkling or upward motion of the eyelids;
blowing or blossoming of a flower; awaking, becom-
ing visible.
<LEND>

<L>11190<pc>0160-a<k1>unmezaRa<k2>unmezaRa
{%Un-meṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. awaking, becoming visible.
<LEND>

<L>11191<pc>0160-a<k1>unmIl<k2>unmIl
{#unmIl#}¦ {%un-mīl (ud-mīl),%} cl. 1. P. {%-mīlati,%}
{%-litum,%} to open the eyes; to open; to expand, be
diffused: Caus. P. {%-mīlayati, -yitum,%} to open.
<LEND>

<L>11192<pc>0160-a<k1>unmIla<k2>unmIla
{%Un-mīla, as,%}¦ m. opening of the eyes, awaking,
becoming visible.
<LEND>

<L>11193<pc>0160-a<k1>unmIlana<k2>unmIlana
{%Un-mīlana, am,%}¦ n. winking, twinkling, opening
of the eye; awaking, becoming visible; blowing,
expanding.
<LEND>

<L>11194<pc>0160-a<k1>unmIlita<k2>unmIlita
{%Un-mīlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ opened (as the eyes);
blown as a flower; ({%am%}), n. unconcealed or open
reference or allusion (to anything, in rhetoric).
<LEND>

<L>11195<pc>0160-a<k1>unmuKa<k2>unmuKa
{#unmuKa#}¦ {%un-mukha (ud-m˚), as, ī, am,%} raising
the face, looking at; waiting for, expecting; near to;
({%as%}), m., N. of an antelope (in the Hari-vaṃśa, in
former births a hunter and a Brāhman). {%—Unmukha-%}
{%tā,%} f. the state of one whose face is raised; state of
watching or expectancy.
<LEND>

<L>11196<pc>0160-a<k1>unmuKara<k2>unmuKara
{#unmuKara#}¦ {%un-mukhara (ud-m˚), as, ā, am,%}
loud-sounding, noisy.
<LEND>

<L>11197<pc>0160-a<k1>unmuc<k2>unmuc
{#unmuc#}¦ {%un-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati, -te,%}
{%-moktum,%} to unfasten, pull off; take off (clothes &c.);
to loosen, liberate; to elevate, raise: Caus. P. {%-moca-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to loosen, deliver.
<LEND>

<L>11198<pc>0160-a<k1>unmuca<k2>unmuca
{%Un-muca, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>11199<pc>0160-a<k1>unmocana<k2>unmocana
{%Un-mocana, am,%}¦ n. unfastening, loosening.
<LEND>

<L>11200<pc>0160-a<k1>unmudra<k2>unmudra
{#unmudra#}¦ {%un-mudra (ud-m˚), as, ā, am,%} un-
sealed, opened; blown as a flower.
<LEND>

<L>11201<pc>0160-a<k1>unmUla<k2>unmUla
{#unmUla#}¦ {%un-mūla (ud-m˚), as, ā, am,%} eradi-
cated, pulled up by the root.
<LEND>

<L>11202<pc>0160-a<k1>unmUlana<k2>unmUlana
{%Un-mūlana, am,%}¦ n. eradicating, pulling up by the
roots; destroying.
<LEND>

<L>11203<pc>0160-a<k1>unmUlaya<k2>unmUlaya
{%Unmūlaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%unmūlayati, -yitum,%} to era-
dicate, pull up by the roots; to extirpate, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>11204<pc>0160-a<k1>unmUlita<k2>unmUlita
{%Un-mūlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ eradicated, pulled up by
the roots; destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>11205<pc>0160-a<k1>unmfj<k2>unmfj
{#unmfj#}¦ {%un-mṛj (ud-m˚),%} cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi,%}
{%mārjitum%} or {%-mārṣṭum,%} to rub off, wipe off;
efface; blot out.
<LEND>

<L>11206<pc>0160-a<k1>unmArjana<k2>unmArjana
{%Un-mārjana, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbing or wiping off.
<LEND>

<L>11207<pc>0160-a<k1>unmfjAvamfjA<k2>unmfjAvamfjA
{%Unmṛjāvamṛjā (˚ja-av˚),%}¦ f. repeatedly rubbing
up and down.
<LEND>

<L>11208<pc>0160-a<k1>unmfzwa<k2>unmfzwa
{%Un-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ worn off, blotted out,
effaced.
<LEND>

<L>11209<pc>0160-a<k1>unmfSya<k2>unmfSya
{#unmfSya#}¦ {%un-mṛśya, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%mṛś%} with
{%ud%}), Ved. to be reached, to be touched.
<LEND>

<L>11210<pc>0160-a<k1>unmedA<k2>unmedA
{#unmedA#}¦ {%un-medā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%mid%} with {%ud%}),
corpulence, fatness.
<LEND>

<L>11211<pc>0160-a<k1>upa<k2>upa
{#upa#}¦ {%upa,%} a prefix to verbs and nouns (ex-
[Page0160-b+ 73]
pressing) towards, near to (opposed to {%apa,%} away), by
the side of, with, together with, under, down (e. g. {%upa-%}
{%gam,%} to go near, undergo; {%upa-gamana,%} approach-
ing. In the Veda the verb has sometimes to be supplied
from the context, and sometimes {%upa%} is placed after the
verb with which it ought to have been compounded,
e. g. {%āyayur upa = upāyayuḥ,%} they approached).
<div n="P"/>(As unconnected with verbs and prefixed to nouns
{%upa%} expresses) direction towards, nearness, contiguity
in space, time, number, degree, resemblance, and re-
lationship, but with the idea of subordination and inferi-
ority (e. g. {%upa-kaniṣṭhikā,%} the finger next to the
little finger; {%upa-purāṇam,%} a secondary or subordinate
Purāṇa; {%upa-daśa,%} nearly ten); sometimes forming
with the nouns to which it is prefixed compound ad-
verbs (e. g. {%upa-mūlam,%} at the root; {%upa-pūrva-%}
{%rātram,%} towards the beginning of night; {%upa-kūpe,%}
near a well), which adverbs lose their adverbial ter-
minations if they are again compounded with nouns
(e. g. {%upakūpa-jalāśaya,%} a reservoir in the neigh-
bourhood of a well). Prefixed to proper names {%upa%}
may express in classical literature ‘a younger brother’
(e. g. {%Upendra,%} ‘the younger brother of Indra’), and
in Buddhist literature ‘a son.’
<div n="P"/>(As a separable adverb {%upa%} rarely expresses) thereto,
further, moreover (e. g. {%tatra upa brahma yo veda,%}
who further knows the Veda).
<div n="P"/>(As a separable preposition with locative) near to,
towards, in the direction of, under, below (e. g. {%upa%}
{%āśāḥ,%} towards the regions); near to, at, on, upon; at
the time of, upon, up to, in, above (with loc., e. g.
{%upa sānuṣu,%} on the tops of the mountains); with,
together with, at the same time with, according to
(with inst., e. g. {%upa dharmabhiḥ,%} according to the
rules of duty).
<div n="P"/>Besides the meanings given above {%upa%} is said to
imply disease, extinction; ornament; command; re-
proof; undertaking; giving; killing; diffusing; wish;
power; effort; resemblance, &c.; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὑπό</lang> Lat.
<nsi>sub;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>up;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>oba;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>ob</nsi>
in <nsi>obdach, obliegen,</nsi> &c.]
<LEND>

<L>11212<pc>0160-b<k1>upaka<k2>upaka
{%Upaka, as,%}¦ m. a diminutive of all proper names
beginning with {%upa.%}
<LEND>

<L>11213<pc>0160-b<k1>upaf<k2>upaf
{#upa-f#}¦ {%upa-ṛ.%} See {%upār.%}
<LEND>

<L>11214<pc>0160-b<k1>upakakza<k2>upakakza
{#upakakza#}¦ {%upa-kakṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. reach-
ing to the shoulder.
<LEND>

<L>11215<pc>0160-b<k1>upakaRWam<k2>upakaRWam
{#upakaRWam#}¦ {%upa-kaṇṭham,%} ind. upon the
neck, near the throat; in the proximity of; ({%am%}),
n. proximity, neighbourhood, contiguous space; space
near a village or its boundary; one of a horse's paces;
({%as, ā, am%}), near, proximate.
<LEND>

<L>11216<pc>0160-b<k1>upakaTA<k2>upakaTA
{#upakaTA#}¦ {%upa-kathā,%} f. a short story, tale.
<LEND>

<L>11217<pc>0160-b<k1>upakanizWikA<k2>upakanizWikA
{#upakanizWikA#}¦ {%upa-kaniṣṭhikā,%} f. the last
finger but one; the finger next to the little finger.
<LEND>

<L>11218<pc>0160-b<k1>upakanyApuram<k2>upakanyApuram
{#upakanyApuram#}¦ {%upa-kanyāpuram,%} ind. near
the women's apartments.
<LEND>

<L>11219<pc>0160-b<k1>upakaraRa<k2>upakaraRa
{#upakaraRa, upakAra#}¦, &c. See {%upa-kṛ%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>11220<pc>0160-b<k1>upakarRam<k2>upakarRam
{#upakarRam#}¦ {%upa-karṇam,%} ind. close to the ear,
into the ear, (whispered &c.)
<LEND>

<L>11221<pc>0160-b<k1>upakarRikA<k2>upakarRikA
{%Upakarṇikā,%}¦ f. what goes from ear to ear, ru-
mour, report.
<LEND>

<L>11222<pc>0160-b<k1>upakalpana<k2>upakalpana
{#upakalpana#}¦ {%upa-kalpana.%} See {%upa-kḷp,%} p. 161.
<LEND>

<L>11223<pc>0160-b<k1>upakAntam<k2>upakAntam
{#upakAntam#}¦ {%upa-kāntam,%} ind. near a friend.
<LEND>

<L>11224<pc>0160-b<k1>upakAla<k2>upakAla
{#upakAla#}¦ {%upa-kāla, as,%} m., N. of a king of
the Nāgas.
<LEND>

<L>11225<pc>0160-b<k1>upakiraRa<k2>upakiraRa
{#upakiraRa#}¦ {%upa-kiraṇa.%} See {%upa-kṝ%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>11226<pc>0160-b<k1>upakIcaka<k2>upakIcaka
{#upakIcaka#}¦ {%upa-kīcaka, as,%} m. a relation or
follower of the Kīcakas.
<LEND>

<L>11227<pc>0160-b<k1>upakuYci<k2>upakuYci
{#upakuYci#}¦ {%upa-kuñci, is,%} or {%upa-kuñcikā,%} f.
the plant Nigella Indica; small cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>11228<pc>0160-b<k1>upakumBa<k2>upakumBa
{#upakumBa#}¦ {%upa-kumbha, as, ā, am,%} near,
proximate; solitary, lonely, retired; ({%am%}), ind. near
the water-jar.
<LEND>
[Page0160-c+ 74]

<L>11229<pc>0160-c<k1>upakurvARa<k2>upakurvARa
{#upakurvARa#}¦ {%upa-kurvāṇa.%} See {%upa-kṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>11230<pc>0160-c<k1>upakulyA<k2>upakulyA
{#upakulyA#}¦ {%upa-kulyā,%} f. the plant Piper
Longum; a canal, a trench, a ditch.
<LEND>

<L>11231<pc>0160-c<k1>upakuSa<k2>upakuSa
{#upakuSa#}¦ {%upa-kuśa, as,%} m. gum-boil; N. of
a Cakravartin, a son of Kuśa.
<LEND>

<L>11232<pc>0160-c<k1>upakUj<k2>upakUj
{#upakUj#}¦ {%upa-kūj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kūjati, -jitum,%} to
fill with cooing, to make resonant.
<LEND>

<L>11233<pc>0160-c<k1>upakUjita<k2>upakUjita
{%Upa-kūjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to resound (with
cooing).
<LEND>

<L>11234<pc>0160-c<k1>upakUpe<k2>upakUpe
{#upakUpe#}¦ {%upa-kūpe,%} ind. near a well; ({%am%}),
n. a well (?). {%—Upakūpa-jalāśaya, as,%} m. a trough
near a well for watering cattle.
<LEND>

<L>11235<pc>0160-c<k1>upakUlam<k2>upakUlam
{#upakUlam#}¦ {%upa-kūlam,%} ind. on the shore.
<LEND>

<L>11236<pc>0160-c<k1>upakUlaka<k2>upakUlaka
{%Upakūlaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>11237<pc>0160-c<k1>upakf<k2>upakf
{#upakf#}¦ {%upa-kṛ,%} cl. 5. 8. P. A. {%-kṛṇoti, -ṇute,%}
{%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to place or bring near, to
furnish with, provide; to assist, serve; favour, benefit;
to foster, take care of; to serve, render homage to (with
acc.); to undertake, begin, set about anything (with
dat.); to place under, subdue; {%upa-s-kṛ%} ({%s%} inserted)
A. to add, supply; to furnish with; to elaborate,
prepare, furnish with anything beautiful, to adorn, or-
nament; to care for, take care of (with acc.); to
furnish badly, deform; corrupt; to bring together.
<LEND>

<L>11238<pc>0160-c<k1>upakaraRa<k2>upakaraRa
{%Upa-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. doing anything for another,
doing a service or favour, helping, assisting; instru-
ment, implement, machine, engine, apparatus, para-
phernalia, as the vessels and offerings at a sacrifice;
anything added over and above, contribution, expedi-
ent, means of subsistence, anything supporting life;
object of art or science, fabricating, composing, &c.;
the insignia of royalty; the attendants of a king.
{%—Upakaraṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with means,
instruments or implements, competent to do anything.
<LEND>

<L>11239<pc>0160-c<k1>upakartf<k2>upakartf
{%Upa-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ doing one a favour, assist-
ing, befriending, one who helps or befriends.
<LEND>

<L>11240<pc>0160-c<k1>upakAra<k2>upakAra
{%Upa-kāra, as,%}¦ m. help, assistance, benefit, service,
favour, use, advantage, ({%upakāre vṛt,%} to be of service
to another); preparation, ornament, garlands sus-
pended at gateways as an embellishment on festivals,
a flower &c.; ({%ī%}), f. a royal tent, a palace, a caravan-
sera. {%—Upakāra-para, as, ā, am,%} beneficent, dili-
gent in doing good. {%—Upakārāpakārau (˚ra-ap˚),%}
m. du. kindness and injury.
<LEND>

<L>11241<pc>0160-c<k1>upakAraka<k2>upakAraka
{%Upa-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ doing a service or favour,
assisting, protecting, befriending; ({%ikā%}), f. a protec-
tress, a female assistant; a palace, a caravansera; a
kind of cake. {%—Upakāraka-tva, am,%} n. assistance,
protection.
<LEND>

<L>11242<pc>0160-c<k1>upakArin<k2>upakArin
{%Upa-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ helping, assisting, doing one
a favour, a benefactor; subsidiary, subservient; (often
used in comp., e. g. {%paropakārin,%} helping others.)
{%—Upakāri-tā,%} f. or {%upakāri-tva, am,%} n. aid, suc-
cour, protection.
<LEND>

<L>11243<pc>0160-c<k1>upakArya<k2>upakArya
{%Upa-kārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ deserving assistance or
favour; to be assisted; ({%ā%}), f. a king's house, a palace,
a caravansera; a royal tent.
<LEND>

<L>11244<pc>0160-c<k1>upakurvARa<k2>upakurvARa
{%Upa-kurvāṇa, as,%}¦ m. a Brāhman when passing
from the state of a pupil ({%Brahma-cārin%}) to that of
a householder ({%Gṛha-stha%}).
<LEND>

<L>11245<pc>0160-c<k1>upakfta<k2>upakfta
{%Upa-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ assisted, benefited; rendered
as assistance, done kindly or beneficently; ({%am%}), n.
a favour, a benefit.
<LEND>

<L>11246<pc>0160-c<k1>upakfti<k2>upakfti
{%Upa-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. aid, assistance, favour, kindness.
<LEND>

<L>11247<pc>0160-c<k1>upakftin<k2>upakftin
{%Upa-kṛtin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ or {%upakṛti-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} one who has done a favour to any body.
<LEND>

<L>11248<pc>0160-c<k1>upakriyA<k2>upakriyA
{%Upa-kriyā,%}¦ f. service, favour.
<LEND>

<L>11249<pc>0160-c<k1>upakft<k2>upakft
{#upakft#}¦ {%upa-kṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛntati, -karti-%}
{%tum,%} to trim, clip off, carp at.
<LEND>

<L>11250<pc>0160-c<k1>upakfz<k2>upakfz
{#upakfz#}¦ {%upa-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-karṣati, -kar-%}
{%ṣṭum%} or {%-kraṣṭum,%} to draw towards, take; to take
away, remove, set aside.
<LEND>

<L>11251<pc>0160-c<k1>upakF<k2>upakF
{#upakF#}¦ {%upa-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -karitum%}
or {%-rītum,%} to scatter or throw down, to scatter upon,
[Page0161-a+ 74]
pour upon, besprinkle, bestrew. {%—Upa-s-kṝ,%} to cut
up, split, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>11252<pc>0161-a<k1>upakiraRa<k2>upakiraRa
{%Upa-kiraṇa, am,%}¦ n. scattering or throwing over,
covering up (with earth &c.), burying.
<LEND>

<L>11253<pc>0161-a<k1>upakIrRa<k2>upakIrRa
{%Upa-kīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ besprinkled, strewed with,
covered.
<LEND>

<L>11254<pc>0161-a<k1>upakxp<k2>upakxp
{#upakxp#}¦ {%upa-kḷp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kalpate, -kalpi-%}
{%tum%} or {%-kalptum,%} to be fit for; to be ready at
hand; to serve as, lead to (with dat.); to take shape
or form, become, be: Caus. {%-kalpayati, -yitum,%} to
prepare, make ready, equip; to bring near, to fetch; to
allot, assign; to set up, exhibit; to render (homage),
to communicate; to assume.
<LEND>

<L>11255<pc>0161-a<k1>upakalpana<k2>upakalpana
{%Upa-kalpana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. preparation, preparing
articles of food, medicine, &c.; fabricating, making,
substituting.
<LEND>

<L>11256<pc>0161-a<k1>upakalpita<k2>upakalpita
{%Upa-kalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ prepared, made; secon-
dary, substituted.
<LEND>

<L>11257<pc>0161-a<k1>upakxpta<k2>upakxpta
{%Upa-kḷpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought near, at hand,
ready, prepared, equipped, adapted, fitted for; formed,
produced.
<LEND>

<L>11258<pc>0161-a<k1>upakoSA<k2>upakoSA
{#upakoSA#}¦ {%upa-kośā,%} f., N. of a daughter of
Upa-varṣa and wife of Vararuci.
<LEND>

<L>11259<pc>0161-a<k1>upakosala<k2>upakosala
{#upakosala#}¦ {%upa-kosala, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>11260<pc>0161-a<k1>upakram<k2>upakram
{#upakram#}¦ {%upa-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A., 4. P. {%-krā-%}
{%mati, -kramate%} (ep. also {%-krāmate%}), {%-krāmyati,%}
{%-kramitum,%} to go near, approach, come to; to go
against, attack; to step over, stride; to approach with
any object, have recourse to, to undertake, begin, set
about (with acc. or dat. or inf.), to treat, act towards,
attend on (as a physician).
<LEND>

<L>11261<pc>0161-a<k1>upakrantf<k2>upakrantf
{%Upa-krantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a beginner, one who
undertakes.
<LEND>

<L>11262<pc>0161-a<k1>upakrama<k2>upakrama
{%Upa-krama, as,%}¦ m. going near to, approach; un-
dertaking; commencement, beginning; enterprise,
planning, original conception, plan; what leads to
any result, a means, an expedient, a stratagem, ex-
ploit; attendance (on a patient), treatment, practice
of medicine, application of remedies, physicking; a
particular ceremony preparatory to reading the Vedas;
trying the fidelity &c. of a counsellor or friend; re-
tiring from flight, retreat (?).
<LEND>

<L>11263<pc>0161-a<k1>upakramaRa<k2>upakramaRa
{%Upa-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. approaching, undertaking,
attendance (on a patient), treatment.
<LEND>

<L>11264<pc>0161-a<k1>upakramaRIya<k2>upakramaRIya
{%Upakramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone to, to be
approached, to be commenced or undertaken; relating
to the attendance (on a patient).
<LEND>

<L>11265<pc>0161-a<k1>upakramitavya<k2>upakramitavya
{%Upa-kramitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be undertaken, to
be commenced.
<LEND>

<L>11266<pc>0161-a<k1>upakramitf<k2>upakramitf
{%Upa-kramitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who begins &c.
<LEND>

<L>11267<pc>0161-a<k1>upakrAmya<k2>upakrAmya
{%Upa-krāmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attended, to be treated.
<LEND>

<L>11268<pc>0161-a<k1>upakrI<k2>upakrI
{#upakrI#}¦ {%upa-krī,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%krīṇāti, -ṇīte,%}
{%-kretum,%} to purchase.
<LEND>

<L>11269<pc>0161-a<k1>upakrIya<k2>upakrIya
{%Upa-krīya,%}¦ ind. having bought or purchased.
<LEND>

<L>11270<pc>0161-a<k1>upakrIq<k2>upakrIq
{#upakrIq#}¦ {%upa-krīḍ,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%-krī-%}
{%ḍati, -te, -ḍitum,%} to approach playing, play around.
<LEND>

<L>11271<pc>0161-a<k1>upakrIqA<k2>upakrIqA
{%Upa-krīḍā,%}¦ f. place for playing, play-ground.
<LEND>

<L>11272<pc>0161-a<k1>upakruSya<k2>upakruSya
{#upakruSya#}¦ {%upa-kruśya,%} ind. (rt. {%kruś%}), chiding,
blaming, affecting to be angry.
<LEND>

<L>11273<pc>0161-a<k1>upakroSa<k2>upakroSa
{%Upa-krośa, as,%}¦ m. censure, reproach.
<LEND>

<L>11274<pc>0161-a<k1>upakroSana<k2>upakroSana
{%Upa-krośana, am,%}¦ n. censuring, blaming.
<LEND>

<L>11275<pc>0161-a<k1>upakrozwf<k2>upakrozwf
{%Upa-kroṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. a censurer, a reprover; an
ass (which brays).
<LEND>

<L>11276<pc>0161-a<k1>upakvaRa<k2>upakvaRa
{#upakvaRa#}¦ {%upa-kvaṇa, as,%} m. (rt. {%kvaṇ%}), the
sound of a lute.
<LEND>

<L>11277<pc>0161-a<k1>upakvasa<k2>upakvasa
{#upakvasa#}¦ {%upa-kvasa, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
worm or insect.
<LEND>

<L>11278<pc>0161-a<k1>upakzar<k2>upakzar
{#upakzar#}¦ {%upa-kṣar,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-kṣarati, -te, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-radhyai,%} to flow or
stream towards.
<LEND>

<L>11279<pc>0161-a<k1>upakzi<k2>upakzi<h>1
{#upakzi#} 1¦. {%upa-kṣi,%} Pass. {%-kṣīyate,%} to waste
away, decay, be consumed, be exhausted, disappear.
<LEND>

<L>11280<pc>0161-a<k1>upakzaya<k2>upakzaya
{%Upa-kṣaya, as,%}¦ m. waste, decay, loss, expenditure,
outlay.
<LEND>
[Page0161-b+ 73]

<L>11281<pc>0161-b<k1>upakzIRa<k2>upakzIRa
{%Upa-kṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ decayed, exhausted, con-
sumed, disappeared.
<LEND>

<L>11282<pc>0161-b<k1>upakzi<k2>upakzi<h>2
{#upakzi#} 2¦. {%upa-kṣi,%} cl. 2. 6. P. {%-kṣeti, -kṣi-%}
{%yati, -kṣetum,%} to stay or dwell near or at (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>11283<pc>0161-b<k1>upakzit<k2>upakzit
{%Upa-kṣit, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. dwelling near; clinging to,
attached to.
<LEND>

<L>11284<pc>0161-b<k1>upakzetf<k2>upakzetf
{%Upa-kṣetṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who dwells
near, attached to, a follower; (Sāy.) one who ap-
proaches.
<LEND>

<L>11285<pc>0161-b<k1>upakzip<k2>upakzip
{#upakzip#}¦ {%upa-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A., 4. P.
{%-kṣipati, -te, -kṣipyati, -kṣeptum,%} to throw at,
hurl against; to throw down; to strike with words,
insult, accuse, insinuate, charge with (a crime).
<LEND>

<L>11286<pc>0161-b<k1>upakzepa<k2>upakzepa
{%Upa-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. throwing at, mention, allusion,
threatening; poetical or figurative style in composition.
<LEND>

<L>11287<pc>0161-b<k1>upakzepaRa<k2>upakzepaRa
{%Upa-kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. throwing down, casting
down, accusing.
<LEND>

<L>11288<pc>0161-b<k1>upaKyA<k2>upaKyA
{#upaKyA#}¦ {%upa-khyā,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%-khyāti,%}
{%-tum,%} to see.
<LEND>

<L>11289<pc>0161-b<k1>upagaRa<k2>upagaRa
{#upagaRa#}¦ {%upa-gaṇa, as, ā, am,%} constituting a
small or subordinate class; ({%as%}), m. a small or inferior
class; a small number less than a troop; N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>11290<pc>0161-b<k1>upaganDa<k2>upaganDa
{#upaganDa#}¦ {%upa-gandha, as,%} m. perfume, scent.
<LEND>

<L>11291<pc>0161-b<k1>upagam<k2>upagam
{#upagam#}¦ {%upa-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} to go near to, come towards, approach, arrive
at, visit, reach, attain; to come upon, attack; to
occur, happen, present itself; to undertake, begin;
to approach a woman (for intercourse); to enter any
state or relation, undergo; suffer, participate in, make
choice of; to admit, agree to, allow, confess: Caus.
{%-gamayati, -yitum,%} to cause to come near or ap-
proach: Desid. {%-jigamiṣati,%} to wish to approach,
desire to go.
<LEND>

<L>11292<pc>0161-b<k1>upaga<k2>upaga
{%Upa-ga, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a compound)
approaching, following, joining; receiving.
<LEND>

<L>11293<pc>0161-b<k1>upagata<k2>upagata
{%Upa-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone to, met, approached,
near at hand, approximate, arrived, occurred, hap-
pened, attained, obtained; undergone, experienced;
become; furnished with; promised, agreed; feeling,
suffering, entertaining; passed away, dead; ({%am%}), n.
receipt, acquittance. {%—Upagata-vat, ān, atī, at,%} going
to, having gone to or approached; possessing; feeling,
suffering (as sorrow &c.); promising.
<LEND>

<L>11294<pc>0161-b<k1>upagati<k2>upagati
{%Upa-gati, is,%}¦ f. going near, approach; undergoing.
<LEND>

<L>11295<pc>0161-b<k1>upagama<k2>upagama
{%Upa-gama, as,%}¦ m. approach, approximation, com-
ing to; obtaining; having; acquaintance, society,
intercourse (as of the sexes); undergoing; suffering,
feeling; agreement, promise; a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>11296<pc>0161-b<k1>upagamana<k2>upagamana
{%Upa-gamana, am,%}¦ n. coming to, obtaining; un-
dertaking, addicting one's self to.
<LEND>

<L>11297<pc>0161-b<k1>upagamya<k2>upagamya<h>1
1. {%upa-gamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ approachable, to be
approached, attainable.
<LEND>

<L>11298<pc>0161-b<k1>upagamya<k2>upagamya<h>2
2. {%upa-gamya%}¦ or {%upa-gatya,%} ind. having ap-
proached.
<LEND>

<L>11299<pc>0161-b<k1>upagAmin<k2>upagAmin
{%Upa-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ coming near, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>11300<pc>0161-b<k1>upagahana<k2>upagahana
{#upagahana#}¦ {%upa-gahana, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>11301<pc>0161-b<k1>upagA<k2>upagA<h>1
{#upagA#} 1¦. {%upa-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to
go near to, arrive at, come into, undergo.
<LEND>

<L>11302<pc>0161-b<k1>upagAh<k2>upagAh
{#upagAh#}¦ {%upa-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -gāhitum%}
or {%-gāḍhum,%} to penetrate; force one's way into.
<LEND>

<L>11303<pc>0161-b<k1>upagiram<k2>upagiram
{#upagiram#}¦ {%upa-giram,%} ind. at a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>11304<pc>0161-b<k1>upagiri<k2>upagiri
{%Upa-giri, is,%}¦ m. a country near a mountain; ({%i%}),
ind. near a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>11305<pc>0161-b<k1>upagu<k2>upagu
{#upagu#}¦ {%upa-gu, us,%} m. (fr. {%upa%} and {%go%}), N.
of a prince; ({%u%}), ind. near a cow.
<LEND>

<L>11306<pc>0161-b<k1>upagupta<k2>upagupta
{#upagupta#}¦ {%upa-gupta, as, ā, am,%} hidden, con-
cealed; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man, the son of Gupta.
{%—Upagupta-vitta, as, ā, am,%} of concealed resources.
<LEND>

<L>11307<pc>0161-b<k1>upaguru<k2>upaguru
{#upaguru#}¦ {%upa-guru, us,%} m. an assistant teacher;
N. of a prince; (a various reading has {%upa-gu.%})
<LEND>

<L>11308<pc>0161-b<k1>upaguh<k2>upaguh
{#upaguh#}¦ {%upa-guh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-gūhati, -te,%}
{%gūhitum%} or {%-goḍhum,%} to hide, cover, conceal, clasp,
embrace.
<LEND>
[Page0161-c+ 76]

<L>11309<pc>0161-c<k1>upagUQa<k2>upagUQa
{%Upa-gūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ hidden, concealed; lulled,
suppressed; embraced; ({%am%}), n. an embrace. {%—Upa-%}
{%gūḍha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has embraced.
<LEND>

<L>11310<pc>0161-c<k1>upagUhana<k2>upagUhana
{%Upa-gūhana, am,%}¦ n. hiding, concealing; embrac-
ing, an embrace; astonishment, surprise.
<LEND>

<L>11311<pc>0161-c<k1>upagohya<k2>upagohya
{%Upa-gohya, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fire considered as
impure (and therefore to be hidden).
<LEND>

<L>11312<pc>0161-c<k1>upagF<k2>upagF<h>1
{#upagF#} 1¦. {%upa-gṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A., Ved. {%-gṛṇāti,%}
{%-ṇīte, -garitum%} or {%-rītum,%} to call out to, invoke
with hymns of praise; to approach with praise (with
acc. of the person).
<LEND>

<L>11313<pc>0161-c<k1>upagF<k2>upagF<h>2
{#upagF#} 2¦. {%upa-gṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-girati%} or {%-gilati,%}
{%-garitum, -litum%} or {%-rītum, -lītum,%} to swallow down.
<LEND>

<L>11314<pc>0161-c<k1>upagE<k2>upagE
{#upagE#}¦ {%upa-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gātum,%} to
sing to any one (with dat. or acc.), to join in
singing; to sing before any one (with acc.); to fill
with song, praise in song, sing, celebrate.
<LEND>

<L>11315<pc>0161-c<k1>upagA<k2>upagA<h>2
2. {%upa-gā,%}¦ f. accompaniment of a song.
<LEND>

<L>11316<pc>0161-c<k1>upagAtf<k2>upagAtf
{%Upa-gātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who accompanies the song
or recitation of the Udgātṛ priest, a chorister.
<LEND>

<L>11317<pc>0161-c<k1>upagIta<k2>upagIta
{%Upa-gīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ celebrated, proclaimed, sung
by bards &c.
<LEND>

<L>11318<pc>0161-c<k1>upagIti<k2>upagIti
{%Upa-gīti, is,%}¦ f. a variety of the Āryā metre, a
stanza of four lines, containing twice 12 + 15 syllabic
instants.
<LEND>

<L>11319<pc>0161-c<k1>upagIya<k2>upagIya
{%Upa-gīya,%}¦ ind. having sung, having celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>11320<pc>0161-c<k1>upagIyamAna<k2>upagIyamAna
{%Upa-gīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>11321<pc>0161-c<k1>upageya<k2>upageya
{%Upa-geya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sung or celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>11322<pc>0161-c<k1>upagranT<k2>upagranT
{#upagranT#}¦ {%upa-granth,%} cl. 9. 1. 10. P. {%-grath-%}
{%nāti, -granthati, -granthayati, -granthitum, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to intwine or wind round.
<LEND>

<L>11323<pc>0161-c<k1>upagranTa<k2>upagranTa
{%Upa-grantha, as,%}¦ m. title of a writing or of a
class of writings.
<LEND>

<L>11324<pc>0161-c<k1>upagras<k2>upagras
{#upagras#}¦ {%upa-gras,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-grasati, -te,%}
{%-grasitum,%} to swallow down, devour; to eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>11325<pc>0161-c<k1>upagrah<k2>upagrah
{#upagrah#}¦ {%upa-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti,%}
{%-ṇīte%} (Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte%}), {%-grahītum,%} to col-
lect (a fluid by holding one vessel under another),
to hold under; to seize from below; to seize, take
possession of, take, obtain; to subdue, become, master
of; to bring near to (one's self), take as one's ally,
conciliate, make favourable; to conceive with one's
mind ({%dhiyā%}); to decide, to determine; to accept,
approve.
<LEND>

<L>11326<pc>0161-c<k1>upagraha<k2>upagraha
{%Upa-graha, as,%}¦ m. seizure, confinement; a prisoner;
subjoining, annexing; making favourable, appeasing,
favour, encouragement, assistance; peace purchased
by the cession of everything; the voice or pada of a
verb; a heap of Kuśa grass; the presiding spirit or cause
directing a planet's motion; (with {%upa%} implying in-
feriority) a minor planet or any heavenly body of a
secondary kind, as a comet, a meteor, a falling star, &c.
<LEND>

<L>11327<pc>0161-c<k1>upagrahaRa<k2>upagrahaRa
{%Upa-grahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. holding up, seizing from
below; the taking any one prisoner, seizure, capture,
taking, supporting, forwarding, promoting; holy study,
reading the Vedas after initiation.
<LEND>

<L>11328<pc>0161-c<k1>upagrAha<k2>upagrAha
{%Upa-grāha, as,%}¦ m. oblation, present, (what is ac-
cepted.)
<LEND>

<L>11329<pc>0161-c<k1>upagrAhya<k2>upagrAhya
{%Upa-grāhya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a present, an offering
to a king or great man, a Nazr.
<LEND>

<L>11330<pc>0161-c<k1>upaGAta<k2>upaGAta
{#upaGAta#}¦ {%upa-ghāta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%han%} with
{%upa%}), a stroke, injury, damage, offence; touch, con-
tact, especially with intent to injure; personal violence,
assault; disease, sickness; a kind of oblation offered
in small portions at a time.
<LEND>

<L>11331<pc>0161-c<k1>upaGAtaka<k2>upaGAtaka
{%Upa-ghātaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%upa-ghātin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} injuring, hurting, offending.
<LEND>

<L>11332<pc>0161-c<k1>upaGna<k2>upaGna
{%Upa-ghna, as,%}¦ m. contiguous support; a contiguous
resting-place, shelter, support, stay, protection; what
rests upon or is supported by.
<LEND>

<L>11333<pc>0161-c<k1>upaGuz<k2>upaGuz
{#upaGuz#}¦ {%upa-ghuṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ghoṣati, -ṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to fill with noise, make resonant.
<LEND>

<L>11334<pc>0161-c<k1>upaGuzwa<k2>upaGuzwa
{%Upa-ghuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ resounding with; reso-
nant; sounding.
<LEND>

<L>11335<pc>0161-c<k1>upaGozaRa<k2>upaGozaRa
{%Upa-ghoṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. proclaiming, publication,
making known.
<LEND>
[Page0162-a+ 75]

<L>11336<pc>0162-a<k1>upaGrA<k2>upaGrA
{#upaGrA#}¦ {%upa-ghrā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jighrati, -ghrātum,%}
to smell, smell at; to kiss: Caus. {%-ghrāpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to smell at or kiss.
<LEND>

<L>11337<pc>0162-a<k1>upacakra<k2>upacakra
{#upacakra#}¦ {%upa-cakra, as,%} m. a variety of the
ruddy goose, Cakra or Cakravāka.
<LEND>

<L>11338<pc>0162-a<k1>upacatura<k2>upacatura
{#upacatura#}¦ {%upa-catura, ās, ās, āṇi,%} pl. almost
four, nearly four.
<LEND>

<L>11339<pc>0162-a<k1>upacaya<k2>upacaya
{#upacaya#}¦ {%upa-caya.%} See 1. {%upa-ci.%}
<LEND>

<L>11340<pc>0162-a<k1>upacar<k2>upacar
{#upacar#}¦ {%upa-car,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-carati, -te,%}
{%-caritum,%} Ved. {%-ritave, -vai, -rase, -radhyai,%}
to come near, approach, go towards; to approach
with the intention of serving, to assist, serve, attend,
wait on (with acc.); to attend on a patient, to
tend, nurse; to undertake; begin: Pass. {%-caryate,%}
to be used figuratively or metaphorically, to be applied
figuratively to any one (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>11341<pc>0162-a<k1>upacara<k2>upacara
{%Upa-cara, as,%}¦ m. approach; attendance, cure.
<LEND>

<L>11342<pc>0162-a<k1>upacaraRa<k2>upacaraRa
{%Upa-caraṇa, am,%}¦ n. going near to, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>11343<pc>0162-a<k1>upacarita<k2>upacarita
{%Upa-carita, as, ā, am,%}¦ waited on, served, adored.
<LEND>

<L>11344<pc>0162-a<k1>upacarya<k2>upacarya<h>1
1. {%upa-carya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be served or waited on,
to be worshipped; ({%ā%}), f. service, attendance; practice
of medicine, physicking.
<LEND>

<L>11345<pc>0162-a<k1>upacarya<k2>upacarya<h>2
2. {%upa-carya,%}¦ ind. having approached or attended
to; having groomed or tended (horses).
<LEND>

<L>11346<pc>0162-a<k1>upacAra<k2>upacAra
{%Upa-cāra, as,%}¦ m. approach, service, attendance,
act of civility, obliging or polite behaviour; proceed-
ing, practice; profession, usage; physicking, the prac-
tice of medicine, tending the sick, nursing; behaviour,
conduct; a ceremony, presenting offerings of water,
betel, flowers, &c.; a present, a bribe; solicitation,
request; incomplete act; a figure of speech, pre-
tence, pretext, ellipsis, metaphor (e. g. {%upacārāt,%}
metaphorically); occurrence of {%s%} and {%ṣ%} in the place
of Visarga in grammar; N. of a Pariśiṣṭa of the
Sāma-veda. {%—Upacāra-karaṇa, am,%} n. or {%upacāra-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. or {%upacāra-kriyā,%} f. offering presents,
especially of perfumes, flowers, &c.; attention, service.
{%—Upacāra-para, as, ā, am,%} diligent in service,
serving diligently. {%—Upacāra-paribhraṣṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} void of civility, destitute of kindness, churlish,
uncourteous.
<LEND>

<L>11347<pc>0162-a<k1>upacArin<k2>upacArin
{%Upa-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ attending, serving.
<LEND>

<L>11348<pc>0162-a<k1>upacArya<k2>upacArya
{%Upa-cārya, as,%}¦ m. practice of medicine.
<LEND>

<L>11349<pc>0162-a<k1>upacarma<k2>upacarma
{#upacarma#}¦ {%upa-carma%} or {%am,%} ind. on the skin,
near the skin.
<LEND>

<L>11350<pc>0162-a<k1>upacAru<k2>upacAru
{#upacAru#}¦ {%upa-cāru, us,%} m. and {%upacāru-mat,%}
{%ān,%} m., N. of two Cakravartins.
<LEND>

<L>11351<pc>0162-a<k1>upaci<k2>upaci<h>1
{#upaci#} 1¦. {%upa-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -nute,%}
{%-cetum,%} to gather together; to heap up, collect, hoard
up, accumulate, increase, strengthen; to cover over
with: Pass. {%-cīyate,%} to be heaped together or accu-
mulated, to increase, become strong; to better one's
circumstances, be prosperous; to gain advantage,
succeed, to be covered with.
<LEND>

<L>11352<pc>0162-a<k1>upacaya<k2>upacaya
{%Upa-caya, as,%}¦ m. accumulation, increase, growth,
prosperity; quantity, heap; elevation, excess; addi-
tion; the third, sixth, tenth, and eleventh degrees
from the first of a zodiacal sign. {%—Upacaya-bhavana,%}
{%am,%} n. (?) according to some, a species of the Daṇ-
ḍaka metre. {%—Upacayāpacayau (˚ya-ap˚),%} m. du.
prosperity and decay, rise and fall.
<LEND>

<L>11353<pc>0162-a<k1>upacAyin<k2>upacAyin
{%Upa-cāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ increasing, being in good
circumstances.
<LEND>

<L>11354<pc>0162-a<k1>upacAyya<k2>upacAyya
{%Upa-cāyya, as,%}¦ m. a certain sacrificial fire; a place
for holding sacrificial fire, a hearth, an altar.
<LEND>

<L>11355<pc>0162-a<k1>upacit<k2>upacit
{%Upa-cit, t,%}¦ f., Ved. a kind of disease, perhaps a
swelling.
<LEND>

<L>11356<pc>0162-a<k1>upacita<k2>upacita
{%Upa-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ collected, gathered together,
heaped up, increased, assembled; thriving, increas-
ing; abundantly furnished with, plastered, smeared;
burnt (?). {%—Upacita-rasa, as, ā, am,%} augmented in
feeling.
<LEND>

<L>11357<pc>0162-a<k1>upaciti<k2>upaciti
{%Upa-citi, is,%}¦ f. accumulation, collection, abundance.
<LEND>

<L>11358<pc>0162-a<k1>upacIyamAna<k2>upacIyamAna
{%Upa-cīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being collected or filled.
<LEND>

<L>11359<pc>0162-a<k1>upaceya<k2>upaceya
{%Upa-ceya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be collected or heaped up.
<LEND>
[Page0162-b+ 73]

<L>11360<pc>0162-b<k1>upaci<k2>upaci<h>2
{#upaci#} 2¦. {%upa-ci,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%-ciketi, -ce-%}
{%tum,%} to honour, worship.
<LEND>

<L>11361<pc>0162-b<k1>upacittacinta<k2>upacittacinta
{#upacittacinta#}¦ {%upacitta-cinta, as,%} m., N. of
a son of Pāpīyas.
<LEND>

<L>11362<pc>0162-b<k1>upacitra<k2>upacitra
{#upacitra#}¦ {%upa-citra, as,%} m., N. of a man;
({%ā%}), f. the plants Salvinia Cuculluta and Croton
Polyandra; N. of several metres, namely, 1. a variety
of Mātrāsamaka, containing 4×16 syllabic instants;
2. a metre of four lines of eleven syllables each; 3. a
metre of two lines of twenty-two syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>11363<pc>0162-b<k1>upacUlana<k2>upacUlana
{#upacUlana#}¦ {%upa-cūlana, am,%} n. heating, burn-
ing (?).
<LEND>

<L>11364<pc>0162-b<k1>upacft<k2>upacft
{#upacft#}¦ {%upa-cṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-cṛtati, -cartitum,%}
to fasten, tie, bind on.
<LEND>

<L>11365<pc>0162-b<k1>upacCad<k2>upacCad<h>1
{#upacCad#} 1¦. {%upa-cchad (upa-chad),%} cl. 10. P.
A. {%-chādayati, -te, -yitum,%} to cover, hide, conceal,
keep secret.
<LEND>

<L>11366<pc>0162-b<k1>upacCanna<k2>upacCanna
{%Upa-cchanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ secret, concealed.
<LEND>

<L>11367<pc>0162-b<k1>upacCad<k2>upacCad<h>2
{#upacCad#} 2¦. {%upa-cchad%} or {%-cchand (upa-chad),%}
Caus. {%-cchandayati, -yitum,%} to present any one
(acc.) with anything (inst.); to persuade a person
to do anything; to coax, to seek to seduce a person;
to conciliate.
<LEND>

<L>11368<pc>0162-b<k1>upacCandana<k2>upacCandana
{%Upa-cchandana, am,%}¦ n. persuasion, persuading,
coaxing.
<LEND>

<L>11369<pc>0162-b<k1>upacyava<k2>upacyava
{#upacyava#}¦ {%upa-cyava, as,%} m. (rt. {%cyu%}), Ved.
pressing close to (in sexual intercourse); (Sāy.) going
into (the chamber).
<LEND>

<L>11370<pc>0162-b<k1>upajagatI<k2>upajagatI
{#upajagatI#}¦ {%upa-jagatī,%} f. a variety of the
Triṣṭubh metre, in which three Pādas contain twelve
syllables instead of eleven.
<LEND>

<L>11371<pc>0162-b<k1>upajan<k2>upajan
{#upajan#}¦ {%upa-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate, -janitum,%}
to be produced in addition, to be born, originate; to
happen, become visible, appear; to be born again;
to exist, be: Caus. {%-janayati, -yitum,%} to produce,
cause.
<LEND>

<L>11372<pc>0162-b<k1>upaja<k2>upaja
{%Upa-ja, as, ā, am,%}¦ being produced in addition,
increasing; ({%as%}), m., N. of a divine being (?).
<LEND>

<L>11373<pc>0162-b<k1>upajana<k2>upajana
{%Upa-jana, as,%}¦ m. additional production, addition,
increase; appendage; addition of a letter in the forma-
tion of words; letters, syllables or affixes added.
<LEND>

<L>11374<pc>0162-b<k1>upajA<k2>upajA
{%Upa-jā,%}¦ f., Ved. distant or not immediate posterity.
<LEND>

<L>11375<pc>0162-b<k1>upajAta<k2>upajAta
{%Upa-jāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced, engendered, aroused.
{%—Upajāta-kopa%} or {%upajāta-krodha, as, ā, am,%}
provoked, excited, moved to anger. {%—Upajāta-%}
{%viśvāsa, as, ā, am,%} believing, confiding, confident,
trusting.
<LEND>

<L>11376<pc>0162-b<k1>upajAti<k2>upajAti
{%Upa-jāti, is,%}¦ f. a mixed metre, especially a con-
junction of Indravajrā and Upendravajrā, and a con-
junction of Vaṃśastha and Indravaṃśa.
<LEND>

<L>11377<pc>0162-b<k1>upajap<k2>upajap
{#upajap#}¦ {%upa-jap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-japati, -japitum,%}
to whisper into the ears (of another), to bring over
to one's own party by secretly suggesting anything in
the ear, to instigate to rebellion or treachery; to
make mischief.
<LEND>

<L>11378<pc>0162-b<k1>upajapya<k2>upajapya
{%Upa-japya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought over or in-
stigated to rebellion by secret suggestions or whisper-
ing in the ear.
<LEND>

<L>11379<pc>0162-b<k1>upajApa<k2>upajApa
{%Upa-jāpa, as,%}¦ m. the act of whispering into the
ears, rousing to rebellion, bringing over to one's own
party; treason, treachery; disunion, separation.
<LEND>

<L>11380<pc>0162-b<k1>upajApaka<k2>upajApaka
{%Upa-jāpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ whispering anything into
the ears, rousing to rebellion; a traitor, treacherous;
a mischief-maker, one who foments quarrels.
<LEND>

<L>11381<pc>0162-b<k1>upajarasam<k2>upajarasam
{#upajarasam#}¦ {%upa-jarasam,%} ind. towards old
age, in old age.
<LEND>

<L>11382<pc>0162-b<k1>upajalA<k2>upajalA
{#upajalA#}¦ {%upa-jalā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>11383<pc>0162-b<k1>upajalp<k2>upajalp
{#upajalp#}¦ {%upa-jalp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jalpati, -pitum,%}
to talk to, chatter, advise.
<LEND>

<L>11384<pc>0162-b<k1>upajalpita<k2>upajalpita
{%Upa-jalpita, am,%}¦ n. talk.
<LEND>

<L>11385<pc>0162-b<k1>upajalpin<k2>upajalpin
{%Upa-jalpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ talking to a person, giving
advice.
<LEND>

<L>11386<pc>0162-b<k1>upajAyam<k2>upajAyam
{#upajAyam#}¦ {%upa-jāyam,%} ind. near a wife.
<LEND>
[Page0162-c+ 73]

<L>11387<pc>0162-c<k1>upajigamizu<k2>upajigamizu
{#upajigamizu#}¦ {%upa-jigamiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr.
Desid. of rt. {%gam%}), desirous of going near.
<LEND>

<L>11388<pc>0162-c<k1>upajihIrzA<k2>upajihIrzA
{#upajihIrzA#}¦ {%upa-jihīrṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of
rt. {%hṛ%} with {%upa%}), desire, intention to rob.
<LEND>

<L>11389<pc>0162-c<k1>upajihvA<k2>upajihvA
{#upajihvA#}¦ {%upa-jihvā%} or {%upajihvikā,%} f. the
uvula or soft palate, the epiglottis; enlargement of
the under side of the tongue; a kind of ant.
<LEND>

<L>11390<pc>0162-c<k1>upajIka<k2>upajIka
{#upajIka#}¦ {%upajīka, as,%} m., Ved. a water deity.
<LEND>

<L>11391<pc>0162-c<k1>upajIv<k2>upajIv
{#upajIv#}¦ {%upa-jīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jīvati, -vitum,%}
to live or exist upon (food), subsist, support one's self
on, be supported by, derive profit from, make use of
(with acc.); to live under, be dependant on, to serve;
to live for a profession, practice.
<LEND>

<L>11392<pc>0162-c<k1>upajIva<k2>upajIva
{%Upa-jīva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. living on &c. (?).
<LEND>

<L>11393<pc>0162-c<k1>upajIvaka<k2>upajIvaka
{%Upa-jīvaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ living upon, subsisting by
(with inst.); living under, depending upon, subject to,
a dependant; ({%am%}), n. means of subsistence, act.
<LEND>

<L>11394<pc>0162-c<k1>upajIvana<k2>upajIvana
{%Upa-jīvana, am,%}¦ n. means of living, subsistence.
<LEND>

<L>11395<pc>0162-c<k1>upajIvanIya<k2>upajIvanIya
{%Upa-jīvanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ granting means of sub-
sistence, affording a livelihood.
<LEND>

<L>11396<pc>0162-c<k1>upajIvikA<k2>upajIvikA
{%Upa-jīvikā,%}¦ f. subsistence, livelihood.
<LEND>

<L>11397<pc>0162-c<k1>upajIvin<k2>upajIvin
{%Upa-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ living on, subsisting by (with acc.
or gen.); living in dependance, dependant, subject.
<LEND>

<L>11398<pc>0162-c<k1>upajIvya<k2>upajIvya
{%Upa-jīvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ that by which one lives,
affording a livelihood; ({%am%}), n. means of subsistence,
cause.
<LEND>

<L>11399<pc>0162-c<k1>upajozam<k2>upajozam
{#upajozam#}¦ {%upa-joṣam,%} ind. (rt. {%juṣ%}), ac-
cording to one's desire or pleasure, quietly; an expres-
sion indicative of joy.
<LEND>

<L>11400<pc>0162-c<k1>upajozaRa<k2>upajozaRa
{%Upa-joṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. enjoying, frequenting.
<LEND>

<L>11401<pc>0162-c<k1>upajYA<k2>upajYA<h>1
{#upajYA#} 1¦. {%upa-jñā,%} cl. 9. A. {%-jānīte, -jñātum,%}
to ascertain; excogitate, invent, find out, hit upon:
Desid. A., ep. also P. {%-jijñāsate, -ti,%} to seek to
ascertain or invent.
<LEND>

<L>11402<pc>0162-c<k1>upajijYAsya<k2>upajijYAsya
{%Upa-jijñāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. enigmatical, unin-
telligible, mysterious.
<LEND>

<L>11403<pc>0162-c<k1>upajYA<k2>upajYA<h>2
2. {%upa-jñā,%}¦ f. a knowledge obtained by one's self
and not handed down by tradition, primitive or un-
taught knowledge, invention; commencement of a
thing not previously done; (at the end of a compound
used in neut., e. g. {%Pāṇiny-upajñam,%} the grammar
invented by Pāṇini.)
<LEND>

<L>11404<pc>0162-c<k1>upajman<k2>upajman
{#upajman#}¦ {%upa-jman, ā,%} m., Ved. striding or
stepping upon (?).
<LEND>

<L>11405<pc>0162-c<k1>upajyotiza<k2>upajyotiza
{#upajyotiza#}¦ {%upa-jyotiṣa,%} N. of a region.
<LEND>

<L>11406<pc>0162-c<k1>upajri<k2>upajri
{#upajri#}¦ {%upa-jri,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-jrayati, -jre-%}
{%tum,%} to extend to; (Sāy.) to go near to, approach.
<LEND>

<L>11407<pc>0162-c<k1>upajvalita<k2>upajvalita
{#upajvalita#}¦ {%upa-jvalita, as, ā, am,%} lighted up.
<LEND>

<L>11408<pc>0162-c<k1>upaQOk<k2>upaQOk
{#upaQOk#}¦ {%upa-ḍhauk,%} Caus. P. {%-ḍhaukayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to present an offering, make a respectful
offering; carry out, accomplish.
<LEND>

<L>11409<pc>0162-c<k1>upaQOkana<k2>upaQOkana
{%Upa-ḍhaukana, am,%}¦ n. a respectful offering or
present, a Nazr.
<LEND>

<L>11410<pc>0162-c<k1>upatakza<k2>upatakza
{#upatakza#}¦ {%upa-takṣa, as,%} m., N. of a certain
semi-divine being, belonging to the class of Gandhar-
vas or of Nāgas.
<LEND>

<L>11411<pc>0162-c<k1>upatawam<k2>upatawam
{#upatawam#}¦ {%upa-taṭam,%} ind. near the skirt;
({%as%}), m. (?) the skirt.
<LEND>

<L>11412<pc>0162-c<k1>upatap<k2>upatap
{#upatap#}¦ {%upa-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -taptum,%}
to make warm, to heat; to feel pain, become sick;
to afflict, befal (as an illness; sometimes used im-
personally with gen. or acc.): Pass. {%-tapyate,%} to feel
pain, become ill, be afflicted with; to be emaciated
with penance ({%tapas%}): Caus. {%-tāpayati, -yitum,%}
to kindle, ignite, burn, consume; to cause pain, ma-
cerate the body by penance; torment, hurt, offend,
oppress.
<LEND>

<L>11413<pc>0162-c<k1>upatapat<k2>upatapat
{%Upa-tapat, am,%}¦ m., Ved. (scil. {%agni%}) interior heat,
a disease.
<LEND>

<L>11414<pc>0162-c<k1>upatapta<k2>upatapta
{%Upa-tapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ heated, parched; distressed,
pained.
<LEND>

<L>11415<pc>0162-c<k1>upataptf<k2>upataptf
{%Upa-taptṛ, tā,%}¦ m. morbid heat; any cause of
heat, burning or inflammation.
<LEND>
[Page0163-a+ 70]

<L>11416<pc>0163-a<k1>upatapyamAna<k2>upatapyamAna
{%Upa-tapyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being distressed.
<LEND>

<L>11417<pc>0163-a<k1>upatApa<k2>upatApa
{%Upa-tāpa, as,%}¦ m. heat, warmth, heating, paining,
pain, trouble, misfortune; sickness, disease, injury;
haste, hurry.
<LEND>

<L>11418<pc>0163-a<k1>upatApana<k2>upatApana
{%Upa-tāpana, am,%}¦ n. heating, distressing.
<LEND>

<L>11419<pc>0163-a<k1>upatApin<k2>upatApin
{%Upa-tāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ heating, inflaming, exciting,
causing pain; suffering heat or pain, sick.
<LEND>

<L>11420<pc>0163-a<k1>upatAraka<k2>upatAraka
{#upatAraka#}¦ {%upa-tāraka, as, ikā, am%} (rt. {%tṝ%}),
overflowing.
<LEND>

<L>11421<pc>0163-a<k1>upatizya<k2>upatizya
{#upatizya#}¦ {%upa-tiṣya, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Tiṣya by Śārikā.
<LEND>

<L>11422<pc>0163-a<k1>upatIram<k2>upatIram
{#upatIram#}¦ {%upa-tīram,%} ind. on the shore.
<LEND>

<L>11423<pc>0163-a<k1>upatuz<k2>upatuz
{#upatuz#}¦ {%upa-tuṣ,%} Caus. {%-toṣayati, -yitum,%}
to content, satisfy.
<LEND>

<L>11424<pc>0163-a<k1>upatUlam<k2>upatUlam
{#upatUlam#}¦ {%upa-tūlam,%} ind. at the cotton.
<LEND>

<L>11425<pc>0163-a<k1>upatfRya<k2>upatfRya
{#upatfRya#}¦ {%upa-tṛṇya, as,%} m., Ved. epithet of
a snake (lurking in grass).
<LEND>

<L>11426<pc>0163-a<k1>upatya<k2>upatya
{#upatya#}¦ {%upatya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa%}), situated
under or below.
<LEND>

<L>11427<pc>0163-a<k1>upatyakA<k2>upatyakA
{%Upatyakā,%}¦ f. low-land, land at the foot of a hill
or mountain; a forest at the foot of a mountain; a
vale, valley.
<LEND>

<L>11428<pc>0163-a<k1>upadaMS<k2>upadaMS
{#upadaMS#}¦ {%upa-daṃś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-daśati, -daṃṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to bite or eat anything as a relish.
<LEND>

<L>11429<pc>0163-a<k1>upadaMSa<k2>upadaMSa
{%Upa-daṃśa, as,%}¦ m. a relish, anything to excite
drinking or appetite, anything eaten in addition;
biting, stinging; the venereal disease, chancre; a tree,
the scraped root of which is used for horse-radish,
Morunga Hyperanthera.
<LEND>

<L>11430<pc>0163-a<k1>upadaMSin<k2>upadaMSin
{%Upadaṃśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ afflicted with the above
disease.
<LEND>

<L>11431<pc>0163-a<k1>upadaDi<k2>upadaDi
{#upadaDi#}¦ {%upa-dadhi.%} See under 1. {%upa-dhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>11432<pc>0163-a<k1>upadamB<k2>upadamB
{#upadamB#}¦ {%upa-dambh,%} Caus. P., Ved. {%-dambha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to lesson, diminish, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>11433<pc>0163-a<k1>upadaSa<k2>upadaSa
{#upadaSa#}¦ {%upa-daśa, ās, ās, āni,%} pl. almost ten,
nearly ten.
<LEND>

<L>11434<pc>0163-a<k1>upadas<k2>upadas
{#upadas#}¦ {%upa-das,%} cl. 4. P. {%-dasyati, -situm,%}
to fail, be wanting, be extinguished, be exhausted, dry
up; (in Ved. used impersonally with inst. or abl.):
Caus. P. {%-dāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to fail or cease,
extinguish.
<LEND>

<L>11435<pc>0163-a<k1>upadAsuka<k2>upadAsuka
{%Upa-dāsuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. failing, wanting.
<LEND>

<L>11436<pc>0163-a<k1>upadah<k2>upadah
{#upadah#}¦ {%upa-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dagdhum,%}
to burn, set fire to.
<LEND>

<L>11437<pc>0163-a<k1>upadA<k2>upadA<h>1
{#upadA#} 1¦. {%upa-dā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadāti, -datte,%}
{%dātum,%} to give in addition, offer, grant, give; to
add: Ved. cl. 1. A. {%-dadate,%} to take upon one's self;
to erect, support.
<LEND>

<L>11438<pc>0163-a<k1>upadA<k2>upadA<h>2
2. {%upa-dā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ Ved. giving a present;
({%ā%}), f. a present, an offering to a king or great man
&c.; a Nazr.
<LEND>

<L>11439<pc>0163-a<k1>upadAna<k2>upadAna
{%Upa-dāna%}¦ or {%upadānaka, am,%} n. an oblation, a
present; a gift which is for the purpose of procuring
favour or protection.
<LEND>

<L>11440<pc>0163-a<k1>upadAnavI<k2>upadAnavI
{#upadAnavI#}¦ {%upa-dānavī,%} f., N. of the daughter
of the Dānava Vṛṣa-parvan and mother of Dush-
manta.
<LEND>

<L>11441<pc>0163-a<k1>upadigDa<k2>upadigDa
{#upadigDa#}¦ {%upa-digdha, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%dih%}
with {%upa%}), smeared, covered; spotted over.
<LEND>

<L>11442<pc>0163-a<k1>upadeha<k2>upadeha
{%Upa-deha, as,%}¦ m. a cover; liniment, ointment;
({%upa%} implying inferiority) a minor or secondary body
growing on diseased parts of the body.
<LEND>

<L>11443<pc>0163-a<k1>upadehikA<k2>upadehikA
{%Upa-dehikā,%}¦ f. a kind of ant; [cf. {%upajihvikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>11444<pc>0163-a<k1>upadiS<k2>upadiS<h>1
{#upadiS#} 1¦. {%upa-diś,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-diśati, -te,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to point out to; to indicate, specify, ex-
plain, instruct, teach; advise, admonish; to assign the
right place to anything, arrange; to mention, exhibit;
to inform; to settle, prescribe; to dictate, command,
govern; to name: Pass. {%-diśyate,%} to be taught &c.,
to be called.
<LEND>
[Page0163-b+ 74]

<L>11445<pc>0163-b<k1>upadiS<k2>upadiS<h>2
2. {%upa-diś, k,%}¦ or {%upa-diśā,%} f. an intermediate
region, as north-east &c.
<LEND>

<L>11446<pc>0163-b<k1>upadiSa<k2>upadiSa
{%Upa-diśa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Vasu-deva.
<LEND>

<L>11447<pc>0163-b<k1>upadiSya<k2>upadiSya
{%Upa-diśya,%}¦ ind. having advised or instructed.
<LEND>

<L>11448<pc>0163-b<k1>upadizwa<k2>upadizwa
{%Upa-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ specified, particularized;
taught, instructed, advised; assigned as a plea or
reason; initiated; ({%am%}), n. council, advice.
<LEND>

<L>11449<pc>0163-b<k1>upadeSa<k2>upadeSa
{%Upa-deśa, as,%}¦ m. pointing out to, instruction, teach-
ing, informing, advice, prescription; specification; plea,
pretext; initiation, communication of the initiatory
Mantra or formula; (in gram.) a form in a rule, an
indicatory form, i. e. a root, base, affix, augment, or
any other word or part of a word furnished with in-
dicatory letters (anubandhas) which serve as a guide
to the application of particular grammatical rules and
are rejected when the word or part of a word is ready
for use. {%—Upadeśa-tā,%} f. the state of being a precept
or rule; injunction; manner of instructing; doc-
trine. {%—Upadeśa-sahasrī,%} f. title of a work of
Śaṅkara on philosophy. {%—Upadeśārthavakya (˚śa-%}
{%ar˚), am,%} n. a parable.
<LEND>

<L>11450<pc>0163-b<k1>upadeSaka<k2>upadeSaka
{%Upa-deśaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ giving instruction, in-
structing, instructive, didactic; ({%as%}), m. an instructor,
a guide, especially a spiritual guide.
<LEND>

<L>11451<pc>0163-b<k1>upadeSana<k2>upadeSana
{%Upa-deśana, am,%}¦ n. advising, instructing; ({%ā%}), f.
information, doctrine.
<LEND>

<L>11452<pc>0163-b<k1>upadeSin<k2>upadeSin
{%Upa-deśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ advising, instructing, inform-
ing; ({%ī%}), m. a teacher, adviser; a word or affix &c. in
the shape in which it appears in grammatical works.
<LEND>

<L>11453<pc>0163-b<k1>upadeSya<k2>upadeSya
{%Upa-deśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be taught; that
which is to be taught or learnt.
<LEND>

<L>11454<pc>0163-b<k1>upadezwavya<k2>upadezwavya
{%Upa-deṣṭavya%}¦ or {%upa-deśanīya, as, ā, am,%} to
be taught or advised, fit or proper to be taught.
<LEND>

<L>11455<pc>0163-b<k1>upadezwf<k2>upadezwf
{%Upa-deṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who points out, an
adviser, teacher; a Guru or spiritual guide.
<LEND>

<L>11456<pc>0163-b<k1>upadI<k2>upadI
{#upadI#}¦ {%upadī,%} f. the plant Vanda Roxburghii
or Aërides Tesselata.
<LEND>

<L>11457<pc>0163-b<k1>upadIkA<k2>upadIkA
{#upadIkA#}¦ {%upadīkā,%} f. a kind of ant; also
{%upa-dehikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>11458<pc>0163-b<k1>upadIkzin<k2>upadIkzin
{#upadIkzin#}¦ {%upa-dīkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} sharing in
an initiatory or other religious rite; a near relation.
<LEND>

<L>11459<pc>0163-b<k1>upadIp<k2>upadIp
{#upadIp#}¦ {%upa-dīp,%} Caus. P. {%-dīpayati, -yitum,%}
to kindle, set fire to.
<LEND>

<L>11460<pc>0163-b<k1>upadfS<k2>upadfS<h>1
{#upadfS#} 1¦. {%upa-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati,%}
{%-draṣṭum,%} to look at; to perceive, observe: Pass.
{%-dṛśyate,%} to be or become visible, appear: Caus.
{%-darśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to see, show, exhibit;
to present a false show, impose upon another person
by sham appearances; to illude; to explain, illustrate.
<LEND>

<L>11461<pc>0163-b<k1>upadarSaka<k2>upadarSaka
{%Upa-darśaka, as,%}¦ m. a guide, one who shows the
way, a door-keeper.
<LEND>

<L>11462<pc>0163-b<k1>upadarSana<k2>upadarSana
{%Upa-darśana, am,%}¦ n. a commentary.
<LEND>

<L>11463<pc>0163-b<k1>upadarSita<k2>upadarSita
{%Upa-darśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ perceived, distinguished.
<LEND>

<L>11464<pc>0163-b<k1>upadfS<k2>upadfS<h>2
2. {%upa-dṛś, k,%}¦ f., Ved. a view, aspect.
<LEND>

<L>11465<pc>0163-b<k1>upadfzwi<k2>upadfzwi
{%Upa-dṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. aspect, view, show.
<LEND>

<L>11466<pc>0163-b<k1>upadrazwf<k2>upadrazwf
{%Upa-draṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ Ved. a supervisor, in-
spector; overseeing, overlooking; ({%ṭā%}), m. a witness.
<LEND>

<L>11467<pc>0163-b<k1>upadfzad<k2>upadfzad
{#upadfzad#}¦ {%upa-dṛṣad%} or {%upa-dṛṣadam,%}
ind. near a boundary stone.
<LEND>

<L>11468<pc>0163-b<k1>upadeva<k2>upadeva
{#upadeva#}¦ {%upa-deva, as,%} m. an inferior deity;
N. of a son of Akrūra; also of Devaka; ({%ī%}), f., N.
of the wife of Vasu-deva; of a daughter of Devaka.
<LEND>

<L>11469<pc>0163-b<k1>upadevatA<k2>upadevatA
{%Upa-devatā,%}¦ f. a minor deity, as a Yakṣa, Gan-
darbha, Apsaras, &c.
<LEND>

<L>11470<pc>0163-b<k1>upadeSa<k2>upadeSa
{#upadeSa#}¦ {%upa-deśa,%} &c. See under 1. {%upa-diś.%}
<LEND>

<L>11471<pc>0163-b<k1>upadoha<k2>upadoha
{#upadoha#}¦ {%upa-doha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%duh%} with
{%upa%}), a nipple of the udder of a cow.
<LEND>

<L>11472<pc>0163-b<k1>upadru<k2>upadru
{#upadru#}¦ {%upa-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -drotum,%} to
run near to, run towards, run at, rush at, assault, attack.
<LEND>

<L>11473<pc>0163-b<k1>upadrava<k2>upadrava
{%Upa-drava, as,%}¦ m. that which befalls suddenly,
an unhappy accident, misfortune, calamity, mischief;
national distress (whether the act of the seasons or the
king, famine, exaction, &c.); national commotion,
rebellion; violence, outrage; a symptom, a super-
[Page0163-c+ 75]
venient disease, one brought on whilst a person labours
under another.
<LEND>

<L>11474<pc>0163-c<k1>upadravin<k2>upadravin
{%Upa-dravin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ attacking, falling on; tyran-
nical, violent, factious; ({%ī%}), m. a tyrant, an oppressor,
a rebel.
<LEND>

<L>11475<pc>0163-c<k1>upadruta<k2>upadruta
{%Upa-druta, as, ā, am,%}¦ visited by calamities, op-
pressed, attacked, persecuted, tyrannized over; (in
astron.) eclipsed; boding evil, inauspicious; ({%am%}), n.
a term of the Bāṣkalas for that kind of Sandhi, which
is also called {%udgrāhavat,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>11476<pc>0163-c<k1>upadvIpa<k2>upadvIpa
{#upadvIpa#}¦ {%upa-dvīpa, as,%} m. an island.
<LEND>

<L>11477<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDarma<k2>upaDarma
{#upaDarma#}¦ {%upa-dharma, as,%} m. a minor or sub-
ordinate duty; a by-law; a heretic, a schismatic.
<LEND>

<L>11478<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDA<k2>upaDA<h>1
{#upaDA#} 1¦. {%upa-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to place or lay upon, place near
to, put into; to place, lay; to put to (as horses to a
carriage); to impose, lay upon, bestow upon, charge
with (as a duty); to lay a command upon, enjoin,
instruct in (with acc.); to place under one's self, to
lie down upon; to place over, cover, conceal; to
locate; to place in addition, to add; to communicate,
cause to share in; (in gram.) to lie or be placed close
to, to precede without the intervention of another
syllable.
<LEND>

<L>11479<pc>0163-c<k1>upadaDi<k2>upadaDi
{%Upa-dadhi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. placing upon.
<LEND>

<L>11480<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDA<k2>upaDA<h>2
2. {%upa-dhā,%}¦ f. imposition, forgery, fraud, deceit,
trick, a false pretence; trial or test of honesty &c., of
four kinds, viz. of loyalty, disinterestedness, conti-
nence, and courage; (in gram.) a penultimate letter.
{%—Upadhā-bhṛta, as,%} m. a servant who has been
guilty of dishonesty. {%—Upadhā-rañjana, am,%} n.
nasalization of the penultimate (?). {%—Upadhā-śuci,%}
{%is, is, i,%} approved, tried, of approved loyalty &c.
<LEND>

<L>11481<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDAna<k2>upaDAna
{%Upa-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. placing or resting upon; that
on which one rests, a pillow, cushion; individuality,
peculiarity; affection, kindness; religious observance
or obligation; poison; excellence, excellent quality;
({%as, ā, am%}), employed in placing upon, i. e. used (as a
Mantra) in the putting up (of the sacrificial bricks).
<LEND>

<L>11482<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDAnIya<k2>upaDAnIya
{%Upadhānīya, am,%}¦ n. a pillow, cushion.
<LEND>

<L>11483<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDAya<k2>upaDAya
{%Upa-dhāya,%}¦ ind. having placed or rested upon.
<LEND>

<L>11484<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDAyin<k2>upaDAyin
{%Upa-dhāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ placing under.
<LEND>

<L>11485<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDi<k2>upaDi
{%Upa-dhi, is,%}¦ m. the part of a wheel between the
nave and the circumference; fraud, circumvention; fear,
terror; foundation, (with Buddhists) substratum (?).
<LEND>

<L>11486<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDika<k2>upaDika
{%Upadhika, as,%}¦ m. a cheat, a knave, especially one
who imposes by threats, fraud.
<LEND>

<L>11487<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDIyamAna<k2>upaDIyamAna
{%Upa-dhīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being preceded by.
<LEND>

<L>11488<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDeya<k2>upaDeya
{%Upa-dheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be placed upon.
<LEND>

<L>11489<pc>0163-c<k1>upahita<k2>upahita
{%Upa-hita.%}¦ See p. 170, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>11490<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDAtu<k2>upaDAtu
{#upaDAtu#}¦ {%upa-dhātu, us,%} m. an inferior mine-
ral, a semi-metal, (seven are specified; pyrites, sulphate
of copper, talc, antimony, red orpiment, yellow orpi-
ment, and calx of brass); secondary secretion of the
body, as the milk, menses, adeps, sweat, teeth, hair,
and lymph.
<LEND>

<L>11491<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDAraRa<k2>upaDAraRa
{#upaDAraRa#}¦ {%upa-dhāraṇa.%} See under {%upa-%}
{%dhṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>11492<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDAv<k2>upaDAv
{#upaDAv#}¦ {%upa-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati, -te,%}
{%-vitum,%} to run near to, approach hastily; have re-
course to for assistance; A. to run, glide, soar.
<LEND>

<L>11493<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDAvana<k2>upaDAvana
{%Upa-dhāvana, as,%}¦ m. a follower.
<LEND>

<L>11494<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDi<k2>upaDi
{#upaDi#}¦ {%upa-dhi.%} See {%upa-dhā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>11495<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDUpita<k2>upaDUpita
{#upaDUpita#}¦ {%upa-dhūpita, as, ā, am,%} fumigated;
one to whom decline or death is near; being at the
point of death; suffering extreme pain.
<LEND>

<L>11496<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDf<k2>upaDf
{#upaDf#}¦ {%upa-dhṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-dhārayati, -yitum,%}
to hold up, support, bear, carry; to hold as, consider
as, regard as; to hold in the mind, to comprehend,
perceive, hear, experience, observe; to reflect or me-
ditate on.
<LEND>

<L>11497<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDAraRa<k2>upaDAraRa
{%Upa-dhāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. considering, consideration,
reflection.
<LEND>

<L>11498<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDArya<k2>upaDArya
{%Upa-dhārya,%}¦ ind. having taken or held up.
<LEND>

<L>11499<pc>0163-c<k1>upaDfti<k2>upaDfti
{%Upa-dhṛti, is,%}¦ f. a ray of light.
<LEND>
[Page0164-a+ 70]

<L>11500<pc>0164-a<k1>upaDe<k2>upaDe
{#upaDe#}¦ {%upa-dhe,%} Caus. A., Ved. {%-dhāpayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to rear by suckling.
<LEND>

<L>11501<pc>0164-a<k1>upaDmA<k2>upaDmA<h>1
{#upaDmA#} 1¦. {%upa-dhmā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhamati,%}
{%-dhmātum,%} to blow or breathe at or upon, fan.
<LEND>

<L>11502<pc>0164-a<k1>upaDmA<k2>upaDmA<h>2
2. {%upa-dhmā,%}¦ f. blowing upon, breathing; the
effort of the voice which produces the sound Upa-
dhmānīya.
<LEND>

<L>11503<pc>0164-a<k1>upaDmAna<k2>upaDmAna
{%Upa-dhmāna, am,%}¦ n. blowing upon, breathing.
<LEND>

<L>11504<pc>0164-a<k1>upaDmAnin<k2>upaDmAnin
{%Upadhmānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ blowing upon, fanning,
breathing.
<LEND>

<L>11505<pc>0164-a<k1>upaDmAnIya<k2>upaDmAnIya
{%Upa-dhmānīya, as,%}¦ m. the aspirate Visarga before
the letters {%p%} and {%ph.%}
<LEND>

<L>11506<pc>0164-a<k1>upaDyE<k2>upaDyE
{#upaDyE#}¦ {%upa-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P., ep. also A.
{%-dhyāyati, -te, -dhyātum,%} to think of, remember.
<LEND>

<L>11507<pc>0164-a<k1>upaDvasta<k2>upaDvasta
{#upaDvasta#}¦ {%upa-dhvasta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%dhvaṃs%} with {%upa%}), Ved. spotted.
<LEND>

<L>11508<pc>0164-a<k1>upanakzatra<k2>upanakzatra
{#upanakzatra#}¦ {%upa-nakṣatra, am,%} n., Ved. a
secondary star.
<LEND>

<L>11509<pc>0164-a<k1>upanaKa<k2>upanaKa
{#upanaKa#}¦ {%upa-nakha, am,%} n. a disease of the
finger-nails, whitlow, agnail.
<LEND>

<L>11510<pc>0164-a<k1>upanagara<k2>upanagara
{#upanagara#}¦ {%upa-nagara, am,%} n. a suburb.
<LEND>

<L>11511<pc>0164-a<k1>upanati<k2>upanati
{#upanati#}¦ {%upa-nati.%} See under {%upa-nam.%}
<LEND>

<L>11512<pc>0164-a<k1>upanadam<k2>upanadam
{#upanadam#}¦ {%upa-nadam%} and {%upa-nadi,%} ind.
near a river.
<LEND>

<L>11513<pc>0164-a<k1>upananda<k2>upananda
{#upananda#}¦ {%upa-nanda, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Vasu-deva; a pupil of Śākya-muni; a king of the
Nāgas.
<LEND>

<L>11514<pc>0164-a<k1>upanandaka<k2>upanandaka
{%Upa-nandaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>11515<pc>0164-a<k1>upanam<k2>upanam
{#upanam#}¦ {%upa-nam,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-namati, -te,%}
{%-nantum,%} to bend towards, tend towards, approach;
to come to, arrive at; to fall to the share of; share in
(with acc., dat., or gen.): Caus. {%-nāmayati, -yitum,%}
to lead towards or into the presence of (with gen.),
introduce to; to offer.
<LEND>

<L>11516<pc>0164-a<k1>upanata<k2>upanata
{%Upa-nata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent towards, bent inwards;
brought under, subjected, surrendered; dependent on
(for protection &c.); brought near to; fallen to one's
share; approached, approximate, near (either in time
or space); brought about, produced, existing.
<LEND>

<L>11517<pc>0164-a<k1>upanati<k2>upanati
{%Upa-nati, is,%}¦ f., Ved. inclination, affection.
<LEND>

<L>11518<pc>0164-a<k1>upanAmuka<k2>upanAmuka
{%Upa-nāmuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. bending towards.
<LEND>

<L>11519<pc>0164-a<k1>upanaya<k2>upanaya
{#upanaya#}¦ {%upa-naya.%} See under 1. {%upa-nī.%}
<LEND>

<L>11520<pc>0164-a<k1>upanara<k2>upanara
{#upanara#}¦ {%upa-nara, as,%} m., N. of a king of
the Nāgas.
<LEND>

<L>11521<pc>0164-a<k1>upanah<k2>upanah
{#upanah#}¦ {%upa-nah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-nahyati, -te,%}
{%-naddhum,%} to tie up, tie together; to make up into
a bundle, bind together; to inlay; to set with: Caus.
{%-nāhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to bind together.
<LEND>

<L>11522<pc>0164-a<k1>upanahana<k2>upanahana
{%Upa-nahana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a cloth in which any-
thing is bound up.
<LEND>

<L>11523<pc>0164-a<k1>upanAha<k2>upanAha
{%Upa-nāha, as,%}¦ m. a bundle; a plaster, an unguent
applied to a wound or sore; the tie of a lute, the
lower part of the tail-piece where the wires are fixed;
inflammation of the ciliary glands, stye.
<LEND>

<L>11524<pc>0164-a<k1>upanAhana<k2>upanAhana
{%Upa-nāhana, am,%}¦ n. putting a plaster upon, apply-
ing an unguent, unction, anointing, plastering.
<LEND>

<L>11525<pc>0164-a<k1>upanAman<k2>upanAman
{#upanAman#}¦ {%upa-nāman, a,%} n. a nickname,
surname.
<LEND>

<L>11526<pc>0164-a<k1>upanAsika<k2>upanAsika
{#upanAsika#}¦ {%upa-nāsika, am,%} n. the part sur-
rounding, the nose, that which is near the nose.
<LEND>

<L>11527<pc>0164-a<k1>upanikzip<k2>upanikzip
{#upanikzip#}¦ {%upa-ni-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A., 4. P.
{%-kṣipati, -te, -kṣipyati, -kṣeptum,%} to throw
down, place down, deposit.
<LEND>

<L>11528<pc>0164-a<k1>upanikzepa<k2>upanikzepa
{%Upa-nikṣepa, as,%}¦ m. a deposit sealed or covered
up so that the contents are unknown; any article
intrusted to one's keeping.
<LEND>

<L>11529<pc>0164-a<k1>upanigam<k2>upanigam
{#upanigam#}¦ {%upa-ni-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to meet with, fall into, fall upon, fall into
any state.
<LEND>
[Page0164-b+ 75]

<L>11530<pc>0164-b<k1>upanigrah<k2>upanigrah
{#upanigrah#}¦ {%upa-ni-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛh-%}
{%ṇāti, -ṇīte%} (Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte%}), {%-grahītum,%} to
press down upon, bring near to.
<LEND>

<L>11531<pc>0164-b<k1>upaniDA<k2>upaniDA
{#upaniDA#}¦ {%upa-ni-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put or place near, to put down,
place before any one (as a meal &c.), bring near, lead
near to; to produce, cause; to deposit, to intrust.
<LEND>

<L>11532<pc>0164-b<k1>upaniDAtf<k2>upaniDAtf
{%Upa-nidhātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ putting down, laying
down.
<LEND>

<L>11533<pc>0164-b<k1>upaniDAna<k2>upaniDAna
{%Upa-nidhāna, am,%}¦ n. a deposit.
<LEND>

<L>11534<pc>0164-b<k1>upaniDi<k2>upaniDi
{%Upa-nidhi, is,%}¦ m. a deposit, pledge, property put
under the care of a creditor, friend, &c.; in law this
word ordinarily implies especially a sealed deposit,
but according to some, any article intrusted to a
friend which he may use whilst in his keeping; N.
of a son of Vasu-deva.
<LEND>

<L>11535<pc>0164-b<k1>upanihita<k2>upanihita
{%Upa-nihita, as, ā, am,%}¦ deposited with, intrusted
to; placed near to; offered, presented.
<LEND>

<L>11536<pc>0164-b<k1>upanipat<k2>upanipat
{#upanipat#}¦ {%upa-ni-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -ti-%}
{%tum,%} to fly down to; to take place in addition; to
be mentioned incidentally.
<LEND>

<L>11537<pc>0164-b<k1>upanipAta<k2>upanipAta
{%Upa-nipāta, as,%}¦ m. sudden and unexpected attack.
<LEND>

<L>11538<pc>0164-b<k1>upanipAtin<k2>upanipAtin
{%Upa-nipātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling into; attacking
suddenly.
<LEND>

<L>11539<pc>0164-b<k1>upanipIq<k2>upanipIq
{#upanipIq#}¦ {%upa-ni-pīḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pīḍayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to oppress, disturb.
<LEND>

<L>11540<pc>0164-b<k1>upanimantr<k2>upanimantr
{#upanimantr#}¦ {%upa-ni-mantr,%} cl. 10. A. {%-mantra-%}
{%yate, -yitum,%} to invite, consecrate, inaugurate.
<LEND>

<L>11541<pc>0164-b<k1>upanimantraRa<k2>upanimantraRa
{%Upa-nimantraṇa, am,%}¦ n. invitation, inauguration.
<LEND>

<L>11542<pc>0164-b<k1>upanivapana<k2>upanivapana
{#upanivapana#}¦ {%upa-nivapana, am,%} n. (rt. {%vap%}),
scattering or pouring down upon.
<LEND>

<L>11543<pc>0164-b<k1>upaniveSin<k2>upaniveSin
{#upaniveSin#}¦ {%upa-niveśin, ī, inī, i%} (rt. {%viś%}),
attached to, inherent, annexed.
<LEND>

<L>11544<pc>0164-b<k1>upanizad<k2>upanizad
{#upanizad#}¦ {%upa-niṣad, t,%} f. (rt. {%sad%} with {%upa%}
and {%ni,%} implying originally sitting down at the feet
of another in order to listen to his words, and hence
confidential information given in this manner; but
according to native authorities {%upa-ni-ṣad%} means
‘to destroy ignorance by revealing the knowledge of
the supreme spirit’); esoteric doctrine, secret doctrine,
mysterious or mystical meaning, words of mystery &c.;
certain mystical writings attached to the Brāhmaṇas,
the aim of which is the ascertainment of the secret
sense of the Veda, (they are more than a hundred in
number, and are said to have been the source of
the six darśanas or systems of philosophy; perhaps
the most celebrated is the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka-upaniṣad
attached to the Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa); true know-
ledge; a neighbouring mansion; a lonely place; (at
the end of compounds {%upaniṣad%} sometimes be-
comes {%upaniṣada.%}) {%—Upaniṣat-kṛ,%} to regard as
a mystical or secret doctrine.
<LEND>

<L>11545<pc>0164-b<k1>upanizAdin<k2>upanizAdin
{%Upa-niṣādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sitting at the feet of a
person; subjected.
<LEND>

<L>11546<pc>0164-b<k1>upanizkara<k2>upanizkara
{#upanizkara#}¦ {%upa-niṣkara, am,%} n. (rt. {%kṛ%}), a
street, a principal or royal road.
<LEND>

<L>11547<pc>0164-b<k1>upanizkram<k2>upanizkram
{#upanizkram#}¦ {%upa-niṣ-kram (-nis-kram),%} cl.
1. P. A., 4. P. {%-krāmati, -kramate%} (ep. also {%-krā-%}
{%mate%}), {%-krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to go out towards,
step out, go out.
<LEND>

<L>11548<pc>0164-b<k1>upanizkramaRa<k2>upanizkramaRa
{%Upa-niṣkramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. going out towards; a
particular religious rite, one of the Saṃskāras, taking
a child in the fourth month of its age for the first
time into the open air (see Manu 11. 34); a main
or royal road.
<LEND>

<L>11549<pc>0164-b<k1>upanI<k2>upanI<h>1
{#upanI#} 1¦. {%upa-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati, -te,%}
{%-netum,%} to lead near to, bring near, bring, adduce,
offer; bring information, communicate; to bring
about, produce; to employ, to bring into any state,
bring into one's possession, lead away, lead; to bring
near to one's self (as a teacher receives a pupil for in-
struction), to invest with the sacred thread, initiate;
A. to take into one's service: Caus. {%-nāyayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause (a master) to receive (a pupil), to
cause to invest with the sacred thread.
<LEND>
[Page0164-c+ 75]

<L>11550<pc>0164-c<k1>upanaya<k2>upanaya
{%Upa-naya, as,%}¦ m. bringing near, procuring; at-
taining, gaining; employing; the fourth member in
a fivefold syllogism, the application to the special
case in question; leading a youth of the three first
castes to a teacher; initiation; investiture with a pe-
culiar thread or cord worn over the left shoulder and
under the right, by which act spiritual birth is con-
ferred and the youth is reckoned a member of the
twice-born classes; (the cord of the Brāhman is of
cotton, Munja or Kuśa grass; of the Kṣatriya, of Śaṇa
or hemp; and of the Vaiśya, of wool: the youths should
be invested, respectively, from eight to sixteen, from
eleven to twenty-two, and from twelve to twenty-four
years of age.)
<LEND>

<L>11551<pc>0164-c<k1>upanayana<k2>upanayana
{%Upa-nayana, am,%}¦ n. leading to, bringing; leading
to a teacher, initiation. See {%upa-naya.%}
<LEND>

<L>11552<pc>0164-c<k1>upanAya<k2>upanAya
{%Upa-nāya, as,%}¦ m. or {%upa-nāyana, am,%} n. leading
to a teacher, initiation. See the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>11553<pc>0164-c<k1>upanAyika<k2>upanAyika
{%Upa-nāyika, as, ā, am,%}¦ leading to; N. of a
Sūtra work.
<LEND>

<L>11554<pc>0164-c<k1>upanIta<k2>upanIta
{%Upa-nīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought near, approximated;
presented; known; obtained, attained; cited, ad-
duced; ({%as%}), m. the youth led to a teacher and in-
vested with the characteristic cord.
<LEND>

<L>11555<pc>0164-c<k1>upanIya<k2>upanIya
{%Upa-nīya,%}¦ ind. having led towards or brought,
having invested (with the sacred thread).
<LEND>

<L>11556<pc>0164-c<k1>upanIyamAna<k2>upanIyamAna
{%Upa-nīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being initiated.
<LEND>

<L>11557<pc>0164-c<k1>upanetavya<k2>upanetavya
{%Upa-netavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought near; to
be employed or observed.
<LEND>

<L>11558<pc>0164-c<k1>upanetf<k2>upanetf
{%Upa-netṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who leads or brings near.
<LEND>

<L>11559<pc>0164-c<k1>upanI<k2>upanI<h>2
{#upanI#} 2¦. {%upa-nī (upa-ni-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-nyeti,%}
{%-tum,%} to enter into, penetrate.
<LEND>

<L>11560<pc>0164-c<k1>upanud<k2>upanud
{#upanud#}¦ {%upa-nud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-nudati, -te,%}
{%-nottum,%} to drive or waft near, impel towards.
<LEND>

<L>11561<pc>0164-c<k1>upanunna<k2>upanunna
{%Upa-nunna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sent, despatched; wafted,
driven (by the wind).
<LEND>

<L>11562<pc>0164-c<k1>upanft<k2>upanft
{#upanft#}¦ {%upa-nṛt,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-nṛtyati, -te,%}
{%-nartitum,%} to dance before any one (with acc.), to
dance before any one with insulting gestures.
<LEND>

<L>11563<pc>0164-c<k1>upanftya<k2>upanftya
{%Upa-nṛtya, am,%}¦ n. a place for dancing.
<LEND>

<L>11564<pc>0164-c<k1>upanyas<k2>upanyas
{#upanyas#}¦ {%upa-ny-as (ni-as),%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati,%}
{%-asitum,%} to lay upon, place down, put down, deposit,
intrust to any one (with dat.), commit to the care
of; to explain minutely, describe in detail; suggest,
plead, put forth or adduce arguments, state.
<LEND>

<L>11565<pc>0164-c<k1>upanyasta<k2>upanyasta
{%Upa-nyasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed near to or upon;
pledged, intrusted, deposited; given, communicated;
brought forward as an example &c., adduced, hinted,
suggested.
<LEND>

<L>11566<pc>0164-c<k1>upanyasya<k2>upanyasya
{%Upa-nyasya,%}¦ ind. having delivered up, delivering
up.
<LEND>

<L>11567<pc>0164-c<k1>upanyAsa<k2>upanyAsa
{%Upa-nyāsa, as,%}¦ m. placing near to, juxta-position;
intrusting, a deposit, pledge, a pawn, a hostage;
statement, suggestion, hint, pretext, an exordium or
introduction; a precept, a law.
<LEND>

<L>11568<pc>0164-c<k1>upanyAsya<k2>upanyAsya
{%Upa-nyāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be adduced or stated.
<LEND>

<L>11569<pc>0164-c<k1>upanyAcar<k2>upanyAcar
{#upanyAcar#}¦ {%upa-ny-ā-car (-ni-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-carati, -te, -ritum%} (Ved. {%-ritave, -vai, -rase, -ra-%}
{%dhyai%}), to enter into, penetrate.
<LEND>

<L>11570<pc>0164-c<k1>upapakza<k2>upapakza
{#upapakza#}¦ {%upa-pakṣa, as,%} m., Ved. the
shoulder.
<LEND>

<L>11571<pc>0164-c<k1>upapakzya<k2>upapakzya
{%Upa-pakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. near the shoulder.
<LEND>

<L>11572<pc>0164-c<k1>upapat<k2>upapat
{#upapat#}¦ {%upa-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -titum,%}
to fly near, hasten towards.
<LEND>

<L>11573<pc>0164-c<k1>upapAta<k2>upapAta
{%Upa-pāta, as,%}¦ m. accident, occurrence, misfortune,
unlucky accident.
<LEND>

<L>11574<pc>0164-c<k1>upapAtaka<k2>upapAtaka
{%Upa-pātaka, am,%}¦ n. (with {%upa%} implying in-
feriority) a crime or sin in the second degree (as
killing a cow, selling a daughter, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>11575<pc>0164-c<k1>upapAtakin<k2>upapAtakin
{%Upapātakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who has committed a
crime in the second degree; a sinner in any but the
first degree.
<LEND>

<L>11576<pc>0164-c<k1>upapAtin<k2>upapAtin
{%Upa-pātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling into, hastening towards.
<LEND>

<L>11577<pc>0164-c<k1>upapati<k2>upapati
{#upapati#}¦ {%upa-pati, is,%} m. a paramour, a
gallant.
<LEND>
[Page0165-a+ 73]

<L>11578<pc>0165-a<k1>upapaTam<k2>upapaTam
{#upapaTam#}¦ {%upa-patham,%} ind. near the road.
<LEND>

<L>11579<pc>0165-a<k1>upapad<k2>upapad
{#upapad#}¦ {%upa-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, -pattum,%}
to go near, approach, come to, arrive at, to be ob-
tained or gained, fall to one's share; to go against,
attack; to take place, occur, to be produced, to be
present, to be possible, to be adapted, to be fit for or
adequate for (with loc.); put in a word or statement:
Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to bring into any state,
cause to arrive or be obtained, offer, present any one
(acc.) with (inst.); to cause to occur or happen; to
accomplish, effect, cause; to make a statement, men-
tion; to justify; to make fit or adequate for, to make
conformable to; to furnish with; to pronounce, de-
clare; to find out, ascertain; examine.
<LEND>

<L>11580<pc>0165-a<k1>upapatti<k2>upapatti
{%Upa-patti, is,%}¦ f. happening, occurring, becoming
visible, appearance, production, birth; gaining, effect-
ing, accomplishing; cause, reason; termination, end;
fitness, propriety; association, connection, possession;
religious abstraction; proof, ascertained or demon-
strated conclusion; (in arithm. or geom.) proof, de-
monstration; {%upapattyā,%} ind. suitably, in a fit man-
ner. {%—Upapatti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} or {%upapatti-%}
{%yukta, as, ā, am,%} right, fit, reasonable, proper;
united, associated.
<LEND>

<L>11581<pc>0165-a<k1>upapanna<k2>upapanna
{%Upa-panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced, effected, ob-
tained, gained, demonstrated, proved, manifested,
offered, presented, endowed with, possessed of, fur-
nished with (e. g. {%guṇopapanna,%} endowed with good
qualities); fit, suited to the occasion, adequate; phy-
sicked, cured.
<LEND>

<L>11582<pc>0165-a<k1>upapAdaka<k2>upapAdaka
{%Upa-pādaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ producing, effecting,
making visible.
<LEND>

<L>11583<pc>0165-a<k1>upapAdana<k2>upapAdana
{%Upa-pādana, am,%}¦ n. effecting doing, causing to
appear; giving, delivering, presenting; proving or
establishing by argument; explaining; examination;
({%as, ā, am%}), examining.
<LEND>

<L>11584<pc>0165-a<k1>upapAdita<k2>upapAdita
{%Upa-pādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ effected, accomplished,
performed, done; given, delivered, presented; proved,
demonstrated.
<LEND>

<L>11585<pc>0165-a<k1>upapAduka<k2>upapAduka<h>1
1. {%upa-pāduka, as, ā, am,%}¦ self-produced; ({%as%}),
m. a superhuman being, a god, a demon, &c.; hell (?).
<LEND>

<L>11586<pc>0165-a<k1>upapAdya<k2>upapAdya
{%Upa-pādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be effected, done,
shown or proved; being produced, coming into ex-
istence.
<LEND>

<L>11587<pc>0165-a<k1>upapada<k2>upapada
{#upapada#}¦ {%upa-pada, as,%} m. a secondary word
of a sentence (as for instance a subordinate word in a
compound generally forming the first member; or a
preposition, particle &c. prefixed to a verb or a noun
derived from a verb qualifying or determining the
idea contained in the verb; or a secondary word of
any kind which is governed by or limits the general
idea contained in the principal word); small, diminu-
tive; a little.
<LEND>

<L>11588<pc>0165-a<k1>upaparIkzaRa<k2>upaparIkzaRa
{#upaparIkzaRa#}¦ {%upa-parīkṣaṇa, am,%} n. or {%upa-%}
{%parīkṣā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%īkṣ%} with {%pari%} and {%upa%}), in-
quiring into, investigation, examination.
<LEND>

<L>11589<pc>0165-a<k1>upapare<k2>upapare
{#upapare#}¦ {%upa-pare (-parā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-paraiti,%}
{%-tum,%} to go towards, approach.
<LEND>

<L>11590<pc>0165-a<k1>upaparcana<k2>upaparcana
{#upaparcana#}¦ {%upa-parcana, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%pṛc%}),
closely touching; in close contact; ({%am%}), n., Ved.
admixture; (Sāy.) impregnation.
<LEND>

<L>11591<pc>0165-a<k1>upapfc<k2>upapfc
{%Upa-pṛc, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. closely attached, in close
contact with.
<LEND>

<L>11592<pc>0165-a<k1>upaparSukA<k2>upaparSukA
{#upaparSukA#}¦ {%upa-parśukā,%} f. the false ribs.
<LEND>

<L>11593<pc>0165-a<k1>upapalI<k2>upapalI
{#upapalI#}¦ {%upa-palī%} (for {%upa-pari-i%}), cl. 2. P.
{%-palyeti, -tum,%} to return, turn back.
<LEND>

<L>11594<pc>0165-a<k1>upapAduka<k2>upapAduka<h>2
{#upapAduka#} 2¦. {%upa-pāduka, as, ī, am,%} having
shoes, shod.
<LEND>

<L>11595<pc>0165-a<k1>upapApa<k2>upapApa
{#upapApa#}¦ {%upa-pāpa, am,%} n. a crime in the
second degree; [cf. {%upa-pātaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>11596<pc>0165-a<k1>upapArSva<k2>upapArSva
{#upapArSva#}¦ {%upa-pārśva, as, am,%} m. n. a shoul-
der; flank; the lesser ribs, the lesser flank; the
opposite side.
<LEND>
[Page0165-b+ 67]

<L>11597<pc>0165-b<k1>upapAlita<k2>upapAlita
{#upapAlita#}¦ {%upa-pālita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2.
{%pā%}), protected, nurtured.
<LEND>

<L>11598<pc>0165-b<k1>upapIq<k2>upapIq
{#upapIq#}¦ {%upa-pīḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pīḍayati, -yitum,%}
to press down, disturb, distress; (in astron.) to eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>11599<pc>0165-b<k1>upapIqana<k2>upapIqana
{%Upa-pīḍana, am,%}¦ n. pressing down, oppressing,
devastating, laying waste; inflicting pain; pain, agony,
torture.
<LEND>

<L>11600<pc>0165-b<k1>upapIqita<k2>upapIqita
{%Upa-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ devastated; tortured,
pained, distressed.
<LEND>

<L>11601<pc>0165-b<k1>upapura<k2>upapura
{#upapura#}¦ {%upa-pura, am,%} n. a suburb, ‘near
the city.’
<LEND>

<L>11602<pc>0165-b<k1>upapOrika<k2>upapOrika
{%Upapaurika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to a suburb.
<LEND>

<L>11603<pc>0165-b<k1>upapurARa<k2>upapurARa
{#upapurARa#}¦ {%upa-purāṇa, am,%} n. a secondary
or minor Purāṇa, a number of writings subordinate
to the eighteen principal Purāṇas: viz. Ādi (by Sanat-
kumāra), Nṛsiṃha, Vāyu, Śivadharma, Durvāsas,
Nārada, Nandikeśvara, Uśanas, Kapila, Varuṇa,
Śāmba, Kālikā, Maheśvara, Padma, Deva, Parāśara,
Marīca, Bhāskara.
<LEND>

<L>11604<pc>0165-b<k1>upapuzpikA<k2>upapuzpikA
{#upapuzpikA#}¦ {%upa-puṣpikā,%} f. yawning,
gaping.
<LEND>

<L>11605<pc>0165-b<k1>upapOrRamAsam<k2>upapOrRamAsam
{#upapOrRamAsam#}¦ {%upa-paurṇamāsam%} or {%upa-%}
{%{{paurnamāsi->paurṇamāsi||20161202|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 308-310|retroflex nasal}},%} ind. at the time of full moon.
<LEND>

<L>11606<pc>0165-b<k1>upapragA<k2>upapragA
{#upapragA#}¦ {%upa-pra-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%jigāti, -gātum,%}
to come near to, approach.
<LEND>

<L>11607<pc>0165-b<k1>upapraC<k2>upapraC
{#upapraC#}¦ {%upa-prach,%} cl. 6. P. {%-pṛcchati,%}
{%-praṣṭum,%} to ask a person (acc.) about anything.
<LEND>

<L>11608<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprajan<k2>upaprajan
{#upaprajan#}¦ {%upa-pra-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate,%}
{%-janitum,%} to be born in addition.
<LEND>

<L>11609<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprajinv<k2>upaprajinv
{#upaprajinv#}¦ {%upa-pra-jinv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jinvati,%}
{%-vitum,%} to impel, stir up; (Sāy.) to gratify or please
in approaching.
<LEND>

<L>11610<pc>0165-b<k1>upapratF<k2>upapratF
{#upapratF#}¦ {%upa-pra-tṝ,%} Caus. {%-tārayati, -yitum,%}
to convey or transport across.
<LEND>

<L>11611<pc>0165-b<k1>upapradarSana<k2>upapradarSana
{#upapradarSana#}¦ {%upa-pradarśana, am,%} n. pointing
out, showing, indication.
<LEND>

<L>11612<pc>0165-b<k1>upapradA<k2>upapradA
{#upapradA#}¦ {%upa-pra-dā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadāti,%}
{%-datte, -dātum,%} to deliver over, commit to (any one).
<LEND>

<L>11613<pc>0165-b<k1>upapradAna<k2>upapradAna
{%Upa-pradāna, am,%}¦ n. delivering over, presenting;
a present, a bribe.
<LEND>

<L>11614<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprayA<k2>upaprayA
{#upaprayA#}¦ {%upa-pra-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%}
to approach, attack.
<LEND>

<L>11615<pc>0165-b<k1>upapraloBana<k2>upapraloBana
{#upapraloBana#}¦ {%upa-pralobhana, am,%} n. (rt.
{%lubh%}), seducing, alluring.
<LEND>

<L>11616<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprARa<k2>upaprARa
{#upaprARa#}¦ {%upa-prāṇa, as,%} m. a secondary or
inferior vital air belonging to the body.
<LEND>

<L>11617<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprAp<k2>upaprAp
{#upaprAp#}¦ {%upa-prāp (-pra-āp),%} cl. 5. P. {%-prā-%}
{%pnoti, -ptum,%} to come near, approach.
<LEND>

<L>11618<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprAyA<k2>upaprAyA
{#upaprAyA#}¦ {%upa-prā-yā (-pra-ā-yā),%} cl. 2. P.,
Ved. {%-yāti, -tum,%} to go near, approach.
<LEND>

<L>11619<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprut<k2>upaprut
{#upaprut#}¦ {%upa-prut, t, t, t,%} Ved. flowing or
rushing near; (Sāy.) approaching.
<LEND>

<L>11620<pc>0165-b<k1>upapre<k2>upapre
{#upapre#}¦ {%upa-pre (-pra-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-praiti,%}
{%-tum,%} to go near, approach, invade; to undertake,
begin; to set about anything (with acc. or dat.).
<LEND>

<L>11621<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprekz<k2>upaprekz
{#upaprekz#}¦ {%upa-prekṣ (-pra-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-prekṣate, -ṣitum,%} to overlook, pass over un-
noticed, disregard.
<LEND>

<L>11622<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprekzaRa<k2>upaprekzaRa
{%Upa-prekṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. overlooking, looking at
without interest, disregarding.
<LEND>

<L>11623<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprez<k2>upaprez
{#upaprez#}¦ {%upa-preṣ (-pra-iṣ),%} cl. 4. P. {%-preṣ-%}
{%yati, -preṣitum,%} to drive, impel; to invite or request
(a priest to do anything at a sacrifice), to summon.
<LEND>

<L>11624<pc>0165-b<k1>upaprEza<k2>upaprEza
{%Upa-praiṣa, as,%}¦ m. invitation, summons.
<LEND>

<L>11625<pc>0165-b<k1>upaplu<k2>upaplu
{#upaplu#}¦ {%upa-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, -plotum,%}
to assault violently, assail.
<LEND>

<L>11626<pc>0165-b<k1>upaplava<k2>upaplava
{%Upa-plava, as,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. {%plu%} with {%upa%}), violent
[Page0165-c+ 72]
assault or attack; unlucky accident, misfortune, great
calamity, disturbance; a portent or natural pheno-
menon, especially an eclipse; a N. of Rāhu, the
ascending node, the author of eclipses; N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>11627<pc>0165-c<k1>upaplavin<k2>upaplavin
{%Upaplavin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who has met with a
calamity.
<LEND>

<L>11628<pc>0165-c<k1>upaplavya<k2>upaplavya
{%Upa-plavya, am,%}¦ n., N. of the capital of Virāṭa's
country, Matsya.
<LEND>

<L>11629<pc>0165-c<k1>upapluta<k2>upapluta
{%Upa-pluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ violently assaulted, assailed,
beset; distressed, pained; harassed (by Rāhu &c.),
eclipsed; marked by prodigies; wet, moistened;
({%ā%}), f. morbid sensibility of the uterus. {%—Upaplutā-%}
{%kṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} weeping.
<LEND>

<L>11630<pc>0165-c<k1>upabanDa<k2>upabanDa
{#upabanDa#}¦ {%upa-bandha, as,%} m. (rt. {%bandh%}),
connection; an affix; a mode of sitting.
<LEND>

<L>11631<pc>0165-c<k1>upabadDa<k2>upabadDa
{%Upa-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected.
<LEND>

<L>11632<pc>0165-c<k1>upabarha<k2>upabarha
{#upabarha#}¦ {%upa-barha, as,%} m. (rt. {%bṛh%} or {%bṛṃh;%}
cf. {%upa-vṛṃh,%} p. 168), a pillow.
<LEND>

<L>11633<pc>0165-c<k1>upabarhaRa<k2>upabarhaRa
{%Upa-barhaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a cushion, coverlet,
covering.
<LEND>

<L>11634<pc>0165-c<k1>upabfMhin<k2>upabfMhin
{%Upa-bṛṃhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ supplementary, additional.
<LEND>

<L>11635<pc>0165-c<k1>upabahu<k2>upabahu
{#upabahu#}¦ {%upa-bahu, us, us, u,%} a few, a tolera-
ble number.
<LEND>

<L>11636<pc>0165-c<k1>upabAhu<k2>upabAhu
{#upabAhu#}¦ {%upa-bāhu, us,%} m. the lower arm
(from the elbow to the wrist); N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>11637<pc>0165-c<k1>upabda<k2>upabda
{#upabda#}¦ {%upabda, as,%} or {%upabdi, is,%} m., Ved.
noise, sound, rattling, clanking. {%—Upabdi-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. noisy, loud.
<LEND>

<L>11638<pc>0165-c<k1>upabrU<k2>upabrU
{#upabrU#}¦ {%upa-brū,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-bravīti, -brūte,%}
to praise, celebrate.
<LEND>

<L>11639<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBaNga<k2>upaBaNga
{#upaBaNga#}¦ {%upa-bhaṅga, as,%} m. (rt. {%bhañj%}), a
division or member (of a verse).
<LEND>

<L>11640<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBAzA<k2>upaBAzA
{#upaBAzA#}¦ {%upa-bhāṣā,%} f. a secondary dialect.
<LEND>

<L>11641<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBuj<k2>upaBuj
{#upaBuj#}¦ {%upa-bhuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhunakti,%}
{%-bhuṅkte, -bhoktum,%} to enjoy, eat, possess, use;
make use of, receive (as a reward).
<LEND>

<L>11642<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBukta<k2>upaBukta
{%Upa-bhukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ enjoyed, used, possessed.
{%—Upabhukta-dhana, as, ā, am,%} one who has en-
joyed or makes use of his riches; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
merchant's son.
<LEND>

<L>11643<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBuYjAna<k2>upaBuYjAna
{%Upa-bhuñjāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ enjoying, using.
<LEND>

<L>11644<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBoktf<k2>upaBoktf
{%Upa-bhoktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an enjoyer, enjoying,
possessing.
<LEND>

<L>11645<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBoga<k2>upaBoga
{%Upa-bhoga, as,%}¦ m. enjoyment, use, eating; usu-
fruct; pleasure, satisfaction, cohabitation.
<LEND>

<L>11646<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBogin<k2>upaBogin
{%Upa-bhogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ enjoying, using.
<LEND>

<L>11647<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBogya<k2>upaBogya
{%Upa-bhogya%}¦ or {%upa-bhoktavya%} or {%upa-bhojanīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} to be enjoyed, to be used; ({%am%}), n. object
of enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>11648<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBojin<k2>upaBojin
{%Upa-bhojin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ eating, enjoying.
<LEND>

<L>11649<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBojya<k2>upaBojya
{%Upa-bhojya, as, ā, am,%}¦ serving as food.
<LEND>

<L>11650<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBU<k2>upaBU
{#upaBU#}¦ {%upa-bhū,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-bhavati,%}
{%-vitum,%} to be near to.
<LEND>

<L>11651<pc>0165-c<k1>upaBft<k2>upaBft
{#upaBft#}¦ {%upa-bhṛt, t,%} f., Ved. a sacrificial
vessel made of wood; a cup of round shape, made of
the wood of the banian tree, and used in sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>11652<pc>0165-c<k1>upama<k2>upama<h>1
{#upama#} 1¦. {%upama, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa%}), Ved.
uppermost, highest; nearest, next, first; most ex-
cellent, eminent, best. {%—Upama-śravas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. of highest fame; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a son of Kuru-
śravaṇa and grandson of Mitrātithi.
<LEND>

<L>11653<pc>0165-c<k1>upamA<k2>upamA<h>1
1. {%upamā,%}¦ ind., Ved. in the closest proximity or
neighbourhood.
<LEND>

<L>11654<pc>0165-c<k1>upamAm<k2>upamAm
{%Upamām,%}¦ ind., Ved. in the highest degree.
<LEND>

<L>11655<pc>0165-c<k1>upama<k2>upama<h>2
{#upama#} 2¦. {%upama,%} at the end of compounds.
See under 3. {%upa-mā.%}
<LEND>

<L>11656<pc>0165-c<k1>upamadgu<k2>upamadgu
{#upamadgu#}¦ {%upa-madgu, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Śvaphalka and younger brother of Madgu.
<LEND>

<L>11657<pc>0165-c<k1>upamantr<k2>upamantr
{#upamantr#}¦ {%upa-mantr,%} cl. 10. A. {%-mantrayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to address, invoke, invite, persuade.
<LEND>

<L>11658<pc>0165-c<k1>upamantraRa<k2>upamantraRa
{%Upa-mantraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of addressing, in-
viting, persuading.
<LEND>
[Page0166-a+ 73]

<L>11659<pc>0166-a<k1>upamantrin<k2>upamantrin
{%Upa-mantrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ inviting, persuading.
<LEND>

<L>11660<pc>0166-a<k1>upamanTanI<k2>upamanTanI
{#upamanTanI#}¦ {%upa-manthanī,%} f. (rt. {%math%}), a
staff for stirring.
<LEND>

<L>11661<pc>0166-a<k1>upamanTitf<k2>upamanTitf
{%Upa-manthitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. stirring up.
<LEND>

<L>11662<pc>0166-a<k1>upamanyu<k2>upamanyu
{#upamanyu#}¦ {%upa-manyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. zealous,
striving after; (Sāy.) knowing, understanding, intelli-
gent; ({%us%}), m., N. of a pupil of Dhaumya Āyoda.
<LEND>

<L>11663<pc>0166-a<k1>upamA<k2>upamA<h>2
{#upamA#} 2¦. {%upa-mā,%} cl. 2. P., 3 or 4. A. {%-māti,%}
{%-mimīte, -māyate, -mātum,%} to measure one thing
by another, compare; Ved. to give, grant.
<LEND>

<L>11664<pc>0166-a<k1>upamA<k2>upamA<h>3
3. {%upa-mā,%}¦ f. resemblance, equality, similarity; a
resemblance, as a picture, portrait, image, &c.; a
simile; comparison, a particle of comparison; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am,%} at the end of a Bahu-vrīhi compound) like, similar
to, resembling (e. g. {%amaropama,%} resembling an im-
mortal). {%—Upamā-dravya, am,%} n. any object used
for a comparison. {%—Upamā-rūpaka, am,%} n. a figure
in rhetoric combining comparison and metaphor.
{%—Upameta (˚mā-ita?), as, ā, am,%} compared with?;
({%as%}), m., N. of the tree Vatica Robusta.
<LEND>

<L>11665<pc>0166-a<k1>upamAtf<k2>upamAtf<h>1
1. {%upa-mātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. an image-maker, a portrait-
painter.
<LEND>

<L>11666<pc>0166-a<k1>upamAna<k2>upamAna
{%Upa-māna, am,%}¦ n. comparison, resemblance, ana-
logy; a simile; that with which anything is com-
pared; a particle of comparison; (in the Nyāya
phil.) recognition of likeness, comparison, the third
of the four pramāṇas or means of correct knowledge.
{%—Upamāna-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m. title of a philosophical
work. {%—Upamānopameya-bhāva (˚na-up˚), as,%} m.
the connection between the subject of comparison and
the comparison adduced.
<LEND>

<L>11667<pc>0166-a<k1>upamita<k2>upamita
{%Upa-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ compared, illustrated by
comparison, similar.
<LEND>

<L>11668<pc>0166-a<k1>upamiti<k2>upamiti
{%Upa-miti, is,%}¦ f. resemblance, comparison, a like-
ness, a picture, image, &c.; analogy; knowledge of
things derived from analogy or resemblance; infer-
ence, induction.
<LEND>

<L>11669<pc>0166-a<k1>upameya<k2>upameya
{%Upa-meya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (with inst. or as last member
of a compound) to be compared, comparable with;
({%am%}), n. the subject of a comparison, that which is
compared (opposed to {%upa-māna,%} that with which it is
compared). {%—Upameyopamā (˚ya-up˚),%} f. the resem-
blance of any object to that compared with it; reciprocal
comparison, as of the moon to a beautiful face.
<LEND>

<L>11670<pc>0166-a<k1>upamAti<k2>upamAti
{#upamAti#}¦ {%upa-māti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%man%} with {%upa%}),
Ved. approaching with a prayer; addressing, address;
(Sāy.) comparison; ({%is%}), m. approaching in a friendly
way; obliging; one who may be addressed, affable, espe-
cially as an epithet of Agni; (Sāy.) granting wealth.
{%—Upamāti-vani, is, is, i,%} Ved. one who receives ad-
dresses in a friendly way; (Sāy.) destroyer of an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>11671<pc>0166-a<k1>upamImAMsA<k2>upamImAMsA
{%Upa-mīmāṃsā,%}¦ f., Ved. deliberation, investigation,
consideration.
<LEND>

<L>11672<pc>0166-a<k1>upamAtf<k2>upamAtf<h>2
{#upamAtf#} 2¦. {%upa-mātṛ, tā,%} f. (a second mo-
ther), a wet nurse; a near female relative.
<LEND>

<L>11673<pc>0166-a<k1>upamAda<k2>upamAda
{#upamAda#}¦ {%upa-māda, as,%} m., Ved. enjoyment,
delight.
<LEND>

<L>11674<pc>0166-a<k1>upamAraRa<k2>upamAraRa
{#upamAraRa#}¦ {%upa-māraṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%mṛ%}),
Ved. submerging (in water &c.).
<LEND>

<L>11675<pc>0166-a<k1>upamAlinI<k2>upamAlinI
{#upamAlinI#}¦ {%upa-mālinī,%} f. a species of the
Ati-śakvarī metre.
<LEND>

<L>11676<pc>0166-a<k1>upamAsya<k2>upamAsya
{#upamAsya#}¦ {%upa-māsya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. occur-
ring every month, monthly.
<LEND>

<L>11677<pc>0166-a<k1>upamit<k2>upamit
{#upamit#}¦ {%upa-mit, t,%} f., Ved, a prop, a stay.
<LEND>

<L>11678<pc>0166-a<k1>upamUlam<k2>upamUlam
{#upamUlam#}¦ {%upa-mūlam,%} ind. at the root.
<LEND>

<L>11679<pc>0166-a<k1>upamfd<k2>upamfd
{#upamfd#}¦ {%upa-mṛd,%} cl. 9. P. {%-mṛdnāti, -mardi-%}
{%tum,%} to crush, bruise, dash to pieces, destroy; rub down.
<LEND>

<L>11680<pc>0166-a<k1>upamarda<k2>upamarda
{%Upa-marda, as,%}¦ m. friction, rubbing down, bruising;
destruction; reproach, abuse, refutation of a charge.
<LEND>

<L>11681<pc>0166-a<k1>upamardaka<k2>upamardaka
{%Upa-mardaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushing, destroying,
destructive; ({%as%}), m. refutation of a charge.
<LEND>

<L>11682<pc>0166-a<k1>upayaj<k2>upayaj
{#upayaj#}¦ {%upa-yaj, ḍ,%} f., Ved., N. of eleven
additional formulas at a sacrifice.
<LEND>
[Page0166-b+ 76]

<L>11683<pc>0166-b<k1>upayazwf<k2>upayazwf
{%Upa-yaṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m., Ved. the priest who utters
these verses.
<LEND>

<L>11684<pc>0166-b<k1>upayAja<k2>upayAja
{%Upa-yāja, as,%}¦ m. additional formulas at a sacrifice;
N. of a younger brother of Yāja.
<LEND>

<L>11685<pc>0166-b<k1>upayantr<k2>upayantr
{#upayantr#}¦ {%upa-yantr,%} cl. 10. P. {%-yantrayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to solicit or compel any one to do anything.
<LEND>

<L>11686<pc>0166-b<k1>upayam<k2>upayam
{#upayam#}¦ {%upa-yam,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-yacchati, -te,%}
{%-yantum,%} to take a wife, marry; to seize, take, re-
ceive, hold; to offer.
<LEND>

<L>11687<pc>0166-b<k1>upayantf<k2>upayantf
{%Upa-yantṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a husband.
<LEND>

<L>11688<pc>0166-b<k1>upayantra<k2>upayantra
{%Upa-yantra, am,%}¦ n. (with {%upa%} implying inferi-
ority) a minor surgical instrument or implement; a
secondary application of any kind, as actual cautery,
escharotics, &c.
<LEND>

<L>11689<pc>0166-b<k1>upayama<k2>upayama
{%Upa-yama, as,%}¦ m. marriage, marrying.
<LEND>

<L>11690<pc>0166-b<k1>upayamana<k2>upayamana
{%Upa-yamana, am,%}¦ n. marrying; taking a wife;
({%ī%}), f. any support of stone, clay, gravel &c. for hold-
ing fire-wood; a sacrificial ladle; ({%as, ā, am%}), that
upon which anything is placed, a support.
<LEND>

<L>11691<pc>0166-b<k1>upayAma<k2>upayAma
{%Upa-yāma, as,%}¦ m., Ved. taking up with a ladle;
a ladle (?); the verses or formulas uttered in ladling
out the Soma juice; marriage.
<LEND>

<L>11692<pc>0166-b<k1>upayA<k2>upayA
{#upayA#}¦ {%upa-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%} to ap-
proach, undergo.
<LEND>

<L>11693<pc>0166-b<k1>upayAta<k2>upayAta
{%Upa-yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ arrived; ({%am%}), n. arrival,
return.
<LEND>

<L>11694<pc>0166-b<k1>upayAna<k2>upayAna
{%Upa-yāna, am,%}¦ n. coming near, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>11695<pc>0166-b<k1>upayAyin<k2>upayAyin
{%Upa-yāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ coming towards, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>11696<pc>0166-b<k1>upayAcaka<k2>upayAcaka
{#upayAcaka#}¦ {%upa-yācaka, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yāc%}),
an asker, solicitor, begging.
<LEND>

<L>11697<pc>0166-b<k1>upayAcana<k2>upayAcana
{%Upa-yācana, am,%}¦ n. soliciting, approaching with
a request or prayer.
<LEND>

<L>11698<pc>0166-b<k1>upayAcita<k2>upayAcita
{%Upa-yācita, as, ā, am,%}¦ requested, solicited; offered,
especially to the deities to render them propitious;
({%am%}), n. prayer, request (to a deity).
<LEND>

<L>11699<pc>0166-b<k1>upayicArika<k2>upayicArika
{#upayicArika#}¦ {%upayicārika, as,%} m. any one
employed to guard a Vihāra; a wrong reading for
{%upavihārika%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>11700<pc>0166-b<k1>upayuj<k2>upayuj
{#upayuj#}¦ {%upa-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti, yun-%}
{%kte, -yoktum,%} to harness (as horses to a carriage); to
occupy, take possession of; to use, employ, apply;
to bestow upon; to attach one's self to, be devoted to;
to appropriate, consume, eat.
<LEND>

<L>11701<pc>0166-b<k1>upayukta<k2>upayukta
{%Upa-yukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached, adapted, suitable,
appropriate, useful; worthy, serviceable; proper,
right; taken, eaten, touched.
<LEND>

<L>11702<pc>0166-b<k1>upayuYjAna<k2>upayuYjAna
{%Upa-yuñjāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ attaching, taking, appro-
priating.
<LEND>

<L>11703<pc>0166-b<k1>upayuyukzu<k2>upayuyukzu
{%Upa-yuyukṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ about to employ or apply.
<LEND>

<L>11704<pc>0166-b<k1>upayoktavya<k2>upayoktavya
{%Upa-yoktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be employed.
<LEND>

<L>11705<pc>0166-b<k1>upayoga<k2>upayoga
{%Upa-yoga, as,%}¦ m. application, employment, use,
service, utility; administration of medicines, prepara-
tion of them; fitness, suitableness; contact, proximity;
any act tending to effect a desired object; good con-
duct, observing established practices. {%—Upayogaṃ%}
{%gam%} or {%vraj,%} to be employed or used.
<LEND>

<L>11706<pc>0166-b<k1>upayogin<k2>upayogin
{%Upa-yogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ employing, using; what is
employed, conducive or contributing to, serviceable,
useful, convenient; appropriate; favourable, propitious;
touching, in contact with. {%—Upayogi-tā,%} f. or {%upa-%}
{%yogi-tva, am,%} n. usefulness; fitness, suitableness;
occasion, need; favour, propitiousness.
<LEND>

<L>11707<pc>0166-b<k1>upayojana<k2>upayojana
{%Upa-yojana, am,%}¦ n. harnessing a horse (by the
side of another); a team.
<LEND>

<L>11708<pc>0166-b<k1>upayojya<k2>upayojya
{%Upa-yojya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be employed or used.
<LEND>

<L>11709<pc>0166-b<k1>upayozam<k2>upayozam
{#upayozam#}¦ {%upa-yoṣam,%} ind. a word express-
ing great pleasure; [cf. {%upa-joṣam.%}]
<LEND>

<L>11710<pc>0166-b<k1>upara<k2>upara
{#upara#}¦ {%upara, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa%}), Ved. situ-
ated below, under; posterior, later; nearer, approxi-
mate; {%uparāsu%} (loc. fem. pl.), in the proximity of,
near to; ({%as%}), m. the lower stone on which the
Soma is laid that it may be ground by means of other
stones held in the hands; the lower part of the sacri-
ficial post; a cloud; region (?). {%—Upara-tāt,%} ind.,
Ved. in the proximity or circumference.
<LEND>

<L>11711<pc>0166-b<k1>uparakta<k2>uparakta
{#uparakta#}¦ {%upa-rakta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%rañj%}
[Page0166-c+ 76]
with {%upa%}), afflicted, overtaken by calamity; ({%as%}), m.
eclipsed (as sun or moon), Rāhu the ascending node.
<LEND>

<L>11712<pc>0166-c<k1>uparAga<k2>uparAga
{%Upa-rāga, as,%}¦ m. colour; darkening, an eclipse of
the sun or moon; Rāhu or the ascending node; an
inauspicious event, calamity, affliction; misbehaviour,
ill conduct; reproach, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>11713<pc>0166-c<k1>uparakzaRa<k2>uparakzaRa
{#uparakzaRa#}¦ {%upa-rakṣaṇa, am,%} n. a guard,
an outpost.
<LEND>

<L>11714<pc>0166-c<k1>uparacita<k2>uparacita
{#uparacita#}¦ {%upa-racita, as, ā, am,%} made, pre-
pared.
<LEND>

<L>11715<pc>0166-c<k1>uparatna<k2>uparatna
{#uparatna#}¦ {%upa-ratna, am,%} n. a secondary or
inferior gem, a diamond of low value.
<LEND>

<L>11716<pc>0166-c<k1>uparam<k2>uparam
{#uparam#}¦ {%upa-ram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ramati, -te,%}
{%-rantum,%} to cease, end, terminate, be finished; to
desist; to cause to cease or desist: Caus. {%-ramayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to cease or desist, stop, render quiet.
<LEND>

<L>11717<pc>0166-c<k1>uparata<k2>uparata
{%Upa-rata, as, ā, am,%}¦ ceased, stopped; dead;
withdrawn or retired from. {%—Uparata-karman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} ceasing from works or from relying on them.
{%—Uparata-rāsa, as, ā, am,%} ceasing to dance or
play. {%—Uparata-viṣayābhilāṣa (˚ya-abh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ceasing from all desire after worldly things.
{%—Uparata-spṛtha, as, ā, am,%} void of desire.
{%—Uparatāri (˚ta-ari), is, is, i,%} having no foe,
being at peace with all.
<LEND>

<L>11718<pc>0166-c<k1>uparati<k2>uparati
{%Upa-rati, is,%}¦ f. ceasing, stopping; death; refrain-
ing from sensual enjoyment, abstaining from prescribed
acts; great or exquisite pleasure (?).
<LEND>

<L>11719<pc>0166-c<k1>uparama<k2>uparama
{%Upa-rama, as,%}¦ m. stopping, ceasing; abstaining
from, giving up; death.
<LEND>

<L>11720<pc>0166-c<k1>uparamaRa<k2>uparamaRa
{%Upa-ramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. abstaining from the pleasures
of sense or from ceremonial acts (with abl.); ceasing,
discontinuance.
<LEND>

<L>11721<pc>0166-c<k1>uparAma<k2>uparAma
{%Upa-rāma, as,%}¦ m. ceasing, stopping.
<LEND>

<L>11722<pc>0166-c<k1>uparava<k2>uparava
{#uparava#}¦ {%upa-rava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ru%} with
{%upa%}), a sound-hole, (designation of certain holes
which increase the sound of the stones when the
Soma is being ground.)
<LEND>

<L>11723<pc>0166-c<k1>uparasa<k2>uparasa
{#uparasa#}¦ {%upa-rasa, as,%} m. a secondary mine-
ral, as red chalk, bitumen, &c.; a secondary passion
or feeling; a subordinate flavour.
<LEND>

<L>11724<pc>0166-c<k1>uparAja<k2>uparAja
{#uparAja#}¦ {%upa-rāja, as,%} m. a viceroy.
<LEND>

<L>11725<pc>0166-c<k1>uparAjam<k2>uparAjam
{%Upa-rājam,%}¦ ind. near a king.
<LEND>

<L>11726<pc>0166-c<k1>upari<k2>upari
{#upari#}¦ {%upari,%} ind. (as a separable adverb)
above, upon, on, upwards, towards the upper side of
(opposed to {%adhas%} and {%nīcā,%} e. g. {%upari yā,%} to go
upwards; sometimes written with a following word as
if compounded with it, e. g. {%upari-cihnita,%} marked
above); besides, in addition to, further ({%sahasraṃ%}
{%śatāny upari cāṣṭau,%} 1000 and 800 in addition);
afterwards (e. g. {%upari payaḥ pibet,%} he should
drink milk afterwards); {%upari upari,%} higher and
higher; repeatedly, continuously.
<div n="P"/>(As a separable preposition, with acc., loc., or gen.)
over, above, upon, on, at the head of, on the upper
side of, beyond (e. g. {%upari śailaṃ gam,%} to go over
the mountain; {%upari Laṅkāyāṃ samprāptaḥ saḥ,%}
he arrived over Laṅkā; {%upary upari sarveṣām%}
{%atiṣṭhat,%} he stood at the very head of all; {%ātmānaṃ%}
{%tasya upari kṣiptvā,%} having thrown himself upon
him); in connection with, with reference to, with
regard to, towards (with gen., e. g. {%mama upari%}
{%vikāritaḥ,%} changed in feeling with regard to me;
{%putrasya upari kruddhaḥ,%} enraged towards his
son); after (with abl., e. g. {%muhūrtād upari,%} after a
minute); [cf. Zend <nsi>upara;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ufar;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>obar;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>über;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>over;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὑπέρ</lang>
Lat. <nsi>super.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>11727<pc>0166-c<k1>upari<k2>upari
{%Upari%}¦ may also be used at the end of a compound;
e. g. {%tadupari gantum,%} to fall upon him, to attack
him.
<LEND>

<L>11728<pc>0166-c<k1>upari<k2>upari
{%Upari%}¦ often stands at the beginning of a com-
pound, as in the following examples. {%—Upari-gata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} gone up, ascended. {%—Upari-cara, as,%} m.
epithet of the king Vasu (‘walking in the air’).
{%—Upari-cita, as, ā, am,%} piled over or above.
[Page0167-a+ 77]
{%—Upari-ja, as, ā, am,%} growing up, produced
above, elevated, high. {%—Upari-nihita, as, ā, am,%}
laid over. {%—Upari-puruṣa, as, ā, am,%} having a
man above. {%—Upari-prut, t, t, t,%} Ved. coming from
above. {%—Upari-babhrava, as,%} m., N. of a teacher
of the ritual. {%—Upari-budhna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. raised
above the ground. {%—Upari-bhāga, as,%} m. the upper
portion or side. {%—Upari-bhāva, as,%} m. the being
above or higher. {%—Upari-bhūmi, is,%} f. the ground
above. {%—Upari-bhram,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-bhramati,%}
{%-bhrāmyati, -bhramitum,%} to wander over or
above. {%—Upari-martya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. above
men. {%—Upari-śayana, am,%} n., Ved. a place of rest.
{%—Upari-śreṇika, as, ā, am,%} being in the upper se-
ries. {%—Upari-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. sitting or dwelling above.
{%—Upari-sadya, am,%} n., Ved. the act of sitting above.
{%—Upari-stha, as, ā, am,%} staying or being above,
upper. {%—Upari-sthāpana, am,%} n. placing upon or
above. {%—Upari-sthita, as, ā, am,%} standing above,
being above, upper. {%—Upari-spṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved.
raised, elevated. {%—Uparītaka (˚ri-it˚), as,%} m. a kind
of coitus. {%—Upary-āsana, am,%} n. sitting on high.
<LEND>

<L>11729<pc>0167-a<k1>uparitana<k2>uparitana
{%Uparitana, as, ī, am,%}¦ upper (opposed to {%adhas-%}
{%tana%}).
<LEND>

<L>11730<pc>0167-a<k1>uparizwAt<k2>uparizwAt
{%Upariṣṭāt,%}¦ ind. (as an adverb) above, from
above; behind (opposed to {%purastāt%}), further on
(in a book), later; afterwards; (as a preposition)
over, upon, down upon (with acc. and gen.); behind
(with gen.). {%—Upariṣṭāj-jyotiṣmatī,%} f., N. of a
Vedic metre consisting of forty-three or forty-four
syllables, the end of which is like the beginning of
the metre Jyotiṣmatī. {%—Upariṣṭāj-jyotis, is,%} f. a
verse of the Triṣṭubh metre, the last Pāda of which
consists of eight syllables. {%—Upariṣṭād-bṛhatī,%} f.,
N. of a Vedic metre consisting of four Pādas, the
first of which contains twelve, each of the three
others only eight syllables.
<LEND>

<L>11731<pc>0167-a<k1>uparuc<k2>uparuc
{#uparuc#}¦ {%upa-ruc,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rocate, -rocitum,%}
to shine, be brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>11732<pc>0167-a<k1>uparuD<k2>uparuD
{#uparuD#}¦ {%upa-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ruṇaddhi,%}
{%-rundhe, -roddhum,%} to obstruct, hinder, molest,
trouble, disturb; to prevent; to conceal.
<LEND>

<L>11733<pc>0167-a<k1>uparudDa<k2>uparudDa
{%Upa-ruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ obstructed, impeded,
molested, disturbed; covered, spread; protected,
favoured.
<LEND>

<L>11734<pc>0167-a<k1>uparuDya<k2>uparuDya
{%Upa-rudhya,%}¦ ind. having kept in check or ob-
structed, having blockaded or hemmed in.
<LEND>

<L>11735<pc>0167-a<k1>uparuDyamAna<k2>uparuDyamAna
{%Upa-rudhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being besieged,
besieged.
<LEND>

<L>11736<pc>0167-a<k1>uparoDa<k2>uparoDa
{%Upa-rodha, as,%}¦ m. surrounding, blockading; ob-
struction, impediment, opposition, check, refusal;
trouble, disturbance; binding, tying, taking hold of;
protection, favour. {%—Uparodha-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
causing trouble, obstructing.
<LEND>

<L>11737<pc>0167-a<k1>uparoDaka<k2>uparoDaka
{%Upa-rodhaka, am,%}¦ n. an inner room, a private
apartment.
<LEND>

<L>11738<pc>0167-a<k1>uparoDana<k2>uparoDana
{%Upa-rodhana, am,%}¦ n. obstruction, impediment.
<LEND>

<L>11739<pc>0167-a<k1>uparoDin<k2>uparoDin
{%Upa-rodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ obstructing, impeding;
obstructed, impeded.
<LEND>

<L>11740<pc>0167-a<k1>uparuh<k2>uparuh
{#uparuh#}¦ {%upa-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati, -roḍhum,%}
to ascend, rise.
<LEND>

<L>11741<pc>0167-a<k1>uparuhya<k2>uparuhya
{%Upa-ruhya,%}¦ ind. having ascended.
<LEND>

<L>11742<pc>0167-a<k1>uparUpaka<k2>uparUpaka
{#uparUpaka#}¦ {%upa-rūpaka, am,%} n. a drama of
an inferior class, of which eighteen are enumerated.
<LEND>

<L>11743<pc>0167-a<k1>upala<k2>upala
{#upala#}¦ {%upala, as,%} m. (connected with {%upara,%}
q. v.), a rock or stone; a precious stone or jewel;
({%ā%}), f. the upper and smaller mill-stone which rests
on the {%dṛṣad;%} refined or candied sugar; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ὤπαλος</lang> Lat. <nsi>opalus.</nsi>] {%—Upala-prakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
Ved. arranging stones; (Sāy.) throwing grain on the
mill-stone. {%—Upala-bhedin, ī,%} m., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>11744<pc>0167-a<k1>upalaka<k2>upalaka
{%Upalaka, as,%}¦ m. a stone.
<LEND>

<L>11745<pc>0167-a<k1>upalakz<k2>upalakz
{#upalakz#}¦ {%upa-lakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-lakṣayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to look at, observe, behold; to regard
as, value as; to imply in addition: Pass. {%-lakṣyate,%}
to be observed &c.; to be likely.
<LEND>

<L>11746<pc>0167-a<k1>upalakzaka<k2>upalakzaka
{%Upa-lakṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ observing, designating.
<LEND>
[Page0167-b+ 75]

<L>11747<pc>0167-b<k1>upalakzaRa<k2>upalakzaRa
{%Upa-lakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking at; observation;
designation; implying something that has not been
expressed, implying something in addition or any ana-
logous object where only one is specified, using a term
in a generic sense, metaphorical or elliptical expression,
synecdoche of a part for the whole, of an individual
for the species or of a quality for that in which it re-
sides; mark. {%—Upalakṣaṇa-tva, am,%} n. the being
implied.
<LEND>

<L>11748<pc>0167-b<k1>upalakzayitavya<k2>upalakzayitavya
{%Upa-lakṣayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be observed.
<LEND>

<L>11749<pc>0167-b<k1>upalakzita<k2>upalakzita
{%Upa-lakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ comprehended, discovered,
included, implied, metaphorically expressed, under-
stood, characterized.
<LEND>

<L>11750<pc>0167-b<k1>upalakzya<k2>upalakzya
{%Upa-lakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ inferable; ({%as%}), m. a
prop, stay, support, asylum; an inference.
<LEND>

<L>11751<pc>0167-b<k1>upalaDipriya<k2>upalaDipriya
{#upalaDipriya#}¦ {%upaladhipriya, as,%} m. the
Bos grunniens; perhaps a wrong form for {%bāladhi-%}
{%priya,%} ‘valued for its tail.’
<LEND>

<L>11752<pc>0167-b<k1>upalaB<k2>upalaB
{#upalaB#}¦ {%upa-labh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-labhate, -lab-%}
{%dhum,%} to acquire, receive, accept, obtain, find; to
conceive, become pregnant; to perceive, observe,
hear, understand; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὑπολαμβάνω</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>11753<pc>0167-b<k1>upalabDa<k2>upalabDa
{%Upa-labdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtained, received; con-
ceived; perceived, understood, known, guessed.
{%—Upalabdha-sukha, as, ā, am,%} one who has ex-
perienced pleasure. {%—Upalabdhārtha (˚dha-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the meaning understood; ({%ā%}), f.
a tale, a true or probable story.
<LEND>

<L>11754<pc>0167-b<k1>upalabDavya<k2>upalabDavya
{%Upa-labdhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be observed.
<LEND>

<L>11755<pc>0167-b<k1>upalabDi<k2>upalabDi
{%Upa-labdhi, is,%}¦ f. obtaining, acquisition, gain;
observation, perception, knowledge (especially re-
ligious), understanding, mind; a guess; appearance,
perceptibility; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὑπόληψις</lang>] {%—Upalabdhi-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} perceptible, intelligible.
<LEND>

<L>11756<pc>0167-b<k1>upalaBya<k2>upalaBya<h>1
1. {%upa-labhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtainable, perceivable,
to be understood.
<LEND>

<L>11757<pc>0167-b<k1>upalaBya<k2>upalaBya<h>2
2. {%upa-labhya,%}¦ ind. having perceived or observed.
<LEND>

<L>11758<pc>0167-b<k1>upalaByamAna<k2>upalaByamAna
{%Upa-labhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being perceived.
{%—Upalabhyamāna-tva, am,%} n. the being known.
<LEND>

<L>11759<pc>0167-b<k1>upalamBa<k2>upalamBa
{%Upa-lambha, as,%}¦ m. acquisition; apprehension, con-
ception, comprehension otherwise than from memory.
<LEND>

<L>11760<pc>0167-b<k1>upalamBaka<k2>upalamBaka
{%Upa-lambhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to observe,
reminding.
<LEND>

<L>11761<pc>0167-b<k1>upalamBana<k2>upalamBana
{%Upa-lambhana, am,%}¦ n. apprehension.
<LEND>

<L>11762<pc>0167-b<k1>upalamBya<k2>upalamBya
{%Upa-lambhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtainable, to be ac-
quired; respectable, commendable, praiseworthy.
<LEND>

<L>11763<pc>0167-b<k1>upalABa<k2>upalABa
{%Upa-lābha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. seizing or taking hastily.
<LEND>

<L>11764<pc>0167-b<k1>upalipsA<k2>upalipsA
{%Upa-lipsā,%}¦ f. desire of obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>11765<pc>0167-b<k1>upalipsita<k2>upalipsita
{%Upa-lipsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to take or seize.
<LEND>

<L>11766<pc>0167-b<k1>upalipsu<k2>upalipsu
{%Upa-lipsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to obtain or know.
<LEND>

<L>11767<pc>0167-b<k1>upalAlikA<k2>upalAlikA
{#upalAlikA#}¦ {%upalālikā,%} f. thirst, oppres-
sion (?).
<LEND>

<L>11768<pc>0167-b<k1>upaliNga<k2>upaliNga
{#upaliNga#}¦ {%upa-liṅga, as,%} m. a portent, a
natural phenomenon considered as boding evil.
<LEND>

<L>11769<pc>0167-b<k1>upalip<k2>upalip
{#upalip#}¦ {%upa-lip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-limpati, -te,%}
{%-leptum,%} to defile, anoint, smear, besmear: Caus.
{%-lepayati, -yitum,%} to cause to anoint or besmear.
<LEND>

<L>11770<pc>0167-b<k1>upalipta<k2>upalipta
{%Upa-lipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ anointed, smeared, plastered.
<LEND>

<L>11771<pc>0167-b<k1>upalepa<k2>upalepa
{%Upa-lepa, as,%}¦ m. smearing, anointing, plastering;
obstruction, the being concealed; becoming deadened
or dull.
<LEND>

<L>11772<pc>0167-b<k1>upalepana<k2>upalepana
{%Upa-lepana, am,%}¦ n. smearing, anointing, plaster-
ing; an ointment, an unguent.
<LEND>

<L>11773<pc>0167-b<k1>upalepin<k2>upalepin
{%Upa-lepin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ serving as an ointment;
anointing, smearing, obstructing.
<LEND>

<L>11774<pc>0167-b<k1>upalipsA<k2>upalipsA
{#upalipsA#}¦ {%upa-lipsā.%} See {%upa-labh%} above.
<LEND>

<L>11775<pc>0167-b<k1>upaleKa<k2>upaleKa
{#upaleKa#}¦ {%upalekha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%likh%} with
{%upa%}), title of a grammatical work connected with
the Prātiśākhyas.
<LEND>

<L>11776<pc>0167-b<k1>upavaktf<k2>upavaktf
{#upavaktf#}¦ {%upa-vaktṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. one who
directs and animates by his words; animating.
<LEND>

<L>11777<pc>0167-b<k1>upavaNga<k2>upavaNga
{#upavaNga#}¦ {%upa-vaṅga, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
country.
<LEND>

<L>11778<pc>0167-b<k1>upavaYc<k2>upavaYc
{#upavaYc#}¦ {%upa-vañc,%} Caus. {%-vañcayati, -yitum,%}
to deceive; to repudiate.
<LEND>
[Page0167-c+ 70]

<L>11779<pc>0167-c<k1>upavawa<k2>upavawa
{#upavawa#}¦ {%upa-vaṭa, as,%} m. the tree Buchanania
Latifolia.
<LEND>

<L>11780<pc>0167-c<k1>upavad<k2>upavad
{#upavad#}¦ {%upa-vad,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vadate, -ditum,%}
to talk over, conciliate; to flatter, cajole.
<LEND>

<L>11781<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAda<k2>upavAda
{%Upa-vāda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. censure, blame.
<LEND>

<L>11782<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAdin<k2>upavAdin
{%Upa-vādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. censuring, blaming.
<LEND>

<L>11783<pc>0167-c<k1>upavana<k2>upavana
{#upavana#}¦ {%upa-vana, am,%} n. a small forest, a
grove, a garden; a planted forest.
<LEND>

<L>11784<pc>0167-c<k1>upavarR<k2>upavarR
{#upavarR#}¦ {%upa-varṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-varṇayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to tell or describe copiously.
<LEND>

<L>11785<pc>0167-c<k1>upavarRa<k2>upavarRa
{%Upa-varṇa, as,%}¦ m. minute description, detail.
<LEND>

<L>11786<pc>0167-c<k1>upavarRana<k2>upavarRana
{%Upa-varṇana, am,%}¦ n. description, minute de-
scription, delineation.
<LEND>

<L>11787<pc>0167-c<k1>upavarRita<k2>upavarRita
{%Upa-varṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ described.
<LEND>

<L>11788<pc>0167-c<k1>upavarta<k2>upavarta
{#upavarta#}¦ {%upa-varta.%} See under {%upa-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>11789<pc>0167-c<k1>upavarza<k2>upavarza
{#upavarza#}¦ {%upa-varṣa, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Śaṅkara-svāmin and younger brother of Varṣa,
author of writings on the Mīmāṃsa philosophy.
<LEND>

<L>11790<pc>0167-c<k1>upavalgitanayana<k2>upavalgitanayana
{#upavalgitanayana#}¦ {%upavalgita-nayana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} swollen or dimmed with tears; (a various read-
ing has {%apavalgita-˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>11791<pc>0167-c<k1>upavallikA<k2>upavallikA
{#upavallikA#}¦ {%upa-vallikā,%} f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>11792<pc>0167-c<k1>upavalha<k2>upavalha
{#upavalha#}¦ {%upa-valha, as,%} m., Ved. emulation,
rivalry.
<LEND>

<L>11793<pc>0167-c<k1>upavas<k2>upavas
{#upavas#}¦ {%upa-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati, -vastum,%}
to dwell in or at; to abide in a state of abstinence,
abstain from food, to fast: Caus. {%-vāsayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to fast.
<LEND>

<L>11794<pc>0167-c<k1>upavasaTa<k2>upavasaTa
{%Upa-vasatha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a fast-day, day of pre-
paration for the Soma sacrifice, the day preceding a
Soma sacrifice, day of a Soma sacrifice; a village (?).
<LEND>

<L>11795<pc>0167-c<k1>upavasaTIya<k2>upavasaTIya
{%Upavasathīya%}¦ or {%upavasathya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
selected for an Upavasatha (as a day), belonging to
or prepared for a Soma sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>11796<pc>0167-c<k1>upavasta<k2>upavasta
{%Upa-vasta, am,%}¦ n. a fast, fasting.
<LEND>

<L>11797<pc>0167-c<k1>upavastf<k2>upavastf
{%Upa-vastṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who fasts.
<LEND>

<L>11798<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAsa<k2>upavAsa
{%Upa-vāsa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a fast, fasting (as a re-
ligious act comprising abstinence from all sensual
gratification, from perfumes, flowers, unguents, orna-
ments, betel, music, dancing, &c.); kindling a sacred
fire, a fire altar.
<LEND>

<L>11799<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAsaka<k2>upavAsaka
{%Upa-vāsaka, am,%}¦ n. a fast, fasting.
<LEND>

<L>11800<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAsin<k2>upavAsin
{%Upa-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fasting, one who observes a
fast.
<LEND>

<L>11801<pc>0167-c<k1>upozaRa<k2>upozaRa
{%Upoṣaṇa, upoṣita, upoṣya.%}¦ See p. 173.
<LEND>

<L>11802<pc>0167-c<k1>upavah<k2>upavah
{#upavah#}¦ {%upa-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vahati, -te,%}
{%-voḍhum,%} to bear or lead near, to lead towards, lead
back; to bring about, commence.
<LEND>

<L>11803<pc>0167-c<k1>upavaha<k2>upavaha
{%Upa-vaha, am,%}¦ n., Ved. anything placed on the
neck of an ox under the yoke, to raise it to the right
level for a yoke-fellow of greater height.
<LEND>

<L>11804<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAhana<k2>upavAhana
{%Upa-vāhana, am,%}¦ n. carrying, bringing back.
<LEND>

<L>11805<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAhin<k2>upavAhin
{%Upa-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ flowing or streaming towards.
<LEND>

<L>11806<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAhya<k2>upavAhya
{%Upa-vāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be drawn or led near
to; ({%as%}), m. a king's elephant, any royal vehicle.
<LEND>

<L>11807<pc>0167-c<k1>upohyamAna<k2>upohyamAna
{%Upohyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being brought near,
being commenced; [cf. {%upoh,%} fr. which this participle
may also be derived.]
<LEND>

<L>11808<pc>0167-c<k1>upavA<k2>upavA
{#upavA#}¦ {%upa-vā,%} f., Ved. blowing at.
<LEND>

<L>11809<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAka<k2>upavAka<h>1
{#upavAka#} 1¦. {%upa-vāka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vac%} with
{%upa%}), Ved. addressing, speaking to, praise.
<LEND>

<L>11810<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAkya<k2>upavAkya
{%Upavākya%}¦ or {%upa-vācya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. to be
addressed or praised.
<LEND>

<L>11811<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAka<k2>upavAka<h>2
{#upavAka#} 2¦. {%upavāka, as, ā,%} m. f., Ved., Indra-
grain (see {%Indra-yava%}).
<LEND>

<L>11812<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAjana<k2>upavAjana
{#upavAjana#}¦ {%upa-vājana, am,%} n. (said to be
derived fr. rt. {%vā%}), a fan.
<LEND>

<L>11813<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAda<k2>upavAda
{#upavAda#}¦ {%upa-vāda.%} See under {%upa-vad.%}
<LEND>

<L>11814<pc>0167-c<k1>upavAsana<k2>upavAsana
{#upavAsana#}¦ {%upa-vāsana, am,%} n. (rt. 2. {%vas%}),
Ved. a dress, a garment, a cover.
<LEND>
[Page0168-a+ 70]

<L>11815<pc>0168-a<k1>upavid<k2>upavid
{#upavid#}¦ {%upa-vid, t,%} f., Ved. investigating,
inquiring into.
<LEND>

<L>11816<pc>0168-a<k1>upavidyA<k2>upavidyA
{%Upa-vidyā,%}¦ f. profane science, inferior sort of
knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>11817<pc>0168-a<k1>upaveda<k2>upaveda
{%Upa-veda, as,%}¦ m. secondary knowledge, a class of
writings subordinate or appended to the four Vedas.
According to the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa their number is
four, viz. {%Āyur-veda, Dhanur-veda, Gāndharva-%}
{%veda,%} and {%Sthāpatya-veda,%} or medicine, military
art, music, and mechanics.
<LEND>

<L>11818<pc>0168-a<k1>upavindu<k2>upavindu
{#upavindu#}¦ {%upa-vindu, us,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>11819<pc>0168-a<k1>upavipASam<k2>upavipASam
{#upavipASam#}¦ {%upa-vipāśam,%} ind. at or near
the river Vipāśā.
<LEND>

<L>11820<pc>0168-a<k1>upaviS<k2>upaviS
{#upaviS#}¦ {%upa-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati, -veṣṭum,%}
to sit down, take a seat; to pitch a camp; to enter;
to seize, take possession of: Caus. {%veśayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to sit down.
<LEND>

<L>11821<pc>0168-a<k1>upaviSya<k2>upaviSya
{%Upa-viśya,%}¦ ind. having sat down, sitting down.
<LEND>

<L>11822<pc>0168-a<k1>upavizwa<k2>upavizwa
{%Upa-viṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seated, sitting; arrived,
entered.
<LEND>

<L>11823<pc>0168-a<k1>upaveSa<k2>upaveSa
{%Upa-veśa, as,%}¦ m. sitting down, sitting, resting;
fixing one's mind upon, being attached to; voiding
by stool.
<LEND>

<L>11824<pc>0168-a<k1>upaveSana<k2>upaveSana
{%Upa-veśana, am,%}¦ n. sitting down, resting; causing
to sit down; devoting one's self to; voiding by stool.
<LEND>

<L>11825<pc>0168-a<k1>upaveSita<k2>upaveSita
{%Upa-veśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to sit; seated.
<LEND>

<L>11826<pc>0168-a<k1>upaveSin<k2>upaveSin
{%Upa-veśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sitting down; fixing one's
mind upon, devoting one's self to.
<LEND>

<L>11827<pc>0168-a<k1>upaveSya<k2>upaveSya
{%Upa-veśya,%}¦ ind. having seated or caused to sit.
<LEND>

<L>11828<pc>0168-a<k1>upavezwf<k2>upavezwf
{%Upa-veṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ he who sits, a sitter,
sitting down.
<LEND>

<L>11829<pc>0168-a<k1>upaviza<k2>upaviza
{#upaviza#}¦ {%upa-viṣa, am,%} n. factitious poison;
a narcotic, any deterious drug, as opium, datura, &c.;
({%ā%}), f. a plant, Atis, Aconitum or Betula. See {%ati-%}
{%viṣā.%}
<LEND>

<L>11830<pc>0168-a<k1>upavIkz<k2>upavIkz
{#upavIkz#}¦ {%upa-vīkṣ (-vi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%-vī-%}
{%kṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look at or towards.
<LEND>

<L>11831<pc>0168-a<k1>upavIj<k2>upavIj
{#upavIj#}¦ {%upa-vīj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-vījayati, -yitum,%}
to blow upon, fan.
<LEND>

<L>11832<pc>0168-a<k1>upavIRaya<k2>upavIRaya
{#upavIRaya#}¦ {%upavīṇaya,%} nom. (fr. {%upa-vīṇā%})
P. {%-vīṇayati, -yitum,%} to play on the Vīṇā or Indian
lute before or in the presence of any one.
<LEND>

<L>11833<pc>0168-a<k1>upavIta<k2>upavIta
{#upavIta#}¦ {%upa-vīta, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%vye%} with
{%upa%}), investiture with the sacred thread; the thread
or cord worn by the first three classes of the Hindūs
over the left shoulder and under the right arm.
<LEND>

<L>11834<pc>0168-a<k1>upavItin<k2>upavItin
{%Upavītin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wearing the string in the usual
manner, or over the left shoulder and under the
right arm.
<LEND>

<L>11835<pc>0168-a<k1>upavIra<k2>upavIra
{#upavIra#}¦ {%upa-vīra, am,%} n. a kind of demon.
<LEND>

<L>11836<pc>0168-a<k1>upavf<k2>upavf
{#upavf#}¦ {%upa-vṛ,%} Intens. P., Ved. {%-varvarti,%}
to put or place over or upon.
<LEND>

<L>11837<pc>0168-a<k1>upavfMh<k2>upavfMh
{#upavfMh#}¦ {%upa-vṛṃh%} or {%-vṛh,%} Caus. P. {%-vṛṃ-%}
{%hayati, -yitum,%} to increase.
<LEND>

<L>11838<pc>0168-a<k1>upavarha<k2>upavarha
{%Upa-varha, as,%}¦ m. a pillow; [cf. {%upa-barha,%} p. 165.]
<LEND>

<L>11839<pc>0168-a<k1>upavfMhaRa<k2>upavfMhaRa
{%Upa-vṛṃhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. increasing, increase, col-
lection.
<LEND>

<L>11840<pc>0168-a<k1>upavfMhita<k2>upavfMhita
{%Upa-vṛṃhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ increased, collected from,
possessed of.
<LEND>

<L>11841<pc>0168-a<k1>upavft<k2>upavft
{#upavft#}¦ {%upa-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate, -titum,%}
to go towards, approach; to return.
<LEND>

<L>11842<pc>0168-a<k1>upavarta<k2>upavarta
{%Upa-varta, as,%}¦ m. a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>11843<pc>0168-a<k1>upavartana<k2>upavartana
{%Upa-vartana, am,%}¦ n. a place for exercise, a country
inhabited or not; a division, a district or Pergana; a
kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>11844<pc>0168-a<k1>upavftti<k2>upavftti
{%Upa-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. motion towards.
<LEND>

<L>11845<pc>0168-a<k1>upaveRA<k2>upaveRA
{#upaveRA#}¦ {%upa-veṇā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>11846<pc>0168-a<k1>upaveda<k2>upaveda
{#upaveda#}¦ {%upa-veda.%} See under {%upa-vid.%}
<LEND>

<L>11847<pc>0168-a<k1>upaveSi<k2>upaveSi
{#upaveSi#}¦ {%upaveśi, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>11848<pc>0168-a<k1>upaveza<k2>upaveza
{#upaveza#}¦ {%upa-veṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%viṣ%} with
[Page0168-b+ 71]
{%upa%}), Ved. a stick (of green wood) used for stirring
the sacrificial fire.
<LEND>

<L>11849<pc>0168-b<k1>upavezw<k2>upavezw
{#upavezw#}¦ {%upa-veṣṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-veṣṭate, -ṭitum,%}
to surround, cover, dress.
<LEND>

<L>11850<pc>0168-b<k1>upavERava<k2>upavERava
{#upavERava#}¦ {%upavaiṇava, am,%} n. (fr. {%upa-veṇu?%}),
the three periods of the day, morning, midday, and
evening.
<LEND>

<L>11851<pc>0168-b<k1>upavyAKyAna<k2>upavyAKyAna
{#upavyAKyAna#}¦ {%upa-vyākhyāna, am,%} n. subsi-
diary or supplementary explanation or interpretation.
<LEND>

<L>11852<pc>0168-b<k1>upavyAGra<k2>upavyAGra
{#upavyAGra#}¦ {%upa-vyāghra, as,%} m. the small
hunting leopard.
<LEND>

<L>11853<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSak<k2>upaSak
{#upaSak#}¦ {%upa-śak,%} Desid. P. {%-śikṣati,%} to
learn.
<LEND>

<L>11854<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSikzamARa<k2>upaSikzamARa
{%Upa-śikṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ training.
<LEND>

<L>11855<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSikzA<k2>upaSikzA
{%Upa-śikṣā,%}¦ f. learning, desire of learning, training.
<LEND>

<L>11856<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSikzita<k2>upaSikzita
{%Upa-śikṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ learnt, studied, trained.
<LEND>

<L>11857<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSam<k2>upaSam
{#upaSam#}¦ {%upa-śam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śāmyati, -śami-%}
{%tum,%} to become calm or quiet, to cease: Caus.
{%-śāmayati, -yitum,%} to calm, tranquillize, appease,
pacify, assuage, mitigate, make quiet, extinguish, kill.
<LEND>

<L>11858<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSama<k2>upaSama
{%Upa-śama, as,%}¦ m. becoming quiet, assuagement,
ceasing, stopping, cessation, relaxation, intermission;
tranquillity, calmness, patience. {%—Upaśama-śīla, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} placid, calm.
<LEND>

<L>11859<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSamaka<k2>upaSamaka
{%Upa-śamaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ calming, affording repose,
making patient.
<LEND>

<L>11860<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSamana<k2>upaSamana
{%Upa-śamana, am,%}¦ n. quieting, calming, appeasing,
mitigation, ceasing to burn, extinction; an anodyne.
<LEND>

<L>11861<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSamanIya<k2>upaSamanIya
{%Upa-śamanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made quiet, to
be appeased.
<LEND>

<L>11862<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSAnta<k2>upaSAnta
{%Upa-śānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ calmed, appeased, pacified;
calm, tranquil; intermitted, diminished. {%—Upaśāntāt-%}
{%man (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} one whose mind is pacified,
placid.
<LEND>

<L>11863<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSAnti<k2>upaSAnti
{%Upa-śānti, is,%}¦ f. cessation, intermission, remission;
appeasing, allaying, assuaging; abatement; tranquil-
lity, calm.
<LEND>

<L>11864<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSAntin<k2>upaSAntin
{%Upaśāntin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ appeased, tame, tranquil, calm;
({%ī%}), m. a tame elephant.
<LEND>

<L>11865<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSaya<k2>upaSaya
{#upaSaya#}¦ {%upa-śaya,%} &c. See {%upa-śī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>11866<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSaradam<k2>upaSaradam
{#upaSaradam#}¦ {%upa-śaradam,%} ind. at the time
of autumn.
<LEND>

<L>11867<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSalya<k2>upaSalya
{#upaSalya#}¦ {%upa-śalya, am,%} n. an open place
before a town or village (lit. ‘a place where archers
practice’ ?).
<LEND>

<L>11868<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSAKA<k2>upaSAKA
{#upaSAKA#}¦ {%upa-śākhā,%} f. a secondary branch.
<LEND>

<L>11869<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSAntv<k2>upaSAntv
{#upaSAntv#}¦ {%upa-śāntv,%} cl. 10. P. {%-śāntvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to appease, console, tranquillize.
<LEND>

<L>11870<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSAntvana<k2>upaSAntvana
{%Upa-śāntvana, am,%}¦ n. appeasing, making quiet.
<LEND>

<L>11871<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSAla<k2>upaSAla
{#upaSAla#}¦ {%upa-śāla, am,%} n. a place near a
house, a court before a house; ({%am%}), ind. near a
house.
<LEND>

<L>11872<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSAstra<k2>upaSAstra
{#upaSAstra#}¦ {%upa-śāstra, am,%} n. a minor science
or treatise.
<LEND>

<L>11873<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSikzA<k2>upaSikzA
{#upaSikzA#}¦ {%upa-śikṣā.%} See {%upa-śak%} above.
<LEND>

<L>11874<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSiNG<k2>upaSiNG
{#upaSiNG#}¦ {%upa-śiṅgh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śiṅghati,%}
{%-ghitum,%} to kiss.
<LEND>

<L>11875<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSiMhana<k2>upaSiMhana
{%Upa-śiṃhana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. rt. {%śiṅgh%} with {%upa%}),
anything given to smell at (in medicine).
<LEND>

<L>11876<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSizya<k2>upaSizya
{#upaSizya#}¦ {%upa-śiṣya, as,%} m. the pupil of a
pupil.
<LEND>

<L>11877<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSI<k2>upaSI
{#upaSI#}¦ {%upa-śī,%} cl. 2. A. {%-śete, -śayitum,%} to
lie near.
<LEND>

<L>11878<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSaya<k2>upaSaya
{%Upa-śaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. lying by the side of,
lying down; productive of happiness or rest; ({%ā%}), f.
a prepared piece of clay, i. e. {%mṛd; (as),%} m. lying
by the side of; ascertainment of disease or diagnosis
by the effect of certain articles of food or medicine;
allaying disease by diet, regimen, &c.
<LEND>

<L>11879<pc>0168-b<k1>upaSAya<k2>upaSAya
{%Upa-śāya, as,%}¦ m. turn or rotation for sleeping
with (another).
<LEND>
[Page0168-c+ 69]

<L>11880<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSAyin<k2>upaSAyin
{%Upa-śāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ lying near to; lying, sleep-
ing; going to bed; allaying, tranquillizing, what
clams &c.; (in medicine) composing, narcotic. {%—Upa-%}
{%śāyi-tā,%} f. or {%upaśāyi-tva, am,%} n. tranquillizing,
calming; secondary means of cure, as diet &c.
<LEND>

<L>11881<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSunam<k2>upaSunam
{#upaSunam#}¦ {%upa-śunam,%} ind. near a dog.
<LEND>

<L>11882<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSuB<k2>upaSuB
{#upaSuB#}¦ {%upa-śubh,%} Caus. P. {%-śobhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to adorn, ornament.
<LEND>

<L>11883<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSoBana<k2>upaSoBana
{%Upa-śobhana, am,%}¦ n. adorning, ornamenting.
<LEND>

<L>11884<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSoBita<k2>upaSoBita
{%Upa-śobhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ornamented, adorned.
<LEND>

<L>11885<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSuz<k2>upaSuz
{#upaSuz#}¦ {%upa-śuṣ,%} Caus. P. {%-śoṣayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to make dry, dry up.
<LEND>

<L>11886<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSozaRa<k2>upaSozaRa
{%Upa-śoṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drying up.
<LEND>

<L>11887<pc>0168-c<k1>upaScyut<k2>upaScyut
{#upaScyut#}¦ {%upa-ścyut%} or {%-ścut,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ścyotati,%}
{%-titum,%} to ooze or trickle down, fall in drops.
<LEND>

<L>11888<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSri<k2>upaSri
{#upaSri#}¦ {%upa-śri,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śrayate, -yitum,%}
to approach, go towards, go against; to attack; to
surround.
<LEND>

<L>11889<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSrI<k2>upaSrI
{%Upa-śrī,%}¦ f. a covering, anything thrown over.
<LEND>

<L>11890<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSru<k2>upaSru
{#upaSru#}¦ {%upa-śru,%} cl. 5. P. {%-śṛṇoti, -śrotum,%}
to listen to, give ear to, to hear.
<LEND>

<L>11891<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSruta<k2>upaSruta
{%Upa-śruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ listened to; promised,
agreed.
<LEND>

<L>11892<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSruti<k2>upaSruti
{%Upa-śruti, is,%}¦ f. giving ear to, listening to; range
of hearing; a supernatural voice heard at night and
personified as a nocturnal deity revealing the future;
judicial astrology, aspect of the stars, fortune-telling;
promise, assent.
<LEND>

<L>11893<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSrutya<k2>upaSrutya
{%Upa-śrutya,%}¦ ind. listening to.
<LEND>

<L>11894<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSrotf<k2>upaSrotf
{%Upa-śrotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a listener, hearer, listening to.
<LEND>

<L>11895<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSliz<k2>upaSliz
{#upaSliz#}¦ {%upa-śliṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śliṣyati,%}
{%-śleṣṭum,%} to embrace: Caus. {%-śleṣayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to lay hold of, bring near, place at hand.
<LEND>

<L>11896<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSlizwa<k2>upaSlizwa
{%Upa-śliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed near, contiguous,
adjoining.
<LEND>

<L>11897<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSleza<k2>upaSleza
{%Upa-śleṣa, as,%}¦ m. juxta-position, contiguity, an
embrace.
<LEND>

<L>11898<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSlokaya<k2>upaSlokaya
{#upaSlokaya#}¦ {%upaślokaya,%} nom. (fr. {%upa-śloka%})
P. {%-ślokayati, -yitum,%} to praise in ślokas.
<LEND>

<L>11899<pc>0168-c<k1>upaSvasa<k2>upaSvasa
{#upaSvasa#}¦ {%upa-śvasa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. sound-
ing, roaring.
<LEND>

<L>11900<pc>0168-c<k1>upazwut<k2>upazwut
{#upazwut#}¦ {%upa-ṣṭut,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%stu%} with {%upa%}),
Ved. at command, (ready) at one's call.
<LEND>

<L>11901<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMyama<k2>upasaMyama
{#upasaMyama#}¦ {%upa-saṃyama, as,%} m. the end of
the world.
<LEND>

<L>11902<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMyoga<k2>upasaMyoga
{#upasaMyoga#}¦ {%upa-saṃyoga, as,%} m. (rt. {%yuj%}), a
secondary or subordinate connection, a modification.
<LEND>

<L>11903<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMroha<k2>upasaMroha
{#upasaMroha#}¦ {%upa-saṃroha, as,%} m. (rt. {%ruh%}),
growing over, growing together, cicatrizing.
<LEND>

<L>11904<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMvAda<k2>upasaMvAda
{#upasaMvAda#}¦ {%upa-saṃvāda, as,%} m. (rt. {%vad%}),
agreeing together, agreement.
<LEND>

<L>11905<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMvyAna<k2>upasaMvyAna
{#upasaMvyAna#}¦ {%upa-saṃvyāna, am,%} n. an under
garment.
<LEND>

<L>11906<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMvraj<k2>upasaMvraj
{#upasaMvraj#}¦ {%upa-saṃ-vraj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vrajati,%}
{%-jitum,%} to enter, go towards, approach.
<LEND>

<L>11907<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMskf<k2>upasaMskf
{#upasaMskf#}¦ {%upa-saṃs-kṛ (-sam-kṛ),%} cl. 5. 8.
P. A. {%-kṛṇoti, -nute, -karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to prepare (as a meal); to ornament.
<LEND>

<L>11908<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMskfta<k2>upasaMskfta
{%Upa-saṃskṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cooked, dressed (as a
meal).
<LEND>

<L>11909<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMhf<k2>upasaMhf
{#upasaMhf#}¦ {%upa-saṃ-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati,%}
{%-te, -hartum,%} to draw together, bring together, col-
lect, to contract; to withdraw, take away, withhold.
<LEND>

<L>11910<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMharaRa<k2>upasaMharaRa
{%Upa-saṃharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. withdrawing, taking
away; excluding; refusing, withholding; attacking,
invading.
<LEND>

<L>11911<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMharat<k2>upasaMharat
{%Upa-saṃharat, an, antī, at,%}¦ withdrawing, taking
away; refusing, excepting; going against, invading.
<LEND>

<L>11912<pc>0168-c<k1>upasaMhAra<k2>upasaMhAra
{%Upa-saṃhāra, as,%}¦ m. drawing towards one's self,
[Page0169-a+ 76]
drawing in or together, contracting; drawing away, tak-
ing away, withholding, excepting, excluding; collection,
assemblage, winding or summing up, a compendium,
brevity, conciseness, résumé; perfection; subduing,
destruction, death, end; attacking, invading; (in
logic) refutation; N. of the fourth section of the
Vāyu-purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>11913<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaMhArin<k2>upasaMhArin
{%Upa-saṃhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ comprehending; exclu-
sive; non-exclusive (?).
<LEND>

<L>11914<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaMhfta<k2>upasaMhfta
{%Upa-saṃhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ withheld, refused, de-
nied; excepted; excluded, compressed, comprehended,
dead.
<LEND>

<L>11915<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaMhfti<k2>upasaMhfti
{%Upa-saṃhṛti, is,%}¦ f. comprehension, seizing, tak-
ing; a compound expressive of various meanings (?).
<LEND>

<L>11916<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNkxp<k2>upasaNkxp
{#upasaNkxp#}¦ {%upa-saṅ-kḷp (-sam-k˚),%} Caus. P.
{%-kalpayati, -yitum,%} to fix, deposit, settle; to appoint,
choose.
<LEND>

<L>11917<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNkxpta<k2>upasaNkxpta
{%Upa-saṅkḷpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed over, built
over.
<LEND>

<L>11918<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNkram<k2>upasaNkram
{#upasaNkram#}¦ {%upa-saṅ-kram (-sam-ka˚),%} cl. 1. P.
A., 4. P. {%-krāmati, -kramate%} (ep. also {%-krāmate%}),
{%-krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to go near to, approach:
Caus. P. {%-kramayati, -yitum,%} to cause to approach.
<LEND>

<L>11919<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNkzepa<k2>upasaNkzepa
{#upasaNkzepa#}¦ {%upa-saṅkṣepa, as,%} m. (rt. {%kṣip%}),
a concise abridgment, a summary; an abstract, com-
pendium.
<LEND>

<L>11920<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNKyAna<k2>upasaNKyAna
{#upasaNKyAna#}¦ {%upa-saṅkhyāna, am,%} n. (rt. {%khyā%}),
annumeration, adding, addition; further enumeration;
(in gram.) a substitute in form or sense, a consig-
nificant term or affix.
<LEND>

<L>11921<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNgam<k2>upasaNgam
{#upasaNgam#}¦ {%upa-saṅ-gam (-sam-g˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to approach together, join in
approaching, to enter into any condition or relation.
<LEND>

<L>11922<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNgrah<k2>upasaNgrah
{#upasaNgrah#}¦ {%upa-saṅ-grah (-sam-g˚),%} cl. 9. P.
A. {%-gṛhṇāti, -ṇīte%} (Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte%}), {%-gra-%}
{%hītum,%} to clasp or embrace; to take upon one's
self, to experience, suffer; to receive, accept; to seize,
take into custody; to win over, conciliate, make
favourable.
<LEND>

<L>11923<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNgfhya<k2>upasaNgfhya
{%Upa-saṅgṛhya,%}¦ ind. having clasped, having taken,
holding.
<LEND>

<L>11924<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNgraha<k2>upasaNgraha
{%Upa-saṅgraha, as,%}¦ m. clasping (e. g. the feet of
a person as a mark of great respect), respectful salu-
tation; polite address; obeisance; bringing together,
collecting, joining.
<LEND>

<L>11925<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNgrahaRa<k2>upasaNgrahaRa
{%Upa-saṅgrahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. respectful salutation (by
clasping the feet of a person with the hands), polite
address.
<LEND>

<L>11926<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaNgrAhya<k2>upasaNgrAhya
{%Upa-saṅgrāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be saluted reveren-
tially, respectable, venerable.
<LEND>

<L>11927<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaYcar<k2>upasaYcar
{#upasaYcar#}¦ {%upa-sañ-car (-sam-c˚),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-carati, -te, -caritum,%} Ved. {%-ritave,%} &c., to enter,
approach; to have sexual intercourse with.
<LEND>

<L>11928<pc>0169-a<k1>upasaYcara<k2>upasaYcara
{%Upa-sañcara, as,%}¦ m. manœuvre, flattery (?).
<LEND>

<L>11929<pc>0169-a<k1>upasad<k2>upasad<h>1
{#upasad#} 1¦. {%upa-sad,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%-sīdati, -sat-%}
{%tum,%} to sit near to, to go near to, approach; to
worship; to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>11930<pc>0169-a<k1>upasatti<k2>upasatti
{%Upa-satti, is,%}¦ f. connection with, union; service,
worship; gift, donation.
<LEND>

<L>11931<pc>0169-a<k1>upasattf<k2>upasattf
{%Upa-sattṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who approaches, a
worshipper; an inhabitant.
<LEND>

<L>11932<pc>0169-a<k1>upasad<k2>upasad<h>2
2. {%upa-sad, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. one who goes near to,
serving, attending, waiting upon; ({%t%}), f. siege, assault;
laying up, accumulating; service; N. of a ceremony
lasting several days and forming part of the Jyotiṣ-
ṭoma ceremony. {%—Upasad-van, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. one
who has attendants or worshippers, one who is wor-
shipped. {%—Upasad-vratin, ī, inī, i,%} observing the
rules of the Upasad, viz. drinking milk in certain
quantities, sleeping on the bare earth, chastity, si-
lence, &c.
<LEND>

<L>11933<pc>0169-a<k1>upasada<k2>upasada
{%Upa-sada, as, ā, am,%}¦ going near to; ({%as%}), m.
approach; gift, donation; N. of a ceremony. See
2. {%upa-sad.%}
<LEND>

<L>11934<pc>0169-a<k1>upasadana<k2>upasadana
{%Upa-sadana, am,%}¦ n. approaching, going to (a
teacher), sitting near (a master), becoming a pupil;
[Page0169-b+ 70]
going near to, being present at, partaking of; a
neighbouring abode, a neighbourhood.
<LEND>

<L>11935<pc>0169-b<k1>upasadI<k2>upasadI
{%Upa-sadī,%}¦ f., Ved. attendants collectively (?).
<LEND>

<L>11936<pc>0169-b<k1>upasadya<k2>upasadya
{%Upa-sadya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attended on or
worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>11937<pc>0169-b<k1>upasanna<k2>upasanna
{%Upa-sanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached, approximate;
worshipped. {%—Upasanna-tā,%} f. or {%upasanna-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. proximity, approach.
<LEND>

<L>11938<pc>0169-b<k1>upasAdita<k2>upasAdita
{%Upa-sādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached, come near to.
<LEND>

<L>11939<pc>0169-b<k1>upasantan<k2>upasantan
{#upasantan#}¦ {%upa-san-tan (-sam-t˚),%} cl. 8. P.
A. {%-tanoti, -nute, -nitum,%} to bring into immediate
connection with.
<LEND>

<L>11940<pc>0169-b<k1>upasantAna<k2>upasantAna
{%Upa-santāna, as,%}¦ m. immediate connection, join-
ing together; a descendant.
<LEND>

<L>11941<pc>0169-b<k1>upasanDA<k2>upasanDA
{#upasanDA#}¦ {%upa-san-dhā (-sam-dhā),%} cl. 3. P.
A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put together,
add, increase; to join, connect, cause to partake of;
to aim at.
<LEND>

<L>11942<pc>0169-b<k1>upasaMhita<k2>upasaMhita
{%Upa-saṃhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected with, furnished
with, accompanied or surrounded by; having regard
or reference to, attached to one another.
<LEND>

<L>11943<pc>0169-b<k1>upasanDyam<k2>upasanDyam
{#upasanDyam#}¦ {%upa-sandhyam,%} ind. near or
towards evening.
<LEND>

<L>11944<pc>0169-b<k1>upasannyAsa<k2>upasannyAsa
{#upasannyAsa#}¦ {%upa-sannyāsa, as,%} m. (rt. 2. {%as%}),
laying down, giving up.
<LEND>

<L>11945<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamaS<k2>upasamaS
{#upasamaS#}¦ {%upa-sam-aś,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-aśnoti,%}
{%-nute, -śitum,%} to reach, obtain.
<LEND>

<L>11946<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamas<k2>upasamas
{#upasamas#}¦ {%upa-sam-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati, -si-%}
{%tum,%} to put or place upon.
<LEND>

<L>11947<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamAkf<k2>upasamAkf
{#upasamAkf#}¦ {%upa-sam-ā-kṛ,%} cl. 5. 8. P. A. {%-kṛ-%}
{%ṇoti, -ṇute, -karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to connect,
combine together.
<LEND>

<L>11948<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamADA<k2>upasamADA
{#upasamADA#}¦ {%upa-sam-ā-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put on (as wood on a
fire), to place in order, arrange.
<LEND>

<L>11949<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamADAna<k2>upasamADAna
{%Upa-samādhāna, am,%}¦ n. placing in or on, laying
one upon the another.
<LEND>

<L>11950<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamAhArya<k2>upasamAhArya
{#upasamAhArya#}¦ {%upa-samāhārya, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%hṛ%}), to be brought together, to be arranged.
<LEND>

<L>11951<pc>0169-b<k1>upasami<k2>upasami
{#upasami#}¦ {%upa-sam-i,%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -tum,%} to
approach together.
<LEND>

<L>11952<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamid<k2>upasamid
{#upasamid#}¦ {%upa-samid%} or {%upa-samidham,%} ind.
near the fire-wood.
<LEND>

<L>11953<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamUh<k2>upasamUh
{#upasamUh#}¦ {%upa-sam-ūh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ūhati, -hi-%}
{%tum,%} to draw together, contract, to collect together,
to bring near.
<LEND>

<L>11954<pc>0169-b<k1>upasame<k2>upasame
{#upasame#}¦ {%upa-sam-e (-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-aiti,%}
{%-tum,%} to meet, meet with (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>11955<pc>0169-b<k1>upasampad<k2>upasampad
{#upasampad#}¦ {%upa-sam-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to come to, arrive at: Caus. P. {%-pādayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to bring near to, lead near, to give, grant;
(with Buddhists) to receive into the order of priests,
to ordain.
<LEND>

<L>11956<pc>0169-b<k1>upasampatti<k2>upasampatti
{%Upa-sampatti, is,%}¦ f. approaching, arriving at,
entering into any condition.
<LEND>

<L>11957<pc>0169-b<k1>upasampanna<k2>upasampanna
{%Upa-sampanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ arrived at; gained,
obtained; furnished with; familiar with; finished;
enough, sufficient; dead, deceased; immolated, sacri-
ficed as a victim &c.; dressed, cooked.
<LEND>

<L>11958<pc>0169-b<k1>upasampraC<k2>upasampraC
{#upasampraC#}¦ {%upa-sam-prach,%} cl. 6. P. {%-pṛc-%}
{%chati, -praṣṭum,%} to ask a person about anything.
<LEND>

<L>11959<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamprAp<k2>upasamprAp
{#upasamprAp#}¦ {%upa-sam-prāp (-pra-āp),%} cl. 5. P.
{%-āpnoti, -ptum,%} to reach, obtain, approach.
<LEND>

<L>11960<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamprApya<k2>upasamprApya
{%Upa-samprāpya,%}¦ ind. having arrived at.
<LEND>

<L>11961<pc>0169-b<k1>upasamBAzA<k2>upasamBAzA
{#upasamBAzA#}¦ {%upa-sambhāṣā,%} f. talking over,
friendly persuasion.
<LEND>

<L>11962<pc>0169-b<k1>upasara<k2>upasara
{#upasara#}¦ {%upa-sara.%} See {%upa-sṛ%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>11963<pc>0169-b<k1>upasarga<k2>upasarga
{#upasarga#}¦ {%upa-sarga.%} See {%upa-sṛj%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>11964<pc>0169-b<k1>upasarpaRa<k2>upasarpaRa
{#upasarpaRa#}¦ {%upa-sarpaṇa.%} See {%upa-sṛp%} next
col.
<LEND>
[Page0169-c+ 74]

<L>11965<pc>0169-c<k1>upasAntv<k2>upasAntv
{#upasAntv#}¦ {%upa-sāntv.%} See {%upa-śāntv.%}
<LEND>

<L>11966<pc>0169-c<k1>upasi<k2>upasi
{#upasi#}¦ {%upasi,%} ind., Ved. in the lap, on the
hip.
<LEND>

<L>11967<pc>0169-c<k1>upasunda<k2>upasunda
{#upasunda#}¦ {%upa-sunda, as,%} m., N. of a Daitya,
son of Nikumbha and younger brother of Sunda.
<LEND>

<L>11968<pc>0169-c<k1>upasUryaka<k2>upasUryaka
{#upasUryaka#}¦ {%upa-sūryaka, am,%} n. the disk of
the sun.
<LEND>

<L>11969<pc>0169-c<k1>upasf<k2>upasf
{#upasf#}¦ {%upa-sṛ,%} cl. 1. and Ved. 3. P. {%-sarati,%}
{%-sisarti, -sartum,%} to go towards, approach, go against,
attack; to have intercourse (as a woman with a man).
<LEND>

<L>11970<pc>0169-c<k1>upasara<k2>upasara
{%Upa-sara, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} who or what approaches;
({%as%}), m. approaching (a cow); the first pregnancy or
impregnation of a cow.
<LEND>

<L>11971<pc>0169-c<k1>upasaraRa<k2>upasaraRa
{%Upa-saraṇa, am,%}¦ n. going or flowing towards,
rapid flowing of the blood towards the heart in sick-
ness; what is approached as a refuge.
<LEND>

<L>11972<pc>0169-c<k1>upasartavya<k2>upasartavya
{%Upa-sartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be approached for
help, to be had recourse to.
<LEND>

<L>11973<pc>0169-c<k1>upasaryA<k2>upasaryA
{%Upa-saryā,%}¦ f. ‘to be approached,’ a cow fit for
a bull.
<LEND>

<L>11974<pc>0169-c<k1>upasArya<k2>upasArya
{%Upa-sārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be approached or gone to.
<LEND>

<L>11975<pc>0169-c<k1>upasftya<k2>upasftya
{%Upa-sṛtya,%}¦ ind. having gone towards, having ap-
proached.
<LEND>

<L>11976<pc>0169-c<k1>upasfj<k2>upasfj
{#upasfj#}¦ {%upa-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati, -sraṣṭum,%}
to pour out or on, to offer, make an oblation; to
join, attach, connect with; to beset with, oppress;
to eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>11977<pc>0169-c<k1>upasarga<k2>upasarga
{%Upa-sarga, as,%}¦ m. addition; trouble, misfortune;
a portent, a natural phenomenon supposed to forbode
future evil, an eclipse; a disease, possession by an
evil spirit; change occasioned by any disease; indi-
cation or symptom of death; a disease superinduced
on another; an inseparable particle or preposition
prefixed to roots; see {%karma-pravacanīya%}. {%—Upa-%}
{%sarga-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} having the character of a
preposition, to be treated like one.
<LEND>

<L>11978<pc>0169-c<k1>upasarjana<k2>upasarjana
{%Upa-sarjana, am,%}¦ n. pouring on; misfortune,
inauspicious phenomenon, portent, eclipse; passing
by, leaving, eclipsing; any person or thing subordi-
nate or subsidiary to another, a substitute, a repre-
sentative; (in gram.) a word which by composition
or derivation loses its original independance, while
it also determines the sense of another word; for
instance, in the derivative {%Aupiśala,%} a pupil of Api-
śali, {%Apiśali%} has become the {%upasarjana;%} so also in
the compound {%rāja-puruṣa%} (fr. {%rājan%} and {%puruṣa%})
the first loses its independant character when com-
pounded and is therefore the {%upasarjana; (ī),%} f.
an infusion.
<LEND>

<L>11979<pc>0169-c<k1>upasfzwa<k2>upasfzwa
{%Upa-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined, attached, connected
to or with, attended by or accompanied with; seized
or possessed by (evil demons &c.); eclipsed, as the
sun or moon; furnished with an {%upasarga%} or prepo-
sition (e. g. the root {%dā%} with {%ā%} prefixed is said to be
{%upasṛṣṭa%}); ({%am%}), n. coition, copulation.
<LEND>

<L>11980<pc>0169-c<k1>upasfp<k2>upasfp
{#upasfp#}¦ {%upa-sṛp,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-sarpati, -te,%}
{%-sarptum%} or {%-sraptum,%} to creep near, approach;
move onward, attack; [cf. <lang n="greek">ὑφέρπω</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>11981<pc>0169-c<k1>upasarpa<k2>upasarpa
{%Upa-sarpa, as,%}¦ m. approach, access, following a
person.
<LEND>

<L>11982<pc>0169-c<k1>upasarpaRa<k2>upasarpaRa
{%Upa-sarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. approaching, advancing
towards.
<LEND>

<L>11983<pc>0169-c<k1>upasarpin<k2>upasarpin
{%Upa-sarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ creeping near, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>11984<pc>0169-c<k1>upasarpya<k2>upasarpya
{%Upa-sarpya,%}¦ ind. having approached.
<LEND>

<L>11985<pc>0169-c<k1>upasektf<k2>upasektf
{#upasektf#}¦ {%upa-sektṛ, tā,%} m. (rt. {%sic%}), Ved. one
who sprinkles or pours one thing on another.
<LEND>

<L>11986<pc>0169-c<k1>upasecana<k2>upasecana
{%Upa-secana, as, ā, am,%}¦ pouring or sprinkling one
thing on another; ({%am%}), n. pouring or sprinkling
upon, watering; infusion, juice; ({%ī%}), f. a ladle or cup
for pouring.
<LEND>

<L>11987<pc>0169-c<k1>upasena<k2>upasena
{#upasena#}¦ {%upa-sena, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>11988<pc>0169-c<k1>upasev<k2>upasev
{#upasev#}¦ {%upa-sev,%} cl. 1. A. {%-sevate, -vitum,%}
to serve, worship, honour; to practise, pursue, culti-
[Page0170-a+ 76]
vate, study, make use of, be addicted to, frequent,
inhabit.
<LEND>

<L>11989<pc>0170-a<k1>upasevaka<k2>upasevaka
{%Upa-sevaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ worshipping, following,
practising.
<LEND>

<L>11990<pc>0170-a<k1>upasevana<k2>upasevana
{%Upa-sevana, am,%}¦ n. worshipping, honouring; ser-
vice, addiction to; using, enjoying.
<LEND>

<L>11991<pc>0170-a<k1>upasevA<k2>upasevA
{%Upa-sevā,%}¦ f. service, worship, honour.
<LEND>

<L>11992<pc>0170-a<k1>upasevin<k2>upasevin
{%Upa-sevin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ serving, worshipping, honour-
ing; liking, pleased with.
<LEND>

<L>11993<pc>0170-a<k1>upaskf<k2>upaskf
{#upaskf#}¦ {%upa-s-kṛ%} ({%s%} inserted, see {%upa-kṛ%}),
cl. 8. A. {%-kurute, -kartum,%} to prepare, elaborate,
perfect, adorn, &c.
<LEND>

<L>11994<pc>0170-a<k1>upaskara<k2>upaskara
{%Upas-kara, as,%}¦ m. any article which serves to
make complete, an ingredient, condiment, spice or
seasoning (mustard, pepper, &c.); an appurtenance,
utensil, implement or instrument; an article of house-
hold use (as a broom, a basket, &c.), apparatus;
blame, censure.
<LEND>

<L>11995<pc>0170-a<k1>upaskAra<k2>upaskAra
{%Upas-kāra, as,%}¦ m. anything additional, a supple-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>11996<pc>0170-a<k1>upaskfta<k2>upaskfta
{%Upas-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ prepared; blamed, censured.
<LEND>

<L>11997<pc>0170-a<k1>upaskfti<k2>upaskfti
{%Upas-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. a supplement, anything additional.
<LEND>

<L>11998<pc>0170-a<k1>upastamB<k2>upastamB
{#upastamB#}¦ {%upa-stambh,%} cl. 5. 9. P. {%-stabhnoti,%}
{%nāti, -stabdhum,%} to stay, prop, support.
<LEND>

<L>11999<pc>0170-a<k1>upastamBa<k2>upastamBa
{%Upa-stambha, as,%}¦ m. (also written {%upa-ṣṭam-%}
{%bha ?%}), stay, support, support of life (as food, sleep,
and government of the passions); encouragement,
incitement; base, basis, ground, occasion.
<LEND>

<L>12000<pc>0170-a<k1>upastamBaka<k2>upastamBaka
{%Upa-stambhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ supporting, promoting,
encouraging.
<LEND>

<L>12001<pc>0170-a<k1>upastamBana<k2>upastamBana
{%Upa-stambhana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a support.
<LEND>

<L>12002<pc>0170-a<k1>upastaraRa<k2>upastaraRa
{#upastaraRa#}¦ {%upa-staraṇa.%} See {%upa-stṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>12003<pc>0170-a<k1>upasti<k2>upasti
{#upasti#}¦ {%upa-sti, is,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%as%} with {%upa%}),
Ved. an attendant, a follower, a servant, a subject.
<LEND>

<L>12004<pc>0170-a<k1>upastu<k2>upastu
{#upastu#}¦ {%upa-stu,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-stauti%} or {%-sta-%}
{%vīti, -stute%} or {%-stuvīte, -stotum,%} to praise, invoke.
<LEND>

<L>12005<pc>0170-a<k1>upastut<k2>upastut
{%Upa-stut, t,%}¦ f., Ved. invocation, praise, invitation.
<LEND>

<L>12006<pc>0170-a<k1>upastuta<k2>upastuta
{%Upa-stuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ invoked, praised; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>12007<pc>0170-a<k1>upastuti<k2>upastuti
{%Upa-stuti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. invocation, praise.
<LEND>

<L>12008<pc>0170-a<k1>upastutya<k2>upastutya
{%Upa-stutya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised or invoked.
<LEND>

<L>12009<pc>0170-a<k1>upastf<k2>upastf
{#upastf#}¦ {%upa-stṛ%} or {%-stṝ,%} cl. 5. 9. P. A. {%-stṛ-%}
{%ṇoti, -ṇute, -ṇāti, -ṇīte, -startum, -ritum%} or {%-rī-%}
{%tum,%} to spread, arrange, set in order; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>substerno.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>12010<pc>0170-a<k1>upastaraRa<k2>upastaraRa
{%Upa-staraṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. spreading out, scatter-
ing; what is spread out; a covering.
<LEND>

<L>12011<pc>0170-a<k1>upastir<k2>upastir
{%Upa-stir,%}¦ f., Ved. scattering about, spreading; what
is spread; a covering.
<LEND>

<L>12012<pc>0170-a<k1>upastIrRa<k2>upastIrRa
{%Upa-stīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread out, arranged.
<LEND>

<L>12013<pc>0170-a<k1>upastrI<k2>upastrI
{#upastrI#}¦ {%upa-strī,%} f. a concubine.
<LEND>

<L>12014<pc>0170-a<k1>upasTA<k2>upasTA<h>1
{#upasTA#} 1¦. {%upa-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-tiṣṭhati, -te,%}
{%-sthātum,%} to stand near, stand by the side of in order
to serve, wait on, attend on, serve (with acc.); to be
or remain near; stay with; to come near, approach;
to approach a god with prayer, worship; to stand
under in order to support; to approach for inter-
course, have intercourse with; to approach for assist-
ance; to approach with hostile intentions, attack;
to occur, come to pass, arise, be present; to meet
with, obtain; to fall to one's share, come to the
possession of; to conciliate: Caus. P. {%-sthāpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to stand near, to provide, present,
furnish with, place upon or near; to produce.
<LEND>

<L>12015<pc>0170-a<k1>upasTa<k2>upasTa
{%Upa-stha, as,%}¦ m. the lap, middle part in general,
a secure place; ({%as, am%}), m. n. the organs of genera-
tion, especially of a woman; the anus; the haunch
or hip; ({%as, ā, am%}), near, proximate; {%upasthaṃ%}
{%kṛ,%} to sit down with the legs bent, make a lap;
{%upasthe kṛ,%} to take on one's lap. {%—Upastha-%}
{%daghna, as, ī, am,%} reaching to the lap. {%—Upastha-%}
{%nigraha, as,%} m. restraint of sensual appetite; con-
tinence. {%—Upastha-pattra, as,%} m. the Indian fig
tree. {%—Upastha-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. sitting in the lap.
<LEND>

<L>12016<pc>0170-a<k1>upasTA<k2>upasTA<h>2
2. {%upa-sthā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ Ved. standing on.
<LEND>

<L>12017<pc>0170-a<k1>upasTAtf<k2>upasTAtf
{%Upa-sthātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. an attendant, servant.
<LEND>
[Page0170-b+ 76]

<L>12018<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTAna<k2>upasTAna
{%Upa-sthāna, am,%}¦ n. standing near, presence,
proximity, nearness; approaching, appearing, coming
into the presence of, introducing one's self; worship-
ping, waiting on; attendance; obeisance; abode; an
assembly; any object approached with respect, a
sanctuary; obtaining, getting; {%upasthānaṃ kṛ,%} to
give access or scope for action. {%—Upasthāna-śālā,%} f.
the assembly-room of a Buddhist monastery.
<LEND>

<L>12019<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTAnIya<k2>upasTAnIya
{%Upa-sthānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be stayed with or
near, to be kept near; to be attended on or served.
<LEND>

<L>12020<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTApaka<k2>upasTApaka
{%Upa-sthāpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ placing or bringing near,
causing to obtain; explaining, teaching, a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>12021<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTApana<k2>upasTApana
{%Upa-sthāpana, am,%}¦ n. placing near; attendance,
service.
<LEND>

<L>12022<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTApanIya<k2>upasTApanIya
{%Upa-sthāpanīya%}¦ or {%upa-sthāpayitavya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} to be placed near.
<LEND>

<L>12023<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTApita<k2>upasTApita
{%Upa-sthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed near, attended.
<LEND>

<L>12024<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTApya<k2>upasTApya
{%Upa-sthāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be placed near, to be
produced or made visible.
<LEND>

<L>12025<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTAya<k2>upasTAya
{%Upa-sthāya,%}¦ ind. having approached, having
brought near to or assembled.
<LEND>

<L>12026<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTAyaka<k2>upasTAyaka
{%Upa-sthāyaka, as,%}¦ m. a servant; (with Buddhists)
a follower of Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>12027<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTAyin<k2>upasTAyin
{%Upa-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ standing near, being pre-
sent, appearing.
<LEND>

<L>12028<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTAvara<k2>upasTAvara
{%Upa-sthāvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. stopping, not
moving.
<LEND>

<L>12029<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTita<k2>upasTita
{%Upa-sthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached, arrived, arisen,
appeared, present; staying by or near at hand, im-
pending, ready; received, obtained, gained; accom-
plished, taken place, happened; caused, occasioned;
felt; known; clean, cleansed; (in Ved. gram.) in the
Pada text followed by the particle {%iti; (am),%} n. the
particle {%iti%} used in this manner; the position of
words before and after {%iti; (ā),%} f., N. of a metre of
four lines of ten syllables each; N. of another metre
of four lines of eleven syllables each. {%—Upasthita-%}
{%pracupita,%} N. of a metre consisting of four lines and
fifty-one syllables. {%—Upasthita-vaktṛ, tā,%} m. a ready
speaker, an eloquent man. {%—Upasthita-samprahāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} about to engage in a battle, having battle
at hand.
<LEND>

<L>12030<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTiti<k2>upasTiti
{%Upa-sthiti, is,%}¦ f. standing near, approach, presence,
proximity, arrival; obtaining, getting; effecting, ac-
complishing; remaining.
<LEND>

<L>12031<pc>0170-b<k1>upasTeya<k2>upasTeya
{%Upa-stheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attended to, to be
worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>12032<pc>0170-b<k1>upasneha<k2>upasneha
{#upasneha#}¦ {%upa-sneha, as,%} m. (rt. {%snih%}), moisten-
ing, attracting moisture.
<LEND>

<L>12033<pc>0170-b<k1>upaspij<k2>upaspij
{#upaspij#}¦ {%upa-spij%} (only used in acc. {%-jam%}),
Ved. inconsiderate curiosity or jest (?).
<LEND>

<L>12034<pc>0170-b<k1>upaspfS<k2>upaspfS<h>1
{#upaspfS#} 1¦. {%upa-spṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-spṛśati,%}
{%-spraṣṭum%} or {%-sparṣṭum,%} to touch (water); to
wash or rinse the mouth; to sip water, to sprinkle;
to wash off; to gnash (the teeth).
<LEND>

<L>12035<pc>0170-b<k1>upasparSa<k2>upasparSa
{%Upa-sparśa, as,%}¦ m. touching, contact; washing,
bathing, ablution; rinsing the mouth, sipping water
and ejecting it.
<LEND>

<L>12036<pc>0170-b<k1>upasparSana<k2>upasparSana
{%Upa-sparśana, am,%}¦ n. touching; bathing; rinsing
the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>12037<pc>0170-b<k1>upasparSin<k2>upasparSin
{%Upa-sparśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ touching, sipping water.
<LEND>

<L>12038<pc>0170-b<k1>upaspfS<k2>upaspfS<h>2
2. {%upa-spṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. touching.
<LEND>

<L>12039<pc>0170-b<k1>upaspfSya<k2>upaspfSya
{%Upa-spṛśya,%}¦ ind. having sipped water.
<LEND>

<L>12040<pc>0170-b<k1>upaspfzwa<k2>upaspfzwa
{%Upa-spṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ touched, sipped.
<LEND>

<L>12041<pc>0170-b<k1>upasmfti<k2>upasmfti
{#upasmfti#}¦ {%upa-smṛti, is,%} f. a minor law-
book; eighteen such books are mentioned.
<LEND>

<L>12042<pc>0170-b<k1>upasravaRa<k2>upasravaRa
{#upasravaRa#}¦ {%upa-sravaṇa, am,%} n. (rt. {%sru%}),
flowing, the periodical flow of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>12043<pc>0170-b<k1>upasvatva<k2>upasvatva
{#upasvatva#}¦ {%upasva-tva, am,%} n. revenue, profit,
what is derived from land or other capital.
<LEND>

<L>12044<pc>0170-b<k1>upasvAvat<k2>upasvAvat
{%Upasvā-vat, ān,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Satrājit.
<LEND>

<L>12045<pc>0170-b<k1>upasveda<k2>upasveda
{#upasveda#}¦ {%upa-sveda, as,%} m. (rt. {%svid%}), moisture.
<LEND>

<L>12046<pc>0170-b<k1>upahan<k2>upahan
{#upahan#}¦ {%upa-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -tum,%} to
kill, injure, destroy, disturb, vex; to waste.
<LEND>

<L>12047<pc>0170-b<k1>upahata<k2>upahata
{%Upa-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured, impaired, evilly
affected by; struck by lightning &c.; pained, hurt;
[Page0170-c+ 75]
destroyed; infected, polluted, vitiated; impure. {%—Upa-%}
{%hata-dṛś, k, k, k,%} dazzled, blinded. {%—Upahata-dhī,%}
{%īs, īs, i,%} infatuated. {%—Upahatātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} agitated in mind, mentally affected as by passion.
<LEND>

<L>12048<pc>0170-c<k1>upahataka<k2>upahataka
{%Upahataka, as, ā, am,%}¦ ill-fated, unfortunate, un-
lucky.
<LEND>

<L>12049<pc>0170-c<k1>upahatnu<k2>upahatnu
{%Upa-hatnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. assailing.
<LEND>

<L>12050<pc>0170-c<k1>upahatyA<k2>upahatyA
{%Upa-hatyā,%}¦ f. dazzling of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>12051<pc>0170-c<k1>upahantavya<k2>upahantavya
{%Upa-hantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be killed.
<LEND>

<L>12052<pc>0170-c<k1>upahantf<k2>upahantf
{%Upa-hantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ having a contrary effect,
disturbing.
<LEND>

<L>12053<pc>0170-c<k1>upaharaRa<k2>upaharaRa
{#upaharaRa#}¦ {%upa-haraṇa.%} See under {%upa-hṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>12054<pc>0170-c<k1>upahas<k2>upahas
{#upahas#}¦ {%upa-has,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hasati, -situm,%}
to laugh at, deride.
<LEND>

<L>12055<pc>0170-c<k1>upahasita<k2>upahasita
{%Upa-hasita, am,%}¦ n. satirical laughter, laughing;
({%as, ā, am%}), laughed at, derided.
<LEND>

<L>12056<pc>0170-c<k1>upahasvan<k2>upahasvan
{%Upa-hasvan, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. laughing at, a derider.
<LEND>

<L>12057<pc>0170-c<k1>upahAsa<k2>upahAsa
{%Upa-hāsa, as,%}¦ m. fun, play, ridicule, derision,
laughing at any one, satirical laughter. {%—Upahāsā-%}
{%spada (˚sa-ās˚), am,%} n. a laughing-stock.
<LEND>

<L>12058<pc>0170-c<k1>upahAsaka<k2>upahAsaka
{%Upa-hāsaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ ridiculing others, jocose;
({%as%}), m. a jester.
<LEND>

<L>12059<pc>0170-c<k1>upahAsya<k2>upahAsya
{%Upa-hāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be laughed at, ridi-
culous, laughable. {%—Upahāsya-tā,%} f. ridiculousness.
{%—Upahāsya-tāṃ gam,%} to expose one's self to
laughter.
<LEND>

<L>12060<pc>0170-c<k1>upahastikA<k2>upahastikA
{#upahastikA#}¦ {%upahastikā,%} f. (fr. {%upa-hasta%}), a
small bag or box containing condiments or betel.
<LEND>

<L>12061<pc>0170-c<k1>upahA<k2>upahA
{#upahA#}¦ {%upa-hā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-jihīte, -hātum,%} to
go down, descend.
<LEND>

<L>12062<pc>0170-c<k1>upahAlaka<k2>upahAlaka
{#upahAlaka#}¦ {%upahālaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
country, part of the peninsula of India.
<LEND>

<L>12063<pc>0170-c<k1>upahiMs<k2>upahiMs
{#upahiMs#}¦ {%upa-hiṃs,%} cl. 7. 1. P. {%-hinasti, -hiṃ-%}
{%sati, -situm,%} to injure, hurt, wound; to overpower.
<LEND>

<L>12064<pc>0170-c<k1>upahita<k2>upahita
{#upahita#}¦ {%upa-hita, as, ā, am%} (past pass. part.
of 1. {%upa-dhā,%} p. 163), placed, deposited, placed in
or upon; preceded by; laid aside, joined; mixed;
ready, deputed to act as a spy, connected with.
{%—Upahita-bhara, as, ā, am,%} having the weight
carried; (a better reading has {%apa-hṛta-.%})
<LEND>

<L>12065<pc>0170-c<k1>upahf<k2>upahf
{#upahf#}¦ {%upa-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te,%}
{%-hartum,%} to bring near, offer; to take away, destroy:
Caus. {%-hārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to offer: Desid.
{%-jihīrṣati,%} to wish to offer.
<LEND>

<L>12066<pc>0170-c<k1>upaharaRa<k2>upaharaRa
{%Upa-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. bringing near; offering gifts
to superiors; presenting victims; distributing or
serving out food; taking, seizing.
<LEND>

<L>12067<pc>0170-c<k1>upaharaRIya<k2>upaharaRIya
{%Upa-haraṇīya%}¦ or {%upa-hartavya, as, ā, am,%} to
be presented, to be offered as a victim.
<LEND>

<L>12068<pc>0170-c<k1>upahartf<k2>upahartf
{%Upa-hartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ offering victims, serving
out food &c.
<LEND>

<L>12069<pc>0170-c<k1>upahAra<k2>upahAra
{%Upa-hāra, as,%}¦ m. oblation; a complimentary gift,
a present to a superior &c.; an offering to a deity, a
victim &c.; honour; tribute, indemnification, pre-
sents as the price of peace; food distributed to guests
&c.; exultation, mirth (consisting in laughter, dance,
song, bellowing as a bull, bowing, recital of prayer &c.).
<LEND>

<L>12070<pc>0170-c<k1>upahAraka<k2>upahAraka
{%Upa-hāraka, as,%}¦ m. an oblation &c.
<LEND>

<L>12071<pc>0170-c<k1>upahArin<k2>upahArin
{%Upa-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ giving, presenting; sacrificing.
<LEND>

<L>12072<pc>0170-c<k1>upahArIkf<k2>upahArIkf
{%Upahārī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make an oblation, to offer.
<LEND>

<L>12073<pc>0170-c<k1>upahfta<k2>upahfta
{%Upa-hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ offered, presented; im-
molated, offered as a victim; served out as food;
taken, collected, gathered.
<LEND>

<L>12074<pc>0170-c<k1>upahoma<k2>upahoma
{#upahoma#}¦ {%upa-homa, as,%} m. a supplementary
sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>12075<pc>0170-c<k1>upahvara<k2>upahvara
{#upahvara#}¦ {%upa-hvara, as,%} m. (rt. {%hvṛ%}), Ved.
bend, curve, arch, slope; declivity; the curved form
of the Soma vessel; ({%am%}), n. proximity; a solitary
or private place; ({%as%}), m. a car, a carriage; ({%e%}), ind.
in the proximity of, near to, in a private place.
<LEND>

<L>12076<pc>0170-c<k1>upahve<k2>upahve
{#upahve#}¦ {%upa-hve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-hvayati, -te,%}
{%-hvātum,%} to invoke, call near to.
<LEND>

<L>12077<pc>0170-c<k1>upahava<k2>upahava
{%Upa-hava, as,%}¦ m. calling to, inviting, invitation;
summoning, invoking; {%upahavam iṣ,%} to wish to
[Page0171-a+ 75]
receive an invitation from (with loc., e. g. {%tasminn%}
{%Indra upahavam aicchata,%} Indra wished to re-
ceive an invitation from him).
<LEND>

<L>12078<pc>0171-a<k1>upahavya<k2>upahavya
{%Upa-havya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>12079<pc>0171-a<k1>upahUta<k2>upahUta
{%Upa-hūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ invoked, invited.
<LEND>

<L>12080<pc>0171-a<k1>upahUya<k2>upahUya
{%Upa-hūya,%}¦ ind. having invoked or called or ad-
dressed.
<LEND>

<L>12081<pc>0171-a<k1>upahvAna<k2>upahvAna
{%Upa-hvāna, am,%}¦ n. act of inviting.
<LEND>

<L>12082<pc>0171-a<k1>upAMSu<k2>upAMSu
{#upAMSu#}¦ {%upāṃśu,%} ind. in a low voice, in a
whisper; secretly, in secret (e. g. {%upāṃśu-vrata,%} a
vow observed in secret); ({%us%}), m. a prayer uttered
in a low voice; muttering prayers, reciting them in
a low voice so as not to be overheard; N. of a Soma
offering. {%—Upāṃśu-krīḍita, as, ā, am,%} played with
in secret, made the companion of (a king's) private
amusements.
<LEND>

<L>12083<pc>0171-a<k1>upAka<k2>upAka
{#upAka#}¦ {%upāka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%añc%} with
{%upa%}), Ved. brought near to one another, joined,
approximate; ({%e%}), Ved. du. an epithet of night and
morning; ({%e%}), ind. in the next neighbourhood, in
the presence of, before. {%—Upāka-cakṣas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. standing present before the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>12084<pc>0171-a<k1>upAkf<k2>upAkf
{#upAkf#}¦ {%upā-kṛ (upa-ā-kṛ),%} cl. 5. 8. P. A.
{%-kṛṇoti, -nute, -karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to bring
near or towards, to fetch; to summon, invite; to
deliver, commit to, offer, grant, bestow; to acquire,
obtain; to bring about, make preparations for a
sacred action; to undertake, begin; to enter.
<LEND>

<L>12085<pc>0171-a<k1>upAkaraRa<k2>upAkaraRa
{%Upā-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. bringing near, inviting, in-
vitation to begin; a term applied to certain sentences,
called Praiṣas &c., with which one priest invites an-
other to perform a sacrifice; immolation, sacrifice
of an animal duly consecrated; preparation, begin-
ning; commencement of reading the Veda after the
performance of a preparatory rite.
<LEND>

<L>12086<pc>0171-a<k1>upAkarman<k2>upAkarman
{%Upā-karman, a,%}¦ n. preparation, beginning; a
ceremony performed before reading the Vedas; be-
ginning to read the Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>12087<pc>0171-a<k1>upAkfta<k2>upAkfta
{%Upā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought near, invited, ad-
dressed with invitatory sentences; ({%as%}), m. a sacri-
ficial animal killed during the recitation of prescribed
prayers; attended with evil omens, disastrous, cala-
mitous; ({%as%}), m. misfortune; a portent, a pheno-
menon announcing calamity.
<LEND>

<L>12088<pc>0171-a<k1>upAkram<k2>upAkram
{#upAkram#}¦ {%upā-kram (upa-ā-kram),%} cl. 1. P. A.,
4. P. {%-krāmati, -kramate%} (ep. also {%-krāmate%}),
{%-krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to advance against in order
to seize, to fall upon, take possession of.
<LEND>

<L>12089<pc>0171-a<k1>upAkzam<k2>upAkzam
{#upAkzam#}¦ {%upākṣam (upa-ak˚),%} ind. before
the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>12090<pc>0171-a<k1>upAKyA<k2>upAKyA
{#upAKyA#}¦ {%upā-khyā (upa-ā-),%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti,%}
{%-tum,%} to tell a story, narrate; to relate or give an
account about anything (with acc.); to observe (?).
<LEND>

<L>12091<pc>0171-a<k1>upAKya<k2>upAKya
{%Upā-khya, as, ā, am,%}¦ observable by the eyes; [cf.
{%nir-upākhya%}]; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12092<pc>0171-a<k1>upAKyAna<k2>upAKyAna
{%Upākhyāna (upa-ākh˚), am,%}¦ n. a tale, a short
narrative, an episode; telling or repetition of a story
already heard from another.
<LEND>

<L>12093<pc>0171-a<k1>upAKyAnaka<k2>upAKyAnaka
{%Upākhyānaka, am,%}¦ n. a short tale.
<LEND>

<L>12094<pc>0171-a<k1>upAgam<k2>upAgam
{#upAgam#}¦ {%upā-gam (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go near or towards, to approach, visit;
to return; to pass into any condition or relation; to
undergo, suffer, endure; to occur, to come or fall to
one's share.
<LEND>

<L>12095<pc>0171-a<k1>upAgata<k2>upAgata
{%Upā-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached, arrived; occurred,
happened; promised; suffering, feeling.
<LEND>

<L>12096<pc>0171-a<k1>upAgama<k2>upAgama
{%Upā-gama, as,%}¦ m. approach, arrival; occurrence;
promise, agreement; the state of suffering, feeling.
<LEND>

<L>12097<pc>0171-a<k1>upAgamya<k2>upAgamya
{%Upā-gamya%}¦ or {%upā-gatya,%} ind. having approached,
having gone near or towards.
<LEND>

<L>12098<pc>0171-a<k1>upAgA<k2>upAgA
{#upAgA#}¦ {%upā-gā (upa-ā-gā),%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti,%}
{%gātum,%} to come near, approach, come to.
<LEND>

<L>12099<pc>0171-a<k1>upAgni<k2>upAgni
{#upAgni#}¦ {%upāgni (upa-agni),%} ind. near a fire.
<LEND>

<L>12100<pc>0171-a<k1>upAgra<k2>upAgra
{#upAgra#}¦ {%upāgra (upa-ag˚), am,%} n. the part
which is next to the end or top; a secondary member.
<LEND>
[Page0171-b+ 73]

<L>12101<pc>0171-b<k1>upAgrah<k2>upAgrah
{#upAgrah#}¦ {%upā-grah (upa-ā-grah),%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛhṇāti, -ṇīte%} (Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte%}), {%-grahītum,%}
to comprehend, embrace.
<LEND>

<L>12102<pc>0171-b<k1>upAgrahaRa<k2>upAgrahaRa
{%Upā-grahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. reading the Vedas after
initiation.
<LEND>

<L>12103<pc>0171-b<k1>upAgrahAyaRam<k2>upAgrahAyaRam
{#upAgrahAyaRam#}¦ {%upāgrahāyaṇam%} or {%upāgrahā-%}
{%yaṇi (upa-ag˚),%} ind. towards the day of full moon
in the month Agrahāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>12104<pc>0171-b<k1>upAGrA<k2>upAGrA
{#upAGrA#}¦ {%upā-ghrā (upa-ā-ghrā),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-jighrati, -ghrātum,%} to smell at; to kiss.
<LEND>

<L>12105<pc>0171-b<k1>upANkya<k2>upANkya
{#upANkya#}¦ {%upāṅkya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa-aṅka%}),
to be marked.
<LEND>

<L>12106<pc>0171-b<k1>upANga<k2>upANga
{#upANga#}¦ {%upāṅga (upa-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a sub-
division; any minor limb or member; a subsidiary
or supplementary work of low value; a supplement
of a supplement; secondary portion of science;
(twelve Aṅgas and Upāṅgas constitute the sacred
writings of the Buddhists); the sectarial mark made
with Sandal &c. on the forehead. {%—Upāṅga-gīta,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of song.
<LEND>

<L>12107<pc>0171-b<k1>upAcar<k2>upAcar
{#upAcar#}¦ {%upā-car (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ca-%}
{%rati, -te, -ritum,%} Ved. {%-tave,%} &c., to come near to;
to attend upon, be attached to, to wait on, serve; to
be obedient; to treat.
<LEND>

<L>12108<pc>0171-b<k1>upAcarita<k2>upAcarita
{%Upā-carita, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached to any one's
service, obedient; (in gram.) that rule of Sandhi by
which the sound Visarga becomes {%s%} before {%k%} and {%p.%}
<LEND>

<L>12109<pc>0171-b<k1>upAcAra<k2>upAcAra
{%Upā-cāra, as,%}¦ m. position (as of a word in a
sentence); procedure; Sandhi by which the sound
Visarga becomes {%s%} before {%k%} and {%p.%}
<LEND>

<L>12110<pc>0171-b<k1>upAcCid<k2>upAcCid
{#upAcCid#}¦ {%upā-cchid (upa-ā-chid),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-cchinatti, -cchinte, -cchettum,%} to tear away from,
cut off from.
<LEND>

<L>12111<pc>0171-b<k1>upAj<k2>upAj
{#upAj#}¦ {%upāj (upa-aj),%} cl. 1. P. A., Ved. {%upā-%}
{%jati, -te, -jitum,%} to bring near to.
<LEND>

<L>12112<pc>0171-b<k1>upAjekf<k2>upAjekf
{%Upāje-kṛ,%}¦ to support. {%—Upāje-kṛtya%} or {%upāje-%}
{%kṛtvā,%} having supported.
<LEND>

<L>12113<pc>0171-b<k1>upAYc<k2>upAYc
{#upAYc#}¦ {%upāñc (upa-añc)%} or {%upāc (upa-ac),%}
cl. 1. P. A. {%upāñcati, -te,%} or {%upācati, -te, -citum,%}
to draw (water).
<LEND>

<L>12114<pc>0171-b<k1>upAYjana<k2>upAYjana
{#upAYjana#}¦ {%upāñjana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%añj%} with
{%upa%}), anointing, plastering the ground with cow
dung &c.
<LEND>

<L>12115<pc>0171-b<k1>upAtigam<k2>upAtigam
{#upAtigam#}¦ {%upāti-gam (upa-ati-gam),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to pass over, cross (a river).
<LEND>

<L>12116<pc>0171-b<k1>upAtI<k2>upAtI
{#upAtI#}¦ {%upātī (upa-ati-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%upāty-%}
{%eti, -tum,%} to pass over; to be added as a surplus.
<LEND>

<L>12117<pc>0171-b<k1>upAtyaya<k2>upAtyaya
{%Upāty-aya, as,%}¦ m. neglect or disobedience of
customs; disorderly behaviour.
<LEND>

<L>12118<pc>0171-b<k1>upAdA<k2>upAdA
{#upAdA#}¦ {%upā-dā (upa-ā-dā),%} cl. 3. A. {%-datte,%}
{%dātum,%} to receive, accept; to gain, acquire; to
take, appropriate to one's self; to take away or off,
carry off, steal; to seize, lay hold of, gather; to draw
(water); to assume a form; to feel, perceive, consider,
regard; to take in addition, include, comprise; to
employ, apply, use; to undertake, begin; to men-
tion, enumerate: Caus. {%-dāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to employ or apply; to make use of: Desid. P.
{%-ditsati,%} to strive to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>12119<pc>0171-b<k1>upAtta<k2>upAtta
{%Upā-tta, as, ā, am,%}¦ received, accepted, acquired,
gained, obtained; appropriated; taken away; seized,
gathered; shaped; felt, perceived, regarded; com-
prised; employed, used; begun; enumerated; allowed
in argument, granted, conceded; ({%as%}), m. an elephant
out of rut. {%—Upātta-raṃhas, ās, ās, as,%} acquiring
speed, quick, fleet. {%—Upātta-śastra, as, ā, am,%}
taking up arms, armed.
<LEND>

<L>12120<pc>0171-b<k1>upAdAna<k2>upAdAna
{%Upā-dāna, am,%}¦ n. taking, acquiring, taking away,
abduction, appropriating to one's self, accepting, em-
ployment, using, becoming familiar with; mentioning,
enumeration; saying, speaking; including, containing;
abstraction, withdrawing the organs of sense and per-
ception from the outer world; cause, motive; imme-
[Page0171-c+ 74]
diate or proximate cause; the formal or distinct form,
the material cause; a double meaning, an expression
conveying a sense besides that which appears in-
tended; (with Buddhists) conception; effort or ex-
ertion of body or speech. {%—Upādāna-kāraṇa, am,%}
n. a proximate cause.
<LEND>

<L>12121<pc>0171-c<k1>upAdAya<k2>upAdAya
{%Upā-dāya,%}¦ ind. having seized, containing; includ-
ing, inclusive of; together with; by means of.
<LEND>

<L>12122<pc>0171-c<k1>upAdeya<k2>upAdeya
{%Upā-deya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or received,
acceptable, admissible; to be chosen; to be selected,
excellent, admirable.
<LEND>

<L>12123<pc>0171-c<k1>upAdika<k2>upAdika
{#upAdika#}¦ {%upādika, as,%} m. a sort of insect;
[cf. {%utpādaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12124<pc>0171-c<k1>upAdiS<k2>upAdiS
{#upAdiS#}¦ {%upā-diś (upa-ā-),%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-di-%}
{%śati, -te, -deṣṭum,%} to advise, show, point out, to indi-
cate, inform, declare; to prescribe, give an order.
<LEND>

<L>12125<pc>0171-c<k1>upAdru<k2>upAdru
{#upAdru#}¦ {%upā-dru (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati,%}
{%-drotum,%} to run near to.
<LEND>

<L>12126<pc>0171-c<k1>upADA<k2>upADA
{#upADA#}¦ {%upā-dhā (upa-ā-),%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to place near, place upon;
to offer; render, make, effect, fix; to keep, hold.
<LEND>

<L>12127<pc>0171-c<k1>upADi<k2>upADi<h>1
1. {%upā-dhi, is,%}¦ m. (for 2. see below), deceit, de-
ception, disguise (in the Vedānta this is especially
applied to certain natural forms or properties, con-
sidered as disguises of the spirit); that which more
closely defines, a discriminative or distinguishing pro-
perty, an attribute, a peculiarity, an indispensable
condition; limitation (e. g. {%an-upādhi-ramaṇīyo%}
{%deśaḥ,%} a country beautiful without limitation, i. e.
altogether beautiful); a title, a discriminative appella-
tion, a nickname; a purpose, an occasion, an object;
(in logic) a special cause for a general effect; (in
rhetoric) the natural character of species, quality or
action. {%Upādhi-tas,%} ind. in consequence of a pe-
culiarity. (At the end of a compound the affix {%ka%}
may be added to {%upādhi,%} e. g. {%asty-upādhika,%}
having ‘is’ as an attribute.)
<LEND>

<L>12128<pc>0171-c<k1>upAhita<k2>upAhita
{%Upā-hita, as, ā, am,%}¦ deposited, placed; put on,
worn; joined, annexed; agreed upon, made or done
mutually; ({%as%}), m. a fiery portent, a meteor, a comet.
<LEND>

<L>12129<pc>0171-c<k1>upADi<k2>upADi<h>2
{#upADi#} 2¦. {%upā-dhi, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%dhyai%} with
{%upa-ā%}), reflection on duty; virtuous reflection; a
man who is careful to support his family. (For 1.
see under {%upā-dhā%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>12130<pc>0171-c<k1>upADika<k2>upADika
{#upADika#}¦ {%upādhika (upa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
exceeding, supernumerary.
<LEND>

<L>12131<pc>0171-c<k1>upADyAya<k2>upADyAya
{#upADyAya#}¦ {%upādhy-āya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 5. {%i%}
with {%upa-adhi%}), a sub-teacher who instructs in a
part only of the Veda or in grammar and the other
Vedāṅgas, and is therefore inferior to the Ācārya
who instructs in the whole Veda with the Kalpa and
Upaniṣads (see Manu II. 141); a spiritual teacher,
a teacher in general; ({%ā%}), f. a female preceptor; ({%ī%}),
f. a female teacher or the wife of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>12132<pc>0171-c<k1>upADyAyAnI<k2>upADyAyAnI
{%Upādhyāyānī,%}¦ f. the wife of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>12133<pc>0171-c<k1>upAnasa<k2>upAnasa
{#upAnasa#}¦ {%upānasa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa%} and
{%anas%}), Ved. being on a carriage; ({%am%}), n. the space
in a carriage; carriage-load; anything placed on a
carriage.
<LEND>

<L>12134<pc>0171-c<k1>upAnah<k2>upAnah
{#upAnah#}¦ {%upā-nah, t,%} f. (rt. {%nah%}), a sandal, a
shoe. {%—Upānad-gūḍha, as, ā, am,%} covered with
a shoe.
<LEND>

<L>12135<pc>0171-c<k1>upAnI<k2>upAnI
{#upAnI#}¦ {%upā-nī (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati,%}
{%-te, -netum,%} to lead or carry or bring near or
towards; lead away, carry off; to initiate, conse-
crate; [cf. {%upa-nī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12136<pc>0171-c<k1>upAnuvAkya<k2>upAnuvAkya
{#upAnuvAkya#}¦ {%upānuvākya (upa-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. an epithet of Agni; ({%am%}), n., N. of a
section of the Taittirīya-Saṃhitā.
<LEND>

<L>12137<pc>0171-c<k1>upAnta<k2>upAnta
{#upAnta#}¦ {%upānta (upa-an˚), am,%} n. proximity
to the edge or margin, border, edge; the angle of
the eye; immediate proximity; the last letter but
one; ({%as, ā, am%}), near to the end, last but one;
near. {%—Upānta-sarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} coming near.
<LEND>
[Page0172-a+ 71]

<L>12138<pc>0172-a<k1>upAntika<k2>upAntika
{%Upāntika, as, ī, am,%}¦ near, proximate, neighbour-
ing; ({%am%}), n. proximity.
<LEND>

<L>12139<pc>0172-a<k1>upAniya<k2>upAniya
{%Upāniya, as, ā, am,%}¦ last but one; ({%as%}), m. the
corner of the eye; ({%am%}), n. vicinity.
<LEND>

<L>12140<pc>0172-a<k1>upAp<k2>upAp
{#upAp#}¦ {%upāp (upa-āp),%} cl. 5. P. {%-āpnoti,%}
{%-ptum,%} to reach, to arrive at: Desid. {%upepsati,%} to
wish to reach, to desire to win over or conciliate.
<LEND>

<L>12141<pc>0172-a<k1>upApa<k2>upApa
{%Upāpa%}¦ in {%dur-upāpa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
obtained.
<LEND>

<L>12142<pc>0172-a<k1>upApti<k2>upApti
{%Upāpti, is,%}¦ f. reaching, obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>12143<pc>0172-a<k1>upepsA<k2>upepsA
{%Upepsā,%}¦ f. desire to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>12144<pc>0172-a<k1>upApraC<k2>upApraC
{#upApraC#}¦ {%upā-prach (upa-ā-),%} cl. 6. P. {%-pṛc-%}
{%chati, -praṣṭum,%} to take leave of.
<LEND>

<L>12145<pc>0172-a<k1>upABfti<k2>upABfti
{#upABfti#}¦ {%upā-bhṛti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%bhṛ%} with
{%upa-ā%}), Ved. act of bringing near.
<LEND>

<L>12146<pc>0172-a<k1>upAmantrya<k2>upAmantrya
{#upAmantrya#}¦ {%upā-mantrya (upa-ā-),%} ind. having
taken leave, having received permission to go.
<LEND>

<L>12147<pc>0172-a<k1>upAya<k2>upAya
{#upAya#}¦ {%upāya.%} See under 1. {%upe%} 3rd col.
<LEND>

<L>12148<pc>0172-a<k1>upAyA<k2>upAyA
{#upAyA#}¦ {%upā-yā (upa-ā-),%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -tum,%}
to approach, arrive at.
<LEND>

<L>12149<pc>0172-a<k1>upAyAta<k2>upAyAta
{%Upā-yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached; ({%am%}), n. arrival;
an event, an accident.
<LEND>

<L>12150<pc>0172-a<k1>upAr<k2>upAr
{#upAr#}¦ {%upār (upa-ṛ),%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%upe-%}
{%yarti, upārtum, -ritum%} or {%-rītum,%} to offend against,
make a mistake; to injure: Caus. P. {%upārpayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to bring near.
<LEND>

<L>12151<pc>0172-a<k1>upAra<k2>upAra
{%Upāra, as,%}¦ m. or {%upāraṇa, am,%} n., Ved. a mis-
take, offence, sin.
<LEND>

<L>12152<pc>0172-a<k1>upAram<k2>upAram
{#upAram#}¦ {%upā-ram (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-ramate,%}
{%-rantum,%} to sport, take one's pleasure, delight in;
to cease; to rest.
<LEND>

<L>12153<pc>0172-a<k1>upArata<k2>upArata
{%Upā-rata, as, ā, am,%}¦ delighted; engaged in, occu-
pied with; frequenting, resorting to.
<LEND>

<L>12154<pc>0172-a<k1>upArama<k2>upArama
{%Upā-rama, as,%}¦ m. engaging in, going to or in.
<LEND>

<L>12155<pc>0172-a<k1>upArAD<k2>upArAD
{#upArAD#}¦ {%upā-rādh (upa-ā-),%} cl. 5. P. {%-rādh-%}
{%noti, -rāddhum,%} to serve, wait upon.
<LEND>

<L>12156<pc>0172-a<k1>upArADya<k2>upArADya
{%Upā-rādhya,%}¦ ind. having served, having waited on.
<LEND>

<L>12157<pc>0172-a<k1>upArud<k2>upArud
{#upArud#}¦ {%upā-rud (upa-ā-),%} cl. 2. P. {%-roditi,%}
{%-roditum,%} to weep, deplore.
<LEND>

<L>12158<pc>0172-a<k1>upAruh<k2>upAruh
{#upAruh#}¦ {%upā-ruh, k,%} f. (rt. {%ruh%} with {%upa%}
and {%ā%}), Ved. the shoot of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>12159<pc>0172-a<k1>upArUQa<k2>upArUQa
{%Upā-rūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown, increased. {%—Upā-%}
{%rūḍha-sneha, as, ā, am,%} whose affection has in-
creased.
<LEND>

<L>12160<pc>0172-a<k1>upArj<k2>upArj
{#upArj#}¦ {%upārj (upa-arj),%} cl. 1. P. {%upārjati,%}
{%jitum,%} to bring near to: Caus. {%upārjayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to bring near, convey near, acquire, gain.
<LEND>

<L>12161<pc>0172-a<k1>upArjaka<k2>upArjaka
{%Upārjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ acquiring, obtaining, earn-
ing, gaining.
<LEND>

<L>12162<pc>0172-a<k1>upArjana<k2>upArjana
{%Upārjana, am,%}¦ n. bringing near to, acquiring.
<LEND>

<L>12163<pc>0172-a<k1>upArjanIya<k2>upArjanIya
{%Upārjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be acquired, to be
earned.
<LEND>

<L>12164<pc>0172-a<k1>upArjita<k2>upArjita
{%Upārjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gained, acquired, earned.
<LEND>

<L>12165<pc>0172-a<k1>upArTa<k2>upArTa
{#upArTa#}¦ {%upārtha (upa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} of
little worth.
<LEND>

<L>12166<pc>0172-a<k1>upArD<k2>upArD
{#upArD#}¦ {%upārdh (upa-ṛdh),%} Desid. P. {%upert-%}
{%sati,%} to wish to accomplish, persevere, hold out.
<LEND>

<L>12167<pc>0172-a<k1>upArz<k2>upArz
{#upArz#}¦ {%upārṣ (upa-ṛṣ),%} cl. 6. P. {%upārṣati,%}
{%ṣitum,%} to pierce, prick, goad.
<LEND>

<L>12168<pc>0172-a<k1>upAlaB<k2>upAlaB
{#upAlaB#}¦ {%upā-labh (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-la-%}
{%bhate, -labdhum,%} to obtain; to censure, revile, abuse,
scold.
<LEND>

<L>12169<pc>0172-a<k1>upAlabDa<k2>upAlabDa
{%Upā-labdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ reproached, reviled.
<LEND>

<L>12170<pc>0172-a<k1>upAlaBya<k2>upAlaBya
{%Upā-labhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ censurable, blamable.
<LEND>

<L>12171<pc>0172-a<k1>upAlamBa<k2>upAlamBa
{%Upā-lambha, as,%}¦ m. or {%upā-lambhana, am,%} n.
abuse, reviling, censure; deferring, delaying.
<LEND>

<L>12172<pc>0172-a<k1>upAlamBya<k2>upAlamBya
{%Upā-lambhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be taken in
addition.
<LEND>

<L>12173<pc>0172-a<k1>upAli<k2>upAli
{#upAli#}¦ {%upāli, is,%} m., N. of a man who
arranged the Buddhist Vinaya.
<LEND>

<L>12174<pc>0172-a<k1>upAv<k2>upAv
{#upAv#}¦ {%upāv (upa-av),%} cl. 1. P. {%-vati, -vitum,%}
[Page0172-b+ 71]
to cherish, behave friendly towards; to encourage
(with dat. or acc.).
<LEND>

<L>12175<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvI<k2>upAvI
{%Upāvī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ Ved. encouraging; attractive.
<LEND>

<L>12176<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvaruh<k2>upAvaruh
{#upAvaruh#}¦ {%upāva-ruh (upa-ava-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-rohati, -roḍhum,%} to descend towards.
<LEND>

<L>12177<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvartana<k2>upAvartana
{#upAvartana#}¦ {%upā-vartana.%} See under 1. {%upā-%}
{%vṛt%} below.
<LEND>

<L>12178<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvasAyin<k2>upAvasAyin
{#upAvasAyin#}¦ {%upāva-sāyin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt.
{%so%} with {%upa-ava%}), Ved. submissive, compliant, obey-
ing, accommodating.
<LEND>

<L>12179<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvasu<k2>upAvasu
{#upAvasu#}¦ {%upā-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. bringing
riches, granting wealth.
<LEND>

<L>12180<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvahf<k2>upAvahf
{#upAvahf#}¦ {%upāva-hṛ (upa-ava-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-harati, -te, -hartum,%} to bring or lead down towards.
<LEND>

<L>12181<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvaharaRa<k2>upAvaharaRa
{%Upāva-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. taking down, bringing
down.
<LEND>

<L>12182<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvft<k2>upAvft<h>1
{#upAvft#} 1¦. {%upā-vṛt (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-var-%}
{%tate, -titum,%} to turn towards, go towards, approach;
to turn away, return: Caus. P. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to turn, lead back.
<LEND>

<L>12183<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvartana<k2>upAvartana
{%Upā-vartana, am,%}¦ n. turning round, revolving;
turning back, returning; approaching; ceasing.
<LEND>

<L>12184<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvft<k2>upAvft<h>2
2. {%upā-vṛt, t,%}¦ f., Ved. return.
<LEND>

<L>12185<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvftta<k2>upAvftta
{%Upā-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned round, rolling on
the ground; ceased, ceasing, refraining; come, ar-
rived; fit, proper; ({%as%}), m. a horse rolling on the
ground; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>12186<pc>0172-b<k1>upAve<k2>upAve
{#upAve#}¦ {%upāve (upa-ava-i),%} cl. 2. P., Ved.
{%-vaiti, -tum,%} to go down, descend (into a bath &c.); to
join in (singing &c.); to assent, show one's self willing.
<LEND>

<L>12187<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvekz<k2>upAvekz
{#upAvekz#}¦ {%upāvekṣ (upa-ava-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-ṣate, -ṣitum,%} to look at, look down at.
<LEND>

<L>12188<pc>0172-b<k1>upAvyADa<k2>upAvyADa
{#upAvyADa#}¦ {%upā-vyādha, as,%} m. (rt. {%vyadh%}),
Ved. a vulnerable or unprotected spot.
<LEND>

<L>12189<pc>0172-b<k1>upAS<k2>upAS<h>1
{#upAS#} 1¦. {%upāś (upa-aś),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-śnoti,%}
{%-śnute, -śitum,%} to obtain, become master of.
<LEND>

<L>12190<pc>0172-b<k1>upAS<k2>upAS<h>2
{#upAS#} 2¦. {%upāś (upa-aś),%} cl. 9. P. {%-śnāti,%}
{%-śitum,%} to eat, consume; to taste, enjoy.
<LEND>

<L>12191<pc>0172-b<k1>upASaMsanIya<k2>upASaMsanIya
{#upASaMsanIya#}¦ {%upā-śaṃsanīya, as, ā, am,%} to be
expected (as anything future).
<LEND>

<L>12192<pc>0172-b<k1>upASri<k2>upASri
{#upASri#}¦ {%upā-śri (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-śrayati,%}
{%-te, -śrayitum,%} to have recourse to.
<LEND>

<L>12193<pc>0172-b<k1>upASraya<k2>upASraya
{%Upā-śraya, as,%}¦ m. recourse (for aid), asylum, sup-
port; reliance, dependance upon.
<LEND>

<L>12194<pc>0172-b<k1>upASrita<k2>upASrita
{%Upā-śrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ relying or depending upon;
supporting (literally or figuratively), bearing, holding,
protecting.
<LEND>

<L>12195<pc>0172-b<k1>upAs<k2>upAs<h>1
{#upAs#} 1¦. {%upās (upa-as),%} cl. 2. P., Ved.
{%upāsti,%} to be near to or in.
<LEND>

<L>12196<pc>0172-b<k1>upAs<k2>upAs<h>2
{#upAs#} 2¦. {%upās (upa-as),%} cl. 4. P. {%upāsyati,%}
{%situm,%} to throw near or upon or among, cast down
upon.
<LEND>

<L>12197<pc>0172-b<k1>upAsana<k2>upAsana<h>1
1. {%upāsana, am,%}¦ n. injuring, hurting; archery.
<LEND>

<L>12198<pc>0172-b<k1>upAs<k2>upAs<h>3
{#upAs#} 3¦. {%upās (upa-ās),%} cl. 2. A. {%upāste,%}
{%situm,%} to sit near to (with acc.), sit at the side of
(as a mark of submission and respect); to sit; to
occupy, reside, abide in, be present at; to approach,
go towards, invest (as an enemy's town); be intent
upon, be engaged in; to undergo, suffer; to remain
or continue in any action (with indecl. part., e. g.
{%kṛtvā upāsata,%} they continued doing); to remain
in expectation, expect, wait for; to approach respect-
fully, to serve, worship, honour; attach one's self to;
to respect, recognize, acknowledge; to regard as; to
employ, make subservient.
<LEND>

<L>12199<pc>0172-b<k1>upAsaka<k2>upAsaka
{%Upāsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ serving, a servant; a Śū-
dra, a low fellow; worshipping, a worshipper, a fol-
lower; (with Buddhists) a worshipper of Buddha (as
distinguished from the {%Bhikṣu%} or Buddhist priest).
{%—Upāsaka-daśa, ās,%} m. pl. title of the seventh
of the twelve sacred books of the Jainas.
<LEND>
[Page0172-c+ 76]

<L>12200<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsana<k2>upAsana<h>2
2. {%upāsana, am,%}¦ n. sitting by the side of; being
intent on, engaging in, serving, service, attendance,
worship, respect, adoration; regarding as, reflecting
on, religious meditation; the sacred fire; ({%ā%}), f. ser-
vice, worship, adoration. {%—Upāsanārtha (˚na-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} worthy of attendance.
<LEND>

<L>12201<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsanIya<k2>upAsanIya
{%Upāsanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attended on, worthy
of attendance.
<LEND>

<L>12202<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsA<k2>upAsA
{%Upāsā,%}¦f. religious reflection or meditation; service,
worship.
<LEND>

<L>12203<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsita<k2>upAsita
{%Upāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ served, honoured, worshipped;
serving, paying worship or service.
<LEND>

<L>12204<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsitavya<k2>upAsitavya
{%Upāsitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be served or worshipped;
to be attended to, to be accomplished; to be regarded
or considered.
<LEND>

<L>12205<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsitf<k2>upAsitf
{%Upāsitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a worshipper.
<LEND>

<L>12206<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsIna<k2>upAsIna
{%Upāsīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sitting near to, occupying.
<LEND>

<L>12207<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsti<k2>upAsti
{%Upāsti, is,%}¦ f. service, especially of a deity, worship,
veneration.
<LEND>

<L>12208<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsya<k2>upAsya<h>1
1. {%upāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be served or worshipped;
to be attended to or accomplished; to be respected;
to be regarded or considered. {%—Upāsya-tā,%} f. or
{%upāsya-tva, am,%} n. respectability, placability.
<LEND>

<L>12209<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsya<k2>upAsya<h>2
2. {%upāsya,%}¦ ind. having served or worshipped; hav-
ing associated (?).
<LEND>

<L>12210<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsyamAna<k2>upAsyamAna
{%Upāsyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being served, waited
upon, attended, worshipped, receiving homage.
<LEND>

<L>12211<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsaNga<k2>upAsaNga
{#upAsaNga#}¦ {%upā-saṅga, as,%} m. (rt. {%sañj%}), prox-
imity; a quiver.
<LEND>

<L>12212<pc>0172-c<k1>upAstamana<k2>upAstamana
{#upAstamana#}¦ {%upāstamana, am,%} n. sunset.
<LEND>

<L>12213<pc>0172-c<k1>upAstamayam<k2>upAstamayam
{%Upāstamayam (upa-as˚),%}¦ ind. about the time of
sunset.
<LEND>

<L>12214<pc>0172-c<k1>upAstra<k2>upAstra
{#upAstra#}¦ {%upāstra (upa-as˚), am,%} n. a secondary
or minor weapon.
<LEND>

<L>12215<pc>0172-c<k1>upAsTA<k2>upAsTA
{#upAsTA#}¦ {%upā-sthā (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-tiṣ-%}
{%ṭhati, -te, -sthātum,%} to stand near, go near to, have
intercourse with.
<LEND>

<L>12216<pc>0172-c<k1>upAhf<k2>upAhf
{#upAhf#}¦ {%upā-hṛ (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati,%}
{%-te, -hartum,%} to offer; to make, prepare.
<LEND>

<L>12217<pc>0172-c<k1>upAhAra<k2>upAhAra
{%Upāhāra (upa-āh˚), as,%}¦ m. slight refreshment
(consisting of fruits, sweetmeats, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>12218<pc>0172-c<k1>upAhfta<k2>upAhfta
{%Upā-hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ offered, prepared; seized.
<LEND>

<L>12219<pc>0172-c<k1>upAhve<k2>upAhve
{#upAhve#}¦ {%upā-hve (upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-hva-%}
{%yati, -te, -hvātum,%} to challenge, invite.
<LEND>

<L>12220<pc>0172-c<k1>upe<k2>upe<h>1
{#upe#} 1¦. {%upe (upa-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%upaiti, -tum,%}
to go near, approach (as a friend or enemy); come
near to, arrive at, reach; to go to (a master), become
a pupil; to undergo, perform, undertake, devote one's
self to; to pass into any state, to fall into (misfortune
&c.), incur, be present at; to obtain; to fall to one's
share; to befal; to regard as, admit, acknowledge.
<LEND>

<L>12221<pc>0172-c<k1>upAya<k2>upAya
{%Upāya, as,%}¦ m. approaching, approach; that by
which one reaches an aim, a means, an expedient, a
way, stratagem; a means of success against an enemy
(four of which are usually enumerated, sowing dissen-
sion, negotiation, bribery, and open attack); joining
(in singing &c.). {%—Upāya-catuṣṭaya, am,%} n. the
four expedients against an enemy; see above. {%—Upā-%}
{%ya-cintā,%} f. devising an expedient, thinking of a re-
source. {%—Upāya-jña, as, ā, am,%} fertile in expedients,
contriving, provident. {%—Upāya-tas,%} ind. by some
means or expedient. {%—Upāya-turīya, as,%} m. a fourth
means, punishment. {%—Upāya-tva, am,%} n. state of
being provided with means. {%—Upāya-yoga, as,%} m.
application of means or combination of expedients.
{%—Upāyāntara (˚ya-an˚), am,%} n. a remedy.
<LEND>

<L>12222<pc>0172-c<k1>upAyana<k2>upAyana
{%Upāyana, am,%}¦ n. approaching, going near to, going
to a teacher, becoming a pupil, engaging in any re-
ligious observance; undertaking, accepting; a present,
a gift, a complementary or respectful gift.
<LEND>

<L>12223<pc>0172-c<k1>upAyika<k2>upAyika
{%Upāyika, as, ī, am,%}¦ conducive to.
<LEND>

<L>12224<pc>0172-c<k1>upAyin<k2>upAyin
{%Upāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ approaching; having sexual in-
tercourse with; expert in the use of means.
<LEND>

<L>12225<pc>0172-c<k1>upAyu<k2>upAyu
{%Upāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. going near to, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>12226<pc>0172-c<k1>upeta<k2>upeta
{%Upeta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come near, approached, arrived
at, come near to, present, existent; accompanied by,
[Page0173-a+ 71]
endowed with, possessed of, having, possessing; sur-
rounded, invested; fallen into.
<LEND>

<L>12227<pc>0173-a<k1>upeti<k2>upeti
{%Upeti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. approach, arrival.
<LEND>

<L>12228<pc>0173-a<k1>upetf<k2>upetf
{%Upetṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ approaching, going near to;
contriving, a contriver, one who employs expedients,
one who comes as an assailant.
<LEND>

<L>12229<pc>0173-a<k1>upetya<k2>upetya
{%Upetya,%}¦ ind. having approached, having gone near.
<LEND>

<L>12230<pc>0173-a<k1>upeya<k2>upeya
{%Upeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone to or approached,
to be effected by any means; assailable; to be sought,
to be had recourse to.
<LEND>

<L>12231<pc>0173-a<k1>upeyivas<k2>upeyivas
{%Upeyivas, ān, yuṣī, at,%}¦ accompanied or followed
by, associated with, united; obtained, got.
<LEND>

<L>12232<pc>0173-a<k1>upe<k2>upe<h>2
{#upe#} 2¦. {%upe (upa-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%upaiti, -tum,%}
to come near to, go to, approach, visit; to have
sexual intercourse with; to undergo, incur, fall into
(misfortune &c.).
<LEND>

<L>12233<pc>0173-a<k1>upekz<k2>upekz
{#upekz#}¦ {%upekṣ (upa-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%upekṣate,%}
{%ṣitum,%} to look at, regard; to perceive; to notice,
have regard to; to consider, expect; to overlook,
disregard; to neglect, to quit, abandon; to despise.
<LEND>

<L>12234<pc>0173-a<k1>upekza<k2>upekza
{%Upekṣa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Śvaphalka.
<LEND>

<L>12235<pc>0173-a<k1>upekzaka<k2>upekzaka
{%Upekṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ disregarding, neglecting,
looking at inattentively, disdaining; patient, enduring.
<LEND>

<L>12236<pc>0173-a<k1>upekzaRa<k2>upekzaRa
{%Upekṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. overlooking, looking at without
interest or attention, disregarding, neglecting, disdain-
ing; leaving, abandoning.
<LEND>

<L>12237<pc>0173-a<k1>upekzaRIya<k2>upekzaRIya
{%Upekṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be neglected or dis-
regarded.
<LEND>

<L>12238<pc>0173-a<k1>upekzA<k2>upekzA
{%Upekṣā,%}¦ f. overlooking, negligence, neglect; in-
diference, contempt, disdain; abandoning, leaving;
endurance, patience; dissent; trick, deceit (as one of
the minor expedients in war); regard.
<LEND>

<L>12239<pc>0173-a<k1>upekzita<k2>upekzita
{%Upekṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disregarded, disesteemed,
neglected, disdained.
<LEND>

<L>12240<pc>0173-a<k1>upekzitavya<k2>upekzitavya
{%Upekṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked at, to be
regarded, to be examined; to be disregarded.
<LEND>

<L>12241<pc>0173-a<k1>upekzya<k2>upekzya
{%Upekṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be regarded or examined;
to be disregarded or neglected.
<LEND>

<L>12242<pc>0173-a<k1>upen<k2>upen
{#upen#}¦ {%upen (upa-in),%} cl. 8. P. {%upenoti%} (cl. 6.
P. fr. {%inv, upenvati%}), to press in, force in.
<LEND>

<L>12243<pc>0173-a<k1>upenita<k2>upenita
{%Upenita, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven or pressed in, turned in.
<LEND>

<L>12244<pc>0173-a<k1>upendra<k2>upendra
{#upendra#}¦ {%upendra, as,%} m. (fr. {%upa-in˚%}), N. of
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa as the younger brother of Indra,
(born subsequently to Indra, especially as son of
Aditi, either as an Āditya or in the Vāmana Avatār);
N. of a king of the Nāgas; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
{%—Upendra-datta, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Upendra-%}
{%bala, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Upendra-vajrā,%} f. a
metre of four lines of eleven syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>12245<pc>0173-a<k1>upepsA<k2>upepsA
{#upepsA#}¦ {%upepsā.%} See under {%upāp.%}
<LEND>

<L>12246<pc>0173-a<k1>upez<k2>upez<h>1
{#upez#} 1¦. {%upeṣ (upa-īṣ),%} cl. 1. A., Ved.
{%upeṣate, -ṣitum,%} to attack.
<LEND>

<L>12247<pc>0173-a<k1>upez<k2>upez<h>2
{#upez#} 2¦. {%upeṣ (upa-ā-īṣ),%} cl. 1. A., Ved.
{%upeṣate, -ṣitum,%} to approach with a request &c.,
to request.
<LEND>

<L>12248<pc>0173-a<k1>upez<k2>upez<h>3
{#upez#} 3¦. {%upeṣ (upa-eṣ),%} cl. 1. P. {%upeṣati,%}
{%ṣitum,%} to creep near, approach.
<LEND>

<L>12249<pc>0173-a<k1>upokz<k2>upokz
{#upokz#}¦ {%upokṣ (upa-ukṣ),%} cl. 6. P. {%upokṣati,%}
{%ṣitum,%} to sprinkle in addition.
<LEND>

<L>12250<pc>0173-a<k1>upoQa<k2>upoQa<h>1
{#upoQa#} 1¦. {%upoḍha, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa-vah%}),
brought near; brought about, advanced, begun; ar-
ranged, arrayed; near, proximate; married.
<LEND>

<L>12251<pc>0173-a<k1>upoQa<k2>upoQa<h>2
{#upoQa#} 2¦. {%upoḍha.%} See {%upoh%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>12252<pc>0173-a<k1>upotI<k2>upotI
{#upotI#}¦ {%upotī,%} f. the pot-herb Basella Rubra
or Lucida. See {%upodikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>12253<pc>0173-a<k1>upotkram<k2>upotkram
{#upotkram#}¦ {%upot-kram (upa-ud-kram),%} cl. 1.
and 4. P. {%-krāmati, -krāmyati, -kramitum,%} to go
up towards, rise upwards, ascend.
<LEND>

<L>12254<pc>0173-a<k1>upottama<k2>upottama
{#upottama#}¦ {%upottama (upa-utt˚), as, ā, am,%} last
but one; ({%am%}), n. (scil. {%akṣaram%}) the last vowel
but one.
<LEND>
[Page0173-b+ 69]

<L>12255<pc>0173-b<k1>upotTita<k2>upotTita
{#upotTita#}¦ {%upot-thita, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%sthā%}),
risen up.
<LEND>

<L>12256<pc>0173-b<k1>upod<k2>upod
{#upod#}¦ {%upod (upa-ud),%} cl. 7. P. {%uponatti,%}
{%uponditum,%} to moisten.
<LEND>

<L>12257<pc>0173-b<k1>upodaka<k2>upodaka
{#upodaka#}¦ {%upodaka (upa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} near
to water; ({%akī%} or {%ikā%}), f. the plant Basella Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>12258<pc>0173-b<k1>upodayam<k2>upodayam
{#upodayam#}¦ {%upodayam (upa-ud˚),%} ind. about
the time of sunrise.
<LEND>

<L>12259<pc>0173-b<k1>upodi<k2>upodi
{#upodi#}¦ {%upod-i (upa-ud-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -tum,%}
to approach.
<LEND>

<L>12260<pc>0173-b<k1>upodIkA<k2>upodIkA
{#upodIkA#}¦ {%upodīkā,%} f. the plant Basella
Cordifolia. See {%upodikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>12261<pc>0173-b<k1>upode<k2>upode
{#upode#}¦ {%upode (upa-ud-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-aiti,%}
{%-tum,%} to go up towards, go up to.
<LEND>

<L>12262<pc>0173-b<k1>upodgrah<k2>upodgrah
{#upodgrah#}¦ {%upod-grah (upa-ud-grah),%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛhṇāti, -ṇīte%} (Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte%}), {%-grahītum,%}
to erect, set up.
<LEND>

<L>12263<pc>0173-b<k1>upodGAta<k2>upodGAta
{#upodGAta#}¦ {%upod-ghāta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%han%} with
{%upa-ud%}), an example, an apposite argument or illus-
tration; analysis, the ascertainment of the elements of
anything; a beginning, a thing begun; an introduc-
tion, a preface. {%—Upodghāta-pāda, as,%} m., N. of
the third part of the Vāyu-purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>12264<pc>0173-b<k1>upodbalaya<k2>upodbalaya
{#upodbalaya#}¦ {%upodbalaya%} (fr. {%upa-udbala%}),
nom. P. {%-balayati, -yitum,%} to confirm.
<LEND>

<L>12265<pc>0173-b<k1>upodbalaka<k2>upodbalaka
{%Upodbalaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ confirming.
<LEND>

<L>12266<pc>0173-b<k1>upopaviS<k2>upopaviS
{#upopaviS#}¦ {%upopa-viś (upa-upa-viś),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-viśati, -veṣṭum,%} to sit down near, to take a seat
near.
<LEND>

<L>12267<pc>0173-b<k1>upoz<k2>upoz
{#upoz#}¦ {%upoṣ (upa-uṣ),%} cl. 1. P. {%-oṣati,%}
{%-ṣitum,%} to burn down, burn.
<LEND>

<L>12268<pc>0173-b<k1>upozaRa<k2>upozaRa
{#upozaRa#}¦ {%upoṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%vas%}
with {%upa%}), a fast, fasting.
<LEND>

<L>12269<pc>0173-b<k1>upozita<k2>upozita
{%Upoṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fasted; ({%am%}), n. fasting.
<LEND>

<L>12270<pc>0173-b<k1>upozya<k2>upozya
{%Upoṣya,%}¦ ind. having fasted.
<LEND>

<L>12271<pc>0173-b<k1>upozaDa<k2>upozaDa
{#upozaDa#}¦ {%upoṣadha, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>12272<pc>0173-b<k1>upoh<k2>upoh
{#upoh#}¦ {%upoh (upa-ūh;%} in some of its senses
connected with {%upa-vah%}), cl. 1. P. {%upohati, -hitum,%}
to push or impel towards; to push under, insert; to
bring near, produce; to accumulate: Pass. {%upohyate,%}
to be brought about, to advance, begin.
<LEND>

<L>12273<pc>0173-b<k1>upoQa<k2>upoQa<h>2
2. {%upoḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought near, brought about,
advanced, commenced.
<LEND>

<L>12274<pc>0173-b<k1>upoha<k2>upoha
{%Upoha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. adding, accumulating.
<LEND>

<L>12275<pc>0173-b<k1>upohyamAna<k2>upohyamAna
{%Upohyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being brought about or
commenced.
<LEND>

<L>12276<pc>0173-b<k1>upta<k2>upta
{#upta#}¦ {%upta, as, ā, am%} (past pass. part. of rt.
{%vap%}), sown (as seed). {%—Upta-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
ploughed after sowing.
<LEND>

<L>12277<pc>0173-b<k1>upti<k2>upti
{%Upti, is,%}¦ f. sowing seeds. {%—Upti-vid, t,%} m. an
agriculturist.
<LEND>

<L>12278<pc>0173-b<k1>uptrima<k2>uptrima
{%Uptrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ sown, cultivated.
<LEND>

<L>12279<pc>0173-b<k1>upya<k2>upya
{%Upya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be scattered or sown.
<LEND>

<L>12280<pc>0173-b<k1>upyamAna<k2>upyamAna
{%Upyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being sown.
<LEND>

<L>12281<pc>0173-b<k1>ubj<k2>ubj
{#ubj#}¦ {%ubj,%} cl. 6. P. {%ubjati, ubjāñ-cakāra,%}
{%ubjiṣyati, aubjīt, ubjitum,%} to press
down, subdue, keep under; to make straight: Desid.
{%ubjijiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>12282<pc>0173-b<k1>ubja<k2>ubja
{%Ubja, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12283<pc>0173-b<k1>ubjita<k2>ubjita
{%Ubjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressed down, subdued.
<LEND>

<L>12284<pc>0173-b<k1>uB<k2>uB
{#uB#}¦ {%ubh%} or {%umbh,%} cl. 6. 9. 7. P., Ved.
{%ubhati%} or {%umbhati, ubhnāti, unapti,%}
impf. {%aunap, uvobha%} or {%umbhāñ-cakāra, ubhitum%}
or {%umbhitum,%} to compact together; to confine; to
cover over, fill with; (Sāy.) to break.
<LEND>

<L>12285<pc>0173-b<k1>uBa<k2>uBa
{#uBa#}¦ {%ubha,%} pron. (nom. du. {%ubhau,%} pl. {%ubhe;%}
said to be fr. rt. {%ubh%} above, and connected with
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄμφω</lang> Lat. <nsi>ambo;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>oba;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>abbù;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>bai, ba</nsi>), both.
<LEND>
[Page0173-c+ 78]

<L>12286<pc>0173-c<k1>uBaya<k2>uBaya
{%Ubhaya, as, ī, am,%}¦ (pl. m. f. n. {%e, ās, āni,%} only
used in sing. and pl., but by some authorities also in
dual), both. {%—Ubhaya-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} possessed
of both qualities. {%—Ubhayaṅ-kara, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
effecting or accomplishing both. {%—Ubhaya-cara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘moving in or on both,’ living in water
and on land or in the air, amphibious. {%—Ubhaya-%}
{%dyus,%} ind., Ved. on both days, on two subsequent days;
the day past and to come. {%—Ubhaya-bhāga-hara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} applicable to two purposes, taking two
shares or parts; ({%am%}), n. a medicine that acts in two
ways, as an emetic and a purge. {%—Ubhaya-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. furnished with or containing both.
{%—Ubhaya-vidyā,%} f. the twofold science, i. e. religious
knowledge and acquaintance with worldly affairs.
{%—Ubhaya-vidha, as, ā, am,%} appearing under two
forms. {%—Ubhaya-vipulā,%} f., N. of a metre. {%—Ubha-%}
{%ya-vetana, as, ā, am,%} serving two masters, receiving
wages from both. {%—Ubhaya-vyañjana, as, ā, am,%}
having the marks of both sexes. {%—Ubhaya-sambhava,%}
{%as,%} m. a dilemma. {%—Ubhayātmaka (˚ya-āt˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} belonging to both. {%—Ubhayānumata (˚ya-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} agreed to or accepted mutually or on both
sides. {%—Ubhayārtham (˚ya-ar˚),%} ind. for a double
object, as for prosperity on earth and happiness in
heaven.
<LEND>

<L>12287<pc>0173-c<k1>uBayatas<k2>uBayatas
{%Ubhayatas,%}¦ ind. from both sides, on both sides, to
both sides; in both cases. {%—Ubhayataḥ-kṣṇut, t, t, t,%}
Ved. two-edged. {%—Ubhayato-dat, an, atī, at,%} having
a double row of teeth (man, animal, &c.). {%—Ubhayato-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} looking either way, two-faced.
{%—Ubhayato-hrasva, as, ā, am,%} having a short
vowel on both sides, (an accented vowel) produced
by two short vowels.
<LEND>

<L>12288<pc>0173-c<k1>uBayatra<k2>uBayatra
{%Ubhayatra,%}¦ ind. in both places, on both sides; in
both cases, both times. {%—Ubhayatrodātta (˚ra-ud˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having an Udātta accent on both sides;
resulting from the blending of two Udātta accents.
<LEND>

<L>12289<pc>0173-c<k1>uBayaTA<k2>uBayaTA
{%Ubhayathā,%}¦ ind. in both ways; in both cases.
<LEND>

<L>12290<pc>0173-c<k1>uBayA<k2>uBayA
{%Ubhayā,%}¦ ind., Ved. in both ways. {%—Ubhayā-dat,%}
{%an, atī, at,%} Ved. having teeth on both sides. {%—Ubhayā-%}
{%vin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. being on both sides, partaking of
both. {%—Ubhayā-hasti,%} ind., Ved. as much as may be
grasped with both hands. {%—Ubhayā-hastya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. filling both hands.
<LEND>

<L>12291<pc>0173-c<k1>uBayIya<k2>uBayIya
{%Ubhayīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to both.
<LEND>

<L>12292<pc>0173-c<k1>uBayedyus<k2>uBayedyus
{%Ubhaye-dyus,%}¦ ind. on both days, on two subse-
quent days.
<LEND>

<L>12293<pc>0173-c<k1>um<k2>um
{#um#}¦ {%um,%} ind. an interjection of anger, in-
terrogation, promise or assent, of cordiality or pacifi-
cation.
<LEND>

<L>12294<pc>0173-c<k1>uma<k2>uma
{#uma#}¦ {%uma, as,%} m. a city, a town; a wharf,
a landing-place.
<LEND>

<L>12295<pc>0173-c<k1>umA<k2>umA
{#umA#}¦ {%umā,%} f. (in the first sense perhaps fr.
rt. {%ve%}), flax (Linum Usitatissimum); the plant Cur-
cuma; N. of the daughter of Himavat and Menā,
and wife of Rudra or Śiva (she is also called Pārvatī
and Durgā); light, splendor; fame, reputation;
quiet, tranquillity; night. According to the Kumāra-
sambhava. 1. 26, the name {%Umā%} is derived from {%u mā,%}
O do not (practice austerities)! the exclamation ad-
dressed to Pārvatī by her mother. {%—Umā-kaṭa, as%}
or {%am,%} m. or n. the pollen of flax. {%—Umā-guru, us,%}
m., N. of the mountain Himālaya as father of Umā.
{%—Umāguru-nadī,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Umā-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. epithet of Śiva as husband of Umā. {%—Umā-%}
{%pati-dhara, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Umāpati-sevin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} worshipping Śiva. {%—Umā-vana, am,%} n.,
N. of the town Vana-pura or Devī-koṭa (Devi Cote).
{%—Umā-sahāya, as,%} m., N. of Śiva as companion of
Umā. {%—Umā-suta, as,%} m., N. of Kārttikeya as son
of Umā. {%—Umeśa (umā-īśa), as,%} m., N. of Śiva as
lord of Umā.
<LEND>

<L>12296<pc>0173-c<k1>umya<k2>umya
{%Umya, am,%}¦ n. a field of linseed or of Curcuma.
<LEND>

<L>12297<pc>0173-c<k1>umbara<k2>umbara
{#umbara#}¦ {%umbara, as,%} m. the upper timber of
a door frame; N. of a Gandharva.
<LEND>

<L>12298<pc>0173-c<k1>umbI<k2>umbI
{#umbI#}¦ {%umbī,%} f. the stalks of wheat or barley
fried over a fire of wet grass, considered as a tonic.
<LEND>
[Page0174-a+ 74]

<L>12299<pc>0174-a<k1>umbura<k2>umbura
{#umbura#}¦ {%umbura, as,%} m. the upper timber of
a door frame; [cf. {%umbara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12300<pc>0174-a<k1>umlocA<k2>umlocA
{#umlocA#}¦ {%umlocā,%} f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>12301<pc>0174-a<k1>ur<k2>ur
{#ur#}¦ {%ur,%} to go; (a Sautra root, i. e. one
occurring only in grammatical Sūtras and not in the
Dhātu-pāṭha.)
<LEND>

<L>12302<pc>0174-a<k1>ura<k2>ura
{#ura#}¦ {%ura, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi said to be of
the family of Vāta.
<LEND>

<L>12303<pc>0174-a<k1>uraka<k2>uraka
{#uraka#}¦ {%uraka, as,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's
attendants.
<LEND>

<L>12304<pc>0174-a<k1>uraga<k2>uraga
{#uraga#}¦ {%ura-ga, as,%} m. (fr. {%ura = uras%} and
rt. {%gam%}), a snake (‘going on the breast’); in
mythology a Nāga or semi-divine serpent usually re-
presented with a human face of great beauty; lead;
({%ī%}), f. a female snake; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town. {%—Uraga-%}
{%pratisara, as, ā, am,%} having a serpent for a wedding
ring. {%—Uraga-bhūṣaṇa, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva,
whose ornaments consist of snakes. {%—Uraga-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. the king of snakes, Śeṣa or Vāsuki. {%—Uraga-%}
{%sāra-candana, as, am,%} m. n. a kind of sandal-wood.
{%—Uraga-sthāna, am,%} n. the abode of the Nāgas,
i. e. Pātāla, a region below the earth (not to be con-
founded with hell). {%—Uragāri (˚ga-ari), is,%} m. Garuḍa,
the bird of Viṣṇu; a large crane; (lit. ‘the enemy of
the snakes.’) {%—Uragāśana (˚ga-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of
Garuḍa; a gigantic crane; (‘whose food consists of
serpents.’) {%—Uragāsya (˚ga-ās˚), am,%} n. a kind of
spade. {%—Uragendra (˚ga-in˚), as,%} m. the king of
the snakes, Śeṣa or Vāsuki.
<LEND>

<L>12305<pc>0174-a<k1>uraNga<k2>uraNga
{%Uraṅ-ga%}¦ and {%uraṅ-gama, as,%} m. a snake.
<LEND>
<L>12305.1<pc>0174-a<k1>uraNgama<k2>uraNgama
{{Lbody=12305}}
<LEND>

<L>12306<pc>0174-a<k1>uraRa<k2>uraRa
{#uraRa#}¦ {%uraṇa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 4. {%ṛ%}),
a ram, a sheep, a young ram; a certain demon slain
by Indra; a cloud?; ({%ī%}), f. a ewe. {%—Uraṇākṣa%}
{%(˚ṇa-ak˚)%} or {%uraṇākṣaka, as,%} m. the plant Cassia
Alata or Tora. {%—Uraṇākhya (˚ṇa-ākh˚)%} or {%uraṇā-%}
{%khyaka, as,%} m. the plant Tora.
<LEND>

<L>12307<pc>0174-a<k1>uraRaka<k2>uraRaka
{%Uraṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a ram; a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>12308<pc>0174-a<k1>uraBra<k2>uraBra
{#uraBra#}¦ {%urabhra, as,%} m. (fr. {%ura = ūrṇā%} and
rt. {%bhṛ?%}), a ram; a kind of poisonous insect.
<LEND>

<L>12309<pc>0174-a<k1>urarI<k2>urarI
{#urarI#}¦ {%urarī,%} ind. (perhaps connected with
{%uru;%} cf. {%urī, ūrī, ūrarī%}), a particle implying assent,
admission, extension, expansion, diffusion; often com-
pounded with the roots, {%as, bhū,%} and {%kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>12310<pc>0174-a<k1>urarIkf<k2>urarIkf
{%Urarī-kṛ,%}¦ to allow, admit, assent. {%—Urarī-kāra,%}
{%as,%} m. a promise, agreement; admission. {%—Urarī-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} promised, agreed; spread, ex-
tended, diffused.
<LEND>

<L>12311<pc>0174-a<k1>uraSa<k2>uraSa
{#uraSa#}¦ {%uraśa, as,%} m., N. of a country in-
habited by a warrior-tribe; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town;
also {%urasā.%}
<LEND>

<L>12312<pc>0174-a<k1>uras<k2>uras
{#uras#}¦ {%uras,%} n. (fr. rt. {%vṛ,%} to cover; cf. {%uru%}),
the breast, the bosom; ({%ās, ās, as%}), best, excellent;
{%urasi kṛ,%} to press any one to one's breast; to assent.
{%—Uraḥ-kṣata, am,%} n. injury to the chest, breaking
a blood-vessel in the chest, consumption. {%—Uraḥ-%}
{%sūtrikā,%} f. a pearl necklace hanging over the breast.
{%—Uraḥ-sthala, am,%} n. the breast, the bosom.
{%—Uraś-chada, as,%} m. a cuirass, breastplate, armour,
mail. {%—Urasi-ja%} or {%urasi-ruha, as,%} m. the female
breast (lit. ‘produced on the chest’). {%—Urasi-loman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} having hairs on the breast. {%—Uras-kaṭa, as,%}
m. the sacrificial thread hung round the neck and
upon the breast, as sometimes worn. {%—Uras-tas,%} ind.
from the breast, in the direction of the breast. {%—Uras-%}
{%trāṇa, am,%} n. a breastplate, cuirass, coat of mail.
{%—Uras-vat, ān, atī, at,%} broad-chested, full-breasted,
strong. {%—Uro-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going on the breast
(as a reptile), creeping, crawling. {%—Uro-graha, as,%}
m. disease of the chest, pleurisy. {%—Uro-ghāta, as,%}
m. striking or beating the breast; pain in the chest.
{%—Uro-ja, as,%} m. the female breast (lit. ‘born on the
chest’). {%—Uro-bṛhatī,%} f., N. of a metre. {%—Uro-%}
{%bhūṣaṇa, am,%} n. an ornament of the breast.
<LEND>

<L>12313<pc>0174-a<k1>urasa<k2>urasa
{%Urasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a strong broad breast;
[Page0174-b+ 78]
({%am%}), n. (at the end of compounds) best, most ex-
cellent.
<LEND>

<L>12314<pc>0174-b<k1>urasila<k2>urasila
{%Urasila, as, ā, am,%}¦ broad-chested, having a full
or broad breast.
<LEND>

<L>12315<pc>0174-b<k1>urasya<k2>urasya<h>1
1. {%urasya,%}¦ nom. P. {%urasyati, -yitum,%} to be strong.
<LEND>

<L>12316<pc>0174-b<k1>urasya<k2>urasya<h>2
2. {%urasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ situated in the breast; pec-
toral; (labour or exertion) requiring an effort of the
chest; legitimate (as a son or daughter); one born
from a married couple of the same tribe or caste;
excellent (i. e. the very heart, the breast or best part).
<LEND>

<L>12317<pc>0174-b<k1>urA<k2>urA
{#urA#}¦ {%urā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%vṛ?%}), Ved. a ewe.
{%—Urā-mathi, is, is, i,%} Ved. killing sheep.
<LEND>

<L>12318<pc>0174-b<k1>urAha<k2>urAha
{#urAha#}¦ {%urāha, as,%} m. a horse of a pale colour
with dark legs; (probably a foreign word.)
<LEND>

<L>12319<pc>0174-b<k1>urI<k2>urI
{#urI#}¦ {%urī,%} ind. (cf. {%urarī, ūrarī, ūrī%}), a particle
implying (especially in composition with the roots
{%as, bhū,%} and {%kṛ%}) promise, assent, admission, ex-
tension, diffusion, &c.
<LEND>

<L>12320<pc>0174-b<k1>urIkf<k2>urIkf
{%Urī-kṛ,%}¦ to promise, allow, admit, assent. {%—Urī-%}
{%kāra, as,%} m. promise, admission, extension. {%—Urī-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} promised, extended, spread.
<LEND>

<L>12321<pc>0174-b<k1>uru<k2>uru
{#uru#}¦ {%uru, us, us%} or {%vī, u%} (fr. rt. {%vṛ,%} to cover),
wide, spacious; extended, great, large; much, excessive;
excellent, precious, valuable; ({%u%}), n., Ved. wide space,
space, room; {%uru kṛ,%} to grant space or scope, give
opportunity; ({%u%}), ind. far, far off; ({%vī%}), f. the wide
earth, see {%urvī%} next col.; comparative {%varīyas,%} super-
lative {%variṣṭha;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">εὐρύς</lang> Hib. <nsi>ur,</nsi> ‘very;’
<nsi>ur-ard,</nsi> ‘very high;’ <nsi>uras,</nsi> ‘power, ability.’] {%—Uru-%}
{%kāla%} or {%urukālaka, as,%} m. the creeper Cucumis
Colocynthis. {%—Uru-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. making room,
granting space. {%—Uru-krama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. far-
stepping, making wide strides; of high rank; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Uru-kṣaya, as,%} m., Ved.
a spacious dwelling, a wide habitation; ({%as, ā, am%}),
occupying spacious dwellings, an epithet of Mitra and
Varuṇa and the Maruts; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince.
{%—Uru-kṣiti, is,%} f., Ved. a spacious or comfortable
dwelling. {%—Uru-kṣepa, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Uru-gavyūti, is, is, i,%} Ved. having a wide domain
or territory. {%—Uru-gāya, as, ā, am%} ({%gāya%} fr. rt. {%gā%}),
Ved. far-going, far-striding; an epithet of Viṣṇu,
the Aśvins, Soma, and Indra; offering wide space or
scope for movement; (Sāy.) praised by the great;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n. wide space,
scope for movement or free and unconfined motion.
{%—Urugāya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} offering ample space
for motion, unconfined, {%—Uru-gūlā%} (?), f., Ved., N.
of a snake. {%—Uru-cakra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
wide wheels. {%—Uru-cakri, is, is, i,%} Ved. allowing
unrestrained motion; (Sāy.) granting ample assist-
ance. {%—Uru-cakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. far-seeing;
epithet of Mitra-Varuṇa and of the Ādityas. {%—Uru-%}
{%jman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having a wide path or range.
{%—Uru-jrayas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%uru-jri, is, is, i,%} Ved.
moving in a wide course, extending over a wide space;
(Sāy.) of great impetuosity, of mighty impetus; epi-
thet of Agni and of Indra. {%—Uru-tama, as, ā, am,%}
widest, greatest. {%—Uru-tara, as, ā, am,%} wider,
greater, larger. {%—Uru-tā,%} f., Ved. wideness; opening.
{%—Uru-tāpa, as,%} m. great heat. {%—Uru-tva, am,%} n.
magnitude, vastness. {%—Uru-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
giving a broad stream (of milk, as a cow). {%—Uru-%}
{%prathas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. wide-spreading, widely ex-
tended, far-spread. {%—Uru-bila, as, ī, am,%} Ved. having
a wide opening. {%—Urubja (uru-ubja ?), as, ā, am,%}
Ved. widely opened; (Sāy.) excellent, pre-eminent.
{%—Uru-mārga, as,%} m. a long road. {%—Uru-muṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Uru-yuga, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
furnished with a broad yoke. {%—Uru-loka, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. containing wide space, widely extended; (Sāy.)
widely illuminating. {%—Uru-vikrama, as, ā, am,%}
valiant, mighty. {%—Uru-vindu, us,%} m., N. of a Fla-
mingo (in the Hari-vaṃśa, whose condition was that
of a hunter in a former birth). {%—Uru-vilvā,%} f., N. of
a village. {%—Uruvilvā-kalpa,%} N. of a place. {%—Uru-%}
{%vyacas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. occupying wide space,
widely extending, widely capacious; ({%ās%}), m. a ma-
[Page0174-c+ 73]
lignant spirit, an imp or goblin. {%—Uru-vyañc, an,%}
{%urūcī, ak,%} Ved. extending far; far-reaching, capacious;
perceived in a distant place (as a sound); containing
wide spaces. {%—Uru-vraja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a
wide domain or territory. {%—Uru-śaṃsa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. praising aloud; (Sāy.) to be praised by many;
reigning over a wide territory; (Sāy.) praised by
many; epithet of Varuṇa, Pūṣan, the Ādityas, In-
dra, and Soma. {%—Uru-śarman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. finding
refuge everywhere throughout the universe, widely
pervading. {%—Uru-ṣā, ās, ās, am%} (rt. {%san%}), Ved.
granting wide space or free scope; (Sāy.) granting
much. {%—Uru-sattva, as, ā, am,%} magnanimous, of a
generous or noble nature. {%—Uru-svana, as, ā, am,%}
stentorian. {%—Uru-hāra, as,%} m. a valuable necklace.
{%—Urū-ṇasa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. broad-nosed, having a
good scent (as a hound). {%—Uru-aṅga, as,%} m. a
mountain; the ocean. {%—Uru-ajra, as,%} m., Ved. an
extensive field.
<LEND>

<L>12322<pc>0174-c<k1>uruvu<k2>uruvu
{%Uruvu, us,%}¦ m. or {%uruvuka, as,%} m. or {%uruvūka,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. the plant Ricinus Communis.
<LEND>

<L>12323<pc>0174-c<k1>uruzya<k2>uruzya
{%Uruṣya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%uruṣyati,%} to desire wide
scope or freedom, to escape from (with acc.); to protect,
preserve, secure, defend from (with abl.), to avert.
<LEND>

<L>12324<pc>0174-c<k1>uruzyA<k2>uruzyA
{%Uruṣyā,%}¦ f., Ved. (only in inst.) with protecting
hands; (Sāy.) with desire to protect.
<LEND>

<L>12325<pc>0174-c<k1>uruzyu<k2>uruzyu
{%Uruṣyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. going to a distant place;
(Sāy.) desiring to protect.
<LEND>

<L>12326<pc>0174-c<k1>urUla<k2>urUla
{%Urūla, as, ā, am,%}¦ liking space; fond of expatiating;
free, unrestrained, disobedient.
<LEND>

<L>12327<pc>0174-c<k1>urviyA<k2>urviyA
{%Urviyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. far, far off, far and near, widely.
<LEND>

<L>12328<pc>0174-c<k1>urvI<k2>urvI
{%Urvī,%}¦ f. the wide earth, the earth, the soil; space,
the open space or great expanse comprising the six
spaces, viz. the four quarters of the sky with the upper
and lower spaces; a river; ({%vī%}), du., Ved. the two
worlds, or heaven and earth. {%—Urvī-dhara, as,%} m.
a mountain; the serpent Śeṣa. {%—Urvī-pati, is,%} m.
a king. {%—Urvī-bhṛt, t,%} m. a mountain. {%—Urvī-%}
{%ruha, as,%} m. a tree, ‘growing on the earth.’ {%—Urvīśa%}
{%(˚vī-īśa), as,%} m. a king.
<LEND>

<L>12329<pc>0174-c<k1>urvyA<k2>urvyA
{%Urvyā,%}¦ f. protection, security.
<LEND>

<L>12330<pc>0174-c<k1>urvyUti<k2>urvyUti
{%Urvy-ūti, is, is, i,%}¦ (fr. {%urviyā-ūti ?%}), Ved. able to
help or defend far and near; (Sāy.) granting extensive
protection.
<LEND>

<L>12331<pc>0174-c<k1>uruRqa<k2>uruRqa
{#uruRqa#}¦ {%uruṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a demon;
also of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12332<pc>0174-c<k1>ururI<k2>ururI
{#ururI#}¦ {%ururī,%} ind. a particle of assent and
admission. See {%urarī.%}
<LEND>

<L>12333<pc>0174-c<k1>urUka<k2>urUka
{#urUka#}¦ {%urūka, as,%} m. an owl; [cf. {%ulūka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12334<pc>0174-c<k1>urUcI<k2>urUcI
{#urUcI#}¦ {%urūcī.%} See {%uru-vyañc%} under {%uru.%}
<LEND>

<L>12335<pc>0174-c<k1>urjita<k2>urjita
{#urjita#}¦ {%urjita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vṛj%}), aban-
doned, left.
<LEND>

<L>12336<pc>0174-c<k1>urjihAnA<k2>urjihAnA
{#urjihAnA#}¦ {%urjihānā,%} f., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>12337<pc>0174-c<k1>urRanABa<k2>urRanABa
{#urRanABa#}¦ {%urṇa-nābha, as,%} m. a spider; [cf.
{%ūrṇa-nābha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12338<pc>0174-c<k1>urRA<k2>urRA
{#urRA#}¦ {%urṇā,%} f. wool, felt, the hair of camels
&c.; a circle of hair between the eyebrows. See {%ūrṇā.%}
<LEND>

<L>12339<pc>0174-c<k1>urd<k2>urd
{#urd#}¦ {%urd,%} cl. 1. A. {%ūrdate, ūrdāñ-cakre,%}
{%ūrdiṣyate, aurdiṣṭa, ūrditum,%} to mea-
sure; to play; to be easy or cheerful.
<LEND>

<L>12340<pc>0174-c<k1>urdra<k2>urdra
{#urdra#}¦ {%urdra, as,%} m. an otter. See {%udra.%}
<LEND>

<L>12341<pc>0174-c<k1>urv<k2>urv
{#urv#}¦ {%urv,%} cl. 1. P. {%ūrvati, ūrvāñ-cakāra,%}
{%ūrvitum,%} to kill or hurt.
<LEND>

<L>12342<pc>0174-c<k1>urva<k2>urva
{#urva#}¦ {%urva, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12343<pc>0174-c<k1>urvawa<k2>urvawa
{#urvawa#}¦ {%urvaṭa, as,%} m. a year.
<LEND>

<L>12344<pc>0174-c<k1>urvarA<k2>urvarA
{#urvarA#}¦ {%urvarā,%} f., Ved. fertile soil, yielding
every kind of crop, field sown with corn; land in
general; a mixed mass of fibres, wool, &c.; jocular
term for curled hairs; N. of an Apsaras. {%—Urvarā-%}
{%jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. acquiring fields. {%—Urvarā-pati,%}
{%is,%} m., Ved. master of the fields sown with corn.
{%—Urvarā-sā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. granting fields.
<LEND>

<L>12345<pc>0174-c<k1>urvarI<k2>urvarI
{%Urvarī,%}¦ f., Ved. tow, fibres drawn out of the distaff.
<LEND>
[Page0175-a+ 71]

<L>12346<pc>0175-a<k1>urvarya<k2>urvarya
{%Urvarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to a field
which is sown with corn.
<LEND>

<L>12347<pc>0175-a<k1>urvaSI<k2>urvaSI
{#urvaSI#}¦ {%urvaśī,%} f. (fr. {%uru-vaśī%}), Ved. wish,
ardour, hot desire; N. of an Apsaras or nymph of
Indra's heaven, who became the wife of Purūravas;
she is also identified with the Gaṅgā. {%—Urvaśī-%}
{%nāma-mālā,%} f., N. of a glossary of synonymous
words by an anonymous author. {%—Urvaśī-ramaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. epithet of Aila or Purūravas, the second king
of the lunar race and the husband of the Apsaras
Urvaśī. {%—Urvaśī-vallabha%} or {%urvaśī-sahāya, as,%}
m. epithet of Purūravas; see the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>12348<pc>0175-a<k1>urvAru<k2>urvAru
{#urvAru#}¦ {%urvāru, us,%} m. a kind of cucumber,
Cucumis Usitatissimus. See {%irvāru.%}
<LEND>

<L>12349<pc>0175-a<k1>urvAruka<k2>urvAruka
{%Urvāruka, am,%}¦ n. the fruit of the above plant.
<LEND>

<L>12350<pc>0175-a<k1>urvArU<k2>urvArU
{%Urvārū, ūs,%}¦ f., Ved. = the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>12351<pc>0175-a<k1>ul<k2>ul
{#ul#}¦ {%ul, ulati,%} to burn; (a Sautra root,
i. e. one mentioned only in grammatical
Sūtras but not occurring in the Dhātu-pāṭha.)
<LEND>

<L>12352<pc>0175-a<k1>ula<k2>ula
{#ula#}¦ {%ula, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of wild animal;
N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12353<pc>0175-a<k1>ulapa<k2>ulapa
{#ulapa#}¦ {%ulapa, as,%} m., Ved. a shrub, bush;
a wick; the stalk of a shrub used as a wick (?); a
creeping plant, a spreading creeper; the grass or reed
Saccharum Cylindricum; N. of a pupil of Kalāpin.
<LEND>

<L>12354<pc>0175-a<k1>ulapya<k2>ulapya
{%Ulapya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. connected with or refer-
ring to a shrub &c.
<LEND>

<L>12355<pc>0175-a<k1>ulinda<k2>ulinda
{#ulinda#}¦ {%ulinda, as,%} m., N. of a country;
an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>12356<pc>0175-a<k1>ulupa<k2>ulupa
{#ulupa#}¦ {%ulupa, as, am,%} m. n. a spreading
creeper; ({%as%}), m. the reed Saccharum Cylindricum.
See {%ulapa.%}
<LEND>

<L>12357<pc>0175-a<k1>ulupin<k2>ulupin
{#ulupin#}¦ {%ulupin%} or {%ulapin%} or {%ulūpin, ī,%} m.
a guinea-pig, a porpoise or fish resembling it.
<LEND>

<L>12358<pc>0175-a<k1>ululi<k2>ululi
{#ululi#}¦ {%ululi, is, is, i%} or {%is,%} m., Ved. ulula-
tion, howling, a howl; [cf. Lat. <nsi>ululabilis, ululatus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>12359<pc>0175-a<k1>ulUka<k2>ulUka
{#ulUka#}¦ {%ulūka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%val%}),
an owl; N. of a country and people (pl.), and of their
king, who appears in the Mahā-bhārata as a hero on
the side of the Kurus; a son of Viśvā-mitra; of Śakuni;
an epithet of Indra; N. of a king of the Nāgas; ({%am%}),
n., N. of the reed Saccharum Cylindricum; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>ulula;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Eule;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>uwila, ûla;</nsi> Eng.
<nsi>owl;</nsi> Fr. <nsi>hulotte.</nsi>] {%—Ulūka-yātu, us,%} m., Ved. a
demon in the shape of an owl. {%—Ulūkāśrama (˚ka-%}
{%āś˚), as,%} m. Indra's hermitage.
<LEND>

<L>12360<pc>0175-a<k1>ulUKala<k2>ulUKala
{#ulUKala#}¦ {%ulūkhala, am,%} n. a wooden mortar
used for cleansing rice from the husk &c.; bdellium,
a gummy substance; ({%as%}), m. a staff of Udumbara
wood, carried on certain occasions; N. of an evil
spirit. {%—Ulūkhala-suta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pressed out
or pounded in a mortar.
<LEND>

<L>12361<pc>0175-a<k1>ulUKalaka<k2>ulUKalaka
{%Ulūkhalaka, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a mortar; bdellium, a
gummy substance, or the plant which produces it.
<LEND>

<L>12362<pc>0175-a<k1>ulUKalika<k2>ulUKalika
{%Ulūkhalika, as, ā, am,%}¦ pounded in a mortar,
cleansed from the husk; (at the end of a compound)
using as a mortar (e. g. {%dantolūkhalika,%} using the
teeth as a mortar).
<LEND>

<L>12363<pc>0175-a<k1>ulUwa<k2>ulUwa
{#ulUwa#}¦ {%ulūṭa%} or {%utūla%} or {%kulūṭa, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>12364<pc>0175-a<k1>ulUta<k2>ulUta
{#ulUta#}¦ {%ulūta, as,%} m. a large snake, the Boa.
<LEND>

<L>12365<pc>0175-a<k1>ulUpa<k2>ulUpa
{#ulUpa#}¦ {%ulūpa, as,%} m. a spreading creeper;
({%am%}), n. a sort of grass; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a daughter of
Nāga Kauravya, married to Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>12366<pc>0175-a<k1>ulUlu<k2>ulUlu
{#ulUlu#}¦ {%ulūlu, us, us, u%} or {%us,%} m. ululation,
howling. See {%ululi.%}
<LEND>

<L>12367<pc>0175-a<k1>ulkA<k2>ulkA
{#ulkA#}¦ {%ulkā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%uṣ%}), a fiery
phenomenon in the sky, a meteor, fire falling from
heaven; a firebrand; torch; fire, a flame, title of a
grammar; [cf. Cambro-Brit. <nsi>ulw,</nsi> ‘ashes.’] {%—Ulkā-%}
{%jihva, as,%} m., N. of a Rakṣas. {%—Ulkā-dhārin, ī, %}
[Page0175-b+ 75]
{%iṇī, i,%} a torch-bearer. {%—Ulkā-pāta, as,%} m. the fall
of a meteor. {%—Ulkā-mālin, ī,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's
attendants. {%—Ulkā-mukha, as,%} m. a demon or
goblin (with a face or mouth of fire who eats what is
vomited, having been a negligent Brāhman in his
lifetime); N. of a descendant of Ikṣvāku; ({%ī%}), f.
a fox.
<LEND>

<L>12368<pc>0175-b<k1>ulkuzI<k2>ulkuzI
{%Ulkuṣī,%}¦ f. a fiery phenomenon in the sky, a
meteor; firebrand. {%—Ulkuṣī-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
accompanied by fiery phenomena.
<LEND>

<L>12369<pc>0175-b<k1>ulmuka<k2>ulmuka
{%Ulmuka, am,%}¦ n. a firebrand, wood burning or
burnt as charcoal; N. of a son of Bala-rāma.
<LEND>

<L>12370<pc>0175-b<k1>ulmukya<k2>ulmukya
{%Ulmukya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to or connected
with a firebrand.
<LEND>

<L>12371<pc>0175-b<k1>ulba<k2>ulba
{#ulba#}¦ {%ulba%} or {%ulva, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), Ved.
the bag which surrounds the embryo; the vulva; the
womb; a cave; [cf. Lat. <nsi>alvus, vulva;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>urwa,</nsi>
<nsi>üla;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>uile,</nsi> ‘a corner.’]
<LEND>

<L>12372<pc>0175-b<k1>ulbaRa<k2>ulbaRa
{%Ulbaṇa%}¦ or {%ulvaṇa, as, ā, am,%} thick, clotted,
abundant; much, exceeding, superfluous, immense,
strong, powerful; abundantly furnished with; manifest;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Vasiṣṭha.
<LEND>

<L>12373<pc>0175-b<k1>ulbya<k2>ulbya
{%Ulbya, as, ā, am,%}¦ with {%āpaḥ,%} the fluid connected
with the embryo; ({%am%}), n. excess and vitiation of
any of the three humors of the body, bile, phlegm
or wind; any calamity.
<LEND>

<L>12374<pc>0175-b<k1>ullakasana<k2>ullakasana
{#ullakasana#}¦ {%ullakasana, am,%} n. horripilation,
erection of the hairs of the body.
<LEND>

<L>12375<pc>0175-b<k1>ullagna<k2>ullagna
{#ullagna#}¦ {%ullagna, as,%} m. the lagna (q. v.) of
any particular place.
<LEND>

<L>12376<pc>0175-b<k1>ullaNG<k2>ullaNG
{#ullaNG#}¦ {%ul-laṅgh (ud-l˚),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-laṅ-%}
{%ghati, -te, -ghitum,%} to leap over, pass over or beyond,
to cross over; transgress, exceed, violate, spurn.
<LEND>

<L>12377<pc>0175-b<k1>ullaNGana<k2>ullaNGana
{%Ul-laṅghana, am,%}¦ n. leaping or passing over or
beyond; transgression, exceeding.
<LEND>

<L>12378<pc>0175-b<k1>ullaNGanIya<k2>ullaNGanIya
{%Ul-laṅghanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be transgressed.
<LEND>

<L>12379<pc>0175-b<k1>ullaNGita<k2>ullaNGita
{%Ul-laṅghita, as, ā, am,%}¦ jumped over or across,
passed over or beyond; exceeded, transgressed, vio-
lated, apostatized. {%—Ullaṅghita-śāsana, as, ā, am,%}
transgressing orders, rebellious, disobedient. {%—Ullaṅ-%}
{%ghitādhvan (˚ta-adh˚), ā, ā, a,%} having passed over
the road.
<LEND>

<L>12380<pc>0175-b<k1>ullaNGya<k2>ullaNGya
{%Ul-laṅghya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be passed over or be-
yond, to be crossed; to be disregarded or neglected.
<LEND>

<L>12381<pc>0175-b<k1>ullaB<k2>ullaB
{#ullaB#}¦ {%ul-labh (ud-labh),%} cl. 1. A. {%-labhate,%}
{%-labdhum,%} to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>12382<pc>0175-b<k1>ullambita<k2>ullambita
{#ullambita#}¦ {%ul-lambita (ud-l˚), as, ā, am,%}
erected, elevated.
<LEND>

<L>12383<pc>0175-b<k1>ullala<k2>ullala
{#ullala#}¦ {%ul-lala, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%lal%}), covered
with thick hair; shaking, trembling.
<LEND>

<L>12384<pc>0175-b<k1>ullalat<k2>ullalat
{%Ul-lalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shaking, trembling; moving
irregularly or convulsively.
<LEND>

<L>12385<pc>0175-b<k1>ullalita<k2>ullalita
{%Ul-lalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, trembling, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>12386<pc>0175-b<k1>ullAla<k2>ullAla
{%Ul-lāla,%}¦ N. of a metre of two verses, each con-
taining 15 + 13 syllabic instants.
<LEND>

<L>12387<pc>0175-b<k1>ullas<k2>ullas
{#ullas#}¦ {%ul-las (ud-las),%} cl. 1. P. {%-lasati, -si-%}
{%tum,%} to jump up, sport, play, dance, flash, shine:
Caus. P. {%-lāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to jump up or
play; to cause to shine; to divert, delight.
<LEND>

<L>12388<pc>0175-b<k1>ullasa<k2>ullasa
{%Ul-lasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sporting, bright, shining;
merry, happy; going out, issuing. {%—Ullasa-tā,%} f.
splendor, brilliancy; mirth, happiness, going forth,
issuing.
<LEND>

<L>12389<pc>0175-b<k1>ullasat<k2>ullasat
{%Ul-lasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sporting, dancing, brilliant,
shining; wantoning.
<LEND>

<L>12390<pc>0175-b<k1>ullasita<k2>ullasita
{%Ul-lasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, bright, splendid;
happy; ejected, brought to the top or surface, drawn
up, uplifted, brandishing. {%—Ullasita-hariṇa-ketana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having its deer-marked banner gleaming
or fluttering.
<LEND>

<L>12391<pc>0175-b<k1>ullAsa<k2>ullAsa
{%Ul-lāsa, as,%}¦ m. jumping or leaping up, happiness,
joy; light, splendor; (in rhetoric) giving prominence
to any subject by comparison or opposition; division
of a book, chapter, section (e. g. {%ācārollāsa,%} a chapter
treating of customs and observances).
<LEND>
[Page0175-c+ 72]

<L>12392<pc>0175-c<k1>ullAsana<k2>ullAsana
{%Ul-lāsana, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to leap or dance;
({%am%}), n. splendor.
<LEND>

<L>12393<pc>0175-c<k1>ullAsita<k2>ullAsita
{%Ul-lāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ delighted, overjoyed, re-
joicing.
<LEND>

<L>12394<pc>0175-c<k1>ullAGa<k2>ullAGa
{#ullAGa#}¦ {%ullāgha, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%lāgh;%} in some of its senses perhaps related to
{%laghu%}), recovered from sickness, convalescent; dex-
trous, clever, intelligent; pure; happy, delighted;
wicked; black.
<LEND>

<L>12395<pc>0175-c<k1>ullApa<k2>ullApa
{#ullApa#}¦ {%ul-lāpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%lap%} with {%ud%}),
calling out in a loud voice; change of voice in grief,
sickness, &c.
<LEND>

<L>12396<pc>0175-c<k1>ullApika<k2>ullApika
{%Ullāpika, as, ā, am,%}¦ betraying, indicating.
<LEND>

<L>12397<pc>0175-c<k1>ullApin<k2>ullApin
{%Ul-lāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ calling out.
<LEND>

<L>12398<pc>0175-c<k1>ullApya<k2>ullApya
{%Ul-lāpya, am,%}¦ n. a kind of drama.
<LEND>

<L>12399<pc>0175-c<k1>ulliK<k2>ulliK
{#ulliK#}¦ {%ul-likh (ud-likh),%} cl. 6. P. {%-likhati,%}
{%-lekhitum,%} to scratch, scrape, cut up, scarify.
<LEND>

<L>12400<pc>0175-c<k1>ulliKat<k2>ulliKat
{%Ul-likhat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} scratching, scrap-
ing; scarifying, making lines or streaks above or on
high; painting, writing; bearing, raising.
<LEND>

<L>12401<pc>0175-c<k1>ulliKita<k2>ulliKita
{%Ul-likhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ scraped, scratched; scarified;
thrown up, tossed; painted, delineated; written over
or above; pared, made thin.
<LEND>

<L>12402<pc>0175-c<k1>ulleKa<k2>ulleKa
{%Ul-lekha, as,%}¦ m. description; (in rhetoric) de-
scription of an object according to the different
impressions caused by its {{apperance->appearance||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}; speaking, utter-
ance, pronunciation.
<LEND>

<L>12403<pc>0175-c<k1>ulleKana<k2>ulleKana
{%Ul-lekhana, am,%}¦ n. scraping, scratching, scarifying,
paring; digging; vomiting; raising up, elevating;
uttering, utterance; writing, painting.
<LEND>

<L>12404<pc>0175-c<k1>ulleKya<k2>ulleKya
{%Ul-lekhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be scraped or pared;
to be written.
<LEND>

<L>12405<pc>0175-c<k1>ulliNgita<k2>ulliNgita
{#ulliNgita#}¦ {%ul-liṅgita (ud-l˚), as, ā, am,%} dis-
criminated, distinguished, known.
<LEND>

<L>12406<pc>0175-c<k1>ulluYcana<k2>ulluYcana
{#ulluYcana#}¦ {%ul-luñcana, am,%} n. plucking out
the hair; cutting the hair; pulling.
<LEND>

<L>12407<pc>0175-c<k1>ulluRWA<k2>ulluRWA
{#ulluRWA#}¦ {%ul-luṇṭhā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%luṇṭh%} with {%ud%}),
irony.
<LEND>

<L>12408<pc>0175-c<k1>ullU<k2>ullU
{#ullU#}¦ {%ul-lū, ūs, ūs, u%} (fr. rt. {%lū%} with {%ud%}),
cutting up.
<LEND>

<L>12409<pc>0175-c<k1>ulleKa<k2>ulleKa
{#ulleKa#}¦ {%ul-lekha.%} See {%ul-likh%} above.
<LEND>

<L>12410<pc>0175-c<k1>ulloca<k2>ulloca
{#ulloca#}¦ {%ul-loca, as,%} m. (rt. {%loc%}), an awning,
a canopy.
<LEND>

<L>12411<pc>0175-c<k1>ullopya<k2>ullopya
{#ullopya#}¦ {%ul-lopya, am,%} n. (rt. {%lup%}), N. of a
song.
<LEND>

<L>12412<pc>0175-c<k1>ullola<k2>ullola
{#ullola#}¦ {%ul-lola (ud-l˚), as,%} m. a large wave
or billow; a surge.
<LEND>

<L>12413<pc>0175-c<k1>ulva<k2>ulva
{#ulva#}¦ {%ulva%} and {%ulvaṇa.%} See {%ulba%} and {%ul-%}
{%baṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>12414<pc>0175-c<k1>uvawa<k2>uvawa
{#uvawa#}¦ {%uvaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a scholiast on
Vedic works.
<LEND>

<L>12415<pc>0175-c<k1>uSaNgava<k2>uSaNgava
{#uSaNgava#}¦ {%uśaṅgava, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>12416<pc>0175-c<k1>uSat<k2>uSat
{#uSat#}¦ {%uśat, an, atī, at%} (fr. rt. {%vaś,%} to desire),
loving, desirous, auspicious, pleasant.
<LEND>

<L>12417<pc>0175-c<k1>uSaDak<k2>uSaDak
{%Uśa-dhak,%}¦ Ved. only in connection with {%vana,%}
wood (fr. {%uśa,%} i. e. rt. {%vaś%} and {%dhaj,%} i. e. rt. {%dhe?;%}
according to native etym. connected with rt. {%dah%}),
(fire) consuming (wood &c.) with desire (?); (Sāy.)
desiring and burning.
<LEND>

<L>12418<pc>0175-c<k1>uSanas<k2>uSanas
{%Uśanas, ā,%}¦ m., N. of a sage mentioned in the
Veda and having the epithet kāvya ({%uśanā kāvyaḥ%});
in the epic poems he is identified with Śukra, the
regent of the planet Venus, and described as the pre-
ceptor of the Asuras or Daityas, and possessor of vast
knowledge; N. of the author of a Dharma-śāstra.
<LEND>

<L>12419<pc>0175-c<k1>uSanA<k2>uSanA
{%Uśanā,%}¦ ind., Ved. with desire, joyfully, with haste.
<LEND>

<L>12420<pc>0175-c<k1>uSAnA<k2>uSAnA
{%Uśānā,%}¦ f., Ved. the desired one; N. of a plant,
from which the Soma juice is produced.
<LEND>

<L>12421<pc>0175-c<k1>uSij<k2>uSij
{%Uśij, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. desiring, striving earnestly;
devoted to, willing; ({%k%}), m. ghee or boiled butter;
fire; ({%k%}), f., N. of a female slave, the mother of
Kakṣīvat.
<LEND>
[Page0176-a+ 78]

<L>12422<pc>0176-a<k1>uSita<k2>uSita
{%Uśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished, desired.
<LEND>

<L>12423<pc>0176-a<k1>uSI<k2>uSI
{%Uśī, īs,%}¦ f. wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>12424<pc>0176-a<k1>uSenya<k2>uSenya
{%Uśenya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be wished, to be
longed for.
<LEND>

<L>12425<pc>0176-a<k1>uSatI<k2>uSatI
{#uSatI#}¦ {%uśatī,%} f. (for {%ruśatī,%} scil. {%vāc%}), inju-
rious discourse; cutting speech.
<LEND>

<L>12426<pc>0176-a<k1>uSanas<k2>uSanas
{#uSanas#}¦ {%uśanas.%} See under {%uśat.%}
<LEND>

<L>12427<pc>0176-a<k1>uSInara<k2>uSInara
{#uSInara#}¦ {%uśīnara, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
or country, Kandahar; ({%as%}), m. the king of this
country.
<LEND>

<L>12428<pc>0176-a<k1>uSIra<k2>uSIra
{#uSIra#}¦ {%uśīra, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%vaś%}), the fragrant root of the plant Andropogon
Muricatus; ({%ī%}), f. a sort of grass, a small sort of
Saccharum. {%—Uśīra-giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Uśīra-vīja, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>12429<pc>0176-a<k1>uSIraka<k2>uSIraka
{%Uśīraka, am,%}¦ n. the fragrant root of the plant
Andropogon Muricatus.
<LEND>

<L>12430<pc>0176-a<k1>uSIrika<k2>uSIrika
{%Uśīrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ trading in or selling Uśīra.
<LEND>

<L>12431<pc>0176-a<k1>uz<k2>uz<h>1
{#uz#} 1¦. {%uṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%oṣati, auṣat, uvoṣa%}
or {%oṣāñ-cakāra, oṣiṣyati, auṣīt, oṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to burn; to punish; to consume; to kill, injure:
Caus. {%oṣayati, -yitum:%} Desid. {%oṣiṣiṣati;%} [cf.
Lat. <nsi>uro, ustus;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">αὔω, αὖος</lang> Hib. <nsi>usga,</nsi> ‘incense.’]
<LEND>

<L>12432<pc>0176-a<k1>uza<k2>uza<h>1
1. {%uṣa, as,%}¦ m. bdellium; saline earth; ({%am%}), n.
fossile salt. See {%ūṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>12433<pc>0176-a<k1>uzaRa<k2>uzaRa
{%Uṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. black pepper; the root of Piper
Longum; ({%ā%}), f. Piper Longum; Piper Chaba;
dried ginger. See {%ūṣaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>12434<pc>0176-a<k1>uzapa<k2>uzapa
{%Uṣapa, as,%}¦ m. fire; the sun.
<LEND>

<L>12435<pc>0176-a<k1>uzA<k2>uzA<h>1
1. {%uṣā,%}¦ f. burning, scorching. (For 2. see next col.)
<LEND>

<L>12436<pc>0176-a<k1>uzita<k2>uzita<h>1
1. {%uṣita%}¦ or {%uṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} burnt; quick,
expeditious. (For 2. see next col.)
<LEND>

<L>12437<pc>0176-a<k1>uzRa<k2>uzRa
{%Uṣṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (opposed to {%śīta%}), hot, warm;
pungent, acrid; sharp, active; impetuous, warm,
passionate; ({%as, am%}), m. n. heat, warmth, the
hot season (June and July); sunshine; a deep or
feverish sigh; ({%as%}), m. an onion; N. of a prince;
({%ā%}), f. heat; consumption; bile. {%—Uṣṇa-kara, as,%}
m. the sun (‘having hot rays’). {%—Uṣṇa-kāla, as,%}
m. the hot season. {%—Uṣṇa-ga, as,%} m. the hot sea-
son. {%—Uṣṇa-gu, us,%} m. the sun (‘having hot rays’).
{%—Uṣṇaṅ-karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} making hot or warm,
heating. {%—Uṣṇa-tā,%} f. or {%uṣṇa-tva, am,%} n. heat,
warmth. {%—Uṣṇa-dīdhiti, is,%} m. the sun (‘having
hot rays’). {%—Uṣṇa-nadī,%} f. the hot river; N. of the
Vaitaraṇī or river of hell. {%—Uṣṇa-raśmi%} or {%uṣṇa-%}
{%ruci, is,%} m. the sun (‘having hot rays’). {%—Uṣṇa-%}
{%vāraṇa, as, am,%} m. n. an umbrella or parasol, a
chattar. {%—Uṣṇa-vāṣpa, as,%} m. hot vapour, steam;
tears. {%—Uṣṇa-vīrya, as,%} m. Delphinus Gangeticus.
{%—Uṣṇa-vetālī,%} f., N. of a female deity. {%—Uṣṇāṃśu%}
{%(˚ṇa-aṃ˚), us,%} m. the sun (‘having hot rays’). {%—Uṣ-%}
{%ṇāgama (˚ṇa-āg˚), as,%} m. approach of the heat,
the hot season, consisting of two months, about June
and July. {%—Uṣṇābhigama (˚ṇa-abh˚), as,%} m. the
hot season. {%—Uṣṇāsaha (˚ṇa-as˚), as,%} m. the cold
season. {%—Uṣṇodaka (˚ṇa-ud˚), am,%} n. warm or
hot water, to be drunk on certain occasions; it be-
longs to the six prāṇa-karāṇi. {%—Uṣṇopagama%}
{%(˚ṇa-up˚), as,%} m. the hot season, summer.
<LEND>

<L>12438<pc>0176-a<k1>uzRaka<k2>uzRaka
{%Uṣṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ sharp, smart, active; suffering
pain; sick of fever; warming, heating; bent, inclin-
ing, stooping; ({%as%}), m. the heat, the hot season
(lasting for two months, about June and July); re-
volving, turning round.
<LEND>

<L>12439<pc>0176-a<k1>uzRAlu<k2>uzRAlu
{%Uṣṇālu, us, us, u,%}¦ suffering from heat.
<LEND>

<L>12440<pc>0176-a<k1>uzRikA<k2>uzRikA
{%Uṣṇikā,%}¦ f. rice-gruel.
<LEND>

<L>12441<pc>0176-a<k1>uzRiman<k2>uzRiman
{%Uṣṇiman, ā,%}¦ m. heat.
<LEND>

<L>12442<pc>0176-a<k1>uzRIkf<k2>uzRIkf
{%Uṣṇī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. 5. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kṛ-%}
{%ṇoti, -ṇute, -kartum,%} to make warm.
<LEND>

<L>12443<pc>0176-a<k1>uzRIgaNga<k2>uzRIgaNga
{%Uṣṇī-gaṅga,%}¦ the hot Gaṅgā, i. e. the Badarī,
having hot sources; (perhaps merely a wrong reading
for {%tūṣṇīṅgaṅga.%})
<LEND>

<L>12444<pc>0176-a<k1>uzma<k2>uzma
{%Uṣma, as,%}¦ m. heat; the hot season (June and
July); spring (April and May); anger, warmth of
temper; ardour, eagerness; [cf. {%uṣman%} and {%ūṣ-%}
{%man.%}] {%—Uṣma-tā,%} f. {%= uṣṇa-tā,%} q. v. {%—Uṣma-%}
{%pā, ās,%} m. a spirit of an inferior order, a deceased
[Page0176-b+ 75]
ancestor; [cf. {%ūṣma-pa.%}] {%—Uṣma-bhās, s,%} m. the sun
(‘having hot beams’). {%—Uṣma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} heated,
burning, smoking. {%—Uṣma-sveda, as,%} m. a vapour
bath. {%—Uṣmāgama (˚ma-āg˚), as,%} m. the hot sea-
son. {%—Uṣmānvita (˚ma-an˚), as, ā, am,%} enraged.
{%—Uṣmopagama (˚ma-up˚), as,%} m. the hot season.
<LEND>

<L>12445<pc>0176-b<k1>uzmaka<k2>uzmaka
{%Uṣmaka, as,%}¦ m. the hot season.
<LEND>

<L>12446<pc>0176-b<k1>uzman<k2>uzman
{%Uṣman, ā,%}¦ m. heat, ardour, steam; the hot season.
<LEND>

<L>12447<pc>0176-b<k1>uzmAya<k2>uzmAya
{%Uṣmāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%uṣmāyate,%} to emit heat or
steam. See {%ūṣmāya.%}
<LEND>

<L>12448<pc>0176-b<k1>uzmAyaRa<k2>uzmAyaRa
{%Uṣmāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. the hot season.
<LEND>

<L>12449<pc>0176-b<k1>uz<k2>uz<h>2
{#uz#} 2¦. {%uṣ%} (connected with rt. 3. {%vas,%} to
shine; used as a noun but only in the form {%uṣas%}),
Ved. light, morning, dawn; {%uṣas tisraḥ,%} morning,
midday, and evening. (The words {%uṣas%} and {%uṣā%}
below are connected by native authorities with 1. {%uṣ.%})
<LEND>

<L>12450<pc>0176-b<k1>uza<k2>uza<h>2
2. {%uṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. shining, brilliant; ({%as%}),
m. early morning, dawn, day-break.
<LEND>

<L>12451<pc>0176-b<k1>uzas<k2>uzas
{%Uṣas, ās,%}¦ f. morning light, dawn, morning; per-
sonified as the daughter of Heaven and sister of the
Ādityas; evening light; {%uṣasau%} or {%uṣāsau,%} du. the
two dawns, i. e. night and day; the outer passage
of the ear; the Malaya range; ({%sī%}), f. the end of
the day, twilight; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἠώς</lang> Lat. <nsi>aurora;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>auszra;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>uh-tvô;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>uohta.</nsi>] {%—Uṣar-%}
{%budh, bhut, t, t,%} Ved. awaking with the morning light,
early awaked. {%—Uṣar-budha, as,%} m. fire; a child.
{%—Uṣāsā-naktā,%} f. du., Ved. dawn and night. {%—Uṣo-%}
{%devatya, as, ā, am,%} whose deity is the dawn.
<LEND>

<L>12452<pc>0176-b<k1>uzasya<k2>uzasya<h>1
1. {%uṣasya,%}¦ nom. P. {%uṣasyati, -yitum,%} to be-
come day.
<LEND>

<L>12453<pc>0176-b<k1>uzasya<k2>uzasya<h>2
2. {%uṣasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ sacred to the dawn.
<LEND>

<L>12454<pc>0176-b<k1>uzA<k2>uzA<h>2
2. {%uṣā,%}¦ f. morning light, dawn, morning; twilight,
night; a cow; N. of a wife of Bhava (who was a
manifestation of Rudra); of a daughter of Bāṇa and
wife of Aniruddha; ({%ā%}), ind. at day-break; at night;
at twilight (?). {%—Uṣā-kāla, as,%} m. a cock. {%—Uṣā-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. an epithet of Aniruddha, the son of
Kāmadeva and husband of Uṣā. {%—Uṣā-ramaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Aniruddha. {%—Uṣeśa (uṣā-īśa),%}
{%as,%} m. the same.
<LEND>

<L>12455<pc>0176-b<k1>usra<k2>usra<h>1
1. {%usra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. relating to or seen in the
morning; bright; shining; clear; (Sāy. {%utsaraṇa-%}
{%śīla%}) rising on high; ({%as%}), m. a ray of light; ({%ā%}),
f. morning light, dawn, morning; light, bright sky.
{%—Usra-dhanvan, ā,%} m. having a bright bow; an
epithet of Indra. {%—Usra-yāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. going
out in the early morning light (as the carriage of the
Aśvins); going out at daylight.
<LEND>

<L>12456<pc>0176-b<k1>usriyA<k2>usriyA
{%Usriyā,%}¦ f., Ved. brightness, light.
<LEND>

<L>12457<pc>0176-b<k1>uza<k2>uza<h>3
{#uza#} 3¦. {%uṣa, as, ā, am%} (connected with rt.
{%vaś%}), wishing, desiring; ({%as%}), m. a lover.
<LEND>

<L>12458<pc>0176-b<k1>uzat<k2>uzat
{%Uṣat, an,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Suyajña.
<LEND>

<L>12459<pc>0176-b<k1>uzaNgu<k2>uzaNgu
{#uzaNgu#}¦ {%uṣaṅgu, us,%} m. an epithet of Śiva;
[cf. {%uśaṅgava.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12460<pc>0176-b<k1>uzatI<k2>uzatI
{#uzatI#}¦ {%uṣatī,%} f. injurious discourse; cutting
speech. See {%uśatī.%}
<LEND>

<L>12461<pc>0176-b<k1>uzadgu<k2>uzadgu
{#uzadgu#}¦ {%uṣadgu, us,%} m., N. of a son of Svāhi.
<LEND>

<L>12462<pc>0176-b<k1>uzadraTa<k2>uzadraTa
{#uzadraTa#}¦ {%uṣadratha, as,%} m. a son of Titikṣu.
<LEND>

<L>12463<pc>0176-b<k1>uzasta<k2>uzasta
{#uzasta#}¦ {%uṣasta, as,%} m., N. of a man, with
the patronymic cākrāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>12464<pc>0176-b<k1>uzita<k2>uzita<h>2
{#uzita#} 2¦. {%uṣita, as, ā, am%} (rt. 1. {%vas%}), in-
habited, dwelt; fixed, remaining in or on; stale.
{%—Uṣitaṅ-gavīna, as, ā, am,%} formerly inhabited
by cattle.
<LEND>

<L>12465<pc>0176-b<k1>uzitvA<k2>uzitvA
{%Uṣitvā,%}¦ ind. having resided in.
<LEND>

<L>12466<pc>0176-b<k1>uzya<k2>uzya
{%Uṣya,%}¦ ind. (irreg. form for {%uṣitvā%}), having
resided or dwelt.
<LEND>

<L>12467<pc>0176-b<k1>uzIra<k2>uzIra
{#uzIra#}¦ {%uṣīra, as, am,%} m. n. the root of
Andropogon Muricatum. See {%uśīra.%}
<LEND>

<L>12468<pc>0176-b<k1>uzwra<k2>uzwra
{#uzwra#}¦ {%uṣṭra, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 1. {%uṣ%}),
a buffalo; a bull with a hump; a camel; a cart, a
waggon; N. of an Asura; ({%ī%}), f. a she-camel; an
earthen vessel in the shape of a camel. {%—Uṣṭra-%}
{%karṇika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Uṣṭra- %}
[Page0176-c+ 71]
{%kāṇḍī,%} f. a flower of a red colour. {%—Uṣṭra-krośin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} making a noise like a camel. {%—Uṣṭra-%}
{%goyuga, am,%} n. a couple of camels. {%—Uṣṭra-grīva,%}
{%as,%} m. hemorrhoids. {%—Uṣṭra-dhūsara-pucchikā,%}
f. the plant Tragia Involucrata. {%—Uṣṭra-pādikā,%} f.
the plant Jasminum Sambac. {%—Uṣṭra-yāna, am,%} n.
a camel-litter, a vehicle drawn by camels. {%—Uṣṭra-%}
{%śiro-dhara, am,%} n. hemorrhoids, piles, bleeding piles.
{%—Uṣṭra-sthāna, am,%} n. a stable for camels; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), born in a camel-stable.
<LEND>

<L>12469<pc>0176-c<k1>uzwf<k2>uzwf
{%Uṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m., Ved. a bull drawing a plough.
<LEND>

<L>12470<pc>0176-c<k1>uzwrikA<k2>uzwrikA
{%Uṣṭrikā,%}¦ f. a she-camel; an earthen vessel of the
shape of a camel.
<LEND>

<L>12471<pc>0176-c<k1>uzRa<k2>uzRa
{#uzRa#}¦ {%uṣṇa.%} See under 1. {%uṣ%} 1st col.
<LEND>

<L>12472<pc>0176-c<k1>uzRih<k2>uzRih
{#uzRih#}¦ {%uṣṇih, k,%} f. (fr. {%ud-snih ?%}), N. of
a Vedic metre of three Pādas, the first two containing
eight each, and the third twelve syllables; a classical
metre of four Pādas of seven syllables; a brick sacred
to the metre Uṣṇih. {%—Uṣṇikchandaska, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the metre Uṣṇih. {%—Uṣṇig-garbhā,%} f.,
N. of a Gāyatrī of three Pādas of six, seven, eleven
syllables respectively.
<LEND>

<L>12473<pc>0176-c<k1>uzRihA<k2>uzRihA
{%Uṣṇihā,%}¦ f. the metre Uṣṇih; ({%ās%}), pl., Ved. the
nape of the neck.
<LEND>

<L>12474<pc>0176-c<k1>uzRIza<k2>uzRIza
{#uzRIza#}¦ {%uṣṇīṣa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
connected with {%uṣṇa%}), anything wound round the
head; a turban, a diadem; a bandage of any kind;
a distinguishing mark; the hair with which a Buddha
is born and which indicates his future sanctity. {%—Uṣ-%}
{%ṇīṣa-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} wearing a turban, turbaned.
<LEND>

<L>12475<pc>0176-c<k1>uzRIzin<k2>uzRIzin
{%Uṣṇīṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ furnished with a turban; an
epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>12476<pc>0176-c<k1>uzma<k2>uzma
{#uzma#}¦ {%uṣma.%} See under 1. {%uṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>12477<pc>0176-c<k1>uzya<k2>uzya
{#uzya#}¦ {%uṣya.%} See under 2. {%uṣita.%}
<LEND>

<L>12478<pc>0176-c<k1>uzyala<k2>uzyala
{#uzyala#}¦ {%uṣyala, am,%} n., Ved. the frame (of
a bed).
<LEND>

<L>12479<pc>0176-c<k1>usra<k2>usra<h>2
{#usra#} 2¦. {%usra, as,%} m. a bull; ({%ā%}), f. a cow; the
plant Anthericum Tuberosum. (For 1. see last col.)
<LEND>

<L>12480<pc>0176-c<k1>usri<k2>usri
{%Usri, is,%}¦ f., Ved. a cow (?).
<LEND>

<L>12481<pc>0176-c<k1>usrika<k2>usrika
{%Usrika, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a small ox.
<LEND>

<L>12482<pc>0176-c<k1>usriya<k2>usriya
{%Usriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to or coming
from a cow or ox; ({%as%}), m. an ox; ({%ā%}), f. a cow;
a calf; milk.
<LEND>

<L>12483<pc>0176-c<k1>usrIya<k2>usrIya
{%Usrīya,%}¦ nom. P. {%usrīyati, -yitum,%} to desire or
wish for a cow.
<LEND>

<L>12484<pc>0176-c<k1>uh<k2>uh
{#uh#}¦ {%uh,%} cl. 1. P. {%ohati, uvoha, ohitum,%} to hurt
or give pain; to kill, to destroy. See {%ūh.%}
<LEND>

<L>12485<pc>0176-c<k1>uhan<k2>uhan
{%Uhan,%}¦ Ved. a wrong reading for {%udan.%}
<LEND>

<L>12486<pc>0176-c<k1>uhAna<k2>uhAna
{%Uhāna, as,%}¦ m., N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>12487<pc>0176-c<k1>uhU<k2>uhU
{#uhU#}¦ {%uhū, ūs, ūs, u%} (fr. rt. {%vah%}), Ved. bear-
ing, carrying.
<LEND>

<L>12488<pc>0176-c<k1>uhyamAna<k2>uhyamAna
{%Uhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being conveyed, borne along.
<LEND>

<L>12489<pc>0176-c<k1>uhyagAna<k2>uhyagAna
{#uhyagAna#}¦ {%uhyagāna,%} a various reading for
{%ūhyagāna,%} q. v.
<LEND>
<H>{#U#}

<L>12490<pc>0176-c<k1>U<k2>U<h>1
{#U#} 1¦. {%ū,%} the sixth letter of the alphabet,
corresponding to {%u%} long, and having the sound of
that letter in the word {%rule%}. {%—Ū-kāra, as,%} m. the
letter or sound {%ū.%}
<LEND>

<L>12491<pc>0176-c<k1>U<k2>U<h>2
{#U#} 2¦. {%ū,%} ind. an interjection of compassion,
of regard; an incipient particle used at the beginning
of a sentence.
<LEND>

<L>12492<pc>0176-c<k1>U<k2>U<h>3
{#U#} 3¦. {%ū, ūs,%} m. the moon; epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>12493<pc>0176-c<k1>U<k2>U<h>4
{#U#} 4¦. {%ū%} (fr. rt. {%av%}), ‘a preserver’ (?).
<LEND>

<L>12494<pc>0176-c<k1>Uta<k2>Uta<h>1
1. {%ūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ favoured, preserved, promoted,
loved.
<LEND>

<L>12495<pc>0176-c<k1>Uti<k2>Uti<h>1
1. {%ūti, is,%}¦ f. favouring, protecting, promoting, aid,
assistance, help, favour, kindness, friendly feeling, affec-
tion, wish, desire, striving after, hastening towards,
delight, enjoyment, sport, play, distillation; ({%ayas%}),
pl. objects of enjoyment, as food &c.
<LEND>
[Page0177-a+ 74]

<L>12496<pc>0177-a<k1>Uma<k2>Uma
{%Ūma, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a good friend, an affectionate
companion, an intimate associate; ({%am%}), n., N. of a
town or country.
<LEND>

<L>12497<pc>0177-a<k1>Uawa<k2>Uawa
{#Uawa#}¦ {%ūaṭa,%} a various reading for {%uvaṭa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>12498<pc>0177-a<k1>UW<k2>UW
{#UW#}¦ {%ūṭh,%} a various reading for {%uṭh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>12499<pc>0177-a<k1>UQa<k2>UQa<h>1
{#UQa#} 1¦. {%ūḍha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vah%} or 1. {%ūh,%}
for 2. {%ūḍha%} see 2. {%ūh%}), carried as a load or burden;
married; ({%ā%}), f. a bride, a wife espoused according
to the ritual. {%—Ūḍha-kaṅkaṭa, as, ā, am,%} armed,
mailed. {%—Ūḍha-bhārya, as, ā, am,%} one who has
married a wife. {%—Ūḍha-vayas, ās,%} m. a young man.
<LEND>

<L>12500<pc>0177-a<k1>UQaya<k2>UQaya
{%Ūḍhaya,%}¦ nom. (fr. {%ūḍha%} or {%ūḍhi%}) P. {%ūḍhayati,%}
aor. {%aujaḍhat%} or {%aujiḍhat,%} or {%auḍiḍhat,%} to carry (?).
<LEND>

<L>12501<pc>0177-a<k1>UQi<k2>UQi
{%Ūḍhi, is,%}¦ f. carrying, bearing.
<LEND>

<L>12502<pc>0177-a<k1>URItejas<k2>URItejas
{#URItejas#}¦ {%ūṇī-tejas, ās,%} m., N. of a Buddha;
(a various reading has {%ūrṇītejas.%})
<LEND>

<L>12503<pc>0177-a<k1>Uta<k2>Uta<h>2
{#Uta#} 2¦. {%ūta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ve%}), woven.
<LEND>

<L>12504<pc>0177-a<k1>Uti<k2>Uti<h>2
2. {%ūti, is,%}¦ f. weaving, sewing.
<LEND>

<L>12505<pc>0177-a<k1>UDan<k2>UDan
{#UDan#}¦ {%ūdhan%} and {%udhar,%} forms used in the
Veda for some of the cases of {%ūdhas%} below.
<LEND>

<L>12506<pc>0177-a<k1>UDas<k2>UDas
{#UDas#}¦ {%ūdhas,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%vah.%} In
the Veda the forms {%ūdhar%} and {%ūdhan%} are used for
some of the cases, e. g. sing. nom. {%ūdhar,%} gen. abl.
{%ūdhnas,%} loc. {%ūdhan%} or {%ūdhani;%} pl. inst. {%ūdhabhis,%}
loc. {%ūdhassu%}), an udder; a covered secret place where
only friends are admitted; the bosom; the breast of
a mother; the udder of the sky, i. e. the clouds. In
classical Sanskrit the form {%ūdhan%} appears only in
the fem. of adjective compounds, cf. {%adhy-ūdhnī,%}
{%kuṇḍodhnī, ghaṭodhnī, pīnodhnī;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">οὖθαρ</lang>
Lat. <nsi>uber;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>ûtar, euter;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>uder;</nsi>
Eng. <nsi>udder;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>uit, uitche.</nsi>] {%—Ūdhas-vatī,%} f.
having a full udder.
<LEND>

<L>12507<pc>0177-a<k1>UDanya<k2>UDanya
{%Ūdhanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced from the udder;
({%am%}), n. milk.
<LEND>

<L>12508<pc>0177-a<k1>UDasya<k2>UDasya
{%Ūdhasya, am,%}¦ n. milk, ‘produced from the udder.’
<LEND>

<L>12509<pc>0177-a<k1>Una<k2>Una
{#Una#}¦ {%ūna, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. {%av%} and
opposed to {%pūrṇa, ati-rikta, adhika%}), wanting, de-
ficient, defective, short of any quantity, less than the
right number, not sufficient; less (in number, size,
or degree), minus, fewer, smaller, inferior, &c. (e. g.
{%ūna-dvivarṣa,%} not quite two years old; {%dvābhyām%}
{%ūna,%} less by two; {%alpona,%} ‘less by a little,’ ‘a little
less.’ Prefixed to any even decimal numeral from
twenty up to a hundred, {%ūna%} serves to denote one
less than the even ten, e. g. {%ūna-viṃśati,%} twenty
minus one or nineteen; {%ūna-triṃśat,%} thirty minus
one; {%ūnatriṃśa,%} the thirtieth minus one or twenty-
ninth: so also with other numerals prefixed, e. g.
{%pañcona-triṃśat,%} thirty minus five or twenty-five;
{%ekonacatvāriṃśa,%} the fortieth minus one or thirty-
ninth.)
<LEND>

<L>12510<pc>0177-a<k1>Unaka<k2>Unaka
{%Ūnaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ not sufficient, less, inferior.
<LEND>

<L>12511<pc>0177-a<k1>Unaya<k2>Unaya
{%Ūnaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%ūnayati, -yitum,%} to leave defi-
cient or unfinished; to deduct or lessen; to mete
out in small quantities; to measure.
<LEND>

<L>12512<pc>0177-a<k1>Unita<k2>Unita
{%Ūnita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lessened by subtraction or deduc-
tion, less, fewer, &c.
<LEND>

<L>12513<pc>0177-a<k1>Um<k2>Um
{#Um#}¦ {%ūm,%} ind. an interjection of interroga-
tion; of anger; of reproach, abuse, envy, and arro-
gance.
<LEND>

<L>12514<pc>0177-a<k1>Uma<k2>Uma
{#Uma#}¦ {%ūma.%} See under 4. {%ū.%}
<LEND>

<L>12515<pc>0177-a<k1>Uy<k2>Uy
{#Uy#}¦ {%ūy,%} cl. 1. A. {%ūyate = ve, vayati,%} to
weave, sew.
<LEND>

<L>12516<pc>0177-a<k1>UrarI<k2>UrarI
{#UrarI#}¦ {%ūrarī,%} ind. a particle of assent and
diffusion; {%ūrarī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} allowed, promised.
See {%urarī.%}
<LEND>

<L>12517<pc>0177-a<k1>UrI<k2>UrI
{%Ūrī,%}¦ ind. {%= ūrarī;%} see {%urī%}. {%—Ūrī-kṛtya,%} ind.
having promised, agreed, assented to.
<LEND>

<L>12518<pc>0177-a<k1>Uru<k2>Uru
{#Uru#}¦ {%ūru, us,%} m. (said to be fr. {%ūrṇu%}), the
thigh; N. of a son of Manu Cākṣuṣa; ({%vī%}), f. the
middle of the thigh or a principal vein situated there.
When {%ūru%} is used at the end of a compound the
fem. form may end in either short or long {%u,%} but
[Page0177-b+ 79]
more properly in the latter (e. g. {%vāmorus%} or {%vāmo-%}
{%rūs,%} a beautiful-thighed woman; {%rambhoru%} and
{%varoru,%} O beautiful-thighed one; voc. cases of
{%varorū%} and {%rambhorū%}). {%—Ūru-glāni, is,%} f. weakness
of the thigh. {%—Ūru-ja, as, ā, am,%} born from the
thigh; ({%as%}), m. a Vaiśya. {%—Ūru-daghna%} or {%ūru-%}
{%dvayasa%} or {%ūru-mātra, as, ī, am,%} reaching to the
thighs, as high as the thighs. {%—Ūru-parvan, ā%} or
{%a,%} m. n. the knee. {%—Ūru-phalaka, am,%} n. the thigh-
bone, the hip-bone. {%—Ūru-bhinna, as, ī, am,%} having
a rent in the thigh (according to Pāṇini IV. 1, 52,
used as a Bahu-vrīhi). {%—Ūru-sambhava, as, ā, am,%}
sprung from the thigh. {%—Ūru-stambha, as,%} m.
paralysis of the lower extremities, rheumatism of the
thigh; ({%ā%}), f. the plantain tree. {%—Ūrūdbhava (ūru-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} sprung from the thigh. {%—Ūru-%}
{%aṣṭhīva, am,%} n. thigh and knee.
<LEND>

<L>12519<pc>0177-b<k1>Uravya<k2>Uravya
{%Ūravya, as,%}¦ m. a man of the third or Vaiśya tribe
as born from the thighs of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>12520<pc>0177-b<k1>UrurI<k2>UrurI
{#UrurI#}¦ {%ūrurī,%} ind. a particle implying as-
sent, admission, promise, diffusion, &c.; [cf. {%ūrarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12521<pc>0177-b<k1>Urj<k2>Urj
{#Urj#}¦ {%ūrj, k,%} f. (fr. rt. {%vṛj;%} cf. Eng. <nsi>work</nsi>),
food, strength, vigour, sap, juice; often occurring in
conjunction with {%iṣ%} (e. g. {%iṣam ūrjam aśyuḥ,%}
‘may they obtain food and strength’); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀργάω</lang>
and <lang n="greek">ὀργάς</lang> Lat. <nsi>urgeo;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>orc,</nsi> ‘a prince, a hero;’
<nsi>orcaim,</nsi> ‘I kill, I destroy.’]
<LEND>

<L>12522<pc>0177-b<k1>Urja<k2>Urja
{%Ūrja, as,%}¦ m., N. of the month Kārttika, i. e.
November-December (as imparting food or strength);
power, strength; effort, exertion; procreative power;
life, breath; N. of a son of the second Manu; of
Satyahita; of Vatsara; of the sons of Hiraṇya-garbha
who are reckoned among the seven Ṛṣis of the
third Manvantara; ({%ā%}), f. food, strength, sap; N. of
a daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Vasiṣṭha; ({%am%}),
n. water. {%—Ūrja-yoni, is,%} m., N. of a son of Viśvā-
mitra. {%—Ūrja-vāha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Śuci.
{%—Ūrja-sani, is, is, i,%} Ved. granting strength.
{%—Ūrja-stambha, as,%} m., N. of one of the seven
Ṛṣis of the second Manvantara. {%—Ūrjād (˚jā-ad),%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. an eater of strengthening food. {%—Ūrjā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding in food. {%—Ūrjāhuti (˚jā-%}
{%āh˚), is, is, i,%} Ved. offering nourishing or strength-
giving sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>12523<pc>0177-b<k1>Urjaya<k2>Urjaya
{%Ūrjaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%ūrjayati, -yitum,%} to feed,
strengthen; A. to become strong, to be powerful.
<LEND>

<L>12524<pc>0177-b<k1>Urjayat<k2>Urjayat
{%Ūrjayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. strong, full of sap or
juice, succulent; feeding, strengthening, nourishing.
<LEND>

<L>12525<pc>0177-b<k1>Urjavya<k2>Urjavya
{%Ūrjavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. abounding in food or
strength.
<LEND>

<L>12526<pc>0177-b<k1>Urjas<k2>Urjas
{%Ūrjas,%}¦ a form for {%ūrj,%} used in compounds and with
affixes, thus {%ūrjas-kara, as, ā, am,%} causing strength.
{%—Ūrjas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} rich in food, abounding in
sap or juice, juicy, succulent, powerful, vigorous,
robust, strong; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Dakṣa
and wife of Dharma; of a daughter of Priya-vrata
and wife of Uśanas; wife of Prāṇa. {%—Ūrjas-vala,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} strong, powerful. {%—Ūrjas-vin, ī, inī, i,%}
strong, powerful; ({%i%}), n. a figure of rhetoric, speak-
ing of anything with disdain.
<LEND>

<L>12527<pc>0177-b<k1>UrjAnI<k2>UrjAnI
{%Ūrjānī,%}¦ f., Ved. {%ūrjā%} personified.
<LEND>

<L>12528<pc>0177-b<k1>Urjita<k2>Urjita
{%Ūrjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ powerful, strong, mighty, great,
excellent, exceeding, much; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince.
{%—Ūrjitāśraya (˚ta-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} spirited, mag-
nanimous.
<LEND>

<L>12529<pc>0177-b<k1>Urjin<k2>Urjin
{%Ūrjin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ abounding in food.
<LEND>

<L>12530<pc>0177-b<k1>UrRa<k2>UrRa
{#UrRa#}¦ {%ūrṇa, am, ā,%} n. f. (fr. rt. {%vṛ,%} to cover,
and connected with rt. {%ūrṇu%} next col.), wool; ({%ā%}), f.
a circle of hair between the eyebrows; N. of the wife
of Citra-ratha and mother of Samrāj; [cf. Lat. <nsi>villus,</nsi>
<nsi>vellus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vulla;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wolla;</nsi> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>Wolle;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>wool;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>wilna;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>vòlna;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἔρος, ἐρέα, εἶρος, εἴριον;</lang> Hib. <nsi>olaun.</nsi>] {%—Ūrṇa-%}
{%nābha, as,%} m. a spider (as having wool on the navel
or belly); N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a Dānava.
{%—Ūrṇa-paṭa, as,%} m. a spider. {%—Ūrṇa-mradas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} or {%ūrṇa-mrada, as, ā, am,%} soft as wool.
{%—Ūrṇa-vābhi, is,%} m. a spider (‘wool-weaver?;’ per-
haps the original form of {%ūrṇa-nābhi,%} derived from
[Page0177-c+ 78]
an obsolete rt. {%vabh,%} to weave). {%—Ūrṇā-deśa, as,%}
m., N. of a country. {%—Ūrṇā-piṇḍa, as,%} m. a ball
of wool. {%—Ūrṇā-maya, as, ī, am,%} woollen, made of
wool. {%—Ūrṇā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} woollen; ({%ān%}), m.,
N. of a man. {%—Ūrṇā-vala, as, ā, am,%} woollen.
{%—Ūrṇā-sūtra, am,%} n., Ved. a thread of wool.
{%—Ūrṇā-stukā,%} f., Ved. a tuft of wool.
<LEND>

<L>12531<pc>0177-c<k1>UrRAyu<k2>UrRAyu
{%Ūrṇāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ woollen; ({%us%}), m. a ram; a
woollen blanket; a spider; N. of a Gandharva.
<LEND>

<L>12532<pc>0177-c<k1>UrRu<k2>UrRu
{#UrRu#}¦ {%ūrṇu%} (connected with rt. {%vṛ%}), cl. 2.
P. A. {%ūrṇoti%} and {%ūrṇauti, ūrṇute, ūrṇu-%}
{%nāva, ūrṇunuve, ūrṇaviṣyati, -te, ūrṇuviṣyati,%}
{%-te, aurṇāvīt, aurṇavīt, aurṇuvīt, aurṇaviṣṭa,%}
{%aurṇuviṣṭa, ūrṇavitum, ūrṇuvitum,%} to cover,
surround, hide; A. to cover one's self: Caus. {%ūrṇā-%}
{%vayati,%} aor. {%aurṇunuvat:%} Desid. {%ūrṇunūṣati, -te,%}
{%ūrṇunaviṣati, -te, ūrṇunuviṣati, -te:%} Intens.
{%ūrṇonūyate, ūrṇonavīti, ūrṇonauti.%}
<LEND>

<L>12533<pc>0177-c<k1>UrRuta<k2>UrRuta
{%Ūrṇuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered.
<LEND>

<L>12534<pc>0177-c<k1>Urd<k2>Urd
{#Urd#}¦ {%ūrd,%} a various reading for rt. {%urd,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>12535<pc>0177-c<k1>Urdara<k2>Urdara
{#Urdara#}¦ {%ūrdara, as,%} m. (said to be in some of
its meanings fr. {%ūrj%} and rt. {%dṝ%}), Ved. a vessel for
measuring corn, a bushel; a hero, a champion; a
Rakṣas, a goblin or fiend.
<LEND>

<L>12536<pc>0177-c<k1>UrDa<k2>UrDa
{#UrDa#}¦ {%ūrdha%} and {%ūrdhaka,%} a wrong reading
for {%ūrdhva%} and {%ūrdhvaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>12537<pc>0177-c<k1>UrDva<k2>UrDva
{#UrDva#}¦ {%ūrdhva, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vṛdh%}), rising
upwards, tending upwards, raised, elevated, erected,
erect, upright; being above; above, high, superior,
upper. In classical Sanskrit an example of the un-
compounded adjective as in {%ūrdhvaiḥ pādaiḥ,%} ‘with
raised feet,’ is rare. ({%am%}), n. elevation, height, any-
thing situated above; ({%am%}), ind. upwards, towards
the upper part, aloft, above, in the upper regions, on
the upper side of (with abl.); in the sequel (as of a
book, the upper leaves of a MS. being read last);
subsequent, after (with abl.); in a high tone, aloud;
{%ūrdhvaṃ dvitīyād acaḥ,%} after the second vowel;
{%ūrdhvam pituḥ,%} after the father's death; {%saṃvat-%}
{%sarād ūrdhvam,%} after a year; {%ata ūrdhvam,%} hence-
forward, from that time forward, hereafter; {%ūrdhvaṃ%}
{%gam,%} to go upwards, to die; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀρθός;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>arduus;</nsi> Gaël. <nsi>ard.</nsi>] {%—Ūrdhva-kaca, as,%} m. an
epithet of Ketu (whose hair streams upwards in the
sky). {%—Ūrdhva-kaṇṭha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant. {%—Ūrdhva-karṇa, as, ā, am,%}
having the ears pricked up or erect. {%—Ūrdhva-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. motion or action tending upwards;
({%ā%}), m., N. of a Viṣṇu (going upwards). {%—Ūrdhva-%}
{%kāya, as,%} m. the upper part of the body. {%—Ūrdhva-%}
{%kṛśana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. effervescing, fermenting;
epithet of the Soma; (Sāy.) having its sharp qualities
stirred up. {%—Ūrdhva-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Sanad-rāja. {%—Ūrdhva-keśa, as, ā, am,%} having the
hair erect. {%—Ūrdhva-kriyā,%} f. motion or action tend-
ing upwards. {%—Ūrdhva-ga, as, ā, am,%} going upwards,
ascending, hovering; being on high. {%—Ūrdhva-gata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} gone up, risen, ascended. {%—Ūrdhva-gati,%}
{%is, is, i,%} going upwards; ({%is%}), f. ascent, elevation.
{%—Ūrdhvaga-pura, am,%} n. the city of Hariścandra,
who with his subjects is supposed to be suspended
in the atmosphere. {%—Ūrdhva-gama, as,%} m. upward
motion of any kind. {%—Ūrdhva-gamana, am,%} n. going
upwards, ascending; elevation in the scale of being.
{%—Ūrdhva-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going up or above,
ascending. {%—Ūrdhva-grāvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. raising
the stones to press out the Soma plant. {%—Ūrdhva-%}
{%caraṇa, as, ā, am,%} supine, having the feet upwards.
{%—Ūrdhva-cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. piling up, heaping up.
{%—Ūrdhva-jānu, us, us, u,%} or {%ūrdhva-jña, as, ā, am,%}
or {%ūrdhva-jñu, us, us, u,%} raising the knees, sitting on
the hams; long-shanked. {%—Ūrdhva-tilakin, ī, inī, i,%}
having a sectarian mark on the forehead. {%—Ūrdhva-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. or {%ūrdhva-tā,%} f. height, elevation. {%—Ūrdh-%}
{%va-thā%} or {%ūrdhva-dhā,%} ind., Ved. upwards, erect.
{%—Ūrdhva-daṃṣṭrā-keśa, as,%} m. whose teeth and
hair are erect; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Ūrdhva-dṛṣṭi, %}
[Page0178-a+ 80]
{%is, is, i,%} looking upwards, of high views, aspiring.
{%—Ūrdhva-deva, as,%} m. a superior deity; an epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Ūrdhva-deha, am,%} n. (‘the body gone
above’), a funeral ceremony. {%—Ūrdhva-nabhas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} Ved. being above in the clouds. {%—Ūrdhvan-%}
{%dama, as, ā, am,%} going upwards, erected, exalted,
elevated; (perhaps a wrong reading for {%ūrdhvan-%}
{%gama.%}) {%—Ūrdhva-patha, as,%} m. the upper region,
the ether. {%—Ūrdhva-pātana, am,%} n. causing to
ascend, sublimation. {%—Ūrdhva-pātra, am,%} n. a sacri-
ficial vessel. {%—Ūrdhva-pāda, as, ā, am,%} heels up-
wards; ({%as%}), m. a fabulous animal with eight legs;
see {%śarabha%}. {%—Ūrdhva-puṇḍra%} or {%ūrdhva-puṇḍra-%}
{%ka, am,%} n. a perpendicular line on the forehead of a
Brāhman made with sandal &c., a Vaiṣṇaya mark.
{%—Ūrdhva-pūram,%} ind. full to the brim, full to over-
flowing. {%—Ūrdhva-pṛśni, is, is, i,%} Ved. spotted
above. {%—Ūrdhva-barhis, is, is, is,%} Ved. being over
the sacrificial grass. {%—Ūrdhva-bāla, as, ā, am,%}
having the hair erect. {%—Ūrdhva-bāhu, us, us, u,%}
having the arms raised; ({%us%}), m. a devotee who
holds his arms above his head constantly till they are
fixed in that position; N. of one of the seven Ṛṣis
of the fifth Manvantara; one of the seven Ṛṣis of
the south; one of the seven sons of Vasiṣṭha.
{%—Ūrdhva-budhna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bottom upwards,
upside down. {%—Ūrdhva-bṛhatī,%} f., N. of a metre.
{%—Ūrdhva-bhāga, as,%} m. the upper part; any part
of a word coming after another part. {%—Ūrdhva-bhāj,%}
{%k, k, k,%} partaking of the upper part; a N. of Baḍa-
vāgni or submarine fire. {%—Ūrdhva-manthin,%} living
in perpetual chastity; see {%ūrdhva-retas%}. {%—Ūrdhva-%}
{%māna, am,%} n. an instrument for measuring altitudes.
{%—Ūrdhva-māyu, us, us, u,%} giving forth a loud
noise. {%—Ūrdhva-māruta, am,%} n. pressure of the
wind (of the body) upwards. {%—Ūrdhva-mukha, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} having the mouth or opening turned upwards.
{%—Ūrdhva-mauhūrtika, as, ī, am,%} happening after
a short time. {%—Ūrdhva-rekhā-śavala, as, ā, am,%}
variegated with lines above. {%—Ūrdhva-retas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} ‘having the semen above,’ abstaining from sexual
intercourse, one who lives in perpetual chastity; a N.
of Śiva, also of Bhīṣma. {%—Ūrdhva-roman, ā, ā, a,%}
having the hairs of the body erect; N. of a mountain.
{%—Ūrdhva-liṅga, as,%} m., N. of Śiva. {%—Ūrdhva-%}
{%loka, as,%} m. the upper world, the world above,
heaven. {%—Ūrdhva-vartman, ā,%} m. the atmosphere,
heaven. {%—Ūrdhva-vāta, as,%} m. or {%ūrdhva-vāyu,%}
{%us,%} m. the wind in the upper part of the body.
{%—Ūrdhva-vṛta, as, ā, am,%} put on above, put on
over the head or shoulder (as the sacred thread of
the Brāhman). {%—Ūrdhva-śāyin, ī, inī, i,%} sleeping
upright; epithet of Śiva. {%—Ūrdhva-śodhana, am,%}
n. ‘purifying upwards,’ i. e. vomiting. {%—Ūrdhva-śo-%}
{%ṣam,%} ind. so as to dry (anything) above. {%—Ūrdhva-%}
{%śvāsa, as,%} m. expiration. {%—Ūrdhva-sānu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. carrying the neck high, with lofty or uplifted
neck; (Sāy.) rising higher and higher. {%—Ūrdhva-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} being above, superior, situated on
high. {%—Ūrdhva-sthita, as, ā, am,%} being or standing
above. {%—Ūrdhva-sthiti, is,%} f. the rearing of a horse;
a horse's back, the part where the rider sits; eleva-
tion, superiority. {%—Ūrdhva-srotas, ās, ās, as,%} N. of
a creation of beings whose stream of life or current
of nutriment tends upwards. {%—Ūrdhvāṅguli (˚va-%}
{%aṅ˚), is, is, i,%} with raised finger. {%—Ūrdhvāmnāya-%}
{%saṃhitā (˚va-ām˚),%} f. the doctrines of a particular
Vaiṣṇava sect. {%—Ūrdhvāyana (˚va-ay˚), ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a caste in Plaksha-dvīpa. {%—Ūrdhvāvarta (˚va-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m. rearing of a horse. {%—Ūrdhvāsita%}
{%(˚va-ās˚), as,%} m. the plant Momordica Charantia.
{%—Ūrdhveha (˚va-īha), as,%} m. motion or tendency
upwards.
<LEND>

<L>12538<pc>0178-a<k1>UrDvaka<k2>UrDvaka
{%Ūrdhvaka as,%}¦ m. a kind of drum.
<LEND>

<L>12539<pc>0178-a<k1>UrDvasAna<k2>UrDvasAna
{%Ūrdhvasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. rising, erecting
one's self.
<LEND>

<L>12540<pc>0178-a<k1>UrDvIkf<k2>UrDvIkf
{%Ūrdhvī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 5. 8. P. A. {%-kṛṇoti, -ṇute, -karoti,%}
{%-kurute, -kartum,%} to raise aloft, to elevate.
<LEND>

<L>12541<pc>0178-a<k1>Urmi<k2>Urmi
{#Urmi#}¦ {%ūrmi, is,%} m. f. (fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), a wave; a
current, the flowing of water; human infirmity (as
[Page0178-b+ 72]
grief, illusion, hunger, thirst, decay, death); speed,
velocity; a fold or plait in a garment; a line, a row;
manifestation, light; mental suffering, distress, un-
easiness, pain; missing, regretting; association, num-
ber, quantity; [cf. Lith. <nsi>wilni-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wella;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>Welle;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>well.</nsi>] {%—Ūrmi-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} wavy, undulating, billowy; crooked; plaited,
curled (as hair). {%—Ūrmimat-tā,%} f. undulation; crook-
edness. {%—Ūrmimālin, ī, inī, i,%} wreathed with waves,
adorned with waves; ({%ī%}), m. the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>12542<pc>0178-b<k1>UrmikA<k2>UrmikA
{%Ūrmikā,%}¦ f. a wave; a plait or fold in a garment;
a finger ring; regret, sorrowing for anything lost;
the buzzing of a bee.
<LEND>

<L>12543<pc>0178-b<k1>Urmin<k2>Urmin
{%Ūrmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. having waves, undulating.
<LEND>

<L>12544<pc>0178-b<k1>UrmilA<k2>UrmilA
{%Ūrmilā,%}¦ f., N. of a daughter of Janaka and wife
of Lakṣmaṇa, mother of Gandharvī Somadā.
<LEND>

<L>12545<pc>0178-b<k1>Urmya<k2>Urmya
{%Ūrmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. undulating, having waves,
agitated; ({%ā%}), f. night.
<LEND>

<L>12546<pc>0178-b<k1>Urva<k2>Urva<h>1
{#Urva#} 1¦. {%ūrva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), Ved. a re-
ceptacle (for water), a reservoir; a cloud; an enclosed
place, a stable for cattle; a prison, captivity (?); an
epithet of the Pitṛs or manes of deceased ancestors.
<LEND>

<L>12547<pc>0178-b<k1>Urvya<k2>Urvya
{%Ūrvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in reservoirs, lakes, &c.
<LEND>

<L>12548<pc>0178-b<k1>Urva<k2>Urva<h>2
{#Urva#} 2¦. {%ūrva, as,%} m. (fr. {%ūru ?%}), N. of a saint
from whose thighs sprang Aurva, a fiery being received
by the ocean; the submarine fire; N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>12549<pc>0178-b<k1>UrvarA<k2>UrvarA
{#UrvarA#}¦ {%ūrvarā,%} f. fertile soil, land bearing
any and every crop. See {%urvarā.%}
<LEND>

<L>12550<pc>0178-b<k1>UrvaSI<k2>UrvaSI
{#UrvaSI#}¦ {%ūrvaśī,%} f., N. of an Apsaras. See
{%urvaśī.%}
<LEND>

<L>12551<pc>0178-b<k1>UrvazWIva<k2>UrvazWIva
{#UrvazWIva#}¦ {%ūrv-aṣṭhīva.%} See under {%ūru.%}
<LEND>

<L>12552<pc>0178-b<k1>UrvI<k2>UrvI
{#UrvI#}¦ {%ūrvī.%} See under {%ūru.%}
<LEND>

<L>12553<pc>0178-b<k1>UrvyaNga<k2>UrvyaNga
{#UrvyaNga#}¦ {%ūrvyaṅga, am,%} n. (said to be fr.
{%ūrvī = urvī,%} ‘earth,’ and {%aṅga%}), a mushroom.
<LEND>

<L>12554<pc>0178-b<k1>UrzA<k2>UrzA
{#UrzA#}¦ {%ūrṣā,%} f. a kind of grass, Andropogon
Serratum.
<LEND>

<L>12555<pc>0178-b<k1>Ulupin<k2>Ulupin
{#Ulupin#}¦ {%ūlupin, ī,%} m. a porpoise. See
{%ulupin.%}
<LEND>

<L>12556<pc>0178-b<k1>UlUka<k2>UlUka
{#UlUka#}¦ {%ūlūka, as,%} m. an owl. See {%ulūka.%}
<LEND>

<L>12557<pc>0178-b<k1>Uvawa<k2>Uvawa
{#Uvawa#}¦ {%ūvaṭa,%} a various reading for {%uvaṭa%}
and {%ūaṭa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>12558<pc>0178-b<k1>UvaDya<k2>UvaDya
{#UvaDya#}¦ {%ūvadhya%} or {%ūbadhya, am,%} n., Ved.
undigested grass &c. in the stomach (of an animal).
<LEND>

<L>12559<pc>0178-b<k1>Uz<k2>Uz
{#Uz#}¦ {%ūṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%ūṣati, -ṣitum,%} to be
diseased or disordered, to be sick or ill.
<LEND>

<L>12560<pc>0178-b<k1>Uza<k2>Uza
{#Uza#}¦ {%ūṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%uṣ%} or fr. {%ūṣ%}
above ?), salt ground, soil impregnated with saline par-
ticles; a cleft, a hole; the cavity of the ear; dawn, day-
break (in the latter sense neut. according to some); the
mountain Malaya; ({%ī%}), f. soil impregnated with saline
particles or not fertile. {%—Ūṣa-puṭa, am,%} n. particles
of salt wrapped up in paper. {%—Ūṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
consisting of saline soil.
<LEND>

<L>12561<pc>0178-b<k1>Uzaka<k2>Uzaka
{%Ūṣaka, am,%}¦ n. salt, pepper; dawn, day-break.
<LEND>

<L>12562<pc>0178-b<k1>UzaRa<k2>UzaRa
{%Ūṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. black pepper; ({%ā%}), f. long pepper.
<LEND>

<L>12563<pc>0178-b<k1>Uzara<k2>Uzara
{%Ūṣara, as, ā, am,%}¦ impregnated with salt; ({%am%}),
n. a barren spot with saline soil. {%—Ūṣara-ja, am,%}
n. salt produced from salt soil; a kind of magnet.
<LEND>

<L>12564<pc>0178-b<k1>UzA<k2>UzA
{#UzA#}¦ {%ūṣā,%} f., N. of the wife of Aniruddha.
See {%uṣas,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>12565<pc>0178-b<k1>Uzman<k2>Uzman
{#Uzman#}¦ {%ūṣman, ā,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%uṣ%}), heat,
steam, vapour, exhalation; ardour, passion, violence; the
hot season; (in gram.) the sounds {%ś, ṣ, s, h; ṣk,%}
{%ṣp, aṃ, aḥ,%} and more especially the first four of
these sounds. {%—Ūṣma-pa, as, ā, am,%} imbibing the
steam of hot food; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of manes or
deceased ancestors; ({%as%}), m. fire. {%—Ūṣma-para, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} followed by an Ūṣman. {%—Ūṣma-prakṛti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} produced from an Ūṣman. {%—Ūṣma-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} hot, steaming. {%—Ūṣmānta (˚ma-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ending in an Ūṣman. {%—Ūṣmāntaḥstha%}
{%(˚ma-an˚), ās,%} m. pl. the sounds called Ūṣman and
[Page0178-c+ 75]
the semivowels. {%—Ūṣmopagama (˚ma-up˚), as,%} m.
the approach of the heat.
<LEND>

<L>12566<pc>0178-c<k1>UzmaRa<k2>UzmaRa
{%Ūṣmaṇa%}¦ or {%ūṣmaṇya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. steaming.
<LEND>

<L>12567<pc>0178-c<k1>UzmAya<k2>UzmAya
{%Ūṣmāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%ūṣmāyate, -yitum,%} to emit
heat or steam, to steam, perspire.
<LEND>

<L>12568<pc>0178-c<k1>Uh<k2>Uh<h>1
{#Uh#} 1¦. {%ūh,%} cl. 1. P. (with prep. also A.)
{%ūhati, -te, auhīt, ūhitum,%} to change,
modify; (with prep.) to push, thrust, move, remove,
touch lightly. (This root is connected with rt. {%vah;%}
and it is often difficult to decide to which of these two
roots forms like 1. {%ūḍha,%} p. 177, are to be assigned.)
<LEND>

<L>12569<pc>0178-c<k1>Uha<k2>Uha<h>1
1. {%ūha, as,%}¦ m. change, modification. {%—Ūha-gāna,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%ūha-gīti, is,%} f., N. of the third Gāna or
song book of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>12570<pc>0178-c<k1>UhanI<k2>UhanI
{%Ūhanī,%}¦ f. a broom.
<LEND>

<L>12571<pc>0178-c<k1>UhyagAna<k2>UhyagAna
{%Ūhya-gāna, am,%}¦ n., N. of the fourth Gāna or
song book of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>12572<pc>0178-c<k1>Uh<k2>Uh<h>2
{#Uh#} 2¦. {%ūh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%ūhati, -te%} (Ved.
{%ohate%}), {%ūhe%} and {%ūhāñ-cakre, ūhiṣyate,%}
{%auhiṣṭa, ūhitum,%} to observe, mark, note, attend
to (with acc.): to reckon on (with loc.); to wait for;
to comprehend, conceive, conjecture, suppose, infer,
reason, deliberate about; to be regarded as: Caus.
{%ūhayati, -yitum,%} aor. {%aujihat,%} to cause to think,
reason, infer, or conjecture; to attend to (?); to do,
accomplish (?): Desid. {%ūjihiṣate;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>uige;</nsi>
Lat. <nsi>äugeo;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>auka;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>ugtar,</nsi> ‘augmentation.’]
<LEND>

<L>12573<pc>0178-c<k1>UQa<k2>UQa<h>2
2. {%ūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ observed, inferred, &c.
<LEND>

<L>12574<pc>0178-c<k1>Uha<k2>Uha<h>2
2. {%ūha, as,%}¦ m. deliberation, examination; reason-
ing; understanding; completing a defective sentence
or verse, supplying an ellipsis; [cf. Hib. <nsi>uga,</nsi> ‘choice,
election.’]
<LEND>

<L>12575<pc>0178-c<k1>Uhana<k2>Uhana
{%Ūhana, am,%}¦ n. reasoning, inferring, concluding.
<LEND>

<L>12576<pc>0178-c<k1>Uhin<k2>Uhin
{%Ūhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ who or what reasons; who or
what assembles, infers, or conjectures; ({%inī%}), f. an
assemblage, a collection; arrangement, a multitude
reduced to order; [cf. {%akṣauhiṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12577<pc>0178-c<k1>Uhya<k2>Uhya
{%Ūhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ inferrible, to be investigated,
requiring to be supplied, elliptical.
<LEND>
<H>{#f#}

<L>12578<pc>0178-c<k1>f<k2>f<h>1
{#f#} 1¦. {%ṛ,%} the seventh vowel of the Sanskrit
alphabet and peculiar to it, resembling the sound of {%ri%}
in {%(merṛly)%}. {%—Ṛ-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>12579<pc>0178-c<k1>f<k2>f<h>2
{#f#} 2¦. {%ṛ,%} ind. an interjection of abuse,
laughter; a sound inarticulate or reiterated as in
stammering.
<LEND>

<L>12580<pc>0178-c<k1>f<k2>f<h>3
{#f#} 3¦. {%ṛ, ā,%} f. a N. of Aditi.
<LEND>

<L>12581<pc>0178-c<k1>f<k2>f<h>4
{#f#} 4¦. {%ṛ,%} cl. 1. 9. (Ved. also 3. 4. 5. P.)
{%ṛcchati, ṛṇāti%} (Ved. {%iyarti, āryate, ṛ-%}
{%ṇoti%} or {%ṛṇvati%}), {%āra%} or {%arāñ-cakāra, ariṣyati%} or
{%arīṣyati (?), ārat, artum, aritum%} or {%arītum%} (?),
(Ved. 3rd pl. impf. {%ranta%}), to rise, tend upwards; to go,
move; to meet with, fall upon or into, reach, obtain;
to fall to one's share (with acc.); to move, excite,
raise, raise (in singing, e. g. {%vācam iyarti,%} he raises
his voice; {%stomān iyarti,%} he sings hymns); to dis-
play; to injure, hurt: Caus. {%arpayati, -yitum,%} to
throw, cast; to put, place, insert, fix, fasten; to direct
towards, cast upon; to pierce; to place on, apply;
to offer, give, give up, surrender; to give back,
restore: Intens. Ved. 2nd pers. {%alarṣi,%} 3rd pers.
{%alarti,%} to move, come; strive, make effort, exert
one's strength: Intens. Class. {%arāryate,%} to wander
about; to run or fly towards: Desid. {%aririṣati;%}
[cf. Goth. <nsi>airus,</nsi> ‘a messenger;’ Hib. <nsi>ria</nsi> or rather
<nsi>do ria,</nsi> ‘he will come or arrive;’ <nsi>ria,</nsi> ‘running,
speed;’ <nsi>riach,</nsi> ‘he came;’ <nsi>riachtaim,</nsi> ‘I arrive;’
<nsi>ar,</nsi> ‘guiding, conducting.’ With the Caus. have
been compared Old Germ. <nsi>arbjan,</nsi> ‘to inherit;’ <nsi>ki-</nsi>
<nsi>erpit,</nsi> ‘possession;’ Goth. <nsi>arbi,</nsi> Them. <nsi>arbja,</nsi> ‘in-
heritance:’ cf. also Lat. <nsi>aro;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>arja;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>erru;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>arù;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>orjû;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">αἴρω</lang> Hib. <nsi>ar,</nsi>
‘slaughter, destruction, plague, the slain in fight;’
<nsi>aor,</nsi> ‘a satire, a course.’]
<LEND>

<L>12582<pc>0178-c<k1>fkCas<k2>fkCas
{#fkCas#}¦ {%ṛk-chas.%} See under 2. {%ṛc.%}
<LEND>
[Page0179-a+ 73]

<L>12583<pc>0179-a<k1>fkRa<k2>fkRa<h>1
{#fkRa#} 1¦. {%ṛkṇa, as, ā, am%} (for {%vṛkṇa%} fr. rt.
{%vraśc%}), wounded. {%—Ṛkṇa-vaha, as, ā, am,%} whose
shoulders are wounded or made sore by drawing.
<LEND>

<L>12584<pc>0179-a<k1>fkRa<k2>fkRa<h>2
{#fkRa#} 2¦. {%ṛkṇa = ṛktha%} below.
<LEND>

<L>12585<pc>0179-a<k1>fkTa<k2>fkTa
{#fkTa#}¦ {%ṛktha, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%ric%}), property,
wealth, possessions, effects (especially left at death);
gold; see {%riktha%}. {%—Ṛktha-grahaṇa, am,%} n. re-
ceiving or inheriting property. {%—Ṛktha-grāha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} an inheritor or receiver of property; ({%as%}),
m. inheriting or receiving property. {%—Ṛktha-jāta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} formed into property, accumulated (as
property). {%—Ṛktha-bhāga, as,%} m. division of pro-
perty, inheritance, partition, a share. {%—Ṛktha-bhā-%}
{%gin, ī, inī, i,%} an heir, a coheir; inheriting or sharing
property. {%—Ṛktha-hara, as, ī, am,%} an heir, a co-
heir. {%—Ṛktha-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} inheriting or sharing
property; an heir. {%—Ṛkthādāna (˚tha-ād˚), as,%}
m. an inheritor.
<LEND>

<L>12586<pc>0179-a<k1>fkva<k2>fkva
{#fkva#}¦ {%ṛkva, as, ā, am,%} or {%ṛkvan, ā, ā, a%} (fr.
rt. {%arc%}), Ved. praising, rejoicing.
<LEND>

<L>12587<pc>0179-a<k1>fkz<k2>fkz
{#fkz#}¦ {%ṛkṣ,%} cl. 5. P. {%ṛkṣṇoti,%} to kill;
to hurt or seek to hurt; (a doubtful root.)
<LEND>

<L>12588<pc>0179-a<k1>fkza<k2>fkza<h>1
{#fkza#} 1¦. {%ṛkṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bald, bare.
<LEND>

<L>12589<pc>0179-a<k1>fkza<k2>fkza<h>2
{#fkza#} 2¦. {%ṛkṣa, as,%} m. (fr. preceding rt.
{%ṛkṣ?%} or fr. rt. {%riś?%} or fr. rt. {%vraśc?,%} cf. 1. {%ṛkṇa;%}
or fr. rt. {%ṛc%} connected with rt. {%ark,%} to shine?; con-
nected with {%rakṣas ?%}), Ved. one who hurts or
destroys (?); a bear (as having a shining coat?); ({%ī%}),
f. a female bear; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the seven stars, the
Pleiades, <lang n="greek">Ἄρκτος</lang> Ursa; in later times the seven
Ṛṣis; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a star, a constellation in
general, a lunar mansion; the particular star in the
twenty-seven mansions of the moon under which a
person happens to be born; ({%as%}), m., N. of the plant
Bignonia Indica, and of a similar species; N. of a
man, a son of Ajamīḍha, or Ariha, or Vidūratha, or
Revata; of Akrodhana; a descendant of Bhṛgu,
identified with Valmīki; N. of a mountain; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of the wife of Ajamīḍha; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄρκτος</lang> Lat.
<nsi>ursus;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>art;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>lokys</nsi> for <nsi>olkys;</nsi> Armen.
<nsi>arǵ.</nsi>] {%—Ṛkṣa-gandhā,%} f. the plant Argyreia Ar-
gentea. {%—Ṛkṣa-gandhikā,%} f. the plant Batatas
Paniculata. {%—Ṛkṣa-grīva, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
imp or demon. {%—Ṛkṣa-nātha, as,%} m. lord of the
stars, an epithet of the moon. {%—Ṛkṣa-nemi, is,%} m.
a N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Ṛkṣa-rāja, as,%} m. the king of
the bears; king of the stars, an epithet of the moon.
{%—Ṛkṣa-vat, ān,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Ṛkṣa-%}
{%vanta, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Ṛkṣa-vibhāvana,%}
{%am,%} n. observing the stars. {%—Ṛkṣa-harīśvara (˚ri-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. the lord of bears and apes. {%—Ṛkṣeśa%}
{%(˚ṣa-īśa), as,%} m. lord of the stars, an epithet of
the moon. {%—Ṛkṣeṣṭi (˚ṣa-iṣ˚), is,%} f. offering
worship to the planets and stars. {%—Ṛkṣoda (˚ṣa-%}
{%uda), as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>12590<pc>0179-a<k1>fkzIkA<k2>fkzIkA
{%Ṛkṣīkā,%}¦ f., Ved., N. of certain demons or evil
spirits.
<LEND>

<L>12591<pc>0179-a<k1>fkza<k2>fkza<h>3
{#fkza#} 3¦. {%ṛkṣa, as, ā, am%} (perhaps a wrong
reading for {%ṛkṇa%}), pierced, cut, divided.
<LEND>

<L>12592<pc>0179-a<k1>fkzara<k2>fkzara
{#fkzara#}¦ {%ṛkṣara, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. or 2. {%ṛṣ?%}), a
thorn; a family priest; ({%am%}), n. a shower, a stream.
<LEND>

<L>12593<pc>0179-a<k1>fkzalA<k2>fkzalA
{#fkzalA#}¦ {%ṛkṣalā,%} f., Ved. a fetter; [cf.
{%ṛccharā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12594<pc>0179-a<k1>fGAya<k2>fGAya
{#fGAya#}¦ {%ṛghāya,%} nom. P. A. (fr. an obso-
lete noun {%ṛgha%}), Ved. {%ṛghāyati, -te, -yitum,%} to
tremble; to tremble with passion, rage, rave; [cf.
Zend <nsi>ereghata;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>arg.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>12595<pc>0179-a<k1>fGAvat<k2>fGAvat
{%Ṛghā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. raving, impetuous.
<LEND>

<L>12596<pc>0179-a<k1>fc<k2>fc<h>1
{#fc#} 1¦. {%ṛc%} (connected with rt. {%arc%} and
with rt. {%ark,%} q. q. v. v.), cl. 6. P. {%ṛcati,%}
{%ānarca, arciṣyati, arcitum,%} Ved. inf. {%ṛcase,%} to
praise, extol, laud, celebrate; to cover, screen; to
shine (?).
<LEND>
[Page0179-b+ 76]

<L>12597<pc>0179-b<k1>fc<k2>fc<h>2
2. {%ṛc, k,%}¦ f. (fr. preceding rt. or fr. rt. {%arc%}), lustre,
splendor; a hymn; a single verse, stanza or text,
especially verses recited or spoken at a sacrifice or
{{religous->religious||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} ceremony (whereas the verses called {%sāman%}
[pl. {%sāmāni%}] are sung, and the verses called {%yajus%}
[pl. {%yajūṃṣi%}] are some of them not metrical and are
muttered in a peculiar manner; these three kinds of
verse constitute the Mantra and are considered as
sacred speech); a verse of the Ṛg-veda, the particular
verse or text on the authority of which a ceremony is pre-
scribed and to which the explanation in the Brāhmaṇa
refers; the collective body of the Ṛc, i. e. the Ṛg-veda
(but in this sense generally pl. {%ṛcas%}). {%—Ṛk-chas%} or
{%ṛk-śas,%} ind. verse by verse, one verse after the other.
{%—Ṛk-tantra-vyākaraṇa, am,%} n. one of the Pari-
śiṣṭas of the Sāma-veda. {%—Ṛk-tas,%} ind. from a Ṛc,
with reference to a Ṛc. {%—Ṛk-prātiśākhya, am,%} n.
the Prātiśākhya of the Ṛg-veda. {%—Ṛk-śata, am,%} n.
a hundred texts. {%—Ṛk-ṣama%} (fr. {%ṛc%} and {%sama%}),
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. similar to a Ṛc; N. of a Sāman.
{%—Ṛk-saṃśita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. instigated by the
Ṛc. {%—Ṛk-saṃhitā,%} f. the arranged collection of the
hymns of the Ṛg-veda. {%—Ṛk-sama, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. similar to a Ṛc (as a Sāman). {%—Ṛk-sāma, e,%}
n. du., Ved. the verses called Ṛc and Sāman. {%—Ṛk-%}
{%sāman, a,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Ṛksāma-śṛṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Ṛg-āvānam,%} ind.
({%āvānam%} fr. rt. {%ve%} with {%ā%}), Ved. connecting one Ṛc
with another, not interrupting their continuance.
{%—Ṛg-gāthā,%} f., N. of a certain song. {%—Ṛg-bhāj,%}
{%k, k, k,%} partaking of a Ṛc, as a deity who is ad-
dressed with it. {%—Ṛg-yajuḥ-sāma-vedin, ī,%} m. one
who is familiar with the Ṛg, Yajur, and Sāma-veda.
{%—Ṛg-vidhāna, am,%} n. title of a work of Śaunaka.
{%—Ṛg-veda, as,%} m. the Ṛg-veda; the collective
body of sacred verses which as being recited are
called Ṛcas and differ from Sāmāni and Yajūṃṣi
in the manner described above; the arranged collection
of these hymns as the most ancient sacred book of the
Hindūs. (The Ṛg-veda consists of ten books or Maṇ-
ḍalas; the first eight books contain groups of hymns,
each group ascribed to one author or to the members
of one family; the ninth book contains the songs
recited at the Soma ceremonies; the tenth contains
hymns of a very different character, composed by a
greater variety of individual authors. In its wider
sense the term Ṛg-veda comprehends the Brāhmaṇas
and the Sūtra works on the ritual connected with the
hymns.) {%—Ṛgveda-prātiśākhya, am,%} n. the Prā-
tiśākhya of the Ṛg-veda, attributed to Śaunaka.
{%—Ṛgveda-vid, t,%} m. a Brāhman familiar with the
Ṛg-veda. {%—Ṛgvedānukramaṇikā (˚da-an˚),%} f. the
index of the Ṛg-veda, attributed to Kātyāyana. {%—Ṛg-%}
{%vedin, ī, inī, i,%} conversant with the Ṛg-veda. {%—Ṛṅ-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of Ṛcas.
<LEND>

<L>12598<pc>0179-b<k1>fgma<k2>fgma
{%Ṛgma, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. having the character of a Ṛc.
<LEND>

<L>12599<pc>0179-b<k1>fgmin<k2>fgmin
{%Ṛgmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. praising exulting with joy,
jubilant with praise.
<LEND>

<L>12600<pc>0179-b<k1>fgmiya<k2>fgmiya
{%Ṛgmiya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. deserving praise, laudable.
<LEND>

<L>12601<pc>0179-b<k1>fca<k2>fca
{%Ṛca%}¦ (at the end of some compounds) {%= Ṛc; (as),%}
m., N. of a prince, a son of Sunīka.
<LEND>

<L>12602<pc>0179-b<k1>fcIka<k2>fcIka
{#fcIka#}¦ {%ṛcīka, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Jamadagni, a son of Heaven; N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>12603<pc>0179-b<k1>fcIza<k2>fcIza
{#fcIza#}¦ {%ṛcīṣa, am,%} n. a frying-pan; ({%as%}),
m. a hell.
<LEND>

<L>12604<pc>0179-b<k1>fcIzama<k2>fcIzama
{#fcIzama#}¦ {%ṛcīṣama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (Sāy.
fr. {%ṛc%} and {%sama%}) equal to the Ṛc; epithet of Indra;
(perhaps this word is related to {%ṛjīṣa, ṛjīṣin,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>12605<pc>0179-b<k1>fceyu<k2>fceyu
{#fceyu#}¦ {%ṛceyu, us,%} m., N. of a man; a son
of Raudrāśva.
<LEND>

<L>12606<pc>0179-b<k1>fC<k2>fC
{#fC#}¦ {%ṛch,%} cl. 6. P. {%ṛcchati, ānarccha,%}
{%arcchitum,%} to go, move; to fail in facul-
ties; to become hard or stiff; [cf. Lat. <nsi>rigere.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>12607<pc>0179-b<k1>fcCakA<k2>fcCakA
{#fcCakA#}¦ {%ṛcchakā,%} f. (fr. rt. 4. {%ṛ%}), wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>12608<pc>0179-b<k1>fcCarA<k2>fcCarA
{#fcCarA#}¦ {%ṛccharā,%} f., Ved. a fetter; a har-
lot, a courtezan.
<LEND>
[Page0179-c+ 74]

<L>12609<pc>0179-c<k1>fj<k2>fj<h>1
{#fj#} 1¦. {%ṛj,%} cl. 1. P. {%arjati, ānarja, ar-%}
{%jitum,%} to bring near, obtain, get, acquire:
Caus. {%arjayati, -yitum,%} to obtain, get, acquire.
<LEND>

<L>12610<pc>0179-c<k1>fj<k2>fj<h>2
{#fj#} 2¦. {%ṛj,%} cl. 1. A. {%arjate, -jitum,%} to
go; to stand or be firm; to acquire; to
be healthy or strong; [cf. Lat. <nsi>rego, rectus;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>raihts;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>recht;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀρέγω</lang> Hib. <nsi>righim,</nsi>
‘I reach, arrive, stretch.’]
<LEND>

<L>12611<pc>0179-c<k1>fjipya<k2>fjipya
{#fjipya#}¦ {%ṛjipya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%ṛñj?%}), Ved.
going quick, striving upwards; [cf. Zend. <nsi>ĕrĕzifja.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>12612<pc>0179-c<k1>fjiSvan<k2>fjiSvan
{#fjiSvan#}¦ {%ṛjiśvan, ā,%} m., Ved., N. of a man
(protected by Indra) who has the epithet Vaidathina.
<LEND>

<L>12613<pc>0179-c<k1>fjIka<k2>fjIka
{#fjIka#}¦ {%ṛjīka, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%arj%}), Ved.
coloured, variegated; mixed with; polluted; ({%as%}), m.
smoke; an epithet of Indra; N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>12614<pc>0179-c<k1>fjIti<k2>fjIti
{%Ṛjīti, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. burning, sparkling.
<LEND>

<L>12615<pc>0179-c<k1>fjIza<k2>fjIza
{#fjIza#}¦ {%ṛjīṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%ṛñj?%}), Ved.
epithet of Indra, carrying or driving away, (or perhaps
{%= ṛjīṣin%} below); ({%am%}), n. the sediment or residue
of Soma; a frying-pan; N. of a hell; (Sāy.) water.
<LEND>

<L>12616<pc>0179-c<k1>fjIzin<k2>fjIzin
{%Ṛjīṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. hastening towards, seizing;
consisting of or receiving the sediment or residue of
Soma.
<LEND>

<L>12617<pc>0179-c<k1>fju<k2>fju
{#fju#}¦ {%ṛju, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. 2. {%ṛñj%}), tending in
a straight direction, straight; straight metaphorically
as in morals, right, honest, upright; (in Ved. {%= sādhu%}
and opposed to {%vṛjina;%} in classical Sanskrit opposed
to {%jihma%} and {%tiryac%}); comparative {%ṛjīyas,%} Ved.
{%rajīyas;%} superlative {%ṛjiṣṭha,%} Ved. {%rajiṣṭha;%}
{%(us),%} m., N. of a son of Vasu-deva; [cf. Hib. <nsi>aroch;</nsi>
Zend <nsi>ĕrĕśu.</nsi>] {%—Ṛju-kāya, as, ā, am,%} having a
straight body; ({%as%}), m., N. of the saint Kaśyapa.
{%—Ṛju-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved. intending what is
honest; (Sāy.) acting honestly. {%—Ṛju-ga, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. going straight. {%—Ṛju-gātha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
singing correctly. {%—Ṛju-tā,%} f. or {%ṛju-tva, am,%} n.
straight direction, straightness; uprightness, sincerity,
honesty. {%—Ṛju-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a son of Vasu-
deva. {%—Ṛju-dhā,%} ind. straight, right. {%—Ṛju-nīti,%}
{%is,%} f., Ved. right conduct. {%—Ṛju-mitākṣarā,%} f. title
of a commentary on Yājñavalkya's law-book, generally
called Mitākṣarā. {%—Ṛju-muṣka, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having straight generative organs; (Sāy.) strong and
muscular. {%—Ṛju-raśmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having straight
rope-traces (said of a chariot). {%—Ṛju-rohita, am,%} n.
the straight red bow of Indra. {%—Ṛju-vani, is, is, i,%}
Ved. striving straightforward; (Sāy.) granting auspi-
cious gifts. {%—Ṛju-śaṃsa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. desiring
what is right. {%—Ṛju-sarpa, as,%} m. a kind of snake.
{%—Ṛju-hasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. extending the hand.
{%—Ṛjū-nas, ās,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12618<pc>0179-c<k1>fjUka<k2>fjUka
{%Ṛjūka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>12619<pc>0179-c<k1>fjUkf<k2>fjUkf
{%Ṛjū-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to straighten,
rectify. {%—Ṛjū-karaṇa, am,%} n. straightening. {%—Ṛjū-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made straight.
<LEND>

<L>12620<pc>0179-c<k1>fjUya<k2>fjUya
{%Ṛjūya,%}¦ nom. Ved. {%ṛjūyati, -te, -yitum,%} to walk
straightforward, on the right or honest way; to direct
one's way towards anything.
<LEND>

<L>12621<pc>0179-c<k1>fjUyA<k2>fjUyA
{%Ṛjūyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. in a straight line.
<LEND>

<L>12622<pc>0179-c<k1>fjUyu<k2>fjUyu
{%Ṛjūyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. honest; upright.
<LEND>

<L>12623<pc>0179-c<k1>fjvac<k2>fjvac
{%Ṛjvac, āṅ, ūcī (?), ak,%}¦ Ved. going straightforward.
<LEND>

<L>12624<pc>0179-c<k1>fjra<k2>fjra<h>1
{#fjra#} 1¦. {%ṛjra, as, ā, am%} (rt. 2. {%arj%}), Ved.
reddish, dark red, reddish brown.
<LEND>

<L>12625<pc>0179-c<k1>fjriya<k2>fjriya
{%Ṛjriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. reddish, red.
<LEND>

<L>12626<pc>0179-c<k1>fjra<k2>fjra<h>2
{#fjra#} 2¦. {%ṛjra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%ṛñj?%}), a leader.
{%—Ṛjrāśva (˚ra-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12627<pc>0179-c<k1>fYj<k2>fYj<h>1
{#fYj#} 1¦. {%ṛñj,%} cl. 1. A. {%ṛñjate, ṛñjāñ-%}
{%cakre, -jitum,%} to fry.
<LEND>

<L>12628<pc>0179-c<k1>fYj<k2>fYj<h>2
{#fYj#} 2¦. {%ṛñj,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%ṛñjati, -te,%}
{%-jitum,%} to spring forward, run; to strive
after, long for; (Sāy.) to decorate.
<LEND>

<L>12629<pc>0179-c<k1>fYjasAna<k2>fYjasAna
{%Ṛñjasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ running towards, striving
after; ({%as%}), m. a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>12630<pc>0179-c<k1>fRa<k2>fRa
{#fRa#}¦ {%ṛṇa, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. 4. {%ṛ;%}
[Page0180-a+ 80]
cf. Lat. <nsi>reus</nsi>), Ved. guilty; ({%am%}), n. guilt; obliga-
tion, debt (opposed to {%dhana%} and {%ṛktha,%} ‘pro-
perty’); a fort, a stronghold; water; a negative
quantity, minus; ({%as%}), m. a N. of a Vyāsa; {%antyam%}
{%ṛṇam,%} the last debt, a debt to the manes, i. e. the
generation of a son; {%ṛṇaṃ kṛ,%} to get into debt;
{%ṛṇaṃ dhṛ,%} to be indebted; {%ṛṇaṃ dā%} or {%pra-%}
{%yam%} or {%saṃ-nī,%} to pay a debt; {%ṛṇam prāp,%} to
become indebted; {%ṛṇam parīps%} (Desid. fr. rt. {%āp%}
with {%pari%}), to require payment of a debt, call in a
debt. {%—Ṛṇa-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} getting into debt,
indebted. {%—Ṛṇa-kāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. requiring pay-
ment of debts, ‘taking revenge;’ (Sāy.) one to
whom praise is due as a debt, or one who receives
praise as a debt to be repaid in benefits. {%—Ṛṇa-%}
{%grasta, as, ā, am,%} indebted, involved in debt.
{%—Ṛṇa-graha, as,%} m. borrowing; a borrower.
{%—Ṛṇa-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} borrowing; a borrower.
{%—Ṛṇa-cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. punishing offences or guilt;
(Sāy.) acknowledging (praise) as an obligation to be
paid for. {%—Ṛṇa-cyut, t, t, t,%} Ved. granting quittance
of a debt or an offence. {%—Ṛṇañ-caya, as,%} m., N. of
a prince of the Ruśamas; N. of an author of a hymn
in the Ṛg-veda (IX. 108). {%—Ṛṇa-da, as, ā, am,%}
or {%ṛṇa-dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or {%ṛṇa-dāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
one who pays a debt. {%—Ṛṇa-dāna, am,%} n. payment
of a debt. {%—Ṛṇa-dāsa, as,%} m. lit. ‘a debt-slave,’
i. e. one who becomes a slave to his creditor till his
debt is paid. {%—Ṛṇa-matkuṇa, as,%} m. a security, a
bail (which sticks to the debtor like an insect).
{%—Ṛṇa-mārgaṇa, as,%} m. a security. {%—Ṛṇa-mukta,%}
{%as ā, am,%} released from debt. {%—Ṛṇa-mukti, is,%} f.
discharge of a debt. {%—Ṛṇa-mokṣa, as,%} m. paying
a debt. {%—Ṛṇa-yā, ās, ās, am,%} or {%ṛṇa-yāvan, ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} Ved. punishing or prosecuting guilt; keeping off
debt or guilt. {%—Ṛṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who is
in debt, one who is under obligation (to another),
indebted. {%—Ṛṇa-van, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. guilty, indebted;
obliged, under obligation (to another). {%—Ṛṇa-śo-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n. payment or discharge of a debt.
{%—Ṛṇādāna (˚ṇa-ād˚), am,%} n. recovery of a debt,
receipt of money &c. lent (as one of the eighteen
titles or subjects of judicial procedure). {%—Ṛṇāntaka%}
{%(˚ṇa-an˚), as,%} m. the planet Mars (as the patron of
debtors). {%—Ṛṇāpanayana (˚ṇa-ap˚), am,%} n. dis-
charge of a debt. {%—Ṛṇāpanodana (˚ṇa-ap˚), am,%}
n. payment of a debt. {%—Ṛṇāpākāraṇa (˚ṇa-ap˚),%}
{%am,%} n. paying off a debt. {%—Ṛṇārṇa (˚ṇa-ṛ˚), am,%}
n. debt of a debt, compound interest; [cf. Gram. 38. d.]
{%—Ṛṇodgrahaṇa (˚ṇa-ud˚), am,%} n. recovering a
debt in any way from the creditor by friendly or legal
proceedings, by stratagem or by arrest.
<LEND>

<L>12631<pc>0180-a<k1>fRika<k2>fRika
{%Ṛṇika, as,%}¦ m. a debtor.
<LEND>

<L>12632<pc>0180-a<k1>fRin<k2>fRin
{%Ṛṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ a debtor, one under any obliga-
tion (to another), indebted, of or belonging to a debt;
[cf. {%an-ṛṇin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12633<pc>0180-a<k1>ft<k2>ft
{#ft#}¦ {%ṛt,%} A. {%ṛtīyate,%} to reproach, contemn,
pity; to rival, have power, domineer; hate; go; (a
Sautra root, i. e. a root occurring only in grammatical
Sūtras and not in the Dhātu-pāṭha.) [To this root
have been referred Goth. rt. <nsi>lith</nsi> in <nsi>leitha, laith,</nsi>
{%lithum;%} Hib. <nsi>rith,</nsi> ‘course, flight, gallop, race;’
<nsi>rithim,</nsi> ‘I run, range, rush.’]
<LEND>

<L>12634<pc>0180-a<k1>fta<k2>fta
{#fta#}¦ {%ṛta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 4. {%ṛ%}), proper,
right; honest, brave, competent; true; worshipped,
respected; enlightened, luminous; gone, risen, moved,
affected by; ({%am%}), ind. right, duly, properly, ener-
getically; {%ṛtam i,%} to go the right way, to live
virtuously; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Rudra; of a prince;
({%am%}), n. fixed or settled order, law, rule (especially
in religion); sacred or pious custom, pious action;
divine law, faith, divine truth; (Sāy.) water, sacrifice,
sacrificial rite; the sun (e. g. {%ṛtam bṛhat,%} the great
divine law, supreme truth, or according to Sāy. a
great sacrifice; {%ṛtasya garbhaḥ%} or {%prajāḥ,%} the off-
spring of divine truth, or according to Sāy. the off-
spring of the water or of sacrifice, as an epithet of
Agni, of Soma, or of Viṣṇu; {%prathamajā ṛtasya,%}
the first-born of divine truth or Prajāpati; {%ṛtasya%}
{%sadanam%} or {%sadaḥ%} or {%sadma%} or {%padam%} or {%nābhiḥ,%}
[Page0180-b+ 81]
the seat or centre of religious faith, as the altar &c.,
or according to Sāy. the seat of water or of the sun;
{%ṛtasya yoniḥ,%} water; {%ṛtasya gopāḥ%} or {%netā%} or
{%rathīḥ%} or {%patiḥ,%} the protector or leader or lord of
divine truth, or according to Sāy. of the sacrifice, as
an epithet of Agni, of Soma, of the Ādityas, and
other gods, or sometimes applied to men who are
guardians of the truth); truth in general, right (e. g.
{%pathyā%} or {%panthā ṛtasya,%} the path of truth, the
right way, a virtuous life, or according to Sāy. the
way of the water); truth personified (as an object of
worship, and hence enumerated among the sacred
objects in the last chapter of the Nighaṇṭavas. In
later Sanskrit he is regarded as a child of Dharma);
gleaning, i. e. the lawful and right means of getting a
livelihood for Brāhmans as opposed to the cultivation
of the ground (this latter being metaphorically called
{%an-ṛta,%} improper). {%—Ṛta-cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. observing
the sacred law, conversant or familiar with it; (Sāy.)
knowing the sacrifice or water. {%—Ṛta-jā, ās, ās, am,%}
or {%ṛta-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. happening at the right
time, of a true nature, sprung from sacred truth,
according to sacred truth. {%—Ṛta-jāta-satya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. realizing what is according to the sacred
law; (Sāy.) born for the sake of the sacrifice and
having true result. {%—Ṛta-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. gaining the
right. {%—Ṛta-jur, ūr, ūr, ur,%} Ved. grown quite old;
(Sāy.) growing old in religious worship. {%—Ṛta-jñā,%}
{%ās, ās, am,%} Ved. well informed; familiar with the
sacred law; (Sāy.) knowing the sacrifice. {%—Ṛta-jya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. furnished with a good bow-string;
(Sāy.) whose string is truth, truth-strung (said of a
bow). {%—Ṛta-dyumna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. filled with
sacred strength. {%—Ṛta-dhāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. of true
or pure nature; ({%ā%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu; of the thir-
teenth Manu; of the Indra in the twelfth Manvantara.
{%—Ṛta-dhīti, is, is, i,%} Ved. of true or sacred disposi-
tion; epithet of the gods; (Sāy.) receiving true praise;
whose actions are unobstructed. {%—Ṛta-dhvaja, as,%}
m. epithet of Rudra; N. of a sage; a son of Kaṅka;
epithet of Pratardana. {%—Ṛta-nī, īs, i,%} Ved. lead-
ing in the right way; (Sāy.) leader of truth (as the
Ādityas). {%—Ṛta-parṇa, as,%} m., N. of a prince (son
of Ayutājit and friend of Nala). {%—Ṛta-pā, ās, ās, am,%}
Ved. observing the truth; observing the law; (Sāy.)
protecting truth or the sacrifice. {%—Ṛta-peya, as,%} m.,
N. of a certain ceremony. {%—Ṛta-peśas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. having a perfect shape; epithet of Varuṇa;
(Sāy.) one whose form consists of water. {%—Ṛta-%}
{%prajāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. happening at the right
time, of true nature, born from sacred truth, accord-
ing to sacred truth; (Sāy.) produced from water.
{%—Ṛta-pravīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. conceived in the
right manner; (Sāy.) invested with truth, or with
water, or with the sacrifice. {%—Ṛta-psu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. having a perfect shape or aspect; (Sāy.) whose
form is truth, or who consumes the sacrificial food.
{%—Ṛta-bhāga, as,%} m., N. of a man, <lang n="greek">Ἀρταβάζης</lang>
{%—Ṛtam-bhara, as, ā, am,%} bearing the truth in
one's self, an epithet of Brahmā, also of Viṣṇu;
({%ā%}), f. intellect; N. of a river. {%—Ṛta-yukti, is,%} f.,
Ved. right union; (Sāy.) true application of a hymn.
{%—Ṛta-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. well harnessed; well
allied; (Sāy.) going to the sacrifice. {%—Ṛta-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} being right, saying the truth. {%—Ṛta-vāka,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. true or pious speech, speaking of truth.
{%—Ṛta-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. saying right, speaking
truth. {%—Ṛta-vrata, ās,%} m. pl., N. of the inhabitants
of Śākadvīpa. {%—Ṛta-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. dwelling or
seated in truth; (Sāy.) dwelling in the sacrifice.
{%—Ṛta-sadana, am, ī,%} n. f., Ved. the right or
usual seat. {%—Ṛta-sāp, p, p, p,%} Ved. practising pious
acts, of a pious disposition; steady in religious belief;
(Sāy.) pervading truth. {%—Ṛta-stubh, p,%} m. ‘praising
in the right manner,’ N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Ṛta-sthā,%}
{%ās, ās, am,%} Ved. standing right. {%—Ṛtas-pati, is,%}
m., Ved. lord of divine truth; an epithet of Vāyu;
(Sāy.) lord of sacrifices. {%—Ṛta-spṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved.
loving sacred truth; an epithet of the Ādityas and of
Mitra-Varuṇa; (Sāy.) touching water. {%—Ṛtānṛta%}
{%(˚ta-an˚), am,%} n. truth and falsehood. {%—Ṛtā-van, ā, %}
[Page0180-c+ 80]
{%arī, a,%} Ved. of true nature or character, according to
fixed order, epithet of any object in nature subject to
fixed laws (e. g. of the moon, of plants, of waters, the
dawn, &c.); true to sacred law; just, pious, faithful,
believing; epithet of Agni, as always present at and
presiding over sacrificial rites and the worship of the
deities; epithet of Bṛhaspati, of Sarasvatī, of Soma,
and especially of the Ādityas; (Sāy.) bestowing food;
possessed of sacrifice. {%—Ṛtā-vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. re-
joicing in justice and piety, holy-minded, especially as
an epithet of the Ādityas; (Sāy.) increasers of water,
or of sacrifice, or of truth. {%—Ṛtā-ṣah, -ṣāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}
Ved. maintaining the sacred law. {%—Ṛtokti (˚ta-uk˚),%}
{%is,%} f. speaking truth. {%—Ṛtodya (˚ta-ud˚), am,%} n.,
Ved. true speech, truth; (Sāy.) born for sacrifice or
religious rites.
<LEND>

<L>12635<pc>0180-c<k1>ftaya<k2>ftaya
{%Ṛtaya,%}¦ nom. P. A. {%ṛtayati, -te, -yitum%} (generally
used in pres. part. {%ṛtayat%} or {%ṛtāyat%}), to submit to
divine ordinances, to act piously; to observe the
sacred law, be obedient or pious; (Sāy.) to desire
sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>12636<pc>0180-c<k1>ftayA<k2>ftayA
{%Ṛtayā,%}¦ inst., Ved. in right manner; (Sāy.) through
desire of reward.
<LEND>

<L>12637<pc>0180-c<k1>ftayu<k2>ftayu
{%Ṛtayu%}¦ or {%ṛtāyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. observing the
sacred law, obedient, pious; (Sāy.) desirous of sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>12638<pc>0180-c<k1>ftAyin<k2>ftAyin
{%Ṛtāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. observing the sacred law.
See {%ṛtayu.%}
<LEND>

<L>12639<pc>0180-c<k1>fte<k2>fte
{%Ṛte,%}¦ ind. except, excepting, with the exception of,
to the exclusion of, besides, without (with abl. or
acc.); sometimes used at the beginning of a com-
pound, e. g. {%ṛte-rakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} (any rite &c.)
from which the Rakṣasas are excluded. {%—Ṛte-%}
{%karmam,%} ind., Ved. acting according to fixed rule
or settled law; (Sāy.) granting rain. {%—Ṛte-jā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. living in truth, true to the law.
<LEND>

<L>12640<pc>0180-c<k1>ftena<k2>ftena
{%Ṛtena,%}¦ ind. according to settled law, duly, properly,
rightly, regularly, in the prescribed manner, justly,
strictly, fairly, truly, honestly.
<LEND>

<L>12641<pc>0180-c<k1>fti<k2>fti
{#fti#}¦ {%ṛti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. 4. {%ṛ,%} and therefore
connected with {%ṛta%} above), going, motion; assault,
combat; abuse, censure, reproach; emulation, envy;
manner of proceeding, manner; road, way; prosperity,
felicity; fitness, trueness (?); remembrance; protec-
tion; misfortune; (some of the latter meanings are
only found in lexicons); [cf. Hib. <nsi>raith,</nsi> ‘prosperity,
increase, profit, benefit, good;’ <nsi>raite,</nsi> ‘ways, passages,
road.’] {%—Ṛtiṅ-kara, as, ī, am,%} unfortunate, pro-
pitious. {%—Ṛtī-ṣah, -ṣāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. enduring an
assault, able to resist, enduring; (Sāy.) subduing an
assailant.
<LEND>

<L>12642<pc>0180-c<k1>ftIya<k2>ftIya
{%Ṛtīya,%}¦ nom. A. P. {%ṛtīyate, -ti, -yitum,%} to
quarrel, litigate; to be in discord with one's self, be
ashamed.
<LEND>

<L>12643<pc>0180-c<k1>ftIyA<k2>ftIyA
{%Ṛtīyā,%}¦ f. censure, reproach; (according to others)
shame.
<LEND>

<L>12644<pc>0180-c<k1>ftu<k2>ftu
{#ftu#}¦ {%ṛtu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. 4. {%ṛ?%}), any settled
point of time, a fixed time, time appointed for
sacrifices and other regular worship, right time, fit
season (especially in the inst. pl. {%ṛtubhis,%} at the
right time or at the appointed time for sacrifice or
for a festival); an epoch, a period, a period of the
year, a season; (the number of seasons is sometimes
limited to three, or sometimes to five, viz. Vasanta,
‘spring;’ Grīṣma, ‘the hot season;’ Varṣa, pl.
‘the rains;’ Sarad, ‘the autumn;’ Hemanta-śiśira,
du. ‘the cold and dewy season:’ but is more com-
monly reckoned as six, Hemanta and Śiśira being
regarded as distinct: occasionally as seven, or even as
twelve, in the latter case each season lasting one
month. The Ṛtus or seasons are occasionally ad-
dressed in the Veda and libations offered to them);
the menstrual evacuation, the time favourable for pro-
creation, or sixteen days in each month; fixed order,
order, rule; light, splendor; the number six (from
the six seasons); a kind of collyrium; N. of the
twelfth Manu; [cf. Hib. <nsi>raithe,</nsi> ‘a quarter of a
year;’ <nsi>alt,</nsi> ‘time, a joint, an article.’] {%—Ṛtu-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. the duration of a season; the period of
menstruation, the period favourable for procreation,
sixteen days of each month. {%—Ṛtu-gaṇa, as,%} m. the
[Page0181-a+ 78]
seasons collectively. {%—Ṛtu-gāmin, ī,%} m. having in-
tercourse with a wife after the period of menstrua-
tion. {%—Ṛtu-graha, as,%} m., Ved. a libation offered
to the seasons. {%—Ṛtu-jit, t,%} m., N. of a prince of
Mithilā. {%—Ṛtu-dhāman, ā,%} m. epithet of Viṣṇu;
N. of the Indra of the twelfth Manvantara. {%—Ṛtu-%}
{%pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of the seasons; an epithet of
Agni. {%—Ṛtu-parṇa, as,%} m., N. of a king of Ayo-
dhyā. {%—Ṛtu-paryāya, as,%} m. the revolution of the
seasons. {%—Ṛtu-pā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. drinking or com-
ing to the libation regularly or at the appointed seasons.
{%—Ṛtu-pātra, am,%} n., Ved. the cup in which the liba-
tion to the seasons is offered. {%—Ṛtu-prāpta, as, ā, am,%}
productive in due season, fruitful, fertile. {%—Ṛtu-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. observing regular times, coming at
regular times; enjoying the seasons; ({%tī%}), f. a woman
during her courses, a woman during menstruation or
in the period favourable for procreation; ({%t%}) n., N.
of Varuṇa's grove or garden. {%—Ṛtu-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of the seasons. {%—Ṛtu-mukha, am,%} n. the
beginning or first day of a season. {%—Ṛtu-yāja, as,%}
m. sacrifice offered to the seasons; N. of a ceremony
of the Prātaḥ-savana, just before the Ājya-śastra.
{%—Ṛtu-rāja, as,%} m. the spring (king of the sea-
sons). {%—Ṛtu-liṅga, am,%} n. characteristic or sign of
the season; symptom of menstruation. {%—Ṛtu-vṛtti,%}
{%is,%} m. revolution of the seasons, a year. {%—Ṛtu-velā,%}
f. the period of menstruation; the period favourable
for procreation, sixteen days of each month. {%—Ṛtu-%}
{%śas,%} ind., Ved. in order, duly; at the right or fixed
time. {%—Ṛtu-ṣṭhā%} and {%ṛtu-sthā, ās, ā, am,%} Ved.
fixed at the proper seasons. {%—Ṛtu-saṃhāra, as,%} m.
‘collection of the seasons,’ title of a poem ascribed
to Kālidāsa in praise of the six seasons. {%—Ṛtu-%}
{%sandhi, is,%} m. the interval or junction between two
seasons, the last seven days of one season and the
first seven of the next. {%—Ṛtu-samaya, as,%} m. the
period favourable for procreation. {%—Ṛtu-sātmya,%}
{%am,%} n. diet &c. suited to the season. {%—Ṛtu-sthalā,%}
f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Ṛtu-snātā,%} f. a woman who
has bathed after menstruation and so prepared herself
for sexual intercourse. {%—Ṛtu-snāna, am,%} n. bathing
after menstruation. {%—Ṛtv-anta, as,%} m. the close of
a season, the termination of menstruation.
<LEND>

<L>12645<pc>0181-a<k1>ftavya<k2>ftavya
{%Ṛtavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ devoted to the seasons, one
who worships them as divinities, relating to the season,
seasonable.
<LEND>

<L>12646<pc>0181-a<k1>ftuTA<k2>ftuTA
{%Ṛtuthā,%}¦ ind. in order, duly; distinctly, precisely,
exactly; (Sāy.) at a right or fixed time.
<LEND>

<L>12647<pc>0181-a<k1>ftvij<k2>ftvij
{%Ṛtv-ij, k, k, k,%}¦ ({%ij%} fr. rt. {%yaj%}), Ved. sacrificing at the
proper seasons, sacrificing regularly; ({%k%}), m. a priest;
(the four chief Ṛtvijas or priests are the Hotṛ, Udgātṛ,
Adhvaryu, and Brahman; sometimes eight are enume-
rated, and at very grand ceremonies sixteen, viz. Hotṛ,
Ud-gātṛ, Adhvaryu, Brahman, Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin,
Pra-stotṛ, Maitrā-varuṇa, Prati-prasthātṛ, Potṛ,
Prati-hartṛ, Acchāvāka, Neṣṭṛ, Agnīdh, Subrah-
maṇya, Grāva-stut, and Un-netṛ.)
<LEND>

<L>12648<pc>0181-a<k1>ftviya<k2>ftviya<h>1
1. {%ṛtviya, as, ā, am,%}¦ due, regular; happening at
fixed or regular times; conforming to ceremonial
rules, familiar with those rules. {%—Ṛtviyā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. conformable to law or rule, formal.
<LEND>

<L>12649<pc>0181-a<k1>ftviya<k2>ftviya<h>2
2. {%ṛtviya%}¦ or {%ṛtvya, as, ā, am,%} menstruating;
being in the period most favourable for procreation;
({%am%}), n. menstruation.
<LEND>

<L>12650<pc>0181-a<k1>fte<k2>fte
{#fte#}¦ {%ṛte.%} See under {%ṛta,%} p. 180.
<LEND>

<L>12651<pc>0181-a<k1>ftvij<k2>ftvij
{#ftvij#}¦ {%ṛtv-ij.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>12652<pc>0181-a<k1>fdUdara<k2>fdUdara
{#fdUdara#}¦ {%ṛdūdara, as, ā, am%} (perhaps related
to {%mṛdu%}), Ved. mild, soft, kind, gracious.
<LEND>

<L>12653<pc>0181-a<k1>fdUpA<k2>fdUpA
{%Ṛdūpā,%}¦ f. (for {%mṛdu-pā?%}), Ved. a bee or any
other insect fond of sweets.
<LEND>

<L>12654<pc>0181-a<k1>fdUvfD<k2>fdUvfD
{%Ṛdū-vṛdh, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. rejoicing in sweets.
<LEND>

<L>12655<pc>0181-a<k1>fD<k2>fD
{#fD#}¦ {%ṛdh,%} cl. 4. 5. 7. P. {%ṛdhyati, ṛdh-%}
{%noti, ṛṇaddhi%} (and in some forms cl. 2,
as pres. 2nd du. {%ṛdhāthe,%} pot. 1st pl. {%ṛdhyāma,%}
impf. 1st pl. {%ārdhma%}), {%ānardha, ardhiṣyati,%}
{%ārdhīt, ardhitum,%} to succeed, prosper; to grow,
increase, flourish; to be prosperous and happy, to
[Page0181-b+ 77]
make prosperous, cause to succeed; to accomplish;
to gratify, satisfy: Caus. {%ardhayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to prosper, accomplish; to satisfy: Desid.
{%īrtsati;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>ol-esco, ad-ul-tus, radix;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>aurti,</nsi> ‘plant,’ in <nsi>aurti-gards;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>alo;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἀλδαίνω</lang> Goth. <nsi>alja;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>alt,</nsi> ‘nursing.’]
<LEND>

<L>12656<pc>0181-b<k1>fdDa<k2>fdDa
{%Ṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ prosperous; increased; thriv-
ing, rising; stored, as grain; ({%am%}), n. stored grain;
a demonstrated conclusion, a distinct result.
<LEND>

<L>12657<pc>0181-b<k1>fdDi<k2>fdDi
{%Ṛddhi, is,%}¦ f. success, prosperity, good fortune,
affluence, increase, growth, accomplishment; perfec-
tion, supernatural power or supremacy; N. of a
medicinal plant; prosperity personified as the wife of
Kuvera; N. of the goddess Pārvatī. {%—Ṛddhi-kāma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} desiring increase or prosperity. {%—Ṛddhi-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} being in a prosperous state, pros-
perous, wealthy, respectable, rich; making a fine
appearance, bringing happiness. {%—Ṛddhi-sākṣāt-%}
{%kriyā,%} f. manifestation of supernatural power.
<LEND>

<L>12658<pc>0181-b<k1>fDat<k2>fDat
{%Ṛdhat, an, atī, at%}¦ (pres. part. from a form in cl. 2),
prospering, thriving, &c. {%—Ṛdhad-rī, īs,%} m. ({%rī =%}
{%rai%}), N. of a man. {%—Ṛdhad-vāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
increasing one's goods; (Sāy.) having desirable or
prosperous wealth.
<LEND>

<L>12659<pc>0181-b<k1>fDila<k2>fDila
{%Ṛdhila, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12660<pc>0181-b<k1>fDak<k2>fDak
{#fDak#}¦ {%ṛdhak,%} ind. (related to {%ardha%}), Ved.
separately; aside, apart; singly, one by one; in a dis-
tinguished manner, particularly. {%—Ṛdhaṅ-mantra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. one who is destitute of speech.
<LEND>

<L>12661<pc>0181-b<k1>fDuka<k2>fDuka
{#fDuka#}¦ {%ṛdhuka, as, ā, am,%} short (?).
<LEND>

<L>12662<pc>0181-b<k1>fP<k2>fP
{#fP#}¦ {%ṛph%} or {%ṛnph%} or {%ṛmph,%} cl. 6. P.
{%ṛphati, ānarpha%} or {%ṛmphāñ-cakāra,%}
to injure, kill; [cf. rt. {%riph.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12663<pc>0181-b<k1>fbIsa<k2>fbIsa
{#fbIsa#}¦ {%ṛbīsa, am,%} n., Ved. a fissure, rent,
gulf, abyss; warmth of the earth.
<LEND>

<L>12664<pc>0181-b<k1>fBu<k2>fBu
{#fBu#}¦ {%ṛbhu, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. {%rabh%}), Ved.
clever, skilful, inventive, prudent (often as an epithet
of the gods Indra, Agni, and the Ādityas); handy
(as a weapon), easy to be used; (Sāy.) shining far,
diffusing light; ({%us%}), m. an artist, one who works in
iron, a smith, a builder (especially of carriages); N.
of three semi-divine beings (called Ṛbhu, Vibhvan,
and Vāja, sons of Su-dhanvan, a descendant of
Aṅgiras, and called Ṛbhus from the name of the
elder. Through their performance of good works
[{%sv-apas%}] they obtained divinity, exercised super-
human powers, and became entitled to worship.]
They are supposed to dwell in the solar sphere, and
are the artists who formed the horses of Indra, the
carriage of the Aśvins, and the miraculous cow of
Bṛhaspati; they made their aged parents young, and
constructed four cups at a sacrifice from the one cup
of Tvaṣṭṛ who, as the proper artificer of the gods,
was in this respect their rival; they appear generally
as accompanying Indra, especially at the evening sacri-
fice. In later mythology {%Ṛbhu%} is a son of Brahmā);
a deity, a divinity in general; [cf. <lang n="greek">Ὀρφεύς.</lang>] {%—Ṛbhu-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. clever, skilful, prudent; con-
nected with or accompanied by the Ṛbhus; (Sāy.)
wide-shining.
<LEND>

<L>12665<pc>0181-b<k1>fBukza<k2>fBukza
{%Ṛbhukṣa, as,%}¦ m. Indra; Indra's heaven or para-
dise; the thunderbolt of Indra. (This word does
not seem to be used, but appears to owe its origin to
the next.)
<LEND>

<L>12666<pc>0181-b<k1>fBukzin<k2>fBukzin
{%Ṛbhukṣin, ās,%}¦ m. (in the Ved. only the following
forms occur, nom. sing. {%-kṣās,%} acc. sing. {%-kṣaṇam,%}
nom. pl. {%-kṣās%} and {%-kṣaṇas%}), the first of the three
Ṛbhus, who is the Ṛbhu par excellence; a Ṛbhu
in general; a N. of Indra; N. of the Maruts; (the
word means, according to the scholiasts, ‘governing
far or reigning over the Ṛbhus.’)
<LEND>

<L>12667<pc>0181-b<k1>fBva<k2>fBva
{%Ṛbhva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. attacking, assailing, cou-
rageous, determined; extending far; clever; skilful.
<LEND>

<L>12668<pc>0181-b<k1>fBvan<k2>fBvan
{%Ṛbhvan, ā, ā, a,%}¦ or {%ṛbhvas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
attacking, assailing, courageous, determined; (Sāy.)
shining widely or far extended.
<LEND>

<L>12669<pc>0181-b<k1>fllaka<k2>fllaka
{#fllaka#}¦ {%ṛllaka, as,%} m. a player on a kind
[Page0181-c+ 78]
of musical instrument; (perhaps a wrong reading for
{%jhallaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>12670<pc>0181-c<k1>fllarI<k2>fllarI
{%Ṛllarī,%}¦ f. a kind of musical instrument.
<LEND>

<L>12671<pc>0181-c<k1>fSya<k2>fSya
{#fSya#}¦ {%ṛśya%} or {%ṛśa, as,%} m. the male of a
species of antelope, the painted or white-footed ante-
lope; [cf. {%ṛṣya%} and {%riśya.%}] {%—Ṛśya-ketu, us,%} m.
an epithet of Aniruddha; (a various reading for {%viśva-%}
{%ketu.%}) {%—Ṛśya-da, as,%} m. ({%da%} fr. rt. 4. {%dā,%} ‘to bind’),
a pit for catching antelopes. {%—Ṛśya-pad, āt, adī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. having the feet of an antelope.
<LEND>

<L>12672<pc>0181-c<k1>fz<k2>fz<h>1
{#fz#} 1¦. {%ṛṣ%} (connected with rt. {%vṛṣ%}),
cl. 1. P. {%arṣati, ānarṣa, arṣitum,%} to
flow, flow quickly; to bring anything near by flowing;
to glide, to move with a gliding or quick motion;
[cf. Goth. <nsi>airz-ja;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>irru;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>erro.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>12673<pc>0181-c<k1>fzadgu<k2>fzadgu
{%Ṛṣad-gu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Vṛjinīvat.
<LEND>

<L>12674<pc>0181-c<k1>fzaBa<k2>fzaBa
{%Ṛṣabha, as,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. {%ṛṣ%} as {%vṛṣabha%} fr.
{%vṛṣ,%} ‘to sprinkle,’ the idea of impregnating being
involved), a bull, a young bull; (in comp. with other
names of animals) the male animal; (in comp. with
other nouns) the best or most excellent of any species
or race (e. g. {%puruṣarṣabha,%} an excellent man;
{%Bharatarṣabha,%} the most eminent of the Bharata
race); the second of the seven notes of the Hindū
gamut, in abbreviation Ṛ; the hollow of the ear;
a boar's tail; a crocodile's tail; a dried plant, one of
the eight principal medicaments; N. of an antidote;
N. of a ceremony; N. of a king of the Śviknas; of
a descendant of Viśvā-mitra and author of several
hymns of the Ṛg-veda; of a Nāga; of a prince,
a son of Nābhi and Meru; of a son of Kuśāgra; of
one of the seven Ṛṣis of the second Manvantara;
of the first Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī, a son of
Nābhi and Marudevā; of a mountain; ({%ī%}), f. a woman
with masculine peculiarities, as with a beard &c.; a
widow; the plant Carpopogon Pruriens; N. of another
plant; [cf. Zend <nsi>arshan;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄρσην</lang>] {%—Ṛṣabha-%}
{%kūṭa, as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Ṛṣabha-gaja-%}
{%vilasita, am,%} n., N. of a metre consisting of four lines
of sixteen syllables each. {%—Ṛṣabha-tara, as,%} m. a
small bull. {%—Ṛṣabha-dāyin, ī, inī, i,%} giving a
bull. {%—Ṛṣabha-dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of a country.
{%—Ṛṣabha-dhvaja, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva; N.
of an Arhat or Jaina saint.
<LEND>

<L>12675<pc>0181-c<k1>fzaBaka<k2>fzaBaka
{%Ṛṣabhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a medicinal plant.
<LEND>

<L>12676<pc>0181-c<k1>fz<k2>fz<h>2
{#fz#} 2¦. {%ṛṣ,%} cl. 6. P. {%ṛṣati, ānarṣa,%}
{%arṣiṣyati, ārṣīt, arṣitum,%} to push;
to pierce; to go, approach.
<LEND>

<L>12677<pc>0181-c<k1>fzi<k2>fzi
{#fzi#}¦ {%ṛṣi, is,%} m. (said to be either fr. rt.
{%dṛś,%} ‘to see,’ or fr. 1. {%ṛṣ;%} perhaps related to {%arc%}
or {%ṛc,%} ‘to praise’), a singer of sacred hymns, an in-
spired poet or sage, any person who alone or with
others invokes the deities in rhythmical speech or
song, especially in song of a sacred character (e. g. the
ancient hymn-singers Kutsa, Atri, Rebha, Agastya,
Kuśika, Vasiṣṭha, Vy-aśva, who were regarded by
later generations as patriarchal sages or saints, occupy-
ing the same position in Indian history as the heroes
and patriarchs of other countries. They Ṛṣis con-
stitute a peculiar class of beings in the early mythical
system, as distinct from gods, men, Asuras, &c.;
they are the authors or rather seers of the Vedic
hymns, i. e. according to orthodox Hindū ideas they
are the inspired personages to whom these hymns
were revealed, and such an expression as ‘the Ṛṣi
says’ is equivalent to ‘so it stands in the sacred texts.’
Seven Ṛṣi, {%sapta ṛṣayaḥ%} or {%saptaṛṣayaḥ%} or
{%saptarṣayaḥ,%} are often mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas
and later works as typical representatives of the charac-
ter and spirit of the pre-historic or mythical period; in
the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa their names are given as
follows, Gotama, Bharadvāja, Viśvā-mitra, Jamadagni,
Vasiṣṭha, Kaśyapa, and Atri; in the Mahā-bhārata
thus, Marīci, Atri, Aṅgiras, Pulaha, Kratu, Pulastya,
Vasiṣṭha; in Manu they are called Prajāpatis or
patriarchs, and are reckoned as ten, three other names
being added, viz. Pracetas or Dakṣa, Bhṛgu, and Nā-
rada, these ten being created by Manu Svāyambhuva
[Page0182-a+ 79]
for the production of all other beings including gods
and men. The seven Ṛṣis form in astronomy the
constellation of ‘the Great Bear.’ Metaphorically,
the seven Ṛṣis may stand for the seven senses or
the seven vital airs of the body); in later times a
saint or sanctified sage in general, an ascetic, an an-
chorite, (sometimes three orders of these Ṛṣis are enu-
merated, viz. Devarṣis, Brahmarṣis, and Rājarṣis;
sometimes seven, four others being added, viz. Ma-
harṣis, Paramarṣis, Śrutarṣis, and Kāṇḍarṣis); a
ray of light; an imaginary circle; the fish Cyprinus
Ṛṣi; [cf. Hib. <nsi>arsan,</nsi> ‘a sage, a man old in
wisdom;’ <nsi>arrach,</nsi> ‘old, ancient, aged.’] {%—Ṛṣi-%}
{%kulyā,%} f. ‘the river of the Ṛṣis,’ a sacred river, as
the Sarasvatī or Gaṅgā; a river in general; N. of the
wife of Bhūman and mother of Udgītha. {%—Ṛṣi-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. rendering a poet inspired, inspiring;
(Sāy.) making one's appearance, appearing. {%—Ṛṣi-%}
{%gaṇa, as,%} m. a company or number of sages, the
host of patriarchal sages. {%—Ṛṣi-giri, is,%} m., N. of
a mountain in Magadha. {%—Ṛṣi-gupta, as,%} m., N.
of a Buddha. {%—Ṛṣi-codana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. in-
spiring the singer. {%—Ṛṣi-cchandas, as,%} n. the
metre of a Ṛṣi. {%—Ṛṣi-jāṅgala, as,%} m. or {%ṛṣi-%}
{%jāṅgalikī,%} f. the plant Convolvulus Argenteus.
{%—Ṛṣi-tarpaṇa, am,%} n. libation offered to the
Ṛṣis. {%—Ṛṣi-tva, am,%} n. the order or state of a
Ṛṣi. {%—Ṛṣi-deva, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Ṛṣi-%}
{%dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. hating an inspired poet. {%—Ṛṣi-%}
{%pañcamī,%} f., N. of a festival on the fifth day in the
second half of the month Bhādra. {%—Ṛṣi-patana,%}
N. of a country near Vārāṇasī. {%—Ṛṣi-putra, as,%}
m., N. of an author. {%—Ṛṣi-praśiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. instructed by the Ṛṣi. {%—Ṛṣi-proktā,%} f. the
plant Glycine Debilis. {%—Ṛṣi-bandhu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. related to a Ṛṣi, connected with a Ṛṣi.
{%—Ṛṣi-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n. title of a work. {%—Ṛṣi-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having the mind of a sacred
poet, inspired. {%—Ṛṣi-mukha, am,%} n. the beginning
of a Maṇḍala composed by a Ṛṣi. {%—Ṛṣi-yajña,%}
{%as,%} m. sacrifice offered to a Ṛṣi, consisting of a
prayer uttered in a low voice. {%—Ṛṣi-loka, as,%} m.
the world of the Ṛṣis. {%—Ṛṣi-vat,%} ind., Ved. like
a Ṛṣi. {%—Ṛṣi-vadana,%} N. of a country; see {%ṛṣi-%}
{%patana%}. {%—Ṛṣi-vaha, as, ā, am,%} bearing or con-
veying a Ṛṣi. {%—Ṛṣi-ṣah, ṣāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. intoxi-
cating and inspiring the singer, as the Soma. {%—Ṛṣi-%}
{%ṣeṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Ṛṣi-ṣṭuta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} praised by the sacred poets. {%—Ṛṣi-sattama,%}
{%as,%} m. best or most excellent of the sages. {%—Ṛṣi-%}
{%stoma, as,%} m. praise of the Ṛṣis. {%—Ṛṣi-svara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. praised by a Ṛṣi. {%—Ṛṣī-tata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} celebrated by the sacred singers. {%—Ṛṣī-%}
{%van, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. equal to the Ṛṣis; (Sāy.) accom-
panied by Ṛṣis.
<LEND>

<L>12678<pc>0182-a<k1>fzika<k2>fzika
{%Ṛṣika, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people; ({%as%}), m. sing.
a prince of this people; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>12679<pc>0182-a<k1>fzizARa<k2>fzizARa
{%Ṛṣiṣāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. attracted by the
pious singer; (Sāy.) worshipped by the praiser.
<LEND>

<L>12680<pc>0182-a<k1>fzu<k2>fzu
{#fzu#}¦ {%ṛṣu%} (occurring only in gen. plur.
{%ṛṣūṇām%}), Ved. a firebrand; glowing fire; (Sāy.)
one who approaches; a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>12681<pc>0182-a<k1>fzwi<k2>fzwi
{#fzwi#}¦ {%ṛṣṭi, is,%} m. f. (fr. rt. 2. {%ṛṣ?%}), a
spear, a lance, a sword, the weapon of the Maruts;
[cf. {%riṣṭi.%}] {%—Ṛṣṭi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. fur-
nished with spears as the Maruts. {%—Ṛṣṭi-vidyut, t,%}
{%t, t,%} Ved. casting spears like lightning; (Sāy.) shining
with weapons. {%—Ṛṣṭi-ṣeṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12682<pc>0182-a<k1>fzya<k2>fzya
{#fzya#}¦ {%ṛṣya, as,%} m. [cf. {%ṛśya%}], the painted
or white-footed antelope; N. of a son of Devātithi;
({%am%}), n. a kind of leprosy. {%—Ṛṣya-ketana, as,%} and
{%ṛṣya-ketu, us,%} m., N. of Aniruddha. {%—Ṛṣya-%}
{%gatā,%} f. the plant Asparagus Racemosus. {%—Ṛṣya-%}
{%gandhā,%} f. the plant Convolvulus Argenteus. {%—Ṛṣya-%}
{%jihva, am,%} n. a kind of leprosy. {%—Ṛṣya-proktā,%}
f., N. of several plants, Carpopogon Pruriens, Aspa-
ragus Racemosus, Sida Cordifolia or Rhombifolia.
{%—Ṛṣya-mūka, as,%} m. a mountain in the Dekhan,
the temporary abode of Rāma with the monkey-chief
[Page0182-b+ 71]
Sugrīva. {%—Ṛṣya-śṛṅga, as,%} m., N. of a personage
(son of the Ṛṣi Vibhāṇḍaka) whose story is told in
Rāmāyaṇa. 1. 9; N. of a legislator. {%—Ṛṣyāṅka%}
{%(˚ya-aṅ˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Aniruddha.
<LEND>

<L>12683<pc>0182-b<k1>fzyaka<k2>fzyaka
{%Ṛṣyaka, as,%}¦ m. the painted or white-footed
antelope.
<LEND>

<L>12684<pc>0182-b<k1>fzva<k2>fzva
{#fzva#}¦ {%ṛṣva, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ṛṣ%}), Ved.
elevated, high, sublime, great; epithet of several
deities, especially of Agni and Indra. {%—Ṛṣva-vīra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. inhabited by sublime beings (as the
sky). {%—Ṛṣvaujas (˚va-oj˚), ās, ās, as,%} Ved. pos-
sessing high power.
<LEND>

<L>12685<pc>0182-b<k1>fhat<k2>fhat
{#fhat#}¦ {%ṛhat, an, atī, at,%} Ved. small, weak,
powerless.
<LEND>
<H>{#F x X#}

<L>12685.1<pc>0182-b<k1>F<k2>F
{#F#}¦ {#x X#} No Sanskrit word begins with any of these vowels;
{%ṝ%} appears only in the gen. plur. of nouns terminating
in {%ṛ,%} in the acc. plur. of fem. nouns. of relationship
in {%ṛ,%} and in the nom. and acc. plur. of neuter nouns
in {%ṛ.%} As to the vowel {%ḷ%} it occurs only in some
forms of the root {%kḷp.%} The long {%ḹ%} is a mere
invention of grammarians.
<LEND>

<L>12685.2<pc>0182-b<k1>x<k2>x
{{Lbody=12685.1}}
<LEND>
<L>12685.3<pc>0182-b<k1>X<k2>X
{{Lbody=12685.1}}
<LEND>

<L>12686<pc>0182-b<k1>F<k2>F<h>1
{#F#} 1¦. {%ṝ,%} ind. a particle uttered at the be-
ginning of a speech; an interjection of warding off
reproach and terror; ({%ṝs%} or {%rī%}), f. the mother of the
gods; also of the demons; recollection; ({%ā%}), m. a N.
of Bhairava; a Dānava or demon; the breast; motion,
going. {%—Ṝ-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>12687<pc>0182-b<k1>F<k2>F<h>2
{#F#} 2¦. {%ṝ%} for rt. 4. {%ṛ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>12688<pc>0182-b<k1>x<k2>x
{#x#}¦ {%ḷ,%} ind. the earth; a mountain; the
mother of the gods; the divine nature; a mystical
letter. {%—Lṛ-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ḷ.%}
{%—Lṛ-varṇa, am,%} n. the vowel {%ḷ.%}
<LEND>

<L>12689<pc>0182-b<k1>X<k2>X
{#X#}¦ {%ḹ,%} ind. a mother; a divine female;
female nature; ({%ḹs%}) m. a N. of Śiva; ({%ḹs%}), f. the
mother of the Dānavas; wife of a Daitya; the mother
of the all-bestowing cow of plenty; ind. a mystical
letter used once or repeatedly in Mantras or mystical
formularies; (the letters {%ṝ%} and {%ḹ%} are employed in
the same manner; they have apparently no significa-
tion, but are personified and invested with mystical
properties in the Tantras.)
<LEND>
<H>{#e#}

<L>12690<pc>0182-b<k1>e<k2>e<h>1
{#e#} 1¦. {%e,%} the eleventh vowel of the alphabet,
corresponding to the letter {%e%} as pronounced in most
languages, and having the sound of {%e%} in {%prey, grey.%}
In English, however, this sound is rarely given to {%e.%}
{%—E-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%e.%}
<LEND>

<L>12691<pc>0182-b<k1>e<k2>e<h>2
{#e#} 2¦. {%e,%} ind. an interjection of remembering,
addressing, censure or contempt, and compassion.
<LEND>

<L>12692<pc>0182-b<k1>e<k2>e<h>3
{#e#} 3¦. {%e, es,%} m. a N. of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>12693<pc>0182-b<k1>e<k2>e<h>4
{#e#} 4¦. {%e (ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%aiti, -tum,%} to come,
come near, come to, to fall to one's share (with acc.);
to arrive at, enter; to addict one's self to; to fall
into; to gain: Intens. Ved. {%eyate,%} to hasten towards;
to request, to obtain by entreaty.
<LEND>

<L>12694<pc>0182-b<k1>eka<k2>eka
{#eka#}¦ {%eka, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. 5. {%i;%}
perhaps fr. the pronom. base {%e%} contained in {%etad%}),
one, alone, solitary, single, happening only once; the
same, one and the same, identical; single of its kind,
unique, singular, chief, pre-eminent, excellent; one
of two or many [cf. {%eka-tara, eka-tama%}]; in later
Sanskrit used as an indefinite article; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a man, the son of Raja.
<LEND>

<L>12695<pc>0182-b<k1>eka<k2>eka
{%Eka%}¦ follows the declension of pronominals (see
Gram. 200, 237), and may be declined in the plural (e. g.
{%eke,%} some, several; {%eke — eke%} or {%eke — apare%} or {%eke — %}
{%anye%} or {%eke — eke — apare%} or {%eke — anye — eke — apare%}
{%—apare,%} some — others). Sometimes {%eka%} may be
repeated in the sense of ‘the one — the other, one — an-
other’ (e. g. {%eka — eka = eka — anya%} or {%eka — dvitīya,%}
[Page0182-c+ 81]
one — the other), or in the sense of ‘one after another’
(e. g. {%eka ekaḥ puruṣaḥ,%} one man after another). It
is often used in the middle of compounds either sub-
stantively or adverbially (e. g. {%puṇyaika-karmā,%} prac-
tising only virtue; {%svargaika-sammukhī,%} f. look-
ing only up to the sky; {%kara-pādaika-hīnas,%} de-
prived of one foot and one hand). In Vedic Sanskrit
it may sometimes be placed, together with {%na,%} before
a decad to lessen it by one, being then used in the
inst. or acc. fem., inst. or abl. neut. (e. g. {%ekayā na%}
{%triṃśat%} or {%ekāṃ na triṃśat%} = twenty-nine; {%ekena%}
{%na viṃśatiḥ%} or {%ekād na viṃśatiḥ%} = nineteen). In
compounds and derivatives {%eka%} never appears in its
fem. form {%ekā%} (e. g. {%ekasyāḥ kṣīram,%} the milk of
one female, is compounded into {%eka-kṣīram%} not
{%ekā-kṣīram%}); [cf. Lith. <nsi>ni-ékas,</nsi> ‘no:’ Hib. <nsi>each,</nsi>
‘any;’ <nsi>neach,</nsi> ‘any one, one, some one, he;’ <nsi>neach-</nsi>
<nsi>tar,</nsi> ‘neither;’ <nsi>neachdarach,</nsi> ‘neutral:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἑκάτερος</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἕκα-τος</lang> Lat. <nsi>œquus, c-ocles</nsi> fr. <nsi>êc-ocles:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>ha</nsi> in compounds, as <nsi>haihs,</nsi> Them. <nsi>haiha,</nsi>
<nsi>ha-iha,</nsi> ‘one-eyed;’ <nsi>ha-nfs,</nsi> Them. <nsi>ha-nfa,</nsi> ‘one-
handed;’ <nsi>halts,</nsi> Them. <nsi>ha-lta,</nsi> ‘lame;’ <nsi>ha-lbs,</nsi>
Them. <nsi>ha-lba,</nsi> ‘half.’] {%—Eka-ṛkthin,%} &c.; see
{%eka-rikthin,%} &c. {%—Eka-kapāla, as, ā, am,%} con-
sisting of one cup, contained in one cup. {%—Eka-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} doing only one thing; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), one-handed, one-rayed. {%—Eka-karma-%}
{%kāraka, as, ā, am,%} doing the same thing, of
the same profession. {%—Eka-kārya, am,%} n. sole
business, the same business or work; ({%as, ā, am%}),
performing the same work, answering the same end.
{%—Eka-kāla, as,%} m. one time, the same time; ({%am%}),
ind. at one time, only once; ({%e%}), ind. at the same
time, at once. {%—Ekakāla-bhojana, am,%} n. eating
but one meal in any given time. {%—Ekakālika, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} happening only once; happening once a day.
{%—Ekakālīna, as, ā, am,%} contemporary, coeval,
simultaneous. {%—Eka-kuṇḍala, as,%} m. an epithet of
Kuvera; of Balabhadra; and of Śeṣa, the king of
the Nāgas. {%—Eka-kuṣṭha, am,%} n. a kind of leprosy,
ichthyosis. {%—Eka-kṣīra, am,%} n. the milk of one
(nurse &c.). {%—Eka-guru, us,%} or {%eka-guruka, as,%}
m. a spiritual brother, pupil of the same pre-
ceptor; having the same preceptor. {%—Eka-grāma,%}
{%as,%} m. the same village. {%—Ekagrāmīṇa%} or {%eka-%}
{%grāmīya, as, ā, am,%} inhabiting the same village.
{%—Eka-cakra, as, ā, am,%} having only one wheel;
passed over by the wheel (of the carriage) of
only one (king), i. e. governed by only one king;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town of
the Kīcakas. {%—Ekacakravarti-tā,%} f. state of being
sole master of the whole earth. {%—Ekacakra-vartin,%}
{%ī,%} m. sole master of the whole earth. {%—Ekacatvā-%}
{%riṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the forty-first. {%—Eka-catvāriṃśat,%}
{%t,%} f. forty-one. {%—Eka-cara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} wander-
ing or living alone, not living in company, segregari-
ous, solitary, alone; having one follower; going
together or at the same time; gregarious; ({%as%}), m.
a rhinoceros. {%—Eka-caraṇa, as, ā, am,%} having only
one foot; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a fabulous race. {%—Eka-%}
{%cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} living alone, not in society; going
alone or with one follower only; ({%ī%}), m. a Pratyeka-
buddha; a follower of Buddha; ({%iṇī%}), f. a loyal wife.
{%—Eka-citta, am,%} n. fixedness of thought on one
object; one and the same thought, unanimity; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), thinking of one thing only, intent upon,
absorbed in (e. g. {%tad-ekacittā,%} f. thinking only of
him); having the same thought, of one mind,
agreeing, concurring. {%—Ekacitta-tā,%} f. fixedness of
mind, agreement, unanimity. {%—Ekacittī-bhūya,%} ind.
having become unanimous. {%—Eka-cintana, am,%} n.
thinking of only one thing. {%—Eka-cūrṇi, is,%} m., N.
of an author. {%—Eka-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} of one mind,
unanimous. {%—Eka-codana, am,%} n. mentioning in the
singular number; ({%as, ā, am%}), resting upon one rule.
{%—Eka-cchāya, as, ā, am,%} having only shadow,
quite dark. {%—Eka-ja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. born alone or
single, produced alone; growing alone (said of a
tree); alone of its kind; of one kind, unchanging.
{%—Eka-janman, ā,%} m. a king, a sovereign (whose
birth is pre-eminent); once-born, a Śūdra (opposed
[Page0183-a+ 81]
to {%dvi-janman,%} ‘twice-born’). {%—Eka-jāta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of one parentage, born of the same parents.
{%—Eka-jāti, is, is, i,%} once-born; belonging to the
same family or kind, of the same caste; ({%is%}), m. a
Śūdra. {%—Ekajāti-pratibaddha, as, ā, am,%} bound
only to one birth, not born again. {%—Eka-jātīya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} belonging to the same family or kind; of the
same kind. {%—Eka-jyā,%} f. the cord of an arc; sine of
30° or of the radius. {%—Eka-jyotis, is,%} m. an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Eka-tama, as, ā, at,%} one of many; one
of two; one (used sometimes as an indefinite article).
{%—Eka-tara, as, ā, am%} (neut. {%am%} not {%at%} by Pā-
ṇini VII. 1, 26), one of two, either, other, different;
one of many; [Gr. <lang n="greek">ἑκάτερος</lang> Hib. <nsi>n'-eachtar,</nsi>
‘neither of two.’] {%—Eka-tā,%} f. oneness, unity, union,
coincidence, identity. {%—Eka-tāna, as, ā, am,%} directed
to one object only, having the mind fixed on one
object only, closely attentive; ({%as%}), m. attention fixed
on only one object; musical harmony, (? a various
reading for the next.) {%—Eka-tāla, as,%} m. harmony,
unison, the accurate adjustment of song, dance, and
instrumental music; ({%ī%}), f. an instrument for beating
time, any instrument having but one note. {%—Eka-%}
{%tīrthin, ī, inī, i,%} bathing in the same holy water, in-
habiting the same hermitage; ({%ī%}), m. an associate in
religious offices or objects, a spiritual brother. {%—Eka-%}
{%tejana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having one shaft (as an ar-
row). {%—Ekatriṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the thirty-first. {%—Eka-%}
{%triṃśat, t,%} f. thirty-one. {%—Eka-trika, as,%} m., N.
of a ceremony. {%—Eka-tva, am,%} n. oneness, unity,
union, coincidence, identity; (in gram.) the singular
number. {%—Eka-daṃṣṭra, as,%} m. single-toothed or
tusked; a N. of Gaṇeśa, as having one tusk, the
fellow-tusk being broken off in a scuffle by Kārtti-
keya, or according to another legend by Paraśu-rāma.
{%—Eka-daṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%} having only one stick;
designation of a class of beggars; [cf. {%tri-daṇḍin.%}]
{%—Eka-danta, as,%} m. a N. of Gaṇeśa; [cf. {%eka-%}
{%daṃṣṭra.%}] {%—Eka-diś, k,%} f. the same region. {%—Eka-%}
{%duḥkha-sukha, as, ā, am,%} sympathizing, having the
same joys and sorrows. {%—Eka-dṛś, k, k, k,%} one-
eyed; ({%k%}), m. a crow (as having excellent sight); an
epithet of Śiva (as having one eye in his forehead).
{%—Eka-dṛśya, as, ā, am,%} alone worthy of being
beheld, the sole object of vision. {%—Eka-dṛṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} f. gaze fixed upon one object. {%—Eka-devata%} or
{%eka-devatya, as, ā, am,%} devoted or offered to one
deity; directed to one deity. {%—Eka-deśa, as,%} m.
one spot; a part, a portion or division of a whole;
({%ena%}), inst. partly; ({%as, ā, am%}), occupying the
same place. {%—Ekadeśa-stha, as, ā, am,%} situated in
the same region. {%—Ekadeśin, ī, inī, i,%} consisting
of parts or portions, divided into parts (as a whole).
{%—Eka-deha, as, ā, am,%} having only one body,
single-bodied, consisting of only one individual;
elegantly formed; ({%as%}), m. the planet Mercury.
{%—Eka-dyū, ūs,%} m., N. of a son of Nodhas (men-
tioned Ṛg-veda VIII. 69, 6. Anukram.). {%—Eka-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n. an excellent gift, an honorific offer-
ing; ({%as%}), m. a kind of jug with which water is
taken up at certain religious ceremonies; ({%ās%}), f. pl.
(scil. {%āpaḥ%}) the water taken up by means of these
vessels. {%—Ekadhana-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. taking or ob-
taining the vessels of water called Ekadhana; obtain-
ing an honorific offering. {%—Ekadhanin, ī, inī, i,%}
Ved. carrying the vessels called Ekadhana. {%—Eka-%}
{%dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having the same properties, of
the same kind, professing the same religion. {%—Eka-%}
{%dhur, ūr,%} f. a particular load or conveyance (?).
{%—Eka-dhura%} or {%ekadhurā-vaha%} or {%ekadhurīṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fit for but one kind of labour, or for only
one yoke; cattle for special burden. {%—Eka-nakṣa-%}
{%tra, am,%} n. a lunar mansion consisting of only one
star. {%—Eka-naṭa, as,%} m. the principal actor in a
drama, the manager, who recites the prologue.
{%—Ekanavata, as, ī, am,%} the ninety-first. {%—Eka-%}
{%navati, is,%} f. ninety-one. {%—Ekanavati-tama, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} the ninety-first. {%—Eka-nātha, as, ā, am,%}
having one master; ({%as%}), m. sole master or lord;
N. of a copyist. {%—Eka-nāyaka, as,%} m. an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Eka-niścaya, as,%} m. general agreement
[Page0183-b+ 81]
or conclusion; ({%as, ā, am%}), having come to the
same conclusion or resolution, having the same aim.
{%—Eka-niṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} intently fixed on one
object. {%—Eka-nīḍa, as, ā, am,%} having only one
seat; having a common home. {%—Eka-netra, as,%} m.
an epithet of Śiva (‘one-eyed’). {%—Eka-nemi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} Ved. having one circumference. {%—Eka-pakṣa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of the same side or party, an associate, a
firm partisan; partial, taking one view only; ({%as%}),
m. one side; ({%e%}), ind. in one point of view. {%—Eka-%}
{%pañcāśa, as, ī, am,%} the fifty-first. {%—Eka-pañcāśat,%}
{%t,%} f. fifty-one. {%—Ekapañcāśat-tama, as, ī, am,%} the
fifty-first. {%—Eka-patika, as, ā, am,%} having the same
husband. {%—Eka-pattrikā,%} f. the plant Ocimum Gra-
tissimum. {%—Eka-patni, is, is, i,%} having only one
wife. {%—Eka-patnī,%} f. only one wife; the wife of one
man, a faithful wife, one devoted to her husband;
the wife of a man who has no other wives; the wife
of the same man. {%—Eka-pad%} or {%eka-pād, pāt,%}
{%padī, pat,%} having only one foot, limping, lame, in-
complete; ({%pāt%}), m. an epithet of Śiva or of Viṣṇu;
N. of a Dānava; ({%padī%}), f. a foot-path; a path, a
way, a road, ({%Aja ekapād, t,%} m., Ved. ‘the one-
footed driver,’ probably a deity presiding over storms;
according to the commentator a N. of the sun.)
{%—Eka-pada, am,%} n. only one step; a simple word,
a simple nominal formation; present time, same
time; ({%e%}), ind. at the same moment, at once, sud-
denly; ({%as, ā, am%}), having only one foot; consisting
of a single word, named with a single word; ({%as%}),
m. a kind of coitus; ({%ā%}), f. (scil. {%ṛc%}) a verse con-
sisting of only one Pāda or quarter-stanza; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a fabulous race. {%—Ekapada-vat,%} ind. like
one word. {%—Ekapada-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing in
the same word. {%—Eka-padi,%} ind. upon one foot,
with one foot. {%—Eka-para, as, ā, am,%} Ved. deciding
by one (mark of the dice), an epithet of the dice in
which one is decisive or of pre-eminent importance.
{%—Eka-pari,%} ind. one over or under, a term at dice.
{%—Eka-parṇā,%} f., N. of a younger sister of Durgā
and wife of Asita-Devala; an epithet of Durgā.
{%—Eka-parvataka, as,%} m. the same mountain, or
N. of a certain mountain. {%—Eka-palāśa, as,%} m. a
single Butea Frondosa. {%—Eka-pāṭalā,%} f., N. of a
younger sister of Durgā and wife of Jaigīṣavya; an
epithet of Durgā. {%—Eka-pāṇa, as,%} m. a single wager
or stake. {%—Eka-pāta, as, ā, am,%} happening at once,
sudden, rapid, coming suddenly. {%—Eka-pātin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} standing alone or solitary, independant; ({%inī%}), f.
(scil. {%ṛc%}) a verse to be taken by itself or regarded
independently of the hymn to which it belongs.
{%—Eka-pāda, as,%} m. one foot; one and the same
Pāda; ({%as, ā, am%}), having only one foot; standing
on one foot, using only one foot; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a fabulous race. {%—Eka-pādikā,%} f. title of the
second book of the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Eka-%}
{%pāduka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a fabulous race (‘wearing
only one shoe’). {%—Eka-piṅga%} or {%eka-piṅgala, as,%}
m. an epithet of Kuvera (‘having a yellow mark in
the place of one of his eyes’). {%—Eka-piṇḍa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} related, near of kin, united by the offering of
the funeral cake. {%—Ekapiṇḍa-tā,%} f. or {%ekapiṇḍa-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. connection by the funeral cake, con-
sanguinity. {%—Eka-putra, as,%} m. having only one
son. {%—Eka-puruṣa, as,%} m. the one supreme spirit;
({%as, ā, am%}), consisting of only one man. {%—Eka-%}
{%puṣpā,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Eka-pṛthaktva, am,%}
n. unity and distinctness. {%—Eka-prakāra, as, ā, am,%}
of the same kind. {%—Eka-prakhya, as, ā, am,%} singu-
larly like, pre-eminently similar. {%—Eka-prabhutva,%}
{%am,%} n. the sovereignty of one, monarchy. {%—Eka-%}
{%prayatna, as,%} m. one effort (of the voice). {%—Eka-%}
{%prahārika, as, ā, am,%} killed by one blow. {%—Eka-%}
{%prāṇa-yoga, as,%} m. union in one breath. {%—Eka-phala,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having one or a principal result or object;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant. {%—Eka-buddhi, is, is, i,%} having
only one thought; ({%is%}), m., N. of a frog in the
Pañca-tantra. {%—1. eka-bhakta, as, ā, am,%} serving
one and the same master; worshipping one deity.
 — 2. {%eka-bhakta, as, ā, am,%} eating together; ({%am%}),
n. eating but one meal (a day). {%—Ekabhakta-vrata, %}
[Page0183-c+ 81]
{%am,%} n. eating but once a day as a religious obligation.
 — 1. {%eka-bhakti, is, is, i,%} of one faith, believing in
one deity. {%—2. eka-bhakti, is,%} f. eating but one meal
(a day). {%—Eka-bhāva, as, ā, am,%} of the same
nature; of a simple or single nature or temperament;
({%as%}), m. becoming one, oneness, agreement. {%—Eka-%}
{%bhukta, as, ā, am,%} eating but one meal (a day &c.);
eating together. {%—Eka-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being one,
undivided; not distracted, closely attentive. {%—Eka-%}
{%bhojana, am,%} n. eating one meal a day; eating in
common, feeding together. {%—Eka-mati, is,%} f. the
mind fixed upon one object; ({%is, is, i%}), unanimous.
{%—Eka-manas, ās, ās, as,%} fixing the mind upon
one object, having only one thought, attentive;
unanimous. {%—Eka-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of
one. {%—Eka-mātra, as, ā, am,%} of one syllabic instant.
{%—Eka-mukha, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} having the face
directed towards one spot, having the same aim; hav-
ing one chief or head, having one overseer. {%—Eka-%}
{%mūrdhan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having the face directed to
one spot, directed towards the same aim. {%—Eka-%}
{%mūlā,%} f. the plants Linum Usitatissimum and Desmo-
dium (Hedysarum) Gangeticum. {%—Eka-yakāra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} containing only one {%y%}. {%—Eka-yaṣṭi, is,%} f.
a single string of pearls. {%—Eka-yaṣṭikā,%} f. a single
string of flowers, pearls, &c. {%—Eka-yāvan, ā,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Eka-yoni, is, is, i,%} of the same
womb, uterine; of the same mother, family or caste.
{%—Eka-raja, as,%} m. the plant Verbesina Scandens;
see {%bhṛṅga-rāja%}. {%—Eka-rasa, as,%} m. the only fla-
vour, the only pleasure; ({%as, ā, am%}), of one flavour,
relishing or finding pleasure in only one thing. {%—Eka-%}
{%rasika, as, ā, am,%} influenced by one feeling, relishing
one thing only. {%—Eka-rāj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} shining alone; ({%ṭ%}),
m. single or absolute king, the king by himself as dis-
tinct from the people. {%—Eka-rāja, as,%} m. an absolute
king. {%—Eka-rātra, as,%} m. a ceremony lasting one
night; ({%am%}), n. duration of one night, one night, a
night. {%—Ekarātrika, as, ā, am,%} sufficient for one
night (or day). {%—Eka-rāśi, is,%} f. a heap, a crowd.
{%—Ekarāśi-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} heaped or collected
together. {%—Eka-rikthin, ī,%} m. a coheir. {%—Eka-%}
{%rūpa, am,%} n. one form, one kind; ({%as, ā, am%}),
uniform, of one kind, one-coloured. {%—Ekarūpa-tas,%}
ind. in one form, unalterably. {%—Ekarūpa-tā,%} f. uni-
formity, unvariableness. {%—Ekarūpya, as, ā, am,%}
formed or arising from one. {%—Ekarca (eka-ṛca),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} consisting of one verse; ({%am%}), n., Ved.
a hymn consisting of only one verse. {%—Ekartu (eka-%}
{%ṛtu), us,%} m., Ved. one time or season. {%—Ekarṣi%}
{%(eka-ṛṣi), is,%} m. the only or chief Ṛṣi. {%—Eka-%}
{%lavya, as,%} m., N. of a son of Hiraṇya-dhanus and
king of the Niṣādas. {%—Eka-liṅga, am,%} n. a place
or district in which for five Krośas there is but one
Phallus, an isolated Liṅga; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Kuvera; [cf. {%eka-piṅga.%}] {%—Eka-lū, ūs,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Eka-vaktra, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava; perhaps
a wrong form for {%eka-cakra%}. {%—Eka-vacana, am,%} n.
the singular number. {%—Eka-vat,%} ind. like one, simple.
{%—Ekavad-bhāva, as,%} m. an aggregate of many, as
in grammar, the formation of a compound noun of
several nouns. {%—Eka-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} of one colour,
one-coloured; identical; of one tribe, of one caste;
consisting of only one letter; of one quality; ({%ī%}), f.
beating time, marking musical measure by clapping
the hands, or the instrument which does so, a casta-
net; see {%eka-tālī%}. {%—Ekavarṇa-vat,%} ind. like one
letter. {%—Ekavarṇa-samīkaraṇa, am,%} n. an equation
involving only one unknown quantity; uniliteral equa-
tion. {%—Ekavarṇika, as, ā, am,%} of one colour, of
one caste. {%—Eka-varṣikā,%} f. a heifer one year old.
{%—Eka-vasana, as, ā, am,%} having only one gar-
ment or robe. {%—Eka-vastra, as, ā, am,%} having only
one garment, in one dress. {%—Ekavastra-tā,%} f. the
state of having only one garment. {%—Ekavastra-%}
{%saṃvīta, as, ā, am,%} clothed in one garment. {%—Eka-%}
{%vastrārdha-saṃvīta, as, ā, am,%} clothed in half a single
garment. {%—Eka-vākya, am,%} n. one opinion. {%—Eka-%}
{%vākya-tā,%} f. unanimity. {%—Ekavāṇa-vat,%} ind. as one
arrow. {%—Eka-vāda, as,%} m. a musical instrument, a
kind of drum or tabor. {%—Eka-vādyā,%} f., Ved. a kind
[Page0184-a+ 81]
of imp or demon. {%—Eka-vāram%} or {%eka-vāre,%} ind.
only once, at once, at one time, suddenly. {%—Eka-%}
{%vāsa, as, ā, am,%} having one house or one residence.
{%—Eka-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%} having only one garment,
in one dress. {%—Ekaviṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the twenty-
first; consisting of twenty-one; connected with the
Ekaviṃśa-stoma; ({%as%}), m. the Ekaviṃśa-stoma; N. of
one of the six Pṛṣṭhya-stomas. {%—Ekaviṃśaka, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} the twenty-first; containing twenty-one. {%—Eka-%}
{%viṃśat, t,%} or {%eka-viṃśati, is,%} f. twenty-one, a com-
bination or collection of twenty-one. {%—Ekaviṃśati-%}
{%tama, as, ī, am,%} the twenty-first. {%—Ekaviṃśati-dhā,%}
ind. twenty-one-fold, in twenty-one parts. {%—Eka-%}
{%viṃśa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. connected with the Eka-
viṃśa-stoma. {%—Ekaviṃśa-stoma, as,%} m., Ved. a Stoma
consisting of twenty-one parts. {%—Eka-vidha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of one kind, simple. {%—Eka-vilocana, as, ā, am,%}
one-eyed; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a fabulous race of people.
{%—Ekaviṣayin, ī,%} m. having one common object or
end, a rival. {%—Eka-vīra, as,%} m. a pre-eminent hero
or warrior; N. of a plant. {%—Eka-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. an
isolated tree; a desert place in which but one tree is
seen for four Krośas. {%—Eka-vṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. simple.
{%—Eka-vṛnda, as,%} m. a peculiar disease of the
throat. {%—Eka-vṛṣa, as,%} m., Ved. the chief bull,
the master of the herd. {%—Eka-veṇi, is%} or {%ī,%} f. a single
braid of hair (worn by a woman as a mark of mourn-
ing for an absent husband &c.); a woman whose
hair is tied in a single braid. {%—Eka-veśman, a,%} n. a
solitary house or room. {%—Eka-vyavasāyin, ī,%} m.
following the same employment. {%—Eka-vrātya, as,%}
m., Ved. the chief or principal Vrātya. {%—Eka-śata,%}
{%am,%} n. 101; ({%as, ī, am%}), the 101st. {%—Ekaśata-%}
{%tama, as, ī, am,%} the 101st. {%—Ekaśata-dhā,%} ind.
101-fold; in 101 parts. {%—Ekaśata-vidha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} 101-fold. {%—Eka-śapha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. whole-
hoofed, not cloven-hoofed; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. n.
any animal whose hoof is not cloven; ({%as%}), m.
a horse. {%—Eka-śaraṇa, am,%} n. one only hope or
refuge, especially applied to a deity. {%—Eka-śarīra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of one body or blood; consanguineous.
{%—Ekaśarīrānvaya (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m. consangui-
neous descent. {%—Ekaśarīrārambha (˚ra-ār˚), as,%}
m. commencement of consanguinity by the union of
father and mother. {%—Eka-śarīrāvayava (˚ra-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a descendant in a right line, a blood-kinsman.
{%—Ekaśarīrāvayava-tva (˚ra-av˚), am,%} n. con-
sanguineous descent or connection. {%—Eka-śākha, as,%}
m. a Brāhman of the same branch or school. {%—Eka-%}
{%śāla, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Eka-śiti-pad, pāt,%}
{%padī, pat,%} Ved. having one white foot. {%—Eka-%}
{%śīrṣan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having the face turned towards
the same place. {%—Ekaśīla-samācara, as, ā, am,%}
one who leads one manner of life, whose manners
are always the same. {%—Eka-śuṅga, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having one sheath. {%—Eka-śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} having
only one horn; ({%as%}), m. a unicorn, a rhinoceros, an
epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%ās%}), m. a class of Pitṛs; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of the mind-born daughter of the Pitṛs called
Sukālas. {%—Eka-śepa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Eka-%}
{%śeṣa, as,%} m. ‘the remainder of one only,’ a term in
grammar denoting that of two or more words only
one remains or is retained (e. g. the dual {%rāmau%} is
the one remainder of {%rāmaḥ + rāmaḥ%}). {%—Eka-%}
{%śruta, as, ā, am,%} once heard. {%—Ekaśruta-dhara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} keeping in mind what one has heard
once. {%—Ekaśrutadhara-tva, am,%} n. state of such a
person. {%—Eka-śruti, is,%} f. the hearing of only one
sound, monotony; the neutral accentless tone; ({%i%}),
ind. in a monotonous manner. {%—Eka-śruṣṭi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} Ved. obedient to one command. {%—Ekaṣaṣṭa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the sixty-first; connected with sixty-one.
{%—Eka-ṣaṣṭi, is,%} f. sixty-one. {%—Ekaṣaṣṭi-%}
{%tama, as, ī, am,%} the sixty-first. {%—Ekasaptata, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} the seventy-first. {%—Eka-saptati, is,%} f. seventy-
one. {%—Ekasaptati-tama, as, ī, am,%} the seventy-
first. {%—Eka-sabha, am,%} n. a common or general
place of meeting. {%—Eka-sarga, as, ā, am,%} closely
attentive, having the mind intent upon one object.
{%—Eka-sahasra, am,%} n. 1001. {%—Eka-sākṣika, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} witnessed by one. {%—Eka-sārtham,%} ind. to
[Page0184-b+ 81]
gether, in one company. {%—Eka-sūtra, am,%} n. a
small double drum played by a string and ball at-
tached to the body of it. {%—Eka-sūnu, us,%} m. an
only son. {%—Eka-stoma, as,%} m. ‘consisting of one
Stoma,’ N. of a Soma ceremony. {%—Eka-stha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} standing together, remaining in one place, re-
maining in the same place, conjoined, collected,
combined, assembled. {%—Eka-sthāna, am,%} n. one
place, the same place. {%—Eka-haṃsa, as,%} m. the
chief or highest Haṃsa (an allegorical designation of
the soul); N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Eka-hāyana, as, ī, am,%}
one year old; ({%ī%}), f. a heifer one year old; ({%am%}), n.
the period of one year. {%—Ekāṃśa (eka-aṃ˚), as,%} m.
a distinct or separate part, a part in general. {%—Ekā-%}
{%kṣa (eka-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} having only one axle;
one-eyed; having an excellent eye; ({%as%}), m. a crow;
an epithet of Śiva; N. of a Dānava. {%—Ekākṣara%}
{%(eka-ak˚), am,%} n. a monosyllable; the sacred mono-
syllable {%om%}. {%—Ekāṣara-koṣa, as,%} m. a vocabulary
of monosyllabic words by Puruṣottamadeva. {%—Ekā-%}
{%kṣara-gaṇapati-stotra, am,%} n. a hymn in honour of
Gaṇeśa, a portion of the Rudrayāmala. {%—Ekākṣarī-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. the production of only one syllable, con-
traction. {%—Ekāgra (eka-ag˚), as, ā, am,%} having one
point, fixing one's attention on only one point or
object, closely attentive, intent; undisturbed, unper-
plexed; known, celebrated; single-pointed; ({%as%}), m.
(in mathematics) the whole of the long side of a figure
which is subdivided. {%—Ekāgra-citta, as, ā, am,%}
having the mind intent on one object. {%—Ekāgra-%}
{%tas,%} ind. with undivided attention. {%—Ekāgra-tā,%} f.
or {%ekāgra-tva, am,%} n. intentness in the pursuit of
one object, close and undisturbed attention. {%—Ekā-%}
{%gra-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} fixing one's eyes on one spot.
{%—Ekāgra-manas, as,%} n. intentness. {%—Ekāgrya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} closely attentive; ({%am%}), n. close attention.
{%—Ekāṅga (eka-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a single member, a
single part; ({%as%}), m. a body-guard; the planet
Mercury; the planet Mars; an epithet of Viṣṇu;
({%am%}), n. sandal-wood. {%—Ekāṅgikā,%} f. a preparation
made with sandal-wood. {%—Ekātapatra (eka-āt˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} characterized by one umbrella (said of
universal sovereignty having an umbrella as one of
its insignia). {%—Ekātma-tā,%} f. the unity of spiritual
essence, the doctrine of one universal spirit. {%—Ekāt-%}
{%man (eka-āt˚), ā,%} m. the one spirit; ({%ā, ā, a%}),
depending solely on self, solitary. {%—Ekātmya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} only, alone, homogeneous. {%—Ekādaśa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} the eleventh; consisting of eleven, lasting eleven
months; ({%ī%}), f. the eleventh day of the half month,
especially sacred to Viṣṇu, when fasting is very effi-
cacious; presentation of offerings to deceased ancestors
or Pitṛs on the eleventh day after his decease, on
which occasion Brāhmans are fed and the period of
impurity for a Brāhman terminates; ({%am%}), n. the
number eleven. {%—Ekādaśaka, as, ā, am,%} consisting
of eleven, consisting of eleven parts; ({%am%}), n. the
number eleven. {%—Ekādaśa-kṛtvas,%} ind. eleven
times. {%—Ekā-daśan, a,%} pl. eleven. {%—Ekādaśama,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the eleventh. {%—Ekādaśa-vidha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} eleven-fold. {%—Ekādaśāha (˚śa-aha), as,%} m. a
sacrifice lasting eleven days. {%—Ekādaśin, ī, inī, i,%}
consisting of eleven; ({%inī%}), f., Ved. the number eleven.
{%—Ekādaśina, as, ā, am,%} belonging to eleven (?).
{%—Ekādaśī-tattva, am,%} n. part of the Smṛti-tattva.
{%—Ekādaśī-vrata, am,%} n. fasting on the eleventh day.
{%—Ekādaśottama (˚śa-ut˚), as,%} m. chief of eleven;
epithet of Śiva (chief among the eleven Rudras).
{%—Ekādeśa (eka-ād˚), as,%} m. one substitute for two
or more letters (e. g. one vowel substituted for two
other vowels either by the blending of the two vowels
together or by the dropping of one). {%—Ekādhipati%}
{%(eka-adh˚), is,%} m. a sole monarch. {%—Ekānaṃśā%}
{%(eka-an-aṃśa),%} f. ‘the only (day) receiving no part
(of the moon),’ an epithet of Kuhū or the day of the
new moon personified as a daughter of Aṅgiras and
identified with Durgā, born together with Kṛṣṇa,
worshipped with Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva. {%—Ekānu-%}
{%diṣṭa (eka-an˚), am,%} n. (scil. {%śrāddha%}) a funeral
ceremony performed for only one ancestor recently
dead; ({%as, ā, am%}), left as a funeral feast; one who
[Page0184-c+ 81]
has recently partaken of it. {%—Ekānta (eka-an˚), as,%}
m. the only end or aim, exclusiveness; a lonely, re-
tired or secret place; devotion to one, worship of
one being, unitarian doctrine, monotheism; ({%am%} or
{%ena%} or {%e%}), ind. solely, only exclusively, absolutely; ne-
cessarily; alone, apart, privately; much, exceedingly;
({%as, ā, am%}), directed towards one point or object;
worshipping only one; excessive; solitary, lonely,
retired; aside, apart. {%—Ekānta-karuṇa, as, ā, am,%}
very compassionate, weakly charitable. {%—Ekānta-tas,%}
ind. solely, only exclusively, apart; see {%ekāntam.%}
{%—Ekānta-tva, am,%} n. exclusive worship. {%—Ekānta-%}
{%duḥṣamā (˚dus-samā),%} f. ‘containing only bad
years,’ with Jainas an epithet of two spokes in the
wheel of time, the sixth of the Avasarpiṇī and the
first of the Utsarpiṇī. {%—Ekānta-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
being alone or solitary. {%—Ekānta-mati, is, is, i,%}
devoted to one object. {%—Ekāntara (eka-an˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} separated by one intermediate member, next
but one. {%—Ekānta-rāj, ṭ,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Ekānta-vihārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} a solitary wanderer.
{%—Ekānta-suṣamā (˚su-samā),%} f. ‘containing ex-
clusively good years,’ with Jainas an epithet of two
spokes in the wheel of time, the first of the Avasar-
piṇī and the sixth of the Utsarpiṇī. {%—Ekānta-sthita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} staying or remaining alone or apart.
{%—Ekāntika, as, ā, am,%} final, conclusive. {%—Ekānti-%}
{%ka-tva, am,%} n. the being devoted to one object.
{%—Ekānti-tva, am,%} n. devotion to one (with loc.).
{%—Ekāntin, ī, inī, i,%} devoted to only one, having
the mind fixed on only one object, worshipping only
one (with gen.). {%—Ekānna (eka-an˚), am,%} n. one
and the same food; ({%as%}), m. a mess-mate. {%—Ekānna-%}
{%bhuj, k,%} m. a mess-mate. {%—Ekānnādin (eka-anna-%}
{%ād˚), ī, inī, i,%} eating a supply of food from one
person only. {%—Ekābdā (eka-ab˚),%} f. a heifer one
year old. {%—Ekāyana (eka-ay˚), am,%} n. a lonely,
retired place; a meeting-place; rendezvous of all
thoughts, union of thoughts; devotion to one, doc-
trine of unity, monotheism; N. of a Śākhā or
branch of the Veda; ({%as, ā, am%}), passable for only
one, as a foot-path; fixing one's thoughts on one
object, closely attentive, intent. {%—Ekāyana-gata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has fixed all his thoughts on one
object. {%—Ekāyu (eka-āyu), us, us, u,%} Ved. assem-
bling or collecting all living beings; the first living
being; (Sāy.) providing the most excellent food.
{%—Ekārṇava (eka-ar˚), as, am,%} m. n. a general
inundation. {%—Ekārtha (eka-ar˚), as,%} m. the same
object; ({%as, ā, am%}), having one or the same aim or
object; having one meaning; N. of a glossary; ex-
pressing one thing, forming only one notion. {%—Ekār-%}
{%tha-tā,%} f. or {%ekārtha-tva, am,%} n. state of having
only one aim or object. {%—Ekārtha-samupeta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} arrived at one object. {%—Ekārthī-bhāva, as,%}
m. the having one meaning. {%—Ekāvama (eka-av˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} inferior or less by one. {%—Ekāvayava%}
{%(eka-av˚), as, ā, am,%} made up of the same mem-
bers or constituent parts. {%—Ekāvalī (eka-āv˚),%} f. a
single line, a single string of pearls, beads, flowers,
&c.; (in rhetoric) a series of periods in which there
is a regular transition from a predicate to a subject or
from a subject to a predicate. {%—Ekāśīta, as, ī, am,%}
the eighty-first. {%—Ekāśīti (eka-as˚), is,%} f. eighty-one.
{%—Ekāśīti-tama, as, ī, am,%} the eighty-first. {%—Ekā-%}
{%śrama (eka-āś˚), as,%} m. a solitary hermitage. {%—Ekā-%}
{%śrita (eka-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} resting upon or clinging
to one object. {%—Ekāśrita-guṇa, as,%} m. a simple
attribute or predicate, as form, taste, smell, &c.
{%—Ekāṣṭakā (eka-aṣ˚),%} f. the first or chief Ash-
ṭakā, either the first Aṣṭakā after full moon ({%=%}
{%Aṣṭakā%}) or the first Aṣṭakā of a year or a longer
period of time. {%—Ekāṣṭī,%} f. a pod or one seed of
cotton. {%—Ekāṣṭhīla (eka-aṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} having
one kernel; ({%as%}), m., N. of the plant Agati Grandi-
flora Desv.; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Clypea Hernandifolia.
{%—Ekāsanika, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%eka%} and {%āsana%}), hav-
ing only one seat. {%—Ekāha (eka-aha), as,%} m. the
period of one day; a ceremony or sacrifice lasting
only one day, a Soma sacrifice in which Soma is
only once prepared; ({%am%}), ind. during one day.
[Page0185-a+ 79]
{%—Ekāha-gama, as,%} m. a day's journey. {%—Ekā-%}
{%hāra (eka-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} taking food only once a
day. {%—Ekeṣa (eka-īṣā), as, ā, am,%} Ved. furnished
with one pole. {%—Ekaika (eka-eka), as, ā, am,%} one
by one, single, every single one; ({%am%}), ind. singly,
one by one. {%—Ekaika-tara, as, ā, am,%} one by one
(of many). {%—Ekaika-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} existing in
every single one. {%—Ekaika-śas,%} ind. one by one,
severally, seriatim. {%—Ekaikaśya, am,%} n. single state,
severalty; ({%ena%}), ind. severally. {%—Ekaiṣikā (eka-%}
{%eṣ˚),%} f., N. of a medicinal plant. {%—Ekokti (eka-uk˚),%}
{%is,%} f. a single expression, a single word. {%—Ekottara%}
{%(eka-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} greater or more by one, in-
creasing by one. {%—Ekottarikā,%} f. title of the fourth
Āgama of the Buddhists. {%—Ekodaka (eka-ud˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} connected (as relatives) by the offering of
funereal oblations of water to the same deceased an-
cestor. {%—Ekodātta (eka-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} having
one Udātta accent. {%—Ekoddiṣṭa (eka-ud˚), am,%} n.
(scil. {%śrāddha%}) the Śrāddha or funeral rite performed
for one definite individual deceased, not including
other ancestors. {%—Ekona (eka-ūna), as, ā, am,%} less
by one, minus one; (used in composition with {%viṃ-%}
{%śati%} and the following decads, e. g. {%ekonaviṃśati%} =
nineteen.) {%—Ekośikā,%} f. the plant Cissampelos Hexan-
dra (?). {%—Ekaugha-bhūta (eka-ogha-bh˚), as, ā, am,%}
collected into one mass, heaped or crowded together.
<LEND>

<L>12696<pc>0185-a<k1>ekaka<k2>ekaka
{%Ekaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ single, alone, solitary.
<LEND>

<L>12697<pc>0185-a<k1>ekata<k2>ekata
{%Ekata, as,%}¦ m., N. of a deity [cf. {%dvita%} and {%trita%}],
one of the seven Dharmarājartvijas; N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>12698<pc>0185-a<k1>ekatas<k2>ekatas
{%Ekatas,%}¦ ind. from one side, on one side, on one
part; singly, one by one; used sometimes as an abl.
c. of {%eka%} (e. g. {%ekato 'pi padāt,%} ‘after the same
word’); {%ekatas — ekatas,%} on the one hand — on the
other hand, on the one side — on the other side, here
 — there. {%—Ekato-dat, an, atī, at,%} having teeth on
only one side.
<LEND>

<L>12699<pc>0185-a<k1>ekatra<k2>ekatra
{%Ekatra,%}¦ ind. in one place, on one spot, in close
connection; in a combined manner, together; used
sometimes as a loc. c. of {%eka%} (e. g. {%ekatra kare,%} ‘on
one hand’); {%ekatra — aparatra%} or {%ekatra — anyas-%}
{%min,%} on the one side — on the other side, here — there.
<LEND>

<L>12700<pc>0185-a<k1>ekadA<k2>ekadA
{%Ekadā,%}¦ ind. at the same time, at once; once,
sometimes; once on a time, one day; at one time.
<LEND>

<L>12701<pc>0185-a<k1>ekaDA<k2>ekaDA
{%Ekadhā,%}¦ ind. simply, singly; in one way, to-
gether; at once, once.
<LEND>

<L>12702<pc>0185-a<k1>ekala<k2>ekala
{%Ekala, as, ā, am,%}¦ alone, solitary.
<LEND>

<L>12703<pc>0185-a<k1>ekaSas<k2>ekaSas
{%Ekaśas,%}¦ ind. one by one, singly.
<LEND>

<L>12704<pc>0185-a<k1>ekAkin<k2>ekAkin
{%Ekākin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. {%eka%} and rt. {%añc?%}), alone,
solitary.
<LEND>

<L>12705<pc>0185-a<k1>ekIkf<k2>ekIkf
{%Ekī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to unite, associate, join together; combine.
<LEND>

<L>12706<pc>0185-a<k1>ekIBU<k2>ekIBU
{%Ekī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to become
one, to join together, blend, combine, mingle. {%—Ekī-%}
{%bhavat, an, antī, at,%} blending together, contracted.
{%—Ekī-bhāva, as,%} m. becoming one, combination,
association; common nature or property. {%—Ekī-%}
{%bhāvin, ī, inī, i,%} relating to the blending of vowels
or accents.
<LEND>

<L>12707<pc>0185-a<k1>ekIya<k2>ekIya
{%Ekīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to one, proceeding
from one; belonging to the same party; a partisan
or associate, a companion.
<LEND>

<L>12708<pc>0185-a<k1>ekAnta<k2>ekAnta
{#ekAnta, ekEka#}¦, &c. See under {%eka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>12709<pc>0185-a<k1>ekz<k2>ekz
{#ekz#}¦ {%ekṣ (ā-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%ekṣate, -ṣitum,%}
to look at.
<LEND>

<L>12710<pc>0185-a<k1>ej<k2>ej
{#ej#}¦ {%ej,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%ejati, -te, ejāñ-cakre,%}
{%ejiṣyati, ejitum,%} to stir, move, tremble,
shake; A. to shine: Caus. {%ejayati, -yitum,%} to move:
Desid. {%ejijiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>12711<pc>0185-a<k1>ejaka<k2>ejaka
{%Ejaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking.
<LEND>

<L>12712<pc>0185-a<k1>ejat<k2>ejat
{%Ejat, t,%}¦ n., Ved. anything moving or living.
<LEND>

<L>12713<pc>0185-a<k1>ejatka<k2>ejatka
{%Ejatka, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling; ({%as%}), m., Ved. a
kind of insect.
<LEND>

<L>12714<pc>0185-a<k1>ejaTu<k2>ejaTu
{%Ejathu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. trembling, shaking (of the
earth).
<LEND>

<L>12715<pc>0185-a<k1>ejana<k2>ejana
{%Ejana, am,%}¦ n. trembling, shaking.
<LEND>

<L>12716<pc>0185-a<k1>ejaya<k2>ejaya
{%Ejaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%ejayat, an, antī, at,%} caus-
ing to shake or tremble, driving away.
<LEND>

<L>12717<pc>0185-a<k1>ejita<k2>ejita
{%Ejita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, agitated, trembling.
<LEND>
[Page0185-b+ 76]

<L>12718<pc>0185-b<k1>ejitavya<k2>ejitavya
{%Ejitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shaken.
<LEND>

<L>12719<pc>0185-b<k1>ejitf<k2>ejitf
{%Ejitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a shaker, shaking, trembling.
<LEND>

<L>12720<pc>0185-b<k1>eji<k2>eji
{#eji#}¦ {%eji, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12721<pc>0185-b<k1>ejya<k2>ejya
{#ejya#}¦ {%ejya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%yaj%} with {%ā%}),
Ved. to be offered (as an oblation or sacrifice).
<LEND>

<L>12722<pc>0185-b<k1>eW<k2>eW
{#eW#}¦ {%eṭh,%} cl. 1. A. {%eṭhate,%} to annoy, resist
or oppose.
<LEND>

<L>12723<pc>0185-b<k1>eqa<k2>eqa
{#eqa#}¦ {%eḍa, as, ā, am,%} deaf; ({%as%}), m. a kind
of sheep. {%—Eḍa-gaja, as,%} m. the medicinal plant
Cassia Tora or Alata, used for the cure of ring-worm.
{%—Eḍa-mūka, as, ā, am,%} deaf and dumb; wicked,
perverse.
<LEND>

<L>12724<pc>0185-b<k1>eqaka<k2>eqaka
{%Eḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of sheep, a ram, a wild
goat; a certain medicinal plant; ({%ā%}), f. a ewe.
<LEND>

<L>12725<pc>0185-b<k1>equka<k2>equka
{#equka#}¦ {%eḍuka, am,%} n. or {%eḍūka%} or {%eḍoka, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a building constructed of rubbish, bones,
&c., or of hard substances resembling bones; a wall
enclosing bones, a tomb, &c.; (with Buddhists) a
sanctuary filled with relics.
<LEND>

<L>12726<pc>0185-b<k1>eRa<k2>eRa
{#eRa#}¦ {%eṇa, as, ī,%} m. f. or {%eṇaka, as,%} m. a kind
of deer or antelope, described as being of a black
colour with beautiful eyes and short legs; (in astron.)
Capricorn. {%—Eṇa-tilaka, as,%} m. the moon; (the
marks of an antelope being fancifully visible on its
disk.) {%—Eṇa-dṛś, k,%} m. Capricorn. {%—Eṇa-bhṛt, t,%}
m. the moon. {%—Eṇājina (eṇa-aj˚), am,%} n. deer-
skin. {%—Eṇī-pacana, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race (cooking
antelopes for food). {%—Eṇī-pada, as,%} m. a kind of
snake; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of poisonous insect.
<LEND>

<L>12727<pc>0185-b<k1>eta<k2>eta<h>1
{#eta#} 1¦. {%eta, etas, etā%} or {%enī, etam%} (said to be
fr. rt. 5. {%i%}), of a variegated colour, shining, varying the
colours; (Sāy.) going, flowing; ({%as%}), m. a deer or
antelope; the hide of one; a variegated colour;
({%nī%}) f., Ved. a river.
<LEND>

<L>12728<pc>0185-b<k1>etagva<k2>etagva
{%Etagva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. of a variegated or dark
colour; (Sāy. also) going on their way; epithet of
the horses of the gods.
<LEND>

<L>12729<pc>0185-b<k1>etaSa<k2>etaSa
{%Etaśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. of variegated colour, shin-
ing; epithet of Brahmaṇaspati; ({%as%}), m. a horse of
variegated colour, a dappled horse, especially the
horse or horses of the sun; N. of a favourite of Indra,
who defends him from Sūrya; N. of one of the seven
sons of Vātaraśana, author of two Ṛg-veda hymns;
a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>12730<pc>0185-b<k1>etaSas<k2>etaSas
{%Etaśas, ās,%}¦ m. a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>12731<pc>0185-b<k1>eta<k2>eta<h>2
{#eta#} 2¦. {%eta, as, ā, am%} (rt. 5. {%i%} with {%ā%}), arrived,
come.
<LEND>

<L>12732<pc>0185-b<k1>eti<k2>eti
{%Eti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. arrival, approach.
<LEND>

<L>12733<pc>0185-b<k1>etya<k2>etya
{%Etya,%}¦ ind. having gone near to or approached.
<LEND>

<L>12734<pc>0185-b<k1>etad<k2>etad
{#etad#}¦ {%etad, eṣas, eṣā, etad%} (fr. {%e%} with pro-
nom. base {%ta.%} The vowel {%e%} appears also in {%eka, eva,%}
&c.; and just as the simple base {%ta%} substitutes {%sa%} for
the nom. sing. m. and f., so {%eta%} makes {%eṣas,%}
{%eṣā;%} but {%eta%} appears in all the other cases, and the
neut. {%etad%} is used as the base to form derivatives
such as {%etadīya%} &c., and at the beginning of com-
pounds), this, this here, here, especially as pointing
to what is nearest to the speaker (e. g. {%eṣa vāṇaḥ,%}
this arrow here in my hand; {%eṣa yāti panthāḥ,%}
here goes the way; {%eṣa kālaḥ,%} here, i. e. now, is
the time; {%etad,%} this here, i. e. this world here below).
{%Etad%} is sometimes used in this sense to give emphasis
to the personal pronouns (e. g. {%eṣo 'ham,%} I this very
person here) or with omission of those pronouns
(e. g. {%eṣa tvāṃ svargaṃ nayāni,%} I standing here
will convey you to heaven; {%etau praviṣṭau svaḥ,%}
we two here have entered). {%Etad%} as the subject of
a sentence agrees in gender and number with the
predicate without reference to the noun to be supplied
(e. g. {%etad me dhanam,%} this [scil. cow] is my
wealth); but may sometimes remain in the neut.
sing. (e. g. {%etad guruṣu vṛttiḥ,%} this is the custom
among Gurus).
<LEND>

<L>12735<pc>0185-b<k1>etad<k2>etad
{%Etad%}¦ often refers to what precedes, especially when
it is associated with {%idam,%} the latter then referring
to what follows (e. g. {%eṣa prathamaḥ kalpaḥ — %}
[Page0185-c+ 78]
{%anukalpas%} to {%ayaṃ jñeyaḥ,%} this before-mentioned
is the first rule, but this following may be considered
a secondary rule).
<LEND>

<L>12736<pc>0185-c<k1>etad<k2>etad
{%Etad%}¦ may be used in connection with a relative
clause, in which case the relative generally follows
(e. g. {%eṣa caiva gurur dharmo yam pravakṣ-%}
{%yāmy ahaṃ tava,%} this is the important law, which
I will proclaim to you).
<LEND>

<L>12737<pc>0185-c<k1>etad<k2>etad
{%Etad,%}¦ ind. in this manner, thus, so, here, at this
time, now (e. g. {%etat suptaḥ,%} asleep in this manner;
{%na vā u etad mriyase,%} not at this time dost thou
die).
<LEND>

<L>12738<pc>0185-c<k1>etad<k2>etad
{%Etad%}¦ appears at the beginning of compounds, as
in the following examples. {%—Etaj-ja, as, ā, am,%}
arising from this. {%—Etat-kāla, as,%} m. the present
time; ({%e%}), ind. now. {%—Etatkālīna, as, ā, am,%}
belonging to the present time. {%—Etat-kṣaṇāt,%} ind.
from this moment, henceforth; ({%e%}), ind. now. {%—Etat-%}
{%tulya, as, ā, am,%} similar to this. {%—Etat-prathama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who does anything for the first time.
{%—Etat-sama, as, ā, am,%} equal to this. {%—Etad-%}
{%atirikta, as, ā, am,%} besides this. {%—Etad-anantaram,%}
ind. immediately after this. {%—Etad-anta, as, ā, am,%}
terminating with this, ending thus. {%—Etad-artha,%}
{%as,%} m. this matter; ({%am%} or {%e%}), ind. on this account,
for this end, therefore; {%etad-artham — yat,%} for this
end — that. {%—Etad-avadhi,%} ind. to this limit, so far.
{%—Etad-avastha, as, ā, am,%} of such a state or con-
dition. {%—Etad-ātmya, as, ā, am,%} being in this
Ātman or supreme soul. {%—Etad-ādi, is, is, i,%} be-
ginning thus, and so forth. {%—Etad-eva,%} ind. this
very same. {%—Etad-dvitīya, as, ā, am,%} one who
does anything for the second time. {%—Etad-yonin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} residing or having one's origin in that. {%—Etad-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like this, thus. {%—Etan-na,%} ind. not so.
{%—Etan-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of this, of such
a kind; [cf. Zend <nsi>aiśa, aita;</nsi> Old Pers. <nsi>aita;</nsi>
Armen. <nsi>ais, aid;</nsi> Osk. <nsi>eiso;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>ise,</nsi> ‘he, himself;’
<nsi>isa</nsi> and <nsi>isi,</nsi> ‘she, herself.’]
<LEND>

<L>12739<pc>0185-c<k1>etadIya<k2>etadIya
{%Etadīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to this.
<LEND>

<L>12740<pc>0185-c<k1>etarhi<k2>etarhi
{%Etarhi,%}¦ ind., Ved. (very often in the Brāhmaṇas),
now, at this time, at present, now-a-days; then (cor-
relative to {%yarhi%}); a certain measure of time = fifteen
{%idānīm%}<nsi>s</nsi> or one fifteenth of a {%kṣipra.%}
<LEND>

<L>12741<pc>0185-c<k1>etAdfkza<k2>etAdfkza
{%Etādṛkṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved., or {%etādṛś, k, k,%}
{%k,%} or {%etādṛśa, as, ī, am,%} such, such like; so
formed, of this kind, similar to this.
<LEND>

<L>12742<pc>0185-c<k1>etAvat<k2>etAvat
{%Etāvat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ so great, so much, so many,
of such a measure or compass, of such extent, so
far, of such quality or kind; often found in connection
with a relative clause, in which case the latter gene-
rally follows (e. g. {%etāvān eva puruṣo yaj jāyātmā%}
{%prajeti ha,%} a man is of such a measure as [i. e. is
made complete by] himself, his wife, and his progeny);
({%vat%}), ind. so far, thus far, so much, in such a degree,
thus, &c. {%—Etāvat-tva, am,%} n. quantity, number;
greatness; (with following {%yad%}) such a state or con-
dition that; such extent.
<LEND>

<L>12743<pc>0185-c<k1>etana<k2>etana
{#etana#}¦ {%etana, as,%} m. expiration, breathing
out, discharging air from the lungs; the fish Silurus
Pelorius.
<LEND>

<L>12744<pc>0185-c<k1>etf<k2>etf
{#etf#}¦ {%etṛ, tā,%} m. (rt. 5. {%i%}), Ved. going, ap-
proaching, asking, requesting.
<LEND>

<L>12745<pc>0185-c<k1>ema<k2>ema
{%Ema, as,%}¦ m. or {%eman, a,%} n., Ved. a course, way.
<LEND>

<L>12746<pc>0185-c<k1>ediDizuHpati<k2>ediDizuHpati
{#ediDizuHpati#}¦ {%edidhiṣuḥpati, is,%} m., Ved.
the husband of a younger sister, whose elder sister
has not yet been married. See {%didhiṣu.%}
<LEND>

<L>12747<pc>0185-c<k1>eD<k2>eD
{#eD#}¦ {%edh%} (connected with rt. {%ṛdh%}), cl. 1. A.
(rarely P.) {%edhate, edhāñ-cakre, edhiṣyate,%}
{%aidhiṣṭa, edhitum,%} to prosper, increase, grow, be-
come happy, grow strong, become great; to extend;
to swell, rise (as waters): Caus. {%edhayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to prosper, increase, celebrate, honour: Desid.
{%edidhiṣate;%} [said to be related to Gr. <lang n="greek">οἶδος, οἰδἀω;</lang>
perhaps also to Lat. <nsi>œsculus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>12748<pc>0185-c<k1>eDatu<k2>eDatu<h>1
1. {%edhatu, us,%}¦ m. (for 2. see {%endh%} next page), Ved.
prosperity, happiness; a man; ({%us, us, u%}), increased,
grown.
<LEND>
[Page0186-a+ 71]

<L>12749<pc>0186-a<k1>eDanIya<k2>eDanIya
{%Edhanīya%}¦ or {%edhitavya%} or {%edhya, as, ā, am,%}
to be increased or enlarged.
<LEND>

<L>12750<pc>0186-a<k1>eDamAna<k2>eDamAna
{%Edhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ prospering, increasing.
{%—Edhamāna-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. hating the pros-
perous, especially those rendered insolent by pros-
perity; (Sāy.) hating the impious who prosper.
<LEND>

<L>12751<pc>0186-a<k1>eDas<k2>eDas<h>1
1. {%edhas, as,%}¦ n. (in comp.) prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>12752<pc>0186-a<k1>eDA<k2>eDA
{%Edhā,%}¦ f. happiness, prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>12753<pc>0186-a<k1>eDita<k2>eDita
{%Edhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown, increased.
<LEND>

<L>12754<pc>0186-a<k1>eDitf<k2>eDitf
{%Edhitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ increasing, growing, enlarging.
<LEND>

<L>12755<pc>0186-a<k1>ena<k2>ena
{#ena#}¦ {%ena,%} a pronom. base (used for certain
cases of the 3rd personal pronoun, and occurring only
in the acc. sing. du. pl. ({%enam, enām, enad,%} &c.),
inst. sing. ({%enena, enayā%}), gen. loc. du. ({%enayos,%} Ved.
{%enos%}); the other cases are formed fr. the pronom.
base {%a,%} see under {%idam%}), he, she, it; this, that.
This pronoun is enclitic and cannot begin a sentence.
It is generally used alone, so that {%enam puruṣam,%}
‘that man,’ would be very unusual if not incorrect.
Grammarians assert that the substitution of {%enam%}
for {%imam%} or {%etam%} takes place in case of the re-em-
ployment of these pronouns in the subsequent part
of a sentence; see Gram. 836; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἕν, οἶος</lang>
Goth. <nsi>ains;</nsi> Old Pruss. <nsi>ains;</nsi> Lat <nsi>oinos, unus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>12756<pc>0186-a<k1>enA<k2>enA
{%Enā,%}¦ ind., Ved. in this manner, thus; here, there;
then, at that time; {%para enā,%} further on; {%para enā%}
{%pṛthivyā,%} beyond the earth here.
<LEND>

<L>12757<pc>0186-a<k1>enas<k2>enas
{#enas#}¦ {%enas, as,%} n. (fr. {%in,%} but said to be
fr. rt. 5. {%i%}), mischief, crime; curse, unhappiness; sin,
offence, fault; censure, blame. {%—Enas-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} or {%enas-vin, ī, inī, i,%} wicked, sinful, a sinner.
<LEND>

<L>12758<pc>0186-a<k1>enasya<k2>enasya
{%Enasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. caused by crime; sinful,
wicked, wrong.
<LEND>

<L>12759<pc>0186-a<k1>enI<k2>enI
{#enI#}¦ {%enī.%} See under 1. {%eta.%}
<LEND>

<L>12760<pc>0186-a<k1>enD<k2>enD
{#enD#}¦ {%endh (ā-indh),%} cl. 7. A. {%endhe, endhitum,%}
to kindle, inflame; to be inflamed, to flame.
<LEND>

<L>12761<pc>0186-a<k1>eDa<k2>eDa
{%Edha, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. simple rt. {%indh%}), kindling,
one who kindles, cf. {%agny-edha; (as),%} m. fuel, as
wood, grass, &c.; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">αἰθός</lang>] {%—Edhāhāra%}
{%(edha-āh˚), as,%} m. one who collects fuel.
<LEND>

<L>12762<pc>0186-a<k1>eDatu<k2>eDatu<h>2
2. {%edhatu, us,%}¦ m. fire.
<LEND>

<L>12763<pc>0186-a<k1>eDas<k2>eDas<h>2
2. {%edhas, as,%}¦ n. fuel.
<LEND>

<L>12764<pc>0186-a<k1>env<k2>env
{#env#}¦ {%env (ā-inv),%} cl. 1. P. {%envati, -vitum,%} to
bring near, to bestow.
<LEND>

<L>12765<pc>0186-a<k1>ema<k2>ema
{#ema#}¦ {%ema.%} See under {%etṛ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>12766<pc>0186-a<k1>emUza<k2>emUza
{#emUza#}¦ {%emūṣa, as,%} m., Ved. corrupted from
{%emuṣam,%} the part. perf. of rt. {%am.%}
<LEND>

<L>12767<pc>0186-a<k1>er<k2>er
{#er#}¦ {%er (ā-īr),%} cl. 2. A. {%erte, eritum,%} to go to or
into: Caus. {%erayati, -te, -yitum,%} to bring near, pro-
cure; to obtain; to raise (the voice in singing &c.).
<LEND>

<L>12768<pc>0186-a<k1>eraka<k2>eraka
{#eraka#}¦ {%eraka, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga; ({%ā%}), f.
a sort of grass of emollient and diluent properties;
(in the Mausala-parva of the Mahā-bh. this grass when
plucked by Kṛṣṇa and his family turned to clubs);
({%am%}), n. a woollen carpet; [cf. {%airakya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12769<pc>0186-a<k1>eraNga<k2>eraNga
{#eraNga#}¦ {%eraṅga, as,%} m. a kind of fish; [cf.
{%elaṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12770<pc>0186-a<k1>eraRqa<k2>eraRqa
{#eraRqa#}¦ {%eraṇḍa, as,%} m. the castor-oil plant,
Palma Christi or Ricinus Communis; ({%ā%}), f. long
pepper. {%—Eraṇḍa-pattrikā,%} f. or {%eraṇḍa-phalā,%} f.
the plant Croton Polyandrum.
<LEND>

<L>12771<pc>0186-a<k1>eraRqaka<k2>eraRqaka
{%Eraṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Ricinus Communis.
<LEND>

<L>12772<pc>0186-a<k1>eramattaka<k2>eramattaka
{#eramattaka#}¦ {%eramattaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12773<pc>0186-a<k1>eru<k2>eru
{#eru#}¦ {%eru,%} a word of doubtful meaning in
Atharva-veda VI. 22, 3.
<LEND>

<L>12774<pc>0186-a<k1>erts<k2>erts
{#erts#}¦ {%erts,%} Desid. of {%ārdh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>12775<pc>0186-a<k1>ervAru<k2>ervAru
{#ervAru#}¦ {%ervāru, us,%} m. f. or {%ervāruka, as,%} m.
a kind of cucumber, Cucumis Utilissimus.
<LEND>

<L>12776<pc>0186-a<k1>ela<k2>ela
{#ela#}¦ {%ela, am,%} n. a particular number.
<LEND>

<L>12777<pc>0186-a<k1>elada<k2>elada
{%Elada, am,%}¦ n. a particular number.
<LEND>

<L>12778<pc>0186-a<k1>elaka<k2>elaka
{#elaka#}¦ {%elaka, as,%} m. a ram. See {%eḍaka.%}
<LEND>
[Page0186-b+ 75]

<L>12779<pc>0186-b<k1>elaNga<k2>elaNga
{#elaNga#}¦ {%elaṅga, as,%} m. a kind of fish; [cf.
{%eraṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12780<pc>0186-b<k1>elapura<k2>elapura
{#elapura#}¦ {%elapura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>12781<pc>0186-b<k1>elavAlu<k2>elavAlu
{#elavAlu#}¦ {%elavālu,%} n. or {%elavāluka%} or {%elvavā-%}
{%luka, am,%} n. the fragrant bark of Feronia Elephantum;
a granular substance, apparently a vegetable of a red-
dish-brown colour (it is used as a drug and perfume).
<LEND>

<L>12782<pc>0186-b<k1>elavila<k2>elavila
{#elavila#}¦ {%elavila, as,%} m. an epithet of Ku-
vera. See {%ailavila.%}
<LEND>

<L>12783<pc>0186-b<k1>elA<k2>elA
{#elA#}¦ {%elā,%} f. cardamoms, the seed of the
Elettaria Cardamomum or Alpinia Cardamomum, it
applies to both the large and small cardamom, but
more commonly to the former; N. of a river; N. of a
metre consisting of four lines of fifteen syllables each.
{%—Elā-pattra, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga. {%—Elā-parṇī,%}
f. the plant Mimosa Octandra. {%—Elā-pura, am,%} n.,
N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>12784<pc>0186-b<k1>elAka<k2>elAka
{%Elāka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12785<pc>0186-b<k1>elIkA<k2>elIkA
{%Elīkā,%}¦ f. small cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>12786<pc>0186-b<k1>elAya<k2>elAya
{#elAya#}¦ {%elāya%} (less correctly {%ilāya%}), nom.
P. {%elāyati, -yitum,%} to be wantonly mischievous or
wild in behaviour, to be merry.
<LEND>

<L>12787<pc>0186-b<k1>elu<k2>elu
{#elu#}¦ {%elu,%} n. a particular number.
<LEND>

<L>12788<pc>0186-b<k1>eluka<k2>eluka
{#eluka#}¦ {%eluka,%} N. of a medicinal substance
or plant.
<LEND>

<L>12789<pc>0186-b<k1>elUka<k2>elUka
{#elUka#}¦ {%elūka, am,%} n. probably identical with
{%eḍūka,%} a wall enclosing bones.
<LEND>

<L>12790<pc>0186-b<k1>eva<k2>eva<h>1
{#eva#} 1¦. {%eva%} (fr. pronom. base {%e,%} see {%etad,%}
Zend {%aiva%}), so, just so, exactly so (e. g. {%ya evedam%}
{%iti bravat,%} who may say ‘it is so;’ in this sense
{%eva%} = the more modern word {%evam%}); like (e. g. {%tvam%}
{%eva yantā,%} a driver like you; but examples of {%eva%}
in the sense of {%iva%} are rare); indeed, truly, really
(often in this sense found in the Veda at the begin-
ning of a verse in conjunction with other particles of
affirmation, especially with {%id, id nu kam, hi,%} &c., e. g.
{%evennu kaṃ tatāra,%} he most certainly crossed; {%evā%}
{%hy asi vīrayuḥ,%} thou art indeed hero-like.
<div n="P"/>(In its most frequent use of strengthening the idea
expressed by any word, {%eva,%} if translateable, must be
variously rendered by such adverbs as) just, exactly, very,
merely, only, even, at the very moment, immediately on,
scarcely, still, already, &c. (e. g. {%tāvatīm eva rātrim,%}
just so long a night; {%evam eva,%} exactly so; {%tān%}
{%eva,%} these very persons; {%nacirād eva,%} in no very
long time; {%apaḥ spṛṣṭvaiva,%} by merely touching
water; {%japyenaiva,%} by sole repetition; {%abhuktvaiva,%}
even without having eaten; {%iti vadann eva,%} at the
very moment of saying so; {%nāmni kīrtita eva,%}
scarcely had the name been mentioned; {%sa jīvann%}
{%eva,%} he while still living.
<LEND>

<L>12791<pc>0186-b<k1>eva<k2>eva
{%Eva%}¦ may often be connected with other adverbs
in the sense of ‘also,’ ‘likewise,’ &c., as in the fol-
lowing examples: {%tathaiva,%} so also; {%tathaiva%}
{%ca,%} and so likewise; {%eva ca,%} and also; {%caiva,%} and
also; {%eva vā,%} or also; {%na tv eva,%} but not also.
Grammarians assert that {%eva%} cuts off the final of {%kva%}
when it follows that adverb, as {%kv-eva,%} where pos-
sibly ? i. e. nowhere. Lexicographers affirm that
{%eva%} may imply emphasis, affirmation, detraction,
diminution, command, restraint; or be used as an
expletive; [cf. Goth. <nsi>aiv,</nsi> Them. <nsi>aiva;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>eo, io;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>je:</nsi> perhaps also Lat. <nsi>œvum;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>ibus;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>ebanêr;</nsi> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>ebener, eben.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>12792<pc>0186-b<k1>evaTA<k2>evaTA
{%Evathā,%}¦ ind., Ved. indeed, certainly, even; (Sāy.
either fr. rt. 5. {%i%}) assailing the strongholds of enemies,
going to war; (or fr. rt. {%av%}) protecting, protection,
assistance.
<LEND>

<L>12793<pc>0186-b<k1>eva<k2>eva<h>2
{#eva#} 2¦. {%eva, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 5. {%i%}), Ved. going,
moving, speedy, quick; ({%as%}), m. a course, way, (often
in inst. pl., e. g. {%sanād divam pari bhumā svebhir%}
{%evair aktoṣā carataḥ,%} from all eternity day and
night move round heaven and earth in their accus-
tomed course); earth, world?; (Sāy.) a courser, a
[Page0186-c+ 78]
fleet horse; ({%ās%}), m. pl. way or manner of acting,
mode of proceeding, custom, usage, habit; (Sāy.)
desire, a hymn which goes or is directed to the
object of praise (e. g. {%abhi caṣṭe sūro arya evān,%}
the sun sees into the conduct of the worshipper; or
according to Sāy. the sun being a lord makes mani-
fest or grants desires). When the inst. c. is used, the
meaning is hardly to be distinguished from that in
the first example (e. g. {%svair evaiḥ,%} in his usual way
of proceeding; {%pūrvyebhir evaiḥ,%} in the ancient
mode; or according to Sāy. with ancient hymns).
{%—Eva-yā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. going in ways or
courses, i. e. either going quickly or going the usual
way; epithet of Viṣṇu; (Sāy.) granting protection.
{%—Evayā-marut,%} Ved., (Sāy.) N. of the author of
a Ṛg-veda hymn, but perhaps rather an exclamation
meaning either {%eva-yā,%} i. e. ‘Viṣṇu (cf. the pre-
ceding word) and the Maruts!’ or ‘moving Maruts.’
{%—Eva-yāvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. going quickly, or going
the usual way; epithet of Viṣṇu and of the Maruts;
(Sāy.) going with horses; granting desires.
<LEND>

<L>12794<pc>0186-c<k1>evam<k2>evam
{#evam#}¦ {%evam,%} ind. (cf. 1. {%eva%} and {%etad%}), so,
thus, in this way, in such a manner, such. {%Evam%} is
not found in the oldest hymns of the Veda, where its
place is taken by {%eva,%} but occurs in later hymns and
in the Brāhmaṇas, especially in connection with the
rt. {%vid,%} ‘to know,’ and its derivatives (e. g. {%ya evaṃ%}
{%veda,%} he who knows so; cf. {%evaṃ-vid%} below). In
classical Sanskrit {%evam%} occurs very frequently, espe-
cially in connection with the roots {%vac,%} ‘to speak,’
and {%śru,%} ‘to hear,’ and refers to what precedes as
well as to what follows (e. g. {%evam uktvā,%} having so
said; {%evamevaitat,%} this is so; {%evam astu%} or {%evam%}
{%bhavatu,%} be it so, I assent; {%asty evam,%} it is so;
{%yady evam,%} if this be so; {%kim evam,%} how so?
what is the meaning of it? what does this refer to?
{%maivam,%} not so! {%evam — yathā%} or {%yathā — evam,%}
so — as). {%Evam%} is often used like an adjective (e. g.
{%evaṃ te vacane rataḥ,%} rejoicing in such words of
thine; where {%evam = evaṃ-vidhe%}). Sometimes
{%evam%} is merely an expletive. According to lexico-
graphers {%evam%} may imply likeness (so); sameness
of manner (thus); assent (yes, verily); affirmation
(certainly, indeed, assuredly); command (thus, &c.);
and be used as an expletive. {%—Evaṃ-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
of such a form or kind. {%—Evaṃ-vāda, as,%} m. such
an expression. {%—Evaṃ-vid, t, t, t,%} or {%evaṃ-vidvas,%}
{%ān, uṣī, as,%} Ved. knowing so or such, well instructed,
familiar with what is right. {%—Evaṃ-vidha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of such a kind, in such form or manner, such.
{%—Evaṃ-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} strong in such a manner,
possessing such a power. {%—Evaṃ-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}
behaving or acting thus, of such a kind. {%—Evaṃ-%}
{%vṛtti, is, is, i,%} behaving thus. {%—Evaṅ-kāram,%} ind.
in this manner. {%—Evaṅ-kāla, as, ā, am,%} containing
so many syllabic instants. {%—Evaṅ-kratu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. thus minded. {%—Evaṅ-gata, as, ā, am,%} being
in such a condition or state, so circumstanced, of such
kind; ({%e%}), ind. under such circumstances. {%—Evaṅ-%}
{%guṇa, as, ā, am,%} possessing such qualities or such
good qualities. {%—Evan-duḥsaha, as, ā, am,%} so hard
to bear. {%—Evan-nāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. so called.
{%—Evam-avastha, as, ā, am,%} so situated. {%—Evam-%}
{%ādi, is, is, i,%} or {%evam-ādya, as, ā, am,%} having
such a beginning, of such qualities or kind. {%—Evam-%}
{%prakāra%} or {%evam-prāya, as, ā, am,%} of such a kind.
{%—Evam-prabhāva, as, ā, am,%} possessed of such
power. {%—Evam-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} of such quality,
of such a description, in such a manner, so, such.
{%—Evambhūta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with any-
thing similar. {%—Evam-bhūmi, is,%} f. such a place,
a place like the one just described.
<LEND>

<L>12795<pc>0186-c<k1>evAra<k2>evAra
{#evAra#}¦ {%evāra, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%eva%} and {%aram?%}),
Ved. so prepared, ready; (Sāy.) N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12796<pc>0186-c<k1>evAvada<k2>evAvada
{#evAvada#}¦ {%evā-vada, as, ā, am,%} Ved. so speak-
ing, true; ({%as%}), m., (Sāy.) N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12797<pc>0186-c<k1>ez<k2>ez<h>1
{#ez#} 1¦. {%eṣ (ā-iṣ),%} cl. 6. P. {%ecchati, aiṣi-%}
{%tum%} or {%-ṣṭum,%} to wish, desire.
<LEND>
[Page0187-a+ 70]

<L>12798<pc>0187-a<k1>ezwa<k2>ezwa
{%Eṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ desired, wished.
<LEND>

<L>12799<pc>0187-a<k1>ez<k2>ez<h>2
{#ez#} 2¦. {%eṣ (ā-īṣ),%} cl. 1. P. A., Ved. {%eṣati,%}
{%-te, eṣitum,%} to hasten near to or towards; to fly at;
to attack any one; to endeavour to reach or gain; to
desire; to request.
<LEND>

<L>12800<pc>0187-a<k1>ezwi<k2>ezwi
{%Eṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. seeking to go towards, desire,
wish; (Sāy.) wishing; (or fr. rt. {%yaj%}) worshipping.
<LEND>

<L>12801<pc>0187-a<k1>ez<k2>ez<h>3
{#ez#} 3¦. {%eṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%eṣati, -te, eṣāñ-%}
{%cakāra, eṣāñ-cakre, eṣitum,%} to creep,
glide; to go or approach: Caus. {%eṣayati, -yitum,%}
to probe.
<LEND>

<L>12802<pc>0187-a<k1>eza<k2>eza<h>1
1. {%eṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. gliding, running; an
epithet of Viṣṇu; (Sāy.) to be desired, desirable;
to be obtained.
<LEND>

<L>12803<pc>0187-a<k1>eza<k2>eza<h>2
{#eza#} 2¦. {%eṣa.%} See {%etad.%}
<LEND>

<L>12804<pc>0187-a<k1>eza<k2>eza<h>3
{#eza#} 3¦. {%eṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%iṣ%}), seeking;
({%as%}), m. running or hastening towards; (according to
Sāy. {%eṣe%} is an inf. fr. rt. {%i,%} ‘to go’) seeking; wish,
election; ({%ā%}), f. wish. {%—Eṣaiṣya (eṣa-eṣ˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. to be sought, desirable.
<LEND>

<L>12805<pc>0187-a<k1>ezaRa<k2>ezaRa
{%Eṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seeking; ({%as%}), m. an iron
arrow; ({%am%}), n. driving, pressing; seeking; probing;
wish, desire; ({%ā%}), f. seeking, wish, desire, begging,
solicitation, request; ({%ī%}), f. an iron or steel probe; a
goldsmith's balance, assay scales.
<LEND>

<L>12806<pc>0187-a<k1>ezaRikA<k2>ezaRikA
{%Eṣaṇikā,%}¦ f. a goldsmith's balance.
<LEND>

<L>12807<pc>0187-a<k1>ezaRin<k2>ezaRin
{%Eṣaṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ seeking, striving.
<LEND>

<L>12808<pc>0187-a<k1>ezaRIya<k2>ezaRIya
{%Eṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be desired, desirable; to
be aimed at; (at the end of a compound) relating to
medical examination.
<LEND>

<L>12809<pc>0187-a<k1>ezitf<k2>ezitf
{%Eṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ wishing, desirous.
<LEND>

<L>12810<pc>0187-a<k1>ezin<k2>ezin
{%Eṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ driving, impelling; (at the end
of compounds) seeking, desiring, desirous of, wishing
(e. g. {%hitaiṣin,%} well-wishing).
<LEND>

<L>12811<pc>0187-a<k1>ezwavya<k2>ezwavya
{%Eṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sought, desirable,
wished.
<LEND>

<L>12812<pc>0187-a<k1>ezwf<k2>ezwf
{%Eṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, tṛ,%}¦ seeking, desiring.
<LEND>

<L>12813<pc>0187-a<k1>ezya<k2>ezya
{%Eṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sought for; to be in-
vestigated or probed.
<LEND>

<L>12814<pc>0187-a<k1>ezavIra<k2>ezavIra
{#ezavIra#}¦ {%eṣa-vīra, as,%} m. designation of a
despised Brāhmaṇic family.
<LEND>

<L>12815<pc>0187-a<k1>ezyat<k2>ezyat
{#ezyat#}¦ {%eṣyat, an, atī%} or {%antī, at%} (fut. part.
fr. rt. 5. {%i%}), what is to come, future. {%—Eṣyatkālīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} future.
<LEND>

<L>12816<pc>0187-a<k1>eha<k2>eha
{#eha#}¦ {%eha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%īh%}), Ved. desirous,
wishing.
<LEND>

<L>12817<pc>0187-a<k1>ehas<k2>ehas
{%Ehas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. anger.
<LEND>

<L>12818<pc>0187-a<k1>ehi<k2>ehi
{#ehi#}¦ {%ehi%} (imperative of rt. 5. {%i%} with {%ā%}),
come!
<LEND>

<L>12819<pc>0187-a<k1>ehimAya<k2>ehimAya
{#ehimAya#}¦ {%ehimāya, as, ā, am,%} Ved., {%= ahi-%}
{%māya,%} q. v., an epithet of the Viśvedevās; (Sāy.) of
all-pervading intelligence; or these deities may be so
named because they uttered on one occasion the words
‘Come near, do not go away’ ({%ehi mā yāsīḥ.%} See
Ṛg-veda 1. 3, 9).
<LEND>
<H>{#E#}

<L>12820<pc>0187-a<k1>E<k2>E<h>1
{#E#} 1¦. {%ai,%} the twelfth vowel of the alphabet,
having the sound of <nsi>ei</nsi> in <nsi>heighth</nsi>. {%—Ai-kāra, as,%} m.
the letter or sound {%ai.%}
<LEND>

<L>12821<pc>0187-a<k1>E<k2>E<h>2
{#E#} 2¦. {%ai,%} ind. (an interjection of calling or
summoning) Hola, Ho, Heigh; (and of remembering)
Aye, Ha.
<LEND>

<L>12822<pc>0187-a<k1>E<k2>E<h>3
{#E#} 3¦. {%ai, ais,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>12823<pc>0187-a<k1>EkaDya<k2>EkaDya
{#EkaDya#}¦ {%aikadhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ekadhā%}), single-
ness of time or occurrence; ({%am%} or {%atas%}), ind. at
once, together.
<LEND>

<L>12824<pc>0187-a<k1>Ekapatya<k2>Ekapatya
{%Aikapatya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%eka-pati%}), the sovereignty
of one, absolute monarchy; supreme authority.
<LEND>

<L>12825<pc>0187-a<k1>Ekapadika<k2>Ekapadika
{%Aikapadika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%eka-pada%}), belonging
to a simple word; consisting of single words; the N.
[Page0187-b+ 78]
given to the Naigama section of Yāska's commentary
on the Nighaṇṭavas, or collection of Vedic words.
<LEND>

<L>12826<pc>0187-b<k1>Ekapadya<k2>Ekapadya
{%Aikapadya, am,%}¦ n. unity of words.
<LEND>

<L>12827<pc>0187-b<k1>EkaBAvya<k2>EkaBAvya
{%Aikabhāvya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%eka-bhāva%}), singleness
of nature.
<LEND>

<L>12828<pc>0187-b<k1>Ekamatya<k2>Ekamatya
{%Aikamatya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%eka-mati%}), unanimity,
sameness of doctrine or of opinion, agreement, con-
sent, concurrence, confederation; ({%as, ī, am%}), con-
nected with sameness of opinion.
<LEND>

<L>12829<pc>0187-b<k1>EkarAjya<k2>EkarAjya
{%Aikarājya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%eka-rāj%}), monarchy.
<LEND>

<L>12830<pc>0187-b<k1>Ekalavya<k2>Ekalavya
{%Aikalavya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic fr. {%eka-lū.%}
<LEND>

<L>12831<pc>0187-b<k1>EkaSatika<k2>EkaSatika
{%Aikaśatika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%eka-śata%}), provided
with 101.
<LEND>

<L>12832<pc>0187-b<k1>EkaSaPa<k2>EkaSaPa
{%Aikaśapha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%eka-śapha%}), produced
by or belonging to animals with uncloven hoofs.
<LEND>

<L>12833<pc>0187-b<k1>EkaSrutya<k2>EkaSrutya
{%Aikaśrutya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%eka-śruti,%} q. v.), the one
accentless monotonous tone, monotony.
<LEND>

<L>12834<pc>0187-b<k1>Ekasahasrika<k2>Ekasahasrika
{%Aikasahasrika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%eka-sahasra%}), pro-
vided with 1001.
<LEND>

<L>12835<pc>0187-b<k1>Ekasvarya<k2>Ekasvarya
{%Aikasvarya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%eka-svara%}), oneness of
accent (as in the case of a compound which has only
one accent, though the separate members when un-
compounded are each accented).
<LEND>

<L>12836<pc>0187-b<k1>EkAgArika<k2>EkAgArika
{%Aikāgārika, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. (fr. {%eka-āgāra%}), a thief, a
robber breaking into lonely houses; the possessor of
one residence.
<LEND>

<L>12837<pc>0187-b<k1>EkAgrya<k2>EkAgrya
{%Aikāgrya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%ekāgra%}), intentness on one
object.
<LEND>

<L>12838<pc>0187-b<k1>EkANga<k2>EkANga
{%Aikāṅga, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%ekāṅga%}), a soldier of the
body-guard.
<LEND>

<L>12839<pc>0187-b<k1>EkAtmya<k2>EkAtmya
{%Aikātmya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%eka-ātman%}), unity of the
soul, unity of being; oneness with the supreme spirit.
<LEND>

<L>12840<pc>0187-b<k1>EkAdaSAkza<k2>EkAdaSAkza
{%Aikādaśākṣa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%ekādaśa + akṣa%}), N.
of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12841<pc>0187-b<k1>EkAdaSina<k2>EkAdaSina
{%Aikādaśina, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%ekādaśinī%}), Ved. be-
longing to a collection or association of eleven.
<LEND>

<L>12842<pc>0187-b<k1>EkADikaraRya<k2>EkADikaraRya
{%Aikādhikaraṇya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%eka + adhikaraṇa%}),
oneness of relation.
<LEND>

<L>12843<pc>0187-b<k1>EkAntika<k2>EkAntika
{%Aikāntika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%ekānta%}), absolute, com-
plete, perfect.
<LEND>

<L>12844<pc>0187-b<k1>EkAnyika<k2>EkAnyika
{%Aikānyika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%eka + anya%}), one who
commits a single error in reading (who makes one
thing another or otherwise than right).
<LEND>

<L>12845<pc>0187-b<k1>EkArTya<k2>EkArTya
{%Aikārthya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%ekārtha%}), oneness of aim
or intention.
<LEND>

<L>12846<pc>0187-b<k1>EkAhika<k2>EkAhika
{%Aikāhika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%ekāha%}), ephemeral,
quotidian, of one day, of the same day; belonging
to a ceremony which lasts one day, belonging to a
simple oblation.
<LEND>

<L>12847<pc>0187-b<k1>Ekya<k2>Ekya
{%Aikya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%eka%}), oneness, unity, single-
ness, identity, harmony, sameness; the identity of
the human soul or of the universe with the Deity;
an aggregate, whole, total; (in alg.) the product of
the length and depth of the portions, or of the little
excavations differing in depth.
<LEND>

<L>12848<pc>0187-b<k1>Ekzava<k2>Ekzava
{#Ekzava#}¦ {%aikṣava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ikṣu%}), pro-
duced from or relating to the sugar-cane, sugary;
({%am%}), n. sugar.
<LEND>

<L>12849<pc>0187-b<k1>Ekzavya<k2>Ekzavya
{%Aikṣavya, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. produced from or re-
lating to the sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>12850<pc>0187-b<k1>Ekzuka<k2>Ekzuka
{%Aikṣuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ suitable for sugar-cane;
bearing sugar-cane; ({%as%}), m. a carrier of sugar-canes;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of Ikṣukīyā.
<LEND>

<L>12851<pc>0187-b<k1>EkzuBArika<k2>EkzuBArika
{%Aikṣubhārika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%ikṣu-bhāra%}),
carrying a load of sugar-canes.
<LEND>

<L>12852<pc>0187-b<k1>EkzvAka<k2>EkzvAka
{#EkzvAka#}¦ {%aikṣvāka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ikṣvāku%}),
belonging to Ikṣvāku, of the family of Ikṣvāku;
({%as%}), m. a descendant of Ikṣvāku; epithet of Puru-
kutsa, and of Daśaratha.
<LEND>

<L>12853<pc>0187-b<k1>EkzvAku<k2>EkzvAku
{%Aikṣvāku, us,%}¦ m. a descendant of Ikṣvāku;
epithet of Triśaṅku, and of Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>12854<pc>0187-b<k1>ENguda<k2>ENguda
{#ENguda#}¦ {%aiṅguda, as, ī, am,%} produced from
the Iṅguda plant; ({%am%}), n. scil. {%phalam,%} the fruit
of the Iṅguda plant.
<LEND>

<L>12855<pc>0187-b<k1>EcCika<k2>EcCika
{#EcCika#}¦ {%aicchika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%icchā%}), optional,
voluntary, arbitrary, at will.
<LEND>

<L>12856<pc>0187-b<k1>Eqa<k2>Eqa
{#Eqa#}¦ {%aiḍa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%iḍā%}), Ved. contain-
ing anything refreshing or strengthening; containing
[Page0187-c+ 71]
the word {%iḍā; (as),%} m. the son of Iḍā, epithet of
Purūravas; [cf. {%aila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12857<pc>0187-c<k1>Eqaka<k2>Eqaka
{#Eqaka#}¦ {%aiḍaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%eḍaka%}), produced
from the animal Eḍaka; ({%as%}), m. a species of sheep.
<LEND>

<L>12858<pc>0187-c<k1>Eqaviqa<k2>Eqaviqa
{#Eqaviqa#}¦ {%aiḍaviḍa, as,%} m. an epithet of
Kuvera; N. of a son of Daśaratha; also {%aiḍavila;%}
[cf. {%ailavila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12859<pc>0187-c<k1>Equka<k2>Equka
{#Equka#}¦ {%aiḍuka%} or {%aiḍūka, am,%} n. a wall &c.
of bones and rubbish. See {%eḍuka.%}
<LEND>

<L>12860<pc>0187-c<k1>ERa<k2>ERa
{#ERa#}¦ {%aiṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%eṇa%}), produced from
or belonging to the male black antelope.
<LEND>

<L>12861<pc>0187-c<k1>ERika<k2>ERika
{%Aiṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ hunting black antelopes, a
deer-killer.
<LEND>

<L>12862<pc>0187-c<k1>EReya<k2>EReya
{%Aiṇeya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%eṇī%}), produced from the
black doe or female antelope; produced from any-
thing belonging to a black doe or female antelope;
({%as%}), m. the black antelope; ({%am%}), n. a kind of
coitus.
<LEND>

<L>12863<pc>0187-c<k1>ERqineya<k2>ERqineya
{#ERqineya#}¦ {%aiṇḍineya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
Śākhā or branch of the Veda.
<LEND>

<L>12864<pc>0187-c<k1>EtadAtmya<k2>EtadAtmya
{#EtadAtmya#}¦ {%aitadātmya, am,%} n. (abstr. noun
of {%etadātman%}), the state of having this property
or peculiarity.
<LEND>

<L>12865<pc>0187-c<k1>Etareya<k2>Etareya
{#Etareya#}¦ {%aitareya, as,%} m. a descendant of Itarā,
to whom the Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa and Āraṇyaka were
revealed; ({%as, ī, am%}), originating from Aitareya.
{%—Aitareya-brāhmaṇa%} or {%aitareyaka, am,%} n. (scil.
{%brāhmaṇa%}) title of a Brāhmaṇa attached to the
Ṛg-veda and prescribing the duties of the Hotṛ
priest. It consists of forty Adhyāyas, divided into
eight Pañcikās. {%—Aitareyopaniṣad (˚ya-up˚), t,%}
f., N. of an Upaniṣad forming part of the Aitareya-
Āraṇyaka. {%—Aitareyopaniṣad-bhāṣya, am,%} n. a
commentary on the last by Saṅkarācārya. {%—Aitare-%}
{%yopaniṣadbhāṣya-ṭippaṇī,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary on the last work by Anantānandagiri.
<LEND>

<L>12866<pc>0187-c<k1>Etareyin<k2>Etareyin
{%Aitareyin, ī,%}¦ m. a follower of Aitareya, a reader of
the Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>12867<pc>0187-c<k1>EtaSa<k2>EtaSa
{#EtaSa#}¦ {%aitaśa, as,%} m., N. of a Muni of the
family of Aurva (Bhṛgu), author of the Aitaśa-
pralāpa forming part of the Kuntāpa hymns of the
Atharva-veda and used with these hymns in the
ritual belonging to the Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>12868<pc>0187-c<k1>EtaSAyana<k2>EtaSAyana
{%Aitaśāyana, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the descendants of Aitaśa.
<LEND>

<L>12869<pc>0187-c<k1>EtiSAyana<k2>EtiSAyana
{%Aitiśāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>12870<pc>0187-c<k1>EtihAsika<k2>EtihAsika
{#EtihAsika#}¦ {%aitihāsika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%iti-%}
{%hāsa%}), derived from ancient legends, legendary,
historical, traditional; ({%as%}), m. one who relates or
knows ancient legends, an historian.
<LEND>

<L>12871<pc>0187-c<k1>Etihya<k2>Etihya
{#Etihya#}¦ {%aitihya, am,%} n. (fr. {%iti-ha;%} see under
{%iti,%} p. 139), traditional instruction.
<LEND>

<L>12872<pc>0187-c<k1>EdaMyugIna<k2>EdaMyugIna
{#EdaMyugIna#}¦ {%aidaṃyugīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%idaṃ-%}
{%yuga%}), fit for this yoke or team.
<LEND>

<L>12873<pc>0187-c<k1>ED<k2>ED
{#ED#}¦ {%aidh,%} f. or {%aidha, as,%} m. or {%aidhā,%} f.
(fr. rt. {%indh%} with {%ā%}), Ved. flaming, a flame, splendor.
<LEND>

<L>12874<pc>0187-c<k1>Ena<k2>Ena
{#Ena#}¦ {%aina, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>12875<pc>0187-c<k1>Enasa<k2>Enasa
{#Enasa#}¦ {%ainasa, am,%} n. (fr. {%enas%}), sin.
<LEND>

<L>12876<pc>0187-c<k1>Endava<k2>Endava
{#Endava#}¦ {%aindava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%indu%}), lunar,
belonging or relating or similar to the moon; ({%ī%}), f.
the plant Serratula Anthelminthica; ({%am%}), n. the
asterism Mṛgaśiras.
<LEND>

<L>12877<pc>0187-c<k1>Endra<k2>Endra
{#Endra#}¦ {%aindra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%indra%}), belonging
to or sacred to Indra, proceeding from Indra, similar
to Indra; ({%as%}), m. the part of a sacrifice offered to
Indra; ({%ī%}), f. (scil. {%ṛc%}) a verse addressed to Indra;
(scil. {%diś%}) the east quarter, of which Indra is regent
(e. g. {%aindryāṃ diśi,%} in the east); the eighteenth
lunar mansion; the eighth day in the second half of
the month Mārgaśīrṣa, and of the month Pauṣa;
Indra's energy, personified as his wife and by some
identified with Durgā; epithet of Durgā; misfortune,
[Page0188-a+ 77]
misery (personified); N. of a plant, a kind of cucum-
ber, Cucumis Madraspatanus; ({%am%}), n. the eighteenth
lunar mansion ({%jyeṣṭhā%}); wild ginger.
<LEND>

<L>12878<pc>0188-a<k1>EndrajAlika<k2>EndrajAlika
{%Aindrajālika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%indra-jāla%}), familiar
with or relating to magic, magical, deceptive, illusory;
({%as%}), m. a juggler.
<LEND>

<L>12879<pc>0188-a<k1>EndraturIya<k2>EndraturIya
{%Aindraturīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ a libation ({%graha%}) &c.,
the fourth part of which is offered to Indra.
<LEND>

<L>12880<pc>0188-a<k1>Endradyumna<k2>Endradyumna
{%Aindradyumna, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Indra-
dyumna; N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>12881<pc>0188-a<k1>Endraluptika<k2>Endraluptika
{%Aindraluptika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%indra-lupta%}),
afflicted with morbid baldness of the head.
<LEND>

<L>12882<pc>0188-a<k1>EndravAyava<k2>EndravAyava
{%Aindravāyava, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to Indra
and Vāyu.
<LEND>

<L>12883<pc>0188-a<k1>EndraSira<k2>EndraSira
{%Aindraśira, as,%}¦ m. a species of elephant.
<LEND>

<L>12884<pc>0188-a<k1>EndrAgna<k2>EndrAgna
{%Aindrāgna, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. sacred to or belonging
to Indra and Agni, proceeding from Indra and Agni.
<LEND>

<L>12885<pc>0188-a<k1>EndrAnErfta<k2>EndrAnErfta
{%Aindrānairṛta, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to Indra
and Nirṛti.
<LEND>

<L>12886<pc>0188-a<k1>EndrApOzRa<k2>EndrApOzRa
{%Aindrāpauṣṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to Indra
and Pūṣan.
<LEND>

<L>12887<pc>0188-a<k1>EndrAbArhaspatya<k2>EndrAbArhaspatya
{%Aindrābārhaspatya, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to Indra
and Bṛhaspati.
<LEND>

<L>12888<pc>0188-a<k1>EndrAmAruta<k2>EndrAmAruta
{%Aindrāmāruta, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to Indra and
the Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>12889<pc>0188-a<k1>EndrAyuDa<k2>EndrAyuDa
{%Aindrāyudha, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Indra's bow
or the rainbow.
<LEND>

<L>12890<pc>0188-a<k1>EndrAvaruRa<k2>EndrAvaruRa
{%Aindrāvaruṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ sacred to Indra and
Varuṇa.
<LEND>

<L>12891<pc>0188-a<k1>EndrAvEzRava<k2>EndrAvEzRava
{%Aindrāvaiṣṇava, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to Indra
and Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>12892<pc>0188-a<k1>EndrAsOmya<k2>EndrAsOmya
{%Aindrāsaumya, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to Indra
and Soma.
<LEND>

<L>12893<pc>0188-a<k1>Endri<k2>Endri
{%Aindri, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Jayanta, the son
of Indra; N. of Arjuna; N. of the monkey-king
Bāli; a crow.
<LEND>

<L>12894<pc>0188-a<k1>Endriya<k2>Endriya
{%Aindriya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%indriya%} and connected
with {%indra,%} q. v.), relating to or belonging to the
senses, sensual; perceptible, perceived, present; ({%am%}),
n. the world of the senses; a section of the Āyur-
veda treating on the senses.
<LEND>

<L>12895<pc>0188-a<k1>Endriyaka<k2>Endriyaka
{%Aindriyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the senses;
perceptible.
<LEND>

<L>12896<pc>0188-a<k1>EndriyeDI<k2>EndriyeDI
{%Aindriye-dhī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ thinking only of sensual
pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>12897<pc>0188-a<k1>EnDana<k2>EnDana
{#EnDana#}¦ {%aindhana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%indhana%}),
consisting of fuel; an epithet of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>12898<pc>0188-a<k1>EBAvata<k2>EBAvata
{#EBAvata#}¦ {%aibhāvata, as,%} m. (fr. {%ibhā-vat%}), a
patronymic of Pratīdarśa.
<LEND>

<L>12899<pc>0188-a<k1>EBI<k2>EBI
{#EBI#}¦ {%aibhī,%} f., N. of a plant; {%= ibhyā ?%}
<LEND>

<L>12900<pc>0188-a<k1>Eyatya<k2>Eyatya
{#Eyatya#}¦ {%aiyatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%iyat%}), quantity,
number, value.
<LEND>

<L>12901<pc>0188-a<k1>EraMmada<k2>EraMmada
{#EraMmada#}¦ {%airaṃmada, as,%} m. (fr. {%iraṃmada%}),
a patronymic of Deva-muni, author of a Ṛg-veda
hymn.
<LEND>

<L>12902<pc>0188-a<k1>EraMmadIya<k2>EraMmadIya
{%Airaṃmadīya, am,%}¦ n., N. of a sea in Brahmā's
world.
<LEND>

<L>12903<pc>0188-a<k1>ErAvaRa<k2>ErAvaRa
{#ErAvaRa#}¦ {%airāvaṇa, as,%} m. (fr. {%irā-van =%}
{%irā-vat,%} ‘possessed of or proceeding from water’),
N. of a king of the Nāgas; Indra's elephant, pro-
duced at the churning of the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>12904<pc>0188-a<k1>ErAvata<k2>ErAvata
{%Airāvata, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of a fabulous serpent-
like being called Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; a serpent, one of the
chiefs of the Nāgas or serpent-race, inhabiting the
lower world or Pātāla; N. of the elephant of Indra,
produced at the churning of the ocean, and the pro-
totype of the elephant race, considered also as the
elephant of the east quarter; [cf. {%nāga,%} which means
both serpent and elephant]; an excellent elephant;
({%as, am%}), m. n. a kind of rainbow, considered as the
long and unbent bow of Indra; a kind of lightning;
({%as%}), m. the orange tree; another tree, Artocarpus
Lacucha; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a vast and waterless
region; ({%āni%}), n. pl., N. of a Varṣa; N. of the
northern path of the moon; the fruit of the tree
Artocarpus Lacucha; ({%ī%}), f. the female of Indra's
elephant; lightning; N. of a plant; N. of the Ravi
[Page0188-b+ 68]
river in the Pañjāb; N. of a particular portion of the
moon's path.
<LEND>

<L>12905<pc>0188-b<k1>EriRa<k2>EriRa
{#EriRa#}¦ {%airiṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%iriṇa%}), fossil or
rock salt.
<LEND>

<L>12906<pc>0188-b<k1>Ereya<k2>Ereya
{#Ereya#}¦ {%aireya, am,%} n. (fr. {%irā%}), a spirituous
liquor.
<LEND>

<L>12907<pc>0188-b<k1>Ermya<k2>Ermya
{#Ermya#}¦ {%airmya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%īrmā%}), good for
healing wounds, (a plaster &c.)
<LEND>

<L>12908<pc>0188-b<k1>Ela<k2>Ela
{#Ela#}¦ {%aila, as,%} m. (= {%aiḍa%}), N. of Purūravas
as son of Ilā; ({%am%}), n. a particular number. {%—Aila-%}
{%dhāna, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>12909<pc>0188-b<k1>Elaba<k2>Elaba
{#Elaba#}¦ {%ailaba, as,%} m., Ved. noise, roaring,
cry. {%—Ailaba-kāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. making a noise,
roaring (epithet of Rudra's dogs).
<LEND>

<L>12910<pc>0188-b<k1>Elabfda<k2>Elabfda
{#Elabfda#}¦ {%ailabṛda, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bringing
food; (perhaps related to {%ailaba.%})
<LEND>

<L>12911<pc>0188-b<k1>ElavAluka<k2>ElavAluka
{#ElavAluka#}¦ {%ailavāluka, am,%} n. a perfume.
See {%elavālu.%}
<LEND>

<L>12912<pc>0188-b<k1>Elavila<k2>Elavila
{#Elavila#}¦ {%ailavila, as,%} m., N. of Kuvera as
son of Ilavilā; (also {%aiḍavida, aiḍavila,%}  and {%ela-%}
{%vila%}); N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>12913<pc>0188-b<k1>ElUza<k2>ElUza
{#ElUza#}¦ {%ailūṣa, as,%} m. (fr. {%ilūṣa%}), a patrony-
mic of Kavasha, the author of two Ṛg-veda hymns.
<LEND>

<L>12914<pc>0188-b<k1>Eleya<k2>Eleya
{#Eleya#}¦ {%aileya, am,%} n. a perfume; {%= elavālu.%}
<LEND>

<L>12915<pc>0188-b<k1>ESa<k2>ESa
{#ESa#}¦ {%aiśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%īśa%}), proceeding from
or relating to Śiva; divine, supreme, regal.
<LEND>

<L>12916<pc>0188-b<k1>ESAna<k2>ESAna
{%Aiśāna, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%īśāna%}), belonging to Śiva;
({%ī%}), f. (scil. {%diś%}) the quarter of Śiva, the north-east
quarter. {%—Aiśāna-ja, ās,%} m. pl. {%= īśāna-ja,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>12917<pc>0188-b<k1>ESika<k2>ESika
{%Aiśika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to Śiva; divine,
heavenly; royal, regal.
<LEND>

<L>12918<pc>0188-b<k1>ESvara<k2>ESvara
{%Aiśvara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%īśvara%}), fit for or belong-
ing to or produced by a master, or by the supreme
lord; mighty, majestic; divine, relating to God;
supreme, royal; belonging to Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>12919<pc>0188-b<k1>ESvarika<k2>ESvarika
{%Aiśvarika, as,%}¦ m. (with Buddhists) a theist.
<LEND>

<L>12920<pc>0188-b<k1>ESvarya<k2>ESvarya
{%Aiśvarya, am,%}¦ n. power, might, sway; dominion;
supremacy; superhuman power; the divine faculties
of omnipresence, omnipotence, invisibility, &c. (some-
times their number is given as five, with reference to
the five elements). {%—Aiśvarya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} en-
dowed with superhuman faculties, possessed of super-
natural powers, connected with them.
<LEND>

<L>12921<pc>0188-b<k1>Ezamas<k2>Ezamas
{#Ezamas#}¦ {%aiṣamas,%} ind. ({%ai%} related to {%e%} or {%i%}
in {%etad%} or {%idam,%} and {%samas%} from {%samā,%} ‘year’),
during this year, in the present year; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σῆτες</lang>
<lang n="greek">σήμερον</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>12922<pc>0188-b<k1>Ezamastana<k2>Ezamastana
{%Aiṣamastana, as, ī, am,%}¦ or {%aiṣamastya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of or belonging to the present year.
<LEND>

<L>12923<pc>0188-b<k1>EzAvIra<k2>EzAvIra
{#EzAvIra#}¦ {%aiṣāvīra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%eṣa-vīra ?%}),
Ved. weak, powerless.
<LEND>

<L>12924<pc>0188-b<k1>EzIka<k2>EzIka
{#EzIka#}¦ {%aiṣīka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%iṣīkā%}), con-
sisting of stalks made of reeds or cane; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a people; {%aiṣīkam parva,%} a section of the
tenth book or Sauptika-parva of the Mahā-bhārata
(Adhyāya 10-18).
<LEND>

<L>12925<pc>0188-b<k1>EzukAri<k2>EzukAri
{#EzukAri#}¦ {%aiṣukāri, ayas,%} m. pl. (fr. {%iṣu-%}
{%kāra%}), N. of a tribe or caste. {%—Aiṣukāri-bhakta,%}
{%am,%} n. the country inhabited by this tribe.
<LEND>

<L>12926<pc>0188-b<k1>Ezwaka<k2>Ezwaka
{#Ezwaka#}¦ {%aiṣṭaka, am,%} n. (fr. {%iṣṭakā%}), Ved. the
sacrificial bricks collectively.
<LEND>

<L>12927<pc>0188-b<k1>Ezwika<k2>Ezwika
{#Ezwika#}¦ {%aiṣṭika, as, ī, am%} (fr. 3. {%iṣṭi%}),
sacrificial, ceremonial.
<LEND>

<L>12928<pc>0188-b<k1>EzwikapOrtika<k2>EzwikapOrtika
{%Aiṣṭikapaurtika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the
Iṣṭāpūrta, ceremonial and meritorious.
<LEND>

<L>12929<pc>0188-b<k1>EhalOkika<k2>EhalOkika
{#EhalOkika#}¦ {%aihalaukika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%iha-%}
{%loka%}), of this world, happening in this world, terres-
trial, sublunary; (opposed to {%pāralaukika.%})
<LEND>
[Page0188-c+ 68]

<L>12930<pc>0188-c<k1>Ehika<k2>Ehika
{%Aihika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%iha%}), of this place, of this
world, temporal, worldly, secular, local; (opposed to
{%āmuṣmika.%}) {%—Aihika-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} worldly-
minded, concerned about worldly affairs.
<LEND>
<H>{#o#}

<L>12931<pc>0188-c<k1>o<k2>o<h>1
{#o#} 1¦. {%o,%} the vowel {%o,%} the thirteenth letter
of the alphabet. {%—O-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or
sound {%o.%}
<LEND>

<L>12932<pc>0188-c<k1>o<k2>o<h>2
{#o#} 2¦. {%o,%} ind. a vocative particle, Oh; an
interjection of calling, Ho, Holla; of reminiscence,
Ho, Ah; of compassion, Ah, Oh.
<LEND>

<L>12933<pc>0188-c<k1>o<k2>o<h>3
{#o#} 3¦. {%o, aus,%} m. a N. of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>12934<pc>0188-c<k1>o<k2>o<h>4
{#o#} 4¦. {%o (ā-u),%} only occurring in the past pass.
part. {%—1. ota, as, ā, am,%} Ved. invoked, summoned.
<LEND>

<L>12935<pc>0188-c<k1>oka<k2>oka
{#oka#}¦ {%oka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%uc%}), a house; an
asylum, a refuge (see {%okas%} below); a bird?; [cf. Lith.
<nsi>ûkis,</nsi> ‘a dwelling;’ <nsi>ûkininkas:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">οἶκος</lang> belongs
to rt. {%viś.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12936<pc>0188-c<k1>okas<k2>okas
{%Okas, as,%}¦ n. gratification, pleasure; place of hap-
piness or pleasure, a resting-place, a home, house;
an asylum, a refuge.
<LEND>

<L>12937<pc>0188-c<k1>okivas<k2>okivas
{%Okivas, ān%}¦ (irreg. perf. part. Par. ?), Ved. delighting
in anything; (Sāy.) meeting together, united.
<LEND>

<L>12938<pc>0188-c<k1>okya<k2>okya
{%Okya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. favourable to the (inmates
of a) house; good for a house, kind to a household;
({%am%}), n. gratification, pleasure; a comfortable place;
a resting-place, a house.
<LEND>

<L>12939<pc>0188-c<k1>okaRa<k2>okaRa
{#okaRa#}¦ {%okaṇa, as,%} or {%okaṇi, is,%} m. a bug.
See {%okodanī.%}
<LEND>

<L>12940<pc>0188-c<k1>okula<k2>okula
{#okula#}¦ {%okula, as,%} m. a cake of flour.
<LEND>

<L>12941<pc>0188-c<k1>okodanI<k2>okodanI
{#okodanI#}¦ {%okodanī%} or {%okkaṇī,%} f. a bug.
See {%okaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>12942<pc>0188-c<k1>okz<k2>okz
{#okz#}¦ {%okṣ (ā-ukṣ),%} cl. 1. P. {%okṣati, -ṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to sprinkle over or upon.
<LEND>

<L>12943<pc>0188-c<k1>oK<k2>oK
{#oK#}¦ {%okh,%} cl. 1. P. {%okhati, okhāñ-cakāra,%}
{%okhitum,%} to be dry or arid; to be able or
competent; to adorn, suffice; to refuse, prevent, ward
off: Caus. {%okhayati, -yitum:%} Desid. {%ocikhiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>12944<pc>0188-c<k1>ogaRa<k2>ogaRa
{#ogaRa#}¦ {%ogaṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ava-gaṇa?%}),
Ved. repudiated by one's companions, solitary, de-
spised; (Sāy.) collected, united.
<LEND>

<L>12945<pc>0188-c<k1>ogIyas<k2>ogIyas
{#ogIyas#}¦ {%ogīyas = ojīyas,%} comparative of
{%ugra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>12946<pc>0188-c<k1>oGa<k2>oGa
{#oGa#}¦ {%ogha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vah%}), flood,
stream; a torrent, a rapid flow of water, an inunda-
tion; a heap or quantity, flock, multitude, abundance;
the whole; quick time in music; tradition, traditional
advice or instruction; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὄχλος?</lang>]. {%—Ogha-ratha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Oghavat and brother of Ogha-
vatī. {%—Ogha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a strong stream;
({%ān%}), m., N. of a prince, father-in-law or brother-in-
law of Sudarśana; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Ogha-
vat; N. of the river Sarasvatī.
<LEND>

<L>12947<pc>0188-c<k1>oNkAra<k2>oNkAra
{#oNkAra#}¦ {%oṅkāra.%} See under {%om.%}
<LEND>

<L>12948<pc>0188-c<k1>oj<k2>oj
{#oj#}¦ {%oj%} (connected with {%ojas%} below),
cl. 1. 10. P. {%ojati, ojitum,%} or {%ojayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to be strong or able; to increase, to have
vital power.
<LEND>

<L>12949<pc>0188-c<k1>oja<k2>oja
{#oja#}¦ {%oja, as, ā, am,%} odd (as the first, third,
fifth, &c., in a series).
<LEND>

<L>12950<pc>0188-c<k1>ojas<k2>ojas
{#ojas#}¦ {%ojas, as,%} n. (fr. {%uj = vaj;%} see {%ugra%}),
bodily strength, vigour, energy, ability; vitality, the
principle of vital warmth and action diffused through-
out the body; virility, the generative faculty; support,
stay; (in rhetoric) a form of style, elaborate style,
abounding with compounds; (in astrology) each
alternate sign of the zodiac (as the first, third,
fifth, &c.); water; light, splendor; metallic lustre;
[Page0189-a+ 74]
manifestation, appearance; {%ojasā,%} with strength,
resolutely, energetically (sometimes used at the be-
ginning of a compound, e. g. {%ojasā-kṛta,%} done ener-
getically); [cf. {%amitaujas, uttamaujas,%} &c.: cf. also
Gr. <lang n="greek">ὑγιής</lang> Zend <nsi>auṣo;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>og,</nsi> ‘young, juvenile,
fresh;’ <nsi>oig,</nsi> ‘a champion;’ <nsi>oighe,</nsi> ‘entireness, virginity.’]
{%—Ojas-tara, as, ā, am%} (comparative), more strong.
{%—Ojas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} or {%ojas-vin, ī, inī, i,%} vigorous,
powerful, strong, energetic; splendid, bright. {%—Ojasvi-%}
{%tā,%} f. strength, power. {%—Ojo-dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
granting power, strengthening, possessed of strength.
{%—Oja-balā,%} f. (with Buddhists) N. of a goddess of
Bodhidruma.
<LEND>

<L>12951<pc>0189-a<k1>ojasIna<k2>ojasIna
{%Ojasīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. showing strength, powerful.
<LEND>

<L>12952<pc>0189-a<k1>ojasya<k2>ojasya
{%Ojasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ showing strength, powerful.
<LEND>

<L>12953<pc>0189-a<k1>ojAya<k2>ojAya
{%Ojāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%ojāyate, -yitum,%} to exhibit
strength or energy, to make effort; to be strong.
<LEND>

<L>12954<pc>0189-a<k1>ojizWa<k2>ojizWa
{%Ojiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (regarded as superlative {%ugra,%}
q. v.), strongest, most vigorous or vehement.
<LEND>

<L>12955<pc>0189-a<k1>ojIyas<k2>ojIyas
{%Ojīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (regarded as comparative of
{%ugra,%} q. v.), stronger, more vigorous or vehement.
<LEND>

<L>12956<pc>0189-a<k1>ojman<k2>ojman
{%Ojman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. strength; (Sāy.) speed; an
instigator.
<LEND>

<L>12957<pc>0189-a<k1>oqa<k2>oqa
{#oqa#}¦ {%oḍa, as,%} m., N. of a minister of Pra-
tāpāditya.
<LEND>

<L>12958<pc>0189-a<k1>oqaka<k2>oqaka
{#oqaka#}¦ {%oḍaka%} or {%oḍava, as,%} m. a musical
mode which omits two of the notes of the scale, Ṛ
and Pa.
<LEND>

<L>12959<pc>0189-a<k1>oqikA<k2>oqikA
{#oqikA#}¦ {%oḍikā%} or {%oḍī,%} f. wild rice.
<LEND>

<L>12960<pc>0189-a<k1>oqra<k2>oqra
{#oqra#}¦ {%oḍra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people and
country, the northern part of Orissa; ({%as%}), m. the
China rose. {%—Oḍra-puṣpa, am,%} n. Hibiscus Rosa
Sinensis, and its flowers. {%—Oḍrākhyā (˚ra-ākh˚),%}
f. the China rose.
<LEND>

<L>12961<pc>0189-a<k1>oQa<k2>oQa
{#oQa#}¦ {%oḍha, as, ā, am%} (past pass. part. of
{%ā-vah,%} q. v.), brought or carried near.
<LEND>

<L>12962<pc>0189-a<k1>oR<k2>oR
{#oR#}¦ {%oṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%oṇati, oṇāñ-cakāra,%}
{%oṇitum,%} to remove, take away, drag
along: Caus. {%oṇayati, -yitum, auṇiṇat:%} Desid.
{%auṇiṇiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>12963<pc>0189-a<k1>oRi<k2>oRi
{#oRi#}¦ {%oṇi, is,%} m. or f. (generally in du. {%ī;%}
said to be fr. preceding rt.), Ved. a vessel used in the
preparation of the Soma juice, and said to consist of
two pieces (?), heaven and earth; preserving power;
protection.
<LEND>

<L>12964<pc>0189-a<k1>ota<k2>ota<h>1
{#ota#} 1¦. {%ota.%} See 4. {%o.%}
<LEND>

<L>12965<pc>0189-a<k1>ota<k2>ota<h>2
{#ota#} 2¦. {%ota, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ve%} with {%ā%}),
woven, sewn with the threads across; [cf. {%prota.%}]
{%—Ota-prota, as, ā, am,%} sewn crosswise and length-
wise, extending to every quarter?; ({%am%}), ind. cross-
wise and lengthwise, vertically and horizontally.
<LEND>

<L>12966<pc>0189-a<k1>otu<k2>otu
{%Otu, us,%}¦ m. the woof or cross-threads of a web;
({%us%}), m. f. a cat, (in this sense said to be fr. rt. {%av.%})
In a compound a final {%a%} preceding may optionally be
dropped (e. g. {%sthūlotu%} or {%sthūlautu,%} a fat cat.)
<LEND>

<L>12967<pc>0189-a<k1>otsa<k2>otsa
{#otsa#}¦ {%otsa, as,%} m., N. of an Agrahāra.
<LEND>

<L>12968<pc>0189-a<k1>odatI<k2>odatI
{#odatI#}¦ {%odatī,%} f. (part. of rt. 2. {%ud%}), Ved.
flowing forth, issuing out, rising upwards; epithet of
the dawn.
<LEND>

<L>12969<pc>0189-a<k1>odana<k2>odana
{%Odana, as, am,%}¦ m. n. grain mashed and cooked
with milk, boiled rice; a cloud; ({%nī%}), f. the plant
Sida Cordifolia. When a name is given to a pupil
to indicate his attachment to any particular master,
{%odana%} may be prefixed to denote that the pupil's
object is rather food than instruction (e. g. {%odana-%}
{%pāṇinīyaḥ,%} a pupil of Pāṇini whose object is only
to be fed by Pāṇini). {%—Odanāhvayā (˚na-āh˚)%} or
{%odanāhvā%} or {%odanikā,%} f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>12970<pc>0189-a<k1>odanIya<k2>odanIya
{%Odanīya,%}¦ nom. P. {%odanīyati, -yitum,%} to wish to
make mashed food of anything.
<LEND>

<L>12971<pc>0189-a<k1>odma<k2>odma
{%Odma, as,%}¦ m. or {%odman, a,%} n. flowing, flooding;
wetting, moistening.
<LEND>

<L>12972<pc>0189-a<k1>oDas<k2>oDas
{#oDas#}¦ {%odhas, as,%} n. an udder; {%= ūdhas.%}
<LEND>

<L>12973<pc>0189-a<k1>opaSa<k2>opaSa
{#opaSa#}¦ {%opaśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%paś ?%}), Ved.
[Page0189-b+ 75]
an ornament of the head, lock of hair, curl; tuft of
hair ?; (Sāy.) a horn (fr. {%upa-śī%} with {%ā%}).
<LEND>

<L>12974<pc>0189-b<k1>opaSin<k2>opaSin
{%Opaśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. adorned with curls.
<LEND>

<L>12975<pc>0189-b<k1>om<k2>om
{#om#}¦ {%om,%} ind. (said to be fr. rt. {%av;%} perhaps
originally {%oṃ,%} which may be derived fr. {%āṃ,%} and this
fr. {%ā%}), a word of solemn affirmation and respectful
assent (sometimes translated by yes, verily, so be it,
and in this sense compared with Amen). It is placed
at the commencement of most Hindū works, and as
a sacred exclamation may be uttered (but not so as
to be heard by ears profane) at the beginning and
end of a reading of the Vedas or previously to any
prayer. It is also regarded as a particle of auspicious
salutation (Hail!). {%Om%} appears first in the Upani-
shads as a mystic monosyllable, and is there set forth
as the object of profound religious meditation, the
highest spiritual efficacy being attributed not only to
the whole word but also to the three sounds {%a, u, m,%}
of which it consists. In later times {%om%} is the mystic
name for the Hindū triad, and represents the union of
the three gods, viz. {%a%} (Viṣṇu), {%u%} (Śiva), {%m%} (Brahmā).
It may also be typical of the three Vedas. {%Om%} is
usually called {%praṇava,%} more rarely {%akṣaram%} or
{%ekākṣaram,%} and only in later times {%oṃ-kāra.%}
The Buddhists use {%om%} at the commencement of
their {%vidyā ṣaḍ-akṣarī%} or mystical formulary in
six syllables (viz. {%om māni padme hūṃ%}). Lexico-
graphers affirm that besides the above uses, {%om%} may
imply command or injunction, removal or warding
off (Away! Hence!), and be used as an inceptive par-
ticle. Grammarians assert that before {%om%} a preced-
ing {%a%} or {%ā%} at the end of a word should be cut off
(e. g. {%vijayoṅkāraḥ%} for {%{{vijayauṅkārah->vijayauṅkāraḥ||20161210|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 311-315|missing underdot final letter}} (˚ya-oṅ˚),%}
thanksgiving for victory; see Gram. 38. <nsi>b</nsi>). {%—Oṃ-kāra,%}
{%as,%} m. the sacred and mystical syllable {%om;%} the ex-
clamation {%om;%} pronouncing the syllable {%om; (ā),%} f.
a Buddhist Śakti or female personification of divine
energy. {%—Oṃkāra-grantha, as,%} m. title of a work
of Nārāyaṇa. {%—Oṃkāra-tīrtha,%} N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Oṃkāra-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12976<pc>0189-b<k1>oma<k2>oma
{#oma#}¦ {%oma, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%av,%} cf. 4. {%ū%}), Ved.
a protector; any one favourably disposed (towards
another); any one worthy of favour or protection.
<LEND>

<L>12977<pc>0189-b<k1>oman<k2>oman
{%Oman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. protection, assistance; favour,
kindness; a kind person. {%—Oman-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. friendly, agreeable; favourable, kind; satiating.
<LEND>

<L>12978<pc>0189-b<k1>omAtrA<k2>omAtrA
{%Omātrā,%}¦ f., Ved. protection, assistance, kindness,
readiness to help.
<LEND>

<L>12979<pc>0189-b<k1>omyA<k2>omyA
{%Omyā,%}¦ f., Ved. favour, protection. {%—Omyā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. friendly, favourable.
<LEND>

<L>12980<pc>0189-b<k1>omila<k2>omila
{#omila#}¦ {%omila, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12981<pc>0189-b<k1>orimikA<k2>orimikA
{#orimikA#}¦ {%orimikā,%} f. title of a section of
the Kāṭhaka Recension of the Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>12982<pc>0189-b<k1>orRu<k2>orRu
{#orRu#}¦ {%orṇu (ā-ūrṇu),%} cl. 2. P. A. {%orṇoti%} or
{%-ṇauti, -ṇute, -ṇavitum%} or {%-ṇuvitum,%} to cover.
<LEND>

<L>12983<pc>0189-b<k1>ola<k2>ola
{#ola#}¦ {%ola%} or {%olla, as, ā, am,%} wet, damp;
({%as%}), m. an esculent root, Arum Campanulatum.
<LEND>

<L>12984<pc>0189-b<k1>olaRq<k2>olaRq
{#olaRq#}¦ {%olaṇḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%olaṇḍayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cast upwards, throw
up; (various readings have {%olaj%} and {%olj.%})
<LEND>

<L>12985<pc>0189-b<k1>oSizWahan<k2>oSizWahan
{#oSizWahan#}¦ {%ośiṣṭha-han, ā, ghnī, a%} (fr. {%ośi-%}
{%ṣṭha = oṣiṣṭha%} and {%han%}), Ved. striking very
quickly; [cf. {%oṣiṣṭha-dāvan.%}]
<LEND>

<L>12986<pc>0189-b<k1>oza<k2>oza
{#oza#}¦ {%oṣa, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%uṣ%}), burning,
combustion; [cf. Goth. <nsi>azgô;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>asca;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>asga;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>asche;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>ashes.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>12987<pc>0189-b<k1>ozaRa<k2>ozaRa
{%Oṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m. pungency, biting or pungent taste,
sharp flavour; ({%ī%}), f. a pot-herb, commonly called Pūrya.
<LEND>

<L>12988<pc>0189-b<k1>ozaDi<k2>ozaDi
{#ozaDi#}¦ {%oṣadhi, is,%} or {%ī,%} f. (a contraction
fr. {%avasa%} and {%dhi,%} ‘containing refreshment or food?;’
according to Pāṇini VI. 3. 132, the form in {%ī%} is only
used for the oblique cases in the Veda; but this re-
striction does not seem to be universal), a herb, a plant,
medicinal plant; an annual plant or herb, one that
dies after becoming ripe. {%—Oṣadhi-garbha, as,%} m.
[Page0189-c+ 73]
the moon (as containing the herbs in its interior).
{%—Oṣadhi-ja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. born or living
among herbs; produced from plants. {%—Oṣadhi-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. a physician (master of the medicinal
plants); the moon. {%—Oṣadhi-prastha, as,%} m., N.
of a mythic town, the town of Himavat. {%—Oṣadhī-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. the moon. {%—Oṣadhī-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. connected with herbs. {%—Oṣadhīśa (˚dhi-īśa),%}
{%as,%} m. the moon (presiding over the plants). {%—Oṣa-%}
{%dhī-saṃśita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. impelled or influ-
enced by herbs. {%—Oṣadhī-sūkta, am,%} n., N. of a
hymn.
<LEND>

<L>12989<pc>0189-c<k1>ozam<k2>ozam
{#ozam#}¦ {%oṣam,%} ind. (fr. rt. 1. {%uṣ ?%}), Ved.
quickly, immediately.
<LEND>

<L>12990<pc>0189-c<k1>ozizWadAvan<k2>ozizWadAvan
{%Oṣiṣṭha-dāvan, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. giving very quickly.
<LEND>

<L>12991<pc>0189-c<k1>ozWa<k2>ozWa
{#ozWa#}¦ {%oṣṭha, as,%} m. (contracted fr. {%ava-%}
{%stha%}), the down-hanging lip, i. e. the upper lip (op-
posed to {%adhara%}), a lip in general; {%oṣṭhau%} or
{%dvāv oṣṭhau,%} du. the lips, the two lips; ({%ī%}), f. a
creeper bearing a red flower, to which the lip is com-
monly compared (Coccinia Grandis); [cf. {%bimba:%}
cf. also Slav. <nsi>ûsta,</nsi> neut. pl.; <nsi>ûstna,</nsi> f.: Lat. <nsi>ostium.</nsi>]
In compounds a final {%a%} or {%ā%} before {%oṣṭha%} may be
optionally dropped (e. g. {%bimba + oṣṭha%} becomes
either {%bimboṣṭha%} or {%bimbauṣṭha,%} ‘red-lipped,’
and the fem. of the comp. adj. may be formed in {%ā%}
or {%ī%}). {%—Oṣṭha-karṇaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a fabu-
lous race who have their ears and lips very near
each other. {%—Oṣṭha-kopa%} or {%oṣṭha-prakopa, as,%}
m. a disease of the lips. {%—Oṣṭha-ja, as, ā, am,%}
produced by the lips, labial. {%—Oṣṭha-jāha, am,%} n.
the root of the ear. {%—Oṣṭha-pallava, am,%} n. a lip
or the lips. {%—Oṣṭha-puṭa, am,%} n. the cavity made
by opening the lips. {%—Oṣṭha-puṣpa, am,%} n. the
plant Pentaptera Tomentosa. {%—Oṣṭha-roga, as,%}
m. any morbid affection of the lips. {%—Oṣṭhādhara%}
{%(˚ṭha-adh˚), au,%} du. or {%am,%} n. the upper and lower
lip. {%—Oṣṭhopama-phalā (˚ṭha-upamā-ph˚),%} f. the
creeper Bryonia Grandis, whose flower resembles
a lip.
<LEND>

<L>12992<pc>0189-c<k1>ozWaka<k2>ozWaka
{%Oṣṭhaka%}¦ (at the end of compounds) {%= oṣṭha;%}
{%(as, ā, am),%} taking care of the lips.
<LEND>

<L>12993<pc>0189-c<k1>ozWya<k2>ozWya
{%Oṣṭhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being at the lips; belonging
to or fit for the lips, labial (as the sounds {%u, ū, o, au,%}
{%p, ph, b, bh, m, v,%} and the Upadhmānīya). {%—Oṣ-%}
{%ṭhya-yoni, is, is, i,%} produced from labial sounds.
{%—Oṣṭhya-sthāna, as, ā, am,%} pronounced with the
lips, as {%o%} and {%au.%}
<LEND>

<L>12994<pc>0189-c<k1>ozRa<k2>ozRa
{#ozRa#}¦ {%oṣṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ā,%} implying di-
minution, and {%uṣṇa%}), a little warm, tepid.
<LEND>

<L>12995<pc>0189-c<k1>oh<k2>oh
{#oh#}¦ {%oh%} (rt. 2. {%ūh%} with {%ā%}), cl. 1. A. {%ohate,%}
{%hitum,%} to understand, admit, receive.
<LEND>

<L>12996<pc>0189-c<k1>oha<k2>oha
{%Oha, as,%}¦ m. (fr. 2. {%ūh%}), Ved. meditation; (Sāy.)
bringing, performing; reaching. {%—Oha-brahman, ā,%}
m., Ved. really a Brāhman, a Brāhman valued as one;
(Sāy.) one who has sacred knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>12997<pc>0189-c<k1>ohala<k2>ohala
{%Ohala, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>12998<pc>0189-c<k1>ohas<k2>ohas
{%Ohas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. idea, true notion; (Sāy.) praise.
<LEND>

<L>12999<pc>0189-c<k1>ohAna<k2>ohAna
{%Ohāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ considering, reflecting on.
<LEND>
<H>{#O#}

<L>13000<pc>0189-c<k1>O<k2>O<h>1
{#O#} 1¦. {%au,%} the fourteenth letter of the
alphabet, having the same sound as {%ou%} in <nsi>our.</nsi>
{%—Au-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%au.%}
<LEND>

<L>13001<pc>0189-c<k1>O<k2>O<h>2
{#O#} 2¦. {%au,%} ind. an interjection of calling,
Ho, Hola; of addressing, Oh; of prohibition and
of asseveration.
<LEND>

<L>13002<pc>0189-c<k1>O<k2>O<h>3
{#O#} 3¦. {%au, aus,%} m. sound; an epithet of
Śeṣa or Ananta; ({%aus%}), f. the earth.
<LEND>

<L>13003<pc>0189-c<k1>OkTika<k2>OkTika
{#OkTika#}¦ {%aukthika, as,%} m. (fr. {%uktha%}), a
Brāhman acquainted with the Ukthas, reciting them.
<LEND>

<L>13004<pc>0189-c<k1>OkTikya<k2>OkTikya
{%Aukthikya, am,%}¦ n. the text of the Ukthas.
<LEND>

<L>13005<pc>0189-c<k1>OkTya<k2>OkTya
{%Aukthya, am,%}¦ n. a peculiar mode of recitation.
<LEND>

<L>13006<pc>0189-c<k1>Okza<k2>Okza
{#Okza#}¦ {%aukṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ukṣan%}), Ved.
[Page0190-a+ 68]
relating to an ox, derived from one, &c. {%—Aukṣa-%}
{%gandhi, is,%} f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>13007<pc>0190-a<k1>Okzaka<k2>Okzaka
{%Aukṣaka, am,%}¦ n. a multitude of oxen.
<LEND>

<L>13008<pc>0190-a<k1>OkzRa<k2>OkzRa
{%Aukṣṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to an ox, derived
from one; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from Ukṣan.
<LEND>

<L>13009<pc>0190-a<k1>OKIya<k2>OKIya
{#OKIya#}¦ {%aukhīya, ās,%} m. pl. the followers
of Ukha.
<LEND>

<L>13010<pc>0190-a<k1>OKya<k2>OKya
{#OKya#}¦ {%aukhya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ukhā%}), boiled
or dressed in a pot.
<LEND>

<L>13011<pc>0190-a<k1>Ograseni<k2>Ograseni
{#Ograseni#}¦ {%augraseni, is,%} m. or {%augrasenya,%}
{%as,%} m. a patronymic fr. {%ugra-sena.%}
<LEND>

<L>13012<pc>0190-a<k1>OgrasEnya<k2>OgrasEnya
{%Augrasainya, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of Yudhāṃśrau-
ṣṭi.
<LEND>

<L>13013<pc>0190-a<k1>Ogrya<k2>Ogrya
{%Augrya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%ugra%}), horribleness, dread-
fulness, fierceness.
<LEND>

<L>13014<pc>0190-a<k1>OGa<k2>OGa
{#OGa#}¦ {%augha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vah%}), a flood;
[cf. {%ogha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13015<pc>0190-a<k1>OcaTya<k2>OcaTya
{#OcaTya#}¦ {%aucathya, as,%} m. (fr. {%ucathya%}), a
patronymic of Dīrgha-tamas of the family of Aṅgiras;
[cf. {%autathya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13016<pc>0190-a<k1>Ocitya<k2>Ocitya
{#Ocitya#}¦ {%aucitya, am,%} n. or {%aucitī,%} f. (fr.
{%ucita%}), aptness, fitness, propriety, suitableness; taking
pleasure in anything, habituation.
<LEND>

<L>13017<pc>0190-a<k1>OccEHSravasa<k2>OccEHSravasa
{#OccEHSravasa#}¦ {%auccaiḥśravasa, as,%} m. (fr. {%uc-%}
{%caiḥ-śravas%}), N. of Indra's horse.
<LEND>

<L>13018<pc>0190-a<k1>Ojasa<k2>Ojasa
{#Ojasa#}¦ {%aujasa, am,%} n. (fr. {%ojas%}), gold.
<LEND>

<L>13019<pc>0190-a<k1>Ojasika<k2>Ojasika
{%Aujasika, as, ī, am,%}¦ energetic, vigorous, acting
with strength or energy; ({%as%}), m. a hero.
<LEND>

<L>13020<pc>0190-a<k1>Ojasya<k2>Ojasya
{%Aujasya,%}¦ conducive to vitality or energy; ({%am%}), n.
freshness or vigour of life, energy.
<LEND>

<L>13021<pc>0190-a<k1>OjjihAyanaka<k2>OjjihAyanaka
{#OjjihAyanaka#}¦ {%aujjihāyanaka, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a grammatical school.
<LEND>

<L>13022<pc>0190-a<k1>Ojjvalya<k2>Ojjvalya
{#Ojjvalya#}¦ {%aujjvalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%uj-jvala%}),
brightness, brilliancy.
<LEND>

<L>13023<pc>0190-a<k1>Oqavi<k2>Oqavi
{#Oqavi#}¦ {%auḍavi, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a warrior-
tribe.
<LEND>

<L>13024<pc>0190-a<k1>OqavIya<k2>OqavIya
{%Auḍavīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of this tribe.
<LEND>

<L>13025<pc>0190-a<k1>Oqupika<k2>Oqupika
{#Oqupika#}¦ {%auḍupika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%uḍupa%}),
crossing in a boat; ({%as%}), m. a passenger, one going
in a raft or boat.
<LEND>

<L>13026<pc>0190-a<k1>Oqumbara<k2>Oqumbara
{#Oqumbara#}¦ {%auḍumbara.%} See {%audumbara.%}
<LEND>

<L>13027<pc>0190-a<k1>Oqulomi<k2>Oqulomi
{#Oqulomi#}¦ {%auḍulomi, is,%} m. (fr. {%uḍuloman%}),
N. of a philosopher.
<LEND>

<L>13028<pc>0190-a<k1>Oqra<k2>Oqra
{#Oqra#}¦ {%auḍra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people and
the country inhabited by them. See {%oḍra.%}
<LEND>

<L>13029<pc>0190-a<k1>OtaNka<k2>OtaNka
{#OtaNka#}¦ {%autaṅka, as, ī, am,%} belonging to
Utan.ka.
<LEND>

<L>13030<pc>0190-a<k1>OtaTya<k2>OtaTya
{#OtaTya#}¦ {%autathya, as,%} m. (fr. {%utatha%}), an
epithet of Dīrgha-tamas.
<LEND>

<L>13031<pc>0190-a<k1>OtkaRWya<k2>OtkaRWya
{#OtkaRWya#}¦ {%autkaṇṭhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%utkaṇṭha%}),
desire, longing for. {%—Autkaṇṭhya-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
desirous, longing for.
<LEND>

<L>13032<pc>0190-a<k1>Otkarzya<k2>Otkarzya
{#Otkarzya#}¦ {%autkarṣya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ut-karṣa%}),
excellence, superiority.
<LEND>

<L>13033<pc>0190-a<k1>Ottami<k2>Ottami
{#Ottami#}¦ {%auttami, is,%} m. (fr. {%uttama%}), epithet
of the third Manu.
<LEND>

<L>13034<pc>0190-a<k1>Ottamika<k2>Ottamika
{%Auttamika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the gods who
are in the highest place (in the sky).
<LEND>

<L>13035<pc>0190-a<k1>Ottara<k2>Ottara
{#Ottara#}¦ {%auttara, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%uttara%}),
living in the north.
<LEND>

<L>13036<pc>0190-a<k1>OttarapaTika<k2>OttarapaTika
{%Auttarapathika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%uttara-patha%}),
going or coming in a northerly direction.
<LEND>

<L>13037<pc>0190-a<k1>Ottarapadika<k2>Ottarapadika
{%Auttarapadika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%uttara-pada%}),
comprehending the last word or term (?).
<LEND>

<L>13038<pc>0190-a<k1>Ottaravedika<k2>Ottaravedika
{%Auttaravedika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the Ut-
tara-vedi.
<LEND>

<L>13039<pc>0190-a<k1>OttarADarya<k2>OttarADarya
{%Auttarādharya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%uttarādhara%}), state
of being below and above.
<LEND>
[Page0190-b+ 68]

<L>13040<pc>0190-b<k1>OttarAha<k2>OttarAha
{%Auttarāha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%uttarāka%}), of or belong-
ing to the following day.
<LEND>

<L>13041<pc>0190-b<k1>Ottareya<k2>Ottareya
{%Auttareya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Uttarā.
<LEND>

<L>13042<pc>0190-b<k1>OttAnapAda<k2>OttAnapAda
{#OttAnapAda#}¦ {%auttānapāda, as,%} and {%auttāna-%}
{%pādi, is,%} m. (fr. {%uttāna-pāda%}), a N. of Dhruva; (in
mythology) the son of Uttāna-pāda, and grandson of
the first Manu; (in astronomy) the polar star or the
north pole itself.
<LEND>

<L>13043<pc>0190-b<k1>Otpattika<k2>Otpattika
{#Otpattika#}¦ {%autpattika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ut-patti%}),
inborn, innate; natural; produced at the same time.
<LEND>

<L>13044<pc>0190-b<k1>OtpAta<k2>OtpAta
{#OtpAta#}¦ {%autpāta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ut-pāta%}),
treating of portents.
<LEND>

<L>13045<pc>0190-b<k1>OtpAtika<k2>OtpAtika
{%Autpātika, as, ī, am,%}¦ portentous, prodigious, as-
tounding, calamitous; ({%am%}), n. a portent.
<LEND>

<L>13046<pc>0190-b<k1>OtpAda<k2>OtpAda
{#OtpAda#}¦ {%autpāda, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ut-pāda%}),
relating to or treating of birth or production.
<LEND>

<L>13047<pc>0190-b<k1>Otpuwika<k2>Otpuwika
{#Otpuwika#}¦ {%autpuṭika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%utpuṭa%}),
receiving anything with the mouth or beak turned
upwards.
<LEND>

<L>13048<pc>0190-b<k1>Otra<k2>Otra
{#Otra#}¦ {%autra, as, ī, am%} (for {%auttara?%}), gross,
rough, inexact.
<LEND>

<L>13049<pc>0190-b<k1>Otsa<k2>Otsa
{#Otsa#}¦ {%autsa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%utsa%}), born or
produced in a well or fountain.
<LEND>

<L>13050<pc>0190-b<k1>OtsaNgika<k2>OtsaNgika
{#OtsaNgika#}¦ {%autsaṅgika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ut-%}
{%saṅga%}), carried or placed upon the hip or flank.
<LEND>

<L>13051<pc>0190-b<k1>Otsargika<k2>Otsargika
{#Otsargika#}¦ {%autsargika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ut-%}
{%sarga%}), that which is abandoned {%(utsṛjyate)%} or
liable to be abolished in exceptional cases, but valid
generally (as a rule of grammar); general as opposed
to special, not particular, not restricted, abandoning,
omitting, leaving; terminating, completing, relating
or belonging to a final ceremony by which a rite is
dismissed; natural, inherent; produced directly and
naturally; derivative. {%—Autsargika-tva, am,%} n. the
generality of a rule.
<LEND>

<L>13052<pc>0190-b<k1>Otsukya<k2>Otsukya
{#Otsukya#}¦ {%autsukya, am,%} n. (fr. {%utsuka%}),
anxiety, disquietude, uneasiness, regret; ardent desire,
longing, eagerness, zeal.
<LEND>

<L>13053<pc>0190-b<k1>Odaka<k2>Odaka
{#Odaka#}¦ {%audaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%udaka%}), aquatic,
watery, of or belonging to water. {%—Audaka-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced by aquatic plants.
<LEND>

<L>13054<pc>0190-b<k1>Odaki<k2>Odaki
{%Audaki, ayas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>13055<pc>0190-b<k1>OdakIya<k2>OdakIya
{%Audakīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of this warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>13056<pc>0190-b<k1>OdaNki<k2>OdaNki
{#OdaNki#}¦ {%audaṅki, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a
warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>13057<pc>0190-b<k1>OdaNkIya<k2>OdaNkIya
{%Audaṅkīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of this tribe.
<LEND>

<L>13058<pc>0190-b<k1>OdaYcana<k2>OdaYcana
{#OdaYcana#}¦ {%audañcana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ud-%}
{%añcana%}), contained in a pitcher.
<LEND>

<L>13059<pc>0190-b<k1>Odanika<k2>Odanika
{#Odanika#}¦ {%audanika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%odana%}),
one who knows how to cook mashed grain &c., a
cook; one to whom mashed grain is given at regular
times.
<LEND>

<L>13060<pc>0190-b<k1>Odanya<k2>Odanya
{%Audanya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Muṇḍibha.
<LEND>

<L>13061<pc>0190-b<k1>OdapAna<k2>OdapAna
{#OdapAna#}¦ {%audapāna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%uda-pāna%}),
raised from wells or drinking fountains (as a tax);
coming from the village Udapāna.
<LEND>

<L>13062<pc>0190-b<k1>OdameGIya<k2>OdameGIya
{#OdameGIya#}¦ {%audameghīya, as, ī, am,%} belong-
ing to Audameghi.
<LEND>

<L>13063<pc>0190-b<k1>Odayaka<k2>Odayaka
{#Odayaka#}¦ {%audayaka, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%ud-aya%}),
a school of astronomers who reckoned the first motion
of the planets from sunrise.
<LEND>

<L>13064<pc>0190-b<k1>Odarika<k2>Odarika
{#Odarika#}¦ {%audarika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%udara%}),
greedily voracious, gluttonous.
<LEND>

<L>13065<pc>0190-b<k1>Odarya<k2>Odarya
{%Audarya,%}¦ being in the womb.
<LEND>

<L>13066<pc>0190-b<k1>Odala<k2>Odala
{#Odala#}¦ {%audala,%} a patronymic from Udala;
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>13067<pc>0190-b<k1>OdavApi<k2>OdavApi
{#OdavApi#}¦ {%audavāpi,%} a patronymic from
Uda-vāpa.
<LEND>
[Page0190-c+ 69]

<L>13068<pc>0190-c<k1>OdavApIya<k2>OdavApIya
{%Audavāpīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to Audavāpi.
<LEND>

<L>13069<pc>0190-c<k1>OdavAhi<k2>OdavAhi
{#OdavAhi#}¦ {%audavāhi,%} a patronymic from
Uda-vāha; N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>13070<pc>0190-c<k1>OdaSvita<k2>OdaSvita
{#OdaSvita#}¦ {%audaśvita%} or {%audaśvitka, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%uda-śvit%}), made of buttermilk; ({%am%}), n. butter-
milk with an equal proportion of water.
<LEND>

<L>13071<pc>0190-c<k1>OdasTAna<k2>OdasTAna
{#OdasTAna#}¦ {%audasthāna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%uda-%}
{%sthāna%}), accustomed to stand in water.
<LEND>

<L>13072<pc>0190-c<k1>OdAttya<k2>OdAttya
{#OdAttya#}¦ {%audāttya, am,%} n. (fr. {%udātta%}), the
state of having the high tone.
<LEND>

<L>13073<pc>0190-c<k1>OdArika<k2>OdArika
{#OdArika#}¦ {%audārika,%} (with Jainas) the gross
body which invests the soul.
<LEND>

<L>13074<pc>0190-c<k1>OdArya<k2>OdArya
{#OdArya#}¦ {%audārya, am,%} n. (fr. {%udāra%}), gene-
rosity, nobility, magnanimity, greatness.
<LEND>

<L>13075<pc>0190-c<k1>OdAsInya<k2>OdAsInya
{#OdAsInya#}¦ {%audāsīnya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ud-āsīna%}),
indifference, apathy.
<LEND>

<L>13076<pc>0190-c<k1>OdAsya<k2>OdAsya
{%Audāsya, am,%}¦ n. indifference, stoicism, philosophy,
solitariness, loneliness.
<LEND>

<L>13077<pc>0190-c<k1>Odumbara<k2>Odumbara
{#Odumbara#}¦ {%audumbara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%udumbara%}),
coming from the Udumbara tree, made of its wood;
({%as%}), m., N. of a region abounding in Udumbara
trees; a form of Yama, the regent of death; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a people; ({%ī%}), f. (scil. {%śākhā%}) a branch of
the Udumbara tree; ({%am%}), n. the wood of the
Udumbara tree or a piece of the wood; the Udum-
bara fruit; a kind of leprosy; copper.
<LEND>

<L>13078<pc>0190-c<k1>Odumbaraka<k2>Odumbaraka
{%Audumbaraka, as,%}¦ m. the country inhabited by
the Udumbaras.
<LEND>

<L>13079<pc>0190-c<k1>OdumbarAyaRa<k2>OdumbarAyaRa
{%Audumbarāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>13080<pc>0190-c<k1>Odumbari<k2>Odumbari
{%Audumbari, is,%}¦ m. a prince of the Udumbaras.
<LEND>

<L>13081<pc>0190-c<k1>OdgAtra<k2>OdgAtra
{#OdgAtra#}¦ {%audgātra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ud-gātṛ%}),
relating to the Udgātṛ priest; ({%am%}), n. the office of
the Udgātṛ priest. {%—Audgātra-sāra-saṅgraha, as,%}
m., N. of a commentary of Rudraskanda on the
Drāhyāyaṇa Sūtras.
<LEND>

<L>13082<pc>0190-c<k1>OdgraBaRa<k2>OdgraBaRa
{#OdgraBaRa#}¦ {%audgrabhaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%ud-gra-%}
{%bhaṇa;%} scil. {%yajus%}), N. of certain sentence recited
at the Dīkṣā.
<LEND>

<L>13083<pc>0190-c<k1>OddAlaka<k2>OddAlaka
{#OddAlaka#}¦ {%auddālaka, am,%} n. (fr. {%uddāla%} or
{%uddālaka;%} scil. {%madhu%}), a bitter and acrid sub-
stance like honey, said to be found in the nest of the
white ant; N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>13084<pc>0190-c<k1>OddAlaki<k2>OddAlaki
{%Auddālaki, is,%}¦ m. an epithet of Śvetaketu, of
Kusuruvinda, and of Āruṇi.
<LEND>

<L>13085<pc>0190-c<k1>OddeSika<k2>OddeSika
{#OddeSika#}¦ {%auddeśika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ud-deśa%}),
pointing out, showing, indicative of; enumerating.
<LEND>

<L>13086<pc>0190-c<k1>OdDatya<k2>OdDatya
{#OdDatya#}¦ {%auddhatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ud-dhata%}),
arrogance, insolence, overbearing manner, disdain.
<LEND>

<L>13087<pc>0190-c<k1>OdDArika<k2>OdDArika
{#OdDArika#}¦ {%auddhārika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ud-%}
{%dhāra%}), belonging to a portion or share, selected,
portionable, heritable; ({%am%}), n. a portion or in-
heritance.
<LEND>

<L>13088<pc>0190-c<k1>Odbilya<k2>Odbilya
{#Odbilya#}¦ {%audbilya, am,%} n. (fr. {%udbila%}), joy-
ful excitement.
<LEND>

<L>13089<pc>0190-c<k1>OdBAri<k2>OdBAri
{#OdBAri#}¦ {%audbhāri, is,%} m. (fr. {%ud-bhāra%}), a
patronymic of Khaṇḍika.
<LEND>

<L>13090<pc>0190-c<k1>OdBijja<k2>OdBijja
{#OdBijja#}¦ {%audbhijja, as,%} m. (fr. {%udbhijja%}),
N. of a man; ({%am%}), n. fossil salt.
<LEND>

<L>13091<pc>0190-c<k1>OdBida<k2>OdBida
{%Audbhida, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%ud-bhid%}), springing forth,
issuing (as from a well); forcing one's way towards
an object, victorious; ({%am%}), n. spring water; fossil
salt, rock or sambher salt.
<LEND>

<L>13092<pc>0190-c<k1>OdBidya<k2>OdBidya
{%Audbhidya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. forcing one's way to
victory, victoriousness.
<LEND>

<L>13093<pc>0190-c<k1>OdvAhika<k2>OdvAhika
{#OdvAhika#}¦ {%audvāhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ud-vāha%}),
relating to marriage; ({%am%}), n. a gift made to a
woman at her marriage.
<LEND>

<L>13094<pc>0190-c<k1>ODasa<k2>ODasa
{#ODasa#}¦ {%audhasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ūdhas%}), being
in the udder, contained in the udder (as milk).
<LEND>
[Page0191-a+ 65]

<L>13095<pc>0191-a<k1>ODeya<k2>ODeya
{#ODeya#}¦ {%audheya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a family;
N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>13096<pc>0191-a<k1>Onnatya<k2>Onnatya
{#Onnatya#}¦ {%aunnatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%un-nata%}),
height.
<LEND>

<L>13097<pc>0191-a<k1>Onnetra<k2>Onnetra
{#Onnetra#}¦ {%aunnetra, am,%} n. (fr. {%un-netṛ%}), the
office of the Un-netṛ.
<LEND>

<L>13098<pc>0191-a<k1>OpakarRika<k2>OpakarRika
{#OpakarRika#}¦ {%aupakarṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa +%}
{%karṇa%}), being near the ears.
<LEND>

<L>13099<pc>0191-a<k1>OpakalApya<k2>OpakalApya
{#OpakalApya#}¦ {%aupakalāpya, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%upa + kalāpa%}), being near the girdle.
<LEND>

<L>13100<pc>0191-a<k1>OpakArya<k2>OpakArya
{#OpakArya#}¦ {%aupakārya, am,%} n. (fr. {%upa-kāryā%}),
a residence; a tent.
<LEND>

<L>13101<pc>0191-a<k1>OpakurvARaka<k2>OpakurvARaka
{%Aupakurvāṇaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%upa-kurvāṇa,%}
q. v.), belonging to the Upa-kurvāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>13102<pc>0191-a<k1>Opagava<k2>Opagava
{#Opagava#}¦ {%aupagava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-gu%}),
belonging to Upagu; a patronymic from Upagu.
<LEND>

<L>13103<pc>0191-a<k1>Opagavaka<k2>Opagavaka
{%Aupagavaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the Aupa-
gavas, coming from the Aupagavas; worshipping
Aupagava; ({%am%}), n. an assemblage of Aupagavas.
<LEND>

<L>13104<pc>0191-a<k1>Opagrastika<k2>Opagrastika
{#Opagrastika#}¦ {%aupagrastika, as,%} m. (fr. {%upa-%}
{%grasta%}) or {%aupagrahika, as,%} m. (fr. {%upa-graha%}),
an eclipse, the sun or moon in eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>13105<pc>0191-a<k1>OpacArika<k2>OpacArika
{#OpacArika#}¦ {%aupacārika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%cāra%}), metaphorical; figurative.
<LEND>

<L>13106<pc>0191-a<k1>OpacCandasika<k2>OpacCandasika
{#OpacCandasika#}¦ {%aupacchandasika, am,%} n. (fr.
{%upa + chandas%}), N. of a metre of two lines, each
containing 16 + 18 syllabic instants or 12 + 13 feet;
see Gram. 970.
<LEND>

<L>13107<pc>0191-a<k1>OpajanDani<k2>OpajanDani
{#OpajanDani#}¦ {%aupajandhani, is,%} m. a patro-
nymic, N. of a teacher; also spelt {%aupacandhani.%}
<LEND>

<L>13108<pc>0191-a<k1>OpajAnuka<k2>OpajAnuka
{#OpajAnuka#}¦ {%aupajānuka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa +%}
{%jānu%}), being upon or near the knees.
<LEND>

<L>13109<pc>0191-a<k1>Opatasvini<k2>Opatasvini
{#Opatasvini#}¦ {%aupatasvini, is,%} m. patronymic
of a Rāma mentioned in the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>13110<pc>0191-a<k1>OpadeSika<k2>OpadeSika
{#OpadeSika#}¦ {%aupadeśika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%deśa%}), living by teaching.
<LEND>

<L>13111<pc>0191-a<k1>Opadravika<k2>Opadravika
{#Opadravika#}¦ {%aupadravika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%drava%}), relating to symptoms, treating of them.
<LEND>

<L>13112<pc>0191-a<k1>Opadrazwrya<k2>Opadrazwrya
{#Opadrazwrya#}¦ {%aupadraṣṭrya, am,%} n. (fr. {%upa-%}
{%draṣṭṛ%}), Ved. the state of being an eye-witness;
superintendence.
<LEND>

<L>13113<pc>0191-a<k1>OpaDarmya<k2>OpaDarmya
{#OpaDarmya#}¦ {%aupadharmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%upa-%}
{%dharma%}), false doctrine, heresy; inferior virtue.
<LEND>

<L>13114<pc>0191-a<k1>OpaDika<k2>OpaDika
{#OpaDika#}¦ {%aupadhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-dhi%}),
deceitful, deceptive.
<LEND>

<L>13115<pc>0191-a<k1>OpaDenava<k2>OpaDenava
{#OpaDenava#}¦ {%aupadhenava, as,%} m. (fr. {%upa +%}
{%dhenu%}), N. of a physician.
<LEND>

<L>13116<pc>0191-a<k1>OpaDeya<k2>OpaDeya
{#OpaDeya#}¦ {%aupadheya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-dhi%}),
serving for the part of the wheel of a carriage, called
Upadhi; ({%am%}), n. the wheel of a carriage.
<LEND>

<L>13117<pc>0191-a<k1>OpanAyanika<k2>OpanAyanika
{#OpanAyanika#}¦ {%aupanāyanika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%upa-nāyana%}), relating to or serving for the rite of
investiture, belonging to it.
<LEND>

<L>13118<pc>0191-a<k1>OpanAsika<k2>OpanAsika
{#OpanAsika#}¦ {%aupanāsika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa +%}
{%nāsā%}), being near the nose.
<LEND>

<L>13119<pc>0191-a<k1>OpaniDika<k2>OpaniDika
{#OpaniDika#}¦ {%aupanidhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%nidhi%}), forming a deposit, relating to a deposit, de-
posited; ({%am%}), n. a deposit, the thing pledged or
deposited.
<LEND>

<L>13120<pc>0191-a<k1>Opanizatka<k2>Opanizatka
{#Opanizatka#}¦ {%aupaniṣatka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%niṣad%}), living by an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>13121<pc>0191-a<k1>Opanizada<k2>Opanizada
{%Aupaniṣada, as, ī, am,%}¦ contained in or taught
in an Upaniṣad, scriptural, theological; ({%as%}), m. the
follower of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>13122<pc>0191-a<k1>OpanIvika<k2>OpanIvika
{#OpanIvika#}¦ {%aupanīvika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa + %}
[Page0191-b+ 69]
{%nīvi%}), being near the Nīvi, i. e. a cloth with which
women cover their loins.
<LEND>

<L>13123<pc>0191-b<k1>Opapakzya<k2>Opapakzya
{#Opapakzya#}¦ {%aupapakṣya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%pakṣa%}), being in the arm-hole.
<LEND>

<L>13124<pc>0191-b<k1>Opapattika<k2>Opapattika
{#Opapattika#}¦ {%aupapattika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%patti%}), present, ready, at hand, within reach, fit,
proper, answering a purpose.
<LEND>

<L>13125<pc>0191-b<k1>OpapAtika<k2>OpapAtika
{#OpapAtika#}¦ {%aupapātika, as, ī, am,%} one who
has committed an Upa-pātaka, q. v.; ({%am%}), n. title
of a Jaina Upāṅga.
<LEND>

<L>13126<pc>0191-b<k1>OpapAduka<k2>OpapAduka
{#OpapAduka#}¦ {%aupapāduka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%pāduka%}), produced by one's self.
<LEND>

<L>13127<pc>0191-b<k1>OpaBfta<k2>OpaBfta
{#OpaBfta#}¦ {%aupabhṛta, as, ī, am,%} belonging to
or being in the ladle called Upa-bhṛt.
<LEND>

<L>13128<pc>0191-b<k1>Opamanyava<k2>Opamanyava
{#Opamanyava#}¦ {%aupamanyava, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Upa-manyu; N. of Mahāśāla Jābāla;
of Prācīnaśāla; of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>13129<pc>0191-b<k1>Opamika<k2>Opamika
{#Opamika#}¦ {%aupamika, as, ī, am%} (fr. 3. {%upa-mā%}),
serving for or forming a comparison.
<LEND>

<L>13130<pc>0191-b<k1>Opamya<k2>Opamya
{%Aupamya, am,%}¦ n. condition of resemblance or
equality, similitude, comparison; often used in com-
position (e. g. {%an-aupamya,%} having no equal, un-
paralleled).
<LEND>

<L>13131<pc>0191-b<k1>Opayaja<k2>Opayaja
{#Opayaja#}¦ {%aupayaja, as, ī, am,%} belonging to
the sentences called Upa-yaj.
<LEND>

<L>13132<pc>0191-b<k1>Opayika<k2>Opayika
{#Opayika#}¦ {%aupayika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upāya%}),
leading to an object, answering a purpose, proper, fit,
right; ({%am%}), n. a means, an expedient.
<LEND>

<L>13133<pc>0191-b<k1>OpayOgika<k2>OpayOgika
{#OpayOgika#}¦ {%aupayaugika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%yoga%}), relating to the employment or application of
(a remedy &c.).
<LEND>

<L>13134<pc>0191-b<k1>Opara<k2>Opara
{#Opara#}¦ {%aupara, as,%} m. (fr. {%upara%}), a patro-
nymic of Daṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>13135<pc>0191-b<k1>OparAjika<k2>OparAjika
{#OparAjika#}¦ {%auparājika, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr.
{%upa-rāja%}), relating to a viceroy.
<LEND>

<L>13136<pc>0191-b<k1>Oparizwa<k2>Oparizwa
{#Oparizwa#}¦ {%aupariṣṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%riṣṭāt%}), being above, produced above.
<LEND>

<L>13137<pc>0191-b<k1>Oparizwaka<k2>Oparizwaka
{%Aupariṣṭaka, am,%}¦ n. part of the Kāma-sūtra, an
amatory work by Vātsyāyana.
<LEND>

<L>13138<pc>0191-b<k1>OparEDika<k2>OparEDika
{#OparEDika#}¦ {%auparaidhika, as,%} m. (fr. {%upara +%}
{%edha ?;%} scil. {%daṇḍa%}), a staff made of the wood of the
Pīlu tree.
<LEND>

<L>13139<pc>0191-b<k1>OparODika<k2>OparODika
{#OparODika#}¦ {%auparaudhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%rodha%}), proceeding from or relating to kindness or
favour; opposing, impeding, connected with or re-
lating to a check or hindrance; ({%as%}), m. a staff of the
wood of the Pīlu tree (used in guarding the women's
apartments ?).
<LEND>

<L>13140<pc>0191-b<k1>Opala<k2>Opala
{#Opala#}¦ {%aupala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upala%}), stony,
of stone; raised from stones (as a tax).
<LEND>

<L>13141<pc>0191-b<k1>OpavasaTika<k2>OpavasaTika
{#OpavasaTika#}¦ {%aupavasathika, as, ī, am,%} or
{%aupavasathya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa-vasatha%}), de-
signed for or belonging to the Upa-vasatha; ({%am%}),
n., N. of a Pariśiṣṭa of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>13142<pc>0191-b<k1>Opavasta<k2>Opavasta
{%Aupavasta, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%upa-vasta%}), fasting, a fast.
<LEND>

<L>13143<pc>0191-b<k1>Opavastra<k2>Opavastra
{%Aupavastra, am,%}¦ n. fasting; food suitable for a
fast.
<LEND>

<L>13144<pc>0191-b<k1>Opavastraka<k2>Opavastraka
{%Aupavastraka, am,%}¦ n. food suitable for a fast.
<LEND>

<L>13145<pc>0191-b<k1>OpavAsa<k2>OpavAsa
{%Aupavāsa, as, ī, am,%}¦ given during fasting, to be
done during fasting.
<LEND>

<L>13146<pc>0191-b<k1>OpavAsika<k2>OpavAsika
{%Aupavāsika, as, ī, am,%}¦ proper for fasting, able to
fast.
<LEND>

<L>13147<pc>0191-b<k1>OpavAsya<k2>OpavAsya
{%Aupavāsya, am,%}¦ n. fasting.
<LEND>

<L>13148<pc>0191-b<k1>OpavAhya<k2>OpavAhya
{#OpavAhya#}¦ {%aupavāhya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%vāha%}), designed for driving in a carriage or for
riding; (a carriage) drawn for pleasure; ({%as%}), m. a
king's elephant, any royal vehicle.
<LEND>

<L>13149<pc>0191-b<k1>Opavindavi<k2>Opavindavi
{#Opavindavi#}¦ {%aupavindavi, is,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Upavindu.
<LEND>
[Page0191-c+ 67]

<L>13150<pc>0191-c<k1>OpaveSi<k2>OpaveSi
{#OpaveSi#}¦ {%aupaveśi, is,%} m. (fr. {%upa-veśa%}),
Ved. a patronymic of Aruṇa.
<LEND>

<L>13151<pc>0191-c<k1>OpaveSika<k2>OpaveSika
{%Aupaveśika, as, ī, am,%}¦ living by entire devotion
to any employment.
<LEND>

<L>13152<pc>0191-c<k1>OpaSivi<k2>OpaSivi
{#OpaSivi#}¦ {%aupaśivi, is,%} m. a patronymic of
Upaśiva; N. of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>13153<pc>0191-c<k1>OpaSlezika<k2>OpaSlezika
{#OpaSlezika#}¦ {%aupaśleṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%śleṣa%}), relating to close or immediate contact.
<LEND>

<L>13154<pc>0191-c<k1>OpasaNkramaRa<k2>OpasaNkramaRa
{#OpasaNkramaRa#}¦ {%aupasaṅkramaṇa, as, ī, am,%}
anything presented or proper to be done at the
Upa-saṅkramaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>13155<pc>0191-c<k1>OpasaNKyAnika<k2>OpasaNKyAnika
{#OpasaNKyAnika#}¦ {%aupasaṅkhyānika, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%upa-saṅkhyāna%}), depending on the authority
of any addition or supplement, mentioned in one;
supplementary.
<LEND>

<L>13156<pc>0191-c<k1>Opasada<k2>Opasada
{#Opasada#}¦ {%aupasada, as, ī, am,%} an Adhyāya
or Anuvāka in which the word Upasad occurs; ({%as%}),
m., N. of an Ekāha ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>13157<pc>0191-c<k1>Opasargika<k2>Opasargika
{#Opasargika#}¦ {%aupasargika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%sarga%}), superior to adversity, able to cope with
calamity; portentous; relating to change &c.;
superinduced, produced in addition to (or out of
another disease); connected with a preposition, pre-
positive; ({%as%}), m. irregular action of the humors of
the body, producing cold sweats &c.
<LEND>

<L>13158<pc>0191-c<k1>OpasIrya<k2>OpasIrya
{#OpasIrya#}¦ {%aupasīrya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa +%}
{%sīra%}), being near a plough.
<LEND>

<L>13159<pc>0191-c<k1>OpasTAna<k2>OpasTAna
{#OpasTAna#}¦ {%aupasthāna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upa-%}
{%sthāna%}), one whose business is to serve, wait on, or
worship.
<LEND>

<L>13160<pc>0191-c<k1>OpasTAnika<k2>OpasTAnika
{%Aupasthānika, as, ī, am,%}¦ living by waiting on or
worshipping.
<LEND>

<L>13161<pc>0191-c<k1>OpasTika<k2>OpasTika
{%Aupasthika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%upa-stha%}), living by
fornication.
<LEND>

<L>13162<pc>0191-c<k1>OpasTya<k2>OpasTya
{%Aupasthya, am,%}¦ n. cohabitation, sexual enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>13163<pc>0191-c<k1>OpasTURya<k2>OpasTURya
{#OpasTURya#}¦ {%aupasthūṇya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upa +%}
{%sthūṇā%}), being near a post.
<LEND>

<L>13164<pc>0191-c<k1>OpasvastI<k2>OpasvastI
{#OpasvastI#}¦ {%aupasvastī,%} f. a patronymic of
a woman. {%—Aupasvastī-putra, as,%} m., N. of a
teacher.
<LEND>

<L>13165<pc>0191-c<k1>Opahastika<k2>Opahastika
{#Opahastika#}¦ {%aupahastika, as, ī, am,%} living
by Upa-hasta (?).
<LEND>

<L>13166<pc>0191-c<k1>OpahArika<k2>OpahArika
{#OpahArika#}¦ {%aupahārika, am,%} n. (fr. {%upa-%}
{%hāra%}), an offering, oblation.
<LEND>

<L>13167<pc>0191-c<k1>OpADika<k2>OpADika
{#OpADika#}¦ {%aupādhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%upā-%}
{%dhi%}), conditional; pertaining to attributes or pro-
perties, an effect produced, a property or quality
communicated (as colour, taste, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>13168<pc>0191-c<k1>OpADyAyaka<k2>OpADyAyaka
{#OpADyAyaka#}¦ {%aupādhyāyaka, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%upādhy-āya%}), preceptral, of or relating to a spiritual
teacher, coming from a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>13169<pc>0191-c<k1>OpAnahya<k2>OpAnahya
{#OpAnahya#}¦ {%aupānahya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%upā-%}
{%nah%}), used for making shoes; to be tied or bound
on (as grass, leather, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>13170<pc>0191-c<k1>OpAyika<k2>OpAyika
{#OpAyika#}¦ {%aupāyika = aupayika,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13171<pc>0191-c<k1>OpAvi<k2>OpAvi
{#OpAvi#}¦ {%aupāvi, is,%} m. (fr. {%upāva%}), a patro-
nymic of Jānaśruteya.
<LEND>

<L>13172<pc>0191-c<k1>OpAsana<k2>OpAsana
{#OpAsana#}¦ {%aupāsana, as,%} m. (fr. {%upāsana;%}
scil. {%agni%}), the fire used for domestic worship;
(scil. {%piṇḍa%}), a small cake offered to the manes;
({%as, ī, am%}), performed with the fire called Aupāsana;
connected with or belonging to worship or service,
devotional, holy.
<LEND>

<L>13173<pc>0191-c<k1>Opeya<k2>Opeya
{#Opeya#}¦ {%aupeya,%} a patronymic from Upeya (?).
<LEND>

<L>13174<pc>0191-c<k1>Opoditi<k2>Opoditi
{#Opoditi#}¦ {%aupoditi, is,%} m. (fr. {%upodita%}),
Ved. a patronymic of Tumiñja.
<LEND>

<L>13175<pc>0191-c<k1>Opoditeya<k2>Opoditeya
{%Aupoditeya, as,%}¦ m., N. of the son of Upoditā.
<LEND>
[Page0192-a+ 75]

<L>13176<pc>0192-a<k1>Om<k2>Om
{#Om#}¦ {%aum,%} ind. the sacred syllable of the
Śūdras; [cf. {%om.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13177<pc>0192-a<k1>Oma<k2>Oma
{#Oma#}¦ {%auma%} or {%aumaka%} or {%aumika, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%umā%}), flaxen, made of flax.
<LEND>

<L>13178<pc>0192-a<k1>OmIna<k2>OmIna
{%Aumīna, am,%}¦ n. a field of flax.
<LEND>

<L>13179<pc>0192-a<k1>Oraga<k2>Oraga
{#Oraga#}¦ {%auraga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ura-ga%}), ser-
pent, serpentine, relating or belonging to a snake;
({%am%}), n. the constellation Āśleṣā.
<LEND>

<L>13180<pc>0192-a<k1>OraBra<k2>OraBra
{#OraBra#}¦ {%aurabhra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ura-bhra%}),
belonging to or produced from a ram or sheep; ({%as%}),
m. a coarse woollen blanket; N. of a physician; ({%am%}),
n. mutton, the flesh of sheep; woollen cloth.
<LEND>

<L>13181<pc>0192-a<k1>OraBraka<k2>OraBraka
{%Aurabhraka, am,%}¦ n. a flock of sheep.
<LEND>

<L>13182<pc>0192-a<k1>OraBrika<k2>OraBrika
{%Aurabhrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to, produced by,
&c., sheep; ({%as%}), m. a shepherd.
<LEND>

<L>13183<pc>0192-a<k1>OraSa<k2>OraSa
{#OraSa#}¦ {%auraśa, as,%} m. (fr. {%uraśā%}), an in-
habitant of Uraśā.
<LEND>

<L>13184<pc>0192-a<k1>Orasa<k2>Orasa<h>1
{#Orasa#} 1¦. {%aurasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%uras%}), be-
longing to or being in the breast; produced from
the breast, i. e. the seat of manly strength, produced
by one's self; legitimate; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. a legitimate
child, i. e. one by a wife of the same caste.
<LEND>

<L>13185<pc>0192-a<k1>Oraska<k2>Oraska
{%Auraska, as, ī, am,%}¦ excellent, distinguished; [cf.
{%urasya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13186<pc>0192-a<k1>Orasya<k2>Orasya
{%Aurasya%}¦ (?), belonging to or being in the breast;
legitimate.
<LEND>

<L>13187<pc>0192-a<k1>Orasa<k2>Orasa<h>2
{#Orasa#} 2¦. {%aurasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%uraśā%} or
{%urasā%}), coming from Urasā.
<LEND>

<L>13188<pc>0192-a<k1>Orukzayasa<k2>Orukzayasa
{#Orukzayasa#}¦ {%aurukṣayasa,%} a patronymic
from Uru-kṣayas = Uru-kṣaya.
<LEND>

<L>13189<pc>0192-a<k1>OrRa<k2>OrRa
{#OrRa#}¦ {%aurṇa%} or {%aurṇaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ūrṇā%}),
made of wool, woollen.
<LEND>

<L>13190<pc>0192-a<k1>OrRanABa<k2>OrRanABa
{%Aurṇanābha,%}¦ a patronymic from Ūrṇa-nābha.
<LEND>

<L>13191<pc>0192-a<k1>OrRanABaka<k2>OrRanABaka
{%Aurṇanābhaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ inhabited by the tribe
of the Ūrṇa-nābhas.
<LEND>

<L>13192<pc>0192-a<k1>OrRavABa<k2>OrRavABa
{%Aurṇavābha,%}¦ a patronymic of Ūrṇa-vābhi; N. of
a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>13193<pc>0192-a<k1>OrRika<k2>OrRika
{%Aurṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ woollen.
<LEND>

<L>13194<pc>0192-a<k1>OrDvakAlika<k2>OrDvakAlika
{#OrDvakAlika#}¦ {%aurdhvakālika, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}
(fr. {%ūrdhva-kāla%}), relating to subsequent or later
time.
<LEND>

<L>13195<pc>0192-a<k1>OrDvadeha<k2>OrDvadeha
{%Aurdhvadeha, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%ūrdhva + deha%}), a
funeral ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>13196<pc>0192-a<k1>OrDvadehika<k2>OrDvadehika
{%Aurdhvadehika, as, ā, am,%}¦ referring to the state
after death, relating to a deceased person, any rite
performed in honour of the dead; funereal, funeral;
({%am%}), n. the obsequies of a deceased person; funeral
solemnities; whatever is given or performed on a
person's decease, as burning of the body, offering
cakes, distributing alms, &c.
<LEND>

<L>13197<pc>0192-a<k1>OrDvadEhika<k2>OrDvadEhika
{%Aurdhvadaihika, as, ī, am,%}¦ funereal, funeral.
<LEND>

<L>13198<pc>0192-a<k1>OrDvasadmana<k2>OrDvasadmana
{%Aurdhvasadmana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%ūrdhva + sadman%}),
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>13199<pc>0192-a<k1>OrDvasrotasika<k2>OrDvasrotasika
{%Aurdhvasrotasika%}¦ or {%aurdhvaśrotasika, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%ūrdhva-srotas,%} a N. of Śiva, ‘above whom
or in whose head is the river or the Ganges’), a Śaiva
or adherent of the sect which gives Śiva the pre-
eminence in the Hindū triad.
<LEND>

<L>13200<pc>0192-a<k1>Orva<k2>Orva
{#Orva#}¦ {%aurva, as,%} m. (a patronymic fr. {%urva%}),
N. of a Ṛṣi, a son of Ūrva and descendant of
Bhṛgu, mentioned in Ṛg-veda VIII. 102, 4. (This
Aurva, who is called Bhārgava and described in Ma-
hā-bh. 1. 2610. as a son of Cyavana by his wife
Āruṣī and therefore grandson of Bhṛgu, is the sub-
ject of a legend told in Mahā-bh. 1. 6802. There
it is said that the sons of Kṛtavīrya, wishing to destroy
the descendants of Bhṛgu in order to recover the
wealth left them by their father, slew even the children
in the womb. One of the women of the family of
Bhṛgu, in order to preserve her embryo, secreted it
in her thigh ({%ūru%}), whence the child at its birth was
named Aurva; on beholding whom, the sons of
Kṛtavīrya were struck with blindness, and from whose
wrath proceeded a flame that threatened to destroy
the world, had not Aurva at the persuasion of the
[Page0192-b+ 73]
Bhārgavas cast it into the ocean, where it remained
concealed, and having the face of a horse. Aurva
was afterwards preceptor to Sagara and gave him the
Āgneyāstram, with which he conquered the barba-
rians who invaded his possessions; cf. {%baḍavā-mukha,%}
{%baḍavāgni%}); a N. of a son of Vasiṣṭha; ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), produced by Aurva, relating to Aurva; ({%as%}),
m. submarine fire; ({%am%}), n. fossil salt. {%—Aurvānala%}
{%(˚va-an˚), as,%} m. submarine fire.
<LEND>

<L>13201<pc>0192-b<k1>OrvaSa<k2>OrvaSa
{#OrvaSa#}¦ {%aurvaśa, as, ī, am,%} an Adhyāya or
Anuvāka containing the word Urvaśī.
<LEND>

<L>13202<pc>0192-b<k1>OrvaSeya<k2>OrvaSeya
{%Aurvaśeya, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of Agastya, the son
of Urvaśī.
<LEND>

<L>13203<pc>0192-b<k1>Olapi<k2>Olapi
{#Olapi#}¦ {%aulapi, ayas,%} m. pl. (a patronymic
fr. {%ulapa%}), N. of a warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>13204<pc>0192-b<k1>Olapin<k2>Olapin
{%Aulapin, inas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>13205<pc>0192-b<k1>OlapIya<k2>OlapIya
{%Aulapīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the Aulapis.
<LEND>

<L>13206<pc>0192-b<k1>OlAna<k2>OlAna
{#OlAna#}¦ {%aulāna,%} Ved. a reservoir for water (?),
a sacrificial oblation (?).
<LEND>

<L>13207<pc>0192-b<k1>OlUka<k2>OlUka
{#OlUka#}¦ {%aulūka, am,%} n. (fr. {%ulūka%}), a number
of owls.
<LEND>

<L>13208<pc>0192-b<k1>OlUkya<k2>OlUkya
{%Aulūkya,%}¦ a patronymic from Ulūka; ({%as%}), m. a
follower of the Vaiśeṣika doctrine; (‘like an owl;’
this etymology, and perhaps the epithet itself, owes
its origin to controversial animosity.) {%—Aulūkya-%}
{%darśana, am,%} n., N. of the system of these philo-
sophers treated of in the Sarvadarśana-saṅgraha.
<LEND>

<L>13209<pc>0192-b<k1>OlUKala<k2>OlUKala
{#OlUKala#}¦ {%aulūkhala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ulūkhala%}),
coming from a mortar; ground or pounded in a
mortar.
<LEND>

<L>13210<pc>0192-b<k1>OlvaRya<k2>OlvaRya
{#OlvaRya#}¦ {%aulvaṇya, am,%} n. excess, super-
abundance.
<LEND>

<L>13211<pc>0192-b<k1>OveRaka<k2>OveRaka
{#OveRaka#}¦ {%auveṇaka, am,%} n., N. of a song
(Gītaka).
<LEND>

<L>13212<pc>0192-b<k1>OSana<k2>OSana
{#OSana#}¦ {%auśana%} or {%auśanasa, as, ī, am,%}
originating from Uśanas, peculiar to him; ({%as, ī%}), m.
f. a patronymic from Uśanas; ({%am%}), n. (scil. {%śāstra%})
the law-book of Uśanas; N. of an Upa-purāṇa; N.
of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>13213<pc>0192-b<k1>OSija<k2>OSija
{#OSija#}¦ {%auśija, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%uśij%}), Ved.
desirous zealous, wishing; a patronymic of Kakṣīvat
and others; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>13214<pc>0192-b<k1>OSInara<k2>OSInara
{#OSInara#}¦ {%auśīnara, as, ī,%} m. f. a prince of
the Uśīnaras; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of Purūravas.
<LEND>

<L>13215<pc>0192-b<k1>OsInari<k2>OsInari
{%Ausīnari, is,%}¦ m. a prince of the Uśīnaras.
<LEND>

<L>13216<pc>0192-b<k1>OSIra<k2>OSIra
{#OSIra#}¦ {%auśīra, as, am,%} m. n. (‘made of
Uśīra’), the stick which serves as a handle to the
cow's tail used as a fan or chowri; the cow's tail
used as a fan, the chowri; ({%am%}), n. a bed, used also
as a seat; a seat, a chair or stool; the root of a fra-
grant grass, Andropogon Muricatum; an unguent,
made of Uśīra.
<LEND>

<L>13217<pc>0192-b<k1>OSIrikA<k2>OSIrikA
{%Auśīrikā,%}¦ f. the shoot (of a plant); a basin, a
bowl.
<LEND>

<L>13218<pc>0192-b<k1>OzaRa<k2>OzaRa
{#OzaRa#}¦ {%auṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%uṣaṇa%}), pun-
gency; black pepper.
<LEND>

<L>13219<pc>0192-b<k1>OzadaSvi<k2>OzadaSvi
{#OzadaSvi#}¦ {%auṣadaśvi, is,%} m. (fr. {%oṣadaśva%}),
a patronymic of Vasumat.
<LEND>

<L>13220<pc>0192-b<k1>OzaDa<k2>OzaDa
{#OzaDa#}¦ {%auṣadha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%oṣadhi%}),
consisting of herbs; ({%am%}), n. a herb, herbs collec-
tively; herbs used in medicine, a medicament, a drug,
a medicine in general; a vessel for herbs; a mineral.
{%—Auṣadhāvalī (˚dha-āv˚),%} f. a medical work com-
posed by Prāṇakṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>13221<pc>0192-b<k1>OzaDi<k2>OzaDi
{%Auṣadhi, is%}¦ or {%ī,%} f. a herb, a plant, a medicinal
herb, an annual or deciduous plant, as grass &c.; a
plant in general, {%= oṣadhi,%} q. v.; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
goddess. {%—Auṣadhī-pati, is,%} m. an epithet of the
Soma, lord of the plants.
<LEND>

<L>13222<pc>0192-b<k1>OzaDIkf<k2>OzaDIkf
{%Auṣadhī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to reduce to a medicament.
<LEND>

<L>13223<pc>0192-b<k1>OzaDIya<k2>OzaDIya
{%Auṣadhīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ medicinal, consisting of
herbs, herby.
<LEND>
[Page0192-c+ 71]

<L>13224<pc>0192-c<k1>Ozara<k2>Ozara
{#Ozara#}¦ {%auṣara%} or {%auṣaraka, am,%} n. (fr.
{%ūṣara%}), fossil salt; iron stone.
<LEND>

<L>13225<pc>0192-c<k1>Ozasa<k2>Ozasa
{#Ozasa#}¦ {%auṣasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%uṣas%}), relat-
ing to dawn, early, matutinal; ({%ī%}), f. day-break;
morning.
<LEND>

<L>13226<pc>0192-c<k1>Ozasya<k2>Ozasya
{%Auṣasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ sacred to Uṣas or the
dawn.
<LEND>

<L>13227<pc>0192-c<k1>Ozika<k2>Ozika
{%Auṣika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. 2. {%uṣā%}), walking out at
day-break; early, matutinal, &c., with the dawn.
<LEND>

<L>13228<pc>0192-c<k1>Ozija<k2>Ozija
{#Ozija#}¦ {%auṣija%} or {%auṣīja,%} desirous &c.;
{%= auśija%} above.
<LEND>

<L>13229<pc>0192-c<k1>Ozwra<k2>Ozwra
{#Ozwra#}¦ {%auṣṭra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%uṣṭra%}), derived
from or relating to a camel; abounding in camels;
({%am%}), n. the camel genus or species, camel-nature.
<LEND>

<L>13230<pc>0192-c<k1>Ozwraka<k2>Ozwraka
{%Auṣṭraka, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming or derived from a
camel; ({%am%}), n. a herd or multitude of camels.
<LEND>

<L>13231<pc>0192-c<k1>OzwraraTa<k2>OzwraraTa
{%Auṣṭraratha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%uṣṭra-ratha%}), be-
longing to a carriage drawn by camels.
<LEND>

<L>13232<pc>0192-c<k1>OzwrAkzi<k2>OzwrAkzi
{%Auṣṭrākṣi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%uṣṭra + akṣa%}), epithet
of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>13233<pc>0192-c<k1>Ozwrika<k2>Ozwrika
{%Auṣṭrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming from or relating to
a camel.
<LEND>

<L>13234<pc>0192-c<k1>OzWa<k2>OzWa
{#OzWa#}¦ {%auṣṭha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%oṣṭha%}), lip-
shaped.
<LEND>

<L>13235<pc>0192-c<k1>OzRiha<k2>OzRiha
{#OzRiha#}¦ {%auṣṇiha, as, ī, am,%} Ved. in the
Uṣṇih metre.
<LEND>

<L>13236<pc>0192-c<k1>OzRIka<k2>OzRIka
{#OzRIka#}¦ {%auṣṇīka,%} perhaps a wrong reading
for {%auṣṇīṣa, = uṣṇīṣin.%}
<LEND>

<L>13237<pc>0192-c<k1>OzRya<k2>OzRya
{#OzRya#}¦ {%auṣṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%uṣṇa%}) or {%auṣ-%}
{%mya, am,%} n. (fr. {%uṣman%}), heat, warmth; burning.
<LEND>
<H>{#ka#}

<L>13238<pc>0192-c<k1>ka<k2>ka<h>1
{#ka#} 1¦. {%ka,%} the first consonant of the alphabet,
and the first of the guttural letters, corresponding in
sound to {%k%} in <nsi>keep</nsi> or {%king%}. {%—Ka-kāra, as,%} m. the
letter or sound {%ka%}. {%—Kakāra-varga, as,%} m. the
guttural consonants collectively.
<LEND>

<L>13239<pc>0192-c<k1>ka<k2>ka<h>2
{#ka#} 2¦. {%ka, kas, kā, kim,%} interrog. pron. (see
{%kim%} and 2. {%kad,%} and cf. the following words in which
the interrogative base {%ka%} appears, {%katama, katara,%}
{%kati, katham, kadā, karhi, kā,%} &c.), who? which?
what? In its declension {%ka%} follows the pronoun {%tad%}
(Gram. 223) except in nom. acc. sing. neut., where
{%kim%} has taken the place of {%kad%} or {%kat%} in classical
Sanskrit; but the old form {%kad%} is found in the Veda.
<div n="P"/>The interrogative sentence introduced by {%ka%} is often
terminated by {%iti%} (e. g. {%kasya sa putra iti kath-%}
{%yatām,%} let it be said, ‘whose son is he?’), but {%iti%}
may be omitted and the sentence lose its direct
interrogative character (e. g. {%kasya sa putro na%}
{%jñāyate,%} it is not known whose son he is). {%Ka%} with
or without {%as,%} ‘to be,’ may express ‘how is it possible
that?’ ‘what power have I, you, they, &c.?’ (e. g.
{%ke mama dhanvino 'nye,%} what can the other archers
do against me? {%ke āvām paritrātum,%} what power
have we to rescue you?). {%Ka%} is often connected
with a demonstrative pron. (e. g. {%ko 'yam āyāti,%} who
comes here?) or with the potential (e. g. {%ko Hariṃ%}
{%nindet,%} who will blame Hari?). {%Ka%} is sometimes
repeated (e. g. {%kaḥ ko 'tra,%} who is there? {%kān kān,%}
whom? whom? i. e. which of them? cf. Gram. 53. <nsi>a</nsi>),
and the repetition is often due to a kind of attrac-
tion (e. g. {%keṣāṃ kiṃ śāstram adhyayanīyam,%}
which book is to be read by whom? Gram. 836. <nsi>a</nsi>).
When {%kim%} is connected with the inst. c. of a noun
or with the indecl. participle it may express ‘what is
gained by doing so, &c.?’ (e. g. {%nīrujaḥ kim au-%}
{%ṣadhaiḥ,%} what is the use of medicine to the healthy?
{%kiṃ vilambena,%} what is gained by delay? {%kim ba-%}
{%hunā,%} what is the use of more words? {%kim pauru-%}
{%ṣaṃ hatvā suptam,%} what manliness is there in
killing one asleep ?).
<LEND>
[Page0193-a+ 76]

<L>13240<pc>0193-a<k1>ka<k2>ka
{%Ka%}¦ is often followed by the particles {%iva, u, nāma,%}
{%nu, vā, svid,%} some of which serve merely to gene-
ralize the interrogation (e. g. {%kim iva etad,%} what
can this be? {%ka u śravat,%} who can possibly hear?
{%ko nāma jānāti,%} who indeed knows? {%ko nv ayam,%}
who is this? {%kiṃ nu kāryam,%} what is to be done?
{%ko vā devād anyaḥ,%} who possibly other than a god?
{%kasya svid hṛdayaṃ nāsti,%} of what person is there
no heart ?).
<LEND>

<L>13241<pc>0193-a<k1>ka<k2>ka
{%Ka%}¦ is occasionally used alone as an indefinite pro-
noun, especially in negative sentences (e. g. {%na kasya%}
{%ko vallabhaḥ,%} no one is a favourite of any one;
{%nānyo jānāti kaḥ,%} no one else knows; {%kathaṃ sa%}
{%ghātayati kam,%} how does he kill any one? More
usually, however, {%ka%} is only made indefinite when con-
nected with the particles {%ca, cana, cid, vā,%} and {%api,%}
in which case {%ka%} may sometimes be preceded by the
relative {%ya%} (e. g. {%ye ke ca,%} any persons whatsoever;
{%yasyai kasyai ca devatāyai,%} to any deity whatso-
ever; {%yāni kāni ca mitrāṇi,%} any friends whatsoever;
{%yat kiñca,%} whatever). The particle {%cana,%} being
composed of {%ca%} and {%na,%} properly gives a negative
force to the pronoun (e. g. {%yasmād Indrād ṛte%}
{%kiñcana,%} without which Indra there is nothing), but
the negative sense is generally dropped (e. g. {%kaścana,%}
any one; {%na kaścana,%} no one), and a relative is
sometimes connected with it (e. g. {%yat kiñcana,%}
anything whatsoever). Examles of {%cid%} with the
interrogative are common; {%vā%} and {%api%} are not so
common, but the latter is often found in classical
Sanskrit (e. g. {%kaścid,%} any one; {%kecid,%} some; {%na%}
{%kaścid,%} no one; {%na kiñcid api,%} nothing whatso-
ever; {%yaḥ kaścid,%} any one whatsoever; {%kecit — %}
{%kecit,%} some — others; {%yasmin kasmin vā deśe,%} in
any country whatsoever; {%na ko 'pi,%} no one; {%na%}
{%kimapi,%} nothing whatever).
<LEND>

<L>13242<pc>0193-a<k1>ka<k2>ka
{%Ka%}¦ may sometimes be used, like 2. {%kad,%} at the
beginning of a compound. See {%ka-pūya,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>13243<pc>0193-a<k1>ka<k2>ka<h>3
{#ka#} 3¦. {%ka, as,%} m. the Who? the Inexplicable,
the Unknown. By a forced and erroneous interpreta-
tion of the interrogative pronoun occurring in a hymn
of the Ṛg-veda (X. 121. {%kasmai devāya haviṣā%}
{%vidhema,%} what god shall we worship with oblations?)
the word {%ka%} is applied as a name to any chief god
or object of worship, as Prajāpati, Brahmā, Viṣṇu;
air or wind; the sun; the mind; the soul; Yama;
Kāma-deva, the god of love; fire; a peacock; a N. of
Dakṣa (a clever or dexterous man?); a knot, joint;
the king of the birds; a prince in general; the body;
time; wealth, property; sound; light, splendor.
<LEND>

<L>13244<pc>0193-a<k1>ka<k2>ka<h>4
{#ka#} 4¦. {%ka, am,%} n. (also regarded as ind.),
happiness, joy, pleasure; water; the head, hair; a
head of hair. (Perhaps this word has arisen from a
far-fetched etymology of the word {%nāka,%} ‘pleasure,’
i. e. {%na-a-ka,%} ‘not-not-pleasure.’) {%—Ka-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} produced in or by water, watery, aquatic; ({%am%}),
n. a lotus. {%—Ka-da, as,%} m. ‘giving water,’ a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>13245<pc>0193-a<k1>kam<k2>kam
{%Kam,%}¦ ind. See 1. {%kam,%} s. v.
<LEND>

<L>13246<pc>0193-a<k1>ka<k2>ka<h>5
{#ka#} 5¦. {%ka,%} a Taddhita affix much used in
forming adjectives. It may also be added to nouns
to express diminution, deterioration, or similarity
(e. g. {%putraka,%} a little son; {%aśvaka,%} a bad horse or
like a horse).
<LEND>

<L>13247<pc>0193-a<k1>kaMyya<k2>kaMyya
{#kaMyya#}¦ {%kaṃyya, as, ā, am,%} or {%kaṃyyu, us, us, u%}
(fr. 1. {%kam%}), happy, prosperous; according to other
authorities also written {%kaṃya%} or {%kaṃyu%} or {%kaṃva.%}
<LEND>

<L>13248<pc>0193-a<k1>kaMvUla<k2>kaMvUla
{#kaMvUla#}¦ {%kaṃvūla%} or {%kavūla, am,%} n., N. of
the eighth Yoga, = Arabic <lang n="arabic">قبول</lang>
<LEND>

<L>13249<pc>0193-a<k1>kaMSa<k2>kaMSa
{#kaMSa#}¦ {%kaṃśa, as, am,%} m. n. {%= kaṃsa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13250<pc>0193-a<k1>kaMs<k2>kaMs
{#kaMs#}¦ {%kaṃs,%} cl. 2. A. {%kaṃste, -situm,%} to go;
to command; to destroy. See {%kas.%}
<LEND>

<L>13251<pc>0193-a<k1>kaMsa<k2>kaMsa
{#kaMsa#}¦ {%kaṃsa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt.
2. {%kam;%} according to others fr. the last), a vessel
made of metal, a drinking vessel, a cup, a goblet (a
noun ending in {%as%} followed by {%kaṃsa%} in a compound
does not change its final, e. g. {%ayas-kaṃsa, payas- %}
[Page0193-b+ 75]
{%kaṃsa,%} &c.); a particular measure; a metal, tutanag
or white copper, brass, bell-metal; cf. {%kaṃsāsthi%} and
{%kāṃsya; (as),%} m., N. of a king of Mathurā, son of
Ugra-sena and cousin of the Devakī who was mother
of Kṛṣṇa, (Ugra-sena being brother of Devaka, who
was father of Devakī.) He is usually called the uncle,
but was really a cousin of Kṛṣṇa, and became his
implacable enemy because it had been prophesied to
him that he would be killed by a child of Devakī
(Vish. Pur. p. 493); as the foe of the deity he is
identified with the Asura Kālanemi; and, as he was
ultimately slain by Kṛṣṇa, the latter receives epithets
like {%Kaṃsa-jit,%} the conqueror of Kaṃsa, &c.; ({%ā%}), f.
N. of a daughter of Ugra-sena and sister of Kaṃsa.
{%—Kaṃsa-kāra, as, ī,%} m. f. a worker in pewter or
white brass, a bell-founder, considered as an inter-
mediate caste. {%—Kaṃsa-jit, t,%} m. an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa, the conqueror of Kaṃsa. {%—Kaṃsa-baṇij, k,%}
m. a brazier or seller of brass vessels. {%—Kaṃsa-%}
{%badha, as,%} m. the slaying of Kṛṣṇa; title of a
comedy of Śeṣa-Kṛṣṇa. {%—Kaṃsa-mākṣika, am,%}
n. a metallic substance in large grains, a sort of
pyrites. {%—Kaṃsa-yajña, as,%} m. a particular sacrifice.
{%—Kaṃsa-vatī,%} f., N. of a daughter of Ugra-sena and
sister of Kaṃsa and Kaṃsā. {%—Kaṃsa-han, ā,%} m. an
epithet of Kṛṣṇa, the destroyer of Kaṃsa. {%—Kaṃsa-%}
{%hanana, am,%} n. the slaying of Kaṃsa. {%—Kaṃsārāti%}
{%(˚sa-ar˚), is,%} or {%kaṃsāri (˚sa-ari), is,%} m. epithet
of Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Kaṃsa. {%—Kaṃsāsthi (˚sa-%}
{%as˚), i,%} n. tutanag, white copper, any alloy of tin and
copper. {%—Kaṃsodbhavā (˚sa-ud˚),%} f. a fragrant earth.
<LEND>

<L>13252<pc>0193-b<k1>kaMsaka<k2>kaMsaka
{%Kaṃsaka, am,%}¦ n. a mineral substance, a salt of
iron used as an application to the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>13253<pc>0193-b<k1>kaMsika<k2>kaMsika
{%Kaṃsika, as, ī, am,%}¦ made of bell-metal &c.
<LEND>

<L>13254<pc>0193-b<k1>kaMsIya<k2>kaMsIya
{%Kaṃsīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for or relating to a cup;
({%am%}), n. bell-metal.
<LEND>

<L>13255<pc>0193-b<k1>kaMsAra<k2>kaMsAra
{#kaMsAra#}¦ {%kaṃ-sāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (rice) the
grain of which hardens in the centre.
<LEND>

<L>13256<pc>0193-b<k1>kak<k2>kak
{#kak#}¦ {%kak,%} cl. 1. A. {%kakate, cakake, kaki-%}
{%tum,%} to be unsteady; to be proud; to be
thirsty; [cf. Lat. <nsi>vacillo</nsi> for <nsi>qvacillo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>13257<pc>0193-b<k1>kakajAkfta<k2>kakajAkfta
{#kakajAkfta#}¦ {%kakajā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
mutilated, torn to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>13258<pc>0193-b<k1>kakanda<k2>kakanda
{#kakanda#}¦ {%kakanda, as,%} m. gold; N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>13259<pc>0193-b<k1>kakara<k2>kakara
{#kakara#}¦ {%kakara, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>13260<pc>0193-b<k1>kakardu<k2>kakardu
{#kakardu#}¦ {%kakardu, us,%} m. (?), Ved. destruction
of enemies.
<LEND>

<L>13261<pc>0193-b<k1>kakAwikA<k2>kakAwikA
{#kakAwikA#}¦ {%kakāṭikā,%} f., Ved. a part of the
back of the human head, (enumerated together with
{%mastiṣka, lalāṭa,%} and {%kapāla.%})
<LEND>

<L>13262<pc>0193-b<k1>kakuYjala<k2>kakuYjala
{#kakuYjala#}¦ {%kakuñjala, as,%} m. the bird Cātaka;
[cf. {%kapiñjala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13263<pc>0193-b<k1>kakutsala<k2>kakutsala
{#kakutsala#}¦ {%kakutsala, as,%} m., Ved. an ex-
pression of endearment applied to a child (?).
<LEND>

<L>13264<pc>0193-b<k1>kakud<k2>kakud
{#kakud#}¦ {%kakud, t,%} f. a peak or summit (cul-
men); chief, head; any projecting corner; the hump
on the shoulders of the Indian bull; a horn; an en-
sign or symbol of royalty, as, the white parasol &c.;
N. of a daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Dharma.
(According to native grammarians {%kakud%} is the form
which must be substituted for {%kakuda%} at the end of
compounds, e. g. {%tri-kakud,%} three-peaked.) {%—Kakut-%}
{%stha, as,%} m., N. of a grandson of Ikṣvāku and son
of Śaśāda, said to be so called because in a battle he
stood on the hump of Indra, who had been changed
into a bull; according to the Rāmāyaṇa he is a son
of Bhagīratha. {%—Kakud-mat%} or {%kakun-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} running high (as a wave); furnished with a
hump; ({%ān%}), m. a mountain; a buffalo with a hump
on his shoulders; N. of a medicinal plant; ({%tī%}), f. the
hip and loins; N. of a metre; [cf. Lat. <nsi>cacûmen</nsi>
and <nsi>culmen</nsi> for <nsi>caculmen.</nsi>] {%—Kakudmi-kanyā,%} f.
a river (‘mountain-daughter’). {%—Kakud-min, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} peaked, humped; ({%mī%}), m. a mountain; a buffalo
with a hump on his shoulders; an epithet of Viṣṇu;
[Page0193-c+ 74]
N. of a prince of the Ānartas; ({%inī%}), f., N. of a river.
{%—Kakudruma, as,%} m. (for {%kakud-druma ?%}), N.
of a jackal in the Pañcatantra. {%—Kakud-vat, ān,%} m.
a buffalo with a hump on his shoulders; ({%tī%}), f., N.
of the wife of Pradyumna.
<LEND>

<L>13265<pc>0193-c<k1>kakuda<k2>kakuda
{%Kakuda, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the summit of a moun-
tain; chief, pre-eminent; the hump on the shoulders
of the Indian bull; a species of serpent; an ensign
or symbol of royalty, as the white parasol, &c.
{%—Kakuda-kātyāyana, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman
who was a violent adversary of Śākya-muni. {%—Ka-%}
{%kudākṣa (˚da-ak˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>13266<pc>0193-c<k1>kakundara<k2>kakundara
{#kakundara#}¦ {%kakundara, am,%} n. the cavities of
the loins; ({%kakudmatī-dara?;%} cf. {%kakudmatī%} and
{%kukundara.%})
<LEND>

<L>13267<pc>0193-c<k1>kakuB<k2>kakuB
{#kakuB#}¦ {%kakubh, p,%} f. (connected with {%kakud%}),
a peak or summit (cacumen); space, region or quarter,
as east, west, &c.; N. of a metre of three Pādas con-
sisting of eight, twelve, and eight syllables respectively,
so called because the second Pāda exceeds the others
by four syllables; unornamented hair or the hair
hanging down as a tail; a wreath of Campaka
flowers; splendor, beauty; a Śāstra or sacred treatise;
a Rāgiṇī or personified mode of music; the personi-
fied quarter of the sky; a daughter of Dakṣa and
wife of Dharma.
<LEND>

<L>13268<pc>0193-c<k1>kakuBa<k2>kakuBa
{%Kakubha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. excelling, distinguished;
({%as%}), m. a kind of goblin or evil spirit; the tree
Terminalia Arjuna; a part of a lute called the belly,
a wooden vessel covered with leather placed under its
neck to render the sound deeper, or a crooked piece
of wood at the end of the lute; one of the Rāgas or
personified musical modes; N. of a man; N. of a
mountain; ({%ā%}), f. space, region, quarter; one of the
Rāgiṇīs or female personifications of music. {%—Kaku-%}
{%bhādanī (˚bhā-ad˚),%} f. ‘food of the sky,’ a kind of
fragrance or perfume; [cf. {%nalī.%} ]
<LEND>

<L>13269<pc>0193-c<k1>kakuha<k2>kakuha
{%Kakuha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. eminent, excelling others,
excellent; ({%as%}), m., Ved. a part of a carriage, perhaps
the seat.
<LEND>

<L>13270<pc>0193-c<k1>kakeruka<k2>kakeruka
{#kakeruka#}¦ {%kakeruka, as,%} m. a worm in the
stomach.
<LEND>

<L>13271<pc>0193-c<k1>kakk<k2>kakk
{#kakk#}¦ {%kakk,%} a various reading for {%kakh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13272<pc>0193-c<k1>kakkawa<k2>kakkawa
{#kakkawa#}¦ {%kakkaṭa, as,%} m., Ved. a species of
animal, perhaps a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>13273<pc>0193-c<k1>kakkula<k2>kakkula
{#kakkula#}¦ {%kakkula, as,%} m., N. of a Bhikṣu.
<LEND>

<L>13274<pc>0193-c<k1>kakkola<k2>kakkola
{#kakkola#}¦ {%kakkola, as,%} m., N. of a plant bear-
ing a berry, the inner part of which is a waxy and
aromatic substance; ({%am%}), n. or {%kakkolaka, am,%} n.
a perfume prepared from the berries of this plant.
<LEND>

<L>13275<pc>0193-c<k1>kakkvalla<k2>kakkvalla
{#kakkvalla#}¦ {%kakkvalla, as,%} m. a patronymic of
Guṇacandra.
<LEND>

<L>13276<pc>0193-c<k1>kakK<k2>kakK
{#kakK#}¦ {%kakkh,%} a various reading for {%kakh,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13277<pc>0193-c<k1>kakKawa<k2>kakKawa
{#kakKawa#}¦ {%kakkhaṭa, as, ā, am,%} hard, solid;
({%ī%}), f. chalk. {%—Kakkhaṭa-pattraka, as,%} m. the
plant Corchorus Olitorius; (rope is made from its
fibre.)
<LEND>

<L>13278<pc>0193-c<k1>kakza<k2>kakza
{#kakza#}¦ {%kakṣa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kaṣ%}),
a lurking or hiding-place; an inner recess, the interior
of a forest; a forest of dead trees, a dry wood (the
lair of wild beasts), grass, dry grass; a spreading
creeper, a climbing plant; the armpit (as the most
concealed part of the human body); the side or flank;
the orbit of a planet or the circle anciently termed a
deferent; sin; a buffalo; a gate; the Beleric Myroba-
lan or Terminalia Belerica; ({%ā%}), f. painful boils in the
armpit, side, shoulder, &c.; an elephant's rope, the
string round his neck, also his girth; a woman's
girdle or zone; a surrounding wall, a wall; a place
surrounded by walls; a court or court-yard; an en-
closure; a secluded portion of an edifice; a private
or inner chamber, the private apartment for women
&c., a room in general; a particular part of a carriage;
[Page0194-a+ 77]
resemblance, similarity; objection or reply in argu-
ment; emulation, rivalry, object of emulation; the
jeweller's weight, the Retti; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. the end of
the lower garment which, after the cloth is carried
round the body, is brought up behind and tucked
into the waistband; a border, lace; the scale or basin
of a balance; ({%am%}), n. a star, a constellation (perhaps
a wrong reading for {%ṛkṣa%}); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people. {%—Kakṣa-dhara, am,%} n. the part of the
body where the upper arm is connected with the
shoulder, the shoulder-joint. {%—Kakṣa-pa, as,%} m.
one of the nine treasures of Kuvera; [cf. {%kacchapa.%}]
{%—Kakṣa-puṭa, as,%} m. the armpit; title of a
work on magic. {%—Kakṣa-ruhā,%} f. a fragrant grass,
Cyperus. {%—Kakṣa-śāya, as,%} m. a dog; [cf.
{%kaṅkaśāya.%}] {%—Kakṣa-sena, as,%} m., N. of a Rā-
jarshi. {%—Kakṣa-stha, as, ā, am,%} situated on the
side, seated on the hip or flank. {%—Kakṣādhyāya%}
{%(˚ṣa-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of a part of a commentary
by Bhūdhara on the Sūrya-siddhānta. {%—Kakṣān-%}
{%tara (˚ṣa-an˚), am,%} n. the inner or private
apartment. {%—Kakṣā-paṭa, as,%} m. a cloth passed
between the legs to cover the privities. {%—Kakṣā-%}
{%puṭi, is,%} m., N. of a physician; (wrong reading for
{%kākṣapuṭi ?%}). {%—Kakṣāvekṣaka, as,%} m. ({%kakṣā%}
{%+ avekṣaka%} fr. rt. {%īkṣ%} with {%ava%}), a guard of the
inner or queen's apartments; keeper of a royal
garden; a door-keeper; a poet; a debauchee; a
player, a painter; warmth of feeling, strength of
sentiment. {%—Kakṣī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} assented, pro-
mised, (touching the armpit with the hand was per-
haps a manner of affirming anything; cf. {%urasi kṛ%}
under {%uras.%}) {%—Kakṣotthā (˚ṣa-ut˚),%} f. a fragrant
grass, Cyperus.
<LEND>

<L>13279<pc>0194-a<k1>kakzaka<k2>kakzaka
{%Kakṣaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>13280<pc>0194-a<k1>kakzatu<k2>kakzatu
{%Kakṣatu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>13281<pc>0194-a<k1>kakzAya<k2>kakzAya
{%Kakṣāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kakṣāyate, -yitum,%} to wait
for any one in a hidden place, lie in ambush; to
intend anything wicked.
<LEND>

<L>13282<pc>0194-a<k1>kakzIvat<k2>kakzIvat
{%Kakṣīvat, ān,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kakṣyā%}), N. of a renowned
Ṛṣi, sometimes called Pajriya; he is the author of
several hymns of the Ṛg-veda, and is described in
legends as a son of Uśij and Dīrgha-tamas; ({%antas%}),
m. pl. the family or the descendants of Kakṣīvat.
<LEND>

<L>13283<pc>0194-a<k1>kakzeyu<k2>kakzeyu
{%Kakṣeyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva and
Ghṛtācī.
<LEND>

<L>13284<pc>0194-a<k1>kakzya<k2>kakzya
{%Kakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. consisting of shrubs or
dry grass; secret; (Sāy.) filling the girth, as a well-fed
horse; ({%ā%}), f. the girth of an elephant or horse, con-
sisting of rope or leather; a woman's girdle or zone;
metaphorically the fingers (encircling the Soma cup);
an upper garment, the border or lace of one; the
enclosure of an edifice, i. e. either the wall &c. so en-
closing it, or the court or chamber constituting the
enclosure, the inner apartment of a palace; similarity;
effort, exertion; a shrub yielding the black and red
berry that serves as a jeweller's weight, the Retti or
Gunja, Abrus Precatorius; ({%am%}), n. the cup or re-
ceptacle of a balance; a part of a carriage. {%—Kakṣya-%}
{%pra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. filling the girth (as a well-fed
horse). {%—Kakṣyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with
a girth. {%—Kakṣyāvekṣaka, as,%} m. {%= kakṣā-%}
{%vekṣaka,%} q. v. {%—Kakṣyā-stotra, am,%} n., N. of a
hymn by Divākara-vatsa.
<LEND>

<L>13285<pc>0194-a<k1>kaK<k2>kaK
{#kaK#}¦ {%kakh,%} cl. 1. P. {%kakhati, -khitum,%}
to laugh, laugh at or deride: Caus. P.
{%kakhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to laugh; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>cachinnare;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">καχάζω, καγχάζω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>13286<pc>0194-a<k1>kaKyA<k2>kaKyA
{#kaKyA#}¦ {%kakhyā,%} f. an enclosure, a division
of a large building; (a wrong reading for {%kakṣyā.%})
<LEND>

<L>13287<pc>0194-a<k1>kag<k2>kag
{#kag#}¦ {%kag,%} cl. 1. P. {%kagati, -gitum,%} to act,
perform.
<LEND>

<L>13288<pc>0194-a<k1>kaNk<k2>kaNk
{#kaNk#}¦ {%kaṅk,%} cl. 1. A. {%kaṅkate, -kitum,%} to
go; [cf. Hib. <nsi>cichet,</nsi> ‘walking;’ <nsi>ciocair,</nsi> ‘a
way, a road:’ Lith. <nsi>kankù; ifs-kankù,</nsi> ‘to come to.’]
<LEND>

<L>13289<pc>0194-a<k1>kaNka<k2>kaNka
{#kaNka#}¦ {%kaṅka, as,%} m. a heron (a bird of prey?);
a kind of mango; an epithet of Yama; N. of a
king; a Vṛṣṇi; a son of Ugra-sena, a son of Śūra;
[Page0194-b+ 73]
pl., N. of a people; a title of Yudhiṣṭhira (from his
assuming the disguise of a Brāhman before king
Virāṭa); a false or pretended Brāhman; a man of
the second or military tribe (perhaps a man of that
caste pretending to be a Brāhman); one of the
eighteen divisions of the continent; the brother of
Kaṃsa; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of sandal; scent of the lotus;
N. of a daughter of Ugra-sena and sister of Kaṅka.
{%—Kaṅka-cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. collected into a heap
resembling a heron. {%—Kaṅka-tuṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a
Rakṣas. {%—Kaṅka-troṭa, as,%} or {%kaṅka-troṭi, is,%} m.
a kind of fish, commonly {%kāṅkilā;%} Esox Kankila.
{%—Kaṅka-pattra, am,%} n. a heron's feather fixed on
an arrow; ({%as, ā, am%}), furnished with the feathers of
a heron; ({%as%}), m. an arrow furnished with heron's
feathers. {%—Kaṅkapattrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} furnished with
heron's feathers. {%—Kaṅka-parvan, ā,%} m., N. of a
serpent. {%—Kaṅka-mālā,%} f. a kind of musical instru-
ment; beating time by clapping the hands. {%—Kaṅka-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} shaped like a heron's mouth;
({%as, am%}), m. n. a pair of tongs, a sort of forceps.
{%—Kaṅka-śatru, us,%} m. the plant Desmodium
Gangeticum. {%—Kaṅka-śāya, as,%} m. a dog (sleeping
like a heron).
<LEND>

<L>13290<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkawa<k2>kaNkawa
{#kaNkawa#}¦ {%kaṅkaṭa%} or {%kaṅkaṭaka, as,%} m. (said
to be fr. rt. {%kaṅk%}), mail, defensive armour; an iron
hook to goad an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>13291<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkawerI<k2>kaNkawerI
{#kaNkawerI#}¦ {%kaṅkaṭerī,%} f. turmeric.
<LEND>

<L>13292<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkaRa<k2>kaNkaRa
{#kaNkaRa#}¦ {%kaṅkaṇa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. rt. {%kai%}), a bracelet, an ornament of the wrist
(used also as a weapon); a string or ribbon tied
round the wrist; an ornament round the foot of an
elephant; any ornament or trinket; a crest; ({%ī%}), f.
a small bell or tinkling ornament; an ornament
furnished with bells: see {%kiṅkiṇī;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>kan-</nsi>
<nsi>kala-s.</nsi>] {%—Kaṅkaṇa-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town,
called from {%Kaṅkaṇa-varṣa%}. {%—Kaṅkaṇa-priya,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a servant of Śiva. {%—Kaṅkaṇa-bhū-%}
{%ṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} adorned with tinkling orna-
ments. {%—Kaṅkaṇa-maṇī,%} f. the jewel in a bracelet.
{%—Kaṅkaṇa-varṣa, as,%} m., N. of an {{alchimist->alchemist||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}};
epithet of the king Kṣemagupta.
<LEND>

<L>13293<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkaRin<k2>kaNkaRin
{%Kaṅkaṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ ornamented with a bracelet.
<LEND>

<L>13294<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkaRIkA<k2>kaNkaRIkA
{%Kaṅkaṇīkā,%}¦ f. an ornament furnished with bells;
a string tied round the wrist.
<LEND>

<L>13295<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkata<k2>kaNkata
{#kaNkata#}¦ {%kaṅkata, as, ī, am,%} m. f. n. or {%kaṅka-%}
{%tikā,%} f. a comb, a hair-comb; ({%as%}), m. a tree; (accord-
ing to Sāy.) a poisonous animal, a slightly venomous
reptile (mentioned in a verse of Ṛg-veda 1. 191,
used as a mystical spell against poison).
<LEND>

<L>13296<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkatIya<k2>kaNkatIya
{%Kaṅkatīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>13297<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkara<k2>kaNkara
{#kaNkara#}¦ {%kaṅkara, as, ī, am,%} vile, bad; ({%am%}),
n. buttermilk mixed with water; a high number, =
100 niyutas.
<LEND>

<L>13298<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkarola<k2>kaNkarola
{#kaNkarola#}¦ {%kaṅkarola, as,%} m. the plant Alan-
gium Hexapetalum. See {%nikocaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>13299<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkaloqya<k2>kaNkaloqya
{#kaNkaloqya#}¦ {%kaṅkaloḍya, am,%} n. a kind of
drug, {%= alkaloḍya.%}
<LEND>

<L>13300<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkAla<k2>kaNkAla
{#kaNkAla#}¦ {%kaṅkāla, as, am,%} m. n. a skeleton;
[cf. Mod. Gr. <lang n="greek">κώκαλον.</lang>] {%—Kaṅkāla-ketu, us,%} m.,
N. of a Dānava. {%—Kaṅkāla-bhairava-tantra, am,%}
n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Kaṅkālamālin, ī,%} m. an epi-
thet of Śiva, whose necklace is formed of bones.
<LEND>

<L>13301<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkAlaya<k2>kaNkAlaya
{#kaNkAlaya#}¦ {%kaṅkālaya%} or {%kalkālaya, as,%} m.,
N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>13302<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNku<k2>kaNku
{#kaNku#}¦ {%kaṅku, us,%} m. {%= kaṅgu,%} N. of a son
of Ugra-sena and brother of Kaṃsa.
<LEND>

<L>13303<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkuzWa<k2>kaNkuzWa
{#kaNkuzWa#}¦ {%kaṅkuṣṭha, as,%} m. a medicinal earth,
described as of two colours, one of a silvery and one
of a gold colour, or one of a light and one of a dark
yellow.
<LEND>

<L>13304<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkUza<k2>kaNkUza
{#kaNkUza#}¦ {%kaṅkūṣa,%} (?) Atharva-veda IX. 8, 2.
<LEND>

<L>13305<pc>0194-b<k1>kaNkeru<k2>kaNkeru
{#kaNkeru#}¦ {%kaṅkeru, us,%} m. a kind of crow.
<LEND>
[Page0194-c+ 71]

<L>13306<pc>0194-c<k1>kaNkella<k2>kaNkella
{#kaNkella#}¦ {%kaṅkella, as,%} m. the tree Jonesia
Aśoka; a kind of pot-herb, Chenopodium Esculentum.
<LEND>

<L>13307<pc>0194-c<k1>kaNkelli<k2>kaNkelli
{%Kaṅkelli, is,%}¦ m. Jonesia Aśoka.
<LEND>

<L>13308<pc>0194-c<k1>kaNkola<k2>kaNkola
{#kaNkola#}¦ {%kaṅkola, as,%} m. a king of the Nāgas;
N. of the author of a hymn called Gaṇapatyārādhana.
<LEND>

<L>13309<pc>0194-c<k1>kaNKa<k2>kaNKa
{#kaNKa#}¦ {%kaṅkha, am,%} n. enjoyment, fruition;
(perhaps a combination of {%ka%} and {%kha.%})
<LEND>

<L>13310<pc>0194-c<k1>kaNgu<k2>kaNgu
{#kaNgu#}¦ {%kaṅgu, us,%} f. or {%kaṅgunī,%} f. a kind of
Panic seed, Panicum Italicum; several varieties of it
are cultivated and form articles of food for the poor.
{%—Kaṅgunī-pattrā,%} f. a kind of grass, {%= paṇyāndhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>13311<pc>0194-c<k1>kaNgula<k2>kaNgula
{#kaNgula#}¦ {%kaṅgula, as,%} m. the hand; [cf.
{%aṅguli.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13312<pc>0194-c<k1>kac<k2>kac
{#kac#}¦ {%kac,%} cl. 1. A. {%kacate, cakace, kaci-%}
{%tum,%} to bind; to shine; P. {%kacati,%} to
sound, cry; [cf. {%kañc;%} cf. also Hib. <nsi>cacht,</nsi> ‘a strait,
a narrow place; bonds, fetters.’]
<LEND>

<L>13313<pc>0194-c<k1>kaca<k2>kaca
{%Kaca, as,%}¦ m. the hair (especially of the head); a
cicatrix, a dry or healed sore, a scar; a binding, band;
the hem of a garment; a cloud; N. of a son of
Bṛhaspati; N. of a place; ({%ā%}), f. a female elephant;
beauty, brilliancy; [cf. {%a-kaca, ut-kaca,%} &c.] {%—Kaca-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. ‘cloud-drinker,’ grass; a leaf; ({%am%}), n.
a vessel for vegetables; a leaf of a vegetable (?).
{%—Kaca-pakṣa%} or {%kaca-pāśa, as,%} m. thick or
ornamented hair. {%—Kaca-māla, as,%} m. smoke; (per-
haps a wrong reading for {%khatamāla?%}). {%—Kaca-%}
{%ripu-phalā,%} f., N. of a tree; see {%śamī%}. {%—Kaca-%}
{%hasta, as,%} m. thick or ornamented hair, a beautiful
head of hair. {%—Kacā-kaci,%} ind. hair against hair,
pulling each other's hair. {%—Kacācita (˚ca-ac˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having long or dishevelled hair. {%—Kacāmoda%}
{%(˚ca-ām˚), am,%} n. a fragrant ointment for the hair.
<LEND>

<L>13314<pc>0194-c<k1>kacaNgana<k2>kacaNgana
{#kacaNgana#}¦ {%kacaṅgana, am,%} n. a free market,
a place of sale paying no duty or custom; [cf. {%karāṅ-%}
{%gaṇa, aṅgaṇa,%} and {%aṅgana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13315<pc>0194-c<k1>kacaNgala<k2>kacaNgala
{#kacaNgala#}¦ {%kacaṅgala, am,%} n. the ocean; N.
of a region.
<LEND>

<L>13316<pc>0194-c<k1>kacAku<k2>kacAku
{#kacAku#}¦ {%kacāku, us, us, u,%} ill-disposed,
wicked; intolerable, difficult to be borne; difficult
to be attained; ({%us%}), m. a snake.
<LEND>

<L>13317<pc>0194-c<k1>kacAwura<k2>kacAwura
{#kacAwura#}¦ {%kacāṭura, as,%} m. a gallinule. See
{%dātyūha.%}
<LEND>

<L>13318<pc>0194-c<k1>kacu<k2>kacu
{#kacu#}¦ {%kacu, us,%} f. an esculent root, Arum
Colocasia and other kinds, many of which are culti-
vated for food. See {%kacvī.%}
<LEND>

<L>13319<pc>0194-c<k1>kacela<k2>kacela
{#kacela#}¦ {%kacela, am,%} n. a string or cover con-
taining and keeping together the leaves of a manu-
script; (perhaps a various reading for {%kācana.%})
<LEND>

<L>13320<pc>0194-c<k1>kaccawa<k2>kaccawa
{#kaccawa#}¦ {%kaccaṭa, am,%} n. an aquatic plant, {%=%}
{%jalapippalī.%}
<LEND>

<L>13321<pc>0194-c<k1>kaccara<k2>kaccara
{#kaccara#}¦ {%kaccara (kad-cara,) as, ā, am,%} dirty,
foul; spoiled, spoiled by dirt; vile, wicked, bad;
({%am%}), n. buttermilk diluted with water; [cf. {%kaṅ-%}
{%kara, kaṭura,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>13322<pc>0194-c<k1>kaccid<k2>kaccid
{#kaccid#}¦ {%kac-cid (= kad-cid).%} See under 2. {%kad.%}
<LEND>

<L>13323<pc>0194-c<k1>kacCa<k2>kacCa
{#kacCa#}¦ {%kaccha, as, am,%} m. n. (in the first
sense a Prākṛt form for {%kakṣa;%} cf. {%kacchaṭikā%}),
the hem or end of a lower garment tucked into the
girdle or waistband; (according to some m. f. n. in
the next senses, according to others only m.) a bank
or any ground bordering on water, as the margin of
a river, lake, tank, &c.; a mound or causeway,
watery soil, marshy ground, a marsh, a morass, low or
flat land skirting mountains; N. of several places; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the people inhabiting them; ({%as%}), m. a part
of a boat; a particular part of a tortoise; a tree, the
timber of which is used for making furniture &c.,
Cedrela Toona or common Tūn; another tree,
Hibiscus Populneoides; ({%ā%}), f. a cricket; the plant
Lycopodium Imbricatum; see {%vārāhī%}. {%—Kaccha- %}
[Page0195-a+ 74]
{%deśa, as,%} m., N. of a place. {%—Kaccha-pa, as,%}
m. a turtle, a tortoise (as inhabiting marshy
places); a tumour on the palate; an apparatus used
in the distillation of spirituous liquor, a flat kind of
still; an attitude in wrestling; the tree Cedrela
Toona; one of the nine nidhis or treasures of
Kuvera; N. of a Nāga; a son of Viśvā-mitra; N. of
a country; ({%ī%}), f. a female tortoise or a small species
of tortoise; a cutaneous disease, wart or blotch; a
kind of lute, also the lute of Sarasvatī (so named from
being similar in shape to the tortoise). {%—Kaccha-%}
{%pa-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a place. {%—Kaccha-bhū,%}
{%ūs,%} f. marshy ground, a swamp, a morass. {%—Kaccha-%}
{%ruhā,%} f. a kind of grass, Dūrva, Agrostis Linearis,
Panicus Dactilon. {%—Kaccha-vihāra, as,%} m., N. of
a marshy region. {%—Kacchānta (˚cha-an˚), as,%} m.
the border of a lake or stream. {%—Kaccheśvara%}
{%(˚cha-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>13324<pc>0195-a<k1>kacCawikA<k2>kacCawikA
{%Kacchaṭikā%}¦ or {%kacchāṭikā%} or {%kacchāṭī,%} f. the
end or hem of a lower garment or cloth gathered up
behind and tucked into the waistband.
<LEND>

<L>13325<pc>0195-a<k1>kacCapikA<k2>kacCapikA
{%Kacchapikā,%}¦ f. a pimple, a blotch or wart; a
wart accompanying gonorrhœa.
<LEND>

<L>13326<pc>0195-a<k1>kacCara<k2>kacCara
{%Kacchara, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>13327<pc>0195-a<k1>kacCowikA<k2>kacCowikA
{%Kacchoṭikā,%}¦ f. {%= kacchaṭikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13328<pc>0195-a<k1>kacCiya<k2>kacCiya
{#kacCiya#}¦ {%kacchiya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(various readings have {%kakṣa%} and {%kaccha.%})
<LEND>

<L>13329<pc>0195-a<k1>kacCu<k2>kacCu
{#kacCu#}¦ {%kacchu, us,%} or {%kacchū, ūs,%} f. (said to
be fr. rt. {%kaṣ%}), itch, formation of watery pustules on
the hands &c., scab. (The form {%kacchū%} is the older
and more correct form.) {%—Kacchu-ghnī,%} f. the plant
Trichosanthes Diœca; another plant, {%= hapuyābheda.%}
{%—Kacchū-matī,%} f. the plant Carpopogon Pruriens,
said to cause itching on being applied to the skin.
<LEND>

<L>13330<pc>0195-a<k1>kacCura<k2>kacCura
{%Kacchura, as, ā, am,%}¦ scabby, itchy; unchaste,
libidinous; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Alhagi Maurorum; a
species of Curcuma; the plant Carpopogon Pruriens.
<LEND>

<L>13331<pc>0195-a<k1>kacCora<k2>kacCora
{%Kacchora, am,%}¦ n. a kind of Curcuma.
<LEND>

<L>13332<pc>0195-a<k1>kacvI<k2>kacvI
{#kacvI#}¦ {%kacvī,%} f. a plant with an esculent
root (Arum Colocasia) cultivated for food.
<LEND>

<L>13333<pc>0195-a<k1>kaj<k2>kaj
{#kaj#}¦ {%kaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%kajati, -jitum,%} to be
happy; to be confused with joy, pride or
sorrow; to grow, (in the last sense a Sautra root.)
<LEND>

<L>13334<pc>0195-a<k1>kaja<k2>kaja
{#kaja#}¦ {%ka-ja.%} See under 4. {%ka.%}
<LEND>

<L>13335<pc>0195-a<k1>kajiNga<k2>kajiNga
{#kajiNga#}¦ {%kajiṅga, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>13336<pc>0195-a<k1>kajjala<k2>kajjala
{#kajjala#}¦ {%kajjala, as,%} m. (in the first sense
from {%kad-jala%}), a cloud; ({%am%}), n. lampblack, con-
sidered as a collyrium and applied to the eyelashes
or eyelids medicinally or as an ornament, also sulphu-
ret of lead or antimony so used; ({%ā, ī%}), f. the fish
Cyprinus Atratus, or any kind peculiar to stagnant
waters, whence the name; ({%ī%}), f. sulphuret of mer-
cury, Æthiop's mineral; ink. {%—Kajjala-dhvaja, as,%}
m. a lamp. {%—Kajjala-rocaka, as, am,%} m. n. the
wooden stand or tripod on which a lamp is placed,
a candlestick. {%—Kajjalī-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>13337<pc>0195-a<k1>kajjalita<k2>kajjalita
{%Kajjalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered with lampblack or
with a collyrium prepared from it.
<LEND>

<L>13338<pc>0195-a<k1>kajjvala<k2>kajjvala
{#kajjvala#}¦ {%kajjvala, am,%} n. lampblack, especially
considered as an application to the eyes; [cf. {%kajjala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13339<pc>0195-a<k1>kaYc<k2>kaYc
{#kaYc#}¦ {%kañc,%} cl. 1. A. {%kañcate, cakañce,%}
{%kañcitum,%} to bind; to shine; [cf. {%kac%}
and {%kāñc.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13340<pc>0195-a<k1>kaYcawa<k2>kaYcawa
{#kaYcawa#}¦ {%kañcaṭa, as,%} m. the aquatic plant
Commelina Salicifolia and C. Bengalensis.
<LEND>

<L>13341<pc>0195-a<k1>kaYcaqa<k2>kaYcaqa
{%Kañcaḍa, as,%}¦ m. the plant Commelina Bengalensis.
<LEND>

<L>13342<pc>0195-a<k1>kaYcAra<k2>kaYcAra
{#kaYcAra#}¦ {%kañcāra, as,%} m. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>13343<pc>0195-a<k1>kaYcikA<k2>kaYcikA
{#kaYcikA#}¦ {%kañcikā,%} f. a small boil; the branch
of a bamboo.
<LEND>

<L>13344<pc>0195-a<k1>kaYcuka<k2>kaYcuka
{#kaYcuka#}¦ {%kañcuka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kañc ?%}), a dress
fitting close to the upper part of the body; armour,
mail; a bodice, jacket; the skin of a snake; cloth,
clothes; a kind of drawers or short breeches; a strap
[Page0195-b+ 77]
of leather; the cast-off skin of a snake; ({%ī%}), f., N.
of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>13345<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYcukAlu<k2>kaYcukAlu
{%Kañcukālu, us,%}¦ m. a snake.
<LEND>

<L>13346<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYcukita<k2>kaYcukita
{%Kañcukita, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with armour or
mail.
<LEND>

<L>13347<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYcukin<k2>kaYcukin
{%Kañcukin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ furnished with armour or
mail; ({%ī%}), m. an attendant on or overseer of the women's
apartments, a chamberlain; a libidinous man, a de-
bauchee, one addicted to women; a serpent; N. of
several plants, Agallochum, barley, Cicer Arietinum.
{%—Kañcuki-recaka, au,%} m. du. the chamberlain and
the forester.
<LEND>

<L>13348<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYculikA<k2>kaYculikA
{%Kañculikā,%}¦ f. a bodice or jacket.
<LEND>

<L>13349<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYcUla<k2>kaYcUla
{%Kañcūla, as, am,%}¦ m. n. an article of female dress,
perhaps a bodice.
<LEND>

<L>13350<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYja<k2>kaYja
{#kaYja#}¦ {%kañ-ja, as,%} m. (fr. {%kam%} = head), the
hair; (fr. {%kam%} = water), an epithet of Brahmā; ({%am%}),
n. a lotus; the Amṛta or food of the immortals;
({%as, ā, am%}), produced in or from water; (in com-
position {%kañja%} may follow or precede the term
compounded with it, e. g. {%kañja-vadana%} or {%vadana-%}
{%kañja,%} a lotus-face.) {%—Kañja-ja, as,%} m. an epithet
of Brahmā (born from a lotus). {%—Kañja-nābha,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>13351<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYjaka<k2>kaYjaka
{#kaYjaka#}¦ {%kañjaka, as,%} m. a kind of bird,
Gracula Religiosa.
<LEND>

<L>13352<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYjana<k2>kaYjana
{%Kañjana, as,%}¦ m. the bird Gracula Religiosa, the
bird of Kandarpa; N. of Kandarpa, the deity of love.
<LEND>

<L>13353<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYjala<k2>kaYjala
{%Kañjala, as,%}¦ m., N. of the bird Gracula Religiosa.
<LEND>

<L>13354<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYjara<k2>kaYjara
{#kaYjara#}¦ {%kañjara, as,%} m. the belly; an ele-
phant; the sun; an epithet of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>13355<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYjAra<k2>kaYjAra
{%Kañjāra, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kaj%}), a peacock;
the belly; an elephant; a Muni or holy sage, an
hermit; the sun; an epithet of Brahmā; also {%=%}
{%vyañjana%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>13356<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYjARa<k2>kaYjARa
{#kaYjARa#}¦ {%kañjāṇa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N.
of a place.
<LEND>

<L>13357<pc>0195-b<k1>kaYjikA<k2>kaYjikA
{#kaYjikA#}¦ {%kañjikā,%} f. the plant Siphonanthus
Indica.
<LEND>

<L>13358<pc>0195-b<k1>kaw<k2>kaw<h>1
{#kaw#} 1¦. {%kaṭ%} or {%kaṇṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%kaṭati%} or
{%kaṇṭati, -ṭitum,%} to go.
<LEND>

<L>13359<pc>0195-b<k1>kaw<k2>kaw<h>2
{#kaw#} 2¦. {%kaṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%kaṭati, cakāṭa, kaṭi-%}
{%tum,%} to rain; surround; to encompass, to
cover or screen.
<LEND>

<L>13360<pc>0195-b<k1>kawa<k2>kawa
{%Kaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a twist of straw or grass, a straw mat;
a screen of straw; the hip; the hollow above the hip or
the loins; the hip and loins; the temples of an elephant;
a particular throw of the dice in hazard; (at the end of
some compounds) much, excessive (but in the words
{%avakaṭa, utkaṭa, prakaṭa,%} and {%saṅkaṭa%} considered
as an affix); N. of a Rakṣas; a corpse; a hearse, a
bier, a bed &c. used for conveying a dead body; a
place where dead bodies are burnt or buried, a place
of sepulture; a time or season; excess, superabundance;
the plant Saccharum Sara; an annual plant; grass;
a thin piece of wood, a plank; ({%am%}), n. (considered
as an affix at the end of compounds), dust of flowers;
({%ī%}), f. long pepper; ({%as, ī, am%}), an agent in any
action. {%—Kaṭa-khādaka, as, ā, am,%} eating much,
one who eats voraciously; ({%as%}), m. a jackal; a crow;
a glass vessel, a tumbler or bowl. {%—Kaṭa-ghoṣa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a region in the east of India. {%—Kaṭa-%}
{%nagara,%} N. of a place in the East. {%—Kaṭa-palli-%}
{%kuñcikā,%} f. a straw hut (?). {%—Kaṭa-palvala,%} N. of a
place in the East. {%—Kaṭa-pūtana, as,%} m. a kind of
demon (a Kṣatriya not performing his duties is born
after his death as such a goblin); a kind of Preta or
inhabitant of the lower regions; see {%pūtanā%} and
{%andhapūtanā%}. {%—Kaṭa-prū, ūs,%} m. a worm; one
who gambles or plays with dice; an epithet of Śiva
or Mahādeva; a Rakṣas, an imp or goblin; a kind
of demi-god, one of the class of Vidyādharas. {%—Kaṭa-%}
{%protha, as,%} m. the buttocks. {%—Kaṭa-bhaṅga, as,%}
m. gleaning, plucking or gathering corn with the
hands; the destruction of a prince; royal misfortune,
as deposure, defeat, &c. {%—Kaṭa-bhī,%} f., N. of several
plants, Cardiospermum Halicacabum (an annual plant);
[Page0195-c+ 73]
Clitoria Ternatea {%= aparājitā;%} N. of a tree. {%—Kaṭa-%}
{%mālinī,%} f. wine or any vinous liquor. {%—Kaṭam-%}
{%bhara, as,%} m. the plant Bignonia Indica; another
plant, {%= kaṭabhī; (ā),%} f. several plants, Pœderia
Fetida; a medicinal plant, Kaṭukī; a sort of cucum-
ber, Cucumis Madraspatanus; Bœrhavia Diffusa, Ale-
tris Hyacinthoides; hog-weed; a female elephant;
red arsenic. {%—Kaṭa-vraṇa, as,%} m. ‘wounding in the
hips,’ a N. of Bhīma-sena. {%—Kaṭa-śarkarā,%} f. a frag-
ment of a mat broken off, or of straw; the plant
Guilandina Bonducella; [cf. {%kaṭu-karañja.%}] {%—Kaṭa-%}
{%sthala, am,%} n. the hip and loins, an elephant's tem-
ples. {%—Kaṭākṣa (˚ṭa-ak˚), as,%} m. a glance or side
look, a leer. {%—Kaṭākṣa-kṣetra,%} N. of a place.
{%—Kaṭākṣa-muṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} caught by a glance.
{%—Kaṭākṣa-viśikha, as,%} m. an arrow-like look of
love. {%—Kaṭākṣāvekṣaṇa (˚ṣa-av˚), am,%} n. cast-
ing lewd or amorous glances, ogling. {%—Kaṭāgni (˚ṭa-%}
{%ag˚), is,%} m. a fire kept up with dry grass or straw; the
straw placed round a criminal who is to be burnt.
<LEND>

<L>13361<pc>0195-c<k1>kawaka<k2>kawaka
{%Kaṭaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a string; a ring placed as
an ornament upon an elephant's tusk; a bracelet of
gold or of shell &c.; a zone; the link of a chain;
a mat; the side or ridge of a hill or mountain; table
land; a circle, a wheel, an army, a camp; a royal
metropolis, a city or town, a village, a house or
dwelling; N. of the capital of Orissa (Cuttack); sea- salt.
<LEND>

<L>13362<pc>0195-c<k1>kawakin<k2>kawakin
{%Kaṭakin, ī,%}¦ m. a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>13363<pc>0195-c<k1>kawasI<k2>kawasI
{%Kaṭasī,%}¦ f. a cemetery.
<LEND>

<L>13364<pc>0195-c<k1>kawAyana<k2>kawAyana
{%Kaṭāyana, am,%}¦ n. the plant Andropogon Muricatus.
<LEND>

<L>13365<pc>0195-c<k1>kawi<k2>kawi
{%Kaṭi, is,%}¦ f. the hip. See below.
<LEND>

<L>13366<pc>0195-c<k1>kawin<k2>kawin
{%Kaṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ matted, screened; having hand-
some loins &c.; ({%ī%}), m. an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>13367<pc>0195-c<k1>kawaka<k2>kawaka
{#kawaka#}¦ {%kaṭaka.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>13368<pc>0195-c<k1>kawakawa<k2>kawakawa
{#kawakawa#}¦ {%kaṭakaṭa, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
See {%kaṭaṅkaṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>13369<pc>0195-c<k1>kawakawA<k2>kawakawA
{#kawakawA#}¦ {%kaṭakaṭā,%} an onomatopoetic word
supposed to represent the noise of rubbing together.
<LEND>

<L>13370<pc>0195-c<k1>kawakawApaya<k2>kawakawApaya
{%Kaṭakaṭāpaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kaṭakaṭāpayati, -yitum,%}
to rub together, utter a creaking or grating noise.
<LEND>

<L>13371<pc>0195-c<k1>kawakola<k2>kawakola
{#kawakola#}¦ {%kaṭakola, as,%} m. a spitting-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>13372<pc>0195-c<k1>kawaNkawa<k2>kawaNkawa
{#kawaNkawa#}¦ {%kaṭaṅkaṭa, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva or Gaṇeśa; [cf. {%kaṭakaṭa, kaṭāṭaṅka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13373<pc>0195-c<k1>kawaNkawerI<k2>kawaNkawerI
{#kawaNkawerI#}¦ {%kaṭaṅkaṭerī,%} f. turmeric; yellow
saunders; [cf. {%dāru-haridrā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13374<pc>0195-c<k1>kawana<k2>kawana
{#kawana#}¦ {%kaṭana, am,%} n. roof or thatch of a
house.
<LEND>

<L>13375<pc>0195-c<k1>kawamba<k2>kawamba
{#kawamba#}¦ {%kaṭamba, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
2. {%kaṭ%}), a kind of musical instrument; an arrow.
<LEND>

<L>13376<pc>0195-c<k1>kawambarA<k2>kawambarA
{#kawambarA#}¦ {%kaṭambarā,%} f. a medicinal plant.
See {%kaṭu-rohiṇī.%}
<LEND>

<L>13377<pc>0195-c<k1>kawAku<k2>kawAku
{#kawAku#}¦ {%kaṭāku, us,%} m. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>13378<pc>0195-c<k1>kawAkza<k2>kawAkza
{#kawAkza#}¦ {%kaṭākṣa.%} See under {%kaṭa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>13379<pc>0195-c<k1>kawAwaNka<k2>kawAwaNka
{#kawAwaNka#}¦ {%kaṭāṭaṅka, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva. See {%kaṭaṅkaṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>13380<pc>0195-c<k1>kawAra<k2>kawAra
{#kawAra#}¦ {%kaṭāra, as,%} m. a libidinous man, a
lecher.
<LEND>

<L>13381<pc>0195-c<k1>kawAha<k2>kawAha
{#kawAha#}¦ {%kaṭāha, as,%} m. (according to the
Schol. m. f. n.), a frying-pan, a boiler or a frying-
vessel of a semispheroidal shape and with handles;
a shallow boiler for oil or butter; a turtle's shell; a
well; a winnowing basket; a hill of earth; hell, the
infernal regions; a young female buffalo whose horns
are just appearing; a dvīpa or division of the known
continent, so called, (perhaps the Katai of the Muham-
medans or China.)
<LEND>

<L>13382<pc>0195-c<k1>kawAhaka<k2>kawAhaka
{%Kaṭāhaka, am,%}¦ n. a pan, a pot.
<LEND>

<L>13383<pc>0195-c<k1>kawi<k2>kawi
{#kawi#}¦ {%kaṭi, is,%} or {%kaṭī,%} f. (fr. rt. 2. {%kaṭ%} ?), the
hip; the buttocks; an elephant's cheek; ({%ī%}), f. long
pepper. {%—Kaṭi-kuṣṭha, am,%} n. leprosy of the hip.
{%—Kaṭi-kūpa, as,%} m. the hollow above the hip, the
loins. {%—Kaṭi-taṭa, am,%} n. the loins, the hip. {%—Kaṭi-%}
{%tra, am,%} n. anything to protect the hips; a cloth tied
[Page0196-a+ 79]
round the loins; a zone; an ornament of small bells
worn round the loins; armour for the hip or loins.
{%—Kaṭi-deśa, as,%} m. the loins. {%—Kaṭi-protha%} or
{%kaṭī-protha, as,%} m. the buttocks; [cf. {%kaṭa-protha.%}]
{%—Kaṭi-mālikā,%} f. a woman's zone. {%—Kaṭi-rohaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the rider of an elephant who sits upon the
hinder parts of the elephant, as distinct from the
driver or the person sitting upon the loins. {%—Kaṭi-%}
{%śīrṣaka, as,%} m. the hip (as projecting like a head);
the hip and loins or the hollow above the hip.
{%—Kaṭi-śṛṅkhalā,%} f. a girdle of small bells. {%—Kaṭi-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} n. a female zone or waistband.
<LEND>

<L>13384<pc>0196-a<k1>kawikA<k2>kawikA
{%Kaṭikā,%}¦ f. the hip.
<LEND>

<L>13385<pc>0196-a<k1>kawIra<k2>kawIra
{%Kaṭīra, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the cavity of the loins or the
iliac region; ({%as%}), m. Mons Veneris; a cave; ({%am%}),
n. a hip.
<LEND>

<L>13386<pc>0196-a<k1>kawIraka<k2>kawIraka
{%Kaṭīraka, am,%}¦ n. the posteriors.
<LEND>

<L>13387<pc>0196-a<k1>kawillaka<k2>kawillaka
{#kawillaka#}¦ {%kaṭillaka, as,%} m. a species of the
balsam apple, Momordica Charantia; [cf. {%kaṭhillaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13388<pc>0196-a<k1>kawItala<k2>kawItala
{#kawItala#}¦ {%kaṭītala, as,%} m. a crooked sword;
a sabre or scymitar; [cf. {%kaḍitula.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13389<pc>0196-a<k1>kawu<k2>kawu
{#kawu#}¦ {%kaṭu, us, us%} or {%vī, u%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%kaṭ%}), pungent, acrid, sharp (one of the six kinds of
flavour); pungent, stimulating (smell); strong-scented,
ill-smelling; bitter, caustic (words); displeasing, dis-
agreeable; fierce, impetuous, hot; envious; ({%us%}),
m. pungency, acerbity (as a flavour); the plants
Michelia Champaca, Trichosanthes Diœca, camphor,
&c.; ({%us%}), f. various plants, {%= kaṭu-rohiṇī,%} a medi-
cinal plant; Sinapis Ramosa; ({%vī%}), f., N. of a plant;
({%u%}), n. an improper action, an act which ought not
to have been done; blaming, reviling, scandal. {%—Ka-%}
{%ṭu-kanda, as, am,%} m. n. ginger, the fresh root or
the plant; garlic; the plant Hyperanthera Moringa.
{%—Kaṭu-karañja, as,%} m. the plant Guilandina
Bonducella. {%—Kaṭu-kīṭa%} or {%kaṭukīṭaka, as,%} m.
a gnat or musquito. {%—Kaṭu-kvāṇa, as,%} m. a spe-
cies of chicken, Parra Jacana or Gœnsis (making a
sharp or piercing noise). {%—Kaṭu-granthi, i,%} n. dried
ginger; the root of long pepper. {%—Kaṭu-cāturjātaka,%}
{%am,%} n. an aggregate of four acid substances, as of
cardamoms, the bark and leaves of Laurus Cassia
and of black pepper. {%—Kaṭu-cchada, as,%} m., N. of
a tree with pungent leaves; [cf. {%tagara.%}] {%—Kaṭu-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} prepared from acid substances, as a
kind of drink. {%—Kaṭu-tiktika, as,%} m. the plants
Gentiana Cherayta and Cannabis Sativa; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a plant. {%—Kaṭu-tuṇḍikā%} and {%kaṭu-tuṇḍī,%} f., N.
of a plant, {%= tikta-tuṇḍī,%} commonly {%kaṭutarāï.%}
{%—Kaṭu-tumbī,%} f. a kind of bitter gourd. {%—Kaṭu-%}
{%traya, am,%} n. the aggregate of three black sub-
stances or spices, ginger, black and long pepper.
{%—Kaṭu-dalā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= karkaṭī%}. {%—Kaṭu-%}
{%niṣplāva, as,%} m. grain not inundated. {%—Kaṭu-%}
{%pattra, as,%} m. the medicinal plant Oldenlandia
Biflora, and of another plant Sitārjaka. {%—Kaṭu-%}
{%pattrikā,%} f., N. of a tree, {%= kārī%}. {%—Kaṭu-padra,%}
N. of a place. {%—Kaṭu-pāka, as, ā, am,%} or {%kaṭu-%}
{%pākin, ī, inī, i,%} producing acrid humors in digestion.
{%—Kaṭu-phala, as,%} m. a sort of cucumber, Tricho-
santhes Diœca. {%—Kaṭu-badarī,%} f., N. of a plant and
of a village called from this plant. {%—Kaṭu-bhaṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. dried ginger. {%—Kaṭu-bhadra, am,%} n. dried
ginger, or ginger in general. {%—Kaṭu-mañjarikā,%} f.
the plant Achyranthes Aspera. {%—Kaṭu-moda, am,%}
n. a certain perfume. {%—Kaṭu-rava, as,%} m. a frog.
{%—Kaṭu-rohiṇī,%} f. the medicinal plant Helleborus
Niger. {%—Kaṭu-vārtākī,%} f. a variety of Solanum.
{%—Kaṭu-vipāka, as, ā, am,%} producing acrid humors
in digestion. {%—Kaṭu-vījā,%} f. long pepper. {%—Kaṭu-%}
{%śṛṅgāla, am,%} n., N. of a vegetable. {%—Kaṭu-sneha,%}
{%as,%} m. the mustard-seed plant, Sinapis Dichotoma.
{%—Kaṭūtkaṭa (˚ṭu-ut˚), as,%} m. ginger. {%—Kaṭūt-%}
{%kaṭaka, am,%} n. dry ginger. {%—Kaṭphala, as,%} m.
(for {%kaṭu-ph˚%}), a small tree found in the north-west
of Hindūstan, the bark and seeds of which are used
in medicine, and as aromatics; the fruit also is eaten;
the common name is Kāyaphal; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several
plants, as of Gmelina Arborea and different kinds of
[Page0196-b+ 74]
Solanum, {%= devadālī%} and {%mṛgervāru%}. {%—Kaṭv-aṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. the tree Calosanthes Indica; an epithet of
Dilīpa.
<LEND>

<L>13390<pc>0196-b<k1>kawuka<k2>kawuka
{%Kaṭuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ sharp, pungent, bitter, fierce,
impetuous, hot; ({%as%}), m. pungency, acerbity; N. of
several plants, Trichosanthes Diœca, a fragrant kind
of grass; gigantic swallow wort, Calotropis Gigantea;
a plant the bark and seed of which have an acrid and
bitter taste, and are used in medicine for worms,
dysentery, &c., Wrigthia Antidysenterica; Sinapis Di-
chotoma or Ramosa; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
several plants, {%= kaṭvī%} and {%kaṭu-rohiṇī;%} Areca Fau-
fel or Catechu; Ruellia Longifolia; ({%ī%}), f. {%= kaṭu-%}
{%rohiṇī; (am),%} n. pungency, acerbity (at the end of
compounds in a bad sense, e. g. {%dadhi-kaṭukam,%}
bad coagulated milk); a compound of pungent sub-
stances, as black pepper, long pepper, dry ginger. {%—Ka-%}
{%ṭuka-traya, am,%} n. an aggregate of three pungent
substances, as black pepper, long pepper, and ginger.
{%—Kaṭuka-tva, am,%} n. pungency. {%—Kaṭuka-phala,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a perfume prepared from the berries
of the plant Kakkola. {%—Kaṭuka-bhakṣin, ī,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Kaṭuka-rohiṇī,%} f. {%= kaṭu-rohiṇī%}. {%—Ka-%}
{%ṭuka-vallī,%} f. {%= kaṭvī%}. {%—Kaṭukālābu (˚ka-al˚), us,%}
m. a kind of bitter gourd, Trichosanthes Diœca.
<LEND>

<L>13391<pc>0196-b<k1>kawuNkatA<k2>kawuNkatA
{#kawuNkatA#}¦ {%kaṭuṅkatā,%} f. rough manners.
<LEND>

<L>13392<pc>0196-b<k1>kawura<k2>kawura
{#kawura#}¦ {%kaṭura, am,%} n. buttermilk mixed
with water, {%= takra;%} [cf. {%kaṅkara, kaccara, kaṭ-%}
{%vara, kadara, kadvara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13393<pc>0196-b<k1>kawerakagrAma<k2>kawerakagrAma
{#kawerakagrAma#}¦ {%kaṭeraka-grāma, as,%} m., N. of
a village.
<LEND>

<L>13394<pc>0196-b<k1>kawodaka<k2>kawodaka
{#kawodaka#}¦ {%kaṭodaka, am,%} n. (fr. {%kaṭa = karta%}
{%= garta ?%} and {%udaka%}), water for a funeral libation,
a funeral rite.
<LEND>

<L>13395<pc>0196-b<k1>kaworA<k2>kaworA
{#kaworA#}¦ {%kaṭorā,%} f. a shallow cup.
<LEND>

<L>13396<pc>0196-b<k1>kawola<k2>kawola
{#kawola#}¦ {%kaṭola, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kaṭ%}), a pungent flavour; a man of an inferior and
degraded tribe, a Caṇḍāla, a Pariah, &c.; ({%as, ā, am%}),
pungent. {%—Kaṭola-vīṇā,%} f. a kind of lute played by
the common people or Caṇḍālas.
<LEND>

<L>13397<pc>0196-b<k1>kawwAra<k2>kawwAra
{#kawwAra#}¦ {%kaṭṭāra, as,%} m. a weapon, a dagger.
<LEND>

<L>13398<pc>0196-b<k1>kawvara<k2>kawvara
{#kawvara#}¦ {%kaṭvara, as, ā, am,%} despised; ({%am%}),
n. the skim or whey of curds; buttermilk with
water; a sauce, condiment; [cf. {%kaṅkara, kaccara,%}
{%kaṭura, kadara, kadvara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13399<pc>0196-b<k1>kawvANga<k2>kawvANga
{#kawvANga#}¦ {%kaṭvāṅga,%} a wrong reading for
{%khaṭvāṅga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13400<pc>0196-b<k1>kaW<k2>kaW
{#kaW#}¦ {%kaṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%kaṭhati, -ṭhitum,%} to
live in distress.
<LEND>

<L>13401<pc>0196-b<k1>kaWa<k2>kaWa
{#kaWa#}¦ {%kaṭha, as,%} m., N. of a sage, a pupil of
Vaiśampāyana and founder of a branch of the Yajur-
veda, called after him; a Brāhman; a note or simple
sound; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the followers or pupils of Kaṭha;
({%ī%}), f. a female follower of Kaṭha; the wife of a
Brāhman. {%—Kaṭha-kālāpāḥ,%} the schools of Kaṭha
and Kalāpin. {%—Kaṭha-kauthumāḥ,%} the schools of
Kaṭha and Kuthumin. {%—Kaṭha-dhūrta, as,%} m. a
Brāhman skilled in the Kaṭha branch of the Yajur-
veda. {%—Kaṭha-vallī%} or {%kaṭhavally-upaniṣad, t,%}
or {%kaṭha-śruti, is,%} or {%kaṭhopaniṣad (˚ṭha-up˚),%}
{%t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad consisting of two Adhyāyas
of three Vallī each. {%—Kaṭha-śākhā,%} f. a branch of
the Yajur-veda; also of the Ṛg-veda (?). {%—Kaṭha-%}
{%śāṭha, as,%} m., N. of a man; {%Kāṭhaśāṭhin, inas,%}
m. pl., N. of a school. {%—Kaṭha-śrotriya, as,%} m. a
Brāhman who has studied the Kaṭha branch of the
Yajur-veda. {%—Kaṭhādhyāpaka (˚ṭha-adh˚), as,%} m.
a teacher of the Kaṭha branch of the Yajur-veda.
{%—Kaṭhopaniṣad-bhāṣya-ṭīkā,%} f. a commentary
by Anantānanda on a Kaṭhopaniṣadbhāṣya. {%—Ka-%}
{%ṭhopaniṣadbhāṣyaṭīkā-vivaraṇa, am,%} n. a com-
mentary by Vyāsatīrtha on the last.
<LEND>

<L>13402<pc>0196-b<k1>kaWamarda<k2>kaWamarda
{#kaWamarda#}¦ {%kaṭhamarda, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva; (fr. {%kaṭha,%} distress ? {%marda,%} dissipating.)
<LEND>
[Page0196-c+ 69]

<L>13403<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWara<k2>kaWara
{#kaWara#}¦ {%kaṭhara, as, ā, am,%} hard; [cf. {%kaṭhina%}
and {%kaṭhora.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13404<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWalya<k2>kaWalya
{#kaWalya#}¦ {%kaṭhalya%} or {%kaṭhalla, as%} or {%am,%} m.
or n. (?), gravel.
<LEND>

<L>13405<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWAku<k2>kaWAku
{#kaWAku#}¦ {%kaṭhāku, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kaṭh%}), a bird (or more probably a particular bird).
<LEND>

<L>13406<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWAhaka<k2>kaWAhaka
{#kaWAhaka#}¦ {%kaṭhāhaka, as,%} m. a gallinule. See
{%dātyūha.%}
<LEND>

<L>13407<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWikA<k2>kaWikA
{#kaWikA#}¦ {%kaṭhikā,%} f. chalk; the plant com-
monly called Tulasī; [cf. {%kaṭhinī%} and {%kaṭhiñjara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13408<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWiYjara<k2>kaWiYjara
{#kaWiYjara#}¦ {%kaṭhiñjara, as,%} m. the tree Ocy-
mum Sanctum, commonly Tulasī.
<LEND>

<L>13409<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWina<k2>kaWina
{#kaWina#}¦ {%kaṭhina, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%kaṭh%}), hard, stiff (opposed to {%mṛdu%}); inflexible;
violent, as pain; ({%as%}), m. a thicket; ({%ā%}), f. crystal-
ized sugar, a sweetmeat made with refined sugar;
({%ī%}), f. chalk; ({%am%}), n. an earthen vessel for cooking
(according to some also f.); [cf. Lat. <nsi>catinum;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">κόφινος</lang>] {%—Kaṭhina-tā,%} f. or {%kaṭhina-tva, am,%} n.
hardness, firmness; severity; difficulty, obscurity.
{%—Kaṭhina-pṛṣṭha%} or {%kaṭhina-pṛṣṭhaka, as,%}
m. a tortoise. {%—Kaṭhina-hṛdaya%} or {%kaṭhina-citta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} hard-hearted, cruel, unkind. {%—Kaṭhināntaḥ-%}
{%karaṇa (˚na-an˚), as, ā, am,%} harsh, cruel, severe.
<LEND>

<L>13410<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWinikA<k2>kaWinikA
{%Kaṭhinikā,%}¦ f. chalk.
<LEND>

<L>13411<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWinIBUta<k2>kaWinIBUta
{%Kaṭhinī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ hardened, indurated.
<LEND>

<L>13412<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWilla<k2>kaWilla
{#kaWilla#}¦ {%kaṭhilla, as,%} m. the plant Momordica
Charantia.
<LEND>

<L>13413<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWillaka<k2>kaWillaka
{%Kaṭhillaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Momordica Charan-
tia; Ocymum Sanctum [cf. {%kaṭhiñjara%}]; Bœrhavia
Diffusa.
<LEND>

<L>13414<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWera<k2>kaWera
{#kaWera#}¦ {%kaṭhera, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kaṭh%}),
a needy or distressed man, a pauper.
<LEND>

<L>13415<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWeraRi<k2>kaWeraRi
{#kaWeraRi#}¦ {%kaṭheraṇi, is,%} m., N. of a man;
({%ayas%}), m. pl. the descendants of this man.
<LEND>

<L>13416<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWeru<k2>kaWeru
{#kaWeru#}¦ {%kaṭheru, us,%} m., N. of Kuvera (?).
<LEND>

<L>13417<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWora<k2>kaWora
{#kaWora#}¦ {%kaṭhora, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%kaṭh%}), hard, solid, stiff; offering resistance; sharp,
piercing; severe, cruel, hard-hearted; full, complete,
full-grown; full (as the moon); [cf. {%kaṭhina.%}] {%—Ka-%}
{%ṭhora-giri-māhātmya, am,%} n. a portion of the
Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa. {%—Kaṭhora-tā,%} f. or {%kaṭhora-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. hardness, firmness; severity, rigour.
<LEND>

<L>13418<pc>0196-c<k1>kaWola<k2>kaWola
{%Kaṭhola, as, ā, am,%}¦ resisting, hard, &c., {%= kaṭhora.%}
<LEND>

<L>13419<pc>0196-c<k1>kaq<k2>kaq
{#kaq#}¦ {%kaḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%kaḍati, -ḍitum,%} to be
confused or disturbed by pleasure or pain, to
be elated or intoxicated; cl. 6. P. {%kaḍati,%} to con-
sume; cl. 10. P. {%kāḍayati, -yitum,%} to break off a
part, to tear, to separate or detach; to remove the
chaff or husk of grain &c.; to preserve; [cf. {%kaṇḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13420<pc>0196-c<k1>kaqa<k2>kaqa
{%Kaḍa, as, ā, am%}¦ (said to be fr. preceding), dumb,
hoarse; ignorant, stupid; [cf. {%jaḍa.%}] {%—Kaḍaṅ-kara%}
or {%kaḍaṅ-gara, as,%} m. straw, the stalks of various
sorts of pulse &c. (rendering hoarse). {%—Kaḍaṅkarīya%}
or {%kaḍaṅkarya%} or {%kaḍaṅgarīya, as, ā, am,%} to be
fed with straw.
<LEND>

<L>13421<pc>0196-c<k1>kaqaka<k2>kaqaka
{#kaqaka#}¦ {%kaḍaka, am,%} n. sea-salt obtained by
evaporation.
<LEND>

<L>13422<pc>0196-c<k1>kaqaNga<k2>kaqaNga
{#kaqaNga#}¦ {%kaḍaṅga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kaḍ ?%}), a
spirituous liquor, a kind of rum.
<LEND>

<L>13423<pc>0196-c<k1>kaqatra<k2>kaqatra
{#kaqatra#}¦ {%kaḍatra, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%gaḍ%}), a kind of vessel or receptacle. See {%kalatra.%}
<LEND>

<L>13424<pc>0196-c<k1>kaqandikA<k2>kaqandikA
{#kaqandikA#}¦ {%kaḍandikā,%} f. science, {%= kalan-%}
{%dikā, kalindikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>13425<pc>0196-c<k1>kaqamba<k2>kaqamba
{#kaqamba#}¦ {%kaḍamba, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kaḍ%}), the end or point; the stalk of a pot-herb; ({%ī%}),
f. the pot-herb Convolvulus Repens. See {%kalamba.%}
<LEND>

<L>13426<pc>0196-c<k1>kaqAra<k2>kaqAra
{#kaqAra#}¦ {%kaḍāra, as, ī, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%gaḍ%}), tawny; ({%as%}), m. tawny (the colour); a servant.
<LEND>
[Page0197-a+ 73]

<L>13427<pc>0197-a<k1>kaqitula<k2>kaqitula
{#kaqitula#}¦ {%kaḍitula, as,%} m. a sword, a scymi-
tar, a sacrificial knife; [cf. {%kaṭī-tala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13428<pc>0197-a<k1>kaqq<k2>kaqq
{#kaqq#}¦ {%kaḍḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%kaḍḍati, -ḍitum,%} to be
hard, rough; to be harsh or severe.
<LEND>

<L>13429<pc>0197-a<k1>kaR<k2>kaR
{#kaR#}¦ {%kaṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%kaṇati, cakāṇa, kaṇi-%}
{%ṣyati, akaṇīt%} or {%akāṇīt, kaṇitum,%} to
become small; to sound, cry as in distress; to go or
approach: Caus. {%kāṇayati, -yitum,%} aor. {%acīkaṇat%}
and {%acakāṇat,%} to sigh, sound; cl. 10. P. {%kāṇayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to wink; to close the eye with the lids or
lashes.
<LEND>

<L>13430<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRita<k2>kaRita
{%Kaṇita, am,%}¦ n. crying out with pain.
<LEND>

<L>13431<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRa<k2>kaRa
{#kaRa#}¦ {%kaṇa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kaṇ;%}
according to others related to {%kanā, kaniṣṭha,%}
{%kanīyas, kanyā,%} in all of which the notion of small-
ness prevails), a grain, a single seed; a grain or
particle of dust; flake (of snow); a drop of water;
a spark of fire, the spark or facet of a gem; an ear
of corn; an atom, a minute particle; small, minute;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of fly, commonly {%kumīrāpokā;%} long
pepper; cummin seed; ({%ī%}), f. a drop, an atom; the
plant Premna Spinosa or Longifolia; a kind of
corn; see {%kaṇikā%}. {%—Kaṇa-guggulu, us,%} m., N. of a
plant; [cf. {%gandharāja, svarṇakarṇa,%} and others.]
{%—Kaṇa-jīra, as,%} m. a white kind of cummin seed.
{%—Kaṇa-jīraka, am,%} n. small cummin seed. {%—Kaṇa-%}
{%bhakṣa, as,%} m. ‘eating atoms or grains’ (?), i. e. liv-
ing on minute particles of food; a nickname of the
philosopher Kaṇāda. {%—Kaṇa-bhakṣaka, as,%} m. a
kind of bird; [cf. {%bhāriṭa, śyāmacataka, śaiśira.%}]
{%—Kaṇa-bhakṣaṇa, am,%} n. the eating of grains.
{%—Kaṇa-bhuj, k,%} m. nickname of Kaṇāda; see
{%kaṇa-bhakṣa%}. {%—Kaṇa-lābha, as,%} m. a whirlpool.
{%—Kaṇa-śas,%} ind. in small parts, in minute particles.
{%—Kaṇānna (˚ṇa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose food
consists of grains. {%—Kaṇānna-tā,%} f. the state of one
who is made to feed on grains (of rice).
<LEND>

<L>13432<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRika<k2>kaRika
{%Kaṇika, as,%}¦ m. a grain, an ear of corn; the meal
of parched wheat, the heart of wheat (commonly suji or
semoule); a small particle, as a crystal &c.; an enemy;
N. of a purificatory ceremony, viz, whirling round lamps
at sacrificial rites [cf. {%nīrājana%}]; N. of a minister of
king Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; ({%ā%}), f. a drop, an atom, a small
particle; small, minute; the plant Premna Spinosa
or Longifolia; a kind of corn or rice.
<LEND>

<L>13433<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRiSa<k2>kaRiSa
{%Kaṇiśa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. an ear or spike of corn.
<LEND>

<L>13434<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRizWa<k2>kaRizWa
{%Kaṇiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%kaniṣṭha%}], the small-
est, the most minute.
<LEND>

<L>13435<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRIka<k2>kaRIka
{%Kaṇīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ small, diminutive.
<LEND>

<L>13436<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRIyas<k2>kaRIyas
{%Kaṇīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ very small; young, younger;
[cf. {%kanīyas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13437<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRapa<k2>kaRapa
{#kaRapa#}¦ {%kaṇapa, as,%} m. a kind of spear or
lance; (various readings have {%kaṇaya%} and {%kanaya.%})
<LEND>

<L>13438<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRaBa<k2>kaRaBa
{#kaRaBa#}¦ {%kaṇabha, as,%} m. a kind of fly with a
sting; [cf. {%kaṇā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13439<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRAwIna<k2>kaRAwIna
{#kaRAwIna#}¦ {%kaṇāṭīna%} or {%kaṇāṭīra%} or {%kaṇāṭīraka,%}
{%as,%} m. a wagtail.
<LEND>

<L>13440<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRAda<k2>kaRAda
{#kaRAda#}¦ {%kaṇāda, as,%} m., N. of a celebrated
sage, considered as the author of the Vaiśeṣika
philosophy, a branch of the Nyāya. He is also
called Kāśyapa, and considered as a Devarṣi; the
nicknames {%kaṇa-bhakṣa%} and {%kaṇa-bhuj%} refer to
the etymology of this name {%kaṇa-ada,%} ‘eating
atoms or grains;’ a goldsmith; [cf. {%kalāda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13441<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRita<k2>kaRita
{#kaRita#}¦ {%kaṇita.%} See under {%kaṇ.%}
<LEND>

<L>13442<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRIci<k2>kaRIci
{#kaRIci#}¦ {%kaṇīci, is,%} and {%kanīcī,%} f. a sound;
a tree ({%pallavin%}); a creeper in flower; the plant
Abrus Precatorius; a cart; [cf. {%kanīci.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13443<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRUkaya<k2>kaRUkaya
{#kaRUkaya#}¦ {%kaṇūkaya,%} nom. P. (connected with
rt. {%kaṇ%}), Ved. to desire to utter words of blame or
censure.
<LEND>

<L>13444<pc>0197-a<k1>kaRe<k2>kaRe
{#kaRe#}¦ {%kaṇe,%} ind. a particle expressing the
satisfying of a desire. {%—Kaṇe-hatya,%} ind. (rt. {%han%}),
[Page0197-b+ 78]
satiating one's self (e. g. {%kaṇe-hatya payaḥ pibati,%}
he drinks milk till he is satiated.)
<LEND>

<L>13445<pc>0197-b<k1>kaRera<k2>kaRera
{#kaRera#}¦ {%kaṇera, as,%} m., N. of a tree, Cascaria
Ovata [cf. {%karṇikāra%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a she-elephant; a
courtezan.
<LEND>

<L>13446<pc>0197-b<k1>kaReru<k2>kaReru
{%Kaṇeru, us,%}¦ m., N. of a tree; f. a she-elephant;
a courtezan.
<LEND>

<L>13447<pc>0197-b<k1>kaRw<k2>kaRw
{#kaRw#}¦ {%kaṇṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%kaṇṭati, -ṭitum,%} to
go, to move.
<LEND>

<L>13448<pc>0197-b<k1>kaRwaka<k2>kaRwaka
{#kaRwaka#}¦ {%kaṇṭaka, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%kaṇṭ?%}),
a thorn; anything pointed, the point of a pin or
needle, a prickle, sting; a fish-bone; a finger-nail [cf.
{%kara-kaṇṭaka%}]; the erection of the hair of the body
in thrilling emotions, horripilation; any troublesome
seditious person who is, as it were, a thorn to the
state and an enemy of order and good government,
a paltry foe ({%kṣudra-śatru%}); a sharp stinging
pain, symptom of a disease; a vexing or injurious
speech; any annoyance or source of vexation; a term
in the Nyāya philosophy implying refutation of argu-
ment, detection of error, &c.; impediment, obstacle;
the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth lunar mansion;
({%as%}), m., N. of a barber; N. of the horse of Śākya-
muni (a wrong form for {%kaṇṭhaka%}); N. of an Agra-
hāra; (according to lexicographers also) a bamboo;
a workshop, a manufactory; fault, defect; N. of
Makara or the marine monster, the symbol of Kāma-
deva; ({%ī%}), f. a species of Solanum. ({%Kaṇṭaka%} takes
the form {%kaṇṭa%} at the beginning of some compounds
and in {%kaṇṭala, kaṇṭālu, kaṇṭin;%} cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κεντέω</lang>
<lang n="greek">κεσ-τός, κέσ-τρον.</lang>) {%—Kaṇṭaka-druma, as,%} m. a
tree with thorns, a thorn bush; the Sālmali or silk-
cotton tree, Bombax Heptaphyllum. {%—Kaṇṭaka-%}
{%prāvṛtā,%} f. the plant Aloe Perfoliata. {%—Kaṇṭaka-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. the Jaka or bread-fruit tree, Arto-
carpus Integrifolia; another plant, Ruellia Longifolia
(commonly called Go-kṣura); the castor-oil tree;
the Datura; the term is applicable to any plant the
fruit of which is invested with a hairy or thorny coat;
[cf. {%kaṇṭaki-phala.%}] {%—Kaṇṭaka-bhuj, k,%} m. a camel
(‘eating thorns’). {%—Kaṇṭaka-mardana, as, ī, am,%}
treading down thorns; suppressing disturbances, an-
noyances, &c.; ({%am%}), n. the act of beating or
treading down thorns; suppressing disturbances &c.
{%—Kaṇṭaka-yukta, as, ā, am,%} having thorns, thorny.
{%—Kaṇṭaka-vṛntākī,%} f. the plant Solanum Jacquini,
a species of nightshade with thorny leaves. {%—Kaṇ-%}
{%ṭaka-śreṇī,%} f. the Solanum Jacquini; a porcupine.
{%—Kaṇṭaka-sthalī,%} f., N. of a region. {%—Kaṇṭakā-%}
{%khya (˚ka-ākhyā), as,%} m. the plant Trapa Bispinosa.
{%—Kaṇṭakāgāra (˚ka-ag˚), as,%} m. a kind of lizard;
a porcupine. {%—Kaṇṭakāśana (˚ka-aś˚), as,%} m. the
camel (eating thorns, thistles, &c.; cf. {%kaṇṭaka-%}
{%bhuj%}). {%—Kaṇṭakāṣṭhīla (˚ka-aṣ˚), as,%} m. a kind
of fish, having many bones. {%—Kaṇṭakī-kārī,%} f.,
Ved. working in thorns. {%—Kaṇṭakī-druma, as,%}
m. Acacia Catechu. {%—Kaṇṭakī-phala = kaṇṭaki-%}
{%phala%}. {%—Kaṇṭa-kuraṇṭa, as,%} m. {%= jhiṇṭī,%} Barleria
Cristata. {%—Kaṇṭakoddharaṇa (˚ka-ud˚), am,%} n.
weeding, extracting thorns &c.; removing annoy-
ances; extirpating thieves, rogues, &c., or all national
and public nuisances. {%—Kaṇṭa-tanu, us,%} f. a species
of Solanum. {%—Kaṇṭa-dalā,%} f. the plant Pandanus
Odoratissimus. {%—Kaṇṭa-pattra, as,%} m. the plant
Flacourtia Sapida. {%—Kaṇṭapattra-phalā,%} f., N. of
a plant, {%= brahmadaṇḍī%}. {%—Kaṇṭa-pāda = kaṇṭa-%}
{%pattra%}. {%—Kaṇṭa-phala, as,%} m., N. of several plants,
{%= gokṣura;%} bread-fruit tree, Datura Fastuosa, {%=%}
{%latākarañja = tejaḥkhala%} (?); Ricinus Communis;
({%ā%}), f. {%= devadālīlatā%}. {%—Kaṇṭa-vallī,%} f. {%= śrīvallī-%}
{%vṛkṣa%}. {%—Kaṇṭa-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. {%= tejaḥphala-%}
{%vṛkṣa%}. {%—Kaṇṭā-phala, as,%} m. {%= kaṇṭa-phala.%}
{%—Kaṇṭārtagalā (˚ṭa-ār˚),%} f. the plant Barleria
Cærulea. {%—Kaṇṭāhvaya (˚ṭa-āh˚), am,%} n. the tube-
rous root of the lotus.
<LEND>

<L>13449<pc>0197-b<k1>kaRwakAra<k2>kaRwakAra
{%Kaṇṭakāra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
several plants, Solanum Jacquini; Bombax Hepta-
phyllum, the silk-cotton tree; Flacourtia Sapida.
<LEND>
[Page0197-c+ 79]

<L>13450<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRwakArikA<k2>kaRwakArikA
{%Kaṇṭakārikā,%}¦ f. Solanum Jacquini; also the fruit
of this plant.
<LEND>

<L>13451<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRwakAla<k2>kaRwakAla
{%Kaṇṭakāla, as,%}¦ m. {%= kaṇṭaka-phala,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13452<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRwakAluka<k2>kaRwakAluka
{%Kaṇṭakāluka, as,%}¦ m. Hedysarum Alhagi.
<LEND>

<L>13453<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRwakita<k2>kaRwakita
{%Kaṇṭakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thorny; covered with erect
hairs.
<LEND>

<L>13454<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRwakin<k2>kaRwakin
{%Kaṇṭakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ thorny, prickly; vexatious,
annoying; ({%ī%}), m., N. of several thorny plants,
Acacia Catechu; Vanguiera Spinosa; Ruellia Longi-
folia; Zizyphus Jujuba, bamboo; a fish; ({%nī%}), f., N.
of several plants, Solanum Jacquini, red amaranth.
{%—Kaṇṭaki-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced from a fish;
produced by the Mimosa tree. {%—Kaṇṭaki-phala, as,%}
m. the Indian bread-fruit tree or Jaka; see {%kaṇṭaka-%}
{%phala%}. {%—Kaṇṭaki-latā,%} f. a gourd.
<LEND>

<L>13455<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRwakila<k2>kaRwakila
{%Kaṇṭakila, as,%}¦ m. a thorny kind of bamboo,
Bambusa Spinosa.
<LEND>

<L>13456<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRwala<k2>kaRwala
{%Kaṇṭala, as,%}¦ m. the plant Mimosa Arabica; gene-
rally {%Vāvala,%} a tree yielding a species of Gum Arabic;
the branches are prickly, whence the name.
<LEND>

<L>13457<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRwAlu<k2>kaRwAlu
{%Kaṇṭālu, us,%}¦ m., N. of different plants; Solanum
Jacquini; another species of Solanum; a bamboo.
<LEND>

<L>13458<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRwin<k2>kaRwin
{%Kaṇṭin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of several plants, Achyranthes
Aspera; Acacia Catechu; Ruellia Longifolia.
<LEND>

<L>13459<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRW<k2>kaRW
{#kaRW#}¦ {%kaṇṭh,%} cl. 1. P. A., 10. P. {%kaṇṭhati,%}
{%-te, -ṭhitum, kaṇṭhayati, -yitum,%} to
mourn; to long for; [cf. {%utkaṇṭh;%} cf. also Gr.
<lang n="greek">πένθος, πόθος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>patior.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>13460<pc>0197-c<k1>kaRWa<k2>kaRWa
{#kaRWa#}¦ {%kaṇṭha, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%kaṇ%}), the throat, the neck (e. g. {%ākaṇṭha-tṛpta,%}
filled up to the throat, quite satiated); the voice (e. g.
{%sanna-kaṇṭhena,%} with broken voice); sound, espe-
cially guttural sound; the neck (of a pitcher or other
vessel); the opening of the womb; metaphorically a
bud on a stalk; immediate proximity; the space of
an inch from the edge of the hole in which sacrificial
fire is deposited; the tree Vanguiera Spinosa; N. of
a Maharṣi; ({%ī%}), f. neck, throat; a rope or leather
round the neck of a horse; a necklace, a collar; [cf.
{%adhara-kaṇṭha, ut-kaṇṭhā;%} cf. also Lat. <nsi>collum?</nsi>].
{%—Kaṇṭha-kubja, as,%} m. a kind of fever. {%—Kaṇṭha-%}
{%kubja-pratīkāra, as,%} m. the cure of the preceding
disease. {%—Kaṇṭha-kūṇikā,%} f. the Vīṇā or Indian lute.
{%—Kaṇṭha-ga, as, ā, am,%} reaching or extending to
the throat. {%—Kaṇṭha-gata, as, ā, am,%} being at or
in the throat; approaching or reaching the throat.
{%—Kaṇṭha-taṭa, as, am,%} m. n. the side of the neck.
{%—Kaṇṭha-talāsikā (˚la-as˚?),%} f. the leather or
rope passing round the neck of a horse. {%—Kaṇṭha-%}
{%daghna, as, ī, am,%} reaching to the neck. {%—Kaṇṭha-%}
{%dhāna, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Kaṇṭha-nīḍaka,%}
{%as,%} m. Falco Cheela; a kite. {%—Kaṇṭha-nīlaka, as,%}
m. a torch, a whisp of lighted straw &c. ({%= ulkā,%}
commonly {%masāla%}). {%—Kaṇṭha-paṇḍita, as,%} m., N.
of a poet. {%—Kaṇṭha-pāśaka, as,%} m. a halter; a
rope passing round an elephant's neck. {%—Kaṇṭha-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. a rope tied round an elephant's neck.
{%—Kaṇṭha-bhūṣā,%} f. a collar or short necklace.
{%—Kaṇṭha-maṇi, is,%} m. a jewel worn on the throat,
a dear or beloved object. {%—Kaṇṭha-rava, as,%} m.,
N. of an author; N. of a certain medical writer.
{%—Kaṇṭha-lagna, as, ā, am,%} fastened or suspended
round the throat; clinging to, embracing. {%—Kaṇṭha-%}
{%latā,%} f. a collar; a horse's halter. {%—Kaṇṭha-vartin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} being in the throat; [cf. {%kaṇṭha-gata.%}]
{%—Kaṇṭha-śālūka, am,%} n. a hard tumour in the
throat. {%—Kaṇṭha-śuṇḍī,%} f. swelling of the tonsils.
{%—Kaṇṭha-śoṣa, as,%} m. drying the throat; fruitless
expostulation. {%—Kaṇṭha-śruty-upaniṣad, t,%} f., N.
of an Upaniṣad belonging to the Atharva-veda.
{%—Kaṇṭha-sajjana, am,%} n. hanging on or round
the throat. {%—Kaṇṭha-sūtra, am,%} n. a kind of em-
brace. {%—Kaṇṭha-stha, as, ā, am,%} sticking in the
throat; being in or upon the throat; guttural; being
in the mouth ready to be repeated by rote, learnt
and ready to be recited. {%—Kaṇṭhāgata (˚ṭha-āg˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} come to the throat (as the breath or soul
of a dying person). {%—Kaṇṭhāgni (˚ṭha-ag˚), is,%} m.
a bird (digesting in the throat or gizzard). {%—Kaṇṭhā- %}
[Page0198-a+ 75]
{%bharaṇa (˚ṭha-ābh˚), am,%} n. a neck-ornament, a
necklace; a shorter N. of the work called Sarasvatī-
kaṇṭhābharaṇa. {%—Kaṇṭhābharaṇa-darpaṇa, as,%}
m. a commentary of Rāmasiṃha-deva on the last.
{%—Kaṇṭhābharaṇa-mārjana,%} a commentary by
Hari-nātha on the same work. {%—Kaṇṭhāvasakta%}
{%(˚ṭha-av˚), as, ā, am,%} clinging to the neck, em-
bracing. {%—Kaṇṭhī-rava, as,%} m. a lion (roaring from
the throat); an elephant in rut; a pigeon; ({%ī%}), f. the
plant Gendarussa Vulgaris. {%—Kaṇṭhe-kāla, as,%} m.
an epithet of Śiva (‘blue on the neck’). {%—Kaṇṭhe-%}
{%viddha, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kaṇṭheśvara-%}
{%tīrtha (˚ṭha-īś˚),%} N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kaṇṭhokta (˚ṭha-%}
{%uk˚), am,%} n. personal testimony.
<LEND>

<L>13461<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRWaka<k2>kaRWaka
{%Kaṇṭhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a horse of Śākya-muni;
[cf. {%kaṇṭaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13462<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRWatas<k2>kaRWatas
{%Kaṇṭhatas,%}¦ ind. from the throat, with distinct
words, explicitly.
<LEND>

<L>13463<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRWikA<k2>kaRWikA
{%Kaṇṭhikā,%}¦ f. a necklace of one string or row.
<LEND>

<L>13464<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRWin<k2>kaRWin
{%Kaṇṭhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ belonging to the throat.
<LEND>

<L>13465<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRWya<k2>kaRWya
{%Kaṇṭhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being at or in the throat;
suitable to the throat; belonging to the throat, pro-
nounced from the throat, guttural; (according to a
Prātiśākhya the guttural letters are {%a, h,%} and the
{%Jihvāmūlīya;%} according to Pāṇini {%a, k, kh, g, gh,%}
{%n,%} and {%h;%} according to Vopadeva also {%e.%}) {%—Kaṇṭhya-%}
{%varṇa, as,%} m. a guttural letter. {%—Kaṇṭhya-svara,%}
{%as,%} m. a guttural vowel, i. e. {%a%} and {%ā.%}
<LEND>

<L>13466<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRWAla<k2>kaRWAla
{#kaRWAla#}¦ {%kaṇṭhāla, as,%} m. a boat, a ship; a
hoe, a spade; war; an esculent root, Arum Campa-
nulatum; a camel [cf. {%kaṇṭakāśana%} and {%kaṇḍola%}];
a churning-vessel; ({%ā%}), f. a churning-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>13467<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRWIla<k2>kaRWIla
{%Kaṇṭhīla, as,%}¦ m. a camel; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a churn-
ing-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>13468<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRq<k2>kaRq
{#kaRq#}¦ {%kaṇḍ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%kaṇḍati, -te, -ḍi-%}
{%tum,%} to be glad; cl. 10. P. {%kaṇḍayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to separate the chaff from the grain; to
protect; [cf. {%kaḍ:%} cf. also Lith. <nsi>kándu,</nsi> ‘to bite;’
Cambro-Brit. <nsi>cat,</nsi> ‘a fragment.’]
<LEND>

<L>13469<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqana<k2>kaRqana
{%Kaṇḍana, am,%}¦ n. threshing, separating the chaff
from the grain in mortar; that which is separated
from the grain, chaff; ({%ī%}), f. a wooden bowl or
mortar in which the cleaning or threshing of grain
is performed.
<LEND>

<L>13470<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqarA<k2>kaRqarA
{#kaRqarA#}¦ {%kaṇḍarā,%} f. a sinew (of which six-
teen are considered to be in the human body); a
principal vessel of the body, a large artery, vein, &c.
<LEND>

<L>13471<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqarIka<k2>kaRqarIka
{#kaRqarIka#}¦ {%kaṇḍarīka, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Kauśika.
<LEND>

<L>13472<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqAnaka<k2>kaRqAnaka
{#kaRqAnaka#}¦ {%kaṇḍānaka, as,%} m., N. of a servant
of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>13473<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqikA<k2>kaRqikA
{#kaRqikA#}¦ {%kaṇḍikā,%} f. a short section, the
shortest subdivision in the arrangement of certain
Vedic compositions, as in the White Yajur-veda;
[cf. {%kāṇḍa%} and {%kāṇḍikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13474<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqu<k2>kaRqu
{#kaRqu#}¦ {%kaṇḍu, us,%} m. f. or usually {%kaṇḍū, ūs,%}
f. (fr. rt. {%kaṇḍ%}), scratching; itching, the itch; ({%us%}),
m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Kaṇḍū-karī,%} f. the plant Mu-
cuna Pruritus. {%—Kaṇḍū-ghna, as,%} m. the plant
Cathartocarpus (Cassia) Fistula; white mustard.
{%—Kaṇḍūmakā,%} f. ({%makā = makṣikā%} or {%maśaka?%}),
a kind of insect with a poisonous bite. {%—Kaṇḍū-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} scratching, itching. {%—Kaṇḍv-ādi,%}
{%ayas,%} m. pl. the nominal verbs, in the list of which
{%kaṇḍūyati%} is the first.
<LEND>

<L>13475<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRquka<k2>kaRquka
{%Kaṇḍuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a barber.
<LEND>

<L>13476<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqura<k2>kaRqura
{%Kaṇḍura, as, ā, am,%}¦ scratching; ({%as%}), m. the
plant Momordica Charantia, a species of reed; ({%ā%}), f.
the plants Mucuna Pruritus and Aty-amlaparnī.
<LEND>

<L>13477<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqUti<k2>kaRqUti
{%Kaṇḍūti, is,%}¦ f. scratching; itching, the itch.
<LEND>

<L>13478<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqUya<k2>kaRqUya
{%Kaṇḍūya,%}¦ nom. P. A. {%kaṇḍūyati, -te, -yitum,%}
to scratch, scrape, rub: Desid. {%kaṇḍūyiyiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>13479<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqUyat<k2>kaRqUyat
{%Kaṇḍūyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ scratching, rubbing.
<LEND>

<L>13480<pc>0198-a<k1>kaRqUyana<k2>kaRqUyana
{%Kaṇḍūyana, am,%}¦ n. scratching, scraping, rubbing,
itching; ({%ī%}), f. a brush for rubbing.
<LEND>
[Page0198-b+ 78]

<L>13481<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRqUyanaka<k2>kaRqUyanaka
{%Kaṇḍūyanaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ scratching, scraping;
({%as%}), m. a tickler, one who tickles or scratches.
<LEND>

<L>13482<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRqUyamAna<k2>kaRqUyamAna
{%Kaṇḍūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ scratching.
<LEND>

<L>13483<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRqUyA<k2>kaRqUyA
{%Kaṇḍūyā,%}¦ f. scratching, itching.
<LEND>

<L>13484<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRqUyita<k2>kaRqUyita
{%Kaṇḍūyita, am,%}¦ n. scratching.
<LEND>

<L>13485<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRqUyitf<k2>kaRqUyitf
{%Kaṇḍūyitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ scratching, a scratcher.
<LEND>

<L>13486<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRqUrA<k2>kaRqUrA
{%Kaṇḍūrā,%}¦ f. the plant Mucuna Pruritus; ‘what
causes itching,’ alluding to the irritating property of
this plant.
<LEND>

<L>13487<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRqUla<k2>kaRqUla
{%Kaṇḍūla, as, ā, am,%}¦ having or feeling the itch,
itchy; ({%as%}), m. an esculent root (Arum Campanu-
latum).
<LEND>

<L>13488<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRqola<k2>kaRqola
{#kaRqola#}¦ {%kaṇḍola, as,%} m. a basket for holding
grain, made of bamboo or canes; a safe, any place
in which provisions are kept; a camel; [cf. {%kaṇ-%}
{%ṭhāla%};] {%(ī),%} f. the lute of the Cāṇḍāla; [cf. {%kaṭola,%}
{%gaṇḍola.%}] {%—Kaṇḍola-vīṇā,%} f. the lute of the Cāṇ-
ḍāla, a vulgar lute.
<LEND>

<L>13489<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRqolaka<k2>kaRqolaka
{%Kaṇḍolaka, as,%}¦ m. a basket, a safe, a store-room.
<LEND>

<L>13490<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRqoza<k2>kaRqoza
{#kaRqoza#}¦ {%kaṇḍoṣa, as,%} m. a caterpillar.
<LEND>

<L>13491<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRva<k2>kaRva
{#kaRva#}¦ {%kaṇva, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%kaṇ%}), deaf; ({%as%}), m., Ved. a peculiar class of evil
spirits, against whom charms are used; a praiser;
N. of a renowned Ṛṣi, author of several hymns of
the Ṛg-veda; he is called a son of Ghora and is said
to belong to the family of Aṅgiras; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
family or descendants of Kaṇva; (besides the cele-
brated Ṛṣi there occur a Kaṇva Nārṣada, Kaṇva Śrā-
yasa, Kaṇva Kāśyapa; the founder of a Vedic school;
a prince, son of Pratiratha and father of Medhātithi;
a son of Apratiratha; a son of Ajamīḍha and father
of Medhātithi; the author of a law-book; a gram-
marian.) The name {%Kaṇva%} was perhaps originally
mythic, and afterwards transferred to a human
family, as was the case with the name Aṅgiras;
({%am%}), n. sin, evil. {%—Kaṇva-jambhana, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. consuming or destroying the evil spirits called
Kaṇvas. {%—Kaṇva-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very much
like Kaṇva, very wise. {%—Kaṇva-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. prepared after the manner of the Kaṇvas (as
Soma); (Sāy.) united with praisers or with the
Kaṇvas (as Indra). {%—Kaṇva-vat,%} ind. like Kaṇva.
{%—Kaṇva-sakhi, ā,%} m., Ved. a friend of the Kaṇvas,
friendly disposed towards them. {%—Kaṇva-hotṛ, tā,%}
m., Ved. one whose Hotṛ priest is a Kaṇva.
<LEND>

<L>13492<pc>0198-b<k1>kaRvAya<k2>kaRvAya
{%Kaṇvāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kaṇvā-yate, -yitum,%} to do
mischief; perhaps originally ‘to act like a Kaṇva or
evil spirit.’
<LEND>

<L>13493<pc>0198-b<k1>kata<k2>kata
{#kata#}¦ {%kata, as,%} m. the clearing nut plant;
see the following; N. of a Muni or saint. {%—Kata-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. the clearing nut plant.
<LEND>

<L>13494<pc>0198-b<k1>kataka<k2>kataka
{%Kataka, as,%}¦ m. the clearing nut plant, Strychnos
Potatorum, (one of the seeds of this plant being rubbed
upon the inside of the water-jars used in Bengal occa-
sions a precipitation of the earthly particles diffused
through the water and removes them.)
<LEND>

<L>13495<pc>0198-b<k1>katama<k2>katama
{#katama#}¦ {%katama, as, ā, at%} (superlative of 2. {%ka;%}
declined as a pronom., Gram. 236), who or which of
many ? (e. g. {%katamena pathā yātās te,%} by which
road have they gone?). {%Katama%} is often a mere
strengthened substitute for {%ka,%} the superlative affix
imparting emphasis. Hence it may occasionally be
used for ‘who or which of two?’ (e. g. {%tayoḥ kata-%}
{%masmai,%} to which of these two ?). It may option-
ally be compounded with the word to which it refers
(e. g. {%katamaḥ Kaṭhaḥ%} or {%katama-kaṭhaḥ,%} which
Kaṭha out of many?). When followed by {%ca%} and
preceded by {%yatama%} an indefinite expression is
formed equivalent to ‘any whosoever,’ ‘any whatso-
ever,’ &c. (e. g. {%yatamad eva katamac ca vidyāt,%}
he may know anything whatsoever). In negative
sentences {%katama%} with {%cana%} or {%katama%} with {%api%}
= not even one, none at all (e. g. {%na katamac-%}
{%canāhaḥ,%} not even on a single day, on no day at
all). In addition to the above uses {%katama%} is said to
mean ‘best,’ ‘excessively good-looking;’ [cf. 3. {%ka.%}]
{%—Katamoraga (˚ma-ur˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>13496<pc>0198-b<k1>katara<k2>katara
{%Katara, as, ā, at%}¦ (comparative of 2. {%ka;%} declined
[Page0198-c+ 75]
as a pronom., Gram. 236), who or which of two?
whether of two? Analogously to {%katama%} above
{%katara%} may occasionally be used to express ‘who or
which of many’ (e. g. {%katarasyāṃ diśi,%} in which
quarter ?), and may optionally be compounded with
the word to which it refers (e. g. {%kataraḥ Kaṭhaḥ%}
or {%katara-kaṭhaḥ%}). In negative sentences {%katara%}
with {%cana%} = neither of the two (e. g. {%na kataraś-%}
{%cana jigye,%} neither of the two was conquered;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πότερος, κότερος;</lang> Goth. <nsi>hvathar;</nsi> Eng.
<nsi>whether;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>uter;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>huedar;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>kotoryi.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>13497<pc>0198-c<k1>kataratas<k2>kataratas
{%Kataratas,%}¦ ind. on which of the two sides ?
<LEND>

<L>13498<pc>0198-c<k1>kati<k2>kati<h>1
1. {%kati%}¦ (fr. 2. {%ka,%} declined in pl. only, Gram. 227.
{%a,%} all the cases except the nom. voc. and acc. taking
terminations, whereas the correlative {%iti%} has become
fixed as an indeclinable adverb), how many? quot?
several (e. g. {%kati devāḥ,%} how many gods? {%kati%}
{%vyāpādayati kati vā tāḍayati,%} some he kills and
some he strikes). In the sense of ‘several,’ ‘some,’
{%kati%} is generally followed by {%cid%} or {%api%} (e. g. {%katicid%}
{%ahāni,%} for several or some days). {%Kati%} may be used
as an adverb with {%cid%} in the sense of ‘oftentimes,’
‘much,’ ‘in many ways’ (e. g. {%katicit stutaḥ,%} much
or often praised). {%Kati-kṛtvas,%} ind. how many
times? {%kati-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of how many kinds?
{%kati-śas,%} how many at a time?
<LEND>

<L>13499<pc>0198-c<k1>katiTa<k2>katiTa
{%Katitha, as, ī, am,%}¦ to what place or stage or
degree advanced? (the how-maniest?) with {%cid%} =
advanced to such and such a point (e. g. {%ahaṃ%}
{%katithaścid āsa,%} I was so far advanced on to such
and such a point).
<LEND>

<L>13500<pc>0198-c<k1>katiDA<k2>katiDA
{%Katidhā,%}¦ ind. in how many places? in how many
parts? how often? {%katidhā cit,%} everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>13501<pc>0198-c<k1>katipaya<k2>katipaya
{%Katipaya, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (pl. m. {%e%} and {%ās%}),
several, some; a certain number, so many; {%kati-%}
{%payena ahargaṇena,%} after some days; also {%kati-%}
{%payair ahobhiḥ, katipayāhasya,%} &c. {%—Katipa-%}
{%yena%} or {%katipayāt,%} ind. with some exertion; [the
affix {%paya%} has been compared with Gr. <lang n="greek">ποῖος</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>13502<pc>0198-c<k1>katipayaTa<k2>katipayaTa
{%Katipayatha, as, ī, am,%}¦ advanced to a certain
place or degree.
<LEND>

<L>13503<pc>0198-c<k1>katamAla<k2>katamAla
{#katamAla#}¦ {%katamāla, as,%} m. fire; the right
form is {%khatamāla;%} [cf. also {%kacamāla%} and {%kara-%}
{%māla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13504<pc>0198-c<k1>kati<k2>kati<h>2
{#kati#} 2¦. {%kati, is,%} m., N. of a sage, son of
Viśvā-mitra and ancestor of Kātyāyana. (For 1. see
above.)
<LEND>

<L>13505<pc>0198-c<k1>katika<k2>katika
{%Katika%}¦ or {%katikā,%} f., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>13506<pc>0198-c<k1>katImuza<k2>katImuza
{#katImuza#}¦ {%katīmuṣa, am,%} n., N. of an Agra-
hāra.
<LEND>

<L>13507<pc>0198-c<k1>kattASabda<k2>kattASabda
{#kattASabda#}¦ {%kattā-śabda, as,%} m. the rattling
sound of dice.
<LEND>

<L>13508<pc>0198-c<k1>kattfRa<k2>kattfRa
{#kattfRa#}¦ {%kat-tṛṇa, kat-toya, kat-tri.%} See
under 2. {%kad.%}
<LEND>

<L>13509<pc>0198-c<k1>katT<k2>katT
{#katT#}¦ {%katth,%} cl. 1. A. {%katthate, -thitum,%}
to boast; to mention with praise, to praise
or celebrate; to flatter or coax; to abuse, revile.
<LEND>

<L>13510<pc>0198-c<k1>katTana<k2>katTana
{%Katthana, as, ā, am,%}¦ boasting, praising; a boaster,
praiser; ({%am%}), n. boasting.
<LEND>

<L>13511<pc>0198-c<k1>katpaya<k2>katpaya
{#katpaya#}¦ {%kat-paya, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%kad%} and
{%paya%} fr. {%pī = pyai%}), Ved. swelling, rising; (Sāy.)
one whose waters cause happiness.
<LEND>

<L>13512<pc>0198-c<k1>katr<k2>katr
{#katr#}¦ {%katr,%} cl. 10. P. {%katrayati, -yitum,%} to
loosen, slacken, remove.
<LEND>

<L>13513<pc>0198-c<k1>katsavara<k2>katsavara
{#katsavara#}¦ {%katsavara, am,%} n. the shoulder,
the shoulder-blade.
<LEND>

<L>13514<pc>0198-c<k1>kaT<k2>kaT
{#kaT#}¦ {%kath%} (this rt. is perhaps connected
with {%katham%}), cl. 10. P., ep. also A.
{%kathayati, -te,%} aor. {%acakathat%} or {%acīkathat, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to converse with any one (with inst. c. alone or
after {%saha%}); to tell, relate, narrate, report, inform,
speak about, declare, explain (with acc. of the thing
or person spoken about); to describe; to denounce,
betray; to suppose, state; Pass. {%kathyate,%} to be
[Page0199-a+ 81]
called; be regarded or considered as: Desid. {%cika-%}
{%thayiṣati,%} to desire to tell; [cf. Goth. <nsi>qvath;</nsi>
Eng. <nsi>quoth</nsi> and <nsi>quote;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κωτίλος, κωτίλλω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>13515<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTaka<k2>kaTaka
{%Kathaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ a narrator, a relater, one
who recites a story or who publicly reads and ex-
pounds the Purāṇas &c., one who speaks or tells;
({%as, ā%}), m. f. the speaker of a prologue or mono-
logue; a professional story-teller; chief actor; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>13516<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTana<k2>kaTana
{%Kathana, as, ā, am,%}¦ telling, talkative; ({%am%}), n.
the act of telling, narration, relating, informing.
<LEND>

<L>13517<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTanIya<k2>kaTanIya
{%Kathanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be said, to be told or
declared; worthy of relation, to be named.
<LEND>

<L>13518<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTayAna<k2>kaTayAna
{%Kathayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ telling, speaking.
<LEND>

<L>13519<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTayitavya<k2>kaTayitavya
{%Kathayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be told, to be men-
tioned, to be communicated.
<LEND>

<L>13520<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTA<k2>kaTA<h>1
1. {%kathā,%}¦ f. conversation, speech, tale; a fable, a
feigned story; talk, mention; (in phil.) disputation;
{%kā kathā%} (with gen. or more commonly with loc.
and sometimes with {%prati%}), what should one
say of? how should one speak of? (e. g. {%eko 'pi%}
{%kṛcchrād varteta, bhūyasāṃ kathaiva kā,%} even
one person would live with difficulty, what should
one say of many? i. e. how much more many?).
{%—Kathākrama (˚thā-āk˚), as,%} m. the commence-
ment of a conversation. {%—Kathā-chala, am,%} n. the
device of a fable. {%—Kathā-java, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Kathānurāga (˚thā-an˚), as,%} m. attention,
taking pleasure in a discourse. {%—Kathānta (˚thā-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. end of a conversation. {%—Kathāntara%}
{%(˚thā-an˚), am,%} n. the course of a conversation.
{%—Kathā-pīṭha,%} N. of the first Lambaka or book of
the Kathā-sarit-sāgara. {%—Kathā-prabandha, as,%} m.
a narrative, a tale, a composed story, a fiction. {%—Ka-%}
{%thā-prasaṅga, as,%} m. connection of speeches or
discourse, talking, conversation, speaking to or with,
rumour, report; ({%as, ā, am%}), talkative, talking much
and foolishly, half-witted, foolish; a conjuror, a dealer
in antidotes &c. {%—Kathā-prāṇa, as,%} m. an actor,
the speaker of a prologue or monologue, the intro-
ducer of a drama; a professed story-teller. {%—Kathā-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of tales. {%—Kathā-mukha,%}
{%am,%} n. the introduction to a tale; N. of the second
Lambaka or book of the Kathā-sarit-sāgara. {%—Kathā-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. conversation, talk, discourse. {%—Kathā-%}
{%rambha (˚thā-ār˚), as,%} m. beginning of a story or
narrative, story-telling. {%—Kathārambha-kāla (˚thā-%}
{%ār˚), as,%} m. story-beginning-time. {%—Kathārāma%}
{%(˚thā-ār˚), as,%} m. garden of fable. {%—Kathārṇava%}
{%(˚thā-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a collection of stories at-
tributed to Śivadāsa. {%—Kathālāpa (˚thā-āl˚), as,%}
m. speech, conversation. {%—Kathāvaśeṣa (˚thā-av˚),%}
or {%kathā-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%} one of whom only the
narrative remains, i. e. deceased, dead; {%kathāva-%}
{%śeṣatāṃ gataḥ,%} deceased, dead. {%—Kathā-virakta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} reserved, taciturn, disliking conversation.
{%—Kathā-saṅgraha, as,%} m. a collection of tales or
fables. {%—Kathā-sarit-sāgara, as,%} m. the ocean of
the rivers of stories; title of a work of Somadeva.
{%—Kathodaya (˚thā-ud˚), as,%} m. the beginning of
a tale, introduction to a tale. {%—Kathodghāta (˚thā-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. the opening of a drama by the character
that first enters overhearing and repeating the last
words of the prelude. {%—Kathopakathana (˚thā-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n. conversation, conference, narration. {%—Katho-%}
{%pākhyāna (˚thā-up˚), am,%} n. narration, narrative,
relation, telling a story.
<LEND>

<L>13521<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTAnaka<k2>kaTAnaka
{%Kathānaka, am,%}¦ n. a small tale; [cf. {%krayāṇaka,%}
{%bhayānaka,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>13522<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTApaya<k2>kaTApaya
{%Kathāpaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kathāpayati, -yitum,%} to
tell, relate, &c.
<LEND>

<L>13523<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTika<k2>kaTika
{%Kathika, as, ī, am,%}¦ a narrator, a relater, a story-
teller by profession.
<LEND>

<L>13524<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTita<k2>kaTita
{%Kathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ told, said, related; ({%am%}), n.
a conversation, discourse. {%—Kathita-pada, am,%} n.
repetition, tautology.
<LEND>

<L>13525<pc>0199-a<k1>kaTIkf<k2>kaTIkf
{%Kathī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to transform into a tale. {%—Kathī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
transformed into a tale, deceased, dead (e. g. {%kathī-%}
{%kṛtaṃ vapuḥ,%} a body of which one can only give
a history, a deceased body).
<LEND>
[Page0199-b+ 79]

<L>13526<pc>0199-b<k1>kaTya<k2>kaTya
{%Kathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken about, to be
told, fit to be mentioned.
<LEND>

<L>13527<pc>0199-b<k1>kaTyamAna<k2>kaTyamAna
{%Kathyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being told or mentioned,
under narration.
<LEND>

<L>13528<pc>0199-b<k1>kaTam<k2>kaTam
{#kaTam#}¦ {%katham%} (fr. 2. {%ka%}), ind. how? in what
manner? whence? (e. g. {%katham etat,%} how is that?
{%katham idānīm,%} how now? what is now to be
done? {%katham mārātmake tvayi viśvāsaḥ,%} how
can there be reliance on thee of murderous mind?
{%katham utsṛjya tvāṃ gaccheyam,%} how can I go
away deserting you? {%katham buddhvā bhaviṣyati%}
{%sā,%} how will she be when she awakes? {%katham mṛ-%}
{%tyuḥ prabhavati vedavidām,%} whence is it that death
has power over those that know the Veda? {%katham%}
{%avagamyate,%} whence is it inferred?). Sometimes
{%katham%} merely introduces an interrogation (e. g. {%ka-%}
{%tham ātmānaṃ nivedayāmi kathaṃ vā ātmā-%}
{%pahāraṃ karomi,%} shall I declare myself or shall I
withdraw ?).
<LEND>

<L>13529<pc>0199-b<k1>kaTam<k2>kaTam
{%Katham%}¦ is often found in connection with the
particles {%iva, nāma, nu, svid,%} which appear to gene-
ralize the interrogation (how possibly? &c.); with {%nu%}
it sometimes {%= kimu%} or {%kutas%} (e. g. {%kathaṃ nu,%} how
much more! {%na kathaṃ nu,%} how much less!).
<LEND>

<L>13530<pc>0199-b<k1>kaTam<k2>kaTam
{%Katham%}¦ is often connected, like {%kim,%} with the
particles {%cana, cid,%} and {%api,%} which give an inde-
finite sense to the interrogative (e. g. {%kathaṃ cana,%}
in no way, not at all). When not itself negative
{%kathaṃ cana%} = in some way, some how; scarcely,
with difficulty; {%na kathaṃ cana,%} in no way; {%ka-%}
{%thañcit,%} some how or other, by some means or
other, in any way, with some difficulty, scarcely, in
a moderate degree, a little; {%na kathañcit,%} not at all,
in no way whatever; {%na kathañcid na,%} in no way
not, i. e. most decidedly; {%yathā kathañcit,%} in any
way whatsoever; {%kathañcid yadi jīvati,%} it is with
difficulty that he lives; {%katham api,%} some how or
other, with some difficulty, scarcely, a little; {%katham%}
{%api na,%} by no means, not at all. In addition to
the above senses lexicographers assert that {%katham%}
may imply ‘amazement, surprise, pleasure, abuse;’
[with {%katham%} cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κατά.</lang>]
<div n="P"/>At the beginning of an adjective compound {%katham%}
may have the same sense as {%kim%}. {%—Kathaṃ-rūpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of what shape ? {%—Kathaṃ-vīrya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of what power? {%—Kathaṅ-kathika, as,%}
{%ā, am%} (fr. {%katham katham%}), one who is always
asking questions, an inquisitive person. {%—Kathaṅ-%}
{%kathika-tā,%} f. questioning, inquiring, inquisitiveness.
{%—Kathaṅkathita (?), as,%} m. an interrogant, one
who puts questions. {%—Kathan-karman, ā, ā, a,%} how
acting. {%—Kathaṅ-kāram,%} ind. in which manner?
{%—Kathan-tā,%} f. enquiry, question, demand. {%—Ka-%}
{%tham-pramāṇa, as, ā, am,%} of what measure? {%—Ka-%}
{%tham-bhāva, as,%} m. what state? {%—Katham-bhūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} how being? of what kind?
<LEND>

<L>13531<pc>0199-b<k1>kaTA<k2>kaTA<h>2
2. {%kathā,%}¦ ind. (for {%katham%}), Ved. how? whence?
why? Sometimes merely a particle of interrogation
(e. g. {%kathā śṛṇoti Indraḥ,%} does Indra hear?
{%yathā kathā ca,%} in any way whatsoever).
<LEND>

<L>13532<pc>0199-b<k1>kad<k2>kad<h>1
{#kad#} 1¦. {%kad,%} cl. 1. A. {%kadate, -ditum,%} perf.
{%cakāda,%} to be confused, suffer mentally; to
grieve; to confound; to kill or hurt; to call; to cry
or shed tears; {%cakāda kadanam,%} he accomplished a
destruction; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κῆδας;</lang> Goth. <nsi>hatan:</nsi> cf. also
{%kand.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13533<pc>0199-b<k1>kadana<k2>kadana
{%Kadana, am,%}¦ n. destruction, killing, slaughter; war,
sin. {%—Kadana-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Ka-%}
{%dana-priya, as, ā, am,%} loving slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>13534<pc>0199-b<k1>kad<k2>kad<h>2
{#kad#} 2¦. {%kad,%} ind. (originally the neuter form
of the interrogative pronoun {%ka%}), Ved. a particle of
interrogation, where? {%Kad%} is used, like {%kim,%} with the
particles {%cana%} and {%cid%} (e. g. {%na kaccana upabdiḥ%}
{%śṛṇve rathasya,%} not at any time or in any manner
is heard the noise of thy chariot; {%veti divaḥ-kaccid%}
{%ā,%} he comes from heaven now and then). {%—Kaccid%} is
sometimes used, like the simple {%kad,%} as a particle of in-
terrogation (e. g. {%kaccid dṛṣṭā tvayā Damayantī,%}
was Damayantī seen by thee?). {%Kaccid%} may some-
[Page0199-c+ 77]
times be equivalent to ‘I hope that’ (e. g. {%vyādhir na%}
{%kaccit te śarīram pratibādhate,%} I hope no illness
afflicts thy body).
<LEND>

<L>13535<pc>0199-c<k1>kad<k2>kad
{%Kad%}¦ at the beginning of a compound marks the
uselessness, badness or defectiveness of anything; as in
the following examples. {%—Kat-tṛṇa, am,%} n. a fragrant
grass; the plant Pistia Stratiotes. {%—Kat-toya, am,%} n.
an intoxicating drink, wine or vinous spirit. {%—Kat-tri,%}
{%ayas,%} m. pl. three inferior articles. {%—Kad-akṣara,%}
{%am,%} n. a bad letter, bad writing. {%—Kad-agni, is,%} m.
some or a little fire. {%—Kad-adhvan, ā,%} m. a bad road.
{%—Kad anna, am,%} n. bad food. {%—Kad-apatya, am,%}
n. bad posterity; bad children. {%—Kad-abhyāsa, as,%}
m. a bad habit. {%—Kad-artha, as,%} m. a useless thing;
({%as, ā, am%}), useless, unmeaning; having what purpose
or aim? {%—Kadarthana, am, ā,%} n. f. tormenting,
torture. {%—Kadarthaya,%} nom. P. {%kadarthayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to despise, to estimate lightly; to torment, tor-
ture, trouble. {%—Kadarthita, as, ā, am,%} despised,
disdained, rejected; rendered useless. {%—Kadarthī-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to
disdain, despise, to estimate at small value. {%—Ka-%}
{%darthī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} despised, disdained, ren-
dered useless and unavailing. {%—Kad-arya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} avaricious, miserly; little, insignificant, mean;
bad, disagreeable; ({%as%}), m. a miser. {%—Kadarya-tā,%}
f. or {%kadarya-tva, am,%} n. avarice; insignificance;
badness. {%—Kadarya-bhāva, as,%} m. avarice, stingi-
ness. {%—Kad-aśva, as,%} m. a bad horse. {%—Kad-ākāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ill-formed, ugly. {%—Kad-ākhya, am,%} n.
the plant Costus Speciosus (‘having a bad name,’
i. e. {%kuṣṭha%} or {%duṣṭa%}). {%—Kad-ācāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} wicked, abandoned, following evil practices;
({%as%}), m. bad conduct. {%—Kad-indriya, āṇi,%} n. pl.
bad organs of sense. {%—Kad-uṣṭra, as,%} m. a bad
camel. {%—Kad-uṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} tepid, lukewarm;
({%am%}), n. warmth, lukewarmness, gentle warmth; [cf.
{%kavoṣṇa, koṣṇa.%}] {%—Kad-ratha, as,%} m. a bad
carriage. {%—Kad-vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing the word
{%ka%}. {%—Kad-vada, as, ā, am,%} speaking ill or inaccu-
rately or indistinctly; contemptible, vile, base. {%—Kal-%}
{%lola,%} see s. v.
<LEND>

<L>13536<pc>0199-c<k1>kada<k2>kada
{#kada#}¦ {%ka-da, as,%} m. a cloud. See 4. {%ka.%}
<LEND>

<L>13537<pc>0199-c<k1>kadaka<k2>kadaka
{#kadaka#}¦ {%kadaka, as,%} m. an awning; [cf.
{%kandaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13538<pc>0199-c<k1>kadana<k2>kadana
{#kadana#}¦ {%kadana.%} See under 1. {%kad.%}
<LEND>

<L>13539<pc>0199-c<k1>kadamba<k2>kadamba
{#kadamba#}¦ {%kadamba, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 1.
{%kad%}), the tree Nauclea Cadamba, a tree with orange-
coloured fragrant blossoms; the mustard-seed plant,
Sinapis Dichotoma; a kind of grass, Andropogon
Serratus; a particular mineral substance; turmeric;
({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant; ({%am%}), n. a multitude, an as-
semblage or collection. {%—Kadamba-puṣpā%} or {%ī,%} f.
a plant, the flowers of which resemble those of the
Kadamba, commonly called Mandīri. {%—Kadamba-%}
{%vāyu, us,%} m. a fragrant breeze. {%—Kadambānila%}
{%(˚ba-an˚), as,%} m. a fragrant breeze, spring.
<LEND>

<L>13540<pc>0199-c<k1>kadambaka<k2>kadambaka
{%Kadambaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Nauclea Cadamba,
Sinapis Dichotoma, {%= haridru; (am),%} n. a multitude.
<LEND>

<L>13541<pc>0199-c<k1>kadambada<k2>kadambada
{%Kadambada, as,%}¦ m. the mustard-seed plant, Si-
napis Dichotoma.
<LEND>

<L>13542<pc>0199-c<k1>kadara<k2>kadara
{#kadara#}¦ {%kadara, as,%} m. a saw; an iron goad
for guiding an elephant; N. of a tree, which may be
substituted for Khadira as a sacrificial post; a white
sort of Mimosa; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a corn, a callosity
of the feet caused by external friction; ({%am%}), n. coagu-
lated milk; [cf. {%kaṅkara, kaccara, kaṭura,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>13543<pc>0199-c<k1>kadala<k2>kadala
{#kadala#}¦ {%kadala, as, ī,%} m. f. the plantain tree
(Musa Sapientum), called also banana. It has a soft
perishable stem, poetically a symbol of the frailty of
human life; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants, Pistia Stra-
tiotes; Bombax Heptaphyllum; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of deer,
the hide of which is used as a seat &c.; a flag, a
banner, a flag carried by an elephant. {%—Kadalī-%}
{%skandha, as,%} m. a kind of illusion.
<LEND>

<L>13544<pc>0199-c<k1>kadalaka<k2>kadalaka
{%Kadalaka, as,%}¦ m. the plantain or banana tree,
Musa Sapientum.
<LEND>
[Page0200-a+ 74]

<L>13545<pc>0200-a<k1>kadalin<k2>kadalin
{%Kadalin, ī,%}¦ m. a kind of antelope.
<LEND>

<L>13546<pc>0200-a<k1>kadalIkzatA<k2>kadalIkzatA
{#kadalIkzatA#}¦ {%kadalīkṣatā,%} f. a sort of cu-
cumber; a fine woman.
<LEND>

<L>13547<pc>0200-a<k1>kadA<k2>kadA
{#kadA#}¦ {%kadā,%} ind. (fr. 2. {%ka%}), when? at what
time? (with following fut. or pres. tense); how?
{%Kadā%} is sometimes found with a following {%ca%} and
preceding {%yadā%} (e. g. {%yadā kadā ca sunavāma%}
{%somam,%} let us press out the Soma as often as may
be or at all times); {%kadā cana,%} (though originally
negative, generally = ) at some time, one day, once;
{%na kadā cana,%} never at any time; {%kadā cit,%} at
some time or other, sometimes, once; {%na kadā cit,%}
never; {%kadāpi (kadā-api),%} sometimes, now and
then; {%na kadāpi,%} never; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κοτέ</lang> and <lang n="greek">ποτέ</lang>
Lat. <nsi>quando;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>kadà;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>kogda.</nsi>] {%—Kadā-%}
{%matta, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>13548<pc>0200-a<k1>kadUhi<k2>kadUhi
{#kadUhi#}¦ {%kadūhi, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>13549<pc>0200-a<k1>kadru<k2>kadru
{#kadru#}¦ {%kadru, us, us%} or {%ūs, u%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%kav%}), tawny, reddish-brown; ({%us%}), m. tawny (the
colour); N. of a Ṛṣi; ({%ūs%}), f. a Soma vessel (?); a
personification described in certain legends which re-
late to the bringing down of the Soma from heaven,
according to the Brāhmaṇas ‘the earth personified;’ N.
of a daughter of Dakṣa, wife of Kaśyapa and mother
of the Nāgas or the serpent-race; N. of a plant. {%—Ka-%}
{%dru-putra, as,%} m. or {%kadru-suta, as,%} m. a serpent.
<LEND>

<L>13550<pc>0200-a<k1>kadryac<k2>kadryac
{#kadryac#}¦ {%kadryac, āṅ, kadrīcī, ak%} (fr. 2. {%ka%}
and rt. {%añc%}), Ved. turned towards what?
<LEND>

<L>13551<pc>0200-a<k1>kadvat<k2>kadvat
{#kadvat#}¦ {%kad-vat.%} See under 2. {%kad.%}
<LEND>

<L>13552<pc>0200-a<k1>kadvara<k2>kadvara
{#kadvara#}¦ {%kadvara, am,%} n. whey; buttermilk
mixed with water; [cf. {%kaṅkara, kaccara, kaṭura,%}
{%kaṭvara,%} and {%kadara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13553<pc>0200-a<k1>kaDapriya<k2>kaDapriya
{#kaDapriya#}¦ {%kadha-priya, as, ā, am,%} or {%kadha-%}
{%prī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. friendly towards whom?; (Sāy.)
fond of praise.
<LEND>

<L>13554<pc>0200-a<k1>kan<k2>kan
{#kan#}¦ {%kan,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%kanati, cakāna,%}
{%akānīt, kantum%} (of the simple root only
the aor. is used), to be satisfied; to be contented
with, to accept anything (acc.) with satisfaction;
(Sāy.) to love, wish, desire; to shine; to go: Intens.
{%cākanti,%} impf. {%cākan,%} perf. {%cākana%} and {%cake,%} to be
satisfied, to like, enjoy anything (with loc., gen.); to
inst.); to be liked, wished, desired (with gen.); to
strive after, seek, desire (with acc. or dat.); [cf. {%kam%}
and {%can:%} cf. also Lat. <nsi>canus, caneo, candeo, can-</nsi>
<nsi>dela;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>canu,</nsi> ‘full moon.’]
<LEND>

<L>13555<pc>0200-a<k1>kana<k2>kana
{#kana#}¦ {%kana,%} a substitute for {%alpa,%} little,
small, not occurring alone, but regarded as the source
of the following derivatives; [cf. {%kaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13556<pc>0200-a<k1>kanaya<k2>kanaya
{%Kanaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kanayati, -yitum,%} to make
less or smaller, diminish.
<LEND>

<L>13557<pc>0200-a<k1>kanA<k2>kanA
{%Kanā,%}¦ f., Ved. a girl.
<LEND>

<L>13558<pc>0200-a<k1>kanizWa<k2>kanizWa
{%Kaniṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ the smallest, least (opposed
to {%bhūyiṣṭha%}); the youngest, younger born (opposed
to {%jyeṣṭha%} and {%vṛddha%}); ({%ā%}), f. (with or without
{%aṅguliḥ%}) the little finger; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class
of deities of the fourteenth Manvantara; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of heroine. {%—Kaniṣṭha-tā,%} f. or {%kaniṣṭha-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of being younger or smaller.
{%—Kaniṣṭha-pada%} or {%kaniṣṭha-mūla, am,%} n.
the least or first root; that quantity of which the
square multiplied by the given multiplicator and
having the given addend added or subtrahend sub-
tracted is capable of affording an exact square root.
<LEND>

<L>13559<pc>0200-a<k1>kanizWaka<k2>kanizWaka
{%Kaniṣṭhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ Ved. the smallest;
({%ā%}), f. the little finger; ({%am%}), n. a kind of grass.
<LEND>

<L>13560<pc>0200-a<k1>kanI<k2>kanI
{%Kanī,%}¦ f. a girl, a maiden.
<LEND>

<L>13561<pc>0200-a<k1>kanIna<k2>kanIna
{%Kanīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. young; ({%ī%}), f. the pupil
of the eye; the little finger.
<LEND>

<L>13562<pc>0200-a<k1>kanInaka<k2>kanInaka
{%Kanīnaka, as,%}¦ m. a boy, a youth; the pupil of
the eye; the caruncula lacrymalis; ({%ā%}), f. a maiden,
a young girl, a virgin; the pupil of the eye; ({%ikā%}),
f. the pupil of the eye; the little finger.
<LEND>

<L>13563<pc>0200-a<k1>kanIyas<k2>kanIyas
{%Kanīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (opposed to {%bhūyas, jyāyas, %}
[Page0200-b+ 76]
{%uttama%}), smaller, less; younger, a younger brother
or sister, a younger son or daughter.
<LEND>

<L>13564<pc>0200-b<k1>kanIyasa<k2>kanIyasa
{%Kanīyasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ smaller, less; younger;
({%am%}), n. copper (‘of less value’); [cf. {%kanyasa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13565<pc>0200-b<k1>kanyakA<k2>kanyakA
{%Kanyakā, kanyā.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>13566<pc>0200-b<k1>kanaka<k2>kanaka
{#kanaka#}¦ {%kanaka, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%kan%}),
gold; N. of several plants, Datura Metel and Fastuosa,
thorn apple; Mesua Ferrea; Michelia Champaka;
Butea Frondosa; Bauhinia Variegata; a black sort
of Agallochum or sandal-wood; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
prince, a son of Durdama; N. of a son of a goddess;
N. of a minister of Narendrāditya; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people; ({%ā%}), f. one of the seven tongues of fire.
{%—Kanaka-kuṇḍalā,%} f. the mother of Harikeśa.
{%—Kanaka-kṣara, as,%} m. borax. {%—Kanaka-giri,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of the founder of a sect. {%—Kanaka-ṭaṅka,%}
{%as,%} m. a golden hatchet. {%—Kanaka-tālābha (˚la-%}
{%ābhā), as, ā, am,%} bright as a golden palm tree.
{%—Kanaka-daṇḍaka, as,%} m. the royal parasol
(golden-sticked). {%—Kanaka-datta, as,%} m. the son
of Nidhipati. {%—Kanaka-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a son
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Kanaka-parāga, as,%} m. gold-
dust. {%—Kanaka-pala, as,%} m. a Pala, a weight of
gold and silver equal to sixteen Māṣakas, or about
280 grains troy. {%—Kanaka-piṅgala,%} N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Kanaka-pura, am, ī,%} n. f., N. of a town. {%—Ka-%}
{%naka-prabhā,%} f., N. of a plant; N. of a metre con-
sisting of four lines of thirteen syllables each; N. of
a princess; ({%as, ā, am%}), bright as gold. {%—Kanaka-%}
{%prasavā,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Kanaka-bhaṅga, as,%}
m. a piece of gold. {%—Kanaka-maya, as, ī, am,%}
golden, consisting or made of gold. {%—Kanaka-%}
{%muni, is,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Kanaka-rambhā,%}
f., N. of a plant. {%—Kanaka-rasa, as,%} m. fluid
gold; a yellow orpiment. {%—Kanaka-rekhā,%} f., N. of
a daughter of Kanaka-prabhā. {%—Kanakalodbhava,%}
{%as,%} m. (fr. {%kanaka-kala-udbhava ?%}), resin of the
plant Shorea Robusta. {%—Kanaka-vatī,%} f., N. of the
residence of king Kanaka-varṇa; [cf. {%kanakā-vatī.%}]
{%—Kanaka-varṇa, as,%} m., N. of a king supposed to
be a former manifestation of Śākya-muni. {%—Kanaka-%}
{%vāhinī,%} f., N. of a river (‘gold stream’). {%—Kanaka-%}
{%vigraha, as,%} m., N. of a king of Viśālapurī. {%—Ka-%}
{%naka-śakti, is,%} m. an epithet of Kārttikeya; [cf.
{%śakti-dhara.%}] {%—Kanaka-sūtra, am,%} n. a gold
cord. {%—Kanaka-stambha-rucira, as, ā, am,%} shin-
ing with columns of gold. {%—Kanaka-sthalī,%} f. a gold
mine, golden soil. {%—Kanakāṅgada (˚ka-an˚), as,%}
m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Kanakācala%}
{%(˚ka-ac˚), as,%} m. the golden mountain; an epithet
of the mountain Sumeru. {%—Kanakādri-khaṇḍa%}
{%(˚ka-ad˚), am,%} n. a section of the Skanda-purāṇa.
{%—Kanakādhyakṣa (˚ka-adh˚), as,%} m. the trea-
surer or superintendent of the gold. {%—Kanakāyu%}
{%(˚ka-āyu), us,%} m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; (a
various reading has {%karakāyu.%}) {%—Kanakālukā (˚ka-%}
{%āl˚),%} f. a golden jar or vase. {%—Kanakā-vatī,%} f. a
proper name. {%—Kanakāvatī-mādhava, as,%} m. title
of a work. {%—Kanakāhva (˚ka-āh˚), am,%} n. the
blossom of the tree Mesua Ferrea. {%—Kanakāhvaya,%}
{%as,%} m. the thorn apple; Mesua Ferrea; N. of a
Buddha. {%—Kanakeśvara-tīrtha (˚ka-īś˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>13567<pc>0200-b<k1>kanakAraka<k2>kanakAraka
{%Kanakāraka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Bauhinia Variegata
Lin.; [cf. {%kāñcanāra%} and {%kāntāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13568<pc>0200-b<k1>kanaknaka<k2>kanaknaka
{#kanaknaka#}¦ {%kanaknaka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. epithet
of a kind of poison.
<LEND>

<L>13569<pc>0200-b<k1>kanaKala<k2>kanaKala
{#kanaKala#}¦ {%kanakhala, am,%} n. and ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a Tīrtha and the mountains surrounding it.
<LEND>

<L>13570<pc>0200-b<k1>kanawI<k2>kanawI
{#kanawI#}¦ {%kanaṭī,%} f. red arsenic, {%= kunaṭī.%}
<LEND>

<L>13571<pc>0200-b<k1>kanadeva<k2>kanadeva
{#kanadeva#}¦ {%kanadeva, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
patriarch.
<LEND>

<L>13572<pc>0200-b<k1>kanana<k2>kanana
{#kanana#}¦ {%kanana, as, ā, am,%} one-eyed; [cf. {%kāṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13573<pc>0200-b<k1>kanapa<k2>kanapa
{#kanapa#}¦ {%kanapa,%} a various reading for {%ka-%}
{%ṇapa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13574<pc>0200-b<k1>kanavaka<k2>kanavaka
{#kanavaka#}¦ {%kanavaka, as,%} m., N. of a son of Śūra.
<LEND>
[Page0200-c+ 72]

<L>13575<pc>0200-c<k1>kanAWa<k2>kanAWa
{#kanAWa#}¦ {%kanāṭha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>13576<pc>0200-c<k1>kanikrada<k2>kanikrada
{#kanikrada#}¦ {%kanikrada, as, ā, am%} (an Intens.
form of rt. {%krand%}), Ved. neighing.
<LEND>

<L>13577<pc>0200-c<k1>kanizka<k2>kanizka
{#kanizka#}¦ {%kaniṣka, as,%} m., N. of an Indo-
scythic king, celebrated in the history of Buddhism.
{%—Kaniṣka-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town founded
by Kaniṣka.
<LEND>

<L>13578<pc>0200-c<k1>kanizWa<k2>kanizWa
{#kanizWa, kanI, kanIna, kanIyas.#}¦ See under
{%kana.%}
<LEND>

<L>13579<pc>0200-c<k1>kanIci<k2>kanIci
{#kanIci#}¦ {%kanīci, is,%} f. a cart; a creeping plant
with blossoms; the plant Abrus Precatorius.
<LEND>

<L>13580<pc>0200-c<k1>kanUja<k2>kanUja
{#kanUja#}¦ {%kanūja,%} a corruption of {%kanyā-kubja,%}
q. v. {%—Kanūja-deśa, as,%} m. the country round
Kanyā-kubja.
<LEND>

<L>13581<pc>0200-c<k1>kanerA<k2>kanerA
{#kanerA#}¦ {%kanerā,%} f. a female elephant; a
harlot. See {%kaṇerā.%}
<LEND>

<L>13582<pc>0200-c<k1>kanta<k2>kanta
{#kanta#}¦ {%kanta, as, ā, am,%} or {%kanti, is, is, i%} (fr.
1. {%kam%}), happy.
<LEND>

<L>13583<pc>0200-c<k1>kantu<k2>kantu
{%Kantu, us, us, u,%}¦ happy; ({%us%}), m. the heart as
the seat or faculty of perception and feeling; Kāma-
deva, the deity of love; a granary.
<LEND>

<L>13584<pc>0200-c<k1>kanTaka<k2>kanTaka
{#kanTaka#}¦ {%kanthaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>13585<pc>0200-c<k1>kanTarI<k2>kanTarI
{#kanTarI#}¦ {%kantharī,%} f., N. of a tree. See {%kan-%}
{%thā, kanthārī, krūragandhā, tīkṣṇakaṇṭakā,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>13586<pc>0200-c<k1>kanTA<k2>kanTA
{#kanTA#}¦ {%kanthā,%} f. a rag, a patched garment,
especially one worn by certain ascetics; a wall; a
town (in composition the word is neuter if the com-
pound imply a town of the Uśīnāras); a kind of
tree; N. of a country. {%—Kanthā-dhāraṇa, am,%} n.
wearing a patched garment as practised by certain
Yogis. {%—Kanthā-dhārin, ī, iṇī,%} m. f. a Yogi, a
religious mendicant. {%—Kantheśvara-tīrtha (˚thā-%}
{%īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>13587<pc>0200-c<k1>kanTArI<k2>kanTArI
{#kanTArI#}¦ {%kanthārī,%} f., N. of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>13588<pc>0200-c<k1>kand<k2>kand
{#kand#}¦ {%kand,%} cl. 1. P. {%kandati, -ditum,%} to
cry, utter lamentations; A. {%kandate,%} to be
confounded, confound; [cf. 1. {%kad, krand, kland.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13589<pc>0200-c<k1>kanda<k2>kanda
{#kanda#}¦ {%kanda, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kan%}), a bulbous or tuberous root; a bulb; the bulb-
ous root of Amorphophallus Campanulatus; garlic;
a lump, swelling, knot; an affection of the feminine
organ, considered as a fleshy excrescence, but ap-
parently prolapsus uteri; N. of a metre of four lines
of thirteen syllables each; a cloud (in this sense fr.
{%kam,%} water, and {%da%}). {%—Kanda-guḍūcī,%} f., N. of a
plant, {%= kanda-rohiṇī,%} &c. {%—Kanda-ja, as, ā, am,%}
growing from bulbs. {%—Kanda-da, as, ā, am,%} giving
or forming bulbs. {%—Kanda-phalā,%} f., N. of a plant.
{%—Kanda-bahulā,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Kanda-mūla,%}
{%am,%} n. a radish. {%—Kanda-latā,%} f., N. of a plant
with a bulbous root. {%—Kanda-vat, ān,%} m. a species
of the Soma plant. {%—Kanda-vardhana, as,%} m.
the esculent root of Amorphophallus Campanulatus.
{%—Kanda-vallī,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Kanda-śūraṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. the plant Amorphophallus Campanulatus.
{%—Kanda-sañjña, am,%} n. prolapsus uteri; [cf.
{%kanda.%}] {%—Kanda-sambhava, as, ā, am,%} growing
from bulbs. {%—Kanda-sāra, am,%} n. the garden or
grove of Indra. {%—Kandāḍhya, (˚da-āḍh˚), as,%} m.
a kind of tuberous plant. {%—Kandāmṛtā (˚da-am˚),%}
f., N. of a plant, {%= kanda-guḍūcī%}. {%—Kandārha%}
{%(˚da-ar˚), as,%} m. the plant Amorphophallus Cam-
panulatus. {%—Kandodbhavā (˚da-ud˚),%} f., N. of a
plant, {%= kanda-guḍūcī.%}
<LEND>

<L>13590<pc>0200-c<k1>kandAlu<k2>kandAlu
{%Kandālu, us,%}¦ m., N. of several plants; an escu-
lent root; a sort of Arum &c.
<LEND>

<L>13591<pc>0200-c<k1>kandin<k2>kandin
{%Kandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a bulbous root; ({%ī%}), m.
the plant Amorphophallus Campanulatus.
<LEND>

<L>13592<pc>0200-c<k1>kandaka<k2>kandaka
{#kandaka#}¦ {%kandaka, as,%} m. a palanquin, {%=%}
{%kadaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>13593<pc>0200-c<k1>kandawa<k2>kandawa
{#kandawa#}¦ {%kandaṭa, am,%} n. the white esculent
water-lily; [cf. {%kandoṭa%} and {%kandota.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0201-a+ 75]

<L>13594<pc>0201-a<k1>kandara<k2>kandara
{#kandara#}¦ {%kandara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} m. f. n.
(perhaps fr. {%kam-dara%}), an artificial or natural cave;
a glen, a defile, a valley; ({%as%}), m. a hook for driving
an elephant; ({%am%}), n. dry ginger (in this sense fr.
{%kanda,%} ‘consisting of bulbs’?). {%—Kandara-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} containing caves or valleys (as a moun-
tain). {%—Kandarākāra (˚ra-āk˚), as,%} m. a moun-
tain. {%—Kandarāntara (˚ra-an˚), am,%} n. the interior
of a cave. {%—Kandarāla (˚ra-āla = ālaya), as,%} m.,
N. of several plants, Hibiscus Populneoides; Ficus
Infectoria. {%—Kandarālaka, as,%} m. the tree Ficus
Infectoria. {%—Kandarodbhavā (˚ra-ud˚),%} f., N. of a
plant.
<LEND>

<L>13595<pc>0201-a<k1>kandarpa<k2>kandarpa
{#kandarpa#}¦ {%kandarpa, as,%} m. (fr. {%kam-darpa,%}
‘how haughty;’ or, according to others, ‘the in-
flamer even of the chief of gods;’ see 3. {%ka%}), N.
of the deity Kāma, or the god of love, the Cupid of
the Hindū mythology; love; ({%ā%}), f. one of the pre-
siding female deities of the Jainas executing the
orders of the fifteenth Arhat. {%—Kandarpa-kūpa,%}
{%as,%} m. pudendum muliebre, (‘a well of love.’)
{%—Kandarpa-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Kan-%}
{%darpa-keli, is,%} m. title of a work. {%—Kandarpa-%}
{%jīva, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= kāma-vṛddhi%}. {%—Kan-%}
{%darpa-jvara, as,%} m. passion, desire. {%—Kandarpa-%}
{%dahana, am,%} n. a section of the Śiva-purāṇa.
{%—Kandarpa-musala, as,%} m. membrum virile.
{%—Kandarpa-śṛṅkhala, as,%} m. a kind of coitus.
{%—Kandarpa-siddhānta, as,%} m., N. of a scholiast
on Supadma.
<LEND>

<L>13596<pc>0201-a<k1>kandala<k2>kandala
{#kandala#}¦ {%kandala, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. the skull
({%= kapāla%}); the cheek, or the cheek and temple;
a new shoot or sprig; a low soft tone; a portent, a
natural phenomenon supposed to forbode evil; re-
proach, censure; ({%as%}), m. gold; war, battle; ({%ī%}), f.
a species of deer of which the hide is used; a plant,
the plantain tree or banana tree (Musa Sapientum;
see {%kadalī%}); lotus seed; a flag, a banner; ({%am%}), n.
the flower of Musa Sapientum; perhaps a mushroom.
{%—Kandalī-kāra, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Kan-%}
{%dalī-kusuma, am,%} n. a mushroom.
<LEND>

<L>13597<pc>0201-a<k1>kandalita<k2>kandalita
{%Kandalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered with mushrooms (?) ;
budded, blown; put forth, emitted.
<LEND>

<L>13598<pc>0201-a<k1>kandalin<k2>kandalin
{%Kandalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ covered with mushrooms;
({%ī%}), m. a kind of antelope (?) .
<LEND>

<L>13599<pc>0201-a<k1>kandirI<k2>kandirI
{#kandirI#}¦ {%kandirī,%} f. the plant Mimosa
Pudica.
<LEND>

<L>13600<pc>0201-a<k1>kandu<k2>kandu
{#kandu#}¦ {%kandu, us,%} m. f. (said to be fr. rt.
{%skand%}), a boiler, a saucepan, or other cooking
utensil of iron; an oven, or vessel serving for one;
({%us%}), m., N. of a Muni. {%—Kandu-pakva, as, ā, am,%}
parched, roasted (as grain), fried &c. in a pan, dressed
without water.
<LEND>

<L>13601<pc>0201-a<k1>kanduka<k2>kanduka
{#kanduka#}¦ {%kanduka, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. the preceding), a ball of wood or pith for playing
with; ({%am%}), n. a pillow; a germ (?) . {%—Kanduka-%}
{%prastha, as,%} m., N. of a town. {%—Kanduka-līlā,%} f.
any game with a ball, fives. {%—Kandukeśa (˚ka-īśa),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kandukeśvara-liṅga (˚ka-%}
{%īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>13602<pc>0201-a<k1>kandowa<k2>kandowa
{#kandowa#}¦ {%kandoṭa, as,%} m. the white lotus,
Nymphæa Esculenta; ({%am%}), n. the blue lotus.
<LEND>

<L>13603<pc>0201-a<k1>kandota<k2>kandota
{%Kandota, as,%}¦ m. the white lotus, Nymphæa Escu-
lenta. See {%kandaṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>13604<pc>0201-a<k1>kanDa<k2>kanDa
{#kanDa#}¦ {%kan-dha, as,%} m. (fr. {%kam,%} water, and
{%dha%} fr. rt. {%dhā%}), a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>13605<pc>0201-a<k1>kanDara<k2>kanDara
{%Kan-dhara, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. (fr. {%kam,%} head, and
{%dhara%} fr. rt. {%dhṛ%}), the neck; ({%as%}), m. the plant
Amaranthus Oleraceus; ({%kam%} = water), a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>13606<pc>0201-a<k1>kanDi<k2>kanDi
{%Kan-dhi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kam,%} water, and {%dhi%} fr. rt.
{%dhā%}), the ocean; ({%is%}), f. ({%kam%} = head), the neck.
<LEND>

<L>13607<pc>0201-a<k1>kanna<k2>kanna
{#kanna#}¦ {%kanna, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi; ({%am%}), n.
fainting, falling in a fit or state of insensibility; sin;
(a various reading has {%kalla.%})
<LEND>

<L>13608<pc>0201-a<k1>kanyakA<k2>kanyakA
{#kanyakA#}¦ {%kanyakā,%} f. (see {%kana%}), a girl, a
[Page0201-b+ 81]
maiden; a young virgin; a daughter; the constellation
Virgo in the zodiac; the plant Aloe Perfoliata. {%—Kan-%}
{%yakā-guṇa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Kanyakā-%}
{%chala, am,%} n. beguiling a maiden, seduction, betrayal.
{%—Kanyakā-jana, as,%} m. a maiden. {%—Kanyakā-%}
{%jāta, as,%} m. the son of an unmarried woman.
{%—Kanyakā-pati, is,%} m. a daughter's husband.
<LEND>

<L>13609<pc>0201-b<k1>kanyanA<k2>kanyanA
{%Kanyanā%}¦ or {%kanyalā,%} f., Ved. a girl.
<LEND>

<L>13610<pc>0201-b<k1>kanyA<k2>kanyA
{%Kanyā,%}¦ f. (the gen. pl. in Ṛg-veda is {%kanīnām%}),
a girl, a virgin, a daughter; ({%kanyāṃ dā%} or {%pra-dā%} or
{%pra-yam%} or {%upa-pad%} in Caus., to give one's daughter
in marriage; {%kanyām prati-grah%} or {%hṛ%} or {%vah,%} to
receive a girl in marriage, to marry); the sign of the
zodiac Virgo; an epithet of Durgā; N. of a metre
of four lines, each of them containing four long
syllables; an annual plant; N. of several plants, the
plant Aloe Perfoliata, a tuberous plant growing in
Kāśmīra; large cardamoms; [cf. Zend <nsi>kainê;</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>cain,</nsi> ‘chaste, undefiled;’ <nsi>caile,</nsi> ‘a country-woman,
a harlot;’ <nsi>caileamhuil,</nsi> ‘girlish, effeminate.’] {%—Kan-%}
{%yā-kāla, as,%} m. the time of virginity. {%—Kanyā-%}
{%kubja%} or {%kanya-kubja, am,%} n., N. of an ancient city
of great note, in the north of Hindūstan, situated on the
{%Kālī nadī,%} a branch of the Ganges, in the modern
district of Furruckabad. The popular spelling of the
name presents, perhaps, greater variations than that of
any place in India (e. g. <nsi>Kunnoj, Kunnouj, Kinoge,</nsi>
<nsi>Kinnoge, Kinnauj, Kanoj, Kannauj, Kunowj,</nsi>
<nsi>Canowj, Canoje, Canauj,</nsi> &c.). In antiquity this
city ranks next to Ayodhyā in Oude. It is known
to classical geography as Canogyza; but the name
applies also to its dependencies and the surrounding
district; the etymology ({%kanyā,%} a girl, and {%kubja,%}
round-shouldered or crooked) refers to a legend relat-
ing to the hundred daughters of Kuśanābha, the king
of this city, who were all rendered crooked by Vāyu
for non-compliance with his licentious desires. The
ruins of the ancient city are said to occupy a site
larger than that of London. {%—Kanyākubja-deśa,%}
{%as,%} m. the country round Kanyākubja. {%—Kanyā-%}
{%kumārī%} or {%kanya-kumāri, is,%} f. the youthful god-
dess, an epithet of Durgā. {%—Kanyā-kūpa, as,%} m.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kanyā-gata, as, ā, am,%} inhe-
rent in or pertaining to a virgin; the position of
a planet in the sign Virgo. {%—Kanyā-garbha,%}
{%as,%} m. the offspring of an unmarried woman.
{%—Kanyā-grahaṇa, am,%} n. taking a girl in mar-
riage. {%—Kanyāṭa (˚yā-āṭa), as, ā, am,%} follow-
ing after young girls; ({%as%}), m. the middle of a
house, the inner or private apartments for women.
{%—Kanyā-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kanyā-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. virginity. {%—Kanyā-dātṛ, tā,%} m. a father
who gives a girl in marriage. {%—Kanyādāna%} (either
{%˚yā-d˚%} or {%˚yā-ād˚%}), {%am,%} n. giving a girl in mar-
riage; receiving a girl in marriage {%—Kanyā-dū-%}
{%ṣaka, as,%} m. the violator or defiler of a virgin;
the calumniator of a girl. {%—Kanyā-dūṣaṇa, am,%}
n. defiling a virgin, calumniating a girl. {%—Kanyā-%}
{%doṣa, as,%} m. a blemish in a virgin, disease, bad
repute, &c. {%—Kanyā-dhana, am,%} n. a portion,
dowry. {%—Kanyā-pati, is,%} m. a daughter's husband.
{%—Kanyā-pāla, as,%} m. a dealer in slave girls; the
father of a maiden; [cf. {%kalyā-pāla.%}] {%—Kanyā-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. the offspring of an unmarried daughter.
{%—Kanyā-pura, am,%} n. the women's apartments.
{%—Kanyā-pradāna, am,%} n. giving a daughter in
marriage. {%—Kanyā-bhartṛ%} or {%kanyā-hartṛ (?) , tā,%}
m. an epithet of Kārttikeya. {%—Kanyā-bhāva, as,%} m.
virginity. {%—Kanyā-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting in a
girl (as property &c.), being a girl. {%—Kanyā-ratna,%}
{%am,%} n. a jewel of a damsel, a lovely girl. {%—Kanyā-%}
{%rāma, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Kanyā-rāśi, is,%}
m. the sign Virgo. {%—Kanyā-vedin, ī,%} m. a son-in-law.
{%—Kanyā-śulka, am,%} n. the purchase-money of a
maiden, money given to the bride's father. {%—Kanyā-%}
{%śrama (˚yā-āś˚), as,%} m., N. of a hermitage.
{%—Kanyā-saṃvedya, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Kanyā-samudbhava, as,%} m. the son of an un-
married girl. {%—Kanyā-sampradāna, am,%} n. the
giving away a maiden in marriage. {%—Kanyā-sva-%}
{%yaṃvara, as,%} m. the choice of a husband by a
[Page0201-c+ 75]
maiden. {%—Kanyā-haraṇa, am,%} n. carrying off a
girl, rape, ravishment. {%—Kanyā-hrada, as,%} m., N.
of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>13611<pc>0201-c<k1>kanyAkA<k2>kanyAkA
{%Kanyākā%}¦ or {%kanyikā,%} f. a young girl, a virgin.
<LEND>

<L>13612<pc>0201-c<k1>kanyasa<k2>kanyasa
{#kanyasa#}¦ {%kanyasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kanīyas%}),
younger; ({%ā%}), f. the little finger.
<LEND>

<L>13613<pc>0201-c<k1>kanyuza<k2>kanyuza
{#kanyuza#}¦ {%kanyuṣa, am,%} n. the hand below
the wrist.
<LEND>

<L>13614<pc>0201-c<k1>kap<k2>kap
{#kap#}¦ {%kap,%} a various reading for {%krap,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13615<pc>0201-c<k1>kapa<k2>kapa
{#kapa#}¦ {%kapa, ās,%} m. pl. a class of demons.
<LEND>

<L>13616<pc>0201-c<k1>kapawa<k2>kapawa
{#kapawa#}¦ {%kapaṭa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%kamp%}), fraud, deceit, cheating, circumvention;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava; ({%ī%}), f. a measure equal to
the capacity of the hollows of the two hands joined.
{%—Kapaṭa-tā,%} f. or {%kapaṭa-tva, am,%} n. deceitful-
ness. {%—Kapaṭa-tāpasa, as,%} m. one who deceitfully
pretends to be an ascetic. {%—Kapaṭa-daitya-badha,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a chapter of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa
(‘destruction of the Daitya Kapaṭa’). {%—Kapaṭa-%}
{%prabandha, as,%} m. fraud, trick, fraudulent plot or
contrivance. {%—Kapaṭa-lekhya, am,%} n. a forged docu-
ment, a false or fraudulent statement. {%—Kapaṭa-%}
{%vacana, am,%} n. deceitful talk. {%—Kapaṭa-veśa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} assuming a false dress or appearance, masked,
disguised; ({%as%}), m. disguise. {%—Kapaṭaveśin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} disguised, in masquerade. {%—Kapaṭeśvarī (˚ṭa-īś˚),%}
f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>13617<pc>0201-c<k1>kapawika<k2>kapawika
{%Kapaṭika, as, ī, am,%}¦ acting deceitfully, fraudu-
lent, dishonest, a rogue, a cheat.
<LEND>

<L>13618<pc>0201-c<k1>kapawin<k2>kapawin
{%Kapaṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fraudulent, dishonest, a cheat;
({%inī%}), f. a kind of perfume, {%= cīdā.%}
<LEND>

<L>13619<pc>0201-c<k1>kapanA<k2>kapanA
{#kapanA#}¦ {%kapanā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%kamp%}),
Ved. a worm, a caterpillar; [cf. <lang n="greek">κάμπη</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>13620<pc>0201-c<k1>kaparda<k2>kaparda
{#kaparda#}¦ {%kaparda, as,%} m. a small shell or
cowrie used as a coin and as a die in gambling,
Cypræa Moneta; braided and knotted hair, especially
that of Śiva (knotted so as to resemble the cowrie
shell).
<LEND>

<L>13621<pc>0201-c<k1>kapardaka<k2>kapardaka
{%Kapardaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= kaparda%} above; ({%ikā%}), f.
Cypræa Moneta. See {%kaparda.%}
<LEND>

<L>13622<pc>0201-c<k1>kapardin<k2>kapardin
{%Kapardin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ shaggy; wearing braided and
knotted hair like the cowrie shell; epithet of Rudra, of
Pūṣan, of the descendants of Vasiṣṭha and of Durgā;
({%ī%}), m., N. of Śiva; N. of one of the eleven Rudras.
{%—Kapardi-kārikā, ās,%} f. pl., N. of a work.
{%—Kapardi-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a scholiast.
<LEND>

<L>13623<pc>0201-c<k1>kapala<k2>kapala
{#kapala#}¦ {%kapala, am,%} n., Ved. a half, a part.
<LEND>

<L>13624<pc>0201-c<k1>kapAwa<k2>kapAwa
{#kapAwa#}¦ {%kapāṭa, as, ī, am,%} m. f. n. a door,
the leaf or panel of a door. {%—Kapāṭa-ghna, as,%} m.
one who breaks the door, a house-breaker, a thief.
{%—Kapāṭa-sandhi, is,%} m. the junction of the leaves
of a door; a mode of multiplying in which the
multiplicand is placed in a certain manner under the
multiplying quantity. {%—Kapāṭasandhika, as, ā, am,%}
term used for a kind of bandage; similarly {%ardha-%}
{%kapāṭasandhika%}. {%—Kapāṭodghāṭana (˚ṭa-ud˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a door-key.
<LEND>

<L>13625<pc>0201-c<k1>kapAla<k2>kapAla
{#kapAla#}¦ {%kapāla, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kamp%}), a cup, a jar, a dish, used especially for the
Puroḍāśa offering (often at the end of a compound,
the first member of which is a numeral, e. g. {%tri-%}
{%kapāla,%} ‘consisting of three cups’); the shell of an
egg, shell of a tortoise; the cotyla of the leg of a
man or animal, any flat bone; a kind of leprosy;
({%as, am%}), m. n. the fragment of a vessel, a pot-
sherd; a cover or lid; the skull, the cranium, the
skull-bone; either half of a water-jar; multitude,
assemblage, collection; a treaty of peace on equal
terms, {%= kapāṭa?; (as),%} m., N. of an intermediate
caste; N. of a man; ({%am, ī%}), n. f. a beggar's bowl;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κεφαλή;</lang> Lat. <nsi>caput;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>haupt;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>haubith,</nsi> Them. <nsi>haubida.</nsi>] {%—Kapāla-nālikā,%} f. a
sort of pin or spindle for winding cotton, thread, &c.
{%—Kapāla-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} having a pot in hand to
receive food (as a beggar). {%—Kapāla-bhātī,%} f. a
[Page0202-a+ 80]
particular sort of penance, consisting in alternate
suppression and emission of the breath. {%—Kapāla-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m. an epithet of Śiva or Mahā-deva (who
wears skulls). {%—Kapālamālin, ī, inī, i,%} bearing a
garland of skulls; epithet of Śiva. {%—Kapāla-mocana,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kapāla-śiras%} (?), {%ās,%} m.,
N. of a Muni; (a various reading has {%kalāpa-śiras.%})
{%—Kapāla-sandhi, is,%} m. a treaty of peace on equal
terms {%(= kapāṭa-sandhi?)%}. {%—Kapāla-sphoṭa, as,%}
m., N. of a Rakṣas (‘splitting the skull’).
<LEND>

<L>13626<pc>0202-a<k1>kapAlikA<k2>kapAlikA
{%Kapālikā,%}¦ f. a potsherd; the tartar of the teeth;
[cf. {%kāpālika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13627<pc>0202-a<k1>kapAlin<k2>kapAlin
{%Kapālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ furnished with or bearing
skulls; ({%ī, inī%}), m. f. a man or woman of low caste,
son or daughter of a Brāhman mother and a fisherman
father; the follower of a certain Śaiva sect, [cf.
{%kāpālika%}]; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Śiva (as wearing
skulls); N. of one of the eleven Rudras; N. of a
servant of Śiva; ({%inī%}), f. the goddess Durgā as the
wife of Śiva-kapālin.
<LEND>

<L>13628<pc>0202-a<k1>kapi<k2>kapi
{#kapi#}¦ {%kapi, is, is, i%} (said to be fr. rt. {%kamp%}),
brown; ({%is%}), m. an ape or monkey; an elephant;
the plant Emblica Officinalis or a species of Karañja;
incense, storax or impure benzoin, [cf. {%kapi-ja,%}
{%kapi-taila,%} &c.]; the sun; an epithet of Viṣṇu or
Kṛṣṇa; N. of a Muni, the author of a Vedic verse,
son of Uru-kṣaya; ({%is%} or {%ī%}), f. a female ape or
monkey; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κῆπος, κεῖπος;</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>affo;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>apa;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>ape.</nsi>] {%—Kapi-kacchu, us%} or
{%ū, ūs,%} f. the plant Mucuna Pruritus. {%—Kapikacchu-%}
{%phalopamā (˚la-up˚),%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Kapi-%}
{%kacchurā,%} f. the plant Mucuna Pruritus. {%—Kapi-%}
{%kanduka, am,%} n. the skull, the cranium (‘playing-
ball of monkeys’). {%—Kapi-ketana, as,%} m. an epithet
of Arjuna, the third son of Pāṇḍu. {%—Kapi-keśa, as,%}
m. monkey's hair (?) . {%—Kapi-koli, is,%} m., N. of a
plant. {%—Kapi-cūḍā,%} f. or {%kapi-cūta, as,%} m. the tree
Spondias Magnifera. {%—Kapi-ja, as, ā, am,%} born of
a monkey; ({%as%}), m. incense, benzoin. {%—Kapi-taila,%}
{%am,%} n. benzoin or storax. {%—Kapi-tva, am,%} n. the
state of an ape, apishness. {%—Kapi-dhvaja, as,%} m. an
epithet of Arjuna (having a monkey as his symbol,
his ensign or arms). {%—Kapi-nāman, ā,%} m. incense.
{%—Kapi-pippalī,%} f., N. of two different kinds of
plants. {%—Kapi-prabhā,%} f. the plant Mucuna Pruritus.
{%—Kapi-prabhu, us,%} m. an epithet of Rāma, general
of the monkey-force, with which he invaded Laṅkā.
{%—Kapi-priya, as,%} m. the tree Spondias Magnifera
and the tree Feronia Elephantum. {%—Kapi-bhakṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. the food of apes; N. of a certain eatable
substance. {%—Kapi-ratha, as,%} m. an epithet of Rāma;
[cf. {%kapi-prabhu.%}] {%—Kapi-roma-phalā,%} f. the plant
Mucuna Pruritus. {%—Kapi-loma-phalā,%} f. the plant
Mucuna Pruritus. {%—Kapi-lomā,%} f. a kind of perfume.
{%—Kapi-loha, am,%} n. brass (monkey-coloured metal).
{%—Kapillikā,%} f. (contracted from {%kapi-vallikā?%}),
a plant which bears a seed resembling pepper, Scin-
dapsus Officinalis, {%= gaja-pippalī%}. {%—Kapi-vaktra,%}
{%as,%} m. a N. of Nārada, a saint and philosopher and
friend of Kṛṣṇa, having a face like a monkey.
{%—Kapi-vana, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kapi-vallī,%}
f. the plant Scindapsus Officinalis. {%—Kapi-śāka, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a cabbage. {%—Kapi-śīrṣa, am,%} n. the
upper part or coping of a wall. {%—Kapi-śīrṣaka,%}
{%am,%} n. vermilion, the red sulphuret of mercury.
{%—Kapi-śīrṣṇī,%} f. a kind of musical instrument.
{%—Kapi-ṣṭhala (˚pi-stha˚), as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of this Ṛṣi. {%—Kapi-skan-%}
{%dha, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Kapi-sthala, am,%} n.
a place frequented by monkeys. {%—Kapi-svara, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Kapī-kacchu, us,%} f. the plant
Mucuna Pruritus; see {%kapi-kacchu%}. {%—Kapījya, as,%}
m. ({%kapi-ijyā?%}), the tree Mimusops Kauki. {%—Ka-%}
{%pīndra (˚pi-in˚), as,%} m. the chief of the monkeys;
an epithet of Viṣṇu; of Jāmbavat, the father-in-law
of Kṛṣṇa; of Hanumat; of Sugrīva, &c. {%—Kapī-%}
{%vat, ān,%} m., N. of a sage; one of the seven sages
of the fourth Manvantara; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a river.
{%—Kapīṣṭa (˚pi-iṣ˚), as,%} m. the tree Feronia
Elephantum. {%—Kapy-ākhya, as,%} m. incense.
<LEND>
[Page0202-b+ 79]

<L>13629<pc>0202-b<k1>kapikA<k2>kapikA
{%Kapikā,%}¦ f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>13630<pc>0202-b<k1>kapitTa<k2>kapitTa
{%Kapittha, as,%}¦ m. ({%ttha = stha%} fr. rt. {%sthā,%} ‘on
which monkeys dwell;’ cf. {%aśvattha%}), the elephant
or wood apple tree, Feronia Elephantum; a particular
position of the hands and fingers; ({%am%}), n. the fruit
of Feronia Elephantum. {%—Kapittha-tvac, k,%} n. the
bark of the tree Feronia Elephantum. {%—Kapittha-%}
{%parṇī%} and {%kapitthānī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= citra-%}
{%pattrikā,%} &c. {%—Kapitthāsya (˚tha-āsya), as,%} m. a
kind of monkey (having a roundish face, in shape
like the wood apple).
<LEND>

<L>13631<pc>0202-b<k1>kapitTaka<k2>kapitTaka
{%Kapitthaka,%}¦ N. of a place in Avanti.
<LEND>

<L>13632<pc>0202-b<k1>kapitTinI<k2>kapitTinI
{%Kapitthinī,%}¦ f. a region abounding in Kapitthas.
<LEND>

<L>13633<pc>0202-b<k1>kapiraka<k2>kapiraka
{%Kapiraka = kapilaka,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13634<pc>0202-b<k1>kapila<k2>kapila
{%Kapila, as, ā, am,%}¦ ‘monkey-coloured,’ brown,
tawny, reddish; ({%as%}), m. the brown or tawny colour;
a (brown) dog; incense; N. of an ancient sage,
identified by some with Viṣṇu and considered as the
founder of the Sāṅkhya system of philosophy; a son
of Vitatha; or a son of Vasu-deva by Narācī; or a
son of Kardama by Devahūti; a form of fire; an epi-
thet of the sun, considered as king of the Nāgas;
N. of a Dānava; N. of a mountain; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a brown cow, a fabulous cow cele-
brated in the Purāṇas; N. of two plants, a kind of
Śiṃśapā or Śiṃśapā itself; the plant Aloe Perfoliata;
a sort of perfume; a kind of brass; the common
leech; N. of a daughter of Dakṣa; N. of the female
elephant of the south-east, the male being called
Puṇḍarīka; N. of a river. {%—Kapila-deva, as,%} m.,
N. of the author of a Smṛti. {%—Kapila-dyuti, is,%}
m. a N. of Sūrya or the sun. {%—Kapila-drākṣā,%} f.
a vine with brown or tawny coloured grapes. {%—Ka-%}
{%pila-druma, as,%} m., N. of a perfume or sweet scented
wood {%(kākṣī)%}. {%—Kapila-dhārā,%} f. an epithet of
the Gaṅgā; N. of a Tīrtha; a holy place, a place of
pilgrimage. {%—Kapila-phalā,%} f. a vine with brown
grapes. {%—Kapila-bhadrā,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Ka-%}
{%pila-mata, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Kapila-rudra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Kapila-vastu, u,%} n., N. of
the town in which Śākya-muni or Buddha was born.
{%—Kapila-śiṃśapā,%} f. a variety of Śiṃśapā with
reddish flowers. {%—Kapila-saṃhitā,%} f. title of an
Upa-purāṇa, a dialogue between Kapila and Satyajit.
{%—Kapilākṣī (˚la-ak˚),%} f. a kind of deer (‘with
brown eyes’); a variety of Śiṃśapā with reddish
flowers. {%—Kapilāñjana (˚la-añ˚), as,%} m. an epithet
of Śiva; [cf. {%kapiśāñjana.%}] {%—Kapilā-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha, (any one bathing there obtains
1000 brown cows.) {%—Kapilāvaṭa (˚la-av˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kapilāśva (˚la-aś˚), as,%} m. an
epithet of the god of Indra; N. of a man, a son of
Dhundhumāra. {%—Kapilā-hrada, as,%} m., N. of a
Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>13635<pc>0202-b<k1>kapilaka<k2>kapilaka
{%Kapilaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ reddish; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of
a woman.
<LEND>

<L>13636<pc>0202-b<k1>kapilIkf<k2>kapilIkf
{%Kapilī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to colour brown or reddish.
<LEND>

<L>13637<pc>0202-b<k1>kapiSa<k2>kapiSa
{%Kapiśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ ‘ape-coloured,’ brown, reddish-
brown; ({%as%}), m. brown or reddish colour, a com-
pound of black and yellow; incense, storax or coarse
benzoin; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a spirit, a sort of rum; ({%ā%}), f.
the mother of the demons called Piśācas; N. of a
river. {%—Kapiśāñjana (˚śa-añ˚), as,%} m. an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Kapiśā-putra, as,%} m. a Piśāca, an imp
or goblin. {%—Kapiśāyana (˚śa-ay˚), as,%} m. a deity;
a sort of spirit or rum. {%—Kapiśāvadāna (˚śa-av˚),%}
N. of a Buddhist work.
<LEND>

<L>13638<pc>0202-b<k1>kapiSita<k2>kapiSita
{%Kapiśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ embrowned, made brown
or dusky red.
<LEND>

<L>13639<pc>0202-b<k1>kapiSIkA<k2>kapiSIkA
{%Kapiśīkā,%}¦ f. a kind of spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>13640<pc>0202-b<k1>kapIta<k2>kapIta
{%Kapīta, as,%}¦ m., N. of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>13641<pc>0202-b<k1>kapItana<k2>kapItana
{%Kapītana, as,%}¦ m., N. of several plants; a tree
bearing an acid fruit, Spondias Magnifera; the plant
Thespesia Populnea; Acacia Sirisa; the holy fig tree,
Ficus Religiosa; the betel nut tree, Areca Faufel;
Ægle Marmelos.
<LEND>

<L>13642<pc>0202-b<k1>kapijaNGikA<k2>kapijaNGikA
{#kapijaNGikA#}¦ {%kapijaṅghikā,%} f. a kind of ant;
also spelt {%kapijāṅghikā.%}
<LEND>
[Page0202-c+ 75]

<L>13643<pc>0202-c<k1>kapiYjala<k2>kapiYjala
{#kapiYjala#}¦ {%kapiñjala, as,%} m. (fr. {%ka + piñjala?,%}
sometimes {%kapiṅgala%}), a bird, the francoline par-
tridge; the Caṭaka; N. of a man; also of a sparrow;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Kapiñjalārma (˚la-ar˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a region (?) .
<LEND>

<L>13644<pc>0202-c<k1>kapucCala<k2>kapucCala
{#kapucCala#}¦ {%ka-pucchala, am,%} n., Ved. the fore
part of a sacrificial ladle, i. e. the part with which the
fluid is skimmed off; hair hanging down to the
ground, or a lock of hair tied on the right side of
the crown of a young Brāhman, when he is invested
with the sacerdotal thread.
<LEND>

<L>13645<pc>0202-c<k1>kapuzwikA<k2>kapuzwikA
{#kapuzwikA#}¦ {%kapuṣṭikā,%} f. a patch of hair on
each side of the head; also written {%kapuṣṇika.%}
<LEND>

<L>13646<pc>0202-c<k1>kapUya<k2>kapUya
{#kapUya#}¦ {%ka-pūya, as, ā, am%} (see 2. {%ka%}), smell-
ing badly, disgusting, disagreeable.
<LEND>

<L>13647<pc>0202-c<k1>kapfT<k2>kapfT
{#kapfT#}¦ {%ka-pṛth, t,%} or {%ka-pṛtha, as,%} m. (see
4. {%ka%}), Ved. ‘causing pleasure,’ membrum virile.
<LEND>

<L>13648<pc>0202-c<k1>kapota<k2>kapota
{#kapota#}¦ {%ka-pota, as,%} m. (2. {%ka + pota,%} q. v.),
a dove, pigeon, especially the spotty-necked pigeon;
(in the Vedas often a bird of evil omen); a bird in
general; a particular position of the hands; the gray
colour of a pigeon; the brightness of antimony (of a
gray colour). {%—Kapota-caraṇā,%} f. a kind of perfume.
{%—Kapota-pāka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a mountain-tribe;
({%ā%}), f. a princess of this tribe. {%—Kapota-pāda, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} having feet like those of a pigeon. {%—Kapota-%}
{%pālikā%} or {%kapota-pālī,%} f. a dove-cot, an aviary or
pigeon-house. {%—Kapota-rāja, as,%} m. the king of
the pigeons. {%—Kapota-retasa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Kapota-roman, ā,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Kapota-%}
{%vaṅkā,%} f., N. of a medicinal plant (used as a remedy
for the stone). {%—Kapota-varṇa, as, ī, am,%} of the
colour of a pigeon, of a bright gray, lead-gray; ({%ī%}),
f. small cardamoms. {%—Kapota-vallī,%} f., N. of a plant.
{%—Kapota-vāṇā,%} f. a kind of perfume. {%—Kapota-%}
{%vegā,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Kapota-sāra, am,%} n. the
brightness of antimony, antimony. {%—Kapota-hasta%}
or {%kapota-hastaka, as,%} m. a mode of joining the
hands in prayer, entreaty, or fear, &c. {%—Kapotāṅghri%}
{%(˚ta-aṅ˚), is,%} f. a kind of perfume. {%—Kapotāñjana%}
{%(˚ta-añj˚), am,%} n. {%= kāpotāñjana,%} the brightness of
antimony, antimony. {%—Kapotābha (˚ta-ābhā), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of the colour of a pigeon, of a bright gray;
({%as%}), m. a pale or dirty white colour. {%—Kapotāri%}
{%(˚ta-ari), is,%} m. a hawk, a falcon.
<LEND>

<L>13649<pc>0202-c<k1>kapotaka<k2>kapotaka
{%Kapotaka, as,%}¦ m. a small pigeon or dove; a mode
of joining the hands; ({%am%}), n. antimony.
<LEND>

<L>13650<pc>0202-c<k1>kapotakIyA<k2>kapotakIyA
{%Kapotakīyā,%}¦ f. a region abounding in pigeons.
<LEND>

<L>13651<pc>0202-c<k1>kapotin<k2>kapotin
{%Kapotin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having pigeons, pigeon-shaped.
<LEND>

<L>13652<pc>0202-c<k1>kapola<k2>kapola
{#kapola#}¦ {%kapola, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kamp%}), a cheek; ({%ī%}), f. the fore part of the knee,
the knee-cap or pan; [cf. {%kapāla.%}] {%—Kapola-kavi,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Kapola-kāṣa, as,%} m. any ob-
ject against which the cheeks or temples are rubbed;
the elephant's temples and cheeks. {%—Kapola-pha-%}
{%laka, as,%} m. the cheek; (perhaps) the cheek-bone.
{%—Kapola-bhitti, is,%} m. the temples and cheek,
the upper part of the face; (perhaps) the opening in
the temples of an elephant during rut. {%—Kapola-%}
{%rāga, as,%} m. colour or flush in the cheek.
<LEND>

<L>13653<pc>0202-c<k1>kapPiRa<k2>kapPiRa
{#kapPiRa#}¦ {%kapphiṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man;
(various readings have {%kapphilla, kaphina, kaphin,%}
{%kaphila, kamphilla.%})
<LEND>

<L>13654<pc>0202-c<k1>kaPa<k2>kaPa
{#kaPa#}¦ {%kapha, as,%} m. phlegm, one of the
three humors of the body (the other two are {%vāyu%}
and {%pitta%}), watery froth or foam in general. {%—Kapha-%}
{%kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} or {%kapha-da, as, ā, am,%}
producing phlegm; occasioning colds. {%—Kapha-%}
{%kūrcikā,%} f. saliva, spittle. {%—Kapha-kṣaya, as,%} m.
pulmonary consumption. {%—Kapha-ghna, as, ī, am,%}
removing phlegm, antiphlegmatic, curing colds (epi-
thet of many plants); ({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant. {%—Ka-%}
{%pha-ja, as, ā, am,%} arising from or produced by
phlegm. {%—Kapha-jvara, as,%} m. fever arising from
excess of phlegm. {%—Kapha-nāśana, as, ī, am,%}
[Page0203-a+ 75]
antiphlegmatic. {%—Kapha-prāya, as, ā, am,%} phlegm-
atic. {%—Kapha-vardhaka, as, ī, am,%} exciting or
increasing phlegm. {%—Kapha-vardhana, as, ī, am,%}
exciting or increasing phlegm; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
plant, a species of Tabernæmontana. {%—Kapha-vi-%}
{%rodhin, ī, inī, i,%} obstructing the phlegm; ({%i%}), n.
pepper. {%—Kapha-sambhava, as, ā, am,%} arising
from phlegm. {%—Kapha-hara, as, ā, am,%} or {%ka-%}
{%pha-hṛt, t, t, t,%} removing phlegm, antiphlegmatic.
{%—Kaphātmaka (˚pha-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} phlegmatic.
{%—Kaphāntaka (˚pha-an˚), as,%} m. a kind of
plant, {%= varvūra%}. {%—Kaphāri (˚pha-ari), is,%} m. dry
ginger.
<LEND>

<L>13655<pc>0203-a<k1>kaPala<k2>kaPala
{%Kaphala, as, ā, am,%}¦ phlegmatic, having phlegm.
<LEND>

<L>13656<pc>0203-a<k1>kaPin<k2>kaPin
{%Kaphin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ phlegmatic; filled with mucus;
({%ī%}), m. an elephant; a various reading for {%kapphiṇa;%}
{%(inī),%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>13657<pc>0203-a<k1>kaPelU<k2>kaPelU
{%Kaphelū, ūs, ūs, u,%}¦ phlegmatic, causing or exciting
phlegm; ({%ūs%}), m. a plant, Cordia Latifolia.
<LEND>

<L>13658<pc>0203-a<k1>kaPaRi<k2>kaPaRi
{#kaPaRi#}¦ {%kaphaṇi, is,%} m. f. the elbow.
<LEND>

<L>13659<pc>0203-a<k1>kaPoRi<k2>kaPoRi
{%Kaphoṇi, is, ī,%}¦ m. f. the elbow. {%—Kaphoṇi-%}
{%ghāta, as,%} m. a stroke with the elbow.
<LEND>

<L>13660<pc>0203-a<k1>kaPOqa<k2>kaPOqa
{#kaPOqa#}¦ {%kaphauḍa, as,%} m., Ved. the elbow (?) .
<LEND>

<L>13661<pc>0203-a<k1>kab<k2>kab
{#kab#}¦ {%kab,%} cl. 1. A. {%kabate, -bitum,%} to
colour, to tinge with various hues; to
praise; [cf. {%kav.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13662<pc>0203-a<k1>kabanDa<k2>kabanDa
{#kabanDa#}¦ {%ka-bandha%} or {%ka-vandha, as%} or {%am,%}
m. or n. a big barrel or cask, a large-bellied vessel;
(metaphorically) a cloud; the belly; the clouds
which obscure the sun at sunset and sunrise (some-
times they are personified); water; a N. of Rāhu;
a headless trunk (shaped like a barrel), especially one
retaining vitality; ({%as%}), m., N. of an Ātharvaṇa and
Gandharva; N. of a Muni; N. of the Dānava or
Rākṣasa called Danu, who was son of Śrī. (His story
is told in Rāmāy. III. 75. It is there related that
Indra punished him for his insolence in challenging the
god to combat, by striking his head and thighs with
his thunderbolt and so pressing them into his body.
He had enormously long arms and a huge mouth in
his belly. It was predicted that he would not recover
his original shape until killed in a battle with Rāma
and Lakṣmaṇa. The whole story probably repre-
sents one of Indra's battles with the clouds.) {%—Ka-%}
{%bandha-tā,%} f. or {%kabandha-tva, am,%} n. headlessness,
decapitation. {%—Kabandha-vadha, as,%} m. ‘the slay-
ing of Kabandha,’ title of a chapter of the Padma-
purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>13663<pc>0203-a<k1>kabanDin<k2>kabanDin
{%Kabandhin%}¦ or {%kavandhin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. ‘bearing
huge vessels of water or the clouds;’ (Sāy.) ‘endowed
with water,’ an epithet of the Maruts who open the
clouds and send down rain; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a Kātyā-
yana.
<LEND>

<L>13664<pc>0203-a<k1>kabitTa<k2>kabitTa
{#kabitTa#}¦ {%kabittha, as,%} m. the elephant or
wood apple tree, Feronia Elephantum. See {%kapittha.%}
<LEND>

<L>13665<pc>0203-a<k1>kabila<k2>kabila
{#kabila#}¦ {%kabila, as, ā, am,%} tawny-coloured;
({%as%}), m. tawny (the colour). See {%kapila.%}
<LEND>

<L>13666<pc>0203-a<k1>kabuli<k2>kabuli
{#kabuli#}¦ {%kabuli, is,%} f. the hinder part of an
animal.
<LEND>

<L>13667<pc>0203-a<k1>kabru<k2>kabru
{#kabru#}¦ {%kabru,%} Atharva-veda II. 3, 6.
<LEND>

<L>13668<pc>0203-a<k1>kam<k2>kam<h>1
{#kam#} 1¦. {%kam,%} ind. (Gr. <lang n="greek">κεν</lang>), well, bene (op-
posed to {%akam,%} ‘badly’), a particle placed after the
word to which it belongs with an affirmative sense
(Well, Yes), which sense, however, is generally so weak
that the Indian grammarians are perhaps right in
enumerating {%kam%} among the expletives; it is often
found attached to a dat. case, giving to the latter a
stronger meaning, and is generally placed at the end
of the Pāda (e. g. {%ajījana oskadhīr bhojanāya%}
{%kam,%} thou didst create the plants for actual food);
it is also used as an enclitic with the particles {%nu, su,%}
and {%hi,%} but is nevertheless treated in the Padapāṭha
as a separate word. Rarely {%kam%} seems to be used,
like {%kad%} and {%kim,%} as an interrogative particle; some-
times it occurs, like {%kim%} and {%kad,%} at the beginning
[Page0203-b+ 80]
of compounds, marking the strange or unusual cha-
racter of anything, [cf. {%kandarpa%}]: according to
native lexicographers {%kam%} means also head; water;
food. {%—Kam-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. lovely.
<LEND>

<L>13669<pc>0203-b<k1>kamba<k2>kamba
{%Kamba%}¦ or {%kambha, as, ā, am,%} well (?).
<LEND>

<L>13670<pc>0203-b<k1>kam<k2>kam<h>2
{#kam#} 2¦. {%kam,%} A. (not used in the con-
jugational tenses) {%cakame, kamiṣyate,%}
{%acakamata, kamitum,%} to wish, desire, long for;
to love, be in love with; to have sexual intercourse
with: Caus. A. (ep. also P.) {%kāmayate, -ti, kāma-%}
{%yāñ-cakre, kāmayiṣyate, acīkamata, kāmayi-%}
{%tum,%} to wish, desire, long for (with pot. or inf.,
e. g. {%kāmaye bhuñjīta,%} I wish he may eat; {%kāmaye%}
{%dātum,%} I wish to give); to love, have sexual inter-
course with; to be inflamed with love; (with {%bahu%}
or {%atyartham%}) to rate or value highly; to cause any
one to love, [cf. also {%kan%}]: Desid. {%cikamiṣate%} and
{%cikāmayiṣate:%} Intens. {%caṅkamyate;%} [cf. Lat.
<nsi>comis;</nsi> also <nsi>amo</nsi> with loss of the initial; <nsi>câ-rus</nsi> for
<nsi>cam-rus;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>caemh,</nsi> ‘love, desire; fine, hand-
some, pleasant;’ <nsi>caomhach,</nsi> ‘a friend, a companion;’
<nsi>caomhaim,</nsi> ‘I save, spare, protect:’ perhaps Old
Germ. <nsi>scim, scimo,</nsi> ‘splendor;’ Armen. <nsi>kamim.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>13671<pc>0203-b<k1>kamana<k2>kamana
{%Kamana, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing for, desirous; libi-
dinous, beautiful, desirable, lovely; ({%as%}), m., N. of
Kāma, the god of love; N. of Brahmā; the tree
Jonesia Aśoka. {%—Kamana-cchada (˚na-cha˚), as,%}
m. a heron (having beautiful plumage).
<LEND>

<L>13672<pc>0203-b<k1>kamanIya<k2>kamanIya
{%Kamanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be desired or wished for,
desirable; lovely, pleasing, beautiful. {%—Kamanīya-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%kamanīya-tva, am,%} n. loveliness, beauty;
desirableness.
<LEND>

<L>13673<pc>0203-b<k1>kamara<k2>kamara
{%Kamara, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirous, lustful.
<LEND>

<L>13674<pc>0203-b<k1>kamala<k2>kamala
{%Kamala, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirous, lustful; ({%as%}), m. a
species of deer; the Indian crane, Ardea Sibirica; an
epithet of Brahmā; N. of a man; ({%am%}), n. (ac-
cording to some m. or n.) the lotus, Nelumbium;
water; copper; the bladder; a medicament, a drug;
N. of a town built by Kamalā; a particular high
number; Ved., N. of a certain colour; ({%am%} or {%ī%}),
n. f., N. of a metre of four lines of three short sylla-
bles each; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Lakṣmī; an excel-
lent woman; N. of a female dancer who afterwards
became the wife of king Jayāpīḍa. {%—Kamala-kīkara%}
and {%kamala-kīṭa,%} N. of two Grāmas or villages.
{%—Kamala-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. an assemblage of lotuses.
{%—Kamala-garbhābha (˚bha-ābhā), as, ā, am,%}
bright as the lotus-cup. {%—Kamala-devī,%} f., N. of the
wife of king Lalitāditya and mother of king Kuva-
layāpīḍa. {%—Kamala-pattrākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one whose eyes are like lotuses. {%—Kamala-%}
{%bhava, as,%} m. or {%kamala-yoni, is,%} m. ‘sprung
from the lotus,’ an epithet of Brahmā. {%—Kamala-%}
{%bhidā,%} f., N. of a Grāma or village. {%—Kamala-vatī,%}
f., N. of the wife of king Lalitāditya. {%—Kamala-%}
{%vadana, am,%} n. a lotus face, i. e. a lovely face.
{%—Kamala-vardhana, as,%} m., N. of a king of
Kampana. {%—Kamala-sambhava, as,%} m. an epithet
of Brahmā. {%—Kamalākara (˚la-āk˚), as,%} m. an
assemblage of lotuses; a lake &c. where lotuses
abound; N. of several authors. {%—Kamalā-keśava,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a sanctuary built by Kamalavatī.
{%—Kamalākṣa (˚la-ak˚),%} N. of a place. {%—Kamalā-%}
{%nandana, as,%} m. son of Kamalā, an epithet of
Miśra-dinakara. {%—Kamalā-pati, is,%} m., N. of a
copyist. {%—Kamalāyatākṣa (˚la-āyata-ak˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having large lotus eyes. {%—Kamalāyudha%}
{%(˚la-āy˚), as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Kamalālayā%}
{%(˚la-āl˚),%} f. an epithet of Lakṣmī. {%—Kamalāsana%}
or {%kamalāsana-stha (˚la-ās˚), as,%} m. an epithet of
Brahmā. {%—Kamalā-haṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a market-
place founded by Kamalavatī. {%—1. kamalāhāsa (˚la-%}
{%āh˚), as,%} m. the shutting or opening of a lotus. {%—2.%}
{%kamalāhāsa,%} nom. (fr. the last) P. {%-hāsati, -situm,%}
to smile like a lotus. {%—Kamalekṣaṇa (˚la-īk˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} lotus-eyed. {%—Kamalottara (˚la-ut˚),%}
{%am,%} n. safflower, Carthamus Tinctorius.
<LEND>

<L>13675<pc>0203-b<k1>kamalaka<k2>kamalaka
{%Kamalaka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>13676<pc>0203-b<k1>kamalinI<k2>kamalinI
{%Kamalinī,%}¦ f. a number of lotus flowers or a lake
or place abounding with them.
<LEND>
[Page0203-c+ 74]

<L>13677<pc>0203-c<k1>kamA<k2>kamA
{%Kamā,%}¦ f. loveliness, beauty, radiance.
<LEND>

<L>13678<pc>0203-c<k1>kamitf<k2>kamitf
{%Kamitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ lustful, desirous, cupidinous.
<LEND>

<L>13679<pc>0203-c<k1>kamra<k2>kamra
{%Kamra, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirous, cupidinous; beautiful,
desirable.
<LEND>

<L>13680<pc>0203-c<k1>kamaka<k2>kamaka
{#kamaka#}¦ {%kamaka, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the descendants of this man.
<LEND>

<L>13681<pc>0203-c<k1>kamaWa<k2>kamaWa
{#kamaWa#}¦ {%kamaṭha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 2. {%kam%}),
a tortoise; a porcupine; a water-jar, especially one
made of a hollow gourd or cocoa-nut, and used by
ascetics; a bamboo; N. of a prince; of a Muni; and
of a Daitya; ({%ī%}), f. a female tortoise, a small one.
{%—Kamaṭha-pati, is,%} m. the king of tortoises.
{%—Kamaṭhāsura-vadha (˚ṭha-as˚), as,%} m. ‘the
slaying of the Daitya Kamaṭha,’ a section of the
Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>13682<pc>0203-c<k1>kamaRqalu<k2>kamaRqalu
{#kamaRqalu#}¦ {%kamaṇḍalu, us, u,%} m. n. an earthen
or wooden water-pot used by the ascetic and religious
student; a vessel with a spout; the waved-leaf fig
tree, Ficus Infectoria. {%—Kamaṇḍalu-taru, us,%} m.
the tree Ficus Infectoria. {%—Kamaṇḍalu-dhara, as,%}
m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>13683<pc>0203-c<k1>kamadyU<k2>kamadyU
{#kamadyU#}¦ {%kamadyū, ūs,%} f. (fr. {%kama%} derived fr.
2. {%kam%} and {%dyū?%}), Ved., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>13684<pc>0203-c<k1>kamantaka<k2>kamantaka
{#kamantaka#}¦ {%kamantaka%} and {%kamandaka, as,%} m.,
N. of two men; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of
these men.
<LEND>

<L>13685<pc>0203-c<k1>kamanDa<k2>kamanDa
{#kamanDa#}¦ {%kamandha, am,%} n. water; (a various
reading for {%kabandha;%} considered also as a com-
pound of {%kam%} and {%andha,%} both being, according to
native lexicographers, synonyms of water.)
<LEND>

<L>13686<pc>0203-c<k1>kamala<k2>kamala
{#kamala#}¦ {%kamala.%} See under rt. 2. {%kam%} above.
<LEND>

<L>13687<pc>0203-c<k1>kamp<k2>kamp
{#kamp#}¦ {%kamp,%} cl. 1. A. (ep. also P.) {%kam-%}
{%pate, kampati, cakampe, kampiṣyate,%}
{%akampiṣṭa, kampitum,%} to tremble, shake: Caus.
P. {%kampayati, -yitum,%} to cause to tremble, make
tremble, shake; to pronounce in a tremulous manner,
i. e. with a trill or shake: Desid. {%cikampiṣate:%}
Intens. {%caṅkampyate, caṅkampti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κάμπτω</lang>
<lang n="greek">πέμπω;</lang> Hib. <nsi>cabhóg,</nsi> ‘hastening.’]
<LEND>

<L>13688<pc>0203-c<k1>kampa<k2>kampa
{%Kampa, as,%}¦ m. trembling, tremor, trembling
motion, shaking; a tremulous or trilling pronuncia-
tion, a modification of the Svarita accent, which may
take place if the Svarita syllable is followed by an
Udātta syllable; N. of a man. {%—Kampa-rāja, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Kampa-lakṣman, ā,%} m. air,
wind. {%—Kampānvita (˚pa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} affected
with trembling, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>13689<pc>0203-c<k1>kampana<k2>kampana
{%Kampana, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, shaken, un-
steady; causing to tremble, shaking; ({%as%}), m. a
kind of weapon; the dewy season (November-De-
cember); N. of a prince; N. of a country near
Kāśmīra; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; ({%am%}), n. trembling,
quivering; quivering pronunciation, a modification of
the Svarita accent (see {%kampa%}); shaking, swinging.
<LEND>

<L>13690<pc>0203-c<k1>kampanIya<k2>kampanIya
{%Kampanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shaken, movable,
vibratory.
<LEND>

<L>13691<pc>0203-c<k1>kampamAna<k2>kampamAna
{%Kampamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, shaking.
<LEND>

<L>13692<pc>0203-c<k1>kampayat<k2>kampayat
{%Kampayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shaking, causing to
tremble.
<LEND>

<L>13693<pc>0203-c<k1>kampAka<k2>kampAka
{%Kampāka, as,%}¦ m. (a wrong reading for {%kam-%}
{%pāṅka%}), wind.
<LEND>

<L>13694<pc>0203-c<k1>kampita<k2>kampita
{%Kampita, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, shaking; caused
to tremble, shaken, swung; ({%am%}), n. trembling, a
trembling, a tremor.
<LEND>

<L>13695<pc>0203-c<k1>kampin<k2>kampin
{%Kampin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ trembling, quivering, shaking.
<LEND>

<L>13696<pc>0203-c<k1>kampila<k2>kampila
{%Kampila%}¦ or {%kampilya%} or {%kampilla%} or {%kam-%}
{%pillaka%} or {%kampīla, as,%} m., N. of a plant, Cri-
num Amaryllacee (?); commonly {%kamalāguṇḍi;%} [cf.
{%kāmpilla%} and {%śuṇḍā-rocanī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13697<pc>0203-c<k1>kampya<k2>kampya
{%Kampya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shaken, to be made to
tremble, to be moved away from one's place; to be
pronounced in a quivering manner.
<LEND>

<L>13698<pc>0203-c<k1>kampra<k2>kampra
{%Kampra, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, shaken, mova-
ble; agile, quick.
<LEND>
[Page0204-a+ 72]

<L>13699<pc>0204-a<k1>kamb<k2>kamb
{#kamb#}¦ {%kamb,%} cl. 1. P. {%kambati, -bitum,%} to
go, move; (a various reading for {%karb.%})
<LEND>

<L>13700<pc>0204-a<k1>kambara<k2>kambara
{#kambara#}¦ {%kambara, as, ā, am,%} variegated, spot-
ted; ({%as%}), m. variegated colour; [cf. {%karbura.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13701<pc>0204-a<k1>kambala<k2>kambala
{#kambala#}¦ {%kambala, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. 2. {%kam%}), a woollen blanket or cloth; an upper
cloth or garment of wool; ({%as%}), m. a dew-lap; a
small worm or insect; a sort of deer; N. of a Nāga;
N. of a man; ({%am%}), n. water; [cf. {%kamala.%}]
{%—Kambala-kāraka, as,%} m. a woollen cloth manu-
facturer. {%—Kambala-cārāyaṇīya, ās,%} m. pl. a nick-
name of a school of Cārāyaṇa. {%—Kambala-dhā-%}
{%vaka, as,%} m. one who cleans woollen clothes.
{%—Kambala-barhiṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Kambala-vāhya, as,%} m. or {%kambala-vāhyaka,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of carriage covered with a coarse
blanket or woollen cloth and drawn by oxen. (The
more correct spelling seems to be {%kambali-vāhya%}
and {%kambali-vāhyaka.%}) {%—Kambala-hāra, as,%} m.,
N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of this man.
<LEND>

<L>13702<pc>0204-a<k1>kambalaka<k2>kambalaka
{%Kambalaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a woollen cloth, a
garment of wool.
<LEND>

<L>13703<pc>0204-a<k1>kambalin<k2>kambalin
{%Kambalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ covered with a woollen cloth
or blanket. {%—Kambali-vāhyaka, am,%} n. a carriage
so covered and drawn by oxen.
<LEND>

<L>13704<pc>0204-a<k1>kambalIya<k2>kambalIya
{%Kambalīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for woollen blankets.
<LEND>

<L>13705<pc>0204-a<k1>kambalya<k2>kambalya
{%Kambalya, am,%}¦ n. 100 Palas of wool (so much
being necessary for making a woollen blanket).
<LEND>

<L>13706<pc>0204-a<k1>kambAlAyin<k2>kambAlAyin
{#kambAlAyin#}¦ {%kambālāyin, ī,%} m. a sort of kite.
<LEND>

<L>13707<pc>0204-a<k1>kambi<k2>kambi
{#kambi#}¦ {%kambi, is,%} f. a ladle or spoon; a
shoot, a branch or joint of a bamboo.
<LEND>

<L>13708<pc>0204-a<k1>kambu<k2>kambu
{#kambu#}¦ {%kambu, us, u,%} m. n. a conch, a shell;
a bivalve shell; a bracelet, a ring made of shells;
({%us%}), m. an elephant; the neck; a tube-shaped
bone; a vein or tubular vessel of the body; a sort
of Curcuma. {%—Kambu-kāṣṭhā,%} f. the tree Physalis
Flexuosa. {%—Kambu-grīva, as,%} m., N. of a tortoise;
({%ā%}), f. a neck marked with three lines like a shell,
and considered to be indicative of exalted fortune;
a shell-shaped neck. {%—Kambu-puṣpī%} and {%kambu-%}
{%mālinī,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Kambu-ātāyin, ī,%} m.
the bird Falco Cheela.
<LEND>

<L>13709<pc>0204-a<k1>kambuka<k2>kambuka
{%Kambuka, as,%}¦ m. a conch, a shell; a mean per-
son; ({%ā%}), f. the tree Physalis Flexuosa; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>13710<pc>0204-a<k1>kambU<k2>kambU
{#kambU#}¦ {%kambū, ūs, ūs, u%} (said to be fr. 2. {%kam%}),
stealing; ({%ūs%}), m. a thief, a plunderer; a bracelet.
<LEND>

<L>13711<pc>0204-a<k1>kambUka<k2>kambUka
{#kambUka#}¦ {%kambūka, as,%} m., Ved. the husk of
rice.
<LEND>

<L>13712<pc>0204-a<k1>kamboja<k2>kamboja
{#kamboja#}¦ {%kamboja, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a country
and its inhabitants; ({%as%}), m. the prince of this
country; a shell; a kind of shell; a species of
elephant; [cf. {%kambu%} and {%kāmboja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13713<pc>0204-a<k1>kamBArI<k2>kamBArI
{#kamBArI#}¦ {%kambhārī,%} f. {%= gambhārī,%} the plant
Gmelina Arborea.
<LEND>

<L>13714<pc>0204-a<k1>kamBu<k2>kamBu
{#kamBu#}¦ {%kambhu, u,%} n. the fragrant root of
Andropogon Muricatus.
<LEND>

<L>13715<pc>0204-a<k1>kaya<k2>kaya
{#kaya#}¦ {%kaya,%} a Vedic form for 2. {%ka,%} occurring
only in the genitive case with {%cid;%} e. g. {%kayasya cid,%}
of every one; ({%ni ṣū nama atimatim kayasya%}
{%cit,%} bow well down the haughtiness of every one);
[cf. Zend <nsi>kaya;</nsi> Armen. <nsi>ui.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>13716<pc>0204-a<k1>kayasTA<k2>kayasTA
{#kayasTA#}¦ {%kayasthā,%} f. a medicinal plant, {%=%}
{%kākolī;%} (probably a various reading for {%vayasthā:%}
cf. {%kāyasthā.%})
<LEND>

<L>13717<pc>0204-a<k1>kayA<k2>kayA
{#kayA#}¦ {%kayā,%} ind., Ved. (fr. 2. {%ka%} inst. fem.),
in what manner?
<LEND>

<L>13718<pc>0204-a<k1>kayAd<k2>kayAd
{#kayAd#}¦ {%kayād, t, t, t%} (fr. {%kaya%} for {%kāya?%} and
rt. {%ad%}), Ved. consuming the body; (a various reading
for {%kravyād.%})
<LEND>

<L>13719<pc>0204-a<k1>kayADU<k2>kayADU
{#kayADU#}¦ {%kayādhū, ūs,%} f., N. of the wife of
Hiraṇyakaśipu.
<LEND>
[Page0204-b+ 79]

<L>13720<pc>0204-b<k1>kayya<k2>kayya
{#kayya#}¦ {%kayya, as,%} m., N. of a prince, founder
of a sanctuary ({%śrīkayya-svāmin%}) and of a Vihāra
({%kayya-vihāra%}) called after him.
<LEND>

<L>13721<pc>0204-b<k1>kayyaka<k2>kayyaka
{#kayyaka#}¦ {%kayyaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>13722<pc>0204-b<k1>kara<k2>kara<h>1
{#kara#} 1¦. {%kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%kṛ,%} to do;
for 2. {%kara%} see p. 205), who or what does or makes
or causes; causing, doing, making (especially at the
end of compounds, e. g. {%bhayaṅ-kara,%} causing fear,
frightful; {%duḥkha-kara,%} causing pain; {%vṛddhi-kara,%}
causing increase; {%sampat-kara,%} causing prosperity;
{%artha-karī vidyā,%} a science productive of wealth
&c.); ({%as%}), m. the hand (‘the active one’); a
measure, the breadth of twenty-four thumbs; an
elephant's trunk; the act of doing, making, &c.;
(at the end of several compounds with a passive
sense, e. g. {%īṣat-kara%} and {%su-kara,%} easy to be
done; {%duṣ-kara,%} difficult to be done; {%īṣad-%}
{%āḍhyaṅ-kara,%} easy to be made rich); [cf. Lith. <nsi>kaire,</nsi>
‘the left hand.’] {%—Kara-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. a finger-
nail (‘thorn of the hand’). {%—Kara-kamala, am,%}
n. the hand, especially of a lover or a mistress &c.
(lit. ‘hand-lotus;’ similar compounds are {%kara-pad-%}
{%ma, kara-paṅkaja, kara-pallava,%} &c.). {%—Kara-%}
{%karṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kara-kalaśa, as,%}
m. the hand hollowed to receive water. {%—Kara-%}
{%kisalaya, as, am,%} m. n. a hand which is like a
branch; the finger (‘shoot of the hand’). {%—Kara-%}
{%kudmala, am,%} n. the finger (‘bud of the hand’).
{%—Kara-koṣa, as,%} m. the hand hollowed to receive
water; [cf. {%kara-kalaśa.%}] — 1. {%kara-graha, as,%} m.
(for 2. see under 2. {%kara,%} p. 205), taking the hand
(of the bride in the marriage ceremony; one part of
the ceremony of marriage is the placing of the right
hand of the bride, with the palm uppermost, in the
right hand of the bridegroom), marriage. {%—1. kara-%}
{%grahaṇa, am,%} n. (for 2. see under 2. {%kara%}), taking
the hand, marriage. {%—1. kara-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
taking the hand. {%—Kara-gharṣaṇa, as,%} m. a
churning-stick; ({%am%}), n. rubbing the hands together.
{%—Kara-gharṣin, ī,%} m. the churning-stick. {%—Kara-%}
{%ghāṭa, as,%} m. a kind of poisonous tree. {%—Kara-%}
{%cchada, as,%} m. the teak tree, Trophis Aspera; ({%ā%}),
f. a tree, commonly called {%sindūra-puṣpī-vṛkṣa.%}
{%—Kara-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced in or from the
hand; ({%as%}), m. a finger-nail; N. of a timber tree,
{%= karañja%} or Pongamia Glabra; ({%am%}), n. a per-
fume, {%= vyāghranakha,%} resembling a nail in appear-
ance. {%—Karaja-vardhana, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Karajākhya (˚ja-ākh˚), as,%} m. a perfume, {%=%}
{%kara-ja%}. {%—Kara-jyoḍi, is,%} m., N. of a tree, {%=%}
{%hasta-jyoḍi%}. {%—Kara-tala, as,%} m. the palm of the
hand; {%karatalī-kṛ,%} to take in the palm of the hands.
{%—Karatala-gata, as, ā, am,%} being in the hand or
in one's possession. {%—Karatala-dhṛta, as, ā, am,%}
held in the hand. {%—Karatala-stha, as, ā, am,%}
held in the hand, resting in the palm of the
hand. {%—Kara-tas,%} ind. from the hand, out of the
hand. {%—Kara-tāla, am,%} n. a musical instrument,
a cymbal; ({%ī%}), f. beating time by clapping the
hands. {%—Karatālaka, am,%} n. a musical instru-
ment, a cymbal. {%—Karatāla-dhvani, is,%} m. the
sound of cymbals. {%—Kara-toyā,%} f. the Karatoyā
river in the north-east of Bengal, (at the wedding of
Śiva and Pārvatī the water which had been poured
into the hand of the former constituted, upon its
being thrown on the ground, the source of this river.)
{%—Karatoyinī,%} f., N. of a river, perhaps the same as
the preceding (?) . {%—1. kara-da, as, ā, am%} (for 2. see
under 2. {%kara%}), one who gives his hand &c. {%—Kara-%}
{%dakṣa, as, ā, am,%} handy, dexterous, ready. {%—Kara-%}
{%druma, as,%} m., N. of a tree, {%= kāraskara%}. {%—Kara-%}
{%dhṛta, as, ā, am,%} held or supported by the hand.
{%—Kara-nihita, as, ā, am,%} held in the hand. {%—Ka-%}
{%ran-dhama, as,%} m., N. of two princes. {%—Kara-%}
{%nyasta-kapolāntam,%} ind. the end of the cheek held
in the hand. {%—Kara-pattra, am,%} n. a saw; splashing
water about while bathing, playing or gamboling in
water; see {%kara-pātra%}. {%—Karapattraka, am,%} n. a
saw. {%—Karapattra-vat, ān,%} m. the palmyra tree,
[Page0204-c+ 81]
Borassus Flabelliformis, (the leaves being compared
to a saw.) {%—Karapattrikā,%} f. playing with water
or in it, splashing it about &c.; [cf. {%kara-pattra%}
and {%kara-pātra.%}] {%—Kara-parṇa, as,%} m., N. of
two plants, commonly called {%bhiṇḍā-vṛkṣa%} and
{%raktairaṇḍa%}. {%—Kara-pallava, as,%} m. a finger, the
hand; conversation with the fingers. {%—Kara-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. splashing water about while bathing, throwing
water about in sport; the hand hollowed so as to
hold anything; [cf. {%kara-pattra%} and {%karapattrikā.%}]
{%—Kara-pāla, as,%} m. a sword, a scymitar (‘pro-
tecting the hand’). {%—Karapālikā,%} f. a cudgel, a
short club or wooden sword, a sword or one-edged
knife. {%—Kara-puṭa, as,%} m. joining the palms of
the hands in token of respect; the hands joined and
hollowed to receive anything. {%—Kara-pṛṣṭha, am,%}
n. the back of the hand. {%—1. kara-praceya, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (for 2. see under 2. {%kara%}), to be held, to be
taken hold of by the hand. {%—1. kara-prada, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} giving the hand &c. {%—Kara-prāpta, as, ā, am,%}
held in the hand; obtained, secured. {%—Karabāla%}
and {%karavāla, as,%} m. (corruptions of {%kara-pāla%}),
a sword, a scymitar; a finger-nail. {%—Karabālikā,%} f.
a small sword; [cf. {%karapālikā.%}] {%—Kara-bhañjaka,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people; (a various reading has
{%kara-bhañjika.%}) {%—Kara-bhājana, as,%} m., N. of a
Brāhman. {%—Kara-bhū, ūs,%} m. a finger-nail. {%—Kara-%}
{%bhūṣaṇa, am,%} n. a bracelet, an ornament worn
round the wrist. {%—Kara-marda, as, ī,%} m. f. a
small tree bearing an acid fruit, Carissa Carandas;
({%am%}), n. the fruit of this tree. {%—Karamardaka, as,%}
m. the tree Carissa Carandas; see the preceding.
{%—Kara-mālā,%} f. the hand used as a rosary, the
joints of the fingers corresponding to the beads.
{%—Kara-mukta, am,%} n. (scil. {%astram%}) a missile
weapon thrown with the hand, a dart, a javelin, &c.
{%—Kara-ruddha, as, ā, am,%} stopped by the hand,
held tight or fast. {%—Kara-ruha, as,%} m. a finger-
nail (growing from the hand). {%—Kararddhi (˚ra-%}
{%ṛddhi), is,%} f. a cymbal; a small musical instrument
used for marking time, (a castanet?); clapping the
hands together for that purpose; [cf. {%kara-tāla.%} ]
{%—Kara-vāraka, as,%} m. an epithet of Skanda.
{%—Karavālikā,%} f. a small club; see {%karabālikā.%}
{%—Kara-vīra, as,%} m. a fragrant Oleander, Nerium
Odorum; a species of Soma; a sword or scymitar;
a particular magical formulary or spell for recovering
or attracting back a missile weapon of mystic pro-
perties after its discharge; a cemetery, a place for
burning or interring the dead; N. of a Nāga; of a
Daitya; of a mountain; of a town on the river
Veṇvā, founded by Padma-varṇa; of a town on the
river Dṛṣadvatī, the residence of Candra-śekhara;
({%ā%}), f. red arsenic; ({%ī%}), f. a woman who has borne
a son, a mother; a good cow; N. of Aditi, the
mother of the gods; ({%am%}), n. the flower of Nerium
Odorum. {%—Karavīraka, as,%} m. the poisonous root
of the fragrant Oleander, a poison; the tree Ter-
minalia Arjuna; a sword; N. of a Nāga. {%—Kara-%}
{%vīra-kanda-sañjña, as,%} m. a species of onion or
bulb, {%= taila-kanda%}. {%—Karavīra-pura, am,%} n., N.
of a town founded by Padma-varṇa. {%—Karavīra-%}
{%bhujā,%} f. Cajanus Indicus. {%—Kara-vīrya, as,%} m., N.
of a physician. {%—Kara-śākhā,%} f. a finger. {%—Kara-%}
{%śīkara, as,%} m. water expelled by an elephant's
trunk. {%—Kara-śūka, as,%} m. a finger-nail. {%—Kara-%}
{%śotha, as,%} m. œdematous swelling of the hands.
 — 1. {%kara-sāda, as,%} m. languor or weakness of the
hands. {%—Kara-sthālin, ī,%} m. an epithet of Śiva,
who uses his hands as a vessel for holding food.
{%—Kara-svana, as,%} m. sound produced by beating
the hands together. {%—Karāgra (˚ra-ag˚), am,%} n.
the tip of an elephant's trunk. {%—Karāgra-pallava,%}
{%as,%} m. finger. {%—Karāghāta (˚ra-āgh˚), as,%} m. a
thumb, a blow with the hand. {%—Karā-marda, as,%}
m. the tree Carissa Carandas; [cf. {%kara-marda.%}]
{%—Karāmbuka%} or {%karāmlaka, as,%} m., N. of the
same tree. {%—Karāroṭa, as,%} m. a finger-ring; (fr. {%kara%}
and?). {%—Karārpita (˚ra-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} taken in
the hand. {%—Karālamba (˚ra-āl˚), as,%} m. the act of
supporting with the hand, giving a helping hand;
[Page0205-a+ 81]
({%as, ā, am%}), stretching out one's hand to support or
raise another. {%—Karālambana, am,%} n. extending
the hand, taking by the hand, helping, sustaining.
{%—Karotpala (˚ra-ut˚), am,%} n. a lotus-hand.
{%—Karodaka (˚ra-ud˚), am,%} n. water held in or
poured into the hand.
<LEND>

<L>13723<pc>0205-a<k1>karaka<k2>karaka<h>1
1. {%karaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the water-pot of the
student or ascetic; the shell of the cocoa-nut hollowed
to form a vessel; shell of the cocoa-nut in general;
({%as%}), m. hand; a species of bird; N. of several
plants, the pomegranate tree, {%= dāḍima;%} Pongamia
Glabra; Butea Frondosa; Bauhinia Variegata; Mi-
musops Elengi; Capparis Aphylla; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people. {%—Karaka-pātrikā,%} f. a leather vessel
for holding water. {%—Karakāmbhas (˚ka-am˚), ās,%}
m. the cocoa-nut tree, Cocos Nucifera.
<LEND>

<L>13724<pc>0205-a<k1>karaRa<k2>karaRa
{%Karaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ doing, making, effecting,
causing (especially at the end of compounds; cf.
{%anta-karaṇa, andhaṅ-karaṇa, uṣṇaṅ-karaṇa,%}
&c.); Ved. clever, skilled; ({%as%}), m., Ved. an assistant;
a man of a mixed class, the son of a Śūdra woman by
a Vaiśya, or (according to some) of an outcast Kṣa-
triya (the occupation of this class is writing, accounts,
&c.); a writer, a scribe; ({%am%}), n. making, doing,
producing, effecting, accomplishing (very often as last
member of a compound, e. g. {%muṣṭi-karaṇa,%}
committing theft; {%virūpa-karaṇa,%} producing de-
formity); an action, especially a religious action;
business, occupation (as trade &c.); the special
business of any tribe or caste; plastering, spreading
anything with the hand; the usage or practice of
the writer-caste; an act, a deed; an instrument or
means of action, an expedient; an organ, an organ
of sense or of speech; (in gram.) the immediate
cause of an action, the idea expressed by the instru-
mental case, instrumentality; the body; (in law)
an instrument, document, a bond; a cause, motive;
the posture of an ascetic; posture in sexual intercourse,
copulation; pronunciation, articulation; (in gram.)
the term used in designating a sound or word when
referring to it as an independent part of speech or as
separated from its context, ({%karaṇa%} may be used in
this way, like {%kāra,%} e. g. {%iti-karaṇa,%} the word {%iti%});
rhythm, time; dramatic action (?), singing (?); an
astrological division of the day, (these Karaṇas are
eleven, viz. {%vava, vālava, kaulava, taitila, gara,%}
{%baṇija, viṣṭi, śakuni, catuṣpada, kintughna,%}
and {%nāga,%} two being equal to a lunar day, or the
time during which the moon's motion amounts to 6°;
the first seven are called {%a-dhruvāṇi%} or movable, and
fill, when eight times repeated, the space from the
second half of the first day in the moon's increase to
the first half of the fourteenth day in its wane; the
four others are {%dhruvāṇi%} or fixed, and occupy the
four half-days from the second half of the fourteenth
day in the wane of the moon to the first half of the
first day in its increase); title of a treatise of Varā-
ha-mihira on the motions of the planets; a field;
grain (?); the mind or heart (?); ({%ī%}), f. a woman of a
mixed caste; a surd or irrational number, a surd root
in arithmetic. {%—Karaṇa-kutūhala, am,%} n. title of a
work on practical astronomy by Bhāskara. {%—Karaṇa-%}
{%grāma, as,%} m. the senses collectively. {%—Karaṇa-%}
{%trāṇa, am,%} n. the head (‘protecting the organs of
sense’). {%—Karaṇa-tva, am,%} n. instrumentality, medi-
ate agency. {%—Karaṇa-niyama, as,%} m. suppression or
restraint of the organs of sense. {%—Karaṇa-vinyaya,%}
{%as,%} m. manner of pronunciation. {%—Karaṇa-sāra,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a work on practical astronomy by
Bhāskara. {%—Karaṇa-sthāna-bheda, as,%} m. differ-
ence of articulation or organ. {%—Karaṇādhikāra%}
{%(˚ṇa-adh˚), as,%} m. a section on articulation.
<LEND>

<L>13725<pc>0205-a<k1>karaRi<k2>karaRi
{%Karaṇi, is,%}¦ f. doing, making, effecting (only oc-
curring with {%a%} privative, e. g. {%a-karaṇi,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>13726<pc>0205-a<k1>karaRIya<k2>karaRIya
{%Karaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be done or made; feasi-
ble, to be accomplished; to be caused or effected.
<LEND>

<L>13727<pc>0205-a<k1>karaBa<k2>karaBa
{%Karabha, as,%}¦ m. the metacarpus, the hand from
the wrist to the root of the fingers; the trunk of
an elephant; a young elephant; a camel; a young
camel or any young animal; a camel three years old;
a perfume ({%= nakha,%} commonly called {%nakhi%}); an
[Page0205-b+ 79]
epithet of Danta-vakra, prince of the Karūṣas; ({%ī%}),
f. a she-camel; the plant Tragia Involucrata; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">κάρπος</lang>] {%—Karabha-kāṇḍikā,%} f., N. of a plant; [cf.
{%uṣṭra-kāṇḍī.%}] {%—Karabha-priyā,%} f. a plant, a sort
of Hedysarum. {%—Karabha-vallabha, as,%} m. the
tree Feronia Elephantum. {%—Karabhādanī (˚bha-%}
{%adana),%} f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%karabha-priyā.%}]
{%—Karabhorū (˚bha-ūru), ūs,%} f. a woman whose
thighs resemble the trunk of an elephant; see {%ūru.%}
<LEND>

<L>13728<pc>0205-b<k1>karaBaka<k2>karaBaka
{%Karabhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a messenger.
<LEND>

<L>13729<pc>0205-b<k1>karaBin<k2>karaBin
{%Karabhin, ī,%}¦ m. an elephant (‘having a trunk’).
<LEND>

<L>13730<pc>0205-b<k1>karas<k2>karas
{%Karas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. an action, a deed.
<LEND>

<L>13731<pc>0205-b<k1>karasna<k2>karasna
{%Karasna, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the arm, the fore part of
the arm; a finger-nail.
<LEND>

<L>13732<pc>0205-b<k1>kari<k2>kari
{%Kari, is, is, i,%}¦ causing, accomplishing (at the end
of a compound, e. g. {%śakṛt-kari,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>13733<pc>0205-b<k1>karikA<k2>karikA
{%Karikā,%}¦ f. a wound caused by a finger-nail.
<LEND>

<L>13734<pc>0205-b<k1>karin<k2>karin
{%Karin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘having a trunk,’ an elephant; ({%ṇī%}),
f. a female elephant. {%—Kari-kaṇā-vallī,%} f. a species
of pepper, Piper Chaba. {%—Kari-kumbha, as,%} m. the
frontal globe of an elephant. {%—Kari-kusumbha, as,%}
m. a fragrant powder prepared from the flowers of
Nāga-keśara. {%—Kari-kusumbhaka, as,%} m. the same.
{%—Kari-garjita, am,%} n. the roaring of elephants.
{%—Kari-carman, a,%} n. an elephant's hide. {%—Kari-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. a young elephant. {%—Kariṇī-sahāya, as,%} m.
the mate of the female elephant. {%—Kari-danta, as,%}
m. an elephant's tusk; ivory. {%—Kari-dāraka, as,%} m. a
lion. {%—Kari-nāsikā,%} f. a musical instrument. {%—Kari-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n., N. of a plant; see {%tālīśa-pattra.%}
{%—Kari-patha, as,%} m. the way or habits of an
elephant. {%—Kari-pippalī,%} f. a plant bearing a pun-
gent fruit, Pothos Officinalis. {%—Kari-pota, as,%} m. a
young elephant, one under ten years old. {%—Kari-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. the post to which an elephant is
tied. {%—Kari-makara, as,%} m. a fabulous monster.
{%—Kari-mācala, as,%} m. a lion, this animal being
considered as the natural enemy and destroyer of the
elephant; [cf. {%gaja-mācala.%}] {%—Kari-mukha, as,%}
m. an epithet of Gaṇeśa, this deity having an ele-
phant's trunk on his face. {%—Kari-yādas,%} n. a water-
elephant, a hippopotamos. {%—Kari-vara, as,%} m. an
excellent elephant. {%—Kari-vaijayantī,%} f. a flag car-
ried by an elephant. {%—Kari-śāvaka, as,%} m. a young
elephant under five years old, (according to some)
also until ten years. {%—Kari-skandha, as,%} m. a troop
of elephants. {%—Karīndra (˚ri-in˚), as,%} m. a large ele-
phant, a war or state elephant; Indra's elephant (?) .
<LEND>

<L>13735<pc>0205-b<k1>kara<k2>kara<h>2
{#kara#} 2¦. {%kara, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ,%} to scatter;
for 1. {%kara%} see p. 204), a ray of light, a sun-beam,
a moon-beam; hail; royal revenue, toll, tax, import,
tribute. {%—2. kara-graha, as,%} m. levying or gathering
taxes, a tax-gatherer. {%—2. kara-grahaṇa, am,%} n.
levying or gathering taxes. {%—2. kara-grāhin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} levying a tax, a tax-collector. {%—Kara-jāla, am,%} n. a
pencil of rays, a stream of light. {%—2. kara-da, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} paying taxes, subject to tax or duty, tributary.
{%—Karadī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to render tributary. {%—Karadī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made
tributary, subjugated. {%—Kara-paṇya, am,%} n. a com-
modity given as tribute. {%—2. kara-praceya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} to be collected by taxes. {%—2. kara-prada, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} paying taxes, subject to tax or duty, tributary.
{%—Kara-rudh, t, t, t,%} ray-obstructing. {%—2. kara-%}
{%sāda, as,%} m. the fading away of rays. {%—Karotkara%}
{%(˚ra-ut˚), as,%} m. a bundle of rays; a heavy tax.
<LEND>

<L>13736<pc>0205-b<k1>karaka<k2>karaka<h>2
2. {%karaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. (according to some
only m. and f.), hail; a thunderstone (?); ({%as%}), m.
toll, tax, tribute (?). {%—1. karakāsāra (˚ka-ās˚), as,%}
m. a shower of hail. {%—2. karakāsāra,%} nom. P. {%ka-%}
{%rakāsārati,%} to pour or shower down like hail.
<LEND>

<L>13737<pc>0205-b<k1>karIkf<k2>karIkf
{%Karī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to offer as a tribute.
<LEND>

<L>13738<pc>0205-b<k1>kara<k2>kara<h>3
{#kara#} 3¦. {%kara, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%kṛ,%} to
praise), Ved. devoted, pious.
<LEND>

<L>13739<pc>0205-b<k1>karakAyu<k2>karakAyu
{#karakAyu#}¦ {%karakāyu, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. See {%kanakāyu.%}
<LEND>

<L>13740<pc>0205-b<k1>karaNka<k2>karaNka
{#karaNka#}¦ {%karaṅka, as,%} m. the skull, the head;
a cocoa-nut hollowed to form a cup or vessel, a water-
[Page0205-c+ 72]
pot made from a cocoa-nut, [cf. 1. {%karaka%}]; a
kind of sugar-cane; any bone of the body. {%—Ka-%}
{%raṅka-śāli, is,%} m. a sort of sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>13741<pc>0205-c<k1>karaNgaRa<k2>karaNgaRa
{#karaNgaRa#}¦ {%karaṅgaṇa, am,%} n. a market or fair;
(a various reading for {%karāṅgaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>13742<pc>0205-c<k1>karaYja<k2>karaYja
{#karaYja#}¦ {%karañja, as,%} m. the tree Pongamia
Glabra, used medicinally; N. of an enemy of Indra,
slain by this god. {%—Karañja-phalaka, as,%} m. Fero-
nia Elephantum; see {%kapittha%}. {%—Karañja-ha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. pernicious to Karañja.
<LEND>

<L>13743<pc>0205-c<k1>karaYjaka<k2>karaYjaka
{%Karañjaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of the tree Pongamia
Glabra; also of Verbesina Scandens.
<LEND>

<L>13744<pc>0205-c<k1>karawa<k2>karawa
{#karawa#}¦ {%karaṭa, as,%} m. an elephant's cheek;
a crow; a man of a low or degraded profession; a
bad Brāhman; an atheist, an unbeliever, an impugner
of the doctrines of the Vedas; a musical instrument
(castanets?); the plant Carthamus Tinctorius; the
first Śrāddha or ceremony performed in honour of a
deceased relative; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; also
of a family; ({%ā%}), f. an elephant's cheek; a cow
difficult to be milked.
<LEND>

<L>13745<pc>0205-c<k1>karawaka<k2>karawaka
{%Karaṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a crow; N. of a jackal in the
Hitopadeśa.
<LEND>

<L>13746<pc>0205-c<k1>karawin<k2>karawin
{%Karaṭin, ī,%}¦ m. an elephant; {%karaṭi-kautuka,%} a
treatise on the elephant and his diseases.
<LEND>

<L>13747<pc>0205-c<k1>karawu<k2>karawu
{#karawu#}¦ {%karaṭu, us,%} m. the numidian crane;
[cf. {%kareṭavyā, kareṭu, karkaṭa,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>13748<pc>0205-c<k1>karaRa<k2>karaRa
{#karaRa#}¦ {%karaṇa.%} See under 1. {%kara.%}
<LEND>

<L>13749<pc>0205-c<k1>karaRIsutA<k2>karaRIsutA
{#karaRIsutA#}¦ {%karaṇīsutā,%} f. an adopted
daughter.
<LEND>

<L>13750<pc>0205-c<k1>karaRqa<k2>karaRqa
{#karaRqa#}¦ {%karaṇḍa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%kṛ%}), a basket or covered box of bamboo wicker-
work; a bee-hive, a honey-comb; a sword; a sort of
duck; an aquatic weed called Vallisneria; ({%ī%}), f. a
basket for flowers; [Lat. <nsi>corbis?</nsi>]. {%—Karaṇḍa-%}
{%vyūha, as,%} m. title of a Buddhist work.
<LEND>

<L>13751<pc>0205-c<k1>karaRqaka<k2>karaRqaka
{%Karaṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a basket. {%—Karaṇḍaka-%}
{%nivāpa, as,%} m., N. of a region near Rājagṛha.
<LEND>

<L>13752<pc>0205-c<k1>karaRqin<k2>karaRqin
{%Karaṇḍin, ī,%}¦ m. a fish; (so called because caught
in a basket?).
<LEND>

<L>13753<pc>0205-c<k1>karaTa<k2>karaTa
{#karaTa#}¦ {%karatha, as,%} m., N. of a physician.
<LEND>

<L>13754<pc>0205-c<k1>karaPu<k2>karaPu
{#karaPu#}¦ {%karaphu,%} a particular high number;
[cf. {%kalahu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13755<pc>0205-c<k1>karaBa<k2>karaBa
{#karaBa#}¦ {%karabha.%} See under 1. {%kara.%}
<LEND>

<L>13756<pc>0205-c<k1>karaBIra<k2>karaBIra
{#karaBIra#}¦ {%karabhīra, as,%} m. a lion.
<LEND>

<L>13757<pc>0205-c<k1>karamawwa<k2>karamawwa
{#karamawwa#}¦ {%karamaṭṭa, as,%} m. the betel-nut
tree. See {%guvākā.%}
<LEND>

<L>13758<pc>0205-c<k1>karamarin<k2>karamarin
{#karamarin#}¦ {%karamarin, ī,%} m. a prisoner, a
captive; [cf. {%kārā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13759<pc>0205-c<k1>karamAla<k2>karamAla
{#karamAla#}¦ {%karamāla, as,%} m. smoke; (probably
a corruption of {%khatamāla.%})
<LEND>

<L>13760<pc>0205-c<k1>karamba<k2>karamba
{#karamba#}¦ {%karamba, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. 1.
{%kṛ%}), mixed, intermingled; set, inlaid; ({%as%}), m.
flour or meal mixed with curds. See {%karambha.%}
<LEND>

<L>13761<pc>0205-c<k1>karambita<k2>karambita
{%Karambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ intermingled, mixed,
blended, &c.; pounded, reduced to grains or dust;
set, inlaid.
<LEND>

<L>13762<pc>0205-c<k1>karamBa<k2>karamBa
{#karamBa#}¦ {%karambha, as,%} m. groats or coarsely
ground oats &c.; a dish of parched grain; a cake, flour
or meal mixed with curds, a kind of gruel, generally
offered to Pūṣan (as having no teeth to masticate
hard food); a mixture, a mixed odour; N. of a
species of poisonous plant; N. of a son of Śakuni
and father of Devarāta; N. of a brother of Rambha;
({%ā%}), f. the plant Asparagus Racemosus; another plant,
{%= priyaṅgu-vṛkṣa;%} N. of a daughter of a king
of Kaliṅga and wife of Akrodhana. {%—Karambhād%}
{%(˚bha-ad), t, t, t,%} Ved. eating groats or gruel, epi-
thet of Pūṣan.
<LEND>

<L>13763<pc>0205-c<k1>karamBaka<k2>karamBaka
{%Karambhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%am%}), n.
groats, coarsely ground oats &c.; a cake, flour or
meal mixed with curd.
<LEND>
[Page0206-a+ 72]

<L>13764<pc>0206-a<k1>karamBi<k2>karamBi
{%Karambhi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Śakuni and
father of Devarāta.
<LEND>

<L>13765<pc>0206-a<k1>karamBin<k2>karamBin
{%Karambhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. having groats.
<LEND>

<L>13766<pc>0206-a<k1>karavI<k2>karavI
{#karavI#}¦ {%karavī,%} f. the leaf of the plant Asa
Fœtida; [cf. {%karvarī, kavarī, kāvarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13767<pc>0206-a<k1>karavIka<k2>karavIka
{#karavIka#}¦ {%karavīka, as,%} m., N. of a mountain;
[cf. {%kara-vīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13768<pc>0206-a<k1>karas<k2>karas
{#karas#}¦ {%karas.%} See under 1. {%kara.%}
<LEND>

<L>13769<pc>0206-a<k1>karasna<k2>karasna
{#karasna#}¦ {%karasna.%} See under 1. {%kara.%}
<LEND>

<L>13770<pc>0206-a<k1>karahaYcA<k2>karahaYcA
{#karahaYcA#}¦ {%karahañcā,%} f., N. of a metre of
four lines, each consisting of seven syllables.
<LEND>

<L>13771<pc>0206-a<k1>karahAwa<k2>karahAwa
{#karahAwa#}¦ {%karahāṭa, as,%} m. the tree Vangueria
Spinosa; the fibrous root of a lotus; N. of a region.
<LEND>

<L>13772<pc>0206-a<k1>karahAwaka<k2>karahAwaka
{%Karahāṭaka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Vangueria Spinosa;
N. of an heretical prince.
<LEND>

<L>13773<pc>0206-a<k1>karANgaRa<k2>karANgaRa
{#karANgaRa#}¦ {%karāṅgaṇa, as,%} m. a market or fair
visited by many men; [cf. {%aṅgaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13774<pc>0206-a<k1>karAyikA<k2>karAyikA
{#karAyikA#}¦ {%karāyikā,%} f. a bird, a small kind
of crane.
<LEND>

<L>13775<pc>0206-a<k1>karAla<k2>karAla
{#karAla#}¦ {%karāla, as, ā, am,%} opening wide,
cleaving asunder, gaping (as a wound); having for-
midable projecting teeth, formidable, dreadful, terrible
(especially as an epithet of the Rākṣasas, of Śiva, of
Kāla, of Viṣṇu, and of a certain Devagandharva);
great, large, high, lofty; spacious, wide; deformed;
({%as%}), m. a certain species of animal; resin, pitch, or
a mixture of oil and the resin of the tree Shorea
Robusta; N. of a region; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Hemi-
desmus Indicus; an epithet of Durgā; N. of a certain
woman; ({%ī%}), f. one of the seven tongues and nine
Samidhs of Agni; ({%am%}), n. a kind of Ocimum.
{%—Karāla-kara, as, ā, am,%} having a powerful arm
or hand; having a large trunk, as an elephant.
{%—Karāla-keśara, as,%} m., N. of a lion in the
Pañcatantra. {%—Karāla-tripuṭā,%} f. a species of corn.
{%—Karāla-daṃṣṭra, as, ā, am,%} having terrific
teeth. {%—Karāla-locana, as, ā, am,%} terrific. {%—Ka-%}
{%rāla-vadanā,%} f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Karālānana%}
{%(˚la-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} terrific.
<LEND>

<L>13776<pc>0206-a<k1>karAlaka<k2>karAlaka
{%Karālaka, am,%}¦ n. a kind of Ocimum.
<LEND>

<L>13777<pc>0206-a<k1>karAlika<k2>karAlika
{%Karālika, as,%}¦ m. a tree; a sword; ({%ā%}), f. an
epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>13778<pc>0206-a<k1>karAlita<k2>karAlita
{%Karālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rendered formidable; afraid
of, alarmed by or at; magnified.
<LEND>

<L>13779<pc>0206-a<k1>kari<k2>kari
{#kari#}¦ {%kari,%} &c. See under 1. {%kara.%}
<LEND>

<L>13780<pc>0206-a<k1>kariBa<k2>kariBa
{#kariBa#}¦ {%karibha, as,%} m. the tree Ficus Re-
ligiosa.
<LEND>

<L>13781<pc>0206-a<k1>karira<k2>karira
{#karira#}¦ {%karira, as, am,%} m. n. the shoot of a
bamboo. See {%karīra.%}
<LEND>

<L>13782<pc>0206-a<k1>karizWa<k2>karizWa
{#karizWa#}¦ {%kariṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (superlative fr. 1.
{%kara%}), doing most, doing very much.
<LEND>

<L>13783<pc>0206-a<k1>karizRu<k2>karizRu
{%Kariṣṇu,%}¦ used in comp. See {%alaṅ-kariṣṇu%}
and {%nir-ākariṣṇu.%}
<LEND>

<L>13784<pc>0206-a<k1>karizya<k2>karizya
{%Kariṣya, as, ā, am (?) ,%}¦ Ved. to be done (?).
<LEND>

<L>13785<pc>0206-a<k1>karizyat<k2>karizyat
{%Kariṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} willing to do,
about to do.
<LEND>

<L>13786<pc>0206-a<k1>karizyamARa<k2>karizyamARa
{%Kariṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ about to do, going
to do.
<LEND>

<L>13787<pc>0206-a<k1>karIyas<k2>karIyas
{%Karīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (comparative fr. 1. {%kara%}),
doing more; one who does much.
<LEND>

<L>13788<pc>0206-a<k1>karIkf<k2>karIkf
{#karIkf#}¦ {%karī-kṛ.%} See under 2. {%kara.%}
<LEND>

<L>13789<pc>0206-a<k1>karIti<k2>karIti
{#karIti#}¦ {%karīti, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>13790<pc>0206-a<k1>karIra<k2>karIra
{#karIra#}¦ {%karīra, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. 1. {%kṝ%}), the shoot of a bamboo; ({%as%}), m. a water-
jar; a thorny plant, described as growing in deserts
and fed upon by camels, Capparisaphylla; ({%am%}), n.
the fruit of this plant; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. the root of an
elephant's tusk; a cricket, a small grasshopper.
{%—Karīra-kuṇa, as,%} m. the fruit season of Cap-
parisaphylla. {%—Karīra-prastha, as,%} m., N. of a
town; (a various reading has {%karīri-prastha.%})
<LEND>

<L>13791<pc>0206-a<k1>karIrikA<k2>karIrikA
{%Karīrikā,%}¦ f. the root of an elephant's tusk.
<LEND>
[Page0206-b+ 74]

<L>13792<pc>0206-b<k1>karIraka<k2>karIraka
{#karIraka#}¦ {%karīraka, am,%} n. fight, battle.
<LEND>

<L>13793<pc>0206-b<k1>karIladeSa<k2>karIladeSa
{#karIladeSa#}¦ {%karīla-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a region.
<LEND>

<L>13794<pc>0206-b<k1>karIza<k2>karIza
{#karIza#}¦ {%karīṣa, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. 1. {%kṝ%}), rub-
bish, refuse, dung; dry cow-dung; N. of a mountain;
[cf. {%ākhu-karīṣa.%}] {%—Karīṣa-gandhi, is,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Karīṣaṅ-kaṣa, as, ā, am,%} sweeping
away dung; ({%ā%}), f. a strong wind, a gale. {%—Karī-%}
{%ṣāgni (˚ṣa-ag˚), is,%} m. a fire of dry cow-dung;
(this substance is very generally used as fuel in
Hindūstan.)
<LEND>

<L>13795<pc>0206-b<k1>karIzaka<k2>karIzaka
{%Karīṣaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>13796<pc>0206-b<k1>karIzin<k2>karIzin
{%Karīṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ abounding in dung; ({%iṇī%}), f.
a region abounding in cow-dung; N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>13797<pc>0206-b<k1>karuRa<k2>karuRa
{#karuRa#}¦ {%karuṇa, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%kṝ,%} but in some of its meanings fr. 1. {%kṛ%}), mourn-
ful, miserable, lamenting; ({%am%}), ind. mournfully,
wofully, pitifully, in distress; ({%as%}), m. that which
causes pity, sorrow, affliction, tenderness, pity, com-
passion; one of the nine Rasas or sentiments of a
poem, the pathetic sentiment; a fruit tree, the
{{pamplemouse->pamplemousse||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}, Citrus Decumana; N. of a Buddha;
a Jaina saint; N. of an Asura; ({%ā%}), f. pity, com-
passion; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant, also called {%grīṣma-%}
{%puṣpī, cāriṇī,%} &c.; ({%am%}), n., Ved. an action, a
holy work. {%—Karuṇa-dhvani, is,%} m. a cry of
distress. {%—Karuṇa-puṇḍarīka, am,%} n. title of a
Buddhist work. {%—Karuṇa-mallī,%} f. the plant Jasmi-
num Sambac; also read {%karuṇā-mallī%}. {%—Karuṇa-%}
{%vedi-tva, am,%} n. compassion, sympathy. {%—Karuṇa-%}
{%vedin, ī, inī, i,%} knowing affliction or distress,
sympathising, pitiful. {%—Karuṇākara (˚ṇa-āk˚), as,%}
m. the father of Padmanābha. {%—Karuṇātmaka%}
{%(˚ṇa-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} compassionate, tender-hearted.
{%—Karuṇātman (˚ṇa-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} kind. {%—Ka-%}
{%ruṇā-para, as, ā, am,%} compassionate, tender.
{%—Karuṇā-maya, as, ī, am,%} gentle, compassionate.
{%—Karuṇārambha (˚ṇa-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} engaging
in deplorable actions. {%—Karuṇārdra (˚ṇa-ār˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} tender-hearted, soft, sensitive. {%—Karuṇār-%}
{%dhita (˚ṇa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} kind. {%—Karuṇā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} being in a pitiful state, pitiable. {%—Karuṇā-%}
{%vipralambha, as,%} m. grief of separation with the un-
certainty of meeting again, fears occurring in absence.
{%—Karuṇā-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} disposed to pity. {%—Ka-%}
{%ruṇā-veditā,%} f. charitableness, kindliness, sympathy.
<LEND>

<L>13798<pc>0206-b<k1>karuRAya<k2>karuRAya
{%Karuṇāya,%}¦ nom. P. A. {%-ṇāyati, -te, -yitum,%} to
be in a pitiful condition.
<LEND>

<L>13799<pc>0206-b<k1>karuRin<k2>karuRin
{%Karuṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ being in a pitiful condition,
pitiable.
<LEND>

<L>13800<pc>0206-b<k1>karutTAma<k2>karutTAma
{#karutTAma#}¦ {%karutthāma, as,%} m., N. of a
prince, a son of Dushyanta and father of Ākrīḍa;
[cf. {%aśvatthāman.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13801<pc>0206-b<k1>karunDaka<k2>karunDaka
{#karunDaka#}¦ {%karundhaka, as,%} m., N. of a son
of Śūra and brother of Vasu-deva.
<LEND>

<L>13802<pc>0206-b<k1>karuma<k2>karuma
{#karuma#}¦ {%karuma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. an epithet
of certain spectral or ghost-like appearances.
<LEND>

<L>13803<pc>0206-b<k1>karUkara<k2>karUkara
{#karUkara#}¦ {%karūkara, am,%} n., Ved. the joint of
the neck and the chine.
<LEND>

<L>13804<pc>0206-b<k1>karULatin<k2>karULatin
{#karULatin#}¦ {%karūḷatin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. one whose
teeth are decayed and broken; [cf. the next.]
<LEND>

<L>13805<pc>0206-b<k1>karUza<k2>karUza
{#karUza#}¦ {%karūṣa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
descended from a son of Manu Vaivasvata, (a prince
of this people is named Danta-vakra.)
<LEND>

<L>13806<pc>0206-b<k1>karUzaka<k2>karUzaka
{%Karūṣaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Manu Vaiva-
svata; ({%am%}), n., N. of a species of fruit.
<LEND>

<L>13807<pc>0206-b<k1>karewa<k2>karewa
{#karewa#}¦ {%kareṭa, as,%} m. a finger-nail.
<LEND>

<L>13808<pc>0206-b<k1>karewavyA<k2>karewavyA
{#karewavyA#}¦ {%kareṭavyā,%} f. or {%kareṭu, us,%} m. the
numidian crane; [cf. {%karaṭu, karkaṭa,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>13809<pc>0206-b<k1>kareRu<k2>kareRu
{#kareRu#}¦ {%kareṇu, us,%} m. f. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%kṛ;%} cf. 1. {%kara%}), a male or female elephant, gene-
rally used for the latter; according to some also
{%kareṇū; (us),%} m. the tree Pterospermum Aceri-
folium; ({%us%}), f., N. of a plant used as a drug and
supposed to grow in Kāśmīra. {%—Kareṇu-pāla, as,%}
[Page0206-c+ 76]
m. the groom or keeper of a female elephant; N. of
a man; [cf. {%kāreṇupāli.%}] {%—Kareṇu-bhū, ūs,%} m. an
epithet of Pālakāpya. {%—Kareṇu-matī,%} f., N. of the
wife of Nakula, daughter of a king of Cedi. {%—Ka-%}
{%reṇu-varya, as,%} m. a large or powerful elephant.
{%—Kareṇu-suta, as,%} m. an epithet of Pālakāpya.
<LEND>

<L>13810<pc>0206-c<k1>kareRuka<k2>kareRuka
{%Kareṇuka, am,%}¦ n. the poisonous fruit of the
plant Kareṇu.
<LEND>

<L>13811<pc>0206-c<k1>kareRU<k2>kareRU
{%Kareṇū, ūs,%}¦ m. f. a male or female elephant.
<LEND>

<L>13812<pc>0206-c<k1>karenara<k2>karenara
{#karenara#}¦ {%karenara, as,%} m. benzoin or storax.
See {%karevara.%}
<LEND>

<L>13813<pc>0206-c<k1>karenduka<k2>karenduka
{#karenduka#}¦ {%karenduka, as,%} m. a species of
grass, {%= bhū-tṛṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>13814<pc>0206-c<k1>karevara<k2>karevara
{#karevara#}¦ {%karevara, as,%} m. benzoin or storax.
<LEND>

<L>13815<pc>0206-c<k1>karowa<k2>karowa
{#karowa#}¦ {%karoṭa, as,%} m. f. a basin, a cup; the
bones of the head, the skull.
<LEND>

<L>13816<pc>0206-c<k1>karowaka<k2>karowaka
{%Karoṭaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>13817<pc>0206-c<k1>karowi<k2>karowi
{%Karoṭi, is,%}¦ or {%karoṭī,%} f. a basin, a cup; the skull.
<LEND>

<L>13818<pc>0206-c<k1>karotkara<k2>karotkara
{#karotkara#}¦ {%karotkara, karotpala,%} &c. See
under 1. and 2. {%kara.%}
<LEND>

<L>13819<pc>0206-c<k1>kark<k2>kark
{#kark#}¦ {%kark,%} to laugh; a Sautra root, or
one occurring in grammatical Sūtras but
not in the Dhātu-pāṭha.
<LEND>

<L>13820<pc>0206-c<k1>karka<k2>karka
{#karka#}¦ {%karka, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. 1. {%kṛ%}),
white; good; excellent; ({%as%}), m. a white horse; a
crab; the sign Cancer; a water-jar; fire; a mirror;
N. of various plants, {%= karkaṭa, karketana,%} and
{%karketila;%} beauty; N. of a commentator on Kātyā-
yana's Śrauta-sūtras; ({%ī%}), f., Ved. a white cow (?).
{%—Karka-khaṇḍa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Karka-cirbhiṭī%} (?), f. a small cucumber. {%—Karka-%}
{%phala, am,%} n., N. of a plant. {%—Karka-sāra, am,%}
n. flour or meal mixed with curds. {%—Karkī-prastha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>13821<pc>0206-c<k1>karkawa<k2>karkawa
{%Karkaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a crab; the sign Cancer; a kind
of bird, the numidian crane, Lanius Excubitor; N.
of a plant with poisonous tubers, the fibrous root of
a lotus; the curved end of the beam of a balance (to
which the strings supporting the scale are attached);
a kind of coitus; the radius of a circle; compass,
circuit; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Momordica Mixta; ({%ī%}), f.
a female crab; a snake (?); a kind of cucumber,
Cucumis Utilissimus; the fruit of the plant Bombax
Heptaphyllum; the curved end of the beam of a
balance &c.; a small water-jar; [cf. {%karkara, kar-%}
{%kaśa;%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">καρκῖνος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>cancer.</nsi>] {%—Karkaṭa-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Karkaṭa-śṛṅga,%}
{%am,%} n. the claw of a crab. {%—Karkaṭa-śṛṅgikā%} or
{%karkaṭa-śṛṅgī,%} f. a plant, the fruit of which is
compared to the claw or feelers of a crab, the horn
of a goat &c., see {%aja-śṛṅgī;%} other names of this
plant are {%kāma-nāśinī, kaulīrā, kuliṅgī,%} &c.
{%—Karkaṭākṣa (˚ṭa-ak˚), as,%} m. the plant Cucu-
mis Utilissimus. {%—Karkaṭākhyā (˚ṭa-ākh˚),%} f. the
plant Karkaṭa-śriṅgī. {%—Karkaṭāṅgā (˚ṭa-aṅ˚),%} f.
the same plant. {%—Karkaṭāsthi (˚ṭa-as˚),%} n. the shell
or crust of a crab. {%—Karkaṭāhva (˚ṭa-āh˚), as,%} m.
the plant Ægle Marmelos; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Karkaṭa-
śṛṅgī. {%—Karkaṭeśa (˚ṭa-īśa), as,%} m., N. of a
sanctuary.
<LEND>

<L>13822<pc>0206-c<k1>karkawaka<k2>karkawaka
{%Karkaṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a crab; the sign Cancer; the
plant Momordica Mixta (?); a kind of sugar-cane; a
hook shaped like the claw of a crab; N. of a Nāga;
({%ī%}), f. a female crab; ({%am%}), n. a poisonous root; a
particular fracture of the bones. {%—Karkaṭaka-rajju,%}
{%us,%} m. a rope with a hook attached to it, shaped like
the claw of a crab. {%—Karkaṭakāsthi (˚ka-as˚),%} n.
the shell or crust of a crab.
<LEND>

<L>13823<pc>0206-c<k1>karkawi<k2>karkawi
{%Karkaṭi, is,%}¦ f. a sort of cucumber, Cucumis Uti-
lissimus.
<LEND>

<L>13824<pc>0206-c<k1>karkawikA<k2>karkawikA
{%Karkaṭikā,%}¦ f., N. of a plant, a kind of gourd; a
kernel.
<LEND>

<L>13825<pc>0206-c<k1>karkawinI<k2>karkawinI
{%Karkaṭinī,%}¦ f. the plant Curcuma Xanthorrhiza.
<LEND>

<L>13826<pc>0206-c<k1>karkawu<k2>karkawu
{%Karkaṭu, us,%}¦ m. the numidian crane; [cf. {%karaṭu,%}
&c.]
<LEND>

<L>13827<pc>0206-c<k1>karkanDu<k2>karkanDu
{#karkanDu#}¦ {%karkandhu, us, ūs,%} m. f. (considered
[Page0207-a+ 71]
by some as an irregular compound of {%karka%} and
{%andhu%}), the jujube tree, Zizyphus Jujuba; a species
of this tree with a larger fruit; ({%u%}), n. the fruit of
this tree, or the uneatable fruits of a wild species;
({%ūs%}), f. the berry of this tree; ({%us%}), m., N. of a
man. {%—Karkandhu-kuṇa, am,%} n. the fruit season
of the Karkandhu tree. {%—Karkandhu-prastha, as,%}
m., N. of a town. {%—Karkandhu-matī,%} f., N. of a
woman (?). {%—Karkandhu-rohita, as, ā, am,%} red
like the berries of the jujube tree.
<LEND>

<L>13828<pc>0207-a<k1>karkaPala<k2>karkaPala
{#karkaPala#}¦ {%karka-phala.%} See under {%karka.%}
<LEND>

<L>13829<pc>0207-a<k1>karkara<k2>karkara
{#karkara#}¦ {%karkara, as, ā, am,%} hard, firm; ({%as%}),
m. a bone; a hammer; a mirror [cf. {%karphara%}];
a strap of leather (?); N. of a Nāga; ({%am%}), n. stone,
limestone, especially the nodule found in Bengal un-
der the name of Kaṅkar; [cf. {%karkaṭa, karkaśa.%}]
{%—Karkarākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as,%} m. a wagtail.
{%—Karkarāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a kind of bird, a
gallinule (?). {%—Karkarāndhuka (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m.
a blind well, one of which the mouth is overgrown
with grass &c. so as to be hidden; also read {%karka-%}
{%rāndhaka;%} see {%andha-kūpa.%}
<LEND>

<L>13830<pc>0207-a<k1>karkarAwu<k2>karkarAwu
{#karkarAwu#}¦ {%karkarāṭu, us,%} m. a glance, a side-
look.
<LEND>

<L>13831<pc>0207-a<k1>karkarAwuka<k2>karkarAwuka
{#karkarAwuka#}¦ {%karkarāṭuka, as,%} m. the numi-
dian crane.
<LEND>

<L>13832<pc>0207-a<k1>karkarewu<k2>karkarewu
{%Karkareṭu, us,%}¦ m. = the preceding; [cf. {%karaṭu,%}
&c.]
<LEND>

<L>13833<pc>0207-a<k1>karkarAla<k2>karkarAla
{#karkarAla#}¦ {%karkarāla, as, am,%} m. n. a curl, a
ringlet.
<LEND>

<L>13834<pc>0207-a<k1>karkari<k2>karkari
{#karkari#}¦ {%karkari, is%} or {%ī,%} f., Ved. a kind of
musical instrument, a lute; ({%ī%}), f. a water-jar.
<LEND>

<L>13835<pc>0207-a<k1>karkarIkA<k2>karkarIkA
{%Karkarīkā,%}¦ f. a small water-jar.
<LEND>

<L>13836<pc>0207-a<k1>karkarewa<k2>karkarewa
{#karkarewa#}¦ {%karkareṭa, am,%} n. the hand curved
as a claw for the purpose of grasping anything.
<LEND>

<L>13837<pc>0207-a<k1>karkarewu<k2>karkarewu
{#karkarewu#}¦ {%karkareṭu.%} See {%karkarāṭuka.%}
<LEND>

<L>13838<pc>0207-a<k1>karkaSa<k2>karkaSa
{#karkaSa#}¦ {%karkaśa, as, ā, am,%} hard, harsh,
rough (opposed to {%komala, ślakṣṇa%}); intangible;
violent, cruel; unfeeling, unmerciful; harsh, unkind,
miserly; ({%as%}), m. a sword, a scymitar; N. of several
plants, {%= kāmpilla = guṇḍārocanī%} (commonly called
Sunda Rochani); a kind of cassia, Cassia or Senna
Esculenta; a species of sugar-cane; ({%ā%}), f. a thorny
plant, Tragia Involucrata; ({%ī%}), f. the wild jujube; [cf.
{%karkaṭa, karkara.%}] {%—Karkaśa-cchada, as,%} m. the
plants Trophis Aspera and Trichosanthes Diœca;
({%ā%}), f. the plant Luffa Acutangula. {%—Karkaśa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. hardness, harshness, rough manners. {%—Kar-%}
{%kaśa-dala, as,%} m. the plant Trichosanthes Diœca;
({%ā%}), f. another plant. {%—Karkaśa-vākya, am,%} n.
harsh or contumelious speech.
<LEND>

<L>13839<pc>0207-a<k1>karkaSikA<k2>karkaSikA
{%Karkaśikā,%}¦ f. wild jujube.
<LEND>

<L>13840<pc>0207-a<k1>karkasAra<k2>karkasAra
{#karkasAra#}¦ {%karka-sāra.%} See under {%karka.%}
<LEND>

<L>13841<pc>0207-a<k1>karkAru<k2>karkAru
{#karkAru#}¦ {%karkāru, us, u,%} m. n. a kind of
gourd, Beninkasa Cerifera.
<LEND>

<L>13842<pc>0207-a<k1>karkAruka<k2>karkAruka
{%Karkāruka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Convolvulus Pani-
culatus.
<LEND>

<L>13843<pc>0207-a<k1>karki<k2>karki
{#karki#}¦ {%karki, is,%} m. the sign of the zodiac,
Cancer; also read {%karkin, ī,%} m.
<LEND>

<L>13844<pc>0207-a<k1>karkIprasTa<k2>karkIprasTa
{#karkIprasTa#}¦ {%karkī-prastha.%} See under {%karka.%}
<LEND>

<L>13845<pc>0207-a<k1>karketana<k2>karketana
{#karketana#}¦ {%karketana%} or {%karketara, as,%} m. (?)
a kind of gem or precious stone.
<LEND>

<L>13846<pc>0207-a<k1>karkowa<k2>karkowa
{#karkowa#}¦ {%karkoṭa, as,%} m. one of the principal
serpents or Nāgas of Pātāla; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people; ({%am%}), n. a poisonous fruit.
<LEND>

<L>13847<pc>0207-a<k1>karkowaka<k2>karkowaka
{%Karkoṭaka, as,%}¦ m. several plants, Momordica
Mixta; Ægle Marmelos; the sugar-cane; N. of a
Nāga or serpent; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a barbarous
tribe of low origin; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant; ({%kā%}), f.
the plant Momordica Mixta. {%—Karkoṭaka-viṣa,%}
{%am,%} n. the poison of Karkoṭaka.
<LEND>
[Page0207-b+ 79]

<L>13848<pc>0207-b<k1>karcUra<k2>karcUra
{#karcUra#}¦ {%karcūra, as,%} m., N. of a plant, a kind
of Curcuma; ({%am%}), n. gold; an orpiment; [cf. {%kar-%}
{%bura%} and {%karbūra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13849<pc>0207-b<k1>karcUraka<k2>karcUraka
{%Karcūraka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Curcuma Zerumbet;
also read {%karbūraka.%}
<LEND>

<L>13850<pc>0207-b<k1>karj<k2>karj
{#karj#}¦ {%karj,%} cl. 1. P. {%karjati, -jitum,%} to
pain or make uneasy.
<LEND>

<L>13851<pc>0207-b<k1>karR<k2>karR
{#karR#}¦ {%karṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%karṇayati, -yitum,%}
to pierce, bore. See {%ā-karṇ.%}
<LEND>

<L>13852<pc>0207-b<k1>karRa<k2>karRa
{#karRa#}¦ {%karṇa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ%}),
the ear, the handle or ear of a vessel; the helm or
rudder of a ship; the plants Cassia Fistula and Calo-
tropis Gigantea; (in prosody) a spondee, a foot of
two long syllables; (in geometry) the hypothenuse
of a triangle or the diagonal of a tetragon; N. of a
renowned hero in the Mahā-bhārata, king of Aṅga
and elder brother by the mother's side of the Pāṇḍu
princes, being the son of the god Sūrya by Pṛthā or
Kuntī, before her marriage with Pāṇḍu. (Afraid of
the censure of her relatives, Kuntī deserted the child
and exposed it in the river, where it was found by a
charioteer named Adhi-ratha and nurtured by his
wife Rādhā; hence {%Karṇa%} is sometimes called Sūta-
putra or Sūta-ja, sometimes Rādheya, though named
by his foster-parents Vasu-ṣeṇa); N. of a son of
Viśvajit; (with Buddhists) a son of Mahā-sammata
and king in Potāla; N. of a king, father of Viśoka-
deva; ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. eared, furnished with long
ears; furnished with chaff (as grain). {%Karṇe,%} (in
theatrical language) into the ear, in a low voice,
aside; {%api karṇe,%} Ved. behind the ear or back,
from behind, after [cf. {%api-karṇa%}]; {%karṇaṃ dā,%}
to give ear to, listen to; {%karṇam ā-gam,%} to come
to one's ears, become known to. {%—Karṇa-kaṇḍu,%}
{%us%} or {%ū, ūs,%} m. f. painful itching of the ear. {%—Karṇa-%}
{%kīṭā,%} f. an insect or worm with many feet and of a
reddish colour, Julus Cornifex; a small centipede;
according to some {%karṇa-kīṭī%}. {%—Karṇa-kubja, am,%}
n., N. of an imaginary town. {%—Karṇa-kṣveḍa, as,%}
m. an affection of the ear, a roaring or constant
noise in it. {%—Karṇa-kharika, as,%} m., N. of a
Vaiśya. {%—Karṇa-ga, as, ā, am,%} touching the ear,
hanging on it, next to the ear, extending to the ear.
{%—Karṇa-gūtha, am,%} n. ear-wax; ({%as%}), m. or
{%karṇa-gūthaka, as,%} m. hardening of the wax of the
ear. {%—Karṇa-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%} seized by the ear.
{%—Karṇa-gṛhya,%} ind. seizing by the ear. {%—Karṇa-%}
{%gocara, as, ā, am,%} perceptible to the ear, audible.
{%—Karṇa-grāha, as,%} m. a helmsman. {%—Karṇa-%}
{%grāha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with a helmsman
(as a ship). {%—Karṇa-cchidra, am,%} n. the outer
auditory passage; [cf. {%karṇa-puṭa, karṇa-randhra,%}
&c.] {%—Karṇa-japa, as,%} m. ‘ear-whisperer,’ an in-
former. {%—Karṇa-jalūkā,%} f. an insect, Julus; a small
centipede; [cf. {%karṇa-kīṭā.%}] {%—Karṇa-jalaukā,%} f. or
{%karṇa-jalaukas, ās,%} f. the same. {%—Karṇa-jāpa%} or
{%karṇa-japa, as,%} m. whispering in the ear, tale-
bearing, calumniating. {%—Karṇa-jāha, am,%} n. the
root of the ear. {%—Karṇa-jit, t,%} m. ‘the conqueror
of Karṇa,’ an epithet of Arjuna; (Karṇa having
taken the part of the Kurus, was killed by Arjuna in
one of the great battles between them and the
Pāṇḍus.) {%—Karṇa-tas,%} ind. away from the ear.
{%—Karṇa-tāla, as,%} m. the flapping of an elephant's
ears. {%—Karṇa-darpaṇa, as,%} m. an ear-ring, an
ornament for the ear. {%—Karṇa-dundubhi, is,%} f. a
kind of worm (making a noise in the ear like a
drum); see {%karṇa-kīṭā%}. {%—Karṇa-deva, as,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Karṇa-dhāra, as,%} m. a helmsman, a
pilot. {%—Karṇadhāra-tā,%} f. the office of an helms-
man. {%—Karṇa-dhāriṇī,%} f. a female elephant.
{%—Karṇa-nāda, as,%} m. ringing in the ear. {%—Karṇa-%}
{%nāsā,%} f. the ears and the nose. {%—Karṇandu, us,%} f.
a woman's ear-ring; see {%karṇāndu%}. {%—Karṇa-pa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Karṇa-pattraka, as,%} m.
the tragus, a part of the external ear. {%—Karṇa-%}
{%patha, as,%} m. the compass or range of hearing;
{%karṇapatham ā-yā%} or {%upe (upa-i),%} to come within
the range of the ear, to be heard. {%—Karṇa-para, %}
[Page0207-c+ 81]
{%as,%} m. an ornament for the ear. {%—Karṇa-param-%}
{%parā,%} f. going from one ear to another. {%—Karṇa-%}
{%parākrama, as,%} m. title of a work. {%—Karṇa-%}
{%parvan, a,%} n. ‘the Karṇa section,’ title of the
eighth book of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Karṇa-pāka,%}
{%as,%} m. inflammation of the outer ear. {%—Karṇa-pāli,%}
{%is,%} f. the lobe of the ear; the outer and curving
edge of the ear; ({%ī%}), f. an ornament of the ear, a
garland or string of jewels pendent from it; N. of a
river. {%—Karṇa-pāśa, as,%} m. a beautiful ear. {%—Kar-%}
{%ṇa-puṭa, am,%} n. the auditory passage of the ear.
{%—Karṇa-pur, ūr,%} f. or {%karṇa-purī,%} f. the capital
of Karṇa, i. e. Campā, the ancient N. of Bhagalpur.
{%—Karṇa-puṣpa, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= moraṭa.%}
{%—Karṇa-pūra, as,%} m. an ornament of flowers worn
round the ears; an ear-ring; N. of several plants,
blue lotus; Acacia Sirissa; Jonesia Aśoka; N. of the
father of Kavicandra, author of the Alaṅkāra Kau-
stubha. {%—Karṇa-pūraka, as,%} m. the Kadamba
tree, Nauclea Cadamba; N. of a servant. {%—Karṇa-%}
{%pūraṇa, am,%} n. the act of filling the ears (with
cotton &c.); any substance used for that purpose;
({%as%}), m. {%= karṇa-pūra%}. {%—Karṇa-pratināha%} or
{%karṇa-pratīnāha, as,%} m. a disease of the ear, sup-
pression of its excretion or wax, which is supposed
to have dissolved and pass by the nose and mouth.
{%—Karṇa-prayāga, as,%} m., N. of the confluence of
the river Gaṅgā and Pindar. {%—Karṇa-prānta, as,%}
m. the lobe of the ear. {%—Karṇa-prāvaraṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} using the ears for a covering; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a fabulous people. {%—Karṇa-phala, as,%} m. a sort of
fish, Ophiocephalus Kurrawey. {%—Karṇa-bhūṣaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%karṇa-bhūṣā,%} f. an ear ornament.
{%—Karṇa-madgura, as,%} m. a sort of sheat fish,
Silurus Unitus. {%—Karṇa-mala, am,%} n. the excretion
or wax of the ear. {%—Karṇa-mukura, as,%} m. an ear
ornament; an ear-ring. {%—Karṇa-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
headed by Karṇa, having Karṇa as leader. {%—Karṇa-%}
{%mūla, am,%} n. the root of the ear. {%—Karṇamūlīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} near the root of the ear. {%—Karṇa-moṭi,%}
{%is,%} f. an epithet of Devī or Durgā in one of her
forms or incarnations (Cāmuṇḍā). {%—Karṇa-yoni,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. having the ear as a source or starting-
point, going forth from the ear, an epithet of an
arrow, because in shooting the bow-string is drawn
back to the ear. {%—Karṇa-randhra, as, am,%} m. n.
the orifice or auditory passage of the ear; [cf. {%karṇa-%}
{%cchidra, karṇa-puṭa,%} &c.] {%—Karṇa-roga, as,%} m.
disease of the ear. {%—Karṇaroga-pratiṣedha, as,%}
m. cure of a disease of the ear. {%—Karṇaroga-%}
{%vijñāna, am,%} n. diagnosis of any disease of the ear.
{%—Karṇa-latā,%} f. or {%karṇa-latikā,%} f. the lobe of
the ear. {%—Karṇa-vaṃśa, as,%} m. an elevated plat-
form of bamboo. {%—Karṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
ears, long-eared; furnished with tendrils or hooks;
having a helm. {%—Karṇa-varjita, as, ā, am,%} earless;
({%as%}), m. a snake. {%—Karṇaviṭka, as, ā, am,%} fur-
nished with ear-wax. {%—Karṇa-vidradhi, is,%} f. ulcer-
ation of the ear. {%—Karṇa-vivara, am,%} n. the audi-
tory passage of the ear. {%—Karṇa-viṣ, ṭ,%} f. ear-wax.
{%—Karṇa-vedha, as,%} m. ‘ear-piercing,’ a religious
ceremony performed to prevent a person from dying,
if the birth of a third son be expected; piercing the
ear to receive ear-rings. {%—Karṇa-vedhanī%} or {%karṇa-%}
{%vedhanikā,%} f. an instrument for piercing the ear of
an elephant. {%—Karṇa-veṣṭa, as,%} m. an ear-ring;
N. of a prince. {%—Karṇa-veṣṭaka, as,%} m. the flaps
of a cap protecting the ear; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. n. (?)
an ear-ring. {%—Karṇa-veṣṭana, am,%} n. an ear-ring.
{%—Karṇa-śaṣkulī,%} f. the outer part of the ear, the
exterior cartilaginous portion leading to the auditory
passage. {%—Karṇa-śirīṣa, as,%} m. a Śirīṣa flower
fastened to the ear as an ornament. {%—Karṇa-śūla,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. ear-ache. {%—Karṇaśūlin, ī, inī, i,%}
having ear-ache. {%—Karṇa-śobhana, am,%} n., Ved. an
ear ornament. {%—Karṇa-śrava, as, ā, am,%} audible,
loud. {%—Karṇa-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
{%—Karṇa-śrut, t,%} m., N. of the author of several
hymns of the Ṛg-veda. {%—Karṇa-saṃsrāva%} or {%kar-%}
{%ṇa-srava%} or {%karṇa-srāva, as,%} m. running of the
ear, discharge of pus or ichorous matter from the ear.
[Page0208-a+ 81]
{%—Karṇa-sū, ūs,%} m. the father of Karṇa, an epithet
of Sūrya or the sun. {%—Karṇa-sūci, is,%} m. a kind of
insect. {%—Karṇa-sphoṭā,%} f. a sort of creeper (com-
monly {%kāṇaphāṭā%}). {%—Karṇa-karṇi,%} ind. from ear
to ear, whispering into each other's ears. {%—Kar-%}
{%ṇāñjali (˚ṇa-añ˚), is,%} m. the auditory passage of
the outer ear. {%—Karṇāḍhaka (˚ṇa-āḍh˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of this man.
{%—Karṇādeśa (˚ṇa-ād˚), as,%} m. an ear-ring (?).
{%—Karṇānuja (˚ṇa-an˚), as,%} m. an epithet of
Yudhiṣṭhira, the younger brother of Karṇa, one of
the five Pāṇḍu princes. {%—Karṇāntika (˚ṇa-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} near or close to the ear. {%—Karṇāndu%}
{%(˚ṇa-an˚), us%} or {%ū, ūs,%} f. an ornament for the ear;
an ear-ring. {%—Karṇābharaṇaka (˚ṇa-ābh˚), as,%}
m. the tree Cathartocarpus (Cassia) Fistula. {%—Kar-%}
{%ṇārā%} ({%˚ṇa%} and rt. {%ṛ?%}), f. an instrument for perfo-
rating the ear of an elephant. {%—Karṇāri (˚ṇa-ari),%}
{%is,%} m. an epithet of Arjuṇa (as the enemy of Karṇa);
the tree Terminalia Arjuna. {%—Karṇārpaṇa (˚ṇa-%}
{%ar˚), am,%} n. applying the ear, giving ear, paying
attention, listening to. {%—Karṇālaṅkāra (˚ṇa-al˚),%}
{%as,%} m. or {%karṇālaṅkriyā,%} f. or {%karṇālaṅkṛti, is,%}
f. an ear ornament, an ear-ring. {%—Karṇāśva (˚ṇa-%}
{%aś˚?), as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Karṇāsphāla (˚ṇa-%}
{%ās˚), as,%} m. the flapping to and fro of an elephant's
ears. {%—Karṇe-curucurā,%} f. tale-bearing. {%—Karṇe-%}
{%japa, as, ā, am,%} a slanderous whisperer, a secret
traducer, a tale-bearer, an informer. {%—Karṇe-ṭiri-%}
{%ṭirā,%} f. tale-bearing. {%—Karṇendu (˚ṇa-in˚), us,%}
f. a semicircular ornament of the ear, an ear-ring;
[cf. {%karṇāndu.%}] {%—Karṇotpala (˚ṇa-ut˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a poet. {%—Karṇodaya (˚ṇa-ud˚),%} N. of a book.
{%—Karṇopakarṇikā (˚ṇa-up˚),%} f. a female tale-
bearer or informer. {%—Karṇorṇa (˚ṇa-ūr˚), as, ā, am,%}
having wool on the ears (as any animal).
<LEND>

<L>13853<pc>0208-a<k1>karRaka<k2>karRaka
{%Karṇaka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a prominence, handle, or
projection on the side or sides (of a vessel &c.);
a tendril; applied also to the legs when spread out;
N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of this
man. {%—Karṇaka-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. furnished
with tendrils or side branches.
<LEND>

<L>13854<pc>0208-a<k1>karRakita<k2>karRakita
{%Karṇakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with tendrils.
<LEND>

<L>13855<pc>0208-a<k1>karRala<k2>karRala
{%Karṇala, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with ears.
<LEND>

<L>13856<pc>0208-a<k1>karRika<k2>karRika
{%Karṇika, as, ā, am,%}¦ having ears, having large or
long ears; having a helm; ({%as%}), m. a steersman;
pl., N. of a people; N. of a king in Potāla; ({%ā%}), f.
an ear-ring or ornament for the ear; a knot, tubercle;
round protuberance (e. g. the round protuberance at
the end of a reed or cane); the pericarp of a lotus;
a fruit-stalk; the tip of an elephant's trunk; the
middle finger; chalk; a pen or small brush; a trowel;
the plants Premna Spinosa or Longifolia, and Odina
Pinnata; a bawd; N. of an Apsaras; N. of the wife
of Kaṅka. {%—Karṇikācala, as,%} m. an epithet of the
fabulous mountain Meru; (fr. {%karṇikā,%} the seed
vessel of a lotus, and {%acala,%} a mountain, Meru being
in the centre of the world, the divisions of which
are compared to the leaves of a lotus); also {%karṇi-%}
{%kādri,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>13857<pc>0208-a<k1>karRikAra<k2>karRikAra
{%Karṇikāra, as,%}¦ m. the tree Pterospermum Aceri-
folium; also Cassia Fistula; the pericarp of a lotus;
({%am%}), n. the flower of the tree Pterospermum Ace-
rifolium and of Cassia Fistula. {%—Karṇikāra-priya,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>13858<pc>0208-a<k1>karRikin<k2>karRikin
{%Karṇikin, ī,%}¦ m. an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>13859<pc>0208-a<k1>karRin<k2>karRin
{%Karṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having ears, relating to the ear;
long-eared; (at the end of compounds) having (any-
thing) attached to the ear; furnished with flaps or
anything similar (said of shoes); barbed, furnished
with knots &c. (as an arrow); having a helm; ({%ī%}),
m. the side of the neck, the part near the ear; a
steersman; N. of a mountain, one of the seven prin-
cipal ranges of the mountains, dividing the universe;
({%inī%}), f. (scil. {%yoni%}) a disease of the uterus, prolapsus
or polypus uteri. {%—Karṇī-ratha, as,%} m. (for {%karṇi-%}
{%ratha%}), a covered car, or (according to some) a litter
for the conveyance of women &c., borne on men's
shoulders.
<LEND>

<L>13860<pc>0208-a<k1>karRila<k2>karRila
{%Karṇila, as, ā, am,%}¦ long-eared.
<LEND>

<L>13861<pc>0208-a<k1>karRI<k2>karRI
{%Karṇī,%}¦ a fem. form related to {%karṇa%} and appear-
[Page0208-b+ 75]
ing in compounds (e. g. {%ayas-karṇī%}). {%—Karṇī-suta,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Kaṃsa, the enemy of Kṛṣṇa;
according to the scholiast the author of a thieves'
manual.
<LEND>

<L>13862<pc>0208-b<k1>karRya<k2>karRya
{%Karṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in or at the ear; suita-
ble to the ear.
<LEND>

<L>13863<pc>0208-b<k1>karRAwa<k2>karRAwa
{#karRAwa#}¦ {%karṇāṭa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a country
and the people inhabiting it, whence the modern
Karnatic; the name, however, was anciently applied
to the central districts of the peninsula, including
Mysore; ({%ī%}), f. a princess of Karṇāṭa; a plant, com-
monly Haṃsapadī; one of the Rāgiṇīs or female
personifications of the musical modes, the bride of
the Rāga Mālava. {%—Karṇāṭa-deśa, as,%} m. the
Karṇāṭa country.
<LEND>

<L>13864<pc>0208-b<k1>karRAwaka<k2>karRAwaka
{%Karṇāṭaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a country and the
people inhabiting it. {%—Karṇāṭaka-deśa, as,%} m. the
Karṇāṭa country. {%—Karṇāṭaka-bhāṣā,%} f. the dia-
lect of Karṇāṭa.
<LEND>

<L>13865<pc>0208-b<k1>karRArpaRa<k2>karRArpaRa
{#karRArpaRa#}¦ {%karṇārpaṇa.%} See under {%karṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>13866<pc>0208-b<k1>kart<k2>kart
{#kart#}¦ {%kart%} (a various reading for {%katr,%}
{%kartr%}), cl. 10. P. {%kartayati, -yitum,%} to
slacken or unloose, to remove.
<LEND>

<L>13867<pc>0208-b<k1>karta<k2>karta
{#karta#}¦ {%karta, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%kṛt?%}), Ved. a hole,
a cavity; (a more recent form is {%garta.%})
<LEND>

<L>13868<pc>0208-b<k1>kartana<k2>kartana<h>1
{#kartana#} 1¦. {%kartana, am,%} n. (fr. 1. {%kṛt%}), cutting,
cutting off or in pieces, excision; ({%ī%}), f. scissors.
<LEND>

<L>13869<pc>0208-b<k1>kartari<k2>kartari
{%Kartari, is,%}¦ f. scissors.
<LEND>

<L>13870<pc>0208-b<k1>kartarikA<k2>kartarikA
{%Kartarikā,%}¦ f. a knife, a small sword or cutlass; a
hunter's knife or sword, a couteau de chasse; scissors.
<LEND>

<L>13871<pc>0208-b<k1>kartarI<k2>kartarI
{%Kartarī,%}¦ f. a scissors or shears; a knife; a small
sword or cutlass; the part of an arrow to which the
feathers are attached.
<LEND>

<L>13872<pc>0208-b<k1>kartana<k2>kartana<h>2
{#kartana#} 2¦. {%kartana, am,%} n. (fr. 2. {%kṛt%}), spin-
ning cotton or thread.
<LEND>

<L>13873<pc>0208-b<k1>kartarIya<k2>kartarIya
{#kartarIya#}¦ {%kartarīya,%} a kind of poisonous
plant.
<LEND>

<L>13874<pc>0208-b<k1>kartavya<k2>kartavya
{#kartavya#}¦ {%kartavya, as, ā, am%} (fut. pass. part.
fr. 1. {%kṛ%}), to be done, made or accomplished, what
ought to be done; to be imposed (as a punishment);
to be turned towards (as the mind); to be offered;
to be acted; ({%am%}), n. what ought to be done, obliga-
tion, duty, task. {%—Kartavya-tā,%} f. or {%kartavya-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. necessity, obligation; propriety, fitness; suit-
able measures.
<LEND>

<L>13875<pc>0208-b<k1>kartu<k2>kartu
{%Kartu,%}¦ the base of several cases, used as infinitives
of the verb {%kṛ%} in the Veda (e. g. {%kartum, kartave,%}
{%kartavai, kartos%}). {%—Kartu-kāma, as, ā, am,%} de-
sirous or intending to do.
<LEND>

<L>13876<pc>0208-b<k1>kartf<k2>kartf
{%Kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a doer, a maker, one who
makes or does, an agent, one who practises what he
knows; one who acts in a religious ceremony, a
priest; (very often at the end of compounds, e. g.
{%bhaya-kartṛ, rājya-kartṛ,%} &c.); ({%tā%}), m. the
creator of the world, an epithet of Brahmā, of
Viṣṇu, and of Śiva; (in gram.) an agent, one who
acts of his own accord ({%sva-tantraḥ%}), the active noun,
the nominative case. {%—Kartṛ-tā,%} f. the state of being
the agent of an action. {%—Kartṛ-tva, am,%} n. agency,
the act or property of an agent. {%—Kartṛ-pura, am,%}
n., N. of a town. {%—Kartṛ-vācya, as,%} m. the active
voice. {%—Kartṛ-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing or being
within the agent. {%—Kartṛstha-kriyaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} any (root &c.) whose action stands within the
agent. {%—Kartṛstha-bhāvaka, as, ā, am,%} any (root
&c.) whose state or {%bhāva%} stands within the agent.
<LEND>

<L>13877<pc>0208-b<k1>kartfka<k2>kartfka
{%Kartṛka, as, ā, am,%}¦ an agent, one who does
anything. {%—Kartṛka-tva, am,%} n. agency, action.
<LEND>

<L>13878<pc>0208-b<k1>kartra<k2>kartra
{%Kartra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. an incantation, charm.
<LEND>

<L>13879<pc>0208-b<k1>kartva<k2>kartva
{%Kartva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be done or accom-
plished; ({%am%}), n. obligation, duty; task.
<LEND>

<L>13880<pc>0208-b<k1>kartita<k2>kartita
{#kartita#}¦ {%kartita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%kṛt%}),
cut, cut off.
<LEND>

<L>13881<pc>0208-b<k1>kartizyat<k2>kartizyat
{%Kartiṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} or {%kartiṣya-%}
{%māṇa, as, ā, am,%} intending or wishing to cut.
<LEND>
[Page0208-c+ 76]

<L>13882<pc>0208-c<k1>karttavya<k2>karttavya
{%Karttavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut down, to be
killed.
<LEND>

<L>13883<pc>0208-c<k1>karttfkA<k2>karttfkA
{%Karttṛkā,%}¦ f. a small sword, a knife; [cf. the next.]
<LEND>

<L>13884<pc>0208-c<k1>karttrikA<k2>karttrikA
{%Karttrikā,%}¦ f. a hunter's knife.
<LEND>

<L>13885<pc>0208-c<k1>karttrI<k2>karttrI
{%Karttrī,%}¦ f. a pair of scissors.
<LEND>

<L>13886<pc>0208-c<k1>kartya<k2>kartya
{%Kartya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut down.
<LEND>

<L>13887<pc>0208-c<k1>kartr<k2>kartr
{#kartr#}¦ {%kartr,%} cl. 10. P. {%kartrayati, -yitum,%}
to unloose, remove; [cf. {%kart%} and {%katr.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13888<pc>0208-c<k1>kard<k2>kard
{#kard#}¦ {%kard,%} cl. 1. P. {%kardati, -ditum,%} to rum-
ble, as the bowels; to caw, as a crow; or to
make any similar noise; [cf. {%pard;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">χορδή.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>13889<pc>0208-c<k1>kardana<k2>kardana
{%Kardana, am,%}¦ n. rumbling of the bowels, bor-
borygmi; ({%ī%}), f. the day of full moon in the month
Caitra.
<LEND>

<L>13890<pc>0208-c<k1>karda<k2>karda
{#karda#}¦ {%karda, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kard%}),
mud; clay.
<LEND>

<L>13891<pc>0208-c<k1>kardawa<k2>kardawa
{%Kardaṭa, as,%}¦ m. mud, dirt; the fibrous root of
the lotus ({%= karahāṭa%}); any aquatic weed, as
Vallisneria &c.
<LEND>

<L>13892<pc>0208-c<k1>kardama<k2>kardama
{%Kardama, as,%}¦ m. mud, slime; mire, clay; dirt,
filth, sin; a kind of plant; a poisonous kind of bulb;
N. of a Nāga; N. of a Prajāpati, born from the
shadow of Brahmā, or son of that god by Chāyā, and
the husband of Devahūti and father of Kapila; a son
of Prajāpati Pulaha; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant; ({%am%}),
n. flesh; ({%as, ā, am%}), furnished with mud, mire,
dirt, filth. {%—Kardama-rāja, as,%} m. or {%kardama-%}
{%rājan, ā,%} m., N. of a man, a son of Kṣema-gupta.
{%—Kardamāṭaka (˚ma-āṭ˚), as,%} m. a receptacle for
filth, a sewer, &c.; [cf. {%kanyāṭa, patnyāṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13893<pc>0208-c<k1>kardamaka<k2>kardamaka
{%Kardamaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of granulous fruit;
a poisonous kind of bulb; a kind of serpent.
<LEND>

<L>13894<pc>0208-c<k1>kardamita<k2>kardamita
{%Kardamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with mud, dirty.
<LEND>

<L>13895<pc>0208-c<k1>kardaminI<k2>kardaminI
{%Kardaminī,%}¦ f. a marshy region.
<LEND>

<L>13896<pc>0208-c<k1>kardamila<k2>kardamila
{%Kardamila, am,%}¦ n., N. of a region.
<LEND>

<L>13897<pc>0208-c<k1>karpawa<k2>karpawa
{#karpawa#}¦ {%karpaṭa, as, am,%} m. n. old or patched
or ragged garments; [cf. {%kārpaṭika%} and {%pañca-%}
{%karpaṭa.%}] {%—Karpaṭa-dhārin, ī,%} m. a religious men-
dicant, a beggar in patched or ragged clothes, or some-
times with merely a cloth to cover the privities.
<LEND>

<L>13898<pc>0208-c<k1>karpawika<k2>karpawika
{%Karpaṭika, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%karpaṭin, ī, inī, i,%}
covered with patched or ragged garments, clothed in
beggar's raiment.
<LEND>

<L>13899<pc>0208-c<k1>karpaRa<k2>karpaRa
{#karpaRa#}¦ {%karpaṇa,%} a kind of lance or spear;
[cf. {%kaṇapa%} and {%karpara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13900<pc>0208-c<k1>karpara<k2>karpara
{#karpara#}¦ {%karpara, as,%} m. a cup, a pot, an iron
saucepan or frying-pan (according to some also n.
in this sense); the skull, the cranium; a kind of
weapon; the plant Ficus Glomerata, [cf. {%udum-%}
{%bara%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a collyrium extracted from the Amo-
mum Anthorhiza, [cf. {%ghaṭa-karpara, kharpara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13901<pc>0208-c<k1>karparAla<k2>karparAla
{%Karparāla, as,%}¦ m. a tree described as a Pīlu grow-
ing in the hills; (a various reading for {%kandarāla.%})
<LEND>

<L>13902<pc>0208-c<k1>karparASa<k2>karparASa
{%Karparāśa, as,%}¦ m. sand, gravel, a sandy soil; (a
wrong reading for {%karparāṃśa,%} a potsherd.)
<LEND>

<L>13903<pc>0208-c<k1>karparikA<k2>karparikA
{%Karparikā,%}¦ f. (diminutive fr. {%karparī%}) in {%karpa-%}
{%rikātuttha, am,%} n. a collyrium extracted from the
Amomum Anthorhiza.
<LEND>

<L>13904<pc>0208-c<k1>karparIka<k2>karparIka
{%Karparīka (?), as,%}¦ m. fire.
<LEND>

<L>13905<pc>0208-c<k1>karpAsa<k2>karpAsa
{#karpAsa#}¦ {%karpāsa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. 1. {%kṛ%}), cotton, Gossypium Herbaceum; ({%ī%}), f.
the cotton tree; [cf. {%kārpāsa;%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">κάρπασος;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>carbasus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>13906<pc>0208-c<k1>karpUra<k2>karpUra<h>1
{#karpUra#} 1¦. {%karpūra, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. rt. {%kṛp%}), camphor (the plant and resinous exuda-
tion and fruit); ({%as%}), m., N. of a poet; N. of the
father of Gajamalla and uncle of Kalyāṇamalla.
<LEND>

<L>13907<pc>0208-c<k1>karpUrakavi<k2>karpUrakavi
{%Karpūra-kavi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a poet. {%—Karpūra-%}
{%khaṇḍa, as,%} m. a field of camphor. {%—Karpūra-%}
{%gaura, am,%} n., N. of a lake or pond (yellowish-
white like camphor). {%—Karpūragaurākhya (˚ra-%}
{%ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} called Karpūragaura. {%—Karpūra-%}
{%tilaka, as,%} m., N. of an elephant; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet
of Jayā, one of Durgā's female attendants or confi-
dantes. {%—Karpūra-taila, am,%} n. camphor liniment.
{%—Karpūra-nālikā,%} f. a kind of food prepared with
[Page0209-a+ 77]
camphor, rice dressed with spices and camphor and
ghee. {%—Karpūra-prakaraṇa, am,%} n. a Jaina work
by Hari. {%—Karpūra-mañjarī,%} f. title of a dramatic
work by Rāja-śekhara. {%—Karpūra-maṇi, is,%} m. a
white mineral used medicinally. {%—Karpūra-saras,%}
{%as,%} n., N. of a lake or pond.
<LEND>

<L>13908<pc>0209-a<k1>karpUra<k2>karpUra<h>2
2. {%karpūra,%}¦ nom. P. {%karpūrati, -ritum,%} to spread
like the smell of camphor.
<LEND>

<L>13909<pc>0209-a<k1>karpUraka<k2>karpUraka
{%Karpūraka, as,%}¦ m. zedoary, Curcuma Zerumbet.
<LEND>

<L>13910<pc>0209-a<k1>karPara<k2>karPara
{#karPara#}¦ {%karphara, as,%} m. a mirror; [cf. {%kar-%}
{%kara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13911<pc>0209-a<k1>karb<k2>karb
{#karb#}¦ {%karb,%} cl. 1. P. {%karbati, -bitum,%} to
go, move, approach.
<LEND>

<L>13912<pc>0209-a<k1>karbara<k2>karbara
{#karbara#}¦ {%karbara.%} See {%karvara.%}
<LEND>

<L>13913<pc>0209-a<k1>karbu<k2>karbu
{#karbu#}¦ {%karbu, us, us, u%} (said to be fr. rt. {%kav,%}
to paint, colour), variegated, spotted. {%—Karbu-dāra,%}
{%as,%} m. the tree Bauhinia Candida or Barleria Cærulea.
{%—Karbu-dāraka, as,%} m. the tree Cordia Latifolia.
<LEND>

<L>13914<pc>0209-a<k1>karbuka<k2>karbuka
{%Karbuka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>13915<pc>0209-a<k1>karbura<k2>karbura
{%Karbura%}¦ and {%karvura, as, ā, am,%} variegated, of
a spotted or variegated colour; white; ({%as%}), m. a
variegated colour; sin; a Rakṣas; the plant Cur-
cuma Amhaldi or Zerumbet; rice growing amidst
inundation; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Bignonia Suaveolens;
another plant, commonly called Varvarā; ({%ī%}), f. an
epithet of the goddess Durgā; ({%am%}), n. gold; the
plant Datura, and the fruit of it; water. {%—Karbura-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. a plant, commonly called Sākuruṇḍa.
<LEND>
<L>13915.1<pc>0209-a<k1>karvura<k2>karvura
{{Lbody=13915}}
<LEND>

<L>13916<pc>0209-a<k1>karbUra<k2>karbUra
{%Karbūra%}¦ or {%karvūra, as,%} m. a Rakṣas; the plant
Curcuma Amhaldi or Zerumbet; ({%ā%}), f. a leech;
({%am%}), n. gold; a yellow orpiment.
<LEND>

<L>13917<pc>0209-a<k1>karbUraka<k2>karbUraka
{%Karbūraka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Curcuma Amhaldi
or Zerumbet.
<LEND>

<L>13918<pc>0209-a<k1>karbUrita<k2>karbUrita
{%Karbūrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ variegated, many-coloured.
<LEND>

<L>13919<pc>0209-a<k1>karbela<k2>karbela
{#karbela#}¦ {%karbela, as,%} m. an epithet of the
copyist Viṣṇu-bhaṭṭa.
<LEND>

<L>13920<pc>0209-a<k1>karman<k2>karman
{#karman#}¦ {%karman, a,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%kṛ;%} according
to some also m.), action, work, deed; performance,
business; office; specific action, moral duty, the
obligation imposed by peculiarities of tribe, occupa-
tion, &c.; labour (as opposed to rest, {%praśānti%});
any religious action or rite (as sacrifice, ablution, &c.,
especially as originating in the hope of future re-
compense and as opposed to speculative religion or
knowledge of spirit); action consisting in motion as
the third among the seven categories of the Nyāya
philosophy, (of these motions there are five, viz.
{%ut-kṣepaṇa,%} throwing upwards; {%ava-kṣepaṇa,%}
throwing downwards; {%ā-kuñcana,%} contraction; {%pra-%}
{%sāraṇa,%} extension or dilatation; and {%gamana,%} going
or motion in general); product, result, effect; organ
of sense [cf. {%karmendriya%}]; natural or active pro-
perty (as maturity, of heat; support, of earth; disper-
sion, of wind, &c.); the immediate object of an agent
or act; (in grammar) the idea or notion expressed
by the acc. case, (this object is of four kinds, viz.
a. {%nirvartya,%} when anything new is produced, e. g.
{%kaṭaṃ karoti,%} ‘he makes a mat;’ {%putram prasūte,%}
‘she bears a son:’ b. {%vikārya,%} when change is implied
either of the substance and form, e. g. {%kāṣṭham%}
{%bhasma karoti,%} ‘he makes ashes out of fuel;’ or
of the form only, e. g. {%suvarṇaṃ kuṇḍalaṃ ka-%}
{%roti,%} ‘he fashions gold into an ear-ring:’ c. {%prāpya,%}
when any desired object is attained, e. g. {%grāmaṃ%}
{%gacchati,%} ‘he goes to the village;’ {%candram paśyati,%}
‘he sees the moon:’ d. {%anīpsita,%} when an undesired
object is abandoned, e. g. {%pāpaṃ tyajati,%} ‘he leaves
the wicked’); fate, the certain consequence of previous
acts [cf. {%karma-pāka%} and {%karma-vipāka%}]; (in as-
tronomy) the tenth lunar mansion. {%—Karma-kara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} working for other people, a hired labourer,
a servant of any kind (as a pupil &c.) who is not a slave,
an agent, any one who does work or business; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Yama, the regent of the dead; ({%ī%}),
f. the plant Sanseviera Zeylonica; the plant Momor-
dica Monadelpha. {%—Karma-kartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘an object-
agent’ or ‘object-containing agent,’ i. e. an agent which
[Page0209-b+ 81]
is at the same time the object of an act on (this is the
idea expressed by the reflexive passive, as in {%odanaḥ%}
{%pacyate,%} ‘the mashed grain cooks of itself,’ see
Gram. 461. <nsi>c</nsi>); {%karma-kartārau,%} m. du. the work
and the person accomplishing it. {%—Karma-kāṇḍa,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. that department of the Veda which
relates to ceremonial acts and sacrificial rites; N. of
a Jaina work. {%—Karma-kāra, as, ī, am,%} a worker,
one who does any business, an artisan, a mechanic;
one who performs any act (without receiving wages
for it, according to native lexicographers); ({%as%}), m.
a bull; a blacksmith (forming a mixed caste re-
garded as the progeny of the divine artist Viśva-
karman and a Śūdrā woman); ({%ī%}), f. the plants
Sanseviera Zeylonica and Momordica Monadelpha.
{%—Karma-kāraka, as, ā, am,%} one who does any
act or work. {%—Karmakārāpaya,%} nom. (fr. {%karma-%}
{%kāra%}) A. {%karmakārāpayate, -yitum,%} to cause any
one to work as a servant. {%—Karma-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
working, doing any work or act, (in compounds
preceded by an adjective or pronoun, e. g. {%śubha-%}
{%karma-kārin,%} doing good works; {%tat-karma-kā-%}
{%rin,%} performing the same business.) {%—Karma-kār-%}
{%muka, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. ‘the bow of action,’ i. e.
an efficacious or strong bow. {%—Karma-kīlaka, as,%}
m. a washerman. {%—Karma-kṛt, t, t, t,%} performing
any work, skilful in work (e. g. {%tīkṣṇa-karma-%}
{%kṛt,%} working with zeal); a workman, an artisan;
a servant; one who has done any work. {%—Karma-%}
{%kṛtavat, ān,%} m. the director of a religious rite, the
reciter of Mantras or formularies. {%—Karma-kṛtya,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. activity, the state of active exertion.
{%—Karma-kṣama, as, ā, am,%} competent to per-
form an act, able to do it. {%—Karma-kṣetra, am,%}
n. the district or region of religious acts; [cf. {%karma-%}
{%bhūmi.%}] {%—Karma-granthi-prathama-vicāra,%} title
of a Jaina work. {%—Karma-ghāta, as,%} m. lit. ‘the
killing of work,’ i. e. the act of leaving off work.
{%—Karma-candra, as,%} m., N. of a prince of Mā-
lava. {%—Karma-cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. collected or accom-
plished by work. {%—Karma-ceṣṭā,%} f. active exertion,
action. {%—Karma-codanā,%} f. the motive impelling to
ritual acts. {%—Karma-ja, as, ā, am,%} resulting from
or produced by any act whether religious or immoral;
({%as%}), m. the holy fig tree, Ficus Religiosa; the
Kali-yuga or fourth and present age of the world,
the age of iniquity. {%—Karmaja-guṇa, as,%} m. a
property resulting from human acts (as separation,
reunion, &c.). {%—Karma-jit, t,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Karma-jña, as, ā, am,%} skilled in any work;
acquainted with religious rites. {%—Karmaṇi-vācya,%}
{%as,%} m. the passive voice in grammar, (but according
to Pāṇini the passive is an Ātmane-pada verb with
the affix {%yak%} in four tenses, and {%karman%} expresses
only one idea of the passive.) {%—Karma-tyāga, as,%}
m. abandonment of worldly duties or ceremonial
rites. {%—Karma-tva, am,%} n. or {%karma-tā,%} f. state
of action, any act, the active discharge of the duties
and functions of life. {%—Karma-duṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
corrupt in action, wicked in practice, immoral, dis-
reputable. {%—Karma-deva, as,%} m., Ved. a god by
actions (opposed to {%ājāna-deva,%} a god by birth).
{%—Karma-doṣa, as,%} m. a sinful work, sin, vice;
error, blunder; the evil consequence of human acts,
discreditable conduct or business. {%—Karma-dhāraya,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a class of compounds (see Gram. 755);
according to native grammarians a subdivision of the
Tat-puruṣa class, the members of which are in the
same relationship either as adjective and substan-
tive or as two substantives in apposition (e. g. {%śve-%}
{%tāśva,%} ‘a white horse;’ Pāṇini I. 2, 42, calls a
Karma-dhāraya comp. a Samānādhikaraṇa-tatpu-
rusha; cf. {%adhi-karaṇa%}). {%—Karma-dhvaṃsa, as,%}
m. loss of benefit arising from religious acts, destruc-
tion of any work, disappointment. {%—Karma-nāman,%}
{%a,%} n. a participle. {%—Karma-nāśā,%} f., N. of a river
between Kāśī and Vihāra, contact with which destroys
the merit of works. {%—Karma-nibandha, as,%} m.
necessary consequence of works. {%—Karma-nirhāra,%}
{%as,%} m. removal of (bad) deeds or their effects.
{%—Karma-niṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. diligent in
[Page0209-c+ 81]
religious actions, engaged in active duties; ({%as%}), m.
a Brāhman who performs sacrifices &c. {%—Karma-%}
{%patha, as,%} m. the way or direction of an action.
{%—Karma-paddhati, is,%} f. title of a work. {%—Kar-%}
{%ma-pāka, as,%} m. the ripening of actions, i. e. re-
compense for actions done in a former life; [cf.
{%karma-vipāka.%}] {%—Karma-pradīpa, as,%} m. title of
a work of Kātyāyana; N. of a work of Miśra.
{%—Karmapradīpa-vivṛti,%} N. of Śivarāma's com-
mentary on the Karmapradīpa. {%—Karma-pradīpikā,%}
f. title of a work of Kāma-deva. {%—Karma-prava-%}
{%canīya,%} employed for the definition of an action;
({%as%}), m. (scil. {%śabdas%}) a term for certain preposi-
tions, particles, or adverbs, not connected with a verb,
but with a case of a noun; (according to Pāṇini the
first and general category to which prepositions belong
is that of Nipātas or particles; they are Upasargas
and Gatis when they are in connection with verbal
action, i. e. with the tenses of a verb; but the term
{%gati%} is more comprehensive than {%upasarga,%} and is
applicable also when the verbal root becomes de-
veloped into a noun substantive, adjective, or parti-
ciple. Moreover, the term {%upasarga%} is confined to
the prepositions with {%su%} and {%dus,%} whereas the Gatis
include many other adverbial prefixes such as {%alam%}
and the nouns and adjectives which take the affix {%cvi%}
&c. Lastly, prepositions are Karmapravacanīyas if they
are unconnected with verbs and govern a noun either
separated from it or forming a compound with it. A
Karmapravacanīya never loses its accent, and exercises
no euphonic influence on the initial letters of a fol-
lowing verb.) {%—Karma-pravāda, as,%} m., N. of the
eighth of the fourteen Pūrvas or oldest religious
writings of the Jainas. {%—Karma-phala, am,%} n. the
fruit or recompense of actions; pain, pleasure, &c.,
considered as the consequence of acts; the fruit of
the tree Averrhoa Carambola; [cf. {%karmaraṅga.%}]
{%—Karmaphalodaya (˚la-ud˚), as,%} m. the occur-
rence of consequences. {%—Karma-bandha, as,%} m. the
tie of works (by which the soul is attached to pleasure
&c.). {%—Karma-bandhana, as, ā, am,%} bound by
acts; ({%am%}), n. confinement to repeated existence, as
the consequence of acts. {%—Karma-bhū, ūs,%} f. tilled
or cultivated ground. {%—Karma-bhūmi, is,%} f. the
land or region of religious actions, i. e. where such
actions are performed; (according to Hemacandra
the Karmabhūmis are Bharata, Airāvata, and Videha,
but not the district of the Kurus; the other Varṣas
are {%phala-bhūmayas,%} i. e. lands of recompense; cf.
{%karma-kṣetra.%}) {%—Karma-maya, as, ī, am,%} con-
sisting of works, resulting from works. {%—Karma-%}
{%mārga, as,%} m. the way of work; a technical term
used by thieves for the breaking of walls &c. {%—Kar-%}
{%ma-mīmāṃsā,%} see s. v. {%mīmāṃsā%}. {%—Karma-mūla,%}
{%am,%} n. Kuśa or sacrificial grass, used as an essential
part in many religious and sacred rites. {%—Karma-%}
{%yuga, am,%} n. the fourth and present age of the
world, the iron age, the Kali-yuga. {%—Karma-yoga,%}
{%as,%} m. performance of a work or business or of
worldly functions and religious duties; active exer-
tion, industry; connection with a sacrifice. {%—Karma-%}
{%yoni, is,%} m. f. source of action. {%—Karmargha, as,%}
m. (fr. {%karman%} and {%ṛgha%} in {%ṛghāya%}), N. of a
teacher. {%—Karma-vacana, am,%} n. (with Buddhists)
the ritual. {%—Karma-vajra, as, ā, am,%} ‘whose
thunderbolt is work;’ an epithet of the Śūdra.
{%—Karma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} busy with a work, em-
ployed in it. {%—Karma-vaśa, as, ā, am,%} being in
the power of or subject to former actions; ({%as%}), m.
the necessary influence of acts; fate, considered as the
inevitable consequence of actions done in a former
life. {%—Karmavaśi-tā,%} f. the condition of having
power over works, a quality of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Karma-vaśin, ī, inī, i,%} having power over
works. {%—Karma-vāṭī,%} f. a lunar day or the thirtieth
division of a lunar month (regulating all ceremonies,
observances, religious actions, &c.). {%—Karma-vighna,%}
{%as,%} m. an impediment to work, obstruction. {%—Kar-%}
{%ma-vidhi, is,%} m. rule of action, observance, practice,
mode of conducting any ceremony. {%—Karma-vi-%}
{%paryaya, as,%} m. succession of office or employment,
[Page0210-a+ 81]
revolving or alternating duty; contrariety or reverse
of any act or business. {%—Karma-vipāka, as,%} m. ‘the
ripening of actions,’ i. e. the good or evil consequences
in this life of human acts performed in previous
births; title of a work on this subject, explaining ex-
piatory rites to be performed in cases of disease &c.,
supposed to be the punishment of offences committed
in a previous existence (written in Ślokas in the form
of a dialogue between Śakuntalā-Bharata and Śātā-
tapa-Bhṛgu), a work of Viśveśvara-bhaṭṭa. {%—Karma-%}
{%vipāka-saṅgraha,%} title of a book. {%—Karmavipāka-%}
{%sāra,%} title of a book composed by Dinakara, the
brother of Kamalākara-bhaṭṭa. {%—Karma-viśeṣa, as,%}
m. variety of act or actions. {%—Karma-vīja, am,%} n.
the seed of works. {%—Karma-śālā,%} f. a workshop, a
house of business. {%—Karma-śālī,%} f., N. of a river in
Caturgrāma. {%—Karma-śīla, as, ā, am,%} assiduous,
laborious, one who perseveres in his duties without
looking to their reward. {%—Karma-śuddha (?), am,%}
n. approved occupation. {%—Karma-śūra, as, ā, am,%}
assiduous, laborious; ({%as%}), m. a skilful or clever work-
man. {%—Karma-śauca, am,%} n. humility. {%—Karma-%}
{%śreṣṭha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Pulaha by Gati.
{%—Karma-saṅgraha, as,%} m. assemblage of acts, com-
prising the act, its performance and the performer.
{%—Karma-saciva, as,%} m. a minister, any officer
employed upon active duties, as a judge, a deputy, &c.
{%—Karma-sannyāsika, as,%} m. an ascetic, a religious
person who has withdrawn from works. {%—Karma-%}
{%samādhi, is,%} m. devotion, abstraction (?) . {%—Karma-%}
{%sambhava, as, ā, am,%} produced by or resulting from
acts. {%—Karma-sākṣin, ī,%} m. ‘the witness of all acts,’
epithet of the sun. {%—Karma-sādhaka, as, ikā, am,%}
accomplishing a work. {%—Karma-sādhana, am,%} n.
implement, means; articles essential to the perform-
ance of any religious act. {%—Karma-siddhi, is,%} f.
accomplishment of an act, success. {%—Karma-sena,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the father of Rāma-candra. {%—Karma-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} standing or being within the object.
{%—Karmastha-kriyaka, as, ā, am,%} any (root)
whose action stands within the object. {%—Karmastha-%}
{%bhāvaka, as, ā, am,%} any (root &c.) whose state
({%bhāva%}) stands within the object. {%—Karma-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. a public office or place of business. {%—Karma-%}
{%hetu, us, us, u,%} caused by acts, arising from acts.
{%—Karmākṣama (˚ma-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} incapable
of business. {%—Karmāṅga (˚ma-aṅ˚), as,%} m. part
of any act, part of a sacrificial rite. {%—Karmātman%}
{%(˚ma-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} one whose character is action,
endowed with principles of action, active, acting.
{%—Karmāditya (˚ma-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Karmādhikāra (˚ma-adh˚), as,%} m. the right of
action (in the Mīmāṃsa philosophy). {%—Karmānu-%}
{%bandha (˚ma-an˚), as,%} m. connection with or de-
pendance upon acts. {%—Karmānubandhin, ī, inī, i,%}
connected with or involved in works. {%—Karmānu-%}
{%rūpa (˚ma-an˚), as, ā, am,%} according to action,
according to function or duty. {%—Karmānurūpatas,%}
ind. conformably to act, function &c. {%—Karmānu-%}
{%ṣṭhāna (˚ma-an˚), am,%} n. practising one's duties,
discharging peculiar functions. {%—Karmānuṣṭhāyin%}
{%(˚ma-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} practising duties, performing
rites &c. {%—Karmānusāra (˚ma-an˚), as,%} m. conse-
quence of or conformity to acts. {%—Karmānusāratas,%}
ind. according to one's deeds. {%—Karmānta (˚ma-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. work, business, administration of an office;
management of any business; the end of any task
or act; the end or abandonment of ritual acts; tilled
or cultivated ground. {%—Karmāntara (˚ma-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. interval between religious actions, suspense of
such an action; difference or contrariety of action;
penance, expiation. {%—Karmāntika, as, ī, am,%} final,
completing; ({%as%}), m. a workman, a servant, one
who finishes a work. {%—Karmābhidhāyaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%karmābhidhāyin (˚ma-abh˚), ī, inī, i,%}
enjoining or prescribing duties or acts. {%—Karmā-%}
{%rambha (˚ma-ār˚), as,%} m. commencement of any
act. {%—Karmārha (˚ma-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} fit for
work, able to do any work, suitable to any rite; ({%as%}),
m. a man. {%—Karmendriya (˚ma-in˚), am,%} n. an
organ of action (opposed to the {%buddhīndriyāṇi%} or
[Page0210-b+ 75]
perceptive organs of sense; five are reckoned, viz.
the hand, the foot, the larynx or organ of the voice,
the organ of generation and of excretion). {%—Karmo-%}
{%dāra (˚ma-ud˚), am,%} n. any honourable or valiant
act, magnanimity, prowess. {%—Karmodyukta (˚ma-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} actively labouring, busily engaged.
{%—Karmodyoga (˚ma-ud˚), as,%} m. engaging actively
in any work.
<LEND>

<L>13921<pc>0210-b<k1>karma<k2>karma
{%Karma, as, am,%}¦ m. n. according to some lexico-
graphers {%= karman.%}
<LEND>

<L>13922<pc>0210-b<k1>karmaka<k2>karmaka
{%Karmaka%}¦ (at the end of some compounds) {%= kar-%}
{%man,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13923<pc>0210-b<k1>karmaWa<k2>karmaWa
{%Karmaṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ skilful or clever in work,
clever; working diligently, accomplishing any rite,
anxious to perform anything; ({%as%}), m. the director
and performer of a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>13924<pc>0210-b<k1>karmaRya<k2>karmaRya
{%Karmaṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. skilful in work, clever,
diligent; proper or fit for any act, suitable to it; (at
the end of compounds) relating to any business or to
the accomplishment of anything; ({%ā%}), f. wages, hire;
({%am%}), n. energy, activity. {%—Karmaṇya-tā,%} f. skil-
fulness, cleverness. {%—Karmaṇya-bhuj, k, k, k,%} re-
ceiving wages, working for hire; (a various reading
for {%bharaṇya-bhuj.%})
<LEND>

<L>13925<pc>0210-b<k1>karmatas<k2>karmatas
{%Karmatas,%}¦ ind. according to actions.
<LEND>

<L>13926<pc>0210-b<k1>karmAra<k2>karmAra
{%Karmāra, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an artificer, a mechanic,
a blacksmith, a brazier, a carpenter, &c.; a bamboo;
the plant Averrhoa Carambola, {%= karmaraṅga%} below.
{%—Karmāra-vana, am,%} n., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>13927<pc>0210-b<k1>karmAraka<k2>karmAraka
{%Karmāraka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Averrhoa Carambola.
<LEND>

<L>13928<pc>0210-b<k1>karmika<k2>karmika
{%Karmika, as, ā, am,%}¦ acting, active.
<LEND>

<L>13929<pc>0210-b<k1>karmin<k2>karmin
{%Karmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ acting, active, busy; performing
a religious action; engaged in any work or business;
belonging or relating to any act.
<LEND>

<L>13930<pc>0210-b<k1>karmizWa<k2>karmizWa
{%Karmiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (said to be a superlative
of the last), very active, assiduous, diligent.
<LEND>

<L>13931<pc>0210-b<k1>karmIRa<k2>karmIRa
{%Karmīṇa = karman%}¦ at the end of a compound;
[cf. {%alaṅkarmīṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13932<pc>0210-b<k1>karmanda<k2>karmanda
{#karmanda#}¦ {%karmanda, as,%} m., N. of a man,
author of a Bhikṣu-sūtra.
<LEND>

<L>13933<pc>0210-b<k1>karmandin<k2>karmandin
{%Karmandin, ī,%}¦ m. a beggar, a religious mendi-
cant, a member of the fourth order (lit. ‘a follower
of Karmanda’).
<LEND>

<L>13934<pc>0210-b<k1>karmara<k2>karmara
{#karmara#}¦ {%karmara%} and {%karmaraka, as,%} m. the
plant Averrhoa Carambola.
<LEND>

<L>13935<pc>0210-b<k1>karmaraNga<k2>karmaraNga
{%Karmaraṅga, as,%}¦ m., N. of the same plant;
({%am%}), n. the acid fruit of this plant.
<LEND>

<L>13936<pc>0210-b<k1>karmarI<k2>karmarI
{#karmarI#}¦ {%karmarī,%} f. the manna of the bam-
boo; [cf. {%vaṃśa-rocanā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13937<pc>0210-b<k1>karmaza<k2>karmaza
{#karmaza#}¦ {%karmaṣa = kalmaṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13938<pc>0210-b<k1>karmasa<k2>karmasa
{#karmasa#}¦ {%karmasa, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Pulaha and Kṣamā; [cf. {%karma-śreṣṭha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13939<pc>0210-b<k1>karmIra<k2>karmIra
{#karmIra#}¦ {%karmīra, as, ā, am,%} variegated; (a
various reading for {%kirmīra.%})
<LEND>

<L>13940<pc>0210-b<k1>karmIraka<k2>karmIraka
{%Karmīraka, as,%}¦ m. a small tree, Trophis Aspera.
<LEND>

<L>13941<pc>0210-b<k1>karv<k2>karv
{#karv#}¦ {%karv,%} cl. 1. P. {%karvati, -vitum,%} to be
proud, to boast; [cf. {%kharv%} and {%garv.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13942<pc>0210-b<k1>karva<k2>karva
{#karva#}¦ {%karva, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ%}),
love, desire; a rat.
<LEND>

<L>13943<pc>0210-b<k1>karvawa<k2>karvawa
{#karvawa#}¦ {%karvaṭa, as, am,%} m. n. declivity of a
mountain; a village, market-town, the capital of a
district (of two or four hundred villages) in a pleasant
site and of handsome construction; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a country or a people; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a river; ({%am%}),
n. a city.
<LEND>

<L>13944<pc>0210-b<k1>karvawaka<k2>karvawaka
{%Karvaṭaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?) declivity of a
mountain.
<LEND>

<L>13945<pc>0210-b<k1>karvara<k2>karvara<h>1
{#karvara#} 1¦. {%karvara, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%kṛ%}), Ved.
a deed, action.
<LEND>

<L>13946<pc>0210-b<k1>karvara<k2>karvara<h>2
{#karvara#} 2¦. {%karvara%} or {%karbara, as, ā, am%} (said
to be fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ%}), variegated, spotted; ({%as%}), m. sin;
a tiger; a Rakṣas; a sort of medicament; ({%ī%}), f.
an epithet of Durgā; night; a Rākṣasī; a tigress;
the leaf of the plant Asa Fœtida; [cf. {%karavī, kavarī,%}
{%kāravī.%}] See {%karbura.%}
<LEND>
[Page0210-c+ 75]

<L>13947<pc>0210-c<k1>karSana<k2>karSana
{#karSana#}¦ {%karśana, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%kṛś%}), ren-
dering lean, attenuating, causing emaciation; ({%as%}),
m. fire; [cf. {%kṛśānu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13948<pc>0210-c<k1>karSaPa<k2>karSaPa
{#karSaPa#}¦ {%karśapha, as,%} m., Ved. an epithet of
imps or goblins.
<LEND>

<L>13949<pc>0210-c<k1>karSya<k2>karSya
{#karSya#}¦ {%karśya, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= kar-%}
{%cūra;%} [cf. {%kārśya%} and {%kārṣya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13950<pc>0210-c<k1>karza<k2>karza
{#karza#}¦ {%karṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kṛṣ%}), drawing,
dragging, pulling; attracting; ploughing; a furrow,
a trench; a scratch; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a weight of
gold or silver, equal to 16 Māṣas = (1/4) Pala = (1/400) of a
Tulā = 11, 375 French grains; according to the ancient
division of 5 Rettis to the Māṣa the Karṣa would
be equal to about 176 grains troy; in common use
8 Rettis are given to the Māṣa, and the Karṣa is
then about 280 grains troy. {%—Karṣa-phala, as,%}
m. the tree Terminalia Bellerica; this tree is also
called Akṣa, because its fruits are used as dice; ({%ā%}),
f. the plant Emblica Officinalis. {%—Karṣārdha (˚ṣa-%}
{%ar˚), am,%} n. a Tolaka, a weight of 16 Māṣas
(according to some calculations).
<LEND>

<L>13951<pc>0210-c<k1>karzaka<k2>karzaka
{%Karṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ a cultivator of the soil, one
who ploughs or lives by tillage; a husbandman; who
or what draws or drags, attractive, what attracts.
<LEND>

<L>13952<pc>0210-c<k1>karzaRa<k2>karzaRa
{%Karṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pulling to and fro, drag-
ging, attracting, overpowering, injuring; tormenting;
harassed; extending (in time); ({%am%}), n. the act of
dragging or pulling; drawing to and fro; removing,
hurting, injuring; bending (a bow); ploughing, cul-
tivating the ground; cultivated land.
<LEND>

<L>13953<pc>0210-c<k1>karzaRi<k2>karzaRi
{%Karṣaṇi, is,%}¦ f. an unchaste woman (attracting
the men).
<LEND>

<L>13954<pc>0210-c<k1>karzaRI<k2>karzaRI
{%Karṣaṇī,%}¦ f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%karṣiṇī%} and
{%kṣīriṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13955<pc>0210-c<k1>karzaRIya<k2>karzaRIya
{%Karṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be drawn or pulled;
to be attracted; to be conciliated or won.
<LEND>

<L>13956<pc>0210-c<k1>karzayat<k2>karzayat
{%Karṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dragging, pulling; at-
tracting; harassing, annoying.
<LEND>

<L>13957<pc>0210-c<k1>karzita<k2>karzita
{%Karṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn, attracted; distracted,
tormented, harassed; worn out; ploughed.
<LEND>

<L>13958<pc>0210-c<k1>karzin<k2>karzin
{%Karṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ who or what pulls or draws or
attracts; attractive; inviting; who or what ploughs
or furrows, a ploughman, peasant; ({%iṇī%}), f. the bit
of a bridle; a medicinal moon-plant; [cf. {%karṣaṇī,%}
{%kṣīriṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13959<pc>0210-c<k1>karzU<k2>karzU
{%Karṣū, ūs,%}¦ f. a furrow, trench, incision; a river;
a canal; a shallow trench for receiving the sacrificial
fire; ({%ūs%}), m. a fire of dried cow-dung; agriculture,
cultivation; livelihood.
<LEND>

<L>13960<pc>0210-c<k1>karzApaRa<k2>karzApaRa
{#karzApaRa#}¦ {%karṣāpaṇa = kārṣāpaṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>13961<pc>0210-c<k1>karhi<k2>karhi
{#karhi#}¦ {%karhi,%} ind. (fr. 2. {%ka%}), Ved. when?
at what time? (followed by the future or present tense)
{%karhi-cid%} or {%karhy-api,%} at any time; [cf. Goth.
<nsi>hvar,</nsi> ‘where?’ Eng. <nsi>where?</nsi> Germ. <nsi>war</nsi> and <nsi>wor</nsi>
in <nsi>warum, woraus,</nsi> &c.; Lith. <nsi>kur.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>13962<pc>0210-c<k1>kal<k2>kal<h>1
{#kal#} 1¦. {%kal,%} cl. 1. A. {%kalate, -litum,%} to
sound; to count; [Gr. <lang n="greek">καλέω</lang> ? Lat.
<nsi>calculo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>13963<pc>0210-c<k1>kal<k2>kal<h>2
{#kal#} 2¦. {%kal,%} cl. 10. P. {%kālayati, -yitum,%}
to push on, drive forward, drive away;
carry off; to drive together, collect; to throw; to
announce the time.
<LEND>

<L>13964<pc>0210-c<k1>kal<k2>kal<h>3
{#kal#} 3¦. {%kal,%} cl. 10. P. {%kalayati, -yitum,%}
to impel, incite, urge on; to bear, carry;
to do, make, accomplish; to tie on, attach, affix; to
utter a sound, murmur; to furnish with; to observe,
perceive, take notice of; to regard, consider, count,
reckon, calculate; to go; to take hold of the die
called Kali (in this last sense {%kal%} may be considered
as a nom. fr. {%kali%}).
<LEND>

<L>13965<pc>0210-c<k1>kala<k2>kala
{%Kala, as, ā, am,%}¦ dumb, hoarse, indistinct, inarticu-
late (especially in composition with {%vāṣpa%} and {%aśru,%}
e. g. {%vāṣpa-kala, aśru-kala,%} having the speech
impeded by tears, sobbing); emitting a low or soft
tone, as humming, buzzing, &c.; weak; crude,
[Page0211-a+ 79]
undigested; ({%as%}), m. (scil. {%svara%}) a low or soft and
inarticulate tone, as humming, buzzing, &c.; the
tree Shorea Robusta; (in poetry) time equal to four
Mātras or instants; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of manes or
deceased ancestors; ({%am%}), n. semen virile; the ju-
jube, Zizyphus Jujuba; (for {%kalā%} see below, s. v.)
{%—Kala-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. a pleasing tone or note; a
low murmuring tone; having a sweet voice, N. of
several birds, as of the Indian cuckoo; a dove, a
pigeon; a goose. {%—Kala-kala, as,%} m. a confused
noise, the murmuring or buz of a crowd; resin,
pitch, the resinous exudation of the tree Shorea
Robusta; an epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%kaṭakaṭa, kaṭaṅ-%}
{%kaṭa.%}] {%—Kalakala-vat, ān, atī, at,%} causing hum-
ming or murmuring. {%—Kala-kīṭa, as,%} m., N. of a
Grāma. {%—Kala-kūjikā,%} f. a wanton, a lascivious
woman. {%—Kala-kūṭa, as,%} m., N. of a warrior-tribe
and the country inhabited by it. {%—Kala-kūṇikā,%} f.
a wanton, a lascivious woman. {%—Kala-ghoṣa, as,%}
m. the Kokila or Indian cuckoo. {%—Kalaṅ-kaṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. a lion; a musical instrument; see {%kara-tālī.%}
{%—Kalaṅ-kura, as,%} m. an eddy, a whirlpool. {%—Kala-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%kala-tva, am,%} n. melody, music. {%—Kala-%}
{%tūlikā,%} f. a wanton or lascivious woman; [cf. {%kala-%}
{%kūṇikā.%}] {%—Kala-dhūta, am,%} n. silver; (wrong read-
ing for {%kala-dhauta?%}). {%—Kala-dhauta, am,%} n. gold
and silver (sounding and shining); ({%as, am%}), m. n.
a low or pleasing tone. {%—Kaladhauta-lipi, is,%} f. a
streak of gold, illumination of a manuscript with gold.
{%—Kala-dhvani, is,%} m. a low sweet tone; the Ko-
kila or Indian cuckoo; the turtle-dove; a peacock.
{%—Kala-nāda, as,%} m. a sort of goose; see {%kala-%}
{%haṃsa%}. {%—Kala-bhāṣaṇa, am,%} n. the prattle of
childhood. {%—Kala-bhairava, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of a deep ravine in the mountains between the
rivers Tāpī and Narmadā. {%—Kala-rava, as,%} m. a
low sweet tone; a dove; the Indian cuckoo; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>columba.</nsi>] {%—Kala-vacas, ās, ās, as,%} speaking
sweetly, singing. {%—Kala-svana, as, ā, am,%} having
a charming voice (a bird). {%—Kala-svara, am,%} n. a
low musical sound. {%—Kala-haṃsa, as,%} m. a kind of
duck or goose; a gander; another bird, Gallinula
Porphyria; a drake or (according to some) a teal;
an excellent king; Brahma or the supreme spirit;
N. of a metre consisting of four lines of thirteen sylla-
bles each. {%—Kalānunādin (˚la-an˚), ī,%} m. a sparrow;
a bee, but particularly one of a very large kind; the
Cātaka bird. {%—Kalālāpa (˚la-āl˚), as,%} m. a sweet
humming sound, discourse; a bee. {%—Kalottāla (˚la-%}
{%ut˚), as, ā, am,%} high, sharp.
<LEND>

<L>13966<pc>0211-a<k1>kalana<k2>kalana
{%Kalana, as, ā, am%}¦ (at the end of compounds),
causing, effecting; ({%as%}), m. a sort of cane; ({%ā%}), f.
doing, making, effecting; subjection, submission;
emitting (?); {%kāla-kalanā,%} fulfilling one's time,
dying; ({%am%}), n. an embryo at the first stage after
conception; a spot, a stain; an offence, fault, defect;
murmuring, sounding.
<LEND>

<L>13967<pc>0211-a<k1>kalita<k2>kalita
{%Kalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ impelled, driven, borne on-
wards; held, laid hold of; attached, affixed, furnished,
endowed with; gained, acquired; considered, known,
understood; numbered, counted, reckoned; separated,
divided; sounded indistinctly, buzzed, murmured.
<LEND>

<L>13968<pc>0211-a<k1>kalaka<k2>kalaka
{#kalaka#}¦ {%kalaka, as,%} m. a kind of fish; a
kind of prose.
<LEND>

<L>13969<pc>0211-a<k1>kalaNka<k2>kalaNka
{#kalaNka#}¦ {%kalaṅka, as,%} m. a spot, a mark; the
rust of iron; a fault, defamation, abuse. {%—Kalaṅka-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} censorious, calumniating, defaming;
spotting, staining. {%—Kalaṅka-kalā,%} f. a digit of the
moon in shadow. {%—Kalaṅka-maya, as, ī, am,%} spot-
ted, stained; calumniated, defamed. {%—Kalaṅka-%}
{%hṛt, t,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>13970<pc>0211-a<k1>kalaNkaya<k2>kalaNkaya
{%Kalaṅkaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kalaṅkayati, -yitum,%} to
spot, defame.
<LEND>

<L>13971<pc>0211-a<k1>kalaNkita<k2>kalaNkita
{%Kalaṅkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spotted, soiled, stained;
calumniated, defamed.
<LEND>

<L>13972<pc>0211-a<k1>kalaNkin<k2>kalaNkin
{%Kalaṅkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ soiled, stained; disgraced,
reviled, rusty.
<LEND>

<L>13973<pc>0211-a<k1>kalaYja<k2>kalaYja
{#kalaYja#}¦ {%kalañja, as,%} m. an animal struck
with a poisoned weapon; tobacco.
<LEND>
[Page0211-b+ 72]

<L>13974<pc>0211-b<k1>kalawa<k2>kalawa
{#kalawa#}¦ {%kalaṭa, am,%} n. the thatch of a house;
(other works read this {%kuṭala,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>13975<pc>0211-b<k1>kalata<k2>kalata
{#kalata#}¦ {%kalata, as, ā, am, = khalati,%} bald-
headed.
<LEND>

<L>13976<pc>0211-b<k1>kalatra<k2>kalatra
{#kalatra#}¦ {%kalatra, am,%} n. (see {%kaḍatra%}), a
wife; any female; the hip and loins; pudendum
muliebre; a royal citadel, a strong hold or fastness;
the seventh lunar mansion in astronomy. {%—Ka-%}
{%latra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} or {%kalatrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having
a wife, united to a wife.
<LEND>

<L>13977<pc>0211-b<k1>kalantaka<k2>kalantaka
{#kalantaka#}¦ {%kalantaka%} or {%kalandaka, as,%} m. a
species of bird.
<LEND>

<L>13978<pc>0211-b<k1>kalandana<k2>kalandana
{#kalandana#}¦ {%kalandana, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>13979<pc>0211-b<k1>kalandara<k2>kalandara
{#kalandara#}¦ {%kalandara, as,%} m. a man of a mixed
caste, the son of a Leṭa (?) man and a Tīvara woman.
<LEND>

<L>13980<pc>0211-b<k1>kalandikA<k2>kalandikA
{#kalandikA#}¦ {%kalandikā,%} f. knowledge, intel-
ligence, wisdom in general; (a various reading for
{%kalindikā,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>13981<pc>0211-b<k1>kalanDu<k2>kalanDu
{#kalanDu#}¦ {%kalandhu, us,%} m. a kind of vegetable;
[cf. {%gholī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13982<pc>0211-b<k1>kalaBa<k2>kalaBa
{#kalaBa#}¦ {%kalabha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 3.
{%kal%}), a young elephant; an elephant thirty years old;
a young camel (perhaps also the young of other
animals); the tree Datura Fastuosa [cf. {%dhustūra%}];
({%ī%}), f. a sort of Ricinus {%(cañcu)%}. {%—Kalabha-vallabha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a tree; [cf. {%pīlu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13983<pc>0211-b<k1>kalama<k2>kalama
{#kalama#}¦ {%kalama, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 3. {%kal%}),
rice, which is sown in May and June, and ripens in
December or January; a white rice growing in deep
water; a pen, a reed for writing with; a thief, a
rogue; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κάλαμος</lang> Lat. <nsi>calamus, culmus;</nsi>
and Arab. <lang n="arabic">قلم</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>13984<pc>0211-b<k1>kalamba<k2>kalamba
{#kalamba#}¦ {%kalamba, as,%} m. the stalk of a pot-
herb; an arrow; the tree Nauclea Cadamba; ({%ī%}), f.
(according to a scholiast also m.), the pot-herb Convol-
vulus Repens; ({%am%}), n. Calumba root, Menispermum
Calumba; [cf. {%kaḍamba, kadamba.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13985<pc>0211-b<k1>kalambaka<k2>kalambaka
{%Kalambaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant; [cf. {%dhārā-%}
{%kadamba.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13986<pc>0211-b<k1>kalambikA<k2>kalambikA
{%Kalambikā,%}¦ f. the nape of the neck (in this sense
usually used in du.); the pot-herb Convolvulus Repens;
[cf. {%kalambī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13987<pc>0211-b<k1>kalambU<k2>kalambU
{%Kalambū, ūs,%}¦ f. the same pot-herb.
<LEND>

<L>13988<pc>0211-b<k1>kalambuwa<k2>kalambuwa
{#kalambuwa#}¦ {%kalambuṭa, am,%} n. fresh butter.
<LEND>

<L>13989<pc>0211-b<k1>kalala<k2>kalala
{#kalala#}¦ {%kalala, as, am,%} m. n. the womb, the
uterus; a small round lump, a term for the embryo
a short time after conception; [cf. {%kalana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13990<pc>0211-b<k1>kalalaja<k2>kalalaja
{#kalalaja#}¦ {%kalalaja, as,%} m. the resinous ex-
udation of the Shorea Robusta; [cf. {%kala-kala.%}]
{%—Kalalajodbhava (˚ja-ud˚), as,%} m. the tree
Shorea Robusta.
<LEND>

<L>13991<pc>0211-b<k1>kalaviNka<k2>kalaviNka
{#kalaviNka#}¦ {%kalaviṅka, as,%} m. a sparrow; a
spot, a stain [cf. {%kalaṅka%}]; a white Cāmara; the
plant Echites Antidysenterica [cf. {%kaliṅgaka%}]; N.
of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>13992<pc>0211-b<k1>kalaSa<k2>kalaSa
{#kalaSa#}¦ {%kalaśa, as, ī, am,%} m. f. n. a water-
pot, a pitcher, a jar, a dish; ({%as%}), m., N. of a poet;
({%ī%}), f. the plant Hemionitis Cordifolia; N. of a
Tīrtha; a churn; [cf. {%kalasa%} and {%droṇa-kalaśa;%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">κάλιξ</lang> Lat. <nsi>calix.</nsi>] {%—Kalaśa-dir, īr,%} m., Ved.
one whose pot or pitcher is broken. {%—Kalaśa-%}
{%potaka, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga. {%—Kalaśī-kaṇṭha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of
this man. {%—Kalaśī-padī,%} f. having feet like a water-
jar. {%—Kalaśī-mukha, as,%} m. a sort of musical instru-
ment. {%—Kalaśī-suta, as,%} m. an epithet of Agastya.
{%—Kalaśodara (˚śa-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of a Daitya.
<LEND>

<L>13993<pc>0211-b<k1>kalaSi<k2>kalaSi
{%Kalaśi, is,%}¦ f. a water-pot, pitcher, dish, water-jar;
the plant Hemionitis Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>13994<pc>0211-b<k1>kalasa<k2>kalasa
{%Kalasa, as, ī, am,%}¦ m. f. n. a pot, a water-jar;
({%as%}), m. a Droṇa measure; a rounded pinnacle or ball
on the top of a temple; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Hemionitis
[Page0211-c+ 79]
Cordifolia. {%—Kalasodadhi (˚sa-ud˚), is,%} m. the
ocean.
<LEND>

<L>13995<pc>0211-c<k1>kalaha<k2>kalaha
{#kalaha#}¦ {%kalaha, as, am,%} m. n. strife, conten-
tion, quarrel, war, battle; the sheath of a sword, a
scabbard; a road, a way; deceit, falsehood; violence
without murderous weapons, abuse, beating, kicking,
&c. {%—Kalaha-kandala, as,%} m., N. of an actor.
{%—Kalaha-kāra, as, ī, am,%} quarrelsome, turbulent;
contentious, pugnacious; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the wife of
Vikramacaṇḍa. {%—Kalaha-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} quarrel-
some, contentious. {%—Kalaha-nāśana, as,%} m. the
tree Cæsalpina Bonducella. {%—Kalaha-priya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fond of contention, quarrelsome, turbulent; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Nārada; ({%ā%}), f. the bird Gracula
Religiosa. {%—Kalahāntaritā (˚ha-an˚),%} f. a heroine
separated from her lover in consequence of a quarrel;
an appeased wife, one who has been angry and is
sorry for it. {%—Kalahāpahṛta (˚ha-ap˚), as, ā, am,%}
taken away by force.
<LEND>

<L>13996<pc>0211-c<k1>kalahAya<k2>kalahAya
{%Kalahāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kalahāyate, -yitum,%} to
quarrel, contend.
<LEND>

<L>13997<pc>0211-c<k1>kalahin<k2>kalahin
{%Kalahin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ contentious, quarrelsome.
<LEND>

<L>13998<pc>0211-c<k1>kalahu<k2>kalahu
{#kalahu#}¦ {%kalahu,%} a particular high number;
[cf. {%karaphu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>13999<pc>0211-c<k1>kalA<k2>kalA
{#kalA#}¦ {%kalā,%} f. (said to be fr. 3. {%kal%}), a small
part of anything, any single part or portion of a
whole, but especially a sixteenth part; a digit or one
sixteenth of the moon's diameter (personified as a
daughter of Kardama and wife of Marīci); interest
on capital, considered as a certain part of it; a division
of time (according to some (1/900) of a day, i. e. 1
minute and 36 seconds; according to others (1/1800) of a
day, i. e. 48 seconds; according to others 20(1/10) Kalās
= 1 Muhūrta or (1/30) of a day, therefore 1 Kalā =
2 minutes and 26(54/201) seconds; according to others
30(1/10) Kalās = 1 Muhūrta, therefore 1 Kalā = 1
minute and 35(205/301) seconds; according to others
1 Kalā = 8 seconds); the sixtieth part of one thirtieth
of a zodiacal sign, a minute of a degree; (in prosody)
a syllabic instant; a term for the seven substrata of
the elements or Dhātus of the human body (which
according to one reckoning are seven, as follows,
flesh, blood, fat, phlegm, urine, bile, and semen; but
according to Hemacandra {%rasa%} ‘chyle,’ {%asthi%} ‘bone,’
and {%majja%} ‘marrow,’ take the place of phlegm, urine,
and bile); an atom (there are 3015 Kalās or atoms
in every one of the six Dhātus, not counting the
{%rasa,%} therefore in all 18090); a small round lump,
a term for the embryo shortly after conception [cf.
{%kalana%}]; the menstrual discharge; any practical art,
any mechanical or fine art (sixty-four such are enu-
merated, as carpentering, architecture, jewellery, far-
riery, acting, dancing, music, medicine, poetry,
&c.); skill, ingenuity, contrivance, fraud, deceit; a
boat; title of a grammatical commentary; N. of a
deity; [cf. {%a-kala, niṣkala, sakala.%}] {%—Kalā-%}
{%kuśala, as, ā, am,%} skilled in the elegant arts, singing,
dancing, &c. {%—Kalā-keli, is, is, i,%} gay, frolicsome,
wanton; ({%is%}), m. an epithet of Kāma, the god of
love. {%—Kalā-dhara, as,%} m. ‘bearing a digit of the
moon;’ an epithet of Śiva; N. of a copyist. {%—Kalā-%}
{%nidhi, is,%} m. ‘a treasure or storehouse of digits,’
the moon. {%—Kalāntara (˚lā-an˚), am,%} n. interest,
profit. {%—Kalāpa%} ({%˚lā + āpa%} fr. rt. {%āp%}), {%as,%} m. ‘that
which holds together the single parts,’ a band, a
bundle (e. g. {%muktā-kalāpa,%} an ornament consisting
of several strings of pearls; {%raśanā-kalāpa,%} a zone
consisting of several strings, worn by women round
the waist; {%jaṭā-kalāpa,%} a tuft or knot of braided
hair); totality, whole body or collection of a number
of separate things, a zone, a string of bells worn by
women round the waist; the rope round an elephant's
neck; a bundle of arrows, a quiver with arrows, a
quiver; a peacock's tail (as consisting of a multitude of
single feathers); an ornament in general; N. of a
grammar, supposed to be revealed by the god Kumāra
or Kārttikeya to Sarva-varman; a village where the
destroyer Kalki is to be born; the moon; a clever
and intelligent man; a poem written in one metre;
[Page0212-a+ 72]
({%ī%}), f. a bundle of grass. {%—Kalāpaka, as,%} m. a band,
a bundle; a string of pearls; the rope round an ele-
phant's neck; a sectarian mark on the forehead; ({%am%}),
n. a number of verses in one metre; a series of four
stanzas on one subject; the eye in a peacock's
feather?; ({%as, ikā, am%}), to be repaid when the
peacocks spread their tails. {%—Kalāpa-grāma, as,%} m.,
N. of a Grāma or village. {%—Kalāpa-cchanda, as,%}
m. an ornament of pearls consisting of twenty-four
strings. {%—Kalāpa-tattvārṇava (˚va-ar˚),%} title of
a commentary on the Kalāpa grammar. {%—Kalāpa-%}
{%dvīpa,%} N. of a place, perhaps the same as {%kalāpa-%}
{%grāma%}. {%—Kalāpa-śiras, ās,%} m., N. of a Muni; (a
various reading for {%kapāla-śiras.%}) {%—Kalāpānusārin%}
{%(˚pa-an˚), ī,%} m. a follower of the Kalāpa grammar.
{%—Kalāpin, ī, inī, i,%} furnished with a bundle of
arrows, bearing a quiver with arrows; spreading its
tail (said of a peacock &c.); ({%ī%}), m. a peacock; the
Indian cuckoo; the waved-leaf fig tree, Ficus Infec-
toria; N. of an old teacher, a pupil of Vaiśampāyana;
(according to some) the author of the Kalāpa
grammar; the time (scil. {%kālaḥ%}) when peacocks
spread their tails; ({%inī%}), f. night; the moon; a
species of Cyperus. {%—Kalā-pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%} filled
up by single or separate parts; ({%as%}), m. the moon.
{%—Kalā-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘digit-bearer,’ the moon; an
artist, a mechanic, &c. {%—Kalāyana (˚lā-ay˚), as,%}
m. a tumbler, a dancer, but especially one who dances
or walks on a sharp edge, as the edge of a sword &c.
{%—Kalā-vat, ān,%} m. ‘having digits,’ the moon;
({%tī%}), f. a mystical ceremony, the initiation of the
Tantrika student, in which the goddess Durgā is
supposed to be transferred from the water-jar to the
body of the novice; N. of an Apsaras; N. of the
mother of Rādhā; N. of the wife of Kṛta-varman,
king of Ayodhyā; N. of the wife of Dāśārha; N. of
the lute of the Gandharva Tumburu. {%—Kalā-vāda-%}
{%tantra, Kalā-vidhi-tantra, Kalā-sāra-tantra,%}
names of Tantras. {%—Kalā-vilāsa, as,%} m. a work
on rhetoric. {%—Kalā-śāstra, am,%} n. a work by
Viśākhila.
<LEND>

<L>14000<pc>0212-a<k1>kalikA<k2>kalikA
{%Kalikā,%}¦ f. a digit of the moon. See below, s. v.
<LEND>

<L>14001<pc>0212-a<k1>kalAkanda<k2>kalAkanda
{#kalAkanda#}¦ {%kalākanda = kanda,%} a species of
the Atijagatī metre.
<LEND>

<L>14002<pc>0212-a<k1>kalAkula<k2>kalAkula
{#kalAkula#}¦ {%kalākula, am,%} n. poison; [cf.
{%halāhala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14003<pc>0212-a<k1>kalANkura<k2>kalANkura
{#kalANkura#}¦ {%kalāṅkura, as,%} m. the bird Ardea
Sibirica, a crane; an epithet of the Asura Kaṃsa.
<LEND>

<L>14004<pc>0212-a<k1>kalANgala<k2>kalANgala
{#kalANgala#}¦ {%kalāṅgala, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?)
a kind of weapon (?).
<LEND>

<L>14005<pc>0212-a<k1>kalAcika<k2>kalAcika
{#kalAcika#}¦ {%kalācika, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?)
a ladle; ({%ā%}), f. or {%kalācī,%} f. the fore-arm, the arm
below the elbow.
<LEND>

<L>14006<pc>0212-a<k1>kalAwIna<k2>kalAwIna
{#kalAwIna#}¦ {%kalāṭīna, as,%} m. the white water
wagtail.
<LEND>

<L>14007<pc>0212-a<k1>kalAda<k2>kalAda
{#kalAda#}¦ {%kalāda, as,%} m. a goldsmith.
<LEND>

<L>14008<pc>0212-a<k1>kalADika<k2>kalADika
{#kalADika#}¦ {%kalādhika, as,%} m. (fr. {%kala%} and
{%adhika ?%}), a cock; [cf. {%kalāvika%} and {%uṣākala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14009<pc>0212-a<k1>kalAnaka<k2>kalAnaka
{#kalAnaka#}¦ {%kalānaka, as,%} m., N. of one of
the attendants of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>14010<pc>0212-a<k1>kalApa<k2>kalApa
{#kalApa#}¦ {%kalāpa,%} &c. See under {%kalā.%}
<LEND>

<L>14011<pc>0212-a<k1>kalApUra<k2>kalApUra
{#kalApUra#}¦ {%kalāpūra, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?),
and {%ā,%} f. a kind of musical instrument.
<LEND>

<L>14012<pc>0212-a<k1>kalAmaka<k2>kalAmaka
{#kalAmaka#}¦ {%kalāmaka, as,%} m. a kind of rice
ripening in the cold season; [cf. {%kalama.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14013<pc>0212-a<k1>kalAmbi<k2>kalAmbi
{#kalAmbi#}¦ {%kalāmbi, is,%} f. or {%kalāmbikā,%} f.
lending, a loan; usury.
<LEND>

<L>14014<pc>0212-a<k1>kalAya<k2>kalAya
{#kalAya#}¦ {%kalāya, as,%} m., N. of various legu-
minous seeds, chiefly of the order Phaseolus, particular
kinds of pulse or vetches; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of Panicum,
{%= gaṇḍadūrvā%}. {%—Kalāya-khañja, as,%} m. one who
trembles and totters as he walks.
<LEND>
[Page0212-b+ 76]

<L>14015<pc>0212-b<k1>kalAvika<k2>kalAvika
{#kalAvika#}¦ {%kalāvika, as,%} m. a cock; [cf.
{%kalādhika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14016<pc>0212-b<k1>kalAvikala<k2>kalAvikala
{#kalAvikala#}¦ {%kalāvikala, as,%} m. a sparrow;
[cf. {%kalaviṅka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14017<pc>0212-b<k1>kalAhaka<k2>kalAhaka
{#kalAhaka#}¦ {%kalāhaka, as,%} m. a kind of musical
instrument; [cf. {%kāhala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14018<pc>0212-b<k1>kali<k2>kali
{#kali#}¦ {%kali, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 3. {%kal%}),
N. of the die or side of a die, which is marked with
one point (personified as a deity or evil genius in
the poem of Nala); the plant Terminalia Bellerica,
the nuts of which in olden times were used as dice;
N. of the last and worst of the four Yugas, the present
or iron age, the age of vice; (the four Yugas or ages
have received their names from the marks on dice, the
best mark being four points and the worst one; the
Kali or fourth age contains, inclusive of the two dawns,
1200 years of the gods or 432,000 years of men,
and begins the eighteenth of February 3102 B. C.;
at the end of this Yuga the world is to be destroyed);
strife (considered as the son of {%Krodha%} ‘Anger’ and
{%Hiṃsā%} ‘Injury,’ and as generating with his sister
{%Durukti%} ‘Calumny,’ two children, viz. {%Bhaya%} ‘Fear’
and {%Mṛtyu%} ‘Death’); dissension, war, battle; the worst
in any class; a hero; an arrow; Ved., N. of a class of
mythic beings related to the Gandharvas, and sup-
posed by some to be fond of gambling; in epic
poetry {%Kali%} is held to be the fifteenth of the Deva-
gandharvas or children of the Munis; N. of a man;
({%is%} or {%ī%}), f. an unblown flower, a bud. {%—Kali-kāra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of several birds, the fork-tailed shrike;
Loxia Philippensis, a small bird with a yellow head;
a kind of chicken; a plant bearing a nut which is
used as a febrifuge, Grey Bonduc, {%= karañja%} and
{%pūtikarañja;%} an epithet of Nārada; ({%ī%}), f. the
poisonous plant Methonica Superba. {%—Kali-kāraka,%}
{%as,%} m. the plant Cæsalpinia Bonducella; (a various
reading has {%kali-māraka%}); an epithet of Nārada
(‘the quarrelsome’). {%—Kali-druma, as,%} m. the plant
Terminalia Bellerica or the tree of strife, being sup-
posed to be the favourite haunt of imps or goblins.
{%—Kali-dharma-nirṇaya, as,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Kali-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a writer on music.
{%—Kali-priya, as, ā, am,%} quarrelsome, mischievous,
mischief-making; ({%as%}), m. a monkey, an ape; an
epithet of Nārada. {%—Kali-māraka, as,%} m. the plant
Cæsalpinia Bonducella; (a various reading for {%kali-%}
{%kāraka,%} q. v.) {%—Kali-mālaka, as,%} m. and {%kali-%}
{%mālya, as,%} m. the plant Cæsalpinia Bonducella.
{%—Kali-yuga, am,%} n., N. of the fourth age, the
present or iron age. {%—Kali-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the tree
Terminalia Bellerica. {%—Kali-saṃśraya, as,%} m. the
act of betaking one's self to Kali.
<LEND>

<L>14019<pc>0212-b<k1>kalika<k2>kalika
{#kalika#}¦ {%kalika, as,%} m. a curlew.
<LEND>

<L>14020<pc>0212-b<k1>kalikA<k2>kalikA
{#kalikA#}¦ {%kalikā,%} f. (fr. {%kalā%}), a digit or the
sixteenth part of the moon; an unblown flower
[cf. {%kali%}]; the bottom or peg of the Indian lute,
made of cane; N. of several metres, a metre con-
taining 4 × 8 + 16 syllabic instants; a metre of four
lines, each containing fifteen syllables; a metre con-
sisting of 12 + 8 + 16 + 20 syllables; title of a work
on medicine.
<LEND>

<L>14021<pc>0212-b<k1>kalikAtA<k2>kalikAtA
{#kalikAtA#}¦ {%kalikātā,%} f. the modern name
Calcutta.
<LEND>

<L>14022<pc>0212-b<k1>kalikApUrva<k2>kalikApUrva
{#kalikApUrva#}¦ {%kalikāpūrva, am,%} n. (fr. {%kalikā%}
and {%apūrva?%}), acts leading to future consequences
not connected with those of a previous birth.
<LEND>

<L>14023<pc>0212-b<k1>kaliNga<k2>kaliNga
{#kaliNga#}¦ {%kaliṅga, as,%} m., N. of a country;
the name is applied in the Purāṇas to several places,
but especially signifies a district on the Coromandel
coast, extending from below Cuttack (Kaṭaka) to
the vicinity of Madras; in this sense, like some other
names of countries, it is usually confined to the plural
number, confounding the place with the people in-
habiting it, (these people are said to owe their origin
to Kaliṅga, the son of Dīrgha-tamas and Sudeṣṇā;
Kaliṅga being sometimes identified with the epic
[Page0212-c+ 74]
Bali); N. of a scholiast on the Amara-koṣa; N. of
a poet; the fork-tailed shrike, Lanius Forficatus, (in
this sense derived from {%kalim%} and {%ga?;%} cf. {%kali-%}
{%kāra%}); the plants Cæsalpinia Bonducella, Wrightia
Antidysenterica, Acacia Sirisa, Ficus Infectoria; ({%ā%}),
f. a beautiful woman; the plant Ipomœa Turpethum;
({%am%}), n. Indra-grain [cf. {%indra-yava%}]; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), clever; cunning.
<LEND>

<L>14024<pc>0212-c<k1>kaliNgaka<k2>kaliNgaka
{%Kaliṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. the seed of the Coraiya, Indra-
grain.
<LEND>

<L>14025<pc>0212-c<k1>kaliNgaqI<k2>kaliNgaqI
{%Kaliṅgaḍī,%}¦ f. (?) an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>14026<pc>0212-c<k1>kaliYja<k2>kaliYja
{#kaliYja#}¦ {%kaliñja, as,%} m. a mat, a screen;
(a various reading for {%kiliñja.%})
<LEND>

<L>14027<pc>0212-c<k1>kalita<k2>kalita
{#kalita#}¦ {%kalita.%} See 3. {%kal.%}
<LEND>

<L>14028<pc>0212-c<k1>kalinda<k2>kalinda
{#kalinda#}¦ {%kalinda, as,%} m. the tree Terminalia
Bellerica; the sun; (in these meanings perhaps a
compound of {%kalim%} and {%da%}); N. of a mountain on
which the river Yamunā rises; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people; ({%ī%}), f. a N. of the river Yamunā or Jumnā.
{%—Kalinda-kanyā%} or {%kalinda-nandinī%} or {%ka-%}
{%linda-śaila-jātā,%} f. epithets of the river Yamunā or
Jumnā.
<LEND>

<L>14029<pc>0212-c<k1>kalindikA<k2>kalindikA
{#kalindikA#}¦ {%kalindikā,%} f. science; (a various
reading has {%kalandikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>14030<pc>0212-c<k1>kalila<k2>kalila
{#kalila#}¦ {%kalila, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ?%}),
covered with, full of; mixed, blended; impenetrable,
impervious; ({%am%}), n. a large heap, thicket, confusion;
[cf. {%kaluṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14031<pc>0212-c<k1>kalukka<k2>kalukka
{#kalukka#}¦ {%kalukka, as,%} m. a musical instru-
ment, a cymbal; ({%ā%}), f. a tavern; a meteor.
<LEND>

<L>14032<pc>0212-c<k1>kaluza<k2>kaluza
{#kaluza#}¦ {%kaluṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ?,%} said
to be fr. rt. 3. {%kal%}), turbid, foul, muddy, unclean;
dark, opaque, without brilliancy; hoarse (as the
voice); wicked, bad; lazy, idle; ({%as%}), m. a buffalo;
({%am%}), n. dirt, uncleanness; sin, wrath. {%—Kaluṣa-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%kaluṣa-tva, am,%} n. foulness, turbidness;
darkness, opacity; agitation, trouble, anger. {%—Kalu-%}
{%ṣa-yoni, is, is, i,%} of impure origin.
<LEND>

<L>14033<pc>0212-c<k1>kaluzAya<k2>kaluzAya
{%Kaluṣāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kaluṣāyate, -yitum,%} to
become turbid.
<LEND>

<L>14034<pc>0212-c<k1>kaluzita<k2>kaluzita
{%Kaluṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ foul, impure; defiled, con-
taminated; wicked.
<LEND>

<L>14035<pc>0212-c<k1>kaluzin<k2>kaluzin
{%Kaluṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ foul, impure; defiled, depraved;
wicked.
<LEND>

<L>14036<pc>0212-c<k1>kaluzIkf<k2>kaluzIkf
{%Kaluṣī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make turbid or unclean.
<LEND>

<L>14037<pc>0212-c<k1>kalUtara<k2>kalUtara
{#kalUtara#}¦ {%kalūtara, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?),
N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>14038<pc>0212-c<k1>kalevara<k2>kalevara
{#kalevara#}¦ {%kalevara, as, am,%} m. n. the body;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>cadâver.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>14039<pc>0212-c<k1>kalka<k2>kalka
{#kalka#}¦ {%kalka, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
3. {%kal%}), a viscous sediment deposited by oily sub-
stances when ground; a kind of tenacious paste;
dirt, filth; the wax of the ear; ordure, fæces; mean-
ness, falsehood, deceit, sin, hypocrisy, pride; the
tree Terminalia Bellerica; incense; levigated powder;
({%as, ā, am%}), sinful, wicked; [cf. {%kaluṣa, kalma-%}
{%ṣa, kilviṣa.%}] {%—Kalka-phala, as,%} m. the pome-
granate plant {%(dāḍima)%}. {%—Kalkālaya (˚ka-āl˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14040<pc>0212-c<k1>kalkana<k2>kalkana
{%Kalkana, am,%}¦ n. falsehood, deceit, cheating,
quarrelling.
<LEND>

<L>14041<pc>0212-c<k1>kalki<k2>kalki
{%Kalki, is,%}¦ m. a N. of Viṣṇu in his future capacity
of destroyer of the wicked and liberator of the world
from its enemies. This will constitute the tenth and
last Avatāra or descent of the deity, and is to take
place at the end of the four Yugas or ages. {%—Kalki-%}
{%prādurbhāva, as,%} m. the apparition of Kalki.
<LEND>

<L>14042<pc>0212-c<k1>kalkin<k2>kalkin
{%Kalkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ foul, turbid, having sediment,
dirty, wicked; ({%ī%}), m. {%= kalki%} above.
<LEND>

<L>14043<pc>0212-c<k1>kalkala<k2>kalkala
{#kalkala#}¦ {%kalkala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>14044<pc>0212-c<k1>kalpa<k2>kalpa
{#kalpa#}¦ {%kalpa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%kḷp%}), prac-
ticable, feasible, possible; proper, fit, able, competent
(with gen., loc., inf., and at the end of a compound,
[Page0213-a+ 81]
e. g. {%dharmasya kalpaḥ,%} competent for duty; {%sva-%}
{%karmaṇi na kalpaḥ,%} not competent for his own work;
{%yadā na śāsituṃ kalpaḥ,%} if he is not able to rule);
strong, vigorous; {%kalpe vayasi,%} in the vigorous
period of life; ({%as%}), m. a sacred precept, law, ordi-
nance [cf. {%vidhi, nyāya%}]; manner of acting, pro-
ceeding, practice prescribed by the Vedas (e. g. {%pra-%}
{%thamaḥ kalpaḥ,%} a rule to be observed before any
other rule, first duty; {%etena kalpena,%} in this way;
{%paśu-kalpa,%} the rites at the animal sacrifice; {%na%}
{%kalpa-mātre,%} not according to the mere letter
of the rule without regard to its spirit); the most
complete of the six Vedāṅgas, that which prescribes
the ritual and gives rules for ceremonial or sacrificial
acts; (in medic.) treatment of the sick, manner of
curing (e. g. {%kalpetara,%} one cured or treated differ-
ently); the doctrine of poisons and antidotes; (at
the end of an adjective compound) having the manner
or form of anything, similar to, resembling, like but
with a degree of inferiority (e. g. {%prabhāta-kalpā%}
{%śarvarī,%} the night which is something similar to
dawn, i. e. the night at the approach of dawn; {%mṛ-%}
{%ta-kalpa,%} similar to a dead person, almost dead;
{%abhedya-kalpa,%} almost impenetrable; according to
native grammarians {%kalpa%} so used is an accentless
affix, before which a final {%s%} is left unchanged, and
final {%ī%} and {%ū%} shortened; native authorities also con-
nect {%kalpa%} with a simple verb, thus {%pacati-kalpam,%}
he cooks pretty well); a resolve, a determination; pro-
priety, fitness (?); optionality, alternative [cf. {%vi-kalpa%}],
doubt; a fabulous period of time, a day of Brahmā
or 1000 Yugas, a period of four hundred and thirty-
two million years of mortals, measuring the duration
of the world; (a month of Brahmā is supposed to
contain thirty such Kalpas; according to the Mahā-
bhārata twelve months of Brahmā constitute his year,
and one hundred such years his lifetime; fifty years
of Brahmā are supposed to have elapsed, and we are
now in the {%śvetavārāha-kalpa%} of the fifty-first.
The Kalpa, in the same way as the Saṃvatsara or
year, is personified as son of Dhruva and Bhrami; at
the end of a Kalpa the world is annihilated; hence
{%kalpa%} is sometimes used for {%kalpānta%} or the de-
struction of the world); N. of certain sentences or
verses containing the verb {%kḷp;%} one of the trees
of paradise, see {%kalpa-taru%} below; (with Jainas)
a term for a particular abode of the deities [cf.
{%kalpa-bhava%} and {%kalpātīta%}]; ({%am%} or {%ā%}), m. f. a
kind of intoxicating liquor; [cf. {%a-kalpa, anu-kalpa,%}
{%upa-kalpa,%} &c.] {%—Kalpa-kāra, as,%} m. an author of
ritual or ceremonial rules. {%—Kalpa-kedāra,%} a medical
work by Kālīśiva. {%—Kalpa-kṣaya, as,%} m. the end
of a Kalpa, end of the world, destruction of all things.
{%—Kalpa-gā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Kalpa-taru, us,%}
m. one of the trees of Svarga or Indra's paradise,
a fabulous tree, granting all desires, hence figuratively
a generous person; title of a work on jurisprudence;
also a work of Lakṣmīdhara; also one of Vācaspati.
{%—Kalpa-dru, us,%} m. {%= kalpa-taru,%} also N. of a
lexicon by Keśava. {%—Kalpa-druma, as,%} m. {%= kalpa-%}
{%taru;%} a work on jurisprudence; also a Tantra work;
the collection of roots by Vopadeva is called {%Kavi-%}
{%kalpadruma,%} the tree from which poets obtain all
desired roots; and the modern encyclopedia of Rā-
dhākānta is entitled {%Śabda-kalpadruma,%} the tree
which satisfies every desire for words. {%—Kalpa-pā-%}
{%dapa, as,%} m. {%= kalpa-taru%} above. {%—Kalpa-pāla,%}
{%as,%} m. a protector of order, a legitimate prince; a
person who distils or sells spirituous liquors. {%—Kalpa-%}
{%bhava, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a certain class of deities.
{%—Kalpa-mahīruh, ṭ,%} m. {%= kalpa-vṛkṣa%}. {%—Kal-%}
{%pa-yukti,%} title of a work by Budha. {%—Kalpa-latā,%}
f. a creeper yielding everything desired; {%Kalpalatā-%}
{%vatāra,%} title of a commentary of Kṛṣṇa on the
Vīja-gaṇita; {%Kalpalatā-prakāśa,%} title of a com-
mentary on the Viṣṇu-bhaktilatā. {%—Kalpa-latikā,%}
f. {%= kalpa-latā%} above; ({%Śabda-k˚,%} title of a dic-
tionary.) {%—Kalpa-varṣa, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Vasu-deva and Upa-devā. {%—Kalpa-vallī,%} f. {%= kalpa-%}
{%latā%} above. {%—Kalpa-vāyu, us,%} m. the wind that is
to blow at the end of the world. {%—Kalpa-viṭapin, %}
[Page0213-b+ 77]
{%ī,%} m. or {%kalpa-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the fabulous tree of
Indra's heaven; see above. {%—Kalpa-vidhi, is,%} m. a
rule resembling a ceremonial injunction. {%—Kalpa-%}
{%vṛkṣa-latā,%} f. a work by Lollaṭa. {%—Kalpa-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n. a Sūtra manual of ritual; also a medicinal
work and a work of the Jaina sect so called. {%—Kalpa-%}
{%sūtra-vyākhyā,%} f. a Jaina work on the Kalpasūtras.
{%—Kalpātīta (˚pa-at˚), ās,%} m. pl., N. of a certain
class of deities. {%—Kalpādi (˚pa-ādi), is,%} m. the
beginning of a Kalpa, the renovation of all things.
{%—Kalpānupada (˚pa-an˚), am,%} n. title of a work
belonging to the Sāma-veda. {%—Kalpānta (˚pa-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the end of a Kalpa, the destruction of the
world. {%—Kalpāntara (˚pa-an˚), am,%} n. another
Kalpa. {%—Kalpānta-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} lasting to the
end of a Kalpa.
<LEND>

<L>14045<pc>0213-b<k1>kalpaka<k2>kalpaka
{%Kalpaka, as,%}¦ m. a rite, a ceremony; a barber [cf.
{%kalpanī%}]; a kind of Curcuma, commonly {%karcūra.%}
{%—Kalpaka-taru, us,%} m., N. of a tree of Indra's
paradise; [cf. {%kalpa-taru.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14046<pc>0213-b<k1>kalpana<k2>kalpana
{%Kalpana, am,%}¦ n. forming, fashioning; doing,
performing; fixing, constituting; anything fixed or
placed upon another thing for ornament; act of
clipping, cutting; ({%ā%}), f. fixing, constituting, settling;
making, performing; fabrication; composing, com-
position (of a poem &c.); inventing, invention; for-
gery; a fancy, an idea or image formed in the mind;
an imagination, intention; contrivance, plan, infer-
ence; caparisoning or decorating an elephant; ({%ī%}),
f. a scissors or shears. {%—Kalpanā-śakti, is,%} f. the
power of forming ideas.
<LEND>

<L>14047<pc>0213-b<k1>kalpanIya<k2>kalpanIya
{%Kalpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made, fashioned or
contrived, to be accomplished, possible, to be substi-
tuted or supplied.
<LEND>

<L>14048<pc>0213-b<k1>kalpika<k2>kalpika
{%Kalpika, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit, proper.
<LEND>

<L>14049<pc>0213-b<k1>kalpita<k2>kalpita
{%Kalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made, fabricated, artificial;
composed, invented; arranged, put in order; pre-
pared; brought; inferred; ({%as%}), m. an elephant
armed or caparisoned for war. {%—Kalpitārgha (˚ta-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} one for whom a respectful offering
is prepared.
<LEND>

<L>14050<pc>0213-b<k1>kalpin<k2>kalpin
{%Kalpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. a term used in gambling
with dice.
<LEND>

<L>14051<pc>0213-b<k1>kalpya<k2>kalpya
{%Kalpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made or contrived or
performed, to be prescribed; relating to ritual; to
be substituted.
<LEND>

<L>14052<pc>0213-b<k1>kalman<k2>kalman
{#kalman#}¦ {%kalman, a,%} n. according to native
grammarians {%= karman.%}
<LEND>

<L>14053<pc>0213-b<k1>kalmali<k2>kalmali
{#kalmali#}¦ {%kalmali,%} Ved. splendor (of the
stars?).
<LEND>

<L>14054<pc>0213-b<k1>kalmalIka<k2>kalmalIka
{%Kalmalīka, am,%}¦ n. brightness, splendor.
<LEND>

<L>14055<pc>0213-b<k1>kalmalIkin<k2>kalmalIkin
{%Kalmalīkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. burning, shining.
<LEND>

<L>14056<pc>0213-b<k1>kalmaza<k2>kalmaza
{#kalmaza#}¦ {%kalmaṣa, as, am,%} m. n. stain, dirt,
sin, dregs; {%jala-kalmaṣa,%} the dirt or sediment of
water; ({%am%}), n. darkness, a division of the infernal
regions; the hand below the wrist; ({%as, ā, am%}), dirty,
foul. {%—Kalmaṣa-dhvaṃsa-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} destroy-
ing darkness or sin; preventing the commission of
crime.
<LEND>

<L>14057<pc>0213-b<k1>kalmAza<k2>kalmAza
{#kalmAza#}¦ {%kalmāṣa, as, ī, am,%} variegated,
spotted; black, black and white; ({%as%}), m. a variegated
colour; a mixture of black and white, the black
colour; a Rakṣas, demon or goblin; a species of
fragrant rice; N. of a Nāga; a form of fire; N. of
a servant of the sun, identified with Yama; Śākya-
muni in a former birth; ({%ī%}), f. the spotted cow of
Jamadagni, the giver of all desires; N. of a river;
({%am%}), n. a stain. {%—Kalmāṣa-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. an
epithet of Śiva. {%—Kalmāṣa-grīva, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having a variegated neck. {%—Kalmāṣa-tantura, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Kalmāṣa-tā,%} f. spottedness, the
state of being variegated. {%—Kalmāṣa-pāda, as,%} m.,
N. of a king; also Saudāsa, a descendant of Ikṣvāku,
transformed to a Rākṣasa by Vasiṣṭha. {%—Kalmā-%}
{%ṣāṅghri (˚ṣa-aṅ˚), is,%} m. another N. of the same
king.
<LEND>

<L>14058<pc>0213-b<k1>kalya<k2>kalya
{#kalya#}¦ {%kalya, as, ā, am%} (rt. 3. {%kal?%}), well,
[Page0213-c+ 77]
sound, healthy, free from sickness; ready, prepared,
armed; clever, dexterous; agreeable, auspicious (as a
speech or discourse); instructive, admonitory; deaf and
dumb [cf. {%kala%} and {%kalla%}]; ({%am%}), n. dawn, day-
break; to-morrow; yesterday (?); {%kalyam%} or {%kalye,%}
ind. at day-break; ({%am%} or {%ā%}), n. f. spirituous liquor;
congratulation; good wishes; good tidings; ({%ā%}), f.
Emblic Myrobalan, see {%harītakī;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">καλός</lang>
<lang n="greek">καλλίων, κάλλιστος</lang> &c., for <lang n="greek">καλyος</lang> &c.] {%—Kalya-%}
{%jagdhi, is,%} f. the morning-meal, breakfast. {%—Kalya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. or {%kalya-tā,%} f. health; recovery, con-
valescence. {%—Kalya-pāla%} or {%kalyā-pāla%} or {%kalya-%}
{%pālaka%} or {%kalyā-pālaka, as,%} m. a distiller. {%—Kal-%}
{%ya-varta, as,%} m. the morning-meal, breakfast; a
light meal; ({%am%}), n. anything light, a trifle, a trivial
or unimportant matter; [cf. {%prātarāśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14059<pc>0213-c<k1>kalyARa<k2>kalyARa
{%Kalyāṇa, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} beautiful, agreeable, friendly,
illustrious, noble, excellent, happy, beneficial, salutary,
prosperous, propitious, lucky, well, right, good; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a prince, also called Bhaṭṭaśrīkalyāṇa; N. of
the author of the poem Gītāgaṅgādhara; ({%ī%}), f. a cow;
a leguminous shrub, Glycine Debilis; N. of two cities;
N. of a river in Ceylon; N. of a deity; ({%am%}), n. good
fortune, happiness, prosperity; virtue; a festival;
gold; heaven; N. of the eleventh of the fourteen
Pūrvas or most ancient writings of the Jainas. {%—Kal-%}
{%yāṇa-kaṭaka, as,%} m., N. of a place. {%—Kalyāṇa-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} propitious, auspicious, conferring
good fortune &c. {%—Kalyāṇa-kāra, as, ī, am,%} or
{%kalyāṇa-kāraka, as, ā, am,%} creating prosperity or
profit. {%—Kalyāṇa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} virtuous, good; pro-
pitious, lucky. {%—Kalyāṇa-candra, as,%} m., N. of an
astronomer in the twelfth century A. D. {%—Kalyāṇa-%}
{%cāra, as, ī, am,%} following virtuous courses; lucky,
fortunate. {%—Kalyāṇa-devī,%} f., N. of the wife of Ja-
yāpīḍa. {%—Kalyāṇa-dharman, ā, ā, a,%} virtuous,
good. {%—Kalyāṇa-pañcamīka, as,%} m. a fortnight,
the fifth lunar day of which is lucky. {%—Kalyāṇa-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Kalyāṇa-malla, as,%}
m., N. of a prince; N. of the author of a work
called Anaṅgaraṅga; N. of a son of Gajamalla,
author of the commentary called Mālatī. {%—Kalyāṇa-%}
{%mitra, am,%} n. a friend of virtue, a religious counsellor.
{%—Kalyāṇa-rāja-caritra, am,%} n. ‘the life of king
Kalyāṇa’ by Madana. {%—Kalyāṇa-vacana, am,%} n.
friendly speech, good wishes. {%—Kalyāṇa-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} happy. {%—Kalyāṇa-vartman, ā,%} f., N. of
a princess, who erected a statue of Viṣṇu, called
Kalyāṇa-svāmi-keśava. {%—Kalyāṇa-varman, ā,%} m.,
N. of an astronomer. {%—Kalyāṇa-vīja, as,%} m. a
sort of pulse, Ervum Hirsutum. {%—Kalyāṇa-śarman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a scholiast on Varāha-mihira. {%—Kalyāṇa-%}
{%sūtra, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Kalyāṇācāra%}
{%(˚ṇa-āc˚), as, ā, am,%} following good practices,
virtuous. {%—Kalyāṇābhijana (˚ṇa-abh˚), as, ī, am,%}
of illustrious birth. {%—Kalyāṇī-pañcamā, ās,%} f. pl.
(scil. {%rātrayas%}) nights of which the fifth is lucky.
<LEND>

<L>14060<pc>0213-c<k1>kalyARaka<k2>kalyARaka
{%Kalyāṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ auspicious, efficacious (as
a drug), prosperous, happy; ({%ikā%}), f. red arsenic.
<LEND>

<L>14061<pc>0213-c<k1>kalyARin<k2>kalyARin
{%Kalyāṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ happy, lucky, prosperous;
illustrious; virtuous, good; ({%inī%}), f. the water-plant
Sida Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>14062<pc>0213-c<k1>kalyuza<k2>kalyuza
{#kalyuza#}¦ {%kalyuṣa, am,%} n. the wrist (?).
<LEND>

<L>14063<pc>0213-c<k1>kall<k2>kall
{#kall#}¦ {%kall,%} cl. 1. A. {%kallate, -litum,%} to
sound indistinctly; to sound; to be mute.
<LEND>

<L>14064<pc>0213-c<k1>kalla<k2>kalla
{%Kalla, as, ā, am,%}¦ deaf; (also a various reading
for {%kanna,%} q. v.) {%—Kalla-tva, am,%} n. or {%kalla-tā,%}
f. deafness; indistinct articulation, hoarseness. {%—Kal-%}
{%la-mūka, as, ā, am,%} deaf and dumb. {%—Kalla-vīra-%}
{%tantra,%} a Buddhist work, also called Caṇḍamahā-
roṣaṇa-tantra. {%—Kallārya, as,%} m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>14065<pc>0213-c<k1>kallawa<k2>kallawa
{#kallawa#}¦ {%kallaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a prince; {%śrī-%}
{%kallaṭa,%} N. of a sage.
<LEND>

<L>14066<pc>0213-c<k1>kalli<k2>kalli
{#kalli#}¦ {%kalli,%} ind. to-morrow.
<LEND>

<L>14067<pc>0213-c<k1>kallinATa<k2>kallinATa
{#kallinATa#}¦ {%kallinātha, as,%} m., N. of a writer
on music.
<LEND>

<L>14068<pc>0213-c<k1>kallola<k2>kallola
{#kallola#}¦ {%kallola, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%kad + lola%}),
[Page0214-a+ 70]
inimical, hostile; ({%as%}), m. a wave; a surge, a billow;
an enemy; joy, happiness, pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>14069<pc>0214-a<k1>kallolita<k2>kallolita
{%Kallolita, as, ā, am,%}¦ surging, billowy.
<LEND>

<L>14070<pc>0214-a<k1>kallolinI<k2>kallolinI
{%Kallolinī,%}¦ f. a surging stream, a river in general.
<LEND>

<L>14071<pc>0214-a<k1>kalhaRa<k2>kalhaRa
{#kalhaRa#}¦ {%kalhaṇa, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Rāja-taraṅgiṇī (often spelt {%kahlaṇa%}); N. of
the father of the copyist Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>14072<pc>0214-a<k1>kalhAra<k2>kalhAra
{#kalhAra#}¦ {%kalhāra, am,%} n. a water-lily.
<LEND>

<L>14073<pc>0214-a<k1>kav<k2>kav
{#kav#}¦ {%kav,%} cl. 1. A. {%kavate, -vitum,%} to de-
scribe (as a poet); to paint; to picture,
colour; [cf. {%kab.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14074<pc>0214-a<k1>kava<k2>kava<h>1
{#kava#} 1¦. {%kava,%} a form substituted for {%ka, kā,%}
and 1. {%ku,%} to express deterioration or deficiency. {%—Ka-%}
{%va-patha, as,%} m., Ved. a bad way. {%—Kavāgni (˚va-%}
{%ag˚), is,%} m. a little fire. {%—Kavoṣṇa (˚va-uṣ˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} slightly warm, tepid; ({%am%}), n. slight warmth.
<LEND>

<L>14075<pc>0214-a<k1>kava<k2>kava<h>2
2. {%kava%}¦ in {%a-kava%} and {%kavāsakha;%} [cf. {%kavatnu%}
and {%kavāri.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14076<pc>0214-a<k1>kavaka<k2>kavaka
{#kavaka#}¦ {%kavaka, am,%} n. a fungus, a mush-
room; a mouthful.
<LEND>

<L>14077<pc>0214-a<k1>kavaca<k2>kavaca
{#kavaca#}¦ {%kavaca, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
3. {%ku%}), armour, mail, a coat of mail, a cuirass; the
jacket of a boy; an amulet, a charm, the mystical
syllable {%hum%} or {%hūm,%} forming part of a Mantra and
considered as a preservative like armour; it is also
inscribed on a birch leaf &c. and worn as an amulet,
being carried about the person as a charm (this is
the probable meaning in the titles {%durgā-kavaca,%}
{%sūryak˚, śivak˚, bhavānīk˚,%} &c.); a drum used in
battle, a kettle-drum; the tree Hibiscus Populneoides.
{%—Kavaca-pattra, am,%} n. the leaf of a birch tree;
[cf. {%bhūrja-pattra.%}] {%—Kavaca-pāśa, as,%} m., Ved.
the fastening of a cuirass or coat of mail. {%—Kavaca-%}
{%hara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} wearing armour or mail, or a
jacket; wearing amulets; ({%as%}), m. a boy, a child.
<LEND>

<L>14078<pc>0214-a<k1>kavacita<k2>kavacita
{%Kavacita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dressed in armour.
<LEND>

<L>14079<pc>0214-a<k1>kavacin<k2>kavacin
{%Kavacin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ dressed in armour; ({%ī%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva; N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>14080<pc>0214-a<k1>kavawI<k2>kavawI
{#kavawI#}¦ {%kavaṭī,%} f. the leaf or panel of a door;
[cf. {%kavāṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14081<pc>0214-a<k1>kavaqa<k2>kavaqa
{#kavaqa#}¦ {%kavaḍa, as,%} m. water &c. for washing
the mouth; [cf. {%kavala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14082<pc>0214-a<k1>kavatnu<k2>kavatnu
{#kavatnu#}¦ {%kavatnu, us, us, u%} (fr. 1. {%ku%}), Ved. self-
ish, stingy; (Sāy.) a bad deed.
<LEND>

<L>14083<pc>0214-a<k1>kavana<k2>kavana
{#kavana#}¦ {%kavana, am,%} n. water; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a son of Śṛṅgin.
<LEND>

<L>14084<pc>0214-a<k1>kavantaka<k2>kavantaka
{#kavantaka#}¦ {%kavantaka, as,%} m., N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of this man.
<LEND>

<L>14085<pc>0214-a<k1>kavanDa<k2>kavanDa
{#kavanDa#}¦ {%kavandha%} and {%kavandhin.%} See {%ka-%}
{%bandha%} and {%kabandhin.%}
<LEND>

<L>14086<pc>0214-a<k1>kavapaTa<k2>kavapaTa
{#kavapaTa#}¦ {%kava-patha.%} See under 1. {%kava.%}
<LEND>

<L>14087<pc>0214-a<k1>kavayI<k2>kavayI
{#kavayI#}¦ {%kavayī,%} f. the fish Cojus Cobojus
(commonly called Kavay or Kay), remarkable for
going by land from one spot to another; [cf. {%ka-%}
{%vikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14088<pc>0214-a<k1>kavara<k2>kavara
{#kavara#}¦ {%kavara, as, ā%} or {%ī%} (?), {%am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%ku%}),
mixed, intermingled, blended; set, inlaid; ({%as%}), m.
a lecturer; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. (according to some also n.)
a braid or fillet of hair; ({%as, am%}), m. n. salt; sour-
ness or acidity; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Ocimum Gratissi-
mum; ({%ī%}), f. the leaf of the Asa Fœtida plant,
Hiṅgupattrī. {%—Kavara-pucchī,%} f. having a twisted
tail or one which resembles a braid. {%—Kavarī-bhara%}
or {%kavarī-bhāra, as,%} m. a fine head of hair. {%—Ka-%}
{%varī-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} wearing a fillet of hair.
<LEND>

<L>14089<pc>0214-a<k1>kavarakI<k2>kavarakI
{#kavarakI#}¦ {%kavarakī,%} f. a captive, a prisoner;
[cf. {%vandi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14090<pc>0214-a<k1>kavala<k2>kavala
{#kavala#}¦ {%kavala, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. 3. {%ku?%}), a
mouthful; an astringent wash for cleansing the mouth,
a gargle; a kind of fish, commonly called Baliya; [cf.
[Page0214-b+ 77]
Hib. <nsi>caomhna, caomhnadh,</nsi> ‘food, nourishment.’]
{%—Kavala-prastha, as,%} m., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>14091<pc>0214-b<k1>kavalikA<k2>kavalikA
{%Kavalikā,%}¦ f. a piece of cloth over a sore or wound,
a bandage.
<LEND>

<L>14092<pc>0214-b<k1>kavalita<k2>kavalita
{%Kavalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ swallowed as a mouthful,
eaten.
<LEND>

<L>14093<pc>0214-b<k1>kavaza<k2>kavaza
{#kavaza#}¦ {%kavaṣa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. according to
Mahīdhara either ‘sounding, creaking,’ or ‘pierced’
(said of the leaves of a door); ({%as%}), m. a shield; N.
of a man, son of Ilūṣa or Ailūṣī, author of several
hymns of the Ṛg-veda; N. of a Muni; N. of the
author of a Dharma-śāstra.
<LEND>

<L>14094<pc>0214-b<k1>kavasa<k2>kavasa
{#kavasa#}¦ {%kavasa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 3. {%ku%}),
armour, a coat of mail; a prickly shrub.
<LEND>

<L>14095<pc>0214-b<k1>kavAwa<k2>kavAwa
{#kavAwa#}¦ {%kavāṭa, as, ī, am,%} m. f. n. (for {%ka-%}
{%pāṭa%}), the leaf or panel of a door; a door; (at the
end of a compound {%kavāṭaka;%} cf. {%kavaṭī.%}) {%—Ka-%}
{%vāṭa-ghna, as,%} m. breaking the door, a thief; [cf.
{%kapāṭa-ghna.%}] {%—Kavāṭa-vakra, am,%} n., N. of a
plant; commonly called {%kavāṭaveṭu;%} or according
to others {%kavāḍaveṇṭuyā.%}
<LEND>

<L>14096<pc>0214-b<k1>kavAra<k2>kavAra
{#kavAra#}¦ {%kavāra, as,%} m. the bird Tantalus
Falcinellus; ({%am%}), n. a lotus; [cf. {%kavela.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14097<pc>0214-b<k1>kavAri<k2>kavAri
{#kavAri#}¦ {%kavāri, is, is, i,%} Ved. selfish, stingy;
[cf. {%a-kavāri, a-kava, kavatnu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14098<pc>0214-b<k1>kavAsaKa<k2>kavAsaKa
{%Kavā-sakha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. a companion of the
selfish man, selfish.
<LEND>

<L>14099<pc>0214-b<k1>kavi<k2>kavi
{#kavi#}¦ {%kavi, is, is%} or {%ī, i%} (said to be fr. rt. 3.
{%ku;%} but perhaps related to {%ākūta, ākūti%}), sensible,
intelligent, prudent, clever, wise, learned; a thinker,
a wise man, a sage, an intelligent man; (metaphoric-
ally) epithet of the gates of the sacrificial enclosure;
epithet of the Ṛbhus (as skilful in contrivance);
epithet of the old sages or patriarchs, now as spirits
surrounding the sun; epithet of the gods, especially
of Agni, Indra, Varuṇa, the Maruts, and Ādityas;
epithet of the Soma priest &c.; ({%is%}), m. a poet,
especially one who composes artificial poems; N.
of a man, according to some genealogies a son of
Brahmā, according to others a son of Bhṛgu and
father of Śukra; epithet of Śukra, the regent of the
planet Venus and preceptor of the demons; the sons
of several Manus are also called Kavis; N. of a son of
Kauśika and pupil of Garga; also a son of Ṛṣabha;
N. of Vālmīki, the inventor of poesy and author of
the Rāmāyaṇa; the sun ?; ({%is%} or {%ī%}), f. the bit of
a bridle or the reins altogether; a ladle. {%—Kavi-%}
{%kaṇṭha-hāra, as,%} m. ‘the ornament of the neck of
a poet,’ title of a work on rhetoric. {%—Kavi-kalpa-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. title of a collection of roots written
in verse by Vopadeva. {%—Kavi-kalpa-latā,%} f. title of
a work on rhetoric by Devendra. {%—Kavi-kratu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. having wise designs, wise; (Sāy.) one
who possesses wisdom or sacrifices. {%—Kavi-candra,%}
{%as,%} m. the son of Karṇa-pūra and father of Kavi-
vallabha, author of the Kāvya-candrikā; the author
of the Dhātu-candrikā; the author of the Ratnāvalī;
the author of the Rāmacandra-campū; the author
of the Śānti-candrikā; the author of a grammar
called Sārala-harī; the author of a book named
Stavāvalī. {%—Kavi-cchad, t, t, t,%} Ved. delighting
in wise men; (Sāy.) causing pleasure to the wise.
{%—Kavi-jyeṣṭha, as,%} m. an epithet of Vālmīki,
the author of the Rāmāyaṇa, ‘the oldest of poets.’
{%—Kavi-tama, as, ā, am,%} wisest. {%—Kavi-tara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} wiser. {%—Kavi-tā,%} f. poesy, poetic style
or composition. {%—Kavitāmṛta-kūpa (˚tā-am˚),%}
{%as,%} m. title of a modern collection of verses, ‘a well
of nectar of poetry.’ {%—Kavitā-vedin, ī, inī, i,%} un-
derstanding poesy, wise, learned, a poet, a genius.
{%—Kavi-tva, am,%} n. wisdom; poesy. {%—Kavi-tvana,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. wisdom. {%—Kavitva-ratnākara, as,%}
m. title of a modern work on rhetoric. {%—Kavi-%}
{%darpaṇa,%} N. of a work by Raghu. {%—Kavi-putra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a dramatic author. {%—Kavi-praśasta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. highly esteemed or praised by sages.
{%—Kavi-priyā,%} f. a work on rhetoric by Keśava-
[Page0214-c+ 73]
dāsa. {%—Kavi-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Kavi-%}
{%bhūma, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kavi-bhūṣaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. the son of Kavi-candra. {%—Kavi-ratha, as,%}
m., N. of a prince, a son of Citra-ratha. {%—Kavi-%}
{%rahasya, am,%} n. ‘the secret of the learned,’ title
of a collection of roots by Halāyudha. {%—Kavi-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. king of the poets, N. of the author of the
Rāghavapāṇḍavīya. {%—Kavi-rāmāyaṇa, as,%} m. an
epithet of Vālmīki, the author of the Rāmāyaṇa,
(an incorrect form for {%rāmāyaṇa-kavi.%}) {%—Kavi-%}
{%lāsikā%} or {%kavi-lāśikā,%} f. (?) a kind of lute. {%—Kavi-%}
{%vallabha, as,%} m., N. of the son of Kavi-candra.
{%—Kavi-vṛdha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. prospering the
wise. {%—Kavi-śasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. praised by wise
men. {%—Kavīśvara (˚vi-īś˚), as,%} m. a king of poets;
N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>14100<pc>0214-c<k1>kavika<k2>kavika
{%Kavika, am,%}¦ n. the bit of a bridle or the reins
altogether; ({%ā%}), f. the bit of a bridle; N. of a flower, {%=%}
{%kevikāpuṣya;%} a sort of fish, commonly called Kay.
<LEND>

<L>14101<pc>0214-c<k1>kavitf<k2>kavitf
{%Kavitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ (?),%}¦ wise, learned.
<LEND>

<L>14102<pc>0214-c<k1>kaviya<k2>kaviya
{%Kaviya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the bit of a bridle or the reins.
<LEND>

<L>14103<pc>0214-c<k1>kavIya<k2>kavIya<h>1
1. {%kavīya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%kavīyati, -yitum,%} to act
like a wise man; A. to claim wisdom for one's self,
pretend to it.
<LEND>

<L>14104<pc>0214-c<k1>kavIya<k2>kavIya<h>2
2. {%kavīya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the bit of a bridle or the
reins; [cf. {%kaviya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14105<pc>0214-c<k1>kavIyas<k2>kavIyas
{%Kavīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. (comparative for {%kavi-%}
{%tara%}), wiser.
<LEND>

<L>14106<pc>0214-c<k1>kavya<k2>kavya
{%Kavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. a wise, intelligent man;
({%as%}), m. a class of manes; N. of one of the seven
sages of the fourth Manvantara; ({%am%}), n. the quali-
ties or the actions of a sage; ‘what must be offered
to sages,’ an oblation or offering of food to deceased
ancestors; (generally connected with {%havya.%}) {%—Ka-%}
{%vya-tā,%} f., Ved. the qualities or the actions or the
state of a sage, wisdom. {%—Kavya-vāḍa%} or {%kavya-%}
{%vāla, as,%} m. (formed fr. {%kavya-vāh%}), a class of
manes or deified ancestors. {%—Kavya-vāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} or
{%kavya-vāhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. an offering to sages,
what must be offered or what belongs to them; ({%as%}),
m. fire; an epithet of Śiva; (the word is formed
like {%havya-vāhana.%})
<LEND>

<L>14107<pc>0214-c<k1>kaviYjuka<k2>kaviYjuka
{#kaviYjuka#}¦ {%kaviñjuka, as,%} m. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>14108<pc>0214-c<k1>kavUla<k2>kavUla
{#kavUla#}¦ {%kavūla%} (in astrol.) = Arabic <lang n="arabic">قبول</lang>
<LEND>

<L>14109<pc>0214-c<k1>kavela<k2>kavela
{#kavela#}¦ {%kavela, am,%} n. a lotus; [cf. {%kavāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14110<pc>0214-c<k1>kavozRa<k2>kavozRa
{#kavozRa#}¦ {%kavoṣṇa.%} See under 1. {%kava.%}
<LEND>

<L>14111<pc>0214-c<k1>kaS<k2>kaS
{#kaS#}¦ {%kaś,%} cl. 1. P. {%kaśati, -śitum,%} to sound;
({%kaś%} occurs also as a various reading for
{%kaṃs, kas, jhaṣ,%} and {%śaś%}); [cf. rt. {%kāś;%} cf. also
Hib. <nsi>casgairim.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>14112<pc>0214-c<k1>kaSa<k2>kaSa
{#kaSa#}¦ {%kaśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kaś%} above?; in
the sense ‘whip’ connected with rt. {%kaṣ%}), Ved. a
species of small animal; a whip; ({%ā%}), f. a whip;
whipping, flogging; a string, a rope; the mouth; a
quality; (sometimes spelt {%kaṣā.%}) {%—Kaśa-kṛtsna,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kaśā-traya, am,%} n. three
modes of whipping (a horse), good, bad, and middling.
{%—Kaśārha (˚śā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} deserving a whip-
ping. {%—Kaśā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with a whip.
<LEND>

<L>14113<pc>0214-c<k1>kaSya<k2>kaSya
{%Kaśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ deserving the whip; ({%am%}), n.
a horse's flank; spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>14114<pc>0214-c<k1>kaSas<k2>kaSas
{#kaSas#}¦ {%kaśas, as,%} n. water. {%—Kaśo-jū, ūs, ūs,%}
{%u,%} Ved. running near the water; (perhaps a Pr. N.?)
<LEND>

<L>14115<pc>0214-c<k1>kaSipu<k2>kaSipu
{#kaSipu#}¦ {%kaśipu, us, u,%} m. n. a mat; a pillow;
({%us%}), m. food; clothing; ({%ū%}), du. food and clothing;
(sometimes spelt {%kasipu;%} cf. {%hiraṇya-kaśipu.%})
{%—Kaśipūpabarhaṇa (˚pu-up˚), am,%} n., Ved. a
cover of a pillow, cloth.
<LEND>

<L>14116<pc>0214-c<k1>kaSIkA<k2>kaSIkA
{#kaSIkA#}¦ {%kaśīkā,%} f., Ved. a weasel.
<LEND>

<L>14117<pc>0214-c<k1>kaSu<k2>kaSu
{#kaSu#}¦ {%kaśu, us,%} m., Ved., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14118<pc>0214-c<k1>kaSeraka<k2>kaSeraka
{#kaSeraka#}¦ {%kaśeraka, as,%} m., N. of a Yakṣa.
<LEND>

<L>14119<pc>0214-c<k1>kaSeru<k2>kaSeru
{#kaSeru#}¦ {%kaśeru%} or {%kaseru, us, u,%} m. n. (fr.
rt. {%śṝ%} with {%ka%} prefixed?), the back-bone; a kind of
[Page0215-a+ 74]
grass, Scirpus Kysoor; ({%us%}), m. one of the nine
divisions of Jambu-dvīpa; ({%us%}), f., N. of a daughter of
Tvaṣṭṛ; (sometimes spelt {%kaseru.%}) {%—Kaśeru-mat%}
or {%kaseru-mat, ān,%} m., N. of a Yavana; N. of a
part of Bharata-varṣa.
<LEND>

<L>14120<pc>0215-a<k1>kaSeruka<k2>kaSeruka
{%Kaśeruka%}¦ or {%kaseruka, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. a sort
of grass, Scirpus Kysoor; ({%ā%}), f. the back-bone.
<LEND>

<L>14121<pc>0215-a<k1>kaSerus<k2>kaSerus
{%Kaśerus, us,%}¦ n. or {%kaśerū, ūs,%} f. a sort of grass,
Scirpus Kysoor.
<LEND>

<L>14122<pc>0215-a<k1>kaSoka<k2>kaSoka
{#kaSoka#}¦ {%kaśoka, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a class
of demons.
<LEND>

<L>14123<pc>0215-a<k1>kaScana<k2>kaScana
{#kaScana#}¦ {%kaścana,%} &c. See under 2. {%ka.%}
<LEND>

<L>14124<pc>0215-a<k1>kaSmala<k2>kaSmala
{#kaSmala#}¦ {%kaśmala, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%kas?%}),
consternation, alarm; fainting, syncope; dejection of
mind, depression of spirit, lowness, weakness; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), foul, dirty. {%—Kaśmala-cetas, ās, ās, as,%}
mentally debased.
<LEND>

<L>14125<pc>0215-a<k1>kaSmaSa<k2>kaSmaSa
{#kaSmaSa#}¦ {%kaśmaśa, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), Ved.
consternation (?).
<LEND>

<L>14126<pc>0215-a<k1>kaSmIra<k2>kaSmIra
{#kaSmIra#}¦ {%kaśmīra, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kaś%}), N. of a country; according to Burnouf a
contraction of Kaśyapamīra; [cf. {%kāśmīra.%}] {%—Kaś-%}
{%mīra-janman, ā%} or {%a,%} m. n. saffron.
<LEND>

<L>14127<pc>0215-a<k1>kaSya<k2>kaSya
{#kaSya#}¦ {%kaśya.%} See under {%kaśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>14128<pc>0215-a<k1>kaSyata<k2>kaSyata
{#kaSyata#}¦ {%kaśyata, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14129<pc>0215-a<k1>kaSyapa<k2>kaSyapa
{#kaSyapa#}¦ {%kaśyapa, as, ā, am,%} having black
teeth; ({%as%}), m. a tortoise; a sort of fish; a kind of
deer; a class of divine beings similar to or equal to
Prajāpati, (also in pl. a peculiar class of semi-divine
spirits or genii connected with or regulating the course
of the sun); a mythical Ṛṣi; N. of an old sage, con-
versant with the Mantras, author of several hymns of
the Ṛg-veda, and according to the Anukramaṇī a de-
scendant of Marīci. (In the later mythology he is the
husband of Aditi and twelve other daughters of Dakṣa,
and father by them of gods, demons, men, fish, rep-
tiles, and all animals; he is also regarded as one of the
seven sages, and in some legends as father of Vivasvat
and of Viṣṇu. He is supposed by some to be a
personification of the race who resided in Caucasus,
the Caspian, Kaṣmīr, &c.); the author of a Dharma-
śāstra; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of Kaśyapa;
{%Kaśyapa%} is also a constellation; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the
authoress of a verse in the White Yajur-veda. {%—Kaśya-%}
{%pa-nandana, as,%} m. an epithet of Garuḍa, the bird
of Viṣṇu; (‘son of Kaśyapa.’) {%—Kaśyapa-saṃhitā,%}
f. and {%kaśyapa-smṛti, is,%} f., N. of two works.
<LEND>

<L>14130<pc>0215-a<k1>kaz<k2>kaz
{#kaz#}¦ {%kaṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%kaṣati, -te, cakā-%}
{%ṣa, kaṣiṣyati, akaṣīt%} and {%akāṣīt,%}
{%kaṣitum,%} to rub, scratch, scrape; to itch; to rub
with a touchstone, test, try; to injure, hurt, destroy,
kill; to leap: cl. 10. P. {%kāṣayati, -yitum,%} to hurt.
<LEND>

<L>14131<pc>0215-a<k1>kaza<k2>kaza
{%Kaṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbing, scraping, rubbing
down; ({%as%}), m. rubbing; the touchstone; ({%ā%}), f. a
whip; see {%kaśa%}. {%—Kaṣa-pāṣāṇa, as,%} m. a touch-
stone. {%—Kaṣāghāta (˚ṣā-āgh˚), as,%} m. a cut, a
stroke with a whip.
<LEND>

<L>14132<pc>0215-a<k1>kazaRa<k2>kazaRa
{%Kaṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ unripe, immature; ({%am%}), n.
rubbing, marking; touch or test of gold by the
touchstone.
<LEND>

<L>14133<pc>0215-a<k1>kazanmuKa<k2>kazanmuKa
{%Kaṣan-mukha, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14134<pc>0215-a<k1>kazAku<k2>kazAku
{%Kaṣāku, us,%}¦ m. fire, the sun.
<LEND>

<L>14135<pc>0215-a<k1>kazi<k2>kazi
{%Kaṣi, is, is, i,%}¦ injurious, mischievous.
<LEND>

<L>14136<pc>0215-a<k1>kazita<k2>kazita
{%Kaṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ hurt, injured.
<LEND>

<L>14137<pc>0215-a<k1>kazwi<k2>kazwi
{%Kaṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. test, trial; pain, trouble.
<LEND>

<L>14138<pc>0215-a<k1>kazAputra<k2>kazAputra
{#kazAputra#}¦ {%kaṣāputra, as,%} m. a Rakṣas;
[cf. {%nikaṣātmaja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14139<pc>0215-a<k1>kazAya<k2>kazAya
{#kazAya#}¦ {%kaṣāya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%kaṣ?%}),
astringent; fragrant; red, dark-red; brown, of a
colour composed of red and yellow; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
an astringent flavour or taste; the red colour; a de-
coction or infusion, that form of a decoction which
has one part of a drug combined with four or
(according to other authorities) with eight or sixteen
[Page0215-b+ 75]
parts of water, the whole being then boiled down
until only one quarter is left; a kind of ointment,
gum, resin, extract, exudation from a tree; plaster-
ing, anointing; colouring or perfuming the person;
dirt, uncleanness, dulness, stupidity; decay, ruin; a
mark of decay (of which, according to Buddhists,
there are five, viz. {%āyus-kaṣāya, dṛṣṭi˚, kleśa˚,%}
{%sattva˚, kalpa˚%}); attachment to worldly objects;
({%as%}), m. passion, emotion; the Kali-yuga; the tree
Bignonia Indica; N. of a teacher; ({%as, ā, am%}),
m. f. n. the tree Grislea Tomentosa; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a plant, a small sort of Hedysarum; [cf. {%kāṣāya%}
and {%pañca-kaṣāya.%}] {%—Kaṣāya-kṛt, t,%} m. the
tree Symplocos Racemosa, the bark of which is used
in dyeing; also {%rakta-lodhra%}. {%—Kaṣāya-citra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} dyed or stained of a dull red colour. {%—Kaṣā-%}
{%ya-tā,%} f. contraction. {%—Kaṣāya-pāṇa, ās,%} m. pl. a
nickname of the Gāndhāras (‘drinking decoctions’).
{%—Kaṣāya-yāvanāla, as,%} m. a sort of grain.
{%—Kaṣāya-vāsika, as,%} m. a kind of poisonous
insect. {%—Kaṣāyānvita (˚ya-an˚), as, ā, am,%} as-
tringent, harsh, styptic.
<LEND>

<L>14140<pc>0215-b<k1>kazAyita<k2>kazAyita
{%Kaṣāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ red, coloured; prepared
for dyeing or colouring.
<LEND>

<L>14141<pc>0215-b<k1>kazAyin<k2>kazAyin
{%Kaṣāyin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ yielding a resinous exudation,
astringent, dyed of a red colour, worldly-minded;
({%ī%}), m., N. of several plants, Shorea Robusta; Arto-
carpus Lacucha; the wild Datura tree.
<LEND>

<L>14142<pc>0215-b<k1>kazAyIkfta<k2>kazAyIkfta
{%Kaṣāyī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made red. {%—Kaṣāyī-%}
{%kṛta-locana, as, ā, am,%} with reddened eyes.
<LEND>

<L>14143<pc>0215-b<k1>kazAyIBUta<k2>kazAyIBUta
{%Kaṣāyī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ become red, reddened.
<LEND>

<L>14144<pc>0215-b<k1>kazi<k2>kazi
{#kazi#}¦ {%kaṣi,%} &c. See under {%kaṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>14145<pc>0215-b<k1>kazikA<k2>kazikA
{#kazikA#}¦ {%kaṣikā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%kaṣ%}),
a bird in general.
<LEND>

<L>14146<pc>0215-b<k1>kazIkA<k2>kazIkA
{%Kaṣīkā,%}¦ f. a species of bird.
<LEND>

<L>14147<pc>0215-b<k1>kazerukA<k2>kazerukA
{#kazerukA#}¦ {%kaṣerukā,%} f. the back-bone, the
spine; [cf. {%kaśerukā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14148<pc>0215-b<k1>kazkaza<k2>kazkaza
{#kazkaza#}¦ {%kaṣkaṣa, as,%} m. (fr. {%kaṣ?%}), Ved.
a kind of poisonous insect.
<LEND>

<L>14149<pc>0215-b<k1>kazwa<k2>kazwa
{#kazwa#}¦ {%kaṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} bad; ill, evil, wrong;
painful; grievous, severe; difficult; most grievous,
most painful; mischievous, noxious, injurious; boding
evil; ({%am%}), n. evil, difficulty, a bad state of things,
misery, wretchedness, pain, suffering, hardship, un-
easiness; {%kaṣṭena,%} with great difficulty or effort;
({%am%}), ind. an exclamation of grief or sorrow, Ah!
Alas! [cf. Hib. <nsi>ceas,</nsi> ‘sorrow, grief, sadness.’]
{%—Kaṣṭa-kara, as, ī, am,%} giving pain or trouble.
{%—Kaṣṭa-kāraka, as, ā, am,%} causing trouble or
annoyance; ({%as%}), m. the world. {%—Kaṣṭa-tapas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} one who performs many penitential
exercises. {%—Kaṣṭa-tara, as, ā, am,%} more difficult,
inconvenient or painful. {%—Kaṣṭa-labhya, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be obtained. {%—Kaṣṭa-śrita, as, ā, am,%}
suffering pain or misfortune, undergoing hardships,
performing penance. {%—Kaṣṭa-sādhya, as, ā, am,%}
accomplishable with difficulty. {%—Kaṣṭa-sthāna, am,%}
n. a bad situation, a disagreeable place or site.
{%—Kaṣṭāgata (˚ṭa-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} with difficulty
or hardly arrived.
<LEND>

<L>14150<pc>0215-b<k1>kazwAya<k2>kazwAya
{%Kaṣṭāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kaṣṭāyate, -yitum,%} to have
wicked intentions.
<LEND>

<L>14151<pc>0215-b<k1>kazwi<k2>kazwi
{#kazwi#}¦ {%kaṣṭi.%} See under {%kaṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>14152<pc>0215-b<k1>kazPila<k2>kazPila
{#kazPila#}¦ {%kaṣphila, as,%} m., N. of a Bhikṣu.
<LEND>

<L>14153<pc>0215-b<k1>kas<k2>kas<h>1
{#kas#} 1¦. {%kas,%} cl. 1. P. {%kasati, cakāsa, kasi-%}
{%tum,%} to go, move, approach: Intens.
{%canīkasīti, canīkasyate;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>cas, cos,</nsi> ‘a
foot;’ <nsi>coisighim,</nsi> ‘to go.’]
<LEND>

<L>14154<pc>0215-b<k1>kasvara<k2>kasvara
{%Kasvara, as, ī, am,%}¦ going, moving.
<LEND>

<L>14155<pc>0215-b<k1>kas<k2>kas<h>2
{#kas#} 2¦. {%kas, kaste,%} a various reading for
{%kaṃs, kaṃste.%}
<LEND>

<L>14156<pc>0215-b<k1>kasa<k2>kasa
{#kasa#}¦ {%kasa, as,%} m. {%= kaṣa,%} a touchstone;
({%ā%}), f. {%= kaśā,%} a whip.
<LEND>

<L>14157<pc>0215-b<k1>kasanA<k2>kasanA
{#kasanA#}¦ {%kasanā,%} f. a kind of poisonous
spider.
<LEND>
[Page0215-c+ 64]

<L>14158<pc>0215-c<k1>kasanotpAwana<k2>kasanotpAwana
{#kasanotpAwana#}¦ {%kasanotpāṭana, as,%} m. the
plant Gendarussa Vulgaris; (perhaps a wrong reading
for {%kāsanotp˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>14159<pc>0215-c<k1>kasarRIra<k2>kasarRIra
{#kasarRIra#}¦ {%kasarṇīra%} or {%kasarṇīla, as,%} m., Ved.
a certain snake; also personified.
<LEND>

<L>14160<pc>0215-c<k1>kasAmbu<k2>kasAmbu
{#kasAmbu#}¦ {%kasāmbu,%} n., Ved. a heap of wood (?) .
<LEND>

<L>14161<pc>0215-c<k1>kasAras<k2>kasAras
{#kasAras#}¦ {%kasāras,%} a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>14162<pc>0215-c<k1>kasipu<k2>kasipu
{#kasipu#}¦ {%kasipu, us,%} m. food, boiled rice;
[cf. {%kaśipu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14163<pc>0215-c<k1>kaseru<k2>kaseru
{#kaseru#}¦ {%kaseru, us,%} m. a kind of grass. See
{%kaśeru,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>14164<pc>0215-c<k1>kaserukA<k2>kaserukA
{%Kaserukā,%}¦ f. a sort of grass, back-bone, &c.
<LEND>

<L>14165<pc>0215-c<k1>kastamBI<k2>kastamBI
{#kastamBI#}¦ {%ka-stambhī,%} f., Ved. the prop of a
carriage-pole.
<LEND>

<L>14166<pc>0215-c<k1>kastIra<k2>kastIra
{#kastIra#}¦ {%kastīra, am,%} n. tin; [cf. <lang n="greek">κασσίτερος</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>14167<pc>0215-c<k1>kasturikA<k2>kasturikA
{#kasturikA#}¦ {%kasturikā%} or {%kastūrikā%} or {%kastūrī,%}
f. musk, the animal perfume so called, as brought
from Kaṣmīr, Napal, and Western Asam or Butan,
(the latter is said to be the best); the plant Hibiscus
Abelmoschus, or the plant Amaryllis Zeylanica; (this
word may be derived from the Gr. <lang n="greek">κάστωρ</lang>) {%—Kas-%}
{%tūra-mallikā%} or {%kastūrī-mallikā,%} f. the musk bag.
{%—Kāstūri-kāṇḍa-ja, as,%} m. musk. {%—Kastūrī-%}
{%mṛga, as,%} m. the musk animal.
<LEND>

<L>14168<pc>0215-c<k1>kasPila<k2>kasPila
{#kasPila#}¦ {%kasphila, as,%} m., N. of a Bhikṣu;
[cf. {%kaṣphila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14169<pc>0215-c<k1>kasmala<k2>kasmala
{#kasmala#}¦ {%kasmala, am,%} n. consternation;
fainting, syncope. See {%kaśmala.%}
<LEND>

<L>14170<pc>0215-c<k1>kasmAt<k2>kasmAt
{#kasmAt#}¦ {%kasmāt,%} ind. (abl. fr. 2. {%ka%}), where
from ? whence? why?
<LEND>

<L>14171<pc>0215-c<k1>kasvara<k2>kasvara
{#kasvara#}¦ {%kasvara.%} See under rt. 1. {%kas.%}
<LEND>

<L>14172<pc>0215-c<k1>kahaya<k2>kahaya
{#kahaya#}¦ {%kahaya, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14173<pc>0215-c<k1>kahAha<k2>kahAha
{#kahAha#}¦ {%kahāha, as,%} m. a buffalo.
<LEND>

<L>14174<pc>0215-c<k1>kahUya<k2>kahUya
{#kahUya#}¦ {%kahūya, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14175<pc>0215-c<k1>kahoqa<k2>kahoqa
{#kahoqa#}¦ {%kahoḍa, as,%} m., N. of a man, with
the patronymic {%kauṣītaki%} or {%kauṣītakeya; (am),%}
n. title of a work derived from him.
<LEND>

<L>14176<pc>0215-c<k1>kahlaRa<k2>kahlaRa
{#kahlaRa#}¦ {%kahlaṇa.%} See under {%kalhaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>14177<pc>0215-c<k1>kahlAra<k2>kahlAra
{#kahlAra#}¦ {%kahlāra, am,%} n. the white esculent
water-lily, Nymphæa Lotus; sometimes spelt {%kal-%}
{%hāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>14178<pc>0215-c<k1>kahva<k2>kahva
{#kahva#}¦ {%kahva, as,%} m. a kind of crane, Ardea
Nivea.
<LEND>

<L>14179<pc>0215-c<k1>kA<k2>kA<h>1
{#kA#} 1¦. {%kā%} = 2. {%kad%} and 1. {%ku,%} at the begin-
ning of some compounds (e. g. {%kākṣa%}), and perhaps
a corruption of {%kad.%}
<LEND>

<L>14180<pc>0215-c<k1>kA<k2>kA<h>2
{#kA#} 2¦. {%kā,%} a form for rt. {%kan%} in the Ved.
participle {%kāyamāna, as, ā, am,%} wishing, desiring,
loving, and in one or two other forms.
<LEND>

<L>14181<pc>0215-c<k1>kAMSi<k2>kAMSi
{#kAMSi#}¦ {%kāṃśi, is,%} m. a cup; [cf. {%kāṃsya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14182<pc>0215-c<k1>kAMs<k2>kAMs
{#kAMs#}¦ {%kāṃs,%} cl. 1. A. {%kāṃsate, -situm,%} to
shine, glitter; [cf. {%kāś.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14183<pc>0215-c<k1>kAMsa<k2>kAMsa
{#kAMsa#}¦ {%kāṃsa, as, ī, am,%} born in Kaṃsa.
<LEND>

<L>14184<pc>0215-c<k1>kAMsIya<k2>kAMsIya
{#kAMsIya#}¦ {%kāṃsīya, am,%} n. white copper; [cf.
the following.]
<LEND>

<L>14185<pc>0215-c<k1>kAMsya<k2>kAMsya
{#kAMsya#}¦ {%kāṃsya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%kaṃsa%}), con-
sisting of white copper or brass; ({%am%}), n. white
copper or brass, queen's metal, any amalgam of zinc
and copper; a musical instrument, a sort of gong or
plate of bell-metal struck with a stick or rod; a kind
of measure; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a drinking vessel of brass,
a goblet. {%—Kāṃsya-kāra, as, ī,%} m. f. a brazier, a
pewterer, a worker in white or bell-metal. {%—Kāṃsya-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} made of brass. {%—Kāṃsya-tāla, as,%} m.
[Page0216-a+ 80]
a cymbal. {%—Kāṃsya-nīla, as,%} m. blue vitriol con-
sidered as a collyrium; N. of a monkey; occasionally
written {%kāṃśya-nīla%}. {%—Kāṃsya-bhājana, am,%} n.
brass. {%—Kāṃsya-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting or made
of brass. {%—Kāṃsya-mala, am,%} n. verdigris. {%—Kāṃsya-%}
{%mākṣika, am,%} n. a metallic substance, probably a
kind of pyrites. {%—Kāṃsyābha (˚ya-ābha), as, ā, am,%}
coloured like brass.
<LEND>

<L>14186<pc>0216-a<k1>kAMsyaka<k2>kAMsyaka
{%Kāṃsyaka, am,%}¦ n. brass.
<LEND>

<L>14187<pc>0216-a<k1>kAka<k2>kAka
{#kAka#}¦ {%kāka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kai,%} to
caw), a crow, (metaphorically an expression of contempt,
e. g. {%na tvāṃ kākam manye,%} I value thee less than a
crow); an impudent, insolent fellow; a lame man, a
cripple; washing the head, bathing by dipping the
head only into the water as crows do; a sectarial
mark ({%tilaka%}); a particular measure; the plant
Ardisia Humilis (see {%kāka-jambu%}); N. of a Dvīpa
or division of the world; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people;
({%ī%}), f. a female crow, personified as a daughter of
Kaśyapa by Tāmrā, and mother of the crows; a kind
of medicinal plant ({%= kākolī%}); N. of one of the seven
mothers of Śiśu; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants, Leea
Hirta, also {%= kāka-jaṅghā, kāka-nāsā;%} Solanum
Indicum, {%= kāka-mācī;%} Ficus Oppositifolia, {%= kāko-%}
{%ḍumbara;%} another medicinal plant, {%= kākolī;%} an-
other plant, commonly {%raktikā; (am),%} n. a multitude
or assemblage of crows; a modus coeundi. {%—Kāka-%}
{%kaṅgu, us,%} f. a kind of panic-grass, Panicum Milia-
ceum. {%—Kāka-kalā,%} f. the plant Leea Hirta; [cf.
{%kāka-jaṅghā.%}] {%—Kāka-kūrma-mṛgākhu (˚ga-%}
{%ākhu), avas,%} m. pl. the crow, tortoise, deer, and
mouse. {%—Kāka-kūrmādi (˚ma-ādi), ayas,%} m. pl.
the crow, the tortoise, and the rest. {%—Kāka-ghnī,%} f.
a tree, said to be a large kind of Karañja, Galedupa
Arborea, {%= mahā-karañja%}. {%—Kāka-caṇḍīśvara, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Kāka-ciñcā,%} f. the shrub which
yields the red and black berry used in India as a
jeweller's weight, Abrus Precatorius; also {%kāka-ciñci%}
and {%kāka-ciñcī%}. {%—Kāka-ciñcika,%} N. of a kind of
soft substance; another reading of the word is {%kāci-%}
{%lindi%}. {%—Kāka-cchada, as,%} m. a wagtail; side-locks
of hair. {%—Kāka-cchadi, is,%} m. or, according to an-
other reading, {%kāka-cchardi, is,%} m. a wagtail; a
crow's vomit. {%—Kāka-jaṅghā,%} f. the plant Leea
Hirta; also Abrus Precatorius. {%—Kāka-jambu, us,%}
f. the plant Ardisia Humilis, commonly Bhumijamb;
({%ūs%}), f. another species of Jambu. {%—Kāka-jāta, as,%}
m. the Indian cuckoo. {%—Kāka-tā,%} f. the state of a
crow. {%—Kāka-tālīya, as, ā, am,%} unexpected, as in
the fable of the fruit of the palm falling unexpectedly
at the moment of the alighting of a crow and killing
it; accidental; ({%am%}), ind. unexpectedly, suddenly;
({%am%}), n. the fable of the crow and the fruit of the
palm. {%—Kākatālīya-vat,%} ind. suddenly, (said of any
unexpected casualty.) {%—Kāka-tālukin, ī, inī, i,%}
having the palate of a crow, contemptible, vile.
{%—Kāka-tiktā,%} f. the plant Abrus Precatorius. {%—Kā-%}
{%ka-tinduka, as,%} m. a kind of ebony, Diospyros
Tomentosa. {%—Kāka-tuṇḍa, as,%} m. the dark species
of Agallochum; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a tree, in Hindī called
Kauāḍoḍi; a sort of brass. {%—Kāka-tuṇḍikā,%} f. the
plant Abrus Precatorius. {%—Kāka-tulya, as, ā, am,%}
like a crow, crow-like, crafty. {%—Kāka-danta, as,%} m.
the tooth of a crow, i. e. anything impossible or not
existing. {%—Kāka-dantaki,%} a patronymic from Kāka-
dantaka; ({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a warrior-tribe; {%kā-%}
{%kadantakīya, as,%} m. a prince of the Kākadantakis.
{%—Kāka-dhvaja, as,%} m. submarine fire, a personage
in Hindū mythology; [cf. {%aurva.%}] {%—Kāka-nāman,%}
{%ā,%} m. the plant Agati Grandiflora. {%—Kāka-nāśā,%} f.
the same plant. {%—Kāka-nāsa, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
commonly called Vikaṇṭaka; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Leea
Hirta. {%—Kāka-nāsikā,%} f. the plant Leea Hirta; N.
of another plant, also called Rakta-trivṛt. {%—Kāka-%}
{%nidrā,%} f. ‘a crow's sleep,’ a light slumber, one which
is easily broken. {%—Kāka-nīlā,%} f. {%= kāka-jambū.%}
{%—Kāka-pakṣa, as,%} m. side-locks of hair on the
temples of boys and young men; three or five locks
on each side left when the head is first shaved and
allowed to remain there, especially in persons of the
[Page0216-b+ 81]
military caste; (also at the end of compounds {%kāka-%}
{%pakṣaka.%}) {%—Kāka-pada, am,%} n. the foot of a
crow; an incision in the skin similar to a crow's
foot; the sign V in MSS. marking that something
has been left out; ({%as%}), m. a modus coeundi. {%—Kā-%}
{%ka-parṇī,%} f. the plant Phaseolus Trilobus. {%—Kāka-%}
{%pīlu, us,%} m., N. of several plants, {%= kāka-tinduka,%}
{%kāka-tuṇḍī,%} and also a variety of Abrus Precatorius.
{%—Kāka-pīluka, as,%} m. {%= kāka-tinduka%}. {%—Kāka-%}
{%puccha, as,%} m. the Kokila or Indian cuckoo, (perhaps
a Prākṛt form of the next.) {%—Kāka-puṣṭa, as,%} m.
the Indian cuckoo, (this bird, like the English cuckoo,
being said to leave its eggs in the nests of other birds,
as in that of the crow &c.) {%—Kāka-puṣpa, am,%} n.
{%= gandha-parṇa (?)%}. {%—Kāka-peya, as, ā, am,%}
what may be drunk by a crow, epithet of a shallow
river. {%—Kāka-phala, as,%} m. the tree Azadirachta
Indica; ({%ā%}), f. {%= kāka-jambū%}. {%—Kāka-bandhyā,%} f.
a woman that bears only one child. {%—Kāka-bhāṇḍī,%}
f. a species of Karañja. {%—Kāka-bhīru, us,%} m. an
owl (‘afraid of crows’). {%—Kāka-madgu, us,%} m. a
water-hen, a gallinule; resembling a crow in colour.
{%—Kāka-marda, as,%} m. a kind of gourd, Cucumis
Colocynthis {%(mahā-kāla)%}. {%—Kāka-mardaka, as,%}
m. the same. {%—Kāka-mācikā%} or {%kāka-mācī,%} f. the
plant Solanum Indicum, an esculent vegetable, com-
monly Gūrkamai. {%—Kāka-mātā,%} f. the same plant.
{%—Kāka-mukha, ās,%} m. pl. ‘crow-faced,’ N. of a
mythical people. {%—Kāka-mudgā,%} f. a plant, com-
monly Mugani; according to some a wild kind of
bean, Phaseolus Trilobus. {%—Kāka-mṛga, au,%} m. du.
the crow and the deer. {%—Kāka-yava, as,%} m. barren
corn, the ear of which has no grains. {%—Kāka-rudra-%}
{%saṃvāda, as,%} m. title of a work on omens. {%—Kāka-%}
{%ruhā,%} f. a parasite plant, Epidendrum Tesseloides &c.
{%—Kāka-vat,%} ind. like a crow, in the manner of a
crow. {%—Kāka-varṇa, as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Kā-%}
{%ka-varṇin, ī,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Kāka-vartaka,%}
{%au,%} m. du. the crow and the quail. {%—Kāka-vallabhā,%}
f. {%= kāka-jambū%}. {%—Kāka-vallarī,%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= svarṇa-vallī%}. {%—Kāka-vyāghra-gomāyu, avas,%}
m. pl. the crow, the tiger, and the jackal. {%—Kāka-%}
{%śabda, as,%} m. the cawing of a crow. {%—Kāka-śimbī,%}
f., N. of a plant, {%= kāka-tuṇḍī%}. {%—Kāka-śīrṣa, as,%}
m. the tree Agati Grandiflora, commonly called Va-
kapuṣpa. {%—Kāka-śīrṣi, is,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Kāka-strī,%} f. the same plant. {%—Kāka-sphūrja,%}
{%as,%} m. the plant Diospyros Tomentosa. {%—Kāka-%}
{%svara, as,%} m. a shrill tone. {%—Kākākṣi (˚ka-ak˚),%}
n. the eye of a crow; {%kākākṣi-nyāyena,%} ind. in
the manner of a crow's eye, (crows are supposed to
have but one eye or visual orb, which, as occasion
requires, moves from the cavity on one side into that
on the other); a term for a word which follows two
rules. {%—Kākāṅgā%} or {%ī (˚ka-aṅ˚),%} f. the plant Leea
Hirta, {%= kāka-nāsā%}. {%—Kākāñcī,%} f. the plant Leea
Hirta; an esculent vegetable, Solanum Indicum. {%—Kā-%}
{%kāṇḍa (˚ka-aṇ˚), as,%} m., N. of two plants, Mahā-
nimba and Kākatindu (?), a kind of bean; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of spider; N. of a plant; see {%kolaśimbī.%}
{%—Kākāṇḍaka, as,%} m., N. of a crow or N. of a
plant; a kind of spider. {%—Kākāṇḍolā,%} f., N. of a
plant. {%—Kākādanī (˚ka-ad˚),%} f., N. of several
plants, Abrus Precatorius; a white variety of this
plant, commonly Śveta-guñjā. {%—Kākāri (˚ka-ari),%}
{%is,%} m. an owl. {%—Kākekṣu (˚ka-ik˚), us,%} m. a kind
of reed, Saccharum Spontaneum. {%—Kākendu (˚ka-%}
{%in˚), us,%} m. a kind of ebony, Diospyros Melanoxylon,
{%= kāka-tinduka%}. {%—Kākeṣṭa (˚ka-iṣ˚), as,%} m. the
tree Melia Azadirachta. {%—Kākoḍumbara (˚ka-uḍ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. or {%kākoḍumbarikā,%} f. or {%kākodumbarikā,%}
f. opposite-leaved fig tree, Ficus Oppositifolia. {%—Kā-%}
{%kodara (˚ka-ud˚), as,%} m. a serpent. {%—Kākolūka%}
{%(˚ka-ul˚), am,%} n. crow and owl. {%—Kākolūkikā,%} f.
the natural enmity of the owl and crow. {%—Kākolū-%}
{%kīya, am,%} n. = the preceding; N. of the third book
of the Pañcatantra. {%—Kākoṣṭhaka%} and {%kākauṣ-%}
{%ṭhaka (˚ka-oṣṭha), as, ikā, am,%} shaped like the
beak of a crow; epithet of a bandage.
<LEND>

<L>14188<pc>0216-b<k1>kAkaRa<k2>kAkaRa
{%Kākaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a leprosy with black and red
spots, considered incurable; (called so from its
[Page0216-c+ 71]
similarity to the black and red seed of the plant
Abrus Precatorius.)
<LEND>

<L>14189<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkaRantikA<k2>kAkaRantikA
{%Kākaṇantikā,%}¦ f. the plant Abrus Precatorius.
<LEND>

<L>14190<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkaRi<k2>kAkaRi
{%Kākaṇi,%}¦ a sort of small coin; [cf. {%kākiṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14191<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkanantI<k2>kAkanantI
{%Kākanantī,%}¦ f. the plant Abrus Precatorius.
<LEND>

<L>14192<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkAyu<k2>kAkAyu
{%Kākāyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a plant, {%= kākavallarī.%}
<LEND>

<L>14193<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkAla<k2>kAkAla
{%Kākāla, as,%}¦ m. a raven; [cf. {%kāka%} and {%kākola.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14194<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkIya<k2>kAkIya
{%Kākīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to a crow.
<LEND>

<L>14195<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkatIyarudra<k2>kAkatIyarudra
{#kAkatIyarudra#}¦ {%kākatīya-rudra, as,%} m., N. of
a king of Nāgapura.
<LEND>

<L>14196<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkandi<k2>kAkandi
{#kAkandi#}¦ {%kākandi, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a
warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>14197<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkandI<k2>kAkandI
{%Kākandī,%}¦ f., N. of a country; Emblic Myrobalan.
<LEND>

<L>14198<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkandIya<k2>kAkandIya
{%Kākandīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the above tribe.
<LEND>

<L>14199<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkambIra<k2>kAkambIra
{#kAkambIra#}¦ {%kākambīra, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
tree; (according to Sāy. literally ‘a crow-bearer.’)
<LEND>

<L>14200<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkaruka<k2>kAkaruka
{#kAkaruka#}¦ {%kākaruka%} or {%kākarūka, as, ā, am,%}
timid, afraid, a coward; naked; poor, indigent;
({%as%}), m. a hen-pecked husband; an owl; fraud,
deceit.
<LEND>

<L>14201<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkala<k2>kAkala
{#kAkala#}¦ {%kākala, am,%} n. a jewel worn upon
the neck.
<LEND>

<L>14202<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkalaka<k2>kAkalaka
{%Kākalaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the top of the
windpipe; the thyroid cartilage; ({%as%}), m. an orna-
ment of the neck; a species of rice.
<LEND>

<L>14203<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkali<k2>kAkali
{#kAkali#}¦ {%kākali, is,%} f. a soft sweet sound
[cf. {%kala%}]; N. of an Apsaras; ({%ī%}), f. a low and
sweet tone; a musical instrument with a low tone
played to ascertain whether a person is asleep or not.
{%—Kākalī-drākṣā,%} f. a kind of grape without a
stone or with a very small one. {%—Kākalī-rava, as,%}
m. the Kokila or Indian cuckoo.
<LEND>

<L>14204<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkalIka<k2>kAkalIka
{%Kākalīka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (?) a low sweet tone.
<LEND>

<L>14205<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkAra<k2>kAkAra
{#kAkAra#}¦ {%kākāra, as, ī, am,%} scattering water.
<LEND>

<L>14206<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkiRI<k2>kAkiRI
{#kAkiRI#}¦ {%kākiṇī,%} f. a small coin, a small
sum of money equal to twenty Kapardas or cowries,
or to a quarter of a Paṇa; the seed of Abrus Preca-
torius used as a weight; the shell Cypræa Moneta or
cowrie used as a coin; a cubit, the fourth part of a
Daṇḍa or short pole; a Daṇḍa; a part of a measure.
<LEND>

<L>14207<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkiRikA<k2>kAkiRikA
{%Kākiṇikā,%}¦ f. = the preceding; an atom, a particle.
<LEND>

<L>14208<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkiRIka<k2>kAkiRIka
{%Kākiṇīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ having the value of a Kākiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>14209<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkinI<k2>kAkinI
{%Kākinī,%}¦ f. the fourth part of a Paṇa; a quarter of
a Māna; the shell Cypræa Moneta.
<LEND>

<L>14210<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkila<k2>kAkila
{#kAkila#}¦ {%kākila, as,%} m. a jewel worn upon
the neck; [cf. {%kākala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14211<pc>0216-c<k1>kAku<k2>kAku
{#kAku#}¦ {%kāku, us,%} f. change of the voice in
fear, anger, grief, &c. [cf. {%sevā-kāku%}]; muttering,
murmuring; the tongue; stress, emphasis.
<LEND>

<L>14212<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkutsTa<k2>kAkutsTa
{#kAkutsTa#}¦ {%kākutstha, as,%} m. a descendant of
Kakutstha; an epithet of Anenas, Aja, Daśaratha,
Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa; N. of a sovereign, also Purañjaya;
({%au%}), du. Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>14213<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkud<k2>kAkud
{#kAkud#}¦ {%kākud, t,%} f., Ved. and {%kākuda, am,%}
n. the hollow of the mouth, the palate.
<LEND>

<L>14214<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkudra<k2>kAkudra
{%Kākudra, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with a palate (?),
a palate (?).
<LEND>

<L>14215<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkuB<k2>kAkuB
{%Kākubh,%}¦ a various reading for {%kākud.%}
<LEND>

<L>14216<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkuBa<k2>kAkuBa
{#kAkuBa#}¦ {%kākubha, as, ā, am,%} consisting of
Kakubh verses; a patronymic from Kakubh. {%—Kā-%}
{%kubha-bārhata, as,%} m. (scil. {%pragātha%}) a Pragātha
beginning with a Kakubh and ending with a Bṛhatī.
<LEND>

<L>14217<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkocika<k2>kAkocika
{#kAkocika#}¦ {%kākocika, as,%} m. or {%kākocī,%} f. or
{%kākocin, ī,%} m. the fish Cyprinus Cachius.
<LEND>

<L>14218<pc>0216-c<k1>kAkola<k2>kAkola
{#kAkola#}¦ {%kākola, as,%} m. a raven [cf. {%kāka%}
and {%kākāla%}]; a boar; a snake; a potter; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. a poisonous substance of a black colour or the
colour of a raven, whence its name; possibly the
berry of the Cocculus Indicus; ({%am%}), n. a division
of the infernal regions or hell; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. a
vegetable substance used in medicine, described as
[Page0217-a+ 71]
sweet and cooling, allaying fever, removing phlegm,
&c.; it is said to be a root brought from Nepal or
Morung.
<LEND>

<L>14219<pc>0217-a<k1>kAkza<k2>kAkza
{#kAkza#}¦ {%kākṣa (kā-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} frowning,
looking scornfully or in displeasure; ({%as%}), m. a glance,
a wink or leer; ({%am%}), n. a frown, a look of dis-
pleasure; [cf. {%kaṭākṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14220<pc>0217-a<k1>kAkzatava<k2>kAkzatava
{#kAkzatava#}¦ {%kākṣatava, am,%} n. the fruit of
Kakṣatu.
<LEND>

<L>14221<pc>0217-a<k1>kAkzaseni<k2>kAkzaseni
{#kAkzaseni#}¦ {%kākṣaseni, is,%} m. (a patronymic
fr. {%kakṣa-sena%}), an epithet of Abhipratārin.
<LEND>

<L>14222<pc>0217-a<k1>kAkzi<k2>kAkzi
{#kAkzi#}¦ {%kākṣi, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14223<pc>0217-a<k1>kAkzI<k2>kAkzI
{#kAkzI#}¦ {%kākṣī,%} f. a perfume, a fragrant kind
of earth; the plant Cytisus Cajan.
<LEND>

<L>14224<pc>0217-a<k1>kAkzIva<k2>kAkzIva
{#kAkzIva#}¦ {%kākṣīva, as,%} m. the plant Hyper-
anthera Moringa; N. of a son of Gautama and of
Auśīnarī, (irregular patronymic fr. {%kakṣīvat%} or
{%kākṣīvat.%})
<LEND>

<L>14225<pc>0217-a<k1>kAkzIvaka<k2>kAkzIvaka
{%Kākṣīvaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Hyperanthera Mo-
ringa.
<LEND>

<L>14226<pc>0217-a<k1>kAkzIvat<k2>kAkzIvat
{#kAkzIvat#}¦ {%kākṣīvat, ān,%} m. {%= kakṣīvat.%}
<LEND>

<L>14227<pc>0217-a<k1>kAkzIvata<k2>kAkzIvata
{%Kākṣīvata, as, ī, am,%}¦ composed by or relating
to Kakṣīvat; (a patronymic fr. {%kakṣīvat%}), epi-
thet of Śambara.
<LEND>

<L>14228<pc>0217-a<k1>kAga<k2>kAga
{#kAga#}¦ {%kāga, as,%} m. a crow; (in the Prākṛt
dialects, a raven; cf. {%kāka.%})
<LEND>

<L>14229<pc>0217-a<k1>kAgni<k2>kAgni
{#kAgni#}¦ {%kāgni (kā-ag˚), is,%} m. a little fire.
<LEND>

<L>14230<pc>0217-a<k1>kANkAyana<k2>kANkAyana
{#kANkAyana#}¦ {%kāṅkāyana, as,%} m. (a patronymic
fr. {%kaṅka%}), N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>14231<pc>0217-a<k1>kANkz<k2>kANkz
{#kANkz#}¦ {%kāṅkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%kāṅkṣati, ca-%}
{%kāṅkṣa,%} ep. also A. {%kāṅkṣate,%} &c.,
{%kāṅkṣitum,%} to wish, desire; to strive to obtain;
to long for, hope for (with acc.), expect; to wait; to
look for anything (with dat.): Caus. {%kāṅkṣayati,%}
{%acakāṅkṣat:%} Desid. {%cikāṅkṣiṣati:%} Intens. {%cā-%}
{%kāṅkṣyate%} and {%cākāṃṣṭi;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>cachta,</nsi>
‘hunger;’ Goth. <nsi>huhru-s,</nsi> ‘hunger;’ <nsi>hungrja,</nsi> ‘to
be hungry;’ Germ. <nsi>Hunger.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>14232<pc>0217-a<k1>kANkzat<k2>kANkzat
{%Kāṅkṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ or {%kāṅkṣamāṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} wishing, desiring, hoping, expecting.
<LEND>

<L>14233<pc>0217-a<k1>kANkzA<k2>kANkzA
{%Kāṅkṣā,%}¦ f. wish, inclination, desire.
<LEND>

<L>14234<pc>0217-a<k1>kANkzita<k2>kANkzita
{%Kāṅkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished, desired; expected,
longed for; ({%am%}), n. wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>14235<pc>0217-a<k1>kANkzin<k2>kANkzin
{%Kāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ desiring, expecting, longing for
(with acc. or at the end of a compound). {%—Kāṅkṣi-%}
{%tā,%} f. wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>14236<pc>0217-a<k1>kANkzoru<k2>kANkzoru
{#kANkzoru#}¦ {%kāṅkṣoru, us,%} m. a heron; also
written {%kāṅkṣāru.%}
<LEND>

<L>14237<pc>0217-a<k1>kANgA<k2>kANgA
{#kANgA#}¦ {%kāṅgā,%} f., N. of a plant, Orris root.
<LEND>

<L>14238<pc>0217-a<k1>kANguka<k2>kANguka
{#kANguka#}¦ {%kāṅguka, am,%} n. a kind of corn.
<LEND>

<L>14239<pc>0217-a<k1>kAca<k2>kAca
{#kAca#}¦ {%kāca, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kac%}), glass, crystal
considered as a natural production and used as a jewel
or ornament; alkaline ashes, any salt of potash or
soda in a glassy or crystalline state; a class of diseases
of the eye, especially an affection of the optic nerve
or gutta serena; a loop, a swinging shelf, a string so
fastened to the yoke as to hold or support burdens
&c.; the string of the scale of a balance; ({%am%}), n.
alkaline salt, black salt; wax. {%—Kāca-kūpī,%} f. a glass
bottle. {%—Kāca-ghaṭī,%} f. a glass ewer. {%—Kāca-bhā-%}
{%jana, am,%} n. a vessel of glass or crystal, a cup, a
goblet. {%—Kāca-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘a glass jewel,’ crystal,
quartz. {%—Kāca-mala, am,%} n. black salt or soda.
{%—Kāca-lavaṇa, am,%} n. black salt, a medicinal salt,
prepared by calcining fossil salt and the fruit of the
Emblic Myrobalan together; it consists chiefly of
muriate of soda, with a small quantity of iron, lime,
and sulphur, and is a tonic aperient. {%—Kāca-vaka-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n. a glass retort. {%—Kāca-sambhava,%}
{%am,%} n. black salt. {%—Kāca-sauvarcala, am,%} n. black
salt. {%—Kāca-sthālī,%} f. the trumpet flower, Bignonia
[Page0217-b+ 73]
Suaveolens. {%—Kācākṣa (˚ca-ak˚), as,%} m. glass-eye,
N. of an aquatic bird.
<LEND>

<L>14240<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcaka<k2>kAcaka
{%Kācaka, as,%}¦ m. glass, a stone; alkaline ashes &c.
<LEND>

<L>14241<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcana<k2>kAcana
{%Kācana%}¦ or {%kācanaka, am,%} n. an enclosure, a
string or tape which ties a parcel or bundle of papers
or the leaves of a manuscript &c.; [cf. {%kacela.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14242<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcanakin<k2>kAcanakin
{%Kācanakin, ī,%}¦ m. a writing, a manuscript.
<LEND>

<L>14243<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcita<k2>kAcita
{%Kācita, as, ā, am,%}¦ suspended by a swing or in a loop.
<LEND>

<L>14244<pc>0217-b<k1>kAciGa<k2>kAciGa
{#kAciGa#}¦ {%kācigha, as,%} m. a mouse, a rat;
gold; a vegetable.
<LEND>

<L>14245<pc>0217-b<k1>kAciYcika<k2>kAciYcika
{#kAciYcika#}¦ {%kāciñcika%} (a various reading for
{%kākaciñcika%}), a kind of soft substance.
<LEND>

<L>14246<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcitkara<k2>kAcitkara
{#kAcitkara#}¦ {%kācit-kara, as, ī, am,%} Ved. doing
various things, serving various purposes; ({%kā-cit,%}
Ved. for {%kāni-cit.%})
<LEND>

<L>14247<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcima<k2>kAcima
{#kAcima#}¦ {%kācima, as,%} m. a tree considered
as sacred, one growing near a temple, and being on
that account an object of religious veneration or
worship &c.
<LEND>

<L>14248<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcilindi<k2>kAcilindi
{#kAcilindi#}¦ {%kācilindi%} and {%kācilindika%} (va-
rious readings for {%kākaciñcika%}), a kind of soft substance.
<LEND>

<L>14249<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcCa<k2>kAcCa
{#kAcCa#}¦ {%kāccha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kaccha%}), being
on the bank of a river (not applicable to a man).
<LEND>

<L>14250<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcCika<k2>kAcCika
{%Kācchika, as, ī, am,%}¦ being on the bank of a river
(as a man).
<LEND>

<L>14251<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcCapa<k2>kAcCapa
{#kAcCapa#}¦ {%kācchapa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kacchapa%}),
relating or belonging to a tortoise.
<LEND>

<L>14252<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcCima<k2>kAcCima
{#kAcCima#}¦ {%kācchima, as, ā, am,%} clear (as
water); [cf. {%accha, svaccha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14253<pc>0217-b<k1>kAcCI<k2>kAcCI
{#kAcCI#}¦ {%kācchī,%} f. a kind of fragrant earth;
[cf. {%kākṣī%} from which {%kācchī%} is derived.]
<LEND>

<L>14254<pc>0217-b<k1>kAjala<k2>kAjala
{#kAjala#}¦ {%kā-jala, am,%} n. a little water.
<LEND>

<L>14255<pc>0217-b<k1>kAYc<k2>kAYc
{#kAYc#}¦ {%kāñc,%} cl. 1. A. {%kāñcate, -citum,%} to
shine; to bind; [cf. {%kac%} and {%kañc.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14256<pc>0217-b<k1>kAYcana<k2>kAYcana
{%Kāñcana, am,%}¦ n. gold; property; wealth; the
filament of the lotus; ({%as, ī, am%}), golden, made or
consisting of gold; ({%as%}), m. several plants, Mesua
Ferrea; Michelia Champaca; Ficus Glomerata; Bau-
hinia Variegata; Datura Fastuosa; another plant, {%=%}
{%punnāga;%} N. of the fifth Buddha; N. of a son of
Nārāyaṇa, author of the play Dhanañjaya-vijaya; N.
of a prince [cf. {%kāñcana-prabha%}]; ({%ī%}), f. turmeric;
a kind of Asclepias; a yellow pigment. {%—Kāñcana-%}
{%kadalī,%} f. a variety of the plant Musa Sapientum.
{%—Kāñcana-kandara, as,%} m. a gold mine. {%—Kāñca-%}
{%na-kāriṇī,%} f. the plant Asparagus Racemosus. {%—Kāñ-%}
{%cana-kṣīrī,%} f. a kind of Asclepias, {%= kṣīriṇī-latā.%}
{%—Kāñcana-giri, is,%} m. the golden mountain, an
epithet of the mount Sumeru. {%—Kāñcana-gairika,%}
{%am,%} n. a species of ochre. {%—Kāñcana-caya, as,%} m.
a heap of gold. {%—Kāñcana-pura, am,%} n., N. of a
town. {%—Kāñcana-puṣpaka, am,%} n. the plant Ta-
bernæmontana Coronaria. {%—Kāñcana-puṣpī,%} f.
the plant Premna Spinosa. {%—Kāñcana-prabha, as,%}
m., N. of a prince, a son of Bhīma and father of
Suhotra. {%—Kāñcana-bhū, ūs,%} f. gold-dust; a golden
or yellow soil. {%—Kāñcana-maya, as, ī, am,%} golden.
{%—Kāñcana-mālā,%} f., N. of the wife of Kunāla, the
son of Aśoka; N. of another woman. {%—Kāñcana-%}
{%vapra, as,%} m. a hill or mound of gold. {%—Kāñcana-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Kāñcana-sandhi,%}
{%is,%} m. a treaty of friendship between two parties on
equal terms. {%—Kāñcana-sannibha, as, ā, am,%} like
gold. {%—Kāñcanākṣa (˚na-ak˚), as,%} m., N. of a
Dānava; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the river Sarasvatī. {%—Kāñ-%}
{%canāṅga (˚na-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} golden-bodied.
{%—Kāñcanābhidhāna-sandhi (˚na-abh˚), is,%} m.
‘golden alliance,’ (lit. golden-named.)
<LEND>

<L>14257<pc>0217-b<k1>kAYcanaka<k2>kAYcanaka
{%Kāñcanaka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Bauhinia Variegata,
mountain ebony; the fruit of rice or grain; ({%am%}),
n. a yellow orpiment.
<LEND>

<L>14258<pc>0217-b<k1>kAYcanAra<k2>kAYcanAra
{%Kāñcanāra%}¦ or {%kāñcanāla%} or {%kāñcanāraka, as,%}
m. mountain ebony, Bauhinia Variegata.
<LEND>
[Page0217-c+ 71]

<L>14259<pc>0217-c<k1>kAYcanIya<k2>kAYcanIya
{%Kāñcanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ golden; ({%ā%}), f. a yellow
pigment, commonly Go-rocanā.
<LEND>

<L>14260<pc>0217-c<k1>kAYci<k2>kAYci
{#kAYci#}¦ {%kāñci, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
[cf. {%kāñcī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14261<pc>0217-c<k1>kAYcika<k2>kAYcika
{#kAYcika#}¦ {%kāñcika, am,%} n. sour gruel; [cf.
{%kāñjika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14262<pc>0217-c<k1>kAYcI<k2>kAYcI
{#kAYcI#}¦ {%kāñcī%} or {%kāñci, is,%} f. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kan%}), a girdle, especially a woman's zone or girdle
furnished with small bells and other ornaments; the
plant Abrus Precatorius; N. of an ancient city situated
in the peninsula and one of the seven sacred cities of
the Hindūs. {%—Kāñci-purī,%} f., N. of a town. {%—Kāñ-%}
{%cī-kṣetra,%} N. of a region. {%—Kāñcī-nagara, am,%}
n., N. of a town. {%—Kāñcī-pada, am,%} n. the hips
and loins; mons veneris, the pubic region. {%—Kāñcī-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Kāñcī-prastha, as,%}
m., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>14263<pc>0217-c<k1>kAYjika<k2>kAYjika
{#kAYjika#}¦ {%kāñjika, am,%} n. sour gruel, the
water of boiled rice in a state of spontaneous fer-
mentation; ({%ā%}), f. the same; N. of two plants, {%=%}
{%jīvantī-latā%} and {%palāśī-latā%}. {%—Kāñjika-vaṭaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a dish consisting of sour gruel, meal, and
several condiments.
<LEND>

<L>14264<pc>0217-c<k1>kAYjI<k2>kAYjI
{%Kāñjī,%}¦ f. sour gruel, {%= kāñjika;%} N. of a plant,
{%= mahādroṇā.%}
<LEND>

<L>14265<pc>0217-c<k1>kAYjIka<k2>kAYjIka
{%Kāñjīka, am,%}¦ n. sour gruel.
<LEND>

<L>14266<pc>0217-c<k1>kAwa<k2>kAwa
{#kAwa#}¦ {%kāṭa, as, am,%} m. n. (a Prākṛt form fr.
{%karta%}), Ved. deepness, a hole; (Sāy.) a well.
<LEND>

<L>14267<pc>0217-c<k1>kAwya<k2>kAwya
{%Kāṭya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in a hole.
<LEND>

<L>14268<pc>0217-c<k1>kAwavema<k2>kAwavema
{#kAwavema#}¦ {%kāṭavema, as,%} m., N. of a com-
mentator on Kālidāsa's Śakuntalā.
<LEND>

<L>14269<pc>0217-c<k1>kAwuka<k2>kAwuka
{#kAwuka#}¦ {%kāṭuka, am,%} n. (fr. {%kaṭuka%}), acidity.
<LEND>

<L>14270<pc>0217-c<k1>kAWa<k2>kAWa
{#kAWa#}¦ {%kāṭha, as, ī, am,%} composed by Kaṭha;
({%as%}), m. a rock, a stone.
<LEND>

<L>14271<pc>0217-c<k1>kAWaka<k2>kAWaka
{%Kāṭhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a work belonging to the
Brāhmaṇa literature, and derived from the Kaṭha
branch of the Vedas; ({%as, ī, am%}), according to the
Kaṭha portion of the Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>14272<pc>0217-c<k1>kAWaSAWin<k2>kAWaSAWin
{%Kāṭhaśāṭhin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils of Kaṭha-
śāṭha.
<LEND>

<L>14273<pc>0217-c<k1>kAWina<k2>kAWina
{#kAWina#}¦ {%kāṭhina, am,%} n. (fr. {%kaṭhina%}), hard-
ness, sternness; ({%as%}), m. the date fruit.
<LEND>

<L>14274<pc>0217-c<k1>kAWinya<k2>kAWinya
{%Kāṭhinya, am,%}¦ n. hardness, rigidity, stiffness,
sternness, severity; firmness of character; difficulty,
obscurity (of style). {%—Kāṭhinya-phala, as,%} m. the
plant Feronia Elephantum, {%= kapittha.%}
<LEND>

<L>14275<pc>0217-c<k1>kARa<k2>kARa
{#kARa#}¦ {%kāṇa, as, ā, am,%} one-eyed, monoculous
({%akṣṇā kāṇaḥ,%} blind of one eye); perforated, as a
cowrie broken or perforated by insects; ({%as%}), m. a
crow; [cf. {%ekākṣa%} and {%kāṇūka.%}] {%—Kāṇa-tva, am,%}
n. one-eyedness. {%—Kāṇa-bhūti, is,%} m., N. of a
Yakṣa.
<LEND>

<L>14276<pc>0217-c<k1>kAReya<k2>kAReya
{%Kāṇeya, as,%}¦ m. the son of a one-eyed woman;
one-eyed. {%—Kāṇeya-vidha, am,%} n. a country inha-
bited by Kaṇeyas.
<LEND>

<L>14277<pc>0217-c<k1>kARera<k2>kARera
{%Kāṇera, as,%}¦ m. son of a one-eyed woman; one-
eyed.
<LEND>

<L>14278<pc>0217-c<k1>kARAda<k2>kARAda
{#kARAda#}¦ {%kāṇāda, as, ī, am,%} composed by or
relating to Kaṇāda.
<LEND>

<L>14279<pc>0217-c<k1>kARUka<k2>kARUka
{#kARUka#}¦ {%kāṇūka%} or {%kānūka, as%} (?), m. (said
to be fr. rt. {%kaṇ%}), a crow; the bird which makes a
hanging nest on the tāl tree; a cock; a species of
goose; [cf. {%kāṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14280<pc>0217-c<k1>kARelImAtf<k2>kARelImAtf
{#kARelImAtf#}¦ {%kāṇelīmātṛ,%} a name of re-
proach, occurring generally in the voc. case; (according
to native commentators) one whose mother was an
unmarried woman, a bastard; (connected with the
word {%kāṇera?%}).
<LEND>

<L>14281<pc>0217-c<k1>kARwakamardanika<k2>kARwakamardanika
{#kARwakamardanika#}¦ {%kāṇṭakamardanika, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%kaṇṭaka-mardana%}), resulting from the treading
down or crushing of thorns or enemies.
<LEND>
[Page0218-a+ 79]

<L>14282<pc>0218-a<k1>kARwakAra<k2>kARwakAra
{#kARwakAra#}¦ {%kāṇṭakāra, as, ī, am,%} made of the
wood of Kaṇṭakāra.
<LEND>

<L>14283<pc>0218-a<k1>kARWevidDi<k2>kARWevidDi
{#kARWevidDi#}¦ {%kāṇṭheviddhi, is, ī%} or {%yā,%} m. f. a
patronymic fr. {%kaṇṭhe-viddha.%}
<LEND>

<L>14284<pc>0218-a<k1>kARqa<k2>kARqa
{#kARqa#}¦ {%kāṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt.
2. {%kam%}), a section, part; a single joint of the stalk
or stem of a plant, i. e. the portion from one knot
to another (e. g. {%iṣus tri-kāṇḍā,%} an arrow made of
a cane with three knots; but by Pāṇ. IV. 1, 21, the
fem. should be {%tri-kāṇḍī%}); any part, portion or divi-
sion of a work or action; any distinct portion or
division of a sacrificial rite (as that belonging to the
gods or to the manes); the section or chapter of a
book, a separate department or subject (e. g. {%karma-%}
{%kāṇḍa,%} the department of the Veda treating of sacri-
ficial rites); a stalk or stem, a branch, a switch; the
part of the trunk of a tree whence the branches pro-
ceed; a cluster, a bundle; a multitude, heap, quantity
(at end of comp.); an arrow; a long bone, a bone
of the arms or legs (e. g. {%kāṇḍa-bhagna,%} fracture of
a bone); a cane, a reed (Saccharum Sara); a particular
measure; water; opportunity, occasion; a private
place, privacy, a secret place; praise, flattery; a
horse. (At the end of a compound {%kāṇḍa%} may
sometimes imply depreciation or deficiency, = vile,
low, bad, sinful, wicked, &c.) {%—Kāṇḍa-kaṭuka, as,%}
m. the plant Momordica Charantia, {%= kāravella.%}
{%—Kāṇḍa-kāṇḍaka, as,%} m. a species of grass.
{%—Kāṇḍa-kāra, am,%} n. the Areca or betel-nut tree,
commonly Guvāka; the betel-nut. {%—Kāṇḍa-kīlaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the tree Symplocos Racemosa. {%—Kāṇḍa-%}
{%kuṣku, us,%} m. (?), N. of a man. {%—Kāṇḍa-guṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of grass. {%—Kāṇḍa-gocara, as,%} m.
an iron arrow. {%—Kāṇḍa-tikta%} and {%kāṇḍa-tiktaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of gentian, Gentiana Cherayta. {%—Kāṇḍa-%}
{%dhāra, as,%} m., N. of a country; ({%as, am%}), coming
from or relating to this country. {%—Kāṇḍa-nīla, as,%}
m. the plant Symplocos Racemosa. {%—Kāṇḍa-paṭa,%}
{%as, ī,%} m. f. or {%kāṇḍa-paṭaka, as,%} m. (?)  an outer
tent, a screen surrounding a tent, a curtain. {%—Kāṇḍa-%}
{%patita, as,%} m., N. of a serpent-king. {%—Kāṇḍa-pāta,%}
{%as,%} m. an arrow's fall or flight. {%—Kāṇḍa-puṅkhā,%} f.,
N. of a plant, {%= śara-puṅkhā%}. {%—Kāṇḍa-puṣpa,%}
{%am,%} n. the flower Artemisia Indica, commonly Donā.
{%—Kāṇḍa-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} ‘arrow-backed,’ one
who carries arrows on his back, one of the military
profession, a soldier; ({%as%}), m. the husband of a
Vaiśyā female; an adopted son, any other than one's
own son; ({%am%}), n. the bow of Karṇa; the bow of
Kāma; [cf. {%kāṇḍa-spṛṣṭa.%}] {%—Kāṇḍa-bhagna, am,%}
n. a fracture or dislocation of the bones or limbs, com-
plete fracture of a limb. {%—Kāṇḍa-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of pieces of cane; ({%ī%}), f. {%= kāṇḍa-vīṇā,%}
q. v. {%—Kāṇḍa-ruhā,%} f. a medicinal plant, {%= kaṭukī.%}
{%—Kāṇḍarṣi (˚ḍa-ṛṣi), is,%} m. a Ṛṣi or divine
saint of a peculiar class, as Jaimini and others, who teach
a peculiar Kāṇḍa or section of the Vedas. {%—Kāṇḍa-%}
{%lāva, as, ā, am,%} cutting a cane or branch, intending
to do so. {%—Kāṇḍa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} armed with an
arrow, an archer. {%—Kāṇḍa-vīṇā,%} f. a musical instru-
ment composed of joints of reed, a reed-pipe (?)
played by the Cāṇḍālas; [cf. {%kaṇḍola-vīṇā.%}]
{%—Kāṇḍa-sandhi, is,%} m. a knot, a joint in the
stem of a tree or of a reed. {%—Kāṇḍa-spṛṣṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} living by the military profession, living by arms,
a soldier; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman who lives by arms; [cf.
{%kāṇḍa-pṛṣṭha.%}] {%—Kāṇḍa-hīna, am,%} n. a fragrant
grass, Cyperus Pertenuis. {%—Kāṇḍānukrama (˚ḍa-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. or {%kāṇḍānukramaṇikā%} or {%kāṇḍā-%}
{%nukramaṇī,%} f. an index of the Kāṇḍas of the
Taittirīya-Saṃhitā. {%—Kāṇḍekṣu (˚ḍa-ik˚), us,%} m.
the plant Asteracantha Longifolia and the plant
Saccharum Spontaneum. {%—Kāṇḍe-ruhā,%} f., N. of a
plant, {%= kāṇḍa-ruhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>14285<pc>0218-a<k1>kARqanI<k2>kARqanI
{%Kāṇḍanī,%}¦ f., N. of a plant, {%= sūkṣma-parṇī%} and
{%rāma-dūtī.%}
<LEND>

<L>14286<pc>0218-a<k1>kARqAla<k2>kARqAla
{%Kāṇḍāla%}¦ or {%kāṇḍola, as,%} m. a reed-basket.
<LEND>

<L>14287<pc>0218-a<k1>kARqikA<k2>kARqikA
{%Kāṇḍikā,%}¦ f. a kind of corn (see {%laṅkā%}); a kind
of gourd, Cucumis Utilissimus.
<LEND>
[Page0218-b+ 73]

<L>14288<pc>0218-b<k1>kARqin<k2>kARqin
{%Kāṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. reed-shaped, hollow.
<LEND>

<L>14289<pc>0218-b<k1>kARqIra<k2>kARqIra
{%Kāṇḍīra, as, ā, am,%}¦ armed with arrows, an
archer; ({%as%}), m. the plant Achyranthes Aspera and
the plant Momordica Charantia; ({%ā%} and {%ī%}), f. the
plant Rubia Munjista.
<LEND>

<L>14290<pc>0218-b<k1>kARqerI<k2>kARqerI
{%Kāṇḍerī,%}¦ f. the plant Tiaridium Indicum.
<LEND>

<L>14291<pc>0218-b<k1>kARqaRI<k2>kARqaRI
{#kARqaRI#}¦ {%kāṇḍaṇī,%} (?) f. a plant, commonly
Rāmadūtī; [cf. {%sūkṣma-parṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14292<pc>0218-b<k1>kARqola<k2>kARqola
{#kARqola#}¦ {%kāṇḍola,%} see above; [cf. {%kaṇḍola.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14293<pc>0218-b<k1>kARva<k2>kARva
{#kARva#}¦ {%kāṇva, as, ī, am%} (a patronymic fr.
{%kaṇva%}), a descendant of Kaṇva; a follower of Kaṇva.
{%—Kāṇva-śākhin, ī,%} m. a follower of the Kāṇva
branch of the Veda. {%—Kāṇvī-putra, as,%} m., N. of a
teacher.
<LEND>

<L>14294<pc>0218-b<k1>kARvaka<k2>kARvaka
{%Kāṇvaka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>14295<pc>0218-b<k1>kARvAyana<k2>kARvAyana
{%Kāṇvāyana, as, ā, am,%}¦ a patronymic fr. {%kāṇva.%}
<LEND>

<L>14296<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtantra<k2>kAtantra
{#kAtantra#}¦ {%kā-tantra, am,%} n. title of a grammar
({%= kalāpa,%} q. v.); there are several appendices to
and commentaries on this grammar, called {%Kātantra-%}
{%gaṇadhātu, ˚catuṣṭayapradīpa, ˚candrikā, ˚dhā-%}
{%tughoṣā,%} &c. {%—Kātantra-pañjikā,%} f. title of a
commentary by Trilocana-dāsa.
<LEND>

<L>14297<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtara<k2>kAtara
{#kAtara#}¦ {%kātara, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%katara?%}),
cowardly, discouraged, timid, depressed, perplexed,
shrinking, afraid; confused, agitated, disordered; ({%as%}),
m. a large kind of fish, Cyprinus Catla, {%= kātala.%}
{%—Kātara-tā,%} f. or {%kātara-tva, am,%} n. cowardice,
timidity, agitation.
<LEND>

<L>14298<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtarAyaRa<k2>kAtarAyaRa
{%Kātarāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic fr. {%kātara.%}
<LEND>

<L>14299<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtarya<k2>kAtarya
{%Kātarya, am,%}¦ n. timidity, fear, dejection, depres-
sion of spirits.
<LEND>

<L>14300<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtala<k2>kAtala
{#kAtala#}¦ {%kātala, as,%} m. a large kind of fish,
Cyprinus Catla; N. of a man; [cf. {%kātara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14301<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtalAyana<k2>kAtalAyana
{%Kātalāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic fr. {%kātala.%}
<LEND>

<L>14302<pc>0218-b<k1>kAti<k2>kAti
{#kAti#}¦ {%kāti, is, is, i%} (fr. 2. {%kā = kan%}), wishing,
desiring (in the compounds {%ṛṇa-kāti%} and {%kāma-%}
{%kāti%}).
<LEND>

<L>14303<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtIya<k2>kAtIya
{#kAtIya#}¦ {%kātīya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%kātya%} below),
composed by Kātya (e. g. in {%kātīya-gṛhyasūtra,%}
{%kātīya-kalpa-sūtra,%} and {%kātīya-sūtra%}); a N. of
Kātyāyana (?); a pupil of the same; also {%kātyā-%}
{%yanīya (?).%}
<LEND>

<L>14304<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtya<k2>kAtya
{%Kātya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic fr. {%kata;%} also {%= kā-%}
{%tyāyana (?).%}
<LEND>

<L>14305<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtyAyana<k2>kAtyAyana
{%Kātyāyana, as,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%kati%} or
{%kātya%}), N. of the author of several treatises on
ritual, grammar, &c.; he is generally identified with
Vararuci, the author of the Prākṛta-prakāśa. He is
also the author of the Vārttikas or supplementary
rules to Pāṇini, of the Yajur-veda Prātiśākhya, and
the Śrauta-sūtras; ({%ī%}), f., N. of one of the two wives
of Yājñavalkya; an epithet of Durgā; a middle-aged
widow dressed in red clothes. {%—Kātyāyana-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n. the Śrauta-sūtras of Kātyāyana. {%—Kātyāyana-%}
{%sūtra-paddhati,%} a commentary on the last by Yājñi-
ka-deva. {%—Kātyāyanasūtra-bhāṣya, am,%} n. a com-
mentary on the same by Karka. {%—Kātyāyanī-putra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a teacher. {%—Kātyāyanī-māhātmya,%}
{%am,%} n. a part of the Skanda-purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>14306<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtyAyanIya<k2>kAtyAyanIya
{%Kātyāyanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ composed by Kātyāyana;
e. g. {%kātyāyanīya-śāstram,%} ‘the law-book composed
by him;’ ({%as%}), m. a pupil of Kātyāyana.
<LEND>

<L>14307<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtu<k2>kAtu
{#kAtu#}¦ {%kātu, us,%} m. a cave; a well (?); [cf.
{%kāṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14308<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtfRa<k2>kAtfRa
{#kAtfRa#}¦ {%kā-tṛṇa, am,%} n. a species of grass,
Rohisha-tṛṇa; [cf. {%kat-tṛṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14309<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtkf<k2>kAtkf
{#kAtkf#}¦ {%kāt-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum%} (fr. {%kāt,%} an exclamation of abuse, and 1. {%kṛ%}),
to insult, dishonour.
<LEND>

<L>14310<pc>0218-b<k1>kAtkfta<k2>kAtkfta
{%Kāt-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dishonoured, insulted.
<LEND>

<L>14311<pc>0218-b<k1>kAttreyaka<k2>kAttreyaka
{#kAttreyaka#}¦ {%kāttreyaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kat-tri%}),
produced from or belonging to any combination of
three inferior articles.
<LEND>
[Page0218-c+ 71]

<L>14312<pc>0218-c<k1>kAtTakya<k2>kAtTakya
{#kAtTakya#}¦ {%kātthakya, as,%} m. (a patronymic
fr. {%katthaka%}), N. of a commentator.
<LEND>

<L>14313<pc>0218-c<k1>kAtyAyana<k2>kAtyAyana
{#kAtyAyana#}¦ {%kātyāyana.%} See under {%kātīya.%}
<LEND>

<L>14314<pc>0218-c<k1>kATaka<k2>kATaka
{#kATaka#}¦ {%kāthaka%} and {%kāthakya,%} patronymics
from Kathaka.
<LEND>

<L>14315<pc>0218-c<k1>kATaYcitka<k2>kATaYcitka
{#kATaYcitka#}¦ {%kāthañcitka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kathañ-%}
{%cid%}), accomplished with difficulty.
<LEND>

<L>14316<pc>0218-c<k1>kATika<k2>kATika
{#kATika#}¦ {%kāthika, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%kathā%}),
belonging to a tale, told in one; knowing stories;
({%as%}), m. a narrator of stories.
<LEND>

<L>14317<pc>0218-c<k1>kAdamba<k2>kAdamba
{#kAdamba#}¦ {%kādamba, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%kad%}), a kind of goose with dark-grey wings ({%kala-%}
{%haṃsa%}); a drake or (according to some) a teal; an
arrow; the plant Nauclea Cadamba; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
plant, {%= kadamba-puṣpī; (am),%} n. the flower of
the plant Nauclea Cadamba.
<LEND>

<L>14318<pc>0218-c<k1>kAdambaka<k2>kAdambaka
{%Kādambaka, as,%}¦ m. an arrow.
<LEND>

<L>14319<pc>0218-c<k1>kAdambinI<k2>kAdambinI
{%Kādambinī,%}¦ f. a long line or bank of clouds.
<LEND>

<L>14320<pc>0218-c<k1>kAdambara<k2>kAdambara
{#kAdambara#}¦ {%kādambara, as, am,%} m. n. the
surface or skim of coagulated milk; ({%am, ī%}), n. f. a
spirituous liquor distilled from the flowers of the
Cadamba; the rain-water which collects in clefts or
hollow places of the tree Nauclea Cadamba when the
flowers are in perfection, and which is supposed to be
impregnated with the honey; wine, spirituous liquor
in general; the fluid which issues from the temples
of a rutting elephant; ({%ī%}), f. the female of the
Kokila or Indian cuckoo; the female of another bird,
{%= śārikā,%} i. e. Turdus Salica; an epithet of Saras-
vatī; N. of a daughter of Citra-ratha and Madirā;
a celebrated work of Vāṇa-bhaṭṭa, called ‘Kādambarī,’
derives its name from her. {%—Kādambarī-vīja, am,%}
n. ferment, yeast, whatever occasions fermentation.
<LEND>

<L>14321<pc>0218-c<k1>kAdambarya<k2>kAdambarya
{%Kādambarya, as,%}¦ m. {%= kadamba,%} Nauclea Ca-
damba.
<LEND>

<L>14322<pc>0218-c<k1>kAdAcitka<k2>kAdAcitka
{#kAdAcitka#}¦ {%kādācitka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kadā-%}
{%cid%}), appearing now and then, produced sometimes,
occasional, incidental. {%—Kādācitka-tā,%} f. the state
of occurring occasionally.
<LEND>

<L>14323<pc>0218-c<k1>kAdikramastuti<k2>kAdikramastuti
{#kAdikramastuti#}¦ {%kādi-krama-stuti,%} a work
attributed to Śaṅkarācārya.
<LEND>

<L>14324<pc>0218-c<k1>kAdimata<k2>kAdimata
{%Kādi-mata,%}¦ a Tantra work.
<LEND>

<L>14325<pc>0218-c<k1>kAdraveya<k2>kAdraveya
{#kAdraveya#}¦ {%kādraveya, as,%} m. (fr. {%kadrū%}),
epithet of the Nāgas or serpents supposed to people
the lower regions; an epithet of Arbuda; also of
Kasarṇīra.
<LEND>

<L>14326<pc>0218-c<k1>kAnaka<k2>kAnaka
{#kAnaka#}¦ {%kānaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kanaka%}),
golden; ({%am%}), n. the seed of Croton Jamalgota.
<LEND>

<L>14327<pc>0218-c<k1>kAnada<k2>kAnada
{#kAnada#}¦ {%kānada, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Dhīmarana.
<LEND>

<L>14328<pc>0218-c<k1>kAnana<k2>kAnana<h>1
{#kAnana#} 1¦. {%kānana, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kan%}), a forest, grove; a house. {%—Kānanāri (˚na-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. a species of the Mimosa tree, Śamī.
{%—Kānanaukas (˚na-ok˚), ās,%} m. the inhabitant of
a forest, a monkey; [cf. {%vanaukas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14329<pc>0218-c<k1>kAnana<k2>kAnana<h>2
{#kAnana#} 2¦. {%kānana (ka-ān˚), am,%} n. the face
of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>14330<pc>0218-c<k1>kAnIta<k2>kAnIta
{#kAnIta#}¦ {%kānīta, as,%} m. a patronymic of
Pṛthu-śravas.
<LEND>

<L>14331<pc>0218-c<k1>kAnIna<k2>kAnIna
{#kAnIna#}¦ {%kānīna, as, ī,%} m. f. (fr. {%kanīna%}),
the son or daughter of a young or unmarried woman;
an epithet of Vyāsa, Karṇa, and Agniveśya; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), suitable to or designed for the eye-ball; [cf.
{%kanīnaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14332<pc>0218-c<k1>kAnIyasa<k2>kAnIyasa
{%Kānīyasa%}¦ (fr. {%kanīyas%}), less in number (used
only in plur.).
<LEND>

<L>14333<pc>0218-c<k1>kAnta<k2>kAnta
{#kAnta#}¦ {%kānta, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%kam%}), desired,
loved, dear; pleasing, agreeable; lovely, beautiful;
({%as%}), m. a lover, a husband; any one beloved; the
moon; spring; the plant Barringtonia Acutangula
[cf. {%hijjala%}]; iron; stone; a precious stone (in
[Page0219-a+ 77]
which sense it is compounded with {%sūrya, candra,%}
and {%ayas%}); an epithet of Kṛṣṇa, and of Skanda;
({%ā%}), f. a beloved or lovely woman, a wife, a mistress;
the earth; N. of a plant (commonly called {%priyaṅgu%});
also of another plant ({%= nāgara-mustā%}); large car-
damoms; a kind of perfume (see {%reṇukā%}); N. of a
metre of four lines of seventeen syllables each; ({%am%}),
n. saffron; a species of iron. {%—Kānta-tā,%} f. or
{%kānta-tva, am,%} n. loveliness, beauty, agreeableness.
{%—Kānta-pakṣin, ī,%} m. a peacock (‘the beautiful
bird’). {%—Kānta-puṣpa, as,%} m. the tree Bauhinia
Variegata, mountain ebony. {%—Kānta-miśra, as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Kānta-loha, am,%} n. the loadstone.
{%—Kānta-lauha, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. steel; [cf.
{%loha-kānta.%}] {%—Kāntāṅghri-dohada (˚tā-aṅ˚), as,%}
m. the tree Jonesia Aśoka (this tree being supposed to
blossom upon coming in contact with the foot of a
handsome female). {%—Kāntā-caraṇa-dohada, as,%} m.
= the preceding. {%—Kāntāyasa (˚ta-ayas), am,%} n. the
iron stone; [cf. {%kānta-loha%} and {%ayas-kānta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14334<pc>0219-a<k1>kAntaka<k2>kAntaka
{%Kāntaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14335<pc>0219-a<k1>kAntalaka<k2>kAntalaka
{%Kāntalaka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Cedrela Toona, com-
monly Tunna, the wood of which sometimes resembles
mahogany.
<LEND>

<L>14336<pc>0219-a<k1>kAntAya<k2>kAntAya
{%Kāntāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%-yate, -yitum,%} to behave like
a lover.
<LEND>

<L>14337<pc>0219-a<k1>kAnti<k2>kAnti
{%Kānti, is,%}¦ f. desire, wish; loveliness, beauty;
splendor; female beauty; personal decoration or
embellishment; (in rhetoric) beauty enhanced by
love; a lovely or desirable woman, personified as
wife of the moon. {%—Kānti-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing
beauty, beautifying, illuminating. {%—Kānti-da, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} giving beauty; beautifying, adorning; ({%ā%}), f.
the plant Serratula Anthelmintika; ({%am%}), n. bile,
the bilious humor. {%—Kānti-dāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}
granting beauty; beautifying, adorning; ({%am%}), n. a
fragrant wood, a kind of Curcuma from the root of
which a yellow die is prepared, C. Zanthorrhiza.
{%—Kānti-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town in Nepal.
{%—Kānti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} lovely, beautiful, splen-
did; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a metre; N. of a woman. {%—Kānti-%}
{%mat-tā,%} f. loveliness, beauty. {%—Kānti-hara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} destroying beauty, making ugly, dulling, dim-
ming. {%—Kāntī-nagarī,%} f. (for {%kānti-n˚%}), N. of a
city of the north; [cf. {%kānti-pura%}].
<LEND>

<L>14338<pc>0219-a<k1>kAntika<k2>kAntika
{%Kāntika, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>14339<pc>0219-a<k1>kAntAra<k2>kAntAra
{#kAntAra#}¦ {%kāntāra, as, am,%} m. n. a wood or
large forest; a bad or difficult road; a hole, a cavity;
({%as%}), m. a red variety of the sugar-cane; a bamboo;
mountain ebony, Bauhinia Variegata; ({%ī%}), f. a kind
of sugar-cane; ({%am%}), n. a symptom or symptomatic
disease, a lotus. {%—Kāntāra-ga, as, ā, am,%} who or
what goes into a wood. {%—Kāntāra-patha, as,%} m.
a forest-way. {%—Kāntāra-pathika, as, ī, am,%} con-
veyed on difficult forest roads. {%—Kāntāra-vāsinī,%} f.
an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>14340<pc>0219-a<k1>kAntAraka<k2>kAntAraka
{%Kāntāraka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of sugar-cane; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of bee.
<LEND>

<L>14341<pc>0219-a<k1>kAntotpAqA<k2>kAntotpAqA
{#kAntotpAqA#}¦ {%kāntotpāḍā,%} f. (for {%kāntotpā-%}
{%dā?%}), N. of a metre consisting of four lines of twelve
syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>14342<pc>0219-a<k1>kAnTaka<k2>kAnTaka
{#kAnTaka#}¦ {%kānthaka%} fr. {%kanthā,%} N. of a place
on the river Varṇu.
<LEND>

<L>14343<pc>0219-a<k1>kAndava<k2>kAndava
{#kAndava#}¦ {%kāndava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kandu%}),
roasted or baked, in an iron pan or oven, as bread,
cakes, &c.
<LEND>

<L>14344<pc>0219-a<k1>kAndavika<k2>kAndavika
{%Kāndavika, as, ī, am,%}¦ employed in baking;
({%as%}), m. a baker.
<LEND>

<L>14345<pc>0219-a<k1>kAndAviza<k2>kAndAviza
{#kAndAviza#}¦ {%kāndā-viṣa, am,%} n., Ved. a
species of poison.
<LEND>

<L>14346<pc>0219-a<k1>kAndiS<k2>kAndiS
{#kAndiS#}¦ {%kāndiś, k, k, k,%} or {%kāndiśīka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} put to flight, running away, flying; (fr. {%kāṃ%}
{%diśam,%} ‘to which region’ shall I fly?). {%—Kāndig-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} run away.
<LEND>

<L>14347<pc>0219-a<k1>kAnyakubja<k2>kAnyakubja
{#kAnyakubja#}¦ {%kānyakubja, am,%} n. {%= kanya-%}
{%kubja,%} N. of a town; ({%ī%}), f. a princess or a female
inhabitant of this town.
<LEND>
[Page0219-b+ 75]

<L>14348<pc>0219-b<k1>kAnyajA<k2>kAnyajA
{#kAnyajA#}¦ {%kānyajā,%} f. a kind of perfume,
commonly Nālī.
<LEND>

<L>14349<pc>0219-b<k1>kApawava<k2>kApawava
{#kApawava#}¦ {%kāpaṭava,%} a patronymic from Kā-
paṭu.
<LEND>

<L>14350<pc>0219-b<k1>kApawavaka<k2>kApawavaka
{%Kāpaṭavaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ coming from the
Kāpaṭavas.
<LEND>

<L>14351<pc>0219-b<k1>kApawika<k2>kApawika
{#kApawika#}¦ {%kāpaṭika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kapaṭa%}),
fraudulent, dishonest; wicked, perverse, bad; ({%as%}),
m. a flatterer, a parasite; a student, a scholar.
<LEND>

<L>14352<pc>0219-b<k1>kApawya<k2>kApawya
{%Kāpaṭya, am,%}¦ n. wickedness, dishonesty, fraud.
<LEND>

<L>14353<pc>0219-b<k1>kApaTa<k2>kApaTa
{#kApaTa#}¦ {%kā-patha, as,%} m. a bad road; bad
ways; ({%am%}), n. the fragrant root of Andropogon
Muricatus; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>14354<pc>0219-b<k1>kApA<k2>kApA
{#kApA#}¦ {%kāpā,%} f., Ved. a call (?).
<LEND>

<L>14355<pc>0219-b<k1>kApAla<k2>kApAla
{#kApAla#}¦ {%kāpāla, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kapāla%}), re-
lating to the skull or cranium; made of skulls; ({%as%}),
m. a follower of a certain Śaiva sect [cf. the follow-
ing]; the plant Cucumis Utilissimus; ({%ī%}), f. a clever
woman; ({%am%}), n. a kind of leprosy.
<LEND>

<L>14356<pc>0219-b<k1>kApAlika<k2>kApAlika
{%Kāpālika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or belonging to
the skull; ({%as%}), m. a worshipper of Śiva of the left-
hand order, characterized by carrying skulls of men
as ornaments and by eating and drinking from them;
N. of a mixed caste; ({%as, ī, am%}), peculiar to a
Kāpālika.
<LEND>

<L>14357<pc>0219-b<k1>kApAlin<k2>kApAlin
{%Kāpālin, ī,%}¦ m. a N. of Śiva; N. of a son of
Kṛṣṇa and Yaudhiṣṭhirī.
<LEND>

<L>14358<pc>0219-b<k1>kApika<k2>kApika
{#kApika#}¦ {%kāpika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kapi%}), shaped
or behaving like a monkey.
<LEND>

<L>14359<pc>0219-b<k1>kApitTa<k2>kApitTa
{%Kāpittha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%kapittha%}), belonging to
the tree Feronia Elephantum.
<LEND>

<L>14360<pc>0219-b<k1>kApitTaka<k2>kApitTaka
{%Kāpitthaka,%}¦ N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>14361<pc>0219-b<k1>kApila<k2>kApila
{%Kāpila, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%kapila%}), peculiar or be-
longing to Kapila (or Viṣṇu), derived from him; of
a tawny colour; ({%as%}), m. a follower of the Sāṅkhya
system of philosophy which was founded by Kapila;
tawny (the colour); ({%am%}), n., N. of an Upa-purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>14362<pc>0219-b<k1>kApileya<k2>kApileya
{%Kāpileya,%}¦ a patronymic from Kapila or a metro-
nymic from Kapilā.
<LEND>

<L>14363<pc>0219-b<k1>kApivana<k2>kApivana
{%Kāpivana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kapi-vana%}), N. of a
festival lasting two days.
<LEND>

<L>14364<pc>0219-b<k1>kApiSa<k2>kApiSa
{%Kāpiśa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%kapiśa%}), a spirituous liquor,
wine; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>14365<pc>0219-b<k1>kApiSAyana<k2>kApiSAyana
{%Kāpiśāyana, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming from Kapiśa
(e. g. {%madhu,%} honey, or {%drākṣā,%} grape); ({%as%}), m. a
patronymic; ({%am%}), n. a spirituous liquor; a deity.
<LEND>

<L>14366<pc>0219-b<k1>kApiSeya<k2>kApiSeya
{%Kāpiśeya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kapiśā%}), a Piśāca, an imp
or goblin.
<LEND>

<L>14367<pc>0219-b<k1>kApizWala<k2>kApizWala
{%Kāpiṣṭhala, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic fr. {%kapiṣṭhala;%}
{%(ās),%} m. pl., N. of a people; [cf. <lang n="greek">καμβισθολοι</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>14368<pc>0219-b<k1>kApI<k2>kApI
{%Kāpī,%}¦ f., N. of a woman; N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>14369<pc>0219-b<k1>kApeya<k2>kApeya
{%Kāpeya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%kapi%}), belonging to or re-
lating to or peculiar to a monkey; a patronymic fr.
{%kapi%} (a descendant of Aṅgiras being meant); ({%am%}),
n. the monkey species; monkey tricks.
<LEND>

<L>14370<pc>0219-b<k1>kApya<k2>kApya
{%Kāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ a patronymic fr. {%kapi%} (a de-
scendant of Aṅgiras being meant).
<LEND>

<L>14371<pc>0219-b<k1>kApuruza<k2>kApuruza
{#kApuruza#}¦ {%kā-puruṣa, as,%} m. a mean con-
temptible man, a coward, a wretch; ({%as, ā, am%}),
cowardly, miserable, mean. {%—Kāpuruṣa-tā,%} f. or
{%kāpuruṣa-tva, am,%} n. meanness, cowardliness.
<LEND>

<L>14372<pc>0219-b<k1>kApuruzya<k2>kApuruzya
{%Kāpuruṣya, am,%}¦ n. cowardice, meanness.
<LEND>

<L>14373<pc>0219-b<k1>kApota<k2>kApota
{#kApota#}¦ {%kāpota, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kapota%}), pecu-
liar to a pigeon; of the colour of a pigeon, grey, of
a dirty white colour; ({%as%}), m. grey (the colour),
a dirty white colour; natron, fossil alkali; antimony
considered as a collyrium or application to the eyes;
({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant; ({%am%}), n. a flock of pigeons;
antimony. {%—Kāpotāñjana (˚ta-añ˚), am,%} n. anti-
mony especially considered as a collyrium or applica-
tion to the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>14374<pc>0219-b<k1>kApotaka<k2>kApotaka
{%Kāpotaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the inhabitants of Kapotakīyā.
<LEND>

<L>14375<pc>0219-b<k1>kApotapAkya<k2>kApotapAkya
{%Kāpotapākya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the Kapotapākas.
<LEND>

<L>14376<pc>0219-b<k1>kApyakara<k2>kApyakara
{#kApyakara#}¦ {%kāpyakara, as,%} m. ({%kāpya? -kara%}),
a penitent, one who acknowledges his faults.
<LEND>
[Page0219-c+ 78]

<L>14377<pc>0219-c<k1>kApyakAra<k2>kApyakAra
{%Kāpya-kāra, as,%}¦ m. avowal or confession of sin;
a penitent, one who confesses a crime.
<LEND>

<L>14378<pc>0219-c<k1>kAPala<k2>kAPala
{#kAPala#}¦ {%kāphala, as,%} m. a bitter seed. See
{%kaṭphala.%}
<LEND>

<L>14379<pc>0219-c<k1>kAbava<k2>kAbava
{#kAbava#}¦ {%kābava, as,%} m., Ved. an epithet of
evil spirits.
<LEND>

<L>14380<pc>0219-c<k1>kAm<k2>kAm
{#kAm#}¦ {%kām,%} ind. an interjection used in
calling out to another.
<LEND>

<L>14381<pc>0219-c<k1>kAma<k2>kAma
{#kAma#}¦ {%kāma, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%kam%}), wish, desire,
longing (e. g. {%prāpta-kāma,%} one who has gained
his wish), affection, love, the object of desire or love,
the god of desire generally; Love, the god of love
(son of Dharma and husband of Rati or, according
to other authorities, son of Brahmā or Saṅkalpa); a
N. of Agni in the Veda (either because he desires to
consume all things or because he makes requests to
the gods in behalf of man); a N. of Bala-deva [cf.
{%kāma-pāla%}]; a species of the mango tree ({%= mahā-%}
{%rāja-cūta%}); N. of a metre consisting of four lines of
two long syllables each; N. of a prince; (at the end
of compounds) having a desire for, desiring (e. g.
{%go-kāma,%} desiring cows; {%dharma-kāma,%} desiring
justice; {%tyaktu-kāma,%} having a desire to leave; see
Gram. 871). After the phrase {%kāmo me,%} ‘my desire
is,’ the potential may be used; e. g. {%kāmo me%}
{%bhuñjīta bhavān,%} my wish is that you should eat;
({%ā%}), f. wish, desire [cf. {%kāmayā%}]; N. of a daughter
of Pṛthu-śravas and wife of Ayuta-nāyin; ({%am%}), n.
object of desire; semen virile; N. of a Tīrtha; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), Ved. wishing, desiring. {%Kāmena%} or {%kāmāt,%}
ind. out of affection or love for, of one's own accord,
intentionally; {%kāmāya%} or {%kāme,%} ind. according to
one's desire; out of love for (with gen. or dat. case).
{%—Kāma-karśana%} in {%a-kāma-karśana,%} q. v. {%—Kā-%}
{%ma-kalā,%} f. an epithet of Rati, the wife of Kāma.
{%—Kāma-kāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. requesting the fulfil-
ment of a wish; (Sāy.) uttering wishes. {%—Kāma-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} or {%kāma-kāmin, ī, inī, i,%} wish-
ing wishes; following the dictates of passion or desire.
{%—Kāma-kāra, as,%} m. voluntary action, the act of
following one's own inclinations, spontaneous deed;
the operation or influence of desire, desire; ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), following one's own inclinations, indulging one's
desires. {%—Kāmakāra-tas,%} ind. according to one's
desires or inclinations. {%—Kāma-kūṭa, as,%} m. the
paramour of a harlot; wanton caresses, harlotry.
{%—Kāma-keli, is,%} m. amorous sport, a euphemistic
term for sexual intercourse; ({%is, is, i%}), having amo-
rous sport, libidinous, wanton. {%—Kāma-krīḍā,%} f.
amorous sport, N. of a metre consisting of four lines
of fifteen long syllables each. {%—Kāma-khaḍga-dalā,%}
f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%svarṇa-ketakī.%}] {%—Kāma-ga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} going or coming of one's own accord, able
to move or act as one pleases; ({%ā%}), f. a libidinous
woman. {%—Kāma-gati, is, is, i,%} or {%kāma-gama, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} or {%kāma-gāmin, ī, inī, i, = kāma-ga%} above;
({%kāma-gamās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of deities of
the eleventh Manvantara. {%—Kāma-giri, is,%} m., N.
of a mountain. {%—Kāma-guṇa, as,%} m. the quality of
desire, passion, affection; satiety, perfect enjoyment;
an object of sense. {%—Kāma-cara, as, ā, am,%} mov-
ing freely, unchecked, unrestrained. {%—Kāma-caraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. free or unchecked motion. {%—Kāmacara-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. unrestrainedness. {%—Kāma-cāra, as, ā, am,%}
moving freely, following one's own pleasure, un-
checked, unrestrained; ({%as%}), m. free, unrestrained
motion; independant, spontaneous action; following
one's own wishes or pleasures, sensuality, selfishness.
{%—Kāmacāra-tas,%} ind. according to one's inclina-
tion. {%—Kāma-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} moving according to
one's inclination, acting unrestrainedly; behaving
freely towards women, desirous, libidinous; self-
willed; ({%as%}), m. a sparrow; an epithet of Garuḍa,
the bird of Viṣṇu. {%—Kāma-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced
or caused by passion or desire; (a son) engendered in
love; ({%as%}), m. the son of Kāma, i. e. Aniruddha.
{%—Kāma-jāna, as,%} m. or (according to another
reading) {%kāma-jani, is,%} m. the Indian cuckoo; [cf.
[Page0220-a+ 81]
{%kāma-tāla.%}] {%—Kāma-jāla = kāma-tāla%}. {%—Kāma-%}
{%jit, t, t, t,%} conquering desire; an epithet of Skanda.
{%—Kāma-jyeṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having desire
(personified) at the head; led by Kāma. {%—Kāma-%}
{%tantra,%} N. of a work. {%—Kāma-taru, us,%} m. the
god of love considered as a tree or parasitical plant;
[cf. {%kāma-vṛkṣa.%}] {%—Kāma-tas,%} ind. according to
wish or affection, passionately, from passion or feel-
ing (opposed to {%dharma-tas%}); of one's own accord,
willingly, intentionally, by consent. {%—Kāma-tāla,%}
{%as,%} m. the Indian cuckoo, (the song of this bird being
poetically considered as an incentive to love.) {%—Kāma-%}
{%da, as, ā, am,%} giving what is wished, granting de-
sires; an epithet of the sun, and of Skanda; ({%ā%}), f.
a fabulous cow, the cow of plenty; N. of a woman.
{%—Kāma-dattā,%} f. title of a work. {%—Kāma-dattikā,%}
f., N. of a woman. {%—Kāma-daminī,%} f. ‘taming
love,’ N. of a libidinous woman in the Pañcatantra.
{%—Kāma-dambhaka, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kā-%}
{%ma-darśana, as, ī, am,%} looking lovely. {%—Kāma-%}
{%dugha, as, ā, am,%} milking all desires, i. e. yielding
what one wishes; ({%ā%}), f. the cow of plenty, a fabu-
lous cow yielding all desires. {%—Kāma-duh, -dhuk,%}
f. and {%kāma-duhā,%} f. the cow of plenty. {%—Kāma-%}
{%dūtikā,%} f. the plant Tiaridium Indicum. {%—Kāma-%}
{%dūtī,%} f. the female of the Indian cuckoo; the plant
Bignonia Suaveolens. {%—Kāma-deva, as,%} m. the god
of love (according to some authorities a son of
Sahiṣṇu and Yaśo-dharā); also a N. of Śiva; N.
of a poet; N. of a king of Jayantīpurī; N. of the
author of the Prāyaścitta-paddhati. {%—Kāma-dohin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} yielding desires; an epithet of the cow of
plenty, which belonged to Vasisṭha. {%—Kāma-dha-%}
{%raṇa, am,%} n., Ved. procuring what is desired, fulfil-
ment of desire. {%—Kāma-dhātu, us,%} m. the region
of the wishes, the seat of the Kāmāvacaras. {%—Kāma-%}
{%dhenu, us,%} f. the cow of plenty, a cow belonging to
the sage Vasiṣṭha, yielding all desires; title of a
commentary of Vopadeva on his Kavi-kalpadruma,
also called Kāvya-kāmadhenu. {%—Kāmadhenu-tan-%}
{%tra, am,%} n. title of a work on the mystical significa-
tion of the letters of the alphabet. {%—Kāma-dhvaṃsin,%}
{%ī,%} m. an epithet of Śiva as ‘subduing the god of love.’
{%—Kāma-nāśaka, as, ikā, am,%} destroying irregular
desires, subduing any sensual appetite. {%—Kāman-%}
{%dhamin, ī,%} m. a brazier; [cf. {%kārandhamin.%}]
{%—Kāma-pati, is,%} m. the lord of desires. {%—Kāma-%}
{%patnī,%} f. the wife of Kāma, i. e. Rati. {%—Kāma-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m. epithet of Bala-deva; also of Śiva; N.
of a man. {%—Kāma-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%} tormented
with lust or irregular desires. {%—Kāma-pūra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fulfilling wishes, granting desires. {%—Kāma-pra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. granting desires; ({%am%}), n. the fulfil-
ling of a desire. {%—Kāma-prada, as, ā, am,%} granting
desires; ({%as%}), m. a kind of coitus. {%—Kāma-praśna,%}
{%as,%} m. questioning as one pleases, asking unrestrain-
edly. {%—Kāma-prastha, as,%} m., N. of a town.
{%—Kāmapri, is,%} m. (fr. {%kāma-pra%}), Ved. a patro-
nymic of Marutta; (Sāy.) ‘whose wishes are ful-
filled.’ {%—Kāma-phala, as,%} m. a species of the
mango tree. {%—Kāma-baddha, as, ā, am,%} bound by
love; ({%am%}), n. a wood. {%—Kāma-bhakṣa%} or {%kā-%}
{%ma-bhakṣya, as, ā, am,%} eating anything or every-
thing. {%—Kāma-bhāj, k, k, k,%} partaking of sensual
enjoyment. {%—Kāma-bhoga, as,%} m. gratification of
desires, sensual gratification (always used in plur.).
{%—Kāma-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Kāma-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of desire, answering all
desires. {%—Kāma-mardana, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva,
‘the destroyer of the god of love.’ {%—Kāma-maha,%}
{%as,%} m. the festival of the god of love (on the day of
full moon in month Caitra or March-April). {%—Kā-%}
{%ma-mālin, ī,%} m. epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Kāma-mūḍha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} infatuated by lust. {%—Kāma-mūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. strongly affected by love. {%—Kāma-%}
{%mohita, as, ā, am,%} overcome by or intoxicated
with desire, love, or passion. {%—Kāma-rasa, as,%} m.
seminal effusion. {%—Kāma-rasika, as, ī, am,%} libidi-
nous. {%—Kāma-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Kāma-%}
{%rūpa, am,%} n. a shape changing at will; ({%as, ā, am%}),
taking any shape at will; beautiful, pleasing; ({%as%} or
[Page0220-b+ 81]
{%ās%}), m. sing. or pl. a district lying east of Bengal, the
western portion of Assam. {%—Kāmarūpa-dhara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} taking any shape at will. {%—Kāmarūpa-pati,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a commentary on the work Śāradā-
tilaka. {%—Kāmarūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} taking any shape at
will; pleasing, beautiful; ({%ī%}), m. a pole-cat; a boar;
a Vidyādhara, a kind of subordinate deity; ({%iṇī%}), f.
the plant Physalis Flexuosa. {%—Kāma-rekhā,%} f. a harlot,
a courtezan; [cf. {%kāma-lekhā.%}] {%—Kāma-latā,%} f. mem-
brum virile; the plant Ipomœa. {%—Kāma-lekhā,%} f. a
harlot, a courtezan; [cf. {%kāma-rekhā.%}] {%—Kāma-lola,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} overcome with desire or passion. {%—Kāma-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} being in love, enamoured, wanton; con-
taining the word Kāma; ({%tī%}), f. a species of Curcuma
[cf. {%dāru-haridrā%}]; N. of a town. {%—Kāma-vara,%}
{%as,%} m. a gift chosen at will. {%—Kāma-vallabha, as,%}
m. spring; the mango tree; ({%ā%}), f. moonlight.
{%—Kāma-vaśa, as,%} m. subjection to love. {%—Kāma-%}
{%vaśya, as, ā, am,%} being in subjection to the god of
love, enamoured. {%—Kāma-vāṇa, as,%} m. an arrow of
Kāma-deva, the deity of love. {%—Kāma-vāda, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} saying anything at pleasure. {%—Kāma-vāsin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} choosing one's residence at will. {%—Kāma-%}
{%viddha, as, ā, am,%} wounded by the god of love;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Kāma-vihantṛ, tā, trī,%}
{%tṛ,%} disappointing desires. {%—Kāma-vīrya, as, ā, am,%}
displaying heroism at will, an epithet of Garuḍa.
{%—Kāma-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a parisitical plant {%(= van-%}
{%dāka)%}. {%—Kāma-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} indulging desires,
licentious, dissipated, debauched. {%—Kāma-vṛddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. increase of desire or passion; ({%is, is, i%}), in-
creasing love; ({%is%}), m. a shrub, called in Karṇāṭaka
Kāma-ja, of supposed aphrodisiac properties. {%—Kā-%}
{%ma-vṛntā,%} f. the trumpet flower, Bignonia Suave-
olens. {%—Kāma-śara, as,%} m. love's shaft; the mango
tree. {%—Kāma-śāstra, am,%} n. a manual of pleasure
or of love, title of a work of Vātsyāyana. {%—Kāma-%}
{%saṃyoga, as,%} m. attainment of desired objects.
{%—Kāma-sakha, as,%} m. spring; the month Caitra;
the mango tree. {%—Kāma-samūha, as,%} m., N. of a
work of Ananta. {%—Kāma-suta, as,%} m. the son of
Kāma-deva, god of love, i. e. Aniruddha. {%—Kāma-%}
{%sū, ūs, ūs, u,%} granting wishes. {%—Kāma-sūtra,%} N. of
a love-manual by Vātsyāyana. {%—Kāma-sena, as,%}
m., N. of a king of Kāmavatī; ({%ā%}), f. the wife of
Nidhipati. {%—Kāma-haituka, as, ī, am,%} caused or
produced by mere desire, without any real cause; of
one's own accord. {%—Kāmākṣī (˚ma-ak˚),%} f. a form
of Durgā. {%—Kāmākhyā (˚ma-ākh˚),%} f. a form of
Durgā. {%—Kāmāgni (˚ma-ag˚), is,%} m. the fire of
love, passion, lust, violent desire. {%—Kāmāgni-sandī-%}
{%pana, am,%} n. kindling the fire of lust, an aphro-
disiac. {%—Kāmāṅkuśa (˚ma-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a finger-
nail; the membrum virile. {%—Kāmāṅga (˚ma-aṅ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the mango tree, Mangifera Indica. {%—Kāmā-%}
{%tura (˚ma-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} love-sick, in love, affected
by love or desire. {%—Kāmātma-tā,%} f. passion, lust;
wish, desire. {%—Kāmātman (˚ma-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} whose
very essence is desire, consisting of desire, libidi-
nous, licentious; desiring, wishing for; enamoured.
{%—Kāmādhikāra (˚ma-adh˚), as,%} m. the influence
of passion or desire, aspiration; that part of a Śāstra
which relates to human wishes or desires. {%—Kāmā-%}
{%dhiṣṭhita (˚ma-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} influenced or
overcome by love. {%—Kāmānala (˚ma-an˚), as,%}
m. the fire of love, passion, lust, violent desire.
{%—Kāmāndha (˚ma-an˚), as,%} m. the Indian cuckoo
(blind from love); ({%ā%}), f. musk. {%—Kāmānnin (˚ma-%}
{%an˚), ī, inī, i,%} having food at will. {%—Kāmābhi-%}
{%kāma (˚ma-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} lustful. {%—Kāmāyudha%}
{%(˚ma-āy˚), am,%} n. the weapon or arrow of the god
of love; membrum virile; ({%as%}), m. a species of the
mango tree. {%—Kāmāyus (˚ma-āy˚), us,%} m. a vul-
ture; an epithet of Garuḍa, the bird of Viṣṇu.
{%—Kāmāraṇya (˚ma-ar˚), am,%} n. a pleasing grove
or wood. {%—Kāmāri (˚ma-ari), is,%} m. a mineral
substance used in medicine, a sort of pyrites (see
{%viṭa-mākṣika%}); an epithet of Śiva, the foe or
conqueror of the god of love. {%—Kāmārta (˚ma-%}
{%ār˚), as, ā, am,%} afflicted by love or passion, in love.
{%—Kāmārthin (˚ma-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} lascivious, wanton,
[Page0220-c+ 80]
amorous. {%—Kāmāvacara (˚ma-av˚), ās,%} m. pl. a
class of deities (with Buddhists). {%—Kāmāvatāra%}
{%(˚ma-av˚), as,%} m., N. of a metre consisting of four
lines of six syllables each; N. of a work. {%—Kāmā-%}
{%vasāya (˚ma-av˚), as,%} m. suppression or mortifi-
cation of the passions, coldness, stoicism. {%—Kāmā-%}
{%vasāyi-tā,%} f. or {%kāmāvasāyi-tva, am,%} n. the power
of suppressing desire, self-denial or mortification (one
of the eight supernatural faculties of Śiva). {%—Kāmā-%}
{%vasāyitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} who or what suppresses or
destroys passion or desire. {%—Kāmāvasāyin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} one who suppresses desire, destructive of love or
desire. {%—Kāmāśana (˚ma-aś˚), am,%} n. eating at
will, unrestrained enjoyment. {%—Kāmāśrama (˚ma-%}
{%āś˚), as,%} m. or {%kāmāśrama-pada, am,%} n. the her-
mitage of the god of love. {%—Kāmāsakta (˚ma-ās˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} overcome with desire or passion, im-
passioned, in love. {%—Kāmāsakti (˚ma-ās˚), is,%} f.
passion, desire. {%—Kāmepsu (˚ma-īp˚), us, us, u,%}
striving to obtain the fulfilment of a desire. {%—Kāme-%}
{%śvara (˚ma-īś˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Kuvera.
{%—Kāmodaka (˚ma-ud˚), am,%} n. a voluntary obla-
tion of water; oblation of water to deceased friends
&c. exclusive of those for whom it is directed by law.
{%—Kāmodā,%} f. a Rāgiṇī, one of the female personi-
fications of the musical notes. {%—Kāmopahata (˚ma-%}
{%up˚), as, ā, am,%} overcome with passion or desire.
{%—Kāmopahata-cittāṅga (˚ma-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
one whose mind and body are overcome with love.
<LEND>

<L>14382<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmana<k2>kAmana
{%Kāmana, as, ā, am,%}¦ lustful, libidinous, desirous;
({%ā%}), f. desire, wish.
<LEND>

<L>14383<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmam<k2>kAmam
{%Kāmam,%}¦ ind. (acc. c. of {%kāma%}), according to wish
or desire, according to inclination; agreeably to
desire; at will; willingly, joyfully; (as a particle of
assent) well, very well; granted; admitted that;
indeed, really, surely; (implying at the same time
a contradiction to what precedes) but really, but.
{%Kāmam — na%} or {%kāmam — na tu,%} rather — than
(with pot. or impv. or fut. pass. part., e. g. {%kāmam%}
{%ā maraṇāt tiṣṭhed gṛhe kanyā — na enām pra-%}
{%yacchet tu guṇa-hīnāya,%} ‘rather should a girl stay
at home till her death, than that he should give her
to one void of excellent qualities’); in this sense the
negative sentence with {%na%} or {%na tu%} may also pre-
cede or its place may occasionally be taken by an
interrogative sentence (e. g. {%kāmaṃ nayatu māṃ%}
{%devaḥ kim ardhena ātmano hi me,%} ‘rather let the
god take me, what is the use to me of half my
existence?’). {%Kāmam — tu,%} or {%kāmam — kiṃ tu,%}
or {%kāmam — athāpi,%} or {%kāmam — tathāpi,%} or {%kā-%}
{%mam — punar,%} well, indeed, surely, granted — how-
ever, notwithstanding, nevertheless (e. g. {%kāmaṃ%}
{%tvayā parityaktā gamiṣyāmi — imaṃ tu bālaṃ%}
{%santyaktuṃ nārhasi,%} ‘granted that forsaken by
thee I shall go — this child however thou must not
forsake;’ or the disjunctive particles are left out alto-
gether). {%—Kāmaṅ-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going at will;
going or coming according to one's inclination or of
one's own accord.
<LEND>

<L>14384<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmayA<k2>kAmayA
{%Kāmayā,%}¦ ind. (inst. c. of an obsolete base {%kāmā%}),
only used with {%brūhi%} or {%prabrūhi%} (e. g. {%kāmayā%}
{%me brūhi deva kas tvam,%} ‘for love of me, say, O
god, who thou art’).
<LEND>

<L>14385<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmayAna<k2>kAmayAna
{%Kāmayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ desiring.
<LEND>

<L>14386<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmayitf<k2>kAmayitf
{%Kāmayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ libidinous, lustful, desirous.
<LEND>

<L>14387<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmala<k2>kAmala
{%Kāmala, as, ā, am,%}¦ libidinous, lustful; ({%as%}), m.
spring; dry and sterile soil, a desert; ({%as, ā%}), m. f.
a form of jaundice, excessive secretion or obstruction
of bile; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
daughter of Reṇu, also called Reṇukā.
<LEND>

<L>14388<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmalAyana<k2>kAmalAyana
{%Kāmalāyana%}¦ or {%kāmalāyani%} (a patronymic fr.
{%kamala%}), an epithet of the Upakosalas.
<LEND>

<L>14389<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmali<k2>kAmali
{%Kāmali, is,%}¦ m., N. of a pupil of Vaiśampāyana.
<LEND>

<L>14390<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmalin<k2>kAmalin
{%Kāmalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ suffering from jaundice; ({%inas%}),
m. pl., N. of a school derived from Kāmali (?).
<LEND>

<L>14391<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmi<k2>kAmi
{%Kāmi, is,%}¦ m. a libidinous man, a lecher; ({%is%}), f.
an epithet of Rati, the wife of the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>14392<pc>0220-c<k1>kAmika<k2>kAmika
{%Kāmika, as, ā, am,%}¦ desired, wished for, one
whose desires are fulfilled; (at the end of a compound)
relating to or connected with a desire or wish; ({%as%}),
[Page0221-a+ 77]
m. a kind of aquatic bird, a wild duck {%(kāraṇḍava);%}
{%(ā),%} f. a mystical N. of the letter {%t.%}
<LEND>

<L>14393<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmita<k2>kAmita
{%Kāmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished, desired; ({%am%}), n. a
wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>14394<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmin<k2>kAmin
{%Kāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ desirous, cupidinous; loving, fond,
impassioned, wanton; ({%ī%}), m. a lover, an uxorious
husband; N. of several birds, the ruddy goose, Anas
Casaca; a pigeon; Ardea Sibirica; a sparrow; an
epithet of Śiva; the moon (?) ; ({%inī%}), f. a loving or
affectionate woman, a timid woman; a woman in
general; a climbing parasitical plant; a species of
Curcuma; spirituous liquor. {%—Kāmi-tā,%} f. or {%kāmi-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of a lover, love, desire. {%—Kā-%}
{%minī-kānta, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), N. of a
metre consisting of four lines of six syllables each.
{%—Kāminīśa (˚nī-īśa), as,%} m. the plant Hyper-
anthera Moringa ({%śobhāñjana%}).
<LEND>

<L>14395<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmIna<k2>kAmIna
{%Kāmīna%}¦ or {%kāmīla, as,%} m. the plant Areca Tri-
andra.
<LEND>

<L>14396<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmuka<k2>kAmuka
{%Kāmuka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} wishing, desirous;
loving; cupidinous, lustful, libidinous; ({%as%}), m. a
lover; a sparrow; the plant Jonesia Aśoka; the
creeping plant Gærtnera Racemosa; a bow (?); ({%ā%}),
f. a woman desirous of wealth, food, &c.; ({%ī%}), f. a
libidinous or lustful woman. {%—Kāmuka-kāntā,%} f.
the plant Gærtnera Racemosa. {%—Kāmuka-tva, am,%}
n. desire.
<LEND>

<L>14397<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmukAyana<k2>kAmukAyana
{%Kāmukāyana, as,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%kāmuka%}),
N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>14398<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmya<k2>kAmya<h>1
1. {%kāmya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kāmyati%} (in composition with
an object), to have a desire for (e. g. {%putra-kāmyati,%}
to have a desire for children).
<LEND>

<L>14399<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmya<k2>kAmya<h>2
2. {%kāmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirable, beautiful; amiable,
lovely, agreeable; optional, supererogatory, performed
for some particular object and opposed to the {%nitya-%}
{%karma%} or fixed and indispensable observance; relating
to desire, will, &c., done through lust or passion; per-
formed through the desire of some advantage (as a
religious ceremony &c.); ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras,
a daughter of Kardama. {%—Kāmya-karman, a,%} n.
rites performed with a view to future fruition. {%—Kā-%}
{%mya-gir, īr,%} f. a pleasing sound, an agreeable speech
or song. {%—Kāmya-tā,%} f. loveliness, beauty. {%—Kā-%}
{%mya-tva, am,%} n. love, desire; supererogation, will,
pleasure. {%—Kāmya-dāna, am,%} n. an acceptable or
desirable gift, a voluntary gift. {%—Kāmya-maraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. voluntary death, suicide. {%—Kāmya-vrata,%}
{%am,%} n. a voluntary vow. {%—Kāmyābhiprāya (˚ya-%}
{%abh˚), as,%} m. self-interested motive or purpose.
<LEND>

<L>14400<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmyaka<k2>kAmyaka
{%Kāmyaka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a wood; also of a lake.
<LEND>

<L>14401<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmyA<k2>kAmyA
{%Kāmyā,%}¦ f. wish, desire, longing for, striving after,
will, intention; (generally compounded with an object,
e. g. {%putra-kāmyayā,%} through desire for a son; {%yat-%}
{%kāmyā,%} irreg. inst. c. with which intention.)
<LEND>

<L>14402<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmaWa<k2>kAmaWa
{#kAmaWa#}¦ {%kāmaṭha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kamaṭha%}),
peculiar to the tortoise.
<LEND>

<L>14403<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmaWaka<k2>kAmaWaka
{%Kāmaṭhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>14404<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmaRqalava<k2>kAmaRqalava
{#kAmaRqalava#}¦ {%kāmaṇḍalava, am,%} n. (fr. {%kamaṇ-%}
{%ḍalu%}), the business or trade of a potter.
<LEND>

<L>14405<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmaRqaleya<k2>kAmaRqaleya
{%Kāmaṇḍaleya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic fr. {%kamaṇ-%}
{%ḍalu%} or {%kamaṇḍalū%} (a species of quadruped).
<LEND>

<L>14406<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmandaki<k2>kAmandaki
{#kAmandaki#}¦ {%kāmandaki, is,%} m. a patronymic
fr. {%kamandaka; (ī),%} f., N. of a Buddhist priestess.
<LEND>

<L>14407<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmAlikA<k2>kAmAlikA
{#kAmAlikA#}¦ {%kāmālikā,%} f. a spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>14408<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmAlu<k2>kAmAlu
{#kAmAlu#}¦ {%kāmālu, us,%} m. the tree Bauhinia
Variegata ({%= rakta-kāñcana%}).
<LEND>

<L>14409<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmpila<k2>kAmpila
{#kAmpila#}¦ {%kāmpila, as,%} m., N. of a country
believed to be situated in the north of India; ({%ī%}), f.
the capital of that region.
<LEND>

<L>14410<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmpilya<k2>kAmpilya
{%Kāmpilya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a town of the Pāñcālas
or N. of a region; N. of one of the five sons of
Hary-aśva or Bharmyāśva, called collectively Pañcālas;
N. of a plant [cf. {%kampila%} and {%kāmpīla%}], a perfume,
commonly called Sunda Rocanī.
<LEND>

<L>14411<pc>0221-a<k1>kAmpilla<k2>kAmpilla
{%Kāmpilla, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant, a perfume and
drug so called; N. of a country said to be in the
north-west of India.
<LEND>
[Page0221-b+ 75]

<L>14412<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmpillaka<k2>kAmpillaka
{%Kāmpillaka, am,%}¦ n. a kind of medicinal substance;
({%ikā%}), f. a drug and perfume, commonly Sunda
Rocanī.
<LEND>

<L>14413<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmpIla<k2>kAmpIla
{%Kāmpīla, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant [cf. the preced-
ing]; N. of a town (?); ({%as, ī, am%}), derived from
this plant. {%—Kāmpīla-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living in the
town Kāmpīla.
<LEND>

<L>14414<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmpIlaka<k2>kAmpIlaka
{%Kāmpīlaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>14415<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmbala<k2>kAmbala
{#kAmbala#}¦ {%kāmbala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kambala%}),
covered with a woollen blanket; ({%as%}), m. a carriage
covered with a woollen cloth or blanket.
<LEND>

<L>14416<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmbalika<k2>kAmbalika
{#kAmbalika#}¦ {%kāmbalika, as,%} m. a sour dish
prepared with milk, whey, and vinegar; gruel, barley-
water, &c.
<LEND>

<L>14417<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmbavika<k2>kAmbavika
{#kAmbavika#}¦ {%kāmbavika, as,%} m. (fr. {%kambu%}), a
dealer in shells, a vender of shell-ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>14418<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmbukA<k2>kAmbukA
{#kAmbukA#}¦ {%kāmbukā,%} f. {%= kambukā,%} the plant
Physalis Flexuosa ({%= aśva-gandhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>14419<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmbuva<k2>kAmbuva
{#kAmbuva#}¦ {%kāmbuva, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?),
N. of a region.
<LEND>

<L>14420<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmboja<k2>kAmboja
{#kAmboja#}¦ {%kāmboja, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kamboja%}),
born in or coming from Kamboja; ({%as%}), m. a native
of Kamboja, a foreign race who like the Yavanas
shave the whole head, (one of the tribes was originally
Kṣatriya, but degraded by omission of the necessary
rites); a prince of this tribe; a horse of the Kamboja
breed; the plant Rottleria Tinctoria, commonly
Punnag; a kind of Mimosa, the white sort of this
plant; ({%ī%}), f., N. of several plants, Glycine Debilis;
a kind of Mimosa, as above; the plant Abrus Pre-
catorius; the plant Serratula Anthelmintica.
<LEND>

<L>14421<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmbojaka<k2>kAmbojaka
{%Kāmbojaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ born in or coming from
Kamboja.
<LEND>

<L>14422<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmboji<k2>kAmboji
{%Kāmboji, is,%}¦ f. (?)  the plant Glycine Debilis.
<LEND>

<L>14423<pc>0221-b<k1>kAmla<k2>kAmla
{#kAmla#}¦ {%kāmla (kā-amla), as, ā, am,%} slightly
acid, acidulous.
<LEND>

<L>14424<pc>0221-b<k1>kAya<k2>kAya<h>1
{#kAya#} 1¦. {%kāya, as, ī, am%} (fr. 3. {%ka%}), relating or
devoted to the god Ka or Prajāpati; (with {%havis%})
clarified butter or any oblation to Brahmā; ({%as%}), m.
scil. {%vidhi%} or {%vivāha,%} one of the eight modes of
marriage, = Prājāpatya; ({%am%}), n. with or without
{%tīrtha,%} part of the hand sacred to the creator Prajā-
pati, the root of the little finger or of the last two
fingers.
<LEND>

<L>14425<pc>0221-b<k1>kAya<k2>kAya<h>2
{#kAya#} 2¦. {%kāya, as%} or {%am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%ci%}),
the body; the trunk of a tree; the body of a lute
(i. e. the whole lute except the wires, including the
gourd, neck, and belly); assemblage, collection, multi-
tude; principal, capital; a house, a habitation; a
butt or mark, an object to be hit or attained; natural
temperament of anything or any being. {%—Kāya-%}
{%kāraṇa-kartṛ-tva, am,%} n. activity exhibited in bodily
acts. {%—Kāya-kleśa, as,%} m. bodily suffering, toil or
pain. {%—Kāya-cikitsā,%} f. a department of medical
science, treatment of the diseases which affect the
whole body. {%—Kāya-bandhana, am,%} n. a girdle.
{%—Kāya-valana, am,%} n. armour, mail. {%—Kāya-%}
{%stha, as,%} m. the supreme being or spirit; a caste or
tribe or man of that tribe; the Kāyath or writer caste
proceeding from a Kṣatriya father and Śūdra mother;
({%ī%}), f. the wife of a Kāyath or scribe; ({%ā%}), f. a woman
of this caste; N. of several plants, Myrobalanus Che-
bula; Emblica Officinalis; Ocimum Sanctum; a drug,
commonly Kākolī; cardamoms. {%—Kāya-sthita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} situated in the body, corporeal. {%—Kāyāgni%}
{%(˚ya-ag˚), is,%} m. the digestive faculty. {%—Kāyāro-%}
{%haṇa (˚ya-ār˚)%} and {%kāyāvarohaṇa (˚ya-av˚),%} N.
of two places.
<LEND>

<L>14426<pc>0221-b<k1>kAyaka<k2>kAyaka
{%Kāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
the body &c., bodily, corporeal; ({%ikā%}), f. with {%vṛd-%}
{%dhis,%} interest obtained from capital. {%—Kāyikā-%}
{%vṛddhi, is,%} f. interest consisting in the use of an
animal or any capital stock pawned or pledged; ser-
vice rendered by the body of an animal (as a cow
&c.) pledged and used by the person to whom it is
[Page0221-c+ 79]
pledged; or (according to some) interest, of which the
payment does not affect the principal.
<LEND>

<L>14427<pc>0221-c<k1>kAyika<k2>kAyika
{%Kāyika, as, ī, am,%}¦ performed with the body; cor-
poreal, relating to the body; belonging to an assem-
blage or multitude (especially at end of comp.).
<LEND>

<L>14428<pc>0221-c<k1>kAyamAna<k2>kAyamAna
{#kAyamAna#}¦ {%kāyamāna, am,%} n. a hut made of
grass or thatch.
<LEND>

<L>14429<pc>0221-c<k1>kAyavya<k2>kAyavya
{#kAyavya#}¦ {%kāyavya, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14430<pc>0221-c<k1>kAra<k2>kAra<h>1
{#kAra#} 1¦. {%kāra, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%kṛ%}), at
the end of a compound = making, doing, working;
who or what does any act, an agent, a maker or doer,
an author (e. g. {%kumbha-kāra, as,%} m. a potter, a
maker of earthen vessels; {%suvarṇa-kāra,%} a gold-
smith; {%yajña-kāra,%} one who performs a sacrifice;
{%vārttika-kāra,%} the author of the Vārttikas); ({%as%}),
m. act, action (e. g. {%kāma-kāra, puruṣa-kāra,%}
&c.); the term used in designating a sound or a word
which is not inflected (e. g. {%a-kāra,%} the sound {%a;%}
{%ka-kāra,%} the sound {%k; eva-kāra,%} the word {%eva;%}
{%phūt-kāra,%} the sound {%phūt;%} cf. {%karaṇa,%} p. 205);
effort, exertion; determination; religious austerity; a
husband, a master, a lord; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= kā-%}
{%rikā, kāryā,%} &c. {%—Kāra-kara, as, ī, am,%} working,
doing work, acting as agent. {%—Kārāvara (˚ra-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a man of a mixed and low caste, one born
from a Niṣāda father and Vaidehī mother, employed
in working in leather and hides.
<LEND>

<L>14431<pc>0221-c<k1>kAraka<k2>kAraka<h>1
1. {%kāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ making, doing, who or
what does, makes, creates, act, &c.; an agent; one
who effects or produces anything; (very often in
composition with that which is produced or done,
e. g. {%siṃha-kāraka,%} the creator of a lion; {%kṛtsna-%}
{%kāraka,%} doing everything; {%śilpa-kārikā,%} a female
mechanic or doer of a mechanical art); intending
to act or do; ({%ikā%}), f. a female dancer; a business;
trade; concise explanation and development of dif-
ficult rules by metrical lines, especially in philosophy
and grammar, a memorial verse or collection of such
verses; or sometimes two or three Vārttikas arranged
in verse; torment, torture; interest; N. of a plant;
({%ikās%}), f. pl. Bhartṛhari's memorial verses on grammar;
({%akam%}), n. the relation of the noun to the verb in a
sentence, the notion of a case but not co-extensive
with the term case, (there are six such relations ac-
cording to Pāṇini; a. {%karman,%} the object or nearest
aim of an agent, the idea expressed by the acc. case;
b. {%karaṇa,%} the instrument or idea expressed by the
inst. case; c. {%kartṛ,%} the agent or doer of an action,
also expressed by the inst. case, or if expressed by nom.
case not considered a {%kāraka,%} i. e. the agent and in-
strument are both expressed by the inst. when they
are not implied in the verbal termination; d. {%sam-%}
{%pradāna,%} the recipient of the object of giving or of a
gift, hence the idea expressed by the dat. case; e. {%apā-%}
{%dāna,%} ablation, i. e. departure or removal from a fixed
point, the idea expressed by the abl. case; f. {%adhi-%}
{%karaṇa,%} location, or the place of the action, i. e. the
idea expressed by the loc. case. The idea of the geni-
tive or possessive case is not considered a {%kāraka,%}
because it expresses the relation of two nouns to each
other, but not the relation of a noun and verb.)
{%—Kāraka-vat, ān, atī, at,%} relating to one who is
active in anything; instrumental, causal. {%—Kāraka-%}
{%vāda, as,%} m. a treatise on logic by Rudra. {%—Kāraka-%}
{%hetu, us,%} m. the efficient or active cause.
<LEND>

<L>14432<pc>0221-c<k1>kAraja<k2>kAraja
{%Kāraja, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%kara-ja%}), of or relating to
the finger-nail; ({%as%}), m. a young elephant (?).
<LEND>

<L>14433<pc>0221-c<k1>kAraRa<k2>kAraRa<h>1
1. {%kāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. cause, reason (with gen. and
also often with loc.); instrument, means, motive,
origin, principle, a cause (in phil.), i. e. that which
is invariably antecedent to some product and is not
otherwise constituted, (cause in the Nyāya philosophy
is of three kinds, according to the distinction of
a. {%samavāyi,%} intimate or inherent, as threads are the
inherent cause of cloth; b. {%a-samavāyi,%} non-intimate
or non-inherent, as the conjunction of the threads is
the non-intimate cause of cloth; and c. {%nimitta,%} in-
strumental, as the weaver's loom is the instrumental
cause of cloth); an element, elementary matter, the
[Page0222-a+ 81]
origin or plot of a play or poem; that on which an
opinion or judgment is founded; a sign, a mark, a
document, a proof; a legal instrument; an organ of
sense; an action; agency, instrumentality; a father
(as the cause of being); a deity as the remote or
proximate cause of creation; the body; a kind of
musical instrument; a sort of song; a number of
scribes or {%kāyasthas; (ā),%} f. pain, agony; casting
into hell; an astronomical period; {%kāraṇāt,%} abl. c.
from some cause or reason (e. g. {%kasmāt kāraṇāt,%}
‘from what cause,’ often with gen., e. g. {%mama kā-%}
{%raṇāt,%} ‘for my sake,’ and at the end of compounds;
according to native grammarians every case of {%kāraṇa%}
may be used in this manner, but only the inst.,
dat., abl., and loc. occur; {%a-kāraṇena,%} without a
reason; {%yena kāraṇena,%} because; {%yasmin kā-%}
{%raṇe,%} from which motive, wherefore). {%—Kāraṇa-%}
{%kāraṇa, am,%} n. a primary cause, an elementary
cause, an atom. {%—Kāraṇa-gata, as, ā, am,%} referred
to its cause, resolved into its principles. {%—Kāraṇa-%}
{%guṇa, as,%} m. a quality of cause; an elementary or causal
property. {%—Kāraṇaguṇodbhava-guṇa (˚ṇa-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a secondary or derivative property, as form,
taste, smell, &c., produced by combinations of ele-
mentary or causal particles. {%—Kāraṇa-tas,%} ind. from
a certain reason; [cf. {%kārya-kāraṇatas.%}] {%—Kāraṇa-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%kāraṇa-tva, am,%} n. causality, causation.
{%—Kāraṇa-dhvaṃsa, as,%} m. the obviating or re-
moving a cause or occasion. {%—Kāraṇa-dhvaṃsaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} or {%kāraṇa-dhvaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%} obvi-
ating or removing the cause or reason of a thing.
{%—Kāraṇa-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} caused. {%—Kāraṇa-%}
{%mālā,%} f. a series or chain of causes or events, a term
for a figure in rhetoric. {%—Kāraṇa-vādin, ī,%} m. a
complainant, a plaintiff. {%—Kāraṇa-vāri, i,%} n. the
original water which was produced at the creation,
from which, as from a reservoir, the Hindūs suppose
all the water in the universe to be supplied. {%—Kā-%}
{%raṇa-vihīna, as, ā, am,%} without a cause or reason,
unreasonable. {%—Kāraṇa-śarīra, am,%} n. the inner
rudiment of the body or causal frame, the seat of the
soul. {%—Kāraṇānvita (˚ṇa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} having a
cause or reason, following as the effect from its cause.
{%—Kāraṇābhāva (˚ṇa-abh˚), as,%} m. absence of
cause. {%—Kāraṇottara (˚ṇa-utt˚), am,%} n. special
plea, denial of the cause of complaint, admission of
the charge generally, but denial of the issue; (thus
with regard to the demand of a debt, acknowledg-
ment that it was incurred, but assertion that the loan
has been repaid &c.)
<LEND>

<L>14434<pc>0222-a<k1>kAraRaka<k2>kAraRaka
{%Kāraṇaka,%}¦ at the end of compounds {%= kāraṇa,%}
cause, reason.
<LEND>

<L>14435<pc>0222-a<k1>kAraRika<k2>kAraRika
{%Kāraṇika, as, ā%}¦ and {%ī, am,%} causal, causative, in-
vestigating, ascertaining the cause.
<LEND>

<L>14436<pc>0222-a<k1>kAram<k2>kAram
{%Kāram,%}¦ a kind of ind. part. fr. rt. {%kṛ%} at the end
of compounds, e. g. {%svāhā-kāram, namas-kāram,%}
making obeisance; also with an acc., e. g. {%cauran-%}
{%kāram ākrośati,%} he abuses a person by calling him
a thief; {%svāduṅkāram,%} making anything sweet &c.
<LEND>

<L>14437<pc>0222-a<k1>kArayat<k2>kArayat
{%Kārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to do, giving power
or authority to do &c.
<LEND>

<L>14438<pc>0222-a<k1>kArayamARa<k2>kArayamARa
{%Kārayamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ doing what is appointed,
carrying into effect what has been ordered.
<LEND>

<L>14439<pc>0222-a<k1>kArayitavya<k2>kArayitavya
{%Kārayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to be done,
to be effected, to be made to do anything. {%—Kāra-%}
{%yitavya-dakṣa, as, ā, am,%} clever at performing
what has to be done.
<LEND>

<L>14440<pc>0222-a<k1>kArayitf<k2>kArayitf
{%Kārayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ causing or instigating to
act or do anything.
<LEND>

<L>14441<pc>0222-a<k1>kArayizRu<k2>kArayizRu
{%Kārayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ causing to act or perform.
<LEND>

<L>14442<pc>0222-a<k1>kAri<k2>kAri<h>1
1. {%kāri, is, is,%}¦ m. f. an artist, an artificer, a
mechanic; ({%is%}), f. action, act, agency, work.
<LEND>

<L>14443<pc>0222-a<k1>kArita<k2>kArita
{%Kārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be made or done,
brought about, effected; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%vṛddhiḥ,%} interest,
the amount of which is fixed by the debtor, he being
forced to do so by the creditor; ({%am%}), n. the causal
form of a verb. {%—Kārita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
caused to be made or done. {%—Kāritānta (˚ta-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ending with a causal affix.
<LEND>

<L>14444<pc>0222-a<k1>kArin<k2>kArin<h>1
1. {%kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ doing, making, effecting, produc-
ing, acting, an actor; ({%ī%}), m. a mechanic, a tradesman.
<LEND>
[Page0222-b+ 69]

<L>14445<pc>0222-b<k1>kAru<k2>kAru
{%Kāru,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>14446<pc>0222-b<k1>kAra<k2>kAra<h>2
{#kAra#} 2¦. {%kāra, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%kṝ,%} to scatter),
tax, toll, royal revenue, tribute; ({%as, ī, am,%} fr. 2.
{%kara%}), produced by hail; ({%as%}), m. a heap of snow
or a mountain covered with it. {%—Kāra-kukṣīya,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the country of king Sālva on the skirts
of the Himālaya ridge in the north-west of Hindūstān;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the people of this country.
<LEND>

<L>14447<pc>0222-b<k1>kAraka<k2>kAraka<h>2
2. {%kāraka, am,%}¦ n. (fr. 2. {%karaka%}), scil. {%salila,%}
water produced from hail.
<LEND>

<L>14448<pc>0222-b<k1>kAra<k2>kAra<h>3
{#kAra#} 3¦. {%kāra, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%kṛ,%} to praise),
Ved. a song or hymn of praise, a battle-song.
<LEND>

<L>14449<pc>0222-b<k1>kAri<k2>kAri<h>2
2. {%kāri, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. raising hymns of praise.
<LEND>

<L>14450<pc>0222-b<k1>kArin<k2>kArin<h>2
2. {%kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. rejoicing, praising.
<LEND>

<L>14451<pc>0222-b<k1>kAra<k2>kAra<h>4
{#kAra#} 4¦. {%kāra, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%kṝ,%} to kill),
killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>14452<pc>0222-b<k1>kAraRa<k2>kAraRa<h>2
2. {%kāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. killing, injuring.
<LEND>

<L>14453<pc>0222-b<k1>kAraYja<k2>kAraYja
{#kAraYja#}¦ {%kārañja, as, ī, am,%} produced by or
coming from the tree Karañja.
<LEND>

<L>14454<pc>0222-b<k1>kAraRqava<k2>kAraRqava
{#kAraRqava#}¦ {%kāraṇḍava, as,%} m. a sort of duck;
[cf. {%karaṇḍa.%}] {%—Kāraṇḍava-vatī,%} f., N. of a river (?),
abounding in Kāraṇḍavas.
<LEND>

<L>14455<pc>0222-b<k1>kAraRqavyUha<k2>kAraRqavyUha
{#kAraRqavyUha#}¦ {%kāraṇḍavyūha, as,%} m., N. of a
Buddha; [cf. {%karaṇḍa-vyūha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14456<pc>0222-b<k1>kAranDama<k2>kAranDama
{#kAranDama#}¦ {%kārandhama, as,%} m. (fr. {%karan-%}
{%dhama%}), a patronymic of Avikṣit; ({%am%}), n., N. of
a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>14457<pc>0222-b<k1>kAranDamin<k2>kAranDamin
{%Kārandhamin, ī,%}¦ m. a brazier, a worker in mixed
or white metal; a mineralogist, an assayer.
<LEND>

<L>14458<pc>0222-b<k1>kArapacava<k2>kArapacava
{#kArapacava#}¦ {%kārapacava, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or
n. (?), N. of a region near the Yamunā.
<LEND>

<L>14459<pc>0222-b<k1>kAraBa<k2>kAraBa
{#kAraBa#}¦ {%kārabha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%karabha%}),
produced by or coming from a camel.
<LEND>

<L>14460<pc>0222-b<k1>kAramihikA<k2>kAramihikA
{#kAramihikA#}¦ {%kāramihikā,%} f. camphor.
<LEND>

<L>14461<pc>0222-b<k1>kAramBA<k2>kAramBA
{#kAramBA#}¦ {%kārambhā,%} f., N. of a plant bearing
a fragrant seed, commonly Priyaṅgu; [cf. {%karambhā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14462<pc>0222-b<k1>kArava<k2>kArava
{#kArava#}¦ {%kā-rava, as,%} m. a crow; [‘making
a discordant sound;’ cf. Lat. <nsi>corvus, cornix;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">κόραξ, κορώνη</lang> Germ. <nsi>Rabe;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>crow.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>14463<pc>0222-b<k1>kAravallI<k2>kAravallI
{#kAravallI#}¦ {%kāravallī,%} f. the plant Momordica
Charantia; [cf. {%kāravella%} and {%kāṇḍīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14464<pc>0222-b<k1>kAravI<k2>kAravI
{#kAravI#}¦ {%kāravī,%} f. the Asa Fœtida plant or
its leaf, = Hiṅguparṇī; the plant Celosia Cristata; a
kind of anise, Anethum Sowa; another plant, Ni-
gella Indica; a kind of fennel; a kind of Cucurbitace-
ous plant or small gourd.
<LEND>

<L>14465<pc>0222-b<k1>kAravella<k2>kAravella
{#kAravella#}¦ {%kāravella, as,%} m. a kind of gourd,
Momordica Charantia; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of this gourd.
<LEND>

<L>14466<pc>0222-b<k1>kAravellaka<k2>kAravellaka
{%Kāravellaka, as,%}¦ m. and {%kāravellikā,%} f. the same.
<LEND>

<L>14467<pc>0222-b<k1>kAravya<k2>kAravya
{#kAravya#}¦ {%kāravya.%} See under 2. {%kāru.%}
<LEND>

<L>14468<pc>0222-b<k1>kAraskara<k2>kAraskara
{#kAraskara#}¦ {%kāraskara, as,%} m., N. of a poisonous
medicinal plant; a tree in general; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people; (a various reading for {%kāraskāra%} and
{%kāraskṛta.%}) {%—Kāraskarāṭikā (˚ra + āṭikā%} fr. rt.
{%aṭ%}), f. a centipede or worm resembling it.
<LEND>

<L>14469<pc>0222-b<k1>kArA<k2>kArA
{#kArA#}¦ {%kārā,%} f. (fr. 1. {%kṛ?%}), a prison; bind-
ing, confinement, a fetter; the part of a lute below
the neck, an instrument for deadening the sound of
a lute; pain, affliction; a female messenger; a female
worker in gold; [cf. Lith. <nsi>kaliu,</nsi> ‘I am a captive;’
<nsi>kaliny-s,</nsi> ‘a captive;’ <nsi>kaline,</nsi> ‘a prison.’] {%—Kārā-%}
{%gāra (˚rā-ag˚), am,%} n. a gaol or place of confine-
ment. {%—Kārā-gupta, as, ā, am,%} captive, imprisoned,
confined, a prisoner. {%—Kārā-gṛha, am,%} n. a prison.
{%—Kārā-pāla, as,%} m. the guard of a prison. {%—Kārā-%}
{%veśman, a,%} n. a prison, a gaol.
<LEND>

<L>14470<pc>0222-b<k1>kArADunI<k2>kArADunI
{#kArADunI#}¦ {%kārādhunī,%} f., Ved., (Sāy.) a
musical instrument, as the conch shell and the like,
(or ‘impelling the singer.’)
<LEND>
[Page0222-c+ 70]

<L>14471<pc>0222-c<k1>kArApaTa<k2>kArApaTa
{#kArApaTa#}¦ {%kārāpatha, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?),
N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>14472<pc>0222-c<k1>kArAyikA<k2>kArAyikA
{#kArAyikA#}¦ {%kārāyikā,%} f. a female crane, {%=%}
{%karāyikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>14473<pc>0222-c<k1>kArikA<k2>kArikA
{#kArikA#}¦ {%kārikā.%} See under 1. {%kāra,%} p. 221.
<LEND>

<L>14474<pc>0222-c<k1>kArIra<k2>kArIra
{#kArIra#}¦ {%kārīra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%karīra%}), made
of the shoots of reed; connected with the fruit of the
plant Capparis Aphylla (as a sacrifice, in which this
fruit is used).
<LEND>

<L>14475<pc>0222-c<k1>kArIrya<k2>kArIrya
{%Kārīrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected with the fruit of the
plant Capparis Aphylla.
<LEND>

<L>14476<pc>0222-c<k1>kArIza<k2>kArIza
{#kArIza#}¦ {%kārīṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%karīṣa%}), pro-
duced from or coming from dung; ({%am%}), n. a heap
of dung, a great quantity of dried cow-dung.
<LEND>

<L>14477<pc>0222-c<k1>kArIzi<k2>kArIzi
{%Kārīṣi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ayas%}), m. pl.,
N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>14478<pc>0222-c<k1>kAru<k2>kAru<h>1
{#kAru#} 1¦. {%kāru, us, us%} or {%ūs, u%} (fr. 1. {%kṛ%}), a
maker, a doer, an agent, artificer, artisan, artist, a
mechanic; terrible, horrible; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Viśva-karman, the artist of the gods; an art, a science.
{%—Kāru-caura, as,%} m. one who commits burglary.
{%—Kāru-ja, as,%} m. the product of an artist or
mechanic, a piece of mechanism, any product of
manufacture; a young elephant; an ant hill, a hillock;
froth, foam; sesamum growing spontaneously; the
tree Mesua Ferrea; red orpiment. {%—Kāru-hasta, as,%}
m. the hand of an artisan or artificer.
<LEND>

<L>14479<pc>0222-c<k1>kAruka<k2>kAruka
{%Kāruka, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. an artisan, an artificer.
<LEND>

<L>14480<pc>0222-c<k1>kAru<k2>kAru<h>2
{#kAru#} 2¦. {%kāru, us,%} m. (fr. 2. {%kṛ%}), Ved. one
who sings or praises, a poet. {%—Kāru-dhāyas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. favouring or supporting the singer; (Sāy.)
arranging works.
<LEND>

<L>14481<pc>0222-c<k1>kAravya<k2>kAravya
{%Kāravya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to the singer,
epithet of certain verses ({%ṛcas%}) of the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>14482<pc>0222-c<k1>kAruRika<k2>kAruRika
{#kAruRika#}¦ {%kāruṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%karuṇa%}),
compassionate, tender, kind. {%—Kāruṇika-tā,%} f. com-
passion.
<LEND>

<L>14483<pc>0222-c<k1>kAruRya<k2>kAruRya
{%Kāruṇya, am,%}¦ n. compassion, tenderness, kindness.
<LEND>

<L>14484<pc>0222-c<k1>kAruRqI<k2>kAruRqI
{#kAruRqI#}¦ {%kāruṇḍī%} or {%kāruṇḍikā,%} f. a leech.
<LEND>

<L>14485<pc>0222-c<k1>kArUza<k2>kArUza
{#kArUza#}¦ {%kārūṣa, as,%} m. a prince of the
Karūṣas; an epithet of Danta-vakra, the son of
Kārūṣa Vṛddhaśarman; N. of a country; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a people; ({%as%}), m. {%= karūṣa,%} N. of a son
of Manu; an intermediate caste, the son of the de-
graded or outcast Vaiśya tribe.
<LEND>

<L>14486<pc>0222-c<k1>kArUzaka<k2>kArUzaka
{%Kārūṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ reigning over the Karūṣas.
<LEND>

<L>14487<pc>0222-c<k1>kAreRava<k2>kAreRava
{#kAreRava#}¦ {%kāreṇava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kareṇu%}),
produced by or coming from the female elephant;
a patronymic of Pālakāpya.
<LEND>

<L>14488<pc>0222-c<k1>kArotara<k2>kArotara
{#kArotara#}¦ {%kārotara, as,%} m., Ved. a filtering
vessel, a cloth for purifying the liquor called surā.
<LEND>

<L>14489<pc>0222-c<k1>kArottama<k2>kArottama
{%Kārottama, as,%}¦ m. yeast, barm, the froth of the
surā liquor.
<LEND>

<L>14490<pc>0222-c<k1>kArottara<k2>kArottara
{%Kārottara, as,%}¦ m. yeast, barm, the froth which
rises on the surā; a well.
<LEND>

<L>14491<pc>0222-c<k1>kArkaRa<k2>kArkaRa
{#kArkaRa#}¦ {%kārkaṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kṛkaṇa%}),
caused by or relating to a pheasant.
<LEND>

<L>14492<pc>0222-c<k1>kArkanDava<k2>kArkanDava
{#kArkanDava#}¦ {%kārkandhava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kar-%}
{%kandhū%}), produced by the plant Zizyphus Jujuba.
<LEND>

<L>14493<pc>0222-c<k1>kArkavAkava<k2>kArkavAkava
{#kArkavAkava#}¦ {%kārkavākava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kṛ-%}
{%kavāku%}), relating to a cock, produced by a cock &c.
<LEND>

<L>14494<pc>0222-c<k1>kArkaSya<k2>kArkaSya
{#kArkaSya#}¦ {%kārkaśya, am,%} n. (fr. {%karkaśa%}),
roughness, hardness; sternness, inflexibility; firmness,
solidity; rough labour.
<LEND>

<L>14495<pc>0222-c<k1>kArkaza<k2>kArkaza
{#kArkaza#}¦ {%kārkaṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14496<pc>0222-c<k1>kArkazAyaRi<k2>kArkazAyaRi
{%Kārkaṣāyaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from the last.
<LEND>

<L>14497<pc>0222-c<k1>kArkIka<k2>kArkIka
{#kArkIka#}¦ {%kārkīka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%karka%}), like
a white horse.
<LEND>

<L>14498<pc>0222-c<k1>kArkowaka<k2>kArkowaka
{#kArkowaka#}¦ {%kārkoṭaka, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>14499<pc>0222-c<k1>kArRa<k2>kArRa
{#kArRa#}¦ {%kārṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%karṇa%}), being in
[Page0223-a+ 77]
the ear, relating to the ear, auricular &c.; a patro-
nymic from Karṇa; ({%am%}), n. the wax of the ear,
an ear-ring.
<LEND>

<L>14500<pc>0223-a<k1>kArRacCidraka<k2>kArRacCidraka
{%Kārṇacchidraka, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%karṇa-cchidra%}), a
sort of well, similar to the opening of the ear.
<LEND>

<L>14501<pc>0223-a<k1>kArRavezwakika<k2>kArRavezwakika
{%Kārṇaveṣṭakika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%karṇa-veṣṭaka%}),
ornamented with or fit for ear-rings; also read {%kār-%}
{%ṇaveṣṭanika.%}
<LEND>

<L>14502<pc>0223-a<k1>kArRaSravasa<k2>kArRaSravasa
{%Kārṇaśravasa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%karṇa-śravas%}), N. of
a Sāman or verse of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>14503<pc>0223-a<k1>kArRika<k2>kArRika
{%Kārṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the ear.
<LEND>

<L>14504<pc>0223-a<k1>kArRAwaBAzA<k2>kArRAwaBAzA
{#kArRAwaBAzA#}¦ {%kārṇāṭa-bhāṣā,%} f. the dialect
of Karṇāṭaka.
<LEND>

<L>14505<pc>0223-a<k1>kArRAwaka<k2>kArRAwaka
{%Kārṇāṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a native of Karṇāṭa.
<LEND>

<L>14506<pc>0223-a<k1>kArta<k2>kArta
{#kArta#}¦ {%kārta, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%kṛt%}), relating
to or treating of the affixes called {%kṛt; (as),%} m. (fr.
{%kṛta%}), N. of a son of Dharma-netra; a patronymic
occurring in the compound Kārta-kaujapau.
<LEND>

<L>14507<pc>0223-a<k1>kArtayaSa<k2>kArtayaSa
{%Kārtayaśa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%kṛta + yaśa%} for {%yaśas%}),
N. of a Sāman or verse of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>14508<pc>0223-a<k1>kArtayuga<k2>kArtayuga
{%Kārtayuga, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%kṛta-yuga%}), relating
to the period of time called Kṛta.
<LEND>

<L>14509<pc>0223-a<k1>kArtavIrya<k2>kArtavIrya
{%Kārtavīrya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Kṛta-vīrya
and epithet of Arjuna, a prince of the Haihayas,
killed by Paraśu-rāma; N. of one of the Jaina
Cakravartins or emperors of the world in Bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>14510<pc>0223-a<k1>kArtasvara<k2>kArtasvara
{%Kārtasvara, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%kṛta-svara%}), gold; the
thorn-apple.
<LEND>

<L>14511<pc>0223-a<k1>kArtAntika<k2>kArtAntika
{%Kārtāntika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kṛtānta%}), an astrologer
who foretels destinies.
<LEND>

<L>14512<pc>0223-a<k1>kArti<k2>kArti
{%Kārti, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Kṛta.
<LEND>

<L>14513<pc>0223-a<k1>kArtisiMhadeva<k2>kArtisiMhadeva
{%Kārtisiṃha-deva, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man ({%kārtisiṃha%}
being a patronymic fr. {%kṛti-siṃha%}).
<LEND>

<L>14514<pc>0223-a<k1>kArttika<k2>kArttika
{#kArttika#}¦ {%kārttika, as,%} m. (fr. {%kṛttikā,%} the
Pleiades), scil. {%māsa,%} N. of the month Kārttika or
October-November, when the moon is full and near
the Pleiades, the twelfth month of the year; a metro-
nymic of Skanda [cf. {%kārttikeya%}]; N. of a Varṣa;
N. of a medical author; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%rātri,%} the night
of full moon in the month Kārttika, the day on
which the moon stands in the constellation Kṛttikā.
{%—Kārttika-mahiman, ā,%} m. ‘the greatness of the
month Kārttika,’ title of a treatise on the festivals of
that month. {%—Kārttika-māhātmya, am,%} n. title of
a section of the Padma-purāṇa. {%—Kārttika-śāli, is,%}
m. the rice which ripens in the beginning of the
cold season and forms the principal harvest in India.
{%—Kārttika-siddhānta, as,%} m., N. of a scholiast on
the Mugdhabodha. {%—Kārttikotsava (˚ka-ut˚), as,%}
m. the day of full moon in the month Kārttika, a
festival.
<LEND>

<L>14515<pc>0223-a<k1>kArttikika<k2>kArttikika
{%Kārttikika, as,%}¦ m. the month Kārttika.
<LEND>

<L>14516<pc>0223-a<k1>kArttikeya<k2>kArttikeya
{%Kārttikeya, as,%}¦ m., N. of Skanda, the god of war, so
called because reared by the six Kṛttikās or Pleiades;
(according to one legend he was son of Śiva without
the intervention of his wife, his generative energy
being cast into the fire and then received by the
Ganges, whence he is sometimes described as son of
Agni and Gaṅgā; when born he was fostered by the
Pleiades, who offering their six breasts the child be-
came six-headed. In other accounts he is described
as a son of Śiva and Pārvatī or Durgā. Skanda
may have been called Kārttikeya because the month
Kārttikā is the best for warfare: he is sometimes
described as presiding over thieves.) {%—Kārttikeya-%}
{%prasū, ūs,%} f. an epithet of Durgā or Pārvatī, who,
according to one legend, was the mother of Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>14517<pc>0223-a<k1>kArtsna<k2>kArtsna
{#kArtsna#}¦ {%kārtsna, am,%} n. (fr. {%kṛtsna%}), the
whole, totality, all, entireness; (perhaps a wrong form
for the following.)
<LEND>

<L>14518<pc>0223-a<k1>kArtsnya<k2>kArtsnya
{%Kārtsnya, am,%}¦ n. the whole, totality, all, entireness.
{%—Kārtsnyena,%} ind. in full, entirely.
<LEND>

<L>14519<pc>0223-a<k1>kArdama<k2>kArdama
{#kArdama#}¦ {%kārdama, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kardama%}),
made of mud, muddy, filled or covered with it;
belonging to Prajāpati Kardama.
<LEND>

<L>14520<pc>0223-a<k1>kArdamika<k2>kArdamika
{%Kārdamika, as, ī, am,%}¦ = the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>14521<pc>0223-a<k1>kArpawa<k2>kArpawa
{#kArpawa#}¦ {%kārpaṭa, as,%} m. (fr. {%karpaṭa?%}), a
[Page0223-b+ 77]
petitioner, a suitor, one who begs for employment
&c.; lac, the animal dye.
<LEND>

<L>14522<pc>0223-b<k1>kArpawika<k2>kArpawika
{%Kārpaṭika, as,%}¦ m. a pilgrim, one who spends his
life in pilgrimage, or who subsists by carrying water
from holy rivers; a caravan of pilgrims; a parasite;
an experienced man.
<LEND>

<L>14523<pc>0223-b<k1>kArpaRya<k2>kArpaRya
{#kArpaRya#}¦ {%kārpaṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kṛpaṇa%}),
poverty, indigence; pitiful circumstances; poorness of
spirit, weakness, parsimony, niggardliness, imbecility;
compassion, pity.
<LEND>

<L>14524<pc>0223-b<k1>kArpARa<k2>kArpARa
{#kArpARa#}¦ {%kārpāṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%kṛpāṇa%}), Ved.
combat, fighting, battle.
<LEND>

<L>14525<pc>0223-b<k1>kArpAsa<k2>kArpAsa
{#kArpAsa#}¦ {%kārpāsa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%karpāsa%}),
made of cotton, cottony; ({%as, am%}), m. n. cotton,
cotton cloth, &c.; paper; ({%ī%}), f. the cotton plant,
Gossypium Hirsutum. {%—Kārpāsa-nāsikā,%} f. a spin-
dle. {%—Kārpāsāsthi (˚sa-as˚),%} n. the seed of the
cotton plant.
<LEND>

<L>14526<pc>0223-b<k1>kArpAsika<k2>kArpAsika
{%Kārpāsika, as, ī, am,%}¦ made of or from cotton;
({%ā%}), f. the cotton plant.
<LEND>

<L>14527<pc>0223-b<k1>kArma<k2>kArma
{#kArma#}¦ {%kārma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%karman%}), labori-
ous, industrious, occupied.
<LEND>

<L>14528<pc>0223-b<k1>kArmaRa<k2>kArmaRa
{%Kārmaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ finishing a work, doing it
well or completely; ({%am%}), n. magic, sorcery, witch-
craft; performing anything by means of magical
incantations. {%—Kārmaṇa-tva, am,%} n. magic, fasci-
nation.
<LEND>

<L>14529<pc>0223-b<k1>kArmaReyaka<k2>kArmaReyaka
{%Kārmaṇeyaka, as%}¦ or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), N. of
a region.
<LEND>

<L>14530<pc>0223-b<k1>kArmAra<k2>kArmAra
{%Kārmāra, as,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= karmāra,%} an artist,
mechanic, a smith; a patronymic from Karmāra.
<LEND>

<L>14531<pc>0223-b<k1>kArmAraka<k2>kArmAraka
{%Kārmāraka, am,%}¦ n. a smith's work.
<LEND>

<L>14532<pc>0223-b<k1>kArmika<k2>kArmika
{%Kārmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ engaged or employed in any
work, epithet of a Buddhist philosophical school;
manufactured, made; worked, embroidered, inter-
mixed with coloured thread (as cloth &c.); any
variegated texture.
<LEND>

<L>14533<pc>0223-b<k1>kArmikya<k2>kArmikya
{%Kārmikya, am,%}¦ n. activity, industry.
<LEND>

<L>14534<pc>0223-b<k1>kArmuka<k2>kArmuka<h>1
1. {%kārmuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ finishing a work, doing
it well or completely, fit for or able to do a work;
({%as%}), m. a bamboo.
<LEND>

<L>14535<pc>0223-b<k1>kArmuka<k2>kArmuka<h>2
{#kArmuka#} 2¦. {%kārmuka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kṛmuka%}),
consisting of the wood Kṛmuka; ({%am%}), n. a bow;
an instrument shaped like a bow. {%—Kārmuka-bhṛt,%}
{%t,%} m. the archer or Sagittarius in the zodiac; an
archer in general, a soldier.
<LEND>

<L>14536<pc>0223-b<k1>kArmukAya<k2>kArmukAya
{%Kārmukāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kārmukāyate, -yitum,%} to
form a bow.
<LEND>

<L>14537<pc>0223-b<k1>kArmukin<k2>kArmukin
{%Kārmukin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ armed with a bow.
<LEND>

<L>14538<pc>0223-b<k1>kArya<k2>kArya
{#kArya#}¦ {%kārya, as, ā, am%} (fut. pass. part. fr.
1. {%kṛ%}), to be made, to be done, practised, performed,
accomplished, &c., feasible; to be imposed (as a
punishment), to be offered (as a libation) &c.; what
ought to be done, fit, right; ({%kārya-tama,%} superl.
what ought chiefly to be done, i. e. first duty); ({%am%}),
n. work or business to be done, duty, affair; a re-
ligious action or performance; occupation, matter,
thing, enterprise, emergency, occurrence, crisis; con-
duct, deportment; business, occasion, need (with
inst. case, e. g. {%triṇena kāryam,%} there is need of a
straw; {%na bhūmyā kāryam asmākam,%} we have no
business whatever with the earth, the earth is not our
concern); lawsuit, dispute; an operation in grammar
(e. g. {%sthāny-āśrayaṃ kāryam,%} an operation which
is borne by or rests on the primitive form as opposed
to the {%ādeśa%} or substitute); an effect, the necessary
result of a cause (in phil.); motive, object, aim,
purpose (e. g. {%kiṃ kāryam,%} for what purpose?
wherefore?); cause, origin; the denouement of a
drama; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, = {%kārī, kārikā.%}
{%—Kārya-kara, as, ī, am,%} producing an effect,
efficacious. {%—Kārya-kartṛ, tā,%} m. or {%kārya-kā-%}
{%raka, as,%} m. an agent, a workman. {%—Kārya-kā-%}
{%raṇa, am,%} n. object and motive, cause and effect,
cause of a special or incidental kind, originating in
some act or occasion. {%—Kārya-kāraṇatas,%} ind. from
some special cause, with a particular design or motive.
[Page0223-c+ 81]
{%—Kārya-kāraṇa-bhāva, as,%} m. relation of cause
and effect. {%—Kārya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} performing a
work. {%—Kārya-kāla, as,%} m. time for action, ap-
pointed time, season, opportunity. {%—Kārya-kuśala,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} skilful or clever in work, doing it well or
completely. {%—Kārya-kṣama, as, ā, am,%} competent
or fit for a work. {%—Kārya-gurutā,%} f. or {%kārya-%}
{%gurutva, am,%} n. necessity or importance of any act.
{%—Kārya-gaurava, am,%} n. importance of an affair
or business. {%—Kārya-cintaka, as, ā, am,%} one who
takes care of a business, the manager of a business;
prudent, considerate, cautious. {%—Kārya-cintā,%} f.
prudence, caution, consideration. {%—Kārya-cyuta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} out of work, removed from an office. {%—Kār-%}
{%ya-tas,%} ind. consequently, necessarily, actually. {%—Kār-%}
{%ya-tva, am,%} n. the being an effect, the relation or
condition of an effect or of what has been effected.
{%—Kārya-darśana, am,%} n. inspection of work, re-
vision. {%—Kārya-darśin, ī,%} m. an inspector or super-
intendent of affairs. {%—Kārya-nirṇaya, as,%} m. ascer-
tainment of the fact; settlement or decision of an
affair. {%—Kārya-puṭa, as,%} m. a man who does use-
less things; a madman, a crazy or hair-brained man;
an impudent or shameless fellow; an idler, one who
follows unprofitable pursuits. {%—Kārya-pradveṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. aversion from activity, idleness. {%—Kārya-%}
{%preṣya, as,%} m. one who is sent on any business, a
messenger. {%—Kārya-bhājana%} or {%kārya-pātra, am,%}
n. any one engaged in active life, one fit for business
or the conduct of affairs. {%—Kārya-bhraṣṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am, = kārya-cyuta%} above. {%—1. kārya-vat,%} ind.
actually, according to act or motive. {%—2. kārya-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having business to transact, engaged in a
business; having a cause or motive, doing one's duty.
{%—Kāryavat-tā,%} f. or {%kāryavat-tva, am,%} n. the
state of being engaged in a work, any business, act,
action. {%—Kārya-vaśa, as,%} m. necessary consequence.
{%—Kārya-vastu, u,%} n. anything that has to be done,
an aim, object. {%—Kārya-vipatti, is,%} f. failure of an
action, reverse, misfortune. {%—Kārya-śeṣa, as,%} m.
the remainder of a business; completion of an affair.
{%—Kārya-sandeha, as,%} m. uncertainty or doubt
about a work, embarrassment, difficulty. {%—Kārya-%}
{%sāgara, as,%} m. ‘an ocean of business,’ heavy or
weighty affairs. {%—Kārya-sādhaka, as, ā, am,%} effec-
tive of any work, accomplishing any object, an agent.
{%—Kārya-sādhana, am,%} n. means of effecting any
object, instrument, implement, aid. {%—Kārya-siddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. accomplishment of a work, success, fulfilment
of any object. {%—Kārya-sthāna, am,%} n. a place of
business, an office. {%—Kārya-hantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}
obstructing or counteracting the work of others, a
mar-plot. {%—Kāryākārya-vicāra, as,%} m. delibera-
tion on the arguments for and against any act.
{%—Kāryākṣama (˚ya-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} unfit
for any work, incompetent, unable. {%—Kāryādhipa%}
{%(˚ya-adh˚), as,%} m. the planet which determines or
decides any inquiry or question in astrology. {%—Kār-%}
{%yānta (˚ya-an˚), as,%} m. the end of a business,
termination of an affair. {%—Kāryābdhi (˚ya-ab˚), is,%}
m. an ocean of business. {%—Kāryārtha (˚ya-ar˚), as,%}
m. the object of a business or enterprise; any object
or purpose; application for employment; ({%am%}), ind.
for the sake of a business, for the sake of any
particular object, to perform any work or duty.
{%—Kāryārtha-siddhi, is,%} f. the accomplishment of
any object or purpose. {%—Kāryārthin (˚ya-ar˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} making a request, seeking for business, apply-
ing for employment; pleading a cause in court,
going to law. {%—Kāryeśa%} and {%kāryeśvara (˚ya-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. = {%kāryādhipa%} above. {%—Kāryoddhāra (˚ya-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. discharge of any duty, performance of
any act. {%—Kāryodyukta (˚ya-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} en-
gaged in any business, intent upon any object.
{%—Kāryodyoga (˚ya-ud˚), as,%} m. active engage-
ment in any business.
<LEND>

<L>14539<pc>0223-c<k1>kAryika<k2>kAryika
{%Kāryika, as, ī, am,%}¦ having business, transacting
business, seeking employment &c.; engaged in a suit
at law, pleading a cause in court.
<LEND>

<L>14540<pc>0223-c<k1>kAryin<k2>kAryin
{%Kāryin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ one who transacts business,
active, assiduous; seeking for employment; having
[Page0224-a+ 73]
an object; a party to a suit, either as plaintiff or
defendant; (in gram.) subject to the operation of a
grammatical rule, requiring an affix &c. {%—Kār-%}
{%yekṣaṇa (˚ya-īk˚), am,%} n. superintendence of
public affairs.
<LEND>

<L>14541<pc>0224-a<k1>kArSakeya<k2>kArSakeya
{#kArSakeya#}¦ {%kārśakeya,%} a patronymic from
Kṛśaka. {%—Kārśakeyī-putra, as,%} m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>14542<pc>0224-a<k1>kArSana<k2>kArSana
{#kArSana#}¦ {%kārśana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kṛśana%}), Ved.
consisting of pearl or mother-of-pearl.
<LEND>

<L>14543<pc>0224-a<k1>kArSAnava<k2>kArSAnava
{#kArSAnava#}¦ {%kārśānava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kṛśānu%}),
fiery, hot, glaring, relating to fire.
<LEND>

<L>14544<pc>0224-a<k1>kArSmarI<k2>kArSmarI
{#kArSmarI#}¦ {%kārśmarī,%} f., N. of a plant, = {%kār-%}
{%ṣmarya, kāśmarī.%}
<LEND>

<L>14545<pc>0224-a<k1>kArSya<k2>kArSya<h>1
{#kArSya#} 1¦. {%kārśya, as,%} m., N. of several
plants, {%= kārṣya%} and {%kārṣmarya, = karcūra;%}
another plant, Artocarpus Lacucha.
<LEND>

<L>14546<pc>0224-a<k1>kArSya<k2>kArSya<h>2
{#kArSya#} 2¦. {%kārśya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kṛśa%}), emacia-
tion, thinness, smallness.
<LEND>

<L>14547<pc>0224-a<k1>kArza<k2>kArza
{#kArza#}¦ {%kārṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%kṛṣ%}), one who
ploughs a field, a peasant, a husbandman.
<LEND>

<L>14548<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzaka<k2>kArzaka
{%Kārṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a husbandman.
<LEND>

<L>14549<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzi<k2>kArzi
{%Kārṣi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. drawing, attracting; plough-
ing; ({%is%}), m. fire; ({%is%}), f. drawing, attracting;
ploughing, cultivation.
<LEND>

<L>14550<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzika<k2>kArzika
{%Kārṣika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%karṣa%}), deserving of
pulling or dragging about; weighing a Karṣa; ({%as%}),
m. a coin of the weight of one Karṣa; a husband-
man.
<LEND>

<L>14551<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzIvaRa<k2>kArzIvaRa
{%Kārṣīvaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kārṣi%} with {%i%} lengthened),
Ved. one who ploughs a field, a husbandman.
<LEND>

<L>14552<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzman<k2>kArzman
{%Kārṣman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. the goal of a race-course
(consisting of a line like a furrow).
<LEND>

<L>14553<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzApaRa<k2>kArzApaRa
{#kArzApaRa#}¦ {%kārṣāpaṇa, as, am,%} m. n. ({%= kar-%}
{%ṣāpaṇa%}), a coin or weight of different values, as
synonymous with Karṣa; if of gold, weighing 16
Māṣas, which are variously calculated, see {%karṣa;%}
if of silver, it is in value = 16 Paṇas of Kowries, i. e.
1280 Kowries, commonly termed a Kāhan; if of
copper, it weighs 80 Raktikās, or the same as of gold,
about 176 grains; according to some it is the same as
a Paṇa of Kowries, i. e. 80 Kowries; at the end of a
compound it means ‘worth so many Kārṣāpaṇas;’
({%am%}), n. money, gold and silver; ({%as%}), m. a husband-
man (?); N. of a warrior-tribe; the chief of this tribe.
{%—Kārṣāpaṇāvara (˚ṇa-av˚), as, ā, am,%} having
the value of at least one Kārṣāpaṇa (as a fine).
<LEND>

<L>14554<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzApaRaka<k2>kArzApaRaka
{%Kārṣāpaṇaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a weight or
measure of different values, as synonymous with
Karṣa.
<LEND>

<L>14555<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzApaRika<k2>kArzApaRika
{%Kārṣāpaṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ worth one Kārṣā-
paṇa, bought &c. with one Kārṣāpaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>14556<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzRa<k2>kArzRa
{#kArzRa#}¦ {%kārṣṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kṛṣṇa%}),
coming from or belonging to the black antelope;
made of the skin of the black antelope; belonging
to the god Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana, composed
by him &c. (e. g. {%kārṣṇaṃ vedam,%} the Mahā-bhā-
rata); belonging to a descendant of Kṛṣṇa; black;
({%ī%}), f. the plant Asparagus Racemosus; ({%am%}), n.,
Ved. the skin of the black antelope; ({%as%}), m. the
black antelope (?).
<LEND>

<L>14557<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzRAjini<k2>kArzRAjini
{%Kārṣṇājini, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kṛṣṇājina%}), a patro-
nymic from Kṛṣṇājina; N. of a teacher; N. of a
philosopher; N. of the author of a law-book.
<LEND>

<L>14558<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzRAyasa<k2>kArzRAyasa
{%Kārṣṇāyasa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%kṛṣṇāyasa%}), of
iron, made of black iron; ({%am%}), n. iron.
<LEND>

<L>14559<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzRi<k2>kArzRi
{%Kārṣṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Kṛṣṇa; an
epithet of Viśvaka; N. of a Devagandharva; an
epithet of the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>14560<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzRya<k2>kArzRya
{%Kārṣṇya, am,%}¦ n. blackness, black colour, darkness.
<LEND>

<L>14561<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzman<k2>kArzman
{#kArzman#}¦ {%kārṣman.%} See under {%kārṣa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>14562<pc>0224-a<k1>kArzmarya<k2>kArzmarya
{#kArzmarya#}¦ {%kārṣmarya, as,%} m., Ved. the tree
Gmelina Arborea. {%—Kārṣmarya-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made of this tree.
<LEND>
[Page0224-b+ 80]

<L>14563<pc>0224-b<k1>kArzya<k2>kArzya
{#kArzya#}¦ {%kārṣya, as,%} m. the tree Shorea
Robusta. {%—Kārṣya-vaṇa, am,%} n. a forest of these
trees.
<LEND>

<L>14564<pc>0224-b<k1>kAla<k2>kAla<h>1
{#kAla#} 1¦. {%kāla, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%kal?;%} for 2.
{%kāla,%} ‘time,’ see next page), black, of a dark colour,
especially dark-blue which is often confounded with
black; ({%as%}), m. a black or dark-blue colour; the
black part of the eye; the Indian cuckoo; the poi-
sonous serpent, Coluber Naga ({%= kāla-sarpa%}); the
plant Cassia Sophora; a plant, a red kind of plum-
bago; the resin of the plant Shorea Robusta; the
planet Saturn; an epithet of Śiva; also of Rudra;
N. of a son of Hrada; also of a prince; also of a
brother of king Prasena-jit; also of a future Buddha;
also of a Nāga-rāja; of a Rakṣas; of an enemy of
Śiva; N. of a mountain; (with the Jainas) N. of
one of the nine treasures; a mystical name for the
letter {%m; (ā),%} f., N. of several plants, Indigofera
Tinctoria; Piper Longum; a plant nearly related to
Ipomœa Turpethum, perhaps Ipomœa Atropurpurea;
Nigella Indica; Rubia Munjista; Ruellia Longifolia;
Physalis Flexuosa; Bignonia Suaveolens; the fruit of
the Kālā (?); N. of a daughter of Dakṣa, the mother
of the Kāleyas or Kālakeyas (a family of Asuras); an
epithet of Durgā; ({%ī%}), f. black colour, ink or black-
ing; abuse, censure, defamation; a row or succession
of black clouds; night; a worm or animalcule gene-
rated in the acetous fermentation of milk, {%= kṣīra-%}
{%kīṭa%} and {%kṣāra-kīṭa;%} N. of several plants, {%= kā-%}
{%lāñjanī;%} another plant, Cajanus Indicus; Ipomœa
Turpethum; Bignonia Suaveolens; one of the seven
tongues or flames of fire; a form of Durgā; one of
the Mātṛs or divine mothers; N. of a female evil
spirit, mother of the Kālakeyas; one of the sixteen
Vidyādevīs; an epithet of Śatyavatī, the wife of king
Śāntanu and mother of Vyāsa or Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana,
but before her marriage. (After her marriage she
had a son called Vicitra-vīrya, whose widows were
married by Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana and bore to him
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu; according to other legends
Kālī is the wife of Bhīma-sena and mother of Sarva-
gata); N. of a river, otherwise {%kālā gaṅgā; (am),%}
n. a black kind of Agallochum; a kind of perfume
({%= kakkolaka%}); iron; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κηλίς, κελαινός</lang>
Lat. <nsi>caligo.</nsi>] {%—Kāla-kacu, us,%} f. the plant Arum
Colocasia. {%—Kāla-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. a gallinule; [cf.
the next.] {%—Kāla-kaṇṭha, as,%} m., N. of several
birds, a peacock; a water fowl, a gallinule; a wag-
tail; a sparrow; the plant Terminalia Tomentosa,
{%= pītaśāla%} and {%pītasāra;%} an epithet of Śiva; [cf.
{%nīla-kaṇṭha.%}] {%—Kāla-kaṇṭhaka, as,%} m. a gallinule.
{%—Kāla-kandaka, as,%} m. a water-snake. {%—Kāla-%}
{%karṇikā%} or {%kāla-karṇī,%} f. misfortune (predicted as the
consequence of having black ears). {%—Kāla-kalāya,%}
{%as,%} m. dark pulse, Phaseolus Max. {%—Kāla-kastūrī,%} f.
the plant Hibiscus Abelmoschus, the seeds smelling of
musk when rubbed. {%—Kāla-kīrti, is,%} m., N. of a king
identified with the Asura Suparṇa. {%—Kāla-kuṣṭha,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of earth brought from mountains; [cf.
{%kaṅkuṣṭha.%}] {%—Kāla-koṭi, is,%} f., N. of a region.
{%—Kāla-klītaka, am,%} n. the indigo plant. {%—Kāla-%}
{%khañja, ās,%} m. pl. {%= kālakañja,%} perhaps only a
wrong reading; ({%am%}), n. the liver. {%—Kāla-khañjana,%}
{%am,%} n. the liver. {%—Kāla-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. the liver.
{%—Kāla-gaṅgā,%} f., N. of a river in Ceylon. {%—Kāla-%}
{%gaṇḍikā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Kāla-gandha, as,%} m.
a kind of Cobra de Capella, {%= kāla-kandaka%}. {%—Kā-%}
{%la-ghaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Kāla-joṣaka,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people; (a various reading has
{%kālajoṣika.%}) {%—Kāla-tāla, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
{%= tamāla%}. {%—Kāla-tinduka, as,%} m. a kind of ebony.
{%—Kāla-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kāla-%}
{%toyaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Kāla-dantaka,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Nāga, a son of Vāsuki. {%—1. kāla-%}
{%nara, as,%} m., N. of a son of Sabhānara, a son of
Anu; (for 2. {%kāla-nara%} see under 2. {%kāla.%}) {%—Kāla-%}
{%nābha, as,%} m. ({%nābha = nābhi%}), N. of an Asura, a
son of Hiraṇyākṣa; also of a son of Hiraṇya-kaśipu;
also of a son of Vipra-citti and Siṃhikā. {%—Kāla-%}
{%niryāsa, as,%} m. a fragrant and resinous exudation
[Page0224-c+ 81]
from the plant Amyris Agallocha. {%—Kāla-netra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} black-eyed. {%—Kāla-parṇa, as,%} m., N. of a tree
bearing dark-coloured leaves, Tabernæmontana Coro-
naria, commonly called Tagara. {%—Kāla-parvata, as,%}
m., N. of a mountain. {%—Kālapātrika, as,%} m. (fr.
{%kāla-pātra%}), a kind of mendicant whose alms-dish
is painted black. {%—Kāla-pālaka, am,%} n. a kind of
earth; [cf. {%kaṅkuṣṭha, kāla-kuṣṭha.%}] {%—Kāla-%}
{%pīluka, as,%} m., N. of a tree; see {%kupīlu%}. {%—Kāla-%}
{%puccha%} or {%kāla-pucchaka, as,%} m. a species of animal
living in marshes. {%—Kāla-puṣpa, am,%} n., N. of a
plant; see {%kalāya%}. {%—Kāla-pūga, as,%} m. the black
multitude, i. e. the common people (?). {%—Kāla-%}
{%pṛṣṭha, as,%} m. a species of antelope (with a black
back); a heron; ({%am%}), n., N. of the bow of Karṇa;
a bow in general. {%—Kāla-peśī,%} f., N. of a plant;
see {%śyāmā%}. {%—Kāla-bhāṇḍikā,%} f. the plant Rubia
Munjista. {%—Kāla-masī,%} f., N. of a river; also called
{%kālamahī%}. {%—Kālamāna%} and {%kāla-māla, as,%} m. the
plant Ocimum Sanctum, a fragrant pot-herb. {%—Kāla-%}
{%mukha, as,%} m. a kind of monkey; N. of a fabulous
people; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a female. {%—Kāla-muṣkaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the plant Bignonia Indica; see {%muṣkaka.%}
{%—Kāla-mūla, as,%} m., N. of a plant, commonly
Rakta-citraka. {%—Kāla-meśikā%} or {%kāla-meṣikā,%} f.
the plant Rubia Munjista; also the plant Ipomœa
Atropurpurea (?). {%—Kāla-meṣī,%} f., N. of several
plants, Vernonia Anthelminthica; Rubia Munjista;
and perhaps Ipomœa Atropurpurea. {%—Kāla-yavana,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a prince of the Yavanas; a tyrannical
Asura, the foe of Kṛṣṇa, destroyed by him by a
stratagem. {%—1. kāla-rātri, is%} or {%ī,%} f. a dark night;
(for 2. see under 2. {%kāla.%}) {%—Kāla-lavaṇa, am,%} n. a
kind of black factitious and purgative salt, commonly
called {%viḍ-lavaṇa%}. {%—Kāla-locana, as,%} m., N. of a
Daitya. {%—Kāla-lauha, am,%} n. iron. {%—Kāla-vadana,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Daitya; also called {%śāla-vadana%}. {%—Kā-%}
{%la-vṛkṣa%} and {%kāla-vṛnta, as,%} m. a kind of vetch,
Dolichos Biflorus [cf. {%kulattha%}]; ({%ī%}), f. the trumpet
flower, Bignonia Suaveolens. {%—Kāla-velā,%} f. the time
of Saturn, a particular time of the day at which any
religious act is improper, half a watch in every day.
{%—Kāla-śambara, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Kāla-%}
{%śāka, am,%} n. the pot-herb Ocimum Sanctum. {%—Kā-%}
{%la-śāli, is,%} m. a black sort of rice. {%—Kāla-śivi, is,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Kāla-śaila, as,%} m., N. of a
mountain. {%—Kāla-saṅkarṣā,%} f. a girl nine years
old, who personates Durgā at a festival in honour of
this goddess. {%—Kāla-sarpa, as,%} m. the black and
most poisonous variety of the Cobra, Coluber Naga.
{%—Kāla-sāra, as,%} m. the black antelope; ({%am%}), n.
a yellow sort of sandal-wood. {%—Kāla-skandha, as,%}
m., N. of several plants; a kind of ebony with a
dark trunk, Diospyros Embryopteris; the Tamāla, a
tree bearing dark blossoms, Xanthochymus Pictorius;
another plant, {%= jīvaka;%} another, {%= duṣkhadira;%}
the glomerous fig tree, Ficus Glomerata. {%—Kālāguru%}
{%(˚la-ag˚), u,%} n. a black kind of aloe wood or Agallo-
chum. {%—Kālāṅga (˚la-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} having a
dark-blue body, as a sword with a dark-blue edge.
{%—Kālājina (˚la-aj˚), as,%} m., N. of a people.
{%—Kālāñjana (˚la-añ˚), am,%} n. a black unguent;
({%ī%}), f. a small shrub used as a purgative. {%—Kālāṇḍaja%}
{%(˚la-aṇ˚), as,%} m. the black bird, an epithet of the
Indian cuckoo. {%—Kālānuśārivā,%} f., N. of two plants,
{%= tagara;%} and {%śītalījaṭā,%} commonly <nsi>śīulīchop</nsi>.
{%—Kālānusāraka (˚la-an˚), am,%} n., N. of a tree,
{%= tagara;%} yellow sandal. {%—Kālānusāri, is,%} m. or
{%kālānusārin (˚la-an˚), ī,%} m. or {%kālānusārivā,%} f.
benzoin or benjamin. {%—Kālānusārya, as, ā, am,%}
m. f. n. gum benjamin or benzoin; ({%am%}), n. a
yellow fragrant wood from which a perfume is pre-
pared, sandal-wood (?); N. of a tree, {%= tagara;%}
{%(as, am),%} m. n. the tree Dalbergia Sissoo. {%—Kālā-%}
{%nusāryaka, am,%} n. gum benzoin or benjamin.
{%—Kālāmra (˚la-ām˚), as,%} m., N. of a Dvīpa.
{%—Kālāyasa (˚la-ayas), am,%} n. iron. {%—Kālāyasa-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} of iron, consisting of iron. {%—Kā-%}
{%lāśoka (˚la-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist king.
{%—Kālāsuhṛd (˚la-as˚), t,%} m. an enemy of Kāla,
epithet of Śiva. {%—Kāleśvara (˚la-īś˚), as,%} m., N.
[Page0225-a+ 80]
of a mountain. {%—Kālodaka (˚la-ud˚), am,%} n., N.
of a dark piece of water; N. of an ocean.
<LEND>

<L>14565<pc>0225-a<k1>kAlaka<k2>kAlaka
{%Kālaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ dark-blue, coloured dark-blue;
dark-coloured, black; ({%as%}), m. a mole, a freckle,
a mark; the black part of the eye; a water-snake
({%alagarda%}); a kind of grain; N. of a Rakṣas;
also of an Asura; N. of a mountain; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a Dānava family; ({%ā%}), f., Ved. a kind of bird;
N. of a female evil spirit, mother of the Kālakeyas; a
daughter of Dakṣa; also of Vaiśvānara; ({%am%}), n. the
liver; N. of a plant. {%—Kālaka-vṛkṣīya, as,%} m.,
N. of a sage. {%—Kālakākṣa (˚ka-ak˚), as,%} m., N.
of an Asura. {%—Kālakāñja (˚ka-añja?), as,%} m. (?),
Ved., N. of an animal (‘black-spotted?’); N. of a
constellation (?); N. of an Asura.
<LEND>

<L>14566<pc>0225-a<k1>kAlakeya<k2>kAlakeya
{%Kālakeya, as,%}¦ m. (a metronymic fr. {%kālakā%}), N. of
an Asura; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a Dānava family; [cf.
{%kālakañja, kālakāñja,%} 1. {%kāleya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14567<pc>0225-a<k1>kAlika<k2>kAlika<h>1
1. {%kālika, as,%}¦ m. a species of heron, Ardea Jacu-
lator (also written {%kālīka%}); N. of a king of the Nāgas;
({%ikā%}), f. blackness or black colour; ink or blacking;
cloudiness, a multitude or succession of clouds, a dark
cloud threatening rain; a fault or flaw in gold; the
liver; a particular blood-vessel in the ear; a line of
hair extending from the pudenda to the navel; a kind
of spirituous liquor; a female crow; a small singing
bird with black wings (Turdus Macrourus, commonly
Śyāmā); a scorpion; a small worm or animalcule
formed by the fermentation of milk; N. of several
plants, a medicinal plant, commonly Vṛścikapattra;
another plant, Valeriana Jaṭāmāṃsi; a kind of Ter-
minalia; a branch of the plant Trichosanthes Diœca;
a kind of fragrant earth; a N. or form of Durgā;
a girl of four years old, who personates the goddess
Durgā at a festival held in honour of that deity; a
kind of Yoginī; a species of Kinnarī; an epithet of
Durgā; N. of a female evil spirit, daughter of Vai-
śvānara; (with Jainas) N. of a kind of genius who
executes the commands of the fourth Arhat; N. of
a river; ({%am%}), n. black sandal-wood. {%—Kālikā-%}
{%krama, as,%} m. title of a work. {%—Kālikā-grantha,%}
{%as,%} m. a medical work. {%—Kālikā-purāṇa, am,%} n.
the Purāṇa of Kālikā, i. e. of Durgā, title of an Upa-
purāṇa. {%—Kālikā-mukha, as,%} m., N. of a Rakṣas.
{%—Kālikāśrama (˚kā-āś˚), as,%} m., N. of a hermit-
age. {%—Kālikopapurāṇa (˚kā-up˚), am,%} n., N. of
an Upa-purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>14568<pc>0225-a<k1>kAliman<k2>kAliman
{%Kāliman, ā,%}¦ m. blackness.
<LEND>

<L>14569<pc>0225-a<k1>kAliya<k2>kAliya<h>1
1. {%kāliya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga or serpent inhabit-
ing the Yamunā, slain by Kṛṣṇa (also written {%kālīya,%}
see below). {%—Kāliya-damana, as,%} or {%kāliya-jit,%} m.,
N. of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu as destroyer of the serpent.
<LEND>

<L>14570<pc>0225-a<k1>kAliyaka<k2>kAliyaka
{%Kāliyaka = kālīyaka%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>14571<pc>0225-a<k1>kAlI<k2>kAlI
{%Kālī,%}¦ f., N. of Durgā, the wife of the god Śiva.
{%—Kālī-kula-sarvasva,%} N. of a work. {%—Kālī-ta-%}
{%naya, as,%} m. a buffalo (‘son or favourite of Durgā,’
more correctly {%haṃsakālī-tanaya%}). {%—Kālī-pu-%}
{%rāṇa, am,%} n. the Purāṇa of Kālī, title of an Upa-
purāṇa. {%—Kālī-māhātmya, am,%} n. {%= caṇḍikā-mā-%}
{%hātmya%}. {%—Kālī-rahasya,%} title of a work. {%—Kālī-%}
{%śiva, as,%} m., N. of the author of the Kalpa-kedāra.
{%—Kālī-hṛdaya,%} title of a work.
<LEND>

<L>14572<pc>0225-a<k1>kAlIya<k2>kAlIya
{%Kālīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to blackness; ({%am%}),
n. a dark kind of sandal or perhaps of Agallochum;
N. of a Nāga, see 1. {%kāliya%} above.
<LEND>

<L>14573<pc>0225-a<k1>kAlIyaka<k2>kAlIyaka
{%Kālīyaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a species of aloe wood;
a kind of turmeric (Curcuma Xanthorrhiza?), a kind
of fragrant wood of a yellow colour; yellow sandal;
a dark kind of sandal-wood; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga,
see 1. {%kāliya%} above.
<LEND>

<L>14574<pc>0225-a<k1>kAleya<k2>kAleya<h>1
1. {%kāleya, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see s.v.), the liver;
saffron; a yellow fragrant wood; the black sandal-
wood; ({%as, ā, am%}), dark-coloured; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a family of Daityas (metronymic fr. {%kālā%}).
<LEND>

<L>14575<pc>0225-a<k1>kAleyaka<k2>kAleyaka
{%Kāleyaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Curcuma Xanthorrhiza,
see {%kālīyaka%} above; ({%am%}), n. a fragrant wood, see
above; a particular part of the intestines; a disease
like jaundice; ({%as%}), m. a dog (for {%kauleyaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>14576<pc>0225-a<k1>kAlyaka<k2>kAlyaka
{%Kālyaka, as,%}¦ m. zedoary (Curcuma Zerumbet). See
{%kālpaka.%}
<LEND>
[Page0225-b+ 81]

<L>14577<pc>0225-b<k1>kAla<k2>kAla<h>2
{#kAla#} 2¦. {%kāla, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%kal%}), a fixed
or right point of time, a space of time, time in general,
(in the Ṛg-veda this word occurs only once, in the
Brāhmaṇas oftener); the proper time or fit season for
(with gen., dat., loc., pot., &c., e. g. {%kālaḥ pra-%}
{%sthānasya%} or {%prasthānāya%} or {%prasthāne,%} time for
departure; {%kriyā-kālaḥ,%} time for action; {%na ayaṃ%}
{%kālo vilambitum,%} this is not the time to delay;
{%kālo yad bhuñjīta bhavān,%} it is time for you to
eat); the weather; time as leading to events, the
causes of which are imperceptible to the mind of
man; destiny, fate; time as destroying all things;
death, time of death, often personified and repre-
sented with the attributes of Yama, regent of the
dead, or even identified with him, (hence {%kālam i%}
or {%kālaṃ kṛ,%} to die; {%kāla-samāyukta,%} dead; {%kāla%}
in this sense is frequently connected with {%antaka%}
and {%mṛtyu,%} e. g. {%abhyadhāvata prajāḥ kāla%}
{%ivāntakaḥ,%} he attacked the people like Time the
destroyer, cf. {%kālāntaka%} below; {%kāla%} personified
is also a Devarṣi in Indra's court, and a son of
Dhruva); a period of time, time of the world;
measure of time, prosody; a section, a part; {%deśa-%}
{%kālau,%} the right place and the right time, place and
time; {%kālaṃ kṛ,%} to appoint or fix a time; {%ubhau%}
{%kālau,%} both times, sunrise and sunset; {%ṣaṣṭhe%}
{%kāle 'hnaḥ,%} at the sixth hour of the day, at midday;
{%ṣaṣṭhānna-kāla,%} one who eats only at the sixth
meal-time, i. e. who passes five meals without eating
and has no meal till the evening of the third
day; or without {%anna,%} e. g. {%caturtha-kālam,%} at the
fourth meal-time, i. e. at the evening of the second
day; {%ṣaṣṭhe kāle,%} at the evening of the third day;
{%ṛtu-kāla,%} the time of a woman's courses; {%gacchatā%}
{%kālena,%} in the course of time, after some time;
{%nitya-kālam,%} constantly, always; {%dīrgha-kālam,%} dur-
ing a long time; {%dīrgheṇa kāleṇa,%} after a long time;
{%kālena,%} in the course of time; {%dīrghasya kālasya,%}
after a long time; {%kasyacit kālasya,%} after some
time; {%kālāt%} or {%kālatas,%} in the course of time &c.;
[cf. Goth. <nsi>hveila;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>weile;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">καιρός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὥρα</lang> (?); Lat. <nsi>hora, calen-dœ:</nsi> cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">κήρ</lang>
Hib. <nsi>ceal,</nsi> ‘death and everything terrible.’] {%—Kāla-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. appointing or fixing a time. {%—Kāla-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. death. {%—Kāla-kalpa, as, ā, am,%}
like death, fatal, deadly. {%—Kāla-kāra, as, ī, am,%}
making or producing time. {%—Kāla-kārita, as, ā, am,%}
effected or brought about by or in time. {%—Kāla-%}
{%kuṇṭha, as,%} m. an epithet of Yama. {%—Kāla-kūṭa,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a deadly poison; see s. v. {%—Kāla-kṛt,%}
{%t,%} m. the sun (producing the times, i. e. seasons).
{%—Kāla-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} produced by time; fixed;
appointed (as to time); lent or deposited by a giver
for a certain time; ({%as%}), m. the sun; time (?). {%—Kāla-%}
{%kaumudī,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Kāla-krama, as,%} m.
lapse of time; {%kāla-krameṇa,%} in process of time.
{%—Kāla-kriyā,%} f. fixing a time; title of the second
chapter of the Sūrya-Siddhānta; death. {%—Kāla-%}
{%kṣepa, as,%} m. allowing time to pass away, delay,
loss of time; spending or passing the time; {%akāla-%}
{%kṣepam,%} ind. without delay. {%—Kāla-gati, is,%} f. the
lapse of time. {%—Kāla-granthi, is,%} m. ‘a joint of
time,’ a year. {%—Kāla-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%} killing in the
course of time, i. e. by degrees, slowly (as a poison).
{%—Kāla-cakra, am,%} n. the wheel of time, time
represented as a wheel, which always turns round; a
given revolution of time, a cycle; according to the
Jainas, the wheel of time has twelve Aras or spokes
and turns round once in 2000, 000,000,000, 000
Sāgaras of years [cf. {%ava-sarpiṇī%} and {%ut-sarpiṇī%}];
the wheel of fortune, the vicissitudes of life, the wheel
of time or fate is sometimes regarded as a weapon;
with Buddhists, a Tantra; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
the sun. {%—Kāla-codita, as, ā, am,%} summoned by
the angel of death. {%—Kālacodita-karman, ā, ā, a,%}
acting under the influence of fate. {%—Kāla-jña, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who knows the fixed times or seasons;
({%as%}), m. an astrologer; a cock. {%—Kāla-jñāna, am,%}
n., N. of a medical work; N. of a work by Malla-
deva on the symptoms of diseases; a medical work
by Śambhūnātha. {%—Kāla-jñānin, ī,%} m. an epithet
[Page0225-c+ 81]
of Śiva. {%—Kāla-tattvārṇava (˚va-ar˚),%} ‘the ocean
of the truth of time,’ title of a work. {%—Kāla-taraṅga,%}
the first part of the Smṛty-artha-sāgara by Nṛsiṃha.
{%—Kāla-tā,%} f. seasonableness, timeliness. {%—Kāla-%}
{%tulya, as, ā, am,%} like death, deadly. {%—Kāla-traya,%}
{%am,%} n. the three times, i. e. past, present, and future.
{%—Kāla-daṇḍa, as,%} m. the staff of death, death.
{%—Kāla-damanī,%} f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Kāla-%}
{%dharma, as,%} m. or {%kāla-dharman, ā,%} m. the line
of conduct suitable to any time or season; the law,
rule or operation of time, death, dying; influence of
time, seasonableness; effects proper to the time or
season. {%—Kāla-dhāraṇā,%} f. prolongation of time.
 — 2. {%kāla-nara, as,%} m. ‘a time-man,’ i. e. in astro-
logy the figure of a man's body on the various limbs
of which the twelve signs of the zodiac are distributed
for the purpose of foretelling future destinies; [cf.
{%kāla-puruṣa.%}] {%—Kāla-nātha, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Kāla-nidhi, is,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Kāla-niyoga, as,%} m. the command of time, fate,
destiny. {%—Kāla-nirūpaṇa, am,%} n. chronology.
{%—Kāla-nirṇaya, as,%} m. ‘determination or fixing of
times,’ title of a work, also called {%kāla-mādhavīya,%}
by Mādhavācārya. {%—Kāla-nirṇaya-dīpikā,%} f. title
of a metrical recension of the same work. {%—Kāla-%}
{%nirṇaya-prakāśa, as,%} m. title of a work on juris-
prudence (?). {%—Kāla-nirvāha, as,%} m. providing for
daily wants. {%—Kāla-nemi, is,%} f. the felly or rim of
the wheel of time, regarded as a terrible weapon;
({%as%}), m., N. of an Asura slain by Kṛṣṇa, iden-
tified with Kaṃsa; N. of a Rakṣas; N. of a son
of the Brāhman Yajña-soma. {%—Kāla-nemin, ī,%} m.,
N. of an Asura; [cf. the preceding.] {%—Kālanemi-%}
{%ripu, us,%} m. or {%kālanemi-han, ā,%} m. or {%kālanemi-%}
{%hara, as,%} m. or {%kālanemy-ari, is,%} m. an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu, the destroyer of the Asura Kāla-
nemi. {%—Kāla-pakva, as, ā, am,%} ripened by time,
i. e. spontaneously (opposed to {%agni-pakva%}). {%—Kāla-%}
{%patha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Viśvā-mitra. {%—Kāla-%}
{%parivāsa, as,%} m. standing for a time (so as to be-
come stale or fermented). {%—Kāla-pāśa, as,%} m. the
noose of Yama or death. {%—Kāla-pāśika, as,%} m. a
hangman, an executioner, (one who has the noose of
Yama.) {%—Kāla-puruṣa, as,%} m., cf. 2. {%kāla-nara.%}
{%—Kāla-prabhāta, am,%} n. the dawning of the best
season, the two months following the rainy season,
autumn; the sultry season. {%—Kāla-prarūḍha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} over-blown, over-ripe. {%—Kāla-bhakṣa, as,%}
m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Kāla-bhṛt, t,%} m. the sun;
[cf. {%kāla-kṛt.%}] {%—Kāla-mayūkha, as,%} m. title of a
part of Bhāskara. {%—Kāla-mahiman, ā,%} m. or {%kāla-%}
{%māhātmya, am,%} n. the power or sway of time.
{%—Kāla-mādhava-kārikā,%} f. title of a work. {%—Kāla-%}
{%mūrti, is,%} f. time personified. {%—Kāla-yāpa, as,%} m.
allowing time to pass away, putting off, delaying,
procrastination. {%—Kāla-yāpana, am,%} n. passing
away time, putting off, delaying. {%—Kāla-yoga, as,%}
m. connection with time, with fate or destiny; fate,
destiny. {%—Kāla-yogin, ī, inī, i,%} reigning over des-
tiny, an epithet of Śiva. {%—Kāla-yodhin, ī, inī, i,%}
fighting, or one who fights in season or at the proper
time. {%—2. kāla-rātri, is%} or {%ī,%} f. the night of all-destroy-
ing time, the night of destruction at the end of the
world, often personified or identified with Durgā or
with one of the Śaktis of Durgā; a particular night
in the life of man, on the seventh day of the seventh
month of the seventy-seventh year, after which period
a man is exempt from attention to the usual ordi-
nances; N. of a Brāhman woman, familiar with magic.
{%—Kāla-rūpa-dhṛṣ, k, k, k%} (the last member of
the compound being by some referred to rt. {%dhṛ%} or
{%dṛh%}), wearing the form of Yama or death. {%—Kāla-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} connected with time. {%—Kāla-vikra-%}
{%ma, as,%} m. power of time, death. {%—Kāla-vidhāna,%}
{%am,%} n. title of a work. {%—Kāla-vidhavaṃsana, as,%} m.
(scil. {%rasa%}) a term for a particular drug or medicine.
{%—Kāla-viprakarṣa, as,%} m. prolongation of time.
{%—Kāla-viveka, as,%} m., N. of a work by Jīmūta-
vahana. {%—Kāla-vṛddhi, is,%} f. periodical interest,
payable monthly, &c. {%—Kāla-vega, as,%} m., N. of a
Nāga, a son of Vāsuki. {%—Kāla-vyāpin, ī, inī, i,%}
[Page0226-a+ 80]
filling all time, everlasting. {%—Kāla-saṃrodha, as,%}
m. keeping back or retaining for a long time; lapse
of a long period of time. {%—Kāla-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of
an astrological work. {%—Kāla-sadṛśa, as, ī, am,%}
opportune, seasonable; deathlike. {%—Kāla-sampanna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} effected by time, dated, bearing a date.
{%—Kāla-sāhvaya, as, ā, am,%} named after Kāla.
{%—Kāla-sūtra%} or {%kāla-sūtraka, am,%} n. the thread
of time or death; N. of one of the twenty-one hells.
{%—Kāla-svarūpa, as, ā, am,%} having the very form
of death (applied to any terrific object). {%—Kālā-%}
{%kṛṣṭa (˚la-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} led to death or de-
struction, drawn to or by one's fate; produced or
brought about by time. {%—Kālākṣarika, as,%} m. (fr.
{%kāla+akṣara%}), a scholar, a pupil who has begun
to read. {%—Kālāgni (˚la-ag˚), is,%} m. the fire that is
to destroy the world; the conflagration at the end of
time. {%—Kālāgni-rudra, as,%} m. Rudra regarded as
the fire that is to destroy the world; (scil. {%rasa%}) N.
of a particular drug or medicine. {%—Kālāgnirudro-%}
{%paniṣad (˚ra-up˚), t,%} f., N. of several Upaniṣads.
{%—Kālātīta (˚la-at˚), as, ā, am,%} elapsed, passed by.
{%—Kālātmaka (˚la-āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} depending on
time or destiny. {%—Kālātyaya (˚la-at˚), as,%} m. lapse
of time, loss or destruction by lapse of time. {%—Kā-%}
{%lātyayopadiṣṭa (˚ya-up˚), as, ā, am,%} taught or
rectified by the lapse of time; term for a vain argu-
ment ({%hetv-ābhāsa%}), also called {%atīta-kāla%} and {%bā-%}
{%dhita%}. {%—Kālādarśa (˚la-ād˚), as,%} m. ‘the mirror of
time,’ title of a work. {%—Kālādhyakṣa (˚la-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the overseer or leader of time, an epithet of
the sun. {%—Kālānala (˚la-an˚), as,%} m. the fire of
all-destroying time, the universal conflagration at
the end of all things; N. of a son of Sabhā-nara.
{%—Kālāntaka (˚la-an˚), as,%} m. time regarded as
the god of death. {%—Kālāntaka-yama, as,%} m. all-
destroying time in the form of Yama. {%—Kālāntara%}
{%(˚la-an˚), am,%} n. interval, intermediate time; period,
process of time; a former or another time. {%—Kālān-%}
{%tara-kṣama, as, ā, am,%} able to bear an interval
of delay. {%—Kālāntara-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} poison-
ous at certain times; ({%as%}), m. a poisonous animal,
venomous only when enraged or alarmed, as a rat &c.
{%—Kālāntarāvṛtta (˚ra-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} hidden
or concealed by time. {%—Kālāntarāvṛtti-śubhā-%}
{%śubha (˚bha-aś˚), āni,%} n. pl. good and evil things
occurring within the revolutions of time. {%—Kālā-%}
{%vadhi (˚la-av˚), is,%} m. a fixed or appointed time.
{%—Kālāvyavāya (˚la-av˚), as,%} m. no interval of
time. {%—Kālāśuddhi, is,%} m. or {%kālāśauca (˚la-aś˚),%}
{%am,%} n. season of mourning or ceremonial impurity,
as at the birth of a child, the death of a relation &c.,
when it is considered unlawful to perform any religious
rites. {%—Kāle-ja, as, ā, am,%} born or produced at a
fixed time or at due time. {%—Kālottara (˚la-ut˚),%} N.
of a work. {%—Kālotpādita (˚la-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} pro-
duced in due season. {%—Kālopta (˚la-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
sown in due season.
<LEND>

<L>14578<pc>0226-a<k1>kAlaya<k2>kAlaya
{%Kālaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kālayati, -yitum,%} to show or
announce the time.
<LEND>

<L>14579<pc>0226-a<k1>kAlika<k2>kAlika<h>2
2. {%kālika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to time, connected
with time, depending on time; fit for any particular
season, seasonable; lasting a long time, of long
standing (often at the end of a compound, e. g.
{%āsanna-kālika,%} relating to a time near at hand,
impending; {%māsa-kālika,%} monthly); {%a-kālikam,%}
without delay; ({%ā%}), f. price of a commodity on credit,
or a price to be paid at a fixed period or by instal-
ments; periodical interest paid by the month &c.;
change of complexion. {%—Kālika-tā,%} f. or {%kālika-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. time, date, season.
<LEND>

<L>14580<pc>0226-a<k1>kAlinI<k2>kAlinI
{%Kālinī,%}¦ f. ‘bringing death,’ N. of the sixth lunar
mansion.
<LEND>

<L>14581<pc>0226-a<k1>kAliya<k2>kAliya<h>2
2. {%kāliya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to time. See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>14582<pc>0226-a<k1>kAlIna<k2>kAlIna
{%Kālīna, as, ā, am%}¦ (at the end of comp.), belonging
or relating to any particular time, timely, seasonable.
<LEND>

<L>14583<pc>0226-a<k1>kAlIya<k2>kAlIya<h>2
2. {%kālīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to time, timely.
<LEND>

<L>14584<pc>0226-a<k1>kAlya<k2>kAlya
{%Kālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ timely, seasonable, fit for any
particular season; being in a particular period; plea-
sant, agreeable, auspicious (as discourse; cf. {%kalya%});
[Page0226-b+ 69]
({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f. a cow fit for the
bull; ({%am%}), n. day-break.
<LEND>

<L>14585<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlakaYja<k2>kAlakaYja
{#kAlakaYja#}¦ {%kālakañja%} or {%kālakañjya, ās,%} m.
pl., N. of a Dānava family, the children of Kālakā.
<LEND>

<L>14586<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlakawaNkawa<k2>kAlakawaNkawa
{#kAlakawaNkawa#}¦ {%kālakaṭaṅkaṭa, as,%} m. an epi-
thet of Śiva; (a various reading has {%śālakaṭaṅkaṭa%});
[cf. {%kaṭaṅkaṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14587<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlakIla<k2>kAlakIla
{#kAlakIla#}¦ {%kālakīla%} or {%kālakīlaka, as,%} m. a
confused or mingled sound, a tumult; [cf. {%kalakala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14588<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlakuYca<k2>kAlakuYca
{#kAlakuYca#}¦ {%kālakuñca, as,%} m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>14589<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlakUwa<k2>kAlakUwa
{#kAlakUwa#}¦ {%kālakūṭa, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. {%kala-%}
{%kūṭa%}), a kind of poison contained in a bulbous root
or tuber; a mortal or deadly poison; a poison pro-
duced at the churning of the ocean, swallowed by
Śiva and causing the blueness of his neck; a poison in
general; ({%as%}), m. myrrh; N. of a country near the
Himālaya and the people inhabiting it; an epithet of
Yama; [cf. {%kāla-kuṇṭha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14590<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlakUwaka<k2>kAlakUwaka
{%Kālakūṭaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a kind of poison
contained in a bulbous root; a deadly poison produced
at the churning of the ocean; a poison in general.
<LEND>

<L>14591<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlakUwi<k2>kAlakUwi
{%Kālakūṭi, is,%}¦ m. a prince of the Kalakūṭas.
<LEND>

<L>14592<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlaNkata<k2>kAlaNkata
{#kAlaNkata#}¦ {%kālaṅkata, as,%} m. the plant Cassia
Sophora.
<LEND>

<L>14593<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlaYjara<k2>kAlaYjara
{#kAlaYjara#}¦ {%kālañjara, as,%} m., N. of a mountain
in Bundalkhand considered as sacred, the modern
Kallinjer; N. of the adjacent country; an assembly
or meeting-place of religious mendicants; Kallinjer
is one of the places at which such assemblies meet,
being enumerated amongst the Tapasyasthānas or
spots adapted to practices of austere devotion; an
epithet of Śiva; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>14594<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlabalana<k2>kAlabalana
{#kAlabalana#}¦ {%kālabalana, am,%} n. armour, mail;
(a wrong reading for {%kāya-balana%} or {%kāya-valana.%})
<LEND>

<L>14595<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlabava<k2>kAlabava
{#kAlabava#}¦ {%kālabava%} or {%kālavava, as,%} m., N.
of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14596<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlabavin<k2>kAlabavin
{%Kālabavin, inas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>14597<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlambI<k2>kAlambI
{#kAlambI#}¦ {%kālambī,%} f. or {%kālambya, as%} or
{%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), N. of a caravansery.
<LEND>

<L>14598<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlava<k2>kAlava
{#kAlava#}¦ {%kālava, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>14599<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlaveya<k2>kAlaveya
{#kAlaveya#}¦ {%kālaveya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>14600<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlaSeya<k2>kAlaSeya
{#kAlaSeya#}¦ {%kālaśeya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kalaśi = ka-%}
{%laśa%}), buttermilk, produced in a jar or pitcher by
churning; also {%kālaseya.%}
<LEND>

<L>14601<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlAnara<k2>kAlAnara
{#kAlAnara#}¦ {%kālānara, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Sabhā-nara; [cf. {%kāla-nara%} and {%kālānala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14602<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlAnunAdin<k2>kAlAnunAdin
{#kAlAnunAdin#}¦ {%kālānunādin, ī,%} m. {%= kalā-%}
{%nunādin,%} a large black bee; a sparrow, the francoline
partridge.
<LEND>

<L>14603<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlApa<k2>kAlApa
{#kAlApa#}¦ {%kālāpa, as,%} m. (fr. {%kalāpa%}), the
hair of the head; a serpent's hood; a demon, an
imp or goblin; a student of the Kalāpa grammar;
one who knows or follows this grammar; (fr. {%kalā-%}
{%pin%}), a pupil of Kalāpin; epithet of Ārāḍa, a teacher
of Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>14604<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlApaka<k2>kAlApaka
{%Kālāpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ belonging to the pupils
of Kalāpin; ({%am%}), n. an assemblage of pupils of
Kalāpin; N. of a grammar.
<LEND>

<L>14605<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlAma<k2>kAlAma
{#kAlAma#}¦ {%kālāma, as,%} m. an epithet of
Ārāḍa, the teacher of Śākya-muni; [cf. {%kālāpa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14606<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlAmuKa<k2>kAlAmuKa
{#kAlAmuKa#}¦ {%kālāmukha, as,%} m. (fr. {%kāla-%}
{%mukha?%}), N. of a Śaiva sect.
<LEND>

<L>14607<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlAyani<k2>kAlAyani
{#kAlAyani#}¦ {%kālāyani, is,%} m., N. of a pupil
of Bāṣkali.
<LEND>

<L>14608<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlAyanI<k2>kAlAyanI
{#kAlAyanI#}¦ {%kālāyanī,%} f. (fr. {%kalā%}), an epithet
of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>14609<pc>0226-b<k1>kAlika<k2>kAlika
{#kAlika#}¦ {%kālika.%} See under 1. {%kāla%} and 2.
{%kāla%} at page 224 and last col.
<LEND>
[Page0226-c+ 70]

<L>14610<pc>0226-c<k1>kAliNga<k2>kAliNga
{#kAliNga#}¦ {%kāliṅga, as,%} m. (fr. {%kaliṅga%}), a
prince of the Kaliṅgas; (pl.) the Kaliṅgas; an ele-
phant; a snake; a species of cucumber, Cucumis
Usitatissimus; a poisonous plant; a sort of iron;
({%ī%}), f. a princess of the Kaliṅgas; a kind of gourd or
cucumber; N. of a river; ({%am%}), n. the water-melon;
({%as, ī, am%}), produced in or belonging to the Ka-
liṅga country.
<LEND>

<L>14611<pc>0226-c<k1>kAliNgaka<k2>kAliNgaka
{%Kāliṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the Kaliṅgas.
<LEND>

<L>14612<pc>0226-c<k1>kAliNgikA<k2>kAliNgikA
{%Kāliṅgikā,%}¦ f. the plant Ipomœa Turpethum.
<LEND>

<L>14613<pc>0226-c<k1>kAliYjara<k2>kAliYjara
{#kAliYjara#}¦ {%kāliñjara, as,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain; [cf. {%kālañjara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14614<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlidAsa<k2>kAlidAsa
{#kAlidAsa#}¦ {%kālidāsa, as,%} m. (fr. {%kālī,%} the
goddess Durgā, and {%dāsa,%} a slave, the final of {%kālī%}
being shortened), N. of a celebrated poet, supposed
to be the author of the Śakuntalā, Vikramorvaśī,
Mālavikāgnimitra, the Megha-dūta, Raghu-vaṃśa,
Nalodaya, and other poems; also of the Śruta-bodha;
he was one of the nine poets or gems of Vikra-
māditya's court, and is supposed to have flourished
in the century preceding the Christian era; the name
is however applied to more persons than one, and
seems, in some measure, to have been used as an
honorary title; the works attributed to this author
are amongst the most elegant compositions in the
Sanskrit language.
<LEND>

<L>14615<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlidAsaka<k2>kAlidAsaka
{%Kālidāsaka, as,%}¦ m. = the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>14616<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlinI<k2>kAlinI
{#kAlinI#}¦ {%kālinī.%} See under 2. {%kāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>14617<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlinda<k2>kAlinda
{#kAlinda#}¦ {%kālinda, am,%} n. the water-melon;
({%ī%}), f. a sort of vessel; N. of a plant [cf. {%kāliṅgikā%}];
N. of a wife of Kṛṣṇa; N. of the wife of Asita
and mother of Sagara; an epithet of the river Ya-
munā; ({%as, ī, am%}), connected with the river Yamunā,
coming from this river; [cf. {%kalinda.%}] {%—Kālindī-%}
{%karṣaṇa, as,%} m. an epithet of Bala-rāma, this hero
having diverted the stream Yamunā into a new and
devious channel, marked out by his ploughshare.
{%—Kālindī-bhedana, as,%} m. an epithet of Bala-rāma;
[cf. the preceding.] {%—Kālindī-sū, ūs,%} m. the father
of the Yamunā, an epithet of Sūrya; ({%ūs%}), f. the
mother of Yamunā, an epithet of one of the wives
of Sūrya. {%—Kālindī-sodara, as,%} m. the brother of
the Yamunā, an epithet of Yama.
<LEND>

<L>14618<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlindaka<k2>kAlindaka
{%Kālindaka, am,%}¦ n. the water-melon.
<LEND>

<L>14619<pc>0226-c<k1>kAliman<k2>kAliman
{#kAliman#}¦ {%kāliman.%} See under 1. {%kāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>14620<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlimmanyA<k2>kAlimmanyA
{#kAlimmanyA#}¦ {%kālim-manyā,%} f. ({%kālim%} instead
of {%kālīm%}), thinking one's self to be Kālī, regarding
one's self as Kālī.
<LEND>

<L>14621<pc>0226-c<k1>kAliya<k2>kAliya<h>3
{#kAliya#} 3¦. {%kāliya, as,%} m. (fr. {%kali;%} for 1.
and 2. see under 1. and 2. {%kāla%}), the present age,
commonly called the Kali-yuga.
<LEND>

<L>14622<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlIka<k2>kAlIka
{#kAlIka#}¦ {%kālīka, as,%} m. a heron; [cf. 1.
{%kālika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14623<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlIcI<k2>kAlIcI
{#kAlIcI#}¦ {%kālīcī,%} f. (fr. 2. {%kāla%} and {%añc?%}), the
judgment-hall of Yama, regent or judge of the dead.
<LEND>

<L>14624<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlIna<k2>kAlIna
{#kAlIna#}¦ {%kālīna.%} See under 2. {%kāla,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>14625<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlIya<k2>kAlIya<h>1
{#kAlIya#} 1¦. {%kālīya.%} See p. 225 and col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>14626<pc>0226-c<k1>kAluzya<k2>kAluzya
{#kAluzya#}¦ {%kāluṣya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kaluṣa%}), foul-
ness, dirtiness, filth, turbidness, opacity; disturbance
or interruption of harmony, disagreement.
<LEND>

<L>14627<pc>0226-c<k1>kAleja<k2>kAleja
{#kAleja#}¦ {%kāle-ja.%} See under 2. {%kāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>14628<pc>0226-c<k1>kAleya<k2>kAleya<h>2
{#kAleya#} 2¦. {%kāleya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kali;%} for 1. see
under 1. {%kāla%}), the Sāman of Kali; ({%as, ā, am%}),
belonging to Kali, the Kali age &c.
<LEND>

<L>14629<pc>0226-c<k1>kAleyaka<k2>kAleyaka
{#kAleyaka#}¦ {%kāleyaka.%} See under 1. {%kāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>14630<pc>0226-c<k1>kAleSvara<k2>kAleSvara
{#kAleSvara#}¦ {%kāleśvara, kālotpādita,%} &c. See
under 1. and 2. {%kāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>14631<pc>0226-c<k1>kAlodAyin<k2>kAlodAyin
{#kAlodAyin#}¦ {%kālodāyin ī,%} m., N. of a pupil
of Śākya-muni; (the right reading is perhaps {%kālo-%}
{%dayin.%})
<LEND>
[Page0227-a+ 73]

<L>14632<pc>0227-a<k1>kAlpa<k2>kAlpa
{#kAlpa#}¦ {%kālpa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kalpa%}), preceptive,
ritual; relating to a Kalpa or period so called; ({%as%}),
m. the plant Curcuma Zerumbet.
<LEND>

<L>14633<pc>0227-a<k1>kAlpaka<k2>kAlpaka
{%Kālpaka, as,%}¦ m. the same plant; [cf. also {%kāl-%}
{%yaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14634<pc>0227-a<k1>kAlpanika<k2>kAlpanika
{%Kālpanika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%kalpanā%}), existing
only in fancy; fictitious, invented; counterfeit, hypo-
critical, artificial, fabricated. {%—Kālpanika-tā,%} f. con-
trivance, hypocrisy, forgery.
<LEND>

<L>14635<pc>0227-a<k1>kAlpasUtra<k2>kAlpasUtra
{%Kālpasūtra, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kalpa-sūtra%}), one who
is familiar with the Kalpasūtras.
<LEND>

<L>14636<pc>0227-a<k1>kAlya<k2>kAlya
{#kAlya#}¦ {%kālya.%} See under 2. {%kāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>14637<pc>0227-a<k1>kAlyARineya<k2>kAlyARineya
{#kAlyARineya#}¦ {%kālyāṇineya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kal-%}
{%yāṇī%}), sprung from a virtuous or fortunate woman;
({%as%}), m. the son of such a woman.
<LEND>

<L>14638<pc>0227-a<k1>kAlvAlIkfta<k2>kAlvAlIkfta
{#kAlvAlIkfta#}¦ {%kālvālī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
made bald (?); [cf. Lat. <nsi>calvus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>14639<pc>0227-a<k1>kAva<k2>kAva
{#kAva#}¦ {%kāva, am,%} n. (fr. {%kavi%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>14640<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvacika<k2>kAvacika
{#kAvacika#}¦ {%kāvacika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kavaca%}),
relating to armour, armorial; ({%am%}), n. a multitude
of men in armour.
<LEND>

<L>14641<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvawa<k2>kAvawa
{#kAvawa#}¦ {%kāvaṭa, am,%} n., N. of a district con-
taining 100 Grāmas; [cf. {%karvaṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14642<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvawikA<k2>kAvawikA
{%Kāvaṭikā,%}¦ f. a district of 200 Grāmas.
<LEND>

<L>14643<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvaruka<k2>kAvaruka
{#kAvaruka#}¦ {%kāvaruka, as, ī, am,%} fearful; hen-
pecked; ({%as%}), m. an owl; (a wrong form for {%kāka-%}
{%ruka%} or {%kākarūka ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>14644<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvaza<k2>kAvaza
{#kAvaza#}¦ {%kāvaṣa, am,%} n. (fr. {%kavaṣa%}), N. of
a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>14645<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvazeya<k2>kAvazeya
{%Kāvaṣeya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Tura in the
Brāhmaṇas.
<LEND>

<L>14646<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvAra<k2>kAvAra
{#kAvAra#}¦ {%kāvāra (kā-āv˚), am,%} n. the aquatic
plant Vallisneria; ({%ī%}), f. an umbrella or chattar,
especially one without a stick and worn like a broad-
brimmed hat.
<LEND>

<L>14647<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvirAj<k2>kAvirAj
{#kAvirAj#}¦ {%kā-virāj, ṭ,%} f. a metre consisting
of 9 + 12 + 9 syllables.
<LEND>

<L>14648<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvfka<k2>kAvfka
{#kAvfka#}¦ {%kā-vṛka, as,%} m., N. of several birds;
a gallinaceous fowl ({%= kukkuṭa, kṛkavāku%}); the
ruddy goose, Anas Casaca ({%= koka%}); a small singing
bird, Loxia Philippensis.
<LEND>

<L>14649<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvera<k2>kAvera
{#kAvera#}¦ {%kāvera, am,%} n. saffron, Crocus Sa-
tivus; ({%ī%}), f. turmeric; a courtezan, a harlot; N. of
a river in the Dekhan (according to a legend in the
Hari-vaṃśa, a daughter of Yuvanāśva and wife of Jahnu,
who by her father's curse was changed from one half
of the Gaṅgā into the river Kāverī, therefore also
called Ardha-gaṅgā or Ardha-jāhnavī).
<LEND>

<L>14650<pc>0227-a<k1>kAveraka<k2>kAveraka
{%Kāveraka, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Rajata-nābhi.
<LEND>

<L>14651<pc>0227-a<k1>kAverikA<k2>kAverikA
{%Kāverikā,%}¦ f., N. of a river, {%= kāverī.%}
<LEND>

<L>14652<pc>0227-a<k1>kAvya<k2>kAvya
{#kAvya#}¦ {%kāvya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%kavi%}), endowed
with the qualities of a sage or poet, descended or
coming from a sage; prophetic, inspired, poetical; a
particular order of manes; a patronymic of Uśanas; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the descendants of Kavi; ({%ā%}), f. understanding,
intelligence; a female fiend [cf. {%pūtanā%}]; ({%am%}), n.
wisdom, intelligence; prophetic inspiration; high
power and art; intellect, knowledge (often used in
pl.); a poem, poetical composition, a work of poetic
art; term for the first tetrastich in the metre Ṣaṭ-
pada; happiness, welfare. {%—Kāvya-kalpa-latā,%} f.
title of a work on artificial poems. {%—Kāvyakalpa-%}
{%latā-vṛtti, is,%} f. a commentary by Amara-candra on
the last work. {%—Kāvyakalpalatāvṛtti-parimala,%}
a commentary on the preceding work. {%—Kāvya-%}
{%kāma-dhenu, us,%} f. title of a commentary by Vopa-
deva on his work called Kavi-kalpadruma. {%—Kāvya-%}
{%candrikā,%} f. title of a work on artificial poems by
Kavi-candra; another work on the same subject by
Nyāyavāgīśa. {%—Kāvya-caura, as,%} m. a robber of
other poems, a plagiarist. {%—Kāvya-tā,%} f. or {%kāvya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the condition of a poetical composition.
{%—Kāvya-devī,%} f., N. of a princess, who erected a
[Page0227-b+ 77]
statue of Śiva, called Kāvyadevīśvara. {%—Kāvya-pra-%}
{%kāśa%} or {%kāvya-pradīpa, as,%} m. title of a work on
artificial poems by Mammaṭa. {%—Kāvya-mīmāṃsaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a poetaster, a rhetorician. {%—Kāvya-rasika,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has a taste for poetical composi-
tions. {%—Kāvya-rākṣasa, am,%} n. title of an artificial
poem. {%—Kāvya-śāstra, am,%} n. title of a small work
on poetics. {%—Kāvya-sudhā,%} f. title of a commentary
on a work on artificial poems. {%—Kāvya-hāsya, am,%}
n. a farce. {%—Kāvyādarśa (˚ya-ād˚), as,%} m. a work
on poetics by Daṇḍin. {%—Kāvyālaṅkāra-vṛtti, is,%}
f. a work on poetics by Vāmana. {%—Kāvyāṣṭaka%}
{%(˚ya-aṣ˚), am,%} n. title of a work of Sūrya.
<LEND>

<L>14653<pc>0227-b<k1>kAS<k2>kAS
{#kAS#}¦ {%kāś,%} cl. 1. and 4. A. {%kāśate%} and
{%kāśyate, cakāśe%} or {%kāśāmāsa, kāśiṣ-%}
{%yate, akāśiṣṭa, kāśitum,%} to be visible, appear;
to shine, be brilliant, have an agreeable appearance:
Caus. {%kāśayati, -yitum:%} Desid. {%cikāśiṣate:%} Intens.
{%cākaśīti%} and {%cākāśyate,%} to shine brightly; to see
clearly, survey; [cf. {%kās.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14654<pc>0227-b<k1>kASa<k2>kASa<h>1
1. {%kāśa, as,%}¦ m. the becoming visible, appearance;
splendor; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a species of grass, Saccha-
rum Spontaneum, used for mats, roofs, &c.; also
personified, together with the Kuśa grass, as one of
Yama's attendants; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; a son of
Sunahotra; also of another Sunahotra, the father of
Kāśi-rāja. {%—Kāśa-kṛtsna, as,%} m., N. of a gram-
marian; also of a philosopher. {%—Kāśakṛtsni, is,%}
m. (a patronymic from the preceding), N. of a
teacher. {%—Kāśa-pauṇḍra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a peo-
ple. {%—Kāśa-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of the grass
Saccharum Spontaneum.
<LEND>

<L>14655<pc>0227-b<k1>kASaka<k2>kASaka
{%Kāśaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of grass, Saccharum
Spontaneum; N. of a man, {%= kāśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>14656<pc>0227-b<k1>kASin<k2>kASin<h>1
1. {%kāśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of compounds)
shining, appearing, having the semblance of any-
thing, e. g. {%jita-kāśin,%} one who appears as a con-
queror or behaves like one; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a man,
a son of Brahman Kavi (Mahā-bh. XIII. 4150).
<LEND>

<L>14657<pc>0227-b<k1>kASila<k2>kASila
{%Kāśila, as, ā, am,%}¦ made of Kāśa grass, abounding
in it.
<LEND>

<L>14658<pc>0227-b<k1>kASizRu<k2>kASizRu
{%Kāśiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ shining, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>14659<pc>0227-b<k1>kASa<k2>kASa<h>2
{#kASa#} 2¦. {%kāśa, as,%} m. (wrongly spelt for
{%kāsa%}), cough, catarrh, irritation of the throat, sneez-
ing. {%—Kāśa-marda, as,%} m. wrongly spelt for {%kāsa-%}
{%marda,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>14660<pc>0227-b<k1>kASin<k2>kASin<h>2
2. {%kāśin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (wrongly spelt for {%kāsin%}), having
a cold or cough.
<LEND>

<L>14661<pc>0227-b<k1>kASaparI<k2>kASaparI
{#kASaparI#}¦ {%kāśaparī,%} f., N. of a region (?).
<LEND>

<L>14662<pc>0227-b<k1>kASaParI<k2>kASaParI
{%Kāśapharī,%}¦ f., N. of a region (?); (a various
reading has {%kāśaphārī.%})
<LEND>

<L>14663<pc>0227-b<k1>kASabda<k2>kASabda
{#kASabda#}¦ {%kā-śabda, as,%} m. the noise {%kā.%}
<LEND>

<L>14664<pc>0227-b<k1>kASAlmali<k2>kASAlmali
{#kASAlmali#}¦ {%kā-śālmali, is,%} f. a kind of silk-
cotton tree, Bombax Heptaphyllum.
<LEND>

<L>14665<pc>0227-b<k1>kASi<k2>kASi
{#kASi#}¦ {%kāśi, is,%} m. the clenched hand, the
fist; a handful; the sun (in this sense fr. rt. {%kāś%});
({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of the people of Kāśi; N. of the an-
cestors of the kings of Kāśi, of the family of Bharata;
({%is%}), m., N. of a son of Suhotra and grandfather of
Dhanvantari; also N. of a son of Kāśya and grandson
of Suhotra; ({%ayas%}), m. pl. the descendants of this man;
({%is%} or {%ī%}), f. a celebrated city and place of pilgrimage, the
modern Benares; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the wife of Sudeva
and mother of Supārśva. {%—Kāśi-kanyā,%} f. the virgin
of Kāśi, daughter of the king of Kāśi. {%—Kāśi-%}
{%khaṇḍa,%} a section of the Skanda-purāṇa. {%—Kāśi-%}
{%nagara, am,%} n. the city of the Kāśis, i. e. Benares.
{%—Kāśi-nātha, as,%} m., N. of several men. {%—Kāśi-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. a sovereign of the Kāśis. {%—Kāśi-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. the ruler of the Kāśis, epithet of Divodāsa
Dhanvantari, a king of Benares, author of certain
medical works and teacher of the Āyur-veda; he is
often confounded with his celestial namesake, the
physician of the gods. {%—Kāśi-purī,%} f. the city of the
Kāśis, i. e. Benares. {%—Kāśi-rāja, as,%} m. a king of
the Kāśis, identified with the Dānava Dīrghajihva;
epithet of Divodāsa Dhanvantari; also of a grand-
[Page0227-c+ 77]
father of Dhanvantari. {%—Kāśi-rājan, ā,%} m. = the
preceding. {%—Kāśi-rāma, as,%} m., N. of the author
of a commentary on the Tithi-tattva and several
other works. {%—Kāśi-vilāsa%} or {%kāśī-vilāsa, as,%} m.
title of a work written in Sanskrit and in one of the
modern dialects. {%—Kāśī-khaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n.
title of a section of the Skanda-purāṇa, treating of
Benares. {%—Kāśī-nātha, as,%} m. ‘a lord or master of
Benares;’ an epithet of Śiva; N. of several men.
{%—Kāśī-māhātmya, am,%} n. a section of the Brahma-
vaivarta-purāṇa. {%—Kāśī-rāja, as,%} m. {%= kāśi-rāja,%} an
epithet of Divodāsa. {%—Kāśī-vilāsa, as,%} m. {%= kāśi-%}
{%vilāsa%}. {%—Kāśīśa (˚śī-īśa), as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva;
an epithet of Divodāsa or any king of Benares; ({%am%}),
n. sulphate of iron. {%—Kāśīśvara (˚śi-īś˚), as,%} m. a
prince of the Kāśis or a sovereign of Benares; N. of
a grammarian; {%Kāśīśvarī,%} f. title of a grammar com-
posed by Kaśīśvara (?); {%Kāśīśvarī-gaṇa,%} title of a trea-
tise on grammar. {%—Kāśī-setu, us,%} m. title of a work.
<LEND>

<L>14666<pc>0227-c<k1>kASika<k2>kASika
{%Kāśika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%purī,%}
the city of the Kāśis, i. e. Benares; {%kāśikā vṛttiḥ%}
or only {%kāśikā,%} f. ‘the commentary composed or
used in Kāśi or Benares,’ title of a commentary on
Pāṇini's grammar by Vāmana Jayāditya. {%—Kāśika-%}
{%sūkṣma, am,%} n. fine cotton from Kāśi. {%—Kāśikā-%}
{%tilaka,%} N. of a poem by Nīla-kaṇṭha. {%—Kāśikā-%}
{%priya, as,%} m. an epithet of king Divodāsa, who
was king of Benares.
<LEND>

<L>14667<pc>0227-c<k1>kASeya<k2>kASeya
{%Kāśeya,%}¦ a patronymic from Kāśi; ({%ī%}), f. a
daughter of the king of the Kāśis.
<LEND>

<L>14668<pc>0227-c<k1>kASya<k2>kASya<h>1
1. {%kāśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the race or
tribe of the Kāśis, a prince of Kāśi; ({%as%}), m., N. of
the father of Kāśyapa and ancestor of Kāśirāja Dhan-
vantari; also of a son of Suhotra, and of Senā-jit;
({%ā%}), f. the daughter of a king of Kāśi.
<LEND>

<L>14669<pc>0227-c<k1>kASyaka<k2>kASyaka
{%Kāśyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the race or
tribe of the Kāśis.
<LEND>

<L>14670<pc>0227-c<k1>kASIta<k2>kASIta
{#kASIta#}¦ {%kāśīta, am,%} n., N. of a verse of the
Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>14671<pc>0227-c<k1>kASUkAra<k2>kASUkAra
{#kASUkAra#}¦ {%kāśūkāra, as,%} m. the Areca or
betel-nut tree; (perhaps a wrong reading for {%kāsū-%}
{%kāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>14672<pc>0227-c<k1>kASmarI<k2>kASmarI
{#kASmarI#}¦ {%kāśmarī,%} f. or {%kāśmarya, as,%} m.
the plant Gmelina Arborea, commonly called Gam-
bhārī; [cf. also {%kārśmarī%} and {%kārṣmarya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14673<pc>0227-c<k1>kASmIra<k2>kASmIra
{#kASmIra#}¦ {%kāśmīra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kaśmīra%}),
born in or coming from Kaśmīra; ({%as%}), m. a king
of Kaśmīra; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of Kaśmīra;
the country Kaśmīra, also in sing.; ({%ā%}), f. a sort
of grape; ({%ī%}), f. the tree Ficus Elastica; ({%am%}), n.
the tuberous root of the plant Costus Speciosus;
saffron; {%(= ṭaṅka.) — Kāśmīra-ja, am,%} n. saffron;
a sort of drug; the tuberous root of the plant Costus
Speciosus; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, Atis or Betula,
{%= ati-viṣā%}. {%—Kāśmīra-janman, a,%} n. saffron.
<LEND>

<L>14674<pc>0227-c<k1>kASmIraka<k2>kASmIraka
{%Kāśmīraka, as, ī, am,%}¦ born or produced in
Kaśmīra, relating to Kaśmīra; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
inhabitants of Kaśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>14675<pc>0227-c<k1>kASmIrika<k2>kASmIrika
{%Kāśmīrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ born or produced in
Kāśmīra; {%kāśmīrika-nivāsa, as,%} m. the residence
of the Kaśmīras.
<LEND>

<L>14676<pc>0227-c<k1>kASya<k2>kASya<h>2
{#kASya#} 2¦. {%kāśya, am,%} n. {%= kaśya,%} a spirituous
liquor.
<LEND>

<L>14677<pc>0227-c<k1>kASyapa<k2>kASyapa
{#kASyapa#}¦ {%kāśyapa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kaśyapa%}),
belonging to Kaśyapa, relating to or connected with
him (e. g. {%kāśyapī devī%} or only {%kāśyapī,%} the
earth); ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from Kaśyapa; N. of
an old grammarian; an epithet of Aruṇa; a sort of
deer; a fish; ({%am%}), n. flesh; ({%ī%}), f. the earth;
(according to a legend of the Purāṇas, Paraśu-rāma,
after the destruction of the Kṣatriya race and the
performance of an Aśva-medha sacrifice, presented the
sovereignty of the world to Kāśyapa.){%—Kāśyapa-%}
{%nandana, ās,%} m. pl. the children of Kāśyapa,
epithet of the gods. {%—Kāśyapī-bālākyā-māṭharī-%}
{%putra, as,%} m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>14678<pc>0227-c<k1>kASyapi<k2>kASyapi
{%Kāśyapi, is,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%kāśyapa%}), an
[Page0228-a+ 79]
epithet of Aruṇa, the charioteer of the sun; also of
Garuḍa, the bird of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>14679<pc>0228-a<k1>kASyapin<k2>kASyapin
{%Kāśyapin, inas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school called after
Kāśyapa.
<LEND>

<L>14680<pc>0228-a<k1>kASyapIya<k2>kASyapIya
{%Kāśyapīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a Buddhist school
called after Kāśyapa.
<LEND>

<L>14681<pc>0228-a<k1>kASyapeya<k2>kASyapeya
{%Kāśyapeya, as,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%kaśyapa%}),
an epithet of the twelve Ādityas; also of the sun;
and of Garuḍa, the bird of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>14682<pc>0228-a<k1>kASvarI<k2>kASvarI
{#kASvarI#}¦ {%kāśvarī,%} f. the plant Gmelina Ar-
borea, {%= kāśmarī.%}
<LEND>

<L>14683<pc>0228-a<k1>kAza<k2>kAza
{#kAza#}¦ {%kāṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kaṣ%}), rubbing;
that against which anything is rubbed.
<LEND>

<L>14684<pc>0228-a<k1>kAzAya<k2>kAzAya
{#kAzAya#}¦ {%kāṣāya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kaṣāya%}),
red, dyed of a reddish colour; a red cloth or garment;
({%ī%}), f. (with {%makṣikā%}) a sort of fly or wasp.
{%—Kāṣāya-grahaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a Caitya, q. v.
{%—Kāṣāya-vasana, as, ā, am,%} having a dark or
brown garment. {%—Kāṣāya-vāsika, as,%} m. a kind
of poisonous insect.
<LEND>

<L>14685<pc>0228-a<k1>kAzAyaRa<k2>kAzAyaRa
{%Kāṣāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%kaṣāya%} or
{%kāṣāya%}), N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>14686<pc>0228-a<k1>kAzAyin<k2>kAzAyin
{%Kāṣāyin, iṇas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school called
from Kaṣāya.
<LEND>

<L>14687<pc>0228-a<k1>kAzWa<k2>kAzWa
{#kAzWa#}¦ {%kāṣṭha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kāś;%}
cf. {%kāṣṭhā%} next col.), N. of one of Kuvera's attendants;
({%am%}), n. a piece of wood or timber, a stick; wood
or timber in general; an instrument for measuring
lengths; a kind of measure; (metaphorically) a mere
stick, a lanky thin man. At the beginning of a
compound and before a simple verb {%kāṣṭha%} may
express excellence or superiority; [cf. Cambro-Brit.
<nsi>coed;</nsi> Brit. <nsi>coat;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ξύ-λον.</lang>] {%—Kāṣṭha-kadalī,%}
f. the wild plantain, Musa Sapientum, (the fruit of this
plant being hard and woody.) {%—Kāṣṭha-kīṭa, as,%}
m. a small insect or worm found in decayed wood.
{%—Kāṣṭha-kuṭṭa%} or {%kāṣṭha-kūṭa, as,%} m. a bird,
a sort of woodpecker, Picus Bengalensis. {%—Kāṣṭha-%}
{%kuddāla, as,%} m. a kind of wooden shovel or scraper
used for baling water out of a boat, or for scraping
and cleaning its bottom; also written {%˚kudāla%} or
{%˚kūddāla%}. {%—Kāṣṭha-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. a stick, a
spar, a piece of wood. {%—Kāṣṭha-ghaṭita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} formed of wood, wooden. {%—Kāṣṭha-jambū,%}
{%ūs,%} f., N. of a tree, {%= bhūmi-jambū%}. {%—Kāṣṭha-%}
{%takṣ, ṭ,%} m. or {%kāṣṭha-takṣaka, as,%} m. a carpen-
ter. {%—Kāṣṭha-tantu, us,%} m. a caterpillar which
secretes itself in wood and there passes into a
chrysalis; a small worm found in timber. {%—Kāṣṭha-%}
{%dāru, us,%} m. the tree Pinus Deodora. {%—Kāṣṭha-%}
{%dru, us,%} m. the tree Butea Frondosa. {%—Kāṣṭha-%}
{%dhātrī-phala, am,%} n. the fruit of the plant Emblica
Officinalis. {%—Kāṣṭha-pāṭalā,%} f., N. of a plant
{%(sita-pāṭalikā)%}. {%—Kāṣṭha-pāṣāṇa-vāsas, āṃsi,%}
n. pl. wood, stone, and clothes. {%—Kāṣṭha-putta-%}
{%likā,%} f. a wooden image. {%—Kāṣṭha-pradāna, am,%}
n. piling up wood, forming a funeral pile. {%—Kā-%}
{%ṣṭha-bhāra, as,%} m. a particular weight of wood.
{%—Kāṣṭhabhārika, as,%} m. a wood-carrier; a bearer
of wood. {%—Kāṣṭha-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} one who has
become wood, or who is like a piece of wood; epithet
of an ascetic, who stands without stirring; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a divine being. {%—Kāṣṭha-bhṛt,%} see under
{%kāṣṭhā%}. {%—Kāṣṭha-maṭhī,%} f. a funeral pile. {%—Kā-%}
{%ṣṭha-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of wood, wooden,
consisting of pieces of wood. {%—Kāṣṭha-malla, as,%}
m. a bier, a plank &c. on which dead bodies are
carried. {%—Kāṣṭha-rajju, us,%} m. or f. (?), a rope
for binding together pieces of wood. {%—Kāṣṭha-%}
{%lekhaka, as,%} m. a small worm found in wood.
{%—Kāṣṭha-lohin, ī,%} m. a club, a short cudgel,
especially if armed with iron. {%—Kāṣṭha-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having wood for fuel &c.; ({%vat%}), ind. like
a piece of wood, like a stick or stock, standing
petrified with fear &c. {%—Kāṣṭha-vallikā,%} f., N. of
a plant, {%= kaṭukā%}. {%—Kāṣṭha-vāṭa, as%} or {%am,%} m.
or n. (?), a wall made of wood; N. of a place (?).
{%—Kāṣṭha-vivara, am,%} n. the hollow of a tree.
{%—Kāṣṭha-śārivā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= śārivā. %}
[Page0228-b+ 75]
{%—Kāṣṭha-stambha, as,%} m. a beam of wood. {%—Kā-%}
{%ṣṭhāgāra (˚ṭha-ag˚), as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. a house of
wood, a wooden house or enclosure. {%—Kāṣṭhāmbu-%}
{%vāhinī (˚ṭha-am˚),%} f. a wooden bucket or baling
vessel; [cf. {%ambu-vāhinī.%}] {%—Kāṣṭhāluka (˚ṭha-%}
{%āl˚), as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. a species of Āluka. {%—Kā-%}
{%ṣṭhekṣu (˚ṭha-ik˚), us,%} m. a kind of sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>14688<pc>0228-b<k1>kAzWaka<k2>kAzWaka
{%Kāṣṭhaka, am,%}¦ n. aloe wood or Agallochum.
<LEND>

<L>14689<pc>0228-b<k1>kAzWika<k2>kAzWika
{%Kāṣṭhika, as,%}¦ m. a bearer of wood; ({%ā%}), f. a
small piece of wood.
<LEND>

<L>14690<pc>0228-b<k1>kAzWin<k2>kAzWin
{%Kāṣṭhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wooden; having wood.
<LEND>

<L>14691<pc>0228-b<k1>kAzWA<k2>kAzWA
{#kAzWA#}¦ {%kāṣṭhā,%} f. [cf. {%kāṣṭha%} last col.], a
place for running, a race-ground, course; the course,
path or track of the wind and clouds in the atmos-
phere; a quarter or region of the world, a cardinal
point, space, tract; water; the mark, the goal; limit,
boundary; the sun; a fixed place, place, site, espe-
cially the situation of the lunar mansions; a measure
of time, = (1/30) Kalā, = (1/15) Laghu, = (1/225) Nāḍikā, = (1/450)
Muhūrta; the plant Curcuma Xanthorrhiza; N. of a
daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa, mother of the
solidungulous quadrupeds; N. of a town. {%—Kāṣṭha-%}
{%bhṛt, t, t, t%} (for {%kāṣṭhā-bhṛt%}), Ved. leading to a
mark or aim.
<LEND>

<L>14692<pc>0228-b<k1>kAzWIla<k2>kAzWIla
{#kAzWIla#}¦ {%kāṣṭhīla (kā-aṣ˚), as,%} m. a large
kind of Calotropis; ({%ā%}), f. a plantain, Musa Sapientum.
<LEND>

<L>14693<pc>0228-b<k1>kAs<k2>kAs<h>1
{#kAs#} 1¦. {%kās,%} cl. 1. A. {%kāsate, cakāse%} or
{%kāsāmāsa, kāsiṣyate, akāsiṣṭa, kāsi-%}
{%tum,%} to cough; to make any disagreeable sound or
one indicating disease; to shine (for rt. {%kāś,%} q. v.):
Caus. {%kāsayati, -yitum:%} Desid. {%cikāsiṣate:%} Intens.
{%cākāsyate, cākāsti;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>kòstu, kòseti;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>kasµjljati;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>huosto;</nsi> Scot. <nsi>casad.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>14694<pc>0228-b<k1>kAs<k2>kAs<h>2
2. {%kās,%}¦ f., Ved. cough.
<LEND>

<L>14695<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsa<k2>kAsa<h>1
1. {%kāsa, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. cough, catarrh. {%—Kāsa-kanda,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of root, {%= kāsālu%}. {%—Kāsa-kara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} producing cough or catarrh. {%—Kāsa-%}
{%kuṇṭha, as, ā, am,%} afflicted with cough; ({%as%}), m.
an epithet of Yama; [cf. {%kāśa.%}] {%—Kāsa-ghna, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} removing or alleviating cough, pectoral; ({%ī%}),
f. a sort of prickly nightshade, Solanum Jacquini.
{%—Kāsa-jit, t,%} f. the plant Clerodendrum Sipho-
nanthus. {%—Kāsa-nāśinī,%} f., N. of a thorny plant,
{%= karkaṭa-śṛṅgī%}. {%—Kāsa-marda, as,%} m. the plant
Cassia Sophora; a remedy against cough, an acid
preparation, a mixture of tamarinds and mustard;
also {%= paṭala%}. {%—Kāsa-mardaka, as,%} m. the plant
Cassia Sophora. {%—Kāsa-mardana, as,%} m. the plant
Trichosanthes Diœca. {%—Kāsa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having a cough. {%—Kāsāri (˚sa-ari), is,%} m. the plant
Cassia Sophora. {%—Kāsālu (˚sa-ālu), us,%} m. an escu-
lent root, a sort of yam.
<LEND>

<L>14696<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsikA<k2>kAsikA
{%Kāsikā,%}¦ f. cough.
<LEND>

<L>14697<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsin<k2>kAsin
{%Kāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a cough.
<LEND>

<L>14698<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsundIvawikA<k2>kAsundIvawikA
{%Kāsundīvaṭikā,%}¦ f. a remedy against cough, an
acid preparation, a mixture of tamarinds and mustard;
(perhaps a wrong reading for {%kāsandī˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>14699<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsa<k2>kAsa<h>2
{#kAsa#} 2¦. {%kāsa, as, am,%} m. n. (for {%kāśa%}), a
species of reed or long grass, Saccharum Spontaneum;
another plant, Hyperanthera Moringa.
<LEND>

<L>14700<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsara<k2>kAsara
{#kAsara#}¦ {%kāsara, as,%} m. a buffalo; (fr. {%ka,%}
water, and {%sara,%} going ?; this animal being partial to
marshy places.)
<LEND>

<L>14701<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsAra<k2>kAsAra
{#kAsAra#}¦ {%kāsāra, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%kās%}), a pond, a pool.
<LEND>

<L>14702<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsIrAma<k2>kAsIrAma
{#kAsIrAma#}¦ {%kāsīrāma, as,%} m., N. of a man;
(more correctly {%kāśī-rāma?%}).
<LEND>

<L>14703<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsIsa<k2>kAsIsa
{#kAsIsa#}¦ {%kāsīsa, am,%} n. green vitriol, green
sulphate of iron; [cf. {%kāśīśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14704<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsU<k2>kAsU
{#kAsU#}¦ {%kāsū, ūs,%} f. (fr. rt. {%kās ?%}), a sort of
spear or lance; indistinct speech; speech in general;
light, lustre; disease; devotion; understanding.
{%—Kāsū-tarī,%} f. a short spear, a javelin.
<LEND>

<L>14705<pc>0228-b<k1>kAsfti<k2>kAsfti
{#kAsfti#}¦ {%kā-sṛti, is,%} f. a by-way, a secret path.
<LEND>

<L>14706<pc>0228-b<k1>kAstIra<k2>kAstIra
{#kAstIra#}¦ {%kāstīra, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>
[Page0228-c+ 70]

<L>14707<pc>0228-c<k1>kAhakA<k2>kAhakA
{#kAhakA#}¦ {%kāhakā,%} f. a kind of musical instru-
ment; [cf. {%kāhalā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14708<pc>0228-c<k1>kAhala<k2>kAhala
{#kAhala#}¦ {%kāhala, as, ā, am,%} dry, withered;
large, excessive; mischievous; ({%as%}), m. a cat; a
cock; a sound in general; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of musical
instrument; N. of an Apsaras; ({%ī%}), f. a young
woman; ({%am%}), n. indistinct speech; a kind of musical
instrument; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. a horn, either a cow-
horn or an instrument of that shape; a large drum;
({%am%}), ind. much, excessively. {%—Kāhalā-puṣpa,%}
{%as,%} m. a thorn-apple, Datura Metel, {%= dhūstūra.%}
<LEND>

<L>14709<pc>0228-c<k1>kAhalin<k2>kAhalin
{%Kāhalin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>14710<pc>0228-c<k1>kAhali<k2>kAhali
{#kAhali#}¦ {%kāhali, is,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>14711<pc>0228-c<k1>kAhAbAha<k2>kAhAbAha
{#kAhAbAha#}¦ {%kāhābāha, am,%} n., Ved. a rumbling
noise in the bowels.
<LEND>

<L>14712<pc>0228-c<k1>kAhI<k2>kAhI
{#kAhI#}¦ {%kāhī,%} f. the plant Wrightia Anti-
dysenterica; [cf. {%kuṭaja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14713<pc>0228-c<k1>kAhUjI<k2>kAhUjI
{#kAhUjI#}¦ {%kāhūjī, īs,%} m., N. of the father of the
writer Mahādeva (author of an astronomical work).
<LEND>

<L>14714<pc>0228-c<k1>ki<k2>ki<h>1
{#ki#} 1¦. {%ki,%} a pronominal base, like {%ka%} and
{%ku,%} in the words {%kim, kiyat, kis, kīdṛkṣa, kīdṛś,%}
{%kīdṛśa, kīvat,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>14715<pc>0228-c<k1>ki<k2>ki<h>2
{#ki#} 2¦. {%ki,%} a verbal root; [cf. {%ci;%} Lat. <nsi>scio?;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>ci,</nsi> ‘see, behold;’ <nsi>ci-thi,</nsi> ‘you see;’ <nsi>citear,</nsi> ‘it
seems, appears.’]
<LEND>

<L>14716<pc>0228-c<k1>kiMstya<k2>kiMstya
{#kiMstya#}¦ {%kiṃstya, am,%} n. a kind of fruit (?).
<LEND>

<L>14717<pc>0228-c<k1>kiki<k2>kiki
{#kiki#}¦ {%kiki, is,%} m. a blue jay; the cocoa
tree, Nārikela; [cf. the following.]
<LEND>

<L>14718<pc>0228-c<k1>kikidiva<k2>kikidiva
{%Kikidiva, as,%}¦ m. or {%kikidivi, is,%} m. or {%kikidīvi,%}
{%is,%} m. a blue jay; Ved. another kind of animal.
<LEND>

<L>14719<pc>0228-c<k1>kikin<k2>kikin
{%Kikin, ī,%}¦ m. or {%kikī,%} f. a blue jay.
<LEND>

<L>14720<pc>0228-c<k1>kikIdiva<k2>kikIdiva
{%Kikīdiva, as,%}¦ m. or {%kikīdivi%} or {%kikīdīvi, is,%} m.
a blue jay.
<LEND>

<L>14721<pc>0228-c<k1>kikirA<k2>kikirA
{#kikirA#}¦ {%kikirā,%} ind., Ved. (with 1. {%kṛ%}) to
tear in pieces, to rend into rags and tatters.
<LEND>

<L>14722<pc>0228-c<k1>kikkiwA<k2>kikkiwA
{#kikkiwA#}¦ {%kikkiṭā,%} ind., Ved. an onomato-
poetic word used like an interjection in invocations.
<LEND>

<L>14723<pc>0228-c<k1>kikkiSa<k2>kikkiSa
{#kikkiSa#}¦ {%kikkiśa, as,%} m. a kind of worm,
pernicious to the hair, nails, and teeth.
<LEND>

<L>14724<pc>0228-c<k1>kikkisAda<k2>kikkisAda
{#kikkisAda#}¦ {%kikkisāda, as,%} m. a species of
snake.
<LEND>

<L>14725<pc>0228-c<k1>kiknasa<k2>kiknasa
{#kiknasa#}¦ {%kiknasa, as,%} m. particles of ground
corn, bruised grain, groats.
<LEND>

<L>14726<pc>0228-c<k1>kiKi<k2>kiKi
{#kiKi#}¦ {%kikhi, is,%} m. a monkey, an ape; ({%is%}),
f. a small jackal, a fox.
<LEND>

<L>14727<pc>0228-c<k1>kiNkaRI<k2>kiNkaRI
{#kiNkaRI#}¦ {%kiṅkaṇī,%} f. a small bell; (a various
reading for {%kiṅkiṇī,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>14728<pc>0228-c<k1>kiNkara<k2>kiNkara
{#kiNkara#}¦ {%kin-kara,%} &c. See under {%kim%} below.
<LEND>

<L>14729<pc>0228-c<k1>kiNkiRa<k2>kiNkiRa
{#kiNkiRa#}¦ {%kiṅkiṇa, as,%} m. (an onomatopoetic
word), a kind of musical instrument; N. of a son of
Bhajamāna.
<LEND>

<L>14730<pc>0228-c<k1>kiNkiRi<k2>kiNkiRi
{%Kiṅkiṇi, is%}¦ or {%ī,%} f. a small bell; a girdle of small
bells, or any tinkling ornament; N. of an acid sort
of grape (Vikaṅkata).
<LEND>

<L>14731<pc>0228-c<k1>kiNkiRIka<k2>kiNkiRIka
{%Kiṅkiṇīka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a small bell.
{%—Kiṅkiṇīkāśrama (˚ka-āś˚), as,%} m., N. of an
hermitage.
<LEND>

<L>14732<pc>0228-c<k1>kiNkiRIkin<k2>kiNkiRIkin
{%Kiṅkiṇīkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ ornamented or decorated
with small bells.
<LEND>

<L>14733<pc>0228-c<k1>kiNkira<k2>kiNkira
{#kiNkira#}¦ {%kiṅkira, as,%} m. a horse; the Indian
cuckoo, the Kokila or Koil; a large black bee; Kāma-
deva, the god of love; ({%ā%}), f. blood; ({%am%}), n. the
frontal sinus of an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>14734<pc>0228-c<k1>kiNkirAta<k2>kiNkirAta
{%Kiṅkirāta, as,%}¦ m. a parrot; the Indian cuckoo
or Kokila; Kāma-deva, the god of love; the tree
Jonesia Aśoka; a species of amaranth; [cf. {%kuraṇ-%}
{%ṭaka, vaktāmlāna, pītāmlāna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14735<pc>0228-c<k1>kiNkirAla<k2>kiNkirAla
{%Kiṅkirāla, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant, {%= varvūra.%}
<LEND>

<L>14736<pc>0228-c<k1>kiNkirin<k2>kiNkirin
{%Kiṅkirin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a plant, commonly Buïnchi,
Flacourtia Sapida; [cf. {%vikaṅkata.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0229-a+ 66]

<L>14737<pc>0229-a<k1>kiNkzaRa<k2>kiNkzaRa
{#kiNkzaRa#}¦ {%kiṅ-kṣaṇa.%} See under {%kim%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>14738<pc>0229-a<k1>kiYca<k2>kiYca
{#kiYca#}¦ {%kiñca,%} ind. See under {%kim%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>14739<pc>0229-a<k1>kiYcana<k2>kiYcana<h>1
{#kiYcana#} 1¦. {%kiñcana, as,%} m. a species of the
Palāśa or Butea Frondosa. (For 2. {%kiñ-cana%} see
under 2. {%ka%} and {%kim%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>14740<pc>0229-a<k1>kiYcanaka<k2>kiYcanaka
{#kiYcanaka#}¦ {%kiñcanaka, as,%} m., N. of a king
of the Nāgas.
<LEND>

<L>14741<pc>0229-a<k1>kiYcit<k2>kiYcit
{#kiYcit#}¦ {%kiñcit, kiñcit-kara,%} &c. See under
{%kim%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>14742<pc>0229-a<k1>kiYcilika<k2>kiYcilika
{#kiYcilika#}¦ {%kiñcilika%} or {%kiñculaka%} or {%kiñcu-%}
{%luka, as,%} m. an earth-worm.
<LEND>

<L>14743<pc>0229-a<k1>kiYja<k2>kiYja
{#kiYja#}¦ {%kiñja, am,%} n. the blossom of the
plant Mesua Ferrea [cf. {%kiñjalka%}]; the filament of
a lotus.
<LEND>

<L>14744<pc>0229-a<k1>kiYjala<k2>kiYjala
{%Kiñjala, as,%}¦ m. the filament of a plant, especially
of a lotus.
<LEND>

<L>14745<pc>0229-a<k1>kiYjalka<k2>kiYjalka
{%Kiñjalka, as,%}¦ m. the filament of a plant, especially
the filament or blossom of a lotus; ({%am%}), n. the
flower of the plant Mesua Ferrea.
<LEND>

<L>14746<pc>0229-a<k1>kiYjalkin<k2>kiYjalkin
{%Kiñjalkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ consisting of filaments.
<LEND>

<L>14747<pc>0229-a<k1>kiw<k2>kiw
{#kiw#}¦ {%kiṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%keṭati, cikeṭa, keṭitum,%}
to go or approach, to alarm or terrify; to
dread, fear.
<LEND>

<L>14748<pc>0229-a<k1>kiwakiwAya<k2>kiwakiwAya
{#kiwakiwAya#}¦ {%kiṭakiṭāya%} (an onomatopoetic
expression), A. {%kiṭakiṭāyate,%} to gnash the teeth.
<LEND>

<L>14749<pc>0229-a<k1>kiwi<k2>kiwi
{#kiwi#}¦ {%kiṭi, is,%} m. a hog; [cf. {%kira, kiri.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14750<pc>0229-a<k1>kiwiBa<k2>kiwiBa
{#kiwiBa#}¦ {%kiṭibha, as,%} m. a bug; a louse, {%=%}
{%keśa-kīṭa; (am),%} n. a species of exanthema; [cf.
the next.]
<LEND>

<L>14751<pc>0229-a<k1>kiwima<k2>kiwima
{#kiwima#}¦ {%kiṭima, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
species of leprosy.
<LEND>

<L>14752<pc>0229-a<k1>kiwwa<k2>kiwwa
{#kiwwa#}¦ {%kiṭṭa%} or {%kiṭṭaka, am,%} n. secretion, ex-
cretion, excrement, dirt. {%—Kiṭṭa-varjita, am,%} n.
semen virile.
<LEND>

<L>14753<pc>0229-a<k1>kiwwAla<k2>kiwwAla
{%Kiṭṭāla, as,%}¦ m. scoria, rust of iron &c.; a copper
vessel.
<LEND>

<L>14754<pc>0229-a<k1>kiwwima<k2>kiwwima
{#kiwwima#}¦ {%kiṭṭima, am,%} n. a kind of liquid.
<LEND>

<L>14755<pc>0229-a<k1>kiRa<k2>kiRa
{#kiRa#}¦ {%kiṇa, as,%} m. a corn, a callosity; a
scar; a wart, a mole; an insect found in wood.
{%—Kiṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} callous. {%—Kiṇālāta (˚ṇa-%}
{%al˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>14756<pc>0229-a<k1>kiRi<k2>kiRi
{#kiRi#}¦ {%kiṇi, is,%} f. or {%kiṇihī,%} f. the plant
Achyranthes Aspera; [cf. {%apāmārga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14757<pc>0229-a<k1>kiRva<k2>kiRva
{#kiRva#}¦ {%kiṇva, as, am,%} m. n. ferment, a drug
or seed used to produce fermentation in the manufac-
ture of spirits from sugar, bassia, &c.; ({%am%}), n. sin.
<LEND>

<L>14758<pc>0229-a<k1>kiRvin<k2>kiRvin
{#kiRvin#}¦ {%kiṇvin, ī,%} m. a horse; [cf. {%kin-%}
{%dhin, kilkin,%} and {%kilvin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14759<pc>0229-a<k1>kit<k2>kit
{#kit#}¦ {%kit.%} See {%cit%} and {%ketaya.%}
<LEND>

<L>14760<pc>0229-a<k1>kita<k2>kita
{#kita#}¦ {%kita, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14761<pc>0229-a<k1>kitava<k2>kitava
{#kitava#}¦ {%kitava, as, ī,%} m. f. (perhaps fr. {%kim%}
{%tava,%} ‘what of you ?’ i. e. what is your stake?), a
gamester, a gambler; a cheat, a fraudulent man or
woman; a mad or crazy person; N. of a man; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people or race; ({%as%}), m. thorn-
apple, Datura Metel [cf. {%dhūrta%} and {%un-matta%}]; a
kind of perfume, commonly Rocana.
<LEND>

<L>14762<pc>0229-a<k1>kinAwa<k2>kinAwa
{#kinAwa#}¦ {%kināṭa, am,%} n. the inner bark of a
tree.
<LEND>

<L>14763<pc>0229-a<k1>kintanu<k2>kintanu
{#kintanu#}¦ {%kin-tanu,%} &c. See under {%kim.%}
<LEND>

<L>14764<pc>0229-a<k1>kinduvilva<k2>kinduvilva
{#kinduvilva#}¦ {%kinduvilva, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
or according to various readings {%kinduvilla, kendu-%}
{%villa,%} or {%tinduvilla,%} N. of the place where Jaya-deva
was born or where his family resided.
<LEND>

<L>14765<pc>0229-a<k1>kinDin<k2>kinDin
{#kinDin#}¦ {%kindhin, ī,%} m. a horse; (a various
reading for {%kilkin.%})
<LEND>
[Page0229-b+ 79]

<L>14766<pc>0229-b<k1>kinnu<k2>kinnu
{#kinnu#}¦ {%kin-nu,%} ind. See under {%kim%} below.
<LEND>

<L>14767<pc>0229-b<k1>kipya<k2>kipya
{#kipya#}¦ {%kipya, as,%} m. a kind of worm.
<LEND>

<L>14768<pc>0229-b<k1>kim<k2>kim
{#kim#}¦ {%kim,%} ind. (originally nom. and acc. sing.
n. of 2. {%ka,%} q. v.), how? whence? wherefore? why?
<LEND>

<L>14769<pc>0229-b<k1>kim<k2>kim
{%Kim%}¦ is much used as a particle of interrogation like
the Lat. <nsi>num, an,</nsi> sometimes translateable by ‘whe-
ther?’ but oftener serving only like a note of interro-
gation to mark a question (e. g. {%kiṃ vyādhā vane%}
{%'smin sañcaranti,%} do hunters roam about in this
wood ? In an interrogation the verb if uncom-
pounded with a preposition generally retains its accent
after {%kim%}). To this sense may be referred the {%kim%}
expressing blame, deficiency, &c., at the beginning
of compounds (e. g. {%kiṃ-rājan,%} what sort of a king?
i. e. a bad king); also the {%kim%} prefixed to verbs
with a similar meaning (e. g. {%kim-adhīte,%} he reads
badly). {%Kim — uta%} or {%kim — utavā%} or {%kim — %}
{%uta — uta%} or {%kim — athavā — uta,%} whether — or — 
or; [cf. {%uta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14770<pc>0229-b<k1>kim<k2>kim
{%Kim%}¦ is very frequently connected with other parti-
cles, as follows: {%kim aṅga,%} wherefore then? {%atha%}
{%kim,%} how else? surely; {%kim api,%} somewhat, to a
considerable extent, rather, much more, still further;
{%kim iti,%} why ? (see {%iti%}); {%kimu%} or {%kimuta,%} how
much more ? how much less? {%kiṃ kila,%} what a
pity! (expressing dissatisfaction); {%kiñca,%} moreover,
further; {%kiñ-cana%} (originally negative = ‘in no way’),
to a certain degree, a little; {%kiñcit,%} somewhat, a little;
{%kiṃ tarhi,%} how then ? but, however; {%kintu,%} but,
however, nevertheless (bearing the same relation to {%tu%}
that {%kiñca%} bears to {%ca%}); {%kin-nu,%} whether indeed? (a
stronger interrogative than {%kim%} alone); how much
more? how much less? {%kin nu khalu,%} how possibly?
(a still stronger interrogative); {%kim punar,%} how
much more ? how much less? {%kiṃ vā,%} whether?
or whether ? or, (often a mere particle of interroga-
tion); {%kiṃ svit,%} whether ? how? (a mere particle of
interrogation like the last).
<LEND>

<L>14771<pc>0229-b<k1>kiMyu<k2>kiMyu
{%Kiṃ-yu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. what wishing? {%—Kiṃ-%}
{%rājan, ā,%} m. a bad king. {%—Kiṃ-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
of what shape? {%—Kiṃ-vat, ān, atī, at,%} poor, mean,
insignificant. {%—Kiṃ-vadanta, as,%} m., N. of an imp
or goblin who lies in wait for children. {%—Kiṃ-%}
{%vadanti, is%} or {%ī,%} f. (lit. what do they say?), the
common saying or rumour, report, tradition, tale.
{%—Kiṃ-varāṭaka, as, ā, am,%} one who says ‘what
is a cowrie?’ i. e. an extravagant careless man who
does not value small coins. {%—Kiṃ-vid, t, t, t,%} what
knowing ?{%—Kiṃ-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} of what power?
{%—Kiṃ-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} one who says ‘what is
behaviour?’ i. e. one who is not careful in his man-
ners. {%—Kiṃ-vyāpāra, as, ā, am,%} following what
occupation?{%—Kiṃ-śāru, us, u,%} m. n. the beard of
corn; ({%us%}), m. an arrow; a heron. {%—Kiṃ-śila, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. (land) having small stones or gravelly
particles. {%—Kiṃ-śīla, as, ā, am,%} of what habits? in
what manner generally existing or living?{%—Kiṃ-%}
{%śuka, as,%} m. the tree Butea Frondosa, a tree bearing
beautiful red blossoms, and hence often alluded to
by poets; ({%am%}), n. the blossom of this tree; [cf.
{%palāśa%} and {%su-kiṃśuka.%}] {%—Kiṃśukodaka (˚ka-%}
{%ud˚), am,%} n. a decoction made from the blossoms
of the tree Butea Frondosa and used for colouring.
{%—Kiṃ-śuluka, as,%} m. a variety of the tree Butea
Frondosa. {%—Kiṃśulukā-giri, is,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain. {%—Kiṃ-sakhi, ā,%} m. a bad friend. {%—Kiṅ-kara,%}
{%as,%} m. a servant, a slave; (Ved.) a particular part of
a carriage; a kind of Rākṣasa; N. of a people;
({%ā%}), f. a female servant; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of a servant.
{%—Kiṅkara-tva, am,%} n. the condition of a servant
or slave. {%—Kiṅkartavya-tā%} or {%kiṅkārya-tā,%} f. any
situation or circumstances in which one asks one's self
what ought to be done ? [cf. {%itikartavya-tā.%}] {%—Kiṅ-%}
{%kala, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kiṅ-kāmya,%} nom. P.
{%-yati,%} to wish what ?{%—Kiṅ-kāmyā,%} ind. (old inst.
for {%-kāmyayā%}), Ved. from a desire for what? {%—Kiṅ-%}
{%kāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} having what reason or cause?
{%—Kiṅ-kṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} one who says ‘what is
a moment ?’ i. e. a lazy fellow who does not value
[Page0229-c+ 81]
moments. {%—Kiṅ-gotra, as, ā, am,%} belonging to what
family ? — 2. {%kiñ-cana,%} see under 2. {%ka%} and {%kim%} above.
{%—Kiñcana-tā,%} f. something, somewhat. {%—Kiñcij-%}
{%jña (˚cit-jña), as, ā, am,%} knowing a little, a mere
smatterer. {%—Kiñcit-kara, as, ī, am,%} doing anything;
({%a-kiñcitkara,%} one who has not done anything
wrong.) {%—Kiñcit-kāla, as,%} m. a little-time, some time.
{%—Kiñcit-pare,%} ind. a little after. {%—Kiñcit-prāṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a little life left. {%—Kiñcin-mātra, am,%}
n. only a little. {%—Kiñ-chandas, ās, ās, as,%} conver-
sant with which Veda ? (which Veda does he know?)
{%—Kiñ-japya, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kiñ-jyotis,%}
{%is, is, is,%} having which light? {%—Kin-tanu, us,%} m.
an insect described as having eight legs and a very
slender body, a species of spider. {%—Kin-tamām,%}
ind. whether? whether of many ?{%—Kin-tarām,%} ind.
whether ? whether of two? {%—Kintu-ghna, as,%} m. one
of the eleven periods called Karaṇa (destroying every
‘but’). {%—Kin-tva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. an adj. formed
from {%kiṃ tvam,%} ‘what thou?’ to denote the impu-
dent manner in which a drunken man asks questions.
{%—Kin-data, as,%} m., N. of a sacred well. {%—Kin-%}
{%dama, as,%} m., N. of a Muni. {%—Kin-darbha, as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Kin-dāna, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Kin-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kin-devata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having what deity ? {%—Kin-devatya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. belonging to or devoted to what deity?
{%—Kin-nara, as,%} m. (what sort of man?), a mythical
being with a human figure and the head of a horse,
originally perhaps a kind of monkey [cf. {%vā-nara%}],
in later times (like the Naras) reckoned among the
Gandharvas or celestial choristers and celebrated as
musicians; also attached to the service of Kuvera;
(with Jainas) one of the eight orders of the Vyantaras;
({%as%}), m., N. of a prince; an epithet of Nara, a son
of Vibhīṣaṇa; (with Jainas) the N. of the attendant
of the fifteenth Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī; N.
of a place; a kind of musical instrument; ({%ī%}), f. a
female Kinnara; the lute of the Caṇḍāla. {%—Kinnara-%}
{%varṣa, as,%}  m. a division of the earth said to be
north of the Himālaya mountains. {%—Kinnareśa%} or
{%kinnareśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Kuvera
as lord of the Kinnaras. {%—Kin-nāmadheya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%kin-nāman, ā, ā, a,%} having what name?
{%—Kin-nimitta, as, ā, am,%} having what cause or
reason? ({%am%}), ind. from what cause ? for what
reason? why? wherefore? {%—Kim-artha, as, ā, am,%}
having what motives or aim ? ({%am%}), ind. from what
motive? what for? wherefore? why? {%—Kim-ākhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having what name? {%—Kimicchaka, as,%}
{%ā, am%} (fr. {%kim + icchā%}), what one wishes or desires,
anything desired. {%—Kim-paca, as, ā, am,%} cooking
what? one who cooks nothing; miserly, avaricious.
{%—Kim-pacāna, as, ā, am,%} miserly, niggardly,
avaricious; [cf. {%mitam-paca.%}] {%—Kim-parākrama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of what power? of what energy? {%—Kim-%}
{%paryantam,%} ind. to what extent? how far? how
long?{%—Kim-pāka, as, ā, am,%} unripe; ignorant;
stupid; not arrived at mature age, childish; ({%as%}),
m. a Cucurbitaceous plant, Trichosanthes Palmata;
also Cucumis Colocynthus [cf. {%mahā-kāla%}]; ({%am%}),
n. the fruit of this plant. {%—Kim-punā,%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Kim-puruṣa%} or {%kim-pūruṣa, as,%} m. a
mongrel being (according to the Brāhmaṇas an evil
being similar to man), perhaps originally a kind of
monkey; in some instances the word seems to mean
merely a low and despicable man; in later times
the word is usually identified with {%kin-nara,%} though
sometimes applied to other beings, in which the
figure of a man and that of an animal are combined,
(these beings are supposed to live on Hemakūṭa, and
are regarded as the attendants of Kuvera; with Jainas
the Kimpuruṣas, like the Kinnaras, belong to the
Vyantaras); N. of one of the nine sons of Āgnīdhra,
having the Varṣa Kimpuruṣa as his hereditary por-
tion; a division of the universe, one of the nine
Khaṇḍas or portions into which the world is divided,
and described as the country between the Himācala
and Hemakūṭa mountains, also called {%kimpuruṣa-%}
{%varṣa%}. {%—Kimpuruṣeśvara (˚ṣa-īś˚), as,%} m. an
epithet of Kuvera. {%—Kim-prakāram,%} ind. in what
[Page0230-a+ 77]
manner? {%—Kim-prabhāva, as, ā, am,%} possessing
what power? {%—Kim-bala, as, ā, am,%} possessing
what strength or power?{%—Kim-bharā%} (?), f. a kind
of perfume, commonly called Nalī. {%—Kim-bhūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being what? ({%am%}), ind. how? in what
manner or degree? like what? {%—Kim-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} Ved. consisting of what?
<LEND>

<L>14772<pc>0230-a<k1>kimIya<k2>kimIya
{%Kimīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to whom
or what?
<LEND>

<L>14773<pc>0230-a<k1>kimIdin<k2>kimIdin
{#kimIdin#}¦ {%kimīdin, ī, inī,%} m. f., Ved., N. of
a class of evil spirits.
<LEND>

<L>14774<pc>0230-a<k1>kiyat<k2>kiyat
{#kiyat#}¦ {%kiyat, ān, atī, at%} (fr. 1. {%ki%}), how
great? how large? how far? how much? of what extent?
of what qualities? (Ved. loc. {%kiyāti%} with following
{%ā,%} how long ago? since what time? e. g. {%kiyāty ā%}
{%prathamaḥ sarga āsām,%} how long is it since their first
creation? {%kiyaty adhvani,%} at what distance? how
far off? {%kiyad etad%} with gen., of what importance
is this to any one? {%tena kiyān arthaḥ,%} what profit
arises from that? {%kiyac cireṇa,%} in how long a
time? {%kiyad dūre,%} how far?); little, small, unim-
portant, of small value (often in compounds, e. g.
{%kiyad-vakra,%} a little bent; {%kiyan-mātra,%} of little
importance; {%kiyad api,%} how large or how far soever,
&c.; {%yāvat kiyacca,%} how large or how much soever,
of what qualities soever; ({%kiyat%}), ind. how far?
how much? how? a little; {%kiyat-kālam,%} how long?
some little time ago. {%—Kiyad-etikā%} or {%kiyad-ehikā,%}
f. effort, vigorous and persevering exertions according
to one's strength. {%—Kiyad-dūra, as, ā, am,%} for a
short distance, a little way. {%—Kiyan-mūlya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of what value? of what price?
<LEND>

<L>14775<pc>0230-a<k1>kiyAmbu<k2>kiyAmbu
{#kiyAmbu#}¦ {%kiyāmbu, u,%} n., Ved. a kind of
aquatic plant.
<LEND>

<L>14776<pc>0230-a<k1>kiyAha<k2>kiyAha
{#kiyAha#}¦ {%kiyāha, as,%} m. a fox, a horse of
a red or bay colour.
<LEND>

<L>14777<pc>0230-a<k1>kiyeDA<k2>kiyeDA
{#kiyeDA#}¦ {%kiye-dhā, ās, ās, am%} (fr. {%kiyad-dhā?%}),
Ved. containing or surrounding much, epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>14778<pc>0230-a<k1>kira<k2>kira
{#kira#}¦ {%kira, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%kṝ%}), a hog.
<LEND>

<L>14779<pc>0230-a<k1>kiraka<k2>kiraka
{%Kiraka, as,%}¦ m. a scribe.
<LEND>

<L>14780<pc>0230-a<k1>kiraRa<k2>kiraRa
{%Kiraṇa, as,%}¦ m. dust, very small dust; a rein (?);
a ray or beam of light, a sun or moon-beam; the
sun; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Kiraṇa-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} radiant, bright, refulgent. {%—Kiraṇa-mālin, ī,%}
m. the sun (having a garland of rays). {%—Kiraṇāvalī%}
{%(˚ṇa-av˚),%} f., N. of a work by Udayana; a commen-
tary by Dādābhāi on the Sūrya-Siddhānta. {%—Kira-%}
{%ṇāvalī-prakāśa, as,%} m. title of a work.
<LEND>

<L>14781<pc>0230-a<k1>kirat<k2>kirat
{%Kirat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} scattering, spreading;
lighting, shedding light.
<LEND>

<L>14782<pc>0230-a<k1>kiri<k2>kiri
{%Kiri, is,%}¦ m. a hog, {%= kiṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>14783<pc>0230-a<k1>kirika<k2>kirika
{%Kirika, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sparkling, beaming.
<LEND>

<L>14784<pc>0230-a<k1>kiryARI<k2>kiryARI
{%Kiryāṇī,%}¦ f. a wild hog.
<LEND>

<L>14785<pc>0230-a<k1>kirAta<k2>kirAta
{#kirAta#}¦ {%kirāta, as,%} m., N. of a degraded
mountain-tribe, one of the barbarous tribes who in-
habit woods and mountains and live by hunting (the
Kirrhadæ of Arrian), having become Śūdras by their
neglect of all prescribed religious rites (they are also
regarded as Mlecchas); a savage; a pigmy, a dwarf;
a groom, a horseman; N. of a plant, a kind of gen-
tian [cf. {%kirāta-tikta%}]; N. of Śiva, as a moun-
taineer opposed to Arjuna, the account of which is
the subject of the celebrated poem by Bhāravi called
Kirātārjunīya; ({%ī%}), f. a woman of the Kirāta tribe;
a woman who carries a fly-flap or anything to keep off
flies; an epithet of the goddess Durgā; a bawd, a
procuress; an epithet of the river Gaṅgā; the celes-
tial Gaṅgā or river of Svarga. {%—Kirāta-tikta, as,%}
m. the plant Agathotes Chirayta, a kind of gentian;
also {%kirāta-tiktaka%}. {%—Kirātārjunīya, am,%} n. (fr.
{%˚ta + arjuna%}), title of an artificial poem by Bhā-
ravi, describing the combat of Arjuna with the god
Śiva in the form of a wild mountaineer or Kirāta,
(this combat and its result is described in the Vana-
parva or third book of the Mahā-bhārata 1538-1664.)
{%—Kirātāśin (˚ta-āś˚), ī,%} m. an epithet of Garuḍa,
the bird of Viṣṇu (‘swallowing the Kirātas’).
<LEND>
[Page0230-b+ 71]

<L>14786<pc>0230-b<k1>kirAtaka<k2>kirAtaka
{%Kirātaka, as,%}¦ m. (at the end of compounds) the
warrior or mountain-tribe of the Kirātas; N. of a
plant, {%= kirāta-tikta.%}
<LEND>

<L>14787<pc>0230-b<k1>kirAti<k2>kirAti
{%Kirāti, is,%}¦ f. an epithet of the river Gaṅgā; [cf.
{%kirātī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14788<pc>0230-b<k1>kirAtinI<k2>kirAtinI
{%Kirātinī,%}¦ f., N. of a plant, the Indian spikenard;
[cf. {%jaṭāmāṃsī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14789<pc>0230-b<k1>kirAri<k2>kirAri
{#kirAri#}¦ {%kirāri, is,%} m., N. of a people; (a
various reading has {%virāri.%})
<LEND>

<L>14790<pc>0230-b<k1>kirikiccikA<k2>kirikiccikA
{#kirikiccikA#}¦ {%kirikiccikā,%} f. a kind of musi-
cal instrument.
<LEND>

<L>14791<pc>0230-b<k1>kiriwi<k2>kiriwi
{#kiriwi#}¦ {%kiriṭi,%} n. the fruit of the marshy
date tree, Phœnix Paludosa.
<LEND>

<L>14792<pc>0230-b<k1>kiriSa<k2>kiriSa
{#kiriSa#}¦ {%kiriśa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14793<pc>0230-b<k1>kirIwa<k2>kirIwa
{#kirIwa#}¦ {%kirīṭa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (said to
be fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ%}), a diadem, a crest, a garland or any
ornament used as a crown, a tiara; N. of a metre of
four lines, each containing twenty-four syllables. {%—Ki-%}
{%rīṭa-dhāraṇa, am,%} n. wearing a diadem, assuming
the crown. {%—Kirīṭa-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} crowned, hav-
ing a tiara; ({%ī%}), m. a king. {%—Kirīṭa-mālin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} ornamented with a diadem.
<LEND>

<L>14794<pc>0230-b<k1>kirIwin<k2>kirIwin
{%Kirīṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ decorated with a diadem, crested,
crowned; ({%ī%}), m. a king; an epithet of Indra; one
of the attendants of Śiva; a N. of Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>14795<pc>0230-b<k1>kiroqAwya<k2>kiroqAwya
{#kiroqAwya#}¦ {%kiroḍāṭya,%} nom. P. {%kiroḍāṭyati,%}
to cheat.
<LEND>

<L>14796<pc>0230-b<k1>kirmira<k2>kirmira
{#kirmira#}¦ {%kirmira, as, ā, am,%} Ved. variegated;
[cf. {%kirmīra%} below and {%karbura.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14797<pc>0230-b<k1>kirmI<k2>kirmI
{#kirmI#}¦ {%kirmī,%} f. a hall, a building, an apart-
ment; an image of gold, a figure of iron; the Palāśa
tree, Butea Frondosa.
<LEND>

<L>14798<pc>0230-b<k1>kirmIra<k2>kirmIra
{#kirmIra#}¦ {%kirmīra, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%kṝ%}), variegated; ({%as%}), m. a variegated colour;
the orange tree; N. of a Rākṣasa or goblin conquered
by Bhīma-sena; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κιῤῥός</lang>] {%—Kirmīra-jit, t,%} m.
or {%kirmīra-nisūdana, as,%} m. or {%kirmīra-bhid, t,%}
m. or {%kirmīra-sūdana, as,%} m. or {%kirmīrāri (˚ra-ari),%}
{%is,%} m. an epithet of Bhīma-sena, the enemy and con-
queror of the Rākṣasa Kirmīra. {%—Kirmīra-tvac, k,%}
m. or f. (?), the orange tree.
<LEND>

<L>14799<pc>0230-b<k1>kirmIrita<k2>kirmIrita
{%Kirmīrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ variegated, spotted.
<LEND>

<L>14800<pc>0230-b<k1>kiryARI<k2>kiryARI
{#kiryARI#}¦ {%kiryāṇī.%} See under {%kira.%}
<LEND>

<L>14801<pc>0230-b<k1>kil<k2>kil
{#kil#}¦ {%kil,%} cl. 6. P. {%kilati, cikela, kelitum,%}
to be or become white; to freeze; to
play; cl. 10. P. {%kelayati, -yitum,%} to send, to throw
or cast; [cf. Hib. <nsi>cal,</nsi> ‘a joke.’]
<LEND>

<L>14802<pc>0230-b<k1>kila<k2>kila<h>1
1. {%kila, as,%}¦ m. play, trifling. {%—Kila-kiñcita, am,%}
n. amorous agitation, weeping, laughing, being angry,
merry, &c., in the society of a lover.
<LEND>

<L>14803<pc>0230-b<k1>kila<k2>kila<h>2
{#kila#} 2¦. {%kila,%} ind. (a particle of asseveration
or emphasis), indeed, verily, assuredly; (or of expla-
nation) namely; {%kila%} is preceded by the word on
which it lays stress, and occurs very rarely at the
beginning of a sentence or verse; according to native
lexicographers {%kila%} may be used in communicating
intelligence, and may imply ‘so said,’ ‘so reported,’
‘probably,’ ‘possibly,’ ‘agreement,’ ‘dislike,’ ‘false-
hood,’ ‘inaccuracy,’ and ‘reason.’
<LEND>

<L>14804<pc>0230-b<k1>kila<k2>kila<h>3
{#kila#} 3¦. {%kila, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14805<pc>0230-b<k1>kilakila<k2>kilakila
{#kilakila#}¦ {%kilakila, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva; N. of a town; ({%ā%}), f. (an onomatopoetic word),
sounds or cries expressing joy or the expression of
pleasure by any sound or cry.
<LEND>

<L>14806<pc>0230-b<k1>kilakilAya<k2>kilakilAya
{%Kilakilāya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kilakilāyati,%} to raise sounds
expressing joy.
<LEND>

<L>14807<pc>0230-b<k1>kilAwa<k2>kilAwa
{#kilAwa#}¦ {%kilāṭa, as, ī,%} m. f. inspissated milk,
coagulated milk; it may also be applied to cheese.
<LEND>

<L>14808<pc>0230-b<k1>kilAwin<k2>kilAwin
{%Kilāṭin, ī,%}¦ m. a bamboo.
<LEND>

<L>14809<pc>0230-b<k1>kilAta<k2>kilAta
{#kilAta#}¦ {%kilāta, as,%} m., N. of an Asura; a
dwarf.
<LEND>
[Page0230-c+ 74]

<L>14810<pc>0230-c<k1>kilAsa<k2>kilAsa
{#kilAsa#}¦ {%kilāsa, as, ā, am,%}  Ved. leprous;
({%ī%}), f., Ved. a kind of spotted deer described as the
vehicle of the Maruts; ({%am%}), n., Ved. a white leprous
spot; a blotch, a scab; (in medic.) a species of leprosy
resembling the so-called white leprosy, in which
disease the skin becomes spotted without producing
ulcers. {%—Kilāsa-ghna, as,%} m. a sort of gourd, Mo-
mordica Mixta (‘what removes leprosy’). {%—Kilāsa-%}
{%nāśana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. removing leprosy. {%—Ki-%}
{%lāsa-bheṣaja, am,%} n., Ved. a remedy against leprosy.
<LEND>

<L>14811<pc>0230-c<k1>kilAsin<k2>kilAsin
{%Kilāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ leprous, having blotches.
<LEND>

<L>14812<pc>0230-c<k1>kiliYca<k2>kiliYca
{#kiliYca#}¦ {%kiliñca, am,%} n. a thin plank, a
board; [cf. the following.]
<LEND>

<L>14813<pc>0230-c<k1>kiliYja<k2>kiliYja
{#kiliYja#}¦ {%kiliñja, as,%} m. a mat; a thin
plank of green wood.
<LEND>

<L>14814<pc>0230-c<k1>kiliYjaka<k2>kiliYjaka
{%Kiliñjaka, as,%}¦ m. a mat; a screen or twist of
grass or straw.
<LEND>

<L>14815<pc>0230-c<k1>kilinakila<k2>kilinakila
{#kilinakila#}¦ {%kilinakila, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), a various reading for {%kilakila;%} N. of a town (?).
<LEND>

<L>14816<pc>0230-c<k1>kilima<k2>kilima
{#kilima#}¦ {%kilima, as,%} m. a tree, a kind of fir
or pine, Pinus Deodar [cf. {%deva-dāru%}]; ({%am%}), n.
resin, the extract of the pine.
<LEND>

<L>14817<pc>0230-c<k1>kilkin<k2>kilkin
{#kilkin#}¦ {%kilkin, ī,%} m. a horse; (also read
{%kindhin%} and {%kilvin.%})
<LEND>

<L>14818<pc>0230-c<k1>kilbiza<k2>kilbiza
{#kilbiza#}¦ {%kilbiṣa%} or {%kilviṣa, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%kil?%}), fault, offence, sin, guilt; injustice, injury;
disease, sickness. {%—Kilviṣa-spṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. re-
moving or avoiding sins or offences.
<LEND>

<L>14819<pc>0230-c<k1>kilvizin<k2>kilvizin
{%Kilviṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ one who commits an offence,
wicked, culpable, criminal, sinful, (often in compounds,
e. g. {%rāja-kilviṣin,%} one who as a king commits an
offence.)
<LEND>

<L>14820<pc>0230-c<k1>kilvin<k2>kilvin
{#kilvin#}¦ {%kilvin, ī,%} m. a horse; [cf. {%kilkin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14821<pc>0230-c<k1>kiSala<k2>kiSala
{#kiSala#}¦ {%kiśala, as, am,%} m. n. a sprout, a
shoot.
<LEND>

<L>14822<pc>0230-c<k1>kiSalaya<k2>kiSalaya
{%Kiśalaya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a young shoot. {%—Kiśa-%}
{%laya-talpa, as,%} m. or {%kiśalaya-śayyā,%} f. or {%kiśa-%}
{%laya-śayana, am,%} n. a bed of young leaves &c.;
see {%kisala, kisalaya,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>14823<pc>0230-c<k1>kiSora<k2>kiSora
{#kiSora#}¦ {%kiśora, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr.
{%kim%} and rt. {%śṝ%}), young, infantine; ({%as%}), m. a colt,
the young of any animal; the sun; Benjamin or
Styrax benzoin ({%= taila-parṇy-oṣadhi%}); N. of a
Dānava; a youth, a lad, one from his birth to the
end of his fifteenth year, a minor in law ({%ajāta-%}
{%vyavahāra%}) becoming after his fifteenth year subject
to suits at law (or {%jāta-vyavahāra%}); ({%ī%}), f. a maiden,
a young woman.
<LEND>

<L>14824<pc>0230-c<k1>kizk<k2>kizk
{#kizk#}¦ {%kiṣk,%} cl. 10. A. {%kiṣkayate, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to injure, kill; (a various reading
for {%hiṣk%} and {%hikk%}); [cf. Hib. <nsi>ceasaim,</nsi> ‘I torment,
crucify, vex.’]
<LEND>

<L>14825<pc>0230-c<k1>kizkinDa<k2>kizkinDa
{#kizkinDa#}¦ {%kiṣkindha, as, ā%} or {%ī,%} m. f., N. of
a mountain in the south of India, in Oḍra, containing
a cave, the residence of the monkey-prince Bālin.
{%—Kiṣkindha-parvata, as,%} m., N. of a place.
{%—Kiṣkindhā-kāṇḍa, am,%} n. title of the fourth
book of the Rāmāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>14826<pc>0230-c<k1>kizkinDaka<k2>kizkinDaka
{%Kiṣkindhaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>14827<pc>0230-c<k1>kizkinDya<k2>kizkinDya
{%Kiṣkindhya, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. (but generally f.), N.
of a mountain and of a district {%= kiṣkindha%} above,
said to be in the peninsula, in the northern part
of Mysore, near the sources of the Pampā river,
the territory of Bālin the monkey-king, from whom
it was conquered by Rāma and transferred to Su-
grīva, the brother of Bāli and rightful king. The
story is told in the fourth book of the Rāmāyaṇa.
The name {%Kiṣkindhyā%} is also applied to the capital
city of the district, the mountain being called
Ṛṣya-mūka. {%—Kiṣkindhyā-kāṇḍa, as,%} m. title
of the fourth book of the Rāmāyaṇa; also of the
Adhyātma-rāmāyaṇa. {%—Kiṣkindhyādhipa (˚ya-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. a N. of Bālin, a monkey-king slain
by Rāma.
<LEND>
[Page0231-a+ 72]

<L>14828<pc>0231-a<k1>kizku<k2>kizku
{#kizku#}¦ {%kiṣku, us, us, u,%} vile, bad, con-
temptible; ({%us%}), m. f. the fore-arm, a cubit, a span;
an instrument for measuring lengths {%= hasta%} or {%kara%}
= twenty-four thumbs' breadths = (1/400) of a Nalva.
{%—Kiṣku-parvan, ā,%} m., N. of several kinds of
reed, as bamboo, sugar-cane, Arundo Tibialis.
<LEND>

<L>14829<pc>0231-a<k1>kis<k2>kis
{#kis#}¦ {%kis,%} ind., Ved. a particle of interro-
gation, ‘whether, if;’ according to native commen-
tators {%= kartṛ,%} ‘a doer;’ [cf. {%nakis, mākis.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14830<pc>0231-a<k1>kisa<k2>kisa
{#kisa#}¦ {%kisa, as,%} m., N. of an attendant of
the sun.
<LEND>

<L>14831<pc>0231-a<k1>kisara<k2>kisara
{#kisara#}¦ {%kisara, am,%} n. an article for sale (?).
<LEND>

<L>14832<pc>0231-a<k1>kisarika<k2>kisarika
{%Kisarika, as, ī, am,%}¦ selling Kisara.
<LEND>

<L>14833<pc>0231-a<k1>kisala<k2>kisala
{#kisala#}¦ {%kisala%} or {%kisalaya, as, am,%} m. n. a
sprout or shoot, the extremity of a branch bearing
new leaves.
<LEND>

<L>14834<pc>0231-a<k1>kisalayita<k2>kisalayita
{%Kisalayita, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with leaf-buds
or young shoots; [cf. {%kiśala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14835<pc>0231-a<k1>kIkawa<k2>kIkawa
{#kIkawa#}¦ {%kīkaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a people not
belonging to the Āryan race; N. of a son of Ṛṣabha;
also of Saṅkaṭa; N. of a country, Behar; a horse
(originally perhaps a horse of the Kīkaṭas); ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), poor, needy; miserly, avaricious.
<LEND>

<L>14836<pc>0231-a<k1>kIkara<k2>kIkara
{#kIkara#}¦ {%kīkara, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?),
N. of a Grāma in the word {%kamala-kīkara,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>14837<pc>0231-a<k1>kIkasa<k2>kIkasa
{#kIkasa#}¦ {%kīkasa, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%kak%}), hard, firm; ({%ās%}), f. pl., Ved. the breast-bone
and the cartilages of the ribs connected with it,
cartilagines costarum; ({%am%}), n. a bone in general;
({%as%}), m. a bone, an insect. {%—Kīkasa-mukha%} or
{%kīkasāsya (˚sa-ās˚), as,%} m. a bird in general.
<LEND>

<L>14838<pc>0231-a<k1>kIki<k2>kIki
{#kIki#}¦ {%kīki, is,%} m. a blue jay; [cf. {%kiki.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14839<pc>0231-a<k1>kIcaka<k2>kIcaka
{#kIcaka#}¦ {%kīcaka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%cīk%}), a hollow bamboo; a bamboo whistling or rattling
in the wind, Arundo Karka, a reed; a kind of tree;
N. of a people, a tribe of the Kekayas, (a Kīcaka is
chief of the army of king Virāṭa, and is conquered
by Bhīma-sena); N. of a Daitya or demon; a certain
Rākṣasa or goblin. {%—Kīcaka-jit, t,%} or {%kīcaka-%}
{%nisūdana, as,%} or {%kīcaka-bhid, t,%} m. an epithet of
Bhīma-sena, conqueror of Kīcaka. {%—Kīcaka-badha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the killing of Kīcaka,’ title of a poem.
<LEND>

<L>14840<pc>0231-a<k1>kIja<k2>kIja
{#kIja#}¦ {%kīja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. wonderful.
<LEND>

<L>14841<pc>0231-a<k1>kIw<k2>kIw
{#kIw#}¦ {%kīṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%kīṭayati, -yitum,%} to
tinge or colour; to bind.
<LEND>

<L>14842<pc>0231-a<k1>kIwa<k2>kIwa
{#kIwa#}¦ {%kīṭa, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. a worm, an
insect; an expression of contempt, e. g. {%pakṣi-kīṭa,%}
a miserable bird; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κίς.</lang>] {%—Kīṭa-ghna, as,%} m.
sulphur (‘destroying insects’). {%—Kīṭa-ja, am,%} n.
silk; ({%ā%}), f. lac, an animal dye of a red colour.
{%—Kīṭa-pakṣodbhava (˚ṣa-ud˚), as,%} m. the
change from the chrysalis or larva to the butterfly.
{%—Kīṭa-pādikā,%} f. the plant Cissus Pedata. {%—Kīṭa-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. a butterfly. {%—Kīṭa-mātā,%} f. the plant
Cissus Pedata. {%—Kīṭa-śatru, us,%} m. (?) and {%kīṭāri%}
{%(˚ṭa-ari), is,%} m. (?) a species of plant.
<LEND>

<L>14843<pc>0231-a<k1>kIwaka<k2>kIwaka
{%Kīṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a worm, an insect; a kind of bard
({%māgadha-jāti%}), a panegyrist, descended from a
Kṣatriya father and Vaiśya mother; N. of a prince;
({%as, ā, am%}), hard, harsh, unfeeling.
<LEND>

<L>14844<pc>0231-a<k1>kIqera<k2>kIqera
{#kIqera#}¦ {%kīḍera, as,%} m. the plant Amaranthus
Polygamus.
<LEND>

<L>14845<pc>0231-a<k1>kIdfkza<k2>kIdfkza
{#kIdfkza#}¦ {%kīdṛkṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%ki%} or {%kid%}
and {%dṛkṣa,%} rt. {%dṛś,%} see {%īdṛkṣa%}), of what kind?
of what sort? of what description? of what qualities?
who or what like?
<LEND>

<L>14846<pc>0231-a<k1>kIdfS<k2>kIdfS
{%Kīdṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. {%ṅ,%} of what kind? of what sort?
&c., who or what like? {%yādṛk-kīdṛk-ca,%} of what-
soever kind or sort. {%—Kīdṛg-vyāpāravat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} of what profession or vocation?
<LEND>

<L>14847<pc>0231-a<k1>kIdfSa<k2>kIdfSa
{%Kīdṛśa, as, ī, am,%}¦ of what kind? what like?
[cf. Slav. <nsi>ko-lik,</nsi> Them. <nsi>ko-liko;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">πη-λίκος;</lang>
[Page0231-b+ 74]
Goth. <nsi>hvê-leiks,</nsi> Them. <nsi>hvê-leika;</nsi> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>we-lcher;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>quâ-lis.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>14848<pc>0231-b<k1>kIna<k2>kIna
{#kIna#}¦ {%kīna, am,%} n. flesh; [cf. {%kīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14849<pc>0231-b<k1>kInAra<k2>kInAra
{#kInAra#}¦ {%kīnāra, as,%} m., Ved. {%= kīnāśa%} (?),
a cultivator of the soil; (Sāy.) a vile man.
<LEND>

<L>14850<pc>0231-b<k1>kInASa<k2>kInASa
{#kInASa#}¦ {%kīnāśa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kliś;%} according to others fr. {%kim%} and {%nāśa%}), a
labourer or cultivator of the soil; the poverty of this
class of men in India was proverbial, so that {%kīnāśa%}
meant sometimes ‘a very poor man;’ according to
native lexicographers {%kīnāśa%} may be an adj. and has
the following meanings, cultivating the soil; poor;
covetous, niggardly; small, little, killing animals or
killing secretly; ({%as%}), m. a kind of monkey [cf.
{%kīśa%}]; an epithet of Yama; a kind of Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>14851<pc>0231-b<k1>kIm<k2>kIm
{#kIm#}¦ {%kīm,%} ind. a particle in {%ākīm%} and {%mā-%}
{%kīm,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>14852<pc>0231-b<k1>kIra<k2>kIra
{#kIra#}¦ {%kīra, as,%} m. a parrot; the country and
(pl.) the people of Kāśmīra; ({%am%}), n. flesh; [cf.
{%kīna.%}] {%—Kīra-varṇaka, am,%} n. a kind of perfume
{%(sthauṇeyaka)%}. {%—Kīreṣṭa (˚ra-iṣ˚), as,%} m., N.
of several plants; the tree Mangifera Indica; a species
of mountain Pīlū Ākhoṭa; another plant, {%= jala-%}
{%madhūka.%}
<LEND>

<L>14853<pc>0231-b<k1>kIraka<k2>kIraka
{#kIraka#}¦ {%kīraka, as,%} m. gaining, obtaining;
a Buddha; a kind of tree.
<LEND>

<L>14854<pc>0231-b<k1>kIri<k2>kIri
{#kIri#}¦ {%kīri, is,%} m. (fr. 2. {%kṛ%}), Ved. grateful
or laudatory mention or remembrance; a poem, hymn,
praise; one who praises, a poet. {%—Kīri-codana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. exciting praise, exciting the praiser.
<LEND>

<L>14855<pc>0231-b<k1>kIrRa<k2>kIrRa
{#kIrRa#}¦ {%kīrṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ%}), scattered,
thrown, cast; covered, secret, hidden; injured, hurt;
full.
<LEND>

<L>14856<pc>0231-b<k1>kIrRi<k2>kIrRi
{%Kīrṇi, is,%}¦ f. scattering, throwing; covering, con-
cealing.
<LEND>

<L>14857<pc>0231-b<k1>kIrya<k2>kIrya
{%Kīrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ what is scattered.
<LEND>

<L>14858<pc>0231-b<k1>kIryamARa<k2>kIryamARa
{%Kīryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being covered, bestrewed;
being scattered; being thrown at.
<LEND>

<L>14859<pc>0231-b<k1>kIrtana<k2>kIrtana
{#kIrtana, kIrti#}¦, &c. See under rt. {%kṝt.%}
<LEND>

<L>14860<pc>0231-b<k1>kIrmI<k2>kIrmI
{#kIrmI#}¦ {%kīrmī,%} f. a house for straw (?).
<LEND>

<L>14861<pc>0231-b<k1>kIrSA<k2>kIrSA
{#kIrSA#}¦ {%kīrśā,%} f., Ved. a species of bird.
<LEND>

<L>14862<pc>0231-b<k1>kIl<k2>kIl
{#kIl#}¦ {%kīl,%} cl. 1. or 10. P. {%kīlati, kīlayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to bind; to fasten; to stake; to
pin.
<LEND>

<L>14863<pc>0231-b<k1>kIla<k2>kIla
{%Kīla, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a sharp piece of wood, a stake,
a pin, a peg, a bolt, a wedge, &c.; a lance, a pike;
a post, a post in a cow-house to which cows are fas-
tened, a pillar; a weapon; the elbow; a blow or
punch with the elbow; a blow, a thump; a blow in
copulation; flame, lambent flame; a small or minute
particle; a gnomon; a position of the fœtus impeding
delivery; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Kīla-saṃsparśa, as,%}
m., N. of a plant, commonly Gāva, = Diospyros Glu-
tinosa, a plant, the fruit of which yields a substance
like turpentine used to cover the bottom of boats.
<LEND>

<L>14864<pc>0231-b<k1>kIlaka<k2>kIlaka
{%Kīlaka, as,%}¦ m. a pin, a bolt, a wedge; a splint
for confining a broken bone; a fence; also {%= śivaka,%}
a pillar for cows &c. to rub themselves against, or
one to which they are tied.
<LEND>

<L>14865<pc>0231-b<k1>kIlikA<k2>kIlikA
{%Kīlikā,%}¦ f. the pin of an axle.
<LEND>

<L>14866<pc>0231-b<k1>kIlita<k2>kIlita
{%Kīlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ staked, impaled; set up as a
stake or pole; pierced, transfixed; pinned, fastened
by a stake &c.; bound, tied, confined.
<LEND>

<L>14867<pc>0231-b<k1>kIlAla<k2>kIlAla
{#kIlAla#}¦ {%kīlāla, as,%} m. a sweet beverage;
also a heavenly drink similar to Amṛta, the food of
the gods; honey; ({%am%}), n. blood; water. {%—Kīlāla-%}
{%ja, am,%} n. flesh. {%—Kīlāla-dhi, is,%} m. the ocean.
{%—Kīlāla-pa, as, ā, am,%} drinking blood; ({%as%}), m.
a Rākṣasa, a sort of goblin or imp. {%—Kīlāla-pā,%}
{%ās,%} m., Ved. an epithet of Agni, ‘drinking the beve-
rage Kīlāla;’ ({%ās%}), m. an attendant of Yama, or N.
of one of the attendants of Yama. {%—Kīlālodhan%}
{%(˚la-ūdhan), ā, dhnī, a,%} Ved. carrying the beverage
Kīlāla in one's udder.
<LEND>
[Page0231-c+ 68]

<L>14868<pc>0231-c<k1>kIvat<k2>kIvat
{#kIvat#}¦ {%kīvat, ān, atī, at%} (fr. 1. {%ki;%} cf. {%kiyat%}),
Ved. how much? how long?
<LEND>

<L>14869<pc>0231-c<k1>kISa<k2>kISa
{#kISa#}¦ {%kīśa, as, ā, am,%} naked; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. an
ape, a monkey; a bird; the sun. {%—Kīśa-parṇa, as,%}
m. the tree Achyranthes Aspera ({%apāmārga%}); [cf.
{%keśa-parṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14870<pc>0231-c<k1>kIsta<k2>kIsta
{#kIsta#}¦ {%kīsta, as,%} m., Ved. one who praises,
a singer, a poet; (related to {%kīrti?%}).
<LEND>

<L>14871<pc>0231-c<k1>ku<k2>ku<h>1
{#ku#} 1¦. {%ku,%} a pronominal base appearing in
{%kutas, kutra, kuvid, kuha, kva,%} and as a prefix im-
plying deterioration, depreciation, deficiency, want,
diminution, littleness, prevention, hindrance, reproach,
contempt, sin, guilt; originally perhaps {%ku%} signified
how (strange!); (as a separate word {%ku%} occurs in the
Vedas in the sense of ‘where?’ {%ku cid,%} wherever,
anywhere); [cf. {%ku-kathā, ku-kara,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>14872<pc>0231-c<k1>ku<k2>ku<h>2
{#ku#} 2¦. {%ku, us,%} f. the earth; the ground or
base of a triangle or other plane figure. {%—Ku-kīla,%}
{%as,%} m. a mountain (‘a pin or bolt of the earth’).
<LEND>

<L>14873<pc>0231-c<k1>ku<k2>ku<h>3
{#ku#} 3¦. {%ku,%} cl. 2. P. or cl. 1. A., Ved. {%kauti%}
or {%kavīti, kavate, cukāva, cukuve, kotum%} or
{%kavītum%} (?), to sound; to sound indistinctly; to cry,
moan, groan; to cry as a bird, to coo, hum as a bee
&c.: Caus. {%kāvayati:%} Desid. {%cukūṣati, -te:%} Intens.
{%cokūyate%} and {%kokūyate,%} to cry aloud.
<LEND>

<L>14874<pc>0231-c<k1>ku<k2>ku<h>4
{#ku#} 4¦. {%ku%} or {%kū,%} cl. 6. A. {%kuvate, cukuve,%}
{%kutum%} or {%kuvitum:%} Intens. {%cokūyate,%} to cry,
make a noise; to moan or groan; [cf. Hib. <nsi>caoi,</nsi>
<nsi>caoidh,</nsi> ‘lamentation, mourning;’ <nsi>caoidhim,</nsi> ‘I la-
ment, mourn, grieve.’]
<LEND>

<L>14875<pc>0231-c<k1>kuMS<k2>kuMS
{#kuMS#}¦ {%kuṃś%} or {%kuṃs,%} cl. 1. or 10. P. {%kuṃśati,%}
{%kuṃśayati,%} or {%kuṃsati, kuṃsayati, -yitum,%}
to speak; to shine.
<LEND>

<L>14876<pc>0231-c<k1>kuk<k2>kuk
{#kuk#}¦ {%kuk,%} cl. 1. A. {%kokate, cukuke, kokitum,%}
to take, accept, seize: Desid. {%cukokiṣate%}
or {%cukukiṣate.%}
<LEND>

<L>14877<pc>0231-c<k1>kuka<k2>kuka
{%Kuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ taking, accepting.
<LEND>

<L>14878<pc>0231-c<k1>kukaTA<k2>kukaTA
{#kukaTA#}¦ {%ku-kathā,%} f. a bad, miserable tale.
<LEND>

<L>14879<pc>0231-c<k1>kukaBa<k2>kukaBa
{#kukaBa#}¦ {%kukabha, am,%} n. a kind of spirituous
liquor.
<LEND>

<L>14880<pc>0231-c<k1>kukara<k2>kukara
{#kukara#}¦ {%ku-kara, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}) , having
a crooked or withered arm; acting wickedly, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>14881<pc>0231-c<k1>kukarman<k2>kukarman
{#kukarman#}¦ {%ku-karman, a,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
wicked deed; wickedness, depravity, villainy; ({%ā, ā,%}
{%a%}), performing evil actions, wicked, depraved. {%—Ku-%}
{%karma-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} wicked, depraved.
<LEND>

<L>14882<pc>0231-c<k1>kukArya<k2>kukArya
{%Ku-kārya, am,%}¦ n. a bad action, sin, wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>14883<pc>0231-c<k1>kukIrtti<k2>kukIrtti
{#kukIrtti#}¦ {%ku-kīrtti, is,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), ill-re-
pute, notoriety.
<LEND>

<L>14884<pc>0231-c<k1>kukuwa<k2>kukuwa
{#kukuwa#}¦ {%kukuṭa, as,%} m., N. of a pot-herb, {%=%}
{%sitāvara,%} commonly {%suṣaṇiśāka,%} Marsilea Quadri-
folia.
<LEND>

<L>14885<pc>0231-c<k1>kukuwumbinI<k2>kukuwumbinI
{#kukuwumbinI#}¦ {%ku-kuṭumbinī,%} f. a bad house-
wife.
<LEND>

<L>14886<pc>0231-c<k1>kukuda<k2>kukuda
{#kukuda#}¦ {%kukuda, as,%} m. one who gives away
a girl in marriage after decoration with fit ornaments
and the prescribed ceremonies; also {%kūkuda,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>14887<pc>0231-c<k1>kukundara<k2>kukundara
{#kukundara#}¦ {%kukundara%} or {%kukundura, am,%} n.,
or {%e,%} du. n. the cavities of the loins just above the
hips [cf. {%kakundara%}]; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%kukkura-dru,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>14888<pc>0231-c<k1>kukunDa<k2>kukunDa
{#kukunDa#}¦ {%kukundha, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
kind of evil spirit.
<LEND>

<L>14889<pc>0231-c<k1>kukuBA<k2>kukuBA
{#kukuBA#}¦ {%kukubhā,%} f. one of the female per-
sonifications of music or Rāgiṇīs.
<LEND>

<L>14890<pc>0231-c<k1>kukura<k2>kukura
{#kukura#}¦ {%kukura, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kuk%}),
a dog; N. of a plant and perfume, {%= granthi-parṇī;%}
N. of a prince, a son of Andhaka; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
[Page0232-a+ 73]
descendants of this prince; N. of a people, a branch
of the Yadu race or Yādavas; the country of this
people; [cf. {%kukkura%} and {%kaukura.%}] {%—Kukura-%}
{%jihvā,%} f. a species of fish, Acheiris Kookor Zibha;
the plant Leea Staphylea; another plant, Ixora
Undulata. {%—Kukurādhinātha (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m.
lord of the Yādavas, an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>14891<pc>0232-a<k1>kukUwI<k2>kukUwI
{#kukUwI#}¦ {%kukūṭī,%} f. the plant Salmalia Mala-
barica; [cf. {%śālmali.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14892<pc>0232-a<k1>kukURaka<k2>kukURaka
{#kukURaka#}¦ {%kukūṇaka, as,%} m. a kind of disease
of the eyes in infants.
<LEND>

<L>14893<pc>0232-a<k1>kukUnana<k2>kukUnana
{#kukUnana#}¦ {%kukūnana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (an
onomatopoetic word), gargling.
<LEND>

<L>14894<pc>0232-a<k1>kukUraBa<k2>kukUraBa
{#kukUraBa#}¦ {%kukūrabha, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
evil spirit.
<LEND>

<L>14895<pc>0232-a<k1>kukUla<k2>kukUla
{#kukUla#}¦ {%kukūla, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. chaff,
conflagration of chaff, a fire made of chaff; ({%am%}), n.
a hole filled with stakes; armour, mail.
<LEND>

<L>14896<pc>0232-a<k1>kukftya<k2>kukftya
{#kukftya#}¦ {%ku-kṛtya, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), an evil
deed, evil, wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>14897<pc>0232-a<k1>kukola<k2>kukola
{#kukola#}¦ {%kukola, am,%} n. the jujube, Zizyphus
Jujuba; [cf. {%koli.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14898<pc>0232-a<k1>kukkuwa<k2>kukkuwa
{#kukkuwa#}¦ {%kukkuṭa, as,%} m. a cock, a wild cock;
a whisp of lighted straw or grass, a firebrand, a spark
of fire; the offspring of a Niṣāda by a Śūdra woman
or woman of the fourth caste; ({%is%} or {%ī%}), f. hypocrisy,
interested observance of religious duties; ({%ī%}), f. a
hen; a small house-lizard; the silk-cotton tree,
Bombax Heptaphyllum, or the red cotton tree, Sal-
malia Malabarica. {%—Kukkuṭa-kantha, am,%} n., N. of
a town. {%—Kukkuṭa-dhvani, is,%} m. the crowing of
a cock, the cackling of fowls. {%—Kukkuṭa-pakṣaka,%}
{%as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), a knife shaped like the
wing of a cock. {%—Kukkuṭa-pāda, as,%} m., N. of a
mountain (cock-foot). {%—Kukkuṭa-maṇḍapa, as,%}
m., N. of a sanctuary in Benares standing on the
right side of a statue of Śiva, a place where final
emancipation may be attained; [cf. {%mukti-maṇḍa-%}
{%pa.%}] {%—Kukkuṭa-mastaka, as,%} m. a sort of pepper,
Piper Chaba. {%—Kukkuṭa-vrata, am,%} n. a religious
observance (worship of Śiva) on the seventh of the
light fortnight of the month Bhādra, by women,
especially for the sake of obtaining offspring. {%—Kuk-%}
{%kuṭa-śikha, as,%} m. safflower, Carthamus Tinctorius
(cockscomb). {%—Kukkuṭā-giri, is,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain. {%—Kukkuṭāṇḍa (˚ṭa-aṇ˚), am,%} n. a fowl's egg.
{%—Kukkuṭāṇḍaka, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), a
species of rice. {%—Kukkuṭābha (˚ṭa-ābhā), as,%} m. a
kind of snake compared to a fowl (perhaps from
having a crest or comb). {%—Kukkuṭārāma (˚ṭa-ār˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a grove; N. of a celebrated hermitage
near Gayā. {%—Kukkuṭārma (˚ṭa-ar˚), am,%} n., N.
of a place. {%—Kukkuṭāsana (˚ṭa-ās˚), am,%} n. a
particular posture of an ascetic in religious medita-
tion. {%—Kukkuṭāhi (˚ṭa-ahi), is,%} m. {%= kukkuṭābha%}
above. {%—Kukkuṭī-vrata, am,%} n. a ceremony in
honour of Śiva and Durgā; see {%kukkuṭa-vrata.%}
<LEND>

<L>14899<pc>0232-a<k1>kukkuwaka<k2>kukkuwaka
{%Kukkuṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a cock, a wild cock; a man of
a mixed caste, one sprung from a Śūdra and a Niṣāda
woman.
<LEND>

<L>14900<pc>0232-a<k1>kukkuBa<k2>kukkuBa
{#kukkuBa#}¦ {%kukkubha, as,%} m. a wild cock, Pha-
sianus Gallus; varnish, oily gloss.
<LEND>

<L>14901<pc>0232-a<k1>kukkura<k2>kukkura
{#kukkura#}¦ {%kukkura, as,%} m. (a more modern form
for {%kukura%}), a dog; N. of a Muni; also of a prince,
a son of Andhaka; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ī%}),
f. a bitch; ({%am%}), n. a vegetable perfume; [cf.
{%granthi-parṇa.%}] {%—Kukkura-dru, us,%} m., N. of a
plant, {%= tāmra-cūḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>14902<pc>0232-a<k1>kukkuvAc<k2>kukkuvAc
{#kukkuvAc#}¦ {%kukku-vāc, k,%} m. (fr. {%kukku,%} an
onomatopoetic word, and {%vāc%}), a kind of deer, {%=%}
{%sāraṅga-mṛga.%}
<LEND>

<L>14903<pc>0232-a<k1>kukriyA<k2>kukriyA
{#kukriyA#}¦ {%ku-kriyā,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
action; ({%as, ā, am%}), wicked, sinful.
<LEND>
[Page0232-b+ 71]

<L>14904<pc>0232-b<k1>kukza<k2>kukza
{#kukza#}¦ {%kukṣa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kuṣ%}),
the belly.
<LEND>

<L>14905<pc>0232-b<k1>kukzi<k2>kukzi
{%Kukṣi, is,%}¦ m. the belly, the cavity of the abdomen
(in the earlier language generally used in dual); the
interior of anything; the womb, the part of the belly
containing the fœtus; a cavity in general (e. g. {%adri-%}
{%kukṣi,%} cavity of a mountain); the cavity of the
ocean, i. e. a bay, a gulf; a cavern; N. of a son (f.
also of a daughter?) of Priya-vrata and Kāmyā; N.
of Bali; of a king; of a son of Ikṣvāku and father
of Vikukṣi; N. of a region; according to a native
lexicographer {%kukṣi%} means also the sheath of a
sword, and steel; [cf. Lat. <nsi>coxa, coxendix;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">κοχώνη?</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>bûh;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>Bauch.</nsi>]
{%—Kukṣim-bhari, is, is, i,%} one who nourishes only
his belly, filling or pampering the belly, voracious,
gluttonous. {%—Kukṣi-randhra, as,%} m. a kind of
reed. {%—Kukṣi-śūla, as,%} m. pain in the belly, belly-
ache, colic.
<LEND>

<L>14906<pc>0232-b<k1>kukzila<k2>kukzila
{%Kukṣila, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a species of evil spirit.
<LEND>

<L>14907<pc>0232-b<k1>kukzitaki<k2>kukzitaki
{#kukzitaki#}¦ {%kukṣitaki, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>14908<pc>0232-b<k1>kukzeyu<k2>kukzeyu
{#kukzeyu#}¦ {%kukṣeyu, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Raudrāśva; (according to others {%kakṣeyu.%})
<LEND>

<L>14909<pc>0232-b<k1>kuKAwi<k2>kuKAwi
{#kuKAwi#}¦ {%kukhāṭi, is,%} f. (said to be fr. rt.
{%khaṭ%}), wantonness, dalliance, frolic.
<LEND>

<L>14910<pc>0232-b<k1>kuKyAti<k2>kuKyAti
{#kuKyAti#}¦ {%ku-khyāti, is,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), evil
report, infamy; a bad reputation, disrepute, disgrace.
<LEND>

<L>14911<pc>0232-b<k1>kugaRin<k2>kugaRin
{#kugaRin#}¦ {%kugaṇin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. 1. {%ku + gaṇa%}),
belonging to an evil set of people.
<LEND>

<L>14912<pc>0232-b<k1>kugo<k2>kugo
{#kugo#}¦ {%ku-go, aus,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a miserable
or weak bull.
<LEND>

<L>14913<pc>0232-b<k1>kugraha<k2>kugraha
{#kugraha#}¦ {%ku-graha, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), an un-
propitious planet; (five are reckoned by some, viz.
Maṅgala, Ravi, Śani, Rāhu, and Ketu.)
<LEND>

<L>14914<pc>0232-b<k1>kugrAma<k2>kugrAma
{#kugrAma#}¦ {%ku-grāma, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a petty
village without a Rājā, an Agnihotrin, a physician, a
rich man, or a river.
<LEND>

<L>14915<pc>0232-b<k1>kuNkuRa<k2>kuNkuRa
{#kuNkuRa#}¦ {%kuṅkuṇa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N.
of a region.
<LEND>

<L>14916<pc>0232-b<k1>kuNkuma<k2>kuNkuma
{#kuNkuma#}¦ {%kuṅkuma, am,%} n. saffron, Crocus
Sativus, the plant and the pollen of the flowers; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">κρόκος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>crocus?</nsi>]. {%—Kuṅkuma-tāmra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} red, coppery red. {%—Kuṅkuma-reṇu, us,%}
f. the dust or pollen of saffron. {%—Kuṅkumākta%}
{%(˚ma-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} dyed or stained with saffron,
orange, yellow. {%—Kuṅkumāṅka (˚ma-aṅ˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} marked with saffron, dyed or stained of an
orange colour. {%—Kuṅkumāruṇa (˚ma-ar˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} red, ruddy.
<LEND>

<L>14917<pc>0232-b<k1>kuNganI<k2>kuNganI
{#kuNganI#}¦ {%kuṅganī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= mahā-%}
{%jyotiṣmatī.%}
<LEND>

<L>14918<pc>0232-b<k1>kuc<k2>kuc
{#kuc#}¦ {%kuc,%} cl. 6. 1. P. {%kucati, kocati, cukoca,%}
{%kucitum%} or {%kocitum,%} to sound high, to
utter a shrill cry (as a bird); to polish; to go; to
connect, mix; to bend, make curved or crooked, to
be crooked; to oppose, impede; to mark with lines,
to delineate, write; to contract or be contracted; to
contend (?); [cf. {%kuñc.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14919<pc>0232-b<k1>kuca<k2>kuca
{%Kuca, as,%}¦ m. (generally du. {%kucau%}), the female
breast, a teat, a nipple, a pap. {%—Kuca-kumbha, as,%}
m. the female breast. {%—Kuca-taṭa, am,%} n. the
female breast. {%—Kucataṭāgra (˚ṭa-ag˚), am,%} n. a
nipple. {%—Kuca-phala, as,%} m. the pomegranate (the
fruit being shaped like the female breast). {%—Kuca-%}
{%mukha, am,%} n. a nipple. {%—Kucāgra (˚ca-ag˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a nipple.
<LEND>

<L>14920<pc>0232-b<k1>kucita<k2>kucita
{%Kucita, as, ā, am,%}¦ closed, contracted; small, little.
<LEND>

<L>14921<pc>0232-b<k1>kucaRqikA<k2>kucaRqikA
{#kucaRqikA#}¦ {%kucaṇḍikā,%} f. a plant, Aletris
Hyacinthoides, {%= mūrvā.%}
<LEND>

<L>14922<pc>0232-b<k1>kucandana<k2>kucandana
{#kucandana#}¦ {%ku-candana, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}),
red sanders, Pterocarpus Santalinus; sappan or log-
[Page0232-c+ 70]
wood, Cæsalpina Sappan [cf. {%pattrāṅga%}]; a legu-
minous plant, Adenanthera Pavonina; saffron.
<LEND>

<L>14923<pc>0232-c<k1>kucara<k2>kucara
{#kucara#}¦ {%ku-cara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}),
going slowly, creeping; following evil practices, low,
vile, wicked; speaking ill of any one, detracting,
censorious; ({%as%}), m. a fixed star.
<LEND>

<L>14924<pc>0232-c<k1>kucaryA<k2>kucaryA
{%Ku-caryā,%}¦ f. evil conduct, wickedness, impropriety.
<LEND>

<L>14925<pc>0232-c<k1>kucANgerI<k2>kucANgerI
{#kucANgerI#}¦ {%ku-cāṅgerī,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), a kind
of wood sorrel, Rumex Vesicarius, {%= cukrikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>14926<pc>0232-c<k1>kucika<k2>kucika
{#kucika#}¦ {%kucika, as, ā,%} m. f. a kind of fish,
in shape like an eel, commonly Kuñciya, Unibran-
chapertura Cuchiya, or Muræna Apterygia Synbrache;
the Hindūs affirm that its bite is mortal to cows,
though perfectly harmless to men; (also a various
reading for {%kuśika,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>14927<pc>0232-c<k1>kucIrA<k2>kucIrA
{#kucIrA#}¦ {%kucīrā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>14928<pc>0232-c<k1>kucumAra<k2>kucumAra
{#kucumAra#}¦ {%kucumāra, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Aupaniṣadādhikaraṇa.
<LEND>

<L>14929<pc>0232-c<k1>kucela<k2>kucela
{#kucela#}¦ {%ku-cela, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
garment; ({%as, ā, am%}), badly clothed, dressed in
dirty or tattered garments; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant,
{%= avikarṇī%} or {%viddhaparṇī; (ī),%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= ambaṣṭhā,%} commonly Ākanādi, Cissampelos
Hexandra.
<LEND>

<L>14930<pc>0232-c<k1>kucezwA<k2>kucezwA
{#kucezwA#}¦ {%ku-ceṣṭā,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), an evil de-
sign, a wicked contrivance.
<LEND>

<L>14931<pc>0232-c<k1>kucCa<k2>kucCa
{#kucCa#}¦ {%kuccha, am,%} n. the white water-lily.
<LEND>

<L>14932<pc>0232-c<k1>kuj<k2>kuj
{#kuj#}¦ {%kuj,%} cl. 1. P. {%kojati, kojitum,%} to steal;
cl. 6. P. {%kujati,%} to be crooked; [cf. {%kuñj.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14933<pc>0232-c<k1>kuja<k2>kuja
{#kuja#}¦ {%ku-ja, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%ku%} and rt. {%jan%}), a
tree; the son of the earth, a N. of the planet Mars;
N. of a Daitya, also called Naraka, conquered by
Kṛṣṇa; ({%ā%}), f. the daughter of the earth, an epithet
of the goddess Durgā; also of Sītā. {%—Kuja-pañ-%}
{%camī,%} f. the fifth day of the moon occurring on a
Tuesday or the day of Mars, by some thought unlucky.
<LEND>

<L>14934<pc>0232-c<k1>kujana<k2>kujana
{#kujana#}¦ {%ku-jana, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad or
wicked man, a low, mean or vulgar person.
<LEND>

<L>14935<pc>0232-c<k1>kujananI<k2>kujananI
{#kujananI#}¦ {%ku-jananī,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
mother.
<LEND>

<L>14936<pc>0232-c<k1>kujanman<k2>kujanman
{#kujanman#}¦ {%ku-janman, ā, ā, a%} (see 1. {%ku%}),
low-born, of inferior origin.
<LEND>

<L>14937<pc>0232-c<k1>kujamBa<k2>kujamBa
{#kujamBa#}¦ {%ku-jambha, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), N. of
a Daitya, a younger brother of Jambha and son of
Prahrāda or Prahlāda, a son of Hiraṇya-kaśipu.
<LEND>

<L>14938<pc>0232-c<k1>kujamBala<k2>kujamBala
{#kujamBala#}¦ {%kujambhala, as,%} m. a thief who
breaks into a house; also {%kujambhira%} and {%kujam-%}
{%bhila;%} [cf. {%kumbhila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14939<pc>0232-c<k1>kujjiSa<k2>kujjiSa
{#kujjiSa#}¦ {%kujjiśa%} or {%kujjhiśa, as,%} m. a sort
of fish; [cf. {%kuḍiśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14940<pc>0232-c<k1>kujJawi<k2>kujJawi
{#kujJawi#}¦ {%kujjhaṭi, is%} or {%ī,%} or {%kujjhaṭikā,%} f. a
fog or mist.
<LEND>

<L>14941<pc>0232-c<k1>kuYc<k2>kuYc
{#kuYc#}¦ {%kuñc,%} cl. 1. P. {%kuñcati, cukuñca,%}
{%kuñcitum,%} to make crooked; to be
crooked; to bend or curve, to move crookedly; to
go; to go to or towards; to be or become small;
to lessen, to make small; to shrink, to contract, to
draw together: Caus. {%kuñcayati, -yitum:%} Desid.
{%cukuñciṣati:%} Intens. {%cokucyate;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>cuach-</nsi>
<nsi>aim,</nsi> ‘I fold, plait;’ <nsi>cuach,</nsi> ‘a curl;’ <nsi>cuachach,</nsi>
‘curled, frizzled.’]
<LEND>

<L>14942<pc>0232-c<k1>kuYcana<k2>kuYcana
{%Kuñcana, am,%}¦ n. curving, bending, contracting;
contraction; a certain disease of the eyes, contracting
the eyelids.
<LEND>

<L>14943<pc>0232-c<k1>kuYcaPalA<k2>kuYcaPalA
{%Kuñca-phalā,%}¦ f. a kind of gourd, {%= kuṣmāṇḍī;%}
(a wrong reading for {%kuca-phala?%}).
<LEND>

<L>14944<pc>0232-c<k1>kuYci<k2>kuYci
{%Kuñci, is,%}¦ f. a measure of capacity equal to eight
handfuls.
<LEND>

<L>14945<pc>0232-c<k1>kuYcikA<k2>kuYcikA
{%Kuñcikā,%}¦ f. a key; a fish, commonly Kuñciya, in
shape like an eel and eaten as one, Unibranchapertura
[Page0233-a+ 78]
Cuchiya, or the fish Muræna Apterygia, Synbrache
[cf. {%kucika%}]; a plant bearing a red and black seed
used as a weight, Abrus Precatorius; or another
plant bearing a pungent seed, Nigella Indica; a sort
of reed; the branch or shoot of a bamboo.
<LEND>

<L>14946<pc>0233-a<k1>kuYcita<k2>kuYcita
{%Kuñcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ crooked, curved, bent, con-
tracted, &c.; ({%am%}), n., N. of a plant. {%—Kuñcitāṅ-%}
{%guli (˚ta-aṅ˚), is, is, i,%} with bent or curved fingers.
<LEND>

<L>14947<pc>0233-a<k1>kuYj<k2>kuYj
{#kuYj#}¦ {%kuñj,%} cl. 1. P. {%kuñjati, -jitum,%} to
murmur, {%= kūj.%}
<LEND>

<L>14948<pc>0233-a<k1>kuYja<k2>kuYja
{#kuYja#}¦ {%kuñja, as, am,%} m. n. a place overrun
with plants or overgrown with creepers, a bower, an
arbour; a cave; the lower jaw; an elephant's tusk
or jaw; a tooth; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Kuñja-%}
{%kuṭīra, as,%} m. a bower, an arbour. {%—Kuñja-vallarī,%}
f., N. of a plant, {%= nikuñjikāmlā.%}
<LEND>

<L>14949<pc>0233-a<k1>kuYjikA<k2>kuYjikA
{%Kuñjikā,%}¦ f. another N. of the plant Kuñja-vallarī;
fennel-flower seed, {%= kuñcikā,%} Nigella Indica.
<LEND>

<L>14950<pc>0233-a<k1>kuYjara<k2>kuYjara
{#kuYjara#}¦ {%kuñjara, as,%} m. (fr. {%kuñja ?%}), an ele-
phant; anything pre-eminent in its kind (generally
in compounds, e. g. {%puruṣa-kuñjara,%} an eminent
man); the tree Ficus Religiosa; N. of a Nāga; N.
of a prince of the Sauvīraka race; N. of a mountain;
of a region; hair; ({%ā%} and {%ī%}), f. a female elephant;
({%ā%}), f. the plant Bignonia Suaveolens; another plant,
Grislea Tomentosa. {%—Kuñjara-kara, as,%} m. an
elephant's trunk. {%—Kuñjara-kṣāra-mūla, am,%} n.
a kind of radish {%(mūlaka)%}. {%—Kuñjara-graha, as,%}
m. an elephant-catcher. {%—Kuñjara-darī,%} f. ‘ele-
phant's cave,’ N. of a place. {%—Kuñjara-pippalī,%} f.,
N. of a plant described as bearing a fruit resembling
long pepper; [cf. {%gaja-pippalī.%}] {%—Kuñjara-rūpin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} elephant-shaped. {%—Kuñjarānīka (˚ra-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the division of an army consisting of ele-
phants, an elephant-corps. {%—Kuñjarārāti (˚ra-ar˚),%}
{%is,%} m. a lion; the Śarabha, a fabulous animal with
eight legs, (‘enemy of the elephant.’){%—Kuñjarā-%}
{%luka (˚ra-āl˚), am,%} n. a species of esculent root, a
sort of yam. {%—Kuñjarāśana (˚ra-aś˚), as,%} m. the
holy fig tree, Ficus Religiosa.
<LEND>

<L>14951<pc>0233-a<k1>kuYjala<k2>kuYjala
{#kuYjala#}¦ {%kuñjala, am,%} n. sour gruel; [cf.
{%kāñjikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14952<pc>0233-a<k1>kuw<k2>kuw
{#kuw#}¦ {%kuṭ,%} cl. 6. P. {%kuṭati, cukoṭa, kuṭi-%}
{%ṣyati, akuṭīt, kuṭitum,%} to be or become
crooked or curved; to bend, curve, curl; to make
crooked; to be dishonest, cheat or deceive; cl. 4. P.
{%kuṭyati,%} or cl. 10. A. {%koṭayate, -yitum,%} to break
to pieces, tear asunder, divide; to speak indistinctly;
to be warm, burn: Caus. {%koṭayati:%} Desid. {%cukuṭi-%}
{%ṣati:%} Intens. {%cokuṭyate;%} [cf. {%kuṭṭ%} and {%kuṇṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14953<pc>0233-a<k1>kuwa<k2>kuwa
{%Kuṭa, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. n. a water-pot, a jar, pitcher;
({%as%}), m. a fort, a stronghold; a house [cf. {%kuṭi,%}
{%kuṭī,%} and {%kūṭa%}]; a hammer, a mallet for breaking
small stones; a tree; a mountain; N. of a man;
({%am%}), n., Ved. {%= kṛta,%} a work. {%—Kuṭa-kārikā,%} f.
a female servant (bringing the water-jar). {%—Kuṭa-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. the medicinal tree Wrightia Antidysenterica,
commonly called Karaya; the seeds are used as a
vermifuge [cf. {%indra-yava%}]; a N. of the sage
Agastya (‘born in a water-jar’); also of Droṇa,
q. v. {%—Kuṭaja-mallī,%} f. a kind of plant.
<LEND>

<L>14954<pc>0233-a<k1>kuwaka<k2>kuwaka
{%Kuṭaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a people; N. of a moun-
tain; the post round which the string of the churning-
stick winds [cf. {%kuṭara%} and {%kuṭhara%}]; ({%am%}), n. a
plough without a pole.
<LEND>

<L>14955<pc>0233-a<k1>kuwi<k2>kuwi
{%Kuṭi, is, ī,%}¦ m. f. a curvature, a curve; a hut,
cottage, house, hall, shop; ({%ī%}), f. a vessel with
openings used for fumigations; a bawd, a procuress
or go-between; a nosegay, a bundle or tuft of flowers
or vegetables; a kind of perfume, commonly Murā;
spirituous liquor; ({%is%}), m. the body; a tree; [cf.
Eng. <nsi>hut;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Hütte.</nsi>] {%—Kuṭi-cara, as,%} m. a
crocodile or porpoise. {%—Kuṭi-pārthiva, as,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Kuṭī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} curved, curled,
twisted, frizzled; ({%am%}), n. anything (as woollen cloth)
curled or twisted. {%—Kuṭī-gata, as, ā, am,%} inside the
house. {%—Kuṭī-gu, us,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kuṭī-%}
{%caka, as,%} m. a kind of religious mendicant, one
[Page0233-b+ 72]
who lives at his son's expense; (lit. ‘delighting in
staying in the house.’){%—Kuṭī-cara, as,%} m. an
ascetic of a particular order, one who consigns the
care of his family to his son and remains at home en-
gaged solely in devotion; or one who goes begging
from one house to another. {%—Kuṭī-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of a house (?). {%—Kuṭī-mukha, as,%} m., N.
of one of the attendants of Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>14956<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwika<k2>kuwika
{%Kuṭika, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, crooked; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a river.
<LEND>

<L>14957<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwita<k2>kuwita
{%Kuṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ crooked, bent.
<LEND>

<L>14958<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwitf<k2>kuwitf
{%Kuṭitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ making crooked; acting
dishonestly; being bent.
<LEND>

<L>14959<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwira<k2>kuwira
{%Kuṭira, am,%}¦ n. a hut, a cottage.
<LEND>

<L>14960<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwila<k2>kuwila
{%Kuṭila, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, crooked, curved, round,
running in curved lines, crisped, curled; going
crookedly, tortuous; insincere, dishonest, fraudu-
lent; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant [cf. {%tagarapādī%}]; N. of
a river; (according to some) N. of the Sarasvatī;
N. of a metre containing four lines of fourteen sylla-
bles each; ({%am%}), n., N. of a plant [cf. {%tagara,%}
{%kuñcita, vakra%}]; a kind of perfume; tin. {%—Kuṭila-%}
{%gati, is,%} f. a species of the Atijagatī metre, {%= can-%}
{%drikā%}. {%—Kuṭila-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going crookedly,
tortuous. {%—Kuṭila-tā,%} f. or {%kuṭila-tva, am,%} n.
crookedness; guile, dishonesty. {%—Kuṭila-pakṣma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having curved eyelashes or brows.
{%—Kuṭila-svabhāva, as, ā, am,%} crooked-minded,
disingenuous. {%—Kuṭilāśaya (˚la-āś˚), as, ā, am,%}
ill-intentioned, malevolent.
<LEND>

<L>14961<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwilaka<k2>kuwilaka
{%Kuṭilaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ bent, curved, crooked,
winding; ({%ikā%}), f. crouching, coming stealthily as a
hunter on his prey; a peculiar movement or gesture
(in theatrical language); an instrument used by a
blacksmith, a blacksmith's forge.
<LEND>

<L>14962<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwIkA<k2>kuwIkA
{%Kuṭīkā,%}¦ f. a small house.
<LEND>

<L>14963<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwIya<k2>kuwIya
{%Kuṭīya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kuṭīyati, -yitum,%} to imagine
one's self in a hut.
<LEND>

<L>14964<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwIra<k2>kuwIra
{%Kuṭīra, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. n. a small house, a hut, a
hovel; a kind of plant; ({%am%}), n. sexual intercourse;
exclusiveness.
<LEND>

<L>14965<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwIraka<k2>kuwIraka
{%Kuṭīraka, as,%}¦ m. a hut.
<LEND>

<L>14966<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwaNka<k2>kuwaNka
{#kuwaNka#}¦ {%kuṭaṅka, as,%} m. (connected with
{%kuṭa%} above), a roof, a thatch; [cf. {%kuṭuṅgaka,%}
{%kuḍaṅga, kuṇḍaṅga, kuṭala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14967<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwaNga<k2>kuwaNga
{#kuwaNga#}¦ {%kuṭaṅga,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>14968<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwaNgaka<k2>kuwaNgaka
{#kuwaNgaka#}¦ {%kuṭaṅgaka, as,%} m. an arbour formed
by creeping plants overrunning a tree; a roof or
thatch; a house, a small house, a hut or cottage;
[cf. {%kuṭuṅgaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14969<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwaca<k2>kuwaca
{#kuwaca#}¦ {%kuṭaca, as,%} m. (for {%kuṭa-ja%}), the
medicinal tree Wrightia Antidysenterica.
<LEND>

<L>14970<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwaja<k2>kuwaja
{#kuwaja#}¦ {%kuṭa-ja.%} See under {%kuṭa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>14971<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwannaka<k2>kuwannaka
{#kuwannaka#}¦ {%kuṭannaka, am,%} n. the fragrant
grass Cyperus Rotundus; [cf. also the following.]
<LEND>

<L>14972<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwannawa<k2>kuwannawa
{#kuwannawa#}¦ {%kuṭannaṭa, as,%} m. the tree Calos-
anthes Indica; ({%am%}), n. the fragrant grass Cyperus
Rotundus.
<LEND>

<L>14973<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwapa<k2>kuwapa
{#kuwapa#}¦ {%kuṭapa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kuṭ%}),
a measure of grain &c. ({%= kuḍava%}); a saint, a
divine sage or Muni; a garden or grove near a house
{%(= niṣkuṭa); (am),%} n. a lotus.
<LEND>

<L>14974<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwara<k2>kuwara
{#kuwara#}¦ {%kuṭara, as,%} m. a post round which
the string passes that works the churning-stick [cf.
{%kuṭaka%} and {%kuṭhara%}]; N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>14975<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwaru<k2>kuwaru
{#kuwaru#}¦ {%kuṭaru, us,%} m., Ved. a cock; a tent,
a house of cloth or canvas.
<LEND>

<L>14976<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwaruRA<k2>kuwaruRA
{#kuwaruRA#}¦ {%kuṭaruṇā,%} f. a plant, commonly
Teöri, Ipomœa Turpethum.
<LEND>

<L>14977<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwala<k2>kuwala
{#kuwala#}¦ {%kuṭala, am,%} n. a roof, a thatch; [cf.
{%kuṭaṅka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14978<pc>0233-b<k1>kuwi<k2>kuwi
{#kuwi#}¦ {%kuṭi, kuṭira.%} See under rt. {%kuṭ%} above.
<LEND>
[Page0233-c+ 75]

<L>14979<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwikozwikA<k2>kuwikozwikA
{#kuwikozwikA#}¦ {%kuṭikoṣṭikā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>14980<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwila<k2>kuwila
{#kuwila#}¦ {%kuṭila.%} See under rt. {%kuṭ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>14981<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwIra<k2>kuwIra
{#kuwIra#}¦ {%kuṭīra.%} See under rt. {%kuṭ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>14982<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwuNgaka<k2>kuwuNgaka
{#kuwuNgaka#}¦ {%kuṭuṅgaka, as,%} m. an arbour or
bower formed of creeping plants; a creeper winding
round a tree; a thatch, a roof; a hut, a cottage; a
granary, a store-room; [cf. {%kuṭaṅka, kuṭaṅgaka,%}
{%kuḍaṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14983<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwunI<k2>kuwunI
{#kuwunI#}¦ {%kuṭunī,%} f. a wrong reading for
{%kuṭṭanī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>14984<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwumba<k2>kuwumba
{#kuwumba#}¦ {%kuṭumba, am,%} n. a household, the
collective members of a household, a family; the care
of a family, house-keeping; the care taken by a
householder for the members of his family, hence
metaphorically care or anxiety about anything; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. name; race; a kinsman, a relation by
descent; a connection, a relation by marriage by the
mother's side; offspring, progeny. {%—Kuṭumba-ka-%}
{%laha, as, am,%} m. n. domestic dissension, family
feud. {%—Kuṭumba-vyāpṛta, as,%} m. a provident and
attentive father of a family. {%—Kuṭumbārtham (˚ba-%}
{%ar˚),%} ind. for the support or on account of a family.
{%—Kuṭumbaukas (˚ba-ok˚), as,%} n. apartments &c.
appropriated to the accommodation of relations &c.
<LEND>

<L>14985<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwumbaka<k2>kuwumbaka
{%Kuṭumbaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ being of one family;
({%am%}), n. a household; the duties and cares of a house-
holder; a family, kindred.
<LEND>

<L>14986<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwumbaya<k2>kuwumbaya
{%Kuṭumbaya,%}¦ nom. A. {%-yate,%} to support a family.
<LEND>

<L>14987<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwumbika<k2>kuwumbika
{%Kuṭumbika, as, ā, am,%}¦ taking care of a family or
household; ({%as%}), m. the slave of a house.
<LEND>

<L>14988<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwumbin<k2>kuwumbin
{%Kuṭumbin, ī,%}¦ m. a householder, a paterfamilias;
one who supports or takes care of a family; meta-
phorically one who takes care of anything (especially
at the end of a compound); a member of a family,
any one belonging to a household; a peasant, a
cultivator of the soil; ({%inī%}), f. the wife of a house-
holder and mother of a family, a matron; a large
household, a large family; a small shrub used in
medicine, a kind of moon-plant, {%= kṣīriṇī%}. {%—Ku-%}
{%ṭumbi-tā,%} f. or {%kuṭumbi-tva, am,%} n. family con-
nection or union, living as one family.
<LEND>

<L>14989<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwera<k2>kuwera
{#kuwera#}¦ {%kuṭera, as,%} m. a hut, a cottage; [cf.
{%kuṭīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>14990<pc>0233-c<k1>kuww<k2>kuww
{#kuww#}¦ {%kuṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%kuṭṭayati, acukuṭṭat,%}
{%yitum,%} to cut, divide; to grind or pound;
to multiply; to censure, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>14991<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwwa<k2>kuwwa
{%Kuṭṭa, as, ī, am,%}¦ (at the end of compounds) cut-
ting, dividing, making small; grinding, pounding;
({%as%}), m. a multiplier such that a given dividend being
multiplied by it and a given quantity added to (or
subtracted from) the product, the sum (or difference)
may be measured by a given divisor. {%—Kuṭṭapa-%}
{%rānta%} or {%kuṭṭāparānta (˚ṭa-ap˚), ās,%} m. pl., N.
of a people. {%—Kuṭṭa-pracaraṇa%} and {%kuṭṭa-prā-%}
{%varaṇa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of two nations.
<LEND>

<L>14992<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwwaka<k2>kuwwaka
{%Kuṭṭaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ what cuts or divides, what
pounds or grinds; ({%as%}), m. a grinder or pulverizer, a
multiplier, &c. [cf. {%kuṭṭa%}]; a kingfisher. {%—Kuṭṭaka-%}
{%vyavahāra, as,%} m. or {%kuṭṭakādhyāya (˚ka-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. that branch or chapter of arithmetic which
treats of the {%kuṭṭa%} or {%kuṭṭaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>14993<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwwana<k2>kuwwana
{%Kuṭṭana, am,%}¦ n. cutting, dividing; pounding,
grinding, beating, threshing; abusing; ({%ī%}), f. a bawd,
a procuress, a go-between.
<LEND>

<L>14994<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwwantI<k2>kuwwantI
{%Kuṭṭantī,%}¦ f. a kind of dagger.
<LEND>

<L>14995<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwwAka<k2>kuwwAka
{%Kuṭṭāka, as, ī, am,%}¦ what cuts or divides.
<LEND>

<L>14996<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwwita<k2>kuwwita
{%Kuṭṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, divided; pounded, flat-
tened; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%sirā,%} unskilful opening of a vein,
the latter being cut to pieces by repeated application
of the knife.
<LEND>

<L>14997<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwwin<k2>kuwwin
{%Kuṭṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ what cuts or pounds; ({%nī%}), f. a
bawd, a procuress.
<LEND>

<L>14998<pc>0233-c<k1>kuwwima<k2>kuwwima
{%Kuṭṭima, as, ā, am,%}¦ plastered with small stones,
decorated with mosaic; ({%as, am%}), m. n. an inlaid or
paved floor, pavement, ground paved with mosaic or
[Page0234-a+ 66]
small stones, ground smoothed and plastered; ground
prepared for the site of a mansion; a jewel mine; a
hut, a cottage; the pomegranate.
<LEND>

<L>14999<pc>0234-a<k1>kuwwamita<k2>kuwwamita
{#kuwwamita#}¦ {%kuṭṭamita, am,%} n. one of the ten
blandishments of women, affected repulse of a lover's
caresses; [cf. {%kuṭṭumita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15000<pc>0234-a<k1>kuwwAra<k2>kuwwAra
{#kuwwAra#}¦ {%kuṭṭāra, as,%} m. a mountain; ({%am%}),
n. sexual intercourse; pleasure; a woollen cloth or
blanket; exclusion; oneness; [cf. {%kuṭīra%} and {%kuṭ-%}
{%ṭīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15001<pc>0234-a<k1>kuwwihArikA<k2>kuwwihArikA
{#kuwwihArikA#}¦ {%kuṭṭihārikā,%} f. a female servant,
a slave; [cf. {%kuṭa-hārikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15002<pc>0234-a<k1>kuwwIra<k2>kuwwIra
{#kuwwIra#}¦ {%kuṭṭīra, as,%} m. a mountain; [cf.
{%kuṭīra%} and {%kuṭṭāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15003<pc>0234-a<k1>kuwwIraka<k2>kuwwIraka
{#kuwwIraka#}¦ {%kuṭṭīraka, am,%} n. (?) a small house,
a hut; (a wrong reading for {%kuṭīraka?%}).
<LEND>

<L>15004<pc>0234-a<k1>kuwwumita<k2>kuwwumita
{#kuwwumita#}¦ {%kuṭṭumita, am,%} n. {%= kuṭṭamita%} above.
<LEND>

<L>15005<pc>0234-a<k1>kuwmala<k2>kuwmala
{#kuwmala#}¦ {%kuṭmala, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr.
rt. {%kuṭ%}), opening or expanding as the blossom of a
flower, blossoming; ({%as, am%}), m. n. an opening
bud; ({%am%}), n. one of the twenty-one hells in which
sinners are punished (where they are bound with
ropes).
<LEND>

<L>15006<pc>0234-a<k1>kuwmalita<k2>kuwmalita
{%Kuṭmalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ budded.
<LEND>

<L>15007<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWa<k2>kuWa
{#kuWa#}¦ {%kuṭha, as,%} m. a tree; (generally written
{%kuṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>15008<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWara<k2>kuWara
{#kuWara#}¦ {%kuṭhara, as,%} m. the post round which
the string of the churning-stick winds; [cf. {%kuṭara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15009<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWAku<k2>kuWAku
{#kuWAku#}¦ {%kuṭhāku, us,%} m. a bird, the wood-
pecker, Picus Bengalensis, commonly Kāṭhṭhākro.
<LEND>

<L>15010<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWAwaNka<k2>kuWAwaNka
{#kuWAwaNka#}¦ {%kuṭhāṭaṅka, as, ā,%} m. f. an axe.
<LEND>

<L>15011<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWAra<k2>kuWAra
{#kuWAra#}¦ {%kuṭhāra, as, ī,%} m. f. an axe; a sort
of hoe or spade; ({%as%}), m. a tree; N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15012<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWAraka<k2>kuWAraka
{%Kuṭhāraka, as,%}¦ m. an axe; ({%ikā%}), f. a small axe
or adze; also a similarly shaped instrument used in
surgery for scarification; N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>15013<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWArika<k2>kuWArika
{%Kuṭhārika, as,%}¦ m. a wood-cutter.
<LEND>

<L>15014<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWAru<k2>kuWAru
{#kuWAru#}¦ {%kuṭhāru, us,%} m. an ape, a monkey;
a tree; an armourer.
<LEND>

<L>15015<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWi<k2>kuWi
{#kuWi#}¦ {%kuṭhi, is,%} m. a tree; a mountain;
[cf. {%kuṭi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15016<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWika<k2>kuWika
{#kuWika#}¦ {%kuṭhika, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%kuṣṭha, mṛtphalī,%} a kind of Costus, commonly
called Kuṭh.
<LEND>

<L>15017<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWumi<k2>kuWumi
{#kuWumi#}¦ {%kuṭhumi, is,%} m., N. of a preceptor,
author of a law-book; [cf. {%kuthumi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15018<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWera<k2>kuWera
{#kuWera#}¦ {%kuṭhera, as,%} m. fire; a kind of Basi-
licum. {%—Kuṭhera-ja, as,%} m. a white kind of Basi-
licum, Ocimum Gratissimum.
<LEND>

<L>15019<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWeraka<k2>kuWeraka
{%Kuṭheraka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of Basilicum, Ocimum
Sanctum; a white sort of the same, Ocimum Gra-
tissimum.
<LEND>

<L>15020<pc>0234-a<k1>kuWeru<k2>kuWeru
{#kuWeru#}¦ {%kuṭheru, us,%} m. the wind produced
by a fan or chowrie.
<LEND>

<L>15021<pc>0234-a<k1>kuq<k2>kuq
{#kuq#}¦ {%kuḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%kuḍati, cukoḍa, kuḍitum,%}
to play or act as a child, to trifle; to eat; to
heap; to plunge under water, be immersed, dive (?).
<LEND>

<L>15022<pc>0234-a<k1>kuqaNga<k2>kuqaNga
{#kuqaNga#}¦ {%kuḍaṅga, as,%} m. a bower, an arbour;
[cf. {%kuṭaṅka, kuṭuṅgaka, kuṇḍaṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15023<pc>0234-a<k1>kuqapa<k2>kuqapa
{#kuqapa#}¦ {%kuḍapa, as, am,%} m. n. {%= kuḍava%} below.
<LEND>

<L>15024<pc>0234-a<k1>kuqava<k2>kuqava
{#kuqava#}¦ {%kuḍava, as,%} m. a measure of grain,
wood, iron, &c., the fourth part of a Prastha, de-
scribed by some as a vessel four fingers wide and as
many deep and containing twelve Prakṛtis or hand-
fuls; it is also said to contain 13(1/2) cubic Angulas;
or to be a finger and a half deep, and three fingers
[Page0234-b+ 68]
each in length and breadth; in medicine it is equal
to two Prakṛtis or thirty-two Tolakas.
<LEND>

<L>15025<pc>0234-b<k1>kuqi<k2>kuqi
{#kuqi#}¦ {%kuḍi, is,%} m. the body; [cf. {%kuṭi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15026<pc>0234-b<k1>kuqikA<k2>kuqikA
{#kuqikA#}¦ {%kuḍikā,%} f. an earthen or wooden
water-pot used by ascetics; [cf. {%kuṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15027<pc>0234-b<k1>kuqiSa<k2>kuqiSa
{#kuqiSa#}¦ {%kuḍiśa, as,%} m. a kind of fish, com-
commonly Kūrchi, Cyprinus Curchius.
<LEND>

<L>15028<pc>0234-b<k1>kuqI<k2>kuqI
{#kuqI#}¦ {%kuḍī,%} f. a small house, a hut; (a wrong
reading for {%kuṭī?%}).
<LEND>

<L>15029<pc>0234-b<k1>kuqupa<k2>kuqupa
{#kuqupa#}¦ {%kuḍupa, as,%} m. the clasp or fastening
of a necklace or bracelet.
<LEND>

<L>15030<pc>0234-b<k1>kuqmala<k2>kuqmala
{#kuqmala#}¦ {%kuḍmala, as, ā, am,%} opening or ex-
panding as the blossom of a flower, blossoming; ({%as%}),
m. an opening bud; ({%am%}), n. a particular hell; some-
times also spelt {%kudmala;%} [cf. {%kuṭmala.%}] {%—Kuḍ-%}
{%mala-dantī,%} f., N. of a metre, {%= anukūlā;%} also
spelt {%kudmala-dantī.%}
<LEND>

<L>15031<pc>0234-b<k1>kuqmalita<k2>kuqmalita
{%Kuḍmalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with opening
buds; budded, blossomed; cheerful, smiling (as the
countenance).
<LEND>

<L>15032<pc>0234-b<k1>kuqya<k2>kuqya
{#kuqya#}¦ {%kuḍya, am, ā,%} n. f. a wall; plaster-
ing (a wall); eagerness, curiosity. {%—Kuḍya-cchedin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a housebreaker, a thief. {%—Kuḍya-cchedya, am,%}
n. an opening, a hole in a wall, a breach. {%—Kuḍya-%}
{%matsī,%} f. or {%kuḍya-matsya, as,%} m. a house-lizard.
<LEND>

<L>15033<pc>0234-b<k1>kuqyaka<k2>kuqyaka
{%Kuḍyaka, am,%}¦ n. a wall.
<LEND>

<L>15034<pc>0234-b<k1>kuR<k2>kuR
{#kuR#}¦ {%kuṇ,%} cl. 6. P. {%kuṇati, -ṇitum,%} to sound;
to cherish, to support or aid with gifts &c.;
to be in pain (?); cl. 10. P. {%kuṇayati, -yitum,%} to
counsel or advise; to converse with, to speak to,
address; to salute; to invite; [cf. Lat. <nsi>cano, sono;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>zwanu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>15035<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRa<k2>kuRa
{#kuRa#}¦ {%kuṇa, as,%} m. in composition with
{%aśvattha%} and other trees or flowers; the time when
a plant bears fruit, e. g. {%pīlu-kuṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15036<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRaka<k2>kuRaka
{#kuRaka#}¦ {%kuṇaka, as,%} m. a young animal just
born.
<LEND>

<L>15037<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRaYjara<k2>kuRaYjara
{#kuRaYjara#}¦ {%kuṇañjara, as,%} m. or {%kuṇañjā,%} f. or
{%kṛṇañja, as,%} m. a species of Chenopodium; (com-
monly Vanavetuā.)
<LEND>

<L>15038<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRapa<k2>kuRapa
{#kuRapa#}¦ {%kuṇapa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%kvaṇ%}), a dead body, a corpse; a carcase; said
contemptuously of living persons; ({%as%}), m. a spear;
N. of a people; a stench, a foul smell; ({%ī%}), f. a small
bird, a kind of Maina or Salik [cf. {%viṭ-sārikā%}];
({%as, ī, am%}), mouldering, smelling like a dead body,
foul smelling; stinking. {%—Kuṇapa-gandha, as,%} m.
the smell of a dead body.
<LEND>

<L>15039<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRarabAqava<k2>kuRarabAqava
{#kuRarabAqava#}¦ {%kuṇara-bāḍava, as,%} m., N. of a
grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>15040<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRAru<k2>kuRAru
{#kuRAru#}¦ {%kuṇāru, us, us, u,%} Ved. having a
distorted arm (?); (Sāy. fr. rt. {%kuṇ%}) crying out.
<LEND>

<L>15041<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRAla<k2>kuRAla
{#kuRAla#}¦ {%kuṇāla, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kvaṇ%}), a kind of bird; N. of a son of Aśoka; N. of
a country.
<LEND>

<L>15042<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRi<k2>kuRi
{#kuRi#}¦ {%kuṇi, is, is, i,%} a cripple with a crooked
or withered arm, or without a hand or finger; ({%is%}),
m. a whitlow; the tree Cedrela Toona ({%tunna%}); N.
of a prince, a son of Jaya and father of Yugan-dhara;
N. of a Muni; N. of the author of a Dharma-śāstra.
{%—Kuṇi-bāhu, us,%} m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>15043<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRitAhi<k2>kuRitAhi
{#kuRitAhi#}¦ {%kuṇitāhi, is,%} m., N. of the author
of a Dharma-śāstra.
<LEND>

<L>15044<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRin<k2>kuRin
{#kuRin#}¦ {%kuṇin, ī, inī, i,%} only in {%kuṇī kaṇa-%}
{%bhaḥ,%} a kind of bug; [cf. {%utkuṇa, matkuṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15045<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRinda<k2>kuRinda
{#kuRinda#}¦ {%kuṇinda, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kuṇ%}), sound, sounding.
<LEND>

<L>15046<pc>0234-b<k1>kuRw<k2>kuRw
{#kuRw#}¦ {%kuṇṭ = kuṇḍ,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0234-c+ 78]

<L>15047<pc>0234-c<k1>kuRwaka<k2>kuRwaka
{#kuRwaka#}¦ {%kuṇṭaka, as, ī, am,%} fat, corpulent.
<LEND>

<L>15048<pc>0234-c<k1>kuRW<k2>kuRW
{#kuRW#}¦ {%kuṇṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%kuṇṭhati, -ṭhitum,%}
to be lame or mutilated, to be blunted or
dulled; to be lazy or stupid; cl. 10. P. {%kuṇṭhayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cover, conceal.
<LEND>

<L>15049<pc>0234-c<k1>kuRWa<k2>kuRWa
{%Kuṇṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ blunt, dull; stupid; weak;
indolent, lazy, slow; foolish; [cf. {%a-kuṇṭha.%}] {%—Kuṇ-%}
{%ṭha-tā,%} f. bluntness, dulness, indolence.
<LEND>

<L>15050<pc>0234-c<k1>kuRWaka<k2>kuRWaka
{%Kuṇṭhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ stupid, ignorant, a fool;
({%as%}), m., N. of a pupil of Luṇṭaka; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15051<pc>0234-c<k1>kuRWita<k2>kuRWita
{%Kuṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ blunted, dulled; mutilated,
stupid; grasped, held, encircled. {%—Kuṇṭhitāśri (˚ta-%}
{%aś˚), is, is, i,%} having its edge or corners blunted.
<LEND>

<L>15052<pc>0234-c<k1>kuRq<k2>kuRq
{#kuRq#}¦ {%kuṇḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%kuṇḍati,%} to mutilate;
cl. 1. A. {%kuṇḍate, -ḍitum,%} to burn; cl.
10. P. {%kuṇḍayati, -yitum,%} to protect.
<LEND>

<L>15053<pc>0234-c<k1>kuRqa<k2>kuRqa
{#kuRqa#}¦ {%kuṇḍa, as, ī, am,%} m. f. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%kuṇ%}), a bowl-shaped vessel, a basin, bowl, pitcher,
jar, pot, water-pot; ({%am%}), n. a particular measure;
a clump, e. g. {%darbha-kuṇḍam,%} a clump of Darbha
grass; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a round hole in the ground,
a hole in the ground for receiving and preserving
water; a hole in general (e. g. in comp. {%agni-kuṇḍa,%}
a hole in the ground for receiving and preserving
consecrated fire); a pit, a vat; a pool, a well, a spring
or basin of water, especially consecrated to some holy
purpose or person; ({%as%}), m. a son born in adultery,
an adulterine, the son of a woman by another man
than her husband, while the husband is alive; N. of
a Nāga; a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; an epithet of Śiva;
({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Kuṇḍa-kīṭa, as,%} m.
the son of a woman of the Brāhmanical tribe born in
adultery with a man of an inferior caste; a keeper of
concubines, a man who has female slaves; a follower
of the Cārvāka doctrine or the tenets of those who
deny the authority of the Vedas. {%—Kuṇḍa-kīla, as,%}
m. a low, a vile man; see {%nāgara%}. {%—Kuṇḍa-kau-%}
{%mudī%} or {%kuṇḍa-maṇḍapa-kaumudī,%} f. title of a
work by Viśvanātha. {%—Kuṇḍa-gola, as,%} m. and
{%kuṇḍa-golaka, am,%} n. sour rice, gruel; see {%kāñjika.%}
{%—Kuṇḍa-ja, as,%} m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
{%—Kuṇḍa-jaṭhara, as,%} m., N. of an old sage; [cf.
{%kuṇḍodara.%}] {%—Kuṇḍa-dhāra, as,%} m., N. of a
Nāga; also of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Kuṇḍa-%}
{%pāyin, ī, inī, i,%} drinking out of pitchers; {%kuṇḍa-%}
{%pāyinām ayanam,%} a particular religious ceremony
[cf. {%kauṇḍapāyina%}]. {%—Kuṇḍa-pāyya, as, ā, am,%}
(scil. {%kratu,%} &c.), a particular ceremony or sacrifice
at which ewers or pitchers are used for drinking;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man (?). {%—Kuṇḍa-prastha, as,%} m.,
N. of a town. {%—Kuṇḍa-bhedin, ī,%} m., N. of a son
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Kuṇḍa-maṇḍapa-siddhi, is,%} f.,
N. of a work by Viṭṭhaladīkṣita. {%—Kuṇḍa-ratnā-%}
{%kara, as,%} m., N. of a work by Viśvanātha. {%—Kuṇḍa-%}
{%śāyin, ī,%} m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Kuṇ-%}
{%ḍāgni (˚ḍa-ag˚), is%} or {%i%} (?), m. or n. (?), N. of a
place; [cf. {%kauṇḍāgnaka.%}] {%—Kuṇḍāśin (˚ḍa-āś˚),%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} one who is supported by a bastard; ({%ī%}), m.
a pander, a pimp; N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; also
of a Nāga; also of one of the attendants of Śiva.
{%—Kuṇḍoda (˚ḍa-uda), as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Kuṇḍodara (˚ḍa-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of a Nāga; a
son of Janamejaya and brother of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra;
also a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Kuṇḍoddyota-dar-%}
{%śana,%} N. of a work by Śaṅkara-bhaṭṭa. {%—Kuṇḍodhnī%}
{%(˚ḍa-ūdh˚),%} f. a cow with a full udder; a woman with
a full bosom; [cf. {%ūdhas.%}] {%—Kuṇḍopadhānīyaka,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (fr. {%˚ḍa + upadhānīya%}), one who uses a
pitcher as a pillow; an epithet of Pūrṇa; according
to others {%kuṇḍopadhāna%} is the N. of a place.
{%—Kuṇḍoparatha,%} cf. {%kauṇḍoparatha.%}
<LEND>

<L>15054<pc>0234-c<k1>kuRqaka<k2>kuRqaka
{%Kuṇḍaka, am,%}¦ n. a pot; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; also of Kṣudraka.
<LEND>

<L>15055<pc>0234-c<k1>kuRqika<k2>kuRqika
{%Kuṇḍika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra;
({%ā%}), f. a pitcher; a student's water-pot, the Kamandalu.
<LEND>

<L>15056<pc>0234-c<k1>kuRqin<k2>kuRqin
{%Kuṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ furnished with a pitcher or
water-jar; ({%ī%}), m. a horse [cf. {%kindhin%} &c.]; a bastard.
<LEND>
[Page0235-a+ 73]

<L>15057<pc>0235-a<k1>kuRqina<k2>kuRqina
{%Kuṇḍina, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra;
N. of an author; ({%am%}), n. a city, the capital of the
district Vidarbha, ruled over by Bhīma, the father-
in-law of Nala, apparently the modern Kondavir in
Berar; (according to some the city is also called
Vidarbha, or m. pl. Vidarbhās, but this is rather the
name of the territory.)
<LEND>

<L>15058<pc>0235-a<k1>kuRqaNga<k2>kuRqaNga
{#kuRqaNga#}¦ {%kuṇḍaṅga, as,%} m. a bower, an ar-
bour; (a wrong reading for {%kuḍaṅga.%})
<LEND>

<L>15059<pc>0235-a<k1>kuRqala<k2>kuRqala
{#kuRqala#}¦ {%kuṇḍala, am,%} n. a ring, an ear-ring;
a bracelet; a fetter, a tie, a collar; the coil of a rope;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman;
N. of a river; ({%ī%}), f., N. of several plants, mountain
ebony, Bauhinia Variegata [cf. {%kāñcana-dru%}]; an-
other plant, Cocculus Cordifolius [cf. {%guḍūcī%}]; another
plant, Mucuna Pruritus [cf. {%kapi-kacchu%}]; N. of two
other plants, commonly called Sarpiṇī-vṛkṣa and
Kundalī-cālana. {%—Kuṇḍala-dhāraṇa, am,%} n. the
wearing of ear-rings. {%—Kuṇḍala-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
wearing ear-rings. {%—Kuṇḍalākāra (˚la-āk˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} shaped like an ear-ring or bracelet, circular,
annular. {%—Kuṇḍaloddyotitānana (˚la-uddyotita-%}
{%ān˚), as, ā, am,%} having his face radiant with glitter-
ing pendants.
<LEND>

<L>15060<pc>0235-a<k1>kuRqalanA<k2>kuRqalanA
{%Kuṇḍalanā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%kuṇḍalaya,%} nom. fr. {%kuṇḍala%}),
encircling a word or the circle round any word which
is to be left out in a MS.
<LEND>

<L>15061<pc>0235-a<k1>kuRqalikA<k2>kuRqalikA
{%Kuṇḍalikā,%}¦ f., N. of a metre in Prākṛt poetry;
[cf. {%vāta-kuṇḍalikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15062<pc>0235-a<k1>kuRqalin<k2>kuRqalin
{%Kuṇḍalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having ear-rings or decorated
with ear-rings; circular, annular, spiral, winding, coil-
ing; ({%ī%}), m. a snake; the spotted or painted deer; a
peacock; an epithet of Varuṇa, and of Śiva; ({%inī%}), f.
the plant Cocculus Cordifolius [cf. {%guḍūcī%}]; a parti-
cular dish, curds boiled with ghee and spices; a Śakti
or form of Durgā worshipped by the Tantrikas.
<LEND>

<L>15063<pc>0235-a<k1>kuRqalIkfta<k2>kuRqalIkfta
{%Kuṇḍalī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ forming a ring, formed
into a circle, coiled, curled, moving in rings or circles.
<LEND>

<L>15064<pc>0235-a<k1>kuRqalIBUta<k2>kuRqalIBUta
{%Kuṇḍalī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ formed into a ring,
coiled, curled.
<LEND>

<L>15065<pc>0235-a<k1>kuRqIra<k2>kuRqIra
{#kuRqIra#}¦ {%kuṇḍīra, as, ā, am,%} strong, power-
ful, able; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15066<pc>0235-a<k1>kuRqfRAcI<k2>kuRqfRAcI
{#kuRqfRAcI#}¦ {%kuṇḍṛṇācī,%} f., Ved. a species of
animal; (Sāy.) tortuous progress.
<LEND>

<L>15067<pc>0235-a<k1>kut<k2>kut
{#kut#}¦ {%kut%} (a Sautra root, or one found in
grammatical Sūtras only), to spread.
<LEND>

<L>15068<pc>0235-a<k1>kuta<k2>kuta
{#kuta#}¦ {%kuta, as,%} m., N. of one of the eighteen
attendants of the sun, identified with the god of the
ocean.
<LEND>

<L>15069<pc>0235-a<k1>kutanaya<k2>kutanaya
{#kutanaya#}¦ {%ku-tanaya, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a de-
generate son.
<LEND>

<L>15070<pc>0235-a<k1>kutanu<k2>kutanu
{#kutanu#}¦ {%ku-tanu, us, vī, u%} (see 1. {%ku%}), de-
formed; ({%us%}), m. an epithet of Kuvera or Kubera
(this deity being of a monstrous appearance, having
three legs and but eight teeth; see {%kubera%}).
<LEND>

<L>15071<pc>0235-a<k1>kutapa<k2>kutapa
{#kutapa#}¦ {%ku-tapa, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), slightly
hot, mild, tepid; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a sort of blanket
made of the hair of the mountain-goat; the eighth
Muhūrta or portion of the day from the last
Daṇḍa of the second watch to the first of the third
or about noon; an eligible time for the performance
of sacrifices to the manes; a kind of sacrificial grass,
Poa Cynosuroides; grain; a daughter's son; a
sister's son; a twice-born man, one of the first three
classes; a Brāhman; a guest; the sun; fire; an
ox; a musical instrument. {%—Kutapa-saptaka, am,%}
n. a Śrāddha in which seven constituents occur, viz.
noon, a horn platter, a Nepal blanket, silver, sacrificial
grass, Sesamum, and Kine.
<LEND>

<L>15072<pc>0235-a<k1>kutapasvin<k2>kutapasvin
{#kutapasvin#}¦ {%ku-tapasvin, ī,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
wicked or bad ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>15073<pc>0235-a<k1>kutarka<k2>kutarka
{#kutarka#}¦ {%ku-tarka, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), falla-
cious argument, sophistry, fallacy, sophism. {%—Ku- %}
[Page0235-b+ 73]
{%tarka-patha, as,%} m. the way of sophists, i. e. a
sophistical method of arguing.
<LEND>

<L>15074<pc>0235-b<k1>kutas<k2>kutas
{#kutas#}¦ {%kutas,%} ind. (fr. 1. {%ku%}), from where?
whence? from whence? whereto? where? in which
direction? wherefore? why? from what cause or
motive? because; how? in what manner? in which
way? how much less? much less. {%Kutas%} is used
sometimes for the abl. case of 2. {%ka = kasmāt%} (e. g.
{%kutaḥ kālāt,%} since what time?). In {%a-kutas,%} which
occurs at the beginning of some compounds, {%kutas%}
has an indefinite sense (e. g. {%akuto-mṛtyu,%} not
fearing death from any quarter; cf. {%akuto-bhaya%});
{%kutas%} is also indefinite when connected with the
particles {%api, cid,%} and {%cana%} (e. g. {%kuto 'pi,%} from
any quarter, from any cause; {%kutaścid,%} from any
one, from anywhere; {%akutaścid-bhaya,%} not fearing
danger from any quarter, not presenting danger on any
side; {%kutaś cana,%} (in Ved.) from no side, to no side;
{%yataḥ kutaścid,%} from any person soever). {%—Kutas-%}
{%tarām,%} ind. how? in what manner? {%—Kuto-ni-%}
{%mitta, as, ā, am,%} having what cause or reason?
{%—Kuto-mūla, as, ā, am,%} having what origin?
<LEND>

<L>15075<pc>0235-b<k1>kutastya<k2>kutastya
{%Kutastya, as, ā, am,%}¦ whence come? how hap-
pened?
<LEND>

<L>15076<pc>0235-b<k1>kutApasa<k2>kutApasa
{#kutApasa#}¦ {%ku-tāpasa, as, ī,%} m. f. (see 1. {%ku%}),
a wicked ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>15077<pc>0235-b<k1>kutittiri<k2>kutittiri
{#kutittiri#}¦ {%ku-tittiri, is,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
species of bird resembling the partridge.
<LEND>

<L>15078<pc>0235-b<k1>kutIpAda<k2>kutIpAda
{#kutIpAda#}¦ {%kutīpāda, as,%} m., N. of one of the
Ṛṣis or poets of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>15079<pc>0235-b<k1>kutIrTa<k2>kutIrTa
{#kutIrTa#}¦ {%ku-tīrtha, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
teacher.
<LEND>

<L>15080<pc>0235-b<k1>kutuka<k2>kutuka
{#kutuka#}¦ {%kutuka, am,%} n. eagerness, vehe-
mence; desire, inclination; curiosity; [cf. {%kautuka%}
and {%kutūhala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15081<pc>0235-b<k1>kutupa<k2>kutupa
{#kutupa#}¦ {%kutupa, as,%} m. a small leathern oil-
bottle [cf. {%kutū%}]; ({%as, am%}), m. n. the eighth Mu-
hūrta or portion of the day from the last Daṇḍa of
the second watch to the first of the third or about
noon; an eligible time for the performance of sacri-
fices to the manes; [cf. {%ku-tapa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15082<pc>0235-b<k1>kutU<k2>kutU
{%Kutū, ūs,%}¦ f. a leathern oil-bottle.
<LEND>

<L>15083<pc>0235-b<k1>kutURaka<k2>kutURaka
{#kutURaka#}¦ {%kutūṇaka, as,%} m. weakness of the
eyes, a disease of the eyes in infants; [cf. {%kukū-%}
{%ṇaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15084<pc>0235-b<k1>kutUhala<k2>kutUhala
{#kutUhala#}¦ {%kutūhala, am,%} n. (fr. the interroga-
tive adv. {%kutas%} and {%hala,%} calling out?), curiosity,
interest in any extraordinary matter; desire, in-
clination; eagerness, vehemence, impetuosity; what
excites curiosity or interest, anything interesting,
fun; ({%as, ā, am%}), surprising, wonderful; excellent,
best, praised, celebrated; [cf. {%kautūhala.%}] {%—Kutū-%}
{%hala-vat, ān, atī, at,%} curious, taking an interest in
anything.
<LEND>

<L>15085<pc>0235-b<k1>kutUhalin<k2>kutUhalin
{%Kutūhalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ curious, highly interested in
any extraordinary matter, inquisitive; eager, im-
patient.
<LEND>

<L>15086<pc>0235-b<k1>kutfRa<k2>kutfRa
{#kutfRa#}¦ {%ku-tṛṇa, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), an
aquatic plant, water house-leek, Pistia Stratiotes.
<LEND>

<L>15087<pc>0235-b<k1>kutTa<k2>kutTa
{#kutTa#}¦ {%kuttha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the
fifteenth Yoga (in astronomy).
<LEND>

<L>15088<pc>0235-b<k1>kutra<k2>kutra
{#kutra#}¦ {%kutra,%} ind. (fr. 1. {%ku%}), where? where-
to? in which case? when? {%kutra — kva,%} where
(this) — where (that), i. e. how distant or how dif-
ferent is this from that, how little is this consistent
with that? {%Kutra%} becomes indefinite when con-
nected with the particles {%api, cid, cana,%} e. g.
{%kutrāpi,%} anywhere, somewhere, to any place where-
soever; {%kutra cid,%} anywhere, somewhere, whereso-
ever, wherever, to any place; (sometimes {%kutra%}
{%cid = kasmiṃścid,%} e. g. {%kutra cid araṇye,%} in a
certain wood); {%na kutra cid,%} nowhere, to no place
whatsoever; {%kutra cid — kutra cid,%} in one case — 
[Page0235-c+ 70]
in the other case; sometimes — sometimes; {%yatra%}
{%kutra ca%} or {%yatra kutra cid,%} wherever it be, here
or there.
<LEND>

<L>15089<pc>0235-c<k1>kutratya<k2>kutratya
{%Kutratya, as, ā, am,%}¦ where being? where living
or residing?
<LEND>

<L>15090<pc>0235-c<k1>kuts<k2>kuts
{#kuts#}¦ {%kuts%} (perhaps related to {%kutas%}), cl.
10. P. A. {%kutsayati, -te, -yitum;%} rarely
cl. 1. P. {%kutsati,%} to despise, abuse, revile, contemn;
[cf. Lith. <nsi>kussinu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>15091<pc>0235-c<k1>kutsana<k2>kutsana
{%Kutsana, as, ā, am,%}¦ reviling, abusive, contemp-
tuous; ({%am%}), n. abuse, reviling, contempt, reproach;
reproachful or abusive language; ({%ā%}), f. contemning,
expression of contempt.
<LEND>

<L>15092<pc>0235-c<k1>kutsA<k2>kutsA
{%Kutsā,%}¦ f. reproach, contempt, censure. {%—Kutsā-%}
{%vādin, ī, inī, i,%} censorious, abusive.
<LEND>

<L>15093<pc>0235-c<k1>kutsita<k2>kutsita
{%Kutsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ despised, contemned, reviled;
contemptible, low, mean, vile, hateful; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a grass, Cyperus. {%—Kutsita-tva, am,%} n. meanness,
vileness.
<LEND>

<L>15094<pc>0235-c<k1>kutsya<k2>kutsya<h>1
1. {%kutsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be reproached, reviled,
abused; blamable.
<LEND>

<L>15095<pc>0235-c<k1>kutsa<k2>kutsa
{#kutsa#}¦ {%kutsa, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi with the
epithet Ārjuneya, author of several hymns of the
Ṛg-veda (when attacked by the demon Śuṣṇa,
Indra defended him and killed the demon; but in
other hymns of the Ṛg-veda, Kutsa is represented as
persecuted by Indra); N. of a descendant of Aṅgiras,
author of several other hymns of the Ṛg-veda;
(pl.) the descendants or the family of Kutsa; light-
ning, thunderbolt; [cf. {%kautsa, puru-kutsa,%} &c.]
{%—Kutsa-kuśikikā,%} f. the intermarriage of the
Kutsa and Kuśika families. {%—Kutsa-putra%} or {%kutsa-%}
{%vatsa, as,%} m. a son of Kutsa.
<LEND>

<L>15096<pc>0235-c<k1>kutsya<k2>kutsya<h>2
2. {%kutsya, as,%}¦ m. {%= kutsa%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>15097<pc>0235-c<k1>kutsalA<k2>kutsalA
{#kutsalA#}¦ {%kutsalā,%} f. the indigo plant; [cf.
{%nīlī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15098<pc>0235-c<k1>kuT<k2>kuT
{#kuT#}¦ {%kuth,%} cl. 4. P. {%kuthyati, cukotha,%}
{%akothīt, kothiṣyati, kothitum,%} to stink,
to become putrid: Caus. P. {%kothayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to putrify.
<LEND>

<L>15099<pc>0235-c<k1>kuTa<k2>kuTa
{#kuTa#}¦ {%kutha, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. a painted or
variegated cloth or blanket, serving as an elephant's
housings; ({%as%}), m. sacrificial or Kuśa grass, Poa
Cynosuroides; Śākya-muni in one of his former
thirty-four births.
<LEND>

<L>15100<pc>0235-c<k1>kuTumi<k2>kuTumi
{#kuTumi#}¦ {%kuthumi, is,%} m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>15101<pc>0235-c<k1>kuTumin<k2>kuTumin
{#kuTumin#}¦ {%kuthumin, ī,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15102<pc>0235-c<k1>kud<k2>kud
{#kud#}¦ {%kud,%} cl. 10. P. {%kodayati, -yitum,%} to
tell a lie; (a various reading for {%kundr,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>15103<pc>0235-c<k1>kudaRqa<k2>kudaRqa
{#kudaRqa#}¦ {%ku-daṇḍa, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), an un-
just punishment.
<LEND>

<L>15104<pc>0235-c<k1>kudAla<k2>kudAla
{#kudAla#}¦ {%kudāla, as,%} m. mountain ebony;
[cf. {%kuddāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15105<pc>0235-c<k1>kudina<k2>kudina
{#kudina#}¦ {%ku-dina, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), an evil
day; a rainy or cloudy day.
<LEND>

<L>15106<pc>0235-c<k1>kudizwi<k2>kudizwi
{#kudizwi#}¦ {%ku-diṣṭi, is,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), a mea-
sure of length, longer than a Diṣṭi, shorter than a
Vitasti.
<LEND>

<L>15107<pc>0235-c<k1>kudfSya<k2>kudfSya
{#kudfSya#}¦ {%ku-dṛśya, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), ill-
favoured, ugly, unseemly.
<LEND>

<L>15108<pc>0235-c<k1>kudfzwa<k2>kudfzwa
{%Ku-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen wrongly or indis-
tinctly.
<LEND>

<L>15109<pc>0235-c<k1>kudfzwi<k2>kudfzwi
{%Ku-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%}¦ having bad eyes; ({%is%}), f.
weak sight, evil eye; a heterodox philosophical doc-
trine, as that of the Sāṅkhyas &c.
<LEND>

<L>15110<pc>0235-c<k1>kudeSa<k2>kudeSa
{#kudeSa#}¦ {%ku-deśa, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
country, where it is difficult to obtain the necessaries
of life; a country subject to oppression.
<LEND>

<L>15111<pc>0235-c<k1>kudeha<k2>kudeha
{#kudeha#}¦ {%ku-deha, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad,
miserable body.
<LEND>
[Page0236-a+ 64]

<L>15112<pc>0236-a<k1>kuddala<k2>kuddala
{#kuddala#}¦ {%kuddala, as,%} m. mountain ebony;
[cf. {%kuddāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15113<pc>0236-a<k1>kuddAra<k2>kuddAra
{%Kuddāra, as,%}¦ m. or {%kuddāla, as, am,%} m. n. a
kind of spade or hoe; ({%as%}), m. mountain ebony,
Bauhinia Variegata.
<LEND>

<L>15114<pc>0236-a<k1>kuddAlaka<k2>kuddAlaka
{%Kuddālaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a spade or
hoe; ({%am%}), n. a copper pitcher. {%—Kuddālaka-%}
{%khāta, am,%} n., N. of a region (?).
<LEND>

<L>15115<pc>0236-a<k1>kudmala<k2>kudmala
{#kudmala#}¦ {%kudmala, am,%} n. an opening bud
&c.; (a wrong spelling for {%kuḍmala.%})
<LEND>

<L>15116<pc>0236-a<k1>kudya<k2>kudya
{#kudya#}¦ {%kudya, am,%} n. a wall; (a wrong spelling
for {%kuḍya.%})
<LEND>

<L>15117<pc>0236-a<k1>kudraNka<k2>kudraNka
{#kudraNka#}¦ {%kudraṅka%} or {%kudraṅga, as,%} m. a
watch-house; a dwelling raised on a platform or
scaffold; [cf. {%draṅka, draṅga,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>15118<pc>0236-a<k1>kudrava<k2>kudrava
{#kudrava#}¦ {%kudrava, as,%} m. a kind of grass, the
grain of which is eaten by the poor, Paspalum Scro-
biculatum; [cf. {%kodrava.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15119<pc>0236-a<k1>kudri<k2>kudri
{#kudri#}¦ {%kudri, is,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ayas%}),
m. pl. the descendants of this man.
<LEND>

<L>15120<pc>0236-a<k1>kuDAnya<k2>kuDAnya
{#kuDAnya#}¦ {%ku-dhānya, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
particular description of grain.
<LEND>

<L>15121<pc>0236-a<k1>kuDI<k2>kuDI
{#kuDI#}¦ {%ku-dhī, īs, īs, i%} (see 1. {%ku%}), foolish,
stupid; wicked; ({%īs%}), m. a fool.
<LEND>

<L>15122<pc>0236-a<k1>kuDra<k2>kuDra
{#kuDra#}¦ {%ku-dhra, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%ku,%} earth, and
rt. {%dhṛ?%}), a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>15123<pc>0236-a<k1>kunaka<k2>kunaka
{#kunaka#}¦ {%kunaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15124<pc>0236-a<k1>kunaKa<k2>kunaKa
{#kunaKa#}¦ {%ku-nakha, as, ī, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), having
ugly nails; ({%am%}), n. a disease of the nails.
<LEND>

<L>15125<pc>0236-a<k1>kunaKin<k2>kunaKin
{%Kunakhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having bad or diseased nails;
({%ī%}), m., N. of a man and N. of a book belonging to
the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>15126<pc>0236-a<k1>kunawa<k2>kunawa
{#kunawa#}¦ {%kunaṭa, as,%} m. a sort of trumpet
flower, Bignonia {%(śyonāka-prabheda); (ī),%} f. a kind
of coriander, Coriandrum Sativum; red arsenic.
<LEND>

<L>15127<pc>0236-a<k1>kunadikA<k2>kunadikA
{#kunadikA#}¦ {%ku-nadikā,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), a small
river.
<LEND>

<L>15128<pc>0236-a<k1>kunannama<k2>kunannama
{#kunannama#}¦ {%ku-nannama, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}
and rt. {%nam%}), Ved. inflexible.
<LEND>

<L>15129<pc>0236-a<k1>kunalin<k2>kunalin
{#kunalin#}¦ {%ku-nalin, ī,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), the
plant Agati Grandiflora.
<LEND>

<L>15130<pc>0236-a<k1>kunaha<k2>kunaha
{#kunaha#}¦ {%kunaha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(a various reading for {%kuṇapa.%})
<LEND>

<L>15131<pc>0236-a<k1>kunATa<k2>kunATa
{#kunATa#}¦ {%ku-nātha, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
protector; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a bad leader.
<LEND>

<L>15132<pc>0236-a<k1>kunAdIkA<k2>kunAdIkA
{#kunAdIkA#}¦ {%ku-nādīkā,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), a small
river; also {%ku-nadikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15133<pc>0236-a<k1>kunABi<k2>kunABi
{#kunABi#}¦ {%ku-nābhi, is,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
whirlwind; the collective treasures of Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>15134<pc>0236-a<k1>kunAman<k2>kunAman
{#kunAman#}¦ {%ku-nāman, ā, ā, a%} (see 1. {%ku%}),
having a bad name; having a bad reputation; ({%ā%}),
m., N. of a man; ({%a%}), n. a bad name, ill repute.
<LEND>

<L>15135<pc>0236-a<k1>kunAyaka<k2>kunAyaka
{#kunAyaka#}¦ {%ku-nāyaka, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}),
having a bad leader, unprotected.
<LEND>

<L>15136<pc>0236-a<k1>kunAla<k2>kunAla
{#kunAla#}¦ {%kunāla, as,%} m. a kind of bird living
on the Himālaya; N. of a son of king Aśoka, named
after the eyes of this bird.
<LEND>

<L>15137<pc>0236-a<k1>kunAlika<k2>kunAlika
{#kunAlika#}¦ {%kunālika, as,%} m. the Indian
cuckoo or Kokila; [cf. the preceding.]
<LEND>

<L>15138<pc>0236-a<k1>kunASaka<k2>kunASaka
{#kunASaka#}¦ {%ku-nāśaka, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), the
plant Alhagi Maurorum.
<LEND>

<L>15139<pc>0236-a<k1>kuni<k2>kuni
{#kuni#}¦ {%kuni, is,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>15140<pc>0236-a<k1>kunizaYja<k2>kunizaYja
{#kunizaYja#}¦ {%ku-niṣañja, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}),
N. of a son of the tenth Manu.
<LEND>
[Page0236-b+ 76]

<L>15141<pc>0236-b<k1>kunIti<k2>kunIti
{#kunIti#}¦ {%ku-nīti, is,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), ill conduct,
misbehaviour; corrupt administration or policy, mis-
government; a low state of morals.
<LEND>

<L>15142<pc>0236-b<k1>kunetraka<k2>kunetraka
{#kunetraka#}¦ {%ku-netraka, as,%} m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>15143<pc>0236-b<k1>kunta<k2>kunta
{#kunta#}¦ {%kunta, as,%} m. a spear, a lance, a
barbed dart [cf. Lat. <nsi>contus;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κοντός</lang>]; a small
animal, an insect; a species of grain, Coix Barbata;
passion; N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>15144<pc>0236-b<k1>kuntala<k2>kuntala
{%Kuntala, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kunta?%}), the hair of the head,
a lock of hair; a drinking cup; a plough; barley;
a kind of perfume, {%= hrīvera; (ās),%} m. pl., N. of a
people and country in the north-west of the peninsula;
({%as%}), m. sing. the prince of this people. {%—Kuntala-%}
{%vardhana, as,%} m., N. of a plant; [cf. {%bhṛṅga-%}
{%rāja.%}] {%—Kuntalośīra (˚la-uś˚), am,%} n. a perfume.
<LEND>

<L>15145<pc>0236-b<k1>kuntalikA<k2>kuntalikA
{%Kuntalikā,%}¦ f. a butter knife or scoop; a species
of plant.
<LEND>

<L>15146<pc>0236-b<k1>kuntApa<k2>kuntApa
{#kuntApa#}¦ {%kuntāpa, am,%} n., Ved., N. of certain
organs or glands (?), twenty in number, supposed to
be in the belly; N. of a section of the Atharva-veda,
according to Sāyaṇācārya, thirty verses, constituting
seven Sūktas of the twentieth book of this Veda.
<LEND>

<L>15147<pc>0236-b<k1>kunti<k2>kunti
{#kunti#}¦ {%kunti, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
({%is%}), m. sing. the prince of this people, also called
Kunti-bhoja; {%Kunti%} is, according to different authori-
ties, a son of either Dharmanetra, or of Netra and
grandson of Dharma, or of Kratha, or of Vidarbha
and father of Dhṛṣṭa, or of Supārśva and grandson
of Sampāti and great-grandson of Garuḍa; ({%ī%}), f.
a N. of Pṛthā, the daughter of a Yādava prince
named Śūra, who gave her to his childless cousin
Kunti or Kunti-bhoja, by whom she was adopted.
She afterwards became one of the two wives of
Pāṇḍu. (On one occasion before her marriage she
paid such respect to the powerful sage Durvāsas that
he taught her an incantation or charm, by virtue of
which she was to have a child by any god she liked
to invoke. Out of curiosity she invoked the Sun,
by whom she had a child, cf. {%karṇa;%} but the Sun
afterwards restored to her her maidenhood. Soon
after his marriage Pāṇḍu retired to the woods to
indulge his passion for hunting. There he killed a
male and female deer, who turned out to be a Ṛṣi
and his wife in the form of these animals. The sage
cursed Pāṇḍu and predicted that he would die in the
embrace of one of his wives. Hence Pāṇḍu lived
apart from Kunti, but with his approval she made
use of her charm and had three sons, Yudhiṣṭhira,
Bhīma, and Arjuna, by the three deities Dharma,
Vāyu, and Indra respectively; cf. {%mādrī%}); N. of a
Rākṣasī; the wife of a Brāhman; the plant Bos-
wellia Thurifera; a fragrant resin {%(= guggulu).%}
{%—Kunti-nandana, as,%} m. a son of Kuntī (the final
being sometimes shortened in a comp.), either of
the three elder Pāṇḍava princes. {%—Kunti-bhoja, as,%}
m., N. of a Yādava prince, king of the Kuntis, who
adopted Kuntī. {%—Kuntī-suta, as,%} m. a son of Kuntī.
<LEND>

<L>15148<pc>0236-b<k1>kuntika<k2>kuntika
{%Kuntika, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15149<pc>0236-b<k1>kunT<k2>kunT
{#kunT#}¦ {%kunth,%} cl. 1. P. {%kunthati, -thitum,%}
to hurt, injure; to suffer pain, want, &c.;
to be distressed; cl. 9. P. {%kuthnāti,%} to injure; to
cling to; to twine round or be connected with, em-
brace; [cf. Lat. <nsi>quatio, per-cutio.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>15150<pc>0236-b<k1>kunTu<k2>kunTu
{#kunTu#}¦ {%kunthu, us,%} m., N. of the sixth Jaina
Cakravartin or emperor in Bhārata; also of the
seventeenth Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>15151<pc>0236-b<k1>kunda<k2>kunda
{#kunda#}¦ {%kunda, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. 3. {%ku%}), a kind of jasmine, Jasminum Multiflorum
or Pubescens; ({%as%}), m. fragrant oleander, Nerium
Odorum [cf. {%karavīra%}]; Olibanum, the resin of the
plant Boswellia Thurifera; a turner's lathe; one of
Kuvera's nine treasures; the number ‘nine;’ an epi-
thet of Viṣṇu; N. of a mountain. {%—Kunda-kara,%}
{%as,%} m. a turner. {%—Kunda-kundācārya (˚da-āc˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of the Pañcāstikāyasaṅgraha-
sūtra. {%—Kunda-mālā,%} f. title of a work. {%—Kunda- %}
[Page0236-c+ 73]
{%samāna-danta, as, ī, am,%} one whose teeth are like
the jasmine.
<LEND>

<L>15152<pc>0236-c<k1>kundaka<k2>kundaka
{%Kundaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Boswellia Thurifera;
the resin of this plant.
<LEND>

<L>15153<pc>0236-c<k1>kundinI<k2>kundinI
{%Kundinī,%}¦ f. an assemblage of lotus flowers or of
jasmines.
<LEND>

<L>15154<pc>0236-c<k1>kundama<k2>kundama
{#kundama#}¦ {%kundama, as,%} m. a cat.
<LEND>

<L>15155<pc>0236-c<k1>kundara<k2>kundara
{#kundara#}¦ {%kundara, as,%} m. a sort of grass; an
epithet of Viṣṇu; [cf. {%kaṇḍura%} and {%kunda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15156<pc>0236-c<k1>kundu<k2>kundu
{#kundu#}¦ {%kundu, us,%} m. a mouse, a rat; ({%us%}),
f. the resin of the plant Boswellia Thurifera; gum
olibanum or frankincense.
<LEND>

<L>15157<pc>0236-c<k1>kundura<k2>kundura
{%Kundura, as,%}¦ m. or {%kunduru, us,%} m. f. the resin
of the plant Boswellia Thurifera.
<LEND>

<L>15158<pc>0236-c<k1>kunduruka<k2>kunduruka
{%Kunduruka, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. the resin of the plant Bos-
wellia Thurifera; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Boswellia Thurifera.
<LEND>

<L>15159<pc>0236-c<k1>kundr<k2>kundr
{#kundr#}¦ {%kundr,%} cl. 10. P. {%kundrayati, -yitum,%}
to tell a lie; [cf. {%kud%} and {%gundr.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15160<pc>0236-c<k1>kup<k2>kup<h>1
{#kup#} 1¦. {%kup,%} cl. 4. P. (ep. also A.) {%kupyati,%}
{%-te, cukopa, kopiṣyati, akupat, kopi-%}
{%tum,%} to be moved, excited, agitated, to swell, heave
or boil with rage or emotion, to be angry, to be angry
with (with dat. or gen. or acc. or with {%upari%} and
gen., e. g. {%tasmai%} or {%tasya%} or {%tam%} or {%tasyopari%}
{%cukopa,%} he was angry with him): Caus. {%kopayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to excite, agitate, affect strongly with anger
&c.; to cause to swell or heave with passion; to stir
up; to provoke, make angry; to be angry: Desid.
{%cukupiṣati%} and {%cukopiṣati:%} Intens. {%cokupyate,%}
{%cokopti;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>cupio;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>hope;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>hoffe.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>15161<pc>0236-c<k1>kupa<k2>kupa
{%Kupa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the beam or lever of a pair of
scales.
<LEND>

<L>15162<pc>0236-c<k1>kupana<k2>kupana
{%Kupana, as,%}¦ m., N. of an Asura.
<LEND>

<L>15163<pc>0236-c<k1>kupaya<k2>kupaya
{%Kupaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. heaving, swelling with
emotion; disturbed; (Sāy.) to be guarded or pro-
tected (as if connected with rt. {%gup%}).
<LEND>

<L>15164<pc>0236-c<k1>kupita<k2>kupita
{%Kupita, as, ā, am,%}¦ provoked, incensed, offended,
angry, bristling. {%—Kupita-vāyu, us,%} m. aggravated
flatulence, hypochondria. {%—Kupitāntaka (˚ta-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. imminent or threatening death.
<LEND>

<L>15165<pc>0236-c<k1>kupya<k2>kupya
{%Kupya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be excited; ({%am%}), n. a vile
metal, any metal but silver and gold, base metal,
copper, brass, &c.; zinc, lapis calaminaris, pewter,
tutenag; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; [cf. Lat. <nsi>cuprum.</nsi>]
{%—Kupya-śālā,%} f. a braziery, a foundry, a place
where metallic vessels &c. are made or sold.
<LEND>

<L>15166<pc>0236-c<k1>kupyaka<k2>kupyaka
{%Kupyaka%}¦ at the end of compounds {%= kupya.%}
<LEND>

<L>15167<pc>0236-c<k1>kopa<k2>kopa
{%Kopa, as,%}¦ m. passion, anger. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>15168<pc>0236-c<k1>kup<k2>kup<h>2
{#kup#} 2¦. {%kup,%} cl. 10. P. {%kopayati, -yitum,%}
to speak, to shine; [cf. Hib. <nsi>cubhas,</nsi> ‘a
word, a promise;’ Lat. <nsi>cupo</nsi> in <nsi>nun-cupo;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>huf,</nsi> ‘to lament.’]
<LEND>

<L>15169<pc>0236-c<k1>kupaNka<k2>kupaNka
{#kupaNka#}¦ {%ku-paṅka, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a slough,
a heap of filth and mud.
<LEND>

<L>15170<pc>0236-c<k1>kupawa<k2>kupawa
{#kupawa#}¦ {%ku-paṭa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (see 1.
{%ku%}), miserable clothes, a miserable garment; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a Dānava (covered with a miserable garment).
<LEND>

<L>15171<pc>0236-c<k1>kupata<k2>kupata
{#kupata#}¦ {%kupata,%} ind. excellent.
<LEND>

<L>15172<pc>0236-c<k1>kupaTa<k2>kupaTa
{#kupaTa#}¦ {%ku-patha, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
road, an evil way; bad conduct, evil way of living,
immorality, profligacy; heterodox doctrine; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), walking in a bad or wrong road; ({%as%}), m., N.
of an Asura or Dānava; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Kupatha-ga, as, ā, am,%} or {%kupatha-gāmin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} or {%kupatha-cara, as, ā, am,%} going in a bad
or wrong road, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>15173<pc>0236-c<k1>kupaTya<k2>kupaTya
{%Kupathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a bad way,
literally or figuratively; unwholesome (as diet, regi-
men, &c.), improper, counter-indicated.
<LEND>

<L>15174<pc>0236-c<k1>kuparijYAta<k2>kuparijYAta
{#kuparijYAta#}¦ {%ku-parijñāta, as, ā, am%} (see 1.
{%ku%}), badly understood, wrongly comprehended.
<LEND>

<L>15175<pc>0236-c<k1>kuparIkzaka<k2>kuparIkzaka
{#kuparIkzaka#}¦ {%ku-parīkṣaka, as, ikā, am%} (see
1. {%ku%}), making a false estimate, not valuing rightly.
<LEND>
[Page0237-a+ 68]

<L>15176<pc>0237-a<k1>kuparIkzita<k2>kuparIkzita
{%Ku-parīkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ badly examined or
tested.
<LEND>

<L>15177<pc>0237-a<k1>kupARi<k2>kupARi
{#kupARi#}¦ {%ku-pāṇi, is, is, i%} (see 1. {%ku%}), crooked-
handed, having a deformed or maimed hand.
<LEND>

<L>15178<pc>0237-a<k1>kupAtra<k2>kupAtra
{#kupAtra#}¦ {%ku-pātra, am,%} n. an unfit recipient.
<LEND>

<L>15179<pc>0237-a<k1>kupiYjala<k2>kupiYjala
{#kupiYjala#}¦ {%ku-piñjala, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), N.
of a man; [cf. {%kaupiñjala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15180<pc>0237-a<k1>kupita<k2>kupita
{#kupita#}¦ {%kupita.%} See under rt. {%kup%} above.
<LEND>

<L>15181<pc>0237-a<k1>kupitf<k2>kupitf
{#kupitf#}¦ {%ku-pitṛ, tā,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
father.
<LEND>

<L>15182<pc>0237-a<k1>kupinI<k2>kupinI
{#kupinI#}¦ {%kupinī,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%kup?%}), a kind of
net for catching small fish, made of bamboos or rushes.
<LEND>

<L>15183<pc>0237-a<k1>kupinin<k2>kupinin
{%Kupinin, ī,%}¦ m. a fisherman.
<LEND>

<L>15184<pc>0237-a<k1>kupinda<k2>kupinda
{#kupinda#}¦ {%kupinda, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 1.
{%kup%}), a weaver; [cf. {%kuvinda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15185<pc>0237-a<k1>kupIlu<k2>kupIlu
{#kupIlu#}¦ {%ku-pīlu, us,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a sort
of ebony tree; [cf. {%kāraskara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15186<pc>0237-a<k1>kuputra<k2>kuputra
{#kuputra#}¦ {%ku-putra, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
son; a disobedient or wicked son; a son of an in-
ferior degree, as an adopted son &c.
<LEND>

<L>15187<pc>0237-a<k1>kupuruza<k2>kupuruza
{#kupuruza#}¦ {%ku-puruṣa, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
low, vile, or miserable man; a poltroon. {%—Kupu-%}
{%ruṣa-janitā,%} f., N. of a metre consisting of four
lines of eleven syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>15188<pc>0237-a<k1>kupUya<k2>kupUya
{#kupUya#}¦ {%ku-pūya, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), inferior,
low, vile, contemptible; [cf. {%kapūya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15189<pc>0237-a<k1>kuprAvaraRa<k2>kuprAvaraRa
{#kuprAvaraRa#}¦ {%ku-prāvaraṇa%} or {%ku-prāvṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), badly or miserably dressed.
<LEND>

<L>15190<pc>0237-a<k1>kupriya<k2>kupriya
{#kupriya#}¦ {%ku-priya, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), dis-
agreeable, contemptible, low, vile, last, worst.
<LEND>

<L>15191<pc>0237-a<k1>kuplava<k2>kuplava
{#kuplava#}¦ {%ku-plava, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a weak
or frail raft or float.
<LEND>

<L>15192<pc>0237-a<k1>kubaDU<k2>kubaDU
{#kubaDU#}¦ {%ku-badhū, ūs,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), a wicked
wife.
<LEND>

<L>15193<pc>0237-a<k1>kubanDa<k2>kubanDa
{#kubanDa#}¦ {%ku-bandha, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a dis-
graceful stigma; [cf. {%aṅka-bandha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15194<pc>0237-a<k1>kubala<k2>kubala
{#kubala#}¦ {%kubala, kubala-prastha, kubalāśva,%}
&c. See under {%kuvala,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>15195<pc>0237-a<k1>kubudDi<k2>kubudDi
{#kubudDi#}¦ {%ku-buddhi, is, is, i%} (see 1. {%ku%}), a
person of base or vile sentiments; stupid, foolish.
<LEND>

<L>15196<pc>0237-a<k1>kubera<k2>kubera
{#kubera#}¦ {%kubera,%} or in later Sanskrit {%kuvera, as,%}
m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kumb%} or fr. 1. {%ku%} and {%vera%}),
originally N. of the chief of the evil beings or spirits
of darkness with the epithet Vaiśravaṇa; afterwards
the god of riches and treasure, the regent of the
northern quarter of the world, which is hence called
Kubera-guptā dik; ({%Kubera%} is the son of Viśravas by
Iḍaviḍā, the chief of the Yakṣas, and a friend of
Rudra; he is represented as having three legs and
only eight teeth); with Jainas, the attendant of the
nineteenth Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī; N. of a
prince of Deva-rāṣṭra; or N. of the great-grand-
father of Vāṇa-bhaṭṭa, the author of the Kādambarī;
or of the author of the Dattaka-candrikā; the tree
Cedrela Toona; ({%as, ā, am%}), deformed, monstrous;
slow, lazy; [cf. {%kuvera.%}] {%—Kubera-nalinī,%} f., N. of
a Tīrtha. {%—Kubera-bāndhava, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva, ‘the relation of Kubera.’ {%—Kubera-vana, am,%}
n. ‘the forest of Kubera,’ N. of a place. {%—Kubera-%}
{%vallabha, as,%} m., N. of a Vaiśya. {%—Kuberākṣī%}
{%(˚ra-ak˚),%} f. the plant Bignonia Suaveolens. {%—Ku-%}
{%berācala (˚ra-ac˚), as,%} m. ‘the mountain of Kubera,’
an epithet of the Kailāsa mountain. {%—Kuberādri%}
{%(˚ra-ad˚), is,%} m. an epithet of the Kailāsa mountain.
<LEND>

<L>15197<pc>0237-a<k1>kuberaka<k2>kuberaka
{%Kuberaka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Cedrela Toona {%(tunna);%}
{%(ikā),%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>15198<pc>0237-a<k1>kuberiRa<k2>kuberiRa
{#kuberiRa#}¦ {%kuberiṇa, as,%} m. (?), N. of a mixed
caste.
<LEND>
[Page0237-b+ 73]

<L>15199<pc>0237-b<k1>kubja<k2>kubja
{#kubja#}¦ {%kubja, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%ku%} and rt. {%ubj?%}),
hump-backed, crooked; ({%as%}), m. a curved sword, scy-
mitar; a sort of fish, Bola Cuja; the plant Achyran-
thes Aspera, {%= apāmārga;%} [cf. {%nyubja%} and {%kanya-%}
{%kubja;%} cf. also Lith. <nsi>kupra, kupotas;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κυφός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κύπτω</lang> Lat. <nsi>gibbus, gibba, gibber;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Höcker?</nsi>].
{%—Kubja-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. a white Mimosa. {%—Kub-%}
{%ja-kirāta%} or {%kubja-vāmana, am,%} n. a hump-backed
person and a dwarf. {%—Kubjāmraka (˚ja-ām˚), as%}
or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kubjā-%}
{%līḍha (˚ja-āl˚), as,%} m., N. of the founder of a sect.
<LEND>

<L>15200<pc>0237-b<k1>kubjaka<k2>kubjaka
{%Kubjaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ hump-backed, crooked; ({%as%}),
m. the aquatic plant Trapa Bispinosa; ({%ikā%}), f. in
the word {%kubjikā-tantra,%} N. of a Tantra; according
to some authorities {%kubjikā kumārī%} is a girl eight
years old personating the goddess Durgā at a festival
of this deity.
<LEND>

<L>15201<pc>0237-b<k1>kubjita<k2>kubjita
{%Kubjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ crooked, curved, bent.
<LEND>

<L>15202<pc>0237-b<k1>kubra<k2>kubra
{#kubra#}¦ {%kubra, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%kumb%}),
a forest; a hole for sacrificial fire; a ring, an ear-
ring; a thread; a cart.
<LEND>

<L>15203<pc>0237-b<k1>kubrahma<k2>kubrahma
{#kubrahma#}¦ {%ku-brahma, as,%} m. or {%ku-brahman,%}
{%ā,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a degraded or contemptible Brāh-
man, one who officiates for Śūdras.
<LEND>

<L>15204<pc>0237-b<k1>kuBanyu<k2>kuBanyu
{#kuBanyu#}¦ {%kubhanyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. desirous
of water.
<LEND>

<L>15205<pc>0237-b<k1>kuBA<k2>kuBA
{#kuBA#}¦ {%kubhā,%} f., Ved., N. of a river falling
into the Indus, the Kabul river (?); [cf. <lang n="greek">κωφήν.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>15206<pc>0237-b<k1>kuBArya<k2>kuBArya
{#kuBArya#}¦ {%ku-bhārya, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}),
having a bad wife; ({%ā%}), f. a bad wife.
<LEND>

<L>15207<pc>0237-b<k1>kuBukta<k2>kuBukta
{#kuBukta#}¦ {%ku-bhukta, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), bad food.
<LEND>

<L>15208<pc>0237-b<k1>kuBftya<k2>kuBftya
{#kuBftya#}¦ {%ku-bhṛtya, as,%}  m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
servant.
<LEND>

<L>15209<pc>0237-b<k1>kum<k2>kum
{#kum#}¦ {%kum,%} ind. an interjection.
<LEND>

<L>15210<pc>0237-b<k1>kumati<k2>kumati
{#kumati#}¦ {%ku-mati, is,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), vile or
base sentiment; slow or weak intellect; folly; ({%is,%}
{%is, i%}), or {%ku-manīṣa, as, ā, am,%} or {%ku-manīṣin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} of slow intellect, foolish.
<LEND>

<L>15211<pc>0237-b<k1>kumantra<k2>kumantra
{#kumantra#}¦ {%ku-mantra, as,%} m. bad advice; evil
counsel; a charm employed to secure success in a
bad enterprise.
<LEND>

<L>15212<pc>0237-b<k1>kumantrin<k2>kumantrin
{%Ku-mantrin, ī,%}¦ m. a bad counsellor.
<LEND>

<L>15213<pc>0237-b<k1>kumAra<k2>kumAra
{#kumAra#}¦ {%kumāra, as,%} m. (fr. {%ku + māra,%} fr. rt.
{%mṛ ?%} ‘easily dying;’ by native authorities derived fr.
rt. 2. {%kam%}), a child, a new-born child (especially in the
earlier language); a boy, a youth, a son; a prince,
the heir-apparent associated in the kingdom with the
reigning monarch (especially in theatrical language);
a groom; a N. of Skanda the god of war, who is
also the reputed author of certain grammatical Sūtras
(see {%kalāpa%}); N. of a son of Agni, who is the author
of some Vedic hymns; an epithet of Agni; (with
Jainas) N. of the attendant of the twelfth Arhat of
the present Avasarpiṇī; N. of a Prajāpati; an epithet
of Mañju-śrī; a parrot; the tree Capparis Trifoliata
[cf. {%kumāraka%}]; an epithet of the river Sindhu;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ī%}), f. a young girl,
one from ten to twelve years old, a maiden; or (in
the Tantras) any virgin up to the age of sixteen, or
before menstruation has commenced; a daughter;
N. of the wife of Bhīma-sena, the son of Parīkṣit;
or of a daughter of Vasu-deva by Rohiṇī; an
epithet of Sītā, the wife of Rāma; an epithet of
the goddess Durgā; the Śyāmā, a bird so named;
N. of several plants, Aloe Perfoliata, or the plant
Clitoria Ternatea [cf. {%aparājitā%}]; also the plant
Jasminum Sambac, and a plant commonly called
Bandhyā-karkoṭakī; the blossom of the plants Taruṇī
and Modinī; great cardamoms; the most southerly
of the nine portions of the known continent, or of
Jambu-dvīpa, the southern extremity of the peninsula,
whence the modern name Cape Comorin (Kumārī);
the central part of the universe, according to Hindū
[Page0237-c+ 78]
geography, Jambu-dvīpa or India; N. of a river
flowing from the mountain Śuktimat; N. of a metre
consisting of four lines of sixteen syllables each;
(when a name is given to a pupil to indicate his
attachment to any particular master, {%kumārī%} may be
prefixed to denote that the pupil's object is to gain
the affections of the master's daughter, e. g. {%kumārī-%}
{%dākṣa%}); ({%am%}), n. pure gold; [Gr. <lang n="greek">κόρος, κοῦρος;</lang>
<lang n="greek">μεῖραξ, μειράκιον</lang> ?]. {%—Kumāra-gupta, as,%} m., N.
of a prince (‘protected by the god of war’). {%—Ku-%}
{%māra-ghātin, ī,%} m. the slayer of a child. {%—Kumāra-%}
{%jīva, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= putrañjīvaka%}. {%—Ku-%}
{%māra-tva, am,%} n. boyhood, youth. {%—Kumāra-%}
{%datta, as,%} m., N. of a son of Nidhipati. {%—Kumāra-%}
{%dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Kumāra-devī,%} f., N. of
the mother of Samudra-gupta. {%—Kumāra-deṣṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. granting perishable gifts; (Sāy.)
granting children. {%—Kumāra-dhārā,%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Kumāra-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a king, {%=%}
{%śālivāhana%} (?), also N. of a king of Guzerat (?).
{%—Kumāra-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Ku-%}
{%māra-bhṛtyā,%} f. care of a young child, care of a
pregnant or lying-in woman, midwifery. {%—Kumāra-%}
{%lalitā,%} f. ‘boy's play,’ N. of a metre consisting of
four lines of eight syllables each. {%—Kumāra-vana,%}
{%am,%} n. Kumāra's (i. e. Kārttikeya's) grove. {%—Kumāra-%}
{%vāhin, ī,%} m. a peacock, (‘carrying the god of war;’
this god being usually represented as borne by a pea-
cock.) {%—Kumāra-vrata, am,%} n. a vow of eternal
chastity. {%—Kumāra-sambhava, as,%} m. ‘the birth of
the god of war,’ title of a poem by Kālidāsa. {%—Ku-%}
{%māra-sū, ūs,%} m. the father of the god of war, an
epithet of Agni; ({%ūs%}), f. the mother of the god of
war, an epithet of the river Gaṅgā, also of the god-
dess Durgā. {%—Kumāra-sena, as,%} m., N. of a minister.
{%—Kumāra-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of the author of a
commentary on the Mīmāṃsā-bhāṣya. {%—Kumāra-%}
{%hārita, as,%} m., N. of a teacher. {%—Kumārābhiṣeka%}
{%(˚ra-abh˚), as,%} m. ‘the inauguration of Kumāra,’
title of the thirteenth book of the Kumāra-sambhava.
{%—Kumārī-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Ku-%}
{%mārī-pāla, as,%} m. the guardian of a virgin or bride.
{%—Kumārī-putra, as,%} m. the child of an unmarried
woman. {%—Kumārī-pura, am,%} n. a gynæceum.
{%—Kumārī-pūjā,%} f. the worship of Kumāri or Durgā,
(a ceremony performed at the great Durgā festival,
when a girl between ten and twelve years old is
placed on a pedestal, as the representative of the
goddess, and fed with offerings made to the idol.)
{%—Kumārī-śvaśura, as,%} m. the father-in-law of a
maiden.
<LEND>

<L>15214<pc>0237-c<k1>kumAraka<k2>kumAraka
{%Kumāraka, as,%}¦ m. a child, a little boy, a boy, a
lad, a youth; the pupil of the eye; N. of a Nāga;
the plant Capparis Trifoliata; ({%ikā%}), f. a girl from
ten to twelve years old, or generally a virgin; an
insect, Sphex Asiatica; double jasmine, Jasminum
Sambac; large cardamoms; N. of a part of Bhārata-
varṣa, a division of the known continent. {%—Kumā-%}
{%rikā-kṣetra, am,%} n., N. of a country. {%—Kumārikā-%}
{%khaṇḍa,%} a section of the Skanda-purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>15215<pc>0237-c<k1>kumAraya<k2>kumAraya
{%Kumāraya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kumārayati, -yitum,%} to
play, especially as a child.
<LEND>

<L>15216<pc>0237-c<k1>kumArayu<k2>kumArayu
{%Kumārayu, us,%}¦ m. a prince, heir-apparent.
<LEND>

<L>15217<pc>0237-c<k1>kumArika<k2>kumArika
{%Kumārika, as, ī, am,%}¦ furnished with girls, abound-
ing in them.
<LEND>

<L>15218<pc>0237-c<k1>kumArin<k2>kumArin
{%Kumārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ abounding in girls.
<LEND>

<L>15219<pc>0237-c<k1>kumArila<k2>kumArila
{%Kumārila, as,%}¦ m. or {%kumārila-svāmin, ī,%} m., N.
of a renowned teacher of the Mīmāṃsā philosophy.
<LEND>

<L>15220<pc>0237-c<k1>kumArI<k2>kumArI
{%Kumārī, ī, ī,%}¦ m. f. a man or woman desirous of
a daughter.
<LEND>

<L>15221<pc>0237-c<k1>kumArga<k2>kumArga
{#kumArga#}¦ {%ku-mārga, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
way, bad ways, (also used metaphorically.)
<LEND>

<L>15222<pc>0237-c<k1>kumAlaka<k2>kumAlaka
{#kumAlaka#}¦ {%kumālaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people and country, {%= kumāraka.%}
<LEND>

<L>15223<pc>0237-c<k1>kumAlaya<k2>kumAlaya
{%Kumālaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kumālayati, -yitum,%} to
play, especially as a child; [cf. {%kumāraya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15224<pc>0237-c<k1>kumitra<k2>kumitra
{#kumitra#}¦ {%ku-mitra, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
friend.
<LEND>
[Page0238-a+ 75]

<L>15225<pc>0238-a<k1>kumuKa<k2>kumuKa
{#kumuKa#}¦ {%ku-mukha, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a hog.
<LEND>

<L>15226<pc>0238-a<k1>kumud<k2>kumud
{#kumud#}¦ {%ku-mud, t, t, t%} (see 1. {%ku%}), unkind,
unfriendly; avaricious, niggardly; ({%t%}), n. the plant
Nymphæa Esculenta, the esculent white water-lily;
the plant Nymphæa Rubra, the red lotus. {%—Kumud-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding in lotuses; ({%atī%}), f. an
assemblage of lotuses; a place or pond filled with
them; the flexible stalk of a water-lily; N. of a
plant bearing a poisonous fruit, Villarsia (Menyanthes)
Indica; N. of a sister of the serpent-king Kumuda
and wife of Kuśa; N. of the wife of Vimarṣaṇa;
N. of a river. {%—Kumudvatīśa (˚tī-īśa), as,%} m. an
epithet of the moon; [cf. {%kumuda-bandhu%} and the
following.]
<LEND>

<L>15227<pc>0238-a<k1>kumuda<k2>kumuda
{%Ku-muda, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the esculent white water-
lily, Nymphæa Esculenta (‘exciting what joy!’); red
lotus, Nymphæa Rubra; ({%am%}), n. silver; ({%as%}), m.
camphor; N. of a Nāga; N. of the elephant of the
south-west or southern quarter; N. of a Daitya; N.
of an attendant of Viṣṇu; N. of a son of Gada by
Vṛhatī; N. of a confidant of king Unmattāvanti; one
of the monkey-heroes of the Rāmāyaṇa; N. of a
poet; N. of a mountain; N. of one of the smaller
Dvīpas; ({%ā%}), f. several plants, Gmelina Arborea;
Pistia Stratiotes; Desmodium Gangeticum; Grislea
Tomentosa; N. of another plant, commonly called
Kaṭphala; N. of a deity; ({%ī%}), f. a plant, commonly
called Kaṭphala. {%—Kumuda-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. an
assemblage of Kumudas. {%—Kumuda-ghnī,%} f., N. of
a plant containing a poisonous milky juice. {%—Ku-%}
{%muda-pattrābha (˚tra-ābha), as, ā, am,%} resem-
bling the leaves of the white water-lily. {%—Kumuda-%}
{%bandhu, us,%} m. or {%kumuda-bāndhava, as,%} m. the
moon (‘friend of the lotus;’ the white esculent lotus
expanding its petals during the night and closing
them in the day time; hence other similar appella-
tions of the moon, as {%kumuda-priya,%} &c.). {%—Ku-%}
{%muda-vatī,%} f. an assemblage of Kumudas, a place
abounding in them, &c. {%—Kumuda-suhṛd, t,%} m.
the moon; [cf. {%kumuda-bandhu.%}] {%—Kumudākara%}
{%(˚da-āk˚), as,%} m. a number of water-lilies or place
abounding in them. {%—Kumudākṣa (˚da-ak˚), as,%}
m., N. of a Nāga; also of an attendant of Viṣṇu.
{%—Kumudādi (˚da-ādi), is,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Pathya. {%—Kumudāvāsa (˚da-āv˚), as, ā, am,%}
abounding or richly furnished with Kumudas; ({%as%}),
m. a pool abounding in them. {%—Kumudeśa (˚da-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. an epithet of the moon, ‘lord of the
lotus.’
<LEND>

<L>15228<pc>0238-a<k1>kumudika<k2>kumudika
{%Kumudika, as, ī, am,%}¦ abounding with Kumudas;
({%ikā%}), f., N. of a plant, commonly called Kaṭphala;
a small tree, the seeds of which are aromatic.
<LEND>

<L>15229<pc>0238-a<k1>kumudinI<k2>kumudinI
{%Kumudinī,%}¦ f. an assemblage of Kumudas or a
place abounding in them; the mother of Raghu-
deva. {%—Kumudinī-nāyaka, as,%} m. or {%kumudinī-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. an epithet of the moon; [cf. {%kumuda-%}
{%bandhu.%}] {%—Kumudinī-vanitā,%} f. any loved woman
fancifully represented as an assemblage of lotus
flowers.
<LEND>

<L>15230<pc>0238-a<k1>kumeDas<k2>kumeDas
{#kumeDas#}¦ {%ku-medhas, ās, ās, as%} (see 1. {%ku%}),
of little intellect, stupid; malicious.
<LEND>

<L>15231<pc>0238-a<k1>kumeru<k2>kumeru
{#kumeru#}¦ {%ku-meru, us,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), the
southern hemisphere or pole, the region of the
demons and Titans.
<LEND>

<L>15232<pc>0238-a<k1>kumodaka<k2>kumodaka
{#kumodaka#}¦ {%kumodaka, as,%} m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu; [cf. {%kaumodakī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15233<pc>0238-a<k1>kump<k2>kump
{#kump#}¦ {%kump,%} cl. 10. P. {%kumpayati, -yitum,%}
another form for {%kumb, kumbayati.%}
<LEND>

<L>15234<pc>0238-a<k1>kumpa<k2>kumpa
{#kumpa#}¦ {%kumpa, as, ā, am,%} crooked-armed.
<LEND>

<L>15235<pc>0238-a<k1>kumb<k2>kumb
{#kumb#}¦ {%kumb,%} cl. 6. and 10. P. {%kumbati%}
and {%kumbayati, -yitum,%} to cover; [cf.
{%kump%} and {%kumbh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15236<pc>0238-a<k1>kumba<k2>kumba
{#kumba#}¦ {%kumba, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), Ved.
a kind of head-dress for women; the upper part
or top of a club; ({%ā%}), f. a thick petticoat; an en-
[Page0238-b+ 78]
closure round a place of sacrifice to prevent profane
intrusion.
<LEND>

<L>15237<pc>0238-b<k1>kumbika<k2>kumbika
{#kumbika#}¦ {%kumbika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15238<pc>0238-b<k1>kumbyA<k2>kumbyA
{#kumbyA#}¦ {%kumbyā%} or {%kumvyā,%} f., Ved. a kind
of hymn or sacred formula.
<LEND>

<L>15239<pc>0238-b<k1>kumB<k2>kumB
{#kumB#}¦ {%kumbh,%} cl. 10. P. {%kumbhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} another form for {%kumb,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15240<pc>0238-b<k1>kumBa<k2>kumBa
{#kumBa#}¦ {%kumbha, as,%} m. a jar, pitcher, water-
pot, ewer, a small water-jar, (often in compounds,
e. g. {%chidra-kumbha,%} a perforated pitcher; {%āma-%}
{%kumbha,%} a jar of unbaked clay; {%hema-kumbha,%} a
golden ewer; {%jala-kumbha,%} a water-pot); an urn
in which the bones of a dead person are collected;
the sign of the zodiac Aquarius; a measure of grain
equal to twenty Droṇas, a little more than three
bushels and three gallons (commonly called a comb,
some make it two Droṇas or sixty-four Seers); the
frontal globe on the upper part of the forehead of an
elephant (there are two of these projections which
swell in the rutting season); a religious exercise, viz.
closing the nostrils and mouth so as to suspend
breathing; the root of a plant used in medicine;
the paramour of a harlot, a bully, a flash or fancy
man; N. of a Muni; N. of a Dānava, son of
Prahlāda and brother of Nikumbha; also of a
Rākṣasa, a son of Kumbha-karṇa; N. of the
father of the nineteenth Arhat of the present Avasar-
piṇī; N. of a monkey; one of the thirty-four jātakas
or former births of Śākya-muni; title of a work;
({%ī%}), f. a small jar or pot, an earthen cooking vessel;
a vessel for preserving grain, a measure of grain; N.
of several plants, a small tree, the seeds of which are
used in medicine, commonly called Kaṭphala; an-
other plant, Bignonia Suaveolens; another plant,
Pistia Stratiotes; another plant, commonly called
Romaśa; another plant, Croton Polyandrum; ({%ā%}),
f. a harlot, a whore; ({%am%}), n. the plant Ipomœa
Turpethum; a fragrant resin ({%guggulu%}), or the
plant which bears it; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κύμβη</lang> Lat. <nsi>cymba.</nsi>]
{%—Kumbha-karṇa, as,%} m., N. of a Rākṣasa, the
gigantic brother of Rāvaṇa, who is described in the
Yuddha-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa as sleeping for six
months at a time, and then waking to gorge him-
self; N. of a Muni; an epithet of Śiva; N. of a
Dānava. {%—Kumbhakarṇa-vadha, as,%} m. ‘the
slaughter of Kumbhakarṇa,’ a section of the Padma-
purāṇa. {%—Kumbha-kāmalā,%} f. a bilious affection,
a sort of jaundice together with swelling of the
joints; [cf. {%kumbha-pāda.%}] {%—Kumbha-kāra, as,%}
m. a potter, being according to some authorities the
son of a Brāhman by a wife of the Kṣatriya caste;
a serpent; a kind of wild fowl; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of a
potter; N. of a girl; a mineral substance used as an
application to strengthen the eyes and beautify the
eyelashes; red arsenic. {%—Kumbha-kāraka, as,%} m.
a potter; ({%ikā%}), f. the wife of a potter, a woman of
the potter caste; a sort of collyrium. {%—Kumbha-%}
{%kāra-kukkuṭa, as,%} m. a kind of chicken, Phasianus
Gallus. {%—Kumbha-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Śambara. {%—Kumbha-koṇa, as,%} m. ‘brim of a jar,’
N. of a town. {%—Kumbha-ghoṇa-tīrtha, am,%} n., N.
of a Tīrtha. {%—Kumbha-janman, ā,%} m. an epithet
of Agastya. {%—Kumbha-tumbī,%} f. a kind of large
round gourd. {%—Kumbha-dāsī,%} f. a bawd, a procuress.
{%—Kumbha-dhara, as,%} m. the sign of the zodiac
Aquarius. {%—Kumbha-nābha, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Bali. {%—Kumbha-pāda, as, -padī, am,%} a person
with swollen legs bulging like a pitcher; [cf. {%kum-%}
{%bha-kāmalā.%}] {%—Kumbha-bāhu, us,%} m., N. of a
Daitya. {%—Kumbha-maṇḍūka, as,%} m. a frog in a
pitcher; [cf. {%kūpa-maṇḍūka.%}] {%—Kumbha-muṣka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. an epithet of certain demons, ‘hav-
ing a jar-shaped scrotum.’ {%—Kumbha-mūrdhan, ā,%}
m. a fabulous being mentioned in the Hari-vaṃśa.
{%—Kumbha-yoni, is,%} m. ‘born in a water-jar,’ an
epithet of the saint Agastya; of Vasiṣṭha; and of
Droṇa, the military preceptor of the Kurus and
Pāṇḍus; N. of a plant, commonly called Droṇa-
[Page0238-c+ 79]
puṣpī; ({%is%}), f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Kumbha-rāśi,%}
{%is,%} m. the sign Aquarius. {%—Kumbha-retas,%} n. semen
virile deposited in a Kumbha; ({%ās%}), m. a form of
Agni. {%—Kumbha-lagna, am,%} n. that time of day in
which Aquarius rises above the horizon. {%—Kumbha-%}
{%vījaka, as,%} m., N. of a plant, commonly called
Rīṭhā-karañja. {%—Kumbha-śālā,%} f. a pottery, a pot-
ter's kiln. {%—Kumbha-sandhi, is,%} m. the hollow on
the top of an elephant's head, between the frontal
globes. {%—Kumbha-sambhava, as,%} m. an epithet of
the saint Agastya; also of Nārāyaṇa. {%—Kumbha-%}
{%sarpis, is,%} n. butter placed in a jar. {%—Kumbha-%}
{%hanu, us,%} m., N. of a Rākṣasa. {%—Kumbhāṇḍa%}
{%(˚bha-aṇ˚), ās,%} m. pl. (with Buddhists) a class of
demons with testicles shaped like a Kumbha; N. of
a minister of the Asura Bāṇa; ({%ī%}), f. a pumpkin
gourd, (a various reading for {%kuṣmāṇḍī.%}) {%—Kum-%}
{%bhī-dhānya, as,%} m. grain stored in jars sufficient
(according to some) for six days, or (to others) for one
year's consumption. {%—Kumbhī-dhānyaka, as,%} m. a
householder who preserves grain in store for six days
&c. {%—Kumbhī-nasa, as,%} m. a kind of large venom-
ous snake; a kind of poisonous insect; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
the wife of the Gandharva Aṅgāraparṇa; also of a
Rākṣasī, the mother of Lavaṇa. {%—Kumbhīnasi,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a demon. {%—Kumbhī-pāka, as,%} m.
the contents of a cooking vessel; ({%as%} or {%ās%}), m.
sing. or pl. a hell, in which the wicked are baked
like potters’ vessels, or cooked like the contents of a
cooking vessel. {%—Kumbhī-vīja, am,%} n. the nut of
the croton; [cf. {%kumbhinī-vīja.%}] {%—Kumbheśvara-%}
{%tīrtha (˚bha-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kum-%}
{%bhodara (˚bha-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of an attendant
of Śiva. {%—Kumbholūka (˚bha-ul˚), as,%} m. a kind
of owl.
<LEND>

<L>15241<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBaka<k2>kumBaka
{%Kumbhaka, as,%}¦ m. the base of a column; stop-
ping the breath by shutting the mouth and closing
both nostrils with the fingers of the right hand; a
religious exercise.
<LEND>

<L>15242<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBikA<k2>kumBikA
{%Kumbhikā,%}¦ f. a small pot or pitcher; N. of
several plants, Pistia Stratiotes; another plant, Big-
nonia Suaveolens; another plant, commonly called
Droṇa-puṣpī; a disease of the eyes, hordeolum or stye.
<LEND>

<L>15243<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBin<k2>kumBin
{%Kumbhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a water-jar; shaped like
a jar &c.; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a demon hostile to children;
an elephant; a crocodile; a fish; a kind of poisonous
insect; a sort of fragrant resin ({%guggulu%}), or the
plant bearing this fragrant resin. {%—Kumbhi-naraka,%}
{%as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), N. of a hell, {%= kumbhī-%}
{%pāka%} (?). {%—Kumbhinī-vīja, am,%} n. the croton-nut,
Croton Jamalgota. {%—Kumbhi-pākī,%} f., N. of a plant,
commonly called Kaṭphala. {%—Kumbhi-mada, as,%} m.
the juice that exudes from an elephant's temples at
certain seasons.
<LEND>

<L>15244<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBila<k2>kumBila
{%Kumbhila, as,%}¦ m. a thief who breaks into a
house, a plagiarist; a wife's brother; a child be-
gotten at undue seasons or of an imperfect impregna-
tion; a kind of fish, the gilt-head, Ophiocephalus
Wrahl.
<LEND>

<L>15245<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBIka<k2>kumBIka
{%Kumbhīka, as,%}¦ m. a pathic, a catamite; the plant
Rottleria Tinctoria, or the plant Pistia Stratiotes, a
plant the bark of which furnishes a yellow dye; ({%ā%}),
f. a swelling, especially of the eyelids, similar to a
seed or grain of the Kumbhīka; an affection of the
eyes, hordeolum or stye, also {%kumbhīka-piḍakā;%}
Ved., N. of a kind of demon.
<LEND>

<L>15246<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBIkin<k2>kumBIkin
{%Kumbhīkin ī, inī, i,%}¦ similar to a seed or grain of
the Kumbhīka.
<LEND>

<L>15247<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBIra<k2>kumBIra
{%Kumbhīra, as,%}¦ m. the crocodile of the Ganges,
the long-nosed alligator; N. of a Yakṣa. {%—Kum-%}
{%bhīra-makṣikā,%} f. a sort of fly or aquatic insect.
<LEND>

<L>15248<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBIraka<k2>kumBIraka
{%Kumbhīraka, as,%}¦ m. a thief.
<LEND>

<L>15249<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBIla<k2>kumBIla
{%Kumbhīla, as,%}¦ m. a crocodile; [cf. {%kumbhīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15250<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBarI<k2>kumBarI
{#kumBarI#}¦ {%kumbharī,%} f. an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>15251<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBalA<k2>kumBalA
{#kumBalA#}¦ {%kumbhalā,%} f. a plant the flowers
of which are compared to those of the plant Nauclea
Cadamba; [cf. {%muṇḍitikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15252<pc>0238-c<k1>kumBila<k2>kumBila
{#kumBila#}¦ {%kumbhila, kumbhīra,%} &c. See un-
der {%kumbha%} above.
<LEND>
[Page0239-a+ 68]

<L>15253<pc>0239-a<k1>kuyajvin<k2>kuyajvin
{#kuyajvin#}¦ {%ku-yajvin, ī,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
bad sacrificer.
<LEND>

<L>15254<pc>0239-a<k1>kuyava<k2>kuyava
{#kuyava#}¦ {%ku-yava, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), Ved.
epithet of the demon Śuṣṇa, who was slain by Indra,
‘causing a bad harvest?;’ ({%as%}), m., N. of another
demon; ({%am%}), n. a bad harvest.
<LEND>

<L>15255<pc>0239-a<k1>kuyavAc<k2>kuyavAc
{#kuyavAc#}¦ {%kuya-vāc, k,%} m. ({%kuya%} = 1. {%ku%}),
Ved. speaking ill, abusing; or N. of a demon who
was slain by Indra (?).
<LEND>

<L>15256<pc>0239-a<k1>kuyoga<k2>kuyoga
{#kuyoga#}¦ {%ku-yoga, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), an in-
auspicious conjunction of planets, signs, periods, &c.
<LEND>

<L>15257<pc>0239-a<k1>kuyogin<k2>kuyogin
{%Ku-yogin, ī,%}¦ m. a false devotee, an impostor, a
hypocrite.
<LEND>

<L>15258<pc>0239-a<k1>kuyoni<k2>kuyoni
{#kuyoni#}¦ {%ku-yoni, is,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), a base
womb, the womb of a low woman.
<LEND>

<L>15259<pc>0239-a<k1>kur<k2>kur
{#kur#}¦ {%kur,%} cl. 6. P. {%kurati, -ritum,%} to utter
a sound, to sound in general.
<LEND>

<L>15260<pc>0239-a<k1>kurakA<k2>kurakA
{#kurakA#}¦ {%kurakā,%} f. the olibanum tree, Bos-
wellia Thurifera ({%= sallakī%}).
<LEND>

<L>15261<pc>0239-a<k1>kuraNkara<k2>kuraNkara
{#kuraNkara#}¦ {%kuraṅkara%} or {%kuraṅkura, as,%} m. the
Indian crane, Ardea Sibirica.
<LEND>

<L>15262<pc>0239-a<k1>kuraNga<k2>kuraNga
{#kuraNga#}¦ {%kuraṅga, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 1. {%kṝ%}),
a species of antelope, an antelope or deer in general;
N. of a mountain; ({%ī%}), f. a female antelope. {%—Ku-%}
{%raṅga-nayanā,%} f. a handsome woman (‘fawn-eyed’).
{%—Kuraṅga-nābhi, is,%} m. musk (formed in a bag
attached to the belly of the deer above the navel).
<LEND>

<L>15263<pc>0239-a<k1>kuraNgaka<k2>kuraNgaka
{%Kuraṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of antelope, an
antelope, a deer; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of bean ({%= mudga-%}
{%parṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>15264<pc>0239-a<k1>kuraNgama<k2>kuraNgama
{%Kuraṅgama, as,%}¦ m. a species of antelope or deer.
<LEND>

<L>15265<pc>0239-a<k1>kuraNgAya<k2>kuraNgAya
{%Kuraṅgāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kuraṅgāyate, -yitum,%} to
become or take the shape of an antelope.
<LEND>

<L>15266<pc>0239-a<k1>kuracilla<k2>kuracilla
{#kuracilla#}¦ {%kuracilla, as,%} m. a crab; (a wrong
reading for {%kuru-cilla.%})
<LEND>

<L>15267<pc>0239-a<k1>kurawa<k2>kurawa
{#kurawa#}¦ {%kuraṭa, as,%} m. a shoemaker, a leather-
seller, a currier; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15268<pc>0239-a<k1>kuraRwa<k2>kuraRwa
{#kuraRwa#}¦ {%kuraṇṭa, as,%} m. or {%kuraṇṭaka, as, ikā,%}
m. f. yellow amaranth ({%pītāmlāna%}), and a yellow
kind of barleria {%(pītajhiṇṭī); (am),%} n. the blossom
of this plant. Also {%kuraṇḍaka%} and {%kuruṇṭaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>15269<pc>0239-a<k1>kuraRqa<k2>kuraRqa
{#kuraRqa#}¦ {%kuraṇḍa, as,%} m. enlargement of the
testicles or rather of the scrotum, including inguinal
hernia, hydrocele, &c.; N. of a plant, commonly
called Sākuruṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>15270<pc>0239-a<k1>kuraRqaka<k2>kuraRqaka
{#kuraRqaka#}¦ {%kuraṇḍaka, as,%} m. yellow amaranth;
a yellow kind of barleria; [cf. {%kuraṇṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15271<pc>0239-a<k1>kurayARa<k2>kurayARa
{#kurayARa#}¦ {%kurayāṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man;
[cf. {%kaurayāṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15272<pc>0239-a<k1>kurara<k2>kurara
{#kurara#}¦ {%kurara, as, ā,%} m. f. (said to be fr. rt.
3. {%ku%}), an osprey; also another species of eagle; ({%ī%}), f.
a female osprey; a sheep, an ewe; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
mountain. {%—Kurarāṅghri (˚ra-aṅ˚), is,%} m. a kind
of mustard {%(deva-sarṣapa)%}. {%—Kurarī-gaṇa, as,%}
m. a flight of ospreys.
<LEND>

<L>15273<pc>0239-a<k1>kurarAva<k2>kurarAva
{%Kurarāva, am,%}¦ n. a place abounding with ospreys.
<LEND>

<L>15274<pc>0239-a<k1>kurala<k2>kurala
{#kurala#}¦ {%kurala, as,%} m. an osprey [cf. {%kurara%}];
a curl, a lock of hair upon the forehead.
<LEND>

<L>15275<pc>0239-a<k1>kurava<k2>kurava
{#kurava#}¦ {%ku-rava, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), having
a bad voice; ({%as%}), m. a bad or harsh sound; N. of a
plant, {%= sitamandāra;%} a red or a yellow kind of
barleria.
<LEND>

<L>15276<pc>0239-a<k1>kuravaka<k2>kuravaka
{%Kuravaka, as,%}¦ m. a crimson species of amaranth;
a purple or a yellow sort of Jhiṇṭi or barleria; a
species of rice or grain; ({%am%}), n. the blossom of the
amaranth or of the barleria.
<LEND>

<L>15277<pc>0239-a<k1>kurasa<k2>kurasa
{#kurasa#}¦ {%ku-rasa, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), having
bad juice or flavour or essence; ({%as%}), m. spirituous or
[Page0239-b+ 77]
vinous liquor; ({%ā%}), f. a wild creeping plant, a species
of hieracium; [cf. {%go-jihvā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15278<pc>0239-b<k1>kurAjan<k2>kurAjan
{#kurAjan#}¦ {%ku-rājan, ā,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
king.
<LEND>

<L>15279<pc>0239-b<k1>kurAjya<k2>kurAjya
{%Ku-rājya, am,%}¦ n. bad dominion, bad administration.
<LEND>

<L>15280<pc>0239-b<k1>kurAla<k2>kurAla
{#kurAla#}¦ {%kurāla, as,%} m. a light bay horse
with black legs; (wrong reading for {%kurāha,%} which
is a various reading for {%urāha.%})
<LEND>

<L>15281<pc>0239-b<k1>kurI<k2>kurI
{#kurI#}¦ {%kurī,%} f. a kind of grass or corn.
<LEND>

<L>15282<pc>0239-b<k1>kurIra<k2>kurIra
{#kurIra#}¦ {%kurīra, am,%} n. (said to be fr. 1. {%kṛ%}),
Ved. a kind of head-dress for women; copulation.
<LEND>

<L>15283<pc>0239-b<k1>kurIrin<k2>kurIrin
{%Kurīrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. decorated with the head-
dress called {%kurīra.%}
<LEND>

<L>15284<pc>0239-b<k1>kuru<k2>kuru
{#kuru#}¦ {%kuru, avas,%} m. pl. (said to be fr. 1. {%kṛ%}),
N. of a people of India and their country, situated
near the country of the Pañcālas (hence often con-
nected with Pañcāla or Pāñcāla; see {%kuru-pañcāla%}
below); the Kurus derive their origin from Kuru (son
of Saṃvaraṇa and Tapatī, daughter of the Sun), who
is the ancestor of both Pāṇḍu and Dhṛta-rāṣṭra,
though the patronymic derived from his name is
usually applied only to the sons of the latter, the sons
and descendants of the former being called Pāṇḍavas;
another Kuru is the son of Agnīdhra and grandson of
Priya-vrata. The {%uttara-kuravaḥ%} or {%uttarāḥ kura-%}
{%vaḥ%} are the northern Kurus, the most northerly of the
four Mahā-dvīpas or principal divisions of the known
world (distinguished Mahā-bh. I. 4346. from the {%dak-%}
{%ṣiṇāḥ kuravaḥ%} or southern Kurus), by other sys-
tems regarded as one of nine divisions or Varṣas of
the same; it was probably a country beyond the most
northern range of the Himālaya, often described
as a country of everlasting happiness, and considered
by some to be the ancient home of the Āryan race.
{%Kurū, ūs,%} f. a princess of the Kuru race. According
to native lexicographers the word {%kuru%} has also the
following meanings; a priest; boiled rice; the plant
Solanum Jacquini, {%= kaṇṭakārika;%} [cf. {%kaurava,%}
{%kauravaka, kauravya.%}] {%—Kuru-kata, ās,%} m. pl.
the Kurus and Katas. {%—Kuru-kandaka, am,%} n.
horse-radish, Raphanus Sativus {%(= mūlaka)%}. {%—Kuru-%}
{%kurukṣetra, am,%} n. the country of the Kurus and
Kurukṣetra. {%—Kuru-kṣetra, am,%} n. the field of
the Kurus, N. of a region or extensive plain near
Delhi, the scene of the great battles between the
Kurus and Pāṇḍus; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of
this country, renowned for their bravery. {%—Kuru-%}
{%kṣetrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} with {%yoga,%} a solar day, in the
course of which three lunar days, three asterisms and
three yogas occur. {%—Kuru-cilla, as,%} m. a crab; [cf.
{%kuracilla.%}] {%—Kuru-jāṅgala, am,%} n., N. of a
country; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the people inhabiting
it. {%—Kuru-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kuru-%}
{%nadikā,%} f. according to native authorities, {%= ku-na-%}
{%dikā%}. {%—Kuru-nandana, as,%} m. a descendant of
Kuru as Arjuna, Yudhiṣṭhira, &c. {%—Kuru-pañcāla,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. the Kurus and Pañcālas. {%—Kurupañcāla-%}
{%trā,%} ind., Ved. as among the Kurus and Pañcālas.
{%—Kuru-patha, as,%} m., N. of a man (?); [cf.
{%kaurupathi.%}] {%—Kuru-puṅgava, as,%} m. a Kuru
chief. {%—Kuru-rāj, ṭ,%} m. an epithet of Duryodhana.
{%—Kuru-rāja, as,%} m. an epithet of Yudhiṣṭhira.
{%—Kuru-rājya, am,%} n. the Kuru realm. {%—Kuru-%}
{%vatsa, as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Kuru-varṇaka, ās,%}
m. pl., N. of a people; or perhaps ({%as, ā, am%}), be-
longing to the race of the Kurus. {%—Kuru-vaśa, as,%}
m., N. of a prince. {%—Kuru-vājapeya, as,%} m. a
particular kind of Vājapeya. {%—Kuru-vista, as,%} m. a
Pala of gold, a weight of gold equal to about 700
troy grains. {%—Kuru-vṛddha, as,%} m. an epithet of
Bhīṣma. {%—Kuru-śravaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Kuru-śreṣṭha%} or {%kuru-sattama, as,%} m. an epi-
thet of Arjuna. {%—Kuru-hāra, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or
n. (?), N. of an Agra-hāra.
<LEND>

<L>15285<pc>0239-b<k1>kuruka<k2>kuruka
{%Kuruka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a prince; (a various reading
for {%ruruka.%})
<LEND>

<L>15286<pc>0239-b<k1>kurukullA<k2>kurukullA
{%Kurukullā,%}¦ f., N. of a Buddhist deity.
<LEND>
[Page0239-c+ 66]

<L>15287<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruNga<k2>kuruNga
{#kuruNga#}¦ {%kuruṅga, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>15288<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruwa<k2>kuruwa
{#kuruwa#}¦ {%kuruṭa, as,%} m. a kind of pot-herb;
[cf. {%sitāvara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15289<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruwin<k2>kuruwin
{#kuruwin#}¦ {%kuruṭin, ī,%} m. a horse.
<LEND>

<L>15290<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruRwa<k2>kuruRwa
{#kuruRwa#}¦ {%kuruṇṭa, as,%} m. yellow amaranth;
yellow barleria; ({%ī%}), f. a doll, a puppet made of wood;
the wife of a Brāhman or teacher.
<LEND>

<L>15291<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruRwaka<k2>kuruRwaka
{%Kuruṇṭaka, as,%}¦ m. yellow or white amaranth; a
yellow species of barleria, B. Prionitis.
<LEND>

<L>15292<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruRqa<k2>kuruRqa
{%Kuruṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. {%= kuruṇṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>15293<pc>0239-c<k1>kurutAvi<k2>kurutAvi
{#kurutAvi#}¦ {%kurutāvi,%} a particular high num-
ber.
<LEND>

<L>15294<pc>0239-c<k1>kurumba<k2>kurumba
{#kurumba#}¦ {%kurumba, am,%} n. a kind of orange,
{%= kulapālaka; (ā),%} f., N. of a plant, commonly
called Droṇa-puṣpī; ({%ī%}), f. another plant, commonly
called Saiṃhalī.
<LEND>

<L>15295<pc>0239-c<k1>kurumbikA<k2>kurumbikA
{%Kurumbikā,%}¦ f., N. of a plant, commonly called
Droṇa-puṣpī.
<LEND>

<L>15296<pc>0239-c<k1>kururI<k2>kururI
{#kururI#}¦ {%kururī,%} f. a species of bird with a
plaintive note; (a wrong reading for {%kurarī.%})
<LEND>

<L>15297<pc>0239-c<k1>kurula<k2>kurula
{#kurula#}¦ {%kurula, as,%} m. a curl or lock of hair,
especially on the forehead.
<LEND>

<L>15298<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruvaka<k2>kuruvaka
{#kuruvaka#}¦ {%kuruvaka, as,%} m. the crimson
amaranth; a purple species of barleria; also a yellow
kind; ({%am%}), n. the blossom of this flower; [cf.
{%kuravaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15299<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruvinda<k2>kuruvinda
{#kuruvinda#}¦ {%kuruvinda, as,%} m. (fr. {%kuru%} and
{%vinda?%}), N. of several plants; a fragrant grass,
Cyperus Rotundus; a kind of barley, see {%kalmāṣa;%}
the bud of a flower?; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a ruby; ({%am%}),
n. black salt; cinnabar, or the plant Terminalia
Catappa (?).
<LEND>

<L>15300<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruvindaka<k2>kuruvindaka
{%Kuruvindaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of Dolichos Biflorus,
a wild variety.
<LEND>

<L>15301<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruvilva<k2>kuruvilva
{#kuruvilva#}¦ {%kuruvilva%} or {%kuruvilla%} (?), {%as,%} m.
a ruby; [cf. {%kuruvinda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15302<pc>0239-c<k1>kuruvilvaka<k2>kuruvilvaka
{%Kuruvilvaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of barley. See
{%kulmāṣa%} and {%kuruvinda.%}
<LEND>

<L>15303<pc>0239-c<k1>kurusuti<k2>kurusuti
{#kurusuti#}¦ {%kurusuti%} or {%kurustuti, is,%} m., N. of
a Vedic poet.
<LEND>

<L>15304<pc>0239-c<k1>kurUwin<k2>kurUwin
{#kurUwin#}¦ {%kurūṭin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. {%= kirīṭin%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>15305<pc>0239-c<k1>kurUpa<k2>kurUpa
{#kurUpa#}¦ {%ku-rūpa, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), ill-
made, of an ugly shape, deformed, ugly; ({%am%}), n.
ugliness. {%—Kurūpa-tā,%} f. or {%kurūpa-tva, am,%} n.
ugliness.
<LEND>

<L>15306<pc>0239-c<k1>kurUpin<k2>kurUpin
{%Ku-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ ill-made, deformed, ugly,
frightful.
<LEND>

<L>15307<pc>0239-c<k1>kurUpya<k2>kurUpya
{%Ku-rūpya, am,%}¦ n. tin, (lit. bad silver.)
<LEND>

<L>15308<pc>0239-c<k1>kurUru<k2>kurUru
{#kurUru#}¦ {%kurūru, us,%} m., Ved. a species of
worm.
<LEND>

<L>15309<pc>0239-c<k1>kurkuwa<k2>kurkuwa
{#kurkuwa#}¦ {%kurkuṭa, as,%} m. [cf. {%kukkuṭa%}], a cock;
rubbish, sweepings (?).
<LEND>

<L>15310<pc>0239-c<k1>kurkuwAhi<k2>kurkuwAhi
{#kurkuwAhi#}¦ {%kurkuṭāhi, is,%} m. a kind of serpent;
[cf. {%kukkuṭāhi%} and {%kukkuṭābha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15311<pc>0239-c<k1>kurkura<k2>kurkura
{#kurkura#}¦ {%kurkura, as,%} m. (an onomatopoetic
word), a dog or bitch; [cf. {%kukkura.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15312<pc>0239-c<k1>kurcikA<k2>kurcikA
{#kurcikA#}¦ {%kurcikā,%} f. the milky juice of a bulb-
ous root; a needle; (a wrong reading for {%kūrcikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>15313<pc>0239-c<k1>kurRaja<k2>kurRaja
{#kurRaja#}¦ {%kurṇaja, as,%} m., N. of a plant, com-
monly called Kulañjana.
<LEND>

<L>15314<pc>0239-c<k1>kurd<k2>kurd
{#kurd#}¦ {%kurd%} and {%kurdana,%} incorrect forms for
{%kūrd%} and {%kūrdana.%}
<LEND>

<L>15315<pc>0239-c<k1>kurpara<k2>kurpara
{#kurpara#}¦ {%kurpara, as,%} m. the knee; the elbow;
[cf. {%kūrpara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15316<pc>0239-c<k1>kurpAsa<k2>kurpAsa
{#kurpAsa#}¦ {%kurpāsa%} and {%kurpāsaka, as,%} m. a
sort of bodice or jacket for women; [cf. {%kūrpāsa.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0240-a+ 79]

<L>15317<pc>0240-a<k1>kurvat<k2>kurvat
{#kurvat#}¦ {%kurvat, an, atī, at%} (pres. part. fr. rt.
1. {%kṛ%}), doing, acting, &c.; acting as a servant, an
agent, a servant. {%—Kurvad-rūpa, am,%} n. cause
according to the Cārvākas.
<LEND>

<L>15318<pc>0240-a<k1>kurvARa<k2>kurvARa
{%Kurvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ doing, making, &c.
<LEND>

<L>15319<pc>0240-a<k1>kul<k2>kul
{#kul#}¦ {%kul,%} cl. 1. P. {%kolati, cukola,%} &c.,
{%kolitum,%} to accumulate, collect; to be of
kin, to behave as a kinsman; to proceed continuously
or without interruption; to count.
<LEND>

<L>15320<pc>0240-a<k1>kula<k2>kula
{#kula#}¦ {%kula, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%kul?%}), a herd, a
troop, a flock, an assemblage, a multitude, a number
&c. (of quadrupeds, birds, insects, &c., or of inanimate
objects, e. g. {%go-kula,%} a herd of cows; {%mṛga-kula,%}
a herd of deer; {%mahiṣī-kula,%} a herd of female
buffaloes; {%ali-kula,%} a swarm of bees; {%alaka-kula,%}
a multitude of curls); a race, family, community,
tribe, caste, association, set, company (e. g. {%brāh-%}
{%maṇa-kula,%} the caste of the Brāhmans); the resi-
dence of a family, seat of a community; (in a
contemptuous sense) a lot, a gang (forming a comp.
with a preceding gen. sing., e. g. {%caurasya-kula,%}
a gang of thieves); an inhabited country; a house,
an abode; a noble or eminent family or race; high
station (often at the beginning of a compound =
chief, principal; see {%kula-giri%} below); the body; the
front, fore part; a blue stone; ({%as%}), m. the chief of
a corporation or guild; [cf. Hib. <nsi>gaol,</nsi> ‘a family or
kindred.’] {%Kuli%} and {%kulī,%} see s. v. {%—Kula-kajjala,%}
{%as,%} m. disgrace of the family. {%—Kula-kaṇṭaka, as,%}
m. ‘a family-thorn,’ any one who is a trouble to his
family. {%—Kula-kanyā,%} f. a girl of good family.
{%—Kula-kara, as, ī, am,%} founding a family, the
founder of a family or race, an ancestor. {%—Kula-%}
{%karkaṭī,%} f. a kind of gourd; [cf. {%cīnākarkatī.%}]
{%—Kula-kartṛ, tā,%} m. the founder of a family or
race, an ancestor. {%—Kula-karman, a,%} n. the peculiar
or proper duty of a family or race, any observance or
custom peculiar to a family. {%—Kula-kalaṅka, as,%} m.
‘a family-stain,’ any one who disgraces his family.
{%—Kula-kṣaya, as,%} m. decay or downfall of a race
or family; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of cowach, Mucuna Pruritus
{%(= śūkaśimbī)%}. {%—Kula-gariman, ā,%} m. family
pride. {%—Kula-giri, is,%} m. a chief mountain, any one
of the seven principal mountains of Bhārata-varṣa;
see {%kulācala%}. {%—Kula-gṛha, am,%} n. a noble house.
{%—Kula-gopa, as,%} m., Ved. the protector of a
domicile. {%—Kula-gaurava, am,%} n. family import-
ance. {%—Kula-ghna, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} destroying a
family. {%—Kula-candra, as,%} m., N. of a scholiast
on the Kātantra grammar; N. of the author of the
Durgāvākya-prabodha. {%—Kula-cūḍāmaṇi,%} title of a
work. {%—Kula-cyuta, as, ā, am,%} rejected by his
family. {%—Kula-ja%} or {%kula-jāta, as, ā, am,%} born in
a noble family, of a good or noble family, well-born,
of good breed; ancestral, hereditary. {%—Kula-jana,%}
{%as,%} m. a person belonging to a noble family, a high-
born or distinguished person. {%—Kula-tattva-vid, t,%}
{%t, t,%} knowing the true state of a family. {%—Kula-tas,%}
ind. by birth. {%—Kula-tithi, is,%} m. f. an important
lunar day, the fourth, eighth, twelfth, or fourteenth
day of the half-month. {%—Kula-tilaka, as,%} m. the
glory of a family, one who does honour to a family.
{%—Kula-damana, as, ā, am,%} subduing a family,
holding it in subjection. {%—Kula-dīpa%} or {%kula-%}
{%dīpaka, as,%} m. the lamp or light or glory of a race
or family; ({%ikā%}), f. title of a work treating on the
noble families of Bengal. {%—Kula-duhitṛ, tā,%} f. the
daughter of a noble family; a high-born maiden.
{%—Kula-devatā,%} f. a principal deity; an epithet of
the goddess Durgā. {%—Kula-daiva, am,%} n. family
destiny; a principal deity. {%—Kula-dharma, as,%} m.
practice or observance peculiar to a tribe or family,
peculiar duty of caste or race. {%—Kula-dhāraka, as,%}
m. ‘upholder of the family,’ a son. {%—Kula-dhurya,%}
{%as,%} m. one who is able to support a family, a grown-
up son. {%—Kula-nakṣatra, am,%} n. any Nakṣatra
or lunar mansion distinguished above others; any
auspicious asterism. {%—Kula-nandana, as, ā, am,%}
causing joy to a family, doing honour to a family; a
[Page0240-b+ 81]
high-born virtuous child. {%—Kula-nāyikā,%} f. a girl
worshipped at the celebration of the orgies of the left-
hand Śāktas. {%—Kula-nārī,%} f. a woman of good
family; a high-bred virtuous woman. {%—Kula-nāśa,%}
{%as,%} m. a camel; a reprobate, an outcast. {%—Kula-%}
{%nindā,%} f. family disgrace. {%—Kulan-dhara, as, ā, am,%}
upholding a family. {%—Kula-pa, as,%} m., Ved. the
chief of a family or race or tribe. {%—Kula-pati, is,%}
m. the head or chief of a family. {%—Kula-pattra, as,%}
m. a plant, commonly called Damanaka. {%—Kula-%}
{%paramparā,%} f. the series of generations comprising
a race. {%—Kula-parvata%} or {%kula-śaila, as,%} m. a
principal mountain, any one of seven mountains in
Bhārata; [cf. {%kula-giri.%}] {%—Kula-pāṃsukā,%} f. an
unchaste woman. {%—Kula-pālaka, as, ikā, am,%} pro-
tecting a family, nourishing or providing for a family;
({%am%}), n. a kind of orange, {%= kurumba,%} commonly
{%kamalānevu%}. {%—Kula-pāli, is,%} f. or {%kula-pālikā,%}
f. or {%kula-pālī,%} f. a chaste, high-born, or noble
woman. {%—Kula-putra, as,%} m. a son of a noble
family, a noble or respectable youth; ({%ī%}), f. the
daughter of a good family, a high-born or respectable
girl; [cf. {%kula-duhitṛ.%}] {%—Kula-putraka, as,%} m.,
N. of a plant, {%= kula-pattra%} and {%muni-putra.%}
{%—Kulaputra-jana, as,%} m. the son of a good
family, a noble or respectable youth. {%—Kula-pu-%}
{%ruṣa, as,%} m. a man of good family, a noble or
respectable man; an ancestor, any family progenitor.
{%—Kula-pūrvaga, as,%} m. an ancestor. {%—Kula-%}
{%prakāśa, as,%} m. title of a work. {%—Kula-prasūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} born in a noble family. {%—Kula-badhū,%}
{%ūs,%} f. a noble, virtuous, or respectable woman; [cf. {%ku-%}
{%la-yoṣit.%}] {%—Kula-bālikā,%} f. {%= kula-pālikā%} above.
{%—Kula-bhāryā,%} f. a virtuous, noble, or high-bred
wife. {%—Kula-bhūbhṛt, t,%} m. a principal mountain,
one of the seven mountains in Bhārata. {%—Kula-%}
{%bhūṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} ‘family-adorning,’ a family
ornament. {%—Kula-bhṛtyā,%} f. the nursing of a preg-
nant woman; a midwife, a nurse?; [cf. {%kumāra-%}
{%bhṛtyā.%}] {%—Kula-bheda-kara, as,%} m. one who
causes discord in a family. {%—Kula-bhraṣṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} expelled from a family. {%—Kula-maryādā,%} f.
family honour or respectability. {%—Kula-mārga, as,%}
m. the best or principal way, the way of honesty.
{%—Kula-mitra, am,%} n. a friend of the family. {%—Ku-%}
{%lam-puna, as, ā, am,%} purifying a family; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of a Tīrtha; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Kulam-%}
{%bhara, as, ā, am,%} carrying or upholding a family;
({%as%}), m. a wrong form for {%kujambhala,%} a thief.
{%—Kula-yoṣit, t,%} f. a woman of noble family; a
virtuous high-born woman. {%—Kula-rakṣaka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} preserving a family. {%—Kula-ratna-mālikā,%}
f. title of a work. {%—Kula-vat, ān, atī, at,%} be-
longing to a noble family. {%—Kula-vadhū, ūs,%} f. a
virtuous wife, a respectable woman, one of good
family. {%—Kulavadhū-tā,%} f. virtue in a wife. {%—Kula-%}
{%varṇā,%} f. a species of the plant Convolvulus with
red blossoms, {%= rakta-trivṛt%}. {%—Kula-vardhana%} or
{%kula-vardhaka, as, ā, am,%} increasing or advancing
or propagating a family. {%—Kula-vāra, as,%} m. a
principal day, i. e. Tuesday and Friday. {%—Kula-%}
{%vidyā,%} f. knowledge handed down in a family.
{%—Kula-vipra, as,%} m. a family priest. {%—Kula-%}
{%vṛddha, as,%} m. the oldest member or head of a
family. {%—Kula-vṛddhi, is,%} f. family advancement.
{%—Kula-vyāpin, ī, inī, i,%} attaching or applicable to
tribe or caste. {%—Kula-vrata, am,%} n. a family vow.
{%—Kula-śīla, as, am,%} m. n. character or conduct
honourable to a family. {%—Kula-śīla-samanvita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} endowed with a noble character or disposi-
tion. {%—Kula-śekhara, as,%} m., N. of the author of
Mukunda-mālā. {%—Kula-śreṣṭhin, ī, inī, i,%} well-
born; of good family, eminent in a family; ({%ī%}), m.
the chief of a guild; an artificer or artisan of eminent
birth. {%—Kula-saṅkhyā,%} f. ranking or being reckoned
as a family, family respectability. {%—Kula-sattra, am,%}
n. a family sacrifice. {%—Kula-santati, is,%} f. propa-
gation of a family, posterity, descendants. {%—Kula-%}
{%sannidhi, is,%} m. the presence of a number of persons
or of witnesses, kindred, relations. {%—Kula-samud-%}
{%bhava, as, ā, am,%} born in a noble family. {%—Kula- %}
[Page0240-c+ 81]
{%sambhava, as, ā, am,%} sprung from a noble family;
(in compounds) sprung from a family. {%—Kula-sāra-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Kula-sundarī,%}
f., N. of a deity. {%—Kula-sevaka, as,%} m. an excellent
attendant or servant. {%—Kula-saurabha, am,%} n., N.
of a plant, {%= maruvaka%}. {%—Kula-strī,%} f. a woman of
good family, a respectable woman, a chaste or virtuous
wife. {%—Kula-sthiti, is,%} f. antiquity or prosperity of
a family. {%—Kulākula (˚la-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} excel-
lent and not excellent, middling; of mixed character,
of mixed origin; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Kulā-%}
{%kula-tithi, is,%} m. f. the second, sixth, and tenth
lunar days of a half-month. {%—Kulākula-nakṣatra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the lunar mansions Ārdrā, Mūlā, Abhi-
jit, and Śatabhiṣā; an asterism of mixed character.
{%—Kulākula-vāra, as,%} m. Wednesday. {%—Kulāṅ-%}
{%ganā (˚la-aṅ˚),%} f. a woman of good family, a
respectable or chaste woman. {%—Kulāṅgāra (˚la-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘a family firebrand,’ metaphorically a
man who foments domestic dissensions or ruins his
family. {%—Kulācala (˚la-ac˚), as,%} m. a principal
mountain, one of a class of seven principal mountains
which are supposed to exist in each Varṣa or division
of a continent; those of Bhārata-varṣa or India are
Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Śuktimat, Ṛkṣa, Vin-
dhya, and Pāripātra or Pāriyātra; N. of a Dānava.
{%—Kulācāra (˚la-āc˚), as,%} m. the peculiar or proper
duty of a family or caste. {%—Kulācārya (˚la-āc˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a family teacher, a family priest; a person
well versed in the pedigrees and customs of different
families and employed to contract marriages between
them; a genealogist. {%—Kulādri (˚la-ad˚), is,%} m. a
principal mountain; one of seven principal mountains;
see {%kulācala%} above. {%—Kulādhāraka (˚la-ādh˚), as,%}
m. a son; [cf. {%kula-dhāraka.%}] {%—Kulānvita (˚la-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} sprung from a noble family. {%—Kulā-%}
{%bhimāna (˚la-abh˚), am,%} n. pride of birth, family
pride. {%—Kulābhimānin, ī, inī, i,%} proud of birth or of
family descent. {%—Kulāmṛta (˚la-am˚), am,%} n. title
of a work. {%—Kulārṇava (˚la-ar˚), as,%} m. title of a
work. {%—Kulārṇava-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra.
{%—Kulālambin (˚la-āl˚), ī, inī, i,%} supporting or
maintaining a family. {%—Kule-cara, as%} or {%am%} (?), m.
or n. (?) , a kind of plant. {%—Kuleśvara (˚la-īś˚), as,%}
m. the chief of a family or race; the lord <lang n="greek">κατ᾽ ἐξοχήν,</lang>
an epithet of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Ku-%}
{%lotkaṭa (˚la-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} excellent by birth, high-
born; ({%as%}), m. a horse of good breed. {%—Kulot-%}
{%karṣa (˚la-ut˚), as,%} m. family eminence. {%—Kulot-%}
{%panna (˚la-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} sprung from a good
family, well-born; belonging to a family (as property
&c.). {%—Kulodgata (˚la-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} sprung
from a noble family. {%—Kulodbhava, as, ā, am,%}
or {%kulodbhūta (˚la-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} well-born, of
good family; born or produced in a family. {%—Kulod-%}
{%vaha (˚la-ud˚), as,%} m. a chief, a leader, the head of a
family. {%—Kulopadeśa (˚la-up˚), as,%} m. family name.
<LEND>

<L>15321<pc>0240-c<k1>kulaka<k2>kulaka
{%Kulaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to a tribe or family, of
good family, of eminent birth; ({%as%}), m. the chief of a
guild; any artisan of eminent birth; an ant-hill, a mole-
hill; a green snake ({%harita-sarpa%}); N. of several
plants, a kind of ebony, Diospyros Tomentosa; another
species of ebony, commonly called Ku-pīlu; another
plant, {%= maruvaka, śuklapuṣpa, tilaka; (am),%}
n. a multitude; a sort of gourd, Trichosanthes
Diœca; a number of stanzas in grammatical con-
nection, several verses in which the government of
noun and verb is carried throughout, contrary to the
practice of closing the sense with each verse; a kind
of prose composition with few compound words.
<LEND>

<L>15322<pc>0240-c<k1>kulAyana<k2>kulAyana
{%Kulāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15323<pc>0240-c<k1>kulika<k2>kulika
{%Kulika, as, ā, am,%}¦ of a good family, well-born;
({%as%}), m. a kinsman; the chief or head man of a tribe
or caste; an artist or artificer of high birth; a thorny
plant, Ruellia Longifolia or Asteracantha (Ruellia)
Longifolia; one of the eight chiefs of the Nāgas or
serpent-race, described as having a half-moon on the
top of his head and being of a dusky-brown colour.
{%—Kulika-velā,%} f. certain portions of each day on
which it is improper to begin any good business.
<LEND>

<L>15324<pc>0240-c<k1>kulin<k2>kulin
{%Kulin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ belonging to a noble family.
<LEND>
[Page0241-a+ 72]

<L>15325<pc>0241-a<k1>kulIna<k2>kulIna
{%Kulīna, as, ā, am%}¦ (at the end of compounds),
belonging to a family; of high or eminent descent,
of a good family, well-born; ({%as%}), m. a horse of
good breed; a Brāhman of the highest class in Ben-
gal, i. e. a member of one of the eight principal
families of the Vārendra division or of one of the
six chief families of the Rāḍha or Rāṛh division as
classified by Balāl Sen, Rāja of Bengal, in the twelfth
century, (common names of the latter families are
Mukharji, Banarji, Chatoji, &c.); a worshipper of
Śakti according to the left-hand ritual; ({%ā%}), f. a
variety of the Āryā metre; ({%am%}), n. a disease of
the nails. {%—Kulīna-tā,%} f. or {%kulīna-tva, am,%} n.
birth, rank, family respectability.
<LEND>

<L>15326<pc>0241-a<k1>kulInaka<k2>kulInaka
{%Kulīnaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ of good family; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of wild kidney-bean.
<LEND>

<L>15327<pc>0241-a<k1>kuleya<k2>kuleya
{%Kuleya, as, ā, am%}¦ (at the end of compounds) {%=%}
{%kulīna.%}
<LEND>

<L>15328<pc>0241-a<k1>kulya<k2>kulya<h>1
1. {%kulya, as, ā, am,%}¦ of or relating to a family or
race; belonging to a congregation or corporation; of
good family, well-born, well-descended; ({%as%}), m. a
respectable man; ({%ā%}), f. a virtuous or decent woman;
custom or habit of a family?; ({%am%}), n. friendly in-
quiry after family affairs or domestic accidents, con-
dolence, congratulation, &c. (For 2. 3. see col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>15329<pc>0241-a<k1>kulakka<k2>kulakka
{#kulakka#}¦ {%kulakka, as,%} m. a cymbal; beating
time in music.
<LEND>

<L>15330<pc>0241-a<k1>kulaNgI<k2>kulaNgI
{#kulaNgI#}¦ {%kulaṅgī,%} f. a thorny plant; (a wrong
form for {%kuliṅgī.%})
<LEND>

<L>15331<pc>0241-a<k1>kulaYja<k2>kulaYja
{#kulaYja#}¦ {%kulañja%} or {%kulañjana, as,%} m. the
plant Alpinia Galanga, {%= gandha-mūla.%}
<LEND>

<L>15332<pc>0241-a<k1>kulawa<k2>kulawa
{#kulawa#}¦ {%kulaṭa, as,%} m. (fr. {%kula%} and rt. {%aṭ?%}),
any son except one's own offspring, an adopted son,
a bought son, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. an unchaste woman.
{%—Kulaṭā-pati, is,%} m. the husband of an unchaste
woman, a cuckold.
<LEND>

<L>15333<pc>0241-a<k1>kulawI<k2>kulawI
{#kulawI#}¦ {%kulaṭī,%} f. red arsenic, {%= kunaṭī.%}
<LEND>

<L>15334<pc>0241-a<k1>kulati<k2>kulati
{#kulati#}¦ {%kulati, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15335<pc>0241-a<k1>kulatTa<k2>kulatTa
{#kulatTa#}¦ {%kulattha, as,%} m. (fr. {%kula?%} cf. {%aś-%}
{%vattha%} and {%kapittha%}), a kind of pulse, Dolichos
Uniflorus; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a kind
of Dolichos; a blue stone used in medicine and ap-
plied as a collyrium to the eyes, also as an astringent
to sores &c.; a species of metre.
<LEND>

<L>15336<pc>0241-a<k1>kulatTikA<k2>kulatTikA
{%Kulatthikā,%}¦ f. a blue stone used as a collyrium
&c.; a sort of vetch, considered as a wild sort of the
Dolichos Uniflorus.
<LEND>

<L>15337<pc>0241-a<k1>kulaBa<k2>kulaBa
{#kulaBa#}¦ {%kulabha, as,%} m., N. of a Daitya;
(another reading has {%sulabha.%})
<LEND>

<L>15338<pc>0241-a<k1>kulahaRqaka<k2>kulahaRqaka
{#kulahaRqaka#}¦ {%kulahaṇḍaka, as,%} m. an eddy,
{%= kūlahaṇḍaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>15339<pc>0241-a<k1>kulAkzutA<k2>kulAkzutA
{#kulAkzutA#}¦ {%kulākṣutā,%} f. a bitch.
<LEND>

<L>15340<pc>0241-a<k1>kulAwa<k2>kulAwa
{#kulAwa#}¦ {%kulāṭa, as,%} m. a kind of small fish.
<LEND>

<L>15341<pc>0241-a<k1>kulAdya<k2>kulAdya
{#kulAdya#}¦ {%kulādya, as,%} m. (?), N. of a country
or people.
<LEND>

<L>15342<pc>0241-a<k1>kulABi<k2>kulABi
{#kulABi#}¦ {%kulābhi, is,%} m. a treasure.
<LEND>

<L>15343<pc>0241-a<k1>kulAya<k2>kulAya
{#kulAya#}¦ {%kulāya, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. {%kula?%}), a
woven texture, a web; the nest of a bird; a case or
investing integument, a receptacle; the body as the
dwelling-place of the soul; the kennel or resting-place
of a dog &c.; a place, a spot in general. {%—Kulāya-%}
{%nilāya, as,%} m. the act of sitting in a nest, hatching,
brooding. {%—Kulāyanilāyi-tā,%} f. the act or state of
hatching, &c. {%—Kulāya-nilāyin, ī, inī, i,%} sitting in
a nest, brooding, hatching. {%—Kulāya-stha, as,%} m.
‘nest-dweller,’ a bird.
<LEND>

<L>15344<pc>0241-a<k1>kulAyayat<k2>kulAyayat
{%Kulāyayat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. nom. {%kulāyaya%}), Ved.
building nests or a resting-place, hiding one's self in
a nest.
<LEND>

<L>15345<pc>0241-a<k1>kulAyikA<k2>kulAyikA
{%Kulāyikā,%}¦ f. a bird-cage, an aviary.
<LEND>

<L>15346<pc>0241-a<k1>kulAyin<k2>kulAyin
{%Kulāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. forming a nest, shaped like
a nest, homely; ({%inī%}), f., N. of a liturgical service.
<LEND>
[Page0241-b+ 67]

<L>15347<pc>0241-b<k1>kulAla<k2>kulAla
{#kulAla#}¦ {%kulāla, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kul%}), a potter; a wild cock, Phasianus Gallus; an
owl; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of a potter; N. of a plant; a
species of blue stone applied as a collyrium to the
eyes {%(kulatthikā)%}. {%—Kulāla-vat,%} ind. like a potter.
<LEND>

<L>15348<pc>0241-b<k1>kulAlikA<k2>kulAlikA
{#kulAlikA#}¦ {%kulālikā,%} f. an aviary; (a wrong
form for {%kulāyikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>15349<pc>0241-b<k1>kulAha<k2>kulAha
{#kulAha#}¦ {%kulāha, as,%} m. a horse of a light-
brown colour with black knees.
<LEND>

<L>15350<pc>0241-b<k1>kulAhaka<k2>kulAhaka
{#kulAhaka#}¦ {%kulāhaka, as,%} m. a lizard, a chame-
lion; N. of a plant, commonly Rāṅgā Kulekhāḍā.
<LEND>

<L>15351<pc>0241-b<k1>kulAhala<k2>kulAhala
{#kulAhala#}¦ {%kulāhala, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
{%= alambuṣa, gocchāla, bhūkadamba,%} commonly
Kokaśimā, Coryza Terebinthina or Celsia Coroman-
delina, (a plant which dogs are fond of smelling before
they eject urine.)
<LEND>

<L>15352<pc>0241-b<k1>kuli<k2>kuli
{#kuli#}¦ {%kuli, is,%} m. the hand; ({%is%}), f., N. of
a plant, {%= kaṇṭakārī,%} a prickly nightshade.
<LEND>

<L>15353<pc>0241-b<k1>kuliNga<k2>kuliNga
{#kuliNga#}¦ {%ku-liṅga, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a kind
of mouse; a species of bird, the fork-tailed shrike;
N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
plant [cf. {%karkaṭa-śṛṅgī%}]; the female of the fork-
tailed shrike. {%—Kuliṅgākṣī (˚ga-ak˚),%} f., N. of a
plant, {%= peṭikā, kuverākṣī.%}
<LEND>

<L>15354<pc>0241-b<k1>kuliNgaka<k2>kuliNgaka
{%Kuliṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. a sparrow.
<LEND>

<L>15355<pc>0241-b<k1>kulija<k2>kulija
{#kulija#}¦ {%kulija, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?),
a sort of measure (occurring at the end of com-
pounds in the forms {%kulija, as, ī, am; kulijika, as,%}
{%ī, am; kulijīna, as, ā, am%}).
<LEND>

<L>15356<pc>0241-b<k1>kulinda<k2>kulinda
{#kulinda#}¦ {%kulinda, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
({%as%}), m. sing. the prince of this people.
<LEND>

<L>15357<pc>0241-b<k1>kulira<k2>kulira
{#kulira#}¦ {%kulira, as,%} m. a crab; also {%kulīra,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15358<pc>0241-b<k1>kuliSa<k2>kuliSa
{#kuliSa#}¦ {%kuliśa, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. 1. {%ku%} and
{%liśa, = riśa%} fr. {%riś%}), Ved. an axe, a hatchet; the
thunderbolt of Indra; a sort of fish; the plant Helio-
tropium Indicum; ({%ī%}), f., Ved., N. of a river supposed
to be in the middle region of the sky. {%—Kuliśa-%}
{%nāyaka, as,%} m. a kind of coitus. {%—Kuliśa-bhṛt, t,%}
m. a N. of Indra, the bearer of the thunderbolt.
{%—Kuliśāṅkuśā (˚śa-aṅ˚),%} f., N. of one of the
sixteen Vidyā-devīs.
<LEND>

<L>15359<pc>0241-b<k1>kuliSAsana<k2>kuliSAsana
{#kuliSAsana#}¦ {%kuli-śāsana, as,%} m. (fr. {%kulin%}
and {%śāsana?%} or fr. {%kuli%} and {%śāsana,%} ‘one who
commands with his hand?’), an epithet of Śākya-
muni.
<LEND>

<L>15360<pc>0241-b<k1>kulI<k2>kulI
{#kulI#}¦ {%kulī,%} f. a wife's elder sister; the
plant Solanum Jacquini or Solanum Longum ({%vṛ-%}
{%hatī%}).
<LEND>

<L>15361<pc>0241-b<k1>kulIkA<k2>kulIkA
{#kulIkA#}¦ {%kulīkā,%} f., Ved. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>15362<pc>0241-b<k1>kulInasa<k2>kulInasa
{#kulInasa#}¦ {%kulīnasa, am,%} n. water.
<LEND>

<L>15363<pc>0241-b<k1>kulIpaya<k2>kulIpaya
{#kulIpaya#}¦ {%kulīpaya, as,%} m., Ved. an aquatic
animal.
<LEND>

<L>15364<pc>0241-b<k1>kulIra<k2>kulIra
{#kulIra#}¦ {%kulīra, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
1. {%kṛ%}), a crab; the sign of the zodiac Cancer; [cf.
{%kulira.%}] {%—Kulīra-śṛṅgī,%} f., N. of a plant; [cf.
{%karkaṭa-śṛṅgī.%}] {%—Kulīrād (˚ra-ad), t,%} m. a young
crab (destroying its parents; the old crab being sup-
posed to perish on producing young).
<LEND>

<L>15365<pc>0241-b<k1>kulIraka<k2>kulIraka
{%Kulīraka, as,%}¦ m. a small crab.
<LEND>

<L>15366<pc>0241-b<k1>kulISa<k2>kulISa
{#kulISa#}¦ {%kulīśa, as, am,%} m. n. Indra's thun-
derbolt; [cf. {%kuliśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15367<pc>0241-b<k1>kuluka<k2>kuluka
{#kuluka#}¦ {%kuluka, am,%} n. the fur or foulness
of the tongue.
<LEND>

<L>15368<pc>0241-b<k1>kulukkaguYjA<k2>kulukkaguYjA
{#kulukkaguYjA#}¦ {%kulukka-guñjā,%} f. a firebrand;
(for {%ulkā-guñjā?%}).
<LEND>

<L>15369<pc>0241-b<k1>kuluNga<k2>kuluNga
{#kuluNga#}¦ {%kuluṅga, as,%} m., Ved. an antelope.
<LEND>
[Page0241-c+ 67]

<L>15370<pc>0241-c<k1>kuluYca<k2>kuluYca
{#kuluYca#}¦ {%ku-luñca, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), Ved.
one who plucks out hairs.
<LEND>

<L>15371<pc>0241-c<k1>kulUta<k2>kulUta
{#kulUta#}¦ {%kulūta, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15372<pc>0241-c<k1>kulPa<k2>kulPa
{#kulPa#}¦ {%kulpha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 3. {%kal%}),
Ved. the ancle; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a disease.
<LEND>

<L>15373<pc>0241-c<k1>kulmala<k2>kulmala
{#kulmala#}¦ {%kulmala, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kuṣ%}), Ved. the part of an arrow or spear by which
the head is attached to the shaft; sin. {%—Kulmala-%}
{%barhiṣa, as,%} m., N. of a Vedic poet.
<LEND>

<L>15374<pc>0241-c<k1>kulmAza<k2>kulmAza
{#kulmAza#}¦ {%kulmāṣa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. sour
gruel prepared by the spontaneous fermentation of
the juice of fruits or of boiled rice; ({%am%}), n. half-
ripe barley; forced rice; a sort of Phaseolus, see
{%rāja-māṣa;%} a species of Dolichos, D. Biflorus, see
{%yāvaka; (as),%} m. a kind of disease; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
river. {%—Kulmāṣābhiṣuta (˚ṣa-abh˚), am,%} n.
sour gruel.
<LEND>

<L>15375<pc>0241-c<k1>kulmAsa<k2>kulmAsa
{%Kulmāsa = kulmāṣa.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>15376<pc>0241-c<k1>kulya<k2>kulya<h>2
{#kulya#} 2¦. {%kulya, am,%} n. (for 1. {%kulya%} see
col. 1), a bone; flesh; a winnowing basket; a
measure of eight Droṇas.
<LEND>

<L>15377<pc>0241-c<k1>kulyA<k2>kulyA<h>1
{#kulyA#} 1¦. {%kulyā,%} f., Ved. a small river; a
river in general; a canal, a channel for irrigation; a
ditch, a dyke or trench; N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>15378<pc>0241-c<k1>kulya<k2>kulya<h>3
3. {%kulya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to a river.
<LEND>

<L>15379<pc>0241-c<k1>kulyAya<k2>kulyAya
{%Kulyāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kulyāyate, -yitum,%} to become
a river.
<LEND>

<L>15380<pc>0241-c<k1>kulyA<k2>kulyA<h>2
{#kulyA#} 2¦. {%kulyā,%} f., N. of a drug or medi-
cinal plant, Celtis Orientalis ({%jīvantikauṣadhi%});
another plant, Solanum Longum ({%sthūlāvārtāka%}).
<LEND>

<L>15381<pc>0241-c<k1>kullUka<k2>kullUka
{#kullUka#}¦ {%kullūka%} or {%kullūka-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N.
of a celebrated scholiast on Manu.
<LEND>

<L>15382<pc>0241-c<k1>kulva<k2>kulva
{#kulva#}¦ {%kulva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bald, bare
[Lat. <nsi>calvus</nsi>] in {%ati-kulva,%} too bald.
<LEND>

<L>15383<pc>0241-c<k1>kulvaka<k2>kulvaka
{#kulvaka#}¦ {%kulvaka, am,%} n. fur upon the tongue;
[cf. {%kuvuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15384<pc>0241-c<k1>kuva<k2>kuva
{#kuva#}¦ {%kuva, am,%} n. a water-lily, a lotus; [cf.
{%kuvala, kuvalaya, kuvela.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15385<pc>0241-c<k1>kuvakAlukA<k2>kuvakAlukA
{#kuvakAlukA#}¦ {%kuvakālukā,%} f., N. of a vegeta-
ble ({%gholī-śāka%}).
<LEND>

<L>15386<pc>0241-c<k1>kuvaNga<k2>kuvaNga
{#kuvaNga#}¦ {%ku-vaṅga, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), lead.
<LEND>

<L>15387<pc>0241-c<k1>kuvaca<k2>kuvaca
{#kuvaca#}¦ {%ku-vaca, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), abusive,
censorius, scurrilous, using bad language.
<LEND>

<L>15388<pc>0241-c<k1>kuvajraka<k2>kuvajraka
{#kuvajraka#}¦ {%ku-vajraka, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}),
crystal, a stone resembling a diamond.
<LEND>

<L>15389<pc>0241-c<k1>kuvada<k2>kuvada
{#kuvada#}¦ {%ku-vada, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), cen-
sorious; [cf. {%ku-vaca.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15390<pc>0241-c<k1>kuvama<k2>kuvama
{#kuvama#}¦ {%kuvama, as,%} m. a N. of Kaśyapa (?).
<LEND>

<L>15391<pc>0241-c<k1>kuvara<k2>kuvara
{#kuvara#}¦ {%kuvara, as, ā, am,%} astringent in fla-
vour; [cf. {%tuvara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15392<pc>0241-c<k1>kuvarza<k2>kuvarza
{#kuvarza#}¦ {%ku-varṣa, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a shower
of rain, a sudden and violent shower.
<LEND>

<L>15393<pc>0241-c<k1>kuvala<k2>kuvala
{#kuvala#}¦ {%kuvala%} or {%kubala, as, ī,%} m. f. the
jujube tree, Zizyphus Jujuba; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of
this tree; the water-lily; a pearl; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
pearl. {%—Kuvala-kuṇa, as,%} m. the time when the
tree Zizyphus Jujuba bears fruits. {%—Kuvala-prastha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a town. {%—Kuvalāśva%} or {%kubalāśva%}
{%(˚la-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince with the epithet
Dhundhumāra. {%—Kuvale-śaya, as,%} m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu (‘resting on a water-lily’).
<LEND>

<L>15394<pc>0241-c<k1>kuvalaya<k2>kuvalaya
{#kuvalaya#}¦ {%kuvalaya, am,%} n. any water-lily;
the blue water-lily; ({%as, am%}), m. n. the earth; ({%as%}),
m., N. of the horse of Kuvalayāśva. {%—Kuvalaya-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Kuvalayāditya%}
{%(˚ya-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince, {%= kuvalayāpīḍa.%}
{%—Kuvalayānanda (˚ya-ān˚), as,%} m. title of a
[Page0242-a+ 68]
work on rhetoric by Apyadīkṣita. {%—Kuvalayāpīḍa%}
{%(˚ya-āp˚), as,%} m., N. of a Daitya, who, changed to
an elephant, became the vehicle of Kaṃsa; N. of a
prince; [cf. {%kuvalayāditya.%}] {%—Kuvalayāvalī (˚ya-%}
{%av˚),%} f., N. of a princess. {%—Kuvalayāśva (˚ya-aś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a prince with the epithet Dhundhu-
māra; an epithet of the prince Pratardana. {%—Kuvala-%}
{%yāśvaka, as,%} m., N. of a prince with the epithet
Dhundhumāra. {%—Kuvalayāśva-carita, am,%} n. ‘the
adventures of Kuvalayāśva,’ title of a Prākṛt poem
composed by Viśvanātha Kavirāja. {%—Kuvalayāśvīya,%}
{%am,%} n. the story of Kuvalayāśva. {%—Kuvalayeśa%}
{%(˚ya-īśa), as,%} m. a ruler of the earth, a king. {%—Ku-%}
{%valayeśa-tā,%} f. kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>15395<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvalayita<k2>kuvalayita
{%Kuvalayita, as, ā, am,%}¦ decorated with water-
lilies.
<LEND>

<L>15396<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvalayinI<k2>kuvalayinI
{%Kuvalayinī,%}¦ f. an assemblage of water-lilies, a
place abounding with them.
<LEND>

<L>15397<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvAkya<k2>kuvAkya
{#kuvAkya#}¦ {%ku-vākya, am,%} n. or {%ku-vāc, k,%} f.
(see 1. {%ku%}), injurious or censorious language, speak-
ing ill of any one.
<LEND>

<L>15398<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvAwa<k2>kuvAwa
{#kuvAwa#}¦ {%kuvāṭa, as,%} m. the fold of a door,
{%= kavāṭa%} and {%kapāṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>15399<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvAda<k2>kuvAda
{#kuvAda#}¦ {%ku-vāda, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), de-
tracting, censorious, one who speaks ill of others.
<LEND>

<L>15400<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvAhula<k2>kuvAhula
{#kuvAhula#}¦ {%kuvāhula, as,%} m. a camel.
<LEND>

<L>15401<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvika<k2>kuvika
{#kuvika#}¦ {%kuvika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15402<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvid<k2>kuvid
{#kuvid#}¦ {%kuvid,%} ind. (fr. 1. {%ku%} and {%id%}), Ved.
a particle of interrogation, ‘if, whether;’ or used in
direct questions; (a verb following this particle does
not lose its accent.){%—Kuvit-sa, as,%} m., Ved. any
one, an unknown person; (Sāy.) N. of a man (‘much
destroying’).
<LEND>

<L>15403<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvinda<k2>kuvinda
{#kuvinda#}¦ {%kuvinda%} or {%kuvindaka, as,%} m. a
weaver, {%= kupinda.%}
<LEND>

<L>15404<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvivAha<k2>kuvivAha
{#kuvivAha#}¦ {%ku-vivāha, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
degrading or improper marriage.
<LEND>

<L>15405<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvIRA<k2>kuvIRA
{#kuvIRA#}¦ {%ku-vīṇā,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), the lute of
the Cāṇḍālas.
<LEND>

<L>15406<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvIra<k2>kuvIra
{#kuvIra#}¦ {%kuvīra, as,%} m. or {%ā,%} f. (?), N. of a
river.
<LEND>

<L>15407<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvfttikft<k2>kuvfttikft
{#kuvfttikft#}¦ {%kuvṛtti-kṛt,%} m. the plant Cæ-
salpinia Bonducella ({%= pūtika%}).
<LEND>

<L>15408<pc>0242-a<k1>kuveRA<k2>kuveRA
{#kuveRA#}¦ {%ku-veṇā,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), N. of a river;
a fish-basket; (various reading for the following.)
<LEND>

<L>15409<pc>0242-a<k1>kuveRI<k2>kuveRI
{%Ku-veṇī,%}¦ f. a fish-basket; a badly braided tress of
hair; a woman with her hair badly braided.
<LEND>

<L>15410<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvera<k2>kuvera
{#kuvera#}¦ {%kuvera,%} &c. See under {%kubera.%}
<LEND>

<L>15411<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvela<k2>kuvela
{#kuvela#}¦ {%kuvela, am,%} n. a water-lily, {%= kuva-%}
{%laya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15412<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvEdya<k2>kuvEdya
{#kuvEdya#}¦ {%ku-vaidya, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
physician.
<LEND>

<L>15413<pc>0242-a<k1>kuvra<k2>kuvra
{#kuvra#}¦ {%kuvra, am,%} n. a forest, a wood.
<LEND>

<L>15414<pc>0242-a<k1>kuS<k2>kuS
{#kuS#}¦ {%kuś,%} cl. 4. P. {%kuśyati,%} to embrace,
enfold; (a various reading for {%kus,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>15415<pc>0242-a<k1>kuSa<k2>kuSa
{#kuSa#}¦ {%kuśa, as,%} m. (used in Sūtra works, but
the word {%darbha%} is more common in the Brāh-
maṇas), grass, especially the sacred grass used at certain
religious ceremonies (i. e. Poa Cynosuroides, a grass
with long stalks and numerous pointed leaves); a
rope made of Kuśa grass used for connecting the yoke
of a plough with the pole; N. of a son of Vasu Upa-
ricara; of a soñ of Balākāśva, grandson of Balāka,
father of Kuśāmba and Kuśanābha; of a son of Su-
hotra [cf. {%kāśa%}]; of a son of Vidarbha; of a son of
Rāma; of a son of Lava, king of Kaśmīra; one of the
great Dvīpas or divisions of the universe, surrounded
by the sea of liquified butter; ({%ā%}), f. a plank for
[Page0242-b+ 79]
covering anything; a piece of wood; a horse's bridle;
N. of a plant, commonly called Madhukarkaṭikā;
({%ī%}), f. a sort of boat or ladle used in making libations;
wrought iron; a ploughshare; a pod of cotton;
({%am%}), n. water; ({%as, ā, am%}), wicked, depraved;
mad, inebriate. {%—Kuśa-cīra, am,%} n. a garment made
of Kuśa grass; ({%as, ā, am%}), covered with a garment
made of Kuśa grass; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Kuśa-%}
{%dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of one of the seven large Dvīpas
or divisions of the universe. {%—Kuśa-dhārā,%} f., N. of
a river. {%—Kuśa-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a prince, a son
of Hrasva-roman; also a grandson of the latter; N.
of a grandson of Vṛṣadhvaja. {%—Kuśa-nagara, am,%}
n., N. of the town in which Śākya-muni died. {%—Kuśa-%}
{%nābha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Kuśa. {%—Kuśa-netra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Daitya. {%—Kuśa-puṣpa, am,%} n., N.
of a plant ({%= granthi-parṇa%}), a perfume so called.
{%—Kuśa-plavana, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Kuśa-%}
{%muṣṭi, is, is, i,%} having the hand full of sacrificial
grass. {%—Kuśa-lava, au,%} m. du. the two sons of
Rāma, called Kuśa and Lava. {%—Kuśa-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} covered with Kuśa grass; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a town.
{%—Kuśa-vāri,%} n. water in which Kuśa grass has
been soaked. {%—Kuśa-vindu, avas,%} m. pl., N. of a
people. {%—Kuśa-vīrā,%} f., N. of a river; (a various
reading for {%kuśa-cīrā.%}) {%—Kuśa-stamba, as,%} m. a
heap of Kuśa grass; N. of a Tīrtha; N. of a prince.
{%—Kuśa-stava, as,%} m. a bundle of Kuśa grass.
{%—Kuśa-sthala, am,%} n. an epithet of the town
Kānyakubja; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of the town Dvārakā.
{%—Kuśa-hasta, as, ā, am,%} having Kuśa grass in the
hand or in the paw (as applied to the tiger in the
Hitopadeśa). {%—Kuśākara (˚śa-āk˚), as,%} m. fire (the
sacrificial fire being made upon a tuft of the Kuśa grass).
{%—Kuśākṣa (˚śa-ak˚), as,%} m. a monkey, an ape.
{%—Kuśāgra (˚śa-ag˚), am,%} n. the sharp point of a
blade of the Kuśa grass; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince, the
son of Bṛhadratha; ({%as, ā, am%}), sharp, shrewd,
intelligent. {%—Kuśāgra-buddhi, is, is, i,%} sharp as
the point of Kuśa grass, shrewd, intelligent; ({%is%}), f.
shrewdness, subtlety; also similar compounds, as {%kuśā-%}
{%gra-dhī,%} &c. {%—Kuśāgrīya, as, ā, am,%} sharp as the
point of Kuśa grass, subtile, penetrating. {%—Kuśā-%}
{%grīya-mati, is, is, i,%} of subtile intellect, subtile,
sharp-sighted, intelligent, possessing mental acumen;
also other similar compounds, as {%kuśāgrīya-dhī,%}
{%kuśāgrīya-buddhi,%} &c. {%—Kuśāṅkura (˚śa-aṅ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a blade of sacrificial grass. {%—Kuśāṅgurīya%} or
{%kuśāṅgurīyaka (˚śa-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a ring of Kuśa
grass worn at religious ceremonies. {%—Kuśāraṇi (˚śa-%}
{%ar˚), is,%} m. ‘one who may be irritated by a Kuśa
blade,’ epithet of the sage Durvāsas, famous for his
irascibility. {%—Kuśā-vatī,%} f., N. of a town, the resi-
dence of Kuśa, son of Rāma. {%—Kuśāvarta (˚śa-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m., N. of a Tīrtha, or passage of the Gan-
ges, personified as a son of Ṛṣabha. {%—Kuśāśva%}
{%(˚śa-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Kuśāsana (˚śa-%}
{%ās˚), am,%} n. a small mat of sacrificial grass on
which a Brāhman sits when performing his devo-
tion. {%—Kuśe-śaya, as, ā, am,%} lying in grass or in
water; ({%as%}), m. a kind of tree, {%= karṇikāra;%} the
Indian crane; N. of a mountain in Kuśa-dvīpa; ({%am%}),
n. ‘lying in water,’ a water-lily, a lotus. {%—Kuśeśaya-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. the sun. {%—Kuśottara (˚śa-ut˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} covered with sacrificial grass. {%—Kuśodaka%}
{%(˚śa-ud˚), am,%} n. water in which Kuśa grass has
been infused; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a deity.
<LEND>

<L>15416<pc>0242-b<k1>kuSaya<k2>kuSaya
{%Kuśaya%}¦ or {%kuśapa, as,%} m. a drinking-vessel, a
cup, a goblet, a cistern.
<LEND>

<L>15417<pc>0242-b<k1>kuSita<k2>kuSita
{%Kuśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ mixed or combined with
water; [cf. {%kuṣita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15418<pc>0242-b<k1>kuSin<k2>kuSin
{%Kuśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ furnished with Kuśa grass; ({%ī%}),
m. an epithet of Vālmīki (so called with reference to
Kuśa, the son of Rāma). {%—Kuśi-grāmaka, as,%} m.,
N. of a village of the Mallas. {%—Kuśi-nagara, am,%} or
{%ī,%} n. or f., N. of the capital of the Mallas.
<LEND>

<L>15419<pc>0242-b<k1>kuSaja<k2>kuSaja
{#kuSaja#}¦ {%kuśaja, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(a various reading for {%kuśala.%})
<LEND>

<L>15420<pc>0242-b<k1>kuSaRqa<k2>kuSaRqa
{#kuSaRqa#}¦ {%kuśaṇḍa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>
[Page0242-c+ 72]

<L>15421<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSanAman<k2>kuSanAman
{#kuSanAman#}¦ {%kuśanāman, ā,%} m. a camel; (pro-
bably a wrong form for {%śiśu-nāman.%})
<LEND>

<L>15422<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSanAra<k2>kuSanAra
{#kuSanAra#}¦ {%kuśanāra,%} a various reading for
{%kuśa-dhārā.%}
<LEND>

<L>15423<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSaya<k2>kuSaya
{#kuSaya#}¦ {%kuśaya%} or {%kuśapa.%} See last col.
<LEND>

<L>15424<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSara<k2>kuSara
{#kuSara#}¦ {%ku-śara, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), Ved. a
kind of reed.
<LEND>

<L>15425<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSarIra<k2>kuSarIra
{#kuSarIra#}¦ {%ku-śarīra, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
body; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>15426<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSala<k2>kuSala
{#kuSala#}¦ {%kuśala, as, ā, am%} (connected with
{%kuśa?%}), right, proper, suitable, good (e. g. {%kuśalam%}
{%man,%} to consider good, to approve), well, healthy,
in good condition; happy, prosperous; fit for, com-
petent, able, skilful, expert, clever, conversant with
anything (with loc., gen., inf., and in compounds, e. g.
{%udgīthe%} or {%udgīthasya kuśalaḥ,%} clever in song;
{%kuśalo vyākhyātum,%} competent to explain; {%aśva-%}
{%kuśala,%} skilled in horses); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people, the inhabitants of Kuśa-dvīpa; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva; N. of a prince; also of a grammarian,
author of the Pañjikāpradīpa; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman;
({%ī%}), f. a plant, {%= aśmantaka;%} another plant, {%= kṣu-%}
{%drāmlikā; (am),%} n. welfare, well-being; a good or
happy or prosperous condition, happiness; virtue,
virtuous action; cleverness, competence, ability; fitness;
due order; {%kuśalam prach,%} to ask after another's
welfare, to say ‘how do you do?’ {%kuśalaṃ te,%} hail
to thee! (used as a salutation, especially in greeting a
Brāhman); {%kuśalam%} or {%kuśalena,%} ind. well, in a
proper manner, properly, rightly; happily, cheerfully.
{%—Kuśala-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desirous of happiness;
({%as%}), m. desire for happiness. {%—Kuśala-tā,%} f. or
{%kuśala-tva, am,%} n. cleverness, ability, conversancy,
experience; skilfulness, well-being. {%—Kuśala-praśna,%}
{%as,%} m. friendly enquiry after a person's health or
welfare; salutation, greeting, saying ‘how do you do?’
{%—Kuśala-buddhi, is, is, i,%} wise, able, intelligent.
{%—Kuśala-sāgara, as,%} m., N. of a scribe, pupil of
Lāvaṇyaratna.
<LEND>

<L>15427<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSalin<k2>kuSalin
{%Kuśalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ healthy, well, happy, prosperous;
auspicious, favourable, good; virtuous; clever.
<LEND>

<L>15428<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSalIkf<k2>kuSalIkf
{%Kuśalī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make
right or proper, to arrange in due order.
<LEND>

<L>15429<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSADya<k2>kuSADya
{#kuSADya#}¦ {%kuśādhya%} or {%kuśāḍhya%} (?), {%ās,%} m.
pl., N. of a people; (a various reading for {%kulādya;%}
cf. also {%kuśāṇḍa.%})
<LEND>

<L>15430<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSAmba<k2>kuSAmba
{#kuSAmba#}¦ {%kuśāmba, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Vasu Uparicara; N. of a son of Kuśa, who was the
founder of the town Kauśāmbī.
<LEND>

<L>15431<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSAmbu<k2>kuSAmbu
{%Kuśāmbu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Kuśa, the
founder of Kauśāmbī.
<LEND>

<L>15432<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSAlmali<k2>kuSAlmali
{#kuSAlmali#}¦ {%ku-śālmali, is,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), the
plant Andersonia Rohitaka.
<LEND>

<L>15433<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSiMSapA<k2>kuSiMSapA
{#kuSiMSapA#}¦ {%ku-śiṃśapā,%} f. a kind of Sisu
tree, Dalbergia Sisu, {%= kapila-śiṃśapā.%}
<LEND>

<L>15434<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSika<k2>kuSika
{#kuSika#}¦ {%kuśika, as, ā, am,%} squint-eyed; ({%as%}),
m., N. of the father of Viśvā-mitra; N. of the father of
Gāthin or Gādhi or Gādhin, the latter being sometimes
identified with Indra, who is called Kauśika or Kuśi-
kottama; (according to the Mahā-bhārata and Rāmā-
yaṇa, Viśvā-mitra is son of Gādhi and grandson of
Kuśika); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of Kuśika; N. of
a people; ({%as%}), m. a ploughshare (in this sense more
properly n.); the sediment of oil; the plant Shorea
Robusta; also Terminalia Bellerica ({%vibhītaka%}); also
Vatica Robusta {%(aśva-karṇa)%}. {%—Kuśikan-dhara, as,%}
m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>15435<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSita<k2>kuSita
{#kuSita#}¦ {%kuśita,%} &c. See under {%kuśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>15436<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSimbi<k2>kuSimbi
{#kuSimbi#}¦ {%ku-śimbi, is,%} m. or f. (?), (see 1.
{%ku%}), N. of a plant; [cf. {%śimba, śimbi,%} and {%kusimbī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15437<pc>0242-c<k1>kuSIda<k2>kuSIda
{#kuSIda#}¦ {%kuśīda, am,%} n. the profession of
usury; red saunders; [cf. {%kusīda.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0243-a+ 66]

<L>15438<pc>0243-a<k1>kuSIla<k2>kuSIla
{#kuSIla#}¦ {%ku-śīla, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), ill-
behaved, rude, wicked; evil-disposed; ill-tempered.
{%—Kuśīla-tā,%} f. or {%kuśīla-tva, am,%} n. misbehaviour,
misconduct; bad disposition; ill-temper.
<LEND>

<L>15439<pc>0243-a<k1>kuSIlava<k2>kuSIlava
{#kuSIlava#}¦ {%kuśīlava, as,%} m. (connected with
{%ku-śīla?%}), a bard, herald; an actor, dancer, mime;
a newsmonger; an epithet of Vālmīki; ({%au%}), m. du.
the two sons of Rāma, Kuśa and Lava, who recited
the Rāmāyaṇa, (probably these names were originally
formed from the word Kuśīlava); [cf. {%kuśa-lava.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15440<pc>0243-a<k1>kuSIvaSa<k2>kuSIvaSa
{#kuSIvaSa#}¦ {%kuśīvaśa, as,%} m. an epithet of
Vālmīki; [cf. {%kuśin%} and {%kuśīlava.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15441<pc>0243-a<k1>kuSumBa<k2>kuSumBa
{#kuSumBa#}¦ {%kuśumbha, as,%} m. a jar; the water-
pot of an ascetic; [cf. {%kusumbha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15442<pc>0243-a<k1>kuSUla<k2>kuSUla
{#kuSUla#}¦ {%kuśūla, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%ku%} and {%śūla?%}),
a granary, a cupboard, a store-room, a place in which
rice or other grain is kept; a conflagration of chaff.
{%—Kuśūla-dhānya, am,%} n. grain stored for three
years' consumption. {%—Kuśūla-dhānyaka, as,%} m. a
householder &c. who has three years' grain in store.
{%—Kuśūla-pūraṇāḍhaka (˚ṇa-āḍh˚), as, ā, am,%}
being (like to mere empty) measures filling a granary.
<LEND>

<L>15443<pc>0243-a<k1>kuSeSaya<k2>kuSeSaya
{#kuSeSaya#}¦ {%kuśe-śaya,%} &c. See under {%kuśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>15444<pc>0243-a<k1>kuSri<k2>kuSri
{#kuSri#}¦ {%kuśri, is,%} m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>15445<pc>0243-a<k1>kuSruta<k2>kuSruta
{#kuSruta#}¦ {%ku-śruta, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), in-
distinctly heard.
<LEND>

<L>15446<pc>0243-a<k1>kuSvaBra<k2>kuSvaBra
{#kuSvaBra#}¦ {%ku-śvabhra, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
small hole.
<LEND>

<L>15447<pc>0243-a<k1>kuz<k2>kuz
{#kuz#}¦ {%kuṣ,%} cl. 9. P. {%kuṣṇāti, cukoṣa,%}
{%koṣiṣyati, akoṣīt, koṣitum,%} to tear,
tear asunder, to force or draw out, to extract, to expel;
to test, assay, examine; to shine: Pass. {%kuṣyati%}
and {%kuṣyate:%} Caus. {%koṣayati:%} Desid. {%cukoṣi-%}
{%ṣati%} and {%cukuṣiṣati:%} Intens. {%cokuṣyate, co-%}
{%koṣṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>15448<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzaRqa<k2>kuzaRqa
{#kuzaRqa#}¦ {%ku-ṣaṇḍa, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), N. of
a priest.
<LEND>

<L>15449<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzala<k2>kuzala
{#kuzala#}¦ {%kuṣala, as, ā, am,%} clever, expert,
&c.; (a wrong reading for {%kuśala.%})
<LEND>

<L>15450<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzavA<k2>kuzavA
{#kuzavA#}¦ {%kuṣavā,%} f., Ved., N. of a Rākṣasī.
<LEND>

<L>15451<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzAku<k2>kuzAku
{#kuzAku#}¦ {%kuṣāku, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. {%kuṣ?%}),
burning, scorching, inflaming; wicked, detestable;
({%us%}), m. fire; the sun; a monkey; [cf. {%kaṣāku.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15452<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzAru<k2>kuzAru
{#kuzAru#}¦ {%kuṣāru, us,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15453<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzit<k2>kuzit
{#kuzit#}¦ {%kuṣit,%} ind. excellently; (for {%kuvit?%}).
<LEND>

<L>15454<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzita<k2>kuzita
{#kuzita#}¦ {%kuṣita, as, ā, am,%} mixed with water
[cf. {%kuśita%}]; ({%am%}), n. happy, well, right, fortunate,
auspicious, &c. (?).
<LEND>

<L>15455<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzItaka<k2>kuzItaka
{#kuzItaka#}¦ {%kuṣītaka, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
bird; N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of
this man.
<LEND>

<L>15456<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzIda<k2>kuzIda
{#kuzIda#}¦ {%ku-ṣīda, as, ā, am,%} indifferent, apa-
thetic, inert; ({%am%}), n. usury; (more correctly {%ku-%}
{%sīda.%})
<LEND>

<L>15457<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzIdin<k2>kuzIdin
{#kuzIdin#}¦ {%kuṣīdin, ī,%} m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>15458<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzuBya<k2>kuzuBya
{#kuzuBya#}¦ {%kuṣubhya,%} nom. P. {%kuṣubhyati,%} to
throw; to abuse; to despise.
<LEND>

<L>15459<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzumBa<k2>kuzumBa
{#kuzumBa#}¦ {%kuṣumbha, as,%} m., Ved. the poison-
bag of an insect.
<LEND>

<L>15460<pc>0243-a<k1>kuzWa<k2>kuzWa
{#kuzWa#}¦ {%kuṣṭha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (fr. 1. {%ku%}
and {%stha?%}), a sort of medicinal plant (used as a remedy
for the disease called {%takman,%} q. v.), Costus Speciosus
or Arabicus; a sort of poison; leprosy, of which
eighteen varieties are enumerated, seven severe and
eleven of minor importance; ({%ā%}), f. the mouth or open-
ing of a basket. {%—Kuṣṭha-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a plant,
[Page0243-b+ 71]
{%= bhūmyāhulya%}. {%—Kuṣṭha-gandhi,%} n. the fra-
grant bark of the plant Feronia Elephantum. {%—Kuṣ-%}
{%ṭha-ghna, as, ī, am,%} curing leprosy; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a medicinal plant, commonly called Hiyāvalī [cf.
{%hitāvalī%}]; ({%ī%}), f. an esculent root, Solanum Indicum,
{%= kākamācī;%} the opposite leaved fig tree. {%—Kuṣ-%}
{%ṭha-cikitsita, am,%} n. the cure of leprosy. {%—Kuṣṭha-%}
{%nāśana, as,%} m., N. of several plants which cure
leprosy; the root of Dioscorea; white pepper or
mustard; another plant, {%= kṣīrīśa-vṛkṣa%}. {%—Ku-%}
{%ṣṭha-nāśinī,%} f. a plant, commonly Hākuca, Psoralia
Corylifolia. {%—Kuṣṭha-maya, as, ī, am,%} full of
leprosy, leprous. {%—Kuṣṭha-roga, as,%} m. leprosy,
elephantiasis. {%—Kuṣṭha-sūdana, as,%} m. the Cassia
tree, Cassia Fistula; [cf. {%āragbadha.%}] {%—Kuṣṭha-%}
{%hantṛ, tā,%}  m. a kind of bulbous plant, {%= hasti-%}
{%kanda; (trī),%} f. another plant, generally called
Vākucī. {%—Kuṣṭha-hṛt, t,%} m. the plant Acacia
Catechu. {%—Kuṣṭhāṅga (˚ṭha-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%}
leprous. {%—Kuṣṭhānvita (˚ṭha-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
afflicted with leprosy. {%—Kuṣṭhāri (˚ṭha-ari), is,%}
m. Acacia Catechu; another plant, Acacia Farnesiana
({%viṭkhadira%}); another plant, Trichosanthes Diœca,
{%= paṭola;%} another plant, {%= āditya-pattra%} and
{%arka-pattra;%} sulphur.
<LEND>

<L>15461<pc>0243-b<k1>kuzWita<k2>kuzWita
{%Kuṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%kuṣṭhin, ī, inī, i,%}
leprous, a leper.
<LEND>

<L>15462<pc>0243-b<k1>kuzWala<k2>kuzWala
{#kuzWala#}¦ {%ku-ṣṭhala, am,%} n. (fr. 1. or 2. {%ku%} and
{%sthala%}), a bad place or spot; the surface of the earth.
<LEND>

<L>15463<pc>0243-b<k1>kuzWikA<k2>kuzWikA
{#kuzWikA#}¦ {%kuṣṭhikā, ās,%} f. pl. (related to {%kuṣ-%}
{%ṭhā?%}), Ved. a part of the foot of a sacrificial animal
considered worthless for sacrificial purposes; (Sāy.)
the contents of the entrails.
<LEND>

<L>15464<pc>0243-b<k1>kuzmala<k2>kuzmala
{#kuzmala#}¦ {%kuṣmala, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kuṣ%}), cutting, dividing; a leaf.
<LEND>

<L>15465<pc>0243-b<k1>kuzmARqa<k2>kuzmARqa
{#kuzmARqa#}¦ {%kuṣmāṇḍa, as,%} m. a kind of pump-
kin-gourd, Benincasa Cerifera; false conception; a
state of the womb in gestation (?); a particular re-
ligious formula; a class of demons; one of a class
of demi-gods attached to Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. the gourd Be-
nincasa Cerifera, a drug; a religious ceremony, a
certain rite, performed as a penance or expiation; an
epithet of the wife of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>15466<pc>0243-b<k1>kuzmARqaka<k2>kuzmARqaka
{%Kuṣmāṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. the gourd Benincasa Ceri-
fera; N. of a Nāga; N. of an attendant of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>15467<pc>0243-b<k1>kus<k2>kus
{#kus#}¦ {%kus,%} cl. 4. P. {%kusyati,%} to embrace,
surround; [cf. {%kuś.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15468<pc>0243-b<k1>kusaciva<k2>kusaciva
{#kusaciva#}¦ {%ku-saciva, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
bad counsellor.
<LEND>

<L>15469<pc>0243-b<k1>kusarit<k2>kusarit
{#kusarit#}¦ {%ku-sarit, t,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), a shallow
stream.
<LEND>

<L>15470<pc>0243-b<k1>kusalam<k2>kusalam
{#kusalam#}¦ {%kusalam,%} ind. well, happy, &c.;
(more correctly {%kuśala,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>15471<pc>0243-b<k1>kusahAya<k2>kusahAya
{#kusahAya#}¦ {%ku-sahāya, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
bad companion.
<LEND>

<L>15472<pc>0243-b<k1>kusAraTi<k2>kusAraTi
{#kusAraTi#}¦ {%ku-sārathi, is,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
bad charioteer.
<LEND>

<L>15473<pc>0243-b<k1>kusita<k2>kusita
{#kusita#}¦ {%kusita, as,%} m. (said to be fr. {%kus%}),
an inhabited country; N. of a country; a money-
lender (?), see {%kusīda%}. {%—Kusitāyī,%} f. the wife of a
money-lender (?); [cf. the following.]
<LEND>

<L>15474<pc>0243-b<k1>kusidAyI<k2>kusidAyI
{#kusidAyI#}¦ {%kusidāyī,%} f. the wife of a Kusida, of
a money-lender (?), see {%kusīdāyī;%} a kind of demon (?).
<LEND>

<L>15475<pc>0243-b<k1>kusinDa<k2>kusinDa
{#kusinDa#}¦ {%kusindha, am,%} n., Ved. a trunk.
<LEND>

<L>15476<pc>0243-b<k1>kusimbI<k2>kusimbI
{#kusimbI#}¦ {%kusimbī,%} f. {%= śimbī.%}
<LEND>

<L>15477<pc>0243-b<k1>kusIda<k2>kusIda
{#kusIda#}¦ {%ku-sīda, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%ku%}), Ved.
sitting too long in one spot (?), lazy, slothful, inert;
({%am%}), n. any loan or thing lent to be repaid with
interest; lending money; usury, the profession of
usury; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a money-lender, a usurer.
{%—Kusīda-patha, as,%} m. usury, usurious interest,
[Page0243-c+ 79]
any exceeding five per cent. {%—Kusīda-vṛddhi, is,%}
f. interest on money.
<LEND>

<L>15478<pc>0243-c<k1>kusIdAyI<k2>kusIdAyI
{%Kusīdāyī,%}¦ f. the wife of a usurer.
<LEND>

<L>15479<pc>0243-c<k1>kusIdika<k2>kusIdika
{%Kusīdika, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who follows the pro-
fession of usury.
<LEND>

<L>15480<pc>0243-c<k1>kusIdin<k2>kusIdin
{%Kusīdin, ī,%}¦ m. a usurer; N. of a descendant of
Kaṇva, author of several hymns of the Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>15481<pc>0243-c<k1>kusuma<k2>kusuma
{#kusuma#}¦ {%kusuma, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%kus%}), a flower; ({%am%}), n. fruit; the menstrual dis-
charge; a term for the shorter sections of Deveśvara's
Kavi-kalpalatā (the longer chapters being called
Stavaka); ophthalmia, disease of the eyes; ({%as%}), m.
a form of fire; N. of the attendant of the sixth
Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī. {%—Kusuma-kār-%}
{%muka%} or {%kusuma-cāpa, as,%} m. or {%kusuma-dhan-%}
{%van, ā,%} m. ‘having flowers for his bow,’ epithet of Kāma,
the god of love. {%—Kusuma-ketumaṇḍalin, ī,%} m.,
N. of a Kinnara. {%—Kusuma-komala, as, ā, am,%}
tender as a flower. {%—Kusuma-cita, as, ā, am,%} heaped
with flowers. {%—Kusuma-deva, as,%} m., N. of an
author. {%—Kusuma-naga, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Kusuma-pura, am,%} n., N. of the town Pāṭali-
putra. {%—Kusuma-madhya, am,%} n., N. of a tree
bearing a large acid fruit, commonly Cālitā gāc, Cor-
dia Myxa or Dillenia Indica. {%—Kusuma-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} consisting of flowers. {%—Kusuma-latā,%} f. a
creeper in blossom. {%—Kusuma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} fur-
nished with flowers, flowering, in flower; ({%tī%}), f. a
female during menstruation; N. of the town Pāṭali-
putra. {%—Kusuma-vāṇa, as,%} m. the flower-arrow of
the god of love; ‘flower-arrowed,’ epithet of Kāma,
the god of love, as having flowers for arrows. {%—Ku-%}
{%suma-vicitrā,%} f., N. of a metre consisting of four
lines of twelve syllables each. {%—Kusuma-śayana,%}
{%am,%} n. a couch of flowers. {%—Kusuma-śara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘flower-arrowed,’ epithet of the god of love.
{%—Kusumaśara-tva, am,%} n. the state of one who
has flowers for arrows. {%—Kusuma-śekhara-vijaya,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a play. {%—Kusuma-sanātha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} possessed of flowers, having flowers. {%—Kusuma-%}
{%stavaka, as,%} m. a bunch of flowers, a nosegay, bou-
quet, a garland; N. of a metre. {%—Kusumākara%}
{%(˚ma-āk˚), as,%} m. a quantity of flowers or place
abounding with them, a parterre, a garden, a nosegay;
spring, the vernal season. {%—Kusumāñjana (˚ma-%}
{%añ˚), am,%} n. the calx of brass, used as a collyrium.
{%—Kusumāñjali (˚ma-añ˚), is,%} f. ‘handful of flow-
ers,’ the title of a philosophical work written to prove
the existence of a Supreme being, by Udayana Āchārya,
consisting of seventy-two Kārikās divided into five
chapters. {%—Kusumāñjali-makaranda, as,%} m. title
of a commentary by Rucidatta on the preceding work.
{%—Kusumātmaka (˚ma-āt˚), am,%} n. saffron. {%—Ku-%}
{%sumādhipa (˚ma-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘the prince of
flowers,’ the champa, a tree which bears a yellow
fragrant flower, Michelia Champaka. {%—Kusumā-%}
{%dhirāj (˚ma-adh˚), ṭ,%} m. the same plant. {%—Ku-%}
{%sumāyudha (˚ma-āy˚), as,%} m. ‘flower-armed,’ an
epithet of Kāma, the god of love, his arrows being
tipped with flowers. {%—Kusumāvacāya (˚ma-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m. gathering flowers. {%—Kusumāvataṃsaka (˚ma-%}
{%av˚), am,%} n. a chaplet, a crown of flowers. {%—Kusu-%}
{%māvalī (˚ma-av˚),%} f. title of a medicinal work.
{%—Kusumāsava (˚ma-ās˚), am,%} n. honey. {%—Ku-%}
{%sumāstra (˚ma-as˚), as,%} m. ‘flower-arrowed,’ epi-
thet of the god of love. {%—Kusumeṣu (˚ma-iṣu),%}
{%us,%} m. {%= kusumāstra%} above; ({%u%}), n. the bow of
Kāma. {%—Kusumojjvala (˚ma-uj˚), as, ā, am,%} bril-
liant with blossoms.
<LEND>

<L>15482<pc>0243-c<k1>kusumaya<k2>kusumaya
{%Kusumaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kusumayati, -yitum,%} to pro-
duce flowers, cause to flower.
<LEND>

<L>15483<pc>0243-c<k1>kusumita<k2>kusumita
{%Kusumita, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with flowers,
flowered, budded, in flower. {%—Kusumita-latā,%} f. or
{%kusumitalatā-vellitā,%} f., N. of a metre consisting
of four lines of eighteen syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>15484<pc>0243-c<k1>kusumya<k2>kusumya
{%Kusumya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kusumyati,%} to begin to flower.
<LEND>

<L>15485<pc>0243-c<k1>kusumAla<k2>kusumAla
{#kusumAla#}¦ {%kusumāla, as,%} m. a thief (fr. {%ku-%}
{%suma + āla,%} ‘living among flowers?’).
<LEND>

<L>15486<pc>0243-c<k1>kusumBa<k2>kusumBa
{#kusumBa#}¦ {%kusumbha, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
[Page0244-a+ 70]
fr. rt. {%kus%}), safflower, Carthamus Tinctorius; saffron,
Crocus Sativus; the water-pot of the student and
Sannyāsin; ({%am%}), n. gold; ({%as%}), m. outward affec-
tion, compared with the colour of safflower; N. of a
mountain. {%—Kusumbha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished
with a jar or water-pot.
<LEND>

<L>15487<pc>0244-a<k1>kusuruvinda<k2>kusuruvinda
{#kusuruvinda#}¦ {%kusuruvinda%} or {%kusurubinda, as,%}
m., N. of a descendant of Uddālaka.
<LEND>

<L>15488<pc>0244-a<k1>kusurubindu<k2>kusurubindu
{%Kusurubindu%}¦ or {%kusuruvindu, us,%} m., N. of an
author of several verses of the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā.
<LEND>

<L>15489<pc>0244-a<k1>kusU<k2>kusU
{#kusU#}¦ {%kusū, ūs,%} m. an earth-worm.
<LEND>

<L>15490<pc>0244-a<k1>kusUla<k2>kusUla
{#kusUla#}¦ {%kusūla, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of spiri-
tual or supernatural being; a granary &c. See
{%kuśūla.%}
<LEND>

<L>15491<pc>0244-a<k1>kusfti<k2>kusfti
{#kusfti#}¦ {%ku-sṛti, is,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), evil con-
duct, wickedness, depravity; conjuring, sleight-of-
hand, magic; ({%is, is, i%}), going evil ways, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>15492<pc>0244-a<k1>kustuBa<k2>kustuBa
{#kustuBa#}¦ {%kustubha, as,%} m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu (derived fr. {%kaustubha?%}).
<LEND>

<L>15493<pc>0244-a<k1>kustumbarI<k2>kustumbarI
{#kustumbarI#}¦ {%kustumbarī,%} f. a pungent seed
used in condiments, coriander.
<LEND>

<L>15494<pc>0244-a<k1>kustumbaru<k2>kustumbaru
{#kustumbaru#}¦ {%kustumbaru, us,%} m., N. of one of
Kubera's attendants.
<LEND>

<L>15495<pc>0244-a<k1>kustumburu<k2>kustumburu
{#kustumburu#}¦ {%kustumburu, us,%} m. (said to be fr.
1. {%ku%} and {%tumburu%}), the plant coriander; ({%u%}), n.
the seed of this plant.
<LEND>

<L>15496<pc>0244-a<k1>kustrI<k2>kustrI
{#kustrI#}¦ {%ku-strī,%} f. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad woman.
<LEND>

<L>15497<pc>0244-a<k1>kusmaya<k2>kusmaya
{#kusmaya#}¦ {%kusmaya%} (fr. {%ku-smaya%}), nom. A.
{%kusmayate,%} to smile improperly; to see mentally,
guess; to perceive, to imagine.
<LEND>

<L>15498<pc>0244-a<k1>kusvapna<k2>kusvapna
{#kusvapna#}¦ {%ku-svapna, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a bad
dream, a nightmare.
<LEND>

<L>15499<pc>0244-a<k1>kusvAmin<k2>kusvAmin
{#kusvAmin#}¦ {%ku-svāmin, ī,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), a
bad master.
<LEND>

<L>15500<pc>0244-a<k1>kuh<k2>kuh
{#kuh#}¦ {%kuh,%} cl. 10. A. {%kuhayate, -yitum,%} to
surprise, astonish; to excite wonder, to cheat,
to deceive by trickery or jugglery, impose upon
(related to {%guh?%}).
<LEND>

<L>15501<pc>0244-a<k1>kuha<k2>kuha<h>1
1. {%kuha, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of Kuvera; a rogue, a
cheat (in {%a-kuha,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>15502<pc>0244-a<k1>kuhaka<k2>kuhaka
{%Kuhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ cheating, a cheat, a rogue, a
juggler; ({%as%}), m. a frog; N. of a king of the serpent-
race; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. juggling, deception, sleight-of-
hand, legerdemain. {%—Kuhaka-kāra, as, ī, am,%} or
{%kuhaka-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%} or {%kuhaka-kārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} practising jugglery or conjuring, cheating.
{%—Kuhaka-cakita, as, ā, am,%} afraid of a trick,
suspicious, cautious, wary. {%—Kuhaka-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%}
living by sleight-of-hand, a conjurer, a cheat, &c.
{%—Kuhaka-vṛtti, is,%} f. juggling, conjuring, sleight-
of-hand; hypocrisy.
<LEND>

<L>15503<pc>0244-a<k1>kuhana<k2>kuhana
{%Kuhana, as, ā, am,%}¦ envious, hypocritical; ({%as%}),
m. a mouse, a rat; a snake; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f.
hypocrisy; assumed and false sanctity; the interested
performance of religious austerities; ({%am%}), n. a small
earthen vessel; a glass vessel.
<LEND>

<L>15504<pc>0244-a<k1>kuhanikA<k2>kuhanikA
{%Kuhanikā,%}¦ f. hypocrisy &c.; [cf. the preceding.]
<LEND>

<L>15505<pc>0244-a<k1>kuha<k2>kuha<h>2
{#kuha#} 2¦. {%kuha,%} ind. (fr. 1. {%ku%}), Ved. where?
{%kuha cid,%} wherever, anywhere, somewhere, to any
place. {%—Kuhacid-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. being everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>15506<pc>0244-a<k1>kuhayA<k2>kuhayA
{%Kuhayā,%}¦ ind., Ved. where? {%—Kuhayā-kṛti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. where active?
<LEND>

<L>15507<pc>0244-a<k1>kuhakasvana<k2>kuhakasvana
{#kuhakasvana#}¦ {%kuhaka-svana%} or {%kuhaka-svara,%}
{%as,%} m. ({%kuhaka%} being here an onomatopoetic word),
a wild cock, Phasianus Gallus.
<LEND>

<L>15508<pc>0244-a<k1>kuhara<k2>kuhara
{#kuhara#}¦ {%kuhara, as,%} m. (fr. {%kuh = guh?%}), N.
of a serpent belonging to the Krodhavaśa race;
({%am%}), n. a cavity, hollow; a hole, rent; the ear;
the throat or larynx; a guttural sound; proximity;
copulation.
<LEND>
[Page0244-b+ 66]

<L>15509<pc>0244-b<k1>kuharita<k2>kuharita
{#kuharita#}¦ {%kuharita, am,%} n. noise, a sound in
general; especially the song or cry of the Kokila or
Indian cuckoo; a sound uttered in copulation.
<LEND>

<L>15510<pc>0244-b<k1>kuhali<k2>kuhali
{#kuhali#}¦ {%kuhali, is,%} m. the leaf of the Piper
Betel (commonly called Pān) with small pieces of
the Areca-nut and Catechu and a little lime, which
are chewed and eaten by the people of the East and
especially offered to the persons present at a matri-
monial ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>15511<pc>0244-b<k1>kuhA<k2>kuhA
{#kuhA#}¦ {%kuhā,%} f., N. of a plant, also called
Kaṭukī. {%—Kuhā-vatī,%} f. an epithet of the goddess
Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>15512<pc>0244-b<k1>kuhArIta<k2>kuhArIta
{#kuhArIta#}¦ {%ku-hārīta, as,%} m. (see 1. {%ku%}), N.
of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15513<pc>0244-b<k1>kuhu<k2>kuhu
{#kuhu#}¦ {%kuhu, us,%} f. the new moon; N. of a
river; the cry of the Kokila; [cf. {%kuhū.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15514<pc>0244-b<k1>kuhukuhAya<k2>kuhukuhAya
{#kuhukuhAya#}¦ {%kuhukuhāya%} (fr. {%kuhu-kuha%} for
{%kuha-kuha,%} where? where?), nom. A. {%kuhukuhā-%}
{%yate,%} to show one's admiration.
<LEND>

<L>15515<pc>0244-b<k1>kuhU<k2>kuhU
{#kuhU#}¦ {%kuhū, ūs,%} f. (fr. {%kuh = guh?%}), the new
moon, personified as a daughter of Aṅgiras; the
first day of the first quarter on which the moon rises
invisible; N. of one of the seven rivers of Plaksha-
dvīpa; the cry or song of the Kokila or Indian
cuckoo. {%—Kuhū-kaṇṭha%} or {%kuhūka, as,%} m. the
Kokila or Indian cuckoo, <lang n="greek">κοκκύ</lang> {%—Kuhū-pāla, as,%}
m. the king of turtles, the tortoise supposed to up-
hold the world. {%—Kuhū-mukha%} or {%kuhū-rava, as,%}
m. the Kokila or Indian cuckoo.
<LEND>

<L>15516<pc>0244-b<k1>kuhUla<k2>kuhUla
{#kuhUla#}¦ {%kuhūla, am,%} n. a pit filled with stakes.
<LEND>

<L>15517<pc>0244-b<k1>kuheqikA<k2>kuheqikA
{#kuheqikA#}¦ {%kuheḍikā%} or {%kuheḍī%} or {%kuhelikā,%} f.
a fog, a mist, haze, haziness.
<LEND>

<L>15518<pc>0244-b<k1>kuhvAna<k2>kuhvAna
{#kuhvAna#}¦ {%ku-hvāna, am,%} n. (see 1. {%ku%}), a dis-
agreeable noise.
<LEND>

<L>15519<pc>0244-b<k1>kU<k2>kU<h>1
{#kU#} 1¦. {%kū%} or {%ku,%} cl. 2. P. {%kauti, kavīti,%} or
cl. 1. A. {%kavate,%} or cl. 6. A. {%kuvate,%} or cl. 9.
P. A. {%kūnāti, -nīte,%} or {%kunāti, -nīte, cukāva,%} &c.,
to sound, make a noise, cry out; to move: Caus.
{%kāvayati:%} Desid. {%cukūṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%cokūyate%}
or {%kokūyate,%} to cry aloud; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κωκύω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>15520<pc>0244-b<k1>kU<k2>kU<h>2
{#kU#} 2¦. {%kū, ūs,%} f. a female Piśāca or goblin.
<LEND>

<L>15521<pc>0244-b<k1>kUkuda<k2>kUkuda
{#kUkuda#}¦ {%kūkuda, as,%} m. one who gives a girl
in marriage with due ceremony and suitable decora-
tions.
<LEND>

<L>15522<pc>0244-b<k1>kUca<k2>kUca
{#kUca#}¦ {%kūca, as,%} m. a breast; the female
breast, especially that of a young or unmarried
woman; [cf. {%kuca.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15523<pc>0244-b<k1>kUcakA<k2>kUcakA
{#kUcakA#}¦ {%kūcakā,%} f. the milky juice of a
bulbous plant; [? cf. {%kūrcikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15524<pc>0244-b<k1>kUcakra<k2>kUcakra
{#kUcakra#}¦ {%kūcakra, as%} or {%am?%} m. or n.? (for
{%ku-cakra%}), Ved. the female breast.
<LEND>

<L>15525<pc>0244-b<k1>kUcavAra<k2>kUcavAra
{#kUcavAra#}¦ {%kūcavāra, as,%} m. (?), N. of a region;
also of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15526<pc>0244-b<k1>kUcikA<k2>kUcikA
{#kUcikA#}¦ {%kūcikā,%} f. a small brush or hair-
pencil; a key; [cf. {%kūcī%} and {%kūrcikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15527<pc>0244-b<k1>kUcidarTin<k2>kUcidarTin
{#kUcidarTin#}¦ {%kūcid-arthin, ī, inī, i%} (for {%ku-%}
{%cid-ar˚%}), Ved. striving to get everywhere; (Sāy.)
seeking (oblations) from any quarter.
<LEND>

<L>15528<pc>0244-b<k1>kUcI<k2>kUcI
{#kUcI#}¦ {%kūcī,%} f. a paint brush, a pencil; [cf.
{%kūcikā%} and {%kūrcikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15529<pc>0244-b<k1>kUcCaliNga<k2>kUcCaliNga
{#kUcCaliNga#}¦ {%kūcchaliṅga, au,%} m. du. {%= ku-%}
{%kundara,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15530<pc>0244-b<k1>kUj<k2>kUj
{#kUj#}¦ {%kūj,%} cl. 1. P. {%kūjati, cukūja, kūjitum,%}
to make any inarticulate or monotonous
sound, to utter a cry as a bird, to coo as a pigeon,
to caw as a crow, to warble; to moan, groan, &c.;
[Page0244-c+ 79]
to utter any sound in a low and indistinct voice;
to fill with sounds &c.: Caus. {%kūjayati:%} Desid.
{%cukūjiṣati:%} Intens. {%cokūjyate, cokūkti.%}
<LEND>

<L>15531<pc>0244-c<k1>kUja<k2>kUja
{%Kūja, as,%}¦ m. rumbling (as of the bowels &c.);
cooing, murmuring, a warbling &c.
<LEND>

<L>15532<pc>0244-c<k1>kUjaka<k2>kUjaka
{%Kūjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ cooing, warbling, sounding, &c.
<LEND>

<L>15533<pc>0244-c<k1>kUjat<k2>kUjat
{%Kūjat, an, antī, at,%}¦ cooing, warbling, &c.
<LEND>

<L>15534<pc>0244-c<k1>kUjana<k2>kUjana
{%Kūjana, am,%}¦ n. rumbling of the bowels; the
uttering of any inarticulate sound, cooing, moaning;
the rattling of wheels.
<LEND>

<L>15535<pc>0244-c<k1>kUjita<k2>kUjita
{%Kūjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ uttered inarticulately, cooed, &c.;
({%am%}), n. the cry of a bird, cooing, warbling, &c.
<LEND>

<L>15536<pc>0244-c<k1>kUjin<k2>kUjin
{%Kūjin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ making a rumbling sound in the
bowels; warbling.
<LEND>

<L>15537<pc>0244-c<k1>kUw<k2>kUw
{#kUw#}¦ {%kūṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%kūṭayati,%} to burn; to
give pain, be distressed, to call, invite; to
counsel, advise; A. {%kūṭayate,%} to avoid or decline
giving, not to give; to render indistinct or unin-
telligible, to muddle, to render confused or foul; to
be distressed; to despair; [cf. Eng. <nsi>heat, hot;</nsi> Old
Island. <nsi>hiti, heitr;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>hitze, heiss.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>15538<pc>0244-c<k1>kUwa<k2>kUwa
{#kUwa#}¦ {%kūṭa, as, am,%} m. n. the bone of the
forehead with its projections or prominences, a horn;
the crown of the head; any prominence or projec-
tion (e. g. {%aṃsa-kūṭa,%} the hump of a buffalo; {%akṣi-%}
{%kūṭa,%} the prominence of the forehead above the eye);
summit, the peak or summit of a mountain; summit,
head, i. e. the highest, the most excellent, the first;
a heap, a multitude (e. g. {%abhra-kūṭa,%} a multitude of
clouds); a kind of vessel or implement; a hammer,
an iron mallet; part of a plough, a ploughshare, the
body of a plough; a trap for catching deer; a con-
cealed weapon as a dagger in a wooden case, a sword-
stick &c.; illusion, fraud, trick, deceit; a roguish
scheme or plot; a knotty point, a puzzling question,
an enigma, an obscure passage; untruth, falsehood,
(or attributively) false, untrue; vile, low; uniform
substance (as the ethereal element &c.); a water-
jar; a kind of plant; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. a house, a
dwelling [cf. {%kuṭa%} and {%kuṭī%}]; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Agastya; ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. not horned or cornuted,
as an animal with incomplete continuations of the
bone of the forehead; ({%as%}), m. an ox whose horns
are broken. {%—Kūṭa-kāra, as,%} m. a rogue, a cheat, a
false witness. {%—Kūṭa-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%} a rogue,
a cheat, a false witness. {%—Kūṭa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} cheating,
committing a fraud, bribing; ({%t%}), m. a Kāyastha or
man of the writer-caste; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Kūṭa-%}
{%khaḍga, as,%} m. a hidden sword, a sword-stick.
{%—Kūṭa-grantha,%} title of a work supposed to be
written by Vyāsa. {%—Kūṭa-cchadman, ā,%} m. a rogue,
a cheat. {%—Kūṭa-tā,%} f. or {%kūṭa-tva, am,%} n. falsehood,
fraud. {%—Kūṭa-tūlā,%} f. a false pair of scales. {%—Kūṭa-%}
{%dharma, as, ā, am,%} (a country or house) where
falsehood is considered a duty. {%—Kūṭa-parva%} or
{%kūṭa-pūrva, as,%} m. fever occurring in an elephant
from vitiation of the three humors; (more correctly
{%kūṭa-pūrva.%}){%—Kūṭa-pālaka, as,%} m. a bilious fever;
a potter's kiln. {%—Kūṭa-pāśa, as,%} m. a trap. {%—Kūṭa-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. a trap. {%—Kūṭa-māna, am,%} n. a
false measure or weight. {%—Kūṭa-mudgara, as,%} m.
a concealed weapon similar to a hammer. {%—Kūṭa-%}
{%mohana, as,%} m. an epithet of Skanda. {%—Kūṭa-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n. a trap or snare for deer, birds, &c.
{%—Kūṭa-yuddha, am,%} n. a treacherous or unfair
battle; ({%as, ā, am%}), fighting treacherously. {%—Kūṭa-%}
{%yodhin, ī, inī, i,%} fighting unfairly or treacherously.
{%—Kūṭa-racanā,%} f. a laid trap. {%—Kūṭa-śas,%} ind. in
heaps, in multitudes, by crowds. {%—Kūṭa-śālmali, is,%}
m. f. or {%ikā,%} f. a fabulous cotton-plant with sharp
thorns, with which the wicked are tortured in the
world of Yama; a species of the Simul silk-cotton
tree. {%—Kūṭa-śāsana, am,%} n. a forged or false grant
or decree. {%—Kūṭa-śaila, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Kūṭa-sākṣin, ī,%} m. a false witness. {%—Kūṭa-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} standing at the top, keeping the highest
position; standing in a multitude, standing in the
midst; (in phil.) immovable, uniform, unchangeable,
perpetually and universally the same, as the soul,
[Page0245-a+ 72]
spirit, space, ether, sound, &c.; ({%am%}), n. a sort of
perfume, a species of dried shell-fish, commonly
Nakhi; the soul. {%—Kūṭastha-tā,%} f. or {%kūṭastha-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. unchangeableness, uniformity. {%—Kūṭa-%}
{%svarṇa, am,%} n. alloyed or counterfeit gold. {%—Kūṭā-%}
{%kṣa (˚ṭa-ak˚), as,%} m. loaded or false dice. {%—Kūṭā-%}
{%gāra (˚ṭa-āg˚), am,%} n. an upper room, an apartment
on the top of a house. {%—Kūṭārtha (˚ṭa-ar˚), as,%}
m. ambiguity of meaning, fiction. {%—Kūṭārtha-bhā-%}
{%ṣitā,%} f., scil. {%kathā,%} a tale, a story, a fiction. {%—Kū-%}
{%ṭopāya (˚ṭa-up˚), as,%} m. trick, fraud, stratagem.
<LEND>

<L>15539<pc>0245-a<k1>kUwaka<k2>kUwaka
{%Kūṭaka, am,%}¦ n. elevation, prominence, projection;
the body of a plough (i. e. the wood without the
ploughshare and pole); a ploughshare; illusion, fraud,
untruth, deceit; ({%as, ā, am%}), fraudulent, unfair; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a mountain; a braid or tress of hair; a
perfume; see {%murā%}. {%—Kūṭakākhyāna (˚ka-ākh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. an invented tale.
<LEND>

<L>15540<pc>0245-a<k1>kUwaja<k2>kUwaja
{#kUwaja#}¦ {%kūṭaja, as,%} m. the plant Wrightia
Antidysenterica; [cf. {%kuṭaja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15541<pc>0245-a<k1>kUq<k2>kUq
{#kUq#}¦ {%kūḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%kūḍati, -ḍitum,%} to eat;
to graze; to become firm or fat or solid.
<LEND>

<L>15542<pc>0245-a<k1>kUqya<k2>kUqya
{#kUqya#}¦ {%kūḍya, am,%} n. a wall, {%= kuḍya.%}
<LEND>

<L>15543<pc>0245-a<k1>kUR<k2>kUR
{#kUR#}¦ {%kūṇ,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%kūṇayati, -te,%}
{%-yitum,%} to draw together, contract, close.
<LEND>

<L>15544<pc>0245-a<k1>kURita<k2>kURita
{%Kūṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ contracted, shut, closed.
{%—Kūṇitekṣaṇa (˚ta-īk˚), as,%} m. a hawk.
<LEND>

<L>15545<pc>0245-a<k1>kURakucCa<k2>kURakucCa
{#kURakucCa#}¦ {%kūṇakuccha, as,%} m., N. of one of
Śiva's attendants.
<LEND>

<L>15546<pc>0245-a<k1>kURi<k2>kURi
{#kURi#}¦ {%kūṇi, is, is, i,%} crooked-armed, having
a curved or withered arm; [cf. {%kuṇi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15547<pc>0245-a<k1>kURikA<k2>kURikA
{#kURikA#}¦ {%kūṇikā,%} f. the horn of any animal;
the peg of a lute; [cf. {%kalikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15548<pc>0245-a<k1>kUdara<k2>kUdara
{#kUdara#}¦ {%kūdara, as,%} m. the offspring of a
Brāhman woman by a Ṛṣi, begotten during men-
struation.
<LEND>

<L>15549<pc>0245-a<k1>kUdI<k2>kUdI
{#kUdI#}¦ {%kūdī,%} f., Ved. a fetter for the feet.
{%—Kūdī-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of a fetter.
<LEND>

<L>15550<pc>0245-a<k1>kUddAla<k2>kUddAla
{#kUddAla#}¦ {%kūddāla, as,%} m. mountain ebony,
Bauhinia Variegata; [cf. {%kuddāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15551<pc>0245-a<k1>kUp<k2>kUp
{#kUp#}¦ {%kūp,%} cl. 10. P. {%kūpayati, -yitum,%} to
be weak, to weaken.
<LEND>

<L>15552<pc>0245-a<k1>kUpa<k2>kUpa
{#kUpa#}¦ {%kūpa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 3. {%ku;%}
according to others perhaps fr. 1. {%ku%} and {%ap;%}
cf. {%anūpa, dvīpa%}), a hole, a hollow, a cave; a
well; a post to which a boat or ship is moored;
a mast (?); a tree or rock in the midst of a river; a
leather oil vessel; ({%ī%}), f. a small well; the navel; a
flask, a bottle; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κύπη.</lang>] {%—Kūpa-kacchapa,%}
{%as,%} m. a tortoise in a well; (metaphorically) a man
without experience, who has seen nothing of the
world. {%—Kūpa-kāra, as,%} m. a well-digger. {%—Kūpa-%}
{%khā, ās,%} m. (rt. {%khan%}), Ved. a well-digger. {%—Kūpa-%}
{%ja, as,%} m. hair. {%—Kūpa-jala, am,%} n. well-water,
spring-water. {%—Kūpa-dardura%} or {%kūpa-maṇḍūka,%}
{%as,%} m. a frog in a well, applied to a person of no ex-
perience and enterprise, one who never leaves home.
{%—Kūpa-rājya, am,%} n., N. of a country. {%—Kū-%}
{%pāṅka%} or {%kūpāṅga (˚pa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. horripilation,
erection of the hairs of the body. {%—Kūpodaka (˚pa-%}
{%ud˚), am,%} n. well-water.
<LEND>

<L>15553<pc>0245-a<k1>kUpaka<k2>kUpaka
{%Kūpaka, as,%}¦ m. a hole, a hollow, a cave; the
hollow below the loins; a well, a temporary well, a
hole dug for water in the dry bed of a rivulet; a
stake &c. to which a boat is moored; the mast of
a vessel; a rock or tree in the midst of a river;
a funeral pile; a hole dug under a funeral pile; a
leather oil vessel; ({%ikā%}), f. a stone or rock in the
middle of a stream.
<LEND>

<L>15554<pc>0245-a<k1>kUpya<k2>kUpya
{%Kūpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in a hole or well.
<LEND>

<L>15555<pc>0245-a<k1>kUpada<k2>kUpada
{#kUpada#}¦ {%kūpada, as,%} m. {%= kūkuda,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15556<pc>0245-a<k1>kUpAra<k2>kUpAra
{#kUpAra#}¦ {%kūpāra, as,%} m. the ocean, {%= akūpāra.%}
<LEND>
[Page0245-b+ 73]

<L>15557<pc>0245-b<k1>kUpuza<k2>kUpuza
{#kUpuza#}¦ {%kūpuṣa, am,%} n. the bladder.
<LEND>

<L>15558<pc>0245-b<k1>kUbara<k2>kUbara
{#kUbara#}¦ {%kūbara,%} or in the later language
generally {%kūvara, as, ī, am,%} m. f. n. the pole of a
carriage or the wooden frame to which the yoke is
fixed; ({%ī%}), f. a carriage covered with a cloth or blanket;
({%as%}), m. a hump-backed man; ({%as, ī, am%}), beautiful,
agreeable, pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>15559<pc>0245-b<k1>kUbarin<k2>kUbarin
{%Kūbarin%}¦ or {%kūvarin, ī,%} m. a carriage.
<LEND>

<L>15560<pc>0245-b<k1>kUma<k2>kUma
{#kUma#}¦ {%kūma, am,%} n. a lake, a pond, a pool.
<LEND>

<L>15561<pc>0245-b<k1>kUmanas<k2>kUmanas
{#kUmanas#}¦ {%kū-manas, ās, ās, as%} (for {%ku-manas,%}
see 1. {%ku%}), Ved. wicked-minded.
<LEND>

<L>15562<pc>0245-b<k1>kUra<k2>kUra
{#kUra#}¦ {%kūra, as,%} m. boiled rice.
<LEND>

<L>15563<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrkura<k2>kUrkura
{#kUrkura#}¦ {%kūrkura, as,%} m., N. of a demon who
persecutes children (perhaps cough or some similar
disease personified).
<LEND>

<L>15564<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrca<k2>kUrca
{#kUrca#}¦ {%kūrca, as, am,%} m. n. a bunch of any-
thing, a bundle of grass &c. (often used as a seat); a
handful of Kuśa grass or peacock's feathers; certain
parts of the human body, as the hands, feet, neck,
and the membrum virile; the upper part of the nose,
the part between the eyebrows; the beard; the tip
of the thumb and middle finger brought in contact so
as to pinch &c.; deceit, fraud, circumvention; false
praise, unmerited commendation either of one's self
or another person, boasting, flattery; hypocrisy;
hardness, solidity; the mystical syllable {%hum; (as),%}
m. the head; a store-room. {%—Kūrca-śiras, as,%} n. the
upper part of the palm of the hand and foot; the heel.
{%—Kūrca-śīrṣa%} or {%kūrca-śīrṣaka, as,%} m., N. of
a plant, a drug, commonly called Jīvaka, one of the
eight principal medicaments. {%—Kūrca-śekhara, as,%}
m. the cocoa-nut tree. {%—Kūrcā-mukha, as,%} m., N.
of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>15565<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrcaka<k2>kUrcaka
{%Kūrcaka, as,%}¦ m. a bushel; a brush for cleaning
the teeth, a painter's brush &c.; certain parts of the
human body [cf. the preceding]; ({%ikā%}), f. a painting
brush or pencil; a key; a needle; a bud, a blossom;
inspissated milk; ({%am%}), n. in {%tri-kūrcaka,%} scil.
{%śastra,%} a three-edged sword.
<LEND>

<L>15566<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrcakin<k2>kUrcakin
{%Kūrcakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ stuffed, puffy.
<LEND>

<L>15567<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrcala<k2>kUrcala
{#kUrcala#}¦ {%kūrcala, as,%} m. (?)  an animal teething
for the second time.
<LEND>

<L>15568<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrd<k2>kUrd
{#kUrd#}¦ {%kūrd%} and {%kurd,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%kūrdati,%}
{%-te, cukūrde, kūrdiṣyate, akūrdiṣṭa,%}
{%kūrditum,%} to leap, jump; to play; [cf. Lat. <nsi>ludo?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>15569<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrda<k2>kUrda
{%Kūrda, as,%}¦ m. a jump; N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>15570<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrdana<k2>kUrdana
{%Kūrdana, am,%}¦ n. leaping; playing, sport, pastime;
({%ī%}), f. the day of full moon in the month Caitra; a
festival in honour of Kāma-deva or the god of love,
held on the day of full moon in the month Caitra.
<LEND>

<L>15571<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrpa<k2>kUrpa
{#kUrpa#}¦ {%kūrpa, am,%} n. the space between the
eyebrows; [cf. {%kūrca.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15572<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrpara<k2>kUrpara
{#kUrpara#}¦ {%kūrpara, as, ā,%} m. f. the elbow; the
knee.
<LEND>

<L>15573<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrpAsa<k2>kUrpAsa
{#kUrpAsa#}¦ {%kūrpāsa, as,%} m. a cuirass or quilted
jacket worn as armour.
<LEND>

<L>15574<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrpAsaka<k2>kUrpAsaka
{%Kūrpāsaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a bodice, a jacket
with short sleeves worn next the body, especially by
women.
<LEND>

<L>15575<pc>0245-b<k1>kUrma<k2>kUrma
{#kUrma#}¦ {%kūrma, as,%} m. a tortoise, a turtle; the
earth considered as a tortoise swimming on the
waters; a particular gesticulation with the fingers;
one of the outer winds of the body; N. of a serpent
or Kādraveya king; the second incarnation of Viṣṇu,
his descent in the form of a tortoise to support the
mountain Mandara at the churning of the ocean; N.
of a son of Gṛtsa-mada, author of several hymns of
the Ṛg-veda; ({%ī%}), f. a female tortoise; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">κλέμμυς, χέλυς, χέλώνη.</lang>] {%—Kūrma-cakra, am,%}
n. an astrological diagram. {%—Kūrma-pitta, am,%} n.
the bilious humor of a tortoise. {%—Kūrma-purāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the Purāṇa of the tortoise incarnation (one of
the incarnations of Viṣṇu) or the fifteenth of the
[Page0245-c+ 75]
eighteen Purāṇas. {%—Kūrma-pṛṣṭha, am,%} n. the
back or shell of a tortoise; ({%as%}), m. globe-amaranth,
Gomphrena Globosa. {%—Kūrma-pṛṣṭhaka, am,%} n.
the cover of a dish, a lid. {%—Kūrmapṛṣṭhāsthi%}
{%(˚ṭha-as˚),%} n. tortoise-shell. {%—Kūrmapṛṣṭhonnata%}
{%(˚ṭha-un˚), as, ā, am,%} raised or elevated like the
back of a tortoise. {%—Kūrma-rāja, as,%} m. the king
of turtles, the tortoise supposed to uphold the world.
{%—Kūrmāvatāra (˚ma-av˚), as,%} m. the tortoise
incarnation (of Viṣṇu).
<LEND>

<L>15576<pc>0245-c<k1>kUrmi<k2>kUrmi
{#kUrmi#}¦ {%kūrmi.%} See {%tuvi-kūrmi.%}
<LEND>

<L>15577<pc>0245-c<k1>kUl<k2>kUl<h>1
{#kUl#} 1¦. {%kūl,%} cl. 1. P. {%kūlati, -litum,%} to
cover, hide, screen, protect; to enclose;
to keep off, obstruct; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κωλύω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>15578<pc>0245-c<k1>kUla<k2>kUla
{%Kūla, am,%}¦ n. a declivity, slope; a shore, a
bank; a heap, a mound; a pond or pool; the rear
of an army; N. of a region; [cf. {%aja-kūlā, anu-%}
{%kūla, utkūla,%} &c.; cf. also Hib. <nsi>cul,</nsi> ‘custody,
guard, defence, the back part of anything;’ <nsi>col,</nsi> ‘an
impediment;’ Lat. <nsi>collis?</nsi>]. {%—Kūlaṅ-kaṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} carrying or tearing away the bank; ({%as%}), m. the
ocean, the sea; the stream or current of a river; ({%ā%}),
f. a river. {%—Kūla-cara, as, ī, am,%} frequenting the
banks of rivers, grazing there &c. {%—Kūla-bhū, ūs,%}
f. a bank, the land upon the bank or shore. {%—Kū-%}
{%lam-udruja, as, ā, am,%} breaking down banks, as a
river &c. {%—Kūlam-udvaha, as, ā, am,%} carrying or
tearing away the bank, as a river &c. {%—Kūla-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} furnished with shores; ({%tī%}), f. a river.
{%—Kūla-haṇḍaka, as,%} m. an eddy.
<LEND>

<L>15579<pc>0245-c<k1>kUlaka<k2>kUlaka
{%Kūlaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. a bank, shore, dyke;
a mound of earth, a heap, a pile; ({%as%}), m. an ant-
hill; ({%am%}), n. the plant Trichosanthes Diœca.
<LEND>

<L>15580<pc>0245-c<k1>kUlin<k2>kUlin
{%Kūlin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ furnished with banks or shores;
({%inī%}), f. a river.
<LEND>

<L>15581<pc>0245-c<k1>kUlya<k2>kUlya
{%Kūlya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to a bank or
shore.
<LEND>

<L>15582<pc>0245-c<k1>kUl<k2>kUl<h>2
{#kUl#} 2¦. {%kūl%} or {%kūḍ,%} cl. 10. P., Ved. {%kūla-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to burn, scorch.
<LEND>

<L>15583<pc>0245-c<k1>kUlika<k2>kUlika
{#kUlika#}¦ {%kūlika, as,%} m., N. of a prince; ({%ā%}),
f. the bottom or lower part of the Indian lute.
<LEND>

<L>15584<pc>0245-c<k1>kUvara<k2>kUvara
{#kUvara#}¦ {%kūvara.%} See {%kūbara.%}
<LEND>

<L>15585<pc>0245-c<k1>kUvAra<k2>kUvAra
{#kUvAra#}¦ {%kūvāra, as,%} m. the ocean. See {%kū-%}
{%pāra%} and {%akūpāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>15586<pc>0245-c<k1>kUzmARqa<k2>kUzmARqa
{#kUzmARqa#}¦ {%kūṣmāṇḍa, as,%} m. a kind of
pumpkin-gourd, Benincasa Cerifera; a kind of spirit
or imp, of which there exists a Gaṇa or class; a kind
of spell or magical formula; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant
[cf. {%oṣadhi%}]; N. of the goddess Durgā; N. of
several verses of the Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>15587<pc>0245-c<k1>kUzmARqaka<k2>kUzmARqaka
{%Kūṣmāṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of pumpkin-gourd,
Benincasa Cerifera Savi; N. of one of Śiva's at-
tendants.
<LEND>

<L>15588<pc>0245-c<k1>kUzmARqinI<k2>kUzmARqinI
{%Kūṣmāṇḍinī,%}¦ f., N. of a goddess; [cf. {%kuṣ-%}
{%māṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15589<pc>0245-c<k1>kUhanA<k2>kUhanA
{#kUhanA#}¦ {%kūhanā,%} f. hypocrisy, affectation of
religious zeal or austerity; [cf. {%kuhanā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15590<pc>0245-c<k1>kUhA<k2>kUhA
{#kUhA#}¦ {%kūhā,%} f. a fog, a mist, {%= kujjhaṭikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>15591<pc>0245-c<k1>kf<k2>kf<h>1
{#kf#} 1¦. {%kṛ.%} The conjugational tenses are
formed in the Veda according to four different
methods, as follows: I) According to the rule for
cl. 2, Pres. 2nd sing. P. {%karṣi,%} du. {%kṛthas,%} pl.
{%kṛtha;%} A. {%kṛṣe;%} Impf. 2nd sing. P. {%akar,%} 3rd {%akar%}
and {%akat;%} 3rd du. {%akartām;%} pl. {%akarma, akarta,%}
{%akran;%} A. {%akri, akṛthās, akṛta, akrātām,%}
{%akrata;%} Impv. P. {%kṛdhi, kṛtam, kṛta;%} A. {%kṛṣva,%}
{%kṛdhvam:%} Leṭ, 2nd and 3rd sing. {%kar,%} pl. {%karma,%}
{%karta%} and {%kartana, kran;%} A. 3rd sing. {%kṛta;%} 3rd
pl. {%kranta:%} Pot. {%kriyāma;%} Part. nom. pl. m.
{%krantas;%} A. {%krāṇa.%} II) According to the rule
for cl. 1. Pres. P. {%karasi, karati, karathas, kara-%}
{%tas, karanti;%} A. {%karase, karate, karāmahe;%}
Impf. {%akaram, akaras, akarat;%} Impf. {%kara,%}
{%karatam, karatām:%} Leṭ, {%karam, karāṇi, karas,%}
{%karat, karāma, karan;%} A. {%karāmahai;%} Part.
[Page0246-a+ 81]
{%karantī.%} III) According to the rule for cl. 5, Pres.
P. {%kṛṇomi,%} &c.; A. {%kṛṇve,%} du. {%kṛṇvaite;%} Impf.
P. {%akṛṇavam,%} &c., 2nd pl. {%akṛṇuta%} and {%akṛṇo-%}
{%tana;%} A. 3rd sing. {%akṛṇuta;%} Impv. P. {%kṛṇu%}
or {%kṛṇuhi%} or {%kṛṇutāt, kṛṇotu; kṛṇutam,%}
{%kṛṇutām; kṛṇuta%} or {%kṛṇota%} or {%kṛṇotana;%}
{%kṛṇvantu;%} A. {%kṛṇuṣva, kṛṇutām, kṛṇvāthām,%}
{%kṛṇudhvam;%} Leṭ, {%kṛṇavas, kṛṇavat%} and {%kṛṇa-%}
{%vāt, kṛṇavāva, kṛṇavāma, kṛṇavātha, kṛṇava-%}
{%tha, kṛṇavan;%} A. {%kṛṇavai, kṛṇavase, kṛṇa-%}
{%vate, kṛṇavāvahai, kṛṇavāmahai,%} 3rd pl. {%kṛṇa-%}
{%vanta%} or {%kṛṇavante%} or {%kṛṇvata:%} Pot. A. {%kṛṇvīta;%}
Part. P. {%kṛṇvat,%} A. {%kṛṇvāna.%} IV) According to
the rule for cl. 8, (this is the usual formation in the
Brāhmaṇas, Sūtras, and in classical Sanskrit), Pres.
P. {%karomi%} (ep. {%kurmi%}), {%karoṣi,%} &c., {%kurmas;%} A.
{%kurve;%} Impf. P. {%akaravam;%} A. 3rd sing. {%akuruta;%}
Impv. P. {%kuru, karotu%} (in the earlier language for
2nd and 3rd sing. {%kurutāt%}), {%kuruta%} or {%kurutana;%}
A. {%kuruṣva, kurudhvam, kurvatām:%} Leṭ, P.
{%karavāṇi, karavas, karavāt,%} &c.; A. {%karavai,%}
{%kuruthās, karavāvahai%} (ep. {%karavāvahe%}), {%kara-%}
{%vaithe, karavaite, karavāmahai%} (ep. {%karavā-%}
{%mahe%}); Pot. P. {%kuryām,%} A. {%kurvīya;%} Part. P.
{%kurvat,%} A. {%kurvāṇa:%} Perf. P. {%cakāra, cakartha,%}
&c.; A. {%cakre,%} &c.; Part. P. {%cakṛvas%} (Acc. sing.
Ved. {%cakruṣam%}); A. {%cakrāṇa;%} 2nd Fut. {%kariṣyati;%}
Leṭ, 2nd sing. {%kariṣyās;%} 1st Fut. {%kartā;%} Prec.
{%kriyāsam;%} Aor. P., Ved. {%cakaram, acakriran,%}
{%acakrat;%} A. {%kṛṣe;%} Class. {%akārṣīt%} (poet. {%akā-%}
{%raṣīt%}); Pass. Aor. reflex. {%akāri%} and {%akṛta;%} Inf.
{%kartum;%} Ved. {%kartave, kartavai, kartos;%} Ind.
Part. {%kṛtvā,%} Ved. {%kṛtvī%} and {%kṛtvāya;%} to do,
make, perform, accomplish, cause, effect, prepare,
undertake; to do anything for the advantage or injury
of another (with gen. or loc. of the person); to
execute, carry out (as an order or command); to
manufacture, prepare, work at, elaborate, build; to
form, construct one thing out of another (with abl.
or inst. of the thing); to compose, describe; to
cultivate; to make a sound, utter, pronounce (often
in comp. with the sounds {%phaṭ, phuṭ, bhāṇ, vaṣaṭ,%}
{%svadhā, svāhā, him%}); to employ, use; to make
use of (with inst.); to accomplish any period, bring
to completion, spend (e. g. {%varṣāṇi daśa cakruḥ,%}
they spent ten years; {%kṣaṇaṃ kuru,%} wait a mo-
ment); to place, put, lay, bring, lead, to take hold
of (with acc. or loc. or inst., e. g. {%ardhaṃ kṛ,%} to
win over to one's own side or party; {%haste%} or {%pāṇau%}
{%kṛ,%} to take by the hand, to marry; {%hṛdayena kṛ,%}
to place in one's heart, love); to direct the thoughts,
mind &c. ({%manaḥ%} or {%matim%} or {%buddhim%} or {%bhā-%}
{%vam%} &c.) towards any object, turn the attention to,
resolve upon, determine on (with loc., dat., or inf.
of the object, e. g. {%mā śoke manaḥ kṛthāḥ,%} do not
turn your mind to grief; {%gamanāya matiṃ cakre,%}
he resolved upon going; {%alābuṃ sraṣṭuṃ cakre,%}
he resolved to create a gourd); to consider, turn in
the mind, think; to make, to render (with two acc.,
e. g. {%ādityaṃ kāṣṭhām akurvata,%} they made the
sun their goal); to procure for another, bestow,
grant; A. to procure for one's self, appropriate,
assume; to give aid, help any one to perform an
action; to make liable; to injure, violate (e. g.
{%kanyāṃ kṛ,%} to violate a maiden); to appoint,
institute; to give an order, commission; to cause to
get rid of, free from (with abl.); to begin (e. g.
{%cakre śobhayitum purīm,%} he began to adorn the
city); to proceed with, put in practice; to worship,
sacrifice; (with numeral adverbs ending in {%dhā%})
to divide, separate, or break up into parts, e. g.
{%dvidhā kṛ,%} to divide into two parts; {%sahasradhā%}
{%kṛ,%} to break into a thousand pieces; (with adverbs
ending in {%vat%}) to make like or similar, to consider
equivalent, e. g. {%rājyaṃ tṛṇavat kṛtvā,%} valuing
the kingdom like a straw; (with adverbs ending in
{%sāt%}) to reduce anything to, cause to become, make
subject, e. g. {%bhasmasāt kṛ,%} to reduce to ashes;
{%ātmasāt kṛ,%} to subject to one's self. The above
senses of {%kṛ%} may be variously modified or almost
infinitely extended according to the noun with which
[Page0246-b+ 81]
this root is connected, as in the following exam-
ples: {%sakhyaṃ kṛ,%} to contract friendship with;
{%pūjāṃ kṛ,%} to honour; {%rājyaṃ kṛ,%} to reign;
{%snehaṃ kṛ,%} to show affection; {%ājñāṃ%} or {%nideśaṃ%}
or {%śāsanaṃ%} or {%kāmaṃ%} or {%yācanāṃ%} or {%vacaḥ%} or
{%vacanaṃ%} or {%vākyaṃ kṛ,%} to perform any one's
command or wish or request &c.; {%dharmaṃ kṛ,%} to
do one's duty; {%nakhāni kṛ,%} to clean one's nails;
{%udakaṃ%} or {%salilaṃ kṛ,%} to offer a libation to the
dead, to perform ablutions &c.; {%astrāṇi kṛ,%} to
practice the use of weapons; {%darduraṃ kṛ,%} to play
on the flute; {%daṇḍaṃ kṛ,%} to inflict punishment &c.;
{%svaraṃ kṛ,%} to utter a sound; {%śabdaṃ kṛ,%} to make
a noise; {%kālaṃ kṛ,%} to bring one's time to an end,
i. e. to die; {%ciraṃ kṛ,%} to be long in doing any-
thing, to delay; {%manasi kṛ,%} to take to heart, to
mind, to determine, resolve upon; {%manasā kṛ,%} to
place in one's mind, think of, meditate; {%hṛdi%}
{%kṛ,%} to place in the heart, remember; {%vaśe kṛ,%} to
place in subjection, become master of; {%śirasā kṛ,%}
to place on the head; {%mūrdhnā kṛ,%} to place on one's
head, to obey, to honour: Caus. {%kārayati, -te, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to act or do, to cause another to perform,
to have anything made or done by another (with acc.
or double acc., e. g. {%sabhāṃ kāritavān,%} he caused
an assembly to be made; {%rāja-darśanam māṃ%}
{%kāraya,%} cause me to have an audience of the king;
{%bānijyaṃ kārayed vaiśyam,%} he ought to cause the
Vaiśya to engage in trade; or with acc. and inst.,
e. g. {%na śakṣyāmi kiñcit kārayituṃ tvayā,%}
I shall not be able to have anything done by thee);
to cause to manufacture or form or cultivate; to
cause to place or put, to have anything placed, put
upon, &c. (e. g. {%taṃ citra-paṭaṃ vāsa-gṛhe%}
{%bhittāv akārayat,%} he had the picture placed on the
wall in his house). Sometimes the Caus. of {%kṛ%} is
used for the simple verb or without a causal significa-
tion (e. g. {%padaṃ kārayati,%} he pronounces a word
&c.; {%mithyā kārayati,%} he pronounces wrongly;
{%Kaikeyīm anu rājānaṃ kāraya,%} treat or deal with
Kaikeyī as the king does): Desid. {%cikīrṣati, -te,%} to
wish to make or do; to intend to do, to design,
intend, begin, strive after; to wish to sacrifice or
worship: Intens. {%carkarti, carikarti, carīkarti,%}
{%carkarīti, carikarīti, carīkarīti, cekrīyate,%} Ved.
3rd pl. {%karikrati,%} to do repeatedly; [cf. Hib. <nsi>caraim,</nsi>
‘I perform, execute;’ <nsi>ceard,</nsi> ‘an art, trade, business,
function;’ <nsi>sucridh,</nsi> ‘easy;’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>creu,</nsi> ‘to
form;’ Island. <nsi>gerdh,</nsi> ‘action;’ Old Germ. <nsi>kara-</nsi>
<nsi>wan,</nsi> ‘to prepare;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>gar,</nsi> ‘prepared (as
food);’ Lat. <nsi>creo, cœremonia, ars</nsi> (for <nsi>cars</nsi>); Gr.
<lang n="greek">κραίνω, κρόνος.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>15592<pc>0246-b<k1>kft<k2>kft<h>1
1. {%kṛt, t, t, t,%}¦ making, doing, performing, accom-
plishing, effecting, manufacturing, acting; one who
accomplishes or performs anything, an author; often
occurring at the end of compounds, see {%su-kṛt,%}
{%karma-kṛt, pāpa-kṛt,%} &c.; ({%t%}), m. an affix used
to form nouns from roots; a noun formed with this
affix. {%—Kṛd-anta, as,%} m. a word ending with a
Kṛt affix (such a word would be called by Pāṇini
simply {%kṛt%}). {%—Kṛl-lopa, as,%} m. the rejection of a
Kṛt affix.
<LEND>

<L>15593<pc>0246-b<k1>kfta<k2>kfta
{%Kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ done, made, accomplished, per-
formed; prepared, made ready; obtained, gained,
acquired; placed at hand; well done, proper, good.
The preceding senses are mostly found in the Veda;
the numerous other senses found in classical writers
may be inferred from the meanings of the rt. {%kṛ%}
above. The neuter of {%kṛta%} is used with {%saha%}
or with the inst. alone in the sense of ‘done with,’
‘away with,’ ‘enough of,’ ‘no need of,’ &c. (e. g.
{%kṛtaṃ sandehena,%} away with doubt; {%kṛtam%}
{%parihāsena,%} enough of joking). {%Kṛta%} is often
found at the end of a compound, e. g. {%pūrva-kṛta,%}
done formerly; {%janmāntara-kṛta,%} done in a former
state of existence; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the Viśva-
devās; of a son of Vasu-deva; of a son of Sannati
and pupil of Hiraṇya-nābha; of a son of Kṛta-ratha
and father of Vibudha; of a son of Jaya and father
of Haryavana; of a son of Cyavana and father of
Upari-cara; ({%am%}), n. deed, work, action; service
[Page0246-c+ 81]
done, kind action, benefit; consequence, result; aim,
object, design; stake at a game; prize or booty
gained in battle; N. of the die or of the side of a die
marked with four points; (according to some) the
collective name of the four dice in opposition to the
fifth die, called {%kali;%} N. of the first of the four ages
of the world (also called {%satya%} or ‘the golden age’)
comprehending together with the morning and even-
ing dawn 4,800 years of men, according to the
Mahā-bhārata; but according to the Purāṇas 4,800
years of the gods, or 1,728000 years of men.
{%—Kṛta-kapaṭa, as, ā, am,%} deceiving, beguiling,
fraudulent. {%—Kṛta-kartavya, as, ā, am,%} one who
has performed what was to be done, who has
done his duty; having done or discharged one's
duty. {%—Kṛta-karman, ā, ā, a,%} one who has done
his work or duty; skilful, clever, able. {%—Kṛta-kalpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who knows the customary rites.
{%—Kṛta-kāma, as, ā, am,%} one whose desire is
attained or fulfilled. {%—Kṛta-kārya, am,%} n. an
attained object; ({%as, ā, am%}), one who has done his
work or obtained his object; one who has no need of
another person's aid (with inst.). {%—Kṛta-kāla, as,%}
m. appointed time; ({%as, ā, am%}), fixed, settled as to
time; sent, deposited &c. for a certain time; one
who has accomplished a certain time, who has waited
a certain time. {%—Kṛta-kūrcchaka, as, ā, am,%} tied
up as a small bundle or brush. {%—Kṛta-kṛtya, am,%}
n. what has been done and what is to be done; an
attained object; ({%as, ā, am%}), having successfully
accomplished a business; one who has accomplished
or attained any object or purpose; contented, satis-
fied; clever. {%—Kṛtakṛtya-tā,%} f. or {%kṛtakṛtya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the full discharge of any duty or realisa-
tion of any object, accomplishment, attainment,
success. {%—Kṛta-koṭi, is,%} m., N. of a Kāśyapa; an
epithet of Upavarṣa. {%—Kṛta-kopa, as, ā, am,%}
angry, indignant. {%—Kṛta-kautuka, as, ī, am,%}
playful. {%—Kṛta-kraya, as,%} m. a purchaser, a buyer.
{%—Kṛta-kriya, as, ā, am,%} one who has finished or
accomplished any object in which he is engaged;
one who has attained his end or object; one who
has fulfilled his duty or performed a religious cere-
mony. {%—Kṛta-krudha, as, ā, am,%} angry, resentful.
{%—Kṛta-kṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} one who is waiting
for the exact moment, one who waits impatiently for
a person or thing, (with {%prati%} or with the inf. or
at the end of a comp., e. g. {%kṛta-kṣaṇāhaṃ te%}
{%gamanam prati,%} I am waiting impatiently for thy
going; {%te bhūmiṃ gantuṃ kṛta-kṣanāḥ,%} they
are waiting for the time to proceed to the earth);
({%as%}), m., N. of a prince. {%—Kṛta-ghāta-yatna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} making efforts to slay, one who tries to kill.
{%—Kṛta-ghna, as, ī, am,%} destroying past trans-
actions or (benefits) done, unmindful of (services)
rendered, recompensing evil for good, not acknow-
ledging good offices or benefits received, ungrateful;
defeating or rendering vain all previous measures.
{%—Kṛtaghna-tā,%} f. or {%kṛtaghna-tva, am,%} n. in-
gratitude. {%—Kṛta-cūḍa, as,%} m. a boy on whom the
ceremony of tonsure has been performed. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%cetas, ās,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Kṛta-cchidrā,%} f.
the plant Luffa Acutangula. {%—Kṛta-janman, ā, ā, a,%}
born, produced, generated. {%—Kṛta-jña, as, ā, am,%}
remembering past transactions, mindful of former aid
or favours, grateful; observing propriety, correct
in conduct; ({%as%}), m. a dog; an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Kṛtajña-tā,%} f. or {%kṛtajña-tva, am,%} n. gratitude.
{%—Kṛtañ-jaya, as,%} m., N. of the seventeenth
Vyāsa; also of a prince. {%—Kṛta-tanutrāṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} mailed, having covered one's self with armour.
{%—Kṛta-tīrtha, as,%} m. one who has visited holy
places &c., one who frequents them; a guide; an
adviser, one fertile in expedients. {%—Kṛta-trā,%} f., N.
of a plant, {%= trāyamāṇā%}. {%—Kṛta-tva, am,%} n. the
state of being done or effected. {%—Kṛta-dāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} married; [cf. {%dārakriyā.%}] {%—Kṛta-dāsa, as,%}
m. one who offers himself as a servant for a certain
time, a self-engaged servant, a hired servant. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%dyuti, is,%} f., N. of the wife of king Citraketu.
{%—Kṛta-dviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. angry with the
[Page0247-a+ 81]
doings of another person. {%—Kṛta-dhanvan, ā,%} m.,
N. of a son of Kanaka. {%—Kṛta-dhī, īs, īs, i,%}
prudent, considerate; learned, educated. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%dhvaṃsa, as, ā, am,%} defeated, overpowered; injured,
destroyed; destroying past transactions; [cf. {%kṛta-%}
{%ghna.%}] {%—Kṛta-dhvaja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. furnished
with banners; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince, a son of
Dharma-dhvaja. {%—Kṛta-dhvasta, as, ā, am,%} lost
after being once possessed or acquired. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%nakha, as, ā, am,%} one who has cleaned his nails.
{%—Kṛta-nāśaka, as, ī, am,%} ungrateful; [cf. {%kṛta-%}
{%ghna.%}] {%—Kṛta-nityakriya, as, ā, am,%} having duly
attended to the daily religious observances. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%nirṇejana, as,%} m. a penitent, one who has per-
formed penance or made expiation. {%—Kṛta-niścaya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has made a resolution, resolved,
determined; confident, sure, certain. {%—Kṛta-parva,%}
{%am,%} n. (?) the golden age of the world. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%paścāttāpa, as, ā, am,%} showing regret or penitence.
{%—Kṛta-puṅkha, as, ā, am,%} ‘one who has fixed
the feathers of his arrows,’ skilled in archery. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%puṇya, as, ā, am,%} accomplished in virtuous acts.
{%—Kṛta-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} done formerly. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%pūrva-nāśana, am,%} n. forgetting past services, in-
gratitude; [cf. {%kṛta-ghna.%}] {%—Kṛta-pūrvin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} one by whom anything was formerly done.
{%—Kṛta-pauruṣa, as, ā, am,%} behaving gallantly.
{%—Kṛta-praṇāma, as, ā, am,%} making obeisance,
saluting. {%—Kṛta-pratikṛta, am,%} n. assault and
counter-assault; attack and resistance; retaliation
for an assault. {%—Kṛta-pratijña, as, ā, am,%} ful-
filling a promise or agreement. {%—Kṛta-prayatna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} making effort, active, industrious, per-
severing. {%—Kṛta-phala, as, ā, am,%} successful,
fruitful; ({%am%}), n. result, consequence of an act; a
poisonous substance; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%kola-%}
{%śimbī.%}] {%—Kṛta-bandhu, us,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Kṛta-bāhu, us, us, u,%} laying hands upon, touch-
ing. {%—Kṛta-buddhi, is, is, i,%} one who has made
a resolution, a man of resolute or firm character;
resolved; informed of one's duty, one who knows
how religious rites ought to be conducted; learned,
wise. {%—Kṛta-brahman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. one who has
performed his devotions; (a deity) towards whom
devotion is made, (a sacrifice) in which prayers are
duly offered. {%—Kṛta-bhaya, as, ā, am,%} alarmed,
apprehensive. {%—Kṛta-bhāva, as, ā, am,%} one whose
mind is directed towards anything, determined, re-
solved. {%—Kṛta-bhūta-maitra, as, ī, am,%} friendly
to all. {%—Kṛta-bhojana, as, ā, am,%} one who has
dined or made a meal. {%—Kṛta-maṅgala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} blessed, consecrated. {%—Kṛta-mati, is, is, i,%}
one who has taken a resolution, one who has resolved
upon anything. {%—Kṛta-mandāra, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Kṛta-manyu, us, us, u,%} angry, offended,
indignant. {%—Kṛta-mārga, as, ā, am,%} having a road
or path made; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Kṛta-māla,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of animal; the tree Cassia Fistula.
{%—Kṛta-mukha, as, ī, am,%} skilled, clever, conver-
sant. {%—Kṛta-maitra, as, ā, am,%} friendly. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%yajus, us, us, us,%} Ved. one who has uttered the
sacrificial formulas. {%—Kṛta-yajña, as,%} m., N. of a
son of Cyavana and father of Uparicara. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%yaśas, ās,%} m., N. of a descendant of Aṅgiras.
{%—Kṛta-yuga, am,%} n. the first of the four ages
of the world; the golden age; see {%kṛta%} above.
{%—Kṛta-yogya, as, ā, am,%} joining in combat.
{%—Kṛta-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a grandson of Maru.
{%—Kṛta-rava, as, ā, am,%} sounding, singing.
{%—Kṛta-ruc, k, k, k,%} splendid, brilliant. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%ruṣa, as, ā, am,%} angry, displeased. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} marked, stamped; branded;
noted for good qualities, excellent, amiable, &c.;
defined, discriminated; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
{%—Kṛta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} making, having done or
made anything; one who holds the stake at a game.
{%—Kṛta-varman, ā,%} m., N. of several princes,
especially of a son of Hṛdika, also of Kanaka or
Dhanaka; N. of the father of the thirteenth Arhat
of the present Avasarpiṇī. {%—Kṛta-vāpa, as,%} m. a
penitent who has shaven his head and chin. {%—Kṛta- %}
[Page0247-b+ 81]
{%vikāra%} or {%kṛta-vikriya, as, ā, am,%} altered, changed.
{%—Kṛta-vikrama, as, ā, am,%} displaying valour,
making vigorous efforts. {%—Kṛta-vidya, as, ā, am,%}
one who has acquired knowledge, well informed,
scientific, a philosopher. {%—Kṛta-vivāha, as, ā, am,%}
married. {%—Kṛta-vismaya, as, ā, am,%} astonished,
astonishing. {%—Kṛta-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} being strong
or powerful; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince, a son of
Kanaka or Dhanaka and father of Arjuna. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%vega, as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Kṛta-vetana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who receives wages, a hired servant or
labourer. {%—Kṛta-vedin, ī, inī, i,%} grateful, observ-
ant of propriety, knowing what is correct; see {%kṛta-%}
{%jña%}. {%—Kṛta-vedhaka%} or {%kṛta-vedhana, as,%} m. a
plant, a sort of Ghoṣa with white flowers. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%vepathu, us, us, u,%} trembling. {%—Kṛta-veśa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} attired, ornamented, decorated. {%—Kṛta-vya-%}
{%dhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having weapons, armed.
{%—Kṛta-vyalīka, as, ā, am,%} annoyed, vexed,
irritated. {%—Kṛta-vrata, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Loma-harṣaṇa. {%—Kṛta-śakti, is, is, i,%} putting
forth one's strength or courage. {%—Kṛta-śastra-%}
{%niḥśrama, as, ā, am,%} exercised in arms. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%śilpa, as, ā, am,%} one who has learned his art or is
skilled in his own trade. {%—Kṛta-śobha, as, ā, am,%}
splendid, brilliant; beautiful, beautified; dexterous,
handy. {%—Kṛta-śauca, as, ā, am,%} purified, cleansed,
freed from bodily impurities, released from conven-
tional defilement &c. {%—Kṛta-śrama, as, ā, am,%}
one who has made great exertions, painstaking,
laborious; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Muni. {%—Kṛta-saṃ-%}
{%sarga, as, ā, am,%} brought into contact, united.
{%—Kṛta-saṃskāra, as, ā, am,%} initiated, one who has
undergone all the purificatory ceremonies. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%saṅkalpa, as, ā, am,%} one who has made a resolu-
tion. {%—Kṛta-saṅketa, as, ā, am,%} making an
agreement or appointment. {%—Kṛta-sañjña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who never loses his self-consciousness, one
who has presence of mind; aroused; restored to
consciousness or animation; distinguished by appro-
priate marks, devices, &c. {%—Kṛta-sannāha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} cased in armour. {%—Kṛta-sannidhāna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} brought into contact, approximated. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%sambandha, as, ā, am,%} connected, allied. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%sāpatnikā%} or {%kṛta-sāpatnī%} or {%kṛta-sāpatnīkā%} or
{%kṛta-sāpatnakā%} or {%kṛta-sapatnikā,%} f. a woman
whose husband has taken another wife; a superseded
wife. {%—Kṛta-sthiti, is, is, i,%} abiding, staying, taking
up an abode. {%—Kṛta-sneha, as, ā, am,%} showing
affection, affectionate. {%—Kṛta-smara, as,%} m., N.
of a mountain. {%—Kṛta-svastyayana, as, ā, am,%}
blessed, commended to the protection of gods pre-
vious to any journey or undertaking. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%svecchāhāra (˚sva-icchā-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} feeding
at pleasure. {%—Kṛta-hasta%} or {%kṛta-hastaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who has exercised his hands; dexterous;
skilled in archery; clever, skilful, dexterous. {%—Kṛta-%}
{%hasta-tā,%} f. dexterity; the being skilled in archery.
{%—Kṛtākṛta (˚ta-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} done and not
done, done in part but not completed, done and
omitted, prepared and not prepared, manufactured
and not manufactured; ({%am%}), n. what has been done
and what has not been done. {%—Kṛtāgama (˚ta-%}
{%āg˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has made progress,
advanced, proficient. {%—Kṛtāgas (˚ta-āg˚), ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} one who has committed an offence, offending,
criminal, sinful, in fault. {%—Kṛtāgni (˚ta-ag˚), is,%}
m., N. of a son of Kanaka or Dhanaka. {%—Kṛtāgni-%}
{%kārya, as,%} m. a Brāhman who has offered the usual
fire-oblation. {%—Kṛtāṅka (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%}
marked, branded; numbered. {%—Kṛtāñjali (˚ta-añ˚),%}
{%is, is, i,%} one who joins the hands in reverence or to
solicit a favour (keeping the palms from touching as if
to hold alms or an offering), standing in a reverent or
respectful posture; ({%is%}), m. a shrub used in medicine,
also in magical potions &c. {%—Kṛtāñjalipuṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} joining the palms of the hands for obeisance,
also for holding water &c. {%—Kṛtātman (˚ta-āt˚),%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} one whose spirit is disciplined, subdued,
tranquil; of a self-governed spirit. {%—Kṛtānati (˚ta-%}
{%ān˚), is, is, i,%} bending, bowing, paying homage or
[Page0247-c+ 81]
respect. {%—Kṛtānukara (˚ta-an˚), as, ī, am,%} imi-
tating what has been done by another, following
another's example, subservient, not independent.
{%—Kṛtānukūlya (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} compliant,
kind, favouring. {%—Kṛtānukṛta (˚ta-an˚), am,%} n.
that which is done before and after. {%—Kṛtānuvyā-%}
{%dha (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} mixed, combined, united.
{%—Kṛtānusāra (˚ta-an˚), as,%} m. established practice,
usage, custom, rate. {%—Kṛtānta (˚ta-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} causing an end, bringing to an end, leading to
any decisive termination; whose end is action; ({%as%}),
m. destiny, fate; the inevitable result of actions done
in a past existence; a N. of Yama, the god of death,
(he is son of Sūrya and regent of the dead); death
personified; a demonstrated conclusion, a dogma, a
proved or established doctrine; a sinful or inauspicious
action; Saturday, ‘closing the week,’ considered as an
unlucky day; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of perfume, [cf. {%reṇukā.%}]
{%—Kṛtānta-janaka, as,%} m. a N. of the sun, as
father of Yama. {%—Kṛtānna (˚ta-an˚), am,%} n. pre-
pared or cooked food; digested food, excrement; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), eating. {%—Kṛtāpakāra (˚ta-ap˚), as, ā, am,%}
injured, wronged; discomfited, overpowered; doing
wrong, offending. {%—Kṛtāpakṛta (˚ta-ap˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} done for and against. {%—Kṛtāpadāna (˚ta-ap˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} completing a great or noble work.
{%—Kṛtāparādha (˚ta-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} guilty, cul-
pable, an offender. {%—Kṛtābhaya (˚ta-abh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} saved from fear. {%—Kṛtābharaṇa (˚ta-ābh˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} adorned, decorated. {%—Kṛtābhisaraṇa-%}
{%veśa (˚ta-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} attired in the dress of a
maiden who goes to meet her lover. {%—Kṛtābhiṣeka%}
{%(˚ta-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} sprinkled, inaugurated; ({%as%}),
m. a prince &c. who has been inaugurated. {%—Kṛtā-%}
{%bhyāsa (˚ta-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} trained, exercised,
practised. {%—Kṛtāya (˚ta-aya), as,%} m. the die called
Kṛta. {%—Kṛtāyāsa (˚ta-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} labouring,
suffering. {%—Kṛtārgha (˚ta-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of the
nineteenth Arhat of the past Utsarpiṇī. {%—Kṛtār-%}
{%tanāda (˚ta-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} making cries of pain.
{%—Kṛtārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has
attained an end or object, having accomplished a
purpose or desire, successful; satisfied, contented;
clever; ({%as%}), m. a various reading for {%kṛtārgha.%}
{%—Kṛtārtha-tā,%} f. or {%kṛtārtha-tva, am,%} n. ac-
complishment of an object, success. {%—Kṛtārthī-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} rendered successful. {%—Kṛtārthī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become successful. {%—Kṛtālaka (˚ta-%}
{%al˚), as,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's attendants. {%—Kṛtā-%}
{%laya (˚ta-āl˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has taken up
his abode in any place (often compounded with the
name of a place or country, e. g. {%svarga-kṛtālayaḥ,%}
an inhabitant of heaven); ({%as%}), m. a frog. {%—Kṛtā-%}
{%loka (˚ta-āl˚), as, ā, am,%} supplied with light, lighted.
{%—Kṛtāvadhāna (˚ta-av˚), as, ā, am,%} careful,
cautious, prudent, attentive. {%—Kṛtāvadhi (˚ta-av˚),%}
{%is, is, i,%} fixed, appointed, agreed upon; bounded,
limited. {%—Kṛtāvamarṣa (˚ta-av˚), as, ā, am,%}
effacing from recollection; intolerant. {%—Kṛtāvaś-%}
{%yaka (˚ta-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} having done all that is
necessary. {%—Kṛtāvasakthika (˚ta-av˚), as, ā, am,%}
seated on the hams with the knees tied together or the
hips and knees surrounded by a cloth. {%—Kṛtāvastha%}
{%(˚ta-av˚), as, ā, am,%} summoned, called; made
present; fixed, settled. {%—Kṛtāvāsa (˚ta-āv˚), as,%}
m. a lodging; ({%as, ā, am%}), lodging. {%—Kṛtāśana%}
{%(˚ta-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} feeding upon. {%—Kṛtāsana-%}
{%parigraha (˚ta-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} seated. {%—Kṛtās-%}
{%kandana (˚ta-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} assailing, attacking;
effacing from recollection. {%—Kṛtāstra (˚ta-as˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has exercised himself in throwing
arrows or other weapons, skilled in archery; armed;
({%as%}), m., N. of a warrior. {%—Kṛtāstra-tā,%} f. consum-
mate skill or proficiency in the use of arms. {%—Kṛ-%}
{%tāspada (˚ta-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} governed, ruled; sup-
porting, resting on; residing in or on, taking up one's
abode. {%—Kṛtāhaka, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%kṛta + ahan%}),
having performed the daily ceremonies or devotions.
{%—Kṛtāhāra%} or {%kṛtāhāraka (˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%}
having eaten food, having made a meal. {%—Kṛtāh-%}
{%vāna (˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} summoned, called, chal-
[Page0248-a+ 80]
lenged. {%—Kṛterṣya (˚ta-īr˚), as, ā, am,%} envious,
jealous. {%—{{KṛtocCais->Kṛtoccais||20161130|Jim Funderburk.|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 303|from uććais}} (˚ta-uc˚),%} ind. raised on high.
{%—Kṛtotsāha (˚ta-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} making effort,
striving. {%—Kṛtodaka (˚ta-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} one
who has performed his ablutions. {%—Kṛtodvāha (˚ta-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} performing penance by standing
with uplifted hands; married. {%—Kṛtopakāra (˚ta-%}
{%up˚), as, ā, am,%} assisted, befriended; friendly, giving
aid. {%—Kṛtopacāra (˚ta-up˚), as, ā, am,%} served,
waited upon. {%—Kṛtopanāyana (˚ta-up˚), as,%} m. a
student who has been invested with the sacrificial
cord. {%—Kṛtopabhoga (˚ta-up˚), as, ā, am,%} used,
enjoyed. {%—Kṛtaujas (˚ta-oj˚), ās,%} m., N. of a son
of Kanaka or Dhanaka.
<LEND>

<L>15594<pc>0248-a<k1>kftaka<k2>kftaka
{%Kṛtaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ artificial, factitious, done arti-
ficially, made, prepared, not produced spontaneously;
not natural, adopted (as a son); assumed, simulated,
false; ({%am%}), ind. in a simulated manner; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a son of Vasu-deva, also of a son of Cyavana.
<LEND>

<L>15595<pc>0248-a<k1>kftaya<k2>kftaya
{%Kṛtaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kṛtayati, -yitum,%} to take the
die called Kṛta.
<LEND>

<L>15596<pc>0248-a<k1>kftAnta<k2>kftAnta
{%Kṛtānta, kṛtārtha.%}¦ See under {%kṛta%} above.
<LEND>

<L>15597<pc>0248-a<k1>kfti<k2>kfti<h>1
1. {%kṛti, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. see col. 2), doing, making, per-
forming, manufacturing, composing; action, activity;
creation, work, literary work; magic; enchantment;
an enchantress, a witch; a kind of Anuṣṭubh metre
consisting of two Pādas of twelve syllables each and
a third Pāda of eight syllables; another metre, a
stanza of four lines with twenty syllables in each; a
square number; N. of the wife of Saṃhrāda and
mother of Pañca-jana; ({%is%}), m., N. of several persons.
{%—Kṛti-sādhya-tva, am,%} n. the state of being ac-
complished by exertion.
<LEND>

<L>15598<pc>0248-a<k1>kftin<k2>kftin
{%Kṛtin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ expert; clever, skilful, knowing,
wise, learned; good, virtuous; pure, pious; following,
obeying, doing what is enjoined; one who has at-
tained an object or accomplished a purpose, satisfied;
({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Cyavana and father of Upari-
cara; N. of a son of Sannatimat.
<LEND>

<L>15599<pc>0248-a<k1>kfte<k2>kfte
{%Kṛte%}¦ and {%kṛtena,%} ind. (originally loc. and inst.
fr. {%kṛta%}), on account of, for the sake of, for (with
gen. or in comp., e. g. {%mama kṛte%} or {%mat-kṛte,%} on
my account, for me).
<LEND>
<L>15599.1<pc>0248-a<k1>kftena<k2>kftena
{{Lbody=15599}}
<LEND>

<L>15600<pc>0248-a<k1>kfteyuka<k2>kfteyuka
{%Kṛteyuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva.
<LEND>

<L>15601<pc>0248-a<k1>kftnu<k2>kftnu
{%Kṛtnu, us, us, u,%}¦ working well, able to work,
powerful; skilful, clever, an artificer or mechanic, an
artist.
<LEND>

<L>15602<pc>0248-a<k1>kftya<k2>kftya
{%Kṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be done or performed;
practicable, feasible; right, proper to be done; one
who may be seduced from allegiance or alliance, one
who may be bribed or hired as an assassin, treacherous;
({%as%}), m., scil. {%pratyaya,%} the class of affixes forming
the fut. pass. part. &c. (as {%tavya, anīya, ya, elima,%}
&c.); a kind of evil spirit or ghost, either with or
without the addition of {%yakṣa, mānuṣa, asura,%}
&c.; ({%ā%}), f. action, act, deed; magic; a female deity
to whom sacrifices are offered for destructive and
magical purposes; N. of a river; ({%am%}), n. what
ought to be done; duty, office; purpose, end, object;
what is proper or fit; motive, cause. {%—Kṛtya-kalpa-%}
{%taru, us,%} m. title of a work on jurisprudence.
{%—Kṛtya-kalpa-latā,%} f., N. of a work by Vācaspati-
miśra. {%—Kṛtya-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m. title of a work
by Śivarāma. {%—Kṛtya-jña, as, ā, am,%} who knows
what is to be done, learned, wise. {%—Kṛtya-tattva,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the true nature of duty or obligation,’ title of
a work. {%—Kṛtya-tā,%} f. seduction from allegiance or
alliance. {%—Kṛtya-ratnākara, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or
n. (?), title of a work on jurisprudence. {%—Kṛtya-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having any business or request or object;
busy, active. {%—Kṛtya-vartman, a,%} n. the right way,
the manner in which any object is to be effected.
{%—Kṛtya-vid, t, t, t,%} one who knows what ought
to be done, knowing duty, learned, wise. {%—Kṛtya-%}
{%vidhi, is,%} m. the way to do anything, a rule, a pre-
cept. {%—Kṛtyā-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. practising magic or
sorcery, bewitching. {%—Kṛtyā-dūṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}
or {%kṛtyā-dūṣi, is, is, i,%} Ved. counteracting magic,
destroying its effect. {%—Kṛtyā-rāvaṇa, as%} or {%am%} (?),
m. or n. (?), title of a work.
<LEND>
[Page0248-b+ 73]

<L>15603<pc>0248-b<k1>kftyaka<k2>kftyaka
{%Kṛtyaka, as,%}¦ m. an injurer?; ({%ā%}), f. an enchan-
tress, a witch, a woman who is the fatal cause of injury
or destruction, the fatal destroyer, the bane.
<LEND>

<L>15604<pc>0248-b<k1>kftrima<k2>kftrima
{%Kṛtrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ made artificially, factitious,
artificial, the reverse of what is naturally or spon-
taneously produced; falsified, adopted (as a child);
({%as%}), m. incense, olibanum; an adopted son; ({%am%}),
n. a kind of salt, the common Bit Noben, or Bit
Lavan, obtained by cooking; a sort of perfume [cf.
{%javādi%}]; a kind of collyrium [cf. {%rasāñjana%}].
{%—Kṛtrima-dhūpa, as,%} m. incense, {{oblibanum.->olibanum.||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}
{%—Kṛtrima-dhūpaka, as,%} m. compound perfume,
containing ten or eighteen ingredients. {%—Kṛtrima-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. an adopted son; one of the twelve
kinds recognised in law, the son made. {%—Kṛtrima-%}
{%putraka, as,%} m. a doll. {%—Kṛtrima-bhūmi, is,%} f. a
made floor. {%—Kṛtrima-mitra, as,%} m. an acquired
friend, one on whom benefits have been conferred,
or from whom they have been received. {%—Kṛtrima-%}
{%vana, am,%} n. a plantation, a park. {%—Kṛtrima-%}
{%śatru, us,%} m. an acquired enemy. {%—Kṛtrimo-%}
{%dāsīna (˚ma-ud˚), as,%} m. an acquired neutral.
<LEND>

<L>15605<pc>0248-b<k1>kftvan<k2>kftvan
{%Kṛtvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. causing, effecting; active,
busy; practising magic or sorcery in order to bewitch.
<LEND>

<L>15606<pc>0248-b<k1>kftvas<k2>kftvas
{%Kṛtvas,%}¦ ind. at the end of a numeral or numeral
adjective, = fold, times (e. g. {%daśa-kṛtvas,%} ten times;
{%bahu-kṛtvas,%} many times; {%pañca-kṛtvas,%} five-fold).
In the earlier language {%kṛtvas%} is used as a separate
word, but native grammarians regard it only as an
affix, and it is so used in classical Sanskrit; it was
perhaps originally an acc. plur. fr. a noun {%kṛtu,%}
formed by the affix {%tu%} fr. the root 1. {%kṛ;%} [cf. also
{%kṛt%} in {%sakṛt.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15607<pc>0248-b<k1>kftvA<k2>kftvA
{%Kṛtvā,%}¦ ind. having made or done.
<LEND>

<L>15608<pc>0248-b<k1>kftvI<k2>kftvI
{%Kṛtvī,%}¦ f., N. of a daughter of Śuka, wife of
Aṇuha (Nīpa) and mother of Brahma-datta.
<LEND>

<L>15609<pc>0248-b<k1>kftvya<k2>kftvya
{%Kṛtvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. one who is able to
perform anything, strong, efficacious; having accom-
plished many deeds, exerting one's power.
<LEND>

<L>15610<pc>0248-b<k1>kriyamARa<k2>kriyamARa
{%Kriyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being done, made, &c.
<LEND>

<L>15611<pc>0248-b<k1>kf<k2>kf<h>2
{#kf#} 2¦. {%kṛ,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%cakarti, akārīt,%}
Intens. {%carkarti,%} to make mention of, to
praise, to speak highly of (with gen.); [cf. {%kāru,%}
{%kīri, kīrti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15612<pc>0248-b<k1>kf<k2>kf<h>3
{#kf#} 3¦. {%kṛ,%} to injure &c. See 2. {%kṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>15613<pc>0248-b<k1>kfti<k2>kfti<h>2
2. {%kṛti, is,%}¦ m. or f. (for 1. see col. 1), Ved. a
kind of weapon, a sort of knife or a dagger; ({%is%}),
f. hurt, hurting, injuring; waylaying. {%—Kṛti-kara,%}
{%as,%} m. epithet of Rāvaṇa. {%—Kṛti-mat, ān,%} m. the
founder of a race, realm, &c.; N. of a son of Yavī-
nara. {%—Kṛti-rāta, as,%} m., N. of a prince; [cf. {%kīrtti-%}
{%rāta.%}] {%—Kṛti-roman, ā,%} m., N. of a son of Kṛtirāta.
<LEND>

<L>15614<pc>0248-b<k1>kfka<k2>kfka
{#kfka#}¦ {%kṛka, as,%} m. the throat, the larynx.
<LEND>

<L>15615<pc>0248-b<k1>kfkaRa<k2>kfkaRa
{#kfkaRa#}¦ {%kṛkaṇa, as,%} m. a kind of partridge,
commonly Kaër, Perdix Sylvatica [cf. {%kṛkara%} and
{%krakara%}]; a worm; N. of a man; N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>15616<pc>0248-b<k1>kfkaRIya<k2>kfkaRIya
{%Kṛkaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
partridge.
<LEND>

<L>15617<pc>0248-b<k1>kfkaReyu<k2>kfkaReyu
{%Kṛkaṇeyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva.
<LEND>

<L>15618<pc>0248-b<k1>kfkadASu<k2>kfkadASu
{#kfkadASu#}¦ {%kṛkadāśu, us%} or {%ūs,%} m., Ved. one
who hurts or injures.
<LEND>

<L>15619<pc>0248-b<k1>kfkara<k2>kfkara
{#kfkara#}¦ {%kṛkara, as,%} m. a kind of partridge,
commonly Kaër, Perdix Sylvatica [cf. {%kṛkaṇa%} and
{%krakara%}]; a kind of pepper, Piper Chaba; the
fragrant oleander tree [cf. {%karavīra%}]; one of the
five vital airs, that which assists in digestion; an epi-
thet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>15620<pc>0248-b<k1>kfkalA<k2>kfkalA
{#kfkalA#}¦ {%kṛkalā,%} f. long pepper; [cf. {%pippalī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15621<pc>0248-b<k1>kfkalASa<k2>kfkalASa
{#kfkalASa#}¦ {%kṛkalāśa%} or {%kṛkalāsa%} or {%kṛka-%}
{%lāsaka, as,%} m. a lizard, a chameleon. {%—Kṛkalāsa-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f. title of a mystical work.
<LEND>

<L>15622<pc>0248-b<k1>kfkavAku<k2>kfkavAku
{#kfkavAku#}¦ {%kṛkavāku, us,%} m. a cock, a gallina-
ceous fowl; a peacock; a lizard, a chameleon; [with the
[Page0248-c+ 74]
first part of this word cf. Hib. <nsi>cearc,</nsi> ‘a hen.’] {%—Kṛ-%}
{%kavāku-dhvaja, as,%} m. an epithet of Kārttikeya.
<LEND>

<L>15623<pc>0248-c<k1>kfkazA<k2>kfkazA
{#kfkazA#}¦ {%kṛkaṣā,%} f. a kind of bird; [cf. {%kaṅ-%}
{%kaṇahārikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15624<pc>0248-c<k1>kfkAwa<k2>kfkAwa
{#kfkAwa#}¦ {%kṛkāṭa, am,%} n., Ved. the joint of
the neck.
<LEND>

<L>15625<pc>0248-c<k1>kfkAwaka<k2>kfkAwaka
{%Kṛkāṭaka, am,%}¦ n. the neck; a part of a column;
({%ikā%}), f. the back of the neck; the raised and straight
part of the neck.
<LEND>

<L>15626<pc>0248-c<k1>kfkAlikA<k2>kfkAlikA
{#kfkAlikA#}¦ {%kṛkālikā,%} f. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>15627<pc>0248-c<k1>kfkin<k2>kfkin
{#kfkin#}¦ {%kṛkin, ī,%} m., N. of a mythical king.
<LEND>

<L>15628<pc>0248-c<k1>kfkulAsa<k2>kfkulAsa
{#kfkulAsa#}¦ {%kṛkulāsa, as,%} m. a lizard, a cha-
meleon; [cf. {%kṛkalāśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15629<pc>0248-c<k1>kfcCra<k2>kfcCra
{#kfcCra#}¦ {%kṛcchra, as, ā, am%} (perhaps fr. rt.
{%kṛṣ%} and connected with {%kaṣṭa%}), causing trouble
or pain, painful, attended with pain or labour; being
in a difficult or painful situation; bad, miserable,
evil, wicked, sinful; ({%am%}), ind. miserably, painfully,
laboriously, with difficulty; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. n. diffi-
culty, trouble, labour, hardship, distress, calamity,
pain, evil, misery, danger, sin, (often in compounds,
e. g. {%vanavāsa-kṛcchra,%} the difficulties of living in
a forest; {%mūtra-kṛcchra,%} ischury; {%artha-kṛcchre-%}
{%ṣu,%} in difficulties, in a miserable situation; {%prāṇa-%}
{%kṛcchra,%} danger of life); bodily mortification, aus-
terity, penance, expiation; torment, torture; a par-
ticular kind of religious penance, according to some
{%= prājāpatya,%} according to others {%= sāntapana.%}
{%Kṛcchreṇa,%} inst. with difficulty, with great exertion,
painfully, laboriously, hardly, scarcely; {%alpa-kṛc-%}
{%chreṇa,%} with little difficulty, easily. {%—Kṛcchra-kar-%}
{%man, a,%} n. a difficult act, difficulty, labour. {%—Kṛc-%}
{%chra-kāla, as,%} m. a season of difficulty. {%—Kṛcchra-%}
{%gata, as, ā, am,%} undergoing trouble or misery, suf-
fering pain; being in difficulties, distressed. {%—Kṛc-%}
{%chra-tā,%} f. painful or dangerous state (especially in
disease). {%—Kṛcchra-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%} one whose
life is in danger; breathing with difficulty; hardly
supporting life. {%—Kṛcchra-mūtra-purīṣa-tva, am,%}
n. pain or difficulty in the evacuations. {%—Kṛcchra-%}
{%sādhya, as, ā, am,%} curable with difficulty. {%—Kṛc-%}
{%chrātikṛcchra (˚ra-at˚), au,%} m. du. the ordinary
and extraordinary penance, penance; ({%as%}), m. sing. a
particular kind of penance, taking no sustenance but
water for three, nine, twelve, or twenty-one days.
{%—Kṛcchrān-mukta, as, ā, am,%} freed from trouble
&c. {%—Kṛcchrāpta (˚ra-āp˚)%} or {%kṛcchropanata%}
{%(˚ra-up˚), as, ā, am,%} gained with difficulty. {%—Kṛc-%}
{%chrāri (˚ra-ari), is,%} m., N. of a plant, a species of
Vilva. {%—Kṛcchrārdha (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. an inferior
penance lasting only six days. {%—Kṛcchre-śrit, t, t, t,%}
Ved. undergoing danger; struggling with difficulties.
<LEND>

<L>15630<pc>0248-c<k1>kfcCrAya<k2>kfcCrAya
{%Kṛcchrāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kṛcchrāyate, -yitum,%} to
feel pain; to have wicked designs.
<LEND>

<L>15631<pc>0248-c<k1>kfcCrin<k2>kfcCrin
{%Kṛcchrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ encompassed with difficulties,
being in trouble, feeling pain; angry.
<LEND>

<L>15632<pc>0248-c<k1>kfq<k2>kfq
{#kfq#}¦ {%kṛḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%kṛḍati,%} to become
thick or coarse; to become fat or gross, to
become solid; to eat; (another form for {%kūḍ.%})
<LEND>

<L>15633<pc>0248-c<k1>kfRaYja<k2>kfRaYja
{#kfRaYja#}¦ {%kṛṇañja, as,%} m. a kind of Cheno-
podium, {%= kuṇañjara.%}
<LEND>

<L>15634<pc>0248-c<k1>kfRu<k2>kfRu
{#kfRu#}¦ {%kṛṇu, us,%} m. a painter.
<LEND>

<L>15635<pc>0248-c<k1>kft<k2>kft<h>2
{#kft#} 2¦. {%kṛt,%} (for 1. {%kṛt%} see under rt. 1. {%kṛ%}
at p. 246), cl. 6. P. {%kṛntati, cakarta,%}
{%kartsyati%} and {%kartiṣyati, akartīt, kartitum,%}
to cut, cut in pieces, cut off, divide; to tear
asunder, destroy: Caus. {%kartayati,%} to cut, divide,
&c.: Desid. {%cikartiṣati%} and {%cikṛtsati:%} Intens.
{%carīkṛtyate, carīkartti;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>kertu,</nsi> inf. <nsi>kirsti,</nsi>
‘to cut;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">κείρω, κάρσις</lang> Slav. <nsi>korjû,</nsi> ‘to split;’
Lat. <nsi>curtus, culter;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>ceartaighim,</nsi> ‘I prune,
trim, cut;’ <nsi>cuirc,</nsi> ‘a knife.’]
<LEND>

<L>15636<pc>0248-c<k1>kftta<k2>kftta
{%Kṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, divided; desired, sought,
wished for.
<LEND>
[Page0249-a+ 75]

<L>15637<pc>0249-a<k1>kftti<k2>kftti
{%Kṛtti, is,%}¦ f. skin, hide; a garment made of skin;
the hide or skin on which the religious student sits,
sleeps, &c., usually the skin of an antelope; the birch
tree; the bark of the birch tree, used for writing
upon, for making hooka pipes, &c.; one of the
lunar mansions, the Pleiads; a house; [cf. Hib.
<nsi>cart;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>cortex.</nsi>] {%—Kṛtti-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a
prince. {%—Kṛtti-vāsa, as,%} m. or {%kṛtti-vāsas, ās,%}
m. covered with a skin, an epithet of Rudra-Śiva;
({%ās%}), f. epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>15638<pc>0249-a<k1>kfttikA<k2>kfttikA
{%Kṛttikā, ās,%}¦ f. pl., N. of a constellation, = the
Pleiades, (originally the first, but in later times the
third lunar mansion, having Agni as its regent; this
constellation, containing six stars, is sometimes re-
presented as a flame or as a kind of razor or knife;
in mythology the six Kṛttikās are nymphs who
became the nurses of the god of war, Kārttikeya);
a vehicle, carriage, cart. {%—Kṛttikāñji (˚kā-añ˚), is,%}
{%is, i,%} having a carriage as an emblem or sign.
{%—Kṛttikā-bhava, as,%} m. ‘being in the lunar
mansion Kṛttikā,’ an epithet of Candra, the moon.
{%—Kṛttikā-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of the Kṛttikās,’ an
epithet of Skanda or Kārttikeya; (the nymphs called
Kṛttikās being his foster-mothers.)
<LEND>

<L>15639<pc>0249-a<k1>kfntatra<k2>kfntatra
{%Kṛntatra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a section, a shred, chip;
a plough.
<LEND>

<L>15640<pc>0249-a<k1>kfntana<k2>kfntana
{%Kṛntana, am,%}¦ n. cutting, cutting off, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>15641<pc>0249-a<k1>kft<k2>kft<h>3
{#kft#} 3¦. {%kṛt,%} cl. 7. P. {%kṛṇatti, cakarta,%}
{%kartiṣyati, kartitum,%} to twist threads, to
spin; to surround, encompass; attire.
<LEND>

<L>15642<pc>0249-a<k1>kftadvasu<k2>kftadvasu
{%Kṛtad-vasu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. distributing goods (?).
<LEND>

<L>15643<pc>0249-a<k1>kftA<k2>kftA
{%Kṛtā,%}¦ f., Ved. an abyss (?).
<LEND>

<L>15644<pc>0249-a<k1>kftsa<k2>kftsa
{%Kṛtsa, am,%}¦ n. water; entire, whole; [cf. the
next.]
<LEND>

<L>15645<pc>0249-a<k1>kftsna<k2>kftsna
{%Kṛtsna, as, ā, am%}¦ (rarely used in pl.), all, whole,
entire; ({%am%}), n. water; the flank or hip; the belly.
{%—Kṛtsna-tā,%} f. totality, completeness. {%—Kṛtsna-%}
{%vid, t, t, t,%} omniscient, knowing all things. {%—Kṛtsna-%}
{%śas,%} ind. wholly, entirely, altogether. {%—Kṛtsna-%}
{%hṛdaya, am,%} n. the whole heart. {%—Kṛtsnāyata%}
{%(˚na-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. stretched out to its full
length.
<LEND>

<L>15646<pc>0249-a<k1>kftsnaka<k2>kftsnaka
{%Kṛtsnaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ all, every.
<LEND>

<L>15647<pc>0249-a<k1>kftAnta<k2>kftAnta
{#kftAnta#}¦ {%kṛtānta, kṛtārtha.%} See p. 247.
<LEND>

<L>15648<pc>0249-a<k1>kfdanta<k2>kfdanta
{#kfdanta#}¦ {%kṛd-anta.%} See under 1. {%kṛt,%} p. 246.
<LEND>

<L>15649<pc>0249-a<k1>kfdara<k2>kfdara
{#kfdara#}¦ {%kṛdara, am,%} n., Ved. a store-room,
a vessel; the lap; ({%as%}), m. a granary, a cupboard &c.
for holding corn, grain, &c.
<LEND>

<L>15650<pc>0249-a<k1>kfDu<k2>kfDu
{#kfDu#}¦ {%kṛdhu, us, us, u,%} or {%kṛdhuka, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. shortened, mutilated, small, deficient. {%—Kṛdhu-%}
{%karṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having short ears (as a sort
of imp); hearing badly.
<LEND>

<L>15651<pc>0249-a<k1>kfntatra<k2>kfntatra
{#kfntatra#}¦ {%kṛntatra.%} See under 2. {%kṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>15652<pc>0249-a<k1>kfp<k2>kfp<h>1
{#kfp#} 1¦. {%kṛp, p,%} f., Ved. (occurring only in
inst.), beautiful appearance, beauty, splendor. {%—Kṛpa-%}
{%nīḷa%} (for {%kṛpā-˚%}), {%as, ā, am,%} Ved. one whose home is
splendor, dwelling in splendor, epithet of Agni; (Sāy.)
the support of sacred rites.
<LEND>

<L>15653<pc>0249-a<k1>kfp<k2>kfp<h>2
{#kfp#} 2¦. {%kṛp%} (connected with rt. {%krap%}),
cl. 1. A. {%karpate,%} to have pity or mercy
on; cl. 10. P. {%kṛpayati%} or {%kṛpāpayati, -yitum,%}
to be weak; to pity; to mourn, grieve, lament;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔλπω</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>15654<pc>0249-a<k1>kfpa<k2>kfpa
{%Kṛpa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man described in the Veda
as a friend of Indra; ({%as%}), m. and ({%ī%}), f., N. of the
son and daughter of the sage Śaradvat, (he performed
severe penance and thereby alarmed the jealous Indra,
who sent a nymph to tempt him, but without
success; however, twin sons were born to the sage
in a clump of grass ({%śara-stambe%}), who were found
by king Śāntanu and out of pity ({%kṛpā%}) taken home
and reared as his own; the daughter, Kṛpī, married
Droṇa, and had by him a son called Aśvatthāman;
the son, Kṛpa, became one of the privy council at
Hastināpur, and is sometimes called Gautama, some-
[Page0249-b+ 79]
times Śāradvata. According to the Hari-vaṃśa and
Viṣṇu-Purāṇa, Kṛpa and Kṛpī were only distant
descendants of Śaradvat. According to others, Kṛpa
= Vyāsa or = a son of Kṛṣṇa.){%—Kṛpī-pati, is,%}
m. a N. of Droṇa as husband of Kṛpī. {%—Kṛpī-%}
{%putra%} or {%kṛpī-suta, as,%} m., a N. of Aśvatthāman
as son of Kṛpī.
<LEND>

<L>15655<pc>0249-b<k1>kfpaRa<k2>kfpaRa
{%Kṛpaṇa, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} inclined to grieve;
pitiable, miserable, poor, wretched, feeble; low, vile;
miserly, stingy; avaricious; arising from pity, caused
by pity; ({%am%}), ind. miserably; ({%as%}), m. a worm; ({%am%}),
n. wretchedness, misery; {%sa-kṛpaṇam,%} miserably,
pitiably; [cf. {%kārpaṇya.%}] {%—Kṛpaṇa-kāśin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} Ved. looking suppliantly, looking desirous; ex-
pressing a desire (?). {%—Kṛpaṇa-tva, am,%} n. misery;
wretchedness; miserable condition. {%—Kṛpaṇa-dhī,%}
{%īs, īs, i,%} little-minded. {%—Kṛpaṇa-nindā,%} f. ‘censure
of the miser,’ title of a chapter of the Sārṅgadhara
Paddhati. {%—Kṛpaṇa-buddhi, is, is, i,%} little-minded.
{%—Kṛpaṇa-vatsala, as, ā, am,%} kind to the poor.
<LEND>

<L>15656<pc>0249-b<k1>kfpaRAya<k2>kfpaRAya
{%Kṛpaṇāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kṛpaṇāyate,%} to feel
miserable.
<LEND>

<L>15657<pc>0249-b<k1>kfpaRin<k2>kfpaRin
{%Kṛpaṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ miserable, one who is in
misery.
<LEND>

<L>15658<pc>0249-b<k1>kfpaRya<k2>kfpaRya
{%Kṛpaṇya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kṛpaṇyati,%} to wish, desire,
be a suppliant for anything, pray for, obtain by
entreaties; (in A. also {%kṛpaṇate.%})
<LEND>

<L>15659<pc>0249-b<k1>kfpaRyu<k2>kfpaRyu
{%Kṛpaṇyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. one who praises.
<LEND>

<L>15660<pc>0249-b<k1>kfpA<k2>kfpA
{%Kṛpā,%}¦ f. pity, tenderness, compassion; N. of a
river. {%—Kṛpā-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. a look with favour, a
kind look. {%—Kṛpādvaita (˚pā-ad˚), as,%} m. one
of the Buddhas or deified saints of the Buddhists.
{%—Kṛpānvita (˚pā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} or {%kṛpā-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} or {%kṛpālu, us, us, u,%} or {%kṛpā-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} pitiful, merciful, compassionate, tender. {%—Kṛpā-%}
{%miśra, as,%} m., N. of a son of Deva-miśra. {%—Kṛpā-%}
{%hīna, as, ā, am,%} pitiless, unfeeling, unkind.
<LEND>

<L>15661<pc>0249-b<k1>kfpAya<k2>kfpAya
{%Kṛpāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%kṛpāyate, -yitum,%} to mourn,
grieve, lament, have pity.
<LEND>

<L>15662<pc>0249-b<k1>kfpARa<k2>kfpARa
{#kfpARa#}¦ {%kṛpāṇa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kṛp%} for rt. {%kḷp?%}), a sword, a scymitar, a sacrificial
knife; ({%ī%}), f. a pair of shears or scissors; a dagger.
<LEND>

<L>15663<pc>0249-b<k1>kfpARaka<k2>kfpARaka
{%Kṛpāṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a sword, a scymitar; ({%ikā%}),
f. a dagger, a knife.
<LEND>

<L>15664<pc>0249-b<k1>kfpIwa<k2>kfpIwa
{#kfpIwa#}¦ {%kṛpīṭa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 2.
{%kṛp%}), underwood, wood, forest; fire-wood, wood,
timber; water; the belly. {%—Kṛpīṭa-pāla, as,%} m.
a rudder or large oar used as one; the ocean; air,
wind. {%—Kṛpīṭa-yoni, is,%} m. fire.
<LEND>

<L>15665<pc>0249-b<k1>kfmi<k2>kfmi
{#kfmi#}¦ {%kṛmi, is,%} or {%krimi, is,%} m. (said to be
fr. rt. {%kram;%} cf. {%krami%}), a worm, an insect in
general; a spider; an ant; lac, the red dye caused
by insects; N. of a son of Uśīnara; N. of an Asura,
the brother of Rāvaṇa; N. of a Nāga-rāja; ({%is%}), f.,
N. of the wife of Uśīnara and mother of Kṛmi;
[cf. Lith. <nsi>kirminis, kirmele;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>cervj;</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>cruimh;</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>pryv;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vaurms,</nsi>
Them. <nsi>vaurmi</nsi> for <nsi>hvaurmi;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>vermi-s</nsi> for
<nsi>quermi-s;</nsi> perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">ἕλμινς</lang> for <lang n="greek">ἕρμινς.</lang>] {%—Kṛ-%}
{%mi-kaṇṭaka, am,%} n. several plants efficacious in
destroying worms, Ficus Glomerata; another plant,
{%= citrā%} or {%citrāṅga;%} another plant, {%= viḍaṅga.%}
{%—Kṛmi-kara, as,%} m. a kind of poisonous insect.
{%—Kṛmi-karṇa%} or {%kṛmi-karṇaka, as,%} m. worms
or lice generated in the external ear. {%—Kṛmi-kośa%}
or {%kṛmi-koṣa, as,%} m. the cocoon of a silkworm.
{%—Kṛmikośottha (˚śa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} silk, silken.
{%—Kṛmi-granthi, is,%} m. a disease of the eyes,
caused by insects generated at the roots of the eye-
lashes. {%—Kṛmi-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%} destroying worms;
({%ī%}), m. a medicinal drug, {%= viḍaṅga%} (?). {%—Kṛmi-%}
{%ghna, as, ī, am,%} vermifuge, anthelmintic; ({%as%}), m.
a shrub used in medicine as a vermifuge, commonly
Bīreng, Erycibe Paniculata, see {%viḍaṅga;%} the onion;
the root of the jujube; the marking nut plant; ({%ī%}),
f. turmeric. {%—Kṛmi-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by
worms; ({%ā%}), f. lac, a red dye produced by an insect,
commonly called Lākṣā; ({%am%}), n. Agallochum.
{%—Kṛmi-jagdha, am,%} n. Agallochum. {%—Kṛmi- %}
[Page0249-c+ 76]
{%jalaja, as,%} m. a shell-fish, an animal living in a shell.
{%—Kṛmi-dantaka, as,%} m. tooth-ache with decay of
the teeth. {%—Kṛmi-parvata, as,%} m. an ant-hill.
{%—Kṛmi-bhakṣa, as,%} m., N. of a hell. {%—Kṛmi-%}
{%bhojana, as, ā, am,%} one whose food consists of worms;
({%as%}), m., N. of a hell. {%—Kṛmi-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
affected or covered with worms. {%—Kṛmi-ripu, us,%} m.
an anthelmintic plant, {%= viḍaṅga%}. {%—Kṛmi-roga, as,%}
m. disease caused by worms. {%—Kṛmi-varṇa, as%} or
{%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), red cloth. {%—Kṛmi-vāriruha,%}
{%as,%} m. a fish living in a shell. {%—Kṛmi-vṛkṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of plant, Koṣāmra. {%—Kṛmi-śaṅkha,%}
{%as,%} m. the fish living in the conch. {%—Kṛmi-śatru,%}
{%us,%} m. an anthelmintic plant, Erythrina Fulgens, {%=%}
{%viḍaṅga%}. {%—Kṛmi-śātrava, as,%} m. the plant Acacia
Farnesiana. {%—Kṛmi-śukti, is,%} f. a bivalve shell, a
muscle; the animal living in a bivalve shell; an
oyster. {%—Kṛmi-śaila%} or {%kṛmi-śailaka, as,%} m. an
ant or mole-hill; [cf. {%kṛmi-parvata.%}] {%—Kṛmi-%}
{%sarārī,%} f. a kind of poisonous insect. {%—Kṛmi-sena,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Yakṣa. {%—Kṛmi-hantṛ, tā, trī,%}
{%tṛ,%} or {%kṛmi-hara, as, ī, am,%} anthelmintic, vermi-
fuge. {%—Kṛmi-hā,%} f. an anthelmintic plant, {%= vi-%}
{%ḍaṅga%}. {%—Kṛmīśa (˚mi-īśa), as,%} m., N. of a hell.
<LEND>

<L>15666<pc>0249-c<k1>kfmika<k2>kfmika
{%Kṛmika, as,%}¦ m. a small worm.
<LEND>

<L>15667<pc>0249-c<k1>kfmiRa<k2>kfmiRa
{%Kṛmiṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having worms.
<LEND>

<L>15668<pc>0249-c<k1>kfmin<k2>kfmin
{%Kṛmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ affected with worms.
<LEND>

<L>15669<pc>0249-c<k1>kfmila<k2>kfmila
{%Kṛmila, as, ā, am,%}¦ having worms, wormy; ({%ā%}),
f. a fruitful woman, one bearing many children; N.
of a town, called after Kṛmi. {%—Kṛmilāśva (˚la-%}
{%aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of Bāhyāśva.
<LEND>

<L>15670<pc>0249-c<k1>kfmilikA<k2>kfmilikA
{%Kṛmilikā,%}¦ f. linen cloth dyed with red colour.
<LEND>

<L>15671<pc>0249-c<k1>kfmIlaka<k2>kfmIlaka
{%Kṛmīlaka, as,%}¦ m. a white sort of kidney-bean;
[cf. {%vana-mudga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15672<pc>0249-c<k1>kfmuka<k2>kfmuka
{#kfmuka#}¦ {%kṛmuka, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of tree;
[cf. {%kārmuka%} and {%kramuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15673<pc>0249-c<k1>kfv<k2>kfv
{#kfv#}¦ {%kṛv%} = 1. {%kṛ,%} cl. 5. {%kṛṇoti.%} See p. 246.
<LEND>

<L>15674<pc>0249-c<k1>kfvi<k2>kfvi
{#kfvi#}¦ {%kṛvi, is,%} m. (said to be fr. 1. {%kṛ%}), a
loom (?); [cf. {%krivi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15675<pc>0249-c<k1>kfS<k2>kfS
{#kfS#}¦ {%kṛś,%} cl. 4. P. {%kṛśyati, cakarśa,%}
{%karśiṣyati, akṛśat, karśitum,%} to be-
come lean or thin, to become emaciated or feeble;
to wane (as the moon): Caus. {%karśayati, -yitum,%}
to make thin or lean, to attenuate, emaciate, to keep
short of food; [cf. perhaps Lat. <nsi>parco, parcus,</nsi>
<nsi>parum, parvus, paucus;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">παῦρος</lang> Goth.
<nsi>favai;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>few.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>15676<pc>0249-c<k1>kfSa<k2>kfSa
{%Kṛśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ lean, emaciated, thin, spare,
weak, feeble; small, little, minute, insignificant,
poor; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man, also of a Nāga; N.
of a Ṛṣi, author of a Ṛg-veda hymn; [cf. Hib.
<nsi>creas,</nsi> ‘narrow, straight;’ <nsi>caile,</nsi> ‘narrowness.’]
{%—Kṛśa-gu, us, us, u,%} Ved. one who has lean
cattle. {%—Kṛśa-tā,%} f. or {%kṛśa-tva, am,%} n. leanness,
thinness. {%—Kṛśa-śākha, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%parpaṭa%}. {%—Kṛśākṣa (˚śa-ak˚), as,%} m., a spider.
{%—Kṛśāṅga (˚śa-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} emaciate, spare,
thin; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. a woman
with a slender shape; a particular plant, commonly
called Priyaṅgu. {%—Kṛśāśva (˚śa-aś˚), as,%} m., N.
of several persons; N. of an author of directions to
players and dancers. {%—Kṛśāśvin, ī,%} m. a pupil of
Kṛśāśva, a dancer, an actor, a tumbler. {%—Kṛśo-%}
{%dara (˚śa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} thin-waisted.
<LEND>

<L>15677<pc>0249-c<k1>kfSikA<k2>kfSikA
{%Kṛśikā,%}¦ f. the plant Salvinia Cucculata.
<LEND>

<L>15678<pc>0249-c<k1>kfSana<k2>kfSana
{#kfSana#}¦ {%kṛśana, am,%} n., Ved. a pearl, mother-
of-pearl; gold; form, shape; ({%as, ā, am%}), yielding
or containing pearls; [cf. {%ūrdhva-kṛśana%} and
{%kārśana.%}] {%—Kṛśanā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. deco-
rated with pearls.
<LEND>

<L>15679<pc>0249-c<k1>kfSanin<k2>kfSanin
{%Kṛśanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. decorated with pearls.
<LEND>

<L>15680<pc>0249-c<k1>kfSara<k2>kfSara
{#kfSara#}¦ {%kṛśara, as, ā,%} m. f. a dish composed
of milk, sesamum, and rice; rice and peas boiled
together with a few spices, commonly called Khi-
chree; [cf. {%kṛsara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15681<pc>0249-c<k1>kfSalA<k2>kfSalA
{#kfSalA#}¦ {%kṛśalā,%} f. the hair of the head.
<LEND>
[Page0250-a+ 78]

<L>15682<pc>0250-a<k1>kfSAku<k2>kfSAku
{#kfSAku#}¦ {%kṛśāku, us,%} m. heating, grieving;
(a various reading for {%kṛśānu.%})
<LEND>

<L>15683<pc>0250-a<k1>kfSAnu<k2>kfSAnu
{#kfSAnu#}¦ {%kṛśānu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kṛś%} for
{%kṛṣ ?%}), Ved. ‘bending the bow,’ an epithet applied
to a good archer, (generally connected with {%astṛ,%}
‘an archer,’ though sometimes used alone: some
regard Kṛśānu as a divine being, either similar in
character to Rudra or this god himself; he is armed
with the lightning and defends the ‘heavenly’ Soma
from the hawk, who tries to steal and bear it from
heaven to earth); a N. of Agni or fire; fire in
general; N. of a plant, Plumbago Zeylanica; N. of
an archer; N. of a Gandharva. {%—Kṛśānu-retas,%}
{%ās,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>15684<pc>0250-a<k1>kfSAnuka<k2>kfSAnuka
{%Kṛśānuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ containing the word Kṛ-
śānu, as an Anuvāka or Adhyāya.
<LEND>

<L>15685<pc>0250-a<k1>kfz<k2>kfz
{#kfz#}¦ {%kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%karṣati, cakarṣa,%}
{%karkṣyati%} and {%krakṣyati, akṛkṣat,%}
{%akārkṣīt%} and {%akrākṣīt, karṣṭum%} and {%kraṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to draw, attract, draw to one's self, drag, pull,
pull to and fro, drag away, tear; to lead or conduct
(as an army); to bend (a bow); to draw into one's
power, become master of, overpower; to obtain; to
take away anything from any one (with two acc., e. g.
{%akarṣat taṃ rājyam,%} he deprived him of the
kingdom); cl. 6. P. A. {%kṛṣati, -te,%} to draw or
make furrows, to plough: Caus. {%karṣayati, -yitum,%}
to draw, to draw out, tear up, tear out; extract; to
drag to and fro, cause pain, torture, torment; to
draw or make furrows, to plough: Desid. {%cikṛkṣati,%}
{%-te:%} Intens. {%carīkṛṣyate, carīkarṣṭi%} or {%carī-%}
{%kraṣṭi;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>karszu, pleszau;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>ceshu;</nsi>
Lat. <nsi>verro, vello;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κόρος, ἕλκω</lang> ? Goth. <nsi>falh.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>15686<pc>0250-a<k1>karza<k2>karza
{%Karṣa, karṣaṇa,%}¦ &c. See s. v. at p. 210.
<LEND>

<L>15687<pc>0250-a<k1>kfzaka<k2>kfzaka
{%Kṛṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ attractive, drawing, who or
what draws furrows or ploughs; ({%as%}), m. a plough-
man, husbandman, farmer; a ploughshare; an ox.
<LEND>

<L>15688<pc>0250-a<k1>kfzARa<k2>kfzARa
{%Kṛṣāṇa, as,%}¦ m. a ploughman, a husbandman.
<LEND>

<L>15689<pc>0250-a<k1>kfzi<k2>kfzi
{%Kṛṣi, is,%}¦ f. ploughing, cultivation of the soil;
agriculture, husbandry; the cultivation of the soil
personified. {%—Kṛṣi-karman, a,%} n. agriculture,
husbandry. {%—Kṛṣi-jīvin, ī,%} m. a cultivator, a
farmer. {%—Kṛṣi-phala, am,%} n. agricultural produce
or profit. {%—Kṛṣi-sevā,%} f. agriculture.
<LEND>

<L>15690<pc>0250-a<k1>kfzika<k2>kfzika
{%Kṛṣika, as,%}¦ m. a cultivator of the soil, a
husbandman; the ploughshare.
<LEND>

<L>15691<pc>0250-a<k1>kfzIvala<k2>kfzIvala
{%Kṛṣīvala, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who lives by hus-
bandry or agriculture; ({%as%}), m. a husbandman.
<LEND>

<L>15692<pc>0250-a<k1>kfzwa<k2>kfzwa
{%Kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ ploughed or tilled, a field
&c. {%—Kṛṣṭa-ja, as, ā, am,%} grown in cultivated
ground, cultivated. {%—Kṛṣṭa-pacya, as, ā, am,%}
ripening in cultivated ground, sown or ripening after
ploughing, as rice &c.; cultivated. {%—Kṛṣṭa-pākya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ripening on cultivated ground; sown or
ripening after ploughing. {%—Kṛṣṭa-phala, am,%} n.
the product of a harvest. {%—Kṛṣṭa-rādhi, is, is, i,%}
Ved. successful in agriculture. {%—Kṛṣṭopta (˚ṭa-%}
{%up˚), as, ā, am,%} sown on cultivated ground.
<LEND>

<L>15693<pc>0250-a<k1>kfzwi<k2>kfzwi
{%Kṛṣṭi, ayas,%}¦ f. pl., Ved. men, races of men,
sometimes with the epithet {%māṇuṣīs;%} (originally
the word may have meant cultivated ground, then an
inhabited land, next its inhabitants, and lastly any
race of men; Indra and Agni have the N. {%rājā%}
{%kṛṣṭīnām;%} and {%pañca kṛṣṭayas,%} ‘the five
races,’ comprehends the whole human race, not
only the Āryan tribes); according to native lexico-
graphers the word means also ploughing, cultivating
the soil; attracting, drawing; and ({%is%}), m. a teacher,
a learned man or Paṇḍit. {%—Kṛṣṭi-prā, ās, ās, am,%}
Ved. pervading the human race. {%—Kṛṣṭi-han, hā,%}
{%ghnī, ha,%} Ved. subduing nations. {%—Kṛṣṭy-ojas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. overpowering men.
<LEND>

<L>15694<pc>0250-a<k1>kfzya<k2>kfzya
{%Kṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be ploughed.
<LEND>

<L>15695<pc>0250-a<k1>krazwavya<k2>krazwavya
{%Kraṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be drawn or drawn out.
<LEND>

<L>15696<pc>0250-a<k1>kfzARu<k2>kfzARu
{#kfzARu#}¦ {%kṛṣāṇu, us,%} m. a N. of fire; (a
wrong reading for {%kṛśānu.%})
<LEND>

<L>15697<pc>0250-a<k1>kfzkara<k2>kfzkara
{#kfzkara#}¦ {%kṛṣkara, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva; [cf. {%kṛkara.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0250-b+ 80]

<L>15698<pc>0250-b<k1>kfzRa<k2>kfzRa<h>1
{#kfzRa#} 1¦. {%kṛṣṇa, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr.
rt. {%kṛṣ%}), black, dark, dark-blue (opposed to {%śveta,%}
{%śukla, rohita,%} and {%aruṇa%}); wicked, evil; ({%as%}), m.
black, the colour, or dark-blue, which is often con-
founded with black by the Hindūs; the black ante-
lope; a kind of beast of prey (described in the Veda
as feeding on carrion and dead corpses); a crow; the
Indian cuckoo or Kokila; the plant Carissa Carandas;
the dark half of the lunar month from full to new
moon [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-pakṣa%} below]; the fourth or
Kali-yuga; N. of one of the poets of the Ṛg-veda
descended from Aṅgiras; N. of a celebrated Avatār
of the god Viṣṇu, or sometimes identified with
Viṣṇu himself, as distinct from his ten Avatārs
or incarnations. (In the earlier legends he ap-
pears as a great hero and teacher; in the more
recent he is deified, and is often represented as
a young and amorous shepherd with flowing hair
and a flute in his hand. The following are a few
particulars of his birth and history as related in the
Purāṇas &c.: Vasu-deva, who was a descendant of Yadu
and Yayāti, had two wives, Rohiṇī and Devakī.
The latter had eight sons, of whom the eighth was
Kṛṣṇa. Kaṃsa, king of Mathurā and cousin of
Devakī, was informed by a prediction that one of
these sons would kill him. He therefore kept Vasu-
deva and his wife in confinement, and slew their first
six children. The seventh was Bala-rāma, who was
saved by being abstracted from the womb of Devakī
and transferred to that of Rohiṇī. The eighth was
Kṛṣṇa, who was born with black skin and a peculiar
mark on his breast. His father Vasu-deva managed
to escape from Mathurā with the child, and favoured
by the gods found a herdsman named Nanda, whose
wife Yaśodā had just been delivered of a son, which
Vasu-deva conveyed to Devakī, after substituting his
own in its place. Nanda with his wife Yaśodā took
the infant Kṛṣṇa and settled first in Gokula or
Vraja, and afterwards in Vṛndāvana, where Kṛṣṇa
and Bala-rāma grew up together, roaming in the
woods and joining in the sports of the herdsmen's
sons. Kṛṣṇa as a youth contested the sovereignty
of Indra, and was victorious over that god, who
descended from heaven to praise Kṛṣṇa, and made
him lord over the cattle. Kṛṣṇa is described as
sporting constantly with the Gopīs or shepherdesses,
of whom a thousand became his wives, though only
eight are specified, Rādhā being the favourite. Kṛṣṇa
built and fortified a city called Dvāraka in Gujarāt,
and thither transported the inhabitants of Mathurā
after killing Kaṃsa. Kṛṣṇa had various wives be-
sides the Gopīs, and by Rukmiṇī had a son Pra-
dyumna, who is usually identified with Kāma-deva;
with Jainas, Kṛṣṇa is one of the nine black Vasu-devas;
with Buddhists he is the chief of the black demons,
who are the enemies of Buddha and the white
demons); N. of a king of the Nāgas; N. of an
Asura or demon; N. of Arjuna, the most renowned
of the Pāṇḍu princes (so named apparently from his
colour as a child, see Mahā-bh. Virāṭa-parva 1389;
the dual {%kṛṣṇau%} = Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna); N. of
Vyāsa; of Kṛṣṇa Hārīta; of a son of Śuka by
Pīvarī, a teacher of the Yoga; N. of a pupil of
Bharadvāja; of Dāśārha; of a son of Havirdhāna;
of a son of Arjuna; of an adopted son of Asamañjas;
of a chief of the Andhras; N. of the author of a com-
mentary on the Mahā-bhārata; N. of a poet; N. of the
author of a commentary on the Dāya-bhāga; N. of the
son of Keśavārka and grandson of Jayāditya; N. of the
father of Tānabhaṭṭa and uncle of Raṅganātha; N.
of the father of Dāmodara and uncle of Malhaṇa; N.
of the father of Prabhūjīka and uncle of Vidyādhara;
N. of the father of Madana; N. of the grammarian
Rāma-candra; N. of the son of Vāruṇendra and
father of Lakṣmaṇa; N. of the father of Hīrabhaṭṭa,
author of the commentary called Caraka-bhāṣya, and
of the work Sāhitya-sudhāsamudra; N. of a hell; ({%ā%}),
f. a kind of poisonous insect; several plants, as Piper
Longum, the Indigo plant; a grape; a kind of
perfume [cf. {%parpaṭī%}]; an epithet of Draupadī;
[Page0250-c+ 81]
an epithet of Durgā; N. of one of the seven tongues
of fire; N. of the river Kistna; ({%ī%}), f. night; ({%am%}), n.
blackness, darkness; the black part of the eye; a kind
of demon or spirit of darkness; black pepper; black
Agallochum; iron; lead; antimony; blue vitriol;
[cf. {%kārṣṇa,%} &c.; cf. also Russ. <nsi>cernyi,</nsi> ‘black.’]
{%—Kṛṣṇa-kanda, am,%} n. the red lotus, Nymphæa
Rubra. {%—Kṛṣṇa-karkaṭaka, as,%} m. a kind of
black crab. {%—Kṛṣṇa-karṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. black-
eared. {%—Kṛṣṇakarṇāmṛta (˚ṇa-am˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a poem by Vilva-maṅgala. {%—Kṛṣṇa-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. making black; a peculiar manner of cauterising;
({%ā, ā, a%}), criminal, guilty. {%—Kṛṣṇa-kāka, as,%} m.
a raven. {%—Kṛṣṇa-kāpotī,%} f. a kind of plant; [cf.
{%śveta-kāpotī, kṛṣṇa-sarpā.%}] {%—Kṛṣṇa-kāṣṭha,%}
{%am,%} n. a black variety of Agallochum. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%keli, is,%} m. a plant, Mirabilis Jalapa. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%kohala, as,%} m. a gamester, a gambler. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%krīḍita, am,%} n., N. of a poem by Keśavārka cele-
brating the god Kṛṣṇa. {%—Kṛṣṇa-khaṇḍa,%} title
of the fourth book of the Brahmavaivarta-purāṇa.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-gaṅgā,%} f., N. of a river, {%= kṛṣṇā,%}
{%kṛṣṇa-samudbhavā, kṛṣṇaveṇyā%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%gati, is,%} m. fire (‘whose way is black’); [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-%}
{%yāma, kṛṣṇa-vartani,%} &c.] {%—Kṛṣṇa-gandhā,%}
f. the tree Hyperanthera Moringa. {%—Kṛṣṇa-gar-%}
{%bha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (clouds) having black cavities;
({%ās%}), f. pl. = according to Sāy. the pregnant wives of
the Asura Kṛṣṇa, but according to others = the
waters contained in the black cavities of the clouds;
({%as%}), m., N. of a plant, {%= kaṭphala%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain; [cf. {%kṛṣṇācala.%}]
{%—Kṛṣṇa-godhā,%} f. a kind of poisonous insect.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-grīva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. black-necked.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-cañcuka, as,%} m. a kind of pea; [cf. {%caṇa-%}
{%ka.%}] {%—Kṛṣṇa-caturdaśī,%} f. the fourteenth day in the
dark half of the month. {%—Kṛṣṇa-canda, as,%} m.,
N. of a copyist who lived about A. D. 1730, a son
of Rāma-candra. {%—Kṛṣṇa-candra, as,%} m., N. of a
prince of the eighteenth century. {%—Kṛṣṇacandra-%}
{%devaśarman, ā,%} m., N. of a logician who lived
about A. D. 1736. {%—Kṛṣṇa-cara, as, ā, am,%}
what formerly or in a former existence belonged to
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Kṛṣṇa-cūḍā,%} f. the plant Cæsalpinia
Pulcherrima. {%—Kṛṣṇa-cūḍikā,%} f. the plant Abrus
Precatorius. {%—Kṛṣṇa-cūrṇa, am,%} n. rust of iron,
iron filings. {%—Kṛṣṇa-cchavi, is,%} m. fire? [cf.
{%kṛṣṇārcis.%}] {%—Kṛṣṇa-jaṃhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
black-winged; (Sāy.) having a black path. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%jaṭā,%} f. a plant, Indian spikenard; [cf. {%jaṭāmāṃsī.%}]
{%—Kṛṣṇa-janma-khaṇḍa,%} N. of a part of the Brah-
mavaivarta-purāṇa. {%—Kṛṣṇa-janmāṣṭamī (˚ma-%}
{%aṣ˚),%} f. the eighth day of the second half of the month
Śrāvaṇa, the birthday of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Kṛṣṇa-jī, īs,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Kṛṣṇa-jīraka, as,%} m. Kaloñji,
a plant having a small black seed, which is used for
medical and culinary purposes, Nigella Indica. {%—Kṛ-%}
{%ṣṇa-taṇḍulā,%} f. a plant [cf. {%karṇa-sphoṭā%}], Piper
Longum. {%—Kṛṣṇa-tarkālaṅkāra (˚ka-al˚), as,%}
m., N. of a scholiast. {%—Kṛṣṇa-tā,%} f. or {%kṛṣṇa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. blackness. {%—Kṛṣṇa-tāmra, am,%} n. a kind
of sandal-wood. {%—Kṛṣṇa-tāra, as,%} m. a deer, an
antelope (‘black-eyed’). {%—Kṛṣṇa-tila, as,%} m.
black sesamum. {%—Kṛṣṇa-tīrtha, as,%} m., N. of a
teacher of Rāma-tīrtha. {%—Kṛṣṇa-tuṇḍa, as,%} m. a
kind of poisonous insect. {%—Kṛṣṇa-trivṛtā,%} f.,
N. of a plant, a kind of Ipomœa, black Teöri.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-datta, as,%} m., N. of the author of a
work on music. {%—Kṛṣṇa-danta, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing black teeth; ({%ā%}), f. the tree Gmelina Arborea.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-darśana, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Kṛṣṇa-daśana, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing black or discoloured teeth. {%—Kṛṣṇa-dāsa, as,%}
m., N. of the author of the poem Camatkāra-candrikā;
N. of the author of the work Caitanya-caritāmṛta;
N. of the author of the poem Preta-tattva-nirūpaṇa;
N. of a son of Harṣa, author of the Vimalanātha-
purāṇa. {%—Kṛṣṇa-deva, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Nārāyaṇa, author of the Prayoga-sāra; N. of a copy-
ist, son of Paṇḍyāpuruṣottama-deva. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%deha, as, ā, am,%} black-bodied; ({%as%}), m. a large
[Page0251-a+ 81]
black bee. {%—Kṛṣṇa-daivajña, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana, as,%} m., a N. of Vyāsa,
considered as the compiler of the Vedas and Purāṇas,
(so named because of his dark complexion and be-
cause he was brought forth by Satyavatī on a dvīpa
or island in the Ganges.) {%—Kṛṣṇa-dhattūra%} or
{%kṛṣṇa-dhattūraka, as,%} m. a dark species of
Datura or thorn-apple, Datura Fastuosa. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%nagara, am,%} n., N. of a small district called after a
town situated in it. {%—Kṛṣṇa-pakṣa, as,%} m. the
dark half of the month, the fifteen days during which
the moon is on the wane, the time from full moon
to new moon; one who stands on the side of
Kṛṣṇa, an epithet of Arjuna. {%—Kṛṣṇa-pakṣika,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king of the Nāgas. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%pakṣīya, as, ā, am,%} pertaining to the wane of the
moon. {%—Kṛṣṇa-paṇḍita, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Prabodha-candrodaya; also of a scholiast on
the Prakriyā-kaumudī. {%—Kṛṣṇa-padī,%} f. a female
with black feet. {%—Kṛṣṇa-parṇī,%} f., N. of a plant,
a kind of Ocimum; [cf. {%kāla-tulasī.%}] {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%pavi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having black fellies, an epithet
of Agni. {%—Kṛṣṇa-pāka%} or {%kṛṣṇa-pāka-phala,%}
{%as,%} m. a tree bearing a small fruit, which, when ripe,
is of a black colour, commonly Karinda or Karonda,
Carissa Carandas; also called {%kṛṣṇa-phala, pāka-%}
{%phala, pākakṛṣṇa-phala,%} &c. {%—Kṛṣṇa-pāṇ-%}
{%ḍura, as, ā, am,%} greyish white. {%—Kṛṣṇa-piṅgala,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} dark-brown in colour; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of this man; ({%ā%}),
f. an epithet of the goddess Durgā. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%piṇḍītaka, as,%} m. a dark kind of Māyana, Vangueria
Spinosa [cf. {%varāha%}]; also called {%kṛṣṇa-piṇḍīra.%}
{%—Kṛṣṇa-pippīlī,%} f. a kind of black ant. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%pilla, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Kṛṣṇapuruṣotta-%}
{%mopaniṣad (˚ma-up˚), t,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad
belonging to the Atharva-veda. {%—Kṛṣṇa-puṣpa,%}
{%as,%} m. a black kind of Datura or thorn-apple; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a plant [cf. {%priyaṅgu%}]. {%—Kṛṣṇa-prut,%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. moving in darkness; (Sāy.) taking or
imparting a black colour. {%—Kṛṣṇa-phala, as,%} m.
a fruit tree, the Karinda [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-pāka%}]; ({%ā%}),
f. the plant Vernonia Anthelmintica. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%phala-pāka, as,%} m. {%= kṛṣṇa-pāka%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%balakṣa, as, ā, am,%} black and white. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%bhakti-candrikā,%} f. title of a play. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a grammarian; N. of a poet.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-bhūma, as, ā, am,%} having a black soil,
furnished with black earth. {%—Kṛṣṇa-bhūmi, is,%} f.
a country with a dark soil, or black mould, blue clay,
&c. {%—Kṛṣṇabhūmi-jā,%} f. a species of grass, de-
scribed as a nourishing food for cattle (growing in a
black soil). {%—Kṛṣṇa-bhedī%} or {%ā,%} f. a medicinal
plant, {%= kaṭu-rohiṇī%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-bhogin, ī,%} m. a
black kind of snake. {%—Kṛṣṇa-maṇḍala, am,%} n.
the black part of the eye. {%—Kṛṣṇa-matsya, as,%}
m. ‘black-fish,’ N. of a fish. {%—Kṛṣṇa-mallikā,%} f.
or {%kṛṣṇa-māluka, as,%} m. a plant, {%= mālūka,%}
{%kṛṣṇārjaka%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-mitra, as,%} m., N. of the
son of Rāma-sevaka, grandson of Devīdatta, author
of the Mañjūṣākuñcikā. {%—Kṛṣṇa-miśra, as,%} m.
the author of the Prabodha-candrodaya. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} having a black mouth, having
black nipples; ({%as%}), m., N. of an Asura; N. of a
sect. {%—Kṛṣṇa-mudga, as,%} m. a sort of pulse,
Phaseolus, {%(vāsanta, mādhava, surāṣṭraja.)%}
{%—Kṛṣṇa-mūlī,%} f. a plant, {%= śārivā-viśeṣa.%}
{%—Kṛṣṇa-mṛga, as,%} m. the black antelope.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-mṛttika, as, ā, am,%} having black
soil; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a Grāma. {%—Kṛṣṇa-mṛd, t,%}
f. black soil; a country with soil of a dark colour.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-yajurveda, as,%} m. the Black Yajur-
veda. {%—Kṛṣṇa-yajurvedīya, as, ā, am,%} be-
longing to the Black Yajur-veda. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%yāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a black path;
an epithet of Agni. {%—Kṛṣṇa-yoni, is, is, i,%}
Ved. {%= kṛṣṇa-garbha,%} q. v. {%—Kṛṣṇa-rakta.%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of a dark-red colour. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%ruhā,%} f. a plant, {%= jatukā%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-rūpya, as,%}
{%ā, am, = kṛṣṇa-cara,%} q. v. {%—Kṛṣṇa-lavaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of black salt; a factitious salt, either
[Page0251-b+ 81]
that prepared by evaporation from saline soil, or the
medicinal kind, called Bit Loben or Bit Noben, a
muriate of soda with a portion of sulphur and iron.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-līlā-taraṅgiṇī,%} f. title of a poem by
Nārāyaṇa-tīrtha. {%—Kṛṣṇa-loha, am,%} n. the load-
stone. {%—Kṛṣṇa-lohita, as, ā, am,%} dark-red, of a
purple colour. {%—Kṛṣṇa-vaktra, as,%} m. the black-
faced monkey. {%—Kṛṣṇa-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} of a
black colour, black or dark-blue; ({%am%}), n. the colour
black. {%—Kṛṣṇa-vartani, is, is, i,%} Ved. having a
black path, epithet of Agni. {%—Kṛṣṇa-vartman,%}
{%ā,%} m. fire (‘whose way is black’); the marking nut
plant, Plumbago Zeylanica; an epithet of Rāhu or
the personified ascending node; a man of evil con-
duct, a low man, an outcast, a profligate, a black-
guard. {%—Kṛṣṇa-varvaraka, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
Varvara. {%—Kṛṣṇa-vallikā,%} f., N. of a plant, =
{%jatukā%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-vallī,%} f. a plant, a dark kind
of Basil, Ocymum Pilosum; a kind of Śārivā.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-vānara, as,%} m. a black kind of monkey.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-vinnā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%viṣāṇā,%} f., Ved. the horns of the black antelope,
whose inner sides are covered with dark hair.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-vīja, as,%} m. a red variety of the Mo-
ringa plant, Rakta-śigru; ({%am%}), n. a water melon.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-vṛntā,%} f. the trumpet flower, Bignonia
Suaveolens; a leguminous plant, Glycine Debilis.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-vṛntikā,%} f. the tree Gmelina Arborea;
see {%gambhīrā%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-veṇā%} or {%ī,%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Kṛṣṇa-vyathis, is, is, is,%} Ved. whose path
is black (?), an epithet of Agni. {%—Kṛṣṇa-vrīhi,%}
{%is,%} m. a black sort of rice. {%—Kṛṣṇa-śakuni, is,%}
m. a crow. {%—Kṛṣṇa-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of an
author. {%—Kṛṣṇa-śāra, as,%} m. {%= kṛṣṇa-sāra,%}
the spotted antelope. {%—Kṛṣṇa-śāli, is,%} m. a sort
of rice of a dark colour. {%—Kṛṣṇa-śigru, us,%} m. a
kind of Moringa; [cf. {%śobhāñjana.%}] {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%śimbikā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= kākāṇḍī, = mahā-%}
{%jyotiṣmatī%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-śimbī,%} f. a sort of bean,
Dolichus Virosus. {%—Kṛṣṇa-śṛṅga, as,%} m. a
buffalo with black horns. {%—Kṛṣṇa-śrita%} or {%kṛṣ-%}
{%ṇaṃ-śrita, as, ā, am,%} worshipping or devoted to
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Kṛṣṇa-sakha, as,%} m. a friend or fol-
lower of Kṛṣṇa, especially an epithet of Arjuna;
({%ī%}), f. cummin seed. {%—Kṛṣṇa-samudbhavā,%} f.,
N. of a river, {%= kṛṣṇā, kṛṣṇa-gaṅgā, kṛṣṇa-%}
{%veṇyā%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-saras, as,%} n., N. of a lake.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-sarpa, as,%} m. a very poisonous snake,
Cobra de Capello, Colubra Naga; ({%ā%}), f. a plant, =
{%kṛṣṇa-kāpotī%}. {%—Kṛṣṇa-sarṣapa, as,%} m. black
mustard. {%—Kṛṣṇa-sāra, as, ā, am,%} spotted black;
({%as%}), m. with and without {%mṛga,%} the spotted ante-
lope; several plants, a kind of Euphorbia; the plant
Dalbergia Sisoo; another plant, Acacia Catechu;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of Euphorbia; the plant Dalbergia
Sisoo. {%—Kṛṣṇa-sāraṅga, as, ā, am,%} spotted
black; ({%as%}), m. the spotted antelope. {%—Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%sārathi, is,%} m. having Kṛṣṇa for a charioteer, an
epithet of Arjuna; the tree Terminalia Arjuna.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-sārvabhauma, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
{%—Kṛṣṇa-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
work Trepanakriya-kathā. {%—Kṛṣṇa-sīta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. drawing black furrows; (Sāy) having a black
path (as an epithet of fire). {%—Kṛṣṇa-sundara, as,%}
m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of this
man. {%—Kṛṣṇa-skandha, as,%} m. a tree which bears
black blossoms, the Tamāla tree; [cf. {%kāla-skandha.%}]
{%—Kṛṣṇa-svasṛ, sā,%} f. the sister of Kṛṣṇa,
an epithet of Durgā. {%—Kṛṣṇāgata (˚ṇa-āg˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} devoted to Kṛṣṇa. {%—Kṛṣṇāguru (˚ṇa-%}
{%ag˚), u,%} n. a black variety of Agallochum or Aloe
wood. {%—Kṛṣṇācala (˚ṇa-ac˚), as,%} m. an epi-
thet of the mountain Raivata, part of the western
portion of the Vindhya chain; it is also one of the
nine principal mountains that separate the nine di-
visions or Varṣas of the known world. {%—Kṛṣṇā-%}
{%jina (˚ṇa-aj˚), am,%} n., Ved. the skin of the black
antelope; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man (‘covered with the
skin of a black antelope’); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descend-
ants of this man. {%—Kṛṣṇājinin, ī, inī, i,%} covered
with the skin of a black antelope. {%—Kṛṣṇāñjanī,%}
[Page0251-c+ 77]
f., N. of a plant, {%= kālāñjanī%}. {%—Kṛṣṇāñji (˚ṇa-%}
{%añ˚), is, is, i,%} Ved. having black marks. {%—Kṛṣṇā-%}
{%treya (˚ṇa-āt˚), as,%} m., N. of a Muni. {%—Kṛṣṇā-%}
{%dhvan (˚ṇa-adh˚), ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having a black
path (an epithet of Agni). {%—Kṛṣṇā-nadī,%} f., N.
of a river, probably the Kistna in the Dekhan.
{%—Kṛṣṇānanda (˚ṇa-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a
scholiast; N. of the author of the Tantra-sāra.
{%—Kṛṣṇābhā (˚ṇa-ābhā),%} f., N. of a plant, =
{%kālāñjanī%}. {%—Kṛṣṇāmiṣa (˚ṇa-ām˚), am,%} n.
iron; (probably only a various reading for {%kṛṣṇā-%}
{%yasa.%}) {%—Kṛṣṇāyas, as,%} or {%kṛṣṇāyasa (˚ṇa-ay˚),%}
{%am,%} n. iron, crude or black iron. {%—Kṛṣṇārcis%}
{%(˚ṇa-ar˚), is,%} m. fire; [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-cchavi.%}] {%—Kṛṣ-%}
{%ṇārjaka (˚ṇa-ar˚), as,%} m. a black species of Basil,
Ocimum Sanctum. {%—Kṛṣṇālaṅkāra (˚ṇa-al˚), as,%}
m. title of a commentary. {%—Kṛṣṇālu (˚ṇa-ālu),%}
{%us,%} m. a kind of ebony. {%—Kṛṣṇāvatāra (˚ṇa-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. an Avatār of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Kṛṣṇā-%}
{%vadāta, as, ā, am,%} black and white. {%—Kṛṣṇā-%}
{%vāsa (˚ṇa-āv˚), as,%} m. the holy fig tree, Ficus
Religiosa, (the abode of Kṛṣṇa.) {%—Kṛṣṇāśrita%}
{%(˚ṇa-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} devoted to or the votary of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Kṛṣṇekṣu (˚ṇa-ik˚), us,%} m. a sort of
sugar-cane. {%—Kṛṣṇaita (˚ṇa-eta), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
spotted black. {%—Kṛṣṇodara (˚ṇa-ud˚), as,%} m. a
kind of snake. {%—Kṛṣṇodumbarikā (˚ṇa-ud˚),%} f.
Ficus Oppositifolia; [cf. {%kākodumbara.%}] {%—Kṛṣṇo-%}
{%paniṣad (˚ṇa-up˚), t,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad in
praise of the god Kṛṣṇa, being a part of the Gopālo-
paniṣad. {%—Kṛṣṇoraga (˚ṇa-ur˚), as,%} m. a kind
of black snake. {%—Kṛṣṇo 'syākhareṣṭhaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} containing the words {%kṛṣṇo'syākhareṣṭhaḥ%}
(as an Adhyāya or Anuvāka).
<LEND>

<L>15699<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRa<k2>kfzRa<h>2
2. {%kṛṣṇa,%}¦ nom. P. {%kṛṣṇati,%} to behave or act
like Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>15700<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRaka<k2>kfzRaka
{%Kṛṣṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ black, blackish; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of plant, {%= kṛṣṇa-taṇḍulā.%}
<LEND>

<L>15701<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRala<k2>kfzRala
{%Kṛṣṇala, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the black berry of the
plant Abrus Precatorius, used as a weight (the average
weight being between one and two grains); a coin
of about the same weight; ({%ā%}), f. a shrub bearing a
small black and red berry, Abrus Precatorius.
<LEND>

<L>15702<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRalaka<k2>kfzRalaka
{%Kṛṣṇalaka, as,%}¦ m. the black berry of the plant
Abrus Precatorius or a coin of about the same
weight.
<LEND>

<L>15703<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRaSa<k2>kfzRaSa
{%Kṛṣṇaśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. blackish; (Sāy.)
extremely black.
<LEND>

<L>15704<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRAya<k2>kfzRAya
{%Kṛṣṇāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%-yate, -yitum,%} to make
black; to behave like Kṛṣṇa; [cf. Russ. <nsi>cernjû.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>15705<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRikA<k2>kfzRikA
{%Kṛṣṇikā,%}¦ f. black mustard.
<LEND>

<L>15706<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRiman<k2>kfzRiman
{%Kṛṣṇiman, ā,%}¦ m. blackness.
<LEND>

<L>15707<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRiya<k2>kfzRiya
{%Kṛṣṇiya, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a man protected
by the Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>15708<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRIkaraRa<k2>kfzRIkaraRa
{%Kṛṣṇī-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. blackening, making
black. {%—Kṛṣṇī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} blackened, made
black.
<LEND>

<L>15709<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzRIBUta<k2>kfzRIBUta
{%Kṛṣṇī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ become black.
<LEND>

<L>15710<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzReya<k2>kfzReya
{%Kṛṣṇeya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15711<pc>0251-c<k1>kfzya<k2>kfzya
{#kfzya#}¦ {%kṛṣya.%} See under {%kṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>15712<pc>0251-c<k1>kfsara<k2>kfsara
{#kfsara#}¦ {%kṛsara, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%kṛ%}), a dish consisting of sesamum and grain; a
mixture of rice and peas with a few spices.
<LEND>

<L>15713<pc>0251-c<k1>kF<k2>kF<h>1
{#kF#} 1¦. {%kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%kirati, cakāra, kariṣ-%}
{%yati%} and {%karīṣyati, akārīt, karitum%} and
{%karītum,%} to pour out, scatter, throw, cast, disperse;
to strew, pour over, fill with, cover with: Caus.
{%kārayati:%} Desid. {%cikariṣati:%} Intens. {%cekīryate,%}
{%cākarti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κεράω, κεράννυμι, κίρνημι.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>15714<pc>0251-c<k1>kIrRa<k2>kIrRa
{%Kīrṇa, kīrṇi,%}¦ &c. See s. v. at p. 231.
<LEND>

<L>15715<pc>0251-c<k1>kF<k2>kF<h>2
{#kF#} 2¦. {%kṝ%} (or sometimes written {%kṛ%}), cl. 5.
and 9. P. A. {%kṛṇoti, -ṇute, kṛṇāti, -ṇīte,%}
{%cakāra, cakare%} and {%cakre, kariṣyati, -te, aka-%}
{%rīṣṭa, akariṣṭa, akīrṣṭa, karitum, karītum,%}
{%kartum,%} to hurt, injure, kill.
<LEND>

<L>15716<pc>0251-c<k1>kF<k2>kF<h>3
{#kF#} 3¦. {%kṝ,%} cl. 10. A. {%kārayate, -yitum,%} to
know, inform; (an incorrect form for {%gṝ.%})
<LEND>
[Page0252-a+ 79]

<L>15717<pc>0252-a<k1>kFt<k2>kFt
{#kFt#}¦ {%kṝt,%} cl. 10. P. (sometimes A.) {%kīrta-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%acīkṛtat%} or {%aci-%}
{%kīrtat,%} to mention, make mention of, tell, name,
call, recite, repeat, relate, declare, communicate, com-
memorate, celebrate, praise, glorify; [cf. Lat. <nsi>celeber.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>15718<pc>0252-a<k1>kIrtana<k2>kIrtana
{%Kīrtana, am,%}¦ n. mentioning, repeating, saying,
telling, celebrating, praising; ({%ā%}), f. fame, glory.
<LEND>

<L>15719<pc>0252-a<k1>kIrtanIya<k2>kIrtanIya
{%Kīrtanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be mentioned, to be
named or repeated, to be celebrated or praised.
<LEND>

<L>15720<pc>0252-a<k1>kIrtanya<k2>kIrtanya
{%Kīrtanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ deserving to be mentioned,
to be related.
<LEND>

<L>15721<pc>0252-a<k1>kIrtayat<k2>kIrtayat
{%Kīrtayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ mentioning, relating, re-
peating, celebrating, praising.
<LEND>

<L>15722<pc>0252-a<k1>kIrtita<k2>kIrtita
{%Kīrtita, as, ā, am,%}¦ said, asserted; mentioned, re-
peated; known, notorious; celebrated, praised.
<LEND>

<L>15723<pc>0252-a<k1>kIrtitavya<k2>kIrtitavya
{%Kīrtitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be mentioned or praised.
<LEND>

<L>15724<pc>0252-a<k1>kIrtenya<k2>kIrtenya
{%Kīrtenya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. deserving to be named
or praised.
<LEND>

<L>15725<pc>0252-a<k1>kIrtti<k2>kIrtti
{%Kīrtti%}¦ or {%kīrti, is,%} f. mention, making mention of,
speech, report; good report, fame, renown, glory;
Fame personified as daughter of Dakṣa and wife of
Dharma; extension, expansion, diffusion; light,
lustre; favour, approbation; sound; dirt, mud; one
of the Mātṛkās or personified divine energies of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Kīrtti-kara, as, ī, am,%} conferring fame.
{%—Kīrtti-dhara, as,%} m., N. of a copyist. {%—Kīrtti-%}
{%pratāpa-bala-sahita, as, ā, am,%} attended with
fame, majesty, and power. {%—Kīrtti-bhāj, k, k, k,%}
receiving fame, celebrated, famous; ({%k%}), m. an
epithet of Droṇācārya, the military preceptor of the
Pāṇḍus and Kurus. {%—Kīrtti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} praised,
famous, celebrated; ({%ān%}), m., N. of one of the
Viśva-devās; a son of Uttāna-pāda and Sūnṛtā; also
a son of Vasu-deva and Devakī; also a son of
Aṅgiras. {%—Kīrtti-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of
fame. {%—Kīrtti-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a prince of the
Videhas, a son of Pratīndhaka; also called {%Kṛtti-%}
{%ratha%} as son of Prasiddhaka. {%—Kīrtti-rāta, as,%} m.,
N. of a prince of the Videhas, a son of Mahāndhraka.
{%—Kīrtti-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Kīrtti-%}
{%vāsa, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Kīrtti-śeṣa, as,%} m.
death (the leaving behind of nothing but fame); [cf.
{%ālekhya-śeṣa, nāma-śeṣa, yaśaḥ-śeṣa.%}] {%—Kīrtti-%}
{%sena, as,%} m., N. of a nephew of Vāsuki, the serpent-
king.
<LEND>

<L>15726<pc>0252-a<k1>kIrtya<k2>kIrtya
{%Kīrtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised or celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>15727<pc>0252-a<k1>kxp<k2>kxp
{#kxp#}¦ {%kḷp,%} cl. 1. A. (and in Fut., Cond.,
and Aor. also P.) {%kalpate, cakḷpe, kalpi-%}
{%ṣyate%} and {%kalpsyati, akalpiṣṭa, akḷpta%} and
{%akḷpat, kalpitum%} and {%kalptum,%} to be well
ordered or regulated, to be well managed; to suc-
ceed; to bear suitable relation to anything, to cor-
respond, be adapted to, fit for, in accordance with,
suitable to; to accommodate one's self to; to be fa-
vourable to, to subserve, to effect or obtain for one's
self; to partake of, become possessed of; to fall to the
share, be shared or partaken by (with loc., e. g. {%yajño%}
{%deveṣu kalpatām,%} let the sacrifice be shared by the
gods); to become, to be; to happen, occur; to de-
clare as right, decide in favour of (?); to prepare,
arrange; to produce, cause, effect, create (with acc.):
Caus. P. A. {%kalpayati, -te,%} Aor. {%acīkḷpat,%} Ved.
{%cākḷpat, cīkḷpāti,%} &c., to set in order, arrange,
distribute, dispose; to bring into suitable connection
with, to cause any one (acc.) to partake of anything
(inst.); to help any one in obtaining (dat.); to pre-
pare, arrange, fit out, furnish with; to consider as fit;
to fix, settle; to destine or design anything for; to
declare as, consider as (with two acc., e. g. {%mātaram%}
{%enāṃ kalpayantu,%} let them consider her as their
mother); to make, execute, bring about; to frame,
form; to invent, compose (as a poem &c.); to per-
form (as a ceremony &c.); to pronounce a formula
or verse which contains the word {%kḷp;%} to cut, pare,
cut asunder (only in Prākṛt): Desid. {%cikḷpsati%}
and {%cikalpiṣate:%} Intens. {%calī˚%} or {%cali˚%} or {%calkalp-%}
{%yate, calkalpti;%} [cf. Goth. <nsi>hilpa;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>help;</nsi>
Germ. <nsi>helfe;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>gelbmi.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>15728<pc>0252-a<k1>kxpta<k2>kxpta
{%Kḷpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ arranged, prepared, ready, at
[Page0252-b+ 74]
hand, in order, complete, right, perfect; made, done;
formed, framed; caused, produced, effected, invented,
contrived, created; fixed, settled, prescribed, ap-
pointed; ascertained, determined; cut, clipt, pared,
shorn. {%—Kḷpta-kīlā,%} f. title-deed, lease of a house
&c. {%—Kḷpta-keśa-nakha-śmaśru, us, us, u,%} having
the hair, nails, and beard cut or clipt and arranged.
{%—Kḷpta-dhūpa, as,%} m. frankincense, olibanum.
<LEND>

<L>15729<pc>0252-b<k1>kxpti<k2>kxpti
{%Kḷpti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. accomplishment, success;
distributing, arranging, making conformable; inven-
tion, contrivance; a term for certain formulas or
verses containing the verb {%kḷp.%}
<LEND>

<L>15730<pc>0252-b<k1>kxptika<k2>kxptika
{%Kḷptika, as, ā, am,%}¦ bought, purchased.
<LEND>

<L>15731<pc>0252-b<k1>kekaya<k2>kekaya
{#kekaya#}¦ {%kekaya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a warrior-
tribe; ({%as%}), m. the chief of this tribe, a prince of
the solar race; ({%ī%}), f. a princess of this tribe, wife of
Daśa-ratha and mother of Bharata.
<LEND>

<L>15732<pc>0252-b<k1>kekara<k2>kekara
{#kekara#}¦ {%kekara, as, ī, am,%} or {%kekarākṣa (˚ra-%}
{%ak˚), as, ā, am,%} squint-eyed; [cf. {%kedara%} and
{%ṭeraka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15733<pc>0252-b<k1>kekala<k2>kekala
{#kekala#}¦ {%kekala, as,%} m. a dancer; (perhaps a
various reading for {%kelaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>15734<pc>0252-b<k1>kekA<k2>kekA
{#kekA#}¦ {%kekā,%} f. the cry of a peacock.
<LEND>

<L>15735<pc>0252-b<k1>kekAvala<k2>kekAvala
{%Kekāvala%}¦ or {%kekika, as,%} m., or {%kekin, ī,%} m. a
peacock.
<LEND>

<L>15736<pc>0252-b<k1>kekeyI<k2>kekeyI
{#kekeyI#}¦ {%kekeyī,%} f. one of Daśa-ratha's
three wives, the mother of Bharata; (a wrong form
for {%kaikeyī.%})
<LEND>

<L>15737<pc>0252-b<k1>kecuka<k2>kecuka
{#kecuka#}¦ {%kecuka, as, ā,%} m. f. a plant with
an esculent root, Colocasia Antiquorum; ({%am%}), n.
the esculent root of this plant; [cf. {%kacu, kacvī,%}
{%kemuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15738<pc>0252-b<k1>keRikA<k2>keRikA
{#keRikA#}¦ {%keṇikā,%} f. a tent.
<LEND>

<L>15739<pc>0252-b<k1>keta<k2>keta
{#keta#}¦ {%keta, as,%} m. (connected with 2. {%kā%} or
{%kit = cit ?%}), desire, wish, will, intention; summons,
invitation; a house, an abode; apparition, form,
shape; (Sāy.) wealth; atmosphere, sky. {%—Keta-pū,%}
{%ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. purifying the desire or will. {%—Keta-%}
{%vedas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. desirous, wishful; (Sāy.)
knowing the wealth of another. {%—Keta-sāp, p, p, p,%}
Ved. obeying the will (of another), obedient; (Sāy.)
touching the sky.
<LEND>

<L>15740<pc>0252-b<k1>ketana<k2>ketana
{%Ketana, am,%}¦ n. a summons, an invitation; a
house, an abode; place, site, situation; the symbol
of a goddess; the ensign of a warrior, a flag or
banner (e. g. {%vānara-ketana,%} one who has a monkey
as his ensign or arms; see also {%makara-ketana,%} &c.);
a sign, a spot or mark; business, indispensable act.
<LEND>

<L>15741<pc>0252-b<k1>ketaya<k2>ketaya
{%Ketaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%ketayati, -yitum,%} to summon,
to call or invite; to counsel or advise; to fix or
appoint a time; to hear.
<LEND>

<L>15742<pc>0252-b<k1>ketita<k2>ketita
{%Ketita, as, ā, am,%}¦ called, summoned; dwelt,
inhabited.
<LEND>

<L>15743<pc>0252-b<k1>ketaka<k2>ketaka
{#ketaka#}¦ {%ketaka, as, ī,%} m. f. the tree Pandanus
Odoratissimus.
<LEND>

<L>15744<pc>0252-b<k1>ketalikIrti<k2>ketalikIrti
{#ketalikIrti#}¦ {%ketali-kīrti, is,%} m., N. of the
author of the work Megha-mālā.
<LEND>

<L>15745<pc>0252-b<k1>ketu<k2>ketu
{#ketu#}¦ {%ketu, us,%} m. (fr. {%ki%} for rt. 2. {%ci%}), bright
appearance, clearness, brightness; a ray of light;
day-time; apparition, form, shape; sign, mark, ensign,
flag, banner; a chief, a leader, any eminent person;
intellect, judgment, discernment; any unusual or
striking phenomena, a comet, meteor, falling star;
the dragon's tail or descending node considered in
astronomy as the ninth of the planets, and in
mythology as the body of the demon Saiṃhikeya,
son of Siṃhikā, which was severed from the head or
Rāhu by Viṣṇu at the churning of the ocean, but
was rendered immortal by having tasted the Amṛta;
a pigmy race (see {%ketu-gaṇa%} below); disease; an
enemy; N. of a son of Agni, supposed to be the
author of a Ṛg-veda hymn; N. of a Dānava; N. of
a son of Ṛṣabha; also of a son of the fourth Manu;
{%aruṇāḥ ketavaḥ,%} red apparitions, a class of superhuman
[Page0252-c+ 74]
spirits or demons, (a kind of sacrificial fire is called
after them {%agnir āruṇaketukaḥ.%}) {%—Ketu-gaṇa, ās,%}
m. pl. the dwarfish inhabitants of Kuśa-dvīpa, children
of Jaimini. {%—Ketu-graha, as,%} m. the descending
node. {%—Ketu-tārā,%} f. a comet. {%—Ketu-dharman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Ketu-bha, as,%} m. a cloud.
{%—Ketu-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being or become a
banner. {%—Ketu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} endowed with
brightness, clear; clear (as a sound), penetrating;
({%ān%}), m., N. of a Dānava; of a regent of the
western part of the world, a son of Rajas; of a
son of Kṣema and father of Suketu; of a son of
Kṣema and father of Varṣa-ketu; of a warrior; of
a son of Dhanvantari; of Ambarīṣa; N. of a
mountain; N. of a palace of Sunandā, the wife of
Vāsu-deva; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a metre consisting of two
lines of twenty-one syllables each. {%—Ketu-mālā,%} f.,
N. of a Tīrtha; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%am%}),
n. one of the nine great divisions of the known world,
the western portion or Varṣa of Jambu-dvīpa,
called after a son of Agnīdhra; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
boar. {%—Ketumālin, ī,%} or {%ketumāli, is,%} m., N. of a
Dānava. {%—Ketu-yaṣṭi, is,%} f. a flag-staff. {%—Ketu-%}
{%ratna, am,%} n. lapis lazuli. {%—Ketu-vasana, as,%} m.
a flag. {%—Ketu-vīrya, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava.
{%—Ketu-śṛṅga, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>15746<pc>0252-c<k1>kedara<k2>kedara
{#kedara#}¦ {%kedara, as, ā, am,%} squint-eyed; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a plant; [cf. {%kekara%} and {%ṭeraka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15747<pc>0252-c<k1>kedAra<k2>kedAra
{#kedAra#}¦ {%kedāra, as,%} m. a field, especially
one under water, a meadow, a plain; a basin for
water round the root of a tree, a bed in a garden or
field; a mountain; a particular mountain; a parti-
cular place, the modern Kedār, part of the Himālaya
mountains; an epithet of Śiva as worshipped in the
Himālayas; N. of the author of a work entitled
Abdhi. {%—Kedāra-kaṭukā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= kaṭukā.%}
{%—Kedāra-kalpa, as,%} m. a part of the Skanda-purāṇa.
{%—Kedāra-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. a small dyke or mound,
earth raised to keep out water; a part of the Skanda-
purāṇa. {%—Kedāra-ja, am,%} n., N. of a plant. {%—Ke-%}
{%dāra-nātha, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva as worshipped
in the Himālayas. {%—Kedāra-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of
an author. {%—Kedāra-malla, as,%} m. an epithet of
Madanapāla.
<LEND>

<L>15748<pc>0252-c<k1>kedAraka<k2>kedAraka
{%Kedāraka, as,%}¦ m. a particular kind of rice, =
{%ṣaṣṭika.%}
<LEND>

<L>15749<pc>0252-c<k1>kena<k2>kena
{#kena#}¦ {%kena,%} ind. (inst. fr. 2. {%ka%}), by what?
wherefore? whence?
<LEND>

<L>15750<pc>0252-c<k1>kenatI<k2>kenatI
{#kenatI#}¦ {%kenatī,%} f. an epithet of the wife of
Kāma, the god of love; (a wrong form?).
<LEND>

<L>15751<pc>0252-c<k1>kenava<k2>kenava
{#kenava#}¦ {%kenava, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Śākapūrṇī.
<LEND>

<L>15752<pc>0252-c<k1>kenAra<k2>kenAra
{#kenAra#}¦ {%kenāra, as,%} m. the head; a skull;
the temples, the upper part of the cheek; a joint; a
division of hell, a hell compared to a potter's kiln.
<LEND>

<L>15753<pc>0252-c<k1>kenipa<k2>kenipa
{#kenipa#}¦ {%kenipa, as,%} m., Ved. a sage, a wise
man; [cf. {%ākenipa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15754<pc>0252-c<k1>kenipAta<k2>kenipAta
{#kenipAta#}¦ {%kenipāta%} or {%kenipātaka, as,%} m. the
helm, a rudder, a large oar used as a rudder.
<LEND>

<L>15755<pc>0252-c<k1>kenezitopanizad<k2>kenezitopanizad
{#kenezitopanizad#}¦ {%keneṣitopaniṣad%} or {%keno-%}
{%paniṣad, t,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad beginning with
the word {%keneṣitam.%}
<LEND>

<L>15756<pc>0252-c<k1>kendu<k2>kendu
{#kendu#}¦ {%kendu, us,%} m. a kind of ebony.
<LEND>

<L>15757<pc>0252-c<k1>kenduka<k2>kenduka
{%Kenduka, as,%}¦ m. another variety of ebony yielding
a species of tar, Diospyros Glutinosa.
<LEND>

<L>15758<pc>0252-c<k1>kendra<k2>kendra
{#kendra#}¦ {%kendra, am,%} n. (a word borrowed from
the Gr. <lang n="greek">κέντρον</lang>), the centre of a circle; the equation
of the centre; the argument of a circle; the argu-
ment of an equation; the distance of a planet from
the first point of its orbit in the fourth, seventh, or
tenth degree; it is variously applied in composition,
as {%patana-kendram,%} argument of the latitude;
{%dvitīya-kendram,%} the distance of the higher apsis of
a planet in any point of its orbit; {%śīghra-kendram,%}
[Page0253-a+ 72]
commutation, the distance of the sun from a superior
planet or of an inferior planet from the sun; {%manda-%}
{%kendram,%} argument of anomaly.
<LEND>

<L>15759<pc>0253-a<k1>kep<k2>kep
{#kep#}¦ {%kep,%} cl. 1. A. {%kepate,%} to shake or
tremble [cf. {%kamp%} and {%vep%}]; to go,
move, approach [cf. {%gep%}].
<LEND>

<L>15760<pc>0253-a<k1>kepi<k2>kepi
{#kepi#}¦ {%kepi, is, is, i,%} Ved. unclean; (or fr. rt.
{%kamp%}), trembling, shaking (?).
<LEND>

<L>15761<pc>0253-a<k1>kemadruma<k2>kemadruma
{#kemadruma#}¦ {%kemadruma%} in astronomy = the
Gr. <lang n="greek">χρηματισμός</lang>
<LEND>

<L>15762<pc>0253-a<k1>kemuka<k2>kemuka
{#kemuka#}¦ {%kemuka, as,%} m., N. of a plant, =
{%kecuka.%}
<LEND>

<L>15763<pc>0253-a<k1>keyUra<k2>keyUra
{#keyUra#}¦ {%keyūra, as, am,%} m. n. a bracelet worn
on the upper arm; ({%as%}), m. a kind of coitus.
{%—Keyūra-bala, as,%} m., N. of a deity.
<LEND>

<L>15764<pc>0253-a<k1>keyUraka<k2>keyUraka
{%Keyūraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Gandharva.
<LEND>

<L>15765<pc>0253-a<k1>keyUrin<k2>keyUrin
{%Keyūrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ decorated with a bracelet on
the upper arm.
<LEND>

<L>15766<pc>0253-a<k1>keraka<k2>keraka
{#keraka#}¦ {%keraka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15767<pc>0253-a<k1>kerala<k2>kerala
{#kerala#}¦ {%kerala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of the inha-
bitants of Malabar; ({%as%}), m. sing. a king of the
Keralas; N. of a son of Ākrīḍa, from whom the
people of Kerala are derived; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of
science; astronomical science; an astronomical Śāstra
or treatise; a Hora or period of time equal to about
one hour; ({%am%}), n., N. of the country inhabited by
the Keralas. {%—Keralotpatti (˚la-ut˚), is,%} f., N. of
a work.
<LEND>

<L>15768<pc>0253-a<k1>keralaka<k2>keralaka
{%Keralaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of the inhabitants of
Malabar.
<LEND>

<L>15769<pc>0253-a<k1>kel<k2>kel
{#kel#}¦ {%kel%} [cf. Prākṛt {%kīl = krīḍ%}], cl. 1. P.
{%kelati,%} to shake; to go or move, move
about, be frolicsome, sport.
<LEND>

<L>15770<pc>0253-a<k1>kelaka<k2>kelaka
{%Kelaka, as,%}¦ m. a dancer, a tumbler, one who walks
or dances on the edge of a sword.
<LEND>

<L>15771<pc>0253-a<k1>kelAya<k2>kelAya
{%Kelāya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kelāyati, -yitum,%} to sport, play.
<LEND>

<L>15772<pc>0253-a<k1>keli<k2>keli
{%Keli, is%}¦ or {%ī,%} m. f. play, sport, amorous sport,
pastime, amusement; ({%is%}), f. the earth. {%—Keli-kalā,%}
f. amorous or sportive accents or address; sportive
skill, wantonness; the Vīṇā or lute of Sarasvatī.
{%—Keli-kila, as,%} m. the confidential companion of
the hero of a drama, in general a sort of buffoon;
one of Śiva's attendant demi-gods; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet
of Rati the wife of Kāma-deva, the god of love.
{%—Keli-kīrṇa, as,%} m. a camel. {%—Keli-kuñcikā,%} f.
a wife's younger sister. {%—Keli-koṣa, as,%} m. an
actor, a dancer or tumbler. {%—Keli-gṛha%} or {%keli-%}
{%niketana, am,%} n. a pleasure-house, a private
apartment. {%—Keli-nāgara, as,%} m. a sensualist, an
enjoyer of worldly pleasures. {%—Keli-para, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} wanton, sportive. {%—Keli-maṇḍapa, as, am,%}
m. n. or {%keli-mandira, am,%} n. a pleasure-house, a
play-room. {%—Keli-mukha, as,%} m. pastime, sport.
{%—Keli-raṅga, as,%} m. a pleasure-ground. {%—Keli-%}
{%raivataka, am,%} n. title of a treatise. {%—Keli-vṛkṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of the Kadamba, commonly called
Kelikadamba (Nauclea Cordifolia), being abundant in
the scene of Kṛṣṇa's sports with the Gopīs. {%—Keli-%}
{%śayana, am,%} n. a pleasure-couch, a sofa. {%—Keli-%}
{%śuṣi, is,%} f. the earth. {%—Keli-saciva, as,%} m. minister
of the sports, master of the revels. {%—Keli-sadana,%}
{%am,%} n. a pleasure-house, a play-room. {%—Keli-sthalī,%}
f. a place of pleasure. {%—Kelī-pika, as,%} m. a cuckoo
kept for pleasure. {%—Kelī-vanī,%} f. a pleasure-park, a
pleasure-grove.
<LEND>

<L>15773<pc>0253-a<k1>kelika<k2>kelika
{%Kelika, as, ā, am,%}¦ sporting, sportive; ({%as%}), m.
the tree Jonesia Aśoka.
<LEND>

<L>15774<pc>0253-a<k1>kela<k2>kela
{#kela#}¦ {%kela%} or {%kelu,%} a particular number.
<LEND>

<L>15775<pc>0253-a<k1>kelAsa<k2>kelAsa
{#kelAsa#}¦ {%kelāsa, as,%} m. crystal.
<LEND>

<L>15776<pc>0253-a<k1>kev<k2>kev
{#kev#}¦ {%kev,%} cl. 1. A. {%kevate, -vitum,%} to
serve, attend to.
<LEND>

<L>15777<pc>0253-a<k1>kevawa<k2>kevawa
{#kevawa#}¦ {%kevaṭa, as,%} m., Ved. a cave, a hollow.
<LEND>
[Page0253-b+ 79]

<L>15778<pc>0253-b<k1>kevarta<k2>kevarta
{#kevarta#}¦ {%kevarta, as,%} m., Ved. a fisherman,
{%= kaivarta,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15779<pc>0253-b<k1>kevala<k2>kevala
{#kevala#}¦ {%kevala, as, ā%} (or Ved. {%ī%}), {%am,%} ex-
clusively one's own (not common to others); peculiar;
alone, only, mere, sole, one, excluding others; not
connected with anything else, isolated, abstract, abso-
lute; simple, pure, uncompounded, unmingled, perfect
in one's self, entire, whole, all; selfish, envious;
({%am%}), ind. only, merely, solely, entirely, wholly,
absolutely, certainly; {%na kevalam — api,%} not only — 
but also; {%kevalam — na tu,%} only — but not; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a prince, a son of Nara; ({%ī%}), f. the doctrine of
the absolute unity of spirit; N. of a place; ({%am%}),
n. the doctrine of the absolute unity of spirit; N. of
a country. {%—Kevala-jñānin, ī,%} m., N. of the first
Arhat of the last Utsarpiṇī. {%—Kevala-tas,%} ind. only.
{%—Kevala-tva, am,%} n. the state of being alone.
{%—Kevala-dravya, am,%} n. black pepper. {%—Kevala-%}
{%naiyāyika, as,%} m. a mere logician, not versed in
any other science. {%—Kevala-vaiyākaraṇa, as,%} m.
a mere grammarian, one not versed in any other
science. {%—Kevalāgha (˚la-agha), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
alone guilty. {%—Kevalātman (˚la-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} one
whose nature or essence is absolute unity. {%—Kevalā-%}
{%din (˚la-ād˚), ī, inī, i,%} eating by one's self alone
or apart from others.
<LEND>

<L>15780<pc>0253-b<k1>kevalin<k2>kevalin
{%Kevalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ alone, one, only; devoted to
the doctrine of the absolute unity of spirit; ({%ī%}), m.
with Jainas, an Arhat.
<LEND>

<L>15781<pc>0253-b<k1>kevikA<k2>kevikA
{#kevikA#}¦ {%kevikā%} or {%kevī,%} f., N. of a flower,
{%= kavikā,%} commonly {%kevera.%}
<LEND>

<L>15782<pc>0253-b<k1>keSa<k2>keSa
{#keSa#}¦ {%keśa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kliś%}),
the hair of the head; the mane (of a horse or lion);
a kind of perfume [cf. {%hrīvera%}]; an epithet of
Varuṇa; of Viṣṇu; N. of a Daitya; ({%ī%}), f. a lock
of hair on the crown of the head; N. of several
plants, the Indigo plant; another plant, Carpopogon
Pruriens; an epithet of the goddess Durgā. {%—Keśa-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. dressing or arranging the air of the
head. {%—Keśa-kalāpa, as,%} m. a mass or quantity of
hair, a head of hair. {%—Keśa-kāra, as,%} m. a sort of
sugar-cane. {%—Keśa-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} dressing or ar-
ranging the hair of the head. {%—Keśa-kīṭa, as,%} m. a
louse or other insect in the hair. {%—Keśa-garbha, as,%}
m. a braid or tress of hair; an epithet of Varuṇa.
{%—Keśa-garbhaka, as,%} m. a braid or tress of hair.
{%—Keśa-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%} pulled or seized by the
hair. {%—Keśa-graha, as,%} m. or {%keśa-grahaṇa, am,%}
n. pulling the hair. {%—Keśa-ghna, am,%} n. morbid
baldness, falling of the hair. {%—Keśa-cūḍa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who has dressed his hair in a tuft or top-
knot. {%—Keśa-cchid, t,%} m. a hair-dresser, a barber.
{%—Keśa-jāha, am,%} n. the root of the hair. {%—Keśa-%}
{%dṛṃhaṇa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. serving for fastening the
hair. {%—Keśa-dhara, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Keśa-dhṛt, t,%} f., N. of a plant, the root of sweet
flag. {%—Keśa-pakṣa, as,%} m. much or ornamented
hair, a tuft. {%—Keśa-paṅkti, is,%} f. a row or line of
hair; a quantity of hair. {%—Keśa-parṇī,%} f. the plant
Achyranthes Aspera; also {%apāmārga%}. {%—Keśa-pāśa,%}
{%as,%} m. much or ornamented hair, a tuft; ({%ī%}), f. a
lock of hair hanging down from the top of the head.
{%—Keśa-bandha, as,%} m. a hair-band. {%—Keśa-bhū,%}
{%ūs,%} m. the head. {%—Keśa-bhūmi, is,%} f. any place on
which hair grows. {%—Keśa-mārjaka, as, am,%} m. n. (?)
a comb. {%—Keśa-mārjana, am,%} n. a comb; cleaning
the hair. {%—Keśa-muṣṭi, is,%} m. a handful of hair; N.
of two plants, (also {%viṣa-muṣṭi%} and {%mahā-nimba.%})
{%—Keśa-racanā,%} f. arranging or dressing the hair.
{%—Keśa-rañjana%} or {%keśa-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a
vegetable, {%= bhṛṅga-rāja%}. {%—Keśa-ruhā,%} f., N. of a
plant, {%= bhadra-dantikā%}. {%—Keśa-rūpā,%} f., N. of a
parasitical plant. {%—Keśa-luñcaka, as, ā, am,%} pulling
the hair. {%—Keśa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a fine head
of hair; having long hair; having a mane. {%—Keśa-%}
{%vapanīya, as,%} m., N. of a festival. {%—Keśa-var-%}
{%dhana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. causing the hair to grow.
{%—Keśa-vardhinī,%} f., N. of a plant, a kind of Sida.
{%—Keśa-veśa, as,%} m. a tress or fillet of hair. {%—Keśa- %}
[Page0253-c+ 79]
{%veṣṭa, as,%} m. the parting of the hair. {%—Keśa-%}
{%hantrī,%} f., N. of a tree, {%= śamī%}. {%—Keśa-hasta, as,%}
m. much or ornamented hair, a tuft. {%—Keśā-keśi,%}
ind. hair to hair, head to head; pulling each other's
hair. {%—Keśāgra (˚śa-ag˚), am,%} n. the top of a hair.
{%—Keśānta (˚śa-an˚), as,%} m. the tip or end of a
hair; long hair hanging down, a lock of hair, a
tuft; cutting off the hair finally, as a religious cere-
mony performed upon Brāhmans at sixteen years of
age, Kṣatriyas at twenty-two, and Vaiśyas at twenty-
four. {%—Keśāntika, as, ā, am,%} extending to the end
of the hair as far as the forehead; relating to the
ceremony of final tonsure. {%—Keśāri (˚śa-ari), is,%}
m. the plant Mesua Ferrea. {%—Keśāruhā (˚śa-ār˚),%}
f., N. of a plant, {%= saha-devī%}. {%—Keśārhā (˚śa-ar˚),%}
f., N. of a plant, {%= mahānīlī%}. {%—Keśāvamarṣaṇa%}
{%(˚śa-av˚), am,%} n. pulling the hair, especially amo-
rously playing with it, rubbing it, &c. {%—Keśoccaya%}
{%(˚śa-uc˚), as,%} m. much or handsome hair.
<LEND>

<L>15783<pc>0253-c<k1>keSaka<k2>keSaka
{%Keśaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ skilful in dressing hair, be-
stowing care upon the hair.
<LEND>

<L>15784<pc>0253-c<k1>keSava<k2>keSava
{%Keśava, as, ā, am,%}¦ having long or much or hand-
some hair; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa;
N. of the author of a lexicon called Kalpa-dru; the
author of the Dvaita-pariśiṣṭa; the father of Govinda
and Rucikara; N. of the father of Brāhma and uncle
of Maheśvara; N. of the son of Viśvadhara and
brother of Karinātha; N. of the father of Vopadeva;
N. of a plant, {%= punnāga%}. {%—Keśava-jātaka-pad-%}
{%dhaty-udāharaṇa, am,%} n. a commentary by Viś-
vanātha on the work Jātaka-paddhati. {%—Keśava-jī-%}
{%nanda-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Keśava-%}
{%dāsa, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Keśava-daivajña,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an astronomer. {%—Keśava-bhakti, is,%}
f. devotion to Kṛṣṇa. {%—Keśava-miśra, as,%} m., N.
of an author. {%—Keśava-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a
grammarian. {%—Keśavāyudha (˚va-āy˚), as,%} m. the
Mango tree; any of Kṛṣṇa's weapons. {%—Keśavārka%}
{%(˚va-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of the author of the poem
Kṛṣṇa-krīḍita, a son of Jayāditya and grandson of
Rāṇiga; N. of the author of a work called Jātaka-
paddhati; N. of the author of a work called Vivāha-
vṛndāvana {%—Keśavālaya (˚va-āl˚)%} or {%keśavā-%}
{%vāla%} (?) or {%keśavāvāsa (˚va-āv˚), as,%} m. the holy
fig tree, Ficus Religiosa.
<LEND>

<L>15785<pc>0253-c<k1>keSi<k2>keSi
{%Keśi, is,%}¦ m., N. of an Asura; [cf. {%keśin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15786<pc>0253-c<k1>keSika<k2>keSika
{%Keśika, as, ī, am,%}¦ having fine or luxuriant hair,
relating to the hair; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Asparagus
Racemosus.
<LEND>

<L>15787<pc>0253-c<k1>keSin<k2>keSin
{%Keśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having fine or long hair, having
a mane; epithet of Indra's and Agni's horses;
epithet of Rudra; ({%ī%}), m. a lion; N. of a race; N.
of an Asura slain by Kṛṣṇa; an epithet of Kṛṣṇa;
N. of a son of Vasu-deva and Kauśalyā; ({%inī%}), f. the
plant Chrysopogon Aciculatus; another plant, Nar-
dostachys Jaṭāmāṃsī; an epithet of the goddess
Durgā; N. of an Apsaras; N. of a daughter of the
king of Vidarbha, wife of Sagara and mother of
Asamañja; N. of the wife of Ājamīḍha (Suhotra)
and mother of Jahnu; N. of the wife of Viśravas
and mother of Rāvaṇa and Kumbhakarṇa; N. of a
Rākṣasī; N. of a servant of Damayantī. {%—Keśi-%}
{%nisūdana%} or {%keśi-mathana%} or {%keśi-sūdana, as,%} m.
or {%keśi-han, ā,%} m. &c. epithet of Kṛṣṇa the slayer
of the Asura Keśin.
<LEND>

<L>15788<pc>0253-c<k1>keSya<k2>keSya
{%Keśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in or on the hair; suit-
able to the hair; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant; ({%am%}), n.
black Aloe wood.
<LEND>

<L>15789<pc>0253-c<k1>keSawa<k2>keSawa
{#keSawa#}¦ {%keśaṭa, as,%} m. a goat; a bug; a
louse; N. of a tree, commonly Sonapat, {%= śoṇaka;%}
the parching arrow of Kāma-deva, the god of love;
a brother; an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>15790<pc>0253-c<k1>keSArukA<k2>keSArukA
{#keSArukA#}¦ {%keśārukā,%} f. {%= kaśerukā,%} the
back-bone.
<LEND>

<L>15791<pc>0253-c<k1>kesara<k2>kesara
{#kesara#}¦ {%kesara%} or {%keśara, as, am,%} m. n. (the
former form being more usual in Vedic and the latter
in classical literature), the hair; the mane (of a
horse or lion); the filament of a lotus or of any
vegetable; a fibre (as of a Mango fruit); ({%am%}), n.
[Page0254-a+ 74]
the tail of the Bos Grunniens, used as a fan for
driving away flies; ({%as%}), m., N. of several plants,
Rottleria Tinctoria; Mimusops Elengi; Mesua Ferrea;
({%am%}), n. the flower of these plants; gold; sulphate
of iron; N. of a metre consisting of four lines of
eighteen syllables each; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. Asa
Fœtida; [cf. Lat. <nsi>cœsaries;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>haer;</nsi>
Eng. <nsi>hair;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Haar.</nsi>] {%—Kesara-grāma, as,%}
m., N. of a Grāma. {%—Kesara-prābandhā,%} f., Ved.,
N. of a woman. {%—Kesara-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
a mane. {%—Kesara-vara, am,%} n. saffron. {%—Kesarā-%}
{%cala (˚ra-ac˚), as,%} m. ‘the filament mountain,’ N. of
the mountains situated round Meru, which is called
‘the seed-vessel of the earth.’ {%—Kesarāmla (˚ra-%}
{%am˚), as,%} m. the citron.
<LEND>

<L>15792<pc>0254-a<k1>kesari<k2>kesari
{%Kesari, is,%}¦ m., N. of the father of Hanumat.
<LEND>

<L>15793<pc>0254-a<k1>kesarin<k2>kesarin
{%Kesarin%}¦ and {%keśarin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having a mane;
({%ī%}), m. a lion; a horse; N. of several plants, Rottle-
ria Tinctoria; Mesua Ferrea; a citron tree; a variety
of Moringa with red flowers ({%= rakta-śigru%}); N.
of a man; of a monkey, husband of the mother of
Hanumat. {%—Kesari-suta, as,%} m., N. of Hanumat.
<LEND>
<L>15793.1<pc>0254-a<k1>keSarin<k2>keSarin
{{Lbody=15793}}
<LEND>

<L>15794<pc>0254-a<k1>kehladeva<k2>kehladeva
{#kehladeva#}¦ {%kehla-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15795<pc>0254-a<k1>kE<k2>kE
{#kE#}¦ {%kai,%} cl. 1. P. {%kāyati, cakau, kāsyati,%}
{%kātum,%} to sound.
<LEND>

<L>15796<pc>0254-a<k1>kEkaya<k2>kEkaya
{#kEkaya#}¦ {%kaikaya, as,%} m. the king of the
Kekayas; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the sons of this king; ({%ī%}), f.
a daughter of this king.
<LEND>

<L>15797<pc>0254-a<k1>kEkeya<k2>kEkeya
{%Kaikeya, as,%}¦ m. a descendant of Kekaya, who was
prince of the Kekayas; a son of Śivi; Dṛṣṭaketu,
king of the Kekayas and father of the five Kaikeyas;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the Kekayas; ({%ī%}), f. a daughter of the
prince of the Kekayas, one of the wives of Daśa-
ratha, mother of Bharata; a shrew, a scold.
<LEND>

<L>15798<pc>0254-a<k1>kENkarya<k2>kENkarya
{#kENkarya#}¦ {%kaiṅkarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kiṅ-kara%}), the
office of a servant or slave; service, servitude.
<LEND>

<L>15799<pc>0254-a<k1>kEwa<k2>kEwa
{#kEwa#}¦ {%kaiṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kīṭa%}), coming from
an insect.
<LEND>

<L>15800<pc>0254-a<k1>kEwaja<k2>kEwaja
{#kEwaja#}¦ {%kaiṭaja, as,%} m. {%= kuṭaja,%} the plant
Wrightia Antidysenterica.
<LEND>

<L>15801<pc>0254-a<k1>kEwaBa<k2>kEwaBa
{#kEwaBa#}¦ {%kaiṭabha, as,%} m., N. of an Asura
slain by Viṣṇu; title of a class of writings; ({%ā%} and {%ī%}),
f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Kaiṭabha-jit, t,%} m. or {%kai-%}
{%ṭabha-han, ā,%} m. or {%kaiṭabhāri (˚bha-ari), is,%} m.
or {%kaiṭabhārdana (˚bha-ar˚), as,%} m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>15802<pc>0254-a<k1>kEwarya<k2>kEwarya
{#kEwarya#}¦ {%kaiṭarya, as,%} m. a plant used in
medicine, commonly Kayaphal; the Nimb tree;
Mayana Vangueria Spinosa.
<LEND>

<L>15803<pc>0254-a<k1>kEqarya<k2>kEqarya
{%Kaiḍarya, as,%}¦ m., N. of two plants, {%= kaṭphala%}
and {%kaṭabhī.%}
<LEND>

<L>15804<pc>0254-a<k1>kEtaka<k2>kEtaka
{#kEtaka#}¦ {%kaitaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ketaka%}), coming
from the plant Pandanus Odoratissimus; ({%am%}), n.
the flower of the tree Pandanus Odoratissimus.
<LEND>

<L>15805<pc>0254-a<k1>kEtava<k2>kEtava
{#kEtava#}¦ {%kaitava, as,%} m. (fr. {%kitava%}), a patro-
nymic of Ulūka; ({%am%}), n. the stake in a game;
gambling; deceit, fraud, cheating, roguery; the lapis
lazuli. {%—Kaitava-prayoga, as,%} m. a trick, a device.
{%—Kaitava-vāda, as,%} m. falsehood, evasion.
<LEND>

<L>15806<pc>0254-a<k1>kEtavaka<k2>kEtavaka
{%Kaitavaka, am,%}¦ n. gambling.
<LEND>

<L>15807<pc>0254-a<k1>kEtaveya<k2>kEtaveya
{%Kaitaveya%}¦ or {%kaitavya, as,%} m. a patronymic of
Ulūka.
<LEND>

<L>15808<pc>0254-a<k1>kEdAra<k2>kEdAra
{#kEdAra#}¦ {%kaidāra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kedāra%}), being
on or growing in a field or meadow, especially one
under water; ({%as%}), m. rice, corn; ({%am%}), n. a multi-
tude of fields.
<LEND>

<L>15809<pc>0254-a<k1>kEdAraka<k2>kEdAraka
{%Kaidāraka%}¦ or {%kaidārika%} or {%kaidārya, am,%} n. a
multitude of fields.
<LEND>

<L>15810<pc>0254-a<k1>kEdArya<k2>kEdArya
{%Kaidārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a field.
<LEND>

<L>15811<pc>0254-a<k1>kEnnara<k2>kEnnara
{#kEnnara#}¦ {%kainnara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kin nara%}),
coming from Kinnara.
<LEND>

<L>15812<pc>0254-a<k1>kEyawa<k2>kEyawa
{#kEyawa#}¦ {%kaiyaṭa%} or {%kaiyyaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a
son of Jaiyaṭa, author of a commentary on Patañ-
jali's Mahā-bhāṣya.
<LEND>
[Page0254-b+ 72]

<L>15813<pc>0254-b<k1>kEraleya<k2>kEraleya
{#kEraleya#}¦ {%kairaleya, as,%} m. a king of the
Keralas.
<LEND>

<L>15814<pc>0254-b<k1>kErava<k2>kErava
{#kErava#}¦ {%kairava, as,%} m. a gambler, a cheat,
a rogue; an enemy; ({%am%}), n. the white esculent
water-lily or lotus blossoming at night; ({%ī%}), f. moon-
shine, moonlight; N. of a plant, {%= methikā%}. {%—Kai-%}
{%rava-bandhu, us,%} m. an epithet of the moon.
<LEND>

<L>15815<pc>0254-b<k1>kEravin<k2>kEravin
{%Kairavin, ī,%}¦ m. the moon; ({%iṇī%}), f. a place or
pond abounding in water-lilies, an assemblage of
them. {%—Kairaviṇī-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. a multitude of
spots filled with water-lilies.
<LEND>

<L>15816<pc>0254-b<k1>kErAwaka<k2>kErAwaka
{#kErAwaka#}¦ {%kairāṭaka, as,%} m. a species of
vegetable poison, one of the fixed kinds.
<LEND>

<L>15817<pc>0254-b<k1>kErAta<k2>kErAta
{#kErAta#}¦ {%kairāta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kirāta%}), relating
or belonging to the Kirātas; ({%as%}), m. a prince of
the Kirātas; a strong man; N. of a serpent; ({%am%}),
n. the plant Agathotes Chirayta; a kind of sandal-
wood.
<LEND>

<L>15818<pc>0254-b<k1>kErAtaka<k2>kErAtaka
{%Kairātaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the Kirāta
people.
<LEND>

<L>15819<pc>0254-b<k1>kErAtika<k2>kErAtika
{%Kairātika, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to the
Kirātas.
<LEND>

<L>15820<pc>0254-b<k1>kErAla<k2>kErAla
{#kErAla#}¦ {%kairāla, am, ī,%} n. f., N. of a plant,
used as a remedy for worms; [cf. {%viḍaṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15821<pc>0254-b<k1>kEriSi<k2>kEriSi
{#kEriSi#}¦ {%kairiśi, is,%} m. (fr. {%kiriśi%}), a patro-
nymic of Sutvan.
<LEND>

<L>15822<pc>0254-b<k1>kErmedura<k2>kErmedura
{#kErmedura#}¦ {%kairmedura, as, am,%} m. n. (?), N. of
a place; ({%as, ī, am%}), coming from that place.
<LEND>

<L>15823<pc>0254-b<k1>kEla<k2>kEla
{#kEla#}¦ {%kaila, am,%} n. sport, pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>15824<pc>0254-b<k1>kElakila<k2>kElakila
{#kElakila#}¦ {%kailakila,%} an epithet of Yavana.
<LEND>

<L>15825<pc>0254-b<k1>kElAvata<k2>kElAvata
{#kElAvata#}¦ {%kailāvata, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15826<pc>0254-b<k1>kElAsa<k2>kElAsa
{#kElAsa#}¦ {%kailāsa, as,%} m., N. of the mountain
Kailāsa, the fabulous residence of Kuvera and paradise
of Śiva; it is placed by the Hindūs in the Himālaya
range, and is regarded as one of the loftiest peaks to
the north of the Mānasa lake. {%—Kailāsa-nātha, as,%}
m. the sovereign of the Kailāsa mountain, i. e. the
god Kuvera. {%—Kailāsa-niketana, as,%} m. an epithet
of Kuvera of Śiva {%—Kailāsa-paṇḍita, as,%} m., N. of
a copyist. {%—Kailāsaukas (˚sa-ok˚), ās,%} m. an epi-
thet of Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>15827<pc>0254-b<k1>kEvarta<k2>kEvarta
{#kEvarta#}¦ {%kaivarta, as,%} m. [cf. {%kevarta%}], a
fisherman, born of a prostitute by a Kṣatriya or of
an Āyogava female by a Niṣāda father; ({%ī%}), f. the
wife of a fisherman; a kind of grass, Cyperus Ro-
tundus; [cf. {%paripela.%}] {%—Kaivarta-musta%} or {%kai-%}
{%varta-mustaka, am,%} n. the grass Cyperus Rotundus.
<LEND>

<L>15828<pc>0254-b<k1>kEvartaka<k2>kEvartaka
{%Kaivartaka, as,%}¦ m. a fisherman.
<LEND>

<L>15829<pc>0254-b<k1>kEvartikA<k2>kEvartikA
{%Kaivartikā,%}¦ f., N. of a plant, {%= suraṅgā, latā,%}
{%vallī, daśaruhā,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>15830<pc>0254-b<k1>kEvartimustaka<k2>kEvartimustaka
{%Kaivarti-mustaka%}¦ or {%kaivartī-mustaka, am,%}
n. a fragrant kind of grass, Cyperus Rotundus.
<LEND>

<L>15831<pc>0254-b<k1>kEvala<k2>kEvala
{#kEvala#}¦ {%kaivala, am,%} n. a kind of plant, used
as a remedy for worms, {%= kairāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>15832<pc>0254-b<k1>kEvalya<k2>kEvalya
{#kEvalya#}¦ {%kaivalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kevala%}), perfect
isolation, abstraction, detachment from all other con-
nections, detachment of the soul from matter or fur-
ther transmigrations; becoming one with the Supreme;
eternal happiness, emancipation, beatitude; exclusive-
ness, soleness, individuality, totality; ({%as, ā, am%}), con-
nected with this state of mind. {%—Kaivalya-tantra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Kaivalya-dīpikā,%} f., N.
of a commentary by Hemādri. {%—Kaivalyāśrama%}
{%(˚ya-āś˚), as,%} m. a pupil of Govinda, author of a
commentary on the poem Ānanda-laharī. {%—Kaiva-%}
{%lyendra (˚ya-in˚), as,%} m., N. of the instructor of
Rāyaṇendra. {%—Kaivalyopaniṣad (˚ya-up˚), t,%} f.
title of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>15833<pc>0254-b<k1>kESava<k2>kESava
{#kESava#}¦ {%kaiśava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%keśava%}), be-
longing to Keśava, (Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu.)
<LEND>

<L>15834<pc>0254-b<k1>kESika<k2>kESika
{#kESika#}¦ {%kaiśika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%keśa%}), hair-
like, fine as a hair; ({%as%}), m. love, passion, lust; N. of a
[Page0254-c+ 74]
subdivision of the Yādavas, descended from Kaiśika,
who was son of Vidarbha and brother of Kratha; ({%ī%}),
f., scil. {%vṛtti,%} one of the four varieties of dramatic style,
the graceful style, suited especially to the passion of
love; N. of a place or river; an epithet of Durgā;
({%am%}), n. a quantity of hair, a head of hair.
<LEND>

<L>15835<pc>0254-c<k1>kESina<k2>kESina
{%Kaiśina, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%keśin%}), connected with
Keśin Dārbhya.
<LEND>

<L>15836<pc>0254-c<k1>kESya<k2>kESya
{%Kaiśya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%keśa%}), the whole mass of
hair, a head of hair, much or ornamented hair.
<LEND>

<L>15837<pc>0254-c<k1>kESora<k2>kESora
{#kESora#}¦ {%kaiśora, am,%} n. (fr. {%kiśora%}), youth,
boyhood, from the age of ten to that of fifteen.
{%—Kaiśoraka-vayas, as,%} n. the age or life of a youth.
<LEND>

<L>15838<pc>0254-c<k1>kEzkinDa<k2>kEzkinDa
{#kEzkinDa#}¦ {%kaiṣkindha, as, ī, am,%} coming
from Kiṣkindhā.
<LEND>

<L>15839<pc>0254-c<k1>ko<k2>ko
{#ko#}¦ {%ko,%} a prefix in a number of words, as
in {%ko-jāgara, ko-mala, ko-vida,%} &c., related to 1.
{%ku;%} [cf. the prefixes {%ka, kava, kā, kim, ku.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15840<pc>0254-c<k1>koka<k2>koka
{#koka#}¦ {%koka, as,%} m. (an onomatopoetic word),
a wolf; a cuckoo; the ruddy goose; a frog; a small
lizard or chameleon; a kind of noxious parasitical
animal; the wild date tree; an epithet of Viṣṇu;
N. of a man, a son of Śoṇa; N. of a river. {%—Koka-%}
{%deva, as,%} m. a pigeon. {%—Koka-nakha, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a people. {%—Koka-bandhu, us,%} m. the friend
of the Cakravāka or ruddy goose, an epithet of the
sun. {%—Koka-yātu, us,%} m., Ved. a demon or ghost
in the shape of a cuckoo. {%—Koka-vāca, as,%} m. a sort
of animal living in caves, a fox (?). {%—Koka-śāstra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a very indecent treatise on the art of
love, ascribed to a Paṇḍit named Koka. {%—Kokāgra%}
{%(˚ka-ag˚), as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= samaṣṭhila.%}
<LEND>

<L>15841<pc>0254-c<k1>kokaqa<k2>kokaqa
{#kokaqa#}¦ {%kokaḍa, as,%} m. an animal of a brown
colour, with a bushy tail, lurking in holes, perhaps a
hare or fox.
<LEND>

<L>15842<pc>0254-c<k1>kokanada<k2>kokanada
{#kokanada#}¦ {%kokanada, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people; ({%am%}), n. the red lotus; the red water-lily.
{%—Kokanada-cchavi, is,%} m. the colour of the red
lotus; ({%is, is, i%}), of the colour of the red lotus.
<LEND>

<L>15843<pc>0254-c<k1>kokaraka<k2>kokaraka
{#kokaraka#}¦ {%kokaraka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15844<pc>0254-c<k1>kokalika<k2>kokalika
{#kokalika#}¦ {%kokalika, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15845<pc>0254-c<k1>kokalI<k2>kokalI
{#kokalI#}¦ {%kokalī,%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>15846<pc>0254-c<k1>kokAmuKa<k2>kokAmuKa
{#kokAmuKa#}¦ {%kokāmukha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>15847<pc>0254-c<k1>kokAha<k2>kokAha
{#kokAha#}¦ {%kokāha, as,%} m. a white horse; (per-
haps a foreign word.)
<LEND>

<L>15848<pc>0254-c<k1>kokila<k2>kokila
{#kokila#}¦ {%kokila, as,%} m. (an onomatopoetic
word; but by some said to be fr. rt. {%kuk%}), the
Kokila or Koïl, the black or Indian cuckoo, Cuculus
Indicus; a kind of mouse; a kind of poisonous insect;
a firebrand, a lighted coal; N. of a poet; N. of a
Rājaputra; ({%ā%}), f. the female of a Kokila, (the Kokila
or Koïl is frequently alluded to in Hindū poetry, and
its musical cry is supposed to inspire pleasing and
tender emotions.) {%—Kokila-nayana, as,%} m. a plant
bearing a dark black flower, Capparis Spinosa; it is
also applied to Barleria Longifolia; [cf. {%kokilākṣa.%}]
{%—Kokila-maitrāvaruṇa, as, ī, am,%} relating to
the duties or office of the Maitrāvaruṇa priest at the
Kaukilīṣṭi; ({%am%}), n. title of a treatise. {%—Kokila-%}
{%hotra, as, ī, am,%} relating to the duties or office of
the Hotṛ priest at the Kaukilīṣṭi; ({%am%}), n. title of
a treatise. {%—Kokilākṣa (˚la-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘having
eyes like those of the Koïl,’ the plant Asteracantha
Longifolia or Capparis Spinosa. {%—Kokilākṣaka, as,%}
m. the same plant. {%—Kokilā-māhātmya, am,%} n. title
of a part of the Skanda-purāṇa. {%—Kokilāvāsa (˚la-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m. the Mango tree; [cf. {%āmra.%}] {%—Koki-%}
{%lekṣu (˚la-ik˚), us,%} m. the black variety of sugar-
cane; [cf. {%kṛṣṇekṣu.%}] {%—Kokileṣṭā (˚la-iṣ˚),%}
f., N. of a plant, {%= mahā-jambū%}. {%—Kokilotsava%}
{%(˚la-ut˚), as,%} m. the Mango tree.
<LEND>

<L>15849<pc>0254-c<k1>kokilaka<k2>kokilaka
{%Kokilaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n (?), N. of a metre
of four lines, each containing seventeen syllables.
<LEND>
[Page0255-a+ 75]

<L>15850<pc>0255-a<k1>kokkawa<k2>kokkawa
{#kokkawa#}¦ {%kokkaṭa = koṅkaṭa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15851<pc>0255-a<k1>kokkvoka<k2>kokkvoka
{#kokkvoka#}¦ {%kokkvoka, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Rati-rahasya.
<LEND>

<L>15852<pc>0255-a<k1>koNka<k2>koNka
{#koNka#}¦ {%koṅka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15853<pc>0255-a<k1>koNkawa<k2>koNkawa
{#koNkawa#}¦ {%koṅkaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a scholiast on
the Amara-koṣa; (a various reading has {%kokkaṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>15854<pc>0255-a<k1>koNkaRa<k2>koNkaRa
{#koNkaRa#}¦ {%koṅkaṇa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
on the western shore of the Dekhan; ({%am%}), n. a
kind of weapon; ({%ā%}), f. a female of the Koṅkaṇa
people. {%—Koṅkaṇā-vatī,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Koṅ-%}
{%kaṇā-suta, as,%} m. an epithet of Paraśu-rāma, the
son of Koṅkaṇā.
<LEND>

<L>15855<pc>0255-a<k1>koNkaRaka<k2>koNkaRaka
{%Koṅkaṇaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people on the
western shore of the Dekhan.
<LEND>

<L>15856<pc>0255-a<k1>koNkAra<k2>koNkAra
{#koNkAra#}¦ {%koṅ-kāra, as,%} m. the sound {%kom.%}
<LEND>

<L>15857<pc>0255-a<k1>koca<k2>koca
{#koca#}¦ {%koca, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%kuc%}), drying,
becoming dry; ({%as%}), m. drying up, desiccation,
aridity; a man of mixed caste, the offspring of a
fisherman by a female of the butcher tribe.
<LEND>

<L>15858<pc>0255-a<k1>kojAgara<k2>kojAgara
{#kojAgara#}¦ {%ko-jāgara, as,%} m. a kind of festi-
val, the night of full moon in the month Āśvina
(September — October), celebrated with various games;
(according to some authorities from {%kaḥ%} and {%jāgara,%}
‘who is awake?’ the exclamation of Lakṣmī, who
descending on this night, promised wealth to all that
were awake; hence the night is spent in festivity and
games of chance in honour of the goddess.)
<LEND>

<L>15859<pc>0255-a<k1>koYja<k2>koYja
{#koYja#}¦ {%koñja, as,%} m. {%= kauñca,%} N. of a
mountain.
<LEND>

<L>15860<pc>0255-a<k1>kowa<k2>kowa
{#kowa#}¦ {%koṭa, as,%} m. (rt. {%kuṭ%}), a fort, a strong-
hold; a shed, a hut [cf. {%kuṭa, kuṭī%}]; crookedness,
curvature; a beard. {%—Koṭa-cakra, am,%} n. a sort of
diagram.
<LEND>

<L>15861<pc>0255-a<k1>kowaka<k2>kowaka
{%Koṭaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ who or what curves or bends;
({%as%}), m. a builder of sheds or huts, a thatcher, a
carpenter; a mixed caste, the son of a mason and of
the daughter of a potter.
<LEND>

<L>15862<pc>0255-a<k1>kowara<k2>kowara
{%Koṭara, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the hollow of a tree; a
cave in general; ({%ī%}), f. a naked woman; an epithet
of the goddess Durgā. {%—Koṭarā-vaṇa, am,%} n. a
wood in which there are hollow trees.
<LEND>

<L>15863<pc>0255-a<k1>kowavI<k2>kowavI
{%Koṭavī,%}¦ f. a naked woman; a form of the goddess
Durgā (represented naked).
<LEND>

<L>15864<pc>0255-a<k1>kowi<k2>kowi
{%Koṭi, is%}¦ or {%ī,%} f. the curved end of a bow or of claws,
&c.; the end or top of anything; the edge or point
of a sword; the horns of the moon; the highest
point, eminence, excellence; the highest number in
the older system of numbers, viz. a Krore or ten
millions; the complement of an arc to 90°; the side
of a right-angled triangle; N. of a plant, Piring or
Asparac, Medicago Esculenta, {%= koṭi-varṣā%}. {%—Koṭi-%}
{%karṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Koṭi-jit, t,%} m. a
conqueror of ten millions; an epithet of the poet
Kālidāsa. {%—Koṭi-jyā,%} f. the cosine of an angle in a
right-angled triangle. {%—Koṭi-tīrtha, as,%} m., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Koṭi-dvaya, am,%} n. ‘the two ends,’ i. e.
two alternatives. {%—Koṭi-pātra, am,%} n. a rudder or
large oar used as one. {%—Koṭi-pāla, as,%} m. the guard
of a stronghold? (a wrong reading for {%koṭṭa-pāla ?%}).
{%—Koṭi-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Koṭi-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} furnished with a point. {%—Koṭi-varṣa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a city, Vāṇapura or Devikote, on the
Coromandel coast; ({%ā%}), f. a plant used medicinally,
either Medicago Esculenta or Trigonella Corni-
culata. {%—Koṭi-vedhin, ī, inī, i,%} striking an edge or
point, i. e. performing the most difficult things.
{%—Koṭi-śas,%} ind. by tens of millions, in innumerable
multitudes. {%—Koṭi-śrī,%} f. an epithet of the goddess
Durgā. {%—Koṭī-varṣa, am,%} n., N. of the town
Vāṇapura on the Coromandel coast; ({%ā%}), f. the plant
Medicago Esculenta or Trigonella Corniculata; [cf.
{%koṭi-varṣa.%}] {%—Koṭīśvara (˚ṭi-īś˚), as,%} m. the lord
of ten millions, a millionaire.
<LEND>

<L>15865<pc>0255-a<k1>kowika<k2>kowika
{%Koṭika, as, ā, am,%}¦ forming the highest point,
top or summit of anything, placed in the highest
[Page0255-b+ 71]
position, e. g. {%mānuṣa-koṭikā,%} a princess; ({%as%}),
m., scil. {%maṇḍūka,%} a frog; an insect, coccinella of
various kinds; N. of the son of a prince. {%—Koṭi-%}
{%kāsya (˚ka-ās˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of king Suratha.
<LEND>

<L>15866<pc>0255-b<k1>kowira<k2>kowira
{%Koṭira, as,%}¦ m. the hair (collected on the forehead
in the shape of a horn); an ichneumon, Viverra
Ichneumon; an insect, coccinella of various kinds
[cf. {%koṭika%}]; an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>15867<pc>0255-b<k1>kowiSa<k2>kowiSa
{%Koṭiśa, as,%}¦ m. a harrow; N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>15868<pc>0255-b<k1>kowIra<k2>kowIra
{%Koṭīra, as,%}¦ m. long entangled hair; a crest, a
diadem.
<LEND>

<L>15869<pc>0255-b<k1>kowISa<k2>kowISa
{%Koṭīśa, as,%}¦ m. a harrow; [cf. {%koṭiśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15870<pc>0255-b<k1>kowwa<k2>kowwa
{#kowwa#}¦ {%koṭṭa, as, am,%} m. n. a fort, a castle, a
stronghold; [cf. {%koṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15871<pc>0255-b<k1>kowwavI<k2>kowwavI
{#kowwavI#}¦ {%koṭṭavī,%} f. (fr. {%ko-ārtava?%}), a naked
woman; an epithet of Durgā; the mother of Vāṇa,
an Asura; [cf. {%koṭavī, kauṭavī, koṭarī.%}] {%—Koṭṭavī-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of the town Vāṇapura on the
Coromandel coast; [cf. {%koṭi-varṣa%} and {%koṭī-%}
{%varṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15872<pc>0255-b<k1>kowwAra<k2>kowwAra
{#kowwAra#}¦ {%koṭṭāra, as,%} m. a fortified town, a
stronghold; a pond; the stairs of a pond; a liber-
tine; [cf. {%koṭṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15873<pc>0255-b<k1>koWa<k2>koWa
{#koWa#}¦ {%koṭha, as,%} m. (fr. {%kuṣṭha%}), a species
of leprosy with large round spots; ringworm, im-
petigo.
<LEND>

<L>15874<pc>0255-b<k1>koWara<k2>koWara
{#koWara#}¦ {%koṭhara, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= aṅ-%}
{%koṭa;%} [cf. {%koṭara.%}] {%—Koṭhara-puṣpī,%} f. the plant
Convolvulus Argenteus.
<LEND>

<L>15875<pc>0255-b<k1>koRa<k2>koRa
{#koRa#}¦ {%koṇa, as,%} m. a corner, an angle
({%= aśri%}); an intermediate point of the compass;
the quill or bow of a lute, a fiddle-stick, &c.; a sort
of musical instrument, a stringed musical instrument;
a drum-stick; the sharp edge of a sword; a stick, a
staff, a club; a N. of Maṅgala, the planet Mars; a
N. of the planet Saturn (in this sense fr. the Gr.
<lang n="greek">κρόνος</lang>). {%—Koṇa-kuṇa, as,%} m. a bug; [cf. {%kola-%}
{%kuṇa, utkuṇa, matkuṇa.%}] {%—Koṇa-vādin, ī,%} m. an
epithet of Śiva. {%—Koṇa-spṛg-vṛtta, as%} or {%am,%} m.
or n. (?), a circle in contact with the angles of a
figure; an exterior circle; one circumscribed. {%—Ko-%}
{%ṇā-koṇi,%} ind. from angle to angle, from one corner
to the other, cornerwise, diagonally; athwart.
<LEND>

<L>15876<pc>0255-b<k1>koRi<k2>koRi
{#koRi#}¦ {%koṇi, is, is, i,%} having a crooked
arm; [cf. {%kuṇi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15877<pc>0255-b<k1>koReraBawwa<k2>koReraBawwa
{#koReraBawwa#}¦ {%koṇera-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m. a N. of a
son of Viṣṇu and father of Rudra-bhaṭṭa.
<LEND>

<L>15878<pc>0255-b<k1>koRqaBawwa<k2>koRqaBawwa
{#koRqaBawwa#}¦ {%koṇḍa-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a
grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>15879<pc>0255-b<k1>koTa<k2>koTa
{#koTa#}¦ {%kotha, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%kuth%}), afflicted
with pain, churned; ({%as%}), m. putrefaction, corrup-
tion; a sore; gangrene; a disease of the eyes,
inflammation and ulceration of the angles of the
eyelids; churning.
<LEND>

<L>15880<pc>0255-b<k1>kodaRqa<k2>kodaRqa
{#kodaRqa#}¦ {%ko-daṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. a bow;
({%as%}), m. an eyebrow (shaped like a bow); a creeping
plant; N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>15881<pc>0255-b<k1>kodaRqin<k2>kodaRqin
{%Kodaṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ armed with a bow; an
epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>15882<pc>0255-b<k1>kodAra<k2>kodAra
{#kodAra#}¦ {%kodāra, as, am,%} m. n. (?), a kind of
grain.
<LEND>

<L>15883<pc>0255-b<k1>kodrava<k2>kodrava
{#kodrava#}¦ {%kodrava, as,%} m. a species of grain
eaten by the poor, Paspalum Scrobiculatum.
<LEND>

<L>15884<pc>0255-b<k1>konAlaka<k2>konAlaka
{#konAlaka#}¦ {%konālaka, as, ā,%} m. f. a kind of
aquatic bird.
<LEND>

<L>15885<pc>0255-b<k1>konAli<k2>konAli
{#konAli#}¦ {%konāli, is,%} m. or f. (?), a kind of
plant.
<LEND>

<L>15886<pc>0255-b<k1>kontala<k2>kontala
{#kontala#}¦ {%kontala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
[cf. {%kuntala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15887<pc>0255-b<k1>konva<k2>konva
{#konva#}¦ {%konva, as,%} m., N. of a mountain;
[cf. {%kola, kollaka, kolagiri, kolvagireya.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0255-c+ 74]

<L>15888<pc>0255-c<k1>konvaSira<k2>konvaSira
{#konvaSira#}¦ {%konvaśira, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
degraded warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>15889<pc>0255-c<k1>kopa<k2>kopa
{#kopa#}¦ {%kopa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kup%}), morbid
irritation or disorder of the humours of the body;
passion, wrath, anger, rage, ({%sa-kopa,%} enraged; {%sa-ko-%}
{%pam,%} angrily.) {%—Kopa-kāraṇa, am,%} n. cause of anger.
 — 1. {%kopa-krama, as,%} m. one who goes to anger,
an angry or passionate man. {%—Kopa-jvalita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} inflamed with wrath, enraged. {%—Kopa-tas,%} ind.
through anger, angrily. {%—Kopa-dīpta, as, ā, am,%}
incensed or inflamed with anger. {%—Kopa-pada, am,%}
n. appearance of anger, pretended wrath. {%—Kopa-%}
{%parīta, as, ā, am,%} affected by anger. {%—Kopa-latā,%}
f., N. of a plant, {%= karṇa-sphoṭā%}. {%—Kopa-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} angry; passionate; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a metre
consisting of four lines of fourteen syllables each.
{%—Kopa-vaśa, as,%} m. subjection to anger. {%—Kopa-%}
{%vega, as,%} m. violence, impetuosity of passion; N. of
a Ṛṣi. {%—Kopa-samanvita, as, ā, am,%} affected by
anger. {%—Kopākula (˚pa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} furious,
enraged. {%—Kopā-kopi,%} ind. in mutual anger, in
reciprocal wrath. {%—Kopāviṣṭa (˚pa-āv˚), as, ā, am,%}
affected with anger.
<LEND>

<L>15890<pc>0255-c<k1>kopana<k2>kopana
{%Kopana, as, ā, am,%}¦ inclined to passion, passionate,
wrathful, angry; irritating, causing morbid irritation
or disorder of the humours; ({%as%}), m., N. of an Asura;
({%am%}), n. irritating; becoming angry; ({%ā%}), f. a pas-
sionate woman.
<LEND>

<L>15891<pc>0255-c<k1>kopanaka<k2>kopanaka
{%Kopanaka, am,%}¦ n. a kind of perfume; [cf. {%coraka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15892<pc>0255-c<k1>kopayizRu<k2>kopayizRu
{%Kopayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ intending to exasperate,
inclined to make angry.
<LEND>

<L>15893<pc>0255-c<k1>kopita<k2>kopita
{%Kopita, as, ā, am,%}¦ enraged, furious.
<LEND>

<L>15894<pc>0255-c<k1>kopin<k2>kopin
{%Kopin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ angry, passionate, wrathful; (at
the end of a compound) irritating, stirring up; ({%ī%}),
m. a bird called the water-pigeon ({%jala-pārāvata%}).
<LEND>

<L>15895<pc>0255-c<k1>kopakrama<k2>kopakrama<h>2
{#kopakrama#} 2¦. {%kopakrama (ka-up˚), am,%} n.
Brahmā's creation; see 3. {%ka.%} (For 1. {%kopa-krama%}
see under {%kopa%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>15896<pc>0255-c<k1>kopajYa<k2>kopajYa
{#kopajYa#}¦ {%kopajña (ka-up˚), am,%} n. Brahmā's
creation.
<LEND>

<L>15897<pc>0255-c<k1>koma<k2>koma
{#koma#}¦ {%koma, am,%} n. {%= kloma,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15898<pc>0255-c<k1>komala<k2>komala
{#komala#}¦ {%ko-mala, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ko = ku%} and
{%mala%} fr. rt. {%mlai,%} ‘easily fading away?’), tender,
soft (opposed to {%karkaśa%}); bland, sweet, low;
pleasing, agreeable, beautiful; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant;
({%am%}), n. water. {%—Komala-gīta%} or {%komala-gītaka,%}
{%am,%} n. a pleasing song. {%—Komala-tā,%} f. or {%komala-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. softness, tenderness, agreeableness.
{%—Komala-svabhāva, as, ā, am,%} tender-hearted.
<LEND>

<L>15899<pc>0255-c<k1>komalaka<k2>komalaka
{%Komalaka, am,%}¦ n. the fibres of the stalk of a
lotus.
<LEND>

<L>15900<pc>0255-c<k1>komAsikA<k2>komAsikA
{#komAsikA#}¦ {%komāsikā,%} f. a budding fruit;
[cf. {%jālikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15901<pc>0255-c<k1>komya<k2>komya
{#komya#}¦ {%komya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= kāmya,%}
lovely (?).
<LEND>

<L>15902<pc>0255-c<k1>koyazwi<k2>koyazwi
{#koyazwi#}¦ {%ko-yaṣṭi, is,%} or {%koyaṣṭika, as,%} m.
the lapwing; a small white crane, commonly called a
paddy-bird.
<LEND>

<L>15903<pc>0255-c<k1>kora<k2>kora
{#kora#}¦ {%kora, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%kur%}), a
movable joint, as the fingers, the knee, &c.; amphi-
arthrosis; a bud (see the next).
<LEND>

<L>15904<pc>0255-c<k1>koraka<k2>koraka
{%Koraka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a bud, an unblown flower;
the fibres of the stalk of a lotus; a species of perfume,
commonly Cor ({%cora%}); another perfume, a berry
containing a resinous and fragrant substance; [cf.
{%kakkolaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15905<pc>0255-c<k1>korakita<k2>korakita
{%Korakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered with buds.
<LEND>

<L>15906<pc>0255-c<k1>korita<k2>korita
{%Korita, as, ā, am,%}¦ budded, sprouted; ground,
pounded, comminuted.
<LEND>

<L>15907<pc>0255-c<k1>koraNgI<k2>koraNgI
{#koraNgI#}¦ {%koraṅgī,%} f. small cardamoms; [cf.
{%elā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15908<pc>0255-c<k1>koradUza<k2>koradUza
{#koradUza#}¦ {%kora-dūṣa%} or {%koradūṣaka, as,%} m.
a kind of grain eaten especially by the poor, Paspalum
Scrobiculatum. See {%kodrava.%}
<LEND>
[Page0256-a+ 71]

<L>15909<pc>0256-a<k1>koralI<k2>koralI
{#koralI#}¦ {%koralī%} or {%korilā,%} f., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>15910<pc>0256-a<k1>kola<k2>kola
{#kola#}¦ {%kola, as,%} m. a hog; a raft, a float,
a boat; a kind of weapon; the breast, the haunch,
the hip or flank, the lap [cf. {%kroḍa%}]; an embrace,
embracing; N. of a plant ({%= citra, citraka%}); the
planet Śani or Saturn; N. of a son of Ākrīḍa; N. of
a degraded warrior-tribe; an outcast, one of a tribe
degraded by Sagara from the military order; a man
of a mixed caste; a barbarian, a Kol, a tribe inhabit-
ing the hills and forests in central India; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f.
the jujube tree, Zizyphus Jujuba; ({%ā%}), f. Piper
Longum, and Piper Chaba {%(cavya); (am),%} n. the
fruit of the jujube; black pepper; the weight of one
Tola; [cf. Lith. <nsi>kuilys, kiaule;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>cullach;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">χοῖρος.</lang>] {%—Kola-kanda, as,%} m. a sort of bulbous
plant, used as a remedy for worms; [cf. {%kṛmi-ghna,%}
{%pañjala,%} &c.] {%—Kola-karkaṭikā,%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= madhu-kharjūrikā%}. {%—Kola-giri, is,%} m., N. of a
mountain. {%—Kola-dala, am,%} n. a kind of perfume,
{%= nakhī%}. {%—Kola-nāsikā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= vaṅ-%}
{%kiṇī%}. {%—Kola-puccha, as,%} m. a heron. {%—Kola-mūla,%}
{%am,%} n. the root of long pepper. {%—Kola-vallī,%} f. the
plant Pothos Officinalis, a plant with a pungent fruit
resembling pepper, {%= gaja-pippalī;%} another plant,
Piper Chaba {%(cavya)%}. {%—Kola-śimbī,%} f., N. of a
plant, commonly called Ālakuśī, Carpopogon Pruri-
ens; [cf. {%kṛta-phalā, khaṭvā,%} &c.] {%—Kolā-koli,%}
ind. with mutual embraces. {%—Kolāñca (˚la-añ˚), as,%}
m. a N. of Kaliṅga, the Coromandel coast from
Cuttack to Madras; but, according to some, this
place is in Gangetic Hindūstan, with Kanouj for the
capital. {%—Kolā-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>15911<pc>0256-a<k1>kolaka<k2>kolaka
{%Kolaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of two plants, {%= aṅkoṭha%} and
{%bahu-vāra; (am),%} n. a kind of perfume, {%= kakko-%}
{%laka;%} black pepper.
<LEND>

<L>15912<pc>0256-a<k1>kolakila<k2>kolakila
{#kolakila#}¦ {%kolakila, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of a town; (also read {%kilakila, kilinakila,%}
{%kolikila.%})
<LEND>

<L>15913<pc>0256-a<k1>kolakuRa<k2>kolakuRa
{#kolakuRa#}¦ {%kolakuṇa, as,%} m. a bug; [cf.
{%koṇakuṇa, utkuṇa, matkuṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15914<pc>0256-a<k1>kolambaka<k2>kolambaka
{#kolambaka#}¦ {%kolambaka, as,%} m. (fr. {%ko + lam-%}
{%baka ?%}), the body of a lute, the whole of it except
the strings.
<LEND>

<L>15915<pc>0256-a<k1>kolAhala<k2>kolAhala
{#kolAhala#}¦ {%kolāhala, as, am,%} m. n. (an
onomatopoetic word), a loud and confused sound,
an uproar, a great and indistinct noise (of men,
animals, &c.); ({%as%}), m., N. of a personified moun-
tain.
<LEND>

<L>15916<pc>0256-a<k1>koli<k2>koli
{#koli#}¦ {%koli, is, is%} or {%ī,%} m. f. the jujube tree,
Zizyphus Jujuba; [cf. {%karkandhu.%}] {%—Koli-sarpa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a degraded warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>15917<pc>0256-a<k1>kolikila<k2>kolikila
{#kolikila#}¦ {%kolikila, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of a town (?); [cf. {%kolakila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15918<pc>0256-a<k1>kolita<k2>kolita
{#kolita#}¦ {%kolita, as,%} m. an epithet of Maud-
galyāyana.
<LEND>

<L>15919<pc>0256-a<k1>koluha<k2>koluha
{#koluha#}¦ {%koluha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15920<pc>0256-a<k1>kolUka<k2>kolUka
{#kolUka#}¦ {%kolūka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N.
of a country; also {%kolūta%} and {%śailūta;%} [cf. {%ulūka,%}
{%ulūṭa, utūla, kulūṭa, kulūta, kaulūta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15921<pc>0256-a<k1>kolyA<k2>kolyA
{#kolyA#}¦ {%kolyā,%} f. Piper Longum; [cf. {%kolā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15922<pc>0256-a<k1>kollaka<k2>kollaka
{#kollaka#}¦ {%kollaka, as,%} m., N. of a mountain;
[cf. {%konva, konvaśira, kola, kolagiri, kolvagi-%}
{%reya.%}] {%—Kolla-giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>15923<pc>0256-a<k1>kolvagireya<k2>kolvagireya
{#kolvagireya#}¦ {%kolva-gireya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of
a people.
<LEND>

<L>15924<pc>0256-a<k1>kovida<k2>kovida
{#kovida#}¦ {%ko-vida, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ko%} and rt.
{%vid,%} to know), experienced, skilled, learned, wise
(with loc., gen., and at the end of comp., e. g. {%aśveṣu%}
or {%aśvānām%} or {%aśva-kovida,%} skilled in horses).
<LEND>

<L>15925<pc>0256-a<k1>kovidAra<k2>kovidAra
{#kovidAra#}¦ {%ko-vidāra, as,%} m. a tree, Bauhinia
Variegata; also one of the trees of paradise.
<LEND>
[Page0256-b+ 81]

<L>15926<pc>0256-b<k1>koSa<k2>koSa
{#koSa#}¦ {%kośa, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%kuś%} or
{%kuṣ ?,%} related to {%kukṣi%} and {%koṣṭha?;%} in the earlier
literature generally spelt {%kośa;%} later books read both
{%kośa%} and {%koṣa%}), a cask, a vessel for holding liquids;
(metaphorically) a cloud; a pail; a bucket; a drink-
ing-vessel, a cup, a vessel in general; a box, a cup-
board, a drawer, a trunk; the interior or inner part
of a carriage; a sheath, a scabbard, &c.; a case, a
covering, a cover; store-room, store, provisions; a
treasury, the apartment where money or plate is kept;
treasure, accumulated wealth, money; gold or silver,
wrought or unwrought, as plate, jewellery, &c.; a
kind of bandage (in surgery); a dictionary, lexicon,
or vocabulary; a bud; the sheath or integument of a
plant; a pod or any similar seed-vessel; a nutmeg,
a nut-shell; the inner part of the fruit Artocarpus
Integrifolia; the cocoon of a silk-worm; the vulva,
the womb; the penis; a testicle or the scrotum;
an egg; (in the Vedānta philosophy) a term for
the three sheaths or succession of cases which make
up the various frames of the body enveloping the
soul, (these are, 1. the {%ānanda-mayaḥ kośaḥ%} or
‘sheath of pleasure,’ forming the {%kāraṇa-śarīra%} or
‘causal frame;’ 2. the {%vijñāna-mayaḥ%} or {%buddhi-%}
{%mayaḥ%} or {%mano-mayaḥ%} or {%prāṇa-mayaḥ kośaḥ,%}
‘the sheath of intellect or will or life,’ forming the
{%sūkṣma-śarīra%} or ‘subtile frame;’ 3. the {%anna-%}
{%mayaḥ kośaḥ,%} ‘the sheath of nourishment,’ forming
the {%sthūla-śarīra%} or ‘gross frame’); a ball or globe
(e. g. {%sūtra-koṣa,%} a ball of thread; {%netra-koṣa,%}
the eye-ball &c.); judicial trial, ordeal by fire, water,
poison, the balance, heated balls of iron, boiling oil
&c., attesting a deity with thrice-repeated drinking
of the water in which some idol has been washed;
the water used at an ordeal; an oath; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
river; ({%ī%}), f. a bud; a seed-vessel; the beard of corn;
a shoe, a sandal; [cf. Hib. <nsi>gucog,</nsi> ‘a bud, a sprout;’
Gr. <lang n="greek">κόκκος</lang>] {%—Kośa-kāra, as,%} m. one who makes
scabbards, cases, boxes, &c.; the compiler of a diction-
ary, a lexicographer; the silk-worm or the insect
while in its cocoon; a chrysalis or pupa; a variety of
sugar-cane or sugar-cane in general. {%—Kośa-kāraka,%}
{%as,%} m. a silk-worm. {%—Kośa-kṛt, t,%} m. a kind of
sugar-cane. {%—Kośa-gṛha, am,%} n. a treasury; a room
in which valuable garments, precious stones &c. are
kept. {%—Kośa-grahaṇa, am,%} n. undergoing an ordeal.
{%—Kośa-cañcu, us,%} m. the Indian crane. {%—Kośa-%}
{%nāyaka, as,%} m. a chief over treasure, a treasurer; an
epithet of Kuvera. {%—Kośa-pāla, as,%} m. the guardian
of a treasure. {%—Kośa-peṭaka, as, am,%} m. n. a chest
or strong box in which treasure is kept. {%—Kośa-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. a kind of creeping plant [cf. {%ghoṣaka%}];
({%ā%}), f. a Cucurbitaceous plant, {%= pīta-ghoṣā;%} the
plant Cucumis Utilissimus, {%= trapuṣī; (am),%} n. a
kind of perfume, a berry containing a waxy and
fragrant substance; a nutmeg. {%—Kośa-bhūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} treasured, stored, accumulated. {%—Kośa-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} possessing treasures, rich, wealthy; ({%tī%}), f., N.
of a kind of plant. {%—Kośa-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living in
a shell, wrapped up in a sheath or shell, incased; ({%ī%}),
m. any animal so incased, a chrysalis or pupa. {%—Kośa-%}
{%vṛddhi, is,%} f. swelled testicle, enlargement of the
scrotum from hernia or hydrocele &c. {%—Kośa-%}
{%veśman, a,%} n. a treasury. {%—Kośa-śāyikā,%} f. a clasp-
knife or one lying in a sheath. {%—Kośa-śuddhi, is,%}
f. purification by ordeal. {%—Kośa-skṛt, t,%} m. a silk-
worm. {%—Kośa-stha, as, ā, am,%} incased, sheathed,
enveloped in a sheath or shell &c.; ({%as%}), m. any
shelled insect or animal, as a snail &c.; a pupa or
chrysalis; the silk-worm in its cocoon. {%—Kośa-hīna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} without treasure, deprived of riches,
poor. {%—Kośāṃśa (˚śa-aṃ˚), as,%} m. part of a trea-
sure, a portion of any one's wealth. {%—Kośāgāra%}
{%(˚śa-āg˚), as, am,%} m. n. a treasure-house, store-room,
treasury. {%—Kośāṅga (˚śa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a kind of
reed or grass, commonly Ikāda; [cf. {%utkaṭa.%}]
{%—Kośādhipati (˚śa-adh˚), is,%} or {%kośādhīśa%} or
{%kośādhyakṣa (˚śa-adh˚), as,%} m. a superintendent
of the treasury, a treasurer, a paymaster; an epithet
of Kuvera. {%—Kośāpaharaṇa (˚śa-ap˚), am,%} n. car-
rying off treasure. {%—Kośāmra (˚śa-ām˚), as,%} m., N.
[Page0256-c+ 72]
of a plant, {%= kṛmi-vṛkṣa, sukeśaka,%} commonly
{%kośāma; (am),%} n. the fruit of this plant, Vulg.
<nsi>keuḍā</nsi> (<nsi>= keurā?</nsi> Sonneratia Apetala?).
<LEND>

<L>15927<pc>0256-c<k1>koSaka<k2>koSaka
{%Kośaka, as,%}¦ m. an egg, a testicle.
<LEND>

<L>15928<pc>0256-c<k1>koSayI<k2>koSayI
{%Kośayī,%}¦ f., Ved. a chest, a box; the interior of a
carriage (?). According to Sāy. {%= kośa.%}
<LEND>

<L>15929<pc>0256-c<k1>koSikA<k2>koSikA
{%Kośikā,%}¦ f. a drinking-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>15930<pc>0256-c<k1>koSin<k2>koSin
{%Kośin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ incased ({%āma-kośin,%} having the
cavity of the ear filled up); ({%ī%}), m. the mango tree;
[cf. {%āmra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15931<pc>0256-c<k1>koSilA<k2>koSilA
{%Kośilā,%}¦ f. a kind of bean [cf. {%mudga-parṇī%}]; N.
of a river.
<LEND>

<L>15932<pc>0256-c<k1>koSala<k2>koSala
{#koSala#}¦ {%kośala%} and {%kośalā.%} See under
{%kosala.%}
<LEND>

<L>15933<pc>0256-c<k1>koSalika<k2>koSalika
{#koSalika#}¦ {%kośalika, am,%} n. a bribe; (wrong
reading for {%kauśalika,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>15934<pc>0256-c<k1>koSAtaka<k2>koSAtaka
{#koSAtaka#}¦ {%kośātaka%} or {%koṣātaka, as,%} m. (fr.
{%kośa?%}), hair; ({%ī%}), f. several Cucurbitaceous plants,
Trichosanthes Diœca, Luffa Acutangula, and Luffa
Pentandra; the fruits of these plants; a moonlight
night.
<LEND>

<L>15935<pc>0256-c<k1>koSAtakin<k2>koSAtakin
{#koSAtakin#}¦ {%kośātakin, ī,%} m. (fr. the pre-
ceding ?), trade, business; a trader, a merchant;
submarine fire.
<LEND>

<L>15936<pc>0256-c<k1>koSya<k2>koSya
{#koSya#}¦ {%kośya, au%} or {%e%} (?), m. or n. (?), du.,
Ved. two lumps of flesh near the heart of a sacrificial
horse.
<LEND>

<L>15937<pc>0256-c<k1>koza<k2>koza
{#koza#}¦ {%koṣa%} with its compounds, see under
{%kośa,%} for which {%koṣa%} is only a later form.
<LEND>

<L>15938<pc>0256-c<k1>kozalA<k2>kozalA
{#kozalA#}¦ {%koṣalā,%} wrongly spelt for {%kosalā.%}
<LEND>

<L>15939<pc>0256-c<k1>kozAtaka<k2>kozAtaka
{#kozAtaka#}¦ {%koṣātaka = kośātaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>15940<pc>0256-c<k1>kozWa<k2>kozWa
{#kozWa#}¦ {%koṣṭha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kuṣ;%} probably
related to {%kukṣi%} and {%kośa%}), any one of the viscera
of the body, as the stomach, heart, lungs, &c., but
particularly the stomach; the belly, bowels, abdomen;
an inner apartment; a granary, a place in which grain
is kept, a store-room, a treasury; ({%am%}), n. a sur-
rounding wall; a kind of vessel; the shell of any-
thing; ({%as, ā, am%}), own. {%—Koṣṭha-koṭi, is,%} m.,
N. of an attendant of Śiva. {%—Koṣṭha-pāla, as,%} m.
a municipal officer, a constable; a watch, a guard,
the watch of a city; a storekeeper, a treasurer.
{%—Koṣṭha-vat, ān,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Koṣ-%}
{%ṭha-śuddhi, is,%} f. dejection by stool, evacuation of
the bowels. {%—Koṣṭhāgāra%} ({%˚ṭha-ag˚%} or {%āg˚%}), {%as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a store-room, a store; a treasury.
{%—Koṣṭhāgārika, as%} or {%ā%} (?), m. or f. (?), a kind
of animal, any animal living in a shell. {%—Koṣṭhā-%}
{%gārin, ī,%} m. a kind of poisonous insect. {%—Koṣ-%}
{%ṭhāgni (˚ṭha-ag˚), is,%} m. the digestive faculty, the
gastric juice. {%—Koṣṭhī-pradīpa, as,%} m., N. of a
work on astronomy.
<LEND>

<L>15941<pc>0256-c<k1>kozWaka<k2>kozWaka
{%Koṣṭhaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a granary,
a treasury [cf. {%anna-koṣṭhaka%}]; a surrounding
wall; ({%am%}), n. a brick trough for watering cattle;
N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>15942<pc>0256-c<k1>kozWakIkf<k2>kozWakIkf
{%Koṣṭhakī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to surround, enclose.
<LEND>

<L>15943<pc>0256-c<k1>kozWila<k2>kozWila
{%Koṣṭhila, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15944<pc>0256-c<k1>kozWya<k2>kozWya
{%Koṣṭhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ proceeding from the chest
or interior of the body, emitted (as a sound) from
the centre of the lungs.
<LEND>

<L>15945<pc>0256-c<k1>kozRa<k2>kozRa
{#kozRa#}¦ {%koṣṇa (kā-uṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} mode-
rately warm, tepid, warm; ({%am%}), n. warmth; [cf.
{%kavoṣṇa, kaduṣṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15946<pc>0256-c<k1>kosala<k2>kosala
{#kosala#}¦ {%kosala, as,%} m. (in later books gene-
rally spelt {%kośala%}), N. of a country and the warrior-
tribe inhabiting it, descendants of Māthava Videgha;
({%ā%}), f., N. of the capital of this country or Ayodhyā,
the modern Oude. {%—Kosalātmajā (˚la-āt˚),%} f. the
daughter of the king of the Kosalas, an epithet of a
wife of Daśa-ratha, the mother of Rāma.
<LEND>
[Page0257-a+ 71]

<L>15947<pc>0257-a<k1>kohaqa<k2>kohaqa
{#kohaqa#}¦ {%kohaḍa, as,%} m., N. of a man; [cf.
{%kauhaḍa%} and {%kohala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15948<pc>0257-a<k1>kohala<k2>kohala
{#kohala#}¦ {%kohala, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ko + hala?%} cf.
{%kutūhala%}), speaking indistinctly; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
musical instrument; a sort of spirituous liquor; N. of
a saint or Muni, the inventor or first teacher of the
drama, also a writer on music.
<LEND>

<L>15949<pc>0257-a<k1>kohalIya<k2>kohalIya
{%Kohalīya, am,%}¦ n. title of Kohala's work on music.
<LEND>

<L>15950<pc>0257-a<k1>kohita<k2>kohita
{#kohita#}¦ {%kohita, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15951<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkuwwaka<k2>kOkuwwaka
{#kOkuwwaka#}¦ {%kaukuṭṭaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people; (variously written {%kaukuntaka%} and {%kau-%}
{%kundaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>15952<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkura<k2>kOkura
{#kOkura#}¦ {%kaukura, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%kukura%}), N.
of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15953<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkuvAdi<k2>kOkuvAdi
{#kOkuvAdi#}¦ {%kaukuvādi, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15954<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkUsta<k2>kOkUsta
{#kOkUsta#}¦ {%kaukūsta, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15955<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkftya<k2>kOkftya
{#kOkftya#}¦ {%kaukṛtya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ku-kṛta%} or
{%ku-kṛtya%}), evil doing, wickedness; repentance.
<LEND>

<L>15956<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkkuwa<k2>kOkkuwa
{#kOkkuwa#}¦ {%kaukkuṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kukkuṭa%}),
relating to a cock or domestic fowl, gallinaceous.
<LEND>

<L>15957<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkkuwika<k2>kOkkuwika
{%Kaukkuṭika, as,%}¦ m. a poulterer, one who sells
fowls; a kind of mendicant, one who walks with his
eyes fixed on the ground for fear of treading upon
insects &c.; a hypocrite.
<LEND>

<L>15958<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkkuwikandala<k2>kOkkuwikandala
{%Kaukkuṭi-kandala, as,%}¦ m. a species of snake,
the Boä or Bor.
<LEND>

<L>15959<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkza<k2>kOkza
{#kOkza#}¦ {%kaukṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kukṣi%}), abdo-
minal, ventral.
<LEND>

<L>15960<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkzeya<k2>kOkzeya
{%Kaukṣeya, as, ī, am,%}¦ being in the belly; being
in a sheath.
<LEND>

<L>15961<pc>0257-a<k1>kOkzeyaka<k2>kOkzeyaka
{%Kaukṣeyaka, as,%}¦ m. a sword; a scymitar.
<LEND>

<L>15962<pc>0257-a<k1>kONka<k2>kONka
{#kONka#}¦ {%kauṅka, as,%} m. the country Koṅka,
{%= koṅka, koṅkaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>15963<pc>0257-a<k1>kONkaRa<k2>kONkaRa
{%Kauṅkaṇa, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people; the dis-
trict of Koṅkan in the peninsula.
<LEND>

<L>15964<pc>0257-a<k1>kONkiRa<k2>kONkiRa
{%Kauṅkiṇa, ās,%}¦ m. pl. {%= kauṅkaṇa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>15965<pc>0257-a<k1>kONkuma<k2>kONkuma
{#kONkuma#}¦ {%kauṅkuma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuṅkuma%}),
relating to the saffron flower.
<LEND>

<L>15966<pc>0257-a<k1>kOcavArya<k2>kOcavArya
{#kOcavArya#}¦ {%kaucavārya, as, ā, am,%} coming
from Kūcavāra.
<LEND>

<L>15967<pc>0257-a<k1>kOYca<k2>kOYca
{#kOYca#}¦ {%kauñca, as,%} m., N. of a mountain,
part of the Himālaya range; [cf. {%krauñca.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15968<pc>0257-a<k1>kOYjara<k2>kOYjara
{#kOYjara#}¦ {%kauñjara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuñjara%}),
belonging to an elephant; ({%as%}), m., N. of a race.
<LEND>

<L>15969<pc>0257-a<k1>kOYjAyana<k2>kOYjAyana
{#kOYjAyana#}¦ {%kauñjāyana, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%kuñja%}),
N. of a mountain-tribe, descended from Kuñja; ({%ī%}),
f. a princess of this tribe; a female descendant of
Kuñja; the wife of a Brāhman or any venerable
personage.
<LEND>

<L>15970<pc>0257-a<k1>kOYjAyanya<k2>kOYjAyanya
{%Kauñjāyanya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the mountain-
tribe called Kauñjāyana.
<LEND>

<L>15971<pc>0257-a<k1>kOwa<k2>kOwa<h>1
{#kOwa#} 1¦. {%kauṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuṭi%}), living in
one's own house, independant, free; domestic, homely,
home-born, home-bred; ({%as%}), m. {%= kuṭaja,%} the plant
Wrightia Antidysenterica. {%—Kauṭa-takṣa, as,%} m.
an independant carpenter, one who works at home
on his own account and not for the village or cor-
poration.
<LEND>

<L>15972<pc>0257-a<k1>kOwa<k2>kOwa<h>2
{#kOwa#} 2¦. {%kauṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kūṭa%}), snared,
wired; fraudulent, dishonest; ({%am%}), n. fraud, false-
hood. {%—Kauṭa-sākṣin, ī,%} m. a false witness, {%= kūṭa-%}
{%sākṣin%}. {%—Kauṭasākṣya, am,%} n. false evidence.
<LEND>

<L>15973<pc>0257-a<k1>kOwakika<k2>kOwakika
{%Kauṭakika, as, ā, am,%}¦ one whose occupation is
to catch animals in traps, caves, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a
vender of the flesh of birds or beasts, a poacher, a
butcher, &c.; [cf. {%kauṭika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15974<pc>0257-a<k1>kOwika<k2>kOwika
{%Kauṭika, as, ī, am,%}¦ one whose business is to catch
animals in traps &c.; one who kills animals and sells
their flesh for his own subsistence, a hunter, a poacher,
a mountaineer, &c.; relating to a snare or trap;
fraudulent, dishonest.
<LEND>
[Page0257-b+ 68]

<L>15975<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwaja<k2>kOwaja
{#kOwaja#}¦ {%kauṭaja, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuṭaja%}), coming
from the plant Wrightia Antidysenterica; ({%as%}), m.
the plant Wrightia Antidysenterica. {%—Kauṭaja-bhā-%}
{%rika, as, ā, am,%} carrying or bearing a load of
Wrightia Antidysenterica.
<LEND>

<L>15976<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwajika<k2>kOwajika
{%Kauṭajika, as, ī, am,%}¦ carrying a load of Wrightia
Antidysenterica.
<LEND>

<L>15977<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwaBI<k2>kOwaBI
{#kOwaBI#}¦ {%kauṭabhī,%} f. an epithet of the god-
dess Durgā; [cf. {%kaiṭabhī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15978<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwalya<k2>kOwalya
{#kOwalya#}¦ {%kauṭalya, as,%} m. an epithet of
Cāṇakya; also called Vātsyāyana; [cf. {%kauṭilya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15979<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwavI<k2>kOwavI
{#kOwavI#}¦ {%kauṭavī,%} f. a naked woman; [cf.
{%koṭṭavī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15980<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwilika<k2>kOwilika
{#kOwilika#}¦ {%kauṭilika, as,%} m. (fr. {%kuṭilikā%}),
a hunter; a blacksmith.
<LEND>

<L>15981<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwilya<k2>kOwilya
{#kOwilya#}¦ {%kauṭilya, as,%} m. (fr. {%kuṭila%}), an
epithet of Cāṇakya [cf. {%kauṭalya%}]; N. of a gram-
marian; ({%am%}), n. crookedness, curvature, curliness
of the hair; falsehood, fraudulent behaviour, dis-
honesty, deceit, insincerity; a kind of horse-radish.
<LEND>

<L>15982<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwIra<k2>kOwIra
{#kOwIra#}¦ {%kauṭīra, as, ī, am,%} belonging to the
plant Kuṭīra, made of it.
<LEND>

<L>15983<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwIryA<k2>kOwIryA
{%Kauṭīryā,%}¦ f. an epithet of Durgā, ‘living in a
hut (?).’
<LEND>

<L>15984<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwumba<k2>kOwumba
{#kOwumba#}¦ {%kauṭumba, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuṭumba%}),
necessary for the household; ({%am%}), n. family relation-
ship.
<LEND>

<L>15985<pc>0257-b<k1>kOwumbika<k2>kOwumbika
{%Kauṭumbika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to a family,
constituting a family; having relations; ({%as%}), m. the
father or master of a family.
<LEND>

<L>15986<pc>0257-b<k1>kOqavika<k2>kOqavika
{#kOqavika#}¦ {%kauḍavika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuḍava%}),
sown with a particular measure (a Kuḍava) of grain
(as a field &c.), containing a Kuḍava.
<LEND>

<L>15987<pc>0257-b<k1>kOqodari<k2>kOqodari
{#kOqodari#}¦ {%kauḍodari, is,%} m. (or {%kauṇḍodari%}
fr. {%kuṇḍodara ?%}), N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>15988<pc>0257-b<k1>kOqya<k2>kOqya
{#kOqya#}¦ {%kauḍya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>15989<pc>0257-b<k1>kORakutsya<k2>kORakutsya
{#kORakutsya#}¦ {%kauṇakutsya, as,%} m., N. of a
Brāhman; [cf. {%kūṇa-kuccha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>15990<pc>0257-b<k1>kORapa<k2>kORapa
{#kORapa#}¦ {%kauṇapa, as,%} m. (fr. {%kuṇapa%}), ‘feed-
ing upon corpses,’ a Rākṣasa or goblin; N. of a Nāga
(these beings are supposed to eat human flesh).
{%—Kauṇapa-danta, as,%} m. an epithet of Bhīṣma,
uncle of the Pāṇḍus. {%—Kauṇapāśana (˚pa-aś˚), as,%}
m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>15991<pc>0257-b<k1>kORinda<k2>kORinda
{#kORinda#}¦ {%kauṇinda, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
({%as%}), m. sing. a prince of this people.
<LEND>

<L>15992<pc>0257-b<k1>kOReya<k2>kOReya
{#kOReya#}¦ {%kauṇeya, as,%} m. (fr. {%kuṇi?%}), Ved. a
patronymic of Rajana.
<LEND>

<L>15993<pc>0257-b<k1>kORqala<k2>kORqala
{#kORqala#}¦ {%kauṇḍala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuṇḍala%}),
furnished with rings.
<LEND>

<L>15994<pc>0257-b<k1>kORqinya<k2>kORqinya
{#kORqinya#}¦ {%kauṇḍinya, as,%} m., N. of a Muni
or divine sage; N. of a grammarian; a patronymic
of the poet Jaya-deva.
<LEND>

<L>15995<pc>0257-b<k1>kORqilyaka<k2>kORqilyaka
{#kORqilyaka#}¦ {%kauṇḍilyaka, as,%} m. (or {%kauṇ-%}
{%ḍinyaka ?%}), a kind of poisonous insect.
<LEND>

<L>15996<pc>0257-b<k1>kORqoparaTa<k2>kORqoparaTa
{#kORqoparaTa#}¦ {%kauṇḍoparatha, ās,%} m. pl. (fr.
{%kuṇḍoparatha%}), N. of a warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>15997<pc>0257-b<k1>kORqoparaTIya<k2>kORqoparaTIya
{%Kauṇḍoparathīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of this tribe.
<LEND>

<L>15998<pc>0257-b<k1>kORya<k2>kORya
{#kORya#}¦ {%kauṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kuṇi%}), distortion or
paralysis of the hands; the being maimed or handless.
<LEND>

<L>15999<pc>0257-b<k1>kOtuka<k2>kOtuka
{#kOtuka#}¦ {%kautuka, am,%} n. (fr. {%kutuka%}), curi-
osity, interest in anything, vehement desire for, wish,
inclination; eagerness, vehemence, impatience; any-
thing causing curiosity, admiration or interest, any
singular or surprising object, a wonder; festivity,
gaiety, a festival, a show, a solemn ceremony, espe-
cially the ceremony with the marriage-thread or ring
preceding a marriage; the marriage-thread or ring;
[Page0257-c+ 71]
joy, pleasure, happiness, enjoyment; sport, pastime;
public diversion; song, dance, show or spectacle;
season of enjoyment; kind or friendly greeting,
civility, salutation. {%—Kautuka-kriyā,%} f. a solemn
ceremony, a marriage ceremony. {%—Kautuka-gṛha,%}
{%am,%} n. the house in which a marriage takes place.
{%—Kautuka-toraṇa, as, am,%} m. n. a triumphal
arch erected at certain festivals. {%—Kautuka-maṅ-%}
{%gala, am,%} n. a solemn ceremony. {%—Kautukāgāra%}
({%˚ka-ag˚,%} or {%āg˚%}), {%as, am,%} m. n. a room for festivity,
a room in which a marriage ceremony takes place.
<LEND>

<L>16000<pc>0257-c<k1>kOtukita<k2>kOtukita
{%Kautukita, as, ā, am,%}¦ eagerly interested, eager.
<LEND>

<L>16001<pc>0257-c<k1>kOtukin<k2>kOtukin
{%Kautukin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ festive, gay, jocose, a jester.
<LEND>

<L>16002<pc>0257-c<k1>kOtUhala<k2>kOtUhala
{#kOtUhala#}¦ {%kautūhala, am,%} n. (fr. {%kutūhala%}),
curiosity, interest in anything, vehement desire for
anything, eagerness, vehemence; anything causing
curiosity, any unusual phenomenon; a solemn cere-
mony. {%—Kautūhala-para, as, ā, am,%} curious, in-
quisitive. {%—Kautūhalānvita (˚la-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
eager, vehement, curious.
<LEND>

<L>16003<pc>0257-c<k1>kOtomata<k2>kOtomata
{#kOtomata#}¦ {%kautomata, am,%} n. (fr. {%kutas + mata%}),
N. of a Sūkta (?).
<LEND>

<L>16004<pc>0257-c<k1>kOtsa<k2>kOtsa
{#kOtsa#}¦ {%kautsa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kutsa%}), composed
by Kutsa; ({%am%}), n. a Sūkta or Sāman composed by
Kutsa; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from Kutsa; N. of a
teacher; N. of a pupil of Vara-tantu; the son-in-law
of Bhagīratha; a patronymic of Jaimini; N. of a
degraded family. {%—Kautsī-putra, as,%} m., N. of a
teacher.
<LEND>

<L>16005<pc>0257-c<k1>kOTuma<k2>kOTuma
{#kOTuma#}¦ {%kauthuma, ās,%} m. pl. the pupils of
Kuthumin.
<LEND>

<L>16006<pc>0257-c<k1>kOdAlika<k2>kOdAlika
{#kOdAlika#}¦ {%kaudālika%} or {%kaudālīka, as,%} m.
(fr. {%kudāla%}), a man of a mixed caste, the son of a
fisherman by a woman of the washerman caste.
<LEND>

<L>16007<pc>0257-c<k1>kOdravika<k2>kOdravika
{#kOdravika#}¦ {%kaudravika, am,%} n. (fr. {%kodrava%}),
sochal salt.
<LEND>

<L>16008<pc>0257-c<k1>kOdravIRa<k2>kOdravIRa
{%Kaudravīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sown with Kodrava (as
a field &c.).
<LEND>

<L>16009<pc>0257-c<k1>kOnaKya<k2>kOnaKya
{#kOnaKya#}¦ {%kaunakhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ku-nakhin%}),
the condition of one who has a disease of the nails;
ugliness of the nails. {%—Kaunakhyādika (˚ya-ād˚),%}
{%am,%} n. neglect of personal decoration.
<LEND>

<L>16010<pc>0257-c<k1>kOntika<k2>kOntika
{#kOntika#}¦ {%kauntika, as,%} m. (fr. {%kunta%}), a
spearman, a soldier armed with a spear.
<LEND>

<L>16011<pc>0257-c<k1>kOntI<k2>kOntI
{#kOntI#}¦ {%kauntī,%} f. (fr. {%kunta%} or {%kunti%}), a sort
of perfume, commonly {%reṇuka.%}
<LEND>

<L>16012<pc>0257-c<k1>kOnteya<k2>kOnteya
{#kOnteya#}¦ {%kaunteya, as,%} m. (a patronymic fr.
{%kuntī%}), a N. of Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma-sena, and Arjuna;
N. of a tree {%= arjuna.%}
<LEND>

<L>16013<pc>0257-c<k1>kOntya<k2>kOntya
{#kOntya#}¦ {%kauntya, as,%} m. a king of the Kuntis.
<LEND>

<L>16014<pc>0257-c<k1>kOnda<k2>kOnda
{#kOnda#}¦ {%kaunda, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kunda%}), relating
to or coming from jasmine.
<LEND>

<L>16015<pc>0257-c<k1>kOpa<k2>kOpa
{#kOpa#}¦ {%kaupa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kūpa%}), coming
from a well or cistern; ({%am%}), n. well-water.
<LEND>

<L>16016<pc>0257-c<k1>kOpIna<k2>kOpIna
{%Kaupīna, am,%}¦ n. the pudenda; a privity, a privy
part; a small piece of cloth worn over the privities
by poor persons; a wrong or improper act, sin.
{%—Kaupīna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has only a
piece of cloth over the privities.
<LEND>

<L>16017<pc>0257-c<k1>kOpya<k2>kOpya
{%Kaupya, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming from a well or cistern.
<LEND>

<L>16018<pc>0257-c<k1>kOpodakI<k2>kOpodakI
{#kOpodakI#}¦ {%kaupodakī,%} f. the mace of Kṛṣṇa,
{%= kaumodakī;%} [also {%kaupādakī ?%}].
<LEND>

<L>16019<pc>0257-c<k1>kObjya<k2>kObjya
{#kObjya#}¦ {%kaubjya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kubja%}), crooked-
ness, hump-backedness.
<LEND>

<L>16020<pc>0257-c<k1>kOma<k2>kOma
{#kOma#}¦ {%kauma, am,%} n., N. of a Vedic treatise,
so named from its author.
<LEND>

<L>16021<pc>0257-c<k1>kOmAra<k2>kOmAra
{#kOmAra#}¦ {%kaumāra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kumāra%} or
{%kumārī%}), juvenile, youthful, girlish, belonging to a
youth or young girl, maiden, maidenly, virgin, ({%kau-%}
{%mārī bhāryā,%} a virgin wife, one who has not had a
husband previously; {%kaumāraḥ patiḥ,%} a man who
[Page0258-a+ 76]
marries a virgin; {%kaumāraṃ vratam,%} a vow of
abstinence); soft, tender; relating to the god of
war or Sanat-kumāra, belonging or peculiar to them;
({%ī%}), f. one of the seven divine Mātṛs, the divine
mothers or personified energies of the gods, the
energy or {%śakti%} of Kumāra or Kārttikeya the god of
war; a kind of bulbous plant, {%= vārāhī-kanda; (am),%}
n. childhood, youth from birth to the age of five;
maidenhood to the age of sixteen. {%—Kaumāra-%}
{%parvata, as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Kaumāra-%}
{%bhṛtya, am,%} n. the rearing and education of chil-
dren, a department of medical science; [cf. {%kumāra-%}
{%bhṛtyā.%}] {%—Kaumārarājya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kumāra-%}
{%rāja = rāja-kumāra, yuva-rāja%}), the position of
an heir-apparent; [cf. {%yauvarājya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16022<pc>0258-a<k1>kOmAraka<k2>kOmAraka
{%Kaumāraka, am,%}¦ n. childhood, the juvenile age.
<LEND>

<L>16023<pc>0258-a<k1>kOmArika<k2>kOmArika
{%Kaumārika, as, ī, am,%}¦ endowed with girls;
({%as%}), m. a father of girls. {%—Kaumārika-tantra, am,%}
n., N. of a Tantra.
<LEND>

<L>16024<pc>0258-a<k1>kOmuda<k2>kOmuda
{#kOmuda#}¦ {%kaumuda, as,%} m. (fr. {%kumuda%}), the
month Kārttika, October-November; ({%ī%}), f. moon-
light, moonshine (from its causing the Kumudas to
blossom); elucidation, (the word Kaumudī being
metaphorically used like other words of similar im-
port ({%candrikā%}) at the end of the title of grammatical
commentaries and other explanatory works to imply
that the book so designated throws much light on
the subject of which it treats, e. g. {%padārtha-kau-%}
{%mudī, prakriyā-k˚, laghu-k˚, vaiṣamya-k˚, sid-%}
{%dhānta-k˚%}); the day of full moon in the month
Kārttika, sacred to the god Kārttikeya; the day of
full moon in the month Āśvina; a festival in honour
of Kārttikeya held on the full moon of the month
Kārttika; a festival in general; N. of a metre con-
sisting of two lines of twenty-four syllables each; N.
of a river. {%—Kaumudī-cāra, as, am,%} m. n. the day
of full moon in the month Āśvina. {%—Kaumudī-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. the moon. {%—Kaumudī-vṛkṣa, as,%}
m. the stick or stand of a lamp.
<LEND>

<L>16025<pc>0258-a<k1>kOmudika<k2>kOmudika
{%Kaumudika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to a water-lily,
abounding with them; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of a female
friend of Umā.
<LEND>

<L>16026<pc>0258-a<k1>kOmodakI<k2>kOmodakI
{#kOmodakI#}¦ {%kaumodakī,%} f. (fr. {%kumodaka%}),
N. of the club or mace of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa, given
to him by Varuṇa.
<LEND>

<L>16027<pc>0258-a<k1>kOmodI<k2>kOmodI
{%Kaumodī,%}¦ f. the club or mace of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>16028<pc>0258-a<k1>kOmBa<k2>kOmBa
{#kOmBa#}¦ {%kaumbha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kumbha%}), put
into a pot.
<LEND>

<L>16029<pc>0258-a<k1>kOmBakAraka<k2>kOmBakAraka
{%Kaumbhakāraka,%}¦ made by a potter (?).
<LEND>

<L>16030<pc>0258-a<k1>kOmBakAri<k2>kOmBakAri
{%Kaumbhakāri, is,%}¦ m. or {%kaumbhakārya, as,%} m.
the son of a potter.
<LEND>

<L>16031<pc>0258-a<k1>kOrama<k2>kOrama
{#kOrama#}¦ {%kaurama, as,%} m., N. of a man; (a
various reading has {%kauruma.%})
<LEND>

<L>16032<pc>0258-a<k1>kOrayARa<k2>kOrayARa
{#kOrayARa#}¦ {%kaurayāṇa, as,%} m. (fr. {%kurayāṇa%}),
a patronymic of Pāka-sthāman.
<LEND>

<L>16033<pc>0258-a<k1>kOrava<k2>kOrava
{#kOrava#}¦ {%kaurava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuru%}), belong-
ing to the Kurus &c.; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from
Kuru; a descendant of Kuru; also {%kauravaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>16034<pc>0258-a<k1>kOravAyaRi<k2>kOravAyaRi
{%Kauravāyaṇi, is,%}¦ or {%kauraveya, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Kuru.
<LEND>

<L>16035<pc>0258-a<k1>kOravya<k2>kOravya
{%Kauravya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Kuru; a
descendant of Kuru; N. of a Nāga, father of Ulūpī.
<LEND>

<L>16036<pc>0258-a<k1>kOravyAyaRI<k2>kOravyAyaRI
{%Kauravyāyaṇī,%}¦ f. a female descendant of Kuru.
{%—Kauravyāyaṇī-putra, as,%} m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>16037<pc>0258-a<k1>kOrukatya<k2>kOrukatya
{%Kaurukatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the family
of the Kurus and Katas.
<LEND>

<L>16038<pc>0258-a<k1>kOrukullaka<k2>kOrukullaka
{%Kaurukullaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a Buddhist sect.
<LEND>

<L>16039<pc>0258-a<k1>kOrupaYcAla<k2>kOrupaYcAla
{%Kaurupañcāla, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the race
of the Kurus and Pañcālas.
<LEND>

<L>16040<pc>0258-a<k1>kOrupaTi<k2>kOrupaTi
{%Kaurupathi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kuru-patha%}), N. of a
teacher.
<LEND>

<L>16041<pc>0258-a<k1>kOrpara<k2>kOrpara
{#kOrpara#}¦ {%kaurpara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kūrpara%}),
being at the elbow.
<LEND>

<L>16042<pc>0258-a<k1>kOrpya<k2>kOrpya
{#kOrpya#}¦ {%kaurpya, as,%} m. (a word borrowed from
the Gr. <lang n="greek">σκοπρίος</lang>), the sign of the zodiac Scorpio.
<LEND>

<L>16043<pc>0258-a<k1>kOrma<k2>kOrma
{#kOrma#}¦ {%kaurma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kūrma%}), belong-
[Page0258-b+ 75]
ing or relating to a tortoise, connected with a tortoise,
acting as one; belonging or relating to the Avatāra
of Viṣṇu as a tortoise; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Kalpa,
the day of full moon of Brahmā; ({%am%}), n., scil.
{%purāṇam,%} title of a Purāṇa on the subject of Viṣṇu's
descent as a tortoise. {%—Kaurmopapurāṇa (˚ma-%}
{%up˚), am,%} n., N. of an Upa-purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>16044<pc>0258-b<k1>kOla<k2>kOla
{#kOla#}¦ {%kaula, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kula%}), belonging
or relating to a family, ancestral, extending over a
whole family or race, sprung from a noble family, of
a good family, well-born; ({%as%}), m. a worshipper of
Śakti according to the left-hand ritual; ({%am%}), n. the
doctrine and practices of the left-hand Śāktas. {%—Kau-%}
{%lopaniṣad (˚la-up˚), t,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>16045<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlakeya<k2>kOlakeya
{%Kaulakeya, as, ī, am,%}¦ sprung from a noble family,
of a good family, well-born; ({%as%}), m. a bastard;
(wrong form for {%kaulaṭeya.%})
<LEND>

<L>16046<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlatTa<k2>kOlatTa
{%Kaulattha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%kulattha%}), made or
prepared with or consisting of Dolichos Uniflorus;
({%am%}), n. a drink prepared with Kulattha.
<LEND>

<L>16047<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlatTIna<k2>kOlatTIna
{%Kaulatthīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sown with Dolichos
Uniflorus (as a field).
<LEND>

<L>16048<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlika<k2>kOlika
{%Kaulika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to a family or
race, customary in a family, ancestral, heritable in
the family; ({%as%}), m. a weaver; a heretic, an im-
postor; a follower of the left-hand Śākta ritual.
<LEND>

<L>16049<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlIna<k2>kOlIna
{%Kaulīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ peculiar or belonging to a
noble family; ({%as%}), m. the son of a female beggar;
a follower of the left-hand Śākta ritual; ({%am%}), n.
rumour, report; evil report, detraction; family scan-
dal; combat of animals, of birds, snakes, &c.; cock-
fighting, &c.; contention of animals as a species of
gambling; a privity, a privy part, the pudenda; high
birth, family descent; an improper act, a bad deed.
<LEND>

<L>16050<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlInya<k2>kOlInya
{%Kaulīnya, am,%}¦ n. high birth, nobility; family
honour; family trouble, family scandal.
<LEND>

<L>16051<pc>0258-b<k1>kOleya<k2>kOleya
{%Kauleya, as, ī, am,%}¦ sprung from a noble family;
of the left-hand Śākta sect; [cf. {%kaula, kaulika,%}
{%kaulīna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16052<pc>0258-b<k1>kOleyaka<k2>kOleyaka
{%Kauleyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ sprung from a noble
family, of good parentage; pertaining to a family;
({%as%}), m. a dog (a domestic animal).
<LEND>

<L>16053<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlya<k2>kOlya
{%Kaulya, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprung from a noble family,
of good family or parentage; of the left-hand
Śākta sect.
<LEND>

<L>16054<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlawineya<k2>kOlawineya
{#kOlawineya#}¦ {%kaulaṭineya, as, ī,%} m. f. (fr.
{%kulaṭā%}), the son or daughter of a female beggar; a
bastard.
<LEND>

<L>16055<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlaweya<k2>kOlaweya
{%Kaulaṭeya, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. the child of a female beggar;
a bastard, the child of a disloyal wife.
<LEND>

<L>16056<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlawera<k2>kOlawera
{%Kaulaṭera, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a bastard, son or daughter
of a disloyal wife; the child of a beggar.
<LEND>

<L>16057<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlava<k2>kOlava
{#kOlava#}¦ {%kaulava, as,%} m., N. of the third
Karaṇa or astronomical period.
<LEND>

<L>16058<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlAla<k2>kOlAla
{#kOlAla#}¦ {%kaulāla, as,%} m., Ved. a potter, =
{%kulāla;%} the son of a potter. {%—Kaulāla-cakra, am,%}
n. a potter's wheel.
<LEND>

<L>16059<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlAlaka<k2>kOlAlaka
{%Kaulālaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ made by a potter, pertaining
to a potter; ({%am%}), n. earthenware, porcelain.
<LEND>

<L>16060<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlitara<k2>kOlitara
{#kOlitara#}¦ {%kaulitara, as,%} m., Ved. an epithet
of the demon Śambara.
<LEND>

<L>16061<pc>0258-b<k1>kOliSika<k2>kOliSika
{#kOliSika#}¦ {%kauliśika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuliśa%}),
resembling a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>16062<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlIka<k2>kOlIka
{#kOlIka#}¦ {%kaulīka, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
bird.
<LEND>

<L>16063<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlIrA<k2>kOlIrA
{#kOlIrA#}¦ {%kaulīrā,%} f. (fr. {%kulīra%}), N. of a
plant, {%= karkaṭa-śṛṅgī.%}
<LEND>

<L>16064<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlUta<k2>kOlUta
{#kOlUta#}¦ {%kaulūta, as,%} m. a king of the Ku-
lūtas; (a various reading has {%kaulūbha.%})
<LEND>

<L>16065<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlmalabarhiza<k2>kOlmalabarhiza
{#kOlmalabarhiza#}¦ {%kaulmalabarhiṣa, am,%} n.,
N. of a Sāman called after Kulmala-barhiṣa.
<LEND>

<L>16066<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlmAzI<k2>kOlmAzI
{#kOlmAzI#}¦ {%kaulmāṣī,%} f. (fr. {%kulmāṣa%}), a
day of full moon on which Kulmāṣa is eaten.
<LEND>

<L>16067<pc>0258-b<k1>kOlmAzIRa<k2>kOlmAzIRa
{%Kaulmāṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sown with or fit for
Kulmāṣa (as a field).
<LEND>
[Page0258-c+ 74]

<L>16068<pc>0258-c<k1>kOvala<k2>kOvala
{#kOvala#}¦ {%kauvala, am,%} n. {%= kuvala,%} the fruit
of the tree Zizyphus Jujuba.
<LEND>

<L>16069<pc>0258-c<k1>kOvera<k2>kOvera
{#kOvera#}¦ {%kauvera, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuvera%}), relat-
ing or belonging to Kuvera, coming from him; ({%ī%}),
f., scil. {%diś,%} the region of Kuvera, the north quarter;
the {%śakti%} or female energy of Kuvera; ({%am%}), n. a
plant, a kind of Costus, Costus Speciosus.
<LEND>

<L>16070<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSa<k2>kOSa<h>1
{#kOSa#} 1¦. {%kauśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuśa%}), made of
Kuśa grass; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%nagara,%} the town of
Kuśa, an epithet of Kānyakubja. {%—Kauśāmbhas%}
{%(˚śa-am˚), as,%} n. Kuśa grass boiled in water.
<LEND>

<L>16071<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSya<k2>kOSya
{%Kauśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ made of Kuśa grass.
<LEND>

<L>16072<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSa<k2>kOSa<h>2
{#kOSa#} 2¦. {%kauśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kośa%}), silken,
silk.
<LEND>

<L>16073<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSika<k2>kOSika<h>1
1. {%kauśika, as, ī, am,%}¦ being in a sheath or scab-
bard, sheathed, incased; silken, silk; ({%as%}), m. one
who is versed in dictionaries; the compiler of a
dictionary, a lexicographer; the fragrant substance
bdellium; marrow; ({%ā%}), f. a drinking-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>16074<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSeya<k2>kOSeya
{%Kauśeya%}¦ or {%kauṣeya, as, ī, am,%} silken, of silk;
({%am%}), n. silk, a silk cloth, a silk petticoat or trowsers,
a woman's lower garments of silk.
<LEND>

<L>16075<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSala<k2>kOSala
{#kOSala#}¦ {%kauśala, am,%} n. (fr. {%kuśala%}), well-
being, welfare, good fortune, happiness, prosperity;
skilfulness, cleverness, experience; ({%ī%}), f. friendly
inquiry, greeting, salutation; a respectful present, a
Nazr; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>16076<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSalikA<k2>kOSalikA
{%Kauśalikā,%}¦ f. a present, a respectful gift or offering.
<LEND>

<L>16077<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSalya<k2>kOSalya
{%Kauśalya, am,%}¦ n. welfare, well-being, good for-
tune, prosperity; cleverness, experience; ({%ā%}), f. see
{%kausalya.%}
<LEND>

<L>16078<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSAmba<k2>kOSAmba
{#kOSAmba#}¦ {%kauśāmba, am,%} n. (fr. {%kuśāmba%}),
N. of a realm; ({%ī%}), f., N. of an ancient city on the
Ganges in the lower part of the Doab, in the vicinity
of Kurrah; also {%vatsa-pattana.%}
<LEND>

<L>16079<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSAmbeya<k2>kOSAmbeya
{%Kauśāmbeya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Kuśāmba.
<LEND>

<L>16080<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSAmbya<k2>kOSAmbya
{%Kauśāmbya, as,%}¦ m. the chief of Kauśambī.
<LEND>

<L>16081<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSASvI<k2>kOSASvI
{#kOSASvI#}¦ {%kauśāśvī,%} f., N. of a town built
by Kuśāśva.
<LEND>

<L>16082<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSika<k2>kOSika<h>2
{#kOSika#} 2¦. {%kauśika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kuśika%}),
of the family of Kuśika &c.; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic
of Viśvā-mitra, who was the son or grandson of Ku-
śika; N. of a teacher, author of the Sūtras of the
Atharva-veda; a brother of Paippalādi; N. of a
grammarian; N. of one of Jarāsandha's generals; an
epithet of Indra (as originally perhaps belonging to the
Kuśikas or friendly to them); N. of a son of Vasu-
deva; N. of an Asura; an epithet of Śiva; N. of
the plant Vatica Robusta [cf. {%kuśika%} and {%aśva-%}
{%karṇa%}]; an ichneumon; an owl; love, passion; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a river in Bahar, commonly called Kosi or
Koosa, created by Viśvā-mitra, or identified with
Satyavatī, the sister of Viśvā-mitra; an epithet of the
goddess Durgā; N. of a Buddhist female beggar
or {%pari-vrājikā; (as, ī, am),%} coming from an owl.
{%—Kauśika-priya, as,%} m. an epithet of Rāma.
{%—Kauśika-phala, as,%} m. the cocoa-nut tree, (said
to have been created by the sage Viśvā-mitra when
endeavouring to form a human being in rivalry of
Brahmā, the nut being the rudiment of the head.)
{%—Kauśikāṅguli, is,%} m., N. of a teacher. {%—Kauśi-%}
{%kātmaja (˚ka-āt˚), as,%} m. Indra's son, an epithet of
Arjuna. {%—Kauśikāyudha (˚ka-āy˚), am,%} n. the bow
of Indra, the rainbow. {%—Kauśikārāti (˚ka-ar˚), is,%}
m. an enemy of owls, a crow; also {%kauśikāri,%} &c.
{%—Kauśikī-putra, as,%} m., N. of a teacher. {%—Kau-%}
{%śiky-oja as,%} m. ({%oja = ojas%}), N. of a tree, {%= śākhoṭā.%}
<LEND>

<L>16083<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSikAyani<k2>kOSikAyani
{%Kauśikāyani, is,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%kauśika%}),
N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>16084<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSikin<k2>kOSikin
{%Kauśikin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils of Kauśika.
<LEND>

<L>16085<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSikAra<k2>kOSikAra
{#kOSikAra#}¦ {%kauśikāra, as,%} m. {%= kośa-kāra,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16086<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSija<k2>kOSija
{#kOSija#}¦ {%kauśija, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>16087<pc>0258-c<k1>kOSItakI<k2>kOSItakI
{#kOSItakI#}¦ {%kauśītakī = kauṣītakī,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0259-a+ 69]

<L>16088<pc>0259-a<k1>kOSIDAnya<k2>kOSIDAnya
{#kOSIDAnya#}¦ {%kauśīdhānya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kośī-%}
{%dhānya%}), a leguminous plant, pulse.
<LEND>

<L>16089<pc>0259-a<k1>kOSIlava<k2>kOSIlava
{#kOSIlava#}¦ {%kauśīlava%} or {%kauśīlavya, am,%} n. (fr.
{%kuśīlava%}), the profession of an actor, a dancer, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16090<pc>0259-a<k1>kOSeya<k2>kOSeya
{#kOSeya#}¦ {%kauśeya.%} See under 2. {%kauśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>16091<pc>0259-a<k1>kOSya<k2>kOSya
{#kOSya#}¦ {%kauśya.%} See under 1. {%kauśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>16092<pc>0259-a<k1>kOzArava<k2>kOzArava
{#kOzArava#}¦ {%kauṣārava, as,%} m. (fr. {%kuṣāru%}),
a patronymic of Maitreya.
<LEND>

<L>16093<pc>0259-a<k1>kOzItaka<k2>kOzItaka
{#kOzItaka#}¦ {%kauṣītaka, as,%} m. (fr. {%kuṣītaka%}),
a patronymic of Kahoḍa; ({%ī%}), f. a patronymic of the
wife of Agastya; N. of a school derived from Kuṣī-
taka; ({%am%}), n., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>16094<pc>0259-a<k1>kOzItaki<k2>kOzItaki
{%Kauṣītaki, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Kuṣītaka.
<LEND>

<L>16095<pc>0259-a<k1>kOzItakin<k2>kOzItakin
{%Kauṣītakin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils of Kauṣī-
taka. {%—Kauṣītaki-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a
Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>16096<pc>0259-a<k1>kOzItakeya<k2>kOzItakeya
{%Kauṣītakeya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of a Kāśyapa;
a patronymic of Kahoḍa.
<LEND>

<L>16097<pc>0259-a<k1>kOzeya<k2>kOzeya
{#kOzeya#}¦ {%kauṣeya.%} See under 2. {%kauśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>16098<pc>0259-a<k1>kOzWa<k2>kOzWa
{#kOzWa#}¦ {%kauṣṭha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%koṣṭha%}), being
in a store-room, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16099<pc>0259-a<k1>kOzWya<k2>kOzWya
{%Kauṣṭhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in the stomach or
abdomen.
<LEND>

<L>16100<pc>0259-a<k1>kOzWila<k2>kOzWila
{#kOzWila#}¦ {%kauṣṭhila%} in {%Mahā-kauṣṭhila, as,%}
m., N. of a Buddhist author.
<LEND>

<L>16101<pc>0259-a<k1>kOzya<k2>kOzya
{#kOzya#}¦ {%kauṣya, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Koṣa.
<LEND>

<L>16102<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsalaka<k2>kOsalaka
{#kOsalaka#}¦ {%kausalaka, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%kosala%}),
N. of a people; (sometimes spelt {%kauśalaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>16103<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsaleya<k2>kOsaleya
{%Kausaleya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%kausalyā%}), a metronymic
of Rāma as son of Kausalyā.
<LEND>

<L>16104<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsalya<k2>kOsalya
{%Kausalya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%kosala%}), belonging to
the people of the Kosalas; ({%as%}), m. a prince of the
Kosalas; ({%ā%}), f. the daughter of a prince of the
Kosalas, the wife of Pūru and mother of Janamejaya;
the wife of Satvat; the wife of Daśa-ratha and mother
of Rāma; epithet of the mother of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra;
of the mother of Pāṇḍu. {%—Kosalyā-nandana, as,%}
m. and {%kosalyā-mātṛ, tā,%} m. an epithet of Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>16105<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsalyAyani<k2>kOsalyAyani
{%Kausalyāyani, is,%}¦ m. a metronymic of Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>16106<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsida<k2>kOsida
{#kOsida#}¦ {%kausida, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kusida%}), relat-
ing or belonging to or coming from a Kusida, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16107<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsIda<k2>kOsIda
{#kOsIda#}¦ {%kausīda, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kusīda%}), con-
nected with or relating to a loan; usurious.
<LEND>

<L>16108<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsIdya<k2>kOsIdya
{%Kausīdya, am,%}¦ n. sloth, indolence; the practice
of usury.
<LEND>

<L>16109<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsuma<k2>kOsuma
{#kOsuma#}¦ {%kausuma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kusuma%}),
flowery, flowering; ({%am%}), n. the ashes of brass, used
as a collyrium.
<LEND>

<L>16110<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsumAyuDa<k2>kOsumAyuDa
{%Kausumāyudha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%kusumāyudha%}),
relating to the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>16111<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsumBa<k2>kOsumBa
{#kOsumBa#}¦ {%kausumbha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kusumbha%}),
prepared with safflower; dyed with safflower, orange,
red; ({%as%}), m. wild safflower.
<LEND>

<L>16112<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsurubinda<k2>kOsurubinda
{#kOsurubinda#}¦ {%kausurubinda, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%kusurubinda%}), N. of a Daśa-rātra.
<LEND>

<L>16113<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsftika<k2>kOsftika
{#kOsftika#}¦ {%kausṛtika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ku-sṛti%}),
following evil courses, fraudulent; a cheat, a knave;
({%as%}), m. a juggler, a conjurer.
<LEND>

<L>16114<pc>0259-a<k1>kOstuBa<k2>kOstuBa
{#kOstuBa#}¦ {%kaustubha, as,%} m. (fr. {%kustubha ?%}),
N. of a celebrated jewel obtained with thirteen other
precious things at the churning of the ocean and
suspended on the breast of Kṛṣṇa; a manner of
joining the fingers; ({%am%}), n. a kind of oil {%(sarṣa-%}
{%podbhava)%}. {%—Kaustubha-lakṣaṇa, as,%} or {%kau-%}
{%stubha-lakṣaka, as,%} m. or {%kaustubha-vakṣas, ās,%}
m. a N. of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>16115<pc>0259-a<k1>kOsTalapura<k2>kOsTalapura
{#kOsTalapura#}¦ {%kausthalapura, am,%} n., N. of a
town.
<LEND>
[Page0259-b+ 72]

<L>16116<pc>0259-b<k1>kOhaliya<k2>kOhaliya
{#kOhaliya#}¦ {%kauhaliya%} or {%kauhalīya (?), ās,%}
m. pl., N. of a school called after Kohala.
<LEND>

<L>16117<pc>0259-b<k1>kOhalIputra<k2>kOhalIputra
{%Kauhalī-putra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>16118<pc>0259-b<k1>knaMs<k2>knaMs
{#knaMs#}¦ {%knaṃs,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%knaṃsati, knaṃ-%}
{%sayati,%} to speak; to shine; [cf. {%kuṃś, kuṃs,%}
{%knas, kraṃś.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16119<pc>0259-b<k1>knaT<k2>knaT
{#knaT#}¦ {%knath,%} cl. 1. P. {%knathati, -thitum,%} to
hurt, injure; to kill.
<LEND>

<L>16120<pc>0259-b<k1>knas<k2>knas
{#knas#}¦ {%knas,%} cl. 4. P. {%knasyati, -situm,%} to
be crooked (in mind or body); to shine:
Caus. {%knasayati, -yitum,%} to shine; [cf. {%kuṃś, kuṃs,%}
{%knaṃs, kraṃś.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16121<pc>0259-b<k1>knu<k2>knu
{#knu#}¦ {%knu%} or {%knū,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%knunāti, -nīte,%}
or {%knūnāti, -nīte,%} to sound, make a noise.
<LEND>

<L>16122<pc>0259-b<k1>knUy<k2>knUy
{#knUy#}¦ {%knūy,%} cl. 1. A. {%knūyate, cuknūye,%}
{%knūyitum,%} to be wet; to make a creaking
sound; to stink: Caus. P. {%knopayati, acuknupat,%}
{%yitum,%} to make wet.
<LEND>

<L>16123<pc>0259-b<k1>knUta<k2>knUta
{%Knūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ stinking, noisy, wet (?).
<LEND>

<L>16124<pc>0259-b<k1>knUyitf<k2>knUyitf
{%Knūyitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ stinking, emitting a stench.
<LEND>

<L>16125<pc>0259-b<k1>kmar<k2>kmar
{#kmar#}¦ {%kmar,%} cl. 1. P. {%kmarati,%} to be crooked
in person, to be crooked in mind, to be
fraudulent or crafty; [cf. {%hvṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16126<pc>0259-b<k1>kya<k2>kya
{#kya#}¦ {%kya, am,%} n., Ved. (according to Sāy. fr. 3.
{%ka = prajā-pati%}), anything agreeable to Prajā-pati.
<LEND>

<L>16127<pc>0259-b<k1>kraMS<k2>kraMS
{#kraMS#}¦ {%kraṃś,%} cl. 1. P. (?) {%kraṃśati,%} to illu-
minate; [cf. {%knaṃs%} and {%knas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16128<pc>0259-b<k1>krakaca<k2>krakaca
{#krakaca#}¦ {%krakaca, as, am,%} m. n. (an onoma-
topoetic word), a saw; ({%as%}), m. the plant Capparis
Aphylla, {%= karīra;%} N. of a part of hell; ({%ā%}), f. the
tree Pandanus Odoratissimus, {%= ketaka;%} [cf. {%kra-%}
{%kara.%}] {%—Krakaca-cchada, as,%} m. the tree Pandanus
Odoratissimus. {%—Krakaca-pattra, as,%} m. the teak
tree. {%—Krakaca-pād, t,%} m. a lizard, a chameleon.
{%—Krakaca-pṛṣṭhī,%} f. a small fish with numerous
small spines in the back, Cojus Cobojus.
<LEND>

<L>16129<pc>0259-b<k1>krakaRa<k2>krakaRa
{#krakaRa#}¦ {%krakaṇa, as,%} m. a kind of partridge,
commonly Kayar, Perdix Sylvatica; [cf. {%kṛkaṇa%} and
{%krakara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16130<pc>0259-b<k1>krakara<k2>krakara
{#krakara#}¦ {%krakara, as,%} m. (an onomatopoetic
word), a kind of partridge, Perdix Sylvatica; the
plant Capparis Aphylla (see {%karīra%}); a saw; a poor
man; disease; [cf. {%krakaca.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16131<pc>0259-b<k1>krakucCanda<k2>krakucCanda
{#krakucCanda#}¦ {%krakucchanda, as,%} m., N. of a
Buddha, a predecessor of Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>16132<pc>0259-b<k1>krakzamARa<k2>krakzamARa
{#krakzamARa#}¦ {%krakṣamāṇa, as, ā, am%} (a part.
fr. an obsolete rt. {%krakṣ%}), Ved. roaring, raving (?).
<LEND>

<L>16133<pc>0259-b<k1>kratu<k2>kratu
{#kratu#}¦ {%kratu, us,%} m. (said to be fr. 1. {%kṛ,%} but
perhaps rather fr. 2. {%kṛ%}), plan, design, intention,
purpose; resolution, determination; desire, will (in
this sense often occurring in the Vedic inst. case,
{%kratvā,%} willingly, readily); power, ability, adequacy,
efficiency, deliberation, consultation; intelligence, un-
derstanding (e. g. {%bhadraḥ kratuḥ,%} right judgment,
good understanding; frequently found in conjunction
with the almost synonymous word {%dakṣa,%} e. g.
{%dakṣa-kratū%} or {%kratu-dakṣau,%} ability and in-
telligence, intelligence and power); inspiration; en-
lightenment; a sacrificial rite or ceremony; sacrifice,
offering, worship; an Aśvamedha sacrifice; ({%Kratu,%}
as intelligence personified, is a son of Brahmā, and
one of the Prajā-patis or ten principal Ṛṣis or saints
mentioned in Manu 1. 35; he is said to be married
to Kriyā and father of the 60, 000 Vālikhilyas, or
according to other authorities the husband of Haya-
śirā); N. of one of the Viśva-devās; also of a
son of Ūru and Āgneyī; N. of the author of
a Dharma-śāstra; [cf. {%a-kratu, adbhuta-kratu,%}
{%abhi-kratu,%} &c.; cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">κράτος</lang>] {%—Kratu-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. a sacrificial ceremony. {%—Kratu-%}
{%cchada, as,%} m. one skilled (?) in sacrifice; a Jina;
(in the latter sense a wrong form for {%kraku-cchanda.%})
[Page0259-c+ 78]
{%—Kratu-jit, t,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kratu-tulya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} equal to an Aśvamedha in merit. {%—Kratu-%}
{%druh, -dhruk,%} m. an enemy of sacrifices, an Asura.
{%—Kratu-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. hating sacrifices, an Asura, a
Daitya or demon. {%—Kratu-dhvaṃsin, ī,%} m. an
epithet of Śiva as ‘destroyer of Dakṣa's sacrifice.’
{%—Kratu-pati, is,%} m. the performer of a sacrifice.
{%—Kratu-paśu, us,%} m. a sacrificial animal; a horse,
especially one fit for an Aśvamedha. {%—Kratu-pā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. watching one's sentiments or intentions.
{%—Kratu-puruṣa, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Kratu-prā, ās, ās, am,%} or {%kratu-prāvan, ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} Ved. becoming inspired or enlightened; (Sāy.)
fulfilling religious rites. {%—Kratu-phala, am,%} n. the
reward of a sacrifice, the object for which it is per-
formed. {%—Kratu-bhuj, k,%} m. one who eats the sacri-
fice, a god, a deity. {%—Kratu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
intelligent, prudent, wise; inspired, enlightened;
(Sāy.) having religious rites; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a son
of Viśvā-mitra. {%—Kratu-maya, as, ī, am,%} endowed
with intelligence. {%—Kratu-rāj, ṭ,%} m. the chief of
sacrifices, the most excellent sacrifice. {%—Kratu-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. the chief of sacrifices, the Rājasūya sacrifice,
performed by a monarch who has made all the
princes of the world tributary to himself. {%—Kratu-%}
{%vikrayin, ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%kratu-vikrāyaka, as, ikā,%}
{%am,%} one who sells the possible benefits of a sacrifice
performed by himself. {%—Kratu-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved.
prudent, wise; causing inspiration, inspiring; (Sāy.)
acquainted with religious rites; granting knowledge;
({%t%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Kratu-saṅkhyā,%} f., N. of
the thirteenth of Kātyāyana's Pariśiṣṭas. {%—Kratu-%}
{%saṅgraha, as,%} m. title of a Pariśiṣṭa of the Sāma-
veda. {%—Kratu-siddhi, is,%} f. completion of a sacri-
fice, attainment of the object for which it is performed.
{%—Kratu-spṛś, k, k, k,%} causing intelligence or in-
spiration. {%—Kratūttama (˚tu-ut˚), as,%} m. the chief
of sacrifices, the Rājasūya sacrifice. {%—Kratvā-magha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving readily.
<LEND>

<L>16134<pc>0259-c<k1>kratUya<k2>kratUya
{%Kratūya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%kratūyati, -yitum,%} to
exert the intellect.
<LEND>

<L>16135<pc>0259-c<k1>kraT<k2>kraT
{#kraT#}¦ {%krath,%} cl. 1. P. {%krathati, -thitum,%} to
hurt, kill; cl. 10. P. {%krāthayati, -yitum,%}
to hurt, injure, kill (with gen. of the person); to
amuse, to delight repeatedly; [cf. {%knath%} and {%klath.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16136<pc>0259-c<k1>kraTa<k2>kraTa
{#kraTa#}¦ {%kratha, as,%} m., N. of a race belonging
to the Yādava people, derived from Kratha, a son of
Vidarbha and brother of Kaiśika; N. of an Asura;
[cf. the next.]
<LEND>

<L>16137<pc>0259-c<k1>kraTana<k2>kraTana
{#kraTana#}¦ {%krathana, as,%} m., N. of an Asura;
N. of a Nāga, a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; N. of a
monkey; ({%am%}), n. slaughter, killing; hemorrhage (?);
snoring, stertor.
<LEND>

<L>16138<pc>0259-c<k1>kraTanaka<k2>kraTanaka
{#kraTanaka#}¦ {%krathanaka, as,%} m., N. of a camel
in the Pañca-tantra; ({%am%}), n. a black sort of Agallo-
chum.
<LEND>

<L>16139<pc>0259-c<k1>krand<k2>krand
{#krand#}¦ {%krand%} or {%krad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%krandati,%}
{%-te,%} or {%kradate, cakranda, cakrade,%}
{%krandiṣyati, -te, akrandīt%} (Ved. Aor. {%akran%}),
{%kranditum,%} to neigh (as a horse); to roar (meta-
phorically applied to the clouds and to wind and
water); to creak (as a wheel); to cry piteously, to
weep, shed tears; to grieve, be confused with sorrow;
to call out piteously to any one (with acc.); to cry
out: Caus. {%krandayati, -yitum,%} to cause to roar or
shake; to cause to weep or lament; to roar, rave:
Desid. {%cikrandiṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%cākrandyate,%}
{%cākranti,%} Ved. {%kanikranti%} (part. {%kanikradat,%}
{%kanikradyamāna%}), to neigh, roar, rave, cry out; to
shake; to creak; [cf. Goth. <nsi>grêta,</nsi> ‘to lament.’]
<LEND>

<L>16140<pc>0259-c<k1>kranda<k2>kranda
{%Kranda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. neighing; a cry, calling out.
<LEND>

<L>16141<pc>0259-c<k1>krandadizwi<k2>krandadizwi
{%Krandad-iṣṭi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. moving with a
great noise or roaring, an epithet of Vāyu.
<LEND>

<L>16142<pc>0259-c<k1>krandana<k2>krandana
{%Krandana, as,%}¦ m. a cat; ({%am%}), n. crying out,
calling; mutual daring or defiance, challenging; weep-
ing, lamenting, sobbing.
<LEND>

<L>16143<pc>0259-c<k1>krandanu<k2>krandanu
{%Krandanu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. roaring, shaking.
<LEND>

<L>16144<pc>0259-c<k1>krandas<k2>krandas
{%Krandas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. battle-cry; ({%asī%}), du. two
[Page0260-a+ 79]
contending armies shouting defiance; (Sāy.) heaven
and earth.
<LEND>

<L>16145<pc>0260-a<k1>krandita<k2>krandita
{%Krandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wept, called or cried out;
({%am%}), n. weeping, calling; mutual daring.
<LEND>

<L>16146<pc>0260-a<k1>krandya<k2>krandya
{%Krandya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. neighing.
<LEND>

<L>16147<pc>0260-a<k1>krap<k2>krap
{#krap#}¦ {%krap,%} cl. 1. A. {%krapate, cakrape,%}
{%krapiṣyate, akrapiṣṭa, krapitum,%} to
long for; to mourn; to lament, implore; to com-
passionate, pity; to go; [cf. {%kṛp,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>16148<pc>0260-a<k1>kram<k2>kram
{#kram#}¦ {%kram,%} cl. 1. P. A., 4. P. {%krāmati%}
(ep. also {%kramati%}), {%kramate%} (ep. also
{%krāmate%}), {%krāmyati%} and {%kramyati%} (?), {%cakrāma,%}
{%cakrame, kramitā, kramiṣyati%} and {%kraṃsyate,%}
{%akramīt%} and {%akraṃsta, kramitum%} (according to
some also {%krāntum%}), to step, walk, go, go towards,
approach (with acc.); to approach in order to ask for
assistance (with loc., e. g. {%tasmin krame,%} I go to
him for assistance); to go across, go over; to ascend;
to have sexual intercourse with; to excel; to per-
vade, take possession of; to fill; to fulfil, accomplish;
to undertake, strive after; A. to proceed well, to gain
a footing, to succeed, have effect; (in gram.) to be
liable to the peculiar arrangement of a Vedic text
called Krama; to be doubled (as a letter or word) in
connection with this arrangement; A. to read ac-
cording to the Krama arrangement of a Vedic text:
Caus. {%kramayati, -yitum,%} to cause to step; {%krama-%}
{%yati%} or {%krāmayati,%} to make liable to the peculiar
arrangement called Krama; to double (a letter or
word) in connection with this arrangement: Intens.
{%caṅkramyate%} or {%caṅkranti,%} to step to and fro, to
walk, wander about: Desid. {%cikramiṣati, cikraṃ-%}
{%sate;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>gra-dus, gra-dior, gran-dis;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>hlaupa,</nsi> ‘to run;’ Old Germ. <nsi>hlaufu, hloufu;</nsi>
<nsi>laufu, loufu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16149<pc>0260-a<k1>krantf<k2>krantf
{%Krantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ going, a goer, who or what
goes.
<LEND>

<L>16150<pc>0260-a<k1>krama<k2>krama
{%Krama, as,%}¦ m. a step; going, proceeding; course
(e. g. {%kāla-kramāt,%} in course of time); passing; the
foot; a position taken (by an animal &c.) before
making a spring or attacking; uninterrupted or
regular progress, order, series, regular arrangement,
hereditary descent, succession (e. g. {%varṇa-krameṇa,%}
in the order of the tribes or castes; {%krameṇa,%} in
regular course, by degrees, according to order, rank,
or series); method, manner (e. g. {%yena krameṇa,%}
in which manner; {%tad-anusaraṇa-krameṇa,%} in a
manner corresponding to that); an undertaking,
enterprise, intention; a peculiar manner or method
of reading and writing Vedic texts, i. e. ‘pro-
gressing step by step,’ so called because the reading
proceeds from the first member (either word or letter)
to the second, then the second is repeated and con-
nected with the third, the third repeated and con-
nected with the fourth, and so on, (this manner of
reading or writing in relation to words is called
{%pada-krama;%} in relation to conjunct consonants
{%varṇa-krama%}); a term for the words or letters
themselves when combined or arranged in this man-
ner; power, strength. {%—Krama-kāla, as,%} m. the
time of the Krama arrangement. {%—Krama-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} produced by the Krama arrangement. {%—Krama-%}
{%jit, t,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Krama-jyā,%} f. the sine
of a planet; declination; [cf. {%krānti-jyā.%}] {%—Krama-%}
{%tas,%} ind. gradually, successively, in order. {%—Krama-%}
{%trairāśika, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a particular
method of applying the direct rule of three (opposed
to {%vyasta˚%} or {%viloma-trairāśika%}). {%—Krama-pada,%}
{%am,%} n. the conjunction of words in the Krama reading,
more usually written {%pada-krama%}. {%—Krama-pāṭha,%}
{%as,%} m. the Krama reading, i. e. a peculiar ‘step by step’
arrangement of a Vedic text made to secure it from all
possible error by, as it were, combining the Saṃhitā-
pāṭha and the Pada-pāṭha, i. e. by giving the words
both as connected and unconnected with following and
preceding words; see under {%krama%} above. {%—Krama-%}
{%pūraka, as,%} m., N. of a tree, {%= vaka%}. {%—Krama-%}
{%prāpta, as, ā, am,%} obtained by succession or here-
ditary descent. {%—Krama-bhaṅga, as,%} m. interruption
[Page0260-b+ 81]
of order, irregularity. {%—Krama-yoga, as,%} m. succes-
sion, regular order, successive or methodical practice;
({%ena%}), ind. in regular manner. {%—Krama-vat,%} ind. in the
manner of the Krama arrangement. {%—Krama-varta,%}
{%as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a district in Kaśmīra.
{%—Krama-śas,%} ind. gradually, by degrees; regularly,
seriatim. {%—Krama-śāstra, am,%} n. rules relating to
the Krama arrangement. {%—Krama-saṃhitā,%} f. a
collection of Vedic texts arranged according to the
Krama method. {%—Kramasaṃhitodāharaṇa (˚tā-%}
{%ud˚), am,%} n. an example from a Krama-saṃhitā.
{%—Krama-saṅgraha,%} title of a treatise; [cf. {%kṛta-%}
{%dāsa.%}] {%—Krama-sandarbha-prabhāsa,%} title of a
chapter ({%khaṇḍa%}) in a particular work. {%—Kramāgata%}
{%(˚ma-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} descended or inherited lineally,
what comes from one's ancestors in regular succession,
arrived in due course or succession. {%—Kramāgata-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. hereditary succession or possession.
{%—Kramāditya (˚ma-ād˚), as,%} m. an epithet of
king Skanda-gupta. {%—Kramādhyayana (˚ma-adh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the Krama reading or arrangement; see {%kra-%}
{%ma-pāṭha%} above. {%—Kramādhyāyin (˚ma-adh˚), ī,%}
m. one who reads the Krama arrangement of a Vedic
text. {%—Kramānuyāyin (˚ma-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} follow-
ing the methodical order. {%—Kramānusāra%} or {%kra-%}
{%mānvaya (˚ma-an˚), as,%} m. regular order, due
arrangement. {%—Kramāyāta (˚ma-āy˚), as, ā, am,%}
descended or inherited lineally, coming from one's
ancestors in regular succession; one who has acceded
to the throne by succession; proceeding in regular
order. {%—Kramāvasāna (˚ma-av˚), am,%} n. the end
of a word in the Krama arrangement of a Vedic text.
{%—Kramokta (˚ma-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} enjoined for
the Krama arrangement. {%—Kramodvega (˚ma-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an ox.
<LEND>

<L>16151<pc>0260-b<k1>kramaka<k2>kramaka
{%Kramaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, proceeding; orderly,
methodical; ({%as%}), m. a student who goes through a
regular course of study, one who proceeds methodi-
cally; one who reads or knows the Krama arrange-
ment of a text.
<LEND>

<L>16152<pc>0260-b<k1>kramaRa<k2>kramaRa
{%Kramaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a step; the foot; a horse; N.
of a son of Bhajamāna; ({%am%}), n. stepping, walking,
going; transgressing; proceeding; approaching or
undertaking anything; treatment of words or letters
according to the Krama arrangement, doubling letters,
words, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16153<pc>0260-b<k1>kramaRIya<k2>kramaRIya
{%Kramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone to, to be gone
beyond.
<LEND>

<L>16154<pc>0260-b<k1>kramadISvara<k2>kramadISvara
{%Kramad-īśvara, as,%}¦ m., N. of the author of the
grammar called Saṅkṣipta-sāra.
<LEND>

<L>16155<pc>0260-b<k1>kramamARa<k2>kramamARa
{%Kramamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, proceeding.
<LEND>

<L>16156<pc>0260-b<k1>kramika<k2>kramika
{%Kramika, as, ā, am,%}¦ proceeding in a fixed order
or methodically; successive.
<LEND>

<L>16157<pc>0260-b<k1>kramitf<k2>kramitf
{%Kramitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ stepping, walking, going,
who or what goes &c.
<LEND>

<L>16158<pc>0260-b<k1>kramya<k2>kramya
{%Kramya, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced by the Krama
arrangement, arising by the Krama.
<LEND>

<L>16159<pc>0260-b<k1>krA<k2>krA
{%Krā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ (at the end of some compounds)
stepping, going; [cf. {%udadhi-krā, dadhi-krā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16160<pc>0260-b<k1>krAnta<k2>krAnta
{%Krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, going, gone or going
over or across; spread, extended; attacking, invading,
gone to or against; overcome, surpassed; ({%as%}), m.
a horse; (in astronomy) declination; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a plant, a kind of Solanum [cf. {%bṛhatī%}]; a species
of the Atyaṣṭī metre [cf. {%kāntā%}]; ({%am%}), n. a step,
({%Viṣṇoḥ krāntam,%} ‘the step of Viṣṇu,’ N. of a
Soma ceremony); a certain aspect in astronomy
when the moon is in conjunction with a planet.
<LEND>

<L>16161<pc>0260-b<k1>krAnti<k2>krAnti
{%Krānti, is,%}¦ f. going, proceeding, a step; overcom-
ing, surpassing; attacking; declination of a planet;
the sun's course on the globe, the ecliptic. {%—Krānti-%}
{%kakṣa, as,%} m. the course of the sun, the ecliptic.
{%—Krānti-kṣetra, am,%} n. a figure described by the
ecliptic. {%—Krānti-jyā,%} f. the sine of the declina-
tion or of the ecliptic. {%—Krānti-pāta, as,%} m. the
intersection of the ecliptic and equinoctial circles, the
equinoctial points or nodes of the ecliptic. {%—Krānti-%}
{%pāta-gati, is,%} f. motion of the nodes of the ecliptic,
precession of the equinox. {%—Krānti-bhāga, as,%} m.
the declination of a point of the ecliptic. {%—Krānti-%}
{%maṇḍala%} or {%krānti-vṛtta, am,%} n. the ecliptic.
[Page0260-c+ 71]
{%—Krānti-valaya, as,%} m. the ecliptic; the space
within the tropics.
<LEND>

<L>16162<pc>0260-c<k1>krAntu<k2>krAntu
{%Krāntu, us,%}¦ m. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>16163<pc>0260-c<k1>krAmat<k2>krAmat
{%Krāmat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going, proceeding over or
across.
<LEND>

<L>16164<pc>0260-c<k1>krami<k2>krami
{#krami#}¦ {%krami, is,%} m. {%= kṛmi,%} a worm.
<LEND>

<L>16165<pc>0260-c<k1>kramu<k2>kramu
{#kramu#}¦ {%kramu, us,%} m. the betel-nut tree,
Areca Faufel or Catechu.
<LEND>

<L>16166<pc>0260-c<k1>kramuka<k2>kramuka
{%Kramuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of several plants, the Areca
or betel-nut tree, Areca Faufel or Catechu; the mul-
berry tree, Morus Indica ({%= brahma-dāru%}); another
tree, a red sort of Lodhra ({%paṭṭikā-lodhra%}); a kind
of fragrant grass, Bhadra-mustaka; the fruit of the
cotton tree; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ī%}), f. the
betel-nut tree, Areca Faufel or Catechu. {%—Kramuka-%}
{%phala, am,%} n. the Areca-nut.
<LEND>

<L>16167<pc>0260-c<k1>kramela<k2>kramela
{#kramela#}¦ {%kramela%} or {%kramelaka, as,%} m. the
camel; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κάμηλος</lang> Lat. <nsi>camelus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16168<pc>0260-c<k1>kraya<k2>kraya
{#kraya#}¦ {%kraya,%} &c. See under rt. {%krī.%}
<LEND>

<L>16169<pc>0260-c<k1>krayaSIrza<k2>krayaSIrza
{#krayaSIrza#}¦ {%krayaśīrṣa, am,%} n. {%= kapi-śīrṣa,%}
the coping of a wall.
<LEND>

<L>16170<pc>0260-c<k1>kravaRa<k2>kravaRa
{#kravaRa#}¦ {%kravaṇa, as,%} m., Ved. a worshipper.
<LEND>

<L>16171<pc>0260-c<k1>kravis<k2>kravis
{#kravis#}¦ {%kravis, is,%} n., Ved. (or {%kravi%} in the
comp. {%a-kravi-hasta,%} q. v.), raw flesh, carrion; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">κρέας;</lang> cf. also {%krūra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16172<pc>0260-c<k1>kravizRu<k2>kravizRu
{%Kraviṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of raw flesh.
<LEND>

<L>16173<pc>0260-c<k1>kravya<k2>kravya
{%Kravya, am,%}¦ n. flesh, raw flesh, carrion; [cf.
Lith. <nsi>krauja-s,</nsi> ‘blood;’ Russ. <nsi>krovj;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>cru;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>hreo;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κρέας;</lang> Lat. <nsi>cruor, cruentus,</nsi>
<nsi>crûdus, caro.</nsi>] {%—Kravya-ghātana, as,%} m. a deer, an
antelope; (killed for its flesh.) {%—Kravya-bhuj, k, k,%}
{%k,%} carnivorous, eating carrion; ({%k%}), m. a Rākṣasa.
{%—Kravya-bhojana, as, ā, am,%} carnivorous. {%—Kra-%}
{%vya-mukha, as,%} m. (?) having flesh in one's mouth,
N. of a wolf in the Pañca-tantra. {%—Kravya-vāhana,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} Ved. carrying corpses, an epithet of Agni
(opposed to {%havya-vāhana%}). {%—Kravyād (˚ya-ad),%}
{%t, t, t,%} consuming flesh or corpses, epithet of the fire
of the funeral pile, or Agni in one of his terrible
forms; epithet of a Yātu-dhāna and other evil beings,
imps, and goblins; N. of a Rakṣas; a beast of prey,
a carnivorous animal. {%—Kravyāda (˚ya-ada), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} carnivorous, an eater of flesh; ({%as%}), m. a goblin,
a Rākṣasa; a lion, a hawk; the fire of the funeral
pile; N. of a people. {%—Kravyāśin (˚ya-āś˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} carnivorous; ({%ī%}), m. a demon; an anthropophagus.
<LEND>

<L>16174<pc>0260-c<k1>kraSaya<k2>kraSaya
{#kraSaya#}¦ {%kraśaya%} (fr. {%kṛśa%}), nom. P. {%kraśa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to emaciate, make thin or lean.
<LEND>

<L>16175<pc>0260-c<k1>kraSita<k2>kraSita
{%Kraśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ emaciated, made thin or lean.
<LEND>

<L>16176<pc>0260-c<k1>kraSiman<k2>kraSiman
{%Kraśiman, ā,%}¦ m. leanness, emaciation.
<LEND>

<L>16177<pc>0260-c<k1>krazwavya<k2>krazwavya
{#krazwavya#}¦ {%kraṣṭavya.%} See rt. {%kṛṣ,%} p. 250.
<LEND>

<L>16178<pc>0260-c<k1>krAkacika<k2>krAkacika
{#krAkacika#}¦ {%krākacika, as,%} m. (fr. {%krakaca%}),
a sawyer.
<LEND>

<L>16179<pc>0260-c<k1>krATa<k2>krATa
{#krATa#}¦ {%krātha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%krath%}), killing,
murder; N. of a prince; of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra;
of a Nāga; of a monkey; a patronymic from Kratha;
[cf. {%krathana.%}] {%—Krātheśvara (˚tha-īś˚)%} or {%kro-%}
{%dheśvara (˚dha-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Āpastamba.
<LEND>

<L>16180<pc>0260-c<k1>krAnta<k2>krAnta
{#krAnta#}¦ {%krānta, krānti,%} &c. See under {%kram.%}
<LEND>

<L>16181<pc>0260-c<k1>krAyaka<k2>krAyaka
{#krAyaka#}¦ {%krāyaka.%} See under rt. {%krī.%}
<LEND>

<L>16182<pc>0260-c<k1>krimi<k2>krimi
{#krimi#}¦ {%krimi, is,%} m. a worm, an insect, &c.,
and the words derived and compounded with {%krimi.%}
See under {%kṛmi.%}
<LEND>

<L>16183<pc>0260-c<k1>kriya<k2>kriya
{#kriya#}¦ {%kriya, as,%} m. (a word borrowed from
the Gr. <lang n="greek">κριός</lang>), the sign of the zodiac Aries.
<LEND>

<L>16184<pc>0260-c<k1>kriyamARa<k2>kriyamARa
{#kriyamARa#}¦ {%kriyamāṇa.%} See rt. 1. {%kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>16185<pc>0260-c<k1>kriyA<k2>kriyA
{#kriyA#}¦ {%kriyā,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%kṛ%}), doing, per-
forming, performance; business; an act, action, un-
dertaking; activity; work; labour; bodily action,
exercise of the limbs; a literary work; medical
[Page0261-a+ 81]
treatment or practice; applying a remedy, cure (e. g.
{%samakriya-tva,%} the being treated according to one
and the same system of medicine; {%viṣamakriya-%}
{%tva,%} the being treated according to different methods);
a religious rite or ceremony, sacrificial act, sacrifice;
obsequies, rites performed immediately after death;
purificatory rites, as ablution &c.; (religious action is
sometimes personified as a daughter of Dakṣa and
wife of Dharma, or a daughter of Kardama and wife
of Kratu); judicial investigation by human means, as
by witnesses, documents, &c., or by superhuman or
ordeals of various kinds; (in grammar) action (as
the general idea expressed by any verb); a verb, (ac-
cording to later grammarians a verb is of two kinds,
{%sakarma-kriyā,%} active, and {%akarma-kriyā,%} intran-
sitive); a noun of action; native lexicographers give
also the following meanings to {%kriyā,%} — atonement;
disquisition; study; means, expedient; instrument,
implement. {%—Kriyā-kara, as,%} m. one who per-
forms an action, a student. {%—Kriyā-kartṛ, tā,%} m.
the doer of an action, an agent. {%—Kriyā-kalāpa,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a grammar; the great body of cere-
monies enjoined in the Hindū laws, a number of
actions of any kind; all the particulars or points of
any business. {%—Kriyā-kāra, as, ī, am,%} one who
does any act, an agent, a performer; ({%as%}), m. a
beginner, a novice, a tyro, a student; an agreement.
{%—Kriyā-kaumudī,%} f. title of a work by Govindā-
nanda. {%—Kriyā-tantra, am,%} n. ‘a Tantra of action,’
one of the four classes of Tantras with Buddhists.
{%—Kriyā-dveṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} one who is averse to
the part of a lawsuit or judicial trial called {%kriyā,%}
i. e. to witnesses, documents, ordeals, &c.; ({%ī%}), m.
one of the five kinds of witnesses, he whose testi-
mony is hurtful to the cause. {%—Kriyā-dvaita, am,%}
n. efficient cause, as resigning all to God. {%—Kriyā-%}
{%nibandha,%} title of a work. {%—Kriyā-nirdeśa, as,%} m.
evidence. {%—Kriyānurūpa (˚yā-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
conformable to the act, according to the action.
{%—Kriyānvita (˚yā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} practising
ritual observances. {%—Kriyā-paṭu, us, us, u,%} clever,
dextrous. {%—Kriyā-patha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
manner of medical treatment or application of reme-
dies. {%—Kriyā-pada, am,%} n. a verb. {%—Kriyā-para,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} attentive to or diligent in the performance
of one's duties. {%—Kriyāpavarga (˚yā-ap˚), as,%} m.
end of an affair, liberation from ceremonial acts.
{%—Kriyā-pāda, as,%} m. the third division of a suit
at law, witnesses, written documents and other proofs
adduced by the complainants, the rejoinder of the
plaintiff. {%—Kriyā-prasaṅga, as,%} m. course of pro-
ceeding. {%—Kriyā-phala, am,%} n. result or conse-
quence of acts. {%—Kriyābhyupagama (˚yā-abh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. special compact or agreement. {%—Kriyām-%}
{%budhi (˚yā-am˚), is,%} m. title of a work of Prāṇa-
kṛṣṇa. {%—Kriyā-yoga, as,%} m. the connection with
an action or verb; the employment of expedients or
instruments; the practical form of the Yoga system
of philosophy, devotion by due performance of the
duties of every day life, active devotion. {%—Kriyāyoga-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m. a section of the Padma-purāṇa. {%—Kriyā-%}
{%lopa, as,%} m. discontinuance or loss of any of the
essential ceremonies of the Hindū religion. {%—Kriyā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who performs an action, active,
busy, engaged in a business, understanding business,
fit for it, possessed of worldly knowledge; performing
ceremonies in the right manner, celebrating religious
rites. {%—Kriyā-vaśa, as, ā, am,%} subject to the in-
fluence of acts; ({%as%}), m. necessity, necessary influence
of acts done or to be done. {%—Kriyāvasanna (˚yā-%}
{%av˚), as, ā, am,%} one who loses a lawsuit through the
statements of the witnesses &c. {%—Kriyā-vācaka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%kriyā-vācin, ī, inī, i,%} expressing an
action (as a verbal noun). {%—Kriyā-vādin, ī,%} m. a
plaintiff; one who states the arguments in a lawsuit.
{%—Kriyā-vidhi, is,%} m. a rule of action; conduct of
affairs, mode of performing any rite. {%—Kriyāvidhi-%}
{%jña, as, ā, am,%} conversant with business, under-
standing the ritual &c. {%—Kriyā-viśāla, am,%} n. title
of the thirteenth of the fourteen Pūrvas or most
ancient Jaina writings. {%—Kriyā-viśeṣaṇa, am,%} n.
[Page0261-b+ 78]
that which defines an action more closely; an adverb.
{%—Kriyā-śakti, is,%} f. capability to act; the power
of action. {%—Kriyā-samabhihāra, as,%} m. repetition
of any act, doing anything repeatedly. {%—Kriyā-sāra,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a work. {%—Kriyā-sthānaka-vicāra,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a Jaina work. {%—Kriyendriya (˚yā-%}
{%in˚), as,%} m. an organ of action, as the hand, foot,
voice, organ of generation and that of excretion;
also called {%karmendriya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16186<pc>0261-b<k1>krivi<k2>krivi
{#krivi#}¦ {%krivi, is,%} m., Ved. a leather bag,
metaphorically ‘a cloud;’ N. of an Asura; a cistern,
a well; the original name of the Pañcālas; [cf.
{%kraivya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16187<pc>0261-b<k1>krI<k2>krI<h>1
{#krI#} 1¦. {%krī,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%krīṇāti, krīṇīte,%}
{%cikrāya, cikriye, kreṣyati, -te, akraiṣīt,%}
{%akreṣṭa, kretum,%} to buy, purchase (with inst. of
the price, and abl. or gen. of the person from which
anything is bought, e. g. {%ka imam Indraṃ daśa-%}
{%bhir dhenubhir mama krīṇāti,%} who will buy this
Indra of me for ten cows ? {%yam mātā-pitror antikāt%}
or {%sakāśāt krīṇīyāt,%} whom he may buy from his
father and mother; {%krīṇīṣva tad daśabhiḥ suvar-%}
{%ṇaiḥ,%} buy that for ten suvarṇas); to barter or ex-
change; to win: Caus. {%krāpayati, -yitum, aci-%}
{%krapat:%} Desid. {%cikrīṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%cekrīyate,%}
{%cekrayīti, cekreti;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>creanaim,</nsi> ‘I buy, I pur-
chase;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πρίαμαι, πέρνημι</lang> Lith. <nsi>prekis, perku</nsi> (?);
Lat. <nsi>pretium;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>hire.</nsi>] {%—Kry-ādi, ayas,%} m.
pl. the roots beginning with {%krī,%} i. e. those of the
ninth class.
<LEND>

<L>16188<pc>0261-b<k1>kraya<k2>kraya
{%Kraya, as,%}¦ m. buying, purchase. {%—Kraya-krīta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} bought, purchased. {%—Kraya-dravya,%}
{%am,%} n. anything for which anything else is bought
or exchanged. {%—Kraya-lekhya, am,%} n. deed of sale,
conveyance, &c. {%—Kraya-vikraya, au,%} m. du. buy-
ing and selling, trade, traffic. {%—Krayavikrayika,%}
{%as,%} m. a trader or merchant, a dealer. {%—Krayavi-%}
{%krayin, ī, iṇī, i,%} one who buys or sells, one who
strikes a bargain. {%—Krayāroha (˚ya-ār˚), as,%} m. a
market, a fair (where goods are piled up for sale).
<LEND>

<L>16189<pc>0261-b<k1>krayaRa<k2>krayaRa
{%Krayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. buying, purchasing.
<LEND>

<L>16190<pc>0261-b<k1>krayaRIya<k2>krayaRIya
{%Krayaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bought or purchased,
purchasable.
<LEND>

<L>16191<pc>0261-b<k1>krayARaka<k2>krayARaka
{%Krayāṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ what is sold, fit to
be sold.
<LEND>

<L>16192<pc>0261-b<k1>krayika<k2>krayika
{%Krayika, as, ā, am,%}¦ buying, purchasing; ({%as%}),
m. a trader, a dealer, a purchaser, a buyer.
<LEND>

<L>16193<pc>0261-b<k1>krayin<k2>krayin
{%Krayin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ a buyer, a purchaser.
<LEND>

<L>16194<pc>0261-b<k1>krayya<k2>krayya
{%Krayya, as, ā, am,%}¦ exhibited for sale, purchasable.
<LEND>

<L>16195<pc>0261-b<k1>krAyaka<k2>krAyaka
{%Krāyaka, as,%}¦ m. a buyer or purchaser; a dealer,
a trader.
<LEND>

<L>16196<pc>0261-b<k1>krI<k2>krI<h>2
2. {%krī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ (at the end of some compounds)
buying.
<LEND>

<L>16197<pc>0261-b<k1>krIta<k2>krIta
{%Krīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ bought, purchased; ({%as%}), m. a
son, one of the twelve kinds acknowledged by the
ancient Hindū law, viz. one purchased from his natural
parents. {%—Krītānuśaya (˚ta-an˚), as,%} m. repenting
a purchase, returning a purchase upon the seller,
admissible in some cases by law.
<LEND>

<L>16198<pc>0261-b<k1>krItaka<k2>krItaka
{%Krītaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ acquired by purchase; ({%as%}),
m. a son bought from his natural parents and adopted
as male issue; also {%krīta-putra (?).%}
<LEND>

<L>16199<pc>0261-b<k1>kreRi<k2>kreRi
{%Kreṇi, is,%}¦ m. and {%kreṇī,%} f. buying, purchasing,
purchase.
<LEND>

<L>16200<pc>0261-b<k1>kretavya<k2>kretavya
{%Kretavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bought, purchasable.
<LEND>

<L>16201<pc>0261-b<k1>kretf<k2>kretf
{%Kretṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a buyer, purchaser.
<LEND>

<L>16202<pc>0261-b<k1>kreya<k2>kreya
{%Kreya, as, ā, am,%}¦ purchasable, to be bought.
{%—Kreya-da, as, ā, am,%} one who exhibits anything
for sale, a seller.
<LEND>

<L>16203<pc>0261-b<k1>krIq<k2>krIq
{#krIq#}¦ {%krīḍ,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%krīḍati,%}
{%cikrīḍa, krīḍiṣyati, akrīḍīt, krīḍitum,%}
to play, sport, amuse one's self, frolic, gambol, dally,
(used of men, animals, the wind and waves, &c.);
to jest, joke with (with inst. or with {%saha%} and inst.,
e. g. {%Droṇena%} or {%Droṇena saha krīḍati,%} he sports
with Droṇa): Caus. {%krīḍayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
play, to allow to play: Desid. {%cikrīḍiṣati:%} Intens.
{%cekrīḍyate, cekrīṭṭi.%}
<LEND>
[Page0261-c+ 78]

<L>16204<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqa<k2>krIqa
{%Krīḍa, as, ā, am,%}¦ playing, sporting; ({%as, ā%}),
m. f. sport, play, pastime, pleasure, amusement (often
in compounds, e. g. {%krīḍā-mudaḥ,%} f. pl. the pleasures
of play, or of amorous sport; {%Kṛṣṇa-krīḍā,%} sport
with Kṛṣṇa; {%jala-krīḍā,%} playing about in water);
disrespect shown by jest or joke. {%—Krīḍā-kānana,%}
{%am,%} n. a pleasure-grove. {%—Krīḍākūta (˚ḍā-āk˚),%}
{%am,%} n. sportive or wanton purpose or desire.
{%—Krīḍā-kopa, as,%} m. assumed anger, anger in
sport. {%—Krīḍā-kautuka, am,%} n. wanton curiosity;
sport, play, pastime, enjoyment; lasciviousness, sexual
intercourse. {%—Krīḍā-khaṇḍa,%} title of the second part
of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Krīḍā-gṛha, am,%} n. a
pleasure-house, a house for amusement. {%—Krīḍā-%}
{%caṅkramaṇa, am,%} n. (?), N. of a place. {%—Krīḍā-%}
{%candra, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a metre
consisting of four lines of eighteen syllables each; N.
of a poet. {%—Krīḍā-nārī,%} f. a harlot, a courtezan.
{%—Krīḍā-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of play or
sport. {%—Krīḍā-mayūra, as,%} m. a peacock kept for
pleasure or amusement. {%—Krīḍā-mṛga, as,%} m. any
animal kept for pleasure, a toy-deer, a toy-animal of
any kind. {%—Krīḍā-ratna, am,%} n. the gem of sports,
copulation. {%—Krīḍā-ratha, as,%} m. a cart, a carriage
used for amusements. {%—Krīḍā-rasātala, am,%} n.
title of a work in the Sāhitya-darpaṇa. {%—Krīḍā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} sportive, playful. {%—Krīḍā-vana, am,%}
n. a pleasure-garden, a park. {%—Krīḍā-veśman,%}
{%a,%} n. a pleasure-house, a house for amusement.
{%—Krīḍā-śakunta, as,%} m. a bird kept for pleasure
or amusement. {%—Krīḍā-śaila, as,%} m. a pleasure-
mountain, a pleasure-mound or hillock in a garden.
{%—Krīḍā-saras, as,%} n. a pleasure-lake. {%—Krīḍā-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. or {%krīḍoddeśa (˚ḍā-ud˚), as,%} m.
a play-ground.
<LEND>

<L>16205<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqaka<k2>krIqaka
{%Krīḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a player, one who sports.
<LEND>

<L>16206<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqat<k2>krIqat
{%Krīḍat, an, antī, at,%}¦ playing, sporting, gamboling.
<LEND>

<L>16207<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqana<k2>krIqana
{%Krīḍana, am,%}¦ n. playing, play, sporting, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16208<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqanaka<k2>krIqanaka
{%Krīḍanaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ playing, sporting; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. or n. (?), a plaything, a toy for children.
{%—Krīḍanaka-tā,%} f. the state of a plaything; {%krīḍa-%}
{%nakatayā,%} after the manner of a plaything.
<LEND>

<L>16209<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqanIya<k2>krIqanIya
{%Krīḍanīya%}¦ or {%krīḍanīyaka, am,%} n. a plaything,
toy, a doll. {%—Krīḍanīyaka-sannibha, as, ā, am,%}
like a toy or doll.
<LEND>

<L>16210<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqamAna<k2>krIqamAna
{%Krīḍamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sporting, playing.
<LEND>

<L>16211<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqi<k2>krIqi
{%Krīḍi%}¦ or {%krīḷi, is, is, i,%} Ved. playing, sporting;
epithet of the winds.
<LEND>

<L>16212<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqitf<k2>krIqitf
{%Krīḍitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a player, one who sports.
<LEND>

<L>16213<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqin<k2>krIqin
{%Krīḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. playing, sporting; epithet
of the Maruts or winds; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>16214<pc>0261-c<k1>krIqu<k2>krIqu
{%Krīḍu%}¦ or {%krīḷu, us, us, u,%} Ved. playing, effer-
vescing (?); epithet of the Soma. {%—Krīḍu-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. playing, playful; epithet of flame.
<LEND>

<L>16215<pc>0261-c<k1>kruYc<k2>kruYc<h>1
{#kruYc#} 1¦. {%kruñc,%} cl. 1. P. {%kruñcati, -citum,%}
to curve or make crooked; to be or be-
come crooked, to move crookedly; to be or become
small, to shrink; to make small, to lessen; to go
towards, approach, arrive at; [cf. Hib. <nsi>cruinn,</nsi>
‘rotundus.’]
<LEND>

<L>16216<pc>0261-c<k1>krukta<k2>krukta
{%Krukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ crooked, curved.
<LEND>

<L>16217<pc>0261-c<k1>kruYc<k2>kruYc<h>2
2. {%kruñc, ṅ,%}¦ m., Ved. a kind of snipe, a curlew.
<LEND>

<L>16218<pc>0261-c<k1>kruYca<k2>kruYca
{%Kruñca, as,%}¦ m. a kind of snipe, a curlew; N. of
a mountain; ({%ā%}), f. a female snipe or curlew; a
kind of Vīṇā or lute.
<LEND>

<L>16219<pc>0261-c<k1>kruYcakIyA<k2>kruYcakIyA
{%Kruñcakīyā,%}¦ f., N. of a place in India.
<LEND>

<L>16220<pc>0261-c<k1>krOYca<k2>krOYca
{%Krauñca, as,%}¦ m. a curlew, heron, &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>16221<pc>0261-c<k1>kruq<k2>kruq
{#kruq#}¦ {%kruḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%kruḍati, -ḍitum,%} to
sink, dive; to be or become thick; (another
form for {%bhṛḍ%}); [cf. {%kūḍ%} and {%krūḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16222<pc>0261-c<k1>kruD<k2>kruD<h>1
{#kruD#} 1¦. {%krudh,%} cl. 4. P. (rarely A.) {%krudh-%}
{%yati, -te, cukrodha, krotsyati, akrudhat,%}
{%kroddhum,%} to become angry, to be wrathful or
angry with (with dat. or gen. or acc. or with {%upari%} and
gen., e. g. {%putrāya%} or {%putrasya%} or {%putram%} or {%putra-%}
{%syopari cukrodha,%} he was angry with his son: Caus.
{%krodhayati, -yitum,%} to make angry, provoke, irritate;
Desid. {%cukrutsati:%} Intens. {%cokrudhyate, cokroddhi;%}
[Page0262-a+ 78]
[cf. Lith. <nsi>rus-tus,</nsi> ‘angry;’ <nsi>rus-tybê,</nsi> ‘anger;’ Lat.
<nsi>crudelis</nsi> (?); Gr. <lang n="greek">κότος;</lang> Germ. <nsi>groll;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>cor-</nsi>
<nsi>ruidhe,</nsi> ‘anger, wrath, motion;’ <nsi>corruigh,</nsi> ‘fury,
resentment.’]
<LEND>

<L>16223<pc>0262-a<k1>krudDa<k2>krudDa
{%Kruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ irritated, provoked, angry,
wrathful; fierce, cruel; ({%am%}), n. anger.
<LEND>

<L>16224<pc>0262-a<k1>kruD<k2>kruD<h>2
2. {%krudh, t,%}¦ f. or {%krudhā,%} f. anger, wrath, passion.
<LEND>

<L>16225<pc>0262-a<k1>kruDmin<k2>kruDmin
{%Krudhmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. wrathful, irritable.
<LEND>

<L>16226<pc>0262-a<k1>kruDyat<k2>kruDyat
{%Krudhyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being angry, feeling pro-
voked.
<LEND>

<L>16227<pc>0262-a<k1>kroDa<k2>kroDa
{%Krodha, as,%}¦ m. anger, wrath, passion; anger
personified as a child of Lobha and Nikṛti; or of
death; or of Brahmā; N. of a Dānava; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a daughter of Dakṣa. {%—Krodha-ja, as, ā, am,%}
proceeding from or engendered by wrath, (especially
applicable to eight vices, hatred, envy, oppression,
violence, &c.) {%—Krodha-maya, as, ī, am,%} a person
of angry disposition; passionate, angry. {%—Krodha-%}
{%mūrchita, as, ā, am,%} overcome or infatuated with
anger, passionate, angry; ({%as%}), m. a kind of perfume,
commonly called Cor, {%= cora%}. {%—Krodha-varjita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} free from wrath, mild, calm. {%—Krodha-%}
{%vardhana, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Krodha-vaśa,%}
{%as,%} m. the power of anger; ({%as, ā, am%}), over-
powered by anger, passionate, violent; N. of several
kinds of evil spirits; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Rakṣas; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa.
{%—Krodhavaśa-ga, as, ā, am,%} subject to anger,
under the influence of anger. {%—Krodha-samanvita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} filled with anger. {%—Krodha-hantṛ, tā,%}
m., N. of an Asura. {%—Krodhānvita (˚dha-an˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} wrathful, angry. {%—Krodhāmarṣa-jihma-%}
{%bhrū (˚dha-am˚), ūs, ūs, u,%} bending the brow with
anger and impatience. {%—Krodhojjhita (˚dha-uj˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} free from wrath, composed, calm.
<LEND>

<L>16228<pc>0262-a<k1>kroDana<k2>kroDana
{%Krodhana, as, ā, am,%}¦ inclined to wrath, passionate,
angry; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Kauśika and pupil
of Garga; also of a son of Ayuta and father of
Devātithi; ({%ā%}), f. a passionate woman, a vixen;
({%am%}), n. the being angry, anger.
<LEND>

<L>16229<pc>0262-a<k1>kroDanIya<k2>kroDanIya
{%Krodhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ anything which may
produce anger, provocative; ({%am%}), n. an injury.
<LEND>

<L>16230<pc>0262-a<k1>kroDAlu<k2>kroDAlu
{%Krodhālu, us, us, u,%}¦ passionate, violent.
<LEND>

<L>16231<pc>0262-a<k1>kroDin<k2>kroDin
{%Krodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ passionate, angry; ({%ī%}), m. a
buffalo; a dog; ({%inī%}), f. mystical name of the
letter {%r.%}
<LEND>

<L>16232<pc>0262-a<k1>kroDizWa<k2>kroDizWa
{%Krodhiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ very irate or wrathful.
<LEND>

<L>16233<pc>0262-a<k1>krunT<k2>krunT
{#krunT#}¦ {%krunth,%} cl. 9. P. {%kruthnāti, krun-%}
{%thitum,%} to embrace, to cling or adhere
to; to be distressed, to pain, injure, kill, suffer pain,
be distressed; (another form for {%kunth.%})
<LEND>

<L>16234<pc>0262-a<k1>krumu<k2>krumu
{#krumu#}¦ {%krumu, us,%} f., Ved., N. of a river, a
tributary of the Indus.
<LEND>

<L>16235<pc>0262-a<k1>krumuka<k2>krumuka
{#krumuka#}¦ {%krumuka, as,%} m., Ved. a piece of
wood or match used to catch the sacrificial fire when
kindled by friction; [cf. {%kṛmuka, kramuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16236<pc>0262-a<k1>kruS<k2>kruS
{#kruS#}¦ {%kruś,%} cl. 1. P. (rarely A.) {%krośati,%}
{%-te, cukrośa, krokṣyati, akrukṣat,%}
{%kroṣṭum,%} to cry out, shriek, yell, bawl, call out, halloo;
to exclaim; to cry, lament; to weep; to sound, make
a singing noise (as the ear): Caus. {%krośayati, -yi-%}
{%tum:%} Desid. {%cukrukṣati:%} Intens. {%cokruśyate,%}
{%cokruśīti;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>klykiu,</nsi> ‘to cry;’ <nsi>kryksztauju;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>cruisigh,</nsi> ‘music, song;’ Lat. <nsi>crocis, crocito;</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">κρώζω, κράζω, κραγγή;</lang> Goth. <nsi>krukya.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16237<pc>0262-a<k1>kruSvan<k2>kruSvan
{%Kruśvan, ā,%}¦ m. a jackal; [cf. {%kroṣṭu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16238<pc>0262-a<k1>kruzwa<k2>kruzwa
{%Kruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ calling out, crying out,
scolding; wept, cried; cried aloud, bawled; called
at, abused; ({%am%}), n. crying, weeping, sobbing;
noise, sound.
<LEND>

<L>16239<pc>0262-a<k1>kroSa<k2>kroSa
{%Krośa, as,%}¦ m. a cry, a yell, a shriek, a shout, a call,
calling out, a noise (e. g. {%karṇa-krośa,%} a noise in
the ears); the range of the voice in calling or hallooing,
a measure of distance, an Indian league, commonly
called a Kos, = 1000 Daṇḍas, = 4000 Hastas, = (1/4) Yo-
jana; according to other authorities = 2000 Daṇḍas,
= 8000 Hastas, = (1/2) Gavyūti; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sā-
man. {%—Krośa-tāla, as,%} m. a large or double drum.
[Page0262-b+ 79]
{%—Krośa-dhvani, is,%} m. a large drum. {%—Krośa-%}
{%mātra-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone the length of a Krośa.
{%—Krośa-mātra-sthita, as, ā, am,%} standing at the
distance of a Krośa. {%—Krośa-yuga, am,%} n. a measure
of two Krośas, = 4000 yards or about 2(1/2) miles;
(this seems to correspond to the modern Krośa,
but the standard varies.)
<LEND>

<L>16240<pc>0262-b<k1>kroSat<k2>kroSat
{%Krośat, an, antī, at,%}¦ crying, calling out.
<LEND>

<L>16241<pc>0262-b<k1>kroSana<k2>kroSana
{%Krośana, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what cries; ({%am%}),
n. crying.
<LEND>

<L>16242<pc>0262-b<k1>kroSin<k2>kroSin
{%Krośin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crying out, calling out, weeping
(e. g. {%uṣṭra-krośin,%} making sounds like a camel).
<LEND>

<L>16243<pc>0262-b<k1>krozwa<k2>krozwa
{%Kroṣṭa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>16244<pc>0262-b<k1>krozwu<k2>krozwu
{%Kroṣṭu%}¦ ({%must%} form strong cases and {%may%} form
weak cases from {%kroṣṭṛ,%} Gram. 128. <nsi>c</nsi>), a
jackal; N. of a son of Yadu and father of Vṛjinīvat
(in this last sense nom. sing. {%kroṣṭā%} or {%kroṣṭus%}).
{%—Kroṣṭu-karṇa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a
place. {%—Kroṣṭu-pāda, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the descendants of this man. {%—Kroṣṭu-%}
{%pucchikā%} or {%kroṣṭu-pucchī,%} f. the plant Hemionitis
Cordifolia; [cf. {%kroṣṭuka-pucchikā%} or {%kroṣṭu-%}
{%vinnā.%}] {%—Kroṣṭu-phala, as,%} m. the tree Ter-
minalia Catappa, {%= iṅguda%}. {%—Kroṣṭu-māna%} and
{%kroṣṭu-māya, as,%} m., N. of two men; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. the descendants of these men. {%—Kroṣṭu-vinnā,%}
f. a plant, either Chaculiya, Hemionitis Cordifolia ({%pṛ-%}
{%śni-parṇī%}), or Ramvāsac; [cf. {%śṛgāla-vinnā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16245<pc>0262-b<k1>krozwuka<k2>krozwuka
{%Kroṣṭuka, as,%}¦ m. a jackal; N. of a man, cf.
{%krauṣṭuki; (ī),%} f. a female jackal; a daughter of
Krodha-vaśā and mother of the yellow apes. {%—Kro-%}
{%ṣṭuka-pucchikā,%} f. a plant, commonly Chaculiya,
Hemionitis Cordifolia; or, according to some, Ram-
vāsac; [cf. {%kroṣṭu-vinnā.%}] {%—Kroṣṭuka-māna, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Kroṣṭuka-mekhalā,%} f. the plant
Hemionitis Cordifolia. {%—Kroṣṭuka-śiras, as,%} n. a
disease of the knee.
<LEND>

<L>16246<pc>0262-b<k1>krozwf<k2>krozwf
{%Kroṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. (not used in the weakest cases,
cf. {%kroṣṭu%}), a jackal; N. of a son of Yadu and
father of Vṛjinīvat; ({%ṭrī%}), f. the female of a jackal;
a kind of Convolvulus; N. of another plant, [cf.
{%lāṅgalī.%}] {%—Kroṣṭekṣu, us,%} m. (fr. {%kroṣṭā =%}
{%kroṣṭṛ%} and {%ikṣu?%}), a kind of sugar-cane, {%=%}
{%śvetekṣu.%}
<LEND>

<L>16247<pc>0262-b<k1>krUq<k2>krUq
{#krUq#}¦ {%krūḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%krūḍayati, -yitum,%} to
make thick; [cf. {%kūḍ, kruḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16248<pc>0262-b<k1>krUra<k2>krUra
{#krUra#}¦ {%krūra, as, ā, am%} (related to {%kravis, kra-%}
{%vya%}), wounded, hurt, sore; bloody; raw; cruel, fierce,
ferocious, hard-hearted; pitiless; hard, harsh, rough;
formidable, terrible; inauspicious (opposed to {%saumya%}
and {%a-krūra,%} and epithet of the first, third, fifth,
seventh, ninth, and eleventh signs of the zodiac, which
are supposed to have a malignant influence); mis-
chievous, destructive; hard, solid; strong (as a bow,
opposed to {%manda%}); hot, sharp, disagreeable; ({%am%}),
ind. in a formidable manner; ({%as, am%}), m. n. boiled
rice; ({%as%}), m. a hawk; a heron; two plants, red
oleander, {%= rakta-karavīra,%} and another plant, {%= bhū-%}
{%tāṅkuśa; (ā),%} f., N. of a plant, {%= rakta-punarnavā;%}
{%(am),%} n. a wound, a sore; blood-shedding, slaughter,
cruelty, any horrible deed; any frightful apparition.
{%—Krūrakarma-kṛt, t, t, t,%} perpetrating cruel
actions; a rapacious animal. {%—Krūra-karman, a,%}
n. a bloody or terrible deed; any hard or difficult
labour; ({%ā, ā, a%}), performing bloody or terrible deeds,
fierce, cruel, unrelenting; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a plant, {%= ka-%}
{%ṭutumbinī = kaṭutumbī%} (?). {%—Krūra-kṛt, t, t, t,%}
performing bloody or terrible deeds, fierce, cruel, un-
relenting. {%—Krūra-koṣṭha, as,%} m. torpid or costive
bowels unaffected by strong purgatives; ({%as, ā, am%}),
one whose bowels are torpid or costive. {%—Krūra-%}
{%gandha, as,%} m. sulphur; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a tree, =
{%kanthārī%}. {%—Krūra-carita, as, ā, am,%} cruel, fero-
cious, addicted to cruel practices. {%—Krūra-tā,%} f. or
{%krūra-tva, am,%} n. cruelty, fierceness. {%—Krūra-dantī,%}
f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Krūra-dṛś, k, k, k,%} evil-
eyed, of terrible aspect, mischievous, villainous, cruel;
({%k%}), m. an epithet of the planet Śani or Saturn; also
an epithet of the planet Mars. {%—Krūra-dhūrta, as,%}
[Page0262-c+ 74]
m. a kind of thorn-apple; [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-dhattūraka.%}]
{%—Krūra-buddhi, is, is, i,%} or {%krūra-mānasa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} cruel-minded. {%—Krūra-rava, as,%} m. a
jackal (?). {%—Krūra-rāvin, ī,%} m. a raven. {%—Krūra-%}
{%locana, as,%} m. an epithet of the planet Saturn (of
an evil or inauspicious aspect). {%—Krūra-sarpa-vat,%}
ind. like an enraged serpent. {%—Krūrākṛti (˚ra-āk˚),%}
{%is,%} m. an epithet of Rāvaṇa, the ruler of Laṅkā.
{%—Krūrākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as,%} m., N. of a minister
of the owl-king Ari-mardana. {%—Krūrācāra (˚ra-%}
{%āc˚), as, ā, am,%} following cruel or savage practices.
{%—Krūrātman (˚ra-āt˚), ā,%} m. an epithet of the
planet Saturn; [cf. {%krūra-dṛś%} and {%krūra-locana.%}]
{%—Krūrāśaya (˚ra-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose
bowels are torpid or costive; containing fierce animals
(as a river &c.); of a terrible or fierce disposition.
{%—Krūropasaṃhata (˚ra-up˚), as, ā, am,%} con-
nected with cruelty.
<LEND>

<L>16249<pc>0262-c<k1>krUrca<k2>krUrca
{#krUrca#}¦ {%krūrca, as, am,%} m. n. the beard; [cf.
{%kūrca.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16250<pc>0262-c<k1>kreRi<k2>kreRi
{#kreRi#}¦ {%kreṇi, kretavya,%} &c. See rt. {%krī.%}
<LEND>

<L>16251<pc>0262-c<k1>krEqina<k2>krEqina
{#krEqina#}¦ {%kraiḍina, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%krīḍin,%} q. v.),
Ved. belonging to the Maruts or winds.
<LEND>

<L>16252<pc>0262-c<k1>krEqinIyA<k2>krEqinIyA
{%Kraiḍinīyā,%}¦ f., scil. {%iṣṭi,%} the Iṣṭi or sacrificial
oblation, sacred to the Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>16253<pc>0262-c<k1>krEvya<k2>krEvya
{#krEvya#}¦ {%kraivya, as,%} m. (fr. {%krivi%}), a king of
the Krivis.
<LEND>

<L>16254<pc>0262-c<k1>kroYca<k2>kroYca
{#kroYca#}¦ {%kroñca,%} &c. Cf. {%krauñca.%}
<LEND>

<L>16255<pc>0262-c<k1>kroWin<k2>kroWin
{#kroWin#}¦ {%kroṭhin, ī,%} m. (?), N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>16256<pc>0262-c<k1>kroqa<k2>kroqa
{#kroqa#}¦ {%kroḍa, as, am, ā,%} m. n. f. (m. in the
earlier language; n. in later works; also f. according
to the lexicographers), the breast, the chest, the
bosom, (at the end of compounds the fem. can only
end in {%ā,%} e. g. {%kalyāṇa-kroḍā,%} a woman with a
well-formed breast), the flank, the hollow above the
hip; the lap; the interior of anything, the inner
part, a cavity, a hollow [cf. {%udara%} and {%garbha%}];
({%as%}), m. a hog; the esculent bulb of a kind of plant,
{%= vārāhī-kanda,%} [cf. {%kroḍa-kanyā%}]; N. of Śani or
the planet Saturn; ({%ā%}), f. a plant, {%= kroḍa-cūḍā.%}
{%—Kroḍa-kanyā,%} f. the esculent bulb of a kind of
plant; [cf. {%kroḍa.%}] {%—Kroḍa-cūḍā,%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= mahā-śrāvaṇikā%}. {%—Kroḍa-pattra, am,%} n. a
marginal writing omitted in its proper place, a post-
script to a letter, a supplement, a codicil to a will.
{%—Kroḍa-parṇī,%} f. a prickly nightshade, Solanum
Jacquini, {%= kaṇṭakārikā%}. {%—Kroḍa-pāda, as,%} m. a
turtle, a tortoise. {%—Kroḍāṅka (˚ḍa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a
tortoise. {%—Kroḍāṅghri (˚ḍa-aṅ˚), is,%} m. a turtle or
tortoise. {%—Kroḍī-mukha, as,%} m. (?) a rhinoceros.
{%—Kroḍeṣṭā (˚ḍa-iṣ˚),%} f. a kind of grass, {%= mustā.%}
<LEND>

<L>16257<pc>0262-c<k1>kroqIkf<k2>kroqIkf
{%Kroḍī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to fold to
the breast, clasp to the bosom, clasp, embrace.
{%—Kroḍī-karaṇa, am,%} n. folding to the breast, em-
bracing. {%—Kroḍī-kṛti, is,%} f. embracing, embrace.
<LEND>

<L>16258<pc>0262-c<k1>krOqa<k2>krOqa
{%Krauḍa, as, ī, am,%}¦ fit for or belonging to a hog.
<LEND>

<L>16259<pc>0262-c<k1>kroRakavarRa<k2>kroRakavarRa
{#kroRakavarRa#}¦ {%kroṇaka-varṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>16260<pc>0262-c<k1>kroTa<k2>kroTa
{#kroTa#}¦ {%krotha, as,%} m. (fr. {%kruth%} for rt.
{%krunth?%}), killing, slaying, murder; [cf. {%krātha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16261<pc>0262-c<k1>kroDa<k2>kroDa
{#kroDa#}¦ {%krodha,%} &c. See under 1. {%krudh.%}
<LEND>

<L>16262<pc>0262-c<k1>kroSa<k2>kroSa
{#kroSa#}¦ {%krośa, kroṣṭu.%} See under {%kruś.%}
<LEND>

<L>16263<pc>0262-c<k1>krOYca<k2>krOYca
{#krOYca#}¦ {%krauñca, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kruñc,%} q. v.),
a kind of curlew or heron (Ardea Jaculator); the
emblem of the fifth Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī;
({%ī%}), f. the female curlew; a daughter of Tāmrā and
mother of the curlews; ({%as%}), m. a mountain, part of
the Himālaya range, situated in the eastern part of the
chain on the north of Asam; one of the Dvīpas or
principal divisions of the world, surrounded by the
sea of curds; N. of a Rakṣas; N. of a pupil of
Śāka-pūrṇi; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%astra,%} N. of a mystical
weapon; N. of a Sāman; also of a particular Vedic
formula. {%—Krauñca-dāraṇa%} or {%krauñca-sūdana, %}
[Page0263-a+ 73]
{%as,%} m. an epithet of the god of war, Kārttikeya, who
tore asunder the mountain Krauñca. {%—Krauñca-%}
{%dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of a Dvīpa, {%= krauñca%}. {%—Krauñca-%}
{%pakṣa, as, ā, am,%} an epithet of horses, ‘the flanks
of which are similar to the wings of a curlew.’
{%—Krauñca-padā,%} f., N. of a metre consisting of
four lines of twenty-five syllables each. {%—Krauñca-%}
{%padī,%} f., N. of a place. {%—Krauñca-pura, as,%} m.,
N. of a town. {%—Krauñca-bandha, as,%} m. a parti-
cular kind of knot. {%—Krauñca-randhra, am,%} n. the
Krauñca pass, caused by the deity Kārttikeya and by
Paraśu-rāma; see {%krauñcāri%} below. {%—Krauñca-vat,%}
{%ān,%} m., N. of a mountain, {%= krauñca%}. {%—Krauñcā-%}
{%dana (˚ca-ad˚), am,%} n. the fibres of the stalk of the
lotus ({%mṛṇāla%}); N. of several plants, {%= gheñculī;%}
another plant, {%= ciñcoṭaka;%} long pepper; ({%ī%}), f. the
seed of the lotus. {%—Krauñcāraṇya (˚ca-ar˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a forest. {%—Krauñcārāti (˚ca-ar˚), is,%} m. an
epithet of the deity Kārttikeya. {%—Krauñcāri (˚ca-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. an epithet of the deity Kārttikeya and
of the hero and Avatāra Paraśu-rāma, who with his
arrows made a pass or defile through the Krauñca
mountain.
<LEND>

<L>16264<pc>0263-a<k1>krOYcikIputra<k2>krOYcikIputra
{%Krauñcikī-putra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>16265<pc>0263-a<k1>krOqa<k2>krOqa
{#krOqa#}¦ {%krauḍa.%} See under {%kroḍa%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>16266<pc>0263-a<k1>krOrya<k2>krOrya
{#krOrya#}¦ {%kraurya, am,%} n. (fr. {%krūra%}), cruelty,
fierceness, anger; hard-heartedness; terribleness.
<LEND>

<L>16267<pc>0263-a<k1>krOSaSatika<k2>krOSaSatika
{#krOSaSatika#}¦ {%krauśaśatika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%krośa%}
{%+ śata%}), one who goes a hundred Krośas or leagues;
one who deserves to be approached from a distance of a
hundred Krośas or leagues (as a religious teacher &c.).
<LEND>

<L>16268<pc>0263-a<k1>krOzwika<k2>krOzwika
{#krOzwika#}¦ {%krauṣṭika, as,%} m. a wrong form for
{%krauṣṭuki,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16269<pc>0263-a<k1>krOzwukarRa<k2>krOzwukarRa
{#krOzwukarRa#}¦ {%krauṣṭukarṇa, as, ī, am,%} coming
from Kroṣṭu-karṇa.
<LEND>

<L>16270<pc>0263-a<k1>krOzwuki<k2>krOzwuki
{#krOzwuki#}¦ {%krauṣṭuki, is,%} m. (a patronymic
fr. {%kroṣṭuka%}), N. of a grammarian; N. of an
astrologer; N. of a warrior-tribe belonging to the
Trigarta-ṣaṣṭhās.
<LEND>

<L>16271<pc>0263-a<k1>krOzwukIya<k2>krOzwukIya
{%Krauṣṭukīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the warrior-
tribe called Krauṣṭuki.
<LEND>

<L>16272<pc>0263-a<k1>kryAdi<k2>kryAdi
{#kryAdi#}¦ {%kry-ādi,%} a term of grammar to de-
note the roots of the ninth class of which {%krī%} is the
first.
<LEND>

<L>16273<pc>0263-a<k1>klaT<k2>klaT
{#klaT#}¦ {%klath,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%klathati, -thi-%}
{%tum,%} to turn round, revolve, to form into
clots or lumps; to kill or hurt; [cf. Lat. <nsi>clades.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16274<pc>0263-a<k1>klaTana<k2>klaTana
{%Klathana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. turning round, forming
into clots or lumps.
<LEND>

<L>16275<pc>0263-a<k1>kladIvat<k2>kladIvat
{#kladIvat#}¦ {%kladīvat, ān, atī, at%} (rt. {%klid?%}),
Ved. wet, moist (?).
<LEND>

<L>16276<pc>0263-a<k1>kland<k2>kland
{#kland#}¦ {%kland%} or {%klad%} [cf. rt. {%krand%}], cl. 1.
P. {%klandati, caklanda, klandiṣyati,%}
{%klanditum,%} to call; to lament; to weep; cl. 1. A.
{%klandate%} or {%kladate%} &c., to be confounded or
troubled; to grieve; [cf. Hib. <nsi>glaodhaim,</nsi> ‘I call,
bawl, roar, shout;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">κλάζω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>16277<pc>0263-a<k1>klanda<k2>klanda
{%Klanda, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%kland%} for {%krand?%}), Ved.
crying, noisy (?).
<LEND>

<L>16278<pc>0263-a<k1>klap<k2>klap
{#klap#}¦ {%klap,%} cl. 10. P. {%klāpayati, -yitum,%} to
speak barbarously; (another form for {%hlap%});
[cf. Lith. <nsi>kalpu,</nsi> ‘to speak.’]
<LEND>

<L>16279<pc>0263-a<k1>klam<k2>klam
{#klam#}¦ {%klam%} [cf. rt. {%śram,%} the rt. {%klam%}
seems principally confined to the later arti-
ficial poems], cl. 1. 4. P. {%klāmati, klāmyati, ca-%}
{%klāma, klamiṣyati, klamitum,%} to be or become
fatigued, to be weary or tired or exhausted; to be de-
pressed; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κάμνω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>lentus</nsi> for <nsi>clentus</nsi> (?);
Germ. <nsi>lahm;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>lam;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>lumas.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16280<pc>0263-a<k1>klama<k2>klama
{%Klama, as,%}¦ m. fatigue, exhaustion, languor,
weariness.
<LEND>

<L>16281<pc>0263-a<k1>klamaTa<k2>klamaTa
{%Klamatha, as,%}¦ m. fatigue, exhaustion.
<LEND>

<L>16282<pc>0263-a<k1>klamaTu<k2>klamaTu
{%Klamathu, us,%}¦ m. fatigue, languor.
<LEND>
[Page0263-b+ 78]

<L>16283<pc>0263-b<k1>klamin<k2>klamin
{%Klamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ becoming tired, languishing,
exhausted, weary. {%—Klami-tā,%} f. or {%klami-tva, am,%}
n. exhaustion, {{langour->languor||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}, fatigue.
<LEND>

<L>16284<pc>0263-b<k1>klAnta<k2>klAnta
{%Klānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ tired, fatigued, exhausted,
languishing; wearied; depressed in spirits or ex-
hausted; dried up, withering; thin, emaciated.
{%—Klānta-manas, ās, ās, as,%} low-spirited, languid,
melancholy. {%—Klānta-vadana, as, ā, am,%} having a
weary face.
<LEND>

<L>16285<pc>0263-b<k1>klAnti<k2>klAnti
{%Klānti, is,%}¦ f. fatigue, weariness. {%—Klānti-cchid,%}
{%t, t, t,%} relieving fatigue, refreshing, invigorating.
{%—Klānti-ccheda, as,%} m. refreshing, restoring, re-
moving fatigue.
<LEND>

<L>16286<pc>0263-b<k1>klav<k2>klav
{#klav#}¦ {%klav,%} cl. 1. A. {%klavate,%} to fear, be
afraid: Caus. {%klavayati.%}
<LEND>

<L>16287<pc>0263-b<k1>klid<k2>klid
{#klid#}¦ {%klid,%} cl. 4. P. {%klidyati, cikleda,%}
{%klediṣyati%} and {%kletsyati, aklidat,%}
{%kleditum%} and {%klettum,%} to be or become wet or
damp: Caus. P. {%kledayati, -yitum,%} to bedew, wet,
moisten: Desid. {%ciklediṣati ciklidiṣati, ciklit-%}
{%sati:%} Intens. {%ceklidyate, cekletti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κλύζω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>16288<pc>0263-b<k1>klinna<k2>klinna
{%Klinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ moistened, wet; running (as
an eye). {%—Klinna-netra, as, ā, am,%} having moist
eyes, pitiful. {%—Klinna-vartman, a,%} n. excess of the
lacrymal discharge, watering of the eyes. {%—Klinna-%}
{%hṛd, t, t, t,%} tender-hearted. {%—Klinnākṣa (˚na-%}
{%ak˚), as, ā, am,%} having moist eyes, blear-eyed.
<LEND>

<L>16289<pc>0263-b<k1>kleda<k2>kleda
{%Kleda, as,%}¦ m. wetness, dampness, moisture; run-
ning, discharge from a sore. {%—Kleda-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} moist, flowing.
<LEND>

<L>16290<pc>0263-b<k1>kledaka<k2>kledaka
{%Kledaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ wetting, moistening, making
wet or moist; ({%as%}), m. phlegm in the stomach,
excess of saliva.
<LEND>

<L>16291<pc>0263-b<k1>kledan<k2>kledan
{%Kledan, ā,%}¦ m. the moon.
<LEND>

<L>16292<pc>0263-b<k1>kledana<k2>kledana
{%Kledana, as, ī, am,%}¦ moistening, making wet;
({%as%}), m. phlegm, the phlegmatic or watery humor
[cf. {%kapha%}]; a species of phlegm; ({%am%}), n. wet-
ting, moistening; oozing, trickling.
<LEND>

<L>16293<pc>0263-b<k1>kledu<k2>kledu
{%Kledu, us,%}¦ m. the moon; a morbid combination
of the three humors of the body ({%sannipāta%}), com-
plication of disorders.
<LEND>

<L>16294<pc>0263-b<k1>kledya<k2>kledya
{%Kledya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be moistened, to be wetted.
<LEND>

<L>16295<pc>0263-b<k1>klind<k2>klind
{#klind#}¦ {%klind,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%klindati, -te,%} to
lament; [cf. {%krand%} and {%kland.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16296<pc>0263-b<k1>klib<k2>klib
{#klib#}¦ {%klib, p,%} f. (?), Ved. accomplishment
(fr. {%kḷp?%}); (Sāy.) the created world; (a various
reading has {%kḷb.%})
<LEND>

<L>16297<pc>0263-b<k1>kliS<k2>kliS
{#kliS#}¦ {%kliś,%} cl. 9. P. {%kliśnāti, cikleśa, kle-%}
{%śiṣyati%} and {%klekṣyati, akleśīt%} and
{%aklikṣat, kleśitum%} and {%kleṣṭum,%} to torment,
torture, trouble, molest; to cause pain, afflict, dis-
tress; to suffer, feel pain, suffer distress; cl. 4. A.
{%kliśyate, cikliśe, kleśiṣyate, akleśiṣṭa, kleśi-%}
{%tum,%} to be tormented or molested; to be afflicted,
feel pain, suffer: Caus. P. A. {%kleśayati, -te, -yitum,%}
to torment, molest: Desid. {%ciklikṣati, cikliśiṣati,%}
{%cikleśiṣati, cikliśiṣate, cikleśiṣate:%} Intens.
{%cekliśyate, cekleṣṭi;%} [cf. Cambro-Brit. <nsi>glœsi,</nsi> ‘to
pain, to cause a pang, to suffer a pang.’]
<LEND>

<L>16298<pc>0263-b<k1>kliSita<k2>kliSita
{%Kliśita%}¦ or {%kliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} molested, tor-
mented, distressed, afflicted; wearied, hurt, injured;
being in a bad condition, worn; put to shame; con-
tradictory, inconsistent; connected with pain or
suffering; ({%am%}), ind. in distress. {%—Kliśita-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} suffering pain or distress. {%—Kliṣṭa-vart-%}
{%man, a,%} n. a disease of the eyelids; [cf. {%klinna-%}
{%vartman.%}] {%—Kliṣṭa-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} leading a
wretched life.
<LEND>

<L>16299<pc>0263-b<k1>kliSyamAna<k2>kliSyamAna
{%Kliśyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being distressed.
<LEND>

<L>16300<pc>0263-b<k1>klizwi<k2>klizwi
{%Kliṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. affliction, calamity, distress; service.
<LEND>

<L>16301<pc>0263-b<k1>kleSa<k2>kleSa
{%Kleśa, as,%}¦ m. pain, affliction, distress; pain from
disease, anguish; wrath, anger; worldly occupation;
care, trouble. {%—Kleśa-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} causing pain,
afflicting. {%—Kleśa-kṣama, as, ā, am,%} capable of
enduring pain and trouble. {%—Kleśa-da, as, ā, am,%}
distressing. {%—Kleśa-nāśana, as, ā, am,%} destroying
or palliating trouble. {%—Kleśa-prahāṇa, am,%} n. ter-
mination of distress, especially of worldly cares and
[Page0263-c+ 73]
passions. {%—Kleśa-bhāgin, ī, inī, i,%} having trouble.
{%—Kleśa-bhāj, k, k, k,%} having trouble. {%—Kleśā-%}
{%paha (˚śa-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} allaying pain or suffer-
ing, consolatory, consoling; palliative; ({%as%}), m. a son.
<LEND>

<L>16302<pc>0263-c<k1>kleSaka<k2>kleSaka
{%Kleśaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ giving pain, troublesome,
annoying, afflicting.
<LEND>

<L>16303<pc>0263-c<k1>kleSita<k2>kleSita
{%Kleśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pained, distressed, afflicted.
<LEND>

<L>16304<pc>0263-c<k1>kleSin<k2>kleSin
{%Kleśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ connected with pain, causing pain
or suffering; hurting, injuring.
<LEND>

<L>16305<pc>0263-c<k1>klezwf<k2>klezwf
{%Kleṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. one who causes pain or suffering.
<LEND>

<L>16306<pc>0263-c<k1>klIta<k2>klIta
{#klIta#}¦ {%klīta, as,%} m. a kind of poisonous
insect.
<LEND>

<L>16307<pc>0263-c<k1>klItaka<k2>klItaka
{#klItaka#}¦ {%klītaka, am,%} n. a kind of plant with
a poisonous root, Glycyrrhiza Glabra ?. ({%Kāla-klī-%}
{%taka, am,%} n. the Indigo plant.)
<LEND>

<L>16308<pc>0263-c<k1>klItakikA<k2>klItakikA
{%Klītakikā,%}¦ f. the Indigo plant, Indigofera Indica.
<LEND>

<L>16309<pc>0263-c<k1>klItanaka<k2>klItanaka
{#klItanaka#}¦ {%klītanaka, am,%} n. a kind of plant,
{%= ati-rasā.%}
<LEND>

<L>16310<pc>0263-c<k1>klIb<k2>klIb
{#klIb#}¦ {%klīb%} or {%klīv,%} cl. 1. A. {%klībate%} or
{%klīvate, ciklībe, klībiṣyate, klībitum%}
(according to some also {%klīvāyate%}), to be impotent,
to behave like one who is impotent or like a eunuch;
to be timorous, to be modest or unassuming.
<LEND>

<L>16311<pc>0263-c<k1>klIba<k2>klIba
{%Klība%}¦ or {%klīva, as, ā, am,%} impotent, emasculated,
a eunuch; unmanly, timorous, timid; weak, weak-
minded, base; idle, slothful; a coward; of the
neuter gender; ({%as, am%}), m. n. the neuter gender;
[cf. Hib. <nsi>cailltean,</nsi> ‘eunuch;’ <nsi>caillte,</nsi> ‘castrated;’
<nsi>caillim,</nsi> ‘I geld, castrate, destroy;’ <nsi>cailleadh,</nsi> ‘emas-
culation.’] {%—Klība-tā,%} f. or {%klība-tva, am,%} n. impo-
tence, the being neuter. {%—Klība-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. similar to a eunuch. {%—Klība-liṅga, am,%} n. the
neuter gender. {%—Klīva-vat,%} ind. like a base man,
like a weak-minded, effeminate person.
<LEND>

<L>16312<pc>0263-c<k1>klEbya<k2>klEbya
{%Klaibya%}¦ or {%klaivya, am,%} n. absence of virility,
impotence, unmanly behaviour, unmanliness, weak-
ness, timidity, cowardice; the neuter gender.
<LEND>

<L>16313<pc>0263-c<k1>klu<k2>klu
{#klu#}¦ {%klu,%} cl. 1. A. {%klavate,%} to move.
<LEND>

<L>16314<pc>0263-c<k1>kleS<k2>kleS
{#kleS#}¦ {%kleś,%} cl. 1. A. {%kleśate, cikleśe, kleśi-%}
{%tum,%} to speak articulately; to impede or
obstruct; to strike, kill; to distress.
<LEND>

<L>16315<pc>0263-c<k1>kleSa<k2>kleSa
{#kleSa#}¦ {%kleśa.%} See under rt. {%kliś.%}
<LEND>

<L>16316<pc>0263-c<k1>klEtakika<k2>klEtakika
{#klEtakika#}¦ {%klaitakika, am,%} n. a fermented
liquor prepared from the root of the plant Klītaka
({%klītakikā?%}), wine, spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>16317<pc>0263-c<k1>klEbya<k2>klEbya
{#klEbya#}¦ {%klaibya%} or {%klaivya.%} See under {%klība.%}
<LEND>

<L>16318<pc>0263-c<k1>kloma<k2>kloma
{#kloma#}¦ {%kloma, am,%} n. or {%kloman, ā, a,%} m. n.
(in the earlier language m.; in the later n.), the
bladder; the lungs, the right lung; bile (?).
<LEND>

<L>16319<pc>0263-c<k1>kloSa<k2>kloSa
{#kloSa#}¦ {%klośa, as,%} m., Ved. {%= krośa,%} calling
out to; (Sāy.) fear.
<LEND>

<L>16320<pc>0263-c<k1>kva<k2>kva
{#kva#}¦ {%kva,%} ind. (fr. 1. {%ku;%} according to Pāṇ.
V. 3, 12, VII. 2, 104, formed first fr. {%kim%} and then
fr. the substitute {%ku%} with affix {%at%}), where? in what
place? whither? how? when? (rarely) how much
less! [cf. {%kutas%}]; connected with the particles {%id,%}
{%svid, nu,%} &c., in the same manner as 2. {%ka,%} q. v.
(e. g. {%kva nu te kṣatriyāḥ śūrāḥ,%} where now are
those Kṣatriya heroes ?); {%kva%} appears to be used as
a loc. of 2. {%ka%} in Manu X. 66. (e. g. {%kva śreyas-%}
{%tvam,%} in whom is the preference?); {%kva%} with {%bhū,%}
{%as,%} or {%gata,%} may denote, how is it with? what has
become of? (e. g. {%kva aham bhavāni,%} what will
become of me? {%kva gatas tava mayy anurāgaḥ,%}
what has become of your affection for me?), or {%kva%}
alone may have the same meaning (e. g. {%kva sukham,%}
where is happiness? i. e. there is no such thing as
happiness); {%kva — kva%} or {%kutra — kva%} implies ex-
cessive incongruity, where is this? where is that?
how distant is this from that, how little does this
agree with that (e. g. {%kva śūrya-prabhavo vaṃśaḥ%}
{%kva ca alpa-viṣayā matiḥ,%} how can my limited
intellect describe the solar race?); {%kvāpi (kva api),%}
[Page0264-a+ 74]
anywhere, somewhere, to some place, to any place,
in a certain place; sometimes; {%kva ca,%} anywhere,
somewhere, at any time; {%kva ca na,%} anywhere
(originally negative); {%na kvacana,%} nowhere; {%kva-%}
{%cid,%} anywhere, somewhere, to any place, in a certain
place; in a certain case, sometimes; at some time,
once upon a time; {%kvacid — kvacid,%} here — there,
here and there, in various places; now — then, now
and then; {%na kvacid,%} nowhere, never, by no means;
{%yatra kvāpi%} or {%yatra kvaca,%} wherever, whereso-
ever, to whatsoever place, anywhere; {%yatra kva-%}
{%cana,%} to whatsoever place, hither and thither, any-
where; whenever, at any time, when, in any case or
matter whatever; {%yatra kva vātha — tatra tatrāpi,%}
wherever — there. {%—Kva-janman, ā, ā, a,%} where
born? {%—Kva-nivāsa, as, ā, am,%} where dwelling?
<LEND>

<L>16321<pc>0264-a<k1>kvatya<k2>kvatya
{%Kvatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%kvatyaka, as, ikā, am,%}
of or belonging to where or what place? being
where?
<LEND>

<L>16322<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaNgu<k2>kvaNgu
{#kvaNgu#}¦ {%kvaṅgu, us,%} m. {%= kaṅgu,%} a sort of
Panic, Panicum Italicum.
<LEND>

<L>16323<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaR<k2>kvaR
{#kvaR#}¦ {%kvaṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%kvaṇati, cakvāṇa,%}
{%kvaṇitum,%} to sound; to hum (as a bee);
to make any sound; to tinkle: Caus. {%kvaṇayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cause to sound, to make sound, to twang,
to produce a sound with anything; e. g. {%nūpuraiḥ,%}
with anklet ornaments; [cf. Lat. <nsi>cano;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hana,</nsi>
‘a cock.’]
<LEND>

<L>16324<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaRa<k2>kvaRa
{%Kvaṇa, as,%}¦ m. the sound or tone of any musical
instrument; sound in general.
<LEND>

<L>16325<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaRat<k2>kvaRat
{%Kvaṇat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sounding.
<LEND>

<L>16326<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaRana<k2>kvaRana
{%Kvaṇana, am,%}¦ n. sounding, the sound of any
musical instrument; ({%as%}), m. a small earthen pot or
boiler.
<LEND>

<L>16327<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaRita<k2>kvaRita
{%Kvaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, twanged (as a
stringed instrument); ({%am%}), n. sound, twang.
<LEND>

<L>16328<pc>0264-a<k1>kvARa<k2>kvARa
{%Kvāṇa, as,%}¦ m. the sound of a musical instrument;
sound in general.
<LEND>

<L>16329<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaT<k2>kvaT
{#kvaT#}¦ {%kvath,%} cl. 1. P. {%kvathati, cakvātha,%}
{%kvathiṣyati, akvathīt, kvathitum,%} to
boil, stew, decoct, prepare by heat; to digest: Caus.
{%kvāthayati, -yitum,%} to cause to boil, to boil, decoct.
<LEND>

<L>16330<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaTa<k2>kvaTa
{%Kvatha, as,%}¦ m. a decoction, an extract.
<LEND>

<L>16331<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaTana<k2>kvaTana
{%Kvathana, am,%}¦ n. boiling, decocting.
<LEND>

<L>16332<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaTita<k2>kvaTita
{%Kvathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ boiled, decocted, stewed,
digested.
<LEND>

<L>16333<pc>0264-a<k1>kvATa<k2>kvATa
{%Kvātha, as,%}¦ m. a decoction, any solution or infusion
prepared with a continued or gentle heat; the mixture
of the materials for a decoction; pain, sorrow, cala-
mity, distress. {%—Kvāthodbhava (˚tha-ud˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} produced by boiling; ({%am%}), n. blue vitriol used
as a collyrium.
<LEND>

<L>16334<pc>0264-a<k1>kvaDaHsTa<k2>kvaDaHsTa
{#kvaDaHsTa#}¦ {%kv-adhaḥ-stha, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%ku-%}
{%adhas-stha%}), Ved. standing below on the earth.
<LEND>

<L>16335<pc>0264-a<k1>kvayi<k2>kvayi
{#kvayi#}¦ {%kvayi, is,%} m., Ved. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>16336<pc>0264-a<k1>kvala<k2>kvala
{#kvala#}¦ {%kvala, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), Ved. a
substance used for coagulating other substances.
<LEND>

<L>16337<pc>0264-a<k1>kvAcitka<k2>kvAcitka
{#kvAcitka#}¦ {%kvācitka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kva-cit%}),
met with somewhere or occasionally; rare, un-
common.
<LEND>

<L>16338<pc>0264-a<k1>kvATi<k2>kvATi
{#kvATi#}¦ {%kvāthi, is,%} m., Ved. an epithet of
Agastya.
<LEND>

<L>16339<pc>0264-a<k1>kvApi<k2>kvApi
{#kvApi#}¦ {%kvāpi,%} ind. somewhere, &c. See {%kva.%}
<LEND>

<L>16340<pc>0264-a<k1>kvel<k2>kvel
{#kvel#}¦ {%kvel,%} cl. 1. P. {%kvelati,%} to shake or
move; (a less correct form for {%kṣvel.%})
<LEND>

<L>16341<pc>0264-a<k1>kSA<k2>kSA
{#kSA#}¦ {%kśā,%} a root forming, according to
native grammarians, some tenses of {%khyā%}
and {%cakṣ%} (e. g. the Fut. {%kśāsyati;%} Inf. {%kśātum;%}
Aor. {%akśāsīt, akśāsta;%} Perf. {%cakśe%}).
<LEND>

<L>16342<pc>0264-a<k1>kza<k2>kza
{#kza#}¦ {%kṣa, as,%} m. (fr. 4. {%kṣi%}), destruction; loss,
disappearance; destruction of the world; lightning; a
field; the protector or cultivator of a field, a peasant,
a husbandman; a demon or Rakṣas; the fourth in-
carnation of Viṣṇu as the man-lion or {%nara-siṃha.%}
<LEND>
[Page0264-b+ 76]

<L>16343<pc>0264-b<k1>kzaj<k2>kzaj
{#kzaj#}¦ {%kṣaj%} or {%kṣañj,%} cl. 1. A. {%kṣajate%}
or {%kṣañjate, cakṣañje, kṣañjitum,%} to
go, approach; to give; cl. 10. P. {%kṣañjayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to live in distress; to live in pain or want.
<LEND>

<L>16344<pc>0264-b<k1>kzaR<k2>kzaR
{#kzaR#}¦ {%kṣaṇ, kṣaṇana.%} See {%kṣan.%}
<LEND>

<L>16345<pc>0264-b<k1>kzaRa<k2>kzaRa
{#kzaRa#}¦ {%kṣaṇa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be a
corruption of {%īkṣaṇa,%} a glance, and not used in the
earlier literature; native lexicographers make this
word m. only), any instantaneous point of time, an
instant, the twinkling of an eye, a moment (e. g.
{%kṣaṇam,%} acc., or {%kṣaṇena,%} inst. for an instant, in
a moment; {%kṣaṇāt,%} abl. after an instant, immedi-
ately, directly, at once; {%kṣaṇe kṣaṇe,%} every instant,
every moment; {%tat-kṣaṇam,%} that very moment,
in that same moment, immediately; {%tat-kṣaṇāt,%}
immediately upon that); a moment regarded as a
measure of time, equal to thirty Kalas or four minutes,
or according to other authorities equal to (4/5) or (2/3) (4/5)
seconds; a leisure moment, a vacant instant, leisure,
({%kṣaṇaṃ kṛ,%} to have leisure for, wait patiently for;
cf. {%kṛta-kṣaṇa%}); a fit or suitable moment, an
opportunity, ({%kṣaṇaṃ kṛ%} or {%dā,%} to give an oppor-
tunity); a festival; a certain day of the fortnight, as
the full moon, change of the moon, &c.; dependance,
servitude; the centre, the middle. {%—Kṣaṇa-kṣepa,%}
{%as,%} m. a momentary delay. {%—Kṣaṇa-da, as,%} m. an
astrologer; ({%ā%}), f. night (giving leisure); turmeric;
({%am%}), n. night-blindness; water. {%—Kṣaṇadā-kara,%}
{%as,%} m. the moon. {%—Kṣaṇadā-cara, as, ī,%} m. f. a
night-walker, a Rakṣas, a fiend, a goblin. {%—Kṣa-%}
{%ṇadāndhya (˚da-ān˚), am,%} n. night-blindness, nycta-
lopsis; [cf. {%kṣapāndhya, naktāndhya.%}] {%—Kṣaṇa-%}
{%dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} momentarily visible, seen for
an instant. {%—Kṣaṇa-dyuti, is,%} f. momentary flash,
lightning; [cf. {%acira-dyuti%} and {%kṣaṇa-prabhā.%}]
{%—Kṣaṇa-niśvāsa, as,%} m. a porpoise, the Gangetic
porpoise. {%—Kṣaṇa-prakāśā,%} f. lightning. {%—Kṣa-%}
{%ṇa-prabha, as, ā, am,%} gleaming or flashing for an
instant; ({%ā%}), f. lightning. {%—Kṣaṇa-bhaṅgura, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} perishing in an instant, transient, frail, perish-
able. {%—Kṣaṇa-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} momentary, short-
lived. {%—Kṣaṇa-mātram,%} ind. for an instant merely,
only for a moment. {%—Kṣaṇa-mātrānurāgin (˚tra-%}
{%an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} one whose affection lasts only a mo-
ment. {%—Kṣaṇa-rāmin, ī,%} m. a pigeon. {%—Kṣaṇa-%}
{%vighna, am,%} n. a momentary hindrance. {%—Kṣaṇa-%}
{%vidhvaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%} collapsing or perishing in a
moment; ({%ī%}), m. the name of a sect of atheistic
philosophers who deny the continued identity of any
part of nature, and maintain that the universe perishes
and undergoes a new creation every instant. {%—Kṣa-%}
{%ṇāntara (˚ṇa-an˚), am,%} n. the interval of a moment;
({%e%}), ind. after a little while, the next moment, there-
upon. {%—Kṣaṇārdha (˚ṇa-ar˚), am,%} n. half the
measure of time called Kṣaṇa, half a moment, a
small space of time.
<LEND>

<L>16346<pc>0264-b<k1>kzaRika<k2>kzaRika
{%Kṣaṇika, as, ā, am,%}¦ momentary, transient; ({%ā%}),
f. lightning. {%—Kṣaṇika-tva, am,%} n. momentary
duration.
<LEND>

<L>16347<pc>0264-b<k1>kzaRita<k2>kzaRita
{%Kṣaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a leisure moment.
<LEND>

<L>16348<pc>0264-b<k1>kzaRin<k2>kzaRin
{%Kṣaṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a leisure moment;
momentary, transient; ({%inī%}), f. the night; [cf.
{%kṣaṇa-dā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16349<pc>0264-b<k1>kzaRatu<k2>kzaRatu
{#kzaRatu#}¦ {%kṣaṇatu,%} &c. See under rt. {%kṣan.%}
<LEND>

<L>16350<pc>0264-b<k1>kzattf<k2>kzattf
{#kzattf#}¦ {%kṣattṛ.%} See under rt. {%kṣad.%}
<LEND>

<L>16351<pc>0264-b<k1>kzatra<k2>kzatra
{#kzatra#}¦ {%kṣatra, am, as,%} n. m. (probably fr.
rt. 1. {%kṣi;%} the m. form does not appear to occur),
dominion, supremacy, power, might (whether human
or supernatural, in the Veda especially applied to the
power of Varuṇa-Mitra and Indra); government,
governing body, the military or reigning order (the
members of which in the earliest times, as represented
by the Vedic hymns, were generally called Rājanya,
not Kṣatriya; afterwards, when the difference be-
tween Brahman and Kṣatra or the priestly and civil
authorities became more distinct, the reigning or
[Page0264-c+ 80]
military caste accepted the title Kṣatriya); a man
of the second or Kṣatriya caste, a warrior, a soldier
(in this sense fancifully derived in Raghu. II. 53. fr.
{%kṣatāt tra%} fr. rt. {%trai,%} i. e. a preserver from injury);
({%ī%}), f. a woman of the second caste; the rank of a
member of the reigning or military order, the
authority of the second caste; wealth; water; the
body; N. of a plant, {%= tagara;%} [cf. {%tuvi-kṣatra,%}
{%deva-kṣatra,%} &c.] {%—Kṣatra-dharma, as,%} m.
the duty of a Kṣatriya, bravery, military conduct.
{%—Kṣatra-dharman, ā, ā, a,%} having the duties of a
soldier or of the second caste; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a prince.
{%—Kṣatradharmānuga (˚ma-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
following or observing the duty of a soldier. {%—Kṣa-%}
{%tra-dhṛti, is,%} f. the support of supreme power; N.
of a particular part of the Rāja-sūya ceremony.
{%—Kṣatra-pa, as,%} m. a governor, a Satrap (a word
found on coins). {%—Kṣatra-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the
possessor of dominion. {%—Kṣatra-bandhu, us, ūs%} or
{%us, u,%} one who belongs to the military order or second
caste; ({%us%}), m. a member of the Kṣatriya caste; a
mere Kṣatriya, i. e. a Kṣatriya by birth but not by
his actions (a term of abuse). {%—Kṣatrabandhu-vat,%}
ind. like a warrior. {%—Kṣatra-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
one who holds or confers dominion. {%—Kṣatra-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m., Ved. union of the princely order.
{%—Kṣatra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} endowed with princely
dignity. {%—Kṣatra-vani, is, is, i,%} Ved. favourable
to the princely order. {%—Kṣatra-vardhana, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} Ved. promoting dominion. {%—Kṣatra-vidyā,%} f.
the knowledge or science possessed by the Kṣatriya
or military order. {%—Kṣatra-vṛkṣa, as,%} m., N. of
a tree, {%= mucukunda%}. {%—Kṣatra-vṛddha, as,%} m.,
N. of a prince. {%—Kṣatra-vṛddhi, is,%} m., N. of one
of the sons of Manu Raucya. {%—Kṣatra-vṛdh, t,%}
m., N. of a prince, {%= kṣatra-vṛddha%}. {%—Kṣatra-%}
{%veda, as,%} m., the Veda of the Kṣatriya or military
order. {%—Kṣatra-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. possessing
sovereignty; (Sāy.) possessed of power. {%—Kṣatra-%}
{%sava, as,%} m., N. of a sacrificial ceremony. {%—Kṣa-%}
{%trāyatanīya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%kṣatra + āyatana%}),
Ved. based on the Kṣatra or kingly power. {%—Kṣa-%}
{%tropakṣatra (˚ra-up˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Kṣatraujas (˚ra-oj˚), ās,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>16352<pc>0264-c<k1>kzatriRa<k2>kzatriRa
{%Kṣatriṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>16353<pc>0264-c<k1>kzatrin<k2>kzatrin
{%Kṣatrin, ī,%}¦ m. a man of the military order or
second caste.
<LEND>

<L>16354<pc>0264-c<k1>kzatriya<k2>kzatriya
{%Kṣatriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ governing, endowed with
sovereignty; ({%as%}), m. a member of the military
or reigning order which in later time constituted the
second caste; ({%ā%}), f. a woman of the military
order or of the second caste; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of a
man of the second caste; ({%am%}), n. the power or
rank of this order. {%—Kṣatriya-jāti, is,%} f. the mili-
tary tribe or caste. {%—Kṣatriya-tā,%} f. or {%kṣatriya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the order or rank of a Kṣatriya.
{%—Kṣatriya-dharma, as,%} m. the duty or occupa-
tion of the warrior-tribe, war, government, &c.
{%—Kṣatriya-dharman, ā, ā, a,%} having the duties
of a soldier or of the second caste. {%—Kṣatriya-%}
{%prāya, as, ā, am,%} mostly consisting of the military
tribe. {%—Kṣatriya-mardana, as, ā, am,%} destroying
or destroyer of Kṣatriyas. {%—Kṣatriya-rāja, as,%} m.
the chief of Kṣatriyas. {%—Kṣatriyarṣabha (˚ya-%}
{%ṛṣ˚), as,%} m. best of Kṣatriyas. {%—Kṣatriya-%}
{%haṇa, as,%} m. one who destroys the military caste.
{%—Kṣatriyāntakara (˚ya-an˚), as,%} m. one who
destroys the Kṣatriyas.
<LEND>

<L>16355<pc>0264-c<k1>kzatriyakA<k2>kzatriyakA
{%Kṣatriyakā%}¦ or {%ikā,%} f. a woman belonging to the
military or reigning order, a woman of the second
caste.
<LEND>

<L>16356<pc>0264-c<k1>kzatriyARI<k2>kzatriyARI
{%Kṣatriyāṇī,%}¦ f. a woman belonging to the mili-
tary caste; the wife of a man of the second caste.
<LEND>

<L>16357<pc>0264-c<k1>kzad<k2>kzad
{#kzad#}¦ {%kṣad,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%kṣadate,%}
{%cakṣade,%} to cut, dissect, cut to pieces,
divide; to kill; to carve (meat), to distribute (food);
to take (food), to consume, eat. (As a Sautra root
{%kṣad%} means ‘to cover, protect, shelter.’)
<LEND>

<L>16358<pc>0264-c<k1>kzattf<k2>kzattf
{%Kṣattṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who cuts anything, one who
carves or distributes; an attendant; a door-keeper,
[Page0265-a+ 78]
a porter; a charioteer, a coachman; [cf. {%anu-kṣat-%}
{%tṛ%}]; one who fights from a chariot; the son of a
Śūdra man and a Kṣatriya woman, or the son of a
Kṣatriya man and a Śūdra woman (called Ugra
in Manu X. 9), or the son of a Śūdra man and
Vaiśya woman (called Āyogava in Manu X. 12);
the son of a female slave; (the proper employment of
a Kṣattṛ is said to be catching animals that live in
holes); a N. of Vidura as the son of a female slave,
his father being the celebrated Vyāsa (see Mahā-bh.
1. 7381); an epithet of Brahmā; a fish.
<LEND>

<L>16359<pc>0265-a<k1>kzadat<k2>kzadat
{%Kṣadat, an, antī, at,%}¦ carving, dividing, tearing;
eating.
<LEND>

<L>16360<pc>0265-a<k1>kzadana<k2>kzadana
{%Kṣadana, am,%}¦ n. the act of carving, dividing,
tearing; eating.
<LEND>

<L>16361<pc>0265-a<k1>kzadman<k2>kzadman
{%Kṣadman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. a carving knife; pieces of
food cut off or carved; (according to Schol.) water.
<LEND>

<L>16362<pc>0265-a<k1>kzan<k2>kzan
{#kzan#}¦ {%kṣan%} or {%kṣaṇ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%kṣa-%}
{%ṇoti, -ṇute, cakṣāṇa, cakṣaṇe, kṣa-%}
{%ṇiṣyati, -te, akṣaṇīt, kṣaṇitum,%} P. to hurt,
injure, wound, break; A. to hurt one's self, be injured
or wounded: Caus. {%kṣāṇayati, -yitum:%} Desid.
{%cikṣaṇiṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%caṅkṣaṇyate, caṅk-%}
{%ṣanti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">καίνω, κανῶ; καίνυται</lang> {%= kṣaṇute;%}
<lang n="greek">ξαίνω;</lang> perhaps also <lang n="greek">σίνομαι</lang> for <lang n="greek">ξίνομαι.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>16363<pc>0265-a<k1>kzaRatu<k2>kzaRatu
{%Kṣaṇatu, us,%}¦ m. a wound or sore.
<LEND>

<L>16364<pc>0265-a<k1>kzaRana<k2>kzaRana
{%Kṣaṇana, am,%}¦ n. hurting, injuring; killing,
slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>16365<pc>0265-a<k1>kzaRanu<k2>kzaRanu
{%Kṣaṇanu, us,%}¦ m. a wound, a sore.
<LEND>

<L>16366<pc>0265-a<k1>kzata<k2>kzata
{%Kṣata, as, ā, am,%}¦ wounded, hurt, hit, injured,
broken, torn, rent, destroyed, impaired, violated;
diminished, trodden or broken down; ({%am%}), n. a
hurt, wound, sore, contusion. {%—Kṣata-kāsa, as,%} m.
a cough produced by an injury; [cf. {%kṣata-ja,%} &c.]
{%—Kṣata-ghna, as,%} m., N. of a plant, commonly
Kukuraśoṅkhā, Conyza Lacera; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a kind
of insect; lac, the animal dye. {%—Kṣata-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} produced by a wound or injury of any kind (e. g.
{%kāsa,%} a kind of cough); ({%am%}), n. blood; pus, matter.
{%—Kṣata-tejas, ās, ās, as,%} dimmed, obscured (as
light or power). {%—Kṣata-puṇya-leśa, as, ā, am,%}
having the stock of merit exhausted. {%—Kṣata-yoni,%}
{%is,%} f. a woman who has been violated, one no longer
a virgin. {%—Kṣata-vikṣata, as, ā, am,%} mangled,
covered with cuts and wounds. {%—Kṣata-vidhvaṃsin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a sort of pot-herb, Convolvulus Argenteus.
{%—Kṣata-vṛtti, is,%} f. destitution, the being without
the means of support, living on what one can get.
{%—Kṣata-vraṇa, as,%} m. a sore produced by an
injury. {%—Kṣata-vrata, as, ā, am,%} a violator of a
vow or religious engagement. {%—Kṣata-hara, am,%}
n. Agallochum or Aloe wood. {%—Kṣatāri (˚ta-ari),%}
{%is, is, i,%} victorious, triumphant. {%—Kṣatottha (˚ta-%}
{%ut˚), as, ā, am,%} produced by injury. {%—Kṣatodara%}
{%(˚ta-ud˚), am,%} n. flux, dysentery. {%—Kṣatodbhava%}
{%(˚ta-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} produced by injury; ({%am%}),
n. (?) blood; [cf. {%kṣata-ja.%}] {%—Kṣataujas (˚ta-%}
{%oj˚), ās, ās, as,%} weakened, reduced, impaired.
<LEND>

<L>16367<pc>0265-a<k1>kzati<k2>kzati
{%Kṣati, is,%}¦ f. injury, hurt, a wound; destruction;
damage, disadvantage.
<LEND>

<L>16368<pc>0265-a<k1>kzap<k2>kzap<h>1
{#kzap#} 1¦. {%kṣap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%kṣapati, -te,%} to
be abstinent, to fast, to do penance: Caus.
{%kṣapayati, -yitum,%} to regret sorrowfully, miss.
<LEND>

<L>16369<pc>0265-a<k1>kzapaRa<k2>kzapaRa<h>1
1. {%kṣapaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a Buddhist mendicant; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), shameless, impudent?; ({%am%}), n. abstinence,
chastisement of the body, defilement, impurity.
<LEND>

<L>16370<pc>0265-a<k1>kzapaRaka<k2>kzapaRaka
{%Kṣapaṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a mendicant, especially a
Buddhist mendicant, who wears no garments; also
a Jaina mendicant; ({%as%}), m., N. of an author
supposed to have lived at the court of king Vikra-
māditya.
<LEND>

<L>16371<pc>0265-a<k1>kzap<k2>kzap<h>2
{#kzap#} 2¦. {%kṣap,%} cl. 10. P. {%kṣapayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to send, throw, cast, direct, &c.;
[cf. Goth. <nsi>skapa.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16372<pc>0265-a<k1>kzapayat<k2>kzapayat
{%Kṣapayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ casting, sending.
<LEND>

<L>16373<pc>0265-a<k1>kzapita<k2>kzapita
{%Kṣapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sent, cast, directed.
<LEND>

<L>16374<pc>0265-a<k1>kzap<k2>kzap<h>3
{#kzap#} 3¦. {%kṣap.%} See Caus. of rt. 4. {%kṣi,%}
‘to destroy.’
<LEND>
[Page0265-b+ 79]

<L>16375<pc>0265-b<k1>kzap<k2>kzap<h>4
4. {%kṣap, p,%}¦ f., Ved. night; a measure of time
equivalent to a whole day of twenty-four hours;
darkness; water; {%kṣapaḥ%} or {%kṣapā,%} ind. at
night; [cf. Lat. <nsi>crepus-culum;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κνέφος, κνέφας.</lang>]
{%—Kṣapotyaya (˚pas-at˚), as,%} m. the end of night.
<LEND>

<L>16376<pc>0265-b<k1>kzapaRa<k2>kzapaRa<h>2
2. {%kṣapaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ destructive, one who
destroys; ({%am%}), n. destroying, diminishing, suppress-
ing, expelling.
<LEND>

<L>16377<pc>0265-b<k1>kzapA<k2>kzapA
{%Kṣapā,%}¦ f. night (Ved. only used in inst. pl.
{%kṣapābhis%}); turmeric. {%—Kṣapā-kara, as,%} m.
‘making the night,’ the moon. {%—Kṣapā-ghana,%}
{%as,%} m. a dark cloud or dark nocturnal clouds. {%—Kṣa-%}
{%pā-cara, as,%} m. a night-walker; a fiend, a goblin.
{%—Kṣapāṭa (˚pā-aṭa), as,%} m. a night-walker; a
Rākṣasa, an imp or goblin. {%—Kṣapā-nātha, as,%}
m. the moon. {%—Kṣapānta (˚pā-an˚), as,%} m. dawn,
day-break. {%—Kṣapāndhya (˚pā-ān˚), am,%} n. night-
blindness, nyctalopsis; [cf. {%kṣaṇadāndhya, nak-%}
{%tāndhya.%}] {%—Kṣapā-pati, is,%} m. the moon; cam-
phor. {%—Kṣapāha (˚pā-ahan), am,%} n. a day and night.
<LEND>

<L>16378<pc>0265-b<k1>kzapaRI<k2>kzapaRI
{#kzapaRI#}¦ {%kṣapaṇī,%} f. {%= kṣepaṇī,%} an oar, a net.
<LEND>

<L>16379<pc>0265-b<k1>kzapaRyu<k2>kzapaRyu
{#kzapaRyu#}¦ {%kṣapaṇyu, us,%} m. an offence, a
transgression.
<LEND>

<L>16380<pc>0265-b<k1>kzam<k2>kzam<h>1
{#kzam#} 1¦. {%kṣam,%} cl. 1. A., 4. P. {%kṣamate,%}
{%kṣāmyati%} (ep. also 1. P. and Ved. 2. P.
{%kṣamati, kṣamiti%}), {%cakṣame, cakṣāma, kṣa-%}
{%miṣyate, -ti,%} and {%kṣaṃsyate, -ti, akṣamiṣṭa,%}
{%akṣaṃsta, akṣamat, kṣamitum%} and {%kṣantum,%}
to be patient or composed, to suppress anger, keep quiet;
to submit to (with dat.); to bear patiently, endure, put
up with, suffer; to pardon, forgive (with gen. or dat.
of the person, e. g. {%kṣamasva tad me,%} forgive me
that); to allow, permit, suffer; to resist; to be com-
petent or able to do anything (with inf.): Caus.
{%kṣamayati, -te, -yitum,%} to ask pardon for anything
(with double acc., e. g. {%tat kṣamaye bhavantam,%}
I ask you to pardon that); to suffer or bear patiently:
Desid. {%cikṣamiṣate, -ti,%} and {%cikṣaṃsate, -ti:%}
Intens. {%caṅkṣamyate, caṅkṣanti;%} [cf. Goth.
<nsi>hramja</nsi> (?); Angl. Sax. <nsi>hremman,</nsi> ‘to hinder,
disquiet.’]
<LEND>

<L>16381<pc>0265-b<k1>kzantavya<k2>kzantavya
{%Kṣantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be borne or endured,
bearable, to be suffered or submitted to patiently, to
be pardoned or forgiven.
<LEND>

<L>16382<pc>0265-b<k1>kzantf<k2>kzantf
{%Kṣantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ pardoning, bearing patiently,
submissive.
<LEND>

<L>16383<pc>0265-b<k1>kzam<k2>kzam<h>2
2. {%kṣam,%}¦ f. (making {%kṣās%} in the nom. case),
Ved. the ground, the earth, <lang n="greek">χθών;</lang> [cf. <lang n="greek">χαμαί.</lang> &c.]
{%—Kṣa-pāvat, ān,%} m., Ved. an earth-protector,
a ruler, a governor.
<LEND>

<L>16384<pc>0265-b<k1>kzama<k2>kzama
{%Kṣama, as, ā, am,%}¦ patient; enduring, suffering,
bearing, submissive, resisting; adequate, competent, able,
fit for (with inf. or at the end of a compound, {%vayaṃ%}
{%tyaktuṃ kṣamāḥ,%} we are able to quit; {%gamana-%}
{%kṣama,%} able to go); friendly; favourable; bear-
able, tolerable; fit, appropriate, becoming suitable,
proper for (with gen. of the person, e. g. {%kṣa-%}
{%maṃ Kauravāṇām,%} proper for the Kauravas; or with
inf., e. g. {%na sa kṣamaḥ kopayitum,%} he is not a
fit object for anger); ({%as%}), m. a N. of Śiva, ‘the
patient;’ ({%ā%}), f. patience, forbearance, indulgence; per-
sonified as a daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Pulaha;
resistance; the earth; an epithet of Durgā; N. of a
female shepherd; the tree Acacia Catechu ({%khadira%});
N. of a species of the Atijayatī metre [cf. {%utpalinī%}];
night (wrong form for {%kṣapā%}); ({%am%}), n. propriety,
fitness; [cf. Hib. <nsi>cam,</nsi> ‘strong, stout, mighty; power,
might;’ <nsi>cama,</nsi> ‘brave.’] {%—Kṣama-tā,%} f. or {%kṣa-%}
{%ma-tva, am,%} n. ability, fitness, capability. {%—Kṣama-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} knowing what is proper or right.
{%—Kṣamā-kalyāṇa, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Jinalābhasūri, who composed 1794 A. D. a com-
mentary on the Jīva-vicāra. {%—Kṣamā-tala, am,%} n.
the earth. {%—Kṣamā-daṃśa, as,%} m., N. of a tree,
{%= śigru%}. {%—Kṣamānvita (˚mā-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
endowed with patience, patient, enduring, forgiving.
{%—Kṣamā-pati, is,%} m. lord of the earth, a king.
{%—Kṣamāpanna (˚mā-āp˚), as, ā, am,%} forbearing,
patient. {%—Kṣamā-para, as, ā, am,%} very patient, for-
[Page0265-c+ 77]
bearing. {%—Kṣamā-bhuj, k, k, k,%} patient; ({%k%}), m.
a king, a prince. {%—Kṣamā-yukta, as, ā, am,%} en-
dowed with patience, patient, enduring. {%—Kṣamā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} patient, enduring, forbearing; ({%atī%}),
f., N. of the wife of Nidhi-pati.
<LEND>

<L>16385<pc>0265-c<k1>kzamaRIya<k2>kzamaRIya
{%Kṣamaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be suffered, to be
patiently borne; to be pardoned.
<LEND>

<L>16386<pc>0265-c<k1>kzamA<k2>kzamA
{%Kṣamā%}¦ (inst. case of 2. {%kṣam%}), on the earth, on
the floor (included by Pāṇini among the indeclinables
with {%svar, divā,%} &c.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χαμαί, χαμᾶ-ζε,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χαμά-θεν, χθαμαλός.</lang>] {%—Kṣamā-cara, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. being in the ground or under the earth.
<LEND>

<L>16387<pc>0265-c<k1>kzamApaya<k2>kzamApaya
{%Kṣamāpaya,%}¦ nom. P. A. {%-payati, -te, -yitum,%}
to ask any one's (acc.) pardon, to beg forgiveness.
<LEND>

<L>16388<pc>0265-c<k1>kzamitavya<k2>kzamitavya
{%Kṣamitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be endured, to be
patiently borne, to be pardoned.
<LEND>

<L>16389<pc>0265-c<k1>kzamitf<k2>kzamitf
{%Kṣamitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ patient, enduring, for-
bearing, indulgent.
<LEND>

<L>16390<pc>0265-c<k1>kzamin<k2>kzamin
{%Kṣamin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ patient, enduring, forbearing,
indulgent; capable, able.
<LEND>

<L>16391<pc>0265-c<k1>kzamya<k2>kzamya
{%Kṣamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in the earth,
terrestrial; <lang n="greek">χθόνιος.</lang>
<LEND>

<L>16392<pc>0265-c<k1>kzAnta<k2>kzAnta
{%Kṣānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ borne, endured; patient,
enduring; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; of a hunter; epi-
thet of Śiva [cf. {%kṣama%}]; ({%ā%}), f. the earth, ‘the
patient one.’
<LEND>

<L>16393<pc>0265-c<k1>kzAnti<k2>kzAnti
{%Kṣānti, is,%}¦ f. patience, forbearance, endurance,
indulgence, patient waiting for anything. {%—Kṣānti-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} patient, enduring, indulgent.
{%—Kṣānti-vādin, ī,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi; N. of
Śākya-muni in one of his former births.
<LEND>

<L>16394<pc>0265-c<k1>kzAntu<k2>kzAntu
{%Kṣāntu, us, us, u,%}¦ patient, enduring; ({%us%}), m.
a father.
<LEND>

<L>16395<pc>0265-c<k1>kzAmya<k2>kzAmya
{%Kṣāmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be borne; to be pardoned
or overlooked.
<LEND>

<L>16396<pc>0265-c<k1>kzamuda<k2>kzamuda
{#kzamuda#}¦ {%kṣamuda, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
particular number.
<LEND>

<L>16397<pc>0265-c<k1>kzamp<k2>kzamp
{#kzamp#}¦ {%kṣamp,%} cl. 1. or 10. P. {%kṣampati%}
or {%kṣampayati, -yitum,%} to suffer, bear;
[cf. 1. {%kṣam.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16398<pc>0265-c<k1>kzaya<k2>kzaya
{#kzaya#}¦ {%kṣaya.%} See under rt. 2. {%kṣi%} and rt.
4. {%kṣi,%} p. 266.
<LEND>

<L>16399<pc>0265-c<k1>kzayaTu<k2>kzayaTu
{#kzayaTu#}¦ {%kṣayathu, us,%} m. cough; (a wrong
form for {%kṣavathu.%})
<LEND>

<L>16400<pc>0265-c<k1>kzayadvIra<k2>kzayadvIra
{#kzayadvIra#}¦ {%kṣayad-vīra.%} See under 1. {%kṣi.%}
<LEND>

<L>16401<pc>0265-c<k1>kzar<k2>kzar
{#kzar#}¦ {%kṣar,%} cl. 1. P. {%kṣarati, cakṣāra,%}
{%kṣariṣyati, akṣārīt, kṣaritum%} (ep.
cl. 1. A. {%kṣarate,%} Ved. cl. 2. P. {%kṣariti,%} Ved.
inf. {%kṣaradhyai%}), to flow, stream, glide; to flow
away; to stream forth; pour out (either in active
or neuter sense); to drop, distil, trickle, ooze,
run; to melt away, wane, perish, be destroyed; to
fall or slip from, to be deprived of (with abl.):
Caus. {%kṣārayati, -yitum:%} Desid. {%cikṣariṣati:%}
Intens. {%cākṣaryate, cākṣarti;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>scateo ?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>16402<pc>0265-c<k1>kzara<k2>kzara
{%Kṣara, as, ā, am,%}¦ melting away, perishable;
({%as%}), m. a cloud; ({%am%}), n. water; a body. {%—Kṣara-%}
{%ja%} or {%kṣare-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by distillation.
{%—Kṣara-pattrā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= droṇa-puṣpī.%}
{%—Kṣara-bhāva, as, ā, am,%} mutable, dissoluble.
<LEND>

<L>16403<pc>0265-c<k1>kzaraka<k2>kzaraka
{%Kṣaraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ pouring forth.
<LEND>

<L>16404<pc>0265-c<k1>kzaraRa<k2>kzaraRa
{%Kṣaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of flowing, trickling,
distilling, dropping (e. g. {%aṅgulī-kṣaraṇa,%} perspira-
tion of the fingers).
<LEND>

<L>16405<pc>0265-c<k1>kzarat<k2>kzarat
{%Kṣarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flowing, running, trickling,
oozing.
<LEND>

<L>16406<pc>0265-c<k1>kzarita<k2>kzarita
{%Kṣarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dropped, liquefied, oozed,
trickling, flowing.
<LEND>

<L>16407<pc>0265-c<k1>kzarin<k2>kzarin
{%Kṣarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ flowing, dropping, trickling;
({%ī%}), m. the rainy season.
<LEND>

<L>16408<pc>0265-c<k1>kzAra<k2>kzAra
{%Kṣāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ caustic, biting, corrosive, acid,
pungent, saline (according to some in these senses fr.
rt. {%kṣai%}), anything converted to alkali or ashes by
distillation; ({%as%}), m. juice, essence; treacle, molasses;
any corrosive or acid or saline substance, especially an
alkali such as soda or potash; caustic alkali, one
species of cautery; glass; a rogue, a cheat; ({%am%}),
[Page0266-a+ 77]
n. a factitious or medicinal salt, commonly black
salt [cf. {%viḍ-lavaṇa%} and {%kṛṣṇa-lavaṇa%}]; water.
{%—Kṣāra-kardama, as,%} m. a pool of saline or acid
mud; N. of a hell. {%—Kṣāra-karman, a,%} n. apply-
ing caustic alkali (Lapis Infernalis) to proud flesh &c.;
or applying acid remedies in general. {%—Kṣāra-%}
{%kṛtya, as, ā, am,%} to be treated with caustic alkali.
{%—Kṣāra-taila, am,%} n. oil cooked with alkaline
ingredients. {%—Kṣāra-traya%} or {%kṣāra-tritaya,%}
{%am,%} n. natron, saltpetre, and borax. {%—Kṣāra-dalā,%}
f. a kind of pot-herb, {%= cillī%}. {%—Kṣāra-dru, us,%} m.
the tree Bignonia Suaveolens; [cf. {%ghaṇṭā-pāṭali.%}]
{%—Kṣāra-nadī,%} f. a river in hell, the water of which
is alkaline. {%—Kṣāra-pattra, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
or {%kṣāra-pattraka, as,%} m. the pot-herb Cheno-
podium Album. {%—Kṣāra-pāla, as,%} m., N. of
a Ṛṣi. {%—Kṣāra-bhūmi, is,%} f. a saline soil.
{%—Kṣāra-madhya, as,%} m. the plant Achyranthes
Aspera [cf. {%apāmārga%}]; its alkaline ashes make it
useful in washing clothes. {%—Kṣāra-mṛttikā,%} f.
saline soil, especially an impure sulphate of soda.
{%—Kṣāra-melaka, as,%} m. an alkaline substance.
{%—Kṣāra-meha, as,%} m. a morbid state of the urine,
in which its smell and taste resemble that of potash.
{%—Kṣāra-rasa, as,%} m. a saline or alkaline flavour.
{%—Kṣāra-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the tree Bignonia Suave-
olens [cf. {%kṣāra-dru%}]; any tree yielding abundant
potash. {%—Kṣāra-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. the tree Butea
Frondosa; also {%= kṣāra-vṛkṣa; (am),%} n. alkaline
earth; [cf. {%vajra-kṣāra.%}] {%—Kṣāra-ṣaṭka, am,%}
n. six kinds of trees distinguished by their juice, as
the Butea Frondosa, Grislea Tomentosa, Achyranthes
Aspera, Cowach, Ghaṇṭā-pāṭali, Coraya. {%—Kṣāra-%}
{%samudra, as,%} m. or {%kṣāra-sindhu, us,%} m. the salt
ocean. {%—Kṣāra-sūtra, am,%} n. acid thread, applied
to fistulas &c. {%—Kṣārākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as, ā, am,%}
having an artificial eye made of glass. {%—Kṣārāgada%}
{%(˚ra-ag˚), as,%} m. remedy prepared by extracting the
alkaline particles from the ashes of plants. {%—Kṣā-%}
{%rāccha (˚ra-accha), am,%} n. sea-salt. {%—Kṣārāñjana%}
{%(˚ra-añ˚), am,%} n. an alkaline unguent. {%—Kṣā-%}
{%rāmbu (˚ra-am˚), u,%} n. or {%kṣāroda (˚ra-uda), as,%}
m. or {%kṣārodaka (˚ra-ud˚), am,%} n. an alkaline
juice or fluid. {%—Kṣārāmbudhi (˚ra-am˚), kṣā-%}
{%rodadhi (˚ra-ud˚), is,%} m. the salt ocean.
<LEND>

<L>16409<pc>0266-a<k1>kzAraka<k2>kzAraka
{%Kṣāraka, as,%}¦ m. alkali; a juice, essence; a
blossom, a new-blown flower or a young fruit; a
bud or a multitude of young buds; a cage or basket
or net for birds or fish; a washerman.
<LEND>

<L>16410<pc>0266-a<k1>kzAraRa<k2>kzAraRa
{%Kṣāraṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. accusing of unfaithfulness;
({%am%}), n. converting to alkali or ashes; distilling.
<LEND>

<L>16411<pc>0266-a<k1>kzAraya<k2>kzAraya
{%Kṣāraya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kṣārayati, -yitum,%} to fur-
nish or mix with acid substances; to torture a person
with acid substances; to speak ill of a person; to
abuse, accuse, calumniate.
<LEND>

<L>16412<pc>0266-a<k1>kzArikA<k2>kzArikA
{%Kṣārikā,%}¦ f. hunger.
<LEND>

<L>16413<pc>0266-a<k1>kzArita<k2>kzArita
{%Kṣārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ distilled from saline matter,
strained through alkaline ashes &c.; calumniated,
falsely accused (especially of adultery), accused of a
crime, guilty.
<LEND>

<L>16414<pc>0266-a<k1>kzal<k2>kzal<h>1
{#kzal#} 1¦. {%kṣal,%} cl. 1. P. {%kṣalati, -litum,%}
to flow; to collect; [cf. {%kṣar.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16415<pc>0266-a<k1>kzal<k2>kzal<h>2
{#kzal#} 2¦. {%kṣal%} (related to rt. {%kṣar%}), cl.
10. P. {%kṣālayati, acikṣalat, -yitum,%}
to wash, wash off, purify, cleanse, clean, make clean;
to wipe away; [cf. Lith. <nsi>skalauju,</nsi> ‘to wash off;’
<nsi>skalbju,</nsi> ‘to wash;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>spüle?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>16416<pc>0266-a<k1>kzAlana<k2>kzAlana
{%Kṣālana, am,%}¦ n. washing, washing off, cleansing
with water; sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>16417<pc>0266-a<k1>kzAlanIya<k2>kzAlanIya
{%Kṣālanīya%}¦ or {%kṣālitavya, as, ā, am,%} to be
washed, to be cleansed with water.
<LEND>

<L>16418<pc>0266-a<k1>kzAlayat<k2>kzAlayat
{%Kṣālayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ washing, cleansing,
sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>16419<pc>0266-a<k1>kzAlita<k2>kzAlita
{%Kṣālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleansed, cleaned, washed.
<LEND>

<L>16420<pc>0266-a<k1>kzava<k2>kzava
{#kzava#}¦ {%kṣava.%} See under rt. 1. {%kṣu.%}
<LEND>

<L>16421<pc>0266-a<k1>kzAti<k2>kzAti
{#kzAti#}¦ {%kṣāti, is,%} f. (fr. {%kṣai%}), Ved. singeing,
scorching, heat.
<LEND>
[Page0266-b+ 74]

<L>16422<pc>0266-b<k1>kzAttra<k2>kzAttra
{#kzAttra#}¦ {%kṣāttra, am,%} n. (fr. {%kṣattṛ%}), Ved.
a community or number of attendants or servants.
<LEND>

<L>16423<pc>0266-b<k1>kzAtra<k2>kzAtra
{#kzAtra#}¦ {%kṣātra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kṣatra%}), be-
longing or relating to or peculiar to the second or
military tribe; ({%am%}), n. the second or military tribe;
the dignity of a ruler or governor.
<LEND>

<L>16424<pc>0266-b<k1>kzAtri<k2>kzAtri
{%Kṣātri, is,%}¦ m. the son of a man of the second
caste (by a woman of another caste ?).
<LEND>

<L>16425<pc>0266-b<k1>kzAnta<k2>kzAnta
{#kzAnta#}¦ {%kṣānta,%} &c. See under 1. {%kṣam.%}
<LEND>

<L>16426<pc>0266-b<k1>kzAma<k2>kzAma
{#kzAma#}¦ {%kṣāma, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%kṣai%}),
scorched, singed; dried up, emaciated, wasted, fallen
away, thin, slim, slender; weak, debilitated, infirm,
slight. {%—Kṣāma-tā,%} f. or {%kṣāma-tva, am,%} n.
emaciation, thinness, slenderness; debility. {%—Kṣā-%}
{%ma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. scorching, singeing, dry-
ing up; epithet of Agni; ({%tī%}), f., scil. {%iṣṭi,%} N. of a
particular sacrificial ceremony. {%—Kṣāmāsya (˚ma-%}
{%ās˚), am,%} n. any diet or any state of the body (as
menstruation) incompatible with a particular medical
treatment.
<LEND>

<L>16427<pc>0266-b<k1>kzAman<k2>kzAman
{#kzAman#}¦ {%kṣāman, a,%} n. (occurring only in
nom., acc., loc. sing.), Ved. earth, soil, ground; [cf. 2.
{%kṣam.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16428<pc>0266-b<k1>kzAmAprasTa<k2>kzAmAprasTa
{#kzAmAprasTa#}¦ {%kṣāmā-prastha, as,%} m., N. of a
town.
<LEND>

<L>16429<pc>0266-b<k1>kzAra<k2>kzAra
{#kzAra#}¦ {%kṣāra.%} See under rt. {%kṣar,%} p. 265.
<LEND>

<L>16430<pc>0266-b<k1>kzAlana<k2>kzAlana
{#kzAlana#}¦ {%kṣālana,%} &c. See under 2. {%kṣal.%}
<LEND>

<L>16431<pc>0266-b<k1>kzAs<k2>kzAs
{#kzAs#}¦ {%kṣās,%} nom. case of 2. {%kṣam,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16432<pc>0266-b<k1>kzi<k2>kzi<h>1
{#kzi#} 1¦. {%kṣi,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%kṣayati%} (only
the pres. seems to occur), to possess, have
power over, rule, govern, be master of (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>16433<pc>0266-b<k1>kzayat<k2>kzayat
{%Kṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ possessing, ruling, govern-
ing. {%—Kṣayad-vīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ruling or
governing men; an epithet of Indra, Rudra, and
Pūṣan; (Sāy. as if fr. 2. {%kṣi%}), possessed of abiding
or of going heroes such as sons &c.
<LEND>

<L>16434<pc>0266-b<k1>kzit<k2>kzit<h>1
1. {%kṣit, t, t, t,%}¦ ruling, a ruler, a governor, a
sovereign, (used in comp., e. g. {%mahī-kṣit,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>16435<pc>0266-b<k1>kzi<k2>kzi<h>2
{#kzi#} 2¦. {%kṣi,%} cl. 2. 6. P., Ved. {%kṣeti,%}
{%kṣiyati, cikṣāya, kṣeṣyati, kṣetum,%}
to abide, stay, dwell, reside (used especially of an
undisturbed or secret residence); to inhabit; to re-
main; to be quiet; to go, move, approach: Caus.
{%kṣayayati%} or {%kṣepayati, -yitum,%} to make a
person live quietly; to pacify.
<LEND>

<L>16436<pc>0266-b<k1>kzaya<k2>kzaya<h>1
1. {%kṣaya, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see under rt. 4. {%kṣi%}
below), an abode, residence, habitation, dwelling-
place, seat, house [cf. {%uru-kṣaya%}]; family, race;
the house of Yama, god of death; dominion (?).
{%—Kṣaya-taru, us,%} m. the plant Bignonia Suave-
olens.
<LEND>

<L>16437<pc>0266-b<k1>kzayaRa<k2>kzayaRa<h>1
1. {%kṣayaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. habitable (?); ({%as%}),
m. a place with tranquil water; a bay, harbour (?);
({%am%}), n. a dwelling-place.
<LEND>

<L>16438<pc>0266-b<k1>kzayas<k2>kzayas
{%Kṣayas, as,%}¦ n. a dwelling-place, habitation.
<LEND>

<L>16439<pc>0266-b<k1>kzi<k2>kzi<h>3
3. {%kṣi, is,%}¦ f. abode, residence; going, moving.
<LEND>

<L>16440<pc>0266-b<k1>kzit<k2>kzit<h>2
2. {%kṣit, t, t, t,%}¦ dwelling, an inhabitant, (at the end
of several compounds, e. g. {%antarikṣa-kṣit,%} an
inhabitant of the air &c.)
<LEND>

<L>16441<pc>0266-b<k1>kzitA<k2>kzitA
{%Kṣitā,%}¦ f. the earth.
<LEND>

<L>16442<pc>0266-b<k1>kziti<k2>kziti<h>1
1. {%kṣiti, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. see under rt. 4. {%kṣi%} below),
an abode, a dwelling, habitation, house, residence
[cf. {%uru-kṣiti%}]; the earth, the soil of the earth;
({%ayas%}), f. pl., Ved. settlements, colonies, races of
men, nations, men in general; the families of the
gods. {%—Kṣiti-kaṇa, as, ā,%} m. f. a particle of
earth, dust. {%—Kṣiti-kampa, as,%} m. an earthquake.
{%—Kṣiti-kṣama, as,%} m. the tree Mimosa Khayar;
[cf. {%khadira.%}] {%—Kṣiti-kṣit, t,%} m. a ruler of the
earth; a king, a prince. {%—Kṣiti-khaṇḍa, as,%} m. a
clod or lump of earth. {%—Kṣiti-garbha, as,%} m., N.
of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Kṣiti-ja, as, ā, am,%} earth-born,
produced of or in the earth; ({%as%}), m. a tree; a kind
of snail ({%= bhū-nāga%}); an earth-worm; N. of the
[Page0266-c+ 80]
planet Mars; an epithet of the demon Naraka; ({%ā%}),
f. an epithet of Sītā, the wife of Rāma; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a circle of the sky. {%—Kṣiti-jantu, us,%} m. a kind
of snail ({%= bhū-nāga%}); an earth-worm. {%—Kṣiti-%}
{%tala, am,%} n. the surface of the earth, the region
below the earth. {%—Kṣiti-deva, as,%} m. the ‘earth-
god,’ an epithet of a king. {%—Kṣiti-devatā,%} f. the
deity of the earth, epithet of a Brāhman. {%—Kṣiti-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m. ‘earth-supporter,’ a mountain.
{%—Kṣiti-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} carrying soil or earth.
{%—Kṣiti-dhenu, us,%} f. the earth considered as a
milch-cow. {%—Kṣiti-nanda, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Kṣiti-nāga, as,%} m. a kind of snail ({%= bhū-nāga%})
or rather snail-shell; an earth-worm (?). {%—Kṣiti-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of the earth,’ a king. {%—Kṣiti-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. ‘earth-protector,’ a king. {%—Kṣiti-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. lord of the earth, a king, a sovereign.
{%—Kṣiti-pāla, as,%} m. ‘earth-protector,’ a king,
a prince. {%—Kṣiti-pīṭha, am,%} n. the surface of the
earth. {%—Kṣiti-putra, as,%} m. a son of the earth, an
epithet of Naraka. {%—Kṣiti-pratiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}
dwelling or abiding on the earth. {%—Kṣiti-bhuj, k,%}
m. one who enjoys the earth, a king. {%—Kṣiti-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘earth-supporter,’ a mountain; a king.
{%—Kṣiti-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the earth, the globe.
{%—Kṣiti-ruh, ṭ,%} or {%kṣiti-ruha, as,%} m. a
plant, a tree. {%—Kṣiti-lava-bhuj, k,%} m. one who
possesses a small tract of the earth, a petty prince.
{%—Kṣiti-vadarī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= bhū-vadarī.%}
{%—Kṣiti-vardhana, as,%} m. a corpse. {%—Kṣiti-%}
{%vṛtti, is,%} f. (patient) behaviour like that of the
earth. {%—Kṣitivṛtti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} patient like
the earth. {%—Kṣiti-vyudāsa, as,%} m. a cave within
the earth. {%—Kṣiti-suta, as,%} m. an epithet of the
demon Naraka; also of the planet Mars; [cf. {%kṣiti-%}
{%putra.%}] {%—Kṣitīśa (˚ti-īśa), as,%} m. a ruler of the
earth, a king. {%—Kṣitīśa-vaṃśāvalī-carita, am,%} n.
‘genealogy and history of the kings,’ title of a work
composed in the last century, being a family chronicle
of the viceroys of a part of Bengal. {%—Kṣitīśvara%}
{%(˚ti-īś˚), as,%} m. a king. {%—Kṣity-aditi, is,%} f. the
Aditi of the earth, an epithet of Devakī, the mother
of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>16443<pc>0266-c<k1>kzitvan<k2>kzitvan
{%Kṣitvan, ā,%}¦ m. air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>16444<pc>0266-c<k1>kzi<k2>kzi<h>4
{#kzi#} 4¦. {%kṣi,%} cl. 1. 5. 9. P. {%kṣayati, kṣi-%}
{%ṇoti, kṣiṇāti, cikṣāya, kṣeṣyati, akṣai-%}
{%ṣīt, kṣetum,%} to destroy, corrupt, ruin, to make an
end of; to kill, injure: Pass. {%kṣīyate,%} to wane; to
decrease; to be diminished, waste away, perish: Caus.
{%kṣayayati%} or {%kṣapayati%} or Ved. {%kṣāpayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to destroy, ruin, make an end of, finish; to
weaken: Desid. {%cikṣīṣati:%} Intens. {%cekṣīyate,%}
{%cekṣayīti, cekṣeti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κτίννυμι?</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>16445<pc>0266-c<k1>kzaya<k2>kzaya<h>2
2. {%kṣaya, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see under 2. {%kṣi%} last
col.), loss, waste, wane, diminution, destruction, decay
wasting or wearing away; fall (as of prices, opposed to
{%vṛddhi,%} e. g. {%kṣayo vṛddhiś ca paṇyānām,%} the
fall and rise in the price of commodities); removal;
end, termination (e. g. {%nidrā-kṣaya,%} the end of
sleep; {%dina-kṣaye,%} at the end of day; {%jīvita-%}
{%kṣaye,%} at the end of life; {%kṣayaṃ yā%} or {%gam,%} to
become less, be diminished, go to destruction, come
to an end, perish); consumption, pthisis pulmonalis;
sickness in general; the destruction of the universe;
(in algebra) a negative quality, a minus. {%—Kṣaya-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} causing destruction or ruin, de-
structive, ruinous, terminating; liberating from ex-
istence. {%—Kṣaya-kāla, as,%} m. the end of all things,
the period of destruction. {%—Kṣaya-kāsa, as,%} m. a
consumptive or phthisical cough. {%—Kṣaya-kṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} or {%kṣayaṅ-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing ruin or
loss; destructive. {%—Kṣaya-nāśinī,%} f. the plant
Celtis Orientalis, {%= jīvantī%} (‘removing consump-
tion’). {%—Kṣaya-pakṣa, as,%} m. the dark fortnight,
that of the moon's wane. {%—Kṣaya-yukti, is,%} f. or
{%kṣaya-yoga, as,%} m. necessity or opportunity of
destroying. {%—Kṣaya-roga, as,%} m. consumption.
{%—Kṣayarogi-tva, am,%} n. or {%kṣayarogi-tā,%} f.
consumption. {%—Kṣaya-rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} consumptive.
{%—Kṣaya-vāyu, us,%} m. the wind that is to blow at
[Page0267-a+ 79]
the end of the world. {%—Kṣaya-sampad, t,%} f. total
loss, ruin, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>16446<pc>0267-a<k1>kzayaRa<k2>kzayaRa<h>2
2. {%kṣayaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroying, annihilating,
driving away, dispersing; (often at the end of com-
pounds, e. g. {%asura-kṣayaṇa, piśāca-kṣayaṇa,%}
&c.)
<LEND>

<L>16447<pc>0267-a<k1>kzayaTu<k2>kzayaTu
{%Kṣayathu, us,%}¦ m. consumption.
<LEND>

<L>16448<pc>0267-a<k1>kzayayitavya<k2>kzayayitavya
{%Kṣayayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>16449<pc>0267-a<k1>kzayin<k2>kzayin
{%Kṣayin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ wasting, decaying, fragile;
consumptive. {%—Kṣayi-tva, am,%} n. fragility.
<LEND>

<L>16450<pc>0267-a<k1>kzayizRu<k2>kzayizRu
{%Kṣayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ destroying, wasting, decay-
ing, perishing; perishable, fragile.
<LEND>

<L>16451<pc>0267-a<k1>kzayya<k2>kzayya
{%Kṣayya, as, ā, am,%}¦ perishable, decaying; [cf.
{%a-kṣayya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16452<pc>0267-a<k1>kzi<k2>kzi<h>5
5. {%kṣi, is,%}¦ f. destruction; waste, loss.
<LEND>

<L>16453<pc>0267-a<k1>kzita<k2>kzita
{%Kṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wasted, decayed, exhausted;
weakened; poor, miserable. {%—Kṣitāyus (˚ta-āy˚),%}
{%us, us, us,%} Ved. one whose life goes to an end, one
whose life is forfeited.
<LEND>

<L>16454<pc>0267-a<k1>kziti<k2>kziti<h>2
2. {%kṣiti, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. see under rt. 2. {%kṣi%} above),
loss, destruction; wane; a period of the destruction
of the universe, the end of the world; a kind of
perfume {%= rocanā; (is),%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>16455<pc>0267-a<k1>kziyA<k2>kziyA
{%Kṣiyā,%}¦ f. loss, waste, destruction; offence against
the customs.
<LEND>

<L>16456<pc>0267-a<k1>kzIRa<k2>kzIRa
{%Kṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ diminished, wasted, expended,
worn away; lost, destroyed; injured, broken, torn;
subdued, suppressed; thin, emaciated, feeble; delicate,
slender, poor, miserable. {%—Kṣīṇa-gati, is, is, i,%}
with slackened or diminished motion or progress.
{%—Kṣīṇa-tamas, ās,%} m., N. of a Vihāra. {%—Kṣīṇa-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%kṣīṇa-tva, am,%} n. the state of wasting
away, diminution, decay; the state of being worn
away or injured; emaciation, thinness; slenderness.
{%—Kṣīṇa-dhana, as, ā, am,%} impoverished. {%—Kṣī-%}
{%ṇa-pāpa, as, ā, am,%} one whose sins are destroyed;
one who is purified after having suffered the con-
sequences of sin. {%—Kṣīṇa-puṇya, as, ā, am,%} one
whose merit is lost; one who has enjoyed the fruits
of merit and is doomed to labour for more in another
birth. {%—Kṣīṇa-madhya, as, ā, am,%} slender-waisted.
{%—Kṣīṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} wasted, decayed. {%—Kṣī-%}
{%ṇa-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} inhabiting a dilapidated house;
({%ī%}), m. a dove or pigeon. {%—Kṣīṇa-vikrānta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has lost courage, destitute of prowess.
{%—Kṣīṇa-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} out of employ, having
no means of subsistence or maintenance. {%—Kṣīṇa-%}
{%śakti, is, is, i,%} one whose strength is wasted, weak,
impotent. {%—Kṣīṇa-śarīra, as, ā, am,%} having a thin
or emaciated body. {%—Kṣīṇa-sukṛta, as, ā, am,%}
having one's stock of merit exhausted. {%—Kṣīṇāṅga%}
{%(˚ṇa-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} having emaciated limbs.
{%—Kṣīṇājya-karman (˚ṇa-āj˚), ā,%} m. a Buddhist.
{%—Kṣīṇāṣṭa-karman (˚ṇa-aṣ˚), ā,%} m. (with
Jainas) an Arhat or inspired teacher.
<LEND>

<L>16457<pc>0267-a<k1>kzIyamARa<k2>kzIyamARa
{%Kṣīyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ perishing, wasting away,
decaying.
<LEND>

<L>16458<pc>0267-a<k1>kzeya<k2>kzeya
{%Kṣeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be destroyed or removed.
<LEND>

<L>16459<pc>0267-a<k1>kziR<k2>kziR
{#kziR#}¦ {%kṣiṇ,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%kṣiṇoti, -ṇute,%}
{%kṣeṇoti, -ṇute%} (?), to kill, to hurt, = 4.
{%kṣi.%}
<LEND>

<L>16460<pc>0267-a<k1>kzidra<k2>kzidra
{#kzidra#}¦ {%kṣidra, as,%} m. disease; the sun; a
horn.
<LEND>

<L>16461<pc>0267-a<k1>kzip<k2>kzip<h>1
{#kzip#} 1¦. {%kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A., 4. P. {%kṣi-%}
{%pati, -te, kṣipyati, cikṣepa, cikṣipe,%}
{%kṣepsyati, -te, akṣaipsīt, akṣipta, kṣeptum,%}
to throw, cast, send, despatch; to put or place any-
thing on or in (with loc.), pour on, scatter, strew;
to fix or attach to; to throw away, cast away, get
rid of; to reject, disdain; to lay (the blame) on; to
strike, hit; to strike down, ruin, destroy; to utter
abusive words, insult, revile, abuse, scold; A. to
throw at each other, destroy one another: Caus. P.
{%kṣepayati, -yitum,%} to cause to cast &c.; to hurt,
injure: Desid. {%cikṣipsati, -te:%} Intens. {%cekṣip-%}
{%yate, cekṣepti;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>sipo, dissipo,</nsi> for <nsi>xipo;</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥίπτω</lang> for <lang n="greek">κρίπτω</lang> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>hipiaw,</nsi> ‘to
cast or dash suddenly;’ Goth. <nsi>vairpa;</nsi> Germ.
<nsi>werfe ?</nsi>].
<LEND>
[Page0267-b+ 81]

<L>16462<pc>0267-b<k1>kzip<k2>kzip<h>2
2. {%kṣip, p,%}¦ f. (only used in nom. and inst. pl.
{%kṣipas%} and {%kṣipābhis%}), Ved. the fingers.
<LEND>

<L>16463<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipa<k2>kzipa
{%Kṣipa, as, ā, am,%}¦ a thrower, striking, hitting;
({%as%}), m. throwing, casting, insulting, reviling; ({%ā%}),
f. sending, casting, throwing, &c.; night; (a wrong
form for {%kṣapā.%})
<LEND>

<L>16464<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipaka<k2>kzipaka
{%Kṣipaka, as,%}¦ m. an archer, a warrior.
<LEND>

<L>16465<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipaRa<k2>kzipaRa
{%Kṣipaṇa, am,%}¦ n. sending, despatching, throwing,
casting; reviling, abusing.
<LEND>

<L>16466<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipaRi<k2>kzipaRi
{%Kṣipaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a stroke or blow with a whip; a
missile weapon; ({%is%} or {%ī%}), f. an oar; a kind of net.
<LEND>

<L>16467<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipaRu<k2>kzipaRu
{%Kṣipaṇu, us,%}¦ m. an archer; a weapon; air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>16468<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipaRyu<k2>kzipaRyu
{%Kṣipaṇyu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. {%kṣipaṇa?%}), fragrant,
sweet-smelling; diffusive, what may be sent or scat-
tered; ({%us%}), m. the body; spring, the season of
spring.
<LEND>

<L>16469<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipat<k2>kzipat
{%Kṣipat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} throwing, casting;
abusing, reproaching.
<LEND>

<L>16470<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipati<k2>kzipati
{%Kṣipati%}¦ or {%kṣipasti, ī,%} du., Ved. the arms.
<LEND>

<L>16471<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipta<k2>kzipta
{%Kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown, cast; sent, despatched,
dismissed, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. night, (like {%kṣipā,%} a wrong
form for {%kṣapā%}); ({%am%}), n. a wound caused by
shooting or throwing. {%—Kṣipta-citta, as, ā, am,%}
distracted in mind, absent. {%—Kṣiptacitta-tā,%} f.
absence of mind. {%—Kṣipta-deha, as, ā, am,%} pros-
trating the body, lying down. {%—Kṣipta-bheṣaja,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} Ved. healing wounds caused by missile
weapons. {%—Kṣipta-yoni, is, is, i,%} of despicable
descent (?), such a man is not allowed to become a
Ṛtvij. {%—Kṣipta-laguḍa, as, ā, am,%} flinging the
staff.
<LEND>

<L>16472<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipti<k2>kzipti
{%Kṣipti, is,%}¦ f. throwing; sending; solving a
riddle; explaining or understanding a hidden mean-
ing; the quantity to be added to the square of the
least root multiplied by the multiplicator, to render
it capable of yielding an exact square root; (in the
latter sense also {%kṣiptikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>16473<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipnu<k2>kzipnu
{%Kṣipnu%}¦ (or {%kṣipṇu?%}), {%us, us, u,%} throwing,
casting, throwing obstacles in the way; obstructive,
scornful, or fond of abusing (?).
<LEND>

<L>16474<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipyat<k2>kzipyat
{%Kṣipyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ throwing, sending.
<LEND>

<L>16475<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipyamARa<k2>kzipyamARa
{%Kṣipyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ throwing, tossing;
casting aside, throwing off; sending, directing; being
thrown, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16476<pc>0267-b<k1>kzipra<k2>kzipra
{%Kṣipra, as, ā, am%}¦ (compar. {%kṣepīyas,%} superl.
{%kṣepiṣṭha%}), springing, flying back with a spring,
elastic (as a bow); quick, speedy, swift; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa; ({%am%}), n. a measure of time
equal to (1/15) Muhūrta or 15 Etarhis; the part of the
hand between the thumb and fore-finger and the cor-
responding part of the foot; ({%am%}), ind. quickly,
immediately, directly; ({%āt%}), ind. shortly afterwards,
thereupon; ({%e%}), ind. directly, immediately; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">κραιπνός.</lang>] {%—Kṣipra-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} acting or work-
ing quickly, skilful. {%—Kṣipra-dhanvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved.
armed with an elastic bow or one which flies back
with a spring. {%—Kṣipra-pākin, ī, inī, i,%} ripening
quickly; ({%ī%}), m. the tree Hibiscus Populneoides; [cf.
{%gardabhāṇḍa.%}] {%—Kṣipra-śyena, as,%} m. a species
of bird. {%—Kṣipra-sandhi, is,%} m. a species of
Sandhi produced by changing the first of two con-
current vowels to its semivowel; also the Svarita
accent on a syllable formed by this kind of Sandhi;
[cf. {%kṣaipra.%}] {%—Kṣipra-hasta, as,%} m., N. of a
Rakṣas (swift-handed).
<LEND>

<L>16477<pc>0267-b<k1>kzepa<k2>kzepa
{%Kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. throwing, casting, tossing; a
throw, cast; a stroke of an oar &c.; sending, dis-
missing, striking down, depression; laying on (as
paint &c.), besmearing; transgressing; passing away
time; delay, procrastination, dilatoriness; insult, in-
vective, abuse, reviling; disrespect, contempt; pride,
haughtiness; a nosegay, a clump of flowers; (in
arithmetic) an additive quantity, addendum.
<LEND>

<L>16478<pc>0267-b<k1>kzepaka<k2>kzepaka
{%Kṣepaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ a thrower, sender; inserted,
interpolated; abusive, disrespectful; ({%as%}), m. a spu-
rious or interpolated passage; an additive quantity,
addendum; N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>16479<pc>0267-b<k1>kzepaRa<k2>kzepaRa
{%Kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of throwing, casting,
shooting off (of an arrow &c.); sending, directing;
sending away; passing away time, spending time;
omitting; abusing; a sling; ({%ī%}), f. a sling or any
[Page0267-c+ 76]
instrument with which missiles are thrown; an oar;
a kind of net.
<LEND>

<L>16480<pc>0267-c<k1>kzepaRi<k2>kzepaRi
{%Kṣepaṇi, is,%}¦ f. an oar; a net, a fishing-net.
<LEND>

<L>16481<pc>0267-c<k1>kzepaRIya<k2>kzepaRIya
{%Kṣepaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thrown or cast;
({%am%}), n. a sling, any instrument for casting missiles.
<LEND>

<L>16482<pc>0267-c<k1>kzepiman<k2>kzepiman
{%Kṣepiman, ā,%}¦ m. great velocity, speed.
<LEND>

<L>16483<pc>0267-c<k1>kzepizWa<k2>kzepizWa
{%Kṣepiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (see {%kṣipra%}), quickest,
speediest.
<LEND>

<L>16484<pc>0267-c<k1>kzepIyas<k2>kzepIyas
{%Kṣepīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (see {%kṣipra%}), more
quick, speedier.
<LEND>

<L>16485<pc>0267-c<k1>kzeptavya<k2>kzeptavya
{%Kṣeptavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cast or thrown, to
be reviled or abused.
<LEND>

<L>16486<pc>0267-c<k1>kzeptf<k2>kzeptf
{%Kṣeptṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a thrower, caster, sender.
<LEND>

<L>16487<pc>0267-c<k1>kzepya<k2>kzepya
{%Kṣepya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thrown; to be thrown
round (as a garment).
<LEND>

<L>16488<pc>0267-c<k1>kziyA<k2>kziyA
{#kziyA#}¦ {%kṣiyā.%} See under rt. 4. {%kṣi.%}
<LEND>

<L>16489<pc>0267-c<k1>kzillikA<k2>kzillikA
{#kzillikA#}¦ {%kṣillikā,%} f., N. of the grand-
mother of king Cakra-varman.
<LEND>

<L>16490<pc>0267-c<k1>kziv<k2>kziv
{#kziv#}¦ {%kṣiv,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%kṣevati, kṣī-%}
{%vyati,%} to eject from the mouth, spit, spit
out, vomit; [cf. {%ṣṭhiv%} and {%kṣīv.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16491<pc>0267-c<k1>kzI<k2>kzI
{#kzI#}¦ {%kṣī,%} another form for 4. {%kṣi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16492<pc>0267-c<k1>kzIj<k2>kzIj
{#kzIj#}¦ {%kṣīj,%} cl. 1. P. {%kṣījati, cikṣīja,%}
{%kṣījitum,%} to sound inarticulately, to sigh
or groan as in distress.
<LEND>

<L>16493<pc>0267-c<k1>kzIjana<k2>kzIjana
{%Kṣījana, am,%}¦ n. the whistling of hollow reeds or
bamboos.
<LEND>

<L>16494<pc>0267-c<k1>kzIRa<k2>kzIRa
{#kzIRa#}¦ {%kṣīṇa.%} See under 4. {%kṣi%} 1st col.
<LEND>

<L>16495<pc>0267-c<k1>kzIb<k2>kzIb
{#kzIb#}¦ {%kṣīb%} and {%kṣība.%} See {%kṣīv, kṣīva.%}
<LEND>

<L>16496<pc>0267-c<k1>kzIra<k2>kzIra
{#kzIra#}¦ {%kṣīra, as, am,%} m. n. (probably fr.
{%kṣar,%} but according to Uṇādi IV. 34. fr. {%ghas%}),
milk, thickened milk; the milky juice or sap of
plants; the resin of the plant Pinus Longifolia;
water; ({%as%}), m., N. of a grammarian [cf. {%kṣīra-%}
{%svāmin%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant [cf. {%kākolī%}]; ({%ī%}), f.,
N. of several plants containing a milky sap; a small
shrub, Asclepia Rosea, also {%dugdhikā;%} a species of
Mimosa, M. Kauki [cf. {%kṣīrikā%}]; gigantic swallow-
wort; Euphorbia &c. {%—Kṣīra-kañcukin, ī,%} m., N.
of a reed, Lipeocercis Serrata {%(kṣīrīśa)%}. {%—Kṣīra-%}
{%kaṇṭha%} or {%kṣīra-kaṇṭhaka, as,%} m. an infant, a
young child, ‘having milk in its throat.’ {%—Kṣīra-%}
{%kanda, as, ā,%} m. f. a kind of pot-herb, black Bhuin-
coönra, Convolvulus Paniculatus; [cf. {%kṣīra-vidā-%}
{%rī.%}] {%—Kṣīra-kalambha,%} see {%kṣairakalambhi.%}
{%—Kṣīra-kākolikā%} or {%kṣīra-kākolī,%} f. a drug, one
of the eight principal medicaments of the Hindūs; it
is a root from the Himālaya yielding a milky juice;
[cf. {%kākolī.%}] {%—Kṣīra-kāṇḍaka, as,%} m. the plant
Tithymalus Antiquorum ({%snuhī%}), and Calotropis
Gigantea {%(arka)%}. {%—Kṣīra-kāṣṭhā,%} f., N. of a
plant, {%= vaṭī%}. {%—Kṣīra-kīṭa, as,%} m. an insect or
animalcule generated by the fermentation of milk.
{%—Kṣīra-kṣava, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= dudgha-%}
{%pāṣāṇa%}. {%—Kṣīra-kharjūra, as,%} m. a species of
Datura tree. {%—Kṣīra-garbha, as,%} m., N. of a
certain Brāhman who was born again as a flamingo.
{%—Kṣīra-ghṛta, am,%} n. purified butter mixed
with milk. {%—Kṣīra-ja, am,%} n. coagulated milk.
{%—Kṣīra-taraṅgiṇī,%} f. title of a grammar com-
posed by Kṣīra-svāmin. {%—Kṣīra-taila, am,%} n.
a kind of unguent prepared with milk, oil, &c.
{%—Kṣīra-toyadhi, is,%} m. the ocean of milk.
{%—Kṣīra-da, as, ā, am,%} milk-giving, what yields
milk. {%—Kṣīra-dala, as,%} m. the plant Calotropis
Gigantea ({%= arka%}), the leaves &c. of which yield a
milky juice. {%—Kṣīra-dātrī,%} f. yielding milk as a
cow. {%—Kṣīra-druma, as,%} m. the tree Ficus Re-
ligiosa; [cf. {%aśvattha.%}] {%—Kṣīra-dhara, as,%} m.,
N. of a king. {%—Kṣīra-dhātrī,%} f. a wet-nurse.
{%—Kṣīra-dhenu, us,%} f. a milch-cow, symbolically
represented by milk &c. offered as a gift to a Brāh-
man. {%—Kṣīra-nāśa, as,%} m. the tree Trophis Aspera
{%(= śākhoṭa)%}. {%—Kṣīra-nidhi, is,%} m. the ocean of
milk. {%—Kṣīra-nīra, am,%} n. milk and water; em-
bracing, embrace (i. e. a union like the mixing of
[Page0268-a+ 81]
milk and water). {%—Kṣīra-pa, as, ā, am,%} drinking
milk, who or what drinks milk; epithet of a class of
ascetics; an infant, a young child. {%—Kṣīra-parṇin,%}
{%ī,%} m. the plant Calotropis Gigantea; [cf. {%arka%} and
{%kṣīra-dala.%}] {%—Kṣīra-palāṇḍu, us,%} m. a kind of
onion. {%—Kṣīra-pāka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. cooked in
milk. {%—Kṣīra-pāṇa, ās,%} m. pl. the milk-drinkers,
an epithet of the Uśīnaras; ({%am%}), n. drinking milk;
({%as, ī, am%}), any vessel out of which milk is drunk.
{%—Kṣīra-pāṇi, is,%} m., N. of a physician. {%—Kṣīra-%}
{%pāyin, ī, iṇī, i,%} drinking or sucking milk; drinking
or imbibing water repeatedly; ({%iṇas%}), m. pl. the
milk-drinkers, an epithet of the Uśīnaras. {%—Kṣīra-%}
{%bhṛta, as, ā, am,%} supported by milk, receiving
wages in the form of milk. {%—Kṣīra-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} composed of milk. {%—Kṣīra-mocaka, as,%} m. a
kind of Moringa, M. Hyperanthera; [cf. {%mocaka.%}]
{%—Kṣīra-moraṭa, as,%} m. a kind of creeping plant;
[cf. {%sitadru, sudala, kṣīraka.%}] {%—Kṣīra-yaṣ-%}
{%ṭika, am,%} n. a dish of liquorice and milk; (perhaps
a wrong form for {%kṣīra-ṣaṣṭika?%}). {%—Kṣīra-%}
{%latā,%} f. the plant Batatas Paniculata; [cf. {%kṣīra-%}
{%vidārī.%}] {%—Kṣīra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. furnished
with milk; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Kṣīra-vallī,%}
f. the dark Bhuincoönra, Convolvulus Paniculatus.
{%—Kṣīra-vāri, is,%} m. the sea of milk; [cf. {%kṣī-%}
{%roda.%}] {%—Kṣīra-vāridhi, is,%} m. the sea of milk.
{%—Kṣīra-vikṛti, is,%} f. inspissated milk. {%—Kṣīra-%}
{%vidārikā%} or {%kṣīra-vidārī,%} f. the plant Batatas
Paniculata. {%—Kṣīra-viṣāṇikā,%} f. the plants Tragia
Involucrata ({%= vṛścikālī%}) and {%kṣīra-kākolī.%}
{%—Kṣīra-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the glomerous fig tree,
Ficus Glomerata [cf. {%udumbara%}]; a common N. for
the four trees {%nyagrodha, udumbara, aśvattha,%}
and {%madhūka%}. {%—Kṣīra-vrata, as, ā, am,%} living
upon milk in consequence of a vow. {%—Kṣīra-%}
{%śara, as,%} m. cream, the surface or skim of milk,
curds; [cf. {%āmikṣā.%}] {%—Kṣīra-śīrṣa, as,%} m. the
resin of the plant Pinus Longifolia; [cf. {%śrī-vāsa.%}]
{%—Kṣīra-śukrā,%} f. {%= kṣīra-vidārī%} and {%kṣīra-%}
{%kākolī%}. {%—Kṣīra-śukla, as,%} m. the plant Trapa
Bispinosa [cf. {%jala-kaṇṭaka%}]; another plant, =
{%rājādanī; (ā),%} f. the plant Batatas Paniculata.
{%—Kṣīra-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. mixed with milk.
{%—Kṣīra-ṣaṣṭika, am,%} n. Ṣaṣṭika rice cooked
in milk. {%—Kṣīra-santānikā,%} f. curds mixed with
milk; (a various reading has {%˚santālikā.%}) {%—Kṣīra-%}
{%samudra, as,%} m. the sea of milk in Śveta-dīpa.
{%—Kṣīra-sarpis, is,%} n. clarified butter mixed with
milk. {%—Kṣīra-sāgara, as,%} m. the ocean of milk;
also N. of a place. {%—Kṣīrasāgara-sutā,%} f. an epi-
thet of Lakṣmī as produced from the ocean of
milk. {%—Kṣīra-sāra, as,%} m. essence of milk, any
product of milk, (in Hindī {%pālajinu%}), butter.
{%—Kṣīra-sphaṭika, as,%} m. a precious stone, de-
scribed as a kind of milky crystal (opal or cat's eye?);
[cf. {%ākāśa-sphaṭika%} and {%taila-sphaṭika.%}] {%—Kṣīra-%}
{%svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a grammarian and commen-
tator on the Amara-koṣa. {%—Kṣīra-hrada, as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Kṣīrāda (˚ra-ada), as,%} m. an
infant at the breast, a sucking child. {%—Kṣīrān-%}
{%nāda (˚ra-anna-ada), as,%} m. an infant which is
both fed and suckled. {%—Kṣīrābdhi (˚ra-abdhi),%}
{%is,%} m. the sea of milk, one of the seven seas sur-
rounding the seven divisions of the terrestrial world.
{%—Kṣīrābdhi-ja, as,%} m. the moon; the Amṛta
or any one of the precious objects produced at the
churning of the ocean; an epithet of Śeṣa; an
epithet of Tārkṣya; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Lakṣmī;
({%am%}), n. sea-salt, a pearl. {%—Kṣīrābdhi-tanayā,%} f.
or {%kṣīrābdhi-mānuṣī,%} f. an epithet of Lakṣmī as
the daughter of the ocean of milk. {%—Kṣīrāhva%} or
{%kṣīrāhvaya (˚ra-āh˚), as,%} m. the resin of the
plant Pinus Longifolia. {%—Kṣīroda (˚ra-uda), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} containing milk instead of water; ({%as%}), m.
the sea of milk; the sea in general. {%—Kṣīroda-%}
{%tanayā,%} f. the daughter of the sea of milk; an epi-
thet of Lakṣmī. {%—Kṣīroda-tanayā-pati, is,%} m.
an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Kṣīrodadhi (˚ra-ud˚), is,%}
m. the sea of milk. {%—Kṣīroda-nandana, as,%} m.
the son of the sea of milk, an epithet of the moon.
[Page0268-b+ 77]
{%—Kṣīroda-mathana, am,%} n. the churning of the
ocean of milk undertaken by the Devas and Asuras
to obtain the Amṛta &c. {%—Kṣīrormi (˚ra-ūr˚), is,%}
m. a wave of milk, a wave of the sea of milk.
{%—Kṣīraudana (˚ra-od˚), as,%} m. rice boiled with
milk.
<LEND>

<L>16497<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIraka<k2>kzIraka
{%Kṣīraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant, {%= kṣīra-%}
{%moraṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>16498<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIraya<k2>kzIraya
{%Kṣīraya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kṣīrayati, -yitum,%} to have
the appearance of milk, look like milk.
<LEND>

<L>16499<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIrasa<k2>kzIrasa
{%Kṣīrasa, as,%}¦ m. {%= kṣīra-sāra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16500<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIrasya<k2>kzIrasya
{%Kṣīrasya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kṣīrasyati, -yitum,%} to long
for milk or for the breast.
<LEND>

<L>16501<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIrAvI<k2>kzIrAvI
{%Kṣīrāvī%}¦ or {%kṣīrāvikā,%} f. a sort of Asclepias, A.
Rosea, {%= dugdhikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>16502<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIrika<k2>kzIrika
{%Kṣīrika, as,%}¦ m. a kind of serpent; a kind of
tree ({%ā%}), f. a dish prepared with milk; a kind of
Datura tree; [cf. {%kṣīra-kharjūra%} and {%piṇḍa-%}
{%kharjūra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16503<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIrin<k2>kzIrin
{%Kṣīrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ milky, yielding milk, abounding
in milk, having plenty of milk; containing milky
juice or sap (as a tree); ({%ī%}), m. a species of tree,
the Udumbara (?); according to native lexicographers
many plants have this epithet; ({%iṇī%}), f. a tree bear-
ing an edible fruit, = Mimusops Kauki; a species of
the moon-plant or acid Asclepias used in medicine.
<LEND>

<L>16504<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIrIya<k2>kzIrIya
{%Kṣīrīya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kṣīrīyati, -yitum,%} to desire
milk.
<LEND>

<L>16505<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIrISa<k2>kzIrISa
{%Kṣīrīśa, as,%}¦ m. {%= kṣīra-kañcukin.%}
<LEND>

<L>16506<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIreyI<k2>kzIreyI
{%Kṣīreyī,%}¦ f. an oblation of milk, rice, and sugar.
<LEND>

<L>16507<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIv<k2>kzIv
{#kzIv#}¦ {%kṣīv,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%kṣīvati, kṣevati%}
and {%kṣīvyati, -vitum,%} to spit, sputter,
eject from the mouth; to be drunk or intoxicated;
[cf. {%kṣiv, kṣev, kṣīb, ṣṭhiv;%} cf. also Hib.
<nsi>siobhas,</nsi> ‘rage, madness.’]
<LEND>

<L>16508<pc>0268-b<k1>kzIva<k2>kzIva
{%Kṣīva%}¦ or {%kṣība, as, ā, am,%} excited, drunk,
intoxicated. {%—Kṣīva-tā,%} f. or {%kṣīva-tva, am,%} n.
intoxication, drunkenness.
<LEND>

<L>16509<pc>0268-b<k1>kzu<k2>kzu<h>1
{#kzu#} 1¦. {%kṣu,%} cl. 2. P. {%kṣauti, cukṣāva,%}
{%kṣaviṣyati, akṣāvīt, kṣavitum,%} to
sneeze, to make any sound like sneezing; to cough:
Caus. {%kṣāvayati:%} Desid. of Caus. {%cukṣāvayiṣati;%}
[cf. Lith. <nsi>czaudmi.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16510<pc>0268-b<k1>kzava<k2>kzava
{%Kṣava, as,%}¦ m. sneezing, cough, catarrh; a black
species of mustard, Sinapis Dichotoma; [cf. {%rājikā.%}]
{%—Kṣava-kṛt, t, t, t,%} anything which causes sneez-
ing; making a sneeze, sneezing, coughing.
<LEND>

<L>16511<pc>0268-b<k1>kzavaka<k2>kzavaka
{%Kṣavaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Achyranthes Aspera,
{%= apāmārga,%} black mustard; ({%am%}), n. a kind of
pot-herb; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of Solanum; a species of
rice; a woman.
<LEND>

<L>16512<pc>0268-b<k1>kzavaTu<k2>kzavaTu
{%Kṣavathu, us,%}¦ m. sneezing; catarrh; cough;
irritation of the throat; sore throat.
<LEND>

<L>16513<pc>0268-b<k1>kzut<k2>kzut
{%Kṣut, t,%}¦ f. a sneeze, sneezing. {%—Kṣut-karī,%} f., N.
of a plant, commonly {%kaṅkālikā,%} black mustard (?).
<LEND>

<L>16514<pc>0268-b<k1>kzuta<k2>kzuta
{%Kṣuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has sneezed; sneezed
upon; (as a less correct form for {%kṣṇuta%}), sharp;
({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. a sneeze, sneezing, cough.
{%—Kṣuta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} sneezing. {%—Kṣutā-%}
{%bhijanana (˚ta-abh˚), as,%} m. black mustard; [cf.
{%kṣudhābhijanana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16515<pc>0268-b<k1>kzutaka<k2>kzutaka
{%Kṣutaka, as,%}¦ m. black mustard.
<LEND>

<L>16516<pc>0268-b<k1>kzuti<k2>kzuti
{%Kṣuti, is,%}¦ f. sneezing.
<LEND>

<L>16517<pc>0268-b<k1>kzuvat<k2>kzuvat
{%Kṣuvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ sneezing, coughing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16518<pc>0268-b<k1>kzu<k2>kzu<h>2
{#kzu#} 2¦. {%kṣu,%} n. (fr. {%ghas?%}), Ved. food.
{%—Kṣu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. abounding in food,
nourishing, nutritious; strong; powerful, robust,
valiant.
<LEND>

<L>16519<pc>0268-b<k1>kzuRa<k2>kzuRa
{#kzuRa#}¦ {%kṣuṇa, as,%} m. the soap-berry plant,
Sapindus Saponaria; [cf. {%ariṣṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16520<pc>0268-b<k1>kzuRRa<k2>kzuRRa
{#kzuRRa#}¦ {%kṣuṇṇa.%} See below under {%kṣud.%}
<LEND>

<L>16521<pc>0268-b<k1>kzud<k2>kzud
{#kzud#}¦ {%kṣud,%} cl. 7. P. A. and Ved. cl. 1. P.
{%kṣuṇatti, kṣunte, kṣodati, cukṣoda,%}
{%cukṣude, kṣotsyati, -te, akṣudat, akṣautsīt,%}
{%akṣutta, kṣottum,%} to strike against, stamp or
trample upon, pound; to bruise, crush, shiver, shatter,
reduce to powder, dash to pieces, shake by stamping
[Page0268-c+ 80]
on; A. to move, to be agitated or shaken: Caus. P.
{%kṣodayati, -yitum,%} to crush, pound, comminute,
pulverize, reduce to powder, diminish; shake or
agitate by stamping; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ξύω, ξέω,</lang> for <lang n="greek">ξεύω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ξυστός, ξεστός;</lang> Lith. <nsi>skausti?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>16522<pc>0268-c<k1>kzuRRa<k2>kzuRRa
{%Kṣuṇṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pounded, bruised, crushed,
stamped or trampled upon; broken to pieces, pul-
verized, shattered, pierced; violated (as a vow); ex-
ercised, practised, skilful; one versed in sacred science
but unable to explain or teach it; defeated, overcome.
{%—Kṣuṇṇa-manas, ās, ās, as,%} contrite in heart,
penitent.
<LEND>

<L>16523<pc>0268-c<k1>kzuRRaka<k2>kzuRRaka
{%Kṣuṇṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of drum beaten at a
funeral.
<LEND>

<L>16524<pc>0268-c<k1>kzuda<k2>kzuda
{%Kṣuda, as,%}¦ m. flour, meal.
<LEND>

<L>16525<pc>0268-c<k1>kzudra<k2>kzudra
{%Kṣudra, as, ā, am%}¦ (compar. {%kṣodīyas,%} superl.
{%kṣodiṣṭha%}), minute, diminutive, tiny, very small,
small, little, trifling; mean, low, vile, niggardly, base,
avaricious; wicked; cruel; poor, indigent; ({%as%}), m.
a small particle of rice; a bee or wasp; the plant
Artocarpus Lacucha [cf. {%lakuca%} and {%ḍahu%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
a peculiar class of writings, see {%kṣudra-kalpa; (ā),%}
f. a woman maimed or crippled; a base or despicable
woman; a whore, a harlot; a dancing girl; a quarrel-
some woman; a bee, fly, gnat; several plants, Sola-
num Jacquini, {%= vṛhatī;%} also {%= cāṅgerikā;%} also =
{%gavedhukā; (am),%} n., Ved. a particle of dust, flour,
meal; [cf. Lith. <nsi>kûdikis,</nsi> ‘an infant;’ Pers. <lang n="arabic">كودك</lang>
<nsi>kūdak,</nsi> ‘small, a boy.’] {%—Kṣudra-kaṇṭakārī,%} f. the
plant Solanum Jacquini, {%= agni-damanī%}. {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%kaṇṭakī,%} f. a kind of Solanum, {%= bṛhatī%}. {%—Kṣu-%}
{%draka-mānasa, am,%} n., N. of a lake. {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%kambu, us,%} m. a small shell. {%—Kṣudra-kalpa, as,%}
m. ‘the smaller ritual,’ title of a class of works.
{%—Kṣudra-kāralikā,%} f. (for {%kṣudra-karālikā?%}),
and {%kṣudra-kāravellī,%} f. a kind of Cucurbitaceous
plant. {%—Kṣudra-kuliśa, as,%} m. a precious stone;
[cf. {%vaikrānta.%}] {%—Kṣudra-kuṣṭha, am,%} n. a mild
form of leprosy, (comprising eleven varieties, whereas
the {%mahā-kuṣṭha%} contains seven severe forms of
leprosy.) {%—Kṣudra-kṣura%} and {%kṣudra-gokṣu-%}
{%raka, as,%} m. a variety of the plant Asteracantha
Longifolia. {%—Kṣudra-ghaṇṭikā,%} f. a tinkling orna-
ment, a girdle of small bells. {%—Kṣudra-gholī,%} f.,
N. of a plant, {%= civillikā%}. {%—Kṣudra-cañcu, us,%} f.,
N. of a plant. {%—Kṣudra-candana, am,%} n. red
sandal-wood. {%—Kṣudra-cirbhiṭā,%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= gopāla-karkaṭī%}. {%—Kṣudra-cūḍa, as,%} m. a kind
of small bird, commonly called {%gosālika%}. {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%jantu, us,%} m. any small animal; a kind of worm,
Julus {%(śata-padī)%}. {%—Kṣudra-jātīphala, am,%} n. a
kind of Myrobalan; [cf. {%āmalaka.%}] {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%jīra, as,%} m. small cummin. {%—Kṣudra-jīvā,%} f., N.
of a plant, {%= jīvantī%}. {%—Kṣudrañ-cara, as, ī, am,%}
following small or minute or trifling matters. {%—Kṣu-%}
{%dra-taṇḍula, as,%} m. a grain of rice. {%—Kṣudra-tā,%}
f. or {%kṣudra-tva, am,%} n. minuteness, smallness;
inferiority, insignificance; meanness. {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%tulasī,%} f. a kind of Ocimum, {%= arjaka%}. {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%daṃśikā%} or {%kṣudra-daṃśī,%} f. a small gad-fly.
{%—Kṣudra-durālabhā,%} f., N. of a thorny plant
much eaten by camels. {%—Kṣudra-duḥsparśā,%} f. the
plant Solanum Jacquini, {%= agni-damanī%}. {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%dhātrī,%} f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%karkaṭa.%}] {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%dhānya, am,%} n. shrivelled grain. {%—Kṣudra-nāsika,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} having a small nose. {%—Kṣudra-pak-%}
{%ṣika, as,%} m. a small bird. {%—Kṣudra-pattrā,%} f. a
kind of wood-sorrel, Oxalis Monadelpha, {%= cāṅgerī;%}
{%(ī),%} f., N. of another plant, {%= vacā%}. {%—Kṣudra-pa-%}
{%nasa, as,%} m. the plant Artocarpus Lacucha {%(lakuca).%}
{%—Kṣudra-parṇa, as,%} m. a kind of Ocimum,
{%= arjaka%}. {%—Kṣudra-pāṣāṇa-bhedā%} or {%ī,%} f.,
N. of a plant, {%= catuḥ-pattrī, pārvatī, naga-bhū,%}
&c. {%—Kṣudra-pippalī,%} f. wild pepper {%(= vana-%}
{%pippalī)%}. {%—Kṣudra-pṛṣatī,%} f., Ved. covered
with small spots. {%—Kṣudra-potikā,%} f., N. of a pot-
herb. {%—Kṣudra-phalaka, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
{%= jīvana,%} Celtis Orientalis. {%—Kṣudra-phalā,%} f., N.
of several plants, Ardisia Solanacea, {%= bhūmi-jambu,%}
and others. {%—Kṣudra-buddhi, is, is, i,%} of little
[Page0269-a+ 81]
understanding, simple, silly, ignorant; ({%is%}), m., N.
of a jackal in the Hitopadeśa. {%—Kṣudrabuddhi-%}
{%nāman, ā, ā, a,%} named Kṣudra-buddhi. {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%bhaṇṭākī,%} f., N. of a plant, a kind of Solanum, =
{%bṛhatī;%} [cf. {%kṣudra-kaṇṭakī.%}] {%—Kṣudra-mīna,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Kṣudra-mustā,%} f. the
plant Scirpus Kysoor; [cf. {%kaseru.%}] {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%rasa, as,%} m. honey; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Pongamia
Glabra; [cf. {%karañja.%}] {%—Kṣudra-roga, as,%} m. a
minor disease, one of little importance; a name
applied to various local diseases, especially exanthemas
of different kinds; there are forty-four such diseases.
{%—Kṣudrarogika, as, ā, am,%} affected with such
a disease. {%—Kṣudra-vaṃśā,%} f., N. of a plant, Dios-
corea, {%= varāha-krāntā%}. {%—Kṣudra-varvaṇā,%} f. a
small gad-fly; [cf. {%varaṭā.%}] {%—Kṣudra-vallī,%} f., N.
of a pot-herb; [cf. {%mūla-potī.%}] {%—Kṣudra-vārtākinī,%}
f. a kind of Solanum with white blossoms, {%= śveta-%}
{%kaṇṭakārī%}. {%—Kṣudra-vārtākī,%} f. a kind of Sola-
num, {%= bṛhatī%}. {%—Kṣudra-śaṅkha, as,%} m. a small
conch shell. {%—Kṣudra-śarkarā%} or {%kṣudra-śar-%}
{%karikā,%} f. a kind of sugar-cane, {%= yāvanāla-śar-%}
{%karā%}. {%—Kṣudra-śārdūla, as,%} m. a kind of tiger,
{%= citra-vyāghra%}. {%—Kṣudra-śīrṣa, as,%} m. the
tree Celosia Cristata, {%= mayūra-śikhā%}. {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%śukti, is,%} m. a bivalve shell, {%= jala-śukti%}. {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%śyāmā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= kaṭabhī%}. {%—Kṣudra-%}
{%śleṣmāntaka, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= bhūkarbu-%}
{%dāraka%}. {%—Kṣudra-śvāsa, as,%} m. short breath.
{%—Kṣudra-śvetā,%} f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%mahā-%}
{%śvetā.%}] {%—Kṣudra-sahā,%} f. the plant Phaseolus Tri-
lobus; the Coloquintida, {%= indra-vāruṇī;%} [cf. {%ma-%}
{%hā-sahā.%}] {%—Kṣudra-suvarṇa, am,%} n. bad gold,
prince's metal. {%—Kṣudra-han, ā,%} m. killing the
wicked; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Kṣudra-hiṅgulikā,%}
f. a small species of prickly nightshade, Solanum
Jacquini; [cf. {%kaṇṭakārī.%}] {%—Kṣudra-hiṅgulī,%} f.
= the preceding. {%—Kṣudrāgnimantha (˚ra-ag˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the plant Premna Spinosa used for kindling
fire; [cf. {%araṇi.%}] {%—Kṣudrāñjana (˚ra-añ˚), am,%}
n. a kind of unguent applied to the eyes in certain
diseases. {%—Kṣudrāṇḍa (˚ra-aṇ˚), as, ā, am,%}
born from minute eggs. {%—Kṣudrāṇḍa-matsya-%}
{%saṅghāta, as,%} m. small fry. {%—Kṣudrāntra%}
{%(˚ra-an˚), am,%} n. the small cavity of the heart.
{%—Kṣudrāpāmārga (˚ra-ap˚), as,%} m., N. of the
plant Desmochæta Atropurpurea ({%= raktāpāmārga%}),
a biennial plant. {%—Kṣudrāmalaka (˚ra-ām˚),%}
{%am,%} n. Myrobalan {%(āmalaka)%}. {%—Kṣudrāmalaka-%}
{%sañjña, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= karkaṭa%}. {%—Kṣu-%}
{%drāmra (˚ra-ām˚), as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= kośāmra.%}
{%—Kṣudrāmlapanasa%} or {%kṣudrāmbupanasa (˚ra-%}
{%am˚), as,%} m. the plant Artocarpus Lacucha {%(lakuca).%}
{%—Kṣudrāmlā (˚ra-am˚),%} f. wood-sorrel, Oxalis
Corniculata ({%= amlaloṇikā%}); another plant, {%= śa-%}
{%śāṇḍulī%}. {%—Kṣudrāmlikā (˚ra-am˚),%} f. a kind of
wood-sorrel or Oxalis, {%= cāṅgerī%}. {%—Kṣudreṅgudī%}
{%(˚ra-iṅ˚),%} f., N. of a plant, {%= yavāsa%}. {%—Kṣudrer-%}
{%vāru (˚ra-ir˚), us,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= gopāla-%}
{%karkaṭī%}. {%—Kṣudrodumbarikā (˚ra-ud˚),%} f. the
plant Ficus Oppositifolia; [cf. {%kākodumbarikā.%}]
{%—Kṣudropodaka-nāmnī (˚ra-up˚),%} f., N. of a
pot-herb; [cf. {%mūla-potī.%}] {%—Kṣudropodakī (˚ra-%}
{%up˚),%} f., N. of a pot-herb, {%= sūkṣma-pattrā%} and
{%maṇṭapī%}. {%—Kṣudrolūka (˚ra-ul˚), as,%} m. a small
kind of owl.
<LEND>

<L>16526<pc>0269-a<k1>kzudraka<k2>kzudraka
{%Kṣudraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ small, minute; ({%as%}),
m. a species of plant; N. of a prince, a son of
Prasenajit; title of a collection of Buddhist works,
{%= vinaya-kṣudraka-vastu; (ās),%} m. pl., N. of a
people living by warfare, the <lang n="greek">Ὀξυδρακοι.</lang>
<LEND>

<L>16527<pc>0269-a<k1>kzudrala<k2>kzudrala
{%Kṣudrala, as, ā, am,%}¦ minute, small, unimportant
(applied especially to animals and diseases).
<LEND>

<L>16528<pc>0269-a<k1>kzudrikA<k2>kzudrikA
{%Kṣudrikā,%}¦ f. a kind of gad-fly, {%= daṃśa;%} small
bells employed for ornament; [cf. {%kṣudra-ghaṇ-%}
{%ṭikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16529<pc>0269-a<k1>kzottf<k2>kzottf
{%Kṣottṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a pestle, any implement for
grinding.
<LEND>

<L>16530<pc>0269-a<k1>kzoda<k2>kzoda
{%Kṣoda, as,%}¦ m. pounding, grinding; the stone or
slab on which anything is ground or powdered, a
mortar &c., any pounded or ground or pulverized
[Page0269-b+ 77]
substance, flour, meal, dust, a particle, a small piece or
fragment. {%—Kṣoda-raja, as, ā, am,%} ground to dust.
<LEND>

<L>16531<pc>0269-b<k1>kzodas<k2>kzodas
{%Kṣodas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. water in agitation, swell of
the sea, rushing or stream of water.
<LEND>

<L>16532<pc>0269-b<k1>kzodita<k2>kzodita
{%Kṣodita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pounded, ground, com-
minuted; ({%am%}), n. powder, dust, flour, meal, any
substance pulverized or ground.
<LEND>

<L>16533<pc>0269-b<k1>kzodiman<k2>kzodiman
{%Kṣodiman, ā,%}¦ m. minuteness, excessive smallness
or inferiority.
<LEND>

<L>16534<pc>0269-b<k1>kzodizWa<k2>kzodizWa
{%Kṣodiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%kṣudra%}),
finely pounded, very small, very minute.
<LEND>

<L>16535<pc>0269-b<k1>kzodIyas<k2>kzodIyas
{%Kṣodīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%kṣudra%}),
more minute, very fine, very minute.
<LEND>

<L>16536<pc>0269-b<k1>kzodya<k2>kzodya
{%Kṣodya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be stamped or trampled
on or pounded.
<LEND>

<L>16537<pc>0269-b<k1>kzuD<k2>kzuD<h>1
{#kzuD#} 1¦. {%kṣudh,%} cl. 4. P. {%kṣudhyati,%}
{%cukṣodha, kṣoddhum,%} to feel hungry;
to be hungry, hunger; [cf. Goth. <nsi>grêdôn,</nsi> ‘to be
hungry.’]
<LEND>

<L>16538<pc>0269-b<k1>kzuD<k2>kzuD<h>2
2. {%kṣudh, t,%}¦ f. hunger. {%—Kṣut-kṣāma, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} emaciated by hunger. {%—Kṣut-tṛṭ-parīta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} hungry and thirsty. {%—Kṣut-tṛḍ-udbhava,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} beginning to feel hungry and thirsty.
{%—Kṣut-tṛṣānvita (˚ṣā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} suffer-
ing from hunger and thirst. {%—Kṣut-tṛṣṇopapīḍita%}
{%(˚ṇā-up˚), as, ā, am,%} hungry and thirsty. {%—Kṣut-%}
{%parīta, as, ā, am,%} overcome with hunger. {%—Kṣut-%}
{%pipāsā-pariśrānta, as, ā, am,%} wearied by hunger
and thirst. {%—Kṣut-pipāsā-parītāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one whose body is affected with hunger
and thirst. {%—Kṣut-pipāsārta (˚sā-ār˚), as, ā, am,%}
afflicted with hunger and thirst. {%—Kṣut-pipāsita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} hungry and thirsty. {%—Kṣut-pratīkāra,%}
{%as,%} m. allaying hunger, eating. {%—Kṣud-roga, as,%}
m. pain of hunger. {%—Kṣud-vat, ān, atī, at,%} hungry.
{%—Kṣun-nivṛtti, is,%} f. cessation of hunger, ap-
peasing of appetite.
<LEND>

<L>16539<pc>0269-b<k1>kzuDA<k2>kzuDA
{%Kṣudhā,%}¦ f. hunger; mystical N. of the letter {%y.%}
{%—Kṣudhā-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing hunger, in-
creasing appetite. {%—Kṣudhā-kuśala, as,%} m., N. of
a tree, {%= vilvāntara-vṛkṣa%}. {%—Kṣudhā-dhvaṃsa,%}
{%as,%} m. allaying hunger. {%—Kṣudhānvita (˚dhā-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} afflicted with hunger. {%—Kṣudhā-%}
{%pīḍita, as, ā, am,%} hungry, starving. {%—Kṣudhā-%}
{%bhijanana (˚dhā-abh˚), as,%} m. black mustard; [cf.
{%kṣutābhijanana.%}] {%—Kṣudhā-māra, as,%} m., Ved.
death caused by starvation. {%—Kṣudhārta (˚dhā-%}
{%ār˚)%} or {%kṣudhārdita (˚dhā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
hungry, hungered. {%—Kṣudhāviṣṭa (˚dhā-āv˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} affected by hunger. {%—Kṣudhā-śānti,%}
{%is,%} f. allaying hunger, satiety, satisfaction.
<LEND>

<L>16540<pc>0269-b<k1>kzuDAlu<k2>kzuDAlu
{%Kṣudhālu, us, us, u,%}¦ hungry.
<LEND>

<L>16541<pc>0269-b<k1>kzuDita<k2>kzuDita
{%Kṣudhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ hungry, hungered.
<LEND>

<L>16542<pc>0269-b<k1>kzoDuka<k2>kzoDuka
{%Kṣodhuka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ Ved. hungry.
<LEND>

<L>16543<pc>0269-b<k1>kzuDuna<k2>kzuDuna
{#kzuDuna#}¦ {%kṣudhuna, as,%} m., N. of a savage
and barbarous race.
<LEND>

<L>16544<pc>0269-b<k1>kzup<k2>kzup
{#kzup#}¦ {%kṣup,%} a Sautra root (i. e. one used in
grammatical Sūtras only), to depress, feel depressed.
<LEND>

<L>16545<pc>0269-b<k1>kzupa<k2>kzupa
{#kzupa#}¦ {%kṣupa, as,%} m. [cf. {%kṣumpa%}], a bush,
a shrub; a small tree, one with short branches and
roots; N. of an old king, a son of Prasandhi and
father of Ikṣvāku; N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa from
Satya-bhāmā; N. of a mountain westward from
Dvārakā. {%—Kṣupa-ḍoḍamuṣṭi, is,%} m., N. of a
plant. {%—Kṣupālu (˚pa-ālu), us,%} m. a kind of
bulbous plant, {%= pānīyālu.%}
<LEND>

<L>16546<pc>0269-b<k1>kzupaka<k2>kzupaka
{%Kṣupaka, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a bush, a shrub.
<LEND>

<L>16547<pc>0269-b<k1>kzuB<k2>kzuB<h>1
{#kzuB#} 1¦. {%kṣubh,%} cl. 9. 4. P., 1. A. {%kṣubh-%}
{%nāti, kṣubhyati, kṣobhate, cukṣo-%}
{%bha, cukṣubhe, kṣobhiṣyati, -te, akṣobhīt,%}
{%akṣubhat%} and {%akṣobhiṣṭa, kṣobhitum,%} to
shake, tremble, to be agitated or disturbed; to be
unsteady; to stumble (literally or metaphorically):
Caus. {%kṣobhayati, -yitum,%} to agitate, cause to
shake, disturb, stir up, excite: Desid. {%cukṣubhi-%}
{%ṣati, -te,%} or {%cukṣobhiṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%cokṣu-%}
{%bhyate, cokṣobdhi;%} [cf. Cambro-Brit. <nsi>hwbiau,</nsi> ‘to
[Page0269-c+ 78]
make a sudden push;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">κοῦφος;</lang> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>schiebe.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16548<pc>0269-c<k1>kzubDa<k2>kzubDa
{%Kṣubdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, shaken, tossed,
stirred up; agitated (mentally), excited, disturbed;
({%as%}), m. the churning-stick; a kind of coitus.
{%—Kṣubdha-tā,%} f. agitation. {%—Kṣubdhārṇava%}
{%(˚dha-ar˚), as,%} m. a stormy ocean.
<LEND>

<L>16549<pc>0269-c<k1>kzuB<k2>kzuB<h>2
2. {%kṣubh, p,%}¦ f., Ved. a blow, a shake, a push.
<LEND>

<L>16550<pc>0269-c<k1>kzuBA<k2>kzuBA
{%Kṣubhā,%}¦ f. a kind of weapon.
<LEND>

<L>16551<pc>0269-c<k1>kzuBita<k2>kzuBita
{%Kṣubhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, tossed, set in
motion; agitated (mentally), disturbed, anxious;
frightened, alarmed, afraid; angry, enraged.
<LEND>

<L>16552<pc>0269-c<k1>kzoBa<k2>kzoBa
{%Kṣobha, as,%}¦ m. shaking, agitation, disturbance,
tossing, trembling, emotion.
<LEND>

<L>16553<pc>0269-c<k1>kzoBaka<k2>kzoBaka
{%Kṣobhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking, causing agitation;
({%as%}), m., N. of a mountain in Kāmākhyā, a place
sacred to the goddess Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>16554<pc>0269-c<k1>kzoBaRa<k2>kzoBaRa
{%Kṣobhaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking, agitating, dis-
turbing, causing emotion; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of
the five arrows of the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>16555<pc>0269-c<k1>kzoBya<k2>kzoBya
{%Kṣobhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shaken or agitated or
disturbed.
<LEND>

<L>16556<pc>0269-c<k1>kzumat<k2>kzumat
{#kzumat#}¦ {%kṣu-mat.%} See under 2. {%kṣu.%}
<LEND>

<L>16557<pc>0269-c<k1>kzumA<k2>kzumA
{#kzumA#}¦ {%kṣumā,%} f., Ved. an epithet of an
arrow, according to the scholiast ‘causing to tremble’
(for {%kṣubhā?%}); N. of several plants; linseed, Linum
Usitatissimum; a sort of flax, Bengal San ({%śaṇa%});
the Indigo plant; a sort of creeper.
<LEND>

<L>16558<pc>0269-c<k1>kzOma<k2>kzOma
{%Kṣauma,%}¦ &c. See s. v., p. 271.
<LEND>

<L>16559<pc>0269-c<k1>kzump<k2>kzump
{#kzump#}¦ {%kṣump,%} cl. 1. P. {%kṣumpati,%} to
go.
<LEND>

<L>16560<pc>0269-c<k1>kzumpa<k2>kzumpa
{#kzumpa#}¦ {%kṣumpa, as,%} m. [cf. {%kṣupa%}], Ved. a
bush, a shrub.
<LEND>

<L>16561<pc>0269-c<k1>kzur<k2>kzur
{#kzur#}¦ {%kṣur,%} cl. 6. P. {%kṣurati, cukṣora,%}
{%kṣoritum,%} to cut, dig, scratch; to make
lines or furrows.
<LEND>

<L>16562<pc>0269-c<k1>kzura<k2>kzura
{%Kṣura, as,%}¦ m. (connected with the preceding,
perhaps related to {%kṣar ?;%} cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ξυρόν</lang>), a razor;
a razor-like barb or sharp blade attached to an arrow;
N. of several plants, Asteracantha Longifolia; also
Tribulus Lanuginosus, see {%go-kṣura;%} also {%= mahā-%}
{%piṇḍītaka,%} and Saccharum Sara ({%śara%}); the hoof of
a cow &c.; a horse's hoof; the foot of a bedstead
[cf. {%khura%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a knife, a dagger; ({%as, ā, am%}),
Ved. (Sāy.) having claws. {%—Kṣura-karman, a,%} n.
the operation of shaving. {%—Kṣura-kḷpta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} shaved. {%—Kṣura-kriyā,%} f. the operation of
shaving, the employment of a razor. {%—Kṣura-%}
{%catuṣṭaya, am,%} n. four things necessary for shaving.
{%—Kṣura-dhāna, am,%} n. a razor-case. {%—Kṣura-%}
{%dhāra, as, ā, am,%} razor-edged, sharp as a razor;
any very sharp instrument for cutting. {%—Kṣura-%}
{%dhārā,%} f. the edge of a razor; N. of a hell. {%—Kṣu-%}
{%radhārābha (˚ra-ābhā), as, ā, am,%} sharp as a razor.
{%—Kṣura-pattra, as,%} m., N. of the plant Saccharum
Sara {%(śara)%}. {%—Kṣura-pattrikā,%} f., N. of a pot-herb,
{%= pālaṅkya%}. {%—Kṣura-pavi, is, is, i,%} Ved. sharp-
angled, sharp-edged, very sharp; ({%is%}), m., N. of a
sacrifice performed in one day {%(ekāha)%}. {%—Kṣura-%}
{%pra, as,%} m. a razor shot as an arrow; a kind of
arrow, one with a sharp horse-shoe-shaped head; a
sort of hoe or weeding spade. {%—Kṣura-praga,%}
{%am,%} n. according to some authorities {%= kṣura-pra.%}
{%—Kṣura-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a razor-case. {%—Kṣura-%}
{%bhṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} Ved. furnished with sharp angles.
{%—Kṣura-mardin, ī,%} m. a barber. {%—Kṣurāṅga%}
{%(˚ra-aṅ˚), as,%} m., N. of a plant; [cf. {%go-kṣuraka.%}]
{%—Kṣurārpaṇa (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain.
<LEND>

<L>16563<pc>0269-c<k1>kzuraka<k2>kzuraka
{%Kṣuraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of several plants, = Astera-
cantha Longifolia; also Tribulus Lanuginosus [cf.
{%go-kṣura%}]; also {%= tilaka;%} also another plant,
{%= bhūtāṅkuśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>16564<pc>0269-c<k1>kzurikA<k2>kzurikA
{%Kṣurikā,%}¦ f. a small razor; a knife, a dagger; a
sort of earthen vessel, a kind of pot-herb {%(= pālaṅ-%}
{%kya)%}. {%—Kṣurikā-pattra, as,%} m. the plant Saccha-
rum Sara {%(śara)%}. {%—Kṣurikopaniṣad (˚kā-up˚), t,%}
f. title of an Upaniṣad belonging to the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>
[Page0270-a+ 78]

<L>16565<pc>0270-a<k1>kzurin<k2>kzurin
{%Kṣurin, ī,%}¦ m. a barber; ({%iṇī%}), f. the wife of a
barber; a kind of yam, see {%varāha-krāntā.%}
<LEND>

<L>16566<pc>0270-a<k1>kzOra<k2>kzOra
{%Kṣaura,%}¦ &c. See s. v., p. 271.
<LEND>

<L>16567<pc>0270-a<k1>kzulika<k2>kzulika
{#kzulika#}¦ {%kṣulika, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>16568<pc>0270-a<k1>kzulla<k2>kzulla
{#kzulla#}¦ {%kṣulla, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%kṣudra ?%}),
small, little, minute. {%—Kṣulla-tāta, as,%} m. the
younger brother of a father. {%—Kṣulla-tātaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the brother of a father.
<LEND>

<L>16569<pc>0270-a<k1>kzullaka<k2>kzullaka
{%Kṣullaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ little, small; low, vile,
poor, indigent; wicked, malicious, abandoned; hard;
young, youngest; pained, distressed; ({%as%}), m. a
small shell; N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>16570<pc>0270-a<k1>kzuvat<k2>kzuvat
{#kzuvat#}¦ {%kṣuvat.%} See under rt. 1. {%kṣu.%}
<LEND>

<L>16571<pc>0270-a<k1>kzeqa<k2>kzeqa
{#kzeqa#}¦ {%kṣeḍa, kṣeḍita, = kṣveḍa, kṣveḍita.%}
<LEND>

<L>16572<pc>0270-a<k1>kzetra<k2>kzetra
{#kzetra#}¦ {%kṣetra, am,%} n. (fr. 1. or 2. {%kṣi%}),
landed property, land, soil, a field (e. g. {%kṣetraṃ%}
{%kṛ,%} to cultivate the soil; {%kṣetrasya pati,%} lord of
the soil, N. for a kind of genius or tutelary deity
regarded in the Veda as the guardian of cultivated
fields); place, region, country; a sacred spot or dis-
trict, a place of pilgrimage, as Benares &c.; an
enclosed plot of ground, portion of space, superficies,
circuit, circumference; fertile soil; the fertile womb,
a wife; place of origin; department, sphere of action,
the body considered as the field of the indwelling
and working of the soul; a sign of the zodiac; (in
geometry) a plane figure, as a triangle, circle, &c.
enclosed by lines, any figure considered as having
geometrical dimensions; a diagram; a house, town;
[cf. {%anya-kṣetra, kuru-kṣetra,%} &c.; cf. also
Goth. <nsi>haithi,</nsi> Them. <nsi>haithjo;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Heide.</nsi>]
{%—Kṣetra-kara, as, ī, am,%} cultivating a field; a
husbandman. {%—Kṣetra-karkaṭī,%} f. a kind of gourd;
[cf. {%bālukī.%}] {%—Kṣetrakarma-kṛt, t, t, t,%} one who
cultivates the soil, a husbandman. {%—Kṣetra-kar-%}
{%man, a,%} n. cultivation of the soil. {%—Kṣetra-gaṇita,%}
{%am,%} n. geometry. {%—Kṣetra-gata, as, ā, am,%} geo-
metrical. {%—Kṣetragatopapatti (˚ta-up˚), is,%} f.
geometrical proof. {%—Kṣetra-cirbhiṭā,%} f. a kind of
gourd, {%= cirbhiṭā%}. {%—Kṣetra-ja, as, ā, am,%} pro-
duced in a field, as corn &c.; born from the body;
({%as%}), m., scil. {%putra,%} a son, the offspring of the wife
by a kinsman or person duly appointed to raise up
issue to the husband, (this is one of the twelve kinds
of issue allowed by the old Hindū law); ({%ā%}), f., N.
of several plants, {%= śveta-kaṇṭakārī, śaśāṇḍulī,%}
{%gomūtrikā, śilpikā, caṇikā%}. {%—Kṣetra-jāta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} begotten on the wife of another. {%—Kṣetra-%}
{%jeṣa, as,%} m., Ved. contest for landed property,
acquisition of land. {%—Kṣetra-jña, as, ā, am,%}
knowing localities; familiar with the cultivation of
the soil, a husbandman &c.; clever, dexterous, skil-
ful, cunning; ({%as%}), m. ‘knowing the body,’ i. e. the
soul, the conscious principle in the corporeal frame;
a libertine, a whoremonger; a form of Śiva; N.
of a prince; ({%ā%}), f. a girl fifteen years old who
personates the goddess Durgā at a festival of this
deity. {%—Kṣetra-tattva, am,%} n. a part of the work
Smṛti-tattva. {%—Kṣetra-tara, am,%} n., Ved. a spot
very fit for cultivation or for habitation. {%—Kṣetra-%}
{%tā,%} f. the state of being a seat or residence, a seat,
a place of residence. {%—Kṣetra-dūtī,%} f. a kind of
Solanum {%(śveta-kaṇṭakārī)%}. {%—Kṣetra-devatā,%} f.
‘the deity of the fields,’ epithet of a serpent in the
Pañca-tantra. {%—Kṣetra-pati, is,%} m. the owner of a
field, a landowner, a landlord, a farmer; [cf. {%kṣai-%}
{%trapata, kṣaitrapatya,%} p. 271, and {%kṣetrasya-%}
{%pati%} above.] {%—Kṣetra-pada, am,%} n. a place
sacred to a deity. {%—Kṣetra-parpaṭī,%} f., N. of
a shrub, Oldenlandia Biflora or another species.
{%—Kṣetra-pāla, as,%} m. a man employed to guard
fields from depredation; a deity protecting the
fields; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Kṣetra-phala, am,%}
n. (in geometry) the superficial contents of a figure.
{%—Kṣetra-bhakti, is,%} f. the division of a field.
{%—Kṣetra-bhūmi, is,%} f. cultivated land. {%—Kṣetra-%}
{%yamānikā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= vacā%}. {%—Kṣetra-%}
{%rakṣa, as,%} m. a man employed to guard fields
[Page0270-b+ 79]
from depredation. {%—Kṣetra-rāśi, is,%} m. quantity
represented by geometrical figures. {%—Kṣetra-ruhā,%}
f. a kind of gourd, {%= bālukī%}. {%—Kṣetra-vasudhā,%} f.
cultivated land. {%—Kṣetra-vid, t, t, t,%} familiar with
localities; experienced, clever, skilful; ({%t%}), m. a
husbandman; a sage, one who possesses spiritual
knowledge; the soul. {%—Kṣetra-vyavahāra, as,%} m.
drawing a figure in geometry; geometrical demon-
stration. {%—Kṣetra-sambhava, as,%} m., N. of either
of the shrubs Cañcu and Bhiṇḍā; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
gourd, {%= śaśāṇḍulī%}. {%—Kṣetra-sambhūta, as,%} m.
a kind of grass, {%= kundara%}. {%—Kṣetra-sāti, is,%} f.,
Ved. acquisition of field or land. {%—Kṣetra-sādhas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. arriving at or coming to a place.
{%—Kṣetra-sīmā,%} f. the boundary of a meadow or
field or holy place. {%—Kṣetra-stha, as, ā, am,%}
residing at a sacred place. {%—Kṣetrājīva (˚ra-āj˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who gains a livelihood by cultivating
the soil; a cultivator, a peasant. {%—Kṣetrādhidevatā%}
{%(˚ra-adh˚),%} f. the tutelary deity of any consecrated
piece of ground. {%—Kṣetrādhipa (˚ra-adh˚), as,%}
m. = the preceding; the regent of a sign of the
zodiac. {%—Kṣetrāmalakī,%} the plant Flacourtia Ca-
taphracta; [cf. {%bhūmy-āmalakī.%}] {%—Kṣetrā-sā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. acquiring or gaining land. {%—Kṣetre-%}
{%kṣu (˚ra-ik˚), us,%} m. a kind of grain, {%= yāvanāla.%}
{%—Kṣetropekṣa (˚ra-up˚), as,%} m., N. of a son
of Śvaphalka.
<LEND>

<L>16573<pc>0270-b<k1>kzetrika<k2>kzetrika
{%Kṣetrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ having a field, relating to a
field &c., agrarian; ({%as%}), m. the owner of a field, a
farmer, a cultivator, a husband.
<LEND>

<L>16574<pc>0270-b<k1>kzetrin<k2>kzetrin
{%Kṣetrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ owning a field, cultivating land,
agricultural; ({%ī%}), m. an agriculturist, a husbandman,
a cultivator; a husband; the soul.
<LEND>

<L>16575<pc>0270-b<k1>kzetriya<k2>kzetriya
{%Kṣetriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to a field, belonging
to land; curable in a future body, i. e. incurable in
the present life; ({%āṇi%}), n. pl. the environs of any
place; ({%am%}), n. a chronic or organic disease, an
incurable one; meadow grass, herbage, pasturage;
({%as%}), m. a medicament, anything fit to be adminis-
tered in medicine (?); an incurable disease; one who
has carnal knowledge of other men's wives, an
adulterer; physicking, operating. {%—Kṣetriya-nā-%}
{%śana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. removing a chronic disease.
<LEND>

<L>16576<pc>0270-b<k1>kzetrIya<k2>kzetrIya
{%Kṣetrīya,%}¦ nom. P. {%kṣetrīyati,%} to desire another
man's wife.
<LEND>

<L>16577<pc>0270-b<k1>kzeda<k2>kzeda
{#kzeda#}¦ {%kṣeda, as,%} m. (?) sorrowing, moan-
ing (?).
<LEND>

<L>16578<pc>0270-b<k1>kzepa<k2>kzepa
{#kzepa#}¦ {%kṣepa, kṣepaka, kṣepaṇa, kṣepaṇi,%}
&c. See under rt. {%kṣip%} at p. 267.
<LEND>

<L>16579<pc>0270-b<k1>kzema<k2>kzema
{#kzema#}¦ {%kṣema, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%kṣi%}), habit-
able, giving rest, giving ease or security or comfort;
conferring happiness; at ease, prosperous, safe, secure,
well, happy, right; ({%as, am%}), m. n. (Ved. always m.)
basis, foundation; residence, place of rest; abiding
at ease; safety, tranquillity, peace, rest, security, any
secure, easy or comfortable state, well-being, weal,
happiness (e. g. {%kṣemeṇa,%} at ease, in security,
safely; {%kṣeme — yoge,%} Ved. both in rest and exertion
 — in enjoying and acquiring); preserving, protecting,
keeping what is acquired; final emancipation, eternal
happiness; ({%as%}), m. a kind of perfume ({%= caṇḍā%});
ease or prosperity personified as a son of Dharma
and Śānti; also a son of Titikṣā; N. of a prince,
a son of Śuci and father of Suvrata; N. of a son of
the third Manu Sāvarṇa; N. of a kind of college or
association [cf. {%maṭha%}]; the proper term (according
to Manu II. 127) of civil address to a Vaiśya, asking
him whether his property is secure; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an
Apsaras; an epithet of Durgā; N. of another deity;
a kind of perfume; ({%am%}), n., N. of one of the seven
Varṣas in Jambu-dvīpa. {%—Kṣema-kara, as, ā, am,%}
causing peace and security, conferring happiness or
good fortune, propitious. {%—Kṣema-karṇa, as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Maheśa, who composed, A. D. 1570,
the work Rāga-mālā. {%—Kṣema-karman, ā, ā, a,%}
one whose work is peace and security, creating tran-
quillity and security; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a prince.
{%—Kṣema-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. longing for rest.
[Page0270-c+ 76]
{%—Kṣema-kāra, as, ī, am,%} granting peace and
security, conferring happiness or good fortune, pro-
pitious, auspicious. {%—Kṣema-kutūhala, am,%} n. title
of a medical work of Kṣema-śarman. {%—Kṣema-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing peace and security. {%—Kṣema-%}
{%gupta, as,%} m., N. of a king of Kāśmīra. {%—Kṣemaṅ-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} promoting well-being, causing
peace and security, propitious, &c.; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a king of Trigarta; N. of a mythical Buddha; N.
of a son of Brahma-datta (Udayana); ({%ī%}), f. the
Brāhmaṇī kite or Coromandel eagle, considered as a
bird of good omen, Falco Ponticerianus; a form of
the goddess Durgā; N. of another goddess; N. of
a sister of Kṣemaṅ-kara. {%—Kṣema-jit, t,%} m., N.
of a prince. {%—Kṣema-tara, as, ā, am,%} better,
happier. {%—Kṣema-darśin, ī,%} m., N. of a prince of
the Kosalas. {%—Kṣemadarśīya, as, ā, am,%} relating
to this prince. {%—Kṣema-dhanvan, ā,%} m., N. of a
prince, a son of Puṇḍarīka. {%—Kṣema-dharman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Kṣema-dhūrta, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a people. {%—Kṣema-dhūrti, is,%} m., N. of
a warrior. {%—Kṣema-dhṛtvan, ā,%} m., N. of a
man with the patronymic Pauṇḍarīka. {%—Kṣema-%}
{%phalā,%} see {%kṣemā-phalā%}. {%—Kṣema-bhūmi, is,%}
m., N. of a prince. {%—Kṣema-mūrti, is,%} m., N. of
a prince. {%—Kṣema-yuktam,%} ind. both quietly and
energetically; in rest and exertion. {%—Kṣema-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Kṣema-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
accompanied with tranquillity and security; prosper-
ous, happy; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a woman. {%—Kṣema-%}
{%vṛddhi, is,%} m., N. of a general of the Śālvas.
{%—Kṣema-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Kṣemāditya (˚ma-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Kṣemādhi (˚ma-ādhi), is,%} m., N. of a prince
of Mithilā. {%—Kṣemā-phalā,%} f. the tree Ficus
Oppositifolia; [cf. {%udumbara.%}] {%—Kṣemāri (˚ma-%}
{%ari), is,%} m., N. of a prince of Mithilā, {%= kṣemādhi.%}
{%—Kṣemārcis (˚ma-ar˚), is,%} m. {%= kṣema-jit.%}
{%—Kṣemendra (˚ma-in˚), as,%} m., N. of the author
of a list of regents of Kāśmīra; N. of a lexico-
grapher; also of the author of a Buddhist work.
{%—Kṣemendra-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a work by
Kṣemendra.
<LEND>

<L>16580<pc>0270-c<k1>kzemaka<k2>kzemaka
{%Kṣemaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of perfume, {%= caura;%}
N. of a Nāga; N. of a Rakṣas; N. of an attendant
of Śiva; N. of an old king; of a son of Alarka; of
the last descendant of Parīkṣit in the Kali-yuga; N.
of a son of Nirāmitra.
<LEND>

<L>16581<pc>0270-c<k1>kzemayat<k2>kzemayat
{%Kṣemayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. resting; granting
rest or an abode.
<LEND>

<L>16582<pc>0270-c<k1>kzemin<k2>kzemin
{%Kṣemin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ enjoying peace and security,
safe, secure, happy, well.
<LEND>

<L>16583<pc>0270-c<k1>kzemya<k2>kzemya
{%Kṣemya, as, ā, am,%}¦ resting, at leisure, at ease;
habitable, comfortable; healthy, salubrious; lucky,
prosperous, thriving; giving peace and tranquillity;
({%as%}), m., N. of Śiva; N. of several princes, a son of
Sunītha and father of Ketumat; of a son of Ugrā-
yudha and father of Suvīra; of a son of Śuci and
father of Suvrata; ({%am%}), n., Ved. resting.
<LEND>

<L>16584<pc>0270-c<k1>kzeya<k2>kzeya
{#kzeya#}¦ {%kṣeya.%} See under rt. 4. {%kṣi,%} p. 266.
<LEND>

<L>16585<pc>0270-c<k1>kzev<k2>kzev
{#kzev#}¦ {%kṣev,%} cl. 1. P. {%kṣevati,%} another
form for {%kṣiv%} or {%kṣīv,%} ‘to spit,’ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16586<pc>0270-c<k1>kzE<k2>kzE
{#kzE#}¦ {%kṣai,%} cl. 1. P. {%kṣāyati, cakṣau, kṣā-%}
{%syati, kṣātum,%} to wane; to waste away, dry
up, decline, become emaciated; [cf. 4. {%kṣi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16587<pc>0270-c<k1>kzAma<k2>kzAma
{%Kṣāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ wasted, dried up. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>16588<pc>0270-c<k1>kzERya<k2>kzERya
{#kzERya#}¦ {%kṣaiṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kṣīṇa%}), destruc-
tion, wasting away; leanness, slenderness, emaciation.
<LEND>

<L>16589<pc>0270-c<k1>kzEta<k2>kzEta
{#kzEta#}¦ {%kṣaita, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%kṣiti%}), Ved. the
chief of a race, a prince. {%—Kṣaita-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. princely.
<LEND>

<L>16590<pc>0270-c<k1>kzEtra<k2>kzEtra
{#kzEtra#}¦ {%kṣaitra, am,%} n. (fr. {%kṣetra%}), a mul-
titude of fields &c.
<LEND>

<L>16591<pc>0270-c<k1>kzEtrajitya<k2>kzEtrajitya
{%Kṣaitrajitya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%kṣetra-jit%}), Ved.
acquisition of land, a victorious battle.
<LEND>

<L>16592<pc>0270-c<k1>kzEtrajYa<k2>kzEtrajYa
{%Kṣaitrajña%}¦ or {%kṣaitrajñya, am,%} n. (fr. {%kṣetra- %}
[Page0271-a+ 71]
{%jña%}), spirituality, the nature of the soul; the know-
ledge of the soul &c.
<LEND>

<L>16593<pc>0271-a<k1>kzEtrapatya<k2>kzEtrapatya
{%Kṣaitrapatya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%kṣetra-pati%}),
Ved. belonging to the lord of the soil.
<LEND>

<L>16594<pc>0271-a<k1>kzEpra<k2>kzEpra
{#kzEpra#}¦ {%kṣaipra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kṣipra%}), a
term for a kind of Sandhi, produced by changing the
first of two concurrent vowels to its semivowel;
the Svarita accent on a syllable formed with this
Sandhi; ({%am%}), n. quickness, speediness. {%—Kṣaipra-%}
{%yukta, as, ā, am,%} joined by the Kṣaipra Sandhi.
{%—Kṣaipra-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} containing a semi-
vowel.
<LEND>

<L>16595<pc>0271-a<k1>kzErakalamBi<k2>kzErakalamBi
{#kzErakalamBi#}¦ {%kṣairakalambhi, is,%} m. (a pa-
tronymic fr. {%kṣīra-kalambha%}), N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>16596<pc>0271-a<k1>kzEreya<k2>kzEreya
{#kzEreya#}¦ {%kṣaireya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kṣīra%}), pre-
pared with milk, milky; ({%ī%}), f. milk and rice or any
preparation of or dish prepared with milk.
<LEND>

<L>16597<pc>0271-a<k1>kzow<k2>kzow
{#kzow#}¦ {%kṣoṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%kṣoṭayati, -yitum,%}
to throw, cast; [cf. {%khoṭ%} and {%khoḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16598<pc>0271-a<k1>kzoqa<k2>kzoqa
{#kzoqa#}¦ {%kṣoḍa, as,%} m. the post to which an
elephant is fastened; [cf. {%a-kṣobha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16599<pc>0271-a<k1>kzoRa<k2>kzoRa
{#kzoRa#}¦ {%kṣoṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. immovable;
or ({%as%}), m. a kind of lute; (perhaps the word is re-
lated to the following.)
<LEND>

<L>16600<pc>0271-a<k1>kzoRI<k2>kzoRI
{#kzoRI#}¦ {%kṣoṇī,%} f., Ved. the earth; ({%yau%}),
du. heaven and earth; (according to some the sing. of
this word and sometimes the plur. may be used col-
lectively, and the original meaning may be ‘a multitude
of men’ or ‘the people’ (as opposed to the chief); the
du. may then mean ‘the two sets of people,’ i. e. the
inhabitants of heaven and earth; sometimes a form
{%kṣoṇi%} occurs); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χθών.</lang>] {%—Kṣoṇī-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} containing the earth in himself, ‘the
source of everything in the earth;’ an epithet of
Viṣṇu in his fish-incarnation.
<LEND>

<L>16601<pc>0271-a<k1>kzottf<k2>kzottf
{#kzottf#}¦ {%kṣottṛ.%} See under rt. {%kṣud.%}
<LEND>

<L>16602<pc>0271-a<k1>kzoda<k2>kzoda
{#kzoda#}¦ {%kṣoda.%} See under rt. {%kṣud.%}
<LEND>

<L>16603<pc>0271-a<k1>kzoDuka<k2>kzoDuka
{#kzoDuka#}¦ {%kṣodhuka.%} See under rt. 1. {%kṣudh.%}
<LEND>

<L>16604<pc>0271-a<k1>kzoBa<k2>kzoBa
{#kzoBa#}¦ {%kṣobha, kṣobhaṇa,%} &c. See under
rt. 1. {%kṣubh.%}
<LEND>

<L>16605<pc>0271-a<k1>kzoma<k2>kzoma
{#kzoma#}¦ {%kṣoma, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%kṣu%}), a room on the top of a house; ({%am%}), n.
wove silk; [cf. {%kṣauma.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16606<pc>0271-a<k1>kzomaka<k2>kzomaka
{#kzomaka#}¦ {%kṣomaka, as,%} m. a kind of perfume
({%gaṇahāsaka%}); [cf. {%kṣema%} and {%kṣaumaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16607<pc>0271-a<k1>kzORI<k2>kzORI
{#kzORI#}¦ {%kṣauṇī, ī%} or {%is,%} f. the earth; [cf.
{%kṣoṇī.%}] {%—Kṣauṇī-tala, am,%} n. the surface of
the earth. {%—Kṣauṇī-prācīra, as,%} m. the ocean.
{%—Kṣauṇī-bhuj, k,%} m. earth-possessor, a king;
[cf. {%kṣiti-bhuj.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16608<pc>0271-a<k1>kzOdra<k2>kzOdra
{#kzOdra#}¦ {%kṣaudra, as,%} m. (fr. {%kṣudra%} and
{%kṣudrā%}), the tree Michelia Champaca ({%campaka%});
N. of a mixed caste, the son of a Vaideha and a
Māgadhī; ({%am%}), n. smallness, minuteness; N. of a
Sūtra of the Sāma-veda; honey, a species of honey;
water. {%—Kṣaudra-ja, am,%} n. wax. {%—Kṣaudra-%}
{%dhātu, us,%} m. a kind of mineral substance; [cf. {%mā-%}
{%kṣika.%}] {%—Kṣaudra-priya, as,%} m., N. of a tree;
[cf. {%jala-madhūka.%}] {%—Kṣaudra-meha, as,%} m.
the disease diabetes mellitus. {%—Kṣaudramehin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} affected with this disease.
<LEND>

<L>16609<pc>0271-a<k1>kzOdreya<k2>kzOdreya
{%Kṣaudreya, am,%}¦ n. wax.
<LEND>

<L>16610<pc>0271-a<k1>kzOdrakya<k2>kzOdrakya
{#kzOdrakya#}¦ {%kṣaudrakya, as, ī,%} m. f. (fr. {%kṣu-%}
{%draka%}), a prince or princess of the Kṣudrakas, a
man belonging to the Kṣudrakas; ({%as, ī, am%}),
small, minute.
<LEND>

<L>16611<pc>0271-a<k1>kzOdrakamAlavI<k2>kzOdrakamAlavI
{%Kṣaudrakamālavī,%}¦ f., scil. {%senā,%} the army of
Kṣudraka and Mālava.
<LEND>

<L>16612<pc>0271-a<k1>kzOma<k2>kzOma
{#kzOma#}¦ {%kṣauma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kṣumā%}), made
of linen, linen, covered with linen; prepared from
linseed (as oil); ({%am%}), n. linen cloth or garment;
[Page0271-b+ 75]
linseed; ({%ī%}), f. lin or flax, Linum Usitatissimum;
({%as, am%}), m. n. wove silk; an airy room on the
top of a house; an apartment on the roof; the back
of an edifice; a fortified place in front of a building;
a building of a particular form; [cf. {%kṣoma.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16613<pc>0271-b<k1>kzOmaka<k2>kzOmaka
{%Kṣaumaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ linen; ({%as%}), m. a parti-
cular perfume; [cf. {%cora.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16614<pc>0271-b<k1>kzOra<k2>kzOra
{#kzOra#}¦ {%kṣaura, am,%} n. (fr. {%kṣura%}), shaving
the head, shaving in general; ({%ī%}), f. a razor. {%—Kṣau-%}
{%ra-karaṇa, am,%} n. the operation of shaving.
<LEND>

<L>16615<pc>0271-b<k1>kzOrapavya<k2>kzOrapavya
{%Kṣaurapavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%kṣura-pavi%}),
formed out of razors and thunderbolts, very sharp,
very hard.
<LEND>

<L>16616<pc>0271-b<k1>kzOrika<k2>kzOrika
{%Kṣaurika, as,%}¦ m. a barber, a shaver.
<LEND>

<L>16617<pc>0271-b<k1>kzRu<k2>kzRu
{#kzRu#}¦ {%kṣṇu,%} cl. 2. P. {%kṣṇauti, cukṣṇāva,%}
{%kṣṇavitum,%} to whet, sharpen.
<LEND>

<L>16618<pc>0271-b<k1>kzRut<k2>kzRut
{%Kṣṇut, t, t, t,%}¦ (at the end of compounds) sharp
(e. g. {%ubhayataḥ-kṣṇut,%} sharp on both sides).
<LEND>

<L>16619<pc>0271-b<k1>kzRuta<k2>kzRuta
{%Kṣṇuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ whetted, sharpened.
<LEND>

<L>16620<pc>0271-b<k1>kzRotra<k2>kzRotra
{%Kṣṇotra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a grind-stone, a whet-stone.
<LEND>

<L>16621<pc>0271-b<k1>kzmA<k2>kzmA
{#kzmA#}¦ {%kṣmā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%kṣam%}), the earth,
(Ved. only inst. sing. {%kṣmayā%}); [cf. {%kṣamā.%}]
{%Kṣmā-ja, as,%} m. ‘earth-born,’ the planet Mars.
{%—Kṣmā-tala, am,%} n. the surface of the earth.
{%—Kṣmā-dhṛti, is,%} m. one who has to support the
earth, a king. {%—Kṣmā-pa, as,%} m. earth-protector,
a king. {%—Kṣmā-pati, is,%} m. lord of the earth, a
king. {%—Kṣmā-pāla, as,%} m. earth-protector, a king.
{%—Kṣmā-bhuj, k,%} m. possessor of the earth, a king.
{%—Kṣmā-bhṛt, t,%} m. supporter of the earth; a
mountain; a king. {%—Kṣmā-vṛṣa, as,%} m. ‘earth-
bull,’ i. e. a mighty king.
<LEND>

<L>16622<pc>0271-b<k1>kzmAy<k2>kzmAy
{#kzmAy#}¦ {%kṣmāy,%} cl. 1. A. {%kṣmāyate, ca-%}
{%kṣmāye, kṣmāyitum,%} to shake,
tremble: Caus. {%kṣmāpayati, -yitum, acikṣma-%}
{%pat,%} to cause to shake, to make tremble: Desid.
{%cikṣmāyiṣate:%} Intens. {%cākṣmāyyate, cākṣ-%}
{%māti%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>16623<pc>0271-b<k1>kzmAyita<k2>kzmAyita
{%Kṣmāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, made to tremble,
trembling.
<LEND>

<L>16624<pc>0271-b<k1>kzmAyitf<k2>kzmAyitf
{%Kṣmāyitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ trembling, shaking.
<LEND>

<L>16625<pc>0271-b<k1>kzmIl<k2>kzmIl
{#kzmIl#}¦ {%kṣmīl,%} cl. 1. P. {%kṣmīlati, cikṣ-%}
{%mīla, kṣmīlitum,%} to wink, to
twinkle, to close the eyelids; [cf. {%mīl.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16626<pc>0271-b<k1>kzrOm<k2>kzrOm
{#kzrOm#}¦ {%kṣraum,%} ind. a mystical exclamation.
<LEND>

<L>16627<pc>0271-b<k1>kzviNkA<k2>kzviNkA
{#kzviNkA#}¦ {%kṣviṅkā,%} f., Ved. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>16628<pc>0271-b<k1>kzviq<k2>kzviq
{#kzviq#}¦ {%kṣviḍ%} or {%kṣvid,%} cl. 1. P. {%kṣve-%}
{%ḍati%} or {%kṣvedati, -ḍitum%} or {%-ditum,%}
to utter an inarticulate sound, to hum, murmur, growl,
roar, hiss, whiz, whistle; A. {%kṣveḍate%} or {%kṣvedate,%}
or cl. 4. P. {%kṣvidyati,%} to be wet or unctuous; to
exude, discharge juice, emit sap: Caus. {%kṣveḍayati%}
or {%-dayati, -yitum,%} to sound inarticulately, hum, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16629<pc>0271-b<k1>kzviRRa<k2>kzviRRa
{%Kṣviṇṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded inarticulately; soft,
unctuous.
<LEND>

<L>16630<pc>0271-b<k1>kzveqa<k2>kzveqa
{%Kṣveḍa, as, ā, am%}¦ (in some senses perhaps con-
nected with rt. {%kṣvel%}), curved, crooked, bending,
bent; wicked, depraved; difficult to be approached;
({%as%}), m. singing or buzzing in the ear from harden-
ing of the wax &c.; sound, noise; venom, poison;
a Cucurbitaceous plant, Luffa Pentandra or Acutangula,
{%= pītaghoṣā;%} a mystical N. of the letter {%m; (am),%}
n. the flower of the Ghoṣa plant; the fruit of a red
kind of swallow-wort; ({%ā%}), f. the roaring of a lion,
a war-whoop, a battle-cry; a bamboo rod or stake;
a kind of Cucurbitaceous plant.
<LEND>

<L>16631<pc>0271-b<k1>kzveqana<k2>kzveqana
{%Kṣveḍana, am,%}¦ n. murmuring, hissing, whistling,
sibilating; a hissing pronunciation.
<LEND>

<L>16632<pc>0271-b<k1>kzveqita<k2>kzveqita
{%Kṣveḍita, as, am,%}¦ m. n. humming, murmuring,
growling; a growl, roar; a battle-cry, a war-whoop.
<LEND>

<L>16633<pc>0271-b<k1>kzveqin<k2>kzveqin
{%Kṣveḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ humming, murmuring.
<LEND>

<L>16634<pc>0271-b<k1>kzvel<k2>kzvel
{#kzvel#}¦ {%kṣvel,%} cl. 1. P. {%kṣvelati,%} &c.,
to leap, jump; to play; to go, move;
to shake, tremble; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>suillu, sual,</nsi>
<nsi>suall.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page0271-c+ 76]

<L>16635<pc>0271-c<k1>kzvelikA<k2>kzvelikA
{%Kṣvelikā,%}¦ f. or {%kṣvelita, as, am,%} m. n. or
{%kṣvelya, am,%} n. play, jest, joke, trick.
<LEND>
<H>{#Ka#}

<L>16636<pc>0271-c<k1>Ka<k2>Ka<h>1
{#Ka#} 1¦. {%kha,%} the second consonant of the
alphabet, being the aspirate of the preceding conso-
nant, and having the sound of <nsi>kh</nsi> in <nsi>inkhorn</nsi>. {%—Kha-%}
{%kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16637<pc>0271-c<k1>Ka<k2>Ka<h>2
{#Ka#} 2¦. {%kha, as,%} m. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>16638<pc>0271-c<k1>Ka<k2>Ka<h>3
{#Ka#} 3¦. {%kha, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%khan%}), a cavity,
hollow, cave, cavern, aperture; an aperture of the
human body (of which there are nine, as the mouth,
the two ears, the two eyes, the two nostrils, and the
organs of excretion and generation); the glottis (in
anatomy); an organ of sense; the hole made by
an arrow, a wound; the hole in the nave of a
wheel through which the axis runs; vacuity, empty
space, air, ether, sky, heaven; the character in arith-
metic which expresses nothing, a cypher; a dot,
Anusvāra, represented by a circle ({%vindu%}); a city, a
field; happiness, pleasure, auspiciousness [cf. {%sukha%}
and {%duḥkha%}]; understanding, knowledge; action;
the tenth from any given constellation or the sun's
entrance into it; talc; Brahma, the supreme spirit;
({%ā%}), f. a fountain, a well; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χάος;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>halo.</nsi>] {%—Kha-kāminī,%} f. the female of the Falco
Cheela ({%cilla%}); an epithet of Durgā {%(carcikā).%}
{%—Kha-kuntala, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Kha-%}
{%kholka, as,%} m. ‘sky-meteor,’ an epithet of the sun.
{%—Khakholkāditya (˚ka-ād˚), as,%} m. a form of
the sun. {%—Kha-ga, as, ā, am,%} moving in the air;
({%as%}), m. a bird; air, wind; the sun; a planet; a
grasshopper; a deity; an arrow. {%—Kha-gaṅgā,%} f.
the Gaṅgā (Ganges) of the sky. {%—Kha-gaṇa, as,%} m.,
N. of a prince, a son of Vajra-nābha. {%—Kha-gati,%}
{%is,%} f. flight in the air; N. of a metre, [cf. {%aśva-%}
{%gati.%}] {%—Khaga-pati, is,%} m. the chief of the birds,
an epithet of Garuḍa, the vehicle of Viṣṇu. {%—Kha-%}
{%gama, as, ā, am,%} moving in the air, flying, an epi-
thet of the Gandharvas and of missile weapons; ({%as%}),
m. a bird; N. of a Brāhman. {%—Kha-garbha, as,%}
m., N. of a mythical person with Buddhists. {%—Khaga-%}
{%vaktra, as,%} m. the tree Artocarpus Lacucha {%(lakuca).%}
{%—Khaga-vatī,%} f. the earth. {%—Khaga-śatru, us,%}
f. a plant, commonly called Chakulīya, Hemionitis
Cordifolia; [cf. {%pṛśni-parṇī.%}] {%—Khaga-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the hollow of a tree; a bird's nest. {%—Khagā-%}
{%dhipa (˚ga-adh˚), as,%} m. the chief of the birds,
an epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Khagāntaka (˚ga-an˚), as,%}
m. a hawk, a falcon (a destroyer of birds). {%—Kha-%}
{%gābhirāma (˚ga-abh˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Khagāsana (˚ga-ās˚), as,%} m. an epithet of the
mountain Udaya, the eastern mountain, on which the
sun rises; an epithet of Viṣṇu (‘sitting on a bird,’
i. e. on Garuḍa). {%—Kha-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} (in arith-
metic or algebra) having a cypher as multiplier.
{%—Khagendra (˚ga-in˚), as,%} m. the chief of the
birds, an epithet of Garuḍa; N. of a prince. {%—Kha-%}
{%gendra-dhvaja, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Kha-%}
{%geśvara (˚ga-īś˚), as,%} m. the chief of the birds,
epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Kha-gola, as,%} m. the vault or
circle of the heaven, the celestial sphere. {%—Khagola-%}
{%vidyā,%} f. knowledge of the celestial sphere, astronomy.
{%—Kha-camasa, as,%} m. the moon (‘the drinking-
vessel in the sky’). {%—Kha-cara, as, ī, am,%} moving
in the air, flying; ({%as%}), m. a bird; a cloud; the
wind; the sun; a Rakṣas or demon; an aerial
spirit; N. of a people. {%—Kha-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} moving
in the air, flying, an epithet of Skanda. {%—Kha-jala,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘air-water,’ i. e. dew, rain, frost, hoar-frost.
{%—Kha-jit, t,%} m. a Buddha, one of the seven teachers
or saints of the Buddha sect. {%—Kha-jyotis, is,%} m. a
shining flying insect, a fire-fly, &c. {%—Kha-tamāla,%}
{%as,%} m. a cloud; smoke. {%—Kha-tilaka, as,%} m. the
sun. {%—Kha-dūra-vāsinī,%} f., N. of one of the female
deities or Śaktis with Buddhists. {%—Kha-dyota, as,%}
m. a shining flying insect, a fire-fly, the sun; ({%ā%}), f.,
[Page0272-a+ 75]
scil. {%dvār,%} the door which shines like a shining insect,
an eye. {%—Kha-dyotaka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
kind of plant with a poisonous fruit. {%—Kha-dyotana,%}
{%as,%} m. the sun. {%—Kha-dhūpa, as,%} m. a rocket, fire-
work. {%—Kha-parāga, as,%} m. darkness. {%—Kha-%}
{%puṣpa, am,%} n. a flower in the sky, a term for any-
thing impossible. {%—Kha-bha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a planet. {%—Kha-bhrānti, is,%} f. a kind of falcon, a
kite; [cf. {%cilla.%}] {%—Kha-maṇi, is,%} m. the jewel of
the sky, the sun. {%—Kha-mīlana, am,%} n. sleepiness,
lassitude, weariness. {%—Kha-mūrti, is,%} f. a celestial
appearance or person. {%—Khamūrti-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
having a divine or celestial person or form. {%—Kha-%}
{%mūli, is, ikā%} or {%ī,%} f. an aquatic plant, Pistia Stratiotes
{%(kumbhikā)%}. {%—Kha-vallī,%} f., N. of a parasitic plant,
{%= ākāśa-vallī%}. {%—Kha-vāri, i,%} n. rain-water, dew,
vapour, &c. {%—Kha-vāṣpa, as,%} m. snow, hoar-frost,
dew. {%—Kha-śaya, as, ā, am,%} resting or dwelling in
the air. {%—Kha-śarīra, am,%} n. a celestial or immortal
body. {%—Khaśarīrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} gifted with an etherial
body, having a heavenly form. {%—Kha-śvāsa, as,%} m.
wind, air. {%—Kha-sama, as,%} m. a Buddha or deified
Bauddha saint. {%—Kha-samuttha, as, ā, am,%} produced
in the sky. {%—Kha-sambhava, as, ā, am,%} produced
in the sky, aerial, etherial; ({%ā%}), f. spikenard, {%= ākāśa-%}
{%māṃsī%}. {%—Kha-sarpaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha or
Bauddha saint; ({%am%}), n. gliding through the air.
{%—Kha-sindhu, us,%} m. the moon. {%—Kha-stanī,%} f.
the earth. {%—Kha-sphaṭika, am,%} n. aerial crystal,
a N. for the sun and moon-gem, {%sūrya-kānta%}
and {%candra-kānta;%} [cf. {%ākāśa-sphaṭika.%}] {%—Kha-%}
{%hara, as, ā, am,%} (in arithmetic) having a cypher
for its denominator (as a fraction). {%—Khātman (kha-%}
{%āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having the air as one's nature. {%—Khā-%}
{%pagā (kha-āp˚),%} f. a stream in the air, an epithet of
the Ganges. {%—Khe-gamana, as,%} m. a kind of galli-
nule, {%= kāla-kaṇṭha%}. {%—Khe-cara, as, ī, am,%} moving
in the air, flying, aerial; ({%as%}), m. a bird; a Gan-
dharva; a Rakṣas; a Vidyādhara; an epithet of Śiva;
a planet; quicksilver; ({%ī%}), f. a semi-divine female
able to fly; an epithet of Durgā; ({%am%}), n. green
vitriol. {%—Khecara-tva, am,%} n. capability of flying.
{%—Khe 'ṭa (khe-aṭa), as,%} m. a planet; the ascend-
ing node or Rāhu. {%—Khe-paribhrama, as, ā, am,%}
flying about in the air. {%—Khe-śaya, as, ā, am,%}
lying in the air. {%—Kholka (kha-ulkā), as,%} m. a
meteor; a planet; [cf. {%kha-kholka.%}] {%—Kholmuka%}
{%(kha-ul˚), as,%} m. the planet Mars; [cf. {%gaganol-%}
{%muka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16639<pc>0272-a<k1>KakK<k2>KakK
{#KakK#}¦ {%khakkh,%} cl. 1. P. {%khakkhati,%} to
laugh, to laugh at or deride; (also read
{%kakh,%} q. v.); [cf. Goth. <nsi>hlaha.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16640<pc>0272-a<k1>KakKawa<k2>KakKawa
{#KakKawa#}¦ {%khakkhaṭa, as, ā, am,%} hard, solid;
(also {%kakkhaṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>16641<pc>0272-a<k1>KakKara<k2>KakKara
{#KakKara#}¦ {%khakkhara, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a beggar's staff; [cf. {%hikkala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16642<pc>0272-a<k1>Kaga<k2>Kaga
{#Kaga#}¦ {%kha-ga.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16643<pc>0272-a<k1>Kagoqa<k2>Kagoqa
{#Kagoqa#}¦ {%khagoḍa, as,%} m. Saccharum Spon-
taneum, a kind of reed (for {%khaggaḍa?%}).
<LEND>

<L>16644<pc>0272-a<k1>Kaggaqa<k2>Kaggaqa
{#Kaggaqa#}¦ {%khaggaḍa, as,%} m. a kind of reed,
Saccharum Spontaneum, commonly {%khāgḍā.%}
<LEND>

<L>16645<pc>0272-a<k1>KaNkara<k2>KaNkara
{#KaNkara#}¦ {%khaṅkara%} or {%khaṅkhara, as,%} m. a
curl, a lock of hair.
<LEND>

<L>16646<pc>0272-a<k1>KaNKa<k2>KaNKa
{#KaNKa#}¦ {%khaṅkha, as,%} m., N. of a minister of
king Bālāditya.
<LEND>

<L>16647<pc>0272-a<k1>KaNKaRA<k2>KaNKaRA
{#KaNKaRA#}¦ {%khaṅkhaṇā%} (an onomatopoetic
word), the tinkling sound of a bell &c.
<LEND>

<L>16648<pc>0272-a<k1>KaNga<k2>KaNga
{#KaNga#}¦ {%khaṅga, as,%} m. (for {%khaḍga ?%}), Ved. a
kind of animal.
<LEND>

<L>16649<pc>0272-a<k1>Kac<k2>Kac
{#Kac#}¦ {%khac,%} cl. 1. 9. P. {%khacati%} and {%khac-%}
{%ñāti, cakhāca, khacitum,%} to come forth,
appear; to be born again; to cause prosperity; to
purify; cl. 10. P. {%khacayati, -yitum,%} to fasten,
bind, set.
<LEND>

<L>16650<pc>0272-a<k1>Kacita<k2>Kacita
{%Khacita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fastened, joined; mixed,
[Page0272-b+ 75]
blended, combined; inlaid, set, studded, (used in
comp., e. g. {%maṇi-khacita,%} inlaid with jewels.)
<LEND>

<L>16651<pc>0272-b<k1>Kaj<k2>Kaj
{#Kaj#}¦ {%khaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%khajati, cakhāja, kha-%}
{%jitum,%} to churn or agitate.
<LEND>

<L>16652<pc>0272-b<k1>Kaja<k2>Kaja
{%Khaja, as,%}¦ m. stirring, agitating, churning; contest,
war (?); a churning-stick; a ladle, a spoon; ({%ā%}), f.
a churning-stick, a ladle; the hand with the fingers
extended; churning, stirring; killing, destroying.
{%—Khaja-kṛt, t, t, t,%} or {%khajaṅ-kara, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. causing the tumult or din of battle.
<LEND>

<L>16653<pc>0272-b<k1>Kajaka<k2>Kajaka
{%Khajaka, as,%}¦ m. a churning-stick; ({%ikā%}), f. a
ladle or spoon.
<LEND>

<L>16654<pc>0272-b<k1>Kajapa<k2>Kajapa
{%Khajapa, am,%}¦ n. ghee or clarified butter.
<LEND>

<L>16655<pc>0272-b<k1>KajAka<k2>KajAka
{%Khajāka, as,%}¦ m. a bird; ({%ā%}), f. a ladle or spoon.
<LEND>

<L>16656<pc>0272-b<k1>KaYj<k2>KaYj<h>1
{#KaYj#} 1¦. {%khañj,%} cl. 1. P. {%khañjati, ca-%}
{%khañja, khañjitum,%} to limp, halt, walk
lame; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σκάζω;</lang> Germ. <nsi>hinke.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16657<pc>0272-b<k1>KaYj<k2>KaYj<h>2
2. {%khañj, khan, n, n,%}¦ probably {%= khañja,%} limping.
<LEND>

<L>16658<pc>0272-b<k1>KaYja<k2>KaYja
{%Khañja, as, ā, am,%}¦ limping, lame, crippled; ({%ā%}),
f. a metre consisting of 2 × 28 short syllables and
1 long and 30 short syllables and 1 long; another
metre containing 30 short syllables + 1 long and 28
short syllables + 1 long; another metre containing
2 × 36 short syllables and 1 Amphimacer. {%—Khañja-%}
{%kheṭa%} or {%khañja-khela, as,%} m. the wagtail. {%—Khañ-%}
{%ja-tā,%} f. or {%khañja-tva, am,%} n. limping, lameness.
{%—Khañja-bāhu, us,%} m., N. of a Daitya.
<LEND>

<L>16659<pc>0272-b<k1>KaYjaka<k2>KaYjaka
{%Khañjaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ limping, lame.
<LEND>

<L>16660<pc>0272-b<k1>KaYjana<k2>KaYjana
{%Khañjana, as,%}¦ m. a species of wagtail, Monta-
cilla Alba; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of wagtail; mustard;
({%am%}), n. moving, going, going lamely. {%—Khañjana-%}
{%rata, am,%} n. the secret pleasures of the Yatis, the
cohabitation of saints. {%—Khañjanākṛti (˚na-āk˚),%}
{%is,%} f. a sort of wagtail.
<LEND>

<L>16661<pc>0272-b<k1>KaYjanaka<k2>KaYjanaka
{%Khañjanaka, as,%}¦ m. a wagtail, Montacilla Alba;
({%ikā%}), f. a species of wagtail.
<LEND>

<L>16662<pc>0272-b<k1>KaYjarIwa<k2>KaYjarIwa
{%Khañjarīṭa%}¦ or {%khañjarīṭaka%} or {%khañjalekha,%}
{%as,%} m. the wagtail.
<LEND>

<L>16663<pc>0272-b<k1>KaYjAra<k2>KaYjAra
{#KaYjAra#}¦ {%khañjāra%} and {%khañjāla, as,%} m., N.
of two persons.
<LEND>

<L>16664<pc>0272-b<k1>Kaw<k2>Kaw
{#Kaw#}¦ {%khaṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%khaṭati,%} &c., to desire,
wish, seek or inquire.
<LEND>

<L>16665<pc>0272-b<k1>Kawa<k2>Kawa
{%Khaṭa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. {%khaṭ%} above?), phlegm, the
phlegmatic or watery humor [cf. {%kapha%}]; a blind
well; an axe, a hatchet [cf. {%ṭaṅka%}]; a plough; a
kind of blow or wound; the closed or doubled fist
(as for striking &c.); grass; a coarse long grass of
several species used to thatch houses [cf. {%kaṭa%} and
{%khaḍa%}]; a fragrant kind of grass. {%—Khaṭa-kaṭāhaka,%}
{%as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a spitting-box. {%—Khaṭa-%}
{%khādaka, as,%} m. (?), an eater; a glass vessel; a
jackal; an animal; a crow.
<LEND>

<L>16666<pc>0272-b<k1>Kawaka<k2>Kawaka
{%Khaṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a go-between, a man whose
business is to negociate marriages [cf. {%ghaṭaka%}]; the
half-closed hand; the doubled fist of wrestlers or
boxers. {%—Khaṭakā-mukha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a particular position of the hand in shooting; ({%as%}),
m. a man in the attitude of shooting.
<LEND>

<L>16667<pc>0272-b<k1>Kawika<k2>Kawika
{%Khaṭika, as,%}¦ m. the hand half-closed, the fist;
({%ā%}), f. chalk [cf. {%kakkhaṭī, kaṭhinī,%} &c.]; the ex-
ternal opening of the ear; the plant Andropogon
Muricatus.
<LEND>

<L>16668<pc>0272-b<k1>KawakkikA<k2>KawakkikA
{#KawakkikA#}¦ {%khaṭakkikā,%} f. a side door; [cf.
{%khaḍakkikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16669<pc>0272-b<k1>KawaKawAya<k2>KawaKawAya
{#KawaKawAya#}¦ {%khaṭakhaṭāya%} (an onomatopoetic
word), A. {%-ṭāyate, -yitum,%} to spring or issue forth
with a noise.
<LEND>

<L>16670<pc>0272-b<k1>KawinI<k2>KawinI
{#KawinI#}¦ {%khaṭinī%} or {%khaṭī,%} f. chalk; (some
books read {%khaṭhinī%}); [cf. {%kaṭhinī, khaṭika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16671<pc>0272-b<k1>KawU<k2>KawU
{#KawU#}¦ {%khaṭū%} (?), an ornament worn on the
wrist or ancle.
<LEND>

<L>16672<pc>0272-b<k1>Kaww<k2>Kaww
{#Kaww#}¦ {%khaṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%khaṭṭayati, -yitum,%}
to cover, to screen.
<LEND>

<L>16673<pc>0272-b<k1>Kawwana<k2>Kawwana
{#Kawwana#}¦ {%khaṭṭana, as,%} m. a dwarf [cf. {%khaṭṭe-%}
{%raka%}]; ({%as, ā, am%}), dwarfish, short of stature.
<LEND>
[Page0272-c+ 73]

<L>16674<pc>0272-c<k1>KawwA<k2>KawwA
{#KawwA#}¦ {%khaṭṭā,%} f. a bedstead; a kind of grass,
Andropogon Serratus; (a wrong reading for {%khaṭvā.%})
<LEND>

<L>16675<pc>0272-c<k1>KawwASa<k2>KawwASa
{#KawwASa#}¦ {%khaṭṭāśa, as,%} m. the civet or zebet
cat, Viverra Zibetha; ({%ī%}), f. the same or (according
to another authority) a different animal; (some write
the word {%khaṭṭāsa.%})
<LEND>

<L>16676<pc>0272-c<k1>Kawwi<k2>Kawwi
{#Kawwi#}¦ {%khaṭṭi, is, ī,%} m. f. a bier, the bed on
which the corpse is carried to the pile.
<LEND>

<L>16677<pc>0272-c<k1>Kawwika<k2>Kawwika
{#Kawwika#}¦ {%khaṭṭika, as,%} m. a butcher, a hunter,
a fowler, one who lives by killing and selling game;
the cream on the milk of a buffalo-cow; ({%ā%}), f. a
small bedstead, a cot; a bier or bed on which the
corpse is carried.
<LEND>

<L>16678<pc>0272-c<k1>Kawweraka<k2>Kawweraka
{#Kawweraka#}¦ {%khaṭṭeraka, as, ā, am,%} dwarfish,
dwarf; [cf. {%khaṭṭana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16679<pc>0272-c<k1>KawvA<k2>KawvA
{#KawvA#}¦ {%khaṭvā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%khaṭ%}), a
bedstead, a couch, a cot; a swing, a hammock; a
kind of bandage; N. of a plant, {%= kolaśimbī%}. {%—Kha-%}
{%ṭvāṅga (˚vā-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a club shaped like the foot
of a bedstead,’ i. e. a club or staff with a skull at the
top considered as the weapon of Śiva and carried by
ascetics and Yogis; wood from a funeral pile; N. of
a king of the solar line, = Dilīpa; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
river. {%—Khaṭvāṅga-dhāra, as,%} m. or {%khaṭvāṅga-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘staff-bearer,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Khaṭvāṅga-vana, am,%} n., N. of a forest. {%—Kha-%}
{%ṭvāṅgin, ī, inī, i,%} having the staff described above; ({%ī%}),
m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Khaṭvāpluta (˚vā-āp˚)%} or
{%khaṭvārūḍha (˚vā-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} mounted on a
bed, lying on a bed: low, vile, abandoned, iniquitous;
erring, going wrong; silly, stupid.
<LEND>

<L>16680<pc>0272-c<k1>KawvikA<k2>KawvikA
{%Khaṭvikā,%}¦ f. a small bedstead.
<LEND>

<L>16681<pc>0272-c<k1>Kaq<k2>Kaq
{#Kaq#}¦ {%khaḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%khāḍayati, -yitum,%}
to divide, tear, break, break off a part or
piece; [cf. {%khaṇḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16682<pc>0272-c<k1>Kaqa<k2>Kaqa
{%Khaḍa, as,%}¦ m. breaking, dividing; buttermilk
boiled with acid vegetables and spices; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. a kind of small grass, straw; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
man. {%—Khaḍonmattā (˚ḍa-un˚),%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>16683<pc>0272-c<k1>KaqakkikA<k2>KaqakkikA
{#KaqakkikA#}¦ {%khaḍakkikā,%} f. a private or back
door, a small or venetian door or window.
<LEND>

<L>16684<pc>0272-c<k1>KaqatU<k2>KaqatU
{#KaqatU#}¦ {%khaḍatū, ūs,%} m. a kind of ornament.
<LEND>

<L>16685<pc>0272-c<k1>KaqikA<k2>KaqikA
{#KaqikA#}¦ {%khaḍikā%} or {%khaḍī,%} f. chalk.
<LEND>

<L>16686<pc>0272-c<k1>Kaqu<k2>Kaqu
{#Kaqu#}¦ {%khaḍu, us,%} or {%khaḍū, ūs,%} m. or f. a bier.
<LEND>

<L>16687<pc>0272-c<k1>Kaqga<k2>Kaqga
{#Kaqga#}¦ {%khaḍga, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%khaḍ%}
for {%khaṇḍ%}), a sword, a scymitar; a large sacrificial
knife; the horn of a rhinoceros; a rhinoceros; one
of the Buddhas or Buddhist saints, a Pratyeka-buddha,
so called because he walks alone like a rhinoceros [cf.
{%eka-cara%} and {%eka-cārin%}]; ({%am%}), n. iron. {%—Khaḍga-%}
{%kośa, as,%} m. the sheath of a sword, a scabbard; a
creeping plant, Scirpus Maximus. {%—Khaḍga-carma-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m. a soldier armed with a sword and shield.
{%—Khaḍga-dṛh, -dhṛk, k, k,%} grasping a scymitar.
{%—Khaḍga-dhara, as,%} m. a swordsman. {%—Khaḍga-%}
{%dhenu, us,%} f. a female rhinoceros; a small knife or
sword, {%= asi-dhenu%}. {%—Khaḍga-pattra, as,%} m. a
kind of creeper, Scirpus Maximus; N. of a mythical
tree in hell bearing swords for leaves; ({%am%}), n. the
blade of a sword. {%—Khaḍga-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} sword in
hand. {%—Khaḍga-pātra, am,%} n. a vessel formed of
buffalo's horns, a large salver or charger on which
the sacrificial knife is laid. {%—Khaḍga-pidhāna%} or
{%khaḍga-pidhānaka, am,%} n. a scabbard, the sheath
of a sword. {%—Khaḍga-putrikā,%} f. a small sword, a
knife. {%—Khaḍga-prahāra, as,%} m. a sword-cut.
{%—Khaḍga-phala, am,%} n. a sword-blade. {%—Khaḍga-%}
{%māṃsa, as,%} m. buffalo-beef. {%—Khaḍga-lekhā,%} f. a
row of swords. {%—Khaḍga-vat, ān, atī, at,%} armed
with a sword. {%—Khaḍgāghāta (˚ga-āgh˚), as,%} m.
a sword-cut. {%—Khaḍgādhāra (˚ga-ādh˚), as,%} m. a
sheath, a scabbard. {%—Khaḍgābhihata (˚ga-abh˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} cut or struck with a sword. {%—Khaḍgā- %}
[Page0273-a+ 80]
{%miṣa (˚ga-ām˚), am,%} n. buffalo's flesh. {%—Khaḍgāhva%}
{%(˚ga-āh˚), as,%} m. a rhinoceros.
<LEND>

<L>16688<pc>0273-a<k1>Kaqgawa<k2>Kaqgawa
{%Khaḍgaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a large kind of reed, Saccharum
Spontaneum; [cf. {%bṛhat-kāśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16689<pc>0273-a<k1>KaqgArIwa<k2>KaqgArIwa
{%Khaḍgārīṭa%}¦ or {%khaḍgārāṭa (?), as,%} m. a shield
or the blade of a sword (?); one who observes a
particular religious penance peculiar to Buddhists,
viz. rubbing the feet backwards and forwards on the
edge of a sword made red hot; [cf. {%asi-dhārā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16690<pc>0273-a<k1>Kaqgika<k2>Kaqgika
{%Khaḍgika, as,%}¦ m. a swordsman; a butcher, a
vender of flesh meat; the cream of buffalo's milk;
[cf. {%khaṭṭika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16691<pc>0273-a<k1>Kaqgin<k2>Kaqgin
{%Khaḍgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ armed with a sword, a swords-
man; ({%ī%}), m. a rhinoceros; N. of a Jina or Jaina
saint. {%—Khaḍgi-māra, as,%} m. a kind of creeper,
Scirpus Maximus, {%= khaḍga-kośa.%}
<LEND>

<L>16692<pc>0273-a<k1>KaqgIka<k2>KaqgIka
{%Khaḍgīka, am,%}¦ n. a sickle, a small scythe.
<LEND>

<L>16693<pc>0273-a<k1>KaRaKaRAya<k2>KaRaKaRAya
{#KaRaKaRAya#}¦ {%khaṇakhaṇāya%} (an onomato-
poetic word), A. {%khaṇakhaṇāyate, -yitum,%} to utter
or give out any peculiar sound; to tick, tinkle,
crack, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16694<pc>0273-a<k1>KaRaKaRAyamAna<k2>KaRaKaRAyamAna
{%Khaṇakhaṇāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ tinkling, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16695<pc>0273-a<k1>KaRq<k2>KaRq
{#KaRq#}¦ {%khaṇḍ,%} cl. 1. A., 10. P. {%khaṇḍate,%}
{%ḍitum, khaṇḍayati, -yitum,%} to break,
tear, break in pieces, crush, cut, divide; destroy,
annihilate, defeat, conquer; disappoint, frustrate,
interrupt, disturb, deceive, cheat.
<LEND>

<L>16696<pc>0273-a<k1>KaRqa<k2>KaRqa
{%Khaṇḍa, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken, torn asunder, divided,
having chasms, gaps, or breaks; deficient, defective,
crippled; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a break, a gap, a chasm,
a fissure, a fracture (e. g. {%kedāra-khaṇḍa,%} a gap or
fracture in the embankment of a field); a piece,
part, fragment, portion; a section of a work, part,
chapter; a party number, multitude, assemblage; a
term in an equation; ({%as%}), m. treacle or molasses
partially dried, candied sugar; a flaw in a jewel; N.
of a people; ({%am%}), n. a kind of salt ({%viḍ-lavaṇa%}),
black salt; a sort of sugar-cane; [cf. {%uttara-khaṇḍa,%}
{%karka˚, kāla˚, kāśī˚.%}] {%—Khaṇḍa-kaṭaka, as%} or
{%am,%} m. or n. (?), title of an astronomical work com-
posed by Brahma-gupta. {%—Khaṇḍa-kathā,%} f. a
fragmentary tale; a tale or story divided into
sections (?). {%—Khaṇḍa-karṇa, as,%} m. a kind of
bulbous plant; sweet potato. {%—Khaṇḍa-kāvya, am,%}
n. a fragmentary poem; a poem interspersed with
prose (?). {%—Khaṇḍa-giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Khaṇḍa-ja, as,%} m. a kind of sugar, treacle,
molasses, {%= guḍa, yavāsa-śarkarā%}. {%—Khaṇḍa-%}
{%jodbhavaja (˚ja-ud˚), as,%} m. a kind of candied
sugar prepared from Khaṇḍaja. {%—Khaṇḍa-tā,%} f. the
being divided, division. {%—Khaṇḍa-deva, as,%} m., N.
of the author of a commentary on Jaimini's Nyāya-
sūtras, called Bhāṭṭadīpikā; also of the Mīmāṃsā-
Kaustubha. {%—Khaṇḍa-dravya, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Khaṇḍa-dhārā,%} f. shears, scissors; a kind of
dance or air (?). {%—Khaṇḍa-pattra, am,%} n. a bundle
of various leaves. {%—Khaṇḍa-paraśu, us,%} m. an
epithet of Śiva as cutting his foes to pieces with his
axe. {%—Khaṇḍa-parśu, us,%} m. a N. of Śiva; of
Paraśu-rāma; of Rāhu; an elephant with a broken
tusk; a spreader of unguents or fragrant powders &c.;
a drug, commonly called Khandāmalaki (see {%khaṇḍā-%}
{%malaka%}). {%—Khaṇḍa-pāṇi, is,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Khaṇḍa-pāla, as,%} m. a confectioner, seller of
sweetmeats (for {%khaṇḍa-pāṇa?%}). {%—Khaṇḍa-pra-%}
{%laya, as,%} m. a partial destruction of the universe in
which all the spheres beneath Svarga or heaven are
dissolved in one common ruin; a quarrel; the dis-
solution of the bands of friendship or of society; (in
the latter sense more correctly {%khaṇḍa-praṇaya.%})
{%—Khaṇḍa-praśasti, is,%} f., N. of a poem attributed
to Hanumat; an older N. for the play Hanuman-nā-
ṭaka. {%—Khaṇḍa-phaṇa, as,%} m. a kind of serpent.
{%—Khaṇḍa-maṇḍala, am,%} n. a segment of a circle,
part of a circle, an incomplete sphere; ({%as, ā, am%}),
gibbous, not full or round. {%—Khaṇḍa-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} consisting of pieces. {%—Khaṇḍa-modaka, as,%}
m. a kind of sugar, granulated or candied ({%yavāsa-%}
{%śarkarā%}). {%—Khaṇḍa-lavaṇa, am,%} n. a kind of salt
({%viḍ-lavaṇa%}), black salt. {%—Khaṇḍa-śarkarā,%} f.
[Page0273-b+ 78]
candied sugar or sugar in pieces. {%—Khaṇḍa-śas,%} ind.
in pieces, by pieces, bit by bit, piece by piece, piece-
meal; {%khaṇḍaśaḥ kṛ,%} to divide or cut into pieces;
{%khaṇḍaśo bhū,%} to be divided, to be separated into
pieces. {%—Khaṇḍa-śākhā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= mahi-%}
{%ṣa-vallī%}. {%—Khaṇḍa-śīlā,%} f. a loose woman, an un-
chaste wife. {%—Khaṇḍa-sara, as,%} m. a kind of sugar
({%yavāsa-śarkarā%}), candied sugar. {%—Khaṇḍābhra%}
{%(˚ḍa-abh˚), am,%} n. scattered clouds; a bite, the
impression of the teeth in amorous sport. {%—Khaṇḍā-%}
{%malaka (ḍa-ām˚), am,%} n. myrobalan cut up into
small pieces (to be used as a medicine). {%—Khaṇḍālī%}
{%(˚ḍa-ālī),%} f. a measure for oil; a pond; a woman
whose husband has been guilty of infidelity.
<LEND>

<L>16697<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqaka<k2>KaRqaka
{%Khaṇḍaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ breaking to pieces, de-
stroying, removing, rendering ineffectual; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. a fragment, a part, a piece; ({%as%}), m. treacle
or molasses partially dried, candied sugar; one who
has no nails; pared or clipped finger-nails (?); N. of
a metre, {%= āryā-gīti;%} a kind of dance or tune (?);
[cf. {%khaṇḍa-dhārā.%}] {%—Khaṇḍakālu%} or {%khaṇḍa-%}
{%kāluka (˚ka-ālu), am,%} n. an esculent root, sweet
potato.
<LEND>

<L>16698<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqana<k2>KaRqana
{%Khaṇḍana, as, ā, am,%}¦ breaking, dividing, cutting,
reducing to pieces, destroying, annihilating, removing;
({%am%}), n. the act of breaking or cutting or dividing,
hurting, injuring, injury; interrupting, disappointing,
frustrating; cheating, deceiving; refuting (in argu-
ment); rebellion, opposition; discarding, dismissal.
{%—Khaṇḍana-kāra, as,%} m. an epithet of Harṣa.
{%—Khaṇḍana-kṛt, t,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Khaṇḍana-khaṇḍakādya (˚ka-ād˚), am,%} n. title
of a work on logic by Harṣa. {%—Khaṇḍana-rata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} skilful in cutting or destroying, destructive.
<LEND>

<L>16699<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqanIya<k2>KaRqanIya
{%Khaṇḍanīya%}¦ or {%khaṇḍitavya, as, ā, am,%} to be
broken or divided, frangible, fragile, brittle; destruc-
tible, refutable, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16700<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqala<k2>KaRqala
{%Khaṇḍala%}¦ or {%khaṇḍava, as, am,%} m. n. a piece,
a part.
<LEND>

<L>16701<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqika<k2>KaRqika
{%Khaṇḍika, as,%}¦ m. a sugar-boiler, a sugar-baker (?);
pease; the armpit; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f. the pod of
pease; a kind of air or tune in music.
<LEND>

<L>16702<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqita<k2>KaRqita
{%Khaṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, torn, broken in pieces,
scattered, dispersed, destroyed; broken as allegiance,
disobeyed against, rebelled; refuted, controverted;
disappointed, betrayed, abandoned as a lover; ({%ā%}), f.
a woman whose husband or lover has been guilty of
infidelity. {%—Khaṇḍita-vigraha, as, ā, am,%} maimed,
mutilated. {%—Khaṇḍita-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} one whose
manner of life is dissolute, an immoral man. {%—Khaṇ-%}
{%ḍitāśaṃsa (˚ta-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} disappointed, foiled,
frustrated.
<LEND>

<L>16703<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqin<k2>KaRqin
{%Khaṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ consisting of pieces, in pieces
or parts; divided, comminuted; ({%ī%}), m. a wild kind
of kidney-bean, = Vana-mudga; a N. of Harṣa;
({%inī%}), f. the earth.
<LEND>

<L>16704<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqIkf<k2>KaRqIkf
{%Khaṇḍī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to divide or break into small pieces, to cut up,
tear to pieces &c.
<LEND>

<L>16705<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqIra<k2>KaRqIra
{%Khaṇḍīra, as,%}¦ m. a kind of kidney-bean, Pīta-
mudga.
<LEND>

<L>16706<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqu<k2>KaRqu
{%Khaṇḍu = khaṇḍa,%}¦ a kind of sugar (?).
<LEND>

<L>16707<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqerAya<k2>KaRqerAya
{%Khaṇḍerāya, as,%}¦ m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>16708<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRqya<k2>KaRqya
{%Khaṇḍya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be broken or divided,
fragile, destructible, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16709<pc>0273-b<k1>KaRvaKA<k2>KaRvaKA
{#KaRvaKA#}¦ {%khaṇvakhā,%} f. (an onomatopoetic
word), Ved., N. of a frog.
<LEND>

<L>16710<pc>0273-b<k1>KatamAla<k2>KatamAla
{#KatamAla#}¦ {%kha-tamāla,%} &c. See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16711<pc>0273-b<k1>Katta<k2>Katta
{#Katta#}¦ {%khatta, as,%} m., N. of an astronomer.
<LEND>

<L>16712<pc>0273-b<k1>Kad<k2>Kad
{#Kad#}¦ {%khad,%} cl. 1. P. {%khadati, cakhāda,%}
{%akhadīt%} and {%akhādīt,%} &c., to be steady
or firm, to strike, hurt, kill; to eat (?); [cf. Lat.
<nsi>clades.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16713<pc>0273-b<k1>Kadira<k2>Kadira
{%Khadira, as,%}¦ m. the tree Acacia Catechu, having
very hard wood, the resin of which is used in medi-
cine, called Catechu, Khayar, Terra Japonica; an
epithet of Indra; the moon; N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f.
a sensitive plant, Mimosa Pudica; (sometimes also
[Page0273-c+ 77]
{%khadirā.%}) {%—Khadira-kuṇa, as,%} m. the fruit time
of the Khadira tree. {%—Khadira-pattrikā%} or {%kha-%}
{%dira-pattrī,%} f. a sensitive plant, a kind of Mimosa
{%(khadirī)%}. {%—Khadira-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of
the wood of Khadira. {%—Khadira-vaṇa, am,%} n. a
Khadira forest. {%—Khadira-vaṇika, as,%} m., N. of a
Buddhist Bhikṣu. {%—Khadira-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
overgrown with Khadira; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a region.
{%—Khadira-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Kha-%}
{%dira-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a scholiast. {%—Khadiro-%}
{%pama (˚ra-up˚), am,%} n. a kind of Mimosa ({%ka-%}
{%dara%}).
<LEND>

<L>16714<pc>0273-c<k1>Kadiraka<k2>Kadiraka
{%Khadiraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>16715<pc>0273-c<k1>KadikA<k2>KadikA
{#KadikA#}¦ {%khadikā, ās,%} f. pl. fried or parched
grain.
<LEND>

<L>16716<pc>0273-c<k1>KadUraka<k2>KadUraka
{#KadUraka#}¦ {%khadūraka, as,%} m., N. of a man;
({%am%}), n. a dwarf.
<LEND>

<L>16717<pc>0273-c<k1>KadUravAsinI<k2>KadUravAsinI
{#KadUravAsinI#}¦ {%kha-dūra-vāsinī,%} &c. See
under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16718<pc>0273-c<k1>Kan<k2>Kan
{#Kan#}¦ {%khan,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%khanati, -te, ca-%}
{%khāna, cakhne, khaniṣyati, -te, akhā-%}
{%nīt%} and {%akhanīt, akhaniṣṭa, khanitum,%} to dig,
dig up, delve, to turn up the soil, excavate, root up;
to dig into the earth, bury: Caus. {%khānayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to dig or dig up: Desid. {%cikhaniṣati,%}
{%-te:%} Intens. {%caṅkhanyate, cākhāyate, caṅkhanti;%}
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χαίνω, χανῶ;</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>ginêm, ginôm;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>gähne;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>cina, cinan;</nsi> Lat.
<nsi>cuniculus, canalis.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>16719<pc>0273-c<k1>Kana<k2>Kana
{%Khana, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. digging; rooting up.
<LEND>

<L>16720<pc>0273-c<k1>Kanaka<k2>Kanaka
{%Khanaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ digging, digging up, dividing;
a digger, excavator; ({%as%}), m. a miner; a house-
breaker, a thief; a rat; N. of a friend of Vidura.
<LEND>

<L>16721<pc>0273-c<k1>Kanat<k2>Kanat
{%Khanat, an, antī, at,%}¦ digging, digging up, ex-
cavating.
<LEND>

<L>16722<pc>0273-c<k1>Kanana<k2>Kanana
{%Khanana, am,%}¦ n. the act of digging, excavating;
digging into the earth, burying.
<LEND>

<L>16723<pc>0273-c<k1>KananIya<k2>KananIya
{%Khananīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be digged, to be ex-
cavated.
<LEND>

<L>16724<pc>0273-c<k1>Kani<k2>Kani
{%Khani, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. digging or rooting up; ({%is%}
or {%ī%}), f. a mine, especially of precious stones; a
quarry, a cave. {%—Khani-netra%} or {%khanī-netra, as,%}
m., N. of a prince with the epithet Karandhama.
<LEND>

<L>16725<pc>0273-c<k1>Kanitf<k2>Kanitf
{%Khanitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a digger, delver, excavator,
ditcher.
<LEND>

<L>16726<pc>0273-c<k1>Kanitra<k2>Kanitra
{%Khanitra, am,%}¦ n. an instrument for digging, a
spade, shovel, hoe, pickaxe; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>16727<pc>0273-c<k1>Kanitraka<k2>Kanitraka
{%Khanitraka, am,%}¦ n. or {%khanitrikā,%} f. a small
shovel or scoop.
<LEND>

<L>16728<pc>0273-c<k1>Kanitrima<k2>Kanitrima
{%Khanitrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. produced by digging.
<LEND>

<L>16729<pc>0273-c<k1>KanitvA<k2>KanitvA
{%Khanitvā,%}¦ ind. having dug.
<LEND>

<L>16730<pc>0273-c<k1>Kanya<k2>Kanya
{%Khanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be digged or excavated.
<LEND>

<L>16731<pc>0273-c<k1>KAta<k2>KAta
{%Khāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dug, dug up, excavated; torn,
rent; ({%am%}), n. digging a hole; an excavation; a
ditch, fosse, moat, well; a cavern; a square or
oblong pond; ({%ā%}), f. an artificial pond; [cf. {%deva-%}
{%khāta,%} &c.] {%—Khāta-bhū, ūs,%} f. a moat, ditch.
{%—Khāta-rūpa-kāra, as,%} m. a potter.
<LEND>

<L>16732<pc>0273-c<k1>KAtaka<k2>KAtaka
{%Khātaka, as,%}¦ m. a digger, delver; a debtor [cf.
{%khādaka%}]; ({%ikā%}), f. a ditch; ({%am%}), n. a moat, ditch.
<LEND>

<L>16733<pc>0273-c<k1>KAti<k2>KAti
{%Khāti, is,%}¦ f. digging, excavating.
<LEND>

<L>16734<pc>0273-c<k1>KAtra<k2>KAtra
{%Khātra, am,%}¦ n. a spade, shovel, hoe; a moat, a
square or oblong pond; a wood; a thread; horror.
<LEND>

<L>16735<pc>0273-c<k1>KAna<k2>KAna
{%Khāna, as,%}¦ m. digging. {%—Khānodaka (˚na-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the cocoa-nut tree.
<LEND>

<L>16736<pc>0273-c<k1>KAnaka<k2>KAnaka
{%Khānaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who digs, a digger.
<LEND>

<L>16737<pc>0273-c<k1>KAni<k2>KAni
{%Khāni, is, ī,%}¦ f. a mine.
<LEND>

<L>16738<pc>0273-c<k1>KAnika<k2>KAnika
{%Khānika, am,%}¦ n. an opening or hole in a wall, a
breach.
<LEND>

<L>16739<pc>0273-c<k1>KAnila<k2>KAnila
{%Khānila, as, ā, am,%}¦ a house-breaker; (sometimes
read {%khānina.%})
<LEND>

<L>16740<pc>0273-c<k1>KAnya<k2>KAnya
{%Khānya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be digged.
<LEND>

<L>16741<pc>0273-c<k1>Keya<k2>Keya
{%Kheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be dug, to be excavated;
({%am%}), n. a ditch, a moat.
<LEND>

<L>16742<pc>0273-c<k1>KanapAna<k2>KanapAna
{#KanapAna#}¦ {%khanapāna, as,%} m., N. of a prince,
a son of Aṅga and father of Divi-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>16743<pc>0273-c<k1>KaparAga<k2>KaparAga
{#KaparAga#}¦ {%kha-parāga.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>
[Page0274-a+ 79]

<L>16744<pc>0274-a<k1>Kapura<k2>Kapura
{#Kapura#}¦ {%kha-pura, as,%} m. (fr. 3. {%kha%} and
{%pura?%}), flatulence; the betel-nut tree, Areca Faufel
or Catechu; the tree Cyperus Pertenuis ({%bhadra-%}
{%mustaka%}); a kind of perfume, {%= vyāla-nakha;%}
{%(am),%} n. a city in the sky, epithet of Hiraṇya-pura,
the city of the Kālakeyas; also N. of the city of
Hariścandra; a water-jar.
<LEND>

<L>16745<pc>0274-a<k1>Kapuzpa<k2>Kapuzpa
{#Kapuzpa#}¦ {%kha-puṣpa,%} &c. See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16746<pc>0274-a<k1>Kamb<k2>Kamb
{#Kamb#}¦ {%khamb,%} cl. 1. P. {%khambati, -bitum,%} to
go or move.
<LEND>

<L>16747<pc>0274-a<k1>Kara<k2>Kara
{#Kara#}¦ {%khara, as, ā, am,%} hard, harsh, rough;
sharp, pungent, acid (opposed to {%mṛdu%} and {%śla-%}
{%kṣṇa%}); solid (opposed to {%drava,%} fluid); dense (as
clouds); sharp, hot (as wind); hurtful, injurious;
cutting (as a speech or word); sharp-edged; cruel;
({%as%}), m. a donkey, an ass, a mule; N. of several
birds; an osprey, a heron, a crow; a thorny plant,
a sort of prickly nightshade; a quadrangular mound
of earth for receiving the sacrificial vessels; a Daitya
or demon in general; epithet of the Asura Dhenuka;
N. of a Rakṣas slain by Rāma, a younger brother
of Rāvaṇa: N. of an attendant of the Sun (= Dhar-
ma); N. of an attendant of Śiva; N. of a Rudra;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of grass, Andropogon Serratus; ({%ī%}), f.
a she-ass. {%—Khara-kāṣṭhikā,%} f. the plant Sida
Cordifolia {%(balā)%}. {%—Khara-kuṭī,%} f. a stable for
asses, a donkey-stall (used as an abusive epithet); a
barber's shop. {%—Khara-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a
Rakṣas. {%—Khara-koṇa%} or {%khara-kvāṇa, as,%} m.
the francoline partridge. {%—Khara-komala, as,%} m.
the month Jyeṣṭha (‘bracing yet mild’). {%—Khara-%}
{%gandha-nibhā%} or {%khara-gandhā,%} f. the plant
Hedysarum Lagopodioides, {%= nāga-balā%}. {%—Khara-%}
{%gṛha%} or {%khara-geha, am,%} n. or {%khara-graha, as,%}
m. a stable for asses. {%—Khara-ghātana, as,%} m. the
tree Mesua Ferrea, commonly Nageśar. {%—Khara-%}
{%cchada, as,%} m., N. of several plants, a kind of
reed or grass, Saccharum Cylindricum; another kind,
commonly Okera; [cf. {%ulūka, itkaṭa, kundara.%}]
{%—Khara-jru, us, us, u,%} Ved. sharp or quick in
motion. {%—Khara-ṇas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%khara-ṇasa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} sharp-nosed; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
{%—Khara-tara, as, ā, am,%} more sharp, very sharp.
{%—Khara-tvac, k,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= alambuṣā.%}
{%—Khara-daṇḍa, am,%} n. a lotus, Nymphæa Lotus.
{%—Khara-dalā,%} f. opposite-leaved fig tree, Ficus
Oppositifolia; [cf. {%udumbara.%}] {%—Khara-dūṣaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. the thorn-apple, Datura Metel. {%—Khara-%}
{%dhāra, as, ā, am,%} having a harsh edge or one full
of notches like that of a saw. {%—Khara-dhvaṃsin, ī,%}
m. destroyer of the demon Khara, an epithet of
Rāma. {%—Khara-nakhara, as,%} m., N. of a lion.
{%—Khara-narāya, as,%} m., N. of a son of Śatānanda.
{%—Khara-nāda, as,%} m. the braying of an ass.
{%—Khara-nādin, ī, inī, i,%} braying like an ass; ({%ī%}),
m., N. of a man; also of a Ṛṣi; ({%inī%}), f. a kind
of perfume, {%= reṇukā%} (‘causing a donkey to bray?’).
{%—Khara-nāla, am,%} n. a lotus. {%—Khara-pa, as,%}
m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of
this man. {%—Khara-pattra, as,%} m., N. of several
plants, a kind of Ocimum ({%tulasī%}) and Tectona
Grandis; a kind of cane; also {%= haridgarbha%} and
{%maruvaka%} (a kind of Ocimum); ({%ī%}), f., N. of two
plants, Elephantopus Scaber ({%gojihvā%}) and Ficus
Oppositifolia {%(kākodumbarikā)%}. {%—Khara-pattra-%}
{%ka, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= tilaka — Khara-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. an iron pot or vessel. {%—Khara-pādāḍhya%}
{%(˚da-āḍh˚), as,%} m. the elephant or wood-apple,
Feronia Elephantum; [cf. {%kapittha.%}] {%—Khara-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m. a wooden vessel; [cf. {%khara-pātra.%}]
{%—Khara-puṣpa, as,%} m. a plant, commonly
Marüa, a kind of Ocimum, see {%maruvaka;%} ({%ā%} or
{%ikā%}), f. a kind of Tulasi, Ocimum Gratissimum;
also Varvara. {%—Khara-priya, as,%} m. a pigeon.
{%—Khara-majra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one whose
strength is very intense. {%—Khara-mañjari, is%} or {%ī,%}
f. the plant Achyranthes Aspera; [cf. {%apāmārga.%}]
{%—Khara-yāna, am,%} n. a donkey-cart, any vehicle
drawn by asses. {%—Khara-raśmi, is,%} m. the sun.
[Page0274-b+ 76]
{%—Khara-roman%} or {%khara-loman, ā,%} m., N. of one
of the chiefs of the Nāga or serpent-race inhabiting
hell. {%—Khara-vallikā,%} f., N. of a plant, commonly
Gorakṣa Chākuliya, Hedysarum Lagopodioides;
[cf. {%nāga-balā.%}] {%—Khara-śabda, as,%} m. an osprey;
the braying of an ass. {%—Khara-śāka, as,%} m. the plant
Clerodendrum Siphonanthus, {%= bhārgī%}. {%—Khara-%}
{%śāla, as, ā, am,%} born or produced in a donkey-stall;
({%ā%}), f. a donkey-stable or stall. {%—Khara-soni, is,%} m.
or {%khara-sonda, as,%} m. or {%khara-solla, as,%} m. an
iron vessel. {%—Khara-skandha, as,%} m., N. of a tree,
{%= priyāla; (ā),%} f. Phœnix Sylvestris, {%= kharjūrī.%}
{%—Khara-svarā,%} f. wild jasmine, {%= vana-mal-%}
{%likā%}. {%—Kharāṃśu (˚ra-aṃ˚), us,%} m. the sun.
{%—Kharā-garī,%} f. a kind of grass, Andropogon
Serratus. {%—Kharāṇḍaka (˚ra-aṇ˚), as,%} m., N. of
one of Śiva's attendants. {%—Kharābdāṅkuraka%}
{%(˚ra-abda-aṅ˚), am,%} n. lapis lazuli. {%—Kharāśvā%}
{%(˚ra-aś˚ ?),%} f. the plant Colosia Cristata, commonly
{%vanayamānī, = aja-gandhā, aja-modā, karavī.%}
{%—Kharāhvā (˚ra-āh˚),%} f., N. of a plant, {%= aja-%}
{%modā%}. {%—Kharin-dhama%} or {%kharin-dhaya, as, ā,%}
{%am (kharin = kharim%} for {%kharīm%}), drinking ass's
milk. {%—Kharī-jaṅgha, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the descendants of this man. {%—Kharī-vṛṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. a jackass.
<LEND>

<L>16748<pc>0274-b<k1>KarikA<k2>KarikA
{%Kharikā,%}¦ f. powdered musk.
<LEND>

<L>16749<pc>0274-b<k1>KarawaKarawAkf<k2>KarawaKarawAkf
{#KarawaKarawAkf#}¦ {%kharaṭa-kharaṭā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
{%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make the sound {%kharaṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>16750<pc>0274-b<k1>KarAlika<k2>KarAlika
{#KarAlika#}¦ {%kharālika, as,%} m. a barber ({%grā-%}
{%maṇī%}); a razor-case; an iron arrow (in this sense
also {%kharālaka%}); a pillow.
<LEND>

<L>16751<pc>0274-b<k1>Karu<k2>Karu
{#Karu#}¦ {%kharu, us, us%} or {%ūs, u%} (said to be fr.
rt. {%khan%}), white; foolish, idiotic, a fool; harsh,
cruel; desirous of improper or prohibited things;
({%us%}), m. a tooth; a horse; pride; love or Kāma,
the deity of love; an epithet of Śiva; ({%us%}), f. a girl
who chooses her own husband.
<LEND>

<L>16752<pc>0274-b<k1>Karosti<k2>Karosti
{#Karosti#}¦ {%kharosti, is,%} m. f. (?), N. of a place;
(a various reading has {%kharoṣṭī.%})
<LEND>

<L>16753<pc>0274-b<k1>KarKoda<k2>KarKoda
{#KarKoda#}¦ {%kharkhoda, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a kind of magic. {%—Kharkhoda-vedin, ī, inī, i,%}
skilled in the Kharkhoda art, a conjurer (?).
<LEND>

<L>16754<pc>0274-b<k1>Karj<k2>Karj
{#Karj#}¦ {%kharj,%} cl. 1. P. {%kharjati, cakharja,%}
{%kharjitum,%} to creak (like a carriage-
wheel); to worship, to treat with respect or courtesy;
to pain, make uneasy; to cleanse, make clean; [cf.
Hib. <nsi>cairtim</nsi> or <nsi>cartaim,</nsi> ‘to cleanse.’]
<LEND>

<L>16755<pc>0274-b<k1>KargalA<k2>KargalA
{%Khargalā,%}¦ f., Ved. an owl or any similar night-bird.
<LEND>

<L>16756<pc>0274-b<k1>KarjikA<k2>KarjikA
{%Kharjikā,%}¦ f. a relish, anything to provoke drink-
ing; [cf. {%kharju%} and {%kharjūra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16757<pc>0274-b<k1>Karju<k2>Karju
{%Kharju, us%}¦ or {%ūs,%} f. scratching, itching, itch,
scab, cutaneous eruption; a worm, a kind of insect;
the wild datura tree. {%—Kharjū-ghna, as,%} m., N. of
several plants, the thorn-apple; Calotropis Gigantea,
Cassia Alata or Tora, {%= cakra-marda.%}
<LEND>

<L>16758<pc>0274-b<k1>Karjura<k2>Karjura
{%Kharjura, am,%}¦ n. silver; [cf. {%kharjūra.%}] {%—Khar-%}
{%jura-karṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>16759<pc>0274-b<k1>KarjUra<k2>KarjUra
{%Kharjūra, as,%}¦ m. the tree Phœnix Sylvestris, the
date tree; a scorpion; N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f. the tree
Phœnix Sylvestris; the wild date tree; ({%am%}), n. the
fruit of the tree Phœnix Sylvestris; silver; yellow
orpiment; (also {%khala.%}) {%—Kharjūra-rasa, as,%} m.
the juice or extract of the wild date or Tāḍi, used
to leaven bread, and as an intoxicating liquor.
<LEND>

<L>16760<pc>0274-b<k1>KarjUraka<k2>KarjUraka
{%Kharjūraka, as,%}¦ m. a scorpion.
<LEND>

<L>16761<pc>0274-b<k1>Kard<k2>Kard
{#Kard#}¦ {%khard,%} cl. 1. P. {%khardati,%} &c., to bite,
to sting, to sting venomously.
<LEND>

<L>16762<pc>0274-b<k1>Karpara<k2>Karpara
{#Karpara#}¦ {%kharpara, as,%} m. a thief; a rogue, a
cheat; the skull; the half of a skull; a beggar's bowl
or dish; an umbrella or parasol; ({%ī, am%}), f. n. a kind
of collyrium or application to the eyes. See {%karpara.%}
<LEND>

<L>16763<pc>0274-b<k1>KarparikA<k2>KarparikA
{%Kharparikā,%}¦ f. or {%kharparītuttha, am,%} n. or
{%kharparīrasaka, am,%} n. a kind of collyrium.
<LEND>

<L>16764<pc>0274-b<k1>KarparAla<k2>KarparAla
{#KarparAla#}¦ {%kharparāla, as,%} m., N. of a plant.
See {%kandarāla.%}
<LEND>
[Page0274-c+ 76]

<L>16765<pc>0274-c<k1>Karb<k2>Karb
{#Karb#}¦ {%kharb,%} cl. 1. P. {%kharbati,%} &c., to go,
move; to go towards; [cf. Old Germ.
<nsi>hwarb, hwarp, hwirbu,</nsi> &c.; Goth. <nsi>bi-hvairba,</nsi>
‘to go round.’]
<LEND>

<L>16766<pc>0274-c<k1>Karma<k2>Karma
{#Karma#}¦ {%kharma, am,%} n. virility, manliness;
wove silk.
<LEND>

<L>16767<pc>0274-c<k1>Karv<k2>Karv
{#Karv#}¦ {%kharv,%} cl. 1. P. {%kharvati,%} &c., to be
proud or haughty; [cf. {%garv.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16768<pc>0274-c<k1>Karva<k2>Karva
{#Karva#}¦ {%kharva%} or {%kharba, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%kharb ?%}), mutilated, maimed, crippled, injured, im-
perfect; pressed down, low, dwarfish, short, little in
size or stature; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the nine
Nidhis or treasures of Kuvera; the plant Trapa
Bispinosa [cf. {%kubjaka%}]; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a large
number, either 10,000,000,000, or 37 cyphers pre-
ceded by 1. {%—Kharva-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} being or
abiding in any mutilated object. {%—Kharva-śākha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} dwarfish, small, short.
<LEND>

<L>16769<pc>0274-c<k1>Karvaka<k2>Karvaka
{%Kharvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ Ved. mutilated, im-
perfect, not full (as the moon).
<LEND>

<L>16770<pc>0274-c<k1>Karvawa<k2>Karvawa
{#Karvawa#}¦ {%kharvaṭa, as, am,%} m. n. the capital
of a district of four hundred villages, a market or
country town; a village at the foot of a mountain;
(a various reading for {%karvaṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>16771<pc>0274-c<k1>KarvurA<k2>KarvurA
{#KarvurA#}¦ {%kharvurā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= taradī.%}
<LEND>

<L>16772<pc>0274-c<k1>KarvUja<k2>KarvUja
{#KarvUja#}¦ {%kharvūja, am,%} n. the water-melon
(fr. the Pers. <lang n="arabic">خربوزه</lang> <nsi>kharbūza</nsi>).
<LEND>

<L>16773<pc>0274-c<k1>Kal<k2>Kal
{#Kal#}¦ {%khal,%} cl. 1. P. {%khalati, cakhāla,%} &c.,
to move, shake; to gather.
<LEND>

<L>16774<pc>0274-c<k1>Kala<k2>Kala
{#Kala#}¦ {%khala, as, am,%} m. n. a threshing-floor,
a granary; earth, mould, or soil; place, site; sedi-
ment, dregs, the deposit of oil &c.; a mill; contest,
battle; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a wicked or mischievous
person; low, base, inferior, cruel, mischief-making;
({%as%}), m. the sun; the plant Xanthochymus Pictorius,
see {%tamāla;%} the datura plant, thorn-apple; ({%ā%}), f.
N. of a daughter of Raudrāśva. {%—Khala-kula, as,%}
m. {%= kulattha,%} Dolichos Uniflorus. {%—Khala-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. produced on a threshing-floor. {%—Khala-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%khala-tva, am,%} n. wickedness, villainy; filthi-
ness. {%—Khala-dhānya, am,%} n. a threshing-floor;
(also {%khaladhāna, khaledhānya, khalādhāna.%})
{%—Khala-pū, ūs, ūs,%} m. f. a sweeper, a cleaner, a
Mehter or Ferash (originally ‘one who cleans a
threshing-floor’). {%—Khala-prīti, is,%} f. the friend-
ship or favour of wicked or low persons. {%—Khala-%}
{%mūrti, is,%} m. quicksilver. {%—Khala-saṃsarga, as,%}
m. associating with bad company. {%—Khalādhārā%}
{%(˚la-ādh˚),%} f. a kind of cockroach. {%—Khale-dhānī%}
or {%khale-bālī,%} f. the post of a threshing-floor round
which the oxen pass which tread out the grain.
{%—Khale-busam,%} ind. at the time when the chaff
is on the threshing-floor, at the threshing-time.
{%—Khale-yavam,%} ind. at the time when barley is
on the threshing-floor, at the barley threshing-time.
{%—Khale-vālī,%} f. the post of a threshing-floor; [cf.
{%khale-dhānī.%}] {%—Khalokti (˚la-uk˚), is,%} f. abuse,
low or wicked language.
<LEND>

<L>16775<pc>0274-c<k1>Kali<k2>Kali
{%Khali, is,%}¦ m. sediment of oil or oil-cake.
<LEND>

<L>16776<pc>0274-c<k1>Kalin<k2>Kalin
{%Khalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having sediment &c.; ({%ī%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva; ({%inas%}), m. pl., N. of a class of Dāna-
vas; ({%inī%}), f. a multitude of threshing-floors; the plant
Anthericum Tuberosum, {%= tāla-parṇī, = tāla-mūlī.%}
<LEND>

<L>16777<pc>0274-c<k1>Kalina<k2>Kalina
{%Khalina, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered with sediment,
covered with oil-dregs (?); ({%as, am%}), m. n. the bit
of a bridle; see {%khalīna;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χαλινός.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>16778<pc>0274-c<k1>KalIkf<k2>KalIkf
{%Khalī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to reduce to sediment, to crush; to hurt, injure; to
treat badly, scorn. {%—Khalī-kāra, as,%} m. or {%khalī-%}
{%kṛti, is,%} f. reducing to sediment; hurting, injuring;
mischief, evil.
<LEND>

<L>16779<pc>0274-c<k1>KalIna<k2>KalIna
{%Khalīna, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the bit of a bridle.
<LEND>

<L>16780<pc>0274-c<k1>Kalya<k2>Kalya
{%Khalya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being on a threshing-floor, fit
for one; fit for oil-cake &c.; ({%ā%}), f. a multitude of
threshing-floors; N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>16781<pc>0274-c<k1>KalyakA<k2>KalyakA
{%Khalyakā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>
[Page0275-a+ 68]

<L>16782<pc>0275-a<k1>Kalati<k2>Kalati
{#Kalati#}¦ {%khalati, is, is%} or {%ī, i%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%khal%}), bald-headed, bald; [cf. {%kulva, khalliṭa,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>16783<pc>0275-a<k1>Kalatika<k2>Kalatika
{%Khalatika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a mountain; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of the forest situated near this mountain.
<LEND>

<L>16784<pc>0275-a<k1>KaliSa<k2>KaliSa
{#KaliSa#}¦ {%khaliśa, as, ā,%} m. f. a kind of fish,
Trichopodus Colisa; or {%= kaṅkatroṭa,%} Esox Kau-
kila; [cf. {%khalliśa, khaleśa,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>16785<pc>0275-a<k1>Kalu<k2>Kalu
{#Kalu#}¦ {%khalu,%} ind. (as a particle of assevera-
tion or affirmation), indeed, verily, certainly, truly,
yes; (as a continuative particle), now, now then, now
further; (as a particle employed in syllogistic forms
of speech), but now, = the Latin <nsi>atqui.</nsi> It occurs
only once in the Ṛg-veda; oftener in the Brāhmaṇas
and Buddhist compositions, especially when combined
with other particles, thus {%atha khalu, u khalu,%}
{%vai khalu,%} and {%khalu vai,%} = now then, now further.
In later Sanskrit {%khalu%} frequently does little more
than lay stress on the word by which it is preceded,
and is sometimes merely an expletive. According
to native lexicographers {%khalu%} is also a particle of
prohibition, endearment, conciliation, and inquiry.
{%Na khalu,%} by no means, not at all, indeed not.
<LEND>

<L>16786<pc>0275-a<k1>Kaluj<k2>Kaluj
{#Kaluj#}¦ {%kha-luj, k,%} m. (instead of {%kha-luk%}
fr. {%luñc?%}), darkness.
<LEND>

<L>16787<pc>0275-a<k1>Kalureza<k2>Kalureza
{#Kalureza#}¦ {%khalureṣa%} or {%khalureṣaka, as,%} m.
a kind of wild quadruped.
<LEND>

<L>16788<pc>0275-a<k1>KalUrikA<k2>KalUrikA
{#KalUrikA#}¦ {%khalūrikā,%} f. a parade, a place
for military exercise; [cf. {%khuralī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16789<pc>0275-a<k1>KaleSa<k2>KaleSa
{#KaleSa#}¦ {%khaleśa%} or {%khaleśaya, as,%} m. a kind
of fish, commonly Trichopodus Colisa; [cf. {%khaliśa%}
and {%khaśeṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16790<pc>0275-a<k1>Kall<k2>Kall
{#Kall#}¦ {%khall,%} cl. 1. A. {%khallate,%} &c., to
shake, be loose; [cf. {%khal.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16791<pc>0275-a<k1>Kalla<k2>Kalla
{#Kalla#}¦ {%khalla, as,%} m. a little case or cap
formed by rolling up paper &c. (used for holding
any small articles of grocery &c.); a mill, a stone or
vessel for grinding drugs; a kind of cloth or clothes;
leather, leather garments; a leather water-bag; a
canal, a cut, a creek, a trench, a deep hole; the
Cātaka, a kind of cuckoo; ({%ī%}), f. shooting pain in
the extremities.
<LEND>

<L>16792<pc>0275-a<k1>KallAtaka<k2>KallAtaka
{#KallAtaka#}¦ {%khallātaka, as,%} m., N. of the first
minister of king Bindusāra.
<LEND>

<L>16793<pc>0275-a<k1>KallAsara<k2>KallAsara
{#KallAsara#}¦ {%khallāsara, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
the tenth Yoga in astronomy.
<LEND>

<L>16794<pc>0275-a<k1>KallikA<k2>KallikA
{#KallikA#}¦ {%khallikā,%} f. a frying-pan.
<LEND>

<L>16795<pc>0275-a<k1>Kalliwa<k2>Kalliwa
{#Kalliwa#}¦ {%khalliṭa%} or {%khallīṭa, as, ā, am,%} bald-
headed, becoming morbidly bald; [cf. {%khalati.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16796<pc>0275-a<k1>KalliSa<k2>KalliSa
{#KalliSa#}¦ {%khalliśa, as,%} m. another form for
{%khaliśa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16797<pc>0275-a<k1>Kalva<k2>Kalva
{#Kalva#}¦ {%khalva, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of grain
or leguminous plant.
<LEND>

<L>16798<pc>0275-a<k1>Kalvawa<k2>Kalvawa
{#Kalvawa#}¦ {%khalvaṭa, as,%} m. a severe cough (?).
<LEND>

<L>16799<pc>0275-a<k1>Kalvala<k2>Kalvala
{#Kalvala#}¦ {%khalvala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>16800<pc>0275-a<k1>KalvAwa<k2>KalvAwa
{#KalvAwa#}¦ {%khalvāṭa, as, ā, am,%} bald, bald-
headed; [cf. {%khalati.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16801<pc>0275-a<k1>Kav<k2>Kav
{#Kav#}¦ {%khav,%} cl. 9. P. {%khaunāti%} or {%khunāti,%}
{%cakhāva,%} &c., to cause prosperity, produce
wealth, to purify; (another form for {%khac.%})
<LEND>

<L>16802<pc>0275-a<k1>KavallI<k2>KavallI
{#KavallI#}¦ {%kha-vallī,%} &c. See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16803<pc>0275-a<k1>KaSa<k2>KaSa
{#KaSa#}¦ {%khaśa, as,%} m. a mountainous country
in the north of India; a native of that country con-
sidered as a degraded Kṣatriya; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
daughter of Dakṣa, one of the wives of Kaśyapa,
the mother of the Yakṣas and Rakṣasas; a kind of
perfume, {%= murā.%} (The word is sometimes spelt
{%khasa.%}) {%—Khasātmaja (˚sā-āt˚), as,%} m. a Rakṣas.
<LEND>

<L>16804<pc>0275-a<k1>KaSaya<k2>KaSaya
{#KaSaya#}¦ {%kha-śaya.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>
[Page0275-b+ 66]

<L>16805<pc>0275-b<k1>KaSIra<k2>KaSIra
{#KaSIra#}¦ {%khaśīra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
[cf. {%khāsīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16806<pc>0275-b<k1>KaSewa<k2>KaSewa
{#KaSewa#}¦ {%khaśeṭa, as,%} m. the Khaliśa, a kind
of fish; [cf. {%khaleśa%} and {%khaliśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16807<pc>0275-b<k1>KaSvAsa<k2>KaSvAsa
{#KaSvAsa#}¦ {%kha-śvāsa.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16808<pc>0275-b<k1>Kaz<k2>Kaz
{#Kaz#}¦ {%khaṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%khaṣati,%} to hurt,
injure, kill; [cf. {%kaṣ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16809<pc>0275-b<k1>Kazpa<k2>Kazpa
{#Kazpa#}¦ {%khaṣpa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%khan%}), violence, oppression; anger, passion.
<LEND>

<L>16810<pc>0275-b<k1>Kasa<k2>Kasa
{#Kasa#}¦ {%khasa, as,%} m. itch, scab, or any similar
disease of the skin; [cf. also {%khaśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16811<pc>0275-b<k1>Kasakanda<k2>Kasakanda
{#Kasakanda#}¦ {%khasakanda%} or {%khasagandha, as,%}
m., N. of a plant, commonly called {%kṣīra-kañcukī.%}
<LEND>

<L>16812<pc>0275-b<k1>Kasatila<k2>Kasatila
{#Kasatila#}¦ {%khasatila, as,%} m. ({%kha-sa-tila?%}),
poppy ({%khaskhasa%}).
<LEND>

<L>16813<pc>0275-b<k1>Kasama<k2>Kasama
{#Kasama#}¦ {%kha-sama,%} &c. See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16814<pc>0275-b<k1>KasAka<k2>KasAka
{#KasAka#}¦ {%khasāka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(a various reading for {%khaśīra.%})
<LEND>

<L>16815<pc>0275-b<k1>KasAtmaja<k2>KasAtmaja
{#KasAtmaja#}¦ {%khasātmaja.%} See under {%khaśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>16816<pc>0275-b<k1>KasinDu<k2>KasinDu
{#KasinDu#}¦ {%kha-sindhu.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16817<pc>0275-b<k1>KasIka<k2>KasIka
{#KasIka#}¦ {%khasīka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people,
{%= khasāka.%}
<LEND>

<L>16818<pc>0275-b<k1>KasUci<k2>KasUci
{#KasUci#}¦ {%khasūci,%} an expression of reproach
at the end of a compound, e. g. {%vaiyākaraṇa-%}
{%khasūci,%} one who has forgotten the grammar; (fr.
{%kha%} and {%sūci?,%} ‘one who pierces a needle into the
air?’).
<LEND>

<L>16819<pc>0275-b<k1>Kasfma<k2>Kasfma
{#Kasfma#}¦ {%khasṛma, as,%} m., N. of a Daitya,
son of Vipracitti and Siṃhikā.
<LEND>

<L>16820<pc>0275-b<k1>KasKasa<k2>KasKasa
{#KasKasa#}¦ {%khaskhasa, as,%} m. poppy. {%—Kha-%}
{%skhasa-rasa, as,%} m. poppy-juice, opium.
<LEND>

<L>16821<pc>0275-b<k1>KastanI<k2>KastanI
{#KastanI#}¦ {%kha-stanī.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16822<pc>0275-b<k1>KA<k2>KA
{#KA#}¦ {%khā,%} (at the end of some compounds)
digging [f. {%kūpa-khā%} and {%visa-khā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16823<pc>0275-b<k1>KAgi<k2>KAgi
{#KAgi#}¦ {%khāgi, is,%} m. f. (?), N. of an Agra-
hāra.
<LEND>

<L>16824<pc>0275-b<k1>KAjika<k2>KAjika
{#KAjika#}¦ {%khājika, as,%} m. fried or parched
grain; [cf. {%khadikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16825<pc>0275-b<k1>KAw<k2>KAw
{#KAw#}¦ {%khāṭ,%} ind. (an onomatopoetic word),
the sound made in clearing the throat; [cf. {%khāt.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16826<pc>0275-b<k1>KAwa<k2>KAwa
{#KAwa#}¦ {%khāṭa, as, ā,%} m. f. a bier, a cot or
bedstead on which dead bodies are conveyed to the
pile; [cf. {%khaṭṭi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16827<pc>0275-b<k1>KAwi<k2>KAwi
{%Khāṭi, is,%}¦ f. a bier; a scar; caprice, whim.
<LEND>

<L>16828<pc>0275-b<k1>KAwikA<k2>KAwikA
{%Khāṭikā,%}¦ f. a bier; [cf. {%khaṭṭikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16829<pc>0275-b<k1>KAwvABArika<k2>KAwvABArika
{#KAwvABArika#}¦ {%khāṭvābhārika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%khaṭvā-bhāra%}), or {%khāṭvika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%khaṭvā%}),
laden with bedsteads.
<LEND>

<L>16830<pc>0275-b<k1>KAqAyana<k2>KAqAyana
{#KAqAyana#}¦ {%khāḍāyana, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Khaḍa. {%—Khāḍāyana-bhakta, am,%} n. the
district inhabited by the Khāḍāyanas.
<LEND>

<L>16831<pc>0275-b<k1>KAqAyanin<k2>KAqAyanin
{%Khāḍāyanin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the followers of Khāḍā-
yana.
<LEND>

<L>16832<pc>0275-b<k1>KAqga<k2>KAqga
{#KAqga#}¦ {%khāḍga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%khaḍga%}), be-
longing to a rhinoceros (as armour made of
rhinoceros hide).
<LEND>

<L>16833<pc>0275-b<k1>KARqa<k2>KARqa
{#KARqa#}¦ {%khāṇḍa, am,%} n. (fr. {%khaṇḍa%}), the
state of having fractures, fissures, or gaps.
<LEND>

<L>16834<pc>0275-b<k1>KARqava<k2>KARqava
{%Khāṇḍava, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%khaṇḍu%}), sugar-candy,
sugar-plums, sweetmeats; N. of a region; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of a forest in Kuru-kṣetra, sacred to Indra and
burnt by the god of fire, Agni, with the assistance
of Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa (see Mahā-bh. I. 8207).
{%—Khāṇḍava-prastha, as,%} m., N. of a town
situated in the Khāṇḍava forest, founded by the
Pāṇḍavas, {%= indra-prastha.%}
<LEND>
[Page0275-c+ 74]

<L>16835<pc>0275-c<k1>KARqavAyana<k2>KARqavAyana
{%Khāṇḍavāyana, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a family of
Brāhmans.
<LEND>

<L>16836<pc>0275-c<k1>KARqavika<k2>KARqavika
{%Khāṇḍavika, as,%}¦ m. a confectioner; sugar-baker.
<LEND>

<L>16837<pc>0275-c<k1>KARqika<k2>KARqika
{%Khāṇḍika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%khaṇḍa%}), a confectioner,
a seller of sugar-plums or sweetmeats; ({%am%}), n. a
mass or multitude of peas (fr. {%khaṇḍika%}).
<LEND>

<L>16838<pc>0275-c<k1>KARqikIya<k2>KARqikIya
{%Khāṇḍikīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the followers of Khaṇḍika.
<LEND>

<L>16839<pc>0275-c<k1>KARqikya<k2>KARqikya
{%Khāṇḍikya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Amita-dhvaja
or Mita-dhvaja; ({%am%}), n. the business of a con-
fectioner (?).
<LEND>

<L>16840<pc>0275-c<k1>KAt<k2>KAt
{#KAt#}¦ {%khāt,%} ind. (an onomatopoetic word),
the sound made in clearing the throat; [cf. {%khāṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16841<pc>0275-c<k1>KAta<k2>KAta
{#KAta#}¦ {%khāta, khāti, khātra.%} See rt. {%khan.%}
<LEND>

<L>16842<pc>0275-c<k1>KAtman<k2>KAtman
{#KAtman#}¦ {%khātman.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16843<pc>0275-c<k1>KAd<k2>KAd
{#KAd#}¦ {%khād,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%khādati,%}
{%cakhāda, khādiṣyati, akhādīt, khā-%}
{%ditum,%} to chew, bite, eat, devour, feed, prey upon;
to hurt: Caus. {%khādayati, -yitum,%} to cause or make
to eat or devour; to eat: Desid. {%cikhādiṣati:%}
Intens. {%cākhādyate, cākhātti;%} [cf. Scot. <nsi>cuid,</nsi>
‘food;’ Hib. <nsi>caithim,</nsi> ‘to eat.’]
<LEND>

<L>16844<pc>0275-c<k1>KAda<k2>KAda
{%Khāda, as, ā, am,%}¦ eating, devouring, (at the end
of compounds, e. g. {%amitra-khāda, vṛtra-khāda,%}
q. v.); ({%as%}), m. chewing, eating; food.
<LEND>

<L>16845<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdaka<k2>KAdaka
{%Khādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ eating, consuming, de-
vouring; an eater; a debtor; a borrower, one who
borrows or uses; [cf. {%khātaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16846<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdatamodatA<k2>KAdatamodatA
{%Khādata-modatā,%}¦ f. (fr. the two impv. {%khādata%}
and {%modata%}), continual eating and being glad.
{%—Khādata-vāmatā,%} f. (fr. the two impv. {%khādata%}
and {%vāmata%}), continual eating and vomiting. {%—Khā-%}
{%datā-camatā%} or {%khādatā-cāmatā,%} f. continual eat-
ing and washing the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>16847<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdana<k2>KAdana
{%Khādana, as,%}¦ m. a tooth; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a wife
of king Megha-vāhana; ({%am%}), n. chewing, eating;
food, victuals.
<LEND>

<L>16848<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdanIya<k2>KAdanIya
{%Khādanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ eatable, edible, to be eaten.
<LEND>

<L>16849<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdita<k2>KAdita
{%Khādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ eaten, devoured. {%—Khādita-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having eaten, eating, feeding.
<LEND>

<L>16850<pc>0275-c<k1>KAditavya<k2>KAditavya
{%Khāditavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten, what may
be or must be eaten.
<LEND>

<L>16851<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdin<k2>KAdin<h>1
1. {%khādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ eating. (For 2. see under
{%khādi.%})
<LEND>

<L>16852<pc>0275-c<k1>KAduka<k2>KAduka
{%Khāduka, as, ī, am,%}¦ mischievous, injurious, ma-
lignant.
<LEND>

<L>16853<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdya<k2>KAdya
{%Khādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ eatable, edible, what may or
must be eaten; ({%am%}), n. food, victuals. {%—Khādyā-%}
{%khādhya (˚ya-akh˚), as, ā, am,%} fit or unfit for food.
<LEND>

<L>16854<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdi<k2>KAdi
{#KAdi#}¦ {%khādi, is,%} m., Ved. a brooch, brace-
let, ring (worn on the hands or feet especially by the
Maruts). {%—Khādi-hasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the
hands ornamented with bracelets or rings, epithet of
the Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>16855<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdin<k2>KAdin<h>2
2. {%khādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. decorated with bracelets
or rings (as the Maruts).
<LEND>

<L>16856<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdira<k2>KAdira
{#KAdira#}¦ {%khādira, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%khadira%}),
made of or coming from the tree Acacia Catechu;
({%as%}), m. Catechu extract prepared from the tree
Acacia Catechu. {%—Khādira-gṛhya, am,%} n., N. of a
literary work. {%—Khādira-sāra, as,%} m. Catechu, the
resinous extract of the tree Acacia Catechu.
<LEND>

<L>16857<pc>0275-c<k1>KAdoarRas<k2>KAdoarRas
{#KAdoarRas#}¦ {%khādoarṇas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
tearing away the bank (as a river ?).
<LEND>

<L>16858<pc>0275-c<k1>KADUyA<k2>KADUyA
{#KADUyA#}¦ {%khādhūyā,%} f., N. of an Agra-hāra.
<LEND>

<L>16859<pc>0275-c<k1>KAna<k2>KAna
{#KAna#}¦ {%khāna, khānila, khānya.%} See rt. {%khan.%}
<LEND>

<L>16860<pc>0275-c<k1>KApagA<k2>KApagA
{#KApagA#}¦ {%khāpagā.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16861<pc>0275-c<k1>KAra<k2>KAra
{#KAra#}¦ {%khāra, as,%} or {%khāri, is, ī,%} m. f. a
Khāri, a measure of grain = 16 Droṇas or about
3 bushels; it is also reckoned at 1(1/2) Sūrpa or
3 Droṇas; also at 46 Gauṇīs or 4096 Palas, or at
4 Droṇas; ({%ī%}), f. a scar. {%—Khārim-paca, as, ā, am,%}
cooking a Khāri by measure; (a vessel &c.) in
which a Khāri may be cooked. {%—Khārī-vāpa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} sown with a Khārī of grain (as a field &c.).
<LEND>
[Page0276-a+ 72]

<L>16862<pc>0276-a<k1>KArika<k2>KArika
{%Khārika%}¦ or {%khārīka, as, ā, am,%} equal to or sown
with a Khāri of grain (as a field &c.).
<LEND>

<L>16863<pc>0276-a<k1>KArkAra<k2>KArkAra
{#KArkAra#}¦ {%khār-kāra, as,%} m. ({%khār%} an ono-
matopoetic word and {%kāra%} fr. 1. {%kṛ%}), the braying
of an ass; [cf. {%khara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16864<pc>0276-a<k1>KArgali<k2>KArgali
{#KArgali#}¦ {%khārgali, is,%} m. (fr. {%khargalā%} or
{%khṛgala%}), an epithet of Kapi; (a various reading
has {%khārjali.%})
<LEND>

<L>16865<pc>0276-a<k1>KArjUra<k2>KArjUra
{#KArjUra#}¦ {%khārjūra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%kharjūra%}),
coming from or made of the tree Phœnix Sylvestris.
<LEND>

<L>16866<pc>0276-a<k1>KArvA<k2>KArvA
{#KArvA#}¦ {%khārvā,%} f. (fr. {%kharva%}), the Tretā
or second Yuga of the world.
<LEND>

<L>16867<pc>0276-a<k1>KAlatya<k2>KAlatya
{#KAlatya#}¦ {%khālatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%khalati%}), Ved.,
or {%khālitya, am,%} n. morbid baldness.
<LEND>

<L>16868<pc>0276-a<k1>KAlika<k2>KAlika
{#KAlika#}¦ {%khālika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%khala%}), like
a threshing-floor.
<LEND>

<L>16869<pc>0276-a<k1>KASi<k2>KASi
{#KASi#}¦ {%khāśi, is,%} m., N. of a country to the
east of Bengal; the Cossya hills; (also {%khāśika%}); [cf.
{%khaśa%} and {%khāṣya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16870<pc>0276-a<k1>KASmarI<k2>KASmarI
{#KASmarI#}¦ {%khāśmarī,%} f. a plant, {%= kāśmarī.%}
<LEND>

<L>16871<pc>0276-a<k1>KAzya<k2>KAzya
{#KAzya#}¦ {%khāṣya%} or (according to a various
reading) {%khoṣya, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a
place; [cf. {%khaśa%} or {%khāśi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16872<pc>0276-a<k1>KAsatA<k2>KAsatA
{#KAsatA#}¦ {%khāsatā,%} f., N. of a place in Kāś-
mīra.
<LEND>

<L>16873<pc>0276-a<k1>KAsIra<k2>KAsIra
{#KAsIra#}¦ {%khāsīra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
[cf. {%khaśīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16874<pc>0276-a<k1>KiKi<k2>KiKi
{#KiKi#}¦ {%khikhi, is,%} f. a fox; (a various read-
ing for {%kikhi.%})
<LEND>

<L>16875<pc>0276-a<k1>KiNKira<k2>KiNKira
{#KiNKira#}¦ {%khiṅkhira, as, ī,%} m. f. a fox; ({%as%}),
m. the foot of a bedstead ({%= khaṭvāṅga%}), one of
Śiva's weapons; a kind of perfume, commonly Hāla.
<LEND>

<L>16876<pc>0276-a<k1>Kiw<k2>Kiw
{#Kiw#}¦ {%khiṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%kheṭati,%} &c., to be
terrified or frightened, to fear, dread; to
terrify, scare, startle, alarm, surprise.
<LEND>

<L>16877<pc>0276-a<k1>Kewita<k2>Kewita
{%Kheṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ terrified, scared, startled,
frightened.
<LEND>

<L>16878<pc>0276-a<k1>Kid<k2>Kid
{#Kid#}¦ {%khid,%} cl. 6. P. {%khindati%} (Ved. {%khi-%}
{%dati%}), {%cikheda, akhaitsīt, khetsyati,%}
{%khettum,%} to strike, press, press down; cl. 7. or 4. A.
{%khintte%} or {%khinte%} and {%khidyate,%} to be pressed down
or depressed, to suffer pain or misery, to be distressed,
to be wearied, to feel tired or exhausted: Caus. {%khe-%}
{%dayati, -yitum,%} to press down, molest, disturb, make
tired or exhausted: Desid. {%cikhitsati, -te:%} Intens. {%ce-%}
{%khidyate, cekhetti;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>zeidziu;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κῆδος?</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>16879<pc>0276-a<k1>Kidira<k2>Kidira
{%Khidira, as,%}¦ m. an ascetic, a penitent; a pauper;
the moon; an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>16880<pc>0276-a<k1>KidyamAna<k2>KidyamAna
{%Khidyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being depressed, suffer-
ing pain or distress.
<LEND>

<L>16881<pc>0276-a<k1>Kidra<k2>Kidra
{%Khidra, as,%}¦ m. a poor man, a pauper; disease,
sickness; ({%am%}), n., Ved. a press; (Sāy.) an instru-
ment for splitting or dividing.
<LEND>

<L>16882<pc>0276-a<k1>Kidvan<k2>Kidvan
{%Khidvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. pressing upon, oppressing.
<LEND>

<L>16883<pc>0276-a<k1>Kinna<k2>Kinna
{%Khinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ depressed, distressed, suffering
pain or uneasiness; wearied, exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>16884<pc>0276-a<k1>Keda<k2>Keda
{%Kheda, as,%}¦ m. lassitude, depression; exhaustion;
pain; poverty; sorrow, affliction, distress; ({%ā%}), f.,
Ved. a hammer, mallet or similar implement be-
longing to Indra. {%—Khedānvita (˚da-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} distressed, pained.
<LEND>

<L>16885<pc>0276-a<k1>Kedana<k2>Kedana
{%Khedana, am,%}¦ n. lassitude, exhaustion, pain, sor-
row, affliction, poverty, distress.
<LEND>

<L>16886<pc>0276-a<k1>Kedayitavya<k2>Kedayitavya
{%Khedayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be depressed, to be
made distressed.
<LEND>

<L>16887<pc>0276-a<k1>Kedita<k2>Kedita
{%Khedita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disturbed, annoyed, harassed;
afflicted, distressed, pained.
<LEND>

<L>16888<pc>0276-a<k1>Keditavya<k2>Keditavya
{%Kheditavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be depressed or cast
down, to be troubled.
<LEND>

<L>16889<pc>0276-a<k1>Kedin<k2>Kedin
{%Khedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ tiring, fatiguing, disturbing;
({%inī%}), f. a creeper, a creeping plant, Marsilea Quadri-
folia ({%aśana-parṇī%}).
<LEND>
[Page0276-b+ 68]

<L>16890<pc>0276-b<k1>Kindaka<k2>Kindaka
{#Kindaka#}¦ {%khindaka, as,%} or {%khindhi, is,%} m., N.
of an Arabic astronomer, Alkindi.
<LEND>

<L>16891<pc>0276-b<k1>KirahiwwI<k2>KirahiwwI
{#KirahiwwI#}¦ {%khirahiṭṭī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= ma-%}
{%hā-samaṅgā.%}
<LEND>

<L>16892<pc>0276-b<k1>Kila<k2>Kila
{#Kila#}¦ {%khila, as, am,%} m. n. a piece of waste
or uncultivated land situated between cultivated fields,
a desert, bare soil, a vacant space, a space not filled
up, a gap, that which serves to fill up a gap, a sup-
plement (of a book &c.), an additional hymn appended
to the regular collection; a compendium, a compi-
lation (especially of hymns and prayers); remainder;
emptiness, vacuity, vanity, anything vain, empty or
fruitless; ({%as%}), m., N. of Brahmā, and of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>16893<pc>0276-b<k1>KilIkf<k2>KilIkf
{%Khilī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to turn into a desert, to devastate, make impassable;
to make vain or powerless.
<LEND>

<L>16894<pc>0276-b<k1>KilIBU<k2>KilIBU
{%Khilī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to become
a desert, become impassable or unfrequented, to be
blocked up; to be frustrated.
<LEND>

<L>16895<pc>0276-b<k1>Kilya<k2>Kilya
{%Khilya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a piece of waste or uncultivated
land situated between cultivated fields, a desert; a piece
of rock in the earth, a mass, a heap, a lump, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16896<pc>0276-b<k1>KElika<k2>KElika
{%Khailika, as, ī, am,%}¦ supplementary. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>16897<pc>0276-b<k1>KIra<k2>KIra
{#KIra#}¦ {%khīra, as, am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>16898<pc>0276-b<k1>KIla<k2>KIla
{#KIla#}¦ {%khīla, as,%} m., Ved. {%= kīla,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16899<pc>0276-b<k1>Ku<k2>Ku
{#Ku#}¦ {%khu,%} cl. 1. A. {%khavate,%} &c., to sound.
<LEND>

<L>16900<pc>0276-b<k1>KuNKuRI<k2>KuNKuRI
{#KuNKuRI#}¦ {%khuṅkhuṇī,%} f. a kind of lute.
<LEND>

<L>16901<pc>0276-b<k1>KuNgAha<k2>KuNgAha
{#KuNgAha#}¦ {%khuṅgāha, as,%} m. a black horse.
<LEND>

<L>16902<pc>0276-b<k1>Kuj<k2>Kuj
{#Kuj#}¦ {%khuj,%} cl. 1. P. {%khojati,%} to steal, rob;
[cf. Lith. <nsi>wagiù ?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>16903<pc>0276-b<k1>KujjAka<k2>KujjAka
{#KujjAka#}¦ {%khujjāka%} or (according to a various
reading) {%khuñjāka, as,%} m. the plant Lipeocercis Ser-
rata; [cf. {%deva-tāḍaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16904<pc>0276-b<k1>Kuq<k2>Kuq
{#Kuq#}¦ {%khuḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%khoḍayati, -yitum%}
(another form for {%khuṇḍ%} below), to break
in pieces, to divide, tear, rend, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16905<pc>0276-b<k1>Kuqaka<k2>Kuqaka
{#Kuqaka#}¦ {%khuḍaka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the
ankle-joint; [cf. {%khulaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16906<pc>0276-b<k1>KuRq<k2>KuRq
{#KuRq#}¦ {%khuṇḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%khuṇḍate,%} to break
in pieces; to limp, be lame; cl. 10. P.
{%khuṇḍayati, -yitum,%} to break in pieces.
<LEND>

<L>16907<pc>0276-b<k1>KuttIrya<k2>KuttIrya
{#KuttIrya#}¦ {%khuttīrya, as,%} m., N. of a foreign
astronomer.
<LEND>

<L>16908<pc>0276-b<k1>Kud<k2>Kud
{#Kud#}¦ {%khud,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%khudati,%} to sport
wantonly or amorously: Intens. 3rd sing.
Leṭ, {%canīkhudat;%} [cf. {%khurd.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16909<pc>0276-b<k1>Kunamuza<k2>Kunamuza
{#Kunamuza#}¦ {%khunamuṣa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of an Agra-hāra.
<LEND>

<L>16910<pc>0276-b<k1>Kur<k2>Kur
{#Kur#}¦ {%khur,%} cl. 6. P. {%khurati, cukhora, kho-%}
{%ritum,%} to cut, cut up, break in pieces; to
scratch; [cf. {%kṣur.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16911<pc>0276-b<k1>Kura<k2>Kura
{#Kura#}¦ {%khura, as,%} m. (said to be fr. the last),
a hoof, a horse's hoof, &c.; a sort of perfume, com-
monly called Nakhi, apparently a dried shell-fish
shaped like a hoof [cf. {%koladala%}]; a razor; the foot
of a bedstead [cf. {%kṣura%}]. {%—Khura-kṣepa, as,%}
m. a kick with a hoof, kicking. {%—Khura-ṇas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} or {%khura-ṇasa, as, ā, am,%} having a nose
like a horse's hoof, flat-nosed. {%—Khura-padavī,%} f.
a horse's foot-marks. {%—Khurāghāta (˚ra-āgh˚)%} or
{%khurābhighāta (˚ra-abh˚), as,%} m. a kick, kicking
(as of a horse).
<LEND>

<L>16912<pc>0276-b<k1>Kuraka<k2>Kuraka
{%Khuraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant, {%= tila;%} a kind
of dance.
<LEND>

<L>16913<pc>0276-b<k1>Kurapra<k2>Kurapra
{#Kurapra#}¦ {%khurapra, as,%} m. an arrow with a
semicircular head; (a wrong form for {%kṣurapra.%})
<LEND>

<L>16914<pc>0276-b<k1>KuralI<k2>KuralI
{#KuralI#}¦ {%khuralī,%} f. military exercise, prac-
tising archery, &c.; [cf. {%khalūrikā.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0276-c+ 63]

<L>16915<pc>0276-c<k1>KurAka<k2>KurAka
{#KurAka#}¦ {%khurāka, as,%} m. an animal in gene-
ral; (perhaps originally ‘an animal with hoofs,’
{%khura ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>16916<pc>0276-c<k1>KurAlaka<k2>KurAlaka
{#KurAlaka#}¦ {%khurālaka, as,%} m. an iron arrow.
<LEND>

<L>16917<pc>0276-c<k1>KurAlika<k2>KurAlika
{#KurAlika#}¦ {%khurālika, as,%} m. a razor-case;
an iron arrow; a pillow; (a various reading for {%kha-%}
{%rālika.%})
<LEND>

<L>16918<pc>0276-c<k1>KurAsAna<k2>KurAsAna
{#KurAsAna#}¦ {%khurāsāna,%} Khurāsān.
<LEND>

<L>16919<pc>0276-c<k1>Kurd<k2>Kurd
{#Kurd#}¦ {%khurd,%} cl. 1. A. {%khūrdate,%} to play,
to sport, {%= kurd, gurd,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16920<pc>0276-c<k1>Kulla<k2>Kulla
{#Kulla#}¦ {%khulla, as, ā, am,%} small, little, low,
mean, {%= kṣudra%} and {%kṣulla; (am),%} n. a kind of
perfume, {%= khura%}. {%—Khulla-tāta, as,%} m. a father's
younger brother; [cf. {%kṣulla-tāta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16921<pc>0276-c<k1>Kullaka<k2>Kullaka
{%Khullaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ little, small, poor, indigent,
low, vile; cruel, harsh; wicked, mischievous, malig-
nant, {%= kṣudraka.%}
<LEND>

<L>16922<pc>0276-c<k1>Kullama<k2>Kullama
{#Kullama#}¦ {%khullama, as,%} m. a road.
<LEND>

<L>16923<pc>0276-c<k1>KUrd<k2>KUrd
{#KUrd#}¦ {%khūrd = khurd,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>16924<pc>0276-c<k1>Kfgala<k2>Kfgala
{#Kfgala#}¦ {%khṛgala, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), Ved.
a staff, a crutch (?); (Sāy.) a coat of mail.
<LEND>

<L>16925<pc>0276-c<k1>KeKIraka<k2>KeKIraka
{#KeKIraka#}¦ {%khekhīraka, as,%} m. a hollow bam-
boo, a sounding reed or cane; [cf. {%kīcaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16926<pc>0276-c<k1>Kegamana<k2>Kegamana
{#Kegamana#}¦ {%khe-gamana.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16927<pc>0276-c<k1>Kew<k2>Kew
{#Kew#}¦ {%kheṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%kheṭayati, -yitum,%} to
eat, consume.
<LEND>

<L>16928<pc>0276-c<k1>Kewa<k2>Kewa
{#Kewa#}¦ {%kheṭa, as,%} m. a village, the residence
of peasants and farmers; a small town, half a Pura;
phlegm, the phlegmatic or watery humor of the
body; a horse; the club of Bala-rāma; ({%am%}), n.
grass; ({%as, am%}), m. n. hunting, the chase [cf.
{%ā-kheṭa%}]; a shield; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a weapon or
weapons, armed; vile, bad, low; (at the end of com-
pounds expressing defectiveness or deterioration, e. g.
{%nagara-kheṭam,%} a miserable town.) {%—Kheṭa-piṇḍa,%}
{%as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a ball of phlegm, i. e. any-
thing impossible.
<LEND>

<L>16929<pc>0276-c<k1>Kewaka<k2>Kewaka
{%Kheṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a village, the residence of agri-
cultural peasants, a small village; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a
shield; the club of Bala-rāma (?). {%—Kheṭaka-pura,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>16930<pc>0276-c<k1>Kewin<k2>Kewin
{%Kheṭin, ī,%}¦ m. a lecher, a libertine; [cf. {%nāgara%}
fr. {%nagara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16931<pc>0276-c<k1>Kewa<k2>Kewa
{#Ke'wa#}¦ {%khe'ṭa.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16932<pc>0276-c<k1>Kewika<k2>Kewika
{#Kewika#}¦ {%kheṭika, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>16933<pc>0276-c<k1>Kewita<k2>Kewita
{#Kewita#}¦ {%kheṭita.%} See under rt. {%khiṭ.%}
<LEND>

<L>16934<pc>0276-c<k1>KewitAla<k2>KewitAla
{#KewitAla#}¦ {%kheṭitāla, as,%} m. a minstrel, a
family bard or piper, whose business is to awaken the
master of the house with music and singing; [cf.
{%vaitālika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16935<pc>0276-c<k1>Keq<k2>Keq
{#Keq#}¦ {%kheḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%kheḍayati, -yitum,%} to
eat; [cf. {%kheṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16936<pc>0276-c<k1>Keqa<k2>Keqa
{#Keqa#}¦ {%kheḍa, am,%} n. grass (?), in {%gandhakheḍa;%}
[cf. {%khaṭa%} and {%kheṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16937<pc>0276-c<k1>KeqitAla<k2>KeqitAla
{#KeqitAla#}¦ {%kheḍitāla, as,%} m. a minstrel, a
family bard or piper, &c., {%= kheṭitāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>16938<pc>0276-c<k1>Keda<k2>Keda
{#Keda#}¦ {%kheda.%} See under rt. {%khid.%}
<LEND>

<L>16939<pc>0276-c<k1>Kedi<k2>Kedi
{#Kedi#}¦ {%khedi, ayas,%} m. pl., Ved. rays (?).
<LEND>

<L>16940<pc>0276-c<k1>KepariBrama<k2>KepariBrama
{#KepariBrama#}¦ {%khe-paribhrama.%} See under 3.
{%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16941<pc>0276-c<k1>KemakarRa<k2>KemakarRa
{#KemakarRa#}¦ {%khemakarṇa, as,%} m. (for {%kṣema-%}
{%karṇa ?%}), N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>16942<pc>0276-c<k1>Keya<k2>Keya
{#Keya#}¦ {%kheya.%} See under rt. {%khan,%} p. 273.
<LEND>
[Page0277-a+ 70]

<L>16943<pc>0277-a<k1>Kel<k2>Kel
{#Kel#}¦ {%khel,%} cl. 1. P. {%khelati,%} &c., to shake,
move to and fro, swing; to tremble:
Caus. {%khelayati, -yitum,%} to cause to move to and
fro, to swing, shake.
<LEND>

<L>16944<pc>0277-a<k1>Kela<k2>Kela
{%Khela, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving, shaking, trembling,
swinging; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f. sport, play.
{%—khela-gati, is, is, i,%} or {%khela-gamana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a stately walk. {%—Khela-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}
stately going.
<LEND>

<L>16945<pc>0277-a<k1>Kelana<k2>Kelana
{%Khelana, am,%}¦ n. shaking; quivering motion (of
the eyes); play, pastime, sport; ({%ī%}), f. a piece or
man at drafts, chess, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16946<pc>0277-a<k1>KelAya<k2>KelAya
{%Khelāya,%}¦ nom. P. {%khelāyati, -yitum,%} to play,
sport.
<LEND>

<L>16947<pc>0277-a<k1>Keli<k2>Keli
{%Kheli, is,%}¦ f. play, sport; an animal; a bird; the
sun; an arrow; a song, a hymn.
<LEND>

<L>16948<pc>0277-a<k1>Keluda<k2>Keluda
{#Keluda#}¦ {%kheluda, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
particular high number; [cf. {%kalahu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16949<pc>0277-a<k1>Kev<k2>Kev
{#Kev#}¦ {%khev,%} cl. 1. A. {%khevate,%} to serve,
wait upon; [cf. {%kev%} and {%sev.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16950<pc>0277-a<k1>KeSaya<k2>KeSaya
{#KeSaya#}¦ {%khe-śaya.%} See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16951<pc>0277-a<k1>Kesara<k2>Kesara
{#Kesara#}¦ {%khesara, as,%} m. a mule; (a wrong form
for {%vesara?%}).
<LEND>

<L>16952<pc>0277-a<k1>KE<k2>KE
{#KE#}¦ {%khai,%} cl. 1. P. {%khāyati, cakhau, khātum,%}
to make firm, be firm or steady; to strike,
injure, hurt, kill; to dig; to mourn, to sorrow.
<LEND>

<L>16953<pc>0277-a<k1>KEmaKA<k2>KEmaKA
{#KEmaKA#}¦ {%khaimakhā,%} f., Ved., N. of a frog;
[cf. {%khaṇvakhā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16954<pc>0277-a<k1>KElika<k2>KElika
{#KElika#}¦ {%khailika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%khila%}), sup-
plementary, additional, added afterwards.
<LEND>

<L>16955<pc>0277-a<k1>KoNgAha<k2>KoNgAha
{#KoNgAha#}¦ {%khoṅgāha, as,%} m. a white and brown
horse; [cf. {%khuṅgāha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16956<pc>0277-a<k1>Kow<k2>Kow
{#Kow#}¦ {%khoṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%khoṭati,%} to limp, to
be lame or lamed; cl. 10. P. {%khoṭayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to throw; [cf. {%khoḍ, khor, khol, kṣoṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16957<pc>0277-a<k1>Kowana<k2>Kowana
{%Khoṭana, am,%}¦ n. limping.
<LEND>

<L>16958<pc>0277-a<k1>Kowi<k2>Kowi
{#Kowi#}¦ {%khoṭi, is,%} f. a cunning or scheming
woman; (also read {%khori.%})
<LEND>

<L>16959<pc>0277-a<k1>KowI<k2>KowI
{#KowI#}¦ {%khoṭī,%} f. the gum olibanum tree,
Boswellia Thurifera; [cf. {%pālaṅkī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16960<pc>0277-a<k1>Koq<k2>Koq
{#Koq#}¦ {%khoḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%khoḍati,%} to limp; to
be or become lame; cl. 10. P. {%khoḍayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to throw or cast.
<LEND>

<L>16961<pc>0277-a<k1>Koqa<k2>Koqa
{%Khoḍa, as, ā, am,%}¦ limping, lame.
<LEND>

<L>16962<pc>0277-a<k1>KoqakaSIrza<k2>KoqakaSIrza
{#KoqakaSIrza#}¦ {%khoḍakaśīrṣa%} or {%khoḍakaśīr-%}
{%ṣaka, am,%} n. the arched roof of a house, the coping
of a wall &c.; [cf. {%kapi-śīrṣa%} and {%kraya-śīrṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16963<pc>0277-a<k1>Kor<k2>Kor
{#Kor#}¦ {%khor,%} cl. 1. P. {%khorati,%} to limp, to
be lame; [cf. {%khoṭ, khoḍ, khol.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16964<pc>0277-a<k1>Kora<k2>Kora
{%Khora, as, ā, am,%}¦ limping, lame.
<LEND>

<L>16965<pc>0277-a<k1>Kol<k2>Kol
{#Kol#}¦ {%khol,%} cl. 1. P. {%kholati,%} to limp, to
be lame.
<LEND>

<L>16966<pc>0277-a<k1>Kola<k2>Kola
{%Khola, as, ā, am,%}¦ limping, lame; ({%am%}), n. a
helmet; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χωλός.</lang>] {%—Khola-śiras, ās, ās, as,%}
furnished with a helmet or armour for the head.
<LEND>

<L>16967<pc>0277-a<k1>Kolaka<k2>Kolaka
{%Kholaka, as,%}¦ m. a helmet, armour for the head; an
ant-hill; a pot, a saucepan; the shell of a betel-nut.
<LEND>

<L>16968<pc>0277-a<k1>Koli<k2>Koli
{%Kholi, is,%}¦ f. a quiver.
<LEND>

<L>16969<pc>0277-a<k1>Kolka<k2>Kolka
{#Kolka#}¦ {%kholka,%} &c. See under 3. {%kha.%}
<LEND>

<L>16970<pc>0277-a<k1>Kozya<k2>Kozya
{#Kozya#}¦ {%khoṣya%} or (according to a various
reading) {%khāṣya, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a
place.
<LEND>

<L>16971<pc>0277-a<k1>KyA<k2>KyA
{#KyA#}¦ {%khyā,%} cl. 2. P. and in the non-con-
jugational tenses P. A. {%khyāti, cakhyau,%}
{%cakhye, khyāsyati, -te, akhyat, akhyata, khyā-%}
{%tum,%} (the original meaning of this root seems to have
been ‘to perceive, look, view, see,’ and it has this
sense in the Veda when combined with prepositions;
the simple verb occurs only in Pass. and Caus.):
Pass. {%khyāyate,%} to be known, be named: Caus.
[Page0277-b+ 75]
{%khyāpayati, -yitum,%} to make known, promulgate,
proclaim; to relate, tell, say, declare, betray, de-
nounce; to make well known or renowned, to praise:
Desid. {%cikhyāsati, -te:%} Intens. {%cākhyāyate, cākh-%}
{%yāti%} and {%cākhyeti;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>in-quam,</nsi> &c.]
<LEND>

<L>16972<pc>0277-b<k1>KyAta<k2>KyAta
{%Khyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ known, named, called, deno-
nominated: told; well known, celebrated, notorious,
famous. {%—Khyāta-garhaṇa%} or {%khyāta-garhita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a bad name or evil report; notoriously
vile, infamous.
<LEND>

<L>16973<pc>0277-b<k1>KyAtavya<k2>KyAtavya
{%Khyātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be styled or called or
denominated; to be told; to be celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>16974<pc>0277-b<k1>KyAti<k2>KyAti
{%Khyāti, is,%}¦ f. the being well known, renown,
fame, glory, celebrity; a name, denomination, title;
fame personified as a daughter of Dakṣa or as a
daughter of Kardama and wife of Bhṛgu; the means
of individual fruition, or the faculty of discriminating
objects by appropriate designations and the like,
opinion, knowledge; ({%is%}), m., N. of a son of the
fourth Manu. {%—Khyāti-kara%} or {%khyāti-janaka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} causing renown, glorious. {%—Khyāti-ghna, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} destroying reputation, disgraceful. {%—Khyāti-%}
{%bodha, as,%} m. sense of honour. {%—Khyāti-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} renowned.
<LEND>

<L>16975<pc>0277-b<k1>KyApaka<k2>KyApaka
{%Khyāpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a compound)
making known, one who tells or declares, declaring;
one who confesses; indicative.
<LEND>

<L>16976<pc>0277-b<k1>KyApana<k2>KyApana
{%Khyāpana, am,%}¦ n. declaring, divulging; saying,
avowing; confessing, public confession (of sins);
making renowned, celebrating.
<LEND>

<L>16977<pc>0277-b<k1>KyApya<k2>KyApya
{%Khyāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be told or related.
<LEND>
<H>{#ga#}

<L>16978<pc>0277-b<k1>ga<k2>ga<h>1
{#ga#} 1¦. {%ga,%} the third consonant of the alpha-
bet, the soft guttural having the sound of {%g%} in <nsi>give.</nsi>
{%—Ga-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ga.%}
<LEND>

<L>16979<pc>0277-b<k1>ga<k2>ga<h>2
{#ga#} 2¦. {%ga, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%gam%}) at the end
of compounds, who or what goes, going, moving
(e. g. {%yāna-ga,%} going in a carriage; {%antarīkṣa-%}
{%ga,%} moving through the air; {%śīghra-ga,%} going
quickly; {%kāma-ga,%} going where one lists; {%anyastrī-%}
{%ga,%} one who goes to another's wife); staying, being,
abiding in (e. g. {%pañcama-ga,%} abiding in or keeping
the fifth place); relating to or standing in connection
with anything; [cf. {%a-ga, agra-ga, agre-ga,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>16980<pc>0277-b<k1>ga<k2>ga<h>3
{#ga#} 3¦. {%ga, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%gai%}) at the end
of compounds, singing [cf. {%chando-ga%} and {%sāma-ga%}];
({%as%}), m. a Gandharva or celestial musician; ({%ā%}), f. a
song; ({%am%}), n. song, singing.
<LEND>

<L>16981<pc>0277-b<k1>ga<k2>ga<h>4
{#ga#} 4¦. {%ga, as,%} m. an epithet of the deity
Gaṇeśa; [cf. the other letters of the alphabet, each of
which is supposed to denote a deity.]
<LEND>

<L>16982<pc>0277-b<k1>ga<k2>ga<h>5
{#ga#} 5¦. {%ga,%} (used in works on prosody as an
abbreviation of the word {%guru%} to denote) a long
syllable.
<LEND>

<L>16983<pc>0277-b<k1>gagaRa<k2>gagaRa
{#gagaRa#}¦ {%gagaṇa, am,%} n. (often spelt {%gagana;%}
perhaps fr. {%ga-gaṇa,%} ‘containing troops of moving
beings?’ said to be for {%gamana%} fr. rt. {%gam,%} to go),
the atmosphere, air; the sky, heaven, the firmament;
talc. {%—Gagaṇa-kusuma, am,%} n., see {%gagaṇa-puṣ-%}
{%pa%}. {%—Gagaṇa-gañja, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Gagaṇa-gati, is, is, i,%} moving in the air, an
inhabitant of the sky. {%—Gagaṇa-cara, as,%} m. moving
in the air, a bird; [cf. {%gagaṇe-cara.%}] {%—Gagaṇa-%}
{%dhvaja, as,%} m. the sun; a cloud. {%—Gagaṇa-puṣpa,%}
{%am,%} n. a flower in the sky, i. e. any unreal or fanciful
thing, an impossibility; [cf. {%kha-puṣpa.%}] {%—Ga-%}
{%gaṇa-priya, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Gagaṇa-%}
{%mūrdhan, ā,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Gagaṇa-vihā-%}
{%rin, ī, iṇī, i,%} moving or sporting in the sky; ({%ī%}),
m. a heavenly luminary; the sun; a celestial being
or divinity. {%—Gagaṇa-sad, t, t, t,%} abiding in the air;
({%t%}), m. an inhabitant of the air, a celestial being.
{%—Gagaṇa-stha%} or {%gagaṇa-sthita, as, ā, am,%} situ-
ated or being in the sky. {%—Gagaṇa-sparśana, as,%}
m. touching the sky; N. of one of the eight Maruts;
[Page0277-c+ 78]
air, wind. {%—Gagaṇāgra (˚ṇa-ag˚), am,%} n. the
highest heavens, the summit or highest part of
heaven. {%—Gagaṇāṅganā (˚ṇa-aṅ˚),%} f., N. of a
metre, containing four lines of twenty-five syllabic
instants each. {%—Gagaṇādhvaga (˚ṇa-adh˚), as,%} m.
the sun; a planet; a celestial spirit. {%—Gagaṇāmbu%}
{%(˚ṇa-am˚), u,%} n. rain-water. {%—Gagaṇe-cara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} going in the air; ({%as%}), m. a bird; a planet;
a lunar mansion; a heavenly spirit; [cf. {%gagaṇa-%}
{%cara.%}] {%—Gagaṇolmuka (˚ṇa-ul˚), as,%} m. the planet
Mars.
<LEND>

<L>16984<pc>0277-c<k1>gagana<k2>gagana
{#gagana#}¦ {%gagana.%} See {%gagaṇa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>16985<pc>0277-c<k1>gagG<k2>gagG
{#gagG#}¦ {%gaggh,%} cl. 1. P. {%gagghati,%} to laugh,
laugh at or deride; [cf. {%kakh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16986<pc>0277-c<k1>gagnu<k2>gagnu
{#gagnu#}¦ {%gagnu,%} a various reading for {%vagnu,%}
‘speech.’
<LEND>

<L>16987<pc>0277-c<k1>gaNgA<k2>gaNgA
{#gaNgA#}¦ {%gaṅgā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%gam,%} to go),
the river Ganges; the Ganges personified and con-
sidered as the eldest daughter of Himavat and Menā,
and wife of Śāntanu and mother of Bhīṣma, or as
one of the wives of Dharma; there is also a Gaṅgā
in the sky ({%ākāśa-gaṅgā%}) and one under the earth;
N. of the wife of Nīla-kaṇṭha and mother of Śaṅkara;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Nārāyaṇa, who was the
author of a commentary on the Vṛhad-araṇyakopa-
niṣad; he is also called Dviveda-gaṅga. {%—Gaṅga-%}
{%datta, as,%} m. (the final {%ā%} being shortened), N. of a
king of the frogs. {%—Gaṅga-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a son
of Poviya, called Jñānānanda, author of a commentary
on the poem Khaṇḍa-praśasti. {%—Gaṅgā-kṣetra, am,%}
n. the sacred district of the Gaṅgā, i. e. the river
Ganges and two Krośas on either of its banks; all
dying within such limits go to heaven, whatever
their crimes. {%—Gaṅgā-campū, ūs,%} f. title of a work.
{%—Gaṅgā-cillī,%} f. the black-headed gull, Larus Ridi-
bundus; (fr. {%gaṅgā%} and {%cillī,%} a kite, considered by
the Hindūs as a species of that bird, the Gangetic
kite.) {%—Gaṅgā-ja, as,%} m. the son of Gaṅgā, an
epithet of Bhīṣma; and also of the deity Kārttikeya.
{%—Gaṅgā-jala, am,%} n. the water of the Ganges,
the holy water by which it is customary to administer
oaths. {%—Gaṅgāṭeya, as, ī, am,%} going in the Ganges;
({%as%}), m. a shrimp or prawn; also {%galāvila%}. {%—Gaṅgā-%}
{%tīra, am,%} n. the bank of the Ganges. {%—Gaṅgā-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Gaṅgā-dāsa, as,%}
m., N. of the author of the Chando-mañjarī and of
the Acyuta-carita; N. of a copyist who lived about
1542; N. of the author of the work Chando-govinda.
{%—Gaṅgāditya (˚gā-ād˚), as,%} m. a form of the
sun. {%—Gaṅgā-dvāra, am,%} n. ‘the door of the Gan-
ges,’ the place where the Ganges enters the plains;
also called Haridvār. {%—Gaṅgādvāra-māhātmya,%}
{%am,%} n. title of a part of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Gaṅgā-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m. ‘Ganges-receiver,’ ‘Ganges-supporter,’
the ocean; an epithet of Śiva, (according to the legend,
the Ganges in its descent from heaven first alighted
on the head of Śiva and continued for a long period
entangled in his hair); N. of a man; N. of a lexi-
cographer; N. of a commentator on the Śārīraka-
sūtras; N. of a commentator on Bhāskara. {%—Gaṅgā-%}
{%dhara-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Gaṅgādhara-%}
{%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a scholiast. {%—Gaṅgādhara-%}
{%mādhava, as,%} m., N. of the father of Dādābhaï.
{%—Gaṅgādhara-rasa, as,%} m. term for a particular
prescription in medicine. {%—Gaṅgā-nāgarāja, as,%} m.,
N. of a Nāga. {%—Gaṅgā-nātha, as,%} m., N. of the
founder of a sect. {%—Gaṅgā-pattrī,%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= pattrī, su-gandhā, gandhapattrikā%}. {%—Gaṅgā-%}
{%pāra, am,%} n. the opposite bank of the Ganges.
{%—Gaṅgā-putra, as,%} m. son of Gaṅgā; an epithet of
Bhīṣma; a man of a mixed and vile caste, employed
to remove dead bodies; a Brāhman who conducts pil-
grims to the Ganges, especially at Benares. {%—Gaṅgā-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m. an epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%gaṅgā-dhara.%}]
{%—Gaṅgā-madhya, am,%} n. the bed or stream of
the Ganges. {%—Gaṅgā-māhātmya, am,%} n. a poem
or any composition in praise of the Ganges. {%—Gaṅ-%}
{%gāmbu (˚gā-am˚), u,%} n. or {%gaṅgāmbhas (˚gā-am˚), %}
[Page0278-a+ 80]
{%as,%} n. pure rain-water, such as falls in the month
Āśvina; Ganges-water. {%—Gaṅgā-yamune,%} du. f. the
Ganges and Yamunā rivers. {%—Gaṅgā-yātrā,%} f. pil-
grimage to the Ganges; carrying a sick person to
the river side to die there. {%—Gaṅgā-rāma, as,%} m.,
N. of the father of Jaya-rāma and uncle of Rāma-
candra. {%—Gaṅgā-laharī,%} f. title of a work (‘the
wave of the Ganges’). {%—Gaṅgāvataraṇa-campū-%}
{%prabandha,%} title of a poem by Śaṅkara-dīkṣita.
{%—Gaṅgā-vākyāvalī (˚ya-āv˚),%} f. title of a work on
jurisprudence. {%—Gaṅgā-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling on
the Ganges. {%—Gaṅgā-śoṇa, am,%} n. the Ganges and
the Śone. {%—Gaṅgāṣṭaka (˚gā-aṣ˚), am,%} n. eight
verses addressed to Gaṅgā. {%—Gaṅgā-sāgara, as,%}
m. the mouth of the Ganges where it enters the
ocean. {%—Gaṅgā-suta, as,%} m. son of Gaṅgā, epithet
of the deity Kārttikeya; also of Bhīṣma. {%—Gaṅgā-%}
{%stuti, is,%} f. or {%gaṅgā-stotra, am,%} n. the praise of
the Ganges. {%—Gaṅgā-snāna, am,%} n. bathing in the
Ganges. {%—Gaṅgā-hrada, as,%} m., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Gaṅgeśa (˚gā-īśa), as,%} m., N. of the author of
the Tattva-cintāmaṇi. {%—Gaṅgeśvara (˚gā-īś˚), as,%}
m., N. of an author. {%—Gaṅgodaka (˚gā-ud˚), am,%}
n. Ganges-water. {%—Gaṅgodbheda (˚gā-ud˚), as,%} m.
the source of the Ganges, a sacred place of pilgrimage.
<LEND>

<L>16988<pc>0278-a<k1>gaNgakA<k2>gaNgakA
{%Gaṅgakā%}¦ or {%gaṅgākā%} or {%gaṅgikā,%} f. the Ganges.
<LEND>

<L>16989<pc>0278-a<k1>gaNgin<k2>gaNgin
{%Gaṅgin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>16990<pc>0278-a<k1>gaNgIBUta<k2>gaNgIBUta
{%Gaṅgī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ become (as sacred as)
the Ganges.
<LEND>

<L>16991<pc>0278-a<k1>gacCa<k2>gacCa
{#gacCa#}¦ {%gaccha, as,%} m. (rt. {%gam%}), a tree; the
period (number of terms) of a progression; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a people; (a various reading for {%kaccha%} and
{%kakṣa%}); [cf. {%a-ga, naga, a-gaccha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16992<pc>0278-a<k1>gacCat<k2>gacCat
{%Gacchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going, &c.
<LEND>

<L>16993<pc>0278-a<k1>gaj<k2>gaj
{#gaj#}¦ {%gaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%gajati, jagāja, gajitum,%}
to sound, roar; to be drunk, to be confused
or inebriated; cl. 10. P. {%gājayati, -yitum,%} to sound,
roar.
<LEND>

<L>16994<pc>0278-a<k1>gaja<k2>gaja
{%Gaja, as,%}¦ m. an elephant, one of the eight ele-
phants of the quarters ({%= dig-gaja%}), and thus a sym-
bolical term for the number 8; a measure of length,
the Gaz, a yard, a measure of two cubits, = 1(3/4) or 2
Hastas; a place prepared for the building of a house;
a mound of earth sloping on both sides, on which a
house may be erected; a small hole in the ground
for a fire, over which to prepare food or medicines;
N. of an attendant on the sun; also of an Asura
conquered by Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. a female elephant. {%—Gaja-%}
{%kanda, as,%} m. a large esculent root, a sort of arum,
{%= hasti-kanda%}. {%—Gaja-karṇa, as,%} m. ‘elephant-
ear,’ N. of a Yakṣa. {%—Gaja-kūrmāśin (˚ma-āś˚),%}
{%ī,%} m. one who devours an elephant and a tortoise,
an epithet of Garuḍa, the bird and vehicle of Viṣṇu,
(in allusion to his swallowing both those animals whilst
engaged in a contest with each other.) {%—Gaja-gati,%}
{%is,%} f. a stately gait like that of an elephant. {%—Gaja-%}
{%gāminī,%} f. a woman of a stately elephant-like walk.
{%—Gaja-cirbhaṭā,%} f. a kind of cucumber, Cucumis Ma-
deraspatanus, {%= indra-vāruṇī%}. {%—Gaja-cirbhiṭa, as,%}
m. the plant Cucumis Maderaspatanus; ({%ā%}), f. another
kind of gourd, {%= mahendra-vāruṇī%}. {%—Gaja-cchāyā,%}
f. a portion of time proper for a Śrāddha (as long as
the shadow of an elephant rests on the spot chosen
for a ceremony?). {%—Gaja-ḍhakkā,%} f. a kettle-drum
carried on an elephant. {%—Gaja-tā,%} f. a multitude of
elephants. {%—Gaja-turaṅga-vilasita, am,%} n., N. of
a metre; [cf. {%ṛṣabha-gaja-vilasita.%}] {%—Gaja-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the state of an elephant. {%—Gaja-daghna, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} as high or tall as an elephant. {%—Gaja-danta,%}
{%as,%} m. an elephant's tusk; ivory; a bracket or pin
projecting from a wall; an epithet of Gaṇeśa, (this
deity being represented with an elephant's head.)
{%—Gajadanta-phalā,%} f. a kind of pumpkin, {%= ḍaṅ-%}
{%garī%}. {%—Gajadanta-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of ivory.
{%—Gaja-dāna, am,%} n. the liquor exuding from an
elephant's temples. {%—Gaja-dvayasa, as, ī, am,%} as
high as an elephant. {%—Gaja-nāsā,%} f. the trunk of
an elephant. {%—Gaja-pati, is,%} m. the lord or keeper
of elephants; a large stately elephant; a title given
to kings; N. of an old king in the south of Jambu-
[Page0278-b+ 81]
dvīpa. {%—Gaja-pādapa, as,%} m. the plant Bignonia
Suaveolens, {%= sthalī%}. {%—Gaja-pippalī,%} f. a plant bear-
ing a seed which resembles pepper, Scindapsus Offici-
nalis; [cf. {%kari-pippalī,%} &c.] {%—Gaja-puṅgava,%}
{%as,%} m. a large and excellent elephant. {%—Gaja-puṭa,%}
{%as,%} m. a small hole in the ground for a fire, over
which to prepare food, medical decoctions, extracts,
&c. {%—Gaja-pura, am,%} n. the town called after the
elephant; another N. of Hāstina-pura; [cf. {%gaja-%}
{%sāhvaya, gajāhvaya, vāraṇa-sāhvaya.%}] {%—Gaja-%}
{%puṣpī,%} f., N. of a flower. {%—Gaja-priyā,%} f. the gum
olibanum tree, Boswellia Serrata. {%—Gaja-bandhanī,%}
{%am,%} f. n. a post to which an elephant is bound.
{%—Gaja-bhakṣaka, as,%} m. the sacred fig tree, Ficus
Religiosa, (the young branches of this tree being the
elephants' favourite food.) {%—Gaja-bhakṣā%} or {%gaja-%}
{%bhakṣyā,%} f. the gum olibanum tree; [cf. {%gaja-%}
{%priyā.%}] {%—Gaja-bhujaṅgama, au,%} m. du. an elephant
and a serpent. {%—Gaja-maṇḍana, am,%} n. the orna-
ments with which an elephant is decorated, especially
the coloured lines on his head. {%—Gaja-maṇḍalikā,%}
f. a ring or circle of elephants surrounding a car &c.
{%—Gaja-malla, as,%} m., N. of a son of Karpūra and
father of Kalyāṇa-malla. {%—Gaja-mācala, as,%} m. a
lion; [cf. {%kari-mācala.%}] {%—Gaja-mātra, as, ī, am,%}
as tall as an elephant. {%—Gaja-muktā,%} f. or {%gaja-%}
{%mauktika, am,%} n. pearl supposed to be found in the
projections (Kumbha) on the forehead of an elephant.
{%—Gaja-mukha, as,%} m. ‘elephant-faced,’ an epithet
of Gaṇeśa. {%—Gaja-moṭana, as,%} m. a lion; also
{%gaja-mocana%} (?). {%—Gaja-yāna-vid, t, t, t,%} expert
in managing an elephant. {%—Gaja-yūtha, as,%} m. a
herd of elephants. {%—Gaja-yodhin, ī, inī, i,%} fighting
on an elephant. {%—Gaja-rāja, as,%} m. a noble ele-
phant. {%—Gaja-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with ele-
phants. {%—Gaja-vadana, as,%} m. ‘elephant-faced,’ an
epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Gaja-vara, as,%} m. the choicest
or best of elephants. {%—Gaja-vallabhā,%} f. the gum
olibanum tree; another plant, {%= giri-kadalī%}. {%—Gaja-%}
{%vilasitā,%} f. a sort of metre. {%—Gaja-vīthi, is,%} f. ‘the
course of the elephant,’ or that division of the moon's
course in the heavens which contains the signs Rohiṇī,
Mṛga-śiras, and Ārdrā, or (according to others) the
signs Punar-vasu, Tiṣya, and Āśleṣā. {%—Gaja-vraja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} walking like an elephant; ({%am%}), n. the
pace of an elephant; a troop of elephants. {%—Gaja-%}
{%śikṣā,%} f. the knowledge or science of elephants,
elephant-lore. {%—Gaja-śiras, ās,%} m., N. of a Dānava.
{%—Gaja-śīrṣa, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga. {%—Gaja-%}
{%sāhvaya, am,%} n. a famous city, Hāstina-pura, the
capital of the Kurus; [cf. {%gaja-pura.%}] {%—Gaja-%}
{%skandha, as,%} m. ‘having shoulders like an elephant,’
N. of a Dānava. {%—Gaja-sthāna, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), N. of a place. {%—Gaja-snāna, am,%} n. vain or
unproductive efforts, efforts which resemble the ab-
lution of elephants, which after squirting water over
their bodies, end by throwing dust and rubbish. {%—Ga-%}
{%jākhya (˚ja-ākh˚), as,%} m. the plant Cassia Alata or
Tora, {%= cakra-marda%}. {%—Gajāgraṇī (˚ja-ag˚), īs,%}
m. the most excellent among the elephants, an epi-
thet of Airāvata, the elephant of Indra. {%—Gajājīva%}
{%(˚ja-āj˚), as,%} m. an elephant-keeper or driver, (ori-
ginally ‘one who gets his livelihood by elephants.’)
{%—Gajāṇḍa (˚ja-aṇ˚), am,%} n. a kind of carrot
{%(piṇḍa-mūla)%}. {%—Gajādana,%} a various reading for
{%gajāśana,%} q. v. {%—Gajādi-nāmā (˚ja-ād˚),%} f., N.
of a plant, {%= gaja-pippalī%}. {%—Gajādhipati (˚ja-%}
{%adh˚), is,%} m. the prince of elephants, a noble ele-
phant. {%—Gajādhyakṣa (˚ja-adh˚), as,%} m. the mas-
ter or superintendent of the elephants. {%—Gajānana%}
{%(˚ja-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘elephant-faced,’ a N. of Gaṇeśa.
{%—Gajāpasada (˚ja-ap˚), as,%} m. a common or low-
born elephant. {%—Gajāyur-veda (˚ja-āy˚), as,%} m. a
work on the treatment of elephants. {%—Gajāri (˚ja-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. a lion (the enemy of elephants); a par-
ticular tree. {%—Gajārūḍha (˚ja-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} riding
on an elephant. {%—Gajāroha (˚ja-ār˚), as,%} m. an ele-
phant-driver. {%—Gajāśana (˚ja-aś˚), as,%} m. the reli-
gious fig tree, {%= aśvattha; (ā),%} f. the gum olibanum
tree, Boswellia Serrata; hemp (Cannabis Sativa, =
{%bhaṅgā%}); the root of a lotus. {%—Gajāsura-dveṣin %}
[Page0278-c+ 74]
{%(˚ja-as˚), ī,%} m. or {%gajāsuhṛd (˚ja-as˚), t,%} m. the
enemy of the Asura Gaja, an epithet of Śiva. {%—Ga-%}
{%jāsya (˚ja-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘elephant-faced,’ an epithet
of Gaṇeśa; [cf. {%gaja-vadana%} and {%gajānana.%}]
{%—Gajāhva (˚ja-āh˚), am,%} n. a N. of Hāstina-pura
[cf. {%gaja-pura%}]; ({%ā%}), f. another N. of the plant
Gaja-pippalī. {%—Gajāhvaya (˚ja-āh˚), am,%} n. =
{%gaja-pura; (ās),%} m. pl. the inhabitants of Hāstina-
pura. {%—Gajekṣaṇa (˚ja-īk˚), as,%} m., N. of a Dā-
nava. {%—Gajendra (˚ja-in˚), as,%} m. a chief among
elephants, a large and noble elephant; Indra's ele-
phant. {%—Gajendra-karṇa, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Gajendra-nātha, as,%} m. a very princely
elephant. {%—Gajendra-mokṣaṇa, am,%} n. title of a
section of the Vāmana-Purāṇa; also said to be the
title of a part of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Gajendra-%}
{%vikrama, as, ā, am,%} having the valour of an excel-
lent elephant. {%—Gajeṣṭā (˚ja-iṣ˚),%} f. the plant
Batatas Paniculata, {%= vidārī%}. {%—Gajodara (˚ja-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Gajoṣaṇā (˚ja-uṣ˚),%}
f., N. of the plant Gaja-pippalī.
<LEND>

<L>16995<pc>0278-c<k1>gajanavI<k2>gajanavI
{#gajanavI#}¦ {%gajanavī%} = <lang n="arabic">غزنوى</lang>
<LEND>

<L>16996<pc>0278-c<k1>gaYj<k2>gaYj
{#gaYj#}¦ {%gañj,%} cl. 1. P. {%gañjati,%} &c., to sound,
give out a particular sound.
<LEND>

<L>16997<pc>0278-c<k1>gaYja<k2>gaYja
{#gaYja#}¦ {%gañja, as, am,%} m. n. = <lang n="arabic">گنج</lang> a
treasury, a jewel room, the place where plate &c.
is preserved; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. a mine, a jewel
mine; ({%as%}), m. a cowhouse or station of cowherds;
a mart, a place where grain &c. is stored for sale;
disrespect, contempt; ({%ā%}), f. a tavern, a drinking-
vessel (especially one for intoxicating liquors); a hut,
a hovel, the abode of low people; (? wrong reading
for {%Guñjā%}) the plant Guñjā or Retti, Abrus Preca-
torius; [cf. {%gagaṇa-gañja%} and {%dharma-gañja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>16998<pc>0278-c<k1>gaYjana<k2>gaYjana
{%Gañjana, as, ā, am,%}¦ contemning, conquering,
excelling.
<LEND>

<L>16999<pc>0278-c<k1>gaYjavara<k2>gaYjavara
{%Gañjavara, as,%}¦ m. a treasurer, = <lang n="arabic">گنجور</lang> a royal
treasury (?).
<LEND>

<L>17000<pc>0278-c<k1>gaYjikA<k2>gaYjikA
{%Gañjikā,%}¦ f. a tavern.
<LEND>

<L>17001<pc>0278-c<k1>gaYjAkinI<k2>gaYjAkinI
{#gaYjAkinI#}¦ {%gañjākinī,%} f. anything made of
hemp (?); perhaps {%gṛñjākinī%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>17002<pc>0278-c<k1>gaq<k2>gaq
{#gaq#}¦ {%gaḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%gaḍati, jagāḍa, gaḍitum,%}
to distil or drop, to run as a liquid; cl. 10.
P. {%gaḍayati, -yitum,%} to cover, hide.
<LEND>

<L>17003<pc>0278-c<k1>gaqa<k2>gaqa
{%Gaḍa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fish, the young of the
Ophiocephalus Lata; another species, Cyprinus Garra;
a kind of gold-fish; a screen, a covering, a fence;
a moat, a ditch; an impediment, an obstacle; a
country, part of Malwa, Garha or Gara Mandala.
{%—Gaḍa-deśa-ja, am,%} n. or {%gaḍa-lavaṇa, am,%} n.
rock or fossil salt, especially that found in the district
of Saṃvara ({%= gaḍa%}) in the province of Ajmere.
{%—Gaḍottha (˚ḍa-ut˚), am,%} n. a kind of salt, = the
preceding.
<LEND>

<L>17004<pc>0278-c<k1>gaqaka<k2>gaqaka
{%Gaḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fish, {%= gaḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>17005<pc>0278-c<k1>gaqayanta<k2>gaqayanta
{#gaqayanta#}¦ {%gaḍayanta, as,%} m. or {%gaḍayitnu,%}
{%us,%} m. [cf. {%gardayitnu%}], a cloud; [cf. {%gaḍ%} and
{%gaḍera.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17006<pc>0278-c<k1>gaqi<k2>gaqi
{#gaqi#}¦ {%gaḍi, is,%} m. a young steer; a lazy ox.
<LEND>

<L>17007<pc>0278-c<k1>gaqu<k2>gaqu
{#gaqu#}¦ {%gaḍu, us,%} m. an excrescence on the
neck, goitre or bronchocele; a hump on the back;
a hump-backed or crooked man; a javelin, a spear;
an earth-worm; a water-pot; any superfluous ex-
crescence or continuation or addition (as to a poem).
{%—Gaḍu-kaṇṭha, as, ā, am,%} having a goitre. {%—Gaḍu-%}
{%śiras, ās, ās, as,%} having an excrescence on the head.
<LEND>

<L>17008<pc>0278-c<k1>gaquka<k2>gaquka
{%Gaḍuka, as,%}¦ m. a water-pot; a finger-ring; N. of
a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of this man.
<LEND>

<L>17009<pc>0278-c<k1>gaqura<k2>gaqura
{%Gaḍura, as, ā, am,%}¦ hump-backed, crooked, bent.
<LEND>

<L>17010<pc>0278-c<k1>gaqula<k2>gaqula
{%Gaḍula, as, ī, am,%}¦ hump-backed, crooked.
<LEND>

<L>17011<pc>0278-c<k1>gaqera<k2>gaqera
{#gaqera#}¦ {%gaḍera, as,%} m. a cloud; [cf. {%gaḍa-%}
{%yanta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17012<pc>0278-c<k1>gaqola<k2>gaqola
{#gaqola#}¦ {%gaḍola, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%gaḍ%}),
raw sugar; a mouthful.
<LEND>
[Page0279-a+ 78]

<L>17013<pc>0279-a<k1>gaqqArikA<k2>gaqqArikA
{#gaqqArikA#}¦ {%gaḍḍārikā,%} f., N. of a river with
a very strong current, of which the source and course
are unknown; or (according to others) a single ewe
going in front of a flock of sheep.
<LEND>

<L>17014<pc>0279-a<k1>gaqquka<k2>gaqquka
{#gaqquka#}¦ {%gaḍḍuka%} or {%gaḍḍūka, as,%} m. a kind
of water-jar, a golden vase; [cf. {%gaḍu%} and {%gaḍuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17015<pc>0279-a<k1>gaR<k2>gaR
{#gaR#}¦ {%gaṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%gaṇayati, -yitum,%}
{%ajagaṇat%} or {%ajīgaṇat,%} to count, number,
enumerate, sum up, add up, reckon, calculate, com-
pute, take into account; collect into one series; to
esteem, think worth, value at (with inst., e. g. {%na%}
{%gaṇayāmi taṃ tṛṇena,%} I do not value him at a
straw); to consider, regard as, enumerate among
(with loc.); to ascribe, attribute to (with loc.); to
attend to, take notice of; (with a negative particle),
not to care about, leave unnoticed (e. g. {%na gaṇayati%}
{%mṛtyum,%} he does not care for death).
<LEND>

<L>17016<pc>0279-a<k1>gaRa<k2>gaRa
{%Gaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a flock, troop, multitude, number,
tribe, series, class, &c. (of animate or inanimate
beings), a body of followers or attendants; troops or
classes of inferior deities (see {%gaṇa-devatā%}), especially
certain troops of demi-gods considered as Śiva's
attendants and under the special superintendence of
the god Gaṇeśa (so called fr. {%gaṇa-īśa,%} ‘lord of the
troops,’ but the word {%gaṇa%} may also denote a single
attendant of Śiva); a N. of Gaṇeśa; a company, any
assemblage, society, or association of men formed for
the attainment of the same aims; (with Jainas) the
nine assemblies of Ṛṣis under the Arhat Vīra; a
sect in philosophy or religion; a small body of
troops, = 3 Gulmas or 27 chariots and as many
elephants, 81 horses, and 135 foot; a series or
group of asterisms or lunar mansions classed under
three heads (that of the gods, that of men, and
that of the Rākṣasas or demons); (in arithmetic)
a number; (in metre) a foot or four instants; (in
grammar) a series of roots or words belonging to
the same rule and called after the first word of the
series (e. g. {%ad-ādi,%} the Gaṇa {%ad%} &c. or the whole
series of roots of the 2nd class; {%gargādi,%} the Gaṇa
{%garga%} &c. or the series of words commencing with
{%garga%}); a kind of perfume, commonly Cor ({%gaṇa-%}
{%hāsaka, caura, caṇḍā%}); N. of an author; [cf.
{%ahar-gaṇa, deva-gaṇa,%} &c.] {%—Gaṇa-karman, a,%}
n. a rite common to a whole class; [cf. {%gaṇa-yajña.%}]
{%—Gaṇa-kāra, as,%} m. a classifier, one who arranges
into classes, one who collects grammatical Gaṇas; an
epithet of Bhīma-sena. {%—Gaṇa-kāri, is,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Gaṇa-kumāra, as,%} m., N. of the founder
of a sect worshipping Haridrā-gaṇapati. {%—Gaṇa-kṛ-%}
{%tvas,%} ind. for a whole series of times, for a number
of times. {%—Gaṇa-gati, is,%} f. a particular high
number; [cf. {%gaṇanā-gati.%}] {%—Gaṇa-cakraka, am,%}
n. a dinner eaten in common by a party of virtuous
men. {%—Gaṇa-cchanda, as,%} n. a metre measured by
feet. {%—Gaṇa-tā,%} f. or {%gaṇa-tva, am,%} n. the forming
a class or multitude or assemblage, the belonging to
a party or faction; a cabal; collusion; classification;
arithmetic; the office of an attendant of Śiva.
{%—Gaṇa-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a dancing-master.
{%—Gaṇa-dīkṣā,%} f. initiation of a number or class;
performance of rites for a number of persons; initia-
tion of a particular kind in which Gaṇeśa is especially
worshipped. {%—Gaṇa-dīkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} one who
officiates for a number of persons or for various
castes and people (as a priest); one who has been
initiated into the worship of Gaṇeśa. {%—Gaṇa-deva,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Gaṇa-devatā, ās,%} f. pl.
troops of deities, deities who generally appear in
classes, as the Ādityas, Viśvas, Vasus, Tuṣitas,
Ābhāsvaras, Anilas, Mahārājikas, Sādhyas, and Ru-
dras. {%—Gaṇa-dravya, am,%} n. public property, com-
mon stock; a variety of articles. {%—Gaṇa-dvīpa,%}
{%as,%} m. a group of islands or the N. of a particular
island (?). {%—Gaṇa-dhara, as,%} m. the head of a class
or number, the teacher of a school; (with Jainas)
the head of an assemblage of Ṛṣis under the Arhat
Vīra. {%—Gaṇa-nātha, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva; the
[Page0279-b+ 81]
god Gaṇeśa. {%—Gaṇa-nāyaka, as,%} m. the leader or
chief of the attendants of any god; the chief of Śiva's
attendants, i. e. the god Gaṇeśa; the head of an
assemblage; ({%ikā%}), f. an epithet of the deity Durgā.
{%—Gaṇa-pa, as,%} m. {%= gaṇeśa%}. {%—Gaṇa-pati, is,%} m.
the leader or chief of a class or troop or assemblage,
an epithet of Bṛhaspati or Indra or Śiva; the god
Gaṇeśa; N. of a king; N. of a scholiast on the
Caura-pañcāśikā; N. of a poet. {%—Gaṇapati-%}
{%khaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. title of a section of the
Brahmavaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Gaṇapati-nātha, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Gaṇapati-pūjana, am,%} n. the
worship of Gaṇeśa. {%—Gaṇapati-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m.,
N. of the father of Govindānanda. {%—Gaṇapati-%}
{%stava-rāja, as,%} m. title of a hymn in praise of
Gaṇeśa. {%—Gaṇapati-stotra, am,%} n. prayers ad-
dressed to Gaṇeśa. {%—Gaṇapaty-ārādhana, am,%}
n. a hymn in honour of Gaṇeśa, attributed to
Kaṅkola. {%—Gaṇa-parvata, as,%} m. the mountain
frequented by troops (of demi-gods, i. e. Kailāsa,
this mountain being the residence of Śiva's attendants
as well as of the Kinnaras and Yakṣas, attendants
of Kuvera). {%—Gaṇa-pāṭha, as,%} m. a collection of the
Gaṇas or series of words (in grammar) which fall
under the same grammatical rule. {%—Gaṇa-pīṭhaka,%}
{%am,%} n. the breast or bosom. {%—Gaṇa-puṅgava%} or
{%gaṇa-pramukha, as,%} m. the head of a tribe or
class; also {%gaṇa-pūjya%}. {%—Gaṇa-pūrva, as, ā, am,%}
one who can enumerate a series of ancestors. {%—Gaṇa-%}
{%bhartṛ, tā,%} m. lord of the troops of deities or demi-
gods, epithet of Śiva. {%—Gaṇa-bhojana, am,%} n.
eating in common. {%—Gaṇa-mukhya, as,%} m. the
chief of an assemblage. {%—Gaṇa-yajña, as,%} m. a rite
common to all; [cf. {%gaṇa-karman.%}] {%—Gaṇa-yāga,%}
{%as,%} m. worship of the troops or classes of deities.
{%—Gaṇa-ratna-kāra, as,%} m. the author of the
Pearls of Gaṇas, i. e. Vardhamāna. {%—Gaṇa-ratna-ma-%}
{%hodadhi, is,%} m. ‘the great ocean in which the Gaṇas
form the pearls,’ title of a collection of grammatical
Gaṇas by Vardhamāna. {%—Gaṇa-rājya, am,%} n., N. of
an empire in Dakṣiṇāpatha {%—Gaṇa-rātra, as, am,%}
m. n. a series or multitude of nights. {%—Gaṇa-rūpa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a plant, swallow-wort, Calotropis
Gigantea, {%= arka%}. {%—Gaṇa-rūpaka, as,%} m. {%= rā-%}
{%jārka%}. {%—Gaṇa-rūpin, ī,%} m. swallow-wort, the white
sort. {%—Gaṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} consisting of a series
or class &c.; followed by attendants; ({%tī%}), f., N. of
the mother of Divodāsa or Dhanvantari. {%—Gaṇa-%}
{%vatī-suta, as,%} m., N. of a sage and physician, also
called Divodāsa or Dhanvantari or Kāśirāja. {%—Gaṇa-%}
{%vṛtta, am,%} n. a kind of metre measured by me-
trical feet. {%—Gaṇa-vyākhyāna, am,%} n. ‘explanation
of the Gaṇas,’ title of a literary work. {%—Gaṇa-%}
{%śas,%} ind. by troops or classes. {%—Gaṇa-śrī, īs,%}
{%īs, i,%} Ved. associated in troops, associating. {%—Gaṇa-%}
{%hāsa%} or {%gaṇa-hāsaka, as,%} m. a species of perfume,
{%= caṇḍā%} &c. {%—Gaṇāgraṇī (˚ṇa-ag˚), īs,%} m. a
N. of the god Gaṇeśa, leader of the troops of
deities. {%—Gaṇācala (˚ṇa-ac˚), as,%} m., a N. of the
mountain Kailāsa as the residence of the Gaṇas or
troops of demi-gods. {%—Gaṇācārya (˚ṇa-āc˚), as,%} m.
the teacher of a multitude, a teacher of the people.
{%—Gaṇādhipa (˚ṇa-adh˚), as,%} m. a N. of Śiva;
also of the god Gaṇeśa; the chief of a troop of
soldiers, of a class of disciples, of a body of men or
animals; (with Jainas) the chief of an assemblage of
Ṛṣis under the Arhat Vīra. {%—Gaṇādhipati (˚ṇa-%}
{%adh), is,%} m. a N. of Śiva; also of the god Gaṇeśa.
{%—Gaṇānna (˚ṇa-an˚), am,%} n. a mess, food pre-
pared for a number of persons in common. {%—Gaṇā-%}
{%bhyantara (˚ṇa-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} one of a troop
or number; ({%as%}), m. a member of any religious
association. {%—Gaṇendra (˚ṇa-in˚), as,%} m., N. of a
Buddha. {%—Gaṇeśa (˚ṇa-īśa), as,%} m. a N. of the god
of wisdom and of obstacles, son of Śiva and Pārvatī,
(or, according to one legend, of Pārvatī alone. Though
Gaṇeśa causes obstacles he also removes them;
hence he is invoked at the commencement of all
undertakings and at the opening of all compositions
with the words {%namo Gaṇeśāya vighneśvarāya,%}
&c. He is represented as a short fat man, with a
[Page0279-c+ 81]
protuberant belly, frequently riding on a rat or
attended by one, and to denote his sagacity has the
head of an elephant, which however has only one tusk.
The appellation {%Gaṇeśa,%} with other similar com-
pounds, alludes to his office as chief of the various
classes of subordinate gods, who are regarded as
Śiva's attendants. He is said to have written down
the Mahā-bhārata as dictated by Vyāsa); N. of Śiva;
of a renowned astronomer of the sixteenth century;
N. of a son of Rāmadeva, author of a commen-
tary on the Nalodaya; N. of a son of Viśvanātha-
dīkṣita and grandson of Bhāvarāma-kṛṣṇa, author
of the commentary called Cic-candrikā. {%—Gaṇeśa-%}
{%kumbha, as,%} m., N. of a rocky cave in Orissa.
{%—Gaṇeśa-kusuma, as,%} m. a kind of oleander with
red flowers. {%—Gaṇeśa-khaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. the
third book of the Brahmavaivarta-Purāṇa; title of a
book of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Gaṇeśa-purāṇa, am,%}
n. title of an Upa-Purāṇa. {%—Gaṇeśa-pūjā,%} f. the
worship of Gaṇeśa. {%—Gaṇeśa-bhujaṅga-prayāta-%}
{%stotra, am,%} n. a hymn in praise of Gaṇeśa, attributed
to Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Gaṇeśa-bhūṣaṇa, am,%} n. red
lead. {%—Gaṇeśa-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a copyist of
the last century. {%—Gaṇeśa-sahasranāman, a,%} n. a
part of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Gaṇeśa-stava-rāja,%}
{%as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a part of the Bhaviṣya-
Purāṇa. {%—Gaṇeśa-stuti, is,%} f. a hymn in honour of
Gaṇeśa by Rāghava. {%—Gaṇeśāna (˚ṇa-īś˚), as,%} m.
the god Gaṇeśa. {%—Gaṇeśvara (˚ṇa-īś˚), as,%} m. the
chief of a troop, leader of a band &c.; N. of a
being mentioned in the Hari-vaṃśa; the chief of the
animals, i. e. the lion. {%—Gaṇotsāha (˚ṇa-ut˚), as,%}
m. the rhinoceros (‘avoiding assemblages?’).
<LEND>

<L>17017<pc>0279-c<k1>gaRaka<k2>gaRaka
{%Gaṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ bought for a large sum;
({%as%}), m. one who reckons, an arithmetician; an
astrologer, a calculator of nativities &c.; an assem-
blage of eight stars; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of an astrologer.
<LEND>

<L>17018<pc>0279-c<k1>gaRatiTa<k2>gaRatiTa
{%Gaṇatitha, as, ī, am,%}¦ forming a troop or assemblage.
<LEND>

<L>17019<pc>0279-c<k1>gaRana<k2>gaRana
{%Gaṇana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. reckoning, counting, calcula-
tion; adding, collecting under one head; enumerat-
ing; considering, supposing, believing; regarding,
taking notice of, consideration. {%—Gaṇanā-gati, is,%}
f. a particular high number, {%= gaṇa-gati%}. {%—Gaṇanā-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. an arithmetician; the master of prudent
calculation, an epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Gaṇanā-mahā-%}
{%mātra, as,%} m. a minister of finance.
<LEND>

<L>17020<pc>0279-c<k1>gaRanIya<k2>gaRanIya
{%Gaṇanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ calculable, to be counted
or reckoned, to be classed; numerable.
<LEND>

<L>17021<pc>0279-c<k1>gaRi<k2>gaRi
{%Gaṇi, is,%}¦ m. one who is familiar with the sacred
writings and the auxiliary sciences; ({%is%}), f. counting,
enumerating {%—Gaṇi-piṭaka, am,%} n. the twelve
sacred writings of the Jainas collectively.
<LEND>

<L>17022<pc>0279-c<k1>gaRikA<k2>gaRikA
{%Gaṇikā,%}¦ f. a harlot, a courtezan; a female ele-
phant; N. of several plants, a sort of jasmine, Jasmi-
num Auriculatum; another plant, Æschynomene
Sesban, {%= tarkārī;%} another plant, commonly called
Gaṇikārikā; counting, enumerating; apprehension.
<LEND>

<L>17023<pc>0279-c<k1>gaRikArikA<k2>gaRikArikA
{%Gaṇikārikā,%}¦ f., N. of a small tree with a very
fetid leaf, commonly Gaṇiyārī, or also Vaḍagaṇiyārī,
the wood of which is used in attrition for the purpose
of producing flame, Premna Spinosa; [cf. the last.]
<LEND>

<L>17024<pc>0279-c<k1>gaRikArI<k2>gaRikArI
{%Gaṇikārī,%}¦ f. a plant similar to the preceding,
commonly called Gaṇiyārī.
<LEND>

<L>17025<pc>0279-c<k1>gaRita<k2>gaRita
{%Gaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ numbered, counted, reckoned,
calculated; ({%am%}), n. reckoning, calculating, the
science of computation (comprising arithmetic, alge-
bra, and geometry, severally called {%pāṭī-gaṇitam%}
or {%vyakta-gaṇitam, vīja-gaṇitam,%} and {%rekhā-%}
{%gaṇitam%}); the astronomical or astrological part of
a Jyotiḥ-śāstra, with exception of the portion treating
of nativities; the sum of a progression, a sum in
general. {%—Gaṇita-kaumudī,%} f. title of a com-
mentary on the Līlāvatī. {%—Gaṇita-tattva-cintā-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. title of a commentary on Bhāskara's
Sūrya-Siddhānta. {%—Gaṇita-mālatī,%} f. or {%gaṇita-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m. titles of two mathematical works.
{%—Gaṇita-śāstra, am,%} n. the book or science of
computation; see above. {%—Gaṇitādhyāya (˚ta-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. title of a chapter in the Brahma-
Siddhānta. {%—Gaṇitāmṛta-sāgarī (˚ta-am˚),%} f. title
of a commentary on the Līlāvatī.
<LEND>
[Page0280-a+ 79]

<L>17026<pc>0280-a<k1>gaRitavya<k2>gaRitavya
{%Gaṇitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be counted or num-
bered, to be calculated.
<LEND>

<L>17027<pc>0280-a<k1>gaRitin<k2>gaRitin
{%Gaṇitin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who has made a calculation.
<LEND>

<L>17028<pc>0280-a<k1>gaRin<k2>gaRin
{%Gaṇin, ī,%}¦ m. a teacher (‘having a class of pupils’).
<LEND>

<L>17029<pc>0280-a<k1>gaRIBUta<k2>gaRIBUta
{%Gaṇī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ included in any class or
troop, calculated.
<LEND>

<L>17030<pc>0280-a<k1>gaReya<k2>gaReya
{%Gaṇeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ numerable, calculable, what
may be reckoned or counted.
<LEND>

<L>17031<pc>0280-a<k1>gaReru<k2>gaReru
{%Gaṇeru, us,%}¦ m. the plant Pterospermum Aceri-
folium [cf. {%karṇikāra%}]; ({%us%}), f. a harlot, a whore;
a female elephant.
<LEND>

<L>17032<pc>0280-a<k1>gaRerukA<k2>gaRerukA
{%Gaṇerukā,%}¦ f. a bawd, a procuress, a female servant.
<LEND>

<L>17033<pc>0280-a<k1>gaReSa<k2>gaReSa
{%Gaṇeśa.%}¦ See under {%gaṇa,%} p. 279.
<LEND>

<L>17034<pc>0280-a<k1>gaRya<k2>gaRya
{%Gaṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ calculable, to be counted or
calculated; (at the end of compounds) belonging to
a multitude or class or troop &c.
<LEND>

<L>17035<pc>0280-a<k1>gaRq<k2>gaRq
{#gaRq#}¦ {%gaṇḍ%} (probably fr. {%gaṇḍa,%} the cheek),
cl. 1. P. {%gaṇḍati%} (?), to affect the cheek,
be rough as the cheek (?).
<LEND>

<L>17036<pc>0280-a<k1>gaRqa<k2>gaRqa
{%Gaṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. the cheek, the whole side of the
face including the temple; an elephant's cheek or
temple; a bubble, a boil, a pimple; a goitre and
other excrescences of the neck; a joint, a bone; the
bladder; a mark, spot; part of a horse's trappings,
a stud or button fixed as an ornament upon the
harness; a rhinoceros [cf. {%gaṇḍaka%} and {%gaṇḍāṅga%}];
a hero [cf. {%gaṇḍīra%}]; the abrupt interchange of
question and answer, as one of the characteristics of
the dramatic composition, called Vīthi; the tenth
Yoga or one of the twenty-seven portions of a circle
on the plane of the ecliptic [cf. {%yoga%}]; an astro-
nomical period; a pledge, deposit (?). In composi-
tion {%gaṇḍa%} may imply chief, best, excellent [cf.
{%gaṇḍa-grāma%} and {%gaṇḍa-mūrkha%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
the female attendant of the seven sages; [cf. {%gaḍu,%}
{%gaṇḍi, gaṇḍu,%} &c.] {%—Gaṇḍa-kaṇḍu, us,%} m., N.
of a Yakṣa. {%—Gaṇḍa-kārī,%} f., N. of two plants;
[cf. {%khadirī%} and {%varāha-krāntā.%}] {%—Gaṇḍa-kālī,%} f.,
N. of a plant; [cf. {%khadirī%}.] {%—Gaṇḍa-kusuma,%}
{%am,%} n. the juice that exudes from the elephant's
temples during rut. {%—Gaṇḍa-kūpa, as,%} m. the peak
or summit of a mountain. {%—Gaṇḍa-gātra, am,%} n.
the fruit of the Anona Reticulata or Squamosa, com-
monly called Ātā or custard apple. {%—Gaṇḍa-grāma,%}
{%as,%} m. any large or considerable village. {%—Gaṇḍa-%}
{%dūrvā,%} f. a kind of Dūrvā grass. {%—Gaṇḍa-deśa%}
or {%gaṇḍa-pradeśa, as,%} m. the region of the cheek,
the cheek. {%—Gaṇḍa-phalaka, am,%} n. the cheek
fancifully regarded as a seed-vessel. {%—Gaṇḍa-bhitti,%}
{%is,%} f. a dimple in the cheek; the openings in the
temples of an elephant, from which a juice exudes in
the time of rut. {%—Gaṇḍa-mālā,%} f. or according to
some also {%gaṇḍa-māla, as,%} m. inflammation of the
glands of the neck &c. {%—Gaṇḍa-mālikā,%} f. a kind
of Mimosa {%(lajjālu)%}. {%—Gaṇḍa-mālin, ī, inī, i,%}
having the glands of the neck inflamed. {%—Gaṇḍa-%}
{%mūrkha, as,%} m. exceedingly foolish, very stupid.
{%—Gaṇḍa-vyūha, as,%} m. title of a Buddhist Sūtra
work. {%—Gaṇḍa-śilā,%} f. any large rock. {%—Gaṇḍa-%}
{%śaila, as,%} m. a huge rock or rocky fragment thrown
down by an earthquake, storm, &c.; the forehead.
{%—Gaṇḍa-sāhvayā,%} f., N. of a river, {%= gaṇḍakī (?).%}
{%—Gaṇḍa-sthala, am, ī,%} n. f. the cheek; the tem-
ples of an elephant. {%—Gaṇḍāṅga (˚ḍa-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
a rhinoceros; [cf. {%gaṇḍa%} and {%gaṇḍaka.%}] {%—Gaṇḍo-%}
{%padhāna (˚ḍa-up), am,%} n. a pillow.
<LEND>

<L>17037<pc>0280-a<k1>gaRqaka<k2>gaRqaka
{%Gaṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a rhinoceros [cf. {%gaṇḍa%} and
{%gaṇḍāṅga%} above]; an obstacle or impediment; dis-
junction, separation; a mode of reckoning by fours,
a peculiar manuer of counting; a coin of the value of
four cowries; a kind of science, astrological science
or a part of it; a mark, spot; a kind of metre con-
taining four lines of twenty syllables each; an epithet
of the Videhas living on the river Gaṇḍakī; an
epithet of Kāla, the brother of Prasena-jit; ({%ī%}), f.,
N. of the river Gaṇḍakī in the northern part of
India; ({%ā%}), f. a lump, a ball. {%—Gaṇḍaka-vatī,%} f.
another N. of the river Gaṇḍakī.
<LEND>

<L>17038<pc>0280-a<k1>gaRqalin<k2>gaRqalin
{%Gaṇḍalin, ī,%}¦ m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>
[Page0280-b+ 78]

<L>17039<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRqAri<k2>gaRqAri
{%Gaṇḍāri, is,%}¦ m. the plant Bauhinia Variegata, =
{%kovidāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>17040<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRqAlI<k2>gaRqAlI
{%Gaṇḍālī,%}¦ f. a bent grass with white blossoms, a
white sort of Dūrvā ({%sitā dūrvā%}), Agrostis Linearis;
also N. of two other plants, {%= gaṇḍa-dūrvā, sar-%}
{%pākṣī.%}
<LEND>

<L>17041<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRqi<k2>gaRqi
{%Gaṇḍi, is,%}¦ m. the trunk of a tree from the root to
the beginning of the branches; goitre or bronchocele.
<LEND>

<L>17042<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRqikA<k2>gaRqikA
{%Gaṇḍikā,%}¦ f. anything advanced beyond the first
stage or commencement; a kind of beverage (in this
sense also {%gaṇḍikākāra ?%}); a declivity (?). This
last sense appears probable in some names of places
(e. g. in {%apara-gaṇḍikā, pūrva-pūrvānugaṇḍikā,%}
&c.), hence {%anugaṇḍikā%} may be the country border-
ing on a declivity.
<LEND>

<L>17043<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRqinI<k2>gaRqinI
{%Gaṇḍinī,%}¦ f. an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>17044<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRqIra<k2>gaRqIra
{%Gaṇḍīra, as,%}¦ m. a kind of pot-herb, described as
growing in watery ground, but according to some a
species of cucumber; a hero, a champion [cf. {%gaṇḍa%}];
({%ī%}), f. the plant Tithymalus Antiquorum, {%= sohuṇḍa;%}
[cf. {%gāṇḍīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17045<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRqu<k2>gaRqu
{%Gaṇḍu, us, us,%}¦ m. f. a pillow [cf. {%gaṇḍopadhāna%}];
({%ū, ūs%}), f. a joint; a knot; a bone; oil. {%—Gaṇḍū-%}
{%pada, as,%} m. a kind of worm, an earth-worm; ({%ī%}),
f. a small or female worm. {%—Gaṇḍūpada-bhava,%}
{%am,%} n. lead.
<LEND>

<L>17046<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRqula<k2>gaRqula
{%Gaṇḍula, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, crooked; [cf. {%gaḍula.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17047<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRqUza<k2>gaRqUza
{%Gaṇḍūṣa, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a mouthful, a handful; a
handful of water, water &c. held in the hollowed palm
of the hand for rincing the mouth &c.; filling the
mouth, rincing it, &c.; the tip of an elephant's
trunk; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Śūra and brother
of Vasu-deva.
<LEND>

<L>17048<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRqola<k2>gaRqola
{%Gaṇḍola, as, am,%}¦ m. n. raw sugar [cf. {%gaḍola%}
and {%guḍa%}]; ({%as%}), m. a mouthful [cf. {%gaṇḍūṣa%}].
<LEND>

<L>17049<pc>0280-b<k1>gaRya<k2>gaRya
{#gaRya#}¦ {%gaṇya.%} See under rt. {%gaṇ.%}
<LEND>

<L>17050<pc>0280-b<k1>gat<k2>gat
{#gat#}¦ {%gat, gata,%} &c. See rt. {%gam,%} p. 282.
<LEND>

<L>17051<pc>0280-b<k1>gad<k2>gad
{#gad#}¦ {%gad,%} cl. 1. P. {%gadati, jagāda, gadiṣ-%}
{%yati, agādīt%} or {%agadīt, gaditum,%} to speak
articulately, speak, say, relate, tell anything to a person
(with two acc.); to enumerate; to name, call; cl.
10. P. {%gadayati, -yitum,%} to thunder: Caus. {%gāda-%}
{%yati, -yitum:%} Desid. {%jigadiṣati,%} to intend or wish
to speak or tell: Intens. {%jāgadyate, jāgatti;%} [cf.
Lith. <nsi>gadijos, zadas, zodis, giedmi;</nsi> Pol. <nsi>gadac;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>gadh.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17052<pc>0280-b<k1>gada<k2>gada
{%Gada, as,%}¦ m. speaking, speech; a sentence; N.
of a son of Vasu-deva and younger brother of
Kṛṣṇa; disease, sickness; ({%am%}), n. poison; [cf.
{%a-gada.%}] {%—Gada-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Gadākhya (˚da-ākh˚), am,%} n., N. of a plant,
{%= kuṣṭha%}. {%—Gadāgada (˚da-ag˚), au,%} m. du. the
two Aśvins, physicians of Svarga. {%—Gadāgraja%}
{%(˚da-ag˚), as,%} m. the elder brother of Gada, epithet
of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Gadāgraṇī (˚da-ag˚), īs,%} m. the
chief of all diseases, consumption. {%—Gadāmbara%}
{%(˚da-am˚), as,%} m. a cloud. {%—Gadārāti (˚da-ar˚),%}
{%is,%} m. a drug, a medicament (‘the enemy of
diseases’). {%—Gadāhva%} or {%gadāhvaya (˚da-āh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of Costus, Costus Speciosus.
<LEND>

<L>17053<pc>0280-b<k1>gadayitnu<k2>gadayitnu
{%Gadayitnu, us, us, u,%}¦ loquacious, talkative, talking
much or idly; libidinous, desirous, lustful; ({%us%}), m.
a bow; a N. of Kāma or Kandarpa, the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>17054<pc>0280-b<k1>gadA<k2>gadA
{%Gadā,%}¦ f. a mace, club, bludgeon; the plant Bignonia
Suaveolens; a particular constellation. {%—Gadāgrapāṇi%}
{%(˚dā-ag˚), is, is, i,%} having a mace in the right hand.
{%—Gadā-dhara, as, ā, am,%} bearing a club; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa [cf. {%kaumodakī%}]; N. of a
physician; N. of the author of the work Viṣaya-
vicāra; N. of the father of Mukunda-priya and uncle
of Rāmānanda &c. {%—Gadādhara-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N.
of an author. {%—Gadā-parvan, a,%} n. title of a book
of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Gadā-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} a club-
bearer, one who fights with a mace; an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Gadā-yuddha, am,%} n. a fight with clubs
or bludgeons. {%—Gadāyudha (˚dā-āy), as, ā, am,%}
armed with a club. {%—Gadāvasāna (˚dā-av˚), am,%}
n., N. of a place near Mathurā (where the mace
[Page0280-c+ 77]
thrown by Jarāsandha rested). {%—Gadā-hasta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} armed with a mace, mace-handed.
<LEND>

<L>17055<pc>0280-c<k1>gadita<k2>gadita
{%Gadita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken, said, related; ({%am%}),
n. speaking, speech. {%—Gadita-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having spoken, speaking.
<LEND>

<L>17056<pc>0280-c<k1>gadin<k2>gadin
{%Gadin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ armed with a club, a mace-
bearer; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Gadi-siṃha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>17057<pc>0280-c<k1>gadgada<k2>gadgada
{%Gadgada, as, ā, am,%}¦ stammering, stuttering;
({%am%}), n. stammering; indistinct or convulsive utter-
ance, as sobbing &c. {%—Gadgada-tva, am,%} n. stam-
mering. {%—Gadgada-dhvani, is,%} m. low inarticulate
expression of joy or grief. {%—Gadgada-pada, am,%} n.
inarticulate speech. {%—Gadgada-vāc, k,%} f. inarticulate
or convulsive speech, interrupted by sobbing &c.
{%—Gadgada-svara, as,%} m. indistinct or stammering
utterance; ({%as, ā, am%}), uttering stammering sounds;
({%as%}), m. a buffalo; N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
<LEND>

<L>17058<pc>0280-c<k1>gadgadita<k2>gadgadita
{%Gadgadita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stammered.
<LEND>

<L>17059<pc>0280-c<k1>gadgadya<k2>gadgadya
{%Gadgadya,%}¦ nom. P. {%gadgadyati,%} to stammer.
<LEND>

<L>17060<pc>0280-c<k1>gadya<k2>gadya
{%Gadya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken or uttered;
({%am%}), n. prose, composition not metrical yet framed
in accordance with harmony, elaborate prose com-
position.
<LEND>

<L>17061<pc>0280-c<k1>gadAya<k2>gadAya
{#gadAya#}¦ {%gadāya,%} nom. A., Ved. {%gadāyate,%}
{%yitum,%} to become lazy or idle; [cf. {%gaḍi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17062<pc>0280-c<k1>gadyARaka<k2>gadyARaka
{#gadyARaka#}¦ {%gadyāṇaka%} or {%gadyānaka%} or {%ga-%}
{%dyālaka, am,%} n. a weight, = 32 Guñjās or berries
of the plant Abrus Precatorius, or = 64 such Guñjās
with physicians.
<LEND>

<L>17063<pc>0280-c<k1>gaD<k2>gaD
{#gaD#}¦ {%gadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%gadhyati,%} to be
mixed.
<LEND>

<L>17064<pc>0280-c<k1>gaDya<k2>gaDya
{%Gadhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be seized, to be
gained as booty.
<LEND>

<L>17065<pc>0280-c<k1>gantavya<k2>gantavya
{#gantavya#}¦ {%gantavya,%} &c. See under rt. {%gam.%}
<LEND>

<L>17066<pc>0280-c<k1>gandikA<k2>gandikA
{#gandikA#}¦ {%gandikā,%} f., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>17067<pc>0280-c<k1>ganD<k2>ganD
{#ganD#}¦ {%gandh,%} cl. 10. A. {%gandhayate, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to injure, hurt, kill; to move, to
go; to ask or beg; [cf. {%gandhana%} and {%gandhaya;%}
cf. also Lith. <nsi>gandinu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17068<pc>0280-c<k1>ganDa<k2>ganDa
{#ganDa#}¦ {%gandha as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%gandh%}), smell, odour, (sometimes nine or ten kinds
are enumerated, viz. {%iṣṭa, aniṣṭa, madhura, kaṭu,%}
{%nirhārin, saṃhata, snigdha, rūkṣa, viśada,%}
{%amla%}); a fragrant substance, fragrance, scent, (in
comp. = fragrant, see {%gandhāmbu%} &c.), a per-
fume; sulphur [cf. {%gandhaka%}]; pounded sandal-
wood; myrrh [cf. {%bala%}]; the tree Hyperanthera
Moringa; the mere smell of anything, a small
quantity, a little; connection, relationship; a neigh-
bour; pride, arrogance; an epithet of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f.
the plant Curcuma Amhaldi or Zerumbet; the plant
Desmodium Gangeticum, {%= śāla-parṇī;%} the bud
of the plant Michelia Champaca; N. of a metre
consisting of four lines with 17 + 18 + 17 + 18 sylla-
bles; ({%am%}), n. smell; black aloe-wood. {%—Gandha-%}
{%kandaka, as,%} m. the plant Scirpus Kysoor, {%= kaśeru.%}
{%—Gandha-kārikā,%} f. a female servant whose busi-
ness is to prepare perfumes; a female artisan living
in the house of another woman. {%—Gandha-kālikā%}
or {%gandha-kālī,%} f., N. of the mother of the poet
Vyāsa; N. of an Apsaras. {%—Gandha-kāṣṭha,%}
{%am,%} n. a fragrant wood, as sandal, aloe-wood, &c.;
a species of sandal-wood {%(śambara-candana).%}
{%—Gandha-kuṭī.%} f. a kind of perfume, commonly
Mura; [cf. {%gandha-kūṭī.%}] {%—Gandha-kusumā,%} f. a
kind of plant, {%= gaṇikārī%}. {%—Gandha-kūṭī,%} f. the hall
of fragrances; (perhaps for {%gandha-kuṭī.%}) {%—Gandha-%}
{%kelikā,%} f. musk; [cf. {%gandha-celikā.%}] {%—Gandha-%}
{%kokilā,%} f. a kind of perfume. {%—Gandha-kheḍa,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of fragrant grass. Andropogon Schœ-
nanthus; also {%gandha-kheḍaka;%} [cf. {%gandha-%}
{%tṛṇa.%}] {%—Gandha-ga, as, ā, am,%} taking a scent,
smelling; redolent. {%—Gandha-gaja, as,%} m. ‘scent-
elephant,’ an elephant of the best kind; [cf. {%gandha-%}
{%dvipa.%}] {%—Gandha-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} having the
property of odour. {%—Gandha-ghrāṇa, am,%} n. the
[Page0281-a+ 81]
smelling of any odour. {%—Gandha-celikā,%} f. musk.
{%—Gandha-jaṭilā,%} f. the plant Acorus Calamus; [cf.
{%vacā.%}] {%—Gandha-jala, am,%} n. fragrant water.
{%—Gandha-jāta, am,%} n. the leaf of the Laurus
Cassia. {%—Gandha-jñā,%} f. the nose. {%—Gandha-%}
{%taṇḍula, as,%} m. fragrant rice. {%—Gandha-tūrya,%}
{%am,%} n. a musical instrument, one of a loud sound
used in battle (a drum or trumpet). {%—Gandha-%}
{%tṛṇa, am,%} n. fragrant grass, Andropogon Schœ-
nanthus. {%—Gandha-taila, am,%} n. a kind of oil pre-
pared with fragrant substances. {%—Gandha-tvac, k,%}
f. a kind of perfume, the fragrant bark of the tree
Feronia Elephantum {%(elavāluka)%}. {%—Gandha-dalā,%}
f., N. of a plant, {%= aja-modā%}. {%—Gandha-dāru, u,%}
n. aloe-wood. {%—Gandha-dravya, am,%} n. a fragrant
substance. {%—Gandha-dvipa, as,%} m. an elephant of
the best class, very much feared by other elephants
(supposed to emit a peculiar smell). {%—Gandha-%}
{%dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} bearing fragrances; ({%ī%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%gandha-pālin.%}] {%—Gandha-%}
{%dhūma-ja, as,%} m. a kind of perfume; [cf. {%svādu.%}]
{%—Gandha-dhūli, is,%} f. musk, the fragrant secretion
of the musk deer. {%—Gandha-nakula, as,%} m. the
musk rat of Bengal, Sorex Moschatus. {%—Gandha-%}
{%nākulī,%} f., N. of a plant, possibly Ophioxylon
Serpentinum. {%—Gandha-nāman, ā,%} m. a fragrant
kind of basil with red flowers; also {%gandha-nāmnī,%}
f.; [cf. {%gandhāhvā.%}] {%—Gandha-nālikā%} or {%gandha-%}
{%nālī,%} f. the nose. {%—Gandha-nilayā,%} f. a kind of
jasmine, J Zambac Floribus Multiplicatis; [cf. {%nava-%}
{%mallikā.%}] {%—Gandha-niśā,%} f., N. of a plant, =
{%gandha-pattrā%}. {%—Gandha-pa, as, ā, am,%} ‘in-
haling the odour,’ epithet of a class of manes.
{%—Gandha-pattra, as,%} m. several plants with fra-
grant leaves; a white sort of basil, Ocimum Gratissi-
mum, {%= śveta-pānā;%} the plant Ægle Marmelos,
{%= vilva;%} the orange tree; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of Cur-
cuma; ({%ī%}), f., N. of several plants, {%= ambaṣṭhā,%}
{%aśva-gandhā, aja-modā%}. {%—Gandha-pattrikā,%} f.,
N. of two plants, {%= gandha-pattrā%} and {%aja-modā.%}
{%—Gandha-parṇa, am,%} n., N. of a plant. {%= kāka-%}
{%puṣpa%}. {%—Gandha-palāśikā,%} f. turmeric; [cf. {%hari-%}
{%drā.%}] {%—Gandha-palāśī,%} f. the plant Curcuma Am-
haldi or Zerumbet, {%= śaṭī%}. {%—Gandha-pālin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} preserving fragrances; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Gandha-pāṣāṇa, as,%} m. sulphur. {%—Gandha-%}
{%piṅgalā,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Gandha-piśācikā,%}
f. the smoke of burned fragrant resin, imp-like, from
its dark colour or cloudy nature. {%—Gandha-pītā,%}
f. a plant, {%= gandha-pattrā,%} a species of Zedoary.
{%—Gandha-puṣpa, am,%} n. a fragrant flower; flowers
and sandal presented together at seasons of worship;
({%as%}), m. several plants with fragrant flowers, a kind
of cane, Calamus Rotang [cf. {%vetasa%}]; another
plant, Alangium Hexapetalum [cf. {%aṅkoṭa%}]; Sebes-
ten, Cordia Myxa, {%= bahu-vāra; (ā),%} f. several
plants, viz. the Indigo plant; Pandanus Odoratissimus
[cf. {%ketaka%}]; the plant Premna Spinosa, {%= gaṇikārī.%}
{%—Gandha-pūtanā,%} f. a kind of imp or goblin.
{%—Gandha-phaṇijjhaka, as,%} m a kind of Ocimum
with red flowers {%—Gandha-phala, as,%} m. several
plants with fragrant fruits, viz. Feronia Elephantum,
{%= kapittha;%} Ægle Marmelos, {%= vilva;%} another
plant, {%= tejaḥ-phala; (ā),%} f. several plants, {%= pri-%}
{%yaṅgu, methikā, vidārī, śallakī; (ī),%} f., N. of a
plant, {%= priyaṅgu;%} the bud of the plant Michelia
Champaca. {%—Gandha-baṇij, k,%} f. a seller of per-
fumes. {%—Gandha-bandhu, us,%} m. the mango tree;
[cf. {%āmra.%}] {%—Gandha-bahula, as,%} m. fragrant rice;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= gorakṣī%}. {%—Gandha-bhadrā,%}
f. a creeper, commonly Gandha-bhādāliyā, (Pœderia
Fœtida?). {%—Gandha-bhāṇḍa, as,%} m. a tree, Hibis-
cus Populneoides; [cf. {%gardabhāṇḍa.%}] {%—Gandha-%}
{%māṃsī,%} f. a kind of Indian spikenard, Valeriana; [cf.
{%jaṭā-māṃsī.%}] {%—Gandha-mātṛ, tā,%} f. the earth (the
quality of odour residing in the earth). {%—Gandha-%}
{%māda, as,%} m., N. of a son of Śvaphalka; also of a
monkey who was an attendant of Rāma. {%—Gandha-%}
{%mādana, as, ī, am,%} intoxicating with fragrance;
({%as%}), m. a large black bee; sulphur [cf. {%gandha-%}
{%modana%}]; N. of a particular mountain, forming the
[Page0281-b+ 81]
division between Ilā-vṛta and Bhadrāśva or to the
east of Meru, renowned for its fragrant forests; an
epithet of Rāvaṇa, chief of the Rākṣasas; N. of a
monkey, an attendant of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. spirituous
liquor; a parasitical plant ({%vandāka%}), a kind of
perfume, {%= cīḍā; (am),%} n. the forest on the moun-
tain Gandha-mādana. {%—Gandha-mādin, ī, inī, i,%}
strong-scented, of intoxicating fragrance; ({%inī%}), f. lac;
a sort of perfume [cf. {%purā%}]; wine or spirituous
liquor; [cf. the preceding.] {%—Gandha-mārjāra, as,%}
m. the civet cat. {%—Gandha-mālatī,%} f. a kind of
perfume. {%—Gandha-mālinī,%} f. a kind of perfume,
{%= murā%}. {%—Gandha-mālya, e,%} n. du. fragrances and
garlands; ({%āni%}), n. pl. fragrances and garlands;
fragrant garlands. {%—Gandha-muṇḍa, as,%} m. a kind
of creeper, Hibiscus Populneoides, {%= gandha-bhāṇḍa%}
or {%gardabhāṇḍa%}. {%—Gandha-mūla, as,%} m. a plant
with a fragrant and tuberous root, one of the Scita-
minea, Alpinia Galanga, {%= kulañjana; (ā),%} f. the
plant Curcuma Amhaldi or Zerumbet [cf. {%śaṭī%}]; the
olibanum tree, {%= śallakī; (ī),%} f. the plant Curcuma
Amhaldi or Zerumbet. {%—Gandha-mūlaka, as,%} m.
the plant Curcuma Amhaldi or Zerumbet; ({%ikā%}),
f. the same plant; another plant, {%= mākandī.%}
{%—Gandha-mūṣika, as,%} m. or {%gandha-mūṣī,%} f.
the musk rat or shrew, Sorex Moschatus. {%—Gandha-%}
{%mṛga, as,%} m. the civet cat; the name may also be
applied to the musk deer. {%—Gandha-maithuna,%}
{%as,%} m. a bull. {%—Gandha-mojavāha, as,%} m., N. of
a son of Śvaphalka, (incorrect for {%gandha-māda.%})
{%—Gandha-modana, as,%} m. sulphur. {%—Gandha-%}
{%mohinī,%} f. the bud of the plant Michelia Campaca.
{%—Gandha-yukti, is,%} f. the blending of fragrant
substances, preparation of perfumes; title of the
seventy-sixth Adhyāya of Varāhamihira's Bṛhaj-jā-
taka. {%—Gandha-yuti, is,%} f. mixture of fragrant sub-
stances. {%—Gandha-rasa, as,%} m. myrrh. {%—Gandha-%}
{%raśāṅgaka (˚śa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. turpentine, {%= śrī-%}
{%veṣṭa%}. {%—Gandha-rāja, as,%} m. a kind of jasmine,
{%= mudgara;%} another plant, {%= kaṇa-guggulu; (ī),%}
f. a sort of perfume, commonly Nakhī; ({%am%}), n.
sandal-wood; a kind of perfume; a kind of white
flower. {%—Gandha-lolupā,%} f. a fly or gnat. {%—Gandha-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} smelling, endowed with fragrance;
scented, odoriferous; ({%tī%}), f. the earth (because it
possesses the quality of smell); a kind of jasmine [cf.
{%nava-mallikā%}]; wine or vinous liquor; a kind
of perfume, {%= murā;%} an epithet of the mother of
Vyāsa, also called Satya-vatī; N. of a city belonging
to Varuṇa; N. of a river. {%—Gandha-vadhū, ūs,%}
f. the plant Curcuma Amhaldi or Zerumbet; a kind
of perfume, {%= cīḍā%}. {%—Gandha-valkala, am,%} n. the
cassia bark, Laurus Cassia; Sarsaparilla. {%—Gandha-%}
{%vallarī%} or {%gandha-vallī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= saha-%}
{%devī%}. {%—Gandha-vaha, as, ā, am,%} bearing fragrances,
epithet of the winds; ({%as%}), m. the wind; ({%ā%}), f. the
nose. {%—Gandha-vahala, am,%} n. a kind of Ocimum,
{%= sitārjaka%}. {%—Gandha-vāha, as,%} m. the wind; a
deer, the musk deer; ({%ā%}), f. the nose. {%—Gandha-%}
{%vihvala, as,%} m. wheat. {%—Gandha-vījā,%} f. a kind of
grass, {%= methikā%}. {%—Gandha-vṛkṣaka, as,%} m. the
Sāl tree, Shorea Robusta. {%—Gandha-vyākula, am,%}
n. a perfume, a fragrant berry, {%= kakkola%}. {%—Gandha-%}
{%śaṭī,%} f. the tree Curcuma Amhaldi or Zerumbet.
{%—Gandha-śāka, am,%} n. a kind of vegetable.
{%—Gandha-śāli, is,%} m. a sweet-smelling kind of
rice. {%—Gandha-śuṇḍinī%} or {%gandhā-śuṇḍinī,%} f. the
musk rat or shrew. {%—Gandha-śekhara, as,%} m.
musk. {%—Gandha-sāra, as,%} m. sandal; a kind of
jasmine, {%= mudgara%}. {%—Gandha-sāraṇa, as,%} m. a
kind of perfume, {%= vṛhan-nakhī%}. {%—Gandha-sukhī%}
or {%gandha-sūyī,%} f. the musk shrew or small musk
rat. {%—Gandha-soma, am,%} n. the white esculent
water-lily. {%—Gandha-hastin, ī,%} m. ‘the scent-ele-
phant;’ [cf. {%gandha-dvipa.%}] {%—Gandha-hārikā,%} f.
a female servant who bears perfumes behind her
mistress, a female artisan working in another person's
house; [cf. {%gandha-kārikā.%}] {%—Gandhākhu (˚dha-%}
{%ākhu), us,%} m. the musk rat. {%—Gandhājīva (˚dha-%}
{%āj˚), as,%} m. a vender of perfumes (one who makes a
livelihood by them). {%—Gandhāḍhya (˚dha-āḍh˚), %}
[Page0281-c+ 80]
{%as, ā, am,%} rich in odour, fragrant; ({%as%}), m. the
orange tree; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants, {%= gandha-%}
{%pattrā;%} yellow jasmine, {%= svarṇa-yūthī;%} other
plants, {%= taruṇī, ārāma-śītalā, gandhālī; (am),%}
n. sandal-wood; a kind of perfume {%(= javādi).%}
{%—Gandhādhika (˚dha-adh˚), am,%} n. a kind of
perfume, {%= tṛṇa-kuṅkuma%}. {%—Gandhāpakarṣaṇa%}
{%(˚dha-ap˚), am,%} n. removing smells. {%—Gandhāmbu%}
{%(˚dha-am˚), u,%} n. fragrant water. {%—Gandhāmlā%}
{%(˚dha-ām˚),%} f. the wild lemon tree. {%—Gandhālā%}
{%(˚dha-āla = ālaya ?),%} f., N. of a plant, commonly
Jiyatī, Celtis Orientalis. {%—Gandhā-śuṇḍinī = gan-%}
{%dha-śuṇḍinī%}. {%—Gandhāśman (˚dha-aś˚), ā,%} m.
sulphur. {%—Gandhāṣṭaka (˚dha-aṣ˚), am,%} n. a
mixture of eight fragrant substances varying according
to the deities to whom they are offered (e. g. the
eight articles, sandal, agallochum, camphor, saffron,
valerian, and some fragrant grasses). {%—Gandhāhvā%}
{%(˚dha-āh˚),%} f. {%= gandha-nāmnī%}. {%—Gandhendriya%}
{%(˚dha-in˚), am,%} n. the organ of smell. {%—Gandhebha%}
{%(˚dha-ibha), as,%} m. ‘the scent-elephant;’ [cf. {%gandha-%}
{%dvipa, gandha-hastin.%}] {%—Gandhotu%} or {%gandhautu%}
{%(˚dha-otu), us,%} m. the civet cat. {%—Gandhotkaṭā%}
{%(˚dha-ut˚),%} f., N. of a plant, {%= damanaka%}. {%—Gan-%}
{%dhottamā (˚dha-ut˚),%} f. spirituous or vinous liquor.
{%—Gandhoda (˚dha-uda), am,%} n. fragrant water.
{%—Gandhopajīvin (˚dha-up˚), ī, inī, i,%} one who
lives by perfumes, a seller of perfumes, a perfumer.
<LEND>

<L>17069<pc>0281-c<k1>ganDaka<k2>ganDaka
{%Gandhaka, as,%}¦ m. sulphur; the Morunga tree,
Hyperanthera Moringa, {%= śobhāñjana.%}
<LEND>

<L>17070<pc>0281-c<k1>ganDakIya<k2>ganDakIya
{%Gandhakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to sulphur,
treating of it.
<LEND>

<L>17071<pc>0281-c<k1>ganDaya<k2>ganDaya
{%Gandhaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%gandhayati, -yitum,%} to
make redolent or odoriferous.
<LEND>

<L>17072<pc>0281-c<k1>ganDAlu<k2>ganDAlu
{%Gandhālu, us, us, u,%}¦ fragrant, perfumed.
<LEND>

<L>17073<pc>0281-c<k1>ganDi<k2>ganDi
{%Gandhi, is, is, i,%}¦ (at the end of compounds)
having the smell of, smelling of, perfumed with;
having only the smell of, containing only a very
small quantity; ({%i%}), n. a kind of perfume.
<LEND>

<L>17074<pc>0281-c<k1>ganDika<k2>ganDika
{%Gandhika, as, ā, am,%}¦ having the smell of, smelling
of [cf. {%aja-gandhika, avi-g˚, utpala-g˚%}]; having
only the smell, having a very little of anything
(e. g. {%bhrātṛ-gandhika,%} being brother only by
name); ({%as%}), m. a seller of perfumes; sulphur.
<LEND>

<L>17075<pc>0281-c<k1>ganDin<k2>ganDin
{%Gandhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a smell, smelling,
odoriferous; ({%ī%}), m. a bug; also the flying bug; the
tree Xanthophyllum Virens; ({%nī%}), f. a kind of per-
fume, {%= murā%}. {%—Gandhi-parṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
plant, {%= sapta-cchada.%}
<LEND>

<L>17076<pc>0281-c<k1>ganDana<k2>ganDana
{#ganDana#}¦ {%gandhana, am,%} n. continued effort,
perseverance; hurting, injury, killing; manifestation,
information, intimation, informing against.
<LEND>

<L>17077<pc>0281-c<k1>ganDarva<k2>ganDarva
{#ganDarva#}¦ {%gandharva%} or sometimes in post-
Vedic writings {%gandharba, as,%} m. a Gandharva.
Though in later times the Gandharvas are regarded
as a class, yet in the Ṛg-veda rarely more than one
is mentioned; he is commonly designated as the
‘heavenly Gandharva’ ({%divyo Gandharvaḥ%}), and
sometimes named Viśvā-vasu; his habitation is the
sky, or the region of the air and the heavenly waters;
his especial duty is to guard the heavenly Soma,
which the gods obtain through his intervention. It
is obtained for the human race by Indra, who
conquers the Gandharva and takes it by force. The
heavenly Gandharva is supposed to be a good phy-
sician, because the Soma is considered as the best
medicine; possibly, however, the word Soma origin-
ally denoted not the beverage so called, but the
moon, and the heavenly Gandharva may have been
the genius or tutelary deity of the moon. It is cer-
tain that the heavenly Gandharva and the Soma are
sometimes identified. He is also regarded as one of
the genii who regulate the course of the Sun's horses;
he knows and makes known the secrets of heaven
and divine truths generally. He is the parent of the
first pair of human beings, Yama and Yamī, and has
a peculiar mystical power over women and a right
to possess them. For this reason he is invoked in
marriage ceremonies. Exstatic states of mind and
possession by evil spirits are supposed to be derived
[Page0282-a+ 79]
from the heavenly Gandharva. With Jainas he is an
attendant of the seventeenth Arhat of the present
Avasarpiṇī. The Gandharvas as a class have the same
characteristic features as the one Gandharva; they
live in the sky, guard the Soma, are governed by
Varuṇa (just as the Apsarasas are governed by Soma),
know the best medicines, regulate the course of the
asterisms (in one passage of the Vājasaneyi-Saṃhitā
twenty-seven being mentioned), follow after women
and are desirous of intercourse with them. As soon
as a girl becomes marriageable, she belongs to Soma,
the Gandharvas and Agni. The wives of the Gandhar-
vas are the Apsarasas, and like them the Gandharvas
are invoked in gambling with dice; they are also
feared as evil beings together with the Rakṣasas,
Kimīdins, Piśācas, &c., amulets being worn as a
protection against them. In the Śatapatha-Brāh-
maṇa they are called the preceptors of the Ṛṣis.
In epic poetry the Gandharvas are the celestial mu-
sicians or heavenly singers who form the orchestra at
the banquets of the gods, and they belong together
with the Apsarasas to Indra's heaven, sharing also in
his battles. In the more systematic mythology the
Gandharvas constitute one of the classes into which
the higher creation is divided (e. g. gods, manes,
Gandharvas; or gods, Asuras, Gandharvas, men, &c.).
In one passage of the Taittirīya-Āraṇyaka eleven
classes of Gandharvas are mentioned. The chief or
leader of the Gandharvas is named Citra-ratha. They
are sometimes called the creatures of Prajāpati or
Brahmā. With Jainas the Gandharvas constitute one
of the eight classes of the Vyantaras. The following
meanings are also given to the word {%gandharva%} — 
a singer; the Koïl or black cuckoo; the soul after
death, and previous to its being born again (cor-
responding in some respects to the western notion
of a ghost); a horse; the sun; a sage, a pious man;
a kind of deer, according to some, the musk deer;
({%ī%}), f. Gandharvī, a daughter of Su-rabhi and mother
of the race of horses; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κένταυρος.</lang>] {%—Gan-%}
{%dharva-khaṇḍa,%} one of the nine divisions of Bhārata-
varṣa. {%—Gandharva-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pos-
sessed by a Gandharva. {%—Gandharva-graha, as,%} m.
the being possessed by a Gandharva. {%—Gandharva-%}
{%nagara%} or {%gandharva-pura, am,%} n. the city of
the Gandharvas, an imaginary town in the sky, pro-
bably the result of the phenomenon called mirage.
{%—Gandharvanagarākāra (˚ra-āk˚), as, ā, am,%}
resembling the city of the Gandharvas. {%—Gandharva-%}
{%patnī,%} f., Ved. the wife of a Gandharva, an Apsaras.
{%—Gandharva-rāja, as,%} m. Citra-ratha, chief of the
Gandharvas. {%—Gandharvartu (˚va-ṛtu), us,%} m.,
Ved. the time or season of the Gandharvas. {%—Gan-%}
{%dharva-vidyā,%} f. the science of the Gandharvas,
music, dancing. {%—Gandharva-vivāha, as,%} m. one
of the forms of marriage described in Manu III. 27,
&c., viz. the form of the Gandharvas; it is described
as a marriage proceeding entirely from love or the
mutual inclination of a youth and maiden without cere-
monies and without consulting relatives, and is allow-
able between persons of the second or military class.
{%—Gandharva-veda, as,%} m. the Gandharva-veda,
the science of music considered as a branch of the
Sāma-veda. {%—Gandharva-hasta%} or {%gandharva-%}
{%hastaka, as,%} m. the castor-oil tree, Palma Christi or
Ricinus Communis, (the leaves being compared to
the foot of a deer.)
<LEND>

<L>17078<pc>0282-a<k1>ganDAra<k2>ganDAra
{#ganDAra#}¦ {%gandhāra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
[cf. {%gāndhāri%}]; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a Vidyā-devī; (a various
reading has {%gāndhārī.%})
<LEND>

<L>17079<pc>0282-a<k1>ganDAri<k2>ganDAri
{%Gandhāri, ayas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>17080<pc>0282-a<k1>ganDAlI<k2>ganDAlI
{#ganDAlI#}¦ {%gandhālī,%} f. a wasp; a creeping
plant, Pœderia Fœtida, commonly {%gāndhālī%} or {%gan-%}
{%dha-bhādāli;%} [cf. {%gandholī.%}] {%—Gandhālī-gar-%}
{%bha, as,%} m. small cardamoms ({%sūkṣmailā%}).
<LEND>

<L>17081<pc>0282-a<k1>ganDoli<k2>ganDoli
{#ganDoli#}¦ {%gandholi, is,%} f. the plant Curcuma
Amhaldi or Zerumbet, {%= śaṭī;%} [cf. {%gandholī%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>17082<pc>0282-a<k1>ganDolI<k2>ganDolI
{%Gandholī,%}¦ f. [cf. {%gandhālī%} above], a wasp; the
plant Pœderia Fœtida ({%= bhadrā%}), Cyperus Rotundus,
[Page0282-b+ 77]
a fragrant grass; the plant Curcuma Amhaldi or
Zerumbet; dried ginger, {%= śuṇṭhī.%}
<LEND>

<L>17083<pc>0282-b<k1>gaBa<k2>gaBa
{#gaBa#}¦ {%gabha, as,%} m. (fr. {%gabh, = gambh, =%}
{%jambh%}), Ved. a slit, anything split asunder, cleft;
the vulva; [cf. {%gabhasti, gabhīra, gambhīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17084<pc>0282-b<k1>gaBastala<k2>gaBastala
{#gaBastala#}¦ {%gabhastala, am,%} n., N. of a hell;
[cf. {%gabhasti-mat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17085<pc>0282-b<k1>gaBasti<k2>gaBasti
{#gaBasti#}¦ {%gabhasti, is, is,%} m. f. (related to
{%gabha;%} the original meaning may have been a fork),
Ved. a particular part of a carriage, the shaft; the
double-edged thunderbolt of Indra (?); the fore part
of the arm, the hand; a ray of light, a sun-beam, a
moon-beam, i. e. the hands of the sun or moon;
({%is%}), m. the sun; ({%is%}), f. an epithet of Svāhā, the
wife of Agni. {%—Gabhasti-nemi, is,%} m. an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Gabhasti-pāṇi, is,%} m. the sun, ‘having
rays for hands.’ {%—Gabhasti-pūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
purified with the hands. {%—Gabhasti-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} shining, brilliant; ({%ān%}), m. the sun; N. of one
of the nine divisions of Bhārata-varṣa; ({%at%}), n. one
of the seven divisions of Pātāla or the region below
the earth. {%—Gabhasti-hasta, as,%} m. the sun; [cf.
{%gabhasti-pāṇi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17086<pc>0282-b<k1>gaBizak<k2>gaBizak
{#gaBizak#}¦ {%gabhi-ṣak,%} ind. (fr. {%gabhi,%} related
to {%gabha%} and {%saj%} fr. rt. {%sañj%}), Ved. deeply down,
far down or within; [cf. {%ānuṣak.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17087<pc>0282-b<k1>gaBIkA<k2>gaBIkA
{#gaBIkA#}¦ {%gabhīkā,%} f., N. of a plant and its
fruit.
<LEND>

<L>17088<pc>0282-b<k1>gaBIra<k2>gaBIra
{#gaBIra#}¦ {%gabhīra%} or {%gambhīra, as, ā, am%} (re-
lated to {%gabha%} and {%gabhasti,%} ‘a deep cleft;’ the Ṛg-
veda generally uses {%gabhīra%} and only {%gambhīra%} at
the beginning of a Pāda or quarter-verse; in post-Vedic
writings {%gambhīra%} is the more usual form, but
{%gabhīra%} occurs occasionally even in the latest writers),
deep (opposed to {%gādha%} and {%dīna%}); deep in sound,
deep-sounding, hollow in sound, hollow-toned (there-
fore enumerated in the Nighaṇṭu among the synonyms
of {%vāc%}); profound, sagacious, grave, serious, solemn,
earnest, secret, mysterious; dense, impervious; not
to be penetrated, not to be investigated or explored,
inscrutable, difficult to be perceived or understood;
inexhaustible, continuous, uninterrupted (as time &c.).
The deepness of a man's navel, of his voice, and of his
character are sometimes praised together: when a
man is said to have a deep navel, voice and character,
he is said to be {%tri-gambhīraḥ; (as),%} m. (without
the nasal), N. of a descendant of Āyu; (with the
nasal), the lemon tree [cf. {%jambhīra%} and {%jambīra%}];
a lotus; a Mantra of the Ṛg-veda: ({%ā%}), f. hiccup,
violent singultus; N. of a river; {%gabhīra, am,%} n.
depth; [cf. Lith. <nsi>gillybe, gelme, gyle; gillus:</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>glûbok; glûbina.</nsi>] {%—Gambhīra-cetas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. of profound mind. {%—Gambhīra-tā,%} f. or {%gam-%}
{%bhīra-tva, am,%} n. depth (of water); depth of sound;
profoundness, earnestness, sagacity. {%—Gambhīra-%}
{%dhvani, is,%} m. a deep sound, low note or tone.
{%—Gambhīra-nāda%} or {%gabhīra-śabda, as,%} m. a
deep or hollow sound, thundering, roaring {%—Gam-%}
{%bhīra-nirghoṣa, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga {%—Gam-%}
{%bhīra-vedin, ī, inī, i%} lit. deeply sagacious, restive
(as an elephant). {%—Gambhīra-vedha, as, ā, am,%}
very penetrating. {%—Gambhīra-vepas%} or {%gabhīra-%}
{%vepas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. moved deeply or inwardly,
deeply excited. {%—Gambhīra-śaṃsa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
ruling secretly or in a hidden manner; (Sāy.) whose
praise is inexhaustible, an epithet of Varuṇa. {%—Gam-%}
{%bhīra-sattva-svara-nābhi, is, is, i,%} having a deep
character, voice, and navel. {%—Gambhīra-svāmin, ī,%}
m. the inscrutable lord; N. of a figure representing
Nārāyaṇa. {%—Gambhīrārtha (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. pro-
found sense or meaning.
<LEND>

<L>17089<pc>0282-b<k1>gaBIrikA<k2>gaBIrikA
{%Gabhīrikā,%}¦ f. a large drum with a deep sound; a
gong; [cf. {%gambhīraka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17090<pc>0282-b<k1>gamBIraka<k2>gamBIraka
{%Gambhīraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ lying deep; (with
{%dṛṣṭi%}), a particular disease of the eye, which
causes the pupil to contract and the eye to sink in
its socket; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>
[Page0282-c+ 80]

<L>17091<pc>0282-c<k1>gaBolika<k2>gaBolika
{#gaBolika#}¦ {%gabholika, as,%} m. a small round
pillow, {%= masūra.%}
<LEND>

<L>17092<pc>0282-c<k1>gam<k2>gam<h>1
{#gam#} 1¦. {%gam.%} The conjugational tenses
are formed in the Veda according to four
different methods, as follows: I) According to the rule
for cl. 1, Pres. P. {%gamati;%} Pot. P. {%gamet;%} Impv. P.
1st sing. {%gamāni,%} &c. II) According to the rule for
cl. 2, Pres. P. {%ganti;%} Pot. P. {%gamyāt;%} Impv. P. 2nd
sing. {%gahi,%} 3rd {%gantu;%} Impf. P. 2nd and 3rd sing.
{%agan,%} 1st pl. {%aganma;%} 3rd pl. {%agman;%} Pres. Part.
{%gmat.%} III) According to the rule for cl. 3, Pres. P.
{%jaganti;%} Pot. P. {%jagamyāt;%} Impf. {%ajagan.%} IV)
According to the rule for cl. 1, with substitution of
{%gacch%} for {%gam%} (this is the only formation used in
classical Sanskrit), Pres. P. {%gacchati;%} Pot. {%gacchet,%}
&c. (the A. is often found in epic poetry); Perf.
{%jagama%} or {%jagāma, jagantha%} or {%jagamitha, ja-%}
{%gāma,%} 2nd du. {%jagmathus,%} 2nd pl. {%jagma;%} Perf.
Part. {%jaganvas%} or {%jagmivas,%} f. {%jagmuṣī;%} 2nd Fut.
{%gamiṣyati;%} 1st Fut. {%gantā;%} Aor. P. {%agamat,%}
A. {%agaṃsta%} and {%agata, agaṃsmahi%} and {%agasmahi;%}
Inf. {%gantum,%} Ved. {%gantave, gantavai, gamadhyai;%}
Ind. Part. {%gatvā,%} Ved. {%gatvī, gatvāya;%} to go,
move, go to or towards; to go away; to set out;
to come; to go or pass as time (e. g. {%kāle gacchati,%}
time going on, in the course of time); to go towards,
approach (with acc. or loc. or dat. or with {%prati%}),
arrive at, fall to the share of; to go against with hostile
intentions, attack; to approach carnally, have inter-
course with a woman (with acc.); to go to any
state or condition, to become (e. g. {%mitratāṃ%}
{%gacchati,%} he goes to friendship, i. e. he becomes
friendly); to undergo, partake, of, participate, in,
receive, obtain; {%pratīpaṃ gam,%} to go against,
to oppose one's self to, resist a person (with gen.);
{%jānubhyām avanīṃ gam,%} to go to the earth
with the knees, to kneel down; {%dharaṇīm mūr-%}
{%dhnā gam,%} to go to the earth with the head, to
bow, make a bow; {%manasā gam%} (or without {%ma-%}
{%nasā%}), to go with the mind, observe, perceive;
understand, guess; {%doṣeṇa%} or {%doṣato gam,%} to
approach with an accusation, to ascribe guilt to a
person (acc.): Pass. {%gamyate,%} to be gone &c., to be
understood, to be meant: Caus. {%gamayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to go or come, lead or conduct towards; to
send to (dat.); to bring to a place (acc.); to cause to
go to any condition (acc.), cause to become; to
spend time; to impart, grant; to cause to understand,
to make clear or intelligible, explain; to convey an
idea or meaning, denote; (causal of the causal) to
cause a person (acc.) to go by means of another:
Desid. P. A. {%jigamiṣati, jigāṃsate,%} to wish to go,
to be going, to strive to approach; to wish to bring:
Intens. {%jaṅgamyate, jaṅgamīti,%} Ved. {%jaṅganti%} and
{%ganīganti,%} to visit; [cf. Goth. <nsi>qvam;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>come;</nsi>
Mod. Germ <nsi>kommen;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>venio</nsi> for <nsi>guemio.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17093<pc>0282-c<k1>gat<k2>gat
{%Gat, t, t, t,%}¦ (at the end of a compound) going; [cf.
{%adhva-gat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17094<pc>0282-c<k1>gata<k2>gata
{%Gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, gone away, departed, departed
from the world, deceased, dead; past (as time), gone
by; disappeared; come, come forth from, come to, ap-
proached, arrived at, being in, situated in, contained
in (with acc. or loc. or with {%prati%} and acc. or in a
compound, e. g. {%sabhāṃ gata,%} come to an assembly;
{%Kānyakubje gata,%} gone to Kānya-kubja; {%mṛgam%}
{%prati gata,%} directed towards the deer; {%ratha-gata,%}
sitting or standing in a carriage; {%ādya-gata, tūrya-%}
{%gata, antya-gata,%} taking the first, fourth, last place;
{%sarva-gata,%} spread everywhere), gone to any state
or condition, fallen into (with acc. or loc. or in
compounds, e. g. {%kṣayaṃ%} or {%kṣaye gata,%} gone
to destruction; {%āpad-gata,%} fallen into misfortune);
directed towards, belonging to; relating to, referring
to, connected with (e. g. {%putra-gataḥ snehaḥ,%} love
directed towards the son; {%tvad-gata,%} belonging to
thee); frequented, visited; spread abroad, celebrated;
known, understood; ({%am%}), n. going, motion, manner
of going; the place where any one has gone; anything
past or done, an event; diffusion, extension, cele-
bration; manner. {%—Gata-kalmaṣa, as, ā, am,%} freed
[Page0283-a+ 81]
from crime. {%—Gata-kāla, as,%} m. past time. {%—Gata-%}
{%kīrtti, is, is, i,%} deprived of reputation. {%—Gata-klama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} rested, refreshed. {%—Gata-cetana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deprived of sense or consciousness, senseless,
void of understanding, fainted away. {%—Gata-cetas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} bereft of sense. {%—Gata-jvara, as, ā, am,%}
free from fever or sickness, convalescent, recovered.
{%—Gata-toyada, as, ā, am,%} cloudless, cleared up,
fair. {%—Gata-trapa, as, ā, am,%} free from fear or
shame, bold. {%—Gata-dina, am,%} n. or {%gata-divasa,%}
{%as,%} m. the past day, yesterday; ({%am%}), ind.
yesterday. {%—Gata-nāsika, as, ā, am,%} noseless.
{%—Gata-nidhana, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Gata-%}
{%pāpa, as, ā, am,%} freed from sin or guilt. {%—Gata-%}
{%puṇya, as, ā, am,%} devoid of holiness or religious
merit. {%—Gata-pratyāgata, as, ā, am,%} gone away
and returned; come back again after having
gone away. {%—Gata-prabha, as, ā, am,%} bereft
of splendor, dim, faded. {%—Gata-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%}
lifeless, expired, dead. {%—Gata-prāya, as, ā, am,%}
almost gone or vanished. {%—Gata-bhartṛkā,%} f. a
widow. {%—Gata-bhī, īs, īs, i,%} free from fear. {%—Gata-%}
{%māya, as, ā, am,%} without deceit, reformed, without
compassion. {%—Gata-rasa, as, ā, am,%} anything which
has lost its flavour or sap, dried, withered. {%—Gata-%}
{%rātri, is,%} f. the past night, last night. {%—Gata-lakṣ-%}
{%mīka, as, ā, am,%} unfortunate, suffering losses; [cf.
{%gata-śrīka.%}] {%—Gata-vat, ān, atī, at,%} going, passing,
obtaining, falling into, feeling, entertaining. {%—Gata-%}
{%vayaska, as, ā, am,%} advanced in life. {%—Gata-var-%}
{%ṣa, as, am,%} m. n. the past year. {%—Gata-vitta%} or
{%gata-vibhava, as, ā, am,%} bereft of wealth, beggared,
impoverished. {%—Gata-vaira, as, ā, am,%} at peace
with, reconciled. {%—Gata-vyatha, as, ā, am,%} free
from pain, unanxious. {%—Gata-śaiśava, as, ā, am,%}
past infancy, above eight years of age. {%—Gata-śrī, īs,%}
{%īs, i,%} Ved. one who has obtained fortune. {%—Gata-%}
{%śrīka, as, ā, am,%} forsaken by fortune; unlucky. {%—Gata-%}
{%saṅkalpa, as, ā, am,%} bereft of sense, foolish. {%—Gata-%}
{%sanga, as, ā, am,%} free from attachment, detached
from. dissevered; adverse or indifferent to {%—Gata-%}
{%sattva, as, ā, am,%} annihilated, lifeless, dead; base.
{%—Gata-sandeha, as, ā, am,%} free from doubt.
{%—Gata-sannaka, as,%} m. an elephant out of rut.
{%—Gata-sādhvasa, as, ā, am,%} afraid. {%—Gata-sau-%}
{%hṛda, as, ā, am,%} bereft of friends; unkind, un-
feeling, indifferent. {%—Gatākṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as, ā, am,%}
sightless, blind. {%—Gatāgata (˚ta-āg˚), am,%} n. going
and coming, going to and fro, reiterated motion in
general; the flight of a bird backward and forward;
(in astron.) irregular course of the asterisms. {%—Gatā-%}
{%gati (˚ta-āg˚), is,%} f. going back to the place whence
one came. {%—Gatādhi (˚ta-ādhi), is, is, i,%} free from
anxiety, happy. {%—Gatādhvan (˚ta-adh˚), ā, ā, a,%}
one who has accomplished a journey, familiar with
anything (loc.), conversant; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%paurṇa-%}
{%māsī,%} the time immediately preceding new moon,
when a small streak of the moon is still visible.
{%—Gatānugata (˚ta-an˚), am,%} n. the following what
precedes, following custom. {%—Gatānugatika, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} following what precedes, following custom or
the conduct of others, imitating, imitative, doing as
others do. {%—Gatānta (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} one
whose end has arrived. {%—Gatāyāta (˚ta-āy˚), am,%}
n. coming and going. {%—Gatāyus (˚ta-āy˚), us, us,%}
{%us,%} one whose vital power has vanished, decayed,
decrepid, infirm, very old; dead. {%—Gatārtavā%}
{%(˚ta-ār˚),%} f. a woman past her courses or past child-
bearing; a barren woman. {%—Gatārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as,%}
{%ā, am, = artha-gata,%} unmeaning, nonsensical; poor,
void of an object. {%—Gatālīka (˚ta-al˚), as, ā, am,%}
real, true. {%—Gatāsu (ta-asu), us, us, u,%} one whose
breath has gone, expired, dead. {%—Gatotsāha (˚ta-%}
{%ut˚), as, ā, am,%} dispirited. {%—Gatodvega (˚ta-ud˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} comforted, freed from sorrow. {%—Gataujas%}
{%(˚ta-oj˚), ās, ās, as,%} bereft of strength.
<LEND>

<L>17095<pc>0283-a<k1>gataka<k2>gataka
{%Gataka, am,%}¦ n. going, motion.
<LEND>

<L>17096<pc>0283-a<k1>gati<k2>gati
{%Gati, is,%}¦ f. going, moving, gait, carriage, deport-
ment, motion in general; manner or power of going;
going away; procession, march, passage, procedure,
progress, movement, (e. g. {%astra-gati,%} the going or
[Page0283-b+ 81]
flying of arrows; {%parāṃ gatiṃ gam,%} to go the
last way, i. e. to die; {%daiva-gati,%} the course of
fate, fate, fortune; {%kāvyasya gatiḥ,%} the progress or
course of a poem); coming, arriving at, obtaining;
path, way, course; the course of the asterisms; (in
astron.) a certain division of the moon's path and
the position of a planet in it; the diurnal motion
of a planet in its orbit; issue, event; course of events,
fortune; an issue, a running wound or sore; place of
issue, origin, reason; event, possibility, an expedient,
means; a means of success, way, or art, me hod of
acting, stratagem: refuge, resource; remedy; the
position (of a child at birth); state, condition, situa-
tion, proportion, mode of existence, nature; a happy
issue, happiness (e. g. {%anuttamā gatiḥ,%} the incom-
parable course, the attainment of eternal bliss), trans-
migration, metempsychosis, the course or migration
of the soul through several bodies, the condition of
a person undergoing this migration; manner; know-
ledge, wisdom; (in gram.) a term for prepositions
and some other adverbial prefixes (such as {%alam%} &c.)
when immediately connected with the tenses of a
verb or with verbal derivatives (see {%karma-prava-%}
{%canīya%}); a particular high number; ({%gati%} personified
is a daughter of Deva-hūti and wife of Pulaha.) {%—Gati-%}
{%tālin, ī,%} m., N. of an attendant of Skanda. {%—Gati-%}
{%bhaṅga, as,%} m. stoppage, impediment to progress.
{%—Gati-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of motion, in
motion, moving; having issues or sores; connected
with a preposition &c.; [cf. {%gati%}] {%—Gati-śakti,%}
{%is,%} f. the power of motion. {%—Gati-hīna, as, ā, am,%}
forlorn, without resource or refuge. {%—Gaty-anusāra,%}
{%as,%} m. following the way of another. {%—Gaty-ūna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} impassable, difficult of access, desert, helpless.
<LEND>

<L>17097<pc>0283-b<k1>gatika<k2>gatika
{%Gatika, am,%}¦ n. going, motion; course; condition;
refuge, asylum.
<LEND>

<L>17098<pc>0283-b<k1>gatilA<k2>gatilA
{%Gatilā,%}¦ f. the not being different from one another,
mutual agreement (?); N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>17099<pc>0283-b<k1>gatIka<k2>gatIka
{%Gatīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ passable; {%a-gatīka,%} impassable.
<LEND>

<L>17100<pc>0283-b<k1>gatvan<k2>gatvan
{%Gatvan.%}¦ See {%pūrva-gatvan.%}
<LEND>

<L>17101<pc>0283-b<k1>gatvara<k2>gatvara
{%Gatvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, moving, movable, loco-
motive, perishable.
<LEND>

<L>17102<pc>0283-b<k1>gatvA<k2>gatvA
{%Gatvā,%}¦ ind. having gone, having gone to or attained.
<LEND>

<L>17103<pc>0283-b<k1>gantavya<k2>gantavya
{%Gantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone, to be gone to
or attained; to be accomplished (as a way); to be
approached, to be requested; to be undergone.
<LEND>

<L>17104<pc>0283-b<k1>gantu<k2>gantu
{%Gantu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. a way, a course; a traveller,
a way-farer.
<LEND>

<L>17105<pc>0283-b<k1>gantukAma<k2>gantukAma
{%Gantu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to go, on the
point of departure, about to die.
<LEND>

<L>17106<pc>0283-b<k1>gantf<k2>gantf
{%Gantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what goes or moves,
going, coming, approaching, arriving at (with acc. or
loc.); going to a woman, having intercourse with
one; ({%trī%}), f. a cart or car drawn by oxen. {%—Gantrī-%}
{%ratha, as,%} m. a car drawn by oxen; [cf. {%maṭha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17107<pc>0283-b<k1>gam<k2>gam<h>2
2. {%gam%}¦ (occurring only in gen. and abl. {%gamas%}), Ved.
the earth; [cf. {%kṣam:%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">γῆ;</lang> Zend <nsi>zem;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>zemie;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>zemlje;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>zemlu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17108<pc>0283-b<k1>gama<k2>gama
{%Gama, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) going
(e. g. {%araṅ-gama, kāma-gama, kha-gama,%} &c.,
q. v.); ({%as%}), m. going, moving; march, especially
the march of an assailant; intercourse with a woman;
a road; flightiness, superficiality, thoughtlessness;
acting inconsiderately, looking at anything hastily or
superficially; a game played with dice and men, as
backgammon &c.; a similar reading in two texts (?),
hasty or careless perusal, running over a book (?).
{%—Gamakāri-tva, am,%} n. inconsiderateness, rashness.
<LEND>

<L>17109<pc>0283-b<k1>gamaka<k2>gamaka
{%Gamaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ leading to conviction
(e. g. {%hetu%} a convincing reason). {%—Gamaka-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%gamaka-tā,%} f. convincing proof.
<LEND>

<L>17110<pc>0283-b<k1>gamaTa<k2>gamaTa
{%Gamatha, as,%}¦ m. a traveller; a road.
<LEND>

<L>17111<pc>0283-b<k1>gamana<k2>gamana
{%Gamana, am,%}¦ n. going, manner of going, going
away, departure, going to or approaching; march in
general or the march of an assailant; intercourse with
a woman, cohabitation; undergoing or obtaining,
attaining; way, possibility. {%—Gamana-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} furnished with motion, moving. {%—Gamanārha%}
{%(˚na-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} to be sought, fit, suitable,
desirable.
<LEND>

<L>17112<pc>0283-b<k1>gamanIya<k2>gamanIya
{%Gamanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ accessible, approachable,
[Page0283-c+ 77]
passable, attainable, what may be gone to or reached;
intelligible, to be understood, what ought to be fol-
lowed, to be practised or observed; relating to going
&c (e. g. {%gurustrī-gamanīya,%} relating to intercourse
with the wife of a teacher, or consisting in it, as a sin).
<LEND>

<L>17113<pc>0283-c<k1>gamayat<k2>gamayat
{%Gamayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing or making to go.
<LEND>

<L>17114<pc>0283-c<k1>gamayitavya<k2>gamayitavya
{%Gamayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made to go,
to be spent.
<LEND>

<L>17115<pc>0283-c<k1>gamayitf<k2>gamayitf
{%Gamayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ causing to arrive at,
leading to.
<LEND>

<L>17116<pc>0283-c<k1>gamita<k2>gamita
{%Gamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to go, sent, brought,
reduced, driven to.
<LEND>

<L>17117<pc>0283-c<k1>gamin<k2>gamin
{%Gamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ intending to go; ({%ī%}), m. a pas-
senger.
<LEND>

<L>17118<pc>0283-c<k1>gamizWa<k2>gamizWa
{%Gamiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ most ready to go, most
willing to come; (a superlative fr. {%gantṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>17119<pc>0283-c<k1>gamya<k2>gamya
{%Gamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone, to be gone to,
approachable, accessible, passable, attainable; accessible
to men (as a woman), fit for cohabitation; a man
with whom a woman may have intercourse, libidi-
nous, a voluptuary; easily brought under the influ-
ence of a drug or medicine, curable by it; to be
perceived or understood, intelligible, perceptible; in-
tended, meant; desirable, suitable fit. {%—Gamya-tā,%}
f. or {%gamya-tva, am,%} n. accessibility, perceptibility,
the being intended or meant, being capable of at-
tainment.
<LEND>

<L>17120<pc>0283-c<k1>gamyamAna<k2>gamyamAna
{%Gamyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being gone or gone to,
being understood.
<LEND>

<L>17121<pc>0283-c<k1>gamAtra<k2>gamAtra
{#gamAtra#}¦ {%ga-mātra, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
particular number.
<LEND>

<L>17122<pc>0283-c<k1>gamb<k2>gamb
{#gamb#}¦ {%gamb,%} cl. 1. P. {%gambati, -bitum,%} to
go or move.
<LEND>

<L>17123<pc>0283-c<k1>gamBan<k2>gamBan
{#gamBan#}¦ {%gambhan, a,%} n., Ved., or {%gambhara,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. depth (as of water); water; [cf. {%gah-%}
{%man%} and {%gabhīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17124<pc>0283-c<k1>gamBArI<k2>gamBArI
{#gamBArI#}¦ {%gambhārī%} or {%gambhārikā,%} f. the
tree Gmelina Arborea; also the flower, fruit, and
root of this tree.
<LEND>

<L>17125<pc>0283-c<k1>gamBIra<k2>gamBIra
{#gamBIra#}¦ {%gambhīra%} and its compounds. See
under {%gabhīra.%}
<LEND>

<L>17126<pc>0283-c<k1>gaya<k2>gaya
{#gaya#}¦ {%gaya, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%gam%} or
{%gai%}), a house, household, family, goods and chattels,
the contents of a house, property, wealth, a species of
ox, the Gayal or Bos Gavæus; N. of a Ṛṣi, son of
Plati; also of a Rājarṣi, performer of a celebrated
sacrifice, (he was conquered by Māndhātṛ); a son of
Amūrta-rajas; also of Āyus; also of a Manu; also
of Havirdhāna and Dhiṣaṇā (Havirdhānī); also of
Ūru and Āgneyī; of Vitatha; of Sudyumna; of
Nakta and Druti; N. of the people living round
Gayā and the district inhabited by them; N. of an
Asura, who like the Rājarṣi Gaya is connected with
the town Gayā; one of the monkey followers of
Rāma; N. of a mountain near Gayā; ({%ās%}), m. pl., Ved.
the vital airs; ({%ā%}), f. Gayā, the city in Behār still so
called and a place of pilgrimage, the residence of the
saint of the same name; it was sanctified by the
benediction of Viṣṇu as a tribute to the piety of
Gaya, the Rājarṣi, or (according to another legend)
to Gaya, the Asura, who was overwhelmed here
with rocks by the gods; the Śrāddha should be per-
formed once at least in the life of every Hindū to his
progenitors at Gayā; N. of a river; [cf. {%śaṅ-gaya%}
and {%buddha-gayā.%}] {%—Gaya-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a
physician. {%—Gaya-śāta, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
patriarch. {%—Gaya-śiras, as,%} n., N. of a mountain
near Gayā, a renowned place of pilgrimage. {%—Gaya-%}
{%sādhana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. promoting domestic wealth
or prosperity, an epithet of Soma. {%—Gaya-sphāna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. increasing domestic wealth, pro-
moting the prosperity of a household; an epithet of
Soma. {%—Gayā-kāśyapa, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Śākya-siṃha. {%—Gayā-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Gayā-māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of a section of the
Vāyu-Purāṇa. {%—Gayā-śikhara, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
or {%gayā-śiras, as,%} n. or {%gayā-śīrṣa, am,%} n., N. of
[Page0284-a+ 78]
a mountain near Gayā, a renowned place of pilgrim-
age; [cf. {%gaya-śiras.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17127<pc>0284-a<k1>gara<k2>gara
{#gara#}¦ {%gara, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%gṝ%}), swallowing;
({%as%}), m. any drink, beverage, fluid; a noxious or
poisonous beverage; a factitious poison; an anti-
dote; sickness, disease; probably a peculiar kind of
disease attended with difficulty of swallowing (?),
dysphagia (?); N. of a son of Uśīnara; ({%am%}), n. a
kind of poison; the fifth of the eleven Karaṇas;
sprinkling, wetting (?); ({%ā%}), f. swallowing; N. of a
plant, {%= devadālī-latā; (ī),%} f. a kind of grass,
Andropogon Serratus. {%—Gara-gir, īr, īr, īr,%} or
{%gara-gīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one who has swal-
lowed a noxious draught, poisoned {%—Garagīrṇin,%}
{%ī,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Gara-ghna, as, ī, am,%}
removing poison or the disease called Gara, an anti-
dote; sanative, healthy; ({%as%}), m. a kind of basil,
Ocimum Sanctum, {%= kṛṣṇārjaka;%} another kind
of Ocimum, {%= varvara; (ī).%} f a kind of fish, com-
monly Garaï, the young of the Ophiocephalus Lata.
{%—Gara-da, as, ā, am,%} poisoning, a poisoner; un-
wholesome, occasioning sickness; ({%am%}), n. poison.
{%—Gara-dāna, am,%} n. giving poison. {%—Gara-%}
{%vrata, as,%} m. a peacock. {%—Gara-han, ā,%} m. the
plant Ocimum Sanctum. {%—Garātmaka (˚ra-āt˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the seed of the plant Śobhāñjana or Hyper-
anthera Moringa. {%—Garādhikā (˚ra-adh˚),%} f. the
insect called Lākṣā or the red dye obtained from it.
<LEND>

<L>17128<pc>0284-a<k1>garaRa<k2>garaRa
{%Garaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of swallowing; wetting,
sprinkling. {%—Garaṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} occupied in
swallowing.
<LEND>

<L>17129<pc>0284-a<k1>garala<k2>garala
{%Garala, as, am,%}¦ m. n. poison; the venom of a
snake or venom in general; ({%am%}), n. a bundle of
grass or hay; a measure in general. {%—Garalāri%}
{%(˚la-ari), is,%} m. an emerald; [cf. {%garuḍāṅkita,%}
{%garuḍāśman, garuḍottīrṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17130<pc>0284-a<k1>garalin<k2>garalin
{%Garalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ venomous, poisonous.
<LEND>

<L>17131<pc>0284-a<k1>garita<k2>garita
{%Garita, as, ā, am,%}¦ poisoned.
<LEND>

<L>17132<pc>0284-a<k1>garaBa<k2>garaBa
{#garaBa#}¦ {%garabha, as,%} m. the fœtus or embryo,
{%= garbha.%}
<LEND>

<L>17133<pc>0284-a<k1>garAgarI<k2>garAgarI
{#garAgarI#}¦ {%garāgarī,%} f. a kind of grass,
Andropogon Serratus, {%= kharā, garī, agarī.%}
<LEND>

<L>17134<pc>0284-a<k1>gariman<k2>gariman
{#gariman#}¦ {%gariman, ā,%} m. (fr. {%guru%}), heavi-
ness, weight; one of the eight Siddhis or faculties
of Śiva (making himself heavy at will); importance,
dignity, venerableness; worth, excellence.
<LEND>

<L>17135<pc>0284-a<k1>garizWa<k2>garizWa
{%Gariṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. fr. {%guru%}), heaviest,
excessively heavy; very venerable; worst; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a man; also of an Asura.
<LEND>

<L>17136<pc>0284-a<k1>garIyas<k2>garIyas
{%Garīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. fr. {%guru%}), heavier,
very heavy, heaviest; weightier, greater; more
precious or valuable, dearer; highly venerable;
worse. {%—Garīyas-tva, am,%} n. weight, importance.
<LEND>

<L>17137<pc>0284-a<k1>garu<k2>garu
{%Garu = guru%}¦ in {%agaru,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17138<pc>0284-a<k1>garuqa<k2>garuqa
{#garuqa#}¦ {%garuḍa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%gṝ,%}
to swallow, because Garuḍa was perhaps originally
identified with the all-consuming fire of the sun's
rays), N. of a mythical bird, the chief of the
feathered race, the enemy of the serpent-race, the
vehicle of Viṣṇu, and the son of Kaśyapa and
Vinatā, and elder brother of Aruṇa; (shortly after
his birth he frightened the gods by his brilliant
lustre; they supposed him to be Agni, and requested
his protection; when they discovered that he was
Garuḍa, they praised him as the highest being, and
called him fire and sun. Aruṇa, the charioteer of the
sun or the personified dawn, is said to be the younger
brother of Garuḍa. In some legends Svāhā, the
wife of Agni, takes the shape of a female Garuḍī, =
{%su-parṇī.%} With Jainas, Garuḍa is an attendant of the
sixteenth Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī); a building
shaped like Garuḍa; N. of a peculiar military array;
N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa; N. of a Kalpa, the fourteenth
day of Brahmā. {%—Garuḍa-dhvaja, as,%} m. an epi-
thet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa (whose symbol is Garuḍa).
{%—Garuḍa-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of the seventeenth
Purāṇa; [cf. {%gāruḍa.%}] {%—Garuḍa-ruta, am,%} n. a
species of metre, having four lines to the stanza and
[Page0284-b+ 76]
sixteen syllables to each line. {%—Garuḍa-vegā,%} f., N.
of a plant. {%—Garuḍāgraja (˚ḍa-ag), as,%} m. having
Garuḍa for his elder brother, an epithet of Aruṇa,
the charioteer of the sun. {%—Garuḍāṅka (˚ḍa-aṅ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Garu-%}
{%{{ḍānkita->ḍāṅkita||20161201|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 303|}} (˚ḍa-aṅ˚), am,%} n. an emerald; [cf. {%garu-%}
{%ḍāśman, garuḍottīrṇa, gāruḍa, gārutmata.%}]
{%—Garuḍārdha (˚ḍa-ar˚), as,%} m. (?), a kind of
arrow. {%—Garuḍāśman (˚ḍa-aś˚), ā,%} m. an emerald.
{%—Garuḍottīrṇa (ḍa-ut˚), am,%} n. an emerald.
{%—Garuḍopaniṣad (˚ḍa-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an
Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>17139<pc>0284-b<k1>garut<k2>garut
{#garut#}¦ {%garut, t,%} m. (said to be fr. 2. {%gṝ%}),
the wing of a bird. {%—Garut-mat, ān, atī, at%} (in
the Veda only found in connection with {%su-parṇa%}),
feathered, winged; swallowing; ({%ān%}), m. the bird
Garuḍa; a bird in general. {%—Garud-yodhin, ī,%} m.
a quail.
<LEND>

<L>17140<pc>0284-b<k1>garula<k2>garula
{#garula#}¦ {%garula = garuḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>17141<pc>0284-b<k1>garga<k2>garga
{#garga#}¦ {%garga, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 2. {%gṝ%}),
N. of an old sage, a descendant of Bharad-vāja and of
Aṅgiras; N. of an astronomer; N. of a physician;
N. of a son of king Vitatha; also of a grandson of
this king; a bull; an earth-worm; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
descendants of Garga; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a woman; [cf. {%gārgī%} and {%gārgya.%}] {%—Garga-%}
{%bhūmi, is,%} m., N. of a prince; (also {%bharga-bhūmi.%})
{%—Garga-śiras, ās,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Garga-%}
{%srotas, as,%} n. Garga's stream, N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>17142<pc>0284-b<k1>gargIya<k2>gargIya
{%Gargīya, as,%}¦ m. a descendant of Garga (?).
<LEND>

<L>17143<pc>0284-b<k1>gargara<k2>gargara
{#gargara#}¦ {%gargara, as,%} m. (an onomatopoetic
word), a whirlpool, an eddy [cf. Lat. <nsi>gurges</nsi>]; a
kind of musical instrument; a kind of fish, Pime-
lodus Gagora; N. of a man; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. a churn;
a vessel for holding water, a guglet.
<LEND>

<L>17144<pc>0284-b<k1>gargaraka<k2>gargaraka
{%Gargaraka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fish [cf. the pre-
ceding]; a kind of plant with a poisonous root.
<LEND>

<L>17145<pc>0284-b<k1>gargAwa<k2>gargAwa
{%Gargāṭa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fish, Pimelodus Gagora;
[cf. the preceding.]
<LEND>

<L>17146<pc>0284-b<k1>garj<k2>garj
{#garj#}¦ {%garj,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%garjati, jagarja,%}
{%garjiṣyati, agarjīt, garjitum, garja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to emit a deep or full sound, to sound
as distant thunder, to thunder; to roar, growl; to
rave &c.; [cf. Lat. <nsi>garrio, gurges;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>kurran, krago, kragil, krachôn, gellan, kallôn,</nsi>
<nsi>kallari;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>quarren, girren.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17147<pc>0284-b<k1>garja<k2>garja
{%Garja, as,%}¦ m. a (roaring) elephant; ({%as, ā%}), m. f.
the roaring of elephants, the rumbling of clouds &c.
{%—Garjā-phala, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= vi-kaṇṭaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>17148<pc>0284-b<k1>garjaka<k2>garjaka
{%Garjaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fish, {%= śāla%} or {%śālaja,%}
commonly {%gajāḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>17149<pc>0284-b<k1>garjana<k2>garjana
{%Garjana, am,%}¦ n. sound, noise; crying, roaring,
the rumbling of clouds &c.; a grumbling noise, a
growl, a grunt; passion, wrath; war, battle, conflict;
excessive indignation, reproach, menace.
<LEND>

<L>17150<pc>0284-b<k1>garjanIya<k2>garjanIya
{%Garjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sounded or roared.
<LEND>

<L>17151<pc>0284-b<k1>garjanmeGa<k2>garjanmeGa
{%Garjan-megha, as,%}¦ m. a thunder-cloud.
<LEND>

<L>17152<pc>0284-b<k1>garji<k2>garji
{%Garji, is,%}¦ m. the muttering of clouds or distant
thunder.
<LEND>

<L>17153<pc>0284-b<k1>garjita<k2>garjita
{%Garjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, roared, bellowed;
({%as%}), m. a (roaring) elephant in rut; ({%am%}), n. the
muttering of clouds or rolling of distant thunder.
<LEND>

<L>17154<pc>0284-b<k1>garjya<k2>garjya
{%Garjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be roared or sounded.
<LEND>

<L>17155<pc>0284-b<k1>gajara<k2>garjara
{#garjara#}¦ {%garjara, am,%} n. a carrot, Daucus
Carota.
<LEND>

<L>17156<pc>0284-b<k1>garta<k2>garta<h>1
{#garta#} 1¦. {%garta, as,%} m., Ved. a high seat (?),
a throne; the seat of a war-chariot, a chariot; a
table for playing at dice; a house. {%—Garta-sad, t,%}
{%t, t,%} Ved. sitting on a war-chariot. {%—Gartāruh (˚ta-%}
{%ār˚), k, k, k,%} Ved. ascending a war-chariot; (Sāy.)
entering a hall of justice.
<LEND>

<L>17157<pc>0284-b<k1>garta<k2>garta<h>2
{#garta#} 2¦. {%garta, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. (said to be
fr. rt. 2. {%gṝ,%} but perhaps a later form for {%karta%}),
a hollow, a hole, a cave; a grave; ({%as%}), m. the
hollow of the loins; a kind of disease; N. of a
country, a part of Trigarta, in the north-west of
[Page0284-c+ 75]
India. {%—Gartan-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having holes
or excavations. {%—Garta-mit, t, t, t,%} Ved. buried in
a hole. {%—Gartāśraya (˚ta-āś˚), as,%} m. any animal
living in holes or under ground, a mouse, rat, &c.
{%—Garteśa (˚ta-īśa), as,%} m. the master of a cave.
{%—Garte-ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} being in a hole or grave.
<LEND>

<L>17158<pc>0284-c<k1>gartikA<k2>gartikA
{%Gartikā,%}¦ f. a weaver's workshop (so called because
a weaver sits at his loom with his feet in a hole
below the level of the floor).
<LEND>

<L>17159<pc>0284-c<k1>gard<k2>gard
{#gard#}¦ {%gard,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%gardati, -ditum,%}
{%gardayati, -yitum,%} to sound, to roar, emit
any sound.
<LEND>

<L>17160<pc>0284-c<k1>gardaBa<k2>gardaBa
{%Gardabha, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. the last), an
ass; a kind of perfume, {%= gandha,%} smell, odour;
N. of a dynasty; ({%ī%}), f. a she-ass; an insect, a kind
of beetle generated in cow-dung; N. of a several
plants, {%= aparājitā, kaṭabhī, śveta-kaṇṭakārī;%} a
disease of the skin, an eruption of round, red, and
painful spots; also {%gardabhikā; (am),%} n. the white
esculent water-lily, Nymphæa Esculenta; a kind of
plant used as a vermifuge; [cf. {%viḍaṅga%}]. {%—Garda-%}
{%bha-gada, as,%} m. a kind of disease of the skin; [cf.
{%gardabhikā, jāla-gardabha, jvālā-gardabhaka,%}
{%pāṣāṇa-gardabha.%}] {%—Gardabha-nādin, ī, inī, i,%}
Ved. braying like an ass. {%—Gardabha-rūpa, as,%} m.
having the form of an ass, an epithet of Vikramāditya.
{%—Gardabha-śāka, as, ā%} or {%ī.%} m. f. the plant Cle-
rodendrum Siphonanthus. {%—Gardabhākṣa (bha-%}
{%ak˚), as,%} m., N. of a descendant of Hiraṇya-kaśipu
and son of Bali. {%—Gardabhājina (˚bha-aj˚), am,%}
n. the skin or hide of an ass. {%—Gardabhāṇḍa (˚bha-%}
{%aṇ˚), as,%} m., N. of a tree, commonly Pārspīpal,
Thespesia Populneoides; or also the tree Ficus
Infectoria; an Adhyāya or Anuvāka, in which the
word Gardabhāṇḍa occurs. {%—Gardabhāṇḍaka, as,%}
m. the tree Thespesia Populneoides. {%—Garda-%}
{%bhāṇḍīya, as,%} m. an Adhyāya or Anuvāka, in
which the word Gardabhāṇḍa occurs. {%—Garda-%}
{%bhāhvaya (˚bha-āh˚), am,%} n. the white esculent
water-lily, Nymphæa Esculenta. {%—Gardabhī-mu-%}
{%kha, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Gardabhī-vipīta,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17161<pc>0284-c<k1>gardaBaka<k2>gardaBaka
{%Gardabhaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of insect; ({%ikā%}), f. a
cutaneous disease, a blotch, an eruption.
<LEND>

<L>17162<pc>0284-c<k1>gardaBi<k2>gardaBi
{%Gardabhi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17163<pc>0284-c<k1>gardaBin<k2>gardaBin
{%Gardabhin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a dynasty; [cf. {%gardabha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17164<pc>0284-c<k1>gardayitnu<k2>gardayitnu
{#gardayitnu#}¦ {%gardayitnu, us,%} m. a cloud; [cf.
{%gaḍayat%} and {%gaḍayitnu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17165<pc>0284-c<k1>garD<k2>garD
{#garD#}¦ {%gardh,%} another form of rt. {%gṛdh.%}
<LEND>

<L>17166<pc>0284-c<k1>garDa<k2>garDa
{%Gardha, as,%}¦ m. desire, greediness, eagerness; a tree,
commonly called Pārspīpal; [cf. {%gardabhāṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17167<pc>0284-c<k1>garDana<k2>garDana
{%Gardhana%}¦ or {%gardhita, as, ā, am,%} covetous,
greedy.
<LEND>

<L>17168<pc>0284-c<k1>garDin<k2>garDin
{%Gardhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ desirous, greedy, covetous;
pursuing or following with eagerness.
<LEND>

<L>17169<pc>0284-c<k1>garb<k2>garb<h>1
{#garb#} 1¦. {%garb,%} cl. 1. P. {%garbati, -bitum,%} to
move, to go or approach, {%= kharb, carb,%}
{%gharb,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>17170<pc>0284-c<k1>garb<k2>garb<h>2
{#garb#} 2¦. {%garb.%} See {%garv%} and {%garva.%}
<LEND>

<L>17171<pc>0284-c<k1>garBa<k2>garBa
{#garBa#}¦ {%garbha, as,%} m. (fr. {%grabh = grah,%} to
conceive, said to be fr. 2. {%gṝ%}), the womb, the belly,
the inside, the middle, the interior of anything; an
inner apartment, a lying-in chamber; any interior
chamber, the adytum of a temple &c.; a fœtus or
embryo, a child, the brood or offspring of birds; the
fruit (of plants); the offspring of the sky, i. e. the
fogs and vapour drawn upwards by the rays of the
sun during eight months and sent down again in
the rainy season; the bed of a river (especially of the
Ganges) when fullest, i. e. on the fourteenth day of
the dark half of the month Bhadrā, or in the height
of the rains, (the Garbha extends to this point, after
which the Tīra or proper bank begins, and extends
for 150 cubits; this space being holy ground);
joining, union; the rough coat of the fruit of the
[Page0285-a+ 81]
Jaka; the calyx of the lotus. ({%Garbha%} is often found
at the end of compounds in the sense of having in
the interior, containing, filled with; e. g. {%jala-gar-%}
{%bha, as, ā, am,%} filled with water; {%agni-garbha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} containing fire); [cf. {%amṛta-garbha, ardha-%}
{%g˚, kṛṣṇa-g˚, mūḍha-g˚, viśva-g˚, hiraṇya-g˚:%}
cf. also Hib. <nsi>cilfin,</nsi> ‘the belly;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>hrif;</nsi>
Germ. <nsi>kalb (?);</nsi> Eng. <nsi>calf;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">δελφός.</lang>] {%—Garbha-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} producing impregnation, procrea-
tive, fecundatory, impregnatory; ({%as%}), m. the plant
Nageia Putrañjīva. {%—Garbha-karaṇa, am,%} n., Ved.
anything which causes impregnation. {%—Garbha-%}
{%kāra, as, ā, am,%} impregnating, fecundatory, pro-
creative, producing impregnation; ({%am%}), n., N. of
a ceremony. {%—Garbha-kāla, as,%} m. the time of
impregnation; the time when the offspring of the
sky, i. e. the vapour collected in the air [cf. {%garbha%}
above], shows the first signs of life, 195 days or seven
lunar months after its first conception. {%—Garbha-%}
{%kośa%} or {%garbha-koṣa, as,%} m. the uterus. {%—Garbha-%}
{%kleśa, as,%} m. pains caused by the embryo, pains of
childbirth. {%—Garbha-kṣaya, as,%} m. loss of the
embryo, miscarriage. {%—Garbha-gṛha, am,%} n. an
inner apartment, an inner chamber, a lying-in cham-
ber; the sanctuary or adytum of a temple; (in
compounds) a house containing anything (e. g. {%śara-%}
{%garbha-gṛha,%} a house containing arrows). {%—Garbha-%}
{%grahaṇa, am,%} n. conception, impregnation. {%—Gar-%}
{%bha-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%} killing the embryo, producing
abortion; ({%inī%}), f. a poisonous plant, Methonica Su-
perba. {%—Garbha-calana, am,%} n. quickening, the mo-
tion of the fœtus in the uterus. {%—Garbha-cyuta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} fallen from the womb (as a child); miscarrying.
{%—Garbha-cyuti, is,%} f. falling from the womb, birth,
delivery; miscarriage. {%—Garbha-tā,%} f. or {%garbha-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. impregnation. {%—Garbha-da, as, ā, am,%}
impregnating, procreative; ({%as%}), m. the tree Nageia
Putrañjīva; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a shrub. {%—Garbha-dātṛ,%}
{%tā, trī, tṛ,%} impregnating, procreative; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
a shrub, {%= garbha-dā, apatya-dā, putra-dā,%} &c.
{%—Garbha-dāsa, as,%} m. a slave by birth. {%—Garbha-%}
{%divasa, ās,%} m. pl. certain days on which the vapours
collected in the air show signs of life; [cf. {%garbha-%}
{%kāla.%}] {%—Garbha-druh, -dhruk, k, k,%} destroying
the fœtus, causing abortion. {%—Garbha-dha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. procreative, impregnatory. {%—Garbha-%}
{%dharā,%} f. bearing a fœtus, pregnant. {%—Garbha-%}
{%dhāna, am,%} n. impregnating. {%—Garbha-dhāraṇa,%}
{%am, ā,%} n. f. gestation, impregnation, conception in the
womb, pregnancy; N. of the twenty-second Adhyāya in
Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-saṃhitā. {%—Garbha-dhārita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} contained in the womb, conceived, borne.
{%—Garbha-dhi, is,%} m., Ved. a breeding-place, a nest,
cohabitation. {%—Garbha-dhvaṃsa, as,%} m. abortion.
{%—Garbha-nāḍī%} or {%garbha-nābhi-nāḍī,%} f. the
umbilical cord. {%—Garbha-nud, t, t, t,%} causing abor-
tion; ({%t%}), m. the poisonous plant Methonica Superba.
{%—Garbha-parisrava, as,%} m. secundines. {%—Garbha-%}
{%pākin, ī,%} m. rice ripening in sixty days (during the
latter period of the sky's pregnancy). {%—Garbha-pāta,%}
{%as,%} m. miscarriage after the fourth month of preg-
nancy. {%—Garbha-pātaka, as, ī, am,%} causing mis-
carriage; ({%as%}), m. a red kind of Moringa. {%—Gar-%}
{%bha-pātana, as, ī, am,%} causing miscarriage, pro-
ducing abortion; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant, {%= rīṭhā-%}
{%karañja; (ī),%} f. the plant Methonica Superba; any
plant or drug supposed to produce abortion; ({%am%}),
n. producing abortion. {%—Garbha-pātin, ī, inī, i,%}
causing miscarriage, producing abortion; ({%inī%}), f., N.
of a plant, {%= viśalyā%}. {%—Garbha-poṣaṇa, am,%} n.
nourishing a fœtus, gestation. {%—Garbha-bharman,%}
{%a,%} n. supporting a fœtus, gestation. {%—Garbha-%}
{%bhavana, am,%} n. the sanctuary or adytum of a
temple; [cf. {%garbha-gṛha.%}] {%—Garbha-bhāra, as,%}
m. the weight of the fœtus. {%—Garbha-maṇḍapa, as,%}
m. an inner apartment, a bed-chamber. {%—Garbha-%}
{%māsa, as,%} m. month of pregnancy. {%—Garbha-mo-%}
{%cana, am,%} n. delivery, birth. {%—Garbha-yoṣā,%} f. a
pregnant woman, metaphorically the river Ganges
overflowing its banks. {%—Garbha-rakṣaṇa, am,%} n.
protecting the fœtus, N. of a ceremony performed
[Page0285-b+ 81]
in the fourth month of gestation. {%—Garbha-randhi,%}
{%is,%} f. complete cooking (?). {%—Garbha-rasa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. endowed with impregnating moisture. {%—Gar-%}
{%bha-rūpa%} or {%garbha-rūpaka, as, ā, am,%} childish,
juvenile; ({%as%}), m. a child, an infant, a youth.
{%—Garbha-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} observing the
signs of the rainy season; ({%am%}), n. symptom of preg-
nancy; N. of the twenty-first Adhyāya of Varāha-mi-
hira's Bṛhat-saṃhitā treating on the marks or signs
of the rainy season. {%—Garbha-lambhana, am,%} n.
a ceremony performed for the sake of facilitating
conception. {%—Garbha-vatī,%} f. a pregnant female.
{%—Garbha-vasati, is,%} f. or {%garbha-vāsa, as,%} m.
the abode of the fœtus, the womb. {%—Garbha-vāyu,%}
{%us,%} m. air in the womb. {%—Garbha-vicyuti, is,%} f.
abortion in the beginning of pregnancy. {%—Garbha-%}
{%vipatti, is,%} f. the death of the fœtus. {%—Garbha-%}
{%vedanā,%} f. the pains of childbirth. {%—Garbha-%}
{%veśman, a,%} n. the womb or a lying-in chamber.
{%—Garbha-vyākaraṇa, am,%} n. the formation of
the embryo, a part of the Śarīra section in medical
works. {%—Garbha-vyāpad, t,%} f. the death of the
fœtus. {%—Garbha-vyūha, as,%} m. a kind of battle
array. {%—Garbha-śaṅku, us,%} m. a kind of vectis or
instrument for extracting the dead fœtus. {%—Garbha-%}
{%śayyā,%} f. the abode of the fœtus, the uterus. {%—Gar-%}
{%bha-saṅkramaṇa, am,%} n. entering the womb.
{%—Garbha-samaya, as,%} m. the time when the
offspring of the sky, the vapour collected in the air,
shows the first signs of life, 195 days or seven lunar
months after its conception; [cf. {%garbha-kāla.%}]
{%—Garbha-sambhava, as,%} m. or {%garbha-sambhūti,%}
{%is,%} f. the production of a fœtus, the becoming preg-
nant. {%—Garbha-subhaga%} or {%garbha-saubhāgya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} blessing the fœtus. {%—Garbha-sūtra, am,%}
n. title of a Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Garbha-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} situated in the womb; centrical, internal,
in the interior, within the centre of anything.
{%—Garbha-srāva, as,%} m. abortion, miscarriage.
{%—Garbhasrāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%} producing or occasion-
ing abortion; ({%ī%}), m. the tree Phœnix Paludosa
{%(hintāla)%}. {%—Garbhāgāra (˚bha-āg˚), am,%} n. the
uterus; an inner and private room, the female apart-
ments, the lying-in chamber; the sanctuary of a
temple, the chamber where the object of worship or
the image of a deity is placed; [cf. {%garbha-gṛha.%}]
{%—Garbhāṅka (˚bha-aṅ˚), as,%} m. interlude during
an act. {%—Garbhāda (˚bha-ada), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
consuming the fœtus. {%—Garbhādhāna (˚bha-ādh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. impregnation; a ceremony performed after
menstruation to ensure or facilitate conception.
{%—Garbhāvakrānti (˚bha-av˚), is,%} f. descent of the
fœtus. {%—Garbhāśaṅkā (˚bha-āś˚),%} f. suspicion of
pregnancy. {%—Garbhāśaya (˚bha-āś˚), as,%} m. the
womb, the uterus. {%—Garbhāṣṭama (˚bha-aṣ˚), as,%}
m. the eighth month of uterine gestation; the eighth
year reckoning from conception. {%—Garbhāspandana%}
{%(˚bha-asp˚), am,%} n. non-quickening of the fœtus.
{%—Garbhāsrāva (˚bha-ās˚), as,%} m. miscarriage.
{%—Garbhe-tṛpta, as, ā, am,%} contented in the womb,
i. e. indolent. {%—Garbheśvara (˚bha-īś˚), as,%} m. a
sovereign by birth. {%—Garbheśvara-tā,%} f. sovereignty
attained by inheritance. {%—Garbhotpatti (˚bha-ut˚),%}
{%is,%} f. the formation of the embryo. {%—Garbho-%}
{%paghāta (˚bha-up˚), as,%} m. miscarriage of the em-
bryo, (applied also to the sky.) {%—Garbhopaghātinī%}
{%(˚bha-up˚),%} f. a cow (or female) miscarrying from
unseasonable gestation. {%—Garbhopaniṣad (˚bha-%}
{%up˚), t,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>17172<pc>0285-b<k1>garBaka<k2>garBaka
{%Garbhaka, as,%}¦ m. a chaplet of flowers &c. worn
in the hair; ({%am%}), n. a period of two nights with
the intermediate day.
<LEND>

<L>17173<pc>0285-b<k1>garBita<k2>garBita
{%Garbhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pregnant, full, filled.
<LEND>

<L>17174<pc>0285-b<k1>garBin<k2>garBin
{%Garbhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ pregnant, impregnated with
(with acc. or inst.); ({%iṇī%}), f. pregnant, a pregnant
woman or animal; compounded with names of
animals (e. g. {%go-garbhiṇī,%} a pregnant cow).
{%—Garbhiṇī-vyākaraṇa, am,%} n. or {%garbhiṇī-%}
{%vyākṛti, is,%} f. ‘science of the progress of preg-
nancy,’ a particular head or subject in medical
works. {%—Garbhiṇy-avekṣaṇa, am,%} n. midwifery,
[Page0285-c+ 74]
attendance and care of pregnant women and new-
born infants.
<LEND>

<L>17175<pc>0285-c<k1>garBaRqa<k2>garBaRqa
{#garBaRqa#}¦ {%garbhaṇḍa, as,%} m. (fr. {%garbha%} and
{%aṇḍa?%}), enlargement of the navel.
<LEND>

<L>17176<pc>0285-c<k1>garmuwikA<k2>garmuwikA
{#garmuwikA#}¦ {%garmuṭikā,%} f. a species of rice;
[cf. {%garmūcchada.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17177<pc>0285-c<k1>garmut<k2>garmut
{#garmut#}¦ {%garmut, t,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%gṝ%}),
a kind of bee [cf. {%gārmuta%}]; a kind of grass; a
creeper; a kind of reed ({%naḍa%}); according to some
authorities the plant Vangueria Spinosa, commonly
Mayanā; according to others Coix Barbata, com-
monly Gaḍagaḍa; gold.
<LEND>

<L>17178<pc>0285-c<k1>garmUcCada<k2>garmUcCada
{#garmUcCada#}¦ {%garmūcchada, as,%} m. and {%garmū-%}
{%ṭikā,%} f. a kind of rice, commonly Māḍuyā, Eleusine
Coracana; [cf. {%garmuṭikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17179<pc>0285-c<k1>garmowikA<k2>garmowikA
{#garmowikA#}¦ {%garmoṭikā,%} f. a species of reed,
{%= jaraḍī.%}
<LEND>

<L>17180<pc>0285-c<k1>garv<k2>garv
{#garv#}¦ {%garv%} or {%garb,%} cl. 1. P., 10. A. {%gar-%}
{%vati, -vitum, garvayate, -yitum,%} to be
or become proud or haughty; [cf. Lith. <nsi>garbê,</nsi>
‘honour, glory;’ Old Germ. <nsi>gelban, gelf.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17181<pc>0285-c<k1>garva<k2>garva
{%Garva%}¦ or {%garba, as,%} m. pride, arrogance.
<LEND>

<L>17182<pc>0285-c<k1>garvara<k2>garvara
{%Garvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ proud, haughty, arrogant.
<LEND>

<L>17183<pc>0285-c<k1>garvAya<k2>garvAya
{%Garvāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%garvāyate, -yitum,%} to show
pride or arrogance.
<LEND>

<L>17184<pc>0285-c<k1>garvita<k2>garvita
{%Garvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ proud, haughty; conceited.
<LEND>

<L>17185<pc>0285-c<k1>garvaRa<k2>garvaRa
{#garvaRa#}¦ {%garvaṇa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N.
of a rock.
<LEND>

<L>17186<pc>0285-c<k1>garvAwa<k2>garvAwa
{#garvAwa#}¦ {%garvāṭa, as,%} m. a watchman, a door-
keeper, a sort of village constable, a head-borough
or beadle.
<LEND>

<L>17187<pc>0285-c<k1>garh<k2>garh
{#garh#}¦ {%garh,%} cl. 1. 10. P. A. {%garhati, -te,%}
{%garhayati, -te, jagarha, jagarhe, gar-%}
{%hiṣyate, agarhiṣṭa, garhitum,%} to lodge a com-
plaint before a person (dat.), accuse, charge with,
reproach, blame, censure a person (acc.); to be sorry
for, repent of: Desid. {%jigarhiṣate, -ti:%} Intens.
{%jāgarhyate, jāgarḍḍhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>17188<pc>0285-c<k1>garhaRa<k2>garhaRa
{%Garhaṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. censuring, censure, blame,
reproach; {%garhaṇāṃ yā,%} to meet with reproach.
<LEND>

<L>17189<pc>0285-c<k1>garhaRIya<k2>garhaRIya
{%Garhaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ censurable, blamable, con-
temptible, vile, bad.
<LEND>

<L>17190<pc>0285-c<k1>garhA<k2>garhA
{%Garhā,%}¦ f. abuse, censure, reproach.
<LEND>

<L>17191<pc>0285-c<k1>garhita<k2>garhita
{%Garhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ blamed, censured; con-
temned, despised; contemptible, ignominious, for-
bidden, bad, vile.
<LEND>

<L>17192<pc>0285-c<k1>garhitavya<k2>garhitavya
{%Garhitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be censured, blamable.
<LEND>

<L>17193<pc>0285-c<k1>garhin<k2>garhin
{%Garhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ abusing, reproaching.
<LEND>

<L>17194<pc>0285-c<k1>garhya<k2>garhya
{%Garhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ deserving reproach, con-
temptible, low, vile; ({%as%}), m., N. of a tree (?).
{%—Garhya-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} speaking ill, speaking
vilely or inaccurately.
<LEND>

<L>17195<pc>0285-c<k1>gal<k2>gal
{#gal#}¦ {%gal,%} cl. 1. P. {%galati, jagāla, galiṣ-%}
{%yati, agālīt, galitum,%} to drip, drop,
ooze, trickle, distil; to fall down or off; to vanish,
perish, pass away; to eat, swallow [cf. 2. {%gṝ%}]:
Caus. {%gālayati, -yitum,%} to cause to drop, to pour
out; to filter, strain; to fuse, liquefy, dissolve, melt:
A. {%gālayate,%} to flow; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>qvall, quillu,</nsi>
<nsi>qual,</nsi> and <nsi>quella,</nsi> ‘a well.’]
<LEND>

<L>17196<pc>0285-c<k1>gala<k2>gala
{%Gala, as,%}¦ m. the throat, neck; resin, especially
the resin of the plant Shorea Robusta; a kind of
fish, a small kind of Cyprinus, a subgenus of that class
or Cyprinus Garra; a kind of musical instrument;
a reed, a large kind of the Saccharum Cylindricum;
a rope [cf. {%galyā%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant [cf.
{%alambuṣā;%} cf. also Lat. <nsi>collum</nsi> (?); Germ. <nsi>hals.</nsi>]
{%—Gala-kambala, as,%} m. a bull's dewlap. {%—Gala-%}
{%gaṇḍa, au,%} m. du. neck and cheek, or neck and
Adam's apple; ({%as%}), m. enlargement of the
glands of the neck; goitre. {%—Galagaṇḍin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} having a goitre. {%—Gala-golin, ī, inī,%} m. f. a kind
of serpent. {%—Gala-graha, as,%} m. seizing by the
throat, throttling, choaking; compression of the
[Page0286-a+ 75]
throat, a kind of disease; a fish-sauce prepared with
salt, pepper, ghee, &c.; N. of certain days in the
dark fortnight, viz. the fourth, seventh, eighth, ninth,
thirteenth and three following days; a day on which
a course of study is commenced, but immediately
preceding a day on which study is prohibited; begun
but immediately interrupted study; also {%gala-gra-%}
{%haṇa, am,%} n. {%—Gala-carman, a,%} n. the gullet,
throat. {%—Gala-dvāra, am,%} n. the door of the throat,
the mouth. {%—Gala-mekhalā,%} f. a string of beads worn
round the neck, a necklace. {%—Gala-vārtta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} living by eating, a parasite. {%—Gala-vidradhi,%}
{%is,%} m. tumor and abscess in the throat. {%—Gala-%}
{%vrata, as,%} m. a peacock; [cf. {%gara-vrata.%}] {%—Gala-%}
{%śuṇḍikā,%} f. the uvula; swelling of the glands of the
neck; ({%e%}), du. the soft palate. {%—Gala-śuṇḍī,%} f.
swelling of the glands of the neck. {%—Gala-stanī,%} f.
a she-goat; (a species of the Bengal goat having small
fleshy protuberances, resembling nipples, depending
from the throat); [cf. {%gale-stanī, ajāgala-stana,%}
{%aja-gallikā.%}] {%—Gala-hasta, as,%} m. the hand at
the throat, seizing by the throat, collaring, throttling.
{%—Galahastaya,%} nom. P. {%-tayati,%} to throttle,
strangle. {%—Gala-hastita, as, ā, am,%} seized by the
throat. {%—Galāṅkura (˚la-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a disease of
the throat, inflammation of the throat and enlarge-
ment of the tonsils. {%—Gale-gaṇḍa, as,%} m. a kind of
bird, the Adjutant or Ardea Argala; (the name
alludes to a pendulous fleshy purse hanging from the
throat of this bird.) {%—Gale-copaka, as, ikā, am,%}
moving the neck. {%—Gale-stanī,%} f. a she-goat; [cf.
{%gala-stanī.%}] {%—Galodbhava (˚la-ud˚), as,%} m. the
tuft of hair on the neck of a horse. {%—Galaugha (˚la-%}
{%ogha), as,%} m. tumor in the throat.
<LEND>

<L>17197<pc>0286-a<k1>galaka<k2>galaka
{%Galaka, as,%}¦ m. the throat, the neck; a kind of
fish, a small kind of Cyprinus.
<LEND>

<L>17198<pc>0286-a<k1>galat<k2>galat
{%Galat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dropping, falling, oozing,
trickling, flowing; melting.
<LEND>

<L>17199<pc>0286-a<k1>galana<k2>galana
{%Galana, as, ā, am,%}¦ dropping, flowing; ({%am%}), n.
dropping, oozing, trickling; melting, fusing; falling
down or off; leaking.
<LEND>

<L>17200<pc>0286-a<k1>galanIya<k2>galanIya
{%Galanīya%}¦ or {%galitavya%} or {%galya, as, ā, am,%}
fusible, soluble, liquefiable, to be melted &c.
<LEND>

<L>17201<pc>0286-a<k1>galantikA<k2>galantikA
{%Galantikā%}¦ or {%galantī,%} f. a small pitcher; a small
water-jar with a hole in the bottom, from which the
water drops upon a Liṅga or upon a Tulasi plant
placed beneath.
<LEND>

<L>17202<pc>0286-a<k1>galita<k2>galita
{%Galita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dropped, fallen; liquefied,
melted; distilled, oozed, flowing; untied, loosed;
lost, deprived; decayed, impaired. {%—Galita-kuṣṭha,%}
{%am,%} n. advanced and incurable leprosy, when the
fingers and toes fall off. {%—Galita-danta, as, ā, am,%}
having the teeth decayed, toothless. {%—Galita-nakha,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having the claws or nails fallen off.
{%—Galita-nakha-danta, as, ā, am,%} one who has
lost his claws and teeth. {%—Galita-nayana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who has lost his eyes, blind. {%—Galita-%}
{%pradīpa, as,%} m. or {%galita-pradīpikā,%} f. title of a
work, lit, ‘the light of dropped words,’ i. e. of certain
words in a manuscript which occur several times and
are given only once at full length.
<LEND>

<L>17203<pc>0286-a<k1>galitaka<k2>galitaka
{%Galitaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of dance, gesticulation.
<LEND>

<L>17204<pc>0286-a<k1>galyA<k2>galyA
{%Galyā,%}¦ f. a multitude of throats; a quantity of a
particular kind of grass or of ropes made of it.
<LEND>

<L>17205<pc>0286-a<k1>galAnila<k2>galAnila
{#galAnila#}¦ {%galānila, as,%} m. a prawn or
shrimp; see {%gaṅgāṭeya;%} (also read {%galānika%} and
{%galāvila.%})
<LEND>

<L>17206<pc>0286-a<k1>galAvala<k2>galAvala
{#galAvala#}¦ {%galāvala, as,%} m. a kind of tree.
<LEND>

<L>17207<pc>0286-a<k1>gali<k2>gali
{#gali#}¦ {%gali, is,%} m. a strong but lazy bull.
<LEND>

<L>17208<pc>0286-a<k1>galU<k2>galU
{#galU#}¦ {%galū, ūs,%} m. a sort of gem.
<LEND>

<L>17209<pc>0286-a<k1>galUna<k2>galUna
{#galUna#}¦ {%galūna, as,%} m., N. of a minister.
<LEND>

<L>17210<pc>0286-a<k1>galoqya<k2>galoqya
{#galoqya#}¦ {%galoḍya%} or {%gāloḍya, as,%} m. (?), N.
of a plant; [cf. {%giloḍya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17211<pc>0286-a<k1>galda<k2>galda
{#galda#}¦ {%galda, as, ā,%} m. f., Ved. speech;
straining; that which flows from a strainer (?).
<LEND>
[Page0286-b+ 77]

<L>17212<pc>0286-b<k1>galB<k2>galB
{#galB#}¦ {%galbh,%} cl. 1. A. {%galbhate,%} to be
bold or confident; [cf. {%garv;%} cf. also
Hib. <nsi>galbha,</nsi> ‘rigour, hardness.’]
<LEND>

<L>17213<pc>0286-b<k1>galBa<k2>galBa
{%Galbha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bold, confident, audacious;
proud, haughty, ({%galbha = garbha%} in {%apa-galbha,%}
q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>17214<pc>0286-b<k1>galla<k2>galla
{#galla#}¦ {%galla, as,%} m. the part of the cheek
near the corners of the mouth; the cheek. {%—Galla-%}
{%cāturī,%} f. a small round pillow to put underneath
the cheek.
<LEND>

<L>17215<pc>0286-b<k1>gallakI<k2>gallakI
{#gallakI#}¦ {%gallakī,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>17216<pc>0286-b<k1>galvarka<k2>galvarka
{#galvarka#}¦ {%galvarka, as,%} m. crystal; lapis
lazuli (?), sapphire (?), emerald (?); a goblet, a vessel
for drinking spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>17217<pc>0286-b<k1>galh<k2>galh
{#galh#}¦ {%galh,%} cl. 1. A. {%galhate,%} to blame,
to censure or despise; [cf. {%garh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17218<pc>0286-b<k1>gava<k2>gava
{#gava#}¦ {%gava = go,%} a cow, cattle; used at the
beginning of a compound before a word beginning
with a vowel, see below; also at the end of a com-
pound (e. g. {%pañca-gavam,%} five cows); ({%as%}), m. a
ray of the sun. {%—Gava-rāja, as,%} m. a bull. {%—Gavā-%}
{%kṛti (˚va-āk˚), is, is, i,%} cow-shaped. {%—Gavākṣa%}
{%(˚va-ak˚), as,%} m. an air-hole, a loop-hole, a round
window, a ‘bull's eye,’ &c.; the mesh of a shirt of
mail; N. of a warrior; N. of a monkey-chief
attached to Rāma, a son of Vaivasvata, the leader of
the Go-lāṅgūlas; N. of a sea (n. in this sense?); ({%ī%}),
f. a sort of cucumber, Cucumis Maderaspatanus or
Coloquintida; the plant Trophis Aspera ({%śākhoṭa%});
the plant Clitoria Ternatea. {%—Gavākṣaka, as,%} m.
an air-hole, a loop-hole, a round window, a bull's
eye. {%—Gavākṣa-jāla, am,%} n. a lattice, a window of
trellice-work. {%—Gavākṣita, as, ā, am,%} furnished
with windows, forming a lattice. {%—Gavāgra = go-%}
{%agra = go 'gra,%} q. v. {%—Gavādana (˚va-ad˚), am,%}
n. pasture or meadow grass; ({%ī%}), f. pasture or meadow
grass, a hay-rack, a manger, a trough for holding
grass &c. for feeding cattle; a species of cucumber,
Cucumis Maderaspatanus, or (according to some)
Cucumis Coloquintida; the plant Clitoria Ternatea.
{%—Gavāmṛta (˚va-am˚), am,%} n. the beverage of
immortality or nectar consisting of rays of light.
{%—Gavārtham%} or {%gavārthe (˚va-ar˚),%} ind. for the
sake of a cow. {%—Gavārha (˚va-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} of
the value of a cow. {%—Gavāvika (˚va-av˚), am,%} n.
cattle and sheep. {%—Gavāśana (˚va-aś˚), as,%} m. =
{%go-bhakṣaka,%} commonly {%muci,%} i. e. a worker in
leather, a shoe-maker; an outcast. {%—Gavāśira (˚va-%}
{%āś˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. mixed with milk, as Soma.
{%—Gavāśva (˚va-aś˚), am,%} n. cattle and horses; [cf.
{%go-aśva%} and {%go'śva.%}] {%—Gavāhnika (˚va-āh˚), am,%}
n. the daily measure of food given to a cow.
{%—Gavendra (˚va-in˚), as,%} m. an owner of kine.
{%—Gaveśa%} or {%gaveśvara (˚va-īś˚), as,%} m. an owner
of kine. {%—Gavaiḍaka (˚va-eḍ˚), am%} n. kine and
sheep. {%—Gavodgha (˚va-ud˚), as,%} m. an excellent
cow.
<LEND>

<L>17219<pc>0286-b<k1>gavacI<k2>gavacI
{%Gavacī,%}¦ f. a Coloquintida, {%= gavākṣī.%}
<LEND>

<L>17220<pc>0286-b<k1>gavaya<k2>gavaya
{%Gavaya, as,%}¦ m. a species of ox, the Gayal, Bos
Gavæus, erroneously classed by Hindū writers as a
species of deer; a monkey-chief attached to Rāma,
the son of Vaivasvata; ({%ī%}), f. the female Gayal.
<LEND>

<L>17221<pc>0286-b<k1>gavala<k2>gavala
{%Gavala, as,%}¦ m. the wild buffalo; ({%am%}), n.
buffalo's horn.
<LEND>

<L>17222<pc>0286-b<k1>gavAcI<k2>gavAcI
{%Gavācī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%go%} and rt. {%añc%}), a kind of fish,
commonly {%pāṅkālamāca,%} Ophidium Punctatum or
Macrognathus Pankalus.
<LEND>

<L>17223<pc>0286-b<k1>gavAmaya<k2>gavAmaya
{%Gavām-aya, as,%}¦ m. or {%gavām-ayana, am,%} n.
‘going of cows,’ N. of a solemn ceremony; [cf. {%go.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17224<pc>0286-b<k1>gavAmpati<k2>gavAmpati
{%Gavām-pati, is,%}¦ m. a guardian of cows, a cow-
herd; the chief of cattle, a bull; the lord of rays, an
epithet of the sun; also of Agni; N. of a Buddhist
mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>17225<pc>0286-b<k1>gavAlUka<k2>gavAlUka
{%Gavālūka, as,%}¦ m. the Gayal, Bos Gavæus; [cf.
{%gavaya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17226<pc>0286-b<k1>gavijAta<k2>gavijAta
{%Gavi-jāta, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni. {%—Gavi-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Vaiśravaṇa. {%—Gavi-ṣṭhira, as,%}
[Page0286-c+ 77]
m., N. of a Ṛṣi of Atri's family; [cf. {%gāviṣṭhira%}
and {%gāviṣṭhirāyaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17227<pc>0286-c<k1>gavinI<k2>gavinI
{%Gavinī,%}¦ f. a herd of cows.
<LEND>

<L>17228<pc>0286-c<k1>gaviz<k2>gaviz
{%Gav-iṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ or {%gav-iṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
wishing for cows, desirous in general, eager, fervent.
{%—Gav-iṣṭi, is, is, i,%} Ved. wishing for cows; desir-
ing fervently, eager, ardent; ({%is%}), f. desire, eagerness,
ardour, fervour; desire for fighting, ardour of battle,
battle. {%—Gav-īśa%} or {%gav-īśvara, as,%} m. an owner
of kine.
<LEND>

<L>17229<pc>0286-c<k1>gavizWa<k2>gavizWa
{%Gaviṣṭha, as,%}¦ m. the sun (either a superl. fr. {%go,%}
‘a ray,’ or fr. {%gavi + stha,%} ‘standing in water’); N.
of a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>17230<pc>0286-c<k1>gaveza<k2>gaveza
{%Gaveṣa%}¦ (either fr. {%gava + iṣ,%} or {%go + eṣ%}), nom.
cl. 1. A. or 10. P. {%gaveṣate%} or {%gaveṣayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to desire ardently or fervently, to strive after;
to seek, hunt after, search or inquire for. {%—Gave-%}
{%ṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. desiring ardently or fervently;
desirous of combat; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Vṛṣṇi; ({%ā,%}
{%am%}), f. n. seeking after, searching for, inquiry,
philosophical research. {%—Gaveṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}
to be desired or sought for. {%—Gaveṣita, as, ā, am,%}
eagerly desired, sought, inquired for. {%—Gaveṣin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} seeking; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Citraka and
brother of Pṛthu.
<LEND>

<L>17231<pc>0286-c<k1>gavezWin<k2>gavezWin
{%Gaveṣṭhin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>17232<pc>0286-c<k1>gavya<k2>gavya<h>1
1. {%gavya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%gavyati,%} to desire cattle
or cows; especially in the part. {%gavyat, an, antī,%}
{%at,%} wishing for or desirous of cattle or cows; ardently
or fervently desiring, fervent; desirous of battle.
<LEND>

<L>17233<pc>0286-c<k1>gavya<k2>gavya<h>2
2. {%gavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ consisting of cattle or cows,
consisting of milk; coming from, of, or belonging
to a cow, as milk, curds, &c. (e. g. {%pañca-gavya,%}
{%am,%} n. five things coming from a cow, — milk,
cheese, butter, urine, and dung); proper or fit for
cattle; sacred to the cow, worshipping the cow;
({%as%}), m., N. of a people in the north of Madhya-
deśa; ({%am%}), n. cattle, a herd of cows; pasture land;
the milk of a cow; a bow-string; a colouring sub-
stance, a yellow pigment or dye; ({%as, ā, am,%}
differing from the preceding only by its accent),
belonging to cattle, consisting of cattle or cows,
coming from cattle or cows; ({%ā%}), f. a multitude or
herd of cows; a measure equal to 1 Gavyūti or
2 Krośas; a bow-string; a colouring substance, a
yellow pigment or dye; [cf. {%go-rocanā.%}] {%—Gavya-%}
{%dṛḍha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a colouring
substance, a yellow pigment or dye; [cf. the pre-
ceding.]
<LEND>

<L>17234<pc>0286-c<k1>gavyaya<k2>gavyaya
{%Gavyaya, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to or coming
from cattle.
<LEND>

<L>17235<pc>0286-c<k1>gavyayu<k2>gavyayu
{%Gavyayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desirous of cattle.
<LEND>

<L>17236<pc>0286-c<k1>gavyA<k2>gavyA
{%Gavyā,%}¦ f., Ved. desire for or delight in cows;
desire, fervency; desire for what comes from a cow,
i. e. for milk; desire of battle (generally used in the
Ved. inst. {%gavyā%}).
<LEND>

<L>17237<pc>0286-c<k1>gavyu<k2>gavyu
{%Gavyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. delighting in cattle or
cows; desiring cows or milk; fervent; desirous of
battle.
<LEND>

<L>17238<pc>0286-c<k1>gavyUta<k2>gavyUta
{%Gavyūta, am,%}¦ n. a measure of length equal to
2000 Daṇḍas or 1 Krośa, or to 4000 Daṇḍas or
2 Krośas; [cf. the following.]
<LEND>

<L>17239<pc>0286-c<k1>gavyUti<k2>gavyUti
{%Gavyūti, is,%}¦ f. (fr. {%go%} and {%yūti ?%} or {%go%} and {%ūti?%}),
Ved. a pasture, a piece of pasture land, a district, place
of residence; a measure of length equal to 4000
Daṇḍas or 2 Krośas.
<LEND>

<L>17240<pc>0286-c<k1>gavalgaRa<k2>gavalgaRa
{#gavalgaRa#}¦ {%gavalgaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man,
the father of Sañjaya; (also read {%gavalgāṇa%}); [cf.
{%gāvalgaṇi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17241<pc>0286-c<k1>gavAzikA<k2>gavAzikA
{#gavAzikA#}¦ {%gavāṣikā,%} f. the insect called
Lākṣā, and the red dye prepared from it; [cf. {%garā-%}
{%dhikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17242<pc>0286-c<k1>gavIDuka<k2>gavIDuka
{#gavIDuka#}¦ {%gavīdhuka, as, ā,%} m. f., Ved. the
grass Coix Barbata; [cf. {%gavedhuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17243<pc>0286-c<k1>gavIni<k2>gavIni
{#gavIni#}¦ {%gavīni, ī,%} or {%gavīnī, yau,%} or {%gavīnikā,%}
{%e,%} f. du., Ved. a part of the belly near the pudenda;
the groins (?).
<LEND>
[Page0287-a+ 77]

<L>17244<pc>0287-a<k1>gavequ<k2>gavequ
{#gavequ#}¦ {%gaveḍu, us,%} m. a cloud; ({%us%}), f. or
{%gaveḍukā,%} f. a kind of grass, Coix Barbata; [cf. the
following.]
<LEND>

<L>17245<pc>0287-a<k1>gaveDu<k2>gaveDu
{#gaveDu#}¦ {%gavedhu, us,%} f. the grass Coix Barbata.
<LEND>

<L>17246<pc>0287-a<k1>gaveDuka<k2>gaveDuka
{%Gavedhuka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of serpent; ({%ā%}), f. a
species of grass, Coix Barbata; according to some
authorities also Hedysarum Lagopodioides [cf. {%gave-%}
{%śakā%}]; ({%am%}), n. red chalk; [cf. {%gavīdhuka, gaveḍu,%}
{%gaveruka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17247<pc>0287-a<k1>gaveruka<k2>gaveruka
{#gaveruka#}¦ {%gaveruka, am,%} n. red chalk; [cf.
{%gavedhuka,%} n.]
<LEND>

<L>17248<pc>0287-a<k1>gaveSakA<k2>gaveSakA
{#gaveSakA#}¦ {%gaveśakā,%} f. the plant Hedysarum
Lagopodioides.
<LEND>

<L>17249<pc>0287-a<k1>gah<k2>gah
{#gah#}¦ {%gah%} (connected with {%gāh%}), cl. 10. P.
{%gahayati, -yitum,%} to be thick or imper-
vious (?); to enter deeply into.
<LEND>

<L>17250<pc>0287-a<k1>gaha<k2>gaha
{%Gaha, as,%}¦ m. a cave; a forest (?); [cf. {%dur-gaha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17251<pc>0287-a<k1>gahana<k2>gahana
{%Gahana, as, ā, am,%}¦ deep, dense, thick, imper-
vious, impenetrable, inexplicable, hard to be under-
stood, inaccessible; ({%am%}), n. an abyss, a depth; an
inaccessible place, a hiding-place, a thicket, a wood,
impenetrable darkness; a cave; pain, distress; [cf.
{%gabhīra.%}] {%—Gahana-tva, am,%} n. density; imper-
viousness, impenetrability. {%—Gahana-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having hiding-places or thickets.
<LEND>

<L>17252<pc>0287-a<k1>gahanAya<k2>gahanAya
{%Gahanāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%gahanāyate, -yitum,%} to have
treacherous intentions towards another, (originally, to
lie hid, lie in wait for a person in a secret place, lie
in ambush.)
<LEND>

<L>17253<pc>0287-a<k1>gahIya<k2>gahIya
{%Gahīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to a cave or a thicket;
deep, difficult of access, impervious.
<LEND>

<L>17254<pc>0287-a<k1>gahman<k2>gahman
{%Gahman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. depth; [cf. {%gambhan.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17255<pc>0287-a<k1>gahvara<k2>gahvara
{%Gahvara, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (related to {%gabhīra%} and
{%gahana%}), deep, impervious, impenetrable; ({%am%}), n.
an abyss, a depth; water; a hiding-place, a thicket;
a wood; an impenetrable secret, a riddle; a cave,
cavern; hypocrisy; weeping; a deep sigh; ({%ī%}), an
abyss, a cave, a cavern, a grotto, a recess in a rock
or mountain &c.; ({%as%}), m. an arbour, a bower.
{%—Gahvare-ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being at the bot-
tom or lowest depths, being in the secret recesses.
<LEND>

<L>17256<pc>0287-a<k1>gahvarita<k2>gahvarita
{%Gahvarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in a hiding-place,
concealed.
<LEND>

<L>17257<pc>0287-a<k1>gA<k2>gA<h>1
{#gA#} 1¦. {%gā,%} cl. 1. or 2. A., 3. P. {%gāte, jigāti,%}
{%jagau, agāt, gāsyati, gātum%} (Ved. {%gātave%}),
(in classical Sanskrit only the aorist of the simple
verb seems to occur), to go, go towards, to come,
approach; to come into any state or condition,
undergo, obtain: Pass. {%gīyate:%} Desid. {%jigāsati%} or
{%jigīṣati%} (?): Intens. {%jegīyate:%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">βίβημι, ἔβην;</lang>
Old Germ. <nsi>gâm, gâs, gât,</nsi> &c.; Goth. <nsi>ga-tvo;</nsi> Eng.
<nsi>to go;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>gehen;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>gaju.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17258<pc>0287-a<k1>gA<k2>gA<h>2
2. {%gā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ (at the end of compounds)
going; [cf. {%a-gā, agre-gā, puro-gā,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>17259<pc>0287-a<k1>gAtu<k2>gAtu<h>1
1. {%gātu, us,%}¦ m. (for 2. see col. 3), Ved. going, motion,
unimpeded motion; free space for moving, place of
abode; the earth; a refuge; way, course; egress,
access; progress, increase, welfare; [cf. {%ariṣṭa-gātu%}
and {%tura-gātu.%}] {%—Gātu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. spa-
cious, commodious. {%—Gātu-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. clearing
the way for unimpeded motion or progress; finding
or opening a way, promoting progress or welfare.
<LEND>

<L>17260<pc>0287-a<k1>gAtuya<k2>gAtuya
{%Gātuya%}¦ or {%gātūya,%} nom. P., Ved. {%gātuyati%} or
{%gātūyati,%} to desire unimpeded motion or free space
for moving, to wish to obtain free progress.
<LEND>

<L>17261<pc>0287-a<k1>gAtra<k2>gAtra
{%Gātra, am,%}¦ n. ‘the instrument of moving,’ a limb
or member of the body; the body; the fore-quarter
of an elephant (according to some also n. and f. in
this meaning); ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Vaśiṣṭha;
({%ā%}), f. earth. {%—Gātra-karśana, as, ā, am,%} emaciating
the body. {%—Gātra-gupta, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Kṛṣṇa and Lakṣmaṇā. {%—Gātra-bhaṅgā,%} f. a
kind of cowach, Mucuna Pruritus {%(= śūka-śimbī).%}
{%—Gātra-mārjanī,%} f. a towel. {%—Gātra-yaṣṭi, is,%}
m. a thin or slender body. {%—Gātra-ruha, am,%} n.
the hairs on the body; [cf. {%aṅga-ruha.%}] {%—Gātra-%}
{%latā,%} f. a flexuous or tender body. {%—Gātra-vat, ān,%}
[Page0287-b+ 73]
m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa and Lakṣmaṇā; ({%tī%}), f.,
N. of a daughter of Kṛṣṇa and Lakṣmaṇā. {%—Gātra-%}
{%vinda, as,%} m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa and Lakṣ-
maṇā. {%—Gātra-vairūpyatā,%} f. deformity of the
limbs. {%—Gātra-saṅkocin, ī,%} m. the pole-cat, Viverra
Putorius, (which draws up or contracts its body in
order to spring.) {%—Gātra-samplava, as,%} m. a small
bird, the diver, Pelicanus Fusicollis; [cf. {%plava.%}]
{%—Gātra-sparśa, as,%} m. contact of the limbs.
{%—Gātrānulepanī (˚ra-an˚),%} f. fragrant unguents
&c. smeared upon the body, perfume for the person.
{%—Gātrāvaraṇa (˚ra-āv˚), am,%} n. a shield. {%—Gā-%}
{%trotsādana (˚ra-ut˚), am,%} n. cleaning the person
with perfumes &c.
<LEND>

<L>17262<pc>0287-b<k1>gAtraka<k2>gAtraka
{%Gātraka, am,%}¦ n. the body.
<LEND>

<L>17263<pc>0287-b<k1>gAtraya<k2>gAtraya
{%Gātraya,%}¦ nom. A. {%gātrayate, -yitum,%} to be
loosened, or to loosen.
<LEND>

<L>17264<pc>0287-b<k1>gAya<k2>gAya<h>1
1. {%gāya, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, striding; ({%am%}), n.
going, motion; [cf. {%uru-gāya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17265<pc>0287-b<k1>gA<k2>gA<h>3
{#gA#} 3¦. {%gā, ās, ās, am%} (fr. rt. {%gai%}), singing,
at the end of a compound [cf. {%sāma-gā%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a
song; a verse or metrical composition; [cf. {%gāthā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17266<pc>0287-b<k1>gAganAyasa<k2>gAganAyasa
{#gAganAyasa#}¦ {%gāganāyasa, am,%} n. (fr. {%gagana%}
{%+ ayas%}), meteoric iron (?).
<LEND>

<L>17267<pc>0287-b<k1>gANga<k2>gANga
{#gANga#}¦ {%gāṅga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%gaṅgā%}), being in or
on the Ganges, coming from or belonging or relating to
the Ganges; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%ambu,%} rain-water of a pecu-
liar kind (supposed to be from the heavenly Ganges);
({%as%}), m. a metronymic of Skanda or Kārttikeya;
also of Bhīṣma; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā.
{%—Gāṅga-deva, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Gāṅgaugha%}
{%(˚ga-ogha), am,%} n. the current of the Ganges.
<LEND>

<L>17268<pc>0287-b<k1>gANgAyani<k2>gANgAyani
{%Gāṅgāyani, is,%}¦ m. a metronymic of Bhīṣma;
also of Skanda or Kārttikeya; ({%Gaṅgā%} was the first
wife of Śāntanu, and bore to him the hero Bhīṣma,
before his marriage with Satyavatī; she was also the
receiver of the vivifying principle of Śiva first cast
into Agni, from which principle was generated Kārtti-
keya the god of war); also an epithet of Citra.
<LEND>

<L>17269<pc>0287-b<k1>gANgeya<k2>gANgeya
{%Gāṅgeya, as, ī, am,%}¦ being in or on the Ganges;
({%as%}), m. a metronymic of Skanda; also of Bhīṣma;
the Hilsa or Illias fish, Clupanodon Ilisha [cf. {%illiśa%}];
the root of a kind of grass [cf. {%bhadra-mustā%}]; ({%am%}),
n. the root of Scirpus Kysoor or Cyperus Hexastachyus
Communis, {%= kaśeru.%}
<LEND>

<L>17270<pc>0287-b<k1>gANgya<k2>gANgya
{%Gāṅgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being on the Ganges; a
metronymic from Gaṅgā.
<LEND>

<L>17271<pc>0287-b<k1>gANgyAyani<k2>gANgyAyani
{%Gāṅgyāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Gāṅgya.
<LEND>

<L>17272<pc>0287-b<k1>gANgawa<k2>gANgawa
{#gANgawa#}¦ {%gāṅgaṭa%} or {%gāṅgaṭaka%} or {%gāṅgaṭeya,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of prawn or shrimp; [cf. {%gaṅgāṭeya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17273<pc>0287-b<k1>gANgerukI<k2>gANgerukI
{#gANgerukI#}¦ {%gāṅgerukī,%} f. the plant Uraria
Lagopodioides; ({%am%}), n. the seed of this plant.
<LEND>

<L>17274<pc>0287-b<k1>gANgezWI<k2>gANgezWI
{#gANgezWI#}¦ {%gāṅgeṣṭhī,%} f. the shrub Guilandina
Bonducella.
<LEND>

<L>17275<pc>0287-b<k1>gAYjikAya<k2>gAYjikAya
{#gAYjikAya#}¦ {%gāñjikāya, as,%} m. a quail.
<LEND>

<L>17276<pc>0287-b<k1>gAqava<k2>gAqava
{#gAqava#}¦ {%gāḍava, as,%} m. a cloud; [cf. {%gaveḍu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17277<pc>0287-b<k1>gAQa<k2>gAQa
{#gAQa#}¦ {%gāḍha.%} See under rt. {%gāh.%}
<LEND>

<L>17278<pc>0287-b<k1>gARagAri<k2>gARagAri
{#gARagAri#}¦ {%gāṇagāri, is,%} m., N. of a teacher;
[cf. {%gaṇakāri.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17279<pc>0287-b<k1>gARapata<k2>gARapata
{#gARapata#}¦ {%gāṇapata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%gaṇa-pati%}),
relating to the leader of a troop or to the god Gaṇeśa.
<LEND>

<L>17280<pc>0287-b<k1>gARapatya<k2>gARapatya
{%Gāṇapatya, as%}¦ (f. {%-tī%}), {%am,%} relating to the leader of
a troop or to the god Gaṇeśa; ({%as%}), m. a worshipper
of Gaṇeśa; ({%am%}), n. worship of him, chieftainship,
presidency.
<LEND>

<L>17281<pc>0287-b<k1>gARika<k2>gARika
{%Gāṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%gaṇa%}), familiar with the
Gaṇas (in grammar).
<LEND>

<L>17282<pc>0287-b<k1>gARikya<k2>gARikya
{%Gāṇikya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%gaṇikā%}), an assemblage of
harlots.
<LEND>

<L>17283<pc>0287-b<k1>gAReSa<k2>gAReSa
{%Gāṇeśa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%gaṇeśa%}), a worshipper of
Gaṇeśa. {%—Gāṇeśopapurāṇa (˚śa-up˚), am,%} n., N.
of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>17284<pc>0287-b<k1>gARqiva<k2>gARqiva
{#gARqiva#}¦ {%gāṇḍiva.%} See under {%gāṇḍī%} next col.
<LEND>
[Page0287-c+ 74]

<L>17285<pc>0287-c<k1>gARqI<k2>gARqI
{#gARqI#}¦ {%gāṇḍī,%} f., N. of a plant, from which
the bow Gāṇḍīva was made.
<LEND>

<L>17286<pc>0287-c<k1>gARqiva<k2>gARqiva
{%Gāṇḍiva%}¦ or {%gāṇḍīva, as, am,%} m. n. the bow of
Arjuna; presented by Soma to Varuṇa, by him to
Agni, and by Agni to Arjuna, (also said to have
belonged to Prajā-pati, Brahmā, and Siva); a bow
in general. {%—Gāṇḍīva-dhanvan, ā,%} m. an epithet
of Arjuna. {%—Gāṇḍīva-mukta, as, ā, am,%} discharged
from the bow Gāṇḍīva.
<LEND>

<L>17287<pc>0287-c<k1>gARqIvin<k2>gARqIvin
{%Gāṇḍīvin, ī,%}¦ m. an epithet of Arjuna; the tree
Terminalia Arjuna; [cf. {%arjuna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17288<pc>0287-c<k1>gARqIra<k2>gARqIra
{#gARqIra#}¦ {%gāṇḍīra, as, ī, am,%} coming from
the plant Gaṇḍīra.
<LEND>

<L>17289<pc>0287-c<k1>gAtavya<k2>gAtavya
{#gAtavya#}¦ {%gātavya.%} See under rt. {%gai.%}
<LEND>

<L>17290<pc>0287-c<k1>gAtAgatika<k2>gAtAgatika
{#gAtAgatika#}¦ {%gātāgatika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%gatā-%}
{%gata%}), caused by going and coming.
<LEND>

<L>17291<pc>0287-c<k1>gAtAnugatika<k2>gAtAnugatika
{%Gātānugatika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%gatānugata%}), caused
by following or imitating what precedes.
<LEND>

<L>17292<pc>0287-c<k1>gAtu<k2>gAtu<h>2
{#gAtu#} 2¦. {%gātu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. {%gai%}), a song; a
singer; a Gandharva or celestial chorister; the male
Koïl or Indian cuckoo; a bee; N. of a descendant of
Atri, author of a hymn of the Ṛg-veda; ({%us, us, u%}),
angry, wrathful. (For 1. {%gātu%} see under 1. {%gā.%})
<LEND>

<L>17293<pc>0287-c<k1>gAtf<k2>gAtf
{%Gātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a singer; angry; ({%tā%}), m. a
Gandharva; the male Koïl or Indian cuckoo; a bee.
<LEND>

<L>17294<pc>0287-c<k1>gATa<k2>gATa
{%Gātha, as,%}¦ m. (also {%am,%} n. ?), singing, a song;
({%ā%}), f. a verse; (in the terminology of the Brāhmaṇas
and liturgical books) a verse which is neither Ṛc,
nor Sāman, nor Yajus, a religious verse, but not one
belonging to the Vedas; a stanza; a song, a chant or
verse to be chanted or sung; (with Buddhists) a
metrical Sūtra; N. of the Āryā metre; also of a
metre not enumerated in the regular treatises on
prosody. {%—Gātha-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of songs.
{%—Gāthā-kāra, as,%} m. an author of songs, hymns,
verses; a singer, a reciter. {%—Gāthā-nī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved.
leading the song, leading a choir. {%—Gāthāntara%}
{%(˚thā-an˚), as,%} m., N. of a Kalpa, the fourth day in
Brahmā's month.
<LEND>

<L>17295<pc>0287-c<k1>gATaka<k2>gATaka
{%Gāthaka, as,%}¦ m. a singer, a musician; a chanter
of the Purāṇas or sacred poems.
<LEND>

<L>17296<pc>0287-c<k1>gATika<k2>gATika
{%Gāthika, as,%}¦ m. one who recites Gāthas, hymns
or verses; ({%ā%}), f. a song, hymn.
<LEND>

<L>17297<pc>0287-c<k1>gATin<k2>gATin
{%Gāthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ familiar with or knowing songs
or hymns, a singer; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Kuśika
and father of Viśvā-mitra; ({%inas%}), m. pl. the de-
scendants of this man; ({%inī%}), f., N. of a metre,
containing 12 + 18 + 12 + 20 or 32 + 29 syllabic
instants; [cf. {%vīṇā-gāthin.%}] {%—Gāthi-ja, as,%} m. the
son of Gāthin, i. e. Viśvā-mitra.
<LEND>

<L>17298<pc>0287-c<k1>gATina<k2>gATina
{%Gāthina, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Gāthin.
<LEND>

<L>17299<pc>0287-c<k1>gAtra<k2>gAtra
{#gAtra#}¦ {%gātra.%} See col. 1. under rt. 1. {%gā.%}
<LEND>

<L>17300<pc>0287-c<k1>gATa<k2>gATa
{#gATa#}¦ {%gātha.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>17301<pc>0287-c<k1>gAdgadya<k2>gAdgadya
{#gAdgadya#}¦ {%gādgadya, am,%} n. (fr. {%gadgada%}),
stammering.
<LEND>

<L>17302<pc>0287-c<k1>gAD<k2>gAD
{#gAD#}¦ {%gādh%} [cf. {%gāh,%} to which this root
is related], cl. 1. A. {%gādhate, jagādhe,%}
{%gādhiṣyate, agādhiṣṭa, gādhitum,%} to stand firmly,
to stay, remain; to set out; to seek, to search or inquire
for, to desire; to compile, string or heap together.
<LEND>

<L>17303<pc>0287-c<k1>gADa<k2>gADa
{%Gādha, as, ā, am,%}¦ any place offering firm standing-
ground, fordable (as a river), not very deep, shallow;
({%am%}), n. ground for standing on in water, a shallow
place, a ford (sometimes also m.); bottom, soundings;
a place, site; desire of gain, cupidity, covetousness.
<LEND>

<L>17304<pc>0287-c<k1>gADi<k2>gADi
{#gADi#}¦ {%gādhi, is,%} m., N. of the father of
Viśvā-mitra and king of Kānyakubja, also called
{%gādhin; (ayas),%} m. pl. the descendants of Gādhi.
{%—Gādhi-ja, as,%} m. Gādhi's son, a N. of Viśvā-
mitra. {%Gādhin, ī,%} m. (a later form for {%gāthin,%}
q. v.), {%= gādhi%}. {%—Gādhi-nagara, am,%} n. Gādhi's
city, an epithet of Kānyakubja. {%—Gādhi-nandana,%}
{%as,%} m. the son of Gādhi, an epithet of Viśvā-mitra;
also {%gādhi-putra, as,%} m., {%gādhi-bhū, ūs,%} m., {%gādhi- %}
[Page0288-a+ 75]
{%sūnu, us,%} m. {%—Gādhi-pura, am,%} n. Gādhi's city,
an epithet of Kānyakubja; [cf. {%gādhi-nagara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17305<pc>0288-a<k1>gADeya<k2>gADeya
{%Gādheya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Viśvā-mitra;
({%ī%}), f. a patronymic of Satyavatī.
<LEND>

<L>17306<pc>0288-a<k1>gAna<k2>gAna
{#gAna#}¦ {%gāna, am,%} n. (fr. {%gai%}), singing, a song;
a sound; [cf. {%araṇya-gāna, ūha-g˚, ūhya-g˚.%}]
{%—Gāna-bandhu, us,%} m. a friend of songs; N. of a
man (?). {%—Gāna-vidyā,%} f. the science of vocal music.
<LEND>

<L>17307<pc>0288-a<k1>gAnIya<k2>gAnIya
{%Gānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ musical.
<LEND>

<L>17308<pc>0288-a<k1>gAninI<k2>gAninI
{#gAninI#}¦ {%gāninī,%} f. Orris root [cf. {%vacā%}], a
medicinal plant (supposed to be of use in clearing
the voice; fr. {%gāna?%}).
<LEND>

<L>17309<pc>0288-a<k1>gAntu<k2>gAntu
{#gAntu#}¦ {%gāntu, us,%} m. (fr. 1. {%gam%}), one who
goes or moves, a goer, a traveller; a singer (in this
sense a wrong form for 2. {%gātu%}).
<LEND>

<L>17310<pc>0288-a<k1>gAntrI<k2>gAntrI
{%Gāntrī,%}¦ f. {%= gantrī,%} a carriage drawn by oxen.
<LEND>

<L>17311<pc>0288-a<k1>gAndama<k2>gAndama
{#gAndama#}¦ {%gān-dama, as,%} m. ({%gān = gām,%} acc.
fr. {%go%}), N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17312<pc>0288-a<k1>gAndika<k2>gAndika
{#gAndika#}¦ {%gāndika, as, ī, am,%} born in Gandikā.
<LEND>

<L>17313<pc>0288-a<k1>gAndinI<k2>gAndinI
{#gAndinI#}¦ {%gāndinī,%} f., N. of a princess of
Kāśi who was the wife of Śvaphalka and mother of
Akrūra (also called {%gāndī%}); an epithet of the river
Ganges or the goddess Gaṅgā; (also read {%gāndhinī.%})
{%—Gāndinī-suta, as,%} m. a son of Gāndinī, epithet
of Akrūra and of Bhīṣma; [cf. {%gāṅgeya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17314<pc>0288-a<k1>gAndI<k2>gAndI
{%Gāndī.%}¦ See {%gāndinī.%}
<LEND>

<L>17315<pc>0288-a<k1>gAnDarva<k2>gAnDarva
{#gAnDarva#}¦ {%gāndharva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%gandharva%}),
belonging or relating to the Gandharvas (especially
{%gāndharvo vivāhaḥ%} or {%vidhiḥ,%} the form of marriage
called after the Gandharvas, that which requires only
mutual agreement; see {%gandharva-vivāha%}); relat-
ing to the Gandharvas as heavenly choristers (e. g.
{%gāndharva-kalāḥ,%} song, music, &c.; {%gāndharvo%}
{%vedaḥ%} or {%gāndharva-vedaḥ,%} the Veda of music,
musical science considered as an appendix of the Sāma-
veda and ascribed to Bharata); ({%as%}), m. a singer in
general; N. of a people in the north-east of Madhya-
deśa; ({%ī%}), f. {%= vāc,%} speech, according to the legend
that the gods gave speech to the Gandharvas and
received from them the Soma in return; an epithet
of the goddess Durgā; ({%am%}), n. the art of the
Gandharvas, song, music, dance; N. of one of the
nine sections of Bhārata-varṣa; [cf. {%gandharva-%}
{%khaṇḍa.%}] {%—Gāndharva-citta, as, ā, am,%} one whose
mind is possessed by the Gandharvas; [cf. {%gandhar-%}
{%va-gṛhīta.%}] {%—Gāndharva-śālā,%} f. music-hall, a
concert-room.
<LEND>

<L>17316<pc>0288-a<k1>gAnDarvika<k2>gAnDarvika
{%Gāndharvika, as,%}¦ m. a singer; (also read {%gān-%}
{%dharvaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>17317<pc>0288-a<k1>gAnDAra<k2>gAnDAra
{#gAnDAra#}¦ {%gāndhāra, as,%} m. a prince of the
Gāndhāris; the third of the seven primary notes
of music; minium or red lead; ({%ī%}), f. a princess
of the Gāndhāris (especially the wife of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra); N. of a Vidyā-devī; N. of a Rāgiṇī (?);
with Jainas, a divine being fulfilling the commands
of the twenty-first Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people and their country,
commonly called Kandahar, and lying between the
north of India and Persia [cf. {%gandhāra, gandhāri,%}
{%gāndhāri%}]; ({%ī%}), f., N. of two plants, Hedysarum
Alhagi and Prickly Nightshade, {%= yavāsa%} and
{%dur-ālabhā; (am),%} n. gum myrrh; [cf. {%gandha-%}
{%rasa.%}] {%—Gāndhāra-rāja, as,%} m. the king of Gān-
dhāra, whose name was Su-bala.
<LEND>

<L>17318<pc>0288-a<k1>gAnDAraka<k2>gAnDAraka
{%Gāndhāraka, ās,%}¦ m. pl. {%= gāndhāra,%} N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>17319<pc>0288-a<k1>gAnDAri<k2>gAnDAri
{%Gāndhāri, ayas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people; ({%is%}), m.
a metronymic of Duryodhana; [cf. the following.]
<LEND>

<L>17320<pc>0288-a<k1>gAnDAreya<k2>gAnDAreya
{%Gāndhāreya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic of Duryodhana,
the son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>17321<pc>0288-a<k1>gAnDika<k2>gAnDika
{#gAnDika#}¦ {%gāndhika, as,%} m. (fr. {%gandha%}), a
vender of perfumes, a perfumer; a scribe, a clerk; a
kind of worm having a strong fetid smell, commonly
{%gāndhipokā,%} a tree-bug; ({%am%}), n. fragrant wares,
perfumes.
<LEND>

<L>17322<pc>0288-a<k1>gAnDinI<k2>gAnDinI
{#gAnDinI#}¦ {%gāndhinī,%} f. See under {%gāndinī.%}
<LEND>
[Page0288-b+ 77]

<L>17323<pc>0288-b<k1>gAmika<k2>gAmika
{#gAmika#}¦ {%gāmika, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%gam,%} used at
the end of compounds), going, leading to (as a way).
<LEND>

<L>17324<pc>0288-b<k1>gAmin<k2>gAmin
{%Gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ going, moving on, or in, or
towards, or in any peculiar manner, &c.; going to,
having intercourse with; reaching to, extending to;
coming to one's share, due; attaining, obtaining;
directed towards; relating to; [cf. {%agra-gāmin,%}
{%anta-g˚, anya-g˚, āśu-g˚, ṛtu-g˚, kāma-g˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17325<pc>0288-b<k1>gAmuka<k2>gAmuka
{%Gāmuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, locomotive.
<LEND>

<L>17326<pc>0288-b<k1>gAmBIrya<k2>gAmBIrya
{#gAmBIrya#}¦ {%gāmbhīrya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%gambhīra%}),
being deep down, being in the depths; ({%am%}), n.
deepness, depth (of water, sound, &c.); depth or
profundity of character, earnestness, sagacity; the
deep sound of the voice of a Jaina saint, like distant
thunder or the muttering of clouds.
<LEND>

<L>17327<pc>0288-b<k1>gAmmanya<k2>gAmmanya
{#gAmmanya#}¦ {%gām-manya, as, ā, am,%} thinking
one's self a cow.
<LEND>

<L>17328<pc>0288-b<k1>gAya<k2>gAya<h>2
{#gAya#} 2¦. {%gāya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%gaya%}), relating
to Gaya, coming from him, &c. (For 1. {%gāya%} see
under 1. {%gā.%})
<LEND>

<L>17329<pc>0288-b<k1>gAya<k2>gAya<h>3
{#gAya#} 3¦. {%gāya, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%gai%}), a song.
<LEND>

<L>17330<pc>0288-b<k1>gAyaka<k2>gAyaka
{%Gāyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ singing, one who sings;
({%as%}), m. a singer. {%—Gāyaka-candra, as,%} m., N. of
a copyist who lived A. D. 1670.
<LEND>

<L>17331<pc>0288-b<k1>gAyat<k2>gAyat
{%Gāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ singing; ({%antī%}), f., N. of
Gaya's wife.
<LEND>

<L>17332<pc>0288-b<k1>gAyatra<k2>gAyatra
{%Gāyatra, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a song, hymn; ({%ī%}), f. an
ancient metre of twenty-four syllables, variously ar-
ranged, but generally as a triplet of three divisions of
eight syllables each; a hymn composed in the Gāyatrī
metre; the Gāyatrī (i. e. Ṛg-veda III. 62, 10, {%tat%}
{%savitur vareṇyam bhargo devasya dhīmahi%}
{%dhiyo yo naḥ pracodayāt.%} This is a very sacred
verse repeated by every Brāhman at his morning and
evening devotions. From being addressed to Savitṛ
or the Sun as generator, it is also called Sāvitrī. The
Gāyatrī verse is personified as a goddess, the wife of
Brahmā and mother of the four Vedas; and is often
mentioned in connection with the Amṛta, both
together constituting as it were the essence and type
of sacred hymns in general. The Gāyatrī personified
is also considered as the mother of the first three
classes, in their capacity of twice born). According to
the system of the Tāntrikas, a number of mystical
verses are called Gāyatrīs, and each deity has one in
particular; ({%am%}), n. a hymn composed and recited
in the metre Gāyatrī; ({%as, ī, am%}), consisting in the
Gāyatrī, connected with it, formed in accordance with
it (e. g. in accordance with the number of syllables of
a Gāyatrī verse &c.); ({%ī%}), f. the tree Acacia Catechu,
{%= khadira; (am),%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Gāyatra-%}
{%kākubha, as,%} m. a Pragātha beginning with a
Gāyatrī and ending with a Kakubh. {%—Gāyatra-%}
{%cchandas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. one to whom the Gāyatrī
metre belongs or to whom it is sacred &c.; relating
to the Gāyatrī metre. {%—Gāyatra-pārśva, am,%} n.,
N. of a Sāman. {%—Gāyatra-bārhata, as,%} m. a Pra-
gātha beginning with a Gāyatrī and found where the
Bṛhatī metre predominates. {%—Gāyatra-vartani, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. moving in Gāyatrī measures. {%—Gāyatra-ve-%}
{%pas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. inciting or inspiring to sing hymns.
{%—Gāyatrī-bhāṣya, am,%} n. title of a commentary
on the Gāyatrī. {%—Gāyatrī-mantra, as,%} m. prayers
connected with the Gāyatrī. {%—Gāyatrī-vallabha,%}
{%as,%} m. a friend of the Gāyatrī, an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Gāyatrī-sāman, a,%} n., N. of several verses of the
Sāma-veda, recited in the Gāyatrī metre. {%—Gāyatry-%}
{%āsita, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>17333<pc>0288-b<k1>gAyatri<k2>gAyatri
{%Gāyatri, is,%}¦ f. {%= gāyatrī.%}
<LEND>

<L>17334<pc>0288-b<k1>gAyatrin<k2>gAyatrin
{%Gāyatrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ one who sings hymns; ({%ī%}), m.
the tree Acacia Catechu. {%—Gāyatri-sāra, as,%} m.
Catechu, Terra Japonica; [cf. {%khadira.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17335<pc>0288-b<k1>gAyatrya<k2>gAyatrya
{%Gāyatrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ epithet of a kind of Soma.
<LEND>

<L>17336<pc>0288-b<k1>gAyana<k2>gAyana
{%Gāyana, as, ī, am,%}¦ singing, a singer; ({%as%}), m. a
singer, a talker, a gossip; N. of an attendant of
Skanda; ({%am%}), n. singing, song; professing or prac-
tising singing as a livelihood.
<LEND>
[Page0288-c+ 76]

<L>17337<pc>0288-c<k1>gAyantikA<k2>gAyantikA
{%Gāyantikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%gāyantī%}), N. of a place on the
Himālaya mountains.
<LEND>

<L>17338<pc>0288-c<k1>gAra<k2>gAra
{#gAra#}¦ {%gāra, as,%} m., N. of a Sāman, com-
posed by Gara.
<LEND>

<L>17339<pc>0288-c<k1>gAritra<k2>gAritra
{#gAritra#}¦ {%gāritra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 2. {%gṝ%}), rice,
corn, grain.
<LEND>

<L>17340<pc>0288-c<k1>gAruqa<k2>gAruqa
{#gAruqa#}¦ {%gāruḍa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%garuḍa%}), shaped
like the bird Garuḍa, coming from or relating to
Garuḍa; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a creeper [cf. {%pātāla-garuḍī%}];
({%am%}), n. an emerald; gold; a Mantra or charm
against poison. {%—Gāruḍa-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of
the seventeenth Purāṇa relating the birth of Garuḍa
from Vinatā. It is doubtful whether a genuine Gā-
ruḍa-Purāṇa exists.
<LEND>

<L>17341<pc>0288-c<k1>gAruqika<k2>gAruqika
{%Gāruḍika, as,%}¦ m. a charmer, a dealer in antidotes.
<LEND>

<L>17342<pc>0288-c<k1>gArutmata<k2>gArutmata
{#gArutmata#}¦ {%gārutmata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%garut-%}
{%mat%}), shaped like the bird Garuḍa, sacred to Garuḍa
&c.; ({%am%}), n. an emerald; [cf. {%garuḍāṅkita,%} &c.]
{%—Gārutmata-pattrikā,%} f., N. of a plant; [cf.
{%pācī%} and {%marakata-pattrī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17343<pc>0288-c<k1>gArga<k2>gArga
{#gArga#}¦ {%gārga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%gārgya%} below,
which is derived fr. {%garga%}), coming from or con-
nected with Gārgya; a contemptuous metronymic
from Gārgī.
<LEND>

<L>17344<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgaka<k2>gArgaka
{%Gārgaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ belonging to Gārgya,
worshipping Gārgya; ({%am%}), n. a multitude or assem-
blage of the descendants of Garga.
<LEND>

<L>17345<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgika<k2>gArgika
{%Gārgika, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Gārgī, ex-
pressing contempt.
<LEND>

<L>17346<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgikA<k2>gArgikA
{%Gārgikā,%}¦ f. descent from Garga, the relation to
the school of Gārgya.
<LEND>

<L>17347<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgI<k2>gArgI
{%Gārgī,%}¦ f. the wife of Gārgya; an epithet of Durgā.
{%—Gārgī-putra, as,%} m. the son of Gārgī; N. of a
teacher. {%—Gārgīputrakāyaṇi%} or {%gārgīputrāyaṇi%} or
{%gārgīputṛ, is,%} m. a descendant of the son of Gārgī.
<LEND>

<L>17348<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgIBUta<k2>gArgIBUta
{%Gārgī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has become a
Gārgya.
<LEND>

<L>17349<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgIya<k2>gArgIya<h>1
1. {%gārgīya,%}¦ nom. P. {%gārgīyati,%} to act like a
Gārgya; A. {%gārgīyate,%} to behave like a Gārgya.
<LEND>

<L>17350<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgIya<k2>gArgIya<h>2
2. {%gārgīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ composed by Garga; com-
ing from Gārgya; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the pupils of the
descendants of Garga; the pupils of Gārgyāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>17351<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgeya<k2>gArgeya
{%Gārgeya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Gārgī.
<LEND>

<L>17352<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgya<k2>gArgya
{%Gārgya, as%}¦ (f. {%gī%}), {%am,%} descended from Garga, as
a son or daughter; ({%as%}), m., N. of several teachers of
grammar, of the ritual, &c.; according to Durga, a
Gārgya is the author of the Pada-pāṭha of the Sāma-
veda; N. of a king of the Gandharvas; N. of a
people. {%—Gārgya-pariśiṣṭa, am,%} n. title of a Pari-
śiṣṭa of the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>17353<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgyAyaRa<k2>gArgyAyaRa
{%Gārgyāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Gārgya,
N. of a teacher; ({%ī%}), f. {%= gārgī.%}
<LEND>

<L>17354<pc>0288-c<k1>gArgyAyaRIya<k2>gArgyAyaRIya
{%Gārgyāyaṇīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils of Gārgyāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>17355<pc>0288-c<k1>gArtsamada<k2>gArtsamada
{#gArtsamada#}¦ {%gārtsamada, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Gṛtsa-mada; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>17356<pc>0288-c<k1>gArdaBa<k2>gArdaBa
{#gArdaBa#}¦ {%gārdabha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%gardabha%}),
belonging to or coming from or relating to an ass;
asinine.
<LEND>

<L>17357<pc>0288-c<k1>gArdaBaraTika<k2>gArdaBaraTika
{%Gārdabharathika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%gardabha-%}
{%ratha%}), fit for a donkey-cart.
<LEND>

<L>17358<pc>0288-c<k1>gArdDya<k2>gArdDya
{#gArdDya#}¦ {%gārddhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%gṛddha,%} rt.
{%gṛdh%}), desire, greediness.
<LEND>

<L>17359<pc>0288-c<k1>gArDra<k2>gArDra
{%Gārdhra%}¦ (or wrongly spelt {%gārdha%}), {%as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%gṛdhra%}), derived from a vulture, vulturous, vul-
turine; rapacious, greedy (?); ({%as%}), m. an arrow;
desire, greediness, cupidity (in the latter sense the
word {%gārdhra%} is probably a wrong reading for
{%gārddhya%}). {%—Gārdhra-pakṣa,%} or {%gārdhra-pat-%}
{%tra,%} or {%gārdhra-vājita,%} or {%gārdhra-rājita, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (?), or {%gārdhra-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%} decorated
with vulture's feathers (especially an arrow so deco-
rated); [cf. {%gṛdhra-vāja%} and {%gṛdhra-vājita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17360<pc>0288-c<k1>gArBa<k2>gArBa
{#gArBa#}¦ {%gārbha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%garbha%}), born
from the womb; fetal, uterine; relating to or con-
nected with gestation, also to conception (as any act
or ceremony).
<LEND>
[Page0289-a+ 76]

<L>17361<pc>0289-a<k1>gArBika<k2>gArBika
{%Gārbhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ fetal, uterine; relating to or
connected with gestation or the fœtus in the womb.
<LEND>

<L>17362<pc>0289-a<k1>gArBiRa<k2>gArBiRa
{%Gārbhiṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%garbhiṇī%}), a number or
assemblage of pregnant women.
<LEND>

<L>17363<pc>0289-a<k1>gArBiRya<k2>gArBiRya
{%Gārbhiṇya, am,%}¦ n. an assemblage of pregnant
women.
<LEND>

<L>17364<pc>0289-a<k1>gArmuta<k2>gArmuta
{#gArmuta#}¦ {%gārmuta, am,%} n. (fr. {%garmut%}), honey (?).
<LEND>

<L>17365<pc>0289-a<k1>gArzweya<k2>gArzweya
{#gArzweya#}¦ {%gārṣṭeya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%gṛṣṭi%}),
Ved. born from a heifer.
<LEND>

<L>17366<pc>0289-a<k1>gArhapata<k2>gArhapata
{#gArhapata#}¦ {%gārhapata, am,%} n. (fr. {%gṛha-pati%}),
the position and dignity of a householder.
<LEND>

<L>17367<pc>0289-a<k1>gArhapatya<k2>gArhapatya
{%Gārhapatya, as,%}¦ m., scil. {%agni,%} a sacred fire, per-
petually maintained by a householder, received from
his father and transmitted to his descendants, and
from which fires for sacrificial purposes are lighted;
the place where this sacred fire is kept; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a class of manes; ({%am%}), n. the government
of a family, position of a householder, a household.
{%—Gārhapatyāgāra (˚ya-āg˚), as,%} m. the place in
which the Gārhapatya fire is kept.
<LEND>

<L>17368<pc>0289-a<k1>gArhameDa<k2>gArhameDa
{%Gārhamedha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%gṛha-medha%}), fit
or proper for a householder.
<LEND>

<L>17369<pc>0289-a<k1>gArhasTya<k2>gArhasTya
{%Gārhasthya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%gṛha-stha%}), fit for
or incumbent on a householder; ({%am%}), n. the order
or estate of a householder, of the father or mother of
a family; household, domestic affairs, the house with
its contents.
<LEND>

<L>17370<pc>0289-a<k1>gArhya<k2>gArhya
{%Gārhya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%gṛha%}), domestic.
<LEND>

<L>17371<pc>0289-a<k1>gAla<k2>gAla
{#gAla#}¦ {%gāla, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%gal%}), flowing,
liquefying; dropping; a flux.
<LEND>

<L>17372<pc>0289-a<k1>gAlana<k2>gAlana
{%Gālana, am,%}¦ n. straining fluids; fusing, lique-
fying, &c.
<LEND>

<L>17373<pc>0289-a<k1>gAlava<k2>gAlava
{%Gālava, as,%}¦ m. the tree Symplocos Racemosa, the
bark of which is used in dyeing, Lodh; a pale species
of the same, {%= śveta-lodhra;%} also a kind of ebony,
Diospyros Glutinosa [cf. {%kenduka%}]; N. of an old
sage and preceptor, according to the Hari-vaṃśa a son,
and according to the Mahā-bhārata a pupil of Viśvā-
mitra; N. of the author of a Dharma-śāstra; N. of a
grammarian; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of Gālava.
<LEND>

<L>17374<pc>0289-a<k1>gAlavi<k2>gAlavi
{%Gālavi,%}¦ a patronymic from Gālava.
<LEND>

<L>17375<pc>0289-a<k1>gAli<k2>gAli
{%Gāli, is,%}¦ f. a curse, execration or imprecation.
{%—Gāli-pradāna, am,%} n. cursing, reviling, abusing.
{%—Gāli-mat, ān, atī, at,%} uttering curses or execra-
tions.
<LEND>

<L>17376<pc>0289-a<k1>gAlita<k2>gAlita
{%Gālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ distilled, strained, dropped,
melted, fused.
<LEND>

<L>17377<pc>0289-a<k1>gAlin<k2>gAlin
{%Gālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ distilling, fusing, liquefying; abus-
ing, abusive.
<LEND>

<L>17378<pc>0289-a<k1>gAlinI<k2>gAlinI
{%Gālinī,%}¦ f. a particular gesticulation or position of
the fingers.
<LEND>

<L>17379<pc>0289-a<k1>gAloqaya<k2>gAloqaya
{#gAloqaya#}¦ {%gāloḍaya,%} A. {%-ḍayate, -yitum,%} to
examine, investigate.
<LEND>

<L>17380<pc>0289-a<k1>gAloqita<k2>gAloqita
{%Gāloḍita, am,%}¦ n. examination, investigation.
<LEND>

<L>17381<pc>0289-a<k1>gAloqya<k2>gAloqya
{#gAloqya#}¦ {%gāloḍya, am,%} n. the seed of the
lotus; [cf. {%aṅkaloḍya, aṅgaloḍya, galoḍya, gi-%}
{%loḍya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17382<pc>0289-a<k1>gAvalgaRi<k2>gAvalgaRi
{#gAvalgaRi#}¦ {%gāvalgaṇi, is,%} m. (fr. {%gavalgaṇa%}),
a patronymic of Sañjaya.
<LEND>

<L>17383<pc>0289-a<k1>gAvizWira<k2>gAvizWira
{#gAvizWira#}¦ {%gāviṣṭhira%} and {%gāviṣṭhirāyaṇa,%}
two patronymics from Gavi-ṣṭhira.
<LEND>

<L>17384<pc>0289-a<k1>gAh<k2>gAh
{#gAh#}¦ {%gāh,%} cl. 1. A. (ep. also P.) {%gāhate,%}
{%-ti, jagāhe, gāhiṣyate, agāhiṣṭa, gā-%}
{%hitum%} or {%gāḍhum,%} to dive into, bathe in, plunge
into, penetrate, enter deeply into; roam, range, rove;
to be absorbed in (with acc.); to hide one's self in:
Caus. {%gāhayati, -yitum, ajīgahat:%} Desid. {%jigā-%}
{%hiṣate%} and {%jighākṣate:%} Intens. {%jāgāhyate%} and
{%jāgāḍhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>17385<pc>0289-a<k1>gAQa<k2>gAQa
{%Gāḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ dived into, bathed in, entered
into; deeply entered, closely pressed together, tightly
drawn, closely fastened, close, fast (opposed to {%śi-%}
{%thila%}); thick, dense; deep (as sleep); strong, vehe-
ment, firm; ({%am%}), ind. excessively, much, very
much, heavily, closely, firmly, strongly, &c. {%—Gāḍha-%}
{%karṇa, as,%} m. an ear penetrated by sound, an attentive
[Page0289-b+ 78]
ear. {%—Gāḍha-tā,%} f. or {%gāḍha-tva, am,%} n. intensity,
closeness; firmness, hardness; excess. {%—Gāḍha-%}
{%muṣṭi, is, is, i,%} close-fisted, avaricious, niggardly,
miserly; ({%is%}), m. a scymitar, a large sacrificial knife.
{%—Gāḍha-śoka-prahāra, as, ā, am,%} inflicting the
keenest anguish. {%—Gāḍhāṅgada (˚ḍha-aṅ˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having closely fitting bracelets. {%—Gāḍhā-%}
{%liṅgana (˚ḍha-āl˚), am,%} n. a close embrace.
<LEND>

<L>17386<pc>0289-b<k1>gAQIkaraRa<k2>gAQIkaraRa
{%Gāḍhī-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. making stiff.
<LEND>

<L>17387<pc>0289-b<k1>gAha<k2>gAha
{%Gāha, as, ī, am,%}¦ diving into, bathing; ({%as%}), m.
depth, interior, innermost recess.
<LEND>

<L>17388<pc>0289-b<k1>gAhana<k2>gAhana
{%Gāhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of diving into, plunging,
bathing, penetrating.
<LEND>

<L>17389<pc>0289-b<k1>gAhanIya<k2>gAhanIya
{%Gāhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be dived into or pene-
trated.
<LEND>

<L>17390<pc>0289-b<k1>gAhita<k2>gAhita
{%Gāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bathed in, plunged into, im-
mersed, entered deeply into, penetrated; shaken,
agitated, destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>17391<pc>0289-b<k1>gAhitf<k2>gAhitf
{%Gāhitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who plunges into water,
a bather, diver; one who penetrates; shaking,
agitating; destroying, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>17392<pc>0289-b<k1>ginduka<k2>ginduka
{#ginduka#}¦ {%ginduka, as,%} m. a ball for playing
with; [cf. {%genduka%} and {%kanduka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17393<pc>0289-b<k1>gir<k2>gir<h>1
{#gir#} 1¦. {%gir, īr, īr, īr%} (fr. 1. {%gṝ%}), Ved. ad-
dressing, invoking, praising; ({%īr%}), f. invocation, ad-
dressing with praise, praise, verse, song; speech,
speaking, language, voice, words (e. g. {%mānuṣīṃ%}
{%giraṃ kṛ,%} to assume a human voice; {%girām pra-%}
{%bhaviṣṇuḥ,%} ‘lord of speech or words,’ an epithet of
Bṛhaspati, regent of the planet Jupiter); a N. of
Sarasvatī, the goddess of speech; fame, celebrity;
[cf. Hib. <nsi>gair,</nsi> ‘an outcry, a shout;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">γῆρυς.</lang>]
{%—1. gir-īśa, as,%} m. an epithet of Bṛhaspati; [cf.
{%gīṣ-pati.%}] {%—Gir-vaṇas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. delighting
in invocations, fond of praise, an epithet of Indra and
Agni. {%—Gir-vaṇasyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. fond of hymns
or praise, an epithet of Indra. {%—Gir-van, ā, ā, a,%}
Ved. addressed with many invocations, receiving much
praise. {%—Girva-vāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. bearing one who is
addressed with many hymns. {%—Gir-vāhas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. one to whom invocations are addressed,
praised in song, an epithet of Indra &c. {%—Gīḥ-%}
{%pati = gīṣ-pati%}. {%—Gī-ratha (gir-ra˚), as,%} m. ‘the
vehicle of words,’ an epithet of Bṛhaspati. {%—Gīr-%}
{%devī,%} f. the goddess of speech, Sarasvatī. {%—Gīr-pati%}
{%= gīṣ-pati%}. {%—Gīr-latā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= mahā-%}
{%jyotiṣmatī%}. {%—Gīr-vāṇa, as,%} m. a god, a deity
(‘whose arrow is speech;’ or perhaps only a cor-
ruption fr. {%gir-vaṇas.%}) {%—Gīrvāṇa-kusuma, am,%} n.
the flower of the gods, cloves. {%—Gīṣ-pati, is,%} m.
the lord of speech, a N. of Bṛhaspati, the regent of
the planet Jupiter and preceptor of the gods; a Paṇḍit,
a learned man. {%—Gīs-tarā,%} f. excellent speech, a
good voice.
<LEND>

<L>17394<pc>0289-b<k1>girA<k2>girA
{%Girā,%}¦ f. speech, speaking; voice. {%—Girā-vṛdh,%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. delighting in being praised; (Sāy.)
thriving by praise (as a god).
<LEND>

<L>17395<pc>0289-b<k1>gir<k2>gir<h>2
{#gir#} 2¦. {%gir%} (fr. 2. {%gṝ%}), swallowing, (at the
end of compounds, e. g. in {%gara-gir%} and {%muhur-gir.%})
<LEND>

<L>17396<pc>0289-b<k1>gira<k2>gira<h>1
1. {%gira, as, ā, am,%}¦ swallowing.
<LEND>

<L>17397<pc>0289-b<k1>girita<k2>girita
{%Girita, as, ā, am,%}¦ swallowed, eaten.
<LEND>

<L>17398<pc>0289-b<k1>gira<k2>gira<h>2
{#gira#} 2¦. {%gira,%} at the end of an adverbial
compound {%= giri%} (e. g. {%anu-giram,%} near the moun-
tain).
<LEND>

<L>17399<pc>0289-b<k1>giri<k2>giri
{#giri#}¦ {%giri, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%gṝ;%}
perhaps originally {%gari%} or {%garu,%} and related to {%guru,%}
{%gariman%}), a hill, a mountain, a rock, an elevation,
a rising-ground (in the foregoing senses often con-
nected in the Veda with {%parvata,%} e. g. {%parvato%}
{%giriḥ,%} explained by Sāy. as a mountain having
many parts); a cloud (this last sense is often given
to {%giri%} by the commentators on Vedic works); a term
for the number eight, because of the eight mountains
surrounding the mountain Meru; a wooden ball, with
which children play [cf. {%girika%} and {%giri-guḍa%}]; a
disease of the eyes; a peculiar defect in quicksilver;
a honorific title given to one of the ten orders of the
Das-nāmī Gosains; N. of a son of Śvaphalka [cf.
[Page0289-c+ 81]
{%giri-kṣipa%}]; ({%is%}), f. swallowing; a rat, a small
rat, a mouse [cf. {%girikā%}]; ({%is, is, i%}), venerable,
respectable, worshipful; [cf. Zend <nsi>gairi;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>gora;</nsi> Afghan. <nsi>ghur;</nsi> cf. also {%garīyas, gariṣṭha,%}
{%gariman.%}] {%—Giri-kacchapa, as,%} m. a kind of tor-
toise living in mountains. {%—Giri-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m.
Indra's thunderbolt. {%—Giri-kadamba%} or {%giri-ka-%}
{%dambaka, as,%} m. a species of the Kadamba tree,
mountain Kadamba; [cf. {%nīpa%} and {%dhārā-ka-%}
{%damba.%}] {%—Giri-kadalī,%} f. the mountain or wild
Kadalī. {%—Giri-kandara, as,%} m. a cave, a cavern.
{%—Giri-karṇā,%} f. the plant Clitoria Ternatea; [cf.
{%a-parājitā.%}] {%—Giri-karṇikā,%} f. the earth; the plant
Clitoria Ternatea; a species of Kiṇihī with white
blossoms. {%—Giri-karṇī,%} f. the plant Clitoria Ternatea
[cf. the preceding]; another plant, Alhagi Maurorum
{%= kacchurā%}. {%—Giri-kāṇa, as,%} m. a blind or one-
eyed man, one blind from a particular disease.
{%—Giri-kānana, am,%} n. a mountain-grove. {%—Giri-%}
{%kūṭa, am,%} n. the summit of a mountain. {%—Giri-%}
{%kṣit, t, t, t,%} Ved. living in mountains or on high,
as Viṣṇu; ({%t%}), m., N. of an Auccāmanyava; [cf.
{%gairikṣita.%}] {%—Giri-kṣipa, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Śvaphalka; [cf. {%arikṣipa%} and {%giri.%}] {%—Giri-gaṅgā,%}
f., N. of a river. {%—Giri-guḍa, as,%} m. a ball for play-
ing with. {%—Giri-guhā,%} f. a mountain-cave. {%—Giri-%}
{%gairika-dhātu, us,%} m. {%= gairika,%} red chalk. {%—Giri-%}
{%gairikadhātu-vat,%} ind. like red chalk. {%—Giri-cara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} Ved. living in or inhabiting mountains.
{%—Giri-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} living in mountains. {%—Giri-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} mountain-born, mountaineer; ({%as%}),
m. the Mahwa tree, Bassia, {%= madhūla;%} N. of a man
with the patronymic Bābhravya; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several
plants, viz. a kind of lemon tree; a plant considered
as a white species of Rasnā [cf. {%rasnā%}]; the shaddock
or pumple-mouse, Citrus Decumana; also {%= śveta-%}
{%vuhnā, kṣudra-pāṣāṇa, giri-kadalī, kārī, trā-%}
{%yamāṇā;%} a kind of jasmine, {%mallikā;%} a N. of the
goddess Pārvatī, as the daughter of the personified
Himālaya mountain; ({%am%}), n. talc; benzoin or gum
benjamin; it is also confounded with another gum
resin called styrax; red chalk; bitumen; iron.
{%—Girijā-kumāra, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of Śaṅka-
rācārya. {%—Girijā-pati, is,%} m. an epithet of Śiva,
the husband of Pārvatī. {%—Girijāmala (˚ja-am˚),%}
{%am,%} n. talc. {%—Giri-jāla, am,%} n. a range of moun-
tains. {%—Girijā-suta, as,%} m., N. of the chief of a
sect worshipping Gaṇeśa. {%—Giri-jvara, as,%} m. Indra's
thunderbolt; [cf. {%giri-kaṇṭaka.%}] {%—Giri-ṇaddha%} or
{%giri-naddha, as, ā, am,%} enclosed by a mountain.
{%—Giri-ṇitamba%} or {%giri-nitamba, as,%} m. the declivity
of a mountain. {%—Giri-tra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ruling over
mountains; epithet of Rudra-Śiva. {%—Giri-durga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%am,%} n. of difficult access in consequence
of being surrounded by mountains; a hill-fort or any
stronghold amongst mountains. {%—Giri-dvāra, am,%}
n. a mountain-pass. {%—Giri-dhara, as,%} m., N. of a
copyist of the seventeenth century. {%—Giri-dhātu,%}
{%us,%} m. different kinds of earth or minerals in the
interior of a mountain; red chalk. {%—Giri-dhvaja,%}
{%as,%} m. Indra's thunderbolt; [cf. {%giri-kaṇṭaka%} and
{%giri-jvara.%}] {%—Giri-nagara, am,%} n., N. of a town
in Dakṣiṇā-patha. {%—Giri-nadī%} or {%giri-ṇadī,%} f. a
mountain-torrent. {%—Giri-nandinī,%} f. daughter of a
mountain, a mountain-stream. {%—Giri-nimnagā,%} f. a
mountain-torrent. {%—Giri-nimba, as,%} m., N. of a
plant, {%= mahāriṣṭa%}. {%—Giri-pīlu, us,%} m., N. of
a fruit tree, {%= paruṣa%}. {%—Giri-pura, am,%} n. moun-
tain-town or N. of a town. {%—Giri-puṣpaka, am,%}
n. a fragrant resin, benzoin. {%—Giri-pṛṣṭha, am,%} n.
the top of a hill. {%—Giri-prapāta, as,%} m. the declivity
of a mountain. {%—Giri-prastha, as,%} m. the table-land
of a mountain. {%—Giri-priya, as, ā, am,%} fond of or
frequenting mountains; ({%ā%}), f. the female of the
Bos Grunniens. {%—Giri-bāndhava, as,%} m. a friend of
the mountains, an epithet of Śiva. {%—Giri-budhna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. resting on a mountain, produced
on a hill; [cf. {%adri-budhna.%}] {%—Giri-bhid, t, t, t,%}
breaking through the mountains, as a river; ({%t%}), f.
the plant Plectranthus Scutellarioides. {%—Giri-bhū,%}
{%ūs, ūs, u,%} mountain-born, mountaineer; ({%ūs%}), f., N.
[Page0290-a+ 77]
of a plant, {%= kṣudra-pāṣāṇa-bhedā;%} a small
stone (?); an epithet of Pārvatī, the wife of Śiva.
{%—Giri-bhraj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. breaking forth from
mountains; (Sāy.) falling from the clouds. {%—Giri-%}
{%mallikā,%} f. the plant Wrightia Antidysenterica; [cf.
{%kuṭa-ja.%}] {%—Giri-mātra, as, ā, am,%} having the size
or dimensions of a mountain. {%—Giri-māna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the extent or dimensions of a mountain;
({%as%}), m. a large and powerful elephant. {%—Giri-māla%}
and {%giri-mālaka, as,%} m., N. of a tree. {%—Giri-%}
{%mṛd, t,%} f. red chalk, mountain soil; [cf. {%gairika.%}]
{%—Girimṛd-bhava, am,%} n. red chalk. {%—Giri-%}
{%meda, as,%} m. a fetid Mimosa, {%= ari-meda%}. {%—Giri-%}
{%rāj, ṭ,%} m. the king of the mountains, the Himavat (?).
{%—Giri-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living on or in mountains,
being or produced in them; ({%ī%}), m. a kind of bulb-
ous plant, a large kind of Arum. {%—Giri-vraja, as,%}
m., N. of the capital of Magadha. {%—Giri-śa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or ({%as%}), m. inhabiting or frequenting moun-
tains, an epithet of Rudra-Śiva. {%—Giri-śanta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. inhabiting or frequenting mountains.
{%—Giri-śaya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. inhabiting mountains.
{%—Giri-śāla, as,%} m. a kind of bird. {%—Giri-śālinī,%}
f. the plant Clitoria Ternatea. {%—Giri-śṛṅga, as,%}
m. an epithet of Gaṇeśa; the peak of a mountain.
{%—Giri-ṣad, t, t, t,%} sitting on mountains; an epi-
thet of Rudra. {%—Giri-ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} or {%giri-%}
{%ṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%sthā%}), inhabiting or frequenting
mountains; epithet of the Maruts and of the Soma
plant which is found in mountains. {%—Giri-sarpa,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of snake. {%—Giri-sānu, u,%} n. table-
land. {%—Giri-sāra, as,%} m. iron; tin; an epithet of
the Malaya mountains, situated in the south of India.
{%—Girisāra-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of iron, iron.
{%—Giri-sutā,%} f. the daughter of the mountain Hima-
vat; an epithet of Pārvatī, the wife of Śiva. {%—Giri-%}
{%sena, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Giri-sravā,%} f. a
mountain-stream, a torrent. {%—Giri-hvā,%} f. another
N. of the plant {%giri-karṇikā,%} Clitoria Ternatea.
{%—Girīndra (˚ri-in˚), as,%} m. a prince among the
mountains, a high mountain; a term for the number
eight; [cf. {%giri.%}] — 2. {%girīśa (˚ri-īśa), as,%} m. the
prince of the mountains, a N. of the Himālaya, the
snowy mountains on the north of Hindūstan, or
the range personified; an epithet of Śiva; a N. of the
eleventh Rudra: (for 1. {%girīśa%} see under 1. {%gir.%})
{%—Giry-āhvā,%} f. {%= giri-hvā.%}
<LEND>

<L>17400<pc>0290-a<k1>girika<k2>girika
{%Girika, as,%}¦ m. the inhabitant of a mountain (?);
a N. of Śiva; a ball for playing with [cf. {%giri%} and
{%giriyaka%}]; N. of a chief of the Nāga or serpent-
race; N. of a certain weaver in a Buddhist work;
also called {%caṇḍagirika; (ā),%} f. a mouse, a small
rat; N. of the wife of Vasu, daughter of the moun-
tain Kolāhala and of the river Śaktimatī.
<LEND>

<L>17401<pc>0290-a<k1>giriyaka<k2>giriyaka
{%Giriyaka%}¦ or {%giriyāka%} or {%girīyaka, as,%} m. a ball
for playing with; [cf. {%giri%} and {%giri-guḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17402<pc>0290-a<k1>giriSa<k2>giriSa
{%Giri-śa.%}¦ See under {%giri%} above.
<LEND>

<L>17403<pc>0290-a<k1>girita<k2>girita
{#girita#}¦ {%girita.%} See under 2. {%gir.%}
<LEND>

<L>17404<pc>0290-a<k1>girISa<k2>girISa<h>1
{#girISa#} 1¦. 2. {%girīśa,%} &c. See under 1. {%gir%}
and under {%giri%} above.
<LEND>

<L>17405<pc>0290-a<k1>gila<k2>gila
{#gila#}¦ {%gila, as, ā, am%} (fr. 2. {%gṝ%}), who or
what swallows; ({%as%}), m. the citron tree, {%= jambīra.%}
{%—Gila-gila, as, ā, am,%} swallowing; [cf. {%timiṅgila-%}
{%gila.%}] {%—Gila-grāha, as,%} m. a crocodile, a shark.
<LEND>

<L>17406<pc>0290-a<k1>gilat<k2>gilat
{%Gilat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} swallowing, devouring.
<LEND>

<L>17407<pc>0290-a<k1>gilana<k2>gilana
{%Gilana, am,%}¦ n. swallowing; also {%giraṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>17408<pc>0290-a<k1>gilAyu<k2>gilAyu
{%Gilāyu, us,%}¦ m. hard tumor in the throat.
<LEND>

<L>17409<pc>0290-a<k1>gili<k2>gili
{%Gili, is,%}¦ f. swallowing, eating.
<LEND>

<L>17410<pc>0290-a<k1>gilita<k2>gilita
{%Gilita, as, ā, am,%}¦ eaten, swallowed.
<LEND>

<L>17411<pc>0290-a<k1>giloqya<k2>giloqya
{#giloqya#}¦ {%giloḍya,%} N. of a plant; [cf.
{%aṅgaloḍya, galoḍya, gāloḍya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17412<pc>0290-a<k1>gizRu<k2>gizRu
{#gizRu#}¦ {%giṣṇu, us,%} m. (probably a corrupt
form of {%geṣṇu;%} rt. {%gai%}), a professional singer; a
Brāhman versed in the Sāma-veda, a chanter of that
Veda; an actor.
<LEND>

<L>17413<pc>0290-a<k1>gIHpati<k2>gIHpati
{#gIHpati#}¦ {%gīḥ-pati, gīṣ-pati.%} See 1. {%gir.%}
<LEND>

<L>17414<pc>0290-a<k1>gIta<k2>gIta
{#gIta#}¦ {%gīta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%gai%}), sung,
[Page0290-b+ 75]
chanted, sounded, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. a song, a sacred
song or poem, religious doctrines declared in me-
trical form by an inspired sage [cf. the titles Śiva-
gītā, Rāma-gītā, Bhagavad-gītā, which last is also
often called the Gītā]; N. of a metre; ({%am%}), n.
singing, song either general or particular. {%—Gīta-%}
{%kaṇḍikā,%} f. a Pariśiṣṭa of the Sāma-veda. {%—Gīta-%}
{%krama, as,%} m. the arrangement of a song. {%—Gīta-%}
{%gaṅgādhara,%} title of a poem by Kalyāṇa. {%—Gīta-%}
{%girīśa,%} title of a poem by Rāma. {%—Gīta-govinda,%}
{%as,%} m. Govinda (i. e. Kṛṣṇa) celebrated in song; title
of a lyrical drama by Jaya-deva, supposed to have
been written about the twelfth or thirteenth century
of our era; it is a mystical erotic poem, describing
the loves of Kṛṣṇa and the Gopīs, especially of
Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā, who is supposed to typify the
human soul. {%—Gīta-jña, as, ā, am,%} versed in the art
of singing, acquainted with songs. {%—Gīta-priya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} fond of songs; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the
Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Gīta-modin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} gladdening with songs; ({%ī%}), m. a Kinnara or
celestial chorister. {%—Gīta-vādana, am,%} n. the sing-
ing of a song. {%—Gīta-śāstra, am,%} n. the science of
music. {%—Gītāyana (˚ta-ay˚), am,%} n. a procession
accompanied with songs.
<LEND>

<L>17415<pc>0290-b<k1>gItaka<k2>gItaka
{%Gītaka, am,%}¦ n. a song.
<LEND>

<L>17416<pc>0290-b<k1>gIti<k2>gIti
{%Gīti, is,%}¦ f. song, singing; a kind of poetical metre,
a form of the Āryā metre, in which the stanza con-
sists of four lines of twelve and eighteen syllabic
instants alternately. {%—Gīti-viśeṣa, as,%} m. a kind of
song. {%—Gīty-āryā,%} f., N. of a metre of four lines of
sixteen short syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>17417<pc>0290-b<k1>gItikA<k2>gItikA
{%Gītikā,%}¦ f. a short song, a small hymn; N. of a
metre consisting of four lines of twenty syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>17418<pc>0290-b<k1>gItin<k2>gItin
{%Gītin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who recites in a singing
manner.
<LEND>

<L>17419<pc>0290-b<k1>gITA<k2>gITA
{%Gīthā,%}¦ f. a song.
<LEND>

<L>17420<pc>0290-b<k1>gIraTa<k2>gIraTa
{#gIraTa#}¦ {%gīratha,%} &c. See under 1. {%gir.%}
<LEND>

<L>17421<pc>0290-b<k1>gIrRa<k2>gIrRa<h>1
{#gIrRa#} 1¦. {%gīrṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%gṝ%}), praised.
1. {%gīrṇi, is,%} f. praise, applause; fame, celebrity.
<LEND>

<L>17422<pc>0290-b<k1>gIrRa<k2>gIrRa<h>2
{#gIrRa#} 2¦. {%gīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} swallowed.
<LEND>

<L>17423<pc>0290-b<k1>gIrRi<k2>gIrRi<h>2
2. {%gīrṇi, is,%}¦ f. swallowing.
<LEND>

<L>17424<pc>0290-b<k1>gIrvi<k2>gIrvi
{%Gīrvi, is, is, i,%}¦ swallowing, devouring.
<LEND>

<L>17425<pc>0290-b<k1>gu<k2>gu<h>1
{#gu#} 1¦. {%gu%} (related to 1. {%gā%}), cl. 1. A. {%ga-%}
{%vate,%} to go.
<LEND>

<L>17426<pc>0290-b<k1>gu<k2>gu<h>2
2. {%gu,%}¦ (at the end of compounds) going; [cf. {%adhri-%}
{%gu, vanar-gu;%} also {%priyaṅ-gu%} and {%śāci-gu%} (?);
cf. {%gū%} in {%agre-gū.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17427<pc>0290-b<k1>gu<k2>gu<h>3
{#gu#} 3¦. {%gu,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%gavate, juguve,%}
{%goṣyate, agoṣṭa, gotum,%} (this verb seems
only to occur in the reduplicated forms {%joguve%} and
{%joguvāna%}), to speak articulately, to proclaim, to
cause to sound: Caus. {%gāvayati:%} Desid. {%jugūṣate:%}
Intens. {%jogūyate, jogoti,%} to shout with joy; [cf.
{%jogū.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17428<pc>0290-b<k1>gu<k2>gu<h>4
{#gu#} 4¦. {%gu,%} cl. 6. P. {%guvati, jugāva, guṣyati,%}
{%aguṣīt, gutum%} or {%guvitum,%} to void by stool,
to void excrement.
<LEND>

<L>17429<pc>0290-b<k1>gu<k2>gu<h>5
{#gu#} 5¦. {%gu%} (at the end of an adj. comp.)
{%= go,%} a cow, cattle, earth, ray, &c., see {%go,%} (e. g.
{%daśa-gu,%} possessing ten cows; {%sahasra-gu,%} possess-
ing 1000 cows; {%calad-gu,%} one under whom the earth
trembles, &c.); [cf. {%anu-gu, ariṣṭa-gu, uṣṇa-gu,%}
{%kṛśa-gu,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>17430<pc>0290-b<k1>guggula<k2>guggula
{#guggula#}¦ {%guggula, as,%} m. or {%guggulu, u, us,%}
n. m. (but always m. in the later language), a fragrant
gum resin, bdellium or the exudation of the Amyris
Agallochum, a perfume and medicament; sometimes
with the epithet {%saindhava%} or {%samudriya,%} i. e.
‘obtained near rivers or the sea,’ (perhaps some
other substance coming from rivers or the sea?);
a species of Morunga with red flowers, Morunga
Hyperanthera; ({%ū, ūs%}), f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>17431<pc>0290-b<k1>gugguluka<k2>gugguluka
{%Gugguluka, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. one who deals in bdellium.
<LEND>

<L>17432<pc>0290-b<k1>guNgu<k2>guNgu
{#guNgu#}¦ {%guṅgu, us,%} m., N. of a man; ({%avas%}),
[Page0290-c+ 76]
m. pl. the descendants of this man; ({%ū, ūs%}), f., Ved.
(Sāy.) {%= kuhū,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17433<pc>0290-c<k1>gucCa<k2>gucCa
{#gucCa#}¦ {%guccha, as,%} m. (assimilated form fr.
{%gutsa%}), a bundle, a bunch, a bunch of flowers, a
cluster of blossoms, a clump (of grass &c.), a bunch
of peacock's feathers, the plumage of a peacock; a
pearl necklace of thirty-two or (according to others)
of seventy strings [cf. {%ardha-guccha%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a
kind of Bonduc or Karañja. {%—Guccha-kaṇiśa, as,%}
m. a kind of corn, {%= rāgin%}. {%—Guccha-karañja, as,%}
m. a kind of Karañja; [cf. {%gucchī.%}] {%—Guccha-%}
{%dantikā,%} f. the plant Musa Sapientum, {%= kadalī.%}
{%—Guccha-pattra, as,%} m. the palm tree; [cf. {%tāla.%}]
{%—Guccha-puṣpa, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= sapta-%}
{%cchada; (ī),%} f., N. of two plants, Grislea Tomentosa
({%dhātakī%}), and another plant {%= śimṛḍī%}. {%—Guccha-%}
{%puṣpaka, as,%} m. two kinds of Karañja, the Rīṭhā-
karañja and the Guccha-karañja. {%—Guccha-phala,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of several plants, {%= rīṭhā-karañja;%} an-
other plant, Strychnos Potatorum [cf. {%kataka%}];
another plant, {%= rājādanī; (ā),%} f., N. of several
plants, Musa Sapientum, {%= kadalī%} or the plantain;
the vine; the plant Solanum Indicum ({%kāka-mācī%});
the plant Solanum Jacquini ({%agni-damanī%}); a kind
of leguminous plant, {%= niṣpāvī%}. {%—Guccha-badhrā,%}
f., N. of a plant, Guṇḍālā. {%—Guccha-mūlikā,%} f. N.
of a plant, {%= guṇḍāsinī%}. {%—Gucchārdha (˚cha-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a pearl necklace of twenty-four strings; a
species of grass, Andropogon Schœnanthus. {%—Gucchā-%}
{%hva-kanda (˚cha-āh˚), as,%} m. a kind of esculent
root, {%= gulañca-kanda.%}
<LEND>

<L>17434<pc>0290-c<k1>gucCaka<k2>gucCaka
{%Gucchaka, as,%}¦ m. a bunch, bundle, cluster of
blossoms, clump of grass, the plumage of a peacock,
a bunch of peacock's feathers; a pearl necklace of
thirty-two strings; a kind of Karañja, {%= rīṭhā-%}
{%karañja; (am),%} n. a kind of fragrant plant, =
{%granthi-parṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>17435<pc>0290-c<k1>gucCAla<k2>gucCAla
{%Gucchāla, as,%}¦ m. a species of grass, Andropogon
Schœnanthus.
<LEND>

<L>17436<pc>0290-c<k1>guj<k2>guj
{#guj#}¦ {%guj,%} cl. 6. and 1 (?). P. {%gujati%}
and {%gojati (?), jugoja, gujitum;%} oftener
{%guñj,%} cl. 1. P. {%guñjati, juguñja, guñjitum,%} to sound
inarticulately; to buz, hum.
<LEND>

<L>17437<pc>0290-c<k1>guYja<k2>guYja
{%Guñja, as,%}¦ m. humming; a bunch, a bundle, a
cluster of blossoms, bunch of flowers, nosegay, =
{%guccha; (ā),%} f. humming, a low murmuring sound;
a kettle-drum; a small shrub, Abrus Precatorius,
bearing a red and black berry, which forms the
smallest of the jeweller's weights; either the berry
which averages about 1(5/16) grains troy or the artificial
weight called by this name, weighing about 2(3/16) grains;
= (1/5) Ādya-māṣaka, = (1/5) Māṣaka, = 3 or 2 barley-
corns, = 4 grains of rice, = 2 grains of wheat; (with
physicians 7 Guñjās = 1 Māṣa, with lawyers 7(1/2)
Guñjās); a kind of plant with a poisonous root;
a tavern; reflection, meditation. {%—Guñja-kṛt, t,%} m.
‘making a humming,’ a large black bee.
<LEND>

<L>17438<pc>0290-c<k1>guYjat<k2>guYjat
{%Guñjat, an, antī, at,%}¦ buzzing, humming, making
a low murmuring sound.
<LEND>

<L>17439<pc>0290-c<k1>guYjana<k2>guYjana
{%Guñjana, am,%}¦ n. sounding low and deep, as
buzzing, murmuring, &c.
<LEND>

<L>17440<pc>0290-c<k1>guYjikA<k2>guYjikA
{%Guñjikā,%}¦ f. the seed of the plant Abrus Precatorius,
[cf. {%guñjā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17441<pc>0290-c<k1>guYjita<k2>guYjita
{%Guñjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ uttered in a low tone, mur-
mured, &c.; ({%am%}), n. sounding, murmuring, buzzing.
<LEND>

<L>17442<pc>0290-c<k1>gujjarI<k2>gujjarI
{#gujjarI#}¦ {%gujjarī,%} f. one of the Rāgiṇīs; (for
{%gurjarī,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>17443<pc>0290-c<k1>guwikA<k2>guwikA
{#guwikA#}¦ {%guṭikā,%} f. a pill, a bolus, any small
globe or ball; a small pustule; the cocoon of the
silk-worm; a pill; a pearl; [cf. {%guḍikā, gulikā,%}
{%gulī, guḍa.%}] {%—Guṭikāñjana (˚kā-añ˚), am,%} n.
collyrium formed like a globe or ball. {%—Guṭikā-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} furnished with a rounded orifice.
<LEND>

<L>17444<pc>0290-c<k1>guq<k2>guq
{#guq#}¦ {%guḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%guḍati,%} to defend, guard,
preserve; [cf. {%ghuḍ%} and {%guṇḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17445<pc>0290-c<k1>guqa<k2>guqa
{%Guḍa, as,%}¦ m. (said to be from the last), a globe
or ball; a ball for playing with; a bit, a mouthful,
[Page0291-a+ 75]
(rice kneaded in the shape of a ball?); sugar which
forms itself into lumps, dry sugar; treacle, molasses,
the first thickening of the juice of the sugar-cane by
boiling; an elephant's trappings or armour (formed
of small balls?); the cotton tree; the plant Tithy-
malus Antiquorum; another plant, {%= kṣīra-dāru;%}
{%(ās),%} m. pl., N. of a people in Madhya-deśa; ({%ā%}), f.
a small ball, a pill; the plant Tithymalus Antiquorum;
another plant, {%= uśīrī; (ī),%} f. the plant Tithymalus
Antiquorum; [cf. {%gula, gauḍa, gauḍika.%}] {%—Guḍa-%}
{%karī,%} f. (perhaps a corruption of {%gurjarī%} or {%gujjarī%}),
one of the Rāgiṇīs or female personifications of the
musical modes. {%—Guḍa-tṛṇa, am,%} n. sugar-cane.
{%—Guḍa-tvac, k,%} n. (?) the aromatic bark of the
Laurus Cassia. {%—Guḍa-tvaca, am,%} n. the aromatic
bark of the Laurus Cassia; mace. {%—Guḍa-dāru, us,%}
{%u,%} m. n. sugar-cane. {%—Guḍa-dhenu, us,%} f. a milch-
cow symbolically represented by sugar &c. and offered
as a present to Brāhmans; sugar piled up for dis-
tribution at certain religious rites. {%—Guḍa-piṣṭa,%}
{%am,%} n. a sort of sweetmeat, flour or rice and sugar
ground and boiled together. {%—Guḍa-puṣpa, as,%} m.
the plant Bassia Latifolia or another species of it,
(the flowers being full of saccharine matter.) {%—Guḍa-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. the tree Careya Arborea or Salvadora
Persica; jujube; [cf. {%gūḍha-phala.%}] {%—Guḍa-bhā,%} f.
a kind of sugar. {%—Guḍa-miśra, am,%} n. a sort of
cake or sweetmeat, flour or rice and coarse sugar
ground and boiled together. {%—Guḍa-mūla, as,%} m. a
kind of amaranth, Amaranthus Polygamus; [cf. {%alpa-%}
{%māriṣa.%}] {%—Guḍaliṇ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having a
sugar-licker. {%—Guḍa-lih, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} sugar-licking. {%—Guḍa-%}
{%vīja, as,%} m. a kind of pease; [cf. {%masūra.%}] {%—Guḍa-%}
{%śarkarā,%} f. sugar, refined sugar. {%—Guḍa-śīgru, us,%}
m. a red sort of Morunga; [cf. {%śobhāñjana.%}] {%—Guḍa-%}
{%śṛṅga, am,%} n. a cupola. {%—Guḍa-harītakī,%} f.
myrobalan preserved in molasses. {%—Guḍā-keśa, as,%}
m. whose hair forms tufts or matted locks (resembling
in shape the leaves of the Euphorbia?), an epithet of
the hero Arjuna; also of Śiva. {%—Guḍāpūpikā (˚ḍa-%}
{%ap˚,%} scil. {%paurṇamāsī%}), f. a certain day of full
moon, on which sweetmeats are eaten. {%—Guḍāśaya%}
{%(˚ḍa-āś˚), as,%} m. a species of Pīlu growing in
mountains; [cf. {%akṣoṭa.%}] {%—Guḍodaka (˚ḍa-ud˚),%}
{%am,%} n. water mixed with molasses; ({%as, ā, am%}),
containing water instead of molasses. {%—Guḍodbhavā%}
{%(˚ḍa-ud˚),%} f. sugar. {%—Guḍaudana (˚ḍa-od˚), am,%}
n. boiled rice and coarse sugar.
<LEND>

<L>17446<pc>0291-a<k1>guqaka<k2>guqaka
{%Guḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a ball [cf. {%nābhi-guḍaka%}]; a bit,
a mouthful; a kind of drug prepared with treacle, a
conserve; ({%ikā%}), f. a small ball, a pill; a kernel;
({%am%}), n. treacle, molasses.
<LEND>

<L>17447<pc>0291-a<k1>guqala<k2>guqala
{%Guḍala, am,%}¦ n. a spirituous liquor distilled from
molasses, a sort of rum.
<LEND>

<L>17448<pc>0291-a<k1>guqera<k2>guqera
{%Guḍera%}¦ or {%guḍeraka, as,%} m. a bit, a mouthful.
<LEND>

<L>17449<pc>0291-a<k1>guqacI<k2>guqacI
{#guqacI#}¦ {%guḍacī,%} f. the shrub Cocculus Cordi-
folius; [cf. {%guḍucī%} and {%guḍūcī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17450<pc>0291-a<k1>guqAkA<k2>guqAkA
{#guqAkA#}¦ {%guḍākā,%} f. sleep; sloth.
<LEND>

<L>17451<pc>0291-a<k1>guqAlA<k2>guqAlA
{#guqAlA#}¦ {%guḍālā,%} f. a species of grass, =
{%guṇḍālā.%}
<LEND>

<L>17452<pc>0291-a<k1>guquguqAyana<k2>guquguqAyana
{#guquguqAyana#}¦ {%guḍuguḍāyana, as, ī, am,%} rattling
in the throat (as breath).
<LEND>

<L>17453<pc>0291-a<k1>guqucI<k2>guqucI
{#guqucI#}¦ {%guḍucī,%} f. the shrub Cocculus Cordi-
folius; [cf. {%guḍacī%} and {%guḍūcī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17454<pc>0291-a<k1>guquha<k2>guquha
{#guquha#}¦ {%guḍuha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people in
Madhya-deśa; (also read {%guruha, guluha,%} and
{%gulaha.%})
<LEND>

<L>17455<pc>0291-a<k1>guqUcI<k2>guqUcI
{#guqUcI#}¦ {%guḍūcī,%} f. the shrub Cocculus Cordi-
folius; [cf. {%guḍacī%} and {%guḍucī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17456<pc>0291-a<k1>guRa<k2>guRa
{#guRa#}¦ {%guṇa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%grah%}),
a single thread or strand of a cord or twine (e. g.
{%tri-guṇa,%} consisting of three threads or strands),
a string or thread, a rope in general; a garland; a
bow-string; a sinew; the string of a musical instru-
ment, a chord; (at the end of a compound after a
[Page0291-b+ 81]
numeral) fold, times, &c. (e. g. {%tri-guṇa,%} three-fold;
{%dvi-guṇa,%} two-fold, double; {%catur-guṇa,%} four-fold;
{%sapta triguṇāni dināni,%} twenty-one days; {%mūl-%}
{%yāt pañcaguṇo daṇḍaḥ,%} a fine five times more
than the value; {%duṣṭo daśaguṇam,%} ten times
worse; {%dviguṇatvam i,%} to become double; {%viśiṣṭo%}
{%daśabhir {{guṇaih->guṇaiḥ||20161201|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 303|}},%} of ten times higher value); a
multiplier, a co-efficient (in arithmetic); division,
subdivision, species, kind (e. g. {%gandhasya guṇāḥ,%}
the different kinds of smell); a secondary element,
a subordinate or unessential part of any action, an
auxiliary act (e. g. {%sarva-guṇa,%} reaching to all sub-
ordinate parts, hence ‘valid throughout’); a secondary
dish (opposed to {%anna,%} i. e. rice or the chief dish), a
side-dish; quality, the unessential part of anything
(opposed to the substance); a quality, a peculiarity,
an attribute or property in general, an attribute of
the five elements, (each element has its own peculiar
quality or qualities as well as organ of sense; thus 1.
ether has {%śabda%} or sound for its Guṇa and the ear
for its organ; 2. the air has tangibility and sound for
its Guṇas and the skin for its organ; 3. fire or light
has shape or colour, tangibility, and sound for its
Guṇas, and the eye for its organ; 4. water has
flavour, shape, tangibility, and sound for its Guṇas,
and the tongue for its organ; 5. earth has the pre-
ceding Guṇas, with the addition of its own peculiar
Guṇa of smell, and the nose for its organ); an in-
gredient or constituent of nature (according to the
Sāṅkhya philosophy, which makes nature to consist
in the equipoise of three Guṇas called {%sattva, rajas,%}
and {%tamas,%} i. e. goodness, passion, and darkness, or
virtue, foulness, and ignorance); a term for the
number three (taken from the three qualities of the
Sāṅkhya system); a property or characteristic of all
created things (according to the Nyāya philosophy,
which makes twenty-four Guṇas, viz. 1. {%rūpa,%} shape,
colour; 2. {%rasa,%} savour; 3. {%gandha,%} odour; 4. {%sparśa,%}
tangibility; 5. {%saṅkhyā,%} number; 6. {%parimāṇa,%}
dimension; 7. {%pṛthaktva,%} severalty; 8. {%saṃyoga,%}
conjunction; 9. {%vibhāga,%} disjunction; 10. {%paratva,%}
remoteness; 11. {%aparatva,%} proximity; 12. {%gurutva,%}
weight; 13. {%dravatva,%} fluidity; 14. {%sneha,%} viscidity;
15. {%śabda,%} sound; 16. {%buddhi%} or {%jñāna,%} under-
standing or knowledge; 17. {%sukha,%} pleasure; 18.
{%duḥkha,%} pain; 19. {%icchā,%} desire; 20. {%dveṣa,%}
aversion; 21. {%prayatna,%} effort; 22. {%dharma,%} merit
or virtue; 23. {%adharma,%} demerit; 24. {%saṃskāra,%}
faculty); an epithet; a good quality, virtue, merit,
excellence, eminence, high degree, proper course
of action in politics, (the six proper courses of
action for a king in foreign politics are peace, war,
march, halt, stratagem, and recourse to the protection
of a mightier king; besides these the four Upāyas,
or means of conquering an enemy, are sometimes
called Guṇas; see {%upāya%}); the peculiar property of
the letters which are pronounced with the {%vāhya-%}
{%prayatna%} or external utterance, (these properties
are eleven in all, viz. {%vivāra,%} expansion of the
throat; {%saṃvāra,%} contraction; {%śvāsa,%} sighing;
{%nāda,%} sounding; {%ghoṣa,%} soft sound or low murmur;
{%a-ghoṣa,%} absence of that murmur; {%alpa-prāṇa,%}
slight aspiration; {%mahā-prāṇa,%} strong aspiration;
and the three accents); a secondary or subordinate
gradation of a vowel (in opposition to the highest
gradation or {%vṛddhi%}), the vowels {%a, e, o%} (with {%ar,%}
{%al%}); the merit of a composition in rhetoric, i. e.
consistency of plan, elegance of expression, &c.; an
organ of sense; a cook; an epithet of Bhīma [cf.
{%guṇa-kāra%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a grass, {%= dūrvā;%} a kind
of perfume, {%= māṃsa-rohiṇī;%} N. of a princess; [cf.
{%gauṇa, nir-guṇa, vi-guṇa, sa-guṇa;%} cf. also Hib.
<nsi>gaoine,</nsi> ‘goodness, honesty.’] {%—Guṇa-karaṇḍa-%}
{%vyūha, as,%} m. title of a Buddhist work; [cf. {%ka-%}
{%raṇḍa-vyūha.%}] {%—Guṇa-karman, a,%} n. an unessen-
tial secondary action; (in grammar) the secondary
or less immediate object of an action. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%karma-vibhāga, as, ā, am,%} distinguishing an action
and an attribute; ({%as%}), m. separation of an action
and an attribute. {%—Guṇa-kāra, as, ī, am,%} one who
counts &c.; productive of good qualities, profitable;
[Page0291-c+ 81]
({%as%}), m. one who prepares side-dishes or any secon-
dary article of food, such as sweetmeats &c.; an
epithet of Bhīma-sena, who performed the duties of
a cook while the Pāṇḍava princes were servants to
Virāṭa. {%—Guṇa-kiraṇāvalī,%} f., N. of a literary
work. {%—Guṇa-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a Buddha.
{%—Guṇa-keśī,%} f., N. of a daughter of Mātali, who
was the charioteer of Indra. {%—Guṇa-gāna, am,%} n.
praising the virtues of another, panegyric, praise.
{%—Guṇa-gṛdhnu, us, us, u,%} desiring or possessing
good qualities. {%—Guṇa-gṛhya, as, ā, am,%} capable
of good qualities, admiring virtue, attached to merit.
{%—Guṇa-grahaṇa, am,%} n. acknowledging or appre-
ciating merit. {%—Guṇa-grāma, as,%} m. an assemblage
of virtues or merits. {%—Guṇa-grāhaka, as, ā, am,%}
or {%guṇa-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} capable of appreciating
merit; one who can appreciate good qualities.
{%—Guṇa-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%} destroying merit, a de-
tractor, a calumniator, envious, censorious. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%candra, as,%} m., N. of a man; N. of a disciple of
Deva-sūri, who was the author of a commentary
called Tattva-prakāśaka-vṛtti. {%—Guṇa-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who knows how to appreciate men or
things, knowing or judging of their merits. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%tas,%} ind. according to the three chief qualities of all
existing beings, from the side of the good qualities
or virtues; according to property or quality; according
to desert; according to the Guṇas or properties of
the letters pronounced with the Vāhya-prayatna.
{%—Guṇa-tā,%} f. subordination, dependence; virtue,
excellence, the possession of good qualities; the
possession of attributes or qualities in general; mul-
tiplication. {%—Guṇa-traya%} or {%guṇa-tritaya, am,%} n.
the three constituent properties of nature, or {%sattva,%}
{%rajas,%} and {%tamas%}. {%—Guṇatrayābhāsa (˚ya-ābh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. life. {%—Guṇa-tva, am,%} n. the condition of a
rope or string; subordination; excellence; the pos-
session of qualities; multiplication. {%—Guṇa-deva,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Guṇāḍhya. {%—Guṇa-doṣa,%}
{%au,%} m. pl. innocence and guilt, virtue and vice.
{%—Guṇa-doṣa-parīkṣaṇa, am,%} n. test or in-
vestigation of merits and defects. {%—Guṇa-dhara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessing good qualities. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%dharma, as,%} m. the virtue or duty incident to the
possession of certain qualities, as clemency is the
virtue and duty of royalty &c. {%—Guṇa-padī,%} f. hav-
ing feet thin as cords. {%—Guṇa-pūga, am,%} n. great
merit. {%—Guṇa-prakarṣa, as,%} m. great merit, ex-
cellence. {%—Guṇa-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
teacher. {%—Guṇa-priya, as, ā, am,%} attached to merit,
fond of excellence. {%—Guṇa-bhadra, as,%} m., N. of
the author of the Ātmānuśāsana; N. of a literary
work. {%—Guṇa-bhuj, k, k, k,%} enjoying or endowed
with qualities. {%—Guṇa-bhedatas,%} ind. according to
the difference of quality &c. {%—Guṇa-bhoktṛ, tā,%}
{%trī, tṛ,%} perceiving the properties of things. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%bhraṃśa, as,%} m. the loss of all good qualities or me-
rits. {%—Guṇa-mati, is,%} m., N. of a Buddhist teacher.
{%—Guṇa-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of single
threads; produced by or consisting of the three
constituent properties of nature (see {%guṇa%}), resting
on them, containing them, endowed with properties;
possessed of merit or virtues. {%—Guṇa-mahat, t,%} n.
great merit, superior qualities. {%—Guṇa-yukta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} possessed of virtues or properties. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%ratna, am,%} n. the pearl of good qualities, title of
a short collection of sentences by Bhava-bhūti.
{%—Guṇaratna-kośa-stotra, am,%} n., N. of a hymn
by Parāśara-bhaṭṭa. {%—Guṇa-rāga, as,%} m. delighting
in the good qualities of others. {%—Guṇa-rāja-pra-%}
{%bhāsa, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Guṇa-rāśi, is,%}
m. an epithet of Śiva; N. of a Buddha. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. mark or indication of internal
property. {%—Guṇa-layanikā%} or {%guṇa-layanī,%} f. a
tent. {%—Guṇa-lubdha, as, ā, am,%} desirous of merit;
attached to excellence; patronising merit. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%vacana, am,%} n. an attributive; an adjective. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} endowed with qualities; endowed
with good qualities, with virtues or merits or excel-
lences; excellent, perfect; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a son of
Guṇavatī; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Su-nābha, the
[Page0292-a+ 81]
wife of Śāmba and mother of Guṇa-vat. {%—Guṇavat-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} most excellent. {%—Guṇavat-tara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} more excellent, excellent. {%—Guṇavat-tā,%}
f. or {%guṇavat-tva, am,%} n. the state of possessing
qualities, the possession of good qualities, or of
virtues; excellence. {%—Guṇa-varṇana, am,%} n. the
describing the merits of another person. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being on the path of virtue.
{%—Guṇa-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%vācaka, as, ikā, am,%} denoting a quality; (with
{%śabda%}) an attributive noun, an adjective. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%vāda, as,%} m. pointing out good qualities or merits.
{%—Guṇa-vidha, as, ā, am,%} possessed of different
qualities. {%—Guṇa-vivecanā,%} f. discernment in appre-
ciating the merits of a person, a just sense of merit.
{%—Guṇa-viśeṣa, as,%} m. a different property. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%viṣṇu, us,%} m., N. of a scholiast. {%—Guṇa-vistara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} abounding in excellent qualities. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%vṛkṣa%} or {%guṇa-vṛkṣaka, as,%} m. a mast or post
to which a ship or boat is fastened. {%—Guṇa-vṛtti,%}
{%is,%} f. a secondary or essential condition or relation
(opposed to {%mukhyā vṛttiḥ%}); character or style of
qualities or merits. {%—Guṇa-vaicitrya, am,%} n. variety
of qualities. {%—Guṇa-vaiśeṣya, am,%} n. pre-eminence
of merit or of any property. {%—Guṇa-śata, am,%} n. a
hundred excellent qualities. {%—Guṇa-śabda, as,%} m.
an adjective. {%—Guṇa-śīla, as, ā, am,%} virtuous.
{%—Guṇa-ślāghā,%} f. encomium, praise. {%—Guṇa-saṅ-%}
{%kīrtana, am,%} n. celebration of qualities. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%saṅkhyāna, am,%} n. the theory of the three essential
properties. {%—Guṇa-saṅga, as,%} m. association with
properties or qualities. {%—Guṇa-saṅgraha, as,%} m. a
collection of merits or properties; acknowledging or
appreciating of merit. {%—Guṇa-samudra, am,%} n. an
ocean of virtues. {%—Guṇa-sampad, t,%} f. great merit,
perfection. {%—Guṇa-sāgara, as, ā, am,%} endowed
with all good qualities; ({%as%}), m. an ocean of good
qualities, one endowed with all virtues; an epithet of
Brahmā; N. of a Buddha. {%—Guṇa-stuti, is,%} f.
panegyric, encomium. {%—Guṇa-sthāna-prakaraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. title of a Buddhist and Jaina work. {%—Guṇa-%}
{%hīna, as, ā, am,%} void of merit, free from properties;
poor (as food). {%—Guṇākara (˚ṇa-āk˚), as,%} m. a
mine or multitude of merits, one endowed with all
virtues; a N. of Buddha Śākya-muni, the founder of
the Buddhist religion; an epithet of Śiva; N. of a
poet; ({%as, ā, am%}), possessing all excellences. {%—Gu-%}
{%ṇākṣara (˚ṇa-ak˚),%} probably for {%ghuṇākṣara,%} q. v.
{%—Guṇāguṇa-jña (˚ṇa-ag˚), as, ā, am,%} a judge of
merit and demerit. {%—Guṇāgradhara (˚ṇa-ag˚), as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Guṇāḍhya (˚ṇa-āḍh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} rich in virtues or excellences; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Brāhman, = Mālyavat in a former birth. {%—Guṇātīta%}
{%(˚ṇa-at˚), as, ā, am,%} freed from or beyond all
properties. {%—Guṇātman (˚ṇa-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having
qualities. {%—Guṇādhāra (˚ṇa-ādh˚), as,%} m. a re-
ceptacle of virtues, i. e. a virtuous person. {%—Guṇā-%}
{%dhipa (˚ṇa-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Guṇā-%}
{%dhiṣṭhānaka (˚ṇa-adhiṣṭhāna), am,%} n. the re-
gion of the breast where the girdle is fastened. {%—Guṇā-%}
{%nurāga (˚ṇa-an˚), as,%} m. delight or pleasure in
the good qualities of others, approbation. {%—Guṇā-%}
{%nurodha (˚ṇa-an˚), as,%} m. conformity or suitable-
ness to good qualities &c. {%—Guṇāntara (˚ṇa-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a different kind of merit, variety of property
or quality. {%—Guṇānvita (˚ṇa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing attributes or qualities; excellent, good, endowed
with virtues. {%—Guṇāpavāda (˚ṇa-ap˚), as,%} m. de-
traction. {%—Guṇābdhi (˚ṇa-ab˚), is,%} m. a Buddha;
[cf. {%guṇa-sāgara.%}] {%—Guṇābhāsa (˚ṇa-ābh˚), as,%}
m. semblance of qualities. {%—Guṇāyana (˚ṇa-ay˚),%}
{%as, ī, am,%} one who goes on the path of virtue.
{%—Guṇālaṅkṛta (˚ṇa-al˚), as, ā, am,%} adorned
with virtues or good qualities. {%—Guṇālābha (˚ṇa-%}
{%al˚), as,%} m. inefficiency. {%—Guṇāśraya (˚ṇa-āś˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} virtuous, excellent, able, endowed with
good qualities. {%—Guṇeśa (˚ṇa-īśa), as,%} m. a lord of
the three qualities; N. of a mountain. {%—Guṇeśvara%}
{%(˚ṇa-īś˚), as, ī, am,%} having good qualities &c.;
({%as%}), m., N. of a mountain; according to some, Citra-
kūṭa or Chatarkot in Bundelcund. {%—Guṇotkarṣa %}
[Page0292-b+ 78]
{%(˚ṇa-ut˚), as,%} m. excellence of merit, the being
endowed with superior qualities. {%—Guṇotkīrtana%}
{%(˚ṇa-ut˚), am,%} n. panegyric, eulogium. {%—Guṇot-%}
{%kṛṣṭa (˚ṇa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} superior in merit or
in good qualities. {%—Guṇopeta (˚ṇa-up˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} endowed with good qualities, rich (as food).
{%—Guṇaugha (˚ṇa-ogha), am,%} n. superior or abun-
dant merit.
<LEND>

<L>17457<pc>0292-b<k1>guRaka<k2>guRaka
{%Guṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a calculator, a numerator, a
reckoner; (in arithmetic) the multiplier; N. of a
maker of garlands.
<LEND>

<L>17458<pc>0292-b<k1>guRakarI<k2>guRakarI
{%Guṇakarī,%}¦ f. {%= goṇḍakirī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17459<pc>0292-b<k1>guRana<k2>guRana
{%Guṇana, am,%}¦ n. multiplication; enumeration;
describing, relating qualities, pointing out merits or
virtues; ({%ī%}), f. examining books, studying, collating
or correcting copies and determining the value of
various readings.
<LEND>

<L>17460<pc>0292-b<k1>guRanikA<k2>guRanikA
{%Guṇanikā,%}¦ f. determining the value of the various
readings of a manuscript; dancing, the science or
profession of dancing, acting, &c.; the prologue or
introduction to a drama; a garland, a necklace; a
cipher, the character in arithmetic which expresses
nothing.
<LEND>

<L>17461<pc>0292-b<k1>guRanIya<k2>guRanIya
{%Guṇanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be advised, to be multi-
plied, to be enumerated; ({%as%}), m. practice, practising
anything, but especially science or study; ({%am%}), n.
the multiplicand.
<LEND>

<L>17462<pc>0292-b<k1>guRaya<k2>guRaya
{%Guṇaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%guṇayati, -yitum,%} to multiply;
to advise, invite.
<LEND>

<L>17463<pc>0292-b<k1>guRala<k2>guRala
{%Guṇala, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Bhoja.
<LEND>

<L>17464<pc>0292-b<k1>guRikA<k2>guRikA
{%Guṇikā,%}¦ f. a tumor, a swelling.
<LEND>

<L>17465<pc>0292-b<k1>guRita<k2>guRita
{%Guṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ {{mutiplied->multiplied||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}; heaped together,
collected.
<LEND>

<L>17466<pc>0292-b<k1>guRin<k2>guRin
{%Guṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ containing parts, consisting of
parts; possessing qualities, an object, a thing, a noun
substantive (as possessing qualities); endowed with
good qualities or merits; auspicious; familiar with
the merits of anything; ({%ī%}), m. a bow. {%—Guṇi-gaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. a number of virtuous persons. {%—Guṇi-tā,%} f.
virtuousness, the state of possessing virtues or merits or
good qualities. {%—Guṇi-dvaidha, am,%} n. equality of
merit on both sides. {%—Guṇi-liṅga, as, ā, am,%}
taking the same gender as a substantive. {%—Guṇi-%}
{%sarvasva, am,%} n. title of a literary work.
<LEND>

<L>17467<pc>0292-b<k1>guRIBUta<k2>guRIBUta
{%Guṇī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made secondary or sub-
ordinate, deprived of the original meaning or im-
portance; made or having become a merit or orna-
ment; invested with attributes &c.; varied according
to qualities; having a certain force or application (as
a word &c.).
<LEND>

<L>17468<pc>0292-b<k1>guRya<k2>guRya
{%Guṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ endowed with virtues; to be
enumerated; to be described, to be praised; to be
multiplied, the multiplicand.
<LEND>

<L>17469<pc>0292-b<k1>guRW<k2>guRW
{#guRW#}¦ {%guṇṭh%} (connected with {%guṇḍ%} and
{%gudh%}), cl. 10. P. {%guṇṭhayati, -yitum,%}
to enclose or envelop, surround, hide, conceal; [cf.
Old Pruss. <nsi>po-kuntu,</nsi> to protect; <nsi>kuns-t,</nsi> to guard:
perhaps Lat. <nsi>cus-tos</nsi> for <nsi>cut-tos</nsi> or <nsi>cud-tos.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17470<pc>0292-b<k1>guRWana<k2>guRWana
{%Guṇṭhana, am,%}¦ n. concealing, covering, en-
closing.
<LEND>

<L>17471<pc>0292-b<k1>guRWita<k2>guRWita
{%Guṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, covered with;
pounded, ground, reduced to dust or powder; [cf.
{%guṇḍita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17472<pc>0292-b<k1>guRq<k2>guRq
{#guRq#}¦ {%guṇḍ%} (connected with {%guṇṭh%} and
{%gudh%}), cl. 10. P. {%guṇḍayati, -yitum,%} to
cover, hide, conceal, protect; to pound, comminute.
<LEND>

<L>17473<pc>0292-b<k1>guRqa<k2>guRqa
{%Guṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fragrant grass, Scirpus
Kysoor; [cf. {%kaśeru;%} cf. also {%kāṇḍa-guṇḍa%} and
{%guṇḍika.%}] {%—Guṇḍa-kanda, as,%} m. the root of this
grass. {%—Guṇḍārocanikā (˚ḍa-ar˚%} or {%ār˚%}), f., N. of
a plant, {%= kāmpilya.%}
<LEND>

<L>17474<pc>0292-b<k1>guRqaka<k2>guRqaka
{%Guṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. dust, powder; an oil vessel; a
low pleasing tone; dirty flour or meal, {%= malana =%}
{%malina.%}
<LEND>

<L>17475<pc>0292-b<k1>guRqana<k2>guRqana
{%Guṇḍana, am,%}¦ n. concealing, covering, hiding;
[cf. {%guṇṭhana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17476<pc>0292-b<k1>guRqAlA<k2>guRqAlA
{%Guṇḍālā,%}¦ f., N. of a plant, {%= jalodbhūtā, guccha-%}
{%bodhrā, jalāśayā;%} a kind of grass, {%= guṇḍāsinī.%}
<LEND>
[Page0292-c+ 72]

<L>17477<pc>0292-c<k1>guRqAsinI<k2>guRqAsinI
{%Guṇḍāsinī,%}¦ f., N. of a grass; [cf. {%guṇḍālā,%}
{%gudālā, guccha-mūlikā, cipiṭā,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>17478<pc>0292-c<k1>guRqika<k2>guRqika
{%Guṇḍika, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. flour, powder, meal.
<LEND>

<L>17479<pc>0292-c<k1>guRqita<k2>guRqita
{%Guṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pounded, ground; covered
with dust.
<LEND>

<L>17480<pc>0292-c<k1>guRqicA<k2>guRqicA
{#guRqicA#}¦ {%guṇḍicā,%} f., N. of the place where
the image of Puruṣottama or Jagannāth is placed
after being carried about at the Ratha-yātrā.
<LEND>

<L>17481<pc>0292-c<k1>guRTa<k2>guRTa
{#guRTa#}¦ {%guṇtha%} (?), {%as,%} m. {%= gavedhukā.%}
<LEND>

<L>17482<pc>0292-c<k1>guRTaka<k2>guRTaka
{%Guṇthaka (?), am,%}¦ n. {%= granthi-parṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>17483<pc>0292-c<k1>guRya<k2>guRya
{#guRya#}¦ {%guṇya.%} See under {%guṇa%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>17484<pc>0292-c<k1>gutsa<k2>gutsa
{#gutsa#}¦ {%gutsa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. {%gudh%}), a
bunch, a bundle, a cluster of blossoms, a nosegay; a
clump of grass; a pearl necklace consisting of thirty-
two strings; a plant or perfume, commonly Gan-
thiāla, {%= granthi-parṇa;%} [cf. {%guccha.%}] {%—Gutsār-%}
{%dha (˚sa-ar˚), as,%} m. a necklace or garland of
twenty-four strings; [cf. {%gucchārdha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17485<pc>0292-c<k1>gutsaka<k2>gutsaka
{%Gutsaka, as,%}¦ m. a bundle, a bunch, a nosegay, a
cluster of blossoms; a chowri, a cow-tail; a section
of a work; [cf. {%guccha%} and {%gucchaka.%}] {%—Gutsaka-%}
{%puṣpa, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= gucchaka-puṣpa%}
{%= sapta-cchada.%}
<LEND>

<L>17486<pc>0292-c<k1>gud<k2>gud
{#gud#}¦ {%gud,%} cl. 1. A. {%godate,%} to play, sport;
[cf. {%gūrd%} and {%gudh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17487<pc>0292-c<k1>guda<k2>guda
{%Guda, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (from the last ?), an intestine,
an entrail, the last of the large intestines, the rectum,
the anus; ({%ās%}), f. pl. the bowels. {%—Guda-kīla, as,%}
or {%guda-kīlaka, as,%} m. piles. {%—Guda-graha, as,%} m.
constipation, flatulence, &c. {%—Guda-pariṇaddha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man; {%Bakanakha-gudapariṇaddhāḥ,%}
the descendants of Bakanakha and Guda-pariṇaddha.
{%—Guda-pāka, as,%} m. inflammation of the anus.
{%—Guda-bhraṃśa, as,%} m. prolapsus ani. {%—Guda-%}
{%roga, as,%} m. a disease of the last of the large intes-
tines; piles (?). {%—Guda-vartman, a,%} n. the anus.
{%—Gudāṅkura (˚da-aṅ˚), as,%} m. piles. {%—Gudā-%}
{%varta (˚da-āv˚), as,%} m. obstruction of the bowels.
{%—Gudodbhava (˚da-ud˚), as,%} m. piles. {%—Gu-%}
{%dauṣṭha (˚da-oṣ˚), as,%} m. the opening of the
anus.
<LEND>

<L>17488<pc>0292-c<k1>guD<k2>guD
{#guD#}¦ {%gudh,%} cl. 4. P. {%gudhyati,%} to wrap up,
envelop, cover, conceal, clothe [cf. {%guṇṭh%}];
cl. 9. P. {%gudhnāti,%} to be angry; cl. 1. A. {%godhate,%}
to play, sport; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κεύθω;</lang> Germ. <nsi>haut;</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>hût;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hyde, hyd;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>cutis?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>17489<pc>0292-c<k1>guDita<k2>guDita
{%Gudhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, enclosed.
<LEND>

<L>17490<pc>0292-c<k1>guDera<k2>guDera
{%Gudhera, as, ā, am,%}¦ protecting, a protector, a
defender; [cf. {%guṇḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17491<pc>0292-c<k1>gundala<k2>gundala
{#gundala#}¦ {%gundala, as,%} m. the sound of a
small oblong drum.
<LEND>

<L>17492<pc>0292-c<k1>gundAla<k2>gundAla
{#gundAla#}¦ {%gundāla, as,%} m. a kind of bird, a
sort of pheasant; the bartavelle; see {%cakora;%} (also
read {%gundrāla.%})
<LEND>

<L>17493<pc>0292-c<k1>gundr<k2>gundr
{#gundr#}¦ {%gundr,%} cl. 10. P. {%gundrayati, -yitum,%}
to lie; (also read {%kundr.%})
<LEND>

<L>17494<pc>0292-c<k1>gundra<k2>gundra
{#gundra#}¦ {%gundra, as,%} m. a kind of grass, Sac-
charum Sara ({%śara%}); N. of a plant, {%= paṭaraka,%}
{%accha, śṛṅgaverāhva, mūlaka; (ā),%} f., N. of
several plants and roots, {%= bhadra-mustaka,%} the
root of the grass Cyperus Pertenuis (also m. and n.
in this sense); {%= mustaka; = priyaṅgu; = kaivartī,%}
Cyperus Rotundus; {%= erakā; = gavedhukā,%} Coix
Barbata.
<LEND>

<L>17495<pc>0292-c<k1>gundrAla<k2>gundrAla
{%Gundrāla,%}¦ a kind of bird, a sort of pheasant.
<LEND>

<L>17496<pc>0292-c<k1>gup<k2>gup<h>1
{#gup#} 1¦. {%gup,%} cl. 4. P. {%gupyati, jugopa, go-%}
{%pitum,%} to become perplexed or confused.
<LEND>

<L>17497<pc>0292-c<k1>gup<k2>gup<h>2
{#gup#} 2¦. {%gup, jugopa%} and {%gopayāñcakāra,%}
{%gopsyati, gopiṣyati, gopāyiṣyati, agau-%}
{%psīt, agopīt, agopāyīt, goptum, gopitum%} and {%go-%}
{%pāyitum,%} to guard, defend, protect, preserve; to
observe: Caus. or cl. 10. P. A. {%gopayati, -te, %}
[Page0293-a+ 80]
{%ajūgupat, -yitum,%} or {%gopāyayati,%} &c., to guard, pre-
serve, protect, keep; to hide, conceal, keep secret; to
speak, to shine: Desid. A. {%jugupsate%} (ep. also P.), {%ju-%}
{%gupiṣati, -te,%} or {%jugopiṣati, -te,%} or {%jugopāyiṣati,%}
{%-te,%} to seek to defend one's self from, be on one's guard,
to beware of, to shun; to avoid, detest, spurn, despise;
to feel offended or hurt: Desid. of Desid. {%jugupsi-%}
{%ṣate:%} Intens. {%jogupyate, jogopti.%}
<LEND>

<L>17498<pc>0293-a<k1>gup<k2>gup<h>3
3. {%gup, p, p, p,%}¦ defending, protecting, (in {%dhar-%}
{%ma-gup,%} defending justice, epithet of Viṣṇu.)
<LEND>

<L>17499<pc>0293-a<k1>gupila<k2>gupila
{%Gupila, as,%}¦ m. a king, a protector.
<LEND>

<L>17500<pc>0293-a<k1>gupta<k2>gupta
{%Gupta%}¦ (and Ved. {%gupita%}), {%as, ā, am,%} protected,
guarded, preserved; hidden, concealed, kept secret,
secret; invisible, withdrawn from sight, (e. g. with
{%daṇḍa,%} a secret fine, a fine secretly imposed); joined,
combined; ({%am%}), ind. privately, secretly; ({%as%}), m. an
appellation forming often the last member of the
name of a Vaiśya or man of the third class; a Vaiśya
with this appellation was the founder of the renowned
Gupta dynasty, in which the names of the sovereigns
generally end in {%gupta%} [cf. {%candra-gupta, samudra-%}
{%gupta, skanda-gupta%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a married woman
who withdraws from her lover's endearments; a kind
of cowach, Mucuna Pruritus; N. of a woman, a
Śākya princess. {%—Gupta-kathā,%} f. a confidential
communication, a secret. {%—Gupta-gati, is,%} m. a spy
or secret emissary; ({%is%}), f. going privately or secretly.
{%—Gupta-cara, as, ī, am,%} who or what goes secretly;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Bala-rāma. {%—Gupta-dāna,%}
{%am,%} n. a hidden gift or present. {%—Gupta-dūta, as,%}
m. a secret messenger. {%—Gupta-veśa, as,%} m. a dis-
guise, dress &c. used for concealment; ({%e%}), ind. in
disguise. {%—Gupta-sarasvatī,%} f. title of a literary
work. {%—Gupta-sneha, as, ā, am,%} one whose love
is secret or invisible; ({%as%}), m. the plant Alangium
Hexapetalum ({%aṅkoṭa%}), the oil of which is hidden.
{%—Guptārma (˚ta-ar˚), am,%} n., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>17501<pc>0293-a<k1>guptaka<k2>guptaka
{%Guptaka, as,%}¦ m. a preserver; N. of a Sauvīraka
prince.
<LEND>

<L>17502<pc>0293-a<k1>gupti<k2>gupti
{%Gupti, is,%}¦ f. preserving, protecting, protection;
restraint, stoppage, check; concealing, hiding, con-
cealment; a means of protection, fortification, a
rampart; a prison; a hole in the ground, a cavern,
a sink, a cellar, &c. (a place of concealment); a leak
in a ship, or the well or lower deck of a boat (?);
digging a hole in the ground.
<LEND>

<L>17503<pc>0293-a<k1>guptika<k2>guptika
{%Guptika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17504<pc>0293-a<k1>gopana<k2>gopana
{%Gopana, am,%}¦ n. guarding, protecting, protection,
preservation; hiding, concealment; reviling, abuse;
flurry, hurry, alarm; light, lustre; the leaf of the
Laurus Cassia, {%= tamāla-pattra; (ā),%} f. protection.
<LEND>

<L>17505<pc>0293-a<k1>gopanIya<k2>gopanIya
{%Gopanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be preserved or pro-
tected; to be prevented; to be concealed or hidden;
secret, mysterious. {%—Gopanīya-tā,%} f. or {%gopanīya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. concealableness, fitness for being kept
secret.
<LEND>

<L>17506<pc>0293-a<k1>gopayatya<k2>gopayatya
{%Gopayatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be protected.
<LEND>

<L>17507<pc>0293-a<k1>gopAyaka<k2>gopAyaka
{%Gopāyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ a preserver, a cherisher,
one who guards or protects.
<LEND>

<L>17508<pc>0293-a<k1>gopAyana<k2>gopAyana
{%Gopāyana, as, ā, am,%}¦ preserving, protecting;
({%am%}), n. protecting, preserving, protection.
<LEND>

<L>17509<pc>0293-a<k1>gopAyita<k2>gopAyita
{%Gopāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ preserved, protected, che-
rished.
<LEND>

<L>17510<pc>0293-a<k1>gopAyitf<k2>gopAyitf
{%Gopāyitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a preserver, a protector.
<LEND>

<L>17511<pc>0293-a<k1>gopin<k2>gopin
{%Gopin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ a protector, one who preserves
or protects; ({%inī%}), f., N. of a creeping plant, Ichno-
carpus Frutescens; [cf. {%gopī%} and {%gopikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17512<pc>0293-a<k1>gopila<k2>gopila
{%Gopila, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who preserves or protects.
<LEND>

<L>17513<pc>0293-a<k1>gopizWa<k2>gopizWa
{%Gopiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. superl. of {%goptṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>17514<pc>0293-a<k1>goptavya<k2>goptavya
{%Goptavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be protected or preserved.
<LEND>

<L>17515<pc>0293-a<k1>goptf<k2>goptf
{%Goptṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a preserver, a protector, one
who defends or cherishes; one who conceals any-
thing.
<LEND>

<L>17516<pc>0293-a<k1>gopya<k2>gopya
{%Gopya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be protected or preserved;
to be kept, to be taken care of; to be kept secret or
hidden; to be cherished; ({%as%}), m. a servant, a
slave; the son of a female slave; an assemblage of
cowherdesses (? n.). {%—Gopyādhi (˚ya-ādhi), is,%} m. a
pledge which is not to be used but carefully preserved.
<LEND>

<L>17517<pc>0293-a<k1>gopyaka<k2>gopyaka
{%Gopyaka, as,%}¦ m. a slave, a servant.
<LEND>
[Page0293-b+ 79]

<L>17518<pc>0293-b<k1>guP<k2>guP
{#guP#}¦ {%guph%} or {%gumph,%} cl. 6. P. {%guphati%} or
{%gumphati, jugumpha, -phitum,%} to string
together, tie, string as a garland, wind round.
<LEND>

<L>17519<pc>0293-b<k1>gumPa<k2>gumPa
{%Gumpha, as,%}¦ m. tying, stringing as a garland; a
bracelet; a whisker, a mustachio.
<LEND>

<L>17520<pc>0293-b<k1>gumPana<k2>gumPana
{%Gumphana, am,%}¦ n. winding (a garland &c.).
<LEND>

<L>17521<pc>0293-b<k1>gumPita<k2>gumPita
{%Gumphita%}¦ or {%guphita, as, ā, am,%} tied, strung
together; arranged, placed in order; also {%guṣpita.%}
<LEND>

<L>17522<pc>0293-b<k1>gur<k2>gur
{#gur#}¦ {%gur%} or {%gūr,%} cl. 6. A. {%gurate, jugure,%}
{%guritum,%} to make effort or exertion; cl. 10.
A. {%gorayate%} or {%gūrayate,%} &c., to make effort; to eat;
cl. 4. A. {%gūryate,%} to hurt, go; Ved. also cl. 6. P.
{%gurati,%} (not used without prepositions except in the
part. {%gūrta%} and {%gūrṇa,%} = approved, welcome, agree-
able; see under {%gūr.%})
<LEND>

<L>17523<pc>0293-b<k1>guraRa<k2>guraRa
{%Guraṇa, am,%}¦ n. effort, perseverance, great or
continued exertion.
<LEND>

<L>17524<pc>0293-b<k1>guru<k2>guru
{#guru#}¦ {%guru, us, vī, u%} (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%gṝ,%}
compar. {%garīyas,%} superl. {%gariṣṭha,%} in Mahā-bh.
VII. 5324, compar. {%garīyastara%}), heavy, weighty
(opposed to {%laghu%}), heavy in the stomach (as food),
difficult to digest; great, large, extended, long; (in
prosody) long by nature or position (as a long vowel
taken alone or a short vowel before two consonants;
sometimes a long vowel followed by consonants is
called {%garīyas%}); high in degree, vehement, violent,
excessive, deep, much; difficult, hard; grievous; im-
portant, serious, momentous; valuable, highly prized;
dear, beloved; haughty, proud (as a speech); venerable,
respectable; best, excellent; ({%us%}), m. any venerable
or respectable person, as a father, mother, or any
relative older than one's self; a spiritual parent or
preceptor from whom a youth receives the initiatory
Mantra or prayer and who conducts the necessary
ceremonies up to the period of investiture with
the sacrificial thread or string; this person may be
the natural parent or the religious preceptor; a
religious teacher, one who explains the law and
religion to his pupil, instructs him in the Śāstras &c.;
a N. of Bṛhaspati or the planet Jupiter, who is con-
sidered as the Guru or preceptor of the gods; an
epithet of Droṇa, the teacher of the Pāṇḍus; N. of
a son of Saṅkṛti; ({%vī%}), f. pregnant, a pregnant
woman; the wife of a teacher; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">βαρύς;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>gravis;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>kauriths;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>giéras.</nsi>]
{%—Guru-kāra, as,%} m. worship, adoration. {%—Guru-%}
{%kārya, am,%} n. a serious or momentous affair, the
business or office of a spiritual teacher. {%—Guru-kula,%}
{%am,%} n. the family of a spiritual preceptor or parent.
{%—Guru-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} worshipped. {%—Guru-%}
{%kopa, as,%} m. violent wrath. {%—Guru-krama, as,%} m.
instruction handed down through a series of teachers,
traditionary instruction. {%—Guru-gata, as, ā, am,%}
being with or belonging to a spiritual teacher. {%—Guru-%}
{%gītā,%} f. title of a section in the Skanda-Purāṇa
relating to Gurus or spiritual preceptors. {%—Guru-%}
{%ghna, as, ī, am,%} destroying or killing a spiritual
teacher; ({%as%}), m. white mustard. {%—Guru-jana, as,%}
m. any venerable or elder person, a father, mother,
the elders of a family &c. {%—Guru-tama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} most important &c.; ({%as%}), m. the best teacher.
{%—Guru-tara, as, ā, am,%} heavier, more important.
{%—Guru-talpa, as,%} m. the bed of a teacher; the
violation of a teacher's bed; a violator of his teacher's
bed. {%—Gurutalpa-ga, as,%} m. a violator of his
teacher's bed; the violation of it (?). {%—Gurutalpa-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n. penance for intercourse with the wife
of a Guru. {%—Gurutalpābhigamana (˚pa-abh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. violation of a teacher's bed. {%—Gurutalpin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} one who has criminal intercourse with his
teacher's wife. {%—Guru-tā,%} f. weight, heaviness, bur-
den, trouble; dignity; importance; the office of a
teacher. {%—Guru-tāpa, as,%} m. excessive heat. {%—Guru-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. weight, heaviness; burden, trouble;
severity, hardness; greatness, magnitude; respect-
ability, venerableness, sacredness; the office of a
teacher. {%—Gurutvaka, am,%} n. heaviness. {%—Guru-%}
{%dakṣiṇā,%} f. a fee given to a spiritual preceptor.
{%—Guru-dāna, am,%} n. a Guru's gift, a present to a
[Page0293-c+ 76]
religious teacher. {%—Guru-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a
teacher. {%—Guru-dīkṣā-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra. {%—Guru-daivata, as,%} m. the eighth lunar
constellation Puṣya, (of which Bṛhaspati is the ruling
deity.) {%—Guru-pattrā,%} f. the Tamarind tree; ({%am%}),
n. tin. {%—Guru-paripāṭī,%} f. a series of Jaina sages.
{%—Guru-pāka, as, ā, am,%} difficult of digestion.
{%—Guru-pūjā,%} f. the ceremonies in propitiation
of Bṛhaspati when a work is to be performed or
undertaken; the worship of one's spiritual guide.
{%—Guru-pramoda, as,%} m. happiness, delight. {%—Gu-%}
{%ru-prasāda, as,%} m. propitiousness or the favour
of one's Guru; the product of a Guru's blessing,
i. e. learning &c. {%—Guru-priya, as, ā, am,%} dear
to a preceptor. {%—Guru-bha, as,%} m. the constellation
of Bṛhaspati, i. e. the lunar mansion Puṣya.
{%—Guru-bhāra, as,%} m., N. of a son of Garuḍa.
{%—Guru-bhāva, as,%} m. the condition of a spiritual
preceptor, importance, consequence, weight. {%—Guru-%}
{%bhṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. bearing heavy things (as the
earth). {%—Guru-mat, ān, atī, at,%} containing a vowel
which is long by nature or position. {%—Guru-mardala,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of drum or tabor. {%—Guru-ratna, am,%}
n. a topaz. {%—Gurulaghu-tā,%} f. (fr. {%guru-laghu%}),
heaviness and lightness. {%—Guru-lāghava, as,%} m. (?)
length and shortness of vowels; ({%am%}), n. great and
small importance, relative importance or value.
{%—Guru-vat,%} ind. like a Guru, as a Guru, as if to a
Guru. {%—Guruvad-vṛtti, is,%} f. behaving to any one
with as much respect as to a sacred teacher. {%—Guru-%}
{%varco-ghna, as,%} m. the lime or citron, {%= limpāka.%}
{%—Guru-varṇa, as,%} m. a heavy vowel; [cf. {%guru.%}] {%—Gu-%}
{%ru-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%guru-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} treat-
ing parents or venerable persons with respect. {%—Guru-%}
{%vāra, as,%} m. the day of Jupiter, Thursday. {%—Guru-%}
{%vṛtti, is, is, i,%} long by nature. {%—Guru-vyatha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} heavily distressed. {%—Guru-śiṃśapā,%} f. the
tree Dalbergia Sisu; [cf. {%śiṃśapā.%}] {%—Guru-śikharin,%}
{%ī,%} m. epithet of the Himālaya (the venerable moun-
tain). {%—Guru-śiṣya-saṃvāda, as,%} m. a philoso-
phical dialogue by Caraṇa-dāsa. {%—Guru-śuśrūṣā,%}
f. service of a Guru. {%—Guru-śokānala (˚ka-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the fire of heavy sorrow. {%—Guru-sārā,%} f., N.
of a tree, {%= śiṃśapā%}. {%—Guru-sevā,%} f. obsequiousness
to a spiritual preceptor. {%—Guru-skandha, as,%} m.,
N. of a large mountain. {%—Guru-sthira, as, ā, am,%}
very firm. {%—Guru-han, ā,%} m. the murderer of a
Guru or spiritual parent; (this is the worst of all
criminals according to the Hindūs.) {%—Gurv-akṣara,%}
{%am,%} n. a long syllable. {%—Gurv-aṅganā,%} f. the wife
of a Guru; any woman entitled to great respect.
{%—Gurv-artha, as,%} m. a Guru's fee for instructing
a pupil; ({%am%}), ind. for or on account of a Guru;
({%as, ā, am%}), important. {%—Gurvartha-gahvara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} deep in meaning.
<LEND>

<L>17525<pc>0293-c<k1>guruka<k2>guruka
{%Guruka, as, ī, am,%}¦ a little heavy; (in prosody)
long.
<LEND>

<L>17526<pc>0293-c<k1>gurviRI<k2>gurviRI
{%Gurviṇī,%}¦ f. pregnant, a pregnant woman; N. of an
irregular species of the Āryā metre.
<LEND>

<L>17527<pc>0293-c<k1>guruRwaka<k2>guruRwaka
{#guruRwaka#}¦ {%guruṇṭaka, as,%} m. a kind of bird,
a sort of peacock. See {%tila-mayūra.%}
<LEND>

<L>17528<pc>0293-c<k1>guruha<k2>guruha
{#guruha#}¦ {%guruha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people in
Madhya-deśa; [cf. {%guḍuha, guluha, gulaha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17529<pc>0293-c<k1>gurjara<k2>gurjara
{#gurjara#}¦ {%gurjara, as,%} m., N. of a district,
Gurjara or Guzerat; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the people of Gu-
zerat; ({%ī%}), f. one of the Rāgiṇīs or female personi-
fications of music; [cf. {%gujjarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17530<pc>0293-c<k1>gurd<k2>gurd
{#gurd#}¦ {%gurd = gūrd,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17531<pc>0293-c<k1>gurv<k2>gurv
{#gurv#}¦ {%gurv,%} cl. 1. P. {%gūrvati, jugūrva,%} &c.,
to raise; to endeavour, to aim or strive.
<LEND>

<L>17532<pc>0293-c<k1>gula<k2>gula
{#gula#}¦ {%gula, as,%} m. raw or unrefined sugar,
molasses; the glans penis; the clitoris; ({%ā%}), f. the
plant Tithymalus Antiquorum; ({%ī%}), f. a pill, a bolus,
any small globular substance; small pox; [cf. {%guḍa%}
and {%gola.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17533<pc>0293-c<k1>gulya<k2>gulya
{%Gulya, as,%}¦ m. sweetness, a sweet or saccharine taste.
<LEND>
[Page0294-a+ 73]

<L>17534<pc>0294-a<k1>gulaYcakanda<k2>gulaYcakanda
{#gulaYcakanda#}¦ {%gulañcakanda, as,%} m. an escu-
lent root (Kanda), commonly Kulī; [cf. {%gucchāhva-%}
{%kanda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17535<pc>0294-a<k1>gulaha<k2>gulaha
{#gulaha#}¦ {%gulaha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people in
Madhya-deśa; [cf. {%guḍuha, guruha, guluha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17536<pc>0294-a<k1>gulika<k2>gulika
{#gulika#}¦ {%gulika, as,%} m., N. of a hunter;
({%ā%}), f. {%= guṭikā,%} a ball; a pearl. {%—Gulikā-krīḍā,%} f.
playing with a ball, bat and ball, golf, &c.
<LEND>

<L>17537<pc>0294-a<k1>guliNka<k2>guliNka
{#guliNka#}¦ {%guliṅka, as,%} m. {%= kuliṅkaka,%} a
sparrow.
<LEND>

<L>17538<pc>0294-a<k1>gulucCa<k2>gulucCa
{#gulucCa#}¦ {%guluccha%} or {%guluñca%} or {%guluñcha%} or
{%guluñchaka, as,%} m. a bunch, a nosegay, a cluster
of blossoms; [cf. {%guccha, gutsa, gulañcakanda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17539<pc>0294-a<k1>guluha<k2>guluha
{#guluha#}¦ {%guluha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people in
Madhya-deśa; [cf. {%guḍuha, guruha, gulaha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17540<pc>0294-a<k1>gulgulu<k2>gulgulu
{#gulgulu#}¦ {%gulgulu, us, u,%} m. n. bdellium; [cf.
{%guggulu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17541<pc>0294-a<k1>gulPa<k2>gulPa
{#gulPa#}¦ {%gulpha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%gal%}),
the ancle; [cf. {%vigulpha%} and {%kulpha.%}] {%—Gulpha-%}
{%jāha, am,%} n. the root of the ancle.
<LEND>

<L>17542<pc>0294-a<k1>gulma<k2>gulma
{#gulma#}¦ {%gulma, as, am,%} m. n. a cluster or
clump of trees, a thicket, a bush, a shrub; a troop
or guard of soldiers, a body of troops, a division of
an army, consisting of 45 foot, 27 horse, 9 chariots,
and 9 elephants; or of 135 foot, 81 horse, 27 cha-
riots, and 27 elephants; a fort, an intrenchment;
disciplining an army, keeping it in a posture of de-
fence; the spleen; a chronic enlargement of the
spleen or as variously situated any glandular enlarge-
ment in the abdomen, as that of the mesenteric
gland &c., so as to be perceived externally; a wharf
or stairs, a Ghaṭ; ({%ī%}), f. a cluster or clump or trees,
a multitude of thickets; Emblic Myrobalan; jujube;
small cardamoms; a tent. {%—Gulma-ketu, us,%} m. a
small sort of cane or reed, sorrel. {%—Gulma-keśa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having bushy hair. {%—Gulma-mūla, am,%} n.
fresh ginger. {%—Gulma-vallī,%} f. the plant Sarcostemma
Viminale. {%—Gulma-vāta, as,%} m. or {%gulmodara%}
{%(˚ma-ud˚), am,%} n. a disease of the spleen.
<LEND>

<L>17543<pc>0294-a<k1>gulmaka<k2>gulmaka
{%Gulmaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of the Brāhman
Soma-śarman.
<LEND>

<L>17544<pc>0294-a<k1>gulmin<k2>gulmin
{%Gulmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ composed of different divisions
(a force &c.); growing in a clump or cluster,
clustered, bushy; having the spleen, affected by that
disease; ({%nī%}), f. a spreading creeper or any creeping
plant.
<LEND>

<L>17545<pc>0294-a<k1>gulya<k2>gulya
{#gulya#}¦ {%gulya.%} See under {%gula.%}
<LEND>

<L>17546<pc>0294-a<k1>guvAka<k2>guvAka
{#guvAka#}¦ {%guvāka, as,%} m. the betel-nut tree,
Areca Faufel or Catechu; [cf. {%gūvāka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17547<pc>0294-a<k1>guzpita<k2>guzpita
{#guzpita#}¦ {%guṣpita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. interlaced,
intwined, tied together &c.; [cf. {%guph%} and {%gumph.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17548<pc>0294-a<k1>guh<k2>guh<h>1
{#guh#} 1¦. {%guh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%gūhati, -te, jugūha,%}
{%juguhe, gūhiṣyati%} or {%ghokṣyati, -te,%}
{%agūhīt, aghukṣat, agūḍha, aghukṣata, agū-%}
{%hiṣi, aghukṣi, gūhitum%} or {%goḍhum,%} to cover,
conceal, hide, hide away, keep secret; to cover with
clothes: Caus. {%gūhayati, -yitum, ajūguhat:%} Desid.
{%jughukṣati, -te,%} to wish to conceal or hide away:
Intens. {%joguhyate, joguhīti%} or {%jogoḍhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>17549<pc>0294-a<k1>guh<k2>guh<h>2
2. {%guh, ghuṭ,%}¦ f., Ved. a hiding-place.
<LEND>

<L>17550<pc>0294-a<k1>guha<k2>guha
{%Guha, as,%}¦ m. a N. of Skanda or Kārttikeya, the
god of war (as reared in a secret place); an epithet
of Śiva; of Viṣṇu; N. of a king of the Niṣādas, a
friend of Rāma; a N. or title proper to persons of
the writer-caste; a horse, a swift horse; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a people in the south of India. {%—Guha-gupta,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Guha-candra, as,%}
m., N. of a merchant. {%—Guha-deva, as,%} m., N. of
a teacher. {%—Guha-rāja, as,%} m. a peculiar form or
construction of a temple. {%—Guha-śiva, as,%} m., N.
of a king of Kaliṅga. {%—Guha-ṣaṣṭhī,%} f. the sixth
day in the former half of Mārgaśīrṣa. {%—Guha-sena,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a merchant.
<LEND>
[Page0294-b+ 80]

<L>17551<pc>0294-b<k1>guhadavadya<k2>guhadavadya
{%Guhad-avadya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. concealing or
removing deficiencies.
<LEND>

<L>17552<pc>0294-b<k1>guhalu<k2>guhalu
{%Guhalu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17553<pc>0294-b<k1>guhA<k2>guhA
{%Guhā,%}¦ f. a cave, a cavern, a hiding-place; a
pit, a hole in the ground; the plant Hemionitis
Cordifolia; another plant, {%= śāla-parṇī; (ā),%} ind. in
a hiding-place, in secret, secretly (opposed to {%āvis%}).
{%Guhā dhā%} or {%guhā nidhā%} or {%guhā kṛ,%} Ved. to
conceal, remove. {%—Guhā-gṛha, am,%} n. a cavern.
{%—Guhā-cara, as, ī, am,%} going in secret or secretly,
going in the interior. {%—Guhā-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
wide-mouthed, open-mouthed. {%—Guhā-śaya, as, ā%} or
{%ī, am,%} lying in a secret place, being in the interior or
in the heart; living in hiding-places or in caverns;
({%as%}), m. a tiger; an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Guhā-%}
{%hita, as, ā, am,%} being in a secret or hidden place,
placed in the heart.
<LEND>

<L>17554<pc>0294-b<k1>guhina<k2>guhina
{%Guhina, am,%}¦ n. a wood, a thicket.
<LEND>

<L>17555<pc>0294-b<k1>guhila<k2>guhila
{%Guhila, am,%}¦ n. wealth, property; a wood (?);
({%as%}), m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>17556<pc>0294-b<k1>guhera<k2>guhera
{%Guhera, as,%}¦ m. a guardian, a protector; a smith.
<LEND>

<L>17557<pc>0294-b<k1>guhya<k2>guhya
{%Guhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be covered or concealed, to
be hidden, to be kept hidden or secret, concealable,
private; secret, solitary, retired; mysterious, mysti-
cal; ({%am%}), ind. secretly, privately; ({%as%}), m. hypo-
crisy; a tortoise; an epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n. a
secret, a mystery; a privity, an organ of generation,
&c.; the anus. {%—Guhya-kālī,%} f. ‘the mysterious
Durgā,’ title of a poem in honour of this deity.
{%—Guhya-guru, us,%} m. the mysterious Guru, an
epithet of Śiva, this deity being considered as the
especial teacher of the Tantras or Hindū mystical
and magical works; [cf. {%gṛhya-guru.%}] {%—Guhya-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Guhya-dīpaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a flying insect which gives out light; the fire-
fly. {%—Guhya-niṣyanda, as,%} m. urine. {%—Guhya-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. lord of the mysteries, an epithet of
Vajra-dhara. {%—Guhya-pidhāna, am,%} n. a covering
over the privities. {%—Guhya-puṣpa, as,%} m. the tree
with concealed blossoms, Ficus Religiosa; [cf. {%aśvat-%}
{%tha.%}] {%—Guhya-bhāṣita, am,%} n. secret speech, a
Mantra, a mystical prayer or incantation; a secret.
{%—Guhya-maya, as, ī, am,%} containing mysteries.
{%—Guhya-vīja, as,%} m. a kind of grass, {%= bhū-tṛṇa.%}
{%—Guhyeśvarī (˚ya-īś˚),%} f. the mysterious deity,
i. e. Prajñā, the female energy of the Ādi-buddha.
<LEND>

<L>17558<pc>0294-b<k1>guhyaka<k2>guhyaka
{%Guhyaka, as,%}¦ m. a N. of a class of demi-gods who
like the Yakṣas are attendants of Kuvera or the god
of wealth, and guardians of his treasures; they may
have received their name from living in mountain
caverns. {%—Guhyakādhipati (˚ka-adh˚), is,%} m. or
{%guhyakādhipa, as,%} m. or {%guhyakeśvara (˚ka-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Kuvera, the deity of wealth.
<LEND>

<L>17559<pc>0294-b<k1>gUQa<k2>gUQa
{%Gūḍha%}¦ (or Ved. {%gūḷha%}), {%as, ā, am,%} covered,
hidden, concealed, invisible, secret, private; dis-
guised; ({%am%}), n. a solitary or private place; a private
part; a mystery. {%—Gūḍha-cāra, as, ī, am,%} one
who goes about secretly or unknown; ({%as%}), m. a
secret emissary. {%—Gūḍha-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} going
about secretly or privately; ({%ī%}), m. a secret emissary,
a spy. {%—Gūḍha-ja, as, ā, am,%} born privately; ({%as%}),
m. the son of a concealed birth, born secretly of a
woman whose husband is absent, the real father
being unknown; (this is one of the twelve forms
particularized in Hindū law, the child belonging to
the husband of the disloyal wife); [cf. {%gūḍhot-%}
{%panna.%}] {%—Gūḍha-tā,%} f. concealment, secrecy;
{%gūḍhatayā,%} privately, secretly. {%—Gūḍha-tva, am,%}
n. concealment, secrecy. {%—Gūḍha-nīḍa, as,%} m. the
wagtail. {%—Gūḍha-pattra, as,%} m. the plant Capparis
Aphylla, {%= karīra;%} another plant, Alangium Hexa-
petalum, {%= aṅkoṭha%}. {%—Gūḍha-patha, as,%} m. a
hidden path; the mind, intellect; a bye-path, a
private way. {%—Gūḍha-pād, t,%} m. a snake. {%—Gūḍha-%}
{%pāda, as, ā, am,%} having hidden feet; ({%as%}), m. a
snake. {%—Gūḍha-puruṣa, as,%} m. a spy, a secret
emissary, a disguised agent. {%—Gūḍha-puṣpaka, as,%}
m. the plant Mimusops Elengi, {%= vakula%}. {%—Gūḍha-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. the jujube, {%= badara%}. {%—Gūḍha-%}
{%bhāṣita, am,%} n. secret intelligence, private com-
[Page0294-c+ 72]
munication. {%—Gūḍha-mārga, as,%} m. a subterranean
passage, a bye-road or secret way; a defile. {%—Gūḍha-%}
{%maithuna, as,%} m. a crow (copulating in secret).
{%—Gūḍha-varcas, ās,%} m. a frog. {%—Gūḍha-vallikā,%}
f. Alangium Hexapetalum, {%= aṅkoṭha%}. {%—Gūḍha-%}
{%sākṣin, ī,%} m. a concealed witness, one placed by
the plaintiff so as to overhear what has been said
by the defendant. {%—Gūḍhāgūḍha-tā,%} f. or {%gūḍhā-%}
{%gūḍha-tva, am,%} n. (fr. {%gūḍha + agūḍha%}), conceal-
ment and publicity. {%—Gūḍhāṅga (˚ḍha-aṅ˚), as,%}
m. a tortoise. {%—Gūḍhāṅghri (˚ḍha-aṅ˚), is,%} m. a
snake. {%—Gūḍhārci (˚ḍha-ar˚), is, is, i,%} of con-
cealed glory. {%—Gūḍhārtha-dīpikā (˚ḍha-ar˚),%} f.
‘light for the hidden meaning,’ title of a commen-
tary. {%—Gūḍhotpanna (˚ḍha-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} born
secretly; ({%as%}), m. {%= gūḍha-ja,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17560<pc>0294-c<k1>gUhana<k2>gUhana
{%Gūhana, am,%}¦ n. concealing, hiding.
<LEND>

<L>17561<pc>0294-c<k1>gUhamAna<k2>gUhamAna
{%Gūhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ hiding, concealing.
<LEND>

<L>17562<pc>0294-c<k1>gUhayitvA<k2>gUhayitvA
{%Gūhayitvā,%}¦ ind. having concealed, having hidden
or disguised.
<LEND>

<L>17563<pc>0294-c<k1>gUhitavya<k2>gUhitavya
{%Gūhitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be hidden or concealed,
to be kept secret.
<LEND>

<L>17564<pc>0294-c<k1>guhera<k2>guhera
{#guhera#}¦ {%guhera.%} See under rt. 1. {%guh%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>17565<pc>0294-c<k1>gU<k2>gU<h>1
{#gU#} 1¦. {%gū,%} cl. 6. P. {%guvati,%} to void by stool;
(another form for 4. {%gu.%})
<LEND>

<L>17566<pc>0294-c<k1>gUTa<k2>gUTa
{%Gūtha, as, am,%}¦ m. n. feces, ordure. {%—Gūtha-%}
{%lakta, as,%} m. a small bird, considered to be a species
of the Mayna, Turdus Salica; [cf. {%sālvika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17567<pc>0294-c<k1>gUna<k2>gUna
{%Gūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ voided (as ordure).
<LEND>

<L>17568<pc>0294-c<k1>gU<k2>gU<h>2
{#gU#} 2¦. {%gū%} (fr. rt. 1. {%gam%}), going, (in {%agre-gū,%}
q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>17569<pc>0294-c<k1>gUQa<k2>gUQa
{#gUQa#}¦ {%gūḍha.%} See under rt. 1. {%guh%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>17570<pc>0294-c<k1>gUr<k2>gUr
{#gUr#}¦ {%gūr = gur,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17571<pc>0294-c<k1>gUraRa<k2>gUraRa
{%Gūraṇa, am,%}¦ n. {%= guraṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17572<pc>0294-c<k1>gUrRa<k2>gUrRa
{%Gūrṇa%}¦ or {%gūrta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. approved, wel-
come, agreeable, thankful (Lat. <nsi>gratus</nsi>). {%—Gūrta-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. with grateful mind; (Sāy.)
with prepared mind. {%—Gūrta-vacas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
speaking agreeably. {%—Gūrta-śravas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
of whom or of what one likes to hear or to speak.
{%—Gūrtā-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. possessing agreeable
things; (Sāy.) bestowing treasure.
<LEND>

<L>17573<pc>0294-c<k1>gUrti<k2>gUrti
{%Gūrti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. approval, praise, a flattering ex-
pression.
<LEND>

<L>17574<pc>0294-c<k1>gUrd<k2>gUrd
{#gUrd#}¦ {%gūrd%} or {%gurd,%} cl. 1. A. {%gūrdate%} or
{%gurdate, jugūrde, gūrditum,%} to play,
sport; to jump, leap; cl. 10. P. {%gūrdayati%} or {%gurda-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to play, sport; to dwell, inhabit; [cf.
{%kūrd.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17575<pc>0294-c<k1>gUrda<k2>gUrda
{%Gūrda, as,%}¦ m. a jump; {%Prajāpater gūrdaḥ%} or
{%Prajāpateḥ kūrdaḥ,%} N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>17576<pc>0294-c<k1>gUrD<k2>gUrD
{#gUrD#}¦ {%gūrdh,%} cl. 10. P., Ved. {%gūrdhayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to praise.
<LEND>

<L>17577<pc>0294-c<k1>gUvAka<k2>gUvAka
{#gUvAka#}¦ {%gūvāka, as,%} m. {%= guvāka,%} the betel-
nut tree.
<LEND>

<L>17578<pc>0294-c<k1>gUzaRA<k2>gUzaRA
{#gUzaRA#}¦ {%gūṣaṇā,%} f. the eye in a peacock's
tail.
<LEND>

<L>17579<pc>0294-c<k1>gUhana<k2>gUhana
{#gUhana#}¦ {%gūhana,%} &c. See under rt. {%guh.%}
<LEND>

<L>17580<pc>0294-c<k1>gf<k2>gf
{#gf#}¦ {%gṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%garati, jagāra, gariṣyati,%}
{%agārṣīt, gartum,%} to sprinkle, moisten, wet;
to grant: Caus. {%gārayati:%} Desid. {%jigīrṣati:%} In-
tens. {%jegrīyate, jargarti.%}
<LEND>

<L>17581<pc>0294-c<k1>gfj<k2>gfj
{#gfj#}¦ {%gṛj%} or {%gṛñj%} [cf. rt. {%garj%}], cl. 1. P.
{%garjati, jagarja, garjitum%} or {%gṛñjati,%}
{%jagṛñja, gṛñjitum,%} to sound, roar, grumble, &c.
<LEND>

<L>17582<pc>0294-c<k1>gfYja<k2>gfYja
{%Gṛñja,%}¦ N. of a plant, {%= gṛñjana%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>17583<pc>0294-c<k1>gfYjana<k2>gfYjana
{%Gṛñjana, as,%}¦ m. garlic, or a small red variety of
it; a turnip; the tops of hemp chewed to produce
an inebriating effect, the Gāñja; ({%am%}), n. the bulb
of a kind of onion; poisoned flesh, the meat of an
animal destroyed by a poisoned arrow.
<LEND>

<L>17584<pc>0294-c<k1>gfYjanaka<k2>gfYjanaka
{%Gṛñjanaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of garlic.
<LEND>
[Page0295-a+ 75]

<L>17585<pc>0295-a<k1>gfYjima<k2>gfYjima
{#gfYjima#}¦ {%gṛñjima, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Śūra and brother of Vasu-deva.
<LEND>

<L>17586<pc>0295-a<k1>gfRat<k2>gfRat
{#gfRat#}¦ {%gṛṇat, gṛṇīṣan.%} See 1. {%gṝ,%} p. 296.
<LEND>

<L>17587<pc>0295-a<k1>gfRqiva<k2>gfRqiva
{#gfRqiva#}¦ {%gṛṇḍiva%} or {%gṛṇḍīva, as,%} m. a kind
of jackal.
<LEND>

<L>17588<pc>0295-a<k1>gftsa<k2>gftsa
{#gftsa#}¦ {%gṛtsa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%gṛdh ?%}),
clever, dexterous; judicious, wise; a sharp fellow, a
sharper; ({%as%}), m. the god of love, Kāma or Kandarpa.
{%—Gṛtsa-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the chief of a number
of sharpers. {%—Gṛtsa-mati, is,%} m., N. of a son of
Su-hotra. {%—Gṛtsa-mada, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Śaunaka, of the family of Bhṛgu; (according to a
legend he was formerly a son of Śuna-hotra, of the
family of Aṅgiras, but by Indra's will was transferred
to the Bhṛgu family; he is the chief Ṛṣi of the
second Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda.)
<LEND>

<L>17589<pc>0295-a<k1>gfD<k2>gfD
{#gfD#}¦ {%gṛdh,%} cl. 4. P. {%gṛdhyati, jagardha,%}
{%gardhiṣyati, agṛdhat, gardhitum,%} to
endeavour to gain; to covet, desire, strive after
greedily; be desirous of, be eager for, long for (with
loc. or acc.), to be greedy: Caus. P. {%gardhayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to make desirous, make greedy, to be greedy;
A. {%gardhayate,%} to deceive, cheat: Desid. {%jigardhi-%}
{%ṣati:%} Intens. {%jarīgṛdhyate, jarīgarddhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>17590<pc>0295-a<k1>gfdDa<k2>gfdDa
{%Gṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirous of, eagerly longing
for; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>gir, kir:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>gier:</nsi>
Eng. <nsi>greedy</nsi> (?): Goth. <nsi>gredags, gaurs:</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>greadaim,</nsi> ‘I burn;’ <nsi>greadhnach,</nsi> ‘joyful, glad;’
<nsi>gradh,</nsi> ‘love, charity; dear;’ <nsi>graidhneog,</nsi> ‘a be-
loved female,’ &c.: Lith. <nsi>godus, gedu:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>glad,</nsi>
‘hunger.’]
<LEND>

<L>17591<pc>0295-a<k1>gfDu<k2>gfDu
{%Gṛdhu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous, Justful, libidinous;
({%us%}), m. the deity Kāma, god of love.
<LEND>

<L>17592<pc>0295-a<k1>gfDna<k2>gfDna
{%Gṛdhna, as, ā, am%}¦ (? a wrong form for {%gṛdhnu%}),
desirous (?).
<LEND>

<L>17593<pc>0295-a<k1>gfDnu<k2>gfDnu
{%Gṛdhnu, us, us, u,%}¦ eager; greedily desirous of,
greedy, covetous, cupidinous; [cf. Goth. <nsi>gairns,</nsi>
<nsi>gairnja;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>godùs.</nsi>] {%—Gṛdhnu-tā,%} f. covetous-
ness, greediness, extreme desire.
<LEND>

<L>17594<pc>0295-a<k1>gfDya<k2>gfDya
{%Gṛdhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be desired or longed for;
({%ā%}), f. desire, greediness.
<LEND>

<L>17595<pc>0295-a<k1>gfDra<k2>gfDra
{%Gṛdhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ desiring greedily or fervently;
eager for, desirous, greedy, covetous; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
a vulture; ({%ī%}), f. the female vulture; a daughter of
Kaśyapa and Tāmrā and mother of the vultures; [cf.
Old Germ. <nsi>gîr;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>geier.</nsi>] {%—Gṛdhra-%}
{%kūṭa, as,%} m., N. of a mountain near Rāja-gṛha.
{%—Gṛdhra-cakra, au,%} m. du. the vulture and the
Cakra-vāka. {%—Gṛdhra-jambūka, as,%} m., N. of an
attendant of Śiva. {%—Gṛdhra-nakhī,%} f. the jujube,
Zizyphus Jujuba, {%= koli;%} another plant, Asteracantha
Longifolia, {%= kulika%}. {%—Gṛdhra-pati, is,%} m. the
lord of the vultures, an epithet of Jaṭāyu. {%—Gṛdhra-%}
{%pattra, as,%} m., N. of an attendant of Skanda; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a plant, {%= dhūmrā-pattrā%}. {%—Gṛdhra-%}
{%mojāntaka, as,%} m., N. of a son of Śvaphalka.
{%—Gṛdhra-yātu, us,%} m., Ved. a Yātu or demon in
the shape of a vulture. {%—Gṛdhra-rāj, ṭ,%} or {%gṛdhra-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. the king of the vultures, an epithet of
Jaṭāyu. {%—Gṛdhra-vaṭa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N.
of a Tīrtha. {%—Gṛdhra-vāja%} or {%gṛdhra-vājita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} furnished with vulture-feathers, as an arrow;
[cf. {%gārdhra-vājita.%}] {%—Gṛdhra-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved.
sitting on a vulture.
<LEND>

<L>17596<pc>0295-a<k1>gfDrARa<k2>gfDrARa
{%Gṛdhrāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ similar to a vulture in
greediness; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= gṛdhra-pattrā.%}
<LEND>

<L>17597<pc>0295-a<k1>gfDrikA<k2>gfDrikA
{%Gṛdhrikā,%}¦ f. the mother of the vultures, a
daughter of Kaśyapa and Tāmrā.
<LEND>

<L>17598<pc>0295-a<k1>gfDU<k2>gfDU
{#gfDU#}¦ {%gṛdhū, ūs,%} m. air voided downwards
[cf. {%apāna%}]; understanding, intellect, reason; bad,
wicked (?).
<LEND>

<L>17599<pc>0295-a<k1>gfDrasI<k2>gfDrasI
{#gfDrasI#}¦ {%gṛdhrasī,%} f. lumbago; rheumatism
affecting the loins.
<LEND>

<L>17600<pc>0295-a<k1>gfB<k2>gfB
{#gfB#}¦ {%gṛbh, p,%} f. (fr. {%grah%}), Ved. grasping,
seizing, grasp, hold.
<LEND>
[Page0295-b+ 79]

<L>17601<pc>0295-b<k1>gfBa<k2>gfBa
{%Gṛbha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the place where anything is
seized, handle, hold.
<LEND>

<L>17602<pc>0295-b<k1>gfBi<k2>gfBi
{%Gṛbhi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. holding, containing, bearing.
<LEND>

<L>17603<pc>0295-b<k1>gfBIta<k2>gfBIta
{%Gṛbhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. grasped, seized; im-
pregnated, bearing fruit. {%—Gṛbhīta-tāti, is,%} f., Ved.
the being seized or grasped.
<LEND>

<L>17604<pc>0295-b<k1>gfzwi<k2>gfzwi
{#gfzwi#}¦ {%gṛṣṭi, is,%} f. a cow which has had
only one calf, a young cow; (in compounds with the
names of other animals) any young female animal
(e. g. {%vāsitā-gṛṣṭi,%} a young female elephant); a
kind of bulbous plant, {%= vārāhī, varāha-kāntā,%}
{%badarā;%} Zizyphus Jujuba (?), Gmelinus Arborea,
{%= kāśmarī; (is),%} m. a boar (various reading for
{%ghṛṣṭi%}).
<LEND>

<L>17605<pc>0295-b<k1>gfzwikA<k2>gfzwikA
{%Gṛṣṭikā,%}¦ f. a kind of plant.
<LEND>

<L>17606<pc>0295-b<k1>gfzwyA<k2>gfzwyA
{%Gṛṣṭyā,%}¦ f. young (as a cow).
<LEND>

<L>17607<pc>0295-b<k1>gfh<k2>gfh
{#gfh#}¦ {%gṛh, ghṛṭ, ṭ, ṭ%} (fr. rt. {%grah%}), at the end
of compounds, taking, holding, seizing, taking away,
drawing away.
<LEND>

<L>17608<pc>0295-b<k1>gfha<k2>gfha
{%Gṛha, am%}¦ or {%ās,%} n. or m. pl. (in Ved. also m.
sing.), a house, a habitation, a mansion; ({%mṛnmayo%}
{%gṛhaḥ,%} ‘the house of earth,’ the grave; {%gṛhās,%} m. pl.
a house as containing several rooms); the inhabitants of
a house, a family (pl.); a wife (sing. or pl.); a sign
of the zodiac (sing.); a name, an appellation (sing.);
({%as%}), m., Ved. an assistant, servant; [cf. {%anti-gṛha,%}
{%devatā-gṛha, bhūmi-gṛha, śayyā-gṛha, su-gṛ-%}
{%ha;%} cf. also Germ. <nsi>kirche</nsi> (?); Old Germ. <nsi>kiricha;</nsi>
Island. <nsi>kyrkia;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>ciric</nsi> for <nsi>circ.</nsi>] {%—Gṛha-%}
{%kacchapa, as,%} m. a small flat oblong stone, used for
grinding condiments &c. (shaped like a tortoise);
[cf. {%gṛhāśman.%}] {%—Gṛha-kanyā,%} f. the plant
Aloe Perfoliata, {%= ghṛta-kumārī;%} [cf. {%kanyakā.%}]
{%—Gṛha-kapota%} or {%gṛha-kapotaka, as,%} m. a
pigeon, a tame or domestic pigeon. {%—Gṛha-karaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. household affairs, house-building. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%kartṛ, tā,%} m. a house-builder, a kind of sparrow.
{%—Gṛha-karma-kara%} or {%gṛha-karma-dāsa, as,%}
m. a domestic servant. {%—Gṛha-karman, a,%} n. a
domestic affair; a domestic rite, a ceremony relating
to a house or household. {%—Gṛha-kalaha, as,%} m.
domestic dissension, intestine broils. {%—Gṛha-kā-%}
{%raka, as,%} m. a house-builder, a mason, a carpenter,
thatcher, &c. {%—Gṛha-kārin, ī,%} m. a house-builder;
a kind of wasp, commonly Kumirakyā. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%kārya, am,%} n. household affairs, domestic duties.
{%—Gṛha-kukkuṭa, as,%} m. a domestic cock. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%kuliṅga, as,%} m. a kind of bird; [cf. {%kuliṅga.%}]
{%—Gṛha-kṛtya, am,%} n. household matters or
affairs, the affairs of a royal house, the ministry.
{%—Gṛha-godhā%} or {%gṛha-godhikā,%} f. the small
house-lizard; [cf. {%āgāra-godhikā.%}] {%—Gṛhagolaka,%}
{%as,%} m. or {%gṛhagolikā,%} f. the small house-lizard.
{%—Gṛha-caṭaka, as,%} m. a house-sparrow. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%cullī,%} f. two rooms contiguous to each other, but one
facing west, the other east. {%—Gṛha-cchidra, am,%}
n. a breach in a house, private or family dissensions
or troubles. {%—Gṛha-ja%} or {%gṛha-jāta, as, ā, am,%}
born in the house; ({%as%}), m. a slave born in the
house. {%—Gṛha-jālikā,%} f. deceit, disguise. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%taṭī,%} f. a terrace in front of a house, a threshold.
{%—Gṛha-dāsa, as, ī,%} m. f. a domestic slave.
{%—Gṛha-dāha, as,%} m. the burning of a house, a
conflagration, arson. {%—Gṛha-dīpti, is,%} f. the splen-
dor or ornament of the house, a virtuous woman.
{%—Gṛha-devatā%} or {%gṛha-devī,%} f. the goddess of a
house. {%—Gṛha-druma, as,%} m., N. of the plant
Meḍhra-śṛṅgī. {%—Gṛha-dvāra, as, am,%} m. n. the
door of a house. {%—Gṛha-dhūma, as,%} m., N. of a
plant; [cf. {%āgāra-dhūma.%}] {%—Gṛha-naraka, am,%} n.
a hell of a house. {%—Gṛha-nāśana, as,%} m. a pigeon
(destroying the walls of a house by building in and
about it). {%—Gṛha-nīḍa, as,%} m. ‘having its nest
in houses,’ a sparrow. {%—Gṛha-pa, as,%} m., Ved.
the guardian of a house. {%—Gṛha-pati, is,%} m. the
master of a house, a householder; Ved. often an
epithet of Agni; a man of the second class who
after having finished his studies is married and
settled; a householder of peculiar merit, giving alms
[Page0295-c+ 81]
and performing all the prescribed ceremonies &c.;
one who has the precedence at a grand sacrifice; the
maintenance of a sacred and perpetual fire; the virtue
of a householder (i. e. hospitality &c.). {%—Gṛha-%}
{%patin, ī,%} m. used in the gen. pl. ({%gṛhapatinām%})
for the preceding. {%—Gṛha-patnī,%} f., Ved. the mistress
of a house, the wife of the householder. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m. the guardian of a house, a house-dog.
{%—Gṛhapālāya,%} nom. A. {%-pālāyate, -yitum,%} to
resemble a house-dog. {%—Gṛha-potaka, as,%} m. the
site of a habitation, the ground on which it stands
and which surrounds it. {%—Gṛha-praveśa, as,%} m. or
{%gṛha-praveśana, am,%} n. solemn entrance into a
house according to prescribed ceremonies. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%praveśanīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to the solemn
entrance into a house. {%—Gṛha-bali, is,%} m. a domes-
tic oblation, the offering of the remnants of a meal
to all creatures, such as animals, supernatural beings,
and especially household deities. {%—Gṛhabali-devatā,%}
f. the deity to whom a domestic oblation is offered.
{%—Gṛhabali-priya, as,%} m. a kind of crane, Ardea
Nivea. {%—Gṛhabali-bhuj, k,%} m. a sparrow; (according
to other {{authorites->authorities||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}), Ardea Nivea, or a crow. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%bhaṅga, as,%} m. an exile, one who is driven from
his house; family decay; destroying a house, break-
ing into a house; failure, breaking up, ruin, destruc-
tion (of a family, firm or association). {%—Gṛha-%}
{%bhañjana, am,%} n. breaking down or destroying a
house; causing the ruin or decay of a family.
{%—Gṛha-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. the master of a house.
{%—Gṛha-bhitti, is,%} f. the wall of a house. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%bhūmi, is,%} f. the site of a habitation. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%bhedin, ī, inī, i,%} prying into domestic affairs,
causing family quarrels. {%—Gṛha-bhojin, ī, inī, i,%} an
inmate of the same house. {%—Gṛha-maṇi, is,%} m. a
lamp. {%—Gṛha-mācikā,%} f. a bat. {%—Gṛha-mūḍha-%}
{%dhī, īs, īs, i,%} bewildered with domestic cares. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%mṛga, as,%} m. a dog. {%—Gṛha-megha, as,%} m. a
multitude of houses. {%—Gṛha-medha, as,%} m. a do-
mestic sacrifice; ({%as, ā, am%}), one who performs the
domestic rites or is the object of them; connected
with domestic rites or the duties of a householder;
an epithet of a ray of the sun. {%—Gṛhamedhin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} one who performs the domestic sacrifices or
is the object of them, a religious man; ({%ī%}), m. the
householder who performs the domestic rites, the
married Brāhman who has a household, the Brāhman
in the second period of his religious life; ({%inī%}), f. a
housewife, the wife of a householder, natural sense
or intelligence. {%—Gṛhamedhīya%} or {%gṛhamedhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating to the Gṛha-medha or Gṛha-
medhin. {%—Gṛha-yantra, am,%} n. an apparatus to
which on solemn occasions the flags of a house are
fastened. {%—Gṛha-rakṣā,%} f. the guarding of a house.
{%—Gṛha-randhra, am,%} n. a breach in the wall of
a house; private or family troubles or dissensions of
an unpleasing nature; [cf. {%gṛha-cchidra.%}] {%—Gṛha-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m., Ved. the lord of the house, an epithet
of Agni. {%—Gṛha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing a
house, the possessor of a house. {%—Gṛha-vāṭikā%} or
{%gṛha-vāṭī,%} f. a garden or grove near a house.
{%—Gṛha-vāsa, as,%} m. the living in a house, the
office of a householder. {%—Gṛha-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}
living in a house. {%—Gṛha-viccheda, as,%} m. the
extinction or destruction of a family or race. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%vitta, as,%} m. {%= gṛha-pati%}. {%—Gṛha-vṛkṣa-vā-%}
{%ṭikā,%} f. title of a literary work. {%—Gṛha-vyāpāra,%}
{%as,%} m. household affairs, domestic economy. {%—Gṛha-%}
{%śuka, as,%} m. a parrot kept in a house; a domestic
poet. {%—Gṛha-śuddhi, is,%} f. ceremonies for the
purification of a house. {%—Gṛha-saṃveśaka, as,%} m.
a house-builder. {%—Gṛha-stha, as, ā, am,%} living or
staying in a house; ({%as%}), m. a householder, a
Brāhman in the second period of his religious life, or
one who after having finished his studies and after
investiture with the sacred thread performs the duties
of the master of a house and father of a family; ({%ā%}),
f. a housewife. {%—Gṛhastha-dharma, as,%} m. the
practice or duty of a householder. {%—Gṛha-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. a temporary residence. {%—Gṛhasthāśrama%}
{%(˚stha-āś˚), as,%} m. the order of a householder.
[Page0296-a+ 80]
{%—Gṛha-sthūṇa, am,%} n. the pillar of a house.
{%—Gṛha-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} pernicious to a house or
its inmates. {%—Gṛhākṣa (˚ha-ak˚), as,%} m. a loop-
hole, an eyelet-hole, a round or oblong window.
{%—Gṛhāgata (˚ha-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has
come to a house; ({%as%}), m. a guest. {%—Gṛhādhipa%}
{%(˚ha-adh˚), as,%} m. the Gṛhastha or householder;
[cf. {%gṛha-stha.%}] {%—Gṛhānubaddha (˚ha-an˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} confined to the house. {%—Gṛhābhipālin%}
{%(˚ha-abh˚), ī, inī, i,%} watching or taking care of the
house; ({%ī%}), m. a watchman. {%—Gṛhāmla (˚ha-am˚),%}
{%am,%} n. sour gruel made from the fermentation of
rice-water. {%—Gṛhāyanika%} or {%gṛhāyaṇika, as,%} m.
(fr. {%gṛha + ayana%}), a householder; [cf. {%gṛha-%}
{%stha.%}] {%—Gṛhārāma (˚ha-ār˚), as,%} m. a garden,
a grove &c. near a house and belonging to it.
{%—Gṛhārūḍha-cetas (˚ha-ār˚), ās, ās, as,%} devoted
to home. {%—Gṛhārtha (˚ha-ar˚), as,%} m. household
affairs, any household matter or care. {%—Gṛhāvagra-%}
{%haṇī (˚ha-av˚),%} f. the threshold, raised ground or a
terrace in front of the door. {%—Gṛhāvasthita (˚ha-%}
{%av˚), as, ā, am,%} dwelling or living in a house;
situated or abiding in any dwelling-place. {%—Gṛhā-%}
{%śayā (˚ha-āś˚),%} f. the betel tree, Piper Betel.
{%—Gṛhāśman (˚ha-aś˚), ā,%} m. a flat oblong stone
upon which condiments are ground. {%—Gṛhāśrama%}
{%(˚ha-āś˚), as,%} m. the order of a householder, the
second stage in the religious life of a Brāhman.
{%—Gṛhāśramin, ī,%} m. the Brāhman as a house-
holder. {%—Gṛhe-jñānin, ī, inī, i,%} wise inside a house,
inexperienced, stupid. {%—Gṛhe-ruha, as, ā, am,%}
growing in a house. {%—Gṛhe-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved.
living in a house. {%—Gṛheśa (˚ha-īśa), as,%} m. the
regent of a sign of the zodiac. {%—Gṛheśvara (˚ha-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. the master of a house, a householder.
{%—Gṛhotpāta (˚ha-ut˚), as,%} m. any domestic nui-
sance (as vermin &c.). {%—Gṛhopakaraṇa (˚ha-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n. any domestic utensil.
<LEND>

<L>17609<pc>0296-a<k1>gfhayApya<k2>gfhayApya
{%Gṛhayāpya%}¦ or {%gṛhayāyya, as,%} m. a house-
holder, the master of a house or family.
<LEND>

<L>17610<pc>0296-a<k1>gfhayAlu<k2>gfhayAlu
{%Gṛhayālu, us, us, u,%}¦ disposed to seize or to lay
hold of.
<LEND>

<L>17611<pc>0296-a<k1>gfhala<k2>gfhala
{%Gṛhala, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17612<pc>0296-a<k1>gfhAlikA<k2>gfhAlikA
{%Gṛhālikā,%}¦ f. a small house-lizard; [cf. {%gṛha-%}
{%golikā%} and {%gṛholikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17613<pc>0296-a<k1>gfhin<k2>gfhin
{%Gṛhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ possessing a house; ({%ī%}), m. the
master of a house, a householder, the Brāhman as a
householder [cf. {%gṛha-stha%}]; ({%iṇī%}), f. the mistress
of a house, a wife.
<LEND>

<L>17614<pc>0296-a<k1>gfhIBU<k2>gfhIBU
{%Gṛhī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to become
a house or habitation.
<LEND>

<L>17615<pc>0296-a<k1>gfholikA<k2>gfholikA
{%Gṛholikā,%}¦ f. a small house-lizard; [cf. {%gṛha-%}
{%godhikā, gṛhālikā,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>17616<pc>0296-a<k1>gfhya<k2>gfhya<h>1
1. {%gṛhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a house,
domestic; N. of a series of ceremonies relating to
family or domestic affairs (such as marriages, births,
&c.) and treated of in a peculiar class of ritual works,
called Gṛhya-sūtras (see below); domesticated, tame,
living in houses (as animals); situated outside of,
(originally ‘adjoining the houses of a town;’ e. g.
{%grāma-gṛhyā senā,%} an army outside a village);
({%as%}), m. the inmate of a house, a domestic; a tame
or domesticated animal; ({%ā%}), f. a suburb, a village
adjoining to a city, or a small village attached to a
larger. {%—Gṛhya-kārikā,%} f. the Sūtras of Āśvalāyana
in metrical form. {%—Gṛhya-guru, us,%} m. an epithet
of Śiva; (a wrong reading for {%guhya-guru?%}).
{%—Gṛhya-grantha, as,%} m. a treatise on domestic
ceremonies. {%—Gṛhya-pariśiṣṭa, am,%} n., N. of a
Pariśiṣṭa. {%—Gṛhya-saṅgraha, as,%} m. title of a
work on ritual ascribed to the son of Gobhila.
{%—Gṛhya-sūtra, am,%} n. a class of ritual works
containing directions for domestic rites and cere-
monies, composed by Āśvalāyana, Gobhila, &c.
{%—Gṛhyāgni (˚ya-ag˚), is,%} m. a sacred fire which
it is incumbent on every Brāhman to keep up.
<LEND>

<L>17617<pc>0296-a<k1>gfhyaka<k2>gfhyaka
{%Gṛhyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ tame, domesticated, do-
mestic; dependent, docile, not following one's own
inclinations; ({%as%}), m. a tame or domesticated animal,
whether a bird or beast.
<LEND>
[Page0296-b+ 72]

<L>17618<pc>0296-b<k1>gfhaRI<k2>gfhaRI
{#gfhaRI#}¦ {%gṛhaṇī,%} f. sour gruel made from
the fermentation of rice-water; [cf. {%gṛhāmla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17619<pc>0296-b<k1>gfhIta<k2>gfhIta
{#gfhIta#}¦ {%gṛhīta.%} See under rt. {%grah.%}
<LEND>

<L>17620<pc>0296-b<k1>gfhya<k2>gfhya<h>1
{#gfhya#} 1¦. 2. 3. {%gṛhya.%} See last col. and under
rt. {%grah.%}
<LEND>

<L>17621<pc>0296-b<k1>gF<k2>gF<h>1
{#gF#} 1¦. {%gṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%gṛṇāti, gṛṇīte,%}
{%jagāra, gariṣyati%} and {%garīṣyati, agārīt,%}
{%garitum%} and {%garītum,%} to utter a sound, call out to,
invoke; to call; to announce, proclaim; to pro-
mulgate, relate; to mention with praise, praise,
extol; [cf. Hib. <nsi>goirim;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">γηρύω, γλώσσα;</lang> Old
Germ. <nsi>quar, quir,</nsi> &c.; Old Pruss. <nsi>gerbu,</nsi> ‘to
speak;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>gale;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>gal</nsi> in <nsi>Nachti-</nsi>
<nsi>gal;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>gallus?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>17622<pc>0296-b<k1>gfRat<k2>gfRat
{%Gṛṇat, an, atī, at,%}¦ praising, flattering; speaking.
<LEND>

<L>17623<pc>0296-b<k1>gfRIzan<k2>gfRIzan
{%Gṛṇīṣan,%}¦ Ved. found only in the loc. {%gṛṇīṣaṇi,%}
= in praise, with invocation; (Sāy.) to be praised.
<LEND>

<L>17624<pc>0296-b<k1>gF<k2>gF<h>2
{#gF#} 2¦. {%gṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%girati%} and {%gilati, jagāra%}
and {%jagāla, gariṣyati%} and {%galiṣyati,%} or
{%garīṣyati%} and {%galīṣyati, agārīt%} and {%agālīt,%}
{%garitum%} and {%galitum,%} or {%garītum%} and {%galītum,%}
to swallow, devour, eat; to emit or eject from the
mouth: Caus. {%gārayati%} and {%gālayati:%} Desid.
{%jigariṣati%} and {%jigaliṣati:%} Intens. {%jegilyate,%}
{%jāgarti;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>gerru,</nsi> ‘to drink;’ Lat. <nsi>glu-tio,</nsi>
<nsi>gula;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>gr-lo;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>schora.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17625<pc>0296-b<k1>gF<k2>gF<h>3
{#gF#} 3¦. {%gṝ%} or {%kṝ,%} cl. 10. A. {%gārayate, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to know, discern, make known, teach.
<LEND>

<L>17626<pc>0296-b<k1>geRqu<k2>geRqu
{#geRqu#}¦ {%geṇḍu, us,%} m. or {%geṇḍuka%} or {%geṇḍūka%}
or {%genduka, as,%} m. a ball for playing with; [cf.
{%kanduka%} and {%ginduka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17627<pc>0296-b<k1>gep<k2>gep
{#gep#}¦ {%gep,%} cl. 1. A. {%gepate,%} to shake,
tremble; [cf. {%kep.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17628<pc>0296-b<k1>geya<k2>geya
{#geya#}¦ {%geya,%} &c. See under {%gai%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>17629<pc>0296-b<k1>gela<k2>gela
{#gela#}¦ {%gela%} or {%gelu,%} a particular number.
<LEND>

<L>17630<pc>0296-b<k1>gev<k2>gev
{#gev#}¦ {%gev,%} cl. 1. A. {%gevate,%} to serve, to
gratify by service; [cf. {%kev, khev, sev.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17631<pc>0296-b<k1>gez<k2>gez
{#gez#}¦ {%geṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%geṣate,%} to seek,
search, investigate; [cf. {%gaveṣ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17632<pc>0296-b<k1>gezRa<k2>gezRa
{#gezRa#}¦ {%geṣṇa,%} &c. See under {%gai.%}
<LEND>

<L>17633<pc>0296-b<k1>geha<k2>geha
{#geha#}¦ {%geha, am,%} n. (corrupted fr. {%gṛha%}), a
house, a dwelling, a habitation. {%—Geha-dāha, as,%} m.
the burning of a house, a conflagration. {%—Geha-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. the master of a house, a householder, husband.
{%—Geha-bhū, ūs,%} f. the site of a house, the ground
on which it is built. {%—Gehe-kṣveḍin, ī, inī, i,%}
blustering at home, a house-hero, a coward. {%—Gehe-%}
{%dāhin, ī, inī, i,%} scorching and burning at home, a
house-hero. {%—Gehe-dṛpta, as, ā, am,%} overbearing
at home. {%—Gehe-dhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} insolent at
home. {%—Gehe-nardin, ī, inī, i,%} shouting defiance
at home, a poltroon, a dunghill-cock. {%—Gehe-mehin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} making water at home; a lazy, effeminate
or indolent man. {%—Gehe-vijitin, ī, inī, i,%} victorious
at home, a cowardly boaster. {%—Gehe-vyāḍa, as,%} m.
fierce at home, a braggart, a boaster. {%—Gehe-śūra,%}
{%as,%} m. a house-hero, a carpet-knight, a boasting
coward. {%—Gehopavana (˚ha-up˚), am,%} n. a small
forest near a house.
<LEND>

<L>17634<pc>0296-b<k1>gehin<k2>gehin
{%Gehin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a house, domestic; ({%ī%}),
m. a householder; ({%inī%}), f. a housewife, a wife.
<LEND>

<L>17635<pc>0296-b<k1>gehya<k2>gehya
{%Gehya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. domestic, being in a
house; ({%am%}), n. domestic affairs; wealth.
<LEND>

<L>17636<pc>0296-b<k1>gE<k2>gE
{#gE#}¦ {%gai,%} cl. 1. P. (rarely A.) {%gāyati, jagau,%}
{%gāsyati, agāsīt, gātum,%} to sing, to speak or
recite in a singing manner, (applied figuratively to
the utterance of beings not endowed with human
language, e. g. to gods, the earth, &c.); to relate in
metrical language, to praise in song; to sing before
(with acc.): Pass. {%gīyate:%} Caus. P. {%gāpayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to sing or praise in song: Desid. {%jigāsati:%}
Intens. {%jegīyate, jāgeti, jāgāti;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>zaidziu.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page0296-c+ 79]

<L>17637<pc>0296-c<k1>gAtavya<k2>gAtavya
{%Gātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sung, what may be sung.
<LEND>

<L>17638<pc>0296-c<k1>gAyaka<k2>gAyaka
{%Gāyaka, gāyatrī, gīta,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>17639<pc>0296-c<k1>geya<k2>geya
{%Geya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sung; singing, a singer;
({%am%}), n. song, singing, a song or chant. {%—Geya-jña,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} skilful in song. {%—Geya-rājan, ā,%} m., N.
of a Cakra-vartin.
<LEND>

<L>17640<pc>0296-c<k1>gezRa<k2>gezRa
{%Geṣṇa, as,%}¦ m. a singer, a professional singer, an
actor, a mime, a chanter of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>17641<pc>0296-c<k1>gezRu<k2>gezRu
{%Geṣṇu, us,%}¦ m. a singer, an actor, a chanter of the
Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>17642<pc>0296-c<k1>gEra<k2>gEra
{#gEra#}¦ {%gaira, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%giri%}), coming from
mountains, grown on them, mountain-born, mountain,
mountaineer; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%lāṅgalikī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17643<pc>0296-c<k1>gErAyaRa<k2>gErAyaRa
{%Gairāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Giri.
<LEND>

<L>17644<pc>0296-c<k1>gErika<k2>gErika
{%Gairika, as, ī, am,%}¦ mountain, mountain-born or
produced; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. red chalk, sometimes
used as a red ornament; ({%am%}), n. gold. {%—Gairi-%}
{%kākṣa (˚ka-ak˚), as,%} m., N. of a plant; [cf. {%jala-%}
{%madhūka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17645<pc>0296-c<k1>gErikzita<k2>gErikzita
{%Gairikṣita, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%giri-kṣit%}), a patronymic
of Trasadasyu; also of the Yaskas.
<LEND>

<L>17646<pc>0296-c<k1>gEreya<k2>gEreya
{%Gaireya, as, ī, am,%}¦ mountain-born, mountain;
({%am%}), n. bitumen, red chalk.
<LEND>

<L>17647<pc>0296-c<k1>gErakaMvUla<k2>gErakaMvUla
{#gErakaMvUla#}¦ {%gairakaṃvūla%} or {%gairikaṃvūla,%}
N. of the ninth Yoga.
<LEND>

<L>17648<pc>0296-c<k1>go<k2>go
{#go#}¦ {%go, gaus,%} m. f. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%gam%}),
an ox, a cow; cattle, kine, a herd of cattle (pl.);
anything coming from or belonging to an ox or cow,
as milk (generally pl.), flesh, skin, hide, leather, a
strap of leather, a sinew, a bow-string; a particular
day of the Abhiplava sacrifice, {%= goṣṭoma;%} the
herds of the sky, i. e. the stars; the sky; (pl.) rays
of light (regarded as the herds of the sky, for which
Indra fights with Vṛtra); the thunderbolt; water;
the eye; an arrow; the hairs of the body; (the
following are m. only), the sign Taurus of the
zodiac; the sun; the moon; the sun's ray, called
Suṣumna; a kind of medicinal plant, {%= ṛṣabha;%}
a singer; a goer, a horse; a billion; N. of a Ṛṣi;
(the following are f. only), a region of the sky;
the earth (as the milch-cow of kings); a mother;
speech, Sarasvatī the goddess of speech; N. of the
wife of Śuka, a daughter of the manes, called Sukālas;
or N. of the daughter-in-law of Śuka; or N. of a
daughter of Kakut-stha and wife of Yayāti; {%gavāṃ%}
{%vratam,%} N. of a Sāman; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">βοῦς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>bos;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>chuo;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>kuh;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>cow;</nsi>
Lett. <nsi>gohw;</nsi> cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">γαῖα, γῆ;</lang> Goth. <nsi>gavi;</nsi>
and Mod. Germ. <nsi>gau.</nsi>] {%—Go-agra, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
headed by cows, having cows or milk &c. as the
chief or most excellent part; ({%am%}), n. a multitude of
cows; (according to native grammarians also {%go'gra%}
and {%gavāgra.%}) {%—Go-ajana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. any-
thing (as a stick, goad, &c.) used for driving
cattle. {%—Go-argha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. of the value of
one cow. {%—Go-arṇas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. flowing or
streaming with milk (?). {%—Go-aśva, am,%} n. cattle
and horses. {%—Goaśvīya, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Go-ṛjīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. prepared or mixed
with milk. {%—Go-opaśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. furnished
with a twist or tuft of leather straps. {%—Go-kakṣa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Go-kaṇṭa, as,%} m. the plant
Asteracantha Longifolia. {%—Go-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. a
road or spot trodden down by oxen or cows and so
made difficult to be passed; the print of a cow's hoof,
a spot so marked; a cow's hoof; the plant Astera-
cantha. {%—Go-karṇa, as, ā, am,%} having cow's ears,
an epithet of certain men and demons; ({%as%}), m.
a cow's ear; a kind of deer, Antilope Picta; a mule;
a serpent; a kind of arrow; a span from the tip of
the thumb to that of the ring finger; a place of pil-
grimage on the Malabar coast, sacred to Śiva; Śiva
as there worshipped; N. of one of the attendants of
Śiva; of a king of Kaśmīra who erected a statue of
Śiva, called after him Gokarṇeśvara; of a Muni; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attendant on Skanda; ({%ī%}), f.
the plant Sanseviera Zeylanica. {%—Go-kāma, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. desirous of cattle. {%—Go-kāmyā,%} f. desire for cows.
{%—Go-kirāṭikā (˚ra-aṭ˚?),%} f. a bird considered as
[Page0297-a+ 81]
one kind of the common Maina, Turdus Salica; also
called Viṭ-sārikā. {%—Go-kila%} or {%go-kīla, as,%} m. a
plough; a pestle. {%—Go-kula, am,%} n. a herd of kine,
a multitude of cattle, a cow-house or station; a
village or tract on the Jumnā, the residence of Nanda
and of Kṛṣṇa during his youth; the inhabitants of
this station; N. of a certain sanctuary or holy place.
{%—Gokula-jit, t,%} m., N. of an author of the seven-
teenth century. {%—Gokula-nātha, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the work Padavākya-ratnākara; also of the
work Rasa-mahārṇava. {%—Gokula-stha, as,%} m., N. of
a sect of Viṣṇu. {%—Gokulika, as, ā, am,%} one who
gives help or gives no help (?) to a cow in the mud;
squint-eyed; N. of a Buddhist sect. {%—Gokulodbhavā%}
{%(˚la-ud˚),%} f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Go-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
{%-karoti, -kartum,%} to transform into a cow. {%—Go-%}
{%kṛta, am,%} n. cow-dung. {%—Go-kṣīra, am,%} n. cow's
milk. {%—Go-kṣura%} or {%go-kṣuraka, as,%} m. ({%kṣura%}
{%= khura%}), the plant Asteracantha Longifolia; ({%am%}),
n. a cow's hoof. {%—Go-kṣoḍaka, as,%} m. a kind of
bird. {%—Go-khura, as,%} m. {%= go-kṣura,%} the plant
Asteracantha Longifolia; another plant, Tribulus
Lanuginosus; N. of a Dānava. {%—Gokhuri, is,%} m. =
{%go-kṣura = go-khura,%} the plant Asteracantha Longi-
folia. {%—Go-gṛṣṭi, is,%} f. a young cow which has had
only one calf. {%—Go-goyuga, am,%} n. a yoke of oxen
or cows. {%—Go-goṣṭha, am,%} n. a station for cattle;
a stable for cows, a cattle-shed. {%—Go-granthi, is,%} m.
dried cow-dung; a station for cows, a cow-yard, cow-
house, &c.; N. of a plant, {%= go-jihvikā%}. {%—Go-graha,%}
{%as,%} m. spoil, booty, capture of cattle. {%—Go-grāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. the ceremony of presenting a mouthful of
grass to a cow when performing an expiatory rite;
the feeding like a cow. {%—Go-ghāta, as,%} m. or {%go-%}
{%ghātaka, as,%} m. or {%go-ghātin, ī,%} m. a cow-killer.
{%—Go-ghāsa, as,%} m. grass for a cow. {%—Go-ghṛta,%}
{%am,%} n. melted butter coming from a cow; rain (i. e.
the Ghṛta of the sky or earth). {%—Go-ghna, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} noxious to kine; who or what kills kine; one
for whom a cow is killed, a guest. {%—Go-ghnata, ās,%}
m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Go-candana, am,%} n. a kind
of sandal-wood [cf. {%go-śīrṣa%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a poisonous sort
of leech. {%—Go-capalā,%} f., N. of a daughter of Rau-
drāśva and Ghṛtācī. {%—Go-cara, as, ā, am,%} ranged or
grazed over by cattle; frequented, visited, offering
range or field or scope for action, within the range
of, accessible, attainable, within the power of (e. g.
{%asmad-gocara,%} within our power; {%dṛṣṭi-gocara,%}
perceptible, cognizable, worthy of observation or
adoration; {%dṛṣṭy-agocara,%} not within range of
the sight, invisible); ranging, circulating, passing
current, having a particular meaning, prevalent; ({%as%}),
m. the range of cattle, pasturage, range in general,
field for action, an abode, dwelling-place, district,
department, province; the range of the organs of
sense, an object of sense, anything perceptible by the
senses, especially the range of the eye, the horizon
(e. g. {%locana-gocaraṃ yā,%} to come within range of
the eye, to become visible); the range of the planets
from the Lagna or from each other. {%—Gocara-phala%}
or {%gocarādhyāya (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of the
104th Adhyāya of Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-saṃhitā.
{%—Gocara-pīḍā,%} f. inauspicious position of stars
withing the ecliptic. {%—Gocarī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-ka-%}
{%roti, -kartum,%} to place within the range, make
current. {%—Gocarī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} within the
range of observation. {%—Go-carman, a,%} n. an ox-
hide, a cow's hide; a particular measure of surface, a
place large enough for the range of 100 cows, one
bull, and their calves, (according to some authori-
ties) 300 feet long by 10 broad; it is also defined
as an extent of land sufficient to support a man
for a year; (originally perhaps a piece of land large
enough to be encompassed by straps of leather from
a cow's hide.) {%—Go-cāraka, as,%} m. a cowherd.
{%—Go-cāraṇa, am,%} n. the tending or feeding of
cows. {%—Go-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} going after cows, epithet
of a class of Yatis; [cf. {%mṛga-cārin.%}] {%—Go-jara,%}
{%as,%} m. an old ox or bull. {%—Go-jala, am,%} n. cow's
urine. {%—Go-jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. produced by milk;
(Sāy.) born amidst rays; (according to Mahī-dhara),
[Page0297-b+ 81]
born in the earth, the earth being identical with the
elements. {%—Go-jāgarika, as,%} m. a kind of prickly
nightshade [cf. {%kaṇṭa-kāraka%}]; ({%am%}), n. (?) a
preparer of food, a baker [cf. {%bhakṣya-kāraka%}];
happiness, fortune. {%—Go-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. born
in the starry sky, one whose home is the starry sky;
(Sāy.) born in the middle region, an epithet of the
gods. {%—Gojā-parṇī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= dugdha-%}
{%phenī%}. {%—Go-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. conquering cattle, gain-
ing cattle. {%—Go-jihvā%} or {%go-jihvikā,%} f. the plant
Phlomis Esculenta or Elephantopus Scaber; or a
kind of Hieracium, {%= dārvikā,%} or {%= gavedhukā;%} in
Bengālī <nsi>gojiā</nsi> = Premna Esculenta. {%—Go-taraṇi,%} a
kind of flower. {%—Go-tallaja, as,%} m. an excellent
cow. {%—Go-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Go-%}
{%tīrthaka, as,%} m., scil. {%cheda,%} an oblique cut applied
to fistula of the rectum. {%—Go-tra, am,%} n. (rt. {%trai%}),
protection or shelter for cows, a cow-pen, cow-shed,
a stable for cattle, a stable in general, a hurdle, an
enclosure; the family enclosed by the hurdle; family,
race, lineage, kin, an affix used for forming patro-
nymics; a name, an appellation, family name; (in
Pāṇini's Sūtras), the grandson and his descendants
if no older offspring of the same ancestor than this
grandson lives (e. g. A. B. C. representing father, son,
and grandson, then C. is called Gotra, if A. and B.
are dead, otherwise he is called Yuvan); a caste, a
tribe, a subdivision, a caste according to families,
(in that of the Brāhman twenty-four Gotras are
reckoned, supposed to be sprung from and named
after celebrated teachers, as Śāṇḍilya, Kaśyapa, Gau-
tama, Bharad-vāja, &c.); a multitude, increase; pos-
session; a forest; a field; a road; a chattar, an
umbrella or parasol; knowledge of futurity, inspira-
tion; a genus, a class or species; ({%as%}), m. a moun-
tain; ({%ā%}), f. a herd of kine; the earth; (a polysyl-
labic fem. in long {%ī%} shortens its final vowel before
{%gotra,%} e. g. {%Brāhmaṇi-gotrā,%} a Brāhman woman
only by name or birth ?). {%—Gotraka, am,%} n. family,
family name. {%—Gotra-kartṛ, tā,%} or {%gotra-kārin, ī,%}
m. the founder of a family. {%—Gotra-kīlā,%} f. the
earth; [cf. {%acala-kīlā%} and {%adri-kīlā.%}] {%—Gotra-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} born in the same family, a relation
(in law, the term is nearly equivalent to the ‘Gentile’
of Roman law, and is applied to kindred of the same
general family, who are connected by offerings of
food and water; hence it is opposed to the Bandhu
or cognate kindred, who do not partake in the offer-
ings to the common ancestors). {%—Gotra-paṭa, as,%}
m. a genealogical table, pedigree. {%—Gotra-pravara,%}
{%as,%} m. the oldest member of a family, founder of a
family. {%—Gotrapravara-darpaṇa, am,%} n. title of
a literary work. {%—Gotra-bhid, t, t, t,%} Ved. opening
the cow-pens of the sky; (Sāy.) splitting the clouds or
mountains (in the battle with the demon Vṛtra),
an epithet of Indra and of the vehicle of Bṛhaspati;
({%t%}), m. Indra (as splitting the mountains with his
thunderbolt [cf. {%adri-bhid%}], and as destroying
families or names). {%—Gotra-bhūmi, is,%} f. (with
Buddhists) ‘family-range,’ one of the periods in
the life of a Śrāvaka. {%—Gotra-riktha, e,%} n. du. the
family or family name and its inheritance; ({%am%}), n.
family estate, patrimony. {%—Gotra-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
belonging to a noble family. {%—Gotra-vṛkṣa, as,%}
m., N. of a plant; [cf. {%dhanvana.%}] {%—Gotrākhyā%}
{%(˚ra-ākh˚),%} f. family name, patronymic. {%—Gotrānta%}
{%(˚ra-an˚), as,%} m. destruction of families or of moun-
tains; (scil. {%śabda%}) a patronymic, i. e. a word ending
with a Gotra affix. {%—Gotrika, as, ā, am,%} relating to
a family; {%gotrikaṃ karma,%} the consciousness of
family descent, one of the four pure Karmans with
Jainas. {%—Go-tva, am,%} n. the being a cow, the state
of being an ox or cow. {%—1. go-da, as, ā, am,%} giving
cattle or cows; ({%au%}), m. du., N. of a village; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a river, commonly Godāvarī. {%—Go-datra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving cattle; an epithet of Indra.
{%—Go-danta, as,%} m. a cow's tooth; yellow orpi-
ment; a white fossil substance, apparently an earthy
salt; N. of a Dānava; ({%as, ā, am%}), having cow's
teeth; armed, armed with a coat of mail. {%—Go-dari,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. opening the stables of the sky; (Sāy.)
[Page0297-c+ 81]
splitting the clouds or mountains, epithet of Indra.
 — 2. {%go-dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. presenting with cattle or
kine. {%—1. go-dāna, am,%} n. presenting with cows,
the gift of a cow; N. of the eastern continent; cutting
(rt. {%do%}) of the hair ({%go%}), the ceremony of tonsure;
see 2. {%godāna,%} s. v. {%—Go-dāya, as, ā, am,%} intending
to present with cows. {%—Go-dāraṇa, am,%} n. a plough;
a spade or hoe. {%—Go-dāvarī,%} f. ‘granting water or kine,’
N. of a river in Dakṣiṇā-patha; [cf. 1. {%go-dā, golā,%}
{%saptagodāvara.%}] {%—Godāvarī-saṅgama, as,%} m., N.
of a place. {%—Go-dugdha, am,%} n. cow's milk. {%—Go-%}
{%dugdha-dā,%} f. a kind of grass, {%= caṇikā%}. {%—Go-duh,%}
{%-dhuk, k,%} m. f. a milkman or milkmaid; a cowherd;
also {%go-duha, as,%} m. {%—Go-doha, as,%} m. the milking
of cows. {%—Go-dohana, am,%} n. the time when cows
are milked, or the time necessary for milking a cow;
({%ī%}), f. a milk-pail. {%—Go-drava, am,%} n. cow's urine.
{%—Go-dhana, am,%} n. possession of cows, a herd of
cows, a multitude or number of cattle, especially if
considered as property, a station of cows; ({%as%}), m. a
broad-pointed arrow. {%—Go-dhara, as,%} m., N. of a
king of Kaśmīra. {%—Go-dharma, as,%} m. the law of
cattle, ordinances relating to cattle. {%—Go-dhas, ās,%}
m., N. of a Ṛṣi of the family of Aṅgiras. {%—Godha-%}
{%sāman, a,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Go-dhā, godhi,%}
see s. v. {%—Go-dhāyas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. supporting or
fostering cows. {%—Go-dhuma%} or {%go-dhūma, as,%} m.
(as it were ‘the smoke of the earth,’ but derived in the
Uṇādi-sūtras fr. {%gudh,%} to surround), wheat (generally
plur.); the orange; a kind of medicinal plant; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%go-lomikā.%}] {%—Godhūmaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of serpent. {%—Godhūma-cūrṇa, am,%}
n. wheat-flour. {%—Godhūma-sambhava, am,%} n. sour
gruel made from wheat-flour, a sour paste. {%—Go-%}
{%dhūli, is,%} m. ‘dust of the earth,’ a period of the
day in the hot season when the sun is half risen; in
the cold and dewy seasons, when the sun is full but
mild; and in the three other seasons, sunset (origin-
ally a time at which mist seems to rise from the
earth). {%—Go-dhenu, us,%} f. a milch-cow; [cf. {%gaudhe-%}
{%nuka.%}] {%—Go-dhra, as,%} m. a mountain (bearing the
earth). {%—Go-nanda, as,%} m., N. of a people in Dak-
ṣiṇā-patha; N. of an attendant of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. an
epithet of the wife of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. the female of the
Ardea Sibirica or Indian crane; [cf. the following.]
{%—Go-narda, as, ā, am,%} bellowing like a bull, an
epithet of Śiva; ({%as%}), m. the bird Ardea Sibirica or
Indian crane; N. of a king of Kaśmīra; N. of a
people in Dakṣiṇā-patha; N. of a mountain; a
various reading has {%yomanta; (am),%} n. the fragrant
grass Cyperus Rotundus. {%—Gonardīya, as, ā, am,%}
relating to the Gonardas; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Patañjali, the founder of the Yoga philosophy; N. of
a grammarian mentioned by Patañjali. {%—Go-nasa,%}
{%as,%} m. a large kind of snake, by some considered to
be the same as the Boa or Bor; a kind of gem;
({%ā%}), f. the mouth of a cow; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant;
[cf. {%go-nāsa.%}] {%—Go-nātha, as,%} m. a bull; a herds-
man. {%—Go-nāya, as,%} m. a cowherd. {%—Go-nāsa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a nose or snout like that of an ox;
({%as%}), m. a kind of snake; ({%ā%}), f. the projecting
snout of a cow or ox; ({%am%}), n. a kind of gem,
{%vaikrānta-maṇi;%} [cf. {%go-nasa.%}] {%—Go-niṣyanda,%}
{%as,%} n. cow's urine. {%—Go-nyoghas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
streaming or flowing among milk; (Sāy.) having
quantities of fluid streaming down. {%—Go-pa, go-pī,%}
see s. v. {%—Go-pati, is,%} m. the lord of a herd of cows,
a bull; the leader of a troop, a leader, a chief; the
chief of herdsmen, i. e. Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu; the lord
of the heavenly herds or stars or rays; the sun;
Indra; the lord of the earth, a king; lord of the
waters, an epithet of Varuṇa; a medicinal plant,
{%= ṛṣabha;%} an epithet of Śiva; N. of a Deva-
gandharva; of a Dānava slain by Kṛṣṇa; of a son
of Śivi. {%—Gopati-cāpa, as,%} m. the rainbow. {%—Go-%}
{%pa-tva, am,%} n. the office or order of a herdsman.
{%—Go-patha, as,%} m. or {%gopatha-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n.
title of a Brāhmaṇa of the Atharva-veda. {%—Go-paśu,%}
{%us,%} m. a sacrificial cow. {%—Go-pāla, as,%} m. a cowherd;
a protector of the earth, a king; cowherd and king;
the cowherd <lang n="greek">κατ᾽ ἐξοχήν,</lang> i. e. Kṛṣṇa; an epithet
[Page0298-a+ 81]
of Śiva; N. of an attendant of Śiva; N. of a Nāga;
N. of a minister of king Bimbi-sāra, also of a king,
and of a general of king Kīrti-varman; N. of a
scholiast; N. of several other men; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
one of the Mātṛs attending Skanda; N. of a Cāṇ-
ḍālī; two plants, {%= gopāla-karkaṭī%} and {%go-rakṣī.%}
{%—Go-pālaka, as,%} m. a cowherd; an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa; an epithet of Śiva; N. of a son of king
Caṇḍa-mahā-sena; ({%ikā%}), f. the wife of a cowherd;
a kind of worm or fly found on dung-heaps. {%—Go-%}
{%pāla-kakṣa, as,%} m., N. of a country and (in plur.)
the inhabitants of this country. {%—Gopāla-karkaṭī,%}
f. a kind of cucumber (in Hindī {%goyālakāṅkarī,%}
{%gurubhā%}); [cf. {%gopa-karkaṭikā,%} &c.] {%—Gopāla-%}
{%keśava, as,%} m., N. of a statue of Kṛṣṇa, called
after Gopāla-varman. {%—Gopāla-tāpanīyopaniṣad%}
{%(˚ya-up˚), t,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad in honour of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Gopāla-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a physician;
N. of a copyist. {%—Gopāla-deva, as,%} m., N. of a
poet. {%—Gopāla-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town called
after Gopāla-varman. {%—Gopāla-prasāda, as,%} m., N.
of a teacher of Rāma-candra. {%—Gopāla-maṭha, as,%}
m., N. of a college called after Gopāla-varman.
{%—Gopāla-yogin, ī,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Gopāla-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m., N. of a king of Kaśmīra. {%—Gopāla-%}
{%sarasvatī,%} m., N. of a pupil of Śiva-rāma and
teacher of Govindānanda. {%—Gopāli, is,%} m. an epithet
of Śiva; N. of a man; [cf. {%go-pāla.%}] {%—Gopāṣ-%}
{%ṭamī (˚pa-aṣ˚),%} f. the eighth lunation of the light
half of Kārttika, on which Kṛṣṇa who had formerly
been a keeper of calves became a cowherd; cows
are especially to be worshipped on this day. {%—Go-%}
{%pitta, am,%} n. ox-bile or the bile of cows from which
the yellow orpiment called Go-rocanā, Rocanā or
Rocanī, is supposed to be prepared; orpiment.
{%—Go-pīta, as,%} m., N. of one of the four water
wagtails, which are regarded as birds of augury.
{%—Go-pītha, as,%} m. (rt. {%pā,%} to protect), protecting,
preserving, protection; ({%am%}), n. a holy place, a
place of pilgrimage; ({%as%}), m., Ved. (rt. {%pā,%} to drink),
a draught of milk; (Sāy.) drinking of any fluid or
juice; [cf. {%soma-pītha.%}] {%—Go-pīthya, am,%} n., Ved.
protection; (Sāy.) protection of the earth. {%—Gopī-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m., N. of a man; N. of a son of Mā-
dhava. {%—Go-puccha, as, am,%} m. n. a cow's tail; ({%as%}),
m. a sort of monkey; a sort of necklace, one of
two, or of four, or of thirty-four strings; a kind of
drum. {%—Go-puṭika, am,%} n. a temple or edifice con-
secrated to Śiva's bull. {%—Go-putra, as,%} m. a young
bull; a son of the sun, epithet of Karṇa. {%—Go-pura,%}
{%am,%} n. a town-gate, a gate in general; the orna-
mented gateway of a temple; a kind of grass,
Cyperus Rotundus, {%= mustaka%} [cf. {%go-narda%}]; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a physician. {%—Gopuraka, as,%} m. the resin
of the Boswellia Thurifera; [cf. {%kunduruka.%}] {%—Go-%}
{%purīṣa, am,%} n. cow-dung. {%—Go-poṣa, as,%} m.,
Ved. increase of herds. {%—Go-prakāṇḍa, am,%} n. a
superior cow, excellent cattle. {%—Go-pracāra, as,%} m.
pasturage for cows or oxen. {%—Go-pratāra, as,%} m.
ox-ford, a ford for cattle; N. of a place of pilgrimage
on the Sarayū; an epithet of Śiva, as leading cattle
safely across the water (?). {%—Go-pradāna, am,%} n.
gift of cattle. {%—Go-praveśa-samaya, as,%} m. the time
when the cows come home, the evening twilight.
{%—Go-phaṇā,%} f. a bandage hollowed out so as to fit
the chin or nose &c.; a sling; also {%gophaṇikā.%}
{%—Go-baka, as,%} m. Ardea Govina. {%—Go-badha,%}
{%as,%} m. the killing of a cow. {%—Go-bandhu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. having a cow as a relative; (Sāy.) having a cow
as mother, an epithet of the Maruts; [cf. {%go-mātṛ%}
and {%pṛśni-mātṛ.%}] {%—Go-bāla, as,%} m. the hair of a
cow. {%—Gobālin, ī, inī, i,%} covered with cow's hair;
{%gobālī gajas,%} a kind of buffalo (?). {%—Go-brāhmaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a cow and a Brāhman. {%—Go-brāhmaṇa-%}
{%manuṣya, ās,%} m. cows, Brāhmans, and men.
{%—Go-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Go-bhaṇḍīra,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of aquatic bird. {%—Go-bhānu, us,%} m.,
N. of a son of Vahni. {%—Go-bhuj, k,%} m. earth-pos-
sessor, a king. {%—Go-bhṛt, t,%} m. earth-supporter, a
mountain. {%—Go-makṣikā,%} f. a gad-fly {%(daṃśa).%}
{%—Go-magha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. granting cattle or
[Page0298-b+ 81]
cows. {%—Go-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the orb of the earth,
the globe. {%—Go-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing or con-
taining cattle, cows, herds, &c.; rich in cattle; con-
sisting of cattle; containing milk, mixed with milk;
({%tī%}), f., Ved. a place abounding in herds; N. of a
river falling into the Indus; also of one falling into the
Ganges; N. of a Vedic hymn, a prayer or formula,
to be repeated during expiation for killing a cow;
({%t%}), n. possession of cattle, property consisting in
herds. {%—Go-matallikā,%} f. a tractable and good cow.
{%—Go-mati, is,%} f., N. of a river, {%= go-matī%}. {%—Gomati-%}
{%putra, as,%} m., N. of a prince; (also read {%gotamī-%}
{%putra.%}) {%—Go-matsya, as,%} m. a kind of fish living in
rivers. {%—Go-madhya-madhya (?), as, ā, am,%} slender
in the waist. {%—Gomanta, as,%} m., N. of a mountain;
N. of a people (also {%goghnata%}); an owner of cattle;
a herd of cattle; a multitude of cattle-owners. {%—Go-%}
{%manda, as,%} m. {%= gomanta%} (?), N. of a mountain.
 — 1. {%go-maya, as, ī, am,%} bovine, consisting of cattle;
defiled with cow-dung; ({%as, am%}), m. n. cow-dung.
 — 2. {%gomaya%} (for {%gomayaya%}), nom. P. {%gomayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cover or smear with (cow-dung). {%—Go-%}
{%maya-cchattra, am,%} n. a mushroom, a fungus.
{%—Gomaya-cchattrikā,%} f. a kind of fungus or mush-
room. {%—Gomaya-priya, am,%} n. the plant Andro-
pogon Schœnanthus. {%—Gomayāya,%} nom. A. {%go-%}
{%mayāyate, -yitum,%} to be similar to cow-dung, to
taste like cow-dung. {%—Gomayotthā (˚ya-ut˚),%} f. a
kind of beetle found in cow-dung; a gad-fly. {%—Go-%}
{%mayodbhava (˚ya-ud˚), as,%} m. the plant Catharto-
carpus Fistula; [cf. {%āragbadha.%}] {%—Go-mahiṣa-dā,%}
f. granting cattle and buffaloes; N. of one of the
Mātṛs attending on Skanda or Kārttikeya. {%—Go-%}
{%māṃsa, am,%} n. the flesh of oxen, beef. {%—Go-mātṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m., Ved. having a cow for mother, coming from
a cow; an epithet of the Maruts; [cf. {%pṛśni-mātṛ.%}]
{%—Go-māyu, us, us, u,%} making sounds like cattle;
({%us%}), m. a kind of frog; a jackal; N. of a jackal;
N. of a Gandharva or celestial musician; the bile or
bilious humor of a cow. {%—Gomāyu-bhakṣa, ās,%}
m. pl., N. of a people (eating jackals). {%—Go-mi-%}
{%thuna, am,%} n. a bull and a cow, a yoke or pair of
cattle. {%—Go-min, ī, inī, i,%} rich in herds &c.; ({%ī%}),
m. the owner of cattle or cows; a jackal; a wor-
shipper, an attendant on a Buddha. {%—Go-mīna, as,%}
m. a sort of fish, the bull-fish; [cf. {%go-matsya.%}]
{%—Go-mukha, as,%} m. a crocodile, a shark; N. of a
son of Mātali; also of a son of the treasurer of king
Vatsa; also of one of Śiva's attendants; also of an
attendant of the first Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī;
({%am%}), n. a kind of musical instrument, (a sort of
horn or trumpet ?); a house built unevenly or crook-
edly, viz. with angles or projections; spreading un-
guents, plastering, smearing; ({%as%}), m. a hole in a
wall of a peculiar shape made by thieves &c., a
breach; ({%am, ī%}), n. f. a cloth-bag containing a rosary,
the beads of which are counted by the hand, thrust
inside; ({%ī%}), f. the chasm in the Himālaya mountains,
through which the Ganges flows, erroneously con-
ceived to be shaped like a cow's mouth; N. of a
river in Rāḍha. {%—Gomukha-vyāghra, as,%} m. ‘cow-
faced tiger,’ a wolf in sheep's clothing. {%—Go-mūḍha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} stupid as an ox. {%—Go-mūtra, am,%} n.
cow's urine. {%—Gomūtraka, as, ikā, am,%} similar to
the course of cow's urine; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of grass,
described as growing in corn-fields, of a reddish
colour and eaten by cattle, commonly called Tāmbaḍu
[cf. {%kṛṣṭa-bhūmijā, kṣetra-jā, rakta-tṛṇā%}]; an
artificial verse, the second half of which repeats nearly
all the syllables of the first; a form of calculation.
{%—Go-mṛga, as,%} m., Ved. the Bos Gavæus. {%—Go-%}
{%meda, as,%} m. a gem or precious stone brought from
the Himālaya and the Indus, described as of four
sorts, white, pale yellow, red, and dark-blue (perhaps
varieties of agate); N. of a plant, {%= kakkola%}. {%—Go-%}
{%medaka, as,%} m. a gem or precious stone [cf. the
preceding]; a kind of poison, {%= kākola;%} smearing
the body with unguents {%(= pattraka)%}. {%—Gomeda-%}
{%sannibha, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= dugdha-pāṣāṇa;%}
chalcedony or opal. {%—Go-medha, as,%} m. the offering
or sacrifice of a cow; N. of the attendant of the
[Page0298-c+ 81]
twenty-second Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī. {%—Go-%}
{%'mbhas, as,%} n. (for {%go-ambhas%}), cow's urine; [cf.
{%go-mūtra.%}] {%—Go-yajña, as,%} m. the sacrifice of a
cow. {%—Go-yāna, am,%} n. a carriage drawn by oxen
or cows, a cart in general. {%—Go-yukta, as, ā, am,%}
drawn by oxen or cows. {%—Go-yuga, am,%} n. a yoke
or pair of oxen, a pair of animals in general. {%—Go-%}
{%yuta, as, ā, am,%} frequented by cattle; ({%am%}), n. a
cattle-station, a hurdle for cattle. {%—Go-rakṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} or
{%k, k, k,%} guarding or preserving cattle. {%—Go-rakṣa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} keeping or tending cattle; ({%as%}), m. a
cowherd, a cowkeeper, the tender of kine: a Gorkha
or inhabitant of Nepāl; an epithet of Śiva; N. of
the author of a work entitled Gorakṣa-śataka; the
orange; N. of a medicinal plant, {%= ṛṣabha; (am),%}
n. keeping or tending cattle; breeding cattle; the
life of a herdsman; ({%ī%}), f., N. of several plants, {%=%}
{%gandha-bahulā, gopālī,%} &c.; also {%= gorakṣa-%}
{%dugdhā;%} a kind of cucumber, {%= kumbha-tumbī.%}
{%—Go-rakṣaka, as, ikā, am,%} guarding cattle;
({%as%}), m. a cowkeeper, one who tends cattle. {%—Go-%}
{%rakṣa-karkaṭī,%} f. a kind of cucumber, {%= cirbhiṭā.%}
{%—Gorakṣa-jambū, ūs,%} f. wheat; the plant Uraria
Lagopodioides; the fruit of the jujube. {%—Go-rakṣa-%}
{%ṇa, am,%} n. tending or taking charge of cattle. {%—Go-%}
{%rakṣa-taṇḍulā,%} f. the plant Uraria Lagopodioides.
{%—Gorakṣa-tumbī,%} f. {%= kumbha-tumbī,%} a kind of
cucumber. {%—Gorakṣa-dugdhā,%} f. a small shrub, {%=%}
{%amṛtā, go-rakṣī, jīvyā,%} &c. {%—Gorakṣya, am,%}
n. tending cattle, the life of a herdsman. {%—Go-%}
{%raṅku, us,%} m. (?) a water-fowl; a chanter; a pri-
soner, any person or animal confined (?); a naked man,
a mendicant &c. wandering about without clothes.
{%—Go-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a mountain; of Śiva.
{%—Gorathaka, as,%} m. a carriage drawn by cattle.
{%—Go-rabhasa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. strengthened with
milk; (Sāy.) endowed with strength, strengthening,
an epithet of the Soma. {%—Go-rambha, as,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Go-rava, am,%} n. saffron. {%—Go-rasa, as,%}
m. buttermilk; curdled or coagulated milk; cow-
milk. {%—Gorasa-ja, am,%} n. buttermilk; curds.
{%—Go-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of cattle,’ a bull. {%—Go-%}
{%rāṭikā%} or {%gorāṭī%} or {%gorikā,%} f. {%= go-kirāṭikā,%} the
bird Turdus Salica. {%—Go-ruta, am,%} n. a measure of
distance equal to two Kroś or Koś, (as far as the
lowing of a cow may be heard.) {%—Go-rudha%} in
{%a-go-rudha,%} q. v. {%—Go-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. cow-
shaped. {%—Go-roca, am,%} n. yellow orpiment. {%—Go-%}
{%rocanā,%} f. a bright yellow pigment prepared from
the urine or bile of a cow, or vomited in the shape
of scibulæ (?) by that animal; or (according to some)
found in the head of a cow; it is employed in
painting and dyeing, and is of especial use in
marking the foreheads of the Hindūs with the
Tilaka or sectarial mark; it is also used in medicine
as a sedative, tonic, and anthelmintic remedy &c.;
[cf. {%rocanā.%}] {%—Go-lattikā,%} f., Ved. a kind of animal.
{%—Go-lavaṇa, am,%} n. the measure or quantity of
salt given to a cow. {%—Go-lāṅgula, as,%} m. a kind
of monkey described as of a black colour and having
a tail like a cow; also {%go-lāṅgūla, ī,%} m. f.; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people (?). {%—Golāṅgula-parivar-%}
{%tana, as,%} m., N. of a mountain near Rāja-gṛha.
{%—Go-liha, as,%} m., N. of a plant; [cf. {%ghaṇṭā-pā-%}
{%ṭali%} and {%go-līḍha.%}] {%—Golīgula,%} a wrong reading for
{%golāṅgula-parivartana%}. {%—Go-līḍha, as,%} m., N. of
a plant, {%= go-liha%}. {%—Go-loka, as, am,%} m. n. ‘cow-
world,’ a part of heaven, or (in the later mythology)
the heaven of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Goloka-varṇana, am,%} n.,
N. of a part of the Sadā-śiva-saṃhitā; N. of a part
of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Go-lomikā,%} f. a kind of
small shrub, {%= go-jā, go-dhūmī,%} &c.; commonly {%go-%}
{%dhūmā%} and {%pātharī%}. {%—Go-lomī,%} f., N. of several
plants; a kind of bent grass, with white blossoms;
also {%śveta-dūrvā;%} root of sweet flag; Orris root [cf.
{%vacā, bhūta-keśa, go-lomikā%}]; an excellent woman;
a harlot (?). {%—Go-vatsa, as,%} m. a calf. {%—Govatsādin%}
{%(˚sa-ād˚), ī,%} m. ‘calf-eater,’ a wolf. {%—Go-vadha,%}
{%as,%} m. the killing of a cow; [cf. {%go-badha.%}] {%—Go-%}
{%vandanī,%} f., N. of a plant bearing a fragrant seed
[cf. {%priyaṅgu%}]; another plant, {%= pīta-puṣpa- %}
[Page0299-a+ 81]
{%daṇḍotpala%} or {%gandha-vallī%}. {%—Go-vapuṣa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. beautiful as a star or as light; (Sāy.)
shaped like a cow. {%—Go-vardhana, as,%} m. a cele-
brated hill in Vṛndā-vana or the country about Ma-
thurā; (this hill was lifted up and supported by
Kṛṣṇa upon one finger for seven days, to shelter
the cowherds from a storm of rain sent by Indra to
test Kṛṣṇa's divinity); N. of a holy fig-tree in the
country of the Bāhīkas; N. of a renowned author.
{%—Govardhana-dhara, as,%} m. ‘hill-supporter,’ a N.
of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Govardhanācārya (˚na-āc˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a poet. {%—Govardhanānanda (˚na-ān˚), as,%}
m., N. of an author. {%—Go-vallava, as,%} m. a cow-
herd. {%—Go-vaśā,%} f. a barren cow. {%—Go-vāṭa, as,%} m.
a hurdle for cattle. {%—Go-vāsa, as,%} m. the abode of
cows, a cow-house, hurdle for cattle; ({%as, ā, am%}),
covered with an ox-hide. {%—Go-vāsana, as, ā, am,%}
covered with an ox-hide; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king of
the Śivis. {%—Go-vikarta, as,%} or {%go-vikarttṛ, tā,%} m.
the killer of a cow. {%—Go-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. acquiring
or procuring cows. {%—Go-vinata, as,%} m. (scil. {%aśva-%}
{%medha%}), a form of the Aśva-medha. {%—Go-vinda,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} obtaining cattle, finding cattle or cows;
({%as%}), m. a cow-keeper, the finder of cows, the
searcher for cows, a chief-herdsman, an epithet of
Bṛhaspati [cf. {%gotra-bhid%}], regent of Jupiter; one
of the most usual appellations of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu
in that form; N. of the fourth month; N. of a
prince; also of several teachers and authors; N. of a
mountain. {%—Govinda-kūṭa, as,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain. {%—Govinda-gira, as,%} m., N. of a son of Śiva-
rāma-gira. {%—Govinda-canda, as,%} m., N. of a king
of Puṣpāvatī. {%—Govinda-candra, as,%} m., N. of a
prince. {%—Govinda-datta, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
{%—Govinda-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Govinda-%}
{%dvādaśī,%} f. the twelfth day in the light half of the
month Phālguna. {%—Govinda-nātha, as,%} m., N. of
the preceptor of Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Govinda-bhaṭṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Govinda-rāja, as,%} m.,
N. of an author. {%—Govinda-rāma, as,%} m., N. of a
scholiast. {%—Govinda-rāya, as,%} m., N. of a lawyer;
also of a poet. {%—Govinda-sūri, is,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Govinda-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Go-%}
{%vindānanda (˚da-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a scholiast.
{%—Govindārṇava (˚da-ar˚), as,%} m. title of a work.
{%—Govindāṣṭaka (˚da-aṣ˚), am,%} n. ‘the eight
verses of Govinda,’ title of a literary work. {%—Go-%}
{%vindu, us, us, u,%} Ved. searching for cows or milk.
{%—Go-viṣ, ṭ,%} f. cow-dung. {%—Go-viṣāṇa, as, am,%}
m. or n. (?), cow-horn. {%—Go-viṣāṇaka, as,%} m. a
kind of musical instrument, a sort of trumpet. {%—Go-%}
{%viṣṭhā,%} f. cow-dung. {%—Go-visarga, as,%} m. {%= go-%}
{%sarga,%} day-break. {%—Go-vīthī,%} f. ‘cow-path,’ N. of
that portion of the moon's path which contains the
asterisms Bhadra-padā, Revatī, and Aśvinī, or (ac-
cording to others) Hasta, Citrā, and Svātī. {%—Go-%}
{%vīrya, am,%} n. the value or price received for milk &c.
{%—Go-vṛnda, am,%} n. property in cattle, possession
of flocks and herds, a herd, a drove of cattle. {%—Go-%}
{%vṛndāraka, as,%} m. an excellent cow. {%—Go-vṛṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. a bull; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Govṛṣa-%}
{%dhvaja, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Go-vṛṣa-%}
{%bha, as,%} m. a bull. {%—Govṛṣabhāṅka (˚bha-aṅ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Go-vaidya, as,%} m.
a cow-doctor, a quack doctor. {%—Go-vyaccha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. one who approaches a cow (in a bad sense).
{%—Go-vyāghra, am,%} n. a cow and a tiger. {%—Go-%}
{%vyādhila, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Go-vraja, as,%} m.
a station for cattle, a cow-pen; N. of an attendant
of Skanda; also of a Dānava. {%—Go-vrata, as, ā, am,%}
or {%govratin, ī, inī, i,%} one who imitates a cow in
frugality. {%—Go-śakṛt, t,%} n. cow-dung. {%—Go-śata,%}
{%am,%} n. a present of 100 cows sent to a Brāhman.
{%—Go-śapha, as,%} m. a cow's hoof. {%—Go-śāla, am,%}
{%ā,%} n. f. a cow-stall, a cow-house; ({%as, ā, am%}), born
in a cow-house; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Gauḍa prince.
{%—Gośāli, is,%} m. (connected with the preceding?),
N. of a man. {%—Go-śīrṣa, as, ā, am,%} shaped like a
cow's head; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a kind of sandal-wood
described as having the colour of brass and very
fragrant; the head of a cow. {%—Go-śīrṣaka, as,%} m.,
[Page0299-b+ 81]
N. of a plant, {%= droṇa-puṣpī%}. {%—Go-śṛṅga, am,%}
n. a cow's horn; N. of a Sāman (in this sense more
correctly {%gauśṛṅga%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant, =
{%varvūra;%} N. of a mountain. {%—Gośṛṅga-vratin,%}
{%inas,%} m. pl., N. of a sect. {%—Go-śrīta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. mixed with milk (as Soma). {%—Go-śruti, is,%}
m., N. of a man with the patronymic Vaiyāghra-
padya. {%—Go'śva (go-aś˚), am,%} n. oxen and horses;
[cf. {%gavāśva%} and {%goaśva.%}] {%—Go-ṣakhi%} or {%go-%}
{%sakhi, is, is, i,%} Ved. furnished with or possessing
cattle; mixed with milk (as Soma). {%—Go-ṣaḍgava,%}
{%am,%} n. three pairs of cattle. {%—Go-ṣaṇi%} and {%go-%}
{%sani, is, is, i,%} Ved. acquiring or presenting with
cattle. {%—Go-ṣan, ā, ā, a,%} or {%go-ṣā, ās, ās, am,%}
Ved. acquiring or bestowing cattle. {%—Go-ṣāti,%}
{%is,%} f., Ved. acquiring cattle, procuring cattle; fight-
ing for the sake of cattle or booty. {%—Go-ṣādī,%}
f. (fr. {%go-sāda%}), Ved. a kind of bird (‘settling on
cows’). {%—Goṣu-cara, as, ī, am,%} walking among
cows. {%—Goṣu-yudh, t, t, t,%} Ved. fighting for the
sake of cattle or booty. {%—Goṣūktin, ī,%} m. (fr. {%go-%}
{%sūkta%}), N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Go-ṣedhā (go-se˚),%} f., Ved.
a kind of evil being. {%—Go-ṣṭoma (go-st˚), as,%} m. a
sort of liturgy, a ceremony lasting for one day and
forming part of the Abhiplava which lasts six days.
{%—Go-ṣṭha (go-stha), as, am,%} m. n. (in the later
language the n. only occurs), an abode for cattle, a
cow-house, cow-pen, a fold for cattle, any place where
animals are kept, a stable; a station of cowherds;
an epithet of Śiva (the refuge of men?); a purifica-
tory Śrāddha for a family (?) ; N. of a Sāman; ({%as%}),
m., N. of an author; ({%ī%}), f. an assembly, a meeting;
society; association; family connections, but espe-
cially the dependant or junior branches; conversation,
discourse, dialogue, dispute; a kind of dramatic
composition or entertainment in one act. {%—Goṣṭha-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} born in a cow-pen; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a Brāhman. {%—Goṣṭha-pati, is,%} m. a chief-herds-
man. {%—Goṣṭha-vedikā,%} f. a mound or altar in a
cow-pen. {%—Goṣṭha-śva, as,%} m. ({%śva%} fr. {%śvan%}), ‘a
dog in a cow-pen’ which barks at every one; (the
word is applied especially to a person who stays at
home and slanders his neighbours); malignant, cen-
sorious, envious; (the word is also derived by native
authorities from {%goṣṭha%} and {%aśva.%}) {%—Goṣṭhāgāra%}
{%(˚ṭha-āg˚), as, am,%} m. n. a house in a cow-pen.
{%—Goṣṭhādhyakṣa (˚ṭha-adh˚), as,%} m. a chief-
herdsman. {%—Goṣṭhāna (go-sthā˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
serving as an abode for cows; [cf. {%go-sthāna.%}]
{%—Goṣṭhāṣṭamī (˚ṭha-aṣ˚),%} f. a particular festive
day; [cf. {%gopāṣṭamī.%}] {%—Goṣṭhi, is,%} m. ({%= goṣ-%}
{%ṭhī?%}), society, partnership, fellowship. {%—Goṣṭhika,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating to an assemblage or society.
{%—Goṣṭhīka,%} at the end of a compound {%= goṣṭhī,%}
partnership, fellowship. {%—Goṣṭhī-pati, is,%} m. the
chief person in an assembly, a president; the master
of a family. {%—Goṣṭhe-kṣveḍin, ī, inī, i,%} bellowing
in a cow-pen, a boasting coward. {%—Goṣṭhe-paṭu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} clever in a cow-pen, a vain boaster.
{%—Goṣṭhe-paṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} learned in a cow-
pen, a vain boaster. {%—Goṣṭhe-pragalbha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} enterprising in a cow-pen, a boasting coward.
{%—Goṣṭhe-vijitin, ī, inī, i,%} victorious in a cow-pen,
a boasting coward. {%—Goṣṭhe-śaya, as, ā, am,%}
sleeping in a cow-pen or cow-stable. {%—Goṣṭhe-śūra,%}
{%as,%} m. a hero in a cow-pen, a boasting coward.
{%—Goṣṭhya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. relating to a cow-
house, being in a cow-pen. {%—Goṣ-pada, am,%} n.
(fr. {%gos,%} gen. fr. {%go%} and {%pada%}), a cow's foot or hoof,
the mark or impression of a cow's foot in the soil;
a quantity of water sufficient to fill such an impres-
sion, a small puddle; a measure, as much as a cow's
footstep will hold; a spot frequented by kine. {%—Go-%}
{%sakhi,%} cf. {%go-ṣakhi%}. {%—Go-saṅkhya, as,%} m. one
who counts the cows, a herdsman, a cowherd. {%—Go-%}
{%saṅkhyātṛ, tā,%} m. ‘counter of the cows,’ a herds-
man, a cowherd. {%—Go-saṅga, as,%} m. day-break,
dawn; (a wrong reading for {%go-sarga.%}) {%—Go-sattra,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. a particular sacrifice. {%—Go-sadṛkṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. the Gayal, Bos Gavæus. {%—Go-sani = go-ṣaṇi,%}
q. v. {%—Go-sandāya, as, ā, am,%} presenting with a
[Page0299-c+ 74]
cow; giving a cow. {%—Go-sambhava, as, ā, am,%}
produced from or by a cow; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant,
{%= śveta-dūrvā;%} [cf. {%golosī.%}] {%—Go-sarga, as,%} m.
the time at which cows are usually let loose, day-
break, dawn. {%—Go-sarpa, as,%} m. Lacerta Godica;
[cf. {%godhikā.%}] {%—Go-sava, as,%} m. a kind of sacrificial
ceremony lasting one day; the sacrifice of a cow,
one of the great sacrifices of the Hindūs in former
times, and not permitted in the present degenerate
Kali age; see {%go-medha%}. {%—Go-sahasra, am,%} n. a
thousand kine; ({%ī%}), f., N. of two holidays; the
fifteenth day in the dark half of month Kārttika,
and the fifteenth day in the dark half of month
Jyaiṣṭha. {%—Go-sūtrikā,%} f. a rope fastened at both
ends having separate halters for each ox or cow.
{%—Go-sevā,%} f. attendance on a cow. {%—Go-stana, as,%}
m. the udder of a cow; a cluster of blossoms, a nose-
gay &c.; a garland consisting of four or of thirty-four
strings, a pearl necklace of four strings; ({%ā%}), f. a bunch
of grape; ({%ī%}), f. a bunch of grape; N. of one of
the Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Go-stoma = go-%}
{%ṣṭoma%}. {%—Go-sthāna%} or {%go-sthānaka, am,%} n. a
station for cattle, a cow-stall, cow-house, cow-pen, a
hurdle for cattle; [cf. {%go-ṣṭhāna.%}] {%—Go-sphuraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a twitching of any particular part of the hide
of a cow, as on being touched &c. {%—Go-svāmin, ī,%}
m. the master or possessor of cows or of herds; a
religious mendicant (commonly <nsi>gosain</nsi>); a honorary
title affixed to proper names (e. g. {%vopadeva-go-%}
{%svāmin%}); one who is master of his organs of sense
({%go,%} an organ?). {%—Gosvāmi-sthāna, am,%} n., N. of
the peak of a mountain in the middle of the Himā-
laya. {%—Go-hatyā,%} f. the killing of a cow. {%—Go-han,%}
{%ā, ghnī, a,%} Ved. killing cattle, a cow-killer. {%—Go-%}
{%hanna, am,%} n. cow-dung; (incorrectly {%gohalla.%})
{%—Go-hara, as,%} m. or {%go-haraṇa, am,%} n. stealing
cows; N. of a section of the fourth book of the
Mahā-bhārata. {%—Go-harītakī,%} f. the tree Ægle
Marmelos; [cf. {%bilva.%}] {%—Go-hiṃsā,%} f. hurting or
injuring a cow. {%—Go-hita, as, ā, am,%} fit or proper
for cattle; cherishing or protecting kine; ({%as%}), m.
the tree Ægle Marmelos; N. of a creeping plant; [cf.
{%ghoṣa.%}] {%—Go-hiraṇya, am,%} n. cows and gold.
<LEND>

<L>17649<pc>0299-c<k1>gokA<k2>gokA
{%Gokā,%}¦ f. diminutive of {%go,%} a cow. {%—Gokā-mukha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>17650<pc>0299-c<k1>goKA<k2>goKA
{#goKA#}¦ {%gokhā,%} f. a particular part of the body.
<LEND>

<L>17651<pc>0299-c<k1>goGnata<k2>goGnata
{#goGnata#}¦ {%goghnata, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>17652<pc>0299-c<k1>gocCAla<k2>gocCAla
{#gocCAla#}¦ {%gocchāla, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
also called Alambuṣa; the palm of the hand with
the fingers extended (?).
<LEND>

<L>17653<pc>0299-c<k1>gojI<k2>gojI
{#gojI#}¦ {%gojī,%} f., N. of a plant with sharp
leaves; (also {%goji%} if required by the metre.)
<LEND>

<L>17654<pc>0299-c<k1>goqa<k2>goqa
{#goqa#}¦ {%goḍa, as,%} m. {%= goṇḍa,%} a fleshy navel;
a lump of flesh on the navel; (also read {%goḍu.%})
<LEND>

<L>17655<pc>0299-c<k1>goqani<k2>goqani
{#goqani#}¦ {%goḍani,%} N. of a country; (a wrong
reading for 1. {%go-dāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>17656<pc>0299-c<k1>goqumba<k2>goqumba
{#goqumba#}¦ {%goḍumba, as,%} m. the water-melon;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of cucumber, Cucumis Maderaspatanus;
a coloquintida.
<LEND>

<L>17657<pc>0299-c<k1>goqumbikA<k2>goqumbikA
{%Goḍumbikā,%}¦ f. Cucumis Maderaspatanus.
<LEND>

<L>17658<pc>0299-c<k1>goRa<k2>goRa
{#goRa#}¦ {%goṇa, as,%} m. an ox (fr. the Pāli).
<LEND>

<L>17659<pc>0299-c<k1>goRika<k2>goRika
{#goRika#}¦ {%goṇika,%} a kind of woollen clot
(fr. the Pāli {%goṇaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>17660<pc>0299-c<k1>goRI<k2>goRI
{#goRI#}¦ {%goṇī,%} f. (at the end of an adj. comp.
{%goṇi%}), a sack; the measure of a Droṇa; torn or
ragged clothes; [cf. {%gauṇika.%}] {%—Goṇī-tarī,%} f. a
small sack.
<LEND>

<L>17661<pc>0299-c<k1>goRqa<k2>goRqa
{#goRqa#}¦ {%goṇḍa, as,%} m. a fleshy navel; a per-
son with a fleshy or prominent navel; a man of a
low tribe, a mountaineer, especially inhabiting the
eastern portion of the Vindhya range between the
Narbadā and Kistna, giving name to the province
of Gondvana. {%—Goṇḍa-vana, am,%} n. the Goṇḍa
forest, N. of a country; (also {%goṇḍavāra.%})
<LEND>
[Page0300-a+ 75]

<L>17662<pc>0300-a<k1>goRqakirI<k2>goRqakirI
{#goRqakirI#}¦ {%goṇḍakirī%} or {%goṇḍākrī,%} f., N. of
a Rāgiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>17663<pc>0300-a<k1>gotama<k2>gotama
{#gotama#}¦ {%gotama, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi be-
longing to the family of Aṅgiras, with the patronymic
Rāhūgaṇa, author of several hymns of the Vedas;
N. of a lawyer; N. of a sage, the founder of the
Nyāya philosophy; N. of the twentieth Vyāsa in
the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa; of a king of Potāla, son of
Karṇika; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of Gotama.
{%—Gotama-stoma, as,%} m., N. of an Ekāha sacrifice.
{%—Gotama-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a Jaina saint; [cf.
{%gantama-svāmin.%}] {%—Gotamānvaya (˚ma-an˚), as,%}
m. a descendant of Gotama, epithet of Śākya-muni,
the founder of the Buddhist religion. {%—Gotamī-%}
{%putva, as,%} m., N. of a prince; (also {%gomati-putra.%})
<LEND>

<L>17664<pc>0300-a<k1>gotra<k2>gotra
{#gotra#}¦ {%go-tra.%} See under {%go,%} p. 297.
<LEND>

<L>17665<pc>0300-a<k1>goda<k2>goda<h>3
{#goda#} 3¦. {%goda, am%} or {%as,%} n. m. the brain;
[cf. 1. {%go-da,%} p. 297, and {%gorda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17666<pc>0300-a<k1>godAna<k2>godAna<h>2
2. {%godāna, am,%}¦ n. the part of the head close to the
right ear: (for 1. {%go-dāna%} see under {%go.%}) {%—Godāna-%}
{%vidhi, is,%} m. or {%godāna-maṅgala, am,%} n. a ceremony
performed by anointing that part of the head of a
youth of sixteen or eighteen years, when he has attained
the age of puberty, and shortly before marriage.
<LEND>

<L>17667<pc>0300-a<k1>godAnika<k2>godAnika
{%Godānika = gaudānika,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17668<pc>0300-a<k1>godAvarI<k2>godAvarI
{#godAvarI#}¦ {%go-dāvarī.%} See under {%go,%} p. 297.
<LEND>

<L>17669<pc>0300-a<k1>goDA<k2>goDA
{#goDA#}¦ {%go-dhā,%} f. (fr. {%go%} and rt. {%dhā%}), a
sinew; a chord; a leathern fence wound round the
left arm to prevent injury from the bow-string; an
Iguana, either the Gosamp or the alligator, commonly
Gosapa. {%—Godhā-padikā%} or {%godhā-padī,%} f. the
plant Cissus Pedata. {%—Godhā-vīṇākā,%} f. a kind of
stringed instrument. {%—Godhā-skandha, as,%} m. a
kind of Mimosa; [cf. {%vit-khadira.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17670<pc>0300-a<k1>goDAya<k2>goDAya
{%Godhāya,%}¦ nom. P. {%godhāyati, -yitum,%} to be
curved as the leathern fence of archers.
<LEND>

<L>17671<pc>0300-a<k1>goDi<k2>goDi
{%Godhi, is,%}¦ m. the forehead; the Gangetic alligator;
an Iguana.
<LEND>

<L>17672<pc>0300-a<k1>goDikA<k2>goDikA
{%Godhikā,%}¦ f. a kind of lizard or alligator, Lacerta
Godica; [cf. {%āgāra-godhikā%} and {%gṛha-g˚.%}] {%—Go-%}
{%dhikātmaja (˚kā-āt˚), as,%} m. a kind of lizard; [cf.
{%gaudhāra, gaudheya, gaudhera.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17673<pc>0300-a<k1>goDinI<k2>goDinI
{%Godhinī,%}¦ f. a kind of Solanum; [cf. {%kṣavikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17674<pc>0300-a<k1>goDUma<k2>goDUma
{#goDUma#}¦ {%go-dhūma, godhūmaka.%} See under {%go.%}
<LEND>

<L>17675<pc>0300-a<k1>goDera<k2>goDera
{#goDera#}¦ {%godhera, as,%} m. a guardian, a pro-
tector, a preserver; [cf. {%guhera.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17676<pc>0300-a<k1>gonAqIka<k2>gonAqIka
{#gonAqIka#}¦ {%gonāḍīka, as,%} m. a kind of plant;
(other authorities have {%gonāḍīca.%})
<LEND>

<L>17677<pc>0300-a<k1>gopa<k2>gopa
{#gopa#}¦ {%go-pa, as,%} m. (fr. {%go%} and rt. {%pā%}), a
cowherd, a herdsman, a milkman, considered as a
man of mixed caste; the chief of a cow-pen or
station; a protector, a guardian, a preserver, a
cherisher, a helper, a friend or patron; the super-
intendent of several villages, the head of a district;
a king; the chief herdsman, i. e. Kṛṣṇa; N. of a
Gandharva [cf. {%go-pati%}]; N. of a Buddhist Arhat;
N. of a mountain; myrrh, {%= gopa-rasa; (ā),%} f.
{%= gopī,%} the plant Ichnocarpus Frutescens; N. of one
of the wives of Śākya-muni; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of a
cowherd, see below; [cf. {%go-pā, ahi-gopa, indra-g˚,%}
{%kula-g˚, tridaśa-g˚, surendra-g˚.%}] {%—Gopa-kanyā,%}
f. the daughter of a cowherd; a nymph of Vṛndā-
vana; the plant Ichnocarpus Frutescens. {%—Gopa-kar-%}
{%kaṭikā,%} f. {%= gopāla-karkatī%}. {%—Gopa-ghoṇṭā,%} f., N.
of a plant, {%= hastikoli,%} commonly {%śeyākula,%} a wild
sort of jujube, Zizyphus Nepeca or Zizyphus Œnoplia.
{%—Gopa-jīvin, ī,%} m., N. of a mixed caste. {%—Gopa-%}
{%tā,%} f. the office of a herdsman. {%—Gopa-datta, as,%}
m., N. of a Buddhist author. {%—Gopa-dala, as,%} m.
the betel-nut or areca tree. {%—Gopa-badhū%} or {%gopa-%}
{%vadhū, ūs,%} f. a cowherd's wife; the plant Ichnocarpus
Frutescens ({%śārivā%}); [cf. {%gopa-kanyā.%}] {%—Gopa-%}
{%badhūṭī,%} f. the youthful wife of a cowherd. {%—Gopa-%}
{%bhadra, am,%} n. the fibrous root of a water-lily
{%(śālūka); (ā),%} f. the plant Gmelina Arborea, [cf.
[Page0300-b+ 74]
{%kāśmarī%}]; also {%gopa-bhadrikā%}. {%—Gopa-rasa, as,%}
m. gum myrrh, myrrh; [cf. {%go-pa%} and {%rasa.%}] {%—Gopa-%}
{%rāṣṭra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Go-parīṇas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. abundantly furnished with cattle or
milk. {%—Gopa-vana, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi of the
family of Atri. {%—Gopa-vallī,%} f. the plant Ichnocarpus
Frutescens ({%anantā%}); Sanseviera Zeylanica {%(mūrvā).%}
{%—Gopa-veśa%} or {%gopa-veṣa, as, ā, am,%} dressed
as a herdsman. {%—Gopāṭavika, as,%} m. a cowherd
(fr. {%gopa,%} a herd, and {%āṭavika,%} a forester?). {%—Go-%}
{%pāditya (˚pa-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a king of Kaś-
mīra; N. of a poet. {%—Gopādhyakṣa (˚pa-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an overseer of herdsmen, the chief of herds-
men. {%—Gopānasī (˚pa-an˚),%} f. the wood of a
thatch, a curved beam which supports it; the bam-
boo frame-work on which it rests. {%—Gopendra (˚pa-%}
{%in˚), as,%} m. the chief of the herdsmen, an epithet
of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. {%—Gopeśa (˚pa-īśa), as,%} m.
a chief herdsman, the keeper or owner of kine; an
epithet of Kṛṣṇa; also of Nanda, the foster-father
of Kṛṣṇa; also of Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>17678<pc>0300-b<k1>gopaka<k2>gopaka
{%Gopaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who guards or protects;
({%as%}), m. the superintendent of a district; myrrh;
({%ikā%}), f. the wife of a cowherd, a cowherdess; a
protectress.
<LEND>

<L>17679<pc>0300-b<k1>gopA<k2>gopA
{%Go-pā, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. a herdsman, a protector, a
guardian; [cf. {%go-pa, deva-gopā, vāta-g˚, vāyu-g˚,%}
{%saha-g˚, su-g˚, soma-g˚.%}] {%—Gopā-jihva, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. one who has the tongue, i. e. the voice of a
cowherd; (Sāy.) an epithet of Indra. {%—Gopā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. granting protection.
<LEND>

<L>17680<pc>0300-b<k1>gopI<k2>gopI
{%Gopī,%}¦ f. a cowherd's wife (especially applied to
the cowherdesses of Vṛndā-vana, the companions of
Kṛṣṇa's juvenile sports, who are considered some-
times as holy or celestial personages); a milkmaid;
a protectress; nature, elementary nature; the plant
Ichnocarpus Frutescens. {%—Gopī-candana, am,%} n. a
species of white clay said to be brought from
Dvārakā and used by Viṣṇu's worshippers for
smearing their face. {%—Gopī-candanopaniṣad (˚na-%}
{%up˚), t,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>17681<pc>0300-b<k1>gopana<k2>gopana
{#gopana#}¦ {%gopana,%} &c. See under rt. {%gup.%}
<LEND>

<L>17682<pc>0300-b<k1>gopAlava<k2>gopAlava
{#gopAlava#}¦ {%gopālava, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
warrior-tribe; (for {%gopālaka?%}).
<LEND>

<L>17683<pc>0300-b<k1>gopuwA<k2>gopuwA
{#gopuwA#}¦ {%gopuṭā,%} f. large cardamoms; [cf.
{%puṭikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17684<pc>0300-b<k1>goBila<k2>goBila
{#goBila#}¦ {%gobhila, as,%} m., N. of an author
of certain Gṛhya-sūtras and of grammatical Sūtras.
<LEND>

<L>17685<pc>0300-b<k1>goBilIya<k2>goBilIya
{%Gobhilīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or proceeding
from Gobhila.
<LEND>

<L>17686<pc>0300-b<k1>gomAyu<k2>gomAyu
{#gomAyu#}¦ {%go-māyu.%} See under {%go,%} p. 298.
<LEND>

<L>17687<pc>0300-b<k1>goyIcandra<k2>goyIcandra
{#goyIcandra#}¦ {%goyīcandra, as,%} m., N. of a
scholiast of the Saṅkṣipta-sāra; (for {%gopī-candra?%}).
<LEND>

<L>17688<pc>0300-b<k1>gorawa<k2>gorawa
{#gorawa#}¦ {%goraṭa, as,%} m. a kind of Acacia; [cf.
{%duṣkhadira.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17689<pc>0300-b<k1>goraRa<k2>goraRa
{#goraRa#}¦ {%goraṇa, am,%} n. effort, exertion, =
{%guraṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>17690<pc>0300-b<k1>gorda<k2>gorda
{#gorda#}¦ {%gorda%} or {%gordha, am,%} n. the brain;
[cf. {%goda%} and {%godhi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17691<pc>0300-b<k1>gola<k2>gola
{#gola#}¦ {%gola, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. (connected
with {%guḍa,%} q. v.), a ball, a celestial or terrestrial
globe; a circle, anything round or globular, a sphere,
{%= maṇḍala%} [cf. {%guḍa%}]; ({%as%}), m. the tree Vangueria
Spinosa; myrrh; a widow's bastard [cf. {%kuṇḍa%}];
the conjunction of all the planets or the presence of
several in one sign; N. of a son of Ākrīḍa; ({%ā%}), f.
a wooden ball with which children play; a large
globular water-jar; red arsenic; ink; a woman's
female friend; a N. of the goddess Durgā; N. of a
river, {%= golā%} or {%go-dāvarī;%} [cf. {%galagolin.%}] {%—Gola-%}
{%grāma, as,%} m., N. of a village situated on the
Godāvarī; (the right reading may be {%golā-grāma.%})
{%—Gola-yantra, am,%} n. a kind of astronomical in-
strument. {%—Golāṅka (gola-aṅ˚), as,%} m., N. of a
[Page0300-c+ 66]
man. {%—Golādhyāya (˚la-adh˚), as,%} m. title of a
chapter of Bhāskara's Siddhānta-Śiromaṇi treating of
the terrestrial and celestial globes.
<LEND>

<L>17692<pc>0300-c<k1>golaka<k2>golaka
{%Golaka, as,%}¦ m. a ball or globe; a wooden ball
for playing with, anything globular, a sphere &c.; a
species of pease; gum myrrh; a globular water-jar;
a widow's bastard; the conjunction of all the planets
or the presence of several in one sign; N. of a pupil
of Veda-mitra; ({%am%}), n. {%= go-loka,%} the heaven of
Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>17693<pc>0300-c<k1>golanda<k2>golanda
{#golanda#}¦ {%golanda, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17694<pc>0300-c<k1>golAsa<k2>golAsa
{#golAsa#}¦ {%golāsa, as,%} m. a mushroom, a kind
of fungus springing from cow-dung; [cf. {%gomaya-%}
{%cchattrikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17695<pc>0300-c<k1>gova<k2>gova
{#gova#}¦ {%gova, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a
country; (also read {%kuva.%})
<LEND>

<L>17696<pc>0300-c<k1>govaya<k2>govaya
{#govaya#}¦ {%govaya,%} nom. P. (a corruption fr.
{%gopaya%}), {%govayati, -yitum,%} to keep back, to pre-
vent from approaching.
<LEND>

<L>17697<pc>0300-c<k1>govAla<k2>govAla
{#govAla#}¦ {%govāla, as,%} m., N. of a man; (per-
haps a corruption fr. {%go-pāla%}); [cf. also {%gobāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17698<pc>0300-c<k1>govicandra<k2>govicandra
{#govicandra#}¦ {%govicandra, as,%} m., N. of a
prince; (the names of the other princes of the same
dynasty ending in {%candra,%} this word may be a comp.
fr. {%govi%} and {%candra, govi%} being probably contracted
fr. {%go%} and {%avi.%})
<LEND>

<L>17699<pc>0300-c<k1>govinda<k2>govinda
{#govinda#}¦ {%go-vinda.%} See under {%go,%} p. 299.
<LEND>

<L>17700<pc>0300-c<k1>goSarya<k2>goSarya
{#goSarya#}¦ {%gośarya, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17701<pc>0300-c<k1>goSe<k2>goSe
{#goSe#}¦ {%gośe,%} ind. a word belonging to one
of the provincial dialects, according to some also a
Sanskrit word; perhaps {%= gose%} (loc. of {%gosa%}), at
day-break.
<LEND>

<L>17702<pc>0300-c<k1>gozaka<k2>gozaka
{#gozaka#}¦ {%goṣaka, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
author.
<LEND>

<L>17703<pc>0300-c<k1>gozw<k2>gozw
{#gozw#}¦ {%goṣṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%goṣṭate,%} to assem-
ble, to collect, to heap together; (pro-
bably a nom. fr. {%goṣṭha%} and more correctly spelt
{%goṣṭh.%})
<LEND>

<L>17704<pc>0300-c<k1>gozWa<k2>gozWa
{#gozWa#}¦ {%go-ṣṭha.%} See under {%go,%} p. 299.
<LEND>

<L>17705<pc>0300-c<k1>gosa<k2>gosa
{#gosa#}¦ {%gosa, as,%} m. gum myrrh, myrrh,
{%= gopa-rasa;%} the last watch of the night, early
morning or day-break, {%= go-sarga;%} [cf. {%gośe.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17706<pc>0300-c<k1>gosagfha<k2>gosagfha
{#gosagfha#}¦ {%gosa-gṛha, am,%} n. (?) the inner
part of a house, an inner or sleeping-room, a bed-
chamber.
<LEND>

<L>17707<pc>0300-c<k1>gosaSaSa<k2>gosaSaSa
{#gosaSaSa#}¦ {%gosaśaśa, as,%} m. myrrh, {%= gopa-%}
{%rasa;%} [cf. also {%gosa%} and {%śaśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17708<pc>0300-c<k1>gosila<k2>gosila
{#gosila#}¦ {%gosila, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17709<pc>0300-c<k1>gosvalu<k2>gosvalu
{#gosvalu#}¦ {%gosvalu, us,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Śākalya; [cf. {%guhalu%} and {%gosila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17710<pc>0300-c<k1>goha<k2>goha
{#goha#}¦ {%goha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%guh%}), Ved. a
hiding-place, a lair; a secret place for hiding refuse
or filth.
<LEND>

<L>17711<pc>0300-c<k1>gohana<k2>gohana
{%Gohana, as, ā, am,%}¦ covering, hiding; [cf. {%ava-%}
{%dya-gohana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17712<pc>0300-c<k1>gohira<k2>gohira
{%Gohira, am,%}¦ n. the heel; (‘hidden part?’).
<LEND>

<L>17713<pc>0300-c<k1>gohya<k2>gohya
{%Gohya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be covered or concealed; to
be kept secret; [cf. {%a-gohya%} and {%guhya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17714<pc>0300-c<k1>gONgava<k2>gONgava
{#gONgava#}¦ {%gauṅgava, am,%} n. (fr. {%guṅgu%}), N. of
several Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>17715<pc>0300-c<k1>gOYjika<k2>gOYjika
{#gOYjika#}¦ {%gauñjika, as,%} m. (fr. {%guñjā%}), a
goldsmith.
<LEND>

<L>17716<pc>0300-c<k1>gOqa<k2>gOqa
{#gOqa#}¦ {%gauḍa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%guḍa%}), prepared
from sugar or molasses; ({%ī%}), f. rum or spirit distilled
from molasses; one of the Rāgiṇīs, the wife of the
Rāga Megha; a style of poetry, the bold and spirited
[Page0301-a+ 75]
style; the Bengal dialect; ({%am%}), n. sweetmeats;
({%as%}), m., scil. {%deśa,%} or ({%am%}), n., scil. {%rāṣṭra,%}
the sugar country; N. of a country, ‘the district of
Gaur,’ the central part of Bengal, extending from
Vaṅga to the borders of Orissa, (the ruins of its
capital called by the same name are still extensive);
({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of this country; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a Rāga; N. of a lexicographer. {%—Gauḍa-deśa,%}
{%as,%} m. the country Gauḍa. {%—Gauḍa-pāda, as,%} m.,
N. of a commentator on several Upaniṣads and on
the Sāṅkhya-kārikā. {%—Gauḍa-pura, am,%} n., N. of
a town. {%—Gauḍa-bhṛtya-pura, am,%} n., N. of a
town. {%—Gauḍābhinanda%} or {%gauḍābhinandana%}
{%(˚ḍa-abh˚), as,%} m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>17717<pc>0301-a<k1>gOqaka<k2>gOqaka
{%Gauḍaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people living to the
east of Madhya-deśa. {%—Gauḍaka-mṛga, as,%} m. a
wild horse; [cf. {%gaura-khara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17718<pc>0301-a<k1>gOqika<k2>gOqika
{%Gauḍika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to sugar or molasses,
fit for the preparation of sugar, prepared with sugar
or molasses; ({%am%}), n. rum.
<LEND>

<L>17719<pc>0301-a<k1>gOqIya<k2>gOqIya
{%Gauḍīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Gauḍa or Bengal.
<LEND>

<L>17720<pc>0301-a<k1>gOqana<k2>gOqana
{#gOqana#}¦ {%gauḍana = godana,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17721<pc>0301-a<k1>gORa<k2>gORa
{#gORa#}¦ {%gauṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%guṇa%}), subordinate,
secondary, unessential; metaphorical, figurative; second-
ary as applied to the month reckoned from full moon
to full moon; having qualities, attributive, adjective;
relating to multiplication or enumeration; {%gauṇaṃ%}
{%karma,%} the less immediate object of an action in a
sentence. {%—Gauṇa-tva, am,%} n. the state of an adjec-
tive or subordinate word. {%—Gauṇa-pakṣa, as,%} m.
the minor or weaker side of an argument &c.
<LEND>

<L>17722<pc>0301-a<k1>gORika<k2>gORika<h>1
1. {%gauṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the three
qualities (of {%sattva, rajas,%} and {%tamas%}), having
qualities, relating to or connected with qualities;
subordinate.
<LEND>

<L>17723<pc>0301-a<k1>gORya<k2>gORya
{%Gauṇya, am,%}¦ n. subordination; the state of being
unessential &c.
<LEND>

<L>17724<pc>0301-a<k1>gORika<k2>gORika<h>2
{#gORika#} 2¦. {%gauṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%goṇī%}), re-
sembling a sack.
<LEND>

<L>17725<pc>0301-a<k1>gOtama<k2>gOtama
{#gOtama#}¦ {%gautama, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%gotama%}), re-
lating to Gotama (e. g. with {%pada-stobhāḥ,%} N. of a
Sāman); ({%as%}), m., N. of Buddha or Śākya-muni
the founder of the Buddhist religion; N. of a teacher
of ritual; N. of a grammarian; of a legislator; a patro-
nymic of Kuśri, of Aruṇa, of Uddālaka, of Śaradvat,
of Śatānanda; the father of Ekata, Dvita, and Trita
(Mahā-bh. IX. 2073); N. of the first pupil of the
last Jina; a kind of poison, one of the fixed kinds;
({%ī%}), f. a patronymic of Kṛpī and other women; an
epithet of Durgā; N. of a Rākṣasī or female gob-
lin; N. of a river, {%= gomatī;%} a kind of yellow pig-
ment or dye, {%= go-rocanā;%} turmeric; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a Sāman; fat; [cf. {%medas,%} and {%bhāradvāja,%}
‘bone.’] {%—Gautama-sambhavā,%} f. an epithet of
the river Godāvarī. {%—Gautama-saras, as,%} n., N. of
a lake. {%—Gautama-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a Jaina
teacher; [cf. {%gotama-svāmin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17726<pc>0301-a<k1>gOtamaka<k2>gOtamaka
{%Gautamaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king of the Nāgas.
<LEND>

<L>17727<pc>0301-a<k1>gOtami<k2>gOtami
{%Gautami,%}¦ a patronymic {%= gautama.%}
<LEND>

<L>17728<pc>0301-a<k1>gOtamIya<k2>gOtamIya
{%Gautamīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to Gautama,
coming from him &c.
<LEND>

<L>17729<pc>0301-a<k1>gOtamasa<k2>gOtamasa
{#gOtamasa#}¦ {%gautamasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%go-tamas?%}),
epithet of two verses of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>17730<pc>0301-a<k1>gOdAnika<k2>gOdAnika
{#gOdAnika#}¦ {%gaudānika, as, ī, am,%} relating to
the ceremony called Godāna (q. v.), performing it.
<LEND>

<L>17731<pc>0301-a<k1>gODAra<k2>gODAra
{#gODAra#}¦ {%gaudhāra, as,%} m. (fr. {%godhā%}), an
Iguana (considered as the offspring of the alligator on
account of its smaller size and similar shape); also
{%gaudheya%} and {%gaudhera.%}
<LEND>

<L>17732<pc>0301-a<k1>gODeraka<k2>gODeraka
{%Gaudheraka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of small venomous
animal.
<LEND>

<L>17733<pc>0301-a<k1>gODUma<k2>gODUma
{#gODUma#}¦ {%gaudhūma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%go-dhūma%}),
coming from wheat, made of it.
<LEND>

<L>17734<pc>0301-a<k1>gODUmra<k2>gODUmra
{#gODUmra#}¦ {%gaudhūmra,%} a various reading for
{%gautama,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0301-b+ 80]

<L>17735<pc>0301-b<k1>gOpatya<k2>gOpatya
{#gOpatya#}¦ {%gaupatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%go-pati%}), Ved.
the possession of cattle.
<LEND>

<L>17736<pc>0301-b<k1>gOpavana<k2>gOpavana
{%Gaupavana,%}¦ a patronymic from Gopa-vana; ({%am%}),
n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>17737<pc>0301-b<k1>gOpAyana<k2>gOpAyana
{%Gaupāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Gopa.
<LEND>

<L>17738<pc>0301-b<k1>gOpika<k2>gOpika
{%Gaupika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%gopikā%}), the son of a herds-
man's wife.
<LEND>

<L>17739<pc>0301-b<k1>gOpucCa<k2>gOpucCa
{%Gaupuccha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%go-puccha%}), like a
cow's tail.
<LEND>

<L>17740<pc>0301-b<k1>gOpucCika<k2>gOpucCika
{%Gaupucchika, as, ī, am,%}¦ of or belonging to a
cow's tail, bought for a cow's tail &c.
<LEND>

<L>17741<pc>0301-b<k1>gOmata<k2>gOmata
{%Gaumata, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%go-matī%}), being in the
river Gomatī; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a river; (the latter being
a wrong reading for {%gautamī.%})
<LEND>

<L>17742<pc>0301-b<k1>gOra<k2>gOra
{#gOra#}¦ {%gaura, as, ī, am%} (said to be fr. rt. 3. {%gu%}),
white, yellowish, reddish, pale red; shining, brilliant,
pure, clean, beautiful; ({%as%}), m. white, yellowish, &c.
(the colour); a kind of buffalo, the Bos Gaurus,
often classed with the Gavaya; white mustard, the
seed of it used as a weight, = 3 Rāja-sarṣapas [cf.
{%gaura-sarṣapa%}]; the plant Grislea Tomentosa
({%= dhava%}); the moon; the planet Jupiter; N.
of a Yoga teacher, a son of Śuka and Pīvarī; an
epithet of the saint Caitanya; ({%ī%}), f. the female of
the Bos Gaurus; the Vāc or voice of the middle
region of the air; turmeric, {%= rajanī,%} and N. of
several other plants, {%= priyaṅgu, mañjiṣṭhā,%} &c.;
a yellow pigment or dye, {%= go-rocanā;%} a girl eight
years old, any young girl prior to menstruation, a
maid, a virgin; the earth; ‘the brilliant goddess,’
N. of the goddess Pārvatī or daughter of Himālaya
and wife of Śiva; N. of the wife of Varuṇa; N. of
the mother of Śākya-muni [cf. {%māyā%}]; N. of one
of the sixteen Vidyā-devīs; N. of the wife of Prasena-
jit (or Yuvanāśva), who incurring the curse of her
husband was changed into the river Bāhu-dā; N. of
the wife of Vi-rajas and mother of Su-dhāman; N. of a
river; N. of a Rāgiṇī, the wife of the Rāga Mālava;
N. of several metres, one consisting of four lines of
twelve syllables each; another consisting of four lines
of thirteen syllables each; another consisting of four
lines of twenty-six long syllables each; ({%am%}), n.
white mustard; the filament of a lotus; saffron;
gold; [cf. Lat. <nsi>gilvus;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>geltônas, giele;</nsi> Russ.
<nsi>schiltyi;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>gelb ?</nsi>]. {%—Gaura-khara, as,%} m.
a wild donkey; [cf. {%gauḍaka-mṛga.%}] {%—Gaura-%}
{%grīva, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people in Madhya-deśa.
{%—Gauragrīvīya, as, ī, am,%} belonging to this
people. {%—Gaura-candra, as,%} m. an epithet of the
saint Caitanya. {%—Gaura-jīraka, as,%} m. white cumin.
{%—Gaura-tittiri, is,%} m. a kind of partridge. {%—Gaura-%}
{%tvac, k,%} m. the plant Terminalia Catappa; [cf.
{%iṅguda.%}] {%—Gaura-pṛṣṭha, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Gaura-mukha, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of Śamīka,
a Purohita of king Ugra-sena. {%—Gaura-mṛga, as,%}
m., Ved. the Bos Gaurus. {%—Gaura-vāhana, as,%} m.,
N. of a prince. {%—Gaura-śāka, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
a kind of Madhūka. {%—Gaura-śiras, ās,%} m., N. of a
Muni. {%—Gaura-sarṣapa, as,%} m. white mustard,
Sinapis Glauca; the white mustard seed considered
as a measure of weight. {%—Gaura-suvarṇa, am,%} n.
a kind of vegetable; [cf. {%pattraśāka-viśeṣa, =%}
{%kaṭu-śṛṅgāla%} and {%gandha-śāka.%}] {%—Gaurāṅga%}
{%(˚ra-aṅ˚), as,%} m. an epithet of the saint Caitanya;
[cf. {%gaura%} and {%gaura-candra.%}] {%—Gaurājājī (˚ra-%}
{%aj˚),%} f. white cumin. {%—Gaurārdraka (˚ra-ār˚), as,%}
m. a kind of poison. {%—Gaurāvaskandin (˚ra-av˚),%}
{%ī,%} m. an epithet of Indra. {%—Gaurāśva (˚ra-aś˚), as,%}
m., N. of a prince. {%—Gaurāsya (˚ra-ās˚), as,%} m. a
kind of black monkey with a white face. {%—Gaurā-%}
{%hika (˚ra-ahi), as,%} m. a kind of serpent. {%—Gauri-%}
{%vīti, is,%} m. (for {%gaurī-v˚),%} N. of a Ṛṣi, a descend-
ant of Śakti. {%—Gaurī-kalpa, as,%} m., N. of a Kalpa,
the thirteenth day of the dark half in Brahmā's
month. {%—Gaurī-kānta, as,%} m., N. of a commentator
on the Tarka-bhāṣā. {%—Gaurīkānta-sārvabhauma,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a commentary called Ānanda-laharī-
tarī. {%—Gaurī-guru, us,%} m. the father of Gaurī, an
epithet of the Himālaya. {%—Gaurī-ja, as,%} m. an
epithet of Kārttikeya; ({%am%}), n. talc. {%—Gaurī-nātha, %}
[Page0301-c+ 74]
{%as,%} m. the husband of Gaurī, an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Gaurī-paṭṭa, as,%} m. the horizontal plate of the
Liṅga, typical of the female organ. {%—Gaurī-pati, is,%}
m. the husband of Gaurī, an epithet of Śiva; N. of
the father of the scholiast Vaṭeśvara. {%—Gaurī-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. son of Gaurī, an epithet of the deity Kārtti-
keya. {%—Gaurī-puṣpa, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%gaurī%} or {%priyaṅgu%}. {%—Gaurī-pūjā,%} f. the adoration
of Gaurī, N. of a festival on the fourth day in the
last half of month Māgha. {%—Gaurī-bhartṛ, tā,%} m.
the husband of Gaurī, an epithet of Śiva. {%—Gaurī-%}
{%mantra, as,%} m. a prayer to Gaurī. {%—Gaurī-lalita,%}
{%am,%} n. yellow orpiment. {%—Gaurī-vara, as,%} m. the
lover of Gaurī, an epithet of Śiva. {%—Gaurīvita,%}
{%am,%} n. (fr. {%gauri-vīti,%} q. v.), N. of a Sāman. {%—Gaurī-%}
{%vivāha, as,%} m. the marriage of Gaurī. {%—Gaurī-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n. the vow of Gaurī, a kind of rite in
honour of Gaurī. {%—Gaurīśa (˚rī-īśa), as,%} m. the
lord of Gaurī, an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>17743<pc>0301-c<k1>gOrika<k2>gOrika
{%Gaurika, as,%}¦ m. white mustard; a metronymic
of Māndhātṛ; ({%ā%}), f. a virgin, a young girl, one
eight years old or in whom menstruation has not yet
commenced.
<LEND>

<L>17744<pc>0301-c<k1>gOrila<k2>gOrila
{%Gaurila, as,%}¦ m. white mustard; iron or steel
filings or dust.
<LEND>

<L>17745<pc>0301-c<k1>gOrakzya<k2>gOrakzya
{#gOrakzya#}¦ {%gaurakṣya, am,%} n. (fr. {%go-rakṣa%}),
the office of a herdsman, breeding cattle.
<LEND>

<L>17746<pc>0301-c<k1>gOrava<k2>gOrava
{#gOrava#}¦ {%gaurava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%guru%}), relating
or belonging to a Guru or teacher; ({%am%}), n. weight,
heaviness; length in prosody; importance, high value
or estimation; cumbrousness; gravity, respectability,
venerableness; dignity; respect shown to a person
(e. g. {%mātṛ-gauravāt,%} out of respect for one's
mother). {%—Gaurava-vat, ān, atī, at,%} important.
{%—Gauravāsana (˚va-ās˚), am,%} n. a seat of honour.
{%—Gauraverita (˚va-īr˚), as, ā, am,%} praised, famed,
celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>17747<pc>0301-c<k1>gOravita<k2>gOravita
{%Gauravita, as, ā, am,%}¦ highly esteemed or valued,
venerable, respectable.
<LEND>

<L>17748<pc>0301-c<k1>gOri<k2>gOri
{#gOri#}¦ {%gauri, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17749<pc>0301-c<k1>gOrutalpika<k2>gOrutalpika
{#gOrutalpika#}¦ {%gaurutalpika, as,%} m. (fr. {%guru-%}
{%talpa%}), the violator of the bed of a Guru or religious
preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>17750<pc>0301-c<k1>gOlakzaRika<k2>gOlakzaRika
{#gOlakzaRika#}¦ {%gaulakṣaṇika, as,%} m. (fr. {%go-%}
{%lakṣaṇa%}), one who knows the good marks of a cow.
<LEND>

<L>17751<pc>0301-c<k1>gOlomana<k2>gOlomana
{%Gaulomana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%go-loman%}), resembling
cow's hair.
<LEND>

<L>17752<pc>0301-c<k1>gOlA<k2>gOlA
{#gOlA#}¦ {%gaulā,%} f. {%= gaurā = gaurī,%} N. of the
daughter of Himālaya and wife of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>17753<pc>0301-c<k1>gOlika<k2>gOlika
{#gOlika#}¦ {%gaulika, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
{%= gauliha%} and {%gaulīḍha.%}
<LEND>

<L>17754<pc>0301-c<k1>gOlmika<k2>gOlmika
{#gOlmika#}¦ {%gaulmika, as,%} m. (fr. {%gulma%}), a
single soldier of a troop, one of a body of soldiers.
<LEND>

<L>17755<pc>0301-c<k1>gOlya<k2>gOlya
{#gOlya#}¦ {%gaulya, am,%} n. (fr. {%gula = guḍa%}),
syrup; spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>17756<pc>0301-c<k1>gOSakawika<k2>gOSakawika
{#gOSakawika#}¦ {%gauśakaṭika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%go-%}
{%śakaṭa%}), possessing a carriage drawn by oxen.
<LEND>

<L>17757<pc>0301-c<k1>gOSatika<k2>gOSatika
{%Gauśatika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%go-śatam%}), possessing
a hundred oxen or cows.
<LEND>

<L>17758<pc>0301-c<k1>gOSfNga<k2>gOSfNga
{%Gauśṛṅga, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%go-śṛṅga%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>17759<pc>0301-c<k1>gOzUkta<k2>gOzUkta
{%Gauṣūkta, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%goṣūktin%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>17760<pc>0301-c<k1>gOzUkti<k2>gOzUkti
{%Gauṣūkti%}¦ (fr. {%gauṣūkta%}), N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17761<pc>0301-c<k1>gOzWIna<k2>gOzWIna
{%Gauṣṭhīna, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%goṣṭha%}), the site of an
old and abandoned cow-pen.
<LEND>

<L>17762<pc>0301-c<k1>gOsahasrika<k2>gOsahasrika
{%Gausahasrika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%go-sahasra%}), pos-
sessing a thousand cows.
<LEND>

<L>17763<pc>0301-c<k1>gDi<k2>gDi
{#gDi#}¦ {%gdhi, is,%} f. (fr. {%ghas%}), Ved. eating,
consuming; [cf. {%sagdhi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17764<pc>0301-c<k1>gnA<k2>gnA
{#gnA#}¦ {%gnā,%} f. (generally used in plur., but
according to some in Ṛg-veda IV. 9, 4, the nom.
sing. {%gnās%} occurs; the word seems to be derived
from {%jñā%} rather than from {%jan,%} and to mean originally
‘a wise female.’ In the Nighaṇṭavas it is enumerated
among the synonyms of {%vāc,%} ‘the voice.’ By Yāska
[Page0302-a+ 80]
in Nirukta III. 21. it is said to be derived from
{%gam,%} ‘to approach,’ and to mean ‘a female or
woman’ in general), Ved. a semi-divine or super-
human female, a kind of goddess or female genius;
a woman. {%—Gnā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. (Sāy.) ac-
companied by women or wives. According to some
the neut. may be {%gnā-vas;%} but Sāy. in Ṛg-veda II.
1, 5, considers {%gnāvas%} a nom. pl., and interprets it to
mean ‘words of praise.’ {%—Gnās-pati, is,%} m., Ved.
the husband of divine wives, or of a divine wife;
(perhaps {%gnās%} is here a shortened genitive.) {%—Gnās-%}
{%patnī,%} f. a divine wife, the wife of a deity; (Sāy.)
a kind of female genius protecting women; (perhaps
{%gnās%} is here the nominative in apposition to {%patnī,%}
i. e. a divine female who is a wife.)
<LEND>

<L>17765<pc>0302-a<k1>graT<k2>graT<h>1
{#graT#} 1¦. {%grath%} or {%granth,%} cl. 9. and 1. P.
{%grathnāti, granthati, jagrantha;%} pl.
{%jagranthus%} and {%grethus; granthiṣyati, agranthīt,%}
{%granthitum;%} A. {%grathnīte, granthate, agran-%}
{%thiṣṭa;%} cl. 1. P. A. also {%grathati, grathate;%} to
fasten, tie or string together; to wind round; to
arrange, connect in a regular series; to string words
together, compose, write (as a literary work); to set
or strew with: Caus. P. {%granthayati%} and {%grātha-%}
{%yati, -yitum;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>glut-en ?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>17766<pc>0302-a<k1>graTana<k2>graTana
{%Grathana, am,%}¦ n. coagulation, thickening, be-
coming obstructed or clogged with knotty lumps;
({%ā%}), f. tying, binding, stringing together.
<LEND>

<L>17767<pc>0302-a<k1>graTita<k2>graTita
{%Grathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ strung, tied, bound, con-
nected, tied together or in order, wound, arranged,
classed, collected; set with, strewn with; artificially
composed or put together (as the plot of a play);
difficult to be unravelled, having knots, knotty, formed
into lumps, coagulated, thickened, clogged; hardened;
hurt, injured; seized, taken possession of; overcome;
({%am%}), n. a tumor with hard lumps or knots.
<LEND>

<L>17768<pc>0302-a<k1>graTna<k2>graTna
{%Grathna, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a bunch, a tuft;
(perhaps for {%grantha.%})
<LEND>

<L>17769<pc>0302-a<k1>granTa<k2>granTa
{%Grantha, as,%}¦ m. tying, binding, stringing together
(literally or metaphorically); an artificial arrangement
of words, a verse, composition, treatise, literary pro-
duction, a book or composition in prose or verse,
a section; the book or sacred scriptures of the Śikhs
containing short moral poems by Nānak Shāh and
others; a metre of thirty-two syllables; wealth,
property; [cf. {%uttara-grantha, nir-gr˚, ṣaḍ-gr˚.%}]
{%—Grantha-karaṇa, am,%} n. composing books or
treatises, composition. {%—Grantha-kartṛ, tā,%} or
{%grantha-kāra, as,%} m. a book-maker, the author of
a book or treatise. {%—Grantha-kuṭī%} or {%grantha-kūṭī,%}
f. a library; an office, a study. {%—Grantha-kṛt, t,%}
m. the writer of a book, author or composer of a
treatise. {%—Grantha-vistara, as,%} m. a multitude of
scientific treatises. {%—Grantha-vistāra, as,%} m. dif-
fuseness of style, voluminousness. {%—Grantha-sandhi,%}
{%is,%} m. a section or chapter of a work.
<LEND>

<L>17770<pc>0302-a<k1>granTana<k2>granTana
{%Granthana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. stringing, tying or con-
necting together either as a chaplet or a book, ar-
ranging, composing.
<LEND>

<L>17771<pc>0302-a<k1>granTi<k2>granTi<h>1
1. {%granthi, is,%}¦ m. a knot, a tie, the knot of a cord
&c., a knot, bunch or protuberance of any kind
(especially if produced by tying several things to-
gether), a knot tied in the end of a garment for
keeping money &c.; the joint or knot of a reed or
cane &c., a joint or articulation of the body; a com-
plaint, knotting, i. e. swelling and hardening of the
vessels as in varicocele; a knot tied closely and
therefore difficult to be undone; N. of several plants
and bulbous roots, {%= granthi-parṇa, hitāvalī, bha-%}
{%dra-mustā, piṇḍālu;%} [cf. {%udara-g˚, kaṭu-g˚,%}
{%kāla-g˚,%} &c.] {%—Granthi-cchedaka, as,%} m. a purse-
cutter, a cut-purse, pickpocket; [cf. {%granthi-bheda.%}]
{%—Granthi-tva, am,%} n. state of becoming knotty;
hardening. {%—Granthi-dala, as,%} m. a kind of per-
fume, {%= coraka; (ā),%} f., N. of a kind of bulbous
root. {%—Granthi-dūrvā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= mālā-%}
{%dūrvā%}. {%—Granthi-pattra, as,%} m. a kind of perfume,
{%= coraka%}. {%—Granthi-parṇa, as,%} m. a kind of per-
fume, {%= coraka; (ā),%} f. a kind of plant, {%= jatukā;%}
{%(ī),%} f. a kind of Dūrvā grass, {%= gaṇḍa-dūrvā; (am),%}
[Page0302-b+ 78]
n. a kind of fragrant plant. {%—Granthi-phala, as,%}
m., N. of several plants, = Feronia Elephantum, {%=%}
{%kapittha;%} another plant, Vanguiera Spinosa, {%= ma-%}
{%dana;%} another plant, {%= śākuruṇḍa%}. {%—Granthi-%}
{%bandhana, am,%} n. tying a knot; a ligament; tying
together the garments of the bride and bridegroom
at the marriage ceremony. {%—Granthi-barhin, ī,%} m.,
N. of a plant, {%= granthi-parṇa%}. {%—Granthi-bheda,%}
{%as,%} m. a purse-cutter, cut-purse; [cf. {%granthi-cche-%}
{%daka.%}] {%—Granthi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} tied, bound;
knotty, bulbous; ({%ān%}), m. the plant Heliotropium
Indicum; [cf. {%asthi-saṃhārī.%}] {%—Granthimat-phala,%}
{%as,%} m. the plant Artocarpus Lacucha ({%lakuca%}).
{%—Granthi-mūla, am,%} n. garlic, {%= gṛñjana; (ā),%}
f. a kind of Dūrvā grass, {%= mālā-dūrvā%}. {%—Granthi-%}
{%mocaka, as,%} m. a cut-purse, thief.
<LEND>

<L>17772<pc>0302-b<k1>granTika<k2>granTika
{%Granthika, as,%}¦ m. an astrologer (one who under-
stands the joints or divisions of time, of the year, &c.;
cf. {%kāla-granthi,%} ‘a year’), a fortune-teller; a N.
assumed by Nakula, the fourth son of Pāṇḍu, when
he became master of the horse to king Virāṭa; a
kind of disease of the outer ear; ({%am%}), n. (according
to some) m., N. of the plant Capparis Aphylla; the
root of long pepper; ({%am%}), n., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%granthi-parṇa;%} a kind of resin, bdellium; [cf.
{%guggulu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17773<pc>0302-b<k1>granTita<k2>granTita
{%Granthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ strung, tied.
<LEND>

<L>17774<pc>0302-b<k1>granTin<k2>granTin
{%Granthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who reads books, bookish,
well-read, learned; relating or belonging to a book,
one who possesses many books.
<LEND>

<L>17775<pc>0302-b<k1>granTila<k2>granTila
{%Granthila, as, ā, am,%}¦ knotted, knotty; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of several plants and roots, = Flacourtia Sapida;
another plant, Capparis Aphylla; also {%= taṇḍulīya-%}
{%śāka = hitāvalī = piṇḍālu = vi-kaṇṭaka;%} also {%= co-%}
{%raka,%} a kind of perfume; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants,
{%= gaṇḍa-dūrvā, mālā-dūrvā, bhadra-mustā;%}
{%(am),%} n. the root of long pepper; green or undried
ginger, {%= ārdraka%}. {%—Granthi-hara, as,%} m. a coun-
sellor, a minister (one who unravels the knots of
business).
<LEND>

<L>17776<pc>0302-b<k1>granTIka<k2>granTIka
{%Granthīka, am,%}¦ n. the root of long pepper, {%=%}
{%granthika.%}
<LEND>

<L>17777<pc>0302-b<k1>graT<k2>graT<h>2
{#graT#} 2¦. {%grath%} or {%granth,%} cl. 1. A. {%gra-%}
{%thate%} and {%granthate,%} to be crooked (literally
or metaphorically), to be wicked; to curve, bend or
make crooked.
<LEND>

<L>17778<pc>0302-b<k1>graTin<k2>graTin
{%Grathin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ false; (Sāy.) talkative, stringing
(too many) words together.
<LEND>

<L>17779<pc>0302-b<k1>granTi<k2>granTi<h>2
2. {%granthi, is,%}¦ m. crookedness, distortion; falsehood.
<LEND>

<L>17780<pc>0302-b<k1>graps<k2>graps
{#graps#}¦ {%graps.%} See {%glaps.%}
<LEND>

<L>17781<pc>0302-b<k1>graB<k2>graB
{#graB#}¦ {%grabh.%} See {%grah.%}
<LEND>

<L>17782<pc>0302-b<k1>gras<k2>gras<h>1
{#gras#} 1¦. {%gras,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%grasati, -te, ja-%}
{%grāsa, jagrase, grasiṣyati, -te, agrasīt,%}
{%agrasiṣṭa, grasitum,%} to seize with the mouth, take
into the mouth, swallow, devour, eat, consume; to
swallow up, cause to disappear; to seize; to eclipse;
to swallow or mouth or slur over words, pronounce
indistinctly: Caus. P. {%grāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
swallow, cause to devour; to consume, swallow, eat:
Desid. {%jigrasiṣate, -ti:%} Intens. {%jāgrasyate, jā-%}
{%grasti;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>gra-men;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>gras, grasen;</nsi>
Eng. <nsi>grass;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">γραίνω</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>17783<pc>0302-b<k1>gras<k2>gras<h>2
2. {%gras, as, as, as,%}¦ (at the end of compounds) seizing
with the mouth, devouring, swallowing (e. g. {%piṇḍa-%}
{%gras,%} devouring a mouthful; see Gram. 164. <nsi>b</nsi>).
<LEND>

<L>17784<pc>0302-b<k1>grasana<k2>grasana
{%Grasana, am,%}¦ n. swallowing, eating; taking, seiz-
ing; a kind of partial eclipse of the sun or moon.
<LEND>

<L>17785<pc>0302-b<k1>grasamAna<k2>grasamAna
{%Grasamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ swallowing, devouring;
receiving, listening to anything eagerly.
<LEND>

<L>17786<pc>0302-b<k1>grasizWa<k2>grasizWa
{%Grasiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. swallowing most,
devouring very much; (Sāy. {%= bhakṣayitṛ-tama.%})
<LEND>

<L>17787<pc>0302-b<k1>grasizRu<k2>grasizRu
{%Grasiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ accustomed to swallow or
devour or seize.
<LEND>

<L>17788<pc>0302-b<k1>grasta<k2>grasta
{%Grasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ swallowed, eaten; taken,
seized; involved in, affected by; possessed by (e. g.
{%graha-grasta,%} seized or possessed by a demon;
{%dāridrya-grasta,%} poverty-stricken); seized (as the
sun or moon by Rāhu); eclipsed (e. g. {%Rāhu-grasta,%}
[Page0302-c+ 80]
q. v.); inarticulately pronounced, slurred, uttered with
the omission of a letter or syllable. {%—Grastāsta (˚ta-%}
{%as˚), as, ā, am,%} commenced and ended as an eclipse;
({%am%}), n. the setting of the sun or moon while
eclipsed. {%—Grastodaya (˚ta-ud˚), as,%} m. the rising
of the sun or moon while eclipsed.
<LEND>

<L>17789<pc>0302-c<k1>grasti<k2>grasti
{%Grasti, is,%}¦ f. the act of swallowing or devouring.
<LEND>

<L>17790<pc>0302-c<k1>grasya<k2>grasya
{%Grasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be swallowed, eaten or seized.
<LEND>

<L>17791<pc>0302-c<k1>grAsa<k2>grAsa
{%Grāsa, as,%}¦ m. a mouthful or a quantity of anything
equivalent to a mouthful, a lump of rice &c. of the
size of a peacock's egg; food, nourishment; the
erosion, the morsel bitten; the quantity eclipsed;
the act of swallowing; the swallowing of the sun
and moon (by Rāhu), an eclipse; slurring, uttering
with the omission of a letter or syllable, a fault in
the pronunciation of the gutturals; (in geom.) a
piece cut out by the intersection of two circles.
{%—Grāsa-śalya, am,%} n. any extraneous substance
lodged in the throat. {%—Grāsācchādana (˚sa-āc˚),%}
{%am,%} n. bare subsistence, food and clothing.
<LEND>

<L>17792<pc>0302-c<k1>grAsIkf<k2>grAsIkf
{%Grāsī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to swallow, devour.
<LEND>

<L>17793<pc>0302-c<k1>grah<k2>grah
{#grah#}¦ {%grah%} or {%grabh%} (the latter being the
more ancient form used especially in the
Ṛg-veda), cl. 9. P. A. {%gṛhṇāti, gṛhṇīte%} (Ved.
{%gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte%}); Impf. 1st sing. {%agṛhṇām%} (irreg.
{%agṛhṇam%}), 2nd sing. Impv. P. {%gṛhāṇa%} (Ved.
{%gṛbhṇāna%} and {%gṛhṇāna,%} other forms {%gṛhṇāhi%} and
{%gṛhṇīhi,%} 3rd sing. {%gṛhṇītāt%}), {%jagrāha%} (Ved. Perf.
{%jagrabha,%} 1st pl. {%jagṛbhma%}), {%jagṛhe%} (Ved. 3rd pl.
{%jagṛbhre%}), {%grahīṣyati, -te, agrahīt, agrahīṣṭa%}
(Ved. Aor. 1st sing. {%agrabham,%} 3rd sing. {%agrabhīt,%}
3rd pl. {%agṛbhran, agṛbhīṣata;%} also 1st sing.
{%ajagrabham%}), {%grahītum,%} to seize, take, receive,
accept, take by the hand, adopt, catch, grasp, hold,
lay hold of (e. g. {%pakṣaṃ grah,%} to take a side, adopt
a party; {%pāṇiṃ grah,%} to take by the hand in the
marriage ceremony, hence to marry); to seize, arrest,
stop; to take captive, take prisoner, capture, im-
prison; to take possession of, gain over, captivate;
to seize, overpower (especially said of diseases and
demons and the punishments of Varuṇa); to seize,
eclipse (the sun and moon being supposed by the
Hindūs to be seized by Rāhu); to abstract, take
away (by robbery); to lay the hand on, gain, win,
obtain, receive, accept; to conceive; to acquire by
purchase (with inst. of the price); to choose; to
take up (as a fluid with any small vessel), to draw
water; to catch, intercept; pluck, pick, gather; to
collect a store of anything; to use, put on (as clothes
&c.); to assume (as a shape); to place upon; to
withdraw, draw back; to include; to take on one's
self, undertake, undergo, begin; to receive hospitably
(as a guest); to take back (as a divorced wife); to take
into the mouth, mention, name [cf. {%nāma-grahaṇa,%}
{%nāma-grāham,%} &c.]; to perceive with the organs of
sense, observe, recognize; to receive into the mind,
apprehend, understand, learn; to accept, admit, approve;
to obey, follow; to take for, consider as; to take in
a particular sense or meaning: Pass. {%gṛhyate,%} 1st
Fut. {%grahītā%} and {%grāhitā,%} 2nd Fut. {%grahīṣyate%} and
{%grāhiṣyate,%} Aor. 3rd sing. {%agrāhi,%} 3rd du. {%agra-%}
{%hīṣātām%} and {%agrāhiṣātām:%} Caus. P. {%grāha-%}
{%yati, -yitum, ajigrahat,%} to cause to take or seize
or lay hold of; to give away a girl (acc.) in marriage
to any one (acc.); to cause any one to be captured;
to cause to take away; to make one take, to deliver
over to; (with {%āsanam%} and acc.) to cause to take a
seat, to bid any one sit down by the side of; to
make any one choose; to cause a person to undertake
or be occupied with (inst.); to make a person learn,
to teach, make any one acquainted or familiar with
(two acc.); to become familiar with: Desid. {%jighṛ-%}
{%kṣati, -te,%} to be about to seize or take; to be
about to take away; to desire to take, to wish to
perceive (with the organs of sense), to strive to
apprehend or recognize: Intens. {%jarīgṛhyate, jā-%}
{%grāḍhi%} (Gram. 711): [cf. Zend <nsi>gerep, geurv;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>greipa;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>greife;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>grêbju, pa-</nsi>
<nsi>grêbju;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>grabljû;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>grabaim,</nsi> ‘I devour,
[Page0303-a+ 81]
stop, interrupt, disturb;’ <nsi>gabhaim,</nsi> ‘I take, receive,
conceive;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">γρῖφος, γρῖπος:</lang> cf. also Lat. <nsi>gero;</nsi>
Pol. <nsi>garniac.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17794<pc>0303-a<k1>gfh<k2>gfh
{%Gṛh, gṛha,%}¦ &c. See s. v. at p. 295.
<LEND>

<L>17795<pc>0303-a<k1>gfhIta<k2>gfhIta
{%Gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ grasped, taken, seized, caught,
held, laid hold of; obtained, acquired, gained; robbed;
received, accepted, conceived; collected; agreed, pro-
mised; perceived, known, understood, ascertained,
learnt, &c.; [cf. {%grah%} above.] {%—Gṛhīta-khaḍga-%}
{%carman, ā, ā, a,%} grasping sword and shield.
{%—Gṛhīta-garbhā,%} f. one who has conceived an
embryo, a pregnant woman. {%—Gṛhīta-cetas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} one whose mind or heart is captivated. {%—Gṛ-%}
{%hīta-diś, k, k, k,%} running away, flying; flown,
escaped, retreated. {%—Gṛhīta-deha, as, ā, am,%} in-
carnate. {%—Gṛhīta-nāman, ā, ā, a,%} one who has
received a name (e. g. {%su-gṛhīta-nāman,%} one who
has received a good name, one named in accordance
with the ordinances). {%—Gṛhīta-vidya, as, ā, am,%}
one who has acquired knowledge, versed in science,
learned, studied. {%—Gṛhīta-vetana, as, ā, am,%} one
who has received his wages, paid, remunerated.
{%—Gṛhīta-śara-kārmuka, as, ā, am,%} handling
arrows and bows. {%—Gṛhīta-śarāvāpa, as, ā, am,%}
taking a bow. {%—Gṛhīta-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} one
whose heart is taken possession of or captivated;
captivating the heart. {%—Gṛhītāmiṣa (˚ta-ām˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} seizing prey. {%—Gṛhītārtha (˚ta-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} comprehending the sense or meaning.
{%—Gṛhītāstra (˚ta-as˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has
taken up arms.
<LEND>

<L>17796<pc>0303-a<k1>gfhItavya<k2>gfhItavya
{%Gṛhītavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (an incorrect form for
{%grahītavya%}), to be seized or taken; to be under-
stood, meant.
<LEND>

<L>17797<pc>0303-a<k1>gfhItin<k2>gfhItin
{%Gṛhītin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ seizing, one who has grasped.
<LEND>

<L>17798<pc>0303-a<k1>gfhItf<k2>gfhItf
{%Gṛhītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (incorrect for {%grahītṛ%}),
seizing, grasping, disposed to seize or take.
<LEND>

<L>17799<pc>0303-a<k1>gfhItvA<k2>gfhItvA
{%Gṛhītvā,%}¦ ind. having taken.
<LEND>

<L>17800<pc>0303-a<k1>gfhu<k2>gfhu
{%Gṛhu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. one who receives alms,
a beggar.
<LEND>

<L>17801<pc>0303-a<k1>gfhRat<k2>gfhRat
{%Gṛhṇat, an, atī, at,%}¦ taking, seizing, accepting.
<LEND>

<L>17802<pc>0303-a<k1>gfhya<k2>gfhya<h>2
2. {%gṛhya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. {%gṛhya%} see s. v. at
p. 296), to be taken or received; to be seized, to
be observed, perceptible, perceivable; to be ac-
knowledged or admitted; to be adopted as faith or
belief, to be trusted, to be relied on, to be honoured;
taking the side of, adopting or choosing as best (e. g.
{%Arjuna-gṛhya,%} taking the side or adhering to the
party of Arjuna); dependant, subservient; ({%as%}), m.
the anus.
<LEND>

<L>17803<pc>0303-a<k1>gfhya<k2>gfhya<h>3
3. {%gṛhya,%}¦ irreg. ind. part. having taken, carrying
along, together with, with.
<LEND>

<L>17804<pc>0303-a<k1>graBa<k2>graBa
{%Grabha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the taking possession of;
one who lays hold of (?).
<LEND>

<L>17805<pc>0303-a<k1>graBaRa<k2>graBaRa
{%Grabhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. seizing, that by which anything
is seized (?). {%—Grabhaṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
anything furnished with a handle.
<LEND>

<L>17806<pc>0303-a<k1>graBItf<k2>graBItf
{%Grabhītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who seizes; [cf.
{%grahītṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17807<pc>0303-a<k1>graha<k2>graha
{%Graha, as, ā, am,%}¦ seizing, laying hold of, holding;
taking, collecting, gathering; ({%as%}), m. one who
seizes; the power that seizes and obscures the sun
and moon and causes eclipses, especially Rāhu or the
ascending node; a planet (as seizing or influencing
the destinies of men in a supernatural manner;
sometimes five planets are enumerated, viz. Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn; sometimes
seven, i. e. the preceding with Rāhu and Ketu or
the ascending and descending nodes; sometimes
nine, i. e. the sun and moon together with the
preceding: the planets are either auspicious, {%śubha-%}
{%grahās, sad-grahās;%} or inauspicious, {%krūra-grahās,%}
{%pāpa-grahās;%} in the system of the Jainas the planets
constitute one of the five classes of the Jyotiṣka);
the place of a planet in the fixed zodiac, a N. for the
number nine; N. of certain evil demons or spirits
who seize or exercise a bad influence on the body and
mind of man, (they cause insanity &c.; the Hindūs
consider that it falls within the province of medical
science to expel these demons; those which especially
seize children and cause convulsions &c. are divided
[Page0303-b+ 81]
into nine classes, according to the number of the planets,
cf. {%pūtanā%}); any state of mind which proceeds from
magical influences and takes possession of the whole
man; a crocodile, a shark; a house ({%= gṛha,%} in {%a-gra-%}
{%ha, khara-g˚, graha-druma, graha-pati%}); anything
seized, spoil, booty, prey; as much as can be taken
with a ladle, spoon &c. out of a larger vessel, a ladle-
ful, spoonful, &c.; any ladle or vessel employed for
taking up a portion of fluid out of a larger vessel,
(especially applied to the vessels used for taking up
the Soma; cf. {%soma-graha%}); the middle of a bow
or that part which is grasped when the bow is used;
grasp, seizing, laying hold of, the drawing up or
taking up of water &c. [cf. {%nīra-graha%}]; seizure
in general (e. g. {%aṅga-graha,%} spasm of the limbs),
seizure of the sun or moon, eclipse; a movable point
in the heavens; stealing, robbing; taking, receiving,
reception, receipt; keeping back, obstructing; men-
tion, nomination; apprehension, perception, intelli-
gence, understanding; an organ or instrument of
apprehension (of which according to the Upaniṣads
there are eight, viz. Prāṇa, Vāc, Jihvā, Cakṣus,
Śrotra, Manas, Hastau, and Tvac); insisting upon,
tenacity, perseverance, purpose, design, favour, pa-
tronage; a N. of the fourth or fifth book of the
Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa; [cf. {%guda-graha, śiro-gr˚,%}
{%hanu-gr˚, hṛd-gr˚.%}] {%—Graha-kallola, as,%} m. the
wave (or enemy ?) of the planets, an epithet of
Rāhu. {%—Graha-gaṇa, as,%} m. the whole number of
planets taken collectively. {%—Graha-gaṇita, am,%} n.
{%= gaṇita,%} the astronomical part of a Jyotiḥ-śāstra.
{%—Graha-cintaka, as,%} m. an astrologer. {%—Graha-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%graha-tva, am,%} n. state of being a planet.
{%—Graha-daśā,%} f. the aspect of the planets. {%—Graha-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. the creeper Gymnema Sylvestre, {%= śā-%}
{%ka-vṛkṣa;%} [cf. {%gṛha-druma.%}] {%—Graha-nāyaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the leader of the planets; the planet Saturn;
the sun. {%—Graha-nāśa%} or {%graha-nāśana, as,%} m.,
N. of the plant Alstonia Scholaris, commonly {%chā-%}
{%tina%}. {%—Graha-nigraha, au,%} m. du. favour and
punishment. {%—Graha-nemi, is,%} m. the moon.
{%—Graha-pati, is,%} m. the chief of the planets, the
sun; the plant Calotropis Gigantea [cf. {%arka%}], {%=%}
{%gṛha-pati%}. {%—Graha-pīḍana, am,%} n. or {%graha-%}
{%pīḍā,%} f. the pain or oppression caused by a planet; the
obscurity caused by Rāhu, an eclipse; the influence of
an unpropitious planet. {%—Graha-puṣa, as,%} m. the
sun (cherishing the planets with his light). {%—Graha-%}
{%pūjā,%} f. worship of the sun and other planets.
{%—Graha-bhakti, is,%} f. distribution among the
planets, division of countries &c. with respect to
the presiding planets; title of the sixteenth chapter
in Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-saṃhitā. {%—Graha-bhīti-%}
{%jit, t,%} m., N. of a perfume (‘conquering the fear
of the demons’). {%—Graha-bhojana, as,%} m. a horse.
{%—Graha-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of planets.
{%—Graha-mardana, am,%} n. friction or opposition
between the planets. {%—Graha-yajña%} or {%graha-%}
{%yāga, as,%} m. worship or sacrifice offered to the
planets. {%—Grahayajña-tattva, am,%} n. title of a
part of the Smṛti-tattva. {%—Graha-yuti, is,%} m. con-
junction of the planets. {%—Graha-yuddha, am,%} n.
strife or opposition of the planets; title of the
seventeenth Adhyāya of Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-
saṃhitā. {%—Graha-rāja, as,%} m. the king of the
planets; the sun; the moon; the planet Jupiter or
its regent. {%—Graha-lāghava, am,%} n. title of an
astronomical work of the sixteenth century. {%—Graha-%}
{%varṣa, as,%} m. a planetary year; title of the nine-
teenth Adhyāya of Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-saṃhitā,
which describes the good or evil fortune belonging
to certain days, months or years ruled over by par-
ticular planets. {%—Graha-vipra, as,%} m. an astrologer.
{%—Graha-vimarda, as,%} m. friction of the planets,
opposition, {%= graha-mardana%}. {%—Graha-śānti, is,%}
f. propitiation of the planets by sacrifices &c. {%—Graha-%}
{%śṛṅgāṭaka, am,%} n. triangular position of the planets
with reference to each other; title of the twentieth
Adhyāya in Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-saṃhitā, treating
also of many other positions of the planets. {%—Graha-%}
{%samāgama, as,%} m. conjunction of the planets; also
[Page0303-c+ 81]
in the comp. {%śaśi-graha-samāgama,%} conjunction
of the moon with asterisms or planets. {%—Grahā-%}
{%dhāra (˚ha-ādh˚), as,%} m. the polar star as the fixed
centre of the planets. {%—Grahādhīna (˚ha-adh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} subject to planetary influence. {%—Grahāmaya%}
{%(˚ha-ām˚), as,%} m. epilepsy, convulsions, demoniacal
possession, which is supposed to cause the complaint.
{%—Grahārāma-kutūhala%} or {%karaṇa-kutūhala, am,%}
n., N. of an astronomical work by Bhāskara. {%—Gra-%}
{%hāluñcana (˚ha-āl˚), am,%} n. pouncing on prey,
seizing and tearing it to pieces. {%—Grahāvamardana%}
{%(˚ha-av˚), am,%} n. friction of the planets, opposition;
[cf. {%graha-mardana.%}] {%—Grahāśin (˚ha-āś˚), ī,%} m.
the plant Echites Scholaris; [cf. {%graha-nāśa.%}] {%—Gra-%}
{%hāśraya (˚ha-āś˚), as,%} m. the polar star; [cf. {%gra-%}
{%hādhāra.%}] {%—Grahāhvaya (˚ha-āh˚), as,%} m., N. of
a plant; [cf. {%bhūtāṅkuśa.%}] {%—Graheśa (˚ha-īś˚), as,%}
m. the chief of the planets, the sun.
<LEND>

<L>17808<pc>0303-c<k1>grahaka<k2>grahaka
{%Grahaka, as,%}¦ m. a prisoner; [cf. {%grāhaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17809<pc>0303-c<k1>grahaRa<k2>grahaRa
{%Grahaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seizing, holding; ({%am%}), n.
the hand; an organ of sense; a prisoner, captive;
mentioning, naming, mention, a word mentioned
(e. g. {%vacana-grahaṇa,%} the word {%vacana%}); seizing,
holding, taking, catching, seizure; taking by the hand,
marrying; receiving, acceptance; taking captive, cap-
tivating, overpowering, imprisonment; seizure of the
sun or moon, eclipse; gaining, obtaining, purchasing;
choosing; taking or drawing up; attraction; putting
on; containing, enclosing; undertaking, undergoing;
service; mentioning with praise, respect; perceiving,
understanding, comprehension, the taking or receiv-
ing of instruction, or the acquirement of any science;
acceptation, meaning; assent, agreement; inviting,
calling, addressing; the taking up of sound, echo;
an organ of sense; [cf. {%kara-grahaṇa, keśa-g˚,%}
{%garbha-g˚, cakṣur-g˚, nāma-g˚, pāṇi-g˚, punar-%}
{%g˚.%}] {%—Grahaṇānta (˚ṇa-an˚), am,%} n. close of study,
acquirement of science &c. {%—Grahaṇāntika (˚ṇa-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. termination of holy study.
<LEND>

<L>17810<pc>0303-c<k1>grahaRaka<k2>grahaRaka
{%Grahaṇaka, am,%}¦ n. containing, involving.
<LEND>

<L>17811<pc>0303-c<k1>grahaRi<k2>grahaRi
{%Grahaṇi, is%}¦ or {%ī,%} f. an imaginary organ supposed
to lie between the stomach and the intestines; the
small intestines or that part of the alimentary canal
where the bile assists digestion and from which vital
warmth is diffused; diarrhœa, dysentery. {%—Grahaṇī-%}
{%doṣa, as,%} m. a morbid affection of the Grahaṇī,
diarrhœa. {%—Grahaṇī-pradoṣa, as,%} m. a morbid
affection of the Grahaṇī. {%—Grahaṇī-ruj, k,%} f. or
{%grahaṇī-roga, as,%} m. a morbid affection of the
Grahaṇī, diarrhœa. {%—Grahaṇīrogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} affected
with diarrhœa. {%—Grahaṇī-hara, am,%} n. cloves.
<LEND>

<L>17812<pc>0303-c<k1>grahaRIya<k2>grahaRIya
{%Grahaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ acceptable, to be taken or
received or understood. {%—Grahaṇīya-tā,%} f. or {%gra-%}
{%haṇīya-tva, am,%} n. acceptableness.
<LEND>

<L>17813<pc>0303-c<k1>grahayAyya<k2>grahayAyya
{%Grahayāyya,%}¦ another form for {%gṛhayāyya,%}
lord of a house, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17814<pc>0303-c<k1>grahayAlu<k2>grahayAlu
{%Grahayālu, us, us, u,%}¦ for {%gṛhayālu,%} taking,
receiving, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17815<pc>0303-c<k1>grahi<k2>grahi
{%Grahi,%}¦ at the end of a compound in {%phale-grahi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17816<pc>0303-c<k1>grahila<k2>grahila
{%Grahila, as, ā, am,%}¦ taking, accepting, acknow-
ledging.
<LEND>

<L>17817<pc>0303-c<k1>grahizRu<k2>grahizRu
{%Grahiṣṇu,%}¦ at the end of a compound in {%phala-%}
{%grahiṣṇu,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17818<pc>0303-c<k1>grahItavya<k2>grahItavya
{%Grahītavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or received,
acceptable, to be accepted; to be taken up or drawn
(as a fluid); to be apprehended or perceived, to be
learned or acquired; ({%am%}), n. the being obliged to
take or receive.
<LEND>

<L>17819<pc>0303-c<k1>grahItf<k2>grahItf
{%Grahītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a taker, seizer, accepter,
receiver, purchaser; perceiver, perceiving, observant;
taking, disposed to take; [cf. {%pāṇi-grahītṛ%} and
{%gṛhītṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17820<pc>0303-c<k1>grahya<k2>grahya
{%Grahya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to or fit for
a Graha.
<LEND>

<L>17821<pc>0303-c<k1>grABa<k2>grABa
{%Grābha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who seizes, what is
seized; grasp, seizure.
<LEND>

<L>17822<pc>0303-c<k1>grAha<k2>grAha
{%Grāha, as, ī, am,%}¦ seizing, holding, catching,
taking, receiving, acceptance (e. g. {%ṛktha-grāha,%}
receiving inherited property; {%yoṣid-grāha,%} taking
a wife); [cf. {%karṇa-grāha, gila-g˚, dhanur-g˚,%}
{%pāṇi-g˚, pārṣṇi-g˚,%} &c.]; ({%as%}), m. a rapacious
[Page0304-a+ 80]
animal living in fresh or sea water; a crocodile, a
shark, a serpent; (according to some the Gangetic
alligator or Lacerta Gangetica, according to others
the water elephant or hippopotamus); any large
fish or marine animal; ({%ī%}), f. a female crocodile;
({%as%}), m. a prisoner; seizure, grasping, laying hold of;
morbid affection, disease; beginning, undertaking;
mentioning; [cf. {%nāma-grāha;%} cf. also {%asad-grāha%}
and {%svayaṃ-grāha.%}] {%—Grāha-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
containing or abounding with alligators &c.
<LEND>

<L>17823<pc>0304-a<k1>grAhaka<k2>grAhaka
{%Grāhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ receiving, accepting, one
who takes or seizes; a purchaser, buyer; containing,
enclosing; perceiving, observing; taking away, per-
suading; ({%as%}), m. a police-officer, a constable, a
bailiff; a hawk, a falcon [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">γρύφ;</lang> Germ. <nsi>greif</nsi>];
a kind of vegetable, {%= sitāvara;%} N. of an attendant
of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>17824<pc>0304-a<k1>grAham<k2>grAham
{%Grāham,%}¦ ind. part. taking, seizing, mentioning,
(often at the end of compounds, e. g. {%jīva-grāham,%}
taking alive; cf. also {%nāma-grāham.%})
<LEND>

<L>17825<pc>0304-a<k1>grAhi<k2>grAhi
{%Grāhi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. a female spirit of evil, seizing
men and causing death and disease, (Sleep is described
as her son); deprivation of sensation, a swoon, faint-
ing fit. {%—Grāhi-phala, am,%} n. the tree Feronia
Elephantum; [cf. {%kapittha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17826<pc>0304-a<k1>grAhita<k2>grAhita
{%Grāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to take or seize.
<LEND>

<L>17827<pc>0304-a<k1>grAhin<k2>grAhin
{%Grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ seizing, taking, holding, laying
hold of; catching, engaged in catching; picking,
gathering; containing, holding; drawing, attracting,
fascinating, alluring; gaining, obtaining, acquiring;
choosing; searching through, scrutinizing; perceiv-
ing, observing; accepting, taking to heart; astringent;
obstructing, binding, constipating; ({%ī%}), m. the plant
Feronia Elephantum [cf. {%kapittha%}]; ({%iṇī%}), f. a small
kind of Yavāśa; a kind of Hedysarum, {%= kṣudra-%}
{%durālabhā, tāmra-mūlā.%}
<LEND>

<L>17828<pc>0304-a<k1>grAhuka<k2>grAhuka
{%Grāhuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ seizing, laying hold of.
<LEND>

<L>17829<pc>0304-a<k1>grAhya<k2>grAhya
{%Grāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be seized, taken, held; to
be captured or imprisoned; to be carried away; to
be picked or gathered, acceptable; to be received,
accepted, gained; to be perceived, observed; to be
taken in marriage; to be received in a friendly or
hospitable manner; to be insisted upon; to be
understood, perceivable; to be considered; to be
understood in a particular sense, meant; to be ac-
cepted as a rule or law, to be acknowledged or
assented to, to be attended to or obeyed, to be
admitted in evidence; acceptable, agreeable; ({%am%}),
n. a present; [cf. {%dur-grāhya, sukha-grāhya,%}
{%svayaṃ-grāhya.%}] {%—Grāhya-vāc, k, k, k,%} uttering
agreeable speech, praising.
<LEND>

<L>17830<pc>0304-a<k1>grAhyaka<k2>grAhyaka
{%Grāhyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ to be perceived; to be
discerned or distinguished.
<LEND>

<L>17831<pc>0304-a<k1>grAma<k2>grAma
{#grAma#}¦ {%grāma, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%gras%}
or fr. {%grah%}), an inhabited place, a village, a hamlet,
an inhabited and unfortified place in the midst of fields
and cultivated land, a municipal and fiscal division, a
township (opposed to {%araṇya,%} and in later Sanskrit also
to {%pura, nagara,%} and {%pattana%}); the collective in-
habitants of a place, a community, race; any number
of men associated together, a troop, multitude, collec-
tion, especially a troop of soldiers; a number of tunes,
a scale in music, a gamut; (at the end of a compound)
a multitude, a class, a collection or number in general;
[cf. {%ariṣṭa-grāma, mahā-g˚, śūra-g˚, saṅgrāma;%}
cf. also Lith. <nsi>kiêma-s;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>gramaisg,</nsi> ‘the mob;’
<nsi>gramasgar,</nsi> ‘a flock, company.’] {%—Grāma-kaṇṭaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the village-pest or tale-bearer. {%—Grāma-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} one who wishes to take posses-
sion of a village; desirous of villages; fond of living
in villages. {%—Grāma-kukkuṭa, as,%} m. a village cock,
a tame or domestic cock. {%—Grāma-kumāra, as,%} m.
a village boy. {%—Grāma-kulāla, as,%} m. a village
potter. {%—Grāma-kūṭa, as,%} m. the noblest man in a
village, a Śūdra or man of the fourth tribe. {%—Grāma-%}
{%ga, as, ā, am,%} or {%grāma-gamin, ī, inī, i,%} who or
what goes to a village, (Pāṇ. II. 1, 24.) {%—Grāma-%}
{%gṛhya, as, ā, am,%} being outside a village, (lit. ad-
joining the houses of a village.) {%—Grāma-geya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} to be sung in a village. {%—Grāmageya-gāna, am,%}
[Page0304-b+ 81]
n. one of the four books into which the Sāma-veda
when arranged for chanting is distributed. {%—Grāma-%}
{%goduh, -dhuk,%} m. the herdsman of a village. {%—Grāma-%}
{%ghāta, as,%} m. plundering a village. {%—Grāma-ghātin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} devastating or plundering a village. {%—Grāma-%}
{%ghoṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. sounding among men or
armies, as a drum. {%—Grāmaṅ-gamin, ī, inī, i,%} who
or what goes to a village. {%—Grāma-caryā,%} f. the
customs of social life, social intercourse. {%—Grāma-%}
{%caitya, as,%} m. the sacred tree of a village. {%—Grāma-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} village-born, village-produced; rustic,
village, grown in cultivated ground. {%—Grāmaja-%}
{%niṣpāvī,%} f. a kind of pulse. {%—Grāma-jāta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} rustic, village-born, produced in a village, grown
in cultivated ground. {%—Grāma-jāla, am,%} n. a num-
ber of villages, a district. {%—Grāmajālin, ī,%} m. the
governor of a province. {%—Grāma-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved.
conquering or gaining villages; conquering troops;
(Sāy.) either conquering villages or dispersing mul-
titudes. {%—Grāmaṇa, as, ī, am,%} coming from a
Grāma-ṇī. {%—Grāma-ṇī, īs, īs, i%} (for {%grāma-nī%}), the
leader or chief of a village or community, the lord
of the manor, the squire, the leader of a troop or
army; a chief, a superintendent; best, pre-eminent,
excellent; one who only thinks of enjoyment (?),
the village barber (as the chief person of a village);
a groom (?); N. of a Gandharva chief; N. of one of
the attendants of Śiva; N. of certain beings who
together with the Ṛṣis, Gandharvas, Apsarasas,
Nāgas, Yātu-dhānas, and Bālakhilyas are by some
supposed to be attendant upon the Sun; N. of a
place; ({%īs%}), f. a female peasant or villager; a whore,
a harlot; the Indigo plant. {%—Grāmaṇī-tva, am,%} n.
the position or condition of a chief or leader of a
village. {%—Grāmaṇīthya, am,%} n. the station of the
chief of a village or community. {%—Grāmaṇī-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. the son of a harlot, a bastard. {%—Grāmaṇīya,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people; ({%am%}), n. {%= grāmaṇīthya.%}
{%—Grāmaṇī-sava, as,%} m., N. of an Ekāha sacri-
fice. {%—Grāma-takṣa, as,%} m. a village carpenter.
{%—Grāma-tas,%} ind. from the village. {%—Grāma-tā,%}
f. or {%grāma-tva, am,%} n. a multitude of villages.
{%—Grāma-daśeśa (˚śa-īśa), as,%} or {%grāmadaśā-%}
{%dhipati (˚śa-adh˚), is,%} m. the head of ten villages.
{%—Grāma-devatā,%} f. the tutelary deity of a villages.
{%—Grāma-druma, as,%} m. a single tree in a village
held sacred by the inhabitants. {%—Grāma-dharā,%} f.
supporting a village or villages, N. of a rock.
{%—Grāma-dharma, as,%} m. the observances or cus-
toms of a village. {%—Grāma-nāpita, as,%} m. the village
barber. {%—Grāma-nivāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living in villages,
tame. {%—Grāma-pāla, as,%} m. the guardian of a
village. {%—Grāma-putra, as,%} m. a village boy.
{%—Grāma-preṣya, as,%} m. the messenger or ser-
vant of a community or village. {%—Grāma-bāla-%}
{%jana, as,%} m. a young peasant. {%—Grāma-bhṛta,%}
{%as,%} m. a village messenger or servant. {%—Grāma-%}
{%madgurikā,%} f. a kind of fish, Silurus Singio ({%=%}
{%śṛṅgī%}); a riot, a fray, a village tumult; [cf. {%grāma-%}
{%yuddha.%}] {%—Grāma-mahiṣī,%} f. a tame buffalo.
{%—Grāma-mukha, am,%} n. a market town, a fair,
a market. {%—Grāma-mṛga, as,%} m. ‘the village
animal,’ a dog. {%—Grāma-maukhya,%} head of a vil-
lage; (probably incorrect for {%grāma-saukhya,%} see
{%grāma-sukha.%}) {%—Grāma-yājaka, as, ikā, am,%}
offering sacrifices for a whole village or community;
({%as%}), m. the village priest, one who conducts the
ceremonies for any or all classes and is consequently
considered as a degraded Brāhman; it also applies
to the attendant of an idol. {%—Grāma-yājin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} offering sacrifices for a whole village or community.
{%—Grāma-yuddha, am,%} n. a riot, a fray, a village
war. {%—Grāma-rathyā,%} f. a village street. {%—Grāma-%}
{%luṇṭana, am,%} n. plundering or pillaging a village.
{%—Grāma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with villages.
{%—Grāma-vāsa, as,%} m. living in a village; a villager;
[cf. {%grāme-vāsa.%}] {%—Grāma-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living
in villages, tame; ({%inas%}), m. pl. the inhabitants
of a village, the villagers; [cf. {%grāme-vāsin%} and
{%grāmya.%}] {%—Grāma-vāstavya, as,%} m. the inhabitant
of a village. {%—Grāma-viśeṣa, as,%} m. variety of the
[Page0304-c+ 81]
scales in music. {%—Grāma-śata, am,%} n. a hundred
villages, a province. {%—Grāmaśateśa (˚ta-īśa), as,%}
m. or {%grāmaśatādhipati (˚ta-adh˚), is,%} m. or {%grā-%}
{%maśatādhyakṣa (˚ta-adh˚), as,%} m. the governor
of a province. {%—Grāma-saṅkara, as,%} m. the com-
mon sewer or drain of a village. {%—Grāma-saṅgha,%}
{%as,%} m. a village corporation, a municipality. {%—Grāma-%}
{%siṃha, as,%} m. a dog. {%—Grāma-sukha, am,%} n. the
pleasure of a villager; [cf. {%grāmya-sukha.%}] {%—Grāma-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} being or residing in a village, be-
longing to a village, rustic, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a village.
{%—Grāma-hāsaka, as,%} m. a sister's husband. {%—Grā-%}
{%mācāra (˚ma-āc˚), as,%} m. village observances, cus-
toms, &c. {%—Grāmādhāna (˚ma-ādh˚), am,%} n. hunt-
ing; a village (?). {%—Grāmādhikṛta (˚ma-adh˚), as,%}
or {%grāmādhipati (˚ma-adh˚), is,%} or {%grāmādhyakṣa%}
{%(˚ma-adh˚), as,%} or {%grāmādhikārin (˚ma-adh˚),%}
{%ī,%} m. superintendent or chief of a village. {%—Grā-%}
{%mānta (˚ma-an˚), as,%} m. the border of a village;
space near a village; ({%e%}), ind. in the neighbourhood
of a village. {%—Grāmāntara (˚ma-an˚), am,%} n.
another village. {%—Grāmāntika, am,%} n. the neigh-
bourhood of a village. {%—Grāmāntīya, as, ā, am,%}
situated in the neighbourhood of a village; ({%am%}), n.
space near a village. {%—Grāme-vāsa, as,%} m. a village
abode; a villager; [cf. {%grāma-vāsa.%}] {%—Grāme-%}
{%vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living in a village, tame; ({%inas%}),
m. pl. the villagers. {%—Grāmeśa (˚ma-īśa), as,%} m.
the head man of a village. {%—Grāmeśvara (˚ma-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the head man or ruler over a village; the lord
of the manor or squire. {%—Grāmopādhyāya (˚ma-%}
{%up˚), as,%} m. the village priest.
<LEND>

<L>17832<pc>0304-c<k1>grAmaka<k2>grAmaka
{%Grāmaka, as,%}¦ m. a village &c., see {%grāma;%} the
collective department or range of celestial pleasures;
N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>17833<pc>0304-c<k1>grAmaya<k2>grAmaya
{%Grāmaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%grāmayati, -yitum,%} to invite.
<LEND>

<L>17834<pc>0304-c<k1>grAmika<k2>grAmika
{%Grāmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ village, rude, rustic; (in
music) chromatic; ({%as%}), m. the head man of a
village; a villager.
<LEND>

<L>17835<pc>0304-c<k1>grAmin<k2>grAmin
{%Grāmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ surrounded by a village com-
munity, pertaining to a village, rustic, rural, village;
({%ī%}), m. a villager, a peasant; the head man of a
village; ({%iṇī%}), f. the Indigo plant. {%—Grāmi-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. the son of a villager.
<LEND>

<L>17836<pc>0304-c<k1>grAmIRa<k2>grAmIRa
{%Grāmīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a village; pro-
duced in or peculiar to a village; vulgar, rude; (in
music) chromatic; a villager, a rustic; ({%as%}), m. a
dog; a hog; a crow; ({%ā%}), f. the Indigo plant; a
kind of vegetable; [cf. {%pālaṅkya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17837<pc>0304-c<k1>grAmIya<k2>grAmIya
{%Grāmīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a village or to
the same village community; produced in or derived
from a village; ({%as%}), m. a villager.
<LEND>

<L>17838<pc>0304-c<k1>grAmIyaka<k2>grAmIyaka
{%Grāmīyaka, as,%}¦ m. the member of a community,
a villager.
<LEND>

<L>17839<pc>0304-c<k1>grAmeya<k2>grAmeya
{%Grāmeya, as, ī, am,%}¦ village-born, a villager, a rustic.
<LEND>

<L>17840<pc>0304-c<k1>grAmeyaka<k2>grAmeyaka
{%Grāmeyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ belonging to a village,
a villager.
<LEND>

<L>17841<pc>0304-c<k1>grAmya<k2>grAmya
{%Grāmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or used in a village,
produced in a village; living in a village, a villager,
rustic, homely, vulgar, clownish, rude; living in a
village, i. e. among men, domesticated, tame (as an
animal), cultivated (as a plant, opposed to {%vanya%} or
{%araṇya,%} wild); allowed in a village, relating to the
sensual pleasures of a village; relating to a musical
scale; ({%as%}), m. a hog, a tame or village hog; ({%ā%}),
f. the Indigo plant, and Phaseolus Radiata; [cf. {%niṣ-%}
{%pāvī%}]; ({%am%}), n. rustic or homely speech; the
Prākṛt and the other dialects of India as contra-
distinguished from the Sanskrit; food prepared in a
village; sensual pleasure, sexual intercourse. {%—Grā-%}
{%mya-kanda, as,%} m. a kind of onion, {%= sthala-%}
{%kanda;%} (perhaps rather {%agrāmya-kanda.%}) {%—Grā-%}
{%mya-karkaṭī,%} f. a kind of pumpkin-gourd, Benincasa
Cerifera. {%—Grāmya-karman, a,%} n. the occupation
of a villager, sensual pleasure and sexual intercourse.
{%—Grāmya-kuṅkuma, am,%} n. a yellow dye, saf-
flower, Carthamus Tinctorius. {%—Grāmya-gaja, as,%} m.
a village-born or tame elephant. {%—Grāmya-dharma,%}
{%as,%} m. the right of a villager or townsman (as opposed
to the right of a recluse), sexual intercourse, copula-
tion; the duties of a villager. {%—Grāmyadharmin, %}
[Page0305-a+ 78]
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} addicted to sexual intercourse, libidinous.
{%—Grāmya-paśu, us,%} m. a domestic animal; (some-
times applied contemptuously to a man.) {%—Grāmya-%}
{%buddhi, is, is, i,%} clownish, ignorant. {%—Grāmya-%}
{%madgurikā,%} f. a kind of fish, Silurus Singio, {%=%}
{%grāma-madgurikā%}. {%—Grāmya-māṃsa, am,%} n. the
flesh of tame animals. {%—Grāmya-mṛga, as,%} m. a
dog; [cf. {%grāma-mṛga.%}] {%—Grāmya-rāśi, is,%} m. a
N. of several of the signs of the zodiac. {%—Grāmya-%}
{%vallabhā,%} f. a kind of vegetable. {%—Grāmya-vādin,%}
{%ī,%} m. the judge of a village, a village bailiff.
{%—Grāmya-śūkara, as,%} m. a village hog, a tame
hog, a pig. {%—Grāmya-sukha, am,%} n. the pleasure
of a villager, sleeping, sexual intercourse. {%—Grāmyā-%}
{%śva (˚ya-aś˚), as,%} m. an ass. {%—Grāmyehoparama%}
{%(˚ya-īhā-up˚), as,%} m. ceasing from sensual desires.
<LEND>

<L>17842<pc>0305-a<k1>grAvan<k2>grAvan
{#grAvan#}¦ {%grāvan, ā,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%grah%}), a stone for pressing out the Soma, (according
to the commentators on the Brāhmaṇas there existed
five such stones, but in earlier times probably only
two were used); a stone or rock in general; a moun-
tain; a cloud; also {%= grāva-stut%} below; ({%ā, ā, a%}),
hard, solid. {%—Grāva-grābha, as,%} m., Ved. a person
who uses the Soma stones. {%—Grāva-rohaka, as,%} m.
the shrub Physalis Flexuosa; [cf. {%aśva-gandhā.%}]
{%—Grāva-stut, t,%} m. he who praises the Soma
stones; N. of one of the sixteen priests (called
after the hymn addressed to the Soma stones).
{%—Grāva-stotrīya, as, ā, am,%} relating or belonging
to the praise of the Soma stones; ({%am%}), n. the
duties of the Grāva-stut. {%—Grāva-hasta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. handling the Soma stones.
<LEND>

<L>17843<pc>0305-a<k1>grAsa<k2>grAsa
{#grAsa#}¦ {%grāsa.%} See under rt. {%gras,%} p. 302.
<LEND>

<L>17844<pc>0305-a<k1>grAha<k2>grAha
{#grAha#}¦ {%grāha.%} See under rt. {%grah,%} p. 303.
<LEND>

<L>17845<pc>0305-a<k1>grIvA<k2>grIvA
{#grIvA#}¦ {%grīvā,%} f. (said to be fr. 2. {%gṝ%}), the back
part of the neck, the nape, the tendon of the trapezium
muscle, the neck (in the earlier literature always pl.),
the neck-part of the hide of an animal; [cf. {%asita-%}
{%grīva, ṛkṣa-g˚, kambu-g˚, kalmāṣa-g˚;%} cf. also
Lith. <nsi>galwà;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>glava</nsi> and <nsi>golova.</nsi>] {%—Grīvā-%}
{%kṣa (˚vā-ak˚), as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Grīvā-%}
{%ghaṇṭā,%} f. a bell hanging down from the neck of a
horse. {%—Grīvā-bila, am,%} n. the hollow in the back
part or nape of the neck.
<LEND>

<L>17846<pc>0305-a<k1>grIvAlikA<k2>grIvAlikA
{%Grīvālikā,%}¦ f. the neck.
<LEND>

<L>17847<pc>0305-a<k1>grIvin<k2>grIvin
{%Grīvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ long-necked, handsome-necked;
({%ī%}), m. a camel.
<LEND>

<L>17848<pc>0305-a<k1>grEva<k2>grEva
{%Graiva, as, ī, am,%}¦ being on or belonging to the
neck, representing the neck, being on the neck;
({%am%}), n. a necklace, a close necklace or collar; a
chain worn round the neck of an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>17849<pc>0305-a<k1>grEveya<k2>grEveya
{%Graiveya, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the neck; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. a collar, a necklace; a chain on the neck
of an elephant or horse.
<LEND>

<L>17850<pc>0305-a<k1>grEveyaka<k2>grEveyaka
{%Graiveyaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. an ornament of the
neck, a chain worn round the neck of an elephant;
({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of deities (nine in number), who
have their seat on the neck of the Loka-puruṣa or
who form his necklace.
<LEND>

<L>17851<pc>0305-a<k1>grEvya<k2>grEvya
{%Graivya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. relating to the neck.
<LEND>

<L>17852<pc>0305-a<k1>grIzma<k2>grIzma
{#grIzma#}¦ {%grīṣma, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%gras%}), hot, warm; ({%as%}), m. the summer, the hot
season, consisting of the months Śuci and Śukra or
Jyeṣṭha and Āṣāḍha (from the middle of May to
the middle of July); heat, warmth; N. of a man;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a tree [cf. {%lodhra%}]; ({%ī%}), f. the tree
Jasminum Sambac; [cf. {%nava-mallikā;%} cf. also Hib.
<nsi>gris,</nsi> ‘fire;’ <nsi>griosgaim,</nsi> ‘I fry, boil;’ <nsi>griosach,</nsi>
‘burning embers;’ Lith. <nsi>karsztas</nsi> and <nsi>karsztis.</nsi>]
{%—Grīṣma-kāla, as,%} m. the hot season (see above).
{%—Grīṣmakālīna, as, ā, am,%} pertaining to the hot
season. {%—Grīṣma-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by heat,
produced in the hot season; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of fruit-
tree, Anona Reticulata; [cf. {%lavanī.%}] {%—Grīṣma-%}
{%dhānya, am,%} n. summer corn. {%—Grīṣma-puṣpī,%}
f., N. of a plant, {%= karuṇī%}. {%—Grīṣma-bhava, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced by heat or in the hot season; ({%ā%}),
f. Jasminum Sambac. {%—Grīṣma-sundaraka, as,%}
[Page0305-b+ 72]
m. a kind of pot-herb, Erythræa Centaureoides,
commonly called {%gimā;%} also the plant Pharnaceum
Mollugo. {%—Grīṣma-hāsa, as,%} m. the flocculent
seeds, down, &c., blown about in the air in summer
(compared from their white colour to ‘the smiles of
the season’). {%—Grīṣmodbhava (˚ma-ud˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} produced by heat or in the hot season; ({%ā%}), f.
double jasmine, Jasminum Sambac.
<LEND>

<L>17853<pc>0305-b<k1>grEzma<k2>grEzma
{%Graiṣma, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the summer, be-
longing to the hot weather, produced by heat or the
hot season, sown in summer; ({%ī%}), f. Jasminum
Sambac.
<LEND>

<L>17854<pc>0305-b<k1>grEzmaka<k2>grEzmaka
{%Graiṣmaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ sown in summer; to
be paid in summer (as a debt).
<LEND>

<L>17855<pc>0305-b<k1>grEzmika<k2>grEzmika
{%Graiṣmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
summer, growing in summer.
<LEND>

<L>17856<pc>0305-b<k1>gruc<k2>gruc
{#gruc#}¦ {%gruc,%} cl. 1. P. {%grocati, jugroca,%}
{%agrucat%} and {%agrocīt, grocitum,%} to steal,
rob; to go; [cf. {%gluc.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17857<pc>0305-b<k1>grEva<k2>grEva
{#grEva#}¦ {%graiva.%} See under {%grīvā%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>17858<pc>0305-b<k1>grEzma<k2>grEzma
{#grEzma#}¦ {%graiṣma.%} See under {%grīṣma%} above.
<LEND>

<L>17859<pc>0305-b<k1>glap<k2>glap
{#glap#}¦ {%glap.%} Cf. {%glai.%}
<LEND>

<L>17860<pc>0305-b<k1>glapsa<k2>glapsa
{#glapsa#}¦ {%glapsa, as, am,%} m. n. a branch (?).
<LEND>

<L>17861<pc>0305-b<k1>glas<k2>glas
{#glas#}¦ {%glas,%} cl. 1. A. {%glasate, = gras,%} to
eat.
<LEND>

<L>17862<pc>0305-b<k1>glasta<k2>glasta
{%Glasta, as, ā, am, = grasta,%}¦ eaten.
<LEND>

<L>17863<pc>0305-b<k1>glah<k2>glah
{#glah#}¦ {%glah,%} cl. 1. A. {%glahate, jaglahe, gla-%}
{%hitum%} and {%glāḍhum,%} to gamble, play with
dice, win by gambling; (= rt. {%grah%}) to take, re-
ceive, accept.
<LEND>

<L>17864<pc>0305-b<k1>glaha<k2>glaha
{%Glaha, as,%}¦ m. a dice-player, the stake in playing,
a wager, bet; the prize or object fought for in a
contest, the person aimed at; a die; a dice-box;
cast of the dice, game at dice; gaming, playing
with dice; contention; a chess-man; {%glahaṃ div,%}
to play at dice.
<LEND>

<L>17865<pc>0305-b<k1>glahana<k2>glahana
{%Glahana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. playing at dice, casting
the dice.
<LEND>

<L>17866<pc>0305-b<k1>glAna<k2>glAna
{#glAna#}¦ {%glāna, glāni,%} &c. See under rt. {%glai.%}
<LEND>

<L>17867<pc>0305-b<k1>gluc<k2>gluc
{#gluc#}¦ {%gluc,%} cl. 1. P. {%glocati, jugloca, aglu-%}
{%cat%} and {%aglocīt, glocitum,%} to steal or rob;
to go; [cf. {%gruc%} and {%gluñc.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17868<pc>0305-b<k1>glucuka<k2>glucuka
{%Glucuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>17869<pc>0305-b<k1>gluYc<k2>gluYc
{#gluYc#}¦ {%gluñc,%} cl. 1. P. {%pluñcati, jugluñca,%}
{%agluñcat%} and {%agluñcīt, gluñcitum,%} to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>17870<pc>0305-b<k1>glep<k2>glep
{#glep#}¦ {%glep,%} cl. 1. A. {%glepate,%} &c., to be
poor or miserable; to shake, tremble;
move.
<LEND>

<L>17871<pc>0305-b<k1>glev<k2>glev
{#glev#}¦ {%glev,%} cl. 1. A. {%glevate,%} to serve,
worship, gratify by service or devotedness;
[cf. {%gev, khev, sev.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17872<pc>0305-b<k1>glez<k2>glez
{#glez#}¦ {%gleṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%gleṣate,%} to seek,
investigate; [cf. {%geṣ%} and {%gaveṣ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17873<pc>0305-b<k1>glE<k2>glE
{#glE#}¦ {%glai,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%glāyati, -te,%}
{%jaglau, glāsyati, aglāsīt, glātum,%} to feel
aversion or dislike, to be averse or reluctant, be un-
willing, disinclined to do anything (with inf., e. g.
{%glāyati bhoktum,%} he dislikes to eat); to be languid
or weary, to feel tired, to be exhausted, to fade away,
lose one's strength, faint, despond, wane: Caus. P.
{%glāpayati%} or {%glapayati%} (but the latter form never
used with prepositions), to make unwilling or averse,
to exhaust, tire; to injure; to cause to perish; (with
or without {%manas%}) to make desponding; to become
cast down or desponding.
<LEND>

<L>17874<pc>0305-b<k1>glapana<k2>glapana
{%Glapana, am,%}¦ n. the act of wearying, making
tired, exhaustion, relaxation.
<LEND>

<L>17875<pc>0305-b<k1>glAtf<k2>glAtf
{%Glātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who is tired or exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>17876<pc>0305-b<k1>glAna<k2>glAna
{%Glāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ wearied, languid, feeble, emaci-
ated, exhausted by fatigue or disease; sick; ({%am%}),
n. exhaustion, disease.
<LEND>
[Page0305-c+ 71]

<L>17877<pc>0305-c<k1>glAni<k2>glAni
{%Glāni, is,%}¦ f. unwillingness, displeasure, depression
of mind, exhaustion, fatigue of body, lassitude, lan-
guor; debility; sickness.
<LEND>

<L>17878<pc>0305-c<k1>glAnya<k2>glAnya
{%Glānya, am,%}¦ n. decrease of strength, languor.
<LEND>

<L>17879<pc>0305-c<k1>glAyat<k2>glAyat
{%Glāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being exhausted, wearied,
languid, faint.
<LEND>

<L>17880<pc>0305-c<k1>glAva<k2>glAva
{%Glāva, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man (with the metronymic
Maitreya).
<LEND>

<L>17881<pc>0305-c<k1>glAvin<k2>glAvin
{%Glāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ displeased, averse, inactive.
<LEND>

<L>17882<pc>0305-c<k1>glAsnu<k2>glAsnu
{%Glāsnu, us, us, u,%}¦ exhausted by fatigue or disease,
languid, wearied; [cf. Lat. <nsi>lassus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17883<pc>0305-c<k1>gleya<k2>gleya
{%Gleya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be wearied or exhausted, ex-
haustible.
<LEND>

<L>17884<pc>0305-c<k1>glO<k2>glO
{#glO#}¦ {%glau, aus,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%glai%}),
Ved. a round lump, a wen-like excrescence; or (ac-
cording to other authorities) certain arteries or vessels
of the heart, or perhaps certain lumps, parts of the flesh
of the sacrificial victim [perhaps related to {%globus%}
and {%glomus,%} cf. also {%guḍa%} and {%gola%}]; the moon;
camphor; the earth. {%Glau-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kartum,%} to transform into the moon. {%Glau-as,%}
cl. 2. P. {%-asti%} and {%glau-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%bhavati,%}
{%vitum,%} to become (like) the moon.
<LEND>

<L>17885<pc>0305-c<k1>glOcukAyanaka<k2>glOcukAyanaka
{#glOcukAyanaka#}¦ {%glaucukāyanaka, as, ikā, am,%}
belonging to Glucukāyani [cf. {%glucuka%}], a worship-
per of Glucukāyani; [cf. the Gr. <lang n="greek">Γλαυκανῖκαι.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>17886<pc>0305-c<k1>gva<k2>gva
{#gva#}¦ {%gva%} (at the end of a compound) in
{%atithi-gva, eta-gva, daśa-gva, nava-gva,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17887<pc>0305-c<k1>gvin<k2>gvin
{#gvin#}¦ {%gvin.%} Cf. {%śata-gvin.%}
<LEND>
<H>{#Ga#}

<L>17888<pc>0305-c<k1>Ga<k2>Ga<h>1
{#Ga#} 1¦. {%gha,%} the fourth consonant of the
Sanskrit alphabet, being the aspirate of the preceding
letter, and having the sound of <nsi>gh</nsi> in <nsi>loghouse</nsi>.
{%—Gha-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%gha.%}
<LEND>

<L>17889<pc>0305-c<k1>Ga<k2>Ga<h>2
{#Ga#} 2¦. {%gha,%} ind. (a particle used to lay stress
on a word), at least, surely, verily, indeed, (cor-
responding to the Gr. <lang n="greek">γε.</lang>) This word occurs often
in the Ṛg-veda, elsewhere rarely; the final vowel is
generally lengthened in the Saṃhitā, but the original
form given in the Pada-pāṭha is always {%gha;%} it is
connected with other particles (as {%cid, uta, id%}), and
appears often after pronouns at the beginning of a
Pāda, after prepositions, and after the negative
particle {%na.%} Frequently this particle occurs in the
clause which depends on a conditional or relative
sentence (e. g. {%ā ghā gamad yadi śravat,%} he will
surely come when he hears).
<LEND>

<L>17890<pc>0305-c<k1>Ga<k2>Ga<h>3
{#Ga#} 3¦. {%gha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%han%}), striking,
killing [cf. {%jīva-gha, tāḍa-gha, pāṇi-gha, rāja-%}
{%gha%}]; ({%as%}), m. a rattling, gurgling, or tinkling
sound; a bell; ({%ā%}), f. striking, killing, a stroke; a
tinkling ornament worn by women round the waist.
<LEND>

<L>17891<pc>0305-c<k1>Ga<k2>Ga<h>4
{#Ga#} 4¦. {%gha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ghṛ%}), wetting,
sprinkling (?).
<LEND>

<L>17892<pc>0305-c<k1>GaMz<k2>GaMz
{#GaMz#}¦ {%ghaṃṣ%} and {%ghaṃs,%} cl. 1. A. {%ghaṃ-%}
{%ṣate, ghaṃsate,%} to diffuse lustre or splen-
dor; to flow; to stream.
<LEND>

<L>17893<pc>0305-c<k1>GagG<k2>GagG
{#GagG#}¦ {%ghaggh%} and {%ghagh,%} cl. 1. P. {%ghag-%}
{%ghati%} and {%ghaghati,%} to laugh; laugh at;
deride.
<LEND>

<L>17894<pc>0305-c<k1>Gaw<k2>Gaw
{#Gaw#}¦ {%ghaṭ%} or {%ghaṇṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%ghaṭate, ja-%}
{%ghaṭe, ghaṭiṣyate, aghaṭiṣṭa, ghaṭitum,%}
to be intently occupied about anything, to be busy
with, to strive or endeavour after, to exert one's self
for (with loc., dat., acc., or inf., e. g. {%asmākam%}
{%arthe ghaṭate,%} he is occupied about our business;
{%tāṃ trātuṃ ghaṭasva,%} strive to rescue her); to
reach, come to; to happen, take place, be possible:
Caus. {%ghaṭayati, -yitum,%} to join together, connect,
bring together, unite; to put on, place on, lay on
(with loc.); to bring near, place near, procure; to
[Page0306-a+ 81]
effect, accomplish, produce, make, form, fashion; to
impel; to exert one's self; to rub, graze, touch,
move, agitate; {%ghāṭayati, -yitum,%} to hurt, injure;
to unite or put together; to speak, shine.
<LEND>

<L>17895<pc>0306-a<k1>Gawa<k2>Gawa
{%Ghaṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ exerting one's self, intently
occupied or busy with; ({%as%}), m. a jar, pitcher, jug,
large earthen water-jar, ewer, watering-pot; an attri-
bute of the nineteenth Arhat of the Jainas (?);
the sign of the zodiac Aquarius; a measure equal to
1 Droṇa, or (according to other authorities) equal to
20 Droṇas; a part of a column; a peculiar form of
a temple; an elephant's frontal sinus; a border;
suspending the breath as a religious exercise [cf.
{%kumbha%}]; ({%ā%}), f. effort, endeavour, an assembly; a
number, a collection, an assemblage; a troop of
elephants assembled for martial purposes; ({%ī%}), f. a
small water-jar, a ewer (in this sense also {%ghaṭi, is,%}
f.); a period of time = 24 minutes; the Gharī or
Indian clock, a plate of iron or mixed metal on
which the hours are struck; [cf. {%kumbha%} and {%dur-%}
{%ghaṭa.%}] {%—Ghaṭa-karpara, as,%} m. the fragments of
a pot; N. of the author of a highly artificial poem,
which is also called {%ghaṭa-karparam,%} n., (according
to other authorities the title of the poem is Yamaka-
kāvya); the poet Ghaṭa-karpara appears among the
nine gems of king Vikramāditya. {%—Ghaṭa-kāra, as,%}
m. or {%ghaṭa-kṛt, t,%} m. a potter. {%—Ghaṭa-graha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} who or what takes a water-pot, a water-
bearer. {%—Ghaṭa-dāsī,%} f. a bawd or procuress. {%—Gha-%}
{%ṭa-prakṣayaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Ghaṭa-%}
{%bhava = ghaṭodbhava (?)%}. {%—Ghaṭa-bhedanaka,%}
{%as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), an instrument used in
making pots. {%—Ghaṭa-yoni, is,%} m. an epithet of
the sage Agastya, q. v. (born in a water-jar). {%—Ghaṭa-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. a large water-jar of baked clay. {%—Ghaṭa-%}
{%sṛñjaya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Ghaṭa-%}
{%sthāpana, am,%} n. placing a water-pot as a type of
Durgā, an essential part of various Tāntrika cere-
monies. {%—Ghaṭāṭopa (˚ṭa-āṭ˚), as,%} m. a covering
for a carriage or any article of furniture. {%—Ghaṭābha%}
{%(˚ṭa-ābhā), as,%} m., N. of a Daitya. {%—Ghaṭin-%}
{%dhama, as, ā, am, (ghaṭin = ghaṭim = ghaṭīm),%}
one who blows into a jar or pot; ({%as%}), m. a potter.
{%—Ghaṭin-dhaya, as, ā, am,%} one who drinks
a pitcherful. {%—Ghaṭī-kāra, as,%} m. a potter.
{%—Ghaṭī-graha, as, ā, am,%} who or what takes a
small jar &c.; ({%as%}), m. a water-carrier. {%—Ghaṭī-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n. (occasionally, to suit the metre,
{%ghaṭi-yantra%}), the rope and bucket of a well, or
any machine for raising water; [cf. {%ara-ghaṭṭa%} and
{%ara-ghaṭṭaka.%}] {%—Ghaṭotkaca (˚ṭa-ut˚), as,%} m., N.
of a Rākṣasa, son of Bhīma or Bhīma-sena and of the
Rākṣasī Hiḍimbā, slain by Karṇa; N. of a Gupta
king. {%—Ghaṭotkacāntaka (˚ca-an˚), as,%} m. ‘the
slayer of Ghaṭotkaca,’ epithet of Karṇa, natural
brother of the Pāṇḍavas. {%—Ghaṭodara (˚ṭa-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an attendant of Varuṇa, also of a
Rākṣasa and of a Daitya; [cf. {%kumbhodara.%}]
{%—Ghaṭodbhava (˚ṭa-ud˚), as,%} m. an epithet of
Agastya, q. v. {%—Ghaṭodhnī (˚ṭa-ūdh˚),%} f. a cow
with a full udder; [see {%ūdhas, pīnodhnī,%} &c.;
Gram. 778.]
<LEND>

<L>17896<pc>0306-a<k1>Gawaka<k2>Gawaka
{%Ghaṭaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ exerting one's self; form-
ing a constituent part, constituting a substantial part;
({%as%}), m. a tree that produces fruit without apparent
flowers; a match-maker, an agent, who ascertains
or invents genealogies and negociates matrimonial
alliances, a genealogist; [cf. {%ghaṭa-dāsī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17897<pc>0306-a<k1>Gawana<k2>Gawana
{%Ghaṭana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. striving after, effort, exer-
tion; motion; happening, occurring; accomplish-
ment; making, effecting, forming, fashioning; join-
ing, mixing, assembling, bringing together, bringing
about.
<LEND>

<L>17898<pc>0306-a<k1>Gawayitavya<k2>Gawayitavya
{%Ghaṭayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be joined or united;
to be locked.
<LEND>

<L>17899<pc>0306-a<k1>Gawika<k2>Gawika
{%Ghaṭika, as, ā, am,%}¦ crossing a river on a jar (?);
({%as%}), m. a waterman; ({%ā%}), f. a water-jar, a bucket,
a pot; a period of time = 24 minutes [cf. {%ghaṭī%}];
(according to other authorities equal to 1 Muhūrta,
i. e. 48 minutes, or = 1 Kalā); the ancle [cf. {%ghuṭikā%}];
({%am%}), n. the hip, the posteriors.
<LEND>
[Page0306-b+ 77]

<L>17900<pc>0306-b<k1>Gawita<k2>Gawita
{%Ghaṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ planned, devised, attempted;
happened, occurred; joined, united, connected, con-
tiguous, in contact with; produced, effected, exerted;
made, made of. {%Ghaṭita-tvāt,%} from the taking
place, because of the occurrence.
<LEND>

<L>17901<pc>0306-b<k1>Gawin<k2>Gawin
{%Ghaṭin, ī,%}¦ m. the sign of the zodiac Aquarius.
<LEND>

<L>17902<pc>0306-b<k1>GawarikA<k2>GawarikA
{#GawarikA#}¦ {%ghaṭarikā,%} in {%ava-ghaṭarikā,%} f. a
a kind of Vīṇā or Indian lute; [cf. {%ghāṭarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17903<pc>0306-b<k1>GawiGawa<k2>GawiGawa
{#GawiGawa#}¦ {%ghaṭighaṭa, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva; [cf. {%ghaṇṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17904<pc>0306-b<k1>Gaww<k2>Gaww
{#Gaww#}¦ {%ghaṭṭ,%} cl. 1. A. and 10. P. {%ghaṭṭate,%}
{%ghaṭṭayati, jaghaṭṭe, ghaṭṭitum,%} to rub
(the hands) over, touch, shake, cause to move; to
stir round, stir about; to press down, to smooth; to
touch with words, to speak of spitefully or malig-
nantly.
<LEND>

<L>17905<pc>0306-b<k1>Gawwa<k2>Gawwa
{%Ghaṭṭa, as,%}¦ m. a Ghaṭ, a quay or landing-place,
steps on the side of a river &c. leading to the water's
edge, a bathing-place; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of metre; ({%ī%}),
f. a small or inferior landing-place, private stairs &c.;
[cf. {%ara-ghaṭṭa%} and {%ara-ghaṭṭaka.%}] {%—Ghaṭṭa-gā,%}
f., N. of a river. {%—Ghaṭṭa-jīvin, ī,%} m. a ferry-man
(commonly Pāṭuni, the son of a washerman and of
a Vaiśya woman); an attendant at a landing-place
who takes care of the clothes of the bathers &c.
{%—Ghaṭṭānanda (˚ṭṭā-ān˚), as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or
n. (?), a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>17906<pc>0306-b<k1>Gawwana<k2>Gawwana
{%Ghaṭṭana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. pushing, touching, rubbing
or striking together, going, moving, practice, busi-
ness, means of living; stirring round or about.
<LEND>

<L>17907<pc>0306-b<k1>Gawwitf<k2>Gawwitf
{%Ghaṭṭitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who exerts himself,
(the sense of this word connects it with rt. {%ghaṭ.%})
<LEND>

<L>17908<pc>0306-b<k1>GaR<k2>GaR
{#GaR#}¦ {%ghaṇ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%ghaṇoti, -ṇute,%} &c.,
to shine; (a various reading for {%ghṛṇ.%})
<LEND>

<L>17909<pc>0306-b<k1>GaRw<k2>GaRw
{#GaRw#}¦ {%ghaṇṭ,%} cl. 1. P. and 10. P. {%ghaṇṭati%}
and {%ghaṇṭayati,%} &c., to speak; shine.
<LEND>

<L>17910<pc>0306-b<k1>GaRwa<k2>GaRwa
{#GaRwa#}¦ {%ghaṇṭa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%han,%}
perhaps related to {%ghaṭa%} above), a N. of Śiva [cf.
{%a-ghaṇṭa, dhaṭin%} or {%ghaṭin%} (?), {%ghaṇṭin,%} and
{%caṇḍika-ghaṇṭa%}], a kind of dish [cf. {%matsya-%}
{%ghaṇṭa%}]; a sort of sauce, vegetables made into a
pulp and mixed with turmeric and mustard seeds and
capsicums; ({%ā%}), f. a bell; also a plate of iron or mixed
metal struck as a clock, (a form {%ghaṇṭī%} occurs in
{%kṣudra-ghaṇṭī,%} a small bell); N. of several plants,
{%= ghaṇṭā-pāṭali;%} another plant, Sida Cordifolia
and Rhombifolia; also Uraria Lagopodioides; also
Achyranthes Aspera [cf. {%apāmārga%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a N. of
Durgā, as having a clear voice (?). {%—Ghaṇṭa-pha-%}
{%laka, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), a shield with a
ringing sound, or a shield furnished with small bells.
{%(Ghaṇṭa = ghaṇṭā ?)%}. {%—Ghaṇṭā-karṇa, as,%} m.
one who has ears as broad as a bell, or whose ears
are decorated with bells; N. of an attendant of
Skanda; also one of Śiva's attendants, who is sup-
posed to preside over cutaneous complaints, and is
worshipped for exemption from them in the month
Caitra; N. of a Piśāca attendant on Kuvera.
{%—Ghaṇṭāgāra (˚ṭā-āg˚), am,%} n. a belfry.
{%—Ghaṇṭā-tāḍa, as,%} m. a bell-man, one who strikes
a bell or Gharī. {%—Ghaṇṭā-tāḍana, am,%} n. striking
a bell. {%—Ghaṇṭā-nāda, as,%} m. the sound of a bell
&c. {%—Ghaṇṭā-patha, as,%} m. the chief road through
a village, a highway, (i. e. the bell-road, or that by
which elephants &c., decorated with tinkling orna-
ments, proceed); N. of Mallinātha's commentary on
the Kirātārjunīya. {%—Ghaṇṭā-pāṭali, is,%} m., N. of a
plant, commonly called Ghaṇṭāpārali, a species of the
trumpet-flower with bell-shaped blossoms, Bignonia
Suaveolens. {%—Ghaṇṭābha (˚ṭā-ābhā), as,%} m., N. of
a Daitya; (a various reading for {%ghaṭābha,%} q. v.)
{%—Ghaṇṭā-rava, as,%} m. the sound of a bell; ({%ā%}), f.
Crotolaria of various species. {%—Ghaṇṭālī (˚ṭā-ālī),%}
f., N. of several cucurbitaceous plants; [cf. {%kośātakī.%}]
{%—Ghaṇṭā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with a bell or
with bells. {%—Ghaṇṭā-vādya, am,%} n. the sound of
a clock. {%—Ghaṇṭā-vīja, am,%} n. the tree Croton
[Page0306-c+ 79]
Jamalgota, commonly Jamālgoṭā; the nut of this
tree. {%—Ghaṇṭā-śabda, as,%} m. bell-metal, brass;
the sound of a bell. {%—Ghaṇṭā-svana, as,%} m. the
sound of a bell or clock. {%—Ghaṇṭeśvara (˚ṭā-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Maṅgala (Mars) and Medhā.
{%—Ghaṇṭodara (˚ṭa-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of an attend-
ant of Varuṇa &c.; (a various reading for {%ghaṭo-%}
{%dara,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>17911<pc>0306-c<k1>GaRwaka<k2>GaRwaka
{%Ghaṇṭaka%}¦ or {%ghaṇṭāka, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
{%= ghaṇṭā-pāṭali.%}
<LEND>

<L>17912<pc>0306-c<k1>GaRwikA<k2>GaRwikA
{%Ghaṇṭikā,%}¦ f. a small bell [cf. {%kṣudra-ghaṇṭikā%}];
the uvula or soft palate.
<LEND>

<L>17913<pc>0306-c<k1>GaRwin<k2>GaRwin
{%Ghaṇṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ furnished with bells, sounding
like a bell; an epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%ghaṇṭa.%}]
{%—Ghaṇṭinī-vīja, am,%} n. the tree Croton Jamalgota;
[cf. {%ghaṇṭā-vīja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17914<pc>0306-c<k1>GaRwu<k2>GaRwu
{%Ghaṇṭu, us,%}¦ m. a string of bells tied on an ele-
phant's chest &c. by way of ornament; heat, light,
&c.; [cf. {%nighaṇṭu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17915<pc>0306-c<k1>GARwika<k2>GARwika
{%Ghāṇṭika, as,%}¦ m. a bell-ringer, a strolling ballad-
singer who carries a bell; a bard who sings in chorus,
and especially in honour of the gods, ringing a bell
in presence of their images; the plant Datura
Fastuosa.
<LEND>

<L>17916<pc>0306-c<k1>GaRqa<k2>GaRqa
{#GaRqa#}¦ {%ghaṇḍa, as,%} m. a bee; [cf. {%ghuṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17917<pc>0306-c<k1>Gatana<k2>Gatana
{#Gatana#}¦ {%ghatana.%} See {%ghātana%} under {%ghāta.%}
<LEND>

<L>17918<pc>0306-c<k1>Gana<k2>Gana
{#Gana#}¦ {%ghana, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%han%}), who or
what slays or strikes or crushes (in these senses Ved.);
compact, solid, material, hard, firm; coarse, gross;
viscid, thick, inspissated; full, densely packed; fol-
lowing closely or in uninterrupted series, uninter-
rupted, permanent, eternal; impenetrable; dark;
deep (as sound); taken in the mass, collective, com-
plete, all; very, much; auspicious, fortunate; ({%as%}), m.
slaying; an iron club, mace, weapon shaped like a
hammer (in these senses Ved.); any compact mass or
substance; a cloud; talc; the bulbous root of the
plant Cyperus Hexastychus Communis; phlegm [cf.
{%kapha%}]; the body; the cube of a number (in
arithmetic), a solid body or cube (in geometry);
extension, diffusion; a collection, multitude, as-
semblage, mass, quantity; a method of reciting the
Ṛg and Yajur-veda; ({%ā%}), f., N. of two plants, {%=%}
{%māṣa-parṇī%} and {%rudra-jaṭā; (am),%} n. a cymbal,
a bell, a gong, &c.; any brazen or metallic instru-
ment or plate which is struck as a clock &c.;
iron; tin; skin, rind, bark, the fragrant bark of
Laurus Cassia; a mode of dancing, neither quick
nor slow. {%—Ghana-kapha, as,%} m. hail; [cf.
{%ghanopala.%}] {%—Ghana-kāla, as,%} m. the rainy sea-
son. {%—Ghana-garjita, am,%} n. the roar of thunder,
a deep loud roar. {%—Ghana-golaka, as,%} m. an alloy
of gold and silver. {%—Ghana-ghana, as,%} m. the cube
of a cube. {%—Ghana-ghanaugha (˚na-ogh˚), as,%} m.
a gathering of dark clouds. {%—Ghana-caya, as,%} m. a
collection of clouds, cumulus. {%—Ghana-cchada, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} involved in clouds. {%—Ghana-jambāla, as,%}
m. a quantity of mire, a slough. {%—Ghana-jāla, am,%}
n. a gathering of clouds. {%—Ghana-jvālā,%} f. lightning,
a flash of lightning. {%—Ghana-tā,%} f. compactness.
{%—Ghana-tāla, as,%} m. a kind of bird, {%= sāraṅga;%}
[cf. also {%ghana-tola.%}] {%—Ghana-timira, am,%} n. the
darkness of clouds, great darkness. {%—Ghana-toya,%}
{%as,%} m. a particular sea having thick water; [cf.
{%ghanoda.%}] {%—Ghana-tola, as,%} m. the bird Cātaka.
{%—Ghana-tva, am,%} n. or {%ghana-tā,%} f. compactness,
firmness; thickness, coarseness, solidity. {%—Ghana-%}
{%druma, as,%} m., N. of a plant; [cf. {%vi-kaṇṭaka.%}]
{%—Ghana-dhātu, us,%} m. lymph. {%—Ghana-dhvani,%}
{%is, is, i,%} roaring, who or what makes a roaring; ({%is%}),
m. a deep and low tone, a roar; the muttering of
thunder clouds. {%—Ghana-nābhi, is,%} m. smoke
(being supposed to be a principal ingredient in
clouds). {%—Ghana-nīhāra, as,%} m. thick hoar-frost or
mist. {%—Ghana-pattra, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%punar-navā%}. {%—Ghana-pada, am,%} n. the cube root.
{%—Ghana-padavī,%} f. the path of the clouds, the
sky. {%—Ghana-payodhara, as,%} m. a firm breast.
{%—Ghana-pallava, as,%} m. the plant Guilandina
[Page0307-a+ 81]
Moringa; [cf. {%śobhāñjana.%}] {%—Ghana-pāṣaṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. a peacock, (this bird being supposed to de-
light in cloudy and rainy weather.) {%—Ghana-phala,%}
{%am,%} n. (in geom.) the solid or cubical contents of a
body or of an excavation compared to a cube;
({%as%}), m., N. of a plant; [cf. {%vi-kaṇṭaka.%}] {%—Ghana-%}
{%mala, am,%} n. deep (thunder) and sin. {%—Ghana-%}
{%mūla, am,%} n. (in arithm.) cube root; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a plant; [cf. {%moraṭa.%}] {%—Ghana-rava, as,%} m. the
roaring of clouds, thunder. {%—Ghana-rasa, as,%} m.
a thick juice; extract, decoction; camphor; N. of
two plants, {%= moraṭa%} and {%pīlu-parṇī;%} ({%as%} or {%am%}),
m. n. the fluid of the clouds, water. {%—Ghana-ruc,%}
{%k, k, k,%} shining like a cloud (with lightning), cloud-
like. {%—Ghana-rucira-kalāpa, as,%} m. (a peacock)
having a tail glistening like a cloud. {%—Ghana-vara,%}
{%am,%} n. the face; [cf. {%ghanottama.%}] {%—Ghana-varga,%}
{%as,%} m. the square of a cube; the sixth power. {%—Ghana-%}
{%vartman, a,%} n. the path of the clouds, the sky, air.
{%—Ghana-rallikā,%} f. lightning; (the creeper of the
clouds.) {%—Ghana-vallī,%} f. lightning; N. of a plant,
{%= amṛta-savā%}. {%—Ghana-vāta, as,%} m. a thick op-
pressive atmosphere or air (constituting a kind of hell);
one of the regions of hell (?). {%—Ghana-vāsa, as,%} m. a
kind of pumpkin-gourd; [cf. {%kuṣmāṇḍa.%}] {%—Ghana-%}
{%vāhana, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva, and also of Indra
(who rides on the clouds). {%—Ghana-vīthi, is,%} f. the
path of the clouds, the air; a line of clouds. {%—Ghana-%}
{%vyapāya, as,%} m. the disappearance of the clouds;
autumn. {%—Ghana-vyūha, as,%} m., N. of a Sūtra work.
{%—Ghana-śabda, as,%} m. the noise of clouds, thun-
der. {%—Ghana-śyāma, as, ā, am,%} deep black, dark
(as heavy clouds); ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Rāma,
and also of Kṛṣṇa; N. of a copyist of the last
century, with the epithet Tripāṭhin. {%—Ghana-saṃ-%}
{%vṛtti, is,%} f. profound secrecy. {%—Ghana-samaya, as,%}
m. the rainy season. {%—Ghana-sāra, as,%} m. camphor;
mercury, or some peculiar form of it (?); water; a
kind of tree. {%—Ghana-skandha, as,%} m., N. of a
plant; [cf. {%kośāmra.%}] {%—Ghana-svana, as,%} m. low
thunder, the muttering of clouds; the plant Ama-
ranthus Polygamus. {%—Ghana-hasta-saṅkhyā,%} f. (in
geom.) the contents of an excavation; or of a solid
alike in figure. {%—Ghanākara (˚na-āk˚), as,%} m. the
rainy season. {%—Ghanāgama (˚na-āg˚), as,%} m. the
approach of the clouds, the rainy season. {%—Ghanā-%}
{%ghana, as, ā, am,%} fond of slaughter, easily striking
down, fond of strife, mischievous, cruel; even, uni-
form, without spaces or interstices, compact; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Indra; a vicious elephant, or one
in rut; a thick or rainy cloud; mutual collision or
contact; ({%ā%}), f. Solanum Indicum; [cf. {%kāka-mācī.%}]
{%—Ghanājñāna (˚na-aj˚), am,%} n. gross ignorance.
{%—Ghanāñjanī (˚na-añj˚),%} f. an epithet of Durgā.
{%—Ghanātyaya (˚na-aty˚), as,%} m. the disappearance
or departure of the clouds, the season succeeding
the rains, autumn. {%—Ghanānta (˚na-anta), as,%} m.
the end of the rains, autumn. {%—Ghanāmaya (˚na-%}
{%ām˚), as,%} m. the date tree, Phœnix Sylvestris; [cf.
{%kharjūra.%}] {%—Ghanāmala (˚na-am˚), as,%} m. a kind
of pot-herb, Chenopodium Album; [cf. {%vāstūka.%}]
{%—Ghanāmbu (˚na-am˚),%} n. rain. {%—Ghanāruṇa%}
{%(˚na-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} deep red. {%—Ghanāruddha%}
{%(˚na-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} overspread with clouds. {%—Gha-%}
{%nāvaruddha (˚na-av˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘the abode
of clouds, overspread with clouds. {%—Ghanāśraya%}
{%(˚na-āś˚), as,%} m. ether, the atmosphere, the heavens,
the firmament. {%—Ghanottama (˚na-ut˚), am,%} n. the
face (the best part of the {%ghana%} or body); [cf.
{%ghana-vara.%}] {%—Ghanoda (˚na-uda), as,%} m. a par-
ticular sea having thick or viscid water; [cf. {%ghana-%}
{%toya.%}] {%—Ghanodadhi (˚na-ud˚), is,%} m. the viscid
sea (constituting a kind of hell); a division of hell (?).
{%—Ghanoparaddha (˚na-up˚), as, ā, am,%} clouded,
overcast. {%—Ghanopala (˚na-up˚), as,%} m. hail; [cf.
{%ghana-kapha.%}] {%—Ghanaugha (˚na-ogha), as,%} m.
a gathering of clouds.
<LEND>

<L>17919<pc>0307-a<k1>GanIkf<k2>GanIkf
{%Ghanī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to harden,
thicken, solidify, congeal. {%—Ghanī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
hardened, compacted, made solid or firm; congealed,
thickened, condensed.
<LEND>
[Page0307-b+ 76]

<L>17920<pc>0307-b<k1>GanIBAva<k2>GanIBAva
{%Ghanī-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. the becoming hardened,
compact or thick, thickening. {%—Ghanī-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} become thick, thickened, condensed, thick,
congealed, inspissated, compact.
<LEND>

<L>17921<pc>0307-b<k1>GanIya<k2>GanIya
{%Ghanīya,%}¦ nom. P. {%ghanīyati, -yitum,%} to long for
solid food.
<LEND>

<L>17922<pc>0307-b<k1>Gamb<k2>Gamb
{#Gamb#}¦ {%ghamb,%} cl. 1. A. {%ghambate,%} &c., to
move, go.
<LEND>

<L>17923<pc>0307-b<k1>Gar<k2>Gar
{#Gar#}¦ {%ghar,%} cl. 10. P. {%ghārayati, -yitum,%} to
cover.
<LEND>

<L>17924<pc>0307-b<k1>Garawwa<k2>Garawwa
{#Garawwa#}¦ {%gharaṭṭa, as,%} m. a grindstone.
<LEND>

<L>17925<pc>0307-b<k1>GarGawa<k2>GarGawa
{#GarGawa#}¦ {%gharghaṭa, as,%} m. a kind of fish,
Pimelodus Gagora or Tengara; [cf. {%gargara, gar-%}
{%garaka, gargāṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17926<pc>0307-b<k1>GarGara<k2>GarGara
{#GarGara#}¦ {%gharghara, as, ā, am%} (an onomato-
poetic word implying an indistinct sound, especially
in the throat), uttered with an indistinct gurgling or
purring sound; ({%as%}), m. an indistinct murmur, a
low murmuring or gurgling sound, the crackling of fire,
rattling of a carriage, creaking, &c.; laughter, mirth; an
owl; a fire of straw or chaff; a door, gate; a sliding
or folding door or curtain (?); the pass of a moun-
tain (?); the N. of a river, the Gogra or Ghogra;
({%ā%}), f. a bell hanging on the neck of a horse; ({%ā, ī%}),
f. a bell used as an ornament; a girdle of small bells
or tinkling ornaments worn by women; a kind of
lute; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. one of the tones or notes
in music. {%—Ghargharā-rava, as,%} m. a tinkling
sound, the sound of small bells.
<LEND>

<L>17927<pc>0307-b<k1>GarGaraka<k2>GarGaraka
{%Ghargharaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a river, {%= ghar-%}
{%ghara; (ikā),%} f. bells used as an ornament; a short
stick for striking several kinds of musical instruments;
a kind of musical instrument; fried grain; N. of a
river; an ornament of small bells.
<LEND>

<L>17928<pc>0307-b<k1>GarGarita<k2>GarGarita
{%Ghargharita, am,%}¦ n. the grunting of a pig &c.
<LEND>

<L>17929<pc>0307-b<k1>GarGurGA<k2>GarGurGA
{#GarGurGA#}¦ {%gharghurghā,%} f. a sort of insect
found in wood, {%= yama-kīṭa;%} [cf. {%ghurghura.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17930<pc>0307-b<k1>Garb<k2>Garb
{#Garb#}¦ {%gharb,%} cl. 1. P. {%gharbati, -bitum,%} to
move, to go.
<LEND>

<L>17931<pc>0307-b<k1>Garma<k2>Garma
{#Garma#}¦ {%gharma, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ghṛ%} or {%ghṛṇ%}),
heat, warmth (of the sun as well as of fire), sunshine;
the hot season, internal heat; sweat, perspiration; a
cauldron, a boiler, saucepan, &c., especially the vessel
in which the milk-offering to the Aśvins is boiled;
a cavity in the earth shaped like a cauldron or boiler,
an excavation; a crater; hot milk or any other hot
beverage offered as an oblation, especially to the
Aśvins; N. of a son of Anu and father of Ghṛta;
{%gharma-tanū,%} du., N. of a Sāman; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">θέρμη;</lang>
Zend <nsi>garĕma;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>varmja;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>warm.</nsi>]
{%—Gharma-carcikā,%} f. eruptions caused by heat and
suppressed perspiration. {%—Gharma-ccheda, as,%} m.
cessation of the heat. {%—Gharma-tapta, as, ā, am,%}
perspiring. {%—Gharma-dīdhiti, is,%} m. ‘having warm
rays,’ the sun; [cf. {%śītāṃśu.%}] {%—Gharma-dugha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} or {%gharma-duh, -dhuk, k, k,%} Ved. giving
warm milk or the substance used for the offering.
{%—Gharma-dyuti, is,%} m. ‘having warm radiance,’
the sun. {%—Gharma-payas, as,%} n. perspiration; warm
water. {%—Gharma-pāvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. drinking
hot milk. {%—Gharma-māsa, as,%} m. a month of the
hot season. {%—Gharma-raśmi, is,%} m. the sun; heat,
radiance; [cf. {%gharma-dīdhiti.%}] {%—Gharma-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of heat, an epithet of
Indra. {%—Gharma-vicarcikā,%} f. cutaneous eruptions
or pimples from heat and suppressed perspiration; [cf.
{%gharma-carcikā.%}] {%—Gharma-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. sitting
near the fire or living in the heat (of the sky), an
epithet of the manes. {%—Gharma-stubh, p, p, p,%} Ved.
assuaging the heat, an epithet of the Maruts. {%—Ghar-%}
{%ma-svaras, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. breathing out heat;
(Sāy.) sounding high or shrill {%(= dīpta-dhvani).%}
{%—Gharma-sveda, as, ā, am,%} Ved. perspiring with
heat, or one whose sweat is milk; (Sāy.) coming
with splendor or showering down water or coming
to the oblation. {%—Gharmāṃśa (˚ma-aṃśu), us,%} m.
[Page0307-c+ 77]
the sun; [cf. {%gharma-dīdhiti.%}] {%—Gharmūnta (˚ma-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. the end of the hot season, the beginning
of the rainy season. {%—Gharmānta-kāmukī,%} f. a
small white bird, a kind of crane; [cf. {%ralākā.%}]
{%—Gharmāmbu (˚ma-am˚),%} n. sweat, perspiration.
{%—Gharmāmbhas (˚ma-am˚), as,%} n. perspiration.
{%—Gharmārta (˚ma-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} suffering
from heat. {%—Gharmodaka (˚ma-ud˚), am,%} n. warm
water, perspiration.
<LEND>

<L>17932<pc>0307-c<k1>Garmin<k2>Garmin
{%Gharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. one who has prepared the
Gharma offering, engaged in preparing the Gharma.
<LEND>

<L>17933<pc>0307-c<k1>Garmya<k2>Garmya
{%Gharmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in the Gharma
or milk-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>17934<pc>0307-c<k1>Garza<k2>Garza
{#Garza#}¦ {%gharṣa, gharṣaṇa,%} &c. See under
rt. {%ghṛṣ,%} p. 309.
<LEND>

<L>17935<pc>0307-c<k1>Gas<k2>Gas
{#Gas#}¦ {%ghas%} (according to Pāṇini II. 4, 37,
a defective verb only used to supply certain
tenses of {%ad,%} such as the Aor. and Desid.), cl. 2. and
1. P. {%ghasti%} and {%ghasati:%} Impf. 2nd sing. {%aghas%} or
{%aghat;%} 2nd pl. {%aghasta:%} Perf. {%jaghasa, jaghasitha,%}
{%jaghāsa;%} 3rd pl. {%jakṣus%} (Part. Perf. {%jakṣivas,%}
fem. {%jakṣuṣī%}); {%aghasat, ghatsyati, ghastum,%} to
consume, devour, eat: Desid. {%jighatsati,%} to wish to
consume or devour, wish to eat; [cf. rt. {%jakṣ%} and
{%gras;%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">γαστήρ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>gustus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>17936<pc>0307-c<k1>Gasa<k2>Gasa
{%Ghasa, as,%}¦ m. the eater or devourer; N. of a
kind of demon; also of a Rākṣasa; [cf. {%mahā-ghasa%}
and {%pra-ghasa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17937<pc>0307-c<k1>Gasi<k2>Gasi
{%Ghasi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. food, victuals; [cf. {%ghāsi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17938<pc>0307-c<k1>Gasmara<k2>Gasmara
{%Ghasmara, as, ā, am,%}¦ voracious, gluttonous;
({%as%}), m., N. of a deer (or a Brāhman changed into
a deer).
<LEND>

<L>17939<pc>0307-c<k1>Gasra<k2>Gasra
{%Ghasra, as, ā, am,%}¦ hurtful, injurious, mischievous,
{%= hiṃsra; (as),%} m. a day [cf. {%ghraṃsa%}]; ({%am%}), n.
saffron.
<LEND>

<L>17940<pc>0307-c<k1>GAsa<k2>GAsa
{%Ghāsa, as,%}¦ m. food, meadow or pasture grass;
[cf. {%aśva-ghāsa%} and {%pūti-ghāsa.%}] {%—Ghāsa-kūṭa,%}
{%am,%} n. a hay-rick. {%—Ghāsa-sthāna, am,%} n. pasture,
pasturage, food. {%—Ghāse-ajra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. im-
pelling to consume, i. e. inviting or exciting appetite.
<LEND>

<L>17941<pc>0307-c<k1>GAsaka<k2>GAsaka
{%Ghāsaka,%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) food, victuals.
<LEND>

<L>17942<pc>0307-c<k1>GAsi<k2>GAsi
{%Ghāsi, is,%}¦ m. fire or its deity (the all-consuming).
<LEND>

<L>17943<pc>0307-c<k1>GAwa<k2>GAwa
{#GAwa#}¦ {%ghāṭa, as, ā,%} m. f. the nape or back
of the neck, the cervical ligament; ({%as%}), m. a pitcher,
a pot (? for {%ghaṭa%}); [cf. {%kara-ghāṭa.%}] {%—Ghāṭa-%}
{%karkarī,%} f. a kind of lute.
<LEND>

<L>17944<pc>0307-c<k1>GAwarI<k2>GAwarI
{%Ghāṭarī,%}¦ f. a kind of lute; [cf. {%ghaṭarikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17945<pc>0307-c<k1>GAwika<k2>GAwika
{%Ghāṭika, as,%}¦ m. {%= ghāṇṭika; (ā),%} f. the nape or
back of the neck; also incorrectly used for {%gha-%}
{%ṭikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17946<pc>0307-c<k1>GAwAla<k2>GAwAla
{#GAwAla#}¦ {%ghāṭāla, as, ā, am%} (a wrong form
for {%ghaṇṭāla%}), bell-shaped (?).
<LEND>

<L>17947<pc>0307-c<k1>GARwika<k2>GARwika
{#GARwika#}¦ {%ghāṇṭika.%} See under {%ghaṇṭā.%}
<LEND>

<L>17948<pc>0307-c<k1>GAta<k2>GAta
{#GAta#}¦ {%ghāta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%han%}), killing;
({%as%}), m. a blow, a bruise, slaying killing, murdering,
slaughter; striking, wounding, hurting, destruction;
an arrow; the product (of a sum in multiplication);
[cf. {%karma-ghāta%} and {%grāma-ghāta.%}] {%—Ghāta-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} murderous, destructive. {%—Ghāta-%}
{%candra, as,%} m. the moon when in an inauspicious
mansion. {%—Ghāta-tithi, is,%} f. an inauspicious lunar
day. {%—Ghāta-nakṣatra, am,%} n. an inauspicious
Nakṣatra. {%—Ghāta-vāra, as,%} m. an inauspicious day
of the week. {%—Ghāta-sthāna, am,%} n. a slaughter-
house, a place of execution.
<LEND>

<L>17949<pc>0307-c<k1>GAtaka<k2>GAtaka
{%Ghātaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ killing, a killer, a murderer;
destroying, a destroyer (used at the end of comp.;
cf. {%viśvāsa-ghātaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>17950<pc>0307-c<k1>GAtana<k2>GAtana
{%Ghātana%}¦ or {%ghatana, as, ā, am,%} killing, a mur-
derer, a killer; ({%as%}), m., N. of certain inhabitants of
hell; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of club; ({%am%}), n. striking, slaying,
killing, slaughter, immolating. {%—Ghātana-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. a place of slaughter, a slaughter-house.
<LEND>

<L>17951<pc>0307-c<k1>GAtayat<k2>GAtayat
{%Ghātayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ striking, hurting, killing.
<LEND>

<L>17952<pc>0307-c<k1>GAtavya<k2>GAtavya
{%Ghātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be killed, what may or
ought to be killed &c., deserving death.
<LEND>

<L>17953<pc>0307-c<k1>GAti<k2>GAti
{%Ghāti, is,%}¦ m. striking, killing in general; catching
[Page0308-a+ 72]
or killing birds, fowling [cf. {%ni-ghāti, ghāti-pakṣin,%}
{%ghāti-vihaga%}]; ({%is%}), f. a bird-net. {%—Ghāti-pakṣin,%}
{%ī,%} m. or {%ghāti-vihaga, as,%} m. a hawk or falcon.
<LEND>

<L>17954<pc>0308-a<k1>GAtin<k2>GAtin
{%Ghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ killing, murderous, who or what
strikes or kills, a murderer; destroying, destructive,
felonious; [cf. {%andhaka-ghātin, amitra-gh˚, ardha-%}
{%ka-gh˚, kumāra-gh˚,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>17955<pc>0308-a<k1>GAtuka<k2>GAtuka
{%Ghātuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ killing, tearing asunder,
hurting, hurtful, mischievous; cruel, savage, violent,
ferocious.
<LEND>

<L>17956<pc>0308-a<k1>GAtya<k2>GAtya
{%Ghātya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be killed, proper or fit to
be killed.
<LEND>

<L>17957<pc>0308-a<k1>GAra<k2>GAra
{#GAra#}¦ {%ghāra.%} See under rt. {%ghṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>17958<pc>0308-a<k1>GArtika<k2>GArtika
{#GArtika#}¦ {%ghārtika, as,%} m. (fr. {%ghṛta%}), pulse
ground and fried with clarified butter, a cake pre-
pared with Ghṛta or clarified butter.
<LEND>

<L>17959<pc>0308-a<k1>GArteya<k2>GArteya
{%Ghārteya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a warrior-tribe; ({%as%}),
m. the prince of this tribe.
<LEND>

<L>17960<pc>0308-a<k1>GAsa<k2>GAsa
{#GAsa#}¦ {%ghāsa.%} See under rt. {%ghas.%}
<LEND>

<L>17961<pc>0308-a<k1>GiRR<k2>GiRR
{#GiRR#}¦ {%ghiṇṇ,%} cl. 1. A. {%ghiṇṇate, jighiṇṇe,%}
{%ghiṇṇitum,%} to take, grasp; [cf. {%ghuṇṇ%}
and {%ghṛṇṇ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17962<pc>0308-a<k1>Gu<k2>Gu<h>1
{#Gu#} 1¦. {%ghu,%} cl. 1. A. {%ghavate,%} &c., to utter
a peculiar sound, to sound.
<LEND>

<L>17963<pc>0308-a<k1>Gu<k2>Gu<h>2
2. {%ghu, us,%}¦ m. a kind of sound.
<LEND>

<L>17964<pc>0308-a<k1>GuMz<k2>GuMz
{#GuMz#}¦ {%ghuṃṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%ghuṃṣate,%} &c., to
diffuse lustre.
<LEND>

<L>17965<pc>0308-a<k1>Guw<k2>Guw
{#Guw#}¦ {%ghuṭ,%} cl. 6. P. {%ghuṭati, jughoṭa, ghu-%}
{%ṭitum,%} to strike again or retaliate, to resist,
oppose; to protect, preserve; cl. 1. A. {%ghoṭate, jughuṭe,%}
{%ghoṭiṣyate, aghuṭat%} and {%aghoṭiṣṭa, ghoṭitum,%} to
come back, to return; to barter, exchange.
<LEND>

<L>17966<pc>0308-a<k1>Guwa<k2>Guwa
{%Ghuṭa, as,%}¦ m. or {%ghuṭi, is,%} f. or {%ghuṭī,%} f. the ancle.
<LEND>

<L>17967<pc>0308-a<k1>Guwika<k2>Guwika
{%Ghuṭika, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. the ancle.
<LEND>

<L>17968<pc>0308-a<k1>GuRwa<k2>GuRwa
{%Ghuṇṭa, as,%}¦ m. or {%ghuṇṭaka, as,%} m. or {%ghuṇṭikā,%}
f. the ancle.
<LEND>

<L>17969<pc>0308-a<k1>Guq<k2>Guq
{#Guq#}¦ {%ghuḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%ghuḍati,%} &c., to pre-
vent, defend, protect.
<LEND>

<L>17970<pc>0308-a<k1>GuR<k2>GuR
{#GuR#}¦ {%ghuṇ%} (related to {%ghūrṇ;%} cf. {%ghol%}),
cl. 1. A. {%ghoṇate, jughuṇe, ghoṇitum,%}
&c., or cl. 6. P. {%ghuṇati, jughoṇa,%} &c., to move to and
fro, stagger, shake.
<LEND>

<L>17971<pc>0308-a<k1>GuRa<k2>GuRa
{%Ghuṇa, as,%}¦ m. a peculiar kind of insect found
in timber; the pangolin or armadillo. {%—Ghuṇa-%}
{%kīṭaka, as,%} m. = the preceding. {%—Ghuṇa-vallabhā,%}
f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%ati-viṣā.%}] {%—Ghuṇākṣara%}
{%(˚ṇa-ak˚), am,%} n. an incision in wood or in the leaf
of a book caused by an insect or book-worm and
resembling somewhat the form of a letter. {%—Ghuṇā-%}
{%kṣara-nyāyena,%} ind. in a fortuitous and unexpected
manner, by a happy chance.
<LEND>

<L>17972<pc>0308-a<k1>GuRi<k2>GuRi
{%Ghuṇi, is, is, i,%}¦ worm-eaten (?).
<LEND>

<L>17973<pc>0308-a<k1>GuRqa<k2>GuRqa
{%Ghuṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. a large black bee.
<LEND>

<L>17974<pc>0308-a<k1>GuRwika<k2>GuRwika
{#GuRwika#}¦ {%ghuṇṭika, am,%} n. cow-dung found
in thickets.
<LEND>

<L>17975<pc>0308-a<k1>GuRR<k2>GuRR
{#GuRR#}¦ {%ghuṇṇ,%} cl. 1. A. {%ghuṇṇate, jughuṇṇe,%}
{%ghuṇṇitum,%} to seize; [cf. {%ghiṇṇ%} and
{%ghṛṇṇ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17976<pc>0308-a<k1>Gur<k2>Gur
{#Gur#}¦ {%ghur,%} cl. 6. P. {%ghurati,%} &c., to frighten
with cries, to cry out through fear, utter
cries of distress; to be frightful or terrible; to
sound; [cf. {%ghora.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17977<pc>0308-a<k1>GuraRa<k2>GuraRa
{%Ghuraṇa, as,%}¦ m. sound.
<LEND>

<L>17978<pc>0308-a<k1>GuraGurAya<k2>GuraGurAya
{#GuraGurAya#}¦ {%ghuraghurāya,%} nom. A. {%-ghurā-%}
{%yate,%} to utter gurgling sounds, to wheeze, snort or
grunt like a hog; [cf. {%gharghara%} and the next.]
<LEND>

<L>17979<pc>0308-a<k1>GurGura<k2>GurGura
{#GurGura#}¦ {%ghurghura, as,%} m. (an onomatopoetic
word), a kind of worm, burrowing in the skin,
guinea-worm, Dracunculus; ({%ī%}), f. the mole-cricket
[cf. {%mṛt-kirā%}]; ({%ā%}), f. growling, as of a dog or cat.
<LEND>

<L>17980<pc>0308-a<k1>GurGuraka<k2>GurGuraka
{%Ghurghuraka, as,%}¦ m. or ({%ikā%}), f. a gurgling or
murmuring sound.
<LEND>
[Page0308-b+ 79]

<L>17981<pc>0308-b<k1>GurGurAya<k2>GurGurAya
{%Ghurghurāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%ghurghurāyate,%} to whis-
tle, murmur, hum, &c.
<LEND>

<L>17982<pc>0308-b<k1>GulaGulArava<k2>GulaGulArava
{#GulaGulArava#}¦ {%ghulaghulā-rava, as,%} m. a kind
of pigeon.
<LEND>

<L>17983<pc>0308-b<k1>GulaYca<k2>GulaYca
{#GulaYca#}¦ {%ghulañca, as,%} m. Coix Barbata; [cf.
{%gavedhukā.%} ]
<LEND>

<L>17984<pc>0308-b<k1>Guz<k2>Guz<h>1
{#Guz#} 1¦. {%ghuṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%ghoṣati, jughoṣa,%}
{%ghoṣiṣyati, aghoṣīt%} and {%aghuṣat,%}
{%ghoṣitum,%} to sound, make any sound or noise;
to cry or proclaim aloud, call out, announce publicly,
declare; to fill with cries; (according to some) to kill:
Caus. {%ghoṣayati, -yitum, ajūghuṣat,%} to proclaim
aloud, call to, invite; to cause to proclaim aloud;
to praise: Desid. {%jughuṣiṣati%} or {%jughoṣiṣati:%}
Intens. {%joghuṣyate, joghoṣṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>17985<pc>0308-b<k1>Guza<k2>Guza
{%Ghuṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounding.
<LEND>

<L>17986<pc>0308-b<k1>Guzita<k2>Guzita
{%Ghuṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, declared, proclaimed.
<LEND>

<L>17987<pc>0308-b<k1>Guzwa<k2>Guzwa
{%Ghuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, proclaimed. {%—Ghu-%}
{%ṣṭānna (˚ṭa-anna), am,%} n. food given away by
proclamation.
<LEND>

<L>17988<pc>0308-b<k1>Guzwra<k2>Guzwra
{%Ghuṣṭra, am,%}¦ n. a cart, a carriage; (fr. {%ghuṣ,%}
in the sense ‘to creak ?’).
<LEND>

<L>17989<pc>0308-b<k1>Guzya<k2>Guzya
{%Ghuṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ giving out sounds; to be
proclaimed aloud.
<LEND>

<L>17990<pc>0308-b<k1>Goza<k2>Goza
{%Ghoṣa, as,%}¦ m. indistinct noise, tumult; the con-
fused cries of a multitude, battle-cry, cries of victory,
cries of woe or distress, any cry or sound; an exclama-
tion, the roar of animals; the sound of a drum or
of a conch-shell, of the Soma stones, of a carriage,
&c.; the whizzing or whir of a bow-string, crackling
of fire, singing in the ear; roaring of a storm, of
thunder, of water, &c.; the sound of the recital
of prayers; rumour, report; a proclamation; (in
grammar) the soft sound or low murmur heard in the
articulation of the soft or sonant consonants {%g, gh,%}
{%j, jh, ḍ, ḍh, d, dh, b, bh, ṅ, ñ, ṇ, n, m, h, y, r, l, v,%}
the vowels, and Anusvāra, which with the Yamas of
the first ten of the soft consonants make up altogether
forty sounds, (the absence of this soft sound or murmur
being called {%a-ghoṣa,%} q. v., and applied to {%k, kh,%}
{%c, ch, ṭ, ṭh, t, th, p, ph,%} the sibilants, Visarga, the
Jihvā-mūlīya, and the Upadhmānīya, which with
the Yamas of the first ten consonants make up
twenty-six sounds); a vowel; a station of herdsmen;
a herdsman; a gnat, a musquito; a creeping plant
bearing white or yellow flowers, Luffa Fœtida or a
similar plant [cf. {%ghoṣaka%}]; brass, bell-metal,
tutenag, &c.; N. of a man; an epithet of Śiva;
a son of Lambā, daughter of Dakṣa, and wife of
Dharma; N. of an Arhat; N. of a prince of the
Kāṇva dynasty (for {%ghoṣa-vasu%}); a common N.
for a Kāyastha or one of the writer-caste, &c.; N.
of a country; a station of herdsmen in general; ({%ī%}), f.
a kind of fennel, Anethum Sowa, another plant {%= kar-%}
{%kaṭa-śṛṅgī;%} N. of a woman, said to be a daughter
of Kakṣīvat; [cf. {%ātma-ghoṣa, indra-gh˚, uccair-%}
{%gh˚, jyā-gh˚, pad-gh˚, madhu-gh˚, mahā-gh˚.%}]
{%—Ghoṣa-kṛt, t,%} m. a person making a noise.
{%—Ghoṣa-koṭi, is,%} f., N. of the peak of a mountain.
{%—Ghoṣa-buddha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. made attentive
by the sound. {%—Ghoṣa-mati, is,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Ghoṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} sounding, making a
noise; (in grammar) sonant, uttered with the soft arti-
culation, see above; ({%vān%}), m., N. of a man; ({%vatī%}),
f. a lute ({%vīṇā%}); a peculiar kind of lute or N. of
a lute. {%—Ghoṣa-varṇa, as,%} m. a sonant letter.
{%—Ghoṣa-vasu, us,%} m., N. of a prince of the
Kāṇva dynasty.
<LEND>

<L>17991<pc>0308-b<k1>Gozaka<k2>Gozaka
{%Ghoṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a crier, a proclaimer (e. g. in
{%paṭaha-gh˚,%} q. v.); the creeping plant Luffa Fœtida
or a similar plant. {%—Ghoṣakākṛti (˚ka-āk˚), is,%}
m. a plant with white blossoms, similar to the Gho-
shaka, and perhaps a species of it, commonly called
Hātīghoṣa.
<LEND>

<L>17992<pc>0308-b<k1>GozaRa<k2>GozaRa
{%Ghoṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounding; ({%am, ā%}), n. f.
speaking loud, making a great noise; crying, pro-
claiming aloud.
<LEND>

<L>17993<pc>0308-b<k1>GozaRIya<k2>GozaRIya
{%Ghoṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be proclaimed aloud,
to be publicly announced.
<LEND>
[Page0308-c+ 77]

<L>17994<pc>0308-c<k1>Gozayitnu<k2>Gozayitnu
{%Ghoṣayitnu, us,%}¦ m. a crier, a proclaimer, a
herald; a Brāhman; the Koïl or Indian cuckoo; a
captive (?).
<LEND>

<L>17995<pc>0308-c<k1>Gozi<k2>Gozi
{%Ghoṣi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. (according to Sāy.) either
‘accompanied with noise,’ or ‘to be proclaimed
aloud;’ but {%ghoṣi%} might also be considered as the
3rd pers. sing. of the Aor. Pass. fr. rt. {%ghuṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>17996<pc>0308-c<k1>Gozin<k2>Gozin
{%Ghoṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ sounding, noisy; (in grammar)
having the soft sound or articulation, sonant, (opposed
to {%a-ghoṣa%}); [cf. {%grāma-ghoṣin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>17997<pc>0308-c<k1>Guz<k2>Guz<h>2
{#Guz#} 2¦. {%ghuṣ = ghṛṣ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>17998<pc>0308-c<k1>GusfRa<k2>GusfRa
{#GusfRa#}¦ {%ghusṛṇa, am,%} n. saffron.
<LEND>

<L>17999<pc>0308-c<k1>GUka<k2>GUka
{#GUka#}¦ {%ghūka, as,%} m. an owl. {%—Ghūkāri (˚ka-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. a crow (enemy of the owl). {%—Ghūkāvāsa%}
{%(˚ka-āv˚), as,%} m., N. of a tree; [cf. {%śākhoṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18000<pc>0308-c<k1>GUr<k2>GUr
{#GUr#}¦ {%ghūr,%} cl. 4. A. {%ghūryate,%} &c., to kill,
hurt, or injure; to become old, to decay.
<LEND>

<L>18001<pc>0308-c<k1>GUrR<k2>GUrR
{#GUrR#}¦ {%ghūrṇ,%} cl. 6. P. or 1. A. {%ghūrṇati%} or
{%ghūrṇate,%} &c., to move to and fro, to shake,
to be agitated, to tremble, roll about, cause to whirl,
whirl, turn round: Caus. P. {%ghūrṇayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to move to and fro or shake.
<LEND>

<L>18002<pc>0308-c<k1>GUrRa<k2>GUrRa
{%Ghūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking, moving to and fro;
({%as%}), m. a kind of pot-herb, Chironia Centauroides;
turning round, whirling, rolling, &c. {%—Ghūrṇa-%}
{%vāyu, us,%} m. a whirlwind.
<LEND>

<L>18003<pc>0308-c<k1>GUrRana<k2>GUrRana
{%Ghūrṇana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. shaking, revolving, whirl-
ing, turning round.
<LEND>

<L>18004<pc>0308-c<k1>GUrRamAna<k2>GUrRamAna
{%Ghūrṇamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being agitated, shaking,
trembling, revolving, turning round.
<LEND>

<L>18005<pc>0308-c<k1>GUrRAyamAna<k2>GUrRAyamAna
{%Ghūrṇāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ whirling, revolving,
rolling, tossing.
<LEND>

<L>18006<pc>0308-c<k1>GUrRi<k2>GUrRi
{%Ghūrṇi, is,%}¦ f. rolling, revolving, going round or over.
<LEND>

<L>18007<pc>0308-c<k1>GUrRikA<k2>GUrRikA
{%Ghūrṇikā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>18008<pc>0308-c<k1>GUrRita<k2>GUrRita
{%Ghūrṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rolling, turning, tossing.
<LEND>

<L>18009<pc>0308-c<k1>GUrRyamAna<k2>GUrRyamAna
{%Ghūrṇyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being agitated, set in
motion, made to go round.
<LEND>

<L>18010<pc>0308-c<k1>Gf<k2>Gf
{#Gf#}¦ {%ghṛ,%} cl. 1. 3. 10. P. {%gharati, jigharti,%}
{%ghārayati, jaghāra, ghariṣyati, aghār-%}
{%ṣīt, ghartum,%} &c., to sprinkle, besprinkle, sprinkle
over; to wet or moisten; to distil; cl. 3. P., 5. P. A.
{%jighasti, ghṛṇoti, -ṇute,%} or {%gharṇoti, -ṇute,%} to
shine; to burn; [cf. {%ghṛṇ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18011<pc>0308-c<k1>GAra<k2>GAra
{%Ghāra, as,%}¦ m. sprinkling, besprinkling, wetting;
({%ī%}), f. a kind of metre consisting of four lines of four
syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>18012<pc>0308-c<k1>Gfta<k2>Gfta
{%Ghṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled; illumined; ({%am%}),
n. clarified butter or butter which has been boiled
gently and allowed to cool; it is then used for culinary
and religious purposes and is highly esteemed by the
Hindūs; it is now commonly called Ghee ({%ghi%} or
{%ghī%}); butter, fat, fat as an emblem of fertility,
especially fluid grease; cream; rain or rather fertil-
izing rain, considered as the fat which drops from
heaven, water; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of tree [cf. {%ghṛta-%}
{%maṇḍā%}]; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Dharma, grand-
son of Anu and father of Duduha. {%—Ghṛta-karañja,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of Karañja, {%= ghṛta-parṇaka, tapa-%}
{%svin, pra-kīrya, vi-rocana, viṣāri%}. {%—Ghṛta-ku-%}
{%mārī%} or {%ghṛta-kumārikā,%} f. the plant Aloe Indica,
(this plant being supposed to resemble a virgin in
delicacy and elegance.) {%—Ghṛta-kumbha, as,%} m. a
jar of ghee. {%—Ghṛta-keśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one
whose locks are unctuous, dropping with butter.
{%—Ghṛta-kauśika, as,%} m., N. of a religious teacher.
{%—Ghṛta-cyutā,%} f., N. of a river; [cf. {%ghṛta-ścut.%}]
{%—Ghṛta-dīdhiti, is,%} m. fire, the deity of fire (as
receiving the clarified butter offered in sacrifice);
another reading has {%dhṛta-dīdhiti%}. {%—Ghṛta-duh,%}
{%dhuk, k, k,%} Ved. giving butter or cream. {%—Ghṛta-%}
{%dhārā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Ghṛta-nirṇij, k, k, k,%}
Ved. having a garment of fat, covered with fat; (Sāy.)
shining with butter mixed (with the Soma). {%—Ghṛta-%}
{%pa, as, ā, am,%} drinking Ghṛta, epithet of a class of
Ṛṣis. {%—Ghṛta-padī,%} adj. f., Ved. (according to the
Brāhmaṇas) one whose path is Ghṛta; or, perhaps,
one whose foot ({%pād%}) drops with Ghṛta, an epithet
[Page0309-a+ 81]
of Iḷā. {%—Ghṛta-parṇaka, as,%} m. {%= ghṛta-karañja;%}
[cf. {%ghṛta-pūrṇaka.%}] {%—Ghṛta-paśu, us,%} m. ghee
or clarified butter made into or supposed to resemble
an animal to be offered at a sacrifice, a sacrificial
victim represented by ghee. {%—Ghṛta-pāvan, ā, arī,%}
{%a,%} Ved. drinking butter &c. {%—Ghṛta-pīta, as, ā,%}
{%am, = pīta-ghṛta,%} one who has drunk butter &c.
{%—Ghṛta-pū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. clarifying butter &c.
{%—Ghṛta-pūra, as,%} m. a sweetmeat composed of
flour, milk, cocoa-nut, and ghee, &c. {%—Ghṛta-%}
{%pūrṇaka, as,%} m. a sweetmeat composed of flour,
milk, cocoa-nut, and ghee, &c.; the tree Pongamia
Glabra; [cf. {%karañja;%} cf. also {%ghṛta-parṇaka.%}]
{%—Ghṛta-pṛc, k, k, k,%} Ved. sprinkling unctuous or
fertilizing fluid; (Sāy.) accompanied with fertilizing
fluid. {%—Ghṛta-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one whose
back or surface consists of Ghṛta; especially an epi-
thet of Agni or his horses; (Sāy.) having a brilliant
form or shining body; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Pri-
ya-vrata by Barhiṣmatī, and sovereign of Krauñca-
dvīpa, also a N. of fire. {%—Ghṛta-pratīka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. one whose form is brilliant with Ghṛta;
an epithet of Agni and of Uṣas. {%—Ghṛta-prayas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. relishing Ghṛta; (Sāy.) receiving
oblations of food mixed with Ghṛta. {%—Ghṛta-pra-%}
{%satta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. propitiated with Ghṛta;
epithet of Agni. {%—Ghṛta-prāśa, as,%} m. swallowing
ghee. {%—Ghṛta-prāśana, am,%} n. tasting or swallow-
ing ghee. {%—Ghṛta-prī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. satisfied with
butter, an epithet of Agni. {%—Ghṛta-pruṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved.
sprinkling fat &c., filling with Ghṛta, i. e. spreading
welfare and gifts. {%—Ghṛta-plata, as, ā, am,%} sprinkled
or smeared with ghee. {%—Ghṛta-bhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
baked or stewed in grease. {%—Ghṛta-maṇḍa, as,%}
m. the scum of melted butter, the fattiest part of
grease; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of medicinal plant (the scum
of its infusion resembling ghee); [cf. {%kākalī.%}]
{%—Ghṛta-maṇḍalikā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= haṃsa-%}
{%padī%}. {%—Ghṛtamaṇḍoda (˚ḍa-uda), as,%} m., N. of
a lake on the mountain Mandara. {%—Ghṛta-yoni, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. an epithet of Agni, abiding or living in
Ghṛta &c.; producing fertilizing rain or welfare and
happiness generally; (Sāy.) whose source is Ghṛta.
{%—Ghṛta-rauḍhīya, ās,%} m. pl. the Rauḍhīyas who
are desirous of Ghṛta. {%—Ghṛta-lekhanī,%} f. a ladle
for ghee. {%—Ghṛta-lolīkṛta, as, ā, am,%} mixed with
ghee, steeped in it. {%—Ghṛta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
greasy, abounding in fat; mixed or smeared with
butter; an epithet, especially of Agni and Soma;
containing the word Ghṛta (as a verse); ({%vat%}), ind.
like clarified butter. {%—Ghṛta-vara, as,%} m. a sweet-
meat, or flour &c. baked with ghee and sugar.
{%—Ghṛta-vartani, is, is, i,%} Ved. whose tracks are in
Ghṛta or sprinkle Ghṛta, an epithet of the chariot
of the Aśvins. {%—Ghṛta-varti, is,%} f. a wick fed with
grease. {%—Ghṛta-vikrayin, ī,%} m. a vender of ghee.
{%—Ghṛta-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. delighted with
Ghṛta, nourished with it; an epithet of Agni.
{%—Ghṛta-vrata, as, ā, am,%} living only upon Ghṛta.
{%—Ghṛta-ścut, t, t, t,%} Ved. sprinkling ghee. {%—Ghṛta-%}
{%ścun-nidhana, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Ghṛta-%}
{%ścyut, t, t, t,%} Ved. distilling ghee. {%—Ghṛtaścyun-ni-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Ghṛta-śrī, īs,%}
{%īs, i,%} Ved. mixed with Ghṛta, mixing ghee; (Sāy.)
having recourse to Ghṛta. {%—Ghṛta-sad, t, t, t,%}
Ved. abiding in Ghṛta. {%—Ghṛta-sthalā,%} f., N. of
an Apsaras; [cf. {%ṛta-sthalā%} and {%kratu-sthalā.%}]
{%—Ghṛta-snā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. dropping fat. {%—Ghṛta-%}
{%snu, us, us, u,%} Ved. bathed in Ghṛta, sprinkling it;
epithet of Mitrā-Varuṇa, and of heaven and earth;
one whose surface consists of Ghṛta. {%—Ghṛta-spṛś,%}
{%k, k, k,%} who or what touches Ghṛta. {%—Ghṛta-hrada,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. (a lake) consisting of Ghṛta.
{%—Ghṛtākta (˚ta-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} anointed with
clarified butter, smeared with Ghṛta. {%—Ghṛtāci,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a man, (derived fr. the following.)
{%—Ghṛtācī%} ({%˚ta%} + rt. {%ac%}), adj. f. greasy, abounding
in Ghṛta; filled with grease; sprinkling Ghṛta or
fertilizing fluid, shining with it, (often with and
without {%juhā,%} f. or the sacrificial ladle with which
the Ghṛta is taken up, poured out, &c.); an epithet
[Page0309-b+ 75]
of Sarasvatī &c.; ({%ī%}), f. the night (considered as moist
and dewy); a kind of serpent (shining like grease);
N. of an Apsaras, loved by Bharad-vāja, or Vyāsa, or
Viśvā-mitra; wife of Pra-mati and mother of Ruru;
(according to other authorities) the wife of Raudrāśva
or Kuśa-nābha. {%—Ghṛtācī-garbha-sambhavā,%} f.
large cardamoms. {%—Ghṛtānna (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
Ved. eating grease. {%—Ghṛtābhyakta (˚ta-abh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} smeared with ghee. {%—Ghṛtārcis (˚ta-ar˚),%}
{%is,%} m. flaring or blazing fire. {%—Ghṛtāvani (˚ta-%}
{%av˚), is,%} f. the spot on the sacrificial post which
is smeared with Ghṛta. {%—Ghṛtā-vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved.
delighted with butter; (Sāy.) increasing the Ghṛta.
{%—Ghṛtāsuti (˚ta-ās˚), is, is, i,%} Ved. receiving the
Ghṛta oblation, one whose food is Ghṛta; epithet of
Mitrā-Varuṇa, Viṣṇu, Indrā-Viṣṇu. {%—Ghṛtāha-%}
{%vana (˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. one to whom the
Ghṛta oblation belongs; epithet of Agni. {%—Ghṛtā-%}
{%huta (˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. one to whom
Ghṛta is offered. {%—Ghṛtāhuti (˚ta-āh˚), is,%} f.
the Ghṛta oblation. {%—Ghṛtāhva (˚ta-āh˚), as,%} m.
and {%ghṛtāhvaya (˚ta-āh˚), as,%} m. the resin of
the tree Pinus Longifolia, turpentine. {%—Ghṛtoda%}
{%(˚ta-uda), as, ā, am,%} having Ghṛta as water;
({%as%}), m. the sea of Ghṛta surrounding Kuśa-dvīpa.
{%—Ghṛtodaṅka (˚ta-ud˚), as,%} m. a leather vessel
for holding ghee. {%—Ghṛtaudana (˚ta-od˚), am,%}
n. rice sprinkled with Ghṛta.
<LEND>

<L>18013<pc>0309-b<k1>Gftin<k2>Gftin
{%Ghṛtin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ containing Ghṛta.
<LEND>

<L>18014<pc>0309-b<k1>Gfteyu<k2>Gfteyu
{%Ghṛteyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva [cf.
{%ghṛtācī%}]; according to other authorities {%kṛteyu%}
or {%kṛkaṇeyu.%}
<LEND>

<L>18015<pc>0309-b<k1>GftelI<k2>GftelI
{%Ghṛtelī,%}¦ f. a cock-roach; [cf. {%tailapāyikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18016<pc>0309-b<k1>Gftya<k2>Gftya
{%Ghṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. consisting of Ghṛta.
<LEND>

<L>18017<pc>0309-b<k1>GfN<k2>GfN<h>1
{#GfN#} 1¦. {%ghṛṅ,%} ind. an onomatopoetic sound.
{%—Ghṛṅ-karikra, as, ā, am,%} bleating, making the
cry of a goat.
<LEND>

<L>18018<pc>0309-b<k1>GfR<k2>GfR<h>2
{#GfR#} 2¦. {%ghṛṇ%} (allied to rt. {%ghṛ%}), cl. 8. P.
A. {%gharṇoti, -ṇute,%} or {%ghṛṇoti, -ṇute,%}
to shine, burn.
<LEND>

<L>18019<pc>0309-b<k1>GfRa<k2>GfRa
{%Ghṛṇa, as,%}¦ m. heat, ardour, sunshine; ({%ā%}), f. a
warm feeling towards others, compassion, tenderness,
pity; reproach, blame, censure, aversion, contempt;
[cf. {%nir-ghṛṇa%} and {%hṛṇīyā.%}] {%—Ghṛṇārcis (˚ṇa-%}
{%ar˚), is,%} m. fire.
<LEND>

<L>18020<pc>0309-b<k1>GfRAlu<k2>GfRAlu
{%Ghṛṇālu, us, us, u,%}¦ compassionate, pitiful.
<LEND>

<L>18021<pc>0309-b<k1>GfRi<k2>GfRi
{%Ghṛṇi, is,%}¦ m. heat, ardour, sunshine; a ray of
the sun or moon, the sun; a wave, water; ({%is, is, i%}),
displeasing, disagreeable. {%—Ghṛṇī-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. burning, shining; ({%ān%}), m. a kind of animal.
<LEND>

<L>18022<pc>0309-b<k1>GfRita<k2>GfRita
{%Ghṛṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pitied; reproached, abused, hated.
<LEND>

<L>18023<pc>0309-b<k1>GfRin<k2>GfRin
{%Ghṛṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ merciful, tender-hearted, com-
passionate; censorious, abusive. {%—Ghṛṇi-tva, am,%}
n. mercifulness, compassion, pity.
<LEND>

<L>18024<pc>0309-b<k1>GfRAvAsa<k2>GfRAvAsa
{#GfRAvAsa#}¦ {%ghṛṇāvāsa, as,%} m. (probably for
{%ghana-vāsa%}), a kind of pumpkin-gourd; [cf. {%kuṣ-%}
{%māṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18025<pc>0309-b<k1>GfRR<k2>GfRR
{#GfRR#}¦ {%ghṛṇṇ,%} cl. 1. A. {%ghṛṇṇate,%} to seize;
[cf. {%ghiṇṇ%} and {%ghuṇṇ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18026<pc>0309-b<k1>Gftsatamas<k2>Gftsatamas
{#Gftsatamas#}¦ {%ghṛtsatamas, ās,%} m., N. of a
man (for {%gṛtsa-tama ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>18027<pc>0309-b<k1>Gftsamada<k2>Gftsamada
{#Gftsamada#}¦ {%ghṛtsamada,%} a wrong form for
{%gṛtsa-mada.%}
<LEND>

<L>18028<pc>0309-b<k1>Gfz<k2>Gfz<h>1
{#Gfz#} 1¦. {%ghṛṣ = hṛṣ,%} to be joyful.
<LEND>

<L>18029<pc>0309-b<k1>Gfzu<k2>Gfzu
{%Ghṛṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. lively, agile, mirthful,
sportive.
<LEND>

<L>18030<pc>0309-b<k1>Gfzvi<k2>Gfzvi<h>1
1. {%ghṛṣvi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. lively, gay, merry, spor-
tive; (Sāy.) crushing, (as if fr. 2. {%ghṛṣ.%}) {%—Ghṛṣvi-%}
{%rādhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. frolicsome with joy; (Sāy.)
whose gifts touch each other or come closely together,
(as if fr. 2. {%ghṛṣ%}); epithet of the Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>18031<pc>0309-b<k1>Gfz<k2>Gfz<h>2
{#Gfz#} 2¦. {%ghṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%gharṣati, jaghar-%}
{%ṣa, gharṣiṣyati, gharṣitum,%} to rub,
grind, brush, polish, furbish; crush, pound: Caus. P.
{%gharṣayati, -yitum,%} to rub, grind.
<LEND>
[Page0309-c+ 74]

<L>18032<pc>0309-c<k1>Garza<k2>Garza
{%Gharṣa, as,%}¦ m. rubbing, grinding, friction, brushing.
<LEND>

<L>18033<pc>0309-c<k1>Garzaka<k2>Garzaka
{%Gharṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbing; ({%as%}), m. a polisher.
<LEND>

<L>18034<pc>0309-c<k1>GarzaRa<k2>GarzaRa
{%Gharṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbing, rubbing so as
to make sore; ({%am%}), n. the act of grinding or rub-
bing, pounding, brushing, friction; ({%ī%}), f. turmeric.
{%—Gharṣaṇāla (˚ṇa-āla = ālaya), as,%} m. a wooden
roller or pestle for grinding.
<LEND>

<L>18035<pc>0309-c<k1>GarzaRIya<k2>GarzaRIya
{%Gharṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be rubbed or cleaned.
<LEND>

<L>18036<pc>0309-c<k1>Garzita<k2>Garzita
{%Gharṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed, ground, brushed.
<LEND>

<L>18037<pc>0309-c<k1>Garzin<k2>Garzin
{%Gharṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ grinding, rubbing.
<LEND>

<L>18038<pc>0309-c<k1>Gfzwa<k2>Gfzwa
{%Ghṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed, ground, pounded;
frayed, grazed, rubbed so as to be sore.
<LEND>

<L>18039<pc>0309-c<k1>Gfzwi<k2>Gfzwi
{%Ghṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ m. a hog [cf. {%gṛṣṭi%} and 2. {%ghṛṣvi%}];
({%is%}), f. grinding, pounding; emulation, contest; N.
of a plant, {%= vārāhī,%} Lycopodium Imbricatum; N. of
another plant, Clitorea Ternatea; [cf. {%viṣṇu-krāntā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18040<pc>0309-c<k1>Gfzvi<k2>Gfzvi<h>2
2. {%ghṛṣvi, is,%}¦ m. a hog.
<LEND>

<L>18041<pc>0309-c<k1>GfzWilA<k2>GfzWilA
{#GfzWilA#}¦ {%ghṛṣṭhilā,%} f., N. of a plant re-
lated to the plant Hemionitis Cordifolia; [cf. {%pṛśni-%}
{%parṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18042<pc>0309-c<k1>GeYculikA<k2>GeYculikA
{#GeYculikA#}¦ {%gheñculikā%} or {%gheñculī,%} f., N. of
an esculent root, Arum Oxicense, {%= krauñcādana.%}
<LEND>

<L>18043<pc>0309-c<k1>GoNGa<k2>GoNGa
{#GoNGa#}¦ {%ghoṅgha, as,%} m. intermediate space.
<LEND>

<L>18044<pc>0309-c<k1>Gowa<k2>Gowa
{#Gowa#}¦ {%ghoṭa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%ghuṭ%}),
a horse.
<LEND>

<L>18045<pc>0309-c<k1>Gowaka<k2>Gowaka
{%Ghoṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a horse; ({%ikā%}), f. a mare; the
plant Cucumis Utilissimus ({%karkaṭī%}); [cf. {%turaṅgī.%}]
{%—Ghoṭaka-mukha, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Kanyā-samprayuktakādhikaraṇa.
<LEND>

<L>18046<pc>0309-c<k1>GoqAcolin<k2>GoqAcolin
{#GoqAcolin#}¦ {%ghoḍācolin, ī,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18047<pc>0309-c<k1>GoRasa<k2>GoRasa
{#GoRasa#}¦ {%ghoṇasa, as,%} m. {%= go-nasa,%} a kind of
serpent; (other authorities have {%ghonasa.%})
<LEND>

<L>18048<pc>0309-c<k1>GoRA<k2>GoRA
{#GoRA#}¦ {%ghoṇā,%} f. (corrupted fr. {%ghrāṇā ?%}),
the nose; the nose or nostrils of a horse.
<LEND>

<L>18049<pc>0309-c<k1>GoRin<k2>GoRin
{%Ghoṇin, ī,%}¦ m. a hog (as having a large snout).
<LEND>

<L>18050<pc>0309-c<k1>GoRwA<k2>GoRwA
{#GoRwA#}¦ {%ghoṇṭā,%} f. the jujube, Zizyphus
Jujuba, {%= vadara, vadarī;%} the betel-nut tree, see
{%guvāka;%} a timber tree, Schrebera Sweietenoides.
{%—Ghoṇṭā-phala, as,%} m. a kind of plant.
<LEND>

<L>18051<pc>0309-c<k1>Gonasa<k2>Gonasa
{#Gonasa#}¦ {%ghonasa, as,%} m. a large kind of
snake; [cf. {%ghoṇasa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18052<pc>0309-c<k1>Gora<k2>Gora
{#Gora#}¦ {%ghora, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. {%han%}
with substitution of {%ghur%} for {%han%}), venerable, awful,
sublime (in these senses Ved); terrific, frightful, terri-
ble, horrible, dreadful, awful, violent, vehement; ({%as%}),
m. the terrible, an epithet of Śiva; N. of an Āṅgi-
rasa, a son of Aṅgiras; N. of Kutsa; ({%ā%}), f. the night;
a kind of creeper, {%= deva-dālī;%} (scil. {%gati%}), N. of
one of the seven stations of the planet Mercury;
({%am%}), n. venerableness; awfulness, horror; a horrible
action, magic formulas and charms; poison; saffron;
[cf. {%dhīra%} and {%gaura.%}] {%—Ghora-ghuṣya, am,%} n.
brass; (a various reading for {%ghora-puṣpa%}); [cf.
{%ghoṣa.%}] {%—Ghora-cakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. of
frightful appearance, having terrific eyes. {%—Ghora-%}
{%tara, as, ā, am,%} more terrible, very awful. {%—Ghora-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%ghora-tva, am,%} n. horribleness, horror.
{%—Ghora-darśana, as, ā, am,%} of horrible or fright-
ful appearance, terrific; ({%as%}), m. an owl. {%—Ghora-%}
{%puṣpa, am,%} n. brass, bell-metal; [cf. {%ghora-%}
{%ghuṣya.%}] {%—Ghora-rāsana, as,%} m. a jackal; (a
wrong reading for {%ghora-vāśana.%}) {%—Ghora-rāsin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a jackal (? for {%ghora-vāśin%}). {%—Ghora-rūpa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} frightful, hideous; ({%am%}), n. a hideous
appearance. {%—Ghora-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} frightful, hor-
rible, hideous. {%—Ghora-varpas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. of
frightful or hideous appearance of shape; an epithet
of the Maruts. {%—Ghora-vāśana, as,%} m. or {%ghora-%}
{%vāśin, ī,%} m. a jackal; [cf. {%ghora-rāsana.%}] {%—Ghora-%}
{%saṅkāśa, as, ā, am,%} dreadful, terrible. {%—Ghora-%}
{%svara, as, ā, am,%} of dreadful sound. {%—Ghorākṛti%}
{%(˚ra-āk˚), is, is, i,%} frightful, hideous, of terrible
aspect or form.
<LEND>

<L>18053<pc>0309-c<k1>Goraka<k2>Goraka
{%Ghoraka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>
[Page0310-a+ 73]

<L>18054<pc>0310-a<k1>GOra<k2>GOra
{%Ghaura, am,%}¦ n. horror, horribleness; ({%as%}), m. a
patronymic from Ghora.
<LEND>

<L>18055<pc>0310-a<k1>Gol<k2>Gol
{#Gol#}¦ {%ghol%} (substituted in Prākṛt for
{%ghuṇ = ghūrṇ%}), cl. 10. P. {%gholayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to mix, to stir together into a semi-fluid
substance; Bengālī <nsi>gholāïte.</nsi>
<LEND>

<L>18056<pc>0310-a<k1>Gola<k2>Gola
{%Ghola, am,%}¦ n. buttermilk; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant
or vegetable; [cf. {%araṇya-gholī, kṣudra-gh˚,%}
{%vana-gh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18057<pc>0310-a<k1>Goli<k2>Goli
{%Gholi, is,%}¦ and {%gholikā,%} f. {%= gholī.%}
<LEND>
<L>18057.1<pc>0310-a<k1>GolikA<k2>GolikA
{{Lbody=18057}}
<LEND>

<L>18058<pc>0310-a<k1>Goza<k2>Goza
{#Goza#}¦ {%ghoṣa.%} See under rt. 1. {%ghuṣ,%} p. 308.
<LEND>

<L>18059<pc>0310-a<k1>GozAtakI<k2>GozAtakI
{#GozAtakI#}¦ {%ghoṣātakī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%śveta-ghoṣā;%} [cf. {%hasti-ghoṣātakī%} and {%kośātakī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18060<pc>0310-a<k1>GOra<k2>GOra
{#GOra#}¦ {%ghaura.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>18061<pc>0310-a<k1>Gna<k2>Gna
{#Gna#}¦ {%ghna, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%han,%} and used at
the end of compounds to express) killing, striking,
a killer, destructive, destroying, removing; see {%artha-%}
{%ghna, jvara-ghna, śatru-ghna, go-ghna, daṇḍa-%}
{%ghna;%} (also to express) multiplied by; see {%dvi-%}
{%catur-ghna.%} In a few compounds the fem. may
end in {%ā%} [cf. {%kula-ghnā%}]; ({%am%}), n. killing, de-
struction.
<LEND>

<L>18062<pc>0310-a<k1>Gnat<k2>Gnat
{%Ghnat, an, atī, at%}¦ (pres. part.), striking, beating,
hurting, killing.
<LEND>

<L>18063<pc>0310-a<k1>GnI<k2>GnI
{%Ghnī = ghna,%}¦ m., in {%ahi-ghnī%} and {%śva-ghnī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18064<pc>0310-a<k1>Gnya<k2>Gnya
{%Ghnya,%}¦ used in a few compounds, see {%a-ghnya%}
and {%ati-ghnya.%}
<LEND>

<L>18065<pc>0310-a<k1>GraMs<k2>GraMs
{#GraMs#}¦ {%ghraṃs, n,%} m., Ved. the heat of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>18066<pc>0310-a<k1>GraMsa<k2>GraMsa
{%Ghraṃsa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the heat of the sun, sun-
shine, brightness.
<LEND>

<L>18067<pc>0310-a<k1>GrA<k2>GrA
{#GrA#}¦ {%ghrā,%} cl. 1. P., ep. also cl. 1. A. and
2. P. {%jighrati, -te, ghrāti, jaghrau, ghrā-%}
{%syati, aghrāt%} and {%aghrāsīt, ghrātum,%} to smell,
perceive odour, be eager for; to smell at, snuffle at;
to kiss: Caus. P. {%ghrāpayati, ajighrapat%} and
{%ajighripat,%} to cause to smell at: Desid. {%jighrāsati:%}
Intens. {%jeghrīyate, jāghreti%} and {%jāghrāti;%} du.
{%jāghrītas;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>fra-grare;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>gros,</nsi> ‘a
snout (?);’ Germ. <nsi>riechen;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>riuhu;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>kwepju, kwapas;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄρωμα; ῥίς, ῥιν-ος.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>18068<pc>0310-a<k1>Grati<k2>Grati
{%Ghrati, is,%}¦ f. the nose (?).
<LEND>

<L>18069<pc>0310-a<k1>GrARa<k2>GrARa
{%Ghrāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ smelled; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. n.
smell; smelling; ({%am%}), n. odour; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n.
the nose; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Ghrāṇa-cakṣus,%}
{%us, us, us,%} using the nose for eyes, blind. {%—Ghrāṇa-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} caused or effected by the nose.
{%—Ghrāṇa-tarpaṇa, as, ā, am,%} pleasant to the
nose, fragrant; ({%am%}), n. fragrance, odour; a fra-
grance, a perfume. {%—Ghrāṇa-duḥkha-dā,%} f., N. of
a plant which causes sneezing (giving pain to the
nose). {%—Ghrāṇa-pāka, as,%} m. a disease of the nose,
{%= nāsā-pāka,%} q. v. {%—Ghrāṇa-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of
one of the attendants of Skanda (‘using the nose
for ears’ [cf. {%ghrāṇa-cakṣus%}] or ‘renowned for
his nose’). {%—Ghrāṇendriya (˚ṇa-in˚), am,%} n. the
organ or sense of smell.
<LEND>

<L>18070<pc>0310-a<k1>GrAta<k2>GrAta
{%Ghrāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ smelled, smelled at.
<LEND>

<L>18071<pc>0310-a<k1>GrAtavya<k2>GrAtavya
{%Ghrātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be smelled or smelled
at; ({%am%}), n. odour.
<LEND>

<L>18072<pc>0310-a<k1>GrAti<k2>GrAti
{%Ghrāti, is,%}¦ f. smell; smelling, snuffling at; the
nose.
<LEND>

<L>18073<pc>0310-a<k1>GrAtf<k2>GrAtf
{%Ghrātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who smells.
<LEND>

<L>18074<pc>0310-a<k1>GrAtvA<k2>GrAtvA
{%Ghrātvā,%}¦ ind. having smelled.
<LEND>

<L>18075<pc>0310-a<k1>Greya<k2>Greya
{%Ghreya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be smelled, what may be
smelled or snuffled at; ({%am%}), n. odour, smell.
<LEND>
<H>{#Na#}

<L>18076<pc>0310-a<k1>Na<k2>Na<h>1
{#Na#} 1¦. {%ṅa,%} the fifth consonant of the San-
skṛt alphabet, and the nasal of the first class. No
real word in use begins with this letter; it is usually
found as the first member of a compound consonant
preceded by a vowel; the sound of {%ṅ%} corresponds to
that of {%ng%} in <nsi>song</nsi>. {%—Ṅa-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or
sound {%ṅa.%}
<LEND>
[Page0310-b+ 76]

<L>18077<pc>0310-b<k1>Na<k2>Na<h>2
{#Na#} 2¦. {%ṅa, as,%} m. an object of sense; desire,
wish for any sensual object; an epithet of Śiva;
(Bhairava.)
<LEND>

<L>18078<pc>0310-b<k1>Nu<k2>Nu
{#Nu#}¦ {%ṅu,%} cl. 1. A. {%ṅavate, ṅuṅuve,%} to sound:
Desid. {%ñuṅūṣate.%}
<LEND>
<H>{#ca#}

<L>18079<pc>0310-b<k1>ca<k2>ca<h>1
{#ca#} 1¦. {%ca,%} the twentieth letter of the alphabet,
and first of the second or palatal class of consonants,
having the simple sound of <nsi>ch</nsi> in <nsi>church</nsi>. {%—Ca-kāra,%}
{%as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ca.%}
<LEND>

<L>18080<pc>0310-b<k1>ca<k2>ca<h>2
{#ca#} 2¦. {%ca,%} ind. (a particle and conjunction
usually translateable by) and, both, also, moreover,
as well as. This conjunction, like the Lat. <nsi>que</nsi> and
Gr. <lang n="greek">τε,</lang> is usually placed as an enclitic after the word
which it connects with what precedes, and when used
with the personal pronouns these must appear in
their fuller accented forms (e. g. {%tava ca mama ca,%}
both of thee and of me, not {%te ca me ca%}). It con-
nects whole sentences as well as parts of sentences,
and seems to have been originally placed after both
the words or clauses which it joins together, for in
the Ṛg-veda the double {%ca%} occurs much more fre-
quently than the single (e. g. {%ahaṃ ca tvaṃ ca,%}
I and thou). The double {%ca%} may also be used
somewhat redundantly in classical Sanskrit (e. g. {%kva%}
{%hariṇakānāṃ jīvitaṃ cātilolaṃ kva ca vajra-%}
{%sārāḥ śarās te,%} where is both the frail existence of
fawns and where are thy adamantine arrows ?). In the
later literature, however, the first {%ca%} is more usually
omitted (e. g. {%ahaṃ tvaṃ ca%}), and when more than
two things are enumerated only one {%ca%} is often found
(e. g. {%tejasā yaśasā lakṣmyā sthityā ca parayā,%}
in glory, in fame, in beauty, and in high condition).
Elsewhere, when more than two things are enume-
rated, {%ca%} is placed after some and omitted after others
(e. g. {%ṛṇa-dātā ca vaidyaśca śrotriyo nadī,%} both
the payer of a debt and a physician [and] a Brāhman
[and] a river). In the Veda and even in classical
Sanskrit, when the double {%ca%} would generally be
used, the second may occasionally be omitted (e. g.
{%Indraśca Somaḥ,%} both Indra [and] Soma; {%dur-%}
{%bhedyaśca āśu-sandheyaḥ,%} both difficult to be
divided [and] quickly to be united). Rarely {%ca%} may
imply a reference to certain other words which are
not expressed (e. g. {%kamaṇḍalau ca karakaḥ,%} the
word {%karaka%} has the meaning ‘pitcher’ and other
meanings).
<LEND>

<L>18081<pc>0310-b<k1>ca<k2>ca
{%Ca%}¦ may be used for {%vā%} and is then translateable by
‘either,’ ‘or’ (e. g. {%iha cāmutra vā,%} either here or
hereafter; {%strī vā pumān vā yaccānyat sattvam,%}
either a woman or a man or any other being); and
when a negative particle is joined with {%ca%} the
two may then be translated by ‘neither,’ ‘nor.’
Occasionally one {%ca%} or one {%na%} may be omitted (e. g.
{%na ca paribhoktuṃ naiva śaknomi hātum,%} I am
able neither to enjoy nor to abandon; {%na pūrvāhṇe%}
{%na ca parāhṇe,%} neither in the forenoon nor in the
afternoon).
<LEND>

<L>18082<pc>0310-b<k1>ca<k2>ca
{%Ca%}¦ is often joined to the adverbs {%eva, api, tathā,%}
{%tathaiva,%} &c., either with or without a negative
particle (e. g. {%vairiṇaṃ nopaseveta sahāyaṃ%}
{%caiva vairiṇaḥ,%} one ought not to serve either an
enemy or the ally of an enemy). See {%eva, api,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>18083<pc>0310-b<k1>ca<k2>ca
{%Ca%}¦ sometimes {%= eva,%} even, indeed, certainly, just,
&c. (e. g. {%su-cintitaṃ cauṣadhaṃ na nāma-%}
{%mātreṇa karoty a-rogam,%} even a well-devised
remedy does not cure a disease by its mere name;
{%yāvanta eva te tāvāṃśca sa,%} as great as they [were]
just so great was he).
<LEND>

<L>18084<pc>0310-b<k1>ca<k2>ca
{%Ca%}¦ may occasionally be disjunctive and be trans-
lated by ‘but,’ ‘on the contrary,’ ‘on the other
hand,’ ‘yet,’ ‘nevertheless’ (e. g. {%varam ādyau na%}
{%cāntimaḥ,%} better the two first but not the last;
{%śāntam idam āśrama-padaṃ sphurati ca bāhuḥ,%}
this hermitage is tranquil yet my arm throbs).
<LEND>

<L>18085<pc>0310-b<k1>caca<k2>caca
{%Ca — ca%}¦ may be used to express immediate
[Page0310-c+ 76]
connection between two acts or their simultaneous
occurrence (e. g. {%mama ca muktaṃ tamasā%}
{%mano manasijena dhanuṣi śaraśca niveśitaḥ,%}
no sooner is my mind freed from darkness than a
shaft is fixed on his bow by the heart-born god).
<LEND>

<L>18086<pc>0310-c<k1>ca<k2>ca
{%Ca%}¦ rarely {%= cet,%} if (e. g. {%jīvituṃ cecchase,%} if thou
wishest to live).
<LEND>

<L>18087<pc>0310-c<k1>ca<k2>ca
{%Ca%}¦ may be used as an expletive (e. g. {%anyaiśca%}
{%kratubhiśca,%} and with other sacrifices). The native
dictionaries assign to {%ca%} the following significations
or forces: — conjunction ({%anv-ācaya%}), collective com-
bination ({%sam-āhāra%}), mutual connection ({%itare-%}
{%tara%}), and aggregation ({%sam-uccaya%}). For the
meaning of {%ca%} after an interrogative see 2. {%ka,%}
2. {%kathā,%} &c.; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τε;</lang> Lat. <nsi>que, pe</nsi> (in <nsi>nempe,</nsi>
&c.); Goth. <nsi>uh;</nsi> Zend <nsi>ca;</nsi> Old Pers. <nsi>câ.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18088<pc>0310-c<k1>ca<k2>ca<h>3
{#ca#} 3¦. {%ca, as, ā, am,%} seedless; bad, vile,
mischievous; ({%as%}), m. a thief; a tortoise; the moon;
an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>18089<pc>0310-c<k1>cak<k2>cak
{#cak#}¦ {%cak,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%cakati, -te, cacāka,%}
{%ceke, acakīt%} and {%acākīt, cakitum,%} to be
satiated, to be contented, to be satisfied; to repel,
resist; to shine [cf. {%kan%} and 2. {%kam%}]: Caus. {%caka-%}
{%yati%} and {%cākayati%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>18090<pc>0310-c<k1>cakita<k2>cakita
{%Cakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking, trembling; fearful,
timid; startled, frightened, afraid of. {%—Cakita-caki-%}
{%tam,%} ind. with great alarm; ({%am%}), n. trembling,
timidity, alarm; {%sa-cakitam,%} tremblingly; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a metre consisting of four lines of sixteen syllables
each. {%—Cakita-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} faint-hearted.
<LEND>

<L>18091<pc>0310-c<k1>cakAs<k2>cakAs<h>1
{#cakAs#} 1¦. {%cakās%} [cf. rt. {%kāś%}], cl. 2. P.
{%cakāsti,%} 3rd pl. {%cakāsati,%} Impf. 2nd
sing. {%acakās%} or {%acakat,%} 3rd sing. {%acakāt,%} Impv.
2nd sing. {%cakādhi%} or {%cakāddhi,%} Perf. {%cakāsāñ-%}
{%cakāra,%} 1st Fut. {%cakāsitā,%} Aor. {%acakāsīt,%} to shine,
to be bright: Caus. {%cakāsayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%acīcakāsat%} or {%acacakāsat,%} to cause to shine, make
bright, illuminate: Desid. {%cicakāsiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>18092<pc>0310-c<k1>cakAs<k2>cakAs<h>2
2. {%cakās, ās, ās, ās,%}¦ shining, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>18093<pc>0310-c<k1>cakAsayat<k2>cakAsayat
{%Cakāsayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ illuminating, beautifying.
<LEND>

<L>18094<pc>0310-c<k1>cakAsita<k2>cakAsita
{%Cakāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ illuminated, shining, splendid,
beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>18095<pc>0310-c<k1>cakora<k2>cakora
{#cakora#}¦ {%cakora, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%cak,%}
to be satisfied, i. e. with moon-beams), the bartavelle
or Greek partridge, Perdix Rufa or Tetrao Rufus,
(this bird is fabled to subsist upon moon-beams,
hence ‘an eye drinking the nectar of a moon-like
face’ is poetically called {%cakṣuś-cakora;%} the eyes
of the Cakora are said to turn red when it looks
on poisoned food, see Schol. to Manu VII. 217); N.
of a people; also of a prince; and of a mountain.
{%—Cakora-dṛś, k, k, k,%} having eyes like those of a
partridge.
<LEND>

<L>18096<pc>0310-c<k1>cakoraka<k2>cakoraka
{%Cakoraka, as,%}¦ m. the Greek partridge; [cf. the
preceding.]
<LEND>

<L>18097<pc>0310-c<k1>cakk<k2>cakk
{#cakk#}¦ {%cakk,%} cl. 10. P. {%cakkayati, -yitum,%}
to suffer; to give or inflict pain.
<LEND>

<L>18098<pc>0310-c<k1>cakka<k2>cakka
{#cakka#}¦ {%cakka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18099<pc>0310-c<k1>cakkala<k2>cakkala
{#cakkala#}¦ {%cakkala, as, ā, am,%} round, circular.
<LEND>

<L>18100<pc>0310-c<k1>caknasa<k2>caknasa
{#caknasa#}¦ {%caknasa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%knas%}), crooked-
ness, dishonesty.
<LEND>

<L>18101<pc>0310-c<k1>cakra<k2>cakra
{#cakra#}¦ {%cakra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%kram%} or rt. 1. {%kṛ?%}
reduplicated), the wheel of a carriage, the wheel of the
Sun's chariot, or (metaphorically) the wheel of Time
(in these senses sometimes {%as,%} m. in Ved.); a potter's
wheel; a discus or sharp circular missile weapon (espe-
cially applied to the favourite weapon of Viṣṇu); an
oil-mill; a circle; any circle or ring (e. g. {%kalāpa-%}
{%cakra,%} the circle of a peacock's tail); a form of
military array (in a circle); circular flight (of a bird
&c.); a circle or depression of the body for mystical,
astrological, or chiromantic purposes, (six of these
are enumerated one above the other, viz. 1. {%mūlā-%}
{%dhāra,%} the parts about the pubis; 2. {%svādhiṣṭhāna,%}
the umbilical region; 3. {%maṇi-pūram,%} the pit of
the stomach or epigastrium; 4. {%anāhatam,%} the root
[Page0311-a+ 81]
of the nose; 5. {%vi-śuddham,%} the hollow between
the frontal sinuses; 6. {%ājñākhyam,%} the fontenelle or
union of the coronal and sagittal sutures: various facul-
ties and divinities are supposed to be present in these
hollows); a general N. for a diagram of various circular
forms used for astrological or astronomical purposes, a
sphere or astronomical circle in general (e. g. {%rāśi-%}
{%cakram,%} the zodiac); a cycle, a cycle of years, the cycle
of the seasons; the horizon; a particular constellation
in the form of a hexagon; a troop, a multitude (in
this sense m. and n.); an army, a host; a province,
number of villages, region, district, circuit; range, de-
partment in general; section of a book; the wheel
of a monarch's chariot rolling over his dominions,
sovereignty; a realm; a whirlpool; the winding of
a river; the convolutions or spiral marks of the
Śāla-grāma or ammonite, a kind of petrified shell;
the flower of the plant Tagara; N. of a particular
plant or drug; a crooked or fraudulent device [cf.
{%cakrikā%}]; N. of a metre consisting of four lines of
fourteen syllables each, {%= cakra-pāta;%} the ruddy goose
or Brāhmany duck, Anas Casarca (in this sense m.);
N. of a people (m. pl.); N. of a man (m.); of a
Nāga (m.); N. of one of the attendants of Skanda
(m.); N. of a mountain (m.); ({%ī%}), f., Ved. a wheel;
({%ā%}), f., N. of two plants, {%= karkaṭa-śṛṅgī%} and
{%nāgara-mustā.%} At the end of an adj. comp. the f.
will end in {%ā;%} [cf. {%a-cakra, uccā-c˚, eka-c˚, kāla-%}
{%c˚, kū-c˚, daṇḍa-c˚, dharma-c˚, sa-c˚,%} &c.; cf.
also Gr. <lang n="greek">κύκλος.</lang>] {%—Cakra-kāraka, am,%} n. a kind
of perfume, apparently a dried shell-fish, see {%nakhī.%}
{%—Cakra-kulyā,%} f., N. of a plant [cf. {%citra-parṇī%}]
said to be a species of fern, commonly Cākuliya
(Hemionites Cordifolia). {%—Cakra-gaja, as,%} m., N.
of a plant, {%= cakra-marda%}. {%—Cakra-gaṇḍu, us,%} m.
a round pillow. {%—Cakra-gati, is,%} f. rotation, revolu-
tion. {%—Cakra-guccha, as,%} m. the tree Jonesia Aśoca;
[cf. {%aśoka.%}] {%—Cakra-goptṛ, tā,%} m. the protector of
a wheel; ({%tārau%}), m. du. two men whose business
is to preserve the wheels of a carriage from damage;
[cf. {%cakra-rakṣa.%}] {%—Cakra-grahaṇa, am, ī,%} n.
f. (?) ‘an army-holder,’ a rampart, an intrenchment.
{%—Cakra-cara, as, ā, am,%} going in a circle, epithet
of a class of superhuman beings; a juggler, {%= cakrā-%}
{%ṭa%} (?). {%—Cakra-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} going in a circle,
walking from one place to another. {%—Cakra-cūḍā-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. a round jewel in a coronet or diadem;
a honorific title of Vopa-deva; N. of a man. {%—Cakra-%}
{%jīvaka, as,%} m. or {%cakra-jīvin, ī,%} m. a potter (who
lives by his wheel). {%—Cakra-talāmra (˚tala-ām˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of mango tree. {%—Cakra-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Cakra-taila, am,%} n. oil pre-
pared from the plant Cakra {%(cakra-marda ?).%}
{%—Cakra-daṃṣṭra, as,%} m. a hog (having curved
tusks). {%—Cakra-datta, as,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Cakra-dantī,%} f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%dantī.%}]
{%—Cakradantī-vīja, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= jaya-%}
{%pāla%} and {%dantī-vīja%}. {%—Cakra-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a
literary work. {%—Cakra-dṛś, k,%} m., N. of an Asura.
{%—Cakra-deva, as,%} m., N. of a warrior. {%—Cakra-%}
{%dvāra, as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Cakra-dhanus,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Cakra-dhara, as, ā, am,%}
bearing a wheel, having a wheel, a wheel-bearer;
carrying a discus; driving in a carriage; ({%as%}), m. a
N. of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa (as holding a discus in one
hand); a sovereign, ruler, the governor of a province,
the owner of many villages; a village tumbler or
juggler; a snake; N. of a man. {%—Cakra-dharman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a prince of the Vidyā-dharas. {%—Cakra-%}
{%dhāra = cakra-dhara%} above. {%—Cakra-dhārā,%} f.
the periphery of a wheel. {%—Cakra-nakha, as,%} m. a
kind of perfume, {%= vyāghra-nakha%}. {%—Cakra-nadī%}
or {%cakra-ṇadī,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Cakra-nābhi,%}
{%is,%} f. the nave of a wheel. {%—Cakra-nāman, ā,%} m. a
pyritic ore of iron, see {%mākṣika%}. {%—Cakra-nāyaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the leader of a troop; a kind of perfume, {%=%}
{%cakra-nakha%}. {%—Cakra-nārāyaṇī-saṃhitā,%} f., N.
of a literary work. {%—Cakra-nemi, is,%} f., N. of one
of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Cakra-pad-%}
{%māṭa, as,%} m., N. of the plant Cassia Tora, {%= cakra-%}
{%marda%}. {%—Cakra-parivyādha, as,%} m. the plant
[Page0311-b+ 81]
Cathartocarpus Fistula; [cf. {%āragbadha.%}] {%—Cakra-%}
{%parṇī,%} f. a plant, commonly Cākuliya, Hemionites
Cordifolia; [cf. {%cakra-kulyā.%}] {%—Cakra-pāṇi, is,%}
m. an epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa (holding a discus
in one hand); N. of an author; (sometimes {%cakra-%}
{%pāṇin.%}). {%—Cakrapāṇi-datta, as,%} m., N. of an author
of a lexicon; [cf. {%candrodaya.%}] {%—Cakra-pāta, as,%}
m. a kind of metre, {%= cakra%}. {%—Cakra-pāda%} or
{%cakra-pādaka, as,%} m. a carriage (having wheels for
feet); an elephant (having circular feet). {%—Cakra-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m. the superintendent of a province; one
who carries a discus; a circle; the horizon. {%—Cakra-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town built by Cakra-mardikā.
{%—Cakra-puṣkariṇī,%} f., N. of a sacred tank at
Kāśi or Benares; [cf. {%cakra-tīrtha%} and {%maṇi-%}
{%karṇikā.%}] {%—Cakra-phala, am,%} n. a missile weapon,
a kind of discus. {%—Cakra-bāndhava, as,%} m. the
sun (‘friend of the ruddy goose,’ these birds being
supposed to couple only in the day-time). {%—Cakra-%}
{%bāla%} and {%cakra-vāla, as, am,%} m. n. a ring, circle
[cf. {%bālī%} and {%vālaka%}]; the horizon (usually n.); a
mass, a multitude, a number, assemblage; ({%as%}), m.
a mythical range of mountains supposed to encircle
the orb of the earth like a wall and to be the limit
of light and darkness (perhaps a bank of clouds
shaped like mountains on the horizon); [cf. {%cakra-%}
{%vāṭa%} and {%cakra-vāḍa.%}] {%—Cakra-bāladhi, is,%} m. a
dog, ‘having a curved tail.’ {%—Cakra-bhānu, us,%} m.,
N. of a Brāhman. {%—Cakra-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘discus-
bearer,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Cakra-bhedinī,%} f.
night (‘dividing the ruddy geese,’ the male and
female of these birds being condemned to be sepa-
rated at night); [cf. {%cakra-bāndhava.%}] {%—Cakra-%}
{%bhrami, is,%} m. f. (?) a grindstone. {%—Cakra-bhrānti,%}
{%is,%} f. the whirling round of the wheels (of a chariot).
{%—Cakra-maṭha, as,%} m., N. of a college built in a
circular form by Cakra-varman. {%—Cakra-maṇḍalin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a large snake, the Boa Constrictor, (the body
of the snake or its spots being compared to a
wheel.) {%—Cakra-manda, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga.
{%—Cakra-marda, as,%} m. the plant Cassia Tora.
{%—Cakra-mardaka, as,%} m. Cassia Tora; ({%ikā%}),
f., N. of the wife of Lalitāditya. {%—Cakram-āsaja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. stopping the wheels (of the chariot).
{%—Cakra-mukha, as,%} m. ‘having a curved mouth,’
a hog. {%—Cakra-muṣala, as, ā, am,%} (a battle) car-
ried on with the discus and club. {%—Cakra-melaka,%}
{%as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n., N. of a place in Kaśmīra.
{%—Cakra-mauli, is,%} m., N. of a Rākṣasa. {%—Cakra-%}
{%yāna, am,%} n. any wheel-carriage. {%—Cakra-yoga,%}
{%as,%} m. applying a splint or similar instrument by
means of pulleys in case of dislocation of the thigh.
{%—Cakra-rakṣa, as,%} m. {%= cakra-goptṛ,%} q. v.
{%—Cakra-rada, as,%} m. a hog, a boar (‘having
curved tusks’); [cf. {%cakra-mukha.%}] {%—Cakra-lak-%}
{%ṣaṇā,%} f. the plant Cocculus Cordifolius, {%= guḍūcī.%}
{%—Cakra-latāmra, as,%} m. a kind of mango tree;
(another reading for {%cakra-talāmra.%}) {%—Cakra-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} furnished with wheels, wheeled; armed
with a discus; circular, being in the form of a ring
or circle; ({%ān%}), m. the proprietor of an oil-mill or
one in which seeds are bruised; an epithet of
Viṣṇu; a sovereign, an emperor; N. of a moun-
tain; ({%vat%}), ind. like a wheel, in rotation, going
round or revolving like a wheel. {%—Cakravarti-tā,%} f.
or {%cakravarti-tva, am,%} n. the mark or state of a
universal emperor; see the next. {%—Cakra-vartin, ī,%}
m. a ruler the wheels of whose chariot roll every-
where without obstruction; an emperor, a sovereign
of the world, a supreme ruler, the ruler of a Cakra
or country described as extending from sea to sea,
(twelve princes beginning with Bharata are especially
considered as Cakra-vartins); ({%ī, inī, i%}), supreme,
holding the highest rank; ({%inī%}), f. a fragrant plant,
commonly Cakāvat [cf. {%janī%}]; the plant Nardos-
tachys Jaṭāmāṃsī; another plant, {%= alaktaka%}. {%—Ca-%}
{%kra-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a king of Kaśmīra; [cf.
{%cākravarmaṇa.%}] {%—Cakra-vāka, as,%} m. the ruddy
goose, commonly called the Brāhmany duck, Anas
Casarca; ({%ī%}), f. the female of this bird; [cf. {%cakra,%}
{%cakra-sāhvaya, cakrāhva, cakrāhvaya,%} &c.]
[Page0311-c+ 81]
{%—Cakravāka-bandhu, us,%} m. the sun; [cf. {%cakra-%}
{%bāndhava.%}] {%—Cakravāka-vatī,%} f. probably N. of a
river (abounding in Cakra-vākas). {%—Cakravākin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} filled with Cakra-vākas. {%—Cakravākopakū-%}
{%jita (˚ka-up˚), as, ā, am,%} made resonant with the
cooing or cry of the Cakra-vāka. {%—Cakra-vāṭa, as,%}
m. a limit, a boundary; a lamp-stand; engaging in an
action; [cf. {%cakra-bāla.%}] {%—Cakra-vāḍa, as,%} m. a
fabulous range of mountains, see {%cakra-bāla; (am),%}
n. a circle. {%—Cakra-vāta, as,%} m. a whirlwind, a
hurricane, {%= cakra-vāla;%} [cf. {%cakra-bāla.%}] {%—Cakra-%}
{%vimala, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a plant.
{%—Cakra-vṛddhi, is,%} f. interest upon interest;
wages for transporting goods in a carriage. {%—Cakra-%}
{%vyūha, as,%} m. any circular array of troops. {%—Cakra-%}
{%śata-pattra, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a plant.
{%—Cakra-śreṇī,%} f. {%= aja-śṛṅgī,%} the plant Odina
Pinnata, bearing a curved fruit. {%—Cakra-saṃvara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Buddha, {%= vajra-ṭīka%}. {%—Cakra-sak-%}
{%tha, as, ā, am,%} having crooked thighs, bow-legged.
{%—Cakra-sañjaña, am,%} n. tin. {%—Cakra-sāhvaya,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= cakra, = cakra-vāka,%} Anas Casarca.
{%—Cakra-sena, as,%} m., N. of the son of Tārā-
candra and father of Siṃha. {%—Cakra-svāmin, ī,%} m.
an epithet of Viṣṇu; [cf. {%cakra-dhara.%}] {%—Cakra-%}
{%hasta, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu (‘discus-handed’).
{%—Cakra-hrada, as,%} m., N. of a lake. {%—Cakrā-%}
{%kāra, as, ā, am,%} or {%cakrākṛti (˚ra-āk˚), is, is, i,%}
circular, round. {%—Cakrākī,%} a various reading for
{%cakrāṅkī,%} q. v. {%—Cakrāṅkitā (˚ra-aṅ˚),%} f. a kind
of plant. {%—Cakrāṅkī,%} f. a goose; [cf. {%cakrāṅga.%}]
{%—Cakrāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a gander (having a
curved neck); a carriage [cf. {%cakra-pāda%}]; ({%ī%}), f.
a goose; N. of several plants, {%= kaṭu-rohiṇī;%} N. of
another plant, = Enhydra Heloncha ({%hila-mocikā%});
another plant, {%= karkaṭa-śṛṅgī;%} another plant,
Cocculus Tomentosus, {%= vṛṣa-parṇī%} or {%su-dar-%}
{%śanā;%} another plant, Rubia Munjista {%(mañjiṣṭhā);%}
{%(am),%} n. a parasol. {%—Cakrāṭa (˚ra-aṭa), as,%} m. a
juggler, a snake-catcher, snake-charmer, one who
exhibits snakes and pretends to cure their bites; a
knave, a cheat, a rogue; a gold coin or certain weight
of gold, a Dīnār. {%—Cakrādhivāsin (˚ra-adh˚), ī,%}
m. the orange-tree. {%—Cakrāyudha (˚ra-āy˚), as,%} m.
an epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa (whose weapon is
the discus). {%—Cakrāyodhya (˚ra-ay˚), as,%} m., N.
of a prince. {%—Cakrāvarta (˚ra-āv˚), as,%} m. turning
round, whirling or rotatory motion. {%—Cakrāhva%}
{%(˚ra-āh˚), as,%} m. {%= cakra-vāka,%} Anas Casarca; {%=%}
{%cakra-marda,%} Cassia Tora; ({%ā%}), f. Cocculus To-
mentosus; [cf. {%cakrāṅgā.%}] {%—Cakrāhvaya (˚ra-%}
{%āh˚), as,%} m. {%= cakrāhva,%} Anas Casarca. {%—Cakrī-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with wheels, wheeled;
({%ān%}), m. an ass; N. of a king. {%—Cakreśvara (˚ra-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. lord of the discus, an epithet of Viṣṇu;
({%ī%}), f. a female deity peculiar to the Jainas, one of
their Vidyā-devīs or goddesses of wisdom, executing
the orders of the first Arhat.
<LEND>

<L>18102<pc>0311-c<k1>cakraka<k2>cakraka
{%Cakraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ resembling a wheel or circle,
wheel-shaped, circular; ({%as%}), m. a logical form or
proposition, arguing in a circle; a kind of serpent;
N. of a Ṛṣi; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant having great
curative properties.
<LEND>

<L>18103<pc>0311-c<k1>cakralA<k2>cakralA
{%Cakralā,%}¦ f. a kind of Cyperus, {%= uccaṭā.%}
<LEND>

<L>18104<pc>0311-c<k1>cakrika<k2>cakrika
{%Cakrika, as,%}¦ m. a discus-bearer; ({%ā%}), f. a heap,
a troop; a crooked or fraudulent device; the
knee (?).
<LEND>

<L>18105<pc>0311-c<k1>cakrin<k2>cakrin
{%Cakrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having a wheel or wheels,
wheeled; having or holding a discus, an epithet of
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa; driving in a carriage; circular;
({%ī%}), m. a potter; an oil-grinder; a sovereign of the
world, an emperor, a Cakra-vartin; the governor of
a province; a kind of juggler or tumbler who ex-
hibits tricks with a discus or a wheel (?); one who
offers sacrifices for a whole village (?); an informer;
an ass; the ruddy goose, Anas Casarca; a crow; a
snake; the plant Cassia Tora, {%= cakra-marda;%}
another plant, Dalbergia Ougeinensis; a kind of
perfume; [cf. {%sa-cakrin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18106<pc>0311-c<k1>cakriya<k2>cakriya
{%Cakriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ going in a carriage, being
on a journey.
<LEND>
[Page0312-a+ 79]

<L>18107<pc>0312-a<k1>cakrIkf<k2>cakrIkf
{%Cakrī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to make round or circular, to curve or bend (as a bow).
<LEND>

<L>18108<pc>0312-a<k1>cakrARa<k2>cakrARa
{#cakrARa#}¦ {%cakrāṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%kṛ%}),
having done, &c.
<LEND>

<L>18109<pc>0312-a<k1>cakri<k2>cakri
{%Cakri, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. doing, making, active, an
agent; ({%is%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18110<pc>0312-a<k1>cakru<k2>cakru
{%Cakru, us,%}¦ m. a doer, a maker, an agent.
<LEND>

<L>18111<pc>0312-a<k1>cakz<k2>cakz
{#cakz#}¦ {%cakṣ%} (perhaps a reduplicated form
of {%kāś = kśā,%} which according to some is
the original root. According to Pāṇini the rt.
{%cakṣ%} can only be used in the conjugational tenses
and optionally in the Perf. In the non-conjugational
tenses and optionally in the Perf. the rt. {%khyā%} is
substituted), cl. 2. A. Pres. {%caṣṭe,%} Perf. {%cacakṣe.%}
Other forms are exceptionally found, e. g. 2nd sing.
Pres. P. {%cakṣi,%} 2nd pl. Impv. P. (with {%ā%}) {%cakṣata,%}
Impf. {%acakṣam,%} Aor. {%acacakṣam,%} Inf. {%caṣṭum,%}
Ved. Inf. {%cakṣe,%} to appear, become visible: to see,
look at, perceive, observe; to speak, say, tell, in-
form; to eat, (a wrong form for {%jakṣ%}): Pass.
{%cakṣyate.%} The rt. {%cakṣ%} appears like {%khyā,%} to
combine the two distinct meanings of seeing and
speaking.
<LEND>

<L>18112<pc>0312-a<k1>cakzaRa<k2>cakzaRa
{%Cakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. appearing, becoming
visible, appearance, aspect; speaking, saying; eating
a relish to promote drinking, (a wrong form for {%ja-%}
{%kṣaṇa?%}); [cf. {%viśva-cakṣaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18113<pc>0312-a<k1>cakzaRi<k2>cakzaRi
{%Cakṣaṇi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. an illuminator, irradiating.
<LEND>

<L>18114<pc>0312-a<k1>cakzan<k2>cakzan
{%Cakṣan, a,%}¦ n., Ved. the eye, (du. {%cakṣaṇī,%}
the eyes.)
<LEND>

<L>18115<pc>0312-a<k1>cakzas<k2>cakzas
{%Cakṣas, ās,%}¦ m. a teacher, a spiritual teacher, an
instructor in sacred science; an epithet of Bṛhaspati,
the teacher of the gods; ({%as%}), n. radiance, clearness;
the act of seeing, being seen, ({%cakṣase,%} dat. = inf. to
see, to be seen); look, sight, the eye; [cf. {%apāka-%}
{%cakṣas, īya-c˚, upāka-c˚, uru-c˚, ghora-c˚,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>18116<pc>0312-a<k1>cakzu<k2>cakzu
{%Cakṣu, us%}¦ or {%u,%} m. or n. (?), Ved. the eye; ({%us%}),
m., N. of a prince; N. of a river. {%—Cakṣu-pa, as,%}
m., N. of a prince; (a various reading has {%cākṣuṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>18117<pc>0312-a<k1>cakzus<k2>cakzus
{%Cakṣus, us, us, us,%}¦ seeing; ({%us%}), m., N. of a
Marut; also of a Ṛṣi with the patronymic Mānava;
N. of a son of Anu; ({%us%}), f., N. of a river [cf. {%cakṣu%}
and {%su-cakṣus%}]; ({%us%}), n. light, clearness; the act
of seeing, faculty of seeing, sight, aspect, a look; the
eye; often at the end of a compound (e. g. {%ghrāṇa-%}
{%cakṣus,%} one who uses his nose for eyes; {%cāra-%}
{%cakṣus,%} one who sees by means of his spies;
{%dharma-cakṣus,%} one who has an eye for justice);
[cf. {%a-cakṣus, aghora-c˚,%} &c.; cf. also Zend {%cas-%}
{%man.%}] {%—Cakṣuḥ-patha, as,%} m. ‘the path of the
eyes,’ the horizon, the range of sight (e. g. {%cakṣuḥ-%}
{%patham prāp,%} to become visible; {%cakṣuḥ-pathād%}
{%apagam,%} to vanish from the sight). {%—Cakṣuḥ-%}
{%pīḍā,%} f. pain of the eyes. {%—Cakṣuḥ-śravas, ās,%} or
{%cakṣuḥ-śruti, is,%} m. a snake (using its eyes for
ears). {%—Cakṣuḥ-sāman, a,%} n., N. of a Sāman {%(=%}
{%prajāpates sāman)%}. {%—Cakṣur-indriya, am,%} n. the
sense of seeing. {%—Cakṣur-gocara, as, ā, am,%} com-
ing within range of the eye. {%—Cakṣur-grahaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. morbid affection of the eyes. {%—Cakṣur-dā,%}
{%ās, ās, am,%} Ved. giving sight. {%—Cakṣur-dāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the ceremony of anointing the eyes of an
image at the time of consecration. {%—Cakṣur-bhṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} promoting sight. {%—Cakṣur-mantra, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. bewitching with the eye. {%—Cakṣur-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} resembling the eye. {%—Cakṣur-mala, am,%}
n. the excretion of the eyes. {%—Cakṣur-loka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} seeing with the eyes. {%—Cakṣur-vanya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. suffering from disease of the eyes. {%—Ca-%}
{%kṣur-vardhanikā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Cakṣur-%}
{%vahana, am,%} n., N. of a plant, {%= meṣa-śṛṅgī.%}
{%—Cakṣur-viṣaya, as,%} m. the horizon, visibility;
presence, sight, ken; an object of sight, any visible
object. {%—Cakṣur-han, ā, -ghnī, a,%} killing with a
look. {%—Cakṣuś-cit, t, t, t,%} collecting the faculty of
sight. {%—Cakṣuṣ-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. wishing
for the faculty of seeing. {%—Cakṣuṣ-ṭas,%} ind. away
from the eye. {%—Cakṣuṣ-pati, is,%} m. the lord of the
eyes. {%—Cakṣuṣ-pā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. protecting
[Page0312-b+ 76]
the eye-sight. {%—Cakṣuṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} endowed
with the faculty of seeing, seeing, furnished with eyes;
representing the eye. {%—Cakṣuṣmat-tā,%} f. the
state of one who sees, the faculty of seeing. {%—Ca-%}
{%kṣū-roga, as,%} m. disease of the eye, ophthalmia.
<LEND>

<L>18118<pc>0312-b<k1>cakzuza<k2>cakzuza
{%Cakṣuṣa,%}¦ at the end of a compound {%= cakṣus,%}
eye (e. g. {%sa-cakṣuṣa,%} having eyes); ({%as%}), m., N.
of the father of Manu Cākṣuṣa; (a wrong reading
for {%cakṣus?%}).
<LEND>

<L>18119<pc>0312-b<k1>cakzuzya<k2>cakzuzya
{%Cakṣuṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleasing or agreeable to
the eyes, agreeable, pleasing, good-looking, beautiful;
({%as%}), m. a collyrium or application to the eyes, ex-
tracted from the Amomum Antorhiza; N. of the plant
Pandanus Odoratissimus, {%= ketaka;%} another plant,
Hyperanthera Moringa; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of collyrium,
the calx of brass or a blue stone used thus; a pleasing
or interesting woman; the plant Pandanus Odora-
tissimus; also of Glycine Labialis, and of Odina
Pinnata; ({%am%}), n. two kinds of collyrium, {%= khar-%}
{%parītuttha%} and {%sauvīrāñjana;%} N. of a small shrub,
{%= prapauṇḍarīka.%}
<LEND>

<L>18120<pc>0312-b<k1>caG<k2>caG
{#caG#}¦ {%cagh,%} cl. 5. P. {%caghnoti,%} &c., to smite
or slay, to kill.
<LEND>

<L>18121<pc>0312-b<k1>caNkuRa<k2>caNkuRa
{#caNkuRa#}¦ {%caṅkuṇa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%cak%}), a carriage, a tree; ({%am%}), n. any vehicle.
<LEND>

<L>18122<pc>0312-b<k1>caNkramaRa<k2>caNkramaRa
{#caNkramaRa#}¦ {%caṅkramaṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens.
of rt. {%kram%}), going about, taking exercise; who or
what goes slowly or crookedly; ({%am%}), n. going about,
walking, proceeding, going tortuously or slowly.
<LEND>

<L>18123<pc>0312-b<k1>caNkramA<k2>caNkramA
{%Caṅkramā,%}¦ f. going about, walking, going tor-
tuously or slowly. {%—Caṅkramā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
who or what moves slowly or crookedly.
<LEND>

<L>18124<pc>0312-b<k1>caNga<k2>caNga
{#caNga#}¦ {%caṅga, as, ā, am,%} handsome, beautiful;
dexterous, clever; sound, healthy; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a man.
<LEND>

<L>18125<pc>0312-b<k1>caceRqA<k2>caceRqA
{#caceRqA#}¦ {%caceṇḍā,%} f., N. of a fruit-bearing
creeper, {%= bṛhat-phala, veśma-kūla, śveta-rājī,%}
commonly {%ciciḍā.%}
<LEND>

<L>18126<pc>0312-b<k1>caccapuwa<k2>caccapuwa
{#caccapuwa#}¦ {%caccapuṭa%} or (according to another
authority) {%caccatpuṭa, as,%} m. a kind of time in
music.
<LEND>

<L>18127<pc>0312-b<k1>caYc<k2>caYc
{#caYc#}¦ {%cañc,%} cl. 1. P. {%cañcati, cacañca,%}
{%cañcitum,%} &c., to leap, jump; to go,
move; to dangle; [cf. Hib. <nsi>ceangtha,</nsi> ‘they go, travel;
<nsi>ceangastair,</nsi> ‘walking, pacing;’ Lat. <nsi>cunctari ?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>18128<pc>0312-b<k1>caYca<k2>caYca
{%Cañca, as,%}¦ m. a basket; ({%ā%}), f. anything made of
cane, a mat, a stool &c. made of reeds or basket-
work; a straw-man, a doll; a puppet of grass or
reeds; a contemptuous epithet of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18129<pc>0312-b<k1>caYcat<k2>caYcat
{%Cañcat, an, antī, at,%}¦ leaping, going, moving;
dangling; unsteady, shaking.
<LEND>

<L>18130<pc>0312-b<k1>caYcatka<k2>caYcatka
{%Cañcatka, as, ā, am,%}¦ leaping, jumping, trembling,
moving.
<LEND>

<L>18131<pc>0312-b<k1>caYcu<k2>caYcu
{%Cañcu, us, us, u,%}¦ renowned, celebrated, known;
clever [cf. {%cañcu-tā, cuñcu, caṇa,%} and {%akṣara-%}
{%cañcu%}]; ({%us%}), m. a deer; N. of several plants, the
castor-oil plant, Ricinus Communis ({%eraṇḍa%}); also
{%= raktairaṇḍa%} and {%kṣudra-cañcu, = gonāḍīka;%}
N. of a son of Harita; ({%us%}), f. a beak, bill; a kind of
vegetable, {%= cañcū, cañcu-pattra,%} &c. {%—Cañcu-tā,%}
f. celebrity, cleverness, activity; the state of a beak.
{%—Cañcu-pattra, as,%} m. a kind of vegetable, {%=%}
{%cañcu,%} f. {%—Cañcu-puṭa, as, am,%} m. n. the bill of
a bird when shut. {%—Cañcu-prahāra, as,%} m. a peck
with the beak. {%—Cañcu-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘having a beak,’
a bird. {%—Cañcu-mat, ān, atī,%} m. f. ‘possessed of a
beak,’ a bird. {%—Cañcu-sūci, is,%} m. the tailor-bird,
Sylvia Sutoria; also {%cañcusūcika, as,%} m.
<LEND>

<L>18132<pc>0312-b<k1>caYcukA<k2>caYcukA
{%Cañcukā,%}¦ f. a beak, bill.
<LEND>

<L>18133<pc>0312-b<k1>caYcura<k2>caYcura<h>1
1. {%cañcura, as,%}¦ m. a kind of vegetable, {%= cañcu,%}
f.; [cf. the following.]
<LEND>

<L>18134<pc>0312-b<k1>caYcU<k2>caYcU
{%Cañcū, ūs,%}¦ f. a beak, the bill of a bird; a kind of
vegetable. See {%cañcu%} above.
<LEND>

<L>18135<pc>0312-b<k1>caYcUka<k2>caYcUka
{%Cañcūka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people to the south-
west of Madhya-deśa.
<LEND>

<L>18136<pc>0312-b<k1>caYcarin<k2>caYcarin
{#caYcarin#}¦ {%cañcarin, ī,%} m. or {%cañcarī,%} f. or
[Page0312-c+ 75]
{%cañcarīka, as,%} m. (fr. Intens. of rt. {%car%}), a bee.
{%—Cañcarīkāvalī (˚ka-āvalī),%} f. a kind of metre
consisting of four lines of thirteen syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>18137<pc>0312-c<k1>caYcura<k2>caYcura<h>2
2. {%cañcura, as, ā, am,%}¦ going repeatedly, expert
in, conversant with.
<LEND>

<L>18138<pc>0312-c<k1>caYcurI<k2>caYcurI
{%Cañcurī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ constantly practising or en-
gaged in.
<LEND>

<L>18139<pc>0312-c<k1>caYcUrgamARa<k2>caYcUrgamARa
{%Cañcūrgamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ following evil practices,
behaving ill, addicted to wickedness, wanton.
<LEND>

<L>18140<pc>0312-c<k1>caYcala<k2>caYcala
{#caYcala#}¦ {%cañcala, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens. of rt.
{%cal%}), moving to and fro, movable, unsteady, shaking,
trembling; unsteady, inconstant, inconsiderate, quiver-
ing, flickering, playing, moving irregularly; fickle;
({%as%}), m. the wind; a lover, a libertine, a lecher;
({%ā%}), f. lightning; long pepper; fortune, Lakṣmī or
the goddess of fortune; N. of a metre consisting of
four lines of sixteen syllables each. {%—Cañcala-tā,%} f.
or {%cañcala-tva, am,%} n. movableness, unsteadiness,
inconstancy, fickleness. {%—Cañcala-hṛdaya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} capricious, fickle, false-hearted. {%—Cañcalā-%}
{%kṣikā (˚la-akṣi),%} f., N. of a metre consisting of
four lines of twelve syllables each. {%—Cañcalākhya%}
{%(˚la-ākh˚), as,%} m. incense.
<LEND>

<L>18141<pc>0312-c<k1>caYcu<k2>caYcu
{#caYcu#}¦ {%cañcu.%} See under rt. {%cuñc.%}
<LEND>

<L>18142<pc>0312-c<k1>caYcura<k2>caYcura
{#caYcura#}¦ {%cañcura.%} See under {%cañc%} and {%cañcarin.%}
<LEND>

<L>18143<pc>0312-c<k1>caYcula<k2>caYcula
{#caYcula#}¦ {%cañcula, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the descendants of this man.
<LEND>

<L>18144<pc>0312-c<k1>caw<k2>caw
{#caw#}¦ {%caṭ%} (fr. rt. {%cat%} and {%cal%} and {%uc-caṭ%}),
cl. 1. P. {%caṭati,%} &c., to break, break off, fall
off, separate; to rain; to cover; (in the last two senses
a various reading for {%kaṭ%}): Caus. P. {%cāṭayati, -yitum,%}
to break, pierce; to kill, injure.
<LEND>

<L>18145<pc>0312-c<k1>cawaka<k2>cawaka
{%Caṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a sparrow; N. of a poet; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. a nickname of the pupils of Vaiśampāyana
(also written {%caraka%}); ({%ā%}), f. a hen-sparrow; a
young hen-sparrow; Turdus Macrourus, {%= śyāmā;%}
the root of long pepper, {%= caṭakā-śiras; (ikā),%} f.
a hen-sparrow; the root of long pepper. {%—Caṭakā-%}
{%śiras,%} n. the root of long pepper. {%—Caṭikā-śira,%}
{%as,%} m. or {%caṭikā-śiras,%} n. the root of long pepper.
<LEND>

<L>18146<pc>0312-c<k1>cawana<k2>cawana
{%Caṭana, am,%}¦ n. cracking, splitting; falling off in
small pieces.
<LEND>

<L>18147<pc>0312-c<k1>cawu<k2>cawu
{%Caṭu, us, u,%}¦ m. n. kind or flattering discourse; a
scream, screech; a devotional posture among ascetics;
({%us%}), m. the belly. {%—Caṭu-grāma, as,%} m., N. of
a place. {%—Caṭu-lālasa, as, ā, am,%} pleased with or
desirous of flattery.
<LEND>

<L>18148<pc>0312-c<k1>cawula<k2>cawula
{%Caṭula, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, tremulous, moving,
movable, shaking, unsteady; kind, fine, beautiful;
({%ā%}), f. lightning.
<LEND>

<L>18149<pc>0312-c<k1>cawulola<k2>cawulola
{%Caṭulola%}¦ or {%caṭullola, as, ā, am%} (perhaps a cor-
ruption of {%caṭula-lola%}), moving gracefully; tremulous
and beautiful, beautiful as a soft swimming eye &c.
<LEND>

<L>18150<pc>0312-c<k1>cawacawA<k2>cawacawA
{#cawacawA#}¦ {%caṭacaṭā,%} ind. an onomatopoetic
word for the clashing of weapons, the crackling of
fire, rattling of violent rain, &c.
<LEND>

<L>18151<pc>0312-c<k1>cawacawAya<k2>cawacawAya
{%Caṭacaṭāya,%}¦ A. {%-yate,%} to crackle, rattle, to make
any sharp sound rapidly repeated.
<LEND>

<L>18152<pc>0312-c<k1>cawacawAyana<k2>cawacawAyana
{%Caṭacaṭāyana, am,%}¦ n. crackling, a rattling sound.
<LEND>

<L>18153<pc>0312-c<k1>caR<k2>caR
{#caR#}¦ {%caṇ%} [cf. rt. {%can%} and {%vaṇ%} and {%van%}],
cl. 1. P. {%caṇati,%} &c., to sound, to give; to
go, to injure, hurt, kill: Caus. {%caṇayati%} or {%cāṇa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%acīcaṇat%} and {%acacāṇat.%}
<LEND>

<L>18154<pc>0312-c<k1>caRa<k2>caRa
{#caRa#}¦ {%caṇa, as, ā, am,%} (at the end of a com-
pound) renowned, famous for, known [cf. {%vidyā-%}
{%caṇa%} and {%akṣara-caṇa%}]; ({%as%}), m. {%= caṇaka,%} the
chick-pea. {%—Caṇa-druma, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
{%= kṣudra-gokṣura;%} (also written {%caṇī-drama.%})
{%—Caṇa-pattrī,%} f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%rudantī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18155<pc>0312-c<k1>caRaka<k2>caRaka
{%Caṇaka, as,%}¦ m. the chick-pea (Cicer Arietinum);
N. of a Muni, the father of Cāṇakya; ({%akā%}), f.
linseed, Linum Usitatissimum ({%atasī%}), [cf. {%caṇḍikā%}];
({%ikā%}), f. a kind of grass, {%= kṣetra-jā, go-dagdhā,%}
{%su-nīlā, himā%}. {%—Caṇakātmaja (˚ka-āt˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a sage, also called Cāṇakya or Vatsyāyana.
[Page0313-a+ 80]
{%—Caṇakāmlaka (˚ka-amla), am,%} n. {%= caṇaka-%}
{%lavaṇa,%} pease with salt, sour pease. {%—Caṇakāmla-%}
{%vār, r,%} n. acid drops of water on the leaves of the
cicer.
<LEND>

<L>18156<pc>0313-a<k1>caRq<k2>caRq
{#caRq#}¦ {%caṇḍ,%} cl. 1. and 10. A. {%caṇḍate%} and
{%caṇḍayate, -yitum,%} to be angry; to be
wrathful or passionate; [cf. Goth. <nsi>hata;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>hate;</nsi>
Germ. <nsi>hasse;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>odi ?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>18157<pc>0313-a<k1>caRqa<k2>caRqa
{%Caṇḍa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fierce, violent, impetuous, hot,
warm, ardent with passion, passionate, wrathful, angry,
cruel; active, quick; mischievous, evil; pungent,
acrid; circumcised; {%caṇḍam,%} ind. violently, passion-
ately, fiercely, in anger; ({%as%}), m. an evil being, a
demon, ({%caṇḍasya naptyaḥ,%} the daughters of
Caṇḍa, a class of female demons); an epithet of
Śiva; also of Skanda; N. of a Daitya; of an
attendant of Yama; or of Śiva; the tamarind tree;
({%ā%}), f. a N. of the goddess Durgā, applied especially
to her incarnation for the purpose of destroying the
Asura or demon called Mahiṣa, (this exploit forms
the subject of a section of the Mārkaṇḍeya-Purāṇa,
and is particularly celebrated in Bengal at the Durgā-
pūjā, or festival held in honour of the goddess,
towards the close of the year, about Oct.-Nov.); N.
of one of the eight Nāyikās or Śaktis of Durgā; N.
of a goddess fulfilling the orders of the twelfth Arhat of
the present Ava-sarpiṇī; N. of a river; N. of several
prickly plants, {%= oṣadhi,%} Andropogon Aciculatus;
Mucuna Pruritus ({%kapi-kacchu%}); Salvinia Cucculata
{%(ākhu-karṇī), = śveta-dūrvā%} and {%= liṅginī;%} a per-
fume, commonly Chor; ({%ī%}), f. a N. of Durgā; a
passionate woman, a vixen; a term of endearment
applied to a mistress; N. of the wife of Uddālaka;
N. of a metre consisting of four lines of thirteen
syllables each; ({%am%}), n. heat, warmth; passion,
wrath; [cf. {%a-caṇḍī, uc-caṇḍa, pra-c˚, cāṇḍa.%}]
{%—Caṇḍa-karman, ā,%} m., N. of a Rākṣasa.
{%—Caṇḍa-kolāhalā,%} f. a kind of musical instrument.
{%—Caṇḍa-kauśika, as,%} m., N. of a son of Kakṣī-
vat; ({%am%}), n. (?) title of a drama. {%—Caṇḍa-girika,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Caṇḍa-ghaṇṭā,%} f., a N.
of Durgā. {%—Caṇḍa-tā,%} f. and {%caṇḍa-tva, am,%} n.
warmth, pungency; warmth of temper, passionate-
ness. {%—Caṇḍa-tuṇḍaka, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Garuḍa. {%—Caṇḍa-dīdhiti, is,%} m. ‘having hot rays,’
the sun; [cf. {%caṇḍāṃśu.%}] {%—Caṇḍa-nāyikā,%} f. an
epithet of the goddess Durgā; N. of one of the
eight Nāyikās or Śaktis of Durgā. {%—Caṇḍa-bala,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of one of the monkey followers of Rāma.
{%—Caṇḍa-bhānu, us,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Caṇḍa-%}
{%bhārgava, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman of the family
of Cyavana. {%—Caṇḍa-mahāvīra-tantra, as,%} m. title
of a Buddhist work, {%= kallavīra-tantra%}. {%—Caṇḍa-%}
{%mahāsena, as,%} m., N. of a king of Ujjayinī. {%—Caṇḍa-%}
{%muṇḍā,%} f. a form of Durgā; [cf. {%carma-muṇḍa%}
and {%cāmuṇḍā.%}] {%—Caṇḍa-mṛga, as,%} m. a wild
animal; epithet of a passionate man. {%—Caṇḍa-rava,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a jackal. {%—Caṇḍa-rudrikā,%} f. know-
ledge of mystical nature, acquired by worship of the
Nāyikās. {%—Caṇḍa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} violent, warm,
passionate; ({%vatī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā; N. of
one of the eight Nāyikās or Śaktis of Durgā.
{%—Caṇḍa-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a prince (probably
a corruption of {%candra-varman%}). {%—Caṇḍa-vikra-%}
{%ma, as, ā, am,%} of impetuous valour; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a prince. {%—Caṇḍa-vṛṣṭi-prayāta, am,%} n., N.
of a metre of four lines of twenty-seven syllables
each. {%—Caṇḍa-vega, as, ā, am,%} having an impetuous
course or current, violent; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Gandharva
chief. {%—Caṇḍa-śakti, is,%} m., N. of a Daitya.
{%—Caṇḍāṃśu (˚ḍa-aṃ˚), us,%} m., the sun (‘having
hot rays;’ cf. {%caṇḍa-dīdhiti%}). {%—Caṇḍāditya-%}
{%tīrtha (˚ḍa-ād˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Caṇḍā-%}
{%śoka (˚ḍa-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince, also called
Kāmāśoka, and as a protector of Buddhism, Dharmā-
śoka. {%—Caṇḍī-kusuma, as,%} m. red oleander; [cf.
{%rakta-karavīra.%}] {%—Caṇḍī-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of the
author of a commentary called Kāvya-prakāśa-ṭīkā.
{%—Caṇḍī-devī-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a scholiast.
{%—Caṇḍī-māhātmya, am,%} n. {%= caṇḍikā-māhātmya. %}
[Page0313-b+ 77]
{%—Caṇḍīśa (˚ḍī-īśa), as,%} m. the husband of Caṇḍī,
Śiva. {%—Caṇḍeśvara (˚ḍā-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘Caṇḍā's
lord,’ an epithet of Śiva; N. of a writer on juris-
prudence; also of an astronomer. {%—Caṇḍogrā (˚ḍa-%}
{%ug˚),%} f., N. of one of the eight Nāyikās, or Śaktis
of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>18158<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqi<k2>caRqi
{%Caṇḍi, is,%}¦ f. {%= caṇḍī,%} a N. of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>18159<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqikA<k2>caRqikA
{%Caṇḍikā,%}¦ f. a N. of Durgā; a N. of the Devī-
māhātmya; Linum Usitatissimum; [cf. {%umā, devī,%}
{%haimavatī, caṇakā.%}] {%—Caṇḍika-ghaṇṭa, as,%} m.
(? fr. {%caṇḍikā + ghaṇṭa,%} q. v.), a N. of Śiva.
{%—Caṇḍikā-māhātmya, am,%} n. a section of the
Mārkaṇḍeya-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>18160<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqin<k2>caRqin
{%Caṇḍin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of an author; [cf. {%cāmuṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18161<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqiman<k2>caRqiman
{%Caṇḍiman, ā,%}¦ m. passion, violence, cruelty; heat.
<LEND>

<L>18162<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqila<k2>caRqila
{%Caṇḍila, as,%}¦ m., N. of Rudra; a barber; a kind
of pot-herb [cf. {%vāstūka%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>18163<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqIkf<k2>caRqIkf
{%Caṇḍī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to enrage,
make angry or violent.
<LEND>

<L>18164<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqAta<k2>caRqAta
{#caRqAta#}¦ {%caṇḍāta, as,%} m. fragrant oleander,
Nerium Odorum.
<LEND>

<L>18165<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqAtaka<k2>caRqAtaka
{#caRqAtaka#}¦ {%caṇḍātaka, as, am,%} m. n. (fr.
{%caṇḍa ?%}), a short petticoat.
<LEND>

<L>18166<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqAla<k2>caRqAla
{#caRqAla#}¦ {%caṇḍāla, as,%} m. (fr. {%caṇḍa ?,%} cf.
{%cāṇḍāla%}), an outcast, a Caṇḍāla, the generic name
for a man of the lowest and most despised of the
mixed tribes, born from a Śūdra father and Brāhman
mother. {%—Caṇḍāla-kanda, as,%} m. a kind of bulbous
plant. {%—Caṇḍāla-tā,%} f. or {%caṇḍāla-tva, am,%} n. the
state or condition of a Caṇḍāla. {%—Caṇḍāla-vallakī,%}
f. the lute of the Caṇḍāla, a common lute.
<LEND>

<L>18167<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqAlikA<k2>caRqAlikA
{%Caṇḍālikā,%}¦ f. the lute of the Caṇḍāla, a common
or vulgar lute; an epithet of Durgā; a kind of plant.
{%—Caṇḍālikā-bandha, as,%} m. a kind of knot.
<LEND>

<L>18168<pc>0313-b<k1>caRqu<k2>caRqu
{#caRqu#}¦ {%caṇḍu, us,%} m. a rat; a small monkey,
Simia Erythræa.
<LEND>

<L>18169<pc>0313-b<k1>cat<k2>cat
{#cat#}¦ {%cat,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%catati, -te,%} occurring
only in pres. part. and past. and fut. pass.
part. (see below), Ved. to hide one's self; to go; to
ask, beg, solicit [cf. {%cad%}]: Caus. P. A. {%cātayati, -te,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to hide; to scare, frighten away;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χατέω, χατίζω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>18170<pc>0313-b<k1>catat<k2>catat
{%Catat, an, antī, at,%}¦ hiding one's self; (Sāy.)
going, residing in, being in.
<LEND>

<L>18171<pc>0313-b<k1>catita<k2>catita
{%Catita,%}¦ or Ved. {%catta, as, ā, am,%} hidden, made
to disappear.
<LEND>

<L>18172<pc>0313-b<k1>catin<k2>catin
{%Catin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. hiding one's self; (Sāy.)
destroying enemies, frightening away.
<LEND>

<L>18173<pc>0313-b<k1>catya<k2>catya
{%Catya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be {{hiden->hidden||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} &c.
<LEND>

<L>18174<pc>0313-b<k1>cAtaka<k2>cAtaka
{%Cātaka, as,%}¦ m. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>18175<pc>0313-b<k1>cAtana<k2>cAtana
{%Cātana, as, ā, am,%}¦ driving away, removing [cf.
{%abhiśasti-c˚, amīva-c˚, arāya-c˚%}]; ({%am%}), n., scil.
{%sūktam,%} certain verses of the Atharva-veda, the object
of which is to avert evil demons; ({%as%}), m., N. of
the supposed Ṛṣi of these verses of the Atharva-
veda.
<LEND>

<L>18176<pc>0313-b<k1>catur<k2>catur
{#catur#}¦ {%catur, catvāras%} m. pl.,
{%catvāri%} n. pl. (said to be fr. rt. {%cat%}), four. In Vedic
Sanskrit the inst., dat., abl., and loc. have the accent
on the penultimate; in the later language either on
the penultimate or on the last syllable. A Vedic form
of the gen. pl. fem. {%catasṝṇām%} for {%catasṛṇām%}
occurs sometimes in Epic poetry; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τέσσαρες,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τέτταρες;</lang> Æol. <lang n="greek">πίσυρες;</lang> Goth. <nsi>fidvor;</nsi> Cambro-
Brit. <nsi>pedwar, pedair;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>quatuor;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>keturi;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>cetyrje;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>ceathair, ceteora;</nsi> Zend <nsi>cathru.</nsi>]
{%—Catuḥ-pañca, as, ā, am,%} four or five; also {%catuḥ-%}
{%pañcan%}. {%—Catuḥpañcāśa, as, ī, am,%} the 54th.
{%—Catuḥ-pañcāśat, t,%} f., 54. {%—Catuḥpañcāsad-%}
{%adhika-śata, as, ī, am,%} the 154th. {%—Catuḥ-%}
{%pattrī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= kṣudra-pāṣāṇa-bhedī.%}
{%—Catuḥ-parṇī,%} f. a kind of sorrel ({%kṣudrāmlikā%}).
{%—Catuḥ-pārśva, am,%} n. the four sides of a square.
{%—Catuḥ-puṇḍra, as,%} m., N. of a shrub, {%= bhiṇḍā.%}
{%—Catuḥ-phalā,%} f. Uraria Lagopodioides {%(= nāga-%}
{%balā)%}. {%—Catuḥ-śata, am,%} n., 104; 400. {%—Catuḥ-%}
{%śata-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 104th. {%—Catuḥ-śāla, as, %}
[Page0313-c+ 81]
{%ā, am,%} having four halls; built in a square; ({%am,%}
{%ā%}), n. f. or {%catuḥ-śālaka, am,%} n. a square of four
houses; a quadrangle enclosed by four buildings. {%—Ca-%}
{%tuḥ-śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} four-horned; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a mountain. {%—Catuḥ-śrotra, as, ā, am,%} having
four ears. {%—Catuḥṣaṣṭa, as, ī, am,%} the 64th;
having 64 added. {%—Catuḥ-ṣaṣṭi, is,%} f., 64; a N.
for the Ṛg-veda which consists of 64 Adhyāyas;
the 64 arts [cf. {%kalā%}]. {%—Catuḥṣaṣṭi-tama, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} the 64th. {%—Catuḥ-sana, as, ā, am,%} con-
taining the four sons of Brahmā, whose names begin
with Sana {%(sanaka, sananda, sanātana, sanatku-%}
{%māra)%}. {%—Catuḥsaptata, as, ī, am,%} the 74th.
{%—Catuḥ-saptati, is,%} f., 74. {%—Catuḥsaptati-tama,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the 74th. {%—Catuḥ-sama, am,%} n. an
unguent of four ingredients, sandal, agallochum,
saffron, and musk; ({%as, ā, am%}), one whose body
has four smooth places. {%—Catuḥ-sahasra, am,%} n.,
1004; 4000. {%—Catuḥ-sīmā,%} f. a border or boun-
dary on all four sides. {%—Catuḥ-srakti, is, is, i,%} Ved.
quadrangular. {%—Catur-aṃśa, as,%} m. a fourth part.
{%—Catur-akṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having four eyes.
{%—Catur-akṣara, am,%} n. an aggregate or com-
bination of four syllables; ({%as, ā, am%}), consisting of
four syllables. {%—Catur-aṅga, as, ā, am,%} consisting
of four members, quadripartite; ({%catur-aṅgam%}
{%balam,%} an entire or complete army, comprising
elephants, chariots, cavalry, and infantry); ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a son of Loma-pāda or Roma-pāda; the plant
Cucumis Utilissimus [cf. {%ghoṭikā%}]; ({%ā%}), f., scil.
{%senā,%} an entire army &c.; ({%am%}), n. an entire army
&c.; a sort of chess. {%—Caturaṅga-bala, am,%} n. an
entire army &c.; [cf. the preceding.] {%—Caturaṅga-%}
{%balādhyakṣa (˚la-adh˚), as,%} m. the commander-
in-chief of a complete army. {%—Caturaṅga-sainya,%}
{%am,%} n. an entire army; [cf. {%catur-aṅga.%}] {%—Catur-%}
{%aṅgin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having four parts or members,
quadripartite; ({%iṇī%}), f. a complete army. {%—Catur-%}
{%aṅgula, am,%} n. the four fingers of the hand (with-
out the thumb); four fingers broad, four inches;
({%as%}), m. the plant Cathartocarpus Fistula. {%—Catur-%}
{%adhyāyikā, am,%} f. n. a collection of four Adhyāyas.
{%—Catur-anīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having four faces,
facing the four quarters. {%—Catur-anugāna, am,%} n., N.
of a Sāman. {%—Catur-anta, as, ā, am,%} bordered on all
four sides; ({%ā%}), f. the earth. {%—Caturanteśa (˚tā-īśa),%}
{%as,%} m. lord of the earth, a king. {%—Catur-avatta,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (see {%ava-do%}), divided into four parts;
({%am%}), n. division into four parts. {%—Catur-avattin,%}
{%ī, inī, i%} (see {%ava-do%}), one who is accustomed to
offer the havis in four portions. {%—Caturaśīta, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} the 84th. {%—Catur-aśīti, is,%} f., 84. {%—Catur-%}
{%aśīti-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 84th. {%—Catur-aśra%} or
{%catur-asra%} or {%catur-asraka, as, ā, am,%} four-
cornered, quadrangular; regular; ({%as%}), m. a quadran-
gular figure; a square; (in astronomy) N. of the
fourth and eighth lunar mansions; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
various Ketus. {%—Catur-aśva, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Catur-asraka, as,%} m., N. of various postures in
acting; see {%catur-aśra%}. {%—Catur-aha, am,%} n. a period
of four days; ({%as%}), m. a Soma sacrifice lasting four days;
[cf. {%atri-catur-aha.%}] {%—Catur-ātman, ā, ā, a,%} re-
presenting four persons; having four faces. {%—Catur-%}
{%ānana, as, ā, am,%} having four faces; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Brahmā. {%—Catur-ānartana, am,%} n. a
dance by four, or in four divisions. {%—Catur-iḍas-%}
{%pada-stobha, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Catur-%}
{%uttara, as, ā, am,%} increasing by four. {%—Catur-%}
{%uṣaṇa, am,%} n. the four hot spices, black pepper,
long pepper, dry ginger, and the root of long pepper;
[cf. {%try-ūṣaṇa%} and {%catur-jātaka.%}] {%—Catur-gati,%}
{%is,%} m. a tortoise (going on four feet). {%—Catur-gara,%}
{%am,%} n. a carriage drawn by four oxen. {%—Catur-%}
{%guṇa, as, ā, am,%} four times, four-fold, quadruple.
{%—Catur-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%} taken up (or ladled
out, as a fluid) four times; ({%am%}), n. taking up (any
fluid) four times. {%—Catur-grāma, as%} or {%am%} (?),
m. or n. (?), N. of a country. {%—Catur-jātaka, am,%}
n. {%= cāturjātaka, = kaṭu-cāturjātaka,%} q. v. {%—Ca-%}
{%turṇavata, as, ī, am,%} with 94 added (e. g. {%catur-%}
{%ṇavataṃ śatam%} = 194); [cf. {%catur-navata.%}]
[Page0314-a+ 81]
{%—Catur-daṃṣṭra, as,%} m. ‘having four tusks;’ N. of
Viṣṇu; of one of the attendants of Skanda; of a
Dānava. {%—Catur-dat, an, antī, at,%} four-toothed.
{%—Catur-danta, as,%} m. ‘having four tusks,’ an epi-
thet of Airāvata, the elephant of Indra; N. of an ele-
phant mentioned in the Pañca-tantra. {%—Caturdaśa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the fourteenth; consisting of fourteen; ({%ī%}),
f., scil. {%rātri,%} the fourteenth day in a lunar fortnight.
{%—Caturdaśa-dhā,%} ind. fourteen-fold. {%—Catur-%}
{%daśan, a,%} pl. fourteen; [cf. Lat. <nsi>quatuordecim;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>keturôlika.</nsi>] {%—Caturdaśama, as, ī, am,%} the
fourteenth. {%—Caturdaśa-mata-viveka, as,%} m. title
of a work by Śaṅkara. {%—Caturdaśika, as%} or {%am,%}
m. or n. (?), a feast on the fourteenth day of a lunar
fortnight. {%—Catur-dārika, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of the fifth Lambaka in the Kathā-sarit-sāgara.
{%—Catur-dikṣu%} or {%catur-diśam,%} ind. towards the
four quarters, on all sides, all around. {%—Catur-dola,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a royal litter. {%—Catur-dvīpa-cakra-%}
{%vartin, ī,%} m. the sovereign of the four Dvīpas.
{%—Catur-dhā,%} ind. in four parts, four-fold; [cf. Hib.
<nsi>ceathardha;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">τέτραχα.</lang>] {%—Caturdhā-bhū,%} cl. 1.
P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to be divided into four parts.
{%—Caturdhā-śānti, is,%} f. a religious ceremony per-
formed at the time of making the stated offerings to
deceased ancestors. {%—Caturnavata, as, ī, am,%} the
94th. {%—Catur-navati, is,%} f., 94. {%—Caturnavati-%}
{%tama, as, ī, am,%} the 94th. {%—Catur-bāhu, us, us, u,%}
four-armed; an epithet of Viṣṇu and Śiva; [cf. {%ca-%}
{%tur-bhuja.%}] {%—Catur-bhadra, am,%} n. the aggregate of
four objects of human wishes, viz. {%dharma,%} virtue;
{%kāma,%} pleasure; {%artha,%} wealth; and {%mokṣa,%} final
beatitude. {%—Catur-bhāga, as,%} m. the fourth part, a
quarter. {%—Catur-bhuja, am,%} n. (generally in com-
pounds), four arms; ({%as, ā, am%}), having four arms;
quadrangular; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu or
Kṛṣṇa; a square; N. of a Dānava; N. of the
instructor of Rāmānanda; N. of the father of Śiva-
datta. {%—Caturbhuja-bhaṭṭācārya (˚ṭa-āc˚), as,%} m.,
N. of an author. {%—Catur-bhūgas, ān, asī, as,%} con-
taining four (syllables) more. {%—Catur-mahārāja, ās,%}
m. pl. the four great kings or gods of the highest of
the six Buddhist heavens. {%—Caturmahārāja-kāyika,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} belonging to the group of the four great
kings; epithet of a class of deities with Buddhists;
also {%caturmahārājika%}. {%—Catur-māsa, am,%} n. a
period of four months. {%—Catur-mukha, am,%} n. (in
compounds), four faces; ({%as, ī, am%}), having four
faces; (an arrow) having four points; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Brahmā, of Viṣṇu, Śiva, and of a Dānava;
a preparation of mercury (?). {%—Caturmukha-rasa,%}
{%as,%} m. a preparation of great curative power. {%—Ca-%}
{%tur-yuga, am,%} n. the aggregate of the four Yugas
or ages of the world, a Mahā-yuga or 4,320,000
years; ({%as, ā, am%}), drawn by four (oxen &c.);
comprehending the four Yugas or ages of the world.
{%—Catar-yuj. k, k, k,%} drawn by four (oxen &c.).
{%—Catur-vaktra, as,%} m. ‘four-faced,’ N. of Brahmā;
of a Dānava. {%—Catur-vaya, as, ī, am,%} Ved. four-fold.
{%—Catur-varga, as,%} m. a collection of four things,
the four objects of human pursuit collectively; see
{%catur-bhadra%}. {%—Caturvarga-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m.
title of a work. {%—Catur-varṇa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
the four classes or castes of Hindūs, viz. Brāhmans,
Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas, and Śūdras; four principal
colours; four letters. {%—Caturvarṇa-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} consisting of the four castes. {%—Caturvarṇya,%}
{%am,%} n. the system of the four castes. {%—Catur-var-%}
{%ṣikā,%} f., scil. {%go,%} a cow four years old. {%—Catur-%}
{%vāhin, ī,%} m., scil. {%ratha,%} a carriage drawn by four
(horses &c.). {%—Caturviṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the 24th;
having 24 added (e. g. {%caturviṃśaṃ śatam,%} 124);
consisting of 24; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Stoma; ({%am%}), n.,
scil. {%ahan,%} N. of an Ekāha. {%—Catur-viṃśati, is,%} f.,
24; the 24th year (e. g. {%ā-caturviṃśaṃ śatam,%} to the
24th year); title of a work. {%—Caturviṃśatika,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} consisting of 24. {%—Caturviṃśati-tama,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the 24th. {%—Caturviṃśati-mata, am,%} n.
‘24 sects,’ title of a work. {%—Caturviṃśatimata-%}
{%vyākhyā,%} f. a commentary by Bhaṭṭoji-dīkṣita.
{%—Caturviṃśaty-avatāra-caritra, am,%} n. ‘history
[Page0314-b+ 81]
of 24 incarnations’ by Narahara-dāsa. {%—Caturviṃśā-%}
{%kṣara, as, ā, am,%} containing 24 syllables. {%—Catur-%}
{%vidya, as, ā, am,%} familiar with the four Vedas; ({%as%}),
m. one who has studied the four Vedas. {%—Catur-%}
{%vidha, as, ā, am,%} four-fold; of four sorts or kinds,
in four ways. {%—Catur-vīja, am,%} n. the four kinds of
seed, i. e. the seed of Kālājājī, Candra-śūra, Me-
thikā, and Yavānikā. {%—Catur-vīra, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. an epithet applied to a particular unguent; also
to a Soma sacrifice which lasts four days. {%—Catur-%}
{%veda, ās,%} m. pl., the four Vedas, viz. the Ṛg-veda,
Yajur-veda, Sāma-veda, and Atharva-veda; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), containing the four Vedas; familiar with the
four Vedas; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of manes. {%—Catur-%}
{%vedin, ī, iṇī, i,%} familiar with the four Vedas.
{%—Catur-vyūha, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; [cf.
{%nava-vyūha.%}] {%—Catur-hanu, us,%} m. ‘having four
jaws,’ N. of a Dānava. {%—Catur-hasta, as, ā, am,%}
four-armed. {%—Catur-hāyaṇa, as, ī, am,%} four years
old; ({%ī%}), f. a cow of four years. {%—Catur-hotṛ, tā%}
or {%tāras,%} m. sing. or plur., N. of a certain liturgical
section of Vedic works intended for recitation; con-
taining the four chief priests. {%—Catur-hotra, as,%} m.
comprehending the four chief priests. {%—Caturho-%}
{%traka, am,%} n. the four chief priests; the duties of
these priests. {%—Catuścatvāriṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the 44th;
having 44 added; containing 44; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Stoma. {%—Catuś-catvāriṃśat, t,%} f., 44. {%—Catuṣ-%}
{%karṇa, as, ā, am,%} four-eared; heard by four ears
only; ({%ī%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attendant on
Skanda. {%—Catuṣkarṇa-tā,%} f. the state of being
heard by only four ears, a secret. {%—Catuṣ-koṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} square, quadrangular; ({%as%}), m. a quadrangular
figure, a square, a tetragon. {%—Catu-ṣṭoma, as,%} m.
(fr. {%catur%} and {%stoma%}), a Stoma consisting of four
parts; ({%as, ā, am%}), connected with such a Stoma.
{%—Catuṣ-patha, as, am,%} m. n. a place where four
roads meet, a cross-way; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman (so
called from the four {%āśramās,%} q. v.). {%—Catuṣpatha-%}
{%niketā%} or {%catuṣpatha-ratā,%} f., N. of one of the
Mātṛs attendant on Skanda. {%—Catuṣ-pada, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having four feet; consisting of four Pādas;
(in arithmetic or algebra) tetranomial; ({%as%}), m. an
animal with four legs, a quadruped; (in astron.) a
term for certain signs of the zodiac; N. of a par-
ticular Karaṇa; a kind of coitus; N. of a shrub;
({%ā%}), f. a metre containing 30+4+4 syllabic instants;
({%am%}), n. a conjunction of four Pādas. {%—Catuṣpa-%}
{%dikā,%} f., N. of a metre containing 30 + 4 + 4 syllabic
instants. {%—Catuṣ-pāṭī,%} f. a river (winding four
ways ?). {%—Catuṣ-pāṭhī,%} f. a school for Brāhmans
in which the four Vedas are repeated. {%—Catuṣ-pāṇi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} four-handed; ({%is%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Catuṣ-pād, -pāt, -padī, -pat,%} quadruped; hav-
ing made four steps; consisting of four members,
divided into four parts, consisting of four parts;
({%-pāt%}), m. a quadruped; anything which has four
parts or members; a judicial procedure, consisting of
four processes, plea, defence, rejoinder, and sentence;
({%-padī%}), f. a female quadruped; ({%-pat%}), n. the quadru-
peds collectively, the animals. {%—Catuṣ-pāda, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} quadruped; divided into four parts, consisting
of four parts; ({%as%}), m. a quadruped. {%—Catuṣ-%}
{%pārśva, am,%} n. the four sides of anything. {%—Catu-%}
{%stana, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%catuḥ-stana%}), having four
nipples. {%—Catustriṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the 34th; having
34 added; containing 34. {%—Catustriṃśaj-jātaka-%}
{%jña, as,%} m. a Buddha. {%—Catus-triṃśat, t,%} f., 34.
{%—Catus-sama,%} see {%catuḥ-sama%}. {%—Catū-rājī,%} f.
(fr. {%catur + rājan%}), the four kings; N. of the
luckiest or most desired termination of the game
called Caturaṅga, by which one king gains the four
thrones. {%—Catū-rātra, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%catur + rātra%}),
lasting four days (lit. nights); ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. n., N.
of a certain ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>18177<pc>0314-b<k1>catura<k2>catura<h>1
1. {%catura, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of some com-
pounds) {%= catur,%} four; see {%a-c˚, upa-c˚, tri-c˚.%}
(For 2. {%catura%} see next col.)
<LEND>

<L>18178<pc>0314-b<k1>caturTa<k2>caturTa
{%Caturtha, as, ī, am,%}¦ fourth, the fourth; ({%as%}), m.
the fourth letter in every class of consonants, i. e. {%gh,%}
{%jh, ḍh, dh, bh; (ī),%} f., scil. {%rātri,%} the fourth day
[Page0314-c+ 77]
in a lunar fortnight; (scil. {%vibhakti%}), the termination
of the fourth case, the fourth case, the dative case;
({%as, ā, am%}), constituting the fourth part; ({%am%}), n.
a quarter; [cf. Lith. <nsi>ketwirtas;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>cetvertyi,</nsi>
<nsi>cetvertaja;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">τέταρος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>quartus;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>fidvorda</nsi> (?); Germ. <nsi>vierter.</nsi>] {%—Caturtha-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. the ceremonies performed on the fourth day of
a marriage. {%—Caturtha-kālam,%} ind. at the fourth
meal, at the evening of every second day of a person's
fasting. {%—Caturthakālika, as, ā, am,%} one who passes
three meals without eating and partakes only of the
fourth. {%—Caturtha-phala, am,%} n. the second in-
equality or equation of a planet. {%—Caturtha-bhakta,%}
{%am,%} n. consuming the fourth meal (after having passed
three without eating). {%—Caturtha-bhāj, k, k, k,%} re-
ceiving the fourth part as a toll from one's subjects (as
a king). {%—Caturtha-svara, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Caturthāṃśa (˚tha-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a quarter, a
fourth part; ({%as, ā, am%}), receiving a quarter. {%—Ca-%}
{%turthāśrama (˚tha-āś˚), as,%} m. the fourth order
of a Brāhman's life.
<LEND>

<L>18179<pc>0314-c<k1>caturTaka<k2>caturTaka
{%Caturthaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ the fourth; returning or
repeated every four days as a fever, quartan; ({%ikā%}),
f. a weight equal to four Karṣas or one Pāla.
<LEND>

<L>18180<pc>0314-c<k1>caturya<k2>caturya
{%Caturya,%}¦ nom. P. {%caturyati,%} to wish for four.
<LEND>

<L>18181<pc>0314-c<k1>catuzka<k2>catuzka
{%Catuṣka, as, ā, am,%}¦ four, consisting of four,
increased by four (e. g. {%catuṣkaṃ śatam%} = 104
or four per cent; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f. a
large four-sided pond or tank; a bed or musquito-
curtain; ({%am%}), n. the number four; a collection of
four; a cross-way; a quadrangular court-yard [cf.
{%catvara%}]; a hall resting on four columns; a neck-
lace of four strings.
<LEND>

<L>18182<pc>0314-c<k1>catuzkikA<k2>catuzkikA
{%Catuṣkikā,%}¦ f. the number four.
<LEND>

<L>18183<pc>0314-c<k1>catuzkin<k2>catuzkin
{%Catuṣkin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having four (parts &c.) of
anything.
<LEND>

<L>18184<pc>0314-c<k1>catuzwaya<k2>catuzwaya
{%Catuṣṭaya, as, ī, am,%}¦ four-fold, consisting of
four; ({%am%}), n. the number four, a collection of four,
an aggregate of four, a quaternion; a square; a
collection of Sūtras consisting of four sections; the
first, fourth, seventh, and tenth signs of the zodiac;
the centre of a circle. {%—Catuṣṭaya-samāsa, ās,%}
m. pl. four classes of compounds, viz. Avyayī-bhāva,
Tat-puruṣa, Dvandva, and Bahu-vrīhi.
<LEND>

<L>18185<pc>0314-c<k1>catus<k2>catus
{%Catus,%}¦ ind. four times; [cf. Zend <nsi>cathrus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18186<pc>0314-c<k1>catvara<k2>catvara
{%Catvara, am,%}¦ n. a quadrangular place or court-
yard, a place in which many ways meet; a levelled
spot of ground prepared for a sacrifice. {%—Catvara-%}
{%vāsinī,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attendant on
Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>18187<pc>0314-c<k1>catvAriMSa<k2>catvAriMSa
{%Catvāriṃśa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the next), the 40th;
having 40 added; consisting of 40.
<LEND>

<L>18188<pc>0314-c<k1>catvAriMSat<k2>catvAriMSat
{%Catvāriṃśat, t,%}¦ f. (said to be fr. {%catvāri,%} n. pl.
+ {%daśat,%} a decad), 40; [cf. Lat. <nsi>quadraginta;</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">τεσσαράκοντα.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>18189<pc>0314-c<k1>catvAriMSati<k2>catvAriMSati
{%Catvāriṃśati, is,%}¦ f. = the preceding (in {%dvā-catvā-%}
{%riṃśati%}).
<LEND>

<L>18190<pc>0314-c<k1>catura<k2>catura<h>2
{#catura#} 2¦. {%catura, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr.
rt. {%cat;%} for 1. see under {%catur%} above), swift, quick;
dexterous, clever, skilful, ingenious; charming, agree-
able; visible, perceptible; ({%as%}), m. a round pillow,
one for the cheek; ({%am%}), n. skilfulness, cleverness;
an elephant's stable; [cf. {%cātura.%}] {%—Catura-tā,%} f.
cleverness, skilfulness, cunningness.
<LEND>

<L>18191<pc>0314-c<k1>caturaka<k2>caturaka
{%Caturaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a jackal; ({%ikā%}), f., N.
of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>18192<pc>0314-c<k1>caturTa<k2>caturTa
{#caturTa#}¦ {%caturtha.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18193<pc>0314-c<k1>catula<k2>catula
{#catula#}¦ {%catula, as, ā, am,%} depositing, placing,
fixing.
<LEND>

<L>18194<pc>0314-c<k1>catvAriMSat<k2>catvAriMSat
{#catvAriMSat#}¦ {%catvāriṃśat.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>18195<pc>0314-c<k1>catvAla<k2>catvAla
{#catvAla#}¦ {%catvāla, as,%} m. a hole in the ground
&c. prepared for an oblation with fire, or for the sacri-
ficial fire; the womb; Kuśa grass; [cf. {%cātvāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18196<pc>0314-c<k1>cad<k2>cad
{#cad#}¦ {%cad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%cadati, -te,%} to ask
or beg, to solicit; [cf. {%cat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18197<pc>0314-c<k1>cadira<k2>cadira
{#cadira#}¦ {%cadira, as,%} m. the moon; camphor;
an elephant; a snake; [cf. {%candira.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0315-a+ 79]

<L>18198<pc>0315-a<k1>can<k2>can<h>1
{#can#} 1¦. {%can,%} cl. 1. P. {%canati,%} to sound,
utter a sound; cl. 1. P. or Caus. {%canati%} or
{%canayati, -yitum,%} to hurt, injure, wound, kill.
<LEND>

<L>18199<pc>0315-a<k1>can<k2>can<h>2
{#can#} 2¦. {%can%} (related to rt. {%kan,%} only found
in the Ved. Aor. 2nd du. {%caniṣṭam%}), to
delight in anything, be satisfied with (with loc.), to
love.
<LEND>

<L>18200<pc>0315-a<k1>canas<k2>canas
{%Canas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. delight, satisfaction; (Sāy.)
food; (only found connected with rt. {%dhā,%} in) {%cano%}
{%dhā,%} to delight in, be satisfied with, to find anything
acceptable or agreeable (with acc. or loc.), to enjoy;
(Sāy.) to grant food. {%—Cano-dhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
satisfied, gracious; (according to schol.) giving food.
{%—Cano-hita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. made favourable or
inclined to do anything, willing to do anything;
(Sāy.) having food given to one's self.
<LEND>

<L>18201<pc>0315-a<k1>canasita<k2>canasita
{%Canasita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%canasya%} below), Ved.
delighted, satisfied, gracious. {%—Canasita-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. containing the word {%canasita;%} agree-
able (as speech or words).
<LEND>

<L>18202<pc>0315-a<k1>canasya<k2>canasya
{%Canasya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%canasyati,%} to delight in,
be satisfied with; (Sāy.) to like; to eat.
<LEND>

<L>18203<pc>0315-a<k1>canizWa<k2>canizWa
{%Caniṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of rt. 2. {%can%}), Ved.
very favourable, very gracious; very acceptable;
(Sāy.) containing or granting much food.
<LEND>

<L>18204<pc>0315-a<k1>cana<k2>cana
{#cana#}¦ {%cana%} (originally for {%ca+na%}), ind. and
not, also not, even not, not even; even, also, and.
This particle is placed after the word to which it
gives force; and in Vedic Sanskrit is generally, but
not always, found without any other negative particle,
whereas in the later language another negative is
usually added (e. g. {%āpaś cana pra minanti vrataṃ%}
{%vām,%} not even the waters violate your ordinance;
{%nāha vivyāca pṛthivī canainam,%} the earth even
does not contain him). When {%cana%} is added to the
interrogatives {%ka, katara, katama, kad, kim,%}
{%katham, kadā, kutas, kva,%} it makes them in-
definite; see 2. {%ka,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>18205<pc>0315-a<k1>cand<k2>cand
{#cand#}¦ {%cand%} (originally {%ścand ?%}), cl. 1. P.
{%candati,%} to shine, to be bright; to glad-
den; (only the Ved. part. of the Intens. {%caniścadat%}
seems to occur); [cf. Lat. <nsi>candeo</nsi> and <nsi>candela.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18206<pc>0315-a<k1>canda<k2>canda
{%Canda, as,%}¦ m. the moon; N. of the author of
the work Pṛthivī-rājarāsaka; [cf. {%candra%} below;
cf. also Hib. <nsi>canu,</nsi> ‘full moon.’]
<LEND>

<L>18207<pc>0315-a<k1>candaka<k2>candaka
{%Candaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleasing, joy-inspiring; ({%as%}),
m. the moon, moonlight; a small silvery fish of a
genus allied to the Zeus or Chanda; (a various reading
has {%candraka.%}) {%—Candaka-puṣpa, am,%} n. cloves;
(a wrong form for {%candana-puṣpa.%})
<LEND>

<L>18208<pc>0315-a<k1>candana<k2>candana
{%Candana, as, am,%}¦ m. n. sandal or Sirium Myrti-
folium; either the tree, the wood, or the unctuous
preparation of the wood held in high estimation as
perfumes; anything which is the most excellent of
its kind; ({%am%}), n. a kind of grass, {%= bhadra-kālī;%}
red sandal-wood; ({%as%}), m., N. of a divine being with
Buddhists; of a prince; of an ape; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
plant [cf. {%candana-gopī%} and {%candana-śārivā%}]; N. of
a river; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a river; [cf. {%ku-candana, pīta-%}
{%c˚, rakta-c˚, śveta-c˚, hari-c˚.%}] {%—Candana-giri,%}
{%is,%} m. the Malaya mountain, part of the southern
range of the Ghaṭs, where sandal-wood is found.
{%—Candana-gopī,%} f. a kind of plant, {%= śārivā-%}
{%viśeṣa;%} [cf. {%candanā.%}] {%—Candana-dāsa, as,%}
m., N. of a merchant. {%—Candana-pāla, as,%} m., N.
of a prince. {%—Candana-puṣpa, am,%} n. cloves.
{%—Candana-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of sandal-wood.
{%—Candana-vāri, i,%} n. sandal-water. {%—Candana-%}
{%śārivā,%} f., N. of a plant, a kind of Śārivā. {%—Can-%}
{%dana-sāra, as,%} m. the most excellent sandal-wood;
a kind of alkali {%(vajra-kṣāra)%}. {%—Candanāgra%}
{%(˚na-ag˚), as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Candanācala%}
{%(˚na-ac˚), as,%} m. or {%candanādri (˚na-ad˚), is,%} m.
{%= candana-giri%}. {%—Candanā-vatī,%} f., N. of a river.
{%—Candanodaka (˚na-ud˚), am,%} n. sandal-water.
{%—Candanodaka-dundubhi, is,%} m. an epithet of
Bhava.
<LEND>

<L>18209<pc>0315-a<k1>candanaka<k2>candanaka
{%Candanaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man mentioned in
the Mṛcchakaṭika.
<LEND>
[Page0315-b+ 81]

<L>18210<pc>0315-b<k1>candanin<k2>candanin
{%Candanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ rubbed with or smelling of
sandal-wood, imbued with sandal.
<LEND>

<L>18211<pc>0315-b<k1>candanIyA<k2>candanIyA
{%Candanīyā,%}¦ f. a kind of yellow pigment; [cf.
{%go-rocanā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18212<pc>0315-b<k1>candalA<k2>candalA
{%Candalā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman; [cf. {%candralā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18213<pc>0315-b<k1>candira<k2>candira
{%Candira, as,%}¦ m. the moon; an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>18214<pc>0315-b<k1>candra<k2>candra
{%Candra, as, ā, am%}¦ (originally {%ścandra;%} cf. {%aśva-%}
{%ścandra, puru-śc˚,%} &c.), Ved. glittering, shining
(as gold), having the brilliancy or hue of light;
({%as%}), m. the moon (regarded as a planet), the moon
personified or regarded as a deity; any eminent or
illustrious person (at end of comp., e. g. {%puruṣa-%}
{%candra,%} a moon of men, an excellent or eminent
man, the moon being regarded as the most beautiful
of the planets); a lovely or agreeable phenomenon
of any kind, anything which gives pleasure; a spot
similar to the moon; the eye in a peacock's tail;
the symbol or mark of the Visarga; gold; a reddish
kind of pearl; water; camphor; a particular plant,
{%= kāmpilla;%} N. of a metre consisting of four lines
of nineteen syllables each; N. of a Daitya, = Can-
dra-varman, king of the Kāmbojas; also of a son
of Viśva-gandhi and father of Yuvanāśva; N. of a
grammarian; of a king; of one of the ancestors of
the Gauḍa Brāhmans, and of several other men; one
of the eighteen minor Dvīpas or divisions of the
known continent; N. of one of the principal branches
of the river Candra-bhāgā; N. of a mountain; ({%ā%}),
f. a hall covered only at the top; an awning, a
canopy; small cardamoms; Cocculus Cordifolius, {%=%}
{%guḍūcī; (ī),%} f. Serratula Anthelmintica, {%= vākucī;%}
{%(am),%} n. gold; a kind of sour rice-gruel, {%= cukra;%}
N. of a Sāman; [cf. {%ardha-candra.%}] {%—Candra-%}
{%kalā,%} f. a digit or one-sixteenth of the moon's disc,
(each digit is personified as a female divinity, and
worshipped in Tantrika ceremonies); the crescent
before or after the new moon; a kind of fish, {%=%}
{%vācā%} or {%bācā,%} Pimelodus Vacha; title of a drama.
{%—Candra-kavi, is,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Candra-%}
{%kāṭuki, is,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Candra-kānta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} lovely as the moon; ({%as%}), m. a fabulous
gem, the moon-stone, supposed to be formed from the
congelation of the rays of the moon and to dissolve
under the influence of its light; a kind of crystal or
jasper may perhaps be meant; ({%am, as%}), n. m. the
white eatable water-lily, blossoming during the night;
({%am%}), n. sandal-wood; ({%ā%}), f. the wife of the moon;
the night. {%—Candra-kānti, is,%} f. the brilliancy or lus-
tre of the moon, moonlight. {%—Candra-kālānala (˚la-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. a kind of diagram. {%—Candra-kīrtti, is,%}
m., N. of an author. {%—Candra-kula, am,%} n., N. of
a town. {%—Candra-kulyā,%} f., N. of a river in Kaś-
mīra. {%—Candra-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a man; also of
a son of Lakṣmaṇa. {%—Candra-koṣa, as,%} m. title
of a lexicon. {%—Candra-garbha, as,%} m. title of a
Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Candra-giri, is,%} m., N. of
a mountain; also of a prince. {%—Candra-gupta, as,%}
m. ‘moon-protected,’ N. of a renowned king, the
<lang n="greek">Σανδο-κυπτος</lang> or <lang n="greek">Σανδρο-κοττος</lang> of the Greeks, who
is supposed to have reigned at Pāṭali-putra, or the mo-
dern Patna, about 315 B. C., (he was installed by the
Brāhman Cāṇakya after causing the death of Nanda,
and was the founder of a new dynasty); N. of two kings
of the Gupta dynasty; the registrar of Yama's court
(in the latter sense a wrong form for {%citra-gupta%}).
{%—Candra-gomin, ī,%} m., N. of a grammarian. {%—Can-%}
{%dra-gola, as,%} m. the lunar orb or sphere. {%—Candra-%}
{%gola-stha, as,%} m. ‘dwelling in the lunar sphere,’ a
deceased progenitor, the manes. {%—Candra-golikā,%} f.
moonlight. {%—Candra-grahaṇa, am,%} n. an eclipse
of the moon. {%—Candra-cañcala, as, ā,%} m. f. a
small fish called Chanda, {%= candraka%}. {%—Candra-%}
{%cūḍa, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva (whose diadem is a
crescent), [cf. {%candra-mauli, candra-śekhara,%} &c.];
N. of an author. {%—Candra-cūḍāmaṇi, is,%} m. title
of a literary work. {%—Candra-cūḍāṣṭaka (˚ḍa-%}
{%aṣ˚), am,%} n., N. of a hymn. {%—Candra-ja, as,%} m.
the son of the moon, an epithet of Budha (Mercury).
{%—Candra-tāpana, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava.
{%—Candra-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. offering
anything bright (as gold &c.) in sacrifice. {%—Candra- %}
[Page0315-c+ 81]
{%datta, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Candra-dāra,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. the twenty-seven lunar mansions, which,
in mythology, are so many nymphs, daughters of
Dakṣa, and wedded to Candra or the moon.
{%—Candra-deva, as,%} m., N. of a warrior; N. of
a Brāhman of Kaśyapa's family; N. of a poet.
{%—Candra-dyuti, is,%} m. sandal-wood; [cf. {%canda-%}
{%na.%}] {%—Candra-dhvaja-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a Samā-
dhi. {%—Candra-nābha, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava.
{%—Candra-nibha, as, ā, am,%} like the moon, bright,
handsome. {%—Candra-nirṇij, k, k, k,%} Ved. one who
has a brilliant garment or appearance; (Sāy.) having
a shape like the moon or whose form causes delight.
{%—Candra-pañcaṅga, am,%} n. the luni-solar calendar.
{%—Candra-pāda, as,%} m. a moon-beam. a ray of the
moon. {%—Candra-putra, as,%} m. ‘son of the moon,’
a N. of Budha or Mercury. {%—Candra-pura, as,%} m.,
N. of a town; [cf. {%cāndrapura.%}] {%—Candra-puṣpā,%}
f. a kind of solanum; [cf. {%śveta-kaṇṭakārī.%}]
{%—Candra-prakāśa, as,%} m. title of a work. {%—Can-%}
{%dra-prabha, as,%} m., N. of the Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī; N. of a king; N. of several persons;
({%ā%}), f. moonlight; the plant Serratula Anthelmintica,
{%= vākucī;%} a compound of various drugs used in
jaundice, piles, &c.; N. of a woman. {%—Candra-%}
{%prabhāva, as, ā, am,%} splendid as the moon.
{%—Candra-prabhāsvara-rāja, as,%} m., N. of several
Buddhas. {%—Candra-priya, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Candra-bālā,%} f. large cardamoms. {%—Candra-%}
{%bāhu, us,%} m., N. of an Asura. {%—Candra-budhna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a bright standing-ground;
(Sāy.) the ground or cause of joy to all creatures.
{%—Candra-bha, as,%} m., N. of an attendant of
Skanda. {%—Candra-bhāgā,%} f., N. of a river, the
Chenab, one of the five streams of the Pañjāb.
{%—Candra-bhāsa, as,%} m. a sword; [cf. {%candra-%}
{%hāsa.%}] {%—Candra-bhūti, i,%} n. silver. {%—Candra-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. {%= candra-kānta,%} the moon-gem.
{%—Candra-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the orb or disc of
the moon; the lunar sphere; a halo round the moon.
{%—Candra-manas, ās,%} m., N. of one of the ten
horses of the moon. {%—Candra-mas, ās,%} m. (fr.
{%candra+mas,%} derived fr. rt. {%mā%}), the moon, the
deity of the moon; a month. {%—Candra-mā,%} f., N.
of a river. {%—Candra-mālā,%} f., N. of a metre; N.
of a river. {%—Candra-mukha, as,%} m. ‘moon-faced,’
N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f. a metre consisting of four lines
of ten syllables each; a lovely woman, whose face is
fair as the moon. {%—Candra-mauli, is,%} m. ‘moon-
crested,’ an epithet of Śiva, (this deity being repre-
sented with a crescent on his forehead); [cf. {%candra-%}
{%cūḍa%}] {%—Candra-ratha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a
brilliant carriage. {%—Candra-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a
minister of king Harṣa. {%—Candra-rekhā,%} f. a digit
of the moon. {%—Candra-reṇu, us,%} m. a plagiarist, a
poetical thief (who has only the dust of the moon).
{%—Candra-lekha, as,%} m., N. of a Rākṣasa; ({%ā%}),
f. a digit of the moon; the plant Serratula Anthel-
mintica, {%= vākucī;%} N. of a metre consisting of four
lines of thirteen syllables each; N. of another metre
of four lines of fifteen syllables each; N. of a daughter
of the Nāga Su-śravas; also of the wife of Kṣema-
gupta; N. of the daughter of king Vīra-siṃha, also
called Śaśi-kalā. {%—Candra-loka, am,%} n. the sphere
or heaven of the moon. {%—Candra-locana, as,%} m.,
N. of a Dānava. {%—Candra-lohaka%} or {%candra-lauha%}
or {%candra-lauhaka, am,%} n. silver. {%—Candra-%}
{%vaṃśa, as,%} m. the race of the moon, the lunar race
of kings or the second great line of Kṣatriya or
royal dynasties in India. (The progenitor of the
lunar race of kings who reigned at ancient Delhi or
Hāstina-pura was Soma the Moon, the child of the
Ṛṣi Atri and father of Budha. The latter married
Iḷā, daughter of the solar king Ikṣavāku, and had by
her a son, Aila or Purūravas. This last had a son
by Urvaśī, named Āyus, from whom came Nahuṣa,
father of Yayāti. The latter had two sons, Puru and
Yadu, from whom proceeded the two branches of the
lunar line. In the line of Yadu was born Kṛṣṇa
and Bala-rāma; in that of Puru came Dushyanta,
the hero of the Śakuntalā and father of the great
[Page0316-a+ 81]
Bharata. Ninth from Bharata came Kuru, and
fourteenth from him Śāntanu, who had a son
Vicitra-vīrya and a step-son Vyāsa. The latter
married the two widows of his half-brother, and had
by them Dhṛta-rāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu, the wars of
whose sons form the subject of the Mahā-bhārata);
[cf. {%sūrya-vaṃśa.%}] {%—Candravaṃśin, ī,%} m. one of
the lunar dynasty. {%—Candra-vaktrā,%} f., N. of a
town. {%—Candra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. brilliant,
golden, abounding in gold; illuminated by the moon;
({%tī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Su-nābha and wife of
Gada; N. of a princess; the wife of a potter; N. of
a town or district. {%—Candra-vatsa, ās,%} m., N. of
a people. {%—Candra-vadana, as, ā, am,%} moon-
faced, having a face fair as the moon. {%—Candra-%}
{%varṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. of brilliant or bright colour.
{%—Candra-vartman, a,%} n., N. of a metre consisting
of four lines of twelve syllables each. {%—Candra-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m., N. of a king of the Kāmbojas; also
of a prince conquered by Samudra-gupta. {%—Candra-%}
{%vallarī,%} f. a kind of Asclepias, {%= soma-vallarī%} or
{%brahmī-śāka%}. {%—Candra-vallī,%} f., N. of several
plants, {%= pra-sāraṇī, mādhavī,%} and {%soma-latā.%}
{%—Candra-vasā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Candra-vindu,%}
{%us,%} m. the sign for the nasal {#Z#}. {%—Candra-vimala,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Samādhi (pure as the moon).
{%—Candra-vimala-sūrya-prabhāsa-śrī, īs,%} m., N.
of a Buddha (the beauty of whom is spotless like the
moon and brilliant as the sun). {%—Candra-vihaṅ-%}
{%gama, as,%} m. a kind of crane, Ardea Nivea.
{%—Candra-vrata, am,%} n. a kind of vow or penance
[cf. {%cāndrāyaṇa%}]; a regal property or virtue.
{%—Candra-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Can-%}
{%dra-śālā,%} f. an upper room, an apartment on the
house-top; moonlight. {%—Candra-śālikā,%} f. a room
on the top of a house. {%—Candra-śilā,%} f. a kind of
gem, moon-stone [cf. {%candra-kānta%}]; N. of one of
the Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Candra-śukla,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of one of the eight Upa-dvīpas in Jambu-
dvīpa. {%—Candra-śūra, am,%} n. a kind of fruit, {%=%}
{%candrikā, kāravī,%} &c., commonly {%hālim,%} Lepidium
Sativum. {%—Candra-śekhara, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva [cf. {%candra-mauli%}]; N. of a prince whose
minister was the father of Viśva-nātha, the author
of the Sāhitya-darpaṇa; or N. of that minister; N.
of a commentator on Kālidāsa's Śakuntalā (perhaps
identical with the minister of the same name); N. of
the author of the play Madhurā-niruddha; N. of a
mountain. {%—Candraśekhara-campū-prabandha,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a work. {%—Candra-śrī, īs,%} m., N. of a
prince. {%—Candra-sañjña, as,%} m. ‘having any name
of the moon,’ camphor. {%—Candra-sambhava, as,%}
m. son of the moon, i. e. Budha, the planet Mercury;
({%ā%}), f. small cardamoms. {%—Candra-saras, as,%} n.
‘moon-lake,’ N. of a lake. {%—Candra-sālokya, am,%} n.
attainment of the lunar heaven. {%—Candra-siṃha, as,%}
m., N. of a king, son of Darpa-nārāyaṇa. {%—Candra-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. {%= candra-ja%}. {%—Candra-surasa, as,%}
m. the plant Vitex Negundo. {%—Candra-sūrya, au,%}
m. du. moon and sun. {%—Candra-sūrya-jihmīkara-%}
{%prabha, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha (whose splendor
obscures moon and sun). {%—Candra-sūrya-pradīpa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Buddha (illuminating moon and
sun). {%—Candra-sena, as,%} m., N. of a prince, son
of Samudra-sena. {%—Candra-han, ā,%} m., N. of a
Dānava. {%—Candra-hanu, us,%} and {%candra-hantṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Candra-hāsa, as,%} m. a
glittering scimitar [‘deriding the moon;’ cf. {%candra-%}
{%bhāsa%}]; the sword of Rāvaṇa; N. of a prince; ({%ā%}),
f. the plant Cocculus Cordifolius [cf. {%guḍūcī%}]; ({%am%}), n.
silver. {%—Candrākara (˚ra-āk˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Candrākṛti (˚ra-āk˚), is, is, i,%} moon-shaped;
like the moon (in roundness, &c.). {%—Candrāgra (˚ra-%}
{%ag˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a brilliant beginning;
(Sāy.) having joy or gold at the head or as the chief
subject. {%—Candrāṅgada (˚ra-aṅ˚), as,%} m., N. of a
son of king Indra-sena. {%—Candrātapa (˚ra-āt˚), as,%}
m. moonlight; an open hall, one only furnished with a
roof; an awning. {%—Candrātmaja (˚ra-āt˚), as,%} m.
the son of the moon, the planet Mercury. {%—Candrā-%}
{%nana (˚ra-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} moon-faced; ({%as%}), m.
[Page0316-b+ 78]
an epithet of Skanda. {%—Candrāpīḍa (˚ra-āp˚), as,%}
m. an epithet of Śiva; N. of a son of Janamejaya;
of a king of Kaśmīra, the brother of Tārā-pīḍa; of
a son of king Tārā-pīḍa. {%—Candrābha-vaktra%}
{%(˚ra-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} whose face is moon-like.
{%—Candrābhāsa (˚ra-ābh˚), as,%} m. a false moon,
an appearance in the sky like the real moon.
{%—Candrārka (˚ra-ar˚), au,%} m. du. moon and sun;
({%ī%}), f. title of an astronomical work by Dina-kara.
{%—Candrārka-dīpa, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha, {%=%}
{%candra-sūrya-pradīpa%}. {%—Candrārdha (˚ra-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a half-moon. {%—Candrārdha-kṛtaśekhara,%}
{%as,%} m. an ascetic who imitates the appearance of Śiva.
{%—Candrārdha-cūdāmaṇi, is,%} m. or {%candrārdha-%}
{%mauli, is,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Candrāloka%}
{%(˚ra-āl˚), as,%} m. title of a work on rhetoric by
Jaya-deva. {%—Candrāvatī,%} f., N. of a place of
pilgrimage; N. of the wife of king Dharma-sena.
{%—Candrāvartā (˚ra-āv˚),%} f. a metre consisting
of four lines of fifteen syllables each. {%—Candrāvalī%}
{%(˚ra-āv˚),%} f., N. of one of Kṛṣṇa's female com-
panions. {%—Candrāvaloka (˚ra-av˚), as,%} m., N. of
a prince. {%—Candrāśva (˚ra-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a
son of Dhundhu-māra. {%—Candrāspadā (˚ra-ās˚),%} f.,
N. of a plant. {%—Candrāhvaya (˚ra-āh˚), as,%} m.
camphor. {%—Candreṣṭā (˚ra-iṣ˚),%} f. an assemblage
of lotuses blossoming during the night (lit. ‘loved
by the moon’). {%—Candrodaya (˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m.
moon-rise; an awning, a cloth or sheet spread over
the large open courts of Hindū houses upon festive
occasions; a mercurial preparation used in medicine;
N. of a warrior on the side of the Pāṇḍavas; ({%ā%}), f.
a medicine for the eyes. {%—Candronmīlana (˚ra-%}
{%un˚), am,%} n. title of a work. {%—Candropala (˚ra-%}
{%up˚), as,%} m. the moon-gem; [cf. {%candra-kānta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18215<pc>0316-b<k1>candraka<k2>candraka
{%Candraka, as,%}¦ m. the moon (generally at the end
of adj. comp.); a spot similar to the moon; the eye
in a peacock's tail; a finger-nail; a fish called Chanda;
N. of a poet; of a minister; of an owl; ({%ikā%}), f.
moonlight, moonshine, illumination, elucidation (used
at the end of the title of some commentaries and
original works to imply that the work so designated
is intended to elucidate the subject of which it
treats, e. g. {%alaṅkāra-candrikā, kātantra-c˚,%}
{%kāvya-c˚,%} &c.; cf. {%kaumudī, dīpikā,%} &c.); a kind
of fish, {%= candraka;%} large or small cardamoms; N.
of several plants, {%= karṇa-sphoṭā, mallikā, śveta-%}
{%kaṇṭakārī, methikā, candra-śūrā;%} N. of a metre,
{%= utpalinī;%} N. of a woman; N. of a river, {%=%}
{%candra-bhāgā; (am),%} n. black pepper. {%—Candra-%}
{%ka-vat, ān,%} m. a peacock. {%—Candrikā-drava, as,%}
m. a kind of gem, the moon-stone (melting in the
moonlight). {%—Candrikā-pāyin, ī, inī, i,%} drinking
moonlight or the moon-beams; ({%ī%}), m. the bird
Cakora. {%—Candrikāmbuja (˚kā-am˚), am,%} n. the
white lotus, blossoming in the moonlight.
<LEND>

<L>18216<pc>0316-b<k1>candrakita<k2>candrakita
{%Candrakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with brilliant
spots similar to the moon.
<LEND>

<L>18217<pc>0316-b<k1>candrakin<k2>candrakin
{%Candrakin, ī,%}¦ m. a peacock.
<LEND>

<L>18218<pc>0316-b<k1>candrawa<k2>candrawa
{%Candraṭa, as,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient physician.
<LEND>

<L>18219<pc>0316-b<k1>candramas<k2>candramas
{%Candra-mas.%}¦ See under {%candra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>18220<pc>0316-b<k1>candralA<k2>candralA
{%Candralā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>18221<pc>0316-b<k1>candrAya<k2>candrAya
{%Candrāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%candrāyate,%} to play the part
of the moon, to represent the moon.
<LEND>

<L>18222<pc>0316-b<k1>candrin<k2>candrin
{%Candrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. golden, possessing gold;
({%ī%}), m. the son of the moon, the planet Mercury.
<LEND>

<L>18223<pc>0316-b<k1>candrimA<k2>candrimA
{%Candrimā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%candra;%} cf. {%pūrṇimā%}), moon-
light.
<LEND>

<L>18224<pc>0316-b<k1>candrila<k2>candrila
{%Candrila, as,%}¦ m. a barber; a N. of Śiva; a pot-
herb, Chenopodium Album.
<LEND>

<L>18225<pc>0316-b<k1>candramaha<k2>candramaha
{#candramaha#}¦ {%candramaha, as,%} m. a dog.
<LEND>

<L>18226<pc>0316-b<k1>cap<k2>cap
{#cap#}¦ {%cap,%} cl. 1. P. {%capati,%} to caress, coax,
soothe, or console; cl. 10. P. {%capayati,%} &c.,
to grind, pound, knead; to cheat.
<LEND>

<L>18227<pc>0316-b<k1>capawa<k2>capawa
{#capawa#}¦ {%capaṭa, as,%} m. the palm with ex-
tended fingers; [cf. {%capeṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18228<pc>0316-b<k1>capala<k2>capala
{#capala#}¦ {%capala, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%cup,%} connected with rt. {%kamp%}), moving to and fro,
[Page0316-c+ 79]
shaking, trembling, tremulous, unsteady, agitated,
wavering; wanton, fickle, inconstant, variable; in-
considerate, careless, thoughtless, ill-mannered, rude,
impertinent; active, quick, swift, agile, expeditious;
momentary, instantaneous; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
animal ({%= mūṣika%}); a fish; black mustard; quick-
silver; a kind of perfume, {%= coraka;%} a kind of
stone; N. of a prince; also of a superhuman being;
({%ā%}), f. lightning; long pepper; the tongue; a dis-
loyal wife, a whore; spirituous liquor, especially the
intoxicating drink made from hemp; the goddess
Lakṣmī or fortune; N. of two metres; one of the
personifications of the fifth note in music. {%—Capala-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%capala-tva, am,%} n. trembling; fickleness,
inconstancy, rudeness. {%—Capalatāśaya (˚tā-āś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. indigestion, flatulence. {%—Capalāṅga (˚la-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. Delphinus Gangeticus. {%—Capalā-jana,%}
{%as,%} m. a fickle or unsteady woman; the goddess of
fortune. {%—Capalātmaka (˚la-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} of
a fickle or inconstant nature.
<LEND>

<L>18229<pc>0316-c<k1>capalaka<k2>capalaka
{%Capalaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ wanton, fickle, inconsiderate.
<LEND>

<L>18230<pc>0316-c<k1>capalAya<k2>capalAya
{%Capalāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%capalāyate,%} to move to and
fro, tremble, become unsteady, wanton.
<LEND>

<L>18231<pc>0316-c<k1>capewa<k2>capewa
{#capewa#}¦ {%capeṭa, as,%} m. a palm of the hand
with the fingers extended; [cf. {%capaṭa%} and {%carpaṭa.%}]
{%—Capeṭāghāta (˚ṭa-āgh˚), as,%} m. a blow or slap
with the open hand.
<LEND>

<L>18232<pc>0316-c<k1>capewikA<k2>capewikA
{%Capeṭikā,%}¦ f. a slap with the open hand.
<LEND>

<L>18233<pc>0316-c<k1>capya<k2>capya
{#capya#}¦ {%capya, am,%} n., Ved. a kind of sacrificial
vessel.
<LEND>

<L>18234<pc>0316-c<k1>cam<k2>cam
{#cam#}¦ {%cam,%} cl. 1. P. {%camati, cacāma, aca-%}
{%mīt, camitum,%} Ved. cl. 5. P. {%camnoti,%} to
sip, drink; to take anything into the mouth, as food,
(generally applied to liquids, but occasionally used of
solid food); to eat: Pass. Aor. {%acami%} (used im-
personally): Caus. {%cāmayati:%} Desid. {%cicamiṣati:%}
Intens. {%cañcamyate%} or {%cañcanti;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>toimhil,</nsi>
‘eatings;’ <nsi>toimhlim,</nsi> ‘I eat, waste, spend, consume.’]
<LEND>

<L>18235<pc>0316-c<k1>camara<k2>camara
{%Camara, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. (fr. rt. {%cam,%} in the sense of
eating), a kind of deer, or rather the Bos Grunniens
(erroneously classed by the Hindū writers amongst
deer), highly valued for its bushy tail; ({%as, am%}), m.
n. a chowrie or long brush, most usually made of the
tail of the Yak or Bos Grunniens, and employed to
whisk off insects, flies, &c.; it is also one of the
insignia of royalty [cf. {%cāmara%}]; a particular high
number; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Daitya; ({%ī%}), f. a com-
pound pedicle. {%—Camara-puccha, am,%} n. the tail
of the Bos Grunniens; ({%as%}), m. a small animal with
a bushy tail living in holes, a squirrel or perhaps
fox ({%kokaḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>18236<pc>0316-c<k1>camarika<k2>camarika
{%Camarika, as,%}¦ m. a kind of ebony, Bauhinia
Variegata, growing in clusters resembling a chowrie;
[cf. {%kovidāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18237<pc>0316-c<k1>camasa<k2>camasa
{%Camasa, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a vessel used at sacrifices for
drinking the juice of the Soma, a kind of flat dish,
pan, or cup; (according to others) a kind of ladle or
spoon, (according to the Brāhmaṇas and Scholiasts
these vessels are generally of a square shape, made of
wood and furnished with a handle, but sometimes
also round or of other shapes); a cake made of
barley, rice, or lentils, ground to meal: a sweetmeat,
or flour, sesamum, &c., mixed up with sugar into a
kind of cake; a plant, commonly Khetpāpara,
Mollugo Pentaphylla; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; also
of a son of Ṛṣabha; {%= camasodbheda,%} q. v. {%—Ca-%}
{%masādhvaryu (˚sa-adh˚), us,%} m., Ved. the priest
who manages the drinking-vessels. {%—Camasodbheda%}
{%(˚sa-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of a place of pilgrimage, held
sacred on account of the supposed bursting forth of the
river Sarasvatī; also {%camasodbhedana, am,%} n.
<LEND>

<L>18238<pc>0316-c<k1>camasi<k2>camasi
{%Camasi, is,%}¦ f. {%= camasī,%} a kind of cake.
<LEND>

<L>18239<pc>0316-c<k1>camasin<k2>camasin
{%Camasin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18240<pc>0316-c<k1>camU<k2>camU
{%Camū, ūs,%}¦ f., Ved. (loc. {%camū%} or {%camvi;%} du.
{%camvā;%} pl. {%camvas%}), a vessel, a dish, (applied
especially to the vessels or reservoirs into which the
Soma is poured; these are generally two in number,
and called {%camvā,%} Ved. du.), metaphorically the two
grand receptacles of all living beings, or heaven and
[Page0317-a+ 77]
earth ({%camvau,%} du., Naigh. III. 30); a grave; an
army; a squadron, a division of an army consisting
of 129 elephants, as many cars, 2187 horse, and
3685 foot. {%—Camū-cara, as,%} m. a soldier, a warrior.
{%—Camū-nātha%} or {%camū-pa, as,%} m. the leader of
an army, a general. {%—Camū-pati, is,%} m. a general
of division, any general. {%—Camū-ṣad, t, t, t,%} Ved.
lying on a dish. {%—Camū-hara, as,%} m., N. of one of
the Viśve-devās.
<LEND>

<L>18241<pc>0317-a<k1>camaka<k2>camaka
{#camaka#}¦ {%camaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18242<pc>0317-a<k1>camakasUkta<k2>camakasUkta
{#camakasUkta#}¦ {%camaka-sūkta, am,%} n., N. of several
verses of the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā, so called because
the words {%ca me%} are repeated in them.
<LEND>

<L>18243<pc>0317-a<k1>camIkAra<k2>camIkAra
{%Camī-kāra, as,%}¦ m. reciting the Camaka-sūkta.
<LEND>

<L>18244<pc>0317-a<k1>camIkf<k2>camIkf
{%Camī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P., Ved. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to
recite the verses containing the words {%ca me%} over
anything.
<LEND>

<L>18245<pc>0317-a<k1>camat<k2>camat
{#camat#}¦ {%camat,%} ind. an interjection of surprise.
{%—Camat-karaṇa, am,%} n. admiration; astonishing,
producing wonder, causing surprise; festival, spectacle;
high poetical composition. {%—Camat-kāra, as,%} m.
admiration, astonishment, surprise; show, spectacle;
row, riot, festive or angry turbulence; elaborate
style or high poetical composition; N. of the tree
Achyranthes Aspera; [cf. {%apāmārga.%}] {%—Camat-%}
{%kāra-candrikā,%} f. title of a grammar; title of a
Bengālī poem by Kṛṣṇa-dāsa. {%—Camatkāra-cintā-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. title of a work. {%—Camat-kārita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} astonished. {%—Camat-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} aston-
ishing, surprising, unusual. {%—Camat-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} astonished, surprised. {%—Camat-kṛti, is,%} f. ad-
miration, astonishment, surprise, &c.; [cf. {%camat-%}
{%kāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18246<pc>0317-a<k1>camIkf<k2>camIkf
{#camIkf#}¦ {%camī-kṛ.%} See under {%camaka-sūkta.%}
<LEND>

<L>18247<pc>0317-a<k1>camU<k2>camU
{#camU#}¦ {%camū.%} See under {%cam%} above.
<LEND>

<L>18248<pc>0317-a<k1>camUru<k2>camUru
{#camUru#}¦ {%camūru, us,%} m. a kind of deer; [cf.
{%samūru.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18249<pc>0317-a<k1>camp<k2>camp
{#camp#}¦ {%camp,%} cl. 10. P. {%campayati,%} to go,
move; (a various reading for {%champ.%})
<LEND>

<L>18250<pc>0317-a<k1>campa<k2>campa
{%Campa, as,%}¦ m. (said to come fr. the last rt.),
the plant Bauhinia Variegata, mountain ebony [cf.
{%kovidāra%}]; N. of a son of Pṛthulākṣa and founder
of the town Campā; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town in Aṅga,
the modern Bhāgalpur or a place in its vicinity,
founded by Campa, and the residence of Karṇa;
also of Brahma-datta. {%—Campa-karambhā,%} f. a
kind of plantain. {%—Campa-kunda, as,%} m. a kind of
fish, commonly {%cānda-kuḍā%}. {%—Campa-koṣa, as,%}
m. the Jāka or bread-fruit tree. {%—Campādhipa (˚pā-%}
{%adh˚)%} or {%campeśa (˚pā-īśa), as,%} m., N. of Karṇa,
natural brother of the Pāṇḍus. {%—Campā-vatī,%} f., N. of
a town; N. of the wife of Nidhi-pati. {%—Campopa-%}
{%lakṣita (˚pā-up˚), as,%} m. the district of Campā
or Bhāgalpur; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of it.
<LEND>

<L>18251<pc>0317-a<k1>campaka<k2>campaka
{%Campaka, as,%}¦ m. a tree bearing a yellow fragrant
flower, Michelia Champaka; a kind of perfume; a
variety of the jack or bread-fruit tree [cf. {%campakālu%}];
N. of the father of Kalhaṇa; N. of a man; N. of a
country; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town; ({%am%}), n. the flower
of the Campaka tree; the fruit of a variety of the
banana or plantain; commonly {%cāmpākalā%}. {%—Cam-%}
{%paka-gandha, am,%} n. a kind of incense. {%—Campa-%}
{%ka-caturdaśī,%} f., N. of a festival, the fourteenth day
in the light half of the month Jyaiṣṭha. {%—Campaka-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Campaka-prabhu,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of the father of Kalhaṇa. {%—Campaka-%}
{%mālā,%} f., N. of a metre consisting of four lines of
ten syllables each. {%—Campaka-vatī,%} f., N. of a
wood in Magadha. {%—Campakāraṇya (˚ka-ar˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the Campaka forest; N. of a place of pil-
grimage. {%—Campakā-vatī%} or {%campakāvalī (˚ka-%}
{%āv˚),%} f. {%= campaka-vatī%}. {%—Campakolva (˚ka-ul˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the Jāḳa or bread-fruit tree.
<LEND>

<L>18252<pc>0317-a<k1>campakAlu<k2>campakAlu
{%Campakālu, us,%}¦ m. the Jāka or Indian bread-fruit
tree, Artocarpus Integrifolia; [cf. {%campakolva, cam-%}
{%pālu, campaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18253<pc>0317-a<k1>campAlu<k2>campAlu
{%Campālu, us,%}¦ m. the Jāka or bread-fruit tree.
<LEND>
[Page0317-b+ 77]

<L>18254<pc>0317-b<k1>campU<k2>campU
{#campU#}¦ {%campū, ūs,%} f. a kind of elaborate
and highly artificial composition in which the same
subject is continued through alternations in prose and
verse ({%gadya%} and {%padya%}); [cf. {%gaṅgā-campū%} and
{%nala-campū.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18255<pc>0317-b<k1>camb<k2>camb
{#camb#}¦ {%camb,%} cl. 1. P. {%cambati,%} &c., to go,
to move.
<LEND>

<L>18256<pc>0317-b<k1>camriz<k2>camriz
{#camriz#}¦ {%camriṣ,%} f., Ved. (Sāy.) libations
(contained) in the sacrificial ladles.
<LEND>

<L>18257<pc>0317-b<k1>camrIza<k2>camrIza
{%Camrīṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. contained in the
sacrificial ladle.
<LEND>

<L>18258<pc>0317-b<k1>cay<k2>cay
{#cay#}¦ {%cay,%} cl. 1. A. {%cayate,%} &c., to go, go
to or towards, move; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κίω, κινέω;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>cieo, cio, citus;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>cai,</nsi> ‘a way, a road;’
Lith. <nsi>koja,</nsi> ‘foot;’ <nsi>kettur-kojis,</nsi> ‘quadruped.’]
<LEND>

<L>18259<pc>0317-b<k1>caya<k2>caya<h>1
{#caya#} 1¦. {%caya.%} See under 1. {%ci.%}
<LEND>

<L>18260<pc>0317-b<k1>caya<k2>caya<h>2
{#caya#} 2¦. {%caya.%} See under 3. {%ci.%}
<LEND>

<L>18261<pc>0317-b<k1>car<k2>car
{#car#}¦ {%car,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%carati, -te,%}
{%cacāra, cere, cariṣyati, -te, acārīt, cari-%}
{%tum%} (ep. {%cartum,%} Ved. {%caradhyai, caritave, ca-%}
{%rase%}), to move one's self, go, walk, move, stir, drive
(in a carriage &c.), roam about, walk about, wander,
(in these senses applied to men, animals, water, ships,
stars, &c.); to graze; to spread, be diffused; to be
active; move or travel through, pervade, go along,
follow; to behave, conduct one's self; to live, be,
remain in any position, act; to be engaged in,
occupied with, busy one's self with (with inst., e. g.
{%yajñena carati,%} he is engaged in a sacrifice); to
undertake, set about, undergo, observe, practise, do
or act in general (e. g. {%vratāni ceruḥ,%} they observed
vows; and in this sense applied rather vaguely to
express various ideas, e. g. {%vighnaṃ carati,%} he puts
a hindrance; {%bhaikṣaṃ carati,%} he begs; {%vivādaṃ%}
{%carati,%} he is engaged in a lawsuit; {%mṛgayāṃ%}
{%carati,%} he hunts; {%sambandhāṃś carati,%} he enters
into connections; {%mārgaṃ cacāra vāṇaiḥ,%} he
made a way with arrows); to continue performing
or being (with a part., e. g. {%arcantaś ceruḥ,%} they
continued worshipping; {%svāminam avajñāya caret,%}
he may go on despising his master); to exercise the
body with penance, e. g. {%tapasā indriyāṇi caret,%}
he should exercise his organs with penance; (with or
without {%mithuna%}) to perform the act of copula-
tion, to have sexual intercourse with, have to do
with; to make or render (with two acc., e. g. {%na-%}
{%rendraṃ satya-sthaṃ carāma,%} let us make the
king keep his word); to act as a spy; to consume,
eat (e. g. {%māṃsaṃ caret,%} let him eat flesh): Caus.
{%cārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to move or walk about;
to pasture; to send, direct, turn, move; to cause to
pervade; to drive away; to cause to practise or per-
form; to cause to copulate; to obtain knowledge of,
acquaint one's self with (with acc.); to doubt [cf.
{%vi-car%}]: Desid. {%cicariṣati,%} to wish to act or con-
duct one's self; to be willing to deal with, to have
intercourse with: Intens. {%carcarīti, cañcūryate,%}
{%cañcurīti, cañcūrti,%} to move quickly or repeat-
edly, to walk about, pervade; to act wantonly or
coquettishly; [cf. Lat. <nsi>curro, currus; properus</nsi> (?):
Hib. <nsi>cara,</nsi> ‘a leg or haunch;’ <nsi>carachadh,</nsi> ‘moving;’
<nsi>carachd,</nsi> ‘motion:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">κύρω, κυρέω:</lang> Goth. <nsi>fara:</nsi>
Germ. <nsi>fahren:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>hor-sc:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>horse:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>kieláuju, kielias, kielione:</nsi> Old Pers. <nsi>cartanay.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18262<pc>0317-b<k1>cara<k2>cara
{%Cara, as, ī, am,%}¦ moving, walking, going; loco-
motive, any animal (so named as moving in contra-
distinction to plants); movable, trembling, shaking,
unsteady; (at the end of comp.) going, walking,
wandering, being, living [cf. {%adhaś-cara, anta-%}
{%cara, ap-c˚, upari-c˚, eka-c˚,%} &c.]; following;
performing, practising (e. g. {%vrata-cara,%} practising
vows). Sometimes {%cara%} is placed at the end of a
word as an affix in the sense of ‘having been formerly,’
e. g. {%āḍhya-cara,%} one who has been rich formerly;
{%devadatta-cara,%} having been formerly possessed by
Devadatta; ({%as%}), m. a spy, a secret emissary or
agent; a wagtail; a kind of small shell, Cypræa
[Page0317-c+ 81]
Moneta [cf. {%kaparda%}]; a game played with dice and
men similar to backgammon; the planet Mars; a
cowrie; the seventh Karaṇa in astrology; the Karaṇas
collectively; the difference of time between the rising
of a heavenly body at Laṅkā or Ceylon, over which
the first meridian passes, and that of its rising at any
particular place; a term for particular lunar mansions
and for a particular number of the signs of the zodiac.
{%—Cara-gṛha, am,%} n. a moving or varying sign of
the zodiac, i. e. the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth.
{%—Cara-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Cara-dravya,%}
{%āṇi,%} n. pl. movables, goods and chattels. {%—Cara-%}
{%puṣṭa, as,%} m. a mediator (lit. ‘nourished by a
spy’). {%—Cara-bha, am,%} n. a moving or varying
sign of the zodiac, i. e. the first, fourth, seventh, and
tenth; [cf. {%cara-gṛha.%}] {%—Cara-bhavana, am,%} n.
a moving or varying sign of the zodiac; [cf. the
preceding.] {%—Cara-mūrti, is,%} f. an idol which is
carried about in procession. {%—1. carācara (˚ra-ac˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} movable and immovable, locomotive and
stationary, moving and fixed (as animals and plants);
({%am%}), n. the aggregate of all created things, whether
animate or inanimate; the world; sky, atmosphere;
heaven, paradise; ({%ī%}), f. a young woman.
<LEND>

<L>18263<pc>0317-c<k1>caraka<k2>caraka
{%Caraka, as,%}¦ m. a wanderer, a wandering religious
student; a spy or secret emissary; N. of a Muni and
physician, (a legend relates that the serpent-king
Śeṣa, who was himself the recipient of the Āyur-veda,
once visited the earth, and finding it full of sickness and
suffering became moved with pity, and determined
to devise a scheme for alleviating disease; hence he
became incarnate as the son of a Muni and was called
Caraka because he had visited the earth as a kind of spy
or {%cara;%} he then composed a new book on medicine,
based on older works of Agni-veśa and other pupils
of Ātreya, which book was called after him); a kind
of plant, cf. {%parpaṭa; (am),%} n. the title of the
treatise on medicine written by Caraka; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a branch of the Black Yajur-veda, the practices
and rites enjoined by which are different in some
respects from those in the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa; ({%ī%}),
f. a kind of poisonous fish; N. of an evil spirit.
{%—Caraka-grantha, as,%} m. Caraka's book. {%—Ca-%}
{%raka-tantra-vyākhyā,%} f. title of a commentary by
Haricandra. {%—Caraka-bhāṣya, am,%} n. title of a
commentary by an author named Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>18264<pc>0317-c<k1>caraRa<k2>caraRa
{%Caraṇa, as,%}¦ m. a foot soldier; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a
foot; a pillar, a support, a prop; the root of a tree;
a single line of a verse, the fourth part of a stanza;
(in prosody) a dactyl; a sect, a school, a branch of
the Vedas; a race, a family; ({%am%}), n. moving,
going round or about, wandering, roaming, grazing;
course; acting, dealing, managing, conduct, per-
formance; fixed or instituted observances for any
class, age, or condition (as priesthood, manhood,
&c.); behaving, conduct of life, good or moral
conduct; practising, accomplishing; consuming, eat-
ing; a particular high number; [cf. {%dvi-caraṇa,%}
{%puraś-caraṇa, ratha-c˚;%} cf. also Gr. and Lat.
<lang n="greek">πέρνα,</lang> <nsi>perna;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>fairzna;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Ferse;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>kulnis;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>cairine;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>crus ?</nsi>]. {%—Cara-%}
{%ṇa-kamala%} or {%caraṇa-kiśalaya, am,%} n. a lotus-
foot (lit. foot-lotus), a beautiful foot, the foot of a lover,
of a deity, &c. {%—Caraṇa-gata, as, ā, am,%} fallen
at one's feet, prostrate. {%—Caraṇa-granthi, is,%} m.
the joint of the foot, the ancle. {%—Caraṇa-dāsa, as,%}
m., N. of the author of the Guruśiṣya-saṃvāda
and of the poems entitled Nāciketūpākhyāna.
{%—Caraṇa-nyāsa, as,%} m. the trace of a foot, foot-
step. {%—Caraṇa-pa, as,%} m. a tree. {%—Caraṇa-patana,%}
{%am,%} n. falling at the feet, prostration. {%—Caraṇa-%}
{%patita, as, ā, am,%} fallen at the feet, prostrate.
{%—Caraṇa-padma, as%} or {%am,%} m. n. a lotus (like)
foot, the foot of a deity or lover. {%—Caraṇa-parvan,%}
{%a,%} n. ‘foot-joint,’ the ancle. {%—Caraṇa-pāta, as,%} m.
tread, trampling; foot-fall. {%—Caraṇa-yuga, am,%} n.
both the feet; two lines of a stanza. {%—Caraṇa-%}
{%vyūha, as,%} m. title of a treatise. {%—Caraṇa-śuśrūṣā,%}
f. prostration. {%—Caraṇa-sevā,%} f. service, devotion.
{%—Caraṇānamita (˚ṇa-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} bent or
bowed under the feet, trodden down. {%—Caraṇā- %}
[Page0318-a+ 81]
{%bharaṇa (˚ṇa-ābh˚), am,%} n. an ornament for the
feet. {%—Caraṇāmṛta (˚ṇa-am˚), am,%} n. foot-nectar,’
the water in which the feet of a Brāhman or spiritual
guide have been washed. {%—Caraṇāyadha (˚ṇa-āy˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the feet for weapons; ({%as%}), m. a
cock. {%—Caraṇāravinda (˚ṇa-ar˚), am,%} n. the lotus
(like) foot (of a deity, lover, &c.). {%—Caraṇārdha%}
{%(˚ṇa-ar˚), am,%} n. the half of the foot; half of the
fourth of a stanza. {%—Caraṇāskandana (˚ṇa-ās˚),%}
{%am,%} n. trampling, treading down with the feet. {%—Ca-%}
{%raṇodaka (˚ṇa-ud˚), am,%} n. water in which the
feet of a venerable Brāhman or spiritual teacher have
been washed. {%—Caraṇopaga (˚ṇa-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
in contact with the feet, at the feet.
<LEND>

<L>18265<pc>0318-a<k1>caraRIya<k2>caraRIya
{%Caraṇīya,%}¦ nom. A., Ved. {%caraṇīyate,%} to follow,
perform, be engaged in, carry on; (Sāy.) to desire
to go.
<LEND>

<L>18266<pc>0318-a<k1>caraRya<k2>caraRya<h>1
1. {%caraṇya,%}¦ nom. P. {%caraṇyati,%} to move.
<LEND>

<L>18267<pc>0318-a<k1>caraRya<k2>caraRya<h>2
2. {%caraṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ foot-like, like a foot.
<LEND>

<L>18268<pc>0318-a<k1>caraRyu<k2>caraRyu
{%Caraṇyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. moving, movable.
<LEND>

<L>18269<pc>0318-a<k1>carat<k2>carat
{%Carat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going, moving, going on; pro-
ceeding, acting, practising.
<LEND>

<L>18270<pc>0318-a<k1>caraTa<k2>caraTa
{%Caratha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. moving, living; capable of
moving, movable; ({%as, am%}), m. n. going, moving, wan-
dering; movableness; liveliness, life; a going, a way.
<LEND>

<L>18271<pc>0318-a<k1>carAcara<k2>carAcara<h>2
2. {%carācara, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%car%} reduplicated; for
1. see P. 317, col. 3), moving locomotive, running;
trembling, shaking, unsteady; wished, desired; ({%am%}),
n., N. of a small shell; [cf. {%kaparda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18272<pc>0318-a<k1>cari<k2>cari
{%Cari, is,%}¦ m. an animal in general.
<LEND>

<L>18273<pc>0318-a<k1>carita<k2>carita
{%Carita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, gone to, attained, prac-
tised; ({%am%}), n. going, moving, course; acting, doing,
practice, behaviour, acts, deeds, practices, adventures,
‘res gestæ;’ story; nature; fixed institute, proper or
peculiar observance; [cf. {%uttara-rāma-carita, duś-%}
{%carita, sac-c˚, saha-c, su-c˚.%}] {%—Carita-guṇatva,%}
{%am,%} n. (?) accompaniment, assistance; meritorious
conduct. {%—Carita-maya, as, ī, am,%} (at the end of
compounds) containing or relating deeds or adven-
tures, made up of deeds. {%—Carita-vrata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} performing an act of devotion. {%—Caritārtha%}
{%(˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} attaining one's object, success-
ful in an undertaking, satisfied, effected, successful.
{%—Caritārtha-tva, am,%} n. the attainment of an aim,
successfulness, success. {%—Caritārthaya,%} nom. P. {%cari-%}
{%tārthayati,%} to cause a person to attain his aim. {%—Ca-%}
{%ritārthin, ī, inī, i,%} desirous of success.
<LEND>

<L>18274<pc>0318-a<k1>caritavya<k2>caritavya
{%Caritavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone, to be managed;
to be followed or observed; to be practised or per-
formed.
<LEND>

<L>18275<pc>0318-a<k1>caritin<k2>caritin
{%Caritin.%}¦ Cf. {%duś-caritin.%}
<LEND>

<L>18276<pc>0318-a<k1>caritra<k2>caritra
{%Caritra, am,%}¦ n. a foot, leg; going; acting, behaving,
behaviour, habit, practice, acts, deeds, proceedings,
exploits; instituted and peculiar observance or con-
duct; adventures, story, history or account of any
one's deeds or exploits; nature, disposition; ({%ā%}), f.
the tamarind tree; [cf. {%cāritra.%}] {%—Caritra-ban-%}
{%dhaka, as,%} m. a friendly pledge, one of unequal
value to the loan. {%—Caritra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} expe-
rienced, familiar with customs.
<LEND>

<L>18277<pc>0318-a<k1>carizRu<k2>carizRu
{%Cariṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ capable of moving, movable,
locomotive, active, unsteady, wandering about; ({%us%}),
m., N. of a son of Manu Sāvarṇa; also of a son of
Kīrttimat and Dhenukā. {%—Cariṣṇu-dhūma, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having moving smoke, whose smoke goes
everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>18278<pc>0318-a<k1>carItra<k2>carItra
{%Carītra, am,%}¦ n. behaviour, conduct, practice; [cf.
{%caritra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18279<pc>0318-a<k1>cartavya<k2>cartavya
{%Cartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be practised &c.; [cf.
{%caritavya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18280<pc>0318-a<k1>carya<k2>carya
{%Carya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone; to be practised or
performed &c.; ({%ā%}), f. going about, wandering, walk-
ing about, driving or going in a carriage; pervading,
visiting; course; proceeding, behaviour; due and
regular observance of all rites or customs, following
the rules of studentship; practising religious austeri-
ties, wandering about as a mendicant; performing,
practising, engaging in, practice, conduct [cf. {%ku-%}
{%caryā%}]; behaviour, deportment, usage; eating; ({%am%}),
n. going about, wandering, driving in a carriage &c.;
proceeding, behaviour, conduct; [cf. {%brahma-carya, %}
[Page0318-b+ 76]
{%bhikṣā-c˚, bhaikṣya-c˚.%}] {%—Caryāvatāra (˚yā-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. title of a Buddhist work.
<LEND>

<L>18281<pc>0318-b<k1>cAra<k2>cAra
{%Cāra, as,%}¦ m. a spy &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>18282<pc>0318-b<k1>carawa<k2>carawa
{#carawa#}¦ {%caraṭa, as,%} m. a wagtail; ({%ī%}), f. {%=%}
{%caraṇṭī, ciriṇṭī, ciraṇṭī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18283<pc>0318-b<k1>carama<k2>carama
{#carama#}¦ {%carama, as, ā, am,%} m. pl. {%carame%} or
{%caramās,%} (said to be fr. rt. {%car%}), last, hinder, ultimate,
final; outermost; western, west; lowest, least; imme-
diately following; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. or n. (?), a particular
high number; ({%am%}), ind. at last, at the end; {%caramā%}
{%kriyā,%} the final ceremony, the funeral ceremony.
{%—Carama-kāla, as,%} m. the last moments, the
hour of death. {%—Carama-kṣmābhṛt, t,%} m. the
western mountain behind which the sun and moon
are supposed to set. {%—Carama-vaiyākaraṇa, as,%}
m. an ignorant grammarian. {%—Carama-śairṣika,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} having the head towards the west. {%—Ca-%}
{%ramācala (˚ma-ac˚), as,%} m. or {%caramādri (˚ma-%}
{%ad˚), is,%} m. {%= carama-kṣmābhṛt%} above. {%—Cara-%}
{%mājā (˚ma-ajā),%} f., Ved. the last or smallest she-goat.
{%—Caramāvasthā (˚ma-av˚),%} f. the last state.
<LEND>

<L>18284<pc>0318-b<k1>caramya<k2>caramya
{%Caramya,%}¦ nom. P. {%caramyati,%} to be the last.
<LEND>

<L>18285<pc>0318-b<k1>caravya<k2>caravya
{#caravya#}¦ {%caravya.%} See below under {%caru.%}
<LEND>

<L>18286<pc>0318-b<k1>caru<k2>caru
{#caru#}¦ {%caru, us,%} m. a kind of vessel in which a
particular oblation is prepared, a saucepan, pot, kettle;
a cloud; an oblation of rice, barley, and pulse, boiled
with butter and milk for presentation to the gods or
manes. {%—Caru-celin, ī, inī, i,%} having portions of
offerings on the clothes (?); an epithet of Śiva;
(perhaps a wrong form for {%cārucelin.%}) {%—Caru-%}
{%vraṇa, as,%} m. a kind of cake. {%—Caru-śrapaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. sprinkling an oblation of milk and ghee.
{%—Caru-sthālī,%} f. the vessel in which an oblation is
prepared, made either of clay or of udumbara-wood.
{%—Caru-homa, as,%} m. an oblation of a meat-offering.
<LEND>

<L>18287<pc>0318-b<k1>caravya<k2>caravya
{%Caravya, as, ā, am,%}¦ destined for the Caru oblation.
<LEND>

<L>18288<pc>0318-b<k1>carkarIta<k2>carkarIta
{#carkarIta#}¦ {%carkarīta, am,%} n. (fr. 1. {%kṛ,%} to do),
a term used by Yāska and others for the intensive
verb formed without the syllable {%ya.%}
<LEND>

<L>18289<pc>0318-b<k1>carkfti<k2>carkfti
{#carkfti#}¦ {%carkṛti, is,%} f. (fr. 2. {%kṛ%}), Ved.
praising, mention, glory, praise.
<LEND>

<L>18290<pc>0318-b<k1>carkftya<k2>carkftya
{%Carkṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be mentioned with
praise, worthy of praise, renowned.
<LEND>

<L>18291<pc>0318-b<k1>carG<k2>carG
{#carG#}¦ {%cargh,%} cl. 1. P. {%carghati,%} &c., to go
or move.
<LEND>

<L>18292<pc>0318-b<k1>carc<k2>carc
{#carc#}¦ {%carc,%} cl. 10. P. {%carcayati,%} to repeat
(a word in reciting the Veda), to read,
recite, study, peruse carefully, consider; cl. 1. or 6. P.
{%carcati,%} &c., to speak, say, abuse, reprove, condemn,
censure, menace; to injure or hurt, to inquire.
<LEND>

<L>18293<pc>0318-b<k1>carca<k2>carca
{%Carca, as,%}¦ m. considering, deliberation, i. e. re-
peating over in thought; ({%ā%}), f. repetition of a word,
recitation, incidental mention, popular talk, alternate
recitation of a poem by two persons; reflection, con-
sideration; the exercise of judgment or deliberation,
inquiry, investigation; an epithet of the goddess
Durgā; covering or cleansing the body with unguents,
smearing with ointment; bribery (?).
<LEND>

<L>18294<pc>0318-b<k1>carcaka<k2>carcaka
{%Carcaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ repeating, the repeater (of a
word in the recitation of the Veda).
<LEND>

<L>18295<pc>0318-b<k1>carcana<k2>carcana
{%Carcana, am,%}¦ n. repeating, repetition; covering
the body with unguents.
<LEND>

<L>18296<pc>0318-b<k1>carcAya<k2>carcAya
{%Carcāya,%}¦ nom. P. {%carcāyate,%} to undergo repe-
tition, to be repeated.
<LEND>

<L>18297<pc>0318-b<k1>carci<k2>carci
{%Carci, is,%}¦ f., Ved. repetition of words in recitation;
({%is%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18298<pc>0318-b<k1>carcikA<k2>carcikA
{%Carcikā,%}¦ f. deliberation, inquiry; cleaning the
person with perfumes, an epithet of the goddess
Durgā or Cāmuṇḍā; [cf. {%gharma-carcikā%} and {%vi-%}
{%carcikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18299<pc>0318-b<k1>carcikya<k2>carcikya
{%Carcikya, am,%}¦ n. anointing the body, an unguent,
{%= cārcikya%} and {%carcā.%}
<LEND>

<L>18300<pc>0318-b<k1>carcita<k2>carcita
{%Carcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ perfumed, anointed, smeared
with sandal &c., covered with anything; inquired
into or after, investigated; sought, desired; ({%am%}), n.
the being covered or anointed (with anything).
<LEND>
[Page0318-c+ 75]

<L>18301<pc>0318-c<k1>carcara<k2>carcara
{#carcara#}¦ {%carcara, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%car%}), Ved.
going; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of song; striking the hands to
beat time; musical symphony; the recitation of
scholars; festive cries or merriment, festive sport; a
festival; flattery, dishonest praise; a kind of metre
consisting of four lines of eighteen syllables each;
curled or woolly hair.
<LEND>

<L>18302<pc>0318-c<k1>carcarikA<k2>carcarikA
{%Carcarikā,%}¦ f. a kind of gesture, gesticulation.
<LEND>

<L>18303<pc>0318-c<k1>carcarIka<k2>carcarIka
{%Carcarīka, as,%}¦ m. a pot-herb; decoration or curling
of the hair [cf. {%carcarī%}]; a form of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>18304<pc>0318-c<k1>carcas<k2>carcas
{#carcas#}¦ {%carcas, ās,%} m., N. of one of the
nine treasures of Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>18305<pc>0318-c<k1>cartana<k2>cartana
{#cartana#}¦ {%cartana, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%cṛt%}), Ved.
stringing together; ({%am%}), n. a hook, a pin.
<LEND>

<L>18306<pc>0318-c<k1>cartya<k2>cartya
{%Cartya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be strung or tied in regular
order; to be hurt or injured.
<LEND>

<L>18307<pc>0318-c<k1>cartavya<k2>cartavya
{#cartavya#}¦ {%cartavya.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>18308<pc>0318-c<k1>carpawa<k2>carpawa
{#carpawa#}¦ {%carpaṭa, as,%} m. the open palm of the
hand with fingers extended; a kind of plant, Mollugo
Pentaphylla; a quantity of bubbles or specks {%(sphāra-%}
{%vipula); (ī),%} f. a thin cake or biscuit of flour; [cf.
{%parpaṭī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18309<pc>0318-c<k1>carpawi<k2>carpawi
{#carpawi#}¦ {%carpaṭi, is,%} m., N. of an author;
(also read {%carpaṭin.%})
<LEND>

<L>18310<pc>0318-c<k1>carb<k2>carb
{#carb#}¦ {%carb,%} cl. 1. P. {%carbati,%} to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>18311<pc>0318-c<k1>carBawa<k2>carBawa
{#carBawa#}¦ {%carbhaṭa, as,%} m. a kind of cucumber,
Cucumis Utilissimus [cf. {%ervāru;%} cf. also {%cirbhaṭī%}
and {%cirbhiṭā%}]; ({%ī%}), f. {%= carcarī,%} the noise of merri-
ment or festivity, cries of joy.
<LEND>

<L>18312<pc>0318-c<k1>carma<k2>carma
{#carma#}¦ {%carma, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%car%}),
Ved. a hide, a skin; a shield. See {%carman%} below.
<LEND>

<L>18313<pc>0318-c<k1>carmaRya<k2>carmaRya
{%Carmaṇya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the next), leather-work.
<LEND>

<L>18314<pc>0318-c<k1>carman<k2>carman
{%Carman, a,%}¦ n. skin, leather, hide bark, parchment,
&c.; the hide of an antelope &c. used as a seat or
bed by the religious student; a shield; [cf. {%gala-car-%}
{%man, duś-carman,%} &c.; cf. also Lat. <nsi>corium, cal-</nsi>
<nsi>ceus</nsi> (?); Hib. <nsi>croicionn;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">πέλμα.</lang>] {%—Carma-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. working in skins or leather. {%—Car-%}
{%ma-kaśā%} or {%carma-kaṣā%} or {%carma-kasā,%} f. ‘skin-
injurer,’ a plant, commonly called Carmakaṣā or Car-
maghās, Mimosa Abstergens; a particular kind of per-
fume. {%—Carma-kāra, as,%} m. a shoe-maker, a currier or
worker in leather, the offspring of a Caṇḍāla woman
by a man of the fisherman caste, or of a Vaideha
female by a Niṣāda; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of the preceding;
N. of a plant, {%= carma-kaśā%}. {%—Carma-kāraka, as,%}
m. a worker in leather. {%—Carma-kārin, ī,%} m. a currier,
skinner, shoe-maker, worker in hides or leather. {%—Car-%}
{%ma-kārya, am,%} n. working in leather or skins. {%—Car-%}
{%ma-kīla, as, am,%} m. n. a wart; excrescences con-
sidered as a kind of hemorrhoids. {%—Carma-kṛt, t,%}
m. a shoe-maker. {%—Carma-khāṇḍika, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a people; (perhaps for {%carma-khaṇḍika ?%});
[cf. {%carma-maṇḍala%} and {%carma-raṅga.%}] {%—Carma-%}
{%grīva, as,%} m., N. of one of the attendants of Śiva.
{%—Carma-caṭaka, as, ā,%} m. f. or {%carma-caṭikā,%} f.
or {%carma-caṭī,%} f. a bat. {%—Carma-citraka, am,%} n.
white leprosy {%(śveta-kuṣṭha)%}. {%—Carma-cela, as%}
or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a garment with the hide turned
outwards. {%—Carma-ja, as, ā, am,%} coming forth
from the skin, produced by or from the skin; ({%am%}),
n. the hairs of the body; blood. {%—Carmaṇ-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. furnished with hide, covered with skin
or leather; ({%tī%}), f. the plantain tree, Musa Sapientum
[cf. {%kadala%}]; a river that flows through Bundelkhand
into the Ganges, the modern Chambal. {%—Carma-%}
{%taraṅga, as,%} m. a wrinkle, a fold of skin. {%—Carma-%}
{%tila, as, ā, am,%} covered with pimples resembling
the seeds of sesamum. {%—Carma-daṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘a
leather stick,’ a whip. {%—Carma-dala, am,%} n. a form
of leprosy or cutaneous disease. {%—Carma-dūṣikā,%}
f. a kind of leprosy with red spots, cutaneous disease.
{%—Carma-druma, as,%} m., N. of a tree; [cf. {%bhūrja.%}]
{%—Carma-nāsikā,%} f. ‘a leather thong,’ a whip.
{%—Carma-paṭṭikā,%} f. a flat piece of leather for play-
[Page0319-a+ 77]
ing upon with dice, a leather backgammon board &c.
{%—Carma-pattrā,%} f. a bat, the small house-bat.
{%—Carma-pādukā,%} f. a leather shoe. {%—Carma-%}
{%prabhedikā,%} f. a shoe-maker's awl. {%—Carma-prase-%}
{%vaka, as, ikā,%} m. f. a bellows. {%—Carma-bandha,%}
{%as,%} m. a leather band or strap. {%—Carma-maṇḍala,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Carma -maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} made of skin or leather, leathern, encased in
leather. {%—Carma-muṇḍā,%} f. a form of the goddess
Durgā, commonly {%cāmuṇḍā%} and {%caṇḍa-muṇḍā.%}
{%—Carma-mna, as,%} m., Ved. a tanner. {%—Carma-%}
{%yaṣṭi, is,%} f. a whip; [cf. {%carma-daṇḍa.%}] {%—Carma-%}
{%raṅga, as,%} m., N. of a people in the north-west of
Madhya-deśa; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= āvartakī.%}
{%—Carma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} covered with hides or
skins; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a warrior. {%—Carma-vasana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} clothed in skin; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Śiva; [cf. {%kṛtti-vāsas.%}] {%—Carma-vādya, am,%} n.
‘skin-instrument,’ i. e. a drum, tabour, &c. {%—Carma-%}
{%vṛkṣa, as,%} m., N. of a tree; [cf. {%carmin.%}] {%—Car-%}
{%ma-sambhavā,%} f. cardamoms. {%—Carma-sāra, as,%}
m. lymph, serum. {%—Carmācchādita (˚ma-ācch˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} covered with skin. {%—Carmānta (˚ma-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. a piece or strap of leather. {%—Carmām-%}
{%bhas (˚ma-am˚), as,%} n. lymph, serum. {%—Carmāva-%}
{%kartana (˚ma-av˚), am,%} n. working in leather or
skins. {%—Carmāvakartin (˚ma-av˚), ī,%} m. a worker
in leather or skins, a shoe-maker, a man of the lowest
caste. {%—Carmāvakarttṛ (˚ma-av˚), tā,%} m. a shoe-
maker. {%—Carmāvanaddha (˚ma-av˚), as, ā, am,%}
covered with skin, bound with leather, &c. {%—Carmā-%}
{%vṛta (˚ma-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} covered with skin or
parchment. {%—Carmāsi-mat (˚ma-asi-), ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} possessed of shield and sword.
<LEND>

<L>18315<pc>0319-a<k1>carmaru<k2>carmaru
{%Carmaru, us,%}¦ m. a shoe-maker, a worker in
leather; [cf. {%carmāra%} and {%carma-kāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18316<pc>0319-a<k1>carmAra<k2>carmAra
{%Carmāra, as,%}¦ m. a worker in leather, a shoe-maker.
<LEND>

<L>18317<pc>0319-a<k1>carmika<k2>carmika
{%Carmika, as, ā, am,%}¦ armed with a shield, a
shield-bearer.
<LEND>

<L>18318<pc>0319-a<k1>carmin<k2>carmin
{%Carmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ covered with skin or parchment,
having a hide or skin; leather, leathern, made of
leather, &c.; armed with a shield; ({%ī%}), m. a soldier
armed with a shield, a shield-bearer; N. of a tree,
the bark of which is used for writing upon, &c. [cf.
{%bhūrja%}]; a plantain; N. of an attendant of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>18319<pc>0319-a<k1>carmarI<k2>carmarI
{#carmarI#}¦ {%carmarī,%} f., N. of a plant with a
poisonous fruit.
<LEND>

<L>18320<pc>0319-a<k1>carya<k2>carya
{#carya#}¦ {%carya.%} See p. 318, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>18321<pc>0319-a<k1>carv<k2>carv
{#carv#}¦ {%carv%} [cf. {%cūrṇ%}]. cl. 1. 10. P. {%carvati,%}
{%carvayati,%} &c., to bruise, crush, grind with
the teeth, chew, champ, masticate; to eat; sup up, suck:
Pass. {%carvyate;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>carbad,</nsi> ‘the jaw;’ <nsi>carbal,</nsi>
‘the palate of the mouth;’ <nsi>creimim,</nsi> ‘I gnaw;’ <nsi>creim,</nsi>
‘corrosion;’ Lith. <nsi>kramtan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18322<pc>0319-a<k1>carvaRa<k2>carvaRa
{%Carvaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ chewing; ({%am%}), n. chewing,
masticating; sipping, tasting; food which must be
chewed, solid food.
<LEND>

<L>18323<pc>0319-a<k1>carvaRIya<k2>carvaRIya
{%Carvaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ masticable, proper to be
chewed.
<LEND>

<L>18324<pc>0319-a<k1>carvita<k2>carvita
{%Carvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ chewed, eaten. {%—Carvita-%}
{%carvaṇa, am,%} n. chewing the chewed; seeking
happiness where others have sought it in vain; repe-
tition of the same act, tautology, tedious reiteration.
{%—Carvita-pātra%} or {%carvita-pātraka, am,%} n. a
spitting-pot.
<LEND>

<L>18325<pc>0319-a<k1>carvya<k2>carvya
{%Carvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be chewed, chewable;
({%am%}), n. solid food requiring mastication.
<LEND>

<L>18326<pc>0319-a<k1>carvan<k2>carvan
{#carvan#}¦ {%carvan, ā,%} m. a blow with the flat of
the hand.
<LEND>

<L>18327<pc>0319-a<k1>carzaRi<k2>carzaRi
{#carzaRi#}¦ {%carṣaṇi, is, is, i%} (said by some to
be derived fr. {%kṛṣ;%} by other native commentators
connected with rt. {%cakṣ.%} to see, and so probably
derived by Yāska, who explains {%carṣaṇi%} by {%cāyitṛ,%}
q. v.; other scholars connect it with rt. {%car%}), Ved.
seeing, observing; discerning, moving, movable, run-
ning, going in a carriage, agile, active, swift; ({%ayas%}),
f. pl. men, people, race, nation (e. g. {%pañca carṣa- %}
[Page0319-b+ 80]
{%ṇayas,%} the five races of men, the five nations; cf.
{%kṛṣṭi, kṣiti, jana%}); ‘beings endowed with dis-
cernment,’ N. of the children of Aryaman and Mā-
trikā, who are regarded in the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa as
the progenitors of the human race; ({%ī%}), f. a disloyal
wife; N. of the wife of Varuṇa and mother of
Bhṛgu; [cf. {%vi-c˚%} and {%viśva-c˚.%}] {%—Carṣaṇi-prā,%}
{%ās, ās, am,%} Ved. governing men or people or races
of men, epithet of Indra. {%—Carṣaṇī-dhṛt, t, t, t,%}
Ved. supporting or protecting men or races of men;
epithet of Indra, Mitra, Varuṇa, and the Viśve-devās.
{%—Carṣaṇī-dhṛti, is,%} f., Ved. support or protection
of men or races. {%—Carṣaṇī-sah, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. ruling
over or overpowering men; (Sāy.) overpowering
enemies.
<LEND>

<L>18328<pc>0319-b<k1>cal<k2>cal
{#cal#}¦ {%cal%} [cf. {%caṭ%} and {%car%}], cl. 1. P.
(sometimes A.) {%calati, -te, cacāla, ca-%}
{%liṣyati, acālīt, calitum,%} to move one's self, be
moved; to stir, tremble, shake, quiver, throb, palpi-
tate, be agitated; totter; to move on or forward,
proceed, go away; to start off, set out, depart; to
walk, march; to be moved from one's usual course,
to be disturbed, become confused or disordered; to
go astray; to turn away from the right course, swerve,
deviate from (with abl., e. g. {%calati dharmāt,%} he
swerves from virtue); fall off, leave off (with abl.);
to sport about, frolic, play, wanton: Caus. P. {%cala-%}
{%yati%} or {%cālayati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to move, to
move, shake, jog, nudge, push, agitate, disturb; to turn
off from, to cause to deviate, lead away from; cause to
fall; drive away, remove or expel from; to cherish,
foster, (wrong form for {%bal%}): Pass. of Caus. {%cālyate,%}
to be moved: Desid. {%cicaliṣati:%} Intens. {%cañalyate%}
or {%cācalyate, cācalti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κέλω, κέλλω, ὀ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">κέλλω, κέλης;</lang> Lat. <nsi>celer, pro-cello, ex-cello, prœ-</nsi>
<nsi>cello; calco, calc-s, calcar;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>caill,</nsi> ‘a path;’
Germ. <nsi>falle;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">πάλλω, πέλω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pello.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18329<pc>0319-b<k1>cala<k2>cala
{%Cala, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving, trembling, tremulous,
movable, shaking, loose, unfixed, unsteady, fickle,
fluctuating, perishable, disturbed, confused; ({%as%}), m.
agitation, shaking, trembling; wind; quicksilver;
({%ā%}), f. lightning; incense; fortune or Lakṣmī the
goddess of fortune; N. of a metre consisting of four
lines of eighteen syllables each; [cf. {%a-cala, niś-%}
{%cala, cāla.%}] {%—Cala-karṇa, as,%} m. the true distance
of a planet from the earth. {%—Cala-kṛti, is, is, i,%}
unsteady, wanton. {%—Cala-ketu, us,%} m. (in astron.)
N. of a moving Ketu. {%—Cala-cañcu, us,%} m., N. of
the Greek partridge, Perdix Rufa; [cf. {%cakora.%}]
{%—Cala-citta, as, ā, am,%} fickle-minded, inconstant;
({%am%}), n. fickleness, mutability. {%—Calacitta-tā,%} f. or
{%calacitta-tva, am,%} n. fickleness of mind, unsteadi-
ness, inconstancy, mutability, frivolity. {%—Cala-tā,%} f.
or {%cala-tra, am,%} n. shaking, trembling, a tremulous
motion, pulsation. {%—Cala-danta, as,%} m. a loose
tooth. {%—Cala-dala, as,%} m. the holy fig-tree, Ficus
Religiosa; [cf. {%aśvattha.%}] {%—Cala-pattra, as,%} m.
the Ficus Religiosa; [cf. {%aśvattha.%}] {%—Cala-sandhi,%}
{%is,%} m. movable articulation of the bones, Diarthrosis.
 — 1. {%calācala (˚la-ac˚), as, ā, am,%} movable and
immovable, locomotive and stationary. {%—Calātaṅka%}
{%(˚la+āt˚), as,%} m. rheumatism. {%—Calātman (˚la-%}
{%āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} fickle-minded, inconstant. {%—Calendriya%}
{%(˚la-in˚), as, ā, am,%} having unsteady organs, sensi-
tive, sensual, not having subdued senses or passions.
{%—Caleṣu (˚la-iṣu), us, us, u,%} one whose arrow
wavers or flies unsteadily.
<LEND>

<L>18330<pc>0319-b<k1>calat<k2>calat
{%Calat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going, moving. {%—Calat-padam.%}
ind. moving, walking. {%—Calat-pūrṇimā,%} f. a small
fish called Chanda, {%= candra-cañcala%}. {%—Calad-%}
{%aṅga%} or {%calad-aṅgaka, as,%} m. a fish, a sort of gilt-
head, commonly Ceṅgā, Ophiocephalus Aurantiacus.
<LEND>

<L>18331<pc>0319-b<k1>calana<k2>calana
{%Calana, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving, movable, trembling
tremulous, shaking; ({%as%}), m. a foot; a deer, an
antelope; ({%ī%}), f. a short petticoat worn by common
women; the rope for tying an elephant; ({%am%}), n. a
shaking motion, shaking, trembling; walking about,
wandering, roaming; turning off from, leaving off.
<LEND>

<L>18332<pc>0319-b<k1>calanaka<k2>calanaka
{%Calanaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. a short petticoat
worn by women of low rank; ({%ikā%}), f. silken fringes.
<LEND>
[Page0319-c+ 74]

<L>18333<pc>0319-c<k1>calanIya<k2>calanIya
{%Calanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be moved or shaken,
movable.
<LEND>

<L>18334<pc>0319-c<k1>calamAna<k2>calamAna
{%Calamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, moving, proceeding,
shaking, &c.
<LEND>

<L>18335<pc>0319-c<k1>calas<k2>calas
{%Calas, as,%}¦ n. wood-sorrel.
<LEND>

<L>18336<pc>0319-c<k1>calAcala<k2>calAcala<h>2
2. {%calācala, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. rt. {%cal%} with reduplica-
tion), moving to and fro, movable, tremulous, unfixed,
unsteady, shaking, loose; variable; ({%as%}), m. a cow.
<LEND>

<L>18337<pc>0319-c<k1>calita<k2>calita
{%Calita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, departed, proceeded (often
used like a past tense, e. g. {%sa calitaḥ,%} he started off,
he departed); shaking, trembling.
<LEND>

<L>18338<pc>0319-c<k1>calitavya<k2>calitavya
{%Calitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone away; to be
moved, movable.
<LEND>

<L>18339<pc>0319-c<k1>calu<k2>calu
{%Calu, us,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%cal%}), water hastily
taken up in the hollowed palm of the hand for rincing
the mouth &c.; a handful or mouthful of water; [cf.
{%gaṇḍūṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18340<pc>0319-c<k1>caluka<k2>caluka
{%Caluka, as,%}¦ m. = the preceding; also a small pot,
a gallipot, &c.; N. of a man; [cf. {%culuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18341<pc>0319-c<k1>caladviza<k2>caladviza
{#caladviza#}¦ {%caladviṣa, as,%} m. the Kokila or
Indian cuckoo.
<LEND>

<L>18342<pc>0319-c<k1>cali<k2>cali
{#cali#}¦ {%cali, is,%} m. a cover, a wrapper, a
surtout; [cf. {%cola.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18343<pc>0319-c<k1>cavi<k2>cavi
{#cavi#}¦ {%cavi, is, ī,%} f. or {%cavika, am, ā,%} n. f. or
{%cavyā, am,%} f. n. a species of the pepper plant, Piper
Chaba; Orris root.
<LEND>

<L>18344<pc>0319-c<k1>caSAti<k2>caSAti
{#caSAti#}¦ {%caśāti,%} a wrong reading for {%va-%}
{%śāti,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18345<pc>0319-c<k1>caz<k2>caz
{#caz#}¦ {%caṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%caṣati, -te,%} to eat;
to kill, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>18346<pc>0319-c<k1>cazaka<k2>cazaka
{%Caṣaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a vessel used for drinking
spirits, a wine glass &c., any drinking-vessel; spirituous
liquor; honey.
<LEND>

<L>18347<pc>0319-c<k1>cazati<k2>cazati
{%Caṣati, is,%}¦ m. eating; killing; decay, infirmity.
<LEND>

<L>18348<pc>0319-c<k1>cazAla<k2>cazAla
{%Caṣāla, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a wooden ring on the top
of a sacrificial post; an iron ring at the base of the
post; ({%as%}), m. a hive. {%—Caṣāla-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. furnished with a Caṣāla.
<LEND>

<L>18349<pc>0319-c<k1>cazwa<k2>cazwa
{#cazwa#}¦ {%caṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (past passive part.
fr. {%cakṣ ?%}), spoken, asked.
<LEND>

<L>18350<pc>0319-c<k1>cazwAna<k2>cazwAna
{#cazwAna#}¦ {%caṣṭāna, as,%} m., N. of a prince,
(= <lang n="greek">Τιαστανος</lang> ?).
<LEND>

<L>18351<pc>0319-c<k1>cah<k2>cah
{#cah#}¦ {%cah%} [cf. {%cap%}], cl. 1. 10. P. {%cahati,%}
{%acahīt, cahayati, -yitum,%} to be wicked,
commit wickedness; to cheat; to be proud; cl. 10.
P. {%cahayati,%} to grind, pound, knead; [cf. Hib.
<nsi>cagnaim,</nsi> ‘I chew, gnaw.’]
<LEND>

<L>18352<pc>0319-c<k1>cAkaciccA<k2>cAkaciccA
{#cAkaciccA#}¦ {%cākaciccā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%śveta-vahnā.%}
<LEND>

<L>18353<pc>0319-c<k1>cAkra<k2>cAkra
{#cAkra#}¦ {%cākra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%cakra%}), carried
on (as a battle) with the discus; circular, belonging
to a wheel &c.; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18354<pc>0319-c<k1>cAkravarmaRa<k2>cAkravarmaRa
{%Cākravarmaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%cakra-%}
{%varman%}), N. of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>18355<pc>0319-c<k1>cAkravAkeya<k2>cAkravAkeya
{%Cākravākeya, as%}¦ or {%am%} (?), m. or n.? (fr. {%cakra-%}
{%vāka%}), N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>18356<pc>0319-c<k1>cAkrAyaRa<k2>cAkrAyaRa
{%Cākrāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Uṣasta.
<LEND>

<L>18357<pc>0319-c<k1>cAkrika<k2>cAkrika
{%Cākrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ circular; belonging to a wheel
or discus; relating to a company or circle; ({%as%}), m.
a potter; an oil-maker; a proclaimer; a chorister,
a bard who chants in chorus the praises of kings,
heroes, gods, &c.; a coachman, a driver; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. companions, followers.
<LEND>

<L>18358<pc>0319-c<k1>cAkriRa<k2>cAkriRa
{%Cākriṇa, as,%}¦ m. the son of a potter or oil-maker.
<LEND>

<L>18359<pc>0319-c<k1>cAkreya<k2>cAkreya
{%Cākreya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to a wheel or discus;
({%as, am%}), m. or n. (?), N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>18360<pc>0319-c<k1>cAkzuza<k2>cAkzuza
{#cAkzuza#}¦ {%cākṣuṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%cakṣus%}),
consisting in sight, depending on or produced from
it; belonging to the eye. visual, optical, perceptible by
the eye, visible, seen; relating to Manu Cākṣuṣa;
{%cākṣuṣī vidyā,%} that magical science which gives
the power of seeing anything; ({%as%}), m., N. of the
sixth Manu who with five other Manus is a son of
Manu Svāyambhuva, or according to other authorities
[Page0320-a+ 71]
a son of Viśva-karman and Ākṛti, or a son of
Cakṣus; N. of a son of Ripu and Bṛhatī, (according
to some he is called Cakṣuṣa, and is father of Manu
Cākṣuṣa); N. of a son of Kakṣeyu and brother
of Sabhānara; also of a son of Anu and brother of
Sabhānara; also of a son of Khanitra; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a class of deities in the fourteenth Manvantara;
({%am%}), n. knowledge which depends on vision.
{%—Cākṣuṣa-jñāna, am,%} n. ocular evidence. {%—Cā-%}
{%kṣuṣa-tva, am,%} n. perceptibility by sight.
<LEND>

<L>18361<pc>0320-a<k1>cAkzma<k2>cAkzma
{#cAkzma#}¦ {%cākṣma, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%kṣam%}), Ved.
forbearing, gracious.
<LEND>

<L>18362<pc>0320-a<k1>cANga<k2>cANga
{#cANga#}¦ {%cāṅga, as,%} m. (fr. {%caṅga%}), wood-sorrel;
whiteness or beauty of the teeth.
<LEND>

<L>18363<pc>0320-a<k1>cANgerI<k2>cANgerI
{%Cāṅgerī,%}¦ f. wood-sorrel, Oxalis Pusilla; [cf. {%ku-%}
{%cāṅgerī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18364<pc>0320-a<k1>cAcapuwa<k2>cAcapuwa
{#cAcapuwa#}¦ {%cācapuṭa, as,%} m. a kind of time in
music; [cf. {%caccapuṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18365<pc>0320-a<k1>cAcali<k2>cAcali
{#cAcali#}¦ {%cācali, is, is, i%} (fr. Intens. of rt. {%cal%}),
moving much or repeatedly; [cf. {%vi-cācali%} and {%a-vic˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18366<pc>0320-a<k1>cAYcalya<k2>cAYcalya
{#cAYcalya#}¦ {%cāñcalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%cañcala%}),
tremulousness, unsteadiness; transitoriness, fugitive-
ness, fidgetiness.
<LEND>

<L>18367<pc>0320-a<k1>cAwa<k2>cAwa
{#cAwa#}¦ {%cāṭa, as,%} m. (fr. {%caṭ = cat ?%}), a cheat,
a rogue, a speculator, one who makes away with
or embezzles money &c. entrusted to him.
<LEND>

<L>18368<pc>0320-a<k1>cAwakEra<k2>cAwakEra
{#cAwakEra#}¦ {%cāṭakaira, as,%} m. (fr. {%caṭaka%} or
{%caṭakā%}), a young sparrow.
<LEND>

<L>18369<pc>0320-a<k1>cAwalikA<k2>cAwalikA
{#cAwalikA#}¦ {%cāṭalikā,%} f., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>18370<pc>0320-a<k1>cAwigrAma<k2>cAwigrAma
{#cAwigrAma#}¦ {%cāṭigrāma, as,%} m., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>18371<pc>0320-a<k1>cAwu<k2>cAwu
{#cAwu#}¦ {%cāṭu, us, u,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt. {%caṭ%}),
pleasing or grateful words or discourse, flattery,
flattering, coaxing; distinct or clear speech; [cf.
{%catu.%}] {%—Cāṭu-kāra, as, ī, am,%} speaking agreeably
or kindly, flattering, complying with a request,
humouring, complaisant; ({%as%}), m. a flatterer. {%—Cāṭu-%}
{%kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} speaking agreeably, flattering.
{%—Cāṭu-paṭu, us,%} m. a jester, a buffoon, one who
makes compliments (?). {%—Cāṭu-lola, as, ā, am,%}
elegantly tremulous. {%—Cāṭu-vaṭu, us,%} m. a jester;
[cf. {%cāṭu-paṭu.%}] {%—Cāṭu-śata, am,%} n. repeated coax-
ing, a hundred entreaties. {%—Cāṭūkti (˚ṭu-ukti), is,%}
f. agreeable language, flattery, service.
<LEND>

<L>18372<pc>0320-a<k1>cAwuka<k2>cAwuka
{%Cāṭuka, as%}¦ or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), pleasing or
grateful discourse.
<LEND>

<L>18373<pc>0320-a<k1>cARakIna<k2>cARakIna
{#cARakIna#}¦ {%cāṇakīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%caṇaka%}),
fit for or sown with the chick-pea (a field &c.).
<LEND>

<L>18374<pc>0320-a<k1>cARakya<k2>cARakya
{#cARakya#}¦ {%cāṇakya, as,%} m. (a patronymic fr.
{%caṇaka,%} N. of a Muni), N. of the sage Vātsyāyana;
N. of a celebrated Brāhman also called Viṣṇu-gupta,
the reputed author of a work on morals and the princi-
ples of government. He is said to have destroyed
the Nanda dynasty and to have made Candra-gupta
(q. v.) king, whose minister he became. From the
tone of his advice to princes he has been styled the
Machiavelli of India; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%śāstram,%} the
work of Cāṇakya, on morals and polity. {%—Cāṇakya-%}
{%mūlaka, am,%} n. a kind of radish; [cf. {%kauṭilya.%}]
{%—Cāṇakya-śloka, ās,%} m. pl. detached stanzas on
morals and the principles of government, supposed
to be written by the Brāhman Cāṇakya or compiled
by him.
<LEND>

<L>18375<pc>0320-a<k1>cARaka<k2>cARaka
{%Cāṇaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (an adj. formed fr. {%cāṇakya%}),
relating to Cāṇakya.
<LEND>

<L>18376<pc>0320-a<k1>cARUra<k2>cARUra
{#cARUra#}¦ {%cāṇūra, as,%} m., N. of a prince; also
of a wrestler in the service of Kaṃsa, slain by Kṛṣṇa,
and identified with the Daitya Varāha. {%—Cāṇūra-%}
{%sūdana, as,%} m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>18377<pc>0320-a<k1>cARqa<k2>cARqa
{#cARqa#}¦ {%cāṇḍa, am,%} n. (fr. {%caṇḍa%}), violence.
<LEND>

<L>18378<pc>0320-a<k1>cARqAla<k2>cARqAla
{#cARqAla#}¦ {%cāṇḍāla, as,%} m. {%= caṇḍāla,%} a name
of an impure or degraded tribe, a Caṇḍāla, a Pariah,
[Page0320-b+ 79]
an outcast; ({%ī%}), f. a woman of the same tribe; N. of
a plant, {%= liṅginī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18379<pc>0320-b<k1>cARqAlikA<k2>cARqAlikA
{%Cāṇḍālikā,%}¦ f. a vulgar lute, the lute of the
Caṇḍāla; a N. of Durgā; a kind of herb; [cf.
{%caṇḍālikā.%}] {%—Cāṇḍālikāśrama (˚kā-āś˚), as,%} m.
N. of the hermitage of Cāṇḍālikā.
<LEND>

<L>18380<pc>0320-b<k1>cAtaka<k2>cAtaka
{#cAtaka#}¦ {%cātaka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%cat%}),
N. of the bird Cuculus Melanoleucus, according to
the legend living only upon rain-drops; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>cot-urnix.</nsi>] {%—Cātakānandana (˚ka-ān˚), as,%} m.
the rainy season. {%—Cātakāṣṭaka (˚ka-aṣ˚), am,%}
n. the eight verses on the Cātaka bird.
<LEND>

<L>18381<pc>0320-b<k1>cAtana<k2>cAtana
{#cAtana#}¦ {%cātana.%} See under rt. {%cat%} at p. 313.
<LEND>

<L>18382<pc>0320-b<k1>cAtura<k2>cAtura<h>1
{#cAtura#} 1¦. {%cātura, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%catur%}), re-
lating to four; (a carriage &c.) drawn by four; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a poem by Nara-siṃha; ({%am%}), n. a carriage,
a cart holding four people.
<LEND>

<L>18383<pc>0320-b<k1>cAtuHsAgarika<k2>cAtuHsAgarika
{%Cātuḥsāgarika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catuḥ-sāgara%}),
belonging to the four oceans.
<LEND>

<L>18384<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturakza<k2>cAturakza
{%Cāturakṣa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%catur-akṣa%}), four casts
in playing at dice.
<LEND>

<L>18385<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturarTika<k2>cAturarTika
{%Cāturarthika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catur-artha%}), used
in four particular senses or meanings.
<LEND>

<L>18386<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturASramika<k2>cAturASramika
{%Cāturāśramika, as, ī, am,%}¦ or {%cāturāśramin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i%} (fr. {%catur-āśrama%}), being in one of the
four periods or orders [cf. {%āśrama%}] of life.
<LEND>

<L>18387<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturASramya<k2>cAturASramya
{%Cāturāśramya, am,%}¦ n. the four periods of the
life of a Brāhman collectively; the aggregate of the
four orders of student, householder, ascetic, and
mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>18388<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturjAtaka<k2>cAturjAtaka
{%Cāturjātaka, am,%}¦ n. {%= kaṭu-cāturjātaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>18389<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturTaka<k2>cAturTaka
{%Cāturthaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ quartan, appearing
every fourth day; ({%as%}), m. a quartan ague.
<LEND>

<L>18390<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturTAhnika<k2>cAturTAhnika
{%Cāturthāhnika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%caturtha-ahan%}),
belonging to the fourth day.
<LEND>

<L>18391<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturTika<k2>cAturTika
{%Cāturthika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the fourth
or to the fourth day; ({%as%}), m. a quartan ague.
<LEND>

<L>18392<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturdaSa<k2>cAturdaSa
{%Cāturdaśa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%caturdaśī%}), appearing
on the fourteenth day of the half month.
<LEND>

<L>18393<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturdaSika<k2>cAturdaSika
{%Cāturdaśika, as, ī, am,%}¦ reading the holy scrip-
tures on the fourteenth day of the half month.
<LEND>

<L>18394<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturdEva<k2>cAturdEva
{%Cāturdaiva, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catur-deva%}), sacred to
four deities.
<LEND>

<L>18395<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturBadra<k2>cAturBadra
{%Cāturbhadra, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%catur-bhadra%}), an
assemblage of four medicinal plants.
<LEND>

<L>18396<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturBuji<k2>cAturBuji
{%Cāturbhuji, is,%}¦ m. a son of Catur-bhuja.
<LEND>

<L>18397<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturBOtika<k2>cAturBOtika
{%Cāturbhautika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catur-bhūta%}),
consisting of four elements.
<LEND>

<L>18398<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturmahArAjakAyika<k2>cAturmahArAjakAyika
{%Cāturmahārājakāyika%}¦ or {%cāturmahārājika =%}
{%caturmahārājakāyika;%} also an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>18399<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturmAsa<k2>cAturmAsa
{%Cāturmāsa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catur-māsa%}), produced
in four months.
<LEND>

<L>18400<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturmAsaka<k2>cAturmAsaka
{%Cāturmāsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ or {%cāturmāsin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} one who performs the Cāturmāsya sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>18401<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturmAsI<k2>cAturmAsI
{%Cāturmāsī,%}¦ f., scil. {%paurṇamāsī,%} the day of full
moon at the Cāturmāsya sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>18402<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturmAsya<k2>cAturmAsya
{%Cāturmāsya, am,%}¦ n., N. of three sacrifices be-
longing to the subdivision called Havir-yajña and
performed (every four months) at the beginning of
the three seasons, viz. the {%vaiśvadevam%} on the full
moon in Phalguna, {%varuṇa-praghāsāḥ%} in Aṣāḍha,
and {%sākamedhāḥ%} in Kṛttikā; ({%as, ā, am%}), belong-
ing to the Cāturmāsya sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>18403<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturvarRya<k2>cAturvarRya
{%Cāturvarṇya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%catur-varṇa%}), suited
to the four tribes or castes, belonging to them (?);
({%am%}), n. the aggregate of the four original castes,
viz. the Brāhman, Kṣatriya, Vaiśya, and Śūdra.
<LEND>

<L>18404<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturviMSika<k2>cAturviMSika
{%Cāturviṃśika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%caturviṃśa%}), be-
longing to the twenty-fourth day.
<LEND>

<L>18405<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturvidya<k2>cAturvidya
{%Cāturvidya, as, dī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catur-vidyā%}), familiar
with the four Vedas; ({%am%}), n. the four Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>18406<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturviDya<k2>cAturviDya
{%Cāturvidhya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%catur-vidha%}), four kinds
collectively.
<LEND>

<L>18407<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturvEdya<k2>cAturvEdya
{%Cāturvaidya, as, dī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catur-veda%}), versed
in or familiar with the four Vedas; ({%am%}), n. know-
ledge of the four Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>18408<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturhotfka<k2>cAturhotfka
{%Cāturhotṛka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catur-hotṛ%}), belong-
ing to the Catur-hotṛ.
<LEND>

<L>18409<pc>0320-b<k1>cAturhotra<k2>cAturhotra
{%Cāturhotra, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catur-hotṛ%}), conducted
[Page0320-c+ 77]
or performed by the four chief priests, viz. the Hotṛ,
Adhvaryu, Udgātṛ, and Brahman; ({%am%}), n. a sacrifice
performed by four priests; the office or duties of the
four chief priests; the four chief priests collectively.
<LEND>

<L>18410<pc>0320-c<k1>cAturhotriya<k2>cAturhotriya
{%Cāturhotriya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catur-hotṛ%}), a sacri-
fice &c. at or in which the four chief priests are
employed.
<LEND>

<L>18411<pc>0320-c<k1>cAtuzkARqika<k2>cAtuzkARqika
{%Cātuṣkāṇḍika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catuṣ-kāṇḍa%}),
divided into four parts.
<LEND>

<L>18412<pc>0320-c<k1>cAtuzwaya<k2>cAtuzwaya
{%Cātuṣṭaya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catuṣṭaya%}), knowing
or familiar with the Catuṣṭaya.
<LEND>

<L>18413<pc>0320-c<k1>cAtuzprASya<k2>cAtuzprASya
{%Cātuṣprāśya, as, śī, am%}¦ (fr. {%catuḥ + prāśa%}),
enough for four persons to eat.
<LEND>

<L>18414<pc>0320-c<k1>cAtvAriMSa<k2>cAtvAriMSa
{%Cātvāriṃśa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%catvāriṃśat%}), title of a
Brāhmaṇa consisting of forty Adhyāyas.
<LEND>

<L>18415<pc>0320-c<k1>cAtvAriMSatka<k2>cAtvAriMSatka
{%Cātvāriṃśatka, as, ī, am,%}¦ bought for forty.
<LEND>

<L>18416<pc>0320-c<k1>cAtura<k2>cAtura<h>2
{#cAtura#} 2¦. {%cātura, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%catura%}),
clever, able, ingenious, shrewd, sagacious; speaking
well or kindly, flattering; perceptible, visible; govern-
ing, ruling; ({%as%}), m. a small round pillow, see below;
({%ī%}), f. dexterity, ability, cleverness.
<LEND>

<L>18417<pc>0320-c<k1>cAturaka<k2>cAturaka
{%Cāturaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ flattering; perceptible;
governing; ({%as%}), m. a small round pillow for resting
the cheek upon; [cf. {%galla-cāturī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18418<pc>0320-c<k1>cAturika<k2>cAturika
{%Cāturika, as,%}¦ m. a charioteer, a coachman.
<LEND>

<L>18419<pc>0320-c<k1>cAturya<k2>cAturya
{%Cāturya, am,%}¦ n. dexterity, cleverness, ability,
shrewdness; amiableness.
<LEND>

<L>18420<pc>0320-c<k1>cAtra<k2>cAtra
{#cAtra#}¦ {%cātra, am,%} n. (sometimes read {%catra%}),
a cylinder of catechu-wood twelve Aṅgulas long,
tipped at both ends with iron and furnished with an
iron bolt, (this and another piece of wood called
Auvīlī are used for producing the sacred fire.)
<LEND>

<L>18421<pc>0320-c<k1>cAtvAla<k2>cAtvAla
{#cAtvAla#}¦ {%cātvāla, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. the hole
formed in the ground by excavating the earth to con-
struct the Uttara-vedi or north altar; ({%as%}), m. a
hollow place dug in the ground to receive a burnt-offer-
ing; any hole in the ground; [cf. {%catvāla.%}] {%—Cā-%}
{%tvāla-vat, ān, atī, at,%} (a sacrifice) at which the
Cātvāla is excavated.
<LEND>

<L>18422<pc>0320-c<k1>cAndanika<k2>cAndanika
{#cAndanika#}¦ {%cāndanika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%candana%}),
made of or derived from sandal, perfumed with it, &c.
<LEND>

<L>18423<pc>0320-c<k1>cAndra<k2>cAndra
{#cAndra#}¦ {%cāndra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%candra%}), lunar,
relating to the moon, regulated by it, &c.; ({%as%}), m.
a month, a lunar month (called Gauṇa, q. v., if
reckoned from full moon to full moon, and Mukhya
if reckoned from new moon to new moon); the
light fortnight or half month, during which the moon
is on the increase; the Candra-kānta or moon-gem;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the pupils of the grammarian Candra;
({%ī%}), f. moonlight; a kind of solanum [cf. {%śveta-%}
{%kaṇṭakārī%}]; N. of a princess; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%vra-%}
{%tam,%} the Cāndrāyaṇa penance, see below. {%—Cān-%}
{%dra-māsa, as,%} m. a lunar month; [cf. {%cāndra%}
above.] {%—Cāndra-vatsara, as,%} m. the lunar year.
{%—Cāndra-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a Sūtra work.
{%—Cāndrākhya (˚ra-ākh˚), am,%} n. fresh ginger;
[cf. {%cāndraka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18424<pc>0320-c<k1>cAndraka<k2>cAndraka
{%Cāndraka, am,%}¦ n. dried ginger; [cf. {%śuṇṭhī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18425<pc>0320-c<k1>cAndrapura<k2>cAndrapura
{%Cāndrapura, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the inhabitants of Candra-
pura.
<LEND>

<L>18426<pc>0320-c<k1>cAndraBAgA<k2>cAndraBAgA
{%Cāndrabhāgā%}¦ or {%ī%} f. {%= candra-bhāgā,%} the Che-
nāb, a river in the Pañjāb.
<LEND>

<L>18427<pc>0320-c<k1>cAndramasa<k2>cAndramasa
{%Cāndramasa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%candramas%}), lunar,
relating or belonging to the moon; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the
wife of Bṛhaspati; ({%am%}), n., N. of the fifth lunar
mansion, the constellation Mṛga-śiras; the stars in
Orion. {%—Cāndramasāyana, as,%} or {%cāndramasā-%}
{%yani, is,%} m. (fr. {%candramas%}), ‘descendant of the
moon,’ a N. of Buddha, regent of Mercury and son of
the moon.
<LEND>

<L>18428<pc>0320-c<k1>cAndravratika<k2>cAndravratika
{%Cāndravratika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%candra-vrata%}),
acting in the manner of the moon, having the
character of the moon.
<LEND>

<L>18429<pc>0320-c<k1>cAndrAyaRa<k2>cAndrAyaRa
{%Cāndrāyaṇa, am,%}¦ n., scil. {%vratam,%} a religious
observance or expiatory penance regulated by the
moon's age, (it consists in diminishing the daily con-
sumption of food every day by one mouthful for the
[Page0321-a+ 74]
dark half of the month, beginning with 15 at the
full moon until the quantity is reduced to O at the
new moon, and then increasing it in like manner
during the fortnight of the moon's increase: if this
penance begins with the full moon, it is called
Pipīlikā-madhya, i. e. having the middle thin like
an ant; if with the new moon, beginning with O
and increasing to 15, it is called Yava-madhya or
Yava-madhyama, i. e. having the middle thick like a
barley-corn); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of various persons.
{%—Cāndrāyaṇa-bhakta, am,%} n. the country in-
habited by the Cāndrāyaṇas. {%—Cāndrāyaṇa-vi-%}
{%dhāna%} or {%cāndrāyaṇa-vrata, am,%} n. the penance
called Cāndrāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>18430<pc>0321-a<k1>cAndrAyaRika<k2>cAndrAyaRika
{%Cāndrāyaṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ performing or a per-
former of the Cāndrāyaṇa, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18431<pc>0321-a<k1>cAnDanAyana<k2>cAnDanAyana
{#cAnDanAyana#}¦ {%cāndhanāyana, as,%} m., N. of an
ancient preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>18432<pc>0321-a<k1>cApa<k2>cApa
{#cApa#}¦ {%cāpa, as, am,%} m. n. (perhaps fr. rt.
{%kap = kamp%}), a bow; (in geometry) an arc or por-
tion of a circle; the sign of the zodiac Sagittarius;
a rainbow [cf. {%indra-cāpa%} and {%śakra-cāpa%}]; N. of
a particular constellation; [cf. {%dhanus.%}] {%—Cāpa-%}
{%dāsī,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Cāpa-paṭa, as,%} m. the tree
Buchanania Latifolia ({%piyāla%}); [cf. {%dhanu%} and
{%paṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18433<pc>0321-a<k1>cApin<k2>cApin
{%Cāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ armed with a bow; ({%ī%}), m. the
sign of the zodiac Sagittarius.
<LEND>

<L>18434<pc>0321-a<k1>cApala<k2>cApala
{#cApala#}¦ {%cāpala, am,%} n. (fr. {%capala%}), fickle-
ness, unsteadiness, mobility, quick movement, swift-
ness, transitoriness; agitation, tremour; inconsiderate
conduct, impertinence, inconsiderateness. {%—Cāpalā-%}
{%śraya (˚la-āś˚), am,%} n. (?) unsteadiness.
<LEND>

<L>18435<pc>0321-a<k1>cApalya<k2>cApalya
{%Cāpalya, am,%}¦ n. fickleness; unsteadiness, transi-
toriness; quickness, agitation, flurry; inconsiderate
conduct, inconsiderateness.
<LEND>

<L>18436<pc>0321-a<k1>cApAla<k2>cApAla
{#cApAla#}¦ {%cāpāla, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
Caitya.
<LEND>

<L>18437<pc>0321-a<k1>cAbukA<k2>cAbukA
{#cAbukA#}¦ {%cābukā,%} f. a small circular pillow.
<LEND>

<L>18438<pc>0321-a<k1>cAmara<k2>cAmara
{#cAmara#}¦ {%cāmara, am, ā%} or {%ī, as,%} n. f. m. a
chowrie, the bushy tail of the Bos Grunniens, used as
a fly-flap or fan, and as one of the insignia of royalty;
also used for a kind of streamer or plume on the
heads of horses; ({%am%}), n., N. of a metre consisting
of four lines of fifteen syllables each. {%—Cāmara-%}
{%grāha, as,%} m. a person who carries a Cāmara.
{%—Cāmara-puṣpa, as,%} m., N. of several plants,
Magnifera Indica [cf. {%āmra%}]; the betel-nut tree,
Areca Faufel or Catechu [cf. {%pūga%}]; the Pandanus
Odoratissimus [cf. {%ketaka%}]; a kind of grass, Saccha-
rum Spontaneum [cf. {%kāśa%}]. {%—Cāmara-puṣpaka,%}
{%as,%} m. or {%cāmara-sāhvaya, as,%} m. a kind of grass,
Saccharum Spontaneum; [cf. {%kāśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18439<pc>0321-a<k1>cAmarika<k2>cAmarika
{%Cāmarika, as,%}¦ m. a person who carries a Cāmara.
<LEND>

<L>18440<pc>0321-a<k1>cAmarin<k2>cAmarin
{%Cāmarin, ī,%}¦ m. a horse (either from his bushy
tail which he uses to whisk off flies or from his
having a Cāmara as his crest; see above).
<LEND>

<L>18441<pc>0321-a<k1>cAmIkara<k2>cAmIkara
{#cAmIkara#}¦ {%cāmīkara, am,%} n. gold; the thorn-
apple. {%—Cāmīkara-prakhya, as, ā, am,%} like gold.
<LEND>

<L>18442<pc>0321-a<k1>cAmuRqA<k2>cAmuRqA
{#cAmuRqA#}¦ {%cāmuṇḍā,%} f. a form of Durgā; one
of the seven Mātṛs; ({%as%}), m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>18443<pc>0321-a<k1>cAmpilA<k2>cAmpilA
{#cAmpilA#}¦ {%cāmpilā,%} f. a river.
<LEND>

<L>18444<pc>0321-a<k1>cAmpeya<k2>cAmpeya
{#cAmpeya#}¦ {%cāmpeya, as,%} m. (fr. {%campā%}), N. of
two trees, Michelia Champaka and Mesua Ferrea;
a stamen or filament, especially of the lotus flower;
a prince of Campā; N. of a son of Viśvā-mitra;
({%as, am%}), m. n. gold.
<LEND>

<L>18445<pc>0321-a<k1>cAmpeyaka<k2>cAmpeyaka
{%Cāmpeyaka, am,%}¦ n. a stamen or filament.
<LEND>

<L>18446<pc>0321-a<k1>cAmya<k2>cAmya
{#cAmya#}¦ {%cāmya, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%cam%}), food.
<LEND>

<L>18447<pc>0321-a<k1>cAy<k2>cAy
{#cAy#}¦ {%cāy,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%cāyati, -te,%} to ob-
serve, discern, perceive; to worship, re-
vere; [cf. 4. {%ci.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18448<pc>0321-a<k1>cAyamAna<k2>cAyamAna
{%Cāyamāna, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic of Abhyā-
vartin.
<LEND>
[Page0321-b+ 79]

<L>18449<pc>0321-b<k1>cAyitf<k2>cAyitf
{%Cāyitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. observing, seeing.
<LEND>

<L>18450<pc>0321-b<k1>cAyu<k2>cAyu
{%Cāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. showing respect or reverence,
honouring.
<LEND>

<L>18451<pc>0321-b<k1>cAra<k2>cAra
{#cAra#}¦ {%cāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%car%}), {%= cara,%} a
spy, scout, secret agent or emissary, messenger;
going, motion, progression, course; wandering about,
travelling; proceeding; performing, practising; bind-
ing, a bond, fetter; a prison, a house of confinement;
the tree Buchanania Latifolia, {%= piyāla; (am),%} n. a
factitious poison, (for {%vāra%}); [cf. Lat. <nsi>carcer.</nsi>]
{%—Cāra-kāṇḍa, am,%} n. ascensional difference (in
astronomy). {%—Cāra-cakṣus, us, us, us,%} ‘spy-eyed,’
i. e. a king or minister who uses spies as his eyes,
one who employs spies or agents and sees through
their medium; ({%us%}), n. espionage. {%—Cāra-caṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} graceful in gait or motion. {%—Cāra-cuñcu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} graceful in walking, of graceful carriage.
{%—Cāra-jyā,%} f. the sine of the ascensional difference.
{%—Cāra-patha, as,%} m. a place where two roads
meet. {%—Cāra-bhaṭa, as,%} m. a valorous warrior.
{%—Cāra-vāyu, us,%} m. summer air, zephyr. {%—Cārān-%}
{%tarita (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m. a secret emissary or spy.
{%—Cārekṣaṇa (˚ra-īk˚), as,%} m. a statesman, a
minister or king (who employs spies).
<LEND>

<L>18452<pc>0321-b<k1>cAraka<k2>cAraka
{%Cāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ acting, setting to work,
proceeding; composed by Caraka; ({%as%}), m. a spy,
a secret agent or emissary; a driver, a herdsman,
a leader; an associate, a companion; a groom, a
horseman, a cavalier; a wandering Brāhmanical stu-
dent; a fetter, a bond, a prison; the plant Bucha-
nania Latifolia ({%= cāra%}); N. of a man; ({%ikā%}), f. a
female attendant; a cock-roach. {%—Cāraka-trirātra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a festival.
<LEND>

<L>18453<pc>0321-b<k1>cArakIRa<k2>cArakIRa
{%Cārakīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for a wandering Brāh-
manical student.
<LEND>

<L>18454<pc>0321-b<k1>cAraRa<k2>cAraRa
{%Cāraṇa, as,%}¦ m. a wanderer, a pilgrim; a wandering
actor or singer, an actor of note, a dancer, a mime,
a bard, a herald; a celestial singer, a panegyrist of
the gods; a reader of scripture; a spy; N. of a
place. {%—Cāraṇa-tva, am,%} n. dancing (the art).
{%—Cāraṇa-dārā, ās,%} f. pl. female dancers, actresses,
&c. {%—Cāraṇa-vidya%} or {%cāraṇa-vaidya%} or {%cāraṇā-%}
{%vidya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a branch of the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>18455<pc>0321-b<k1>cAraTa<k2>cAraTa
{%Cāratha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. going, wandering or
moving about, going in a carriage.
<LEND>

<L>18456<pc>0321-b<k1>cArayitvA<k2>cArayitvA
{%Cārayitvā,%}¦ ind. having enjoined or prescribed,
having caused to observe; having made to go &c.
<LEND>

<L>18457<pc>0321-b<k1>cArAyaRa<k2>cArAyaRa
{%Cārāyaṇa, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a patronymic from Cara;
({%as%}), m., N. of the author of the Sādhāraṇādhi-
karaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>18458<pc>0321-b<k1>cArAyaRaka<k2>cArAyaRaka
{%Cārāyaṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ derived from the
Cārāyaṇas.
<LEND>

<L>18459<pc>0321-b<k1>cArAyaRIya<k2>cArAyaRIya
{%Cārāyaṇīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils of Cārāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>18460<pc>0321-b<k1>cArita<k2>cArita
{%Cārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to go; distilled, &c.
<LEND>

<L>18461<pc>0321-b<k1>cAritArTya<k2>cAritArTya
{%Cāritārthya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%caritārtha%}), attainment
of an object.
<LEND>

<L>18462<pc>0321-b<k1>cAritra<k2>cAritra
{%Cāritra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Marut; ({%ā%}), f. the tama-
rind tree; ({%am%}), n. proceeding, manner of acting,
conduct; good conduct, behaviour; good name or
character, reputation; peculiar observance or practice,
peculiarity of customs or conditions; a ceremony.
{%—Cāritra-kavaca, as, ā, am,%} cased in the armour
of chastity. {%—Cāritra-vatī,%} f., N. of a Samādhi.
<LEND>

<L>18463<pc>0321-b<k1>cAritrya<k2>cAritrya
{%Cāritrya, am,%}¦ n. becoming or honourable practices,
moral conduct, instituted observance.
<LEND>

<L>18464<pc>0321-b<k1>cArin<k2>cArin
{%Cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ (generally at the end of a comp.)
moving, walking or wandering about, living, being
(e. g. {%pāda-cārin,%} going on foot; {%nimeṣāntara-%}
{%cārin,%} going in an instant, arriving after a short
interval &c.), [cf. {%ambu-cārin, eka-c˚, kha-c˚,%} &c.];
acting, proceeding, doing, practising; living on; ({%ī%}),
m. a foot soldier; ({%iṇī%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= karuṇī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18465<pc>0321-b<k1>cArawikA<k2>cArawikA
{#cArawikA#}¦ {%cāraṭikā,%} f. a kind of perfume,
{%= nalī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18466<pc>0321-b<k1>cArawI<k2>cArawI
{#cArawI#}¦ {%cāraṭī,%} f., N. of two plants, {%= pad-%}
{%ma-cāriṇī%} an {%bhūmy-āmalī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18467<pc>0321-b<k1>cAraBawa<k2>cAraBawa
{#cAraBawa#}¦ {%cārabhaṭa, as,%} m. a courageous
man, a hero, a chief, a warrior; ({%ī%}), f. courage; [cf.
{%ārabhaṭa.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0321-c+ 79]

<L>18468<pc>0321-c<k1>cArivAc<k2>cArivAc
{#cArivAc#}¦ {%cārivāc, k,%} f., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%karkaṭa-śṛṅgī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18469<pc>0321-c<k1>cAru<k2>cAru
{#cAru#}¦ {%cāru, us, vī, u%} (said to be fr. rt. {%car,%}
perhaps connected with 2. {%can%}), agreeable, welcome,
approved, esteemed, beloved, dear (with dat. or loc. of
the person, e. g. {%varuṇāya%} or {%varuṇe cāruḥ,%} dear to
Varuṇa), pleasing, lovely, beautiful, pretty, elegant;
({%us%}), m. an epithet of Bṛhaspati; N. of a son of
Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī; of a Cakra-vartin; ({%rī%}), f. a
beautiful woman; splendor; moonlight; intelligence;
N. of the wife of Kuvera; ({%u%}), n. a various reading
for {%vara,%} saffron; [cf. Eng. <nsi>fair;</nsi> Brit. <nsi>kaer.</nsi>]
{%—Cāru-karṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having beautiful
ears. {%—Cāru-keśarā,%} f. a kind of grass, Cyperus, {%=%}
{%nāgara-mustā;%} a kind of tree, {%= taruṇī%}. {%—Cāru-%}
{%garbha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa and Ruk-
miṇī. {%—Cāru-gīti, is,%} f. a kind of metre, a sort of
Gīti, containing 29+32 syllabic instants. {%—Cāru-%}
{%gupta, as,%} m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī.
{%—Cāru-ghoṇa, as, ā, am,%} handsome-nosed. {%—Cāru-%}
{%citra, as,%} m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Cāru-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%cāru-tva, am,%} n. loveliness, beauty. {%—Cāru-%}
{%datta, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Cārudatta-nā-%}
{%man, ā,%} m. named Cāru-datta. {%—Cāru-danta, as,%}
m. ‘having beautiful teeth,’ N. of a merchant's son.
{%—Cāru-darśana, as, ā, am,%} good-looking. {%—Cāru-%}
{%deva, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Cāru-deṣṇa, as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Gaṇḍūṣa; also of a son of Kṛṣṇa by
Rukmiṇī. {%—Cāru-dhāman, ā,%} m., N. of a plant.
{%—Cāru-dhāmā%} or {%cāru-dhārā,%} f. an epithet of
Śacī, the wife of Indra. {%—Cāru-dhiṣṇya, as,%} m.,
N. of one of the Saptarṣayas in the eleventh Man-
vantara. {%—Cāru-nālaka, am,%} n. a kind of lotus with
red flowers. {%—Cāru-netra, as, ā, am,%} having beautiful
eyes; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Cāru-pada, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Namasyu. {%—Cāru-parṇī,%} f., N.
of a plant, {%= pra-sāraṇī%}. {%—Cāru-puṭa, as,%} m. a
particular time in music. {%—Cāru-pratīka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. of lovely appearance. {%—Cāru-phalā,%} f. a
vine, a grape. {%—Cāru-bāhu, us,%} or {%cāru-bhadra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa by Rukmiṇī.
{%—Cāru-mat, ān, atī, at,%} lovely, beautiful; ({%ān%}),
m., N. of a Cakra-vartin; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a daughter
of Kṛṣṇa by Rukmiṇī. {%—Cāru-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
handsome-faced, fair, beauteous; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a metre
consisting of four lines of ten syllables each. {%—Cāru-%}
{%yaśas, ās,%} m. ‘of fair fame,’ N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa
by Rukmiṇī; [cf. {%cāru.%}] {%—Cāru-ratha, as%} or {%am,%}
m. or n. (?), N. of a forest. {%—Cāru-rāvā,%} f. an epithet
of Śacī, the wife of Indra. {%—Cāru-locana, as, ā, am,%}
lovely-eyed, having beautiful eyes; ({%as%}), m. a deer,
antelope; ({%ā%}), f. a woman with fine eyes. {%—Cāru-vak-%}
{%tra, as,%} m. ‘handsome-faced,’ N. of one of Skanda's
attendants. {%—Cāru-vardhanā,%} f. a woman. {%—Cāru-%}
{%vinda, as,%} m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa by Rukmiṇī.
{%—Cāru-veśa, as,%} m. ‘well-dressed,’ = the preceding.
{%—Cāru-vratā,%} f. a female who fasts for a whole
month. {%—Cāru-śilā,%} f. ‘beautiful stone,’ a jewel, a
gem. {%—Cāru-śīrṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Cāru-%}
{%śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a lovely nature, beautiful. {%—Cāru-%}
{%śravas, ās,%} m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa by Rukmiṇī.
{%—Cāru-sarvāṅga-darśana (˚va-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a beautiful appearance in all the limbs. {%—Cāru-%}
{%hāsin, ī, inī, i,%} smiling sweetly; ({%inī%}), f., N. of a
metre containing 4 × 14 syllabic instants. {%—Cārv-%}
{%aṅgī,%} f. a beautifully formed woman. {%—Cārv-āghāṭa%}
or {%cārv-āghāta, as, ā, am,%} destructive of beauty.
<LEND>

<L>18470<pc>0321-c<k1>cAruka<k2>cAruka
{%Cāruka, as,%}¦ m. the seed of Saccharum Śara.
<LEND>

<L>18471<pc>0321-c<k1>cArcika<k2>cArcika
{#cArcika#}¦ {%cārcika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%carcā%}), con-
versant with the repetitions (in the recitation of the
Veda).
<LEND>

<L>18472<pc>0321-c<k1>cArcikya<k2>cArcikya
{%Cārcikya, am,%}¦ n. perfuming the person, smearing
it with sandal &c.; unguent; [cf. {%carcikya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18473<pc>0321-c<k1>cArma<k2>cArma
{#cArma#}¦ {%cārma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%carman%}), made
of hide or leather, leathern; covered with leather (as
a car &c.); defended by a hide or skin; shielded,
having a shield.
<LEND>

<L>18474<pc>0321-c<k1>cArmaRa<k2>cArmaRa
{%Cārmaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ covered with skin or leather;
({%am%}), n. a multitude of hides or of shields &c.
<LEND>
[Page0322-a+ 77]

<L>18475<pc>0322-a<k1>cArmika<k2>cArmika
{%Cārmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ leather, made of leather, be-
longing to the skin &c.
<LEND>

<L>18476<pc>0322-a<k1>cArmikAyaRi<k2>cArmikAyaRi
{%Cārmikāyaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Carmin.
<LEND>

<L>18477<pc>0322-a<k1>cArmiRa<k2>cArmiRa
{%Cārmiṇa, am,%}¦ n. a number of men armed with
shields.
<LEND>

<L>18478<pc>0322-a<k1>cArya<k2>cArya
{#cArya#}¦ {%cārya, as,%} m., N. of a despised caste,
the son of an outcast Vaiśya; (perhaps for {%acārya.%})
<LEND>

<L>18479<pc>0322-a<k1>cArvAka<k2>cArvAka
{#cArvAka#}¦ {%cārvāka, as,%} m. (fr. {%cāru + vāka%}),
N. of a Rākṣasa described in the Mahā-bh. Śānti-
parva 1414, &c., as a friend of Duryodhana and an
enemy of the Pāṇḍavas; (having taken the shape of
a mendicant Brāhman, when Yudhiṣṭhira entered
Hāstina-pura in triumph, he reviled him and the
assembled Brāhmans, but was soon detected; and
the real Brāhmans, filled with fury, killed him on the
spot); N. of a sophistical philosopher who probably
lived before the composition of the Rāmāyaṇa; see
{%jāvāli.%} He was a sceptic in matters of Hindū
faith, and considered by the orthodox as an atheist
or materialist; according to some, the sceptical
doctrines of the Indian materialists were handed
down to Cārvāka and his followers by Vācas-pati
or Bṛhaspati, and the aphorisms of Bṛhaspati
(Bārhaspatya sūtras) are said to embody their
opinions; ({%as, ī, am%}), derived from or composed by
Cārvāka. {%—Cārvāka-darśana, am,%} n. the doctrine
of Cārvāka.
<LEND>

<L>18480<pc>0322-a<k1>cAla<k2>cAla
{#cAla#}¦ {%cāla, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%cal%}), the thatch
or roof of a house; the blue jay; shaking, the being
movable.
<LEND>

<L>18481<pc>0322-a<k1>cAlaka<k2>cAlaka
{%Cālaka, as,%}¦ m. a restive elephant.
<LEND>

<L>18482<pc>0322-a<k1>cAlana<k2>cAlana
{%Cālana, am,%}¦ n. causing to move or go, causing to
pass through a sieve, sifting, shaking, moving to
and fro, wagging (as the tail), loosening; muscular
action; ({%ī%}), f. a sieve, a strainer.
<LEND>

<L>18483<pc>0322-a<k1>cAlanIya<k2>cAlanIya
{%Cālanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be moved, capable of
being moved.
<LEND>

<L>18484<pc>0322-a<k1>cAlya<k2>cAlya
{%Cālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be moved; to be loosened
or shaken or led away from.
<LEND>

<L>18485<pc>0322-a<k1>cAlikya<k2>cAlikya
{#cAlikya#}¦ {%cālikya, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>18486<pc>0322-a<k1>cAza<k2>cAza
{#cAza#}¦ {%cāṣa, as,%} m. the blue jay, Coracias
Indica; (according to some) a kingfisher.
<LEND>

<L>18487<pc>0322-a<k1>cAsa<k2>cAsa
{%Cāsa, as,%}¦ m. the blue jay, Coracias Indica; sugar-
cane. {%—Cāsa-vaktra, as, ā, am,%} having a face like
that of a jay; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the attendants of
Skanda; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of demons or evil spirits.
<LEND>

<L>18488<pc>0322-a<k1>ci<k2>ci<h>1
{#ci#} 1¦. {%ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%cinoti, -nute, cikāya%}
and {%cicāya, cikye%} and {%cicye, ceṣyati, -te,%}
{%acaiṣīt, cetum,%} to arrange in order, place in a line,
heap up, pile up, construct (as a sacrificial altar, used
in P. if the priests construct the altar for another, in
A. if the sacrificer builds it for himself); to collect,
gather together, accumulate, gain for one's self; to
cover, inlay, set with (with inst., e. g. {%ratnaiḥ,%} with
jewels): Caus. {%cāyayati%} or {%cāpayati,%} or {%cayayati%}
or {%capayati:%} Desid. {%cikīṣati,%} and {%cicīṣati,%} to
wish to pile up: Caus. of the Desid. {%cicīṣayati,%}
to cause a person to wish to arrange in order or
pile up: Intens. {%cecīyate;%} [cf. Cambro-Brit. <nsi>cai,</nsi>
‘collection;’ Lat. <nsi>cumulus;</nsi> Pol. <nsi>kupa;</nsi> Germ.
<nsi>Haufen.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18489<pc>0322-a<k1>caya<k2>caya<h>1
1. {%caya, as,%}¦ m. stacked wood; a mound of earth
raised to form the foundation of a building; a ram-
part or mound of earth raised from the ditch of a
fort; the gate of a fort; any edifice; a seat, a stool;
a cover, a covering; a heap, pile, collection, a multi-
tude, an assemblage, aggregation; the amount or
augment by which each term increases, the common
increase or difference of the terms; [cf. {%agni-caya;%}
cf. also Cambro-Brit. <nsi>cai,</nsi> ‘collection;’ Hib. <nsi>scea,</nsi>
‘plenty, abundance.’]
<LEND>

<L>18490<pc>0322-a<k1>cayana<k2>cayana
{%Cayana, am,%}¦ n. the act of collecting, gathering,
heaping up, aggregation; stacking wood; stacked
wood; [cf. {%agni-cayana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18491<pc>0322-a<k1>cayanIya<k2>cayanIya
{%Cayanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be collected or gathered,
to be heaped up.
<LEND>

<L>18492<pc>0322-a<k1>cicIzat<k2>cicIzat
{%Cicīṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing to gather or collect.
<LEND>
[Page0322-b+ 75]

<L>18493<pc>0322-b<k1>cit<k2>cit<h>1
1. {%cit, t, t, t,%}¦ (at the end of compounds) piling up
(e. g. {%agni-cit,%} q. v.); forming a layer or stratum,
piled up.
<LEND>

<L>18494<pc>0322-b<k1>cita<k2>cita
{%Cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ piled, heaped; collected, gathered,
accumulated; covered, veiled, concealed; ({%ā%}), f. a
layer, a pile of wood, a funeral pile, pyre; a heap, an
assemblage, a multitude; ({%am%}), n. a building (e. g.
{%pakveṣṭaka-cita,%} a building of burnt bricks). {%—Cita-%}
{%vistara, as,%} m. a kind of ornament. {%—Citāgni (˚ta-%}
{%ag˚), is,%} m. the funeral fire. {%—Citā-cūḍaka, am,%} n.
a mark where a funeral pile has been, a mausoleum,
a monument, &c. {%—Citaidha (˚ta-edha), as, ā, am,%}
Ved. belonging or referring to a funeral pile.
<LEND>

<L>18495<pc>0322-b<k1>citi<k2>citi<h>1
1. {%citi, is,%}¦ f. a stratum, layer of wood or bricks
&c.; a pile, a stack; a funeral pile; an oblong with
quadrangular sides; collecting, gathering; a heap, a
quantity, a multitude; N. of the eighth or tenth
book of the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa; [cf. {%amṛta-citi.%}]
{%—Citi-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a funeral pile.
<LEND>

<L>18496<pc>0322-b<k1>citikA<k2>citikA
{%Citikā,%}¦ f. a stack, a pile; a funeral pile; a small
chain worn as an ornament round the loins, a kind
of girdle.
<LEND>

<L>18497<pc>0322-b<k1>citIka<k2>citIka
{%Citīka%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp. after a
numeral) {%= citi,%} a layer (e. g. {%pañca-citīka, tri-c˚,%}
{%eka-c˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>18498<pc>0322-b<k1>citya<k2>citya
{%Citya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be arranged in order or built
up; (scil. {%agni,%} fire), placed or constructed upon a
foundation or basis (as of stones &c.); ({%ā%}), f. piling
up, building (an altar &c.); a funeral pile; ({%am%}), n.
the place at which a corpse has been burnt and where
a monument has been erected; a monument or any
mark of the site of a funeral pile. {%—Cityādhirohaṇa%}
{%(˚ya-adh˚), am,%} n. burning with a husband's corpse.
{%—Cityārohaṇa (˚ya-ār˚), am,%} n. ascending the
funeral pile.
<LEND>

<L>18499<pc>0322-b<k1>cinvat<k2>cinvat<h>1
1. {%cinvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ gathering, collecting.
<LEND>

<L>18500<pc>0322-b<k1>citi<k2>citi
{%Citi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. gathering, collecting.
<LEND>

<L>18501<pc>0322-b<k1>cetavya<k2>cetavya
{%Cetavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be collected or gathered,
to be piled up.
<LEND>

<L>18502<pc>0322-b<k1>ceya<k2>ceya
{%Ceya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be piled up, to be gathered
or collected.
<LEND>

<L>18503<pc>0322-b<k1>ci<k2>ci<h>2
{#ci#} 2¦. {%ci,%} cl. 3. P., Ved. {%ciketi,%} Impf.
{%aciket,%} Impv. 2nd sing. {%cikīhi, cikāya;%} cl.
5. P. A. {%cinoti, cinute%} &c. like 1. {%ci,%} to observe, per-
ceive; to fix the gaze upon; to be intent upon; to seek
for, investigate; to make inquiries, search through.
<LEND>

<L>18504<pc>0322-b<k1>cit<k2>cit<h>2
2. {%cit, t, t, t,%}¦ observing, knowing (in {%ṛta-cit%}).
<LEND>

<L>18505<pc>0322-b<k1>cinvat<k2>cinvat<h>2
2. {%cinvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ seeking for, searching for.
<LEND>

<L>18506<pc>0322-b<k1>cetf<k2>cetf<h>1
1. {%cetṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an observer, guardian.
<LEND>

<L>18507<pc>0322-b<k1>ci<k2>ci<h>3
{#ci#} 3¦. {%ci,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%cayate,%} to detest,
hate; to revenge, punish, take vengeance on.
<LEND>

<L>18508<pc>0322-b<k1>caya<k2>caya<h>2
2. {%caya, as, ā, am,%}¦ revenging, punishing.
<LEND>

<L>18509<pc>0322-b<k1>cit<k2>cit<h>3
3. {%cit, t, t, t,%}¦ punishing (in {%ṛṇa-cit%}).
<LEND>

<L>18510<pc>0322-b<k1>cetf<k2>cetf<h>2
2. {%cetṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. a revenger.
<LEND>

<L>18511<pc>0322-b<k1>cetyA<k2>cetyA
{%Cetyā,%}¦ f., Ved. revenge, punishment.
<LEND>

<L>18512<pc>0322-b<k1>ci<k2>ci<h>4
{#ci#} 4¦. {%ci,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%cāyati, -te,%} to fear,
be afraid of (with acc.); to respect, honour;
to observe; [cf. {%cāy.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18513<pc>0322-b<k1>cikarizu<k2>cikarizu
{#cikarizu#}¦ {%cikariṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. 1. {%kṝ%}), desirous to cast or throw, wishing to pour
out.
<LEND>

<L>18514<pc>0322-b<k1>cikartizu<k2>cikartizu
{#cikartizu#}¦ {%cikartiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. 2. {%kṛt%}), desirous or intending to cut or cut off.
<LEND>

<L>18515<pc>0322-b<k1>cikit<k2>cikit
{#cikit#}¦ {%cikit, cikiti,%} &c. See p. 323, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>18516<pc>0322-b<k1>cikina<k2>cikina
{#cikina#}¦ {%cikina, as, ā, am,%} flat-nosed;
({%am%}), n. flat-nosedness; [cf. {%cikka%} and {%cipiṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18517<pc>0322-b<k1>cikila<k2>cikila
{#cikila#}¦ {%cikila, as,%} m. mud, mire, a slough,
a bog; [cf. {%icikila%} and {%cikhalla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18518<pc>0322-b<k1>cikIrzaka<k2>cikIrzaka
{#cikIrzaka#}¦ {%cikīrṣaka, as, ā, am%} (fr. Desid.
of rt. 1. {%kṛ%}), desirous of doing, meaning to do.
<LEND>

<L>18519<pc>0322-b<k1>cikIrzat<k2>cikIrzat
{%Cikīrṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing or purposing to
act or do.
<LEND>

<L>18520<pc>0322-b<k1>cikIrzA<k2>cikIrzA
{%Cikīrṣā,%}¦ f. intention or desire to act, wish, will,
design, purpose, desire of doing or performing any-
thing.
<LEND>
[Page0322-c+ 66]

<L>18521<pc>0322-c<k1>cikIrzita<k2>cikIrzita
{%Cikīrṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ intended to be done; wished,
designed, purposed; ({%am%}), n. purpose, design, in-
tention.
<LEND>

<L>18522<pc>0322-c<k1>cikIrzu<k2>cikIrzu
{%Cikīrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to act, desiring or
intending to do or make or perform anything;
wishing to practice; desirous for.
<LEND>

<L>18523<pc>0322-c<k1>cikIrzya<k2>cikIrzya
{%Cikīrṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be wished to be done,
to be designed.
<LEND>

<L>18524<pc>0322-c<k1>cikura<k2>cikura
{#cikura#}¦ {%cikura, as, ā, am%} (perhaps a redu-
plicated form of rt. {%kṝ%} or of {%kar%} for {%car%}), incon-
siderate, rash, punishing or injuring others without
consideration; ({%as%}), m. the hair of the head, a lock
of hair; a mountain; a kind of tree or plant; a
snake, N. of a Nāga; a kind of bird; a musk-rat;
[cf. {%cikka%} and {%cikkira;%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">κίκιννος;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>cincinnus ?</nsi>]. {%—Cikura-kalāpa%} or {%cikura-pakṣa%}
or {%cikura-pāśa%} or {%cikura-bhāra, as,%} m. or {%cikura-%}
{%racanā,%} f. or {%cikura-hasta%} or {%cikuroccaya (˚ra-%}
{%uc˚), as,%} m. a mass of hair, a tuft of hair.
<LEND>

<L>18525<pc>0322-c<k1>cikUra<k2>cikUra
{%Cikūra, as,%}¦ m. the hair, {%= cikura.%}
<LEND>

<L>18526<pc>0322-c<k1>cikk<k2>cikk
{#cikk#}¦ {%cikk,%} cl. 10. P. {%cikkayati, -yitum,%}
to feel pain; to give or inflict pain;
[cf. {%cakk%} and {%cukk.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18527<pc>0322-c<k1>cikka<k2>cikka
{#cikka#}¦ {%cikka, as, ā, am,%} flat-nosed; ({%am%}),
n. flat-nosedness; ({%as%}), m. the musk-rat; (according
to other authorities {%cika;%} cf. {%cikura%} and {%cikkira%});
({%ā%}), f. a mouse; a betel-nut; [cf. {%cikkaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18528<pc>0322-c<k1>cikkaRa<k2>cikkaRa
{#cikkaRa#}¦ {%cikkaṇa, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr.
rt. 4. {%cit%}), smooth, glossy; slippery; bland, emollient;
unctuous, greasy; ({%as%}), m. the betel-nut tree; ({%am,%}
{%ā%} or {%ī%}), n. f. the betel-nut; ({%ā%}), f. an excellent
cow; (other authorities have {%cikkiṇā.%}) {%—Cikkaṇa-%}
{%kantha, am,%} n., N. of a town; [cf. {%citkaṇa-kantha%}
and {%cihaṇa-kantha.%}] {%—Cikkaṇa-tā,%} f. or {%cik-%}
{%kaṇa-tva, am,%} n. smoothness, oiliness, greasiness,
unctuousness.
<LEND>

<L>18529<pc>0322-c<k1>cikkasa<k2>cikkasa
{#cikkasa#}¦ {%cikkasa, as, am,%} m. n. barley-meal.
<LEND>

<L>18530<pc>0322-c<k1>cikkiRa<k2>cikkiRa
{#cikkiRa#}¦ {%cikkiṇa, as, ā, am,%} glossy, shining,
smooth; slippery; bland, emollient; unctuous, greasy;
({%ā%}), f. an excellent cow.
<LEND>

<L>18531<pc>0322-c<k1>cikkira<k2>cikkira
{#cikkira#}¦ {%cikkira, as,%} m. a small venomous
animal ({%mūṣika%}); [cf. {%cikura, cikka, chikkara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18532<pc>0322-c<k1>cikraMsA<k2>cikraMsA
{#cikraMsA#}¦ {%cikraṃsā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. {%kram%}),
a wish to go, desire of approaching.
<LEND>

<L>18533<pc>0322-c<k1>cikrIqizA<k2>cikrIqizA
{#cikrIqizA#}¦ {%cikrīḍiṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt.
{%krīḍ%}), a wish or desire to play.
<LEND>

<L>18534<pc>0322-c<k1>ciklida<k2>ciklida
{#ciklida#}¦ {%ciklida, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%klid%}), the
moon; ({%am%}), n. moisture, freshness; [cf. {%kledu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18535<pc>0322-c<k1>ciKalla<k2>ciKalla
{#ciKalla#}¦ {%cikhalla, as,%} m. mud, mire, a
slough; [cf. {%icikila%} and {%cikila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18536<pc>0322-c<k1>ciKAdizu<k2>ciKAdizu
{#ciKAdizu#}¦ {%cikhādiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid.
of rt. {%khād%}), wishing or desiring to eat.
<LEND>

<L>18537<pc>0322-c<k1>ciNgawa<k2>ciNgawa
{#ciNgawa#}¦ {%ciṅgaṭa, as, ī,%} m. f. or {%ciṅgaḍa, as,%}
m. a shrimp or prawn; [cf. {%ucciṅgaṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18538<pc>0322-c<k1>ciciRqa<k2>ciciRqa
{#ciciRqa#}¦ {%ciciṇḍa, as,%} m. a sort of gourd,
Trichosanthes Anguina.
<LEND>

<L>18539<pc>0322-c<k1>cicIkucI<k2>cicIkucI
{#cicIkucI#}¦ {%cicīkucī%} and {%cicīkūcī.%} See
{%cīcīkūcī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18540<pc>0322-c<k1>cicIzat<k2>cicIzat
{#cicIzat#}¦ {%cicīṣat.%} See under 1. {%ci,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>18541<pc>0322-c<k1>cicciwiNga<k2>cicciwiNga
{#cicciwiNga#}¦ {%cicciṭiṅga, as,%} m. a species of
venomous insect; [cf. {%ucciṭiṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18542<pc>0322-c<k1>cicCitsu<k2>cicCitsu
{#cicCitsu#}¦ {%cicchitsu, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. {%chid%}),
wishing or intending to cut off.
<LEND>

<L>18543<pc>0322-c<k1>cicCila<k2>cicCila
{#cicCila#}¦ {%cicchila, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>18544<pc>0322-c<k1>cicCuka<k2>cicCuka
{#cicCuka#}¦ {%cic-chuka.%} See under 5. {%cit.%}
<LEND>

<L>18545<pc>0322-c<k1>ciYcA<k2>ciYcA
{#ciYcA#}¦ {%ciñcā,%} f. the tamarind tree or its
[Page0323-a+ 75]
fruit. {%—Ciñcāmla (˚cā-am˚)%} or {%ciñcā-sāra, as,%} m.
an acid pot-herb, Rumex Vesicatorius.
<LEND>

<L>18546<pc>0323-a<k1>ciYcAwaka<k2>ciYcAwaka
{#ciYcAwaka#}¦ {%ciñcāṭaka, as,%} m. a various read-
ing for {%ciñcoṭaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>18547<pc>0323-a<k1>ciYcinI<k2>ciYcinI
{#ciYcinI#}¦ {%ciñcinī,%} f., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>18548<pc>0323-a<k1>ciYcI<k2>ciYcI
{#ciYcI#}¦ {%ciñcī,%} f. the plant Abrus Preca-
torius; [cf. {%kāka-ciñcā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18549<pc>0323-a<k1>ciYcowaka<k2>ciYcowaka
{#ciYcowaka#}¦ {%ciñcoṭaka, as,%} m. a kind of plant,
{%= aṅkaloḍya%} or {%krauñcādana.%}
<LEND>

<L>18550<pc>0323-a<k1>ciw<k2>ciw
{#ciw#}¦ {%ciṭ,%} cl. 1. and 10. P. {%ceṭati%} and {%ceṭa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to send out or forth (as a mes-
senger), to give orders to a servant; to be a servant.
<LEND>

<L>18551<pc>0323-a<k1>cewa<k2>cewa
{%Ceṭa, as,%}¦ m. a servant, &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>18552<pc>0323-a<k1>cit<k2>cit<h>1
{#cit#} 1¦. 2. 3. {%cit.%} See under rt. 1. 2. 3. {%ci.%}
<LEND>

<L>18553<pc>0323-a<k1>cit<k2>cit<h>4
{#cit#} 4¦. {%cit%} ({%= kit,%} which is by some
regarded as a separate root; cf. {%keta,%} &c.;
cf. also rt. {%cint%}), cl. 1. 3. P. {%cetati, ciketti, ciceta%}
or {%ciketa, cikite%} or {%cekite%} or {%cicite%} (Ved. 3rd pl. {%ci-%}
{%kitre%} or {%cikitrire;%} Part. {%cikitāna%} or {%cekitāna%}), {%ceti-%}
{%ṣyati, acetīt;%} Leṭ, {%ciketati%} or {%ciketat; cettum%} or
{%cetitum,%} to perceive, fix the mind upon, attend to,
be attentive, observe, notice, take notice of (with
gen. or acc., e. g. {%yajñasya%} or {%yajñaṃ cetati,%} he
takes notice of the sacrifice); to aim at, intend,
design (with dat., e. g. {%yudhaye ciketati,%} he intends
fighting), to desire, long for (with acc.); to be anxious
about, to care for; to resolve; to understand, com-
prehend, know, make known; to recover conscious-
ness, become conscious; P. and A. to become per-
ceptible, to appear; to be regarded as: to be known;
Pass. Aor. {%aceti:%} Caus. P. A. {%citayati%} Ved., and {%ceta-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum, ketayati, -yitum%} (see {%keta,%} p. 252),
to cause to attend, to make attentive, remind of; to
cause to comprehend or understand, instruct, teach;
to observe, perceive, be intent upon; to form an idea
in the mind, be conscious of, understand, compre-
hend, think, reflect upon; to form a conception,
have a right notion; to appear, be conspicuous,
shine: Desid. P. A {%cicitiṣati, cicetiṣati, cikit-%}
{%sati, -te;%} Inf. {%cikitsitum,%} to intend, have in view, aim
at, desire, long for; to care for, be anxious about;
to treat medically, heal, cure, attend as a physician
(in these senses the form {%cikitsati%} is usual); to wish
to appear; to remove, destroy; to keep down, press
down; to doubt: Caus. of the Desid. {%cikitsayati,%}
to cure, to heal; Intens. {%cecityate, cecetti;%} [cf. Lith.
<nsi>kettu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18554<pc>0323-a<k1>cikit<k2>cikit
{%Cikit, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. understanding, knowing, ex-
perienced.
<LEND>

<L>18555<pc>0323-a<k1>cikita<k2>cikita
{%Cikita, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; [cf. {%cekita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18556<pc>0323-a<k1>cikitAna<k2>cikitAna
{%Cikitāna, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; [cf. {%caikitāneya%}
and {%cekitāna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18557<pc>0323-a<k1>cikitAyana<k2>cikitAyana
{%Cikitāyana, as,%}¦ m. a descendant of Cikita; [cf.
{%caikitāyana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18558<pc>0323-a<k1>cikiti<k2>cikiti
{%Cikiti, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. knowing, acquainted with,
experienced.
<LEND>

<L>18559<pc>0323-a<k1>cikitu<k2>cikitu
{%Cikitu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. understanding, knowing,
experienced; ({%us%}), f. understanding, intellect.
<LEND>

<L>18560<pc>0323-a<k1>cikitvan<k2>cikitvan
{%Cikitvan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. understanding, intellect.
<LEND>

<L>18561<pc>0323-a<k1>cikitvas<k2>cikitvas
{%Cikitvas, vān, uṣī, vas,%}¦ one who has observed,
observing, attending to, attentive, knowing, under-
standing, experienced, conversant with.
<LEND>

<L>18562<pc>0323-a<k1>cikitvit<k2>cikitvit
{%Cikitvit,%}¦ ind., Ved. with intelligence, intelligently;
with deliberation, deliberately; (Sāy.) making known
({%= jñāpayantīm%} in Ṛg-veda IV. 52, 4). {%—Cikitvin-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. one whose mind is attentive;
coming from an intelligent mind, well considered;
(Sāy.) one who knows all hearts.
<LEND>

<L>18563<pc>0323-a<k1>cikitsaka<k2>cikitsaka
{%Cikitsaka, as,%}¦ m. a physician, doctor, practiser in
medicine.
<LEND>

<L>18564<pc>0323-a<k1>cikitsana<k2>cikitsana
{%Cikitsana, am,%}¦ n. healing, practising medicine,
medical attendance.
<LEND>

<L>18565<pc>0323-a<k1>cikitsA<k2>cikitsA
{%Cikitsā,%}¦ f. the practice or science of medicine,
healing, curing, administering or applying remedies;
(in the system of medicine) one of the six sections,
[Page0323-b+ 81]
therapeutics. {%—Cikitsā-kalikā,%} f. title of a medical
work by Tīśaṭa. {%—Cikitsākalikā-ṭīkā,%} f. a com-
mentary on the last work by Candraṭa. {%—Cikitsā-%}
{%kaumudī,%} f. title of a medical work by Kāśī-rāja.
{%—Cikitsā-tattva-jñāna, am,%} n. title of a medical
work by Dhanvantari. {%—Cikitsā-darpaṇa, am,%} n.
title of a medical work by Divodāsa.
<LEND>

<L>18566<pc>0323-b<k1>cikitsita<k2>cikitsita
{%Cikitsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ treated medically, remedied,
healed, physicked, cured; ({%am%}), n. healing, reme-
dying, medical attendance; pl. the chapters of the
therapeutical section of medicine; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>18567<pc>0323-b<k1>cikitsu<k2>cikitsu
{%Cikitsu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. wise, cunning.
<LEND>

<L>18568<pc>0323-b<k1>cikitsya<k2>cikitsya
{%Cikitsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be treated medically, to
be cured, curable.
<LEND>

<L>18569<pc>0323-b<k1>cit<k2>cit<h>5
5. {%cit, t,%}¦ f. thought, intelligence, intellect, under-
standing, mind; the soul, heart. {%—Cic-candrikā,%} f.
title of a commentary on the Prabodha-candrodaya
by Gaṇeśa. {%—Cic-chakti (cit+śakti), is,%} f. mental
power, intellectual capacity. {%—Cic-chuka (cit-śu˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a scholiast on the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa;
({%ī%}), f. or {%cit-sukhī,%} f. the commentary written by
this scholiast. {%—Cit-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the lord of
thought. {%—Cit-pravṛtti, is,%} f. thinking, reflection.
{%—Cit-svarūpa, am,%} n. pure intelligence, an epithet
of the Supreme. {%—Cid-acicchakti-yukta (-acit-%}
{%śa˚), as, ā, am,%} having power over matter and
spirit. {%—Cid-ambara, as,%} m., N. of the author of a
law-book. {%—Cid-asthi-mālā,%} f. title of a commen-
tary on a grammatical work. {%—Cid-ātmaka, am,%} n.
consciousness, perception. {%—Cid-ātman, ā,%} m. the
thinking principle, pure intelligence, spirit. {%—Cid-%}
{%ullāsa, as, ā, am,%} gladdening the mind or heart.
{%—Cid-gagana-candrikā,%} f. title of a literary work.
{%—Cid-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} consisting of intelligence;
wise, intelligent, of liberal or expansive mind;
amiable, good-hearted; ({%am%}), n. pure intelligence,
the Supreme Being as identified with intellect or
intelligence. {%—Cid-vilāsa, as,%} m. a pupil of Śaṅ-
karācārya. {%—Cin-maya, as, ī, am,%} spiritual, ‘all
intelligence,’ as an epithet of the Deity; ({%am%}), n.
pure intelligence. {%—Cin-mātra, am,%} n. pure in-
telligence.
<LEND>

<L>18570<pc>0323-b<k1>citi<k2>citi<h>2
2. {%citi, is,%}¦ f. understanding; ({%is%}), m. the thinking
mind.
<LEND>

<L>18571<pc>0323-b<k1>citta<k2>citta
{%Citta, as, ā, am,%}¦ perceived, observed, considered;
reflected upon; resolved; intended, aimed at, under-
stood; visible, perceptible; ({%am%}), n. attending, ob-
serving; thinking, reflecting, imagining, thought;
intention, aim, wish; the heart considered as the
seat of intellect; the mind, the reasoning faculty;
intellect, reason; reason personified; [cf. {%a-citta,%}
{%iha-c˚, cala-c˚, pūrva-c˚, prāyaś-c˚,%} &c.] {%—Citta-%}
{%kalita, as, ā, am,%} anticipated, expected, calculated;
known. {%—Citta-garbhā,%} f., Ved. visibly pregnant.
{%—Citta-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} proceeding or acting accord-
ing to the wish of another (with gen.) {%—Citta-janman,%}
{%ā,%} m. produced within the mind, love, the god of love;
[cf. {%citta-bhū, citta-yoni, manasi-ja.%}] {%—Citta-%}
{%jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing the hearts, heart-searching.
{%—Cittajña-tā,%} f. knowledge of the heart. {%—Citta-%}
{%nāśa, as,%} m. loss of conscience. {%—Citta-nirvritti,%}
{%is,%} f. contentment of mind, happiness. {%—Citta-%}
{%pramāthin, ī, inī, i,%} moving or touching the heart,
exciting passion or love, afflicting the mind. {%—Citta-%}
{%praśama, as, ā, am,%} satisfied in mind, composed,
complacent, tranquil, content. {%—Citta-prasanna-tā,%}
f. happiness of the mind, gaiety, joy. {%—Citta-pra-%}
{%sādana, am,%} n. gladdening of the mind. {%—Citta-%}
{%bhava, as, ā, am,%} being in the thoughts, felt, per-
ceived. {%—Citta-bheda, as,%} m. inconsistency, con-
trariety of purpose or will. {%—Citta-bhū, ūs,%} m. love,
the god of love. {%—Citta-bhrama-cikitsā,%} f. ‘medical
treatment of mental derangement,’ a chapter of the
medical work Vaidya-vallabha. {%—Citta-moha, as,%}
m. confusion or infatuation of mind. {%—Citta-yoni,%}
{%is,%} m. love; see {%citta-janman%}. {%—Citta-rāga, as,%}
m. affection, passion, desire. {%—Citta-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} endowed with understanding, reasonable; kind-
hearted, amiable. {%—Cittavat-kartṛka, as, ā, am,%}
(a root) employing an intelligent agent (e. g. {%Deva- %}
[Page0323-c+ 81]
{%dattaḥ pacati,%} Deva-datta cooks). {%—Citta-vikāra,%}
{%as,%} m. change of thoughts or feelings, disturbance of
mind. {%—Citta-vikārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} changing a person's
character or feeling. {%—Citta-vināśana, as, ā, am,%}
destroying the conscience. {%—Citta-viplava, as,%} m.
disturbance of mind, madness, insanity. {%—Citta-%}
{%vibhrama, as,%} m. derangement of mind, madness.
{%—Citta-viśleṣa, as,%} m. parting of hearts, breach
of friendship. {%—Citta-vṛtti, is,%} f. disposition of
mind, feeling; inward purpose, emotion; thinking,
imagining. {%—Citta-vedanā,%} f. anxiety, affliction.
{%—Citta-vaikalya, am,%} n. bewilderment of mind,
distraction, perplexity. {%—Citta-saṃhati, is,%} f. a
multitude of thoughts or emotions, many minds.
{%—Citta-saṅkhya, as, ā, am,%} pervading the heart,
penetrating the soul, knowing the thoughts. {%—Citta-%}
{%samunnati, is,%} f. pride of heart, arrogance, hau-
teur, haughtiness. {%—Citta-stha%} or {%citta-sthita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fixed in the mind, being in the heart;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Samādhi. {%—Citta-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
stealing the heart, fascinating, agreeable, beautiful.
{%—Citta-hṛt, t, t, t,%} fascinating, winning. {%—Cittā-%}
{%nuvartin (˚ta-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} gratifying wishes,
humouring. {%—Cittāpahāraka (˚ta-ap˚), as, ikā,%}
{%am,%} or {%cittāpahārin (˚ta-ap˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} heart-
stealing, captivating, attractive. {%—Cittābhoga (˚ta-%}
{%ābh˚), as,%} m. full consciousness, consciousness of
pleasure or pain, the attention of the mind to its
own sensations. {%—Cittāsaṅga (˚ta-ās˚), as,%} m.
attachment, affection, love. {%—Cittaikya (˚ta-aik˚),%}
{%am,%} n. unanimity, harmony, agreement. {%—Citton-%}
{%nati (˚ta-un˚), is,%} f. pride of heart, arrogance.
<LEND>

<L>18572<pc>0323-c<k1>citti<k2>citti<h>1
1. {%citti, is,%}¦ f. thinking, thought, reflection; under-
standing, wisdom; thoughts, devotion (in pl.); inten-
tion; a wise person; thought personified as the wife
of Atharvan and mother of Dadhyac; [cf. {%a-citti,%}
{%pūrva-citti, prāyaś-citti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18573<pc>0323-c<k1>cittin<k2>cittin
{%Cittin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. intelligent, wise.
<LEND>

<L>18574<pc>0323-c<k1>cittIkf<k2>cittIkf
{%Cittī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to
make anything an object of thought or reflection.
<LEND>

<L>18575<pc>0323-c<k1>cittIkfta<k2>cittIkfta
{%Cittī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed in the mind.
<LEND>

<L>18576<pc>0323-c<k1>citra<k2>citra
{%Citra, as, ā, am,%}¦ perceptible, visible, conspicuous,
excellent, distinguished; bright, clear, bright-coloured;
variegated, spotted, speckled; rough, agitated (as the
sea, opposed to {%sama%}); clear, loud, perceptible (as
a sound); various, different, manifold; strange,
wonderful, surprising, ({%kim atra citram,%} what is
there surprising in that? there is nothing strange in
that); containing the word {%citra; (as),%} m. variety
of colour; N. of several plants, viz. Plumbago Zey-
lanica, Ricinus Communis, Jonesia Aśoka; a form
of Yama; N. of a king; of a descendant of Gaṅga
and of Gauśra; of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a king
of Draviḍa; ({%ā%}), f. Spica Virginis, a star in the
virgin's spike, a constellation; (according to the
more ancient reckoning the twelfth, according to the
new the fourteenth lunar mansion); a kind of snake;
N. of several plants, viz. Anthericum Tuberosum or
Salvinia Cucculata, Cucumis Maderaspatanus, a kind
of cucumber; also {%= dantī;%} Ricinus Communis; the
Myrobalan tree; also {%= mṛgervāru%} and {%gaṇḍa-%}
{%dūrvā;%} Rubia Munjista; N. of a metre, a kind of
Mātrāsamaka, containing 4 × 16 syllabic instants;
another metre consisting of four lines of fifteen
syllables each; another metre consisting of four lines
of sixteen syllables each; worldly illusion, unreality;
N. of an Apsaras; also of a sister of Kṛṣṇa and
wife of Arjuṇa, {%= su-bhadrā;%} also of a daughter of
Gada, or (according to a various reading) of Kṛṣṇa;
also of a river; ({%am%}), n. anything bright or coloured
which strikes the eyes; a brilliant ornament, an
ornament; a bright or extraordinary appearance, a
wonder; the ether, sky, heaven; a spot; a circular
ornament, a sectarial mark on the forehead; white
or spotted leprosy; a picture, painting, sketch, de-
lineation: variety of colour; various modes of writing
or arranging verses in the shape of mathematical or
other fanciful figures, (this is done either by leaving
out syllables which occur repeatedly, or by represent-
ing words in a shortened form); playing upon words,
punning in the form of question and answer, facetious
[Page0324-a+ 81]
conversation, conundrums, riddles, &c.; [cf. {%a-citra,%}
{%dānu-c˚, vi-c˚, caitra;%} cf. also Lith. <nsi>kytras.</nsi>]
{%—Citra-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. ‘having a speckled throat,’
a pigeon. {%—Citra-kathālāpa-sukha (˚thā-āl˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} happy in telling charming stories. {%—Citra-%}
{%kambala, as,%} m. a variegated carpet; a painted cloth
used as an elephant's housing. {%—Citra-kara, as,%} m.
a painter; [cf. {%citra-kāra%} and {%citra-kṛt.%}] {%—Citra-%}
{%karṇa, as,%} m. ‘strange-ear,’ N. of a camel. {%—Citra-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. any extraordinary act, a wonderful deed;
magic; ornamenting, decorating; painting, a paint-
ing, picture; ({%ā%}), m. working wonders, a magician;
a painter; the tree Dalbergia Ougeinensis; [cf. {%citra-%}
{%kṛt.%}] {%—Citrakarma-vid, t,%} m. skilled in the art of
painting; a painter, a magician. {%—Citra-kāya, as,%} m.
‘having a striped or speckled body,’ a tiger, a leopard,
panther. {%—Citra-kāra, as,%} m. a painter; [cf. {%citra-%}
{%kara.%}] {%—Citra-kuṇḍala, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Citra-kūṭa, as,%} m. ‘wonderful peak,’
N. of a hill and district, the modern Chitrakote or
Chatarcot (near Kampta), situated on the river Pai-
suni (Piśunī) about fifty miles S. E. of the town of
Bandah in Bundelkhund, lat. 25. 12, long. 80. 47.
It was the first habitation of Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa
in their exile after leaving Ayodhyā, and as the holiest
spot of the worshippers of Rāma is crowded with
temples and shrines; N. of a town. {%—Citra-kṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} astonishing, surprising; ({%t%}), m. a painter; the
tree Dalbergia Ougeinensis; [cf. {%citra-karman.%}]
{%—Citra-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a son of Garuḍa; also
of Vasiṣṭha; also of Lakṣmaṇa; also of Deva-
bhāga; also of a king of the Śūra-senas. {%—Citra-kola,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of lizard. {%—Citra-kriyā,%} f. painting.
{%—Citra-kṣatra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one whose do-
minion is brilliant (as Agni); (Sāy.) having various
power or one whose wealth is visible. {%—Citra-ga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} represented in a picture, painted. {%—Citra-%}
{%gata, as, ā, am,%} coloured, variegated; represented
in a picture, painted, delineated. {%—Citra-gandha,%}
{%am,%} n. yellow orpiment. {%—Citra-gupta, as,%} m., N.
of one of the beings recording the vices and virtues
of mankind in Yama's world; N. of a mixed caste, a
secretary or writer of a man of rank; a form of Yama;
N. of the sixteenth Arhat of the future Utsarpiṇī.
{%—Citra-gṛha, as,%} m. a painted room, or one
ornamented with pictures; [cf. {%citra-śālā.%}] {%—Citra-%}
{%go, aus, aus, u,%} having a brindled cow. {%—Citra-%}
{%grīva, as,%} m. ‘speckled-neck,’ N. of a pigeon-king.
{%—Citra-cāpa, as,%} m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra. {%—Citra-jalpa, as,%} m. talking on various
things, talking incoherently. {%—Citra-taṇḍula, am,%}
{%ā,%} n. f. a medicinal plant said to possess anthelmintic
virtues; [cf. {%viḍ-aṅga.%}] {%—Citra-tala, as, ā, am,%}
painted or variegated on the surface. {%—Citra-tvac,%}
{%k,%} m. ‘having curious bark,’ the birch or bhūrja tree.
{%—Citra-daṇḍaka, as,%} m. the cotton plant, Arum
Campanulatum; [cf. {%ola.%}] {%—Citra-darśana, as,%} m.,
N. of a Brāhman changed into a bird (‘having varie-
gated eyes’). {%—Citra-dīpa, as,%} m. title of a philo-
sophical work. {%—Citra-dṛśīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
looking brilliant or shining. {%—Citra-deva, as,%} m.,
N. of one of the attendants of Skanda; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
a plant, {%= mahendra-vāruṇī%}. {%—Citra-dharman, ā,%}
m., N. of a prince identified with the Asura Virū-
pākṣa. {%—Citra-dhā,%} ind. in a manifold way.
{%—Citra-dhrajati, is, is, i,%} Ved. making a bright
line, an epithet of Agni; (Sāy.) having a wonderful
course. {%—Citra-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Citra-netrā,%} f. a small bird called Maina, {%=%}
{%sārikā;%} [cf. {%citra-locanā%} and {%citrākṣī.%}] {%—Citra-%}
{%nyasta, as, ā, am,%} represented in a picture, painted.
{%—Citra-pakṣa, as, ā, am,%} having variegated wings;
({%as%}), m. the francoline partridge; N. of a demon
causing head-ache. {%—Citra-paṭa%} or {%citra-paṭṭa, as%}
or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a painting, a picture. {%—Citra-%}
{%paṭṭa-gata, as, ā, am,%} ‘committed to a picture,’
painted. {%—Citra-pattrikā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%kapittha-parṇī%} and {%droṇa-puṣpī%}. {%—Citra-pattrī,%}
f., N. of an aquatic plant; [cf. {%jala-pippalī.%}] {%—Citra-%}
{%pada, as, ā, am,%} divided into various parts; full of
graceful words or expressions; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the plant
[Page0324-b+ 81]
Cissus Pedata [cf. {%godhāpadī%}]; N. of a metre con-
sisting of four lines of eight syllables each; ({%am%}),
n., N. of a metre consisting of four lines of twenty-
three syllables each. {%—Citrapada-kramam,%} ind. at
a good or brisk pace. {%—Citra-parṇikā,%} f., N. of a
plant, commonly Cākulīya, Hemionites Cordifolia;
Bengal madder, Rubia Munjista, {%= ati-guhā, ghṛṣ-%}
{%ṭhilā, tri-parṇī, dīrgha-pattrā,%} &c. {%—Citra-parṇī,%}
f., N. of several plants, {%= pṛśni-parṇī, karṇa-%}
{%sphoṭā, jala-pippalī, droṇa-puṣpī;%} also = Rubia
Munjista. {%—Citra-pāṭala, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of a plant. {%—Citra-pādā,%} f. a small bird com-
monly called Maina; [cf. {%sārikā.%}] {%—Citra-picchaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having a variegated tail,’ a peacock. {%—Citra-%}
{%puṅkha, as,%} m. ‘having variegated feathers,’ an
arrow. {%—Citra-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Citra-%}
{%puṣpī,%} f., N. of a shrub, {%= ambaṣṭhā%}. {%—Citra-%}
{%pṛṣṭha, as,%} m. ‘speckled-back,’ a sparrow. {%—Citra-%}
{%pratikṛti, is,%} f. a representation in colours, a paint-
ing, a picture. {%—Citra-priya-katha, as, ā, am,%}
speaking very kindly. {%—Citra-phala, as,%} m. a kind
of fish, commonly Chitala, Mystus Chitala; a kind of
cucumber, Cucumis Sativus; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of fish,
commonly Phalaï, {%= phalakin, mahonmada, rāja-%}
{%grīva,%} Mystus Karpirat; N. of several plants, {%=%}
{%cirbhiṭā, mṛgervāru, mahendra-vāruṇī, vārtākī,%}
{%kaṇṭakārī; (ī),%} f. the above fish. {%—Citra-pha-%}
{%laka, am,%} n. a tablet for painting, a picture, a
painting; ({%as%}), m. a kind of fish; see above.
{%—Citra-barha, as,%} m. ‘having a variegated tail,’
a peacock; N. of a son of Garuḍa. {%—Citra-barhin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} having a variegated tail. {%—Citra-barhis,%}
{%is, is, is,%} Ved. having a brilliant or shining litter
(i. e. bed of stars), an epithet of Pūṣan and the
moon; (Sāy.) strewed with various grasses (as the
ground). {%—Citra-bāhu, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Citra-bhānu, us, us, u,%} of varie-
gated lustre, shining with light; epithet of Agni,
Savitṛ, the Aśvins, &c.; ({%us%}), m. a N. of fire; of Śiva;
the plant Plumbago Zeylanica; the sun; N. of the
Calotropis Gigantea ({%= arka%}); the first year of the
first cycle of Jupiter; an epithet of Bhairava, a form of
Śiva; N. of the father of Vāṇa-bhaṭṭa, the author of
the Kādambarī. {%—Citra-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} made
into a picture, painted. {%—Citra-bheṣajā,%} f. the tree
Ficus Oppositifolia; [cf. {%kākoḍumbara.%}] {%—Citra-%}
{%maṇḍala, as,%} m. a kind of snake. {%—Citra-mahas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having extraordinary abundance;
(Sāy.) having conspicuous brightness or splendor.
{%—Citra-mṛga, as,%} m. the spotted antelope. {%—Citra-%}
{%mekhala, as,%} m. ‘girdled with spots,’ a peacock.
{%—Citra-yajña, as,%} m. title of a comedy by Vaidya-
nātha. {%—Citra-yāna, as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Citra-%}
{%yāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a splendid or brilliant
course (as Agni). {%—Citra-yodhin, ī, inī, i,%} fighting
in a wonderful manner or in various ways; ({%ī%}), m.
an epithet of Arjuna; the tree Terminalia Arjuna.
{%—Citra-ratha, as, ā, am,%} having a bright or splen-
did chariot (as Agni); ({%as%}), m. ‘having a variegated
car,’ the sun; the king of the Gandharvas; N. of a
snake-demon; of a Vidyā-dhara; of a son of Gada
or (according to a various reading) of Kṛṣṇa; of a
king; of a king of the Aṅgas; of a descendant of
Aṅga and son of Dharma-ratha; of a son of Ushadgu;
of Vṛṣṇi; of Gaya; of Su-pārśvaka; of Ukta; of
a prince of Mṛttikāvatī; of a Sūta; and of others;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; [cf. {%caitraratha.%}] {%—Citra-%}
{%raśmi, is,%} m., N. of a Marut (‘having variegated
rays’). {%—Citra-rāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. granting wonderful
or excellent gifts, epithet of the Aśvins. {%—Citra-%}
{%rādhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. bestowing excellent favour;
(Sāy.) having wonderful wealth. {%—Citra-repha, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Medhātithi, king of Śāka-dvīpa.
{%—Citra-latā,%} f. the plant Rubia Munjista; [cf.
{%citra-parṇī.%}] {%—Citra-likhana, am,%} n. ‘variegated
drawing,’ paining. {%—Citra-likhita, as, ā, am,%} repre-
sented, delineated (as in a picture), painted; motion-
less, dumb (as a picture or statue). {%—Citra-lekhaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a painter. {%—Citra-lekhanikā,%} f. a painter's
brush. {%—Citra-lekhā,%} f. a picture, a portrait; N. of
a metre of four lines of seventeen syllables each;
[Page0324-c+ 81]
another metre of the same sort; N. of a metre of
four lines of eighteen syllables each; N. of an Apsaras
born from Brahmā's hand, (she was a friend of Ūṣā
and skilful in painting); N. of a daughter of Kum-
bhāṇḍa, minister of king Vāṇa, also a friend of
Ūṣā. {%—Citralekhā-dvitīyā,%} f. having Citralekhā
as a second, accompanied by Citralekhā. {%—Citra-%}
{%locanā,%} f. ‘having variegated eyes,’ a small bird,
commonly called Maina, {%= sārikā;%} [cf. {%citra-netrā%}
and {%citrākṣī.%}] {%—Citra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} decorated
with paintings or ornaments; containing the word
{%citra; (tī),%} f., N. of a metre of four lines of thirteen
syllables each; N. of a daughter of Gada or (accord-
ing to others) of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Citra-vadāla, as,%} m.
the sheat-fish, Silurus Pelorius, {%= pāṭhīna%}. {%—Citra-%}
{%vana, am,%} n. wonderful wood,’ N. of a wood
near the Gaṇḍakī; [cf. {%citraka.%}] {%—Citra-varman,%}
{%ā,%} m. ‘having variegated arrows,’ N. of a son of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; also of a king of the Kulūtas; N. of
a king of Mathura and Campāvatī. {%—Citra-varṣin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} raining in an unusual manner. {%—Citra-%}
{%vallika, as,%} m. a kind of sheat-fish, Silurus Boalis;
[cf. {%citra-vadāla.%}] {%—Citra-vallī,%} f., N. of two
plants, {%= mṛgervāru%} and {%mahendra-vāruṇī%}. {%—Ci-%}
{%tra-vahā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Citra-vāja, as, ā, am,%}
decorated with variegated feathers; possessed of ex-
cellent power; (Sāy.) making wonderful progress or
having wonderful riches or strength; ({%as%}), m. a cock.
{%—Citra-vāṇa, as,%} m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra. {%—Citra-vāhana, as,%} m., N. of a king of
Maṇi-pūra. {%—Citra-vicitra, as, ā, am,%} variously
coloured, variegated, multiform. {%—Citra-vidyā,%} f. the
art of painting. {%—Citra-vīrya, as,%} m. a kind of
Ricinus, {%= raktairaṇḍa%}. {%—Citra-vṛtti, is,%} f. any
astonishing act or practice. {%—Citra-vegika, as,%} m.
‘having wonderful velocity,’ N. of a Nāga. {%—Citra-%}
{%veśa, as,%} m. ‘having a variegated dress,’ an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Citra-śālā,%} f. a painted room, or one
decorated with pictures [cf. {%citra-gṛha%}]; N. of a
metre consisting of four lines of eighteen syllables
each. {%—Citraśikhaṇḍi-ja%} or {%citraśikhaṇḍi-pra-%}
{%sūta, as,%} m. epithet of Bṛhaspati or the planet
Jupiter (regarded as the son of the Citraśikhaṇḍinas,
but more properly of Aṅgiras). {%—Citra-śikhaṇḍin,%}
{%inas,%} m. pl. ‘having bright crests,’ an epithet of the
seven Ṛṣis, Marīci, Atri, Aṅgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu, and Vasiṣṭha, as represented in the seven
principal stars of the Great Bear. {%—Citra-śiras, ās,%}
m. ‘having a variegated head,’ a kind of venomous
insect [cf. {%citra-śīrṣaka%}]; N. of a Gandharva.
{%—Citra-śīrṣaka, as,%} m. a kind of venomous insect.
{%—Citra-śocis, is, is, is,%} Ved. shining brilliantly;
epithet of Agni. {%—Citra-śravas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
uttering loud cries, songs, &c.; worthy of loud praise;
(Sāy.) having wonderful fame. {%—Citra-śrī, īs,%} f.
great beauty, the beauty of variegated colours. {%—Citra-%}
{%saṃstha, as, ā, am,%} represented in a picture, deli-
neated, painted; [cf. {%citra-gata, citra-stha,%} &c.]
{%—Citra-saṅga, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a
metre of four lines of sixteen syllables each. {%—Citra-%}
{%sarpa, as,%} m. a kind of snake, the large speckled
snake (Mālu-dhāna). {%—Citra-sena, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
furnished with a brilliant spear; (Sāy.) having a
bright weapon; ({%as%}), m., N. of a snake-demon;
also of a leader of the Gandharvas who was a son of
Viśvā-vasu; one of the judges or recorders of hell;
N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of Parīkṣit;
of a son of Sambara; of a son of Nariṣyanta; of a
son of the thirteenth Manu; of a son of Gada; N.
of an adversary of Kṛṣṇa; of Jarā-sandha's general
who is also called Ḍimbhaka; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an
Apsaras; also of one of the Mātṛs attending on
Skanda; N. of a river. {%—Citrasena-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m.,
N. of the author of a commentary entitled Piṅgala-
chando-grantha-ṭīkā. {%—Citra-stha, as, ā, am,%} repre-
sented in a picture, painted; [cf. {%citra-gata%} and
{%citra-saṃstha.%}] {%—Citra-hasta, am,%} n. a particular
position of the hands in fighting. {%—Citrākṛti (˚ra-%}
{%āk˚), is,%} f. a painted resemblance, portrait, picture.
{%—Citrākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘having variegated
eyes,’ N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; also of a
[Page0325-a+ 81]
descendant of Parīkṣit; also of a Nāga-rāja; ({%ī%}),
f. a kind of bird, commonly called Maina; [cf. {%sā-%}
{%rikā, citra-netrā, citra-locanā.%}] {%—Citrā-kṣupa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= droṇa-puṣpī%}. {%—Citrāṅga%}
{%(˚ra-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} having a variegated or spotted
body, striped, painted; ({%as%}), m. a kind of snake;
the plant Plumbago Zeylanica; another plant, {%=%}
{%rakta-citraka;%} N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; an
epithet of Arjuna; N. given to various animals in
fables; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of worm or ear-wig, Julus Cor-
nifex; the plant Rubia Munjista; ({%am%}), n. vermilion;
yellow orpiment. {%—Citrāṅgada (˚ra-aṅ˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} decorated with brilliant or variegated bracelets;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Śāntanu; of a king of the
Daśārṇas; of a Vidyā-dhara; of a Gandharva or
chief of the Gandharvas; a judge and recorder of the
deeds of men in Yama's kingdom or the lower
regions; a secretary of a person of rank (?); ({%ā%}),
f., N. of an Apsaras; a daughter of king Citra-
vāhana, wife of Arjuna and mother of Babhru-vāhana.
{%—Citrāṅgada-sū, ūs,%} f. the mother of Citrāṅgada,
an epithet of Satyavatī, the mother of Vyāsa. {%—Citrā-%}
{%ṭīra, as,%} m. (fr. {%citrā%} +?), the moon; the forehead
spotted with the blood of a goat slain in honour of
the demon Ghaṇṭā-karṇa. {%—Citrānna (˚ra-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. variegated rice, rice dressed with coloured
condiments. {%—Citrāpūpa (˚ra-ap˚), as,%} m. a kind
of cake (lit. speckled cake, plum cake ?). {%—Citrā-%}
{%magha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bestowing brilliant gifts,
an epithet of Uṣas; (Sāy.) having wonderful wealth.
{%—Citrāyasa (˚ra-ay˚), am,%} n. steel. {%—Citrāyudha%}
{%(˚ra-āy˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
{%—Citrāyus (˚ra-āy˚), us, us, us,%} Ved. possessed of
excellent vital power; (Sāy.) making wonderful pro-
gress or having excellent food. {%—Citrārambha (˚ra-%}
{%ār˚), as,%} m. the outline of a picture, a sketch,
drawing; ({%as, ā, am%}), represented in a picture.
{%—Citrārpita (˚ra-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} committed to
a picture, painted. {%—Citrā-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
rich in brilliant ornaments; decorated with shining
stars, an epithet of the night. {%—Citrāśva (˚ra-aś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having painted horses,’ epithet of Satyavat as
fond of painting horses. {%—Citreśa (˚rā-īśa), as,%} m. lord
of Citrā, i. e. the moon. {%—Citrokti (˚ra-uk˚), is,%} f.
a marvellous voice or speech, a voice from heaven,
the voice of an invisible speaker; a surprising tale;
agreeable or eloquent discourse. {%—Citroti (˚ra-ūti),%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. one who gives excellent proofs of his
love, one who bestows pleasure or happiness; (Sāy.)
granting wonderful assistance. {%—Citropalā (˚ra-%}
{%up˚),%} f., N. of a river. {%—Citraudana (˚ra-od˚),%}
{%am,%} n. boiled rice coloured with turmeric &c.
<LEND>

<L>18577<pc>0325-a<k1>citraka<k2>citraka
{%Citraka, as,%}¦ m. a painter; a tiger, a panther, the
Chīta or small hunting leopard; a kind of snake;
the plant Plumbago Zeylanica; also Ricinus Com-
munis or the castor-oil plant; N. of a son of Vṛṣṇi
or of Pṛśni; N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; also of
a Nāga; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%am%}), n. a
sectarial mark on the forehead; a particular manner
of fighting; the fruit of the plant Plumbago Zeylanica;
N. of a wood near the mountain Raivataka; [cf.
{%citra-vana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18578<pc>0325-a<k1>citraya<k2>citraya
{%Citraya,%}¦ nom. P. {%citrayati,%} to make variegated,
paint with various colours, decorate; to regard as a
wonder.
<LEND>

<L>18579<pc>0325-a<k1>citrala<k2>citrala
{%Citrala, as, ā, am,%}¦ variegated, spotted; ({%as%}), m. a
variegated colour; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= go-rakṣī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18580<pc>0325-a<k1>citrika<k2>citrika
{%Citrika, as,%}¦ m. {%= caitrika,%} the month Caitra or
Cheyt (March-April).
<LEND>

<L>18581<pc>0325-a<k1>citrita<k2>citrita
{%Citrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ variegated, spotted, striped;
painted.
<LEND>

<L>18582<pc>0325-a<k1>citrin<k2>citrin
{%Citrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ containing wonders, wonderful;
variegated; having variegated (black and grey) hair;
({%iṇyas%}), f. pl. wonderful deeds; ({%iṇī%}), f., N. for a
woman endowed with various talents and excellencies,
one of the four divisions into which women are
classed by erotic writers.
<LEND>

<L>18583<pc>0325-a<k1>citriya<k2>citriya<h>4
4. {%Citriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. variegated (?), epithet of
a species of Aśvattha; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18584<pc>0325-a<k1>citrIkaraRa<k2>citrIkaraRa
{%Citrī-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. and {%citrī-kāra, as,%} m.
wondering, wonder, surprise.
<LEND>
[Page0325-b+ 74]

<L>18585<pc>0325-b<k1>citrIkf<k2>citrIkf
{%Citrī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to feel wonder; to make a picture, change into a
picture, paint, variegate, embellish.
<LEND>

<L>18586<pc>0325-b<k1>citrIkfta<k2>citrIkfta
{%Citrī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ painted, variegated, em-
bellished.
<LEND>

<L>18587<pc>0325-b<k1>citrIya<k2>citrIya
{%Citrīya,%}¦ nom. A. {%citrīyate, -yitum,%} to wonder,
be surprised; to become a wonder to any one (with
gen.); to cause surprise.
<LEND>

<L>18588<pc>0325-b<k1>citrIyamARa<k2>citrIyamARa
{%Citrīyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming a wonder,
causing wonder or astonishment.
<LEND>

<L>18589<pc>0325-b<k1>citrya<k2>citrya
{%Citrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. brilliant; (Sāy.) to be
honoured, to be thought highly of.
<LEND>

<L>18590<pc>0325-b<k1>cekita<k2>cekita
{%Cekita, as,%}¦ m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>18591<pc>0325-b<k1>cekitAna<k2>cekitAna
{%Cekitāna, as,%}¦ m. ‘the intelligent one,’ an epithet
of Śiva; N. of a prince and ally of the Pāṇḍus.
<LEND>

<L>18592<pc>0325-b<k1>cetaka<k2>cetaka
{%Cetaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to think, reminding;
what thinks or feels, sentient; ({%ī%}), f. the yellow
myrobalan, {%= harītakī,%} Terminalia Chebula; or {%=%}
{%jātī-phala,%} Jasminum Grandiflorum.
<LEND>

<L>18593<pc>0325-b<k1>cetana<k2>cetana
{%Cetana, as, ī, am,%}¦ visible, conspicuous, distin-
guished, excellent; percipient, observing, conscious,
sentient, intelligent; alive, living, feeling; ({%as%}), m.
a living and sentient being, a man; self, soul, mind;
({%ā%}), f. consciousness, understanding, sense, intelli-
gence, wisdom, reflection; ({%am%}), n. appearance;
the thinking principle, the mind; [cf. {%a-cetana,%}
{%niś-c˚, vi-c˚, sa-c˚, caitanya.%}] {%—Cetana-tā,%} f. or
{%cetana-tva, am,%} n. consciousness, the state or con-
dition of an observing and conscious being. {%—Cetanā-%}
{%cetana (˚na-ac˚), as, ā, am,%} animate and inanimate.
{%—Cetanā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having consciousness,
knowing, understanding, reasonable.
<LEND>

<L>18594<pc>0325-b<k1>cetanakI<k2>cetanakI
{%Cetanakī,%}¦ f. {%= cetakī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18595<pc>0325-b<k1>cetanIyA<k2>cetanIyA
{%Cetanīyā,%}¦ f. a kind of medicinal herb, {%= ṛddhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>18596<pc>0325-b<k1>cetaya<k2>cetaya
{%Cetaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ observing, conscious, sentient,
living.
<LEND>

<L>18597<pc>0325-b<k1>cetayamAna<k2>cetayamAna
{%Cetayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sentient, reflecting,
conscious.
<LEND>

<L>18598<pc>0325-b<k1>cetayAna<k2>cetayAna
{%Cetayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ understanding, having sense,
sensible, conscious, sentient.
<LEND>

<L>18599<pc>0325-b<k1>cetayitavya<k2>cetayitavya
{%Cetayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be observed or thought.
<LEND>

<L>18600<pc>0325-b<k1>cetayitf<k2>cetayitf
{%Cetayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ observing, perceiving,
sentient.
<LEND>

<L>18601<pc>0325-b<k1>cetas<k2>cetas
{%Cetas, as,%}¦ n. bright appearance, Ved. (Sāy. a re-
verent mind); consciousness, intelligence, the sentient
or thinking soul, heart, mind, intellect, the faculty
of reasoning or understanding; will; [cf. {%a-cetas,%}
{%dabhra-c˚, dhīra-c˚, nānā-c˚, laghu-c˚, vi-c˚, sa-%}
{%c˚, su-c˚.%}] {%—Ceto-bhava, as,%} m. or {%ceto-bhū, ūs,%} m.
love, the deity of love. {%—Ceto-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
endowed with consciousness, living. {%—Ceto-vikāra,%}
{%as,%} m. disturbance of mind, emotion. {%—Ceto-vikārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} disturbed in mind, moved.
<LEND>

<L>18602<pc>0325-b<k1>cetasa<k2>cetasa
{%Cetasa%}¦ at the end of an adv. comp. {%= cetas.%}
<LEND>

<L>18603<pc>0325-b<k1>cettf<k2>cettf
{%Cettṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. an observer, a guardian.
<LEND>

<L>18604<pc>0325-b<k1>cetya<k2>cetya
{%Cetya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. observable, perceivable.
<LEND>

<L>18605<pc>0325-b<k1>cEtanya<k2>cEtanya
{%Caitanya,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>18606<pc>0325-b<k1>cit<k2>cit<h>6
{#cit#} 6¦. {%cit,%} an interjection. {%—Cit-kāra, as,%}
m. or {%citkāra-śabda, as,%} m. a cry, scream, bray.
{%—Citkāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} accompanied by cries
or noise.
<LEND>

<L>18607<pc>0325-b<k1>cit<k2>cit<h>7
{#cit#} 7¦. {%cit,%} ind. a particle, {%= cid%} below.
<LEND>

<L>18608<pc>0325-b<k1>cita<k2>cita
{#cita#}¦ {%cita.%} See p. 322, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18609<pc>0325-b<k1>citkanakanTa<k2>citkanakanTa
{#citkanakanTa#}¦ {%citkana-kantha, am,%} n., N. of
a town; [cf. {%cikkaṇa-kantha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18610<pc>0325-b<k1>citta<k2>citta
{#citta#}¦ {%citta.%} See p. 323, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18611<pc>0325-b<k1>citti<k2>citti<h>2
{#citti#} 2¦. {%citti, is,%} f., Ved. (according to
some commentaries) crackling, whizzing; (according
to others) a sacrificial act; [cf. {%cit-kāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18612<pc>0325-b<k1>citya<k2>citya
{#citya#}¦ {%citya.%} See p. 322, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18613<pc>0325-b<k1>citra<k2>citra
{#citra#}¦ {%citra.%} See p. 323, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>18614<pc>0325-b<k1>cid<k2>cid
{#cid#}¦ {%cid,%} ind. [cf. 2. {%ca%} and {%id%}], an enclitic
particle, requiring in the Veda a preceding simple
verb to retain its accent. In the Pada-pāṭha {%cid%} is
[Page0325-c+ 79]
considered as an independent word ({%kaś cid%} &c.
being always separated into two words). In later
Sanskrit it is generally a particle affixed to interroga-
tive pronouns to render them indefinite. The use
of {%cid%} in Vedic Sanskrit is principally to lay stress or
emphasis on a preceding word or to extend or limit
the sense. Hence it is often translateable by ‘even,’
‘indeed,’ ‘also,’ ‘at least,’ ‘just,’ ‘merely,’ &c. (e. g.
{%devāś cid,%} the gods indeed; {%ekasya cid,%} of one
merely); or when preceded by a negative particle by
‘not even’ (e. g. {%na devāś cid,%} not even the gods):
but its force may often be expressed by merely laying
an emphasis on the word by which it is preceded.
Hence in Nirukta I. 4. it is said to be used {%pūjāyām,%}
i. e. for enhancing the force of a word. It is also
stated by Yāska to be a particle of comparison
({%upamārthe%}). The following Vedic uses of {%cid%}
may be noted; {%yac cid, yathā cid,%} = when indeed,
as indeed; {%cid — cid%} or {%cid — ca%} or {%cid — u,%} = as well
as — as; both — and.
<LEND>

<L>18615<pc>0325-c<k1>cid<k2>cid
{%Cid%}¦ is often joined to interrogative pronouns and
adverbs (see 2. {%ka, katama, katara, kad, kim,%}
{%katham, kadā, kutas, kva,%} &c.) to render them
indefinite; especially in classical Sanskrit, where the
only other word after which it is found is {%jātu,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18616<pc>0325-c<k1>cidambara<k2>cidambara
{#cidambara#}¦ {%cid-ambara.%} See 5. {%cit,%} p. 323.
<LEND>

<L>18617<pc>0325-c<k1>cint<k2>cint
{#cint#}¦ {%cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%cintayati, -yitum,%}
(according to some also cl. 1. P. {%cintati,%}
&c.), to think, have a thought or idea, reflect, con-
sider; to think about, reflect upon, direct the
thoughts towards any person or thing (with acc.
or dat. or loc., or {%prati%} with acc., e. g. {%anyonyaṃ%}
{%cintayatas,%} they think of one another; {%sutebhyas%}
or {%suteṣu%} or {%sutān prati cintayan,%} thinking
about one's sons); to mind, take notice of, regard,
turn the attention to; to find out, investigate; to
take into consideration, treat of, speak of; to have
an opinion about, consider as, esteem; [cf. Goth.
<nsi>thagkja,</nsi> ‘to think;’ Lat. <nsi>censeo?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>18618<pc>0325-c<k1>cinta<k2>cinta
{%Cinta, as,%}¦ m. (?) thought; [cf. {%cintā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18619<pc>0325-c<k1>cintaka<k2>cintaka
{%Cintaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ thinking of, reflecting on,
considering, studying, conversant, familiar with;
(used at the end of compounds, e. g. {%daiva-cintaka,%}
an astrologer; {%vaṃśa-cintaka,%} a genealogist &c.)
<LEND>

<L>18620<pc>0325-c<k1>cintana<k2>cintana
{%Cintana, am,%}¦ n. thinking, thinking of, reflecting
upon, anxious thought; ({%pūrva-cintana,%} the former
manner of thinking.)
<LEND>

<L>18621<pc>0325-c<k1>cintanIya<k2>cintanIya
{%Cintanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thought of or con-
sidered; to be meditated on; to be attended to; to
be investigated or comprehended.
<LEND>

<L>18622<pc>0325-c<k1>cintayat<k2>cintayat
{%Cintayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ reflecting, considering, &c.
<LEND>

<L>18623<pc>0325-c<k1>cintayAna<k2>cintayAna
{%Cintayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ reflecting, considering,
meditating.
<LEND>

<L>18624<pc>0325-c<k1>cintayitavya<k2>cintayitavya
{%Cintayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be considered, to be
reflected on.
<LEND>

<L>18625<pc>0325-c<k1>cintayitvA<k2>cintayitvA
{%Cintayitvā,%}¦ ind. having thought or considered;
having mused or reflected.
<LEND>

<L>18626<pc>0325-c<k1>cintA<k2>cintA
{%Cintā,%}¦ f. thought, especially sad or sorrowful
thought, care, anxiety; reflecting on, reflection, con-
sideration, attention; recollection; N. of a woman.
{%—Cintā-karman, a,%} n. anxiety, troubled thoughts.
{%—Cintā-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} considering, regarding.
{%—Cintākula (˚tā-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} disturbed in thought,
distracted by any idea. {%—Cintā-para, as, ā, am,%} lost
in thought, thoughtful, anxious. {%—Cintā-maṇi, is,%}
m. a fabulous gem, supposed to yield its possessor all
desires; the philosopher's stone; a common title of
various text-books, treatises, and commentaries (e. g.
{%abhidhāna-cintāmaṇi, upamāna-c˚, kṛtya-c˚,%}
{%janma-c˚, muhūrta-c˚%}); N. of Brahmā; N. of a
Buddha; of an author. {%—Cintāmaṇi-sāraṇikā%} or
{%tithi-sāraṇikā,%} f. title of a work on astrology by Daśa-
bala. {%—Cintā-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of thought
or intelligence, produced by thoughts. {%—Cintā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} thinking, thoughtful. {%—Cintā-veśman,%}
{%a,%} n. a council-house, council-room.
<LEND>

<L>18627<pc>0325-c<k1>cintita<k2>cintita
{%Cintita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thought, considered; reflect-
ing, considering; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman; ({%am%}), n.
thought, reflection, care, intention.
<LEND>
[Page0326-a+ 73]

<L>18628<pc>0326-a<k1>cintiti<k2>cintiti
{%Cintiti, is,%}¦ f. or {%cintiyā,%} f. thinking, consideration,
reflection.
<LEND>

<L>18629<pc>0326-a<k1>cintya<k2>cintya
{%Cintya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be considered or reflected;
to be thought of or meditated upon; to be appre-
hended or conceived; to be deliberated about; un-
certain, questionable; ({%am%}), n. the necessity of
thinking about anything. {%—Cintya-dyota, ās,%} m.
pl. a class of deities (whose brightness is only to be
apprehended by the imagination).
<LEND>

<L>18630<pc>0326-a<k1>cinti<k2>cinti
{#cinti#}¦ {%cinti, is,%} m., N. of a man (?).
<LEND>

<L>18631<pc>0326-a<k1>cintiqI<k2>cintiqI
{#cintiqI#}¦ {%cintiḍī,%} f. the tamarind tree; (a
wrong form for {%tintiḍī.%})
<LEND>

<L>18632<pc>0326-a<k1>cintokti<k2>cintokti
{#cintokti#}¦ {%cintokti, is,%} f. midnight cry or
alarm; (a wrong form for {%citrokti.%})
<LEND>

<L>18633<pc>0326-a<k1>cinna<k2>cinna
{#cinna#}¦ {%cinna, as,%} m. a kind of grain, Pani-
cum Miliaceum; [cf. {%cīna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18634<pc>0326-a<k1>cinmaya<k2>cinmaya
{#cinmaya#}¦ {%cinmaya.%} See 5. {%cit,%} p. 323.
<LEND>

<L>18635<pc>0326-a<k1>cinvat<k2>cinvat
{#cinvat#}¦ {%cinvat.%} See p. 322, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18636<pc>0326-a<k1>cipawa<k2>cipawa
{#cipawa#}¦ {%cipaṭa, as, ā, am,%} flat-nosed; ({%as%}),
m. rice or grain flattened; [cf. {%cipiṭa%} and {%cipuṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18637<pc>0326-a<k1>cipiwa<k2>cipiwa
{%Cipiṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ blunted, flattened, pressed flat,
flat, flat-nosed; ({%as%}), m. a kind of poisonous insect;
rice or grain flattened; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of grass; [cf.
{%guṇḍāsinī.%}] {%—Cipiṭa-grīva, as, ā, am,%} short-necked.
{%—Cipiṭa-nāsa%} or {%cipiṭa-nāsika, as, ā, am,%} flat-
nosed; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people in the north
of Madhya-deśa.
<LEND>

<L>18638<pc>0326-a<k1>cipiwaka<k2>cipiwaka
{%Cipiṭaka, as,%}¦ m. flattened rice.
<LEND>

<L>18639<pc>0326-a<k1>cipiwikAvat<k2>cipiwikAvat
{%Cipiṭikā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ having the appearance
of flattened grains of rice (?).
<LEND>

<L>18640<pc>0326-a<k1>cipuwa<k2>cipuwa
{%Cipuṭa, as,%}¦ m. flattened rice.
<LEND>

<L>18641<pc>0326-a<k1>cippa<k2>cippa
{#cippa#}¦ {%cippa, am,%} n. a kind of disease of
the finger-nail; [cf. {%cipya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18642<pc>0326-a<k1>cippawajayApIqa<k2>cippawajayApIqa
{#cippawajayApIqa#}¦ {%cippaṭa-jayāpīḍa, as,%} m.,
N. of a king of Kaśmīra, ({%cippaṭa = cipiṭa ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>18643<pc>0326-a<k1>cippikA<k2>cippikA
{#cippikA#}¦ {%cippikā,%} f. a kind of bird (?);
(a various reading for {%chippikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>18644<pc>0326-a<k1>cipya<k2>cipya
{#cipya#}¦ {%cipya, as,%} m. a kind of worm [cf. {%ki-%}
{%pya%}]; ({%am%}), n. a disease of the finger-nail, whitlow.
<LEND>

<L>18645<pc>0326-a<k1>cibuka<k2>cibuka
{#cibuka#}¦ {%cibuka.%} See {%civuka.%}
<LEND>

<L>18646<pc>0326-a<k1>cimi<k2>cimi
{#cimi#}¦ {%cimi, is,%} m. a parrot [cf. {%ciri%}]; a
kind of plant, from the fibres of which coarse cloth
and ropes are made, {%= paṭṭa-vṛkṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>18647<pc>0326-a<k1>cimika<k2>cimika
{%Cimika, as,%}¦ m. a parrot.
<LEND>

<L>18648<pc>0326-a<k1>cira<k2>cira
{#cira#}¦ {%cira, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ci,%} or perhaps
rather fr. rt. {%car%}), long, lasting a long time, existing
from ancient times, old; {%ciraṃ kālam,%} during a
long time; {%cirāt kālāt,%} after a long time; ({%am%}),
n. a long time, delay, putting off for too long a
time (e. g. {%gamana-ciram,%} delay in going; {%kiṃ%}
{%cireṇa,%} wherefore delay ? {%kiyac-cireṇa,%} for how
long a time ? {%a-cirāt%} or {%a-ciratas,%} after no long time,
soon, shortly; cf. {%a-cira%}). Any of the oblique cases
sing. of {%cira%} may be used adverbially, e. g. {%ciram%}
or {%cireṇa%} or {%cirāya%} or {%cirāt%} or {%cirasya%} or {%cire,%} =
long, for a long time, after a long time, a long while
ago, long since; at last, finally, too late. {%Cira%} is
also used adverbially at the beginning of comp. as in
some of the following examples; [cf. Hib. <nsi>sir,</nsi> ‘long.’]
{%—Cira-kāra, as, ā, am,%} or {%cira-kāri, is, is, i,%} or
{%cira-kārika, as, ā, am,%} or {%cira-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
working or acting slowly, dilatory, delaying. {%—Cira-%}
{%kāri-tā,%} f. or {%cirakāri-tva, am,%} n. dilatoriness,
slowness. {%—Cira-kāla, as,%} m. a long period; {%cira-%}
{%kālam%} or {%-lāya,%} for a long time. {%—Cirakāla-pālita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} protected for a long time. {%—Cirakālika%} or
{%cirakālīna, as, ā, am,%} of long standing, old, long-
continued, chronic. {%—Cirakālopārjita (˚la-up˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} accumulated slowly or after a long time. {%—Cira-%}
{%kīrtti, is,%} m., N. of the founder of a religious sect.
{%—Cira-kriya, as, ā, am,%} dilatory, slow, tedious.
{%—Cira-gata, as, ā, am,%} long absent, long gone,
gone a long while ago. {%—Cira-ceṣṭita, as, ā, %}
[Page0326-b+ 77]
{%am,%} long sought for, of rare occurrence. {%—Cira-jāta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} born long ago, old; ({%tvattaś cirajā-%}
{%taḥ%} or {%bhavataś cirajātaraḥ,%} older than thou.)
{%—Cirajāmbā,%} f., N. of the mother of Rudra-bhaṭṭa.
{%—Cira-jīvaka, as,%} m., N. of a tree, {%= jīvaka%}. {%—Ci-%}
{%ra-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%} long-lived; an epithet of Mārkaṇ-
ḍeya, of Aśvatthāman, of Bali, Vyāsa, Hanumat,
Vibhīṣaṇa, Kṛpa, and Paraśu-rāma; ({%ī%}), m. a N. of
Viṣṇu; a crow; two plants, {%= jīvaka%} and {%śālmali.%}
{%—Cirañ-jīva, as, ā, am,%} long-lived; an epithet of
Kāma-deva; ({%as%}), m. and {%cirañjīva-bhaṭṭācārya,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of several authors. {%—Cirañ-jīvin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} long-lived; ({%ī%}), m. a N. of Viṣṇu; a crow; two
plants, {%= jīvaka%} and {%śālmali%}. {%—Cira-tā,%} f. long du-
ration. {%—Cira-divasam,%} ind. for a long time. {%—Cira-%}
{%niviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} abiding long, anything which
has rested for a long time. {%—Cira-pākin, ī, inī, i,%}
ripening late; ({%ī%}), m. the plant Feronia Elephantum;
[cf. {%kapittha.%}] {%—Cira-puṣpa, as, ā, am,%} blossom-
ing late; ({%as%}), m. the plant Mimusops Elengi; [cf.
{%vakula.%}] {%—Cira-pravāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling long
abroad, a long absentee. {%—Cira-mitra, am,%} n. an
old friend; a crony. {%—Cira-mehin, ī,%} m. an ass.
{%—Cira-mocana, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Cira-%}
{%rātra, am,%} n. a period of many nights, a long time,
a long period; {%cira-rātram%} or {%-trāya,%} &c., for a long
time, after a long time, at last, finally, {%= ciram%} above.
{%—Cirarātroṣita (˚ra-uṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} having
lodged for a long time. {%—Cira-roga, as,%} m. a chronic
disease. {%—Cira-labdha, as, ā, am,%} obtained after a
long time (as a son in old age). {%—Cira-loka-loka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} whose world is a long-existing world; an
epithet of the manes. {%—Cira-viproṣita, as, ā, am,%}
long banished. {%—Cira-vilva, as,%} m. the tree Pon-
gamia Glabra; [cf. {%karañja.%}] {%—Cira-vṛtta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} happened long since. {%—Cira-supta-buddhi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} one whose mind has been asleep a long
time, long senseless or careless. {%—Cira-sūtā%} or {%cira-%}
{%sūtikā,%} f. a cow that has borne many calves. {%—Cira-%}
{%sevaka, as,%} m. an old servant. {%—Cira-ṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%cira-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%cira-sthita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} long continuing or enduring, lasting, of long
continuance, left for a long time. {%—Cirasthāyi-tā,%} f.
long continuance, durability. {%—Cirād (˚ra-ad), t, t, t,%}
eating for a long time; ({%t%}), m. an epithet of Garuḍa.
{%—Cirāntaka (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of
Garuḍa. {%—Cirāyuṣa (˚ra-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} bestow-
ing long life. {%—Cirāyus (˚ra-āy˚), us, us, us,%} long-
lived; ({%us%}), m. a deity, a divinity. {%—Cirārodha%}
{%(˚ra-ār˚), as,%} m. a long or protracted siege; blockade.
{%—Cirāśrita (˚ra-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} long maintained
or protected; an old dependant. {%—Cirojjhita (˚ra-%}
{%uj˚), as, ā, am,%} long since abandoned or left. {%—Ci-%}
{%rottha (˚ra-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} existing a long time.
<LEND>

<L>18649<pc>0326-b<k1>ciratna<k2>ciratna
{%Ciratna, as, ī, am,%}¦ old, ancient, of long standing,
long-lasting, long-enduring.
<LEND>

<L>18650<pc>0326-b<k1>cirantana<k2>cirantana
{%Cirantana, as, ī, am,%}¦ old, ancient, antiquated,
of long standing.
<LEND>

<L>18651<pc>0326-b<k1>ciraya<k2>ciraya
{%Ciraya,%}¦ nom. P. A. {%cirayati, -te,%} to act slowly,
delay, to be absent a long while.
<LEND>

<L>18652<pc>0326-b<k1>cirAya<k2>cirAya
{%Cirāya,%}¦ nom. P. A. {%cirāyati, -te,%} to delay, be slow,
be absent for a long time.
<LEND>

<L>18653<pc>0326-b<k1>ciraRwI<k2>ciraRwI
{#ciraRwI#}¦ {%ciraṇṭī%} or {%ciraṇṭhī,%} f. a woman
married or single who continues to reside after ma-
turity in her father's house; a young woman; [cf.
{%caraṭī, caraṇṭī, ciriṇṭī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18654<pc>0326-b<k1>ciratikta<k2>ciratikta
{#ciratikta#}¦ {%ciratikta, as,%} m. a kind of gen-
tian, Gentiana Cherayta, {%= kirāta-tikta,%} (in Bengālī
{%cirātā.%})
<LEND>

<L>18655<pc>0326-b<k1>ciramBaRa<k2>ciramBaRa
{#ciramBaRa#}¦ {%cirambhaṇa, as,%} m. a kind of
falcon or kite; [cf. {%cilla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18656<pc>0326-b<k1>cirAwikA<k2>cirAwikA
{#cirAwikA#}¦ {%cirāṭikā,%} f. (fr. {%cira ?%}), N. of a
plant with white flowers, a kind of hogweed, Bœrhavia
Erecta, {%= caṭikā,%} commonly {%pātāḍī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18657<pc>0326-b<k1>cirAtikta<k2>cirAtikta
{#cirAtikta#}¦ {%cirātikta, as,%} m. a sort of gen-
tian, {%= ciratikta.%}
<LEND>

<L>18658<pc>0326-b<k1>ciri<k2>ciri<h>1
{#ciri#} 1¦. {%ciri, is,%} m. (perhaps fr. the sound
[Page0326-c+ 70]
or imitative cry {%ci%}), a parrot; [cf. {%kīra%} and {%cimi.%}] {%—Ci-%}
{%ri-vilva, as,%} m., N. of a tree, (perhaps {%= cira-vilva.%})
<LEND>

<L>18659<pc>0326-c<k1>ciri<k2>ciri<h>2
{#ciri#} 2¦. {%ciri,%} cl. 5. P. {%ciriṇoti,%} &c., to
hurt, injure, wound or kill; [cf. {%jiri.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18660<pc>0326-c<k1>cirikA<k2>cirikA
{%Cirikā,%}¦ f. a kind of weapon, {%= cilikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>18661<pc>0326-c<k1>ciriRwI<k2>ciriRwI
{#ciriRwI#}¦ {%ciriṇṭī,%} f. {%= ciraṇṭī%} above.
<LEND>

<L>18662<pc>0326-c<k1>ciru<k2>ciru
{#ciru#}¦ {%ciru, us,%} m. the shoulder-joint.
<LEND>

<L>18663<pc>0326-c<k1>cirBawa<k2>cirBawa
{#cirBawa#}¦ {%cirbhaṭa, as%} and {%ī,%} m. and f., Cucu-
mis Utilissimus, {%= karkaṭī;%} also its fruit; [cf.
{%carbhaṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18664<pc>0326-c<k1>cirBiwa<k2>cirBiwa
{%Cirbhiṭa, am, ā%}¦ and {%ikā,%} n. f. a kind of gourd,
different from the preceding; [cf. {%indra-cirbhiṭī,%}
{%kṣudra-cirbhiṭā, kṣetra-c˚, gaja-c˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18665<pc>0326-c<k1>cil<k2>cil
{#cil#}¦ {%cil,%} cl. 6. P. {%cilati,%} &c., to put on
clothes; [cf. Hib. <nsi>ceilim,</nsi> ‘I conceal,
hide, cover;’ <nsi>caille,</nsi> ‘a veil, a cowl;’ Lat. <nsi>celare;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>hilu, helm, heliu, heli;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hulja;</nsi>
Lat. <nsi>oc-culo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18666<pc>0326-c<k1>cilamIlikA<k2>cilamIlikA
{#cilamIlikA#}¦ {%cilamīlikā,%} f. a kind of neck-
lace; a luminous flying insect, a fire-fly; lightning.
<LEND>

<L>18667<pc>0326-c<k1>cilikA<k2>cilikA
{#cilikA#}¦ {%cilikā,%} f. a kind of weapon, {%=%}
{%cirikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>18668<pc>0326-c<k1>cilicima<k2>cilicima
{#cilicima#}¦ {%cilicima, as,%} m. a kind of sprat,
Clupea Cultrata, commonly {%vāliyā-gaḍaka%} ({%vāliyā,%}
Cyprinus Denticulatus, {%gaḍaka,%} a kind of golden trout);
according to some authorities, a kind of prawn. Other
forms of this word are {%cilicimi, cilicīma, cilicīmi,%}
{%cilimīnaka, cilīcima, cilīcimi, cilīma, celicīma.%}
<LEND>

<L>18669<pc>0326-c<k1>ciliminikA<k2>ciliminikA
{#ciliminikA#}¦ {%ciliminikā%} and {%cilimīlikā,%} a
various reading for {%cilamīlikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18670<pc>0326-c<k1>cill<k2>cill
{#cill#}¦ {%cill,%} cl. 1. P. {%cillati,%} &c., to become
loose; to be slack or flaccid; to play,
sport, act wantonly; to indicate one's meaning (?).
<LEND>

<L>18671<pc>0326-c<k1>cilla<k2>cilla
{%Cilla, as, ā, am,%}¦ blear-eyed [cf. {%culla%} and {%pilla%}];
({%as%}), m. a bleared or sore eye; the Bengal kite,
Falco Cheela; ({%ī%}), f., cf. {%cilli;%} [cf. {%kuru-cilla.%}]
{%—Cilla-bhakṣyā,%} f. a kind of vegetable perfume;
see {%haṭṭa-vilāśinī%}. {%—Cillābha (˚la-ābhā), as,%} m.
a petty thief, a shop-lifter, a pickpocket, &c.
<LEND>

<L>18672<pc>0326-c<k1>cillaka<k2>cillaka
{%Cillaka, as%}¦ or {%ā,%} m. or f. a particular animal;
({%ā%}), f. a cricket, {%= cīrikā%} and {%jhillikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>18673<pc>0326-c<k1>cilli<k2>cilli
{%Cilli, is,%}¦ m. a species of bird of prey [cf. {%cilla%}];
({%is%}), f. a kind of plant [cf. {%cillī%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a cricket
[cf. {%cillakā%}]; a kind of pot-herb.
<LEND>

<L>18674<pc>0326-c<k1>cillikA<k2>cillikA
{%Cillikā,%}¦ f. a kind of pot-herb.
<LEND>

<L>18675<pc>0326-c<k1>civi<k2>civi
{#civi#}¦ {%civi, is,%} m. {%= civuka,%} the chin.
<LEND>

<L>18676<pc>0326-c<k1>civiwa<k2>civiwa
{#civiwa#}¦ {%civiṭa, as,%} m. {%= cipiṭa,%} flattened
grain, rice, &c.
<LEND>

<L>18677<pc>0326-c<k1>civillikA<k2>civillikA
{#civillikA#}¦ {%civillikā,%} f., N. of a small shrub,
{%= kṣudra-gholī, madhu-māla-pattrikā, rakta-%}
{%dalā.%}
<LEND>

<L>18678<pc>0326-c<k1>civuka<k2>civuka
{#civuka#}¦ {%civuka%} or {%cibuka, am,%} n. the chin
[cf. {%cubuka%} and {%chubuka%}]; ({%as%}), m., N. of a tree,
{%= mucukunda; (ās),%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>18679<pc>0326-c<k1>ciScA<k2>ciScA
{#ciScA#}¦ {%ciścā,%} ind., Ved. an onomatopoetic
word for a rattling sound.
<LEND>

<L>18680<pc>0326-c<k1>cihaRakanTa<k2>cihaRakanTa
{#cihaRakanTa#}¦ {%cihaṇa-kantha, am,%} n., N. of a
town.
<LEND>

<L>18681<pc>0326-c<k1>cihura<k2>cihura
{#cihura#}¦ {%cihura, ās,%} m. pl. {%= cikura,%} the hair
of the head.
<LEND>

<L>18682<pc>0326-c<k1>cihna<k2>cihna
{#cihna#}¦ {%cihna, am,%} n. a mark, spot, stain,
stamp, sign, badge, symbol, symptom; a banner, a
standard, insignia; a sign of the zodiac; aim, direc-
tion towards; [cf. {%sa-cihna.%}] {%—Cihna-kārin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} making or leaving marks, marking, spotting;
wounding, striking, killing; exciting fear, frightful,
hideous. {%—Cihna-dhara, as,%} m. bearing the signs
or insignia (of office). {%—Cihna-dhāriṇī,%} f. the plant
Echites Frutescens, {%= śyāmā-latā%}. {%—Cihna-bhūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} become a mark, formed into a mark.
<LEND>
[Page0327-a+ 71]

<L>18683<pc>0327-a<k1>cihnaya<k2>cihnaya
{%Cihnaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%cihnayati, -yitum,%} to mark,
sign, stamp, spot.
<LEND>

<L>18684<pc>0327-a<k1>cihnita<k2>cihnita
{%Cihnita, as, ā, am,%}¦ marked, signed, spotted,
stained, stamped, designated; known.
<LEND>

<L>18685<pc>0327-a<k1>cihnIkfta<k2>cihnIkfta
{%Cihnī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ marked, delineated.
<LEND>

<L>18686<pc>0327-a<k1>cIk<k2>cIk
{#cIk#}¦ {%cīk,%} cl. 1. and 10. P. {%cīkati%} and
{%cīkayati,%} to endure, suffer, to be patient;
to be impatient; to touch.
<LEND>

<L>18687<pc>0327-a<k1>cIcIkUcI<k2>cIcIkUcI
{#cIcIkUcI#}¦ {%cīcīkūcī,%} an onomatopoetic
word for the chirping or warbling of birds.
<LEND>

<L>18688<pc>0327-a<k1>cIqA<k2>cIqA
{#cIqA#}¦ {%cīḍā,%} f. a kind of perfume.
<LEND>

<L>18689<pc>0327-a<k1>cIRa<k2>cIRa
{#cIRa#}¦ {%cīṇa, ās,%} m. pl. (for {%cīna%}), N. of a
country.
<LEND>

<L>18690<pc>0327-a<k1>cIRaka<k2>cIRaka
{#cIRaka#}¦ {%cīṇaka, as,%} m. a kind of grain;
[cf. {%cīna%} and {%cīnaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18691<pc>0327-a<k1>cIti<k2>cIti
{#cIti#}¦ {%cīti.%} See under 1. {%ci.%}
<LEND>

<L>18692<pc>0327-a<k1>cItkAra<k2>cItkAra
{#cItkAra#}¦ {%cīt-kāra, as,%} m. crying, a cry, the
braying of an ass, a noise. {%—Cītkāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
accompanied with a noise or cry.
<LEND>

<L>18693<pc>0327-a<k1>cIna<k2>cIna
{#cIna#}¦ {%cīna, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people, the
inhabitants of China, the Chinese; ({%as%}), m. a kind
of deer; Panicum Miliaceum; a sort of cloth; a
thread; ({%am%}), n. a banner (perhaps made of deer
skin), a standard; a kind of bandage for the corners
of the eyes; lead. {%—Cīna-karpūra, as,%} m. a kind
of camphor, also called {%tuṣāra, dvīpa-karpūraja.%}
{%—Cīna-ja, am,%} n. steel. {%—Cīna-nī, īs,%} m. a peach
tree. {%—Cīna-paṭṭa, am,%} n. lead. {%—Cīna-pati, is,%}
m., N. of a kingdom. {%—Cīna-piṣṭa, am,%} n.
minium or red lead; lead. {%—Cīnapiṣṭa-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} consisting of minium or representing it.
{%—Cīna-rāja-putra, as,%} m. a pear tree. {%—Cīna-%}
{%vaṅga, am,%} n. lead or more probably tutenag.
{%—Cīnāṃśuka (˚na-aṃ˚), am,%} n. China cloth, silk,
a silken cloth.
<LEND>

<L>18694<pc>0327-a<k1>cInaka<k2>cInaka
{%Cīnaka, as,%}¦ m. an inhabitant of China, Chinese;
a kind of panic, Panicum Miliaceum; fennel, {%=%}
{%kaṅgunī;%} also {%= cīna-karpūra.%}
<LEND>

<L>18695<pc>0327-a<k1>cInAkarkawI<k2>cInAkarkawI
{#cInAkarkawI#}¦ {%cīnākarkaṭī,%} f. a kind of cu-
cumber said to be found near Citra-kūṭa.
<LEND>

<L>18696<pc>0327-a<k1>cIb<k2>cIb
{#cIb#}¦ {%cīb = cīv,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18697<pc>0327-a<k1>cIB<k2>cIB
{#cIB#}¦ {%cībh%} (a various reading for {%bībh%}),
cl. 1. A. {%cībhate,%} &c., to coax, commend,
flatter; to boast, &c.
<LEND>

<L>18698<pc>0327-a<k1>cIy<k2>cIy
{#cIy#}¦ {%cīy%} (another form for {%cīv%}), cl. 1. P.
A. {%cīyati, -te,%} &c., to take, receive, wear.
<LEND>

<L>18699<pc>0327-a<k1>cIra<k2>cIra<h>1
{#cIra#} 1¦. {%cīra = cira%} in the adv. {%a-cīram,%}
quick, soon, shortly.
<LEND>

<L>18700<pc>0327-a<k1>cIra<k2>cIra<h>2
{#cIra#} 2¦. {%cīra, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%ci%}),
a strip, a long narrow piece of bark or rind; a strip of
cloth, clothes, a rag, tatter, old and torn cloth; the
dress of a Buddhist priest; a kind of garland, a
necklace of pearls consisting of four strings; a stripe,
stroke, line; a manner of writing with strokes or
lines; lead; a crest. {%—Cīra-pattrikā,%} f. a kind of
vegetable, {%= cañcu-śāka%}. {%—Cīra-parṇa, as,%} m. the
tree Shorea Robusta, {%= śāla-vṛkṣa%}. {%—Cīra-bha-%}
{%vantī,%} f. the elder sister of a wife. {%—Cīra-vāsas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} clothed in bark, dressed in rags or
tatters; ({%ās%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; N. of a Yakṣa;
N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>18701<pc>0327-a<k1>cIraka<k2>cIraka
{%Cīraka, as,%}¦ m. a manner of writing. See above.
<LEND>

<L>18702<pc>0327-a<k1>cIrita<k2>cIrita
{%Cīrita, as, ā, am,%}¦  having strips or stripes, ragged,
tattered. {%—Cīrita-cchadā,%} f. a kind of vegetable;
[cf. {%pālaṅkya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18703<pc>0327-a<k1>cirin<k2>cirin
{%Cirin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ clothed in bark, clothed in rags
and tatters.
<LEND>

<L>18704<pc>0327-a<k1>cIralli<k2>cIralli
{#cIralli#}¦ {%cīralli, is,%} m. or f. (?) a kind of
large fish; (also read {%cīrilli%} and {%cīrīlli.%})
<LEND>

<L>18705<pc>0327-a<k1>cIri<k2>cIri
{#cIri#}¦ {%cīri, is,%} f. a veil or shade for cover-
ing the eyes.
<LEND>
[Page0327-b+ 68]

<L>18706<pc>0327-b<k1>cIrI<k2>cIrI
{#cIrI#}¦ {%cīrī%} or {%cīrikā,%} f. a cricket; the hem
of an under garment. {%—Cīrī-vāka, as,%} m. a cricket.
<LEND>

<L>18707<pc>0327-b<k1>cIruka<k2>cIruka
{#cIruka#}¦ {%cīruka, am,%} n. a kind of fruit,
commonly {%cem̐ura; (ā),%} f. a cricket; [cf. {%cīrikā%}
and {%cīrī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18708<pc>0327-b<k1>cIrRa<k2>cIrRa
{#cIrRa#}¦ {%cīrṇa, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%car%}), conversant,
versed, learned; split, divided; ({%am%}), n. conduct.
{%—Cīrṇa-parṇa, as,%} m., N. of two trees, {%= nimba%}
and {%kharjūra.%}
<LEND>

<L>18709<pc>0327-b<k1>cIlikA<k2>cIlikA
{#cIlikA#}¦ {%cīlikā,%} f. a cricket; also {%cīllakā;%}
[cf. {%cīrī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18710<pc>0327-b<k1>cIv<k2>cIv
{#cIv#}¦ {%cīv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%cīvati, -te,%} &c., to
take; to wear, cover; cl. 10. P. {%cīva-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to shine; to speak; [cf. Hib. <nsi>cib,</nsi>
‘the hand;’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>cipiaw,</nsi> ‘to take;’ Gr.
<lang n="greek">σκεῦος.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>18711<pc>0327-b<k1>cIvara<k2>cIvara
{#cIvara#}¦ {%cīvara, am,%} n. (said to be fr. 1. {%ci%}),
the dress of a Buddhist mendicant or of any mendi-
cant. {%—Cīvara-gopaka, as,%} m. a wardrobe-keeper,
(a particular officer.) {%—Cīvara-nivasana, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a people. {%—Cīvara-bhajaka, as,%} m. a dis-
tributer of garments.
<LEND>

<L>18712<pc>0327-b<k1>cIvaraya<k2>cIvaraya
{%Cīvaraya,%}¦ nom. A. {%-yate, -yitum,%} to collect rags,
put on a tattered garment.
<LEND>

<L>18713<pc>0327-b<k1>cIvarin<k2>cIvarin
{%Cīvarin, ī,%}¦ m. a Buddhist or Jaina mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>18714<pc>0327-b<k1>cukopayizu<k2>cukopayizu
{#cukopayizu#}¦ {%cukopayiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid.
of Caus. of rt. {%kup%}), wishing to make a person
angry.
<LEND>

<L>18715<pc>0327-b<k1>cukk<k2>cukk
{#cukk#}¦ {%cukk,%} cl. 10. P. {%cukkayati, -yitum,%}
to inflict or suffer pain.
<LEND>

<L>18716<pc>0327-b<k1>cukkasa<k2>cukkasa
{#cukkasa#}¦ {%cukkasa, as,%} m. {%= bukkasa,%} a Cāṇḍāla.
<LEND>

<L>18717<pc>0327-b<k1>cukkAra<k2>cukkAra
{#cukkAra#}¦ {%cuk-kāra, as,%} m. the roaring of a
lion; (a various reading has {%bukkāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>18718<pc>0327-b<k1>cukra<k2>cukra
{#cukra#}¦ {%cukra, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%cak%}), vinegar made by the acetous fermentation
of grain; acid seasoning; sourness; Indian sorrel,
Rumex Vesicarius; ({%ī%}), f. {%= cāṅgerī,%} Oxalis Pusilla;
({%ā%}), f. the tamarind tree. {%—Cukra-phala, am,%} n.
the tamarind fruit. {%—Cukra-vāstūka, am,%} n. wood-
sorrel. {%—Cukra-vedhaka, am,%} n. a kind of sour
rice-gruel. {%—Cukrāmla (˚ra-am˚), am,%} n. vinegar
made by the acetous fermentation of grain; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of wood-sorrel, {%= amlaloṇikā;%} a tamarind
tree; a kind of sour rice-gruel.
<LEND>

<L>18719<pc>0327-b<k1>cukraka<k2>cukraka
{%Cukraka, am,%}¦ n. a kind of wood-sorrel, Rumex
Vesicarius, commonly {%cukāpālaṅga; (ikā),%} f. wood-
sorrel, {%= kucāṅgerī;%} a kind of sour rice-gruel; [cf.
{%amla-cukrikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18720<pc>0327-b<k1>cukriman<k2>cukriman
{%Cukriman, ā,%}¦ m. sourness.
<LEND>

<L>18721<pc>0327-b<k1>cukzA<k2>cukzA
{#cukzA#}¦ {%cukṣā,%} f. washing; [cf. {%cokṣa%} and
{%caukṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18722<pc>0327-b<k1>cukzoBayizu<k2>cukzoBayizu
{#cukzoBayizu#}¦ {%cukṣobhayiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr.
Desid. of Caus. of rt. {%kṣubh%}), intending or wishing
to cause to shake.
<LEND>

<L>18723<pc>0327-b<k1>cuci<k2>cuci
{#cuci#}¦ {%cuci, is,%} m. the female breast, bosom.
<LEND>

<L>18724<pc>0327-b<k1>cucu<k2>cucu
{#cucu#}¦ {%cucu, us,%} m. a kind of vegetable.
<LEND>

<L>18725<pc>0327-b<k1>cuccU<k2>cuccU
{%Cuccū, ūs,%}¦ m. f. a kind of vegetable, = the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>18726<pc>0327-b<k1>cucuka<k2>cucuka
{#cucuka#}¦ {%cucuka, as, am,%} m. n. the nipple
of the breast, see {%cūcuka; (ās),%} m. pl., N. of a
people in Dakṣiṇā-patha; [cf. {%cucupa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18727<pc>0327-b<k1>cucUka<k2>cucUka
{%Cucūka, am,%}¦ n. a nipple; [cf. {%cūcuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18728<pc>0327-b<k1>cucupa<k2>cucupa
{#cucupa#}¦ {%cucupa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
[cf. {%cucuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18729<pc>0327-b<k1>cucy<k2>cucy
{#cucy#}¦ {%cucy,%} cl. 1. P. {%cucyati,%} &c., another
form for {%śucy,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18730<pc>0327-b<k1>cuYcu<k2>cuYcu
{#cuYcu#}¦ {%cuñcu, us, us, u%} (considered as an
affix at the end of certain comp.), known, cele-
brated, renowned [cf. {%akṣara-cuñcu, cāra-c˚, %}
[Page0327-c+ 71]
{%cañcu, caṇa%}]; ({%us%}), m. the musk-rat or shrew; a
mixed caste, born of a Brāhman father by a Vaideha
female, whose business is hunting; N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18731<pc>0327-c<k1>cuYcumAyana<k2>cuYcumAyana
{#cuYcumAyana#}¦ {%cuñcumāyana, am,%} n. irritation
or itching (of a wound).
<LEND>

<L>18732<pc>0327-c<k1>cuYcurI<k2>cuYcurI
{#cuYcurI#}¦ {%cuñcurī,%} f. a game, a kind of hazard
played with tamarind seeds instead of dice; also
{%cuñculi%} and {%cuñculī.%}
<LEND>

<L>18733<pc>0327-c<k1>cuYcula<k2>cuYcula
{#cuYcula#}¦ {%cuñcula, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>18734<pc>0327-c<k1>cuw<k2>cuw
{#cuw#}¦ {%cuṭ,%} cl. 6. 10. P. {%cuṭati, coṭayati,%} &c.,
to cut off, pierce, divide; cl. 1. and 10.
P. {%coṭati%} and {%coṭayati,%} to wane, become small or
low or shallow; [cf. {%cuṭṭ, cuṇṭ, chuṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18735<pc>0327-c<k1>cuww<k2>cuww
{#cuww#}¦ {%cuṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%cuṭṭayati,%} &c., to be-
come small or low or shallow as a river &c.;
[cf. {%puṭṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18736<pc>0327-c<k1>cuq<k2>cuq
{#cuq#}¦ {%cuḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%cuḍati,%} &c., to conceal;
[cf. {%buḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18737<pc>0327-c<k1>cuqq<k2>cuqq
{#cuqq#}¦ {%cuḍḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%cuḍḍati,%} &c., to dally,
wanton, coquet, &c.; to hint one's mean-
ing; to act (?); [cf. {%cull.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18738<pc>0327-c<k1>cuR<k2>cuR
{#cuR#}¦ {%cuṇ,%} cl. 6. P. {%cuṇati,%} &c., to cut off,
pierce, divide; [cf. Hib. <nsi>guinim,</nsi> ‘I
wound, prick, sting;’ <nsi>guinneach,</nsi> ‘sharp-pointed;’
<nsi>gun-ta,</nsi> ‘wounded.’]
<LEND>

<L>18739<pc>0327-c<k1>cuRw<k2>cuRw
{#cuRw#}¦ {%cuṇṭ%} [cf. rt. {%cuṭ%} and {%cuṭṭ%}], cl. 1. 10.
P. {%cuṇṭati, cuṇṭayati,%} &c., to cut off,
pierce, divide; cl. 1. P. {%cuṇṭati,%} to become small.
<LEND>

<L>18740<pc>0327-c<k1>cuRwA<k2>cuRwA
{%Cuṇṭā%}¦ and {%ī,%} f. a small well or reservoir near a
well; [cf. {%cauṇṭya, cūḍaka, cūtaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18741<pc>0327-c<k1>cuRW<k2>cuRW
{#cuRW#}¦ {%cuṇṭh,%} cl. 10. P. {%cuṇṭhayati,%} &c.,
to hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>18742<pc>0327-c<k1>cuRq<k2>cuRq
{#cuRq#}¦ {%cuṇḍ%} [cf. rt. {%cuṭ%} and {%cuṭṭ%}], cl. 1. P.
{%cuṇḍati,%} &c., to become small; cl. 10. P.
{%cuṇḍayati,%} to cut off.
<LEND>

<L>18743<pc>0327-c<k1>cuRQI<k2>cuRQI
{%Cuṇḍhī,%}¦ f. a small well. See {%cuṇṭā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>18744<pc>0327-c<k1>cut<k2>cut<h>1
{#cut#} 1¦. {%cut,%} a various reading for {%cyut;%}
[cf. {%ścut.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18745<pc>0327-c<k1>cut<k2>cut<h>2
{#cut#} 2¦. {%cut,%} ind. an interjection.
<LEND>

<L>18746<pc>0327-c<k1>cuta<k2>cuta
{#cuta#}¦ {%cuta, as,%} m. and {%cuti, is,%} f. the anus;
[cf. {%cūta%} and {%cyuti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18747<pc>0327-c<k1>cud<k2>cud
{#cud#}¦ {%cud,%} cl. 1. P. A., Ved. {%codati, -te,%}
{%acodīt,%} &c., to impel, incite, animate; to
offer quickly (as the Soma); to hasten: Caus. P.
(rarely A.) {%codayati, -te, -yitum,%} to urge on, drive,
impel, incite, send, cause to move quickly, hasten,
accelerate; to inspire, excite, animate; to direct (the
eye) towards; to enjoin; to request, petition, ask,
question, inquire after; to press or importune with
a request; to help on, assist in the attainment
of (with dat., e. g. {%asmāñ śriye codaya,%} help us on
to fortune); to bring or offer quickly; to fix, settle,
direct; to be quick; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σκεύδω, σπουδάζω:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>cudo; re-pudio.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18748<pc>0327-c<k1>coda<k2>coda
{%Coda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an implement for driving
horses, a goad or whip; ({%as, ā, am%}), animating,
inspiring, promoting. {%—Coda-pravṛddha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. exalted by the inspiring (draught of Soma),
an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>18749<pc>0327-c<k1>codaka<k2>codaka
{%Codaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ driving; ({%as%}), m. direction,
invitation; (in grammar) {%= pari-graha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18750<pc>0327-c<k1>codana<k2>codana
{%Codana, as, ā, am,%}¦ driving, impelling; ({%am%}), n.
the act of driving, inviting, invitation, order, rule,
precept; ({%ā%}), f. sending, commanding, directing; cast-
ing, throwing; enjoining, ordaining; a precept, sacred
ordinance or commandment; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant,
(a various reading for {%rodanī%}); [cf. {%eka-codana.%}]
{%—Codanā-guḍa, as,%} m. a ball for playing with.
<LEND>

<L>18751<pc>0327-c<k1>codayat<k2>codayat
{%Codayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ impelling, animating, in-
spiring. {%—Codayan-mati (˚yat-ma˚), is, is, i,%} Ved.
[Page0328-a+ 72]
inspiring, promoting piety or devotion; (Sāy.) whose
mind is inspiring.
<LEND>

<L>18752<pc>0328-a<k1>codayitf<k2>codayitf
{%Codayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ driving, impelling, ani-
mating, promoting.
<LEND>

<L>18753<pc>0328-a<k1>codas<k2>codas
{%Codas, as,%}¦ n. {%= codana.%} See {%a-codas.%}
<LEND>

<L>18754<pc>0328-a<k1>codita<k2>codita
{%Codita, as, ā, am,%}¦ impelled, urged; ordered,
directed; thrown, cast; appointed; informed, ap-
prised.
<LEND>

<L>18755<pc>0328-a<k1>coditf<k2>coditf
{%Coditṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ driving, impelling, animating,
promoting.
<LEND>

<L>18756<pc>0328-a<k1>codizWa<k2>codizWa
{%Codiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of preceding), Ved.
impelling or animating much.
<LEND>

<L>18757<pc>0328-a<k1>codya<k2>codya
{%Codya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be driven or impelled; to be
sent, thrown or directed; to be mentioned or com-
municated; ({%am%}), n. raising a question, objecting,
asking a question; surprise, astonishment, wonder.
<LEND>

<L>18758<pc>0328-a<k1>codyamAna<k2>codyamAna
{%Codyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being urged or driven.
<LEND>

<L>18759<pc>0328-a<k1>cunanda<k2>cunanda
{#cunanda#}¦ {%cunanda, as,%} m., N. of a Bhikṣu.
<LEND>

<L>18760<pc>0328-a<k1>cund<k2>cund
{#cund#}¦ {%cund.%} Cf. {%bund.%}
<LEND>

<L>18761<pc>0328-a<k1>cunda<k2>cunda
{#cunda#}¦ {%cunda, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of Śākya-
muni; ({%ī%}), f. a procuress, a bawd.
<LEND>

<L>18762<pc>0328-a<k1>cup<k2>cup<h>1
{#cup#} 1¦. {%cup,%} cl. 1. P. {%copati, cucopa, copi-%}
{%ṣyati, copitum,%} to move, stir; to move
slowly, creep or steal along; [cf. Lith. <nsi>kopu;</nsi> Germ.
<nsi>hüpfen;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>hop.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18763<pc>0328-a<k1>copaka<k2>copaka
{%Copaka.%}¦ Cf. {%gale-copaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>18764<pc>0328-a<k1>copana<k2>copana
{%Copana, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving, stirring, moving
slowly; ({%am%}), n. moving, moving slowly.
<LEND>

<L>18765<pc>0328-a<k1>cup<k2>cup<h>2
{#cup#} 2¦. {%cup%} (a various reading for {%chup%}),
cl. 6. P. {%cupati,%} to touch.
<LEND>

<L>18766<pc>0328-a<k1>cupa<k2>cupa
{#cupa#}¦ {%cupa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18767<pc>0328-a<k1>cupuRIkA<k2>cupuRIkA
{#cupuRIkA#}¦ {%cupuṇīkā,%} f., Ved., N. of an
{%iṣṭakā%} or sacrificial brick.
<LEND>

<L>18768<pc>0328-a<k1>cubuka<k2>cubuka
{#cubuka#}¦ {%cubuka, am,%} n. the chin; [cf. {%cibuka%}
and {%chubuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18769<pc>0328-a<k1>cubra<k2>cubra
{#cubra#}¦ {%cubra, am,%} n. (fr. 1. {%cumb ?%}), the face,
the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>18770<pc>0328-a<k1>cumuri<k2>cumuri
{#cumuri#}¦ {%cumuri, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a hostile
demon whom Indra, to favour Dabhīti, sent to sleep.
<LEND>

<L>18771<pc>0328-a<k1>cumb<k2>cumb<h>1
{#cumb#} 1¦. {%cumb,%} cl. 1. P. {%cumbati, cucumba,%}
{%cumbiṣyati, cumbitum,%} to kiss, touch
with the mouth; touch softly or lightly, graze: Caus.
P. {%cumbayati, -yitum,%} to cause to kiss; [cf. Goth.
<nsi>kukja;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>pogaim;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>bucioju;</nsi> Lett. <nsi>sz-</nsi>
<nsi>kûpstit.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18772<pc>0328-a<k1>cumba<k2>cumba
{%Cumba, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. kissing, a kiss.
<LEND>

<L>18773<pc>0328-a<k1>cumbaka<k2>cumbaka
{%Cumbaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ a kisser, one who kisses
much; a lecher; knavish, roguish, a rogue, a cheat;
one who has read much, a superficial scholar who
knows parts in a variety of books; ({%as%}), m. a load-
stone; the upper part or middle of a balance.
<LEND>

<L>18774<pc>0328-a<k1>cumbat<k2>cumbat
{%Cumbat, an, antī, at,%}¦ kissing.
<LEND>

<L>18775<pc>0328-a<k1>cumbana<k2>cumbana
{%Cumbana, am,%}¦ n. kissing, a kiss. {%—Cumbana-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. giving a kiss, kissing.
<LEND>

<L>18776<pc>0328-a<k1>cumbita<k2>cumbita
{%Cumbita, as, ā, am,%}¦ kissed, touched softly or
lightly. {%—Cumbita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has
kissed; kissing.
<LEND>

<L>18777<pc>0328-a<k1>cumbin<k2>cumbin
{%Cumbin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ kissing; touching closely or
softly, grazing.
<LEND>

<L>18778<pc>0328-a<k1>cumb<k2>cumb<h>2
{#cumb#} 2¦. {%cumb,%} cl. 10. P. {%cumbayati,%} &c.,
to hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>18779<pc>0328-a<k1>cur<k2>cur
{#cur#}¦ {%cur,%} cl. 10. and (according to some)
1. P. {%corayati, acūcurat%} &c., {%corati%} &c.,
to steal, rob; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">φωράω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>furari;</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>coire,</nsi> ‘trespass, offence,’ &c.]
<LEND>

<L>18780<pc>0328-a<k1>curaRa<k2>curaRa
{%Curaṇa, am,%}¦ n. stealing, thieving, robbing.
<LEND>

<L>18781<pc>0328-a<k1>curaRya<k2>curaRya
{%Curaṇya,%}¦ nom. P. {%curaṇyati,%} to thieve, steal, rob.
<LEND>

<L>18782<pc>0328-a<k1>curA<k2>curA
{%Curā,%}¦ f. stealing, theft; [cf. {%caura.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18783<pc>0328-a<k1>cora<k2>cora
{%Cora, as,%}¦ m. a thief, a robber; N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%kṛṣṇa-śaṭī;%} a kind of perfume, {%= coraka;%} N. of a
poet; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= cora-puṣpī; (ī),%} f. a
female thief; [cf. {%caura;%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">φώρ.</lang>] {%—Cora- %}
[Page0328-b+ 76]
{%kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. a kind of grass, the seeds of which
stick in the clothes, commonly Chorkānta. {%—Cora-%}
{%puṣpikā%} or {%cora-puṣpī,%} f. the plant Chrysopogon
Aciculatus. {%—Cora-snāyu, us,%} m. a plant, {%= kāka-%}
{%nāsā.%}
<LEND>

<L>18784<pc>0328-b<k1>coraka<k2>coraka
{%Coraka, as,%}¦ m. a thief; a kind of plant [cf. {%pṛkkā%}
and {%taskara%}]; a kind of perfume.
<LEND>

<L>18785<pc>0328-b<k1>corikA<k2>corikA
{%Corikā,%}¦ f. {%= caurikā,%} theft, robbery.
<LEND>

<L>18786<pc>0328-b<k1>corita<k2>corita
{%Corita, am,%}¦ n. stealing, theft.
<LEND>

<L>18787<pc>0328-b<k1>coritaka<k2>coritaka
{%Coritaka, am,%}¦ n. thieving, petty theft or larceny;
anything stolen.
<LEND>

<L>18788<pc>0328-b<k1>cOra<k2>cOra
{%Caura, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a thief, a robber, a pilferer; a
dishonest or unfair dealer, a usurper, any one who
usurps a position or a title dishonestly; one who
steals or captivates the heart; (at the end of a comp.)
anything bad of its kind; N. of a plant, {%= cora-%}
{%puṣpikā,%} used for the preparation of a perfume; a
kind of perfume. {%—Caura-karman, a,%} n. theft,
thievery. {%—Caura-gata, as, ā, am,%} stolen, robbed.
{%—Caura-tas,%} ind. from robbers, from theft. {%—Cau-%}
{%ra-dhvaja-baddhaka, as,%} m. a term applied to a
notorious thief. {%—Caura-pañcāśikā,%} f. ‘the fifty
stanzas of Caura,’ title of an erotic poem by a poet
named Sundara. {%—Caura-puṣpauṣadhi (˚pa-%}
{%oṣ˚), is,%} f. {%= cora-puṣpikā%}. {%—Caura-rūpa, as,%} m.
a clever thief. {%—Caura-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having the cha-
racter of a thief. {%—Caurasya-kula, am,%} n. a gang of
thieves. {%—Caura-hṛta, as, ā, am,%} taken by robbery,
stolen. {%—Caurāṃśā (˚ra-aṃ˚),%} f., N. of a metre
consisting of four lines of six syllables each. {%—Caurā-%}
{%pahṛta (˚ra-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} carried off, stolen.
<LEND>

<L>18789<pc>0328-b<k1>cOrAdika<k2>cOrAdika
{%Caurādika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%cur-ādi%}), belonging to
the class of roots beginning with {%cur,%} i. e. the tenth
class.
<LEND>

<L>18790<pc>0328-b<k1>cOrikA<k2>cOrikA
{%Caurikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%cora%} or {%caura%}), thievery, theft,
robbing.
<LEND>

<L>18791<pc>0328-b<k1>cOrikAka<k2>cOrikAka
{%Caurikāka, as,%}¦ m. ‘a thief of a crow;’ (perhaps a
wrong form for {%caura-kāka ?%} or {%cauri%} may be {%=%}
{%caurī = caurya ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>18792<pc>0328-b<k1>cOrI<k2>cOrI
{%Caurī,%}¦ f. stealing, theft, {%= caurya.%}
<LEND>

<L>18793<pc>0328-b<k1>cOrIBUta<k2>cOrIBUta
{%Caurī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has become a
thief or the prey of thieves.
<LEND>

<L>18794<pc>0328-b<k1>cOrya<k2>cOrya
{%Caurya, am,%}¦ n. theft, robbery, thievery; trickery.
{%—Caurya-rata, am,%} n. secret sexual enjoyment.
{%—Caurya-vṛtti, is,%} f. the practice of theft or rob-
bery. {%—Cauryārjita (˚ya-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} acquired
by plunder or robbery.
<LEND>

<L>18795<pc>0328-b<k1>cOryaka<k2>cOryaka
{%Cauryaka, am,%}¦ n. theft, stealing.
<LEND>

<L>18796<pc>0328-b<k1>curI<k2>curI
{#curI#}¦ {%curī,%} f. a small well.
<LEND>

<L>18797<pc>0328-b<k1>cul<k2>cul
{#cul#}¦ {%cul,%} cl. 10. P. {%colayati, -yitum,%} to
raise, elevate; to rise, increase; to dip,
dive into; [cf. {%bul.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18798<pc>0328-b<k1>culakA<k2>culakA
{#culakA#}¦ {%culakā,%} f., N. of a river; (also read
{%culukā.%})
<LEND>

<L>18799<pc>0328-b<k1>culuka<k2>culuka
{#culuka#}¦ {%culuka, as,%} m. deep mud or mire;
a mouthful of water, the hand hollowed to hold
water; a small vessel or pot, a gallipot &c.; N. of a
man; ({%ā%}), f. {%= culakā; (am),%} n. water in which
pulse has been steeped; [cf. {%caluka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18800<pc>0328-b<k1>culukin<k2>culukin
{%Culukin, ī,%}¦ m. a porpoise, sea-hog, or similar
animal; [cf. {%ulupin, cullakī, culumpin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18801<pc>0328-b<k1>culump<k2>culump
{#culump#}¦ {%culump,%} cl. 1. P. {%culumpati,%} &c.,
to swing, rock; to cut (?), to dis-
appear, to be lost (?).
<LEND>

<L>18802<pc>0328-b<k1>culumpa<k2>culumpa
{%Culumpa, as,%}¦ m. fondling or nursing children;
({%ā%}), f. a she-goat.
<LEND>

<L>18803<pc>0328-b<k1>culumpin<k2>culumpin
{%Culumpin%}¦ or {%culūpin, ī,%} m. {%= culukin,%} a Gangetic
porpoise, sea-hog, or similar animal.
<LEND>

<L>18804<pc>0328-b<k1>cull<k2>cull
{#cull#}¦ {%cull,%} cl. 1. P. {%cullati,%} &c., to play,
sport, dally, wanton, coquet; to con-
jecture; manifest one's meaning (?).
<LEND>

<L>18805<pc>0328-b<k1>culla<k2>culla
{#culla#}¦ {%culla, as, ā, am,%} blear-eyed; ({%as%}), m.
a blear eye; [cf. {%cilla%} and {%pilla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18806<pc>0328-b<k1>cullaka<k2>cullaka
{#cullaka#}¦ {%cullaka, as,%} m. (for {%culuka%}), the
palm of the hand hollowed as if to hold water.
<LEND>

<L>18807<pc>0328-b<k1>cullakI<k2>cullakI
{%Cullakī,%}¦ f. a kind of water-pot; a porpoise, sea-
[Page0328-c+ 76]
hog [cf. {%culukin%}]; N. of a family; a sort of tribe
or caste (?); the opposite bank of a river (?).
<LEND>

<L>18808<pc>0328-c<k1>culli<k2>culli
{#culli#}¦ {%culli, is,%} f. a fire-place, chimney.
<LEND>

<L>18809<pc>0328-c<k1>cullI<k2>cullI
{%Cullī,%}¦ f. a fire-place, chimney; a funeral pile; a
large apartment or hall composed of three wings or
divisions, one looking north, another east, and the
third west.
<LEND>

<L>18810<pc>0328-c<k1>cuScyUzA<k2>cuScyUzA
{#cuScyUzA#}¦ {%cuścyūṣā,%} f. (fr. {%cūṣ%}), sucking,
sucking out.
<LEND>

<L>18811<pc>0328-c<k1>custa<k2>custa
{#custa#}¦ {%custa, as, am,%} m. n. the burnt ex-
terior of roast meat; fried meat; chaff; rind.
<LEND>

<L>18812<pc>0328-c<k1>cUcuka<k2>cUcuka
{#cUcuka#}¦ {%cūcuka, am,%} n. (perhaps a redupli-
cated form of rt. {%cūṣ%} or fr. {%cūcu,%} imitative noise
in sucking &c.), the nipple of the breast; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), stammering, a stammerer; [cf. {%cucuka;%} cf.
also Hib. <nsi>cioch,</nsi> ‘the breast,’ and Gr. <lang n="greek">θηλή, τίτθη,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τιτθός;</lang> Germ. <nsi>zitze</nsi> in relation to rt. {%dhe,%} ‘to drink,’
and Lat. <nsi>papilla</nsi> in relation to rt. {%pā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18813<pc>0328-c<k1>cUqa<k2>cUqa
{#cUqa#}¦ {%cūḍa, as,%} m. a sort of knob or pro-
tuberance on a sacrificial brick (Ved.); the ceremony
of tonsure as performed on a child; N. of a man with
the patronymic Bhāgavitti; ({%ā%}), f. the hair on the
top of the head, a single lock or tuft of hair left on
the crown of the head after the ceremony of tonsure,
a top-knot; the ceremony of tonsure (see {%cūḍā-%}
{%karaṇa%}); the crest of a cock or peacock; any crest,
plume, diadem, &c.; the head; top, summit; an
upper room, a room on the top of a house &c.; a
kind of bracelet; a small well; a kind of metre; N.
of a woman; [cf. {%cūla, coḍa, caula, uc-cūḍa,%}
{%tāmra-cūḍa, pañca-cūḍā;%} cf. also {%kūṭa%} and Hib.
<nsi>cuit,</nsi> ‘the head.’] {%—Cūḍā-karaṇa, am,%} n. ‘forming
the crest,’ i. e. shaving the head all but one lock,
considered as a religious and purificatory rite; it
should be performed in the first or third year; [cf.
{%caula.%}] {%—Cūḍā-karṇa, as,%} m., N. of a mendicant.
{%—Cūḍā-karman, a,%} n. the ceremony of forming
the crest, the rite of tonsure; [cf. {%cūḍā-karaṇa.%}]
{%—Cūḍā-pakṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man (?). {%—Cūḍā-%}
{%pratigraha, as,%} m., N. of a Caitya. {%—Cūḍā-maṇi,%}
{%is,%} m. a jewel worn by men and women on the top
of the head; a jewel worn in a crest or diadem;
(often at the end of a comp.) the best or most ex-
cellent of a class, ‘the gem’ (e. g. {%ācārya-cakra-%}
{%cūḍāmaṇi,%} ‘the best of the whole circle of Ācāryas,’
an epithet of Vopa-deva; {%paṇḍita-cūḍāmaṇi,%} a
chief among scholars); the seed of the Abrus Preca-
torius [cf. {%guñjā%}]; title of an astronomical work;
title of a work on music. {%—Cūḍāmaṇi-dhara, as,%}
m., N. of a serpent-demon. {%—Cūḍā-ratna, am,%} n.
a jewel worn by men and women on the top of the
head; [cf. {%cūḍā-maṇi.%}] {%—Cūḍā-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n.
tonsure. {%—Cūḍā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a single
lock of hair or tuft on the top of the head, crested,
tufted. {%—Cūḍā-vana, am,%} n., N. of a mountain.
{%—Cūḍāvalambin (˚ḍā-av˚), ī, inī, i,%} hanging
down or reclining on the crest or summit.
<LEND>

<L>18814<pc>0328-c<k1>cUqaka<k2>cUqaka
{%Cūḍaka%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. {%= cūḍā,%} ton-
sure; ({%as%}), m. a well; [cf. {%cūḍā, cuṇṭā, cūtaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18815<pc>0328-c<k1>cUqAra<k2>cUqAra
{%Cūḍāra, as, ā, am, = cūḍāla%}¦ (?), having one lock
of hair on the top of the head.
<LEND>

<L>18816<pc>0328-c<k1>cUqAraka<k2>cUqAraka
{%Cūḍāraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his
descendants.
<LEND>

<L>18817<pc>0328-c<k1>cUqAla<k2>cUqAla
{%Cūḍāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a top-knot or single
lock of hair on the crown of the head, crested; ({%ā%}),
f. a kind of Cyperus, Kyllinga Monocephala, {%= uc-%}
{%caṭā, = nāgara-mustā%} and {%śveta-guñjā; (am),%} n.
the head.
<LEND>

<L>18818<pc>0328-c<k1>cUqika<k2>cUqika
{%Cūḍika, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a lock or tuft of hair
on the top of the head; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a metre; [cf.
{%cūlikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18819<pc>0328-c<k1>cUqin<k2>cUqin
{%Cūḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a top-knot or tuft of hair
on the crown of the head, crested, tufted. {%—Cūḍi-%}
{%kalā,%} f., N. of a metre.
<LEND>

<L>18820<pc>0328-c<k1>cUqAmla<k2>cUqAmla
{#cUqAmla#}¦ {%cūḍāmla, am,%} n. vinegar prepared
from fruits; [cf. {%cukrāmla.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0329-a+ 75]

<L>18821<pc>0329-a<k1>cUR<k2>cUR
{#cUR#}¦ {%cūṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%cūṇayati, -yitum,%} to
contract; to close or shrink.
<LEND>

<L>18822<pc>0329-a<k1>cUta<k2>cUta
{#cUta#}¦ {%cūta, as,%} m. the mango tree, Mangifera
Indica; the anus; [cf. {%cuta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18823<pc>0329-a<k1>cUtaka<k2>cUtaka
{%Cūtaka, as,%}¦ m. the mango tree; a small or shallow
well; [cf. {%cūḍaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18824<pc>0329-a<k1>cUti<k2>cUti
{%Cūti, is,%}¦ f. the anus.
<LEND>

<L>18825<pc>0329-a<k1>cUr<k2>cUr
{#cUr#}¦ {%cūr,%} cl. 4. A. {%cūryate, cucūre, cūritum,%}
to burn.
<LEND>

<L>18826<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrI<k2>cUrI
{#cUrI#}¦ {%cūrī,%} f. (a various reading for {%curī%}), a
small well.
<LEND>

<L>18827<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrikA<k2>cUrikA
{%Cūrikā,%}¦ f. {%= cūrī,%} above.
<LEND>

<L>18828<pc>0329-a<k1>cUru<k2>cUru
{#cUru#}¦ {%cūru, us,%} m. a kind of worm.
<LEND>

<L>18829<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrR<k2>cUrR
{#cUrR#}¦ {%cūrṇ%} (perhaps more properly re-
garded as a nom. fr. {%cūrṇa%} below), cl. 10.
P. {%cūrṇayati, -yitum,%} to reduce to powder or flour,
to crumble, pulverize, grind, pound, knead, crush,
bruise, split, crumple; [cf. Hib. <nsi>coirneach,</nsi> ‘a part;’
<nsi>crinim,</nsi> ‘I gnaw, bite.’]
<LEND>

<L>18830<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrRa<k2>cUrRa
{%Cūrṇa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (said to be connected in the
first instance with rt. {%carv%}), powder, any minute
particle of substance; flour; aromatic powder, pulvil,
pounded sandal; pounded camphor; ({%as%}), m. chalk,
lime. {%—Cūrṇa-kāra, as,%} m. a lime-burner, maker of
lime, considered as a man of mixed caste. {%—Cūrṇa-%}
{%kuntala, as,%} m. a lock of hair, a curl, curly hair.
{%—Cūrṇa-khaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. a pebble, gravel,
hardened fragments of earth or brick; limestone
nodule, commonly known in India by the name of
Concar or {%karkara%}. {%—Cūrṇa-tā,%} f. or {%cūrṇa-tva, am,%}
n. pulverulence, comminution, the state of dust or
powder. {%—Cūrṇa-pada, am,%} n. a peculiar exercise or
movement, walking backwards and forwards at various
paces. {%—Cūrṇa-pārada, as,%} m. vermilion. {%—Cūrṇa-%}
{%muṣṭi, is,%} f. a handful of powder or perfume.
{%—Cūrṇa-yoga, ās,%} m. pl. a fragrant compound, per-
fumed powder: [cf. {%vāsa-yoga.%}] {%—Cūrṇa-śas,%} ind.
in powder, (ground) to powder (e. g. {%cūrṇaśaḥ kṛ,%}
to reduce to powder). {%—Cūrṇa-śākāṅka (˚ka-aṅ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of vegetable; [cf. {%gaura-suvarṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18831<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrRaka<k2>cUrRaka
{%Cūrṇaka, as,%}¦ m. grain fried and pounded; a kind
of grain belonging to the class called Ṣaṣṭika;
({%am%}), n. a fragrant powder; a kind of easy prose not
abounding in compound words; expounding in prose
the purport of a foregoing verse, giving the order or
interpretation of the words; [cf. {%cūrṇikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18832<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrRana<k2>cUrRana
{%Cūrṇana, am,%}¦ n. rubbing, pounding, pulverizing.
<LEND>

<L>18833<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrRi<k2>cUrRi
{%Cūrṇi, is,%}¦ f. (said by some to come fr. rt. {%car%}), a
sum of 100 kapardas or cowries, i. e. the small shell
Cypræa Moneta, used as a coin; ({%is%} or {%ī%}), f., N. of
Patañjali's great commentary or Mahā-bhāṣya, on the
Sūtras of Pāṇini, perhaps so named because Patañjali
notices every minute point of difficulty in Pāṇini's
grammar [cf. {%eka-cūrṇi%}]; a selection or picking out
of an unanswerable argument; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a river
near the Grāma Rāṇāghaṭṭa. {%—Cūrṇi-kṛt, t,%} m. an
epithet of Patañjali, the author of the Mahā-bhāṣya;
an annotator, commentator in general.
<LEND>

<L>18834<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrRikA<k2>cUrRikA
{%Cūrṇikā,%}¦ f. fried and pounded rice, or grain of any
kind; a kind of cake; a sort of metre; a kind of
easy prose; [cf. {%cūrṇaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18835<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrRita<k2>cUrRita
{%Cūrṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ground, pulverized, pounded,
reduced to dust or powder; bruised, smashed.
<LEND>

<L>18836<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrRin<k2>cUrRin
{%Cūrṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ made or mixed up with anything
powdered or pounded, covered with it.
<LEND>

<L>18837<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrRIkf<k2>cUrRIkf
{%Cūrṇī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to reduce to dust or powder, pulverize, pound, grind,
beat to pieces, bruise, smash. {%—Cūrṇī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} pulverized, ground.
<LEND>

<L>18838<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrRIBU<k2>cUrRIBU
{%Cūrṇī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to be-
come dust or powder, fly off into minute particles.
{%—Cūrṇī-bhavat, an, antī, at,%} becoming dust or
pulverized, crumbling.
<LEND>

<L>18839<pc>0329-a<k1>cUrti<k2>cUrti
{#cUrti#}¦ {%cūrti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%car%}), going.
<LEND>

<L>18840<pc>0329-a<k1>cUla<k2>cUla
{#cUla#}¦ {%cūla, as,%} m. ({%= cūḍa,%} q. v.), N. of a
[Page0329-b+ 71]
man; ({%ā%}), f. an upper room, a room on the top of a
house; a crest, see {%cūḍā;%} the top part or crest of a
comet; [cf. {%uc-cūla;%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">σκόλλυς.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>18841<pc>0329-b<k1>cUlika<k2>cUlika
{%Cūlika, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. the
crest or comb of a cock; the root of an elephant's
ear; N. of a metre; a particular part or division of
a drama, the body of a drama, the inferior personages
of the drama collectively; title of a Jaina work form-
ing one of the five parts of the Dṛṣṭi-vāda; ({%am%}),
n. cakes of flour fried with ghee. {%—Cūlikā-paiśācī,%}
f., N. of a particular dialect in the drama. {%—Cūliko-%}
{%paniṣad (˚kā-up˚), t,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>18842<pc>0329-b<k1>cUlin<k2>cUlin
{%Cūlin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a crest (as a bird) or an
ornament on the head; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>18843<pc>0329-b<k1>cUz<k2>cUz
{#cUz#}¦ {%cūṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%cūṣati, cucūṣa, cū-%}
{%ṣiṣyati, cūṣitum,%} to suck, suck out:
Pass. {%cūṣyate,%} to be sucked up or dried up (by in-
ternal inflammations &c.): Caus. {%cūṣayati, -yitum,%}
to suck up; [cf. Lat. <nsi>sugere, succus;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>saugen;</nsi>
Iceland. <nsi>siuga.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18844<pc>0329-b<k1>cUzaRIya<k2>cUzaRIya
{%Cūṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ capable of being sucked.
<LEND>

<L>18845<pc>0329-b<k1>cUzA<k2>cUzA
{%Cūṣā,%}¦ f. a leathern girth; a girdle; sucking (?);
[cf. {%būṣā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18846<pc>0329-b<k1>cUzita<k2>cUzita
{%Cūṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sucked, sucked up.
<LEND>

<L>18847<pc>0329-b<k1>cUzya<k2>cUzya
{%Cūṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sucked, suckable; ({%am%}),
n. anything that can be sucked.
<LEND>

<L>18848<pc>0329-b<k1>coza<k2>coza
{%Coṣa, as,%}¦ m. sucking, suction; burning (of the
skin), heat, inflammation, dryness; drying up.
<LEND>

<L>18849<pc>0329-b<k1>cozaRa<k2>cozaRa
{%Coṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. sucking, suction.
<LEND>

<L>18850<pc>0329-b<k1>cozya<k2>cozya
{%Coṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sucked out; [cf. {%cūṣya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18851<pc>0329-b<k1>cft<k2>cft
{#cft#}¦ {%cṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%cṛtati, cacarta, cartiṣ-%}
{%yati%} or {%cartsyati, cartitum,%} to tie, con-
nect together; to hurt, wound, kill; cl. 1. 10. P.
{%cartati, cartayati,%} &c., to light, kindle; (a various
reading for {%chṛd.%})
<LEND>

<L>18852<pc>0329-b<k1>cfp<k2>cfp
{#cfp#}¦ {%cṛp,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%carpati, carpayati,%}
&c., to light, kindle; (a various reading for
{%chṛd.%})
<LEND>

<L>18853<pc>0329-b<k1>ceka<k2>ceka
{#ceka#}¦ {%ceka, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), N. of
a country.
<LEND>

<L>18854<pc>0329-b<k1>cekita<k2>cekita
{#cekita#}¦ {%cekita,%} &c. See under 4. {%cit.%}
<LEND>

<L>18855<pc>0329-b<k1>cekriya<k2>cekriya
{#cekriya#}¦ {%cekriya, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens. of rt.
1. {%kṛ%}), doing much or often, active, industrious.
<LEND>

<L>18856<pc>0329-b<k1>ceccet<k2>ceccet
{#ceccet#}¦ {%ceccet (cet-cet),%} ind. an interjection;
hush! be quiet!
<LEND>

<L>18857<pc>0329-b<k1>cewa<k2>cewa
{#cewa#}¦ {%ceṭa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ciṭ%}), a servant, a
slave, ({%garbha-ceṭa,%} a slave by birth); ({%ī%}), f. a
female servant or slave.
<LEND>

<L>18858<pc>0329-b<k1>cewaka<k2>cewaka
{%Ceṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a servant, a slave, a minister who
fulfils an appointed duty; a paramour; ({%ikā%}), f. a
female slave or servant, a servant girl, a little maid-
servant.
<LEND>

<L>18859<pc>0329-b<k1>ceqa<k2>ceqa
{%Ceḍa, as,%}¦ m. (for {%ceṭa%} above), a servant; ({%ī%}), f. a
female servant or slave.
<LEND>

<L>18860<pc>0329-b<k1>ceqaka<k2>ceqaka
{%Ceḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a servant; ({%ikā%}), f. a female servant.
<LEND>

<L>18861<pc>0329-b<k1>cet<k2>cet
{#cet#}¦ {%cet.%} See {%ced%} below.
<LEND>

<L>18862<pc>0329-b<k1>cetaka<k2>cetaka
{#cetaka#}¦ {%cetaka.%} See p. 325, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18863<pc>0329-b<k1>cetavya<k2>cetavya
{#cetavya#}¦ {%cetavya.%} See p. 322, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18864<pc>0329-b<k1>cetas<k2>cetas
{#cetas#}¦ {%cetas,%} &c. See p. 325, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18865<pc>0329-b<k1>cetasaka<k2>cetasaka
{#cetasaka#}¦ {%cetasaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>18866<pc>0329-b<k1>cetizWa<k2>cetizWa
{#cetizWa#}¦ {%cetiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (superl. of
{%citra,%} q. v.), very brilliant &c., especially an epithet
of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>18867<pc>0329-b<k1>cetf<k2>cetf
{#cetf#}¦ {%cetṛ, cetyā.%} See 2. and 3. {%ci,%} p. 322.
<LEND>

<L>18868<pc>0329-b<k1>ced<k2>ced
{#ced#}¦ {%ced%} (originally 2. {%ca + id%}), a compound
particle, never found at the beginning of a sentence
or verse. In the Veda it is sometimes used as a
conjunction, like the simple {%ca,%} in the sense of ‘and,’
‘also,’ ‘even.’ But in Vedic as well as classical
Sanskrit the most usual sense of {%ced%} is ‘if,’ ‘although,’
‘provided that,’ ‘when,’ and in these senses it may
[Page0329-c+ 74]
be joined with the present indicative (e. g. {%mahyaṃ%}
{%ced dadāti tat,%} if he gives that to me); or with
the future (e. g. {%tṛṣṇāṃ cet tyakṣyati,%} if he
shall abandon avarice); or with the conditional (e. g.
{%vṛṣṭiś ced abhaviṣyat,%} if there should have been
rain); or with the potential (e. g. {%gacchec cet,%} if
he should go); or with the perfect (e. g. {%sa cen ma-%}
{%māra,%} when he died); or with a participle (e. g.
{%kartavyaṃ cet priyam mahyam,%} if a kindness is
to be done to me). It should be observed that in
the Veda the verb which depends on {%ced%} retains
its accent.
<div n="P"/>The negative particle {%na%} may be prefixed to {%ced%}
either immediately or separated from it (e. g. {%na%}
{%ced vacaḥ kariṣyati%} or {%na kariṣyati ced vacaḥ,%}
if he should not make a speech); and frequently the
negative {%no%} is used in connection with {%ced,%} the
verb being understood (e. g. {%dūram apasara no%}
{%ced dhantavyo'si mayā,%} depart to a distance, if not,
i. e. if thou departest not, thou art to be killed by me).
Sometimes {%no ced = api na,%} would that not! (e. g.
{%no ced evaṃ kuryāt,%} would that he did not so!).
Rarely {%yadi%} and {%ced%} are joined together, when {%ced%}
may be translated by ‘that is,’ ‘that is to say,’ ‘namely’
(e. g. {%yadi ced rājyam avāpsyati,%} if, that is, he
shall obtain the kingdom). In the argumentative
writings of native commentators {%ced%} preceded by {%iti%}
and followed by {%na%} is often placed at the end of an
objector's statement (e. g. ‘{%Ṛg-vedam adhyemi%}’
{%ityādi vākyam pramāṇam iti cen na,%} if it be urged
that the text ‘I peruse the Ṛg-veda’ is a proof, no,
it is not so). {%Atha ced,%} but if; [cf. {%ned.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18869<pc>0329-c<k1>cedAra<k2>cedAra
{#cedAra#}¦ {%cedāra, as,%} m. (a wrong reading for
{%vedāra%}), a lizard, a chameleon.
<LEND>

<L>18870<pc>0329-c<k1>cedi<k2>cedi
{#cedi#}¦ {%cedi, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a people who
lived in Bandela-khaṇḍa (Bundelkhand) and were re-
nowned in epic poetry for their attachment to ancient
laws and institutions; their capital was Śuktimatī, and
some of their kings were Vasu Upari-cara, Su-bāhu,
Dhṛṣṭa-ketu, Dama-ghoṣa, Śiśu-pāla, &c.; their
ancestor who was a son of Kaiśika or Uśika is also
called Cedi; their country is supposed by some to
be the same as the modern Chandail. {%—Cedi-pa,%}
{%as,%} m. a prince of the Cedis. {%—Cedi-pati, is,%} m. a
N. of Vasu Upari-cara; a N. of Śiśu-pāla. {%—Cedi-%}
{%bhūbhṛt, t,%} or {%cedi-rāja, as,%} m. a N. of Śiśu-pāla,
a king of the Cedayas slain by Kṛṣṇa; see {%śiśu-%}
{%pāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>18871<pc>0329-c<k1>cedika<k2>cedika
{#cedika#}¦ {%cedika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
living in the south-east of Madhya-deśa.
<LEND>

<L>18872<pc>0329-c<k1>ceya<k2>ceya
{#ceya#}¦ {%ceya.%} See 1. {%ci,%} p. 322, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18873<pc>0329-c<k1>cera<k2>cera
{#cera#}¦ {%cera,%} N. of a kingdom in the south
of India.
<LEND>

<L>18874<pc>0329-c<k1>ceru<k2>ceru
{#ceru#}¦ {%ceru, us, us, u%} (rt. {%car%}), Ved. perform-
ing a holy work.
<LEND>

<L>18875<pc>0329-c<k1>cel<k2>cel
{#cel#}¦ {%cel,%} cl. 1. P. {%celati,%} to shake or
tremble; to go or move; [cf. {%cal, cell,%}
{%kel, khel, vel.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18876<pc>0329-c<k1>cela<k2>cela
{#cela#}¦ {%cela, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%cil;%} according to
the scholiasts also {%celī,%} f.), cloth, clothes, a garment,
raiment; (at the end of a comp. {%cela, as, ī, am,%}
expresses) vile, wicked, bad (e. g. {%bhāryā-cela, am,%}
n. the garment or the mere outward appearance of
a wife, a bad wife); [cf. {%caila;%} cf. also <nsi>caille,</nsi> ‘a veil
or cowl.’] {%—Cela-gaṅgā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Cela-%}
{%prakṣālaka, as,%} m. a washerman. {%—Celāśaka%}
{%(˚la-āś˚), as,%} m. a moth.
<LEND>

<L>18877<pc>0329-c<k1>celikA<k2>celikA
{%Celikā,%}¦ f. a particular part of a woman's dress, a
corset, a bodice, stays.
<LEND>

<L>18878<pc>0329-c<k1>celaka<k2>celaka
{#celaka#}¦ {%celaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18879<pc>0329-c<k1>celAna<k2>celAna
{#celAna#}¦ {%celāna, as,%} m. a kind of cucumber,
commonly {%celanā;%} [cf. the following.]
<LEND>

<L>18880<pc>0329-c<k1>celAla<k2>celAla
{#celAla#}¦ {%celāla, as,%} m. a kind of cucumber,
Cucumis Sativus.
<LEND>
[Page0330-a+ 73]

<L>18881<pc>0330-a<k1>celicIma<k2>celicIma
{#celicIma#}¦ {%celicīma%} or {%celīma = cilicima,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18882<pc>0330-a<k1>celuka<k2>celuka
{#celuka#}¦ {%celuka, as,%} m. a Buddhist novice.
<LEND>

<L>18883<pc>0330-a<k1>cell<k2>cell
{#cell#}¦ {%cell,%} cl. 1. P. {%cellati,%} a various
reading for {%cel,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18884<pc>0330-a<k1>cevI<k2>cevI
{#cevI#}¦ {%cevī,%} f. one of the Rāgiṇīs or female
personifications of music.
<LEND>

<L>18885<pc>0330-a<k1>cezw<k2>cezw
{#cezw#}¦ {%ceṣṭ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%ceṣṭati, -te, ci-%}
{%ceṣṭe, ceṣṭiṣyate, ceṣṭitum,%} to move
the limbs, to move, stir, make effort, exert one's self,
struggle, strive, endeavour, be active, be busy or occu-
pied; to act, do, perform, prepare; to frequent: Caus.
P. A. {%ceṣṭayati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to move, set
in motion, move, impel, drive; [cf. Lat. <nsi>quœro;</nsi>
Cambro-Brit. <nsi>cais.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18886<pc>0330-a<k1>cezwa<k2>cezwa
{%Ceṣṭa, am,%}¦ n. moving the limbs, gesture; acting;
({%ā%}), f. moving any member of the body; gesture,
action, activity; effort, endeavour, exertion, bodily
effort; doing, performing, behaving, manner of exist-
ence; [cf. {%karma-ceṣṭā, aceṣṭa-tā, niś-ceṣṭa.%}]
{%—Ceṣṭā-nāśa, as,%} m. the ceasing of every motion
or action, destruction of the world. {%—Ceṣṭā-nirū-%}
{%paṇa, am,%} n. observing a person's actions. {%—Ceṣ-%}
{%ṭārha (˚ṭā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy of effort. {%—Ceṣṭā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having motion, full of activity, active.
<LEND>

<L>18887<pc>0330-a<k1>cezwaka<k2>cezwaka
{%Ceṣṭaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ making effort or exertion;
({%as%}), m. a kind of coitus.
<LEND>

<L>18888<pc>0330-a<k1>cezwana<k2>cezwana
{%Ceṣṭana, as, ā, am,%}¦ making effort, who or what
acts or attempts any act; ({%am%}), n. motion; per-
forming, doing; effort, exertion.
<LEND>

<L>18889<pc>0330-a<k1>cezwamAna<k2>cezwamAna
{%Ceṣṭamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving, stirring, struggling.
<LEND>

<L>18890<pc>0330-a<k1>cezwayitf<k2>cezwayitf
{%Ceṣṭayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ moving, impelling, causing
to act.
<LEND>

<L>18891<pc>0330-a<k1>cezwita<k2>cezwita
{%Ceṣṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ done with effort, exerted, done,
set in motion, &c.; ({%am%}), n. motion, gesture, act,
function; doing, action, behaviour, manner of life.
<LEND>

<L>18892<pc>0330-a<k1>cezwitavya<k2>cezwitavya
{%Ceṣṭitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be acted; to be managed.
<LEND>

<L>18893<pc>0330-a<k1>cEkita<k2>cEkita
{#cEkita#}¦ {%caikita, as, ī, am,%} an adjective de-
rived fr. {%caikitya.%}
<LEND>

<L>18894<pc>0330-a<k1>cEkitAna<k2>cEkitAna
{%Caikitāna, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Cikitāna.
<LEND>

<L>18895<pc>0330-a<k1>cEkitAna<k2>cEkitAna
{%Caikitāna, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from the preced-
ing, or from Cekitāna.
<LEND>

<L>18896<pc>0330-a<k1>cEkitAyana<k2>cEkitAyana
{%Caikitāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Dālbhya (fr.
{%cikitāyana%} or {%cekita%}).
<LEND>

<L>18897<pc>0330-a<k1>cEkitya<k2>cEkitya
{%Caikitya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Cekita.
<LEND>

<L>18898<pc>0330-a<k1>cEkIrzata<k2>cEkIrzata
{#cEkIrzata#}¦ {%caikīrṣata, as, ī, am, = cikīrṣat,%}
wishing to do &c.
<LEND>

<L>18899<pc>0330-a<k1>cEwayata<k2>cEwayata
{#cEwayata#}¦ {%caiṭayata, as,%} m., N. of a man and
his descendants. {%—Caiṭayata-vidha, am,%} n. the
district inhabited by the Caiṭayatas.
<LEND>

<L>18900<pc>0330-a<k1>cEwayatAyani<k2>cEwayatAyani
{%Caiṭayatāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Caiṭa-
yata.
<LEND>

<L>18901<pc>0330-a<k1>cEtanya<k2>cEtanya
{#cEtanya#}¦ {%caitanya, am,%} n. (fr. {%cetana%}), intel-
ligence, mental perception, feeling, consciousness,
sense, sensation, soul, spirit, the deity considered as
the essence of all being and source of all sensation;
({%as%}), m., N. of a modern reformer of the Vaiṣṇava
faith, who is regarded in Bengal as an Ava-tāra of
Kṛṣṇa; he was born about 1484 A. D., and his
life is described by Kṛṣṇa-dāsa in a work named
Caitanya-caraṇāmṛta or Caitanya-caritāmṛta. {%—Cai-%}
{%tanya-candrodaya (˚ra-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘the moon-
rise of Caitanya,’ title of a play. {%—Caitanya-yukta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} endowed with consciousness, sentient.
{%—Caitanyāmṛta (˚ya-am˚), am,%} n. title of a
grammar.
<LEND>

<L>18902<pc>0330-a<k1>cEtasika<k2>cEtasika
{#cEtasika#}¦ {%caitasika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%cetas%}), re-
lating to the mind or heart.
<LEND>

<L>18903<pc>0330-a<k1>cEtika<k2>cEtika
{#cEtika#}¦ {%caitika, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. 2. {%caitya?%}),
N. of a Buddhist school.
<LEND>

<L>18904<pc>0330-a<k1>cEtta<k2>cEtta
{#cEtta#}¦ {%caitta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%citta%}), mental,
belonging to thought or intelligence.
<LEND>

<L>18905<pc>0330-a<k1>cEttika<k2>cEttika
{%Caittika, as, ī, am,%}¦ mental, intellectual, belonging
to thought.
<LEND>
[Page0330-b+ 77]

<L>18906<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtya<k2>cEtya<h>1
{#cEtya#} 1¦. {%caitya, as,%} m. (fr. 5. {%cit%} or 2. {%citi%}),
the individual soul.
<LEND>

<L>18907<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtya<k2>cEtya<h>2
{#cEtya#} 2¦. {%caitya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%citā%}), relating
to a funeral pile or grave; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a
monument, a tombstone, a column &c. erected in
memory of some deceased person or on the site of a
funeral pile; a pile of stones forming a landmark
or boundary; a sacred tree, a religious fig-tree &c.
growing in or near a village and held in veneration
by the villagers; a place of sacrifice or religious
worship, an altar, a shed kept for sacrifices &c.; a
sacred building peculiar to the Jainas, a Jaina temple;
a Jaina or Buddhist image; ({%as%}), m., N. of a moun-
tain. {%—Caitya-taru, us,%} m. a fig-tree standing on a
sacred spot. {%—Caitya-dru, us,%} m., N. of the Ficus
Religiosa [cf. {%aśvattha%}]; a large tree in a village.
{%—Caitya-druma, as,%} m. {%= caitya-taru%}. {%—Caitya-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m. the guardian of a sanctuary. {%—Caitya-%}
{%mukha, as,%} m. an hermit's water-pot. {%—Caitya-%}
{%yajña, as,%} m. a sacrificial ceremony performed at
monuments. {%—Caitya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing
a sanctuary. {%—Caitya-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a fig-tree
standing on a sacred spot; the tree Ficus Religiosa.
{%—Caitya-śaila, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a Buddhist school;
[cf. {%caitika.%}] {%—Caitya-sthāna, am,%} n. a place made
sacred by a monument or a temple.
<LEND>

<L>18908<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtyaka<k2>cEtyaka
{%Caityaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of the five moun-
tains surrounding the town Giri-vraja.
<LEND>

<L>18909<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtra<k2>cEtra
{#cEtra#}¦ {%caitra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%citra%} and {%citrā%}),
made of the tree called Citra or Citrā; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a spring month or the month in which the
full moon stands in the constellation Citrā (March-
April); N. of the sixth year in the cycle of Jupiter;
a Buddhist or Jaina religious mendicant; a common
N. for a man, used like Deva-datta as a general desig-
nation for any person; a metronymic (from Citrā) for
the son of Budha and grandfather of Su-ratha; one of
the seven ranges of mountains dividing the continent
into divisions or Varṣas; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%paurṇamāsī,%}
the day of full moon in the month Caitra and the
sacrifice offered on that day; ({%am%}), n. a monument
erected to the dead, a column or block of wood, a
tree &c. so considered; [cf. 2. {%caitya.%}] {%—Caitra-%}
{%vatī,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Caitra-sakha, as,%} m. the
friend of the month Caitra, i. e. the god of love.
{%—Caitrāvalī (˚ra-āv˚),%} f. the day of full moon in
the month Caitra.
<LEND>

<L>18910<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtraka<k2>cEtraka
{%Caitraka, as,%}¦ m. the month Caitra; (a patronymic
fr. {%citrā.%})
<LEND>

<L>18911<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtrakUwI<k2>cEtrakUwI
{%Caitrakūṭī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%citra-kūṭa%}), title of a com-
mentary on a grammatical work.
<LEND>

<L>18912<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtraraTa<k2>cEtraraTa
{%Caitraratha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%citra-ratha%}), treating
of the Gandharva Citra-ratha; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic
from Citra-ratha; N. of a Dvyaha ceremony; a
facetious expression for the pubes of a woman,
‘Citra-ratha's wood;’ ({%ī%}), f. a patronymic of a
daughter of Śaśa-vindu; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%vana,%} the
grove of the deity Kuvera cultivated by the Gan-
dharva Citra-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>18913<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtraraTi<k2>cEtraraTi
{%Caitrarathi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Śaśa-vindu.
<LEND>

<L>18914<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtraraTya<k2>cEtraraTya
{%Caitrarathya, am,%}¦ n. the grove of the deity
Kuvera cultivated by the Gandharva Citra-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>18915<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtravAhanI<k2>cEtravAhanI
{%Caitravāhanī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%citra-vāhana%}), a patronymic
of Citrāṅgadā.
<LEND>

<L>18916<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtrAyaRa<k2>cEtrAyaRa
{%Caitrāyaṇa,%}¦ a patronymic from Citra; N. of a
place.
<LEND>

<L>18917<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtri<k2>cEtri
{%Caitri, is,%}¦ m. the month Caitra; (a various reading
for {%caitrin.%})
<LEND>

<L>18918<pc>0330-b<k1>cEtrika<k2>cEtrika
{%Caitrika, as,%}¦ m. and {%caitrin, ī,%} m. the month
Caitra.
<LEND>

<L>18919<pc>0330-b<k1>cEdika<k2>cEdika
{#cEdika#}¦ {%caidika, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%cedi%}), an
adjective derived fr. {%cedi.%}
<LEND>

<L>18920<pc>0330-b<k1>cEdya<k2>cEdya
{%Caidya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the Cedis, a
prince of the Cedis; ({%as%}), m. a N. of Śiśu-pāla, son
of Dama-ghoṣa and sovereign of Cedi or Chandail,
and adversary of Kṛṣṇa; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the Cedi
people.
<LEND>
[Page0330-c+ 67]

<L>18921<pc>0330-c<k1>cEntita<k2>cEntita
{#cEntita#}¦ {%caintita, as,%} m. a metronymic from
Cintitā.
<LEND>

<L>18922<pc>0330-c<k1>cEla<k2>cEla
{#cEla#}¦ {%caila, am,%} n. {%= cela,%} a piece of cloth,
clothes, a garment; ({%as%}), m. a moth; ({%as, ī, am%}),
cloth, made of cloth; bred in clothes (as insects,
lice, &c.). {%—Caila-dhāva, as,%} m. a washerman,
{%—Cailāśaka (˚la-āś˚), as,%} m. a kind of goblin
feeding on moths and lice.
<LEND>

<L>18923<pc>0330-c<k1>cElaka<k2>cElaka
{%Cailaka, as,%}¦ m. a Buddhist mendicant having only
a piece of cloth round the middle of the body.
<LEND>

<L>18924<pc>0330-c<k1>cElika<k2>cElika
{%Cailika, as,%}¦ m. a piece of cloth.
<LEND>

<L>18925<pc>0330-c<k1>cElaki<k2>cElaki
{#cElaki#}¦ {%cailaki, is,%} m. (fr. {%celaka%}), a patro-
nymic of Jīvala.
<LEND>

<L>18926<pc>0330-c<k1>cokuwi<k2>cokuwi
{#cokuwi#}¦ {%cokuṭi, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18927<pc>0330-c<k1>cokza<k2>cokza
{#cokza#}¦ {%cokṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%cukṣā ?%}), pure,
clean; honest; clever, dexterous; pleasing, delight-
ful, beautiful; sung (?); sharp, pungent, keen; [cf.
{%caukṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18928<pc>0330-c<k1>coca<k2>coca
{#coca#}¦ {%coca, am,%} n. the bark of Cinnamon
Albiflorum or of another kind of cinnamon; bark,
rind in general; skin, hide; the uneatable part of a
fruit; the fruit of the fan-palm; the cocoa-nut; a
banana or plantain.
<LEND>

<L>18929<pc>0330-c<k1>cocaka<k2>cocaka
{%Cocaka, am,%}¦ n. the bark of Cinnamon Albiflorum
or of another kind of cinnamon; bark, rind in
general.
<LEND>

<L>18930<pc>0330-c<k1>cowI<k2>cowI
{#cowI#}¦ {%coṭī,%} f. a petticoat; [cf. {%śāṭī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18931<pc>0330-c<k1>coqa<k2>coqa
{#coqa#}¦ {%coḍa, as,%} m. {%= cūḍa,%} a sort of knob or
protuberance on a brick or tile; a bodice or jacket;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people [cf. {%cola%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a plant.
<LEND>

<L>18932<pc>0330-c<k1>coda<k2>coda
{#coda#}¦ {%coda, codya.%} See {%cud,%} p. 327, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>18933<pc>0330-c<k1>copaka<k2>copaka
{#copaka#}¦ {%copaka.%} See 1. {%cup,%} p. 328, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>18934<pc>0330-c<k1>cora<k2>cora
{#cora#}¦ {%cora,%} &c. See rt. {%cur,%} p. 328, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>18935<pc>0330-c<k1>cola<k2>cola
{#cola#}¦ {%cola, as, ī,%} m. f. a short jacket, a
bodice; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people in southern
India on the Coromandel coast, in the province now
called Tāñjora; ({%as%}), m. a prince of the Colas; the
ancestor of this people is also called Cola and was
a son of Ā-krīḍa; ({%am%}), n. clothes, a garment.
{%—Coloṇḍuka (˚la-uṇ˚), as,%} m. a diadem, a fillet
for the head, a turban or tiara.
<LEND>

<L>18936<pc>0330-c<k1>colaka<k2>colaka
{%Colaka, as,%}¦ m. a breastplate, a cuirass; N. of a
people, = the preceding; ({%am%}), n. bark, rind.
<LEND>

<L>18937<pc>0330-c<k1>colakin<k2>colakin
{%Colakin, ī,%}¦ m. a cuirassier, a soldier armed with a
breastplate; the shoot of a bamboo; the orange
tree; the wrist.
<LEND>

<L>18938<pc>0330-c<k1>coza<k2>coza
{#coza#}¦ {%coṣa,%} &c. See {%cūṣ,%} p. 329, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18939<pc>0330-c<k1>coska<k2>coska
{#coska#}¦ {%coska, as,%} m. a horse peculiar to the
Indus district; a horse of a particular and good breed.
<LEND>

<L>18940<pc>0330-c<k1>cOkrya<k2>cOkrya
{#cOkrya#}¦ {%caukrya, am,%} n. (fr. {%cukra%}), sourness,
acidity.
<LEND>

<L>18941<pc>0330-c<k1>cOkza<k2>cOkza
{#cOkza#}¦ {%caukṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%cukṣā;%} cf. {%co-%}
{%kṣa%}), pure, clean; honest (?); agreeable, pleasant.
<LEND>

<L>18942<pc>0330-c<k1>cOqa<k2>cOqa
{#cOqa#}¦ {%cauḍa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%cūḍā%}), crested,
relating to a crest; relating to tonsure; ({%am%}), n.
the ceremony of tonsure; [cf. {%caula.%}] {%—Cauḍa-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. the rite of tonsure.
<LEND>

<L>18943<pc>0330-c<k1>cORa<k2>cORa
{#cORa#}¦ {%cauṇa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people in
the west of Madhya-deśa.
<LEND>

<L>18944<pc>0330-c<k1>cORwya<k2>cORwya
{#cORwya#}¦ {%cauṇṭya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%cuṇṭī%}), coming
from a pond or well.
<LEND>

<L>18945<pc>0330-c<k1>cORqapAcArya<k2>cORqapAcArya
{#cORqapAcArya#}¦ {%cauṇḍapācārya (˚pa-āc˚), as,%}
m., N. of a son of Ārya who was the author of a
commentary called Prayoga-ratna-mālā.
<LEND>

<L>18946<pc>0330-c<k1>cOdAyani<k2>cOdAyani
{#cOdAyani#}¦ {%caudāyani, is,%} m. a patronymic
from Coda (?).
<LEND>
[Page0331-a+ 75]

<L>18947<pc>0331-a<k1>cOpayata<k2>cOpayata
{#cOpayata#}¦ {%caupayata, as, tyā,%} m. f. a patro-
nymic from Copayat fr. rt. {%cup%} (?). {%—Caupayata-%}
{%vidha, am,%} n. the district inhabited by the Caupa-
yatas.
<LEND>

<L>18948<pc>0331-a<k1>cOpayatAyani<k2>cOpayatAyani
{%Caupayatāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Cau-
payata.
<LEND>

<L>18949<pc>0331-a<k1>cOpAyana<k2>cOpAyana
{#cOpAyana#}¦ {%caupāyana, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Cupa.
<LEND>

<L>18950<pc>0331-a<k1>cOra<k2>cOra
{#cOra#}¦ {%caura.%} See p. 328, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>18951<pc>0331-a<k1>cOrola<k2>cOrola
{#cOrola#}¦ {%caurola, as%} or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?),
N. of a metre.
<LEND>

<L>18952<pc>0331-a<k1>cOla<k2>cOla
{#cOla#}¦ {%caula, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%cūlā = cūḍā%}), re-
lating to a crest or top-knot &c.; ({%am%}), n. ton-
sure; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σκόλλυς.</lang>] {%—Caula-karman, a,%} n.
the ceremony of tonsure, cutting off all the hair from
the head of a child three years old except one lock
on the crown; [cf. {%cūḍā,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>18953<pc>0331-a<k1>cOlukya<k2>cOlukya
{#cOlukya#}¦ {%caulukya, as,%} m. (fr. {%culuka%}), a
patronymic of Kumāra-pāla.
<LEND>

<L>18954<pc>0331-a<k1>cOluka<k2>cOluka
{%Cauluka, as, ī, am,%}¦ an adjective derived from the last.
<LEND>

<L>18955<pc>0331-a<k1>cOhitTa<k2>cOhitTa
{#cOhitTa#}¦ {%cauhittha, as,%} m., N. of a Paṇḍit.
<LEND>

<L>18956<pc>0331-a<k1>cyavana<k2>cyavana
{#cyavana#}¦ {%cyavana.%} See below under 1. {%cyu.%}
<LEND>

<L>18957<pc>0331-a<k1>cyu<k2>cyu<h>1
{#cyu#} 1¦. {%cyu,%} cl. 1. A. (ep. also P.) {%cyavate,%}
{%-ti, cucyuve, cyoṣyate, acyoṣṭa, cyotum,%}
to move to and fro, shake about, move, stir, move
from one's place, go away, retire from (with abl.);
to fly from (the hand or the bow-string, as a spear or
arrow); to fall off from, deviate from, abandon (duty
&c.); to be deprived of, lose (with abl., e. g. {%rājyāc%}
{%cyavate,%} he loses the kingdom); to fall away, fade
away, disappear, vanish, perish, wane, fail; to come
forth from, come out of, flow out, drop from, trickle,
stream forth from (in this sense cf. 2. {%cyut%}); to fall
down, fall, slip, slide; to sink down, sink (literally
and metaphorically); to decrease; to cause to move
or shake about; to bring about, create, make; to
cause to go away, to make forget: Caus. P. {%cyāva-%}
{%yati,%} (in the Pada-pāṭha {%cyavayati%}), {%-yitum,%} to
cause to move, excite, agitate; A. to move one's self,
be shaken or moved; P. to loosen, to remove from
a place, drive away, expel from, remove; to deprive
a person of anything (with two acc., e. g. {%devī na%}
{%cyāvayed rājānam prāṇān,%} let not the goddess
deprive the king of life); to cause to fall: Desid. of
Caus. {%cicyāvayiṣati%} and {%cucyāvayiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>18958<pc>0331-a<k1>cyava<k2>cyava
{%Cyava.%}¦ Cf. {%bhuvana-cyava.%}
<LEND>

<L>18959<pc>0331-a<k1>cyavana<k2>cyavana
{%Cyavana, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to move, moving,
shaking; ({%as%}), m., N. of a disease or of the demon
causing it; N. of a Ṛṣi who was a son of Bhṛgu
and author of several hymns [cf. {%cyavāna,%} which is
the original form]; N. of an astronomer; also of
one of the seven sages under Manu Svārociṣa; of a
son of Mitrāyu; of Suhotra; of a physician; ({%am%}),
n. moving, motion; departure from, deprivation,
being deprived of; sinking, falling, perishing, dying;
trickling, flowing; [cf. {%duś-cyavana.%}] {%—Cyavana-%}
{%naghuṣa-saṃvāda, as,%} m. an episode of the
thirteenth book of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Cyavana-%}
{%prāśa, as,%} m., N. of an electuary {%(ava-leha)%}. {%—Cya-%}
{%vana-samāgama, as,%} m. a chapter of the Padma-
Purāṇa. {%—Cyavanopākhyāna (˚na-up˚), am,%} n. the
story of Cyavana, a chapter of the Padma-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>18960<pc>0331-a<k1>cyavas<k2>cyavas
{%Cyavas%}¦ in {%tṛṣu-cyavas,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18961<pc>0331-a<k1>cyavAna<k2>cyavAna
{%Cyavāna, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Ṛṣi restored to youth
by the Aśvins; [cf. {%cyavana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18962<pc>0331-a<k1>cyAva<k2>cyAva
{%Cyāva%}¦ in {%duś-cyāva,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>18963<pc>0331-a<k1>cyAvana<k2>cyAvana
{%Cyāvana, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to move or fall;
({%am%}), n. expulsion, driving away; N. of a Sāman;
({%as%}), m. a patronymic from Cyavana.
<LEND>

<L>18964<pc>0331-a<k1>cyAvayitf<k2>cyAvayitf
{%Cyāvayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who causes to move
or fall.
<LEND>

<L>18965<pc>0331-a<k1>cyAvita<k2>cyAvita
{%Cyāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to fall, expelled.
<LEND>

<L>18966<pc>0331-a<k1>cyut<k2>cyut<h>1
1. {%cyut, t, t, t,%}¦ (at the end of compounds) shaking,
causing to fall, removing, destroying; dropping, dis-
tilling; [cf. {%acyuta-cyut, ṛṇa-c˚, dhanva-c˚,%} &c.]
<LEND>
[Page0331-b+ 70]

<L>18967<pc>0331-b<k1>cyuta<k2>cyuta
{%Cyuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved, shaken; deviated from,
erred, strayed; deprived; removed, expelled, ba-
nished; fallen from, fallen off, broken, disordered;
lost; fallen (e. g. {%nabhaś-cyuta,%} fallen from the
sky), dropped, oozed out; (in Rāmāyaṇa II. 91, 64,
{%madhu-cyuta%} is probably a wrong form for {%madhu-%}
{%cyut.%}) {%—Cyuta-kūṭa, as,%} m., N. of a country.
{%—Cyuta-pathaka, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of Śākya-
muni. {%—Cyutācāra (˚ta-āc˚), as, ā, am,%} deviating
from duty. {%—Cyutādhikāra (˚ta-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
dismissed from an office &c., deprived of a right.
{%—Cyutotsāha (˚ta-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has
spent his energies, exhausted, incapable of effort.
<LEND>

<L>18968<pc>0331-b<k1>cyuti<k2>cyuti
{%Cyuti, is,%}¦ f. quick motion; falling, a fall; falling
from, deviating from (rectitude &c.); vanishing,
perishing, dying; coming or streaming forth from;
falling, gliding, dropping, dripping, oozing; the
vulva; the anus; [cf. {%cuta, cuti, cūta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18969<pc>0331-b<k1>cyOtna<k2>cyOtna
{%Cyautna, as, ī, am,%}¦ animating, inspiring, pro-
moting; a mover, goer; oviparous; abandoned,
wicked, void of virtue or purity; ({%am%}), n. shaking,
concussion; enterprise, exertion, contrivance, manage-
ment, strength.
<LEND>

<L>18970<pc>0331-b<k1>cyu<k2>cyu<h>2
{#cyu#} 2¦. {%cyu%} [cf. {%cyus%}], cl. 10. P. {%cyāvayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to laugh; to suffer, bear (?); [cf.
Hib. <nsi>tibhim,</nsi> ‘I laugh, joke.’]
<LEND>

<L>18971<pc>0331-b<k1>cyut<k2>cyut<h>2
{#cyut#} 2¦. {%cyut,%} cl. 1. P. {%cyotati, cucyota,%}
{%cyotiṣyati, acyutat%} and {%acyotīt, cyoti-%}
{%tum,%} to drop, sprinkle, flow, trickle, ooze, exude; to
wet thoroughly, moisten; to fall down; to cause to
drop or stream forth; [cf. {%ścut, ścyut,%} and 1. {%cyu%}
for 1. {%cyut;%} cf. also Hib. <nsi>cioth,</nsi> ‘a heavy shower;’
<nsi>ciothmhar,</nsi> ‘showery.’]
<LEND>

<L>18972<pc>0331-b<k1>cyota<k2>cyota
{%Cyota, am,%}¦ n. sprinkling, pouring, dropping, fall-
ing, dripping (as any unctuous substance), oozing,
trickling, &c.; [cf. {%ścyota.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18973<pc>0331-b<k1>cyupa<k2>cyupa
{#cyupa#}¦ {%cyupa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 1. {%cyu%}),
the face, mouth.
<LEND>

<L>18974<pc>0331-b<k1>cyus<k2>cyus
{#cyus#}¦ {%cyus%} [cf. 2. {%cyu%} above], cl. 10. P.
{%cyosayati, -yitum,%} to laugh; to bear; to
leave; to loose; to hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>18975<pc>0331-b<k1>cyUta<k2>cyUta
{#cyUta#}¦ {%cyūta, as,%} m. (for {%cūta%}), the anus.
<LEND>

<L>18976<pc>0331-b<k1>cyOtna<k2>cyOtna
{#cyOtna#}¦ {%cyautna.%} See under 1. {%cyu%} above.
<LEND>
<H>{#Ca#}

<L>18977<pc>0331-b<k1>Ca<k2>Ca<h>1
{#Ca#} 1¦. {%cha,%} the seventh consonant of the
Sanskrit alphabet, being the aspirate of the preceding
letter, and having the sound of <nsi>ch</nsi> in <nsi>church-hill.</nsi>
{%—Cha-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%cha.%}
<LEND>

<L>18978<pc>0331-b<k1>Ca<k2>Ca<h>2
{#Ca#} 2¦. {%cha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%cho%}), cutting,
dividing; a part, a fragment.
<LEND>

<L>18979<pc>0331-b<k1>Ca<k2>Ca<h>3
{#Ca#} 3¦. {%cha, as, ā, am%} (perhaps connected
with {%cho%}), pure, clean; trembling, tremulous, un-
steady; ({%ā%}), f. covering, concealing (in this sense
connected with rt. {%chad%}); an infant, a child, any
young animal (?); [cf. {%chā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18980<pc>0331-b<k1>Caga<k2>Caga
{#Caga#}¦ {%chaga, as, ā,%} m. f. (said to be fr. rt. {%cho%}),
a goat; [cf. {%chāga;%} cf. also Germ. <nsi>Bock;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>bucca;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>boch, poch, pog;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>caper;</nsi>
<nsi>hircus</nsi> (?); Hib. <nsi>gabhar.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18981<pc>0331-b<k1>Cagala<k2>Cagala
{%Chagala, as,%}¦ m. a goat; a N. of Atri; of a
Muni; of a country; ({%ā, ī%}), f. a she-goat; a kind of
convolvulus, see the next; ({%am%}), n. blue cloth or
raiment; [cf. {%chāgala.%}] {%—Chagalāṅghrī (˚la-aṅ˚)%}
or {%chagalāṇḍī (˚la-aṇ˚),%} f. a plant, see the next.
{%—Chagalāntrikā%} or {%chagalāntrī (˚la-an˚),%} f.
the plant Argyreia Speciosa or Argentea; a wolf;
[cf. {%ajāntrī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18982<pc>0331-b<k1>Cagalaka<k2>Cagalaka
{%Chagalaka, as,%}¦ m. a goat.
<LEND>

<L>18983<pc>0331-b<k1>Cagalin<k2>Cagalin
{%Chagalin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor who was him-
self a pupil of Kalāpin; [cf. {%chāgaleyin.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0331-c+ 78]

<L>18984<pc>0331-c<k1>CagaRa<k2>CagaRa
{#CagaRa#}¦ {%chagaṇa, as, am,%} m. n. dried cow-
dung; [cf. {%chāgaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>18985<pc>0331-c<k1>CajjU<k2>CajjU
{#CajjU#}¦ {%chajjū, ūs,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18986<pc>0331-c<k1>CawA<k2>CawA
{#CawA#}¦ {%chaṭā,%} f. a mass, lump, assemblage,
number; a collection of rays of light, light, lustre,
splendor; a straight or continuous line; [cf. {%jaṭā.%}]
{%—Chaṭā-phala, as,%} m. the betel-nut tree, palmyra
tree. {%—Chaṭābhā (˚ṭā-ābhā),%} f. lightning.
<LEND>

<L>18987<pc>0331-c<k1>CaRqaka<k2>CaRqaka
{#CaRqaka#}¦ {%chaṇḍaka,%} a wrong form for {%chan-%}
{%daka.%}
<LEND>

<L>18988<pc>0331-c<k1>Cad<k2>Cad<h>1
{#Cad#} 1¦. {%chad,%} cl. 10. P. (ep. also A.) {%chāda-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum%} (also said to form {%chanda-%}
{%yati%} and cl. 1. P. {%chadati,%} but these forms do not
seem to occur; in the Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa a form
{%chadayati%} is found), to cover, cover over, clothe,
veil; to use anything as a cover, spread as a cover,
cover one's self; to hide, conceal, keep secret; to
protect: Desid. {%cicchādayiṣati;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>scailim,</nsi>
‘I shade, shelter;’ <nsi>scailein,</nsi> ‘a fan, umbrella,’ &c.:
Gr. <lang n="greek">σκιά, σκοτός:</lang> Goth. <nsi>scadus:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>skyda;</nsi>
Germ. <nsi>Schild; schale:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>skal-ja:</nsi> Lat.
<nsi>squāma; spolium.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>18989<pc>0331-c<k1>Cattra<k2>Cattra
{%Chattra, as,%}¦ m. (often spelt {%chatra%}), a mush-
room; N. of a kind of grass, {%= bhū-tṛṇa;%} a bee-
hive of a conical or umbrella form; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
several plants, viz. Anethum Sowa; also {%= ati-%}
{%cchattra;%} coriander; N. of a plant supposed to
grow in Kaśmīra; the plant Rubia Munjista; a
mushroom; ({%am%}), n. a parasol, an umbrella, called
Chattar by the natives, and regarded as an ensign of
royal or delegated power; N. of a constellation;
concealing the faults of a teacher (this meaning is
invented for the explanation of the word {%chāttra%});
[cf. {%ati-cchatra, ākṛti-cchattrā, gomaya-cch˚.%}]
{%—Chattra-guccha, as,%} m. the grass Scirpus Kysoor
{%(kaśeru), = guṇḍa-tṛṇa%}. {%—Chattra-gṛha, am,%} n.
the room in which the parasol (or badge of royalty)
is kept. {%—Chattra-cakra, am,%} n. an astrological
diagram. {%—Chattra-dhāra, as, ī, am,%} bearing a
parasol or umbrella, having or possessing one; ({%as%}),
m. the bearer of a parasol. {%—Chattra-dhāraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. carrying or using a parasol or umbrella;
carrying one as a type of royal authority. {%—Chattra-%}
{%dhāra-tva, am,%} n. the office of a parasol-bearer.
{%—Chattra-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i, = chatra-dhāra%} above;
({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Horila-siṃha. {%—Chattra-%}
{%pati, is,%} or sometimes {%chattra-pa, as,%} m. ‘lord of
the umbrella or parasol,’ title of an ancient king in
Jambu-dvīpa, or of any king over whom a parasol
is carried as a mark of dignity, (whence the title
Satrap is probably derived.) {%—Chattra-pattra, am,%}
n., N. of the plant Ketmia Mutabilis. {%—Chattra-%}
{%puṣpaka, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= tilaka%}. {%—Chat-%}
{%tra-bhaṅga, as,%} m. breaking or destruction of the
royal parasol, loss of dominion or empire, deposition,
&c.; wilfulness, independence; a forlorn condition,
widowhood. {%—Chattra-yukti, is,%} f. a chapter in king
Bhoja's work called Yukti-kalpa-taru. {%—Chattra-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} furnished with an umbrella; ({%tī%}), f., N.
of a country or town. {%—Chattrāticchattra (˚ra-at˚),%}
{%as, ā,%} m. f. a fragrant grass described as growing
in marshy ground, {%= chattraka%} and {%ati-cchattrā.%}
{%—Chattrā-dhānya, am,%} n. coriander.
<LEND>

<L>18990<pc>0331-c<k1>Cattraka<k2>Cattraka
{%Chattraka, as,%}¦ m. a temple in honour of Śiva of
a spherical or umbrella shape; a beehive of a conical
form; the plant Asteracantha Longifolia; a mush-
room; a kingfisher; ({%ikā%}), f. a mushroom.
<LEND>

<L>18991<pc>0331-c<k1>CattrAka<k2>CattrAka
{%Chattrāka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant, {%= jāla-varvū-%}
{%raka; (ī),%} f., N. of a plant, {%= rāsnā; (am),%} n. a
mushroom.
<LEND>

<L>18992<pc>0331-c<k1>Cattrika<k2>Cattrika
{%Chattrika, as,%}¦ m. the bearer of a parasol.
<LEND>

<L>18993<pc>0331-c<k1>CattriRa<k2>CattriRa
{%Chattriṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>18994<pc>0331-c<k1>Cattrin<k2>Cattrin
{%Chattrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ bearing or having a parasol or
umbrella, belonging to one; ({%ī%}), m. a barber.
<LEND>

<L>18995<pc>0331-c<k1>Cattvara<k2>Cattvara
{%Chattvara, as,%}¦ m. a house, a dwelling; a bower,
an arbour.
<LEND>

<L>18996<pc>0331-c<k1>Cad<k2>Cad<h>2
2. {%chad, t, t, t,%}¦ (in compounds) concealing, hiding;
[cf. {%dhāma-cchad.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0332-a+ 79]

<L>18997<pc>0332-a<k1>Cada<k2>Cada
{%Chada, as,%}¦ m. a cover, covering (e. g. {%alpa-cchada,%}
scantily covered or dressed; {%ghana-cchada,%} con-
cealed by clouds); a wing; a leaf; N. of two plants,
{%= granthi-parṇa%} and {%= tamāla;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>sgiath,</nsi>
‘a wing.’] {%—Chada-pattra, as,%} m. the tree Sym-
plocos Racemosa.
<LEND>

<L>18998<pc>0332-a<k1>Cadana<k2>Cadana
{%Chadana, am,%}¦ n. a cover, covering, a sheath, a
scabbard; a wing; a leaf; the leaf of Laurus Cassia.
<LEND>

<L>18999<pc>0332-a<k1>Cadi<k2>Cadi
{%Chadi = chadis,%}¦ the roof of a carriage; a wing (?).
<LEND>

<L>19000<pc>0332-a<k1>Cadis<k2>Cadis
{%Chadis, is,%}¦ n. (f. ?), Ved. a cover, the roof of a
carriage, the thatch or roof of a house.
<LEND>

<L>19001<pc>0332-a<k1>Cadman<k2>Cadman
{%Chadman, a,%}¦ n. the thatch or roof of a house;
external covering, a deceptive dress, disguise,
masquerade; plea, pretext, pretence, trick, deceit;
fraud, craft, dishonesty; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>scerm;</nsi>
Germ. <nsi>Schirm.</nsi>] {%—Chadma-tāpasa, as,%} m. a re-
ligious hypocrite, a false ascetic. {%—Chadma-rū-%}
{%peṇa,%} ind. in disguise, incognito. {%—Chadma-veśa,%}
{%as,%} m. a deceptive dress, disguise. {%—Chadma-veśin,%}
{%ī,%} m. dressed in disguise, a player, a cheat.
<LEND>

<L>19002<pc>0332-a<k1>CadmikA<k2>CadmikA
{%Chadmikā,%}¦ f. the plant Cocculus Cordifolius;
[cf. {%guḍūcī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19003<pc>0332-a<k1>Cadmin<k2>Cadmin
{%Chadmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) dis-
guised, in an assumed dress or garb (e. g. {%Brāhmaṇa-%}
{%cchadmin,%} disguised as a Brāhman).
<LEND>

<L>19004<pc>0332-a<k1>Canna<k2>Canna
{%Channa, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, clad, concealed,
secret, clandestine, private, solitary.
<LEND>

<L>19005<pc>0332-a<k1>CAttra<k2>CAttra
{%Chāttra, as,%}¦ m. a pupil, scholar, disciple, tyro,
novice, (as carrying his teacher's umbrella or as con-
cealing his faults ?); ({%am%}), n. a kind of honey.
{%—Chāttra-gaṇḍa, as,%} m. an indifferent poetical
scholar knowing only the beginnings of verses.
{%—Chāttra-gomin, ī, inī, i,%} any one attendant on a
pupil. {%—Chāttra-tā,%} f. condition of a pupil, pupilage.
{%—Chāttra-darśana, am,%} n. fresh butter prepared
from milk one day old (‘looked at by the pupils’).
{%—Chāttra-vyaṃsaka, as,%} m. a knavish or roguish
pupil.
<LEND>

<L>19006<pc>0332-a<k1>CAttraka<k2>CAttraka
{%Chāttraka, am,%}¦ n. honey in the comb or hive.
<LEND>

<L>19007<pc>0332-a<k1>CAttrikya<k2>CAttrikya
{%Chāttrikya, am,%}¦ n. the office of a parasol-bearer.
<LEND>

<L>19008<pc>0332-a<k1>CAda<k2>CAda
{%Chāda, am,%}¦ n. thatch, a roof; (an incorrect form.)
<LEND>

<L>19009<pc>0332-a<k1>CAdana<k2>CAdana
{%Chādana, as,%}¦ m. the plant Barleria Cærulea, {%=%}
{%nīlāmlāna; (ī),%} f. hide, skin; ({%am%}), n. covering,
a cover, screen; hiding, concealing; darkening;
clothes; a leaf.
<LEND>

<L>19010<pc>0332-a<k1>CAdayat<k2>CAdayat
{%Chādayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ covering, veiling, shrouding.
<LEND>

<L>19011<pc>0332-a<k1>CAdita<k2>CAdita
{%Chādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, hidden, concealed;
cut, divided (?).
<LEND>

<L>19012<pc>0332-a<k1>CAdin<k2>CAdin
{%Chādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) hiding,
covering.
<LEND>

<L>19013<pc>0332-a<k1>CAdizeya<k2>CAdizeya
{%Chādiṣeya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%chadis%}), suitable for
the roof of a carriage or for the thatch of a house.
<LEND>

<L>19014<pc>0332-a<k1>CAdmika<k2>CAdmika
{%Chādmika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%chadman%}), fraudulent,
dishonest; ({%as%}), m. a rogue.
<LEND>

<L>19015<pc>0332-a<k1>CAdyamAna<k2>CAdyamAna
{%Chādyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being covered.
<LEND>

<L>19016<pc>0332-a<k1>Cad<k2>Cad<h>3
{#Cad#} 3¦. {%chad%} or {%chand,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%chada-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} cl. 1. P. and 10. P. A., Ved.
{%chandati, chandayati, -te, cacchanda,%} Aor. {%ac-%}
{%chān, chantum,%} to seem, appear, be considered or
esteemed as; to seem good, please, be pleasant: A.
{%chandayate,%} to be pleased with, delight in, approve
of (with acc. or loc.); (Sāy.) to render celebrated
or honoured: P. {%chandayati,%} to gratify a person
(acc. or sometimes gen.) with anything (e. g. {%vareṇa,%}
with a boon), to present.
<LEND>

<L>19017<pc>0332-a<k1>Cad<k2>Cad<h>4
4. {%chad, t, t, t,%}¦ (in compounds) pleased with &c.;
[cf. {%kavi-cchad.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19018<pc>0332-a<k1>Canda<k2>Canda
{%Chanda, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleasing, alluring, inviting;
praising, a praiser; ({%as%}), m. appearance, look, shape;
pleasure, delight, appetite, liking, fondness for, fancy,
whim, predilection, desire, wish, subjection, will, free
will, arbitrary choice; wilfulness, wilful conduct (e. g.
{%mac-chandāt,%} according to my wish or will, at my
pleasure; {%sva-cchanda,%} following one's own will,
independent; {%a-svacchanda,%} dependent; {%sva-cchan-%}
{%dam,%} according to one's own wish; {%sva-cchandāt,%}
willingly; {%a-cchandena,%} against the will); mean-
ing, intention, purport, opinion; poison; ({%ena%}),
ind. at the will of, according to wish or will, at one's
[Page0332-b+ 81]
pleasure; [cf. {%indra-cchanda, kalāpa-c˚, deva-c˚,%}
{%vijaya-c˚,%} all meaning pearl-ornaments or neck-
laces of various kinds; cf. also Lat. <nsi>spons, sponte.</nsi>]
{%—Chanda-tas,%} ind. at will, at pleasure, according to
one's own wish or desire. {%—Chandānuvartin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} indulging the humour, complying with the wishes.
{%—Chandānuvṛtta (˚da-an˚), am,%} n. indulgence
of whims, humouring, compliance.
<LEND>

<L>19019<pc>0332-b<k1>Candaka<k2>Candaka
{%Chandaka%}¦ in {%sarva-cchandaka,%} epithet of Nārā-
yaṇa, ‘assuming every shape?;’ ({%as%}), m., N. of the
charioteer of Śākya-siṃha; [cf. {%chaṇḍaka.%}] {%—Chan-%}
{%daka-nivartana,%} ‘the return of Chandaka,’ N. of
a Caitya. {%—Chandaka-pātana%} or {%chanda-pātana,%}
{%as,%} m. a hypocrite, a pretended or false ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>19020<pc>0332-b<k1>Candana<k2>Candana
{%Chandana, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleasing, charming.
<LEND>

<L>19021<pc>0332-b<k1>Candas<k2>Candas
{%Chandas, as,%}¦ n. desire, longing for, delight,
pleasure, wish, will; free will; meaning, intention,
purport, object; a sacred hymn or verse as distin-
guished from the verses of the four Vedas, a verse
which is neither Ṛc, nor Sāman, nor Yajus, nor
Ātharvaṇa, originally perhaps a hymn or verse used
in incantations; the sacred text of the Vedic hymns;
metre in general, supposed to consist of three or
seven typical forms; metrical science, prosody.
{%—Chandaḥ-prakaraṇa, am,%} n. a chapter on metre.
{%—Chandaḥ-praśasti%} or {%chanda-praśasti, is,%} f. a
work by Harṣa. {%—Chandaḥ-śāstra, am,%} n. metrical
science, a work on metre by Piṅgala. {%—Chandaḥ-%}
{%saṅgraha%} and {%chandaḥ-sāra, as,%} m. a work giving
a summary of metres. {%—Chandaḥ-siddhi, is,%} f.
a chapter of the Kāvya-kalpa-latā-vṛtti-parimala.
{%—Chandaḥ-stut, t, t, t,%} or {%chandaḥ-stubh, p, p,%}
{%p,%} Ved. praising in hymns. {%—Chandaś-cūḍāmaṇi,%}
{%is,%} m. a work by Hema-candra. {%—Chandas-kṛta,%}
{%am,%} n. any metrical part of the Vedas or other sacred
compositions. {%—Chandas-pakṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
one whose wing is sacred song, (borne aloft on the
wings of praise ?). {%—Chandas-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. pleasing, lovely. {%—Chando-ga, as,%} m. (rt.
{%gai%}), a reciter or singer in metre, a chanter of
the Sāma-veda, generally the same as the Udgātṛ
priest. {%—Chandoga-pariśiṣṭa, am,%} n. title of
a work by Kātyāyana giving a supplement to
Gobhila's Sūtras. {%—Chandoga-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n.
the Brāhmaṇa of the Udgātṛ priests attached to the
Sāma-veda. Some authorities give eight of these
Brāhmaṇas, the principal being called Prauḍha or
Pañcaviṃśa, as consisting of twenty-five sections.
{%—Chandoga-māhaki, is,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
{%—Chandoga-śākhā,%} f. a branch of the Sāma-veda.
{%—Chāndoga-śruti, is,%} f. the Veda of the Chandogas,
the Sāma-veda. {%—Chandogāhnika-paddhati (˚ga-%}
{%ah˚),%} title of a work by Rāma-kṛṣṇa. {%—Chando-%}
{%govinda,%} title of a work on metre by Gaṅgā-dāsa.
{%—Chando-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man, {%= mataṅga.%}
{%—Chando-nāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having the name
of metre, metrical. {%—Chandonuvṛtta (˚das-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. conforming to one's humour, humouring,
indulgence. {%—Chando-bhaṅga, as,%} m. violation of
the laws of metre. {%—Chando-bhāṣā,%} f. the language
of the Vedas (?). {%—Chando-mañjari, is%} or {%ī,%} f. title
of a work on metre by Gaṅgā-dāsa. {%—Chando-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} Ved. consisting of or containing
sacred hymns. {%—Chando-māna, am,%} n., Ved. the
measure of metre, i. e. a syllable regarded as the
metrical unit. {%—Chando-mārtaṇḍa, as,%} m. title of
a work on metre. {%—Chando-mālā,%} f. title of a work
on metre. {%—Chando-ruṭ-stoma, as,%} m., N. of a
Ṣaḍaha rite. {%—Chando-viciti, is,%} f. ‘examination
of metres,’ title of a treatise on metre. {%—Chando-%}
{%vivṛti, is,%} f. ‘explanation of metres,’ title of Piṅ-
gala's work on metre. {%—Chando-vṛtta, am,%} n. a
metre in general, any metre.
<LEND>

<L>19022<pc>0332-b<k1>Candasya<k2>Candasya
{%Chandasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. taking the form of
hymns, metrical, fit for hymns, relating to the Vedic
hymns; made or done according to one's wish.
<LEND>

<L>19023<pc>0332-b<k1>Candita<k2>Candita
{%Chandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gratified, pleased.
<LEND>

<L>19024<pc>0332-b<k1>Candu<k2>Candu
{%Chandu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. pleasing, lovely.
<LEND>

<L>19025<pc>0332-b<k1>Candoma<k2>Candoma
{%Chandoma, as,%}¦ m., N. of the eighth, ninth, and
tenth day in a sacrificial ceremony which lasts
twelve days {%(dvādaśāha)%}. {%—Chandoma-trikakud, %}
[Page0332-c+ 70]
{%t,%} m., N. of a Soma ceremony lasting three days.
{%—Chandoma-daśāha, as,%} m., N. of a Daśa-rātra.
{%—Chandoma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. accompanied
by a Chandoma.
<LEND>

<L>19026<pc>0332-c<k1>Cad<k2>Cad<h>5
{#Cad#} 5¦. {%chad,%} cl. 1. P. {%chadati,%} &c., to
nourish, strengthen.
<LEND>

<L>19027<pc>0332-c<k1>Cad<k2>Cad<h>6
{#Cad#} 6¦. {%chad,%} cl. 1. and 10. P. {%chandati%} and
{%chandayati,%} &c., to kindle; (a various
reading for {%chṛd.%})
<LEND>

<L>19028<pc>0332-c<k1>Cadmaw<k2>Cadmaw
{#Cadmaw#}¦ {%chadmaṭ,%} ind. {%= chambaṭ%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>19029<pc>0332-c<k1>Cadvara<k2>Cadvara
{#Cadvara#}¦ {%chadvara, as,%} m. a tooth (?); a bower;
[cf. {%chattvara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19030<pc>0332-c<k1>CanacCan<k2>CanacCan
{#CanacCan#}¦ {%chanacchan,%} ind. an imitative
sound expressive of the noise of falling drops, of
sobbing &c.; (according to some a reduplicated form
of {%chanat.%})
<LEND>

<L>19031<pc>0332-c<k1>Canna<k2>Canna
{#Canna#}¦ {%channa.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>19032<pc>0332-c<k1>Cam<k2>Cam
{#Cam#}¦ {%cham,%} cl. 1. P. {%chamati,%} &c., to eat;
[cf. {%cam, jam, jham.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19033<pc>0332-c<k1>CamacCamikAratna<k2>CamacCamikAratna
{#CamacCamikAratna#}¦ {%chamacchamikā-ratna, as,%}
m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>19034<pc>0332-c<k1>CamacCamita<k2>CamacCamita
{#CamacCamita#}¦ {%chamacchamita, am,%} n. (an ono-
matopoetic word with the termination of the past
pass. part.), crackling, rattling.
<LEND>

<L>19035<pc>0332-c<k1>CamaRqa<k2>CamaRqa
{#CamaRqa#}¦ {%chamaṇḍa, as,%} m. an orphan, a
fatherless son; a single man, one who has no kins-
men; [cf. {%chemaṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19036<pc>0332-c<k1>Camp<k2>Camp
{#Camp#}¦ {%champ,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%champati,%}
{%champayati,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>19037<pc>0332-c<k1>Cambaw<k2>Cambaw
{#Cambaw#}¦ {%chambaṭ,%} ind., Ved. (used with rt.
{%kṛ,%} especially in sacrificial language), to make a
failure, fail in obtaining or accomplishing.
<LEND>

<L>19038<pc>0332-c<k1>Card<k2>Card
{#Card#}¦ {%chard,%} cl. 10. P. {%chardayati, -yitum,%}
to vomit, be sick; [cf. {%chṛd;%} cf. also Hib.
<nsi>sceithim,</nsi> ‘I vomit, spew;’ Lat. <nsi>screo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19039<pc>0332-c<k1>Carda<k2>Carda
{%Charda, as,%}¦ m. (a various reading for {%chardi%}),
vomiting.
<LEND>

<L>19040<pc>0332-c<k1>Cardana<k2>Cardana
{%Chardana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a plant ({%= alambuṣa%});
of a Rākṣasa; another plant, {%= nimba;%} the plant
Vangueria Spinosa; ({%am%}), n. vomiting, sickness;
retching.
<LEND>

<L>19041<pc>0332-c<k1>Cardi<k2>Cardi
{%Chardi, is,%}¦ f. sickness, vomiting. {%—Chardi-ghna,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘anti-emetic,’ N. of a tree, {%= nimba.%}
<LEND>

<L>19042<pc>0332-c<k1>CardikA<k2>CardikA
{%Chardikā,%}¦ f. sickness, vomiting; a plant, {%=%}
{%viṣṇu-krāntā%}. {%—Chardikā-ripu, us,%} m. small
cardamoms (‘anti-emetic’).
<LEND>

<L>19043<pc>0332-c<k1>Cardis<k2>Cardis<h>1
1. {%chardis, is,%}¦ f. n. vomiting. (For 2. {%chardis%} see
below.)
<LEND>

<L>19044<pc>0332-c<k1>CardIkA<k2>CardIkA
{%Chardīkā,%}¦ f. vomiting, sickness.
<LEND>

<L>19045<pc>0332-c<k1>CardApanikA<k2>CardApanikA
{#CardApanikA#}¦ {%chardāpanikā,%} f. a kind of cu-
cumber, {%= karkaṭī;%} (a corruption of {%chardāpana-%}
{%yikā ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>19046<pc>0332-c<k1>Cardis<k2>Cardis<h>2
{#Cardis#} 2¦. {%chardis, is,%} n. (fr. 1. {%chad ?%}), Ved.
a fence, a secure place, secure residence; a house;
[cf. {%chadis.%}] {%—Chardiṣ-pā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. pro-
tecting a house.
<LEND>

<L>19047<pc>0332-c<k1>Cal<k2>Cal
{#Cal#}¦ {%chal, chalayati.%} See under {%chala.%}
<LEND>

<L>19048<pc>0332-c<k1>Cala<k2>Cala
{#Cala#}¦ {%chala, as, am,%} m. n. (probably fr. 1.
{%chad%}), fraud, deceit, deception, sham, guise, dis-
guise, pretence, pretext, delusion, illusion, semblance,
counterfeit appearance, fiction, feint, circumvention,
trick, stratagem; fallacy (e. g. {%vāk-chalaiḥ,%} with
fallacious words); wickedness; design, device; in-
tention; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Dala and descendant
of Kuśa; {%chalāt,%} through deceit or fraud, deceitfully;
{%chalena,%} deceitfully, illusively, under the disguise or
pretext or pretence of; {%upadā-chalena,%} under pre-
tence of gifts of honour, i. e. with feigned gifts;
{%rajaś-chalena,%} under the semblance of dust; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>scelus.</nsi>] {%—Chala-kāraka, as, ā, am,%} or {%chala- %}
[Page0333-a+ 73]
{%kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} practising fraud or deceit, fraudulent.
{%—Chala-tā,%} f. fraud, deception, deceit.
<LEND>

<L>19049<pc>0333-a<k1>Calaka<k2>Calaka
{%Chalaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ delusive, deceptive, cheating.
<LEND>

<L>19050<pc>0333-a<k1>Calana<k2>Calana
{%Chalana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. deceiving, deluding, trick-
ing, cheating, outwitting, feigning. {%—Chalanā-para,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} deceitful, cunning, crafty.
<LEND>

<L>19051<pc>0333-a<k1>Calaya<k2>Calaya
{%Chalaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%chalayati, -yitum,%} to deceive,
cheat, delude, circumvent, outwit, feign.
<LEND>

<L>19052<pc>0333-a<k1>Calayat<k2>Calayat
{%Chalayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ deceiving, cheating, de-
luding, outwitting.
<LEND>

<L>19053<pc>0333-a<k1>Calita<k2>Calita
{%Chalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ deceived, cheated, deluded;
feigned. {%—Chalita-rāma, as,%} m. ‘Rāma the out-
witted,’ title of a play.
<LEND>

<L>19054<pc>0333-a<k1>Calin<k2>Calin
{%Chalin, ī,%}¦ m. cheating, a cheat; a swindler.
<LEND>

<L>19055<pc>0333-a<k1>Calika<k2>Calika
{#Calika#}¦ {%chalika, am,%} n. a song consisting
of four parts and recited with certain gestures or
gesticulation; [cf. {%chālikya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19056<pc>0333-a<k1>Calitaka<k2>Calitaka
{#Calitaka#}¦ {%chalitaka, as,%} m., N. of a man,
the builder of a sanctuary which was called after him;
({%am%}), n. {%= chalika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>19057<pc>0333-a<k1>Calli<k2>Calli
{#Calli#}¦ {%challi, is,%} f. skin, bark, rind, {%= challī;%}
[cf. {%chavi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19058<pc>0333-a<k1>Callita<k2>Callita
{#Callita#}¦ {%challita%} in {%asthi-cchallita,%} elevation
of a small portion of the bone.
<LEND>

<L>19059<pc>0333-a<k1>CallI<k2>CallI
{#CallI#}¦ {%challī,%} f. skin, bark, rind [cf. {%challi%}
and {%chavi%}]; a spreading creeper ({%vīrudh%}); a kind
of flower; offspring, posterity.
<LEND>

<L>19060<pc>0333-a<k1>Cavi<k2>Cavi
{#Cavi#}¦ {%chavi, is,%} or {%chavī,%} f. (the latter only
in Ved.; said to be fr. rt. {%cho%}), skin, hide; hue,
colour of the skin, colour in general; beauty, splen-
dor, brilliance; light, lustre; [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-cchavi;%}
cf. also Old Germ. <nsi>scieri,</nsi> ‘lucid;’ Hib. <nsi>sceimh,</nsi>
‘beauty, bloom;’ <nsi>sceimheach,</nsi> ‘handsome.’]
<LEND>

<L>19061<pc>0333-a<k1>CavillAkara<k2>CavillAkara
{#CavillAkara#}¦ {%chavillākara, as,%} m., N. of an
historian of Kaśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>19062<pc>0333-a<k1>Caz<k2>Caz
{#Caz#}¦ {%chaṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%chaṣati, -te,%} to
hurt, injure, kill.
<LEND>

<L>19063<pc>0333-a<k1>CA<k2>CA
{#CA#}¦ {%chā, ās,%} m. a young animal; [cf. 2. {%cha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19064<pc>0333-a<k1>CAga<k2>CAga
{#CAga#}¦ {%chāga, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%cho%}),
a goat; the sign of the zodiac Aries; N. of one of
the attendants of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. a she-goat; ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), coming from or relating to a goat or she-
goat. {%—Chāga-bhojin, ī,%} m. a wolf, (‘goat-eater.’)
{%—Chāga-maya, as, ī, am,%} like a goat or she-goat.
{%—Chāga-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Chāga-%}
{%mitrika, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} relating to Chāga-mitra.
{%—Chāga-ratha, as,%} m. Agni the god of fire (whose
vehicle is the goat). {%—Chāga-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n., N.
of a Pariśiṣṭa attributed to Kātyāyana. {%—Chāga-%}
{%vāhana, as,%} m. Agni the deity of fire.
<LEND>

<L>19065<pc>0333-a<k1>CAgala<k2>CAgala
{%Chāgala, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%chagala%}), coming from
or relating to a goat or to a she-goat, caprigenous;
born in Chagala; ({%as%}), m. a goat; a kind of fish,
{%= chāgalaka;%} a patronymic from Chagala (when
a descendant of Atri is to be designated); N. of a
mountain. {%—Chāgalāntrikā,%} f. a kind of plant, {%=%}
{%chagalāntrikā%}. {%—Chāgalāntrī (˚la-an˚),%} f. a wolf;
also {%= chagalāntrī.%}
<LEND>

<L>19066<pc>0333-a<k1>CAgalaka<k2>CAgalaka
{%Chāgalaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fish.
<LEND>

<L>19067<pc>0333-a<k1>CAgali<k2>CAgali
{%Chāgali, is,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Chagalā and a
patronymic from Chagala; a descendant of Atri; N.
of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>19068<pc>0333-a<k1>CAgaleya<k2>CAgaleya
{%Chāgaleya,%}¦ N. of a place; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
school; ({%as%}), m., N. of the author of a law-book.
<LEND>

<L>19069<pc>0333-a<k1>CAgaleyin<k2>CAgaleyin
{%Chāgaleyin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils of Chagalin;
the Sūtras of the pupils of Chagalin.
<LEND>

<L>19070<pc>0333-a<k1>CAgikA<k2>CAgikA
{%Chāgikā,%}¦ f. a she-goat.
<LEND>

<L>19071<pc>0333-a<k1>CAgeya<k2>CAgeya
{%Chāgeya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>19072<pc>0333-a<k1>CAgyAyani<k2>CAgyAyani
{%Chāgyāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Chāga.
<LEND>

<L>19073<pc>0333-a<k1>CAgaRa<k2>CAgaRa
{#CAgaRa#}¦ {%chāgaṇa, as,%} m. a fire of dried cow-
dung ({%chagaṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>19074<pc>0333-a<k1>CAgaleya<k2>CAgaleya
{#CAgaleya#}¦ {%chāgaleya.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>19075<pc>0333-a<k1>CACikA<k2>CACikA
{#CACikA#}¦ {%chāchikā,%} f., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>
[Page0333-b+ 76]

<L>19076<pc>0333-b<k1>CAwA<k2>CAwA
{#CAwA#}¦ {%chāṭā,%} f. title of a commentary on
the Mugdha-bodha; [cf. {%chaṭā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19077<pc>0333-b<k1>CAta<k2>CAta
{#CAta#}¦ {%chāta.%} See p. 334, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>19078<pc>0333-b<k1>CAttra<k2>CAttra
{#CAttra#}¦ {%chāttra.%} See p. 332, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>19079<pc>0333-b<k1>CAda<k2>CAda
{#CAda#}¦ {%chāda.%} See p. 332, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>19080<pc>0333-b<k1>CAnda<k2>CAnda
{#CAnda#}¦ {%chānda, as, ī, am,%} adj. fr. {%chanda%} or
{%chandas%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>19081<pc>0333-b<k1>CAndaqa<k2>CAndaqa
{#CAndaqa#}¦ {%chāndaḍa, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>19082<pc>0333-b<k1>CAndasa<k2>CAndasa
{#CAndasa#}¦ {%chāndasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%chandas%}),
Vedic, having the sacred text of the Veda as (its)
subject, peculiar to the Veda, relating or belonging to
the Vedic hymns; studying the holy text of the
Vedic hymns, a priest familiar with it; metrical, re-
lating to poetical metre; ({%as%}), m. a priest conversant
with the Veda or sacred hymns. {%—Chāndasa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the being Vedic, the being metrical.
<LEND>

<L>19083<pc>0333-b<k1>CAndasaka<k2>CAndasaka
{%Chāndasaka, am,%}¦ n. the being Vedic or metrical.
<LEND>

<L>19084<pc>0333-b<k1>CAndasIya<k2>CAndasIya
{%Chāndasīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ metrical, familiar with
metres, a metrical scholar.
<LEND>

<L>19085<pc>0333-b<k1>CAndoga<k2>CAndoga
{%Chāndoga, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%chando-ga%}), relating to
the Chando-gas. {%—Chāndoga-brāhmaṇa,%} see {%chan-%}
{%doga-brāhmaṇa%}. {%—Chāndoga-sūtra, am,%} n. a Sūtra
work of the Chando-gas.
<LEND>

<L>19086<pc>0333-b<k1>CAndogya<k2>CAndogya
{%Chāndogya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%chando-ga%}), the doctrine
of the Chando-gas or Udgātṛ priests contained in
a Brāhmaṇa of the Sāma-veda; see {%chandoga-%}
{%brāhmaṇa%}. {%—Chāndogya-mantra-bhāṣya, am,%} n.
a commentary by Guṇa-viṣṇu on the prayers and texts
in Gobhila's Gṛhya-sūtras. {%—Chāndogyopaniṣad%}
{%(˚ya-up˚), t,%} f. title of the Upaniṣad attached to
the Sāma-veda. {%—Chāndogyopaniṣad-bhāṣya,%}
{%am,%} n. a commentary on the above Upaniṣad by
Śaṅkarācārya.
<LEND>

<L>19087<pc>0333-b<k1>CAndoBAza<k2>CAndoBAza
{%Chāndobhāṣa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%chando-bhāṣā%}),
relating to the language of the Vedas (?).
<LEND>

<L>19088<pc>0333-b<k1>CAndoma<k2>CAndoma
{%Chāndoma, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%chandoma%}), taken from
the Chandomas.
<LEND>

<L>19089<pc>0333-b<k1>CAndomAna<k2>CAndomAna
{%Chāndomāna, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%chando-māna%}), re-
lating to a syllable regarded as the measure of metre
or metrical unity.
<LEND>

<L>19090<pc>0333-b<k1>CAndomika<k2>CAndomika
{%Chāndomika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%chandoma%}), belong-
ing to the Chandomas.
<LEND>

<L>19091<pc>0333-b<k1>CAyA<k2>CAyA
{#CAyA#}¦ {%chāyā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%cho,%} to
cut off the light; perhaps a corruption of {%chadyā%} fr.
rt. 1. {%chad%}), shade, shadow, dark shadow, a shady
place, (in the Naighaṇṭuka III. 4. = a screened or
covered place, i. e. a house); a reflected image, re-
flection; a shadowy fancy, hallucination; shading or
blending of colours, play of light or colours, lustre,
light, beauty; colour, the colour of the face, com-
plexion, the features; a kind of metre consisting of
four lines of nineteen syllables each; Shadow personi-
fied, and like Sañjñā wife of the Sun and mother of the
planet Saturn; the sun; the shadow of a gnomon as
indicating the sun's position; a screen, protection,
nourishing, cherishing; a row, line, straight or con-
tinuous line; nightmare; a bribe; a N. of the goddess
Durgā; ({%am%}), n. shade, shadow (at the end of a
Tat-puruṣa compound); ({%as%}), m. one who grants
shade. {%—Chāyā-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing shadow,
shadowing, shading; ({%as%}), m. a parasol or umbrella-
bearer; a species of metre. {%—Chāyā-graha, as,%} m.
‘receiving the shadow or image,’ a mirror, a sun-
dial (?); [cf. {%chāyā-yantra.%}] {%—Chāyāṅka (˚yā-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. the moon (containing the image of a
hare or deer, i. e. marked like a hare or deer); [cf.
{%chāyā-bhṛt%} and {%chāyā-mṛga-dhara.%}] {%—Chāyā-%}
{%tanaya, as,%} m. the son of Chāyā, an epithet of
Saturn. {%—Chāyā-taru, us,%} m. a large umbrageous tree,
(giving abundant shade or shelter.) {%—Chāyātmaja%}
{%(˚yā-āt˚), as,%} m. the son of Chāyā, an epithet of
Saturn. {%—Chāyātman (˚yā-āt˚), ā,%} m. a reflected
image or form (lit. ‘shadow-self,’ the shadow or re-
flected image of one's own person). {%—Chāyā-druma,%}
{%as,%} m. an umbrageous tree; see {%chāyā-taru%}. {%—Chāyā-%}
{%dvitīya, as, ā, am,%} accompanied by one's shadow.
[Page0333-c+ 76]
{%—Chāyā-patha, as,%} m. ether, the atmosphere or
firmament. {%—Chāyā-puruṣa, as,%} m. Puruṣa in
the form of a shadow. {%—Chāyā-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}
divided in radiance, reflecting light from various
surfaces. {%—Chāyā-bhṛt, t,%} m. the moon; [cf.
{%chāyāṅka.%}] {%—Chāyā-maya, as, ī, am,%} shadowy,
casting a shadow, reflected. {%—Chāyā-māna, am,%} n.
an instrument that measures a shadow. {%—Chāyā-%}
{%mitra, am,%} n. a chattar or parasol (friend of the
shade). {%—Chāyā-mṛga-dhara, as,%} m. ‘possessing
the image of a deer,’ the moon; [cf. {%chāyāṅka.%}]
{%—Chāyā-yantra, am,%} n. ‘shadow instrument,’ a sun-
dial. {%—Chāyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} shadowy, possessing
or granting shade. {%—Chāyā-vyavahāra, as,%} m.
measuring or calculating the shadow cast by the sun
on the dial. {%—Chāyā-suta, as,%} m. the son of Chāyā,
an epithet of Saturn.
<LEND>

<L>19092<pc>0333-c<k1>CAyaka<k2>CAyaka
{%Chāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ Ved. shadowy (as a demon).
<LEND>

<L>19093<pc>0333-c<k1>CAlikya<k2>CAlikya
{#CAlikya#}¦ {%chālikya, am,%} n., N. of a kind of
song; [cf. {%chalika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19094<pc>0333-c<k1>Ci<k2>Ci
{#Ci#}¦ {%chi, is,%} m. abuse, reproach.
<LEND>

<L>19095<pc>0333-c<k1>Cikkana<k2>Cikkana
{#Cikkana#}¦ {%chikkana, am,%} n. (an onomatopoetic
word with the affix of a noun of action), sneezing;
({%ī%}), f. the plant Artemisia Sternutatoria.
<LEND>

<L>19096<pc>0333-c<k1>CikkA<k2>CikkA
{%Chikkā,%}¦ f. sneezing.
<LEND>

<L>19097<pc>0333-c<k1>Cikkika<k2>Cikkika
{%Chikkika, as, ā, am,%}¦ sneezing, sternutatory; ({%ā%}),
f. the plant Artemisia Sternutatoria.
<LEND>

<L>19098<pc>0333-c<k1>Cikkara<k2>Cikkara
{#Cikkara#}¦ {%chikkara, as,%} m. a kind of animal;
(perhaps an incorrect form.)
<LEND>

<L>19099<pc>0333-c<k1>CikkAra<k2>CikkAra
{#CikkAra#}¦ {%chikkāra, as,%} m. a kind of antelope.
<LEND>

<L>19100<pc>0333-c<k1>Cita<k2>Cita
{#Cita#}¦ {%chita.%} See rt. {%cho,%} p. 334.
<LEND>

<L>19101<pc>0333-c<k1>Cid<k2>Cid<h>1
{#Cid#} 1¦. {%chid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%chinatti, chintte,%}
{%ciccheda, cicchide, chetsyati, -te, acchi-%}
{%dat%} or {%acchaitsīt, acchitta, chettum,%} to cut, cut off,
amputate, cut through, hew, chop, rend, split, pierce,
separate, divide, unfasten; to take away, remove, de-
prive of; to interrupt, disturb; to destroy, annihilate,
efface, blot out: Pass. {%chidyate,%} to be split, to be
cut, to break, be torn, &c.: Caus. P. {%chedayati,%}
{%yitum;%} Aor. {%acicchidat,%} to cut off; to cause to
cut off or through: Desid. {%cicchitsati, -te:%} Intens.
{%cecchidyate, cecchidīti, cecchetti;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>scindo:</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">σχίζω, σχίδη, σχέδη, σχινδαλμός, σκινδαλμός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σκίδνημι; σκάζω</lang> (?): Goth. <nsi>skeida:</nsi> Germ. <nsi>scheide:</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>schîte; splitar:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>splitter:</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>scaithim,</nsi> ‘I cut off, lop,’ &c.]
<LEND>

<L>19102<pc>0333-c<k1>Citti<k2>Citti
{%Chitti, is,%}¦ f. cutting, division; N. of a tree, {%=%}
{%karañja.%}
<LEND>

<L>19103<pc>0333-c<k1>Cittvara<k2>Cittvara
{%Chittvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ cutting or fit for cutting (as
a weapon &c.), trenchant; hostile, inimical, a foe;
roguish, fraudulent, knavish, a knave; [cf. {%chat-%}
{%tvara%} and {%chidura.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19104<pc>0333-c<k1>CittvA<k2>CittvA
{%Chittvā,%}¦ ind. having cut, amputated, divided.
<LEND>

<L>19105<pc>0333-c<k1>Cid<k2>Cid<h>2
2. {%chid, t, t, t,%}¦ (at the end of a compound) cutting,
cutting through, tearing asunder, splitting, piercing
[cf. {%ukha-cchid, keśa-cchid, pakṣa-cchid%}]; de-
stroying, annihilating, removing [cf. {%duḥkha-cchid%}];
({%t%}), m. the divisor, denominator.
<LEND>

<L>19106<pc>0333-c<k1>Cidaka<k2>Cidaka
{%Chidaka, am,%}¦ n. Indra's thunderbolt or diamond.
<LEND>

<L>19107<pc>0333-c<k1>CidA<k2>CidA
{%Chidā,%}¦ f. cutting, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>19108<pc>0333-c<k1>Cidi<k2>Cidi
{%Chidi, is, is, i,%}¦ cutting or tearing off, splitting;
({%is%}), f. an axe.
<LEND>

<L>19109<pc>0333-c<k1>Cidira<k2>Cidira
{%Chidira, as,%}¦ m. an axe; a sword; fire; a rope,
cord.
<LEND>

<L>19110<pc>0333-c<k1>Cidura<k2>Cidura
{%Chidura, as, ā, am,%}¦ cutting, dividing, what cuts
or divides; easily breaking; hostile, a foe; roguish,
a knave; [cf. {%chittvara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19111<pc>0333-c<k1>CidyamAna<k2>CidyamAna
{%Chidyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being cut, cut.
<LEND>

<L>19112<pc>0333-c<k1>Cidra<k2>Cidra
{%Chidra, as, ā, am,%}¦ containing holes, pierced;
({%am%}), n. a hole, slit, incision, cleft, opening, fissure,
crack, perforation, vacuity, interruption, ({%chidraṃ%}
{%daiva-kṛtam,%} the opening or hole made by nature,
the cartilage of the ear, the pupil of the eye, &c.);
defect, fault, blemish, flaw (moral or physical); a
vulnerable or weak point, weak side, foible, imper-
fection, infirmity; (in astronomy) N. of the eighth
[Page0334-a+ 80]
house; [cf. {%a-cchidra, karṇa-cch˚, kṛta-cch˚, gṛ-%}
{%ha-cch˚, niś-ch˚.%}] {%—Chidra-karṇa, as, ī, am,%} having
the ears bored or pierced. {%—Chidra-tā,%} f. the state of
being perforated, the quality of being perforated or
pervaded by everything. {%—Chidra-darśana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} exhibiting faults or deficiencies, ({%a-cchidradar-%}
{%śana,%} faultless); ({%as%}), m., N. of a Cakra-vāka that
had been a Brāhman in a former birth. {%—Chidra-%}
{%darśin, ī, inī, i,%} observing faults or deficiencies,
a captious critic; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a Cakra-vāka; see
above. {%—Chidra-vaidehī,%} f. the plant Scindapsus
Officinalis, {%= gaja-pippalī%}. {%—Chidrātman (˚ra-%}
{%āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} one who exposes his weak points to
attack. {%—Chidrānusandhānin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%chidrā-%}
{%nusārin%} or {%chidrānveṣin (˚ra-an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} look-
ing out for faults or flaws, picking holes, a censorious
or captious critic. {%—Chidrāntar (˚ra-an˚), aḥ,%} m.
‘internally hollow,’ cane or reed. {%—Chidrānveṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ra-an˚), am,%} n. the searching for faults, picking
holes; [cf. {%chidrānusandhānin%} above.] {%—Chidrā-%}
{%phala, am,%} n. a kind of fruit; [cf. {%māyā-%}
{%phala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19113<pc>0334-a<k1>Cidraya<k2>Cidraya
{%Chidraya,%}¦ nom. P. {%chidrayati, -yitum,%} to pierce,
perforate, bore, make openings or holes, to perforate
the ears for rings &c.
<LEND>

<L>19114<pc>0334-a<k1>CidrApaya<k2>CidrApaya
{%Chidrāpaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%-payati, -yitum,%} to pierce,
perforate.
<LEND>

<L>19115<pc>0334-a<k1>Cidrita<k2>Cidrita
{%Chidrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pierced, perforated, having
holes, orifices or openings.
<LEND>

<L>19116<pc>0334-a<k1>Cidrin<k2>Cidrin
{%Chidrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having holes, hollow.
<LEND>

<L>19117<pc>0334-a<k1>Cidvara<k2>Cidvara
{%Chidvara, as, ā, am, = chittvara.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>19118<pc>0334-a<k1>Cindaka<k2>Cindaka
{%Chindaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a family or race.
<LEND>

<L>19119<pc>0334-a<k1>Cinna<k2>Cinna
{%Chinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, divided, torn, broken, de-
stroyed; decaying, declining, exhausted, tired; ({%ā%}), f.
a whore, a harlot; the tree Cocculus Cordifolius, {%=%}
{%guḍūcī%}. {%—Chinna-karṇa, as, ī, am,%} having the ears
cut off. {%—Chinna-keśa, as, ā, am,%} having the hair cut,
shorn, shaven. {%—Chinna-granthinikā,%} f. a kind of
bulbous plant, {%= tri-parṇikā%}. {%—Chinna-druma, as,%}
m. a riven tree. {%—Chinna-dhanvan, ā,%} m. a warrior
whose bow has been cut or broken by his enemy's
arrow. {%—Chinna-nāsika, as, ā, am,%} having the
nose cut off, noseless. {%—Chinna-nāsya, as, ā, am,%}
having the nose-rein (or cord passing through the
nose) cut or broken. {%—Chinna-pakṣa, as, ā, am,%}
having the wings clipped or torn off. {%—Chinna-pat-%}
{%trī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= ambaṣṭhā%}. {%—Chinna-ban-%}
{%dhana, as, ā, am,%} loosed from bonds, liberated.
{%—Chinna-bhinna, as, ā, am,%} pierced through and
through, cut up, destroyed, scattered. {%—Chinna-bhū-%}
{%yiṣṭhadhūma, as, ā, am,%} bursting through the thick
smoke, scattering the mass of smoke. {%—Chinna-%}
{%masta%} or {%chinna-mastaka, as, ā, am,%} decapitated;
({%ā%}), f. a headless form of Durgā. {%—Chinna-%}
{%mūla, as, ā, am,%} cut up by the root. {%—Chinna-%}
{%ruha, as,%} m., N. of a tree, {%= tilaka; (ā),%} f.
N. of several plants, viz. Cocculus Cordifolius;
incense, {%= śallakī;%} also {%= svarṇa-ketakī%}. {%—Chin-%}
{%na-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having cut or cut off. {%—Chinna-%}
{%veśikā,%} f. the plant Clypea Hernandifolia, {%= pāṭhā.%}
{%—Chinna-śvāsa, as,%} m. interrupted or irregular
breathing, a kind of asthma; ({%as, ā, am%}), breathing
at irregular intervals. {%—Chinna-saṃśaya, as, ā, am,%}
one whose doubts are dispelled, freed from doubt;
confirmed, confident. {%—Chinnodbhavā (˚na-ud˚),%} f.
the plant Cocculus Cordifolius, {%= guḍūcī.%}
<LEND>

<L>19120<pc>0334-a<k1>Cinnaka<k2>Cinnaka
{%Chinnaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a little cut off, in-
cised; (Compar. {%chinnaka-tara = chinnataraka.%})
<LEND>

<L>19121<pc>0334-a<k1>Cettavya<k2>Cettavya
{%Chettavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut, to be cut off &c.
<LEND>

<L>19122<pc>0334-a<k1>Cettf<k2>Cettf
{%Chettṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what cuts, a cutter, a
wood-cutter; destroying, removing, solving, a resolver
of (doubts &c.).
<LEND>

<L>19123<pc>0334-a<k1>Ceda<k2>Ceda
{%Cheda, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of comp.) cutting,
cutting off [cf. {%sthāṇu-ccheda%}]; ({%as%}), m. a cutting
or dividing, divisor, the denominator of a fraction;
a distinguishing mark [cf. {%bhakti-ccheda%}]; a cut, a
section, a piece, portion, a part cut off or broken off;
an incision, cleft; slit; cutting, dividing, tearing off;
solving, dissipating (doubt &c.); destruction, inter-
ruption, vanishing; cessation, deprivation, want, de-
[Page0334-b+ 72]
ficiency. {%—Cheda-kara, as, ā%} and {%ī, am,%} cutting;
({%as%}), m. a wood-cutter.
<LEND>

<L>19124<pc>0334-b<k1>Cedaka<k2>Cedaka
{%Chedaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ cutting off, dividing; the
denominator of a fraction; [cf. {%granthi-cchedaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19125<pc>0334-b<k1>Cedana<k2>Cedana
{%Chedana, as, ī, am,%}¦ cutting asunder, splitting;
destroying, solving, removing; ({%am%}), n. cutting,
cutting off, amputation, dividing, tearing asunder,
splitting; division; a section, a part, a portion; de-
struction, removing.
<LEND>

<L>19126<pc>0334-b<k1>CedanIya<k2>CedanIya
{%Chedanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut or divided,
divisible.
<LEND>

<L>19127<pc>0334-b<k1>Cedi<k2>Cedi
{%Chedi, is, is, i,%}¦ cutting off; breaking; ({%is%}), m. a
carpenter.
<LEND>

<L>19128<pc>0334-b<k1>Cedita<k2>Cedita
{%Chedita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, divided.
<LEND>

<L>19129<pc>0334-b<k1>Ceditavya<k2>Ceditavya
{%Cheditavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut or divided, divisible.
<LEND>

<L>19130<pc>0334-b<k1>Cedin<k2>Cedin
{%Chedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ cutting off, tearing off or asun-
der; destroying, removing.
<LEND>

<L>19131<pc>0334-b<k1>Cedya<k2>Cedya
{%Chedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut or divided, divisible;
to be cut off or amputated, to be split, to be muti-
lated; ({%am%}), n. amputation, excision; [cf. {%kuḍya-%}
{%cchedya%} and {%pattra-c˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19132<pc>0334-b<k1>CEdika<k2>CEdika
{%Chaidika, as,%}¦ m. a ratan, a cane.
<LEND>

<L>19133<pc>0334-b<k1>CippikA<k2>CippikA
{#CippikA#}¦ {%chippikā,%} f. a kind of bird (?);
[cf. {%cippikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19134<pc>0334-b<k1>CilihiRqa<k2>CilihiRqa
{#CilihiRqa#}¦ {%chilihiṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
{%= pātāla-garuḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>19135<pc>0334-b<k1>CucCundara<k2>CucCundara
{#CucCundara#}¦ {%chucchundara, as,%} m. or ({%i, is%} or
{%ī%}), f. the musk-rat or shrew.
<LEND>

<L>19136<pc>0334-b<k1>CucCU<k2>CucCU
{#CucCU#}¦ {%chucchū, ūs,%} f. or {%chucchū-piṅgalā,%} f.
a kind of animal.
<LEND>

<L>19137<pc>0334-b<k1>Cuw<k2>Cuw
{#Cuw#}¦ {%chuṭ%} (a various reading for {%cuṭ%}), cl.
6. 10. P. {%chuṭati, choṭayati,%} &c., to cut;
[cf. Hib. <nsi>sgoth,</nsi> ‘a cut;’ <nsi>sgothan,</nsi> ‘a small flock.’]
<LEND>

<L>19138<pc>0334-b<k1>Cuq<k2>Cuq
{#Cuq#}¦ {%chuḍ%} (a various reading for {%thuḍ%}),
cl. 6. P. {%chuḍati,%} &c., to cover.
<LEND>

<L>19139<pc>0334-b<k1>Cuqqa<k2>Cuqqa
{#Cuqqa#}¦ {%chuḍḍa, as,%} m., N. of several men;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>19140<pc>0334-b<k1>Cudra<k2>Cudra
{#Cudra#}¦ {%chudra, am,%} n. retaliation, counter-
action, remedying; a ray.
<LEND>

<L>19141<pc>0334-b<k1>Cup<k2>Cup
{#Cup#}¦ {%chup,%} cl. 6. P. {%chupati, cucchopa,%}
{%chopsyati, acchaupsīt, choptum,%} to touch.
<LEND>

<L>19142<pc>0334-b<k1>Cupa<k2>Cupa
{%Chupa, as,%}¦ m. touch, touching; a small tree, a
shrub, a bush; air, wind; war, combat.
<LEND>

<L>19143<pc>0334-b<k1>Cubuka<k2>Cubuka
{#Cubuka#}¦ {%chubuka, am,%} n., Ved. the chin;
[cf. {%civuka%} and {%cubuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19144<pc>0334-b<k1>Cur<k2>Cur
{#Cur#}¦ {%chur,%} cl. 6. P. {%churati, cucchora,%}
{%churitum,%} &c., to cut, engrave, incise,
etch: Caus. {%churayati%} and {%chorayati, -yitum,%} to
inlay, veneer, to set with mosaic ornaments; [cf.
{%kṣur;%} cf. also Hib. <nsi>scuirim</nsi> or <nsi>sguirim,</nsi> ‘I cease,
desist,’ cf. {%cheda;%} Old Germ. <nsi>scar, sciru,</nsi> &c.;
Mod. Germ. <nsi>Schere.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19145<pc>0334-b<k1>CurA<k2>CurA
{%Churā,%}¦ f. lime.
<LEND>

<L>19146<pc>0334-b<k1>CurikA<k2>CurikA
{%Churikā,%}¦ f. a knife.
<LEND>

<L>19147<pc>0334-b<k1>Curita<k2>Curita
{%Churita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, inlaid, set, coated, spread;
blended, intermingled. {%—Churitodara (˚ta-ud˚),%}
{%as, ī, am,%} pierced through the belly; transfixed.
<LEND>

<L>19148<pc>0334-b<k1>CurI<k2>CurI
{%Churī,%}¦ f. a knife, {%= kṣurī.%}
<LEND>

<L>19149<pc>0334-b<k1>CUrikA<k2>CUrikA
{%Chūrikā,%}¦ f. {%= churikā%} in {%chūrikā-pattrī,%} N. of a
plant, {%= śvetā,%} Andropogon Aciculatus; the mouth
of a cow; (other readings have {%khurikā, sphurikā,%}
{%sthurikā, sthūrikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>19150<pc>0334-b<k1>CUrI<k2>CUrI
{%Chūrī,%}¦ f. {%= churī.%}
<LEND>

<L>19151<pc>0334-b<k1>CoraRa<k2>CoraRa
{%Choraṇa, am,%}¦ n. abandoning, leaving.
<LEND>

<L>19152<pc>0334-b<k1>Cfd<k2>Cfd
{#Cfd#}¦ {%chṛd,%} cl. 7. P. {%chṛṇatti, caccharda,%}
{%chardiṣyati%} or {%chartsyati, charditum,%}
to pour out; P. and A. {%chṛṇatti, chṛntte,%} &c., to
play, shine; to vomit; cl. 1. P. {%chardati,%} &c., to
kindle: Caus. {%chardayati,%} to pour out; to spit
out, eject, vomit; to cause to spit; to kindle: Desid.
{%cicchardiṣati, -te,%} or {%cicchṛtsati, -te:%} Intens.
{%carīcchṛdyate, caricchartti;%} [cf. {%chard;%} cf.
[Page0334-c+ 65]
also Lat. <nsi>splendeo;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>spindẓiu, spindulys,</nsi>
<nsi>skaistus, skaistas;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>glänzen ?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>19153<pc>0334-c<k1>Cfp<k2>Cfp
{#Cfp#}¦ {%chṛp%} (a various reading for {%chṛd%}),
cl. 1. 10. P. {%charpati, charpayati,%} &c.,
to kindle, inflame.
<LEND>

<L>19154<pc>0334-c<k1>Ceka<k2>Ceka
{#Ceka#}¦ {%cheka, as, ā, am,%} tame, domesticated
(as a bird or beast); citizen, town-bred, shrewd,
sharp, smart, trained in the acuteness and vice of
towns; (with {%anu-prāsa%}), a kind of alliteration, repe-
tition of two or more consonants in different words;
({%as%}), m. a bee. {%—Chekokti (˚ka-uk˚), is,%} f. indirect
speech, insinuation, double entendre, hint.
<LEND>

<L>19155<pc>0334-c<k1>CekAla<k2>CekAla
{%Chekāla%}¦ or {%chekila, as, ā, am, = cheka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>19156<pc>0334-c<k1>Cettavya<k2>Cettavya
{#Cettavya#}¦ {%chettavya.%} See under 1. {%chid.%}
<LEND>

<L>19157<pc>0334-c<k1>CemaRqa<k2>CemaRqa
{#CemaRqa#}¦ {%chemaṇḍa, as,%} m. a fatherless child;
[cf. {%chamaṇḍa%} and {%kācigha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19158<pc>0334-c<k1>Celu<k2>Celu
{#Celu#}¦ {%chelu, us,%} m. the plant Vernonia
Anthelmintica.
<LEND>

<L>19159<pc>0334-c<k1>CEdika<k2>CEdika
{#CEdika#}¦ {%chaidika.%} See under 1. {%chid.%}
<LEND>

<L>19160<pc>0334-c<k1>Co<k2>Co
{#Co#}¦ {%cho,%} cl. 4. P. {%chyati, cacchau, chās-%}
{%yati, acchāt%} or {%acchāsīt, chātum,%} to cut,
divide, mow, reap: Caus. P. {%chāyayati.%}
<LEND>

<L>19161<pc>0334-c<k1>CAta<k2>CAta
{%Chāta%}¦ or {%chita, as, ā, am,%} cut, divided, thin,
feeble, emaciated.
<LEND>

<L>19162<pc>0334-c<k1>Coja<k2>Coja
{#Coja#}¦ {%choja, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19163<pc>0334-c<k1>CowikA<k2>CowikA
{#CowikA#}¦ {%choṭikā,%} f. snapping the thumb
and forefinger together.
<LEND>

<L>19164<pc>0334-c<k1>Cowin<k2>Cowin
{#Cowin#}¦ {%choṭin, ī,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%cho%}),
a fisherman.
<LEND>

<L>19165<pc>0334-c<k1>CoraRa<k2>CoraRa
{#CoraRa#}¦ {%choraṇa.%} See under rt. {%chur.%}
<LEND>

<L>19166<pc>0334-c<k1>ColaNga<k2>ColaNga
{#ColaNga#}¦ {%cholaṅga, as,%} m. {%= mātulu ga,%} a
citron, lime; [cf. {%ambu-keśara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19167<pc>0334-c<k1>Cyu<k2>Cyu
{#Cyu#}¦ {%chyu,%} cl. 1. A. {%chyavate,%} &c., to go,
move, approach.
<LEND>
<H>{#ja#}

<L>19168<pc>0334-c<k1>ja<k2>ja<h>1
{#ja#} 1¦. {%ja,%} the third letter of the second or
palatal class of consonants, having the sound of {%j%} in
{%jump%}. {%—Ja-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ja.%}
<LEND>

<L>19169<pc>0334-c<k1>ja<k2>ja<h>2
{#ja#} 2¦. {%ja, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%jan,%} and used
at the end of comp.), born from, descended from, a
son or daughter of, produced or caused by, born in,
produced in or at or upon, growing in, living at,
being at [cf. {%atri-dṛg-ja, dhṛtarāṣṭra-ja, ātma-%}
{%ja, aṇḍa-ja, kula-ja, vana-ja, sarasi-ja, agra-ja,%}
{%avara-ja, eka-ja,%} &c.]; prepared from, made of or
with; belonging to, connected with, peculiar to [cf.
{%anna-ja%} and {%śakra-ja%}]; ({%as%}), m. a father, pro-
genitor; birth, production; [cf. {%jā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19170<pc>0334-c<k1>ja<k2>ja<h>3
{#ja#} 3¦. {%ja, as, ā, am%} (connected with the
preceding by some lexicographers, but the meanings
appear to be artificial), speedy, swift; victorious,
triumphant, conquering; eaten; ({%as%}), m. speed;
enjoyment; light, lustre; poison; a Piśāca; a N.
of Viṣṇu; also of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. a husband's brother's
wife.
<LEND>

<L>19171<pc>0334-c<k1>jaMs<k2>jaMs
{#jaMs#}¦ {%jaṃs,%} cl. 10. P. {%jaṃsayati, -yitum,%} to
protect; to liberate.
<LEND>

<L>19172<pc>0334-c<k1>jaMh<k2>jaMh
{#jaMh#}¦ {%jaṃh,%} Ved. only in Intens. {%jaṅgahe,%}
to strike with the wings or feet, to kick;
(Sāy. who derives this word from {%grah%}), to hold
tight, hold fast.
<LEND>

<L>19173<pc>0334-c<k1>jaMhas<k2>jaMhas
{%Jaṃhas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. flapping of the wings; (Sāy.)
velocity, speed; [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-jaṃhas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19174<pc>0334-c<k1>jaka<k2>jaka
{#jaka#}¦ {%jaka, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>19175<pc>0334-c<k1>jakuwa<k2>jakuwa
{#jakuwa#}¦ {%jakuṭa, as,%} m. a dog; the Malaya
[Page0335-a+ 78]
mountains; ({%am%}), n. a pair; ({%as, am%}), m. n. the
egg-plant, Solanum Melongena, or its flower.
<LEND>

<L>19176<pc>0335-a<k1>jakz<k2>jakz<h>1
{#jakz#} 1¦. {%jakṣ%} (probably a reduplicated
form of {%ghas,%} q. v.), cl. 2. P. {%jakṣiti,%} 3rd
pl. {%jakṣati%} (Gram. 290. {%b%}); Impf. {%ajakṣīt%} and
{%ajakṣat%} (Pāṇ. VII. 3, 98, 99), 3rd pl. {%ajakṣus;%}
{%jajakṣa, jakṣiṣyati;%} Aor. {%ajakṣīt,%} 3rd pl.
{%ajakṣiṣus; jakṣitum%} or {%jagdhum,%} (Pres. part.
nom. sing. m. {%jakṣat,%} Pāṇ. VII. 1, 78), to eat,
consume, destroy; to wish to eat: Caus. {%jakṣa-%}
{%yati, ajajakṣat:%} Desid. {%jijakṣiṣati:%} Intens.
{%jājakṣyate, jājaṣṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>19177<pc>0335-a<k1>jakzaRa<k2>jakzaRa
{%Jakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. eating, consuming.
<LEND>

<L>19178<pc>0335-a<k1>jakzi<k2>jakzi
{%Jakṣi, is,%}¦ f. eating, consuming.
<LEND>

<L>19179<pc>0335-a<k1>jakzivas<k2>jakzivas
{%Jakṣivas, ān, uṣī, at%}¦ (perf. part. fr. rt. {%ghas%}),
one who has eaten.
<LEND>

<L>19180<pc>0335-a<k1>jagDa<k2>jagDa
{%Jagdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ eaten; ({%am%}), n. a place where a
person has eaten. {%—Jagdha-pāpman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. one
whose sin or wickedness is consumed or blotted out.
<LEND>

<L>19181<pc>0335-a<k1>jagDi<k2>jagDi
{%Jagdhi, is,%}¦ f. eating, consuming; food, victuals;
[cf. {%kalya-jagdhi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19182<pc>0335-a<k1>jakz<k2>jakz<h>2
{#jakz#} 2¦. {%jakṣ%} (reduplicated fr. rt. {%has%}),
cl. 2. P., Ved. {%jakṣiti,%} &c., to laugh.
<LEND>

<L>19183<pc>0335-a<k1>jakza<k2>jakza
{#jakza#}¦ {%jakṣa, as,%} m. a Prākṛt form for {%yakṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>19184<pc>0335-a<k1>jakzma<k2>jakzma
{%Jakṣma, as,%}¦ m. and {%jakṣman, ā,%} m. two
Prākṛt forms for {%yakṣman.%}
<LEND>

<L>19185<pc>0335-a<k1>jagat<k2>jagat
{#jagat#}¦ {%jagat, at, atī, at%} (reduplicated form
fr. rt. {%gam%}), moving, movable, locomotive, transitory;
({%t%}), n. that which moves or is alive, men and animals,
or animals as opposed to men; (in the later language)
the world, the earth, the universe; ({%tī%}), n. du. heaven
and the lower world; {%jaganti,%} n. pl. the worlds;
({%t%}), m. air, wind; ({%tī%}), f. a female animal, a cow,
(metaphorically ‘milk, water’); the earth; the site
of a house; people, mankind; the world, the uni-
verse; a particular metre consisting of four lines of
twelve syllables each; a general name for any metre
containing 4 × 12 syllables; a sacrificial brick named
after the metre Jagatī; a field planted with Jambū.
{%—Jagac-cakṣus, us,%} m. ‘the eye of the universe,’
the sun. {%—Jagac-candrikā,%} f., N. of a commentary
by Bhaṭṭotpala on the work Vṛhaj-jātaka; (this com-
mentary is also called Cintā-maṇi.) {%—Jagac-chandas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} one to whom the metre Jagatī belongs,
or to whom it is chiefly addressed &c. {%—Jagaj-jīva,%}
{%as,%} m. living in the world, a living being. {%—Jagaj-%}
{%jīvana-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of the author of three
poems entitled Jñāna-prakāśa, Prathama-grantha, and
Mahā-pralaya. {%—Jagatī-dhara, as,%} m. ‘supporter of
the world,’ a mountain; N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Ja-%}
{%gatī-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the earth,’ a king. {%—Ja-%}
{%gatī-pāla, as,%} m. ‘earth-protector,’ a king. {%—Jagatī-%}
{%bhartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘supporter of the earth,’ king.
{%—Jagatī-bhuj, k,%} m. one who enjoys or possesses
the earth, a king. {%—Jagatī-ruha, as,%} m. ‘growing
on the earth,’ a tree. {%—Jagatī-varāha, am,%} n., N.
of a Sāman. {%—Jagat-kartṛ, tā,%} m. the creator of
the world; Brahmā. {%—Jagat-kāraṇa, am,%} n. the
cause of the universe. {%—Jagat-kṛtsna, am,%} n. the
whole world, the universe. {%—Jagat-kṣaya, as,%} m.
the destruction of the world. {%—Jagat-traya, am,%} n.
the three worlds, or heaven, earth, and the lower
world {%(pātāla)%}. {%—Jagat-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the
world,’ an epithet of Śiva, also of Viṣṇu or
Kṛṣṇa; a king. {%—Jagat-prabhu, us,%} m. ‘lord of
the world,’ an epithet of Brahmā, of Śiva, of Viṣṇu;
an Arhat of the Jainas. {%—Jagat-prasiddha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} known throughout the world, notorious. {%—Ja-%}
{%gat-prāṇa, as,%} m. the breath of the world, wind,
air. {%—Jagat-samagra, am,%} n. the entire world, the
universe. {%—Jagat-sarva, am,%} n. the whole world.
{%—Jagat-sākṣin, ī,%} m. the witness or spectator of
the world, the sun. {%—Jagat-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a
son of Māna-siṃha and father of Mahā-siṃha. {%—Ja-%}
{%gat-sraṣṭṭi, ṭā,%} m. the creator of the world;
Brahmā; Śiva. {%—Jagat-svāmin, ī,%} m. lord of the
world, the supreme deity; N. of an image of the
sun in Dvādaśādityāśrama; N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Jagad- %}
[Page0335-b+ 81]
{%anta, as,%} m. the end of the world. {%—Jagad-antaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the destroyer of the world. {%—Jagadanta-%}
{%kāntaka (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m. destroying the destroyer
of the world. {%—Jagad-ambā,%} f. the mother of the
world, a N. of Durgā. {%—Jagad-ātmaka, as, ā, am,%}
whose self is the world, identical with the world.
{%—Jagad-ātman, ā,%} m. the soul of the world, the
supreme spirit. {%—Jagad-ādi-ja, as,%} m. the first-born
of the world, an epithet of Śiva. {%—Jagad-ādhāra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘stay or supporter of the universe,’ an epithet
of Time; also of the Jina Vīra; air, wind. {%—Jagad-%}
{%ānanda, as, ā, am,%} rejoicing the world. {%—Jagad-%}
{%āyu, us,%} m. or {%jagad-āyus, us,%} m. the life-spring of
the world, an epithet of the wind. {%—Jagad-īśa, as,%}
m. ‘lord of the universe,’ and epithet of Viṣṇu or
Kṛṣṇa, also of Śiva and Brahmā; N. of a man;
N. of the author of a commentary entitled Anumāna-
dīdhiti-ṭippanī. {%—Jagad-īśvara, as,%} m. the lord of
the universe; an epithet of Śiva; a king; N. of the
author of the play Hāsyārṇava. {%—Jagad-uddhāra,%}
{%as,%} m. the salvation or deliverance of the world.
{%—Jagad-ekanātha, as,%} m. the sole monarch
of the world; an epithet of Raghu. {%—Jagad-eka-%}
{%pāvana, as, ī, am,%} the sole purifier of the world.
{%—Jagad-guru, us,%} m. the father of the world; an
epithet of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva, and Rāma (as an
incarnation of Viṣṇu). {%—Jagad-gaurī,%} f. an epithet
of Manasādevī, the deified wife of the sage Jaratkāru
and sister of the Nāgas or serpent-race. {%—Jagad-%}
{%ghātin, ī, inī, i,%} destroying the world, destructive,
hostile to mankind. {%—Jagad-dīpa, as,%} m. ‘illumi-
nator of the world,’ an epithet of the sun. {%—Jagad-%}
{%dvīpa, as,%} m. wrong reading for {%jagad-vīja,%} q. v.
{%—Jagad-dhara, as,%} m. ‘supporter or sustainer of
the world,’ N. of the author of a commentary on the
plays Mālatī-mādhava and Veṇī-saṃhāra, a son of
Ratna-dhara and grandson of Vidyā-dhara. {%—Ja-%}
{%gad-dhātṛ, tā,%} m. ‘maintainer of the world,’ an
epithet of Brahmā and of Viṣṇu; ({%trī%}), f. ‘fosterer
of the world,’ an epithet of Sarasvatī and Durgā.
{%—Jagad-bala, as,%} m. ‘the strength of the world,’
or ‘surrounding the world,’ (fr. rt. {%val%}), wind, air.
{%—Jagad-yoni, is,%} m. ‘the womb or place of pro-
duction of the world,’ an epithet of Śiva, Viṣṇu,
Kṛṣṇa, and Brahmā; ({%is%}), f. the mother of all
living beings, the earth. {%—Jagad-vandya, as,%} m.
‘to be praised or adored by the world,’ an epithet
of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Jagad-vahā,%} f. ‘bearer of all living
beings,’ the earth. {%—Jagad-vināśa, as,%} m. the de-
struction of the world, the expiration of a Yuga or
period of the world's existence. {%—Jagad-vīja, am,%} n.
seed or first principle of the world, epithet of Śiva.
{%—Jagan-nātha, as,%} m. ‘the lord of the world,’ a N.
of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa; also of Rāma and of Dattātreya
(both incarnations of Viṣṇu); N. of a celebrated
idol; also of a temple, and the surrounding district
on the Coromandel coast near Cuttack in Orissa,
where Viṣṇu is especially worshipped as Jagan-nāth;
(pilgrimages are made from all parts of India to the
idol of Jagannāth there enshrined; see {%jagannātha-%}
{%kṣetra%} and {%puruṣottama-kṣetra%}); N. of the
author of a work entitled Rekhā-gaṇita; the author
of the poem Bhāminī-vilāsa; N. of a son of Rudra
who compiled at the end of the last century the work
Vivāda-bhaṅgārṇava; ({%au%}), m. du. epithet of Viṣṇu
and Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of Durgā. {%—Jagannātha-%}
{%kṣetra, am,%} n. the shrine of Jagannātha and sur-
rounding district, see above. {%—Jagannātha-valla-%}
{%bha-nāṭaka, am,%} n. title of a play. {%—Jagan-nivāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. the abode of the world, an epithet of Viṣṇu
or Kṛṣṇa; worldly existence. {%—Jagan-maṇi, is,%}
m., N. of a copyist. {%—Jagan-maya, as, ī, am,%} con-
taining the whole world. {%—Jagan-mātṛ, tā,%} f.
‘mother of the world,’ epithet of Durgā and
Lakṣmī.
<LEND>

<L>19186<pc>0335-b<k1>jaganvas<k2>jaganvas
{%Jaganvas, vān, gmuṣī, vat%}¦ (perf. part.), one
who has gone.
<LEND>

<L>19187<pc>0335-b<k1>jagmi<k2>jagmi
{%Jagmi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. going, being in constant
motion; going to, hastening towards (with acc. or
loc.); ({%is%}), m. the wind, air.
<LEND>

<L>19188<pc>0335-b<k1>jagmivas<k2>jagmivas
{%Jagmivas, vān, muṣī, vat,%}¦ who or what has gone.
<LEND>
[Page0335-c+ 74]

<L>19189<pc>0335-c<k1>jaNgama<k2>jaNgama
{%Jaṅgama, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. Intens. of rt. {%gam%}),
moving, movable, locomotive, that which has motion
as opposed to that which is stationary, living; a
living being ({%= jagat%} in the earlier language); de-
rived from living beings; [cf. Goth. <nsi>gagga;</nsi> Germ.
<nsi>Gang.</nsi>] {%—Jaṅgama-kuṭī,%} f. a parasol, a chattar or
umbrella (‘movable house’). {%—Jaṅgama-tva, am,%}
n. the state of having motion, movableness.
<LEND>

<L>19190<pc>0335-c<k1>jagada<k2>jagada
{#jagada#}¦ {%jagada, as,%} m. an attendant, a
guardian.
<LEND>

<L>19191<pc>0335-c<k1>jagaddala<k2>jagaddala
{#jagaddala#}¦ {%jagaddala, as,%} m., N. of a king of
the Darads.
<LEND>

<L>19192<pc>0335-c<k1>jaganu<k2>jaganu
{#jaganu#}¦ {%jaganu%} or {%jagannu, us,%} m. a living
being, an animal; an insect; fire or its deity.
<LEND>

<L>19193<pc>0335-c<k1>jagara<k2>jagara
{#jagara#}¦ {%jagara, as,%} m. armour, mail; [cf.
{%jāgara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19194<pc>0335-c<k1>jagala<k2>jagala
{#jagala#}¦ {%jagala, as, ā, am,%} fraudulent, knav-
ish; ({%as%}), m. a kind of intoxicating beverage, any
fluid suitable for distillation; the plant Vangueria
Spinosa, {%= madana-vṛkṣa;%} armour, mail [cf. {%ja-%}
{%gara%}]; ({%am%}), n. cow-dung.
<LEND>

<L>19195<pc>0335-c<k1>jaguri<k2>jaguri
{#jaguri#}¦ {%jaguri, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. {%gam%} or {%gā%}),
Ved. leading, conducting.
<LEND>

<L>19196<pc>0335-c<k1>jaggika<k2>jaggika
{#jaggika#}¦ {%jaggika, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19197<pc>0335-c<k1>jagDa<k2>jagDa
{#jagDa#}¦ {%jagdha.%} See under 1. {%jakṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>19198<pc>0335-c<k1>jagmi<k2>jagmi
{#jagmi#}¦ {%jagmi, jagmivas.%} See under {%jagat.%}
<LEND>

<L>19199<pc>0335-c<k1>jaGana<k2>jaGana
{#jaGana#}¦ {%jaghana, as, am,%} m. n. in the later
language always n. (probably a reduplicated form of
rt. {%han,%} but by some connected with {%jaṃh%}), the
hinder part, the buttock, the hip and loins, the
pudenda, mons veneris; rear-guard, reserve of an
army; [cf. {%jaṅghā.%}] {%—Jaghana-kūpaka, au,%} m.
du. the hollow of the loins of a handsome woman.
{%—Jaghana-gaurava, am,%} n. the weight of the
hips. {%—Jaghana-capalā,%} f. a libidinous woman
(moving the hips); a woman active in dancing; a
species of the Āryā metre. {%—Jaghana-tas,%} ind.
behind, on the hinder part, after; [cf. {%agra-tas.%}]
{%—Jaghanārdha (˚na-ar˚), as,%} m. the hinder part
(opposed to {%pūrvārdha%}); rear-guard, reserve of an
army. {%—Jaghane-phalā,%} f. the opposite-leaved fig-
tree, Ficus Oppositifolia.
<LEND>

<L>19200<pc>0335-c<k1>jaGanin<k2>jaGanin
{%Jaghanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having stout hips or large
buttocks.
<LEND>

<L>19201<pc>0335-c<k1>jaGanena<k2>jaGanena
{%Jaghanena,%}¦ ind. behind, (with gen. or acc.) back-
wards, away from.
<LEND>

<L>19202<pc>0335-c<k1>jaGanya<k2>jaGanya
{%Jaghanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ hindmost, hinder, last,
latest, lowest, low, worst, vilest, vile, base, shortest,
least, least important; of low origin or rank; ({%as%}),
m. a Śūdra or man of the lowest class; N. of the
attendant of Mālavya, who was one of the five princes
born under particular constellations; ({%am%}), n. the
penis; ({%am%} or {%e%}), ind. after, behind, last; {%jaghanye%}
{%kṛ,%} to leave behind, turn the back on; [cf. Hib.
<nsi>deaghanach,</nsi> ‘last.’] {%—Jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} addicted to low pursuits, chiefly familiar
with the lowest of the three Guṇas. {%—Jaghanya-ca-%}
{%palā,%} f. a species of the Āryā metre; [cf. {%jaghana-%}
{%capalā.%}] {%—Jaghanya-ja, as, ā, am,%} last born, young-
est; low-born; ({%as%}), m. a younger brother; a Śūdra.
{%—Jaghanya-tara, as, ā, am,%} lower, inferior. {%—Ja-%}
{%ghanya-tas,%} ind. behind, at the back, after. {%—Jaghanya-%}
{%śāyin, ī, inī, i,%} lying down last, going to bed last.
<LEND>

<L>19203<pc>0335-c<k1>jaGanvas<k2>jaGanvas
{#jaGanvas#}¦ {%jaghanvas, vān, ghnuṣī, vat%} (fr.
rt. {%han%}), who or what has killed.
<LEND>

<L>19204<pc>0335-c<k1>jaGni<k2>jaGni
{%Jaghni, is, is, i,%}¦ striking, killing; ({%is%}), m. a
weapon, offensive instrument.
<LEND>

<L>19205<pc>0335-c<k1>jaGnivas<k2>jaGnivas
{%Jaghnivas, vān, ghnuṣī, vat%}¦ (perf. part.), {%=%}
{%jaghanvas%} above.
<LEND>

<L>19206<pc>0335-c<k1>jaGnu<k2>jaGnu
{%Jaghnu, us, us, u,%}¦ striking, beating, killing.
<LEND>

<L>19207<pc>0335-c<k1>jaGri<k2>jaGri
{#jaGri#}¦ {%jaghri, is, is, i%} (reduplicated form fr.
rt. {%ghṛ%}), Ved. pouring out, sprinkling about.
<LEND>

<L>19208<pc>0335-c<k1>jaNkz<k2>jaNkz
{#jaNkz#}¦ {%jaṅkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%jaṅkṣati,%} a various
reading for {%kṣaj%} or {%kṣañj.%}
<LEND>
[Page0336-a+ 72]

<L>19209<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNga<k2>jaNga
{#jaNga#}¦ {%jaṅga, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19210<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNgapUga<k2>jaNgapUga
{#jaNgapUga#}¦ {%jaṅgapūga, as,%} m. wickedness,
sin (?).
<LEND>

<L>19211<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNgama<k2>jaNgama
{#jaNgama#}¦ {%jaṅgama.%} See p. 335, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>19212<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNgala<k2>jaNgala
{#jaNgala#}¦ {%jaṅgala, as, ā, am,%} arid, sterile,
desert; ({%as%}), m. a desert, waste or overgrown land,
any arid or sterile region, any wild or uninhabited
country, a jungle; ({%as, am%}), m. n. flesh, meat; [cf.
{%jāṅgala%} and {%jaṅgula.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19213<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNgAla<k2>jaNgAla
{%Jaṅgāla, as,%}¦ m. a land-mark, a limit, a boundary,
a ridge of earth running along the edge of a field for
collecting water and forming a passage over it, a balk.
<LEND>

<L>19214<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNgula<k2>jaNgula
{%Jaṅgula, am,%}¦ n. poison, venom.
<LEND>

<L>19215<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNgiqa<k2>jaNgiqa
{#jaNgiqa#}¦ {%jaṅgiḍa, as,%} m., N. of a plant
which is worn as an amulet.
<LEND>

<L>19216<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNGa<k2>jaNGa
{#jaNGa#}¦ {%jaṅgha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%jan,%}
or corrupted from {%jaṅgā%} fr. rt. {%gā,%} to go, or fr. rt.
{%jaṃh;%} cf. {%jaghana%}), N. of a Rakṣas; ({%ā%}), f. the
shank or lower part of the leg from the ankle to the
knee; (in the earlier language also) the upper part
of the leg; a part of a bedstead; [cf. Old Germ.
<nsi>scinkel;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Schenkel.</nsi>] {%—Jaṅghā-kara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} or {%jaṅghā-karika, as, ā, am,%} active with the
legs, running quickly, a runner. {%—Jaṅghā-kārika,%}
{%as,%} m. a runner, a courier, an express. {%—Jaṅghā-%}
{%trāṇa, am,%} n. armour or protection for the legs,
cuisses or greaves. {%—Jaṅghā-bandhu, us,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Jaṅghā-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. his descendants. {%—Jaṅghāri (˚ghā-ari), is,%}
m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19217<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNGAla<k2>jaNGAla
{%Jaṅghāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ running swiftly, quick, rapid,
going quickly; ({%as%}), m. a courier; a deer, an antelope.
<LEND>

<L>19218<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNGikA<k2>jaNGikA
{%Jaṅghikā,%}¦ f. a diminutive fr. {%jaṅghā.%}
<LEND>

<L>19219<pc>0336-a<k1>jaNGila<k2>jaNGila
{%Jaṅghila, as, ā, am,%}¦ running swiftly, quick, rapid.
<LEND>

<L>19220<pc>0336-a<k1>jaj<k2>jaj
{#jaj#}¦ {%jaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%jajati,%} &c., to fight;
[cf. {%jañj;%} cf. also Hib. <nsi>fighim,</nsi> ‘I fight;’
Germ. <nsi>fechte;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>vihtu;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>pugno.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19221<pc>0336-a<k1>jaja<k2>jaja
{%Jaja, as,%}¦ m. a warrior. {%—Jajaujas (˚ja-oj˚), as,%}
n. prowess, valour; [cf. {%jājin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19222<pc>0336-a<k1>jajja<k2>jajja
{#jajja#}¦ {%jajja, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19223<pc>0336-a<k1>jajjala<k2>jajjala
{%Jajjala, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19224<pc>0336-a<k1>jajYi<k2>jajYi
{#jajYi#}¦ {%jajñi, is, is, i%} (reduplicated form fr.
rt. {%jan%}), germinating, shooting.
<LEND>

<L>19225<pc>0336-a<k1>jaJJatI<k2>jaJJatI
{#jaJJatI#}¦ {%jajhjhatī, īs,%} f. pl., Ved. (scil. {%āpas%}),
dashing, splashing or rushing waters; (an onomato-
poetic word formed like a pres. part. from a supposed
rt. {%jajhjh.%})
<LEND>

<L>19226<pc>0336-a<k1>jaYj<k2>jaYj
{#jaYj#}¦ {%jañj,%} cl. 1. P. {%jañjati,%} &c., {%= jaj,%}
to fight; [cf. Lith. <nsi>ẓinczíju.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19227<pc>0336-a<k1>jaYjaRABavat<k2>jaYjaRABavat
{#jaYjaRABavat#}¦ {%jañjaṇā-bhavat, an, antī, at,%}
Ved. glittering, flashing.
<LEND>

<L>19228<pc>0336-a<k1>jaYjapUka<k2>jaYjapUka
{#jaYjapUka#}¦ {%jañjapūka, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens.
of rt. {%jap%}), muttering prayers repeatedly, muttering
incantations or charms; ({%as%}), m. an ascetic, a devotee,
one who mutters prayers.
<LEND>

<L>19229<pc>0336-a<k1>jaw<k2>jaw
{#jaw#}¦ {%jaṭ%} (probably a rt. derived fr. {%jaṭa%}
below), cl. 1. P. {%jaṭati,%} &c., to clot, to form
into a concrete mass, to become twisted together or
entangled and matted as hair; [cf. {%jhaṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19230<pc>0336-a<k1>jawa<k2>jawa
{#jawa#}¦ {%jaṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%jan ?%}), wearing
twisted or entangled locks of hair; ({%ā%}), f. the hair
matted and twisted together as worn by the god
Śiva and by ascetics and persons in mourning; the
long tresses of hair twisted or braided together, and
coiled in a knot over the head so as to project like
a horn from the forehead, or at other times allowed
to fall carelessly over the back and shoulders; a
fibrous root, a root in general; N. of several plants,
{%= jaṭā-māṃsī;%} Mucuna Pruritus, Flacourtia Cata-
phracta; Asparagus Racemosus; also {%= rudra-jaṭā%}
[cf. {%kṛṣṇa-jaṭā%}]; N. of a Pāṭha or arrangement
of the Vedic text so called from a peculiar repetition
[Page0336-b+ 79]
and inversion of the words, (it is a still more artificial
arrangement than the Krama-pāṭha, each pair of words
being repeated three times and one repetition being
in inverted order.) {%—Jaṭā-kara, as, ā, am,%} matting
the hair. {%—Jaṭā-cīra%} or {%jaṭāṭīra, as,%} m. a N. of
Śiva. {%—Jaṭā-jūṭa, as,%} m. the long tresses of hair
twisted on the top of the head; a quantity of twisted
hair; Śiva's hair. {%—Jaṭā-jvāla, as,%} m. ‘having a
flame like a tuft,’ a lamp. {%—Jaṭā-ṭaṅka, as,%} m. an
epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%kaṭaṅkaṭa.%}] {%—Jaṭā-dhara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} wearing twisted or matted hair; ({%as%}), m.
any mendicant or ascetic wearing the Jaṭā; an epithet
of Śiva; N. of one of the attendants of Skanda; N.
of a Buddha; N. of a lexicographer; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a people in the south of India. {%—Jaṭā-dhārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} wearing matted or braided hair. {%—Jaṭā-%}
{%pāṭha, as,%} m. the Jaṭā reading or arrangement of
the Vedic text, see above. {%—Jaṭā-bandha, as,%} m.
the knot or coil of matted hair. {%—Jaṭā-maṇḍala,%}
{%am,%} n. braided or twisted hair forming a coil on
the top of the head. {%—Jaṭā-māṃsī,%} f. the plant
Nardostachys Jaṭāmāṃsi. {%—Jaṭā-mālin, ī,%} m., N. of
a form of Śiva, ‘garlanded with matted hair.’ {%—Jaṭā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} wearing the Jaṭā, wearing knotted or
clotted hair; ({%tī%}), f. {%= jaṭā-māṃsī%}. {%—Jaṭā-vallī,%} f.,
N. of two plants, {%= rudra-jaṭā%} and {%gandha-māṃsī.%}
{%—Jaṭāsura (˚ṭā-as˚), as,%} m., N. of a Rakṣas
killed by Bhīma-sena; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people
living in the north-east of Madhya-deśa. {%—Jaṭe-%}
{%śvara-tīrtha (˚ṭā-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>19231<pc>0336-b<k1>jawAyu<k2>jawAyu
{%Jaṭāyu, us,%}¦ and {%jaṭāyus, us,%} m., N. of a fabulous
bird, the king of the vultures ({%gṛdhra-rāja%}), son
of Aruṇa and Śyenī (or according to the Rāmāyaṇa,
son of Garuḍa), and younger brother of Sampāti.
(It is related in Chap. XX of the Araṇya-kāṇḍa of
the Rāmāyaṇa, that whilst Rāma was on his way to
Pañcavatī he met Jaṭāyus, who declared his intention
of aiding Rāma, out of regard for his father Daśa-
ratha. Accordingly when Rāvaṇa carried off Sītā,
the semi-divine bird attempted to rescue her, but
was defeated and mortally wounded by Rāvaṇa;
Chap. LVI); bdellium, see {%guggulu;%} N. of a
mountain.
<LEND>
<L>19231.1<pc>0336-b<k1>jawAyus<k2>jawAyus
{{Lbody=19231}}
<LEND>

<L>19232<pc>0336-b<k1>jawAla<k2>jawAla
{%Jaṭāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ wearing a coil of twisted or
clotted hair; ({%as%}), m. bdellium; a kind of Curcuma
({%karcūra%}); the plant Bignonia Suaveolens; the Indian
fig-tree or {%vaṭa; (ā),%} f. {%= jaṭā-māṃsī.%}
<LEND>

<L>19233<pc>0336-b<k1>jawAlaka<k2>jawAlaka
{%Jaṭālaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ wearing knotted or matted
hair.
<LEND>

<L>19234<pc>0336-b<k1>jawi<k2>jawi
{%Jaṭi, is,%}¦ f. clotted or twisted hair, an assemblage,
multitude; the waved-leaf fig-tree, Ficus Venosa ({%=%}
{%plakṣa%}); [cf. {%jaṭī%} and {%dhurjaṭi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19235<pc>0336-b<k1>jawika<k2>jawika
{%Jaṭika, as, ā, am,%}¦ wearing twisted or braided hair
({%= jaṭin ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>19236<pc>0336-b<k1>jawin<k2>jawin
{%Jaṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wearing the Jaṭā, having twisted
hair; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; N. of one of the
attendants of Skanda; an elephant sixty years old;
waved-leaf fig-tree ({%= plakṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>19237<pc>0336-b<k1>jawila<k2>jawila
{%Jaṭila, as, ā, am,%}¦ wearing the Jaṭā, having clotted
or entangled hair; complicated, twisted together,
intermixed, confused; ({%as%}), m. a lion; a goat with
certain marks; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman
with the patronymic Gautamī said to have had seven
husbands, mother-in-law of Rādhikā; N. of several
plants, {%= jaṭā-māṃsī;%} long pepper; also {%= uccaṭā;%}
{%= vacā,%} Acorus Calamus; {%= damanaka%}. {%—Jaṭila-%}
{%sthala, am,%} n., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>19238<pc>0336-b<k1>jawilaka<k2>jawilaka
{%Jaṭilaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
descendants of this man; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>19239<pc>0336-b<k1>jawilIkf<k2>jawilIkf
{%Jaṭilī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to twist together, form into a clotted mass, to
braid; to complicate, interweave, wrap round.
<LEND>

<L>19240<pc>0336-b<k1>jawilIBAva<k2>jawilIBAva
{%Jaṭilī-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. the being twisted together,
complication, confusion.
<LEND>

<L>19241<pc>0336-b<k1>jawI<k2>jawI
{%Jaṭī,%}¦ f. the waved-leaf fig-tree [cf. {%jaṭi%}]; also {%=%}
{%jaṭā-māṃsī.%}
<LEND>

<L>19242<pc>0336-b<k1>jawAwIra<k2>jawAwIra
{#jawAwIra#}¦ {%jaṭāṭīra.%} See {%jaṭā-cīra.%}
<LEND>

<L>19243<pc>0336-b<k1>jawula<k2>jawula
{#jawula#}¦ {%jaṭula, as,%} m. a freckle, a mark;
[cf. {%jaḍula.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0336-c+ 79]

<L>19244<pc>0336-c<k1>jaWara<k2>jaWara
{#jaWara#}¦ {%jaṭhara, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%jan%}), hard, firm; old; bound, tied (?); yellowish (?);
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people in the south-east of
Madhya-deśa; ({%as%}), m., N. of a mountain; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. the stomach, belly, abdomen, viscera,
bowels; the womb; a hole, cavity; the interior of
anything; the bosom; certain morbid affections of
the bowels; Ved. course (?); [cf. Goth. <nsi>qvithrs,</nsi>
Them. <nsi>qvithra;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>venter ?</nsi>]. {%—Jaṭhara-gada,%}
{%as,%} m. a morbid affection of the abdomen or bowels,
dropsy (?). {%—Jaṭhara-jvālā,%} f. belly-ache, colic, en-
teritis. {%—Jaṭhara-nud, t,%} m. the plant Cathartocar-
pus Fistula; [cf. {%āragbadha.%}] {%—Jaṭhara-yantraṇā%}
or {%jaṭhara-yātanā,%} f. pain endured by the child in
the womb before birth. {%—Jaṭhara-roga, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%jaṭhara-gada%} above. {%—Jaṭhara-vyathā,%} f. stomach-
ache, colic. {%—Jaṭhara-stha, as, ā, am,%} or {%jaṭhara-%}
{%sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%jaṭhara-sthita, as, ā, am,%}
being in the belly, being in the womb. {%—Jaṭharāgni%}
{%(˚ra-ag˚), is,%} m. the digestive fire of the stomach, the
gastric juice [cf. {%agni%} and {%jāṭhara%}]; a N. of Agastya
in a former birth; [cf. {%dahrāgni.%}] {%—Jaṭharāmaya%}
{%(˚ra-ām˚), as,%} m. dropsy, water in the abdomen.
<LEND>

<L>19245<pc>0336-c<k1>jaWarin<k2>jaWarin
{%Jaṭharin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having a large belly; abdo-
minal, {%= udarin,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19246<pc>0336-c<k1>jaWarIkfta<k2>jaWarIkfta
{%Jaṭharī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ contained in the belly;
concealed in the bosom.
<LEND>

<L>19247<pc>0336-c<k1>jaWala<k2>jaWala
{%Jaṭhala, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (?), Ved. {%= jaṭhara;%} (Sāy.)
the cavity or receptacle of waters, the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>19248<pc>0336-c<k1>jaqa<k2>jaqa
{#jaqa#}¦ {%jaḍa, as, ā, am%} (perhaps corrupted fr.
rt. {%jal,%} cf. {%jala%}), cold, frigid, chilly; stiff; stunned, para-
lyzed, motionless, apathetic, senseless, stupid, idiotic,
irrational, dumb; stunning, stupefying; ({%as%}), m. ‘the
stupid one,’ an epithet of Su-mati who, though intelli-
gent, simulated stupidity; cold, frost, winter; idiocy,
fatuity, stupidity; dulness, apathy, sluggishness of
mind or body; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Mucuna Pruritus;
also the plant Flacourtia Cataphracta [cf. {%jaṭā%}];
({%am%}), n. water [cf. {%jala%}]; lead; [cf. Hib. <nsi>fiod,</nsi>
<nsi>fuar.</nsi>] {%—Jaḍa-kriya, as, ā, am,%} working slowly or
stupidly, dilatory. {%—Jaḍa-tā,%} f. or {%jaḍa-tva, am,%} n.
coldness, chilliness, frigidness, apathy, stupidity, stupe-
faction, despair. {%—Jaḍa-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} stupid, idiotic.
{%—Jaḍa-bharata, as,%} m. ‘the stupid Bharata,’ N. of
a man simulating stupidity; an idiot in general.
<LEND>

<L>19249<pc>0336-c<k1>jaqiman<k2>jaqiman
{%Jaḍiman, ā,%}¦ m. frigidity, stupefaction, insensibility,
stupidity, dulness.
<LEND>

<L>19250<pc>0336-c<k1>jaqIkf<k2>jaqIkf
{%Jaḍī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to stun,
stupify, benumb, congeal. {%—Jaḍī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
stunned, rendered cold or torpid or insensible, stupe-
fied, confounded, paralyzed.
<LEND>

<L>19251<pc>0336-c<k1>jaqIBU<k2>jaqIBU
{%Jaḍī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to become
insensible or stupid or frozen or rigid. {%—Jaḍī-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. frigidity, coldness, apathy, stupidity. {%—Jaḍī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become torpid, stunned, stupefied,
paralyzed, infatuated.
<LEND>

<L>19252<pc>0336-c<k1>jaqula<k2>jaqula
{#jaqula#}¦ {%jaḍula, as,%} m. a freckle, a mark;
[cf. {%jaṭula%} and {%jatu-maṇi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19253<pc>0336-c<k1>jatu<k2>jatu
{#jatu#}¦ {%jatu, u,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%jan%}), lac,
a red dye or pigment formed by an insect analogous
to cochineal, a kind of gum; ({%ū, ūs%}), f. a bat.
{%—Jatu-kārī,%} f. or {%jatu-kṛt, t,%} f. a kind of fragrant
tree, {%= jatukā,%} (‘making lac,’ the lac insect forming
its nest in this tree.) {%—Jatu-kṛṣṇā,%} f. {%= parpaṭī.%}
{%—Jatu-gṛha, am,%} n. a house plastered with lac,
resin, and other combustible substances, (such a house
was built for the reception of the Pāṇḍava princes in
Vāraṇāvata by Purocana, at the instigation of Dur-
yodhana, the object being to burn them alive when
they were asleep after a festival. Warned, however,
by Vidura, they discovered the dangerous character of
their abode, and dug an underground passage by
which to escape from the interior. Next having
invited an outcaste woman with her five sons to a
feast, they first stupefied them with wine, and then
having burnt Purocana in his own house, set fire to
the house of lac and, leaving the charred bodies of
the woman and her sons inside, escaped by the under-
ground passage; see Mahā-bh. I. 5864.) {%—Jatu- %}
[Page0337-a+ 79]
{%geha, am,%} n. {%= jatu-gṛha%}. {%—Jatu-putraka, as,%}
m. a man at chess or backgammon &c. (coloured
with lac). {%—Jatu-maṇi, is,%} m. a mole, a natural
mark on the body. {%—Jatu-mukha, as,%} m. a kind
of rice. {%—Jatu-rasa, as,%} m. lac, the dye. {%—Jatu-%}
{%veśmadāha, as,%} m. the conflagration of the house
of lac. {%—Jatu-veśman, a,%} n. {%= jatu-gṛha,%} q. v.
{%—Jatū-karṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man; (a various
reading for {%jātūkarṇa.%}) {%—Jatv-aśmaka, am,%} n. red
arsenic; [cf. {%śilā-jatu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19254<pc>0337-a<k1>jatuka<k2>jatuka
{%Jatuka, am,%}¦ n. lac, see {%jatu;%} Asa Fœtida [cf.
{%jātuka%}]; ({%ā%}), f. lac; a kind of fragrant plant or tree,
{%= jatu-kṛt, jatūkā, janī,%} &c.; also {%= parpaṭī;%} a
bat; [cf. {%jatunī, jatūkā, aśma-jatuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19255<pc>0337-a<k1>jatunI<k2>jatunI
{%Jatunī,%}¦ f. a bat.
<LEND>

<L>19256<pc>0337-a<k1>jatUkA<k2>jatUkA
{%Jatūkā,%}¦ f. a kind of fragrant plant; a bat.
<LEND>

<L>19257<pc>0337-a<k1>jatru<k2>jatru
{#jatru#}¦ {%jatru, us, u,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%jan;%} in the earlier language m. and pl. only), the
continuations of the vertebræ; (in later Sanskrit) the
collar-bone, clavicle; {%ūrdhva-jatru,%} the part of the
body above the collar-bone.
<LEND>

<L>19258<pc>0337-a<k1>jatruka<k2>jatruka
{%Jatruka, am,%}¦ n. the collar-bone, the clavicle.
<LEND>

<L>19259<pc>0337-a<k1>jan<k2>jan
{#jan#}¦ {%jan,%} cl. 1. 3. P. {%janati, jajanti, jajāna,%}
{%janiṣyati, janitum,%} to generate, beget,
(in these senses Ved.); cl. 4. A. {%jāyate, jajñe, janiṣ-%}
{%yate, ajaniṣṭa%} and {%ajani, janitum%} (Ved. {%janitos%}),
to be born or produced, to come into existence; to
grow (as plants &c.); to be born again; to be, be-
come, take place, happen; to be possible, applicable,
suitable, &c.; to be born for or destined for anything
(with acc., e. g. {%taṃ lokaṃ jāyate,%} he is born for that
world, Ved.): Caus. {%janayati, -te, ajījanat, jana-%}
{%yitum%} (Ved. {%janayitavai%}), to generate, beget,
bring forth, produce, create, cause, occasion; to
cause to be born; to assign, procure: Desid. {%jijani-%}
{%ṣati:%} Intens. {%jañjanyate%} and {%jājāyate, jañjanti,%}
{%jājāti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">γίγνομαι;</lang> Lat. <nsi>gigno, genui,</nsi>
<nsi>(g)nascor;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>genim,</nsi> ‘I beget, generate;’ Lith.
<nsi>gemù;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>kin</nsi> in <nsi>keina, kain;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Kind,</nsi> &c.]
<LEND>

<L>19260<pc>0337-a<k1>jana<k2>jana
{%Jana, as,%}¦ m. a created being, a creature, a living
being, man; a person or individual in general, (used
collectively in sing. as well as in pl., e. g. {%daivyo%}
{%janaḥ%} or {%divyo janaḥ,%} the gods collectively; often
at the end of a compound, e. g. {%preṣya-jana,%} a
servant; {%svajana-jana,%} a relation; {%dāsa-jana,%} a
slave; {%sakhī-jana,%} a female friend); people, race,
tribe, subjects, nation (e. g. {%pañca janāḥ,%} the five races
of men or nations; cf. {%carṣaṇi%} and {%kṛṣṭi%}); the
person nearest to the speaker (hence {%ayaṃ janaḥ =%}
this person, these persons, often = I, I myself, we our-
selves; cf. <nsi>hic homo</nsi>); a common person, one of the
people; the world beyond the Mahar-loka, the heaven
of deified mortals or the people living in it [cf. {%jana-%}
{%loka%}]; N. of a man with the patronymic Śārkarā-
kṣya; ({%ā%}), f. birth, production; [cf. {%antaḥpura-%}
{%jana, itara-jana, kula-jana, guru-jana, tiro-%}
{%jana,%} &c.; cf. also Hib. <nsi>duine,</nsi> man either male or
female; Goth. <nsi>qvinô;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>schena.</nsi>] {%—Janaṃ-%}
{%saha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. subduing all creatures, epithet
of Indra. {%—Jana-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} containing cere-
monial ordinances for mankind, ({%janakalpā ṛcaḥ,%}
applied to several verses of the Atharva-veda);
similar to mankind. {%—Janaṅ-gama, as,%} m. a
Cāṇḍāla, a man of a low or degraded tribe; [cf.
{%jalaṅ-gama.%}] {%—Jana-cakṣus, us,%} n. the eye of all
creatures, the sun; [cf. {%jagac-cakṣus.%}] {%—Jana-tā,%}
f. a number of men, an assemblage of people, a
community; people, subjects; mankind, manhood;
birth, generation. {%—Jana-traya, am,%} n. three per-
sons. {%—Jana-trā,%} f. (for {%jala-trā ?%}), an umbrella, a
parasol. {%—Jana-deva, as,%} m. a king. {%—Janan-%}
{%tapa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Jana-pada, as,%}
m. a community, nation, people (sing. or pl.);
the people (as opposed to the sovereign); an empire,
an inhabited country; man, mankind; [cf. {%jāna-%}
{%pada.%}] {%—Janapadādhipa (˚da-adh˚), as,%} m. the
ruler of a people or empire, a prince, a king. {%—Ja-%}
{%napadāyuta (˚da-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} crowded with
people, populous. {%—Janapadin, ī,%} m. the ruler of
[Page0337-b+ 81]
an empire, a prince, king. {%—Janapadeśvara (˚da-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. the lord of a country. {%—Jana-pravāda,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the talk of men,’ rumour, report. {%—Jana-%}
{%priya, as, ā, am,%} fond of mankind; philanthropic;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; coriander-seed; the
tree Morunga Hyperanthera, {%= śobhāñjana%}. {%—Jana-%}
{%bhakṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. devouring men; (Sāy.)
loving men or to be loved by men. {%—Jana-bhṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} Ved. supporting men. {%—Jana-maraka, as,%} m.
‘men-killer,’ an epidemic disease. {%—Jana-maryādā,%}
f. popular observance, established usage. {%—Janam-%}
{%ejaya, as,%} m. ‘causing men to tremble,’ N. of a
celebrated king to whom Vaiśampāyana recited the
Mahā-bhārata, (he was great-grandson to Arjuna, as
being son and successor to Parikṣit, who was son of
Abhi-manyu, who was son of Arjuna); N. of a son of
Kuru; of a son of Puru; of Purañ-jaya; of Soma-
datta; of Su-mati; N. of a Nāga. {%—Jana-mohin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} infatuating men. {%—Jana-yopana, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. impeding or perplexing men, causing them to
suffer; (Sāy.) gladdening men. {%—Jana-rañjana,%}
{%am,%} n. gratifying the people, courting popular favour.
{%—Jana-rava, as,%} m. rumour, report; calumny,
scandal. {%—Jana-rāj, ṭ,%} or {%jana-rājan, ā,%} m., Ved.
king of men, ruler of men. {%—Jana-loka, as,%} m. one of
the seven Lokas or divisions of the universe, the fifth
or next above Mahar-loka, where the sons of Brahmā
and other pious men reside; [cf. {%janas.%}] {%—Jana-%}
{%vallabha, as, ā, am,%} agreeable to men; a favourite
with men, fond of men; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%śveta-rohita%}. {%—Jana-vāda, as,%} m. ‘the talk of
men,’ news, rumour, report, scandal; [cf. {%jane-vāda%}
and {%jano-vāda.%}] {%—Jana-vādin, ī,%} m., Ved. a talker,
newsmonger, gossip, tattler. {%—Jana-vid, t, t, t,%} pos-
sessing men. {%—Jana-vyavahāra, as,%} m. popular
practice or usage. {%—Jana-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. coming
or going to men; epithet of Pūṣan. {%—Jana-śruta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} known among men; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman. {%—Jana-śruti, is,%}
f. rumour, news, tidings, intelligence. {%—Jana-saṃ-%}
{%sad, t,%} f. an assembly of men. {%—Jana-saṅkṣaya,%}
{%as,%} m. destruction of men. {%—Jana-sambādha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} densely crowded with people (a place). {%—Jana-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} living or abiding among men.
{%—Jana-sthāna, am,%} n. ‘the resort of demons,’ N.
of a part of the Daṇḍaka forest in the Dakhin.
{%—Janasthāna-ruha, as, ā, am,%} growing in Jana-
sthāna. {%—Janākīrṇa (˚na-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} crowded
with people. {%—Janācāra (˚na-āc˚), as,%} m. popular
usage or custom, propriety, decorum, good conduct.
{%—Janātiga (˚na-at˚), as, ā, am,%} superhuman,
superior. {%—Janādhinātha (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m. su-
preme lord of men, a king; an epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Janādhipa (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m. a ruler of men,
a prince, a king. {%—Janānta (˚na-an˚), as,%} m. a
place removed from men, an uninhabited place; a
region; personal proximity; an epithet of Yama,
the destroyer of men. {%—Janāntika (˚na-an˚), am,%}
n. secret communication, whispering, speaking aside
to another; ({%am%}), ind. (as a stage-direction) speak-
ing aside, aside. {%—Janāyana (˚na-ay˚), as, ā, am,%}
Ved. leading to men. {%—Janārṇava (˚na-ar˚), as,%}
m. ‘ocean of men,’ a large concourse of people, a
caravan. {%—Janārtha-śabda (˚na-ar˚), as,%} m. a family
appellation, a gentile noun. {%—Janārdana (˚na-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa (exciting
or agitating men); N. of several men. {%—Janār-%}
{%dana-vibudha, as,%} m., N. of the author of a com-
mentary called Bhāvārtha-dīpikā. {%—Janāv (˚na-av),%}
{%aus,%} m., Ved. a preserver or protector of mankind.
{%—Janāśana (˚na-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘man-eater,’ a wolf.
{%—Janāśraya (˚na-āś˚), as,%} m. an asylum or shelter
for men, an inn, caravansary. {%—Janā-ṣah%} (in some
forms {%janā-sah%}), {%ṣāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. subduing men.
{%—Janendra (˚na-in˚), as,%} m. the prince or lord of
men, a king. {%—Jane-vāda, as,%} m. rumour, report;
[cf. {%jana-vāda.%}] {%—Janeśa%} or {%janeśvara (˚na-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. lord of men, a king. {%—Janeṣṭa (˚na-iṣ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} desired or praised by mankind; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of jasmine {%(mudgara); (ā),%} f., N. of a fra-
grant plant, {%= jatukā;%} N. of a medicinal plant, {%= %}
[Page0337-c+ 81]
{%vṛddhi;%} turmeric, {%= haridrā;%} the flower of Jas-
minum Grandiflorum, {%= jātī-puṣpa%}. {%—Janodāha-%}
{%raṇa (˚na-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘laudation of men,’ glory,
fame. {%—Janau,%} cf. {%janāv%}. {%—Janaugha (˚na-ogha),%}
{%am,%} n. a multitude of people, a crowd, a mob.
<LEND>

<L>19261<pc>0337-c<k1>janaka<k2>janaka
{%Janaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ generative, generating, be-
getting, producing, causing; ({%as%}), m. a father, a
progenitor; N. of two kings of Videha or Mithilā,
one a son of Mithi and father of Udāvasu, the other
a son of Hrasva-roman and father of Rāma's wife Sītā,
who is therefore called {%Janaka-tanayā, Janaka-%}
{%nandinī, Janaka-sutā,%} and {%Janakātmajā;%} N. of a
disciple of Bhagavat and of several others; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. the descendants of Janaka; ({%ikā%}), f. a daughter-
in-law [cf. {%jani%} and {%janī%}]; a mother. {%—Janaka-%}
{%kāṇa, as,%} m. ‘the one-eyed Janaka,’ N. of a man.
{%—Janaka-candra, as,%} m., N. of several persons.
{%—Janaka-tā,%} f. or {%janaka-tva, am,%} n. generative-
ness, productiveness, paternity. {%—Janaka-bhadra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Janaka-rāja, as,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Janaka-saptarātra, as,%} m., N. of a
Saptāha. {%—Janaka-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Janakātmajā (˚ka-āt˚),%} f., see above. {%—Jana-%}
{%keśvara-tīrtha (˚ka-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>19262<pc>0337-c<k1>janat<k2>janat
{%Janat,%}¦ ind. a sacred exclamation used in religious
ceremonies (like {%om%} &c.) without any definite
meaning.
<LEND>

<L>19263<pc>0337-c<k1>janana<k2>janana
{%Janana, as, ī, am,%}¦ generating, begetting, pro-
ducing, causing; ({%as%}), m. a parent, progenitor, a
creator; ({%ī%}), f. a mother; a queen-mother; a bat;
lac; N. of several plants, {%= janī, yūthikā, kaṭukā,%}
{%mañjiṣṭhā;%} tenderness, compassion; ({%am%}), n.
birth, production, causation, coming into existence,
life (e. g. {%pūrve janane,%} in a former birth, i. e. in a
former life); race, lineage, family; [cf. {%indra-ja-%}
{%nana%} and {%medhā-janana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19264<pc>0337-c<k1>janani<k2>janani
{%Janani, is,%}¦ f. {%= jananī,%} a mother; birth; N. of
a plant, {%= janī.%}
<LEND>

<L>19265<pc>0337-c<k1>jananIya<k2>jananIya
{%Jananīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be produced, produced.
<LEND>

<L>19266<pc>0337-c<k1>janayat<k2>janayat
{%Janayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ begetting, generating,
engendering, producing.
<LEND>

<L>19267<pc>0337-c<k1>janayati<k2>janayati
{%Janayati, is,%}¦ f., Ved. generation, engendering,
production.
<LEND>

<L>19268<pc>0337-c<k1>janayanta<k2>janayanta
{%Janayanta, as, ā, am,%}¦ generating, producing.
<LEND>

<L>19269<pc>0337-c<k1>janayitavya<k2>janayitavya
{%Janayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be engendered,
generated, produced.
<LEND>

<L>19270<pc>0337-c<k1>janayitf<k2>janayitf
{%Janayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ generating, begetting,
producing, who or what produces; ({%tā%}), m. a pro-
genitor, a father; ({%trī%}), f. a mother.
<LEND>

<L>19271<pc>0337-c<k1>janayizRu<k2>janayizRu
{%Janayiṣṇu, us,%}¦ m. a progenitor.
<LEND>

<L>19272<pc>0337-c<k1>janar<k2>janar
{%Janar.%}¦ See {%janas%} below.
<LEND>

<L>19273<pc>0337-c<k1>janas<k2>janas
{%Janas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. race, class of beings; (Sāy.)
generator, parent; ({%as%}) or {%janar,%} ind. (before soft
letters generally {%janar%}), N. of one of the seven worlds
or divisions of the universe; see {%jana%} and {%jana-loka.%}
{%—Jano-loka, as,%} m. the world described above.
<LEND>

<L>19274<pc>0337-c<k1>jani<k2>jani
{%Jani, is,%}¦ or {%janī,%} f. a woman, wife, mother; any
female animal, (in the Veda perhaps metaphorically =
the fingers, e. g. {%janibhiḥ samiddha,%} kindled by the
fingers); the wife of a son or brother's son; birth,
production; birthplace; a kind of fragrant plant; [cf.
Hib. <nsi>gean,</nsi> ‘a woman;’ Goth. <nsi>qvêns, qveins;</nsi> Eng.
<nsi>queen.</nsi>] {%—Jani-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. wishing for a
wife. {%—1. jani-tva%} or {%jani-tvana, am,%} n. the state
of a wife, wedlock, conjugal state. {%—Jani-dā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} Ved. giving a wife. {%—Jani-nīlikā,%} f., N. of a
plant, {%= mahā-nīlī%}. {%—Jani-mat%} or {%jani-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. having a wife, relating to women.
<LEND>

<L>19275<pc>0337-c<k1>janika<k2>janika
{%Janika, as, ā, am,%}¦ producing, generating.
<LEND>

<L>19276<pc>0337-c<k1>janita<k2>janita
{%Janita, as, ā, am,%}¦ engendered, begotten; pro-
duced, occasioned; occurring. {%—Janita-svana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} making a noise, sounding. {%—Janitodyama%}
{%(˚ta-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} making exertion, energetic.
<LEND>

<L>19277<pc>0337-c<k1>janitavya<k2>janitavya
{%Janitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be born or produced.
<LEND>

<L>19278<pc>0337-c<k1>janitf<k2>janitf
{%Janitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a father, progenitor; ({%trī%}), f. a
mother; [cf. Lat. <nsi>genitor;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">γενέτωρ, γενετήρ;</lang>
Hib. <nsi>genteoir,</nsi> ‘a begetter, sower, planter;’ Lat.
<nsi>genitrix;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">γενέτειρα.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>19279<pc>0337-c<k1>janitra<k2>janitra
{%Janitra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a birthplace, place of ori-
gin, home; origin, generative or procreative matter;
N. of a Sāman; ({%āṇi%}), n. pl. parents, relatives.
<LEND>
[Page0338-a+ 81]

<L>19280<pc>0338-a<k1>janitva<k2>janitva<h>2
2. {%janitva, as, ā, am, = janitavya,%}¦ to be born or
produced; ({%as%}), m. father; ({%ā%}), f. mother; ({%au%}),
m. du. father and mother, parents.
<LEND>

<L>19281<pc>0338-a<k1>janiman<k2>janiman
{%Janiman, a,%}¦ n. (said to be also m.), Ved. birth,
generation, engenderment, production; offspring, de-
scendants; a creature, being; gender, sex, genus, kind,
race; [cf. Hib. <nsi>geineamhuin,</nsi> ‘birth, conception.’]
<LEND>

<L>19282<pc>0338-a<k1>janizWa<k2>janizWa
{%Janiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. a superl. fr. {%janitṛ%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>19283<pc>0338-a<k1>janizya<k2>janizya
{%Janiṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be born or produced.
<LEND>

<L>19284<pc>0338-a<k1>janIna<k2>janIna
{%Janīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ suitable for men.
<LEND>

<L>19285<pc>0338-a<k1>janIya<k2>janIya
{%Janīya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%janīyati%} or {%janiyati,%} to
wish for a wife.
<LEND>

<L>19286<pc>0338-a<k1>janu<k2>janu
{%Janu, us,%}¦ and {%janū, ūs,%} f. birth; [cf. {%janus.%}]
<LEND>
<L>19286.1<pc>0338-a<k1>janU<k2>janU
{{Lbody=19286}}
<LEND>

<L>19287<pc>0338-a<k1>janus<k2>janus
{%Janus, us,%}¦ n. (Ved. Nom. m. {%janūs,%} Acc. {%janu-%}
{%ṣam,%} Inst. {%januṣā%}), birth, production, descent;
nativity; birthplace; a creature, being; creation;
genus, class, kind; {%januṣā,%} ind., Ved. by birth,
from birth (e. g. {%januṣāndha,%} blind from birth),
by nature, naturally, originally, essentially, necessa-
rily, &c.
<LEND>

<L>19288<pc>0338-a<k1>jantu<k2>jantu
{%Jantu, us,%}¦ m. a creature, a living being, man,
person; people, mankind; any animal, (usually beings
of the lowest organization, such as worms, insects,
&c.); N. of a son of Somaka; [cf. {%kṣiti-jantu,%}
{%kṣudra-j˚, jala-j˚.%}] {%—Jantu-kambu, u,%} n. any
animal living in a shell, as a snail; a snail's shell.
{%—Jantu-ghna, as, ī, am,%} killing worms; N. of
several vermifuge plants; ({%as%}), m. the citron; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a plant, {%= viḍaṅga; (am),%} n. {%= viḍaṅga;%}
Asa Fœtida. {%—Jantu-nāśana, as, ī, am,%} destroying
worms; ({%am%}), n. Asa Fœtida. {%—Jantu-pādapa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a tree, {%= kośāmra%}. {%—Jantu-phala,%}
{%as,%} m. the glomerous fig-tree, Ficus Glomerata; [cf.
{%udumbara.%}] {%—Jantu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} containing
worms or insects. {%—Jantu-mārin, ī,%} m. or ({%ī%}), f.
‘destroying worms,’ the citron. {%—Jantu-hantrī,%} f.,
N. of a vermifuge, {%= viḍaṅga.%}
<LEND>

<L>19289<pc>0338-a<k1>jantuka<k2>jantuka
{%Jantuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his
descendants; ({%ā%}), f. lac, gum; a kind of Asa Fœtida;
[cf. {%jatukā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19290<pc>0338-a<k1>jantulA<k2>jantulA
{%Jantulā,%}¦ f. the plant Saccharum Spontaneum.
<LEND>

<L>19291<pc>0338-a<k1>jantva<k2>jantva
{%Jantva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be born or produced.
<LEND>

<L>19292<pc>0338-a<k1>janma<k2>janma
{%Janma, am,%}¦ n. {%= janman,%} birth.
<LEND>

<L>19293<pc>0338-a<k1>janman<k2>janman
{%Janman, a,%}¦ n. birth, production, origin, (in comp.)
born from (e. g. {%śūdra-janman,%} born from a Śūdra);
existence, life (e. g. {%dṛṣṭādṛṣṭa-janman,%} pre-
sent and future life); nativity; birthplace, home; a
progenitor, father; natal star; (in astrology) N. of the
first mansion or Nakṣatra; a creature, being; people;
the people of a household, kind, race (e. g. {%ubhe%}
{%janmanī%} or {%ubhayaṃ janma,%} both races or both
kinds of living beings, i. e. gods and men or men
and animals); nature, quality, custom, manner (e. g.
{%pratnena janmanā,%} according to ancient custom);
{%= udaka,%} water (?); [cf. {%janiman, agra-janman,%}
{%antya-j˚, kaśmīra-j˚, kāśmīra-j˚, dvi-j˚,%} &c.; cf. also
Lat. <nsi>ger-men;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>geanamhuin,</nsi> ‘engendering.’]
{%—Janma-kāla, as,%} m. time or hour of birth.
{%—Janma-kīla, as,%} m. ‘pillar or stay of birth,’ an
epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Janma-kṛt, t,%} m. a progenitor,
a father. {%—Janma-kṣetra, am,%} n. birthplace.
{%—Janma-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m. title of a work on
nativities. {%—Janma-jyeṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} the eldest
by birth, the first-born. {%—Janma-tithi, is,%} m. the
lunar day on which a birth occurs, birthday. {%—Jan-%}
{%ma-da, as,%} m. ‘a birth-giver,’ a father, progenitor.
{%—Janma-dina, am,%} n. or {%janma-divasa, as,%} m.
a birthday. {%—Janma-nakṣatra, am,%} n. the natal
star, the constellation under which a person is born;
[cf. {%janma-rāśi%} and {%janmarkṣa.%}] {%—Janma-nā-%}
{%man, a,%} n. the name received at birth (i. e. on the
twelfth day after). {%—Janma-pa, as,%} m. the regent
of a planet under which a person is born. {%—Janma-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. or {%janma-pattrikā,%} f. a horoscope,
the paper or scroll on which are recorded the year,
lunar day, configuration, and relative position of the
planets &c., of the birth of a particular individual, a
table of his fortunes throughout life. {%—Janma-pā-%}
{%dapa, as,%} m. the tree under which a person is born,
a family-tree. {%—Janma-pratiṣṭhā,%} f. birthplace; a
mother. {%—Janma-pradīpa, as,%} m., N. of a work
[Page0338-b+ 78]
by Vi-budha. {%—Janma-prabhṛti,%} ind. ever since
birth. {%—Janma-bhāj, k,%} m. a creature, a living being
(possessing birth). {%—Janma-bhāṣā,%} f. mother-tongue.
{%—Janma-bhūmi, is,%} f. birthplace, native country.
{%—Janma-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} possessing birth, enjoying
life. {%—Janma-yoga, as,%} m. a horoscope. {%—Janma-%}
{%rāśi, is,%} m. or {%janma-lagna, am,%} n. the sign of the
zodiac under which a person is born. {%—Janma-rogin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} sickly from birth. {%—Janmarkṣa (˚ma-%}
{%ṛk˚), am,%} n. the constellation under which a person
is born; N. of the first Nakṣatra. {%—Janma-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessing birth, born, mortal, living.
{%—Janma-vartman, a,%} n. ‘the path of birth,’ the
vulva. {%—Janma-vasudhā,%} f. native country, home.
{%—Janma-vailakṣaṇya, am,%} n. acting in a manner
contrary to or unbecoming one's birth. {%—Janma-%}
{%śayyā,%} f. the bed on which a person is born. {%—Jan-%}
{%ma-śodhana, am,%} n. discharging the obligations
derived from birth. {%—Janma-sāphalya, am,%} n. at-
tainment of the object or end of existence. {%—Janma-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. birthplace, native land, home; the
womb. {%—Janmādhipa (˚ma-adh˚), as,%} m. lord of
birth, an epithet of Śiva; the regent of a constellation
under which a person is born; [cf. {%janma-pa.%}]
{%—Janmāntara (˚ma-an˚), am,%} n. another birth,
another life; the preceding life; the future life;
regeneration; the other world. {%—Janmāntara-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} committed in another birth. {%—Janmān-%}
{%tarīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to or done in another
life. {%—Janmāndha (˚ma-an˚), as, ā, am,%} blind
from birth, born blind. {%—Janmāṣṭamī (˚ma-aṣ˚),%}
f. the birthday of Kṛṣṇa, the eighth day in the dark
half of the month Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra, on which
Kṛṣṇa was born. {%—Janmāspada (˚ma-ās˚), am,%}
n. birthplace; [cf. {%bhavāspada.%}] {%—Janmeśa (˚ma-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. the regent of a constellation under
which any one is born; [cf. {%janma-pa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19294<pc>0338-b<k1>janmin<k2>janmin
{%Janmin, ī,%}¦ m. a creature, a living being, a man,
an animal.
<LEND>

<L>19295<pc>0338-b<k1>janmejaya<k2>janmejaya
{%Janmejaya.%}¦ See {%janam-ejaya%} under {%jana.%}
<LEND>

<L>19296<pc>0338-b<k1>janya<k2>janya
{%Janya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be born or produced, pro-
ducible; born, produced; (often at the end of a
comp.) born from, arising or produced from, occa-
sioned by; generating; ({%as%}), m. a father; ({%am%}), n.
the body; a portent occurring at birth; ({%as, ā, am%}),
belonging to a race or family; national; belonging
to the same country; vulgar, common, belonging to
or relating to men or to the people, fit for men;
({%as%}), m. the friend or attendant or companion
of a bridegroom; a common man; ({%ā%}), f. the
friend of a mother; the relation or companion of a
bride, a bridesmaid; pleasure, happiness; affection;
({%am%}), n. people; a community, nation; fighting,
war, combat; a market, a fair; rumour, report;
censure, abuse. {%—Janya-tā,%} f. the state of anything
that is to be born or produced.
<LEND>

<L>19297<pc>0338-b<k1>janyu<k2>janyu
{%Janyu, us,%}¦ m. birth; a creature, an animal, a living
and sentient being; fire; an epithet of Brahmā; N.
of one of the seven sages of the fourth Manvantara.
<LEND>

<L>19298<pc>0338-b<k1>jAta<k2>jAta
{%Jāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ born &c. See p. 344.
<LEND>

<L>19299<pc>0338-b<k1>jAyamAna<k2>jAyamAna
{%Jāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being born, coming into life.
<LEND>

<L>19300<pc>0338-b<k1>janakarI<k2>janakarI
{#janakarI#}¦ {%janakarī,%} f. or {%janakārin, ī,%} m.
a red substance called lac. See {%alakta.%}
<LEND>

<L>19301<pc>0338-b<k1>janamejaya<k2>janamejaya
{#janamejaya#}¦ {%janam-ejaya.%} See {%jana,%} p. 337.
<LEND>

<L>19302<pc>0338-b<k1>janAntika<k2>janAntika
{#janAntika#}¦ {%janāntika.%} See {%jana,%} p. 337.
<LEND>

<L>19303<pc>0338-b<k1>jantu<k2>jantu
{#jantu#}¦ {%jantu, janman.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>19304<pc>0338-b<k1>jap<k2>jap
{#jap#}¦ {%jap,%} cl. 1. P. {%japati, jajāpa, japiṣ-%}
{%yati, ajapīt%} and {%ajāpīt, japitum,%} to utter
in a low voice or under-tone, to mutter, whisper,
repeat internally, talk to one's self; to mutter prayers
or incantations, whisper magical spells or charms;
to pray to any one in a low voice (e. g. {%Śivo japyate,%}
Śiva is addressed with muttered prayers); to invoke
or call upon in a low voice: Caus. {%jāpayati, -yitum,%}
{%ajījapat:%} Desid. {%jijapiṣati:%} Intens. {%jañjapyate,%}
{%jañjapīti;%} [cf. {%jalp.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19305<pc>0338-b<k1>japa<k2>japa
{%Japa, as, ā, am,%}¦ muttering, whispering, uttering
in a low voice [cf. {%karṇe-japa%}]; ({%as%}), m. mutter-
[Page0338-c+ 78]
ing prayers, repeating in a murmuring tone passages
from scripture, charms, names of a deity, &c.; counting
silently the beads of a rosary, &c.; a muttered prayer
or spell; [cf. {%jāpa.%}] {%—Japa-tā,%} f. the state of a
mutterer or of one who mutters prayers. {%—Japa-%}
{%parāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%} devoted to repetition of prayers,
engaged in muttering prayers. {%—Japa-mālā,%} f. a
rosary used for counting muttered prayers. {%—Japa-%}
{%yajña, as,%} m. muttering prayers as a religious rite or
sacrifice. {%—Japa-homa, as,%} m. a sacrifice which con-
sists in muttering prayers.
<LEND>

<L>19306<pc>0338-c<k1>japat<k2>japat
{%Japat, an, antī, at,%}¦ muttering prayers in a low tone.
<LEND>

<L>19307<pc>0338-c<k1>japana<k2>japana
{%Japana, am,%}¦ n. the muttering or whispering of
prayers or spells.
<LEND>

<L>19308<pc>0338-c<k1>japanIya<k2>japanIya
{%Japanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be uttered in a low
voice, to be whispered, to be muttered or repeated
inaudibly, to be meditated on.
<LEND>

<L>19309<pc>0338-c<k1>japita<k2>japita
{%Japita, as, ā, am,%}¦ muttered, whispered.
<LEND>

<L>19310<pc>0338-c<k1>japitvA<k2>japitvA
{%Japitvā,%}¦ ind. having muttered or repeated in a
low tone.
<LEND>

<L>19311<pc>0338-c<k1>japin<k2>japin
{%Japin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ uttering prayers in a low voice,
muttering.
<LEND>

<L>19312<pc>0338-c<k1>japtavya<k2>japtavya
{%Japtavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be muttered or whispered.
<LEND>

<L>19313<pc>0338-c<k1>japtvA<k2>japtvA
{%Japtvā,%}¦ ind. having muttered or repeated inaudibly.
<LEND>

<L>19314<pc>0338-c<k1>japya<k2>japya
{%Japya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be repeated in an under-
tone, to be muttered or whispered; ({%am, as%}), n. m.
a prayer to be uttered in a low voice, a muttered
prayer; [cf. {%jāpya, kiñ-japya, dhyāna-japya.%}]
{%—Japyeśvara-tīrtha (˚ya-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>19315<pc>0338-c<k1>japyaka<k2>japyaka
{%Japyaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19316<pc>0338-c<k1>japA<k2>japA
{#japA#}¦ {%japā,%} f. the China rose, either the
flower or plant; [cf. {%javā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19317<pc>0338-c<k1>japila<k2>japila
{#japila#}¦ {%japila, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N.
of a place.
<LEND>

<L>19318<pc>0338-c<k1>jabAru<k2>jabAru
{#jabAru#}¦ {%jabāru, us, us, u%} (fr. {%java?%}), Ved.
hastening, speedy.
<LEND>

<L>19319<pc>0338-c<k1>jabAla<k2>jabAla
{#jabAla#}¦ {%jabāla, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>19320<pc>0338-c<k1>jaB<k2>jaB<h>1
{#jaB#} 1¦. {%jabh%} or {%jambh,%} cl. 1. A. {%jabhate%}
or {%jambhate,%} &c., to snap at, seize with
the mouth: Caus. P. {%jambhayati, -yitum,%} to crush,
destroy: Intens. {%jañjabhyate, jañjabhīti,%} to open
the jaws wide, snap at.
<LEND>

<L>19321<pc>0338-c<k1>jabDf<k2>jabDf
{%Jabdhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ snatching at, seizing
with the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>19322<pc>0338-c<k1>jamBa<k2>jamBa
{%Jambha, as,%}¦ m. the jaws (generally used in plur.);
the mouth, a tooth, an eye-tooth, tusk; one who
crushes or devours, as a demon; N. of several demons;
a leader of the demons in the war against the gods
under Indra; N. of a son of Pra-hrāda; of a son of
Hiraṇya-kaśipu; N. of the father-in-law of Hiraṇya-
kaśipu; N. of the father of Sunda; the citron tree,
{%= jambhīra, jambhala, jambīra;%} eating, food;
biting asunder, opening by biting, explanation, inter-
pretation; a quiver; a part, a portion; ({%ā%}), f. opening
of the mouth; [cf. {%antar-jambha, ku-j˚, tapur-j˚,%}
{%tigma-j˚, tṛṣṭa-j˚,%} &c.; cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">γαμφηλαί.</lang>]
{%—Jambha-kuṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Jam-%}
{%bha-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. the enemy of Jambha, an epithet
of Indra. {%—Jambha-bhedin, ī,%} m. the destroyer of
Jambha, a N. of Indra. {%—Jambha-suta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. pressed with the jaws, chewed. {%—Jambhāri%}
{%(˚bha-ari), is,%} m. ‘the enemy of Jambha,’ Indra;
Indra's thunderbolt; fire.
<LEND>

<L>19323<pc>0338-c<k1>jamBaka<k2>jamBaka
{%Jambhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushing, devouring; killing,
destroying; biting asunder; explaining, interpreting;
opening, expanding; yawning; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
demon or of a despised tribe of men; N. of several
evil spirits supposed to reside in various magical
weapons; N. of a verse addressed to them; N. of a
demon conquered by Kṛṣṇa; N. of an attendant of
Śiva; a lime or citron; ({%ā%}), f. opening the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>19324<pc>0338-c<k1>jamBan<k2>jamBan
{%Jambhan = jambha%}¦ in {%tṛṇa-jambhan,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>19325<pc>0338-c<k1>jamBana<k2>jamBana<h>1
1. {%jambhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. crushing, destroying;
one who crushes.
<LEND>

<L>19326<pc>0338-c<k1>jamBya<k2>jamBya
{%Jambhya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an incisor (tooth) or per-
haps a grinder.
<LEND>
[Page0339-a+ 74]

<L>19327<pc>0339-a<k1>jaB<k2>jaB<h>2
{#jaB#} 2¦. {%jabh%} or {%jambh,%} cl. 1. P. {%jabhati%} or
{%jambhati,%} a various reading for {%yabh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19328<pc>0339-a<k1>jamBana<k2>jamBana<h>2
2. {%jambhana, am,%}¦ n. sexual intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>19329<pc>0339-a<k1>jaBya<k2>jaBya
{#jaBya#}¦ {%jabhya, as,%} m., Ved. a species of
animal destructive to grain.
<LEND>

<L>19330<pc>0339-a<k1>jam<k2>jam<h>1
{#jam#} 1¦. {%jam,%} cl. 1. P. {%jamati, jajāma,%}
{%jamitum,%} to eat, consume; to go (?);
to blaze (?); [cf. Hib. <nsi>diamanu,</nsi> ‘food, sustenance;’
<nsi>gion,</nsi> ‘the mouth:’ Old Germ. <nsi>gouma, kouma,</nsi> ‘food;’
<nsi>gaumo,</nsi> ‘the palate:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>Gaumen.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19331<pc>0339-a<k1>jamat<k2>jamat
{%Jamat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. blazing. {%—Jamad-%}
{%agni, is,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi often mentioned together
with Viśvā-mitra as an adversary of Vasiṣṭha, and
according to some a descendant of Bhṛgu; in epic
poetry a son of Bhārgava Ṛcīka and father of
Paraśu-rāma.
<LEND>

<L>19332<pc>0339-a<k1>jamana<k2>jamana
{%Jamana, am,%}¦ n. eating; food, victuals.
<LEND>

<L>19333<pc>0339-a<k1>jam<k2>jam<h>2
{#jam#} 2¦. {%jam,%} Ved. (used in Inst. {%jmā%} and
Abl. Gen. {%jmas%}), the earth; {%jmā,%} on earth; [cf. {%gam%}
and {%kṣam.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19334<pc>0339-a<k1>jamaja<k2>jamaja
{#jamaja#}¦ {%jama-ja, as, ā, am, = yama-ja,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19335<pc>0339-a<k1>jamadagni<k2>jamadagni
{#jamadagni#}¦ {%jamad-agni.%} See {%jamat%} above.
<LEND>

<L>19336<pc>0339-a<k1>jampatI<k2>jampatI
{#jampatI#}¦ {%jampatī%} (fr. {%dampatī ?,%} but accord-
ing to some {%jam%} is fr. {%jāyā;%} cf. Hib. <nsi>gamh;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">γάμος</lang> ?), m. du. wife and husband.
<LEND>

<L>19337<pc>0339-a<k1>jambAla<k2>jambAla
{#jambAla#}¦ {%jambāla, as, am,%} m. n. mud, clay;
an aquatic plant, Vallisneria; ({%as%}), m. a fragrant
plant, Pandanus Odoratissimus.
<LEND>

<L>19338<pc>0339-a<k1>jambAlinI<k2>jambAlinI
{%Jambālinī,%}¦ f. a river.
<LEND>

<L>19339<pc>0339-a<k1>jambira<k2>jambira
{#jambira#}¦ {%jambira, as,%} m. {%= jambīra,%} the citron
tree.
<LEND>

<L>19340<pc>0339-a<k1>jambIra<k2>jambIra
{%Jambīra, as,%}¦ m. the citron tree or common
lime; a plant called by some a sort of basil with
small leaves, a kind of Ocimum, {%= maruvaka%} or
{%prastha-puṣpa; (am),%} n. a citron; [cf. {%jam-%}
{%bhīra, jambha, jambhala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19341<pc>0339-a<k1>jambIraka<k2>jambIraka
{%Jambīraka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of Ocimum.
<LEND>

<L>19342<pc>0339-a<k1>jambu<k2>jambu
{#jambu#}¦ {%jambu, us,%} or {%jambū, ūs,%} f. (said to be
fr. rt. 1. {%jam%}), a fruit tree, the rose apple, Eugenia
Jambolana, or another species of Eugenia; ({%ūs, u%}),
f. n. its fruit; ({%us, u%}), m. n., N. of a Dvīpa [cf.
{%jambu-dvīpa%}]; N. of a fabulous river, said to flow
from the mountain Meru and to be formed by the
juice of the fruits of an immense Jambu tree on that
mountain; [cf. {%āḍhaka-jambu, kāka-j˚, gorakṣa-%}
{%j˚.%}] {%—Jambu-dvīpa%} or {%jambū-dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of
one of the seven continents or rather large islands
surrounding the mountain Meru; it is so named
either from the Jambu trees abounding in it, or from
an enormous Jambu tree on Mount Meru visible like
a standard to the whole continent, and implies
(according to the Purāṇas) the central division of the
world, or the known world, including India; with
Buddhists it is confined to India; with Jainas it is
one of the five divisions of India. {%—Jambu-dhvaja,%}
{%as,%} m. another N. for Jambu-dvīpa (‘having the
Jambu tree as its standard’); N. of a Nāga.
{%—Jambu-parvata, as,%} m. another N. for Jambu-
dvīpa. {%—Jambu-prastha, as,%} m., N. of a town.
{%—Jambu-mat, ān,%} m. a mountain; a monkey;
({%tī%}), f. an Apsaras or heavenly nymph; [cf. {%jāmba-%}
{%vat%} and {%jambu-vat.%}] {%—Jambu-māla, as,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Jambu-mālin, ī,%} m., N. of a Rakṣas.
{%—Jambu-rudra, as,%} m., N. of a serpent-king.
{%—Jambu-vana-ja, am,%} n. the white flower of the
China rose. {%—Jambu-sara, as,%} m., N. of a town in
Gurjara (Jumbooseer between Cambay and Baroch).
{%—Jambū-khaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. another N. for
Jambu-dvīpa. {%—Jambūkhaṇḍa-vinirmāṇa-parvan,%}
{%a,%} n. the first six Adhyāyas of the sixth book of
the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Jambūnada-prabha, as,%} m.,
N. of a future Buddha. {%—Jambū-nadī,%} f., N. of one
of the seven arms of the heavenly Gaṅgā. {%—Jambū-%}
{%mārga, as, am,%} m. n., N. of a Tīrtha (the way
[Page0339-b+ 76]
leading to the sacred Jambu on Meru). {%—Jambū-%}
{%svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of the last Arhat of the Jainas.
{%—Jambv-oṣṭha = jāmbavauṣṭha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19343<pc>0339-b<k1>jambuka<k2>jambuka
{#jambuka#}¦ {%jambuka, as,%} m. a jackal; a low
man; N. of one of the attendants of Skanda; an
epithet of Varuṇa; the plant Eugenia (commonly
called {%golāpa jāma%}); or perhaps a kind of Śyoṇāka;
({%ā%}), f. a female jackal; [cf. {%jambūka.%}] {%—Jambu-%}
{%keśvara-tīrtha (˚ka-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>19344<pc>0339-b<k1>jambUka<k2>jambUka
{%Jambūka, as,%}¦ m. a jackal; a low man; N. of one
of the attendants of Skanda; an epithet of Varuṇa;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of grape without stones, {%= kākalī-%}
{%drākṣā;%} [cf. {%jambuka%} and {%gṛdhra-jambūka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19345<pc>0339-b<k1>jambula<k2>jambula
{#jambula#}¦ {%jambula, as,%} m. a kind of disease of
the outer ear; the plant Eugenia Jambolana [cf.
{%jambu%}]; another plant, Pandanus Odoratissimus;
[cf. {%ketaka;%} cf. also {%jambūla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19346<pc>0339-b<k1>jambUla<k2>jambUla
{%Jambūla, as,%}¦ m. the plant Pandanus Odoratissi-
mus; the plant Eugenia Jambolana [cf. {%jambū%}];
({%am%}), n. jests addressed to the bridegroom by his
female relatives and friends; [cf. the following.]
{%—Jambūla-mālikā,%} f. a garland of Jambūla flowers;
brightness of countenance in a bride and bridegroom;
jesting compliments addressed to the bride and bride-
groom by the female relatives of the bridegroom.
<LEND>

<L>19347<pc>0339-b<k1>jamBa<k2>jamBa
{#jamBa#}¦ {%jambha.%} See under 1. {%jabh,%} p. 338.
<LEND>

<L>19348<pc>0339-b<k1>jamBana<k2>jamBana
{#jamBana#}¦ {%jambhana.%} See under 1. and 2. {%jabh.%}
<LEND>

<L>19349<pc>0339-b<k1>jamBara<k2>jamBara
{#jamBara#}¦ {%jambhara, as,%} m. the lime or citron
tree; [cf. the following.]
<LEND>

<L>19350<pc>0339-b<k1>jamBala<k2>jamBala
{%Jambhala, as,%}¦ m. the lime or citron tree [cf.
{%jambīra%}]; N. of a Jina or deified Jaina saint; N.
of a man; ({%ā%}), f. a female Rākṣasī, by meditating
on whom women become pregnant. {%—Jambhala-%}
{%datta, as,%} m., N. of the supposed author of the
Vetāla-pañca-viṃśati.
<LEND>

<L>19351<pc>0339-b<k1>jamBin<k2>jamBin
{%Jambhin, ī,%}¦ m. the lime or citron tree.
<LEND>

<L>19352<pc>0339-b<k1>jamBIra<k2>jamBIra
{%Jambhīra, as,%}¦ m. the lime or citron tree, appa-
rently of more than one species; a plant considered
to be a kind of basil with small leaves; [cf. {%jam-%}
{%bīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19353<pc>0339-b<k1>jamBalikA<k2>jamBalikA
{#jamBalikA#}¦ {%jambhalikā,%} f. a kind of song.
({%Jambhālikā%} appears to be incorrect.)
<LEND>

<L>19354<pc>0339-b<k1>jamva<k2>jamva
{#jamva#}¦ {%jamva, as,%} m. mud, mire.
<LEND>

<L>19355<pc>0339-b<k1>jaya<k2>jaya
{#jaya#}¦ {%jaya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ji%}), conquering,
winning, (used at the end of comp.; cf. {%kṛtañ-jaya,%}
{%dhanañ-j˚, purañ-j˚,%} &c.); ({%as%}), m. conquest, vic-
tory, triumph, winning, being victorious (in battle, in
playing with dice or in a lawsuit; {%indriyāṇāṃ%}
{%jayaḥ,%} victory over or restraint of the senses; {%ātma-%}
{%jaya,%} self-restraint; {%prāṇa-jaya,%} victory over life,
i. e. resigning it willingly; {%rug-jaya,%} healing of a
disease); a verse or formula causing victory; the
plant Premna Spinosa or Longifolia; a yellow variety
of Phaseolus Mungo; N. of the third year of the
sixth lustrum of the cycle of Jupiter; an epithet of
the sun; a class of deities (pl.); N. of a son of
Indra; of an attendant of Viṣṇu; N. of a Nāga;
of a Dānava; of a Ṛṣi under the tenth Manu; of
a son of Vatsara by Svar-vīthi; of a son of Viśvā-
mitra; of a son of Purū-ravas and Urvaśī; N. of an
ancient king; of the eleventh Cakra-vartin in Bhā-
rata; of a hero on the side of the Pāṇḍus; a N.
assumed by Yudhi-ṣṭhira at the court of king Virāṭa;
N. of several other persons; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several
plants, viz. {%= jayantī,%} Sesbania Ægyptiaca, Premna
Spinosa or Longifolia, Terminalia Chebula; also {%=%}
{%nīla-dūrvā, śāntā,%} and {%vi-jayā;%} the third, eighth,
or thirteenth lunar days of either half-month; a N.
of Durgā; N. of a daughter of Dakṣa; of a wife
of Śiva; of a confidential female attendant of Durgā
and wife of Puṣpa-danta; of a Buddhist deity; of
the mother of the twelfth Arhat of the present Ava-
sarpiṇī; of one of the seven kumārīs on the standard
of Indra. {%—Jaya-karaṇa, am,%} n. obtaining a victory,
conquering. {%—Jaya-kāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} desirous of
victory. {%—Jaya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} gaining a victory,
[Page0339-c+ 81]
victorious. {%—Jaya-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing or granting
victory. {%—Jaya-kolāhala, as,%} m. a shout of victory;
a kind of dice; [cf. {%jaya-putraka.%}] {%—Jaya-kṣetra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a place. {%—Jaya-gata, as, ā, am,%}
conquering, victorious. {%—Jaya-garva, as,%} m. pride
of conquest, exultation. {%—Jaya-gupta, as,%} m., N. of
a poet. {%—Jaya-ghoṣa, as,%} m. or {%jaya-ghoṣaṇa,%}
{%am%} or {%ā,%} n. f. a shouting to proclaim victory, a cry
of victory. {%—Jaya-candra, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the work Gośṛṅga-svayambhū-caitya-bhaṭṭārakod-
deśa; N. of a king of Gauḍa; of a king of Kānyakubja.
{%—Jaya-caryā,%} f. a work on omens by Nara-hari.
{%—Jaya-ḍhakkā,%} f. a large kettle-drum beaten as
a sign of victory. {%—Jaya-tīrtha, as,%} m., N. of a
scholiast. {%—Jaya-da, as, ā, am,%} granting victory;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a tutelary deity in the family of Vāma-
deva. {%—Jaya-datta, as,%} m., N. of the son of Indra;
of a Bodhi-sattva; of a certain king; of a minister
of king Jayā-pīḍa; of a physician. {%—Jaya-deva, as,%}
m., N. of the author of the Gīta-govinda; also of
the Prasanna-rāghava-nāṭaka; also of the grammar
entitled Īṣat-tantra. {%—Jaya-devaka, as,%} m. {%= jaya-%}
{%deva,%} N. of a Muhūrta. {%—Jaya-dharman, ā,%} m.,
N. of a hero on the side of the Kurus. {%—Jaya-%}
{%dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a son of Kārtavīrya Arjuna
and father of Tāla-jaṅgha. {%—Jaya-dhvani, is,%} m. a
shout or cry of victory. {%—Jaya-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m.,
N. of the author of the poem Kāśī-khaṇḍa. {%—Jaya-%}
{%nṛsiṃha, as,%} m., N. of a deity. {%—Jaya-pattra, am,%} n.
a written account of a victory, record of victory. {%—Ja-%}
{%ya-pāla, as,%} m. ‘guardian of victory,’ an epithet of
Brahmā, also of Viṣṇu; a king; N. of several
kings; the plant Croton Jamalgota. {%—Jaya-putra-%}
{%ka, as,%} m. a kind of dice; [cf. {%jaya-kolāhala%} and
{%jatu-putraka.%}] {%—Jaya-pura, am,%} n. ‘town of
victory,’ N. of a fortress in Kaśmīra; also of a small
state in Marwur. {%—Jaya-prasthāna, am,%} n. march
to victory. {%—Jaya-priya, as,%} m., N. of a hero on
the side of the Pāṇḍavas; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the
Mātṛs in attendance on Skanda. {%—Jaya-maṅgala,%}
{%as,%} m. a royal elephant; a remedy for fever, a
febrifuge; N. of a commentator on the Bhaṭṭi-
kāvya; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a commentary on the Bhaṭṭi-
kāvya composed by Jaya-maṅgala; ({%am%}), n. a cheer
of victory; [cf. {%jayāśis.%}] {%—Jaya-mati, is,%} m., N.
of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Jaya-matī,%} f., N. of several
women; [cf. {%jaya-vat.%}] {%—Jaya-mādhava, as,%} m.,
N. of a poet. {%—Jaya-yajña, as,%} m. the Aśva-medha
or sacrifice of a horse as a mark of dominion. {%—Ja-%}
{%ya-rāja, as,%} m., N. of several men. {%—Jaya-rāta,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a warrior who took the side of the
Kuru princes. {%—Jaya-rāma, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the Nyāya-siddhānta-mālā; N. of several
other men. {%—Jaya-lakṣmī, īs,%} f. victory, the god-
dess of victory; N. of a woman. {%—Jaya-lekha, as,%}
m. record of victory; [cf. {%jaya-pattra.%}] {%—Jaya-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} victorious, triumphant; [cf. {%jaya-%}
{%matī%} and {%jayā-vatī.%}] {%—Jaya-vardhana, as,%} m.,
N. of a poet. {%—Jaya-varma-deva, as,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Jaya-vaha, as, ā, am,%} conferring victory,
victorious. {%—Jaya-vādya, am,%} n. a drum or other
instrument sounded to proclaim victory. {%—Jaya-%}
{%vārāha-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Jaya-%}
{%vāhinī,%} f., N. of the wife of Indra. {%—Jaya-śabda,%}
{%as,%} m. a shout or song of victory, or the exclamation
Jaya, Jaya repeated like the <nsi>Io</nsi> of the Greeks as in
{%Jaya-jaya deva hare,%} &c. {%—Jaya-śarman, ā,%} m.,
N. of a poet. {%—Jaya-śīla, as, ā, am,%} victorious,
triumphant. {%—Jaya-śṛṅga, am,%} n. a horn blown
to announce a victory. {%—Jaya-śrī, īs,%} f. victory,
glory; the goddess of victory. {%—Jaya-siṃha, as,%} m.,
N. of several men; N. of a king of Kaśmīra; [cf.
{%jayā-siṃha.%}] {%—Jaya-sena, as,%} m., N. of a king of
Magadha; also of a son of Adīna or Ahīna; of a son
of Sārvabhauma; N. of the father of the Āvantyau;
also of the son of Mahendra-varman; N. of a
Buddhist; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a female door-keeper; [cf.
{%jayat-sena.%}] {%—Jaya-skandha, as,%} m., N. of a
minister of king Yudhi-ṣṭhira. {%—Jaya-stambha,%}
{%as,%} m. a trophy; a column erected to commemorate
a victory. {%—Jaya-svāmin, ī,%} m. the lord of victory;
[Page0340-a+ 81]
an epithet of Śiva; N. of a scholiast on the
Chandoga-sūtras and of the author of a commentary
on the Āśvalāyana-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Jayasvāmi-pura,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a town founded by Jushka. {%—Jayā-%}
{%kara (˚ya-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘a mine of victory,’ N. of a
man. {%—Jayāditya (˚ya-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a king;
N. of the author of the Kāśikā-vṛtti. {%—Jayā-devī,%} f.,
N. of a Buddhist deity [cf. {%jayā%}]; N. of a woman.
{%—Jayānanda (˚ya-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Jayānanda-vāra, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Jayā-%}
{%nīka (˚ya-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a warrior on the side
of the Pāṇḍavas. {%—Jayāntarāya (˚ya-an˚), as,%} m.
an impediment or hindrance to victory. {%—Jayāpīḍa%}
{%(˚ya-āp˚), as,%} m., N. of a king of Kaśmīra.
{%—Jayā-bhaṭṭārikā,%} f., N. of a place. {%—Jayārava%}
{%(˚ya-ār˚), as,%} m. song of victory; [cf. {%jaya-śabda.%}]
{%—Jayāvaghoṣa (˚ya-av˚), as,%} m. proclamation of
victory, cheering. {%—Jayā-vatī,%} f., N. of one of the
Mātṛs attending on Skanda; [cf. {%jaya-matī%} and
{%jaya-vat.%}] {%—Jayāvaha (˚ya-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} con-
ferring victory, victorious; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of Croton;
[cf. {%bhadra-dantikā.%}] {%—Jayāśis (˚ya-āś˚), īs,%} f.
a prayer for victory; congratulations after a victory;
cheer of victory. {%—Jayāśraya (˚ya-āś˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘the asylum of victory,’ favoured by victory; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of grass; [cf. {%jaraḍī.%}] {%—Jayāśva (˚ya-aś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a hero on the side of the Pāṇḍavas.
{%—Jayā-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Jayāhvā (˚ya-%}
{%āh˚),%} f. {%= jayāvahā,%} q. v. {%—Jayendra (˚ya-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king of Kaśmīra; also of another
person; a vihāra built by the latter is called Ja-
yendra-vihāra. {%—Jayeśvara (˚ya-īś˚), as,%} m., N.
of a sanctuary built by Jayā-devī. {%—Jayoddhura%}
{%(˚ya-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} exulting in victory. {%—Jayol-%}
{%lāsa-nidhi (˚ya-ul˚), is,%} m. title of a work.
<LEND>

<L>19356<pc>0340-a<k1>jayaka<k2>jayaka
{%Jayaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ victorious; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>19357<pc>0340-a<k1>jayat<k2>jayat
{%Jayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ conquering, defeating; ex-
celling. {%—Jayat-sena, as,%} m., N. of a king of
Magadha; of a son of Sārvabhauma; of Nadīna; a
N. assumed by the fourth (?) son of Pāṇḍu; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda; [cf.
{%jaya-sena.%}] {%—Jayad-bala, as,%} m. a N. assumed
by one of the youngest Pāṇḍu princes at the court of
king Virāṭa. {%—Jayad-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a king of
the Sindhus and Sauvīras fighting on the side of the
Kuru princes; a son of Vṛhan-manas; a son of Vṛhat-
karman; of Vṛhat-kāya; of the tenth Manu.
<LEND>

<L>19358<pc>0340-a<k1>jayana<k2>jayana
{%Jayana, am,%}¦ n. conquering, subduing; armour
for cavalry, elephants, &c.; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a daughter
of Indra; [cf. {%jayantī.%}] {%—Jayana-yuj, k, k, k,%}
caparisoned (as a war horse), victorious.
<LEND>

<L>19359<pc>0340-a<k1>jayanta<k2>jayanta
{%Jayanta, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Indra; an epithet
of Śiva; N. of a Rudra; N. of a son of Dharma by
Marutvatī (he was a part of Vāsudeva and {%= upendra%});
a class of deities (with Jainas) forming a subdivision of
the Anuttaras; the moon; the assumed N. of Bhīma
at the court of king Virāṭa; N. of a minister of
Daśa-ratha; also of a Gandharva, the father of Vikra-
māditya; of a king of Gauḍa; of a Brāhman of
Kaśmīra; of an author of a grammatical work; N.
of a mountain; ({%ī%}), f. a flag, a banner; the plant
Sesbania Ægyptiaca, {%= jīvantī;%} blades of barley
planted at the commencement of the Daśaharā and
gathered at its close; a particular combination in
astronomy, or the rising of the asterism Rohiṇī at
midnight, on the eighth of the dark half of Srāvaṇa,
or in fact on the birthday of Kṛṣṇa, which is then
particularly sacred; an epithet of Durgā; of Dāk-
ṣāyaṇī (the wife of Śiva) in Hastinā-pura; N. of the
tutelary deity of Vasūdreka; N. of the daughter of
Indra; N. of the wife of Ṛṣabha received by him
from Indra; N. of a river; N. of a country. {%—Ja-%}
{%yanta-pattra, am,%} n. ‘leaf of victory or triumph;’
(in law) the sealed and written award of the judge in
favour of either party; (in historical tradition) the
label on the forehead of a horse turned loose for
the Aśva-medha sacrifice. {%—Jayanta-pura, am,%} n.,
N. of a town. {%—Jayanta-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of the
author of a small treatise on the Vedic accent. {%—Ja-%}
{%yantī-purī,%} f., N. of a town.
<LEND>
[Page0340-b+ 80]

<L>19360<pc>0340-b<k1>jayitf<k2>jayitf
{%Jayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a victor, conqueror, victorious.
<LEND>

<L>19361<pc>0340-b<k1>jayin<k2>jayin
{%Jayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ conquering, victorious, a con-
queror; gaining the victory, winning in a suit at
law; granting victory.
<LEND>

<L>19362<pc>0340-b<k1>jayizRu<k2>jayizRu
{%Jayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ habitually victorious, victorious.
<LEND>

<L>19363<pc>0340-b<k1>jayus<k2>jayus
{%Jayus, us, us, us,%}¦ Ved. victorious.
<LEND>

<L>19364<pc>0340-b<k1>jayya<k2>jayya
{%Jayya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be conquered or gained,
conquerable, vulnerable.
<LEND>

<L>19365<pc>0340-b<k1>jara<k2>jara
{#jara#}¦ {%jara, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%jṝ%}), becoming
old or worn out, old; wearing out; causing old age,
producing decay, consuming; ({%as%}), m. wearing out,
wasting; ({%ā%}), f. the becoming old, old age; old age
personified as a daughter of Death; decrepitude, the
general debility consequent upon old age; digestion;
a kind of date tree, {%= kṣīrikā;%} N. of a Rākṣasī
worshipped for having united the two halves into
which Jarā-sandha (q. v.) was divided at his birth;
[cf. {%vi-jara.%}] {%—Jarātura (˚rā-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} in-
firm, decrepit, debilitated, old. {%—Jarā-pariṇata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} stooping, bent down with age or infirmity.
{%—Jarā-puṣṭa, as,%} m. {%= jarā-sandha%}. {%—Jarā-%}
{%bhīru, us,%} m. love or the deity Kāma (‘afraid of
old age’). {%—Jarā-mṛtyu, ū,%} m. du. old age and
death; ({%us, us, u%}), one who dies from old age.
{%—Jarā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} aged, old. {%—Jarāvasthā%}
{%(˚rā-av˚),%} f. state of old age, decrepitude. {%—Jarā-%}
{%sandha, as,%} m., N. of a celebrated king and warrior,
sovereign of Magadha and Cedi, son of Bṛhad-ratha,
father-in-law to Kaṃśa, and enemy of Kṛṣṇa; he
was slain in single combat by Bhīma; (according to
a legend, he was born divided in two halves, which
were put together by the Rākṣasī Jarā, q. v.; he is
also identified with the Dānava Vipracitti, and men-
tioned among the hundred sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.)
{%—Jarāsandha-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of Jarā-sandha,’
N. of Bhīma-sena, the second of the Pāṇḍu princes.
<LEND>

<L>19366<pc>0340-b<k1>jaraWa<k2>jaraWa
{%Jaraṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ old, decayed, infirm; bent,
bowed down, drooping; hard, solid; hard-hearted,
harsh, cruel; pale, yellowish-white (the colour of old
leaves); ({%as%}), m. decrepitude, old age; [cf. Germ.
<nsi>hart;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hardus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19367<pc>0340-b<k1>jaraRa<k2>jaraRa
{%Jaraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ old, decayed, infirm; solvent,
promoting digestion; ({%as, am%}), m. n. several medi-
cinal plants or drugs used for promoting digestion, {%=%}
{%jīraka,%} cumin-seed; {%kṛṣṇa-jīraka,%} Nigella Indica;
{%= kāsa-marda%} and {%= kuṣṭhauṣadhi;%} Asa Fœ-
tida; a sort of salt, Bit-lobon or Bit-lavana; ({%ā%}), f.
old age; the plant Nigella Indica; ({%am%}), n. old age,
becoming old and infirm; one of the ten ways in
which an eclipse is supposed to end. {%—Jaraṇa-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. the tree Vatica Robusta.
<LEND>

<L>19368<pc>0340-b<k1>jaraRA<k2>jaraRA<h>1
1. {%jaraṇā.%}¦ See under {%jaraṇa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>19369<pc>0340-b<k1>jaraRqa<k2>jaraRqa
{%Jaraṇḍa, as, ā, am,%}¦ decayed, old.
<LEND>

<L>19370<pc>0340-b<k1>jaraRyA<k2>jaraRyA
{%Jaraṇyā,%}¦ f., Ved. decrepitude.
<LEND>

<L>19371<pc>0340-b<k1>jarat<k2>jarat
{%Jarat, an, antī%}¦ (or {%atī ?%}), {%at,%} old, ancient, advanced
in years, infirm, decayed; ({%an%}), m. an old man; ({%tī%}),
f. an old woman; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">γέρων;</lang> Hib. <nsi>gearait,</nsi> ‘a
saint, a holy man;’ Germ. <nsi>krank ?</nsi>]. {%—Jarat-kāru,%}
{%us, us,%} m. f., N. of an ancient Ṛṣi of the family of
Yāyāvara, and of his wife who was a sister of the ser-
pent-prince Vāsuki, both being the parents of Āstīka;
({%us%}), m. the Vyāsa of the twenty-seventh Dvāpara.
{%—Jaratkāru-priyā,%} f. the wife of Jarat-kāru exer-
cising a peculiar power over serpents, see the preceding.
{%—Jarad-aṣṭi, is, is, i,%} Ved. reaching to a great
age, very old; ({%is%}), f. longevity. {%—Jarad-gava, as,%}
m. an old bull or ox; N. of a vulture; ({%ī%}), f. an old
cow; [cf. {%go-jara.%}] {%—Jaradgava-vīthi, is,%} f. ‘the
course of the old bull,’ N. of a part of the moon's path
occupied by the constellations Vi-śākhā, Anu-rādhā,
and Jyeṣṭhā. {%—Jarad-yoṣā,%} f. an old woman. {%—Ja-%}
{%rad-viṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. (Sāy.) seizing on and devouring
dry (wood) or consuming water (applied to Agni).
<LEND>

<L>19372<pc>0340-b<k1>jaratikA<k2>jaratikA
{%Jaratikā,%}¦ f. an old woman.
<LEND>

<L>19373<pc>0340-b<k1>jaratin<k2>jaratin
{%Jaratin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19374<pc>0340-b<k1>jaranta<k2>jaranta
{%Jaranta, as,%}¦ m. an old man; a buffalo.
<LEND>

<L>19375<pc>0340-b<k1>jarayitf<k2>jarayitf
{%Jarayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ consuming, devouring.
<LEND>

<L>19376<pc>0340-b<k1>jarayu<k2>jarayu
{%Jarayu, us, us, u,%}¦ becoming old; [cf. {%a-jarayu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19377<pc>0340-b<k1>jaras<k2>jaras
{%Jaras, ā,%}¦ f. (only {%jaras%} before vowel-terminations,
Gram. 171), the becoming old, decay, decrepitude, old
[Page0340-c+ 76]
age; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa by Turī; N. of
the hunter who wounded Kṛṣṇa; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">γῆρας.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>19378<pc>0340-c<k1>jarasa<k2>jarasa
{%Jarasa%}¦ at the end of an adv. comp. {%= jaras;%} [cf.
{%ā-jarasam.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19379<pc>0340-c<k1>jarasAna<k2>jarasAna
{%Jarasāna, as,%}¦ m. a man.
<LEND>

<L>19380<pc>0340-c<k1>jarA<k2>jarA<h>1
1. {%jarā,%}¦ f. old age &c. See under {%jara,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>19381<pc>0340-c<k1>jarAyaRi<k2>jarAyaRi
{%Jarāyaṇi, is,%}¦ m. {%= jarā-sandha.%}
<LEND>

<L>19382<pc>0340-c<k1>jarAyu<k2>jarAyu
{%Jarāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ withering, dying away; ({%u%}),
n. the slough or cast-off skin of a serpent; the
membrane which envelopes the fetus, the outer skin
of the embryo or chorion, (the inner or amnion is
called {%ulva%}); after-birth, secundines; ({%us%}), m., N.
of a plant, {%= agni-jāra;%} also {%= jaṭāyu; (us),%} f., N.
of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda; [cf.
{%jyotir-jarāyu%} and {%nir-jarāyu.%}] {%—Jarāyu-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} born from the womb, viviparous, born alive.
<LEND>

<L>19383<pc>0340-c<k1>jarita<k2>jarita
{%Jarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ old, decayed; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
Śārṅgikā (or kind of bird), the mother of four sons
at once by the Ṛṣi Manda-pāla in the form of a
male Sārṅgaka. {%—Jaritāri (˚ta-ari), is,%} m., N. of
the eldest son of Manda-pāla by Jaritā.
<LEND>

<L>19384<pc>0340-c<k1>jarin<k2>jarin
{%Jarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ old, ancient, infirm, decayed; ({%ī%}),
m. an old man.
<LEND>

<L>19385<pc>0340-c<k1>jariman<k2>jariman
{%Jariman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. old age; decrepitude,
death from old age.
<LEND>

<L>19386<pc>0340-c<k1>jarUTa<k2>jarUTa<h>1
1. {%jarūtha, am,%}¦ n. skinniness, flesh flaccid with
old age; flesh.
<LEND>

<L>19387<pc>0340-c<k1>jarjara<k2>jarjara
{%Jarjara, as, ā, am,%}¦ old, infirm, decrepit, decayed;
torn or broken in pieces, split up into small particles,
divided in parts or pieces, broken; perforated,
wounded, hurt; dull, hollow (as the sound of a
broken vessel); ({%am%}), n. Indra's banner or emblem;
{%= saivala,%} an aquatic plant. {%—Jarjara-tva, am,%} n.
the being old or decayed or perforated &c. {%—Jarja-%}
{%rānanā (˚ra-ān˚),%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>19388<pc>0340-c<k1>jarjarita<k2>jarjarita
{%Jarjarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn in pieces, worn out.
<LEND>

<L>19389<pc>0340-c<k1>jarjarIka<k2>jarjarIka
{%Jarjarīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ old, decayed; ragged,
perforated, full of holes.
<LEND>

<L>19390<pc>0340-c<k1>jarjarIkfta<k2>jarjarIkfta
{%Jarjarī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ wounded, disabled.
<LEND>

<L>19391<pc>0340-c<k1>jarRa<k2>jarRa
{%Jarṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ old, decayed; ({%as%}), m. the
(waning) moon; a tree.
<LEND>

<L>19392<pc>0340-c<k1>jaraqI<k2>jaraqI
{#jaraqI#}¦ {%jaraḍī,%} f. a kind of grass; [cf.
{%garmoṭikā, jayāśrayā, sunālā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19393<pc>0340-c<k1>jaraRA<k2>jaraRA<h>2
{#jaraRA#} 2¦. {%jaraṇā,%} f. (fr. 3. {%jṝ%}), Ved. roaring,
crackling, sounding; (Sāy.) invoking, praising; [cf.
1. {%jaraṇa,%} col. 2.]
<LEND>

<L>19394<pc>0340-c<k1>jaraRiprA<k2>jaraRiprA
{%Jaraṇi-prā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ Ved. moving on with
noise; (Sāy.) increasing the wealth of the praiser.
<LEND>

<L>19395<pc>0340-c<k1>jaraRIya<k2>jaraRIya
{%Jaraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be addressed with praise
or invoked.
<LEND>

<L>19396<pc>0340-c<k1>jaraRyu<k2>jaraRyu
{%Jaraṇyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. invoking aloud; (Sāy.)
desiring praise.
<LEND>

<L>19397<pc>0340-c<k1>jaramARa<k2>jaramARa
{%Jaramāṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19398<pc>0340-c<k1>jarA<k2>jarA<h>2
2. {%jarā,%}¦ f., Ved. crackling, roaring; invoking,
greeting; praise; [cf. 1. {%jarā%} above.] {%—Jarā-bodha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. attending to invocation or praise.
{%—Jarābodhīya, am,%} n., N. of several Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>19399<pc>0340-c<k1>jaritf<k2>jaritf
{%Jaritṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. an invoker, singer, praiser,
worshipper.
<LEND>

<L>19400<pc>0340-c<k1>jarUTa<k2>jarUTa<h>2
2. {%jarūtha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who roars or makes
a noise; N. of a demon conquered by Agni; (Sāy.)
speaking harshly or to be invoked.
<LEND>

<L>19401<pc>0340-c<k1>jarc<k2>jarc
{#jarc#}¦ {%jarc,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%jarcati,%} &c., to say,
speak; to reprove, abuse, blame; to
threaten.
<LEND>

<L>19402<pc>0340-c<k1>jarC<k2>jarC
{#jarC#}¦ {%jarch,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%jarcchati,%} &c., to
say, speak; to blame; [cf. {%carc.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19403<pc>0340-c<k1>jarj<k2>jarj
{#jarj#}¦ {%jarj,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%jarjati,%} &c., to say;
to blame, reprove; to kill or hurt (?).
<LEND>

<L>19404<pc>0340-c<k1>jarjita<k2>jarjita
{%Jarjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn to pieces, wounded;
(perhaps a wrong form for {%jarjarita.%})
<LEND>

<L>19405<pc>0340-c<k1>jarjara<k2>jarjara
{#jarjara#}¦ {%jarjara.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>19406<pc>0340-c<k1>jarJ<k2>jarJ
{#jarJ#}¦ {%jarjh,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%jarjhati,%} to say or
speak; to blame; to threaten; [cf. {%jarc.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19407<pc>0340-c<k1>jarta<k2>jarta
{#jarta#}¦ {%jarta, as,%} m. {%= jartu,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0341-a+ 75]

<L>19408<pc>0341-a<k1>jartika<k2>jartika
{#jartika#}¦ {%jartika, ās,%} m. pl. {%= bāhīka.%}
<LEND>

<L>19409<pc>0341-a<k1>jartila<k2>jartila
{#jartila#}¦ {%jartila, as,%} m. wild sesamum.
<LEND>

<L>19410<pc>0341-a<k1>jartu<k2>jartu
{#jartu#}¦ {%jartu, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%jan%}),
the vulva; an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>19411<pc>0341-a<k1>jarts<k2>jarts
{#jarts#}¦ {%jarts,%} cl. 1. P. {%jartsati,%} &c., to say,
speak; to blame, censure, abuse; to
protect.
<LEND>

<L>19412<pc>0341-a<k1>jarBari<k2>jarBari
{#jarBari#}¦ {%jarbhari, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. {%bhṛ ?%}), Ved.
supporting (?). According to Sāy. {%jarbharī = bhar-%}
{%tārau,%} supporters (epithet of the Aśvins).
<LEND>

<L>19413<pc>0341-a<k1>jarya<k2>jarya
{#jarya#}¦ {%jarya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%jṝ%}), becoming
old; [cf. {%a-jarya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19414<pc>0341-a<k1>jarvara<k2>jarvara
{#jarvara#}¦ {%jarvara, as,%} m., N. of a priest assist-
ing at a sacrifice by which the serpent-race overcame
death.
<LEND>

<L>19415<pc>0341-a<k1>jarhila<k2>jarhila
{#jarhila#}¦ {%jarhila, as,%} m. wild sesamum; [cf.
{%jartila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19416<pc>0341-a<k1>jal<k2>jal
{#jal#}¦ {%jal,%} cl. 1. P. {%jalati,%} &c., to be rich
or wealthy; to cover, hide, or veil; to
cover as with a net, encompass; to be sharp; to be
cold, stiff, dull, dumb; cl. 10. P. {%jālayati, -yitum,%}
to cover; [cf. Lat. <nsi>galea.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19417<pc>0341-a<k1>jala<k2>jala<h>1
1. {%jala, as, ā, am%}¦ (said to be fr. the preceding rt.;
perhaps connected with {%gal;%} cf. {%jaḍa%}), cold, stupid,
apathetic, idiotic; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man with the
patronymic Jātukarṇya; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river;
({%am%}), n. water, any fluid; a kind of fragrant medi-
cinal plant, {%= hrīvera;%} the embryo or uterus of a
cow; frigidity (moral, mental, or physical); [cf. Lat.
<nsi>gelu;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>kalds;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>sẓala, szattas;</nsi> Russ.
<nsi>cholodnyi;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>gil.</nsi>] {%—Jala-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. a
crocodile; ‘water-thorn,’ the plant Trapa Bispinosa.
{%—Jala-kapi, is,%} m. the Gangetic porpoise, Delphinus
Gangeticus (‘water-monkey’). {%—Jala-kapota, as,%}
m. ‘water-pigeon,’ N. of a particular species of bird.
{%—Jala-kara, as, ī, am,%} making or pouring forth
water; ({%as%}), m. rent or tax derived from water for
fisheries &c. {%—Jala-karaṅka, as,%} m. a shell, a
conch; a cocoa-nut; a cloud; a wave; a lotus.
{%—Jala-kalka, as,%} m. ‘water-sediment,’ mud, mire.
{%—Jala-kalmaṣa, as,%} m. the poison produced at the
churning of the ocean. {%—Jala-kāka, as,%} m. ‘a water-
crow,’ the diver bird. {%—Jala-kāṅkṣa, as,%} m. ‘de-
sirous of water,’ an elephant; [cf. {%jalākāṅkṣa.%}]
{%—Jala-kāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} desirous of water, fond
of water; ({%ī%}), m. an elephant. {%—Jala-kānta, as,%} m.
the wind (‘the water-lover’). {%—Jala-kāntāra, as,%}
m. a N. of Varuṇa (‘whose grove or garden is
water’). {%—Jala-kāmuka, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%kuṭumbinī%}. {%—Jala-kirāṭa, as,%} m. ({%kirāṭa%} for {%ki-%}
{%rāta ?%}), a shark or (according to some) a large
alligator. {%—Jala-kukkuṭa, as,%} m. a water-fowl or
other water-bird; ({%ī%}), f. the black-headed gull; [cf.
{%gaṅgācillī.%}] {%—Jala-kukkubha, as,%} m. a species of
aquatic bird, {%= koyaṣṭi%}. {%—Jala-kuntala, as,%} m.
‘water-hair,’ N. of an aquatic plant, Blyxa Octandra;
[cf. {%jala-keśa.%}] {%—Jala-kubjaka, as,%} m., N. of an
aquatic plant, Trapa Bispinosa. {%—Jala-kūpī,%} f. a
spring, well; pond, pool; whirlpool. {%—Jala-kūrma,%}
{%as,%} m. the Gangetic porpoise. {%—Jala-kṛt, t, t, t,%}
causing rain. {%—Jala-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a particular
comet. {%—Jala-keli, is, is,%} m. f. playing or gambol-
ing in water, splashing one another with water.
{%—Jalakeli-varṇana, am,%} n. title of the third
chapter of Hari-nātha's poem Rāma-vilāsa-kāvya.
{%—Jala-keśa, as,%} m. ‘water-hair,’ the plant Blyxa
Octandra; [cf. {%jala-kuntala.%}] {%—Jala-kriyā,%} f. a
funeral ceremony, offering libations, presenting water
to the manes of the deceased. {%—Jala-krīḍā,%} f. sport-
ing or gamboling in water, bathing for pleasure or
amusement; [cf. {%jala-keli.%}] {%—Jala-khaga, as,%} m.
an aquatic bird. {%—Jala-gandha, as, ā, am,%} making
the water fragrant (?) or turbid (?). {%—Jala-gandhe-%}
{%bha, as,%} m. ‘a scented elephant frequenting water,’
N. of a species of animal. {%—Jala-garbha, as,%} m.,
[Page0341-b+ 81]
N. of a son of Jala-vāhana, = Ānanda in a former
birth. {%—Jala-gulma, as,%} m. a turtle, tortoise; a
quadrangular tank, a piece of water; a whirlpool.
{%—Jalaṅ-ga, as, ā, am,%} aquatic, frequenting water,
going in water; ({%as%}), m. the colocynth ({%mahā-%}
{%kāla)%}. {%—Jalaṅ-gama, as,%} m. a Cāṇḍāla, an outcast;
(a various reading for {%janaṅ-gama.%}) {%—Jala-ca-%}
{%tvara, am,%} n. a square tank. {%—Jala-cara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} going in water, aquatic, amphibious; ({%as%}), m.
an aquatic animal. {%—Jalacara-jīva, as,%} m. a fisher-
man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of the east coast.
{%—Jalacarājīva (˚ra-āj˚), as,%} m. a fisherman.
{%—Jala-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} living in or near water,
frequenting water; ({%ī%}), m. an aquatic animal, a fish.
{%—Jala-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced or born in water,
living or growing in water; coming from or peculiar
to water; ({%as%}), m. an aquatic animal, a fish; sea-salt,
{%= lonāra,%} a collective N. for several signs of the
zodiac; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant, {%= klītaka; (as, am),%}
m. n. a shell; the conch-shell used as a trumpet;
({%am%}), n. a pearl, a shell or other product of the sea;
the lotus (Nelumbium); N. of several other plants,
{%= hijjala, śaivala, vānīra, kupīlu%}. {%—Jalaja-%}
{%kusuma, am,%} n. ‘water-flower,’ the lotus. {%—Jalaja-%}
{%kusuma-yoni, is,%} m. ‘born from a lotus-flower,’ a
N. of Brahmā. {%—Jalaja-dravya, am,%} n. a pearl, a
shell or other product of the sea. {%—Jala-jantu, us,%}
m. a fish or any marine or aquatic or amphibious
animal. {%—Jala-jantukā,%} f. a leech. {%—Jala-janman,%}
{%a,%} n. ‘water-born,’ the lotus (Nelumbium). {%—Jalajā-%}
{%jīva (˚ja-āj˚), as,%} m. a fisherman; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
inhabitants of the eastern coast; [cf. {%jalacara-jīva.%}]
{%—Jalajāsana (˚ja-ās˚), as,%} m. a N. of Brahmā
(sitting on the lotus). {%—Jala-jihva, as,%} m. a croco-
dile (‘having a cold tongue?’). {%—Jala-jīvin, ī,%} m.
a fisherman. {%—Jala-ḍimba, as,%} m. a bivalve shell.
{%—Jala-taraṅga, as,%} m. a wave; a metal cup filled
with water producing harmonic notes like a musical
glass. {%—Jala-tā,%} f. the state of water. {%—Jala-tāḍana,%}
{%am,%} n. beating water, any fruitless action. {%—Jala-%}
{%tāpika, as,%} m. the Hilsa or sable fish, Clupanodon
Ilisha (also called {%jala-tāpin%}); another kind of fish,
commonly Caöuchi, Cyprinus Cachius. {%—Jala-tāla,%}
{%as,%} m. the Ilisha or Hilsa fish. {%—Jala-tiktikā,%} f.
Boswellia Murifera. {%—Jala-turaga, as,%} m. ‘water-
horse,’ hippopotamus (?). {%—Jala-trā,%} f. ‘water-guard,’
an umbrella. {%—Jala-trāsa, as,%} m. hydrophobia. {%—Ja-%}
{%la-trāsin, ī, inī, i,%} having hydrophobia, hydrophobic.
{%—Jala-da, as, ā, am,%} giving or pouring forth
water; ({%as%}), m. a cloud; a fragrant grass, Cyperus
Rotundus [cf. {%mustaka%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
school of the Atharva-veda; N. of a Varṣa in
Śāka-dvīpa. {%—Jalada-kṣaya, as,%} m. disappear-
ance of the clouds, autumn. {%—Jalada-paṅkti,%}
{%is,%} f. a line or long succession of clouds. {%—Jala-%}
{%dardura, as,%} m. a water-pipe, a kind of musical
instrument. {%—Jalada-saṃhati, is,%} f. the gathering
of clouds, cloudiness. {%—Jaladāgama (˚da-āg˚), as,%}
m. the arrival or approach of clouds, the rainy season.
{%—Jala-dāna, am,%} n. the giving of water. {%—Jala-%}
{%dābha (˚da-ābha), as, ā, am,%} cloud-like, dark,
black. {%—Jaladāśana (˚da-aś˚), as,%} m. the tree
Shorea Robusta, {%= śāla%}. {%—Jala-deva, am,%} n., scil.
{%bha%} or {%nakṣatra,%} the constellation Aṣāḍhā,
having the water as its deity. {%—Jala-devatā,%} f. a
water-goddess, naiad. {%—Jala-dravya, am,%} n. a pearl,
a shell or other product of the sea; [cf. {%jalaja-%}
{%dravya.%}] {%—Jala-droṇī,%} f. a bucket. {%—Jala-dvīpa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an island. {%—Jala-dhara, as, ā, am,%}
holding or carrying or having water; ({%as%}), m. a
cloud; the ocean; a kind of grass, Cyperus Ro-
tundus; the plant Dalbergia Ougeinensis; N. of a
metre containing 4 × 32 syllabic instants. {%—Jala-%}
{%dhara-garjita-ghoṣa-susvara-nakṣatra-rāja-%}
{%saṅkusumitābhijña (˚ta-abh˚), as,%} m., N. of a
Buddha (having a voice musical as the sound of the
thunder of the clouds and conversant with the
appearance of the regents of the Nakṣatras). {%—Ja-%}
{%ladhara-mālā,%} f. a row of clouds; a metre con-
sisting of four lines of twelve syllables each. {%—Jala-%}
{%dhāra, as,%} m., N. of a mountain; N. of a Varṣa
[Page0341-c+ 81]
in Śāka-dvīpa; ({%ā%}), f. a stream of water. {%—Jala-%}
{%dhi, is,%} m. the ocean; a large number, 100 billions.
{%—Jaladhi-gā,%} f. ‘going to the ocean,’ a river.
{%—Jaladhi-jā,%} f. ‘ocean-born,’ N. of the goddess
Lakṣmī (as one of the fourteen precious things re-
covered at the churning of the ocean). {%—Jaladhi-%}
{%rasana, as, ā, am,%} ‘ocean-girt,’ an epithet of the
earth. {%—Jaladhi-sambhava, as, ā, am,%} produced
from the ocean, marine. {%—Jala-nakula, as,%} m. an
otter. {%—Jala-nara, as,%} m. ‘water-man,’ merman, N.
of a particular animal. {%—Jala-nāḍī,%} f. a water-course.
{%—Jala-nidhi, is,%} m. ‘treasure of water,’ the ocean,
sea. {%—Jala-nirgama, as,%} m. a drain, a water-course,
a pipe along a wall or building for carrying off water,
a water-fall, the descent of a spring &c. into a river
below. {%—Jala-nivaha, as,%} m. a quantity of water.
{%—Jala-nīlikā%} or {%jala-nīlī,%} f. the aquatic plant
Blyxa Octandra. {%—Jalan-dhama, as,%} m., N. of one
of the attendants of Skanda; also of a Dānava; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a daughter of Kṛṣṇa by Satya-bhāmā.
{%—Jalan-dhara, as,%} m. ‘water-bearer,’ N. of a
man; N. of an Asura fabled to have been produced
by the contact of a flash from Śiva's eye with the
ocean and adopted by the god of the waters; he is
so called as having on a particular occasion caught
the water which flowed from Brahmā's eye. {%—Ja-%}
{%landhara-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Jalan-%}
{%dhara-vadha, as,%} m. title of a chapter of the Liṅga-
Purāṇa. {%—Jala-pakṣin, ī,%} m. a water-bird. {%—Jala-%}
{%paṭala, am,%} n. a sheet of water, a cloud. {%—Jala-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the waters,’ i. e. Varuṇa or the
Hindū Neptune; the ocean. {%—Jala-patha, as,%} m.
a sea voyage. {%—Jala-paddhati, is,%} f. a water-course,
gutter, drain. {%—Jala-pātra, am,%} n. a drinking-vessel.
{%—Jala-pāda, as,%} m. (for {%jāla-pāda ?%}), N. of a
frog-king. {%—Jala-pāna, am,%} n. the drinking of
water; (in Bengal = refreshment, luncheon.) {%—Jala-%}
{%pārāvata, as,%} m. ‘an aquatic pigeon,’ N. of a
particular bird. {%—Jala-pitta, am,%} n. fire (‘the bile
of water’). {%—Jala-pippalī,%} f. an aquatic plant,
Commelina Salicifolia, and another species. {%—Jala-%}
{%pippikā,%} f. a fish. {%—Jala-puṣpa, am,%} n. an
aquatic flower. {%—Jala-pūra, as,%} m. the full bed or
stream of a river, a full stream. {%—Jala-pṛṣṭhajā,%}
f. the plant Blyxa Octandra, or Pistia Stratiotes.
{%—Jala-prapāta, as,%} m. a water-fall. {%—Jala-pra-%}
{%laya, as,%} m. destruction by water. {%—Jala-prānta,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the water's edge,’ shore, bank of a river.
{%—Jala-prāya, as, ā, am,%} abounding with water;
({%am%}), n. a country abounding with water. {%—Jala-%}
{%priya as, ā, am,%} fond of water, frequenting water;
({%as%}), m. the bird Cātaka, Cuculus Melanoleucus; a
fish; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Dākṣāyaṇi. {%—Jala-plava,%}
{%as,%} m. an otter. {%—Jala-plāvana, am,%} n. immersion
under water, an inundation, a deluge. {%—Jala-phala,%}
{%as,%} m. the water-nut, Trapa Bispinosa. {%—Jala-ban-%}
{%dhaka, as,%} m. ‘water-barrier,’ a dam, a dike, rocks
or stones impeding a current. {%—Jala-bandhu, us,%}
m. a fish (‘friend of water’). {%—Jala-bālaka%} or {%jala-%}
{%vālaka, as,%} m. an epithet of the Vindhya mountains;
({%ikā%}), f. lightning (surrounded by water, i. e. clouds ?).
{%—Jala-bimba,%} a kind of plant (?). {%—Jala-budbuda,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a bubble of water. {%—Jala-brahmī,%} f.
a kind of pot-herb, Hingcha Repens. {%—Jala-bhā-%}
{%jana, am,%} n. a vessel for water, water-pot. {%—Jala-%}
{%bhīti, is,%} f. hydrophobia. {%—Jala-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%}
aquatic, produced in or by water; ({%ūs%}), m. a cloud;
N. of a plant, {%= {{kańćaṭa->kañcaṭa||20161122|Jim Funderburk.|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/320|from guttural to palatal nasal}}%}. {%—Jala-bhūṣaṇa, as,%} m.
wind (‘decorating the water’). {%—Jala-bhṛt, t,%} m.
a cloud (‘water-bearing’). {%—Jala-makṣikā,%} f. a
water-insect. {%—Jala-magna, as, ā, am,%} immersed
in water. {%—Jala-madgu, us,%} m. a kingfisher. {%—Ja-%}
{%la-madhūka, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= kīreṣṭa,%}
{%kṣaudra-priya,%} &c. {%—Jala-mandira, am,%} n. {%=%}
{%jala-yantra-gṛha%}. {%—Jala-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed
of water, consisting of water, watery. {%—Jala-masi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘water-ink,’ a dark cloud. {%—Jala-mātreṇa,%}
ind. by mere water. {%—Jala-mārga, as,%} m. a water-
course, a drain or canal leading from a pond &c.
{%—Jala-mārjāra, as,%} m. ‘water-cat,’ an otter.
{%—Jala-muc, k, k, k,%} shedding water; ({%k%}), m.
[Page0342-a+ 81]
a cloud. {%—Jala-mūrti, is,%} m. Śiva, of whom one
form is water, (implying his presence in all matter.)
{%—Jala-mūrtikā,%} f. hail (a form of water). {%—Jala-%}
{%moda, am,%} n. ‘delighting in water,’ the fragrant
root of Andropogon Muricatus, {%= uśīra%}. {%—Jalam-%}
{%bala (?), am,%} n. a stream; collyrium. {%—Jala-yantra,%}
{%am,%} n. a water-engine, a machine for raising water
&c., any contrivance connected with that element;
a water-clock, a clepsydra. {%—Jala-yantraka, am,%} n.
a machine for raising water &c. {%—Jalayantra-gṛha%}
or {%jalayantra-niketana%} or {%jalayantra-mandira,%}
{%am,%} n. a house or fabric erected in the midst of
water; subterranean apartments constructed in the
bank of a river to serve as a retreat in the hot season,
a summer-house &c. {%—Jala-yātrā,%} f. a voyage. {%—Ja-%}
{%la-yāna, am,%} n. ‘a water vehicle,’ a ship. {%—Jala-%}
{%raṅka, as,%} m. or {%jala-rañja, as,%} m. a species of Vaka
or crane (Ardea Nivea). {%—Jala-raṅku, us,%} m. a
kind of gallinule. {%—Jala-raṇḍa, as,%} m. a whirlpool;
a drop, drizzle, thin sprinkling of water; a snake;
[cf. {%jala-ruṇḍa.%}] {%—Jala-rasa, as,%} m. sea-salt. {%—Ja-%}
{%la-rākṣasī,%} f. ‘the water Rākṣasī,’ also called
Su-rasā, a female demon described in Rāmāyaṇa
V. 6. as the mother of the Nāgas; she placed herself
in the way of Hanumat in his flight across the straits
between the continent and Ceylon, and in order to
prevent his crossing attempted to swallow him bodily.
He escaped by reducing himself to the size of a
thumb, darting through her huge body and coming
out at her right ear. {%—Jala-rāśi, is,%} m. a sheet of
water, a quantity of water; the ocean. {%—Jala-ruṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= jala-raṇḍa%}. {%—Jala-ruh, ṭ,%} m. ‘growing in
water,’ a lotus (Nelumbium). {%—Jala-ruha, as,%} m.
an aquatic animal; ({%am%}), n. the lotus (Nelumbium).
{%—Jala-rūpa, as,%} m. the fish of Kāma-deva, {%=%}
{%makara%}. {%—Jala-latā,%} f. ‘water-creeper,’ a wave, a
billow. {%—Jala-lava-muc, k, k, k,%} discharging drops
of water. {%—Jala-lohita, as,%} m. a Rākṣasa (having
water for blood). {%—Jala-vat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding
in water. {%—Jala-varaṇṭa, as,%} m. a watery pustule.
{%—Jala-valkala, am,%} n., N. of the aquatic plant
Pistia Stratiotes. {%—Jala-vallī,%} f. the water-nut,
Trapa Bispinosa. {%—Jala-vādita, am,%} n. water-music,
a kind of music in which water is used. {%—Jala-%}
{%vādya, am,%} n. a kind of musical instrument in which
water is used. {%—Jala-vāyasa, as,%} m. ‘a water-crow,’
the diver bird. {%—Jala-vālaka,%} cf. {%jala-bālaka.%}
{%—Jala-vāsa, as,%} m. residence in water; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), living or residing in water; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
root, {%= viṣṇu-kanda; (am),%} n. the root of Andro-
pogon Muricatus, {%= uśīra%}. {%—Jala-vāha, as, ā, am,%}
carrying water; ({%as%}), m. a water-bearer, a cloud.
{%—Jala-vāhaka, as,%} m. a water-bearer, or carrier.
{%—Jala-vāhana, as,%} m. a water-carrier; N. of a
physician, = Śākya-muni in a former birth; ({%am%}),
n. flowing of water; ({%ī%}), f. a water-course, aqueduct.
{%—Jala-viḍāla, as,%} m. an otter. {%—Jala-vindu, us,%}
m. a drop of water; N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Jalavindu-%}
{%jā,%} f. a kind of sugar. {%—Jala-vilva, as,%} m. the plant
Pistia Stratiotes; a tortoise; a crab; a quadrangular
pond. {%—Jala-viṣuva, am,%} n. the autumnal equinox,
the moment of the sun's entering Libra; a kind of
circle or cycle. {%—Jala-vihaṅgama, as,%} m. a water-
fowl. {%—Jala-vīrya, as,%} m., N. of a son of Bharata.
{%—Jala-vṛścika, as,%} m. ‘water-scorpion,’ a prawn
or shrimp. {%—Jala-vetasa, as,%} m. a kind of cane, {%=%}
{%vānīra%}. {%—Jala-vyatha%} or {%jala-vyadha, as,%} m. a
kind of fish, Esox Cancila. {%—Jala-vyāla, as,%} m. a
water-snake; a marine monster. {%—Jala-śaya%} or {%ja-%}
{%la-śayana, as,%} or {%jala-śāyin, ī,%} m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu, who is supposed to sleep, reposing on his
serpent-couch above the waters, during the four
months of the periodical rains; also during the inter-
vals of the submersion of the world; [cf. {%jale-śaya.%}]
{%—Jalaśāyi-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Jala-%}
{%śukti, is,%} f. a bivalve shell. {%—Jala-śuci, is, is, i,%}
cleansed by water, bathed, washed. {%—Jala-śūka, am,%}
n. the plant Blyxa Octandra, a green moss-like sub-
stance growing on the surface of stagnant water,
duckweed. {%—Jala-śūkara, as,%} m. a crocodile (‘water-
hog’). {%—Jala-śoṣa, as,%} m. drying up of water, drought.
[Page0342-b+ 81]
{%—Jala-saṃsarga, as,%} m. mixing with water, dilu-
tion. {%—Jala-sandha, as,%} m., N. of a prince, a son
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Jala-samudra, as,%} m. the sea
of fresh water. {%—Jala-samparka, as,%} m. mixture or
dilution with water. {%—Jala-sarpiṇī,%} f. ‘water-glider,’
a leech. {%—Jala-sāt,%} ind. to the state of water (e. g.
{%jalasāt kṛ,%} to reduce to water; {%jalasāt sampad-%}
{%yate,%} it is turned into water). {%—Jala-sikta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} sprinkled with water, wetted. {%—Jala-sūci, is,%}
m. the Gangetic porpoise, Delphinus Gangeticus; a
crow; a fish, a small sort of pike, Esox Cancila; a
leech; a water-nut, Trapa Bispinosa. {%—Jala-seka,%}
{%as,%} m. sprinkling with water. {%—Jala-stha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} standing or abiding or situated in water; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of grass, {%= gaṇḍa-dūrvā%}. {%—Jala-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%jala-sthāya, as,%} m. a reservoir, a pond,
a lake. {%—Jala-ha, am,%} n. a small water (or summer)
house; [cf. {%jalayantra-gṛha.%}] {%—Jala-haraṇa, am,%}
n. a metre consisting of 4 × 32 syllabic instants. {%—Jala-%}
{%hastin, ī,%} m. a water-elephant; hippopotamus (?). {%—Ja-%}
{%la-hāra, as, ī,%} m. f. a water-carrier. {%—Jala-hāriṇī,%} f.
a water-course, drain, a channel for water. {%—Jala-hāsa%}
or {%jala-hāsaka, as,%} m. cuttle-fish bone, considered
as the indurated foam of the sea. {%—Jala-hrada, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Jalākara (˚la-āk˚), as,%} m. a source
of water, a spring, a fountain. {%—Jalākā,%} f. {%= jalaukā,%}
a leech. {%—Jalākāṅkṣa (˚la-āk˚), as,%} m. {%= jala-%}
{%kāṅkṣa,%} an elephant. {%—Jalākṣī (˚la-ak˚),%} f. an
aquatic plant, Commelina Salicifolia. {%—Jalākhu (˚la-%}
{%ākhu), us,%} m. ‘water-mole,’ an otter. {%—Jalāñcala%}
{%(˚la-añ˚), am,%} n. a spring, well; natural water-course;
the plant Blyxa Octandra. {%—Jalāñjali (˚la-añ˚),%}
{%is,%} f. a handful of water, or water held in the palms
of the hand, as presented to the manes of a dead
person &c. {%—Jalāṭana (˚la-aṭ˚), as,%} m. ‘water-
goer,’ a heron; ({%ī%}), f. a leech. {%—Jalāḍhya (˚la-%}
{%āḍh˚), as, ā, am,%} watery, marshy. {%—Jalāṇuka%}
{%(˚la-aṇ˚), am,%} n. the fry of fish. {%—Jalāṇṭaka, as,%}
m. a shark or (according to some) a large alligator
&c. {%—Jalāṇḍaka (˚la-aṇ˚), am,%} n. the fry of fish.
{%—Jalātmikā (˚la-āt˚),%} f. a leech; a well (in the
latter sense a various reading for {%jalāmbikā%}). {%—Ja-%}
{%lātyaya (˚la-at˚), as,%} m. the passing away of the
water (or clouds), autumn. {%—Jalādarśa (˚la-ād˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a watery mirror, water reflecting any object
like a mirror. {%—Jalādhāra (˚la-ādh˚), as,%} m. a
pond, a lake, a reservoir, any receptacle of water.
{%—Jalādhidaivata (˚la-adh˚), am,%} n., scil. {%bha%} or
{%nakṣatra,%} the constellation Aṣāḍhā (having the
water as its deity; cf. {%jala-deva%}); ({%as%}), m. an epithet
of Varuṇa (?). {%—Jalādhipa (˚la-adh˚), as,%} or {%jalā-%}
{%dhipati (˚la-adh˚), is,%} or {%jalādhyakṣa (˚la-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Varuṇa, lord of the waters.
{%—Jalānusāra (˚la-an˚), as,%} m. going or acting
like water. {%—Jalāntaka (˚la-an˚), as,%} m., N. of a
son of Kṛṣṇa by Satya-bhāmā; ({%as, ā, am%}), having
water in the interior ({%anta%}); containing water.
{%—Jalāpasparśana (˚la-ap˚), am,%} n. touching
water, use of water. {%—Jalābhiṣeka (˚la-abh˚), as,%}
m. sprinkling with water. {%—Jalāmbara (˚la-am˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man, = Rāhala-bhadra in a former
birth. {%—Jalāmbikā (˚la-am˚),%} f. a well; [cf. {%jalāt-%}
{%mikā.%}] {%—Jalāmbu-garbhā (˚la-am˚),%} f., N. of a
woman, = Gopā in a former birth. {%—Jalāyukā (˚la-%}
{%āyu)%} or 1. {%jalālukā%} or {%jalālokā%} or {%jalāvukā%} or
{%jalāsukā,%} f. a leech (living in water). {%—Jalārka%}
{%(˚la-ar˚), as,%} m. the sun reflected in water. {%—Jalār-%}
{%ṇava (˚la-ar˚), as,%} m. the rainy season; the sea of
fresh water. {%—Jalārthin (˚la-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} desirous
of water, thirsty. {%—Jalārdra (˚la-ār˚), as, ā, am,%}
wet, charged with aqueous moisture; ({%as, ā%}), m. f.
wet cloth or clothes. {%—Jalālu (˚la-ālu), us,%} m. a
kind of bulbous plant. {%—Jalāvatāra (˚la-av˚), as,%}
m. a landing-place at a river's side. {%—Jalāvarta (˚la-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m. ‘the turning round of water,’ an eddy, a
whirlpool. {%—Jalāvila (˚la-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} stained
or soiled with water. {%—Jalāśaya (˚la-āś˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} resting or lying in water; stupid, dull, apathetic,
cold; ({%as%}), m. a pond, a tank, a lake, a reservoir or
any piece of water; a fish; the water-nut, Trapa
Bispinosa; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant, {%= guṇḍālā; (am),%}
[Page0342-c+ 79]
n. the root of Andropogon Muricatus. {%—Jalāśayān-%}
{%tara (˚ya-an˚), am,%} n. another lake. {%—Jalāśayot-%}
{%sarga-tattva (˚ya-ut˚), am,%} n. a part of the Smṛti-
tattva. {%—Jalāśayotsarga-vidhi, is,%} m. title of a work
by Kamalākara-bhaṭṭa. {%—Jalāśāyin (˚la-āś˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} lying or sleeping in water as a penance. {%—Jalāśraya%}
{%(˚la-āś˚), as,%} m. a piece of water, a pond, a lake; a
water-house; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of crane; a kind of grass.
{%—Jalā-ṣah%} or {%jalā-sah, -ṣāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} subduing water.
{%—Jalāṣṭhīlā (˚la-aṣ˚)%} or {%ī,%} f. a large square pond.
{%—Jalā-sāha, as, ā, am, = jalā-ṣah%}. {%—Jalāsukā,%}
f., see {%jalāyukā%}. {%—Jalāhvaya (˚la-āh˚), am,%} n. a
lotus (Nelumbium). {%—Jale-cara, as, ī, am,%} living
or going in water; ({%as%}), m. an aquatic animal; a
fish; any kind of water-fowl. {%—Jalecchayā,%} f. the
plant Heliotropium Indicum; [cf. {%hasti-śuṇḍā.%}]
{%—Jale-jāta, am,%} n. a lotus (Nelumbium). {%—Jalen-%}
{%dra (˚la-in˚), as,%} m. ‘chief of waters,’ the sea; the
ocean of fresh water; Varuṇa, the regent of the
waters; N. of a Jina or Jaina saint. {%—Jalendhana%}
{%(˚la-in˚), am,%} n. submarine fire. {%—Jalebha (˚la-%}
{%ibha), as,%} m. a water-elephant; [cf. {%jala-hastin.%}]
{%—Jale-ruha, as,%} m., N. of a king of Orissa; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a plant, {%= kuṭumbinī%}. {%—Jale-vāha, as,%}
m. a diver (by caste or business). {%—Jaleśa (˚la-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. the sea, ocean; lord of the waters, i. e.
Varuṇa. {%—Jale-śaya, as, ā, am,%} resting or abiding
in water; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; a fish.
{%—Jaleśvara (˚la-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of waters,’ the
sea, the ocean; the deity of the waters, i. e. Varuṇa;
N. of a sanctuary. {%—Jaloka, as,%} m., N. of a king
of Kaśmīra; ({%ā%}), f. a leech; see {%jalaukas%}. {%—Jalo-%}
{%kikā,%} f. a leech; see {%jalaukas%}. {%—Jalocchvāsa (˚la-%}
{%uc˚), as,%} m. a drain or channel made for carrying
off an excess of water, or a similar channel made
naturally by the overflow of a river &c. {%—Jalodara%}
{%(˚la-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘water-belly,’ dropsy. {%—Jalod-%}
{%dhata-gati (˚la-ud˚), is,%} f., N. of a metre consisting
of four lines of twelve syllables each. {%—Jalodbhava%}
{%(˚la-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} born or produced in water,
aquatic, marine; ({%as%}), m. ‘origin of the waters,’ N.
of a place; an aquatic animal; N. of a water-demon
slain by Kaśyapa; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= laghu-%}
{%brāhmī,%} benzoin. {%—Jalodbhūta (˚la-ud˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} born in or produced from water; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a plant, {%= guṇḍālā%}. {%—Jalonnāda (˚la-un˚), as,%} m.,
N. of one of the attendants of Śiva. {%—Jaloragī%}
{%(˚la-ur˚),%} f. ‘water-snake,’ a leech. {%—Jalauka, as,%}
m. a leech; ({%ā%}), f. a leech; [cf. the next.] {%—Ja-%}
{%laukas (˚la-ok˚), ās, ās, as,%} living in water, an
inhabitant of the water, an aquatic animal; ({%ās%}), m.,
N. of a king of Kaśmīra; ({%ās%}), f. a leech (said to
be used in plur. only). {%—Jalaukasa, as, ā, am,%} m.
f. n. a leech. {%—Jalaugha (˚la-ogha), as,%} m. a
quantity of water.
<LEND>

<L>19418<pc>0342-c<k1>jala<k2>jala<h>2
2. {%jala,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%jalati,%} to become water.
<LEND>

<L>19419<pc>0342-c<k1>jalaka<k2>jalaka
{%Jalaka, am,%}¦ n. a conch, a shell.
<LEND>

<L>19420<pc>0342-c<k1>jalAya<k2>jalAya
{%Jalāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%-yate, -yitum,%} to become water,
appear as water.
<LEND>

<L>19421<pc>0342-c<k1>jalAluka<k2>jalAluka<h>2
2. {%jalāluka, am,%}¦ n. a lotus root; [cf. {%jalāyukā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19422<pc>0342-c<k1>jalikA<k2>jalikA
{%Jalikā%}¦ or {%jalukā%} or {%jalūkā,%} f. a leech.
<LEND>

<L>19423<pc>0342-c<k1>jaleyu<k2>jaleyu
{%Jaleyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva.
<LEND>

<L>19424<pc>0342-c<k1>jalelA<k2>jalelA
{%Jalelā,%}¦ f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on
Skanda; (or perhaps for two words {%jalā ilā.%})
<LEND>

<L>19425<pc>0342-c<k1>jalAluddInakabaraSAha<k2>jalAluddInahakabaraSAha
{#jalAluddInahakabaraSAha#}¦ m. {%= jalālu'ddīn%}
{%akbar ṣāh.%}
<LEND>

<L>19426<pc>0342-c<k1>jalAza<k2>jalAza
{#jalAza#}¦ {%jalāṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. mitigating,
pacifying, appeasing, healing, comforting; ({%am%}), n.
water; happiness, comfort. {%—Jalāṣa-bheṣaja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. possessed of healing medicines, an
epithet of Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>19427<pc>0342-c<k1>jalp<k2>jalp
{#jalp#}¦ {%jalp%} [cf. {%jap%} and {%lap%}], cl. 1. P.
(ep. also A.) {%jalpati, -te, jajalpa,%}
{%jalpiṣyati, jalpitum,%} to speak inarticulately, mur-
mur; chatter, prattle, babble, wrangle; to speak,
say; to address a person, speak with; to speak of
or about (with acc.); to praise: Caus. P. {%jalpayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cause to speak; [cf. Lith. <nsi>kalbu,</nsi> ‘to
speak;’ <nsi>kalba,</nsi> ‘speech:’ Hib. <nsi>gaill,</nsi> ‘speech.’]
<LEND>
[Page0343-a+ 73]

<L>19428<pc>0343-a<k1>jalpa<k2>jalpa
{%Jalpa, as,%}¦ m. talk, speech; prate, babble, gossip,
chatter, discourse; debate, disputation, wrangling dis-
cussion, an argument in which a disputant tries to
assert his own opinion and to refute that of his ad-
versary by overbearing reply or wrangling rejoinder;
[cf. {%citra-jalpa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19429<pc>0343-a<k1>jalpaka<k2>jalpaka
{%Jalpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ a talker, chatterer, talka-
tive, one who talks much or idly, garrulous.
<LEND>

<L>19430<pc>0343-a<k1>jalpana<k2>jalpana
{%Jalpana, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking, saying, talking;
({%am%}), n. talking, saying; chattering, prattling,
garrulity.
<LEND>

<L>19431<pc>0343-a<k1>jalpAka<k2>jalpAka
{%Jalpāka, as, ī, am,%}¦ a chatterer, talking much and
foolishly, or improperly; [cf. {%jalpaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19432<pc>0343-a<k1>jalpi<k2>jalpi
{%Jalpi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. inarticulate speech, murmuring;
speaking in a low voice.
<LEND>

<L>19433<pc>0343-a<k1>jalpita<k2>jalpita
{%Jalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ said, told, spoken; ({%am%}), n.
talk, babbling, gossip; talking.
<LEND>

<L>19434<pc>0343-a<k1>jalpitf<k2>jalpitf
{%Jalpitṛ, tā, tṛ,%}¦ or {%jalpin, ī, inī, i,%} a talker,
speaker, chatterer; saying, speaking.
<LEND>

<L>19435<pc>0343-a<k1>jallAladIndra<k2>jallAladIndra
{#jallAladIndra#}¦ {%jallāladīndra, as,%} m. {%= jalālu%}
{%'ddīn.%}
<LEND>

<L>19436<pc>0343-a<k1>ja|u<k2>ja|u
{#ja|u#}¦ {%jaḷhu, us, us, u%} (related to {%jaḍa ?%}),
Ved. deprived of splendor or without sacrificial fire.
<LEND>

<L>19437<pc>0343-a<k1>java<k2>java
{#java#}¦ {%java, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ju%} or {%jū%}), speed,
quickness, velocity, rapidity, swiftness; ({%as, ā, am%}),
swift, expeditious; ({%ā%}), f. the China rose, Hibiscus
Rosa Sinensis; [cf. {%japā.%}] {%—Java-yukta, as, ā, am,%}
possessed of fleetness. {%—Java-vat, ān, atī, at,%} quick,
swift, fleet. {%—Javādhika (˚va-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} very
quick, extremely swift; ({%as%}), m. a fleet horse, a
courser. {%—Javānila (˚va-an˚), as,%} m. a strong
wind, gale, hurricane. {%—Javā-puṣpa, as,%} m. the
China rose, the plant or its flower.
<LEND>

<L>19438<pc>0343-a<k1>javana<k2>javana<h>1
1. {%javana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to hasten; quick,
swift, fleet; ({%as%}), m. a courser, a fleet horse; a kind
of deer; N. of one of the attendants of Skanda; ({%ī%}),
f. a screen surrounding a tent, a Kanāt; N. of a
plant; ({%am%}), n. speed, velocity; [cf. {%dhī-javana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19439<pc>0343-a<k1>javanikA<k2>javanikA
{%Javanikā,%}¦ f. a wall or screen of cloth surrounding
a tent, an outer tent, &c.; a curtain, a screen in
general; the sail of a boat; [cf. {%yavanikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19440<pc>0343-a<k1>javaniman<k2>javaniman
{%Javaniman, ā,%}¦ m. quickness, speed, velocity.
<LEND>

<L>19441<pc>0343-a<k1>javas<k2>javas
{%Javas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. quickness, velocity; [cf. {%a-%}
{%javas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19442<pc>0343-a<k1>javin<k2>javin
{%Javin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ quick, fleet, expeditious; ({%ī%}), m.
a horse, a camel.
<LEND>

<L>19443<pc>0343-a<k1>javina<k2>javina
{%Javina, as, ā, am,%}¦ rapid, quick; ({%as%}), m. {%= ko-%}
{%kaḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>19444<pc>0343-a<k1>javizWa<k2>javizWa
{%Javiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. quickest, fleetest;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>19445<pc>0343-a<k1>javIyas<k2>javIyas
{%Javīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. quicker, speedier.
<LEND>

<L>19446<pc>0343-a<k1>javana<k2>javana<h>2
{#javana#} 2¦. {%javana, as,%} m., N. of a people
whose country is by some thought to be identical
with Ionia or Greece, {%= yavana,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19447<pc>0343-a<k1>javanAla<k2>javanAla
{#javanAla#}¦ {%javanāla, am,%} n. a sort of grain,
Andropogon Bicolor; [cf. {%yavanāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19448<pc>0343-a<k1>javasa<k2>javasa
{#javasa#}¦ {%javasa, as,%} m. meadow or pasture
grass; [cf. {%yavasa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19449<pc>0343-a<k1>javAdi<k2>javAdi
{#javAdi#}¦ {%javādi, i,%} n. a kind of perfume, {%=%}
{%kṛtrima, gandha-rāja.%}
<LEND>

<L>19450<pc>0343-a<k1>javAla<k2>javAla
{#javAla#}¦ {%javāla, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19451<pc>0343-a<k1>javipulA<k2>javipulA
{#javipulA#}¦ {%ja-vipulā,%} f. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>19452<pc>0343-a<k1>jaz<k2>jaz
{#jaz#}¦ {%jaṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%jaṣati, -te,%} &c.,
to kill, wound, hurt, injure; [cf. Hib. <nsi>gus,</nsi>
‘death.’]
<LEND>

<L>19453<pc>0343-a<k1>jaza<k2>jaza
{#jaza#}¦ {%jaṣa, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of aquatic
animal; [cf. {%jhaṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19454<pc>0343-a<k1>jas<k2>jas
{#jas#}¦ {%jas,%} cl. 1. A. P., cl. 4. P., Ved. {%ja-%}
{%sate, -ti, jasyati, jajāsa, jasitum,%} to be
exhausted or tired; cl. 4. P. to set free, release,
liberate, let loose: Caus. P. {%jāsayati, -yitum, ajī-%}
{%jasat,%} to exhaust, weaken, cause to expire; cl. 10. 1.
P. {%jāsayati, jasati,%} &c., to hurt, injure; to strike,
[Page0343-b+ 72]
punish with blows; to slight or disregard, treat
irreverently.
<LEND>

<L>19455<pc>0343-b<k1>jasu<k2>jasu
{%Jasu, us,%}¦ f., Ved. exhaustion, weakness; a hiding-
place, cover (?).
<LEND>

<L>19456<pc>0343-b<k1>jasuri<k2>jasuri
{%Jasuri, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. exhausted, weak; ({%is%}), m.
Indra's thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>19457<pc>0343-b<k1>jasra<k2>jasra
{%Jasra, am,%}¦ n. exhaustion, fatigue.
<LEND>

<L>19458<pc>0343-b<k1>jasvan<k2>jasvan
{%Jasvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. needy, poor, hungry;
(Sāy.) causing to waste away, destroying; [cf. {%a-%}
{%jasra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19459<pc>0343-b<k1>jassarAja<k2>jassarAja
{#jassarAja#}¦ {%jassa-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19460<pc>0343-b<k1>jahaka<k2>jahaka
{#jahaka#}¦ {%jahaka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%hā%}), aban-
doning, one who leaves or abandons; ({%as%}), m. time;
a child; the slough of a snake; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
weasel or polecat.
<LEND>

<L>19461<pc>0343-b<k1>jahat<k2>jahat
{%Jahat, at, atī, at,%}¦ leaving, quitting, foregoing.
{%—Jahat-svārthā,%} f., scil. {%lakṣaṇā,%} a particular
figure of speech, a word losing its original meaning
and taking a different sense; irony. {%—Jahal-%}
{%lakṣaṇā,%} f. = the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>19462<pc>0343-b<k1>jahA<k2>jahA
{#jahA#}¦ {%jahā,%} f. a plant, commonly Muṇḍirī;
also {%kadamba-puṣpī,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>19463<pc>0343-b<k1>jahAnaka<k2>jahAnaka
{#jahAnaka#}¦ {%jahānaka, as,%} m. the period of the
total destruction of the world; [cf. {%jihānaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19464<pc>0343-b<k1>jahijoqa<k2>jahijoqa
{#jahijoqa#}¦ {%jahi-joḍa, as, ā, am%} ({%jahi%} impv. fr.
rt. {%han%} and {%joḍa%}), one who is in the habit of hitting
his chin.
<LEND>

<L>19465<pc>0343-b<k1>jahistamBa<k2>jahistamBa
{%Jahi-stambha, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who is constantly
striking against a post.
<LEND>

<L>19466<pc>0343-b<k1>jahu<k2>jahu
{#jahu#}¦ {%jahu, us,%} m. a young animal; N. of a
son of Puṣpa-vat and descendant of Ṛṣabha.
<LEND>

<L>19467<pc>0343-b<k1>jahnu<k2>jahnu
{#jahnu#}¦ {%jahnu, us,%} m., N. of an ancient king
and sage who adopted the Gaṅgā as his daughter,
(the river Ganges, when brought down from heaven
by the austerities of Bhagīratha, was forced to flow
over the earth and to follow him to the ocean, and
thence to the lower regions, for the purpose of
watering the ashes of Sagara's sons. In its course it
inundated the sacrificial ground of Jahnu, who there-
fore drank up its waters, but consented at the prayer
of Bhagīratha to discharge them from his ears.
Hence the river is regarded as his daughter, and is
called Jāhnavī); N. of a son of Aja-mīḍha, of a son
of Su-hotra, of Kuru, and of Hotraka; N. of an
ancestor of the Kuśikas; a N. of Viṣṇu; ({%avas%}),
m. pl. the descendants of Jahnu. {%—Jahnu-kanyā,%} f.
or {%jahnu-tanayā,%} f. or {%jahnu-sutā,%} f. ‘daughter
of Jahnu,’ N. of Gaṅgā or the Ganges.
<LEND>

<L>19468<pc>0343-b<k1>jahnAvI<k2>jahnAvI
{%Jahnāvī,%}¦ f., Ved. the family of Jahnu.
<LEND>

<L>19469<pc>0343-b<k1>jahman<k2>jahman
{#jahman#}¦ {%jahman, a,%} n. water (?).
<LEND>

<L>19470<pc>0343-b<k1>jahla<k2>jahla
{#jahla#}¦ {%jahla, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19471<pc>0343-b<k1>jA<k2>jA
{#jA#}¦ {%jā, ās, ās, am%} (fr. rt. {%jan,%} and used in
Ved. for 2. {%ja,%} which appears rarely in the Veda),
born, produced, &c. [cf. {%agni-jā, agra-jā, adri-jā,%}
{%indra-jā, go-jā,%} &c.], see 2. {%ja; (ās),%} m. f., Ved.
offspring, descendants; ({%ā%}), f. a race, tribe. {%—Jās-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ({%jās%} gen. fr. {%jā ?%}), the father or head of
a family or house. {%—Jāspatya, am,%} n., Ved. the state
or condition of the father of a family.
<LEND>

<L>19472<pc>0343-b<k1>jAMhagiri<k2>jAMhagiri
{#jAMhagiri#}¦ {%jāṃhagiri, is,%} m. = <nsi>jahāngīrī.</nsi>
<LEND>

<L>19473<pc>0343-b<k1>jAgata<k2>jAgata
{#jAgata#}¦ {%jāgata, as, ī, am,%} composed in the
Jagatī metre, consisting of it, conforming to it;
chiefly praised in the Jagatī metre (each deity having
his own peculiar metre); ({%am%}), n. the Jagatī metre.
<LEND>

<L>19474<pc>0343-b<k1>jAguqa<k2>jAguqa
{#jAguqa#}¦ {%jāguḍa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
({%as%}), m., N. of their country, renowned for its
saffron; ({%am%}), n. saffron.
<LEND>

<L>19475<pc>0343-b<k1>jAgf<k2>jAgf
{#jAgf#}¦ {%jāgṛ,%} cl. 2. P. {%jāgarti, jajāgāra%} or
{%jāgarāñ-cakāra, jāgariṣyati, jāgari-%}
{%tum,%} to be awake, to watch, be watchful, attentive,
intent; to foresee, provide; to sit up during the
night: Caus. {%jāgarayati,%} Aor. Ved. 2nd and 3rd sing.
[Page0343-c+ 76]
{%ajīgar,%} 2nd du. {%jigṛtam,%} 2nd pl. {%jigṛta,%} to awaken:
Desid. {%jijāgariṣati;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐγείρω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>vigil,</nsi>
<nsi>vigilo;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wachar, wachem;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>waka.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19476<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgara<k2>jAgara
{%Jāgara, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. waking, wakefulness, vigilance;
({%as, ā, am%}), waking, awake; ({%as%}), m. a vision in a
waking state; {%= jagara,%} mail, armour.
<LEND>

<L>19477<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgaraka<k2>jAgaraka
{%Jāgaraka, as,%}¦ m. waking, awake.
<LEND>

<L>19478<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgaraRa<k2>jAgaraRa
{%Jāgaraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ waking, remaining awake;
({%am%}), n. waking, watchfulness; keeping watch, sit-
ting up at night as part of a religious ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>19479<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgarita<k2>jAgarita
{%Jāgarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has been long awake
or is exhausted with sleeplessness; ({%am%}), n. waking.
<LEND>

<L>19480<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgaritf<k2>jAgaritf
{%Jāgaritṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ wakeful, awake, vigilant.
<LEND>

<L>19481<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgarin<k2>jAgarin
{%Jāgarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ wakeful, awake.
<LEND>

<L>19482<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgarizRu<k2>jAgarizRu
{%Jāgariṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ very wakeful or sleepless.
<LEND>

<L>19483<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgarUka<k2>jAgarUka
{%Jāgarūka, as, ā, am,%}¦ wakeful, waking, sleepless,
watchful.
<LEND>

<L>19484<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgartavya<k2>jAgartavya
{%Jāgartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be awake or awaked.
<LEND>

<L>19485<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgarti<k2>jAgarti
{%Jāgarti, is,%}¦ f. waking, vigilance; keeping watch,
watchfulness.
<LEND>

<L>19486<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgaryA<k2>jAgaryA
{%Jāgaryā,%}¦ f. wakefulness, waking, watching.
<LEND>

<L>19487<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgftavya<k2>jAgftavya
{%Jāgṛtavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be awake. See {%jā-%}
{%gartavya.%}
<LEND>

<L>19488<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgfvi<k2>jAgfvi
{%Jāgṛvi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. watchful, attentive; awake;
not extinguished, clear, bright (as fire); active, ani-
mating, exciting; ({%is%}), m. fire or its deity; a king.
<LEND>

<L>19489<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgrat<k2>jAgrat
{%Jāgrat, at, atī, at,%}¦ watching, being awake. {%—Jā-%}
{%grat-svapna, au,%} m. du. a state of waking and sleep;
({%as%}), m. Ved. dreaming in a waking state, day-dream,
hallucination; ({%as, ā, am%}), occurring in a state of
waking and sleep (?). {%—Jāgrad-avasthā%} or {%jāgrad-%}
{%daśā,%} f. a state of wakefulness. {%—Jāgrad-duḥṣvap-%}
{%nya, am,%} n., Ved. a disagreeable dream or vision
while in a waking state.
<LEND>

<L>19490<pc>0343-c<k1>jAgriyA<k2>jAgriyA
{%Jāgriyā,%}¦ f. waking, watching, wakefulness.
<LEND>

<L>19491<pc>0343-c<k1>jAGanI<k2>jAGanI
{#jAGanI#}¦ {%jāghanī,%} f. (fr. {%jaghana%}), a tail;
the thigh, leg.
<LEND>

<L>19492<pc>0343-c<k1>jANgala<k2>jANgala
{#jANgala#}¦ {%jāṅgala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jaṅgala%}),
arid; sparingly grown with trees &c. but nevertheless
fertile; rural, picturesque, diversified with hill, vale,
wood, and water; found or existing in such a district;
desert, covered with jungle; wild, not tame (as an
animal &c.); savage, barbarous; ({%as%}), m. the franco-
line partridge; N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Mucuna Pruritus; ({%am%}), n.
flesh; game, the flesh of deer &c.
<LEND>

<L>19493<pc>0343-c<k1>jANgali<k2>jANgali
{%Jāṅgali, is,%}¦ m. a snake-catcher; [cf. {%jāṅguli.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19494<pc>0343-c<k1>jANgalika<k2>jANgalika
{%Jāṅgalika, as,%}¦ m. a snake-charmer, {%= jaṅgulika.%}
<LEND>

<L>19495<pc>0343-c<k1>jANgula<k2>jANgula
{%Jāṅgula, am,%}¦ n. poison, venom, {%= jaṅgula;%} the
fruit of the Jālinī, a kind of cucumber; ({%ī%}), f.
knowledge of poisons, the possession of charms or
drugs and employment of them as antidotes; a pot-
herb, Luffa Acutangula; an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>19496<pc>0343-c<k1>jANguli<k2>jANguli
{%Jāṅguli, is,%}¦ m. a snake-catcher, a dealer in anti-
dotes, a conjuror.
<LEND>

<L>19497<pc>0343-c<k1>jANgulika<k2>jANgulika
{%Jāṅgulika, as,%}¦ m. a snake-catcher, a snake-doctor,
one who pretends by charms to cure the bite of snakes
or other venomous animals, a dealer in antidotes &c.
<LEND>

<L>19498<pc>0343-c<k1>jANGanI<k2>jANGanI
{#jANGanI#}¦ {%jāṅghanī,%} f. (fr. {%jaṅghā%}), the thigh;
(perhaps a wrong form for {%jāghanī.%})
<LEND>

<L>19499<pc>0343-c<k1>jANGAprahatika<k2>jANGAprahatika
{%Jāṅghāprahatika%}¦ or {%jāṅghāprahṛtika, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%jaṅghā-prahata%} or {%-prahṛta%}), produced
by a blow with the leg.
<LEND>

<L>19500<pc>0343-c<k1>jANGAlAyana<k2>jANGAlAyana
{%Jāṅghālāyana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%jaṅghāla%}), N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19501<pc>0343-c<k1>jANGi<k2>jANGi
{%Jāṅghi,%}¦ a patronymic from Jaṅgha or metronymic
from Jaṅghā.
<LEND>

<L>19502<pc>0343-c<k1>jANGika<k2>jANGika
{%Jāṅghika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%jaṅghā%}), swift of foot,
a courier; relating to or belonging to the leg; ({%as%}),
m. a courier, a running footman, an express; a
camel; a kind of antelope; [cf. {%kapi-jāṅghikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19503<pc>0343-c<k1>jAjanAga<k2>jAjanAga
{#jAjanAga#}¦ {%jājanāga, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19504<pc>0343-c<k1>jAjamat<k2>jAjamat
{#jAjamat#}¦ {%jājamat, at, atī, at%} (fr. Intens. of
1. {%jam,%} p. 339), excessively or repeatedly devouring.
<LEND>

<L>19505<pc>0343-c<k1>jAjala<k2>jAjala
{#jAjala#}¦ {%jājala, ās,%} and {%jājalin, inas,%} m. pl.,
N. of a school of the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>19506<pc>0343-c<k1>jAjali<k2>jAjali
{#jAjali#}¦ {%jājali, is,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>
[Page0344-a+ 76]

<L>19507<pc>0344-a<k1>jAjin<k2>jAjin
{#jAjin#}¦ {%jājin, ī,%} m. a warrior, a combatant;
[cf. {%jaj%} and {%jaja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19508<pc>0344-a<k1>jAjvalyamAna<k2>jAjvalyamAna
{#jAjvalyamAna#}¦ {%jājvalyamāna, as, ā, am%} (fr.
Intens. of rt. {%jval%}), shining, flaming, blazing, re-
splendent, effulgent, dazzling.
<LEND>

<L>19509<pc>0344-a<k1>jAwali<k2>jAwali
{#jAwali#}¦ {%jāṭali, is, ī,%} m. f. the plant Big-
nonia Suaveolens; (other readings have {%pāṭali%} and
{%jhāṭali.%})
<LEND>

<L>19510<pc>0344-a<k1>jAwAlikA<k2>jAwAlikA
{#jAwAlikA#}¦ {%jāṭālikā,%} f. (fr. {%jaṭāla%} or {%jaṭā-%}
{%laka%}), N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>19511<pc>0344-a<k1>jAwikAyana<k2>jAwikAyana
{#jAwikAyana#}¦ {%jāṭikāyana, as,%} m. (fr. {%jaṭika%}),
N. of the author of a hymn of the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>19512<pc>0344-a<k1>jAWara<k2>jAWara
{#jAWara#}¦ {%jāṭhara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jaṭhara%}),
stomachic, abdominal, visceral, being in the stomach
or belly, relating to it, relating to the womb, e. g.
{%jāṭharo'gniḥ,%} the fire in the stomach, the digestive
faculty, gastric juice, hunger; ({%as%}), m. ‘offspring of
the womb,’ a child; N. of an attendant of Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>19513<pc>0344-a<k1>jAWarya<k2>jAWarya
{%Jāṭharya, am,%}¦ n. morbid affection of the abdomen.
<LEND>

<L>19514<pc>0344-a<k1>jAqya<k2>jAqya
{#jAqya#}¦ {%jāḍya, am,%} n. (fr. {%jaḍa%}), coldness,
frigidity; stiffness, inactivity, apathy, sluggishness, in-
sensibility; absence of feeling in the tongue, taste-
lessness; dulness or coldness of intellect, stupidity,
folly. {%—Jāḍyāri (˚ya-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of cold-
ness,’ the citron tree.
<LEND>

<L>19515<pc>0344-a<k1>jAta<k2>jAta
{#jAta#}¦ {%jāta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%jan%}), born,
brought into existence, brought forth, engendered
(e. g. {%māsa-jāta,%} born a month ago, one month
old; {%putro-jātaḥ,%} a son only by birth, not by quali-
ties); grown, produced, arisen, caused, occasioned,
appearing, appeared, apparent, manifest; happened;
become, present; ready at hand, collected, stored up,
possessed, felt, experienced, inspired, with, affected
by, (often at the beginning of an adjective compound,
see examples below; also at the end of a comp., e. g.
{%putra-jāta,%} having a son born; {%śmaśru-jāta,%} having
a beard; {%danta-jāta,%} having teeth just growing);
({%as%}), m. male issue, a son; a living being (used of
men and gods, but especially of the former); ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a race of the Haihayas; ({%ā%}), f. female
offspring, a daughter; {%jāte,%} O daughter! ({%am%}), n.
a living being, a creature; birth, production, origin;
race, kind, sort, class, species; a multitude or collec-
tion of things forming a class (e. g. {%karma-jātam,%}
the whole aggregate of actions; {%sukha-jātam,%}
everything included under the name pleasure); in-
dividuality, specific condition; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">γετος;</lang> Germ.
<nsi>Kind;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>gentis.</nsi>] {%—Jāta-karman, a,%} n. a
ceremony at the birth of a child when the navel
string is divided, (it consists in touching the infant's
tongue thrice with ghee after appropriate prayers);
delivery of a new-born infant. {%—Jāta-kalāpa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a tail (as a peacock). {%—Jāta-kāma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fallen in love. {%—Jāta-kopa%} or {%jāta-kro-%}
{%dha, as, ā, am,%} enraged. {%—Jāta-kautuka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} delighted. {%—Jāta-kautūhala, as, ā, am,%} being
eagerly desirous. {%—Jāta-kṣobha, as, ā, am,%} agitated.
{%—Jāta-danta, as, ī, am,%} (a child) that has a tooth
or teeth growing; having teeth. {%—Jāta-pakṣa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} whose wings have grown, possessing wings.
{%—Jāta-pāśa, as, ā, am,%} having fetters, fettered.
{%—Jāta-putrā,%} f. a woman who has borne a son or
sons. {%—Jāta-pratyaya, as, ā, am,%} inspired with
confidence, confiding, believing. {%—Jāta-bala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} possessing strength, strong. {%—Jāta-bhī, īs,%} f.
‘fearful,’ N. of a woman. {%—Jāta-manmatha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} being in love, fallen in love, loving. {%—Jāta-mātra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} just born, merely born; ({%am%}), n. as soon
as born, the instant of birth. {%—Jāta-rajas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} having the catamenia. {%—Jāta-rasa, as, ā, am,%}
having taste or flavour. {%—Jāta-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
embodied, having assumed a shape or form, beautiful,
brilliant, golden (?); ({%am%}), n. the form in which a
person is born, nakedness; gold; the thorn-apple.
{%—Jātarūpa-dhara, as, ā, am,%} quite naked. {%—Jā-%}
{%tarūpa-pariṣkṛta, as, ā, am,%} adorned with gold.
[Page0344-b+ 81]
{%—Jātarūpa-maya, as, ī, am,%} golden. {%—Jātarūpa-%}
{%śila, as,%} m., N. of a golden mountain. {%—Jāta-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} containing the word {%jāta%} or any other
form derived from {%jan%}. {%—Jāta-vāsa-gṛha, am,%} n.
the room in which a child is born, the room of a
lying-in woman. {%—Jāta-vidyā,%} f., Ved. a know-
ledge of what exists or of the origin and nature of
all things. {%—Jāta-vibhrama, as, ā, am,%} flurried,
precipitate. {%—Jāta-viśvāsa, as, ā, am,%} having the
confidence excited. {%—Jāta-vedas, ās,%} m., Ved. an
epithet of Agni; (the meaning is explained in five
ways: 1. ‘knowing all created beings;’ 2. ‘possess-
ing all creatures or everything existent;’ 3. ‘known
by created beings;’ 4. ‘possessing {%vedas%} = riches;’
5. ‘possessing {%vedas%} = wisdom:’ other derivations
and explanations are found in the Brāhmaṇas, but the
exact sense of this word seems to have been very
early lost, and of the five explanations given above
only the first two would seem to be admissible for
the Vedic texts; in one passage a form {%jāta-veda%}
seems to occur.) {%—Jātavedasa, as, ī, am,%} relating to
Jāta-vedas; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Jātaveda-%}
{%sīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging or relating to Jāta-vedas.
{%—Jāta-vepathu, us, us, u,%} affected with tremor.
{%—Jāta-veśman, a,%} n. the room in which a child is
born, the room of a lying-in woman. {%—Jāta-śmaśru,%}
{%us, us, u,%} one whose beard has grown. {%—Jāta-śrama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} wearied, exhausted. {%—Jāta-saṃvṛddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} born and grown up. {%—Jāta-saṅkalpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} feeling a desire or passion for. {%—Jāta-%}
{%sādhvasa, as, ā, am,%} afraid. {%—Jāta-sena, as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Jātasenya, as,%} m. a patronymic
from the last. {%—Jāta-sneha, as, ā, am,%} enamoured,
feeling love or affection for. {%—Jāta-spṛha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} desirous, wishing for. {%—Jāta-harṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} rejoiced, glad. {%—Jāta-hārda, as, ī, am,%} feeling
affection, becoming attached. {%—Jātāgas (˚ta-āg˚),%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} offending, sinning, committing fault; also
{%jātāparādha, jāta-doṣa,%} &c. {%—Jātāpatyā (˚ta-%}
{%ap˚),%} f. a mother, a woman who has borne a child.
{%—Jātāmarṣa (˚ta-am˚), as, ā, am,%} having the
anger roused, vexed, enraged, put in a passion.
{%—Jātāśru (˚ta-aś˚), us, us, u,%} weeping, shedding
tears. {%—Jāteṣṭi (˚ta-iṣ˚), is,%} f. rites or sacrifice
performed at the birth of a child. {%—Jātokṣa (˚ta-%}
{%uk˚), as,%} m. a young bullock, an ox.
<LEND>

<L>19516<pc>0344-b<k1>jAtaka<k2>jAtaka
{%Jātaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ born, produced; ({%as%}), m. a
new-born child; a mendicant; ({%am%}), n. {%= jāta-%}
{%karman,%} a ceremony performed after the birth of a
child; nativity, astrological calculation of a nativity;
(with Buddhists) a former birth of Śākya-muni and
its history; an aggregate or a collection of similar
things; [cf. {%catur-jātaka.%}] {%—Jātaka-dhvani, is,%}
m. a leech. {%—Jātaka-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a work
on nativities by Ananta; another work by Keśava.
{%—Jātaka-muktāvalī,%} f. title of an astrological
work by Śiva-dāsa. {%—Jātakāmbhonidhi (˚ka-am˚),%}
{%is,%} m. title of an astrological work by Bhadra-bāhu.
<LEND>

<L>19517<pc>0344-b<k1>jAtAyana<k2>jAtAyana
{%Jātāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Jāta.
<LEND>

<L>19518<pc>0344-b<k1>jAti<k2>jAti
{%Jāti, is,%}¦ f. birth, production; the form of existence,
whether as a man or animal, which is fixed by birth;
position assigned by birth; rank; family, race, lineage;
kind, sort, genus, species, class, tribe, caste; the cha-
racter or peculiarities of a species, the genuine or
true state of anything; reduction of fractions to a
common denominator; false generalization; a futile
answer, a self-confuting reply; a particular figure of
speech in rhetoric; a class of metres; a manner of
singing; a fire-place; N. of several plants, = Jas-
minum Grandiflorum; Emblica Officinalis; mace,
nutmeg; [cf. {%antya-jāti, eka-jāti, dvi-jāti;%} cf. also
Lat. <nsi>gens;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pri-gentis.</nsi>] {%—Jāti-kośa%} or {%jāti-%}
{%koṣa%} or {%jātī-kośa, am,%} n. a nutmeg; ({%ī%}), f. the
outer skin of the nutmeg. {%—Jāti-tva, am,%} n. or
{%jāti-tā,%} f. distinction or nature of caste or tribe;
special or generic property. {%—Jāti-dharma, as,%} m.
the duty of caste, the law or usage of caste (e. g.
sacred study is the caste-duty of the Brāhman, fight-
ing of the Kṣatriya, &c.); generic or specific
property. {%—Jāti-dhvaṃsa, as,%} m. the loss of caste
or its privileges. {%—Jātin-dhara, as,%} m., N. of a
[Page0344-c+ 77]
physician, = Śuddhodana in a former birth. {%—Jāti-%}
{%pattrī%} or {%jātī-pattrī,%} f. the outer skin of the nut-
meg. {%—Jāti-phala%} or {%jātī-phala, am,%} n. a nutmeg;
[cf. {%kṣudrajātī-phala.%}] {%—Jāti-brāhmaṇa, as,%} m.
a Brāhman by birth but not by knowledge. {%—Jāti-%}
{%bhraṃśa, as,%} m. loss of rank or caste. {%—Jāti-%}
{%bhraṃśa-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing loss of caste;
forbidden, improper; ({%am%}), n. doing an act pro-
hibited to a particular caste. {%—Jāti-bhraṣṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fallen from caste, outcast. {%—Jāti-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
of high rank, obtaining a high position. {%—Jāti-maha,%}
{%as,%} m. birthday-festival. {%—Jāti-mātra, am,%} n. mere
birth, position in life obtained by mere birth; caste
only, but not the performance of the especial duties;
species, genus. {%—Jātimātropajīvin (˚ra-up˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} or {%jātimātra-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%} (a Brāhman)
who lives only by his caste (without any sacerdotal
acts). {%—Jāti-mālā,%} f. ‘garland of the castes,’ title
of a work treating of the different castes. {%—Jāti-%}
{%lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. specific or generic distinction,
characteristic, mark of tribe or caste. {%—Jāti-vacana,%}
{%am,%} n. the idea of species or genus. {%—Jāti-vācaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} expressing genus, generic (as a name).
{%—Jāti-viveka, as,%} m. title of a literary work.
{%—Jāti-vaira, am,%} n. natural enmity, innate or
instinctive hostility. {%—Jāti-vailakṣaṇya, am,%} n.
inconsistency, incompatibility, conduct or quality at
variance with birth or tribe. {%—Jāti-śabda, as,%} m. a
word expressing the idea of species or genus. {%—Jāti-%}
{%sampanna, as, ā, am,%} sprung from a good family,
belonging to a noble family. {%—Jāti-sāra, as,%} m.
nutmeg. {%—Jāti-smara, as, ā, am,%} recollecting a
former existence, remembering one's condition in a
former life; N. of a Tirtha. {%—Jāti-smaraṇa, am,%}
n. recollection of a former existence. {%—Jāti-sva-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. specific or generic character or nature.
{%—Jāti-hīna, as, ā, am,%} of low birth or descent,
void of caste, outcast, having a low position. {%—Jātī-%}
{%rasa, as,%} m. gum myrrh. {%—Jāty-andha, as, ā, am,%}
blind from birth, born blind.
<LEND>

<L>19519<pc>0344-c<k1>jAtIya<k2>jAtIya
{%Jātīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (used at the end of a compound
and by native grammarians considered as an affix),
relating or belonging to any species, genus, tribe,
order, family, race, &c. (e. g. {%aśva-jātīya,%} belonging
to the horse-kind; {%vṛkṣa-jātīya,%} belonging to
trees); [cf. {%vi-jātīya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19520<pc>0344-c<k1>jAtIyaka<k2>jAtIyaka
{%Jātīyaka, as, ā, am, = jātīya;%}¦ (e. g. {%evaṃ-jātī-%}
{%yaka,%} of such a kind, of such a tribe or race.)
<LEND>

<L>19521<pc>0344-c<k1>jAtya<k2>jAtya
{%Jātya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a family or caste;
of the same family, related; sprung from a noble
family, noble; well-born, legitimate, born of parents
of the same caste, genuine (<lang n="greek">γνήσιος</lang>); best, excellent;
pleasing, beautiful; (in mathematics) rectangular.
<LEND>

<L>19522<pc>0344-c<k1>jAtarUpa<k2>jAtarUpa
{#jAtarUpa#}¦ {%jāta-rūpa.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>19523<pc>0344-c<k1>jAti<k2>jAti
{#jAti#}¦ {%jāti.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>19524<pc>0344-c<k1>jAtu<k2>jAtu
{#jAtu#}¦ {%jātu,%} ind. (fr. {%jan ?;%} cf. {%januṣā%} under
{%janus%}), at all, ever; possibly, perhaps; sometimes,
some day, once, once upon a time (e. g. {%kiṃ tena%}
{%jātu jātena,%} what is the use at all of him born ?).
{%Jātu%} is said to be used in connection with the
potential in the sense of ‘not allowing’ (e. g. {%jātu%}
{%vṛṣalaṃ yājayen na marṣayāmi,%} I suffer not
that he should cause an outcast to sacrifice), or with
a present indicative to express censure (e. g. {%jātu%}
{%yājayati vṛṣalam,%} ought he to cause an outcast
to sacrifice ?). In the Veda when {%jātu%} stands at the
beginning of a sentence the verb which follows re-
tains its accent. {%Na jātu,%} not at all, by no means,
never; {%api jātu,%} perhaps, possibly; {%jātu-cit,%} at
some time or other, some day, one day. {%—Jātū-%}
{%ṣṭhira, as, ā, am,%} Ved. eminently strong; (Sāy.)
always strong; or ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19525<pc>0344-c<k1>jAtuka<k2>jAtuka
{#jAtuka#}¦ {%jātuka,%} the plant from which the
Asa Fœtida is obtained; ({%am%}), n. Asa Fœtida; [cf.
{%jatuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19526<pc>0344-c<k1>jAtuDAna<k2>jAtuDAna
{#jAtuDAna#}¦ {%jātudhāna, as,%} m. {%= yātu-dhāna,%}
a Rākṣasa, an imp, ogre or goblin.
<LEND>
[Page0345-a+ 76]

<L>19527<pc>0345-a<k1>jAtuza<k2>jAtuza
{#jAtuza#}¦ {%jātuṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jatu%}), made of
lac or gum, covered with lac or with any artificial
form or condition of it; sticky, adhesive.
<LEND>

<L>19528<pc>0345-a<k1>jAtU<k2>jAtU
{#jAtU#}¦ {%jātū,%} Ved. (Sāy.) {%= aśani,%} a thunder-
bolt. {%—Jātū-bharman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. (Sāy.) armed
with the thunderbolt or nourishing created beings;
[cf. {%jātū%} and {%jāta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19529<pc>0345-a<k1>jAtUkarRa<k2>jAtUkarRa
{#jAtUkarRa#}¦ {%jātūkarṇa, as,%} m. (fr. {%jatū-karṇa ?%}),
N. of an ancient preceptor; N. of a physician; and
of the author of a law-book; an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>19530<pc>0345-a<k1>jAtUkarRya<k2>jAtUkarRya
{%Jātūkarṇya, as,%}¦ m., N. of several preceptors and
grammarians; N. of the author of a law-book.
<LEND>

<L>19531<pc>0345-a<k1>jAna<k2>jAna
{#jAna#}¦ {%jāna, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%jan%}), Ved. pro-
duction, birth, origin, birthplace; ({%as%}), m. a patro-
nymic of Vṛśa.
<LEND>

<L>19532<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnaka<k2>jAnaka
{%Jānaka, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%janaka%}), a patronymic of
Kratu-vid; also of Āya-sthūṇa; ({%ī%}), f. a patronymic
of Sītā, the wife of Rāma; N. of a metre consisting
of four lines of twenty-four syllables each. {%—Jānakī-%}
{%nātha%} or {%jānakīśa (˚kī-īśa), as,%} m. the husband
of Sītā, i. e. Rāma. {%—Jānakīnātha-śarman, ā,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Jānakī-rāghava, am,%} n. title of a
play.
<LEND>

<L>19533<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnaki<k2>jAnaki
{%Jānaki, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Kratu-jit; also of
Āya-sthūṇa.
<LEND>

<L>19534<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnantapi<k2>jAnantapi
{%Jānantapi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%janan-tapa%}), a patronymic
of Aty-arāti.
<LEND>

<L>19535<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnapada<k2>jAnapada
{%Jānapada, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%jana-pada%}), one who be-
longs to a country, a subject; ({%as, ī, am%}), living in
the country, an inhabitant of the country (opposed
to {%paura,%} inhabiting a town); a peasant, rustic, be-
longing to or suited for the inhabitants of the
country; ({%ā%}), f. a popular expression; N. of a place;
N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>19536<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnapadika<k2>jAnapadika
{%Jānapadika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to a country or
to the subjects of a country.
<LEND>

<L>19537<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnarAjya<k2>jAnarAjya
{%Jānarājya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%jana-rājan%}), Ved. sove-
reignty, supremacy.
<LEND>

<L>19538<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnavAdika<k2>jAnavAdika
{%Jānavādika%}¦ or {%jānevādika%} or {%jānovādika, as,%}
{%ī, am%} (fr. {%jana-vāda, jane-vāda,%} and {%jano-vāda%}),
knowing the popular report.
<LEND>

<L>19539<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnaSruti<k2>jAnaSruti
{%Jānaśruti, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Jana-śruta.
<LEND>

<L>19540<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnaSruteya<k2>jAnaSruteya
{%Jānaśruteya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%jana-śrutā%} or {%jāna-%}
{%śruti%}), a patronymic of Aupāvi.
<LEND>

<L>19541<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnAyana<k2>jAnAyana
{%Jānāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Jana.
<LEND>

<L>19542<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnArdana<k2>jAnArdana
{%Jānārdana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%janārdana%}), a patronymic
of Pra-dyumna.
<LEND>

<L>19543<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnuka<k2>jAnuka<h>1
1. {%jānuka, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. rt. {%jan%}), bringing forth.
(For 2. {%jānuka%} see under {%jānu%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>19544<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnat<k2>jAnat
{#jAnat#}¦ {%jānat, an, atī, at%} (fr. rt. 1. {%jñā%}),
knowing, understanding, &c.
<LEND>

<L>19545<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnanti<k2>jAnanti
{%Jānanti, is,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>19546<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnAna<k2>jAnAna
{%Jānāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ knowing, understanding.
<LEND>

<L>19547<pc>0345-a<k1>jAni<k2>jAni
{#jAni#}¦ {%jāni%} (at the end of an adj. comp. {%=%}
{%jani%} or {%jāna%} for {%jāyā%}), a wife (e. g. {%ananya-jāni,%}
having no other wife); [cf. {%a-jāni, arundhatī-j˚,%}
{%dvi-j˚,%} &c.; cf. also Goth. <nsi>qvêns.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19548<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnu<k2>jAnu
{#jAnu#}¦ {%jānu, us, u,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%jan ?%}), the
knee; {%jānubhyām avanīṃ gam,%} to fall to the ground
on one's knees; [cf. Lat. <nsi>genu;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">γόνυ;</lang> Goth.
<nsi>kniu;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Knie;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>glun</nsi> (?); Slav. <nsi>koljeno;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>kiélis.</nsi>] {%—Jānu-jaṅgha, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Jānu-daghna, as, ī, am,%} up to the knees. {%—Jā-%}
{%nuprahṛtika, as, ī, am,%} produced by a blow with
the knee; [cf. {%jāṅghāprahṛtika.%}] {%—Jānu-pha-%}
{%laka%} or {%jānu-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the knee-pan or
patella. {%—Jānu-vijānu, u,%} n. contracting and ex-
tending the knees, a peculiar position in fighting.
{%—Jānu-sandhi, is,%} m. the knee-joint.
<LEND>

<L>19549<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnuka<k2>jAnuka<h>2
2. {%jānuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp.
{%= jānu,%} the knee (e. g. {%ūrdhva-jānuka,%} having the
knees raised).
<LEND>

<L>19550<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnevAdika<k2>jAnevAdika
{#jAnevAdika#}¦ {%jānevādika.%} See {%jānavādika.%}
<LEND>

<L>19551<pc>0345-a<k1>jAnDita<k2>jAnDita
{#jAnDita#}¦ {%jāndhita, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%jana%} and
{%dhita = hita ?%}), Ved. ‘agreed upon by men,’ custom-
ary, usual.
<LEND>
[Page0345-b+ 76]

<L>19552<pc>0345-b<k1>jAnya<k2>jAnya
{#jAnya#}¦ {%jānya, as,%} m. (fr. {%jāni ?%}), N. of an
ancient sage.
<LEND>

<L>19553<pc>0345-b<k1>jApa<k2>jApa
{#jApa#}¦ {%jāpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%jap%}), muttering,
whispering, muttering prayers or telling beads, reciting
passages of the Vedas &c. inaudibly; a prayer uttered
in this manner; [cf. {%karṇa-jāpa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19554<pc>0345-b<k1>jApaka<k2>jApaka
{%Jāpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ muttering prayers, one who
mutters prayers; relating to a muttered prayer;
({%am%}), n. a kind of fragrant wood; (a various reading
has {%jāyaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>19555<pc>0345-b<k1>jApin<k2>jApin
{%Jāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) re-
citing in a low voice.
<LEND>

<L>19556<pc>0345-b<k1>jApya<k2>jApya
{%Jāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be muttered, to be repeated
in a low voice; ({%am%}), n. a prayer to be muttered
inaudibly, the muttering of prayers &c.
<LEND>

<L>19557<pc>0345-b<k1>jApana<k2>jApana
{#jApana#}¦ {%jāpana, am,%} n. (a Prākṛt form for
{%yāpana%}), declining, rejection, dissent; dismissing,
sending away; completing, finishing.
<LEND>

<L>19558<pc>0345-b<k1>jAbAla<k2>jAbAla<h>1
{#jAbAla#} 1¦. {%jābāla, as,%} m. (fr. {%jabālā%}), a
metronymic of Mahā-śāla; also of Satya-kāma; the
author of a law-book; also of a medicinal work;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a school of the Yajur-veda. {%—Jā-%}
{%bālopaniṣad (˚la-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad
belonging to the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>19559<pc>0345-b<k1>jAbAlAyana<k2>jAbAlAyana
{%Jābālāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>19560<pc>0345-b<k1>jAbAli<k2>jAbAli
{%Jābāli, is,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient sage; also of the
author of a law-book; N. of an infidel Brāhman who
was one of the priests of king Daśa-ratha and after
his death tried ineffectually to shake the resolution
of Rāma and induce him to take the throne offered
to him by his dutiful younger brother Bharata; (his
speech, which is given in Rāmāyaṇa II. 108, con-
tains doctrines very similar to those of the Cārvākas
or materialists.)
<LEND>

<L>19561<pc>0345-b<k1>jAbAlin<k2>jAbAlin
{%Jābālin, inas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>19562<pc>0345-b<k1>jAbAla<k2>jAbAla<h>2
{#jAbAla#} 2¦. {%jābāla, as,%} m. (a corruption of
{%ajā-pāla%}), a goat-herd.
<LEND>

<L>19563<pc>0345-b<k1>jAmadagna<k2>jAmadagna
{#jAmadagna#}¦ {%jāmadagna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jamad-%}
{%agni%}), derived from or produced by Jamad-agni;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Catur-aha ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>19564<pc>0345-b<k1>jAmadagniya<k2>jAmadagniya
{%Jāmadagniya%}¦ and {%jāmadagneya,%} a patronymic
from Jamad-agni.
<LEND>
<L>19564.1<pc>0345-b<k1>jAmadagneya<k2>jAmadagneya
{{Lbody=19564}}
<LEND>

<L>19565<pc>0345-b<k1>jAmadagnya<k2>jAmadagnya
{%Jāmadagnya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to Jamad-
agni or to his son Jāmadagnya; a patronymic; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a Catur-aha ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>19566<pc>0345-b<k1>jAmarya<k2>jAmarya
{#jAmarya#}¦ {%jāmarya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (Sāy.) from
{%jā-amarya,%} making creatures immortal; but per-
haps connected with a rt. {%jam%} for {%cam%} and used as
an epithet of milk.
<LEND>

<L>19567<pc>0345-b<k1>jAmala<k2>jAmala
{#jAmala#}¦ {%jāmala = yāmala%} in {%kṛṣṇa-jāmala%}
&c.
<LEND>

<L>19568<pc>0345-b<k1>jAmA<k2>jAmA
{#jAmA#}¦ {%jāmā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%jan%}), a daughter-
in-law.
<LEND>

<L>19569<pc>0345-b<k1>jAmAtf<k2>jAmAtf
{%Jā-mātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. (‘the maker of [new] offspring,’
or perhaps related to {%jāmi%} below), a daughter's
husband, a son-in-law; a husband, a lord or master;
a friend; the sunflower, Heliantus Annuus; [cf.
{%yāmātṛ;%} cf. also Lat. <nsi>gener</nsi> (?); Gr. <lang n="greek">γάμβρος.</lang>]
{%—Jāmātṛ-tva, am,%} n. the relationship of a
daughter's husband.
<LEND>

<L>19570<pc>0345-b<k1>jAmAtfka<k2>jAmAtfka
{%Jāmātṛka, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming from or belonging
to a daughter's husband; ({%as%}), m. a daughter's
husband.
<LEND>

<L>19571<pc>0345-b<k1>jAmi<k2>jAmi
{%Jāmi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. related by blood, con-
sanguineous, (rarely applied to a brother but often to
a sister either with or without the word {%svasṛ%}); re-
lated like brother and sister; (in Vedic language the
fingers are sometimes called {%jāmayaḥ%} or ‘the sisters;’
the {%sapta jāmayaḥ%} or ‘seven sisters’ are the seven
Dhītayas or acts of devotion in the Soma wor-
ship); related in general, belonging to, peculiar
to, customary, usual; ({%is%}), f. a sister, a virtuous and
respectable woman; (more properly) a female rela-
tive of the head of a family, a daughter-in-law; N.
of a deity; N. of an Apsaras; ({%ī%}), n. blood-relation-
ship, consanguinity, the relation of brother and sister,
[Page0345-c+ 73]
relation in general, descent; (in grammar and in the
sacrificial language) tautology, repetition; water;
[cf. {%a-jāmi%} and {%deva-j˚.%}] {%—Jāmi-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
creating relationship. {%—Jāmi-tva, am,%} n., Ved. con-
sanguinity, relationship. {%—Jāmi-vat,%} ind., Ved. like
a sister or brother. {%—Jāmi-śaṃsa, as,%} m., Ved. the
curse pronounced by a brother or relation.
<LEND>

<L>19572<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmeya<k2>jAmeya
{%Jāmeya, as,%}¦ m. a sister's son.
<LEND>

<L>19573<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmitra<k2>jAmitra
{#jAmitra#}¦ {%jāmitra, am,%} n. (fr. the Gr. <lang n="greek">διάμετρον,</lang>
in astronomy) the seventh lunar mansion.
<LEND>

<L>19574<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmbava<k2>jAmbava
{#jAmbava#}¦ {%jāmbava, as, ī, am,%} coming from or
belonging to the Jambū tree; ({%as%}), m. {%= jāmbavat,%}
q. v.; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= nāga-damanī; (am),%}
n. the fruit of the Jambū tree, the rose-apple; gold;
N. of a town. {%—Jāmbavauṣṭha (˚va-oṣ˚), am,%} n.
a cauterizing needle or probe; also {%jāmbavoṣṭha,%}
{%jāmboṣṭha, jāmbauṣṭha,%} and {%jambv-oṣṭha.%}
<LEND>

<L>19575<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmbavaka<k2>jAmbavaka
{%Jāmbavaka, as%}¦ or {%am%} (?), m. or n. (?), N. of a
place.
<LEND>

<L>19576<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmbavat<k2>jAmbavat
{%Jāmbavat, ān,%}¦ m. (for {%jāmbava-vat ?%}), N. of the
chief of the bears who, with the monkeys, was an ally
of Rāma and therefore sometimes called a monkey;
he was a son of Pitāmaha and father of Jāmbavatī
who was wife of Kṛṣṇa and mother of Śāmba; ({%tī%}),
f., N. of the daughter of Jāmbavat, wife of Kṛṣṇa
and mother of Śāmba; N. of a plant, {%= jambū.%}
<LEND>

<L>19577<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmbuvat<k2>jAmbuvat
{%Jāmbuvat, ān,%}¦ m. {%= jāmbavat; (tī),%} f. {%= jāmba-%}
{%vatī.%}
<LEND>

<L>19578<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmbIra<k2>jAmbIra
{#jAmbIra#}¦ {%jāmbīra, am,%} n. (fr. {%jambīra%}), a
citron.
<LEND>

<L>19579<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmbIla<k2>jAmbIla
{#jAmbIla#}¦ {%jāmbīla, as,%} m., Ved. the knee-
bone, knee-pan; (said by some to be so called from
its similarity to a citron, by others considered as
a corruption fr. {%jānu%} and {%bila.%})
<LEND>

<L>19580<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmbuka<k2>jAmbuka
{#jAmbuka#}¦ {%jāmbuka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jambuka%}),
coming from or belonging to a jackal; {%jāmbukaṃ%}
{%vacas,%} a jackal's cry.
<LEND>

<L>19581<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmbUnada<k2>jAmbUnada
{#jAmbUnada#}¦ {%jāmbūnada, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jambū-%}
{%nadī%}), coming from or belonging to the river
Jambū, epithet of a kind of gold; made of the
gold called Jāmbūnada, golden; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a son of Janam-ejaya; N. of a mountain; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a river; ({%am%}), n. gold from the Jambū.
river, any gold, a golden ornament; N. of a lake;
the thorn-apple. {%—Jāmbūnada-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made of the gold called Jāmbūnada, golden.
<LEND>

<L>19582<pc>0345-c<k1>jAmBa<k2>jAmBa
{#jAmBa#}¦ {%jāmbha, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Jambha.
<LEND>

<L>19583<pc>0345-c<k1>jAyaka<k2>jAyaka
{#jAyaka#}¦ {%jāyaka, am,%} n. a kind of yellow
fragrant wood; [cf. {%jāpaka%} and {%jāṣaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19584<pc>0345-c<k1>jAyadraTa<k2>jAyadraTa
{#jAyadraTa#}¦ {%jāyadratha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jayad-%}
{%ratha%}), belonging to Jayad-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>19585<pc>0345-c<k1>jAyantIputra<k2>jAyantIputra
{%Jāyantī-putra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>19586<pc>0345-c<k1>jAyanteya<k2>jAyanteya
{%Jāyanteya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Jayantī.
<LEND>

<L>19587<pc>0345-c<k1>jAyamAna<k2>jAyamAna
{#jAyamAna#}¦ {%jāyamāna.%} See p. 338. col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>19588<pc>0345-c<k1>jAyA<k2>jAyA
{#jAyA#}¦ {%jāyā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%jan,%} to bring forth;
cf. Manu IX. 8), a wife, one wedded lawfully or
according to the ritual, a consort; (in astronomy) N.
of the seventh mansion. {%—Jāyā-ghna, as, ī, am,%}
a wife-murderer; ({%as%}), m. a mole or mark on the
body indicative of the death of a wife. {%—Jāyājīva%}
{%(˚yā-āj˚), as,%} m. a dancer, an actor (who gets a liveli-
hood by his wife). {%—Jāyā-tva, am,%} n. the character
or attributes of a wife. {%—Jāyānujīvin (˚yā-an˚), ī,%}
m. an actor, a dancer, a mime; the husband of a
harlot; a needy man, a pauper; a kind of crane,
the Vaka or Ardea Nivea. {%—Jāyā-pati, ī,%} m. du.
husband and wife.
<LEND>

<L>19589<pc>0345-c<k1>jAyAnya<k2>jAyAnya
{#jAyAnya#}¦ {%jāyānya, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
disease; [cf. {%jāyenya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19590<pc>0345-c<k1>jAyin<k2>jAyin
{#jAyin#}¦ {%jāyin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ji%}), conquer-
ing, subduing; ({%ī%}), m. a stanza repeated, the burden
of a song; [cf. {%dhruvaka.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0346-a+ 76]

<L>19591<pc>0346-a<k1>jAyu<k2>jAyu
{%Jāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ victorious, striving to conquer or
gain; ({%us%}), m. a medicine, medicament; a physician.
<LEND>

<L>19592<pc>0346-a<k1>jAyenya<k2>jAyenya
{#jAyenya#}¦ {%jāyenya, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
disease; [cf. {%jāyānya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19593<pc>0346-a<k1>jAra<k2>jAra
{#jAra#}¦ {%jāra, jāraka,%} &c. See p. 350, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>19594<pc>0346-a<k1>jAruDi<k2>jAruDi
{#jAruDi#}¦ {%jārudhi, is,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>19595<pc>0346-a<k1>jArUTI<k2>jArUTI
{#jArUTI#}¦ {%jārūthī,%} f., N. of a river (?); [cf.
{%jarūtha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19596<pc>0346-a<k1>jArUTya<k2>jArUTya
{#jArUTya#}¦ {%jārūthya%} or {%jāruthya.%} This word
is generally found connected with {%aśva-medha,%} the
horse sacrifice, but the meaning is doubtful.
<LEND>

<L>19597<pc>0346-a<k1>jArutTa<k2>jArutTa
{%Jāruttha, as,%}¦ m. (is said to mean) a sacrifice in
which three offerings are made, or in which the sun
is thrice worshipped in his southern declination (?).
<LEND>

<L>19598<pc>0346-a<k1>jArtika<k2>jArtika
{#jArtika#}¦ {%jārtika, ās,%} m. pl. a various read-
ing for {%jartika.%}
<LEND>

<L>19599<pc>0346-a<k1>jArya<k2>jArya
{#jArya#}¦ {%jārya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according to
Sāy.) ‘to be praised’ (as if fr. 3. {%jṝ%}); but perhaps
rather ({%am%}), n. familiarity, intimacy, (fr. {%jāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>19600<pc>0346-a<k1>jAryaka<k2>jAryaka
{#jAryaka#}¦ {%jāryaka, as,%} m. a particular animal.
<LEND>

<L>19601<pc>0346-a<k1>jAla<k2>jAla
{#jAla#}¦ {%jāla, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%jal%} and connected
with 1. {%jāla%}), a net (for catching birds &c.); a web, a
spider's web, cobweb, net-work, any reticulated or
woven texture, a wire net, reticulated or chain-armour,
a coat of mail, a helmet made of wire; a lattice, an
eyelet or loophole, a window; a collection, multitude,
assemblage; the membrane which unites the toes of
many water-birds; the membrance between the fingers
and toes of divine beings and godlike or heroic per-
sonages; a disease of the eyes in which the blood-
vessels are filled with blood and look like net-work;
an unblown flower; magic; conjuring, illusion, de-
ception; pride, arrogance; (wrong reading for {%jāta%}),
kind; ({%as%}), m. the tree Nauclea Cadamba, the young
fruit of a gourd or cucumber; ({%ī%}), f. a small cucumber,
Trichosanthes Diœca, any medicament or drug.
{%—Jāla-karman, a,%} n. the occupation of catching
fish, fishing. {%—Jāla-kāraka, as,%} m. a web-maker,
a spider, a net-maker. {%—Jāla-kīṭa, as,%} m., N. of
an Udīcya-grāma. {%—Jāla-kṣīrya, am,%} n. a kind
of plant containing a poisonous juice. {%—Jāla-gar-%}
{%dabha, as,%} m. a kind of pimple or boil; [cf. {%gar-%}
{%dabha-gada,%} &c.] {%—Jāla-goṇikā,%} f. a kind of
churning-vessel. {%—Jāla-daṇḍa, as,%} m., Ved. the
pole of a net. {%—Jāla-padī,%} f., N. of a place. {%—Jāla-%}
{%pād, t,%} m. a goose (‘web-foot’). {%—Jāla-pāda, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} having a web-like membrane between the
toes, web-footed; ({%as%}), m. a web-footed bird; N.
of a frog; of a magician. {%—Jāla-prāyā,%} f. armour,
iron net-work, chain-armour. {%—Jāla-baddha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} caught in a net, snared. {%—Jāla-bhuja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the rudiments of a web-like membrane
between the fingers. {%—Jāla-vat, ān, atī, at,%} fur-
nished with a net or net-like texture, reticulated;
covered with iron net work or retiform armour; (ac-
cording to some) cunning, deceptive. {%—Jāla-var-%}
{%vūraka, as,%} m., N. of a plant, a kind of Varvūra.
{%—Jālākṣa (˚la-ak˚), am,%} n. (?) a loophole, eye-
lethole, window.
<LEND>

<L>19602<pc>0346-a<k1>jAlaka<k2>jAlaka
{%Jālaka, am,%}¦ n. a net, woven texture, web; mul-
titude, assemblage; a lattice; an eyelet or loophole;
a nest; a collection or bundle of buds, a germ, an
unblown flower; a plantain, the fruit; illusion; pride;
({%as%}), m. a window, a lattice, a loop or eyelethole;
N. of a tree; ({%ikā%}), f. a net (for catching birds &c.);
chain-armour, armour; a spider; a leech; a kind of
cloth or raiment, woollen cloth; plantain; iron; a
widow, (perhaps so called from the net or braid worn
by widows.) {%—Jālaka-mālin, ī, inī, i,%} veiled.
<LEND>

<L>19603<pc>0346-a<k1>jAlAya<k2>jAlAya
{%Jālāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%jālāyate,%} to be like a net, to
form a net-like enclosure.
<LEND>

<L>19604<pc>0346-a<k1>jAlika<k2>jAlika
{%Jālika, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who uses nets to gain a
livelihood, a fisherman, a fowler, birdcatcher, any
hunter using nets; ({%as%}), m. a spider; the president
of a district, governor of a province; a cheat, a
rogue, a vagabond, a conjurer or juggler.
<LEND>
[Page0346-b+ 69]

<L>19605<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlin<k2>jAlin
{%Jālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a net; retiform; having a
window; illusory, deceptive; ({%inī%}), f., scil. {%piḍakā,%}
a term applied to certain boils or pustules which
make their appearance in the disease called Pra-meha;
a painted room or one ornamented with pictures; {%=%}
{%śveta-ghoṣā, ghoṣātakī, kośātakī,%} a species of
melon or gourd (the rind of which is reticulated like
a net).
<LEND>

<L>19606<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlya<k2>jAlya
{%Jālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ liable to be caught in a net.
<LEND>

<L>19607<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlaki<k2>jAlaki
{#jAlaki#}¦ {%jālaki, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a sub-
division of the Trigarta people.
<LEND>

<L>19608<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlakIya<k2>jAlakIya
{%Jālakīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the above people.
<LEND>

<L>19609<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlakinI<k2>jAlakinI
{#jAlakinI#}¦ {%jālakinī,%} f. a sheep, an ewe.
<LEND>

<L>19610<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlanDara<k2>jAlanDara
{#jAlanDara#}¦ {%jālandhara, as,%} m. (fr. {%jalan-%}
{%dhara%}), N. of a country situated in the north-west
of India, apparently part of Lahore, and perhaps the
modern Jallindhar or Julinder; ({%ās%}), m. pl. its inha-
bitants. {%—Jālandharopākhyāna (˚ra-up˚), am,%} n.
title of an episode of the Padma-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>19611<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlanDarAyaRa<k2>jAlanDarAyaRa
{%Jālandharāyaṇa,%}¦ a patronymic from Jalan-dhara.
<LEND>

<L>19612<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlanDarAyaRaka<k2>jAlanDarAyaRaka
{%Jālandharāyaṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ inhabited by
the Jālandharāyaṇas.
<LEND>

<L>19613<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlanDari<k2>jAlanDari
{%Jālandhari, is,%}¦ m., N. of a physician.
<LEND>

<L>19614<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlahrada<k2>jAlahrada
{%Jālahrada, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Jala-hrada.
<LEND>

<L>19615<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlamAni<k2>jAlamAni
{#jAlamAni#}¦ {%jālamāni, is,%} m. a patronymic;
({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a subdivision of the Trigarta
people.
<LEND>

<L>19616<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlamAnIya<k2>jAlamAnIya
{%Jālamānīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the above people.
<LEND>

<L>19617<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlavAla<k2>jAlavAla
{#jAlavAla#}¦ {%jālavāla, as,%} m. a kind of fish,
{%= vādāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>19618<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlAza<k2>jAlAza
{#jAlAza#}¦ {%jālāṣa, am,%} n. (fr. {%jalāṣa%}), Ved.
a particular drug or anodyne with soothing qualities.
<LEND>

<L>19619<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlora<k2>jAlora
{#jAlora#}¦ {%jālora, as,%} m., N. of an Agra-hāra.
<LEND>

<L>19620<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlma<k2>jAlma
{#jAlma#}¦ {%jālma, as, ī, am,%} cruel, harsh, severe;
inconsiderate, rash, acting without thinking; ({%as, ī%}),
m. f. a despised or contemptible person, a rogue; a
wretch, a miscreant, a low man, one of a degraded
tribe or occupation; one who reads or recites badly
(Pāṇ. VI. 2, 158); [cf. Hib. <nsi>galmha,</nsi> ‘hardness,
hardihood, rigour, valour.’]
<LEND>

<L>19621<pc>0346-b<k1>jAlmaka<k2>jAlmaka
{%Jālmaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ base, despised, contempti-
ble, low.
<LEND>

<L>19622<pc>0346-b<k1>jAvaqa<k2>jAvaqa
{#jAvaqa#}¦ {%jāvaḍa, as,%} m., N. of a man; [cf.
{%bhāvaḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19623<pc>0346-b<k1>jAvat<k2>jAvat
{#jAvat#}¦ {%jā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessing
offspring, granting offspring; (Sāy.) received by
praiseworthy persons (epithet of the Soma).
<LEND>

<L>19624<pc>0346-b<k1>jAvanya<k2>jAvanya
{#jAvanya#}¦ {%jāvanya, am,%} n. (fr. {%javana%}), quick-
ness, swiftness, rapidity.
<LEND>

<L>19625<pc>0346-b<k1>jAvAli<k2>jAvAli
{#jAvAli#}¦ {%jāvāli.%} See {%jābāli.%}
<LEND>

<L>19626<pc>0346-b<k1>jAzaka<k2>jAzaka
{#jAzaka#}¦ {%jāṣaka, am,%} n. (a various reading
for {%jāyaka%}), a kind of yellow fragrant wood.
<LEND>

<L>19627<pc>0346-b<k1>jAzkamada<k2>jAzkamada
{#jAzkamada#}¦ {%jāṣkamada, as,%} m., Ved. a par-
ticular species of animal.
<LEND>

<L>19628<pc>0346-b<k1>jAsawa<k2>jAsawa
{#jAsawa#}¦ {%jāsaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19629<pc>0346-b<k1>jAspati<k2>jAspati
{#jAspati#}¦ {%jās-pati, jāspatya.%} See under
{%jā%} at p. 343.
<LEND>

<L>19630<pc>0346-b<k1>jAha<k2>jAha
{#jAha#}¦ {%jāha, am,%} n. (used at the end of a
comp. and considered as an affix), the root or point
of issue of certain parts of the body (e. g. {%oṣṭha-%}
{%jāha,%} the point of issue of the lips; cf. {%akṣi-j˚,%}
{%karṇa-j˚, keśa-j˚, nakha-j˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>19631<pc>0346-b<k1>jAhaka<k2>jAhaka
{#jAhaka#}¦ {%jāhaka, as,%} m. a kind of animal;
a polecat, a cat; Lemur Tardigradus; a leech; a
bed, a cot.
<LEND>

<L>19632<pc>0346-b<k1>jAhuza<k2>jAhuza
{#jAhuza#}¦ {%jāhuṣa, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a man
protected by the Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>19633<pc>0346-b<k1>jAhnava<k2>jAhnava
{#jAhnava#}¦ {%jāhnava, as,%} m. (fr. {%jahnu%}), a patro-
nymic of Viśvā-mitra; also of Su-ratha; N. of a
[Page0346-c+ 80]
Catur-aha ceremony; ({%ī%}), f. the daughter of Jahnu,
an epithet of the river Gaṅgā or Ganges. {%—Jāhnavī-%}
{%phena-lekhā,%} f. a streak of the foam of the Ganges.
<LEND>

<L>19634<pc>0346-c<k1>jAhnavIya<k2>jAhnavIya
{%Jāhnavīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
the river Gaṅgā.
<LEND>

<L>19635<pc>0346-c<k1>ji<k2>ji<h>1
{#ji#} 1¦. {%ji,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%jayati, -te, jigāya,%}
{%jigye, jeṣyati, -te, ajaiṣīt, ajeṣṭa, je-%}
{%tum%} (Ved. Inf. {%jetave%} and {%jiṣe%}), to win or acquire
by conquest (or in gambling), to conquer, defeat,
vanquish, overcome; excel, surpass; to vanquish in
a game or in a suit at law; to convict; to conquer
the passions; overcome a disease &c.; to expel from
(with abl.); to be victorious, to gain the upper hand:
Pass. {%jīyate:%} Caus. {%jāpayati, -yitum;%} Aor. {%ajī-%}
{%japat,%} to cause to conquer or win: Pass. of Caus.
{%jāpyate,%} to be made to conquer: Desid. {%jigīṣati,%}
to wish to win, obtain, conquer, vanquish or excel
&c., to vie with, emulate; to seek for prey: Intens.
{%jejīyate, jejayīti, jejeti;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>galu, galybê;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>gar,</nsi> ‘profit, advantage, gain, good.’]
<LEND>

<L>19636<pc>0346-c<k1>jaya<k2>jaya
{%Jaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ conquering; ({%as%}), m. conquest,
see s. v. at p. 339.
<LEND>

<L>19637<pc>0346-c<k1>ji<k2>ji<h>2
2. {%ji, is, is, i,%}¦ victorious, conquering, a victor;
({%is%}), m. a Piśāca, a demon.
<LEND>

<L>19638<pc>0346-c<k1>jigIzat<k2>jigIzat
{%Jigīṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing or striving to
overcome, emulous, ambitious, a warrior.
<LEND>

<L>19639<pc>0346-c<k1>jigIzamARa<k2>jigIzamARa
{%Jigīṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ striving to win.
<LEND>

<L>19640<pc>0346-c<k1>jigIzA<k2>jigIzA
{%Jigīṣā,%}¦ f. desire of gaining or obtaining; desire
of conquering or vanquishing or overpowering;
military ardour; wish to excel, emulation, rivalry;
eminence; usage, profession or habit of life.
<LEND>

<L>19641<pc>0346-c<k1>jigIzu<k2>jigIzu
{%Jigīṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to gain or obtain,
seeking for; striving to conquer or overcome, or to
excel, vying or contending with; ({%us%}), m., N. of a
man. {%—Jigīṣu-tā,%} f. desire of conquering, emulation.
<LEND>

<L>19642<pc>0346-c<k1>jigyu<k2>jigyu
{%Jigyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. victorious, triumphant.
<LEND>

<L>19643<pc>0346-c<k1>jit<k2>jit
{%Jit, t, t, t,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) winning, van-
quishing, conquering, removing (e. g. {%śatru-jit,%} van-
quishing enemies); [cf. {%ananta-jit, abhimāti-j˚,%}
{%aśva-j˚, ugra-j˚.%}] — 1. {%jit-tama, as, ā, am,%} (at end
of comp.) most victorious, first of conquerors; [cf. 2.
{%jittama.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19644<pc>0346-c<k1>jita<k2>jita
{%Jita, as, ā, am,%}¦ conquered, vanquished, subdued;
surpassed, overcome, subject to, enslaved by (e. g.
{%kāma-jita,%} under the dominion of lust); won,
gained, obtained; ({%as%}), m. one of the attendants
upon a Jina or Jaina saint; (a wrong form for {%a-jita.%})
{%—Jita-kāśi, is,%} m. the fist doubled. {%—Jita-kāśin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} appearing victorious. {%—Jita-kopa%} or {%jita-%}
{%krodha, as, ā, am,%} one who has subdued anger,
imperturbable, not to be roused to wrath. {%—Jita-%}
{%klama, as, ā, am,%} one who has overcome fatigue.
{%—Jita-nemi, is,%} m. a staff made of the wood of the
religious fig-tree (carried during the performance of
certain vows). {%—Jita-manyu, us, us, u,%} one who
has subdued his wrath; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Jita-loka, as, ā, am,%} one who has con-
quered heaven, epithet of a class of manes. {%—Jita-%}
{%vatī,%} f., N. of a daughter of Uśīnara. {%—Jita-vrata,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Havir-dhāna. {%—Jita-śatru,%}
{%us, us, u,%} one whose enemies are conquered, con-
quering foes, victorious, triumphant; ({%us%}), m., N. of
a Buddha; the father of A-jita, the second Arhat of
the present Ava-sarpiṇī. {%—Jita-śrama, as,%} m. one
who has conquered toil, free from worldly cares, a
stoic. {%—Jita-svarga, as, ā, am,%} one who has con-
quered or won heaven. {%—Jitākṣara (˚ta-ak˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘one who has mastered the letters,’ reading
well or readily. {%—Jitātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} self-
subdued, void of passion; ({%ā%}), m., N. of one of the
Viśve-devas. {%—Jitāmitra (˚ta-am˚), as, ā, am,%} one
who has conquered an enemy, triumphant, victorious;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Jitāri (˚ta-ari),%}
{%is, is, i,%} triumphant over an enemy; ({%is%}), m., N. of
a son of Avikṣit; a Buddha; N. of the father of
Śam-bhava, the third Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī.
{%—Jitāhava (˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has
won a battle, victorious, triumphant. {%—Jitāhāra%}
{%(˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} one who by abstraction is able
to do without food. {%—Jitendriya (˚ta-in˚), as, ā, %}
[Page0347-a+ 72]
{%am,%} one who has conquered his passions or subdued
the senses, calm, impassive, unmoved; ({%as%}), m. an
ascetic, a sage; N. of a man. {%—Jitendriya-tva, am,%}
n. subjugation of the senses or passions. {%—Jitendri-%}
{%yāhva (˚ya-āh˚), as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= kāma-%}
{%vṛddhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>19645<pc>0347-a<k1>jiti<k2>jiti
{%Jiti, is,%}¦ f. gaining, obtaining, a victory, conquest.
<LEND>

<L>19646<pc>0347-a<k1>jitya<k2>jitya
{%Jitya, as, ā, am,%}¦ conquerable, vincible; ({%ā%}), f.
victory, acquisition, gain; a ploughshare; ({%as%}), m.
a harrow.
<LEND>

<L>19647<pc>0347-a<k1>jitvan<k2>jitvan
{%Jitvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ victorious; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>19648<pc>0347-a<k1>jitvara<k2>jitvara
{%Jitvara, as, ī, am,%}¦ victorious, triumphant; ({%ī%}),
f. ‘Victrix,’ N. of the city Benares.
<LEND>

<L>19649<pc>0347-a<k1>jitvA<k2>jitvA
{%Jitvā,%}¦ ind. having conquered or excelled.
<LEND>

<L>19650<pc>0347-a<k1>jetavya<k2>jetavya
{%Jetavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be conquered or overcome,
conquerable, vincible; to be surpassed.
<LEND>

<L>19651<pc>0347-a<k1>jeya<k2>jeya
{%Jeya, as, ā, am, = jetavya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>19652<pc>0347-a<k1>jikaRa<k2>jikaRa
{#jikaRa#}¦ {%jikaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a lawyer.
<LEND>

<L>19653<pc>0347-a<k1>jigatnu<k2>jigatnu
{#jigatnu#}¦ {%jigatnu, us, us, u%} (reduplicated
form fr. rt. {%gam%}), going quickly, fleet; ({%us%}), m.
breath, life.
<LEND>

<L>19654<pc>0347-a<k1>jigamizat<k2>jigamizat
{%Jigamiṣat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. Desid. of rt. {%gam%}),
wishing or endeavouring to go.
<LEND>

<L>19655<pc>0347-a<k1>jigamizA<k2>jigamizA
{%Jigamiṣā,%}¦ f. wish to go or move, intention to go.
<LEND>

<L>19656<pc>0347-a<k1>jigamizu<k2>jigamizu
{%Jigamiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to go, intending
or purposing to go.
<LEND>

<L>19657<pc>0347-a<k1>jigarizu<k2>jigarizu
{#jigarizu#}¦ {%jigariṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. 2. {%gṝ%}), wishing to swallow or devour, desirous of
seizing.
<LEND>

<L>19658<pc>0347-a<k1>jigarti<k2>jigarti
{%Jigarti, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a swallower, devourer;
swallowing.
<LEND>

<L>19659<pc>0347-a<k1>jigIzA<k2>jigIzA
{#jigIzA#}¦ {%jigīṣā.%} See p. 346, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>19660<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGatnu<k2>jiGatnu
{#jiGatnu#}¦ {%jighatnu, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. {%han%}), Ved.
endeavouring to hurt.
<LEND>

<L>19661<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGAMsaka<k2>jiGAMsaka
{%Jighāṃsaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. Desid. of rt. {%han%}),
wishing or endeavouring to kill, revengeful.
<LEND>

<L>19662<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGAMsA<k2>jiGAMsA
{%Jighāṃsā,%}¦ f. wish or intention to strike, slay, or
destroy; malice, revenge.
<LEND>

<L>19663<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGAMsin<k2>jiGAMsin
{%Jighāṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ intending to kill.
<LEND>

<L>19664<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGAMsIyas<k2>jiGAMsIyas
{%Jighāṃsīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of the last),
more intent on slaughter, very desirous of killing.
<LEND>

<L>19665<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGAMsu<k2>jiGAMsu
{%Jighāṃsu, us, us, u,%}¦ intending or seeking to kill
or slay, desirous of destroying, malicious, murderous,
revengeful; ({%us%}), m. an unrelenting foe, an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>19666<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGatsat<k2>jiGatsat
{#jiGatsat#}¦ {%jighatsat, an, antī, at%} (fr. Desid.
of rt. {%ghas%}), wishing to eat, hungry.
<LEND>

<L>19667<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGatsA<k2>jiGatsA
{%Jighatsā,%}¦ f. desire of eating, hunger, voracity.
<LEND>

<L>19668<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGatsu<k2>jiGatsu
{%Jighatsu, us, us, u,%}¦ hungry, voracious; ({%us%}), f.
an epithet of evil demons.
<LEND>

<L>19669<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGfkzat<k2>jiGfkzat
{#jiGfkzat#}¦ {%jighṛkṣat, an, antī, at,%} or {%ji-%}
{%ghṛkṣamāṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. Desid. of rt. {%grah%}),
wishing or intending to take or seize, greedy,
avaricious.
<LEND>

<L>19670<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGfkzA<k2>jiGfkzA
{%Jighṛkṣā,%}¦ f. wish or intention to take or seize,
greediness, covetousness.
<LEND>

<L>19671<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGfkzu<k2>jiGfkzu
{%Jighṛkṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing or intending to
take or seize, covetous, avaricious; wishing to rob or
deprive of; wishing to take up (a fluid); wishing to
gather; wishing to learn.
<LEND>

<L>19672<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGra<k2>jiGra
{#jiGra#}¦ {%jighra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ghrā%}), smell-
ing, a smeller; observing, conjecturing.
<LEND>

<L>19673<pc>0347-a<k1>jiGrat<k2>jiGrat
{%Jighrat, an, antī, at,%}¦ smelling, smelling at.
<LEND>

<L>19674<pc>0347-a<k1>jiNgaSalya<k2>jiNgaSalya
{#jiNgaSalya#}¦ {%jiṅgaśalya, as,%} m. the tree Mi-
mosa Catechu; [cf. {%jihma-śalya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19675<pc>0347-a<k1>jiNginI<k2>jiNginI
{#jiNginI#}¦ {%jiṅginī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= jhiṅ-%}
{%ginī, jhiṅgī, pra-modinī, suniryāsā.%}
<LEND>

<L>19676<pc>0347-a<k1>jiNgI<k2>jiNgI
{#jiNgI#}¦ {%jiṅgī,%} f. the plant Rubia Munjista.
<LEND>

<L>19677<pc>0347-a<k1>jijIvizA<k2>jijIvizA
{#jijIvizA#}¦ {%jijīviṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt.
{%jīv%}), desire to live.
<LEND>

<L>19678<pc>0347-a<k1>jijIvizu<k2>jijIvizu
{%Jijīviṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to live, desirous of
life.
<LEND>
[Page0347-b+ 75]

<L>19679<pc>0347-b<k1>jijYApayizu<k2>jijYApayizu
{#jijYApayizu#}¦ {%jijñāpayiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid.
of Caus. of 1. {%jñā%}), wishing to make known, seeking
to inform, communicative.
<LEND>

<L>19680<pc>0347-b<k1>jijYAsaka<k2>jijYAsaka
{%Jijñāsaka, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. Desid. of 1. {%jñā%}),
wishing to know, {%= jijñāsu.%}
<LEND>

<L>19681<pc>0347-b<k1>jijYAsana<k2>jijYAsana
{%Jijñāsana, am,%}¦ n. desire of knowing or becoming
acquainted with, examining.
<LEND>

<L>19682<pc>0347-b<k1>jijYAsanIya<k2>jijYAsanIya
{%Jijñāsanīya, as, ā, am, = jijñāsya%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>19683<pc>0347-b<k1>jijYAsamAna<k2>jijYAsamAna
{%Jijñāsamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirous of knowing,
inquiring, testing, investigating, proving.
<LEND>

<L>19684<pc>0347-b<k1>jijYAsA<k2>jijYAsA
{%Jijñāsā,%}¦ f. desire of knowing or becoming ac-
quainted with, inquiring; inquisitiveness; search,
investigation, examination, test.
<LEND>

<L>19685<pc>0347-b<k1>jijYAsita<k2>jijYAsita
{%Jijñāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ investigated, asked, inquired,
sought.
<LEND>

<L>19686<pc>0347-b<k1>jijYAsu<k2>jijYAsu
{%Jijñāsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of knowing, wishing
to become acquainted with, inquiring, inquisitive,
curious, examining.
<LEND>

<L>19687<pc>0347-b<k1>jijYAsya<k2>jijYAsya
{%Jijñāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ deserving of being inquired
into, desirable to be known, worthy of being in-
vestigated; an object for inquiry, to be investigated
or examined.
<LEND>

<L>19688<pc>0347-b<k1>jijYu<k2>jijYu
{%Jijñu, us, us, u, = jijñāsu%}¦ (?).
<LEND>

<L>19689<pc>0347-b<k1>jiqaDana<k2>jiqaDana
{#jiqaDana#}¦ {%jiḍadhana, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Paramānanda.
<LEND>

<L>19690<pc>0347-b<k1>jita<k2>jita
{#jita#}¦ {%jita,%} &c. See under rt. 1. {%ji.%}
<LEND>

<L>19691<pc>0347-b<k1>jittama<k2>jittama<h>2
{#jittama#} 2¦. {%jittama%} or {%jituma%} or {%jitma, as,%}
m. (a word borrowed fr. the Gr. <lang n="greek">διδύμοι</lang>), the sign
of the zodiac Gemini.
<LEND>

<L>19692<pc>0347-b<k1>jina<k2>jina
{#jina#}¦ {%jina, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ji%}), victorious,
triumphant; ({%as%}), m. ‘the overcomer of all things,’
a generic term applied to a Buddha or chief saint of
the Bauddha sect in the same manner as to a Jaina
saint; a N. applied to an Arhat who is a kind of
sovereign pontiff or saint of the Jainas and regarded
by them as superior to the gods of other sects;
(twenty-four Jinas are supposed to flourish in each
of the three Ava-sarpiṇīs or Jaina ages, past, present,
and to come, making seventy-two in all; they are
all born in Āryāvarta); N. of a Bodhi-sattva; an
epithet of Viṣṇu; any very old man; [cf. {%jīna%} and
{%jīrna.%}] {%—Jina-trāta%} or {%jina-datta%} or {%jina-putra,%}
{%as,%} or {%jina-bandhu, us,%} m., N. of various persons
mentioned in Buddhist writings. {%—Jina-dharma,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Jaina work. {%—Jina-bhakti-sūri, is,%}
m., N. of a preceptor of Jina-lābha-sūri. {%—Jina-%}
{%mitra, as,%} m., N. of one of the translators of the
Lalita-vistara. {%—Jina-lābha-sūri, is,%} m., N. of a
pupil of Jina-bhakti-sūri and preceptor of Kṣamā-
kalyāṇa. {%—Jina-vaktra, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha.
{%—Jina-śrī, īs,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Jina-sadman,%}
{%a,%} n. a Jaina temple or monastery. {%—Jina-sena, as,%}
m., N. of the author of the work Triṣaṣṭi-lakṣaṇa-
mahāpurāṇa-saṅgraha. {%—Jināṅkura (˚na-aṅ˚), as,%}
m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Jinādhāra (˚na-ādh˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Jinendra (˚na-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a Jaina saint, a Buddha; N. of a grammarian.
{%—Jinendra-nyāsa, as,%} m. title of the work of
Jinendra-buddhi. {%—Jinendra-buddhi%} or {%jinendra-%}
{%bhūti, is,%} m., N. of a writer on grammar. {%—Jine-%}
{%śvara (˚na-īś˚), as,%} m. an Arhat of the Jainas; N.
of the twentieth Arhat of the past Ut-sarpiṇī. {%—Ji-%}
{%nottama (˚na-ut˚), as,%} m. an Arhat of the Jainas.
{%—Jinorasa (˚na-ur˚), as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-
sattva.
<LEND>

<L>19693<pc>0347-b<k1>jinayoni<k2>jinayoni
{#jinayoni#}¦ {%jina-yoni, is,%} m. (for {%ajina-yoni,%}
q. v.), a deer.
<LEND>

<L>19694<pc>0347-b<k1>jindurAja<k2>jindurAja
{#jindurAja#}¦ {%jindu-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19695<pc>0347-b<k1>jinv<k2>jinv
{#jinv#}¦ {%jinv%} (connected with {%jīv%} and {%jū ?%}),
cl. 1. P., Ved. {%jinvati, jijinva, jinvi-%}
{%ṣyati, jinvitum,%} to move one's self, be active or
lively; to urge on, cause to move quickly, impel, in-
cite, excite; to refresh, animate; to promote, help,
favour; to help any one (acc.) to anything (dat.),
cause to obtain, grant, confer; to please, satisfy,
[Page0347-c+ 71]
gladden, gratify, make happy or contented; to re-
ceive favourably (a request &c.): cl. 10. P. {%jinva-%}
{%yati,%} a various reading for {%juñc.%}
<LEND>

<L>19696<pc>0347-c<k1>jinva<k2>jinva
{%Jinva, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%dhiyañ-jinva,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19697<pc>0347-c<k1>jim<k2>jim
{#jim#}¦ {%jim%} [cf. {%cham, jam, jham%}], cl. 1. P.
{%jemati,%} &c., to eat.
<LEND>

<L>19698<pc>0347-c<k1>jemana<k2>jemana
{%Jemana, am,%}¦ n. eating; food, victuals.
<LEND>

<L>19699<pc>0347-c<k1>jimBa<k2>jimBa
{#jimBa#}¦ {%jimbha,%} perhaps for {%jṛmbha%} in {%jim-%}
{%bha-jihva-tā,%} swelling of the tongue.
<LEND>

<L>19700<pc>0347-c<k1>jiraRa<k2>jiraRa
{#jiraRa#}¦ {%jiraṇa, as,%} m. {%= jaraṇa, jīraka,%}
{%jīraṇa,%} cumin.
<LEND>

<L>19701<pc>0347-c<k1>jiri<k2>jiri
{#jiri#}¦ {%jiri,%} cl. 5. P. {%jiriṇoti,%} &c., to hurt,
injure, wound, kill; [cf. {%ciri;%} cf. also
Hib. <nsi>gearaim,</nsi> ‘I sharpen, whet, cut, bite.’]
<LEND>

<L>19702<pc>0347-c<k1>jillika<k2>jillika
{#jillika#}¦ {%jillika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>19703<pc>0347-c<k1>jivAjiva<k2>jivAjiva
{#jivAjiva#}¦ {%jivājiva, as,%} m. a pheasant; [cf.
{%jīvañ-jīva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19704<pc>0347-c<k1>jivri<k2>jivri
{#jivri#}¦ {%jivri, is, is, i%} (fr. 1. {%jṝ%}), Ved. old,
worn out, decayed, decrepit; ({%is%}), m. time; a bird.
<LEND>

<L>19705<pc>0347-c<k1>jiz<k2>jiz
{#jiz#}¦ {%jiṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%jeṣati,%} &c., to
sprinkle; [cf. {%viṣ%} and {%miṣ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19706<pc>0347-c<k1>jizRu<k2>jizRu
{#jizRu#}¦ {%jiṣṇu, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ji%}), vic-
torious, triumphant, gaining, winning; (with acc. or
at end of comp.) vanquishing, conquering, excelling;
({%us%}), m. the sun; an epithet of Indra, of Viṣṇu,
and of Arjuna; N. of a Vasu; N. of a son of Manu
Bhautya, N. of the father of Brahma-gupta; [cf.
{%parā-jiṣṇu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19707<pc>0347-c<k1>jihAna<k2>jihAna
{#jihAna#}¦ {%jihāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%hā, jihīte%}),
going, going to, attaining, obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>19708<pc>0347-c<k1>jihAnaka<k2>jihAnaka
{%Jihānaka, as,%}¦ m. the destruction of the world;
[cf. {%jahānaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19709<pc>0347-c<k1>jihAsA<k2>jihAsA
{#jihAsA#}¦ {%jihāsā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. {%hā, ja-%}
{%hāti%}), desire of abandoning or giving up.
<LEND>

<L>19710<pc>0347-c<k1>jihAsu<k2>jihAsu
{%Jihāsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of abandoning or
giving up.
<LEND>

<L>19711<pc>0347-c<k1>jihIrzA<k2>jihIrzA
{#jihIrzA#}¦ {%jihīrṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. {%hṛ%}),
desire of seizing, taking, or robbing; wish to take
away or remove.
<LEND>

<L>19712<pc>0347-c<k1>jihIrzu<k2>jihIrzu
{%Jihīrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to seize, desirous of
taking or carrying or removing, wishing to rob or
appropriate.
<LEND>

<L>19713<pc>0347-c<k1>jihIrzya<k2>jihIrzya
{%Jihīrṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirable to be taken away
or brought near.
<LEND>

<L>19714<pc>0347-c<k1>jihma<k2>jihma
{#jihma#}¦ {%jihma, as, ā, am%} (perhaps related to
rt. {%hvṛ;%} but said to be fr. rt. {%hā, jahāti,%} and to
denote originally quitting the upright direction or
leaning out of the perpendicular), sloping, oblique,
transverse, diagonal, athwart, squinting (as the eye),
crooked, awry, not straight (opposed to {%ṛju%}),
tortuous, going irregularly; ({%jihmam i%} or {%gam,%}
to go crookedly, turn off from the right way);
curved, bent; morally crooked, deceitful, deceptive,
illusory, false, untrue, unfair, dishonest; slow, lazy;
({%am%}), n. falsehood, dishonesty; the plant Tabernæ-
montana Coronaria ({%tagara%}); [cf. Hib. <nsi>giomh,</nsi> ‘a
lock of hair, a fault.’] {%—Jihma-ga, as, ā, am,%} going
tortuously or crookedly, moving slowly; ({%as%}), m. a
snake. {%—Jihma-gati, is, is, i,%} going tortuously. {%—Jih-%}
{%ma-tā,%} f. or {%jihma-tva, am,%} n. crookedness, curva-
ture; dishonesty, falsehood. {%—Jihma-bāra, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having an aperture on one side; (Sāy.) having
an opening below; having its door closed. {%—Jihma-%}
{%mīna, as,%} m. appearing in the deceptive shape of a
fish. {%—Jihma-mohana, as,%} m. a frog. {%—Jihma-%}
{%yodhin, ī, inī, i,%} fighting unfairly; ({%ī%}), m. epithet
of Bhīma, who in his great battle with Dur-yodhana
struck him an unfair blow with his club on the
thighs; (see Śalya-parva 3345.) {%—Jihma-śalya,%}
{%as,%} m. the tree Acacia Catechu; [cf. {%khadira.%}]
{%—Jihma-śī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. lying crookedly or
[Page0348-a+ 77]
diagonally (on the ground &c.). {%—Jihmākṣa (˚ma-%}
{%ak˚), as, ī, am,%} crooked-eyed, squinting. {%—Jih-%}
{%māśin (˚ma-āś˚), ī,%} m. ‘eating crookedly,’ N. of a
man; (perhaps a wrong reading for {%jihvāśin.%})
<LEND>

<L>19715<pc>0348-a<k1>jihmAya<k2>jihmAya
{%Jihmāya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%-yati, -yitum,%} to go
crookedly or in crooked ways.
<LEND>

<L>19716<pc>0348-a<k1>jihmita<k2>jihmita
{%Jihmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, bowed, curved; turned
away.
<LEND>

<L>19717<pc>0348-a<k1>jihmIkf<k2>jihmIkf
{%Jihmī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make
crooked, bend. {%—Jihmī-kara, as, ā, am,%} making
crooked or oblique, causing to bend; (metaphori-
cally) obscuring. {%—Jihmī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made
crooked, bent, bowed down (with fear &c.).
<LEND>

<L>19718<pc>0348-a<k1>jihva<k2>jihva
{#jihva#}¦ {%jihva, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%ji,%} per-
haps fr. rt. {%hve;%} cf. 1. {%juhū%}), the tongue; ({%ā%}), f. the
tongue; the tongue or tongues of Agni, i. e. various
forms of flame, (sometimes three are mentioned,
sometimes seven, the names of which are given as fol-
lows: {%kālī, karālī, mano-javā, su-lohitā, sudhūmra-%}
{%varṇā, sphuliṅginī, viśva-rūpī;%} or are identified
with the seven winds, {%pra-vaha, ā-vaha, ud-vaha,%}
{%saṃ-vaha, vi-vaha, pari-vaha,%} and {%ni-vaha.%} The
horses of Agni or {%vahnayaḥ%} are said to be {%sapta-%}
{%jihvāḥ,%} having seven tongues); the root of the plant
Tabernæmontana Coronaria; [cf. {%jihma;%} cf. also Lat.
<nsi>lingua ?;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>tuggô;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Zunge;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>teanga ?</nsi>].
{%—Jihvā-kātya, as,%} m., N. of a man, the voracious
Kātya. {%—Jihvāgra (˚vā-ag˚), am,%} n. the tip of the
tongue. {%—Jihvā-tala, am,%} n. the surface of the
tongue. {%—Jihvā-nirlekhana%} and {%jihvā-nirlekha-%}
{%nika, am,%} n. scraping the tongue; a tongue-scraper;
[cf. {%jihvollekhana.%}] {%—Jihvā-pa, as,%} m. (‘drinking
with the tongue’), a dog; a cat; a tiger; a panther,
the hunting leopard; a bear. {%—Jihvā-prathana,%}
{%am,%} n. expansion or too great flattening of the
tongue (a defect in pronunciation). {%—Jihvā-mala,%}
{%am,%} n. the fur of the tongue. {%—Jihvā-mūla, am,%}
n. the root of the tongue. {%—Jihvāmūlīya, as, ā, am,%}
belonging to or uttered from the root of the tongue,
a term applied to the vowels {%ṛ, ḷ,%} the Visarga be-
fore {%k, kh,%} and the guttural class of consonants, but
especially to the Visarga before {%k, kh%}. {%—Jihvā-rada,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having a tongue-like beak,’ a bird. {%—Jihvā-%}
{%lih, ṭ,%} m. ‘licking with the tongue,’ a dog. {%—Jihvā-%}
{%laulya, am,%} n. greediness. {%—Jihvā-vat, ān,%} m., N.
of a preceptor. {%—Jihvā-śata, am,%} n. a hundred
tongues. {%—Jihvā-śalya, as,%} m. {%= jihma-śalya,%} q. v.
{%—Jihvā-śodhana, am,%} n. cleaning of the tongue.
{%—Jihvāsvāda (˚vā-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘tasting with the
tongue,’ licking, lapping. {%—Jihvollekhana (˚vā-%}
{%ul˚), am,%} n. scraping the tongue; ({%ī%} and {%ikā%}), f. a
tongue-scraper made of a thin piece of wood of the
Mimusops Kauki or other trees.
<LEND>

<L>19719<pc>0348-a<k1>jihvaka<k2>jihvaka
{%Jihvaka%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. in {%a-jih-%}
{%vakā,%} f. tongueless.
<LEND>

<L>19720<pc>0348-a<k1>jihvala<k2>jihvala
{%Jihvala, as, ā, am,%}¦ voracious, greedy.
<LEND>

<L>19721<pc>0348-a<k1>jihvikA<k2>jihvikA
{%Jihvikā,%}¦ f. a diminutive fr. {%jihvā;%} [cf. {%adho-%}
{%jihvikā, ali-j˚, upa-j˚, prati-j˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19722<pc>0348-a<k1>jihvu<k2>jihvu
{#jihvu#}¦ {%jihvu, us,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19723<pc>0348-a<k1>jI<k2>jI
{#jI#}¦ {%jī,%} in {%kṛṣṇa-jī%} and {%keśava-jī-nanda-%}
{%śarman,%} = the Bengālī {%jī%} (fr. {%jīva,%} life, soul ?), sir,
master, madam, attached to names and titles as a
mark of endearment or respect.
<LEND>

<L>19724<pc>0348-a<k1>jIta<k2>jIta
{#jIta#}¦ {%jīta,%} &c. See rt. 1. {%jyā,%} p. 352.
<LEND>

<L>19725<pc>0348-a<k1>jIti<k2>jIti
{%Jīti, is,%}¦ f. fading away. See {%a-jīti.%}
<LEND>

<L>19726<pc>0348-a<k1>jIna<k2>jIna
{%Jīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ old, aged; a leather bag.
<LEND>

<L>19727<pc>0348-a<k1>jImUta<k2>jImUta
{#jImUta#}¦ {%jīmūta, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%ji%}), a cloud; a mountain; N. of the sun; N. of
Indra; a nourisher, a sustainer; the plant Lipeo-
cercis Serrata; also Luffa Fœtida or a similar plant;
a kind of Cyperus; a kind of metre; N. of an
ancient sage; of a certain wrestler; of a son of
Vyoman. {%—Jīmūta-kuṭa, as,%} m. a small hill near
a mountain. {%—Jīmūta-ketu, us,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva; N. of a prince of the Vidyā-dharas. {%—Jīmūta-%}
{%mūla, am,%} n. Curcuma Amhaldi or Zerumbet.
{%—Jīmūta-vāhana, as,%} m. an epithet of Indra; N.
[Page0348-b+ 78]
of a son of king Śāli-vāhana; N. of a son of Jīmūta-
ketu; N. of a lawyer, author of the Dāya-bhāga.
{%—Jīmūta-vāhin, ī,%} m. smoke. {%—Jīmūta-svana-%}
{%sannibha, as, ā, am,%} like the sound of a cloud.
{%—Jīmūtāṣṭamī (˚ta-aṣ˚),%} f., N. of a festival in
honour of Jīmūta-vāhana, son of Śāli-vāhana, on
the eighth day in the dark half of month Āśvina.
<LEND>

<L>19728<pc>0348-b<k1>jImUtaka<k2>jImUtaka
{%Jīmūtaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Lipeocercis Serrata.
<LEND>

<L>19729<pc>0348-b<k1>jIra<k2>jIra
{#jIra#}¦ {%jīra, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. {%jinv%}),
Ved. quick, speedy, lively, active, busy; driving,
exciting; {%go-jīra,%} exciting (the milk of) the cows;
({%as%}), m. quick motion or movement (especially of
the Soma stones); a sword, a scymitar, a sacrificial
knife; Panicum Miliaceum; cumin-seed, (in this
latter sense said to be fr. rt. {%ju%} or 1. {%jṝ.%}) {%—Jīra-%}
{%dānu, us, us, u,%} Ved. dropping, trickling, drizzling,
sprinkling or scattering in small drops; causing to
flow abundantly; (Sāy.) ‘granting a victorious dis-
position’ (as if fr. rt. 1. {%ji%}). {%—Jīrādhvara (˚ra-adh˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having animated or vigorous rites;
(Sāy.) free from injury or molestation. {%—Jīrāśva%}
{%(˚ra-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. having lively or fleet
horses.
<LEND>

<L>19730<pc>0348-b<k1>jIraka<k2>jIraka
{%Jīraka%}¦ or {%jīraṇa, as,%} m. cumin-seed.
<LEND>

<L>19731<pc>0348-b<k1>jIri<k2>jIri
{%Jīri, is,%}¦ m. f., Ved. quick or flowing water.
<LEND>

<L>19732<pc>0348-b<k1>jIrikA<k2>jIrikA
{%Jīrikā,%}¦ f., N. of a plant, {%= jīrṇa-pattrikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>19733<pc>0348-b<k1>jIrRa<k2>jIrRa
{#jIrRa#}¦ {%jīrṇa.%} See under rt. 1. {%jṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>19734<pc>0348-b<k1>jIrvi<k2>jIrvi
{#jIrvi#}¦ {%jīrvi, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%jṝ%}),
an axe; a cart; the body; an animal.
<LEND>

<L>19735<pc>0348-b<k1>jIv<k2>jIv
{#jIv#}¦ {%jīv,%} cl. 1. P. (poet. also A.) {%jīvati,%}
{%-te, jijīva, jīviṣyati, jīvitum,%} to live,
be alive; to revive, return to life; to make a liveli-
hood, live by (with inst.): Caus. P. (ep. also A.)
{%jīvayati, -te, -yitum,%} to make alive, restore to life,
vivify; to support life, to keep alive; to nourish,
nurture, bring up; (a Causal form {%jīvāpayati%}
occasionally occurs, meaning ‘to restore to life’):
Desid. {%jijīviṣati%} (Ved. {%jujyūṣati%} or {%jijyūṣati%}),
to wish to live, to seek a livelihood, wish to live by
(with inst.); [cf. Lith. <nsi>gywénu,</nsi> ‘to live;’ <nsi>gywas,</nsi>
‘alive:’ Slav. <nsi>schivû,</nsi> ‘to live:’ Goth. <nsi>qvivs:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>qveh:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>cvic:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>quick:</nsi> Lat. <nsi>vivo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19736<pc>0348-b<k1>jIva<k2>jIva
{%Jīva, as, ā, am,%}¦ living, existing, a living being;
causing to live, vivifying; ({%as%}), m. the principle of
life, the vital breath, the living or personal soul in-
corporated in the body and imparting to it life, motion,
and sensation, (hence also called {%jīvātman;%} it is
distinguished from the {%paramātman%} or supreme
soul, q. v.); livelihood, profession, specific occupa-
tion; a kind of plant; an epithet of Bṛhaspati as
regent of the planet Jupiter; or as regent of the
Nakṣatra Tiṣya or Puṣya; the third lustrum in
the cycle of Jupiter which lasts sixty years; N. of
one of the eight Maruts; an epithet of Karṇa; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. life, existence; ({%ā%}), f. the living or life-
giving element, i. e. water; the earth; a bow-string;
(in geometry) the chord of an arc, the sine of an
arc; the tinkling of metallic ornaments; N. of two
plants, {%= jīvantī%} and {%vacā;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>gywas,</nsi> ‘alive;’
Goth. <nsi>qvivs;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>vivus;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">βίος;</lang> Hib. <nsi>beo,</nsi>
‘living, alive.’] {%—Jīva-gṛbh, -ghṛp, p, p,%} Ved.
taking alive, seizing beings alive. {%—Jīva-graha, as,%}
m., Ved. filling (a cup) with the living Soma, i. e.
with the plant in its unpressed state. {%—Jīva-grāha,%}
{%as,%} m. a prisoner, one taken alive; {%jīva-grāhaṃ%}
{%grah,%} to capture alive. {%—Jīva-ghoṣa-svāmin, ī,%}
m., N. of a grammarian. {%—Jīva-ja, as, ā, am,%} born
alive. {%—Jīva-jīva%} or {%jīva-jīvaka, as,%} m. a kind of
bird; see the next. {%—Jīvañ-jīva, as,%} m. a kind of
bird supposed to be a pheasant; the Chakor or
Greek partridge; a kind of tree. {%—Jīva-tokā,%} f. a
woman whose children are living. {%—Jīva-tva, am,%}
n. the state of life or existence. {%—1. jīva-da, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (rt. {%dā%}), ‘life-giving,’ who or what gives life;
({%as%}), m. a physician, a practitioner of medicine. {%—2.%}
{%jīva-da, as,%} m. (rt. {%do%}), ‘cutting off life,’ an enemy.
{%—Jīva-daśā,%} f. mortal existence. {%—Jīva-dātrī,%} f.
‘life-giver,’ a kind of medicinal plant, {%= ṛddhi. %}
[Page0348-c+ 81]
{%—Jīva-dāna, am,%} n. ‘giving life,’ ‘rescuing from
sickness,’ title of a manual of medicine composed by
Cyavana. {%—Jīva-dānu, us, us, u,%} Ved. a wrong
form for {%jīra-dānu,%} q. v. {%—Jīva-dāman, ā,%} m., N.
of a prince. {%—Jīva-dāyaka, as, ā, am,%} ‘life-giving.’
{%—Jīva-dhana, am,%} n. ‘living wealth,’ property in
living creatures, live stock, wealth in flocks and
herds. {%—Jīva-dhanya, as, ā, am,%} ‘supporting living
beings;’ (Sāy.) ‘satiating living beings,’ an epithet of
Soma, and of Prajā-pati. {%—Jīva-dhānī,%} f. ‘receptacle
of living beings,’ an epithet of the earth. {%—Jīva-naś,%}
{%k, k, k,%} or {%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} (a sacrifice &c.) where living beings
are killed. {%—Jīva-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a writer on
astronomy; N. of a physician. {%—Jīva-nāya%} or {%jīva-%}
{%nāyaka, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Jīva-nāśam,%} ind.
with {%naś,%} to lose one's life, die, perish. {%—Jīva-%}
{%nikāya, as,%} m. a being endowed with life. {%—Jīva-%}
{%netrī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= saiṃhalī%}. {%—Jīva-pati, is,%}
m. a living husband. {%—Jīva-pattra, am,%} n. a fresh leaf.
{%—Jīvapattra-pracāyikā,%} f. gathering fresh leaves,
a sort of game. {%—Jīva-patnī,%} f. a woman whose hus-
band is alive. {%—Jīva-pitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or {%jīva-%}
{%pitṛka, as, ā, am,%} a son or daughter whose father
is still alive. {%—Jīva-pīta-sarga, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
one whose rays are drunk by living beings; (Sāy.)
one whose creation is enjoyed by all. {%—Jīva-putra,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} one whose sons or children are living;
({%as%}), m. a kind of plant. {%—Jīva-putraka, as,%} m.
a tree, commonly Ingua; another plant bearing
seeds used in rosaries, commonly Jiyaputa, Nageia
Putranjiva. {%—Jīvaputra-pracāyikā,%} f. the gathering
of the above plant, a sort of game. {%—Jīva-purā,%}
f., Ved. the abode of living beings or men. {%—Jīva-%}
{%puṣpa, am,%} n. ‘flower of life,’ N. of a plant
and metaphorically applied to the head; N. of
two plants, {%= damanaka%} and {%phaṇijjhaka; (ā),%} f.,
N. of a plant, {%= bṛhaj-jīvantī%}. {%—Jīva-priyā,%} f. the
tree Terminalia Chebula, {%= harītakī%}. {%—Jīva-badha,%}
{%as,%} m. destruction of living beings. {%—Jīva-barhis,%}
{%is, is, is,%} Ved. having a living, i. e. fresh bed of
sacrificial grass. {%—Jīva-bhadrā,%} f. a kind of plant,
{%= jīvantī;%} a kind of medicinal plant, {%= vṛddhi.%}
{%—Jīva-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become alive, endowed
with life. {%—Jīva-bhojana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving
enjoyment to living beings; ({%am%}), n. the pleasure or
enjoyment of living beings. {%—Jīva-mandira, am,%}
n. ‘the mansion of the soul,’ the body. {%—Jīva-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} animated, endowed with life.
{%—Jīva-miśra, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Jīva-%}
{%yāja, as,%} m., Ved. the sacrifice of living beings.
{%—Jīva-yoni, is, is, i,%} enclosing a soul (as a body
or a sentient being). {%—Jīva-rakta, am,%} n. living
blood, menstrual blood. {%—Jīva-rahita, as, ā, am,%}
lifeless. {%—Jīva-loka, as,%} m. the world or habitation
of living beings (opposed to the world of deceased
ancestors), living beings, mankind. {%—Jīva-laukika,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} peculiar to the world of living beings or
to men. {%—Jīva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} animated, living;
{%—Jīva-vallī,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Jīva-vicāra, as,%}
m. title of a Jaina work. {%—Jīvavicāra-prakaraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. title of a Jaina work by Śānti-sūri. {%—Jīva-%}
{%vṛtti, is,%} f. breeding or keeping cattle. {%—Jīva-%}
{%śaṃsa, as,%} m., Ved. rule over living beings; (Sāy.)
to be praised by living beings. {%—Jīva-śarman, ā,%}
m., N. of an astronomer. {%—Jīva-śāka, as,%} m. a
kind of pot-herb growing in Mālava. {%—Jīva-śuklā,%}
f. a kind of plant. {%—Jīva-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%} one to
whom only life is left or who has escaped with his
life and nothing more. {%—Jīva-śoṇita, am,%} n. living,
i. e. healthy blood. {%—Jīva-śreṣṭhā,%} f. a kind of
medicinal plant. {%—Jīva-saṅkramaṇa, am,%} n. me-
tempsychosis. {%—Jīva-sañjña, as,%} m., N. of a shrub,
{%= kāma-vṛddhi%}. {%—Jīva-sādhana, am,%} n. ‘means
of subsistence,’ rice, grain. {%—Jīva-sāphalya, am,%} n.
‘fruitfulness of life,’ realisation of a life's wishes.
{%—Jīva-suta, as, ā, am,%} one whose children are all
alive. {%—Jīva-sū, ūs,%} f. the mother of living offspring.
{%—Jīva-sthāna, am,%} n. a joint, an articulation.
{%—Jīvājīvādhāra (˚va-ajīva-ādh˚), as,%} m. the world
of organic beings and of inorganic matter. {%—Jīvā-%}
{%jīvādhāra-kṣetra, am,%} n. the material world, the
[Page0349-a+ 81]
receptacle of inorganic beings and inorganic substances.
{%—Jīvātman (˚va-āt˚), ā,%} m. the living or individual
soul enshrined in the human body (distinguished from
the {%paramātman%} or supreme soul), the vital principle
or spirit, that principle of life which renders the body
capable of motion or sensation; [cf. {%jīva.%}] {%—Jīvā-%}
{%dāna (˚va-ād˚), am,%} n. abstracting living or healthy
blood, bleeding. {%—Jīvādhāna (˚va-ādh˚), am,%} n.
preservation of life. {%—Jīvāntaka (˚va-an˚), as,%} m. a
fowler, a birdcatcher; a destroyer of life, a slayer, a
murderer. {%—Jīvābhigama-sūtra (˚va-abh˚), am,%} n.
title of a Jaina work. {%—Jīvāśa (˚va-āśa), as, ā, am,%}
hoping for life; ({%ā%}), f. hope of living. {%—Jīvāstikāya%}
{%(˚va-as˚), as,%} m. (with Jainas) the category of ‘soul.’
{%—Jīvendhana (˚va-in˚), am,%} n. glowing fire-wood,
burning wood. {%—Jīvotsarga (˚va-ut˚), as,%} m. aban-
donment of life, voluntary death. {%—Jīvorṇā (˚va-%}
{%ūr˚),%} f. the wool of a living animal.
<LEND>

<L>19737<pc>0349-a<k1>jIvaka<k2>jIvaka
{%Jīvaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) living,
living by, making a livelihood by, causing to live,
generating; one who lives a long time or for whom
a long life is desired [cf. {%āyuṣ-mat%}]; ({%as%}), m. a living
being; a servant, slave, one who makes a livelihood
by service; a mendicant, one who lives by begging;
an usurer, one who lives by lending money at high
interest; a snake-catcher, one whose business is to
catch snakes and cure their bites &c.; a tree; N. of
several plants, = Terminalia Tomentosa, Coccinia
Grandis, a cucurbitaceous plant; a medicinal plant,
commonly called by the same name Jīvaka and con-
sidered as one of the eight principal drugs classed
together under the name Aṣṭa-varga; N. of a man;
({%ikā%}), f. the living or life-giving element (i. e. water);
living, means of living, livelihood; N. of a plant,
{%= jīvantī;%} [cf. {%aja-jīvaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19738<pc>0349-a<k1>jIvat<k2>jIvat
{%Jīvat, an, antī, at,%}¦ living, alive; {%jīvann eva,%}
during life. {%—Jīvat-tokā,%} f. a woman whose children
are living. {%—Jīvat-pati, is,%} or {%jīvat-patnī,%} f. a wife
whose husband is alive. {%—Jīvat-pitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or
{%jīvat-pitṛka, as, ā, am,%} a son or daughter whose
father is alive; [cf. {%jīva-pitṛ.%}] {%—Jīvatpitṛka-%}
{%nirṇaya, as,%} m. title of a work by Rāma-kṛṣṇa.
{%—Jīvan-mukta, as,%} m. a man purified by knowledge of
Brahma and exonerated whilst living from future birth
and all ritual ceremonies. {%—Jīvan-mukti, is,%} f. libera-
tion in the present state of life. In the Vedānta system
a secondary sort of liberation which conducts the soul
after death to live with Brahma, not however divested
of a subtile corporeal frame. {%—Jīvanmukti-viveka, as,%}
m. title of a philosophical treatise. {%—Jīvan-mṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} at once alive and dead, dead while alive, (said
of one whose character is lost or of a madman &c.)
<LEND>

<L>19739<pc>0349-a<k1>jIvaTa<k2>jIvaTa
{%Jīvatha, as, ā, am,%}¦ long-lived; virtuous, pious;
({%as%}), m. life, existence, breath; a tortoise; a pea-
cock; a cloud; virtue, piety.
<LEND>

<L>19740<pc>0349-a<k1>jIvana<k2>jIvana
{%Jīvana, as, ī, am,%}¦ enlivening, vivifying, giving
life; ({%as%}), m. a living being, an animal; wind; a
son; a kind of drug, {%= jīvaka;%} N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%kṣudra-phalaka;%} N. of the author of the work
Mānasa-nayana; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of medicinal plant;
({%ī%}), f., N. of several plants and drugs, {%= jīvantī,%}
{%kākolī,%} a kind of jasmine &c.; ({%am%}), n. life, existence,
living, livelihood, profession (often at the end of a
comp., e. g. {%mṛga-jīvana,%} living by hunting); en-
livening, making alive; the life-giving element (water);
butter made from new milk or milk one day old; mar-
row. {%—Jīvana-tā,%} f. life, mode of life. {%—Jīvana-yoni,%}
{%is,%} m. source of life. {%—Jīvana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed
of or relating to life. {%—Jīvana-viḍambana, am,%} n.
disappointment in life, living in vain. {%—Jīvana-hetu,%}
{%us,%} m. object of life, cause of living. {%—Jīvanā-%}
{%ghāta (˚na-āgh˚), am,%} n. ‘that which destroys life,’
poison. {%—Jīvanānta (˚na-an˚), as,%} m. end of life,
death. {%—Jīvanāvāsa (˚na-āv˚), as,%} m. Varuṇa, the
regent of water. {%—Jīvanopāya (˚na-up˚), as,%} m.
livelihood, means of subsistence. {%—Jīvanauṣadha%}
{%(˚na-auṣ˚), am,%} n. an invigorating or life-giving
medicine, a drug for reviving the dead; elixir vitæ.
<LEND>

<L>19741<pc>0349-a<k1>jIvanaka<k2>jIvanaka
{%Jīvanaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ enlivening; ({%am%}), n.
food; ({%ikā%}), f. the tree Terminalia Chebula, {%=%}
{%harītakī.%}
<LEND>
[Page0349-b+ 77]

<L>19742<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvanasyA<k2>jIvanasyA
{%Jīvanasyā,%}¦ f., Ved. desire of life.
<LEND>

<L>19743<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvanIya<k2>jIvanIya
{%Jīvanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be lived; supporting life,
N. of a particular class of drugs; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
plant, {%= jīvantī; (am),%} n. a form of milk, milk
fresh from the cow; water.
<LEND>

<L>19744<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvanta<k2>jIvanta
{%Jīvanta, as, ī, am,%}¦ living, existent, long-lived;
({%as%}), m. life, existence; a medicament, a drug; a
kind of pot-herb ({%jīva-śāka%}); N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f.
a kind of medicinal plant, also eaten as a vegetable,
= Pæderia Fœtida (?); also {%= guḍūcī,%} Cocculus Cor-
difolius and {%= vandā,%} a parasitical plant.
<LEND>

<L>19745<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvantika<k2>jIvantika
{%Jīvantika, as,%}¦ m. a fowler, a birdcatcher; see
{%jīvāntaka; (ikā),%} f. a parasitical plant, Epidendron
Tesseloides, and other species; a plant Menispermum
Glabrum; a kind of pot-herb.
<LEND>

<L>19746<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvamAna<k2>jIvamAna
{%Jīvamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ living, alive.
<LEND>

<L>19747<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvala<k2>jIvala
{%Jīvala, as, ā, am,%}¦ full of life, animating; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of plant; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant.
<LEND>

<L>19748<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvAtu<k2>jIvAtu
{%Jīvātu, us,%}¦ f. life, existence; ({%us, u%}), m. n. victuals,
food, boiled rice; a medicine for restoring life; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>victus.</nsi>] {%—Jīvātu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} animated,
living.
<LEND>

<L>19749<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvikA<k2>jIvikA
{%Jīvikā,%}¦ see under {%jīvaka%}. {%—Jīvikāpanna (˚kā-%}
{%āp˚), as, ā, am,%} having obtained subsistence. {%—Jīvi-%}
{%kā-prāpta, as, ā, am,%} having obtained a livelihood.
<LEND>

<L>19750<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvita<k2>jIvita
{%Jīvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lived, lived through (as a period
of time), living, alive, existent; revivified, returned
to life; animated, enlivened; ({%am%}), n. a living being;
living, life, existence; duration of life; livelihood,
means of existence; [cf. Lith. <nsi>gywata;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>schi-</nsi>
<nsi>vot;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>vita</nsi> for <nsi>vivita.</nsi>] {%—Jīvita-kāla, as,%} m.
life-time, period or duration of life, a life. {%—Jīvita-%}
{%jñā,%} f. an artery, a vessel of the body. {%—Jīvita-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of life,’ a husband. {%—Jīvita-%}
{%yopana, as, ā, am,%} oppressing or molesting living
beings. {%—Jīvita-vyaya, as,%} m. casting away life,
sacrifice of life. {%—Jīvita-saṃśaya, as,%} m. risk
of life, fear of death. {%—Jīvita-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} de-
stroying life. {%—Jīvitānta (˚ta-an˚), as,%} m. end of
life, death. {%—Jīvitāntaka (˚ta-an˚), as,%} m. putting
an end to life, an epithet of Śiva. {%—Jīvitāśā (˚ta-āśā),%}
f. hope of life; love of life. {%—Jīvitepsu (˚ta-īp˚), us,%}
{%us, u,%} seeking to save (one's) life. {%—Jīviteśa (˚ta-%}
{%īśa), as, ā, am,%} presiding over life; ({%as%}), m. ‘the
lord or master of existence,’ a lover, a husband; an
epithet of Yama the regent of death; the sun; the
moon; a drug to revive the dead. {%—Jīviteśvara%}
{%(˚ta-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of life,’ an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>19751<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvitavya<k2>jIvitavya
{%Jīvitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be lived, to be kept
alive; ({%am%}), n. the possibility of living; possible
return to life.
<LEND>

<L>19752<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvin<k2>jIvin
{%Jīvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ living, alive, animate; living upon
or by; ({%ī%}), m. a living being. {%—Jīvi-tva, am,%} n.
life, existence.
<LEND>

<L>19753<pc>0349-b<k1>jIvya<k2>jIvya
{%Jīvya, am,%}¦ n. life; ({%ā%}), f. several plants, {%= jīvantī,%}
{%gokṣura-dugdhā;%} Terminalia Chebula, {%= harītakī.%}
{%—Jīvyopāya (˚ya-up˚), as,%} m. means of existence,
subsistence, livelihood.
<LEND>

<L>19754<pc>0349-b<k1>ju<k2>ju
{#ju#}¦ {%ju,%} see 1. {%jū.%} The form of this root
given in the Dhātu-pāṭha is {%ju,%} but the deri-
vatives from it have the vowel long.
<LEND>

<L>19755<pc>0349-b<k1>jukuwa<k2>jukuwa
{#jukuwa#}¦ {%jukuṭa, as,%} m. a dog [cf. {%kukkuṭa%}];
the Malaya range of mountains; ({%am%}), n. the egg-
plant, Solanum Melongena; [cf. {%jakuṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19756<pc>0349-b<k1>jugupizu<k2>jugupizu
{#jugupizu#}¦ {%jugupiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. {%gup%}), intending or wishing to protect.
<LEND>

<L>19757<pc>0349-b<k1>jugupsana<k2>jugupsana
{%Jugupsana, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a dislike, detesting;
({%am%}), n. censure, abuse, reproach, reviling, dislike,
horror.
<LEND>

<L>19758<pc>0349-b<k1>jugupsA<k2>jugupsA
{%Jugupsā,%}¦ f. censure; dislike, aversion, abhorrence,
disgust.
<LEND>

<L>19759<pc>0349-b<k1>jugupsita<k2>jugupsita
{%Jugupsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reviled, blamed, censured,
abused.
<LEND>

<L>19760<pc>0349-b<k1>jugupsu<k2>jugupsu
{%Jugupsu, us, us, u,%}¦ having a dislike or disgust.
<LEND>

<L>19761<pc>0349-b<k1>jugurvaRi<k2>jugurvaRi
{#jugurvaRi#}¦ {%jugurvaṇi, is, is, i%} (reduplicated
form fr. rt. 1. {%gṝ%}), Ved. fond of praise, wishing to
praise; (Sāy.) favouring the praiser.
<LEND>
[Page0349-c+ 71]

<L>19762<pc>0349-c<k1>juNg<k2>juNg
{#juNg#}¦ {%juṅg,%} cl. 1. P. {%juṅgati,%} &c., to quit,
abandon; to except, exclude; [cf. {%yuṅg%}
and {%vuṅg.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19763<pc>0349-c<k1>juNga<k2>juNga
{%Juṅga, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. or {%juṅgaka, as,%} m. a kind of
plant, Argyreia Speciosa or Argentea.
<LEND>

<L>19764<pc>0349-c<k1>juNgita<k2>juNgita
{%Juṅgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ deserted, injured, abandoned,
outcast; ({%as%}), m. a man of a degraded caste, a
Cāṇḍāla &c.
<LEND>

<L>19765<pc>0349-c<k1>juYc<k2>juYc
{#juYc#}¦ {%juñc%} (?), cl. 1. 10. P. {%juñcati, juñca-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to speak.
<LEND>

<L>19766<pc>0349-c<k1>juw<k2>juw
{#juw#}¦ {%juṭ,%} cl. 6. P. {%juṭati,%} &c., a various
reading for {%juḍ,%} to bind; [cf. {%jaṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19767<pc>0349-c<k1>juwaka<k2>juwaka
{%Juṭaka, am,%}¦ n. [cf. {%jaṭā%} and {%jūṭaka%}], a braid of
hair, any knot or fillet of hair; ({%ikā%}), f. {%= cūḍā,%} a
tuft of hair on the top of the head; the matted hair
of Śiva or of ascetics.
<LEND>

<L>19768<pc>0349-c<k1>juq<k2>juq
{#juq#}¦ {%juḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%juḍati,%} &c., to bind, to
join together; cl. 10. P. {%joḍayati,%} &c., to
send, cast or throw, direct; to grind or pound.
<LEND>

<L>19769<pc>0349-c<k1>jut<k2>jut
{#jut#}¦ {%jut,%} cl. 1. A. {%jotate,%} to shine; [cf.
{%jyut, dyut, yut.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19770<pc>0349-c<k1>jutuma<k2>jutuma
{#jutuma#}¦ {%jutuma%} and {%juthuma,%} two incorrect
readings for {%jituma,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19771<pc>0349-c<k1>jun<k2>jun
{#jun#}¦ {%jun,%} cl. 6. P. {%junati,%} &c., to go; (a
various reading has {%juḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19772<pc>0349-c<k1>jumara<k2>jumara
{#jumara#}¦ {%jumara, as,%} m., N. of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>19773<pc>0349-c<k1>jumbaka<k2>jumbaka
{#jumbaka#}¦ {%jumbaka, as,%} m., Ved., N. of Varuṇa.
<LEND>

<L>19774<pc>0349-c<k1>jur<k2>jur<h>1
{#jur#} 1¦. {%jur%} (related to 1. {%jṝ%}), cl. 6. 4. P.,
Ved. {%jurati, jūryati, jujora%} (?), &c., to
decay, become old or decrepit, to grow old, perish;
also {%jūr,%} cl. 4. A. {%jūryate,%} to grow old.
<LEND>

<L>19775<pc>0349-c<k1>jur<k2>jur<h>2
2. {%jur, ūr,%}¦ m. an old man; [cf. 2. {%jū.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19776<pc>0349-c<k1>jurya<k2>jurya
{%Jurya, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming old; [cf. {%a-jurya%}
and {%jūrya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19777<pc>0349-c<k1>jUrRa<k2>jUrRa
{%Jūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ decayed, old. {%—Jūrṇākhya%}
{%(˚ṇa-ākh˚), as,%} m. the plant Saccharum Cylindricum,
commonly Ulū. {%—Jūrṇāhvaya (˚ṇa-āh˚), as,%} m.
the plant Andropogon Saccharatus.
<LEND>

<L>19778<pc>0349-c<k1>jUrRI<k2>jUrRI
{%Jūrṇī,%}¦ f., Ved., N. of a snake.
<LEND>

<L>19779<pc>0349-c<k1>jUrya<k2>jUrya
{%Jūrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. becoming old, aged,
weak, an old man.
<LEND>

<L>19780<pc>0349-c<k1>jurv<k2>jurv
{#jurv#}¦ {%jurv.%} See {%jūrv.%}
<LEND>

<L>19781<pc>0349-c<k1>jul<k2>jul
{#jul#}¦ {%jul,%} cl. 10. P. {%jolayati,%} &c., to re-
duce to powder, grind.
<LEND>

<L>19782<pc>0349-c<k1>juvas<k2>juvas
{#juvas#}¦ {%juvas.%} See under rt. {%jū.%}
<LEND>

<L>19783<pc>0349-c<k1>juz<k2>juz<h>1
{#juz#} 1¦. {%juṣ,%} cl. 6. A. (ep. also P.) {%juṣate,%}
{%-ti, jujuṣe, joṣiṣyate, ajoṣiṣṭa, jo-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to be pleased or satisfied, to be propitiated
or propitious; to be favourable; to like, be fond of,
to have pleasure in, delight in (with acc. or gen.);
to enjoy; to show one's self favourable towards
(with acc.); to have pleasure in granting (with loc. of
the person); to devote one's self to, practise, undergo,
suffer; to delight in visiting, frequent, visit, inhabit,
enter; happen to; to have pleasure in performing
(with dat., e. g. {%juṣate karmaṇe,%} he likes to engage
in any act); to choose; to give pleasure to (with loc.
of the person): Caus. {%joṣayati, -te, -yitum,%} to
like, be fond of, love, behave kindly towards (with
acc.); fondle, cherish; to delight in, approve of,
choose: Desid. {%jujuṣiṣate%} or {%jujoṣiṣate:%} Intens.
{%jojuṣyate, jojoṣṭi;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>zaosha,</nsi> ‘will, de-
sire;’ Hib. <nsi>gus,</nsi> ‘a desire, inclination;’ Goth. <nsi>kus,</nsi> ‘to
choose,’ <nsi>kiusu, kaus, kusum;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>kiese;</nsi> Lat.
<nsi>gus-tus;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">γεύω, γεύομαι.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>19784<pc>0349-c<k1>juz<k2>juz<h>2
2. {%juṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ liking, fond of, devoted to (with
acc.); visiting, approaching; [cf. {%sa-juṣ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19785<pc>0349-c<k1>juzARa<k2>juzARa
{%Juṣāṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a sacrificial formula con-
taining the word {%juṣāṇa,%} pres. part. of rt. 1. {%juṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>19786<pc>0349-c<k1>juzwa<k2>juzwa
{%Juṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ gratified, pleased, propitiated,
propitious, favourable; liked, wished, loved, agreeable,
[Page0350-a+ 72]
usual; frequented, visited; served, obliged, worshipped,
gratified by service; practised; furnished with, pos-
sessed of; ({%am%}), n. the crumbs or remnants of a
meal or its leavings.
<LEND>

<L>19787<pc>0350-a<k1>juzwi<k2>juzwi
{%Juṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. love, service, favour, satisfaction.
<LEND>

<L>19788<pc>0350-a<k1>juzya<k2>juzya
{%Juṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be served or worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>19789<pc>0350-a<k1>joza<k2>joza
{%Joṣa, joṣaṇa,%}¦ &c. See p. 351, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>19790<pc>0350-a<k1>juz<k2>juz<h>3
{#juz#} 3¦. {%juṣ,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%joṣati, joṣa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to reason, think, conceive, ima-
gine, investigate, examine; to injure, hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>19791<pc>0350-a<k1>juzka<k2>juzka
{#juzka#}¦ {%juṣka, as,%} m., N. of one of the three
Turuṣka kings in Kaśmīra. {%—Juṣka-pura, am,%}
n., N. of a town founded by Jushka.
<LEND>

<L>19792<pc>0350-a<k1>juzkaka<k2>juzkaka
{#juzkaka#}¦ {%juṣkaka, as,%} m. {%= yūṣa,%} the water
of boiled pulse, pease-soup, porridge, &c.
<LEND>

<L>19793<pc>0350-a<k1>juhu<k2>juhu
{#juhu#}¦ {%juhu%} = 2. {%juhū%} below.
<LEND>

<L>19794<pc>0350-a<k1>juhurARa<k2>juhurARa
{#juhurARa#}¦ {%juhurāṇa, as,%} m. (a corrupt form,
said to be fr. rt. {%hurch;%} or fr. rt. {%hvṛ%}), the moon;
[cf. {%juhūrāṇa%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>19795<pc>0350-a<k1>juhuvARa<k2>juhuvARa
{#juhuvARa#}¦ {%juhuvāṇa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hu;%} a cor-
rupt form), fire, (also spelt {%juhūvāṇa%}); a sacrificing
priest.
<LEND>

<L>19796<pc>0350-a<k1>juhuvAna<k2>juhuvAna
{%Juhuvāna, as,%}¦ m. (perf. part. fr. rt. {%hu%}), fire;
a tree; a hard-hearted man.
<LEND>

<L>19797<pc>0350-a<k1>juhUrARa<k2>juhUrARa
{%Juhūrāṇa, as,%}¦ m. (a corrupt form), fire; a sacri-
ficing priest; the moon.
<LEND>

<L>19798<pc>0350-a<k1>juhU<k2>juhU<h>1
{#juhU#} 1¦. {%juhū, ūs,%} f. (fr. rt. {%hve%}), a tongue;
especially the tongue or tongues of Agni, the flames;
{%sapta juhvaḥ,%} the seven tongues of Agni; see {%jihvā.%}
{%Juhū%} personified is the wife of Brahmā and goddess
of speech; [cf. {%sarasvatī.%}] {%—Juhū-vat, ān,%} m. fire
or its deity Agni. {%—Juhv-āsya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
tongue-mouthed, whose mouth consists of tongues
or is full of them, an epithet of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>19799<pc>0350-a<k1>juhU<k2>juhU<h>2
{#juhU#} 2¦. {%juhū, ūs,%} f. (fr. rt. {%hu%}), a wooden
ladle or vessel of the shape of a semicircle or crescent,
used for pouring the sacrificial butter into the fire;
that part of the frame enshrining the supreme spirit
which faces the east.
<LEND>

<L>19800<pc>0350-a<k1>juhoti<k2>juhoti
{#juhoti#}¦ {%juhoti, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hu%}), a technical
name for those sacrificial ceremonies to which the
verb {%juhoti%} and not {%yajati%} is applied. {%—Juhoty-ādi,%}
{%ayas,%} m. pl. the roots beginning with {%hu,%} to sacrifice,
i. e. the roots of the third class.
<LEND>

<L>19801<pc>0350-a<k1>juhvat<k2>juhvat
{%Juhvat, at, atī, at,%}¦ sacrificing, offering oblations.
<LEND>

<L>19802<pc>0350-a<k1>jU<k2>jU<h>1
{#jU#} 1¦. {%jū%} (or according to the Dhātu-pāṭha
{%ju%}), cl. 1. P. A., 9. P. {%javati, -te, junāti,%} &c.,
to press forwards, hurry on, move on quickly, be
quick; to impel quickly, urge or drive on, incite; to
excite, promote, animate, inspire.
<LEND>

<L>19803<pc>0350-a<k1>juvas<k2>juvas
{%Juvas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. quickness, speed, liveliness.
<LEND>

<L>19804<pc>0350-a<k1>jU<k2>jU<h>2
2. {%jū, ūs, ūs, u,%}¦ Ved. quick, speedy; (according
to Sāy. {%jūḥ%} may also be the Nom. c. of {%jur,%} old); in-
citing, pressing, driving; ({%ūs%}), f. speed, expedition,
velocity, going, motion; the atmosphere; a female
demon or goblin; an epithet of the goddess Sarasvatī;
a spot or mark on the forehead of horses and oxen;
[cf. {%kaśo-jū%} and {%mano-jū.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19805<pc>0350-a<k1>jUta<k2>jUta
{%Jūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved quickly, impelled, urged,
pressed, (at the end of comp. in {%adri-jūta, indra-j˚,%}
{%deva-j˚),%} &c., q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>19806<pc>0350-a<k1>jUti<k2>jUti
{%Jūti, is,%}¦ f. going on, proceeding, moving; quick-
ness, speed, velocity; flowing without obstruction or
interruption; impulse, incitement, instigation, anima-
tion; inclination, impulse, energy. {%—Jūti-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. impetuous, speedy.
<LEND>

<L>19807<pc>0350-a<k1>jUka<k2>jUka
{#jUka#}¦ {%jūka%} (a word borrowed fr. the Gr.
<lang n="greek">ζυγόν</lang>), the sign of the zodiac Libra.
<LEND>

<L>19808<pc>0350-a<k1>jUwa<k2>jUwa
{#jUwa#}¦ {%jūṭa, as,%} m. the matted hair of Śiva,
the twisted or clotted hair of an ascetic; [cf. {%jaṭā%}
and {%cūḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19809<pc>0350-a<k1>jUwaka<k2>jUwaka
{%Jūṭaka, am,%}¦ n. twisted or braided hair; [cf. {%jaṭā.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0350-b+ 74]

<L>19810<pc>0350-b<k1>jUtikA<k2>jUtikA
{#jUtikA#}¦ {%jūtikā,%} f. a kind of camphor.
<LEND>

<L>19811<pc>0350-b<k1>jUmaranandin<k2>jUmaranandin
{#jUmaranandin#}¦ {%jūmara-nandin, ī,%} m., N. of
the author of a commentary on the grammar entitled
Saṅkṣipta-sāra.
<LEND>

<L>19812<pc>0350-b<k1>jUr<k2>jUr
{#jUr#}¦ {%jūr,%} cl. 4. A. {%jūryate,%} &c., to hurt,
injure, wound, kill; to be angry with (with
dat.); to grow old. See rt. 1. {%jur,%} p. 349.
<LEND>

<L>19813<pc>0350-b<k1>jUrRa<k2>jUrRa
{#jUrRa#}¦ {%jūrṇa, jūrya.%} See rt. 1. {%jur,%} p. 349.
<LEND>

<L>19814<pc>0350-b<k1>jUrRi<k2>jUrRi<h>1
{#jUrRi#} 1¦. {%jūrṇi, is, is, i%} (fr. {%jur = gur%}), Ved.
skilfully praising, invoking.
<LEND>

<L>19815<pc>0350-b<k1>jUrv<k2>jUrv
{#jUrv#}¦ {%jūrv%} (connected with rt. {%jvar%}), cl. 1.
P., Ved. {%jūrvati,%} &c., to consume by heat,
singe, burn; to hurt, kill; [cf. Hib. <nsi>gearbaim,</nsi> ‘I
grieve, hurt, wound;’ cf. also rt. {%jval.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19816<pc>0350-b<k1>jUrRi<k2>jUrRi<h>2
2. {%jūrṇi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. glowing fire, a blaze, a fiery
weapon; anger [cf. {%jūr%}]; speed (perhaps for {%jūti%});
fever [cf. {%jvara%}]; disease, sickness; the body; the
sun; Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>19817<pc>0350-b<k1>jUrRin<k2>jUrRin
{%Jūrṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. surrounded by glowing
fire, glowing.
<LEND>

<L>19818<pc>0350-b<k1>jUrti<k2>jUrti
{%Jūrti, is,%}¦ f. fever; feverish or morbid heat; [cf.
Hib. <nsi>gurt,</nsi> ‘pain, trouble, fierceness.’]
<LEND>

<L>19819<pc>0350-b<k1>jUz<k2>jUz
{#jUz#}¦ {%jūṣ%} (a various reading for {%yūṣ%}), cl.
1. P. {%jūṣati,%} &c., to kill, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>19820<pc>0350-b<k1>jUza<k2>jUza
{%Jūṣa, am,%}¦ n. the water of boiled pulse, pease-
soup, porridge, &c.
<LEND>

<L>19821<pc>0350-b<k1>jUzaRa<k2>jUzaRa
{%Jūṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the plant Grislea Tomentosa,
commonly Dhäiphula.
<LEND>

<L>19822<pc>0350-b<k1>jf<k2>jf
{#jf#}¦ {%jṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%jarati,%} &c., to surpass,
excel; make low, depress, humiliate; [cf.
Germ. <nsi>kurz;</nsi> Scot. <nsi>gearr, goirid,</nsi> ‘short.’]
<LEND>

<L>19823<pc>0350-b<k1>jfNgi<k2>jfNgi
{#jfNgi#}¦ {%jṛṅgi, ayas,%} or {%jṛṅgin, iṇas,%} m. pl.,
N. of a particular race or people.
<LEND>

<L>19824<pc>0350-b<k1>jfB<k2>jfB
{#jfB#}¦ {%jṛbh%} or {%jṛmbh,%} cl. 1. A. (poet. also
P.) {%jṛmbhate, -ti,%} or {%jarbhate, jajṛmbhe,%}
{%jṛmbhiṣyate, jṛmbhitum,%} to open the mouth, yawn,
gape; to gape open, open (as a flower), burst open; fly
back or recoil (as a bow); to unfold, spread, extend,
expand, occupy a larger circuit; to spread (as sound);
to feel at ease: Caus. {%jṛmbhayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to gape or yawn, cause to expand or unfold;
[cf. Old Germ. <nsi>chliupu,</nsi> ‘to split;’ Germ. <nsi>klaffe,</nsi>
<nsi>kluft;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>graba;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>grabe;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">γράφω;</lang>
Hib. <nsi>grabhaim, grafain, grafan;</nsi> cf. also 1. {%jabh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19825<pc>0350-b<k1>jfmBa<k2>jfmBa
{%Jṛmbha, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. gaping, yawning;
bursting open; blossoming, swelling, blowing, being
puffed up; expansion, stretching, expanding; ({%as%}),
m. a particular animal. {%—Jṛmbhā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
yawning, gaping.
<LEND>

<L>19826<pc>0350-b<k1>jfmBaka<k2>jfmBaka
{%Jṛmbhaka, as,%}¦ m. a yawner, a sort of demon or
spirit; N. of certain magical formularies for exorcising
the evil spirits supposed to possess weapons; ({%ikā%}),
f. gaping, yawning; ({%am%}), n. swelling.
<LEND>

<L>19827<pc>0350-b<k1>jfmBaRa<k2>jfmBaRa
{%Jṛmbhaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to gape or yawn;
({%am%}), n. gaping, yawning; stretching the limbs;
bursting or gaping open, blossoming, blooming.
<LEND>

<L>19828<pc>0350-b<k1>jfmBamARa<k2>jfmBamARa
{%Jṛmbhamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ gaping, yawning;
opening, blossoming, blowing.
<LEND>

<L>19829<pc>0350-b<k1>jfmBita<k2>jfmBita
{%Jṛmbhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ opened, expanded; opened (as
a flower), blown; enlarged, increased; done, exerted;
({%am%}), n. gaping, yawning; bursting, opening, expansion,
unfolding; developing, coming into view, swelling;
exertion; wish, active search for; a kind of coitus.
<LEND>

<L>19830<pc>0350-b<k1>jfmBin<k2>jfmBin
{%Jṛmbhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ yawning, gaping; expanding,
blossoming; ({%iṇī%}), f. the plant Mimosa Octandra,
{%= elāparṇī.%}
<LEND>

<L>19831<pc>0350-b<k1>jF<k2>jF<h>1
{#jF#} 1¦. {%jṝ,%} cl. 4. 9. 1. P. {%jīryati, jṛṇāti, jara-%}
{%ti, jajāra, jariṣyati%} and {%jarīṣyati, ajārīt%}
and {%ajarat, jaritum%} and {%jarītum,%} to grow old,
become decrepit, decay, wear out, wither; to be
consumed, perish; to break up or fall to pieces; to
be dissolved or digested; (cl. 1. P.) to make old or de-
crepit; to cause to grow old; cl. 10. P. {%jārayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to become old: Caus. P. {%jarayati, -yitum,%}
[Page0350-c+ 78]
to make old, wear out, consume, cause to be con-
sumed; to cause to be digested; to digest: Desid.
{%jijariṣati, jijarīṣati, jijīrṣati:%} Intens. {%jejīr-%}
{%yate, jājarti;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>crionaim,</nsi> ‘I dry, wither;’
<nsi>criona,</nsi> ‘old, ancient:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">γέρων, γεραιός, γραῦς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">γῆρας:</lang> Lat. <nsi>grânum</nsi> for <nsi>gârnum:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>kaurn:</nsi>
Germ. <nsi>Korn:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>girna.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19832<pc>0350-c<k1>jara<k2>jara
{%Jara, jaratha, jaraṇa, jaras,%}¦ &c. See p. 340.
<LEND>

<L>19833<pc>0350-c<k1>jAra<k2>jAra
{%Jāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. becoming old; ({%as%}), m. a
paramour, gallant, lover, (in the Veda applied to Agni
or to the Sun as the paramour of the dawn); a
confidential friend; ({%ī%}), f. a particular herb or medi-
cament; a N. of Durgā; [cf. Goth. <nsi>hôrs;</nsi> Germ.
<nsi>Hure.</nsi>] {%—Jāra-garbha, as, ā, am,%} pregnant by a
paramour. {%—Jāra-ja, as, ā, am,%} a bastard, the child
of a woman by her paramour. {%—Jāra-jāta%} or {%jāra-%}
{%jātaka, as, ā, am,%} a bastard; ({%as%}), m. a plagiarist.
{%—Jāra-tā,%} f. an intrigue, love-affair. {%—Jāra-dvaya,%}
{%am,%} n. a couple of gallants. {%—Jāra-bharā,%} f. an
adulteress.
<LEND>

<L>19834<pc>0350-c<k1>jAraka<k2>jAraka
{%Jāraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to decay; promoting
digestion, digestive.
<LEND>

<L>19835<pc>0350-c<k1>jAraRa<k2>jAraRa
{%Jāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to decay; pro-
moting digestion; calcining or oxidizing metals; a
condiment, a digester; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of cumin-seed.
<LEND>

<L>19836<pc>0350-c<k1>jAratineya<k2>jAratineya
{%Jāratineya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Jaratī; a
patronymic from Jaratin.
<LEND>

<L>19837<pc>0350-c<k1>jAratkArava<k2>jAratkArava
{%Jāratkārava, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Jarat-
kāru.
<LEND>

<L>19838<pc>0350-c<k1>jAradgava<k2>jAradgava
{%Jāradgava, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%jarad-gava%}), scil.
{%vīthi,%} the path of the old ox, (according to Varāha-
mihira the portion of the moon's path occupied by
the constellations Śravaṇā, Dhaniṣṭhā, and Śata-
bhiṣaj, or according to other authorities that occupied
by Vi-śākhā, Anu-rādhā, and Jyeṣṭhā.)
<LEND>

<L>19839<pc>0350-c<k1>jAramARya<k2>jAramARya
{%Jāramāṇya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Jaramāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>19840<pc>0350-c<k1>jArAsanDi<k2>jArAsanDi
{%Jārāsandhi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%jarā-sandha%}), a patro-
nymic of Saha-deva.
<LEND>

<L>19841<pc>0350-c<k1>jAriRI<k2>jAriRI
{%Jāriṇī,%}¦ f., Ved. a woman who has a paramour,
enamoured.
<LEND>

<L>19842<pc>0350-c<k1>jAruja<k2>jAruja
{%Jāruja, as, ā, am, = jarāyu-ja.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>19843<pc>0350-c<k1>jIrRa<k2>jIrRa
{%Jīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ old, ancient; worn out, wasted,
withered, decayed, ruined, in ruins; digested; ({%as%}),
m. an old man; a tree; cumin-seed; ({%ā%}), f. large
cumin-seed; ({%am%}), n. decrepitude, old age; benja-
min. {%—Jīrṇa-jvara%} or {%jīrṇāmaya-jvara, as,%} m. a
lingering fever with diminishing intensity. {%—Jīrṇa-%}
{%jvarin, ī, iṇī, i,%} affected with the above fever.
{%—Jīrṇa-ṭīkā,%} f. ‘the ancient commentary,’ title of
an astronomical work. {%—Jīrṇa-tā,%} f. or {%jīrṇa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. old age; infirmity, decay. {%—Jīrṇa-dāru,%}
{%us,%} m. the plant Convolvulus Argenteus. {%—Jīrṇa-%}
{%pattrikā,%} f. ‘having withered leaves,’ N. of a plant,
{%= vaṃśa-pattrī%}. {%—Jīrṇa-parṇa, as, am,%} m. n.
‘having withered leaves,’ the plant Nauclea Cadamba.
{%—Jīrṇa-phañjī,%} f. {%= jīrṇa-dāru%}. {%—Jīrṇa-budhna,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of Lodhra. {%—Jīrṇa-budhnaka, am,%}
n. a kind of Cyperus. {%—Jīrṇa-vajra, am,%} n. a gem,
said to be a sort of diamond. {%—Jīrṇa-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} old decayed. {%—Jīrṇa-vastra, am,%} n. old, worn
or tattered raiment; ({%as, ā, am%}), wearing old clothes.
{%—Jīrṇa-vāṭikā,%} f. a ruined house. {%—Jīrṇa-vradh-%}
{%naka, as,%} m. a fragrant grass, Cyperus Rotundus.
{%—Jīrṇoddhāra (˚ṇa-ud˚), as,%} m. the repairing of
what is worn out, renewal, repairs. {%—Jīrṇoddhṛta%}
{%(˚ṇa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} rescued from decay, repaired.
{%—Jīrṇodyāna (˚ṇa-ud˚), am,%} n. a neglected garden.
<LEND>

<L>19844<pc>0350-c<k1>jIrRaka<k2>jIrRaka
{%Jīrṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ almost dried up or withered.
<LEND>

<L>19845<pc>0350-c<k1>jIrRi<k2>jIrRi
{%Jīrṇi, is, is, i,%}¦ decrepit with age; ({%is%}), f. old age,
infirmity, decay; digestion.
<LEND>

<L>19846<pc>0350-c<k1>jF<k2>jF<h>2
{#jF#} 2¦. {%jṝ,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%jarate,%} &c., to
move, approach, come near.
<LEND>

<L>19847<pc>0350-c<k1>jF<k2>jF<h>3
{#jF#} 3¦. {%jṝ,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%jarate,%} to crackle
(as fire); to roar; to call out to, address, in-
voke, praise.
<LEND>

<L>19848<pc>0350-c<k1>jaraRA<k2>jaraRA
{%Jaraṇā, jaritṛ, jarūtha,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>19849<pc>0350-c<k1>jetavya<k2>jetavya
{#jetavya#}¦ {%jetavya.%} See p. 347, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>19850<pc>0350-c<k1>jetf<k2>jetf
{#jetf#}¦ {%jetṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ji%}), victorious,
[Page0351-a+ 71]
triumphant; surpassing, excelling; gaining; ({%tā%}),
m. a victor, conqueror; N. of a Vedic poet who was
son of Madhu-cchandas; N. of a prince who had a
garden near Śrāvastī in which Śākya-muni pro-
mulgated his doctrines. {%—Jeta-vana, am,%} n. (for
{%jetṛ+vana%}), the wood of Jetṛ, N. of a grove or
garden near Śrāvastī where Śākya-muni or Buddha
promulgated his doctrines. {%—Jetavanīya, ās,%} m. pl.
N. of a Buddhist school. {%—Jeta-sāhvaya, as, ā, am,%}
called after Jetṛ. {%—Jetārāma, as,%} m. (for {%jetṛ+%}
{%ār˚%}), {%= jeta-vana.%}
<LEND>

<L>19851<pc>0351-a<k1>jetva<k2>jetva
{%Jetva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be gained or conquered.
<LEND>

<L>19852<pc>0351-a<k1>jeman<k2>jeman
{%Jeman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. surpassing, excelling; ({%ā%}),
m. excellence.
<LEND>

<L>19853<pc>0351-a<k1>jeza<k2>jeza
{%Jeṣa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. winning, gaining, obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>19854<pc>0351-a<k1>jentAka<k2>jentAka
{#jentAka#}¦ {%jentāka, as,%} m. a dry hot bath or
heated chamber for inducing perspiration in rheuma-
tism, &c.
<LEND>

<L>19855<pc>0351-a<k1>jenya<k2>jenya
{#jenya#}¦ {%jenya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%jana%}), Ved. of
noble origin (<lang n="greek">γενναῖος</lang>); genuine, true. {%—Jenyā-%}
{%vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having genuine or true wealth,
an epithet of the Aśvins; also of Indra and Agni;
(Sāy.) having acquired wealth.
<LEND>

<L>19856<pc>0351-a<k1>jemana<k2>jemana
{#jemana#}¦ {%jemana.%} See under rt. {%jim,%} p. 347.
<LEND>

<L>19857<pc>0351-a<k1>jeya<k2>jeya
{#jeya#}¦ {%jeya.%} See p. 347, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>19858<pc>0351-a<k1>jelaka<k2>jelaka
{#jelaka#}¦ {%jelaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19859<pc>0351-a<k1>jez<k2>jez
{#jez#}¦ {%jeṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%jeṣate,%} &c., to move,
go.
<LEND>

<L>19860<pc>0351-a<k1>jeza<k2>jeza
{#jeza#}¦ {%jeṣa.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>19861<pc>0351-a<k1>jeh<k2>jeh
{#jeh#}¦ {%jeh%} (related to 1. {%jabh%} and {%jṛbh%}),
cl. 1. A., Ved. {%jehate, jijehe, jehiṣyate,%}
{%jehitum,%} to open the mouth, breathe heavily, gasp,
gape, open wide, yawn; (Sāy.) to reach, go towards,
strive after: Caus. {%jehayati, ajijehat.%}
<LEND>

<L>19862<pc>0351-a<k1>jehamAna<k2>jehamAna
{%Jehamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gaping, opening wide;
(Sāy.) going towards.
<LEND>

<L>19863<pc>0351-a<k1>jE<k2>jE
{#jE#}¦ {%jai,%} cl. 1. P. {%jāyati, jajau, jāsyati, jā-%}
{%tum,%} to wane, decline, fade away, perish; [cf.
1. {%jyā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19864<pc>0351-a<k1>jEgIzavya<k2>jEgIzavya
{#jEgIzavya#}¦ {%jaigīṣavya, as,%} m. (fr. {%jigīṣu%}),
N. of an ancient Ṛṣi often named in connection
with Asita Devala. {%—Jaigīṣavyeśvara (˚ya-īś˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga in Vārāṇasī.
<LEND>

<L>19865<pc>0351-a<k1>jEtra<k2>jEtra
{#jEtra#}¦ {%jaitra, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ji%}), victorious,
triumphant, leading to victory, overcoming, surpass-
ing, superior; ({%as%}), m. a conqueror, victor; N. of a
son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Sesbania
Ægyptiaca; ({%am%}), n. victory, triumph, superiority.
{%—Jaitra-ratha, as, ā, am,%} having a triumphant
car; ({%as%}), m. a victor, a conqueror, a hero; a
triumphant car.
<LEND>

<L>19866<pc>0351-a<k1>jEtrAyaRi<k2>jEtrAyaRi
{%Jaitrāyaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Jaitra.
<LEND>

<L>19867<pc>0351-a<k1>jEna<k2>jEna
{#jEna#}¦ {%jaina, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jina%}), relating to
the Jinas; ({%as%}), m. a Jaina, a teacher of heterodox
notions, the chief of which are the supremacy of
certain Jinas or great saints over the gods of the
Hindūs, a denial of the divine authority of the Vedas,
and a disregard of the distinction of castes; N. of a
prince of Kaśmīra. {%—Jaina-taraṅgiṇī,%} f. a history
of Kaśmīra by Śrīvara. {%—Jaināśrama (˚na-āś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a Jaina monastery. {%—Jainendra (˚na-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>19868<pc>0351-a<k1>jEnya<k2>jEnya
{%Jainya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the Jainas (?).
<LEND>

<L>19869<pc>0351-a<k1>jEpAla<k2>jEpAla
{#jEpAla#}¦ {%jaipāla, as,%} m. ({%= jaya-pāla%}), a
plant, Croton Tiglium.
<LEND>

<L>19870<pc>0351-a<k1>jEmanta<k2>jEmanta
{#jEmanta#}¦ {%jaimanta, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19871<pc>0351-a<k1>jEmantAyana<k2>jEmantAyana
{%Jaimantāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Jai-
manta.
<LEND>

<L>19872<pc>0351-a<k1>jEmini<k2>jEmini
{#jEmini#}¦ {%jaimini, is,%} m., N. of a celebrated
saint and philosopher, the pupil of Vyāsa and founder
of the Pūrva (or Karma) Mimāṃsā school. He is said
[Page0351-b+ 70]
to have acted as Udgātṛ at the sacrifice of Janam-
ejaya (Mahā-bh. I. 2046), and to have received
the Sāma-veda from Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>19873<pc>0351-b<k1>jEminIya<k2>jEminIya
{%Jaiminīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to Jaimini; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a school of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>19874<pc>0351-b<k1>jEmUta<k2>jEmUta
{#jEmUta#}¦ {%jaimūta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jīmūta%}), relating
to Jīmūta.
<LEND>

<L>19875<pc>0351-b<k1>jEyawa<k2>jEyawa
{#jEyawa#}¦ {%jaiyaṭa, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Kaiyaṭa; (sometimes spelt {%jaigaṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>19876<pc>0351-b<k1>jEyyawa<k2>jEyyawa
{%Jaiyyaṭa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a physician.
<LEND>

<L>19877<pc>0351-b<k1>jEva<k2>jEva
{#jEva#}¦ {%jaiva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jīva%}), relating to
Jupiter.
<LEND>

<L>19878<pc>0351-b<k1>jEvantAyana<k2>jEvantAyana
{%Jaivantāyana, as,%}¦ m. or {%jaivantāyani, is,%} m.
or {%jaivanti, is,%} m. a patronymic from Jīvanta.
<LEND>

<L>19879<pc>0351-b<k1>jEvali<k2>jEvali
{%Jaivali, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%jīvala%}), a patronymic of Pra-
vāhana.
<LEND>

<L>19880<pc>0351-b<k1>jEvAtfka<k2>jEvAtfka
{%Jaivātṛka, as, ī, am,%}¦ long-lived, one for whom
long life is desired; thin, lean; ({%as%}), m. the moon;
camphor (as a synonym of the moon); a peasant; a
drug, medicament; a son; [cf. {%jīvātu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19881<pc>0351-b<k1>jEvi<k2>jEvi
{%Jaivi, is,%}¦ m. or {%jaiveya, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Jīva.
<LEND>

<L>19882<pc>0351-b<k1>jEzRava<k2>jEzRava
{#jEzRava#}¦ {%jaiṣṇava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jiṣṇu%}), re-
lating to a conqueror, relating to Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>19883<pc>0351-b<k1>jEhmya<k2>jEhmya
{#jEhmya#}¦ {%jaihmya, am,%}  n. (fr. {%jihma%}), crooked-
ness (moral or physical), deceit, falsehood.
<LEND>

<L>19884<pc>0351-b<k1>jEhva<k2>jEhva
{#jEhva#}¦ {%jaihva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%jihvā%}), belonging
or relating to the tongue, lying on the tongue.
<LEND>

<L>19885<pc>0351-b<k1>jEhvAkAta<k2>jEhvAkAta
{%Jaihvākāta, as, ī, am,%}¦ an adj. derived fr. {%jihvā-%}
{%kātya.%}
<LEND>

<L>19886<pc>0351-b<k1>jEhvya<k2>jEhvya
{%Jaihvya, am,%}¦ n. the pleasure of taste (derived
from the tongue), pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>19887<pc>0351-b<k1>jogU<k2>jogU
{#jogU#}¦ {%jogū, ūs, ūs, u%} (fr. rt. {%gu%}), Ved. praising.
<LEND>

<L>19888<pc>0351-b<k1>joNga<k2>joNga
{#joNga#}¦ {%joṅga%} or {%joṅgaka, am,%} n. aloe wood,
Agallochum.
<LEND>

<L>19889<pc>0351-b<k1>joNgawa<k2>joNgawa
{#joNgawa#}¦ {%joṅgaṭa, as,%} m. longing, earnest
wish, eager desire, the longing of a pregnant woman.
<LEND>

<L>19890<pc>0351-b<k1>jowiNga<k2>jowiNga
{#jowiNga#}¦ {%joṭiṅga, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva;
a devotee, an ascetic who subjects himself to the
severest penances; the sacrificial cord (?).
<LEND>

<L>19891<pc>0351-b<k1>joqa<k2>joqa
{#joqa#}¦ {%joḍa,%} the chin; [cf. {%jahi-joḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19892<pc>0351-b<k1>jonarAja<k2>jonarAja
{#jonarAja#}¦ {%jona-rāja, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Rāja-taraṅgiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>19893<pc>0351-b<k1>jonnAlA<k2>jonnAlA
{#jonnAlA#}¦ {%jonnālā,%} f. {%= yavanāla,%} the plant
Andropogon Saccharatus; also {%jontālā.%}
<LEND>

<L>19894<pc>0351-b<k1>jola<k2>jola
{#jola#}¦ {%jola,%} N. of a mixed caste.
<LEND>

<L>19895<pc>0351-b<k1>joza<k2>joza
{#joza#}¦ {%joṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%juṣ%}), satisfac-
tion, approval, pleasure, enjoyment, felicity, happiness;
({%joṣam ā,%} Ved. to one's satisfaction, abundantly;
{%anu joṣam,%} according to one's pleasure, willingly);
({%am%}), ind. according to one's wish or liking, happily,
with ease, without effort; well; silently; {%joṣam%}
{%ās,%} to remain quiet or silent; {%joṣam āssva,%} be
thou quiet, keep thou silent; [cf. {%a-joṣa.%}] {%—Joṣa-%}
{%vāka, as,%} m., Ved. unintelligible words, chattering
nonsense; (Sāy.) words which ought to please but
do not.
<LEND>

<L>19896<pc>0351-b<k1>jozaRa<k2>jozaRa
{%Joṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. liking; satisfaction, approval;
choosing; ({%ā%}), f. the expression of satisfaction by the
word {%juṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>19897<pc>0351-b<k1>jozayitavya<k2>jozayitavya
{%Joṣayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made dear or
agreeable, to be reflected upon or thought about,
obscure, unintelligible (in words).
<LEND>

<L>19898<pc>0351-b<k1>jozayitf<k2>jozayitf
{%Joṣayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ or {%joṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}
loving, cherishing, fostering, taking care of; (Sāy.)
serving.
<LEND>

<L>19899<pc>0351-b<k1>jozas<k2>jozas
{%Joṣas%}¦ in {%vi-joṣas, sa-joṣas,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19900<pc>0351-b<k1>jozya<k2>jozya
{%Joṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. delightful, agreeable, wel-
come, satisfactory.
<LEND>

<L>19901<pc>0351-b<k1>jozA<k2>jozA
{#jozA#}¦ {%joṣā,%} f. {%= yoṣā,%} a woman.
<LEND>
[Page0351-c+ 74]

<L>19902<pc>0351-c<k1>jozikA<k2>jozikA
{#jozikA#}¦ {%joṣikā,%} f. {%= jālikā,%} a cluster of
young buds, a bud, a germ.
<LEND>

<L>19903<pc>0351-c<k1>jozit<k2>jozit
{#jozit#}¦ {%joṣit%} or {%joṣitā,%} f. {%= yoṣit,%} a
woman.
<LEND>

<L>19904<pc>0351-c<k1>johUtra<k2>johUtra
{#johUtra#}¦ {%johūtra, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%hve%}), Ved.
making a loud noise, neighing; calling out, challeng-
ing to battle, neighing (as a horse).
<LEND>

<L>19905<pc>0351-c<k1>jOmara<k2>jOmara
{#jOmara#}¦ {%jaumara, am,%} n., scil. {%vyā-karaṇa,%}
the grammar composed by Jumara.
<LEND>

<L>19906<pc>0351-c<k1>jOlAyanaBakta<k2>jOlAyanaBakta
{#jOlAyanaBakta#}¦ {%jaulāyana-bhakta, am,%} n. the
district inhabited by the Jaulāyanas.
<LEND>

<L>19907<pc>0351-c<k1>jOhotyAdika<k2>jOhotyAdika
{#jOhotyAdika#}¦ {%jauhotyādika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%juhoty-ādi%}), belonging to the class of roots begin-
ning with {%hu,%} i. e. to the third class.
<LEND>

<L>19908<pc>0351-c<k1>jYa<k2>jYa<h>1
{#jYa#} 1¦. {%jña = jñu = jānu,%} the knee, in {%ūr-%}
{%dhva-jña.%} (For 2. {%jña%} see below.)
<LEND>

<L>19909<pc>0351-c<k1>jYA<k2>jYA<h>1
{#jYA#} 1¦. {%jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%jānāti, jānīte, ja-%}
{%jñau, jajñe, jñāsyati, -te, ajñāsīt, ajñāsta,%}
{%jñātum,%} [irreg. forms, {%jānatha%} for {%jānītha%} Mahā-
bh. II. 842, {%jānata%} for {%jānīta%} II. 2397, {%jijāhi%} for
{%jājñāhi = jānīhi,%} know thou, XIII. 4495, {%abhy-anu-%}
{%jānithās%} for {%abhy-anv-ajānīthās%} XIV. 1641, {%jāna-%}
{%māna%} pres. part.], to know, have knowledge, become
acquainted with; to perceive, apprehend, understand,
experience; to recognise; to ascertain, investigate;
to know as, know or perceive that, regard or consider
as (with acc. of the object and predicate, e. g. {%tasya%}
{%māṃ tanayāṃ jānīta,%} know me to be his daughter);
to be conversant or familiar with; to visit as a friend
(Ved.); to acknowledge, approve, allow, permit; to
recognise as one's own, take possession of; to act, en-
gage in (with gen. of the instrument, e. g. {%sarpiṣo%} for
{%sarpiṣā jānīte,%} he engages in sacrifice with clarified
butter): Caus. {%jñāpayati%} or {%jñapayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%ajijñapat,%} to make known, teach, make acquainted
with, inform, announce, notify; to give information;
A. to request, ask: Desid. A. {%jijñāsate%} (ep. also P.),
to wish to know, &c.; to investigate, examine, wish
to learn; to conjecture, suppose: Desid. of Caus.
{%jijñāpayiṣati%} and {%jijñapayiṣati%} and {%jñīpsati,%} to
wish to make known or inform: Pass. of Desid. of
Caus. {%jñīpsyate,%} to be wished or intended to be in-
formed: Intens. {%jājñāyate, jājñāti, jājñeti;%} [cf.
Lat. <nsi>gna, gno,</nsi> in <nsi>gnârus, (g)nosco, cognosco,</nsi>
<nsi>ignoro;</nsi> perhaps <nsi>gloria</nsi> for <nsi>gnoria:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">γνω</lang> in
<lang n="greek">γνῶθι, ἔγνων, γνῶσις; (γ)νοέω, (γ)νοῦς; γιγνώ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">σκω:</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>chna, chnâta, chnât:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>know:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>kaun:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>chan:</nsi> Germ. <nsi>kann,</nsi>
<nsi>kenne:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>zinnaù,</nsi> ‘I know;’ <nsi>zinne, sazinne:</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>najû:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>gnia,</nsi> ‘knowledge;’ <nsi>gnic; gno,</nsi>
‘ingenious;’ <nsi>gnas,</nsi> ‘custom, use.’]
<LEND>

<L>19910<pc>0351-c<k1>jYa<k2>jYa<h>2
2. {%jña, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what knows, a knower,
knowing, familiar with (often in comp., e. g. {%dharma-%}
{%jña,%} familiar with the law; {%sarva-jña,%} knowing
everything); intelligent, wise; ({%as%}), m. a wise and
learned man, especially one possessed of sacred learn-
ing or religious knowledge; the sentient soul; Budha
who was first of the lunar line and regent of the planet
Mercury; the planet Mars or its regent; an epithet
of Brahmā; [cf. Lat. <nsi>beni-gnus, mali-gnus.</nsi>] {%—Jña-%}
{%tā,%} f. (at the end of a comp.) knowledge of, familiarity
with; intelligence. {%—Jñammanya, as, ā, am,%} think-
ing one's self wise.
<LEND>

<L>19911<pc>0351-c<k1>jYaka<k2>jYaka
{%Jñaka, as, akā%}¦ or {%ikā,%} m. f. a diminutive fr. 2. {%jña.%}
<LEND>

<L>19912<pc>0351-c<k1>jYapita<k2>jYapita
{%Jñapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made known, informed,
taught, expounded.
<LEND>

<L>19913<pc>0351-c<k1>jYapta<k2>jYapta
{%Jñapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made known, {%= jñapita.%}
<LEND>

<L>19914<pc>0351-c<k1>jYapti<k2>jYapti
{%Jñapti, is,%}¦ f. understanding, apprehension, the
exercise of the intellectual faculty; promulgating,
making known.
<LEND>

<L>19915<pc>0351-c<k1>jYA<k2>jYA<h>2
2. {%jñā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) know-
ing, familiar with [cf. {%ṛta-jñā, pada-jñā,%} and 2.
{%jña%}]; ({%ā%}), f. in epic poetry sometimes a shortened
form of {%ā-jñā,%} the initial vowel of the latter being
[Page0352-a+ 81]
irregularly elided after a preceding final {%e%} and {%o%} (e. g.
{%te'jñayā,%} by thy order, Mahā-bh. 1. 3168).
<LEND>

<L>19916<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAta<k2>jYAta
{%Jñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ known, ascertained, compre-
hended, perceived, understood; {%āṃ jñātam,%} Ah!
I know (lit. it is known). {%—Jñāta-nandana, as,%}
m. an epithet of Vīra, the twenty-fourth Arhat of the
present Ava-sarpiṇī. {%—Jñāta-mātre,%} ind. on its being
ascertained merely. {%—Jñāta-siddhānta, as,%} m. a
man completely versed in any science or Śāstra.
{%—Jñātādharma-kathā%} ({%˚ta-adh˚%} or {%˚tā-dha˚ ?%}),
f. title of one of the twelve sacred books of the
Jainas. {%—Jñātānvaya (˚ta-an˚), as,%} m. ‘of known
lineage,’ a name of Vardhamāna, the last Jina or
Jaina pontiff.
<LEND>

<L>19917<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAtaka<k2>jYAtaka
{%Jñātaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ known, &c. See {%jñāta.%}
<LEND>

<L>19918<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAtala<k2>jYAtala
{%Jñātala, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>19919<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAtaleya<k2>jYAtaleya
{%Jñātaleya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from the last.
<LEND>

<L>19920<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAtavya<k2>jYAtavya
{%Jñātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be known or understood,
to be investigated or inquired after; perceptible, con-
ceivable; to be considered as.
<LEND>

<L>19921<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAti<k2>jYAti
{%Jñāti, is,%}¦ m. a paternal relation, a kinsman in ge-
neral, a father, a brother; a distant kinsman, one
who does not participate in the oblations offered to de-
ceased ancestors; ({%is%}), f., N. of a woman; (according
to the Schol. {%jñāti%} is a paternal, and {%sam-bandhin%} a
maternal relation; the original meaning of {%jñāti%} may
be ‘intimately acquainted;’ cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">γνωτός, γνωτή;</lang>
Goth. <nsi>knôdi.</nsi>) {%—Jñāti-karman, a,%} n. or {%jñāti-%}
{%kārya, am,%} n. the act or duty of a kinsman. {%—Jñāti-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. relationship, consanguinity. {%—Jñāti-%}
{%dravya-vinākṛta, as, ā, am,%} deprived of relations
and wealth. {%—Jñāti-putra, as,%} m. the son of a
relative; an epithet of Pūrṇa. {%—Jñāti-bhāva, as,%}
m. the condition of a kinsman, relationship, kin.
{%—Jñāti-bheda, as,%} m. dissension among relatives.
{%—Jñāti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has near rela-
tions. {%—Jñāti-mukha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the
appearance or character of a relative. {%—Jñāti-vid, t,%}
{%t, t,%} one who has or makes near relations.
<LEND>

<L>19922<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAtf<k2>jYAtf
{%Jñātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ knowing, wise, intelligent,
a knower; ({%tā%}), m. an acquaintance; a bail, a
surety; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">γνωστήρ.</lang>] {%—Jñātṛ-tva, am,%} n. or
{%jñātṛ-tā,%} f. knowledge, information.
<LEND>

<L>19923<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAteya<k2>jYAteya
{%Jñāteya, am,%}¦ n. relationship, affinity.
<LEND>

<L>19924<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAtra<k2>jYAtra
{%Jñātra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the faculty of perception,
intelligence, knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>19925<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAtvA<k2>jYAtvA
{%Jñātvā,%}¦ ind. having known, having ascertained, &c.
<LEND>

<L>19926<pc>0352-a<k1>jYAna<k2>jYAna
{%Jñāna, am,%}¦ n. knowing, understanding, becoming
acquainted with, knowledge; sacred or religious
knowledge, especially that which is derived from
meditation on the higher truths of religion and
philosophy and which teaches man his own nature
and how he may be reunited to the supreme spirit;
knowledge about anything, cognizance, consciousness
(e. g. {%tasya jñānāt,%} with his knowledge; {%a-jñānāt%}
{%tasya,%} without his knowledge or cognizance; {%jñā-%}
{%nād a-jñānād vā,%}  knowingly or ignorantly; {%vigata-%}
{%jñāna,%} one who has lost consciousness); conscience;
organ of intelligence, sense. {%—Jñāna-kanda, as,%} m.,
N. of a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Jñāna-kāṇḍa, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. that inner or esoteric portion of the Veda
which relates to true spiritual knowledge or the
knowledge of the supreme spirit as distinguished
from the knowledge of ceremonies; [cf. {%karma-%}
{%kāṇḍa.%}] {%—Jñāna-kīrtti, is,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
preceptor. {%—Jñāna-ketu, us,%} m. a mark of intelli-
gence; ({%us, us, u%}), furnished with marks of in-
telligence. {%—Jñānaketu-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a
divine being. {%—Jñāna-khaṇḍa,%} title of a part of the
Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Jñāna-gamya, as, ā, am,%} attainable
by the understanding. {%—Jñāna-garbha, as,%} m. ‘filled
with knowledge,’ N. of a scholar; also of a Bodhi-
sattva. {%—Jñāna-cakṣus, us,%} n. the eye of intelligence,
inner eye, mind's eye, intellectual vision. {%—Jñāna-%}
{%tattva, am,%} n. true knowledge, knowledge of God.
{%—Jñāna-tapas, as,%} n. penance consisting in the cul-
tivation of true knowledge. {%—Jñāna-tas,%} ind. know-
ingly, intuitively, designedly; {%jñānato'jñānato vā,%}
knowingly or unknowingly. {%—Jñāna-da, as,%} m. an
imparter of knowledge. {%—Jñāna-datta, as,%} m. ‘given
by knowledge,’ N. of a scholar. {%—Jñāna-darpaṇa, %}
[Page0352-b+ 81]
{%as,%} m. ‘mirror of true knowledge,’ a N. of Mañju-
śrī. {%—Jñāna-dīpa, as,%} m. the lamp of knowledge,
knowledge. {%—Jñāna-durbala, as, ā, am,%} de-
ficient in knowledge, ignorant. {%—Jñāna-niścaya,%}
{%as,%} m. soundness of knowledge, certainty, ascertain-
ment. {%—Jñāna-niṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} engaged in
cultivating true knowledge. {%—Jñānapata, as, ī, am,%}
an adj. derived from the next. {%—Jñāna-pati, is,%} m.
the lord of knowledge. {%—Jñāna-para, as, ā, am,%}
versed in spiritual wisdom. {%—Jñāna-pāvana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} purifying knowledge, refining the understanding;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Jñāna-pūrva, as, ā, am,%}
preceded by knowledge or wisdom. {%—Jñāna-pra-%}
{%kāśa, as,%} m. title of a poem by Jagajjīvana-dāsa.
{%—Jñāna-pradīpa, as,%} m. title of the second book
of the Yoga-sāra-saṅgraha. {%—Jñāna-prabha, as,%} m.,
N. of a man; also of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Jñāna-pra-%}
{%vāda, am,%} n. title of one of the fourteen Pūrvas or
older writings of the Jainas. {%—Jñāna-prasthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘system or method of knowledge,’ title of a
Buddhist work. {%—Jñāna-bodhinī,%} f. ‘awakening
knowledge,’ title of a philosophical treatise composed
by Śaṅkara. {%—Jñāna-bhāskara, as,%} m. ‘sun of
knowledge,’ title of a medical compilation. {%—Jñāna-%}
{%maṇḍapa, as, am,%} m. n. ‘temple of knowledge,’ N.
of a temple. {%—Jñāna-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting
of knowledge, containing knowledge. {%—Jñāna-%}
{%muktāvalī,%} f. ‘necklace of knowledge,’ title of an
astronomical work. {%—Jñāna-mudra, as, ā, am,%}
having the impress of wisdom, wise. {%—Jñāna-mūla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} founded on spiritual knowledge. {%—Jñāna-%}
{%meru, us,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Jñāna-ratnāvalī,%} f.
title of a book. {%—Jñāna-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of know-
ledge,’ N. of the author of the Siddhānta-sundara.
{%—Jñānarṣi-bhāskarācārya (˚na-ṛṣ˚, ˚ra-āc˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Jñāna-lakṣaṇa, am, ā,%}
n. f. indication, sign, means of knowing or inferring;
(in logic) sign or proof or characteristic of knowledge;
subsequent derived from antecedent knowledge.
{%—Jñāna-vajra, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist author.
{%—Jñāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} endowed with knowledge
or science, knowing, familiar with, intelligent, wise,
learned, having spiritual knowledge; ({%ān%}), m., N. of
a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Jñāna-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a
poet. {%—Jñāna-vāpī,%} f. ‘pool of divine knowledge,’
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Jñāna-vijñāna, am,%} n. sacred and
miscellaneous knowledge; the Vedas with the sup-
plementary branches of knowledge, medicine, arms,
&c. {%—Jñāna-vibhūti-garbha, as,%} m. ‘filled with
superhuman knowledge,’ N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Jñāna-vilāsa-kāvya, am,%} n. title of a poem.
{%—Jñāna-śakti, is,%} f. capacity of knowing. {%—Jñā-%}
{%na-śāstra, am,%} n. ‘the science of knowing
the future,’ a manual of fortune-telling. {%—Jñāna-%}
{%śreṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} pre-eminent in wisdom. {%—Jñā-%}
{%na-hastika, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Jñānākara%}
{%(˚na-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘mine of knowledge,’ N. of a
son of Buddha Mahābhijñājñānābhibhū; N. of a
Buddha. {%—Jñānātman (˚na-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} all-wise.
{%—Jñānānanda (˚na-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘joy of know-
ledge,’ N. of an author. {%—Jñānānutpāda (˚na-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. non-production of knowledge, folly, ignorance.
{%—Jñānāmṛta (˚na-am˚), am,%} n. ‘nectar of
knowledge,’ title of a grammar. {%—Jñānārṇava (˚na-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m. ‘ocean of knowledge,’ title of a manual
of medicine composed by Yama-rāja; title of a
prayer-book. {%—Jñānāvaraṇīya (˚na-āv˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} to be covered or obstructed by knowledge, (an
act which is considered) to be impeded by knowledge;
also written {%jñānavaraṇīya%}. {%—Jñānāvalokālaṅkā-%}
{%ra (˚na-avaloka-al˚), as,%} m. title of a Buddhist work.
{%—Jñānāvasthita (˚na-av˚), as, ā, am,%} engaged in
cultivating wisdom. {%—Jñānendra-sarasvatī (˚na-%}
{%in˚),%} m., N. of a scholiast on the Siddhānta-kaumudī.
{%—Jñānendriya (˚na-in˚), am,%} n. an organ of per-
ception or sensation, of which there are five, viz.
the skin, tongue, eye, ear, and nose; see {%indriya.%}
{%—Jñānoda-tīrtha (˚na-ud˚), am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha; ‘the Tīrtha of the waters of knowledge.’
{%—Jñānolkā (˚na-ul˚),%} f. ‘the meteor of know-
ledge,’ N. of a Samādhi.
<LEND>
[Page0352-c+ 79]

<L>19927<pc>0352-c<k1>jYAnika<k2>jYAnika
{%Jñānika, as, ā, am,%}¦ at the end of comp. {%= jñāna.%}
<LEND>

<L>19928<pc>0352-c<k1>jYAnin<k2>jYAnin
{%Jñānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ endowed with knowledge or
intelligence, intelligent, wise, a knower; ({%ī%}), f. an
astrologer, a fortune-teller, a man prescient of future
events; a sage, one possessing religious wisdom.
{%—Jñāni-tva, am,%} n. prescience, fortune-telling.
<LEND>

<L>19929<pc>0352-c<k1>jYAnIya<k2>jYAnIya
{%Jñānīya,%}¦ nom. P. {%jñānīyati, -yitum,%} to wish for
knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>19930<pc>0352-c<k1>jYApaka<k2>jYApaka
{%Jñāpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ making or causing to know,
teaching, designing, informing; ({%as%}), m. a teacher,
an instructor; a commander, a master; a master of
requests, an officer of the court of a Hindū prince;
({%am%}), n. a significant expression or one which gives
some particular information, a precept, a rule, a name
given to those rules of Pāṇini which imply or indi-
cate some other grammatical laws than those which
would follow from the mere words of the Jñāpaka
rules themselves. {%—Jñāpaka-samuccaya, as,%} m.
a work by Puruṣottama-deva giving a collection of
the Jñāpaka rules contained in Pāṇini's grammar.
<LEND>

<L>19931<pc>0352-c<k1>jYApana<k2>jYApana
{%Jñāpana, am,%}¦ n. making known, announcing,
apprizing, informing, teaching, notification.
<LEND>

<L>19932<pc>0352-c<k1>jYApanIya<k2>jYApanIya
{%Jñāpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made known or
announced.
<LEND>

<L>19933<pc>0352-c<k1>jYApita<k2>jYApita
{%Jñāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made known, informed.
<LEND>

<L>19934<pc>0352-c<k1>jYApti<k2>jYApti
{%Jñāpti, is,%}¦ f. making known, apprizing, informing.
<LEND>

<L>19935<pc>0352-c<k1>jYApya<k2>jYApya
{%Jñāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made known or in-
formed, to be told.
<LEND>

<L>19936<pc>0352-c<k1>jYAs<k2>jYAs
{%Jñās,%}¦ m., Ved. a near relative; [cf. {%jñāti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>19937<pc>0352-c<k1>jYIpsyamAna<k2>jYIpsyamAna
{%Jñīpsyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being intended to be
informed.
<LEND>

<L>19938<pc>0352-c<k1>jYeya<k2>jYeya
{%Jñeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ cognizable, to be ascertained or
investigated, to be learned or understood, to be per-
ceived or inquired about; to be regarded as. {%—Jñeya-%}
{%jña, as, ā, am,%} understanding what is to be under-
stood; the mind. {%—Jñeya-tā,%} f. or {%jñeya-tva, am,%}
n. perceptibility, intelligibleness.
<LEND>

<L>19939<pc>0352-c<k1>jYu<k2>jYu
{#jYu#}¦ {%jñu = jānu,%} the knee, in {%abhi-jñu, ūr-%}
{%dhva-jñu,%} &c. {%—Jñu-bādh, -bhāt, t, t,%} Ved. bending
the knees; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πρόχνυ.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>19940<pc>0352-c<k1>jman<k2>jman
{#jman#}¦ {%jman%} (fr. {%jam = gam%}), only occurring
in the Ved. loc. {%jman,%} in (his) course or way;
(Sāy.) in the sky; on the earth; [cf. {%uru-jman%} and
{%pṛthu-jman.%}] {%—Jma-yā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. going
on or following a course; (Sāy.) on the earth (as if
{%jmayā%}).
<LEND>

<L>19941<pc>0352-c<k1>jmAyat<k2>jmAyat
{%Jmāyat, an, antī, at%}¦ (pres. part. of a nom. fr.
{%jman%}), Ved. making a way or course; (Sāy.) going
on or reaching the earth.
<LEND>

<L>19942<pc>0352-c<k1>jyA<k2>jyA<h>1
{#jyA#} 1¦. {%jyā,%} cl. 9. P., 4. A. {%jināti, jīyate,%}
{%jijyau, jijye, jyāsyati, -te, ajyāsīt, jyā-%}
{%tum,%} to overpower, oppress, to deprive of property,
&c., (in the Veda often connected with rt. {%han,%} e. g.
{%jīyate hanti,%} ‘he oppresses and kills;’ and in the
Brāhmaṇas applied to the oppressions of the Brāhmans
and Vaiśyas by the Kṣatriyas); (cl. 4. A.) to be
oppressed, treated badly, deprived of property, &c.;
(cl. 9. P.) to become old: Caus. {%jyāpayati,%} see
{%jyāpaya%} below: Desid. P. {%jijyāsati,%} to wish to over-
power or oppress: Intens. {%jejīyate, jājyāti;%} [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">βιάω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>19943<pc>0352-c<k1>jIta<k2>jIta
{%Jīta%}¦ or {%jīna, as, ā, am,%} oppressed, overpowered;
become old. See also under {%jīta,%} p. 348, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>19944<pc>0352-c<k1>jya<k2>jya
{%Jya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) oppressing.
<LEND>

<L>19945<pc>0352-c<k1>jyA<k2>jyA<h>2
2. {%jyā,%}¦ f. overpowering force or strength (<lang n="greek">βία,</lang> cf.
{%parama-jyā%}); excessive demand, importunity.
<LEND>

<L>19946<pc>0352-c<k1>jyAna<k2>jyAna
{%Jyāna, am,%}¦ n., Ved. oppression, tyrannizing over.
<LEND>

<L>19947<pc>0352-c<k1>jyAni<k2>jyAni
{%Jyāni, is,%}¦ f. oppression; deprivation, loss; decay,
infirmity, old age; quitting, abandoning; a river,
a stream.
<LEND>

<L>19948<pc>0352-c<k1>jyApaya<k2>jyApaya
{%Jyāpaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%jyāpayati, -yitum,%} to make
old, to call a person old, (supposed to be a nom. fr.
{%jya%} substituted for {%vṛddha.%})
<LEND>

<L>19949<pc>0352-c<k1>jyAyas<k2>jyAyas
{%Jyāyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (considered by grammarians to
be a compar. of {%pra-śasya%} and {%vṛddha,%} for which
{%jya%} is substituted), superior, more excellent, greater,
larger, stronger; elder, senior, elder born (opposed
to {%kanīyas%} and {%aṇīyas%}); a master; most excellent;
(in law) one who is of age and answerable for his
[Page0353-a+ 80]
own conduct. {%—Jyāyas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having
or acknowledging a senior or superior.
<LEND>

<L>19950<pc>0353-a<k1>jyAyasa<k2>jyAyasa
{%Jyāyasa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. greater in number (op-
posed to {%kānīyasa%}).
<LEND>

<L>19951<pc>0353-a<k1>jyAyizWa<k2>jyAyizWa
{%Jyāyiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (irreg. superl.), the most
excellent; noblest, first, best.
<LEND>

<L>19952<pc>0353-a<k1>jyeya<k2>jyeya
{%Jyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be oppressed, to be deprived
of (property &c.); the most excellent, first, best.
<LEND>

<L>19953<pc>0353-a<k1>jyezWa<k2>jyezWa
{%Jyeṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ the most excellent, noblest,
pre-eminent; first, chief; best, greatest; eldest, very
old, elder, senior, elder born; an elder brother; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a month, for {%jyaiṣṭha,%} q. v.; N. of a
man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the sixteenth or (according to
more modern reckoning) eighteenth lunar mansion
sacred to Indra; the eighth year of a Jupiter
cycle of twelve years; the middle finger; a small
house-lizard; an epithet of the Gaṅgā; a kind of
heroine; misfortune personified as a goddess and the
elder sister of Lakṣmī; ({%ī%}), f. a small house-lizard;
({%am%}), n. the most excellent, the first, the head; tin;
({%am%}), ind. most, extremely; [cf. Hib. <nsi>gast,</nsi> ‘an old
woman;’ <nsi>giostaire,</nsi> ‘an active old man;’ <nsi>giostai-</nsi>
<nsi>reas,</nsi> ‘old age.’] {%—Jyeṣṭha-ghnī,%} f., Ved. {%= jye-%}
{%ṣṭhā,%} the sixteenth lunar mansion. {%—Jyeṣṭha-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. best of all; first of all; oldest
of all. {%—Jyeṣṭha-tara, as, ā, am,%} elder, an elder
one. {%—Jyeṣṭha-tas,%} ind., Ved. according to seniority,
(reckoning) from the eldest. {%—Jyeṣṭha-tā,%} f. or
{%jyeṣṭha-tva, am,%} n. superiority; primogeniture,
seniority. {%—Jyeṣṭha-tāta, as,%} m. a father's elder
brother. {%—Jyeṣṭha-tāti, is,%} f., Ved. superiority;
superior. {%—Jyeṣṭha-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Jyeṣṭha-puṣkara, am,%} n., N. of a renowned
place of pilgrimage. {%—Jyeṣṭha-balā,%} f., N. of a
plant, a kind of Balā, {%= mahā-balā, saha-devī.%}
{%—Jyeṣṭha-bhāryā,%} f. an elder brother's wife, the
elder, senior or chief wife. {%—Jyeṣṭha-rāj, ṭ,%} m., Ved.
a sovereign. {%—Jyeṣṭha-lalitā,%} f. a particular vow to
be observed in the month Jyeṣṭha (Jyaiṣṭha).
{%—Jyeṣṭha-varṇa, as,%} m. one of the first caste, a
Brāhman. {%—Jyeṣṭha-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} behaving like
the first-born or eldest brother; ({%is%}), f. the duties of
seniority. {%—Jyeṣṭha-śvaśrū, ūs,%} f. a wife's elder
sister. {%—Jyeṣṭha-sāman, a,%} n., N. of a Sāman;
({%ā, ā, a%}), a chanter of the Jyeṣṭha-Sāman. {%—Jye-%}
{%ṣṭhasāmika, as, ā, am,%} an adj. derived from the
last. {%—Jyeṣṭha-stoma, as,%} m., N. of an Ekāha
ceremony. {%—Jyeṣṭha-sthāna, am,%} n., N. of a place
of pilgrimage. {%—Jyeṣṭhāṃśa (˚ṭha-aṃ˚), as,%} m.
the eldest brother's share; the right of primogeniture
or the right of the eldest son to a larger portion of
the patrimonial property than his brothers, — a right
formerly recognized but now obsolete; the best share.
{%—Jyeṣṭhā-mūla%} or {%jyeṣṭhā-mūlīya, as,%} m. the
month Jyaiṣṭha. {%—Jyeṣṭhāmbu (˚ṭha-am˚), us,%}
m. the scum of boiled rice or water in which grain
has been washed. {%—Jyeṣṭhāśrama (˚ṭha-āś˚), as,%}
m. the most excellent order or period in the religious
life of a Brāhman, viz. that of a householder; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), being in that period. {%—Jyeṣṭhāśramin, ī,%}
m. a Brāhman in the order of a householder. {%—Jye-%}
{%ṣṭheśvara (˚ṭha-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga in
Vārāṇasī.
<LEND>

<L>19954<pc>0353-a<k1>jyezWilA<k2>jyezWilA
{%Jyeṣṭhilā,%}¦ f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>19955<pc>0353-a<k1>jyEzWa<k2>jyEzWa
{%Jyaiṣṭha, as,%}¦ m., N. of a month (May — June),
the month in which the full moon stands in the
constellation Jyeṣṭhā; ({%ī%}), f. the full moon in the
month Jyaiṣṭha; a small house-lizard. {%—Jyaiṣṭha-%}
{%sāman,%} a wrong form for {%jyeṣṭha-sāman,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19956<pc>0353-a<k1>jyEzWineya<k2>jyEzWineya
{%Jyaiṣṭhineya, as, ī, am,%}¦ born from the elder or
principal wife; {%jyaiṣṭhineyo jyeṣṭhaḥ,%} the eldest
son and at the same time the son of the father's
first wife.
<LEND>

<L>19957<pc>0353-a<k1>jyEzWya<k2>jyEzWya
{%Jyaiṣṭhya, am,%}¦ n. pre-eminence, sovereignty; pre-
cedence, priority of birth, primogeniture, seniority.
<LEND>

<L>19958<pc>0353-a<k1>jyA<k2>jyA<h>3
{#jyA#} 3¦. {%jyā,%} f. (perhaps fr. rt. 1. {%jyā%}), the
string of a bow, a bow-string; the chord of an arc, a
sine in geometry; [cf. {%adhi-jya, uj-jya,%} &c.; cf.
also Gr. <lang n="greek">βιός.</lang>] {%—Jyā-kāra, as,%} m., Ved. one who
makes bow-strings. {%—Jyā-ghoṣa, as,%} m. the twang
[Page0353-b+ 79]
of a bow. {%—Jyā-pāśa, as,%} m. a bow-string. {%—Jyā-%}
{%piṇḍa%} or {%jyā-piṇḍaka,%} a sine expressed in figures.
{%—Jyā-magha, as,%} m., N. of the father of Vi-
darbha. {%—Jyārdha (jyā-ar˚), as,%} m. the sine of an
arc. {%—Jyārdha-piṇḍa,%} a sine expressed in figures.
{%—Jyā-vāja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the elasticity
of a bow-string; (Sāy.) a stout or strong bow (as if
a substantive). {%—Jyā-vāṇeya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
warrior-tribe; ({%as%}), m. a prince of this tribe. {%—Jyā-%}
{%hroḍa, as,%} m. a peculiar kind of bow; ({%au%}), m.
du., N. of a Sāman. {%—Jyotpatti (jyā-ut˚), is,%} f.
‘the calculation of the length of a chord,’ derivation
of (semi)-chords.
<LEND>

<L>19959<pc>0353-b<k1>jyakA<k2>jyakA
{%Jyakā,%}¦ f. a bow-string; the chord of an arc in
geometry.
<LEND>

<L>19960<pc>0353-b<k1>jyAkA<k2>jyAkA
{%Jyākā,%}¦ f., Ved. a bow-string.
<LEND>

<L>19961<pc>0353-b<k1>jyAya<k2>jyAya
{%Jyāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%jyāyate,%} to represent a bow-
string.
<LEND>

<L>19962<pc>0353-b<k1>jyA<k2>jyA<h>4
{#jyA#} 4¦. {%jyā,%} f. the earth; a mother.
<LEND>

<L>19963<pc>0353-b<k1>jyu<k2>jyu
{#jyu#}¦ {%jyu,%} cl. 1. A. {%jyavate,%} &c., to go,
approach.
<LEND>

<L>19964<pc>0353-b<k1>jyut<k2>jyut
{#jyut#}¦ {%jyut%} (for {%dyut%}), cl. 1. A. P. {%jyotate,%}
{%-ti,%} to shine: Caus. P. {%jyotayati, -yitum,%}
to shine upon, illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>19965<pc>0353-b<k1>jyuti<k2>jyuti
{%Jyuti, is,%}¦ f. (for {%dyuti%}), light. {%—Jyuti-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} shining, full of light.
<LEND>

<L>19966<pc>0353-b<k1>jyotA<k2>jyotA
{%Jyotā,%}¦ f., Ved. ‘the brilliant or shining one,’ one
of the mystical names of the cow.
<LEND>

<L>19967<pc>0353-b<k1>jyotiza<k2>jyotiza
{%Jyotiṣa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%jyotis%}), relating to the
heavenly bodies, astronomical, astrological; ({%as%}), m.
an astronomer, astrologer; N. of certain magical
formularies for exorcising the evil spirits supposed to
possess weapons; ({%am%}), n. astronomy, astrology, the
science of the course of the heavenly bodies and divi-
sions of time resting thereon; N. of one of the six
Vedāṅgas or of a short tract which gives only
such a knowledge of the heavenly bodies as was
required for fixing the days and hours of the Vedic
sacrifices; ({%ī%}), f. a star, a planet, an asterism. {%—Jyo-%}
{%tiṣa-tattva, am,%} n. or {%jyotiṣa-ratnamālā,%} f., N.
of two works on astronomy. {%—Jyotiṣa-vidyā,%} f. astro-
nomical science. {%—Jyotiṣa-saṅgraha, as,%} m. the
whole science of astronomy. {%—Jyotiṣī-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. shining, brilliant; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a par-
ticular sun or form of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>19968<pc>0353-b<k1>jyotizika<k2>jyotizika
{%Jyotiṣika,%}¦ a wrong form for {%jyautiṣika,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19969<pc>0353-b<k1>jyotizka<k2>jyotizka
{%Jyotiṣka, as,%}¦ m. a luminary, a heavenly body;
the luminaries regarded by the Jainas as a class of deities
arranged under five heads, viz. sun, moon, the planets,
fixed stars, and lunar mansions; the plant Premna
Spinosa; the plant Plumbago Zeylanica; the seed of
Trigonella Fœnum Græcum; N. of a Nāga; N. of
a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= jyotiṣmatī; (am),%}
n., N. of a luminous weapon with which Arjuna
destroyed Tamas or darkness personified (see Mahā-
bh. Droṇa-parva 1325); N. of the shining peak of
the Meru.
<LEND>

<L>19970<pc>0353-b<k1>jyotis<k2>jyotis
{%Jyotis, is,%}¦ n. light in various forms and under various
aspects, as the light of the sun, of dawn, of fire, of
lightning, &c.; brightness or clearness of the sky,
daylight (opposed to Tamas); lightning; light ap-
pearing in three forms, viz. fire on the earth, ether
or air in the intermediate region, and sun in the sky;
a glance of the eye, the faculty of seeing, the eye;
the heavenly bodies, the planets and stars (in this
sense pl., e. g. {%jyotiṣām ayanam,%} the course of the
heavenly bodies); sun and moon (in this sense du.,
e. g. {%jyotiṣor upasargāḥ,%} eclipses &c. of the sun
and moon); the light of heaven, the celestial world;
light as the divine principle of life or as the source
of intelligence, intelligence; light as a type of
freedom, of bliss and of victory, [cf. Lat. <nsi>lux</nsi> and Gr.
<lang n="greek">φάος, φῶς</lang>]; N. of the Jyotiṣṭoma as applied to
the first and sixth days of the Abhi-plava ceremony
which lasts six days; N. of certain formularies containing
the word {%jyotis;%} a kind of metre consisting of thirty-
two short and sixteen long syllables; the science of
the course of the heavenly bodies, &c., see {%jyotiṣa;%}
a mystical term for the letter {%r; (is),%} m. fire; the
[Page0353-c+ 81]
sun; N. of the plant Trigonella Fœnum Græcum;
N. of a son of Manu Svārociṣa; also of Marut;
[cf. {%citra-jyotis%} and {%dakṣiṇā-j˚.%}] {%—Jyotiḥ-śāstra,%}
{%am,%} n. the science of astronomy; a work upon
astronomy. {%—Jyotiḥ-sāman, a,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Jyotiḥ-siddhānta, as,%} m. title of an astronomical
work. {%—Jyotir-agra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. preceded by
light or life. {%—Jyotirathyā,%} f., N. of a river; (a wrong
form for {%jyotī-rathā.%}) {%—Jyotir-anīka, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having a shining face or appearance. {%—Jyotir-%}
{%iṅga%} or {%jyotir-iṅgaṇa, as,%} m. ‘moving light,’ a fire-
fly. {%—Jyotir-īśa%} or {%jyotir-īśvara, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the Dhūrta-samāgama. {%—Jyotir-gaṇa, as,%}
m. the heavenly bodies collectively. {%—Jyotir-jarāyu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. surrounded by a brilliant covering;
(Sāy.) brilliant (among the clouds) like an embryo.
{%—Jyotir-jña, as,%} m. ‘star-knower,’ an astrologer,
one versed in astronomy. {%—Jyotir-jvalanārci-śrī-%}
{%garbha (˚na-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Jyotir-dhāman, ā,%} m., N. of one of the seven
sages in the Manv-antara of Tāmasa. {%—Jyotir-bhāsa-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. a kind of gem. {%—Jyotir-bhāsin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} brilliant with light. {%—Jyotir-maṇḍala, am,%}
n. the stellar sphere. {%—Jyotir-maya, as, ī, am,%} con-
sisting of light, brilliant, abounding with stars, starry.
{%—Jyotirmilin, ī,%} m. (for {%-mālin ?%}), a fire-fly.
{%—Jyotir-mukha, as,%} m., N. of one of the monkey-
followers of Rāma. {%—Jyotir-liṅga, am,%} n., N. of
several Liṅga temples. {%—Jyotir-lekhāvalayin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} studded with rows of stars. {%—Jyotir-loka, as,%}
m. the world of light. {%—Jyotir-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing
the stars, an astronomer; creating light (in this
sense rt. 3. {%vid,%} to find). {%—Jyotir-vidyā,%} f. the
science of astronomy, astrology. {%—Jyotir-vīja, am,%}
n. ‘seed of light,’ a fire-fly. {%—Jyotir-hastā,%} f. an
epithet of Durgā. {%—Jyotiś-cakra, am,%} n. ‘circle of
the luminaries,’ the zodiac. {%—Jyotiṣ-kaṇa, as,%} m.
a spark of fire. {%—Jyotiṣ-kara, as,%} m. ‘light-causer,’
a kind of flower. {%—Jyotiṣ-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} like
flame or fire, blazing, radiant. {%—Jyotiṣkalpa-latā,%}
f. title of an astrological work. {%—Jyotiṣ-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make light, illumine.
{%—Jyotiṣ-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. creating light. {%—Jyotiṣ-%}
{%ṭama, as, ā, am,%} diffusing the most brilliant light.
{%—Jyotiṣṭoma, as,%} m. (fr. {%jyotis-stoma%}), a Soma
ceremony considered as the typical form of a whole
class of ceremonies; it consists of either four or seven
subdivisions, viz. the Agni-ṣṭoma, Ukthya, Ṣoḍa-
śin, Ati-rātra, or in addition to these the Atyagni-
ṣṭoma, Vāja-peya, and Aptor-yāma. {%—Jyotiṣ-ṭva,%}
{%am,%} n. luminousness, illumination; the condition of
light. {%—Jyotiṣ-pakṣa, as, ā, am,%} having brilliant
wings. {%—Jyotiṣ-prabha, as,%} m. ‘brilliant with light,’
N. of a kind of flower; N. of a Buddha; also of a
Bodhi-sattva. {%—Jyotiṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} luminous,
brilliant, shining, belonging to the world of light,
heavenly, celestial; {%jyotiṣmatī triṣṭup,%} a form of
the Triṣṭubh metre, containing three Pādas of twelve
syllables each and one Pāda of eight syllables; ({%ān%}),
m. the sun; N. of one of the seven suns appearing
at the destruction of the world; N. of the third foot
of Brahmā; N. of a son of Manu Svāyambhuva;
also of Manu Sāvarṇa; N. of a king of Kuśa-dvīpa;
also of a son of Priya-vrata; N. of a mountain; ({%tī%}),
f. the night (as illumined by the stars), heart-pea,
Cardiospermum Halicacabum. {%—Jyotis-sāt,%} ind. to
flame, to fire or light; {%jyotissāt kṛ,%} to light,
illumine, set on fire. {%—Jyotī-rata, as,%} m., N. of a
serpent-demon. {%—Jyotī-ratha, as, ā, am,%} whose
chariot is light; (Sāy.) bearing fire or the oblation
like a chariot; ({%as%}), m. the pole-star or in mythology
Dhruva, son of Uttāna-pāda; a kind of serpent;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a river which joins the Śoṇa or Sone.
{%—Jyotī-rasa, as,%} m. a kind of gem. {%—Jyotī-rūpa-%}
{%svayambhū, ūs,%} m. Svayambhū (Brahmā) in the
form of light. {%—Jyotī-rūpeśvara (˚pa-īś˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a Liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>19971<pc>0353-c<k1>jyotsnA<k2>jyotsnA
{%Jyotsnā,%}¦ f. a moonlight night; moonlight; light,
splendor in general; N. of one of the bodies of
Brahmā; N. of one of the sixteen Kalās of the
moon; an epithet of Durgā; N. of two plants, {%= %}
[Page0354-a+ 75]
{%jyotsnī%} and {%ghoṣātakī%}. {%—Jyotsnā-kālī,%} f., N. of a
daughter of the moon and wife of Puṣkara who was
a son of Varuṇa. {%—Jyotsnā-priya, as,%} m. ‘a friend of
the moonlight,’ the bird Chakora or Greek partridge.
{%—Jyotsnā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} illuminated by the moon,
shining, brilliant. {%—Jyotsnā-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the
tree or tripod of a lamp, a lamp-stand, candlestick.
{%—Jyotsneśa (˚nā-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord or husband of
the moonlight,’ the moon.
<LEND>

<L>19972<pc>0354-a<k1>jyotsnikA<k2>jyotsnikA
{%Jyotsnikā,%}¦ f., N. of a plant, {%= koṣātakī.%}
<LEND>

<L>19973<pc>0354-a<k1>jyotsnI<k2>jyotsnI
{%Jyotsnī,%}¦ f. a moonlight night; a small cucumber,
Trichosanthes Diœca; a kind of perfume, {%= reṇukā;%}
(a wrong form for {%jyautsnī.%})
<LEND>

<L>19974<pc>0354-a<k1>jyOtiza<k2>jyOtiza
{%Jyautiṣa, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>19975<pc>0354-a<k1>jyOtizika<k2>jyOtizika
{%Jyautiṣika, as,%}¦ m. one who knows the Jyotiṣa,
an astronomer, astrologer.
<LEND>

<L>19976<pc>0354-a<k1>jyOtsna<k2>jyOtsna
{%Jyautsna, as, ī, am,%}¦ luminous especially with
moonlight; ({%as%}), m. the time of moonlight, the
light half of a month; ({%ī%}), f. a full moon night; N.
of a plant, {%= paṭolikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>19977<pc>0354-a<k1>jyOtsnikA<k2>jyOtsnikA
{%Jyautsnikā,%}¦ f. a moonlight night; (perhaps an
incorrect form for {%jyotsnikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>19978<pc>0354-a<k1>jyo<k2>jyo
{#jyo#}¦ {%jyo,%} cl. 1. A. {%jyavate,%} &c., to advise,
instruct, order; observe a vow or any reli-
gious obligation.
<LEND>

<L>19979<pc>0354-a<k1>jyok<k2>jyok
{#jyok#}¦ {%jyok,%} ind. long, for a long time, for
a long while; {%jyoktamām,%} superl. ind. for the longest
time, longest. {%—Jyog-jīvātu, us,%} f. long life; {%jyok%}
{%kṛ,%} to be long about anything, delay.
<LEND>

<L>19980<pc>0354-a<k1>jyoqi<k2>jyoqi
{#jyoqi#}¦ {%jyoḍi,%} in names of plants. Cf. {%kara-%}
{%jyoḍi%} and {%hasta-j˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>19981<pc>0354-a<k1>jyotayamAnaka<k2>jyotayamAnaka
{#jyotayamAnaka#}¦ {%jyotayamānaka, as, ikā, am,%}
Ved. shining (?).
<LEND>

<L>19982<pc>0354-a<k1>jyotika<k2>jyotika
{#jyotika#}¦ {%jyotika, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga;
(perhaps a wrong reading for {%jyotiṣka.%})
<LEND>

<L>19983<pc>0354-a<k1>jyotis<k2>jyotis
{#jyotis#}¦ {%jyotis,%} &c. See p. 353, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>19984<pc>0354-a<k1>jyO<k2>jyO
{#jyO#}¦ {%jyau, aus,%} m. (a word borrowed fr. the
Gr. <lang n="greek">Ζεύς</lang>), the planet Jupiter.
<LEND>

<L>19985<pc>0354-a<k1>jri<k2>jri<h>1
{#jri#} 1¦. {%jri,%} cl. 1. P. {%jrayati,%} &c., to over-
power, conquer; to go.
<LEND>

<L>19986<pc>0354-a<k1>jraya<k2>jraya
{%Jraya.%}¦ Cf. {%pṛthu-jraya.%}
<LEND>

<L>19987<pc>0354-a<k1>jrayas<k2>jrayas
{%Jrayas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. a plain, expanse, space; (Sāy.)
speed; splendor; overpowering; [cf. Zend <nsi>zarajo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19988<pc>0354-a<k1>jrayasAna<k2>jrayasAna
{%Jrayasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. spreading, expanding,
occupying space; (Sāy.) going.
<LEND>

<L>19989<pc>0354-a<k1>jri<k2>jri<h>2
2. {%jri, is, is, i,%}¦ in {%uru-jri,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>19990<pc>0354-a<k1>jri<k2>jri<h>3
{#jri#} 3¦. {%jri%} or {%jrī%} [cf. rt. 1. {%jṝ%}], cl. 1. 10.
9. P. {%jrayati, jrāyayati, jriṇāti,%} &c., to
grow old, to be or become old or decayed.
<LEND>

<L>19991<pc>0354-a<k1>jvar<k2>jvar
{#jvar#}¦ {%jvar,%} cl. 1. P. {%jvarati, jajvāra, jvari-%}
{%ṣyati, ajvārīt, jvaritum,%} to be feverish,
to be hot with fever or passion, to be diseased &c.:
Caus. P. {%jvarayati, -yitum,%} to make feverish: Desid.
{%jijvariṣati:%} Intens. {%jājvaryate, jājūrti;%} [cf. Lat.
<nsi>a-ger;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>gurt,</nsi> ‘pain, trouble, fierceness;’ Germ.
<nsi>schwer;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>swâr, swâri;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>quâlen ?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>19992<pc>0354-a<k1>jUrRa<k2>jUrRa
{%Jūrṇa, as, ā, am.%}¦ See rt. 1. {%jur,%} p. 349, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>19993<pc>0354-a<k1>jvara<k2>jvara
{%Jvara, as,%}¦ m. fever of different kinds (called after
the different doṣas or humors of the body which
are supposed to be affected by them; fever is called
the leader and king of all diseases); fever of the
soul, mental pain, affliction, grief, trouble, sorrow,
distress; ({%ā%}), f. fever; ({%as, ā, am%}), heated, raging
(with fever, passion, &c.), excited, inflamed. {%—Jvara-%}
{%ghna, as, ī, am,%} febrifuge, anti-febrile, dispelling
fever or ague; ({%as%}), m. or according to some ({%ī%}), f.
the plant Cocculus Cordifolius, {%= guḍūcī;%} the plant
Chenopodium Album, {%= vāstūka%}. {%—Jvara-cikitsā,%}
f. medical treatment of fever. {%—Jvara-nāśaka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} febrifuge. {%—Jvara-nirṇaya, as,%} m., N. of
a medical work. {%—Jvara-pratīkāra, as,%} m. cure
of fever. {%—Jvara-hantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} febrifuge;
({%trī%}), f. the plant Rubia Munjista. {%—Jvarāgni (˚ra-%}
{%ag˚), is,%} m. feverish heat, the hot paroxysm in
fever. {%—Jvarāṅkuśa (˚ra-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a febrifuge;
[Page0354-b+ 80]
the plant Andropogon Jvarancusa; title of a work
on medicine. {%—Jvarāṅgī (˚ra-aṅ˚%}), f., N. of a
plant, {%= bhadra-dantikā%}. {%—Jvarāntaka (˚ra-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} febrifuge, dispelling fever; ({%as%}), m.
the plant Cathartocarpus Fistula; a kind of Nimba
growing in Nepal. {%—Jvarānvita (˚ra-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
suffering from fever or ague. {%—Jvarāpaha (˚ra-ap˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} febrifuge; ({%ā%}), f. a febrifuge, the plant
Medicago Esculenta, {%= villa-pattrī%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>19994<pc>0354-b<k1>jvarita<k2>jvarita
{%Jvarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%jvarin, ī, iṇī, i,%} febrile,
feverish, affected with fever.
<LEND>

<L>19995<pc>0354-b<k1>jvAra<k2>jvAra
{%Jvāra.%}¦ See {%nava-jvāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>19996<pc>0354-b<k1>jval<k2>jval
{#jval#}¦ {%jval,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%jvalati,%}
{%-te, jajvāla, jvaliṣyati, ajvālīt, jvali-%}
{%tum,%} to burn brightly, blaze, flame, glow, shine; to
burn (as a wound); to be ardent: Caus. P. {%jvāla-%}
{%yati%} and {%jvalayati, -yitum,%} to set on fire, light,
kindle, make radiant, illuminate: Desid. {%jijvali-%}
{%ṣati:%} Intens. {%jājvalyate, jājvalti,%} to flame vio-
lently, shine strongly, be brilliant; [cf. Hib. <nsi>gual-</nsi>
<nsi>laim,</nsi> ‘I blacken, burn;’ <nsi>gual,</nsi> ‘coal, coals, fire:’
Germ. <nsi>Kohle:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>colo:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>coal:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>swelù:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wallu, walm, wâli.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>19997<pc>0354-b<k1>jvala<k2>jvala
{%Jvala, as, ā, am,%}¦ flaming, blazing, shining, bril-
liant; ({%as%}), m. flame, blaze, light. {%—Jvala-mukhī,%}
f., N. of a tutelary deity in the family of Lomaśa;
[cf. {%jvālā-mukhī.%}] {%—Jvalānana (˚la-ān˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the face flaming. {%—Jvalā-rāsabhakā-%}
{%maya, as,%} m. {%= jāla-gardabha.%}
<LEND>

<L>19998<pc>0354-b<k1>jvalakA<k2>jvalakA
{%Jvalakā,%}¦ f. a large flame or blaze.
<LEND>

<L>19999<pc>0354-b<k1>jvalat<k2>jvalat
{%Jvalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ burning, blazing; shining,
radiant, brilliant. {%—Jvalan-maṇi, is, is, i,%} blazing
with jewels; ({%is%}), m. a brilliant gem.
<LEND>

<L>20000<pc>0354-b<k1>jvalana<k2>jvalana
{%Jvalana, as, ā, am,%}¦ inflammable, combustible,
flaming, shining; ({%as%}), m. fire; a N. of the numeral 3;
corrosive alkali; the plant Plumbago Zeylanica; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a daughter of Takṣaka and wife of Ṛceyu [cf.
{%jvālā%}]; ({%am%}), n. burning, blazing. {%—Jvalanāśman%}
{%(˚na-aś˚), ā,%} m. the sun-stone; [cf. {%sūrya-kānta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20001<pc>0354-b<k1>jvalanIya<k2>jvalanIya
{%Jvalanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit to be burnt, combustible.
<LEND>

<L>20002<pc>0354-b<k1>jvalayat<k2>jvalayat
{%Jvalayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ kindling, burning, illu-
mining, blazing, radiant.
<LEND>

<L>20003<pc>0354-b<k1>jvalita<k2>jvalita
{%Jvalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ kindled, burnt, blazing, flam-
ing; ({%tṛṇeṣu jvalitaṃ tvayā,%} you have lighted a
fire in the grass, i. e. you have had easy work.)
{%—Jvalita-nayana, as, ā, am,%} fiery-eyed, looking
angrily or fiercely; also {%jvalita-cakṣus, jvalita-%}
{%netra,%} &c. {%—Jvalitānana (˚ta-ān˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the face flaming.
<LEND>

<L>20004<pc>0354-b<k1>jvalin<k2>jvalin
{%Jvalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ burning, flaming, shining; ({%inī%}),
f. the plant Sanseviera Zeylanica, {%= mūrvā.%}
<LEND>

<L>20005<pc>0354-b<k1>jvAla<k2>jvAla
{%Jvāla, as, ī, am,%}¦ burning, blazing; ({%as%}), m. light,
flame, a torch; ({%ā%}), f. a blaze, flame, illumination;
burnt rice; N. of a daughter of Takṣaka and wife
of Ṛkṣa; [cf. Hib. <nsi>gual,</nsi> ‘coal.’] {%—Jvālā-khara-%}
{%gada%} and {%jvālā-gardabhaka, as,%} m. {%= jāla-garda-%}
{%bha%}. {%—Jvālāgni (˚la-ag˚), is,%} m. blazing fire, flame.
{%—Jvālā-jihva, as,%} m. ‘flame-tongued,’ N. of fire;
N. of an attendant of Skanda; of Śiva; of a Dānava.
{%—Jvālā-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘flame-marked,’ fire. {%—Jvā-%}
{%lā-mukha, as,%} m. ‘flame-mouthed,’ a class of demons;
({%ī%}), f. a volcano; any place where subterranean fire
or inflammable gas breaks forth, such places being
held sacred by the Hindūs as indicating the presence
of a form of Durgā; (a celebrated Jvālā-mukhī exists
in the hills north-east of the Pañjāb to which pilgrim-
ages are made; the soil abounds with carburetted
hydrogen gas which takes fire upon coming in con-
tact with the external air. According to the legend,
the flame proceeds from the fire which the wife of
Śiva created and in which she burned herself. Śiva
finding that this flame was about to consume the
world, buried it in the hollow of the mountain.
According to another legend, the tongue of Pārvatī
fell at this place. There is a similar volcanic region
in Chinese Tartary where fire is produced by digging
into the earth.) {%—Jvālā-liṅga, am,%} n. ‘flame-liṅga,’
N. of a temple of Śiva. {%—Jvālā-vaktra, as,%} m. ‘flame-
mouthed,’ N. of an attendant of Śiva. {%—Jvāleśvara%}
{%(˚la-īś˚),%} N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>
[Page0354-c+ 70]

<L>20006<pc>0354-c<k1>jvAlin<k2>jvAlin
{%Jvālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ flaming, blazing; ({%inī%}), f. mystical
name of the letter {%v.%}
<LEND>
<H>{#Ja#}

<L>20007<pc>0354-c<k1>Ja<k2>Ja<h>1
{#Ja#} 1¦. {%jha,%} the ninth consonant of the
Sanskrit alphabet and the aspirate of the preceding
letter. {%—Jha-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%jh.%}
<LEND>

<L>20008<pc>0354-c<k1>Ja<k2>Ja<h>2
{#Ja#} 2¦. {%jha, as, ā, am,%} asleep, sleeping; lost,
destroyed; ({%as%}), m. a peculiar sound; playing a tune,
beating time; a sound like the splashing of water or
the clashing of symbols, jingling, clanking, &c.;
wind accompanied by rain; a stray, a thing lost or
mislaid; a N. of a chief of the Daityas or demons;
an epithet of Bṛhaspati, the preceptor of the gods;
({%ā%}), f. the descent of a cascade, a water-fall.
<LEND>

<L>20009<pc>0354-c<k1>JagaJagAya<k2>JagaJagAya
{#JagaJagAya#}¦ {%jhagajhagāya,%} nom. A. {%jhagajha-%}
{%gāyate,%} to sparkle, flash.
<LEND>

<L>20010<pc>0354-c<k1>JaNkAra<k2>JaNkAra
{#JaNkAra#}¦ {%jhaṅ-kāra, as,%} m. or {%jhaṅ-kārita, am,%}
n. (fr. the imitative word {%jham%}), a low murmuring
sound, as the buzzing or humming of bees &c.
<LEND>

<L>20011<pc>0354-c<k1>JaYJana<k2>JaYJana
{#JaYJana#}¦ {%jhañjhana, am,%} n. (onomatopoetic),
an indistinct noise like the jingling and clanking of
metal ornaments, any ringing or rattling sound.
<LEND>

<L>20012<pc>0354-c<k1>JaYJA<k2>JaYJA
{%Jhañjhā,%}¦ f. the noise of the wind or of falling
rain; wind, wind and rain, a hurricane, a gale; a
clang or sharp clanking sound, jingling; raining in
large drops; a stray, anything lost. {%—Jhañjhānila%}
{%(˚jhā-an˚), as,%} m. wind with rain, a high wind in
the rainy season, a typhoon or the sort of tempest
frequent during the south-west monsoon. {%—Jhañjhā-%}
{%vāta, as,%} m. wind with rain, a storm, a squall.
<LEND>

<L>20013<pc>0354-c<k1>Jaw<k2>Jaw
{#Jaw#}¦ {%jhaṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%jhaṭati,%} &c., to become
matted together or entangled (as hair), to
become confused or intermixed.
<LEND>

<L>20014<pc>0354-c<k1>JawA<k2>JawA
{%Jhaṭā,%}¦ f. the plant Flacourtia Cataphracta.
<LEND>

<L>20015<pc>0354-c<k1>Jawi<k2>Jawi
{%Jhaṭi, is,%}¦ m. a small tree, a shrub, a bush.
<LEND>

<L>20016<pc>0354-c<k1>JAwa<k2>JAwa
{%Jhāṭa, as,%}¦ m. an arbour, bower, place overgrown
with creepers; a wood, a thicket; cleaning sores or
wounds; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. jasmine, Jasminum Auriculatum.
<LEND>

<L>20017<pc>0354-c<k1>JAwala<k2>JAwala
{%Jhāṭala, as,%}¦ m. the tree Bignonia Suaveolens.
<LEND>

<L>20018<pc>0354-c<k1>JAwikA<k2>JAwikA
{%Jhāṭikā%}¦ or {%jhāṭīkā,%} f. {%= jhāṭā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>20019<pc>0354-c<k1>Jawiti<k2>Jawiti
{#Jawiti#}¦ {%jhaṭiti,%} ind. (fr. {%jhaṭ,%} an onomato-
poetic word with {%iti;%} cf. {%paṭiti%}), quickly, speedily,
instantly; at once; on the spot.
<LEND>

<L>20020<pc>0354-c<k1>JaRaJaRa<k2>JaRaJaRa
{#JaRaJaRa#}¦ {%jhaṇajhaṇa%} or {%jhaṇajhaṇā%} (an ono-
matopoetic word), the jingling or tinkling of orna-
ments; [cf. {%chanacchan%} and {%jhalajjhalā.%}] {%—Jhaṇa-%}
{%jhaṇī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} rattling.
<LEND>

<L>20021<pc>0354-c<k1>JaRaJaRAya<k2>JaRaJaRAya
{%Jhaṇajhaṇāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%-yate,%} &c., to jingle,
tinkle.
<LEND>

<L>20022<pc>0354-c<k1>JaRaJaRAyita<k2>JaRaJaRAyita
{%Jhaṇajhaṇāyita, am,%}¦ n. jingling, tinkling.
<LEND>

<L>20023<pc>0354-c<k1>JaRatkAra<k2>JaRatkAra
{#JaRatkAra#}¦ {%jhaṇat-kāra%} or {%jhanat-kāra, as,%}
m. (fr. the imitative sound {%jhaṇat%} and {%kāra%}), the
jingling, tinkling, or clinking of metallic ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>20024<pc>0354-c<k1>JanajJanA<k2>JanajJanA
{#JanajJanA#}¦ {%jhanajjhanā,%} flapping noise.
<LEND>

<L>20025<pc>0354-c<k1>Jam<k2>Jam
{#Jam#}¦ {%jham,%} cl. 1. P. {%jhamati,%} &c. {%= cham%}
and {%jam,%} to eat, consume.
<LEND>

<L>20026<pc>0354-c<k1>Jampa<k2>Jampa
{#Jampa#}¦ {%jhampa, as, ā,%} m. f. a spring, a jump,
jumping, springing, plunging. {%—Jhampāśin (˚pa-%}
{%āś˚), ī,%} m. a kingfisher.
<LEND>

<L>20027<pc>0354-c<k1>JampAka<k2>JampAka
{%Jhampāka, as,%}¦ m. or {%jhampāru, us,%} m. a
monkey, an ape.
<LEND>

<L>20028<pc>0354-c<k1>Jampin<k2>Jampin
{%Jhampin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘a leaper,’ an ape, a monkey.
<LEND>

<L>20029<pc>0354-c<k1>Jara<k2>Jara
{#Jara#}¦ {%jhara, as, ā%} or {%ī,%} m. f. a cascade, a
water-fall; ({%ī%}), f. a river; [cf. {%nir-jhara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20030<pc>0354-c<k1>Jarat<k2>Jarat
{%Jharat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flowing or falling down;
[cf. {%kṣar.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20031<pc>0354-c<k1>Jarc<k2>Jarc
{#Jarc#}¦ {%jharc,%} cl. 6. P. {%jharcati,%} or {%jharch,%}
cl. 6. P. {%jharchati,%} or {%jharjh,%} cl. 6. P.
{%jharjhati,%} to speak; to blame, menace; injure.
<LEND>

<L>20032<pc>0354-c<k1>JarJara<k2>JarJara
{#JarJara#}¦ {%jharjhara, as, ī,%} m. f. (said to be fr.
[Page0355-a+ 70]
the last), a sort of drum; ({%as%}), m. the Kali-yuga,
the present Yuga or age of the world; N. of a
Daitya, a son of Hiraṇyākṣa; N. of a river; ({%ā%}),
f. a whore [cf. {%ṛccharā%}]; ({%am%}), n. a sound as of
splashing or dropping.
<LEND>

<L>20033<pc>0355-a<k1>JarJaraka<k2>JarJaraka
{%Jharjharaka, as,%}¦ m. the fourth or present age of
the world, the Kali-yuga.
<LEND>

<L>20034<pc>0355-a<k1>JarJarin<k2>JarJarin
{%Jharjharin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ furnished with a drum; epi-
thet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>20035<pc>0355-a<k1>JarJarIka<k2>JarJarIka
{#JarJarIka#}¦ {%jharjharīka, as,%} m. the body; a
region, a country; a picture.
<LEND>

<L>20036<pc>0355-a<k1>JalakkA<k2>JalakkA
{#JalakkA#}¦ {%jhalakkā,%} f. a large flame.
<LEND>

<L>20037<pc>0355-a<k1>JalajJalA<k2>JalajJalA
{#JalajJalA#}¦ {%jhalajjhalā,%} f. an onomatopoetic
word for the noise of falling drops, the flapping of
an elephant's ears, or of flaccid breasts, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20038<pc>0355-a<k1>JalarI<k2>JalarI
{#JalarI#}¦ {%jhalarī,%} f. {%= jharjhara,%} a sort of
drum; a curl; [cf. {%jhallarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20039<pc>0355-a<k1>JalA<k2>JalA
{#JalA#}¦ {%jhalā,%} f. a girl, a daughter; sun-
shine, splendor, brilliant or glittering light; a cricket;
[cf. {%jhillī;%} cf. also rt. {%jval;%} Hib. <nsi>gal,</nsi> ‘heat;’
<nsi>galla,</nsi> ‘fairness, brightness, beauty;’ <nsi>gallad,</nsi> ‘a lass,
a young girl.’]
<LEND>

<L>20040<pc>0355-a<k1>Jali<k2>Jali
{#Jali#}¦ {%jhali, is,%} f. the areca-nut.
<LEND>

<L>20041<pc>0355-a<k1>Jalla<k2>Jalla
{#Jalla#}¦ {%jhalla, as,%} m. a prize-fighter, a cudgel-
player, a man of a tribe following the profession of
a Jhalla; a designation of one of the degraded classes
sprung from an outcast Kṣatriya; ({%ī%}), f. a kind
of drum.
<LEND>

<L>20042<pc>0355-a<k1>Jallaka<k2>Jallaka
{#Jallaka#}¦ {%jhallaka, am,%} n. (fr. {%jhalla,%} imitative
sound), cymbals; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of drum.
<LEND>

<L>20043<pc>0355-a<k1>JallakaRWa<k2>JallakaRWa
{#JallakaRWa#}¦ {%jhallakaṇṭha, as,%} m. a pigeon;
[cf. {%jhillī-kaṇṭha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20044<pc>0355-a<k1>JallanA<k2>JallanA
{#JallanA#}¦ {%jhallanā,%} f. a particular Prākṛt
metre.
<LEND>

<L>20045<pc>0355-a<k1>JallarI<k2>JallarI
{#JallarI#}¦ {%jhallarī,%} f. (fr. {%jhalla,%} imitative
sound; cf. {%jhalarī%}), a kind of musical instrument,
a sort of drum or cymbal; a curl, a lock of hair;
moisture; purity; a ball &c. of perfumed substances
used for cleaning the hair; [cf. {%jhalarī%} and {%jhillarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20046<pc>0355-a<k1>JallikA<k2>JallikA
{#JallikA#}¦ {%jhallikā,%} f. a rag or cloth used for
applying colour or perfumes; dirt rubbed off the body
by the application of perfumes; light, splendor, lustre;
[cf. {%jhillikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20047<pc>0355-a<k1>JallIzaka<k2>JallIzaka
{#JallIzaka#}¦ {%jhallīṣaka,%} a sort of musical
instrument.
<LEND>

<L>20048<pc>0355-a<k1>Jallola<k2>Jallola
{#Jallola#}¦ {%jhallola, as,%} m. a ball or protuber-
ance at the lower end of a spindle.
<LEND>

<L>20049<pc>0355-a<k1>Jaz<k2>Jaz
{#Jaz#}¦ {%jhaṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%jhaṣati, -te,%} &c.,
to take; to put on, wear, cover; (only P.)
to hurt or kill.
<LEND>

<L>20050<pc>0355-a<k1>Jaza<k2>Jaza
{%Jhaṣa, as,%}¦ m. a large fish, a fish in general; the
sign of the zodiac Pisces; a forest, a thicket; a
forest overgrown with grass; heat, warmth; ({%ā%}), f.
the plant Uraria Lagopodioides; ({%am%}), n. a desert.
{%—Jhaṣa-ketana%} or {%jhaṣa-dhvaja, as,%} m. a N.
of Kandarpa or the god of love; love. {%—Jhaṣāṅka%}
{%(˚ṣa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Aniruddha or the
son of Kāma. {%—Jhaṣāśana (˚ṣa-aś˚), as,%} m. the
Gangetic porpoise, Delphinus Gangeticus. {%—Jhaṣo-%}
{%darī (˚ṣa-ud˚),%} f. an epithet of Satyavatī, the wife
of Sāntanu and mother of Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>20051<pc>0355-a<k1>JANkfta<k2>JANkfta
{#JANkfta#}¦ {%jhāṅ-kṛta, am,%} n. (fr. {%jhām,%} imita-
tive sound, and rt. 1. {%kṛ%}), a tinkling ornament worn
round the toes or feet.
<LEND>

<L>20052<pc>0355-a<k1>JAwa<k2>JAwa
{#JAwa#}¦ {%jhāṭa.%} See under rt. {%jhaṭ.%}
<LEND>

<L>20053<pc>0355-a<k1>JAwAmalA<k2>JAwAmalA
{#JAwAmalA#}¦ {%jhāṭāmalā,%} f. {%= jhāṭā,%} Jasminum
Auriculatum; (according to others two separate words,
{%jhāṭā%} and {%amalā.%})
<LEND>

<L>20054<pc>0355-a<k1>JAwAstraka<k2>JAwAstraka
{#JAwAstraka#}¦ {%jhāṭāstraka, as,%} m. the water
melon.
<LEND>
[Page0355-b+ 65]

<L>20055<pc>0355-b<k1>JAbuka<k2>JAbuka
{#JAbuka#}¦ {%jhābuka, as,%} m. the tree Tamarix
Indica (?); [cf. {%jhāvuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20056<pc>0355-b<k1>JAmaka<k2>JAmaka
{#JAmaka#}¦ {%jhāmaka, am,%} n. a burnt or vitrified
brick.
<LEND>

<L>20057<pc>0355-b<k1>JAmara<k2>JAmara
{#JAmara#}¦ {%jhāmara, as,%} m. a small whetstone,
used chiefly by housewives for sharpening their spin-
dles, needles, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20058<pc>0355-b<k1>JArJara<k2>JArJara
{#JArJara#}¦ {%jhārjhara%} or {%jhārjharika, as,%} m. (fr.
{%jharjhara%}), a tabor-player, a drummer.
<LEND>

<L>20059<pc>0355-b<k1>JAlarI<k2>JAlarI
{#JAlarI#}¦ {%jhālarī%} [cf. {%jhalarī%}], a kind of drum
or tabor.
<LEND>

<L>20060<pc>0355-b<k1>JAlA<k2>JAlA
{#JAlA#}¦ {%jhālā,%} f. {%= jhalā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20061<pc>0355-b<k1>JAli<k2>JAli
{#JAli#}¦ {%jhāli, is,%} f. a sort of sour or unripe
mango fried with salt, mustard, and Asa Fœtida.
<LEND>

<L>20062<pc>0355-b<k1>JAvu<k2>JAvu
{#JAvu#}¦ {%jhāvu, us,%} m. the tree Tamarix In-
dica; also {%jhāvuka, as,%} m. and {%jhāvū, ūs,%} m.
<LEND>

<L>20063<pc>0355-b<k1>JiNgAka<k2>JiNgAka
{#JiNgAka#}¦ {%jhiṅgāka, as,%} m. a sort of cucum-
ber, Luffa Acutangula.
<LEND>

<L>20064<pc>0355-b<k1>JiNginI<k2>JiNginI
{#JiNginI#}¦ {%jhiṅginī,%} f. a sort of cucumber,
Luffa Acutangula; a torch, a firebrand.
<LEND>

<L>20065<pc>0355-b<k1>JiNgI<k2>JiNgI
{%Jhiṅgī,%}¦ f. a sort of cucumber, Luffa Acutangula.
<LEND>

<L>20066<pc>0355-b<k1>JijjI<k2>JijjI
{#JijjI#}¦ {%jhijjī,%} f. {%= jhillī,%} a cricket; [cf.
{%jhiñjhī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20067<pc>0355-b<k1>JiYJima<k2>JiYJima
{#JiYJima#}¦ {%jhiñjhima, as,%} m. a forest on fire.
<LEND>

<L>20068<pc>0355-b<k1>JiYJirA<k2>JiYJirA
{#JiYJirA#}¦ {%jhiñjhirā%} and {%jhiñjhiriṣṭā,%} f., N.
of a shrub.
<LEND>

<L>20069<pc>0355-b<k1>JiYJI<k2>JiYJI
{#JiYJI#}¦ {%jhiñjhī,%} f. {%= jhillī,%} a cricket.
<LEND>

<L>20070<pc>0355-b<k1>JiRwI<k2>JiRwI
{#JiRwI#}¦ {%jhiṇṭī,%} f. a shrub, Barleria Cristata;
{%nīlā jhiṇṭī,%} Barleria Cærulea.
<LEND>

<L>20071<pc>0355-b<k1>JirikA<k2>JirikA
{#JirikA#}¦ {%jhirikā%} or {%jhirī%} or {%jhirīkā%} or {%jhi-%}
{%rukā,%} f. a cricket.
<LEND>

<L>20072<pc>0355-b<k1>JillarI<k2>JillarI
{#JillarI#}¦ {%jhillarī,%} f. {%= jhallarī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20073<pc>0355-b<k1>Jilli<k2>Jilli
{#Jilli#}¦ {%jhilli, is,%} f. a cricket; a kind of
musical instrument; membrane or parchment; [cf.
{%jhillī;%} cf. also Lat. <nsi>gryllus;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Grille.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>20074<pc>0355-b<k1>JillikA<k2>JillikA
{%Jhillikā,%}¦ f. a cricket; a cricket's cry; the light of
sunshine, strong light, splendor; the dirt which
comes from the body in rubbing it with perfumes;
a cloth or rag used for applying colour, unguents,
&c.; a kind of skin or membrane, parchment.
{%—Jhillikā-gaṇa-nādita, as, ā, am,%} resounding
with a multitude of crickets.
<LEND>

<L>20075<pc>0355-b<k1>JillI<k2>JillI
{%Jhillī,%}¦ f. a cricket; the wick of a lamp; a cloth
or rag for applying unguents, colour, &c.; sunshine,
light, lustre; rice burnt by cooking in a saucepan, &c.;
a musical instrument, cymbals; parchment. {%—Jhillī-%}
{%kaṇṭha, as,%} m. a domestic pigeon.
<LEND>

<L>20076<pc>0355-b<k1>JillIka<k2>JillIka
{%Jhillīka, as,%}¦ m. a cricket; ({%ā%}), f. a cricket; sun-
shine; dirt taken off the body in rubbing it with
perfumes.
<LEND>

<L>20077<pc>0355-b<k1>JIrikA<k2>JIrikA
{%Jhīrikā%}¦ and {%jhīrukā,%} f. a cricket.
<LEND>
<L>20077.1<pc>0355-b<k1>JIrukA<k2>JIrukA
{{Lbody=20077}}
<LEND>

<L>20078<pc>0355-b<k1>Jillin<k2>Jillin
{#Jillin#}¦ {%jhillin, ī,%} m., N. of a Vṛṣṇi.
<LEND>

<L>20079<pc>0355-b<k1>Ju<k2>Ju
{#Ju#}¦ {%jhu,%} cl. 1. A. {%jhavate,%} &c., to go or
move.
<LEND>

<L>20080<pc>0355-b<k1>JuRwa<k2>JuRwa
{#JuRwa#}¦ {%jhuṇṭa, as,%} m. a shrub, a bush.
<LEND>

<L>20081<pc>0355-b<k1>Jumari<k2>Jumari
{#Jumari#}¦ {%jhumari%} or {%jhumeri, is,%} f. one of the
Rāgiṇīs or modes of music personified.
<LEND>

<L>20082<pc>0355-b<k1>JURi<k2>JURi
{#JURi#}¦ {%jhūṇi, is,%} f. a kind of betel-nut; a
voice or communication from heaven boding ill-luck,
evil omen; a thicket &c. ({%= kaṭhina.%})
<LEND>

<L>20083<pc>0355-b<k1>JUz<k2>JUz
{#JUz#}¦ {%jhūṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%jhūṣati,%} to hurt,
kill; (a various reading for {%yūṣ.%})
<LEND>

<L>20084<pc>0355-b<k1>JF<k2>JF
{#JF#}¦ {%jhṝ%} (another form of rt. 1. {%jṝ%}), cl. 4. 9.
P. {%jhīryati, jhṛṇāti,%} &c., to become old.
<LEND>

<L>20085<pc>0355-b<k1>Joqa<k2>Joqa
{#Joqa#}¦ {%jhoḍa, as,%} m. the betel-nut tree.
<LEND>
[Page0355-c+ 66]

<L>20086<pc>0355-c<k1>JOlika<k2>JOlika
{#JOlika#}¦ {%jhaulika,%} a small bag for betel &c.
<LEND>

<L>20087<pc>0355-c<k1>Jyu<k2>Jyu
{#Jyu#}¦ {%jhyu,%} cl. 1. P. {%jhyavati,%} &c., to go
or move.
<LEND>
<H>{#Ya#}

<L>20088<pc>0355-c<k1>Ya<k2>Ya<h>1
{#Ya#} 1¦. {%ña,%} the nasal belonging to the palatal
class of letters. It only really occurs in conjunction
with palatal consonants; and when preceding {%c, ch,%}
has much the sound of {%n%} in <nsi>inch;</nsi> when preceding
{%j, jh,%} much the sound of <nsi>n</nsi> in <nsi>singe</nsi>. {%—Na-kāra, as,%}
m. the letter or sound {%ñ.%}
<LEND>

<L>20089<pc>0355-c<k1>Ya<k2>Ya<h>2
{#Ya#} 2¦. {%ña, as,%} m. a singer; any jingling or
inarticulate sound; a heretic, an apostate; an ox; a
N. of Śukra, regent of the planet Venus.
<LEND>
<H>{#wa#}

<L>20090<pc>0355-c<k1>wa<k2>wa<h>1
{#wa#} 1¦. {%ṭa,%} the eleventh consonant of the San-
skṛt alphabet and first of the third class or cerebrals;
it has much the sound of {%t%} in <nsi>true,</nsi> but properly pro-
nounced by keeping back the tip of the tongue and
slightly turning it upwards. {%—Ṭa-kāra, as,%} m. the
letter or sound {%ṭ%}. {%—Ṭa-varga, as,%} m. the cerebral
consonants collectively. {%—Ṭavargīya, as, ā, am,%}
belonging to the cerebral class of consonants.
<LEND>

<L>20091<pc>0355-c<k1>wa<k2>wa<h>2
{#wa#} 2¦. {%ṭa, as,%} m. sound or an imitative
sound like the twang of a bow-string &c.; a dwarf;
a quarter, a fourth; ({%ā%}), f. the earth; an oath, con-
firming an assertion by ordeal &c.; ({%am%}), n. a hol-
lowed cocoa-nut.
<LEND>

<L>20092<pc>0355-c<k1>wakkadeSa<k2>wakkadeSa
{#wakkadeSa#}¦ {%ṭakka-deśa, as,%} m. the country of
the Ṭakkas; [cf. {%ṭakva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20093<pc>0355-c<k1>wakkadeSIya<k2>wakkadeSIya
{%Ṭakkadeśīya, as,%}¦ m. a kind of pot-herb, Cheno-
podium Album; [cf. {%vāstūka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20094<pc>0355-c<k1>wakkara<k2>wakkara
{#wakkara#}¦ {%ṭakkara, as,%} m. the clapping of cym-
bals or a drum (?), a blow, knock, rap (?).
<LEND>

<L>20095<pc>0355-c<k1>wakkibudDa<k2>wakkibudDa
{#wakkibudDa#}¦ {%ṭakkibuddha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20096<pc>0355-c<k1>wakva<k2>wakva
{#wakva#}¦ {%ṭakva, ās,%} m. pl. {%= bāhīka;%} [cf. {%ṭakka-%}
{%deśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20097<pc>0355-c<k1>wakvara<k2>wakvara
{#wakvara#}¦ {%ṭakvara, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>20098<pc>0355-c<k1>wagara<k2>wagara
{#wagara#}¦ {%ṭagara, as, ā, am,%} squint-eyed [cf.
{%kekara%} and {%ṭeraka%}]; ({%as%}), m. borax; wanton play
or sport; wandering of the mind, confusion, per-
plexity; an object of sense.
<LEND>

<L>20099<pc>0355-c<k1>waNk<k2>waNk
{#waNk#}¦ {%ṭaṅk,%} cl. 10. 1. P. {%ṭaṅkayati, ṭaṅkati,%}
to bind, tie; cover.
<LEND>

<L>20100<pc>0355-c<k1>waNka<k2>waNka
{%Ṭaṅka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (according to some only
m.; said to be fr. the preceding), a spade, hoe,
hatchet, stone-cutter's chisel or similar instrument;
a sword, scimitar, sacrificial hatchet or knife; a scab-
bard, the sheath of a sword (only m.); a peak or
crag shaped like the edge of a hatchet, the edge or
declivity of a hill, slope; a chasm, cleft; anger, wrath;
pride, arrogance; a weight (of silver) equal to four
Māṣas or twenty-four Raktikās; the wood-apple
or Feronia Elephantum, {%= nīla-kapittha;%} the fruit
of the wood-apple (n. only); borax; a stamped coin;
({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. the leg. {%—Ṭaṅka-ṭīka, as,%} m.
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Ṭaṅka-pati, is,%} m. the master
of the mint. {%—Ṭaṅka-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having crags
or declivities. {%—Ṭaṅka-śālā,%} f. a mint.
<LEND>

<L>20101<pc>0355-c<k1>waNkaka<k2>waNkaka
{%Ṭaṅkaka, as,%}¦ m. a stamped coin especially of
silver, silver money. {%—Ṭaṅkaka-pati, is,%} m. the
master of a mint or superintendent of the silver coin.
{%—Ṭaṅkaka-śālā,%} f. a mint.
<LEND>

<L>20102<pc>0355-c<k1>waNkaRa<k2>waNkaRa
{#waNkaRa#}¦ {%ṭaṅkaṇa, as,%} m. borax; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a people in the north-east of Madhya-deśa;
({%am%}), n. binding, tying. {%—Ṭaṅkaṇa-kṣāra, as,%}
m. borax.
<LEND>
[Page0356-a+ 65]

<L>20103<pc>0356-a<k1>waNkAnaka<k2>waNkAnaka
{#waNkAnaka#}¦ {%ṭaṅkānaka, as,%} m. the mulberry,
Morus Indica.
<LEND>

<L>20104<pc>0356-a<k1>waNkAra<k2>waNkAra
{#waNkAra#}¦ {%ṭaṅ-kāra, as,%} m. (fr. {%ṭam,%} imita-
tive sound, and 1. {%kāra%}), howling, a howl, a cry, a
sound, a clang, the twang of a bow-string &c.; fame,
notoriety; surprise, wonder, [cf. {%ṭāṅ-kāra%}]; ({%ī%}), f.,
N. of a shrub, commonly called Ṭekārī.
<LEND>

<L>20105<pc>0356-a<k1>waNkArita<k2>waNkArita
{%Ṭaṅkārita, am,%}¦ n. humming; (a various reading
for {%jhaṅkārita.%})
<LEND>

<L>20106<pc>0356-a<k1>waNga<k2>waNga
{#waNga#}¦ {%ṭaṅga, as, am,%} m. n. (another form of
{%ṭaṅka%} above), a spade, a hoe; a sword, a peculiar
kind of sword; a leg; ({%as%}), m. borax; a weight of
four Māṣās.
<LEND>

<L>20107<pc>0356-a<k1>waNgaRa<k2>waNgaRa
{#waNgaRa#}¦ {%ṭaṅgaṇa, as, am,%} m. n. borax; [cf.
{%ṭaṅkaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20108<pc>0356-a<k1>waNginI<k2>waNginI
{#waNginI#}¦ {%ṭaṅginī,%} f. the plant Clypea Her-
nandifolia, commonly Ākanādi.
<LEND>

<L>20109<pc>0356-a<k1>wawwanI<k2>wawwanI
{#wawwanI#}¦ {%ṭaṭṭanī,%} f. a small house-lizard.
<LEND>

<L>20110<pc>0356-a<k1>wawwarI<k2>wawwarI
{#wawwarI#}¦ {%ṭaṭṭarī,%} f. a kind of musical instru-
ment; a kettle-drum; a joke, a jest; a lie.
<LEND>

<L>20111<pc>0356-a<k1>wawwura<k2>wawwura
{#wawwura#}¦ {%ṭaṭṭura, as,%} m. the sound of a drum;
(a various reading for {%dardura.%})
<LEND>

<L>20112<pc>0356-a<k1>waRqana<k2>waRqana
{#waRqana#}¦ {%ṭaṇḍana, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>20113<pc>0356-a<k1>wal<k2>wal
{#wal#}¦ {%ṭal,%} cl. 1. P. {%ṭalati, ṭaṭāla,%} &c., to
be confused, to be disturbed by fear or
anxiety &c.
<LEND>

<L>20114<pc>0356-a<k1>wala<k2>wala
{%Ṭala%}¦ or {%ṭāla, as,%} m. perturbation, confusion (?).
<LEND>

<L>20115<pc>0356-a<k1>walana<k2>walana
{%Ṭalana, am,%}¦ n. anxiety, perturbation.
<LEND>

<L>20116<pc>0356-a<k1>wANka<k2>wANka
{#wANka#}¦ {%ṭāṅka, am,%} n. a spirituous liquor pre-
pared from the fruit of the Feronia Elephantum or a
similar tree.
<LEND>

<L>20117<pc>0356-a<k1>wANkara<k2>wANkara
{#wANkara#}¦ {%ṭāṅkara, as,%} m. a blackguard, a
lecher, a libertine; [cf. {%ṭāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20118<pc>0356-a<k1>wANkAra<k2>wANkAra
{#wANkAra#}¦ {%ṭāṅ-kāra, as,%} m. or {%ṭāṅ-kṛta, am,%} n.
(fr. {%ṭām,%} imitative sound, and rt. 1. {%kṛ%}), a sound, a
clang, a twang, &c.; [cf. {%ṭaṅ-kāra%} and {%ḍāṅ-kṛti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20119<pc>0356-a<k1>wAra<k2>wAra
{#wAra#}¦ {%ṭāra, as,%} m. a horse; a catamite.
<LEND>

<L>20120<pc>0356-a<k1>wik<k2>wik
{#wik#}¦ {%ṭik,%} cl. 1. A. {%ṭekate,%} &c., to go or
move; [cf. {%ṭīk, tik, tīk.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20121<pc>0356-a<k1>wikA<k2>wikA
{#wikA#}¦ {%ṭikā%} in {%svarga-grāma-ṭikā-viluṇṭhana,%}
the spoils of the poor villages of heaven (?).
<LEND>

<L>20122<pc>0356-a<k1>wikka<k2>wikka
{#wikka#}¦ {%ṭikka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20123<pc>0356-a<k1>wiwiBaka<k2>wiwiBaka
{#wiwiBaka#}¦ {%ṭiṭibhaka, as,%} m. a bird, {%= ṭiṭṭibha.%}
<LEND>

<L>20124<pc>0356-a<k1>wiwila<k2>wiwila
{#wiwila#}¦ {%ṭiṭila, am,%} n. a large number, =
100 Nāga-balas.
<LEND>

<L>20125<pc>0356-a<k1>wiwwiBa<k2>wiwwiBa
{#wiwwiBa#}¦ {%ṭiṭṭibha, as,%} m. a kind of bird, Parra
Jacana or Gœnsis; N. of a Daitya; also of a Dānava
who was an enemy of Indra in the thirteenth Manv-
antara; ({%ī%}), f. the female of the bird Parra Jacana.
<LEND>

<L>20126<pc>0356-a<k1>wiwwiBaka<k2>wiwwiBaka
{%Ṭiṭṭibhaka, as,%}¦ m. the bird Parra Jacana or Gœnsis.
<LEND>

<L>20127<pc>0356-a<k1>wiRwiRi<k2>wiRwiRi
{#wiRwiRi#}¦ {%ṭiṇṭiṇi, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20128<pc>0356-a<k1>wiRwiRikA<k2>wiRwiRikA
{#wiRwiRikA#}¦ {%ṭiṇṭiṇikā%} or {%ṭiṇṭiṇīkā,%} f., N. of
a plant.
<LEND>

<L>20129<pc>0356-a<k1>wiRqiSa<k2>wiRqiSa
{#wiRqiSa#}¦ {%ṭiṇḍiśa, as,%} m. a kind of plant,
{%= tindiśa,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>20130<pc>0356-a<k1>wip<k2>wip
{#wip#}¦ {%ṭip,%} cl. 10. P. {%ṭepayati,%} &c., to direct,
send, throw, cast; (a various reading for {%ḍip.%})
<LEND>

<L>20131<pc>0356-a<k1>wepana<k2>wepana
{%Ṭepana, am,%}¦ n. sending, throwing.
<LEND>

<L>20132<pc>0356-a<k1>wippanI<k2>wippanI
{#wippanI#}¦ {%ṭippanī,%} f. (also spelt {%ṭippaṇī%}), a
gloss, a comment, commentary.
<LEND>

<L>20133<pc>0356-a<k1>wiriwirA<k2>wiriwirA
{#wiriwirA#}¦ {%ṭiriṭirā,%} f. (an onomatopoetic
word), whispering.
<LEND>

<L>20134<pc>0356-a<k1>wIk<k2>wIk
{#wIk#}¦ {%ṭīk%} [cf. {%ṭik%}], cl. 1. A. {%ṭīkate,%} &c., to
go or move; cl. 10. P. {%ṭīkayati,%} &c., to
explain, make clear.
<LEND>
[Page0356-b+ 62]

<L>20135<pc>0356-b<k1>wIkA<k2>wIkA
{%Ṭīkā,%}¦ f. any commentary, but especially a com-
mentary on another commentary (e. g. the com-
mentary by Ānanda-giri on Śaṅkara's Upaniṣad-
bhāṣya is called {%bhāṣya-ṭīkā.%}
<LEND>

<L>20136<pc>0356-b<k1>wu<k2>wu
{#wu#}¦ {%ṭu, us,%} m. gold; one who changes his
shape at will, a proteus; Kāma or the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>20137<pc>0356-b<k1>wuRwuka<k2>wuRwuka
{#wuRwuka#}¦ {%ṭuṇṭuka, as, ā, am,%} small, little, low,
vile; cruel, harsh; ({%as%}), m. the tree Colosanthes
Indica; the bird Sylvia Sutoria; ({%ā%}), f. a plant,
commonly Aknidhi; [cf. {%ṭaṅginī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20138<pc>0356-b<k1>wunAkA<k2>wunAkA
{#wunAkA#}¦ {%ṭunākā,%} f. the plant Curculigo
Orchioides.
<LEND>

<L>20139<pc>0356-b<k1>wulla<k2>wulla
{#wulla#}¦ {%ṭulla, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20140<pc>0356-b<k1>wepana<k2>wepana
{#wepana#}¦ {%ṭepana.%} See rt. {%ṭip,%} last col.
<LEND>

<L>20141<pc>0356-b<k1>wera<k2>wera
{#wera#}¦ {%ṭera, as, ā, am,%} squinting. {%—Ṭerākṣa%}
{%(˚ra-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} squint-eyed.
<LEND>

<L>20142<pc>0356-b<k1>weraka<k2>weraka
{%Ṭeraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ squinting.
<LEND>

<L>20143<pc>0356-b<k1>wowaka<k2>wowaka
{#wowaka#}¦ {%ṭoṭaka,%} a kind of metre consisting
of four lines of twelve syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>20144<pc>0356-b<k1>woqarakzmApati<k2>woqarakzmApati
{#woqarakzmApati#}¦ {%ṭoḍara-kṣmāpati, is,%} m. or
{%ṭoḍaramalla%} or {%ṭoḍarendra, as,%} m., N. of a
minister of Akbar Shāh and author of the Ṭoḍarā-
nanda.
<LEND>

<L>20145<pc>0356-b<k1>wotalA<k2>wotalA
{#wotalA#}¦ {%ṭotalā,%} f., N. of a deity.
<LEND>

<L>20146<pc>0356-b<k1>wodalatantra<k2>wodalatantra
{#wodalatantra#}¦ {%ṭodala-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra.
<LEND>

<L>20147<pc>0356-b<k1>wOk<k2>wOk
{#wOk#}¦ {%ṭauk,%} cl. 1. A. {%ṭaukate,%} &c., to go,
approach; (various reading for {%ḍhauk.%})
<LEND>

<L>20148<pc>0356-b<k1>wval<k2>wval
{#wval#}¦ {%ṭval,%} cl. 1. P. {%ṭvalati,%} &c., to be
disturbed or confused.
<LEND>
<H>{#Wa#}

<L>20149<pc>0356-b<k1>Wa<k2>Wa<h>1
{#Wa#} 1¦. {%ṭha,%} the twelfth consonant and aspi-
rate of the preceding letter. {%—Ṭha-kāra, as,%} m.
the letter or sound {%ṭh%}. {%—Ṭhakāraya%} (fr. the last),
nom. P. {%ṭhakārayati:%} Desid. {%ṭiṭhakārayiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>20150<pc>0356-b<k1>Wa<k2>Wa<h>2
{#Wa#} 2¦. {%ṭha, as,%} m. a loud noise; an imitative
sound as of a golden pitcher rolling down steps; the
disk of the sun or moon, a circle, a globe; a cypher;
a place frequented or held sacred by all; an object of
sense; an idol, a deity; an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>20151<pc>0356-b<k1>Wakkana<k2>Wakkana
{#Wakkana#}¦ {%ṭhakkana, as,%} m., N. of a prince;
(various readings have {%ḍhakkana%} and {%thakkana.%})
<LEND>

<L>20152<pc>0356-b<k1>Wakkura<k2>Wakkura
{#Wakkura#}¦ {%ṭhakkura, as,%} m. an idol, a deity, an
object of reverence or worship; an honorific title
after the name of a distinguished person; (sometimes
written Thākur or popularly Tagore.)
<LEND>

<L>20153<pc>0356-b<k1>WaWam<k2>WaWam
{#WaWam#}¦ {%ṭhaṭham,%} ind. an imitative sound.
See 2. {%ṭha.%}
<LEND>

<L>20154<pc>0356-b<k1>WAra<k2>WAra
{#WAra#}¦ {%ṭhāra, as,%} m. rime, hoar-frost.
<LEND>

<L>20155<pc>0356-b<k1>WAlinI<k2>WAlinI
{#WAlinI#}¦ {%ṭhālinī,%} f. a girdle.
<LEND>

<L>20156<pc>0356-b<k1>WiRWA<k2>WiRWA
{#WiRWA#}¦ {%ṭhiṇṭhā,%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>
<H>{#qa#}

<L>20157<pc>0356-b<k1>qa<k2>qa<h>1
{#qa#} 1¦. {%ḍa,%} the third letter of the cerebral
class of consonants, having much the sound of {%d%} in
<nsi>drum,</nsi> but properly pronounced by keeping back the
tip of the tongue and slightly turning it upwards. In
Bengal {%ḍ%} is often confounded in pronunciation with a
hard {%r%}. {%—Ḍa-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ḍ.%}
<LEND>

<L>20158<pc>0356-b<k1>qa<k2>qa<h>2
{#qa#} 2¦. {%ḍa, as,%} m. a sound; a kind of drum
or tabor; fear; submarine fire; an epithet of Śiva;
({%ā%}), f. a Ḍākinī, i. e. a kind of female imp or goblin;
a basket &c. carried by means of a sling.
<LEND>
[Page0356-c+ 66]

<L>20159<pc>0356-c<k1>qakkArI<k2>qakkArI
{#qakkArI#}¦ {%ḍakkārī,%} f. the lute of the Cāṇḍālas.
<LEND>

<L>20160<pc>0356-c<k1>qaNgara<k2>qaNgara
{#qaNgara#}¦ {%ḍaṅgara, as,%} m. {%= ḍiṅgara,%} throwing,
casting; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of gourd; (also {%ḍaṅgārī,%} &c.)
<LEND>

<L>20161<pc>0356-c<k1>qap<k2>qap
{#qap#}¦ {%ḍap,%} cl. 10. A. {%ḍāpayate,%} &c., to col-
lect, accumulate, heap together.
<LEND>

<L>20162<pc>0356-c<k1>qam<k2>qam
{#qam#}¦ {%ḍam,%} cl. 1. P. {%ḍamati,%} &c., to sound.
<LEND>

<L>20163<pc>0356-c<k1>qama<k2>qama
{#qama#}¦ {%ḍama, as,%} m. a despised mixed caste
(commonly Ḍom), the son of a Cāṇḍālī and a Leṭa,
employed to clear away filth &c.
<LEND>

<L>20164<pc>0356-c<k1>qamara<k2>qamara
{#qamara#}¦ {%ḍamara, as, ā,%} m. f. a riot, tumult,
affray, a conflict without weapons; terrifying an
enemy by shouts and gestures; petty or predatory
warfare carried on by detachments or between
villages and not kings; ({%am%}), n. flight, rout, running
away through fear; [cf. {%ḍāmara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20165<pc>0356-c<k1>qamarin<k2>qamarin
{#qamarin#}¦ {%ḍamarin, ī,%} m. (?) a sort of drum,
= the next.
<LEND>

<L>20166<pc>0356-c<k1>qamaru<k2>qamaru
{%Ḍamaru, us,%}¦ m. a musical instrument, a sort of
small drum shaped like an hour-glass and held in one
hand; anything surprising, any strange occurrence &c.
<LEND>

<L>20167<pc>0356-c<k1>qamaruka<k2>qamaruka
{%Ḍamaruka, am,%}¦ n. a kind of drum.
<LEND>

<L>20168<pc>0356-c<k1>qamp<k2>qamp
{#qamp#}¦ {%ḍamp,%} cl. 10. A. {%ḍampayate,%} &c. (a
various reading for {%ḍap%}), to heap together.
<LEND>

<L>20169<pc>0356-c<k1>qamb<k2>qamb
{#qamb#}¦ {%ḍamb,%} cl. 10. P. {%ḍambayati,%} &c., to
throw, cast, send; order.
<LEND>

<L>20170<pc>0356-c<k1>qambara<k2>qambara
{#qambara#}¦ {%ḍambara, as,%} m., N. of one of the
attendants of Skanda; an assemblage, collection,
mass; ({%as, ā, am%}), famous, renowned.
<LEND>

<L>20171<pc>0356-c<k1>qamB<k2>qamB
{#qamB#}¦ {%ḍambh,%} cl. 10. A. {%ḍambhayate,%} &c.
(various reading for {%ḍap%}), to collect.
<LEND>

<L>20172<pc>0356-c<k1>qayana<k2>qayana
{#qayana#}¦ {%ḍayana.%} See rt. {%ḍī,%} p. 357, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20173<pc>0356-c<k1>qalaka<k2>qalaka
{#qalaka#}¦ {%ḍalaka%} or {%ḍallaka, am,%} n. a sling, a
basket, a Dūlī carried on men's shoulders by means
of a stick and ropes like the beam and strings of a
balance, (presents of fruit, sweetmeats, &c., are usu-
ally sent in this manner); ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20174<pc>0356-c<k1>qalana<k2>qalana
{#qalana#}¦ {%ḍalana%} or {%ḍallana, as,%} m., N. of a
scholiast on the medical work of Su-śruta.
<LEND>

<L>20175<pc>0356-c<k1>qavitTa<k2>qavitTa
{#qavitTa#}¦ {%ḍavittha, as,%} m., N. of a man; a
wooden antelope (?); [cf. {%ḍittha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20176<pc>0356-c<k1>qahu<k2>qahu
{#qahu#}¦ {%ḍahu, us,%} or {%ū, ūs,%} m. the plant Arto-
carpus Lacucha.
<LEND>

<L>20177<pc>0356-c<k1>qAkinI<k2>qAkinI
{#qAkinI#}¦ {%ḍākinī,%} f. a kind of female imp or
evil being attending Kālī and feeding on human
flesh; N. of a place; [cf. {%śākinī.%}] {%—Ḍākinī-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the condition of a female demon.
<LEND>

<L>20178<pc>0356-c<k1>qANkfti<k2>qANkfti
{#qANkfti#}¦ {%ḍān-kṛti, is,%} f. (fr. {%ḍām,%} imitative
sound, and 1. {%kṛti%}), a sound, the clang of a bell,
ding-dong, &c.; [cf. {%ṭāṅ-kāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20179<pc>0356-c<k1>qANgarI<k2>qANgarI
{#qANgarI#}¦ {%ḍāṅgarī,%} f. {%= ḍaṅgarī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20180<pc>0356-c<k1>qAmara<k2>qAmara
{#qAmara#}¦ {%ḍāmara, as,%} m. affray, riot, conflict
without weapons &c. [cf. {%ḍamara%}]; rout, uproar,
the bustle and confusion of festivity or strife; any
surprising thing, sight, or occurrence; a N. common
to six Tantras, viz. the Yoga-ḍāmara, Śiva-ḍ˚, Durgā-
ḍ˚, Sārasvata-ḍ˚, Brahma-ḍ˚, and Gandharva-ḍ˚; N.
of one of the attendants of Śiva; N. of a race or
mixed caste; ({%as, ā, am%}), riotous; [cf. {%uḍ-ḍāmara.%}]
{%—Ḍāmara-tva, am,%} n. the state of one who excites
awe.
<LEND>

<L>20181<pc>0356-c<k1>qAlima<k2>qAlima
{#qAlima#}¦ {%ḍālima, as,%} m. {%= dāḍima,%} a pome-
granate.
<LEND>

<L>20182<pc>0356-c<k1>qAhala<k2>qAhala
{#qAhala#}¦ {%ḍāhala, as,%} m., N. of a people and
their country.
<LEND>

<L>20183<pc>0356-c<k1>qAhuka<k2>qAhuka
{#qAhuka#}¦ {%ḍāhuka, as,%} m. a gallinule; [cf.
{%dātyūha.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0357-a+ 70]

<L>20184<pc>0357-a<k1>qikkarI<k2>qikkarI
{#qikkarI#}¦ {%ḍikkarī,%} f. a young woman; (wrong
form for {%dikkarī.%})
<LEND>

<L>20185<pc>0357-a<k1>qiNgara<k2>qiNgara
{#qiNgara#}¦ {%ḍiṅgara, as,%} m. a servant, a slave;
a rogue, a cheat; a low or depraved man; a fat
man; throwing, flinging; invective, insult (?).
<LEND>

<L>20186<pc>0357-a<k1>qiqakA<k2>qiqakA
{#qiqakA#}¦ {%ḍiḍakā,%} f. perhaps a wrong form
for {%ḍimbhakā.%}
<LEND>

<L>20187<pc>0357-a<k1>qiqima<k2>qiqima
{#qiqima#}¦ {%ḍiḍima%} or {%ḍiḍimāṇaka,%} a kind of
bird; [cf. {%ṭiṭṭibha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20188<pc>0357-a<k1>qiRqika<k2>qiRqika
{#qiRqika#}¦ {%ḍiṇḍika, as,%} m., N. of a mouse
whose story {{istold->is told||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} in the Mahā-bh. Udyoga-parva 5440.
<LEND>

<L>20189<pc>0357-a<k1>qiRqima<k2>qiRqima
{#qiRqima#}¦ {%ḍiṇḍima, as,%} m. a musical instru-
ment, a kind of small drum or tabor; a plant bearing
a small fruit, Carissa Carandas. {%—Ḍiṇḍimeśvara-%}
{%tīrtha (˚ma-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>20190<pc>0357-a<k1>qiRqira<k2>qiRqira
{#qiRqira#}¦ {%ḍiṇḍira, as,%} m. cuttle-fish bone
considered to be the foam of the sea; [cf. {%hiṇḍira%}
and {%ḍiṇḍīra.%}] {%—Ḍiṇḍira-modaka, am,%} n. garlic.
<LEND>

<L>20191<pc>0357-a<k1>qiRqiSa<k2>qiRqiSa
{#qiRqiSa#}¦ {%ḍiṇḍiśa, as,%} m. {%= ṭiṇḍiśa = tindiśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>20192<pc>0357-a<k1>qiRqIra<k2>qiRqIra
{#qiRqIra#}¦ {%ḍiṇḍīra, as,%} m. cuttle-fish bone
held to be the foam of the sea; [cf. {%ḍiṇḍira.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20193<pc>0357-a<k1>qitTa<k2>qitTa
{#qitTa#}¦ {%ḍittha, as,%} m., N. of a man; a wooden
elephant; a good-looking dark-coloured young man
who is conversant with every branch of learning;
[cf. {%ḍavittha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20194<pc>0357-a<k1>qip<k2>qip
{#qip#}¦ {%ḍip%} or {%ḍimp%} or {%ḍimbh,%} cl. 10. A. {%ḍe-%}
{%payate%} or {%ḍimpayate%} or {%ḍimbhayate,%} to
collect, heap together; {%ḍip,%} cl. 4. 6. 10. P. {%ḍipyati,%}
{%ḍipati, ḍepayati,%} to throw, cast, send or order; to
direct; also {%ḍimb,%} cl. 10. A. {%ḍimbayate;%} [cf. rt. {%ṭip.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20195<pc>0357-a<k1>qim<k2>qim
{#qim#}¦ {%ḍim%} (a Sautra root or one not occur-
ring in the Dhātu-pāṭha), to hurt, injure.
<LEND>

<L>20196<pc>0357-a<k1>qima<k2>qima
{#qima#}¦ {%ḍima, as,%} m. a dramatic entertainment,
dramatic exhibition of battle or siege, such as the
Tripura-dāha, in which the destruction of the three
cities of Tripura by Śiva is dramatised; a kind of
mixed caste.
<LEND>

<L>20197<pc>0357-a<k1>qimba<k2>qimba
{#qimba#}¦ {%ḍimba, as,%} m. affray, riot, conflict
without weapons, mutual defiance, petty and predatory
war, &c. [cf. {%ḍamara%}]; sound or noise occasioned
by terror; an egg; a chrysalis; the embryo in the
first stage of its existence; a new-born child, any young
animal; the bladder, the spleen, the lungs; the
uterus; a globe or ball. {%—Ḍimba-yuddha, am,%} n.
or {%ḍimbāhava (˚ba-āh˚), as,%} m. petty warfare,
affray, skirmish, riot, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20198<pc>0357-a<k1>qimbikA<k2>qimbikA
{#qimbikA#}¦ {%ḍimbikā,%} f. a libidinous woman;
a bubble; a kind of water-fly; {%= śoṇaka,%} Calosanthes
Indica.
<LEND>

<L>20199<pc>0357-a<k1>qimB<k2>qimB
{#qimB#}¦ {%ḍimbh%} or {%ḍimb.%} See rt. {%ḍip%} above.
<LEND>

<L>20200<pc>0357-a<k1>qimBa<k2>qimBa
{#qimBa#}¦ {%ḍimbha, as,%} m. a new-born child,
any young animal; a fool, an idiot, a blockhead;
({%ā%}), f. an infant. {%—Ḍimbha-cakra, am,%} n. a mystical
circle; a diagram for telling fortunes.
<LEND>

<L>20201<pc>0357-a<k1>qimBaka<k2>qimBaka
{%Ḍimbhaka, as, ikā,%}¦ m. f. a new-born child, young
animal; ({%as%}), m., N. of a general of Jarā-sandha,
younger brother of Haṃsa and son of Brahma-datta.
<LEND>

<L>20202<pc>0357-a<k1>qI<k2>qI
{#qI#}¦ {%ḍī,%} cl. 1. 4. A. {%ḍayate, ḍīyate, ḍiḍye,%}
{%ḍayiṣyate, aḍayiṣṭa, ḍayitum,%} to fly, pass
through the air; to go: Caus. P. {%ḍāyayati, -yitum,%}
{%aḍīḍayat:%} Desid. {%ḍiḍayiṣate:%} Intens. {%ḍeḍīyate,%}
{%ḍeḍayīti%} or {%ḍeḍeti.%}
<LEND>

<L>20203<pc>0357-a<k1>qayana<k2>qayana
{%Ḍayana, am,%}¦ n. flying in the air, the flight of a
bird; a car or litter carried upon men's shoulders,
a palanquin, a Dūlī.
<LEND>

<L>20204<pc>0357-a<k1>qayamAna<k2>qayamAna
{%Ḍayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ flying, passing through
the air.
<LEND>

<L>20205<pc>0357-a<k1>qItara<k2>qItara
{%Ḍītara, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. following one another
quickly.
<LEND>

<L>20206<pc>0357-a<k1>qIna<k2>qIna
{%Ḍīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ flown, flying; ({%am%}), n. flying,
[Page0357-b+ 64]
the flight of a bird. {%—Ḍīna-ḍīnaka, as,%} m. flying
reiteratedly. {%—Ḍīnāvaḍīna (˚na-av˚), am,%} n. flying
up and down; flying badly.
<LEND>

<L>20207<pc>0357-b<k1>ququBa<k2>ququBa
{#ququBa#}¦ {%ḍuḍubha%} or {%ḍuḍuma, as,%} m. or {%ḍuṇḍu,%}
{%us,%} f. or {%ḍuṇḍubha, as,%} m. a kind of snake (Am-
phisbæna) or lizard.
<LEND>

<L>20208<pc>0357-b<k1>qORquBa<k2>qORquBa
{%Ḍauṇḍubha, as, ī, am,%}¦ of or belonging to an
Amphisbæna.
<LEND>

<L>20209<pc>0357-b<k1>quRqula<k2>quRqula
{#quRqula#}¦ {%ḍuṇḍula, as,%} m. a small owl.
<LEND>

<L>20210<pc>0357-b<k1>qunduka<k2>qunduka
{#qunduka#}¦ {%ḍunduka, as,%} m. a gallinule, {%= ḍāhuka.%}
<LEND>

<L>20211<pc>0357-b<k1>quli<k2>quli
{#quli#}¦ {%ḍuli, is,%} f. a small turtle, a female
turtle, {%= duli, kamaṭhī.%}
<LEND>

<L>20212<pc>0357-b<k1>qulikA<k2>qulikA
{#qulikA#}¦ {%ḍulikā,%} f. a kind of wagtail.
<LEND>

<L>20213<pc>0357-b<k1>qulI<k2>qulI
{#qulI#}¦ {%ḍulī,%} f. a kind of pot-herb, {%= cillī.%}
<LEND>

<L>20214<pc>0357-b<k1>qoqI<k2>qoqI
{#qoqI#}¦ {%ḍoḍī,%} f. a sort of shrub, {%= jīvantī,%}
{%jīvanī,%} &c.; [cf. {%kṣupaḍoḍa-muṣṭi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20215<pc>0357-b<k1>qoma<k2>qoma
{#qoma#}¦ {%ḍoma, as,%} m. a man of low caste, a
Ḍom; [cf. {%ḍama, ḍomba;%} cf. also the N. for the
Gypsies, {%Rom.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20216<pc>0357-b<k1>qomba<k2>qomba
{#qomba#}¦ {%ḍomba, as,%} m. a man of low caste
obtaining a livelihood by singing and music &c.; N.
of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20217<pc>0357-b<k1>qora<k2>qora
{#qora#}¦ {%ḍora%} or {%ḍoraka, am,%} n. a fillet of
thread or cord tied round the arm or wrist; the
string for tying a packet or parcel.
<LEND>

<L>20218<pc>0357-b<k1>qoraqI<k2>qoraqI
{#qoraqI#}¦ {%ḍoraḍī,%} f. a kind of Solanum, {%=%}
{%vṛhatī.%}
<LEND>

<L>20219<pc>0357-b<k1>qORquBa<k2>qORquBa
{#qORquBa#}¦ {%ḍauṇḍubha%} (scil. {%rūpa%}), the form of
an Amphisbæna. See under {%ḍuḍubha.%}
<LEND>

<L>20220<pc>0357-b<k1>qval<k2>qval
{#qval#}¦ {%ḍval,%} Caus. P. {%ḍvālayati,%} &c., to
mix; [cf. rt. {%ṭval.%}]
<LEND>
<H>{#Qa#}

<L>20221<pc>0357-b<k1>Qa<k2>Qa<h>1
{#Qa#} 1¦. {%ḍha,%} the aspirate of the preceding
letter; its use as an initial letter is very limited, and
several of the words in which it occurs can scarcely
be regarded as pure Sanskrit. {%—Ḍha-kāra, as,%} m.
the letter or sound {%ḍh.%}
<LEND>

<L>20222<pc>0357-b<k1>Qa<k2>Qa<h>2
{#Qa#} 2¦. {%ḍha, as,%} m. an imitative sound; a
large drum; a dog's tail; a dog; a serpent; void of
qualities (?).
<LEND>

<L>20223<pc>0357-b<k1>Qakka<k2>Qakka
{#Qakka#}¦ {%ḍhakka, as,%} m., N. of a city or district
(commonly {%ḍhākā%} or {%dhakka;%} the word is said also
to signify a large sacred building); ({%ā%}), f. a large or
double drum, a Ḍhāk; coveting; disappearance.
<LEND>

<L>20224<pc>0357-b<k1>Qakkana<k2>Qakkana
{#Qakkana#}¦ {%ḍhakkana, as,%} m., N. of a man;
(also written {%ṭakkana, ḍhakkama, thakkana.%})
<LEND>

<L>20225<pc>0357-b<k1>QakkArI<k2>QakkArI
{#QakkArI#}¦ {%ḍhakkārī,%} f. an epithet of the god-
dess Tāriṇī or Tārā, a Tāntrika form of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>20226<pc>0357-b<k1>QaNka<k2>QaNka
{#QaNka#}¦ {%ḍhaṅka, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>20227<pc>0357-b<k1>QaRWI<k2>QaRWI
{#QaRWI#}¦ {%ḍhaṇṭhī, is,%} f. {%= vākya-viśeṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>20228<pc>0357-b<k1>QAmarA<k2>QAmarA
{#QAmarA#}¦ {%ḍhāmarā,%} f. a goose.
<LEND>

<L>20229<pc>0357-b<k1>QAla<k2>QAla
{#QAla#}¦ {%ḍhāla, am,%} n. a shield.
<LEND>

<L>20230<pc>0357-b<k1>QAlin<k2>QAlin
{%Ḍhālin, ī,%}¦ m. a warrior armed with a shield, a
shield-bearer.
<LEND>

<L>20231<pc>0357-b<k1>QuRQ<k2>QuRQ
{#QuRQ#}¦ {%ḍhuṇḍh, ḍhuṇḍhati%} (properly a
Sautra root not occurring in the Dhātu-
pāṭha), to search, seek.
<LEND>

<L>20232<pc>0357-b<k1>QuRQana<k2>QuRQana
{%Ḍhuṇḍhana, am,%}¦ n. seeking, investigating.
<LEND>

<L>20233<pc>0357-b<k1>QuRQi<k2>QuRQi
{%Ḍhuṇḍhi, is,%}¦ m. an epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Ḍhuṇḍhi-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m., N. of an author who was the father
of Bāla-Kṛṣṇa and uncle of Śaṅkara-dīkṣita.
<LEND>

<L>20234<pc>0357-b<k1>QuRQita<k2>QuRQita
{%Ḍhuṇḍhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sought, inquired.
<LEND>

<L>20235<pc>0357-b<k1>QeNka<k2>QeNka
{#QeNka#}¦ {%ḍheṅka, as,%} m. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>20236<pc>0357-b<k1>Qola<k2>Qola
{#Qola#}¦ {%ḍhola, as,%} m. a large drum or tabor.
<LEND>
[Page0357-c+ 70]

<L>20237<pc>0357-c<k1>QOk<k2>QOk
{#QOk#}¦ {%ḍhauk,%} cl. 1. A. {%ḍhaukate, ḍu-%}
{%ḍhauke, ḍhaukiṣyate, aḍhaukiṣṭa,%}
{%ḍhaukitum,%} to go, move, approach: Caus. {%ḍhau-%}
{%kayati, -yitum, aḍuḍhaukat,%} to bring near, cause
to approach, offer: Desid. {%ḍuḍhaukiṣate:%} Intens.
{%ḍoḍhaukyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>20238<pc>0357-c<k1>QOkana<k2>QOkana
{%Ḍhaukana, am,%}¦ n. offering; a present, a bribe.
<LEND>
<H>{#Ra#}¦

<L>20239<pc>0357-c<k1>Ra<k2>Ra<h>1
{#Ra#} 1¦. {%ṇa,%} the nasal {%ṇ%} belonging to the
third or cerebral class of consonants. {%—Ṇa-kāra, as,%}
m. the letter or sound {%ṇ.%}
<LEND>

<L>20240<pc>0357-c<k1>Ra<k2>Ra<h>2
{#Ra#} 2¦. {%ṇa, as,%} m. knowledge; certainty,
ascertainment; ornament; a water or summer-house;
a bad man; a N. of Vindu-deva, said to be a Jaina
deity; an epithet of Śiva; the sound of negation;
gift, giving.
<LEND>

<L>20241<pc>0357-c<k1>Rad<k2>Rad
{#Rad#}¦ {%ṇad, ṇam, ṇaś,%} &c. Many roots which
really begin with the dental {%n%} are written in
native grammars and the Dhātu-pāṭha with the cerebral
{%ṇ%} to show that the nasal is liable to be cerebralized
when preceded by prepositions like {%pra, pari,%} &c.
These roots will be found in the present Dictionary
under the dental {%n.%} See {%nad, nam, naś,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>20242<pc>0357-c<k1>Rya<k2>Rya
{#Rya#}¦ {%ṇya, as,%} m., N. of an ocean in Brahma-
loka.
<LEND>
<H>{#ta#}

<L>20243<pc>0357-c<k1>ta<k2>ta<h>1
{#ta#} 1¦. {%ta,%} the first consonant of the fourth
or dental class, the sound of which is more dental
than the English {%t%}. {%—Ta-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or
sound {%t%}. {%—Ta-varga, as,%} m. the dental class of letters.
{%—Tavargīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the dental class.
<LEND>

<L>20244<pc>0357-c<k1>ta<k2>ta<h>2
{#ta#} 2¦. {%ta,%} the base of the third personal
pronoun in all the cases except the nom. sing. masc.
and fem. See {%tad,%} p. 360.
<LEND>

<L>20245<pc>0357-c<k1>ta<k2>ta<h>3
{#ta#} 3¦. {%ta, as,%} m. a tail; any tail except that
of the Bos Gaurus; the tail of a jackal; the breast;
the womb; the hip or flank; a warrior; a thief; a
wicked man; an outcast, a barbarian or Mleccha; a
Buddha; a jewel; nectar, the food of the immortals;
({%ā, am%}), f. n. passing, crossing; virtue, sanctity;
({%ā%}), f., N. of Lakṣmī.
<LEND>

<L>20246<pc>0357-c<k1>taMs<k2>taMs
{#taMs#}¦ {%taṃs,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%taṃsate, tatasre,%}
&c., to shake, move to and fro; to pour
out (metaphorically a wish); to request: Caus. P.
{%taṃsayati, -yitum,%} to move to and fro, shake; cl.
1. 10. P. {%taṃsati, taṃsayati,%} to decorate; [cf. Old
Pruss. <nsi>teisint,</nsi> ‘to honour;’ <nsi>teisi,</nsi> ‘honour.’]
<LEND>

<L>20247<pc>0357-c<k1>taMsu<k2>taMsu
{#taMsu#}¦ {%taṃsu, us,%} m., N. of a prince of the
lunar race, a son of Matināra (or Rantināra); in
some places he is called Taṃsu-rodha.
<LEND>

<L>20248<pc>0357-c<k1>tak<k2>tak
{#tak#}¦ {%tak,%} cl. 1. 2. P., Ved. {%takati, takti,%}
{%tatāka, takiṣyati, atakīt%} and {%atākīt,%}
{%takitum,%} to fly (as an arrow or bird), fly at, rush or
pounce upon; to laugh at or deride; to bear.
<LEND>

<L>20249<pc>0357-c<k1>takavAna<k2>takavAna
{%Takavāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. rushing, darting along,
moving quickly; (Sāy.) shaking, moving with dif-
ficulty.
<LEND>

<L>20250<pc>0357-c<k1>taku<k2>taku
{%Taku, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. rushing, moving quickly;
(Sāy.) approaching.
<LEND>

<L>20251<pc>0357-c<k1>takta<k2>takta
{%Takta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. rushing or darting along.
<LEND>

<L>20252<pc>0357-c<k1>takman<k2>takman<h>1
1. {%takman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. (especially in the Atharva-
veda), a kind of disease, or probably a whole class of
diseases, accompanied by eruptions of the skin.
{%—Takma-nāśana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. removing the
disease called Takman.
<LEND>

<L>20253<pc>0357-c<k1>takya<k2>takya
{%Takya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be borne or endured;
laughable, ridiculous.
<LEND>

<L>20254<pc>0357-c<k1>takva<k2>takva
{%Takva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. quick (?).
<LEND>

<L>20255<pc>0357-c<k1>takvan<k2>takvan
{%Takvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. rushing, darting, pouncing
on; ({%ā%}), m. a bird, especially a bird of prey; (Sāy.)
[Page0358-a+ 75]
a fleet horse; a thief. {%—Takva-vī, īs,%} m., Ved. a
bird, bird of prey, or a particular bird. {%—Takvavīya,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. rapid flight, rush.
<LEND>

<L>20256<pc>0358-a<k1>taka<k2>taka
{#taka#}¦ {%taka, as, ā, at%} (fr. {%tad%} with {%ak%} inserted
after {%t%}), that.
<LEND>

<L>20257<pc>0358-a<k1>takarI<k2>takarI
{#takarI#}¦ {%takarī,%} f., Ved. a particular part of
the pudenda of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>20258<pc>0358-a<k1>takila<k2>takila
{#takila#}¦ {%takila, as, ā, am,%} fraudulent, crafty,
a rogue or cheat; ({%ā%}), f. a medicament, drug; a
kind of plant.
<LEND>

<L>20259<pc>0358-a<k1>takkola<k2>takkola
{#takkola#}¦ {%takkola,%} the tree Pimenta Acris,
commonly called Kaṅkola.
<LEND>

<L>20260<pc>0358-a<k1>takman<k2>takman<h>2
{#takman#} 2¦. {%takman, a,%} n. {%= tokman = apatya,%}
offspring, a child; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τέκνον;</lang> cf. also 1. {%tak-%}
{%man%} under rt. {%tak,%} p. 357, col. 3.]
<LEND>

<L>20261<pc>0358-a<k1>takra<k2>takra
{#takra#}¦ {%takra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%tañc%}), buttermilk
which is half water; (according to others) with a
fourth or three parts of water. {%—Takra-kūrcikā,%} f.
inspissated buttermilk. {%—Takra-bhid, t,%} n. (?) the
fruit of Feronia Elephantum. {%—Takra-māṃsa, am,%}
n. meat fried with ghee, turmeric, Asa Fœtida, &c.,
and eaten with buttermilk. {%—Takra-sāra, am,%} n.
fresh butter. {%—Takrāṭa (˚ra-aṭa), as,%} m. a
churning-stick; [cf. {%dadhi-cāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20262<pc>0358-a<k1>takz<k2>takz<h>1
{#takz#} 1¦. {%takṣ,%} cl. 1. 5. P. (sometimes A.)
{%takṣati, -te, takṣṇoti, -ṇute, tatakṣa,%}
{%-ṣe, takṣiṣyati%} or {%takṣyati, -te, atakṣīt,%}
{%takṣitum%} or {%taṣṭum,%} to form by cutting, plane,
chisel, pare, chip, chop, slice, split; to cut, wound;
to make thin; to fashion, form (out of wood &c.),
to make, create in general; to form in the mind, in-
vent; to make one's own, appropriate; to cover; to
skin, peel: Caus. {%takṣayati, -yitum, atatakṣat:%}
Desid. {%titakṣiṣati%} or {%titakṣati%} (?): Intens. {%tāta-%}
{%kṣyate, tātaṣṭi;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>taszau:</nsi> Russ. <nsi>tesatj:</nsi>
Pol. <nsi>cieśla:</nsi> Lat. <nsi>tignum:</nsi> Old Pruss. <nsi>tikint,</nsi> ‘to
make;’ <nsi>tikinnimai, teikusna:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">τίκτω, τέκνον,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τεύχω, τάσσω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>20263<pc>0358-a<k1>takz<k2>takz<h>2
2. {%takṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) paring,
cutting, forming by cutting, working; [cf. {%kāṣṭha-%}
{%takṣ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20264<pc>0358-a<k1>takza<k2>takza
{%Takṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ cutting off, cutting through;
({%as%}), m. (at the end of a comp.) {%= takṣan,%} a car-
penter [cf. {%kauṭa-takṣa%} and {%grāma-t˚%}]; N. of a
serpent-demon; N. of a son of Bharata; N. of a
son of Vṛka.
<LEND>

<L>20265<pc>0358-a<k1>takzaka<k2>takzaka
{%Takṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a cutter, one who cuts off, a
wood-cutter, a carpenter; the divine architect or
artist Viśva-karman; the Sūtra-dhāra or manager
and chief actor in the prelude of a drama; one of the
principal Nāgas or serpents of Pātāla; N. of a son
of Prasena-jit and father of Bṛhad-bala; N. of a
particular tree.
<LEND>

<L>20266<pc>0358-a<k1>takzakIyA<k2>takzakIyA
{%Takṣakīyā,%}¦ f., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>20267<pc>0358-a<k1>takzaRa<k2>takzaRa
{%Takṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. cutting, paring, peeling, planing;
({%ī%}), f. a carpenter's adze or similar instrument for
cutting, an axe &c; ({%as%}), m. a cutter, an abrader;
(in mathem.) the divisor employed in certain com-
putations.
<LEND>

<L>20268<pc>0358-a<k1>takzan<k2>takzan
{%Takṣan, ā,%}¦ m. (Ved. acc. {%takṣāṇam%} or {%takṣa-%}
{%ṇam%}), a wood-cutter, a carpenter; N. of a preceptor;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τέκτω.</lang>] {%—Takṣa-śilā,%} f., N. of a city of
the Gandhāras, the <lang n="greek">Τάξιλα</lang> of Ptolemy in the Pañjāb;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of this city. {%—Takṣa-%}
{%śilā-vatī,%} f., N. of a district. {%—Takṣāyaskāra%}
{%(˚ṣa-ay˚), am,%} n. a carpenter and a blacksmith.
<LEND>

<L>20269<pc>0358-a<k1>takzitf<k2>takzitf
{%Takṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who cuts, pares, &c.;
a cutter.
<LEND>

<L>20270<pc>0358-a<k1>takzya<k2>takzya
{%Takṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be formed or fashioned.
<LEND>

<L>20271<pc>0358-a<k1>tagaqavallI<k2>tagaqavallI
{#tagaqavallI#}¦ {%tagaḍa-vallī,%} f. ({%tagaḍa = tagara%}),
the shrub Cassia Auriculata.
<LEND>

<L>20272<pc>0358-a<k1>tagara<k2>tagara
{#tagara#}¦ {%tagara, am,%} n. the shrub Tabernæ-
montana Coronaria and a {{fragrnt->fragrant||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} powder prepared
from it; N. of a town; ({%as%}), m. a thorny shrub,
Vangueria Spinosa; another plant, commonly Taga-
[Page0358-b+ 72]
ra-mūla; [cf. {%kāla-parṇa, kaṭu-cchada, madana-%}
{%vṛkṣa.%}] {%—Tagara-pādikā, am,%} f. n. or {%tagara-%}
{%pādī,%} f. the plant Tabernæmontana Coronaria and
its powder. {%—Tagara-śikhin, ī,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20273<pc>0358-b<k1>tagarika<k2>tagarika
{%Tagarika, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a seller of Tagara powder.
<LEND>

<L>20274<pc>0358-b<k1>taNk<k2>taNk
{#taNk#}¦ {%taṅk,%} cl. 1. P. {%taṅkati, tataṅka,%}
{%taṅkitum,%} to live in distress, be in poverty
or pain; to go (?); [cf. Hib. <nsi>teicheamh,</nsi> ‘a going,
passage;’ <nsi>tochamhlaim,</nsi> ‘I march;’ <nsi>tochar,</nsi> ‘a
causeway, pavement;’ <nsi>toichim,</nsi> ‘going, departing:’
Lith. <nsi>tekù,</nsi> ‘I run;’ <nsi>tákas,</nsi> ‘a path;’ <nsi>tekûnas,</nsi> ‘a
runner:’ Slav. <nsi>takû,</nsi> ‘I run.’]
<LEND>

<L>20275<pc>0358-b<k1>taNka<k2>taNka<h>1
1. {%taṅka, as,%}¦ m. grief produced by separation from a
beloved object; fear, terror; [cf. {%ā-taṅka, tapas-taṅka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20276<pc>0358-b<k1>taNka<k2>taNka<h>2
{#taNka#} 2¦. {%taṅka, as, am,%} m. n. (for {%ṭaṅka%}), an
axe, a stone-cutter's chisel.
<LEND>

<L>20277<pc>0358-b<k1>taNg<k2>taNg
{#taNg#}¦ {%taṅg,%} cl. 1. P. {%taṅgati,%} &c., to go,
move; to stumble; to shake, tremble; [cf.
Hib. <nsi>tagaidh,</nsi> ‘advance;’ <nsi>tigim,</nsi> ‘I come, go.’]
<LEND>

<L>20278<pc>0358-b<k1>taNgaRa<k2>taNgaRa
{#taNgaRa#}¦ {%taṅgaṇa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
in the upper part of the valley of the Sarayū.
<LEND>

<L>20279<pc>0358-b<k1>taNgalva<k2>taNgalva
{#taNgalva#}¦ {%taṅgalva, as,%} m., Ved., N. of an
evil spirit.
<LEND>

<L>20280<pc>0358-b<k1>tacCIla<k2>tacCIla
{#tacCIla#}¦ {%tacchīla.%} See {%tad,%} p. 360, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20281<pc>0358-b<k1>tajja<k2>tajja
{#tajja#}¦ {%taj-ja, taj-jaya,%} &c. See {%tad,%} p. 360.
<LEND>

<L>20282<pc>0358-b<k1>tajvI<k2>tajvI
{#tajvI#}¦ {%tajvī,%} f. {%= hiṅgu-pattrī.%}
<LEND>

<L>20283<pc>0358-b<k1>taYc<k2>taYc<h>1
{#taYc#} 1¦. {%tañc%} or {%tañj,%} cl. 7. P. {%tanakti,%}
{%tatañca, taṅkṣyati%} and {%tañciṣyati,%}
{%atāṅkṣīt%} and {%atañcīt, taṅktum%} and {%tañcitum,%} to
contract, shrink: Caus. {%tañcayati, -yitum:%} Desid.
{%titaṅkṣati%} or {%titañciṣati:%} Intens. {%tātacyate,%}
{%tātaṅkti.%}
<LEND>

<L>20284<pc>0358-b<k1>taYc<k2>taYc<h>2
{#taYc#} 2¦. {%tañc,%} cl. 1. P. {%tañcati,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>20285<pc>0358-b<k1>taYj<k2>taYj
{#taYj#}¦ {%tañj,%} a various reading for 1. {%tañc%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>20286<pc>0358-b<k1>taw<k2>taw
{#taw#}¦ {%taṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%taṭati,%} &c., to rumble,
groan; to be raised or elevated, rise; cl. 10.
P. {%tāṭayati,%} to beat, strike; (a various reading for
{%taḍ%}); [cf. Lith. <nsi>tesiu,</nsi> ‘to raise.’]
<LEND>

<L>20287<pc>0358-b<k1>tawa<k2>tawa
{%Taṭa, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a slope, an acclivity, declivity,
precipice; the sky or horizon (as appearing to slope);
({%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}), m. f. n. a shore or bank; a term
applied to certain parts of the human body which
have, as it were, sloping sides (e. g. {%śroṇi-taṭa,%}
{%stana-taṭa,%} q. v.); ({%am%}), n. a field; [cf. {%a-taṭa,%}
{%ut-taṭa, pura-taṭī.%}] {%—Taṭa-stha, as, ā, am,%} situ-
ated on a declivity, or on a bank or shore; standing
near; indifferent, not partaking of or engaging in,
alien, neuter; ({%as%}), m. an indifferent person, one
neither a friend nor a foe; ({%am%}), n. that property
which is distinct from the nature of anything and yet
is the faculty by which it is known, spiritual essence
unconnected with bodily wants or passions.
<LEND>

<L>20288<pc>0358-b<k1>tawaka<k2>tawaka
{%Taṭaka, am,%}¦ n. a shore or bank.
<LEND>

<L>20289<pc>0358-b<k1>tawAka<k2>tawAka
{%Taṭāka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a pond deep enough for
the lotus and other aquatic flowers.
<LEND>

<L>20290<pc>0358-b<k1>tawinI<k2>tawinI
{%Taṭinī,%}¦ f. a river (as having a bank). {%—Taṭinī-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘the lord of the rivers,’ the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>20291<pc>0358-b<k1>tawya<k2>tawya
{%Taṭya, as, ā, am,%}¦ living on hills or slopes,
epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>20292<pc>0358-b<k1>tawatawa<k2>tawatawa
{#tawatawa#}¦ {%taṭataṭa%} (an onomatopoetic word to
express a particular noise), rumbling, thundering, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20293<pc>0358-b<k1>taq<k2>taq
{#taq#}¦ {%taḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%tāḍayati, -yitum, atī-%}
{%taḍat%} (redupl. perf. {%tatāḍa%}), to beat, strike,
hit, knock; to strike with arrows, wound, punish; to
strike a musical instrument; (in astronomy) to strike
against, touch, partially obscure or eclipse; (in arith-
metic) to multiply; to speak; to shine; [cf. Hib.
<nsi>tathaim,</nsi> ‘I kill, destroy;’ <nsi>tathog,</nsi> ‘a clash, a slap.’]
<LEND>

<L>20294<pc>0358-b<k1>taqit<k2>taqit
{%Taḍit, t,%}¦ f., Ved. (in Ṛg-veda {%taḷit%}), lightning;
{%taḷit%} or {%taḷitas,%} ind. closely, near, (as it were
striking against.) {%—Taḍit-kumāra, ās,%} m. pl. (with
[Page0358-c+ 72]
Jainas) N. of a class of deities belonging to the
Bhavana-patis. {%—Taḍit-prabhā,%} f., N. of one of
the Mātṛs attendant on Skanda. {%—Taḍit-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having lightning, emitting lightning,
flashing; ({%ān%}), m. a cloud, a kind of Cyperus, {%=%}
{%mustaka%}. {%—Taḍid-garbha, as,%} m. a cloud, ‘con-
taining lightning.’ {%—Taḍin-maya, as, ī, am,%} con-
sisting of lightning, flashing like lightning. {%—Taḍin-%}
{%mālāvalambin (˚lā-av˚), ī, inī, i,%} having garlands
of lightning hanging down. {%—Taḍil-latā,%} f. forked
lightning. {%—Taḍil-lekhā,%} f. a line or streak of lightning.
<LEND>

<L>20295<pc>0358-c<k1>taqaga<k2>taqaga
{#taqaga#}¦ {%taḍaga, as,%} m. {%= taḍāga,%} a pool, lake.
<LEND>

<L>20296<pc>0358-c<k1>taqAka<k2>taqAka
{#taqAka#}¦ {%taḍāka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%taḍ%}),
{%= taḍāga,%} a pond or pool deep enough for the lotus;
({%ā%}), f. a blow; a bank, a shore; splendor, lightning (?);
[cf. {%taṭāka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20297<pc>0358-c<k1>taqAkin<k2>taqAkin
{%Taḍākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having pools or lakes.
<LEND>

<L>20298<pc>0358-c<k1>taqAga<k2>taqAga
{%Taḍāga, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a pond or pool deep enough
for the growth of the lotus &c.; a tank; a trap for
catching deer. {%—Taḍāga-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
pools or lakes; ({%ān%}), m., scil. {%deśa,%} a district.
<LEND>

<L>20299<pc>0358-c<k1>taqAGAta<k2>taqAGAta
{#taqAGAta#}¦ {%taḍāghāta, as,%} m. a blow from an
elephant's uplifted trunk; probably a wrong form
for {%tāḍāghāta (tāḍa-āghāta%}).
<LEND>

<L>20300<pc>0358-c<k1>taqit<k2>taqit
{#taqit#}¦ {%taḍit.%} See {%taḍ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20301<pc>0358-c<k1>taRq<k2>taRq
{#taRq#}¦ {%taṇḍ%} (connected with {%taḍ%}), cl. 1. A.
{%taṇḍate,%} &c., to beat.
<LEND>

<L>20302<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqa<k2>taRqa
{#taRqa#}¦ {%taṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20303<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqaka<k2>taRqaka
{#taRqaka#}¦ {%taṇḍaka, as, am,%} m. n. complete per-
formance or preparation; decoration; the upright
post of a house; composition abounding in compound
words; ({%as%}), m. a juggler, a cheat; the trunk of a
tree; froth, foam; a wagtail; [cf. {%tāṇḍaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20304<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqi<k2>taRqi
{#taRqi#}¦ {%taṇḍi, is,%} m., N. of a man; also of
a Ṛṣi in the Kṛta-yuga who saw and praised Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>20305<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqin<k2>taRqin
{#taRqin#}¦ {%taṇḍin, ī,%} m., N. of the author of
a work on prosody quoted by Piṅgala.
<LEND>

<L>20306<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqu<k2>taRqu
{#taRqu#}¦ {%taṇḍu, us,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's
door-keepers and one of the original teachers of the
arts of dancing and mimicry.
<LEND>

<L>20307<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqurIRa<k2>taRqurIRa
{#taRqurIRa#}¦ {%taṇḍurīṇa, as,%} m. one not a citizen,
a barbarian; a fool, a blockhead; the water in which
rice has been soaked or steeped.
<LEND>

<L>20308<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqula<k2>taRqula
{#taRqula#}¦ {%taṇḍula, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. {%taḍ,%} cf. {%taṇḍ%}), grain after threshing and winnowing,
especially rice; rice used as a weight; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a
vermifuge plant or its seed [cf. {%taṇḍulu, viḍaṅga%}];
({%as%}), m. a pot-herb, a sort of amaranth, {%= taṇḍulīya;%}
{%(ā),%} f. a kind of plant, {%= odanāhvayā, odanikā,%}
{%mahā-samaṅgā;%} a sort of Sida; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
several plants, {%= yava-tiktā, śaśāṇḍulī, taṇḍulīya.%}
{%—Taṇḍula-kaṇa, as,%} m. a grain of rice. {%—Taṇḍula-%}
{%deva, as,%} m., N. of a poet of Kaśmīra. {%—Taṇḍula-%}
{%phalā,%} f. long pepper. {%—Taṇḍulāmbu (˚la-am˚),%}
{%u,%} n. rice-water or gruel. {%—Taṇḍulottha (˚la-ut˚),%}
{%am,%} n. or {%taṇḍulodaka (˚la-ud˚), am,%} n. water in
which rice has been boiled, rice-gruel. {%—Taṇḍu-%}
{%laugha (˚la-ogha), as,%} m. a prickly sort of bamboo,
Bambusa Spinosa; a heap of grain.
<LEND>

<L>20309<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqulIka<k2>taRqulIka
{%Taṇḍulīka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of pot-herb, Amaranthus
Polygonoides.
<LEND>

<L>20310<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqulIya<k2>taRqulIya
{%Taṇḍulīya, as,%}¦ m. a kind of pot-herb, Amaranthus
Polygonoides; a vermifuge plant [cf. {%viḍaṅga%}]; a
mineral, iron pyrites.
<LEND>

<L>20311<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqulIyaka<k2>taRqulIyaka
{%Taṇḍulīyaka, as,%}¦ m. Amaranthus Polygonoides;
a vermifuge seed; [cf. {%viḍaṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20312<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqulu<k2>taRqulu
{%Taṇḍulu, us,%}¦ m. a plant the seeds of which are
used as a vermifuge; [cf. {%viḍaṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20313<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqulera<k2>taRqulera
{%Taṇḍulera, as,%}¦ m. Amaranthus Polygonoides.
<LEND>

<L>20314<pc>0358-c<k1>taRqUlikASrama<k2>taRqUlikASrama
{#taRqUlikASrama#}¦ {%taṇḍūlikāśrama (˚ka-āś˚), as,%}
m., N. of a hermitage, Mahā-bh. Vana-parva 4084.
<LEND>

<L>20315<pc>0358-c<k1>tat<k2>tat<h>1
{#tat#} 1¦. {%tat%} for {%tad,%} that. See {%tad,%} p. 360.
<LEND>
[Page0359-a+ 75]

<L>20316<pc>0359-a<k1>tat<k2>tat<h>2
{#tat#} 2¦. {%tat,%} 2. {%tata.%} See rt. 3. {%tan,%} p. 361.
<LEND>

<L>20317<pc>0359-a<k1>tata<k2>tata<h>1
{#tata#} 1¦. {%tata, as,%} m. (connected with {%tāta,%} said
to be fr. rt. 3. {%tan%}), Ved. father (a familiar expression
corresponding to {%nanā,%} mother). {%—Tata-tata, as,%}
m. father of fathers. {%—Tatā-maha, as,%} m., Ved. a
grandfather; [cf. {%pra-tatāmaha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20318<pc>0359-a<k1>tatatva<k2>tatatva
{#tatatva#}¦ {%tatatva, am,%} n. slow time in music;
[cf. {%tattva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20319<pc>0359-a<k1>tatanuzwi<k2>tatanuzwi
{#tatanuzwi#}¦ {%tatanuṣṭi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. 3. {%tan ?%}),
Ved. fond of ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>20320<pc>0359-a<k1>tatama<k2>tatama
{#tatama#}¦ {%tatama, as, ā, at%} (fr. {%tad%}), that one
(of many).
<LEND>

<L>20321<pc>0359-a<k1>tatara<k2>tatara
{%Tatara, as, ā, at,%}¦ that one (of two).
<LEND>

<L>20322<pc>0359-a<k1>tatas<k2>tatas
{#tatas#}¦ {%tatas,%} ind. (fr. the pronom. base 2. {%ta;%}
correlative of {%yatas,%} and often used for the abl. cases
{%tasmāt, tasyāḥ,%} &c., of the pronoun {%tad,%} but oftener
as an adverb), from that place, thence; in that place,
there, thither (e. g. {%tata ā-yāhi,%} come from that
place); thereupon, then, after that, afterwards (e. g.
{%tataḥ kim,%} what happened then ?); from that, in
consequence of that; for that reason, therefore, conse-
quently; beyond that, besides that, further, moreover.
{%Tatas-tatas,%} from that and that place, here and there,
hither and thither, from all sides, to every place, every-
where. {%Tatas tatas,%} (in dramatic poetry) what then?
what took place after that? {%yato-yatas — tatas-tatas,%}
from whatever place — to that place; wherever — there;
{%itas-tatas,%} from this place and that, here and there,
hither and thither, see, s. v.; {%yatas-tatas,%} from which
place soever, from any one whatever; {%tataḥ kṣaṇāt,%}
immediately afterwards; {%tataḥ param,%} thereupon,
afterwards; {%tataḥ paścāt,%} after that; {%tataḥ-pra-%}
{%bhṛti,%} thenceforth, thenceforward, from that time
forward; {%tato 'nyatas,%} to some other place, i. e.
to another place than that; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τότε, τόθεν;</lang>
Slav. <nsi>ot-tûdû.</nsi>] {%—Tato-bhavat, ān,%} m. His Highness
from there, His Highness there, Your Honour there;
[cf. {%tatra-bhavat%} and {%atra-bhavat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20323<pc>0359-a<k1>tatastya<k2>tatastya
{%Tatastya, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming from that, proceeding
thence; of or belonging to that, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20324<pc>0359-a<k1>tati<k2>tati<h>1
{#tati#} 1¦. {%tati%} (fr. the pronom. base 2. {%ta%}), pl.
(in nom. and acc. without termination), so many.
(For 2. {%tati%} see p. 361, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>20325<pc>0359-a<k1>tatiTa<k2>tatiTa
{%Tatitha, as, ī, am%}¦ (correlative of {%yatitha%}), so
maniest, that one of a number; e. g. {%tatithī samā,%}
that year (out of a number of years).
<LEND>

<L>20326<pc>0359-a<k1>tatiDA<k2>tatiDA
{%Tatidhā,%}¦ ind., Ved. in so many parts, of such a
number.
<LEND>

<L>20327<pc>0359-a<k1>taturi<k2>taturi
{#taturi#}¦ {%taturi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. {%tṝ%}), preserving,
cherishing, conquering; an epithet of Agni and Indra.
<LEND>

<L>20328<pc>0359-a<k1>tatfpi<k2>tatfpi
{#tatfpi#}¦ {%tatṛpi%} for {%tātṛpi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20329<pc>0359-a<k1>tatkara<k2>tatkara
{#tatkara#}¦ {%tat-kara, tat-kāla, tat-kriya,%} &c.
These and other similar compounds will be found
under {%tad,%} p. 360, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20330<pc>0359-a<k1>tattva<k2>tattva
{#tattva#}¦ {%tattva, am,%} n. (fr. {%tad%}), the state of
being that, true state, real state, truth, reality, opposed
to what is illusory or fallacious; essential nature; the
real nature of the human soul as being one and the
same with the supreme spirit pervading the universe;
(in philosophy) truth, reality, a true principle, first
principle, (the number of these first principles varies
according to the different systems; the Sāṅkhya
phil. has twenty-five Tattvas, viz. A-vyakta or ‘the
undiscrete;’ Buddhi, ‘intellect;’ Ahaṅkāra, ‘indi-
viduality;’ the five Tan-mātras or ‘subtile elements;’
the five Mahā-bhūtas or ‘gross elements;’ the eleven
organs, including Manas or ‘mind;’ and, lastly, Puruṣa
or ‘soul:’ hence {%tattva%} is sometimes a term for
‘twenty-five.’ The Māheśvaras admit only five
Tattvas, viz. the five elements. In the Vedānta phil.
{%tattva%} is regarded as made up of {%tad%} and {%tvam,%}
‘this — thou,’ and called {%mahā-vākya,%} ‘the great
word,’ by which the identity of the whole world with
the one eternal Brahma is expressed); an element
or elementary property; the essence or substance of
[Page0359-b+ 79]
anything, sum and substance; slow time in music, a
musical instrument; ({%ena%}), ind. according to the true
state or nature of anything, in truth, truly, really,
accurately. {%—Tattva-kaumudī,%} f. ‘moonlight of the
Tattvas,’ or {%sāṅkhya-tattvakaumudī,%} title of a
commentary on the Sāṅkhya-kārikā. {%—Tattva-%}
{%candra, as,%} m. ‘the moon of truth,’ title of a
commentary on the grammar Prakriyā-kaumudī.
{%—Tattva-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m. title of a philosophical
work by Gaṅgeśa. {%—Tattva-jña, as, ā, am,%} or
{%tattva-jñānin, ī, inī, i,%} knowing the truth or true
nature of anything; acquainted with the true princi-
ples of philosophy, understanding the principles of a
science thoroughly; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman. {%—Tattva-%}
{%jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge of the truth; a thorough
knowledge of the principles of a science, insight into
the true principles of philosophy. {%—Tattva-tas,%} ind.
truly, really, actually, accurately, according to the truth,
fully. {%—Tattva-tā,%} f. truth, reality. {%—Tattva-darśa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘perceiving truth,’ N. of one of the seven Ṛṣis
under Manu Deva-sāvarṇi. {%—Tattva-darśin, ī,%} m.
‘perceiving truth,’ N. of one of the sons of Manu
Raivata; N. of a Brāhman. {%—Tattva-dīpana, am,%}
n. ‘light of the Tattvas,’ title of a work. {%—Tattva-%}
{%nikaṣa-grāvan, ā,%} m. the touchstone of principle.
{%—Tattva-nyāsa, as,%} m. ‘the imposition of truth or
of the true principles,’ N. of a ceremony performed
in honour of Viṣṇu; it consists in the application of
mystical letters and other marks to the different
parts of the body while certain prayers are recited.
{%—Tattva-prakāśa, as,%} m. ‘light of the true princi-
ples,’ title of a philosophical commentary. {%—Tattva-%}
{%bodhinī,%} f. ‘revealing truth,’ title of a commentary
on the Siddhānta-kaumudī by Jñānendra-sarasvatī.
{%—Tattva-bhāva, as,%} m. true being or nature.
{%—Tattva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing truth or the
reality of things. {%—Tattva-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing the
truth or first principles, knowing things as they are.
{%—Tattva-vindu, us,%} m. ‘drop of truth,’ title of a
philosophical treatise. {%—Tattva-vivitsā,%} f. desire of
knowing the truth or God. {%—Tattva-viveka, as,%} m.
or {%siddhānta-tattvaviveka,%} ‘sifting of established
truths,’ title of an astronomical work. {%—Tattvavi-%}
{%veka-dīpana, am,%} n. ‘light of the investigation of
truth,’ title of a philosophical work. {%—Tattva-%}
{%sañcaya, as,%} m. ‘collection of truths,’ title of a
Buddhist work. {%—Tattva-satya-śāstra, am,%} n. title
of a work by Guṇa-prabha. {%—Tattva-samāsa, as,%}
m. ‘compendium of the Tattvas or principles,’ the
title of the Sāṅkhya-sūtras ascribed to Kapila.
{%—Tattvābhiyoga (˚va-abh˚), as,%} m. a positive
charge or declaration. {%—Tattvārtha (˚va-ar˚), as,%}
m. the exact truth, reality, truth. {%—Tattvārtha-%}
{%kaumudī (˚va-ar˚),%} f. the title of a commentary by
Govindānanda on the Prāyaścitta-viveka. {%—Tattvār-%}
{%tha-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing the exact truth, knowing
the reality. {%—Tattvārtha-sūtra (˚va-ar˚), am,%} n.
title of a Jaina work. {%—Tattvāvabodha (˚va-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m. perception of truth.
<LEND>

<L>20331<pc>0359-b<k1>tatra<k2>tatra
{#tatra#}¦ {%tatra,%} ind. (fr. the pronom. base 2. {%ta;%}
correlative of {%yatra,%} and often used for the loc. cases
{%tasmin, tasyām,%} &c., of the pronoun {%tad,%} but oftener
as an adverb), in that place, there, yonder, thither,
to that place; in that, therein; on that occasion, in
that case, under those circumstances, then; therefore;
{%tatra tatra,%} in that and that place, here and there,
hither and thither, to every place; {%yatra tatra,%}
indiscriminately; [cf. Goth. <nsi>thathrô.</nsi>] {%—Tatra-%}
{%bhavat, ān, atī, at,%} ‘Your Honour there,’ venera-
ble, respectable, reverend; a respectful title given
in dramatic language to absent persons; [cf. {%atra-%}
{%bhavat.%}] {%—Tatra-stha, as, ā, am,%} there standing,
dwelling there, situated there, belonging to that place,
a by-stander. {%—Tatrāpi (˚tra-api),%} ind. there also,
even there, nevertheless.
<LEND>

<L>20332<pc>0359-b<k1>tatratya<k2>tatratya
{%Tatratya, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced there or in that
place, relating to that place, of that place, being there.
<LEND>

<L>20333<pc>0359-b<k1>tatva<k2>tatva
{#tatva#}¦ {%tatva,%} a less correct form for {%tattva.%}
<LEND>

<L>20334<pc>0359-b<k1>taTA<k2>taTA
{#taTA#}¦ {%tathā,%} ind. (fr. the pronom. base 2. {%ta%}
[Page0359-c+ 81]
and correlative of {%yathā%}), in that manner, so, thus,
(the correlative standing in the preceding clause, e. g.
{%yathā priyaṃ tathā'stu,%} as is agreeable so let it
be; or in the subsequent clause, e. g. {%tathā prayat-%}
{%nam ātiṣṭhed yathā na pīḍayed ātmānam,%} he
should so make effort as that he may not injure him-
self.) {%Yathā-tathā,%} in whatever way, in any way;
by all means. {%Yathā-yathā — tathā-tathā,%} in what-
ever manner — in that manner; in whatever degree — 
in that degree; the more — the more, ({%yathā yathā%}
{%puruṣaḥ śāstraṃ samadhi-gacchati tathā tathā%}
{%vi-jānāti,%} the more a man studies a book the more
he understands it.)
<LEND>

<L>20335<pc>0359-c<k1>taTA<k2>taTA
{%Tathā%}¦ followed by {%iti%} is also used as a particle of
assent, agreement, or promise, to express ‘so be it,’
‘yes,’ ‘so it shall be,’ &c. (e. g. {%tathety uktvā,%} having
said, ‘so be it’ or ‘yes;’ {%tatheti prati-jñāya,%} having
promised, ‘so it shall be’); also in forms of adjura-
tion (e. g. {%yathā 'ham anyaṃ na cintaye tathā%}
{%'yam patatāṃ kṣudraḥ parāsuḥ,%} as surely as I
do not think on any other man, so surely let this
wretch fall dead).
<LEND>

<L>20336<pc>0359-c<k1>taTA<k2>taTA
{%Tathā%}¦ is frequently used as a conjunction to ex-
press ‘so also,’ ‘in like manner,’ ‘and also’ (e. g.
{%sukhaṃ seved duḥkhaṃ tathā,%} let him make use of
prosperity and also adversity). {%Tathā hi,%} for so,
for thus (it has been said), for instance; {%tathā ca,%}
and likewise; and so it has been said; (this and the
preceding are often used in introducing quotations.)
{%Tathāpi (tathā-api),%} even thus, even so, neverthe-
less, yet, still, notwithstanding; {%yadyapi — tathāpi,%}
even if — yet; although — nevertheless. {%Tathaiva (ta-%}
{%thā-eva),%} even so, even thus, exactly so, in like man-
ner. {%—Tathā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} thus done or made.
{%—Tathā-kratu, us, us, u,%} so intending, having
such an aim. {%—Tathā-gata, as, ā, am,%} being in such
a state or condition; of such a quality or nature;
({%as%}), m. a Buddha; a Jina; N. of a prince. {%—Ta-%}
{%thāgata-kūpa, as,%} m. ‘the well of the Tathā-gata,’
N. of a well. {%—Tathāgata-garbha, as,%} m. title of
a Buddhist Sūtra work; N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Ta-%}
{%thāgata-guṇa-jñānācintya-viṣayāvatāra-nir-%}
{%deśa (˚na-acintya-viṣaya-av˚), as,%} m. title of a
Buddhist Sūtra work; direction ({%nir-deśa%}) how to
attain ({%ava-tāra%}) to the inconceivable subject ({%acin-%}
{%tya-viṣaya%}) of the qualities ({%guṇa%}) and to the
knowledge ({%jñāna%}) of a Tathā-gata. {%—Tathāgata-%}
{%gupta, as,%} m., N. of a man; N. of a king. {%—Ta-%}
{%thāgata-guhyaka, am,%} n. ‘the mystery of a Tathā-
gata,’ title of one of the nine works highly revered
by the Buddhists of Nepal. {%—Tathāgata-bhadra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a pupil of Nāgārjuna. {%—Tathā-guṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} endowed with such qualities. {%—Tathā-tā,%}
f. or {%tathā-tva, am,%} n. such a state of things, such a
condition; true state of things, true, nature; the
being so; the case or circumstances being admitted
to be as stated. {%—Tathā-prabhāva, as, ā, am,%}
having such power. {%—Tathā-bhāvin, ī, inī, i,%} of
such a nature; about to be so or of such a kind.
{%—Tathā-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} of such qualities, of
such a kind or nature. {%—Tathā-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
‘so-facing,’ turning the face in the same direction.
{%—Tathāyata (˚thā-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘so-directed,’
turned towards the same point. {%—Tathā-rāja, as,%} m.
a Buddha or Jina; [cf. {%tathā-gata.%}] {%—Tathā-rūpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%tathā-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} of such a
form, thus shaped, so formed, looking thus. {%—Ta-%}
{%thā-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} professing to be so and so.
{%—Tathā-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of such a sort or kind,
being in such a condition or state, of such qualities;
({%am%}), ind. thus, in this manner; likewise, equally.
{%—Tathā-vidheya, as, ā, am,%} relating to such a sort
or kind, being of such a kind or nature. {%—Tathā-%}
{%vrata, as, ā, am,%} observing such conduct or practices,
so acting. {%—Tathā-śīla, as, ā, am,%} behaving or con-
ducting one's self thus. {%—Tathāstu (˚thā-as˚),%} ind.
so be it. {%—Tathā-svara, as, ā, am,%} uttered with
the same accent. {%—Tatheti,%} see {%tathā%} followed by
{%iti%} above. {%—Tathaiva (˚thā-eva),%} ind., see {%tathā%}
above. {%—Tathotsāha (˚thā-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} making
so great efforts.
<LEND>
[Page0360-a+ 80]

<L>20337<pc>0360-a<k1>taTya<k2>taTya
{%Tathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ ‘being really so,’ true, real,
genuine; ({%am%}), n. truth, reality; {%tathyena%} or {%tath-%}
{%yatas,%} ind. according to truth. {%—Tathya-vādin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} speaking the truth.
<LEND>

<L>20338<pc>0360-a<k1>taTya<k2>taTya
{#taTya#}¦ {%tathya.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>20339<pc>0360-a<k1>tad<k2>tad
{#tad#}¦ {%tad, sas, sā, tad%} or {%tat,%} (the actual
base of this pronoun in all the cases except the nom.
sing. m. and f. is {%ta,%} but the neut. {%tad%} represents
the base in compounds and in the derivative {%tadīya.%}
In the Veda the nom. and acc. du. m. may be {%tā%} as
well as {%tau,%} the nom. plur. n. {%tā%} as well as {%tāni,%} and
the inst. plur. m. or n. {%tebhis%} as well as {%tais%}), he,
she, it, that, this, (often occurring as a correlative of
the relative pronoun {%ya,%} ‘who, which,’ the relative
generally standing in the preceding clause, e. g. {%yasya%}
{%buddhiḥ sa balavān,%} of whom there is intellect he
is strong, see Gram. 799.)
<LEND>

<L>20340<pc>0360-a<k1>tad<k2>tad
{%Tad%}¦ is sometimes used, for the sake of emphasis, in
connection with the first and second personal pronouns,
with other demonstratives and with relatives like the
Lat. <nsi>ille</nsi> (e. g. {%so'ham,%} I that very person, I myself;
{%te vayam,%} we those very persons; {%tāv imau,%} those
very two; {%tad etad,%} that very thing; {%yat tat kā-%}
{%raṇam,%} that very reason which; {%yā sā śrīḥ,%} that
very fortune which).
<LEND>

<L>20341<pc>0360-a<k1>tad<k2>tad
{%Tad%}¦ is repeated in the sense of ‘this and that,’
‘this or that,’ ‘various,’ ‘different’ (e. g. {%taṃ taṃ%}
{%deśaṃ jagāma,%} he went to this and that place;
{%tāsu tāsu yoniṣu,%} in different or various birth-
places).
<LEND>

<L>20342<pc>0360-a<k1>tad<k2>tad
{%Tad%}¦ is used in connection with a relative pronoun
in the sense of ‘whosoever,’ ‘whichsoever,’ ‘every’
(e. g. {%yasmiṃs tasmin kule,%} in any family whatever).
Sometimes both the demonstrative and the relative
are repeated (e. g. {%yadyat karma para-vaśaṃ tat-%}
{%tad varjayet,%} whatever action depends on another,
that he should avoid).
<LEND>

<L>20343<pc>0360-a<k1>tad<k2>tad
{%Tad,%}¦ n., may be used to signify ‘this world’ [cf.
{%idam%}]; also to denote ‘the supreme spirit or Brahma’
(opposed to {%tvam%}).
<LEND>

<L>20344<pc>0360-a<k1>tad<k2>tad
{%Tad,%}¦ ind. there, thither, in that place, to that spot
(e. g. {%tamāṃsi yatra gacchanti tat kravyādo%}
{%ajīgamam,%} where dark shades prevail there I caused
the flesh-eaters to go); then, at that time, in that
case (e. g. {%yadi māṃ na vihātum icchasi tat%}
{%kim-artham panthāḥ samupa-diśyate,%} if thou dost
not wish to leave me why is the road pointed out?);
thus, in this manner, with regard to that, in connec-
tion with that (often so used in the Brāhmaṇas, e. g.
{%tad etau ślokau bhavataḥ,%} with reference to that
there are these two verses); on that account, for
that reason, therefore, consequently (in this sense
commonly used in classical Sanskrit, e. g. {%yad — tad%}
or {%yena — tad,%} because — therefore); now, so also,
equally, in like manner (often connecting two sen-
tences or clauses in the Brāhmaṇas). {%Tad api,%} and
also, and equally; nevertheless, notwithstanding
({%yady api — tad api,%} even if — nevertheless); {%tad%}
{%yathā,%} in such a manner as follows, as here follows,
namely; {%taccāpi,%} and also, and likewise; [cf.
Lith. <nsi>tas, ta,</nsi> ‘this;’ Goth. <nsi>tha</nsi> (the base of
the article), masc. <nsi>sa,</nsi> fem. <nsi>sô;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὁ, ἡ, τό;</lang>
Slav. <nsi>t', ta, to;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>is-te, is-ta, is-tud, tam, tum,</nsi>
<nsi>tunc;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>so</nsi> ‘this,’ <nsi>se</nsi> ‘he,’ <nsi>si</nsi> ‘she.’] {%—Tac-%}
{%chīla (tad-śi˚), as, ā, am,%} having an inclination for
that, accustomed to that; [cf. {%tācchīlika%} and {%tāc-%}
{%chīlya.%}] {%—Taj-ja (tad-ja), as, ā, am,%} ‘produced
at that moment,’ immediate, instantaneous. {%—Taj-%}
{%jaya (tad-ja˚), as,%} m. the conquest of that. {%—Taj-%}
{%ja-lān (tad-ja-la-an), n, n, n,%} produced, absorbed,
and breathing in that. {%—Taj-jña (tad-jña), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} knowing that, knowing, experienced in or fami-
liar with; ({%as%}), m. a knowing or intelligent man,
(in this and other compounds {%tad%} often loses its
meaning and becomes redundant; cf. {%tat-para, tad-%}
{%bhāva,%} &c.) {%—Tat-kara, as, ā, am,%} performing a
particular work or service, serving, obeying, a servant.
{%—Tat-kartavya, as, ā, am,%} proper or necessary to
be done with reference to present circumstances; [cf.
{%iti-kartavya.%}] {%—Tat-kāla, as,%} m. that time (op-
[Page0360-b+ 81]
posed to {%etat-kāla,%} this time); present time, time
being, the time referred to or spoken of, the same
time, the time when an act occurs; ({%am%}), ind. at
that time, at a certain time; directly, immediately;
({%as, ā, am%}), happening at the same time or imme-
diately; [cf. {%tātkālika.%}] {%—Tatkāla-dhī, īs, īs, i,%}
wise or intelligent for the time being, having presence
of mind, &c. {%—Tatkāla-lavaṇa, am,%} n. a kind of
salt prepared artificially, {%= viḍ-lavaṇa%}. {%—Tatkālot-%}
{%panna-dhī (˚la-ut˚), īs, īs, i,%} possessed of presence
of mind. {%—Tat-kulīna, as, ā, am,%} belonging to
that family or caste. {%—Tat-kriya, as, ā, am,%} per-
forming a particular work or service; working without
hire or wages. {%—Tat-kṣaṇa, as,%} m. time present,
time being; the same moment; a measure of time,
= 120 Kṣaṇas, = (1/60) Lava; ({%am%} or {%āt%}), ind. at
the same moment, immediately, directly. {%—Tatkṣa-%}
{%ṇa-bhaṅgura, as, ā, am,%} vanishing immediately,
transient. {%—Tat-tṛtīya, as, ā, am,%} doing that for
the third time. {%—Tat-pada, am,%} n. the place or
position of that; the word {%tad; (as),%} m. the tree
Ficus Religiosa. {%—Tat-para, as, ā, am,%} following
that or thereupon, coming after, inferior; having that
as one's highest object or aim, totally devoted or
addicted to anything, attending to anything closely,
eagerly engaged in (with loc. or in composition);
diligent; ({%as%}), m. the thirtieth part of the twinkling
of the eye; (with reference to the redundant use of
{%tad%} cf. {%taj-jña, tad-gata, tad-bhāva, tātparya.%})
{%—Tatpara-tā,%} f. or {%tatpara-tva, am,%} n. entire de-
votion or addiction to; the state of following after or
behind, inferiority. {%—Tat-parāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%} at-
tached or addicted to any particular thing or person.
{%—Tat-puruṣa, as,%} m. the original or supreme
spirit; the servant or attendant of him; a class of
compounds in which the last member is defined or
qualified by the first without losing its original inde-
pendance, i. e. continues the principal member of the
compound and preserves its original grammatical charac-
ter whether as a noun, adjective, or participle, whereas
in a Bahu-vrīhi compound the last member loses its
independance as well as its original grammatical cha-
racter and serves together with the first member
only to qualify or define <nsi>another word;</nsi> the Karma-
dhāraya and Dvigu compounds are considered as
subdivisions of the Tat-puruṣa class. The word
{%tat-puruṣa,%} ‘his servant,’ is itself an example of
this class of compounds. The stock example is
{%divya-kusumam,%} ‘heavenly flower,’ which belongs
to the Karma-dhāraya subdivision. {%—Tat-pūrva, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} occurring or happening for the first time;
prior, former. {%—Tatpūrva-saṅga, as, ā, am,%} then
first restrained. {%—Tat-prakāra, as, ā, am,%} of that
kind, of that sort. {%—Tat-prathama, as, ā, am,%}
doing that for the first time. {%—Tat-prabhāte,%} ind.
early on the next morning. {%—Tat-phala, as, ā, am,%}
having that as a fruit or reward; having as a result
or consequence; ({%as%}), m. the white water-lily; a
kind of medicinal plant ({%kuṣṭha%}); a kind of per-
fume {%(= caura)%}. {%—Tat-samanantaram,%} ind. im-
mediately upon that or afterwards; [cf. {%tad-anan-%}
{%taram.%}] {%—Tat-sādhu-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} accomplishing
or performing that. {%—Tat-stha, as, ā, am,%} being on
or in that, connected with that; ({%as%}), m. a particular
mode of multiplication. {%—Tad-atipāta, as, ā, am,%}
transgressing that, going beyond the bounds. {%—Tad-%}
{%anantara, as, ā, am,%} nearest or next to that; ({%am%}),
ind. immediately upon that, thereupon, then ({%prāk — %}
{%tad-anantaram,%} first — afterwards; {%prathamam — %}
{%—tad-anantaram — tṛtīyam — ataḥ param,%} first
 — afterwards — thirdly — further; [cf. {%tat-samanan-%}
{%taram.%}] {%—Tad-anu,%} ind. after that, afterwards.
{%—Tad-anusaraṇa-krameṇa,%} ind. in a manner
conformably to that, subsequently to that. {%—Tad-%}
{%anta, as, ā, am,%} coming to an end or perishing in
that, ending thus, thus terminating. {%—Tad-anna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. accustomed to that food. {%—Tad-%}
{%anyat,%} ind. other than that, different from that.
{%—Tad-apas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. doing that work,
having that occupation, accustomed to do that; ({%as%}),
ind. in the usual way. {%—Tad-artha, as, ā, am,%} des-
[Page0360-c+ 81]
tined or intended for that, on that account, with that
object; having that meaning; ({%am%}), ind. on that
account, with that object, for that end, therefore;
[cf. {%tādarthya.%}] {%—Tad-arthīya, as, ā, am,%} destined
or intended for that, undertaken for that end. {%—Tad-%}
{%arpaṇa, am,%} n. delivery of that, delivering or returning
any article. {%—Tad-arha, as, ā, am,%} meriting that.
{%—Tad-avadhi, is,%} m. that limit, that period; ({%i%}),
ind. so far, up to that period; from that time. {%—Tad-%}
{%avastha, as, ā, am,%} so situated, thus circumstanced,
in that condition. {%—Tad-ākāra, as, ā, am,%} having that
appearance or aspect. {%—Tad-āmukha, am,%} n. com-
mencement, beginning. {%—Tad-id-artha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. intent on that particular object. {%—Tad-ekacitta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having all the thoughts fixed on that
(person or thing). {%—Tadevopaniṣad (tad-eva-up˚),%}
{%t,%} f. title of an Upaniṣad beginning with the words
{%tad eva%}. {%—Tad-okas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. rejoicing or
delighting in that, at home in it; (Sāy.) having that
as one's dwelling-place. {%—Tad-ojas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
endowed with such strength. {%—Tad-gata, as, ā, am,%}
gone to that, directed towards that, devoted to, intent
on; ({%as%}), m. (?) the continued multiplication of four
or more like quantities; [cf. {%taj-jña, tat-para, tad-%}
{%bhāva.%}] {%—Tad-guṇa, as,%} m. the quality of that
(person or thing), quality or virtue of anything; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), possessing these qualities; ({%as%}), m. a figure
of speech in rhetoric, transferring the qualities of one
thing to another. {%—Tadguṇa-saṃvijñāna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} a term applied to those Bahu-vrīhi compounds
in which the qualities implied in the name are per-
ceived along with the thing itself (e. g. {%Dīrgha-kar-%}
{%ṇam ā-naya,%} bring {%Dīrgha-karṇa,%} ‘long-ear,’
where the long ears accompany and mark the indi-
vidual. An example of the {%a-tadguṇa-saṃvijñāna%}
would be {%dṛṣṭa-sāgaram ā-naya,%} bring the man
who has seen the ocean). {%—Tad-dina, am,%} n. that
day; ({%am%}), ind. during the day, every day, day by
day, on a certain day. {%—Tad-duḥkha, am,%} n. that
grief, grief for that or of that. {%—Tad-dvitīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} doing that for the second time. {%—Tad-dhana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} miserly, niggardly. {%—Tad-dharman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} having that business, accomplishing that business;
[cf. {%tāddharmya.%}] {%—Tad-dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} obey-
ing the laws of him or that. {%—Tad-dhita, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%tad-hita%}), good for that, salutary; ({%am%}), n.
the welfare of any one; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%pratyayaḥ,%}
an affix which forms nouns from other nouns, (whereas
a Kṛt affix forms nouns from roots); a noun formed
by a Taddhita affix, a derivative noun. {%—Tad-bala,%}
{%as, ā,%} m. f. a kind of arrow. {%—Tad-bhāva, as,%} m.
the becoming that, becoming (in general), e. g.
{%abhūta-tadbhāva,%} the becoming what one was not
formerly. {%—Tad-bhinna, as, ā, am,%} different or
distinct from that. {%—Tad-rasa, as,%} m. the spirit
thereof. {%—Tad-rāja, as,%} m., scil. {%pratyayaḥ,%} an affix
added to a proper name to form from it the name of
a king or chief (e. g. fr. {%aṅga%} is formed {%āṅga,%} ‘king
of the Aṅgas,’ by the Tad-rāja affix {%añ%}). {%—Tad-%}
{%rūpa, as, ā, am,%} thus shaped, so formed. {%—Tadryañc,%}
{%aṅ, drīcī, ak%} (fr. {%tad,%} with {%adri%} substituted for {%ad,%}
and rt. {%añc%}), extending thither; [cf. {%devadryañc,%} &c.]
{%—Tad-vacaḥ-pratīta, as, ā, am,%} believing his words.
{%—Tad-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having or containing that,
possessed of that; ({%vat%}), ind. like that, in that manner,
thus; in like manner, equally, likewise, also; ({%yadvat — %}
{%tadvat%} or {%yathā — tadvat,%} as — so.) {%—Tadvat-tā,%} f.
conformity, agreement. {%—Tad-vaśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
longing for or desiring that. {%—Tad-vācaka, as, ikā,%}
{%am,%} signifying that. {%—Tad-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing that,
familiar with that; knowing the truth, a knowing
man. {%—Tad-vidya, as, ā, am,%} possessing a knowledge
of that. {%—Tad-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of that kind, cor-
responding to that, conformable to that. {%—Tadvidha-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. correspondence or conformity with that.
{%—Tad-viṣaya%} or {%tad-viṣayaka, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing that for its object, attending to that business,
relating to that. {%—Tan-na,%} ind. not that, not so.
{%—Tan-nāśa, as,%} m. destruction of that. {%—Tan-ma-%}
{%dhya-stha, as, ā, am,%} situated in the midst of that.
{%—Tan-madhyāt,%} ind. from the midst thereof,
[Page0361-a+ 79]
from amongst them. {%—Tan-maya, as, ī, am,%} made
up of that, having the nature of that, absorbed or
contained in or identical with that, become one
with. {%—Tanmaya-tā,%} f. or {%tanmaya-tva, am,%} n.
the being contained in or identical with that. {%—Tan-%}
{%maraṇa, am,%} n. his death. {%—Tan-mātra, as, ā, am,%}
only so much or so little; consisting of rudimentary
atoms or elementary matter; ({%am%}), n. merely that,
only a trifle; that in which its own peculiar property
resides without any change or variety, i. e. a subtile
element or a rudiment of elementary matter, (of
these there are five, viz. {%śabda-t˚, sparśa-t˚, rūpa-%}
{%t˚, rasa-t˚,%} and {%gandha-t˚,%} from which the five
Mahā-bhūtas or grosser elements are produced. In
this sense also according to some {%tan-mātrā,%} f.)
{%—Tanmātra-tā,%} f. or {%tanmātra-tva, am,%} n. the
state of a Tanmātra. {%—Tanmātra-sarga, as,%} m. (in
the Sāṅkhya phil.) the rudimental creation. {%—Tan-%}
{%mātrika, as, ā, am,%} consisting of rudimentary atoms
or elementary matter. {%—Tan-mānin, ī, inī, i,%} im-
plying the doing of that which the base indicates (?),
(e. g. the nominal {%aghāya,%} to act wickedly, is a
{%tan-mānin.%}) {%—Tal-lakṣaṇa (tad-la˚), am,%} n. the
mark of him, a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>20345<pc>0361-a<k1>tadA<k2>tadA
{%Tadā,%}¦ ind. at that time, then; in that case; (some-
times used rather redundantly in epic poetry, e. g.
{%tato 'ntarīkṣago vācaṃ vyā-jahāra Nalaṃ%}
{%tadā,%} upon that the bird addressed words to Nala
then); {%yadā tadā,%} at any time whatsoever; {%tadā%}
{%prabhṛti,%} from that time forward; {%yad — tadā%} or
{%yatra — tadā%} or {%yadā — tadā%} or {%yadi — tadā,%} when
 — then; if — then, &c.; {%yatas — tadā,%} from the time
when — then, i. e. ever since; {%yarhy eva — tadaiva,%}
at what time — at that very time, i. e. at the very
time when. {%—Tadā-tva, am,%} n. ‘the state of then,’
that time, present time, time being, present state or
circumstances, (usually in connection with {%āyati,%}
future time.)
<LEND>

<L>20346<pc>0361-a<k1>tadAnIm<k2>tadAnIm
{%Tadānīm,%}¦ ind. at that time, then [cf. {%idānīm%}];
{%yadā — tadānīm,%} when — then. {%—Tadānīn-tana,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} of that time, belonging to that time.
{%—Tadānīn-dugdha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. milked at that
time or at the time spoken of, just milked.
<LEND>

<L>20347<pc>0361-a<k1>tadIya<k2>tadIya
{%Tadīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to him or her or
that or them; his, hers, its, theirs; such (e. g. {%cintayā%}
{%tadīyayā,%} with a thought such as that). {%—Tadīya-%}
{%saṅga, as,%} m. meeting with her, union with her.
<LEND>

<L>20348<pc>0361-a<k1>tan<k2>tan<h>1
{#tan#} 1¦. {%tan (= stan),%} cl. 4. P., Ved. {%tan-%}
{%yati,%} to resound, sound aloud, roar; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">τόνος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>tonare;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>thunor;</nsi> Eng.
<nsi>thunder.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>20349<pc>0361-a<k1>tanayitnu<k2>tanayitnu
{%Tanayitnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. roaring, thundering;
[cf. {%stanayitnu, tanyatā, tanyatu, tanyu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20350<pc>0361-a<k1>tan<k2>tan<h>2
{#tan#} 2¦. {%tan,%} cl. 1. and 10. P. {%tanati%} and
{%tānayati,%} &c., to confide, belive or have
faith in; to aid, assist; to be harmless; to pain or
afflict with disease (?); [cf. rt. 1. {%can%} and {%van.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20351<pc>0361-a<k1>tan<k2>tan<h>3
{#tan#} 3¦. {%tan,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%tanoti, tanute, ta-%}
{%tāna%} (2nd sing. {%tatantha%} or {%tenitha%}),
{%tene, taniṣyati, -te, atānīt%} and {%atanīt, atata%} and
{%ataniṣṭa, tanitum,%} to extend, stretch, spread, be
diffused over, shine (as light), extend towards, reach
to; protract, prolong, lengthen out, augment; to
lengthen, be lengthened out, be protracted, continue,
endure, last; to stretch (a cord), extend or bend (a
bow), spread or spin out, weave; to emboss, chase;
to prepare (a way for); direct one's way towards; to
propagate, be propagated; to accomplish, perform (as
a ceremony), to sacrifice; to compose (a literary work);
to bestow, grant, cause, prepare: Pass. {%tanyate%} or
{%tāyate,%} to be extended; to increase, &c.: Caus. {%tāna-%}
{%yati, -yitum, atītanat:%} Desid. {%titaniṣati, titaṃsati,%}
{%titāṃsati:%} Intens. {%tantanyate, tantanīti, tantanti;%}
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τείνω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>tendo, tenuis, tener:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>thanja:</nsi> Russ. <nsi>tonju:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>tempju:</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>tana,</nsi> ‘thin, slender, lean;’ <nsi>tanaighim,</nsi> ‘I make
thin.’] {%—Tan-ādi, ayas,%} m. pl., scil. {%dhātavas,%} the
roots beginning with {%tan,%} i. e. the eighth class of
roots.
<LEND>
[Page0361-b+ 81]

<L>20352<pc>0361-b<k1>tat<k2>tat<h>2
2. {%tat, t, t, t,%}¦ at the end of a comp.; [cf. {%parī-%}
{%tat.%}] (For 1. {%tat%} see p. 358, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>20353<pc>0361-b<k1>tata<k2>tata<h>2
2. {%tata, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 359), extended,
stretched, spread, diffused, expanded; spreading or
reaching over, extending to; covered over, concealed;
protracted, continued; bent (as a bow); spreading, wide,
&c.; ({%as%}), m. wind, air; ({%am%}), n. any stringed musical
instrument; a kind of metre consisting of four lines
of twelve syllables each. {%—Tata-cihna, as, ā, am,%}
having marks drawn along, distinctly marked. {%—Ta-%}
{%ta-pattrī,%} f. the plantain tree, Musa Sapientum;
[cf. {%kadala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20354<pc>0361-b<k1>tati<k2>tati<h>2
2. {%tati, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. see p. 359, col. 1), a series,
a line, a row or range; a number, a crowd, a troop;
a sacrificial act, a ceremony; [cf. {%tanti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20355<pc>0361-b<k1>tan<k2>tan<h>4
4. {%tan%}¦ (probably f., but occurring only in dat., inst.,
and abl.), Ved. continuation, diffusion, propagation,
offspring, posterity, descendants; ({%tanve tane ca,%} for
one's own person and one's children); {%tanā%} (inst.
used as an adv.), in uninterrupted succession or series,
one after another, continually.
<LEND>

<L>20356<pc>0361-b<k1>tana<k2>tana
{%Tana, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a descendant; ({%ā, am%}), f. n.
offspring, a descendant, posterity.
<LEND>

<L>20357<pc>0361-b<k1>tanaya<k2>tanaya
{%Tanaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. propagating or extend-
ing a family, belonging to one's own family; ({%to-%}
{%kaṃ tanayam,%} a child which propagates the family);
({%as%}), m. a male descendant, a son; N. of one of the
seven sages in the eleventh Manv-antara with the
patronymic Vāsiṣṭha; (in astrology) N. of the fifth
lunar mansion; ({%au%}), m. du. a son and a daughter;
({%ā%}), f. a daughter; N. of a plant, {%= cakra-kulyā;%}
{%(am),%} n. posterity, family, race, offspring, child,
descendant; (according to the scholiasts {%tanaya%} is a
grandchild and {%toka%} a child); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people. {%—Tanaya-bhavana, as,%} m. (in astrology)
N. of the fifth lunar mansion.
<LEND>

<L>20358<pc>0361-b<k1>tanayIkfta<k2>tanayIkfta
{%Tanayī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made a son.
<LEND>

<L>20359<pc>0361-b<k1>tanas<k2>tanas
{%Tanas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. offspring, posterity.
<LEND>

<L>20360<pc>0361-b<k1>taniman<k2>taniman
{%Taniman, ā,%}¦ m. (fr. {%tanu%} below), thinness, slen-
derness, minuteness; ({%a%}), n. the liver.
<LEND>

<L>20361<pc>0361-b<k1>tanizWa<k2>tanizWa
{%Taniṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%tanu%}), thinnest,
very thin, smallest, least; very minute or delicate.
<LEND>

<L>20362<pc>0361-b<k1>tanIyas<k2>tanIyas
{%Tanīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%tanu%}), thinner,
more minute, smaller, less, very thin, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20363<pc>0361-b<k1>tanu<k2>tanu
{%Tanu, us, us,%}¦ or {%vī%} or {%ūs, u,%} thin, slender, slim,
attenuated, emaciated, small, minute; delicate, fine,
having minute interstices (as a web); little, un-
important; shallow (as a river); spare; ({%us%}), m.,
N. of a certain Ṛṣi with a very emaciated body
[cf. {%tānavya%}]; ({%us%} or {%tanū, ūs%}), f. (the latter form
only being used in the earlier language), the body,
the person (applied also to gods); one's own person,
self (often used in the Veda like a reflexive pronoun,
e. g. {%yajasva tanvam,%} worship thy own person or
thyself; cf. {%ātman%}); outward form or manifestation;
nature, form, or character of anything; appearance; ({%us%}),
f. the skin; N. of the first lunar mansion; ({%vī%}), f. a
delicate or slender or graceful woman; N. of one of the
wives of Kṛṣṇa; a kind of plant [cf. {%śāla-parṇī%}];
a stanza of four lines and twenty-four syllables in
each; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τανυ-</lang> Lat. <nsi>tenuis;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>dunni;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>dūnn;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>tana;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>thin.</nsi>]
{%—Tanu-kūpa, as,%} m. a pore of the skin, (lit. well
of the skin.) {%—Tanu-kṣīra, as,%} m. the tree Spon-
dias Magnifera; [cf. {%āmrātaka.%}] {%—Tanu-gṛha,%}
{%am,%} n. (in astrology) N. of the first lunar mansion.
{%—Tanu-cchad, t, t, t,%} or {%tanu-cchada, as, ā, am,%}
covering the body, protecting, clothing; ({%t%}), f. or
({%das%}), m. armour, attire. {%—Tanu-cchāya, as,%} m. a
kind of Acacia, {%= jāla-varvūraka%}. {%—Tanu-ja, as,%}
m. a son; ({%ā%}), f. a daughter; [cf. {%tanū-ja%} and {%ātma-%}
{%ja.%}] {%—Tanuja-tva, am,%} n. sonship. {%—Tanu-tara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} thinner, more minute; [cf. {%tanīyas.%}]
{%—Tanu-tā,%} f. thinness, tenuity, extenuation, little-
ness, diminutiveness. {%—Tanu-tyaj, k, k, k,%} giving
up one's person, dying; risking one's life, facing
death with courage; [cf. {%tanū-tyaj.%}] {%—Tanu-tyāga,%}
{%as,%} m. giving up one's own self, risking one's life;
({%as, ā, am%}), giving scantily, spending little, nig-
gardly, sparing. {%—Tanu-tra, am,%} n. armour, mail
(‘protecting the body’). {%—Tanutra-vat, ān, atī, %}
[Page0361-c+ 81]
{%at,%} having armour, defended. {%—Tanu-trāṇa, am,%} n.
(‘protection for the body’), armour, mail. {%—Tanu-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. thinness. {%—Tanu-tvac, k,%} n. (?) the cinna-
mon tree; the plant Cassia Senna. {%—Tanu-tvacā,%} f.
the plant Premna Spinosa; [cf. {%kṣudrāgni-man-%}
{%tha.%}] {%—Tanu-pattra, as,%} m. the tree Terminalia
Catappa [cf. {%iṅguda%}], commonly Hiṅganabeṭa;
leafy orpiment. {%—Tanu-bhava, as,%} m. a son; [cf.
{%tanū-ja%} and {%tanūdbhava.%}] {%—Tanu-bhastrā,%} f. the
nose (‘the bellows of the body’). {%—Tanu-bhāva, as,%}
m. thinness. {%—Tanu-bhūmi, is,%} f. ‘the stage of per-
sonality,’ one of the periods in the life of a Buddhist
Śrāvaka. {%—Tanu-bhṛt, t,%} m. any being furnished
with a body, especially a human being. {%—Tanu-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} embodied, corporeal. {%—Tanu-madhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a slender or elegant waist; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a metre of four lines, each consisting of two
short syllables between four long ones (¯¯˘˘¯¯);
[cf. {%tanu-śiras.%}] {%—Tanu-madhyama, as, ā, am,%}
slender-waisted. {%—Tanu-rasa, as,%} m. perspiration,
sweat. {%—Tanu-ruh, ṭ,%} or {%tanu-ruha, am,%} n. the
hair or down of the body; [cf. {%tanū-ruha.%}] {%—Tanu-%}
{%vāta, as,%} m. a very thin or rarefied atmosphere (con-
stituting a kind of hell; opposed to {%ghana-vāta,%} q. v.);
according to others, a peculiar division of hell. {%—Ta-%}
{%nu-vāra, am,%} n. (fr. {%tanu%} and {%vāra%} fr. rt. {%vṛ,%} to
cover, protect), armour, mail. {%—Tanuvāra-bhasa,%}
{%as,%} m. (?) a man in armour, a warrior. {%—Tanu-vīja,%}
{%as,%} m. the jujube; [cf. {%rāja-badara.%}] {%—Tanu-%}
{%vraṇa, as,%} m. a pimple, a pustule, a boil, elephanti-
asis. {%—Tanu-śarīra, as, ā, am,%} having a delicate
body, delicately formed. {%—Tanu-śiras, ās, ās, as,%}
‘having a small head,’ N. of a subdivision of the
Uṣṇih metre, consisting of three Pādas of eleven,
eleven, and six syllables; [cf. {%tanu-madhyā.%}] {%—Ta-%}
{%nu-sañcāriṇī,%} f. a young woman, a girl, one ten
years old (‘moving the body coquettishly?’). {%—Tanu-%}
{%hrada, as,%} m. the anus, the rectum; [cf. {%tanū-%}
{%hrada.%}] {%—Tanū-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced or born on
or from the body; belonging to the person; ({%as%}),
m. a son; N. of a Sādhya; ({%ā%}), f. a daughter; [cf.
{%tanu-ja.%}] {%—Tanū-jani, is,%} m. a son. {%—Tanū-jan-%}
{%man, ā,%} m. a son. {%—Tanūjāṅga (˚ja-aṅ˚), am,%} n.
a wing, the feathers (‘member produced on the
body’); [cf. {%tanū-ruha.%}] {%—Tanū-tala, as,%} m. a
measure of length equal to the arms extended, a
fathom. {%—Tanū-tyaj, k, k, k,%} Ved. giving up one's
person, risking one's life, rash, foolhardy. {%—Tanū-%}
{%dūṣi, is, is, i,%} Ved. destroying the person. {%—Tanū-%}
{%devatā,%} f. a form of fire deified. {%—Tanū-deśa, as,%} m. a
region or part of the body. {%—Tanūdbhava (˚nu-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a son; [cf. {%tanu-bhava.%}] {%—Tanūna (˚nu-%}
{%ūna), as,%} m. ‘the bodiless one,’ the wind. {%—Tanū-%}
{%napa, am,%} n. clarified butter, ghee; (this word
owes its existence to a wrong derivation of the
following word from {%tanūnapa-ad,%} ‘eating the
clarified butter.’) {%—Tanū-napāt, t,%} m. one of the
sacred names of Fire, ‘the son or descendant of him-
self,’ so called because fire need not necessarily be
derived from other fire, but is sometimes self-gene-
rated as in the lightning or by the attrition of the
Araṇis, q. v.; (for a fanciful derivation see the pre-
ceding. Agni appears chiefly as Tanū-napāt in some
verses of the Āprī hymns; see {%ā-prī%}); the plant
Plumbago Zeylanica. {%—Tanūnapāt-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
containing the word {%tanū-napāt%}. {%—Tanū-naptṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m., Ved. {%= tanū-napāt;%} [cf. {%tānūnaptra.%}]
{%—Tanū-pā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. protecting the person,
preserving the life. {%—Tanū-pāna, as, ī, am,%} Ved.
protecting the person or life; ({%am%}), n. protection of
the person. {%—Tanū-pāvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. protect-
ing the person or life. {%—Tanū-pṛṣṭha, as,%} m., N.
of a Soma sacrifice. {%—Tanū-bala, am,%} n., Ved. the
strength of the body, one's own strength. {%—Tanū-%}
{%ruc, k, k, k,%} Ved. brilliant in person (as Agni);
brilliant with arms (?). {%—Tanū-ruha, as, am,%} m. n.
the hair of the body; the wing or feathers of a bird;
({%as%}), m. a son; [cf. {%tanu-ruha, tanu-ja, tanu-%}
{%jāṅga.%}] {%—Tanūrja (˚nu-ūr˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of
the third Manu. {%—Tanū-vaśin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. having
power over the body, an epithet of Agni. {%—Tanū- %}
[Page0362-a+ 81]
{%śubhra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. decorating the person,
adorning the body. {%—Tanū-havis, is,%} n., N. of
three oblations offered to the three tanūs or forms
(of Agni). {%—Tanū-hrada, as,%} m. the anus, the
rectum; [cf. {%tanu-hrada.%}] {%—Tanv-aṅga, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having slender limbs, delicate, slim; ({%ī%}), f. a
delicate or slender woman; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20364<pc>0362-a<k1>tanuka<k2>tanuka
{%Tanuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ thin, small; ({%as%}), m., N. of
several plants, Grislea Tomentosa, Terminalia Bel-
lerica; the cinnamon tree; ({%ā%}), f. the tree Diospyros
Embryopteris.
<LEND>

<L>20365<pc>0362-a<k1>tanula<k2>tanula
{%Tanula, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread, expanded.
<LEND>

<L>20366<pc>0362-a<k1>tanus<k2>tanus
{%Tanus, us,%}¦ n. the body.
<LEND>

<L>20367<pc>0362-a<k1>tanU<k2>tanU
{%Tanū, ūs,%}¦ f. the body. See {%tanu,%} p. 361, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20368<pc>0362-a<k1>tanUkf<k2>tanUkf
{%Tanū-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to make thin or fine, to attenuate, diminish, emaciate;
to pare. {%—Tanū-karaṇa, am,%} n. making thin, at-
tenuation, diminishing, weakening. {%—Tanū-kṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} Ved. shaping or forming the person, preserving
the life; (Sāy.) forming offspring, granting children.
{%—Tanū-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made delicate or thin,
pared. {%—Tanū-kṛtha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), Ved.
preservation of the person; (Sāy.) on account of his
son (in loc. case).
<LEND>

<L>20369<pc>0362-a<k1>tanti<k2>tanti
{%Tanti, is,%}¦ f. a thread, cord, line, string; a series,
a line, row; expansion, extension; N. of a woman;
({%is%}), m. a weaver. {%—Tanti-pāla%} or {%tanti-pālaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘a guardian of the rows (of calves),’ a N.
assumed by Saha-deva when living with king Virāṭa;
(also applied to Nakula.)
<LEND>

<L>20370<pc>0362-a<k1>tantI<k2>tantI
{%Tantī,%}¦ f. a leading cow (i. e. one going at the head
of the Tantayas or lines of calves).
<LEND>

<L>20371<pc>0362-a<k1>tantu<k2>tantu
{%Tantu, us,%}¦ m. a thread, cord, wire, string, line,
the warp of a web; N. of the Supreme Being; a cob-
web; a filament, fibre, sprig; a line of descendants,
propagation of offspring, issue, race; a shark [cf. {%tan-%}
{%tuṇa%} and {%tantu-nāga%}]; N. of a man; [cf. {%kāṣṭha-%}
{%tantu, vara-t˚, sapta-t˚.%}] {%—Tantu-kāṣṭha, am,%}
n. a piece of fibrous wood, or a brush used by weavers
for cleaning the threads of the woof; [cf. {%tantra-%}
{%kāṣṭha.%}] {%—Tantu-kīṭa, as,%} m. a silk-worm. {%—Tan-%}
{%tu-nāga, as,%} m. a shark. {%—Tantu-niryāsa, as,%} m.
the palmyra tree [cf. {%tāla%}]; (fr. {%tantu,%} a thread,
and {%nir-yāsa,%} exudation, alluding to the stringy or
adhesive nature of this tree.) {%—Tantu-parvan, a,%}
n. ‘the festival of the thread,’ the anniversary of the
day of full moon in the month Śrāvaṇa, when
Kṛṣṇa was invested with the Brāhmanical cord.
{%—Tantu-bha, as,%} m. mustard-seed, Sinapis Dicho-
toma, also {%tantuka;%} a calf. {%—Tantu-mat, ān,%} m.
an epithet of Agni, perhaps ‘uninterrupted like a
thread;’ ({%tī%}), f., N. of the mother of Murāri.
{%—Tantu-vardhana, as,%} m. ‘increasing a race,’ a N.
of Viṣṇu; also of Śiva. {%—Tantu-vādya, am,%} n. a
stringed musical instrument in general. {%—Tantu-%}
{%vāna, am,%} n. weaving. {%—Tantu-vāpa, as,%} m. a
weaver; a loom; weaving. {%—Tantu-vāya, as,%} m. a
weaver; a spider; weaving; [cf. {%tantra-vāya.%}]
{%—Tantuvāya-daṇḍa, as,%} m. a loom. {%—Tantu-%}
{%vigrahā,%} f. the banana or plantain, Musa Sapientum.
{%—Tantu-śālā,%} f. a weaver's shop. {%—Tantu-santata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} woven, sewn; ({%am%}), n. wove cloth.
{%—Tantu-santati, is,%} f. or {%tantu-santāna, as,%} m.
sewing, weaving. {%—Tantu-sāra%} or {%tantu-sāraka, as,%}
m. the areca or betel-nut tree (as having a fibrous
pith). {%—Tantv-agra, am,%} n. the end of a thread.
<LEND>

<L>20372<pc>0362-a<k1>tantuka<k2>tantuka
{%Tantuka, as,%}¦ m. (at the end of an adj. comp.), a
thread, a rope; a kind of serpent; mustard-seed,
Sinapis Dichotoma, {%= tantu-bha; (ī),%} f. a vein or
any tubular vessel.
<LEND>

<L>20373<pc>0362-a<k1>tantuRa<k2>tantuRa
{%Tantuṇa, as,%}¦ m. a shark.
<LEND>

<L>20374<pc>0362-a<k1>tantura<k2>tantura
{%Tantura%}¦ or {%tantula, am,%} n. the filaments or
fibrous root of a lotus; ({%as%}), m. {%= taṇḍula.%}
<LEND>

<L>20375<pc>0362-a<k1>tantra<k2>tantra
{%Tantra, am,%}¦ n. an implement of weaving, a loom;
a thread; the warp or threads extended lengthwise
in a loom; an uninterrupted series (e. g. {%deha-tantra,%}
assuming a series of bodies); posterity; the leading
or principal action of a ceremony, characteristic or
prevalent features, the regular order of ceremonies or
rites, system, framework, ritual; chief or essential part,
main point; principal doctrine, rule, theory; model,
[Page0362-b+ 80]
typical form, science; a scientific work; any scientific
chapter of a work (especially the first section of a
Jyotiḥ-śāstra or treatise on astronomy); a religious
treatise teaching magical and mystical formularies
for the worship of the deities, or the attainment
of superhuman power; it is mostly in the form of
a dialogue between Śiva and Durgā, who are the
peculiar gods of the Tāntrikas, (these works are very
numerous, and their authority, in many parts of
India, seems to have superseded that of the Vedas:
they are said to comprise five subjects, viz. 1. the
creation, 2. the destruction of the world, 3. the
worship of the gods, 4. the attainment of all objects,
especially of six superhuman faculties, 5. the four
modes of union with the supreme spirit by medita-
tion; a variety of subjects are, however, introduced
into many of them, whilst some are limited to a
single topic, as the mode of breathing in certain rites,
the language of birds, beasts, &c.); a cause which
leads to two or more results; the cause of more than
one effect; a medicament, a drug; a chief remedy
or ‘charm’ considered as producing medicinal effects;
a spell; oath or ordeal; raiment, vesture; sup-
porting a family; necessary or indispensable act or
provision; the right way of doing anything; royal
retinue, a court, train; an army; providing for the
security and prosperity of a kingdom; a realm, a
country; subservience, service, dependance; decora-
tion, hanging with trophies, garlands, &c.; heap,
multitude; wealth; a house; happiness, felicity; ({%as%}),
m. a weaver (?); ({%tantrī, īs%} or {%ī%}), f. any string,
cord, or rope; a bow-string; the wire or string of
a lute; (metaphorically) the strings of the heart;
any tubular vessel of the body, a sinew; a tail; the
plant Cocculus Cordifolius [cf. {%tantrikā%} and {%tan-%}
{%traka%}]; a young woman or girl with peculiar quali-
ties; N. of a river. {%—Tantreṇa,%} ind. in such a way
as to hold good or remain. {%—Tantra-kāṣṭha, am,%}
n. a fibrous stick or brush used by weavers for clean-
ing the threads of the woof; [cf. {%tantu-kāṣṭha.%}]
{%—Tantra-kaumudī,%} f., {%tantra-gandharva, tantra-%}
{%garbha, tantra-cūḍāmaṇi,%} titles of different Tantra
works. {%—Tantra-tā,%} f. or {%tantra-tva, am,%} n. ar-
ranging into a system; dependance, subservience;
the quality or character of a Tantra; comprehending
several rites in one, performance of one ceremony,
or penance in lieu of a number. {%—Tantra-prakāśa,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a literary work. {%—Tantra-pradīpa,%}
{%as,%} m. title of a commentary on the Dhātu-pāṭha.
{%—Tantra-bheda,%} title of a Tantra. {%—Tantra-ratna,%}
{%am,%} n. title of a work by Pārtha-sārathi. {%—Tantra-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. title of a work. {%—Tantra-vāpa, as,%}
m. a weaver; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a loom, weaving;
[cf. the next.] {%—Tantra-vāya, as,%} m. a weaver; a
spider; [cf. {%tantu-vāya.%}] {%—Tantra-vārttika =%}
{%mīmāṃsā-tantra-vārttika%}. {%—Tantra-sāra, as,%} m.
‘the essence of the Tantras,’ title of a compilation.
{%—Tantra-hṛdaya, am,%} n. title of a Tantra work.
{%—Tantrī-mukha, as,%} m. a peculiar position of the
hand.
<LEND>

<L>20376<pc>0362-b<k1>tantraka<k2>tantraka
{%Tantraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ new and unbleached (as
cloth), recently from the loom; (at the end of a
comp.) {%= tantra; (ikā),%} f. the plant Cocculus Cor-
difolius; [cf. {%tantrī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20377<pc>0362-b<k1>tantraRa<k2>tantraRa
{%Tantraṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tantraya%}), maintenance of
order, discipline.
<LEND>

<L>20378<pc>0362-b<k1>tantraya<k2>tantraya
{%Tantraya%}¦ (fr. {%tantra%}), nom. P. {%tantrayati,%} to
perform or go through in order; to maintain by disci-
pline, keep in order; A. {%tantrayate,%} to support a
family.
<LEND>

<L>20379<pc>0362-b<k1>tantrAyin<k2>tantrAyin
{%Tantrāyin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. drawing out a thread;
going continuously (as the sun).
<LEND>

<L>20380<pc>0362-b<k1>tantrin<k2>tantrin
{%Tantrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having threads, made of threads,
spun, wove; chorded, having chords or wires (as an
instrument); having a Tantra, following one; ({%ī%}), m.
a musician; a soldier.
<LEND>

<L>20381<pc>0362-b<k1>tandra<k2>tandra<h>1
1. {%tandra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a series, a row.
<LEND>

<L>20382<pc>0362-b<k1>tanvat<k2>tanvat
{%Tanvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ stretching, extending.
<LEND>

<L>20383<pc>0362-b<k1>tanaka<k2>tanaka
{#tanaka#}¦ {%tanaka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a re-
ward; (perhaps a wrong reading for {%vetanaka.%})
<LEND>
[Page0362-c+ 66]

<L>20384<pc>0362-c<k1>tanabAla<k2>tanabAla
{#tanabAla#}¦ {%tanabāla, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people; [cf. {%tālavana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20385<pc>0362-c<k1>tanayitnu<k2>tanayitnu
{#tanayitnu#}¦ {%tanayitnu.%} See 1. {%tan,%} p. 361.
<LEND>

<L>20386<pc>0362-c<k1>tanu<k2>tanu
{#tanu#}¦ {%tanu.%} See p. 361, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20387<pc>0362-c<k1>tanonu<k2>tanonu
{#tanonu#}¦ {%tanonu,%} a kind of rice ({%= ṣaṣṭika%}).
<LEND>

<L>20388<pc>0362-c<k1>tantasya<k2>tantasya
{#tantasya#}¦ {%tantasya,%} nom. P. {%tantasyati,%} to
grieve, be distressed; to afflict; [cf. rt. {%taṃs.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20389<pc>0362-c<k1>tanti<k2>tanti
{#tanti#}¦ {%tanti, tantu, tantra,%} &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20390<pc>0362-c<k1>tantrA<k2>tantrA
{#tantrA#}¦ {%tantrā,%} f. a wrong form for {%tandrā.%}
<LEND>

<L>20391<pc>0362-c<k1>tantri<k2>tantri
{#tantri#}¦ {%tantri, is,%} f. another form for {%tantrī,%}
see col. 2; (also a wrong form for {%tandri.%}) {%—Tan-%}
{%tri-pālaka, as,%} m. an epithet of Jayad-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>20392<pc>0362-c<k1>tantrija<k2>tantrija
{#tantrija#}¦ {%tantrija, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Kanavaka; (another reading has {%tandrija.%})
<LEND>

<L>20393<pc>0362-c<k1>tantrita<k2>tantrita
{#tantrita#}¦ {%tantrita, tantri-tā,%} wrong forms for
{%tandrita, tandri-tā.%}
<LEND>

<L>20394<pc>0362-c<k1>tantripAla<k2>tantripAla
{#tantripAla#}¦ {%tantripāla, as,%} m. a N. assumed
by Saha-deva [cf. {%tanti-pāla%}]; N. of a son of
Kanavaka; (another reading has {%tandripāla.%})
<LEND>

<L>20395<pc>0362-c<k1>tantrillaka<k2>tantrillaka
{#tantrillaka#}¦ {%tantrillaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20396<pc>0362-c<k1>tantrI<k2>tantrI
{#tantrI#}¦ {%tantrī.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20397<pc>0362-c<k1>tantvagra<k2>tantvagra
{#tantvagra#}¦ {%tantv-agra.%} See {%tantu,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20398<pc>0362-c<k1>tand<k2>tand
{#tand#}¦ {%tand,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%tandate,%} &c.,
to relax, give away, become relaxed, to
grow fatigued; (Sāy.) to make languid or fatigued.
<LEND>

<L>20399<pc>0362-c<k1>tandra<k2>tandra<h>2
2. {%tandra, as, ā, am,%}¦ tired, fatigued; lazy; ({%ā%}), f.
lassitude, exhaustion, weariness, syncope; sleepiness,
sluggishness. (For 1. {%tandra%} see col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>20400<pc>0362-c<k1>tandraya<k2>tandraya
{%Tandraya%}¦ (fr. the preceding), nom. A. {%tandra-%}
{%yate,%} to grow fatigued.
<LEND>

<L>20401<pc>0362-c<k1>tandrayu<k2>tandrayu
{%Tandrayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. fatigued, lazy.
<LEND>

<L>20402<pc>0362-c<k1>tandrAya<k2>tandrAya
{%Tandrāya,%}¦ another form for {%tandraya.%}
<LEND>

<L>20403<pc>0362-c<k1>tandrAlu<k2>tandrAlu
{%Tandrālu, us, us, u,%}¦ tired, wearied, sleepy, over-
come with sleep or fatigue, slothful, sluggish.
<LEND>

<L>20404<pc>0362-c<k1>tandri<k2>tandri
{%Tandri, is%}¦ (?) and {%ī, īs%} or {%ī,%} m. (?), f. sleepiness,
drowsiness, fatigue, lassitude; fainting, exhaustion.
{%—Tandri-ja%} or {%tandri-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a son
of Kanavaka; [cf. {%tantri-pāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20405<pc>0362-c<k1>tandrikA<k2>tandrikA
{%Tandrikā,%}¦ f. sloth, sleepiness.
<LEND>

<L>20406<pc>0362-c<k1>tandrita<k2>tandrita
{%Tandrita,%}¦ only in {%a-tandrita, as, ā, am,%} indefa-
tigable, unremitting; [cf. {%a-tanda%} and {%tantrita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20407<pc>0362-c<k1>tandrin<k2>tandrin
{%Tandrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ weary, lazy. {%—Tandri-tā,%} f.
lassitude, exhaustion, weariness, sleepiness.
<LEND>

<L>20408<pc>0362-c<k1>tandr<k2>tandr
{#tandr#}¦ {%tandr%} (a Sautra root), to be dis-
turbed in mind, become bewildered, be
exhausted or fatigued.
<LEND>

<L>20409<pc>0362-c<k1>tandra<k2>tandra<h>1
{#tandra#} 1¦. and 2. {%tandra.%} See above and col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20410<pc>0362-c<k1>tandravAya<k2>tandravAya
{#tandravAya#}¦ {%tandravāya,%} a wrong form for
{%tantra-vāya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20411<pc>0362-c<k1>tannI<k2>tannI
{#tannI#}¦ {%tannī,%} f. or {%tanni, is%} (?), f. the plant
Hemionitis Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>20412<pc>0362-c<k1>tanmaya<k2>tanmaya
{#tanmaya#}¦ {%tan-maya.%} See p. 361, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20413<pc>0362-c<k1>tanmAtra<k2>tanmAtra
{#tanmAtra#}¦ {%tan-mātra.%} See p. 361, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20414<pc>0362-c<k1>tanyatA<k2>tanyatA
{#tanyatA#}¦ {%tanyatā,%} f., Ved. or {%tanyatu, us,%} m.,
Ved. (fr. rt. 1. {%tan%}), roaring, thundering, thunder;
wind; night; a musical instrument (?).
<LEND>

<L>20415<pc>0362-c<k1>tanyu<k2>tanyu
{%Tanyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. making a roaring sound,
epithet of the winds.
<LEND>

<L>20416<pc>0362-c<k1>tanlIka<k2>tanlIka
{#tanlIka#}¦ {%tanlīka%} (?), an areca seller, a desig-
nation of one of the inferior castes of Hindūs.
<LEND>

<L>20417<pc>0362-c<k1>tanva<k2>tanva
{#tanva#}¦ {%tanva, as,%} m., N. of a man; [cf.
{%tānva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20418<pc>0362-c<k1>tanvaNga<k2>tanvaNga
{#tanvaNga#}¦ {%tanv-aṅga.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20419<pc>0362-c<k1>tanvat<k2>tanvat
{#tanvat#}¦ {%tanvat.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20420<pc>0362-c<k1>tanvin<k2>tanvin
{#tanvin#}¦ {%tanvin, ī,%} m., N. of a son of Manu
Tāmasa.
<LEND>
[Page0363-a+ 80]

<L>20421<pc>0363-a<k1>tap<k2>tap<h>1
{#tap#} 1¦. {%tap%} [cf. 2. {%pat%}], cl. 4. A. {%tapyate,%}
&c., to rule, govern.
<LEND>

<L>20422<pc>0363-a<k1>tap<k2>tap<h>2
{#tap#} 2¦. {%tap,%} cl. 1. P. (rarely A.) {%tapati,%}
{%-te, tatāpa, tapsyati%} (ep. also {%tapiṣyati%}),
{%atāpsīt, taptum,%} to give out heat, be hot; to
shine; to heat, make hot or warm; to shine upon;
to be burnt; to burn, to consume or destroy by
heat; to suffer pain; to cause pain or distress; to
injure, hurt, damage, spoil; to torment one's self,
mortify the body, undergo penance, (often with
{%tapas,%} e. g. {%tapas tatāpa,%} he performed penance);
cl. 4. P. {%tapyati%} (rarely used), to warm one's self,
become hot: Pass. {%tapyate,%} to be heated, to suffer
or feel pain; to be injured or hurt; to suffer pain
voluntarily, undergo severe penances, (often with
{%tapas,%} e. g. {%tapas tapyāmahe,%} we undergo penance);
Caus. P. A. {%tāpayati, -te, -yitum,%} to make warm
or hot; to burn, consume by heat, cause pain,
trouble, distress; to torment one's self, undergo
penance: Desid. {%titapsati, -te:%} Intens. {%tātapyate,%}
{%tātapti,%} to feel violent pain, suffer torment, be in
great anxiety or distress; [cf. Lat. <nsi>tepeo:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">τέφρα,</lang>
rt. <lang n="greek">ταφ, θάπτω:</lang> Russ. <nsi>tepl,</nsi>  ‘warm;’ <nsi>teplota,</nsi>
‘warmth:’ Hib. <nsi>tebhot,</nsi> ‘intense heat:’ Old Germ.
<nsi>damf:</nsi> Lat. <nsi>tempus ?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>20423<pc>0363-a<k1>tap<k2>tap<h>3
3. {%tap, p, p, p,%}¦ warming one's self; [cf. {%agni-tap.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20424<pc>0363-a<k1>tapa<k2>tapa
{%Tapa, as, ā, am,%}¦ warming; burning, consuming
by heat [cf. {%lalāṭan-tapa%}]; causing pain or trouble,
distressing [cf. {%janan-tapa%} and {%paran-tapa%}]; ({%as%}),
m. heat, warmth, fire [cf. {%ā-tapa%}]; the sun; the
hot season; religious austerity, penance, mortifica-
tion ({%= tapas%}); a peculiar form of fire which
generated the seven mothers of Skanda; N. of one
of the attendants of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the
eight deities of the Bodhi-druma; [cf. {%a-tapa%} and
{%tāpa.%}] {%—Tapa-ruj, k,%} f. the pain of penance. {%—Ta-%}
{%pātmaka (˚pa-āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} practising austeri-
ties. {%—Tapātyaya (˚pa-at˚), as,%} m. the end of the
heat, the beginning of the rainy season. {%—Tapānta%}
{%(˚pa-an˚), as,%} m. the end of the heat, the beginning
of the rainy season.
<LEND>

<L>20425<pc>0363-a<k1>tapat<k2>tapat
{%Tapat, an, antī, at,%}¦ heating or warming; per-
forming penance &c. {%—Tapatām-pati, is,%} m. ‘the
chief of burners,’ the sun.
<LEND>

<L>20426<pc>0363-a<k1>tapatI<k2>tapatI
{%Tapatī,%}¦ f. ‘the warming one,’ N. of a daughter
of the Sun and of his wife Chāyā, married to Saṃ-
varaṇa and mother of Kuru; N. of a river, commonly
called Taptī; [cf. {%tāpatya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20427<pc>0363-a<k1>tapana<k2>tapana
{%Tapana, as, ā, am,%}¦ warming, burning, shining,
an epithet of the sun; causing pain or distress; ({%as%}),
m. the sun; N. of a divine being (perhaps the sun)
who fights with Garuḍa; N. of one of the five fires in
the Svāhā-kāra; N. of a Rakṣas; a N. of Agastya;
heat, burning, the hot season; N. of a burning hell;
N. of several plants, viz. Semecarpus Anacardium
[cf. {%aruṣ-kara%}]; Calotropis Gigantea ({%arka%}), the
white variety of it; Premna Spinosa ({%kṣu-%}
{%drāgni-mantha%}); Cassia Senna; the sun-stone [cf.
{%sūrya-kānta, tapana-maṇi, tapanopala%}]; ({%ī%}), f.
heat; the root of Bignonia Suaveolens; N. of a
river, {%= tāpī%} and {%tapanātmajā,%} according to some
authorities {%= godāvarī; (am),%} n. the being hot,
burning; pining, grieving, mental distress; [cf. {%rāma-%}
{%tapana,%} ‘the distress of Rāma,’ N. of an Upaniṣad;
{%tripurā-t˚, gopāla-t˚;%} cf. also {%tāpana.%}] {%—Tapana-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. a ray, a sunbeam. {%—Tapana-cchada,%}
{%as,%} m. the sunflower, {%= āditya-pattra%}. {%—Tapana-%}
{%tanaya, as,%} m. ‘the son of the Sun,’ a N. of Karṇa;
({%ā%}), f. ‘the daughter of the Sun,’ the Yamunā river;
the Taptī river [cf. {%tapanātmajā%}]; N. of a tree;
[cf. {%śamī.%}] {%—Tapana-maṇi, is,%} m. the sun-stone;
[cf. {%sūrya-kānta.%}] {%—Tapanāṃśu (˚na-aṃ˚), us,%}
m. a ray of the sun, a sunbeam. {%—Tapanātmajā%}
{%(˚na-ātma-jā),%} f. ‘the daughter of the Sun,’ N. of a
river, {%= tapanī%} and {%tāpī,%} according to some authori-
ties {%= godāvarī%} [cf. {%tapanī%} and {%tapana%}], and
{%yamunā%}. {%—Tapaneṣṭa (˚na-iṣ˚), am,%} n. copper
(‘loved by the rays of the sun,’ i. e. easily heated or
coloured by them). {%—Tapanopala (˚na-up˚), as,%}
m. the sun-stone; [cf. {%sūrya-kānta.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0363-b+ 81]

<L>20428<pc>0363-b<k1>tapanIya<k2>tapanIya
{%Tapanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be heated; to be suffered
or practised as penance; ({%am%}), n. gold purified with
fire, gold in general; a sort of rice. {%—Tapanīya-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of purified gold, golden.
<LEND>

<L>20429<pc>0363-b<k1>tapanIyaka<k2>tapanIyaka
{%Tapanīyaka, am,%}¦ n. gold.
<LEND>

<L>20430<pc>0363-b<k1>tapantaka<k2>tapantaka
{%Tapantaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20431<pc>0363-b<k1>tapas<k2>tapas
{%Tapas, as,%}¦ n. warmth, heat, fire, ({%pañca tapāṃsi,%}
the five fires to which an ascetic is exposed in the
hot season, viz. four fires lighted in the several
quarters and the sun burning from above); pain,
suffering; religious austerity, penance, mortification,
the practice of mental or personal self-denial or the
infliction of bodily tortures; the meditation connected
with such a practice; moral virtue, merit; special
observance or duty of any particular caste (e. g. the
Tapas of a Brāhman is sacred learning; of a Kṣa-
triya, the protection of subjects; of a Vaiśya, giving
alms to Brāhmans; of a Śūdra, service; and of a
Ṛṣi or saint, feeding upon herbs and roots); a
particular month of the cold season intervening
between winter and spring (= Māgha or January-
February, the month of religious austerities; cf. {%ta-%}
{%pasya%}); one of the seven worlds, the region above
the Jana-loka, inhabited by saints or devotees after
death [cf. {%tapo-loka%}]; (in astrology) the ninth lunar
mansion, {%= dharma;%} N. of a long period of time, a
Kalpa; ({%ās, as%}), m. n. the cold or dewy season ({%=%}
{%śiśira%}); the winter ({%= himartu%}); the hot season.
{%—Tapaḥ-kara, as, ā, am,%} undergoing religious
austerities or penance &c.; ({%as%}), m. a kind of fish,
Polynemus Risua or Paradiseus, (this fish is also
called Tapasyā-matsya); [cf. {%tapas-vin.%}] {%—Tapaḥ-%}
{%kṛśa, as, ā, am%} emaciated by austerities. {%—Tapaḥ-%}
{%kleśa-saha, as, ā, am,%} patient of austerities, enduring
the pain of penance. {%—Tapaḥ-prabhāva, as,%} m. the
efficacy of devotion. {%—Tapaḥ-śīla, as, ā, am,%} in-
clined to religious austerities. {%—Tapaḥ-samādhi, is,%}
m. the practice of penance. {%—Tapaḥ-sādhya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} to be accomplished by penance. {%—Tapaḥ-siddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} accomplished by penance. {%—Tapaḥ-sthalī,%}
f. ‘the seat of religious austerity or piety,’ a N. of
Benares. {%—Tapaś-caraṇa, am,%} n. or {%tapaś-caryā,%}
f. the practice of penance. {%—Tapaś-cit, t, t, t,%} accu-
mulating religious merit by austerities; ({%tas%}), m. pl.,
N. of a class of deities; {%tapaścitām ayanam,%} N.
of a religious ceremony which lasts several days.
{%—Tapaso-mūrti, is,%} m., N. of one of the seven
sages in the twelfth Manv-antara; [cf. {%tapo-mūrti.%}]
{%—Tapas-takṣa, as,%} m. ‘destroying religious
penance,’ an epithet of Indra as disturbing the
austerities of ascetics lest they should acquire too
great power; (other authorities explain the word
‘emaciating himself by his devotions;’ and others
read {%tapas-taṅka,%} ‘afraid of austerities’ or ‘the axe
of austerities.’) {%—Tapas-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
place of pilgrimage. {%—Tapas-pati, is,%} m. the lord
of penance. {%—Tapas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. burning,
hot; ascetic, devout; [cf. {%tapo-vat.%}] {%—Tapasvi-tā,%}
f. devout austerity, religious penance, bodily morifica-
tion. {%—Tapas-vin, ī, inī, i,%} distressed, wretched,
poor, miserable, pitiable; practising austerities, de-
vout; a mendicant, a pauper; an ascetic, a religious
man engaged in the practice of rigorous and devout
penance; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Manu Cākṣuṣa
and Naḍvalā; N. of one of the seven sages of the
twelfth Manv-antara; an epithet of Nārada; the
mango fish, Polynemus Risua [cf. {%tapaḥ-kara%}]; N.
of a tree, a kind of Karañja ({%ghṛta-karañja%});
({%inī%}), f. a female devotee, a woman leading a re-
ligious life; a poor wretched woman; spikenard,
Valeriana Jaṭāmānsi; another plant, Helleborus Niger,
{%= kaṭu-rohiṇī;%} also {%= mahā-śrāvaṇikā%}. {%—Tapa-%}
{%svi-pattra, as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= damanaka;%} [cf.
{%tapo-dhana.%}] {%—Tapo-jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. born from
heat; one who practises religious austerities. {%—Tapo-%}
{%da, as, ā, am,%} granting piety; ({%am%}), n., N. of a
Tīrtha in Magadha. {%—Tapo-dāna, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Tapo-dhana, as, ā, am,%} rich in religious
penance; ascetic, pious; a very treasure of mortifica-
tions and austerities, a devotee, an ascetic, performing
religious penance; consisting in religious penance;
[Page0363-c+ 81]
granting religious merit or piety; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
son of Manu Tāmasa; N. of a plant, {%= damanaka,%}
commonly {%davaṇā,%} Artemisia [cf. {%tapasvi-pattra%}];
({%ā%}), f. the plant Sphæranthus Mollis, {%= muṇḍīrī,%}
commonly {%muṇḍī%}. {%—Tapo-dharma, as,%} m., N. of
a son of the thirteenth Manu. {%—Tapo-dhāman, a,%}
n. ‘the abode of penance,’ N. of a place of pilgrimage.
{%—Tapo-dhṛti, is,%} m., N. of one of the seven sages
of the twelfth Manv-antara. {%—Tapo-nitya, as, ā, am,%}
devoting one's self uninterruptedly to religious auste-
rities or penance; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man with the
patronymic Pauruśiṣṭi. {%—Tapo-nidhi, is,%} m. a
treasury of religious austerities and penance, a very
treasure of merit derived from self-mortification, an
eminently pious man. {%—Tapo-niṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}
performing penance, practising austerities. {%—Tapo-%}
{%'nubhāva (˚pas-an˚), as,%} m. the influence of re-
ligious penance. {%—Tapo-bala, am,%} n. the power
acquired by religious austerities. {%—Tapo-bhaṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. interruption of religious penance. {%—Tapo-%}
{%bhṛt, t, t, t,%} undergoing penance, ascetic, pious; an
ascetic, a pious man. {%—Tapo-maya, as, ī, am,%} con-
sisting in religious penance, containing it; practising
austerities, devout. {%—Tapo-mūrti, is,%} f. an incarna-
tion of religious austerity or penance; an ascetic;
({%is%}), m., N. of one of the seven sages of the twelfth
Manv-antara; [cf. {%tapaso-mūrti.%}] {%—Tapo-mūla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} founded on religious austerity or penance;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Manu Tāmasa. {%—Tapo-%}
{%yukta, as, ā, am,%} employed in penitential exercises,
ascetic, pious. {%—Tapo-rati, is, is, i,%} rejoicing in re-
ligious austerity; ({%is%}), m., N. of a son of Manu
Tāmasa. {%—Tapo-ravi, is,%} m. ‘the sun of the ascetics,’
N. of one of the seven sages in the twelfth Manv-
antara. {%—Tapo-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of penance,’ the
moon. {%—Tapo-rāśi, is,%} m. ‘a heap of religious
austerities;’ an ascetic. {%—Tapo-loka, as,%} m. one of
the seven worlds, that which is situated above the
Jana-loka; [cf. {%tapas.%}] {%—Tapo-vaṭa, as,%} m. ‘en-
closure or district of religious penance,’ a N. applied
to Brahmāvarta, i. e. the holy land situated in central
India. {%—Tapo-vat, ān, atī, at,%} ascetic, pious; [cf.
{%tapas-vat.%}] {%—Tapo-vana, as,%} m. ‘penance-grove,’
a sacred grove in which ascetics perform their re-
ligious austerities. {%—Tapo-vāsa, as,%} m. a place of
religious austerity. {%—Tapo-viśeṣa, as,%} m. excellence
of devotion. {%—Tapo-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%} rich in
religious austerity or penance, very ascetic or pious.
{%—Tapo-vrāta, as,%} m. a multitude of penances.
{%—Tapo-'śana (˚pas-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose
food is religious austerity; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of
the seven sages of the twelfth Manv-antara; also of
a son of Manu Tāmasa.
<LEND>

<L>20432<pc>0363-c<k1>tapasIvan<k2>tapasIvan
{%Tapasīvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ causing pain (?).
<LEND>

<L>20433<pc>0363-c<k1>tapasya<k2>tapasya<h>1
1. {%tapasya,%}¦ nom. P. {%tapasyati,%} to undergo reli-
gious austerities, do penance.
<LEND>

<L>20434<pc>0363-c<k1>tapasya<k2>tapasya<h>2
2. {%tapasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced by heat; ({%as%}),
m. the month Phālguna (February-March), the
second month of the season intervening between
winter and spring; a N. of Arjuna; N. of a son of
Manu Tāmasa; ({%ā%}), f. devout austerity, religious
penance; ({%am%}), n. devout austerity, mortification,
religious penance; the flower of Jasminum Multi-
florum or Pubescens {%(kunda-puṣpa)%}. {%—Tapasyā-%}
{%matsya,%} the mango fish; [cf. under {%tapaḥ-kara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20435<pc>0363-c<k1>tapita<k2>tapita
{%Tapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heated, burnt, refined.
<LEND>

<L>20436<pc>0363-c<k1>tapizWa<k2>tapizWa
{%Tapiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. 2. {%tap%} with the superl.
affix), Ved. extremely hot, burning; [cf. {%tapīyas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20437<pc>0363-c<k1>tapizRu<k2>tapizRu
{%Tapiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ warming, heating, burning.
<LEND>

<L>20438<pc>0363-c<k1>tapIyas<k2>tapIyas
{%Tapīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (fr. 2. {%tap%} with the compar.
affix), extremely ascetic, most devoted to religious
austerities.
<LEND>

<L>20439<pc>0363-c<k1>tapu<k2>tapu
{%Tapu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. burning hot.
<LEND>

<L>20440<pc>0363-c<k1>tapuzi<k2>tapuzi
{%Tapuṣi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. burning.
<LEND>

<L>20441<pc>0363-c<k1>tapuzI<k2>tapuzI
{%Tapuṣī,%}¦ f. the heat of anger or wrath.
<LEND>

<L>20442<pc>0363-c<k1>tapus<k2>tapus
{%Tapus, us, us, us,%}¦ Ved. burning hot; ({%us%}), m.
fire; the sun; an enemy (who causes pain); ({%us%}),
n. heat, pain. {%—Tapur-agra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
a burning point or extremity (as a spear). {%—Tapur-%}
{%jambha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having burning jaws, an
epithet of Agni. {%—Tapur-mūrdhan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved.
[Page0364-a+ 78]
having a burning head, an epithet of Agni; ({%ā%}), m.,
N. of an author of a hymn of the Ṛg-veda who was
a son of Bṛhaspati. {%—Tapur-vadha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having burning weapons. {%—Tapuṣ-pā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} Ved. (Sāy.) protecting from pain; (perhaps
rather) drinking warm (beverages).
<LEND>

<L>20443<pc>0364-a<k1>tapta<k2>tapta
{%Tapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ heated, inflamed, burnt; hot;
red-hot; fused, melted, molten; burnished; scorched
by pain or sorrow, distressed, afflicted; inflamed with
anger, incensed; undergone or performed (as penance).
{%—Tapta-kumbha, as,%} m. a heated or red-hot jar;
N. of a particular hell; ({%as, ā, am%}), having hot jars.
{%—Tapta-kūpa,%} ‘hot-well,’ N. of a hell; (perhaps a
wrong reading for the preceding.) {%—Tapta-kṛcchra,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a sort of penance which consists in
drinking hot water, milk, and ghee for three days
each, and inhaling hot air for three days. {%—Tapta-%}
{%tapas, ās,%} m. one who has performed penance, an
ascetic. {%—Tapta-pāṣāṇa-kuṇḍa, am,%} n. ‘a pit
filled with burning stones,’ N. of a hell. {%—Tapta-%}
{%bāluka, as, ā, am,%} having hot or burning gravel;
({%as%}), m., N. of a hell. {%—Tapta-rūpa%} or {%tapta-%}
{%rūpaka, am,%} n. silver. {%—Tapta-lomaśa,%} green
vitriol. {%—Tapta-loha, am,%} n. ‘glowing iron,’ N. of
a hell. {%—Tapta-śūrmi%} or {%tapta-sūrmi, is,%} f. ‘a red-
hot iron statue,’ N. of a hell in which the wicked are
made to embrace red-hot images. {%—Taptaśūrmi-%}
{%kuṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of a hell. {%—Tapta-surā-kuṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘a jar or hole filled with burning spirituous
liquor,’ N. of a hell. {%—Tapta-hema-maya, as, ī, am,%}
like or consisting of melted gold. {%—Taptānna (˚ta-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. hot food, hot rice. {%—Taptāyana (˚ta-%}
{%ay˚), as, ī, am,%} Ved. serving as a dwelling-place for
the distressed (as the earth).
<LEND>

<L>20444<pc>0364-a<k1>taptavya<k2>taptavya
{%Taptavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be performed as a reli-
gious penance.
<LEND>

<L>20445<pc>0364-a<k1>taptf<k2>taptf
{%Taptṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ making warm or hot, heating,
a heater.
<LEND>

<L>20446<pc>0364-a<k1>taptvA<k2>taptvA
{%Taptvā,%}¦ ind. having heated, having performed
penance.
<LEND>

<L>20447<pc>0364-a<k1>tapya<k2>tapya
{%Tapya, as, ā, am,%}¦ performing religious austerity,
doing penance.
<LEND>

<L>20448<pc>0364-a<k1>tapyati<k2>tapyati
{%Tapyati, is,%}¦ f., Ved. heat.
<LEND>

<L>20449<pc>0364-a<k1>tapyatu<k2>tapyatu
{%Tapyatu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. hot, glowing.
<LEND>

<L>20450<pc>0364-a<k1>tapsyat<k2>tapsyat
{%Tapsyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} practising or intend-
ing to practise austerities.
<LEND>

<L>20451<pc>0364-a<k1>tapaSa<k2>tapaSa
{#tapaSa#}¦ {%tapaśa, as,%} m. the moon; [cf. the
following.]
<LEND>

<L>20452<pc>0364-a<k1>tapasa<k2>tapasa
{#tapasa#}¦ {%tapasa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 2. {%tap%}),
the moon; a bird; [cf. the preceding.]
<LEND>

<L>20453<pc>0364-a<k1>tabalAkfti<k2>tabalAkfti
{#tabalAkfti#}¦ {%tabalākṛti, is,%} f. (fr. {%tabala?%}
and {%ākṛti%}), N. of a kind of creeping plant.
<LEND>

<L>20454<pc>0364-a<k1>tam<k2>tam
{#tam#}¦ {%tam,%} cl. 4. P. (rarely A.) {%tāmyati,%}
{%tāmyate, tatāma, tamitum,%} to gasp for
breath (as one suffocating), choke, be suffocated,
breathe with difficulty; to faint away; to be exhausted,
perish; to be distressed in body or mind; to be
disturbed or perplexed; to stop, become immovable
or stiff; to wish, desire: Caus. {%tamayati, -yitum,%}
to suffocate, deprive of breath; [cf. Lat. <nsi>temere,</nsi>
<nsi>tabeo</nsi> (?); Old Germ. <nsi>damf;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>tomlju.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>20455<pc>0364-a<k1>tama<k2>tama<h>1
1. {%tama, as,%}¦ m. darkness &c., {%= tamas%} in its
various meanings; also {%= tamāla; (ā),%} f. night, {%=%}
{%tamāla,%} Phyllanthus Emblica; ({%am%}), n. darkness,
gloom; the point of the foot. {%—Tamāhvaya (˚ma-%}
{%āh˚),%} a kind of plant, {%= tālīśa-pattra.%}
<LEND>

<L>20456<pc>0364-a<k1>tamaka<k2>tamaka
{%Tamaka, as,%}¦ m. oppression (of the chest), a kind
of asthma; [cf. {%pra-tamaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20457<pc>0364-a<k1>tamakA<k2>tamakA
{%Tamakā,%}¦ f. {%= tamā, tamālakā, ˚kī, tamālī, ta-%}
{%mālinī,%} Phyllanthus Emblica.
<LEND>

<L>20458<pc>0364-a<k1>tamata<k2>tamata
{%Tamata, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirous, cupidinous, longing
or hankering after; wished, desired.
<LEND>

<L>20459<pc>0364-a<k1>tamana<k2>tamana
{%Tamana, am,%}¦ n. the becoming breathless.
<LEND>

<L>20460<pc>0364-a<k1>tamas<k2>tamas
{%Tamas, as,%}¦ n. darkness, gloom; the darkness of
hell, hell itself or a peculiar division of hell; the
obscuration of the sun or moon in eclipses, darkness
personified as Rāhu or the ascending node; mental
darkness, illusion, error (constituting one of the five
[Page0364-b+ 81]
forms of {%a-vidyā%} in the Sāṅkhya phil.), sin, sorrow;
(in the Sāṅkhya phil.) darkness or ignorance as one
of the three qualities or constituents of everything in
creation, the other two being {%sattva%} and {%rajas,%} see
{%guṇa;%} as an inherent quality of nature {%tamas%} is
heavy and obstructive, and predominates in earth
and water, whence they fall and tend downwards;
in living beings it is the cause of ignorance, illusion,
lust, anger, pride, sorrow, dulness, and stolidity;
({%as%}), m., N. of a descendant of Gṛtsa-mada, a son
of Śravas and father of Pra-kāśa; N. of a son of
Pṛthu-śravas and father of Uśanas; [cf. Lith. <nsi>tamsa,</nsi>
‘darkness;’ <nsi>tamsus,</nsi> ‘obscure:’ Russ. <nsi>temnyi,</nsi> ‘dark;’
<nsi>temno-ta,</nsi> ‘darkness:’ Hib. <nsi>teim,</nsi> ‘dark, obscure;’
<nsi>teimhen,</nsi> ‘darkness;’ <nsi>teimheal,</nsi> ‘an eclipse, dark-
ness:’ Old Germ. <nsi>demar:</nsi> Old Sax. <nsi>thim:</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>dim:</nsi> Lat. <nsi>tenebrœ?</nsi>]. {%—Tamaḥ-prabhā%} or
{%tama-prabhā,%} f., or {%tama-prabha%} or {%tamaḥ-%}
{%prabha, as,%} m. a hell, one of the lowermost di-
visions of the infernal regions. {%—Tamaḥ-praveśa,%}
{%as,%} m. groping in the dark; mental perplexity or
aberration. {%—Tamaḥ-sthita, am,%} n. ‘situated in
darkness,’ N. of a hell, one of the lowest divisions
of hell. {%—Tamasā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} or {%tamas-%}
{%kalpa, as, ā, am,%} like darkness, black, gloomy.
{%—Tamas-kāṇḍa, as,%} m. or {%tamas-tati, is,%} f. great
or spreading darkness. {%—Tamas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} hav-
ing darkness, dark, gloomy; ({%tī%}), f. night. {%—Tamas-%}
{%vin, ī, inī, i,%} dark, gloomy; ({%nī%}), f. night; turmeric.
{%—Tamo-gā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. roaming in the dark-
ness, concealing himself in darkness, an epithet of
Śuṣṇa. {%—Tamo-gu, us,%} m. an epithet of Rāhu, the
personified ascending node, the causer of darkness.
{%—Tamo-guṇa, as,%} m. the quality of darkness or
ignorance; see above under {%tamas%}. {%—Tamoguṇin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} having the quality of {%tamas%} predominant
in the temperament, irascible, ignorant, proud, &c.
{%—Tamo-ghna, as, ī, am,%} destroying darkness;
({%as%}), m. the sun; the moon; fire; an epithet of
Viṣṇu; an epithet of Śiva; a Buddha. {%—Tamo-%}
{%jyotis, is,%} m. ‘light in darkness,’ a fire-fly. {%—Tamo-%}
{%darśana,%} bilious fever. {%—Tamo-nud, t, t, t,%} dis-
persing darkness; ({%t%}), m. a shining body; the sun;
the moon; fire; a lamp; light. {%—Tamo-nuda, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} dispersing darkness; ({%as%}), m. the sun; the moon.
{%—Tamo-'ntakṛt (˚mas-an˚), t, t, t,%} making an end
of darkness; ({%t%}), m., N. of one of the attendants
of Skanda. {%—Tamo-'ntya (˚mas-an˚), as,%} m. one
of the ten ways in which an eclipse may happen.
{%—Tamo-'paha (˚mas-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} removing
darkness physical or moral, illumining, enlightening;
({%as%}), m. the sun; the moon; fire; a Buddha.
{%—Tamo-bhid, t, t, t,%} dispersing darkness; ({%t%}), m.
a fire-fly. {%—Tamo-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} ‘become dark-
ness,’ dark, covered with darkness; ignorant. {%—Ta-%}
{%mo-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘the jewel of darkness,’ a kind of
gem; a fire-fly. {%—Tamo-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting
or composed of darkness, derived from it, covered
with it; ({%as%}), m. the mind enveloped with darkness,
vexation, anger, one of the five forms of {%a-vidyā%} in
the Sāṅkhya phil. {%—Tamo-'ri (˚mas-ari), is,%} m.
the enemy of darkness, the sun. {%—Tamo-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} dark, gloomy; [cf. {%tamas-vat.%}] {%—Tamo-%}
{%vikāra, as,%} m. disease, sickness, (as a modification
of the Guṇa {%tamas.%}) {%—Tamo-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}
obscured, clouded; overcome with or influenced by
rage, fear, &c., or any of the effects of the property
of darkness. {%—Tamo-vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. rejoicing or
delighting in darkness; (Sāy.) growing in the dark-
ness, increasing by the darkness. {%—Tamo-han, ā,%}
{%-ghnī, a,%} Ved. striking down or dispersing darkness.
{%—Tamo-hara, as, ā, am,%} removing darkness, illu-
minating; ({%as%}), m. the moon.
<LEND>

<L>20461<pc>0364-b<k1>tamasa<k2>tamasa
{%Tamasa, as, ī, am,%}¦ dark-coloured; ({%as%}), m.
darkness; a well; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river, the Tamasā
or Tonse, falling into the Ganges below Pratiṣṭhāna;
({%am%}), n. darkness (at end of comp., cf. {%andha-t˚,%}
{%ava-t˚, vi-t˚, san-t˚%}); a city.
<LEND>

<L>20462<pc>0364-b<k1>tamaska<k2>tamaska
{%Tamaska, as, ā, am,%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp.
{%= tamas;%} [cf. {%nis-tamaska.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20463<pc>0364-b<k1>tamAla<k2>tamAla
{%Tamāla, as,%}¦ m., N. of a tree with a very dark bark
[Page0364-c+ 68]
(but white blossoms), Xanthochymus Pictorius; N.
of various other plants, {%= varuṇa%} and {%kṛṣṇa-kha-%}
{%dira; (as),%} m. the sectarial mark made with sandal
(or perhaps the juice of the Tamāla fruit) upon the
forehead; a sword, a scymitar or large sacrificial
knife; ({%ī%}), f., N. of several plants, {%= tāmra-vallī;%}
Phyllanthus Emblica; also {%= varuṇa; (as, am),%} m.
n. the bark of the bamboo; ({%am%}), n. the leaf of
the Laurus Cassia, {%= pattraka = tamāla-pattra.%}
{%—Tamāla-pattra, am,%} n. the leaf of the Xantho-
chymus Pictorius; the leaf of the Laurus Cassia, Mala-
bathron; a sectarial mark on the forehead; the tree
Xanthochymus Pictorius. {%—Tamālapattra-canda-%}
{%na-gandha, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>20464<pc>0364-c<k1>tamAlaka<k2>tamAlaka
{%Tamālaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the tree Xanthochymus
Pictorius; the bark of a bamboo; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of two
plants, {%= tāmra-vallī%} and {%bhūmy-āmalī,%} Phyllanthus
Emblica; N. of a place, {%= tāma-lipta%} [cf. {%tamālinī%}];
N. of a woman; ({%am%}), n. the leaf of the Laurus
Cassia; a sort of pot-herb, Marsilea Dentata.
<LEND>

<L>20465<pc>0364-c<k1>tamAlinI<k2>tamAlinI
{%Tamālinī,%}¦ f. a place overgrown with Tamāla trees;
N. of a country, {%= tāma-lipta;%} N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%bhūmy-āmalī,%} Phyllanthus Emblica.
<LEND>

<L>20466<pc>0364-c<k1>tamisra<k2>tamisra
{%Tamisra, am,%}¦ n. darkness, a dark night; darkness
of mind, illusion; anger, wrath; ({%ā%}), f. a dark night,
or one during the wane of the moon; great or ex-
tensive darkness, the night of new moon, any night;
({%as%}), m. the dark half of the month, from the full
to the change; [cf. {%su-tamisra, tāmisra, tami-%}
{%ṣīci.%}] {%—Tamisra-pakṣa, as,%} m. the fortnight of
the moon's wane, the time from full moon to new
moon.
<LEND>

<L>20467<pc>0364-c<k1>tama<k2>tama<h>2
{#tama#} 2¦. {%tama%} (for 1. see under rt. {%tam,%} col. 1),
a Taddhita affix, the termination of the superlative
degree, used also as an independent word in the
sense of {%iṣṭa-tama,%} most desired, and sometimes
added adverbially in the form {%tamām;%} [cf. {%tāra-%}
{%tamya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20468<pc>0364-c<k1>tamaNga<k2>tamaNga
{#tamaNga#}¦ {%tamaṅga, as,%} m. a platform, stage.
<LEND>

<L>20469<pc>0364-c<k1>tamaNgaka<k2>tamaNgaka
{%Tamaṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. the flat and projecting roof
of a house, a sort of balcony or terrace.
<LEND>

<L>20470<pc>0364-c<k1>tamara<k2>tamara
{#tamara#}¦ {%tamara, am,%} n. tin; lead (?).
<LEND>

<L>20471<pc>0364-c<k1>tamarAja<k2>tamarAja
{#tamarAja#}¦ {%tamarāja, as,%} m. a kind of sugar.
<LEND>

<L>20472<pc>0364-c<k1>tamAla<k2>tamAla
{#tamAla#}¦ {%tamāla.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20473<pc>0364-c<k1>tamAhvaya<k2>tamAhvaya
{#tamAhvaya#}¦ {%tamāhvaya.%} See 1. {%tama,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20474<pc>0364-c<k1>tami<k2>tami
{#tami#}¦ {%tami, is,%} or {%tamī,%} f. the night; tur-
meric; [cf. 1. {%tama%} and {%tamas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20475<pc>0364-c<k1>tamizIci<k2>tamizIci
{#tamizIci#}¦ {%tamiṣīci, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. {%tam ?%}),
Ved. oppressing, stunning, afflicting, confusing, dis-
turbing; (Sāy.) powerful, strong.
<LEND>

<L>20476<pc>0364-c<k1>tamisra<k2>tamisra
{#tamisra#}¦ {%tamisra.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>20477<pc>0364-c<k1>tamuzwuhIya<k2>tamuzwuhIya
{#tamuzwuhIya#}¦ {%tamuṣṭuhīya, as, ā, am,%} N. of a
Sūkta beginning with the words {%tam u ṣṭuhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>20478<pc>0364-c<k1>tamoliptI<k2>tamoliptI
{#tamoliptI#}¦ {%tamoliptī,%} f., N. of a country,
the district of Tumlook in Bengal, {%= tāma-lipta,%}
commonly called {%tamoluka.%}
<LEND>

<L>20479<pc>0364-c<k1>tampA<k2>tampA
{#tampA#}¦ {%tampā,%} f. a cow; [cf. {%tambā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20480<pc>0364-c<k1>tamb<k2>tamb
{#tamb#}¦ {%tamb,%} cl. 1. P. {%tambati,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>20481<pc>0364-c<k1>tambA<k2>tambA
{#tambA#}¦ {%tambā,%} f. a cow; [cf. {%tampā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20482<pc>0364-c<k1>tambIra<k2>tambIra
{#tambIra#}¦ {%tambīra%} or {%tamvīra,%} in astrology
<lang n="arabic">تمْوير</lang> the fourteenth Yoga.
<LEND>

<L>20483<pc>0364-c<k1>tamra<k2>tamra
{#tamra#}¦ {%tamra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%tam%}), Ved.
oppressing, darkening; (Sāy.) causing to languish.
<LEND>

<L>20484<pc>0364-c<k1>tay<k2>tay
{#tay#}¦ {%tay,%} cl. 1. A. {%tayate, teye, tayitum,%}
to go, move; to guard, preserve.
<LEND>

<L>20485<pc>0364-c<k1>taya<k2>taya
{%Taya, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what protects; ({%as%}), m.
protection.
<LEND>

<L>20486<pc>0364-c<k1>tara<k2>tara<h>1
{#tara#} 1¦. {%tara,%} a Taddhita affix, the termina-
[Page0365-a+ 80]
tion of the comparative degree, sometimes added ad-
verbially in the form {%tarām;%} [cf. {%kaṣṭa-tara,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>20487<pc>0365-a<k1>tara<k2>tara<h>2
{#tara#} 2¦. {%tara, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%tṝ%}), who or
what passes over or beyond, crossing; surpassing;
conquering, overpowering; excelling; to be crossed,
to be overcome [cf. {%dus-tara%} and {%duṣ-ṭara%}]; ({%as%}),
m. passing over, crossing, passage; freight; a road (?);
a ferry-boat, raft (?); a tree (?); a sort of magical spell
against the evil spirits supposed to possess certain wea-
pons; N. of a man; (for {%tarī%} see {%tari%} next col.)
{%—Tara-paṇya, am,%} n. ferriage, freight, the price
or fare paid at a ferry. {%—Tara-paṇyika, as,%} m. one
who receives the ferriage or freight. {%—Tara-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. a landing-place, a wharf or stairs.
<LEND>

<L>20488<pc>0365-a<k1>taraNga<k2>taraNga<h>1
1. {%taraṅga, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps fr. {%taram + ga%}), a
wave; a name given to sections of certain literary
works (especially when the title contains such a word
as ‘sea,’ ‘river,’ &c., e. g. of the Kathā-sarit-sāgara
and Rāja-taraṅgiṇī); a jumping motion, a leap, a
jump, the gallop of a horse, waving, moving to and
fro; cloth or clothes; [cf. {%ut-taraṅga%} and {%carma-%}
{%taraṅga.%}] {%—Taraṅga-bhīru, us,%} m., N. of a son
of the fourteenth Manu. {%—Taraṅgāpatrasta (˚ga-%}
{%ap˚), as, ā, am,%} a little afraid of waves (Pāṇ. II. 1, 38).
<LEND>

<L>20489<pc>0365-a<k1>taraNga<k2>taraNga<h>2
2. {%taraṅga,%}¦ nom. P. {%taraṅgati, -gitum,%} to move
like a billow, wave, move to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>20490<pc>0365-a<k1>taraNgaka<k2>taraNgaka
{%Taraṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. a wave; [cf. {%nārī-taraṅgaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20491<pc>0365-a<k1>taraNgita<k2>taraNgita
{%Taraṅgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wavy, billowy, tossing with
waves; overflowing; ({%am%}), n. waving, moving to
and fro.
<LEND>

<L>20492<pc>0365-a<k1>taraNgin<k2>taraNgin
{%Taraṅgin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ wavy, moving like a billow,
moving {{restessly->restlessly||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} to and fro, unsteady; ({%iṇī%}), f. a
river; (sometimes at the end of the title of a literary
work, e. g. {%kṣīra-taraṅgiṇī, rāja-t˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>20493<pc>0365-a<k1>taraRa<k2>taraRa
{%Taraṇa, as,%}¦ m. a raft, a boat; Svarga or paradise
(the final landing-place); ({%am%}), n. crossing over,
passing, going across, carrying over, transporting;
conquering, overcoming; an oar; (for {%taraṇī%} see
under {%taraṇi%} below; cf. also {%su-taraṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>20494<pc>0365-a<k1>taraRi<k2>taraRi
{%Taraṇi, is, is%}¦ or {%ī, i,%} Ved. passing through, per-
vading (space &c., said of the sun); moving forwards,
quick, untired, energetic; bringing or carrying over,
saving, helping, benevolent; ({%is%}), m. the sun; the
plant Calotropis Gigantea [cf. {%arka%}]; a ray of light;
({%is%} or {%ī%}), f. a float, a raft, a boat, ferry-boat; the
plant Aloe Perfoliata or Hibiscus Mutabilis; (accord-
ing to others {%= taraṇī-vallī%}), a kind of rose, Rosa
Glandulifera; [cf. {%go-taraṇi.%}] {%—Taraṇi-tva, am,%}
n., Ved. quickness, eagerness, zeal. {%—Taraṇi-dhanya,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Taraṇi-peṭaka, as,%} m.
an oval bowl or bason of wood for baling a boat.
{%—Taraṇi-ratna, am,%} n. a ruby (‘a sun-jewel’).
{%—Taraṇī-vallī,%} f. a kind of rose, Rosa Glandu-
lifera.
<LEND>

<L>20495<pc>0365-a<k1>taraRIya<k2>taraRIya
{%Taraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be crossed or passed over.
<LEND>

<L>20496<pc>0365-a<k1>taraRqa<k2>taraRqa
{%Taraṇḍa, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} m. f. n. a boat, a vessel;
({%as, am%}), m. n. a raft or float made of bamboos &c.
tied together and sometimes floated upon jars or
hollow gourds inverted; the float of a fishing line;
an oar; ({%as%}), m., N. of a country; [cf. the following.]
{%—Taraṇḍa-pādā,%} f. a boat, a ship.
<LEND>

<L>20497<pc>0365-a<k1>taraRqaka<k2>taraRqaka
{%Taraṇḍaka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>20498<pc>0365-a<k1>taraRya<k2>taraRya
{%Taraṇya%}¦ (fr. {%taraṇa%}), nom. P. {%taraṇyati,%} &c.,
to cross over.
<LEND>

<L>20499<pc>0365-a<k1>tarat<k2>tarat
{%Tarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ crossing, passing over. {%—Ta-%}
{%rad-dveṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. conquering or over-
powering enemies, an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>20500<pc>0365-a<k1>taratsamandIya<k2>taratsamandIya
{%Taratsamandīya, am,%}¦ n., scil. {%sūktam,%} the Sūkta
beginning with the words {%tarat sa mandī.%}
<LEND>

<L>20501<pc>0365-a<k1>tarad<k2>tarad
{%Tarad, t,%}¦ f. a raft, a float; a kind of duck.
<LEND>

<L>20502<pc>0365-a<k1>taranta<k2>taranta
{%Taranta, as,%}¦ m. the ocean; a hard shower, a
torrent of rain; a frog; N. of a man with the patro-
nymic Vaidadaśvi; ({%ī%}), f. a boat, ship.
<LEND>

<L>20503<pc>0365-a<k1>tarantuka<k2>tarantuka
{%Tarantuka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Tīrtha; [cf. {%ta-%}
{%raṇḍaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20504<pc>0365-a<k1>tarala<k2>tarala
{%Tarala, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving to and fro, trembling,
tremulous; fickle, splendid, glittering, sparkling, lu-
minous; unsteady, vain; liquid, liquefied; libidinous,
lecherous, wanton; hollow; ({%as%}), m. the central
gem of a necklace; a necklace; iron; a level sur-
[Page0365-b+ 81]
face ({%= tala%}); bottom, depth, lower or under part;
the thorn-apple; N. of a poet; ({%ā%}), f. rice-gruel;
wine, vinous or spirituous liquor; a bee; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a race. {%—Tarala-tā,%} f. or {%tarala-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. tremulousness, unsteadiness, sprightliness.
{%—Tarala-nayanī,%} f. a woman having tremulous or
rolling eyes; N. of a metre consisting of four lines of
twelve short syllables each. {%—Tarala-lekhā,%} f., N. of
a woman. {%—Tarala-locanā,%} f. a woman with tremu-
lous eyes.
<LEND>

<L>20505<pc>0365-b<k1>taralaya<k2>taralaya
{%Taralaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%taralayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to tremble, impart a tremulous motion; to wave,
flutter, move to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>20506<pc>0365-b<k1>taralAya<k2>taralAya
{%Taralāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%taralāyate,%} &c., to tremble,
move to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>20507<pc>0365-b<k1>taralAyita<k2>taralAyita
{%Taralāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to tremble, made
tremulous, agitated, waving to and fro, undulating;
({%as%}), m. a large wave, surf; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. or n. (?),
fickleness.
<LEND>

<L>20508<pc>0365-b<k1>taralikA<k2>taralikA
{%Taralikā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>20509<pc>0365-b<k1>taralita<k2>taralita
{%Taralita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking, dangling, moving
to and fro, undulating, trembling, tremulous. {%—Ta-%}
{%ralita-hāra, as, ā, am,%} having a tremulous garland.
<LEND>

<L>20510<pc>0365-b<k1>taras<k2>taras
{%Taras, as,%}¦ n. rapid progress, speed, velocity;
strength, energy, efficacy; a bank; a float, a raft;
a ferry, a place of crossing: a symbolical N. of
Stoma; ({%ās, ās, as%}), Ved. pervading, quick, ener-
getic; {%tarasā,%} ind. speedily, quickly, directly,
energetically. {%—Taras-mat, ān,%} m., N. of a son of
the fourteenth Manu. {%—Taras-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
quick, swift (e. g. {%taras-vatyas,%} ‘the swift ones,’
i. e. the rivers); valiant, energetic, an epithet of
Indra. {%—Taras-vin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. quick, swift,
strong, violent, energetic, courageous, bold; ({%ī%}), m.
a courier, an express, a runner; a hero; air, wind;
an epithet of Garuḍa, the bird of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>20511<pc>0365-b<k1>tarasa<k2>tarasa
{%Tarasa, am,%}¦ n. meat, flesh. {%—Tarasa-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} consisting of meat.
<LEND>

<L>20512<pc>0365-b<k1>tarasAna<k2>tarasAna
{%Tarasāna, as,%}¦ m. a boat.
<LEND>

<L>20513<pc>0365-b<k1>tarAnDu<k2>tarAnDu
{%Tarāndhu%}¦ or {%tarālu, us,%} m. a large flat-bottomed
boat.
<LEND>

<L>20514<pc>0365-b<k1>tari<k2>tari
{%Tari, is,%}¦ f. a boat, ship; a clothes-basket; the
end of a cloth; ({%ī, īs%} or {%ī%}), f. a boat; a clothes-
basket; the hem of a garment; a small wooden
baling-vessel; a club; smoke. {%—Tari-ratha, as,%} m.
an oar, a paddle.
<LEND>

<L>20515<pc>0365-b<k1>tarika<k2>tarika
{%Tarika, as,%}¦ m. a ferry-man; a float, a raft, a
boat; ({%ā%}), f. a boat; cream.
<LEND>

<L>20516<pc>0365-b<k1>tarikin<k2>tarikin
{%Tarikin, ī,%}¦ m. a ferry-man.
<LEND>

<L>20517<pc>0365-b<k1>taritavya<k2>taritavya
{%Taritavya%}¦ or {%tarītavya%} or {%tartavya, as, ā, am,%}
to be crossed or passed over, to be carried over or
across.
<LEND>

<L>20518<pc>0365-b<k1>taritf<k2>taritf
{%Taritṛ%}¦ or {%tarītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} who or what
crosses, passes or carries over; ({%trī%}), f. a boat, a raft.
<LEND>

<L>20519<pc>0365-b<k1>taritra<k2>taritra
{%Taritra, am,%}¦ n. a boat, a ship.
<LEND>

<L>20520<pc>0365-b<k1>tarin<k2>tarin
{%Tarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ who or what crosses; crossing;
({%iṇī%}), f. a boat.
<LEND>

<L>20521<pc>0365-b<k1>tarIyas<k2>tarIyas
{%Tarīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. easily passing through
or pervading; (Sāy.) easy to be passed through.
<LEND>

<L>20522<pc>0365-b<k1>tarIza<k2>tarIza
{%Tarīṣa, as,%}¦ m. a raft, a float, a boat; the ocean;
a fit or competent person; a fine shape or form; deco-
rating, ornamenting; practice, business, profession;
heaven or paradise; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>20523<pc>0365-b<k1>tarIzan<k2>tarIzan
{%Tarīṣan%}¦ (occurring only as a loc. or Vedic inf.
{%tarīṣaṇi%}), Ved. passing through, going across.
<LEND>

<L>20524<pc>0365-b<k1>taru<k2>taru<h>1
1. {%taru, us, us, u, = taraṇi,%}¦ Ved. passing through;
(Sāy.) rapid motion, velocity; a wooden ladle for
taking up the Soma; [cf. 2. {%taru%} next col.]
<LEND>

<L>20525<pc>0365-b<k1>tarutf<k2>tarutf
{%Tarutṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. overcoming, conquer-
ing, a conqueror; impelling, causing to be quick;
[cf. {%taritṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20526<pc>0365-b<k1>tarutra<k2>tarutra
{%Tarutra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. carrying across; over-
coming, conquering.
<LEND>

<L>20527<pc>0365-b<k1>taruza<k2>taruza
{%Taruṣa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a conqueror, overcomer;
({%ī%}), f. victory.
<LEND>

<L>20528<pc>0365-b<k1>taruzya<k2>taruzya
{%Taruṣya%}¦ (fr. the next), nom. P. {%taruṣyati,%}
&c., Ved. to attack, overcome, conquer.
<LEND>

<L>20529<pc>0365-b<k1>tarus<k2>tarus
{%Tarus, us,%}¦ n., Ved. battle; superiority; (Sāy.)
overcoming.
<LEND>

<L>20530<pc>0365-b<k1>tarUzas<k2>tarUzas
{%Tarūṣas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. (Sāy.) overcoming,
conquering, saving, protecting; ({%as%}), n. rescue (?).
<LEND>
[Page0365-c+ 70]

<L>20531<pc>0365-c<k1>tarakza<k2>tarakza
{#tarakza#}¦ {%tarakṣa, as,%} m. or {%tarakṣu, us,%} m.
or {%tarakṣuka, as,%} m. a hyena, or perhaps a
tiger (?).
<LEND>

<L>20532<pc>0365-c<k1>taraNga<k2>taraNga
{#taraNga#}¦ {%taraṅga.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20533<pc>0365-c<k1>tarawa<k2>tarawa
{#tarawa#}¦ {%taraṭa,%} a kind of medicinal plant,
commonly <nsi>ṭāmMMkalā;</nsi> [cf. {%taradī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20534<pc>0365-c<k1>taratsala<k2>taratsala
{#taratsala#}¦ {%taratsala, as,%} m. conflagration of
chaff; (perhaps a wrong reading.)
<LEND>

<L>20535<pc>0365-c<k1>taradI<k2>taradI
{#taradI#}¦ {%taradī,%} f., N. of a thorny plant
({%= tāradī, tīvrā, kharvurā, rakta-vījakā;%} some
read also {%taraṭī%} and {%tāraṭī%}).
<LEND>

<L>20536<pc>0365-c<k1>tarantuka<k2>tarantuka
{#tarantuka#}¦ {%tarantuka.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20537<pc>0365-c<k1>tarabAlikA<k2>tarabAlikA
{#tarabAlikA#}¦ {%tarabālikā,%} f. a kind of sword,
{%= karabālikā;%} [cf. {%taravāri.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20538<pc>0365-c<k1>tarambuja<k2>tarambuja
{#tarambuja#}¦ {%tarambuja, am,%} n. a water-melon,
(most probably borrowed from the Persian <lang n="arabic">تربز</lang>);
[cf. also {%kharvūja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20539<pc>0365-c<k1>tarala<k2>tarala
{#tarala#}¦ {%tarala.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20540<pc>0365-c<k1>taravawa<k2>taravawa
{#taravawa#}¦ {%taravaṭa,%} the plant Cassia Auri-
culata.
<LEND>

<L>20541<pc>0365-c<k1>taravAri<k2>taravAri
{#taravAri#}¦ {%taravāri, is,%} m. a sword, a scymi-
tar; [cf. {%tarabālikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20542<pc>0365-c<k1>taravI<k2>taravI
{#taravI#}¦ {%taravī,%} in astrology = <lang n="arabic">تربيع</lang> quadra-
ture.
<LEND>

<L>20543<pc>0365-c<k1>taras<k2>taras
{#taras#}¦ {%taras, tarasā,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20544<pc>0365-c<k1>tarasantI<k2>tarasantI
{#tarasantI#}¦ {%tarasantī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%tras%}), Ved. the
female of a deer.
<LEND>

<L>20545<pc>0365-c<k1>tarAm<k2>tarAm
{#tarAm#}¦ {%tarām,%} an adverbial form of 1. {%tara.%}
<LEND>

<L>20546<pc>0365-c<k1>taritA<k2>taritA
{#taritA#}¦ {%taritā,%} f. (perhaps fr. rt. {%tṝ%}), the
fore-finger; garlic, or perhaps hemp; a form of
Durgā; [cf. {%tāriṇī.%}] {%—Taritā-dhāraṇā-yantra%}
and {%taritā-pūjā-yantra, am,%} n. mystic diagrams
given in the Tantra-sāra.
<LEND>

<L>20547<pc>0365-c<k1>taru<k2>taru<h>2
{#taru#} 2¦. {%taru, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%tṝ;%}
for 1. {%taru%} see col. 2), a tree; N. of a son of Manu
Cākṣuṣa; ({%taru%} in the sense of ‘tree’ does not
appear to occur in the Veda or Manu; it is perhaps
a modern derivation fr. {%dru;%} but according to Sāy.
it is used in Ṛg-veda V. 44, 5, in the sense of
‘wooden ladle;’ cf. 1. {%taru,%} col. 2); [cf. Lat. <nsi>termes.</nsi>]
{%—Taru-khaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. an assemblage of
trees; (also {%taru-ṣaṇḍa.%}) {%—Taru-cchāyā,%} f. the
shade of a tree. {%—Taru-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by
a tree (as a flower, fruit, &c.). {%—Taru-jīvana, am,%}
n. the root of a tree, i. e. the vital organ of a
tree. {%—Taru-tala, as,%} m. the part under the
branches of a tree, the ground about its root, the
foot of a tree. {%—Taru-tā,%} f. the state of a tree, the
being a tree. {%—Taru-tūlikā%} or (according to another
reading) {%taru-dūlikā,%} f. the flying fox (suspended
like a balance from the branches of a tree); [cf. {%vā-%}
{%tuli.%}] {%—Taru-nakha, as,%} m. a thorn, (‘a tree-nail.’)
{%—Taru-paṅkti, is,%} f. a row of trees, an avenue.
{%—Taru-bhuj, k,%} m. a kind of parasitical plant, Vanda
Roxburghii; [cf. {%taru-ruhā, taru-rohiṇī, taru-%}
{%sthā.%}] {%—Taru-mahiman, ā,%} m. a section in the
Vṛkṣāyur-veda which treats of the future rewards
of those who plant trees. {%—Taru-mṛga, as,%} m. ‘a
tree-animal,’ a monkey, an ape. {%—Taru-rāga, as%} or
{%am,%} m. or n. (?), a sprout; a bud, a blossom. {%—Taru-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. ‘the king of trees,’ the palmyra-
tree; [cf. {%tṛṇa-rāja.%}] {%—Taru-rājan, ā,%} m. ‘the
king of the trees,’ an epithet of the Pārijāta.
{%—Taru-ruhā,%} f. and {%taru-rohiṇī,%} f. ‘growing
on trees,’ a parasitical plant, {%= taru-bhuj%}. {%—Taru-%}
{%vara, as,%} m. an excellent tree, the best of trees, an
epithet of the Pārijāta. {%—Taru-vallī,%} f. a kind of
plant; [cf. {%parpaṭī.%}] {%—Taru-viṭapa, as,%} m. a
branch or sprout. {%—Taru-śāyin, ī,%} m. a bird (‘sleep-
ing on trees’). {%—Taru-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. the best of
[Page0366-a+ 77]
trees. {%—Taru-ṣaṇḍa, as,%} m. a group of trees.
{%—Taru-sāra, as,%} m. ‘essence of trees,’ camphor.
{%—Taru-stha, as, ā, am,%} staying or being in a tree;
({%ā%}), f. a parasitical plant.
<LEND>

<L>20548<pc>0366-a<k1>taruSa<k2>taruSa
{%Taruśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ abounding in trees.
<LEND>

<L>20549<pc>0366-a<k1>tarukURi<k2>tarukURi
{#tarukURi#}¦ {%tarukūṇi, is,%} m. a sort of bird,
{%= vāgguda.%}
<LEND>

<L>20550<pc>0366-a<k1>tarukza<k2>tarukza
{#tarukza#}¦ {%tarukṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man; [cf.
{%tārukṣāyaṇi, tārukṣya, talukṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20551<pc>0366-a<k1>taruRa<k2>taruRa
{#taruRa#}¦ {%taruṇa, as, ī, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%tṝ%}), young, tender, juvenile; new, fresh; a young
man, one of the virile age; fresh, lively, vivid;
risen only a short time ago (as the sun), not yet
high in the sky; ({%as%}), m. the castor-oil plant, Ricinus
Communis; large cumin seed, {%= kubja-puṣpa,%} the
blossom of Achyranthes Aspera; N. of one of the
Saptarṣayas in the eleventh Manv-antara; N. of a
Gandharva; N. of a particular section in a mystical
Tantra work treating of various stages in the life of the
Tāntrika; ({%ī%}), f. a young woman, a girl from about
sixteen years of age; N. of several plants; a kind of
pot-herb, Aloe Perfoliata; also {%= taraṇī,%} Rosa Glan-
dulifera; also {%= dantī,%} a kind of flower, {%= sahā,%}
{%kumārī, gandhāḍhyā, cāru-keśarā,%} &c.; a kind
of perfume, commonly {%cīḍā; (am),%} n. cartilage [cf.
{%taruṇāsthi%} below]; a sprout; [cf. {%taluna;%} cf. also
Gr. <lang n="greek">τέρην, τέρεινα;</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>diorna,</nsi> ‘maiden;’
Old Island. <nsi>therna.</nsi>] {%—Taruṇa-jvara, as,%} m. a fever
that lasts a week. {%—Taruṇa-dadhi, i,%} n. coagulated
milk five days old. {%—Taruṇa-pītikā,%} f. red arsenic.
{%—Taruṇābhāsa (˚ṇa-ābh˚), as,%} m. a kind of cu-
cumber. {%—Taruṇāsthi (˚ṇa-as˚), i,%} n. ‘soft-bone;’
cartilage, gristle. {%—Taruṇī-kaṭākṣa-māla, as,%} m.,
N. of a plant, {%= tilaka%}. {%—Taruṇī-gaṇa, as,%} m. a
number of young women. {%—Taruṇī-jana, as,%} m. a
young woman.
<LEND>

<L>20552<pc>0366-a<k1>taruRaka<k2>taruRaka
{%Taruṇaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a serpent-demon; ({%am%}),
n. a sprout.
<LEND>

<L>20553<pc>0366-a<k1>taruRAya<k2>taruRAya
{%Taruṇāya,%}¦ nom. P. {%-yati,%} &c., to bring forth; A. {%ta-%}
{%ruṇāyate,%} &c., to become or remain young or fresh.
<LEND>

<L>20554<pc>0366-a<k1>taruRiman<k2>taruRiman
{%Taruṇiman, ā,%}¦ m. youth, juvenility.
<LEND>

<L>20555<pc>0366-a<k1>tarUwa<k2>tarUwa
{#tarUwa#}¦ {%tarūṭa, as,%} m. the root of the lotus.
<LEND>

<L>20556<pc>0366-a<k1>tarURaka<k2>tarURaka
{#tarURaka#}¦ {%tarūṇaka, am,%} n. (probably a wrong
reading for {%taruṇaka%}), Ved. a sprout.
<LEND>

<L>20557<pc>0366-a<k1>tark<k2>tark
{#tark#}¦ {%tark,%} cl. 10. P. (ep. also A.) {%tarkayati,%}
{%-te, tarkayāmāsa, tarkayitum,%} to sup-
pose, conjecture, guess, suspect, make a guess, infer,
express an opinion, try to discover or ascertain,
reason, speculate about; to consider or regard as
(with two acc.); to reflect, think of, recollect, have
in one's mind, intend; to ascertain; to shine, to
speak; [cf. Lat. <nsi>torqueo, torques, torcular, torvus;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>threihan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>thringan;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>drayan;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>drehen;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>thagkyan;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>tikiu?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>20558<pc>0366-a<k1>tarka<k2>tarka
{%Tarka, as,%}¦ m. supposition, conjecture; reasoning,
speculation, inquiry, meditation, discussion; doubt;
the science of logic, logic; a system of doctrine
founded on speculation or free thinking, a philoso-
phical system (especially one of the six, viz. Pūrva-
mīmāṃsā, Uttara-mīmāṃsā, Nyāya, Vaiśeṣika, Sāṅ-
khya, and Yoga); a name of the number six; (in
logic) confutation, reduction to absurdity, a conclusion
opposed to or disproving the premises; wish, desire;
supplying an ellipsis; cause, motive; ({%ā%}), f. specu-
lation, reasoning. {%—Tarka-kārikā,%} f., N. of a work
setting forth the principles of the Vaiśeṣika phil.
by Jīva-rāja Dīkṣita. {%—Tarka-kaumudī,%} f., N. of
an elementary work on the Vaiśeṣika system.
{%—Tarka-grantha, as,%} m. a treatise on reasoning,
manual of logic. {%—Tarka-candrikā,%} f., N. of an ele-
mentary exposition of the Nyāya philosophy. {%—Tarka-%}
{%jvālā,%} f. ‘the flame of speculation,’ N. of a Buddhist
work. {%—Tarka-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a commentary
on the Tarka-saṅgraha. {%—Tarka-prakāśa, as,%} m.
{%= tarka-bhāṣā-prakāśa%}. {%—Tarka-pradīpa, as,%}
m., N. of a manual of Vaiśeṣika principles by
[Page0366-b+ 78]
Koṇḍa-bhaṭṭa. {%—Tarka-bhāṣā%} or {%tarkānubhāṣā%}
{%(˚ka-an˚)%} or {%tarka-paribhāṣā,%} f., N. of a manual-
of the Nyāya phil. {%—Tarkabhāṣā-prakāśa, as,%} m.
or {%tarkabhāṣā-prakāsikā,%} f. or {%tarkabhāṣā-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. or {%tarkabhāṣā-sāra-mañjarī,%} f.,
N. of certain commentaries on this work. {%—Tarka-%}
{%mañjarī,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Tarka-
kārikā by the author of the original work. {%—Tarka-%}
{%mudrā,%} f. a particular position of the hand. {%—Tarka-%}
{%yukta, as, ā, am,%} conjectured, suspected. {%—Tarka-%}
{%ratna, am,%} n., N. of a Vaiśeṣika disquisition
by Koṇḍa-bhaṭṭa. {%—Tarka-vāg-īśa, as,%} m., N. of
several writers on the Nyāya phil. {%—Tarka-vidyā,%}
f. the science of reasoning or logic, a logical treatise.
{%—Tarka-śāstra, am,%} n. the science of reasoning,
logic; a philosophical work. {%—Tarka-saṅgraha, as,%}
m., N. of a manual of the Vaiśeṣika branch of the
Nyāya phil. by Annam-bhaṭṭa. {%—Tarkasaṅgraha-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f., N. of a commentary on the preceding
by the same author. {%—Tarkābhāsa (˚ka-ābh˚), as,%}
m. apparent reasoning, fallacy in drawing conclusions,
incompatibility of conclusion and premises. {%—Tarkā-%}
{%mṛta (˚ka-am˚), am,%} n., N. of an elementary
work on the Vaiśeṣika doctrine by Jagad-īśa Tar-
kālaṅkāra Bhaṭṭācārya. {%—Tarkāmṛta-caṣaka,%} N.
of a commentary on the preceding work by Gaṅ-
gārāma Jaḍī. {%—Tarkāmṛta-taraṅgiṇī,%} f., N. of
a commentary on the Tarkāmṛta by Mukunda
Bhaṭṭa Gāḍegila.
<LEND>

<L>20559<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkaka<k2>tarkaka
{%Tarkaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ inquiring, inquisitive, investi-
gating; ({%as%}), m. a suppliant, a petitioner, an asker,
an inquirer; a logician.
<LEND>

<L>20560<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkaRa<k2>tarkaRa
{%Tarkaṇa, am,%}¦ n. conjecturing, reasoning, specu-
lating.
<LEND>

<L>20561<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkaRIya<k2>tarkaRIya
{%Tarkaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be suspected, to be an
object of the suspicion of others (with gen.); causing
suspicion.
<LEND>

<L>20562<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkayat<k2>tarkayat
{%Tarkayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ conjecturing, expecting,
anticipating, doubting, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20563<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkArI<k2>tarkArI
{%Tarkārī,%}¦ f. the tree Sesbania Ægyptiaca, a kind of
gourd.
<LEND>

<L>20564<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkiRa<k2>tarkiRa
{%Tarkiṇa%}¦ or {%tarkila, as,%} m. the tree Cassia Tora,
{%= cakra-marda.%}
<LEND>

<L>20565<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkita<k2>tarkita
{%Tarkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ investigated, examined, doubted,
discussed, &c.; ({%am%}), n. conjecture, supposition.
<LEND>

<L>20566<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkin<k2>tarkin
{%Tarkin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ conjecturing, supposing; reason-
ing, skilled in speculation or philosophy; ({%ī%}), m. a
logician, disputant, reasoner.
<LEND>

<L>20567<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkuka<k2>tarkuka
{%Tarkuka, as,%}¦ m. a suppliant, beggar; [cf. {%tarkaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20568<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkya<k2>tarkya
{%Tarkya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be imagined or supposed,
capable of investigation or reasoning.
<LEND>

<L>20569<pc>0366-b<k1>tarku<k2>tarku
{#tarku#}¦ {%tarku, us, us,%} m. f. (said to be fr. rt. {%kṛt,%}
with transposition of the consonants), a spindle, an
iron pin upon which the cotton is first drawn out and
which serves as the distaff, the cotton being next
transferred from it to the wheel; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄ-τρακτος.</lang>]
{%—Tarku-piṇḍa, as,%} m. a ball of clay &c. at the
lower end of a spindle to assist in giving it a rotatory
motion. {%—Tarku-pīṭha, as, ī,%} m. f. or {%tarku-pāṭhī,%}
f. a ball at the lower end of a spindle. {%—Tarku-%}
{%lāsaka, as,%} m. a concave shell or saucer which serves
to hold the lower end of the spindle when whirled
round. {%—Tarku-śāṇa, as,%} m. a small whetstone for
sharpening spindles, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20570<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkuwa<k2>tarkuwa
{%Tarkuṭa, am,%}¦ n. drawing out the cotton upon the
distaff or upon the wheel; spinning; ({%ī%}), f. a spindle,
a distaff.
<LEND>

<L>20571<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkzu<k2>tarkzu
{#tarkzu#}¦ {%tarkṣu, us,%} m. {%= tarakṣu,%} a hyena.
<LEND>

<L>20572<pc>0366-b<k1>tarkzya<k2>tarkzya
{#tarkzya#}¦ {%tarkṣya, as,%} m. nitre, saltpetre.
<LEND>

<L>20573<pc>0366-b<k1>tarj<k2>tarj
{#tarj#}¦ {%tarj,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%tarjati,%}
{%-te, tatarja, tarjitum,%} to threaten, me-
nace; to blame, censure, reprove; Caus. P. (ep. also
A.) {%tarjayati, -te, -yitum,%} to threaten; to scold,
censure; to frighten, terrify; to deride, mock; [cf.
Old Germ. <nsi>trug, druk, triugu, driuku,</nsi> ‘to cheat:’
Angl. Sax. <nsi>threagan,</nsi> ‘to chide;’ <nsi>thracian, thraec:</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>dravyan:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>drohen.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>20574<pc>0366-b<k1>tarjana<k2>tarjana
{%Tarjana, am,%}¦ n. threatening, blaming, censuring;
[Page0366-c+ 73]
pointing at in ridicule or contempt; putting to shame,
surpassing; wrath, anger; ({%ā%}), f. threatening, censur-
ing; ({%ī%}), f. the fore-finger (as used for threatening).
<LEND>

<L>20575<pc>0366-c<k1>tarjanIya<k2>tarjanIya
{%Tarjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be threatened, repre-
hensible.
<LEND>

<L>20576<pc>0366-c<k1>tarjita<k2>tarjita
{%Tarjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ threatened, blamed, reviled;
shamed, disgraced; ({%am%}), n. threatening, menace.
<LEND>

<L>20577<pc>0366-c<k1>tarjika<k2>tarjika
{#tarjika#}¦ {%tarjika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a country
or people, perhaps to the north-west of India or
Bokhara, the country of the Tājiks; (also {%tāyika%}
or {%tājika.%})
<LEND>

<L>20578<pc>0366-c<k1>tarRa<k2>tarRa
{#tarRa#}¦ {%tarṇa%} or {%tarṇaka, as,%} m. (perhaps cor-
rupted fr. {%taruṇa%}), a calf.
<LEND>

<L>20579<pc>0366-c<k1>tarRi<k2>tarRi
{#tarRi#}¦ {%tarṇi, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%tṝ%}), a float, a
raft; the sun.
<LEND>

<L>20580<pc>0366-c<k1>tartarIka<k2>tartarIka
{#tartarIka#}¦ {%tartarīka, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens. of
rt. {%tṝ%}), being in the habit of passing or crossing over,
a passenger; ({%am%}), n. a boat, a raft, a vessel.
<LEND>

<L>20581<pc>0366-c<k1>tartavya<k2>tartavya
{%Tartavya, as, ā, am.%}¦ See {%taritavya,%} p. 365, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20582<pc>0366-c<k1>tard<k2>tard
{#tard#}¦ {%tard%} (connected with rt. {%tṛd%}) , cl. 1.
P. {%tardati,%} &c., to kill, injure, hurt; cut
through; [cf. rt. {%tṛd.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20583<pc>0366-c<k1>tarda<k2>tarda
{%Tarda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a species of bird; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>turdus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>20584<pc>0366-c<k1>tardU<k2>tardU
{%Tardū, ūs,%}¦ m. f. ? (fr. rt. {%tṛd,%} but said to be fr.
rt. {%tṝ%}), a wooden ladle.
<LEND>

<L>20585<pc>0366-c<k1>tardman<k2>tardman
{%Tardman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. a hole, an opening, a cleft.
<LEND>

<L>20586<pc>0366-c<k1>tarpaRa<k2>tarpaRa
{#tarpaRa#}¦ {%tarpaṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%tṛp%}), satis-
fying, satiating, pleasing, refreshing [cf. {%ghrāṇa-%}
{%tarpaṇa%}]; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a kind of plant; ({%ī%}), f.,
N. of a plant, {%= guru-skandha, śleṣmaṇā; (am),%}
n. the becoming satisfied or satiated, the act of sati-
ating, refreshing, pleasing; satisfaction given or re-
ceived; the state of being pleased; satiety, fulness;
pleasure; a religious rite, libation, presenting libations
of water to the manes of the deceased or to the
Pitṛs collectively, also to the gods, either generally or
individually; gladdening; satiating the eyes, i. e. filling
them with oil &c.; food; fuel used on sacrificial
occasions or for lighting a sacrificial fire; a kind of
sweetmeat (?). {%—Tarpaṇa-vidhi, is,%} m. a chapter of
the Smṛty-artha-sāra by Śrīdhara-svāmin on funeral
ceremonies &c. {%—Tarpaṇecchu (˚ṇa-ic˚), us, us,%}
{%u,%} desirous of satisfaction or of receiving after death
the presentation of water called Tarpaṇa; ({%us%}), m.
an epithet of Bhīṣma.
<LEND>

<L>20587<pc>0366-c<k1>tarpaRIya<k2>tarpaRIya
{%Tarpaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be satiated or satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>20588<pc>0366-c<k1>tarpayitavya<k2>tarpayitavya
{%Tarpayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be satiated or re-
freshed.
<LEND>

<L>20589<pc>0366-c<k1>tarpayitvA<k2>tarpayitvA
{%Tarpayitvā,%}¦ ind. having satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>20590<pc>0366-c<k1>tarpita<k2>tarpita
{%Tarpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, gratified, satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>20591<pc>0366-c<k1>tarpin<k2>tarpin
{%Tarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ gratifying, giving pleasure or
satisfaction; offering oblations to the manes, one
who does so; ({%iṇī%}), f. the plant Hibiscus Mutabilis
({%padma-cāriṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>20592<pc>0366-c<k1>tarPitf<k2>tarPitf
{#tarPitf#}¦ {%tarphitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%} (fr. rt. {%tṛph%}),
a killer, injurer.
<LEND>

<L>20593<pc>0366-c<k1>tarb<k2>tarb
{#tarb#}¦ {%tarb,%} cl. 1. P. {%tarbati,%} &c., to go
or move.
<LEND>

<L>20594<pc>0366-c<k1>tarbawa<k2>tarbawa
{#tarbawa#}¦ {%tarbaṭa, as,%} m. a year; the plant
Cassia Tora, {%= cakra-marda.%}
<LEND>

<L>20595<pc>0366-c<k1>tarman<k2>tarman
{#tarman#}¦ {%tarman, a,%} n. (perhaps fr. rt. {%tṝ%}),
the top or end of the sacrificial post; [cf. {%su-tarman;%}
cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">τέρμα;</lang> Lat. <nsi>terminus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>20596<pc>0366-c<k1>tarya<k2>tarya
{#tarya#}¦ {%tarya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%tṝ%}), Ved. (Sāy.)
N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20597<pc>0366-c<k1>tarza<k2>tarza<h>1
1. {%tarṣa, as,%}¦ m. a raft or float; the ocean; the
sun; [cf. {%taraṇi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20598<pc>0366-c<k1>tarza<k2>tarza<h>2
{#tarza#} 2¦. {%tarṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%tṛṣ%}), thirst;
wish, desire; Desire personified as a son of Arka
(the sun) and Vāsanā.
<LEND>

<L>20599<pc>0366-c<k1>tarzaRa<k2>tarzaRa
{%Tarṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. thirsting, thirst; desiring, wish,
desire.
<LEND>
[Page0367-a+ 78]

<L>20600<pc>0367-a<k1>tarzam<k2>tarzam
{%Tarṣam,%}¦ ind. thirsting, being thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>20601<pc>0367-a<k1>tarzita<k2>tarzita
{%Tarṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thirsting, athirst, thirsty;
desiring, wishing for; [cf. {%tṛṣita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20602<pc>0367-a<k1>tarzula<k2>tarzula
{%Tarṣula, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing, desiring; in {%a-tar-%}
{%ṣula,%} without desire.
<LEND>

<L>20603<pc>0367-a<k1>tarzyAvat<k2>tarzyAvat
{%Tarṣyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>20604<pc>0367-a<k1>tarhaRa<k2>tarhaRa
{#tarhaRa#}¦ {%tarhaṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%tṛh%}), Ved.
injuring, crushing, bruising; [cf. {%dasyu-tarhaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20605<pc>0367-a<k1>tarhi<k2>tarhi
{#tarhi#}¦ {%tarhi,%} ind. (fr. the pronom. base 2. {%ta%}),
at that time, then, at that moment, in that case; in
the mean time; (this word occurs in the Veda, but
is rarely found in the earlier epic poetry); {%yadā — %}
{%tarhi,%} when — then; {%yadi — tarhi, yatra — tarhi,%}
{%ced — tarhi,%} if — then; [cf. {%etarhi, karhi, yarhi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20606<pc>0367-a<k1>tal<k2>tal
{#tal#}¦ {%tal,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%talati, tālayati,%} &c.,
to be full or complete; to fix, found; to
establish; to be fixed; to accomplish a vow; (ac-
cording to others a Sautra root.)
<LEND>

<L>20607<pc>0367-a<k1>tala<k2>tala
{#tala#}¦ {%tala, as, am,%} m. n. (perhaps fr. rt.
{%stṛ%}), surface, a level surface, the flat roof of a house;
(often used in composition with only a slight altera-
tion of the sense of the word to which it is added,
but explained by lexicographers to mean ‘essential
nature,’ e. g. {%mahī-tala,%} the very earth, the surface
of the earth, earth itself; {%nabhas-tala,%} the sky,
heaven); the inner side or palm of the hand with
extended fingers (in {%pāṇi-tala,%} &c.); the sole of the
foot (in {%pāda-tala%}); the fore-arm; a span; a slap or
clap with the hand, ({%anyonyasya talān daduḥ,%} they
slapped each other with the palms of the hands);
depth, lowness, inferiority of position, the under
part, the part underneath, lower part, base, bottom;
a hole, a pit, a chasm; {%tale,%} ind. at the bottom,
under, beneath; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. a leathern fence worn
by archers on the left arm [cf. {%tala-tra%} and {%tala-%}
{%trāṇa%}]; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva [cf. {%tāla%} and
{%a-tala%}]; the palmyra-tree, {%= tāla;%} the hilt or haft
or handle of a sword &c.; pressing the strings of a
lute with the left hand; a division of hell; ({%am%}), n.
a wood; a pond; cause, origin, motive, the root or
seed of events; [cf. {%a-tala, jihvā-t˚, dharaṇī-t˚,%}
{%ni-t˚, pra-t˚, mahā-t˚, rasā-t˚, vi-t˚, su-t˚;%} cf. also
Hib. <nsi>talamh,</nsi> ‘the world, earth;’ Lat. <nsi>tellus.</nsi>] {%—Ta-%}
{%la-ghāta, as,%} m. a slap with the palm of the hand.
{%—Tala-tas,%} ind. from the bottom. {%—Tala-tāla, as,%}
m. clapping the hands; [cf. {%tāla-śabda.%}] {%—Tala-%}
{%tra%} or {%tala-trāṇa, am,%} n. (hand or arm-guard), the
leathern glove of an archer. {%—Talatra-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} wearing a leathern glove (as an archer). {%—Tala-%}
{%prahāra, as,%} m. a slap or blow with the palm of
the hand or with a claw. {%—Tala-mukha-hasta, as,%}
m. a particular position of the hand with the palm
expanded. {%—Tala-yukta, as, ā, am,%} furnished with a
handle or haft. {%—Tala-yuddha, am,%} n. a fight carried
on with the palms of the hands, a fight. {%—Tala-%}
{%loka, as,%} m. the lower regions, nether world; [cf.
{%talātala, rasātala, a-tala.%}] {%—Tala-sāraka, am,%}
n. a martingale, a strap passing between the fore-
legs of a horse; a kind of trough or vessel from
which horses are fed (?). {%—Tala-stha%} or {%tala-sthita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} remaining beneath. {%—Tala-hṛdaya,%}
{%am,%} n. the centre of the sole of the foot. {%—Talāṅ-%}
{%guli (˚la-aṅ˚), is,%} f. a toe. {%—Talācī,%} f. (fr. {%tala%}
and rt. {%añc%}), a mat, one made of reeds or bamboos.
{%—Talātala (˚la-at˚), am,%} n. the fourth of the
seven divisions of the infernal regions; [cf. {%a-tala,%}
{%mahā-t˚, rasā-t˚, vi-t˚, su-t˚.%}] {%—Talekṣaṇa (˚la-%}
{%īk˚), as,%} m. a hog (‘looking downwards’). {%—Ta-%}
{%lottama (˚la-ut˚), as, am,%} m. n. (?), cover, site (?).
{%—Talodara (˚la-ud˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having a
protuberant belly or one that hangs down (?); ({%ī%}),
f. a mistress or wife. {%—Talodā (˚la-ud),%} f. a river
(‘whose water flows downwards’).
<LEND>

<L>20608<pc>0367-a<k1>talaka<k2>talaka
{%Talaka, am,%}¦ n. a large pond; [cf. {%talla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20609<pc>0367-a<k1>talakowa<k2>talakowa
{%Talakoṭa,%}¦ a kind of plant.
<LEND>

<L>20610<pc>0367-a<k1>talikA<k2>talikA
{%Talikā,%}¦ f. a martingale; [cf. {%tala-sāraka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20611<pc>0367-a<k1>talita<k2>talita<h>1
1. {%talita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed, placed, having a bottom;
[cf. 2. {%talita%} next col.]
<LEND>
[Page0367-b+ 69]

<L>20612<pc>0367-b<k1>talin<k2>talin
{%Talin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wearing the leathern fence called
Tala (as an archer).
<LEND>

<L>20613<pc>0367-b<k1>talamIna<k2>talamIna
{#talamIna#}¦ {%tala-mīna,%} a various reading for
{%nala-mīna,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20614<pc>0367-b<k1>talava<k2>talava
{#talava#}¦ {%talava, am,%} n., Ved. a musician.
{%—Talava-kāra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school of the
Sāma-veda. {%—Talavakāropaniṣad (˚ra-up˚), t,%} f.
{%= kenopaniṣad.%}
<LEND>

<L>20615<pc>0367-b<k1>talavAraRa<k2>talavAraRa
{#talavAraRa#}¦ {%talavāraṇa, am,%} n. a sword; [cf.
{%taravāri;%} Beng. <nsi>talvār;</nsi> Hind. <lang n="arabic">تلوار</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>20616<pc>0367-b<k1>talASA<k2>talASA
{#talASA#}¦ {%talāśā,%} f., Ved. a kind of tree.
<LEND>

<L>20617<pc>0367-b<k1>talita<k2>talita<h>2
{#talita#} 2¦. {%talita, am,%} n. fried meat. (For
1. {%talita%} see col. 1, under {%tala.%})
<LEND>

<L>20618<pc>0367-b<k1>talina<k2>talina
{#talina#}¦ {%talina, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%tal%}), thin, spare, meagre, delicate; small, little;
clear, clean; separate, having spaces or interstices;
below, situated under or beneath [cf. {%tala%}]; ({%am%}),
n. a bed, a couch or cot; (a various reading for {%ta-%}
{%lima.%})
<LEND>

<L>20619<pc>0367-b<k1>talima<k2>talima
{#talima#}¦ {%talima, am,%} n. ground prepared for
the site of a dwelling &c. ({%kuṭṭima%}); a bed, a couch
or cot [cf. {%talina%} and {%talpa%}]; an awning; a scymitar,
a large sacrificial sword or knife.
<LEND>

<L>20620<pc>0367-b<k1>talIqya<k2>talIqya
{#talIqya#}¦ {%talīḍya,%} Ved. a particular part of
the body.
<LEND>

<L>20621<pc>0367-b<k1>talukza<k2>talukza
{#talukza#}¦ {%talukṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man; [cf.
{%tarukṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20622<pc>0367-b<k1>taluna<k2>taluna
{#taluna#}¦ {%taluna, as, ī, am%} (for {%taruṇa,%} q. v.),
young; ({%as%}), m. a youth; air, wind; ({%ī%}), f. a girl,
a young woman.
<LEND>

<L>20623<pc>0367-b<k1>talka<k2>talka
{#talka#}¦ {%talka, am,%} n. a wood, a forest; [cf.
{%tala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20624<pc>0367-b<k1>talpa<k2>talpa
{#talpa#}¦ {%talpa, as, am,%} m. n. (in the earlier
language m., in the later n.; perhaps fr. rt. {%stṛ,%} but
according to others fr. rt. {%tal%} or fr. rt. {%tṛp%}), a couch,
bed, sofa; a wife; the seat of a carriage; an upper
story, a room on the top of a house, a turret, a tower or
keep; (in the Atharva-veda XIII. 1, 17, {%talpā%} occurs.)
{%—Talpa-kīṭa, as,%} m. ‘a bed-insect,’ a bug. {%—Talpa-%}
{%ga,%} see under {%guru%}. {%—Talpa-giri, is,%} m., N. of a
mountain. {%—Talpa-ja, as, ā, am,%} brought forth in
or on a marriage-bed; born of a wife (as a son by
an appointed substitute). {%—Talpa-śīvan, ā, arī, a,%}
or {%talpe-śaya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. resting on a couch.
<LEND>

<L>20625<pc>0367-b<k1>talpaka<k2>talpaka
{%Talpaka, as,%}¦ m. a maker of beds or sofas.
<LEND>

<L>20626<pc>0367-b<k1>talpana<k2>talpana
{%Talpana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. a nom. formed fr. {%talpa%}),
an elephant's back, the exterior muscles of the back.
<LEND>

<L>20627<pc>0367-b<k1>talpIkfta<k2>talpIkfta
{%Talpī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made into a bed or couch.
<LEND>

<L>20628<pc>0367-b<k1>talpya<k2>talpya
{%Talpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to a bed;
worthy of a couch or sofa; born in a marriage-bed.
<LEND>

<L>20629<pc>0367-b<k1>talla<k2>talla
{#talla#}¦ {%talla, as,%} m. a reservoir, a large pond,
a tank or Talao; ({%ī%}), f. a young woman; N. of the
wife of Varuṇa; a boat; ({%am%}), n. a pit, a hole; [cf.
{%tala%} and {%talaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20630<pc>0367-b<k1>tallakzaRa<k2>tallakzaRa
{#tallakzaRa#}¦ {%tal-lakṣaṇa.%} See under {%tad,%} p. 361.
<LEND>

<L>20631<pc>0367-b<k1>tallaja<k2>tallaja
{#tallaja#}¦ {%tallaja, as,%} m. excellence, happiness;
(also attributively) excellent, happy; used in apposition
as an epithet (e. g. {%kumārī-tallaja,%} an excellent
maiden; {%go-tallaja,%} the best of cows.)
<LEND>

<L>20632<pc>0367-b<k1>tallaha<k2>tallaha
{#tallaha#}¦ {%tallaha (?), as,%} m. a dog.
<LEND>

<L>20633<pc>0367-b<k1>tallikA<k2>tallikA
{#tallikA#}¦ {%tallikā,%} f. a key; [cf. {%tālī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20634<pc>0367-b<k1>talva<k2>talva
{#talva#}¦ {%talva, am,%} n. scent arising from the
rubbing of fragrant substances.
<LEND>

<L>20635<pc>0367-b<k1>tavaka<k2>tavaka
{#tavaka#}¦ {%tavaka, as, ā, am,%} thine; (perhaps an
incorrect form for {%tāvaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>20636<pc>0367-b<k1>tavakzIra<k2>tavakzIra
{#tavakzIra#}¦ {%tavakṣīra%} (a corruption of {%tvak-%}
{%kṣīra%}), {%am,%} n. manna of bamboo (commonly Ta-
bāṣīr); a N. applied to a kind of extract of wheat,
barley, rice, &c., (or, according to some, a kind
[Page0367-c+ 74]
of milk and water), {%= payaḥ-kṣīra, yava-ja,%}
{%yavajodbhava%} (commonly Toṣākṣīra); ({%ī%}), f. a
kind of Curcuma {%(gandha-pattrā)%}. {%—Tavakṣīry-%}
{%ekapattrikā,%} the single-leaved Tavakṣīrī, turmeric,
Curcuma Zedoaria.
<LEND>

<L>20637<pc>0367-c<k1>tavara<k2>tavara
{#tavara#}¦ {%tavara,%} a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>20638<pc>0367-c<k1>tavarAja<k2>tavarAja
{#tavarAja#}¦ {%tavarāja, as,%} m. a sort of sugar
prepared from a species of Hedysarum {%(yavāsa-%}
{%śarkarā)%}. {%—Tavarājodbhava-khaṇḍa (˚ja-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a sort of hard sugar prepared from the pre-
ceding.
<LEND>

<L>20639<pc>0367-c<k1>tavas<k2>tavas
{#tavas#}¦ {%tavas, ās, ās, as%} (fr. rt. 2. {%tu%}), Ved.
strong, powerful, courageous, efficacious, energetic;
an epithet of Rudra, the Maruts, Indra, Parjanya,
Agni, Pūṣan; ({%ās%}), m. power, strength, courage;
[cf. {%pra-tavas.%}] {%—Tavas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
powerful, strong, an epithet of Soma.
<LEND>

<L>20640<pc>0367-c<k1>tavasya<k2>tavasya
{%Tavasya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. strength, efficacy; courage;
(Sāy.) an oblation which increases the strength.
<LEND>

<L>20641<pc>0367-c<k1>tavAgA<k2>tavAgA
{%Tavāgā%}¦ (fr. {%tavā,%} a derivative of rt. 2. {%tu,%} and {%go?%}),
an epithet of a bull; (but in the Pada-pāṭha this
word is not considered as a compound, and by Sāy.
it is said to mean) of great strength.
<LEND>

<L>20642<pc>0367-c<k1>taviza<k2>taviza
{%Taviṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. powerful, strong, ener-
getic, efficacious; courageous; ({%as%}), m. the ocean,
sea; heaven, paradise; ({%ī%}), f. power, strength, violence,
courage, (inst. plur. {%taviṣībhis,%} powerfully, violently);
the earth; a river; N. of a daughter of Indra; ({%am%}),
n. power, strength. {%—Taviṣī-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
powerful, violent, epithet of the winds. {%—Taviṣī-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. powerful, strong, an epithet
of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>20643<pc>0367-c<k1>tavizIya<k2>tavizIya
{%Taviṣīya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%taviṣīyati,%} &c., to be
strong or violent or courageous, to make effort;
(Sāy.) to wish for power or strength; [cf. {%taviṣya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20644<pc>0367-c<k1>tavizIyu<k2>tavizIyu
{%Taviṣīyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. spirited (as a horse);
violent, epithet of the Maruts; (Sāy.) evincing
strength.
<LEND>

<L>20645<pc>0367-c<k1>tavizya<k2>tavizya
{%Taviṣya,%}¦ nom. A., Ved. {%taviṣyate,%} &c., to be
strong or violent, have courage.
<LEND>

<L>20646<pc>0367-c<k1>tavizyA<k2>tavizyA
{%Taviṣyā,%}¦ f., Ved. violence, force.
<LEND>

<L>20647<pc>0367-c<k1>tavIyas<k2>tavIyas
{%Tavīyas%}¦ or {%tavyas, ān, asī, as%} (compar. of {%ta-%}
{%vas%}), stronger, very strong, powerful, rich; (generally
found in the phrase {%tavasas tavīyān,%} stronger than
the strong.)
<LEND>

<L>20648<pc>0367-c<k1>tavIza<k2>tavIza
{%Tavīṣa, as,%}¦ m. the ocean; heaven; gold; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a daughter of Indra; [cf. {%taviṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20649<pc>0367-c<k1>tavya<k2>tavya<h>1
1. {%tavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. powerful, strong, grown
strong. (For 2. {%tavya%} see below.)
<LEND>

<L>20650<pc>0367-c<k1>tavArisARa<k2>tavArisARa
{#tavArisARa#}¦ {%tavārisāṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>20651<pc>0367-c<k1>tavipulA<k2>tavipulA
{#tavipulA#}¦ {%ta-vipulā,%} f. a particular metre.
<LEND>

<L>20652<pc>0367-c<k1>tavya<k2>tavya<h>2
{#tavya#} 2¦. {%tavya,%} a {%kṛt%} affix by means of which
the future passive participle is formed from roots.
<LEND>

<L>20653<pc>0367-c<k1>taSlI<k2>taSlI
{#taSlI#}¦ {%taślī,%} f. in astron., trigon. = <lang n="arabic">تثليث</lang>
<LEND>

<L>20654<pc>0367-c<k1>tazwa<k2>tazwa
{#tazwa#}¦ {%taṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%takṣ%}), pared,
hewn, cut, chiseled, split, made thin; fashioned.
<LEND>

<L>20655<pc>0367-c<k1>tazwf<k2>tazwf
{%Taṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. a carpenter, a builder, a builder
of chariots; a N. of Viśva-karman, the architect of
the gods; N. of one of the twelve Ādityas; [cf.
{%tvaṣṭṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20656<pc>0367-c<k1>tas<k2>tas
{#tas#}¦ {%tas,%} cl. 4. P. {%tasyati,%} &c., to fade
away, become exhausted, perish, wane;
to throw down; to cast upwards, reject, cast; [cf.
rt. {%taṃs%} and Eng. <nsi>toss.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>20657<pc>0367-c<k1>tasara<k2>tasara
{#tasara#}¦ {%tasara, am, as,%} n. m. (?), (fr. rt.
{%taṃs ?%}), Ved. a shuttle.
<LEND>

<L>20658<pc>0367-c<k1>tasIra<k2>tasIra
{#tasIra#}¦ {%tasīra,%} in astron. {%= tāsīra,%} = <lang n="arabic">تسيير</lang>
<LEND>

<L>20659<pc>0367-c<k1>taskara<k2>taskara
{#taskara#}¦ {%taskara, as,%} m. (said to be derived
fr. {%atas%} and rt. {%kṛ;%} according to others fr. {%tad%} and
rt. {%kṛ%}), a thief, a robber; (at the end of a comp.)
anything bad or contemptible [cf. {%caura%}]; (in astron.)
N. of certain Ketus; a kind of pot-herb, Trigonella
Corniculata; a tree, Vangueria Spinosa [cf. {%madana%}];
the ear; ({%ī%}), f. a passionate woman; N. of several
[Page0368-a+ 72]
plants, a sort of Mimosa, {%= taskara-snāyu,%} Leea
Hirta, &c. {%—Taskara-tā,%} f. or {%taskara-tva, am,%} n.
thievishness, thieving, theft; catching by means of
the ear, hearing. {%—Taskara-vat,%} ind. like a thief.
{%—Taskara-snāyu, us,%} m. the plant Leea Hirta.
<LEND>

<L>20660<pc>0368-a<k1>tastuva<k2>tastuva
{#tastuva#}¦ {%tastuva, am,%} n., Ved. an antidote
against poison (?).
<LEND>

<L>20661<pc>0368-a<k1>tasTu<k2>tasTu
{#tasTu#}¦ {%tasthu, us, us, u%} (fr. the weakest
cases of {%tasthivas,%} perf. part. of rt. {%sthā%}), stationary,
immovable, motionless.
<LEND>

<L>20662<pc>0368-a<k1>tasdI<k2>tasdI
{#tasdI#}¦ {%tasdī,%} in astron., hexagon, = <lang n="arabic">تسْديس</lang>
<LEND>

<L>20663<pc>0368-a<k1>tasmAt<k2>tasmAt
{#tasmAt#}¦ {%tasmāt,%} ind. (abl. of the pronom.
base 2. {%ta%}), from that, on that account, therefore,
(correlative to {%yasmāt%} and {%yad.%})
<LEND>

<L>20664<pc>0368-a<k1>tAkzaka<k2>tAkzaka
{#tAkzaka#}¦ {%tākṣaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%takṣakīyā%}),
relating or belonging to Takṣakīyā.
<LEND>

<L>20665<pc>0368-a<k1>tAkzaRya<k2>tAkzaRya
{%Tākṣaṇya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%takṣan%}), the son of a
woodcutter or carpenter.
<LEND>

<L>20666<pc>0368-a<k1>tAkzaSila<k2>tAkzaSila
{%Tākṣaśila, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming or produced from
Takṣaśilā.
<LEND>

<L>20667<pc>0368-a<k1>tAkzRa<k2>tAkzRa
{%Tākṣṇa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%takṣan%}), fit for a car-
penter; ({%as%}), m. the son of a carpenter.
<LEND>

<L>20668<pc>0368-a<k1>tAcCabdya<k2>tAcCabdya
{#tAcCabdya#}¦ {%tācchabdya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tacchabda%}
{%[tad+śabda],%} having that name or the name of that),
the being called or named after that.
<LEND>

<L>20669<pc>0368-a<k1>tAcCIlika<k2>tAcCIlika
{#tAcCIlika#}¦ {%tācchīlika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tac-%}
{%chīla%} or {%tācchīlya%}), a N. given to an affix when it
denotes ‘having a particular inclination or custom.’
<LEND>

<L>20670<pc>0368-a<k1>tAcCIlya<k2>tAcCIlya
{%Tācchīlya, am,%}¦ n. the being accustomed to that,
doing anything regularly, consuetude.
<LEND>

<L>20671<pc>0368-a<k1>tAjak<k2>tAjak
{#tAjak#}¦ {%tājak.%} See {%tājat.%}
<LEND>

<L>20672<pc>0368-a<k1>tAjaka<k2>tAjaka
{#tAjaka#}¦ {%tājaka%} and {%tājika, am,%} n., N. of
certain astronomical books translated from the Arabic
and Persian (e. g. {%tājika-jyotir-maṇi, tājaka-pad-%}
{%dhati, tājaka-śāstra, tājaka-sāra-sudhā-nidhi,%}
{%viśvanātha-tājaka,%} &c.).
<LEND>

<L>20673<pc>0368-a<k1>tAjat<k2>tAjat
{#tAjat#}¦ {%tājat%} or sometimes {%tājak,%} ind., Ved.
suddenly, abruptly, (opposed to {%ciram.%}) {%—Tājad-%}
{%bhaṅga, as,%} m., Ved. a species of very fragile wood;
[cf. {%kovidāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20674<pc>0368-a<k1>tAjika<k2>tAjika
{#tAjika#}¦ {%tājika%} or {%tājīka,%} N. of a district;
also {%= tājaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20675<pc>0368-a<k1>tAwaNka<k2>tAwaNka
{#tAwaNka#}¦ {%tāṭaṅka, as,%} m. an ornament for
the ear, a large sort of ear-ring; [cf. {%tāḍaṅka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20676<pc>0368-a<k1>tAwasTya<k2>tAwasTya
{#tAwasTya#}¦ {%tāṭasthya, am,%} n. (fr. {%taṭa-stha,%} a
by-stander), proximity; indifference, disregard, ex-
emption from attachment or aversion, neutrality.
<LEND>

<L>20677<pc>0368-a<k1>tAqa<k2>tAqa
{#tAqa#}¦ {%tāḍa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%taḍ%}), beating,
striking; ({%as%}), m. a blow, thump, knock, beating,
whipping, chastisement; sound, noise; a handful of
grass, corn, &c., a sheaf; a mountain; a kind of grass,
Andropogon Serratus, {%= devatāḍa;%} [cf. {%tāḍi%} next col.]
{%—Tāḍa-gha, as, ā, am,%} beating with a whip or
strokes of any kind; ({%as%}), m. a blacksmith (?).
{%—Tāḍa-ghāta, as,%} m. an artificer who beats or
hammers, a smith. {%—Tāḍa-vakra,%} N. of a district.
<LEND>

<L>20678<pc>0368-a<k1>tAqakA<k2>tAqakA
{%Tāḍakā,%}¦ f., N. of a Yakṣiṇī or female fiend,
daughter of Su-ketu, wife of Sunda, and mother of
Mārīca, (she was changed into a Rākṣasī by Agastya,
whose devotions she had disturbed, and was afterwards
killed by Rāma, see Rāmāyaṇa I. 28); the large
dark-green pumpkin. {%—Tāḍakā-phala, am,%} n. large
cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>20679<pc>0368-a<k1>tAqakAyana<k2>tAqakAyana
{%Tāḍakāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>20680<pc>0368-a<k1>tAqana<k2>tAqana
{%Tāḍana, as, ā, am,%}¦ beating, whipping, striking,
hitting, hurting; ({%am%}), n. the act of striking, beating,
thumping, whipping, chastising, a stroke, blow; (in
astron.) touching, partial eclipse; ({%ā%}), f. striking;
({%ī%}), f. a whip.
<LEND>

<L>20681<pc>0368-a<k1>tAqanIya<k2>tAqanIya
{%Tāḍanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be beaten, punishable.
<LEND>

<L>20682<pc>0368-a<k1>tAqayitf<k2>tAqayitf
{%Tāḍayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a striker, beater, thumper,
who or what beats or strikes.
<LEND>
[Page0368-b+ 74]

<L>20683<pc>0368-b<k1>tAqayitvA<k2>tAqayitvA
{%Tāḍayitvā,%}¦ ind. having beaten or struck.
<LEND>

<L>20684<pc>0368-b<k1>tAqita<k2>tAqita
{%Tāḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck, beaten, chastised.
<LEND>

<L>20685<pc>0368-b<k1>tAqula<k2>tAqula
{%Tāḍula, as, ā, am,%}¦ beating, who or what beats
or strikes, punishing with blows.
<LEND>

<L>20686<pc>0368-b<k1>tAqya<k2>tAqya
{%Tāḍya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be beaten or chastised or
punished, punishable.
<LEND>

<L>20687<pc>0368-b<k1>tAqyamAna<k2>tAqyamAna
{%Tāḍyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being beaten or struck;
suffering blows, undergoing a beating; ({%as%}), m. a
musical instrument which is struck (as a drum &c.).
<LEND>

<L>20688<pc>0368-b<k1>tAqaNka<k2>tAqaNka
{#tAqaNka#}¦ {%tāḍaṅka, as,%} m. or {%tāḍapattra, am,%}
n. a kind of ear-ring or ornament of the ear; [cf.
{%tāṭaṅka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20689<pc>0368-b<k1>tAqAga<k2>tAqAga
{#tAqAga#}¦ {%tāḍāga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%taḍāga%}), being
in tanks, coming from ponds (as water &c.).
<LEND>

<L>20690<pc>0368-b<k1>tAqi<k2>tAqi
{#tAqi#}¦ {%tāḍi, is%} or {%ī%} f. (for {%tālī%}), a kind of
palm, Corypha Taliera; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of ornament.
<LEND>

<L>20691<pc>0368-b<k1>tARqa<k2>tARqa
{#tARqa#}¦ {%tāṇḍa, as,%} m. (fr. {%taṇḍa%} or {%taṇḍā%}),
N. of an old sage; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>20692<pc>0368-b<k1>tARqaka<k2>tARqaka
{%Tāṇḍaka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>20693<pc>0368-b<k1>tARqava<k2>tARqava
{#tARqava#}¦ {%tāṇḍava, as, am,%} m. n. dancing,
especially with violent gesticulation, and particularly
applied to the frantic dance of the god Śiva and his
votaries; (in prosody) a tribrach or foot of three
short syllables; a sort of grass, Saccharum Procerum.
{%—Tāṇḍava-tālika, as,%} m. an epithet of Nandin
the door-keeper of Śiva. {%—Tāṇḍava-priya, as,%} m.
an epithet of Śiva (‘fond of the Tāṇḍava dance’).
{%—Tāṇḍava-brāhmaṇa,%} perhaps a wrong reading
for {%tāṇḍaka-brāhmaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>20694<pc>0368-b<k1>tARqavita<k2>tARqavita
{%Tāṇḍavita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving round in a wild
dance; dancing; fluttering; frowning.
<LEND>

<L>20695<pc>0368-b<k1>tARqi<k2>tARqi
{%Tāṇḍi, i,%}¦ n., N. of a manual of the art of dancing;
the science of dancing.
<LEND>

<L>20696<pc>0368-b<k1>tARqin<k2>tARqin
{%Tāṇḍin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a writer on prosody; ({%inas%}),
m. pl., N. of a Vedic school founded by a pupil of
Vaiśampāyana. {%—Tāṇḍi-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n., N. of
a Brāhmaṇa belonging to this school.
<LEND>

<L>20697<pc>0368-b<k1>tARqya<k2>tARqya
{%Tāṇḍya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a Brāhmaṇa belonging to the Sāma-veda, to which
there is a commentary by Sāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>20698<pc>0368-b<k1>tARqyAyanI<k2>tARqyAyanI
{%Tāṇḍyāyanī,%}¦ f. a patronymic from Tāṇḍya.
<LEND>

<L>20699<pc>0368-b<k1>tAt<k2>tAt
{#tAt#}¦ {%tāt,%} ind. (an obsolete abl. fr. the
pronom. base 2. {%ta%}), Ved. thus, in this way.
<LEND>

<L>20700<pc>0368-b<k1>tAta<k2>tAta
{#tAta#}¦ {%tāta, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. 3. {%tan%}),
venerable, reverend, respectable, dear; ({%as%}), m. a
father; a term of affection or endearment addressed
to any person, but especially to a junior or inferior,
as to a child or pupil (e. g. {%he tāta,%} O child!); any
person for whom one feels pity; [cf. Lat. <nsi>tata:</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">τἐττα;</lang> Boh. <nsi>tata,</nsi> ‘father:’ Lith. <nsi>téta, tétis,</nsi>
‘daddy;’ <nsi>teta,</nsi> ‘aunt:’ Old Germ. <nsi>toto:</nsi> Low
Germ. <nsi>teite,</nsi> ‘daddy, dad.’] {%—Tāta-gu, us, us, u,%}
agreeable to a father, paternal, fatherly, relating or
belonging to a father; ({%us%}), m. a paternal uncle.
{%—Tāta-janayitrī, tryau,%} f. du. father and mother,
parents. {%—Tāta-tulya, as, ā, am,%} like a father,
paternal; ({%as%}), m. a paternal uncle or the most
respectable of a man's male relations.
<LEND>

<L>20701<pc>0368-b<k1>tAtala<k2>tAtala
{%Tātala, as,%}¦ m. a fatherly relative, one who may
be considered as a father; an iron club or spike;
sickness, disease; cooking or maturing; heat, physical
or morbid; ({%as, ā, am%}), hot.
<LEND>

<L>20702<pc>0368-b<k1>tAti<k2>tAti
{%Tāti, is,%}¦ m. offspring, a son.
<LEND>

<L>20703<pc>0368-b<k1>tAtya<k2>tAtya
{%Tātya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. paternal, fatherly.
<LEND>

<L>20704<pc>0368-b<k1>tAtana<k2>tAtana
{#tAtana#}¦ {%tātana, as,%} m. a wagtail.
<LEND>

<L>20705<pc>0368-b<k1>tAtfpi<k2>tAtfpi
{#tAtfpi#}¦ {%tātṛpi, is, is, i%} (fr. Intens. of rt.
{%tṛp%}), Ved. satisfying, delighting much.
<LEND>

<L>20706<pc>0368-b<k1>tAtfzARa<k2>tAtfzARa
{#tAtfzARa#}¦ {%tātṛṣāṇa, as, ā, am%} (perf. part.
fr. rt. 1. {%tṛṣ%}), Ved. thirsting, very thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>20707<pc>0368-b<k1>tAtkarmya<k2>tAtkarmya
{#tAtkarmya#}¦ {%tātkarmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tat-karman%}),
sameness of occupation.
<LEND>

<L>20708<pc>0368-b<k1>tAtkAlika<k2>tAtkAlika
{#tAtkAlika#}¦ {%tātkālika, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr.
{%tat-kāla%}), ‘lasting that time,’ lasting equally long,
happening at that time, simultaneous, contemporary,
[Page0368-c+ 71]
instantly appearing; happening immediately or with-
out delay; relating to any particular moment of time.
<LEND>

<L>20709<pc>0368-c<k1>tAtkAlya<k2>tAtkAlya
{%Tātkālya, am,%}¦ n. simultaneousness.
<LEND>

<L>20710<pc>0368-c<k1>tAttali<k2>tAttali
{#tAttali#}¦ {%tāttali, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20711<pc>0368-c<k1>tAttvika<k2>tAttvika
{#tAttvika#}¦ {%tāttvika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tattva%}),
accordant with reality, real, true, essential.
<LEND>

<L>20712<pc>0368-c<k1>tAtparya<k2>tAtparya
{#tAtparya#}¦ {%tātparya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tat-para%}),
aim, reference to any object (with loc.), object,
purpose, intent, design; meaning, scope, purport;
explanation; {%tātparyatas%} or {%tātparyeṇa,%} ind. with
this intention, with this aim or object. {%—Tātparya-%}
{%pariśuddhi, is,%} f., N. of a work by Udayana.
{%—Tātparya-bodhinī,%} f., N. of a commentary on
a philosophical work called Citra-dīpa. {%—Tātpar-%}
{%yārtha (˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m. the meaning or purpose
of a sentence.
<LEND>

<L>20713<pc>0368-c<k1>tAtparyaka<k2>tAtparyaka
{%Tātparyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ aiming at, intending,
meaning.
<LEND>

<L>20714<pc>0368-c<k1>tAtya<k2>tAtya
{#tAtya#}¦ {%tātya.%} See under {%tāta,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20715<pc>0368-c<k1>tAtstomya<k2>tAtstomya
{#tAtstomya#}¦ {%tātstomya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tat-stoma%}),
sameness of praise.
<LEND>

<L>20716<pc>0368-c<k1>tAtsTya<k2>tAtsTya
{#tAtsTya#}¦ {%tātsthya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tat-stha%}), the
residing in that, the being contained in.
<LEND>

<L>20717<pc>0368-c<k1>tATABAvya<k2>tATABAvya
{#tATABAvya#}¦ {%tāthābhāvya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%tathā-%}
{%bhāva%}), a N. for the Svarita accent at the end of the
first member of a compound when an Udātta syllable
immediately follows, (the low-sounding vowel in such
a position cannot strictly be called either Svarita or
Anudātta-tara, and a new name is therefore given
to it; this may often happen in the case of two
separate words, but the vowel is then called An-
udātta-tara.)
<LEND>

<L>20718<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdarTika<k2>tAdarTika
{#tAdarTika#}¦ {%tādarthika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tad-ar-%}
{%tha%} or {%tādarthya%}), destined or intended for that.
<LEND>

<L>20719<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdarTya<k2>tAdarTya
{%Tādarthya, am,%}¦ n. the being destined or intended
for that, the having that or the same object, identity
of aim, object; relation to; sameness or precision of
meaning.
<LEND>

<L>20720<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdAtmya<k2>tAdAtmya
{#tAdAtmya#}¦ {%tādātmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tad-ātman%}),
sameness of nature or character, identity, unity.
<LEND>

<L>20721<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdItnA<k2>tAdItnA
{#tAdItnA#}¦ {%tādītnā,%} ind. (fr. {%tadī = tadi,%} a cor-
relative of {%yadi,%} and affix {%tna?%}), Ved. at that time.
<LEND>

<L>20722<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdurI<k2>tAdurI
{#tAdurI#}¦ {%tādurī,%} f., Ved. epithet of a frog
(explained by Durga as either {%taraṇa-śīlā,%} able to
swim, or {%tāvad udaram,%} consisting only of a belly;
perhaps a wrong reading for {%tāḍurī,%} as if fr. rt. {%taḍ;%}
cf. also {%dardura,%} ‘a frog’).
<LEND>

<L>20723<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdfkza<k2>tAdfkza
{#tAdfkza#}¦ {%tā-dṛkṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. the pronom.
base 2. {%ta%} and {%dṛkṣa%} fr. rt. {%dṛś%}), such like, such
a one, like that, like him, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20724<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdfSi<k2>tAdfSi
{%Tā-dṛśi, k, k, k%}¦ (Ved. nom. m. f. {%tādṛṅ%}), like
that, such like, like him or it, &c.; ({%k%}), ind. in
such a manner. {%—Tādṛg-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} of such
qualities. {%—Tādṛg-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} of such a shape
or form. {%—Tādṛg-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of such a
kind, of such qualities, being in this situation.
<LEND>

<L>20725<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdfSa<k2>tAdfSa
{%Tā-dṛśa, as, ī, am,%}¦ such like, such a one; {%yā-%}
{%dṛśas tādṛśas,%} anybody whosoever; [cf. Prāk.
<nsi>tārisa;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">τηλίκος;</lang> Dor. <lang n="greek">ταλίκος</lang> Slav. <nsi>tolik;</nsi>
Lat. <nsi>talis.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>20726<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdDarmya<k2>tAdDarmya
{#tAdDarmya#}¦ {%tāddharmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tad-dhar-%}
{%man%}), sameness of law, analogy.
<LEND>

<L>20727<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdDita<k2>tAdDita
{#tAdDita#}¦ {%tāddhita, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tad-dhita%}),
formed with a Taddhita affix.
<LEND>

<L>20728<pc>0368-c<k1>tAdrUpya<k2>tAdrUpya
{#tAdrUpya#}¦ {%tādrūpya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tad-rūpa%}),
oneness or sameness of form, figure, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20729<pc>0368-c<k1>tAna<k2>tAna
{#tAna#}¦ {%tāna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%tan%}), a thread,
a fibre; a tone, a protracted tone, the key-note (in
music); a monotonous tone (in reciting, also called
Eka-śruti); ({%am%}), n. expanse, extension; an object
of sense; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τόνος.</lang>] {%—Tāna-karman, a,%} n.
[Page0369-a+ 74]
tuning the voice previously to singing; running over
the notes to catch the key.
<LEND>

<L>20730<pc>0369-a<k1>tAnava<k2>tAnava
{#tAnava#}¦ {%tānava, am,%} n. (fr. {%tanu%}), thinness,
spareness, meagreness, smallness. {%—Tānava-kṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} diminishing, causing thinness.
<LEND>

<L>20731<pc>0369-a<k1>tAnavya<k2>tAnavya
{%Tānavya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Tanu; (the
fem. is {%tānavyāyanī.%})
<LEND>

<L>20732<pc>0369-a<k1>tAnUnapAta<k2>tAnUnapAta
{#tAnUnapAta#}¦ {%tānūnapāta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tanū-%}
{%napāt%}), relating to Tanū-napāt, addressed to that
form of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>20733<pc>0369-a<k1>tAnUnaptra<k2>tAnUnaptra
{%Tānūnaptra, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tanū-naptṛ%}), a cere-
mony in which Tanū-napāt is invoked and the
oblation touched by the sacrificer and the priests as
a form of adjuration; ({%as, ī, am%}), used or employed
in this ceremony, (as clarified butter &c.)
<LEND>

<L>20734<pc>0369-a<k1>tAnUra<k2>tAnUra
{#tAnUra#}¦ {%tānūra, as,%} m. a whirlpool; [cf.
{%tālūra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20735<pc>0369-a<k1>tAnta<k2>tAnta
{#tAnta#}¦ {%tānta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%tam%}), wearied,
fatigued, distressed; languid, languishing; faded,
withered, blighted; a mystical N. of the letter {%d.%}
{%—Tānta-nayana, as, ā, am,%} having languid or
languishing eyes.
<LEND>

<L>20736<pc>0369-a<k1>tAntava<k2>tAntava
{#tAntava#}¦ {%tāntava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tantu%}), made
of thread; ({%am%}), n. spinning, weaving; a web; a
woven cloth.
<LEND>

<L>20737<pc>0369-a<k1>tAntavya<k2>tAntavya
{%Tāntavya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Tantu; (the
fem. is {%tāntavyāyanī.%})
<LEND>

<L>20738<pc>0369-a<k1>tAntuvAyya<k2>tAntuvAyya
{%Tāntuvāyya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%tantu-vāya%}), the son of
a weaver.
<LEND>

<L>20739<pc>0369-a<k1>tAntra<k2>tAntra
{#tAntra#}¦ {%tāntra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tantra;%} rt. 3.
{%tan%}), stringed, having wires or strings (as a musical
instrument); relating to the Tantras &c.; ({%am%}), n.
the music of a stringed instrument.
<LEND>

<L>20740<pc>0369-a<k1>tAntrika<k2>tAntrika
{%Tāntrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ completely versed in any
science or system, a scholar; a philosopher; relating
to the Tantras, taught or contained in them, fol-
lowing them, &c.; {%tāntrikī sañjñā,%} a technical
name; ({%as%}), m. a follower of the Tantra doctrine
or mystical system of the Tantras.
<LEND>

<L>20741<pc>0369-a<k1>tAndana<k2>tAndana
{#tAndana#}¦ {%tāndana (?), as,%} m. wind.
<LEND>

<L>20742<pc>0369-a<k1>tAnva<k2>tAnva
{#tAnva#}¦ {%tānva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tanū%}), Ved. be-
longing to one's own body or person, personal;
({%as%}), m. a patronymic from Tanva; ({%am%}), n., N. of
a Sāman called after Tanva; ({%as, ā, am%}), forming
the warp of a web, woven, spun; (Sāy.) a cloth for
filtering the Soma; (perhaps for {%tanva%} by a metrical
lengthening of the first syllable.)
<LEND>

<L>20743<pc>0369-a<k1>tAnvaNga<k2>tAnvaNga
{%Tānvaṅga, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Tanv-aṅga.
<LEND>

<L>20744<pc>0369-a<k1>tApa<k2>tApa
{#tApa#}¦ {%tāpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%tap%}), heat,
glow, burning, torment, pain (mental or physical);
fever; sorrow, affliction, distress; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the
Taptī or Surat river; N. of the Yamunā or Jumnā
river; [cf. {%paścāt-tāpa.%}] {%—Tāpa-hara, as, ī, am,%}
removing heat; cooling; consoling, alleviating distress;
({%ī%}), f. a dish, a sort of soup of pulse and grain, first
fried with ghee and turmeric and afterwards boiled
with salt and sugar. {%—Tāpī-ja%} or {%tāpī-samudbhava,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} produced near or occurring near the
river Taptī; pyrites or another kind of mineral
substance; a kind of gem. {%—Tāpeśvara-tīrtha%}
{%(˚pa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Tāpy-uttha-%}
{%sañjñaka, am,%} n. {%= tāpya%} below.
<LEND>

<L>20745<pc>0369-a<k1>tApaka<k2>tApaka
{%Tāpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ heating, burning, inflaming;
({%as%}), m. fever, morbid heat.
<LEND>

<L>20746<pc>0369-a<k1>tApatya<k2>tApatya
{%Tāpatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to Tapatī (q. v.),
treating of her; a metronymic from Tapatī, epithet
of Kuru, also of Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>20747<pc>0369-a<k1>tApana<k2>tApana
{%Tāpana, as, ī, am,%}¦ burning, inflaming, heating,
distressing [cf. {%indra-t˚%} and {%candra-t˚%}]; ({%as%}), m.
the sun; the hot season; the sun-stone [cf. {%sūrya-%}
{%kānta%}]; N. of one of the arrows of the god of
love; ({%am%}), n. burning; distressing, chastising; a
division of hell; gold; [cf. {%tapana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20748<pc>0369-a<k1>tApanIya<k2>tApanIya
{%Tāpanīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%tapanīya%}), golden,
[Page0369-b+ 74]
made of gold; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a school of the
Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā or White Yajur-veda. {%—Tāpanī-%}
{%yopaniṣad (˚ya-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>20749<pc>0369-b<k1>tApayAna<k2>tApayAna
{%Tāpayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ warming, burning, illu-
minating.
<LEND>

<L>20750<pc>0369-b<k1>tApayizRu<k2>tApayizRu
{%Tāpayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. heating, burning,
causing pain.
<LEND>

<L>20751<pc>0369-b<k1>tApaScita<k2>tApaScita
{%Tāpaścita, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tapaś-cit%}), N. of a sacri-
ficial ceremony of long continuance; ({%as, ī, am%}), an
epithet of the sacrificial fire used at this ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>20752<pc>0369-b<k1>tApasa<k2>tApasa
{%Tāpasa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tapas%}), performing pe-
nance, a practiser of austerities; devout; a hermit;
a devotee, an ascetic; relating to religious penance
or to an ascetic; ({%as%}), m., N. or epithet of a Hotṛ;
a kind of crane, Ardea Nivea, {%= vaka;%} a kind of
sugar-cane; a kind of plant, {%= damanaka; (ī),%} f., N.
of two plants, viz. Curcuma Zedoaria and Jaṭāmāṃsī;
({%am%}), n. the leaf of the Laurus Cassia, {%= tamāla-%}
{%pattra;%} [cf. {%tāpasa-ja.%}] {%—Tāpasa-ja, am,%} n. the
leaf of the Laurus Cassia. {%—Tāpasa-taru, us,%} m. or
{%tāpasa-druma, as,%} m. the tree of the ascetics,
Terminalia Catappa [cf. {%iṅguda%}] or Putranjiva
Roxburghii. {%—Tāpasadruma-sannibhā,%} f. a kind
of plant, {%= garbha-dātrī%}. {%—Tāpasa-pattrī,%} f. the
plant Artemisia Indica. {%—Tāpasa-priya, as, ā, am,%}
dear to ascetics; ({%as%}), m. the tree Buchanania Lati-
folia, {%= priyāla; (ā),%} f. a kind of sugar-cane; a
grape; Ganitrus Sphærica; Chironia Sapida, {%= rudrā-%}
{%kṣa%}. {%—Tāpasa-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. {%= tāpasa-taru.%}
{%—Tāpasādhyuṣita (˚sa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} in-
habited by hermits. {%—Tāpasāraṇya (˚sa-ar˚), am,%}
n. a wood of hermits. {%—Tāpaseṣṭa (˚sa-iṣ˚), as,%}
m. the tree Buchanania Latifolia.
<LEND>

<L>20753<pc>0369-b<k1>tApasya<k2>tApasya
{%Tāpasya, am,%}¦ n. asceticism, the condition of a
devotee, penance.
<LEND>

<L>20754<pc>0369-b<k1>tApAyana<k2>tApAyana
{%Tāpāyana, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school of the
Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā or White Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>20755<pc>0369-b<k1>tApika<k2>tApika
{%Tāpika%}¦ in {%jala-tāpika,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20756<pc>0369-b<k1>tApita<k2>tApita
{%Tāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heated, inflamed, distressed,
pained.
<LEND>

<L>20757<pc>0369-b<k1>tApin<k2>tApin
{%Tāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ oppressed by heat, morbid, suf-
fering from disease (moral or physical); anything
heated or glowing; ({%ī%}), m. one of the deified saints
of the Buddhists; ({%inī%}), f. a N. of the letter {%v;%}
[cf. {%jala-tāpika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20758<pc>0369-b<k1>tApya<k2>tApya
{%Tāpya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. or {%tāpyaka, am,%} n. a
mineral substance, sulphuret of iron.
<LEND>

<L>20759<pc>0369-b<k1>tApicCa<k2>tApicCa
{#tApicCa#}¦ {%tāpiccha%} or {%tāpiñcha, as,%} m. the
plant Xanthochymus Pictorius; [cf. {%tamāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20760<pc>0369-b<k1>tApiYja<k2>tApiYja
{%Tāpiñja, as,%}¦ m. the plant Xanthochymus Pictorius;
({%am%}), n. {%= tāpīja, tāpya,%} sulphuret of iron.
<LEND>

<L>20761<pc>0369-b<k1>tApitawa<k2>tApitawa
{#tApitawa#}¦ {%tāpitaṭa%} or {%tīpītaṭa%} or {%tāpītaṭa-%}
{%deśa, as,%} m., N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>20762<pc>0369-b<k1>tApImAhAtmya<k2>tApImAhAtmya
{#tApImAhAtmya#}¦ {%tāpī-māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of
a part of the Skanda-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>20763<pc>0369-b<k1>tAbarisARu<k2>tAbarisARu
{#tAbarisARu#}¦ {%tābarisāṇu,%} N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>20764<pc>0369-b<k1>tAbuva<k2>tAbuva
{#tAbuva#}¦ {%tābuva, am,%} n., Ved. an antidote
against poison.
<LEND>

<L>20765<pc>0369-b<k1>tAma<k2>tAma
{#tAma#}¦ {%tāma, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%tam%}), an object of
terror; fault, defect, vice; anxiety, distress, desire.
<LEND>

<L>20766<pc>0369-b<k1>tAmara<k2>tAmara
{#tAmara#}¦ {%tāmara, am,%} n. water; ghee or
oiled butter.
<LEND>

<L>20767<pc>0369-b<k1>tAmarasa<k2>tAmarasa
{#tAmarasa#}¦ {%tāmarasa, am,%} n. a red-coloured
lotus; gold; copper [cf. {%tāmra%}]; a metre consisting
of four lines of twelve syllables each; ({%as%}), m. a
kind of crane, Ardea Sibirica; ({%ī%}), f. a lotus pond.
<LEND>

<L>20768<pc>0369-b<k1>tAmalakI<k2>tAmalakI
{#tAmalakI#}¦ {%tāmalakī,%} f. the tree Flacourtia
Cataphracta.
<LEND>

<L>20769<pc>0369-b<k1>tAmalipta<k2>tAmalipta
{#tAmalipta#}¦ {%tāmalipta, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people in the south of Bengal; ({%am, ī%}), n. f., N. of
the city and district inhabited by this people, the
modern Tumlook or Tamoluk in the district of
Midnapore; (also called {%tamoliptī, tāmralipta, dā-%}
{%malipta;%} cf. also {%tamālikā%} and {%tamālinī.%})
<LEND>
[Page0369-c+ 75]

<L>20770<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmasa<k2>tAmasa
{#tAmasa#}¦ {%tāmasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tamas%}), dark,
of or belonging to darkness; affected by or apper-
taining to the third quality or that of darkness (vice,
ignorance, &c.); ignorant, vicious, malignant; relating
to Manu Tāmasa; ({%as%}), m. a malignant or mis-
chievous person, a villain, an incendiary; a snake;
an owl; N. of the fourth Manu; N. of one of the
attendants of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. night; sleep; an epithet
of Durgā; N. of a river, {%= jaṭāmāṃsī%} (in this sense
a wrong reading for {%tāpasī%}); ({%am%}), n. darkness
[cf. {%andha-tāmasa%}]; {%tāmasī tanūs,%} the form as-
sumed by the Deity for the destruction of the world;
{%tāmasī śaktis,%} the faculty of Tamas. {%—Tāmasa-%}
{%kīlaka, as,%} m., N. of certain astronomical Ketus.
{%—Tāmasa-guṇa, as,%} m. the quality of darkness;
see {%guṇa%}. {%—Tāmasa-līna, as, ā, am,%} (in the
Sāṅkhya phil.) one of the forms of {%a-tuṣṭi,%} dissatis-
faction. {%—Tāmasa-vana, am,%} n. ‘the dark wood,’
N. of a forest.
<LEND>

<L>20771<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmasika<k2>tAmasika
{%Tāmasika, as, ī, am,%}¦ dark, obscure, of or be-
longing to the quality of darkness, derived from it,
teaching lessons so characterized, &c.
<LEND>

<L>20772<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmi<k2>tAmi
{#tAmi#}¦ {%tāmi, is%} or {%ī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%tam%}), restrain-
ing or keeping in the breath until it produces ex-
haustion; (also said to {%= tamī,%} night.)
<LEND>

<L>20773<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmisra<k2>tAmisra
{#tAmisra#}¦ {%tāmisra%} (fr. {%tamisra%}), scil. {%pakṣa,%}
the dark half of the month, the time from full moon
to new moon; ({%as%}), m. a Rākṣasa (as going about
in the dark); indignation at being disappointed or
slighted, anger, one of the five forms of Avidyā in
the Sāṅkhya system; a division of hell, that of
deep gloom.
<LEND>

<L>20774<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmu<k2>tAmu
{#tAmu#}¦ {%tāmu, us,%} m., Ved. a praiser; (a various
reading has {%stāmu.%})
<LEND>

<L>20775<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmbalI<k2>tAmbalI
{#tAmbalI#}¦ {%tāmbalī,%} f., N. of a kind of plant.
<LEND>

<L>20776<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmbUla<k2>tAmbUla
{#tAmbUla#}¦ {%tāmbūla, am, ī,%} n. f. (said to be fr.
rt. {%tam%}), betel, Piper Betel, or rather its pungent
and aromatic leaf, which together with the areca-nut
and catechu and sometimes caustic lime and spices
is eaten or chewed very generally by the natives of
the east, acting as a carminative and antacid tonic.
It is called Pān (fr. {%parṇa,%} ‘a leaf,’ the name
betel being connected with {%vīṭikā,%} q. v.), and is pre-
sented to guests and visitors, and sometimes sent to
relations and friends at family festivals, inclosed in
gold or silver paper; ({%am%}), n. the areca-nut; ({%as%}),
m. Bengal Śaṇa or Crotolaria Juncea. {%—Tāmbūla-%}
{%karaṅka, as,%} m. the Pān-dān or betel-box, (this box
generally resembling a Karaṅka or hollowed cocoa-
nut.) {%—Tāmbūla-da%} or {%tāmbūla-dāyaka%} or {%tām-%}
{%būla-dhara, as,%} m. the betel-bearer (who attended
on kings and great men). {%—Tāmbūla-pattra, am,%}
n. betel-leaf; ({%as%}), m. the Dioscorea Globosa; [cf.
{%piṇḍālu.%}] {%—Tāmbūla-peṭikā,%} f. a betel-box. {%—Tām-%}
{%būla-bhakṣaṇa, am,%} n. the eating of betel-leaf.
{%—Tāmbūla-rāga, as,%} m. a kind of pulse, Ervum
lens. {%—Tāmbūla-vallikā%} or {%tāmbūla-vallī,%} f. the
betel plant (Piper Betel) bearing a pungent leaf;
see above. {%—Tāmbūla-vāhaka, as,%} m. or {%tāmbūla-%}
{%vāhin, ī,%} m. a betel-bearer, a servant attached to
men of rank to prepare the Pān and carry the betel-
box. {%—Tāmbūlākta (˚la-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} smeared
with the juice of chewed betel. {%—Tāmbūlādhikāra%}
{%(˚la-adh˚), as,%} m. the office of carrying the betel-
box for persons of rank.
<LEND>

<L>20777<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmbUlika<k2>tAmbUlika
{%Tāmbūlika, as,%}¦ m. a seller of betel.
<LEND>

<L>20778<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmbUlin<k2>tAmbUlin
{%Tāmbūlin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ relating or belonging to betel,
having betel, giving it, &c.; ({%ī%}), m. the Pān-bearer,
a servant who prepares and furnishes the Pān; a
seller of betel.
<LEND>

<L>20779<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmya<k2>tAmya
{#tAmya#}¦ {%tāmya, am,%} n. (?) {%= kloman.%}
<LEND>

<L>20780<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmyat<k2>tAmyat
{#tAmyat#}¦ {%tāmyat, an, antī, at%} (fr. rt. {%tam%}),
distressing, afflicting, annoying.
<LEND>

<L>20781<pc>0369-c<k1>tAmra<k2>tAmra
{#tAmra#}¦ {%tāmra, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%tam%}), of a coppery red colour, ({%tāmrā tvac,%} the
[Page0370-a+ 81]
fourth of the seven skins or membranes with which an
embryo is covered); ({%as%}), m. a kind of leprosy with
large red spots; N. of a man [cf. {%tāmrāyaṇa%}]; N.
of an island [cf. {%tāmra-dvīpa%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several
plants, viz. {%= mañjiṣṭhā,%} Rubia Munjista, {%= rakta-%}
{%guñjā,%} Abrus Precatorius, {%= saiṃhalī;%} N. of a
daughter of Dakṣa, one of the wives of Kaśyapa,
and mother of various birds; N. of a river; ({%am%}),
n. a dark or coppery red; copper; a kind of sandal,
represented as of a dark-red colour and smelling like
a lotus; Ved. form, figure; ({%as, ī, am%}), made of
copper; ({%ī%}), f. a copper or metallic cup of prescribed
capacity and perforated by a small hole at the bottom,
(when placed in a vessel of water it answers the
purpose of a clepsydra, and the water gradually filling
it marks the time that has elapsed); [cf. Hib. <nsi>umha,</nsi>
‘copper.’] {%—Tāmra-kaṇṭaka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a kind of Acacia. {%—Tāmra-karṇī,%} f., N. of the
female of one of the elephants of the quarters called
Añjana; also of the elephant Śeṣa. {%—Tāmra-kāra,%}
{%as,%} m. a brazier, a copper-smith. {%—Tāmra-kili, is,%}
m. a small worm of a red colour; [cf. {%tāmra-kṛmi.%}]
{%—Tāmra-kuṭṭa, as, ī,%} m. f. a brazier or copper-
smith. {%—Tāmra-kuṭṭaka, as,%} m. = the last; tobacco (?).
{%—Tāmra-kuṇḍa, am,%} n. a copper bason or other
vessel; probably N. of a place. {%—Tāmra-kūṭa, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a kind of plant, tobacco (?). {%—Tāmra-%}
{%kṛmi, is,%} m. the lady-bird; cochineal. {%—Tāmra-%}
{%garbha, am,%} n. blue vitriol or sulphate of copper.
{%—Tāmra-cakṣus, us,%} m. a kind of pigeon.
{%—Tāmra-cūḍa, as, ā, am,%} red-crested; ({%as%}),
m. a cock [cf. {%tāmra-śikhin%}]; a kind of plant
({%kukkura-dru%}); a particular position of the hand
[cf. {%tāmracūḍaka%}]; N. of a Pari-vrājaka; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
{%—Tāmracūḍaka, as,%} m. (scil. {%hasta%}), a kind of
theatrical gesticulation or motion of the hands.
{%—Tāmracūḍa-bhairava, as,%} m. a peculiar form of
Bhairava. {%—Tāmracūḍādi-kathana (˚ḍa-ād˚), am,%}
n. ‘explanation of the Tāmra-cūḍa gesticulation
&c.,’ N. of a section of the Mantra-mahodadhi by
Mahī-dhara. {%—Tāmrajākṣa (˚ja-ak˚), as,%} m., N.
of a son of Kṛṣṇa and Satya-bhāmā. {%—Tāmra-%}
{%tanu, us, us, u,%} having a ruddy or fair complexion,
copper-coloured. {%—Tāmra-tuṇḍa, as,%} m. a sort of
monkey. {%—Tāmra-trapuja,%} brass. {%—Tāmra-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. dark-red or copper colour, redness. {%—Tāmra-%}
{%dugdhā,%} f. a species of plant, {%= gorakṣa-dugdhā.%}
{%—Tāmra-dru, us,%} m. red sandal-wood. {%—Tāmra-%}
{%dvīpa, as,%} m. the island Ceylon. {%—Tāmra-dhātu,%}
{%us,%} m. red chalk. {%—Tāmra-dhūmra, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. dark-red, coppery red. {%—Tāmra-dhvaja, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Tāmra-netra, as, ā, am,%} red-
eyed. {%—Tāmra-pakṣā,%} f., N. of a daughter of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Tāmra-pakṣin, ī,%} m., N. of a son of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Tāmra-paṭṭa, as,%} m. a copper plate on
which Hindū grants of land &c. are frequently in-
scribed; [cf. {%tāmra-śāsana.%}] {%—Tāmra-pattra,%}
{%am,%} n. a copper plate; ({%as%}), m. a kind of pot-herb,
{%= jīva-śāka%}. {%—Tāmra-pattraka,%} N. of the two
plants Bauhinia Tomentosa and Capparis Aphylla.
{%—Tāmra-parṇa, am,%} n., N. of a district renowned
for a temple of Śiva, the ancient Taprobane; Ceylon;
({%ī%}), f. the plant Rubia Munjista ({%mañjiṣṭhā%});
a kind of pond or lake; N. of a river rising in
Malaya and of the district in its vicinity, (the river is
celebrated for its pearls); N. of a town in Ceylon,
after which the whole island is by some called
Tāmra-parṇī; [cf. {%tāmra-dvīpa.%}] {%—Tāmrapar-%}
{%ṇīya, as,%} m. (fr. the last), an inhabitant of Ceylon,
especially a Buddhist. {%—Tāmra-pallava, as,%} m. the
Aśoka tree. {%—Tāmra-pākin, ī,%} m. the tree Thes-
pesia Populneoides and Hibiscus Populneoides. {%—Tā-%}
{%mra-pātra, am,%} n. a copper vessel. {%—Tāmra-pādī,%}
f. a kind of plant related to the Mimosa Pudica,
{%= haṃsa-padī%}. {%—Tāmra-puṣpa, am,%} n. a copper-
coloured or red flower; ({%as%}), m. the plant Bauhinia
Variegata or a kind of ebony ({%rakta-kāñcana%});
another plant, Kæmpferia Rotunda ({%bhūmi-cam-%}
{%paka%}); ({%ī%}), f., N. of several plants having red
flowers, viz. Bignonia Suaveolens, Grislea Tomentosa,
[Page0370-b+ 79]
Ipomœa Turpethum ({%tri-vṛt%}); [cf. {%tāmra-puṣ-%}
{%pikā.%}] {%—Tāmra-puṣpaka, as,%} m. Bauhinia Varie-
gata or a kind of ebony; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of several
plants, viz. = Bignonia Suaveolens, Grislea Tomentosa,
also = Marāthī {%rakta-niśottarā%}. {%—Tāmra-phala,%}
{%as,%} m. the tree Alangium Hexapetalum. {%—Tāmra-%}
{%phalaka, am,%} n. a copper plate. {%—Tāmra-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} consisting of copper, coppery. {%—Tāmra-%}
{%māraṇa, am,%} n. the decomposition of copper and
its application as a remedy. {%—Tāmra-mukha, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} copper-faced, fair-complexioned; ({%as%}), m. a
European. {%—Tāmra-mūlā%} and {%ī,%} f., N. of several
plants, Rubia Munjista, Alhagi Maurorum, Mimosa
Pudica. {%—Tāmra-mṛga, as,%} m. the red deer.
{%—Tāmra-rasāyanī,%} f. a species of plant with a
milky juice, {%= tāmra-dugdhā%}. {%—Tāmra-lipta, ās,%}
m. pl., N. of a people near the western mouth of
the Ganges; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f.,
N. of the capital of the Tāmra-liptas; [cf. {%tāma-%}
{%liptī.%}] {%—Tāmraliptaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
near the western mouth of the Ganges; ({%ikā%}), f.,
N. of the capital of this people, {%= tāmra-liptā.%}
{%—Tāmra-varṇa, as, ī, am,%} copper-coloured, dark-
red; ({%as%}), m. a kind of grass, {%= pallivāha;%} N. of
one of the nine divisions of Bhārata-varṣa; ({%ā%}), f.
the China rose; ({%ī%}), f. the blossom of sesamum.
{%—Tāmra-varṇaka, as,%} m. {%= tāmra-varṇa%}. {%—Tā-%}
{%mra-vallī,%} f. the plant Rubia Munjista; a medi-
cinal plant used as an emollient in affections of
the mouth and fauces; also called {%tamālī, tālī,%}
{%sūkṣma-vallī,%} &c. {%—Tāmra-vīja, as,%} m. a kind
of vetch, Dolichos Uniflorus {%(kulattha)%}. {%—Tāmra-%}
{%vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the plant Dolichos Uniflorus; a red
sort of sandal-wood. {%—Tāmra-vṛnta, as,%} m. the plant
Dolichos Uniflorus; ({%ā%}), f. another kind of Dolichos.
{%—Tāmra-śāṭīya, ās,%} m. pl. ‘having red vestments,’
N. of a Buddhist school. {%—Tāmra-śāsana, am,%} n.
an edict or grant &c. inscribed on copper; [cf. {%tāmra-%}
{%paṭṭa.%}] {%—Tāmra-śikhin, ī,%} m. ‘having a red crest,’
a cock; [cf. {%tāmra-cūḍa.%}] {%—Tāmra-sāgara, as,%} m.,
N. of an ocean. {%—Tāmra-sāra, am,%} n. a red kind
of sandal, Pterospermum Santolinum. {%—Tāmra-%}
{%sāraka, as,%} m. a sort of Khadira with red flowers;
({%am%}), n. red sandal-wood. {%—Tāmra-sena, as,%} m.,
N. of a king. {%—Tāmrākha (˚ra-ak˚), as, ī, am,%}
red-eyed; ({%as%}), m. a crow; the Indian cuckoo.
{%—Tāmrākhya (˚ra-ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} N. of a kind
of pearl, so called either because reddish in colour or
because found in the river Tāmra-parṇī. {%—Tāmrābha%}
{%(˚ra-ābh˚), am,%} n. red saunders. {%—Tāmrāri (˚ra-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. ‘the copper-coloured enemy,’ N. of a
hostile people. {%—Tāmrāruṇa (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. a
coppery red dawn; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Tāmrārdha (˚ra-ar˚), am,%} n.
mixed or bell-metal. {%—Tāmrā-vatī,%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Tāmropajīvin (˚ra-up˚), ī,%} m. a copper-
smith. {%—Tāmroṣṭha%} and {%tāmrauṣṭha (˚ra-oṣ˚),%}
{%au,%} m. du. red lips; ({%as, ā, am%}), having red lips;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Yakṣa.
<LEND>

<L>20782<pc>0370-b<k1>tAmraka<k2>tAmraka
{%Tāmraka, am,%}¦ n. copper; ({%ikā%}), f. {%= tāmrī,%} the
plant Abrus Precatorius, {%= guñjā.%}
<LEND>

<L>20783<pc>0370-b<k1>tAmrAyaRa<k2>tAmrAyaRa
{%Tāmrāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a pupil of Yājñavalkya;
(also read {%tāmrāyaṇi.%})
<LEND>

<L>20784<pc>0370-b<k1>tAmrika<k2>tAmrika
{%Tāmrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ coppery, made of copper,
&c.; ({%as%}), m. a brazier, a copper-smith; (for {%tā-%}
{%mrikā%} see {%tāmraka.%})
<LEND>

<L>20785<pc>0370-b<k1>tAmriman<k2>tAmriman
{%Tāmriman, ā,%}¦ m. redness, dark-red, copper colour,
the colour of copper.
<LEND>

<L>20786<pc>0370-b<k1>tAmrIkf<k2>tAmrIkf
{%Tāmrī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to die red or a dark-red or coppery.
<LEND>

<L>20787<pc>0370-b<k1>tAmrya<k2>tAmrya
{%Tāmrya, am,%}¦ n. a dark-red colour, redness.
<LEND>

<L>20788<pc>0370-b<k1>tAmrAku<k2>tAmrAku
{#tAmrAku#}¦ {%tāmrāku, us,%} m., N. of an Upa-
dvīpa.
<LEND>

<L>20789<pc>0370-b<k1>tAy<k2>tAy
{#tAy#}¦ {%tāy%} [cf. rt. 3. {%tan, trai, tay%}], cl. 1.
A. {%tāyate, tatāye, tāyiṣyate, atāyi%}
and {%atāyiṣṭa, tāyitum,%} to spread, extend, proceed
in a continuous stream or line; to cherish, protect.
<LEND>

<L>20790<pc>0370-b<k1>tAyana<k2>tAyana
{%Tāyana, am,%}¦ n. proceeding or succeeding well;
increase, growth.
<LEND>
[Page0370-c+ 78]

<L>20791<pc>0370-c<k1>tAya<k2>tAya
{#tAya#}¦ {%tāya,%} ? in Gaṇa to Pāṇ. VI. 1, 203.
<LEND>

<L>20792<pc>0370-c<k1>tAyAdara<k2>tAyAdara
{#tAyAdara#}¦ {%tāyādara,%} ? Atharva-veda VI. 72, 2.
<LEND>

<L>20793<pc>0370-c<k1>tAyika<k2>tAyika
{#tAyika#}¦ {%tāyika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a country;
the inhabitants of this country, {%= tarjika.%}
<LEND>

<L>20794<pc>0370-c<k1>tAyu<k2>tAyu
{#tAyu#}¦ {%tāyu, us,%} m. [cf. {%stāyu;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">τητάω</lang>],
Ved. a thief.
<LEND>

<L>20795<pc>0370-c<k1>tAra<k2>tAra
{#tAra#}¦ {%tāra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%tṝ,%} or in the
senses ‘shining,’ ‘star,’ &c., for {%stāra%} fr. rt. {%stṛ,%}
to scatter rays of light, or according to others fr. rt.
2. {%as,%} cf. {%astra%}), all-pervading, all-conquering, a
protector; an epithet of Rudra and Viṣṇu; high
(as a note in music), soprano; loud, shrill; a loud
or shrill note, a high tone or note (in music); shin-
ing, radiant, radiating; clean, clear; good, excellent,
well flavoured, &c.; ({%as%}), m. descent to a river, a
bank [cf. {%tīra%} and {%tīrtha%}]; crossing, passing over,
&c.; the clearness or transparency of a pearl, a clear
or beautiful pearl; the (saving) mystical syllable {%om%}
{%(praṇava);%} a mystical monosyllable in the Tantras;
N. of a Daitya slain by Viṣṇu; N. of one of Rāma's
monkey generals, who was a son of Bṛhas-pati, and
whose wife is called Tārā; N. of Maṇi-rāma, a
commentator on the Bhāminī-vilāsa; ({%as, ā, am%}),
m. f. n. a star in general, a fixed star, asterism, &c.
[cf. {%tṛ%} and {%stṛ%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a star, planet, a kind of meteor,
perhaps a falling star; the pupil of the eye, (according
to some also m. and n.); N. of one of the eight
Siddhis in the Sāṅkhya phil.; a kind of perfume;
N. of the wife of Bṛhas-pati who was carried off by
Soma; of a form of Dākṣāyaṇī worshipped on the
mountain Kiṣkindha, protectress of the Gṛtsa-madas;
of the wife of Buddha Amogha-siddha; of one
of the Jaina Śaktis; of a female monkey in the
Rāmāyaṇa, daughter of Su-ṣeṇa, wife of Bālin and
mother of Aṅgada; N. of the wife of Tāra; ({%am%}),
n. silver; ({%as, am%}), m. n. camphor; ({%am, ā%}),
n. f. a pearl; [cf. Zend <nsi>śtārĕ;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀστήρ, ἄστρον;</lang>
Goth. <nsi>stairno;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>aster, astrum, stella</nsi> for <nsi>ste-</nsi>
<nsi>rula.</nsi>] {%—Tāra-ja, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a kind of
mineral substance. {%—Tāra-taṇḍula, as,%} m. a kind of
Sorghum {%(dhavala-yāvanāla)%}. {%—Tāra-tama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very loud. {%—Tāra-tāra, am,%} n., N. of one of the
eight Siddhis in the Sāṅkhya phil.; [cf. {%tāra%} and
{%tārā.%}] {%—Tāra-nātha, as,%} m. (for {%tārā-n˚%}), N. of a
renowned Tibetian who lived in the beginning of the
seventeenth century and wrote a history of Buddhism.
{%—Tāra-nāda, as,%} m. a loud or shrill sound or cry.
{%—Tāra-patana, am,%} n. the falling of a meteor, a
falling star. {%—Tāra-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a lexico-
grapher. {%—Tāra-puṣpa, as,%} m. jasmine. {%—Tāra-%}
{%mākṣika, am,%} n. a kind of mineral substance, {%=%}
{%tāra-ja%}. {%—Tāra-mūla%} and {%tāra-mūlaka, am,%} n.,
N. of a place. {%—Tāra-vimalā,%} f. a sort of mineral
said to be of the colour of silver. {%—Tāra-śuddhi-%}
{%kara, am,%} n. (‘what refines silver’), lead. {%—Tāra-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Tāra-svara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a loud or shrill sound. {%—Tārā-%}
{%kavaca, am,%} n., N. of a chapter in the Tantra-sāra
by Kṛṣṇānanda; see {%kavaca%}. {%—Tārā-kāruṇya,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the compassion of Tārā,’ N. of a chapter in
the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Tārākṣa (˚rā-ak˚), as, ī, am,%}
star-eyed, one whose eyes are stars; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a Daitya, {%= tārakākṣa,%} uncle of Dhūmrākṣa and
king of the Niṣadhas. {%—Tārā-graha,%} ‘star-planet,’
i. e. one of the five lesser planets exclusive of the
sun and moon. {%—Tārā-cakra, am,%} n., N. of a
mystical circle. {%—Tārā-candra, as,%} m., N. of a
scholiast and of a king. {%—Tārā-cchāya, as, ā, am,%}
reflecting the stars. {%—Tārādhipa, as,%} m. or {%tārā-%}
{%dhipati (˚rā-adh˚), is,%} m. ‘ruler of the stars,’
the moon. {%—Tārādhīśa (˚rā-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of
a prince. {%—Tārā-pajjhaṭikā,%} f., N. of a hymn
written by Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Tārā-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord
of the stars,’ the moon; a N. of Bṛhas-pati as
husband of Tārā; N. of Śiva; of the monkey Bālin;
of a prince. {%—Tārā-patha, as,%} m. the path of the
stars, the atmosphere, the firmament, heaven or
sky; N. of a country. {%—Tārāpaharaṇa (˚rā-ap˚), %}
[Page0371-a+ 81]
{%am,%} n., N. of a chapter in the Brahmavaivarta-
Purāṇa. {%—Tārāpīḍa (˚rā-āp˚), as,%} m. the moon
(‘having a chaplet of stars’); N. of several princes.
{%—Tārā-pramāṇa, am,%} n. sidereal measure,
sidereal time. {%—Tārābha%} ({%˚ra%} or {%˚rā-ābha%}), {%as,%}
m. quicksilver, (‘looking like silver or bright as the
stars.’) {%—Tārā-bhūṣā,%} f. ‘decorated with stars,’ an
epithet of the night. {%—Tārābhra (˚rā-abh˚), as,%}
m. camphor. {%—Tārā-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the starry
region, the sphere of the stars, the zodiac; the
pupil of the eye; ({%as%}), m. a Śiva temple of a par-
ticular form or decorated in a peculiar manner.
{%—Tārā-mantra, as,%} m., N. of a chapter in the
Mantra-mahodadhi. {%—Tārā-maya, as, ī, am,%} con-
sisting of stars. {%—Tārā-mṛga, as,%} m. the star-
antelope, the Nakṣatra Mṛga-śīrṣa. {%—Tārāri (˚ra-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. a pyritic ore of iron; see {%viḍ-mākṣika.%}
{%—Tārā-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} star-shaped, star-like.
{%—Tārā-vatī,%} f., N. of a form of Durgā; of a
daughter of Kakut-stha and Mano-māthinī, wife of
king Candra-śekhara; of the wife of Dharma-dhvaja,
who was a king of Kāñcana-pura. {%—Tārā-varṣa,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘star-rain,’ falling stars. {%—Tārāvalī (˚rā-%}
{%āv˚),%} f., N. of a daughter of the Yakṣa prince
Maṇi-bhadra. {%—Tārā-vākya, am,%} n. ‘the speech of
Tārā,’ N. of a chapter in the fourth book of the
Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Tārā-vilāpa, as,%} m. ‘the lamentation
of Tārā,’ N. of a chapter in the fourth book of the
Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Tārā-sthāna, am,%} n. the place in the
gamut for the treble notes, those of the higher
octave. {%—Tārendra (˚rā-in˚), as,%} m. ‘the prince
of the stars,’ N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>20796<pc>0371-a<k1>tAraka<k2>tAraka
{%Tāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who causes or enables
to pass or go over, carrying over; rescuing; one
who helps another through a difficulty &c.; a pro-
tector, a preserver (e. g. {%tārakam brahma,%} ‘the
saving prayer,’ N. of a particular prayer which saves
or liberates); belonging to the stars; ({%as%}), m. a pilot,
a helmsman or steersman; a N. of Śiva; N. of
a Daitya conquered by Indra with the assistance of
Kārttikeya or Skanda; (Tāraka is also enumerated
among the nine enemies of Viṣṇu); N. of a friend
of Sīmanta; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the children of Tāraka; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. a float, a raft; ({%akā%}), f. a star; a meteor,
a falling star. &c., (with Jainas constituting one of
the five divisions of the Jyotiṣkas); a sort of colo-
quintida; N. of a daughter of Sunda; of the wife of
Bṛhas-pati, usually called Tārā; also {%= laghu-vṛn-%}
{%dāvana; (ikā),%} f. the juice of palms, {%= tāla-rasa,%}
commonly {%tāḍī; (ā, am),%} f. n. the pupil of the
eye; the eye; ({%am%}), n., N. of a metre of four lines
of thirteen syllables each. {%—Tāraka-jaya, as,%} m.
‘conquest of Tāraka,’ N. of a chapter in the Padma-
Purāṇa. {%—Tāraka-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of Tāraka,’
epithet of Skanda. {%—Tāraka-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of
a Tīrtha. {%—Tāraka-vadha, as,%} m. ‘the killing of
Tāraka,’ N. of a chapter in the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Tā-%}
{%rakākṣa (˚kā-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} having stars for
eyes; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Daitya, a son of Tāraka.
{%—Tārakākhya (˚ka-ākh˚), as,%} m., N. of a Daitya,
a son of Tāraka. {%—Tārakāntaka (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m.
‘destroying Tāraka,’ an epithet of Skanda. {%—Tā-%}
{%rakā-maya, as, ī, am (tārakā = tārā),%} on account
of Tārā, by reason of Tārā, (generally used as an
epithet of either Saṅgrāma or Yuddha or Samara,
i. e. the war waged by gods and demons for the
rescue of Tārā, the wife of Bṛhas-pati, who had
been carried off by Soma); a N. of Śiva, as taking
part in that fight. {%—Tārakā-māna, am,%} n. sidereal
measure, sidereal time. {%—Tārakāri (˚ka-ari), is,%}
m. ‘the enemy of Tāraka,’ an epithet of Skanda.
{%—Tārakopaniṣad (˚ka-up˚), t,%} f. ‘the saving or
liberating Upaniṣad,’ N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>20797<pc>0371-a<k1>tArakAyaRa<k2>tArakAyaRa
{%Tārakāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Tāraka.
<LEND>

<L>20798<pc>0371-a<k1>tArakita<k2>tArakita
{%Tārakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ starry, star-spangled.
<LEND>

<L>20799<pc>0371-a<k1>tArakin<k2>tArakin
{%Tārakin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ starry; ({%iṇī%}), f. night.
<LEND>

<L>20800<pc>0371-a<k1>tAraRa<k2>tAraRa
{%Tāraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ who or what causes or enables
to cross; helping over a difficulty &c.; liberating,
saving; ({%as%}), m. a N. of Śiva and of Viṣṇu; a
raft, a float; ({%am%}), n. crossing, reaching the opposite
shore, safe passage; conquering; carrying or con-
[Page0371-b+ 74]
veying across, the act of saving or liberating; a sort
of sacrificial vessel (?); N. of a Sāman; N. of the
third year of the fourth Jupiter cycle.
<LEND>

<L>20801<pc>0371-b<k1>tAraRi<k2>tAraRi
{%Tāraṇi, is,%}¦ f. {%= taraṇi,%} a boat, ship.
<LEND>

<L>20802<pc>0371-b<k1>tAraReya<k2>tAraReya
{%Tāraṇeya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Yāja and
Upa-yāja.
<LEND>

<L>20803<pc>0371-b<k1>tArayitf<k2>tArayitf
{%Tārayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a liberator, promoter,
promoting, liberating.
<LEND>

<L>20804<pc>0371-b<k1>tArAyaRa<k2>tArAyaRa
{%Tārāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. the tree of salvation, the holy
fig-tree.
<LEND>

<L>20805<pc>0371-b<k1>tArika<k2>tArika
{%Tārika, am,%}¦ n. fare, freight, toll for passage.
<LEND>

<L>20806<pc>0371-b<k1>tArikA<k2>tArikA
{%Tārikā,%}¦ f. See under {%tāraka,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20807<pc>0371-b<k1>tArita<k2>tArita
{%Tārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to cross, conveyed
across, saved.
<LEND>

<L>20808<pc>0371-b<k1>tArin<k2>tArin
{%Tārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ enabling or causing to get over
or across, saving; ({%iṇī%}), f. a form of Durgā, {%=%}
{%dvitīyā śaktiḥ;%} N. of a kind of goddess with
Buddhists. {%—Tāriṇī-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a section
of the Śakti-ratnākara.
<LEND>

<L>20809<pc>0371-b<k1>tAreya<k2>tAreya
{%Tāreya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic of the monkey
Aṅgada; [cf. {%tārā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20810<pc>0371-b<k1>tArya<k2>tArya
{%Tārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be crossed, passable, to be
carried across, to be ferried over, to be conquered or
defeated; ({%am%}), n. fare, freight, toll.
<LEND>

<L>20811<pc>0371-b<k1>tArakzati<k2>tArakzati
{#tArakzati#}¦ {%tārakṣati, tārakṣiti,%} and {%tiri-%}
{%kṣati,%} N. of a district to the west of Madhya-deśa.
<LEND>

<L>20812<pc>0371-b<k1>tAratamya<k2>tAratamya
{#tAratamya#}¦ {%tāratamya, am,%} n. (an abstract
noun from {%tara+tama,%} the affixes of the compara-
tive and superlative degrees), gradation, proportion,
the state or condition of more or less; dependance
of larger numbers on smaller in a progressive series;
({%ena%}), ind. in different degrees, in various gradations.
<LEND>

<L>20813<pc>0371-b<k1>tAradI<k2>tAradI
{#tAradI#}¦ {%tāradī,%} f. a kind of plant, {%= taradī;%}
also read {%tāraṭī (taraṭī).%}
<LEND>

<L>20814<pc>0371-b<k1>tArala<k2>tArala
{#tArala#}¦ {%tārala, as, ī, am (= tarala),%} un-
steady; libidinous, dissipated, a lecher.
<LEND>

<L>20815<pc>0371-b<k1>tAralya<k2>tAralya
{%Tāralya, am,%}¦ n. tremulousness, unsteadiness, libi-
dinousness, wantonness.
<LEND>

<L>20816<pc>0371-b<k1>tArAj<k2>tArAj
{#tArAj#}¦ {%tā-rāj, ṭ,%} f., N. of a kind of Virāj
metre.
<LEND>

<L>20817<pc>0371-b<k1>tArika<k2>tArika
{#tArika#}¦ {%tārika, tārin.%} See under {%tāra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>20818<pc>0371-b<k1>tArIza<k2>tArIza
{#tArIza#}¦ {%tārīṣa,%} an incorrect form for {%tā-%}
{%vīṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20819<pc>0371-b<k1>tArukzAyaRi<k2>tArukzAyaRi
{#tArukzAyaRi#}¦ {%tārukṣāyaṇi,%} a patronymic
from Tarukṣa.
<LEND>

<L>20820<pc>0371-b<k1>tArukzya<k2>tArukzya
{%Tārukṣya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Tarukṣa;
(the fem. is {%tārukṣyāyaṇī.%})
<LEND>

<L>20821<pc>0371-b<k1>tAruRa<k2>tAruRa
{#tAruRa#}¦ {%tāruṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%taruṇa%}), youth-
ful, young, adolescent.
<LEND>

<L>20822<pc>0371-b<k1>tAruRya<k2>tAruRya
{%Tāruṇya, am,%}¦ n. youth, youthfulness.
<LEND>

<L>20823<pc>0371-b<k1>tArkava<k2>tArkava
{#tArkava#}¦ {%tārkava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tarku%}), spun,
woven, made with a spindle, belonging to a spindle.
<LEND>

<L>20824<pc>0371-b<k1>tArkika<k2>tArkika
{#tArkika#}¦ {%tārkika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tarka%}), re-
lated or belonging to the science of reasoning or
logic, belonging to philosophy; ({%as%}), m. a dialecti-
cian, a logician, a philosopher, a sophist, a follower
of one of the six schools of Hindū philosophy.
<LEND>

<L>20825<pc>0371-b<k1>tArkza<k2>tArkza
{#tArkza#}¦ {%tārkṣa, as,%} m. a kind of bird; a
kind of plant; a N. of Kaśyapa; a wrong reading
for {%tārkṣya,%} i. e. Garuḍa; ({%ī%}), f. a sort of creeping
plant, {%= pātāla-garuḍī%}. {%—Tārkṣa-ja = tārkṣya-%}
{%ja,%} q. v. {%—Tārkṣa-putra%} or {%tārkṣa-suta, as,%} m.
‘the son of Tārkṣa or Kaśyapa,’ i. e. Garuḍa.
<LEND>

<L>20826<pc>0371-b<k1>tArkzAka<k2>tArkzAka
{%Tārkṣāka,%}¦ a patronymic from Tṛkṣāka.
<LEND>

<L>20827<pc>0371-b<k1>tArkzya<k2>tArkzya
{%Tārkṣya, as,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%tṛkṣa%}), N.
of a mythical being, described either as a horse or
bird, and originally one of the personifications of the
sun, which was represented under these forms; (the
most ancient representation seems to have been that
of the horse: in Mahā-bh. 1. 2548, Tārkṣya,
Ariṣṭa-nemi, Garuḍa, Aruṇa, and Āruṇī are described
as children of Kaśyapa and Vinatā; Tārkṣya is also
called Garuḍāgra-ja, the elder brother of Garuḍa: in
Mahā-bh. III. 12660, mention is made of a Muni
[Page0371-c+ 77]
called Ariṣṭa-nemi Tārkṣya, but in the epic and
later literature Tārkṣya is generally identified with
Garuḍa, the bird and vehicle of Viṣṇu and destroyer
of the race of snakes); a N. of Garuḍa; a N. of
Śiva; a Vedic hymn supposed to be composed by
Ariṣṭa-nemi Tārkṣya; a horse in general; a car,
a chariot; a bird in general; N. of a race; a snake;
the tree Vatica Robusta [cf. {%tārkṣya-prasava%}]; a
sort of antidote; gold; ({%ī%}), f. a wild creeper; ({%am%}),
n. a kind of drug; a sort of collyrium. {%—Tārkṣya-%}
{%ja%} and {%tārkṣa-ja, am,%} n. a sort of collyrium.
{%—Tārkṣya-dhvaja, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu
(whose symbol is Garuḍa). {%—Tārkṣya-nāyaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the leader or chief of the birds,’ an epithet
of Garuḍa. {%—Tārkṣya-nāśaka, as,%} m. ‘destroyer
of birds,’ the bird Falco Calidus. {%—Tārkṣya-pra-%}
{%sava, as,%} m. the tree Vatica Robusta; [cf. {%aśva-%}
{%karṇa%} and {%tārkṣya.%}] {%—Tārkṣya-śaila, am,%} n.
a substance prepared from the calx of brass or from
the Amomum Anthorrhiza, and used as a medical
application to the eyes; [cf. {%rasāñjana.%}] {%—Tār-%}
{%kṣya-sāman, a,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>20828<pc>0371-c<k1>tArkzyAyaRa<k2>tArkzyAyaRa
{%Tārkṣyāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Tār-
kṣya. {%—Tārkṣyāyaṇa-bhakta, am,%} n. the district
inhabited by the Tārkṣyāyaṇas.
<LEND>

<L>20829<pc>0371-c<k1>tArRa<k2>tArRa
{#tArRa#}¦ {%tārṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tṛṇa%}), made of
grass; levied from grass (as a tax); ({%as, ī%}), m. f. a
patronymic from Tṛṇa.
<LEND>

<L>20830<pc>0371-c<k1>tArRaka<k2>tArRaka
{%Tārṇaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ an adjective derived from
Tṛṇakīyā.
<LEND>

<L>20831<pc>0371-c<k1>tArRakarRa<k2>tArRakarRa
{%Tārṇakarṇa,%}¦ a patronymic from Tṛṇa-karṇa.
<LEND>

<L>20832<pc>0371-c<k1>tArRavindavIya<k2>tArRavindavIya
{%Tārṇavindavīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ sacred to Tṛṇa-
vindu.
<LEND>

<L>20833<pc>0371-c<k1>tArRAyana<k2>tArRAyana
{%Tārṇāyana,%}¦ a patronymic from Tṛṇa.
<LEND>

<L>20834<pc>0371-c<k1>tArtIya<k2>tArtIya
{#tArtIya#}¦ {%tārtīya, as, ā%} or {%ī (?), am%} (fr. {%tṛtīya%}),
belonging to the third; the third; ({%am%}), n. a third
part. {%—Tārtīyasavana%} or {%tārtīyasavanika, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%tṛtīya-savana%}), belonging to the third
Savana; [cf. {%tri-ṣavaṇa.%}] {%—Tārtīyāhnika, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%tṛtīya+ahan%}), belonging to the third day.
<LEND>

<L>20835<pc>0371-c<k1>tArtIyaka<k2>tArtIyaka
{%Tārtīyaka,%}¦ belonging to the third, third.
<LEND>

<L>20836<pc>0371-c<k1>tArtIyIka<k2>tArtIyIka
{%Tārtīyīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ the third.
<LEND>

<L>20837<pc>0371-c<k1>tArpya<k2>tArpya
{#tArpya#}¦ {%tārpya, am,%} n., Ved. a garment made
of a particular vegetable substance; (according to
Sāy. derived fr. {%tṛpā,%} a kind of plant.)
<LEND>

<L>20838<pc>0371-c<k1>tArya<k2>tArya
{#tArya#}¦ {%tārya.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20839<pc>0371-c<k1>tArzwAGa<k2>tArzwAGa
{#tArzwAGa#}¦ {%tārṣṭāgha, as,%} m. (fr. {%tṛṣṭāgha ?%}),
a kind of tree; ({%as, ī, am%}), coming from or be-
longing to this tree.
<LEND>

<L>20840<pc>0371-c<k1>tAla<k2>tAla
{#tAla#}¦ {%tāla, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%taḍ%} or {%tal%}), the
palmyra-tree or fan-palm, Borassus Flabelliformis,
from the juice of which a sort of sugar or by fer-
mentation a spirituous liquor is prepared; a measure
of height (i. e. the palm-tree so considered, e. g.
{%prāsādo bahu-tāla-samutsedhaḥ,%} a palace many
palm-trees in height); a banner formed of the palm
[cf. {%tāla-ketu, tāla-dhvaja, tāla-bhṛt, tāla-lakṣ-%}
{%man, tālāṅka%}]; slapping or clapping the hands
together or against the opposite arm; clapping or
flapping in general; the flapping of the ears of an
elephant; beating time in music, musical time or
measure; a musical instrument of bell-metal or brass,
a sort of cymbal played with a stick; (in prosody) a
trochee; an epithet of Śiva [cf. {%tala%}]; a short span,
one measured by the thumb and middle finger; the
open hand with the fingers extended, the palm; the
hilt of a sword or sacrificial knife; a lock, a bolt;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people [cf. {%apara-tāla%} and
{%tāla-vana%}]; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a division of hell [cf.
{%tala%}]; {%= haritāla,%} yellow orpiment; ({%ī%}), f. the tree
Corypha Taliera; a species of the mountain-palm;
Corypha Umbraculifera; Flacourtia Cataphracta; Cur-
culigo Orchioides; the spirituous juice of the palm,
the common toddy; a fragrant earth, {%= tuvarī;%} a
sort of key or instrument for opening a door, {%=%}
{%prati-tālī;%} a sort of metre consisting of four lines of
three long syllables each; ({%am%}), n. the fruit or nut of
[Page0372-a+ 81]
the palmyra-palm; orpiment; the throne of Durgā
[cf. {%manas-tāla%}]; ({%as, ī, am%}), made of the palmyra-
tree or of the palm-wood; [cf. {%ucca-tāla, ut-t˚, eka-t˚,%}
{%kara-t˚, kāma-t˚, krośa-t˚,%} &c.] {%—Tāla-ketu, us,%} m.
‘having the palm-tree as a banner,’ an epithet of
Bhīṣma; N. of an adversary of Kṛṣṇa, slain by the
latter; N. of a Dānava who was a younger brother of
Pātāla-ketu. {%—Tāla-kṣīra, am,%} n. an extract, {%=%}
{%tavakṣīra%}. {%—Tāla-kṣīraka, am,%} n. the exuda-
tion of the palm. {%—Tāla-garbha, as%} or {%am,%} m.
or n. (?), the fermented exudation of the palm-tree.
{%—Tāla-cara, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race. {%—Tāla-%}
{%jaṅgha, as, ā, am,%} having legs as long as a palm-
tree; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a warrior-tribe; ({%as%}), m.
the prince of this tribe; N. of the ancestor of the
Tāla-jaṅghas who was a descendant of Śaryāti; N.
of a son of Jaya-dhvaja; of a Rakṣas; of a
Daitya. {%—Tāla-jaṭā,%} f. the fibres of the palm-tree
under the outer bark. {%—Tāla-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing the palm-tree as a banner,’ a N. of Bala-rāma
[cf. {%tāla-bhṛt, tāla-lakṣman, tālāṅka%}]; N. of a
mountain; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
river. {%—Tāla-navamī,%} f. the ninth day of the light
half of the month Bhādra, sacred to Durgā. {%—Tāla-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. the palm-leaf, an oblong piece of
the leaf used to write on with an iron stile; Trigonella
Fœnum Græcum; a hollow cylinder of gold (or a
palm-leaf used as a substitute) with or without a ring
attached and thrust through the lobe of the ear as
an ornament; ({%ī%}), f., N. of several plants, {%= raṇḍā,%}
Salvinia Cucullata; Anethum Graveolens; Curculigo
Orchioides. {%—Tāla-parṇa, am, ī,%} n. f. a kind of
vegetable perfume, see {%murā; (ī),%} f. a sort of anise,
Anethum Graveolens {%(madhurikā)%}. {%—Tāla-puṣ-%}
{%paka, am,%} n. a medicinal application to the eyes
{%(= pra-pauṇḍarīka)%}. {%—Tāla-pralamba, am,%} n.
the fibres growing on the cocoa-nut and other palms
under the outer rind, and from which a sort of
cordage called coir is prepared, {%= tāla-jaṭā%}. {%—Tāla-%}
{%baddha%} or {%tāla-śuddha, as, ā, am,%} measured,
rhythmical, regulated by measure or musical time.
{%—Tāla-bhaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a warrior. {%—Tāla-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘bearer of the palm-tree,’ a N. of
Bala-rāma; [cf. {%tāla-dhvaja.%}] {%—Tāla-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} made of the palm. {%—Tāla-mardaka, as,%} m.
a kind of musical instrument. {%—Tāla-mardala, as,%}
m. a cymbal. {%—Tāla-mātra, as, ā, am,%} of the
measure of a palm-tree, as big as a palm; ({%am%}), ind.
only a moment, i. e. one beat. {%—Tāla-mūlikā%} or
{%tāla-mūlī,%} f. Curculigo Orchioides. {%—Tāla-yantra,%}
{%am,%} n. a particular surgical instrument, a small pair of
pincers; a lock, a lock and key. {%—Tāla-recanaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a dancer, actor; (a various reading has {%tāla-%}
{%vecanaka.%}) {%—Tāla-lakṣman, ā,%} m. a N. of Bala-
rāma; [cf. {%tāla-dhvaja.%}] {%—Tāla-vana, am,%} n. a
grove of palmyra-trees; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a race.
{%—Tāla-vṛnta, am,%} n. a palm-leaf used as a fan,
a fan in general; ({%as%}), m. a kind of Soma plant.
{%—Tāla-vṛntaka, am,%} n. a fan. {%—Tālavṛnta-%}
{%nivāsin, ī,%} m., N. of a scholiast. {%—Tāla-vecanaka,%}
see {%tāla-recanaka%}. {%—Tāla-śabda, as,%} m. the noise
caused by the falling of the fruit of the palm; clap-
ping the hands; [cf. {%tala-tāla.%}] {%—Tālākhyā (˚la-%}
{%ākh˚),%} f. {%= tāla-parṇī,%} a sort of vegetable perfume
{%(murā)%}. {%—Tālāṅka (˚la-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a N. of
Bala-rāma [cf. {%tāla-dhvaja%}]; a N. of Śiva [cf.
{%tālin%}]; a man marked with every fortunate spot or
sign &c.; the leaf of a palm used for writing, the
leaf of a book; a book; a saw; a sort of vegetable.
{%—Tālādhyāya (˚la-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of the sixth
book of the Saṅgīta-darpaṇa, treating of musical in-
struments. {%—Tālāvacara (˚la-av˚), as,%} m. a dancer,
an actor; (also read {%tālāvacaraṇa%} and, less correctly,
{%tālārdha-caraṇa.%}) {%—Tālī-pattra, am,%} n. {%= tālīśa-%}
{%pattra%}. {%—Tālīśa (˚lī-īśa), am,%} n. or {%tālīśa-pattra,%}
{%am,%} n. the tree Flacourtia Cataphracta, the leaves of
which are used in medicine.
<LEND>

<L>20841<pc>0372-a<k1>tAlaka<k2>tAlaka
{%Tālaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of poisonous insect; N. of
a teacher; of a prince; ({%ikā%}), f. the open palm of
the hand [cf. {%tālika%}]; N. of two plants, {%= tāla-%}
{%mūlī%} and {%tāmra-vallī; (ī),%} f. toddy or the fer-
[Page0372-b+ 74]
mented exudation of the palm; ({%am%}), n. {%= tāla,%}
{%hari-tāla,%} yellow orpiment; a fragrant earth; a
bolt, a latch, a kind of lock for fastening a door;
a kind of ornament. {%—Tālakābha (˚ka-ābh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} (‘like orpiment’), green; ({%as%}), m. green,
the colour.
<LEND>

<L>20842<pc>0372-b<k1>tAli<k2>tAli
{%Tāli, is,%}¦ f. Corypha Taliera; Flacourtia Cata-
phracta; [cf. {%tāḍi,%} and {%tālī%} under {%tāla,%} p. 371.]
<LEND>

<L>20843<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlika<k2>tAlika
{%Tālika, as,%}¦ m. the open palm of the hand; clap-
ping the hands; a tie, seal, string or cover for binding
a letter, or parcel of papers, or the leaves of a manu-
script; N. of a preceptor; [cf. {%tālikā%} under {%tālaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20844<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlita<k2>tAlita
{%Tālita, am,%}¦ n. dyed or coloured cloth; a string,
a tie; any musical instrument. {%—Tālita-nagara,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>20845<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlin<k2>tAlin
{%Tālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ ‘furnished with cymbals,’ an epithet
of Śiva; ({%inas%}), m. pl. the pupils of Tala.
<LEND>

<L>20846<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlI<k2>tAlI
{%Tālī,%}¦ compounded as a {%gati%} (q. v.) with the roots
{%as, bhū,%} and {%kṛ;%} see also {%tālī%} under {%tāla,%} p. 371.
<LEND>

<L>20847<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlIyaka<k2>tAlIyaka
{%Tālīyaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a cymbal.
<LEND>

<L>20848<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlakawa<k2>tAlakawa
{#tAlakawa#}¦ {%tālakaṭa%} or {%tālikaṭa%} or {%tālākaṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>20849<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlavya<k2>tAlavya
{#tAlavya#}¦ {%tālavya.%} See under {%tālu%} below.
<LEND>

<L>20850<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlita<k2>tAlita
{#tAlita#}¦ {%tālita.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>20851<pc>0372-b<k1>tAliSa<k2>tAliSa
{#tAliSa#}¦ {%tāliśa, as,%} m. a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>20852<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlISa<k2>tAlISa
{#tAlISa#}¦ {%tālīśa, am,%} n., N. of a tree or its
leaf. {%—Tālīśa-pattra, am,%} n. the leaf of this tree;
Flacourtia Cataphracta.
<LEND>

<L>20853<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlu<k2>tAlu
{#tAlu#}¦ {%tālu, u,%} n. (rarely used as masc.; said
to be fr. rt. {%tṝ%}), the palate. {%—Tālu-kaṇṭaka, as,%}
or {%am,%} m. or n. (?) , a disease of the palate with
children. {%—Tālu-jihva, as,%} m. a crocodile; the
uvula. {%—Tālu-pāka, as,%} m. suppuration or abscess
in the palate. {%—Tālu-pāta%} or {%tālu-pīḍaka, as,%} m.
a particular disease of the palate with children.
{%—Tālu-puppuṭa, as,%} m. an indolent swelling of
the palate. {%—Tālu-mūla, am,%} n. the root or back
part of the palate. {%—Tālu-viśoṣaṇa, am,%} n. the
drying of the palate (through much talking &c.).
{%—Tālu-śoṣa, as,%} m. morbid dryness of the palate.
{%—Tālu-sthāna, as, ā, am,%} palatal.
<LEND>

<L>20854<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlavya<k2>tAlavya
{%Tālavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the palate, palatal;
(the palatal letters are formed by the contact of the
tongue and the palate; they are {%i, e, ai, c, ch, j,%}
{%jh, ñ, y,%} and {%ś.%} {%—Tālavya-varṇa, as,%} m. a palatal
letter.
<LEND>

<L>20855<pc>0372-b<k1>tAluka<k2>tAluka
{%Tāluka, am,%}¦ n. the palate; a disease of the palate;
{%tālukā, e,%} f. du. the two arteries of the palate.
<LEND>

<L>20856<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlukin<k2>tAlukin
{%Tālukin.%}¦ See {%kāka-tālukin.%}
<LEND>

<L>20857<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlUzaka<k2>tAlUzaka
{%Tālūṣaka = tālu,%}¦ the palate.
<LEND>

<L>20858<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlukzya<k2>tAlukzya
{#tAlukzya#}¦ {%tālukṣya, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Talukṣa; (the fem. is {%tālukṣyāyaṇī.%})
<LEND>

<L>20859<pc>0372-b<k1>tAluna<k2>tAluna
{#tAluna#}¦ {%tāluna,%} adj. formed fr. {%taluna.%}
<LEND>

<L>20860<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlUra<k2>tAlUra
{#tAlUra#}¦ {%tālūra, as,%} m. a whirlpool, an eddy;
(also written {%tālura;%} cf. {%tānūra.%})
<LEND>

<L>20861<pc>0372-b<k1>tAlpa<k2>tAlpa
{#tAlpa#}¦ {%tālpa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%talpa%}), {%= talpya,%}
offspring of the marriage-bed.
<LEND>

<L>20862<pc>0372-b<k1>tAvaka<k2>tAvaka
{#tAvaka#}¦ {%tāvaka%} (fr. {%tava%}), {%as, ī, am,%} thy, thine.
<LEND>

<L>20863<pc>0372-b<k1>tAvakIna<k2>tAvakIna
{%Tāvakīna, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī (?), am,%} thine.
<LEND>

<L>20864<pc>0372-b<k1>tAvat<k2>tAvat
{#tAvat#}¦ {%tāvat, ān, atī, at%} (fr. the pronom.
base 2. {%ta;%} correlative of {%yāvat%}), so great, so large,
so much, so far, so long, so many, such (e. g. {%tā-%}
{%vantas taṇḍulāḥ,%} so many rice-grains; {%yāvatā%}
{%kṣaṇena tāvatā,%} after what time, in that time;
{%yāvanti tasya dvīpasya vastūni tāvanty upane-%}
{%tavyāni,%} whatever are the commodities of that
island, so many are to be brought); {%tāvatā,%} ind. in
the mean time, during that time; to that extent;
{%tāvat,%} ind. so much, so greatly, to such an extent,
in such a number, so far, so long, in that time
(correlatively to {%yāvat,%} e. g. {%yāvat — tāvat,%} as long
as — so long; when — then; {%yāvat trayas te jīveyus%}
{%tāvan nānyaṃ samācaret,%} as long as those three
live, so long he must perform no other duty), mean-
[Page0372-c+ 74]
while, in the mean time, (often connected with {%yā-%}
{%vat%} and a negative, e. g. {%tāvac {{chobate->chobhate||20161201|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 303|}} mūrkho%}
{%yāvat kiñcin na bhāṣate,%} so long a fool shines as
long as he says nothing; or with omission of the
negative, e. g. {%śoṣayiṣyāmy ātmānaṃ tāvad%}
{%yāvan me prāptam brāhmaṇyam,%} so long I will
emaciate myself as long as, i. e. until I have obtained
the state of a Brāhman); at once, now, just, (often
connected rather redundantly with an imperative or
with a potential or the verb {%arh,%} e. g. {%gaccha tāvat%}
or {%gacches tāvat,%} go now; {%tat tāvad vākyaṃ%}
{%kṣantum arhasi,%} deign now to pardon that speech);
indeed, really, truly, well, (as an emphatic particle,
or to express assent, e. g. {%dṛḍhas tāvad bandhaḥ,%}
the knot is tight I must admit; {%gatā tāvat,%} she
is indeed gone; sometimes connected in this sense
with the particle {%eva,%} e. g. {%vikrayas tāvad eva saḥ,%}
it is really a sale.) {%Na tāvat,%} not at all; not yet
(e. g. {%na tāvad dṛśyate sūryaḥ,%} the sun is not
yet visible); {%itas tāvat,%} away then! just come hither;
{%mā tāvat,%} by no means, God forbid! {%yāvat — dvis-%}
{%tāvat,%} as long — twice so long. According to the
lexicographers {%tāvat%} may imply measure, limitation,
totality, restriction, surprise, emphasis, &c.; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>tantus</nsi> fr. <nsi>tavantus;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">τόσος, τῆμος.</lang>] {%—Tāvac-%}
{%chata (˚vat-śa˚), as, ī, am,%} a measure containing
so many hundreds. {%—Tāvac-chas (tāvat-śas),%} ind.,
Ved. in so many ways, so manifoldly. {%—Tāvat-kālam,%}
ind. for so long a period, for such a time. {%—Tāvat-%}
{%kṛtvas,%} ind. so many times. {%—Tāvat-phala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having such results. {%—Tāvad-guṇa, as, ā, am,%}
having so many qualities. {%—Tāvad-dvayasa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} measuring so much, so long, &c. {%—Tāvad-dhā,%}
ind. in that number, in such a number; so many
times, so often. {%—Tāvad-varṣa, as, ā, am,%} so
many years old. {%—Tāvad-vyakta,%} (in alg.) a known
number annexed to an unknown quantity. {%—Tāvan-%}
{%mātra, as, ī, am,%} just so much, just so many.
{%—Tāvan-māna, as, ā, am,%} measuring so much.
<LEND>

<L>20865<pc>0372-c<k1>tAvatika<k2>tAvatika
{%Tāvatika, as, ā, am,%}¦ bought for so much, worth
so much, of so great value; [cf. {%tāvatka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20866<pc>0372-c<k1>tAvatiTa<k2>tAvatiTa
{%Tāvatitha, as, ī, am,%}¦ the so manieth, such a one
(of a number).
<LEND>

<L>20867<pc>0372-c<k1>tAvatka<k2>tAvatka
{%Tāvatka, as, ā, am,%}¦ bought for so much, worth
so much, of so much value, &c.; [cf. {%tāvatika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20868<pc>0372-c<k1>tAvara<k2>tAvara
{#tAvara#}¦ {%tāvara, am,%} n. a bow-string.
<LEND>

<L>20869<pc>0372-c<k1>tAviza<k2>tAviza
{#tAviza#}¦ {%tāviṣa, as, ī,%} m. f. the ocean;
heaven or paradise; gold; [cf. {%taviṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20870<pc>0372-c<k1>tAvIza<k2>tAvIza
{%Tāvīṣa, as,%}¦ m. the ocean; heaven or paradise;
gold; ({%ī%}), f. a river; the earth; N. of a daughter
of Indra; N. of a daughter of the moon (?); [cf.
{%tavīṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20871<pc>0372-c<k1>tAvuri<k2>tAvuri
{#tAvuri#}¦ {%tāvuri, is,%} m. (borrowed fr. the
Gr. <lang n="greek">ταῦρος</lang>), the sign of the Zodiac Taurus.
<LEND>

<L>20872<pc>0372-c<k1>tAsIra<k2>tAsIra
{#tAsIra#}¦ {%tāsīra = tasīra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20873<pc>0372-c<k1>tAskarya<k2>tAskarya
{#tAskarya#}¦ {%tāskarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%taskara%}),
theft, robbery, larceny.
<LEND>

<L>20874<pc>0372-c<k1>tAsyandra<k2>tAsyandra
{#tAsyandra#}¦ {%tāsyandra%} or {%tāsvindra, am,%} n.,
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>20875<pc>0372-c<k1>ti<k2>ti
{#ti#}¦ {%ti = iti%} in the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>20876<pc>0372-c<k1>tik<k2>tik
{#tik#}¦ {%tik,%} cl. 1. A. {%tekate,%} &c., to go or
move [cf. rt. {%tīk%}]; cl. 5. P. {%tiknoti,%} &c.,
to go or move; to assail, assault; to wound; to seek to
injure or kill; to challenge; [cf. rt. {%tig%} and {%stigh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20877<pc>0372-c<k1>tika<k2>tika
{#tika#}¦ {%tika, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Tika-%}
{%kitava, ās,%} m. pl. the descendants of Tika and
Kitava.
<LEND>

<L>20878<pc>0372-c<k1>tikIya<k2>tikIya
{%Tikīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ an adj. derived from Tika.
<LEND>

<L>20879<pc>0372-c<k1>tikta<k2>tikta
{#tikta#}¦ {%tikta.%} See rt. {%tij,%} p. 373, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>20880<pc>0372-c<k1>tig<k2>tig
{#tig#}¦ {%tig,%} cl. 5. P. {%tignoti,%} &c., to go or
move; to assail, assault; to seek to
injure or kill; [cf. rt. {%tik.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20881<pc>0372-c<k1>tigala<k2>tigala
{#tigala#}¦ {%tigala (?), as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20882<pc>0372-c<k1>tigma<k2>tigma
{#tigma#}¦ {%tigma.%} See next page, col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page0373-a+ 79]

<L>20883<pc>0373-a<k1>tiG<k2>tiG
{#tiG#}¦ {%tigh,%} cl. 5. P. {%tighnoti,%} &c., to
strike; to hurt or kill.
<LEND>

<L>20884<pc>0373-a<k1>tiNguda<k2>tiNguda
{#tiNguda#}¦ {%tiṅguda, as,%} m. (a wrong reading
for {%tinduka%}), N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>20885<pc>0373-a<k1>tij<k2>tij
{#tij#}¦ {%tij,%} cl. 1. P. A., Ved. {%tejati, -te,%}
Ved. Inf. {%tejase,%} to be or become sharp;
to sharpen: Caus. P. {%tejayati, -yitum,%} to sharpen,
whet; to stir up, excite, incite, urge on: Desid. A.
{%titikṣate,%} to desire to become sharp or firm, to
resist, oppose, to bear with firmness, suffer with
courage or patience, endure, bear: Intens. Ved.
{%tetikte;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>tigh-ra,</nsi> ‘pointed, peaked;’
<nsi>tigh-ri,</nsi> ‘an arrow:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">στίζ-ω, στίγ-μα, στιγ-μή,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στικ-τό-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>di-sting-u-o</nsi> (<lang n="greek">δια-στίζω</lang>), <nsi>in-stinc-</nsi>
<nsi>tu-s, in-stīga-re, stĭ-mulu-s</nsi> for <nsi>stig-mulu-s, stĭ-</nsi>
<nsi>lu-s</nsi> for <nsi>stig-lu-s:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>us-stiggan,</nsi> ‘to sting;’
<nsi>tēka,</nsi> ‘to touch;’ <nsi>stiggqvan, stik-s, stak-s:</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>sting-u, stihhu,</nsi> ‘I sting;’ <nsi>stachila,</nsi> ‘a
prickle;’ <nsi>stihhil,</nsi> ‘a stile:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>stician,</nsi>
‘to sting:’ Lith. <nsi>tékinu,</nsi> ‘I whet;’ <nsi>tékélis,</nsi> ‘a large
whetstone:’ Russ. <nsi>tocù,</nsi> ‘I whet;’ <nsi>tocílo,</nsi> ‘a whet-
stone:’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>teg,</nsi> ‘clear, fair, beautiful, pretty,
bland.’]
<LEND>

<L>20886<pc>0373-a<k1>tikta<k2>tikta
{%Tikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ bitter (as sharpening the appe-
tite), pungent; fragrant; ({%as%}), m. a bitter taste;
one of the six modifications of flavour ({%rasa%}); bit-
terness, pungency; fragrance, perfume; N. of several
plants, viz. Wrightia Antidysenterica ({%= kuṭaja%});
Capparis Trifoliata ({%= varuṇa%}); Agathotes Chirayta
({%= kirāta-tikta%}); Melia Azadirachta; Terminalia
Catappa ({%= iṅgudī%}); a bitter sort of cucumber,
Trichosanthes Cucumerina (?); a kind of salt; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of several plants, viz. Helleborus Niger ({%=%}
{%kaṭu-rohiṇī%}); Clypea Hernandifolia ({%= pāṭhā%});
Artemisia Sternutatoria; ({%am%}), n. a medicinal plant,
Mollugo Pentaphylla. {%—Tikta-kandakā,%} f. Curcuma
Zedoaria. {%—Tikta-gandhā%} or {%tikta-gandhikā,%} f.
mustard, Lycopodium Imbricatum. {%—Tikta-guñjā,%}
f. Pongamia Glabra, {%= karañja%}. {%—Tikta-ghṛta, am,%}
n. a mixture of Ghṛta with bitter herbs &c. {%—Tikta-%}
{%taṇḍulā,%} f. long pepper. {%—Tikta-tuṇḍī,%} f. {%= kaṭu-%}
{%tuṇḍī%}. {%—Tikta-tumbī,%} f. {%= kaṭu-tumbī,%} a bitter
gourd. {%—Tikta-dugdhā,%} f., N. of several plants, {%=%}
{%kṣīriṇī, aja-śṛṅgī, svarṇa-kṣīrī%}. {%—Tikta-%}
{%dhātu, us,%} m. bile. {%—Tikta-pattra, as,%} m. a cu-
curbitaceous plant, Momordica Mixta. {%—Tikta-par-%}
{%van, ā,%} f., N. of several plants, viz. Cocculus Cor-
difolius; Hingcha ({%= hilamocī%}) Repens; Panicum
Dactylon, {%= madhu-yaṣṭi;%} liquorice. {%—Tikta-%}
{%puṣpā,%} f. Clypea Hernandifolia; Bignonia Suaveo-
lens. {%—Tikta-phala, as,%} m. Strychnos Potatorum
[cf. {%kataka%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants, {%= yava-%}
{%tiktā, vārtākī, ṣaḍ-bhujā%}. {%—Tikta-bhadraka,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of cucumber, Trichosanthes Dioica.
{%—Tikta-marica, as,%} m. Strychnos Potatorum; [cf.
{%kataka.%}] {%—Tikta-yavā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= śaṅ-%}
{%khinī%}. {%—Tikta-rohiṇikā%} or {%tikta-rohiṇī,%} f. a medi-
cinal plant, {%= kaṭu-rohiṇī%}. {%—Tikta-vallī,%} f. the plant
Sanseviera Roxburghiana. {%—Tikta-vījā,%} f. a kind of
cucumber, {%= kaṭu-tumbī%}. {%—Tikta-śāka, as,%} m.
‘bitter herbs or greens,’ N. of several plants, viz.
Capparis Trifoliata; Acacia Catechu, a kind of Mi-
mosa [cf. {%khadira%}]; {%= pattra-sundara%}. {%—Tikta-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m. the plant Acacia Catechu; ({%am%}), n. a
kind of fragrant grass. {%—Tiktākhyā (˚ta-ākh˚),%} f.
the plant Tikta-tuṇḍī. {%—Tiktāṅgā (˚ta-aṅ˚),%} f. a
kind of creeper, {%= pātāla-garuḍī%}. {%—Tiktāmṛtā%}
{%(˚ta-am˚),%} f. Menispermum Glabrum. {%—Tiktāyana%}
{%(˚ta-ay˚), as, ī, am,%} Ved. possessing the heat or
radiance of fire.
<LEND>

<L>20887<pc>0373-a<k1>tiktaka<k2>tiktaka
{%Tiktaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ bitter; anything having a
bitter flavour; ({%as%}), m., N. of several plants, viz.
Trichosanthes Dioica; Agathotes Chirayta; a sort
of Acacia Catechu; Terminalia Catappa [cf. {%kirāta-%}
{%tiktaka%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of gourd ({%kaṭu-tumbī%});
Cardiospermum Halicacabum, {%= karañja-vallī;%}
{%(ikā),%} f. a kind of gourd ({%kaṭu-tumbī%}); [cf. {%jala-%}
{%tiktikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20888<pc>0373-a<k1>tigita<k2>tigita
{%Tigita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sharp, pointed.
<LEND>
[Page0373-b+ 72]

<L>20889<pc>0373-b<k1>tigma<k2>tigma
{%Tigma, as, ā, am,%}¦ sharp, pointed (as a weapon
or as flame or a ray of light); violent; hot;
pungent, acrid; scorching; fiery, passionate, hasty;
({%as%}), m., N. of a prince; ({%am%}), n. heat; a pungent
or hot flavour, the heat of spices, pungency;
[cf. {%tīkṣṇa;%} cf. also Hib. <nsi>time,</nsi> ‘heat, warmth.’]
{%—Tigma-kara, as,%} m. ‘hot-rayed,’ the sun; [cf.
{%tigma-dīdhiti, tigma-raśmi, tigmāṃśu.%}] {%—Tig-%}
{%ma-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a son of Svar-vīthi and
Vatsara. {%—Tigma-ga, as, ā, am,%} going or flying
swiftly. {%—Tigma-jambha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
sharp teeth, an epithet of Agni. {%—Tigma-tā,%} f. or
{%tigma-tva, am,%} n. sharpness, pungency; heat;
passion, petulance. {%—Tigma-tejas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
sharp-edged, sharp-pointed; penetrating, pervading;
of a violent character. {%—Tigma-dīdhiti, is,%} m. the
sun; [cf. {%tigma-kara.%}] {%—Tigma-bhṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%}
Ved. sharp-pointed, a N. of Agni. {%—Tigma-yātanā,%}
f. acute pain, agony, torment. {%—Tigma-raśmi, is,%}
m. the sun; [cf. {%tigma-kara.%}] {%—Tigma-ruc, k, k, k,%}
shining brightly, hot; ({%k%}), m. the sun. {%—Tigma-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing the word {%tigma.%}
{%—Tigma-śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having sharp
horns. {%—Tigma-śocis, is, is, is,%} Ved. having sharp
rays, epithet of Agni. {%—Tigma-heti, is, is, i,%} Ved.
having sharp weapons (or flames); forming a sharp
weapon (as the horns of Agni). {%—Tigmāṃśu (˚ma-%}
{%aṃ˚), us, us, u,%} having sharp rays or warm beams;
({%us%}), m. the sun; fire; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Tigmā-%}
{%tman (˚ma-āt˚), ā,%} m., N. of a prince, son of Urva.
{%—Tigmānīka (˚ma-an˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. sharp-
pointed; (Sāy.) sharp-mouthed. {%—Tigmāyudha%}
{%(˚ma-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. having or casting or
forming sharp weapons. {%—Tigmeṣu (˚ma-iṣu),%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. having sharp arrows.
<LEND>

<L>20890<pc>0373-b<k1>titikza<k2>titikza
{%Titikṣa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. Desid. of rt. {%tij%}), N. of a man;
({%ā%}), f. endurance, patience, resignation, suffering,
forbearance; Patience personified as a daughter of
Dakṣa and wife of Dharma and mother of Kṣema.
<LEND>

<L>20891<pc>0373-b<k1>titikzita<k2>titikzita
{%Titikṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ borne, endured, suffered.
<LEND>

<L>20892<pc>0373-b<k1>titikzu<k2>titikzu
{%Titikṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ bearing, enduring patiently,
patient, resigned, forbearing; ({%us%}), m., N. of a son
of Mahā-manas and descendant of Janam-ejaya.
<LEND>

<L>20893<pc>0373-b<k1>tijila<k2>tijila
{#tijila#}¦ {%tijila, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%tij%}), the moon; a Rakṣas.
<LEND>

<L>20894<pc>0373-b<k1>tiwiBa<k2>tiwiBa
{#tiwiBa#}¦ {%tiṭibha,%} a particular high number;
(also read {%tiṭilambha.%})
<LEND>

<L>20895<pc>0373-b<k1>tiRisa<k2>tiRisa
{#tiRisa#}¦ {%tiṇisa, as,%} m. {%= tiniśa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20896<pc>0373-b<k1>tiRwI<k2>tiRwI
{#tiRwI#}¦ {%tiṇṭī,%} f. a plant, commonly Teori,
Convolvulus Turpethum ({%= tri-vṛt%}).
<LEND>

<L>20897<pc>0373-b<k1>titau<k2>titau
{#titau#}¦ {%tita-u, us, u,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt.
3. {%tan%} by a kind of reduplication, cf. <lang n="greek">τιταίνω</lang> but
perhaps fr. rt. {%taṃs%}), a sieve, a cribble; a parasol; [cf.
{%cālanī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20898<pc>0373-b<k1>titanizu<k2>titanizu
{#titanizu#}¦ {%titaniṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. 3. {%tan%}), desirous of extending or enlarging.
<LEND>

<L>20899<pc>0373-b<k1>titikza<k2>titikza
{#titikza#}¦ {%titikṣa.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>20900<pc>0373-b<k1>titiBa<k2>titiBa
{#titiBa#}¦ {%titibha, as,%} m. an insect, cochineal.
<LEND>

<L>20901<pc>0373-b<k1>titiri<k2>titiri
{#titiri#}¦ {%titiri, is,%} m. {%= tittiri,%} a partridge.
<LEND>

<L>20902<pc>0373-b<k1>titila<k2>titila
{#titila#}¦ {%titila, am,%} n. a sort of sweetmeat
made of sesamum ground and baked with sugar; one
of the seven Karaṇas or astronomical periods; a
bowl or bucket, {%= nandaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>20903<pc>0373-b<k1>titIrzA<k2>titIrzA
{#titIrzA#}¦ {%titīrṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. {%tṝ%}),
desire of crossing over, wish to pass, wish to be freed
from mundane existence, desire of final emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>20904<pc>0373-b<k1>titIrzu<k2>titIrzu
{%Titīrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of crossing; wishing
to attain; desirous of emancipation from existence.
<LEND>

<L>20905<pc>0373-b<k1>tittiqa<k2>tittiqa
{#tittiqa#}¦ {%tittiḍa%} and {%tittiḍīka,%} incorrect forms
for {%tintiḍa%} and {%tintiḍīka.%}
<LEND>

<L>20906<pc>0373-b<k1>tittira<k2>tittira
{#tittira#}¦ {%tittira, as,%} m. {%= tittiri,%} col. 3; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a race.
<LEND>
[Page0373-c+ 77]

<L>20907<pc>0373-c<k1>tittiri<k2>tittiri
{#tittiri#}¦ {%tittiri, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%tṝ,%}
but perhaps an onomatopoetic word fr. the cry
{%titti%}), the francoline partridge; N. of a Muni, pupil
of Yāska, and said to be the first teacher of the
Taittirīya or Black Yajur-veda; (according to a
legend the pupils of Vaiśampāyana became par-
tridges in order to pick up the Veda which was
vomited forth in a tangible shape by Yājñavalkya;
cf. {%taittirīya%}); N. of a Nāga; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τέτριξ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τέτραξ, τετράων, τετράζω;</lang> Old Island. <nsi>thid-r,</nsi> ‘a
kind of hen;’ Lith. <nsi>tetèrva,</nsi> ‘black grouse;’ Boh.
<nsi>tetrev.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>20908<pc>0373-c<k1>tittirika<k2>tittirika
{%Tittirika, as,%}¦ m. the francoline partridge.
<LEND>

<L>20909<pc>0373-c<k1>tittirIka<k2>tittirIka
{%Tittirīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ variegated like a partridge
({%tittiri%}) or made of Croton Tiglium ({%tittirī-phala%}).
<LEND>

<L>20910<pc>0373-c<k1>tittirIPala<k2>tittirIPala
{%Tittirī-phala (tittirī = tittiri?),%}¦ Croton Tiglium.
<LEND>

<L>20911<pc>0373-c<k1>tiTa<k2>tiTa
{#tiTa#}¦ {%titha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%tij%}),
fire; love; time; autumn.
<LEND>

<L>20912<pc>0373-c<k1>tiTi<k2>tiTi
{#tiTi#}¦ {%tithi, is, ī,%} m. f. (said to be fr. rt. {%at%}),
a lunar day, the thirtieth part of a whole lunation,
(the auspicious Tithis are Nandā, Bhadrā, Vi-jayā,
Pūrṇā); the number 15; [cf. {%janma-tithi.%}] {%—Ti-%}
{%thi-kṣaya, as,%} m. the day of new moon; the
day or space in which a Tithi begins or ends without
one sunrising; the difference between the solar and
lunar days in a Yuga. {%—Tithi-tattva, am,%} n., N. of
the seventh section of the Smṛti-tattva, treating of
lunar holidays, by Raghu-nandana. {%—Tithitattva-%}
{%ṭīkā,%} f., N. of the commentary on the preceding
work by Kāśī-rāma. {%—Tithi-dāna, am,%} n., N. of a
chapter of the second part of the Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa,
treating of the observance of various ceremonies.
{%—Tithi-dvaita, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the
Purāṇa-sarva-sva by Halāyudha. {%—Tithi-niyama,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the Tantra-sāra, or com-
pendium of Tantra doctrine, by Kṛṣṇānanda.
{%—Tithi-nirṇaya%} and {%tithinirṇaya-saṅkṣepa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of two astronomical works. {%—Tithi-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. {%= tithīśa%}. {%—Tithi-pattrī,%} f. an almanack.
{%—Tithi-pālana, am,%} n. observance of the rites
appointed for the several lunar days. {%—Tithi-pra-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Cintā-maṇiḥ
Sāraṇikā or Tithi-sāraṇikā, treating of astronomical
periods and constellations, by Daśa-bala; N. of a
chapter of the Jyotiṣa-ratna-mālā, an astronomical
work by Śrī-pati. {%—Tithi-praṇī, īs,%} m. ‘the leader of
the lunar days,’ the moon; [cf. {%dina-praṇī.%}] {%—Tithi-%}
{%vāra-yoga, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-
sarva-sva. {%—Tithi-viveka, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of
the Saṃskāra-tattva by Raghu-nandana, treating of
the Indian sacraments. {%—Tithi-vṛddhi, is,%} f. that
day or space in which a Tithi commences before or
with one sunrise and ends after or at the next, thus
completed under two suns. {%—Tithīśa (˚thi-īśa), as,%}
m. the regent of a lunar day. {%—Tithy-anta-nir-%}
{%ṇaya, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the Smṛty-artha-
sāra by Śrī-dhara-svāmin, treating of the Indian
ceremonies. {%—Tithy-ardha, as, am,%} m. n. half a
Tithi, {%= karaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>20913<pc>0373-c<k1>tinASaka<k2>tinASaka
{#tinASaka#}¦ {%tināśaka, as,%} m. a tree, {%= tiniśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>20914<pc>0373-c<k1>tinikA<k2>tinikA
{#tinikA#}¦ {%tinikā,%} f. Holcus Sorghum.
<LEND>

<L>20915<pc>0373-c<k1>tiniSa<k2>tiniSa
{#tiniSa#}¦ {%tiniśa, as,%} m. the tree Dalbergia
Ougeinensis; [cf. {%tiṇisa%} and {%timiśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20916<pc>0373-c<k1>tintiqa<k2>tintiqa
{#tintiqa#}¦ {%tintiḍa, as,%} m. the tamarind tree,
Tamarindus Indica; acid seasoning, sour sauce,
especially a sauce made of the fruit of the tamarind
tree; an inauspicious period, the evil aspect of
planets (?); ({%ī%}), f. the Indian tamarind tree; a sour
sauce, especially one made of the fruit of the tamarind
tree; Emblic Myrobalan. {%—Tintiḍī-dyūta, am,%} n.
a kind of game, a sort of odd or even played with
tamarind seeds.
<LEND>

<L>20917<pc>0373-c<k1>tintiqikA<k2>tintiqikA
{%Tintiḍikā,%}¦ f. the tamarind tree.
<LEND>

<L>20918<pc>0373-c<k1>tintiqIka<k2>tintiqIka
{%Tintiḍīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. the tamarind tree;
({%am%}), n. the fruit of the tamarind; a sour sauce,
especially one made of the fruit of the tamarind
tree.
<LEND>
[Page0374-a+ 75]

<L>20919<pc>0374-a<k1>tintilI<k2>tintilI
{%Tintilī%}¦ or {%tintilikā%} or {%tintilīkā,%} f. the tamarind
tree.
<LEND>

<L>20920<pc>0374-a<k1>tindiSa<k2>tindiSa
{#tindiSa#}¦ {%tindiśa, as,%} m. a kind of plant,
{%= ṭiṇḍiśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>20921<pc>0374-a<k1>tindu<k2>tindu
{#tindu#}¦ {%tindu, us,%} m. a species of ebony,
from the fruit of which is obtained a kind of resin
used in India as pitch for caulking vessels &c.,
Diospyros Glutinosa; also Strychnos Nux Vomica.
<LEND>

<L>20922<pc>0374-a<k1>tinduka<k2>tinduka
{%Tinduka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Diospyros Embryopteris
or Diospyros Glutinosa; ({%ī%}), f. the resinous fruit
of this tree; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of this tree; a
Karṣa, a kind of measure or weight (= the weight
of the Tinduka fruit).
<LEND>

<L>20923<pc>0374-a<k1>tinduki<k2>tinduki
{%Tinduki, is,%}¦ f. or {%tindula, as,%} m. the tree Dios-
pyros Embryopteris.
<LEND>

<L>20924<pc>0374-a<k1>tindukinI<k2>tindukinI
{%Tindukinī,%}¦ f. the senna plant, {%= āvartakī.%}
<LEND>

<L>20925<pc>0374-a<k1>tinduvilva<k2>tinduvilva
{#tinduvilva#}¦ {%tinduvilva, am,%} n., N. of the
birthplace of the Lyric poet Jaya-deva.
<LEND>

<L>20926<pc>0374-a<k1>tip<k2>tip
{#tip#}¦ {%tip,%} cl. 1. P. {%tepati,%} &c., to sprinkle,
to distil or drop, to ooze or leak.
<LEND>

<L>20927<pc>0374-a<k1>tim<k2>tim
{#tim#}¦ {%tim,%} cl. 4. P. {%timyati, titema,%} &c.,
to be or become wet or damp &c.; to
become pacified or quiet: Intens. {%tetimyate;%} [cf.
rt. {%tīm%} and {%stim.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20928<pc>0374-a<k1>timita<k2>timita
{%Timita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moistened, moist, wet, damp;
quiet; unmoved, unshaken; steady, fixed.
<LEND>

<L>20929<pc>0374-a<k1>timi<k2>timi
{#timi#}¦ {%timi, is,%} or sometimes {%tima, as,%} m.
(said to be fr. rt. {%tam%}), a kind of whale or fabulous
fish of an enormous size, said to be 100 Yojanas
long; a fish in general; the figure of a fish produced
by drawing two lines, one intersecting the other at
right angles; the ocean; N. of a son of Dūrva and
father of Bṛhad-ratha; ({%is, ī%}), f. a fish; N. of a
daughter of Dakṣa who was the wife of Kaśyapa
and mother of the sea-monsters. {%—Timi-koṣa%} or
{%timi-koṣaka, as,%} m. the ocean (‘the receptacle of
great fish’). {%—Timiṅ-gila, as,%} m. ‘swallowing even
the Timi,’ a large fabulous fish; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people in Dakṣiṇā-patha; ({%as%}), m. a prince of
this people. {%—Timiṅgila-gila, as,%} m. a large
fabulous fish (‘swallowing even the Timiṅ-gila’).
{%—Timi-ja, as, ā, am,%} coming or derived from the
Timi, a sort of pearl. {%—Timi-timiṅ-gila, as,%} m.
a large fabulous fish. {%—Timi-dhvaja, as, ā, am,%}
‘having a Timi depicted in his banner,’ epithet of
the Asura Śambara, prince of Vaijayanta; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20930<pc>0374-a<k1>timita<k2>timita
{#timita#}¦ {%timita.%} See under rt. {%tim%} above.
<LEND>

<L>20931<pc>0374-a<k1>timira<k2>timira
{#timira#}¦ {%timira, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%tim,%} but rather related to {%tamas%} fr. rt. {%tam%}), dark,
gloomy; ({%am%}), n. darkness; darkness of the eyes,
blindness; a class of morbid affections of the eyes
seated in the {%paṭala%} or coats of the eye; gutta
serena, total blindness from affection of the optic
nerve; iron-rust; a sort of aquatic plant [cf. {%timīra%}
and {%timiṣa%}]; ({%am, ā%}), n. f., N. of two towns.
{%—Timira-nud, t, t, t,%} dispelling darkness; ({%t%}), m.
the sun; the moon. {%—Timira-pratiṣedha, am,%} n.,
N. of a chapter of the Uttara-tantra or sixth book
of the Aṣṭāṅga-hṛdaya-saṃhitā by Vāg-bhaṭa,
treating of medicine. {%—Timira-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of darkness; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Rāhu
(who creates darkness), or an eclipse in general.
{%—Timira-ripu, us,%} m. ‘the enemy of darkness,’ the
sun. {%—Timirāri (˚ra-ari), is,%} m. ‘the enemy of
darkness,’ the sun. {%—Timirodghāṭa (˚ra-ud˚),%} N.
of a treatise in verse connected with the Śaiva
dogmas.
<LEND>

<L>20932<pc>0374-a<k1>timiraya<k2>timiraya
{%Timiraya,%}¦ nom. P. {%timirayati, -yitum,%} to ob-
scure, darken, eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>20933<pc>0374-a<k1>timirAya<k2>timirAya
{%Timirāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%timirāyate,%} &c., to appear
dark, to darken.
<LEND>

<L>20934<pc>0374-a<k1>timirin<k2>timirin
{%Timirin, ī,%}¦ m. the cochineal insect.
<LEND>

<L>20935<pc>0374-a<k1>timiri<k2>timiri
{#timiri#}¦ {%timiri,%} a kind of fish (not the
{%timi%}).
<LEND>
[Page0374-b+ 76]

<L>20936<pc>0374-b<k1>timirGa<k2>timirGa
{#timirGa#}¦ {%timirgha, as,%} m., N. of a man with
the patronymic Daureśruta.
<LEND>

<L>20937<pc>0374-b<k1>timiSa<k2>timiSa
{#timiSa#}¦ {%timiśa,%} probably a wrong reading
for {%tiniśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>20938<pc>0374-b<k1>timiza<k2>timiza
{#timiza#}¦ {%timiṣa, as,%} m. a kind of pumpkin-
gourd, Benincasa Cerifera; a water-melon ({%nā-%}
{%ṭāmra%}).
<LEND>

<L>20939<pc>0374-b<k1>timIra<k2>timIra
{#timIra#}¦ {%timīra, as,%} m. a kind of tree; [cf.
{%timira.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20940<pc>0374-b<k1>tiraya<k2>tiraya
{#tiraya#}¦ {%tiraya.%} See next col.
<LEND>

<L>20941<pc>0374-b<k1>tiraSc<k2>tiraSc
{#tiraSc#}¦ {%tiraśc,%} &c. See under {%tiryañc.%}
<LEND>

<L>20942<pc>0374-b<k1>tiras<k2>tiras
{#tiras#}¦ {%tiras,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%tṝ,%} the {%as%} being
probably the ablative termination), through (with acc.
in Ved., e. g. {%tiraḥ pavitram,%} through the strainer;
{%tiras tamāṃsi darśataḥ,%} discernible through the
darkness); across, beyond, over (e. g. {%nadīṃ tiras,%}
across the river; {%rajāṃsi tiras,%} over the world; {%te%}
{%nas tiro viśvāni duritā nayanti,%} they lead us
over all difficulties); without (i. e. in such a manner
as to pass by or leave on one side); apart from, on
one side of, aside, secretly from, ‘clam’ (with acc.,
e. g. {%tiraś cittāni,%} without the knowledge; {%tiro%}
{%vaśam,%} against the will; or sometimes with abl.,
e. g. {%manuṣyebhyas tiras,%} on one side of the men);
crookedly, obliquely, awry; transversely, indirectly,
badly, secretly, covertly; [cf. Lat. <nsi>trans:</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>thairh:</nsi> Germ. <nsi>durch:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>tar, tair,</nsi> ‘beyond,
over, across, through; bad;’ <nsi>tri,</nsi> ‘through, by:’
Lith. <nsi>tiês:</nsi> Zend <nsi>tarō.</nsi>] {%—Tiras-kara, as, ī, am,%}
leaving on one side, passing by, surpassing, excelling.
{%—Tiras-karin, ī, iṇī,%} m. f. a curtain, veil; an
outer tent, kanāt, wall, or screen of cloth surrounding
the principal tent; a kind of magical veil rendering
the wearer invisible. {%—Tiras-kāra, as,%} m. placing
aside, concealment, disappearance; disrespect, abuse,
reproach, censure, disgrace, disdain. {%—Tiras-kāriṇī,%}
f. a curtain, {%= tiras-kariṇī%}. {%—Tiras-kuḍya%} or {%ti-%}
{%ras-prākāra, as, ā, am,%} looking through a wall.
{%—Tiras-kṛ%} or {%tiraḥ kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%}
to put on one side, set aside, remove, cover, conceal;
to pass by, surpass, excel, conquer; to blame, re-
proach, abuse, treat disrespectfully, contemn, despise;
[according to Pāṇini I. IV. 71, 72, {%tiras%} must be
a {%gati%} (q. v.), in the sense of ‘covering,’ ‘concealing,’
but an option is allowed in its connection with
rt. 1. {%kṛ.%}] {%—Tiras-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} concealed,
hidden, veiled, vanished, disappeared; censured, re-
viled, abused, reproached, scorned. {%—Tiras-kṛtya%}
(or {%tiraḥ kṛtvā%}), ind. having concealed. {%—Tiras-%}
{%kriyā,%} f. concealment, disappearance; disrespect,
reproach, contempt. {%—Tiro-ahnya%} or {%tiro-'hnya,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (the former form occurring in the Veda,
the latter in the Brāhmaṇas and later writings), more
than one day old, prepared the day before yesterday.
{%—Tiro-gata, as, ā, am,%} disappeared, vanished, out
of sight. {%—Tiro-janam,%} ind., Ved. apart from men.
 — 1. {%tiro-dhā%} or {%tiro dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%dadhāti,%}
{%dhatte, dhātum,%} to place on one side, set aside,
remove out of the way, cover, conceal, hide; to
hide one's self from (with abl.), disappear; to over-
power, conquer: Pass. {%tiro-dhīyate%} or {%tiro dhīyate,%}
to be hidden, to vanish, disappear. {%—2. tiro-dhā,%} f.,
Ved. concealment, secrecy. {%—Tiro-dhātavya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} to be covered or concealed, to be closed.
{%—Tiro-dhāna, am,%} n. disappearance, vanishing, the
being hidden or the act of hiding, concealing, &c.; a
covering, a sheath, a veil, a cloth or cloak, anything
which conceals from sight. {%—Tiro-bhavitṛ, tā, trī,%}
{%tṛ,%} disappearing. {%—Tiro-bhāva, as,%} m. disappear-
ance, (opposed to {%āvir-bhāva%} and {%prādur-bhāva.%})
{%—Tiro-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%tiro-bhavati, -vitum,%} to be
set on one side, disappear, vanish, hide one's self:
Caus. {%tiro-bhāvayati%} or {%tiro bhāvayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to disappear, dispel. {%—Tiro-varṣa, as, ā, am,%}
protected from rain. {%—Tiro-hita, as, ā, am,%} covered,
concealed, hidden, removed or withdrawn from
[Page0374-c+ 70]
sight. {%—Tirohita-tā,%} f. disappearance, the becoming
invisible; {%tirohitatāṃ gam,%} to disappear.
<LEND>

<L>20943<pc>0374-c<k1>tiraya<k2>tiraya
{%Tiraya,%}¦ nom. P. {%tirayati, -yitum,%} to keep
hidden or concealed, to prevent from appearing,
hinder, stop, restrain; to conquer.
<LEND>

<L>20944<pc>0374-c<k1>tirasya<k2>tirasya
{%Tirasya,%}¦ nom. P. {%tirasyati,%} &c., to disappear.
<LEND>

<L>20945<pc>0374-c<k1>tirohaya<k2>tirohaya
{%Tirohaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%tirohayati, -yitum,%} to hide,
conceal.
<LEND>

<L>20946<pc>0374-c<k1>tirohnya<k2>tirohnya
{%Tiro-'hnya.%}¦ See {%tiro-ahnya,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20947<pc>0374-c<k1>tiraskara<k2>tiraskara
{#tiraskara#}¦ {%tiras-kara, tiras-kṛ,%} &c. See
under {%tiras,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>20948<pc>0374-c<k1>tirijihvika<k2>tirijihvika
{#tirijihvika#}¦ {%tirijihvika, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), Erythrina Crista Galli (?).
<LEND>

<L>20949<pc>0374-c<k1>tiriwi<k2>tiriwi
{#tiriwi#}¦ {%tiriṭi, is,%} or {%tiriṭa, as%} (?), m. the
joint of the sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>20950<pc>0374-c<k1>tiriRIkaRwa<k2>tiriRIkaRwa
{#tiriRIkaRwa#}¦ {%tiriṇīkaṇṭa = tirijihvika.%}
<LEND>

<L>20951<pc>0374-c<k1>tirindira<k2>tirindira
{#tirindira#}¦ {%tirindira, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>20952<pc>0374-c<k1>tirima<k2>tirima
{#tirima#}¦ {%tirima%} or {%tiriya, as,%} m. a sort of
rice; [cf. {%tirya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20953<pc>0374-c<k1>tirIwa<k2>tirIwa
{#tirIwa#}¦ {%tirīṭa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%tṝ,%}
perhaps for {%tirī-tra,%} or a wrong form for {%kirīṭa%}),
a kind of head-dress, a tiara, a diadem; gold; ({%as%}),
m. the tree Symplocos Racemosa.
<LEND>

<L>20954<pc>0374-c<k1>tirIwaka<k2>tirIwaka
{%Tirīṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>20955<pc>0374-c<k1>tirIwin<k2>tirIwin
{%Tirīṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. furnished with a head-
dress.
<LEND>

<L>20956<pc>0374-c<k1>tiro<k2>tiro
{#tiro#}¦ {%tiro%} for {%tiras.%} See under {%tiras.%}
<LEND>

<L>20957<pc>0374-c<k1>tirohita<k2>tirohita
{#tirohita#}¦ {%tiro-hita.%} See under {%tiras.%}
<LEND>

<L>20958<pc>0374-c<k1>tirpirika<k2>tirpirika
{#tirpirika#}¦ {%tirpirika, am,%} n. {%= tilpilika.%}
<LEND>

<L>20959<pc>0374-c<k1>tirpili<k2>tirpili
{#tirpili#}¦ {%tirpili, is,%} m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>20960<pc>0374-c<k1>tirya<k2>tirya
{#tirya#}¦ {%tirya, as, ā, am, = tilya,%} Ved. prepared
from the seeds of sesamum (?); [cf. {%tiriya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20961<pc>0374-c<k1>tiryaga<k2>tiryaga
{#tiryaga#}¦ {%tiryaga%} for {%tiryag-ga.%} See {%tiryañc.%}
<LEND>

<L>20962<pc>0374-c<k1>tiryaYc<k2>tiryaYc
{#tiryaYc#}¦ {%tiryañc%} or {%tiryac, aṅ, tiraścī,%} or
according to Vopa-deva also {%tiryañcī, ak%} (fr. {%tiras%} and
rt. {%añc%}), going or lying crosswise or transversely or
obliquely, oblique, transverse (opposed to {%anv-añc%}),
horizontal (opposed to {%ūrdhva,%} vertical); going
across; crossing over, traversing; moving tortuously,
going crookedly or awry; curved, crooked; mean-
dering; lying in the middle or between; ({%aṅ, ak%}),
m. n. an animal (going horizontally, as opposed to
man who walks erect), a brute, an amphibious
animal; a bird; (with Jainas) plants, the organic
world; ({%tiraścī%} or {%tiryañcī%}), f. the female of an
animal or of any beast or bird; ({%ak%}), ind., Ved. across,
obliquely, transversely, horizontally, sideways; {%tiraścā,%}
ind. across, obliquely. {%—Tiraści-rāji, is, is, i%} ({%tiraści%}
loc. case of {%tiryañc%}), Ved. striped across (as a ser-
pent). {%—Tiryak-kāram%} or {%tiryak-kṛtya,%} ind. having
laid aside (after the completion of any work), having
placed on one side. {%—Tiryak-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}
placed obliquely or across; a form of dislocation
when a part of the joint is forced outwards. {%—Tir-%}
{%yak-tā,%} f. or {%tiryak-tva, am,%} n. the state of going
across or obliquely; the state of a beast or animal,
animal nature; measurement across, breadth. {%—Tir-%}
{%yak-pātana, am,%} n., N. of a part of the Ānanda-
kanda, treating of medicine. {%—Tiryak-pramāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. measurement across, breadth; {%purastāt-%}
{%tiryakpramāṇa,%} breadth in front; {%paścāt-t˚,%} breadth
behind. {%—Tiryak-prekṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} looking
obliquely or askance; ({%am%}), n. a squint, oblique
glance, side look. {%—Tiryak-prekṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
looking obliquely or sideways. {%—Tiryak-sūtra, am,%}
n. a cross-line. {%—Tiryak-srotas, as,%} n. ‘the hori-
zontal stream of life,’ the animal creation; ({%ās%}), m.
‘hurrying the stream of life horizontal,’ i. e. the
animal world; an animal, a beast or bird; [cf.
[Page0375-a+ 79]
{%arvāk-srotas, avāk-srotas, ūrdhva-srotas.%}] {%—Tir-%}
{%yag-antara, am,%} n. intermediate space measured
across, breadth. {%—Tiryag-ayana, am,%} n. the hori-
zontal course, the annual revolution of the sun,
(opposed to its diurnal revolution, in which it rises
and sets vertically.) {%—Tiryag-āgata, as, ā, am,%} lying
across (a particular position of the child at birth).
{%—Tiryag-īkṣa, as, ā, am,%} looking obliquely; [cf.
{%tiryak-prekṣaṇa.%}] {%—Tiryag-īśa, as,%} m. ‘the lord
of the animals,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Tiryag-ga%}
(or sometimes {%tirya-ga%}), {%as, ā, am,%} going obliquely,
going across or horizontally [cf. {%pratīpa-ga, adho-%}
{%mukha, ūrdhva-ga%}]; an animal; going towards the
north or south, (opposed to {%pūrva-mukhī%} and
{%paścān-mukhī.%}) {%—Tiryag-gata, as, ā, am,%} going
horizontally, (opposed to man who walks erect.)
{%—Tiryag-gati, is,%} f. the course of an animal, trans-
migration of animals. {%—Tiryag-gama, as, ā, am,%}
going sideways or obliquely. {%—Tiryag-gamana, am,%}
n. motion sideways or across, (opposed to {%ūrdhva-g˚%}
and {%adho-g˚.%}) {%—Tiryag-guṇana, am,%} n. oblique
multiplication. {%—Tiryag-ja, as, ā, am,%} born from
an animal, having an animal as father or mother.
{%—Tiryag-jana, as,%} m. an animal. {%—Tiryag-jāti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} belonging to the race of animals or to the
brute creation, born as an animal; ({%is%}), f. the brute
kind. {%—Tiryag-jyā,%} f. an oblique chord. {%—Tiryag-%}
{%diś, k,%} f. the region or part of the universe which
lies horizontally, (opposed to {%ūrdhva%} and {%adhas.%})
{%—Tiryag-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} having curved or oblique
edges. {%—Tiryag-nāsa%} or {%tiryaṅ-nāsa, as, ā, am,%}
crooked-nosed, wry-nosed. {%—Tiryag-yavodara (˚va-%}
{%ud˚), am,%} n. a barleycorn. {%—Tiryag-yāna, as,%} m.
‘going crookedly,’ a crab. {%—Tiryag-yona, as,%} m. an
animal (as a bird &c.); [cf. {%tairyagyona.%}] {%—Tiryag-%}
{%yoni, is, is, i,%} born of or as an animal; ({%is%}), f. the
womb of an animal, the animal creation or race, organic
nature (including plants). {%—Tiryagyony-anvaya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of the animal race; ({%as%}), m. the race of
animals, birds, &c. {%—Tiryag-viddha, as, ā, am,%}
pierced obliquely (as a vein in bleeding by an unskilful
operator). {%—Tiryaṅ-niraya, as,%} m. the hell of animals
or animal nature as a punishment for evil deeds.
<LEND>

<L>20963<pc>0375-a<k1>tiraSca<k2>tiraSca
{%Tiraśca, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the cross-board of a bed-
stead. {%—Tiraścāṅgirasa (˚ca-āṅ˚), as,%} m. the
Āṅgirasa Tiraśca; [cf. {%tiraścī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20964<pc>0375-a<k1>tiraScatA<k2>tiraScatA
{%Tiraścatā,%}¦ ind., Ved. across, transversely, through.
<LEND>

<L>20965<pc>0375-a<k1>tiraScaTA<k2>tiraScaTA
{%Tiraścathā,%}¦ ind., Ved. aside, secretly.
<LEND>

<L>20966<pc>0375-a<k1>tiraScI<k2>tiraScI
{%Tiraścī,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a Ṛṣi, descendant of
Aṅgiras. {%—Tiraścī-nidhana, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>20967<pc>0375-a<k1>tiraScIna<k2>tiraScIna
{%Tiraścīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ lying across, oblique, trans-
verse, sideways, awry, horizontal; irregular; {%ā-tira-%}
{%ścīnam,%} a little across. {%—Tiraścīna-nidhana, am,%}
n., Ved., N. of a Sāman. {%—Tiraścīna-pṛśni, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. spotted across. {%—Tiraścīna-vaṃśa, as,%}
m., Ved. a bee-hive.
<LEND>

<L>20968<pc>0375-a<k1>til<k2>til<h>1
{#til#} 1¦. {%til,%} cl. 1. P. {%telati,%} &c., to go
or move; [cf. rt. {%till.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20969<pc>0375-a<k1>til<k2>til<h>2
{#til#} 2¦. {%til%} (probably an artificial rt. fr.
{%tila%} below), cl. 6. 10. P. {%tilati, telayati,%}
&c., to be unctuous or greasy; to oil or anoint.
<LEND>

<L>20970<pc>0375-a<k1>tila<k2>tila
{%Tila, as,%}¦ m. the sesamum plant (Sesamum Indi-
cum) which bears an oily seed; the seed of this
plant (much used in Oriental cookery); a mole or
spot compared to a seed of sesamum; a small particle
or portion as much as a sesamum-seed [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-%}
{%tila%} and {%carma-tila%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a chapter
of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Tila-kaṭa, am,%} n. the farina
of sesamum. {%—Tila-kalka, as,%} m. dough made of
ground sesamum. {%—Tilakalka-ja, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), oil-cake made of the sediment of ground
sesamum. {%—Tila-kālaka, as,%} m. a mole, a dark spot
under the skin; a disease of the penis in which the
fleshy parts become black and die off; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having a mole or mark. {%—Tila-kiṭṭa, am,%} n. the
caky sediment of sesamum after the oil is pressed out.
{%—Tila-khali, is%} or {%ī%} f. oil-cake made from sesa-
mum. {%—Tila-gañji-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place
mentioned in the Rasika-ramaṇa by Raghu-nātha.
[Page0375-b+ 81]
{%—Tila-grāma, as,%} m., N. of a Grāma or township.
{%—Tila-citra-pattraka, as,%} m. a kind of bulbous
plant. {%—Tila-cūrṇa, am,%} n. sesamum ground and
pounded. {%—Tila-taṇḍulaka, am,%} n. an embrace
(as agreeable as rice mixed with sesamum). {%—Tila-%}
{%tejā,%} f. a kind of plant. {%—Tila-taila, am,%} n. sesa-
mum-oil. {%—Tiladeśvara-tīrtha (˚da-īś˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha; [cf. {%tilakeśvara-tīrtha.%}] {%—Tila-%}
{%dvādaśī,%} f. a festival occurring on the twelfth day of
a particular month. {%—Tila-dhenu, us,%} f. sesamum
made up in the shape of a cow for the purpose of
being presented to Brāhmans &c. {%—Tiladhenu-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Vārāha-
Purāṇa. {%—Tilan-tuda, as, ā, am,%} bruising sesamum-
seed, a sesamum-grinder, one who extracts oil out of
sesamum-seed; [cf. {%tila-pīḍa.%}] {%—Tila-parṇa, as,%} m.
turpentine; ({%ī%}), f. the sandal tree, Pterocarpus Santa-
linus; frankincense; turpentine; ({%am%}), n. the leaf of
the Tila tree; sandal-wood. {%—Tila-parṇikā,%} f. or {%tila-%}
{%parṇika%} or {%tila-parṇaka, am,%} n. red sanders, sandal-
wood. {%—Tila-piccaṭa, am,%} n. ({%piccaṭa = piṣṭaka%}),
a sort of sweetmeat made chiefly of ground sesamum.
{%—Tila-piñja, as,%} m. barren sesamum, bearing no
blossom or yielding a seed which gives no oil; white
sesamum; [cf. {%tila-peja, tilpiñja, taila-piñja.%}]
{%—Tila-pīḍa, as,%} m. {%= tilan-tuda;%} [cf. {%taila-%}
{%pīḍa.%}] {%—Tila-puṣpaka,%} Terminalia Bellerica {%(vi-%}
{%bhītaka)%}. {%—Tila-peja, as,%} m. barren sesamum;
[cf. {%tila-piñja.%}] {%—Tila-bhāra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
race. {%—Tila-bhāvinī,%} f. jasmine. {%—Tila-bhṛṣṭa,%}
{%am,%} n. fried sesamum-seed. {%—Tila-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made of or prepared from sesamum, abounding with
sesamum. {%—Tila-mayūra, as,%} m. a species of pea-
cock. {%—Tila-miśra, as, ā, am,%} mixed with sesamum.
{%—Tila-rasa, as,%} m. sesamum-oil. {%—Tila-vatsa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. having sesamum-seed (as it were) for
children. {%—Tila-vratin, ī, inī, i,%} eating only sesa-
mum-seeds in consequence of a vow. {%—Tila-śas,%} ind.
in pieces as small as sesamum-seeds. {%—Tila-sam-%}
{%baddha, as, ā, am,%} mixed with sesamum-oil. {%—Tila-%}
{%sneha, as,%} m. oil, especially of sesamum. {%—Tila-%}
{%homa, am,%} n. burnt-offering of sesamum. {%—Tilāṅ-%}
{%kita-dala (˚la-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a kind of bulbous
plant, {%= taila-kanda%}. {%—Tilāḍhaka? (˚la-āḍh˚),%} N.
of a monastery; (also read {%tilaṭaka, tilaḍhāka,%}
{%tila-śākya.) — Tilānna (˚la-an˚), am,%} n. rice with
sesamum-seeds. {%—Tilāpatyā (˚la-ap˚),%} f. a plant
bearing a small pungent seed, Nigella Indica.
{%—Tilāmbu (˚la-am˚), u,%} n. water with sesamum.
{%—Tilottamā (˚la-ut˚),%} f., N. of an Apsaras; a
form of Dākṣāyaṇī; N. of a woman. {%—Tilodaka%}
{%(˚la-ud˚), am,%} n. sesamum-seeds and water (as an
oblation). {%—Tilaudana (˚la-od˚), am,%} n. a dish of
milk, rice, and sesamum.
<LEND>

<L>20971<pc>0375-b<k1>tilaka<k2>tilaka
{%Tilaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of tree with beautiful
flowers, (so called either because it is similar in some
way to the sesamum plant, or because it is used as an
ornament like the mark on the forehead); a plant
growing near water; a freckle, a natural mark under
the skin (compared to a seed of sesamum); a kind of
eruption of the skin; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a mark or marks
made with coloured earths, sandal-wood, or unguents,
upon the forehead and between the eyebrows, either as
an ornament or a sectarial distinction; the ornament
of anything (used in comp. to express greatness or
distinction, e. g. {%trailokya-tilaka,%} the ornament of
the three worlds, i. e. a distinguished personage);
({%as%}), m. the burden of a song, {%= dhruvaka;%} a
species of horse; N. of a son of Pra-dyota; N. of a
prince of Kampanā; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of necklace;
({%am%}), n. the bladder; the lungs; black sochal salt,
a factitious salt containing sulphur and iron &c.; a
disease, the appearance of dark spots on the skin,
unattended with inflammation; alliteration; a kind
of metre consisting of four lines of six syllables each;
[cf. {%ūrdhva-tilakin, eṇa-tilaka, kha-t˚, vasanta-%}
{%t˚.%}] {%—Tilaka-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Tilaka-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the second part
of the Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa, treating of ceremonies.
{%—Tilaka-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Tilakā-%}
{%śraya (˚ka-āś˚), as,%} m. the forehead (‘the receptacle
[Page0375-c+ 71]
of the Tilaka’). {%—Tilakeśvara-tīrtha (˚ka-īś), am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha; [cf. {%tiladeśvara-tīrtha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20972<pc>0375-c<k1>tilakaka<k2>tilakaka
{%Tilakaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>20973<pc>0375-c<k1>tilakAya<k2>tilakAya
{%Tilakāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%tilakāyate,%} &c., to form the
Tilaka mark on the forehead, to ornament.
<LEND>

<L>20974<pc>0375-c<k1>tilakita<k2>tilakita
{%Tilakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ marked with the Tilaka, or-
namented; freckled, spotted.
<LEND>

<L>20975<pc>0375-c<k1>tilakin<k2>tilakin
{%Tilakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ marked with the Tilaka; freckled,
spotted.
<LEND>

<L>20976<pc>0375-c<k1>tilu<k2>tilu
{%Tilu,%}¦ an adj. derived by Sāy. fr. {%tila,%} and meaning
‘fertile,’ ‘rich;’ [cf. {%tilvila%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>20977<pc>0375-c<k1>tilpiYja<k2>tilpiYja
{%Tilpiñja, as,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= tila-piñja,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>20978<pc>0375-c<k1>tilya<k2>tilya
{%Tilya, as, ā, am,%}¦ suited for the cultivation of
sesamum, grown with sesamum; ({%am%}), n. a field of
sesamum.
<LEND>

<L>20979<pc>0375-c<k1>tilva<k2>tilva
{%Tilva%}¦ or {%tilvaka, as,%} m. the tree Symplocus
Racemosa, {%= iṅgudī,%} Terminalia Catappa.
<LEND>

<L>20980<pc>0375-c<k1>tilvila<k2>tilvila
{%Tilvila, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. having a fertile soil,
prolific, rich; [cf. {%ibhya-tilvila%} and {%dhānya-t˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20981<pc>0375-c<k1>tilvilAya<k2>tilvilAya
{%Tilvilāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%tilvilāyate,%} &c., Ved. to be
fertile or rich, to cause fertility of soil.
<LEND>

<L>20982<pc>0375-c<k1>tilakanija<k2>tilakanija
{#tilakanija#}¦ {%tilakanija, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
race.
<LEND>

<L>20983<pc>0375-c<k1>tiliNga<k2>tiliNga
{#tiliNga#}¦ {%tiliṅga,%} N. of a place mentioned
in the Kāka-rudra-saṃvāda.
<LEND>

<L>20984<pc>0375-c<k1>tiliNgila<k2>tiliNgila
{#tiliNgila#}¦ {%tiliṅgila, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people; (also {%timiṅgila, tileṅgala.%})
<LEND>

<L>20985<pc>0375-c<k1>tilitsa<k2>tilitsa
{#tilitsa#}¦ {%tilitsa%} or {%tiliccha, as,%} m. a large
snake; (according to some = Gokhura; according
to others = the Boa or Boa Constrictor.)
<LEND>

<L>20986<pc>0375-c<k1>tilpilika<k2>tilpilika
{#tilpilika#}¦ {%tilpilika, am,%} n. {%= tirpirika.%}
<LEND>

<L>20987<pc>0375-c<k1>till<k2>till
{#till#}¦ {%till,%} cl. 1. P. {%tillati,%} &c., to go or
move; (a various reading for 1. {%til.%})
<LEND>

<L>20988<pc>0375-c<k1>tivya<k2>tivya
{#tivya#}¦ {%tivya, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>20989<pc>0375-c<k1>tizWat<k2>tizWat
{#tizWat#}¦ {%tiṣṭhat, an, antī, at%} (pres. part. fr.
rt. {%sthā%}), staying, remaining, abiding, standing,
being, &c. {%—Tiṣṭhad-gu,%} ind. ({%gu%} fr. {%go%}), at
milking-time (when the cows stand to be milked),
after sunset. {%—Tiṣṭhad-dhoma (˚at-ho˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. (a sacrifice) at which the oblation is offered
standing, (opposed to {%upaviṣṭa-homa.%})
<LEND>

<L>20990<pc>0375-c<k1>tizya<k2>tizya
{#tizya#}¦ {%tiṣya, as,%} m., N. of a mythical
being who like Kṛśānu is a kind of heavenly
archer; an asterism regarded as shaped like an
arrow and containing three stars, of which <lang n="greek">δ</lang> Cancri
is one, (it is the sixth Nakṣatra of the old or eighth
of the new order, and is also called Puṣya and
Sidhya); the month Pauṣa (December-January);
a common N. of men, ‘born under the asterism
Tishya’ [cf. {%upa-tiṣya%}]; ({%ā%}), f. Terminalia To-
mentosa; Emblica Officinalis; Emblic Myrobalan;
({%as, am%}), m. n. the Kali-yuga, the fourth or present
age; ({%as, ā, am%}), auspicious, fortunate, lucky (?).
{%—Tiṣya-ketu, us,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Tiṣya-%}
{%punarvasīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to the asterisms
Tiṣya and Punar-vasu. {%—Tiṣya-puṣpā,%} f. Emblic
Myrobalan {%(āmalakī)%}. {%—Tiṣya-phalā,%} f. Emblic
Myrobalan. {%—Tiṣya-rakṣitā,%} f., N. of the first
wife of Aśoka.
<LEND>

<L>20991<pc>0375-c<k1>tizyaka<k2>tizyaka
{%Tiṣyaka, as,%}¦ m. the month Pauṣa.
<LEND>

<L>20992<pc>0375-c<k1>tisf<k2>tisf
{#tisf#}¦ {%tisṛ, tisras,%} f. pl. three; see {%tri,%}
{%—Tisṛ-dhanva, am,%} n., Ved. a bow with three
arrows.
<LEND>

<L>20993<pc>0375-c<k1>tisfkA<k2>tisfkA
{%Tisṛkā,%}¦ f., N. of a Grāma.
<LEND>

<L>20994<pc>0375-c<k1>tisrA<k2>tisrA
{%Tisrā,%}¦ f. the grass Andropogon Aciculatus.
<LEND>

<L>20995<pc>0375-c<k1>tihan<k2>tihan
{#tihan#}¦ {%tihan, ā,%} m. sickness; a good dis-
position; rice; a bow.
<LEND>

<L>20996<pc>0375-c<k1>tIk<k2>tIk
{#tIk#}¦ {%tīk,%} cl. 1. A. {%tīkate,%} &c., to go or
move; [cf. rt. {%tik.%}]
<LEND>

<L>20997<pc>0375-c<k1>tIkzRa<k2>tIkzRa
{#tIkzRa#}¦ {%tīkṣṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%tij;%} cf.
the similar word {%tigma,%} which is more used than
[Page0376-a+ 81]
{%tīkṣṇa%} in the older literature), sharp (in all senses),
hot, pungent, warm, fiery; acid ({%= khara-uṣṇa%});
virulent, harsh, rough, rude, cross; injurious, noxious,
unfriendly, unpropitious, inauspicious (e. g. {%tīkṣ-%}
{%ṇāni nakṣatrāṇi,%} the inauspicious Nakṣatras,
viz. Mūla, Ārdrā, Jyeṣṭhā, Ā-śleṣā); sharp, keen;
intelligent; zealous, vehement, active, eager, energetic,
quick; devoted, self-abandoning; devout, ascetic, a de-
votee, zealot; ({%as%}), m. nitre; the resin of Boswellia
Thurifera, {%= śveta-kuśa%} or {%śveta-darbha;%} long
pepper; black pepper; black mustard; Moringa
Pterygosperma, horse-radish tree; Dalbergia Sissoo
({%śiṃśapā%}), marjoram; Asa Fœtida; Galmei; N. of
a Nāga; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants,
{%= vacā, = sarpa-kaṅkālikā%} (wrongly translated
‘the cast skin of a snake’); Mucuna Pruritus, {%=%}
{%mahā-jyotiṣmatī, = atyamla-parṇī;%} Cardiosper-
mum Halicacabum; black mustard; a mystical name
of the letter {%p; (am),%} n. iron; steel; any weapon;
anything sharp (as sharp language, &c.); heat, pun-
gency; haste; sea-salt, nitre; poison, {%= muṣkaka;%}
the tree Bignonia Suaveolens or (according to others)
the scrotum or testicles; Piper Chaba; war, battle;
plague, pestilence, epidemic destruction; death, dying;
[cf. {%a-tīkṣṇa%} and {%su-tīkṣṇa.%}] {%—Tīkṣṇa-kaṇ-%}
{%ṭaka, as,%} m., N. of several plants, viz. thorn-apple;
Capparis Aphylla; Terminalia Catappa; Acacia Ara-
bica; Euphorbia Tortilis; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant, {%=%}
{%kanthārī%}. {%—Tīkṣṇa-kanda, as,%} m. ‘pungent root,’
the onion. {%—Tīkṣṇa-karma-kṛt, t, t, t,%} acting
in a sharp or clever manner, active, energetic.
{%—Tīkṣṇa-karman, ā, ā, a,%} ‘sharp in action,’ active,
energetic, zealous, brisk; ({%a%}), n. a clever work.
{%—Tīkṣṇa-kalka, as,%} m. coriander. {%—Tīkṣṇa-%}
{%kāntā,%} f. a form of Caṇḍikā. {%—Tīkṣṇa-gandha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having a pungent smell,’ N. of two plants,
{%= śobhāñjana%} and {%phaṇijjhaka;%} the resin of the
Boswellia Thurifera; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants, {%=%}
{%śobhāñjana, rājikā, vacā, śveta-vacā, kanthārī,%}
{%jīvantī;%} small cardamoms. {%—Tīkṣṇa-gandhaka,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= śobhāñjana%}. {%—Tīkṣṇa-taṇḍulā,%} f. long
pepper. {%—Tīkṣṇa-tara, as, ā, am,%} sharper, &c.
{%—Tīkṣṇa-tā,%} f. or {%tīkṣṇa-tva, am,%} n. warmth,
heat, sharpness, pungency. {%—Tīkṣṇa-tuṇḍa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a sharp beak (as a bird). {%—Tīkṣṇa-%}
{%taila, am,%} n. ‘pungent oil,’ the resin of the Shorea
Robusta; the milky juice of the Euphorbia Lactea;
spirituous or vinous liquor. {%—Tīkṣṇa-daṃṣṭra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having sharp teeth or tusks; ({%as%}), m.
a tiger. {%—Tīkṣṇa-daṃṣṭraka, as,%} m. a leopard.
{%—Tīkṣṇa-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} sharp-edged, sharp; ({%as%}),
m. a sword. {%—Tīkṣṇa-pattra, as,%} m. ‘having pun-
gent leaves,’ coriander; the plant Terminalia Catappa;
a species of sugar-cane. {%—Tīkṣṇa-puṣpa, am,%}
n. ‘pungent flower,’ cloves; ({%ā%}), f. Pandanus Odora-
tissimus; the clove tree. {%—Tīkṣṇa-priya = tīkṣ-%}
{%ṇa-śūka,%} barley. {%—Tīkṣṇa-phala, as,%} m. ‘having
pungent fruit,’ coriander; black mustard. {%—Tīkṣṇa-%}
{%buddhi, is, is, i,%} sharp-witted, sagacious, acute. {%—Tī-%}
{%kṣṇa-mañjarī,%} f. the betel plant. {%—Tīkṣṇa-mukha,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} sharp-mouthed. {%—Tīkṣṇa-mūla, as,%}
m. ‘having a pungent root,’ Moringa Pterygosperma;
Alpinia Galanga. {%—Tīkṣṇa-raśmi, is, is, i,%} having
hot rays (as the sun). {%—Tīkṣṇa-rasa, as,%} m. ‘pun-
gent liquid,’ saltpetre. {%—Tīkṣṇa-loha, as,%} m. ‘sharp
iron,’ steel. {%—Tīkṣṇa-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} having
virulent poison. {%—Tīkṣṇa-vṛṣaṇa, as,%} m. ‘having
strong testicles,’ N. of a bull. {%—Tīkṣṇa-vega, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} possessing great velocity; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Rak-
shas. {%—Tīkṣṇa-śūka, as,%} m. ‘having sharp awns,’
barley. {%—Tīkṣṇa-śṛṅga, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having
sharp horns. {%—Tīkṣṇa-sāra, as,%} m. Dalbergia
Sissoo ({%= śiṃśapā%}); Bassia Latifolia; iron. {%—Tīkṣ-%}
{%ṇāṃśu (˚ṇa-aṃ˚), us, us, u,%} having hot rays; ({%us%}),
m. the sun; fire. {%—Tīkṣṇāṃśu-tanaya, as,%} m. ‘the
son of the sun,’ the planet Saturn. {%—Tīkṣṇāgni%}
{%(˚ṇa-ag˚), is,%} m. ‘acid gastric juice,’ heartburn,
dyspepsia. {%—Tīkṣṇāgra (˚ṇa-ag˚), as, ā, am,%}
sharp-pointed; ({%as%}), m. Zingiber Zerumbet. {%—Tīkṣ-%}
{%ṇāyasa%} ({%˚ṇa + ayasa%} for {%ayas,%} q. v.), {%am,%} n.
‘sharp iron,’ steel; ({%as, ī, am%}), made of steel,
[Page0376-b+ 74]
sharp. {%—Tīkṣṇeṣu (˚ṇa-iṣu), us, us, u,%} having
sharp arrows. {%—Tīkṣṇopāya (˚ṇa-up˚), as,%} m.
forcible means, a strong measure.
<LEND>

<L>20998<pc>0376-b<k1>tIkzRaka<k2>tIkzRaka
{%Tīkṣṇaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= muṣkaka,%} Bignonia Suave-
olens or (according to others) the scrotum or testicles;
black mustard; long pepper.
<LEND>

<L>20999<pc>0376-b<k1>tIkzRizWa<k2>tIkzRizWa
{%Tīkṣṇiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ sharpest, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21000<pc>0376-b<k1>tIkzRIyas<k2>tIkzRIyas
{%Tīkṣṇīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ sharper, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21001<pc>0376-b<k1>tIm<k2>tIm
{#tIm#}¦ {%tīm,%} cl. 4. P. {%tīmyati,%} &c., to be
wet or moist; [cf. rt. {%tim.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21002<pc>0376-b<k1>tIr<k2>tIr
{#tIr#}¦ {%tīr,%} cl. 10. P., to accomplish, (better
regarded as a nominal verb; see under
{%tīra%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>21003<pc>0376-b<k1>tIra<k2>tIra
{#tIra#}¦ {%tīra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%tṝ%}), a shore, a
bank; margin, brink, edge; the brim of a vessel;
a sort of arrow [cf. the Pers. <lang n="arabic">تير</lang>]; ({%as%}), m. tin
[cf. {%tīvra%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of arrow, three-fourths of
which consists of reed and a fourth part of iron.
{%—Tīra-graha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race. {%—Tīra-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} growing or standing near a shore;
({%as%}), m. a tree near a shore. {%—Tīra-bhukti, is,%} m.,
N. of a country, the modern Tirhut, a province in
the east of central Hindūstan, lying to the north of
Bahar (fr. {%tīra,%} a bank, and {%bhukti,%} here signifying
a limit; being bounded on the east by Bhaugulpore,
on the west by Sarum, on the south by the Ganges,
and on the north by the skirts of the Himā-
laya mountains); [cf. {%tri-bhukti.%}] {%—Tīra-ruha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} growing on a bank; ({%as%}), m. a tree
growing on a bank. {%—Tīra-stha, as, ā, am,%} situated
on a bank or shore. {%—Tīrāntara (˚ra-an˚), am,%}
n. the opposite bank or shore.
<LEND>

<L>21004<pc>0376-b<k1>tIraya<k2>tIraya
{%Tīraya,%}¦ nom. P. {%tīrayati, -yitum,%} to get through,
cross over, to finish, accomplish, complete success-
fully.
<LEND>

<L>21005<pc>0376-b<k1>tIrita<k2>tIrita
{%Tīrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ finished, settled, completed,
adjudged, decided according to evidence; ({%am%}), n.
completion of any act or affair; corrupt or improper
non-infliction of a sentence.
<LEND>

<L>21006<pc>0376-b<k1>tIraRa<k2>tIraRa
{#tIraRa#}¦ {%tīraṇa,%} a kind of plant, {%= karañjikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>21007<pc>0376-b<k1>tIrAwa<k2>tIrAwa
{#tIrAwa#}¦ {%tīrāṭa, as,%} m. {%= tirīṭa,%} Symplocos
Racemosa.
<LEND>

<L>21008<pc>0376-b<k1>tIru<k2>tIru
{#tIru#}¦ {%tīru,%} perhaps a wrong reading for
{%bhīru.%}
<LEND>

<L>21009<pc>0376-b<k1>tIrRa<k2>tIrRa
{#tIrRa#}¦ {%tīrṇa, as, ā, am.%} See under rt. {%tṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>21010<pc>0376-b<k1>tIrtvA<k2>tIrtvA
{#tIrtvA#}¦ {%tīrtvā,%} ind. See under rt. {%tṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>21011<pc>0376-b<k1>tIrTa<k2>tIrTa
{#tIrTa#}¦ {%tīrtha, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%tṝ,%} the
masc. is only exceptionally used in epic poetry), a
passage, way, road, ford; especially a Ghāt or the
stairs of a landing-place, a descent into a river, a
bathing-place, a holy place, a shrine or sacred place
of pilgrimage, as Benares &c., especially particular
spots along the course of sacred streams, as the
Ganges &c., or in the vicinity of sacred springs;
any piece of water; (in sacrificial language) the path
to the altar between the Cātvāla and Utkara; a
channel, a canal, watercourse; the usual way, the
usual or right manner (e. g. {%tīrthena%} or {%tīrthatas,%}
in right order, in the usual way; {%a-tīrthena,%} in a
wrong way); the right place, the right moment;
a sacred place, a sacred moment, opportunity; a
sacrifice; advice, instruction, counsel; a counsellor,
an adviser; a sacred preceptor, a Guru; an oppor-
tunity, a means, an expedient; certain lines or parts
of the hand sacred to the deities &c. (as the root
of the two smaller fingers, to Prajāpati; the tops of
the fingers, to the gods; the space between the
thumb and finger, to the manes; the root of the
thumb, to Brahma or to the Veda; {%saumyan tīr-%}
{%tham%} = the middle of the hand); an object of
veneration, a sacred object; a worthy object or
person, a fit recipient, (sometimes at the end of
names, e. g. {%ānanda-tīrtha, jaya-t˚,%} &c.); a Brāh-
man; a minister; a N. given to certain officers
[Page0376-c+ 79]
(eighteen or fifteen in number) who are in close
attendance on a king; pudendum muliebre; menstrual
courses of a woman; a school of philosophy ({%= dar-%}
{%śana%}), a sect; ascertainment of disease; fire. {%—Tīr-%}
{%tha-kamaṇḍalu, us, u,%} m. n. a pot with water
from a sacred bathing-place. {%—Tīrtha-kara, as, ā%} or
{%ī, am,%} ‘creating a passage (through life, or through the
circuit of life);’ ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; one
of the synonyms of an Arhat or sanctified teacher of
the Jaina sect; (with Buddhists) an ascetic (‘bathing
in holy waters’). {%—Tīrtha-kāka, as,%} m. a crow at
a sacred bathing-place, i. e. one not in his own
proper place. {%—Tīrtha-kāśikā,%} f., N. of a work by
Gaṅgā-dhara. {%—Tīrtha-kīrtti, is, is, i,%} one whose
mere fame makes holy. {%—Tīrtha-kṛt, t,%} m. {%=%}
{%tīrtha-kara,%} a Jaina Arhat. {%—Tīrtha-gopāla, am,%}
n., N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Tīrthaṅ-kara,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= tīrtha-kara,%} a Jaina Arhat. {%—Tīrtha-%}
{%cintā-maṇi, is,%} m. f., N. of a chapter of the
Saṃskāra-tattva by Raghu-nandana, treating of the
Indian sacraments. {%—Tīrtha-tama, am,%} n. (fr. {%tīr-%}
{%tha%} with the affix of the superl.), a more sacred
place of pilgrimage; an object of the highest sanctity.
{%—Tīrtha-deva, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Tīr-%}
{%tha-{{dhvānkṣa->dhvāṅkṣa||20161202|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 308-310|guttural nasal}}, as,%} m. ‘a crow at a place of pil-
grimage,’ a contemptuous epithet; [cf. {%tīrtha-kāka.%}]
{%—Tīrtha-pati, is,%} m., N. of the chief of a sect.
{%—Tīrtha-pād, pāt, padī, pat,%} ‘one whose feet are
sacred or sanctify,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Tīrtha-%}
{%pādīya, as,%} m. an adherent of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Tīrtha-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} rendered holy, sacred. {%—Tīrtha-%}
{%mahā-hrada, as,%} m., N. of a shrine or place of
pilgrimage. {%—Tīrtha-mahiman, ā,%} m., N. of a
chapter of the Śūdra-dharma-tattva, treating of the
duties of the Śūdras. {%—Tīrtha-māhātmya, am,%} n.,
N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva by Halā-
yudha. {%—Tīrtha-yātrā,%} f. a visit to any sacred
shrine or bathing-place, a pilgrimage; N. of a
chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Tīrthayātrā-tattva,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a part of the Smṛti-tattva by Raghu-
nandana. {%—Tīrthayātrā-parvan, a,%} n., N. of a sec-
tion of the third book of the Mahā-bhārata (ch. 80-
156). {%—Tīrtha-yātrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} going to a place of
pilgrimage. {%—Tīrtha-rājī,%} f. ‘a line of sacred bathing-
places,’ epithet of Benares. {%—Tīrtha-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having descents to the water, abounding in
sacred bathing-places; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Tīr-%}
{%tha-vāka, as,%} m. the hair of the head. {%—Tīrtha-%}
{%vāyasa, as,%} m. a crow at a Tīrtha; see {%tīrtha-%}
{%kāka%}. {%—Tīrtha-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling at a place
of pilgrimage. {%—Tīrtha-vidhi, is,%} m. the rites ob-
served at a place of pilgrimage. {%—Tīrtha-śilā,%} f. the
stone steps leading to a bathing-place. {%—Tīrtha-%}
{%śravas, ās, ās, as,%} one whose mere fame is sacred
or sanctifies. {%—Tīrtha-śrāddha-prayoga, as,%} m.,
N. of a chapter of the Śrāddha-cintā-maṇi by Śiva-
rāma, treating of funeral ceremonies. {%—Tīrtha-%}
{%seni, is,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on
Skanda. {%—Tīrtha-sevin, ī, inī, i,%} visiting shrines,
a pilgrim; ({%ī%}), m. a kind of crane, Ardea Nivea.
{%—Tīrtha-saukhya, am,%} n. title of a particular work
or of a part of a work.
<LEND>

<L>21012<pc>0376-c<k1>tIrTaka<k2>tIrTaka
{%Tīrthaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ holy, sacred, venerable;
({%as%}), m. an ascetic Brāhman; N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>21013<pc>0376-c<k1>tIrTika<k2>tIrTika
{%Tīrthika, as,%}¦ m. an ascetic Brāhman (visiting
holy shrines or bathing-places), a pilgrim.
<LEND>

<L>21014<pc>0376-c<k1>tIrTIkf<k2>tIrTIkf
{%Tīrthī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make sacred. {%—Tīrthī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the
act of rendering sacred; ({%as, ī, am%}), sanctifying.
<LEND>

<L>21015<pc>0376-c<k1>tIrTIBUta<k2>tIrTIBUta
{%Tīrthī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ become sacred.
<LEND>

<L>21016<pc>0376-c<k1>tIrTya<k2>tIrTya
{%Tīrthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to a ford or to a
sacred bathing-place, &c.; ({%as%}), m. an ascetic; [cf.
{%tairthya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21017<pc>0376-c<k1>tIv<k2>tIv
{#tIv#}¦ {%tīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%tīvati,%} &c., to be
large or strong, to be fat or corpulent;
[cf. rt. {%nīv.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21018<pc>0376-c<k1>tIvara<k2>tIvara
{#tIvara#}¦ {%tīvara, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%tīr%}),
the ocean; a hunter, the adulterine offspring of a
Rājaputrī by a Kṣatriya; one who lives by killing
[Page0377-a+ 77]
and selling game; a fisherman (?); ({%ī%}), f. the wife
of a hunter or of a fisherman.
<LEND>

<L>21019<pc>0377-a<k1>tIvra<k2>tIvra
{#tIvra#}¦ {%tīvra, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. {%tij;%}
probably connected with rt. {%tīv%} and rt. 2. {%tu%}), strong,
severe, violent, intense, fierce, ardent, impetuous,
sharp, keen, acute, poignant, pungent, sour; hot,
warm; flashing, pervading; much, exceeding, ex-
cessive, endless, unbounded, unlimited; horrible,
dreadful; ({%as%}), m. sharpness, &c.; a hunter (?); an
epithet of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants, viz.
Helleborus Niger; black mustard; a sort of Dūrvā
or bent grass, {%= gaṇḍa-dūrvā;%} basil, {%= taradī, =%}
{%mahā-jyotiṣmatī;%} N. of a river, the Padma-vatī,
in the east of Bengal; ({%am%}), n. heat, pungency; a
shore [cf. {%tīra%}]; tin [cf. {%tīra%}]; iron, steel [cf.
{%tīkṣṇa%}]; ({%am%}), ind. violently, impetuously, sharply,
fiercely; much, excessively. {%—Tīvra-kanda%} or (ac-
cording to a various reading) {%tīvra-kaṇṭha, as,%} m.
a pungent kind of Arum. {%—Tīvra-gati, is, is, i,%}
moving rapidly, quick, swift. {%—Tīvra-gandhā,%} f.
cumin-seed or Ptychotis Ajowan. {%—Tīvra-jvālā,%} f.
Grislea Tomentosa; [cf. {%agni-jvālā%} and {%vahni-%}
{%śikhā.%}] {%—Tīvra-tā,%} f. violence, sharpness, heat,
pungency. {%—Tīvra-dāru, us,%} m. a species of tree.
{%—Tīvra-pauruṣa, am,%} n. daring heroism, such as
the storming of a fortress. {%—Tīvra-roṣa-samāviṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} filled with fierce anger. {%—Tīvra-vedanā,%}
f. excessive pain, agony, the pain of damnation.
{%—Tīvra-śoka-samāviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} filled with
excessive sorrow. {%—Tīvra-śokārta (˚ka-ār˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} afflicted with poignant grief. {%—Tīvra-sava,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an Ekāha sacrifice. {%—Tīvra-sut, t, t, t,%}
Ved. pressed out of a sour or fermenting substance;
(Sāy. {%tīvra-suta, as, ā, am%}), whose expressed juice
is sharp or pungent; ({%t%}), m., N. of an Ekāha sacri-
fice. {%—Tīvrānanda (˚ra-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘having intense
joy,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Tīvrānta (˚ra-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. becoming strong or sharp at the close
(i. e. by a process of fermentation); having a sure or
excessive result.
<LEND>

<L>21020<pc>0377-a<k1>tIvraya<k2>tIvraya
{%Tīvraya,%}¦ nom. P. {%-yati, -yitum,%} to make sharp,
strengthen.
<LEND>

<L>21021<pc>0377-a<k1>tIsawa<k2>tIsawa
{#tIsawa#}¦ {%tīsaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a writer on
medicine.
<LEND>

<L>21022<pc>0377-a<k1>tu<k2>tu<h>1
{#tu#} 1¦. {%tu,%} the base of some of the cases of
the 2nd personal pronoun; [cf. {%tva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21023<pc>0377-a<k1>tu<k2>tu<h>2
{#tu#} 2¦. {%tu,%} cl. 2. P., Ved. {%tavīti%} and {%tauti,%}
{%tūtāva, totum%} and {%tavitum,%} to have authority
or power, to be strong; to attain; to thrive or increase,
to fill, become full; to go or move; to injure, hurt,
kill: Caus., Ved. (only used in aor. {%tūtot%}), to make
strong or efficient, make valid, accomplish; [cf. Zend
<nsi>tav,</nsi> ‘to be able;’ <nsi>tavan,</nsi> ‘powerful:’ Pers. <lang n="arabic">توان</lang> <nsi>tuvân,</nsi>
‘power;’ <lang n="arabic">توانم</lang> <nsi>tuvânam,</nsi> ‘I can:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">τύλος, τύλη,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τυλόω, ταΰς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>tumor, tumere, tumidus, tu-</nsi>
<nsi>mulus (?), tuber, tueri, totus:</nsi> Umbr. Osc. <nsi>tauta,</nsi>
<nsi>tota, touta,</nsi> ‘town;’ <nsi>tut-icus,</nsi> ‘townish:’ Goth.
<nsi>thiuda, thiuth, thiuthyan:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>thū-ma,</nsi>
‘the thumb;’ <nsi>theod,</nsi> ‘people:’ Old Germ. <nsi>dū-mo,</nsi>
‘the thumb:’ Slav. <nsi>ty-ti,</nsi> ‘to grow fat;’ <nsi>tu-kŭ,</nsi> ‘fat:’
Lith. <nsi>tau-ka-i,</nsi> ‘fat;’ <nsi>tunk-u,</nsi> ‘I become fat:’ Old
Pruss. <nsi>tau-ta,</nsi> ‘land, country:’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>tyv-u,</nsi>
‘to increase.’]
<LEND>

<L>21024<pc>0377-a<k1>tu<k2>tu<h>3
{#tu#} 3¦. {%tu,%} ind. (a particle, perhaps connected
with the pronom. base 2. {%ta,%} or with the Vedic pro-
noun {%tva;%} never found at the beginning of a sentence
or verse, and causing the verb with which it is con-
structed to retain its accent). As a particle implying
‘earnest entreaty’ or ‘urgent request’ it is often used in
the Veda, like Lat. <nsi>dum,</nsi> with an imperative, and may
be translated by ‘pray!’ ‘I beg,’ ‘do’ (e. g. {%ā tveta,%}
come here, do); or it may be rendered by ‘well,’
‘now then,’ ‘now,’ ‘just.’ As an adversative particle
it is equivalent to ‘but,’ ‘on the contrary,’ ‘on the
other hand’ (e. g. {%na cchinati janayati tu,%} he
does not destroy but he produces). The sense ‘but’
is most common in later Sanskrit.
<LEND>
[Page0377-b+ 71]

<L>21025<pc>0377-b<k1>tu<k2>tu
{%Tu%}¦ is sometimes, however, used for {%ca,%} ‘and’
(e. g. {%ā samudrāt pūrvād ā samudrāt tu paści-%}
{%māt,%} to the eastern sea and to the western sea); and
even for {%vā,%} ‘or’ (e. g. {%uṣṭra-yānaṃ samāruhya%}
{%khara-yānaṃ tu,%} having ascended a camel-carriage
or one drawn by donkeys). Sometimes it appears to
be incorrectly written for {%nu%} (e. g. {%kin tu%} for {%kin%}
{%nu%}). Occasionally it seems to be used for {%tadā%} after
{%cet%} (e. g. {%tāṃ ced na ditseyam pramathyaināṃ%}
{%hareyus tu,%} if I were not willing to give her then
they would take her by force). Not unfrequently {%tu%}
is used as an expletive to fill out a verse or prevent
the blending of vowels (e. g. {%īrṣyī ghṛṇī tv%}
{%a-santuṣṭaḥ,%} &c., an envious man, one over-com-
passionate, a discontented man, &c.). {%Tu — tu,%}
although — yet; {%api-tu,%} moreover; {%kin tu,%} but,
nevertheless, notwithstanding; {%paran tu,%} more-
over, but, nevertheless; {%na tv eva tu,%} but by no
means. According to lexicographers {%tu%} implies dis-
junction, mutual opposition, alternative, asseveration,
emphasis, conjunction, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21026<pc>0377-b<k1>tuHKAra<k2>tuHKAra
{#tuHKAra#}¦ {%tuḥkhāra, ās,%} m. pl. (probably {%=%}
{%tukhāra%}), N. of a race of people; ({%as%}), m. a man
of this race.
<LEND>

<L>21027<pc>0377-b<k1>tuk<k2>tuk
{#tuk#}¦ {%tuk.%} See 1. {%tuc%} below.
<LEND>

<L>21028<pc>0377-b<k1>tukajyotirvid<k2>tukajyotirvid
{#tukajyotirvid#}¦ {%tuka-jyotir-vid, t,%} m., N. of
an astronomer.
<LEND>

<L>21029<pc>0377-b<k1>tukAkzIrI<k2>tukAkzIrI
{#tukAkzIrI#}¦ {%tukākṣīrī,%} f. {%= tugākṣīrī,%} the
manna of bamboos.
<LEND>

<L>21030<pc>0377-b<k1>tukka<k2>tukka
{#tukka#}¦ {%tukka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21031<pc>0377-b<k1>tuKAra<k2>tuKAra
{#tuKAra#}¦ {%tukhāra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a non-
Hindū people to the north-west of Madhya-deśa;
(often written {%tuṣāra%}); [cf. {%tuḥkhāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21032<pc>0377-b<k1>tugA<k2>tugA
{#tugA#}¦ {%tugā,%} f. the so-called Tabāṣīr (fr.
{%tvak-kṣīrā%}), a white secretion found sometimes in
the joints of bamboos, the manna of bamboos. {%—Tu-%}
{%gā-kṣīrī,%} f. a peculiar kind of bamboo manna; [cf.
{%tukā-kṣīrī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21033<pc>0377-b<k1>tugra<k2>tugra
{#tugra#}¦ {%tugra, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Bhujyu who was protected by the Aśvins; N. of an
enemy of Indra, conquered by the latter.
<LEND>

<L>21034<pc>0377-b<k1>tugriya<k2>tugriya
{%Tugriya,%}¦ Ved. {%= tugrya.%}
<LEND>

<L>21035<pc>0377-b<k1>tugrya<k2>tugrya
{%Tugrya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic of Bhujyu; N.
of a man or of a race; ({%ā%}), f. water. {%—Tugryā-%}
{%vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. delighting in the Tugryas; epi-
thet of Indra and of Soma; (Sāy.) increasing water,
increasing with water.
<LEND>

<L>21036<pc>0377-b<k1>tugvan<k2>tugvan
{#tugvan#}¦ {%tugvan, a,%} n., Ved. {%= tīrtha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21037<pc>0377-b<k1>tuNga<k2>tuNga
{#tuNga#}¦ {%tuṅga.%} See under rt. 2. {%tuj%} next col.
<LEND>

<L>21038<pc>0377-b<k1>tuc<k2>tuc<h>1
{#tuc#} 1¦. {%tuc%} or 1. {%tuj, k,%} f., Ved. offspring,
children, propagation; [cf. {%toka%} and {%tokman.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21039<pc>0377-b<k1>tuji<k2>tuji
{%Tuji, is,%}¦ f., Ved. propagation, begetting children;
({%is%}), m., Ved., N. of a man protected by Indra.
<LEND>

<L>21040<pc>0377-b<k1>tuc<k2>tuc<h>2
{#tuc#} 2¦. {%tuc%} in {%ā-tuc%} (q. v.), growing dusk.
<LEND>

<L>21041<pc>0377-b<k1>tucCa<k2>tucCa
{#tucCa#}¦ {%tuccha, as, ā, am%} (probably for {%tuṣa%}),
empty, void, vain, light; small, little, trifling; aban-
doned, deserted; low, mean, insignificant, contemptible;
miserable, poor; worthless; ({%ā%}), f. the Indigo plant,
{%= tutthā; (am),%} n. chaff; [cf. Lith. <nsi>tuszcias,</nsi>
‘empty.’] {%—Tuccha-tva, am,%} n. emptiness, mean-
ness, inanity, vanity. {%—Tuccha-dru, us,%} m. (‘the
sapless tree’), the castor-oil tree, Ricinus Communis.
{%—Tuccha-dhānya%} or {%tuccha-dhānyaka, am,%} n.
straw, chaff.
<LEND>

<L>21042<pc>0377-b<k1>tucCaka<k2>tucCaka
{%Tucchaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ void, empty, &c., {%= tuccha.%}
<LEND>

<L>21043<pc>0377-b<k1>tucCaya<k2>tucCaya
{%Tucchaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%tucchayati,%} &c., to make
empty or poor.
<LEND>

<L>21044<pc>0377-b<k1>tucCIkf<k2>tucCIkf
{%Tucchī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to consider as vain or idle, to despise, contemn.
<LEND>

<L>21045<pc>0377-b<k1>tucCya<k2>tucCya
{%Tucchya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. void, empty, vain.
<LEND>

<L>21046<pc>0377-b<k1>tuj<k2>tuj<h>1
{#tuj#} 1¦. {%tuj.%} See 1. {%tuc%} above.
<LEND>
[Page0377-c+ 77]

<L>21047<pc>0377-c<k1>tuj<k2>tuj<h>2
{#tuj#} 2¦. {%tuj%} or {%tuñj,%} cl. 1. 6. P., Ved. {%to-%}
{%jati, tujati, tutoja, tojitum,%} or cl. 1. P.
{%tuñjati, tutuñja, tuñjitum,%} Ved. Inf. {%tujase,%} to
strike, hit; impel, push; to press out, emit; to stir
up, urge on, instigate, incite; wave to and fro; to
hasten; Ved. reach, extend, project; to kill or hurt;
to guard, protect, to be strong; to clothe; to live:
Pass. {%tujyate,%} &c., to be struck, to be vexed, &c.: Caus.
{%tujayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to promote, instigate; to
move quickly, spring, run [cf. {%tūtujāna%}]; {%tuñjayati%}
or {%tojayati, -yitum,%} to hurt, to injure or kill; to be
strong or vigorous; to give or take; to dwell, abide;
to shine, speak; [cf. {%tūtuji.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21048<pc>0377-c<k1>tuNga<k2>tuNga
{%Tuṅga, as, ā, am,%}¦ high, elevated, prominent, erect,
lofty; long; vaulted; chief, principal; strong, passionate
[cf. {%ut-tuṅga%}]; ({%as%}), m. an elevation, height, culmina-
tion, altitude; a mountain; top, highest point, peak,
vertex; the superior apsis or aphelion of a planet; (meta-
phorically) a throne; a wise man; a rhinoceros; the
planet Mercury; the tree Rottleria Tinctoria; the
cocoa-nut; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a tree [cf.
{%śamī%}]; also {%= tugā,%} bamboo manna; N. of a metre
consisting of four lines of eight syllables each; N. of
a river in the Mysore territory; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of
Ocimum ({%varvarā%}); turmeric; night; ({%am%}), n.
the stamina of the lotus blossom; [cf. Lith. <nsi>tunkù,</nsi>
‘to grow fat:’ Russ. <nsi>tucnyĭ,</nsi> ‘fat:’ Hib. <nsi>tonngo,</nsi> ‘a
billowy sea;’ <nsi>tonnghail, tonnta,</nsi> ‘waved.’] {%—Tuṅga-%}
{%kūṭa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a place of
pilgrimage. {%—Tuṅga-tā,%} f. or {%tuṅga-tva, am,%} n.
altitude, loftiness, height, passionateness. {%—Tuṅga-%}
{%dhanvan, ā,%} m., N. of a king of Suhma. {%—Tuṅga-%}
{%nābha, as,%} m. a particular species of poisonous
insect. {%—Tuṅga-nāsikā%} or {%ī,%} f. a woman having a
prominent nose. {%—Tuṅga-prastha, as,%} m., N. of a
mountain. {%—Tuṅga-bala, as,%} m., N. of a warrior.
{%—Tuṅga-bha, am,%} n. the lunar mansion in which
a planet reaches its apsis, the apsis of a planet.
{%—Tuṅga-bhadra, as,%} m. a restive elephant or one
in rut; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river in the Mysore territory,
commonly called Tumbudra, formed by the junction
of the Tuṅga and Bhadra rivers. {%—Tuṅga-mukha,%}
{%as,%} m. a rhinoceros, (‘having a prominent snout.’)
{%—Tuṅga-vīja, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), quick-
silver, (‘forming long seed-like balls.’) {%—Tuṅga-veṇā,%}
f., N. of a river in the Dekha. {%—Tuṅga-śekhara,%}
{%as,%} m. the top of a mountain. {%—Tuṅga-śaila, as,%}
m. ‘the high mountain,’ N. of a mountain with a
temple of Śiva. {%—Tuṅgī-nāsa, as,%} m. a kind of
poisonous insect. {%—Tuṅgī-pati, is,%} m. the moon,
(‘lord of night.’) {%—Tuṅgīśa (˚gī-īśa), as,%} m. the
moon; the sun; an epithet of Śiva; N. of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Tuṅgeśvara (˚ga-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of the
mountains,’ an epithet of Śiva; a temple of Śiva;
[cf. {%giriśa%} and {%girīśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21049<pc>0377-c<k1>tuNgaka<k2>tuNgaka
{%Tuṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Rottleria Tinctoria;
({%am%}), n., N. of a sacred forest.
<LEND>

<L>21050<pc>0377-c<k1>tuNgin<k2>tuNgin
{%Tuṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ high, lofty; ({%ī%}), m. a planet
at the apex of its orbit or of its position with regard
to others considered astrologically; ({%inī%}), f., N. of a
plant, {%= mahā-śatāvarī.%}
<LEND>

<L>21051<pc>0377-c<k1>tuj<k2>tuj<h>3
3. {%tuj, k%}¦ (?), f., Ved. shock, impulse; pressure;
assault; ({%k, k, k%}), pressing, urging on, impelling.
<LEND>

<L>21052<pc>0377-c<k1>tujya<k2>tujya
{%Tujya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be struck or pushed, to
be impelled.
<LEND>

<L>21053<pc>0377-c<k1>tuYja<k2>tuYja
{%Tuñja, as,%}¦ m., Ved. shock, assault; a Daitya, a
demon; a thunderbolt; giving; ({%as, ā, am%}), noxious,
mischievous.
<LEND>

<L>21054<pc>0377-c<k1>tuji<k2>tuji
{#tuji#}¦ {%tuji.%} See under 1. {%tuc,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>21055<pc>0377-c<k1>tuYjIna<k2>tuYjIna
{#tuYjIna#}¦ {%tuñjīna, as,%} m., N. of several kings
of Kaśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>21056<pc>0377-c<k1>tuw<k2>tuw
{#tuw#}¦ {%tuṭ,%} cl. 6. P. {%tuṭati, tutoṭa, tuṭitum,%}
to dispute, quarrel, wrangle; to hurt or
injure: Caus. P. {%toṭayati,%} &c., a wrong reading for
{%troṭayati.%}
<LEND>

<L>21057<pc>0377-c<k1>tuwituwa<k2>tuwituwa
{#tuwituwa#}¦ {%tuṭituṭa, as,%} m. a N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>21058<pc>0377-c<k1>tuwuma<k2>tuwuma
{#tuwuma#}¦ {%tuṭuma, as,%} m. a mouse or rat.
<LEND>
[Page0378-a+ 72]

<L>21059<pc>0378-a<k1>tuq<k2>tuq
{#tuq#}¦ {%tuḍ,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%toḍati, tuḍati, tutoḍa,%}
{%toḍitum%} or {%tuḍitum,%} to tear, split, break,
cut, pull to pieces; to push; to injure, hurt or kill;
to bring near.
<LEND>

<L>21060<pc>0378-a<k1>tuqq<k2>tuqq
{#tuqq#}¦ {%tuḍḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%tuḍḍati,%} &c., to dis-
respect, disregard, contemn; [cf. rt. {%tūḍ%}
and {%toḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21061<pc>0378-a<k1>tuR<k2>tuR
{#tuR#}¦ {%tuṇ,%} cl. 6. P. {%tuṇati, tutoṇa, toṇi-%}
{%tum,%} to curve, bend or make crooked; to
be crooked or curved; to act fraudulently.
<LEND>

<L>21062<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRi<k2>tuRi
{#tuRi#}¦ {%tuṇi, is,%} m. {%= kuṇi = tunna,%} the tree
Cedula Toona.
<LEND>

<L>21063<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRika<k2>tuRika
{#tuRika#}¦ {%tuṇika (tūṇika ?), as,%} m., N. of a
tree, {%= nandī-vṛkṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>21064<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRq<k2>tuRq
{#tuRq#}¦ {%tuṇḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%tuṇḍate,%} &c., {%= tuḍ.%}
<LEND>

<L>21065<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqa<k2>tuRqa
{%Tuṇḍa, am,%}¦ n. (according to some also {%as,%} m.),
a beak, snout (of a hog &c.), trunk (of an elephant),
mouth, face; the point of an instrument; ({%as%}), m.
a N. of Śiva; of a Rakṣas or demon; [cf. {%asthi-t˚,%}
{%kaṅka-t˚, kāka-t˚,%} &c.] {%—Tuṇḍa-deva, as,%} m.,
N. of a race or of a particular class of men. {%—Tuṇḍa-%}
{%deva-bhakta, am,%} n. the district inhabited by the
Tuṇḍa-devas.
<LEND>

<L>21066<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqaka<k2>tuRqaka
{%Tuṇḍaka = tuṇḍa%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>21067<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqakerikA<k2>tuRqakerikA
{%Tuṇḍakerikā,%}¦ f. {%= tuṇḍikerī,%} the cotton plant.
<LEND>

<L>21068<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqakerI<k2>tuRqakerI
{%Tuṇḍakerī,%}¦ f. a cucurbitaceous plant, Momordica
Monadelpha.
<LEND>

<L>21069<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqi<k2>tuRqi
{%Tuṇḍi, is,%}¦ m. a beak, the mouth, the face; ({%is%}),
f. the navel, a prominent navel [cf. {%tundi%}]; em-
physema or distention of the navel (in infants); a
kind of gourd or cucumber, {%= īrvāru, kuṣmāṇḍa;%}
[cf. {%tuṇḍī%} in {%kaṭu-tuṇḍī, tikta-t˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21070<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqika<k2>tuRqika
{%Tuṇḍika, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with a trunk or
snout; ({%ā%}), f. the navel [cf. {%tundikā%}]; the plant
Momordica Monadelpha; [cf. {%kaṭu-tuṇḍikā%} and
{%kāka-t˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21071<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqikera<k2>tuRqikera
{%Tuṇḍikera, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a race; ({%as%}), m. the
prince of this race; ({%ī%}), f. the cotton plant; a kind
of cucumber, Momordica Monadelpha; a large boil
or swelling on the palate.
<LEND>

<L>21072<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqikerikA<k2>tuRqikerikA
{%Tuṇḍikerikā,%}¦ f. Momordica Monadelpha.
<LEND>

<L>21073<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqikerin<k2>tuRqikerin
{%Tuṇḍikerin, ī,%}¦ m. a species of poisonous insect.
<LEND>

<L>21074<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqikeSI<k2>tuRqikeSI
{%Tuṇḍikeśī,%}¦ f. a sort of gourd, Momordica Mona-
delpha.
<LEND>

<L>21075<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqicela<k2>tuRqicela
{%Tuṇḍicela, am,%}¦ n. a particular kind of costly
garment.
<LEND>

<L>21076<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqiBa<k2>tuRqiBa
{%Tuṇḍibha, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a prominent or
elevated navel; [cf. {%tundibha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21077<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqila<k2>tuRqila
{%Tuṇḍila, as, ā, am,%}¦ talkative; speaking harshly
or severely; loquacious; having a prominent or
elevated navel; [cf. {%tundila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21078<pc>0378-a<k1>tuRqela<k2>tuRqela
{#tuRqela#}¦ {%tuṇḍela, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a kind
of evil spirit or goblin.
<LEND>

<L>21079<pc>0378-a<k1>tutAta<k2>tutAta
{#tutAta#}¦ {%tutāta, as,%} m., N. of the founder of
a philosophical system; [cf. {%tautātika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21080<pc>0378-a<k1>tuturvaRi<k2>tuturvaRi
{#tuturvaRi#}¦ {%tuturvaṇi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. 1. {%tur%}),
Ved. striving to bring near or obtain; (Sāy.) acting
with alacrity, acting speedily; [cf. {%jugurvaṇi%} and
{%śuśukvani.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21081<pc>0378-a<k1>tutTa<k2>tutTa
{#tutTa#}¦ {%tuttha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%tud%}),
fire; ({%ā%}), f. the Indigo plant; small cardamoms;
({%am%}), n. blue vitriol, sulphate of copper, especially
considered as an ointment or medical application to
the eyes; a collyrium extracted from the Amomum
Zanthorrhiza; a stone, a rock. {%—Tutthāñjana%}
{%(˚tha-añ˚), am,%} n. blue vitriol as an ointment or
medicinal application to the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>21082<pc>0378-a<k1>tutTaka<k2>tutTaka
{%Tutthaka, am,%}¦ n. blue vitriol.
<LEND>

<L>21083<pc>0378-a<k1>tutTaya<k2>tutTaya
{%Tutthaya%}¦ (originally ‘to cover with blue vitriol ?’),
nom. P. {%tutthayati, -yitum,%} to screen, veil, cover;
to spread.
<LEND>

<L>21084<pc>0378-a<k1>tuTa<k2>tuTa
{#tuTa#}¦ {%tutha,%} Ved. occurring in certain
[Page0378-b+ 74]
formularies, (explained in commentaries by {%brahma-%}
{%rūpa,%} ‘having the shape or form of Brahma.’)
<LEND>

<L>21085<pc>0378-b<k1>tud<k2>tud<h>1
{#tud#} 1¦. {%tud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%tudati, -te, tutoda,%}
{%tutude, totsyati, -te, atautsīt, atutta,%}
{%tottum,%} to strike, hit, push; to goad, prick; to
bruise; to pain, wound, sting, vex, harass, tease,
torture, torment: Caus. {%todayati, -yitum, atūtu-%}
{%dat,%} to push &c.: Desid. {%tututsati, -te:%} Intens.
{%totudyate, tototti;%} [cf. rt. {%tund, tottra, toda;%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">Τυδ-εύ-ς, Τύδ-α-ς, Τυνδ-άρη-ς, Τυνδ-άρεο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">Τυνδ-άρεω-ς, Τυνδάρ-ιχο-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>tund-o, tud-es,</nsi>
<nsi>tud-i-tare, dea Pertunda, tussis;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>staut-</nsi>
<nsi>an;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>stoz-an;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>stoss-en;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>a-stintan,</nsi> ‘to blunt:’ the initial <nsi>s</nsi> is
original, and dropped in Sanskrit.]
<LEND>

<L>21086<pc>0378-b<k1>tud<k2>tud<h>2
2. {%tud, t, t, t,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) striking,
pricking, goading.
<LEND>

<L>21087<pc>0378-b<k1>tuda<k2>tuda
{%Tuda, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) striking,
pricking, stinging, paining, tormenting [cf. {%tilan-%}
{%tuda%} and {%arun-tuda,%} ‘striking a wound’]; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a man. {%—Tud-ādi,%} the grammatical
designation of the sixth class of roots or those of
which {%tud%} is the first.
<LEND>

<L>21088<pc>0378-b<k1>tunna<k2>tunna
{%Tunna, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck, hit; pricked; goaded,
tormented, hurt, vexed, injured; cut, broken, cut
down &c.; ({%as%}), m. the Toon or Tuna tree, the
wood of which bears some resemblance to mahogany
and is used for furniture &c.; Cedrela Toona.
{%—Tunna-vāya, as,%} m. a tailor. {%—Tunna-sevanī,%}
f. the suture of a wound (in surgery); a suture of
the skull.
<LEND>

<L>21089<pc>0378-b<k1>tuna<k2>tuna
{#tuna#}¦ {%tuna, as, am,%} m. n. (?), Ved. a various
reading (in the Sāma-veda) for {%tana,%} posterity.
<LEND>

<L>21090<pc>0378-b<k1>tund<k2>tund
{#tund#}¦ {%tund,%} cl. 1. P. {%tundati,%} &c., to be
busy, active; to search, seek; [cf. rt.
{%trand.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21091<pc>0378-b<k1>tunda<k2>tunda
{#tunda#}¦ {%tunda, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%tud%}),
a protuberant belly, the belly, abdomen; ({%as, ī%}), m. f.
the navel. {%—Tunda-kūpikā%} or {%tunda-kūpī,%} f. the
cavity of the navel. {%—Tunda-parimārja, as, ā, am,%}
one who is in the habit of stroking his belly (in the
literal sense). {%—Tunda-parimṛja, as, ā, am,%} one
who is in the habit of rubbing his belly (meta-
phorically), a lazy man, a sloth, a sluggard. {%—Tunda-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} corpulent, fat.
<LEND>

<L>21092<pc>0378-b<k1>tundi<k2>tundi
{%Tundi, is, i,%}¦ f. n. the belly; ({%is%}), f. the navel;
({%is%}), m., N. of a Gandharva.
<LEND>

<L>21093<pc>0378-b<k1>tundika<k2>tundika
{%Tundika, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a large or prominent
navel or belly, fat, corpulent; ({%ā%}), f. the navel.
<LEND>

<L>21094<pc>0378-b<k1>tundikara<k2>tundikara
{%Tundikara, as,%}¦ m. the navel.
<LEND>

<L>21095<pc>0378-b<k1>tundita<k2>tundita
{%Tundita, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%tundin, ī, inī, i,%} or
{%tundibha%} or {%tundila, as, ā, am,%} having a large or
prominent belly or navel; gorbellied, corpulent.
{%—Tundila-phalā,%} f. Cucumis Utilissimus.
<LEND>

<L>21096<pc>0378-b<k1>tunna<k2>tunna
{#tunna#}¦ {%tunna.%} See under rt. 1. {%tud%} above.
<LEND>

<L>21097<pc>0378-b<k1>tup<k2>tup
{#tup#}¦ {%tup%} or {%tuph%} or {%tump%} or {%tumph,%} cl. 1.
6. P. {%topati, tupati, tophati, tuphati,%}
{%tumpati, tumphati,%} &c., (in the last two the form
in cl. 1. will only differ from that in cl. 6. by the
accent), to injure, hurt, wound; kill; {%tump,%} cl. 10.
P. {%tumpayati,%} &c., a various reading for {%tumb,%} q. v.;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τύπ-τ-ω, τύπο-ς, τυπή, τύμ-μα, τυπά(δ)ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τύμπ-ανο-ν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>stupeo;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>stumpf,</nsi>
<nsi>stumb-alon, stumph;</nsi> Old Island. <nsi>stūf-r.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21098<pc>0378-b<k1>tubarI<k2>tubarI
{#tubarI#}¦ {%tubarī,%} f. {%= tumbarī,%} coriander; a
bitch.
<LEND>

<L>21099<pc>0378-b<k1>tuB<k2>tuB
{#tuB#}¦ {%tubh,%} cl. 1. A., 4. 9. P. {%tobhate,%}
{%tubhyati, tubhnāti, tutobha, tutubhe,%}
{%tobhitum,%} to push, to kill, hurt, injure in any man-
ner; [cf. {%stubh;%} Goth. <nsi>thiubs;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>theof.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21100<pc>0378-b<k1>tuBa<k2>tuBa
{#tuBa#}¦ {%tubha, as,%} m. {%= stubha,%} a goat.
<LEND>

<L>21101<pc>0378-b<k1>tumala<k2>tumala
{#tumala#}¦ {%tumala,%} a various reading for {%tu-%}
{%mula,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21102<pc>0378-b<k1>tumiYja<k2>tumiYja
{#tumiYja#}¦ {%tumiñja, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>
[Page0378-c+ 73]

<L>21103<pc>0378-c<k1>tumura<k2>tumura
{#tumura#}¦ {%tumura, as, am,%} m. n. mingled com-
bat; [cf. {%tumula.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21104<pc>0378-c<k1>tumula<k2>tumula
{#tumula#}¦ {%tumula, as, ā, am,%} tumultuous,
noisy; excited, perplexed, confused; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
uproar, tumult, tumultuous sound, clang, clatter,
tumultuous or confused combat, melée, confusion;
({%as%}), m. Beleric Myrobalan, Terminalia Bellerica;
(sometimes read {%tumala%} and {%tumūla%}); [cf. Lat.
<nsi>tumultus.</nsi>] {%—Tumula-yuddha, am,%} n. a tumultuous
conflict.
<LEND>

<L>21105<pc>0378-c<k1>tump<k2>tump
{#tump#}¦ {%tump%} and {%tumph.%} See rt. {%tup.%}
<LEND>

<L>21106<pc>0378-c<k1>tumb<k2>tumb
{#tumb#}¦ {%tumb,%} cl. 1. P. {%tumbati,%} &c., to
distress, trouble, torment; to hurt, kill;
cl. 10. P. {%tumbayati,%} &c., to trouble; or (according
to a various reading) to be invisible.
<LEND>

<L>21107<pc>0378-c<k1>tumba<k2>tumba
{#tumba#}¦ {%tumba, as,%} m. a kind of long gourd,
Lagenaria Vulgaris; ({%ā%}), f. Lagenaria Vulgaris; a
milk-pail or vessel used in milking; a milch-cow;
({%ī%}), f. Lagenaria Vulgaris; Asteracantha Longifolia;
({%am%}), n. the fruit of Lagenaria Vulgaris; [cf. {%kaṭu-%}
{%tumbī, kumbha-t˚, gorakṣa-t˚.%}] {%—Tumba-vana,%}
{%as%} or {%am,%} m. n. (?), N. of a country. {%—Tumba-%}
{%vīṇa, as,%} m. ‘having a Tumba or gourd for a lute,’ a
N. of Śiva. {%—Tumbī-puṣpa, am,%} n. the flower of
the Lagenaria Vulgaris.
<LEND>

<L>21108<pc>0378-c<k1>tumbaka<k2>tumbaka
{%Tumbaka, as,%}¦ m. the gourd Lagenaria Vulgaris;
({%am%}), n. the fruit of this gourd.
<LEND>

<L>21109<pc>0378-c<k1>tumbi<k2>tumbi
{%Tumbi, is,%}¦ or {%tumbikā,%} f. a long white gourd,
Lagenaria Vulgaris.
<LEND>

<L>21110<pc>0378-c<k1>tumbinI<k2>tumbinI
{%Tumbinī,%}¦ f. {%= kaṭu-tumbī.%}
<LEND>

<L>21111<pc>0378-c<k1>tumbuka<k2>tumbuka
{%Tumbuka, as,%}¦ m. the plant, and ({%am%}), n. the
fruit, of Lagenaria Vulgaris.
<LEND>

<L>21112<pc>0378-c<k1>tumbara<k2>tumbara
{#tumbara#}¦ {%tumbara, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
kind of plant; ({%ī%}), f. {%= tuvarī,%} a sort of earth, {%=%}
{%tubarī,%} a bitch.
<LEND>

<L>21113<pc>0378-c<k1>tumbaru<k2>tumbaru
{#tumbaru#}¦ {%tumbaru, us,%} m., N. of a Gandharva;
(perhaps a wrong reading for {%tumburu.%})
<LEND>

<L>21114<pc>0378-c<k1>tumbuma<k2>tumbuma
{#tumbuma#}¦ {%tumbuma, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race or
people; [cf. {%tumbura.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21115<pc>0378-c<k1>tumbura<k2>tumbura
{#tumbura#}¦ {%tumbura, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race;
({%ī%}), f. coriander; a bitch; [cf. {%tumbarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21116<pc>0378-c<k1>tumburu<k2>tumburu
{#tumburu#}¦ {%tumburu, us,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Kalāpin; N. of a Gandharva; N. of the attendant
of the fifth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī; ({%u%}), n.
the fruit of Diospyros Embryopteris; coriander;
(according to others {%us, u%}), m. n. the plant and seed
of Diospyros Embryopteris.
<LEND>

<L>21117<pc>0378-c<k1>tumra<k2>tumra
{#tumra#}¦ {%tumra, as, ā, am%} [cf. {%tumura%} above],
Ved. big, strong, powerful; wild; (Sāy.) energetic ({%=%}
{%preraka%}); destroying or defeating adversaries; see
{%tūtuma;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>tumidus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21118<pc>0378-c<k1>tur<k2>tur<h>1
{#tur#} 1¦. {%tur%} (connected with rts. {%tṝ, tvar,%}
and {%tūr%}), cl. 6. P. A., Ved. {%turati, -te,%} &c.,
to hurry, hasten, press forwards, run; overcome; in-
jure; cl. 3. P., Ved. {%tutorti:%} Caus. {%turayati, -yitum,%}
to run: Desid., Ved. {%tūtūrṣati:%} Intens. A., Ved.
in the part. {%tarturāṇa,%} running forwards; [cf. rt.
{%tvar;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">τύρ-βη, τύρ-βα, τυρβάζω, τυρβασία,</lang>
<lang n="greek">Τυρ-μ-ίδαι;</lang> Lat. <nsi>turba, turbare, turb-idu-s, turma;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>thrym,</nsi> ‘multitude, mass, troop;’ Goth.
<nsi>thaurp;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>dorf,</nsi> ‘conference, assembly,
meeting;’ Old Island. <nsi>thyrpaz,</nsi> ‘to congregate.’]
<LEND>

<L>21119<pc>0378-c<k1>tur<k2>tur<h>2
2. {%tur, tūr, tūr, tūr,%}¦ Ved. running a race, hasten-
ing, fighting, conquering, a warrior; [cf. {%ap-tur,%}
{%āji-tur,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>21120<pc>0378-c<k1>tura<k2>tura<h>1
1. {%tura, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. 3. {%tura%} see p. 379, col. 1),
Ved. furthering, promoting, a promoter; quick, will-
ing, prompt; ({%am%}), ind. quickly. {%—Tura-ga, as,%} m.
‘going quickly,’ a horse; the mind, thought; ({%ī%}), f.
a mare, {%= aśva-gandhā,%} the plant Physalis Flexuosa;
[cf. {%turaṅ-ga%} and {%turaṅ-gama.%}] {%—Turaga-gandhā,%}
f. {%= tura-gī,%} Physalis Flexuosa; [cf. {%turaṅga-gandhā.%}]
{%—Turaga-dānava%} or {%turaga-daitya, as,%} m. ‘horse-
[Page0379-a+ 79]
titan’ or ‘Dānava in the shape of a horse,’ an epithet
of Keśin. {%—Turaga-nīla-tāla, as,%} m. a kind of
gesture with the hand. {%—Turaga-priya, as%} or {%am,%}
m. or n. (?), barley, ‘liked by horses;’ [cf. {%turaṅga-%}
{%priya.%}] {%—Turaga-brahma-caryaka, am,%} n. the
sexual restraint of horses, i. e. compulsory celibacy,
leading a life of continence, in consequence merely
of being without female society. {%—Turaga-medha,%}
{%as,%} m. a horse-sacrifice, {%= aśva-medha%}. {%—Turaga-%}
{%rakṣa, as,%} m. ‘horse-guardian,’ a groom, an equery.
{%—Turaga-līlaka, as,%} m. a particular time in music.
{%—Turaga-vadana%} or {%turagānana (˚ga-ān˚), ās,%}
m. pl. ‘horse-faced,’ N. of a race in the north of
Madhya-deśa. {%—Tura-gātu, us, us, u,%} Ved. going
quickly. {%—Turagāroha (˚ga-ār˚), as,%} m. ‘one
mounted on a horse,’ a horseman. {%—Turagin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} equestrian, riding, mounted or carried on a
horse; ({%ī%}), m. a horseman, a cavalier. {%—Turagīya,%}
an adj. derived fr. {%tura-ga%} in {%khara-turagīya-sam-%}
{%parka, as,%} m. sexual intercourse between asses
and horses. {%—Turagopacāraka (˚ga-up˚), as,%} m.
‘attending to horses,’ a groom, an equery. {%—Turaṅ-%}
{%ga, as,%} m. ‘going quickly,’ a horse; a N. of the
number seven (because of the seven horses of the
sun); the mind considered as the seat of feeling as
well as of intellect, the heart; ({%ī%}), f. a mare, {%=%}
{%tura-gī,%} Physalis Flexuosa, {%= ghoṭikā,%} Cucumis Uti-
lissimus; [cf. {%tura-ga%} and {%turaṅ-gama.%}] {%—Turaṅ-%}
{%gaka, as,%} m. the plant Luffa Fœtida; ({%ikā%}), f. a
kind of cucurbitaceous plant, {%= deva-dālī,%} the large
dark-green pumpkin. {%—Turaṅga-gandhā,%} f. {%= tu-%}
{%raga-gandhā%}. {%—Turaṅga-dviṣaṇī,%} f. (for {%-dve-%}
{%ṣaṇi%}), a she-buffalo. {%—Turaṅga-nātha, as,%} m.,
N. of the chief of a sect. {%—Turaṅga-priya, as,%} m.
{%= turaga-priya,%} barley. {%—Turaṅ-gama, as,%} m. a
horse; ({%ī%}), f. a mare; [cf. {%tura-ga%} and {%turaṅ-ga.%}]
{%—Turaṅgama-śālā,%} f. a horse-stable. {%—Turaṅga-%}
{%medha, as,%} m. a horse-sacrifice, {%= aśva-medha.%}
{%—Turaṅga-yāyin, ī, inī, i,%} going on horseback.
{%—Turaṅga-vaktra%} or {%turaṅga-vadana, as,%} m.
‘horse-faced,’ a Kinnara or chorister of Indra's heaven.
{%—Turaṅga-sādin, ī,%} m. a horseman, a horse-soldier.
{%—Turaṅga-skandha, as,%} m. a troop of horses.
{%—Turaṅga-sthāna, am,%} n. a horse-stable. {%—Tu-%}
{%raṅgāri (˚ga-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of the horse,’ a
buffalo; fragrant oleander {%(karavīra)%}. {%—Turaṅgā-%}
{%rūḍha (˚ga-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} mounted on horseback;
({%as%}), m. a horseman. {%—Turaṅgin, ī,%} m. a horse-
man, a rider, a groom; [cf. {%turagin.%}] {%—Tura-yā,%}
{%ās, ās, am,%} Ved. going quickly.
<LEND>

<L>21121<pc>0379-a<k1>turaRa<k2>turaRa
{%Turaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. quick, swift, energetic;
({%am%}), n. haste.
<LEND>

<L>21122<pc>0379-a<k1>turaRya<k2>turaRya
{%Turaṇya,%}¦ nom. P., Ved. {%turaṇyati,%} &c., to be
quick or swift; to make haste, to accelerate.
<LEND>

<L>21123<pc>0379-a<k1>turaRyasad<k2>turaRyasad
{%Turaṇya-sad, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. dwelling among the
quick or active.
<LEND>

<L>21124<pc>0379-a<k1>turaRyu<k2>turaRyu
{%Turaṇyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. quick, swift, energetic,
zealous.
<LEND>

<L>21125<pc>0379-a<k1>turaspeya<k2>turaspeya
{%Turas-peya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. anything drunk quickly (?).
<LEND>

<L>21126<pc>0379-a<k1>turI<k2>turI<h>1
1. {%turī,%}¦ f., Ved. overpowering strength, superior
power. (For 2. {%turī%} see col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>21127<pc>0379-a<k1>turyA<k2>turyA
{%Turyā,%}¦ f., Ved. overpowering or superior strength.
<LEND>

<L>21128<pc>0379-a<k1>tura<k2>tura<h>2
{#tura#} 2¦. {%tura, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%tu;%} for 1. {%tura%}
see p. 378, col. 3), Ved. strong, powerful, excelling,
surpassing, overpowering; an epithet of Indra, of the
Maruts, Ādityas, &c.; possessed of property; rich;
abundant, abounding; ({%as%}), m., N. of a preceptor
and priest with the patronymic Kāvaṣeya. {%—Turā-%}
{%ṣāh, -ṣāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} overpowering the mighty or over-
powering quickly, epithet of Indra and of Viṣṇu;
({%ṭ%}), m. a N. of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>21129<pc>0379-a<k1>turAyaRa<k2>turAyaRa
{%Turāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. 2. {%tura%}), N.
of a man; ({%am%}), n., N. of a particular sacrifice or
vow, {%= paurṇamāsa-vikāra,%} a modification of the
full moon sacrifice; N. of a Sattra; ({%as, ā, am%}), m.
f. n. attachment to any object or pursuit; attached
to any object or pursuit (?); [cf. {%parāyaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21130<pc>0379-a<k1>tura<k2>tura<h>3
{#tura#} 3¦. {%tura, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hurt, wounded;
(according to Sāy. {%= ā-tura,%} q. v.)
<LEND>
[Page0379-b+ 71]

<L>21131<pc>0379-b<k1>turakin<k2>turakin
{#turakin#}¦ {%turakin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Turkish; [cf.
{%turuṣka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21132<pc>0379-b<k1>turakva<k2>turakva
{#turakva#}¦ {%turakva,%} N. of a people, ‘the Turks;’
[cf. {%turuṣka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21133<pc>0379-b<k1>turaga<k2>turaga
{#turaga#}¦ {%tura-ga, turaṅga.%} See 1. {%tura,%} p. 378.
<LEND>

<L>21134<pc>0379-b<k1>turazka<k2>turazka
{#turazka#}¦ {%turaṣka,%} N. of a country and people
mentioned in the Śrī-ṣavāyaṇa or part of the Ro-
maka-siddhānta.
<LEND>

<L>21135<pc>0379-b<k1>turAzAh<k2>turAzAh
{#turAzAh#}¦ {%turā-ṣāh.%} See 2. {%tura,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>21136<pc>0379-b<k1>turI<k2>turI<h>2
{#turI#} 2¦. {%turī,%} f. (or {%turi, is,%} in the first
sense; cf. {%tuli%}), the fibrous stick used by weavers to
clean and separate the threads of the woof; a painter's
brush; a shuttle; N. of a wife of Kṛṣṇa (or Vasu-
deva) and mother of Jaras. (For 1. {%turī%} see col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>21137<pc>0379-b<k1>turIpa<k2>turIpa
{#turIpa#}¦ {%turīpa, am,%} n., Ved. seminal fluid;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Tvaṣṭṛ, ‘spermatic.’
<LEND>

<L>21138<pc>0379-b<k1>turIya<k2>turIya<h>1
{#turIya#} 1¦. {%turīya,%} P., Ved. {%turīyati,%} &c., to
go or move; [cf. rt. 1. {%tur%} and {%turaṇya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21139<pc>0379-b<k1>turIya<k2>turIya<h>2
{#turIya#} 2¦. {%turīya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. fourth, a
fourth; consisting of four parts; whose power ex-
tends on all four sides, mighty; ({%am%}), n. the fourth
state of the soul (according to the Vedānta phil.),
that state in which it has become one with Brahma
or the universal spirit; ({%as, ā, am%}), (with a different
accent), a fourth, constituting the fourth part; ({%am%}),
n. a fourth part, a quarter; [cf. {%turya%} and {%caturtha.%}]
{%—Turīya-bhāga, as,%} m. a fourth part or share.
{%—Turīya-bhāj, k, k, k,%} a sharer of a fourth
{%—Turīya-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the
fourth caste; ({%as%}), m. the fourth caste or tribe, a
Śūdra. {%—Turīyāṃśa (˚ya-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a fourth
part or share, a quarter. {%—Turīyātīta (˚ya-at˚),%} N.
of an Upaniṣad. {%—Turīyārdha (˚ya-ar˚), am,%} n.
one half of a fourth, an eighth part.
<LEND>

<L>21140<pc>0379-b<k1>turIyaka<k2>turIyaka
{%Turīyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ a fourth (part).
<LEND>

<L>21141<pc>0379-b<k1>turya<k2>turya
{%Turya, as, ā, am,%}¦ = 2. {%turīya,%} fourth, a fourth;
({%am%}), n. the fourth state of the soul, in which it be-
comes one with Brahma, a quarter; ({%as, ā, am%}), being
in the above state; the fourth (part). {%—Turya-vah%} or
{%-vāh, ṭ,%} f. {%turyauhī,%} Ved. an ox or cow four years old.
<LEND>

<L>21142<pc>0379-b<k1>turuzka<k2>turuzka
{#turuzka#}¦ {%turuṣka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race,
the Indo-Scythian race or Turks; ({%as%}), m. the country
of this race, Turan or Turkestan; a prince of this
race; ({%as, am%}), m. n. olibanum, Indian incense,
the resin of the Boswellia Serrata; the resin of the
Pinus Longifolia; [cf. {%yāvana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21143<pc>0379-b<k1>turPari<k2>turPari
{#turPari#}¦ {%turphari,%} Ved. (fr. rt. {%tṛph%}), accord-
ing to Yāska {%= kṣipra-hantṛ,%} striking quickly; (ac-
cording to Sāy., {%turpharī,%} du. = killers of the enemy.)
<LEND>

<L>21144<pc>0379-b<k1>turParItu<k2>turParItu
{%Turpharītu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. according to Yāska
{%= hantṛ,%} striking; (according to Sāy., {%turpharītū,%}
du. {%= tarphitārau = śatrūṇāṃ hantārau.%})
<LEND>

<L>21145<pc>0379-b<k1>turya<k2>turya
{#turya#}¦ {%turya.%} See above under 2. {%turīya.%}
<LEND>

<L>21146<pc>0379-b<k1>turyA<k2>turyA
{#turyA#}¦ {%turyā,%} f. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>21147<pc>0379-b<k1>turv<k2>turv
{#turv#}¦ {%turv%} [cf. rt. 1. {%tur%}], cl. 1. P., Ved. {%tūr-%}
{%vati, tutūrva, tūrvitum,%} to overpower,
overcome, excel; to cause to overpower or conquer,
help to victory; to save; to strike, to hurt, kill,
injure; [cf. {%tūrvayāṇa%} and {%tūrvi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21148<pc>0379-b<k1>turvaRi<k2>turvaRi
{%Turvaṇi, is, is, i%}¦ (fr. rt. 1. {%tur%}), Ved. overpowering,
excelling, victorious; (Sāy.) acting quickly, serving
quickly, moving quickly; injuring or destroying
enemies.
<LEND>

<L>21149<pc>0379-b<k1>turvan<k2>turvan
{%Turvan, a,%}¦ n., Ved. (only used in the dat. {%tur-%}
{%vaṇe%}), conquering, defeating, injuring.
<LEND>

<L>21150<pc>0379-b<k1>turvaSa<k2>turvaSa
{#turvaSa#}¦ {%turvaśa, as,%} m. (also written {%turvasu%}),
Ved., N. of a hero and ancestor of the Āryan race,
often mentioned in the Ṛg-veda and probably re-
lated to the Kaṇvas; he is generally mentioned
together with his brother Yadu; N. of a whole
race; [cf. {%turvasu%} and {%taurvaśa.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0379-c+ 79]

<L>21151<pc>0379-c<k1>turvasu<k2>turvasu
{#turvasu#}¦ {%turvasu, us,%} m. (a later form of
{%turvaśa%}), N. of a son of Yayāti and Devayāni and
brother of Yadu.
<LEND>

<L>21152<pc>0379-c<k1>turvIti<k2>turvIti
{#turvIti#}¦ {%turvīti, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a man
or of a race.
<LEND>

<L>21153<pc>0379-c<k1>tul<k2>tul
{#tul#}¦ {%tul%} [cf. rt. {%tūl%}], cl. 10. P. A. (accord-
ing to Vopa-deva also cl. 1. P.) {%tolayati%} or
{%tulayati, -te,%} (the form {%tolayati%} is rarely used in
the metaphorical sense), {%tolati, atūtulat, -yitum,%} to
lift up, raise; to determine the weight of anything by
lifting it; to weigh, poise, measure; to compare by
weighing and examining; to ponder, weigh in the
mind, consider; to examine with distrust, suspect;
to make equal in weight, to equal, compare one
thing with another (with inst., e. g. {%na brāhmaṇais%}
{%tulaye bhūtam anyat,%} I do not compare any other
being with Brāhmans); to counterpoise, counter-
balance, outweigh, weigh against, equal in weight,
match, be equal to (with acc.); to possess in the same
degree, to attain, reach; [cf. rt. {%dul:%} Old Lat. <nsi>tul-o,</nsi>
<nsi>te-tul-i:</nsi> Lat. <nsi>tul-i, lātus</nsi>; (for <nsi>tlātus</nsi>), <nsi>tollere, toll-o,</nsi>
<nsi>tolleno, tolerare, tolūtim:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">τλῆ-ναι, τάλα-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πολύ-τλᾱ-ς, ταλα-ό-ς, τλή-μων, τάλ-αντο-ν, ἀ-τά-</lang>
<lang n="greek">λαντο-ς, τάλ-αρο-ς, τελα-μών, τόλ-μα, τολμά-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">Τάν-ταλο-ς:</lang> Goth. <nsi>thul-an,</nsi> ‘to tolerate;’ <nsi>us-</nsi>
<nsi>thul-ain-s,</nsi> ‘patience:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>tholian, thyl-</nsi>
<nsi>dian, athylgian:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>dol-an:</nsi> Germ.
<nsi>duld-en:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>tul-ŭ,</nsi> ‘a quiver.’]
<LEND>

<L>21154<pc>0379-c<k1>tulana<k2>tulana
{%Tulana, am,%}¦ n. lifting, raising; weighing, mea-
suring; rating, assessing, taxing; a particular high
number.
<LEND>

<L>21155<pc>0379-c<k1>tulayitvA<k2>tulayitvA
{%Tulayitvā,%}¦ ind. having weighed, having counter-
poised, having made equal or like, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21156<pc>0379-c<k1>tulA<k2>tulA
{%Tulā,%}¦ f. a balance, especially a fine balance, the
beam of a balance, goldsmith's or assay scales; a
measure, a weight, ({%tulayā dhṛ,%} to hold in a
balance, to weigh); the balance as an ordeal; weigh-
ing; resemblance, likeness, equality, similarity; the
sign of the zodiac Libra; the seventh sign in a circle
divided like a zodiac; a measure or weight of gold
and silver = 100 Palas or about 145 ounces troy; a
kind of vessel; sloping beams or timbers in the roof
of a house; [cf. {%bhāra-tulā%} and {%tulopatulā.%}] {%—Tulā-%}
{%koṭi, is, ī,%} m. f. an ornament on the feet or toes
of women; a particular weight; a hundred millions,
{%= arbuda%}. {%—Tulā-kośa%} or {%tulā-koṣa, as,%} m. a
place where a balance or pair of scales is kept; ordeal
by weighing; see {%tulā-parīkṣā%}. {%—Tulākośa-ra-%}
{%hasya, am,%} n. a mystical rite which consists in
weighing seeds and thence calculating the fertility
of the soil. {%—Tulā-dāna, am,%} n. the gift to a
Brāhman of as much gold, silver, &c., as equals the
weight of the body. {%—Tulā-dhaṭa, as,%} m. the scale
or cup of a balance; an oar, a paddle. {%—Tulā-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m. ‘holding a pair of scales,’ the sign of
the zodiac Libra, the sun. {%—Tulā-dhāra, as, ā, am,%}
‘holding a pair of scales;’ trading, trafficking, a
trader, a dealer; ({%as%}), m. the string of a balance;
the beam; the sign of the zodiac Libra; N. of a
merchant. {%—Tulā-paddhati,%} N. of a book by Ka-
malākara-bhaṭṭa. {%—Tulā-parīkṣā,%} f. ordeal by the
balance, (the weight of the accused being first taken,
certain prayers and ceremonies are performed, after
which he is weighed again; if lighter, he is innocent; if
heavier, or as at first, guilty.) {%—Tulā-puruṣa, as,%} m.
‘a weighed man,’ or gold, jewels, and other ornaments
equal to a man's weight, an offering of such extent
constituting one of the sixteen pious gifts; a kind
of penance. {%—Tulāpuruṣa-dāna, am,%} n. gift of
gold or valuables to an amount equivalent to the
weight of the donor. {%—Tulā-pragraha%} or {%tulā-%}
{%pragrāha, as,%} m. the string of a balance. {%—Tulā-%}
{%māna, am,%} n. measure by weight. {%—Tulā-yaṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} m. or f. (?), the beam of a balance. {%—Tulā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} furnished with or possessed of a balance.
{%—Tulā-vīja, am,%} n. the Guñjā or berry of the
Abrus Precatorius, from which the goldsmith's or
jeweller's weight in India is taken; the berry weighs
about 1(5/16) grain troy, the factitious weight about 2(3/16).
[Page0380-a+ 75]
{%—Tulā-sūtra, am,%} n. the string of a balance.
{%—Tulopatulā (˚lā-up˚),%} f. a supporting beam or
prop in the roof of a house (?).
<LEND>

<L>21157<pc>0380-a<k1>tulita<k2>tulita
{%Tulita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made equal or like, equalled,
compared (with inst., e. g. {%śaśāṅkena tulita,%} com-
pared with the moon); weighed, counterpoised.
<LEND>

<L>21158<pc>0380-a<k1>tulya<k2>tulya
{%Tulya, as, ā, am,%}¦ equal to, of the same kind or
class, well matched, similar, comparable, equally
valuable or precious, like, resembling (with gen. or
inst., e. g. {%tulya etasya,%} equal to him; {%prāṇais%}
{%tulyā,%} a woman as dear as life; or with the crude form
in comp., e. g. {%amṛta-tulya,%} similar to the immor-
tals or to nectar; {%etat-tulya,%} equal to this man); fit
for (with inst.); even, same; indifferent; ({%am%}), ind.
equally, similarly, in like manner; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a Gandharva. {%—Tulya-tā,%} f. or {%tulya-tva, am,%} n.
equality, likeness, sameness, resemblance (with inst.,
e. g. {%vayasā tulyatā,%} equality in age); equality of
place, conjunction (in astronomy); {%dṛk-tulyatā,%}
conformity with any observed place. {%—Tulya-tejas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} equal in splendor. {%—Tulya-darśana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} regarding with equal or indifferent eyes.
{%—Tulya-pāna, am,%} n. drinking together, compota-
tion. {%—Tulya-bala, as, ā, am,%} of equal strength. {%—Tu-%}
{%lya-bhāvanā,%} f. (in arithm. or algebra) combination of
like or analogous sets of magnitude. {%—Tulya-mūlya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of equal value. {%—Tulya-yogitā,%} f. ‘com-
bination of equal actions or qualities,’ a figure in
rhetoric. {%—Tulya-rūpa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} of like or
equal form; like, similar, analogous. {%—Tulya-lak-%}
{%ṣaṇā,%} f. a particular figure in rhetoric. {%—Tulya-%}
{%vaṃśa, as, ā, am,%} equal in race, of equal race. {%—Tu-%}
{%lya-vikrama, as, ā, am,%} of equal prowess. {%—Tulya-%}
{%vīrya, as, ā, am,%} of equal strength. {%—Tulya-vṛtti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} following the same or similar occupation.
{%—Tulya-śas,%} ind. in equal parts. {%—Tulya-śuddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. equal subtraction, transposition (in arithmetic).
{%—Tulya-śodhana, am,%} n. reducing an equation by
removing the like magnitudes on both sides. {%—Tu-%}
{%lyākṛti (˚ya-āk˚), is, is, i,%} of the same form,
alike. {%—Tulyātulya, as, ā, am,%} similar and dis-
similar, like and unlike. {%—Tulyānumāna (˚ya-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. like inference, a parallel case. {%—Tulyodyoga%}
{%(˚ya-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} equal in labours or exertions.
<LEND>

<L>21159<pc>0380-a<k1>tulakuci<k2>tulakuci
{#tulakuci#}¦ {%tulakuci, is,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>21160<pc>0380-a<k1>tulaBa<k2>tulaBa
{#tulaBa#}¦ {%tulabha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a warrior-
tribe.
<LEND>

<L>21161<pc>0380-a<k1>tulaBIya<k2>tulaBIya
{%Tulabhīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the above tribe.
<LEND>

<L>21162<pc>0380-a<k1>tulasAriRI<k2>tulasAriRI
{#tulasAriRI#}¦ {%tulasāriṇī,%} f. {%= tūṇa,%} a quiver.
<LEND>

<L>21163<pc>0380-a<k1>tulasI<k2>tulasI
{#tulasI#}¦ {%tulasī%} or {%tulasikā,%} f. holy basil, a
small shrub said to have been produced from the
hair of the goddess Tulasī and held in veneration by
the worshippers of Viṣṇu (Ocymum Sanctum); N.
of a deity. {%—Tulasī-dveṣā,%} f. a kind of plant, {%=%}
{%varvarī%}. {%—Tulasī-pattra, am,%} n. a Tulasī leaf,
hence a very small gift. {%—Tulasī-vivāha, as,%} m.
the marriage of an image of Viṣṇu with the holy
basil, a festival on the twelfth day in the first half of
the month Kārttika. {%—Tulasī-vṛndāvana, as,%} m.
a small altar, a square pedestal before the gate of a
Hindū house on which the sacred basil is planted.
<LEND>

<L>21164<pc>0380-a<k1>tuli<k2>tuli
{#tuli#}¦ {%tuli, is,%} or {%tulī,%} f. a fibrous stick or
brush used by weavers for cleaning the threads of
the woof; a painter's brush used for that purpose; [cf.
{%tūlī, tūli, tūlikā, turi.%}] {%—Tuli-phalā,%} f. the Simul
or silk-cotton tree; [cf. {%tūli-phalā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21165<pc>0380-a<k1>tulinI<k2>tulinI
{%Tulinī (= tūlinī),%}¦ f. the Simul or silk-cotton
tree.
<LEND>

<L>21166<pc>0380-a<k1>tulikA<k2>tulikA
{#tulikA#}¦ {%tulikā,%} f. a small bird said to re-
semble the wagtail.
<LEND>

<L>21167<pc>0380-a<k1>tulya<k2>tulya
{#tulya#}¦ {%tulya.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>21168<pc>0380-a<k1>tuvara<k2>tuvara
{#tuvara#}¦ {%tuvara, as, ā, am,%} astringent; beard-
less; ({%as, am%}), m. n. an astringent taste; ({%as%}),
m. a sort of grain, {%= tuvara-yāvanāla; (ī),%} f. {%=%}
{%āḍhakī,%} a kind of lentil, Cajanus Indicus; a fragrant
[Page0380-b+ 79]
earth; alum; [cf. {%tūvara.%}] {%—Tuvara-yāvanāla,%}
{%as,%} m. a sort of grain, {%= kaṣāya-yāvanāla,%} &c.
{%—Tuvarī-śimba, as,%} m. a kind of plant, Cassia
Tora, {%= cakra-mardaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>21169<pc>0380-b<k1>tuvaraka<k2>tuvaraka
{%Tuvaraka, as,%}¦ m. a sort of grain (?); N. of a tree
growing in the countries bordering on the western
ocean; ({%ikā%}), f. Cajanus Indicus; a sort of earth;
alum.
<LEND>

<L>21170<pc>0380-b<k1>tuvi<k2>tuvi
{#tuvi#}¦ {%tuvi%} (fr. rt. 2. {%tu%}), {%= bahu,%} much, many,
great, strong, excessive, very, (only used in the Ved.
compounds enumerated below); ({%is%}), f. {%= tumbī,%} a
long gourd. {%—Tuvi-kūrmi, is, is, i,%} or {%tuvi-kūrmin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. powerful in working, efficacious; (Sāy.)
doing many and various deeds; epithet of Indra. {%—Tu-%}
{%vi-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved. of a strong will; (Sāy.) doing
many deeds; having much knowledge; epithet of
Indra. {%—Tuvi-kṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. epithet of Indra's
bow, (according to Sāy. and the Nirukta {%= bahu-vi-%}
{%kṣepa%} or {%mahā-vikṣepa%}), ‘throwing far,’ perhaps
‘very destructive,’ ({%kṣa%} being then fr. rt. 4. {%kṣi.%})
{%—Tuvi-kṣatra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ruling powerfully,
(according to Mahī-dhara) preserving from many inju-
ries, epithet of Aditi. {%—Tuvi-gra, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
swallowing much; (Sāy.) sounding loudly; going
quickly. {%—Tuvi-grābha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. seizing
powerfully. {%—Tuvi-gri, is, is, i,%} Ved. swallowing
much or greedily; (Sāy.) having a full throat or to
be praised by many. {%—Tuvi-grīva, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having a powerful or firm or erect neck, having
many throats, swallowing or consuming much, all-
embracing. {%—Tuvi-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. of strong
or powerful nature, powerful; born for many,
born for the protection of many; (Sāy.) born
with many (qualities), from whom many are
born; epithet of the gods Indra, Varuṇa, Varuṇa-
Mitra, &c. {%—Tuvi-deṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. granting
excellent gifts, epithet of Indra; (Sāy.) giving much.
{%—Tuvi-dyumna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very glorious,
powerful, wealthy; epithet of Indra, and of the
Maruts. {%—Tuvi-nṛmṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very
manly or valiant or courageous; epithet of Indra.
{%—Tuvi-prati, is, is, i,%} Ved. (Sāy.) visiting many,
approaching many; withstanding many, (perhaps
rather) resisting powerfully; [cf. {%a-prati.%}] {%—Tuvi-%}
{%bādha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. killing many. {%—Tuvi-%}
{%brahman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. very devoted or pious.
{%—Tuvi-manyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. very zealous, very
furious. {%—Tuvi-mātra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. making or
creating much, very efficacious, measuring many (?).
{%—Tuvi-mrakṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. injuring greatly,
destructive; (Sāy.) destroying much (timber). {%—Tuvi-%}
{%rādhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. granting in abundance;
(Sāy.) opulent, having great wealth. {%—Tuvi-vāja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having much food or strength,
strengthening, abounding with food. {%—Tuvi-śagma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. able to do much; (Sāy.) having
much enjoyment or pleasure. {%—Tuvi-śuṣma, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. high-spirited; (Sāy.) of great power,
very strong, epithet of Indra and of Indra-Varuṇa.
{%—Tuvi-śravas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. highly renowned,
having great fame. {%—Tuviśravas-tama, as, ā, am,%}
having very great fame, an epithet of Agni. {%—Tuviṣ-%}
{%ṭama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. strongest, most powerful,
most valid. {%—Tuviṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. power-
ful, mighty, efficacious. {%—Tuvi-ṣvaṇas (˚vi-sv˚),%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} or {%tuvi-ṣvaṇi, is, is, i,%} or {%tuvi-ṣvan,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} Ved. loud-sounding, roaring. {%—Tuvī-magha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving abundantly; (Sāy.) having
great riches, epithet of Indra, and of the Maruts.
{%—Tuvī-rava, as, ā, am,%} Ved. making a terrible
noise (in battle &c.). {%—Tuvī-ravat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
making a great noise (?); (Sāy.) possessed of many
praisers, (either for {%tuvīrava-vat,%} or {%ravān%} may be
an irregular nom. case of the part. {%ravat.%}) {%—Tuvy-%}
{%ojas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. very strong or powerful.
<LEND>

<L>21171<pc>0380-b<k1>tuS<k2>tuS<h>1
{#tuS#} 1¦. {%tuś,%} cl. 1. A., Ved. {%tośate,%} &c., to drip,
trickle; sprinkle; (Sāy.) to be struck; to
be pressed out or extracted; to be drunk; [cf. {%tośa%}
and {%tośas.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0380-c+ 78]

<L>21172<pc>0380-c<k1>tuS<k2>tuS<h>2
{#tuS#} 2¦. {%tuś%} (for {%tuṣ ?%}), cl. 1. A., Ved. {%to-%}
{%sate,%} &c., to quiet, pacify, appease, satisfy.
<LEND>

<L>21173<pc>0380-c<k1>tuz<k2>tuz
{#tuz#}¦ {%tuṣ%} [cf. rt. 1. {%juṣ%}], cl. 4. P. (ep.
also A.) {%tuṣyati, -te, tutoṣa, tokṣyati,%}
{%atuṣat, toṣṭum,%} to become tranquil or calm or
quiet; to be contented or satisfied, to be pleased or
delighted with anything or any person (with inst.,
gen., loc. or {%prati%} after the acc., e. g. {%dattena%}
{%tuṣyati,%} he is satisfied with the gift; {%tasya%} or
{%tena%} or {%tasmin%} or {%tam prati tuṣyāmi,%} I am
pleased with him); to satisfy, please (with acc.,
e. g. {%sā patiṃ na tutoṣa,%} she did not please her
husband): Caus. P. {%toṣayati, -yitum,%} to make
satisfied, satisfy, please, gratify, gladden, quiet, calm,
appease, pacify; to gratify any one with anything
(with acc. of the person and inst. of the thing,
e. g. {%toṣaya Haraṃ tapasā,%} gratify Śiva with
penance; {%ātmānam toṣayati,%} he satisfies himself,
he becomes satisfied): Desid. {%tutukṣati:%} Intens.
{%totuṣyate, totoṣṭi;%} [cf. {%tūṣṇīm;%} cf. also Lith.
<nsi>têsziju,</nsi> ‘to recreate, to refresh;’ Lat. <nsi>taceo;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>thahan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21174<pc>0380-c<k1>tuzita<k2>tuzita
{%Tuṣita, ās,%}¦ m. pl. a class of subordinate deities,
thirty-six in number (sometimes reckoned as twelve
in number and identified with the twelve Ādityas);
N. of twelve sons of Bhaga-vat; ({%as%}), m. a N. of
Viṣṇu (one of the Ādityas); ({%ā%}), f., N. of the
wife of Veda-śiras and mother of the god Vibhu.
{%—Tuṣita-kāyika, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the
body or class of the Tuṣitas.
<LEND>

<L>21175<pc>0380-c<k1>tuzwa<k2>tuzwa
{%Tuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfied, contented, pleased,
glad, &c. {%—Tuṣṭa-dhī, dhīs, dhīs, dhi,%} pleased in
mind, satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>21176<pc>0380-c<k1>tuzwi<k2>tuzwi
{%Tuṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. satisfaction, gratification, content-
ment, pleasure; acquiescence, indifference to every-
thing but that possessed, (the Sāṅkhya phil. reckons
nine kinds of Tuṣṭi); Contentment personified as
a daughter of Dakṣa and mother of Santoṣa or
Muda; N. of a daughter of Kaśyapa; of a deity
sprung from the Kalās of Prakṛti and wife of
Ananta; of a Mātṛkā; of one of the Kalās of the
moon. {%—Tuṣṭi-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} causing satis-
faction, pleasing, gratifying, satisfying. {%—Tuṣṭi-ja-%}
{%nana, as, ī, am,%} or {%tuṣṭi-da, as, ā, am,%} giving
or producing satisfaction, affording pleasure, gratify-
ing. {%—Tuṣṭi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} pleased, gratified;
({%ān%}), m., N. of a prince, a son of Ugra-sena.
<LEND>

<L>21177<pc>0380-c<k1>tuzwvA<k2>tuzwvA
{%Tuṣṭvā,%}¦ ind. having pleased or satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>21178<pc>0380-c<k1>tuzya<k2>tuzya
{%Tuṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be satisfied or gratified,
easily satisfied; an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>21179<pc>0380-c<k1>toza<k2>toza
{%Toṣa, toṣita,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>21180<pc>0380-c<k1>tuza<k2>tuza
{#tuza#}¦ {%tuṣa, as,%} m. (perhaps connected with
{%tvac%}), the husk or chaff of grain, of corn, rice, &c.
[cf. {%a-tuṣa, ut-tuṣa, nis-tuṣa, tuccha%}]; Beleric
Myrobalan, Terminalia Bellerica. {%—Tuṣa-graha,%}
{%as,%} m. Agni or fire (‘seizing the husk’). {%—Tuṣa-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} produced from husk or chaff.
{%—Tuṣaja-ka, as,%} m., N. of a Śūdra. {%—Tuṣa-%}
{%dhānya, am,%} n. a leguminous plant; N. of a place.
{%—Tuṣa-vana, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a
place; (a various reading has {%tuṃva-vana.%}) {%—Tu-%}
{%ṣa-sāra, as,%} m. ({%= tuṣa-graha%}), Agni or fire.
{%—Tuṣāgni (˚ṣa-ag˚), is,%} m. or {%tuṣānala (˚ṣa-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. a conflagration of chaff or of the husk
of corn; a capital punishment which consists in
twisting dry straw &c. round the limbs of a criminal
and setting it on fire. {%—Tuṣāmbu (˚ṣa-am˚), u,%}
n. sour rice or barley-gruel. {%—Tuṣottha (˚ṣa-ut˚),%}
{%as,%} m. or {%tuṣodaka (˚ṣa-ud˚), am,%} n. sour rice-
gruel or barley-gruel, (‘made from husk.’)
<LEND>

<L>21181<pc>0380-c<k1>tuzaspa<k2>tuzaspa
{#tuzaspa#}¦ {%tuṣaspa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21182<pc>0380-c<k1>tuzAra<k2>tuzAra
{#tuzAra#}¦ {%tuṣāra, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%tuṣ%}), cold, frigid, frosty, dewy; ({%as%}), m. frost,
cold; ice, snow, mist, dew, thin rain; N. of a place
mentioned in the Śrī-ṣavāyaṇa or part of the
Romaka-siddhānta; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a race; [cf.
{%tuhina;%} cf. also Angl. Sax. <nsi>thystre, thystrian,</nsi>
<nsi>theostre, theosterlic.</nsi>] {%—Tuṣāra-kaṇa, as,%} m. a
[Page0381-a+ 69]
dew-drop, an icicle, hoar frost. {%—Tuṣāra-kāla, as,%}
m. winter, the cold season. {%—Tuṣāra-kiraṇa, as,%}
m. the moon (‘having cold rays’). {%—Tuṣāra-giri,%}
{%is,%} m. the snowy mountain, the Himālaya. {%—Tuṣā-%}
{%ra-gaura, as, ī, am,%} white as snow, white with
snow; camphor. {%—Tuṣāra-raśmi, is,%} m. the moon;
[cf. {%tuṣāra-kiraṇa.%}] {%—Tuṣārādri (˚ra-ad˚), is,%}
m. or {%tuṣāra-parvata%} or {%tuṣāra-śaila, as,%} m.
the Himālaya mountain.
<LEND>

<L>21183<pc>0381-a<k1>tuzita<k2>tuzita
{#tuzita#}¦ {%tuṣita, tuṣṭi,%} &c. See under rt. {%tuṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>21184<pc>0381-a<k1>tuzwu<k2>tuzwu
{#tuzwu#}¦ {%tuṣṭu, us,%} m. a jewel worn in the ears.
<LEND>

<L>21185<pc>0381-a<k1>tus<k2>tus
{#tus#}¦ {%tus,%} cl. 1. P. {%tosati,%} &c., to sound.
<LEND>

<L>21186<pc>0381-a<k1>tusa<k2>tusa
{#tusa#}¦ {%tusa, as,%} m. the husk of corn or rice,
{%= tuṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21187<pc>0381-a<k1>tusta<k2>tusta
{#tusta#}¦ {%tusta, as, am,%} m. n. dust; husk; (a
various reading for {%busta%}); [cf. {%tūsta;%} Angl. Sax.
and Eng. <nsi>dust.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21188<pc>0381-a<k1>tuh<k2>tuh
{#tuh#}¦ {%tuh,%} cl. 1. P. {%tohati,%} &c., to hurt,
pain, kill.
<LEND>

<L>21189<pc>0381-a<k1>tuhara<k2>tuhara
{#tuhara#}¦ {%tuhara, as,%} m., N. of one of the
attendants of Skanda; (also written {%tuhāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>21190<pc>0381-a<k1>tuhina<k2>tuhina
{#tuhina#}¦ {%tuhina, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%tuh%}), cold, frigid, frosty; ({%am%}), n. mist, dew, snow,
frost, cold; moonlight, moonshine; camphor; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a tree, {%= śuka-nāsa;%} [cf. {%tuṣāra;%} Hib.
<nsi>deigh,</nsi> ‘ice.’] {%—Tuhina-kaṇa, as,%} m. a dew-drop;
snow-flake. {%—Tuhina-kiraṇa, as,%} m. ‘cold-rayed,’
the moon. {%—Tuhinakiraṇa-putra, as,%} m. the son
of the moon, the planet Mercury. {%—Tuhina-gu, us,%}
m. ‘having cold rays,’ the moon. {%—Tuhina-dyuti,%}
{%is,%} m. or {%tuhina-raśmi, is,%} m. ‘cold-rayed,’ the
moon. {%—Tuhina-śarkarā,%} f. a piece of ice, ice.
{%—Tuhina-śaila, as,%} m. a snowy mountain, a snowy
peak, the Himālaya. {%—Tuhināṃśu (˚na-aṃ˚), us,%}
m. ‘cold-rayed,’ the moon; camphor. {%—Tuhināṃśu-%}
{%taila, am,%} n. oil of camphor. {%—Tuhinācala (˚na-%}
{%ac˚), as,%} m. or {%tuhinādri (˚na-ad˚), is,%} m. a snow
mountain, a snowy peak, the Himālaya.
<LEND>

<L>21191<pc>0381-a<k1>tuhuRqa<k2>tuhuRqa
{#tuhuRqa#}¦ {%tuhuṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava;
of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>21192<pc>0381-a<k1>tUKa<k2>tUKa
{#tUKa#}¦ {%tūkha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21193<pc>0381-a<k1>tUq<k2>tUq
{#tUq#}¦ {%tūḍ (= tuḍ),%} cl. 1. P. {%tūḍati,%} &c., to
split; to slight, disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>21194<pc>0381-a<k1>tUR<k2>tUR
{#tUR#}¦ {%tūṇ%} [cf. {%kūṇ%} and {%cūṇ%}], cl. 10. P.
{%tūṇayati, -yitum,%} to shrink, contract, close
as the eyelids, wink; A. {%tūṇayate,%} to fill, fill up.
<LEND>

<L>21195<pc>0381-a<k1>tURa<k2>tURa
{#tURa#}¦ {%tūṇa, as, ī,%} m. f. (this word appears
to be connected with the preceding root, which may
perhaps be formed from it), a quiver; ({%ī%}), f. an in-
ternal disease by which the anus and the bladder
become painfully affected; the Indigo plant; [cf.
Slav. <nsi>tūl,</nsi> ‘quiver.’] {%—Tūṇa-dhāra, as,%} m. a quiver-
bearer (a kind of officer). {%—Tūṇa-mukha, am,%} n.
the mouth or opening of a quiver. {%—Tūṇa-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} furnished with a quiver.
<LEND>

<L>21196<pc>0381-a<k1>tURi<k2>tURi
{%Tūṇi, is,%}¦ m. a quiver [cf. {%tūṇa%} and {%tūṇī%}]; N. of
a prince, father of Yugan-dhara.
<LEND>

<L>21197<pc>0381-a<k1>tURika<k2>tURika
{%Tūṇika%}¦ or {%tūṇīka, as,%} m., N. of a tree, {%=%}
{%nandī-vṛkṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>21198<pc>0381-a<k1>tURin<k2>tURin
{%Tūṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a quiver, quivered; ({%ī%}),
m., N. of a tree, {%= nandī-vṛkṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>21199<pc>0381-a<k1>tURIra<k2>tURIra
{%Tūṇīra, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a quiver. {%—Tūṇīra-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} provided with a quiver.
<LEND>

<L>21200<pc>0381-a<k1>tURaka<k2>tURaka
{#tURaka#}¦ {%tūṇaka, as,%} m. a kind of metre
consisting of four lines of fifteen syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>21201<pc>0381-a<k1>tURava<k2>tURava
{#tURava#}¦ {%tūṇava, as,%} m., Ved. a wind instru-
ment, a flute (?). {%—Tūṇava-dhma, as,%} m., Ved. a
flute-player (?).
<LEND>

<L>21202<pc>0381-a<k1>tURika<k2>tURika
{#tURika#}¦ {%tūṇika, tūṇīka.%} See above.
<LEND>
[Page0381-b+ 68]

<L>21203<pc>0381-b<k1>tUtaka<k2>tUtaka
{#tUtaka#}¦ {%tūtaka, am,%} n. {%= tuttha,%} blue vitriol.
<LEND>

<L>21204<pc>0381-b<k1>tUtujAna<k2>tUtujAna
{#tUtujAna#}¦ {%tūtujāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%tuj%}),
Ved. hastening, quick, eager, ardent.
<LEND>

<L>21205<pc>0381-b<k1>tUtuji<k2>tUtuji
{%Tūtuji, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. quick, swift; (a various
reading has {%tūtujit.%})
<LEND>

<L>21206<pc>0381-b<k1>tUtuma<k2>tUtuma
{#tUtuma#}¦ {%tūtuma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. granting
much (?); (Sāy.) quick, active; [cf. {%tumra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21207<pc>0381-b<k1>tUda<k2>tUda
{#tUda#}¦ {%tūda, as,%} m. {%= tūla-vṛkṣa,%} the cotton
tree; also <lang n="arabic">توت</lang> the mulberry tree; Thespesia
Populneoides; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a district.
<LEND>

<L>21208<pc>0381-b<k1>tUpara<k2>tUpara
{#tUpara#}¦ {%tūpara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hornless,
(often applied to a goat, and sometimes used alone
to denote ‘a hornless goat.’)
<LEND>

<L>21209<pc>0381-b<k1>tUbara<k2>tUbara
{#tUbara#}¦ {%tūbara,%} see {%tūvara; tūbarikā, tubarī,%}
and {%tūbarīkā,%} f. {%= tubarikā,%} a kind of earth.
<LEND>

<L>21210<pc>0381-b<k1>tUya<k2>tUya
{#tUya#}¦ {%tūya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%tu%}), Ved. strong,
powerful; (Sāy.) quick, not delaying; ({%am%}), n.
water; ({%am%}), ind. quickly, swiftly.
<LEND>

<L>21211<pc>0381-b<k1>tUr<k2>tUr<h>1
{#tUr#} 1¦. {%tūr%} [cf. rt. 1. {%tur%} and {%tvar%}], cl. 4. A.
{%tūryate,%} &c., to go quickly, make haste;
to kill, hurt, injure.
<LEND>

<L>21212<pc>0381-b<k1>tUr<k2>tUr<h>2
{#tUr#} 2¦. {%tūr, r, r, r%} (fr. {%tvar%}), hastening; a
courier; ({%r%}), f. speed, swift motion, swiftness; [cf.
2. {%tur.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21213<pc>0381-b<k1>tUra<k2>tUra
{#tUra#}¦ {%tūra, am,%} n. = 1. {%tūrya,%} any musical in-
strument; ({%ī%}), f. a thorn-apple; [cf. {%ardha-tūra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21214<pc>0381-b<k1>tUrGna<k2>tUrGna
{#tUrGna#}¦ {%tūrghna, am,%} n., N. of the northern
part of Kuru-kṣetra.
<LEND>

<L>21215<pc>0381-b<k1>tUrRa<k2>tUrRa
{#tUrRa#}¦ {%tūrṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%turv%} and {%tvar%}),
quick, expeditious; fleet; ({%am%}), n. rapidity, quickness;
({%am%}), ind. quick, swift, quickly, speedily, in haste;
[cf. Hib. <nsi>tonn,</nsi> ‘quick.’] {%—Tūrṇa-vani,%} quickly
honouring or serving, (a word made by Yāska to
explain the etymology of {%turvaṇi,%} q. v.) {%—Tūrṇo-%}
{%dita (˚ṇa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} spoken quickly, uttered
rapidly.
<LEND>

<L>21216<pc>0381-b<k1>tUrRaka<k2>tUrRaka
{%Tūrṇaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a sort of rice
which ripens quickly.
<LEND>

<L>21217<pc>0381-b<k1>tUrRi<k2>tUrRi
{%Tūrṇi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. quick, swift, expeditious;
clever, zealous; ({%is%}), m. f. speed, velocity, expedi-
tion; ({%is%}), m. the mind; a Śloka; dirt, excrement.
{%—Tūrṇy-artha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pursuing an object
with zeal, eager to accomplish a purpose; (Sāy.)
going quickly.
<LEND>

<L>21218<pc>0381-b<k1>tUrta<k2>tUrta
{%Tūrta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. quick, speedy.
<LEND>

<L>21219<pc>0381-b<k1>tUrRASa<k2>tUrRASa
{#tUrRASa#}¦ {%tūrṇāśa, am,%} n., Ved. water; a
waterfall (?).
<LEND>

<L>21220<pc>0381-b<k1>tUrya<k2>tUrya<h>1
{#tUrya#} 1¦. {%tūrya, am,%} n., Ved. an abstract noun
of 2. {%tur,%} occurring at the end of comp. [cf. {%ap-%}
{%tūrya%} under {%apta,%} &c.]; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a musical
instrument, of which four kinds are sometimes
reckoned, (wind instruments, stringed instruments,
&c.); {%sa-tūrya,%} accompanied by music; {%sa-tūryam,%}
with music; [cf. {%maṅgala-t˚, mṛtyu-t˚, yāma-t˚,%}
{%taurya.%}] {%—Tūrya-khaṇḍa, as,%} m. a musical instru-
ment, a sort of tabor. {%—Tūrya-maya, as, ī, am,%}
representing music, musical. {%—Tūryaugha (˚ya-%}
{%ogha), as,%} m. a band of instruments.
<LEND>

<L>21221<pc>0381-b<k1>tUrya<k2>tUrya<h>2
{#tUrya#} 2¦. {%tūrya, as, ā, am%} (for {%turya%}), a fourth,
a quarter.
<LEND>

<L>21222<pc>0381-b<k1>tUrvayARa<k2>tUrvayARa
{#tUrvayARa#}¦ {%tūrvayāṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%turv%}),
Ved. overpowering; (Sāy.) going quickly, having a
rapid course (as if {%tūrva-yāna%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>21223<pc>0381-b<k1>tUrvi<k2>tUrvi
{%Tūrvi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. excelling, superior; (Sāy.)
quick, rapid.
<LEND>

<L>21224<pc>0381-b<k1>tUl<k2>tUl
{#tUl#}¦ {%tūl%} [cf. {%tul%}], cl. 1. P. and according
to some cl. 10. P. A. {%tūlati, tūlayati, %}
[Page0381-c+ 73]
{%te,%} &c., to ascertain quantity or weight; to weigh,
measure; to fill; [cf. rt. {%tūṇ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21225<pc>0381-c<k1>tUla<k2>tUla
{#tUla#}¦ {%tūla, am,%} n. a tuft of grass or reeds
&c.; the panicle of a flower or plant; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. cotton; ({%am%}), n. the mulberry, Morus Indica;
the thorn-apple; the sky, air, atmosphere; ({%ā%}), f.
the cotton tree; the wick of a lamp, cotton twisted
into that form for applying unguents &c.; ({%ī%}), f.
cotton; the wick of a lamp; a weaver's fibrous stick
or brush, a painter's brush &c.; the Indigo plant;
[cf. {%indra-tūla%} &c.] {%—Tūla-kārmuka%} or {%tūla-%}
{%cāpa, am,%} n. or {%tūla-dhanus, us,%} n. ‘cotton-bow,’
i. e. a bow or similarly shaped instrument used for
cleaning cotton. {%—Tūla-nālī%} or {%tūla-nālikā,%} f.
‘cotton-tube,’ i. e. a thick roll of cotton which is
drawn out in spinning. {%—Tūla-picu, us,%} m. {%= tūla%}
or {%picu,%} cotton. {%—Tūla-mūla,%} N. of a district on
the Candra-bhāgā. {%—Tūla-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the
cotton tree. {%—Tūla-śarkarā,%} f. a pod or seed of
the cotton plant, any seed yielding a similar sub-
stance. {%—Tūla-secana, am,%} n. the act of spinning
(‘sprinkling or moistening the cotton’).
<LEND>

<L>21226<pc>0381-c<k1>tUlaka<k2>tUlaka
{%Tūlaka, am,%}¦ n. cotton.
<LEND>

<L>21227<pc>0381-c<k1>tUli<k2>tUli
{%Tūli, is,%}¦ f. a painter's brush or pencil or a fibrous
stick so used and for other purposes; [cf. {%tūlī%} under
{%tūla.%}] {%—Tūli-phalā,%} f. the silk-cotton tree.
<LEND>

<L>21228<pc>0381-c<k1>tUlikA<k2>tUlikA
{%Tūlikā,%}¦ f. a pencil, a brush, a painter's brush or
stick with a fibrous extremity used as one; a wick
or twist of cotton either for a lamp or for applying
unguents, a whisk of any soft substance, &c.; a kind
of probing-rod; a mattress or quilt filled with cotton,
a bed, a down or cotton bed; an ingot mould.
<LEND>

<L>21229<pc>0381-c<k1>tUlinI<k2>tUlinI
{%Tūlinī,%}¦ f. the silk-cotton tree; a kind of bulbous
plant, {%= lakṣmaṇā-kanda.%}
<LEND>

<L>21230<pc>0381-c<k1>tUvara<k2>tUvara
{#tUvara#}¦ {%tūvara, as, ā, am, = tuvara,%} astrin-
gent; ({%as%}), m. an astringent taste; a bull without
horns [cf. {%tūpara%}] though of an age to have them;
a beardless man; a eunuch; ({%ī%}), f. a fragrant earth,
{%= tuvarī.%}
<LEND>

<L>21231<pc>0381-c<k1>tUvaraka<k2>tUvaraka
{%Tūvaraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ unmanly; a eunuch; (used
as a taunt or abusive epithet.)
<LEND>

<L>21232<pc>0381-c<k1>tUvarikA<k2>tUvarikA
{%Tūvarikā,%}¦ f. {%= tuvarikā,%} a kind of earth.
<LEND>

<L>21233<pc>0381-c<k1>tUz<k2>tUz
{#tUz#}¦ {%tūṣ (= tuṣ),%} cl. 1. P. {%tūṣati,%} &c.,
to be satisfied or pleased; to satisfy.
<LEND>

<L>21234<pc>0381-c<k1>tUza<k2>tUza
{#tUza#}¦ {%tūṣa, as, am,%} m. n., Ved. a lappet,
the border or fringe of a garment.
<LEND>

<L>21235<pc>0381-c<k1>tUzRIm<k2>tUzRIm
{#tUzRIm#}¦ {%tūṣṇīm,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%tuṣ%} with the
termination {%nīm,%} as in {%idānīm, tadānīm,%} &c.; cf.
{%joṣam%} fr. rt. 1. {%juṣ%}), silent, in silence, silently,
quietly, still, softly, without speaking, without noise.
{%—Tūṣṇīṃ-śaṃsa, as,%} m., Ved. silent recitation,
certain formulas or verses to be recited; [cf. Russ.
<nsi>tishina,</nsi> ‘silence, tranquillity:’ Lith. <nsi>tylà,</nsi> ‘silence;’
<nsi>tylù,</nsi> ‘to be silent:’ Hib. <nsi>tosd,</nsi> ‘silence, taciturnity;’
<nsi>tosdadh,</nsi> ‘silencing, confutation.’] {%—Tūṣṇīṃ-śīla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} silent, taciturn. {%—Tūṣṇīṅ-gaṅgam,%} ind.
(a place) where the Ganges flows silently. {%—Tūṣṇīm-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. the being silent, silence, taciturnity;
(rarely spelt {%tuṣṇī-bhāva.%}) {%—Tūṣṇīm-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} being silent, silent. {%—Tūṣṇīm-bhūya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} become silent. {%—Tūṣṇī-śīla = tūṣṇīṃ-%}
{%śīla,%} (perhaps a wrong reading.)
<LEND>

<L>21236<pc>0381-c<k1>tUzRIka<k2>tUzRIka
{%Tūṣṇīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ silent, taciturn; ({%am%} or
{%ām%}), ind. silently, quickly.
<LEND>

<L>21237<pc>0381-c<k1>tUsta<k2>tUsta
{#tUsta#}¦ {%tūsta, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%tus%}),
a braid of hair, matted or clotted hair; dust; sin;
an atom, any very minute or delicate substance.
<LEND>

<L>21238<pc>0381-c<k1>tf<k2>tf
{#tf#}¦ {%tṛ, tā,%} m. (for {%stṛ%}), Ved. a star; [cf.
{%tāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21239<pc>0381-c<k1>tfMh<k2>tfMh
{#tfMh#}¦ {%tṛṃh.%} See rt. {%tṛh,%} p. 383, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>21240<pc>0381-c<k1>tfMhaRa<k2>tfMhaRa
{%Tṛṃhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. crushing, bruising, hurting,
killing.
<LEND>

<L>21241<pc>0381-c<k1>tfMhaRIya<k2>tfMhaRIya
{%Tṛṃhaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be crushed, killed, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0382-a+ 75]

<L>21242<pc>0382-a<k1>tfQa<k2>tfQa
{%Tṛḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushed, bruised, hurt, injured,
&c. See under rt. {%tṛh,%} p. 383.
<LEND>

<L>21243<pc>0382-a<k1>tfkvan<k2>tfkvan
{#tfkvan#}¦ {%tṛkvan, ā,%} m., Ved. a thief; (also
read {%trikvan%} and {%rikvan.%})
<LEND>

<L>21244<pc>0382-a<k1>tfkz<k2>tfkz
{#tfkz#}¦ {%tṛkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%tṛkṣati,%} &c., to
go, move or approach; [cf. rt. {%stṛkṣ:%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">τρέχω:</lang> Goth. <nsi>thragjan,</nsi> ‘to run;’ <nsi>treihan,</nsi> ‘to
urge:’ Hib. <nsi>teilg,</nsi> ‘to go;’ <nsi>teilgin,</nsi> ‘a shock.’]
<LEND>

<L>21245<pc>0382-a<k1>tfkza<k2>tfkza
{#tfkza#}¦ {%tṛkṣa, as,%} m. or {%tṛkṣas, as,%} n., Ved.
strength (?), [cf. {%tvakṣas%}]; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
tree (?); N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21246<pc>0382-a<k1>tfkzAka<k2>tfkzAka
{#tfkzAka#}¦ {%tṛkṣāka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21247<pc>0382-a<k1>tfkzi<k2>tfkzi
{#tfkzi#}¦ {%tṛkṣi, is,%} m., N. of a man with the
patronymic Trāsadasyava.
<LEND>

<L>21248<pc>0382-a<k1>tfKa<k2>tfKa
{#tfKa#}¦ {%tṛkha, am,%} n. nutmeg.
<LEND>

<L>21249<pc>0382-a<k1>tfca<k2>tfca
{#tfca#}¦ {%tṛca%} or {%trica, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. {%tri-%}
{%ṛc%}), a strophe consisting of three verses; [cf. {%try-%}
{%ṛc.%}] {%—Tṛca-kḷpta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. arranged in
strophes of three verses each.
<LEND>

<L>21250<pc>0382-a<k1>tfQa<k2>tfQa
{#tfQa#}¦ {%tṛḍha.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>21251<pc>0382-a<k1>tfR<k2>tfR
{#tfR#}¦ {%tṛṇ%} (according to some, a rt.
formed from the conjugational base of rt.
{%tṛd%}), cl. 8. P. A. {%tṛṇoti, -ṇute,%} or {%tarṇoti, -ṇute,%}
&c., to eat (especially grass), to graze; [cf. {%tṛṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21252<pc>0382-a<k1>tfRa<k2>tfRa
{#tfRa#}¦ {%tṛṇa, am,%} n. (according to the lexi-
cographers also {%as,%} m.; perhaps connected with the
preceding rt. or fr. rt. {%stṛ,%} to spread, or rt. {%tṝ,%} to
pierce, cf. {%taru;%} but according to native authorities
fr. rt. {%tṛh;%} according to the conjecture of others,
{%tṛṇa%} is for {%tṛṇṇa%} fr. rt. {%tṛd%}), grass, a herb or
any gramineous plant, a blade of grass, a bamboo,
a reed, (often a symbol of minuteness and worthless-
ness); straw, grass or reeds for roofing a house [cf.
rt. {%jval%}]; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; N. of a prince,
a son of Uśīnara; [cf. Goth. <nsi>thaurnus;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>thorn;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>dorn;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>tern,</nsi> ‘thorn;’ Hib.
<nsi>dreas, dris,</nsi> ‘a briar, bramble.’] {%—Tṛṇa-karṇa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants
of this man. {%—Tṛṇa-kāṇḍa, am,%} n. a heap or
quantity of grass. {%—Tṛṇa-kuṅkuma, am,%} n. a sort
of perfume. {%—Tṛṇa-kuṭī,%} f. or {%tṛṇa-kuṭīraka,%}
{%am,%} n. a hut of grass or straw. {%—Tṛṇa-kūṭa, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a heap of grass. {%—Tṛṇa-kūrma, as,%} m.
a long gourd, Cucurbita Lagenaria {%(= tumbī).%}
{%—Tṛṇa-ketakī,%} f. a kind of Tabāṣīr {%(tavakṣīra).%}
{%—Tṛṇa-ketu, us,%} or {%tṛṇa-ketuka, as,%} m. a bam-
boo; [cf. {%tṛṇa-dhvaja.%}] {%—Tṛṇa-gaḍa, as,%} m. a
sort of sea crab, {%= uc-ciṅgaṭa%}. {%—Tṛṇa-gandhā,%} f.
Batatas Paniculata, {%= vidārī;%} [cf. {%ikṣu-gandhā.%}]
{%—Tṛṇa-godhā,%} f. a kind of newt, a chameleon,
a worm, {%= citra-kola%} and {%kṛkalāsa%}. {%—Tṛṇa-%}
{%gaura, am,%} n. a sort of perfume, {%= tṛṇa-%}
{%kuṅkuma%}. {%—Tṛṇa-granthi, is,%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= svarṇa-jīvantī%}. {%—Tṛṇa-grāhini, ī,%} m. sapphire,
{%= nīla-maṇi;%} another gem, commonly {%kāphura-%}
{%dānā,%} amber, &c., or any gem which being
rubbed becomes electrically attractive. {%—Tṛṇa-%}
{%cara, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a kind of gem, {%=%}
{%go-meda%}. {%—Tṛṇa-jambhan, ā, ā, a,%} grass-toothed,
having teeth like grass, &c., graminivorous, feeding
on grass. {%—Tṛṇa-jalāyukā%} or {%tṛṇa-jalūkā,%} f.
a caterpillar. {%—Tṛṇa-jāti, is,%} m. the vegetable
kingdom. {%—Tṛṇa-jyotis,%} a particular kind of
shining plant. {%—1. tṛṇa-tā,%} f. or {%tṛṇa-tva, am,%} n.
the aggregate properties of grass or herbage, the
state or condition of grass, gramineousness; (for
2. {%tṛṇatā%} see col. 3.) {%—Tṛṇa-duh, -dhuk,%} m. {%=%}
{%baḍavāgni%}. {%—Tṛṇa-druma, as,%} m. a palm-tree,
any of the various species, as the palmyra, cocoa-nut,
date, &c.; [cf. {%tṛṇa-vṛkṣa.%}] {%—Tṛṇa-dhānya,%}
{%am,%} n. grain growing wild or without cultivation;
[cf. {%tṛṇānna.%}] {%—Tṛṇa-dhvaja, as,%} m. a bamboo;
[cf. {%tṛṇa-ketu.%}] {%—Tṛṇa-nimba, as,%} m. a kind of
Nimba growing in Nepal ({%nepāla-nimba%}); Aga-
thotes Chirayta {%(kirāta-tikta) — Tṛṇa-pa, as,%} m.,
[Page0382-b+ 81]
N. of a Gandharva. {%—Tṛṇa-pañca-mūla, am,%} n.
an aggregate of five roots of gramineous plants, viz.
of rice, sugar-cane, Darbha, Scirpus Kysoor ({%ka-%}
{%śeru%}), and a cane similar to Saccharum Sara {%(=%}
{%śara)%}. {%—Tṛṇa-pattrikā,%} f. a kind of sugar-cane
{%(ikṣu-darbhā)%}. {%—Tṛṇa-pattrī,%} f. a kind of grass,
{%= guṇḍāśinī%}. {%—Tṛṇa-padī,%} f. having legs as thin
as blades of grass. {%—Tṛṇa-pāṇi, is,%} m., N. of a
Ṛṣi. {%—Tṛṇa-pīḍa, am,%} n. pressing as close as
grass, hand to hand fighting, close quarters. {%—Tṛṇa-%}
{%puṣpa, am,%} n. a kind of perfume, {%= tṛṇa-kuṅ-%}
{%kuma; (ī),%} f. a kind of plant, {%= sindūra-puṣpī.%}
{%—Tṛṇa-pūlaka = tṛṇa-pūlī (?) %}. {%—Tṛṇa-pūlī,%}
f. a mat, a seat made of reeds or basket-work.
{%—Tṛṇa-prāya, as, ā, am,%} worth a straw, worth-
less. {%—Tṛṇa-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘straw-attracting gem,’
a sort of gem, apparently amber; [cf. {%tṛṇa-grā-%}
{%hin.%}] {%—Tṛṇa-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting or made
of grass, grassy. {%—Tṛṇa-muṣṭi, is,%} f. a handful of
grass. {%—Tṛṇa-rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘the king of the grasses,’
the vine-palm. {%—Tṛṇa-rāja, as,%} m. ‘the king of
the grasses,’ the palm or the palmyra-tree, Borassus
Flabelliformis; the cocoa-nut tree; bamboo; sugar-
cane. {%—Tṛṇa-rājan, ā,%} m. ‘the king of the grasses,’
the vine-palm. {%—Tṛṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding
in grass, grassy. {%—Tṛṇa-valva-ja, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), Saccharum Cylindricum; ({%ā%}), f. {%= valva-jā.%}
{%—Tṛṇa-vindu, us,%} m., N. of an ancient sage and
prince; [cf. {%tārṇavindavīya.%}] {%—Tṛṇavindu-saras,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a lake. {%—Tṛṇa-vistara, as,%} m. a
heap of grass. {%—Tṛṇa-vīja%} or {%tṛṇa-vījaka%} or {%tṛ-%}
{%ṇavījottama (˚ja-ut˚), as,%} m. a kind of grain, {%=%}
{%śyāmāka%}. {%—Tṛṇa-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the fan-palm;
the date tree; the cocoa-nut tree; the areca-nut
tree; Pandanus Odoratissimus; [cf. {%tṛṇa-druma.%}]
{%—Tṛṇa-śīta, am,%} n. a kind of fragrant grass, An-
dropogon Serratus; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of aquatic plant,
{%= jala-pippalī%}. {%—Tṛṇa-śūnya, as,%} m. Jasmi-
num Sambac; the fruit of Pandanus Odoratissimus.
{%—Tṛṇa-śūlī,%} f. a kind of plant. {%—Tṛṇa-śoṇita,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of perfume, {%= tṛṇa-kuṅkuma;%} [cf.
{%tṛṇāsṛj.%}] {%—Tṛṇa-śoṣaka, as,%} m. a kind of ser-
pent. {%—Tṛṇa-śauṇḍikā,%} f. a kind of Achyranthes.
{%—Tṛṇa-ṣaṭpada, as,%} m. a wasp (‘an insect with
six feet infesting grass’). {%—Tṛṇa-sārā,%} f. the plan-
tain or banana, Musa Sapientum. {%—Tṛṇa-siṃha,%}
{%as,%} m. an axe (‘a reed lion’). {%—Tṛṇa-somāṅgiras%}
{%(˚ma-aṅ˚), ās,%} m., N. of one of the seven sacrificial
priests of Yama. {%—Tṛṇa-skanda, as,%} m., Ved., N.
of a man; (Sāy.) trembling or fading away like
grass. {%—Tṛṇa-harmya, as,%} m. a house or upper
room of grass or straw. {%—Tṛṇāṃhripa (˚ṇa-aṃ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of grass, {%= manthānaka-tṛṇa;%} (also
read {%tṛṇāṅghripa.%}) {%—Tṛṇāgni (˚ṇa-ag˚), is,%} m.
a grass fire, i. e. one quickly extinguished; confla-
gration of straw or chaff; burning a criminal wrapped
up in straw. {%—Tṛṇāñjana (˚ṇa-añ˚), as,%} m. a
chameleon, a lizard. {%—Tṛṇāṭavī (˚ṇa-aṭ˚),%} f. a
forest abounding in grass. {%—Tṛṇāḍhya (˚ṇa-āḍh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of grass, {%= parvata-tṛṇa;%} [cf. {%pat-%}
{%trāḍhya.%}] {%—Tṛṇānna (˚ṇa-an˚), am,%} n. rice grow-
ing wild; [cf. {%tṛṇa-dhānya.%}] {%—Tṛṇāmla (˚ṇa-%}
{%am˚), am,%} n. a kind of grass, {%= lavaṇa-tṛṇa.%}
{%—Tṛṇāri (˚ṇa-ari), is,%} m. a kind of Mollugo, (a
common weed.) {%—Tṛṇāvarta (˚ṇa-āv˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Tṛṇāvarta-vadha, as,%} m., N. of
a chapter of the Gaṇeśa-khaṇḍa or third part of the
Brahmavaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Tṛṇā-vallī-tīrtha,%} N.
of a place mentioned in the Rasika-ramaṇa by
Raghu-nātha. {%—Tṛṇāsṛj (˚ṇa-as˚), k,%} n. a kind
of perfume, {%= tṛṇa-kuṅkuma, tṛṇa-śoṇita%}. {%—Tṛ-%}
{%ṇekṣu (˚ṇa-ik˚), us,%} m. a kind of long grass,
Saccharum Cylindricum. {%—Tṛṇendra (˚ṇa-in˚), as,%}
m. ‘prince of the grasses,’ the palmyra-palm ({%=%}
{%tāla%}); [cf. {%tṛṇa-rāja.%}] {%—Tṛṇottama (˚ṇa-ut˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘best of grasses,’ a kind of Andropogon {%(ukhar-%}
{%vala)%}. {%—Tṛṇottha (˚ṇa-ut˚), as,%} m. a kind of
perfume, {%= tṛṇa-kuṅkuma%}. {%—Tṛṇodaka (˚ṇa-%}
{%ud˚), am,%} n. grass and water. {%—Tṛṇodbhava (˚ṇa-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. rice &c. growing wild or without culti-
vation; a kind of perfume, {%= tṛṇottha%}. {%—Tṛṇolapa %}
[Page0382-c+ 75]
{%(˚ṇa-ul˚), am,%} n. grass and shrubs. {%—Tṛṇolkā%}
{%(˚ṇa-ul˚),%} f. a torch of hay; a fire-brand made of a
wisp of straw. {%—Tṛṇaukas (˚ṇa-ok˚), as,%} n. a hut,
a house of straw or mats. {%—Tṛṇauṣadha (˚ṇa-%}
{%oṣ˚), am,%} n. the fragrant bark of Feronia Elephan-
tum ({%= elavāluka%}).
<LEND>

<L>21253<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRaka<k2>tfRaka
{%Tṛṇaka, am,%}¦ n. grass, a worthless blade of grass;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21254<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRakIyA<k2>tfRakIyA
{%Tṛṇakīyā,%}¦ f. a grassy place.
<LEND>

<L>21255<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRasa<k2>tfRasa
{%Tṛṇasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ grassy, abounding in grass, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21256<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRIkf<k2>tfRIkf
{%Tṛṇī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make straw
of, to make light of. {%—Tṛṇī-kṛtya,%} having esteemed
as lightly as straw.
<LEND>

<L>21257<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRIya<k2>tfRIya
{%Tṛṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to grass (?).
<LEND>

<L>21258<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRyA<k2>tfRyA
{%Tṛṇyā,%}¦ f. a heap or quantity of grass or straw.
<LEND>

<L>21259<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRatA<k2>tfRatA<h>2
{#tfRatA#} 2¦. {%tṛṇatā,%} f. (for 1. see under {%tṛṇa,%}
col. 1), a bow, {%= triṇatā.%}
<LEND>

<L>21260<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRamatkfRa<k2>tfRamatkfRa
{#tfRamatkfRa#}¦ {%tṛṇamatkṛṇa%} or {%tṛṇamatkuṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. a bail or surety, security, warranty; (the right
reading may be {%ṛṇamatkuṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>21261<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRANku<k2>tfRANku
{#tfRANku#}¦ {%tṛṇāṅku, us,%} m., N. of an ancient
sage.
<LEND>

<L>21262<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRAmalla<k2>tfRAmalla
{#tfRAmalla#}¦ {%tṛṇāmalla,%} N. of a temple; (also
read {%triṇāmalla%} and {%trimalla%} and {%tṛṇāvallī-%}
{%tīrtha.%})
<LEND>

<L>21263<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRRa<k2>tfRRa
{#tfRRa#}¦ {%tṛṇṇa.%} See under rt. {%tṛd%} below.
<LEND>

<L>21264<pc>0382-c<k1>tfta<k2>tfta
{#tfta#}¦ {%tṛta = trita,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21265<pc>0382-c<k1>tftIya<k2>tftIya
{#tftIya#}¦ {%tṛtīya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%tri%}), the third;
forming or constituting the third part; ({%as%}), m.,
scil. {%varṇa,%} the third consonant of a Varga (i. e.
{%g, j, ḍ, d, b%}); ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%tithi,%} the third day in
a half month; scil. {%vibhakti,%} the terminations of
the third case, the third case, the instrumental;
({%am%}), n. a third part; ({%am%} or {%ena%}), ind. at or
for the third time, thirdly; [cf. Zend <nsi>thri-tya;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>tré-cia-s</nsi> of <nsi>trétias;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>ter-tius;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">τρίτος;</lang>
Goth. <nsi>thri-dya;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>tre-tiĭ;</nsi> Scot. <nsi>tri-teamh;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>triugha.</nsi>] {%—Tṛtīya-tā,%} f. ‘thirdness,’ the con-
dition of the third consonant of a Varga. {%—Tṛtīya-%}
{%prakṛti, is,%} f. (‘the third nature’), a eunuch; the
neuter gender. {%—Tṛtīya-savana, am,%} n., Ved. the
third Soma offering (in the evening). {%—Tṛtīya-%}
{%savanīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the third Soma
offering. {%—Tṛtīya-svara, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Tṛtīyāṃśa (˚ya-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a third part; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), receiving a third as one's share. {%—Tṛtīyā-%}
{%prakṛti, is,%} f. a eunuch; a hermaphrodite; the
neuter gender, {%= tṛtīya-prakṛti%}. {%—Tṛtīyā-sa-%}
{%māsa, as,%} m. a compound word (Tat-puruṣa), the
former member of which would stand in the instru-
mental case, if separated from the latter.
<LEND>

<L>21266<pc>0382-c<k1>tftIyaka<k2>tftIyaka
{%Tṛtīyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ recurring every third day,
tertian (as fever &c.); occurring for the third time;
the third; ({%ikā%}), f. {%= tṛtīyā,%} the third day in a half
month. {%—Tṛtīyaka-jvara, as,%} m. tertian ague.
<LEND>

<L>21267<pc>0382-c<k1>tftIyAkf<k2>tftIyAkf
{%Tṛtīyā-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to plough for the third time. {%—Tṛtīyā-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} thrice ploughed (as a field).
<LEND>

<L>21268<pc>0382-c<k1>tftIyin<k2>tftIyin
{%Tṛtīyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ holding the third place or
rank; having or receiving a third as one's share.
<LEND>

<L>21269<pc>0382-c<k1>tftsu<k2>tftsu
{#tftsu#}¦ {%tṛtsu, us,%} m., {%avas,%} m. pl., Ved., N. of
a Vedic race or family; (Sāy.) injurious, an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>21270<pc>0382-c<k1>tfd<k2>tfd
{#tfd#}¦ {%tṛd%} [cf. rt. {%tard%}], cl. 7. P. A. {%tṛ-%}
{%ṇatti, tṛntte%} or {%tṛnte, tatarda, tatṛde,%}
{%tardiṣyati, -te,%} and {%tartsyati, -te, atṛdat%} and
{%atardīt, atṛtta, tarditum,%} to cleave; to split
open; to pierce, cut through; to let out, set free;
to kill, destroy, injure; to disregard; to eat (?); to
give; cl. 1. P. {%tardati,%} to kill, injure: Caus. {%tar-%}
{%dayati, -yitum, atatardat%} and {%atītṛdat:%} Desid.
{%titardiṣati, -te,%} and {%titṛtsati, -te:%} Intens. {%tarī-%}
{%tṛdyate, tarītartti.%}
<LEND>

<L>21271<pc>0382-c<k1>tfRRa<k2>tfRRa
{%Tṛṇṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ split, pierced, cut, injured, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21272<pc>0382-c<k1>tfdila<k2>tfdila
{%Tṛdila, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. having holes, porous;
(Sāy.) splitting, cleaving.
<LEND>
[Page0383-a+ 74]

<L>21273<pc>0383-a<k1>tfp<k2>tfp<h>1
{#tfp#} 1¦. {%tṛp,%} cl. 4. 5. 6. P. {%tṛpyati, tṛp-%}
{%noti%} (Ved. {%tṛpṇoti%}), {%tṛpati%} or {%tṛmpati,%}
{%tatarpa; tarpiṣyati, tarpsyati, trapsyati; atṛ-%}
{%pat, atarpīt, atārpsīt, atrāpsīt; tarptum, trap-%}
{%tum, tarpitum;%} to satisfy one's self, to become
satiated or satisfied, to be pleased or satisfied or con-
tented (with gen., inst., or loc., e. g. {%nāgnis tṛp-%}
{%yati kāṣṭhānām,%} fire is not satisfied with wood;
{%tṛpyati phalaiḥ,%} he is satisfied with fruits); to
enjoy; to satisfy, satiate, please; cl. 1. P. {%tarpati,%}
&c., to light up, kindle (i. e. satiate a fire with fuel):
Caus. P. A. {%tarpayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%atītṛpat%}
and {%atatarpat,%} to gladden, exhilarate; to satiate,
refresh, satisfy; A. to become satiated or satisfied;
P. to light, kindle: Desid. {%titṛpsati, titarpiṣati,%}
to wish to satiate one's self, to desire to satisfy:
Desid. of the Caus. {%titarpayiṣati,%} to wish to
satiate or refresh or satisfy: Intens. {%tarītṛpyate, ta-%}
{%rītarpti%} and {%tarītrapti;%} [cf. {%tṛmp, tṛph, tṛmph:%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">τέρτω, τρέφω</lang> (?) Old Pruss. <nsi>en-terpo,</nsi> ‘to be
useful:’ Lith. <nsi>tarpstu,</nsi> ‘to increase, to prosper;’
<nsi>tarpà,</nsi> ‘increase:’ Goth. <nsi>tharf,</nsi> ‘to satisfy, to be
useful:’ Old Germ. <nsi>trôstyan:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>thearf:</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>tropadh,</nsi> ‘heavy, grave;’ <nsi>tromaighim = tar-</nsi>
<nsi>payāmi; tormach,</nsi> ‘increase, augmentation;’ <nsi>torp,</nsi>
‘bulk;’ <nsi>tormad,</nsi> ‘pregnant, big.’]
<LEND>

<L>21274<pc>0383-a<k1>tfp<k2>tfp<h>2
2. {%tṛp,%}¦ at the end of a comp. in {%a-sutṛp%} and
{%paśu-tṛp.%}
<LEND>

<L>21275<pc>0383-a<k1>tfpa<k2>tfpa
{%Tṛpa.%}¦ See {%a-tṛpa.%}
<LEND>

<L>21276<pc>0383-a<k1>tfpat<k2>tfpat
{%Tṛpat,%}¦ ind., Ved. with pleasure or enjoyment, to
one's satisfaction; ({%t%}), m. a parasol; the moon.
<LEND>

<L>21277<pc>0383-a<k1>tfpala<k2>tfpala
{%Tṛpala, as, ā, am%}¦ (said by some to be fr. rt.
{%trap%}), Ved. quick, restless, hasty, anxious; pleased,
glad; ({%ā%}), f. a creeper or creeping plant; [cf.
{%tṛpra.%}] {%—Tṛpala-prabharman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved.
pressing quickly forwards, acting quickly.
<LEND>

<L>21278<pc>0383-a<k1>tfpA<k2>tfpA
{%Tṛpā,%}¦ f. a kind of plant; [cf. {%tārpya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21279<pc>0383-a<k1>tfpAya<k2>tfpAya
{%Tṛpāya%}¦ (fr. {%tṛpat%}), nom. A. {%tṛpāyate,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>21280<pc>0383-a<k1>tfpta<k2>tfpta
{%Tṛpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ satiated, satisfied, contented;
({%am%}), n. the becoming satiated, satisfaction. {%—Tṛp-%}
{%tāṃśu (˚ta-aṃ˚), us, us, u,%} Ved. having well nou-
rished shoots or members, epithet of the Soma
plant. {%—Tṛptātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having a
contented mind, contented, satisfied, tranquil.
<LEND>

<L>21281<pc>0383-a<k1>tfptAya<k2>tfptAya
{%Tṛptāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%tṛptāyate,%} &c., to be or
become satiated or satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>21282<pc>0383-a<k1>tfpti<k2>tfpti
{%Tṛpti, is,%}¦ f. satisfaction, contentment; satiety,
disgust; hilarity, pleasure, gratification; Ved. water;
[cf. {%ati-tṛpti.%}] {%—Tṛpti-da, as, ā, am,%} giving satis-
faction, pleasing. {%—Tṛpti-dīpa, as,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Tṛpti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} satisfied, feeling
satisfaction.
<LEND>

<L>21283<pc>0383-a<k1>tfptin<k2>tfptin
{%Tṛptin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ satiated, satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>21284<pc>0383-a<k1>tfpra<k2>tfpra
{%Tṛpra, as, ā, am,%}¦ restless, hasty, anxious; pleased,
contented, (compar. {%trapīyas,%} superl. {%trapiṣṭha%});
({%as%}), m. an oblation of ghee or boiled butter.
{%—Tṛpra-daṃśin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. biting hastily.
<LEND>

<L>21285<pc>0383-a<k1>tfprAlu<k2>tfprAlu
{%Tṛprālu, us, us, u,%}¦ having ghee, but not liking
it or not blending with it.
<LEND>

<L>21286<pc>0383-a<k1>tfpu<k2>tfpu
{#tfpu#}¦ {%tṛpu, us,%} m., Ved. a thief; [cf. {%tripu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21287<pc>0383-a<k1>tfP<k2>tfP
{#tfP#}¦ {%tṛph,%} cl. 6. P. {%tṛphati,%} &c., = 1. {%tṛp,%}
to satisfy, gratify, please; to be contented
or pleased; to kill, hurt. See {%tarphitṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>21288<pc>0383-a<k1>tfPalA<k2>tfPalA
{#tfPalA#}¦ {%tṛphalā,%} f. {%= tri-phalā,%} the three
myrobalans.
<LEND>

<L>21289<pc>0383-a<k1>tfPU<k2>tfPU
{#tfPU#}¦ {%tṛphū, ūs,%} f. a serpent in general,
the serpent race.
<LEND>

<L>21290<pc>0383-a<k1>tfmadaRqika<k2>tfmadaRqika
{#tfmadaRqika#}¦ {%tṛmadaṇḍika (?), as,%} m., N. of
a man.
<LEND>

<L>21291<pc>0383-a<k1>tfmp<k2>tfmp
{#tfmp#}¦ {%tṛmp%} or {%tṛmph,%} cl. 6. P. {%tṛmpati%}
or {%tṛmphati,%} &c., = 1. {%tṛp,%} to be pleased
or satisfied; to content, please.
<LEND>

<L>21292<pc>0383-a<k1>tfmPaRa<k2>tfmPaRa
{%Tṛmphaṇa, am,%}¦ n. pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>21293<pc>0383-a<k1>tfmPaRIya<k2>tfmPaRIya
{%Tṛmphaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pleased, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0383-b+ 77]

<L>21294<pc>0383-b<k1>tfz<k2>tfz<h>1
{#tfz#} 1¦. {%tṛṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%tṛṣyati, tatarṣa%}
(Ved. 3rd pl. {%tātṛṣus,%} part. {%tātṛṣāṇa%}),
{%atarṣat, tarṣitum,%} to be thirsty, to thirst; to
thirst for (metaphorically), desire, long for: Caus.
{%tarṣayati, -yitum,%} to cause to thirst; [cf. Zend
<nsi>tarṣṇa,</nsi> ‘thirst;’ Goth. <nsi>thars,</nsi> ‘to become dry;’
<nsi>thairsa, thars, thaursum; thaursus,</nsi> ‘dry;’ <nsi>thaurs-</nsi>
<nsi>tei,</nsi> ‘thirst;’ <nsi>thaursyan,</nsi> ‘to thirst;’ <nsi>ga-thaurs-</nsi>
<nsi>an-s,</nsi> ‘dry:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>thurst, thyrr:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>darran,</nsi> ‘to become dry:’ Germ. <nsi>durst:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">τέρσ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">ο-μαι, τερσαίνω, ταρσός, ταρσ-ιά, τρασ-ιά:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>torreo</nsi> for <nsi>torseo, tos-tum</nsi> from <nsi>tors-tum, torris,</nsi>
<nsi>torrens:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>tróksztu,</nsi> ‘to thirst;’ <nsi>trószkulis,</nsi>
‘thirst:’ Hib. <nsi>tart (tar-t),</nsi> ‘thirst, drought;’ <nsi>tart-</nsi>
<nsi>mhar,</nsi> ‘thirsty, dry.’]
<LEND>

<L>21295<pc>0383-b<k1>tfz<k2>tfz<h>2
2. {%tṛṣ, ṭ,%}¦ f. thirst; thirst after (metaphorically),
wish, strong desire; Desire personified as a daughter
of the god of Love (Kāma).
<LEND>

<L>21296<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzA<k2>tfzA
{%Tṛṣā,%}¦ f. thirst; strong desire or wish; Desire
personified as a daughter of Kāma; a poisonous
plant, Methonica Superba {%(lāṅgalikī)%}. {%—Tṛṣā-%}
{%bhū, ūs,%} f. the bladder (whence thirst exists or
arises). {%—Tṛṣā-roga, as,%} m. ‘morbid thirst,’ N. of
a particular disease. {%—Tṛṣārta (˚ṣā-ār˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} suffering from thirst, thirsty; affected by desire.
{%—Tṛṣā-ha, am,%} n. water (destroying or quenching
thirst); ({%ā%}), f. a kind of anise, {%= madhurikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>21297<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzARa<k2>tfzARa
{%Tṛṣāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (Ved. part.) being thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>21298<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzita<k2>tfzita
{%Tṛṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thirsty, thirsting (physically
or metaphorically); ({%am%}), n. thirst, desire. {%—Tṛ-%}
{%ṣitottarā (˚ta-ut˚),%} f., N. of a plant, {%= aśana-%}
{%parṇī.%}
<LEND>

<L>21299<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzitvA<k2>tfzitvA
{%Tṛṣitvā%}¦ or {%tarṣitvā,%} ind. having become thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>21300<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzu<k2>tfzu
{%Tṛṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. greedy, libidinous, thirst-
ing for, eagerly desirous; rushing violently, quick.
{%—Tṛṣu-cyavas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. moving rapidly
or quickly. {%—Tṛṣu-cyut, t, t, t,%} Ved. quickly
issuing, rapidly moving.
<LEND>

<L>21301<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzRaka<k2>tfzRaka
{%Tṛṣṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ said to {%= tṛṣṇaj.%}
<LEND>

<L>21302<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzRaj<k2>tfzRaj
{%Tṛṣṇaj, k, k, k,%}¦ thirsty (physically or meta-
phorically), desiring, longing for, cupidinous; [cf.
{%a-tṛṣṇaj.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21303<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzRA<k2>tfzRA
{%Tṛṣṇā,%}¦ f. (in the Veda the accent is on the first
syllable, in later Sanskrit on the last), thirst, strong
wish, desire, avidity; (Tṛṣṇā and Lobha are some-
times personified as the parents of Dambha; or
Tṛṣṇā is variously regarded as a daughter of Death,
or of Pāpīyas, or as generated by Vedanā and gene-
rating Upādāna); [cf. {%ati-tṛṣṇa.%}] {%—Tṛṣṇā-%}
{%kṣaya, as,%} m. cessation of desire, tranquillity of
mind, resignation, patience, content. {%—Tṛṣṇā-ghna,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} quenching the thirst. {%—Tṛṣṇāmaya%}
{%(˚ṇā-ām˚), as, ā, am,%} ill with thirst. {%—Tṛṣṇā-%}
{%māra, as,%} m., Ved. dying of thirst. {%—Tṛṣṇāri%}
{%(˚ṇā-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of thirst,’ a kind of plant
({%= parpaṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>21304<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzRAlu<k2>tfzRAlu
{%Tṛṣṇālu, us, us, u,%}¦ thirsting much, very thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>21305<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzyat<k2>tfzyat
{%Tṛṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ thirsting, athirst; desiring.
<LEND>

<L>21306<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzyA<k2>tfzyA
{%Tṛṣyā,%}¦ f., Ved. thirst. {%—Tṛṣyā-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. thirsty; [cf. {%tarṣyā-vat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21307<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzama<k2>tfzama
{#tfzama#}¦ {%tṛṣama = triṣama,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21308<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzwa<k2>tfzwa
{#tfzwa#}¦ {%tṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. rough, harsh;
pungent; rugged; hoarse. {%—Tṛṣṭa-jambha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. having rough or uneven teeth. {%—Tṛṣṭa-%}
{%daṃśman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. biting roughly. {%—Tṛṣṭa-%}
{%dhūma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having pungent breath,
epithet of a snake. {%—Tṛṣṭa-vandana, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. one whose praise is distasteful. {%—Tṛṣṭāmā%}
{%(˚ṭa-am˚),%} f., Ved. N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>21309<pc>0383-b<k1>tfzwikA<k2>tfzwikA
{%Tṛṣṭikā,%}¦ f., Ved. rough, disagreeable, epithet of
a woman.
<LEND>

<L>21310<pc>0383-b<k1>tfh<k2>tfh
{#tfh#}¦ {%tṛh%} or {%tṛṃh,%} cl. 6. 7. P. {%tṛhati%} or
{%tṛṃhati, tṛṇeḍhi, tatarha, tarhiṣyati%}
and {%tarkṣyati, atarhīt%} and {%atṛkṣat, tarhitum%}
and {%tarḍhum,%} to dash to pieces, crush, bruise; to
hurt, injure, strike, kill: Caus. {%tarhayati:%} Desid.
{%titarhiṣati, titṛkṣati, titṛṃhiṣati:%} Intens.
[Page0383-c+ 78]
{%tarītṛhyate, tarītarḍhi:%} [cf. perhaps Goth. <nsi>thras-</nsi>
<nsi>can;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>therscan</nsi> old desid.]
<LEND>

<L>21311<pc>0383-c<k1>tfQa<k2>tfQa
{%Tṛḍha, as, ā, am%}¦ (Ved. {%tṛḷha%}), crushed, bruised,
hurt, injured, wounded, killed.
<LEND>

<L>21312<pc>0383-c<k1>tfQvA<k2>tfQvA
{%Tṛḍhvā%}¦ or {%tarhitvā,%} ind. having killed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21313<pc>0383-c<k1>tF<k2>tF
{#tF#}¦ {%tṝ,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A., Ved. also
cl. 6.) {%tarati, -te, tatāra%} (2nd sing. {%teritha,%}
3rd du. {%teratus,%} 3rd pl. {%terus%}), {%tariṣyati%} or {%ta-%}
{%rīṣyati, atārīt, taritum%} or {%tarītum%} or {%tartum;%}
[the following are Vedic forms, some of them
occurring also in epic poetry; {%tirati%} when preceded
by prep.; {%titarti,%} part. {%titrat; tīryati, -te; turyāt,%}
{%tuturyāt;%} Aor. {%tāriṣat, atārima, tarīt; taru-%}
{%ṣema%} in Ṛg-veda VII. 48, 2, Pāṇ. III. 1, 85,
{%taruṣanta, taruṣante; titirus,%} part. {%titirvas;%}
gen. {%tataruṣas;%} inf. {%taradhyai%}]; to pass across
or over, cross over (a river), sail across, navigate; to
float, swim; to move on rapidly; to get through,
attain an end or aim; to pervade; to come to the
end of; to live through (a definite period); to fulfil,
accomplish, perform; to surpass, overcome, over-
power, subdue, destroy, become master of; to ac-
quire, gain; to escape (with acc.); to be saved or
rescued; to escape from a danger (with abl.); to
carry through or over, transport, save, liberate from;
to strive or contend together, to compete: Caus. P.
{%tārayati, -yitum,%} to carry or lead over or across;
to cause to arrive at; to rescue, save, liberate [cf. rt.
{%trai%}]: Desid. {%titīrṣati, titariṣati, titarīṣati,%}
to wish to cross: Intens. {%tetīryate, tātarīti%} or {%tā-%}
{%tarti%} (Ved. pres. part. {%taritrat%}), to pass completely
through, make a way through, pervade; [cf. 1. {%tur, tul,%}
{%turv; tara%} at p. 365: Zend <nsi>tarō,</nsi> ‘over:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">τερ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">έ-ω, τέρ-ε-τρο-ν, τέρ-θρο-ν, τέρ-μα, τέρμων, τέρμ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">ιο-ς, τερμιό-ει-ς, τείρ-ω, τρύ-ω, τρί-βω, τρύ-χ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τέρ-ην, τι-τρά-ω, τι-τραίν-ω, τέρ-α-ς, τορ-ό-ς, τόρ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">ο-ς, τόρ-νο-ς, τορ-ύνη, τορ-εύ-ω, τρῦ-μα, τρῶ-μα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τρῆ-μα, τέλος, τέλλω</lang> (‘to rise’), <lang n="greek">τηρέω</lang> (caus.),
<lang n="greek">τρῡτάνη;</lang> perhaps also <lang n="greek">Τάρᾱς, Τρο-ία, Τροιζήν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τελέω, τέλειος, τελευτή, τᾶλις, θραύ-ω, τραῦ-μα</lang>
<lang n="greek">θλά-ω, θλίβ-ω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>ter-mo, ter-men, ter-minu-s,</nsi>
<nsi>ter-o, ter-e(t)-s, ter-e-bra, trib-ula, tribulare, trī-</nsi>
<nsi>ti-cu-m, in-tra-re, peni-tra-re, ex-tra-re, trans:</nsi>
Umbr. <nsi>termnu, traf = trans:</nsi> Osc. <nsi>teremenniu§:</nsi>
Sabin. <nsi>terentum, Terentius, tur-unda, tru-a,</nsi>
‘a ladle;’ <nsi>trāme(t)-s, Tras-im-enu-s,</nsi> ‘the opposite,
ulterior:’ Goth. <nsi>thair-ko,</nsi> ‘a hole;’ <nsi>thairh:</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>durh:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>through:</nsi> Old Island. <nsi>thrö-m,</nsi>
‘margin:’ Old Germ. <nsi>dru-m,</nsi> ‘limit, border:’ Angl.
Sax. <nsi>thrā-v-an:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>drā-y-an,</nsi> ‘to turn,
whirl;’ <nsi>thearl, thearm, thirel, thirlian, thole,</nsi>
<nsi>tholian, thaelian, for-thyldian:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>tre†-ti, try-</nsi>
<nsi>ti,</nsi> ‘to rub:’ Lith. <nsi>trī1n-ti,</nsi> ‘to rub, file, polish,
bore;’ <nsi>til-tas,</nsi> ‘a bridge;’ <nsi>tolùs,</nsi> ‘long, distant:’
Hib. <nsi>toir,</nsi> ‘a pursuit;’ <nsi>tor,</nsi> ‘a pursuer;’ <nsi>toramh,</nsi>
‘pursuit;’ <nsi>toras,</nsi> ‘a journey;’ <nsi>teirin,</nsi> ‘a descent;’
<nsi>tearnadh,</nsi> ‘descending;’ <nsi>tarradh,</nsi> ‘protection;’
<nsi>tarthadoir,</nsi> ‘a saviour.’]
<LEND>

<L>21314<pc>0383-c<k1>tarUtf<k2>tarUtf
{%Tarūtṛ = tarutṛ,%}¦ at p. 365, by Pāṇ. VII. 2, 34.
<LEND>

<L>21315<pc>0383-c<k1>tIrRa<k2>tIrRa
{%Tīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crossed, passed over; spread,
expanded; surpassed, excelled; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a metre
consisting of four lines of four long syllables each.
{%—Tīrṇa-padī,%} f. a species of plant, {%= tāla-mūlī.%}
<LEND>

<L>21316<pc>0383-c<k1>tIrtvA<k2>tIrtvA
{%Tīrtvā,%}¦ ind. having passed, crossed over, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21317<pc>0383-c<k1>tega<k2>tega
{#tega#}¦ {%tega, as,%} m., Ved. only occurring in
Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā XXV. 1, where the sense is
doubtful.
<LEND>

<L>21318<pc>0383-c<k1>tej<k2>tej
{#tej#}¦ {%tej%} (probably connected with rt.
{%tij%}), cl. 1. P. {%tejati,%} &c., to guard, cherish,
defend, protect.
<LEND>

<L>21319<pc>0383-c<k1>teja<k2>teja
{#teja#}¦ {%teja, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%tij%}), sharpness,
pungency; sharpness (of a weapon); brilliancy;
spirit; N. of a man. {%—Teja-pattra, as,%} m. the leaf
of Laurus Cassia. {%—Teja-vat, ān, atī, at,%} sharp,
&c.; see {%tejo-vat.%} {%—Teja-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a
king, a descendant of Paramāra, mentioned in the
Rāja-taraṅgiṇī by Kalhaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>21320<pc>0383-c<k1>tejana<k2>tejana
{%Tejana, am,%}¦ n. sharpening; kindling, inflammation;
[Page0384-a+ 81]
enlightening, rendering bright, making splendid or
polished; whetting; a point, the point of an arrow;
a reed, a bamboo, the shaft of an arrow; the reed
Saccharum Sara; ({%ī%}), f. a number of reeds, straw,
&c., twisted or matted together, a mat; a tuft; a
tuft of hair on the head (of a horse); N. of a plant,
{%= mūrvā,%} Sanseviera Roxburghiana; also {%= jyotiṣ-%}
{%matī,%} Cardiospermum Halicacabum.
<LEND>

<L>21321<pc>0384-a<k1>tejanaka<k2>tejanaka
{%Tejanaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of reed, Saccharum Sara
({%= śara%}).
<LEND>

<L>21322<pc>0384-a<k1>tejala<k2>tejala
{%Tejala, as,%}¦ m. the francoline partridge ({%= ka-%}
{%piñjala%}).
<LEND>

<L>21323<pc>0384-a<k1>tejas<k2>tejas
{%Tejas, as,%}¦ n. sharpness; the sharp edge (of a
knife &c.); the point or top of a flame or of a ray
&c.; glow, glare, fierce or scorching heat, radiance,
splendor, brilliance, lustre, light, fire; clearness of
the eyes; the clear or bright appearance of the
human body (in health), beauty; the heating and
strengthening faculty of the human frame seated in
the {%pitta;%} the bile; bilious humor &c.; fiery
energy, ardour, power, might, spirit, strength,
efficacy, male energy, semen virile, vital power;
the brain; marrow; the essential nature or value
of anything, essence; violence, mettle, fierceness,
severity, energetic opposition; impatience, inability
to bear or put up with; spiritual or moral or magical
power; virtue; influence, effect, consequence, ma-
jesty, fame, dignity, glory, authority; a brave man;
a venerable or dignified person, a splendid object, a
renowned person, a person of consequence; fresh
butter; gold; [cf. {%a-tejas, agni-t˚, ugra-t˚, tigma-%}
{%t˚,%} &c.; cf. also Hib. <nsi>teas,</nsi> ‘warmth, fervour.’]
{%—Tejaḥ-prabha, as, ā, am,%} gleaming with lustre,
flashing with brilliance (as a weapon). {%—Tejaḥ-phala,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of plant, {%= bahu-phala,%} &c. {%—Tejaḥ-%}
{%sambhava, as,%} m. {%= rasa,%} lymph; [cf. {%agni-sam-%}
{%bhava.%}] {%—Tejaḥ-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of an astronomer.
{%—Tejaḥ-sena, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Tejas-ka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} splendid, radiant, glorious, famous. {%—Tejas-%}
{%kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} irradiating, illuminating, granting
strength or vital power. {%—Tejas-kāma, as, ā, am,%}
longing for manly strength or vital power, desiring
influence or authority or dignity. {%—Tejas-timira, e,%}
n. du. light and darkness. {%—Tejas-tejas, ās,%} m.
whose essence is light, who is light of lights. {%—Te-%}
{%jas-tva, am,%} n. the nature or essence of light,
brightness, &c. {%—Tejas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a
sharp edge (as a weapon); sharp, pungent; splendid,
bright; energetic, spirited; ({%tī%}), f., N. of a princess;
[cf. {%tejo-vat.%}] {%—Tejasvi-tā,%} f. or {%tejasvi-tva, am,%}
n. energetic behaviour or nature, energy, brilliancy,
splendor. {%—Tejas-vin, ī, inī, i,%} brilliant, splendid,
bright; powerful, energetic, strong, sound, inspiring
respect, dignified, noble; famous, glorious, illustri-
ous, celebrated; violent; lawful; haughty; granting
strength &c.; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Indra; ({%inī%}),
f. {%= jyotiṣ-matī,%} Cardiospermum Halicacabum.
{%—Tejasvi-praśaṃsā,%} f., N. of a chapter of Śārṅga-
dhara's anthology called Śārṅga-dhara-paddhati.
{%—Tejo-nātha-tīrtha, am,%} n. the Tīrtha of the
lord of light (the Sun?). {%—Tejo-nidhi, is, is, i,%} ‘a
treasury of glory,’ abounding in glory. {%—Tejo-bala-%}
{%samanvita%} or {%tejo-bala-samāyukta, as, ā, am,%}
endowed with spirit and strength. {%—Tejo-bhaṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. destruction of dignity, disgrace. {%—Tejo-maṇ-%}
{%ḍala, am,%} n. a disk or halo of light. {%—Tejo-mantha,%}
{%as,%} m. the tree Premna Spinosa, (the friction of the
wood engendering flame); [cf. {%agni-mantha.%}]
{%—Tejo-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of splendor or
light, shining, brilliant, luminous, glorious; full of
energy or ardour. {%—Tejo-mūrti, is, is, i,%} whose
form is light, consisting totally of light. {%—Tejo-rāśi,%}
{%is,%} m. a heap or mass of splendor, i. e. all splendor.
{%—Tejo-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} whose form is light, con-
sisting wholly of splendor; ({%am%}), n. Brahma, the
supreme spirit; the nature of light. {%—Tejo-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} sharp, pungent; bright, splendid; energetic;
({%tī%}), f. {%= cavya,%} Piper Chaba; Scindapsus Officinalis,
{%= gaja-pippalī, = mahā-jyotiṣmatī;%} a kind of
medicinal root, commonly called Tejo-bala; N. of a
princess; [cf. {%tejas-vat.%}] {%—Tejo-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved.
[Page0384-b+ 70]
possessing splendor or light. {%—Tejo-vindūpaniṣad%}
{%(˚du-up˚), t,%} f. ‘a drop or particle of light,’ N. of
an Upaniṣad. {%—Tejo-vīja, am,%} n. marrow. {%—Tejo-%}
{%vṛkṣa, as,%} m. {%= kṣudrāgni-mantha%}. {%—Tejo-%}
{%vṛtta, am,%} n. noble or dignified behaviour; superior
brilliancy or power. {%—Tejo-vṛddhi, is,%} f. increase
of glory or dignity. {%—Tejo-hrāsa, as,%} m. loss of
dignity or lustre. {%—Tejohvā (˚jas-āh˚),%} f. {%= tejas-%}
{%vinī, = tejinī.%}
<LEND>

<L>21324<pc>0384-b<k1>tejasa<k2>tejasa
{%Tejasa, am,%}¦ n. {%= tejas,%} power &c. (at the end of a
compound).
<LEND>

<L>21325<pc>0384-b<k1>tejasya<k2>tejasya
{%Tejasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. splendid, conspicuous.
<LEND>

<L>21326<pc>0384-b<k1>tejita<k2>tejita
{%Tejita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sharpened, whetted, polished,
burnished; excited, invigorated, stimulated.
<LEND>

<L>21327<pc>0384-b<k1>tejinI<k2>tejinI
{%Tejinī,%}¦ f. a sort of medicinal plant, commonly
called Tejo-bala; Sanseviera Zeylanica.
<LEND>

<L>21328<pc>0384-b<k1>tejizWa<k2>tejizWa
{%Tejiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%tigma%} or
{%tīkṣṇa%}), Ved. very sharp or pointed, very bright,
splendid, shining; vigorous, powerful, violent.
<LEND>

<L>21329<pc>0384-b<k1>tejIyas<k2>tejIyas
{%Tejīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. very bright, radiant,
splendid; very powerful or vigorous; a man of high
dignity or influence.
<LEND>

<L>21330<pc>0384-b<k1>tejeyu<k2>tejeyu
{%Tejeyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva.
<LEND>

<L>21331<pc>0384-b<k1>tejAura<k2>tejAura
{#tejAura#}¦ {%tejāüra,%} N. of a place mentioned
in the poem Rasika-ramaṇa by Raghu-nātha.
<LEND>

<L>21332<pc>0384-b<k1>tedanI<k2>tedanI
{#tedanI#}¦ {%tedanī,%} f., Ved. blood or clotted
blood.
<LEND>

<L>21333<pc>0384-b<k1>tena<k2>tena<h>1
{#tena#} 1¦. {%tena, as,%} m. a note or cadence in-
troductory to a song &c.
<LEND>

<L>21334<pc>0384-b<k1>tena<k2>tena<h>2
{#tena#} 2¦. {%tena,%} ind. (Inst. sing. of the pronom.
base 2. {%ta%}), in that direction, there (correlative to
{%yena,%} in which direction, where); in that manner,
thus, so (correlative to {%yena,%} in what manner); on
that account, for that reason, therefore, in conse-
quence of; so with regard to (with acc.); {%tena hi,%}
therefore, now then.
<LEND>

<L>21335<pc>0384-b<k1>tep<k2>tep
{#tep#}¦ {%tep,%} cl. 1. A. {%tepate,%} &c., to sprinkle,
distil, ooze, drop; to shake, tremble; to
shine.
<LEND>

<L>21336<pc>0384-b<k1>tema<k2>tema
{#tema#}¦ {%tema, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%tim%}), the becoming
wet, wet, damp, moisture; [cf. {%stema.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21337<pc>0384-b<k1>temana<k2>temana
{%Temana, am,%}¦ n. wetting, moistening, moisture;
a sauce, condiment; ({%ī%}), f. a sort of chimney, a fire-
place.
<LEND>

<L>21338<pc>0384-b<k1>tera<k2>tera
{#tera#}¦ {%tera (?), am,%} n. the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>21339<pc>0384-b<k1>tela<k2>tela
{#tela#}¦ {%tela, as,%} m. a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>21340<pc>0384-b<k1>telu<k2>telu
{#telu#}¦ {%telu, us,%} m., N. of a race.
<LEND>

<L>21341<pc>0384-b<k1>tev<k2>tev
{#tev#}¦ {%tev,%} cl. 1. A. {%tevate,%} &c., to play,
sport; to weep, lament; [cf. {%div%} and {%dev.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21342<pc>0384-b<k1>tevana<k2>tevana
{%Tevana, am,%}¦ n. play, sport, pastime; a garden, a
pleasure-garden or play-ground.
<LEND>

<L>21343<pc>0384-b<k1>tEkAyana<k2>tEkAyana
{#tEkAyana#}¦ {%taikāyana, as,%} m. and {%taikāyani,%}
{%is,%} m. two patronymics from Tika.
<LEND>

<L>21344<pc>0384-b<k1>tEkAyanIya<k2>tEkAyanIya
{%Taikāyanīya, as,%}¦ m. a descendant or a pupil of
Taikāyani.
<LEND>

<L>21345<pc>0384-b<k1>tEkzRAyana<k2>tEkzRAyana
{#tEkzRAyana#}¦ {%taikṣṇāyana, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Tīkṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>21346<pc>0384-b<k1>tEkzRya<k2>tEkzRya
{#tEkzRya#}¦ {%taikṣṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tīkṣṇa%}), sharp-
ness (of a knife &c.), acuteness, heat, pungency,
acerbity, fierceness, severity, vehemence, violence,
cruelty.
<LEND>

<L>21347<pc>0384-b<k1>tEgmya<k2>tEgmya
{#tEgmya#}¦ {%taigmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tigma%}), sharp-
ness, pungency, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21348<pc>0384-b<k1>tEjanitvac<k2>tEjanitvac
{#tEjanitvac#}¦ {%taijanitvac, k,%} f. (?), a sort of
Vīṇā.
<LEND>

<L>21349<pc>0384-b<k1>tEjasa<k2>tEjasa
{#tEjasa#}¦ {%taijasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tejas%}), bright,
luminous, brilliant, consisting of light or fire, fiery,
splendid; consisting of any shining substance such
as metal, metallic; the gastric juice as coloured by
digested food; passionate, energetic, vigorous, power-
[Page0384-c+ 75]
ful, intense; ({%as%}), m. ‘the bright one,’ i. e. the highly
refined or subtle essence (in the Vedānta phil.); ({%ī%}),
f. Scindapsus Officinalis; ({%am%}), n. any metal; ghee
or oiled butter; intensity; vigour, energy; N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Taijasāvartanī%} or {%taijasāvartinī (˚sa-%}
{%āv˚),%} f. a crucible.
<LEND>

<L>21350<pc>0384-c<k1>tEtala<k2>tEtala
{#tEtala#}¦ {%taitala, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21351<pc>0384-c<k1>tEtalAyani<k2>tEtalAyani
{%Taitalāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Taitala.
<LEND>

<L>21352<pc>0384-c<k1>tEtikza<k2>tEtikza
{#tEtikza#}¦ {%taitikṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%titikṣā%}),
patient; (this word is also an adj. fr. {%taitikṣya.%})
<LEND>

<L>21353<pc>0384-c<k1>tEtikzava<k2>tEtikzava
{%Taitikṣava, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Titi-
kṣu.
<LEND>

<L>21354<pc>0384-c<k1>tEtikzya<k2>tEtikzya
{%Taitikṣya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Titikṣa.
<LEND>

<L>21355<pc>0384-c<k1>tEtira<k2>tEtira
{#tEtira#}¦ {%taitira, as,%} m. {%= tittiri,%} a partridge;
(probably a wrong reading for {%taittira.%})
<LEND>

<L>21356<pc>0384-c<k1>tEtila<k2>tEtila
{#tEtila#}¦ {%taitila, as,%} m. a rhinoceros; a god;
{%= kaliṅga; (am),%} n., N. of the fourth astronomical
period called Karaṇas.
<LEND>

<L>21357<pc>0384-c<k1>tEtili<k2>tEtili
{%Taitili, is,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21358<pc>0384-c<k1>tEttira<k2>tEttira
{#tEttira#}¦ {%taittira, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tittiri%}), pro-
duced or coming from a partridge; sprung from the
sage Tittiri; ({%as%}), m. {%= tittiri,%} a partridge; a rhino-
ceros; ({%am%}), n. a flock of partridges.
<LEND>

<L>21359<pc>0384-c<k1>tEttiri<k2>tEttiri
{%Taittiri, is,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient sage who was
an elder brother of Vaiśampāyana; N. of a son of
Kapota-roman and father of Punar-vasu.
<LEND>

<L>21360<pc>0384-c<k1>tEttirika<k2>tEttirika
{%Taittirika, as,%}¦ m. one who catches partridges.
<LEND>

<L>21361<pc>0384-c<k1>tEttirIya<k2>tEttirIya
{%Taittirīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils of Tittiri, the
followers of the Taittirīya school of the Yajur-veda;
or the Yajur-veda itself, according to the version of
this school; see {%taittirīya-saṃhitā%}. {%—Taittirīya-%}
{%caraṇa, as, am,%} m. n. the school or sect of the
Taittirīyas. {%—Taittirīya-prātiśākhya, am,%} n. the
Prātiśākhya of the Taittirīyas. {%—Taittirīya-brāh-%}
{%maṇa, am,%} n. a Brāhmaṇa of the Taittirīya Yajur-
veda. {%—Taittirīya-śikṣā,%} f. the pronunciation of
letters, accents, &c., according to the Taittirīyas.
{%—Taittirīya-saṃhitā,%} f. the collection of the
hymns &c. of the dark or black Yajur-veda; (this,
the more ancient version of the Yajur-veda, was
called Taittirīya, as, handed, down by Tittiri, the
pupil of Yāska, the pupil of Vaiśampāyana; the more
modern or bright Yajur-veda being attributed to
Yājñavalkya, of the family of the Vājasaneyins: the
legend relates that the Yajus in its original form
was first taught by the sage Vaiśampāyana to twenty-
seven pupils, Yājñavalkya being deputed by him to
teach it to others; subsequently the sage being
offended with Yājñavalkya, bade him relinquish the
Veda committed to him, which he instantly disgorged
in a tangible form; whereupon the other disciples of
Vaiśampāyana receiving his command to pick it up,
assumed the form of partridges for that purpose, and
swallowed the texts, which were soiled, and hence
named ‘black,’ the other name {%taittirīya%} having
reference to the partridges. Yājñavalkya then had
recourse to the Sun, and from that deity received a
new revelation of the Yajus, which is sometimes
called ‘white,’ and sometimes from the patronymic
of Yājñavalkya, Vājasaneyin.) {%—Taittirīyāraṇyaka%}
{%(˚ya-ār˚), am,%} n. the Āraṇyaka of the Taittirīyas.
{%—Taittirīyopaniṣad (˚ya-up˚), t,%} f. the Upani-
shad of the Taittirīyas.
<LEND>

<L>21362<pc>0384-c<k1>tEttirIyaka<k2>tEttirIyaka
{%Taittirīyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the Taitti-
rīya version of the Yajur-veda; ({%ās%}), m. pl. {%= taitti-%}
{%rīyās,%} i. e. the followers of the Taittirīya school of
the Yajur-veda. {%—Taittirīyakopaniṣad (˚ka-up˚),%}
{%t,%} f. the Upaniṣad of the Taittirīyas mentioned in
the Sarva-darśana-saṅgraha.
<LEND>

<L>21363<pc>0384-c<k1>tEntiqIka<k2>tEntiqIka
{#tEntiqIka#}¦ {%taintiḍīka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tintiḍīka%}),
prepared with a sour sauce of tamarinds.
<LEND>

<L>21364<pc>0384-c<k1>tEnduka<k2>tEnduka
{#tEnduka#}¦ {%tainduka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tinduka%}),
derived from or belonging to the tree Diospyros
Embryopteris.
<LEND>

<L>21365<pc>0384-c<k1>tEBa<k2>tEBa
{#tEBa#}¦ {%taibha, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>
[Page0385-a+ 73]

<L>21366<pc>0385-a<k1>tEmAta<k2>tEmAta
{#tEmAta#}¦ {%taimāta, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
serpent.
<LEND>

<L>21367<pc>0385-a<k1>tEmira<k2>tEmira
{#tEmira#}¦ {%taimira, as,%} m. (fr. {%timira%}), scil.
{%roga,%} darkness or dimness of the eyes, a disease of
the eyes; [cf. {%timira.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21368<pc>0385-a<k1>tEmirika<k2>tEmirika
{%Taimirika, as, ī, am,%}¦ affected by this disease.
<LEND>

<L>21369<pc>0385-a<k1>tEra<k2>tEra
{#tEra#}¦ {%taira, as,%} m. or {%tairaṇa, as,%} m. or
{%tairaṇī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= ku-nīlī, rāga-da.%}
<LEND>

<L>21370<pc>0385-a<k1>tEraBukta<k2>tEraBukta
{#tEraBukta#}¦ {%tairabhukta, as, ī, am,%} derived from
or a native of Tīra-bhukti.
<LEND>

<L>21371<pc>0385-a<k1>tEraSca<k2>tEraSca
{#tEraSca#}¦ {%tairaśca, as, ī, am,%} derived from or
composed by Tiraścī (as a Sāman or Sūkta).
<LEND>

<L>21372<pc>0385-a<k1>tEraScya<k2>tEraScya
{%Tairaścya, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>21373<pc>0385-a<k1>tErovirAma<k2>tErovirAma
{#tErovirAma#}¦ {%tairovirāma, as,%} m. (fr. {%tiras+%}
{%virāma%}), ‘extending beyond a pause’ or ‘having a
pause between,’ i. e. the dependent Svarita in a com-
pound when the Udātta upon which it depends
stands on the last syllable of the first member of the
compound.
<LEND>

<L>21374<pc>0385-a<k1>tErovyaYjana<k2>tErovyaYjana
{#tErovyaYjana#}¦ {%tairovyañjana, as,%} m. (fr. {%tiras%}
{%+vy˚%}), ‘extending beyond the consonant’ or
‘having a consonant between,’ the dependent Sva-
rita when separated from the Udātta syllable of
the same word by one or more consonants, i. e. a
circumflex accent between which and the preceding
acute vowel one or more consonants intervene.
<LEND>

<L>21375<pc>0385-a<k1>tErohnya<k2>tErohnya
{#tEro'hnya#}¦ {%tairo'hnya = tiro-'hnya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21376<pc>0385-a<k1>tErTa<k2>tErTa
{#tErTa#}¦ {%tairtha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tīrtha%}), relating
to a sacred bathing-place or shrine, coming from
it, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21377<pc>0385-a<k1>tErTaka<k2>tErTaka
{%Tairthaka, as,%}¦ &c., an adj. fr. {%tīrtha.%}
<LEND>

<L>21378<pc>0385-a<k1>tErTika<k2>tErTika
{%Tairthika, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming or derived from a
holy place of pilgrimage; visiting the holy shrines or
bathing-places; sacred, holy; ({%am%}), n. water from
a sacred bathing-place, holy water; ({%as%}), m. an
ascetic; [cf. {%tīrthika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21379<pc>0385-a<k1>tErTya<k2>tErTya
{%Tairthya, am,%}¦ n. abstract noun fr. {%tīrtha.%}
<LEND>

<L>21380<pc>0385-a<k1>tEryagayanika<k2>tEryagayanika
{#tEryagayanika#}¦ {%tairyagayanika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%tiryag-ayana%}), measured by the revolution of the
sun, as a year, (opposed to {%sāvanaḥ saṃvat-%}
{%saraḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>21381<pc>0385-a<k1>tEryagyona<k2>tEryagyona
{#tEryagyona#}¦ {%tairyagyona, as, ī, am,%} or {%tair-%}
{%yagyoni, is, is, i,%} or {%tairyagyonya, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%tiryag-yoni%}), of animal origin, relating to the
animals, an animal, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21382<pc>0385-a<k1>tEla<k2>tEla
{#tEla#}¦ {%taila, am,%} n. (fr. {%tila%}), oil expressed
from sesamum, mustard, &c.; oil in general, (often
compounded with the name of the plant from which
the oil is extracted); storax, gum benzoin, incense;
[cf. {%tīkṣṇa-taila.%}] {%—Taila-kanda, as,%} m. a kind
of bulbous plant. {%—Taila-kalka-ja, as,%} m. oil-cake;
[cf. {%tilakalka-ja.%}] {%—Taila-kalpanā,%} f., N. of a
chapter in the Śārṅga-dhara-saṃhitā or medical
work by Śārṅga-dhara, son of Dāmodara. {%—Taila-%}
{%kāra, as,%} m. an oil manufacturer. {%—Taila-kiṭṭa,%}
{%am,%} n. oil-cake, a cake made of oily seed; [cf. {%tila-%}
{%kiṭṭa.%}] {%—Taila-kīṭa, as,%} m. a kind of insect, {%=%}
{%tailinī, dardru-nāśinī,%} &c. {%—Taila-caurikā,%} f.
a cock-roach (‘stealing oil’). {%—Taila-tva, am,%} n.
oiliness, oily state. {%—Taila-droṇī,%} f. a tub or bath
filled with oil. {%—Taila-paka, as,%} m. ({%paka%} fr. {%pa,%}
drinking), a kind of bird; an ‘oil-drinking’ beetle,
a cock-roach; [cf. {%taila-pā.%}] {%—Taila-parṇaka, am,%}
n. a kind of fragrant grass, {%= granthi-parṇa;%} sandal-
wood. {%—Tailaparṇika, as,%} m. a kind of sandal-
wood. {%—Taila-parṇī,%} f. sandal; turpentine; incense;
[cf. {%tila-parṇa%} and {%tila-parṇī.%}] {%—Taila-pā%} or
{%taila-pāyikā,%} f. a kind of beetle or cock-roach; [cf.
{%taila-paka.%}] {%—Taila-pāyin, ī,%} m. a kind of cock-
roach; a sword (‘drinking oil,’ i. e. anointed with
oil ?); ({%inī%}), f. a kind of cock-roach. {%—Taila-piñja%}
{%= tila-piñja,%} white sesamum. {%—Taila-pipīlikā,%} f.
the small red ant. {%—Taila-pīta, as, ā, am, = pīta- %}
[Page0385-b+ 73]
{%taila,%} one who has drunk oil. {%—Taila-phala, as,%}
m. the sesamum plant; Terminalia Catappa ({%=%}
{%iṅgudī%}); Terminalia Bellerica. {%—Taila-bhāvinī,%} f.
{%= tila-bhāvinī,%} jasmine. {%—Taila-mālī,%} f. a wick,
the cotton of a lamp. {%—Tailam-pātā,%} f. the pouring
of sesamum-seeds into fire [cf. {%śyainam-pātā%}];
oblation to fire; ({%as, ā, am%}), mixed with oil &c.
{%—Taila-yantra, am,%} n. an oil-mill. {%—Taila-vallī,%}
f. a kind of plant, {%= laghu-śatāvarī%} (Asparagus).
{%—Taila-vīja,%} Semecarpus Anacardium. {%—Taila-%}
{%sādhana, am,%} n. a fragrant substance or perfume,
civet? {%(= kakkolaka)%}. {%—Taila-spandā,%} f., N. of
several plants, {%= śveta-gokarṇī; kākolī;%} Cucurbita
Pepo. {%—Taila-sphaṭika, as,%} m. a sort of gem,
amber (?). {%—Tailākara (˚la-āk˚), as,%} m. seeds &c.
from which oil is expressed. {%—Tailāguru (˚la-ag˚),%}
{%u,%} n. a sort of Agallochum. {%—Tailāṭī (˚la-aṭī),%} f.
a wasp. {%—Tailābhyaṅga (˚la-abh˚), as,%} m. anoint-
ing the body with oil. {%—Tailāmbukā (˚la-am˚),%} f.
{%= taila-pāyikā,%} a sort of cock-roach.
<LEND>

<L>21383<pc>0385-b<k1>tElaka<k2>tElaka
{%Tailaka, am,%}¦ n. a small quantity of oil.
<LEND>

<L>21384<pc>0385-b<k1>tElika<k2>tElika
{%Tailika, as,%}¦ m. an oilman, an oil manufacturer.
<LEND>

<L>21385<pc>0385-b<k1>tElin<k2>tElin
{%Tailin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ relating or belonging to oil, oily,
&c.; ({%ī%}), m. an oilman, an oil-grinder or preparer;
({%inī%}), f. the wick or cotton of a lamp; a kind of
insect found in oil {%(= taila-kīṭa)%}. {%—Taili-śālā,%} f.
an oil-mill.
<LEND>

<L>21386<pc>0385-b<k1>tElIna<k2>tElIna
{%Tailīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown with sesamum; ({%am%}),
n. a field of sesamum.
<LEND>

<L>21387<pc>0385-b<k1>tElakya<k2>tElakya
{#tElakya#}¦ {%tailakya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tilaka%}), putting
the Tilaka-mark on the forehead (?).
<LEND>

<L>21388<pc>0385-b<k1>tElaNga<k2>tElaNga
{#tElaNga#}¦ {%tailaṅga, as,%} m. the country along
the coast south of Orissa as far as Madras, the
modern Carnatic.
<LEND>

<L>21389<pc>0385-b<k1>tElavaka<k2>tElavaka
{#tElavaka#}¦ {%tailavaka, as,%} &c., inhabited by
the Telus.
<LEND>

<L>21390<pc>0385-b<k1>tElvaka<k2>tElvaka
{#tElvaka#}¦ {%tailvaka, as,%} &c. (fr. {%tilvaka%}), com-
ing from or made of the Tilvaka tree, the plant
Symplocos Racemosa.
<LEND>

<L>21391<pc>0385-b<k1>tEvraka<k2>tEvraka
{#tEvraka#}¦ {%taivraka, as,%} &c., inhabited by the
Tīvras.
<LEND>

<L>21392<pc>0385-b<k1>tEvradArava<k2>tEvradArava
{#tEvradArava#}¦ {%taivradārava, as, ī, am,%} made of
or coming from the tree Tīvra-dāru.
<LEND>

<L>21393<pc>0385-b<k1>tEza<k2>tEza
{#tEza#}¦ {%taiṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tiṣya%}), relating
to the asterism Tiṣya; ({%as%}), m., N. of a month
(December-January), the month in which the full
moon stands in the asterism Tiṣya, {%= pauṣa%} and
{%sahasya; (ī),%} f., scil. {%tithi%} or {%rātri,%} the day of full
moon in month Taiṣa.
<LEND>

<L>21394<pc>0385-b<k1>toka<k2>toka
{#toka#}¦ {%toka, am,%} n. (connected with 1. {%tuc%} and
1. {%tuj,%} and said by some to be fr. rt. 2. {%tu%}), offspring,
children, race, male or female offspring, a child,
(in the Ṛg-veda {%toka%} is never used in pl.; it is
often joined with {%tanaya%}); a new-born child; the
offspring of any animal (in comp., e. g. {%varāha-%}
{%toka,%} a young boar); [cf. {%tvakṣ, stoka, takṣ;%} Gr.
<lang n="greek">τέκνον, τίκτω, ἔτεκον, τοκάς;</lang> Angl. Sax. <nsi>thegn,</nsi>
<nsi>thegen;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>degan,</nsi> ‘servant.’] {%—Toka-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. connected with offspring, having
children. {%—Toka-sāti, is,%} f., Ved. the acquisition of
offspring.
<LEND>

<L>21395<pc>0385-b<k1>tokma<k2>tokma
{%Tokma, as,%}¦ m. and (in the earlier language) {%tok-%}
{%man, a,%} n. a young green blade of corn, especially
of barley, green or unripe barley; ({%as%}), m. green
colour; ({%am%}), n. the wax of the ear; a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>21396<pc>0385-b<k1>towaka<k2>towaka
{#towaka#}¦ {%toṭaka, as,%} m. a kind of poisonous
insect; N. of a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya; ({%am%}), n. a
particular metre (each line of the stanza containing
twelve syllables); according to some also a kind of
drama, (probably a Prākṛt form for {%troṭaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>21397<pc>0385-b<k1>toq<k2>toq
{#toq#}¦ {%toḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%toḍate,%} &c., to treat
with disrespect; to despise; [cf. {%tuḍḍ,%}
{%tūḍ, rauḍ.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0385-c+ 74]

<L>21398<pc>0385-c<k1>toqana<k2>toqana
{#toqana#}¦ {%toḍana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%tuḍ%}), split-
ting (?).
<LEND>

<L>21399<pc>0385-c<k1>toqalatantra<k2>toqalatantra
{#toqalatantra#}¦ {%toḍala-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra.
<LEND>

<L>21400<pc>0385-c<k1>totala<k2>totala
{#totala#}¦ {%totala, as,%} m., N. of a writer on
medicine; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a goddess; [cf. {%trotala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21401<pc>0385-c<k1>totas<k2>totas
{#totas#}¦ {%totas,%} ind., Ved. (according to
Mahī-dhara), a wife; or {%= tvayi.%}
<LEND>

<L>21402<pc>0385-c<k1>tottAyana<k2>tottAyana
{#tottAyana#}¦ {%tottāyana, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
branch of the Atharva-veda, (also read {%tottāyanīya,%}
{%tauta,%} and {%tauttāyana.%})
<LEND>

<L>21403<pc>0385-c<k1>tottra<k2>tottra
{#tottra#}¦ {%tottra%} or {%totra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%tud%}),
a stick or bamboo with a sharp iron head used for
guiding an elephant; a goad or pike for driving
cattle. {%—Totra-vetra, am,%} n. a rod or wand borne
by Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>21404<pc>0385-c<k1>toda<k2>toda
{%Toda, as,%}¦ m. guiding or driving (horses &c.);
‘the instigator and exciter’ (of all nature), an epi-
thet of the Sun; sharp, shooting or pricking pain;
pain, anguish, vexation, torture, disease, uneasiness
either of body or mind; ({%as%}), m., Ved. a sacrificer;
{%gotamasya todaḥ,%} N. of a Sāman. {%—Toda-parṇī,%}
f. ‘prick-leaf,’ N. of a plant enumerated among the
Ku-dhānyas.
<LEND>

<L>21405<pc>0385-c<k1>todana<k2>todana
{%Todana, am,%}¦ n. a stick used for guiding or driving
cattle &c., a goad; stinging; pain, affliction from
disease &c.; ({%as, am%}), m. n., N. of a tree and its
fruit, (in Marāṭhī {%laghukāṅkaḍa.%})
<LEND>

<L>21406<pc>0385-c<k1>tomara<k2>tomara
{#tomara#}¦ {%tomara, as, am,%} m. n. an iron club
or crow; a lance, a javelin; a kind of metre con-
sisting of four lines of nine syllables each; N. of a
man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a race. {%—Tomara-graha,%}
{%as,%} m. a warrior armed with a club or lance; throw-
ing a lance. {%—Tomara-dhara, as,%} m. a warrior
armed with a club or lance; fire.
<LEND>

<L>21407<pc>0385-c<k1>tomarARa<k2>tomarARa
{#tomarARa#}¦ {%tomarāṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man;
[cf. {%toramāṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21408<pc>0385-c<k1>tomarikA<k2>tomarikA
{#tomarikA#}¦ {%tomarikā,%} f. {%= tuvarikā,%} a fra-
grant earth.
<LEND>

<L>21409<pc>0385-c<k1>toya<k2>toya
{#toya#}¦ {%toya, am,%} n. (perhaps fr. rt. 2. {%tu%}),
water; the regent of the Nakṣatra Āṣāḍhā;
({%toyaṃ kṛ,%} to make an offering of water to a
deceased person, with gen.); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river;
[cf. Slav. <nsi>tayati,</nsi> ‘to melt.’] {%—Toya-karman, a,%} n.
a religious ceremony performed with water, ablutions
of various parts of the body, oblations of water
offered to a deceased person. {%—Toya-kāma, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fond of water; ({%as%}), m. a sort of cane growing
in or near water, Calamus Fasciculatus. {%—Toya-%}
{%kumbha,%} Blyxa Saivala. {%—Toya-kṛcchra, as, am,%}
m. n. a sort of penance, drinking nothing but water
for a fixed period. {%—Toya-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing water
or rain. {%—Toya-krīḍā,%} f. sport or pastime in water,
splashing about in water or besprinkling one another;
[cf. {%jala-krīḍā.%}] {%—Toya-garbha,%} the cocoa-nut
(‘containing water’). {%—Toya-cara, as, ā, am,%}
moving in water; ({%as%}), m. an aquatic animal.
{%—Toya-ja, as, ā, am,%} born or living in water.
{%—Toya-ḍimba%} or {%-ḍimbha%} or {%-ḍimbhaka, as,%} m.
hail. {%—Toya-da, as, ā, am,%} giving water; ({%as%}), m.
a cloud; a kind of Cyperus, {%= mustaka; (am),%} n.
ghee or oiled butter. {%—Toyadātyaya (˚da-at˚), as,%}
m. the departure of the clouds, the autumn. {%—Toya-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. a kind of gesticulation mentioned in
the Purāṇa-sarva-sva by Halāyudha. {%—Toya-dhara,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} bearing or containing water; ({%as%}), m.
a cloud; a kind of medicinal plant, {%= su-niṣaṇṇa;%}
a kind of Cyperus, {%= mustā%}. {%—Toya-dhāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} bearing or containing water; ({%as%}), m. a stream
of water. {%—Toya-dhi, is,%} m. ‘the receptacle of
waters,’ the ocean. {%—Toyadhi-priya, am,%} n. cloves,
(‘fond of the sea,’ i. e. produced in maritime
countries.) {%—Toya-nidhi, is,%} m. ‘a treasure-house
of water,’ the ocean. {%—Toya-nīvī,%} f. ‘girdled by
[Page0386-a+ 77]
the ocean,’ an epithet of the earth. {%—Toya-pāṣāṇa-%}
{%ja-mala, am,%} n. calamine, oxide of zinc. {%—Toya-%}
{%pippalī,%} f. the plant Jussiæa Repens. {%—Toya-%}
{%puṣpī%} or {%toya-praṣṭhā,%} f. trumpet-flower, Big-
nonia Suaveolens. {%—Toya-prasādana, as, ā, am,%}
purifying water; ({%am%}), n. the tree or the nut of the
tree Strychnos Potatorum, the clearing-nut, (this nut
being rubbed upon the inside of a water-jar occasions
the precipitation of the impurities of the water
poured into it.) {%—Toyaprasādana-phala, am,%} n.
the nut of the tree Strychnos Potatorum; [cf. the
preceding.] {%—Toya-phalā,%} f. Cucumis Utilissimus
{%(= irvāru)%}. {%—Toya-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed or
consisting of water. {%—Toya-mala, am,%} n. sea foam.
{%—Toya-muc, k,%} m. a cloud (‘discharging water’).
{%—Toya-yantra, am,%} n. a water-clock, a clepsydra;
[cf. {%jala-yantra.%}] {%—Toya-rasa, as,%} m. water,
moisture. {%—Toya-rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘the king of the waters,’
an epithet of the ocean. {%—Toya-rāśi, is,%} m. ‘a heap
of water,’ a pond, a lake. {%—Toya-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
‘having water,’ surrounded by water; ({%atī%}), f., N.
of a plant, {%= amṛta-vallī,%} Cocculus Cordifolius.
{%—Toya-vallikā,%} f. Cocculus Cordifolius. {%—Toya-%}
{%vallī,%} f. a kind of gourd, Momordica Charantia; [cf.
{%kāravella.%}] {%—Toya-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the plant Blyxa
Saivala. {%—Toya-vṛtti = toyāpāmārga%}. {%—Toya-%}
{%velā,%} f. the margin of the water, the water's edge,
the shore. {%—Toya-vyatikara, as,%} m. blending or
union of the waters (of two rivers). {%—Toya-śuktikā,%}
f. a bivalve shell, an oyster. {%—Toya-śūka,%} Blyxa Sai-
vala. {%—Toya-sarpikā,%} f. a frog. {%—Toya-sucaka, as,%}
m. a frog. {%—Toyādhāra (˚ya-ādh˚), as,%} m. a water
reservoir, a lake. {%—Toyādhi-vāsinī (˚ya-adh˚),%} f.
trumpet-flower, Bignonia Suaveolens; [cf. {%ambu-%}
{%vāsinī%} and {%ambu-vāsī.%}] {%—Toyāpāmārga (˚ya-ap˚),%}
{%as,%} m. Achyranthes Aquatica. {%—Toyālaya (˚ya-āl˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ocean, sea; N. of a constellation. {%—Toyāśaya%}
{%(˚ya-āś˚), as,%} m. a water reservoir, a cistern, a lake,
a river. {%—Toyotsarga (˚ya-ut˚), as,%} m. the pouring
out or discharge of water, raining. {%—Toyotsarga-%}
{%stanita-mukhara, as, ā, am,%} noisy with rain and
thunder. {%—Toyodbhavā (˚ya-ud˚),%} f. Achyranthes
Aquatica.
<LEND>

<L>21410<pc>0386-a<k1>toraRa<k2>toraRa
{#toraRa#}¦ {%toraṇa, as, am,%} m. n. (perhaps fr.
rt. 1. {%tur,%} to press forwards, i. e. through a passage),
an arch, a gate, an arched doorway, a portal, the
ornamented arch of a door or gateway; any tempo-
rary and ornamental arch; decoration of the gate-post
(with boughs of trees, garlands, &c.); an outer door;
a mound or elevated place near a bathing-place; a
triangle supporting a large balance; ({%am%}), n. the
neck, the throat; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Toraṇa-māla, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a
place of pilgrimage. {%—Toraṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
arched, having ornamental arches.
<LEND>

<L>21411<pc>0386-a<k1>toramARa<k2>toramARa
{#toramARa#}¦ {%toramāṇa, as,%} m., N. of a prince;
[cf. {%tomarāṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21412<pc>0386-a<k1>toraSravas<k2>toraSravas
{#toraSravas#}¦ {%tora-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of a
Ṛṣi with the patronymic Āṅgirasa; [cf. {%taura-%}
{%śravasa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21413<pc>0386-a<k1>tola<k2>tola
{#tola#}¦ {%tola, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%tul%}), poising
one's self, e. g. {%ghana-tola,%} (a bird) poising itself in
the clouds; ({%as, am%}), m. n. weighing, weight or
quantity measured by the balance; a Tola, a weight
of gold or silver, (reckoned in books at 16 Māṣas
or 5 Rettis or 6(1/2) grains each, and weighing there-
fore 105 grains troy: in practice it is calculated at
12 Māṣas, jeweller's weight, and weighs nearly
double or 210 grains; but actually it is of the same
weight as the Sicca or 179(2/3) grains.)
<LEND>

<L>21414<pc>0386-a<k1>tolaka<k2>tolaka
{%Tolaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a kind of weight, {%= tola.%}
<LEND>

<L>21415<pc>0386-a<k1>tolana<k2>tolana
{%Tolana, am,%}¦ n. raising, lifting up, weighing.
<LEND>

<L>21416<pc>0386-a<k1>tolayitvA<k2>tolayitvA
{%Tolayitvā,%}¦ ind. having lifted up, having weighed.
<LEND>

<L>21417<pc>0386-a<k1>tolya<k2>tolya
{%Tolya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be raised, to be weighed.
<LEND>

<L>21418<pc>0386-a<k1>toSa<k2>toSa
{#toSa#}¦ {%tośa, as, ā, am,%} or {%tośas, ās, ās, as%}
(fr. rt. 1. {%tuś%}), Ved. distilling, trickling, granting.
<LEND>

<L>21419<pc>0386-a<k1>toza<k2>toza
{#toza#}¦ {%toṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%tuṣ%}), satisfaction,
[Page0386-b+ 65]
gratification, contentment, pleasure, joy, happiness;
Contentment personified as a son of Bhaga-vat and
one of the twelve Tuṣitas.
<LEND>

<L>21420<pc>0386-b<k1>tozaka<k2>tozaka
{%Toṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ gratifying, causing pleasure
or happiness.
<LEND>

<L>21421<pc>0386-b<k1>tozaRa<k2>tozaRa
{%Toṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ satisfying, gratifying, making
contented, appeasing, pleasing; ({%am%}), n. the act
of satisfying, satisfaction, gratification, pleasing, de-
lighting; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>21422<pc>0386-b<k1>tozaRIya<k2>tozaRIya
{%Toṣaṇīya%}¦ or {%toṣayitavya, as, ā, am,%} to be
satisfied or gratified or made contented, to be
pleased.
<LEND>

<L>21423<pc>0386-b<k1>tozita<k2>tozita
{%Toṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, satisfied, gratified,
appeased.
<LEND>

<L>21424<pc>0386-b<k1>tozin<k2>tozin
{%Toṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) satisfied
or contented with, pleased with, liking; gladdening,
satisfying, making contented.
<LEND>

<L>21425<pc>0386-b<k1>tozya<k2>tozya
{%Toṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made satisfied or con-
tented, to be pleased or delighted.
<LEND>

<L>21426<pc>0386-b<k1>tozala<k2>tozala
{#tozala#}¦ {%toṣala%} or {%tosala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of
a race (?).
<LEND>

<L>21427<pc>0386-b<k1>tOkzAyaRa<k2>tOkzAyaRa
{#tOkzAyaRa#}¦ {%taukṣāyaṇa,%} adj. from Tukṣa.
<LEND>

<L>21428<pc>0386-b<k1>tOkzika<k2>tOkzika
{#tOkzika#}¦ {%taukṣika, as,%} m. (a word borrowed
fr. the Gr. <lang n="greek">τοξότης</lang>), the sign of the zodiac Sagit-
tarius.
<LEND>

<L>21429<pc>0386-b<k1>tOgrya<k2>tOgrya
{#tOgrya#}¦ {%taugrya, as,%} m., Ved. the son of
Tugra, a patronymic of Bhujyu.
<LEND>

<L>21430<pc>0386-b<k1>tOcCya<k2>tOcCya
{#tOcCya#}¦ {%taucchya, am,%} n. (abstract noun fr.
{%tuccha%}), emptiness, meanness, worthlessness.
<LEND>

<L>21431<pc>0386-b<k1>tORqikera<k2>tORqikera
{#tORqikera#}¦ {%tauṇḍikera, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
race; [cf. {%tuṇḍikera.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21432<pc>0386-b<k1>tOta<k2>tOta
{#tOta#}¦ {%tauta,%} another form for {%tottāyana.%}
<LEND>

<L>21433<pc>0386-b<k1>tOtAtika<k2>tOtAtika
{#tOtAtika#}¦ {%tautātika, as, ī, am,%} composed
by Tutāta, (according to a scholiast) = Kaumārilaṃ
Śāstram.
<LEND>

<L>21434<pc>0386-b<k1>tOtika<k2>tOtika
{#tOtika#}¦ {%tautika, as,%} m. the pearl-oyster;
({%am%}), n. a pearl.
<LEND>

<L>21435<pc>0386-b<k1>tOttAyana<k2>tOttAyana
{#tOttAyana#}¦ {%tauttāyana,%} another form for
{%tottāyana.%}
<LEND>

<L>21436<pc>0386-b<k1>tOda<k2>tOda
{#tOda#}¦ {%tauda, am,%} n. (fr. {%tuda%} or {%toda%}), N. of
a Sāman; ({%ī%}), f., Ved., N. of a plant (?).
<LEND>

<L>21437<pc>0386-b<k1>tOdAdika<k2>tOdAdika
{#tOdAdika#}¦ {%taudādika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tud + ādi%}),
belonging to the class of roots which begins with
{%tud,%} i. e. to the sixth class.
<LEND>

<L>21438<pc>0386-b<k1>tOdeya<k2>tOdeya<h>1
1. {%taudeya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Tuda.
<LEND>

<L>21439<pc>0386-b<k1>tOdiya<k2>tOdiya
{#tOdiya#}¦ {%taudiya, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>21440<pc>0386-b<k1>tOdeya<k2>tOdeya<h>2
{#tOdeya#} 2¦. {%taudeya, as, ī, am,%} produced in or
coming from the district called Tūdī, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21441<pc>0386-b<k1>tOmburavin<k2>tOmburavin
{#tOmburavin#}¦ {%taumburavin, iṇas,%} m. pl. the
pupils of Tumburu.
<LEND>

<L>21442<pc>0386-b<k1>tOra<k2>tOra
{#tOra#}¦ {%taura, as, ī, am,%} relating to Tura;
({%am%}), n., scil. {%ayana,%} N. of a Sat-tra ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>21443<pc>0386-b<k1>tOrayARa<k2>tOrayARa
{#tOrayARa#}¦ {%taurayāṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%=%}
{%tūrṇayāna,%} hastening.
<LEND>

<L>21444<pc>0386-b<k1>tOraSravasa<k2>tOraSravasa
{#tOraSravasa#}¦ {%tauraśravasa, am,%} n. (fr. {%tora-%}
{%śravas%}), N. of two Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>21445<pc>0386-b<k1>tOrAyaRika<k2>tOrAyaRika
{#tOrAyaRika#}¦ {%taurāyaṇika, as, ī, am,%} per-
forming the sacrifice or vow Turāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>21446<pc>0386-b<k1>tOrya<k2>tOrya
{#tOrya#}¦ {%taurya, am,%} n. (fr. {%tūrya%}), the sound
of musical instruments, music, harmony, &c. {%—Taur-%}
{%ya-trika, am,%} n. triple symphony or harmony, i. e.
union of song, dance, and instrumental music.
<LEND>

<L>21447<pc>0386-b<k1>tOrvaSa<k2>tOrvaSa
{#tOrvaSa#}¦ {%taurvaśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%turvaśa%}),
epithet of a peculiar species of horse.
<LEND>

<L>21448<pc>0386-b<k1>tOla<k2>tOla
{#tOla#}¦ {%taula, am,%} n. a balance, {%= tulā.%}
<LEND>
[Page0386-c+ 74]

<L>21449<pc>0386-c<k1>tOlika<k2>tOlika<h>1
1. {%taulika%}¦ in {%daśa-taulika,%} having the weight of
10 Tulās.
<LEND>

<L>21450<pc>0386-c<k1>tOlin<k2>tOlin
{%Taulin, ī,%}¦ m. (fr. {%tulā%}), one who holds a balance,
a weigher; the sign of the zodiac Libra.
<LEND>

<L>21451<pc>0386-c<k1>tOlya<k2>tOlya
{%Taulya, am,%}¦ n. weight; equality, similarity,
likeness.
<LEND>

<L>21452<pc>0386-c<k1>tOlika<k2>tOlika<h>2
{#tOlika#} 2¦. {%taulika, as,%} m. (fr. {%tūlikā%}), a
painter; [cf. the next.]
<LEND>

<L>21453<pc>0386-c<k1>tOlikika<k2>tOlikika
{%Taulikika, as,%}¦ m. a painter.
<LEND>

<L>21454<pc>0386-c<k1>tOlvali<k2>tOlvali
{#tOlvali#}¦ {%taulvali, is,%} m. (fr. {%tulvala?%}), N.
of a preceptor; {%ajā-taulvali,%} Taulvali fond of
goats.
<LEND>

<L>21455<pc>0386-c<k1>tOlvalAyana<k2>tOlvalAyana
{%Taulvalāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Taulvali.
<LEND>

<L>21456<pc>0386-c<k1>tOvaraka<k2>tOvaraka
{#tOvaraka#}¦ {%tauvaraka, as, ī, am,%} derived or
coming from the plant Tuvaraka.
<LEND>

<L>21457<pc>0386-c<k1>tOvilikA<k2>tOvilikA
{#tOvilikA#}¦ {%tauvilikā,%} f., Ved. a kind of
animal (?).
<LEND>

<L>21458<pc>0386-c<k1>tOzAra<k2>tOzAra
{#tOzAra#}¦ {%tauṣāra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tuṣāra%}),
snowy, dewy; ({%am%}), n. snow, cold.
<LEND>

<L>21459<pc>0386-c<k1>tman<k2>tman
{#tman#}¦ {%tman, ā,%} m. {%= ātman%} (acc. {%tmanam%}
and {%tmānam,%} dat. {%tmane,%} loc. {%tmani;%} the initial
{%ā%} is also rarely dropped in epic poetry after {%e%}
or {%o%}), Ved. the vital breath; one's own person, self.
{%Tman%} is also used in Ved. for {%tmanā%} at the end of
a Pāda.
<LEND>

<L>21460<pc>0386-c<k1>tmanA<k2>tmanA
{%Tmanā,%}¦ ind., Ved. Although according to the
unanimous interpretation of the native scholiasts
and grammarians (cf. Pāṇ. VI. 4, 141) this word
stands for {%ātmanā,%} ‘by itself, myself, himself, one's
self,’ &c., yet it has evidently in many cases lost its
original meaning and is used as an emphatic particle
in the same way as the Greek <lang n="greek">μέν and μήν;</lang> it may
then be translated by ‘yet,’ ‘really,’ ‘indeed,’ ‘even,’
‘at least,’ ‘certainly,’ ‘also;’ ({%tmanā%} usually lays
stress on a preceding and more rarely on a following
word); {%uta tmanā, tmanā ca,%} and also, and cer-
tainly; {%iva tmanā%} or {%na tmanā,%} just as; {%adha%}
{%tmanā,%} then certainly, even.
<LEND>

<L>21461<pc>0386-c<k1>tmanyA<k2>tmanyA
{%Tmanyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. (in certain Āprī hymns) {%=%}
{%tmanā.%}
<LEND>

<L>21462<pc>0386-c<k1>tmUta<k2>tmUta
{#tmUta#}¦ {%tmūta, as, ā, am%} (perhaps for {%tyūta%} fr.
rt. {%tīv%}), Ved. soaked with fat.
<LEND>

<L>21463<pc>0386-c<k1>tya<k2>tya
{#tya#}¦ {%tya.%} See {%tyad.%}
<LEND>

<L>21464<pc>0386-c<k1>tyagala<k2>tyagala
{#tyagala#}¦ {%tyagala, as,%} m., N. of an author;
(also read {%tigala.%})
<LEND>

<L>21465<pc>0386-c<k1>tyagnAyi<k2>tyagnAyi
{#tyagnAyi#}¦ {%tyagnāyi,%} Ved., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>21466<pc>0386-c<k1>tyaj<k2>tyaj<h>1
{#tyaj#} 1¦. {%tyaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%tyajati, tatyāja%}
(Ved. {%tityāja%}), {%tyakṣyati%} (rarely {%tyaji-%}
{%ṣyati%}), {%atyākṣīt, tyaktum,%} to leave, abandon,
quit; to leave a place, go away from; to let go, dis-
miss, discharge; to shoot off; to give up, surrender,
resign, part from, renounce (e. g. {%tanuṃ%} or {%dehaṃ%}
or {%kalevaraṃ tyaj,%} to abandon the body, die; {%prā-%}
{%ṇān%} or {%śvāsaṃ%} or {%jīvitaṃ tyaj,%} to give up breath or
life, die, risk one's life); to shun, avoid; to get rid
of, free one's self from, lose; to distribute, give away,
give, offer (as a sacrifice or oblation to a deity);
to set aside, leave unnoticed, disregard; to except:
Pass. {%tyajyate,%} to be abandoned by, to become
deprived of, lose, get rid of (with inst., e. g. {%dha-%}
{%nena tyajyate,%} he loses his riches): Caus. {%tyāja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%atityajat,%} to cause to leave or
abandon or quit, to deprive a person of anything
(with two acc., e. g. {%tyājayati māṃ gṛham,%} he
causes me to quit the house; or with acc. and inst.,
e. g. {%atityajat tam prāṇaiḥ,%} he caused him to lose his
life); to expel, turn out; to quit; to cause anything
not to be noticed: Desid. {%tityakṣati:%} Intens.
{%tātyajyate, tātyakti;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>treigim,</nsi> ‘I leave,
forsake;’ <nsi>treigthe,</nsi> ‘forsaken,’ = {%tyakta%}; <nsi>treigean,</nsi>
‘leaving, forsaking, abandonment,’ {%= tyajana;%}
<nsi>treigtheoir,</nsi> ‘a deserter, forsaker,’ {%= tyaktṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21467<pc>0386-c<k1>tyakta<k2>tyakta
{%Tyakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, resigned, forsaken, aban-
doned, deserted, left alone, &c. {%—Tyakta-jīvita%} or
[Page0387-a+ 80]
{%tyakta-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%} ready to abandon life;
willing to run all hazards, having relinquished all
expectation of life as men on the forlorn hope.
{%—Tyakta-lajja, as, ā, am,%} abandoning shame,
shameless. {%—Tyakta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having left,
leaving, abandoning, &c. {%—Tyakta-vidhi, is, is, i,%}
transgressing rules. {%—Tyakta-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} abandoned
by fortune. {%—Tyaktāgni (˚ta-ag˚), is,%} m. a Brāh-
man who has given up his household fire, one who
neglects essential ceremonies.
<LEND>

<L>21468<pc>0387-a<k1>tyaktavya<k2>tyaktavya
{%Tyaktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be left or abandoned or
released, to be left to one's fate; to be removed or
kept back; to be given up or sacrificed.
<LEND>

<L>21469<pc>0387-a<k1>tyaktukAma<k2>tyaktukAma
{%Tyaktu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to leave.
<LEND>

<L>21470<pc>0387-a<k1>tyaktf<k2>tyaktf
{%Tyaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ resigning, leaving, abandon-
ing, giving up, sacrificing; an abandoner, forsaker.
<LEND>

<L>21471<pc>0387-a<k1>tyaktvA<k2>tyaktvA
{%Tyaktvā,%}¦ ind. having left, abandoned, surrendered,
&c.; leaving aside, disregarding, with exception of.
<LEND>

<L>21472<pc>0387-a<k1>tyaj<k2>tyaj<h>2
2. {%tyaj, k, k, k,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) leaving,
abandoning, giving up, dying, risking one's life; [cf.
{%tanu-t˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21473<pc>0387-a<k1>tyajana<k2>tyajana
{%Tyajana, am,%}¦ n. leaving, quitting, abandoning;
giving; excepting, exclusion.
<LEND>

<L>21474<pc>0387-a<k1>tyajanIya<k2>tyajanIya
{%Tyajanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be left or abandoned, to
be avoided, to be excepted, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21475<pc>0387-a<k1>tyajas<k2>tyajas
{%Tyajas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. abandonment; difficulty,
danger; alienation, estrangement, dislike, anger,
aversion, envy; (Sāy.) a weapon or instrument
causing abandonment; ({%ās, ās, as%}), m. f. n., Ved.
offspring, a descendant.
<LEND>

<L>21476<pc>0387-a<k1>tyAga<k2>tyAga
{%Tyāga, as,%}¦ m. leaving, letting go, abandoning,
forsaking, parting from, deserting, renouncing, separa-
tion; discharging; dismissing; giving up, resigning;
gift, donation, distribution; sacrificing one's life;
liberality, generosity, prodigality; secretion, excretion;
a sage, one who separates himself from the world;
[cf. {%ātma-t˚, tanu-t˚, deha-t˚.%}] {%—Tyāga-pattra,%}
{%am,%} n. a bill of divorcement. {%—Tyāga-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} consisting only in giving or in donation.
{%—Tyāga-yuta, as, ā, am,%} liberal. {%—Tyāga-śīla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} disposed to give away, generous, liberal.
{%—Tyāgaśīla-tā,%} f. or {%tyāgaśīla-tva, am,%} n.
generosity.
<LEND>

<L>21477<pc>0387-a<k1>tyAgin<k2>tyAgin
{%Tyāgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ leaving, abandoning, renouncing;
giving up, resigning; sacrificing; liberal; ({%ī%}), m. an
abandoner, (often applied to the religious ascetic who
abandons terrestrial objects, thoughts, &c.); a giver,
a donor; a hero. {%—Tyāgi-tā,%} f. or {%tyāgi-tva, am,%}
n. liberality, generosity.
<LEND>

<L>21478<pc>0387-a<k1>tyAgima<k2>tyAgima
{%Tyāgima, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, abandoned.
<LEND>

<L>21479<pc>0387-a<k1>tyAjaka<k2>tyAjaka
{%Tyājaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who leaves, abandons,
expels; leaving, abandoning, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21480<pc>0387-a<k1>tyAjita<k2>tyAjita
{%Tyājita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to quit or abandon;
caused to be disregarded.
<LEND>

<L>21481<pc>0387-a<k1>tyAjya<k2>tyAjya
{%Tyājya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be left or abandoned or
quitted, to be avoided or shunned, to be expelled, to
be removed; to be given up or relinquished or
abstained from; to be sacrificed; to be excepted;
({%am%}), n. part of an asterism or its duration con-
sidered as unlucky.
<LEND>

<L>21482<pc>0387-a<k1>tyad<k2>tyad
{#tyad#}¦ {%tyad, syas, syā, tyad%} (a pronoun com-
posed of the base of the demonstrative pron. {%ta%} and
the relative {%ya,%} and not found in the later language),
Ved. that, that person or thing, (often used like the
article in other languages, e. g. {%tyad vasu Paṇīnāṃ%}
{%vidas,%} thou didst find that wealth, i. e. the wealth of
the Paṇis); it is sometimes strengthened by {%cid%} and
often occurs in connection with other demonstratives;
({%tyad%}), ind., Ved. indeed, namely, as it is known,
(always preceded by the particle {%ha,%} e. g. {%tvam ha%}
{%tyad Indra Kutsam āvas,%} thou indeed, O Indra,
didst help Kutsa); [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>dër</nsi> fr. <nsi>diar,</nsi> f. <nsi>diu,</nsi>
acc. <nsi>dia</nsi> = {%tyām,%} nom. pl. m. <nsi>die</nsi> = {%tye,%} f. <nsi>dio</nsi> = {%tyās,%}
n. <nsi>diu</nsi> = {%tyāni%}: to <nsi>syā</nsi> belongs Old Germ. <nsi>siu,</nsi> acc.
<nsi>sia:</nsi> Lith. and Slav. <nsi>szis, sy, = syas; szi, si, = syā.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21483<pc>0387-a<k1>tyatra<k2>tyatra
{%Tyatra,%}¦ ind., Ved. at that place, there.
<LEND>

<L>21484<pc>0387-a<k1>tyatratya<k2>tyatratya
{%Tyatratya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. existing or being there.
<LEND>

<L>21485<pc>0387-a<k1>tyada<k2>tyada
{%Tyada, as,%}¦ m. a son of that person; ({%am%}), ind.
(at the end of an adv. comp.) {%= tyad.%}
<LEND>

<L>21486<pc>0387-a<k1>tyadAyani<k2>tyadAyani
{%Tyadāyani, is,%}¦ m. a son of that person.
<LEND>
[Page0387-b+ 73]

<L>21487<pc>0387-b<k1>tyAdfS<k2>tyAdfS
{%Tyā-dṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ and {%tyā-dṛśa, as, ī, am,%} such
a one as that.
<LEND>
<L>21487.1<pc>0387-b<k1>tyAdfSa<k2>tyAdfSa
{{Lbody=21487}}
<LEND>

<L>21488<pc>0387-b<k1>tra<k2>tra<h>1
{#tra#} 1¦. {%tra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%trai%}), protecting
(in comp.; see {%aṃsa-t˚, aṅguli-t˚, ātapa-t˚, kaṭi-%}
{%t˚,%} &c.).
<LEND>

<L>21489<pc>0387-b<k1>tra<k2>tra<h>2
{#tra#} 2¦. {%tra = tri,%} three, in {%dvi-tra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21490<pc>0387-b<k1>traMs<k2>traMs
{#traMs#}¦ {%traṃs,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%traṃsati, traṃsa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to speak or shine.
<LEND>

<L>21491<pc>0387-b<k1>traK<k2>traK
{#traK#}¦ {%trakh,%} cl. 1. P. {%trakhati,%} &c., to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>21492<pc>0387-b<k1>traNk<k2>traNk
{#traNk#}¦ {%traṅk,%} cl. 1. A. {%traṅkate,%} &c., to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>21493<pc>0387-b<k1>traNK<k2>traNK
{#traNK#}¦ {%traṅkh%} or {%traṅg,%} cl. 1. P. {%traṅkhati%}
or {%traṅgati,%} &c., to go or move, (a various
reading for {%tvaṅg%}); [cf. Hib. <nsi>tairgim,</nsi> ‘I escape;’
<nsi>tairgeadh,</nsi> ‘going, passing.’]
<LEND>

<L>21494<pc>0387-b<k1>traNga<k2>traNga
{#traNga#}¦ {%traṅga, as, ā,%} m. f. a kind of town
or N. of a town; the city of Hari-ścandra supposed to
be suspended in the air; [cf. {%draṅka, draṅga,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>21495<pc>0387-b<k1>trada<k2>trada
{#trada#}¦ {%trada, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%tṛd%}), Ved. split-
ting, one who cleaves or opens; a creator; (Sāy.) {%=%}
{%tardayitṛ,%} a killer or injurer (of enemies).
<LEND>

<L>21496<pc>0387-b<k1>trand<k2>trand
{#trand#}¦ {%trand,%} cl. 1. P. {%trandati,%} &c., to
act, perform functions; to endeavour,
strive; to be busy.
<LEND>

<L>21497<pc>0387-b<k1>trap<k2>trap
{#trap#}¦ {%trap,%} cl. 1. A. {%trapate, trepe, tra-%}
{%piṣyate%} and {%trapsyate, atrapiṣṭa%} and
{%atrapta, trapitum%} and {%traptum,%} to become per-
plexed or embarrassed, to be ashamed, be modest:
Caus. {%trapayati%} and {%trāpayati, -yitum,%} to make
perplexed or ashamed: Desid. {%titrapiṣate%} and {%ti-%}
{%trapsate:%} Intens. {%tātrapyate, tātrapti;%} [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">τρέπω, έν-τρέπω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>turpis,</nsi> probably also <nsi>trepi-</nsi>
<nsi>dus,</nsi> = Ved. {%tṛpra,%} ‘hastening;’ Lith. <nsi>trópiyu,</nsi> ‘to
throw;’ Slav. <nsi>trepet,</nsi> ‘trembling;’ probably Goth.
<nsi>dreiban;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>drif-an, dref-an.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21498<pc>0387-b<k1>trapa<k2>trapa
{%Trapa, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. (more commonly {%ā,%} f.), per-
plexity, embarrassment, bashfulness, shame, modesty;
({%ā%}), f. an unchaste woman (a shame to her family);
family, race; fame, celebrity; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐν-τροπή.</lang>]
{%—Trapā-nirasta, as, ā, am,%} shameless, impudent.
{%—Trapānvita (˚pā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} modest, bash-
ful, ashamed. {%—Trapā-bhara, as, ā, am,%} overcome
with shame. {%—Trapā-yukta, as, ā, am,%} bashful,
modest. {%—Trapā-raṇḍā,%} f. a harlot. {%—Trapā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} modest, ashamed. {%—Trapā-hīna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} shameless, immodest, impudent.
<LEND>

<L>21499<pc>0387-b<k1>trapamARa<k2>trapamARa
{%Trapamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being ashamed.
<LEND>

<L>21500<pc>0387-b<k1>trapita<k2>trapita
{%Trapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ modest, bashful, ashamed.
<LEND>

<L>21501<pc>0387-b<k1>trapu<k2>trapu
{%Trapu, u,%}¦ n. tin; lead; (tin is said to be called
{%trapu%} from its contracting just before melting; cf.
{%lajjālu,%} as a N. of the sensitive plant.) {%—Trapu-%}
{%karkaṭī,%} f. a kind of cucumber, {%= trapusī%}. {%—Trapu-%}
{%karṇin, ī, inī, i,%} having tin ear-ornaments; ({%ī%}),
m. an epithet of Bhava-nandin.
<LEND>

<L>21502<pc>0387-b<k1>trapula<k2>trapula
{%Trapula, am,%}¦ n. tin, lead.
<LEND>

<L>21503<pc>0387-b<k1>trapuza<k2>trapuza
{%Trapuṣa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a merchant; a cucumber
or melon; ({%ī%}), f. {%= trapusī; (am),%} n. cucumber,
the fruit of the Trapuṣī; tin.
<LEND>

<L>21504<pc>0387-b<k1>trapus<k2>trapus
{%Trapus, us,%}¦ n. tin; [cf. {%trāpuṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21505<pc>0387-b<k1>trapusa<k2>trapusa
{%Trapusa, am,%}¦ n. cucumber, the fruit of the
Trapusī; tin; ({%ī%}), f. coloquintida and other sorts
of cucumber, {%= mahendra-vāruṇī, karkaṭī, pīta-%}
{%puṣpā.%}
<LEND>

<L>21506<pc>0387-b<k1>trapAka<k2>trapAka
{#trapAka#}¦ {%trapāka, as,%} m., N. of a barbarous
tribe.
<LEND>

<L>21507<pc>0387-b<k1>trapizWa<k2>trapizWa
{#trapizWa#}¦ {%trapiṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (superl. of {%tṛ-%}
{%pra%}), highly satisfied, much pleased or contented.
<LEND>

<L>21508<pc>0387-b<k1>trapIyas<k2>trapIyas
{%Trapīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%tṛpra%}), more
satisfied, highly pleased.
<LEND>

<L>21509<pc>0387-b<k1>trapuwI<k2>trapuwI
{#trapuwI#}¦ {%trapuṭī,%} f. small cardamoms; [cf.
also {%tri-puṭā%} and {%tri-puṭī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21510<pc>0387-b<k1>trapus<k2>trapus
{#trapus#}¦ {%trapus.%} See under rt. {%trap%} above.
<LEND>
[Page0387-c+ 78]

<L>21511<pc>0387-c<k1>trapra<k2>trapra
{#trapra#}¦ {%trapra, am,%} n. (a various reading for
{%vapra%}), lead.
<LEND>

<L>21512<pc>0387-c<k1>trapsya<k2>trapsya
{#trapsya#}¦ {%trapsya, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%tṛp%}), thin or diluted curds; (according to some
authorities written {%drapsya%} and {%drapsa.%})
<LEND>

<L>21513<pc>0387-c<k1>traya<k2>traya
{#traya#}¦ {%traya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tri%}), triple, three-
fold, consisting of three, divided into three parts, of
three kinds, treble; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%vidyā,%} the threefold
knowledge, the triple science (i. e. sacred revelation
in its threefold form of hymn, sacrificial formula,
and song, afterwards represented by the Ṛg, Yajur,
and Sāma Vedas), the three Vedas collectively
(omitting the Atharvan, which is not of equal au-
thority); a triad, three collectively, a triplet, three,
(e. g. {%śata-trayī,%} 300); a matron, a married woman
whose husband and children are living; intellect,
understanding; N. of a plant (Conyza Serratula), {%=%}
{%soma-rājin; (am),%} n. a triad, three collectively,
three, <lang n="greek">τριάς.</lang> {%—Trayī-tanu, us,%} m. an epithet of
the Sun (having the three Vedas for a body, either as
celebrated in the Vedas or because the Sāma-veda
and portions of the other Vedas are said to have
proceeded from the Sun); an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Trayī-dharma, as,%} m. the duty enjoined by the
Vedas (i. e. the forms of sacrifice &c. prescribed by
them). {%—Trayī-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of the
three Vedas, containing them, resting on them, &c.
{%—Trayī-mukha, as,%} m. a Brāhman (‘having the
three Vedas in his mouth’). {%—Trayī-vida, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. knowing the triple science; [cf. {%trayī%} and
{%traivida.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21514<pc>0387-c<k1>trayas<k2>trayas
{%Trayas,%}¦ nom. pl. of {%tri,%} three, (used in comp. with
a following decad, except {%asīti%} which takes {%tri.%} The
other decads, except ten, twenty, and thirty, may also
take {%tri%} for + 3.) {%—Trayaḥ-pañcāśat, t,%} f. fifty-
three; [cf. {%tri-pañcāśat.%}] {%—Trayaḥ-ṣaṣṭi, is,%} f.
sixty-three; [cf. {%tri-ṣaṣṭi.%}] {%—Trayaḥ-saptati, is,%}
f. seventy-three; [cf. {%tri-saptati.%}] {%—Trayaś-catvā-%}
{%riṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the forty-third. {%—Trayaś-catvā-%}
{%riṃśat, t,%} f. forty-three; [cf. {%tri-catvāriṃśat.%}]
{%—Trayas-triṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the thirty-third; joined
with thirty-three (e. g. {%trayastriṃśaṃ śatam,%} 133);
consisting of thirty-three; celebrated with the Stoma
which consists of thirty-three parts or syllables, con-
taining that Stoma, &c. {%—Trayas-triṃśat, t,%} f. thirty-
three. {%—Trayas-triṃśati, is,%} f., Ved. thirty-three.
{%—Trayastriṃśa-pati, is,%} m. the chief of the thirty-
three gods, an epithet of Indra. {%—Trayastriṃśa-%}
{%stoma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. containing the Trayastriṃśa-
stoma. {%—Trayas-triṃśin, ī, inī, i,%} containing thirty-
three. {%—Trayo-daśa, as, ī, am,%} the thirteenth; joined
with thirteen or having thirteen added (e. g. {%tra-%}
{%yodaśaṃ śatam,%} 113); consisting of thirteen; ({%ī%}),
f. the thirteenth day of the lunar fortnight; a kind
of gesticulation mentioned in the Purāṇa-sarva-sva.
{%—Trayodaśaka,%} consisting of thirteen; ({%am%}), n. the
number thirteen. {%—Trayodaśa-dhā,%} ind. into or in
thirteen parts. {%—Trayo-daśan, a,%} m. f. n. pl. thirteen;
[Gr. <lang n="greek">τρις-καί-δεκα</lang> for <lang n="greek">τρεῖς-˚</lang> cf. Lat. <nsi>tredecim</nsi> for
<nsi>tres-decem;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>trylika</nsi> fr. <nsi>trydika.</nsi>] {%—Trayo-%}
{%daśama, as, ī, am,%} the thirteenth. {%—Trayodaśa-%}
{%vidha, as, ā, am,%} of thirteen kinds. {%—Trayo-%}
{%daśika,%} happening on the thirteenth day of the
half-moon. {%—Trayo-daśin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. containing
thirteen. {%—Trayo-navati, is,%} f. ninety-three; [cf.
{%tri-navati.%}] {%—Trayoviṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the twenty-
third; consisting of twenty-three. {%—Trayo-viṃśati,%}
{%is,%} f. twenty-three. {%—Trayo-viṃśatika, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} consisting of twenty-three. {%—Trayoviṃśati-%}
{%tama, as, ī, am,%} the twenty-third. {%—Trayoviṃśati-%}
{%dhā,%} ind. in twenty-three parts, in twenty-three
ways, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21515<pc>0387-c<k1>trayayAyya<k2>trayayAyya
{#trayayAyya#}¦ {%trayayāyya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (ac-
cording to Sāy.) {%= trātavya,%} to be protected.
<LEND>

<L>21516<pc>0387-c<k1>trayodaSan<k2>trayodaSan
{#trayodaSan#}¦ {%trayo-daśan.%} See {%trayas%} above.
<LEND>

<L>21517<pc>0387-c<k1>trayyAruRa<k2>trayyAruRa
{#trayyAruRa#}¦ {%trayyāruṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
prince, a son of Tri-dhanvan; a son of Uru-kṣaya;
N. of the Vyāsa in the fifteenth Dvāpara.
<LEND>
[Page0388-a+ 79]

<L>21518<pc>0388-a<k1>travAqilaGu<k2>travAqilaGu
{#travAqilaGu#}¦ {%travāḍi-laghu, us,%} m., N. of the
father of Mahī-dhara.
<LEND>

<L>21519<pc>0388-a<k1>tras<k2>tras<h>1
{#tras#} 1¦. {%tras,%} cl. 10. P. {%trāsayati, -yitum,%}
to take, seize; to hold; to oppose, pre-
vent, forbid.
<LEND>

<L>21520<pc>0388-a<k1>tras<k2>tras<h>2
{#tras#} 2¦. {%tras,%} cl. 1. and 4. P. (ep. also A.)
{%trasati, trasyati, tatrāsa%} (3rd pl. {%ta-%}
{%trasus%} and {%tresus%}), {%trasiṣyati, atrāsīt%} and {%atra-%}
{%sīt, trasitum,%} to tremble, quiver, quake, or start
with fear; to be agitated, be afraid of; to fear, dread
(with abl. or gen. and more rarely with inst., e. g.
{%tasmāt%} or {%tasya trasyati,%} he fears that or is afraid
of him); to run away, run: Caus. {%trāsayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to tremble, terrify, to frighten, scare,
agitate, set in motion: Desid. {%titrasiṣati:%} Intens.
{%tātrasyate, tātrasti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>tareś, tars-ti:</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">τρέω</lang> for <lang n="greek">τρεσιyω, ταρταρίζω, τρήπων</lang> for <lang n="greek">τρεσ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">πων, τρέ-μ, τάρβος, ταράσσω, θάλασσα, ὀ-τρηρός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὀ-τραλέος:</lang> Lat. <nsi>tristis = trasta; tremo; terreo</nsi> fr.
<nsi>terseo</nsi> for <nsi>treseo</nsi> = Caus. {%trāsayāmi:%} Goth. <nsi>thlahs-</nsi>
<nsi>yan:</nsi> Russ. <nsi>tryasu,</nsi> ‘to shake;’ <nsi>tryasu-sy,</nsi> ‘I
tremble:’ Lett. <nsi>trīsseht,</nsi> ‘to tremble:’ Hib. <nsi>tor,</nsi>
‘fear, dread.’]
<LEND>

<L>21521<pc>0388-a<k1>trasa<k2>trasa
{%Trasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ movable, moving, locomotive;
({%am%}), n. the collective body of moving or living
beings; animals; animals and men, (opposed to
{%sthāvara,%} cf. {%jagat;%} under {%trasa%} are sometimes
reckoned gods, men, and the inhabitants of the
lower regions); ({%as%}), m. the heart (‘the quivering
one’); ({%am%}), n. a forest, a wood. {%—Trasa-dasyu,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘before whom evil beings tremble,’ N. of a
prince, (celebrated for his liberality and favoured by the
gods; he bears the patronymic Paurukutsya or Pauru-
kutsi or Paurukutsa, and is supposed to be the author
of certain Ṛg-veda hymns; in the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa
{%Trasad-dasyu,%} which is probably the original form,
is identified with Māṃ-dhātṛ and regarded as the
father of Puru-kutsa; the meaning of the name may
be ‘frightening evil beings;’ cf. {%jamad-agni, tarad-%}
{%dveṣas, bharad-vāja,%} &c.) {%—Trasa-reṇu, us,%} m. f.
an atom, the mote or atom of dust which is seen
moving in a sun-beam, especially considered as an
ideal weight either of the lowest denomination or
equal to three or (according to some) thirty invisible
atoms; ({%us%}), f., N. of one of the wives of the Sun.
<LEND>

<L>21522<pc>0388-a<k1>trasana<k2>trasana
{%Trasana, am,%}¦ n. in {%hasti-trasanāni,%} the moving
ornaments of an elephant (?).
<LEND>

<L>21523<pc>0388-a<k1>trasara<k2>trasara
{%Trasara, as,%}¦ m. a shuttle; weaving; {%= tasara.%}
<LEND>

<L>21524<pc>0388-a<k1>trasura<k2>trasura
{%Trasura, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, timid, fearful.
<LEND>

<L>21525<pc>0388-a<k1>trasta<k2>trasta
{%Trasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ frighted, alarmed; timid,
trembling, fearful; quick. {%—Trasta-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
terrified, fearful.
<LEND>

<L>21526<pc>0388-a<k1>trasnu<k2>trasnu
{%Trasnu, us, us, u,%}¦ fearful, timid, timorous.
<LEND>

<L>21527<pc>0388-a<k1>trasyat<k2>trasyat
{%Trasyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ fearing, apprehending.
<LEND>

<L>21528<pc>0388-a<k1>trAsa<k2>trAsa
{%Trāsa, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving, movable, locomotive;
frightening; ({%as%}), m. fear, terror, anxiety; terrifying,
frightening, causing alarm, (often in comp., e. g.
{%trāsārtham,%} ind. in order to frighten); a flaw or
defect in a jewel. {%—Trāsa-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing
fear, fearful, alarming. {%—Trāsa-dāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
causing alarm, fear-exciting.
<LEND>

<L>21529<pc>0388-a<k1>trAsadasyava<k2>trAsadasyava
{%Trāsadasyava, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Tra-
sad-dasyu; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>21530<pc>0388-a<k1>trAsana<k2>trAsana
{%Trāsana, as, ī, am,%}¦ terrifying, alarming, frighten-
ing (with gen.), making anxious; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Śiva; ({%am%}), n. the act of frightening or alarming; a
means of frightening, cause of alarm, fright.
<LEND>

<L>21531<pc>0388-a<k1>trAsanIya<k2>trAsanIya
{%Trāsanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be dreaded, frightened, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21532<pc>0388-a<k1>trAsita<k2>trAsita
{%Trāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ frightened, scared, alarmed.
<LEND>

<L>21533<pc>0388-a<k1>trAsin<k2>trAsin
{%Trāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fearful, timid, afraid.
<LEND>

<L>21534<pc>0388-a<k1>trA<k2>trA<h>1
{#trA#} 1¦. {%trā%} (by native authorities written
{%trai,%} q. v.), cl. 1. A. {%trāyate,%} &c., to pro-
tect, &c. See rt. {%trai,%} p. 394.
<LEND>

<L>21535<pc>0388-a<k1>trA<k2>trA<h>2
2. {%trā, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. a protector, a defender; [cf.
1. {%tra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21536<pc>0388-a<k1>trARa<k2>trARa
{%Trāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ preserved, saved, guarded, pro-
tected; ({%am%}), n. protecting, preserving; protection,
a preservative, defence; shelter, help, (often in
comp., e. g. {%ārta-trāṇāya,%} for the protection of the
[Page0388-b+ 77]
distressed; {%ātma-trāṇa,%} self-defence); protection for
the body, armour; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= trāya-%}
{%māṇā;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>troiath,</nsi> ‘a helmet.’] {%—Trāṇa-%}
{%kartṛ, tā,%} or {%trāṇa-kārin, ī,%} m. a preserver, pro-
tector, saviour, deliverer.
<LEND>

<L>21537<pc>0388-b<k1>trAta<k2>trAta
{%Trāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ preserved, rescued, guarded,
protected; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%am%}), n. pre-
serving, protection.
<LEND>

<L>21538<pc>0388-b<k1>trAtavya<k2>trAtavya
{%Trātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be guarded or protected.
<LEND>

<L>21539<pc>0388-b<k1>trAtf<k2>trAtf
{%Trātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a protector, saviour, guardian,
defender; protecting, defending.
<LEND>

<L>21540<pc>0388-b<k1>trAtra<k2>trAtra
{%Trātra, am,%}¦ n. defence, protection.
<LEND>

<L>21541<pc>0388-b<k1>trAtvA<k2>trAtvA
{%Trātvā,%}¦ ind. having preserved or rescued.
<LEND>

<L>21542<pc>0388-b<k1>trAman<k2>trAman
{%Trāman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. protection; [cf. {%su-trāman.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21543<pc>0388-b<k1>trAyat<k2>trAyat
{%Trāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ preserving, defending, pro-
tecting; ({%antī%}), f. a protectress; a medicinal plant;
[cf. {%trāyamāṇā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21544<pc>0388-b<k1>trAyantikA<k2>trAyantikA
{%Trāyantikā,%}¦ f. a medicinal plant.
<LEND>

<L>21545<pc>0388-b<k1>trAyamARa<k2>trAyamARa
{%Trāyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ preserving, defending, a
preserver; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a medicinal plant; also
{%trāyamāṇikā,%} f.; [cf. {%kṛta-trā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21546<pc>0388-b<k1>trAhi<k2>trAhi
{%Trāhi%}¦ (2nd sing. impv. of rt. {%trai%}), save! deliver!
to the rescue!
<LEND>

<L>21547<pc>0388-b<k1>trApuza<k2>trApuza
{#trApuza#}¦ {%trāpuṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%trapu%}), made
of tin [cf. {%jātuṣa%}]; silver (produced from tin).
<LEND>

<L>21548<pc>0388-b<k1>trApusa<k2>trApusa
{#trApusa#}¦ {%trāpusa, as, ī, am,%} sprung or coming
from the plant Trapusī.
<LEND>

<L>21549<pc>0388-b<k1>trAyodaSa<k2>trAyodaSa
{#trAyodaSa#}¦ {%trāyodaśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%trayo-%}
{%daśī%}), relating &c. to the thirteenth day of a half-
moon.
<LEND>

<L>21550<pc>0388-b<k1>tri<k2>tri
{#tri#}¦ {%tri, trayas%} m. pl., {%tisras%} f. pl., {%trīṇi%}
n. pl. (said to be fr. rt. {%tṝ;%} in Ved. {%trī%} occurs for
{%trīṇi%} and {%trīṇām%} for {%trayāṇām%}), three; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">τρεῖς, τρί-α, τρί-το-ς, τρί-ς, τρισσό-ς:</lang> Zend <nsi>thri,</nsi>
<nsi>thri-tya, thris:</nsi> Lat. <nsi>tres, tri-a, ter-tiu-s, ter:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>threis, thriya, thri-dya:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>threo,</nsi>
<nsi>thry, thri:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>triye, tre-tii,</nsi> ‘third:’ Lith. <nsi>trýs,</nsi>
‘three;’ <nsi>tré-cza-s,</nsi> ‘third:’ to <nsi>tisras</nsi> belong Old
Hib. <nsi>teora,</nsi> Cambro-Brit. f. <nsi>tair,</nsi> Armor. <nsi>teir.</nsi>]
{%—Tri-kakud, t, t, t,%} having three peaks or points
or horns &c.; ({%t%}), m., N. of a mountain in the
Himālaya [cf. {%tri-kūṭa%} and {%su-vela%}]; an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu; N. of a son of Śuci and father
of Dharma-sārathi; a kind of ritual observance; the
highest, chief. {%—Tri-kakuda, as, ā, am,%} having
three peaks or humps &c. {%—Tri-kakubh, p, p, p,%}
Ved. having three peaks or points; an epithet of
Indra's thunderbolt or of Indra himself; ({%p%}), m., N.
of a mountain; a kind of ritual observance; [cf. {%tri-%}
{%kakud.%}] {%—Tri-kaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a plant (Ruellia
Longifolia), {%= go-kṣuraka;%} [cf. {%tri-kaṇṭa.%}] {%—Tri-%}
{%kaṭu, u,%} n. or {%tri-kaṭuka, am,%} n. the aggregate of
three spices, viz. black and long pepper and dry
ginger; [cf. {%kaṭu-traya.%}] {%—Tri-kaṇṭa, am,%} n. the
three thorny plants, a collective N. of three kinds of
Solanum, viz. {%bṛhatī, agni-damanī,%} and {%duḥ-%}
{%sparśā; (as, ā, am),%} having three thorns; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a plant, {%= go-kṣuraka%} or {%pattra-gupta;%}
a kind of fish. {%—Tri-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m., N. of a
plant, {%= go-kṣuraka;%} a kind of poisonous insect;
a kind of fish (Silurus); a kind of weapon. {%—Tri-%}
{%kadruka, ās,%} m. pl., Ved. probably a N. of three
peculiar Soma-vessels [cf. {%kadru%}], or perhaps a N.
of an oblation consisting of three offerings of the
Soma (which is of a dark-brown colour); the first
three days of the Abhi-plava festival which lasts six
days, (respectively called Jyotis, Go, and Āyus.)
{%—Trikadrukīya, as, ā, am,%} containing the word
{%tri-kadruka%}. {%—Tri-karṇa, as, ī, am,%} having
three ears. {%—Tri-karman,%} (at the beginning of a
comp.) the three chief duties of a Brāhman, viz.
sacrifice, study of the Vedas, and liberality (e. g. {%tri-%}
{%karma-kṛt,%} performing these three duties); ({%ā, ā,%}
{%a%}), engaging in these three actions. {%—Tri-karṣa,%}
{%am,%} n. {%= tri-kārṣika%}. {%—Tri-kalā,%} f., N. of a female
deity produced by the union of three gods for
the destruction of Andhaka. {%—Tri-kāṇḍa, as, ā, %}
[Page0388-c+ 81]
{%am,%} consisting of three parts or divisions; forty-
eight cubits long; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. or n. (?), a work
consisting of three parts, especially the dictionary of
Amara-siṃha, also called Amara-koṣa. {%—Trikāṇḍa-%}
{%cintā-maṇi, is,%} m. or {%trikāṇḍa-viveka, as,%} m., N.
of commentaries on this work. {%—Trikāṇḍa-man-%}
{%dana,%} N. of a work. {%—Trikāṇḍa-śeṣa, as,%} m. a
vocabulary in three chapters supplementary to the
Amara-koṣa by Puruṣottama. {%—Tri-kāya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having three bodies; ({%as%}), m., N. of Buddha or of
a Buddha. {%—Tri-kārṣika, am,%} n. the three contracting
({%kārṣika%} fr. rt. {%kṛṣ%}) substances, dry ginger, Ati-
viṣā, and Mustā; [cf. {%tri-karṣa, danta-karṣaṇa.%}]
{%—Tri-kāla, am,%} n. the three times, viz. past,
present, and future time; morning, noon, and
evening; the present, past, and future tenses of a
verb; ({%am%}), ind. three times, thrice; ({%as, ā, am%}),
connected with or relating to the three times (past,
present, and future). {%—Trikāla-jña, as, ā, am,%}
knowing the three times, omniscient; ({%as%}), m. a
divine sage; a deity; a N. of Buddha, the founder of
the Buddhist religion. {%—Trikāla-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} see-
ing (or knowing) the past, present, and future, omni-
scient; ({%ī%}), m. a Ṛṣi or divine sage; N. of Buddha.
{%—Trikāla-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing the three times; ({%t%}),
m. a Buddha; (with Jainas) an Arhat. {%—Tri-kuṇḍī-%}
{%śvara (˚ḍa-īś˚?), am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Tri-%}
{%kūṭa, as, ā, am,%} having three peaks or humps or
elevations &c.; ({%as%}), m., N. of several mountains,
{%= tri-kakud%} and {%su-vela;%} a mountain in Ceylon
on the top of which Laṅkā, the capital of Rāvaṇa,
was situated; ({%am%}), n. sea-salt prepared by evapo-
ration. {%—Trikūṭa-lavaṇa, am,%} n. a peculiar kind
of salt {%(= droṇī-lavaṇa)%}. {%—Trikūṭa-vat, ān,%} m., N.
of a mountain. {%—Tri-kūrcaka, am,%} n. a sort of
knife with three edges. {%—Trikaika (˚ka-eka),%} Ved.,
N. of an Ekāha; [cf. {%eka-trika.%}] {%—Tri-koṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (borrowed fr. the Gr. <lang n="greek">τρίγωνον</lang>), triangular,
forming a triangle; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. Trapa Bispinosa;
({%am%}), n. (in astron.) N. of the fifth and ninth
mansion [cf. {%tri-kona-bhavana%} and {%tri-trikoṇa%}];
the vulva; [cf. {%tri-bhuj.%}] {%—Trikoṇa-kuṇḍa, am,%}
n., N. of a mystical vessel in the form of a diagram.
{%—Trikoṇa-phala, am,%} n. Trapa Bispinosa. {%—Tri-%}
{%koṇa-bhavana, am,%} n. (in astron.) N. of the fifth
and ninth mansion. {%—Tri-krama, as,%} m. (according
to the Prātiśākhyas) a Krama word composed of three
words or members, the middle one of which is a single
vowel. {%—Tri-kṣāra, am,%} n. the three burning or
acrid substances, viz. natron, saltpetre, and borax.
{%—Tri-kṣura,%} N. of a plant, {%= kokilākṣa%}. {%—Tri-%}
{%kha, am,%} n. a cucumber (‘having three cavities’).
{%—Tri-khaṭva, am, ī,%} n. f. three beds collectively.
{%—Tri-khaṇḍa,%} the earth as divided into three por-
tions. {%—Tri-kharva, ās,%} m. pl., Ved., N. of a particu-
lar school of theologians. {%—Tri-gaṅga, am,%} n., N.
of a Tīrtha; [cf. {%sapta-gaṅga.%}] {%—Tri-gaṇa, as,%}
m. the aggregate of the three objects of existence,
viz. virtue ({%dharma%}), pleasure or the ‘dulce’ ({%kāma%}),
and wealth or the ‘utile’ ({%artha%}); [cf. {%tri-varga.%}]
{%—Tri-gata, as, ā, am,%} tripled; gone or done in three
ways; ({%am%}), n. the expression of different senses by the
same word. {%—Tri-gandhaka, am,%} n. {%= tri-jātaka,%}
{%—Tri-gambhīra,%} see under {%gabhīra%}. {%—Tri-garta,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people inhabiting the modern
Lahore; ({%as%}), m. a prince of the Tri-gartas; the
country of the Tri-gartas; a particular method of
calculation; ({%ā%}), f. a lascivious woman, a wanton;
a woman in general; a kind of cricket ({%= ghur-%}
{%gurī, ghurgurikā%}); a pearl. {%—Trigartaka, ās,%}
m. pl. {%= tri-garta%}. {%—Trigarta-rāja, as,%} and {%tri-%}
{%garta-rājan, ā,%} m. king of Tri-garta. {%—Tri-gar-%}
{%tika, as,%} m. the country of the Tri-gartas. {%—Tri-%}
{%guṇa, ās,%} m. pl. the three qualities or constituents
of nature and every existing thing, i. e. {%sat-tva,%}
{%rajas,%} and {%tamas; (as, ā, am),%} consisting of three
threads or strings; threefold, three times repeated,
thrice, triple, treble (e. g. {%sapta triguṇāni dināni,%}
three times seven days); containing the three Guṇas
or properties; ({%am%}), ind. in three ways, three times,
thrice. {%—Triguṇā-karṇa, as, ī, am,%} whose ears
[Page0389-a+ 81]
have two slits dividing them into three parts (as a
mark of distinction). {%—Triguṇā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
thrice ploughed (a field &c.). {%—Tri-grāmī,%} f. an
assemblage of three villages, N. of a place. {%—Tri-%}
{%grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} extending to the length of three
(padyās). {%—Tri-cakṣus, us,%} m. ‘triocular,’ ‘three-
eyed,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa (more properly of Śiva).
{%—Tri-catuḥ-karṇa,%} the third and fourth hypo-
tenuses. {%—Tri-catura, ās, ās, āṇi,%} pl. three or
four. {%—Tri-caturdaśa, au,%} &c., du. the thir-
teenth and fourteenth. {%—Tricatvāriṃśa, as, ī, am%}
(fr. the next), the forty-third. {%—Tri-catvāriṃśat,%}
{%t,%} f. forty-three. {%—Tri-caritra (?), am,%} n. three
kinds of characters, (perhaps a wrong reading for
{%strī-caritra;%} cf. {%tri-gūḍha.%}) {%—Tri-cit, t, t, t,%} con-
sisting of three layers or seats of sacrificial grass.
{%—Tri-cīvara, am,%} n. the three vestments of the
Buddhist ascetic. {%—Trijagaj-jananī,%} f. the mother of
the three worlds, an epithet of Pārvatī. {%—Tri-jagat,%}
{%t,%} n. or {%tri-jagatī,%} f. the triple world, i. e. heaven,
the intermediate region, and earth, or heaven, earth,
and the lower world. {%—Trijagan-mohinī,%} f. confound-
ing the minds of the (inhabitants of the) three worlds,
a form of Durgā (?). {%—Tri-jaṭa, as, ā, am,%} wearing
three braids of hair; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva;
N. of a Brāhman; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a Rākṣasī who
was friendly to Sītā; N. of a tree, {%= vilva,%} Ægle
Marmelos. {%—Trijaṭā-svapna-darśana, am,%} n. ‘the
dream of Tri-jaṭā,’ N. of a chapter in the fifth book
of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Tri-jāta%} or {%tri-jātaka, am,%} n.
three spices collectively, viz. mace, cardamoms, and
Laurus Cassia (cinnamon). {%—Tri-jīvā,%} f. the sine
of three signs or ninety degrees, a radius. {%—Tri-%}
{%jyā,%} f. = the preceding. {%—Tri-ṇata, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%tri-nata%}), bent in three places, epithet of a bow;
({%ā%}), f. a bow; [cf. {%tṛṇatā.%}] {%—Tri-ṇayana, as,%} m.
[cf. {%tri-nayana%}], ‘three-eyed,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Tri-ṇavan%} or {%tri-ṇava%} (fr. {%tri+navan%}), consisting
of three times nine or twenty-seven parts, connected
with the Tri-ṇava Stoma; three times nine, i. e. twenty-
seven; {%triṇava-sāhasra,%} twenty-seven thousand; [cf.
{%tri-saptan.%}] {%—Tri-ṇāciketa, as, ā, am,%} one who
has thrice kindled the fire called Nāciketa; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Nārāyaṇa (perhaps as worshipped
with this fire); (according to Kullūka Bhaṭṭa on
Manu III. 185, {%tri-ṇāciketa%} means either ‘a part
of the Adhvaryu or Yajur-veda,’ or ‘a vow connected
with it,’ or ‘one who performs this vow.’) {%—Tri-%}
{%ṇāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having three names, epithet
of a deity, perhaps of Agni. {%—Tri-ṇītā,%} f. a wife,
(‘thrice married,’ according to the belief that a girl
belongs to Soma, Gandharva and Agni, before she
obtains a human husband.) {%—Tri-takṣa, am, ī,%} n. f.
(fr. {%tri-takṣan%}), an association of three carpenters.
{%—Tri-tas,%} ind. on three sides, from every side. {%—Tri-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%tri-tva, am,%} n. a triad, a trinity, an assemblage
of three. {%—Tri-trikoṇa, am,%} n. (in astronomy) N. of
the ninth mansion; [cf. {%tri-koṇa%} and {%trikoṇa-bha-%}
{%vana.%}] {%—Tri-daṇḍa, am,%} n. the three staves of a
mendicant Brāhman who has resigned the world,
(these staves are tied together so as to form one);
triple subjection of words, thoughts, and acts; the
state of a religious ascetic; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a literary
work. {%—Tri-daṇḍaka, am,%} n. the three staves of a
mendicant Brāhman described above. {%—Tridaṇḍa-%}
{%dhāraṇa, am,%} n. carrying three staves tied together.
{%—Tri-daṇḍin, ī,%} m. a wandering mendicant or
devotee who has resigned worldly pursuits and carries
three long bamboo staves tied together in his right
hand; the religious man who has obtained a com-
mand over his words, thoughts, and actions, or mind,
body, and speech; [cf. {%eka-daṇḍin.%}] {%—Tri-dat, an,%}
{%atī, at,%} having three teeth. {%—Tri-dalā,%} f. a creeping
plant, Cissus Pedata. {%—Tri-dalikā%} or (according to
some) {%tri-dālikā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= carma-kaṣā.%}
{%—Tri-daśa, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%tri-daśan%}), three times
ten, i. e. thirty; the three times ten or thirty
deities, i. e. in round numbers a N. for the thirty-
three deities, not including Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and
Śiva, viz. the twelve Ādityas, eight Vasus, eleven
Rudras, and two Aśvins; ({%as, ā, am%}), divine; ({%as%}),
[Page0389-b+ 81]
m. a god, a deity, an immortal; ({%am%}), n. the
residence of the thirty-three deities, i. e. heaven.
{%—Tridaśa-guru, us,%} m. ‘the preceptor of the gods,’
i. e. Bṛhas-pati, regent of the planet Jupiter. {%—Tri-%}
{%daśa-gopa%} or {%tridaśa-gopaka, as,%} m. a fire-fly, {%=%}
{%indra-gopa,%} q. v. {%—Tridaśa-tva, am,%} n. the state
or condition of a god, divinity, divine nature. {%—Tri-%}
{%daśa-dīrghikā,%} f. ‘the heavenly lake,’ epithet of
the Gaṅgā. {%—Tridaśa-nadī,%} f. the heavenly river,
the Gaṅgā. {%—Tridaśa-pati, is,%} m. the chief of
the gods, Indra. {%—Tridaśapati-śastra, am,%} n.
Indra's weapon, the thunderbolt. {%—Tridaśa-prati-%}
{%pakṣa, as,%} m. an adversary of the gods. {%—Tridaśa-%}
{%mañjarī,%} f. {%= tulasī,%} basil. {%—Tridaśa-vadhū, ūs,%}
f. or {%tridaśa-vanitā,%} f. a nymph of Indra's heaven,
an Apsaras, a goddess. {%—Tridaśa-śreṣṭha, as,%} m.
‘the best of the thirty-three deities,’ a N. of Agni; of
Brahmā. {%—Tridaśa-sarṣapa, as,%} m. {%= deva-sar-%}
{%ṣapa%}. {%—Tridaśāṅkuśa (˚śa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. the
thunderbolt (‘divine goad’). {%—Tridaśācārya (˚śa-%}
{%āc˚), as,%} m. {%= tridaśa-guru%} above. {%—Tridaśādhi-%}
{%pati (˚śa-adh˚), is,%} m. ‘lord of the thirty-three
deities,’ a N. of Śiva. {%—Tridaśāyana (˚śa-ay˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the refuge of the deities,’ i. e. to whom the
deities resort, an epithet of Nārāyaṇa; [cf. {%brahmā-%}
{%yaṇa%} and {%lokāyana.%}] {%—Tridaśāyudha (˚śa-āy˚),%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the divine bow,’ the rainbow; a thunder-
bolt. {%—Tridaśāri (˚śa-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of the
gods,’ an Asura, a demon, a Titan. {%—Tridaśāri-%}
{%rājan, ā,%} m. ‘king of the demons,’ a N. of Rāvaṇa.
{%—Tridaśālaya (˚śa-āl˚), as,%} m. the residence of
the gods, Svarga, Indra's heaven or paradise, the
mountain Su-meru; an inhabitant of the divine world,
a god. {%—Tridaśāvāsa (˚śa-āv˚), as,%} m. the resi-
dence of the gods, heaven. {%—Tridaśāhāra (˚śa-%}
{%āh˚), as,%} m. the food of the gods, i. e. Amṛta or
ambrosia. {%—Tridaśī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become
divine or immortal. {%—Tridaśendra (˚śa-in˚)%} or
{%tridaśeśa (˚śa-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘the chief of the thirty-
three deities,’ epithet of Indra; of Śiva; of Brahmā,
&c. {%—Tridaśeśa-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. epithet of Rāvaṇa
or any demon. {%—Tridaśeśvara (˚śa-īś˚) = tri-%}
{%daśendra; (ī),%} f., N. of Durgā. {%—Tridaśeśvara-%}
{%dviṣ = tridaśeśa-dviṣ%}. {%—Tri-dālikā,%} f. for {%tri-%}
{%dalikā,%} q. v. {%—Tri-dina, am,%} n. three days col-
lectively. {%—Tridina-spṛś, k,%} m. conjunction or con-
currence of three lunations with one solar day.
{%—Tri-diva, am,%} n. the space within the third sky,
i. e. the innermost or most sacred part of the sky,
heaven; the sky, atmosphere; paradise; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a river; cardamoms. {%—Tridivādhīśa (˚va-adh˚)%}
or {%tridiveśa (˚va-īś˚)%} or {%tridiveśvara (˚va-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the lord of Tri-diva or heaven,’ an epithet of
Indra; a god, a deity. {%—Tridivodbhavā (˚va-ud˚),%}
f. small cardamoms. {%—Tridivaukas (˚va-ok˚), ās,%}
m. an inhabitant of Tri-diva, a celestial, a god. {%—Tri-%}
{%dṛś, k,%}  m. ‘triocular,’ ‘three-eyed,’ an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Tri-doṣa, am,%} n. disorder of the three
humors of the body, vitiation of the bile, blood,
and phlegm. {%—Tridoṣa-ghna, as, ī, am,%} correcting
the vitiated state of the three humors. {%—Tridoṣa-%}
{%ja, as,%} m. disease &c. proceeding from disorder of
the three humors of the body. {%—Tri-dhanvan, ā,%}
m., N. of a prince or father of Trayyāruṇa. {%—Tri-%}
{%dhā,%} ind. adv. in three ways, in three parts, in three
places, triply, trebly; {%tridhā-kṛ,%} to do in three
ways, to make threefold. {%—Tri-dhātu, us, us, u,%}
consisting of three elements or ingredients, triple,
threefold, thrice repeated (used like <nsi>triplex</nsi> in Lat.
to denote excessive), tripartite; (Sāy.) causing the
well-being of the three humors; ({%us%}), m. a N. of
Gaṇeśa; ({%u%}), n. the aggregate of three minerals or
of the three humors; the triple world. {%—Tridhātu-%}
{%śṛṅga, as,%} m., Ved. having a tripartite horn, having
horns or flames of three colours, red, white, and
black (with smoke), an epithet of Agni. {%—Tridhā-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of being threefold or in three
parts, tripartition. {%—Tri-dhāman, a,%} n. probably {%=%}
{%tri-diva; (ā, ā, a),%} belonging or relating to the
three worlds or regions; having three residences,
&c.; ({%ā%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of Vyāsa
[Page0389-c+ 81]
(= Viṣṇu) in the tenth Dvāpara; an epithet of
Śiva; Agni or fire; death. {%—Tridhā-mūrti, is,%} f. a
girl three years of age representing the deity Durgā
at her festivals. {%—Tri-dhāraka, as,%} m. ‘having three
edges,’ the plants Scirpus Kysoor and Euphorbia
Antiquorum. {%—Tri-dhāra-snuhī,%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= dhārā-snuhī, try-aśra%}. {%—Tri-nagarī,%} f. the three
cities. {%—Tri-nayana, as, ā, am,%} triocular, three-
eyed; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Rudra-Śiva; ({%ā%}), f.
epithet of Durgā; [cf. {%tri-ṇayana.%}] {%—Tri-navata,%}
{%as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tri-navati%}), the ninety-third. {%—Tri-%}
{%navati, is,%} f. ninety-three. {%—Trinavati-tama, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} the ninety-third. {%—Tri-nāka, am,%} n., Ved.
{%= tri-diva%}. {%—Tri-nābha, as, ā, am,%} having three
navels or centres or central points; whose navel sup-
ports the three worlds. {%—Tri-nābhi, is, is, i, =%}
{%tri-nābha%}. {%—Tri-nidhana, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman
(generally in connection with the names {%āgneyam,%}
{%āyasyam,%} and {%tvāṣṭrī-sāma%}). {%—Tri-niṣka, as,%}
{%ā, am, = tri-naiṣkika,%} worth three Niṣkas. {%—Tri-%}
{%netra, as, ī, am,%} triocular; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Rudra-Śiva; N. of a prince; ({%ī%}), f. {%= vārāhī-%}
{%kanda,%} the root of Yam (Dioscorea). {%—Trinetra-%}
{%cūḍā-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘the crest of the three-eyed,’
i. e. the moon (worn by Śiva as his crest). {%—Tri-%}
{%pakṣa, am,%} n. a period of three fortnights or six
weeks. {%—Tri-pacchas,%} ind. adv. ({%tri+pad+śas%}),
by three Pādas. {%—Tripañcāśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tri-%}
{%pañcāśat%}), the fifty-third; containing or consisting
of fifty-three. {%—Tri-pañcāśat, t,%} f. fifty-three; [cf.
{%trayaḥ-pañcāśat%} under {%trayas.%}] {%—Tripañcāśat-%}
{%tama, as, ī, am,%} the fifty-third. {%—Tri-paṭu, u,%} n.
the three saline substances, stone-salt ({%= saindhava%}),
Viḍ-lavaṇa, and black salt {%(= kāca)%}. {%—Tri-patāka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} (with {%hasta%}) the hand with three fingers
stretched out or erect; (with {%lalāṭa%}) the forehead
marked naturally with three horizontal lines or
wrinkles. {%—Tri-patī,%} f., N. of a place of pilgrimage.
{%—Tri-pattra, as,%} m. three-leaved, trifoliate, the
plant Ægle Marmelos {%(= vilva); (am),%} n. {%= caṇ-%}
{%ḍāla-kanda,%} a kind of bulbous plant. {%—Tri-pat-%}
{%traka, as,%} m. the Kiṃśuka tree, Butea Frondosa.
{%—Tri-patha, am,%} n. the three paths or ways, viz.
the sky, atmosphere, and earth, or the sky, earth,
and lower world; a place where three roads meet;
({%ā%}), f. epithet of Mathurā. {%—Tripatha-gā%} or {%tri-%}
{%patha-gāminī,%} f. ‘flowing through heaven, earth,
and the lower regions,’ an epithet of the Gaṅgā.
{%—Tri-pad%} or {%tri-pād, -pāt, -pāt%} or {%-padī, -pat,%}
Ved. ‘three-footed,’ ‘tripod,’ epithet of Viṣṇu (as
pacing the universe in three steps; cf. {%tri-vikrama%});
epithet of Fever personified as a demon or evil
spirit and represented with three feet and three
hands, (probably symbolizing the cold, hot, and
sweating stages of fever); having three steps; con-
taining three Pādas; trinomial; ({%t%}), m., N. of a
Daitya; ({%-padī%}), f. the girth of an elephant; the
plant Cissus Pedata ({%= godhā-padhī%}); a kind of
metre in Prākṛt; (according to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 9, the
f. must be {%tri-padā%} when agreeing with {%ṛc,%} e. g.
{%trīpadā ṛk,%} a verse containing three Pādas, cf. the
next.) {%—Tri-pada, as, ā, am,%} three-footed; having
three divisions (as a stanza); containing a measure
of three feet; containing three words; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a plant, {%= haṃsa-padī; (am),%} n. a tripod; three
words. {%—Tri-padikā,%} f. a stand with three feet.
{%—Tri-panna, as,%} m., N. of one of the ten horses
of the moon. {%—Tri-parikrānta, as, ā, am,%} one
who walks thrice round the sacred fire or who cir-
cumambulates the three sacred fires. {%—Tri-parṇa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} three-leaved, trefoil; ({%as%}), m. Butea
Frondosa; ({%ā%}), f. wild hemp; ({%ī%}), f., N. of several
plants, Desmodium Gangeticum, {%= śāla-parṇī,%} wild
cotton, wild hemp, {%= pṛśni-parṇī-bheda%} and {%vana-%}
{%kārpāsī,%} Sanseviera Ceylanica; a kind of bulbous
plant, {%= tri-parṇikā%}. {%—Tri-parṇikā,%} f., N. of
several plants, a kind of bulbous plant ({%= bṛhat-%}
{%pattrā,%} &c.); Carpopogon Pruriens; Alhagi Mau-
rorum. {%—Tri-paryāya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
three folds or plaits. {%—Tri-paśu, us, us, u,%} having
three victims. {%—Tri-pastya, as,%} m., Ved. ‘having
[Page0390-a+ 81]
three dwellings,’ an epithet of Agni. {%—Tri-pājasya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having three flanks or sides; (Sāy.)
having three breasts (or seasons). {%—Tri-pāṭa, as,%}
m. intersection of a prolonged side and perpendicular
(in a quadrangular figure); the figure formed by such
intersection. {%—Tripāṭhin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. {%tri-pāṭha%}),
familiar with the three Pāṭhas, (probably with the
{%saṃhitā, pada,%} and {%krama-pāṭha,%} q. v.) {%—Tri-%}
{%pāṇa, as, ī, am%} (probably a Prākṛt form for {%tri-%}
{%parṇa%} or {%traiparṇa%}), made of the plant Tri-parṇī.
{%—Tri-pād,%} see {%tri-pad%}. {%—Tri-pāda, as,%} m. a
constellation or asterism of which three-fourths are
included under one sign of the zodiac; a stand with
three feet?; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of Mimosa. {%—Tri-pādaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} three-footed; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of a plant,
{%= haṃsa-padī,%} a kind of Mimosa. {%—Tri-piṭaka,%}
{%am,%} n. the three baskets or collections of writings,
a collective N. for the three classes of Buddhist
writings, viz. Sūtra-piṭaka, Vinaya-piṭaka, and Abhi-
dharma-piṭaka. {%—Tri-piṇḍī,%} f. the three sacrificial
cakes (mentioned in Manu III. 215). {%—Tri-piba,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} drinking with three members of the body
(as with the two pendent ears and tongue); ({%as%}), m.
along-eared goat. {%—Tri-piṣṭapa, am,%} n. {%= tri-diva,%}
the residence of the thirty-three gods, Indra's heaven;
paradise; the sky, ether; [cf. {%tri-viṣṭapa.%}] {%—Tri-%}
{%piṣṭapa-sad, t,%} m. an inhabitant of heaven, a
deity. {%—Tri-puṭa, as, ī, am,%} triangular; ({%as%}), m.
pulse, pease of three kinds; a kind of vetch, Cicer
Arietinum; the palm of the hand; a measure, {%=%}
{%hasta-bheda,%} a cubit; a bank or shore; ({%ā%}), f.
Convolvulus Turpethum; Arabian jasmine; small
cardamoms; a form of Durgā; ({%ī%}), f. Convolvulus
Turpethum; small cardamoms; [cf. {%karāla-tri-%}
{%puṭā.%}] {%—Tripuṭaka, as, ā, am,%} triangular; ({%as%}),
m. a triangle; a species of pulse. {%—Tripuṭā-pūjā-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n., N. of a kind of mystical diagram
described in the Tantra-sāra by Kṛṣṇānanda. {%—Tri-%}
{%puṭā-mantra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a chapter of the Tan-
tra-sāra. {%—Tripuṭā-stotra, am,%} n., N. of a chapter
of the Tantra-sāra. {%—Tripuṭin, ī,%} m. or {%tripuṭī-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. the castor-oil plant, Ricinus Com-
munis. {%—Tri-puṇḍra%} or {%tri-puṇḍhra%} or {%tri-%}
{%puṇḍraka, am,%} n. a mark consisting of three lines
on the forehead, the back, heart, and shoulders, or
three curved horizontal marks made across the fore-
head with cow-dung, ashes, &c., which are worn
especially by the followers of Śiva or Śakti, and are
indispensable in proceeding to worship the former;
({%as, ā, am%}), having three horizontal marks. {%—Tri-%}
{%pur,%} f. (in pl. {%tri-puras%}) {%= tri-pura%}. {%—Tri-pura,%}
{%am,%} n. three strong cities collectively, a triple forti-
fication; (in epic poetry) three strong cities of gold,
silver, and iron, in the sky, air, and earth, built by
Maya for a celebrated Asura or demon, and burnt by
Śiva; ({%as%}), m., N. of the above Asura and king of
Tri-pura; a form of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town; a
form of Durgā {%(= tri-puṭā ?); (ī),%} f., N. of a town,
{%= cedi-nagarī;%} N. of a country to the south-east
of Madhya-deśa, the modern Tipparah; ({%ā%} or {%ī?%}),
N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Tripura-kumāra, as,%} m.,
N. of a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya mentioned in the
Śaṅkara-vijaya by Anantānanda-giri. {%—Tripura-%}
{%ghna, as,%} or {%tripura-jit, t,%} or {%tripura-dahana,%} or
{%tripura-dāha, as,%} m., N. of Śiva as destroyer
of Tri-pura. {%—Tripura-dāha, as,%} m. ‘burning of
Tri-pura,’ N. of the 3rd chapter of the Pātāla-
khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Tripura-bhairavī,%}
f. a form of Durgā. {%—Tripura-mallikā,%} f. a medicinal
plant, apparently a kind of jasmine; [cf. {%tri-puṭā.%}]
{%—Tripura-vadha, as,%} m. ‘slaughter of Tri-pura,’
N. of the 7th chapter of the Uttara-khaṇḍa of the
Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Tripura-vijaya, as,%} m. ‘conquest
of Tri-pura,’ N. of the 70th chapter of the Liṅga-
Purāṇa. {%—Tripura-hara, as,%} m., N. of the 71st
chapter of the Liṅga-Purāṇa. {%—Tripurādhāraṇa-%}
{%yantra (˚na-ādh˚), am,%} n., N. of a mystical dia-
gram given in the Tantra-sāra. {%—Tripurādhipati%}
{%(˚ra-adh˚), is,%} m., N. of Maya, builder of the city of
Tri-pura. {%—Tripurāntaka%} or {%tripurānta-kara (˚ra-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m., N. of Śiva as destroyer of Tri-pura.
[Page0390-b+ 81]
{%—Tripurā-nyāsa, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the
Tantra-sāra. {%—Tripurā-bhairavī,%} f. a form of
Durgā. {%—Tripurābhairavī-pūjā-yantra, am,%} n.,
N. of a mystical diagram given in the Tantra-sāra.
{%—Tripurāri (˚ra-ar˚), is,%} m. ‘the enemy of Tri-
pura,’ a N. of Śiva. {%—Tripurārṇava (˚ra-ar˚), as,%}
m., N. of a literary work. {%—Tripurārdana (˚ra-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. {%= tripurāntaka%}. {%—Tripurī-prakaraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work, probably by Saṅkara, con-
taining the elements of the Vedānta phil. {%—Tri-%}
{%puruṣa, as, ā, am,%} having the length of three
men; having three assistants; ({%am%}), ind. through
three males, i. e. through three generations of men,
or father, grandfather, and great-grandfather. {%—Tri-%}
{%puruṣāgata (˚ṣa-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} inherited through
three generations. {%—Tripureśa (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m.
‘lord of Tri-pura,’ N. of Śiva. {%—Tripureśādri (˚śa-%}
{%ad˚), is,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Tripureśvara%}
{%(˚ra-īś˚),%} N. of a town or district, or of a sacred
place. {%—Tripuropākhyāna (˚rā-up˚), am,%} n. ‘the
story of Tri-pura,’ N. of the 52-54th chapters of the
Jñāna-khaṇḍa or second part of the Śiva-Purāṇa.
{%—Tri-puṣā,%} f. Convolvulus Turpethum, {%= kṛṣṇa-%}
{%tri-vṛt;%} [cf. {%tri-puṭā.%}] {%—Tri-puṣkara, ās,%} m. pl.
‘the three lakes,’ N. of certain holy bathing-places;
({%as, ā, am%}), decorated with three lotus flowers. {%—Tri-%}
{%pṛṣṭha, as,%} m. (with Jainas) N. of the first of the
black Vāsu-devas; a N. of Viṣṇu, as ‘living above
the three worlds,’ or as ‘existing independently of the
three qualities of nature;’ epithet of the Soma, as hav-
ing three elevations or surfaces, found in three places (?),
having three hymns (?), having three vessels (?), hav-
ing three waters (used in its preparation ?), having
three oblations (?), having three filtering cloths (?),
or press, filter, and vessel for holding the Soma (?).
(The above are the conjectures of various scholars, but
according to Sāy. the word means) ‘mixed with
cream, thickened with milk,’ &c.; ({%am%}), n. the
highest part of the three heavens, the highest heaven.
{%—Tri-pauruṣa, as, ī, am,%} extending or be-
longing to three persons or three generations of
men; offered to three (as the funeral cake &c.),
inherited from three (as an estate &c.); [cf. {%trai-%}
{%puruṣa.%}] {%—Tri-prasruta, as, ā, am,%} epithet of a
rutting elephant, i. e. ‘having three streams of fluid
flowing from the forehead.’ {%—Tri-plakṣa, ās,%} m.
pl. ‘the three fig-trees,’ a place near the Yamunā in
the neighbourhood of which the Dṛṣad-vatī dis-
appears. {%—Tri-phala, as, ā, am,%} having three fruits;
({%ā%}), f. the three myrobalans, the fruits of Terminalia
Chebula, T. Bellerica, and Phyllanthus Emblica;
the three fragrant fruits, nutmeg, areca-nut, and
cloves; the three sweet fruits, grape, pomegranate,
and date. {%—Triphalādi-varga (˚la-ād˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a chapter of the Śabda-candrikā or medical
lexicon by Cakra-pāṇi-datta. {%—Tri-bandhana, as,%}
m., N. of the son of Aruṇa and father of Tri-śaṅku.
{%—Tri-bandhu, us,%} m. the friend of the three
worlds or regions; (Sāy.) binding together or sup-
porting the three worlds, (said of Indra.) {%—Tri-%}
{%bandhura, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having three uneven
poles or seats, (said of the chariot of the Aśvins.)
{%—Tri-barhis, is, is, is,%} Ved. having three seats of
sacrificial grass. {%—Tri-balī,%} f. three folds of skin or
corrugations over the navel (of a woman; this
peculiarity is regarded as a beauty); the anus.
{%—Tri-balīka, as,%} m., N. of Rāma, ‘having three
folds in the neck;’ ({%am%}), n. the anus. {%—Tri-bāhu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} ‘three-armed,’ epithet of a kind of
spirit or demon; ({%us%}), m. a technical term in
fighting. {%—Tri-bulīka, am,%} n. the anus. {%—Tri-bha,%}
{%am,%} n. three signs of the zodiac, the quadrant of a
circle, ninety degrees; ({%as, ā, am%}), containing three
signs of the zodiac. {%—Tri-bhaṅga, as, ā, am,%}
having three curves or bends (as have many images
of Kṛṣṇa); ({%ī%}), f., N. of a metre consisting of
4 × 32 syllabic instants. {%—Tribha-jīvā,%} f. and {%tri-%}
{%bha-jyā,%} f. {%= tri-jīvā%} and {%tri-jyā%}. {%—Tri-bhaṇḍī,%}
f. Convolvulus Turpethum. {%—Tri-bhadra, am,%} n.
copulation, cohabitation. {%—Tribha-maurvikā,%} f. {%=%}
{%tri-jyā%}. {%—Tri-bhāga, as,%} m. the third part; the
[Page0390-c+ 81]
third part of a sign of the zodiac. {%—Tri-bhānu, us,%}
m., N. of a descendant of Yayāti and father of
Karan-dhama. {%—Tri-bhāṣya-ratna, am,%} n., N. of
a commentary on the Taittirīya-Prātiśākhya. {%—Tri-%}
{%bhukti = tīra-bhukti (?) %}. {%—Tri-bhuj, k, k, k,%} Ved.
threefold. {%—Tri-bhuja, as, ā, am,%} having three arms,
triangular; ({%as%}), m. a triangle. {%—Tri-bhuvana, am,%}
n. the three worlds, i. e. sky, atmosphere, and earth,
or heaven, earth, and the lower region; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a prince. {%—Tribhuvana-guru, us,%} m. ‘master
of the three worlds,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Tribhuva-%}
{%na-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the three worlds,’ epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Tribhuvaneśvara (˚na-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord
of the three worlds,’ epithet of Indra. {%—Tribhu-%}
{%vaneśvara-liṅga, am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga temple.
{%—Tribhona-lagna (˚bha-ūn˚), am,%} n. that part of
the ecliptic which does not reach the eastern point
by three signs or ninety degrees, i. e. the highest
point of the ecliptic above the horizon. {%—Tri-%}
{%maṇḍalā,%} f., scil. {%lūtā,%} a kind of poisonous spider.
{%—Tri-mada, as, am,%} m. n. (?) the three narcotic
plants, Mustā, Citraka, Viḍaṅga; the threefold illusion.
{%—Tri-madhu, u,%} n. the three sweet substances,
sugar, honey, and ghee; ({%us%}), m. one who knows or
recites the three verses of Ṛg-veda 1. 90, 6-8, which
begin with {%madhu%}. {%—Tri-madhura, am,%} n. the
three sweet substances, sugar, honey, and ghee.
{%—Tri-malla,%} N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Tri-%}
{%mātṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. ‘having three mothers;’ (Sāy.) the
maker or creator of the three worlds. {%—Tri-mārga,%}
(at the beginning of a comp.) the three paths;
({%ī%}), f. three ways or paths; the meeting of three
roads; [cf. {%tri-patha.%}] {%—Trimārga-gā,%} f. flowing
by three ways; [cf. {%tripatha-gā.%}] {%—Tri-mukuṭa,%}
{%as,%} m. a mountain with three peaks; N. of a
mountain, {%= tri-kūṭa%}. {%—Tri-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
three-faced, having three faces, having three mouths;
({%as%}), m., N. of the third Arhat of the present Ava-
sarpiṇī; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Māyā or the mother of
Śākya-muni. {%—Tri-muni,%} ind. produced by the
three Munis or sages, (as the grammar of Pāṇini,
Kātyāyana, and Patañjali.) {%—Tri-mūrti, is, is, i,%}
having or assuming three forms or shapes, (as Brahmā,
Viṣṇu, and Śiva); ({%is%}), m. a Buddha, a Jina; ({%is%}),
f. (?) the Hindū triad, the united form of the above
three gods. {%—Tri-mūrdha, as, ā, am,%} three-headed.
{%—Tri-mūrdhan, ā,%} m. ‘three-headed,’ N. of a
Rākṣasa. {%—Triy-ambaka, as,%} m. {%= try-ambaka,%}
‘triocular,’ ‘three-eyed,’ N. of Śiva. {%—Tri-yava, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} containing or weighing three barleycorns; ({%am%}),
n. a retti ({%= raktika%}) or weight of three barley-
corns, {%= kṛṣṇala%}. {%—Triy-avi = try-avi%}. {%—Tri-%}
{%yaṣṭi, is,%} m. a species of plant, {%= kṣetra-parpaṭī.%}
{%—Tri-yāna, am,%} n. (with Buddhists) the three
vehicles (leading to welfare). {%—Tri-yāma, as, ā, am,%}
containing (as the night) three Yāmas or watches,
i. e. about nine hours; ({%ā%}), f. night, ({%ahas-triyā-%}
{%mam,%} day and night); turmeric; a convolvulus with
dark flowers; the Indigo plant; the river Yamunā.
{%—Tri-yāmaka, am,%} n. sin (‘the impeder of the
three objects of life?’). {%—Tri-yuga, am,%} n. a space
of time containing three periods or ages; ({%as%}), m.
‘appearing in the three Yugas,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Tri-yoni, is,%} f. a lawsuit in which a person
engages from anger, covetousness, or infatuation.
{%—Triyyṛca = try-ṛca = tṛca,%} a strophe consist-
ing of three verses. {%—Tri-ratna, am,%} n. the three
gems, viz. Buddha, the law, and the congregation.
{%—Tri-rasaka, am,%} n. a spirituous liquor (‘having
a triple flavour’). {%—Tri-rātra, am,%} n. three nights
collectively, or the duration of three nights or days;
({%am%}), ind. for three nights or days, during three
days; ({%āt%} or {%eṇa%}), ind. after three days; ({%as, ā, am%}),
lasting three days; ({%as%}), m. a festival which lasts
three days; [cf. {%try-aha.%}] {%—Tri-rāśi-pa, as, ā, am,%}
governing three signs of the zodiac. {%—Tri-rūpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of three colours. {%—Tri-rekha, as,%} m.
‘having three lines,’ a conch, a muscle-shell, a shell
marked with three lines. {%—Tri-lavaṇa, am,%} n. the
three salts, {%= tri-paṭu,%} q. v. {%—Tri-liṅga, as, ā, am,%}
possessing the three Guṇas; having three genders,
[Page0391-a+ 81]
(often = ‘an adjective’); the Sanskrit form for Telinga
(called so fr. three Liṅgas). {%—Tri-liṅgaka, as,%} &c.,
having three genders, an adjective. {%—Tri-liṅgī,%}
f. the three grammatical genders. {%—Tri-loka, am,%} n.
the three worlds, i. e. sky, atmosphere, and earth, or
heaven, earth, and the lower region; ({%as%}), m. an
inhabitant of the three worlds; ({%ī%}), f. the universe,
the aggregate of the three worlds. {%—Triloka-nātha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘lord of the three worlds,’ an epithet of
Indra. {%—Triloka-rakṣin, ī,%} m. guardian of the
three worlds. {%—Trilokātman (˚ka-āt˚), ā,%} m. ‘soul
of the three worlds,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Trilokī-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Trilokeśa%}
{%(˚ka-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of the three worlds,’ an
epithet of the Sun. {%—Tri-locana, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} ‘tri-
ocular,’ ‘three-eyed,’ epithet of Śiva; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a poet; of a grammarian; of a prince &c.; ({%ā%}), f.
a disloyal wife, unchaste woman; (with Buddhists)
N. of a deity; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Tri-%}
{%locana-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Trilocana-%}
{%dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a grammarian. {%—Trilocane-%}
{%śvara-tīrtha (˚na-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Tri-lohaka, am,%} n. the three metals, i. e. gold,
silver, and copper. {%—Tri-lauha, as, ī, am,%} made of
the above three metals. {%—Tri-vat, ān, atī, at,%} con-
taining the word {%tri%}. {%—Tri-vatsa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
three years old (as an ox or cow). {%—Tri-vandhura,%}
see {%tri-bandhura%}. {%—Tri-varga, as,%} m. an aggreagate
of three things or substances &c.; the three objects
or pursuits of life, viz. religion or virtue ({%dharma%}),
pleasure ({%kāma%}), and wealth ({%artha%}); the three
conditions of a king or kingdom, viz. progress
({%vṛddhi%}), remaining stationary ({%sthāna%}), and de-
cline ({%kṣaya%}); the three qualities of nature, viz.
{%sat-tva, rajas,%} and {%tamas,%} see under {%guṇa;%} the
three higher castes or tribes; the three myrobalans;
the three spices &c.; propriety, good behaviour.
{%—Trivarga-cintana, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of
the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Trivarga-pārīṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having passed through the three conditions or
attained the three objects of life. {%—Tri-varṇa, am,%} n.
three colours; ({%as, ā, am%}), three-coloured (Ved.).
{%—Tri-varṇaka, am,%} n. a kind of plant, {%= go-kṣu-%}
{%raka;%} the three myrobalans [cf. {%tri-phalā%}]; the three
spices; [cf. {%tri-kaṭu.%}] {%—Trivarṇa-kṛt, t,%} m. the
chameleon. {%—Tri-vartu, us, us, u,%} Ved. threefold;
[cf. {%tri-vṛt.%}] {%—Trivartma-gā,%} f. ‘flowing by three
paths,’ an epithet of the Gaṅgā; [cf. {%tripatha-gā.%}]
{%—Tri-vartman, a,%} n. three paths; ({%ā, ā, a%}), going
by three paths (Ved.). {%—Tri-varṣa, am,%} n. a period
of three years; ({%as, ā, am%}), three years old. {%—Tri-%}
{%varṣikā,%} f. a three-year-old heifer. {%—Tri-varṣīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} triennial, lasting for three years, used for
three years. {%—Tri-vali, ī,%} n. f. the three folds or
wrinkles across the belly; [cf. {%tri-balī.%}] {%—Tri-%}
{%vāra, as,%} m., N. of a son of Garuḍa; ({%am%}), ind.
three times, thrice. {%—Tri-vikrama, am,%} n. the
three steps (of Viṣṇu), three strides; ({%as%}), m.
‘one who makes three steps or strides,’ an epithet
of Viṣṇu, who paced the three worlds in three
steps in his Vāmana or dwarf Avatār, see {%bali;%} N.
of a Brāhman; of an astronomer; of a jurist; of a
medical author. {%—Trivikrama-tīrtha, am,%} n., N.
of a Tīrtha. {%—Trivikrama-deva, as,%} m., N. of an
author. {%—Trivikrama-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the Damayantī-kathā. {%—Trivikramācārya%}
{%(˚ma-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of an astronomer. {%—Tri-%}
{%vidya, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva, ‘familiar with or
containing the three Vedas;’ ({%ā%}), f. three branches
of knowledge, especially that of the three Vedas.
{%—Tri-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of three kinds, threefold,
triple, in three ways. {%—Tri-vidhā,%} ind. (?), in three
parts, triply (?). {%—Tri-vinata, as, ā, am,%} bowing
in the presence of three, viz. gods, Brāhmans, and
preceptors; bent in three places, curved in three
parts of the body (?). {%—Tri-viṣṭapa, am,%} n. {%= tri-%}
{%piṣṭapa,%} the world of Indra, i. e. heaven or paradise;
the three worlds. {%—Triviṣṭapa-sad, t,%} m. an in-
habitant of heaven, a deity. {%—Tri-vista, as, ā, am,%}
{%= tri-vaistika,%} worth three Vistas. {%—Tri-vīja, as,%}
m. a kind of grain; [cf. {%śyāmāka.%}] {%—Tri-vṛt, %}
[Page0391-b+ 81]
{%t, t, t,%} threefold, triple, tri-form; consisting of three
parts or folds &c.; (with {%stoma%}) a threefold hymn
of praise, (i. e. a particular recitation, in which first
the first three Ṛks of each Tṛca of the eleventh
hymn of the ninth Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda are sung
together, then the second Ṛks, and lastly the third;
hence this Stoma consists of 3 × 3 or 9 verses);
connected with the Trivṛt-stoma; ({%t%}), m. a triple
cord consisting of three strings; a girdle &c. of
three strings; an amulet of three strings; ({%t%}), f. a
plant of valuable purgative properties, commonly
called Tëori, and distinguished into two species,
white and black (Convolvulus Turpethum); also
called {%tri-vṛtā;%} [cf. {%try-āvṛt.%}] {%—Tri-vṛta,%} f.; see
the preceding. {%—Trivṛt-karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} com-
bining three things; ({%am%}), n. making a com-
bination of three things; combining earth, water,
and fire, in the proportion of half of one with a
quarter of each of the others. {%—Tri-vṛtti, is,%} f.
truth (?); [cf. {%try-akṣara.%}] {%—Trivṛt-parṇī,%} f.,
N. of a pot-herb, Hincha Repens; [cf. {%hila-moci.%}]
{%—Tri-vṛnta, as,%} m. (?) the plant Butea Frondosa.
{%—Trivṛntikā,%} f. the plant Ipomœa Turpethum.
{%—Tri-vṛṣa, as,%} m., N. of a Muni; [cf. the next.]
{%—Tri-vṛṣan, ā,%} m., N. of the father of Try-aruṇa
[cf. {%trai-vṛṣṇa%}]; N. of the Vyāsa of the twelfth
Dvāpara. {%—Tri-veṇī,%} f. ‘triple-braid,’ the place (now
called Allahabad) where the Gaṅgā joins with the
Yamunā or Jumnā and is supposed to receive under-
ground the Sarasvatī; N. of the Gaṅgā. {%—Tri-veṇu,%}
{%us,%} m. a particular part of a carriage; ({%us, us, u%}),
epithet of a carriage, (according to some) furnished
with three banners. {%—Tri-veda,%} (at the beginning of
a comp.) the three Vedas, viz. Ṛg, Yajus, and
Sāman; ({%as, ā, am%}), familiar with the three Vedas.
{%—Tri-vedin, ī, inī, i,%} familiar or acquainted with
the three Vedas. {%—Tri-vedī,%} f. the three Vedas
collectively. {%—Tri-velā,%} f. the plant Ipomœa Tur-
pethum. {%—Tri-śakti, is,%} f., N. of a female deity,
{%= tri-kalā%}. {%—Tri-śaṅku, us,%} m., N. of a sage; N.
of a prince of the solar race, king of Ayodhyā,
(according to the Rāmāyaṇa he was a son of Pṛthu,
and was a pious prince who aspired to celebrate a
great sacrifice whereby to ascend to heaven in his
mortal body; he first requested the sage Vasiṣṭha
to officiate for him, but being refused he then
applied to the sage's hundred sons, by whom he was
cursed and degraded to the condition of a Cāṇḍāla;
in this emergency he had recourse to Viśvā-mitra,
who undertook the sacrifice and invited all the gods
to be present; they, however, declined, upon which
the enraged Viśvā-mitra, by his own power, trans-
ported Tri-śaṅku to the skies, whither he had no
sooner arrived than he was hurled down again head-
foremost by the gods; but, being arrested in his
downward course by Viśvā-mitra, remained suspended
with his head towards the earth, forming a constella-
tion in the southern hemisphere: according to the
Hari-vaṃśa and Vāyu-Purāṇa he was a son of Tray-
yāruṇa: according to the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa, a son
of Tri-bandhana: and he is sometimes described as
a wicked prince, guilty of three Śaṅkus or heinous
crimes); a cat, the civet-cat; a bird, the Cātaka,
Cuculus Melanoleucos; a grasshopper; a fire-fly.
{%—Triśaṅku-ja, as,%} m. ‘the son of Tri-śaṅku,’ epithet
of Hari-ścandra. {%—Triśaṅku-yājin, ī,%} m. ‘sacrificing
for Tri-śaṅku,’ epithet of Viśvā-mitra. {%—Tri-śata,%}
{%am,%} n., 103, 300; ({%as, ī, am%}), the 300th; con-
sisting of 300; ({%ās%}), m. pl., 300. {%—Tri-śataka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} consisting of 300. {%—Triśata-tama,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the 300th; the 103rd. {%—Tri-śatī,%} f. the
aggregate of 300 (e. g. {%paśūnāṃ tri-śatī,%} 300
cattle). {%—Tri-śaraṇa, am,%} n. (with Buddhists) the
three places of refuge, Buddha, the Law, and the
Assembly; ({%as%}), m. a Buddha. {%—Tri-śarkarā,%} f.
three kinds of sugar, viz. {%guḍotpannā, himotthā,%}
and {%madhurā;%} [cf. {%tri-sitā.%}] {%—Tri-śalā,%} f., N. of the
mother of the twenty-fourth Arhat of the present Ava-
sarpiṇī. {%—Triśalākā-puruṣa-carita, am,%} n., N. of
a work by Hema-candra. {%—Tri-śas,%} ind. by threes,
by three at a time. {%—Tri-śākha, as, ī, am,%} having
[Page0391-c+ 81]
three branches. {%—Triśākha-pattra, as,%} m. the plant
Ægle Marmelos. {%—Tri-śāṇa, as, ī, am,%} worth
three Śāṇas. {%—Tri-śānu, us,%} m. a various reading
for {%tri-bhānu%}. {%—Tri-śāla, as, ā, am,%} or {%tri-%}
{%śālaka, as, ā, am,%} consisting of three halls or
rooms; ({%am%}), n. a house with three halls. {%—Tri-%}
{%śikha, as, ā, am,%} three-crested, three-headed, having
the shape of a trident; ({%as%}), m. the plant Ægle
Marmelos; the son of Rāvaṇa, a demon with three
heads; N. of Indra in the Manv-antara of Tāmasa;
({%ī%}), f., N. of an Upaniṣad; ({%am%}), n. a trident, a
three-pronged spear; a crest, a tiara with three
points. {%—Tri-śikhara, as, ā, am,%} having three tops
or peaks; ({%as%}), m. (with {%śaila%}) N. of a mountain.
{%—Triśikhi-dalā,%} f. a kind of bulbous plant. {%—Tri-%}
{%śikhin, ī, inī, i,%} three-crested, three-headed. {%—Tri-%}
{%śira, as, ā, am,%} having three points; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a Rākṣasa; ({%ā%}), f. the root of Bignonia Suave-
olens. {%—Tri-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} three-headed, having
three points or tops; ({%ās%}), m. epithet of Tvāṣṭra
Viśva-rūpa; Fever personified as a demon with three
heads [cf. {%tri-pad%} and {%tri-pād%}]; N. of an Asura
killed by Viṣṇu; N. of a Rākṣasa killed by
Rāma; an epithet of Kuvera. {%—Tri-śīrṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘three-headed,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Tri-śīr-%}
{%ṣaka, as, ā, am,%} three-headed; ({%am%}), n. a tri-
dent, a three-pointed or three-pronged spear. {%—Tri-%}
{%śīrṣan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. three-headed. {%—Tri-śukra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. white or bright in three places. {%—Tri-%}
{%śukriya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. triply illuminated. {%—Tri-%}
{%śuc, k, k, k,%} Ved. triply shining or splendid, shining in
three ways. {%—Tri-śūla, am,%} n. a trident, a three-
pointed pike or spear, especially the weapon of Śiva;
({%as, ā, am%}), ‘bearing the trident,’ epithet of Śiva;
N. of a mountain. {%—Triśūla-khāta, am,%} n., N.
of a Tīrtha, (‘digged with the trident.’) {%—Triśūla-%}
{%gaṅgā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Triśūlāṅka (˚la-aṅ˚), as,%}
m. ‘trident-marked,’ a N. of Śiva; of a teacher. {%—Tri-%}
{%śūlin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘armed with the trident;’ ({%ī%}), m.
epithet of Śiva; ({%inī%}), f. epithet of Durgā. {%—Tri-%}
{%śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} having three horns or peaks;
({%as%}), m. a hill with three peaks; N. of a mountain;
a triangle. {%—Triśṛṅgin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having three
horns; ({%ī%}), m. a sort of fish, commonly Rohi,
Cyprinus Rohita. {%—Tri-śoka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%=%}
{%tri-śuc (?) ; (as),%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Tri-ṣaṃ-%}
{%yukta, as, ā, am%} (for {%tri-sam˚),%} triply connected.
{%—Tri-ṣaṃvatsara, as, ā, am%} (for {%tri-sam˚),%}
lasting three years. {%—Tri-ṣatya, as, ā, am%} (for {%tri-%}
{%satya%}), Ved. trebly true (in thought, word, and deed).
{%—Tri-ṣadhastha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being in three
places. {%—Tri-ṣandhi, is, is, i%} (for {%tri-san˚),%} Ved.
composed of three parts or members; ({%is%}), m., N.
of a demon in the Atharva-veda, generally associated
with Arbudi; ({%ī%}), n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Tri-ṣapta%}
or {%tri-sapta%} (fr. {%tri+saptan%}), Ved. three times
seven, twenty-one; an indefinite number. {%—Tri-%}
{%ṣaptīya, as,%} m. adj., N. of the first verse of the
Atharva-veda, beginning with the words {%ye tri-%}
{%ṣaptās,%} &c. {%—Tri-ṣavaṇa%} or {%tri-savana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} containing three oblations; ({%as%}), m., N. of an
ancient sage; {%tri-ṣavaṇam%} or {%triṣavaṇa-snānam,%}
the three ablutions to be performed daily, i. e. at dawn,
noon, and sunset. {%—Triṣavaṇa-snāyin, ī,%} m. a
man performing regularly the prescribed ablutions
morning, noon, and evening. {%—Triṣaṣṭa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} the sixty-third. {%—Tri-ṣaṣṭi, is,%} m. sixty-
three; [cf. {%trayaḥ-ṣaṣṭi.%}] {%—Triṣaṣṭi-tama,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the sixty-third. {%—Triṣaṣṭi-dhā,%} ind.
in sixty-three parts, sixty-three-fold. {%—Triṣaṣṭi-%}
{%śalākāpuruṣa-carita, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Triṣṭup-chandas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having the
metre Tri-ṣṭubh. {%—Tri-ṣṭubh, p,%} f. (for {%tri-stubh%}
fr. {%tri+stubh,%} to praise; or possibly the word may
come fr. {%stubh,%} to stop, because the voice is obliged
to pause three times; according to Yāska, the prefix
{%tri%} may be fr. rt. {%tṝ,%} to denote the rapidity of
the metre, cf. {%jagatī;%} or fr. {%tri,%} three, {%+stubh,%} to
praise, because the metre is in praise of the {%vajra%}
or thunderbolt, which has three edges); N. of a
Vedic metre consisting of four Pādas of eleven
[Page0392-a+ 81]
syllables each; (in the later metrical system) N. of
every metre consisting of four times eleven syllables
(e. g. the Indra-vajrā and Upendra-vajrā metres); [cf.
{%traiṣṭubha.%}] {%—Tri-ṣṭoma, as, ā, am%} (for {%tri-%}
{%stoma%}), Ved. containing three Stomas; ({%as%}), m., N. of
an Ekāha. {%—Tri-ṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (for {%tri-stha%}), Ved.
standing on three (wheels), situated in three places;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Tri-ṣṭhin, ī, inī, i%} (for {%tri-%}
{%sthin%}), Ved. standing on triply divided ground. {%—Tri-%}
{%saṃvatsara,%} see under {%tri-ṣaṃvatsara%}. {%—Tri-%}
{%satya,%} see under {%tri-ṣatya%}. {%—Tri-sandhi, is, is, i,%}
see {%tri-ṣandhi; (is),%} f. a kind of mallow. {%—Tri-%}
{%sandhika, as, ā, am,%} occurring or happening at the
three periods or divisions of the day, (probably a
wrong reading for {%trisandhyika.%}) {%—Tri-sandhya,%}
{%am,%} n. the three periods or divisions of the day, viz.
dawn, noon, and evening or sunset; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
goddess; a form of Durgā; a kind of mallow; ({%ā%}
or {%ī%}), f. the three periods of the day; ({%am%}), ind.
at the time of the three Sandhyās; ({%as, ā, am%}),
relating to the three periods of the day. {%—Tri-%}
{%sandhya-kusumā,%} f. a kind of mallow. {%—Tri-%}
{%saptata, as, ī, am%} (fr. the following), the seventy-
third. {%—Tri-saptati, is,%} f. seventy-three; [cf. {%trayaḥ-%}
{%saptati.%}] {%—Trisaptati-tama, as, ī, am,%} the seventy-
third. {%—Tri-saptan%} or {%tri-sapta,%} three times seven,
twenty-one [cf. {%tri-ṣapta%}]; {%trisapta-kṛtvas,%}
ind. twenty-one times. {%—Tri-sama, as, ā, am,%}
(in geom.) having three equal sides; ({%am%}), n. an
aggregate of equal parts of three substances, viz.
yellow myrobalan, ginger, and molasses; {%trisama-%}
{%caturaśra, am,%} n. a quadrangle having three equal
sides. {%—Tri-sara, as, am,%} m. n. a dish of
sesamum, rice, &c., {%= kṛśara%} or {%kṛsara%}. {%—Tri-%}
{%sarga, as,%} m. the triple product of the three
qualities of nature. {%—Tri-savana = tri-ṣavaṇa,%} q. v.
{%—Tri-sādhana, as, ā, am,%} triply composed, having
three component parts. {%—Tri-sāman, ā, ā, a,%} sing-
ing three Sāmans or the Sāman called Triḥ-sāman.
{%—Tri-sāmā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Tri-sāmya, am,%} n.
equilibrium of the three (qualities). {%—Tri-sāhasra,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} Ved. consisting of 3000. {%—Tri-sitā,%} f. {%= tri-%}
{%śarkarā,%} three kinds of white sugar, viz. {%guḍot-%}
{%pannā, madhu-jā,%} and {%himotthā%}. {%—Tri-sītya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} thrice ploughed (as a field &c.). {%—Tri-%}
{%sugandhi%} or {%tri-sugandhika, am,%} n. {%= tri-jāta,%} the
three fragrant substances or spices. {%—Tri-suparṇa, as,%}
m. a N. of certain hymns of the Ṛg and Yajur
Vedas; ({%as, ā, am%}), or {%tri-suparṇaka, as, ikā,%}
{%am,%} familiar or conversant with the above hymns of
the Veda; [cf. {%tri-sauparṇa.%}] {%—Tri-suvarcaka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a threefold excellent splendor.
{%—Tri-saugandhya, am,%} n. {%= tri-sugandhi%}. {%—Tri-%}
{%sauparṇa, as, ī, am,%} relating to the part of the
Vedas called Tri-suparṇa; N. of a particular religious
vow or observance. {%—Tri-sauvarṇa, am,%} n. perhaps
a wrong reading for {%tri-suparṇa%}. {%—Tri-skandhaka,%}
N. of a Sūtra work. {%—Tri-stana, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} milked
from three nipples (Ved.); having three breasts. {%—Tri-%}
{%stobha-yukta, as, ā, am,%} having three pauses or
three rhythms or three divisions (?). {%—Tri-sthalī,%} f.
the three (sacred) places. {%—Tristhalī-setu,%} N. of a
work. {%—Tri-sthāna, am,%} n. a sacred spot celebrated
for a junction of three streams of the Ganges; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), reaching through the three worlds. {%—Tri-%}
{%srotas, ās, ās, as,%}  having three streams; ({%ās%}), f. an
epithet of the Ganges [cf. {%tri-patha-gā, tri-mārga-%}
{%gā, tri-vartma-gā%}]; N. of another river. {%—Tri-%}
{%srotasī,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Tri-halya, as, ā, am,%}
thrice ploughed (as a field &c.). {%—Tri-hāyaṇa, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} three years old; appearing in three ages of
the world; ({%ī%}), f. a three-year-old heifer. {%—Trīṣu%}
{%(tri-iṣ˚), us, us, u,%} or {%trīṣuka, as, ā, am,%} fur-
nished with three arrows. {%—Trīṣṭaka (tri-iṣ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. furnished with three Iṣṭakās or sacri-
ficial bricks. {%—Try-aṃśa, as, am,%} m. or n. (?), three
shares or portions, three-fourths; a third part, the third
part of a sign of the zodiac ({%= dṛkkāṇa,%} q. v.).
{%—Tryaṃśa-nātha, as,%} m. the regent of a Dṛkkāṇa.
{%—Try-akṣa, as, ī, am,%} triocular; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Rudra-Śiva; also of a Daitya or Dānava.
[Page0392-b+ 81]
{%—Tryakṣaka, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Try-%}
{%akṣan, ā, ā, a,%} triocular; ({%ā%}), m. epithet of Rudra.
{%—Tryakṣa-patnī,%} f. an epithet of Pārvatī. {%—Try-%}
{%akṣara, as, ā, am,%} consisting of three sounds or
letters or syllables, triliteral; ({%am%}), n. a word or
song consisting of three letters or syllables (e. g.
{%satyam%} or {%sa + ti + am%}); ({%as%}), m. a genealogist;
the Ghaṭaka or matchmaker; [cf. {%ghaṭaka%} and
{%khaṭaka.%}] {%—Try-aṅkaṭa, am,%} n. or {%try-aṅgaṭa,%}
{%as,%} m. a sling or three strings like those of a balance
suspended to either end of a pole for carrying bur-
dens; a sort of collyrium; ({%as%}), m. a N. of Śiva.
{%—Try-aṅga, āṇi,%} n. pl., Ved. three portions of the
sacrificial victim supposed to belong to the Sv-iṣṭa-
kṛt, q. v., viz. the upper part of the right fore-foot,
a part of the left thigh, and a part of the bowels.
{%—Try-aṅgula, as, ā, am,%} Ved. three fingers long
or broad or deep &c. {%—Tryaṅgya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
belonging to the Try-aṅgas. {%—Try-añjana, am,%} n.
the three kinds of collyrium, or Kālāñjana, Push-
pāñjana, and Rasāñjana. {%—Try-añjala, am,%} n. and
{%try-añjali, i,%} n. three handfuls. {%—Try-adhipati,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘the lord of the three qualities,’ (i. e. {%sat-tva,%}
{%rajas,%} and {%tamas;%} cf. {%guṇa%}), an epithet of Kṛṣṇa
or Viṣṇu. {%—Try-adhiṣṭhāna, as, ā, am,%} having
three stations, situated in three places. {%—Try-adhīśa,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= try-adhipati,%} q. v. {%—Try-adhva-gā,%} f. a
N. of the Ganges, ‘going or flowing through the
three worlds.’ {%—Try-anīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
three faces, followed by three hosts; (Sāy.) having
the three properties of heat, rain, and cold. {%—Try-%}
{%anta, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Try-abda, am,%} n.
a period of three years; ({%am%}), ind. during three
years; ({%as, ā, am%}), three years old. {%—Try-ambaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a N. of Śiva (Rudra) as triocular or uttering
the three (Vedas) or uttering the three mystical
letters (?), or as having three wives or sisters (as
if fr. {%tri-ambā%}); N. of one of the eleven Rudras;
the sacrificial ceremony in which the Try-ambakās
or cakes sacred to Rudra Try-ambaka are offered;
N. of a mountain; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Pārvatī;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Liṅga. {%—Tryambaka-māhātmya,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the glory of Try-ambaka,’ N. of a part of
the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Tryambaka-sakha, as,%} m.
‘the friend of Try-ambaka,’ an epithet of Kuvera,
the god of wealth. {%—Try-aruṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
man with the patronymic Traivṛṣṇa. {%—Try-aruṣa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} Ved. marked red in three places. {%—Try-%}
{%avara, as, ā, am,%} having three who are inferior,
three at the least; ({%am%}), ind. at least three times,
(see Manu XI. 80.) {%—Try-avi, is, ī,%} m. f., Ved. a
calf eighteen months old. {%—Tryaśīta, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%try-aśīti%}), the eighty-third. {%—Try-aśīti, is,%} f.
eighty-three. {%—Tryaśīti-tama, as, ī, am,%} the
eighty-third. {%—Try-aśra, as, ā, am,%} triangular; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a plant, {%= tridhāra-snuhī; (am),%} n. a
triangle. {%—Tryaśra-kuṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of a mystical
diagram. {%—Try-aṣṭaka, as, ā, am,%} containing three
Aṣṭakās; ({%am%}), n. a kind of vessel. {%—Try-aṣṭan%}
or {%try-aṣṭa,%} three times eight, twenty-four; {%try-%}
{%aṣṭa-varṣa,%} twenty-four years old. {%—Try-asra,%}
see {%try-aśra%}. {%—Try-aha, am,%} n. a period of
three days; {%try-aham,%} ind. during three days; {%try-%}
{%ahāt%} or {%try-ahena,%} ind. after three days; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), lasting three days; ({%as%}), m., Ved. a festival lasting
three days. {%—Tryaha-sparśa, as,%} m. or {%tryaha-%}
{%spṛśa, am,%} n. the meeting of part of three lunar
days in one solar day, (the first lunar day ending just
after midnight and the third beginning a little before
the next midnight.) {%—Tryahīna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. last-
ing three days. {%—Tryahaihika (˚ha-aih˚), as, ī, am,%}
having provision sufficient for three days, providing
for three days. {%—Try-ahna, as, ā, am,%} happening
or occurring after three days. {%—Tryākṣāyaṇa, as,%}
m. (fr. {%try-akṣa%}), a worshipper of Śiva (?). {%—Tryā-%}
{%kṣāyaṇa-bhakta, am,%} n. a district inhabited by
worshippers of Śiva. {%—Try-āyuṣa, am,%} n., Ved.
threefold vital power or period of life; (according to
Mahī-dhara) the threefold period of life, consisting of
childhood, youth, and old age. {%—Tryāruṇi, is,%} m.
(fr. {%try-aruṇa%}), N. of the Vyāsa in the fifteenth
[Page0392-c+ 81]
Dvāpara; N. of a mountain. {%—Try-ārṣeya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} containing three lines or families of Ṛṣis;
({%ās%}), m. pl. an aggregate of three persons, viz. blind,
deaf, and dumb. {%—Try-ālikhita, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
scratched or marked in three places. {%—Tryālikhita-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} consisting of bricks marked in
three places. {%—Try-āvṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. carried on in
three periods, consisting of three series. {%—Try-āśir,%}
{%īr,%} m., Ved. mixed with three products of milk;
(according to Sāy.) mixed with Dadhi, Saktu, and
Payas, (said of the Soma.) {%—Tryāhika, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%try-aha%}), produced or performed &c. in three
days; tertian; returning after the third day, quartan
(as a fever); having provisions for three days.
{%—Try-uttarī-bhāva, as,%} m. progression by three.
{%—Try-udāya, am,%} n., Ved. the threefold going to
the altar, i. e. in the three daily oblations; (Sāy.)
having three goings to the altar (as the Soma).
{%—Try-udhan, ā,%} m., Ved. three-uddered, (according
to Sāy.) said of the year as having three seasons.
{%—Try-uṣaṇa%} or {%try-ūṣaṇa, am,%} n. the three
spices collectively, i. e. black pepper, long pepper,
and dry ginger. {%—Try-ṛca, am,%} n. {%= tṛca,%} a
strophe consisting of three verses. {%—Try-eta, as,%} m.,
{%tryeṇī%} or {%tryenī,%} f., {%am,%} n., Ved. variegated or
spotted in three places.
<LEND>

<L>21551<pc>0392-c<k1>triMSa<k2>triMSa
{%Triṃśa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%triṃśat%}), the thirtieth, con-
stituting the thirtieth part; joined with thirty (e. g.
{%triṃśaṃ śatam,%} 130); consisting of thirty (as a
Stoma); connected with the Triṃśa-stoma; (1/30) of
a sign of the zodiac, a degree. {%—Triṃśāṃśa%} or
{%triṃśāṃśaka (˚śa-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a thirtieth part,
(1/30) of a sign of the zodiac, a degree.
<LEND>

<L>21552<pc>0392-c<k1>triMSaka<k2>triMSaka
{%Triṃśaka, as, ā, am, = triṃśa,%}¦ consisting of thirty
parts, divided into thirty; bought for thirty, worth
thirty; ({%am%}), n. a collection or aggregate of thirty.
<LEND>

<L>21553<pc>0392-c<k1>triMSat<k2>triMSat
{%Triṃśat, t,%}¦ f. (fr. {%tri%} and {%śat = daśat%}), thirty,
the number thirty. {%—Triṃśac-chata, am,%} n., 130.
<LEND>

<L>21554<pc>0392-c<k1>triMSati<k2>triMSati
{%Triṃśati, is,%}¦ f. {%= triṃśat,%} thirty; [cf. {%trayas-%}
{%triṃśati, pañca-t˚, sapta-t˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21555<pc>0392-c<k1>triMSatka<k2>triMSatka
{%Triṃśatka, am,%}¦ n. an aggregate or collection of
thirty.
<LEND>

<L>21556<pc>0392-c<k1>triMSattama<k2>triMSattama
{%Triṃśat-tama, as, ī, am,%}¦ the thirtieth.
<LEND>

<L>21557<pc>0392-c<k1>triMSatpattra<k2>triMSatpattra
{%Triṃśat-pattra, am,%}¦ n. the white esculent water-
lily, Nymphæa Esculenta.
<LEND>

<L>21558<pc>0392-c<k1>triMSadviMSa<k2>triMSadviMSa
{%Triṃśad-viṃśa, ās,%}¦ m. pl. about twenty or thirty,
between twenty and thirty.
<LEND>

<L>21559<pc>0392-c<k1>triMSin<k2>triMSin
{%Triṃśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ containing thirty, consisting of
thirty.
<LEND>

<L>21560<pc>0392-c<k1>trika<k2>trika
{%Trika, as, ā, am,%}¦ triple, threefold; trine, forming
a triad; trebly repeated, happening the third time;
(with or without {%śata%}) three out of every hundred,
three per cent; ({%as%}), m., N. of two plants, {%= go-%}
{%kṣuraka%} and Trapa Bispinosa [cf. {%tri-kaṇṭaka%}];
({%ā%}), f. a triangular frame or bar across the mouth of
a well over which passes the rope of the bucket; a
wooden frame at the mouth of a well, or the upper
part of the well; a frame at the bottom of a well on
which the masonry rests; the cover or lid of a well;
({%am%}), n. the aggregate of three, a triad [cf. {%taurya-%}
{%trika%}]; a place where three roads meet; the lower
part of the spine or regio sacra; the part about the
hips; the part between the shoulder-blades; the
three mystical words pronounced before the Gāyatrī
[cf. {%vyāhṛti%}]; the three spices, three myrobalans
&c. collectively. {%—Trika-sthāna, am,%} n. the region
at the lower part of the spine. {%—Trikāgni-kāla%}
{%(˚ka-ag˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>21561<pc>0392-c<k1>trita<k2>trita
{%Trita, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (in the Atharva-veda also
{%tṛta%}), N. of a Vedic deity; (he is generally asso-
ciated with the Maruts, Vāyu, and Indra; and fights
like the latter with Tvāṣṭra, Vṛtra, and other
demons: he is also called Āptya, q. v., either as
produced in water by Agni, whence he is sometimes
called ‘a son of the water,’ or as son of the Ṛṣi
Āpta. In some passages of the Taittirīya-Saṃhitā he
is regarded as bestowing long life; while elsewhere
he is supposed to reside in the remotest regions of
the world, whence the idea of wishing to remove
calamity to Trita or to the remotest place possible;
cf. Ṛg-veda VIII. 47, 14. In some passages of the
[Page0393-a+ 72]
Veda, Indian commentators explain Trita by {%tri-%}
{%sthāna,%} ‘reaching through the triple world,’ as an
epithet of Indra or Vāyu. In later myths Trita is
described as a Ṛṣi, by whom several hymns of the
Ṛg-veda were-composed. Sāyaṇa in his introduction
to Ṛg-veda I. 105, relates that there were three Ṛṣis,
named Ekata, Dvita, and Trita, who lived in a desert
country; being parched with thirst, they looked
about for a well, and having found one, Trita entered
it to draw water, when the other two, desirous of
obtaining his property, threw him into the well and
closed up the mouth with a wheel; shut up in the
well, Trita composed a hymn to the gods, and
managed, in a marvellous manner, to perform the
Soma sacrifice, that he might drink the Soma himself
before death, or offer it to the deities in the hope of
being extricated by them: his preparation of the
Soma is described in the Mahā-bh. Śalya-parva 2095,
and he is elsewhere celebrated as an offerer of the
Soma. In various other epic legends, Ekata, Dvita,
and Trita are described as three brothers, sons of
Gautama or of Prajā-pati, = Brahmā. According to
the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa, Trita is one of the twelve
sons of Manu and Naḍvalā. Some identify the Vedic
{%Trita%} with the Vedic {%Traitana,%} and with <nsi>Thraetana</nsi>
the Zend form of <nsi>Feridun.</nsi> His connection with
water points to a comparison with the Gr. <lang n="greek">Τρίτων,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τριτο-γενής, Τριτωνίς, Τριτο-πάτορες,</lang> &c.) ({%Trita%}
seems also to mean) a class of deities, ‘the third
ones,’ i. e. those who live in the sky (?); the priest
who prepares the Soma.
<LEND>

<L>21562<pc>0393-a<k1>tritaya<k2>tritaya
{%Tritaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ consisting of three parts;
({%am%}), n. a collection of three, <lang n="greek">τριάς.</lang>
<LEND>

<L>21563<pc>0393-a<k1>tris<k2>tris
{%Tris,%}¦ ind. thrice, three times, at three places;
(followed by gutturals and palatals there may be the
optional substitution of {%ṣ%} for Visarga, e. g. {%triṣ%}
{%karoti%} or {%triḥ karoti,%} he does thrice.) {%—Triḥ-%}
{%plakṣa = tri-plakṣa,%} q. v. {%—Triḥ-sāman, a,%} n.,
N. of a Sāman. {%—Triḥ-snāna, am,%} n. bathing
thrice every day. {%—Trir-aśri, is, is, i,%} Ved. having
three edges, three-cornered. {%—Tris-tāvā,%} f. (fr. {%tris-%}
{%tāvat%}), three times the usual size, (only used with
{%vedi.%})
<LEND>

<L>21564<pc>0393-a<k1>trigUQa<k2>trigUQa
{#trigUQa#}¦ {%trigūḍha, am,%} n. the dancing or
acting of a man in female attire, (evidently a wrong
form for {%strī-gūḍha%}); [cf. {%tri-caritra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21565<pc>0393-a<k1>triNK<k2>triNK
{#triNK#}¦ {%triṅkh,%} cl. 1. P. {%triṅkhati,%} &c., to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>21566<pc>0393-a<k1>tricaritra<k2>tricaritra
{#tricaritra#}¦ {%tricaritra,%} a wrong reading for
{%strī-caritra;%} [cf. {%trigūḍha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21567<pc>0393-a<k1>triRa<k2>triRa
{#triRa#}¦ {%triṇa, am,%} n. {%= tṛṇa,%} grass.
<LEND>

<L>21568<pc>0393-a<k1>triRAka<k2>triRAka
{#triRAka#}¦ {%tri-ṇāka = tri-nāka,%} p. 389, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>21569<pc>0393-a<k1>tripu<k2>tripu
{#tripu#}¦ {%tripu, us,%} m., Ved. a thief.
<LEND>

<L>21570<pc>0393-a<k1>triBukti<k2>triBukti
{#triBukti#}¦ {%tribhukti (?)%} for {%tīra-bhukti,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21571<pc>0393-a<k1>triyUha<k2>triyUha
{#triyUha#}¦ {%triyūha, as,%} m. (probably a foreign
word), a chesnut-coloured horse; [cf. {%ukanāha,%}
{%urāha, kiyāha, kokāha,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>21572<pc>0393-a<k1>trillaka<k2>trillaka
{#trillaka#}¦ {%trillaka%} and {%trillasena, as,%} m., N.
of two men.
<LEND>

<L>21573<pc>0393-a<k1>trizama<k2>trizama
{#trizama#}¦ {%triṣama,%} Ved. {%= hrasva,%} short (?).
<LEND>

<L>21574<pc>0393-a<k1>tris<k2>tris
{#tris#}¦ {%tris.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>21575<pc>0393-a<k1>trIRi<k2>trIRi
{#trIRi#}¦ {%trīṇi,%} n. pl. three. See {%tri.%}
<LEND>

<L>21576<pc>0393-a<k1>trISawa<k2>trISawa
{#trISawa#}¦ {%trīśaṭa, as,%} m. [cf. {%tīsaṭa%}], N. of
the author of a medical work.
<LEND>

<L>21577<pc>0393-a<k1>truw<k2>truw
{#truw#}¦ {%truṭ,%} cl. 6. 4. P. {%truṭati, truṭyati,%}
{%tutroṭa, truṭitum,%} to be torn or split, to
tear, break, burst, snap, fall asunder: Caus. P. A.
{%troṭayati, -te, -yitum,%} to tear, break, cut, divide.
<LEND>

<L>21578<pc>0393-a<k1>truwi<k2>truwi
{%Truṭi, is,%}¦ f. (or {%truṭī,%} f. ?), cutting, breaking,
a tear, split; a small part, an atom or a visible atom
composed of three subtler elementary particles; a
very minute space of time, a moment, equal to (1/2)
[Page0393-b+ 77]
Lava, = (1/4) Kṣaṇa, = (1/40) Kāṣṭhā, = (1/400) Kalā, =
(1/4000) Nālikā, = (1/8000) Muhūrta, (or = (1/100) Vedha, =
(1/300) Lava, = (1/900) Nimeṣa, = (1/2700) Kṣaṇa, = (1/13500)
Kāṣṭhā, = (1/202500) Laghu, = (1/3037500) Nāḍikā, =
(1/6075000) Muhūrta); small cardamoms (Alpinia Car-
damomum), cardamoms from Guzerat; a sort of
tree; doubt, uncertainty; breaking (a promise); loss,
destruction; N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on
Skanda. {%—Truṭi-vīja, as,%} m. Arum Colocasia ({%=%}
{%kacu%}), an esculent root. {%—Truṭi-śas,%} ind. in short
spaces of time. {%—Truṭy-avayava, as,%} m. one half
of a Truṭi.
<LEND>

<L>21579<pc>0393-b<k1>truwita<k2>truwita
{%Truṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, broken, divided, hurt,
wounded, chapped, chafed. {%—Truṭita-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having cut or broken, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21580<pc>0393-b<k1>trowi<k2>trowi
{%Troṭi, is,%}¦ f. the beak or bill of a bird; the mouth
of a fish; a kind of bird; a kind of pike (Esox
Kankila); a medicinal plant. {%—Troṭi-hasta, as,%} m. a
bird (‘having a beak for hands’).
<LEND>

<L>21581<pc>0393-b<k1>truq<k2>truq
{#truq#}¦ {%truḍ,%} Ved. {%= truṭ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21582<pc>0393-b<k1>trup<k2>trup
{#trup#}¦ {%trup%} or {%truph%} or {%trump%} or {%trumph,%} cl.
1. P. {%tropati%} or {%trophati%} or {%trumpati%} or
{%trumphati,%} &c., to hurt, injure, kill; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">θρύπτω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τρύφος:</lang> Lith. <nsi>truppù,</nsi> ‘to be worn away by friction;’
<nsi>trumpas,</nsi> ‘short;’ <nsi>trumpinu,</nsi> ‘to shorten.’]
<LEND>

<L>21583<pc>0393-b<k1>tretA<k2>tretA
{#tretA#}¦ {%tretā,%} f. (fr. {%traya,%} which is fr. {%tri,%}
p. 388), a triad, a collection or assemblage of three,
a triplet; the three sacred fires collectively (i. e. the
southern, household, and sacrificial fires; often called
{%agni-tretā,%} see {%agni-traya%}); trey, i. e. a throw at
dice or the side of a die marked with three spots or
points; (with or without {%yuga%}) the second Yuga or
silver age of the Hindūs which consists of 1, 296, 000
years. {%—Tretāgni (˚tā-ag˚), is,%} m. one who has
preserved the three sacred fires; the three fires
collectively ({%= agni-tretā%}).
<LEND>

<L>21584<pc>0393-b<k1>tretinI<k2>tretinI
{%Tretinī,%}¦ f., Ved. the threefold flame of the three
fires of the altar.
<LEND>

<L>21585<pc>0393-b<k1>treDA<k2>treDA
{%Tre-dhā,%}¦ ind. {%= tri-dhā,%} triply, in three parts, in
three ways, in three places. {%—Tredhā-vihita,%} divided
into three parts. {%—Tredhā-sthita, as, ā, am,%} existing
in three states.
<LEND>

<L>21586<pc>0393-b<k1>trEMSa<k2>trEMSa
{%Traiṃśa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%triṃśat%}), scil. {%brāhmaṇa,%} the
Brāhmaṇa consisting of thirty Adhyāyas.
<LEND>

<L>21587<pc>0393-b<k1>trEMSika<k2>trEMSika
{%Traiṃśika, as, ā, am,%}¦ consisting of thirty.
<LEND>

<L>21588<pc>0393-b<k1>trEkakuda<k2>trEkakuda
{%Traikakuda, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. coming from the
mountain Tri-kakud.
<LEND>

<L>21589<pc>0393-b<k1>trEkakuBa<k2>trEkakuBa
{%Traikakubha, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tri-kakubh%}), N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>21590<pc>0393-b<k1>trEkaRwaka<k2>trEkaRwaka
{%Traikaṇṭaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming from or made
of the plant Tri-kaṇṭaka.
<LEND>

<L>21591<pc>0393-b<k1>trEkAlajYa<k2>trEkAlajYa
{%Traikāla-jña,%}¦ probably a wrong reading for {%trai-%}
{%kālya-jña;%} [cf. {%tri-kāla-jña.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21592<pc>0393-b<k1>trEkAlika<k2>trEkAlika
{%Traikālika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-kāla%}), relating to
the three times, i. e. past, present, and future.
<LEND>

<L>21593<pc>0393-b<k1>trEkAlya<k2>trEkAlya
{%Traikālya, am,%}¦ n. the three times; past, present,
and future time; sunrise, noon, and sunset; tripar-
tition; an aggregate of three, a triad.
<LEND>

<L>21594<pc>0393-b<k1>trEkuntaka<k2>trEkuntaka
{%Traikuntaka, am,%}¦ n. ? (fr. {%tri-kunta%}), a kind of
ornament.
<LEND>

<L>21595<pc>0393-b<k1>trEgarta<k2>trEgarta
{%Traigarta, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the Trigartas;
({%as%}), m. a prince of the Trigartas; ({%ī%}), f. a princess
of the Trigartas; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the Trigartas.
<LEND>

<L>21596<pc>0393-b<k1>trEgartaka<k2>trEgartaka
{%Traigartaka,%}¦ belonging to the Trigartas.
<LEND>

<L>21597<pc>0393-b<k1>trEguRika<k2>trEguRika
{%Traiguṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-guṇa%}), relating or
belonging to three qualities, repeated three times,
triple, relating to thrice, threefold, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21598<pc>0393-b<k1>trEguRya<k2>trEguRya
{%Traiguṇya, am,%}¦ n. the state of consisting of
three threads, qualities, &c.; triplicity, tripleness,
a triad, the triad of qualities, the three Guṇas or
properties collectively (i. e. Sat-tva, Rajas, and Tamas;
cf. {%guṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>21599<pc>0393-b<k1>trEcIvarika<k2>trEcIvarika
{%Traicīvarika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-cīvara%}), possessing
three mendicant garments.
<LEND>

<L>21600<pc>0393-b<k1>trEta<k2>trEta
{%Traita, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tretā%}), Ved. a triad, a collec-
tion of three, the aggregate of three, triplicity; (fr.
{%trita%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>
[Page0393-c+ 81]

<L>21601<pc>0393-c<k1>trEtana<k2>trEtana
{%Traitana, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a Vedic deity or
supernatural being, thought by some to be connected
with Trita, q. v.; (according to Sāy.) N. of a Dāsa.
<LEND>

<L>21602<pc>0393-c<k1>trEdaSika<k2>trEdaSika
{%Traidaśika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tridaśa%}), relating to
the thirty-three gods; sacred to the gods, belonging
to them, divine; ({%am%}), n. the part of the hand
sacred to the gods.
<LEND>

<L>21603<pc>0393-c<k1>trEDa<k2>trEDa
{%Traidha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-dhā%} or {%tre-dhā%}), three-
fold, triple; ({%am%}), ind. {%= tri-dhā%} or {%tre-dhā,%} triply,
in a triple manner, in three ways.
<LEND>

<L>21604<pc>0393-c<k1>trEDAtavI<k2>trEDAtavI
{%Traidhātavī,%}¦ f. (scil. {%iṣṭi%}), N. of a particular
closing ceremony, (fr. {%tri-dhātu.%})
<LEND>

<L>21605<pc>0393-c<k1>trEDAtavIya<k2>trEDAtavIya
{%Traidhātavīya, am,%}¦ n. (scil. {%karman%}), N. of a
particular closing rite.
<LEND>

<L>21606<pc>0393-c<k1>trEDAtuka<k2>trEDAtuka
{%Traidhātuka, am,%}¦ n. the three worlds.
<LEND>

<L>21607<pc>0393-c<k1>trEDAtva<k2>trEDAtva
{%Traidhātva, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Try-aruṇa.
<LEND>

<L>21608<pc>0393-c<k1>trEnizkika<k2>trEnizkika
{%Trainiṣkika, as, ī, am,%}¦ three Niṣkas worth.
<LEND>

<L>21609<pc>0393-c<k1>trEpaTa<k2>trEpaTa
{%Traipatha, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tri-patha%}), a peculiar
manner of sitting (generally with {%āsana%}).
<LEND>

<L>21610<pc>0393-c<k1>trEpada<k2>trEpada
{%Traipada, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tri-pada%}), three quarters
(of a Yojana).
<LEND>

<L>21611<pc>0393-c<k1>trEpArAyaRika<k2>trEpArAyaRika
{%Traipārāyaṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ performing the
Pārāyaṇa three times.
<LEND>

<L>21612<pc>0393-c<k1>trEpizwapa<k2>trEpizwapa
{%Traipiṣṭapa, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Tri-pish-
ṭapa, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21613<pc>0393-c<k1>trEpura<k2>trEpura
{%Traipura, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Tri-pura; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the inhabitants of the three cities of the Asura
named Tri-pura, q. v.; the inhabitants of Tri-purā or
Tri-purī or the Cedis; ({%as%}), m. a prince of Tri-pura.
<LEND>

<L>21614<pc>0393-c<k1>trEpurIya<k2>trEpurIya
{%Traipurīya,%}¦ N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>21615<pc>0393-c<k1>trEpuruza<k2>trEpuruza
{%Traipuruṣa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-puruṣa%}), ex-
tending through three male generations, or father,
grandfather, and great-grandfather.
<LEND>

<L>21616<pc>0393-c<k1>trEPala<k2>trEPala
{%Traiphala, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-phalā%}), coming from
or belonging to the three myrobalans &c.
<LEND>

<L>21617<pc>0393-c<k1>trEbali<k2>trEbali
{%Traibali, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%tri-bali%} or {%tri-balī%}), N. of
a man.
<LEND>

<L>21618<pc>0393-c<k1>trEBAvya<k2>trEBAvya
{%Traibhāvya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tri-bhāva%}), threefold
nature or manner.
<LEND>

<L>21619<pc>0393-c<k1>trEmAtura<k2>trEmAtura
{%Traimātura, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-mātṛ%}), having
three-mothers.
<LEND>

<L>21620<pc>0393-c<k1>trEmAsika<k2>trEmAsika
{%Traimāsika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-māsa%}), three
months old, lasting three months, occurring every
three months, quarterly.
<LEND>

<L>21621<pc>0393-c<k1>trEmAsya<k2>trEmAsya
{%Traimāsya, am,%}¦ n. a period of three months.
<LEND>

<L>21622<pc>0393-c<k1>trEyambaka<k2>trEyambaka
{%Traiyambaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging
to Try-ambaka (e. g. {%apūpa,%} cake sacred to Try-
ambaka). {%—Traiyambaka-mantra, am,%} n., N. of
the twenty-third chapter of the Śāradā-tilaka by
Lakṣmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>21623<pc>0393-c<k1>trEyAruRa<k2>trEyAruRa
{%Traiyāruṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>21624<pc>0393-c<k1>trErASika<k2>trErASika
{%Trairāśika, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%tri-rāśi%}), relating
to three numbers or to the three signs of the zodiac;
{%trairāśikam%} or {%trairāśika-gaṇitam,%} the rule of
three in arithmetic, (this is of two kinds, viz. {%krama-%}
{%trairāśika,%} rule of three direct; {%vyasta-%} or {%viloma-%}
{%trairāśika,%} rule of three inverse.)
<LEND>

<L>21625<pc>0393-c<k1>trErUpya<k2>trErUpya
{%Trairūpya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tri-rūpa%}), tripleness of
form, threefold change of form; three forms or ways.
<LEND>

<L>21626<pc>0393-c<k1>trElAwa<k2>trElAwa
{%Trailāṭa%}¦ (fr. {%tri-lāṭa ?%}), a sort of horse-fly.
<LEND>

<L>21627<pc>0393-c<k1>trEliNga<k2>trEliNga
{%Trailiṅga, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-liṅga%}), having three
genders.
<LEND>

<L>21628<pc>0393-c<k1>trEloka<k2>trEloka
{%Trailoka, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%tri-loka%}), ‘the ruler of the
three worlds,’ epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>21629<pc>0393-c<k1>trElokya<k2>trElokya
{%Trailokya, am,%}¦ n. the three worlds, see {%tri-%}
{%loka; (as),%} m., N. of a man. {%—Trailokya-kartṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m. ‘creator of the three worlds,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Trailokya-ḍambara,%} N. of a medical work.
{%—Trailokya-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a Jaina work. {%—Trai-%}
{%lokya-devī,%} f., N. of the wife of king Yaśas-kara.
{%—Trailokya-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of the three
worlds,’ epithet of Rāma as an incarnation of Viṣṇu.
{%—Trailokya-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of an astrono-
mical work. {%—Trailokya-prabhava, as,%} m., N. of
Viṣṇu. {%—Trailokya-bhaya-kāraka, as, ā, am,%}
causing fear to the three worlds. {%—Trailokya-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘king of the three worlds,’ N. of a powerful
man. {%—Trailokya-rājya, am,%} n. the sovereignty
of the three worlds. {%—Trailokya-vikramin, ī,%} m.,
N. of a Bodhi-sattva (striding through the three
worlds). {%—Trailokya-vijayā,%} f. a sort of hemp from
[Page0394-a+ 78]
which an intoxicating infusion &c. is prepared.
{%—Trailokya-sāgara, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Trai-%}
{%lokya-sāra, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Trailocana,%}
{%as, ī, am%} (fr. {%tri-locana%}), relating to Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>21630<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvaRi<k2>trEvaRi
{%Traivaṇi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>21631<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvargika<k2>trEvargika
{%Traivargika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-varga%}), relating
to the three objects of life [cf. {%tri-varga%}], directed
towards or devoted to them.
<LEND>

<L>21632<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvargya<k2>trEvargya
{%Traivargya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the Tri-
varga. See {%traivargika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>21633<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvarRika<k2>trEvarRika
{%Traivarṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-varṇa%}), relating
or belonging to the first three castes; ({%as%}), m. a
member of the first three castes.
<LEND>

<L>21634<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvarzika<k2>trEvarzika
{%Traivarṣika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-varṣa%}), tri-
ennial, three years old, lasting three years, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21635<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvArzika<k2>trEvArzika
{%Traivārṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ sufficient for three
years, lasting three years.
<LEND>

<L>21636<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvikrama<k2>trEvikrama
{%Traivikrama, as,%}¦ &c. (fr. {%tri-vikrama%}), be-
longing to Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n. the three strides or
steps (of Viṣṇu).
<LEND>

<L>21637<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvida<k2>trEvida
{%Traivida,%}¦ a various reading for {%trayī-vida,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21638<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvidya<k2>trEvidya
{%Traividya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tri-vidyā%} and {%tri-vidya%}),
the three sciences; the three Vedas (Ṛg, Yajus, and
Sāman); study or knowledge of the three Vedas;
the three duties of teaching the Veda, sacrificing, and
donation; a particular Vrata or religious observance;
a collection or assembly of Brāhmans who are
familiar with the three Vedas; ({%as, ā, am%}), familiar
with the three Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>21639<pc>0394-a<k1>trEviDya<k2>trEviDya
{%Traividhya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tri-vidha%}), the state of
being of three kinds, threefoldness, triplicity, triple-
ness, three ways or kinds.
<LEND>

<L>21640<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvizwapa<k2>trEvizwapa
{%Traiviṣṭapa%}¦ or {%traiviṣṭapeya, as,%} m. an inha-
bitant of Tri-viṣṭapa, a god.
<LEND>

<L>21641<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvfta<k2>trEvfta
{%Traivṛta, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-vṛt%}), coming from
the plant Ipomœa Turpethum.
<LEND>

<L>21642<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvfzRa<k2>trEvfzRa
{%Traivṛṣṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Try-aruṇa.
<LEND>

<L>21643<pc>0394-a<k1>trEvedika<k2>trEvedika
{%Traivedika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-veda%}), relating to
the three Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>21644<pc>0394-a<k1>trESaNkava<k2>trESaNkava
{%Traiśaṅkava, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%tri-śaṅku%}), a patro-
nymic of Hari-ścandra.
<LEND>

<L>21645<pc>0394-a<k1>trESARa<k2>trESARa
{%Traiśāṇa, as, ī, am, = triśāṇa,%}¦ worth three Śāṇas.
<LEND>

<L>21646<pc>0394-a<k1>trESAmba<k2>trESAmba
{%Traiśāmba, as,%}¦ m., N. of the father of Karan-
dhama; (various readings have {%tribhānu, triśānu,%}
{%triśāri, traisānu.%})
<LEND>

<L>21647<pc>0394-a<k1>trESIrza<k2>trESIrza
{%Traiśīrṣa, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-śīrṣan%}), relating
to the three-headed Viśva-rūpa.
<LEND>

<L>21648<pc>0394-a<k1>trESoka<k2>trESoka
{%Traiśoka, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tri-śoka%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>21649<pc>0394-a<k1>trEzwuBa<k2>trEzwuBa
{%Traiṣṭubha, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or written
in the metre Tri-ṣṭubh; ({%am%}), n. the Tri-ṣṭubh
stanza or metre; (Sāy.) the atmosphere or inter-
mediate region consisting of rain, clouds, and light-
ning. (In the Brāhmaṇas the three chief metres
Gāyatrī, Tri-ṣṭubh, and Jagatī are often identified
with the sky, atmosphere, and earth.)
<LEND>

<L>21650<pc>0394-a<k1>trEsAnu<k2>trEsAnu
{%Traisānu, us,%}¦ m., N. of the father of Karan-
dhama.
<LEND>

<L>21651<pc>0394-a<k1>trEsrotasa<k2>trEsrotasa
{%Traisrotasa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%tri-srotas%}), belonging
to the Ganges.
<LEND>

<L>21652<pc>0394-a<k1>trEsvarya<k2>trEsvarya
{%Traisvarya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tri-svara%}), the three
accents collectively.
<LEND>

<L>21653<pc>0394-a<k1>trEhAyaRa<k2>trEhAyaRa
{%Traihāyaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%tri-hāyaṇa%}), Ved. a
period or age of three years.
<LEND>

<L>21654<pc>0394-a<k1>trE<k2>trE
{#trE#}¦ {%trai%} (by some modern scholars written
{%trā,%} q. v.), cl. 1. A. {%trāyate%} (3rd sing. Pres. ep.
{%trāti;%} 2nd sing. Impv. Ved. {%trāsva,%} ep. {%trāhi, trātu%}),
{%tatre, trāsyate%} (ep. {%trāsyati%}), {%atrāsta, trātum,%} to
protect, preserve, cherish, defend, rescue from, (in
the earlier language with abl. and gen., in the later
only with abl.)
<LEND>

<L>21655<pc>0394-a<k1>trARa<k2>trARa
{%Trāṇa, trāta,%}¦ &c. For these and other deriva-
tives of the rt. {%trai%} see 1. {%trā,%} p. 388, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>21656<pc>0394-a<k1>trEguRya<k2>trEguRya
{#trEguRya#}¦ {%traiguṇya, am,%} n. See p. 393, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>21657<pc>0394-a<k1>trowaka<k2>trowaka
{#trowaka#}¦ {%troṭaka, as,%} m. [cf. {%toṭaka%}], a kind
of poisonous insect; N. of a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya;
({%ī%}), f. a Rāgiṇī or one of the female personifications
of music; ({%am%}), n. a minor drama, such as the
Vikramorvaśī; angry speech.
<LEND>
[Page0394-b+ 76]

<L>21658<pc>0394-b<k1>trowi<k2>trowi
{#trowi#}¦ {%troṭi.%} See p. 393, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>21659<pc>0394-b<k1>trotala<k2>trotala
{#trotala#}¦ {%trotala, am,%} n. f., N. of a Tantra.
{%—Trotalottara (˚la-ut˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tantra.
<LEND>

<L>21660<pc>0394-b<k1>trotra<k2>trotra
{#trotra#}¦ {%trotra, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%trai%}
above), a weapon, a goad; a kind of disease.
<LEND>

<L>21661<pc>0394-b<k1>trOk<k2>trOk
{#trOk#}¦ {%trauk,%} cl. 1. A. {%traukate,%} &c., to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>21662<pc>0394-b<k1>tryaMSa<k2>tryaMSa
{#tryaMSa#}¦ {%try-aṃśa.%} For compounds with {%try%}
for {%tri%} see under {%tri.%}
<LEND>

<L>21663<pc>0394-b<k1>tva<k2>tva<h>1
{#tva#} 1¦. {%tva,%} base of some cases of the second
personal pronoun (in some of the cases the base is
{%tu,%} Nom. sing. {%tvam,%} Acc. {%tvā%} and {%tvām,%} Abl.
{%tvat%} or {%tvad;%} in Ved. {%tvā%} occurs for {%tvayā,%}
{%tubhya%} for {%tubhyam, tve%} for {%tvayi;%} at the be-
ginning of a compound {%tvat%} or {%tvad,%} and in the
Vedas {%tvā%} is used), thou, you; [cf. Lat. <nsi>tu;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>tù;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>tu;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>thu;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>ty;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">τούν, τύ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σύ.</lang>] {%—Tvaṅ-kāra, as,%} m. the expression ‘thou,’
addressing with ‘thou’ (disrespectfully). {%—Tvaṅ-kṛ,%}
cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to address with
‘thou.’ {%—Tvat-ka, as, ā, am%} (a familiar diminu-
tive), thine, your. {%—Tvat-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made
or composed by thee; made like you. {%—Tvat-tana,%}
‘your sphere or department,’ you. {%—Tvat-saṅgama,%}
{%as,%} m. union with thee. {%—Tvad-anya, as, ā, at,%}
other than thee. {%—Tvad-artham%} or {%tvad-arthe,%}
ind. on thy account, about thee, respecting thee.
{%—Tvad-gṛha, am,%} n. thy house. {%—Tvad-bha-%}
{%ya, am,%} n. dread of thee. {%—Tvad-bhū,%} cl. 1. P.
{%-bhavati, -vitum,%} to become thou, to become like
you. {%—Tvad-yoni, is, is, i,%} Ved. produced or pro-
ceeding from thee. {%—Tvad-vidha, as, ā, am,%} similar
to thee, like thee, of thy kind. {%—Tvad-viyoga, as,%}
m. separation from thee. {%—Tvan-maya, as, ī, am,%}
produced from thee, consisting of thee. {%—Tva-yata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. given by thee. {%—Tvāṅ-kāma, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. longing for thee. {%—Tvā-datta%} or {%tvā-%}
{%dāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. given by thee; (Sāy. {%tvā-%}
{%dāta,%} purified by thee.) {%—Tvā-dūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having thee as a messenger. {%—Tvā-dṛś, k, k, k,%} or
{%tvā-dṛśa, as, ī, am,%} similar to thee, one of thy kind.
{%—Tvā-nid, t, t, t,%} Ved. blaming thee. {%—Tvā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. similar to thee; as rich, mighty,
great, &c., as you; worthy of thee. {%—Tvā-vasu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. having thee as a possession; (Sāy.)
having thee as a pervading attribute. {%—Tvā-vṛdha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having thee as patron, favoured by
thee. {%—Tveṣita, as, ā, am%} ({%tva%} or {%tvā+iṣita%}),
Ved. sent by thee. {%—Tvota, as, ā, am%} ({%tva%} or {%tvā%}
{%+ ūta%}), Ved. helped or protected or loved by thee.
{%—Tvoti, is, is, i%} ({%tva%} or {%tvā + ūti%}), Ved. enjoying
thy protection or help or love.
<LEND>

<L>21664<pc>0394-b<k1>tva<k2>tva<h>2
2. {%tva, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. thy, your, yours.
<LEND>

<L>21665<pc>0394-b<k1>tvakat<k2>tvakat
{%Tvakat,%}¦ a familiar diminutive from {%tvad,%} e. g. in
{%tvakat-pitṛka;%} [cf. {%tvat-ka%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>21666<pc>0394-b<k1>tvadIya<k2>tvadIya
{%Tvadīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ thine, your, yours.
<LEND>

<L>21667<pc>0394-b<k1>tvadrik<k2>tvadrik
{%Tvadrik,%}¦ ind. towards thee, directed towards thee;
(Sāy. {%= tvad-abhimukha.%})
<LEND>

<L>21668<pc>0394-b<k1>tvAyat<k2>tvAyat
{%Tvāyat, an, antī, at%}¦ (part. fr. a nom. derived fr. 1.
{%tva%}), Ved. longing for thee, seeking thee, loving thee.
<LEND>

<L>21669<pc>0394-b<k1>tvAyA<k2>tvAyA
{%Tvāyā%}¦ (fr. the same nom.; used as an inst.), Ved.,
out of love towards thee, for thee.
<LEND>

<L>21670<pc>0394-b<k1>tvAyu<k2>tvAyu
{%Tvāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. longing for thee, loving thee.
<LEND>

<L>21671<pc>0394-b<k1>tva<k2>tva<h>3
{#tva#} 3¦. {%tva, as, ā, at,%} Ved. pron. one, several,
other, different; {%tva — tva,%} one — the other; {%tvad,%}
ind. partly; {%tvad — tvad,%} partly — partly.
<LEND>

<L>21672<pc>0394-b<k1>tvakz<k2>tvakz
{#tvakz#}¦ {%tvakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%tvakṣati, tatva-%}
{%kṣa, tvakṣitum%} and {%tvaṣṭum,%} to
create, produce, generate, effect, to work (Ved.); to
pare, make thin, peel, skin; to cover; [cf. rt. {%takṣ,%}
{%takman, toka:%} Zend <nsi>thwakhsh, tash,</nsi> ‘to cut;’
<nsi>tasha,</nsi> ‘a hatchet;’ <nsi>tas-ta,</nsi> ‘a cup, bowl;’ <nsi>tuc,</nsi> ‘to
produce, create:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">τεκ, ἔ-τεκ-ον, τίκ-τ-ω, τοκ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">εύ-ς, τόκ-ος, τέκ-μαρ, τεκμήρ-ιο-ν, Τέκμησσα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τόξο-ν, τόσσαις, τέχ-νη, τέκ-τ-ων, τυκ, τυχ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τυγχάν-ω, ἔ-τυχ-ο-ν, τύχ-η, τεύχ-ω, τε-τύκ-οντο,</lang>
[Page0394-c+ 79]
<lang n="greek">τύκ-ο-ς, Τεῦκ-ρο-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>tig-nu-m, tē-lu-m, tē-mo,</nsi>
<nsi>tex-o, tex-tor, tex-tura, tē-la:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>theik-an,</nsi>
‘to thrive:’ Old Sax. <nsi>thigg-yu:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>dig-yu,</nsi>
‘I obtain;’ <nsi>deh-s-a,</nsi> ‘a mattock, trowel;’ <nsi>deh-</nsi>
<nsi>sen,</nsi> ‘to break flax;’ <nsi>dihsel,</nsi> ‘a shaft:’ Lith. <nsi>tek-</nsi>
<nsi>ý-s,</nsi> ‘a ram;’ <nsi>tenk-ù,</nsi> ‘to fall to one's share;’ <nsi>tink-ù,</nsi>
‘to be fit;’ <nsi>tinka-s,</nsi> ‘it happens;’ <nsi>tik-ra-s,</nsi> ‘right,
orderly;’ <nsi>tiký-ti,</nsi> ‘to take aim;’ <nsi>taszý-ti,</nsi> ‘to cut
timber;’ <nsi>taisy-ti,</nsi> ‘to prepare:’ Slav. <nsi>tŭk-ña-ti,</nsi> ‘to
fix;’ <nsi>tŭk-a-ti,</nsi> ‘to weave;’ <nsi>tes-a-ti,</nsi> ‘to cut;’ <nsi>te†z-</nsi>
<nsi>a-ti,</nsi> ‘to obtain:’ Boh. <nsi>tesar,</nsi> ‘a smith.’]
<LEND>

<L>21673<pc>0394-c<k1>tvakzas<k2>tvakzas
{%Tvakṣas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. efficiency, energy, vigour;
(Sāy.) foe-destroying might.
<LEND>

<L>21674<pc>0394-c<k1>tvakzIyas<k2>tvakzIyas
{%Tvakṣīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. very vigorous, very
invigorating; [cf. Zend <nsi>thwakhshista.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21675<pc>0394-c<k1>tvazwa<k2>tvazwa
{%Tvaṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pared, peeled, made thin.
<LEND>

<L>21676<pc>0394-c<k1>tvazwi<k2>tvazwi
{%Tvaṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. carpentry, the profession of a
carpenter.
<LEND>

<L>21677<pc>0394-c<k1>tvazwf<k2>tvazwf
{%Tvaṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. a carpenter, builder, workman,
maker of carriages, &c. [cf. {%taṣṭṛ%}]; N. of a god,
sometimes identified with the later deity Viśva-
karman, (he is the builder and architect <lang n="greek">κατ᾽ ἐξοχήν</lang>
and the Vulcan of the Hindūs; hence in the Veda he
has the epithets {%su-pāṇi, su-gabhasti, sv-apas, su-%}
{%kṛt, viśva-rūpa, puru-rūpa,%} &c.: he makes the
various implements of the gods, especially the
thunderbolt of Indra, and is said to have taught the
Ṛbhus who are also skilful workmen: he is some-
times regarded as the creator himself, and as forming
the bodies of men and animals is invoked for the
sake of offspring, especially in the Āprī hymns;
elsewhere he is associated with other similar deities,
e. g. Dhātṛ, Savitṛ, Prajā-pati, and Pūṣan; as
Indra is accompanied by the Vasus, Rudra by the
Rudras, so Tvaṣṭṛ is surrounded by the divine
females called Gnās, Janayas, Devānām Patnyaḥ, who
may be regarded as the recipients of his generative
energy; he has a son Viśva-rūpa or Tri-śiras, a
daughter Saraṇyū (or Sureṇu, Svareṇu, Sañjñā), wife
of Vivasvat, the children of whom are the Aśvins,
and Vāyu is called his son-in-law: Indra overpowers
Tvaṣṭṛ and recovers the Soma, which, according to
the Brāhmaṇas, was concealed by the latter because
Indra had killed his son Viśva-rūpa: Tvaṣṭṛ is
the deity of the Nakṣatra Citrā, regent of the fifth
Yuga or of the fifth cycle of Jupiter; and is also a
form of the sun, the N. being derived by Yāska in
Nirukta VIII. 13. fr. the rt. {%tviṣ,%} ‘to shine,’ and
being applied in Ṛg-veda 1. 84, 15, to one of
the Ādityas; it is also in the sense ‘shining,’
‘brilliant,’ applied to Agni and to Vāyu as well as to
the Rudras); N. of a prince, a son of Manasyu
(Bhauvana). {%—Tvaṣṭṛ-mat%} or {%tvaṣṭī-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. connected with or accompanied by Tvaṣṭṛ.
<LEND>

<L>21678<pc>0394-c<k1>tvAzwI<k2>tvAzwI
{%Tvāṣṭī,%}¦ f. (? for {%tvāṣṭṝ%}), N. of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>21679<pc>0394-c<k1>tvAzwra<k2>tvAzwra
{%Tvāṣṭra, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to or coming
from Tvaṣṭṛ; (with {%yuga%}) the fifth Jupiter cycle,
the regent of which is Tvaṣṭṛ; (with {%putra%}) the
son of Tvaṣṭṛ; ({%as%}), m. the son of Tvaṣṭṛ, i. e.
Viśva-rūpa (also identified with Vṛtra), and Ābhūti;
({%ī%}), f. the daughter of Tvaṣṭṛ, patronymic of
Saraṇyū (or Sureṇu, Svareṇu, Sañjñā), who was wife
of Vivasvat; the asterism Citrā, the regent of which
is Tvaṣṭṛ; a small car; {%tvāṣṭryas,%} f. pl. the
daughters of Tvaṣṭṝ, certain divine female beings;
({%am%}), n. the power or energy of Tvaṣṭṛ, creative
power; (with {%bha%} or {%nakṣatra%}) the asterism
Citrā [cf. {%tvaṣṭṛ%}]; a kind of eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>21680<pc>0394-c<k1>tvagela<k2>tvagela
{#tvagela#}¦ {%tvagela, am,%} n. probably {%= elavālu,%}
the bark of Feronia Elephantum.
<LEND>

<L>21681<pc>0394-c<k1>tvaNg<k2>tvaNg
{#tvaNg#}¦ {%tvaṅg,%} cl. 1. P. {%tvaṅgati,%} &c., to
go, move, tremble, wave; to jump, leap,
gallop.
<LEND>

<L>21682<pc>0394-c<k1>tvac<k2>tvac<h>1
{#tvac#} 1¦. {%tvac,%} cl. 6. P. {%tvacati,%} &c., to
cover, (a root artificially formed to furnish
an etymology for 2. {%tvac%}); [cf. Lat. <nsi>tego;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>dekiu,</nsi> ‘to cover;’ Lith. <nsi>dengiù.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21683<pc>0394-c<k1>tvakka<k2>tvakka
{%Tvakka%}¦ at end of adj. comp., e. g. {%sāndra-tvakka,%}
covered with thick armour-like skin.
<LEND>
[Page0395-a+ 80]

<L>21684<pc>0395-a<k1>tvac<k2>tvac<h>2
2. {%tvac, k,%}¦ f. skin (as of men, serpents, &c.); hide
(as of a goat, cow, &c.); a cow's hide (used in
pressing out the Soma); bark, rind, peel; any
surface or covering (as turf of the earth); a cover,
horse-cloth; (Ved.) the black cover, = darkness; a
protecting cover or guard, mail, a shield; a leather
bag; Cassia bark; cinnamon, the cinnamon tree;
mystical N. of the letter {%ya%}. {%—Tvak-kaṇḍura, as,%}
m. skin-wound, a sore. {%—Tvak-kṣīrā, ī,%} f. manna
of bamboo (commonly Tabāṣīr); [cf. {%tavakṣīra.%}]
{%—Tvak-chada, as,%} m. the grass Lipeocercis Serrata.
{%—Tvak-cheda, as,%} m. a skin-wound, flesh-wound,
cut, scratch; circumcision. {%—Tvak-chedana, am,%} n.
cutting the skin; see {%tvak-cheda%}. {%—Tvak-taraṅ-%}
{%gaka, as,%} m. ‘skin-wave,’ a wrinkle. {%—Tvak-tra,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘protection for the skin,’ armour. {%—Tvak-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. Cassia (the plant and bark); ({%ī%}), f. {%=%}
{%kāravī, hiṅgu-pattrī,%} the leaf of the Asa Fœtida (?),
{%= tamāla-pattra,%} the leaf of the Laurus Cassia,
Malabathron. {%—Tvak-paripuṭana, am,%} n. peeling
of the skin, desquamation. {%—Tvak-pāka, as,%} m.
inflammation of the skin, N. of a particular disease.
{%—Tvak-pāruṣya, am,%} n. roughness of the skin.
{%—Tvak-puṣpa, am,%} n. ‘skin-sprout,’ erection of
the hairs of the skin, horripilation; ({%am, ī%}), n. f.
blotch, scab, cutaneous eruption, &c. {%—Tvak-puṣ-%}
{%pikā,%} f. scab, blotch. {%—Tvak-sāra, as, ā, am,%}
having an excellent or sound skin; ({%as%}), m. a
bamboo; Cassia (the plant and the bark); Bignonia
Indica; ({%ā%}), f. Tabāṣīr; [cf. {%tvak-kṣīrā.%}] {%—Tvak-%}
{%sāra-bhedinī,%} f. a kind of plant, {%= kṣudra-cañcu.%}
{%—Tvak-sugandha, as,%} m. an orange (‘having
fragrant peel’); ({%ā%}), f. the fragrant bark of Fe-
ronia Elephantum {%(= elavāluka)%}. {%—Tvak-svādvī,%}
f. a kind of cinnamon (‘having sweet bark’).
{%—Tvag-aṅkura, as,%} m. {%= tvak-puṣpa%} above.
{%—Tvag-asthi-mātra-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%} with mere
skin and bone left, reduced to a skeleton. {%—Tvagā-%}
{%kṣīrī,%} f. {%= tugā-kṣīrī, = tvak-kṣīrā, ī%}. {%—Tvag-%}
{%indriya, am,%} n. the sense or organ of touch.
{%—Tvag-gandha, as,%} m. an orange; [cf. {%tvak-%}
{%sugandha.%}] {%—Tvag-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced on or
issuing from the skin; ({%am%}), n. the hairs on the
body; blood. {%—Tvag-doṣa, as,%} m. disease of the
skin, leprosy. {%—Tvag-doṣāpahā (˚ṣa-apahā),%}
f. Vernonia Anthelminthica (‘destroying leprosy’).
{%—Tvag-doṣāri (˚ṣa-ari), is,%} m. a kind of
bulbous plant (‘the enemy of leprosy’), {%= hasti-%}
{%kanda%}. {%—Tvagdoṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} affected with skin
disease or with leprosy. {%—Tvag-bheda, as,%} m.
‘breaking of the skin,’ a flesh-wound, a scratch.
{%—Tvag-bhedaka, as,%} m. one who cuts the skin, a
stabber, scratcher, one who draws blood from the
skin. {%—Tvag-roga, as,%} m. any cutaneous disease;
leprosy &c. {%—Tvag-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with
skin or bark. {%—Tvaṅ-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of
bark or skin. {%—Tvaṅ-mala, am,%} n. the hairs of the
body. {%—Tvaci-sāra, as,%} m. ({%tvaci%} loc. of 2. {%tvac%}), {%=%}
{%tvak-sāra,%} a bamboo. {%—Tvaci-sugandhā,%} f. small
cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>21685<pc>0395-a<k1>tvaca<k2>tvaca
{%Tvaca%}¦ at the end of a comp. = 2. {%tvac;%} cf. {%sa-t˚,%}
{%sūrya-t˚, hiranya-t˚; (am),%} n. skin; bark, rind;
cinnamon, the cinnamon tree, Cassia bark; ({%ā%}), f.
skin; [cf. {%guḍa-tvaca%} and {%tanu-tvacā.%}] {%—Tvacā-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. {%= tvak-pattra,%} Cassia bark.
<LEND>

<L>21686<pc>0395-a<k1>tvacana<k2>tvacana
{%Tvacana, am,%}¦ n. covering with a skin or hide;
skinning.
<LEND>

<L>21687<pc>0395-a<k1>tvacaya<k2>tvacaya
{%Tvacaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%tvacayati,%} &c., to cover with a
skin or hide; to tear off the skin, to skin.
<LEND>

<L>21688<pc>0395-a<k1>tvacasya<k2>tvacasya
{%Tvacasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in the skin.
<LEND>

<L>21689<pc>0395-a<k1>tvacizWa<k2>tvacizWa
{%Tvaciṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%tvag-vat,%} Pāṇ.
V. 3, 65), having the best skin, having an excellent
skin; bark &c.
<LEND>

<L>21690<pc>0395-a<k1>tvacisAra<k2>tvacisAra
{%Tvaci-sāra.%}¦ See under 2. {%tvac%} above.
<LEND>

<L>21691<pc>0395-a<k1>tvacIyas<k2>tvacIyas
{%Tvacīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%tvag-vat,%} Pāṇ.
V. 3, 65), having a more excellent or an excellent
skin; bark &c.; [cf. {%tvaciṣṭha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21692<pc>0395-a<k1>tvacya<k2>tvacya
{%Tvacya, as, ā, am,%}¦ conducive to the healthiness
of the skin.
<LEND>

<L>21693<pc>0395-a<k1>tvAca<k2>tvAca
{%Tvāca, as, ī, am,%}¦ cuticular, relating to the skin,
[Page0395-b+ 76]
contagious, derived from touch. {%—Tvāca-pratya-%}
{%kṣa, am,%} n. ascertainment of objects by contact.
<LEND>

<L>21694<pc>0395-b<k1>tvaYc<k2>tvaYc
{#tvaYc#}¦ {%tvañc = tañc,%} cl. 1. P. {%tvañcati,%} &c.,
to go, move; cl. 7. P. {%tvanakti,%} &c., to
contract.
<LEND>

<L>21695<pc>0395-b<k1>tvat<k2>tvat
{#tvat#}¦ {%tvat%} or (according to the proper form
of the base) {%tvad.%} See 1. {%tva,%} p. 394.
<LEND>

<L>21696<pc>0395-b<k1>tvar<k2>tvar
{#tvar#}¦ {%tvar,%} cl. 1. A. {%tvarate%} (ep. also P.
{%tvarati%}), {%tatvare, tvaritum,%} to hurry, make
haste, go or move with speed, do anything quickly or
precipitately: Caus. {%tvarayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%atatva-%}
{%rat,%} to cause to hasten, quicken, urge forward,
accelerate: Desid. {%titvariṣati:%} Intens. {%tātvaryate,%}
{%totūrti;%} [cf. {%tur, tṝ:%} Gr. <lang n="greek">θόρνυμι, θοῦρος, θρύσκω;</lang>
perhaps <lang n="greek">ἀ-θύρω, τύρβη, θόρυβος:</lang> Lat. <nsi>turba:</nsi> per-
haps Angl. Sax. <nsi>a-thwerian,</nsi> ‘to move, shake:’ Hib.
<nsi>tuairim,</nsi> ‘to go round, move in a circle.’]
<LEND>

<L>21697<pc>0395-b<k1>tUrRa<k2>tUrRa
{%Tūrṇa = tvarita.%}¦ See p. 381, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>21698<pc>0395-b<k1>tvaraRa<k2>tvaraRa
{%Tvaraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ making haste; ({%am%}), n.
making haste, speed, velocity.
<LEND>

<L>21699<pc>0395-b<k1>tvaraRIya<k2>tvaraRIya
{%Tvaraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be hastened or acce-
lerated.
<LEND>

<L>21700<pc>0395-b<k1>tvarA<k2>tvarA
{%Tvarā,%}¦ f. haste, speed, velocity. {%—Tvarānvita%}
{%(˚rā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} possessed of haste, swift, quick.
{%—Tvarā-yukta, as, ā, am,%} hasty, impetuous, quick,
expeditious. {%—Tvarāroha (˚rā-ār˚), as,%} m. a pigeon
(‘ascending quickly’). {%—Tvarā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
quick, expeditious.
<LEND>

<L>21701<pc>0395-b<k1>tvarAyasya<k2>tvarAyasya
{%Tvarāyasya,%}¦ nom. P. {%tvarāyasyati,%} &c., to make
haste.
<LEND>

<L>21702<pc>0395-b<k1>tvari<k2>tvari
{%Tvari, is,%}¦ f. haste, speed.
<LEND>

<L>21703<pc>0395-b<k1>tvarita<k2>tvarita
{%Tvarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ hastening, quick, swift,
speedy, expeditious; ({%am%}), n. despatch, haste;
({%am%}), ind. quickly, swiftly; hastily, in haste, fast,
speedily; ({%ā%}), f. a form of Durgā; a magical formula
called after her. {%—Tvarita-gati, is,%} f. swift motion;
a species of the Paṅkti metre. {%—Tvarita-prayoga,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the Tantra-sāra. {%—Tvaritā-%}
{%mantra, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the Śāradā-
tilaka. {%—Tvaritā-yantra, am,%} n., N. of a mystical
diagram. {%—Tvaritodita (˚ta-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} spoken
quickly, uttered rapidly, hurried.
<LEND>

<L>21704<pc>0395-b<k1>tvaritaka<k2>tvaritaka
{%Tvaritaka, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a sort of rice ripening
before the usual time.
<LEND>

<L>21705<pc>0395-b<k1>tvarAyaRa<k2>tvarAyaRa
{#tvarAyaRa#}¦ {%tvarāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. (a
various reading for {%parāyaṇa%}), adherence, attach-
ment; (according to some only {%am,%} n.)
<LEND>

<L>21706<pc>0395-b<k1>tvazwa<k2>tvazwa
{#tvazwa#}¦ {%tvaṣṭa, tvaṣṭṛ,%} &c. See under rt.
{%tvakṣ,%} p. 394.
<LEND>

<L>21707<pc>0395-b<k1>tvAca<k2>tvAca
{#tvAca#}¦ {%tvāca.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>21708<pc>0395-b<k1>tvAdfS<k2>tvAdfS
{#tvAdfS#}¦ {%tvā-dṛś.%} See 1. {%tva,%} p. 394.
<LEND>

<L>21709<pc>0395-b<k1>tvAyat<k2>tvAyat
{#tvAyat#}¦ {%tvāyat.%} See under 1. {%tva,%} p. 394.
<LEND>

<L>21710<pc>0395-b<k1>tviz<k2>tviz<h>1
{#tviz#} 1¦. {%tviṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%tveṣati, -te,%}
{%titveṣa, titviṣe%} (part. {%titviṣāṇa%}),
{%tvekṣyati, -te, atvikṣat, atvikṣata%} (Ved. forms
{%atviṣus, atviṣanta, atitviṣanta%}), {%tveṣṭum,%}
Ved. inf. {%tviṣe,%} to be violently agitated or moved;
to be excited; to be troubled or perplexed; to ex-
cite, instigate; to shine, glitter, sparkle; to be
brilliant, to blaze: Caus. {%tveṣayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%atitviṣat:%} Desid. {%titvikṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%tetvi-%}
{%ṣyate, tetveṣṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>21711<pc>0395-b<k1>tviz<k2>tviz<h>2
2. {%tviṣ, ṭ,%}¦ f. violent agitation or quivering motion
of any kind, vehemence, violence, fury, perplexity;
light, brilliance, glitter, any shining colour, splendor,
beauty; authority, weight, consideration; speech;
wish, desire; custom, practice, usage; [cf. {%acala-t˚%}
and {%vāta-t˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21712<pc>0395-b<k1>tvizA<k2>tvizA
{%Tviṣā,%}¦ f. light, splendor; N. of a daughter of
Kaśyapa. {%—Tviṣām-īśa, as,%} or {%tviṣām-pati, is,%}
m. ‘the lord of rays,’ the sun.
<LEND>

<L>21713<pc>0395-b<k1>tvizi<k2>tvizi
{%Tviṣi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. vehemence, impetuousity,
energy, internal power; (Sāy.) splendor, light, ray,
brilliancy, beauty. {%—Tviṣi-mat%} and (Ved.) {%tviṣī-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} vehemently excited, vehement,
energetic; brilliant, beautiful, N. of Rudra.
<LEND>
[Page0395-c+ 70]

<L>21714<pc>0395-c<k1>tveza<k2>tveza
{%Tveṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. vehement, impetuous;
inspiring awe, causing fear, awful; (Sāy.) brilliant,
bright, glittering, epithet of Rudra and the Maruts,
shining. {%—Tveṣa-dyumna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
vehement energy, impetuous; (Sāy.) possessed of
brilliant reputation. {%—Tveṣa-nṛmṇa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having impetuous energy or courage; (Sāy.)
of brilliant power. {%—Tveṣa-pratīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having a brilliant appearance, having an awful aspect,
having the aspect of great power; (Sāy.) bright-
pointed (as a shaft). {%—Tveṣa-yāma, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. impetuous in course, rushing impetuously;
(Sāy.) ‘having a brilliant course,’ epithet of the
Maruts. {%—Tveṣa-ratha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
rushing chariots; (Sāy.) having brilliant chariots.
{%—Tveṣa-sandṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. of a splendid
aspect, similar to flame; ‘looking awful,’ epithet of
the Maruts, of Indra, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21715<pc>0395-c<k1>tvezaTa<k2>tvezaTa
{%Tveṣatha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. fury, violence; (Sāy.)
radiance.
<LEND>

<L>21716<pc>0395-c<k1>tvezas<k2>tvezas
{%Tveṣas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. force, energy, impulse;
(Sāy.) brilliant energy.
<LEND>

<L>21717<pc>0395-c<k1>tvezya<k2>tvezya
{%Tveṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitating, terrifying, awful,
inspiring awe, any terrible object; (Sāy.) shining,
brilliant, epithet of Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>21718<pc>0395-c<k1>tvEzIraTi<k2>tvEzIraTi
{%Tvaiṣīrathi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Kuśika.
<LEND>

<L>21719<pc>0395-c<k1>tvota<k2>tvota
{#tvota#}¦ {%tvota, tvoti.%} See 1. {%tva,%} p. 394.
<LEND>

<L>21720<pc>0395-c<k1>tsar<k2>tsar
{#tsar#}¦ {%tsar,%} cl. 1. P. {%tsarati, tatsāra, tsari-%}
{%ṣyati, atsārīt%} and {%atsār, tsaritum,%} Ved.
to go or approach stealthily, to creep, crawl, creep
on, steal upon, sneak, to obtain by sneaking; to
proceed crookedly or fraudulently.
<LEND>

<L>21721<pc>0395-c<k1>tsaru<k2>tsaru
{%Tsaru, us,%}¦ m. any creeping or crawling animal or
a particular animal of this kind; the stalk of a leaf
&c.; the hilt or handle of a sword and similar
weapons. {%—Tsaru-mārga, as,%} m. sword-exercise,
sword-fight.
<LEND>

<L>21722<pc>0395-c<k1>tsArin<k2>tsArin
{%Tsārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. creeping, sneaking, ap-
proaching stealthily or secretly; crooked; (Sāy.)
very fearful, very much alarmed.
<LEND>

<L>21723<pc>0395-c<k1>tsAruka<k2>tsAruka
{%Tsāruka, as, ā, am,%}¦ skilful in handling a sword,
skilled in sword-exercise.
<LEND>
<H>{#Ta#}

<L>21724<pc>0395-c<k1>Ta<k2>Ta<h>1
{#Ta#} 1¦. {%tha,%} the second consonant of the
dental class and the aspirate of the preceding letter,
having much the sound of {%th%} in {%ant-hill,%} but more
dental. {%—Tha-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%th.%}
<LEND>

<L>21725<pc>0395-c<k1>Ta<k2>Ta<h>2
2. {%tha, as,%}¦ m. a mountain; a protector, preserver;
a sign of danger; a kind of disease; eating; ({%am%}),
n. preserving, preservation; fear, terror; auspicious-
ness; a prayer for the welfare of another.
<LEND>

<L>21726<pc>0395-c<k1>Takkana<k2>Takkana
{#Takkana#}¦ {%thakkana, as,%} m., N. of a man;
(also read {%ḍhakkana%} and {%ḍhakkama.%})
<LEND>

<L>21727<pc>0395-c<k1>Takkiyaka<k2>Takkiyaka
{#Takkiyaka#}¦ {%thakkiyaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21728<pc>0395-c<k1>Takriya<k2>Takriya
{#Takriya#}¦ {%thakriya, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21729<pc>0395-c<k1>Tarv<k2>Tarv
{#Tarv#}¦ {%tharv%} (said to be = rt. {%car%}), cl. 1. P.
{%tharvati,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>21730<pc>0395-c<k1>Talyoraka<k2>Talyoraka
{#Talyoraka#}¦ {%thalyoraka, as,%} m., N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>21731<pc>0395-c<k1>Tuq<k2>Tuq
{#Tuq#}¦ {%thuḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%thuḍati,%} &c., to cover,
screen; to clothe; to hide; [cf. rt. {%sthuḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21732<pc>0395-c<k1>Toqana<k2>Toqana
{%Thoḍana, am,%}¦ n. covering, clothing, wrapping up.
<LEND>

<L>21733<pc>0395-c<k1>TutkAra<k2>TutkAra
{#TutkAra#}¦ {%thut-kāra, as,%} m. the making of
the sound {%thut,%} the sound made in spitting.
<LEND>

<L>21734<pc>0395-c<k1>TutTu<k2>TutTu
{#TutTu#}¦ {%thutthu%} (an onomatopoetic word),
the sound heard in eating.
<LEND>

<L>21735<pc>0395-c<k1>TuTukft<k2>TuTukft
{%Thuthu-kṛt, t,%}¦ m. the making the imitative
sound {%thuthu;%} a kind of bird (= Marāṭhī {%holā%}).
<LEND>

<L>21736<pc>0395-c<k1>Turv<k2>Turv
{#Turv#}¦ {%thurv,%} cl. 1. P. {%thūrvati, tuthūrva,%}
&c., to hurt, injure; [cf. rt. {%turv.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21737<pc>0395-c<k1>TUtkAra<k2>TUtkAra
{#TUtkAra#}¦ {%thūt-kāra, as,%} m. the making of
[Page0396-a+ 73]
the sound {%thūt,%} the sound made in spitting; [cf.
{%thut-kāra.%}] {%—Thūt-kṛta, am,%} n. the sound {%thūt%}
made in spitting.
<LEND>

<L>21738<pc>0396-a<k1>TUTU<k2>TUTU
{#TUTU#}¦ {%thūthū,%} imitative sound of spitting;
(according to others {%thuthu.%})
<LEND>

<L>21739<pc>0396-a<k1>TETE<k2>TETE
{#TETE#}¦ {%thaithai,%} imitative sound of a musical
instrument.
<LEND>
<H>{#da#}

<L>21740<pc>0396-a<k1>da<k2>da<h>1
{#da#} 1¦. {%da,%} the eighteenth consonant of the
alphabet and the third letter of the fourth or dental
class, the sound of which is more dental than the
English {%d%}. {%—Da-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%d.%}
<LEND>

<L>21741<pc>0396-a<k1>da<k2>da<h>2
{#da#} 2¦. {%da, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dā,%} to give),
giving, a giver, donor; presenting, favouring with,
granting, a granter; causing, (often at the end of
comp., e. g. {%vāri-da,%} giving water; {%anna-da,%}
granting food &c.; exceptionally compounded with
the receiver of the gift, e. g. {%pitṛ-da,%} giving to the
father); ({%as%}), m. a gift, anything given; ({%am, ā%}),
n. f. a gift, donation.
<LEND>

<L>21742<pc>0396-a<k1>da<k2>da<h>3
{#da#} 3¦. {%da, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%dā%} for {%do,%} to
cut), cutting off, destroying, breaking, &c., (generally
at the end of comp.); ({%as, ā%}), m. f. the act of cutting
off, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>21743<pc>0396-a<k1>da<k2>da<h>4
{#da#} 4¦. {%da, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 4. {%dā,%} to bind),
binding, (generally at the end of comp.; cf. {%ṛśya-%}
{%da.%})
<LEND>

<L>21744<pc>0396-a<k1>da<k2>da<h>5
{#da#} 5¦. {%da, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 7. {%dā,%} to purify),
cleaning, cleansing.
<LEND>

<L>21745<pc>0396-a<k1>da<k2>da<h>6
{#da#} 6¦. {%da, as,%} m. a mountain; ({%ā%}), f. heat,
pain, repentance; ({%am%}), n. a wife; [cf. {%dam-patī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21746<pc>0396-a<k1>daMS<k2>daMS<h>1
{#daMS#} 1¦. {%daṃś,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%daṃśati, daṃśa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to speak or shine.
<LEND>

<L>21747<pc>0396-a<k1>daMS<k2>daMS<h>2
{#daMS#} 2¦. {%daṃś,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%da-%}
{%śati, -te, dadaṃśa, daṅkṣyati%} (ep. also
{%daṃśiṣyati%}), {%adāṅkṣīt, daṃṣṭum,%} to bite, sting;
to see [? cf. rt. {%daṃs%}]: Caus. P. {%daṃśayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%adadaṅkṣat,%} to cause to bite; to bite: Desid.
{%didaṅkṣati:%} Intens. {%dandaśyate, dandaṃṣṭi,%}
{%dandaṣṭi:%} Caus. of Intens. {%dandaśayati,%} to cause
to bite violently; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δάκνω, δάκος, ὀδαγμός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὀδάζω, ὀδακτάζω, ὀδαξέω,</lang> &c., <lang n="greek">δάκρυ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>la-</nsi>
<nsi>cruma,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>lacero;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>tahyan,</nsi> ‘dilacerate,’
<nsi>tagr;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>taeher, tux, tusk, tang;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>zanga, zangar;</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>danhezu,</nsi> ‘to bite;’
Hib. <nsi>dan-t,</nsi> ‘a morsel, portion, share;’ Russ. <nsi>desnà,</nsi>
‘ginger.’]
<LEND>

<L>21748<pc>0396-a<k1>daMSa<k2>daMSa
{%Daṃśa, as,%}¦ m. biting, stinging; cutting, dividing,
tearing; the sting of a snake; a bite, the spot bitten;
pungency; fault, defect (in a jewel &c.); a tooth; a
gad-fly; armour, a coat of mail; a joint, limb; N. of
an Asura; ({%ī%}), f. a small gad-fly; [cf. {%kṣamā-d˚%} and {%vṛ-%}
{%ṣa-d˚.%}] {%—Daṃśa-nāśinī,%} f. (‘healing irritation of the
skin ?’), a kind of insect, {%= taila-kīṭa;%} [cf. {%dardru-%}
{%nāśinī.%}] {%—Daṃśa-bhīru, us,%} m. or {%daṃśa-bhīruka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘afraid of the gad-fly,’ a buffalo. {%—Daṃśa-mūla,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having a pungent root,’ the plant Hyperanthera
Moringa or a sort of horse-radish, {%= śigru%}. {%—Daṃśa-%}
{%vadana, as,%} m. ‘having a sharp beak,’ a heron.
<LEND>

<L>21749<pc>0396-a<k1>daMSaka<k2>daMSaka
{%Daṃśaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} biting, stinging;
({%as%}), m. a dog; gad-fly, common fly; N. of a
prince of Kampana; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of gad-fly.
<LEND>

<L>21750<pc>0396-a<k1>daMSana<k2>daMSana
{%Daṃśana, am,%}¦ n. the act of biting, stinging;
armour, mail.
<LEND>

<L>21751<pc>0396-a<k1>daMSita<k2>daMSita
{%Daṃśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bitten, stung; (fr. {%daṃśa%}),
armed, mailed; protected; fitting closely (like armour),
standing closely together, crowded; ({%am%}), n. a bite;
[cf. {%pari-daṃśita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21752<pc>0396-a<k1>daMSin<k2>daMSin
{%Daṃśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ biting, stinging [cf. {%tṛpra-%}
{%daṃśin%}]; ({%ī%}), m. a dog; a gad-fly, a wasp.
<LEND>

<L>21753<pc>0396-a<k1>daMSuka<k2>daMSuka
{%Daṃśuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. biting, stinging.
<LEND>

<L>21754<pc>0396-a<k1>daMSera<k2>daMSera
{%Daṃśera, as, ā, am%}¦ (more correctly {%daśera,%}
q. v.), biting, mordacious; noxious, mischievous.
<LEND>
[Page0396-b+ 77]

<L>21755<pc>0396-b<k1>daMSman<k2>daMSman
{%Daṃśman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. a bite; the place bitten.
<LEND>

<L>21756<pc>0396-b<k1>daMzwf<k2>daMzwf
{%Daṃṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ Ved. a biter, biting, stinging.
<LEND>

<L>21757<pc>0396-b<k1>daMzwra<k2>daMzwra
{%Daṃṣṭra, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. (in the later language
usually f.), a large tooth, tusk, fang, (often at the
end of comp.; cf. {%ayo-d˚, aṣṭa-d˚, tīkṣṇa-d˚,%}
&c.) {%—Daṃṣṭrā-karāla, as, ā, am,%} having terrible
tusks. {%—Daṃṣṭrā-nivāsin, ī,%} m., N. of a Yakṣas.
{%—Daṃṣṭrāyudha (˚rā-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} using
tusks as weapons; ({%as%}), m. a wild boar. {%—Daṃṣ-%}
{%ṭrā-sena, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist scholar.
<LEND>

<L>21758<pc>0396-b<k1>daMzwrAla<k2>daMzwrAla
{%Daṃṣṭrāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ tusked, having large
tusks; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>21759<pc>0396-b<k1>daMzwrika<k2>daMzwrika
{%Daṃṣṭrika, as, ā, am,%}¦ tusked, having tusks;
({%ā%}), f. {%= dāḍhikā,%} a beard (?); a kind of plant; [cf.
{%nakuleṣṭā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21760<pc>0396-b<k1>daMzwrin<k2>daMzwrin
{%Daṃṣṭrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ tusked, having tusks or
large teeth; biting or wounding with the teeth;
carnivorous; ({%ī%}), m. any animal with tusks; a wild
boar; a hyena; a snake.
<LEND>

<L>21761<pc>0396-b<k1>daMzwvA<k2>daMzwvA
{%Daṃṣṭvā,%}¦ ind. having bitten.
<LEND>

<L>21762<pc>0396-b<k1>dazwa<k2>dazwa
{%Daṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ bitten, &c. See p. 406, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>21763<pc>0396-b<k1>daMs<k2>daMs
{#daMs#}¦ {%daṃs%} (connected with rt. {%das,%} q. v.;
perhaps only a various reading for rt. 1. and
2. {%daṃś,%} col. 1, or a Prākṛt form of rt. 1. {%dṛś%}), cl.
1. P. 10. A. {%daṃsati, daṃsayate%} or {%dāsayate,%} &c.,
to bite; to destroy, overpower; to see, ({%daṃsati ?%});
cl. 10. P. {%daṃsayati,%} &c., to speak or to shine.
<LEND>

<L>21764<pc>0396-b<k1>daMsana<k2>daMsana
{%Daṃsana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. (Ved. inst. {%daṃsanā%}),
a surprising or wonderful deed or operation, mar-
vellous power; an action, work, deed; armour,
mail, (in the latter meaning only a various reading
for {%daṃśana%}); [cf. {%dasma%} and {%dasra.%}] {%—Daṃ-%}
{%sanā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having wonderful power;
(Sāy.) abounding in marvellous deeds.
<LEND>

<L>21765<pc>0396-b<k1>daMsayitf<k2>daMsayitf
{%Daṃsayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a destroyer, (a word formed
to explain {%dasra.%})
<LEND>

<L>21766<pc>0396-b<k1>daMsas<k2>daMsas
{%Daṃsas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. {%= daṃsana,%} a surprising
action or deed (applied especially to the wonderful
actions of the Aśvins, by which these deities pro-
tected their human friends); [cf. {%puru-d˚%} and {%su-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21767<pc>0396-b<k1>daMsi<k2>daMsi
{%Daṃsi, is,%}¦ m. f. (?), Ved. {%= karman,%} act, deed.
<LEND>

<L>21768<pc>0396-b<k1>daMsizWa<k2>daMsizWa
{%Daṃsiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%daṃsu%} or {%da-%}
{%sra%}), Ved. of very wonderful strength, performing
marvellous deeds, eminent in action, epithet of the
Aśvins and of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>21769<pc>0396-b<k1>daMsu<k2>daMsu
{%Daṃsu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. of wonderful strength;
(according to Sāy., loc. of {%dam = daṃseṣu%} or {%kar-%}
{%ma-vatsu%}); ({%u%}), ind. in a wonderful way, wonder-
fully. {%—Daṃsu-jūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. wonderfully
quick; (Sāy.) borne along by well-trained horses (as
if fr. rt. 1. {%dam%}). {%—Daṃsu-patnī,%} f., Ved. having a
powerful lord or master; (Sāy.) having the Asuras
as good masters (as if fr. {%dam + su + patnī, su =%}
{%suṣṭhu%}); in Ṛg-veda VI. 3, 7, {%dam%} is regarded
as a separate word.
<LEND>

<L>21770<pc>0396-b<k1>daMh<k2>daMh
{#daMh#}¦ {%daṃh,%} cl. 10. P. {%daṃhayati,%} &c., to
shine, burn; [cf. rt. 1. {%dah.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21771<pc>0396-b<k1>daka<k2>daka
{#daka#}¦ {%daka, am,%} n. {%= udaka%} (the initial vowel
being dropped), water. {%—Daka-lāvaṇika, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%daka+lavaṇa%}), prepared with water and salt.
{%—Dakodara (˚ka-ud˚), am,%} n. (instead of {%uda-%}
{%kodara,%} cf. {%udakodarin%}), a watery or dropsical belly.
<LEND>

<L>21772<pc>0396-b<k1>dakz<k2>dakz
{#dakz#}¦ {%dakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%dakṣati, -te,%}
{%dadakṣa, dakṣitum,%} Ved. to act to the
satisfaction of another (with dat. in P.); to be
competent, be able, be strong or powerful (A.); to
grow, increase; to do or act quickly, go, move;
to hurt, kill: Caus. P. {%dakṣayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%adadakṣat,%} to make able or strong.
<LEND>

<L>21773<pc>0396-b<k1>dakza<k2>dakza
{%Dakṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ able, fit, competent, suitable,
adroit, expert, clever, judicious, dexterous [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">δεξιός</lang>]; intelligent, upright, honest; ({%as%}), m. epi-
thet of Soma (as heightening or strengthening the
intellectual faculties; according to Sāy. {%= vṛddha%});
epithet of Śiva; epithet of the Ganges (as satisfying
or suiting all); ability, power, fitness; capacity,
intellectual ability, mental power, talent; strength of
[Page0396-c+ 81]
will, energy, will, disposition; (in the Veda {%dakṣa%}
and {%kratu,%} i. e. energy and intelligence, are often
joined together as the chief two faculties of the
mind, cf. {%kratu%}); bad disposition, evil design; N.
of an Āditya; a creative power associated with
Aditi, and therefore sometimes identified with Prajā-
pati; (his daughter is called Kṛttikā: in the Post-
vedic literature Dakṣa is the subject of numerous
legends, which relate his history differently; he is
there generally called the son of Brahmā, and placed
among the Prajā-patis or at their head as ‘the lord
of all creatures,’ being born from Brahmā's right
thumb, as his wife was from the left, see Manu IX.
128: in other legends he is said to be the son of
the ten Pra-cetasas or of Pra-cetas alone, whence his
patronymic Prācetasa; he is variously stated to have
had fifty, sixty, forty-four, and a less number of
daughters, of whom twenty-seven became the wives
of the Moon, forming the lunar asterisms, and thir-
teen or, according to others, seventeen or only eight
the wives of Kaśyapa, becoming by this latter the
mothers of gods, demons, men, and animals: Dakṣa
on one occasion celebrated a great sacrifice to obtain
a son, but omitted to invite Śiva who, according to
one legend, was his son-in-law, (Śiva's wife being Satī,
a form of Durgā, daughter of Dakṣa); this irritated
the god, who interrupted the sacrifice and decapitated
his father-in-law, see {%dakṣādhvara-dhvaṃśa-kṛt:%}
Dakṣa is sometimes regarded as an Avatār of
Brahmā himself, and is even in one legend identified
with Viṣṇu); N. of a son of Garuḍa; N. of a man
with the patronymic Pārvati; of a Muni and legis-
lator; of a prince or a son of Uśīnara; of one of the
five Brāhmans of Kānya-kubja, from whom the
Brāhmans of Bengal are said to have sprung; (ac-
cording to the lexicographers also) the bull of Śiva;
a cock; a kind of plant; a name of Agni or fire;
a general lover, one attached to many mistresses; ({%ā%}),
f. the earth; [cf. {%atūrta-dakṣa, dīna-d˚,%} &c.: cf. also
{%dakṣiṇa;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">δεξιός, δεξιτερός;</lang> Lat. <nsi>dex-ter, dex-</nsi>
<nsi>timus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>taihsvs;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>teso;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>zeso;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>deas,</nsi> ‘right, southern.’] {%—Dakṣa-kanyā,%}
f. ‘daughter of Dakṣa,’ (especially) epithet of Durgā,
the wife of Śiva. {%—Dakṣa-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
having a strong will or intelligence, having a clear
understanding. {%—Dakṣa-jā,%} f. ‘daughter of Dakṣa,’
the goddess Durgā; a lunar asterism; [cf. {%dakṣa.%}]
{%—Dakṣajā-pati, is,%} m. ‘the husband of the
daughters of Dakṣa,’ an epithet of the Moon; also
of Śiva. {%—Dakṣa-tā,%} f. or {%dakṣa-tva, am,%} n.
dexterity, cleverness, ability. {%—Dakṣa-tāti, is,%} f.,
Ved. mental power or capacity. {%—Dakṣa-nidhana,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Dakṣa-pati, is,%} m., Ved.
lord of the faculties, lord of power or might; pro-
tector of the sacrifice. {%—Dakṣa-pitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}
Ved. having Dakṣa as father or progenitor, (the m.
pl. may be either {%dakṣa-pitaras%} or {%-pitāras%}); pre-
serving, possessing or granting abilities. {%—Dakṣa-%}
{%makha-mathana, am,%} n. ‘destruction of Dakṣa's
sacrifice,’ N. of the ninety-seventh and ninety-eighth
chapters of the Liṅga-Purāṇa. {%—Dakṣa-yajña, as,%}
m. the sacrifice celebrated by Dakṣa. {%—Dakṣa-%}
{%yajña-bhaṅga, as,%} m. the interruption of Dakṣa's
sacrifice. {%—Dakṣayajña-vidhvaṃsa, as,%} m. ‘de-
struction of Dakṣa's sacrifice,’ N. of the fifteenth
chapter of the Kūrma-Purāṇa. {%—Dakṣayajña-vi-%}
{%dhvaṃsana, am,%} n., N. of the fifth chapter of the
Śṛṣṭi-khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Dakṣaya-%}
{%jña-vināśinī,%} f. ‘destroyer of the sacrifice of Dakṣa,’
an epithet of Durgā. {%—Dakṣa-vihitā,%} f. (scil. {%gā-%}
{%thā%}), a hymn or song arranged by Dakṣa. {%—Da-%}
{%kṣa-vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. rejoicing in power or
energy &c. {%—Dakṣa-śāpa, as,%} m. ‘the curse of
Dakṣa,’ N. of the thirty-third chapter of the
Svarga-khaṇḍa or third part of the Padma-Purāṇa.
{%—Dakṣa-sādhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. effective
of energy, inspiring courage. {%—Dakṣa-sāvarṇi,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of the ninth Manu. {%—Dakṣa-suta,%}
{%as,%} m. the son of Dakṣa (?); ({%ā%}), f. a daughter
of Dakṣa, a lunar asterism or one of the wives
of the Moon. {%—Dakṣādhvara-dhvaṃśa-kṛt %}
[Page0397-a+ 81]
{%(˚kṣa-adh˚), t,%} m. ‘disturber of the sacrifice of
Dakṣa,’ a N. of Śiva; (Dakṣa having instituted
a sacrifice to which he invited all the gods except
his son-in-law Śiva and his wife Satī, the latter went
unbid, and being received contemptuously, threw
herself into the fire; upon which an emanation or
incarnation of Śiva was produced, named Vīra-bha-
dra, who attacked Dakṣa, and a general affray
ensued in which the gods and Ṛṣis took the part
of Dakṣa, but were wounded and dispersed: Dakṣa
himself was decapitated, but was restored to life by
Śiva at the prayer of the gods; the decapitated head,
however, was not to be found, and the head of a ram
had therefore to be substituted for the one lost.) {%—Da-%}
{%kṣeśvara-liṅga (˚kṣa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>21774<pc>0397-a<k1>dakzas<k2>dakzas
{%Dakṣas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. {%= dakṣa,%} able, strong,
dexterous, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21775<pc>0397-a<k1>dakzAyya<k2>dakzAyya
{%Dakṣāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be satisfied or
pleased; (Sāy.) increaser of all; to be honoured, to
be augmented (by oblations); ({%as%}), m. a vulture;
an epithet of Garuḍa or the bird of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>21776<pc>0397-a<k1>dakziRa<k2>dakziRa
{%Dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (according to Pāṇ. I. 1,
34, and VII. 1, 16, can only be declined as a
pronominal when it denotes relative position, i. e.
‘situated on the right hand’ or ‘southern,’ and
even in this sense can be optionally declined like
{%śiva%} in abl. loc. sing. m. n. and nom. voc. pl. m.;
but {%dakṣiṇāyāṃ diśi,%} for the loc. f. in Hari-vaṃśa
12390, is against the rule), able, competent, clever,
skilful, dexterous [cf. {%dakṣa%}]; right (not left;
probably applied to the right hand, foot, &c., as the
cleverest or most skilful), situated on the right side,
(opposed to {%savya, vāma; dakṣiṇam parī,%} to
walk round a person with the right side towards
him; {%dakṣiṇaṃ kṛ,%} to place on the right side,
to turn the right side towards a person as a mark of
respect); south, southern (as being on the right side
of a person looking towards the east), situated to
the south, turned or directed southward, ({%dakṣiṇā%}
{%diś,%} the south, the southern quarter or point of the
compass; {%dakṣiṇasyāṃ diśi,%} in the southern
quarter; {%dakṣiṇa āmnāyas,%} the southern sacred
text, one of the holy texts of the Tāntrikas); straight-
forward, candid, sincere, upright, honest, impartial;
pleasing, amiable, compliant; submissive, dependent,
subject; ({%as%}), m. the right (hand or arm); the
right hand horse, the horse on the right side of the
pole of a carriage; an epithet of Śiva; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. the right side; {%savyaṃ dakṣiṇam eva ca,%}
to the left and to the right; the south, the country
of the south, the Dekhan; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%go,%} a prolific
cow, ‘able to calve and give milk,’ a good milch-
cow; a present to Brāhmans or young virgins (con-
sisting originally of a cow, and given upon solemn
or sacrificial occasions); property so acquired [cf.
Manu VIII. 349]; Donation to Brāhmans personified
as a goddess, (generally mentioned together with
Brahmaṇas-pati, Soma, Indra, &c., and said to be
the authoress of Ṛg-veda X. 107; sometimes re-
garded as a daughter of Prajā-pati, or as the wife of
Sacrifice personified, or as born from Kṛṣṇa's right
side, or as the wife of Ruci); wages or remunera-
tion in general; a fee, gift, donation (e. g. {%prāṇa-%}
{%dakṣiṇā,%} the gift of life); offering, oblation in
general; completion of any rite, fixing or establish-
ing any act or place; scil. {%diś,%} the south; the
southern quarter, the southern point of the compass,
the Dekhan; a form or figure of Durgā, in which
the right side is said to be advanced; ({%am%}), n. the
right hand or highest doctrine of the Śāktas; {%da-%}
{%kṣiṇā%} or {%dakṣiṇena,%} ind. on the right, on the
right side of (with acc. and gen.); on the south,
southward; {%dakṣiṇena kṛ,%} to place on the right,
to leave on the right; {%dakṣiṇāt,%} ind. on the
right, from the south, southward; {%dakṣiṇe,%} ind.
on the right, on the south, southward; [cf. Lith.
<nsi>dészinê,</nsi> f. ‘the right hand,’ = perhaps Russ. <nsi>yug,</nsi>
‘south;’ <nsi>yuṣnyĭ,</nsi> ‘southern.’] {%—Dakṣiṇa-kālikā,%}
f. a form of Durgā worshipped by the Tāntrikas.
{%—Dakṣiṇa-tas,%} ind. from the right, to the right
hand; from the south, southward, southerly; {%da- %}
[Page0397-b+ 81]
{%kṣiṇataḥ kṛ,%} to turn the right side towards a
person (as a mark of respect); to stand on the
right side of any one and so assist him; {%dakṣiṇa-%}
{%taḥ purastāt%} or {%dakṣiṇataḥ puraḥ,%} to the south-
east, on the south-east. {%—Dakṣiṇatas-kaparda%} or
{%dakṣiṇā-kaparda, ās,%} m. pl., Ved. ‘wearing the
hair knotted or braided on the right side of the
head,’ epithet of the Vasiṣṭhas. {%—Dakṣiṇa-trā,%}
ind., Ved. on the right side. {%—Dakṣiṇa-tva, am,%}
n. uprightness, honesty. {%—Dakṣiṇa-dhurīṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} harnessed on the right side of the pole of a
carriage. {%—Dakṣiṇa-patha,%} a wrong reading for
{%dakṣiṇā-patha,%} q. v. {%—Dakṣiṇa-paścāt,%} ind. to
the south-west, on the south-west. {%—Dakṣiṇa-%}
{%paścārdha (˚ca-ar˚), as,%} m. the south-western side.
{%—Dakṣiṇa-paścima, as, ā, am,%} south-western.
{%—Dakṣiṇa-pāñcālaka, as, ikā, am,%} relating to
the southern Pañcālas. {%—Dakṣiṇa-pūrva, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} south-eastern; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%diś,%} the south-east
quarter; ({%eṇa%}), ind. to the south-east of (with acc.).
{%—Dakṣiṇa-prāñc, āṅ, ācī, āk,%} south-eastern; {%da-%}
{%kṣiṇa-prācī,%} f. the south-east quarter. {%—Dakṣiṇa-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. the southern hemisphere. {%—Dakṣi-%}
{%ṇa-mānasa,%} N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Dakṣi-%}
{%ṇa-māruta, as,%} m. the south wind. {%—Dakṣiṇa-%}
{%sad%} or {%dakṣiṇā-sad, t, t, t,%} sitting or remaining
seated on the right or southern side. {%—Dakṣiṇa-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} standing upon the right, to the
south, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a charioteer (as standing
on the right of his master; cf. {%savye-ṣṭha%}).
{%—Dakṣiṇā-kaparda,%} see {%dakṣiṇatas-kaparda.%}
{%—Dakṣiṇā-kāla, as,%} m. the time of (receiving)
the sacrificial gift or fee. {%—Dakṣiṇāgni (˚ṇa-ag˚),%}
{%is,%} m. the southern fire of the altar, a sacred fire
placed towards the south, (in the Brāhmaṇas generally
called Anvāhārya-pacana.) {%—Dakṣiṇāgra (˚ṇā-%}
{%agra), as, ā, am,%} pointing to the south, having
the head or point turned towards the south. {%—Da-%}
{%kṣiṇācala (˚ṇa-ac˚), as,%} m. the southern moun-
tain, the Malaya range. {%—Dakṣiṇācāra (˚ṇa-āc˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} honest or upright in conduct, well-
behaved; a worshipper of Śakti according to the
purer or right hand ritual. {%—Dakṣiṇācārin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} a worshipper of Śakti according to the purer or
right hand ritual; a follower of the right hand
Śākta system. {%—Dakṣiṇā-jyotis, is, is, is,%} Ved.
brilliant by the sacrificial gift. {%—Dakṣiṇāñc (˚ṇa-%}
{%añc), āṅ, ācī, āk,%} turned to the south, southward.
{%—Dakṣiṇātyaya (˚ṇa-at˚), as,%} m. one who
goes beyond the south, a dweller in the south.
{%—Dakṣiṇā-dvāra, as, ā, am,%} having the door
on the south. {%—Dakṣiṇāntikā (˚ṇa-an˚),%} f. a
kind of metre. {%—Dakṣiṇā-patha, as,%} m. the path
or road of the Dakṣiṇā, i. e. of the cow constituting
the sacrificial fee (situated between the Śālā and the
Sadas); the southern region or country, the De-
khan. {%—Dakṣiṇāpatha-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going to
the south, living in the south. {%—Dakṣiṇāpatha-jan-%}
{%man, ā,%} m. born in the south, a southern; ({%-janmā-%}
{%nas%}), m. pl., N. of the Andhakas, Guhas, Pulindas, Sava-
ras, Cucukas, and Madrapas, all outcast or barbarous
tribes. {%—Dakṣiṇā-pathika, as, ā, am,%} belonging
to the southern region. {%—Dakṣiṇāpara (˚ṇa-ap˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} south-western. {%—Dakṣiṇā-pravaṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} shelving or inclining to the south. {%—Da-%}
{%kṣiṇā-praṣṭi, is,%} m., Ved. the horse harnessed on
the right side of the yoke-horses ({%yugya%}); [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">δεξιόσειρος.</lang>] {%—Dakṣiṇā-bandha, as,%} m. (in the
Sāṅkhya phil.) N. of one of the three states of bondage,
the bondage of ritual observance; [cf. {%dākṣiṇa%} and
{%dākṣiṇika.%}] {%—Dakṣiṇābhimukha (˚ṇā-abh˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} facing southwards, directed southwards,
flowing southwards. {%—Dakṣiṇābhimukha-sthita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} standing with the face southwards. {%—Da-%}
{%kṣiṇā-mukha, as, ī, am,%} turning the face to the
right or to the south, facing south. {%—Dakṣiṇā-%}
{%mūrti, is,%} m. one of the forms of Śiva with the
Tāntrikas; N. of an author. {%—Dakṣiṇāmūrti-%}
{%prayoga, as,%}  m., N. of a chapter of the Tantra-
sāra. {%—Dakṣiṇāmūrti-mantra, as,%} m., N. of a
chapter of the Śāradātilaka by Lakṣmaṇa. {%—Da- %}
[Page0397-c+ 79]
{%kṣiṇāmūrti-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of a chapter of the
Tantra-sāra. {%—Dakṣiṇāmūrty-upaniṣad, t,%} f., N.
of an Upaniṣad. {%—Dakṣiṇāyana (˚ṇa-ay˚), am,%}
n. the sun's progress south of the equator, the winter's
solstice, the half-year in which the sun moves from
north to south; {%dakṣiṇāyanam anuyā,%} to follow
the southward way, to go to Yama's quarter, i. e. to
die; ({%as, ā, am%}), situated in the sun's course from
north to south (said of certain asterisms). {%—Da-%}
{%kṣiṇā-yugya, as,%} m. the right yoke-horse. {%—Da-%}
{%kṣiṇāraṇya (˚ṇa-ar˚), am,%} n. the southern forest,
N. of a particular forest (probably in the Dekhan).
{%—Dakṣiṇārus (˚ṇa-ar˚), us, us, us,%} wounded on
the right side. {%—Dakṣiṇārdha (˚ṇa-ar˚), as,%} m.
the right side, the southern side. {%—Dakṣiṇārdhya,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (fr. the preceding), Ved. situated on the
right, being on the southern side. {%—Dakṣiṇārha%}
{%(˚ṇā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} deserving a fee, meriting a
reward, worthy of a gift. {%—Dakṣiṇā-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at%} (fr. {%dakṣiṇa%} with lengthening of the final), Ved.
able, competent, strong, fit, effective; (fr. {%dakṣi-%}
{%ṇā%}), giving sacrificial presents, offering large remu-
neration, abounding in presents, possessed of a gift,
having ample rewards, piously disposed. {%—Dakṣiṇā-%}
{%varta (˚ṇā-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} turning to the right,
turned towards the south; {%dakṣiṇāvarta ādityas,%}
the sun in his course from the north to the south;
({%as%}), m. the southern country, the Dekhan, a conch-
shell with the valve opening to the right. {%—Dakṣi-%}
{%ṇāvartaka (˚ṇā-āv˚), as, ikā, am,%} turning to the
right, turned towards the south; ({%akī%}), f., N. of a
plant or shrub ({%= vṛści-kāli%}); a line of bees.
{%—Dakṣiṇā-vah, -vāṭ,%} Ved. ‘being borne to the right
or to the south of the (Āhavanīya) fire,’ epithet of the
sacrificial ladle. {%—Dakṣiṇāvṛt (˚ṇā-āv˚), t, t, t,%} Ved.
turned towards the right, going round on the right.
{%—Dakṣiṇāśā (˚ṇa-āśā),%} f. the southern quarter,
the south. {%—Dakṣiṇāśā-pati, is,%} m. ‘the lord of
the south,’ epithet of Yama. {%—Dakṣiṇāśā-rati, is,%}
m. (? {%rati%} for {%pati%}), an epithet of Agastya. {%—Da-%}
{%kṣiṇā-sad,%} see {%dakṣiṇa-sad%}. {%—Dakṣiṇetara%}
{%(˚ṇa-it˚),%} different from the right, other than the
right, the left. {%—Dakṣiṇerman%} ({%˚ṇa-īrman%} = 2.
{%īrma%}), {%ā, ā, a,%} wounded on the right side or right fore
leg (as a deer). (In any other sense this compound
takes the form {%dakṣiṇerma, as, ā, am,%} e. g. {%da-%}
{%kṣiṇermaṃ śakaṭam,%} a cart broken on the right
side.) {%—Dakṣiṇottara (˚ṇa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} situ-
ated on the right and left, lying to the south and
north, turned to the south and north. {%—Dakṣi-%}
{%ṇottara-vṛtta,%} the meridian line. {%—Dakṣiṇotta-%}
{%rin (˚ṇa-ut˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. being above on the
right side, overhanging on the right side.
<LEND>

<L>21777<pc>0397-c<k1>dakziRA<k2>dakziRA
{%Dakṣiṇā, dakṣiṇena, dakṣiṇe.%}¦ See col. 1,
under {%dakṣiṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>21778<pc>0397-c<k1>dakziRAhi<k2>dakziRAhi
{%Dakṣiṇāhi,%}¦ ind. far on the right, far in the
south (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>21779<pc>0397-c<k1>dakziRit<k2>dakziRit
{%Dakṣiṇit, t,%}¦ ind., Ved. on the right hand, to the
right; [cf. {%pra-dakṣiṇit.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21780<pc>0397-c<k1>dakziRIkf<k2>dakziRIkf
{%Dakṣiṇī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 5. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to place on the right hand, to turn the right
side towards any one (acc.), to walk round a person
with the right side turned towards him (as a mark
of respect). {%—Dakṣiṇī-kṛtya,%} ind. having walked
round in the above manner.
<LEND>

<L>21781<pc>0397-c<k1>dakziRIya<k2>dakziRIya
{%Dakṣiṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ worthy of the sacrificial
fee, meriting a reward, fit for a sacrificial donation,
worthy to be honoured with presents; [cf. {%ā-dakṣi-%}
{%ṇīya%} and {%dakṣiṇya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21782<pc>0397-c<k1>dakziRya<k2>dakziRya
{%Dakṣiṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= dakṣiṇīya,%} merit-
ing a sacrificial reward &c.; [cf. {%dākṣiṇya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21783<pc>0397-c<k1>dakzi<k2>dakzi
{#dakzi#}¦ {%dakṣi%} or {%dakṣin%} (fr. 1. {%dah%}), Ved.
burning, blazing; (according to Sāy. {%= dhakṣi%}),
thou burnest. (In Ṛg-veda I. 141, 8, {%dakṣi =%}
{%dahati.%})
<LEND>

<L>21784<pc>0397-c<k1>dakziRa<k2>dakziRa
{#dakziRa#}¦ {%dakṣiṇa.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>21785<pc>0397-c<k1>dagArgala<k2>dagArgala
{#dagArgala#}¦ {%dagārgala, am,%} n. (fr. {%da = uda%} +
2. {%ga + argala%}), examining the soil in searching for
wells or rules for doing so.
<LEND>
[Page0398-a+ 77]

<L>21786<pc>0398-a<k1>dagu<k2>dagu
{#dagu#}¦ {%dagu, us,%} m., N. of a man; [cf. {%dāga-%}
{%vyāyani.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21787<pc>0398-a<k1>dagDa<k2>dagDa
{#dagDa#}¦ {%dagdha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dah%}), burnt,
scorched, consumed by fire; (metaphorically) tor-
mented, tortured, pained, consumed by grief, dis-
tressed; burnt by the fire of the gastric juice (as the
stomach; cf. {%jaṭharāgni%}), famished; dry; tasteless,
insipid; inauspicious; cunning {%(= vi-dagdha); (ā),%}
f. the quarter where the sun remains overhead (?);
a lunar day or Tithi on which it is unlucky to do
anything and religious rites are prohibited; a species
of plant, {%= dagdhikā, dagdha-ruhā; (am),%} n.
burning, cauterizing (e. g. {%agni-dagdha,%} actual cau-
tery; {%kṣāra-dagdha,%} potential cautery, in surgery;
{%tvag-dagdha,%} cauterizing of the skin); a species of
fragrant grass, {%= rohiṣa%}. {%—Dagdha-kāka, as,%} m.
‘a black or inauspicious crow,’ a raven, or perhaps
the carrion crow. {%—Dagdha-tithi,%} N. of a chapter
of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dagdha-mandira-sāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has burned the best of mansions.
{%—Dagdha-maraṇa, as,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Dagdha-yoni, is, is, i,%} having its source or
origin destroyed. {%—Dagdha-ratha, as,%} m. {%= citra-%}
{%ratha,%} N. of the chief of the Gandharvas. {%—Dagdha-%}
{%ruha, as,%} m. ‘growing in ashes,’ N. of a tree, {%=%}
{%tilaka; (ā),%} f., N. of a plant, {%= dagdhā, dagdhikā,%}
{%bhasma-rohā,%} &c. {%—Dagdha-varṇaka,%} ‘black-
coloured (?),’ a species of grass, {%= dagdha, rohiṣa.%}
{%—Dagdhākṣara (˚dha-ak˚),%} N. of certain letters
regarded as inauspicious in poems. {%—Dagdheṣṭakā%}
{%(˚dha-iṣ˚),%} f. a burnt or vitrified brick. {%—Dagdho-%}
{%dara (˚dha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘having a burnt or
starving stomach,’ starving; ({%am%}), n. ‘a burnt stomach,’
i. e. an empty or craving stomach.
<LEND>

<L>21788<pc>0398-a<k1>dagDavya<k2>dagDavya
{%Dagdhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be burnt or consumed
by fire, inflammable.
<LEND>

<L>21789<pc>0398-a<k1>dagDikA<k2>dagDikA
{%Dagdhikā,%}¦ f. scorched rice; N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%dagdhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>21790<pc>0398-a<k1>dagDf<k2>dagDf
{%Dagdhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ a burner, consuming
by fire, one who burns, a consumer.
<LEND>

<L>21791<pc>0398-a<k1>dagDvA<k2>dagDvA
{%Dagdhvā,%}¦ ind. having burnt, having consumed.
<LEND>

<L>21792<pc>0398-a<k1>daG<k2>daG
{#daG#}¦ {%dagh,%} cl. 4. P. {%daghyati,%} &c., Ved.
to move, go, flow, reach, attain; to go
away; (with {%paścā%} or {%paścāt%}) to lag behind, fall
short of [cf. {%a-paścā-daghvan%}]; cl. 5. P. {%dagh-%}
{%noti,%} &c., to hurt, kill; to go, to leap; to protect;
[cf. rt. {%daṅgh%} below; cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">ταχύς, δέχομαι;</lang>
Goth. <nsi>tekan,</nsi> ‘to take;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>taengan,</nsi> ‘to
hasten;’ Lat. <nsi>tango.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21793<pc>0398-a<k1>daGna<k2>daGna
{%Daghna, as, ī, am%}¦ (at the end of a comp.; re-
garded by native grammarians as an affix), reaching
to, as high as; [cf. {%ā-daghna, upastha-daghna,%}
{%ūru-daghna, jānu-daghna,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>21794<pc>0398-a<k1>daGvan<k2>daGvan
{%Dagh-van%}¦ in {%apaścā-daghvan,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21795<pc>0398-a<k1>daMkzRu<k2>daMkzRu
{#daMkzRu#}¦ {%daṅkṣṇu, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. 2. {%daṃś%}),
Ved. biting, mordaceous.
<LEND>

<L>21796<pc>0398-a<k1>daNG<k2>daNG
{#daNG#}¦ {%daṅgh,%} cl. 1. P. {%daṅghati,%} &c., to
quit, abandon; to cherish, protect; [cf. rt.
{%dagh%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>21797<pc>0398-a<k1>dacCada<k2>dacCada
{#dacCada#}¦ {%dac-chada.%} See under {%dat,%} p. 399.
<LEND>

<L>21798<pc>0398-a<k1>daRq<k2>daRq
{#daRq#}¦ {%daṇḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%daṇḍayati, -yitum,%}
to punish, &c. (rather to be regarded as
a nom. fr. {%daṇḍa%} below).
<LEND>

<L>21799<pc>0398-a<k1>daRqa<k2>daRqa
{%Daṇḍa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (fr. rt. 1. {%dam,%} but connected
with the preceding; the neut. is rare), a stick, staff, rod,
pole, cudgel, mace, club or club-shaped weapon; a
sceptre; a blow with a stick, &c.; the staff given to a
twice-born man at initiation or at investiture with the
sacred thread, (this staff was of different lengths, the
longest belonging to the Brāhmans, see Manu II.
45-47); the penis; the trunk of an elephant; an
arm or leg (generally in comp. with a word signifying
‘arm,’ &c.; see {%dor-daṇḍa, bāhu-daṇḍa%}); a stalk,
the stem of a tree [cf. {%ud-d˚%} and {%khara-d˚%}];
the handle of anything (as of a ladle, sauce-pan, fly-
flap, parasol, &c.), the staff or pole of a banner or of
a tent; the beam of a plough; the oar of a boat; the
[Page0398-b+ 81]
cross-bar or bridge of a lute or other stringed instrument
which holds the strings; a churning-stick (said to be
neut. only, cf. {%daṇḍāhata%}); a pole as a measure of
length, = 4 Hastas, = 96 finger-breadths; a particular
measure of time, = 60 Vi-kalās, = 360 breaths, = (1/60)
part of the day and night, = 24 minutes [cf. {%nāḍikā%}];
the stick with which an instrument is played; a
particular appearance in the sky similar to a staff or
rod; a particular planet, {%= graha-bheda;%} a particular
constellation; a form of military array, a long line
or column of troops [cf. {%daṇḍa-vyūha%}]; an uninter-
rupted row or series, a line [cf. {%daṇḍa-pāta%} and
{%daṇḍaka%}]; a staff or sceptre as a symbol of power
and sovereignty; application of power or physical
force (e. g. {%rājā nityam udyata-daṇḍaḥ syāt,%} a king
should always hold his sceptre erect, i. e. prepared to
use his power; {%daṇḍodyama,%} raising the sceptre,
exertion of power; {%nyasta-daṇḍa,%} laying aside the
sceptre, resigning power); assault, attack, violence,
(in this sense {%daṇḍa%} is one of the four Upāyas;
{%sāman,%} ‘negotiation,’ {%dāna,%} ‘bribery,’ and {%bheda,%}
‘sowing dissension,’ constituting the other three,
see {%upāya%}); power over, control, restraint (e. g.
{%mano-d˚, vāg-d˚, kāya-d˚,%} restraint of thoughts,
words, and bodily actions, see Manu XII. 10; cf. {%tri-%}
{%daṇḍin%}); power or physical force embodied, an
army (e. g. {%koṣa-daṇḍau,%} du. treasure and army);
the rod as a symbol of judicial authority and punish-
ment; punishment in general; corporal chastisement;
fine, mulct, amercement; imprisonment; capital
punishment, putting to death; reprimand; (Punish-
ment personified is a son of Dharma and Kriyā;
sometimes = Yama or = Śiva); standing upright or
erect; N. of one of the attendants of the sun; N.
of a man; N. of a prince slain by Arjuna (brother of
Daṇḍa-dhara and identified with the Asura Krodha-
hantṛ); N. of a son of Ikṣvāku; (according to
lexicographers {%daṇḍa%} also means) pride; a horse, a
corner, an angle (?); ({%ā%}), f. Hedysarum Lagopodi-
oides, {%= nāga-balā;%} [cf. {%carma-d˚, jāla-d˚,%} &c.]
{%—Daṇḍa-kandaka, as,%} m. a species of bulbous
plant, {%= dharaṇī-kanda%}. {%—Daṇḍa-kartṛ, tā,%} m. a
punisher, chastiser. {%—Daṇḍa-karman, a,%} n. ‘appli-
cation of the rod,’ infliction of punishment, chastise-
ment. {%—Daṇḍa-kala,%} a kind of metre. {%—Daṇḍa-%}
{%kāka, as,%} m. a raven; (perhaps for {%dagdha-kāka,%}
q. v.) {%—Daṇḍa-kāṣṭha, am,%} n. a wooden staff or
pole. {%—Daṇḍa-kuśa, ās,%} m. pl. a various reading for
the next. {%—Daṇḍa-kūla, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Daṇḍa-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Daṇḍa-%}
{%gaurī,%} f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Daṇḍa-grahaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. assumption of the (pilgrim's) staff, becoming
a mendicant or ascetic. {%—Daṇḍa-grāha, as,%} m. a
staff-bearer, (probably) N. of a man. {%—Daṇḍa-ghna,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} striking with a stick, one who commits
an assault. {%—Daṇḍa-cakra, as,%} m. ‘the discus of
punishment,’ N. of a mythical weapon; a division of
an army; [cf. {%daṇḍānīka.%}] {%—Daṇḍa-cchadana,%}
{%am,%} n. a room in which utensils of various kinds are
kept. {%—Daṇḍa-jita, as, ā, am,%} subdued by punish-
ment. {%—Daṇḍa-ḍhakkā,%} f. a sort of kettle-drum,
upon which the hours are struck. {%—Daṇḍa-tāmrī,%}
f. {%= tāmrī,%} p. 370, col. 1. {%—Daṇḍa-tva, am,%} n. the
state of a staff, stick, &c. {%—Daṇḍa-dāsa, as,%} m.
‘a slave from a fine not paid,’ i. e. one who has be-
come a slave from non-payment of a debt. {%—Daṇḍa-%}
{%deva-kula, am,%} n. ‘temple of punishment,’ a court
of justice. {%—Daṇḍa-dhara, as, ā, am,%} a staff-
bearer, having or carrying a staff or sceptre, hav-
ing oars (as a ship); exercising judicial power,
chastising, punishing, having authority to punish;
({%as%}), m. a king; a magistrate, judge, the supreme
judge; a N. of Yama; a mendicant carrying a staff;
a potter. {%—Daṇḍadharādhipa (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m.
‘the prince of sceptre-bearers,’ a plenipotentiary, a
king. {%—Daṇḍa-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} bearing the
sceptre, exercising judicial power; ({%as%}), m. a king;
a judge; an epithet of Yama; N. of a prince slain
by Arjuna (brother of Daṇḍa and identified with the
Asura Krodha-vardhana, enumerated among the sons
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra in Mahā-bh. I. 2738); ({%ās%}), m.
[Page0398-c+ 81]
pl., N. of a barbarous people. {%—Daṇḍa-dhāraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the carrying a staff (as by the Brahma-cārin);
following the order of a mendicant; chastising,
punishment. {%—Daṇḍa-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} carrying
the rod, chastening, punishing. {%—Daṇḍa-dhṛṣ,%}
{%k, k, k,%} carrying the staff or rod, exercising authority.
{%—Daṇḍa-nāyaka, as,%} m. ‘one who applies the
rod,’ a judge, magistrate, a head police-officer; a
leader of a column, leader of an army, general, com-
mander-in-chief; N. of one of the attendants of the
sun. {%—Daṇḍanāyaka-puruṣa, as,%} m. a policeman,
police-officer, constable, beadle. {%—Daṇḍa-nipātana,%}
{%am,%} n. applying the rod, chastising, punishing; [cf.
{%daṇḍa-pātana.%}] {%—Daṇḍa-nīti, is,%} f. application of
the rod, administration of justice, judicature, the
doctrine of the right administration of justice; the
rule of inflicting punishment, the system of civil and
military administration taught by Cāṇakya and others,
polity, ethics, system of morals; an epithet of
Durgā. {%—Daṇḍanīti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} familiar with
the administration of justice. {%—Daṇḍa-netṛ, tā,%} m.
‘one who applies the rod,’ a punisher, an inflicter of
punishment, a judge; {%adhi-daṇḍanetṛ,%} the supreme
chastiser, i. e. Yama. {%—Daṇḍanetṛ-tva, am,%} n.
the office of a judge, administration of justice.
{%—Daṇḍa-pa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Daṇḍa-%}
{%pakṣaka, as,%} m. a particular gesture or motion of
the hands. {%—Daṇḍa-pāṃśula (?), as,%} m. a porter, a
warder or door-keeper. {%—Daṇḍa-pāṇi, is, is, i,%}
staff-handed, bearing a staff or rod; ({%is%}), m. an
epithet of Yama; N. of a leader of two of the
troops of the god Śiva in Kāśī (identified with
the Yakṣa Hari-keśa); N. of the father of Go-pā,
the wife of Śākya-muni; N. of a prince, grand-
father of Kṣemaka; [cf. {%khaṇḍa-pāṇi.%}] {%—Daṇḍa-%}
{%pāṇi-vara-pradāna, am,%} n., N. of the forty-
fourth chapter of the Jñāna-khaṇḍa or second part
of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Daṇḍa-pāta, as,%} m. ‘the
falling of the stick’ [cf. {%dāṇḍa-pātā%}]; dropping one
line in a manuscript. {%—Daṇḍa-pātana, am,%} n. ap-
plying the rod, punishing, punishment; [cf. {%daṇḍa-%}
{%nipātana.%}] {%—Daṇḍa-pātin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘letting fall the
stick or rod,’ punishing, chastising, fining, mulcting.
{%—Daṇḍa-pāruṣya, am,%} n. ‘stick-assault, actual
violence, assault and battery (as a title of jurispru-
dence); cruel or harsh infliction of punishment, (one
of the seven vices of kings and rulers.) {%—Daṇḍa-%}
{%pāla%} or {%daṇḍa-pālaka, as,%} m. ‘superintendent of
punishment or of the administration of justice,’ a
head magistrate or judge; a door-keeper, a porter;
a kind of fish ({%= ardha-śaphara, śakula;%} com-
monly {%dāṇḍikā%}). {%—Daṇḍapāla-tā,%} f. the adminis-
tration of justice. {%—Daṇḍa-pāśaka%} or {%daṇḍa-pā-%}
{%śika, as,%} m. ‘holding the fetters or noose of punish-
ment,’ a head police-officer, policeman; a hangman,
an executioner. {%—Daṇḍa-pāsika (?) = paurika,%}
q. v. {%—Daṇḍa-piṅgalaka, ās,%} m., N. of a people
to the north of Madhya-deśa. {%—Daṇḍa-poṇa, am,%}
n. ({%poṇa = pavana%}), a strainer or filtering machine
with a handle. {%—Daṇḍa-praṇayana, am,%} n. ‘in-
fliction of punishment,’ N. of a chapter of the
Purāṇa-sarva-sva by Halāyudha. {%—Daṇḍa-praṇāma,%}
{%as,%} m. a stiff bow, bowing without bending the
body like a stick. {%—Daṇḍa-badha, as,%} m. ‘death
by punishment,’ capital punishment. {%—Daṇḍa-bā-%}
{%ladhi, is,%} m. an elephant (‘having a tail like a
stick’). {%—Daṇḍa-bāhu, us, us, u,%} ‘stick-armed,’
carrying a stick or staff; ({%us%}), m., N. of one of the
attendants of Skanda. {%—Daṇḍa-bhaṅga, as,%} m.
‘omission of punishment,’ non-execution of a sen-
tence, reprieve, escape. {%—Daṇḍa-bhaya, am,%} n. fear
of the rod. {%—Daṇḍa-bhīti, is,%} f. dread of punish-
ment. {%—Daṇḍa-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} carrying a staff or
stick; ({%t%}), m. a potter. {%—Daṇḍa-māṇava%} or {%daṇḍa-%}
{%mānava, as,%} m. ‘a staff-man,’ a staff-bearer, an
ascetic, one who bears a staff; a chief or leader.
{%—Daṇḍa-mātaṅga,%} Tabernæmontana Coronaria
{%(= piṇḍa-tagara)%}. {%—Daṇḍa-mukha, as,%} m. the
leader of an army, a general, a commander-in-chief;
[cf. {%daṇḍa-nāyaka.%}] {%—Daṇḍa-yātrā,%} f. a solemn
or festive procession, moving in state or with
[Page0399-a+ 81]
attendants, especially a bridal procession; warlike
expedition, subjection or conquest of a region or
quarter {%(= dig-vijaya)%}. {%—Daṇḍa-yāma, as,%} m. a
day; an epithet of Yama; of Agastya; (also written
{%daṇḍā-yāma.%}) {%—Daṇḍa-yoga, as,%} m. infliction of
punishment. {%—Daṇḍa-leśa, am,%} n. a small fine.
 — 1. {%daṇḍa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a stick, carrying
a staff; furnished with a handle; having a large
army. {%—2. daṇḍa-vat,%} ind. like a stick, erect or up-
right as a stick; prostrate, falling or lying prostrate;
{%daṇḍa-vat praṇamya,%} bowing like a stick; [cf.
{%daṇḍa-praṇāma.%}] {%—Daṇḍa-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} utter-
ing a reprimand, rebuking, censuring, threatening
with punishment or castigation; ({%ī%}), m. a door-
keeper, warder; [cf. {%daṇḍa-vāsin.%}] {%—Daṇḍa-%}
{%vārkṣa, am,%} n. a particular posture, a mode of
sitting. {%—Daṇḍa-vāsika, as,%} m. a door-keeper.
{%—Daṇḍa-vāsin, ī,%} m. a door-keeper, warder,
chamberlain; the magistrate or head of a village.
{%—Daṇḍa-vāhin, ī,%} m. a police-officer. {%—Daṇḍa-%}
{%vikalpa, as,%} m. ‘alternative of punishment,’ discre-
tionary punishment or fine. {%—Daṇḍa-vidhi, is,%} m.
criminal law; rule or mode of punishment. {%—Daṇḍa-%}
{%viśeṣa, as,%} m. kind or degree of punishment.
{%—Daṇḍa-viṣkambha, as,%} m. a post or a stake to
which is fastened the string that works the churning-
stick. {%—Daṇḍa-vīrya, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Daṇḍa-vṛkṣaka, as,%} m. the plant Tithymalus
Antiquorum {%(= snuhī)%}. {%—Daṇḍa-vyūha, as,%} m.
drawing up or arraying an army in long lines or
columns. {%—Daṇḍa-vrata-dhara, as, ā, am,%} exer-
cising judicial power, decreeing punishment, punish-
ing. {%—Daṇḍa-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a prince; (also
read {%datta-śarman.%}) {%—Daṇḍa-śāstra, am,%} n. the
criminal law. {%—Daṇḍa-saṅkhyā,%} f., N. of a chapter
of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Daṇḍa-sena, as,%} m., N.
of a prince, son of Viṣvak-sena. {%—Daṇḍa-hasta,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘staff-handed,’ ‘a staff-bearer;’ epithet of
the god of death; a door-keeper, warder; ({%as, ā%}
or {%ī%}), m. f. the plant Tabernæmontana Coronaria;
({%am%}), n. the flower of this plant. {%—Daṇḍākhya%}
{%(˚ḍa-ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} called after a staff; having
the name Daṇḍa; ({%am%}), n., N. of a place of pilgrim-
age; a hall with two wings, one of which faces
towards the north, the other towards the east.
{%—Daṇḍāghāta (˚ḍa-āgh˚), as,%} m. a blow with a
stick or staff. {%—Daṇḍājina (˚ḍa-aj˚), am,%} n. ‘staff
and skin’ (as mere outer signs of devotion); hypo-
crisy, deceit, fraud, cheating, roguery; [cf. {%dāṇḍā-%}
{%jinika.%}] {%—Daṇḍājñā (˚ḍa-āj˚),%} f. judicial sentence.
{%—Daṇḍā-daṇḍi,%} ind. ‘stick against stick’ in fight-
ing, single-stick, cudgelling, fighting with sticks and
staves. {%—Daṇḍādhipa, as,%} or {%daṇḍādhipati (˚ḍa-%}
{%adh˚), is,%} m. a superior judge, supreme magistrate.
{%—Daṇḍānīka (˚ḍa-an˚), am,%} n. a division of an
army, a detachment; [cf. {%daṇḍa-cakra.%}] {%—Daṇḍā-%}
{%patānaka (˚ḍa-ap˚), as,%} m. tetanus, lock-jaw,
spasm. {%—Daṇḍāmitrā (˚ḍa-am˚),%} f., N. of a place;
[cf. {%dattāmitra%} or {%dattāmitrā.%}] {%—Daṇḍā-yāma%}
{%= daṇḍa-yāma%}. {%—Daṇḍārta (˚ḍa-ār˚),%} N. of a
sacred bathing-place. {%—Daṇḍārha (˚ḍa-ar˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deserving punishment. {%—Daṇḍālasikā (˚ḍa-%}
{%al˚),%} f. the cholera. {%—Daṇḍāśrama (˚ḍa-āś˚), as,%} m.
the order of the staff, condition of a pilgrim. {%—Daṇḍā-%}
{%śramin (˚ḍa-āś˚), ī,%} m. assuming the pilgrim's staff,
a devotee. {%—Daṇḍāsana (˚ḍa-as˚%} or {%-ās˚), am,%} n. a
sort of arrow. {%—Daṇḍāstra (˚ḍa-as˚), am,%} n. the
stick-weapon or ‘the weapon of punishment,’ N. of
a fabulous weapon. {%—Daṇḍāhata (˚ḍa-āh˚), am,%}
n. ‘struck with the churning-stick,’ buttermilk.
{%—Daṇḍotpala (˚ḍa-ut˚), am,%} n. a species of plant
(commonly Ḍānipolā and Ḍānakuni) with yellow,
red, and white flowers; (according to some, the one
with white flowers is called Daṇḍotpalā.)
<LEND>

<L>21800<pc>0399-a<k1>daRqaka<k2>daRqaka
{%Daṇḍaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a stick, staff, handle,
staff of a banner &c., see {%daṇḍa;%} a species of
plant; a line, row, uninterrupted series; a sort of
metre the stanza of which may extend from 27 × 4
to 999 × 4 syllables; N. of a work; ({%as, ā, am%}),
m. f. n., N. of a district in the Dekhan between the
Nermadā and Godavarī rivers, which in the time of
[Page0399-b+ 78]
Rāma-candra was a forest and celebrated as a place
of pilgrimage; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the above district and its
inhabitants; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince who was son
of Īkṣvāku and connected with the Daṇḍaka
district; N. of a man; ({%ikā%}), f. a stick, a staff; a
row, line, series; a rope; a string of pearls; [cf.
{%yaṣṭi.%}] {%—Daṇḍakāraṇya (˚ka-ar˚), am,%} n. the
Daṇḍaka forest, see above; N. of a part of the
Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Daṇḍakāraṇya-prasthāna, am,%}
n., N. of a part of the Abhirāma-maṇi-nāṭaka. {%—Daṇ-%}
{%ḍakālasaka (˚ka-al˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21801<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqana<k2>daRqana
{%Daṇḍana, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a cane?; ({%am%}), n.
beating, punishing, chastising, inflicting punishment
(e. g. {%adharma-daṇḍana,%} unjust punishment).
<LEND>

<L>21802<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqanIya<k2>daRqanIya
{%Daṇḍanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ punishable, to be chas-
tised, deserving punishment, liable to a fine.
<LEND>

<L>21803<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqaya<k2>daRqaya
{%Daṇḍaya,%}¦ nom. P. {%daṇḍayati, -yitum,%} to punish,
chastise, to fine, amerce (with acc. of the person
and of the punishment inflicted).
<LEND>

<L>21804<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqAya<k2>daRqAya
{%Daṇḍāya,%}¦ nom. A. {%daṇḍāyate,%} &c., (common in
Bengālī for) to stand erect.
<LEND>

<L>21805<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqAyamAna<k2>daRqAyamAna
{%Daṇḍāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ (common in Bengālī
for) standing erect.
<LEND>

<L>21806<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqika<k2>daRqika
{%Daṇḍika, as, ā, am,%}¦ carrying a stick, punishing,
one who chastises; ({%as%}), m. a staff-bearer, mace-
bearer [cf. {%dāṇḍika%}]; a fish, Cyprinus Dankena,
commonly called Ḍānikaṇā Māca; ({%ā%}), f., see
{%daṇḍaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>21807<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqita<k2>daRqita
{%Daṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ punished, chastised, amerced,
sentenced, mulcted, fined.
<LEND>

<L>21808<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqin<k2>daRqin
{%Daṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having or bearing a staff or
stick [cf. {%tri-daṇḍin%}]; ({%ī%}), m. a Brāhman of the
fourth order or in the fourth stage of his life; a
religious mendicant or Bhikṣu carrying a staff; N.
of a particular order of mendicants deriving their
origin from Śaṅkarācārya; a Jaina ascetic; a door-
keeper, warder, porter; an oarsman, boatman; a N. of
Yama; of Mañju-śrī; of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of the
author of the Kāvyādarśa; of the author of the Daśa-
kumāra-carita; a species of plant; [cf. {%damanaka.%}]
{%—Daṇḍi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing staff-bearers,
having club-bearers. {%—Daṇḍi-muṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘carry-
ing a staff and having the head shaved,’ epithet of
Śiva. {%—Daṇḍimuṇḍīśvara%} (? for {%daṇḍimuṇḍe-%}
{%śvara%}), a form of Śiva; N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>21809<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqiman<k2>daRqiman
{%Daṇḍiman, ā,%}¦ m. (abstract noun fr. {%daṇḍa%}), the
state or condition of a staff, rod, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21810<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqya<k2>daRqya
{%Daṇḍya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be punished, punishable,
deserving punishment, to be fined (with acc. of
the punishment inflicted, or in comp., e. g. {%sarva-%}
{%sva-daṇḍya,%} to be fined in all one's property).
<LEND>

<L>21811<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqarI<k2>daRqarI
{#daRqarI#}¦ {%daṇḍarī,%} f. {%= ḍaṅgarī,%} a species of
cucumber.
<LEND>

<L>21812<pc>0399-b<k1>daRqAra<k2>daRqAra
{#daRqAra#}¦ {%daṇḍāra, as,%} m. a carriage, vehicle;
a raft, boat; a potter's wheel; a bow or any other
instrument for shooting arrows or darts; an elephant
in rut, a furious or intoxicated elephant.
<LEND>

<L>21813<pc>0399-b<k1>dat<k2>dat
{#dat#}¦ {%dat%} (perhaps fr. rt. {%ad,%} to eat, the initial
being dropped, as in {%khādana,%} a tooth, fr. rt. {%khād%} and
<lang n="greek">φαγόνες</lang> fr. <lang n="greek">φαγ;</lang> or according to others fr. rt. 3. {%dā,%}
to cut), optionally substituted for {%danta,%} a tooth, in
the acc. pl. and remaining weak and middle cases (Pāṇ.
VI. 1, 63; Vopa-deva III. 39); the form {%dat%} occurs
frequently at the end of compounds, the nom. case
ending in {%an%} as in pres. participles; [cf. {%ubha-%}
{%yato-dat, su-dat, a-dat,%} &c.] {%—Dac-chada, as,%}
m. ‘the covering of the teeth,’ the lip, (chiefly in
comp., see {%daṣṭa-dacchada%}); [cf. {%danta-cchada.%}]
{%—Dat-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. furnished with teeth,
biting; {%dat-vatī rajjuḥ,%} ‘a rope with teeth,’ = a
serpent or snake.
<LEND>

<L>21814<pc>0399-b<k1>datka<k2>datka
{%Datka%}¦ in {%adatka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21815<pc>0399-b<k1>datta<k2>datta<h>1
{#datta#} 1¦. {%datta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dā,%} to give;
cf. 1. {%dad%}), given, granted, presented, made over,
assigned; placed, extended, stretched forth; ({%as%}),
m. a given son, i. e. a son given away by his natural
parents to persons engaging to adopt him [cf. {%dattaka%}
and {%datrima%}]; a common N. or title of a man of
[Page0399-c+ 78]
the Vaiśya or third tribe, (generally in comp. with a
preceding word, e. g. {%vasu-datta, deva-datta,%} &c.,
but {%datta%} sometimes stands alone, at present the
title is common to the Kāyastha or writer class);
N. of a man, brother of Dur-vāsas; of a son of Atri,
{%= dattātreya;%} (with Jainas) N. of a son of Agni-
siṃha and the seventh black Vāsu-deva; of a son of
Rājādhideya Śūra; one of the seven sages in the
second Manv-antara; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several women;
({%am%}), n. a gift, a donation. {%—Datta-tīrtha-kṛt, t,%}
m., N. of the eighth Arhat of the past Ut-sarpiṇī.
{%—Datta-nṛtyopahāra (˚ya-up˚), as, ā, am,%} com-
plimented with a dance. {%—Datta-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%}
one who has given up or sacrificed life. {%—Datta-%}
{%bhujaṅga-stotra, am,%} n. and {%datta-mahiman, ā,%}
m., N. of two works of Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Datta-%}
{%mārga, as, ā, am,%} given way to, having the road
ceded. {%—Datta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has given.
{%—Datta-vara, as, ā, am,%} allowed to choose a boon;
granted as a boon. {%—Datta-śatru, us,%} or {%datta-%}
{%śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a son of Rājādhideya Śūra.
{%—Datta-śulkā,%} f. a bride for whom a sum of money
or dowry has been paid. {%—Datta-hasta, as, ā, am,%}
having a hand given for support, supported. {%—Dattā-%}
{%tman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} one who has given himself,
self-given; (with {%putra%}) an orphan or a son deserted
by his parents who gives himself to persons disposed
to adopt him as their child; ({%ā%}), m., N. of one of
the Viśve Devās. {%—Dattātreya (˚ta-āt˚), as,%} m., N.
of a sage, son of Atri and Anasūyā, who favoured
Arjuna Kārtavīrya, (see Mahā-bh. Śānti-parva 1751;
according to one legend, Atri performed a very severe
penance by which the three gods Brahmā, Viṣṇu,
and Śiva were propitiated and became in portions
of themselves severally his sons Soma, Datta, and
Dur-vāsas); N. of an author mentioned in the
Ānanda-laharī or Saundarya-laharī by Śaṅkara.
{%—Dattātreyāṣṭottara-śata-nāma-stotra, am,%} n.,
N. of a chapter of the Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa. {%—Dattā-%}
{%treyīya, am,%} n. the story of Dattātreya. {%—Dattā-%}
{%datta (˚ta-ād˚), as, ā, am,%} given and received.
{%—Dattādara (˚ta-ād˚), as, ā, am,%} showing re-
spect, respectful; treated with respect. {%—Dattānapa-%}
{%karman (˚ta-an˚), a,%} n. non-resumption of gifts.
{%—Dattāpahṛta (˚ta-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} given and
taken again. {%—Dattāpradānika (˚ta-a-pr˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} relating to the non-delivery of a gift; ({%am%}),
n. non-delivery or resumption of gifts, one of the
eighteen titles of law. {%—Dattāmitra (˚ta-am˚), as,%}
m., N. of a prince of the Sauvīras; ({%as, ā%}), m. f.,
N. of a district; [cf. {%daṇḍāmitrā.%}] {%—Dattāva-%}
{%dhāna (˚ta-av˚), as, ā, am,%} attentive. {%—Dattā-%}
{%sana (˚ta-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} having a seat given,
requested to sit. {%—Dattairaṇḍa-pallaka (˚ta-er˚),%}
N. of a district in the Dekhan. {%—Dattopaniṣad%}
{%(˚ta-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad; (also written
{%śrīmad-dattopaniṣad,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>21816<pc>0399-c<k1>dattaka<k2>dattaka
{%Dattaka, as,%}¦ m. (scil. {%putra%}), a son given away by
his natural parents to persons engaging to adopt him;
one of the twelve heirs acknowledged by the old
Hindū law; N. of the father of Māgha; N. of the
author of the Vaiśikādhikaraṇa; a familiar diminu-
tive of the names of persons ending with {%datta.%}
{%—Dattaka-candrikā%} and {%dattaka-mīmāṃsā,%} f.,
N. of two legal works.
<LEND>

<L>21817<pc>0399-c<k1>datti<k2>datti
{%Datti, is,%}¦ f. a gift, donation, offering.
<LEND>

<L>21818<pc>0399-c<k1>dattika<k2>dattika
{%Dattika, dattiya,%}¦ and {%dattila, as,%} m. familiar
diminutives of the names of persons ending in
{%datta.%}
<LEND>
<L>21818.1<pc>0399-c<k1>dattila<k2>dattila
{{Lbody=21818}}
<LEND>
<L>21818.2<pc>0399-c<k1>dattiya<k2>dattiya
{{Lbody=21818}}
<LEND>

<L>21819<pc>0399-c<k1>datteya<k2>datteya
{%Datteya, as,%}¦ m., N. of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>21820<pc>0399-c<k1>datta<k2>datta<h>2
{#datta#} 2¦. {%datta, as, ā, am%} (fr. 5. {%dā%}), pre-
served, guarded, protected.
<LEND>

<L>21821<pc>0399-c<k1>dattoli<k2>dattoli
{#dattoli#}¦ {%dattoli, is,%} m., N. of a son of
Pulastya, one of the seven sages in the second
Manv-antara.
<LEND>

<L>21822<pc>0399-c<k1>datra<k2>datra
{#datra#}¦ {%datra.%} See below under rt. 1. {%dad.%}
<LEND>

<L>21823<pc>0399-c<k1>dad<k2>dad<h>1
{#dad#} 1¦. {%dad,%} a reduplicated form substituted
for rt. 1. {%dā,%} to give, before certain affixes and
[Page0400-a+ 76]
terminations (Pāṇ. VI. 4, 126; VII. 4, 46; VIII. 2,
38), and by some grammarians given as a separate
rt.: cl. 1. A. {%dadate,%} &c., to give, (see rt. 1. {%dā.%})
<LEND>

<L>21824<pc>0400-a<k1>datra<k2>datra
{%Datra, am,%}¦ n. (perhaps more correctly {%dattra%}),
Ved. gift, donation; [cf. {%a-datrayā%} and {%go-datra.%}]
{%—Datra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. rich in gifts, giving
abundantly.
<LEND>

<L>21825<pc>0400-a<k1>datrima<k2>datrima
{%Datrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ received by gift, produced
or effected by gifts; ({%as%}), m. a slave or a son re-
ceived by gift; (see Manu VII. 415; IX. 141.)
<LEND>

<L>21826<pc>0400-a<k1>dad<k2>dad<h>2
2. {%dad,%}¦ giving, in {%āyur-dad.%}
<LEND>

<L>21827<pc>0400-a<k1>dada<k2>dada
{%Dada, as, ā, am,%}¦ giving; [cf. {%abhayan-dada.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21828<pc>0400-a<k1>dadat<k2>dadat
{%Dadat, at, atī, at%}¦ (pres. part. of rt. 1. {%dā%}),
giving, presenting.
<LEND>

<L>21829<pc>0400-a<k1>dadana<k2>dadana
{%Dadana, am,%}¦ n. gift, giving, donation.
<LEND>

<L>21830<pc>0400-a<k1>dadi<k2>dadi
{%Dadi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. giving, bestowing, distributing
(with acc.); [cf. Pāṇ. II. 3, 69.]
<LEND>

<L>21831<pc>0400-a<k1>daditf<k2>daditf
{%Daditṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. a giver, giving;
(according to others) a preserver, preserving; a
possessor; [cf. 5. {%dā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21832<pc>0400-a<k1>dadivas<k2>dadivas
{%Dadivas, vān, duṣī, vas,%}¦ who or what has
given.
<LEND>

<L>21833<pc>0400-a<k1>dadada<k2>dadada
{#dadada#}¦ {%dadada,%} an onomatopoetic word for
the roaring of thunder.
<LEND>

<L>21834<pc>0400-a<k1>dadari<k2>dadari
{#dadari#}¦ {%dadari,%} N. of a river. {%—Dadari-%}
{%saṅgama,%} N. of a place mentioned in the Rasika-
ramaṇa by Raghu-nātha.
<LEND>

<L>21835<pc>0400-a<k1>dadASvas<k2>dadASvas
{#dadASvas#}¦ {%dadāśvas, vān, uṣī, vas%} (perf. part.
fr. rt. 1. {%dāś%}), worshipping, serving the gods, giving,
having given or bestowed.
<LEND>

<L>21836<pc>0400-a<k1>dadfkzeRya<k2>dadfkzeRya
{#dadfkzeRya#}¦ {%dadṛkṣeṇya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1.
{%dṛś%}), Ved. worth seeing, worthy to be seen, (Pāṇ.
III. 4, 14; according to some {%didṛkṣeṇya,%} q. v.,
is the only correct form.)
<LEND>

<L>21837<pc>0400-a<k1>dadfSAnapavi<k2>dadfSAnapavi
{%Dadṛśāna-pavi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. having the track
of the wheels visible; epithet of Agni; (Sāy.) having
a thunderbolt or weapon visible.
<LEND>

<L>21838<pc>0400-a<k1>dadfSivas<k2>dadfSivas
{%Dadṛśivas%}¦ or {%dadṛśvas, vān, uṣī, vas,%} having
seen, having looked at.
<LEND>

<L>21839<pc>0400-a<k1>dadft<k2>dadft
{#dadft#}¦ {%dadṛt, t, t, t%} (reduplicated form fr.
rt. {%dṝ%}), tearing, splitting, bursting out.
<LEND>

<L>21840<pc>0400-a<k1>dadru<k2>dadru
{%Dadru, us,%}¦ or {%ū, ūs,%} m. f. [cf. {%dardru%}], a cuta-
neous eruption or rash, herpes; a kind of leprosy,
(or according to others) a ringworm; a tortoise.
{%—Dadru-ghna%} or {%dadrū-ghna, as, ī, am,%} de-
stroying or removing cutaneous eruptions; ({%as%}), m.
ringworm-shrub, Cassia Tora or Alata; Psoralea
Corylifolia, (commonly Hākuc; the seeds are used
as a remedy for cutaneous diseases.)
<LEND>

<L>21841<pc>0400-a<k1>dadruka<k2>dadruka
{%Dadruka, as,%}¦ m. cutaneous eruption or scab,
leprosy.
<LEND>

<L>21842<pc>0400-a<k1>dadruRa<k2>dadruRa
{%Dadruṇa%}¦ or {%dadrūṇa, as, ā, am,%} or {%dadru-%}
{%rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} herpetic, afflicted with cutaneous
diseases or ringworm; [cf. {%dardru-rogin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21843<pc>0400-a<k1>daD<k2>daD
{#daD#}¦ {%dadh%} (reduplicated form substituted
for rt. 1. {%dhā%} before certain affixes and ter-
minations; also given as a distinct rt.), cl. 1. A.
{%dadhate,%} &c., to hold, possess, retain; to give,
present, assign, make over; (see rt. 1. {%dhā.%})
<LEND>

<L>21844<pc>0400-a<k1>daDa<k2>daDa
{%Dadha, as, ā, am,%}¦ holding, having, possessing,
giving; [cf. {%ilā-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21845<pc>0400-a<k1>daDat<k2>daDat
{%Dadhat, at, atī, at%}¦ (pres. part. of rt. 1. {%dhā%}),
having, holding, possessing.
<LEND>

<L>21846<pc>0400-a<k1>daDAna<k2>daDAna
{%Dadhāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (pres. part.), having, hold-
ing, possessing.
<LEND>

<L>21847<pc>0400-a<k1>daDi<k2>daDi<h>1
1. {%dadhi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. presenting, giving; pre-
serving, keeping (with acc.); holding, having, pos-
sessing, bearing; ({%i%}), n. a house, an abode.
<LEND>

<L>21848<pc>0400-a<k1>daDan<k2>daDan
{#daDan#}¦ {%dadhan,%} substituted for 2. {%dadhi%}
below, in the weakest cases (e. g. inst. {%dadhnā,%} dat.
{%dadhne,%} abl. gen. {%dadhnas,%} loc. {%dadhni%} or {%da-%}
{%dhani%}). {%—Dadhan-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing
coagulated milk.
<LEND>

<L>21849<pc>0400-a<k1>daDi<k2>daDi<h>2
{#daDi#} 2¦. {%dadhi, i,%} n. (perhaps a reduplicated
form fr. rt. {%dhe,%} to drink; cf. {%dadhan%} above),
milk thickened or coagulated spontaneously by heat,
[Page0400-b+ 81]
thick sour milk, commonly called {%dahī,%} (it is a
general article of food in high estimation among the
Hindūs, and regarded as a remedy or preventive of
many disorders; it differs from curds in not having
the whey separated from it); turpentine, the resin
of the Shorea Robusta; [cf. Goth. <nsi>daddyan,</nsi> ‘to
suckle.’] {%—Dadhi-karṇa, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga;
N. of a cat in the Pañca-tantra. {%—Dadhi-kulyā,%} f.
a stream of coagulated milk. {%—Dadhi-kūrcikā,%} f. a
mixture of boiled and coagulated milk; see {%kūrcaka.%}
{%—Dadhi-kra, as,%} m., N. of a man; [cf. the fol-
lowing.] {%—Dadhi-krā, ās,%} m., Ved., N. of a
mythical being often mentioned in the Veda, and
the actual subject of Ṛg-veda IV. 38, 39, 40;
VII. 44; (he is described as a kind of divine horse,
and probably, like Tārkṣya, is a personification of
the morning Sun; sometimes he is considered as a
creation of heaven and earth, sometimes of Mitra-
Varuṇa, and is invoked in the morning, together
with Agni, Uṣas, and the Aśvins; the N. is pro-
bably derived fr. 2. {%dadhi%} and rt. 1. {%kṝ,%} to scatter,
in allusion to the rising sun spreading dew and hoar
frost like milk, but Mahī-dhara and Yāska explain it
as if fr. 1. {%dadhi%} and rt. {%kram,%} i. e. one who bears
his rider and advances, see Nirukta II. 27: in Nigh.
I. 14, {%dadhi-krā%} is given as one of the synonyms
of {%aśva,%} a horse.) {%—Dadhi-krāvan, ā,%} m., Ved. {%=%}
{%dadhi-krā%}. {%—Dadhi-gharma, as,%} m., Ved. a warm
beverage made of inspissated milk. {%—Dadhi-cāra,%}
{%as,%} m. the churning-stick. {%—Dadhi-ja, as, ā, am,%}
produced from thickened or coagulated milk; ({%am%}),
n. fresh butter. {%—Dadhi-drapsa, as,%} m., Ved. a
drop or globule of thickened milk. {%—Dadhi-dhenu,%}
{%us,%} f. a quantity of thickened milk representing or
equivalent to a cow given as an offering to the priests
at a sacrifice; N. of the 105th chapter of the
Vārāha-Purāṇa. {%—Dadhidhenu-vidhi, is,%} m., N.
of the 168th chapter of the second part of the
Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa. {%—Dadhi-nadī,%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Dadhi-parṇa, as,%} m., N. of a saint.
{%—Dadhi-puccha, as,%} m., N. of a jackal.
{%—Dadhi-puṣpikā,%} f. the plant Clitoria Ternatea,
{%= aparājitā%}. {%—Dadhi-puṣpī,%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= kolaśimbī%}. {%—Dadhi-pūraṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
Nāga. {%—Dadhi-pūrva-mukha, as,%} m. {%= dadhi-%}
{%mukha,%} N. of a monkey, (‘in whose name the
word {%mukha%} is preceded by {%dadhi.%}’) {%—Dadhi-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. the elephant or wood-apple, Feronia
Elephantum, (the fruit having the acid taste of
coagulated milk.) {%—Dadhi-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a vessel
for holding coagulated milk, a pail. {%—Dadhi-maṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. the liquid part of curdled milk, whey. {%—Da-%}
{%dhi-maṇḍoda (˚ḍa-uda), as,%} m. the sea of whey.
{%—Dadhi-manthana, am,%} n. the churning of co-
agulated milk. {%—Dadhi-mukha, as,%} m. a kind of
serpent, N. of a Nāga; N. of a monkey, brother-
in-law of Su-grīva; N. of a Yaska. {%—Dadhimukha-%}
{%śrāva, as,%} m., N. of the fifty-seventh chapter of
the Sundara-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Dadhi-%}
{%vaktra, as,%} m., N. of a monkey, brother-in-law
of Su-grīva. {%—Dadhi-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. hav-
ing coagulated milk, prepared with thick sour
milk. {%—Dadhi-varga, as,%} m., N. of a chapter in
the medical work called Bhāva-prakāśa. {%—Dadhi-%}
{%vāmana-prayoga, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the
Tantra-sāra. {%—Dadhivāmana-mantra, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a chapter of the Tantra-sāra. {%—Dadhi-vāri,%}
{%is, is, i,%} containing coagulated milk for water (as
a sea). {%—Dadhi-vāhana, as,%} m., N. of a prince,
son of Aṅga and father of Divi-ratha. {%—Dadhi-%}
{%vidarbha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people; (various
reading for {%daśī-vidarbha.%}) {%—Dadhi-śoṇa, as,%} m.
a monkey. {%—Dadhi-saktu, avas,%} m. pl. barley-
meal mixed with thickened milk. {%—Dadhi-sam-%}
{%bhava, as, ā, am,%} prepared or produced from thickened
milk. {%—Dadhi-sara, as,%} m. the skim of coagulated
milk. {%—Dadhi-sāra, as,%} m. fresh butter. {%—Dadhi-%}
{%skanda, as,%} m., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Dadhi-sneha,%}
{%as,%} m. the oily skim of coagulated milk. {%—Dadhi-%}
{%sveda, as,%} m. buttermilk. {%—Dadhy-añc, aṅ,%} m.
(acc. {%dadhyañcam,%} inst. {%dadhīcā,%} &c.), Ved., N.
[Page0400-c+ 76]
of a Ṛṣi or of a mythical being, called in Ṛg-veda
I. 80, 16, and 117, 22, son of Atharvan; (the N.
properly denotes ‘sprinkling or bestowing thick
milk’ [cf. {%ghṛtācī%}]; and the legends concerning
him were probably originally connected with those
of Dadhi-krā; he is described as having the head
of a horse given to him by the Aśvins, with which he
taught them the Madhu-vidyā and revealed to them
where the Soma of Tvaṣṭṛ was concealed; accord-
ing to Ṛg-veda I. 84, 13, Indra slew ninety times
nine Vṛtras with his bones converted into a thunder-
bolt; a portion of the latter part of the Yajur-veda
is ascribed to Dadhy-añca, and he and his father are
regarded as the first founders of sacrifice.) {%—Dadhy-%}
{%anna, am,%} n. rice prepared with {%dadhi%}. {%—Dadhy-%}
{%ākara, as,%} m. the sea of inspissated milk. {%—Dadhy-%}
{%āśir, īr, īr, īr,%} Ved. mixed with coagulated milk
(as Soma). {%—Dadhy-āhva%} or {%dadhy-āhvaya, as,%}
m. the resin of the Pinus Longifolia. {%—Dadhy-%}
{%uttara%} or {%dadhyuttaraka, am,%} n. the skim of
curdled milk, whey. {%—Dadhy-uda, as, ā, am, =%}
{%dadhi-vāri%} above. {%—Dadhy-odana, as,%} m. boiled
rice mixed with coagulated milk.
<LEND>

<L>21850<pc>0400-c<k1>daDika<k2>daDika
{%Dadhika%}¦ (at the end of adj. comp.) {%= dadhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>21851<pc>0400-c<k1>daDitTa<k2>daDitTa
{%Dadhittha, as,%}¦ m. the wood-apple, Feronia Ele-
phantum, the wood of which is not allowed to be
used in sacrifices; [cf. {%dadhi-phala, kapittha,%}
{%dādittha.%}] {%—Dadhittha-rasa, as,%} m. or {%dadhitthā-%}
{%khya (˚tha-ākh˚), as, am,%} m. n. the resin of the
above tree.
<LEND>

<L>21852<pc>0400-c<k1>daDizAyya<k2>daDizAyya
{%Dadhiṣāyya, as,%}¦ m. clarified butter; [cf. {%didhi-%}
{%ṣāyya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21853<pc>0400-c<k1>daDisya<k2>daDisya
{%Dadhisya,%}¦ nom. P. {%dadhisyati,%} &c., to wish for
thick milk; [cf. {%dadhīya%} and {%dadhyasya%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>21854<pc>0400-c<k1>daDIca<k2>daDIca
{%Dadhīca, as,%}¦ m. (a later and corrupt form of
{%dadhy-añc,%} col. 2), the N. of a Ṛṣi or sage cele-
brated for having devoted himself to death that the
gods might be armed with his bones, (his story is
told in Mahā-bh. III. 8695; the gods being op-
pressed by the Kālakeya Asuras, solicited from the
sage his bones, and with them Tvaṣṭṛ fabricated
the thunderbolt with which Indra slew Vṛtra and
routed the Asuras; the Saras-vatī receives his gene-
rative energy, from which springs Sāras-vata.) {%—Da-%}
{%dhīca-kṣupa-saṃvāda, as,%} m., N. of the thirty-
fifth chapter of the Liṅga-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>21855<pc>0400-c<k1>daDIci<k2>daDIci
{%Dadhīci, is,%}¦ m. {%= dadhīca%}. {%—Dadhīcy-asthi,%}
n. Dadhīci's bones, the thunderbolt; the diamond,
(the latter being regarded as similar in nature to
the thunderbolt.)
<LEND>

<L>21856<pc>0400-c<k1>daDIya<k2>daDIya
{%Dadhīya,%}¦ nom. P. {%dadhīyati,%} &c., to like sour-
curds.
<LEND>

<L>21857<pc>0400-c<k1>daDyasya<k2>daDyasya
{%Dadhyasya,%}¦ nom. P. {%dadhyasyati,%} &c., to long
for thick or coagulated milk; [cf. {%dadhisya%} and
{%dadhīya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21858<pc>0400-c<k1>daDyAnI<k2>daDyAnI
{%Dadhyānī,%}¦ f., N. of a medicinal plant, {%= su-%}
{%darśanā.%}
<LEND>

<L>21859<pc>0400-c<k1>daDfz<k2>daDfz
{#daDfz#}¦ {%dadhṛṣ, k, k, k,%} m. f. n. (reduplicated
form of rt. {%dhṛṣ%}), Ved. firm, strong, bold. {%—Da-%}
{%dhṛk,%} ind. firmly, strongly, boldly; (according to
some, this word is to be referred to rt. {%dṛṃh.%})
<LEND>

<L>21860<pc>0400-c<k1>daDfza<k2>daDfza
{%Dadhṛṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. courageous, bold,
fighting bravely.
<LEND>

<L>21861<pc>0400-c<k1>daDfzvaRi<k2>daDfzvaRi
{%Dadhṛṣvaṇi, is, is, i, = dadhṛṣa.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>21862<pc>0400-c<k1>daDna<k2>daDna
{#daDna#}¦ {%dadhna, as,%} m. an epithet of Yama.
<LEND>

<L>21863<pc>0400-c<k1>daDyaYc<k2>daDyaYc
{#daDyaYc#}¦ {%dadhy-añc,%} &c. See bottom of col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>21864<pc>0400-c<k1>dan<k2>dan<h>1
{#dan#} 1¦. {%dan,%} Ved., explained by Sāyaṇa as
a participle fr. rt. 1. {%dā = dadat%} or {%dātṛ,%} giving,
bestowing; modern scholars connect this word with
{%pati%} and explain {%patir-dam%} as a transposition of
{%dam-pati,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>21865<pc>0400-c<k1>dan<k2>dan<h>2
{#dan#} 2¦. {%dan,%} considered by some as a Vedic
root, from which they derive the Desid. {%dīdāṃsate%}
(referred by Pāṇ. III. 1, 6, to rt. {%dān,%} q. v.) and
other forms; the meaning is said to be straight, to
straighten; to correct. (In Ṛg-veda I. 174, 2,
[Page0401-a+ 78]
{%danas%} is said by Yāska to {%= dāna-manasas,%} liberal-
minded, disposed to give, see Nirukta VI. 31; but
according to Sāy., {%danas = adamayas,%} thou hast
humbled, or by transposition of the letters {%ana-%}
{%das.%})
<LEND>

<L>21866<pc>0401-a<k1>danAyus<k2>danAyus
{#danAyus#}¦ {%danāyus, us,%} f., N. of one of the
daughters of Dakṣa, married to Kaśyapa; ({%ūs%}),
m. (?), N. of the supposed father (?) of the Dānavas;
[cf. {%danu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21867<pc>0401-a<k1>danIDvaMsa<k2>danIDvaMsa
{#danIDvaMsa#}¦ {%danīdhvaṃsa,%} an adj. formed fr.
Intens. of rt. {%dhvaṃs.%}
<LEND>

<L>21868<pc>0401-a<k1>danu<k2>danu
{#danu#}¦ {%danu, us,%} f., N. of one of the daughters
of Dakṣa, wife of Kaśyapa, and mother of the
demons called Dānavas, the Titans of Hindū mytho-
logy; the number of these Dānavas is stated to be
40 in Mahā-bh. 1. 252, but 100 &c. are reckoned
in other places; ({%us%}), m., N. of a son of Śrī, also
called Dānava; (he was originally very handsome,
but having offended Indra, was changed by him into
a deformed monster; see {%kabandha.%}) {%—Danu-ja,%}
{%as,%} or {%danu-sambhava, as,%} or {%danu-sūnu, us,%} m.
a son of Danu, a Dānava. {%—Danuja-dviṣ, ṭ,%} or
{%danujāri (˚ja-ari), is,%} m. an enemy of the Dānavas,
a god, a deity.
<LEND>

<L>21869<pc>0401-a<k1>danuza<k2>danuza
{%Danuṣa, as,%}¦ m. (?) a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>21870<pc>0401-a<k1>danta<k2>danta
{#danta#}¦ {%danta, as,%} m. (for etym. see {%dat,%} p. 399,
col. 2), a tooth, tusk, fang; an elephant's tusk, ivory;
the point of an arrow; the peak of a mountain, the
side or ridge of a mountain; ({%ī%}), f. a medicinal plant
yielding a pungent oil, commonly Danti, Croton
Polyandrum or Croton Tiglium [cf. {%danta-mūlikā%}
and {%dantinī%}]; at the end of an adj. comp. the fem.
of {%danta%} may end in {%ā%} or {%ī;%} [cf. {%ibha-dantā,%}
{%kuḍmala-dantī, krūra-dantī,%} &c.: cf. also Zend
<nsi>dañt-an,</nsi> ‘tooth;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀ-δούς, ὀ-δοντ</lang> Æol. pl.
<lang n="greek">ἔδοντες;</lang> Lat. <nsi>dens;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>dant-i-s;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>tunth-</nsi>
<nsi>u-s;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>todh;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>zant, zand, zan;</nsi>
Cambro-Brit. <nsi>dant;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>déad.</nsi>] {%—Danta-kar-%}
{%ṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%} contracting the teeth, i. e. setting
them on edge; ({%as%}), m. the common lime, Citrus
Acida. {%—Danta-kāra, as,%} m. an artist who works
in ivory. {%—Danta-kāṣṭha, am,%} n. a piece of stick
or small twig of particular trees used as a tooth-brush
or chewed to cleanse the teeth; cleaning the teeth
in this manner; ({%as%}), m., N. of various trees, the
wood of which is used for cleaning the teeth; Fla-
courtia Sapida ({%= vi-kaṅkata%}); Asclepias Gigantea;
Ficus Indica ({%= vaṭa%}); Acacia Catechu; Pongamia
Glabra; Terminalia Alata; [cf. {%danta-dhāvana.%}]
{%—Danta-kāṣṭhaka, as,%} m. the shrub Tabernæ-
montana Coronaria {%(= āhulya)%}. {%—Dantakāṣṭhā-%}
{%bhakṣaṇa (˚ṭha-a-bh˚), am,%} n., N. of the 128th
chapter of the Vārāha-Purāṇa. {%—Danta-kumāra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Danta-krūram,%} ind. cruelly
or fearfully on the teeth, fearfully with or by the
teeth (e. g. to seize or strike a person in this man-
ner). {%—Dantagrāhi-tā,%} f. the state of causing injury
to the teeth. {%—Danta-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} injuring
the teeth, causing them to decay &c. {%—Danta-%}
{%gharṣa, as,%} m. chattering or grinding of the teeth;
[cf. {%danta-saṅgharṣa%} and {%danta-harṣa.%}] {%—Dan-%}
{%ta-ghāta, as,%} m. ‘a blow with the teeth,’ a bite
[cf. {%danta-vighāta%}]; N. of a man. {%—Danta-cāla,%}
{%as,%} m. looseness of the teeth. {%—Danta-cchada,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the covering of the teeth,’ a lip [cf. {%dac-%}
{%chada%} and {%daśana-cchada%}]; ({%ā%}), f. Momordica
Monadelpha. {%—Dantacchadopamā (˚da-up˚),%} f.
Momordica Monadelpha, (to the red fruit of which
the lips are often compared.) {%—Danta-jāta = jāta-%}
{%danta, as, ā, am,%} ‘having teeth,’ a child who is teeth-
ing or whose teeth are just appearing; ({%a-dantajāta,%}
having no teeth.) {%—Danta-jāha, am,%} n. the root
of a tooth. {%—Danta-darśana, am,%} n. showing the
teeth (as a dog does). {%—Danta-dhāvana, am,%} n.
cleaning or washing the teeth; a tooth-brush or
fibrous stick for cleaning the teeth, or a piece of
wood chewed for that purpose [cf. {%danta-kāṣṭha%}];
({%as%}), m., N. of various trees, the wood of which is
[Page0401-b+ 81]
used for cleaning the teeth, Acacia Catechu, Mimu-
sops Elengi ({%= vakula%}); N. of a chapter of the
Purāṇa-sarva-sva by Halāyudha. {%—Dantadhāva-%}
{%naka, as,%} m. a species of tree. {%—Dantadhāvana-%}
{%prakaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Parā-
śara-smṛti-vyākhyā by Mādhava. {%—Dantadhāvana-%}
{%vidhi, is,%} m., N. of a chapter of the Smṛti-kau-
mudī. {%—Danta-pattra, am,%} n. a kind of ear-ring.
{%—Danta-pattraka, am,%} n. a kind of jasmine ({%=%}
{%kunda%}), Jasminum Pubescens, (the petals or leaves
of the flower resembling teeth in colour and shape,
and are often so compared in poetry.) {%—Danta-%}
{%pavana, am,%} n. a dentifrice, or a small piece of
wood taken to clean the teeth; [cf. {%danta-kāṣṭha%}
and {%danta-dhāvana.%}] {%—Danta-pāta, as,%} m. the
falling out of the teeth. {%—Danta-pālī,%} f. the gum.
{%—Danta-puppuṭa%} or {%danta-puppuṭaka, as,%} m.
gum-boil. {%—Danta-pura, am,%} n. ‘the town of Bud-
dha's tooth,’ N. of the capital of the Kaliṅgas.
{%—Danta-puṣpa, as,%} m. the plant Strychnos Po-
tatorum, the flower of which is compared to a tooth;
({%am%}), n. the fruit of the above plant. {%—Danta-%}
{%prakṣālana, am,%} n. cleaning the teeth; any in-
strument or means for cleaning the teeth; [cf. {%dan-%}
{%ta-kāṣṭha, danta-dhāvana, danta-pavana.%}]
{%—Danta-phala, as,%} m. Feronia Elephantum, {%=%}
{%kapittha%} [cf. {%dadhi-phala%}]; ({%ā%}), f. long pepper;
({%am%}), n. {%= danta-puṣpa,%} q. v. {%—Danta-bhaṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. fracture of the teeth. {%—Danta-bhāga, as,%}
m. the fore part of an elephant's head (where the
tusks appear); part of a tooth. {%—Danta-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} made of ivory. {%—Danta-mala, am,%} n. the
tartar of the teeth, any impurity of the teeth.
{%—Danta-māṃsa, am,%} n. the gums. {%—Danta-%}
{%mūla, am,%} n. the root of a tooth, the gums; a gum-
boil. {%—Danta-mūlikā,%} f. {%= dantī,%} Croton Polyan-
drum or Croton Tiglium. {%—Dantamūlīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} belonging to the root of the teeth, as the dental
letters; {%dantamūlīyas ta-kāra-vargas,%} the class of
letters beginning with {%ta%} which are uttered from the
root of the teeth. {%—Danta-rajas, as,%} n. the tartar of
the teeth, impurity of the teeth. {%—Danta-roga, as,%}
m. disease of the teeth, tooth-ache. {%—Dantarogin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} affected with tooth-ache. {%—Danta-lekha-%}
{%ka, as,%} m. one who makes a livelihood by painting
or marking the teeth. {%—Danta-loka, as,%} m., N. of a
mountain in Gāndhāra. {%—Danta-vaktra, as,%} m., N.
of a prince of the Karūṣas (described as a Dānava or
Asura; more correctly {%danta-vakra%}). {%—Danta-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having teeth, toothed. {%—Danta-valka,%}
{%am,%} n. the enamel of the teeth. {%—Danta-vastra,%}
{%am,%} n. (according to some also {%as,%} m.), ‘teeth-
covering,’ i. e. the lip. {%—Danta-vāsas, ās (?), as,%} m. (?)
n. the lip; see the preceding. {%—Danta-vighāta,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= danta-ghāta,%} a bite. {%—Danta-vīja, as,%}
{%ā,%} m. f. and {%danta-vījaka, as,%} m. pomegranate;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of cucumber. {%—Danta-vīṇā,%} f. ‘a
tooth-guitar,’ a kind of jew's-harp; ({%danta-vīṇāṃ%}
{%vādayat,%} playing this instrument; in Pañca-tantra
94, 4, = making a chattering with the teeth.) {%—Dan-%}
{%ta-veṣṭa, as,%} m. the gums; ({%au%}), m. du. the
gums of the upper and lower jaw; a ring round
the tusk of an elephant (?) ; tumor of the gums;
see the next. {%—Danta-veṣṭaka, as,%} m. tumor of
the gums (internal abscess accompanied with loosening
of the teeth), gum-boil. {%—Danta-vaidarbha, as,%} m.
loosening of the teeth through external injury.
{%—Danta-vyasana, am,%} n. fracture or decay of the
teeth or of a tusk. {%—Danta-śaṅku, u,%} n. a pair of
forceps or pincers for drawing teeth. {%—Danta-śaṭa,%}
{%as,%} m. a wrong form for {%danta-śaṭha%}. {%—Danta-%}
{%śaṭha, as, ā, am,%} ‘bad for the teeth,’ acid; ({%as%}),
m. sourness, acidity; N. of several trees with acid
fruits; common lime (Citrus Acida), elephant or
wood-apple, Feronia Elephantum, Averrhoa Caram-
bola (Acida), Citrus Aurantium; ({%ā%}), f. wood-sorrel,
Oxalis Pusilla, {%= kṣudrāmlikā; (am),%} n. the fruits
of the above trees. {%—Danta-śarkarā,%} f. tartar or
concretion of the teeth. {%—Danta-śāṇa, am,%} n. a
dentifrice composed chiefly of the powdered fruit of
the myrobalan and green sulphate of iron. {%—Danta- %}
[Page0401-c+ 79]
{%śirā,%} f. a back or double tooth ({%= māḍhī%}); the
gum. {%—Danta-śuddhi, is,%} f. cleaning the teeth.
{%—Danta-śūla, as, am,%} m. n. tooth-ache. {%—Danta-%}
{%śodhanī,%} f. ‘tooth-cleanser,’ a tooth-pick. {%—Danta-%}
{%śopha, as,%} m. swelling of the gum. {%—Danta-śli-%}
{%ṣṭa%} or {%danta-sakta, as, ā, am,%} entangled in or
between the teeth. {%—Danta-saṅgharṣa, as,%} m.
rubbing the teeth together, gnashing the teeth;
[cf. {%danta-gharṣa%} and {%danta-harṣa.%}] {%—Danta-%}
{%harṣa, as,%} m. morbid sensitiveness of the teeth,
intolerance of any rough or acid substances; chat-
tering of the teeth; [cf. {%danta-gharṣa%} and {%danta-%}
{%saṅgharṣa.%}] {%—Danta-harṣaka%} or {%danta-har-%}
{%ṣaṇa, as,%} m. ‘making the teeth sensitive, setting
them on edge,’ the lime tree, Citrus Acida. {%—Danta-%}
{%hīna, as, ā, am,%} toothless. {%—Dantāgra (˚ta-ag˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the top or point of a tooth. {%—Dantāghāta%}
{%(˚ta-āgh˚), as,%} m. ‘tooth-blow’ or ‘tooth-wound,’
a bite; the citron or lime tree. {%—Dantāghātin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} struck with the teeth, bitten, remaining
between the teeth. {%—Dantāda (˚ta-ad˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} corroding the teeth. {%—Dantā-danti,%} ind. tooth
against tooth, i. e. biting one another. {%—Dantāntara%}
{%(˚ta-an˚), am,%} n. the space between the teeth.
{%—Dantāntarādhiṣṭhita (˚ra-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
sticking between the teeth. {%—Dantāyudha (˚ta-%}
{%āy˚), as,%} m. a wild boar, a hog (‘having tusks for
weapons’). {%—Dantārbuda (˚ta-ar˚), as, am,%} m. n.
gum-boil, ulceration of the gums. {%—Dantālaya (˚ta-%}
{%āl˚), as,%} m. ‘the abode of the teeth,’ i. e. the
mouth. {%—Dantālikā%} or {%dantālī (˚ta-āl˚),%} f. a
horse's bridle or bit; [cf. 1. {%āli.%}] {%—Dantoc-%}
{%chiṣṭa (˚ta-uc˚), am,%} n. the remains of food
lodged between the teeth. {%—Dantodbheda (˚ta-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. appearance of the teeth, dentition. {%—Danto-%}
{%lūkhalika, as, ā, am,%} or {%dantolūkhalin (˚ta-ul˚),%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} ‘one who uses his teeth as a mortar,’ one
who grinds his grain between the teeth, i. e. eats it
before being ground, an anchorite. {%—Dantoṣṭhaka%}
{%(˚ta-oṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} one who attends to or takes
care of his teeth and lips.
<LEND>

<L>21871<pc>0401-c<k1>dantaka<k2>dantaka
{%Dantaka = danta,%}¦ a tooth &c. (at the end of a
comp., cf. {%a-dantaka, kṛmi-d˚, śyāva-d˚%}); ({%as%}),
m. a jagged peak or projection in a rock or moun-
tain; a bracket, a pin or shelf projecting from a
wall; ({%as, ā, am%}), paying attention to one's teeth.
<LEND>

<L>21872<pc>0401-c<k1>dantAvala<k2>dantAvala
{%Dantāvala%}¦ or {%dantābala, as,%} m. an elephant
(? for {%danta-vala = dantin%}).
<LEND>

<L>21873<pc>0401-c<k1>danti<k2>danti
{%Danti, is,%}¦ m. (probably) an epithet of Gaṇeśa;
[cf. {%eka-danta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21874<pc>0401-c<k1>dantikA<k2>dantikA
{%Dantikā%}¦ or {%dantijā = dantī%} below; [cf. {%guccha-%}
{%dantikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21875<pc>0401-c<k1>dantin<k2>dantin
{%Dantin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having teeth, toothed, tusked;
({%ī%}), m. an elephant; a mountain; ({%inī%}), f. {%= dantī%}
below. {%—Danti-danta, as,%} m. an elephant's tusk,
ivory. {%—Dantidanta-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of
ivory. {%—Danti-mada, as,%} m. the juice flowing from
the temples of a rutting elephant.
<LEND>

<L>21876<pc>0401-c<k1>dantila<k2>dantila
{%Dantila, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21877<pc>0401-c<k1>dantI<k2>dantI
{%Dantī,%}¦ f. the plant Croton Polyandrum; see above
under {%danta;%} [cf. {%dantikā%} and {%dantijā.%}] {%—Dantī-%}
{%vīja, am,%} n. a strongly purgative nut, the fruit of
the Croton.
<LEND>

<L>21878<pc>0401-c<k1>dantura<k2>dantura
{%Dantura, as, ā, am,%}¦ having long or projecting
teeth; jagged, notched, serrated, uneven; waving,
undulatory; rising (as hair), bristling. {%—Dantura-%}
{%cchada, as,%} m. the lime tree (‘having prickly leaves’).
<LEND>

<L>21879<pc>0401-c<k1>danturaka<k2>danturaka
{%Danturaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ having prominent teeth;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people living to the east of
Madhya-deśa.
<LEND>

<L>21880<pc>0401-c<k1>danturita<k2>danturita
{%Danturita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having prominent teeth,
toothed, notched, bristling.
<LEND>

<L>21881<pc>0401-c<k1>dantUla<k2>dantUla
{%Dantūla, as, ā, am,%}¦ having teeth, furnished with
teeth.
<LEND>

<L>21882<pc>0401-c<k1>dantya<k2>dantya
{%Dantya, as, ā, am,%}¦ dental, of or belonging to
the teeth, produced on the teeth; suitable to the
teeth; [cf. {%a-d˚.%}] {%—Dantyoṣṭhya%} or {%dantyau-%}
{%ṣṭhya (˚ya-oṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} denti-labial.
<LEND>

<L>21883<pc>0401-c<k1>dantakUra<k2>dantakUra
{#dantakUra#}¦ {%dantakūra,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>
[Page0402-a+ 77]

<L>21884<pc>0402-a<k1>dandaSa<k2>dandaSa
{#dandaSa#}¦ {%dandaśa, as,%} m. (fr. Intens. of rt.
2. {%daṃś%}), a tooth.
<LEND>

<L>21885<pc>0402-a<k1>dandaSUka<k2>dandaSUka
{%Dandaśūka, as, ā, am,%}¦ mordacious, biting, mis-
chievous, malignant, venomous; ({%as%}), m. a snake,
serpent; a particular kind of serpent; N. of a hell
infested by serpents; a Rākṣasa, a demon or goblin.
<LEND>

<L>21886<pc>0402-a<k1>dandrama<k2>dandrama
{#dandrama#}¦ {%dandrama, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens. of
rt. {%dram%}), going tortuously or slowly (?).
<LEND>

<L>21887<pc>0402-a<k1>dandramaRa<k2>dandramaRa
{%Dandramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of going tortu-
ously; ({%as, ā, am%}), who or what goes tortuously.
<LEND>

<L>21888<pc>0402-a<k1>danv<k2>danv
{#danv#}¦ {%danv,%} cl. 1. P. {%danvati,%} &c., to go
or move; [cf. 1. {%du, dhanv, dhāv;%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">δονέω</lang> = Caus. {%danvayāmi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21889<pc>0402-a<k1>daPArabAhlIka<k2>daPArabAhlIka
{#daPArabAhlIka#}¦ {%daphārabāhlīka,%} N. of a place
mentioned in the Romaka-siddhānta.
<LEND>

<L>21890<pc>0402-a<k1>daB<k2>daB
{#daB#}¦ {%dabh%} (connected with rt. {%dambh,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. 5. P. {%dabhati, dabhnoti,%}
&c., to hurt, injure, destroy; to go; cl. 10. P.
{%dābhayati%} or {%dambhayati,%} &c., to send, impel, order,
command; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">θάμβος, ἔταφον, τέθηπα;</lang> Old
Germ. <nsi>tepyan</nsi> or <nsi>depyan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21891<pc>0402-a<k1>dabDi<k2>dabDi
{%Dabdhi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. injury, hurt, damage.
<LEND>

<L>21892<pc>0402-a<k1>daBa<k2>daBa
{%Dabha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. injuring, hurting; ({%as%}),
m. deception, deceiving, (only occurring in dat. case,
{%dabhāya%} used for inf.; cf. {%a-dabha, dambha,%}
{%dūḍabha.%})
<LEND>

<L>21893<pc>0402-a<k1>daBIti<k2>daBIti
{%Dabhīti, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. injuring, an enemy;
({%is%}), m., N. of a being protected by the Aśvins
and especially by Indra.
<LEND>

<L>21894<pc>0402-a<k1>daBya<k2>daBya
{%Dabhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be hurt or injured,
to be deceived.
<LEND>

<L>21895<pc>0402-a<k1>daBra<k2>daBra
{%Dabhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ little, small, deficient; ({%as%}), m.
the sea, ocean; ({%am%}), ind. a little, slightly. {%—Da-%}
{%bhra-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%dabhra-buddhi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} little-minded, weak-minded.
<LEND>

<L>21896<pc>0402-a<k1>dam<k2>dam<h>1
{#dam#} 1¦. {%dam,%} cl. 4. P. {%dāmyati, dadāma,%}
{%damitum,%} to be tamed or subdued; to be
tranquillized; to tame, subdue, conquer, subject, con-
trol, restrain; to quiet, pacify: Pass. {%damyate%} (Aor.
{%adami%}): Caus. P. A. {%damayati, -te,%} &c., to subdue,
overpower, conquer; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δάμνημι, δαμνάω, δαμνάζω</lang>
<lang n="greek">δάμ-αρ, δαμάλη-ς, δμώς, δαμάω</lang> = Caus. {%da-%}
{%mayāmi;%} Lat. <nsi>domare, damnum, damnare;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>tamyan,</nsi> ‘to tame,’ <nsi>ga-timan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>tam, tam-</nsi>
<nsi>yan;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>zami, zam;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>zahm,</nsi>
<nsi>ziemen.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>21897<pc>0402-a<k1>dam<k2>dam<h>2
2. {%dam%}¦ (in comp.) {%= dama,%} a house. {%—Dam-%}
{%pati, is,%} m., Ved. the master or lord of the house,
a master or lord in general; ({%ī%}), du. wife and hus-
band; (in this case the compound is by modern
scholars explained as = ‘the two masters;’ but accord-
ing to Sāy. and others {%dam%} is here {%= jāyā,%} a wife;
cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δεσπότης.</lang>)
<LEND>

<L>21898<pc>0402-a<k1>dama<k2>dama
{%Dama, as, am,%}¦ m. n., Ved. house, home, (pro-
perly ‘domain,’ the place of the husband's do-
minion); the inmates of a house [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δόμος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δέμω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>domus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>timryan;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>timber, timbrian</nsi>]; ({%as, ā, am%}), (at the end of
comp.) taming, subduing, see {%arin-dama; (as),%} m.,
N. of several men; of a Maharṣi; of one of the
three sons of Bhīma, king of Vidarbha; taming,
subduing; self-command, self-restraint, self-control,
endurance of painful austerities, temperance, sub-
duing the passions; punishing, punishment, chastise-
ment, fine, mulct, a N. of Prajā-pati (?); mud,
mire (?) . {%—Dama-kartṛ, tā,%} m. a ruler. {%—Dama-%}
{%ghoṣa, as,%} m. a prince of the lunar race, king of
Cedi, father of Śiśu-pāla. {%—Damaghoṣa-suta, as,%}
m., N. of Śiśu-pāla, the enemy of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Dama-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of self-control. {%—Dama-%}
{%svasṛ, ā,%} f. ‘the sister of Dama,’ a N. of Dama-
yantī.
<LEND>

<L>21899<pc>0402-a<k1>damaka<k2>damaka
{%Damaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ taming, a tamer, subduer.
<LEND>

<L>21900<pc>0402-a<k1>damaTa<k2>damaTa
{%Damatha, as, am,%}¦ m. n. self-restraint, self-con-
trol, taming, subduing, endurance of rigorous aus-
terities, subduing the senses, suppressing the passions;
punishment, punishing, chastising.
<LEND>
[Page0402-b+ 79]

<L>21901<pc>0402-b<k1>damaTu<k2>damaTu
{%Damathu, us,%}¦ m. self-restraint, self-subjugation;
self-denial, subjection; punishment, punishing.
<LEND>

<L>21902<pc>0402-b<k1>damana<k2>damana
{%Damana, as, ī, am,%}¦ taming, subduing, over-
powering, (at the end of a comp., e. g. {%śatru-d˚%});
tranquil, passionless, a philosopher; ({%as%}), m. a sub-
duer, a tamer of horses, a charioteer; N. of a son
of Vasu-deva and Rohiṇī; of a Brahmarṣi; of a
son of Bharad-vāja; of an old king; of a son of
Bhīma, king of Vidarbha; the flower Artemisia
Indica, commonly called Donā; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
plant, {%= agni-damanī,%} Solanum Jacquini; ({%am%}), n.
taming, subduing, subjugation, restraining, chastising,
punishing, self-restraint.
<LEND>

<L>21903<pc>0402-b<k1>damanaka<k2>damanaka
{%Damanaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; N. of a
jackal; Artemisia Indica, {%= damana;%} N. of a metre
consisting of four lines of six short syllables each;
N. of another metre of four lines of ten short sylla-
bles and one long.
<LEND>

<L>21904<pc>0402-b<k1>damanIya<k2>damanIya
{%Damanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ tamable, to be restrained
or subdued.
<LEND>

<L>21905<pc>0402-b<k1>damanya<k2>damanya
{%Damanya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%damanyati,%} &c., Ved. to
subdue, overpower, conquer.
<LEND>

<L>21906<pc>0402-b<k1>damayat<k2>damayat
{%Damayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ subduing, taming, re-
straining, chastising.
<LEND>

<L>21907<pc>0402-b<k1>damayantikA<k2>damayantikA
{%Damayantikā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>21908<pc>0402-b<k1>damayantI<k2>damayantI
{%Damayantī,%}¦ f. (‘subduing men’), N. of a beauti-
ful woman who was the daughter of Bhīma, king of
Vidarbha, and wife of Nala, whose story forms the
subject of a celebrated episode of the Mahā-bhārata;
(according to some) = Śākya-muni in a former birth;
a kind of cucumber, see {%bhadra-mallikā%}. {%—Dama-%}
{%yantī-kathā,%} f. ‘the story of Damayantī,’ N. of a
song. {%—Damayantī-kāvya, am,%} n. ‘poem of Da-
mayantī,’ N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>21909<pc>0402-b<k1>damayitf<k2>damayitf
{%Damayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a tamer, subduer, sub-
duing; a punisher, chastiser; epithet of Viṣṇu and
of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>21910<pc>0402-b<k1>damAya<k2>damAya
{%Damāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%damāyati,%} &c., Ved. to restrain
or control one's self; to subdue, overpower.
<LEND>

<L>21911<pc>0402-b<k1>damita<k2>damita
{%Damita, as, ā, am%}¦ (or {%dānta,%} q. v.), tamed,
subdued, patient of every suffering or exaction or
privation.
<LEND>

<L>21912<pc>0402-b<k1>damitf<k2>damitf
{%Damitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. a tamer, subduer.
<LEND>

<L>21913<pc>0402-b<k1>damitvA<k2>damitvA
{%Damitvā%}¦ or {%dāntvā,%} ind. having subdued or
tamed.
<LEND>

<L>21914<pc>0402-b<k1>damin<k2>damin
{%Damin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ tamed, subdued, subduing the
passions; taming, subduing, a tamer; ({%i%}), n., N. of
a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>21915<pc>0402-b<k1>damunas<k2>damunas
{%Damunas, ās,%}¦ m., N. of Agni, the god of fire.
<LEND>

<L>21916<pc>0402-b<k1>damUnas<k2>damUnas
{%Damūnas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. belonging to the
house or family, devoted to the house or family;
a friend of the house; epithet of Agni, Savitṛ, Indra,
&c.; (Sāy.) of subdued mind, docile. In Ṛg-veda
V. 42, 12, the pl. is regarded by Sāy. as an epithet
of the Ṛbhus.
<LEND>

<L>21917<pc>0402-b<k1>damya<k2>damya<h>1
1. {%damya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fut. pass. part.), to be
tamed, tamable, to be subjected or controlled; to be
punished, punishable; ({%as%}), m. a young bullock; a
steer that has to be tamed. {%—Damya-sārathi, is,%}
m. ‘the guide of those who have to be restrained,’
an epithet of Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>21918<pc>0402-b<k1>damya<k2>damya<h>2
2. {%damya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%dama%}), Ved. being in
a house, being at home, homely.
<LEND>

<L>21919<pc>0402-b<k1>damAvandu<k2>damAvandu
{#damAvandu#}¦ {%damāvandu,%} N. of a place men-
tioned in the Romaka-siddhānta.
<LEND>

<L>21920<pc>0402-b<k1>dampati<k2>dampati
{#dampati#}¦ {%dam-pati.%} See under 2. {%dam,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>21921<pc>0402-b<k1>damB<k2>damB
{#damB#}¦ {%dambh%} (connected with rt. {%dabh,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. 5. P. {%dabhati, dabhnoti,%}
{%dadambha%} or {%dadābha%} or {%debha%} (pl. {%dadambhus%}
or {%debhus%}), {%dambhiṣyati, adambhīt, dambhitum,%}
Ved. inf. {%ā-dabhe,%} to seek to injure, to hurt, injure,
cause damage; to act deceitfully, cheat, impose upon,
trick, deceive: Caus. P. A. {%dambhayati, -te, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%adadambhat,%} to destroy, strike down; A. to
collect, gather, arrange, string: Desid. {%didambhi-%}
{%ṣati, dhipsati, dhīpsati,%} Ved. {%dipsati%} or {%dīpsati,%}
to wish to hurt or injure, desire to destroy; to have
the power to deceive or destroy: Intens. {%dādabh-%}
{%yate, dādambdhi.%}
<LEND>
[Page0402-c+ 78]

<L>21922<pc>0402-c<k1>damBa<k2>damBa
{%Dambha, as,%}¦ m. deceit, fraud, cheating, trickery,
feigning hypocrisy, sanctimony; arrogance, osten-
tation, pride; sin, wickedness; Deceit personified
as a son of A-dharma and Mṛṣā; an epithet of
Śiva; Indra's thunderbolt. {%—Dambha-caryā,%} f. de-
ceit, hypocrisy. {%—Dambhodbhava (˚bha-ud˚), as,%}
m., N. of a king whose story is told in Mahā-bh.
Udyoga-parva 3473, (he fought with two hermits
but was worsted.)
<LEND>

<L>21923<pc>0402-c<k1>damBaka<k2>damBaka
{%Dambhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (at the end of comp.)
cheating, deceiving, deluding; [cf. {%kāma-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21924<pc>0402-c<k1>damBana<k2>damBana
{%Dambhana, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of comp.)
injuring, damaging, subduing [cf. {%amitra-dam-%}
{%bhana, sapatna-d˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. cheating, deceiving,
deceit.
<LEND>

<L>21925<pc>0402-c<k1>damBin<k2>damBin
{%Dambhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ acting deceitfully, hypocritical,
wicked, proud; ({%ī%}), m. a hypocrite, a deceiver, an
impostor.
<LEND>

<L>21926<pc>0402-c<k1>damBoli<k2>damBoli
{%Dambholi, is,%}¦ m. Indra's thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>21927<pc>0402-c<k1>damya<k2>damya
{#damya#}¦ {%damya.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>21928<pc>0402-c<k1>day<k2>day
{#day#}¦ {%day%} [cf. rt. 3. {%dā%}], cl. 1. A. {%dayate,%}
{%dayāñ-cakre, dayitum,%} to divide, impart,
allot, grant, give, (according to Pāṇ. II. 3, 52, re-
quiring the gen. case); to partake, possess; to divide
asunder, destroy, kill, hurt; to take part in, be in-
terested in, sympathise with, have pity on, love,
protect (with acc. or gen.); to repent; to go, move:
Intens. {%dandayyate%} and {%dādayyate;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δαίομαι</lang>
<lang n="greek">δαίνυμι, δαῖς:</lang> Hib. <nsi>deidh,</nsi> f. ‘desire, longing;’
<nsi>deidh,</nsi> m. ‘a protector, defender;’ <nsi>deide,</nsi> ‘obedi-
ence, submission.’]
<LEND>

<L>21929<pc>0402-c<k1>dayamAna<k2>dayamAna
{%Dayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ dividing, having pity on,
preserving, protecting.
<LEND>

<L>21930<pc>0402-c<k1>dayA<k2>dayA
{%Dayā,%}¦ f. taking interest in, sympathy, compas-
sion, pity, mercy, tenderness, love, clemency, pity
for (with loc. or gen., e. g. {%mayi%} or {%mama da-%}
{%yāṃ kuru,%} take pity on me); Pity personified as a
daughter of Dakṣa, wife of Dharma, and mother
of Abhaya. (According to some, the form {%daya,%}
{%as,%} m. occurs; and according to others, {%daya%} may
be used as an adj. meaning ‘compassionate;’ cf.
{%a-daya, nir-d˚, sa-d˚.%}) {%—Dayā-kara, as, ā%} or
{%ī, am,%} showing pity or compassion, sympathis-
ing, kind; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Dayā-%}
{%kūrca, as,%} m. a Buddha or a form of Buddha,
the founder of the Buddhist religion. {%—Dayā-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} pitiful, compassionate. {%—Dayā-nidhi,%}
{%is,%} m. a treasure of mercy, a very compassion-
ate person. {%—Dayānvita (˚yā-an˚)%} or {%dayā-%}
{%yukta, as, ā, am,%} full of pity, pitiful, compassionate,
benevolent. {%—Dayā-rāma, as,%} m., N. of several
men. {%—Dayā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pitiful, merciful,
tender, compassionate, taking pity on (with loc. or
gen.). {%—Dayā-vīra, as,%} m. a hero in compassion,
a very merciful man. {%—Dayā-śaṅkara, as,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Dayā-śīla, as, ā, am,%} tender-hearted,
compassionate. {%—Dayormi (˚yā-ūr˚), is, is, i,%} having
compassion for (its) waves.
<LEND>

<L>21931<pc>0402-c<k1>dayAlu<k2>dayAlu
{%Dayālu, us, us, u,%}¦ or {%dayāluka, as, ā, am,%}
pitiful, merciful, compassionate, kind, tender, taking
pity on (with loc.). {%—Dayālu-tā,%} f. or {%dayālu-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. pitifulness, tenderness, compassionateness,
pity for (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>21932<pc>0402-c<k1>dayita<k2>dayita
{%Dayita, as, ā, am,%}¦ desired, cherished, beloved,
dear; ({%as%}), m. ‘the loved one,’ a husband, a lover;
({%ā%}), f. a wife or mistress, a woman. {%—Dayitādhīna%}
{%(˚tā-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} subject to a wife, hen-pecked.
<LEND>

<L>21933<pc>0402-c<k1>dayitnu<k2>dayitnu
{%Dayitnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. pitiful, compassionate.
<LEND>

<L>21934<pc>0402-c<k1>dara<k2>dara
{#dara#}¦ {%dara, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dṝ;%} at the end
of comp.) cleaving, rending, splitting, cutting open,
opening, breaking [cf. {%puran-d˚%}]; ({%as, am%}), m.
f. n. a hole in the ground, a cave, cavity; a conch-
shell; ({%ī%}), f. a natural or artificial excavation in a
mountain, a cave, a cavern, a grotto, &c.; a valley;
({%as%}), m. a stream [cf. {%asṛg-d˚%}]; fear, terror, dread,
despair; ({%as, ā, am%}), little, small; ({%am%}), ind. a
little. {%—Dara-kaṇṭikā,%} f. the plant Asparagus Race-
mosa {%(= śatāvarī)%}. {%—Dara-timira, am,%} n. the
[Page0403-a+ 79]
darkness of fear. {%—Dara-manthara, as, ā, am,%} a
little slow. {%—Dara-mukulita, as, ā, am,%} a little
budded. {%—Dara-vidalita, as, ā, am,%} slightly burst
or opened. {%—Dara-vrīḍā,%} f. slight shame. {%—Dara-%}
{%ślatha, as, ā, am,%} a little loose. {%—Darī-bhū, ūs,%} f.
a cavern, a hollow. {%—Darī-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘having
caves,’ a mountain. {%—Darī-mukha, am,%} n. a mouth
like a cave; a cave like a mouth; the opening of
a cave; ({%as, ī, am%}), having a mouth as large as a
cave; ({%as%}), m., N. of a monkey. {%—Darī-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} containing caves, cavernous, abounding in
caves. {%—Darendra (˚ra-in˚), as,%} m. Viṣṇu's conch.
<LEND>

<L>21935<pc>0403-a<k1>daraRa<k2>daraRa
{%Daraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of cleaving, rending,
splitting, tearing, breaking; breaking off, falling
away.
<LEND>

<L>21936<pc>0403-a<k1>daraRi<k2>daraRi
{%Daraṇi, is, is,%}¦ m. f. breaking; an eddy; a cur-
rent; breakers, surf.
<LEND>

<L>21937<pc>0403-a<k1>daraTa<k2>daraTa
{%Daratha, as,%}¦ m. a cavity, cave; running away,
taking flight; spreading over the country for forage.
<LEND>

<L>21938<pc>0403-a<k1>darad<k2>darad
{%Darad, t,%}¦ m., N. of a people; ({%t%}), f. the heart;
a bank, mound; a mountain; a precipice; terror,
fear.
<LEND>

<L>21939<pc>0403-a<k1>darada<k2>darada
{%Darada, ās,%}¦ m. pl. a country bordering on
Kaśmīr, the mountains about Kaśmīr and above
Peshāwar; the inhabitants of this country; ({%as%}), m.
the king or chief of the Daradas; ({%as%}), m. fear,
terror; ({%am%}), n. red lead.
<LEND>

<L>21940<pc>0403-a<k1>dari<k2>dari
{%Dari, is, is, i,%}¦ splitting, rending, opening [cf.
{%go-d˚%}]; ({%is%}), m., N. of a Nāga; ({%is%}), f. a cave.
(For {%darī%} see under {%dara.%})
<LEND>

<L>21941<pc>0403-a<k1>darita<k2>darita
{%Darita, as, ā, am,%}¦ frightened, terrified, timid;
torn, rent, divided.
<LEND>

<L>21942<pc>0403-a<k1>dartf<k2>dartf
{%Dartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ or {%dartnu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
a breaker, render, splitting, breaking, one who splits,
breaks, or opens.
<LEND>

<L>21943<pc>0403-a<k1>dardara<k2>dardara
{%Dardara, as, ā, am,%}¦ cracked, broken, burst,
flawed, slightly broken; ({%as%}), m. a mountain (‘con-
taining caves’); N. of a mountain (also {%dardura%});
a kind of drum. {%—Dardarāmra (˚ra-ām˚), as,%} m.
a sort of sauce or condiment ({%= mīnāmrīṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>21944<pc>0403-a<k1>dardarIka<k2>dardarIka
{%Dardarīka, as,%}¦ m. a frog; a cloud; a kind of
musical instrument; ({%am%}), n. any musical instru-
ment; [cf. {%darvarīka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21945<pc>0403-a<k1>dardura<k2>dardura
{%Dardura, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps an onomatopoetic
word), a frog [cf. {%dārdura%} and {%dārdurika%}]; a sort
of musical instrument, a pipe or flute; the sound of
a drum; a cloud; a sort of rice; a mountain; N.
of a mountain in the south (sometimes associated with
the mountain Malaya); N. of a man; of a gamester;
({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a N. of Durgā; ({%am%}), n. an assem-
blage of villages, a district, a province. {%—Dardura-%}
{%cchadā,%} f. or {%dardura-parṇī,%} f., N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%brāhmī%}. {%—Dardura-puṭa, as,%} m. the mouth or
extremity of a pipe.
<LEND>

<L>21946<pc>0403-a<k1>darduraka<k2>darduraka
{%Darduraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a gamester; [cf. {%da-%}
{%rodara%} and {%durodara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21947<pc>0403-a<k1>dardU<k2>dardU
{%Dardū, ūs,%}¦ or {%dardru, us,%} or {%dardrū, ūs,%} m.
(according to some fr. {%daridrā%}), {%= dadru,%} cutaneous
and herpetic eruptions, especially a kind of leprosy.
{%—Dardru-ghna, as,%} m. {%= dadru-ghna,%} the shrub
Cassia Tora; Psoralea Corylifolia. {%—Dardru-nāśinī,%}
f. a kind of insect, {%= tailinī%}. {%—Dardru-rogin%} or
{%dardrū-rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} afflicted with cutaneous
eruptions, herpetic.
<LEND>

<L>21948<pc>0403-a<k1>dardruRa<k2>dardruRa
{%Dardruṇa%}¦ or {%dardrūṇa, as, ā, am,%} having cu-
taneous eruptions, herpetic.
<LEND>

<L>21949<pc>0403-a<k1>daridrA<k2>daridrA
{#daridrA#}¦ {%daridrā%} (reduplicated form of
rt. 1. {%drā;%} according to some, an old
Intens. form; perhaps connected with rt. {%dṝ%}), cl. 2.
P. {%daridrāti%} ({%daridrivas, daridritas,%} 3rd pl. {%da-%}
{%ridrati%}), {%daridrāñ-cakāra%} or {%dadaridrau, dari-%}
{%driṣyati, adaridrīt%} and {%adaridrāsīt, daridri-%}
{%tum,%} to be poor or needy, to be in distress.
<LEND>

<L>21950<pc>0403-a<k1>daridra<k2>daridra
{%Daridra, as, ā, am,%}¦ poor, needy, indigent, dis-
tressed, a poor person, beggar; (Ved.) unsteady,
roving, strolling. {%—Daridra-tā,%} f. or {%daridra-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. poverty, indigence, penury. {%—Daridra-%}
{%nindā,%} f., N. of the twenty-fifth chapter of the
Śārṅgadhara-paddhati.
<LEND>
[Page0403-b+ 77]

<L>21951<pc>0403-b<k1>daridrARa<k2>daridrARa
{%Daridrāṇa, am,%}¦ n. the state of being poor,
poverty.
<LEND>

<L>21952<pc>0403-b<k1>daridrAyaka<k2>daridrAyaka
{%Daridrāyaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} poor, needy.
<LEND>

<L>21953<pc>0403-b<k1>daridrita<k2>daridrita
{%Daridrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ impoverished, distressed.
<LEND>

<L>21954<pc>0403-b<k1>daridritf<k2>daridritf
{%Daridritṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ poor, distressed, needy.
<LEND>

<L>21955<pc>0403-b<k1>darodara<k2>darodara
{#darodara#}¦ {%darodara, as,%} m. {%= durodara,%} a
gamester [cf. {%dardura%} and {%darduraka%}]; a stake
at play; ({%am%}), n. gambling, playing at dice; a
die, dice.
<LEND>

<L>21956<pc>0403-b<k1>dardara<k2>dardara
{#dardara#}¦ {%dardara, dardarīka, dardura.%} See
last col.
<LEND>

<L>21957<pc>0403-b<k1>darpa<k2>darpa
{#darpa#}¦ {%darpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%dṛp%} or 2. {%dṛp;%}
according to some, also {%am,%} n.), pride, arrogance,
haughtiness, insolence, rashness, temerity; vanity, con-
ceit; sullenness, sulkiness; Pride &c. personified as a
son of Śrī, or of A-dharma and Śrī, or of Dharma and
Lakṣmī, or of Unnati; heat; musk; [cf. {%ati-d˚%}
and {%sa-d˚.%}] {%—Darpa-cchid, t, t, t,%} destroying pride,
humbling. {%—Darpa-da, as,%} m., N. of Śiva. {%—Dar-%}
{%pa-dhmāta, as, ā, am,%} puffed up or swelling with
pride. {%—Darpa-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Darpa-pattraka, as,%} m. a kind of grass; [cf. {%dar-%}
{%bha-pattra.%}] {%—Darpa-pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%} full of
pride. {%—Darpa-sāra, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Dar-%}
{%pa-ha%} or {%darpa-hara, as, ā, am,%} pride-destroying,
humbling, humiliating. {%—Darpa-han, ā,%} m., N. of
Śiva. {%—Darpārambha (˚pa-ār˚), as,%} m. beginning
of pride, incipient pride, conceit. {%—Darpopaśānti%}
{%(˚pa-up˚), is,%} f. allaying pride, conciliating or sub-
duing arrogance.
<LEND>

<L>21958<pc>0403-b<k1>darpaka<k2>darpaka
{%Darpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ making proud, inflaming,
exciting, an inflamer; ({%as%}), m. a N. of Kāma-deva,
god of love.
<LEND>

<L>21959<pc>0403-b<k1>darpaRa<k2>darpaRa
{%Darpaṇa, as,%}¦ m. ‘causing vanity or pride,’ a
looking-glass, mirror, (sometimes occurring at the
end of comp. or titles of books, e. g. {%karṇa-d˚,%}
{%jñāna-d˚, sāhitya-d˚,%} q. v.); a N. of Śiva [cf.
{%darpa-da%}]; N. of a mountain inhabited by Kuvera
and of a river rising there; ({%am%}), n. the eye;
kindling, inflaming.
<LEND>

<L>21960<pc>0403-b<k1>darpita<k2>darpita
{%Darpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made proud, arrogant; in-
flamed. {%—Darpita-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>21961<pc>0403-b<k1>darpin<k2>darpin
{%Darpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ proud, arrogant, insolent.
<LEND>

<L>21962<pc>0403-b<k1>darBa<k2>darBa
{#darBa#}¦ {%darbha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%dṛbh;%} said
to be fr. rt. {%dṝ%}), a bundle of grass, tuft or bunch
of grass; N. of various kinds of grass used at sacri-
ficial ceremonies, especially of the Kuśa grass, Poa
Cynosuroides; Saccharum Spontaneum; Saccharum
Cylindricum; (the first kind or Kuśa grass was held
very sacred; it was used to strew the ground in
preparing for a sacrifice, the officiating Brāhmans
being purified by sitting on it; under the name Darbha
it was even addressed as a deity; its various sancti-
fying qualities are described in Manu II. 43, III.
208, IV. 36, &c.; cf. {%kuśa, kāśa, muñja, valva-ja,%}
{%śara%}); N. of a man; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>zurba, zurft;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>torf;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>turf.</nsi>] {%—Darbha-kusuma,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of insect {%(= darbha-puṣpa)%}. {%—Dar-%}
{%bha-cīra, am,%} n. a dress of Kuśa grass. {%—Darbha-ta-%}
{%ruṇaka, am,%} n., Ved. a young shoot of Kuśa grass.
{%—Darbha-pattra, as,%} m. a kind of grass, Saccha-
rum Spontaneum {%(= kāśa)%}. {%—Darbha-puñjīla =%}
{%darbha-piñjūla, am,%} n., Ved. a bunch or bundle
of Kuśa grass. {%—Darbha-puṣpa, as,%} m. a kind of
serpent; a kind of insect, ‘similar to the Darbha
flower;’ [cf. {%darbha-kusuma.%}] {%—Darbha-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} made of Kuśa or Darbha grass. {%—Darbha-%}
{%muṣṭi, is,%} m. f. a handful of Kuśa grass. {%—Darbha-%}
{%saṃstara, as,%} m. a bed of Darbha grass. {%—Darbha-%}
{%stamba, as,%} m. a cluster or bunch of Kuśa grass.
{%—Darbhāhvaya (˚bha-āh˚), as,%} m. a kind of
grass; [cf. {%muñja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21963<pc>0403-b<k1>darBara<k2>darBara
{%Darbhara, as,%}¦ m. (?), a kind of bird, {%= lāvā,%}
Perdix Chinensis.
<LEND>

<L>21964<pc>0403-b<k1>darBi<k2>darBi
{%Darbhi, is,%}¦ m. or {%darbhin, ī,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21965<pc>0403-b<k1>darBawa<k2>darBawa
{#darBawa#}¦ {%darbhaṭa, am,%} n. a private apartment
or house, a retired room; [cf. {%dārvaṭa.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0403-c+ 76]

<L>21966<pc>0403-c<k1>darvawa<k2>darvawa
{%Darvaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a door-keeper, warder, village
constable, police officer; [cf. {%garvāṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21967<pc>0403-c<k1>darma<k2>darma
{#darma#}¦ {%darma, as,%} or {%darman, ā,%} m. (fr. rt.
{%dṝ%}), Ved. a destroyer, demolisher; a tearer.
<LEND>

<L>21968<pc>0403-c<k1>daryaka<k2>daryaka
{#daryaka#}¦ {%daryaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>21969<pc>0403-c<k1>darva<k2>darva
{#darva#}¦ {%darva, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%dṝ%}), a
ladle, spoon (at the end of comp., e. g. {%pūrṇa-d˚,%} q. v.);
the hood of a snake [cf. {%darvi%} below]; a Rākṣasa,
an imp, goblin; a mischievous man, a rapacious
animal, &c.; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people [cf. {%dārva%}];
({%ā%}), f., N. of a wife of Uśīnara; (sometimes written
{%darbā;%} cf. {%dārvan.%})
<LEND>

<L>21970<pc>0403-c<k1>darvi<k2>darvi
{%Darvi%}¦ or {%darbi, is,%} f. (in later Sanskrit also {%darvī%}
or {%darbī,%} f.; acc. in Ved. {%darvyam%} or {%darvīm%}), a
ladle, spoon; the expanded hood of a snake; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a country. {%—Darvi-homa%} or {%darvī-homa,%}
{%as,%} m. an oblation made with a ladle; [cf. {%dārvī-%}
{%haumika.%}] {%—Darvihomin,%} relating to the preceding
oblation. {%—Darvī-kara, as,%} m. (scil. {%sarpa%}), a class
of snakes with expanded hoods, of which twenty-six
species are enumerated. {%—Darvī-saṅkramaṇa, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>21971<pc>0403-c<k1>darvika<k2>darvika
{%Darvika%}¦ or {%darbika, as, ā,%} m. f. a ladle, a spoon;
({%ā%}), f. a pot-herb; a kind of collyrium; [cf. {%dār-%}
{%vikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21972<pc>0403-c<k1>darvawa<k2>darvawa
{#darvawa#}¦ {%darvaṭa.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>21973<pc>0403-c<k1>darvarIka<k2>darvarIka
{#darvarIka#}¦ {%darvarīka, as,%} m. a kind of musical
instrument; air, wind; an epithet of Indra; [cf.
{%dardarīka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21974<pc>0403-c<k1>darvi<k2>darvi
{#darvi#}¦ {%darvi%} or {%darvī.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>21975<pc>0403-c<k1>darvidA<k2>darvidA
{#darvidA#}¦ {%darvidā,%} f., Ved. a species of bird,
(according to Mahī-dhara) {%= kāṣṭha-kuṭṭa,%} a sort
of woodpecker; (perhaps corrupted fr. {%dāru-vidha;%}
cf. {%dārvāghāṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>21976<pc>0403-c<k1>darSa<k2>darSa
{#darSa#}¦ {%darśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dṛś%}), looking
at, viewing, seeing, perceiving, showing, having a
view, (generally at the end of comp., see {%avasāna-%}
{%d˚, ādinava-d˚, ātma-d˚, tattva-d˚%}); ({%as%}), m.
sight, view, seeing, appearance, (generally at the
end of comp., see {%priya-d˚, dur-d˚%}); the moon
when only just becoming visible, the new moon;
day of new moon; the festival of new moon; half
monthly sacrifice (performed at the change of the
moon by persons maintaining a perpetual fire); New
Moon or Day of New Moon, personified as a son
of Dhātṛ and Sinīvalī. {%—Darśa-pa, as, ā, am,%}
drinking the new moon oblation. {%—Darśa-pūrṇa-%}
{%māsau,%} m. du. new and full moon, the days and the
ceremonies which precede all other ceremonies. {%—Dar-%}
{%śa-yāga, as,%} m. a sacrifice or ceremony on the day
of new moon. {%—Darśa-yāminī,%} f. the night of new
moon on which it rises hardly visible. {%—Darśa-%}
{%vipad, t,%} m. the moon (‘as having the misfortune to
be hardly visible when new’).
<LEND>

<L>21977<pc>0403-c<k1>darSaka<k2>darSaka
{%Darśaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} seeing, looking at,
a spectator; examining, searching; who or what
shows or displays or explains or makes clear; ({%as%}),
m. a door-keeper, a warder; a shower, exhibiter,
discoverer, one who points out; a skilful man, one
conversant with any science or art; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people.
<LEND>

<L>21978<pc>0403-c<k1>darSata<k2>darSata
{%Darśata, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. visible, striking the
eye, beautiful; conspicuous; ({%as%}), m. the sun; the
moon. {%—Darśata-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. of conspicuous
beauty.
<LEND>

<L>21979<pc>0403-c<k1>darSana<k2>darSana
{%Darśana, as, ā, am,%}¦ seeing, looking, (at the end of
comp., e. g. {%tulya-d˚, deva-d˚, dharma-d˚%}); show-
ing, exhibiting, demonstrating, teaching; ({%ī%}), f. epithet
of Durgā, ‘as showing the way or leading;’ ({%am%}),
n. seeing, observing, looking; sight, vision, observa-
tion; inspection, examination; perception; the being
or becoming visible; the act of showing [cf. {%dan-%}
{%ta-d˚%}]; exhibition; appearance, aspect, semblance,
colour; visiting, visiting a sacred shrine, worshipping
in the presence of an image; going into the presence
of (e. g. {%darśanaṃ kṛ,%} to visit, to go into any
[Page0404-a+ 80]
one's presence; cf. {%puṇya-darśana%}); a view or
theory prescribed in a system or book (e. g. {%Śāstra-%}
{%darśanāt,%} in the manner prescribed in the Śāstras);
experiencing; seeing in the mind, mental or spiritual
vision, foreseeing, divining; contemplating; a vision,
a dream; apprehension, judgment; discernment,
understanding, intellect; knowledge, religious know-
ledge; opinion; intention; doctrine, demonstration,
a Śāstra, a N. applied to the six recognized systems
of philosophy (viz. 1. Pūrva-mīmāṃsā, usually called
Mīmāṃsā by Jaimini; 2. Uttara-mīmāṃsā, usually
called Vedānta by Vyāsa or Bādarāyaṇa; 3. Nyāya
by Gotama; 4. Vaiśeṣika by Kaṇāda; 5. Sāṅkhya
by Kapila; 6. Yoga by Patañjali; cf. {%tarka%}); virtue,
moral merit; the eye; a mirror [cf. {%ā-d˚%}]; a sacri-
fice, oblation [cf. {%danta-d˚%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of insect
{%(= taila-kīṭa)%}. {%—Darśana-patha, as,%} m. ‘the path
of the sight,’ the range of sight or view, horizon.
{%—Darśana-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Dar-%}
{%śana-pratibhū, ūs,%} m. bail or surety for appearance.
{%—Darśana-prātibhāvya, am,%} n. surety for appear-
ance, bail. {%—Darśana-bhūmi, is,%} f. the region or
range of perception; (with Buddhists) one of the
periods in the life of a Śrāvaka. {%—Darśana-lālasa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} longing to see, ardently desirous of
beholding. {%—Darśanepsu (˚na-īp˚), us, us, u,%}
anxious to see. {%—Darśanojjvalā (˚na-uj˚),%} f. ‘of
brilliant aspect,’ great white jasmine. {%—Darśanopa-%}
{%niṣad (˚na-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>21980<pc>0404-a<k1>darSanIya<k2>darSanIya
{%Darśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ visible, to beseen; observable,
perceptible, conspicuous; worthy of being seen, good-
looking, beautiful, agreeable, handsome; to be made
to appear before a court of justice, to be produced
in court; ({%as%}), m. Asclepias Gigantea. {%—Darśa-%}
{%nīya-tama, as, ā, am,%} most worthy of being seen,
very beautiful. {%—Darśanīya-mānin, ī, inī, i,%} think-
ing one's self good-looking, vain, conceited.
<LEND>

<L>21981<pc>0404-a<k1>darSayitukAma<k2>darSayitukAma
{%Darśayitu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to show.
<LEND>

<L>21982<pc>0404-a<k1>darSayitf<k2>darSayitf
{%Darśayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ showing, exhibiting, dis-
playing, a shower, exhibiter, director, instructor, show-
man, guide; ({%tā%}), m. a warder, usher, door-keeper.
<LEND>

<L>21983<pc>0404-a<k1>darSayitvA<k2>darSayitvA
{%Darśayitvā,%}¦ ind. having shown or exhibited, hav-
ing made manifest.
<LEND>

<L>21984<pc>0404-a<k1>darSayizyat<k2>darSayizyat
{%Darśayiṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ intending or pro-
posing to show or explain.
<LEND>

<L>21985<pc>0404-a<k1>darSita<k2>darSita
{%Darśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shown, displayed, exhibited,
exposed to view; explained; seen, understood;
visible, apparent. {%—Darśita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
shown or explained or taught.
<LEND>

<L>21986<pc>0404-a<k1>darSin<k2>darSin
{%Darśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of comp.) seeing,
a spectator, looking, looking at, inspecting, observ-
ing, examining, perceiving, apprehending; knowing,
understanding; seeing or knowing (the hymns of
the Veda); experiencing, looking, appearing, having
an aspect; causing to see, showing, exhibiting, teach-
ing, causing to experience or suffer; [cf. {%anīci-d˚,%}
{%amogha-d˚, kṣema-d˚, pāpa-d˚,%} &c.] {%—Darśi-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of seeing &c.
<LEND>

<L>21987<pc>0404-a<k1>darSivas<k2>darSivas
{%Darśivas, ān,%}¦ m. (perf. part. fr. rt. 1. {%dṛś%} without
reduplication; always at the end of comp., and usually
at the end of a verse), a seer, one who has seen, one
who sees or knows or understands (e. g. {%Arjuna-%}
{%darśivān,%} one who has seen Arjuna; cf. {%dīrgha-d˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>21988<pc>0404-a<k1>darSya<k2>darSya
{%Darśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. worthy of being shown
or exhibited; worthy of being seen, conspicuous.
<LEND>

<L>21989<pc>0404-a<k1>dal<k2>dal
{#dal#}¦ {%dal%} (connected with rt. {%dṝ%}), cl. 1.
P. {%dalati, dadāla, adālīt, dalitum,%} to
burst open, split, crack, to be divided, to fly open,
open in chinks, open (as a bud or blossom), expand,
blossom: Caus. {%dalayati%} and {%dālayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to burst, to split or tear or open, tear asunder; to
cut, divide, split, pierce; to wither; [cf. Lith. <nsi>dalis,</nsi>
‘a part;’ <nsi>dallykas,</nsi> ‘a fragment;’ <nsi>daliyu,</nsi> ‘to
divide:’ Goth. <nsi>dails,</nsi> ‘a part:’ Old Germ. <nsi>tail,</nsi>
<nsi>teil; tīlōn, tīligōn</nsi> = Caus. {%dalayāmi:%} Lat. <nsi>dolo:</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>dail,</nsi> ‘a share;’ <nsi>dailim,</nsi> ‘I deal out;’ <nsi>duil,</nsi>
‘partition;’ <nsi>duillean,</nsi> ‘a spear.’]
<LEND>

<L>21990<pc>0404-a<k1>dala<k2>dala
{%Dala, am,%}¦ n. (according to lexicographers also
{%as,%} m.), a piece torn or split off; a part, a portion,
a fragment, a rent, side [cf. {%aṣṭa-dala%}]; a degree;
[Page0404-b+ 80]
a half, the half (e. g. {%ahar-dala,%} mid-day); a sheath,
scabbard; a small shoot, blade, petal, leaf (i. e. what
unfolds itself; often occurring at the end of names
of plants, the fem. being {%dalā;%} cf. {%udumbara-d˚,%}
{%karkaśa-d˚, kāma-khaḍga-d˚, kṣāra-d˚%}); the blade
of anything (as of a knife &c.); a clump, lump, heap,
quantity; a detachment, body of men; dividing,
tearing, cutting, splitting, &c.; an adulteration or
alloy; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince; ({%ī%}), f., see {%dali%}
below; [cf. Hib. <nsi>duille,</nsi> ‘a leaf.’] {%—Dala-kapāṭa, as,%}
m. a folded petal or leaf. {%—Dala-komala = kamala,%}
the lotus (Nelumbium). {%—Dala-koṣa, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing young shoots incased in sheaths,’ a sort of jasmine
(J. Pubescens). {%—Dala-ja, am,%} n. ‘produced by
small bees’ or ‘produced from young shoots,’ a kind
of honey; [cf. {%dāla.%}] {%—Dala-taru, us,%} m. {%= tāḍī,%}
a kind of palm, Corypha Taliera. {%—Dala-nirmoka,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of birch (lit. ‘leaf-shedding’), the
bark of which is used for hookahs &c. {%(= bhūrja-%}
{%pattra)%}. {%—Dala-pati, is,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Dala-%}
{%puṣpā, ī,%} f. a fragrant plant, the leaves of which
surround the flower, Pandanus Odoratissimus {%(= ke-%}
{%takī)%}. {%—Dala-mālinī,%} f. a kind of cabbage. {%—Dala-%}
{%śas,%} ind. in pieces or fragments (e. g. {%dalaśo yā,%} to
go or fall to pieces). {%—Dala-śālinī,%} f. a species of
pot-herb {%(= kañcuka-śāka)%}. {%—Dala-sāyasī%} (?), f.
white basil. {%—Dala-sāriṇī,%} f. {%= kemuka,%} a species
of pot-herb, (probably) {%= dala-śālinī%}. {%—Dala-sūci,%}
{%is,%} m. a thorn. {%—Dala-snasā,%} f. the fibre or vein of a
leaf. {%—Dalākhya (˚la-ākh˚), as,%} m., N. of a parti-
cular constellation (subdivisions of which are Ahi and
Mālā). {%—Dalāgra-lohita, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a sort of spinage. {%—Dalāḍhaka (˚la-āḍh˚), as,%} m.,
N. of several plants, Pistia Stratiotes ({%= pṛśnī%});
a kind of jasmine ({%= kunda%}); wild sesamum;
Mesua Ferrea (commonly Nageśar); Acacia Sirissa
({%= śirīṣa%}); red chalk ({%= gaurika%}); foam ({%=%}
{%phena%}); cuttle-fish bone; a moat, a ditch; a Śūdra;
the head man of a village (?), the driver of an ele-
phant (?); an elephant's ear; a hurricane, a high
wind. {%—Dalāḍhya (˚la-āḍh˚), as,%} m. mud, espe-
cially on the banks of a river; [cf. {%dalāḍhaka.%}]
{%—Dalāmala (˚la-am˚), am,%} n., N. of several
plants, {%= damanaka%} and {%maruvaka;%} Vangueria
Spinosa and Artemisia. {%—Dalāmla (˚la-am˚), am,%}
n. sorrel. {%—Dalī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} divided, bisected,
halved. {%—Dale-gandhi, is,%} m. (‘fragrance in the
leaf’), N. of a plant, Echites Scholaris; [cf. {%sapta-%}
{%parṇa.%}] {%—Dalodbhava (˚la-ud˚), am,%} n. a kind
of honey; [cf. {%dala-ja%} and {%dāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21991<pc>0404-b<k1>dalat<k2>dalat
{%Dalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ splitting, bursting open,
rending; being torn or cut. {%—Dalad-dhṛdaya, as,%}
{%ā, am (dalat + hṛdaya),%} broken-hearted, cut to the
heart, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21992<pc>0404-b<k1>dalana<k2>dalana
{%Dalana, as, ī, am,%}¦ splitting, tearing asunder or
in two, breaking to pieces, cutting, dividing; ({%ī%}), f.
a clod of earth [cf. {%dali%}]; ({%am%}), n. bursting; tear-
ing, rending, breaking, crushing, cutting to pieces,
grinding.
<LEND>

<L>21993<pc>0404-b<k1>dalanIya<k2>dalanIya
{%Dalanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be broken or destroyed
or trodden down.
<LEND>

<L>21994<pc>0404-b<k1>dali<k2>dali
{%Dali, is,%}¦ f. (according to some also {%dalī%}), a clod
of clay or earth; [cf. {%dalanī%} and {%dalana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>21995<pc>0404-b<k1>dalika<k2>dalika
{%Dalika, am,%}¦ n. timber, a piece of wood.
<LEND>

<L>21996<pc>0404-b<k1>dalita<k2>dalita
{%Dalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ burst, split, broken, torn,
rent; torn asunder, cut to pieces, wounded; opened,
unfolded, expanded, blown, full blown; divided in
two, bisected, halved; divided into degrees, distri-
buted; driven asunder, scattered; trodden down;
crushed; destroyed; manifested.
<LEND>

<L>21997<pc>0404-b<k1>dalin<k2>dalin
{%Dalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having pieces, leaves, &c.
<LEND>

<L>21998<pc>0404-b<k1>dalmi<k2>dalmi
{%Dalmi, is,%}¦ m. Indra's thunderbolt; an epithet of
Indra; [cf. {%darma, darmin, dālmi.%}] {%—Dalmi-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} having a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>21999<pc>0404-b<k1>dalapa<k2>dalapa
{#dalapa#}¦ {%dalapa, as,%} m. a weapon; a sacred
or religious book ({%= śāstra%} for {%śastra%}); gold.
<LEND>

<L>22000<pc>0404-b<k1>dalBa<k2>dalBa
{#dalBa#}¦ {%dalbha, as,%} m. a wheel; fraud, dis-
honesty, sin; N. of a Ṛṣi; [cf. Hib. <nsi>dalbh,</nsi>
‘falsehood.’]
<LEND>

<L>22001<pc>0404-b<k1>dalBya<k2>dalBya
{%Dalbhya, as,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient preceptor.
<LEND>
[Page0404-c+ 78]

<L>22002<pc>0404-c<k1>dava<k2>dava
{#dava#}¦ {%dava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%du%}), fire, burn-
ing, heat; fever, pain; a wood on fire, a forest con-
flagration; a wood, a forest; [cf. {%dāva;%} cf. also
Cambro-Brit. <nsi>daiv,</nsi> ‘burning.’] {%—Dava-dagdhaka,%}
{%as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a kind of grass {%(= ro-%}
{%hiṣa)%}. {%—Dava-dahana, as,%} m. the fire in a
burning forest. {%—Davāgni (˚va-ag˚), is,%} or {%davā-%}
{%nala (˚va-an˚), as,%} m. a wood on fire, a forest
conflagration; [cf. {%dāvāgni.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22003<pc>0404-c<k1>davaTu<k2>davaTu
{%Davathu, us,%}¦ m. fire, heat; pain, anxiety, vex-
ation, distress; inflammation of the eye.
<LEND>

<L>22004<pc>0404-c<k1>davaya<k2>davaya
{#davaya#}¦ {%davaya%} (fr. {%dava,%} substituted for {%dūra%}
in the same manner as in {%davīyas, daviṣṭha%}), Nom.
P. {%davayati, -yitum,%} to make distant, remove.
<LEND>

<L>22005<pc>0404-c<k1>davayat<k2>davayat
{%Davayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ removing, making distant,
distancing, placing at a distance.
<LEND>

<L>22006<pc>0404-c<k1>davizWa<k2>davizWa
{%Daviṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. fr. {%dūra%}), very
remote, very distant.
<LEND>

<L>22007<pc>0404-c<k1>davIyas<k2>davIyas
{%Davīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. fr. {%dūra%}), more
or very remote, more distant.
<LEND>

<L>22008<pc>0404-c<k1>daS<k2>daS
{#daS#}¦ {%daś.%} See 2. {%daṃś,%} p. 396, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22009<pc>0404-c<k1>daSan<k2>daSan
{#daSan#}¦ {%daśan, a,%} m. f. n. pl. (said to be fr. rt. 2.
{%daṃś%}), ten; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δέκα</lang> Lat. <nsi>decem;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>taihun</nsi>
for <nsi>tihun;</nsi> Armor. <nsi>dek;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>déagh, deich;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>deszimtis, deszim-ts, deszim-t;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>desya-ty.</nsi>]
{%—Daśa-kaṇṭha%} or {%daśa-kandhara, as, ā, am,%}
ten-necked; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Rāvaṇa. {%—Daśa-%}
{%kaṇṭha-jit, t,%} m. or {%daśakaṇṭhāri (˚ṭha-ari), is,%}
m. an epithet of Rāma. {%—Daśa-kanyā-tīrtha, am,%}
n. ‘the Tīrtha of the ten virgins,’ N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Daśa-karman, āṇi,%} n. pl. the ten ceremonies
prescribed to the three twice-born classes. {%—Daśa-%}
{%karma-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a work on the ten cere-
monies. {%—Daśa-kāma-ja-vyasana, am,%} n. ten vices
(see Manu VII. 47) arising from love of pleasure, viz.
hunting, gambling, sleeping by day, fault-finding, lust,
drunkenness, dancing, singing, playing, and useless
travel. {%—Daśa-kumāra-carita, am,%} n. ‘the adven-
tures of the ten princes,’ N. of a book of stories by
Daṇḍin. {%—Daśa-kṣiti-garbha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), N. of a Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Daśa-kṣīra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} mixed with ten parts of milk; ({%am%}), n. a
compound of ten parts of milk mixed with one part
of some other substance. {%—Daśa-gaṇī,%} f. ten classes
collectively. {%—Daśa-gītikā,%} f., N. of an astronomical
work, i. e. ‘the ten poems of Ārya-bhaṭṭa.’ {%—Daśa-%}
{%guṇa, as, ā, am,%} ten-fold, ten times larger, ten
times more; ({%am%}), ind. ten times, ten-fold. {%—Daśa-%}
{%grāma, am,%} n. a district or collection of ten villages.
{%—Daśagrāma-pati, is,%} m. a magistrate or chief of
ten villages. {%—Daśagrāmin, ī,%} m. the head man of
ten villages. {%—Daśa-grāmī,%} f. a collection of ten
villages; a municipality or corporation of ten villages.
{%—Daśa-grīva, as, ā, am,%} ten-necked; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a demon; of an enemy of Vṛṣa, who is the Indra
of the eleventh Manv-antara; an epithet of Rāvaṇa;
N. of a son of Dama-ghoṣa. {%—Daśa-gva, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. going in ten ways, one who observes a ten-
days rite or conducts sacrifices for ten months; going
to completion in ten months; a N. applied to the
Maruts; also to the family of the Aṅgirasas. {%—Daśa-%}
{%gvin, ī, inī, i,%} ten-fold, going ten ways; (Sāy.)
going for ten (leagues). {%—Daśa-jyoti%} and {%daśa-%}
{%jyotis, is,%} m., N. of a son of Su-bhrāj. {%—Daśa-daśin%}
or {%daśan-daśin%} or {%daśā-daśin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. con-
sisting of repeated decads. {%—Daśa-diś, k,%} f. the ten
quarters of the heavens (including that overhead and
underneath). {%—Daśa-dyu, us,%} m., Ved. (according
to Sāy.) N. of a person. {%—Daśa-dhanus, us,%} m.,
N. of one of the ancestors of Śākya-muni. {%—Daśa-%}
{%dhā,%} ind. in ten parts, into ten parts, ten-fold, in
ten ways. {%—Daśa-pa, as,%} m. a chief of ten villages;
[cf. {%daśagrāma-pati.%}] {%—Daśa-paśu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. prepared or intended for ten oxen. {%—Daśa-%}
{%pādī,%} f., N. of a grammatical work. {%—Daśa-pāra-%}
{%mitā-dhara, as, ā, am,%} possessing the ten Pāra-
mitās or perfections; ({%as%}), m. a Buddha or Buddhist
saint. {%—Daśa-pārśva, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
[Page0405-a+ 81]
{%—Daśa-piṇḍa-śrāddha, am,%} n. a funereal cere-
mony in which a Piṇḍa or ball of rice is offered
by the next of kin to a person deceased, increasing
the number daily for ten successive days until they
amount to ten. {%—Daśa-pura, am,%} n. a district or
part of Malwa or Bandelkhand; (perhaps) N. of a
town, Decapolis; a fragrant grass, a species of Cyperus
Rotundus. {%—Daśa-puruṣam,%} ind. for ten persons
or male progenitors, i. e. through a series of ten
ancestors. {%—Daśapuruṣaṃ-rājya, am,%} n. a king-
dom inherited through a series of ten ances-
tors. {%—Daśa-pūra, am,%} n. a fragrant grass {%(= da-%}
{%śa-pura)%}. {%—Daśa-pūruṣam = daśa-puruṣam%}
above. {%—Daśa-pūrva-ratha, as,%} m. a periphrasis
for the name Daśa-ratha (‘{%ratha%} preceded by {%daśa%}’).
{%—Daśa-pūrvin, ī,%} m., N. of seven saints of the
Jainas. {%—Daśa-peya, as,%} m., Ved. ‘to be quaffed by
ten,’ N. of a Soma oblation forming part of the
Rāja-sūya. {%—Daśa-pramati, is, is, i%} (?), Ved. re-
ceiving excessive honour in the ten regions or spread-
ing over the ten regions. {%—Daśa-bandha, as,%} m. a
tenth part, a fine equivalent to the tenth part.
{%—Daśa-bala, as, ā, am,%} possessing ten powers;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Buddha. {%—Daśabala-kāś-%}
{%yapa, as,%} m., N. of one of the first five pupils of
Śākya-muni. {%—Daśa-bāhu, us, us, u,%} ten-armed;
({%us%}), m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Daśabhakti-pañca-%}
{%stuti, is,%} f., N. of a collection of Jaina prayers.
{%—Daśa-bhujā,%} f. ‘the ten-armed,’ a form of Durgā.
{%—Daśa-bhūmi-ga, as, ā, am,%} traversing the ten
worlds; ({%as%}), m. Buddha, the founder of the Bud-
dhist religion, a Buddha or the generic name of
the sanctified teachers of that religion. {%—Daśa-bhū-%}
{%mīśa (˚mi-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of the ten worlds,’ a
N. of Buddha or a Buddha. {%—Daśabhūmīśvara (˚mi-%}
{%īś˚),%} N. of a Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Daśa-mahā-%}
{%vidyā,%} f. an epithet of Durgā (‘possessing the ten
great sciences’). {%—Daśa-māla, am, ī,%} n. f. a collec-
tion of ten garlands. {%—Daśa-mālika, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a people. {%—Daśa-māsya, as, ā, am,%} ten
months old, as the child in the womb just before
birth; (with {%aśva%}), a horse let loose for ten months.
{%—Daśa-mukha, āni,%} n. pl. ten mouths or faces;
({%as, ī, am%}), having ten faces; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Rā-
vaṇa. {%—Daśamukha-ripu, us,%} or {%daśamukhān-%}
{%taka (˚kha-an˚), as,%} m. ‘the enemy of Rāvaṇa,’
an epithet of Rāma. {%—Daśa-mūtraka, am,%} n. the
urine of ten (i. e. of the elephant, buffalo, camel,
cow, goat, sheep, horse, donkey, man, and woman).
{%—Daśa-mūla, am,%} n. a tonic medicine prepared
from the roots of ten plants, viz. Tri-kaṇṭaka, the
two Vṛhatīs, Pṛthak-parṇī, Vidāri-gandhā, Vilva,
Agni-mantha, Ṭuṇṭuka, Pāṭalā, and Kāśmarī; [cf.
{%dvipañca-mūla.%}] {%—Daśa-yojana-vistīrṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ten Yojanas broad. {%—Daśa-ratha, as, ā, am,%}
having ten chariots; ({%as%}), m., N. of several princes,
among whom the most renowned is the father of
Rāma, (he was a descendant of Ikṣvāku and sove-
reign of Ayodhyā or Oude); N. of an older Daśa-
ratha, son of Mūlaka, and ancestor of the above,
(also written {%śata-ratha%}); N. of a son of Nava-
ratha and father of Śakuni; N. of a son of Su-yaśas
and father of Saṅgata; N. of an ancestor of Buddha;
({%am%}), n. the body (?). {%—Daśaratha-tattva, am,%}
n., N. of a work. {%—Daśaratha-yajñārambha (˚ña-%}
{%ār˚), as,%} m., N. of the fourteenth chapter of the Pātāla-
khaṇḍa or fourth part of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Daśa-%}
{%ratha-vijaya, as,%} m., N. of the twelfth chapter of the
Pātāla-khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Daśa-raśmi-%}
{%śata, as,%} m. ‘possessed of a thousand rays,’ an epi-
thet of the sun; [cf. {%daśaśata-raśmi.%}] {%—Daśa-%}
{%rātra, as,%} m. a period of ten days and nights; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), Ved. lasting ten days; ({%as%}), m., Ved. any
ceremony that lasts ten days; a particular ceremony
lasting ten days (forming the chief part of the Dvā-
daśāha). {%—Daśarātra-parvan, a,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Daśa-rūpaka, am,%} n., N. of a rhetorical work.
{%—Daśarūpaka-ṭīkā,%} f., N. of a commentary on
the preceding work by Pāṇi. {%—Daśa-rūpa-bhṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} taking ten forms, appearing in ten shapes; ({%t%}),
m. an epithet of Viṣṇu (with reference to his ten
[Page0405-b+ 81]
Avatāras). {%—Daśarca (˚śa-ṛca), as,%} m., Ved. a
strophe of ten verses. {%—Daśarṣabha (˚śa-ṛṣ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. consisting of ten bulls. {%—Daśa-%}
{%lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. ten marks or attributes. {%—Daśa-%}
{%lakṣaṇaka, as, ikā, am,%} having ten forms or
characteristics, ten-fold. {%—Daśa-vaktra, as, ā, am,%}
having ten mouths; ({%as%}), m. a particular magical
formula against the evil spirits supposed to possess
certain weapons. {%—Daśa-vadana, as,%} m. ‘the ten-
faced,’ an epithet of Rāvaṇa. {%—Daśa-varman, ā,%} m.,
N. of a prince. {%—Daśa-varṣa, as, ā, am,%} ten
years old. {%—Daśa-vājin, ī,%} m. the moon ‘whose
car is drawn by ten horses.’ {%—Daśa-vārṣika, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} happening after ten years. {%—Daśa-vidha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of ten kinds, ten-fold. {%—Daśa-vīra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. granting ten men. {%—Daśa-vṛkṣa, as,%}
m., Ved. a species of tree. {%—Daśa-vraja, as,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Daśa-śata, am,%} n. ten hundred, a
thousand; one hundred and ten; ({%ī%}), f. a thousand;
({%as, ī, am%}), Ved. containing ten hundred. {%—Daśa-%}
{%śata-kara-dhārin, ī,%} m. ‘having a thousand rays,’
the sun. {%—Daśaśata-tama, as, ī, am,%} the one
hundred and tenth. {%—Daśaśata-nayana, as, ā%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} having a thousand eyes; ({%as%}), m. an epithet
of Indra. {%—Daśaśata-raśmi, is, is, i,%} having a
thousand rays; ({%is%}), m. the sun; [cf. {%daśa-raśmi-%}
{%śata.%}] {%—Daśaśatākṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} having
a thousand eyes; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Indra.
{%—Daśaśatāṅghri (˚ta-aṅ˚), is, is, i,%} having a
thousand feet; ({%is%}), f. a species of plant, {%= śatāvarī.%}
{%—Daśa-śipra, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Daśa-%}
{%śiras, ās, ās, as,%} ten-headed; ({%ās%}), m. an epithet
of Rāvaṇa; N. of a mountain. {%—Daśa-śīrṣa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ten-headed; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Rāvaṇa;
a kind of magical formula against the evil spirits
supposed to possess weapons. {%—Daśa-ślokī,%} f. ‘a col-
lection of ten Ślokas,’ N. of a summary of the Vedānta
system by Śaṅkarācārya; also of another similar
summary by Nimbārka. {%—Daśa-saptā,%} f., Ved., N.
of a Viṣṭuti of the Saptadaśa-stoma (in which the
verses of a Tṛca are repeated in the following order,
11123, 12223, 1222333). {%—Daśa-sāhasra, am,%}
n., 10,000; ({%as, ī, am%}), consisting of 10,000, form-
ing 10,000. {%—Daśa-sāhasrika, as, ī, am,%} consisting
of 10, 000. {%—Daśa-stobha, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Daśa-harā,%} f. an epithet of Gaṅgā or the Ganges,
‘as taking away ten sins;’ a festival in honour of
Gaṅgā (vulgarly called Dusrah) on the tenth day of
the month Jyaiṣṭha, but now held in honour of Durgā
in the month Aśvin. {%—Daśa-hotṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. a
particular Mantra in which the ten sacrificial vessels are
mentioned; ({%tā, trī, tṛ%}), connected with the Mantra
Daśa-hotṛ. {%—Daśāṃśa (˚śa-aṃśa), as%} or {%am,%} m.
or n. (?), ten parts, the tenth part, ten-fold amount
of anything (?) . {%—Daśākṣa (˚śa-ak˚), as, ī, am,%}
ten-eyed; ({%as%}), m. a kind of magical formula against
the evil spirits supposed to possess weapons. {%—Da-%}
{%śākṣara (˚śa-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. containing ten
syllables. {%—Daśāṅgula (˚śa-aṅ˚), as,%} &c., ten
fingers long; ({%am%}), n. a water-melon. {%—Daśādhi-%}
{%pati (˚śa-adh˚), is,%} m. a decurion or commander
of ten men. {%—Daśānana (˚śa-ān˚), as, ā%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} ten-faced; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Rāvaṇa. {%—Da-%}
{%śānugāna (˚śa-an˚), am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Da-%}
{%śārdha (˚śa-ar˚), ās, ās, āni,%} pl. half of ten, five.
{%—Daśārdha-saṅkhya, as, ā, am,%} five in number.
{%—Daśārha (˚śa-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘worthy of ten (?),’ an
epithet applied to a Buddha; an epithet of Kṛṣṇa;
({%ās%}), or {%daśārhakās,%} m. pl., N. of a warrior-tribe
descended from Daśārha of the family of Yadu; ({%ī%}),
f. a princess of the Daśārhas. {%—Daśāvatāra (˚śa-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu (the deity, of whom there
are ten descents from heaven); N. of the fifty-sixth
chapter of the Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa. {%—Daśāvara (˚śa-%}
{%av˚), as, ā, am,%} consisting of ten at least; ({%as%}), m., N.
of an evil spirit. {%—Daśāśva (˚śa-aś˚), as, ā, am,%}
possessing ten horses, driving ten horses; ({%as%}), m. the
moon; N. of a son of Ikṣvāku. {%—Daśāśvamedha%}
{%(˚śa-aś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha, the Tīrtha of the
ten horse-sacrifices. {%—Daśāsya (˚śa-ās˚), as, ā, am,%}
having ten mouths, ten-faced; ({%as%}), m. an epithet
[Page0405-c+ 80]
of Rāvaṇa. {%—Daśāsya-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of the
ten-faced,’ an epithet of Rāma. {%—Daśāha (˚śa-aha),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} lasting ten days; ({%as%}), m. a period of ten
days; a kind of ceremonial observance; [cf. {%daśa-%}
{%rātra.%}] {%—Daśendra (˚śa-in˚), as,%} &c., having the
ten Indrāṇīs as a deity (schol. to Pāṇ. 1. 2, 49). {%—Da-%}
{%śendriya (˚śa-in˚), āṇi,%} n. pl. the ten organs of per-
ception and action, viz. the skin, eye, tongue, nose, ear,
larynx, hand, foot, anus, and pudendum; see {%indriya.%}
{%—Daśeśa (˚śa-īś˚), as,%} m. a superintendent of ten
villages. {%—Daśaikādaśika (˚śa-ek˚), as, ī, am,%} one
who lends ten and receives eleven in return, i. e. one
who lends money for ten per cent. {%—Daśoṇi (˚śa-%}
{%oṇi), is,%} m., N. of a person protected by Indra;
of an Asura; (Sāy.) offering many oblations; (ac-
cording to some) an oblation giving ten-fold reward.
{%—Daśoṇya, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Daśopaniṣad-%}
{%bhāṣya (˚śa-up˚), am,%} n., N. of a commentary
by Ānanda Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>22010<pc>0405-c<k1>daSa<k2>daSa
{%Daśa%}¦ (at the end of comp.) {%= daśan%} above; [cf.
{%tri-daśa, dvi-daśa, nir-daśa.%}] {%Daśa%} (at the end
of comp.) may also stand for {%daśā,%} p. 406, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22011<pc>0405-c<k1>daSaka<k2>daSaka
{%Daśaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ consisting of ten, having ten,
having ten parts, ten-fold; (with {%śata%}), ten in a hun-
dred, ten from a hundred, ten per cent; ({%am%}), n.
an aggregate of ten, a decad. {%—Daśaka-māsika,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} hired for ten months.
<LEND>

<L>22012<pc>0405-c<k1>daSat<k2>daSat
{%Daśat, t,%}¦ f. a collection or aggregate of ten, a
decad; (m. f. n. ?), consisting of ten, divided into ten
parts; [cf. {%dāśat%} and {%pañcat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22013<pc>0405-c<k1>daSataya<k2>daSataya
{%Daśataya, as, ī, am,%}¦ consisting of ten parts,
ten-fold; ({%yyas%}), f. pl., scil. {%śākhās%} or {%ṛcas,%} the
texts of the ten-fold Ṛg-veda, i. e. of the Ṛg-veda
divided into ten Maṇḍalas; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a commen-
tary; [cf. {%dāśataya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22014<pc>0405-c<k1>daSati<k2>daSati
{%Daśati, is,%}¦ f. (probably for original {%daśatī%}), a
collection or aggregate of ten, a decad; N. of the
subdivisions of a Prapāṭhaka of the first part of the
Sāma-veda, usually containing ten verses, (in this
sense the crude form {%daśati%} without Visarga is used,
probably as a weakened form of {%daśatī%}); = a hun-
dred in connection with {%daśan%} (e. g. {%daśatīr daśa%}
in Mahā-bh. 1. 1081).
<LEND>

<L>22015<pc>0405-c<k1>daSama<k2>daSama
{%Daśama, as, ī, am,%}¦ the tenth, the tenth part,
the tenth day, N. of an Ekāha, the last day of the
Daśa-rātra belonging to the Dvādaśāha; ({%ī%}), f., scil.
{%tithi,%} the tenth day of the half moon; the tenth
decad or last stage of human life, the last ten years
of a century; ({%am%}), n. a tenth part; ({%am%}), ind. at or
for the tenth time; [cf. Lat. <nsi>decimus;</nsi> Scot. <nsi>dei-</nsi>
<nsi>cheamh;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>deachmad.</nsi>] {%—Daśama-bhāva, as,%}
m. the culminating point, or that point in which
the meridian crosses a given circle. {%—Daśamīṅ-gata%}
or {%daśamī-stha, as, ā, am,%} arrived at the tenth
decad of life, above ninety years old.
<LEND>

<L>22016<pc>0405-c<k1>daSamin<k2>daSamin
{%Daśamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ between ninety and one hun-
dred years, very old or aged.
<LEND>

<L>22017<pc>0405-c<k1>daSin<k2>daSin
{%Daśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having ten, divided into ten parts;
({%inī%}), f. a decad; ({%ī%}), m. a superintendent of ten
villages.
<LEND>

<L>22018<pc>0405-c<k1>daSana<k2>daSana
{#daSana#}¦ {%daśana, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%daś%} or
2. {%daṃś%}), a tooth; biting; ({%as%}), m. the peak of a
mountain; ({%am%}), n. armour, mail; [cf. {%daṃśana.%}]
{%—Daśana-cchada, as,%} m. ‘teeth-covering,’ the
lip. {%—Daśana-pada, am,%} n. ‘teeth-mark,’ a bite.
{%—Daśana-vāsas, as,%} n. ‘the covering of the teeth,’
the lip. {%—Daśana-vīja, am,%} n. (?) the pomegranate.
{%—Daśanāṃśu (˚na-aṃ˚), us,%} m. whiteness or bright-
ness of the teeth. {%—Daśanāṅka (˚na-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
‘teeth-mark,’ a bite. {%—Daśanāḍhyā (˚na-āḍh˚),%} f.
a kind of sorrel {%(= cukrikā)%}. {%—Daśanocchiṣṭa%}
{%(˚na-uc˚), as,%} m. ‘remainder or leavings of the teeth,’
a kiss; a sigh; a lip.
<LEND>

<L>22019<pc>0405-c<k1>daSera<k2>daSera
{%Daśera, as, ā, am,%}¦ biting, mordacious, injuring;
hurtful, attacking or killing any one when asleep;
({%as%}), m. a mischievous or venomous animal, a beast
of prey, &c.
<LEND>

<L>22020<pc>0405-c<k1>daSeraka<k2>daSeraka
{%Daśeraka%}¦ or {%daseraka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people, {%= maru;%} a young camel; [cf. {%dāśera, dā-%}
{%śeraka, dāsera, dāseraka.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0406-a+ 73]

<L>22021<pc>0406-a<k1>dazwa<k2>dazwa
{%Daṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ bitten, stung; pressed together.
{%—Daṣṭa-dacchada, as, ā, am,%} biting the lips.
<LEND>

<L>22022<pc>0406-a<k1>daSamAna<k2>daSamAna
{#daSamAna#}¦ {%daśamāna%} or {%daśamānika, ās,%} m.
pl., N. of a people; (also written {%deśamānika.%})
<LEND>

<L>22023<pc>0406-a<k1>daSasya<k2>daSasya
{#daSasya#}¦ {%daśasya%} (fr. {%daśas,%} probably an old
form for {%yaśas,%} = Lat. <nsi>decus;</nsi> cf. rt. 1. {%dāś%}), Nom. P.
{%daśasyati,%} &c., Ved. to render service, serve, wor-
ship, favour, oblige, aid (with acc.); to do service
or favour to any one (with dat.); to grant, accord;
[cf. {%namasya; dāśaspatya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22024<pc>0406-a<k1>daSasyA<k2>daSasyA
{%Daśasyā,%}¦ f. occurring only in Ved. inst. {%daśasyā,%}
at the pleasure of, according to the liking, in order to
please; (Sāy.) by desire of giving or granting.
<LEND>

<L>22025<pc>0406-a<k1>daSA<k2>daSA
{#daSA#}¦ {%daśā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%daś%} or 2. {%daṃś%}),
the threads or fringe projecting at the end of a piece
of woven cloth, the fringe of a garment (e. g. {%apa-%}
{%daśaṃ vāsas,%} a fringeless garment), the loose ends
of any piece of cloth or garment, the skirt or edge
or hem of a garment, (according to some in these
senses also m. pl., but in most passages where the pl.
{%daśās%} occurs the gender may be f.); the wick of a
lamp; ‘the wick of life,’ state or condition of life;
age, period or time of life (as youth, manhood, &c.);
period in general; state, condition, circumstances;
state or condition of mind; the result of actions,
fate; (in astrology) the aspect or position of the
planets (at birth &c.), the fate of men as depending
on the position of the planets; the mind, under-
standing. {%—Daśākarṣa, as,%} or {%daśākarṣin (˚śā-%}
{%āk˚%} or {%˚śā-ka˚%}), {%ī,%} m. ‘wick-drawing,’ a lamp. {%—Da-%}
{%śānta (˚śā-an˚), as,%} m. the end of a wick, the end
of life. {%—Daśāpanna (˚śā-āp˚), as, ā, am,%} being in
a particular state or condition. {%—Daśā-pavitra, am,%}
n. a fringed filtering cloth for straining the Soma.
{%—Daśā-pāka, as,%} m. the fulfilment of fate. {%—Daśā-%}
{%phala, am,%} n. result of circumstances or of condition
of life. {%—Daśāruhā (˚śā-ār˚),%} f, N. of a particular
species of plant, {%= kaivartikā,%} (probably so called
as sticking or attaching itself to clothes.) {%—Daśā-%}
{%lakṣaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-
sarva-sva. {%—Daśā-viśeṣa, as,%} m. any particular
state or condition, existing circumstances. {%—Daśen-%}
{%dhana (˚śā-in˚), as,%} m. ‘wick-kindling,’ a lamp.
<LEND>

<L>22026<pc>0406-a<k1>daSAnika<k2>daSAnika
{#daSAnika#}¦ {%daśānika, as,%} m. {%= dantī,%} Croton
Polyandrum or Croton Tiglium.
<LEND>

<L>22027<pc>0406-a<k1>daSAmaya<k2>daSAmaya
{#daSAmaya#}¦ {%daśāmaya, as,%} m. (fr. {%daśā%} or {%da-%}
{%śan + āmaya ?%}), an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>22028<pc>0406-a<k1>daSArRa<k2>daSArRa
{#daSArRa#}¦ {%daśārṇa, ās,%} m. pl. (said to be fr.
{%daśan + ṛṇa,%} ‘having ten forts’), N. of a people
living south-east of Madhya-deśa in the centre of
Hindūstān; ({%as%}), m. the king of the Daśārṇas; the
region of the Daśārṇas; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river rising
in the Vindhya hills, the ancient Dosarence (?).
<LEND>

<L>22029<pc>0406-a<k1>daSArRaka<k2>daSArRaka
{%Daśārṇaka,%}¦ a wrong form for {%dāśārṇaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22030<pc>0406-a<k1>daSArReyu<k2>daSArReyu
{%Daśārṇeyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva.
<LEND>

<L>22031<pc>0406-a<k1>daSArha<k2>daSArha
{#daSArha#}¦ {%daśārha.%} See p. 405, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22032<pc>0406-a<k1>daSIvidarBa<k2>daSIvidarBa
{#daSIvidarBa#}¦ {%daśīvidarbha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of
a people; [cf. {%dadhi-vidarbha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22033<pc>0406-a<k1>daSera<k2>daSera
{#daSera#}¦ {%daśera.%} See {%daśana,%} p. 405, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>22034<pc>0406-a<k1>daSonasi<k2>daSonasi
{#daSonasi#}¦ {%daśonasi, is,%} m., Ved. a kind of
serpent.
<LEND>

<L>22035<pc>0406-a<k1>dazwa<k2>dazwa
{#dazwa#}¦ {%daṣṭa.%} See above at top of this col.
<LEND>

<L>22036<pc>0406-a<k1>das<k2>das
{#das#}¦ {%das%} (connected with rt. {%daṃs,%} p. 396,
col. 2), cl. 4. P. {%dasyati, dadāsa,%} &c.,
Ved. to suffer want, to waste away, perish, become ex-
hausted, to be ruined; to throw up, toss [cf. rt. {%tas;%}
Eng. <nsi>toss</nsi>]; cl. 1. 10. P. {%daṃsati, daṃsayati,%} &c. (see
rt. {%daṃs%}), to bite, destroy, overpower; to see; to
shine: Caus. P. {%dasayati, dāsayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to waste away, exhaust.
<LEND>

<L>22037<pc>0406-a<k1>dasa<k2>dasa
{%Dasa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= dasyu,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22038<pc>0406-a<k1>dasana<k2>dasana
{%Dasana, am,%}¦ n. wasting, perishing, destroying;
throwing, tossing; dismissing.
<LEND>
[Page0406-b+ 80]

<L>22039<pc>0406-b<k1>dasamAna<k2>dasamAna
{%Dasamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. wasting away, be-
coming exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>22040<pc>0406-b<k1>dasta<k2>dasta
{%Dasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ wasted, lost, destroyed; thrown,
tossed; sent away, dismissed.
<LEND>

<L>22041<pc>0406-b<k1>dasma<k2>dasma
{%Dasma, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroying, destructive, over-
coming enemies, worthy to be seen, beautiful, ac-
complishing wonderful deeds, wonderful, extraordi-
nary; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Agni; of Indra; of
Pūṣan; of Varuṇa; ({%ās%}), m. pl. an epithet of the
Maruts; of the horses of Agni. According to the
lexicographers {%dasma, as,%} m., may also mean ‘a
sacrificer’ or ‘institutor of a sacrifice;’ ‘fire;’ ‘a thief,’
‘a rogue;’ [cf. {%daṃsana.%}] {%—Dasma-varcas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. of wonderful appearance; (Sāy.) whose
glory is worthy of being seen or whose power is
destructive; ({%ās%}), m. an epithet of Indra; of Pūṣan;
({%asas%}), m. pl. an epithet of the Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>22042<pc>0406-b<k1>dasmat<k2>dasmat
{%Dasmat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. wonderful, extraordi-
nary; (Sāy.) worthy of being seen, desirable, accept-
able. According to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 74, 4, the
form {%dasmat%} is for {%dasmam.%}
<LEND>

<L>22043<pc>0406-b<k1>dasmya<k2>dasmya
{%Dasmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. wonderful, extraordi-
nary; (Sāy.) beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>22044<pc>0406-b<k1>dasyu<k2>dasyu
{%Dasyu, us,%}¦ m. (probably connected with {%dāsa%}),
‘destroyer (of the good),’ N. of a class of evil beings
or demons, enemies of god and men, and especially
of Indra and Agni; (many of the demons defeated
by Indra have the general name Dasyu, e. g. Vṛtra,
Śambara, Śuṣṇa, Cumuri, &c.; and these Dasyus
are not only spirits of darkness like the Rākṣasas,
but have other characteristics which bring them into
closer relationship to men living in the world: some-
times a general distinction is drawn between man,
i. e. {%manu, āyu, nṛ,%} and the Dasyus, the latter
being called {%a-mānuṣa,%} or the Dasyu is contrasted
as an {%an-ārya%} with the pious and respectable man
or {%ārya;%} or rarely {%dasyu%} means ‘a barbarian or
savage,’ as contrasted with ‘a civilized man’); any
cruel or mischievous man, an enemy, thief, robber,
oppressor, bandit, ruffian, violator, perpetrator of in-
justice; (according to Manu) a barbarian, an out-
cast or a Hindū who has become so by neglect of
the essential rites. {%—Dasyu-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%} living
the life of a robber or barbarian. {%—Dasyu-jūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. instigated by Dasyus or by wicked men.
{%—Dasyu-tarhaṇa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. crushing the
Dasyus; killing or injuring the Dasyus. {%—Dasyu-%}
{%sāt,%} ind. into the hands of the Dasyus, a prey to
robbers. {%—Dasyu-hatya, am,%} n., Ved. a fight with
the Dasyus or with wicked men. {%—Dasyu-han, ā,%}
{%ghnī, a,%} Ved. destroying the Dasyus or the wicked;
({%ā%}), m. an epithet of Indra; of Agni; of Manyu.
{%—Dasyuhan-tama, as,%} m. (superl. of the preced-
ing), an epithet of Budha, who was son of Tārā
and Soma.
<LEND>

<L>22045<pc>0406-b<k1>dasra<k2>dasra
{%Dasra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. destroying, destructive,
overcoming enemies, accomplishing wonderful deeds,
giving marvellous aid; worthy to be seen, handsome,
beautiful; ({%as%}), m., N. of Pūṣan; N. of one of
the two Aśvins (the other being called Nāsatya); an
ass; a robber, thief, &c., see {%dasyu;%} ({%au,%} Ved. {%ā%}), m.
du., N. or epithet of the Aśvins, said to be so called
as ‘destroying diseases or enemies,’ (occurring usually
in the nom. and voc.); a N. of Indra-Viṣṇu; the
numeral two; ({%ās%}), m. pl. an epithet of the Maruts;
({%am%}), n. the cold season, hoar frost. In Sūrya-sid-
dhānta VIII. 9, {%dasrādīnām%} must be translated ‘of
the Nakṣatra Aśvinī, &c.,’ see {%dasra-devatā;%} [cf.
{%daṃsana, daṃsas, daṃsa, daṃsiṣṭha.%}] {%—Dasra-%}
{%devatā,%} f. the lunar constellation Aśvinī. {%—Dasra-%}
{%sū, ūs,%} f. ‘the mother of the Aśvins,’ N. of Sañjñā
or the wife of the Sun.
<LEND>

<L>22046<pc>0406-b<k1>dAsita<k2>dAsita
{%Dāsita, as, ā, am, = dasta%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>22047<pc>0406-b<k1>dasArAma<k2>dasArAma
{#dasArAma#}¦ {%dasārāma, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>22048<pc>0406-b<k1>dah<k2>dah<h>1
{#dah#} 1¦. {%dah%} (the original form of this rt.
was probably {%dagh%}), cl. 1. P. {%dahati%} (ep.
{%dahate%}), {%dadāha, dhakṣyati%} (ep. {%dahiṣyati%}),
{%dhakṣyate, dagdhum%} (Ved. inf. {%dagdhos;%} other
Vedic forms are {%dakṣi, adhāk, dhāk;%} part. {%dha-%}
{%kṣat%} or {%dakṣat%}), to burn, consume by fire, scorch,
[Page0406-c+ 79]
roast; (in surgery) to cauterize; to consume, de-
stroy completely; to torment, torture, pain, distress,
disturb, grieve: Pass. {%dahyate%} (ep. also {%dahyati%}),
to be burnt, to burn, to be in flames; to be consumed
by fire; to be inflamed; to be consumed by internal
heat or by grief, to suffer pain, be distressed, be
vexed; to be destroyed &c.; (also transitive) to
burn: Caus. {%dāhayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%adīdahat,%} to
cause to burn or to be burned &c.; to cause to
roast or to be cooked: Desid. {%didhakṣati%} (ep. {%-te%}),
to wish to burn, to be about to consume or destroy,
&c. [cf. {%didhakṣā%} and {%didhakṣu%}]: Caus. of
Desid. {%didhakṣayati, -yitum,%} to cause to desire
to burn or to be about to burn: Intens. {%dandahīti,%}
{%dandahyate, dandagdhi%} (also 2nd sing. impv.),
to burn completely, destroy completely; (A.) to be
burnt completely, be entirely consumed by fire or
grief; [cf. Hib. <nsi>daghaim; daighim, daghte,</nsi> ‘burnt,’
= {%dagdha%}; <nsi>dvighir,</nsi> ‘flame:’ Lith. <nsi>degù,</nsi> ‘I am
hot;’ <nsi>deginù,</nsi> ‘I burn:’ Old Germ. <nsi>tāh-t</nsi> or <nsi>dāh-t,</nsi>
‘a wick,’ fr. Caus.: Goth. <nsi>dag-s,</nsi> ‘the day:’ Angl.
Sax. <nsi>daeg:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>tag:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>day:</nsi> perhaps
Gr. <lang n="greek">τήγανον:</lang> Lat. <nsi>lig-nu-m</nsi> for <nsi>dig-nu-m.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>22049<pc>0406-c<k1>dah<k2>dah<h>2
2. {%dah, dhak, k, k,%}¦ burning (at the end of comp.;
cf. {%uśa-dhak%}).
<LEND>

<L>22050<pc>0406-c<k1>dahat<k2>dahat
{%Dahat, an, antī, at,%}¦ burning, scorching.
<LEND>

<L>22051<pc>0406-c<k1>dahati<k2>dahati
{%Dahati, is,%}¦ m., N. of one of the attendants on
Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>22052<pc>0406-c<k1>dahadahA<k2>dahadahA
{%Dahadahā,%}¦ f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>22053<pc>0406-c<k1>dahana<k2>dahana
{%Dahana, as, ī, am,%}¦ burning, consuming by fire,
scorching, destroying [cf. {%tripura-d˚%}]; destructive,
injurious, mischievous; ({%as%}), m. fire, a N. of Agni
the god of fire; the numeral three; one of the five
forms of fire in the Svāhā-kāra; N. of one of the
eleven Rudras; of one of the attendants of Skanda;
a bad man; a pigeon; lead-wort, Plumbago Zeyla-
nica ({%= citraka%}); the marking-nut, Anacardium
Officinarum {%(= bhallātaka); (ī),%} f. fire; ({%am%}), n.
burning, cauterizing, consuming by fire; sour gruel.
{%—Dahana-ketana, as,%} m. ‘the mark of burning,’
smoke. {%—Dahana-priyā,%} f. ‘the beloved of fire,’
N. of Svāhā or the wife of Agni. {%—Dahanarkṣa%}
{%(˚na-ṛkṣa), am,%} n. ‘the burning constellation,’
the constellation Kṛttikā. {%—Dahanāguru (˚na-ag˚),%}
{%us,%} m., N. of a species of the plant Agallochum.
{%—Dahanārāti (˚na-ar˚), is,%} m. ‘enemy of fire,’
water. {%—Dahanopakaraṇa (˚na-up˚), am,%} n. the
means for cauterizing. {%—Dahanopala (˚na-up˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘fire-stone,’ the sun-gem, a crystal lens; (also
read {%dahanopama;%} cf. {%sūrya-kānta.%}) {%—Daha-%}
{%nolkā (˚na-ul˚),%} f. a firebrand.
<LEND>

<L>22054<pc>0406-c<k1>dahanIya<k2>dahanIya
{%Dahanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be burnt, burnable,
combustible. {%—Dahanīya-tā,%} f. or {%dahanīya-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. combustibility.
<LEND>

<L>22055<pc>0406-c<k1>dahyamAna<k2>dahyamAna
{%Dahyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being burnt.
<LEND>

<L>22056<pc>0406-c<k1>dahara<k2>dahara
{#dahara#}¦ {%dahara, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%dah,%} probably another form of {%dahra,%} which is
for {%dabhra;%} see {%dahra%} below), small, fine, thin,
subtile, short; young in age, (opposed to {%vṛddha%});
the cavity of the heart, the heart; ({%as%}), m. a child,
infant; a younger brother; a young animal; a rat,
mouse. {%—Dahara-pṛṣṭha, am,%} n., N. of a section
of the Taittirīya-saṃhitā; [cf. {%mahā-pṛṣṭha.%}]
{%—Dahara-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist Sūtra
work.
<LEND>

<L>22057<pc>0406-c<k1>daharaka<k2>daharaka
{%Daharaka = dahara%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>22058<pc>0406-c<k1>dahra<k2>dahra
{%Dahra, as, ā, am,%}¦ small, fine, thin; the cavity of
the heart; the heart itself; ({%as%}), m. fire; a forest
conflagration, a wood on fire. {%—Dahra-tas,%} ind. from
the cavity of the heart. {%—Dahrāgni (˚ra-ag˚), is,%}
m., N. of Agastya in a former birth.
<LEND>

<L>22059<pc>0406-c<k1>dahiyaka<k2>dahiyaka
{#dahiyaka#}¦ {%dahiyaka, as,%} m. (?) , N. of a par-
ticular kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>22060<pc>0406-c<k1>dahra<k2>dahra
{#dahra#}¦ {%dahra.%} See above under {%dahara.%}
<LEND>

<L>22061<pc>0406-c<k1>dA<k2>dA<h>1
{#dA#} 1¦. {%dā%} (many of the forms of this rt.
are to be referred to the base {%dad,%} which is
sometimes regarded as a separate rt.; cf. 1. {%dad%}), cl. 3.
P. A. {%dadāti, datte,%} 1st pl. {%dadmas,%} 2nd pl. {%dattha,%}
[Page0407-a+ 81]
3rd pl. {%dadati%} (3rd pl. A. {%dadate%}); Impf. {%adadāt,%}
{%adatta%} (3rd du. {%adattām,%} 3rd pl. {%adadus,%} A.
{%adadata%}); Pot. {%dadyāt, dadīta%} (1st pl. A. {%dadī-%}
{%mahi,%} 3rd pl. {%dadīran%}); Impv. {%dadātu, dattām%}
(2nd sing. {%dehi,%} A. {%datsva,%} 3rd du. {%dattām,%} 2nd
pl. {%datta,%} 3rd pl. {%dadatu%}); Perf. {%dadau, dade%}
(2nd sing. {%daditha%} or {%dadātha,%} 2nd du. {%dadathus,%}
2nd pl. {%dada,%} 3rd pl. {%dadus,%} 3rd du. A. {%dadāte,%}
part. {%dadivas,%} gen. {%daduṣas%}); Fut. {%dātā, dāsyati,%}
{%-te;%} Aor. {%adāt, adita%} (3rd pl. P. {%adus,%} 1st sing. A.
{%adiṣi,%} 3rd pl. {%adiṣata%}); Prec. {%deyāt, dāsīṣṭa;%}
(Ved. forms are Pres. 3rd sing. {%dāti,%} 1st pl. {%dad-%}
{%masi;%} Impf. 2nd pl. {%adadāta, adattana,%} 2nd sing.
{%dadās,%} 3rd sing. {%dadāt,%} 2nd pl. {%dadāta;%} Impv.
{%dātu,%} 2nd sing. {%daddhi;%} Perf. 3rd pl. A. with
{%pra, dadrire,%} part. {%dadāvat, dadvat;%} Aor. {%dāt,%}
3rd du. {%dātām,%} 2nd pl. {%dāta,%} 3rd pl. {%dus,%} 3rd sing.
A. {%adadiṣṭa, adediṣṭa,%} 2nd sing. Let {%dadas.%}
Ep. forms fr. 1. {%dad%} are 1st sing. Pres. {%dadmi,%} 3rd
sing. {%dadati, -te,%} 3rd pl. {%dadanti, -te;%} Impf. 3rd
sing. {%adadat;%} Impv. 2nd sing. {%dada,%} A. {%dadasva;%}
Perf. 3rd sing. {%dadade,%} 3rd du. {%dadadāte,%} 3rd pl.
{%dadadire%}); {%dātum,%} Ved. inf. {%dātave, dātavai, dā-%}
{%tos, dai%} in {%parā-dai;%} to give, bestow, grant,
yield, impart, present, offer (usually with acc. of the
thing and dat. gen. or loc. of the person, e. g. {%tat%}
{%tasmai%} or {%tasya%} or {%tasmin dehi,%} give that to him);
to deliver over, hand over; to give back, restore,
return; to pay (e. g. {%ṛṇaṃ dā,%} to pay a debt;
{%daṇḍaṃ dā,%} to pay a fine); to give away, give up,
cede, sacrifice, devote, surrender (e. g. {%prāṇān%} or
{%jīvitaṃ dā,%} to give one's life; {%ātmānaṃ dā,%} to
sacrifice one's self; {%ātmānaṃ khedāya dā,%} to give
one's self up to grief); to give in marriage (with or
without {%bhāryām,%} e. g. {%dadau kanyāṃ tasmai%}
{%bhāryām,%} he gave the maiden to him as wife;
{%yasmai pitā tāṃ dadyāt,%} to whomsoever a father
may marry her); to communicate knowledge or
advice, to teach (e. g. {%vidyāṃ dā,%} to impart know-
ledge); to sell (with inst. of the price, e. g. {%gavāṃ%}
{%sahasreṇa dā,%} to sell for a thousand cows); to
permit, allow (e. g. {%vāṣpo na dadāti tāṃ draṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} tears do not allow her to see); to place, put,
apply (e. g. {%padam bhasma-caye dadau,%} he placed
his foot on a heap of ashes). The root {%dā%} may
sometimes yield senses equivalent to ‘to do,’ ‘make,’
‘cause,’ ‘perform,’ ‘bring about,’ ‘accomplish;’ and
the meanings of this root may be variously modified
according to the nouns with which it is connected,
as in the following examples: {%śokaṃ dā,%} to cause
grief; {%vrataṃ dā,%} to accomplish a vow; {%śrāddhaṃ%}
{%dā,%} to perform the Śrāddha; {%sañjñāṃ dā,%} to make
a sign; {%panthānaṃ%} or {%mārgaṃ dā,%} to give up
the road, stand out of the way, allow to pass; {%ava-%}
{%kāśaṃ dā,%} to give room or space, allow to enter;
{%yuddhaṃ%} or {%saṅgrāmaṃ dā,%} to give battle, fight
with; {%ājñāṃ%} or {%ādeśaṃ dā,%} to give an order, to
command; {%sandeśaṃ dā,%} to give information;
{%varaṃ dā,%} to grant a boon; {%āśiṣo dā,%} to grant
or utter blessings; {%prati-vacas%} or {%prati-vacanaṃ%}
or {%praty-uttaraṃ dā,%} to give an answer; {%śabdaṃ%}
{%dā,%} to make a noise, call out; {%vācaṃ dā%} (with
dat.), to address a speech to; {%satyaṃ vaco dā,%} to
speak the truth; {%samayaṃ dā,%} to propose an agree-
ment; {%śāpaṃ dā,%} to utter a curse or oath; {%āliṅga-%}
{%naṃ dā,%} to embrace; {%jhampaṃ dā,%} to give a
spring, to jump; {%anuyātrāṃ dā,%} to accompany;
{%talaṃ%} or {%talān dā,%} to slap with the palms of the
hands, to shake hands; {%tala-prahāraṃ dā,%} to strike
with the palm &c.; {%tālaṃ dā,%} to beat time with
the hands; {%saṅketakaṃ dā,%} to make an appoint-
ment with any one; {%prayogaṃ dā,%} to give a dramatic
representation; {%vṛtiṃ dā,%} to inclose or fence in;
{%darśanaṃ%} or {%dṛṣṭiṃ dā,%} to show one's self, be-
come visible, appear; {%dṛṣṭiṃ%} or {%dṛśaṃ%} or {%akṣi%}
or {%cakṣur dā%} (with loc.), to fix the eyes on, look
at; {%nigaḍāni dā,%} to put on fetters; {%pāvakaṃ dā,%} to
set on fire; {%śāraṃ dā,%} to move a chess-man; {%ar-%}
{%galaṃ dā,%} to draw a bolt, to bar; {%padaṃ dā,%} to
direct the steps; {%karṇaṃ dā,%} to give ear, listen;
{%mano dā,%} to direct the mind to anything, think
[Page0407-b+ 81]
upon. In some passages of the Veda the base {%dad%}
(A. {%dadate%}) yields senses equivalent to ‘to receive,’
‘carry,’ ‘convey,’ ‘bear,’ ‘hold,’ ‘keep,’ ‘preserve,’
to which some refer the part. {%datta,%} preserved; [cf.
5. {%dā.%}] Caus. P. {%dāpayati, -yitum, adīdapat,%}
to cause to give or to be given, to cause to bestow,
present, &c. (with two acc.); to cause to be offered;
to oblige to pay, make pay; to force to restore or
return, to make surrender or deliver; to procure;
to cause to do or perform or accomplish; to cause to
put or apply, cause to be put on; to cause to speak
or utter: Desid. P. A. {%ditsati, -te,%} (Ved.) {%didāsati,%}
to wish to give &c., to be ready to bestow &c.:
Intens. {%dedīyate, dādāti;%} [cf. rts. {%dās, rā, lā:%}
Zend <nsi>dā,</nsi> ‘to give;’ <nsi>dā-tar, dā-ta,</nsi> ‘giver;’ <nsi>dā-na, dā-</nsi>
<nsi>thra,</nsi> ‘present:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">δίδομι</lang> {%= dadāmi,%} <lang n="greek">δο-τήρ, δω-τήρ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δῶ-τι-ς, δό-τι-ς, δῶ-ρο-ν, δάνος, δαπάνη</lang> from
the Caus. {%dāpayati:%} Lat. <nsi>dă-re, dă-tor, dō-s, dō-</nsi>
<nsi>nu-m:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>da-mĭ = dad-mi; da-rŭ,</nsi> ‘present;’
<nsi>da-nĭ,</nsi> ‘tax:’ Lith. <nsi>du§-mi = dad-mi, du§-ti-s, du§-</nsi>
<nsi>ni-s,</nsi> ‘a gift:’ Hib. <nsi>daighim</nsi> or <nsi>dailim</nsi> fr. <nsi>daidim,</nsi>
‘I give:’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>dodi,</nsi> ‘to give:’ Angl. Sax.
<nsi>tidhe, tidhian.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>22062<pc>0407-b<k1>dA<k2>dA<h>2
2. {%dā, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. a giver; (at the end of comp.)
giving, granting; [cf. {%an-aśva-dā, aśva-dā, āyur-%}
{%dā,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>22063<pc>0407-b<k1>dAka<k2>dAka
{%Dāka, as,%}¦ m. a giver, donor, one who makes
presents, especially to Brāhmans; the institutor of
a sacrifice who employs and pays the officiating
priests.
<LEND>

<L>22064<pc>0407-b<k1>dAta<k2>dAta<h>1
1. {%dāta,%}¦ Ved., said by some to {%= datta,%} ‘given,’ in
{%tvā-dāta,%} q. v.; but the form {%dāta%} according to
native authorities can only belong to 3. {%dā%} or 7. {%dā.%}
<LEND>

<L>22065<pc>0407-b<k1>dAtavya<k2>dAtavya
{%Dātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given or bestowed;
to be paid, payable; to be restored or returned; to
be communicated or taught; to be given in marriage;
to be placed upon or applied.
<LEND>

<L>22066<pc>0407-b<k1>dAti<k2>dAti<h>1
1. {%dāti, is,%}¦ f. giving. See {%dāti-vāra%} under 2.
{%dāti,%} p. 408, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22067<pc>0407-b<k1>dAtukAma<k2>dAtukAma
{%Dātu-kāma, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%dātum%} inf. of 1. {%dā%}
{%+ kāma%}), wishing to bestow, desirous of giving.
<LEND>

<L>22068<pc>0407-b<k1>dAtf<k2>dAtf<h>1
1. {%dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ giving, bestowing, imparting,
communicating, liberal; a giver, donor, imparter,
lender, creditor, payer; teacher; [cf. {%kanyā-d˚,%}
{%brahma-d˚, ṛna-d˚;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">δωτήρ, δοτήρ;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>dator.</nsi>] {%—Dātṛ-tā,%} f. or {%dātṛ-tva, am,%} n. the
state of being a giver, liberality. {%—Dātṛ-nirūpaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva.
{%—Dātṛ-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>22069<pc>0407-b<k1>dAtva<k2>dAtva
{%Dātva, as,%}¦ m. a giver, donor; ({%am%}), n. a sacri-
ficial ceremony; the performance of a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>22070<pc>0407-b<k1>dAda<k2>dAda
{%Dāda, as,%}¦ m. (fr. base {%dad%}), a gift, donation,
oblation, giving. {%—Dāda-da, as,%} m. a donor, giver
of a gift.
<LEND>

<L>22071<pc>0407-b<k1>dAdin<k2>dAdin
{%Dādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ giving, a giver.
<LEND>

<L>22072<pc>0407-b<k1>dAna<k2>dAna<h>1
1. {%dāna, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a giver, giving; an offering,
(according to Sāy. {%= datta%} or {%deya-bhūta,%} but
thought by modern scholars to be the epithet of a
horse); ({%am%}), n. giving, presenting; giving in
marriage (e. g. {%kanyā-d˚,%} q. v.); giving up, sacri-
ficing (e. g. {%prāṇa-d˚,%} q. v.); delivering, distributing;
communicating, imparting, teaching, giving instruc-
tion (e. g. {%brahma-d˚,%} q. v.); a gift, present, donation
(e. g. {%dānaṃ dā,%} to offer a gift; cf. Lat. <nsi>donum</nsi>);
special gift, oblation (e. g. {%udaka-d˚,%} q. v.); adding,
addition; liberality; bribery (one of the four means
by which a king overpowers his enemies; cf. {%upāya%});
the fragrant fluid that flows from the temples of an
elephant in rut (more probably connected with rt. 3. {%dā;%}
see 2. {%dāna,%} p. 408, col. 1); a kind of honey, (per-
haps for {%dāla.%}) {%—Dāna-kalpa-taru, us,%} m., N. of a
work mentioned in the Saṃskāra-tattva by Raghu-
nandana. {%—Dāna-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. fond of
giving, liberal. {%—Dāna-kulyā,%} f. the flow of fluid from
an elephant's temples. {%—Dāna-kusumāñjali (˚ma-%}
{%añ˚),%} N. of a poem. {%—Dāna-kaumudī,%} f., N. of the
second part of the Kriyā-kaumudī. {%—Dāna-cyuta, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Dāna-tas,%} ind. through gifts, by
liberality. {%—Dāna-darpaṇa,%} N. of a work mentioned
in the Saṃskāra-tattva. {%—Dāna-dharma, as,%} m. alms-
giving, charitable acts, charity; the rules or practice
[Page0407-c+ 81]
of alms-giving. {%—Dānadharma-vidhi, is,%} m. ‘the
rules for alms-giving &c.,’ N. of a chapter of the
Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Dāna-pati, is,%} m. ‘a master of
liberality,’ an exceedingly liberal or munificent man;
an epithet of A-krūra, who was kinsman of Kṛṣṇa;
N. of a Daitya. {%—Dāna-pattra, am,%} n. a deed of
gift or conveyance. {%—Dāna-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of
a work on the sixteen chief oblations. {%—Dāna-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘an object of charity, one who deserves a gift,’
N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dāna-%}
{%pratibhāvya, am,%} n. security for payment of a debt
&c. {%—Dāna-bhinna, as, ā, am,%} divided or made
hostile by bribes. {%—Dāna-yogya, as, ā, am,%} worthy
of a gift, meriting a donation. {%—Dāna-vajra, as,%}
&c., ‘whose thunderbolt is liberality,’ an epithet of
the Vaiśyas or men of the third tribe. {%—Dāna-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having gifts, presenting gifts, liberal.
{%—Dāna-vidhi, is,%} m., N. of a chapter of the
Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Dāna-vīra, as,%} m. ‘a hero in
liberality,’ an exceedingly liberal man. {%—Dāna-vya-%}
{%tyāsa, as,%} m. ‘perversion of gifts,’ gift under error,
giving to the wrong person. {%—Dāna-vrata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} devoted to liberality or benevolence; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. the inhabitants of Śāka-dvīpa. {%—Dāna-śīla, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} liberally disposed, liberal, generous, charitable,
munificent; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the translators
of the Lalita-vistara in Tibetian. {%—Dāna-śūra, as,%}
m. ‘a hero in liberality,’ N. of a Bodhi-sattva (=
Śākya-muni in a former birth; cf. {%dāna-vīra%}). {%—Dā-%}
{%na-śauṇḍa, as, ī, am,%} ‘intoxicated with giving,’ ex-
ceedingly liberal. {%—Dāna-sāgara, as,%} m. ‘the ocean
of gifts,’ N. of a work by Malamāsa mentioned
in the Saṃskāra-tattva by Raghu-nandana. {%—Dā-%}
{%na-stuti, is,%} f. ‘praise of liberality,’ N. of a kind of
hymn. {%—Dāna-hīna, as, ā, am,%} deprived of gifts.
{%—Dāna-hemādri (˚ma-ad˚),%} N. of a work on
oblations written under the patronage of Hemādri.
{%—Dānādhikāra (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of a short
Buddhist work on alms-giving.
<LEND>

<L>22073<pc>0407-c<k1>dAnaka<k2>dAnaka
{%Dānaka, am,%}¦ n. a mean, paltry, or miserable gift.
<LEND>

<L>22074<pc>0407-c<k1>dAnika<k2>dAnika
{%Dānika,%}¦ (at the end of comp.) relating or referring
to a gift, liberality, giving instruction, &c. (e. g.
{%adhyayana-d˚,%} consisting in the giving of instruction
or in reading; cf. {%vara-d˚%} and {%udaka-d˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>22075<pc>0407-c<k1>dAnin<k2>dAnin
{%Dānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ giving, liberal, benevolent; hav-
ing gifts; [cf. {%agra-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22076<pc>0407-c<k1>dAnIya<k2>dAnIya
{%Dānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ due, bestowable, worthy or
fit to be given; receiving gifts or oblations; ({%am%}),
n. a thing to be given, gift, donation.
<LEND>

<L>22077<pc>0407-c<k1>dAnu<k2>dAnu<h>1
1. {%dānu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. liberal; a donor, giver;
prosperity, contentment; air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>22078<pc>0407-c<k1>dApana<k2>dApana
{%Dāpana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), forcing or obliging
to give or pay, causing to restore.
<LEND>

<L>22079<pc>0407-c<k1>dApanIya<k2>dApanIya
{%Dāpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made to give or pay,
liable to be amerced, subject to the payment of a
fine (with acc. of the sum paid); to be caused to
be given.
<LEND>

<L>22080<pc>0407-c<k1>dApayitavya<k2>dApayitavya
{%Dāpayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be forced or obliged
to give or pay.
<LEND>

<L>22081<pc>0407-c<k1>dApayitvA<k2>dApayitvA
{%Dāpayitvā,%}¦ ind. having caused or compelled to
give or pay, having fined.
<LEND>

<L>22082<pc>0407-c<k1>dApita<k2>dApita<h>1
1. {%dāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be given, con-
demned to pay, fined; adjudged, to be paid by way
of fine; assigned, awarded, entitled to receive a fine,
any one to whom a fine is to be paid.
<LEND>

<L>22083<pc>0407-c<k1>dApya<k2>dApya
{%Dāpya, as, ā, am, = dāpanīya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>22084<pc>0407-c<k1>dAman<k2>dAman<h>1
1. {%dāman, ā,%}¦ m. (for 2. and 3. {%dāman%} see
p. 408, col. 2), Ved. a giver, donor; ({%a%}), n. giving,
a gift; [cf. {%a-d˚%} and {%su-d˚.%}] — 1. {%dāman-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} furnished with gifts; [cf. 2. {%dāman-vat%}
under 3. {%dāman,%} p. 408, col. 2.]
<LEND>

<L>22085<pc>0407-c<k1>dAya<k2>dAya<h>1
1. {%dāya, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. 2. {%dāya,%} p. 408, col. 2], giv-
ing, presenting [cf. {%śata-d˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. a gift, present,
donation; a special gift, a nuptial present, that which
a bride and bridegroom receive on their marriage;
alms to a student at his initiation &c.; delivering,
delivery, handing over; (for other meanings given by
some under 1. {%dāya%} see 2. {%dāya,%} p. 408, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>22086<pc>0407-c<k1>dAyaka<k2>dAyaka<h>1
1. {%dāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ giving, bestowing, pre-
senting, granting; effecting; a giver, donor (e. g.
{%viṣa-d˚, uttara-d˚, manoratha-d˚, kānti-d˚, %}
[Page0408-a+ 80]
{%jīva-d˚,%} q. v.); placing upon, arranging. {%—Dāyaka-%}
{%tā,%} f. the state of a giver, giving.
<LEND>

<L>22087<pc>0408-a<k1>dAyita<k2>dAyita
{%Dāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ probably a wrong reading for
{%dāpita,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22088<pc>0408-a<k1>dAyitf<k2>dAyitf<h>1
1. {%dāyitṛ,%}¦ incorrect form for 1. {%dātṛ,%} p. 407, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22089<pc>0408-a<k1>dAyin<k2>dAyin
{%Dāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of comp.) giving,
presenting, granting, paying, owing; communicat-
ing; causing, effecting; [cf. {%a-d˚, udaka-d˚, ṛ-%}
{%ṣabha-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22090<pc>0408-a<k1>dAru<k2>dAru<h>1
1. {%dāru, us, us, u%}¦ (for 2. {%dāru%} see p. 410, col. 1),
liberal, munificent, giving, communicating, compas-
sionate; a giver, donor; an artist (in this sense
perhaps to be referred to rt. {%dṝ%}).
<LEND>

<L>22091<pc>0408-a<k1>dAvan<k2>dAvan
{%Dāvan,%}¦ Ved., occurring only in dat. {%dāvane,%} for
the giving, in order to give or present; in order to
receive; ({%ā, ā, a%}), giving, granting, (usually at the
end of comp.; cf. {%aśva-d˚%} and {%śata-d˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>22092<pc>0408-a<k1>dA<k2>dA<h>3
{#dA#} 3¦. {%dā,%} cl. 2. 4. P. {%dāti, dyati, dātum,%} to
cut, divide; [according to native authorities the
proper form of this rt. is {%do,%} q. v.; cf. rts. {%dāy, dal:%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">δαί-ο-μαι, δαί(τ)-ς, δαιτύ-ς, δαί-τη, δαι-τρό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δαί-νυ-μι, δαί-νυ-μαι, δαι-τυ-μών, δαΐζω, δατέ-ο-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δα-σ-μό-ς, δάπτω</lang> (Caus.), <lang n="greek">δεῖπνον:</lang> Lat. <nsi>daps:</nsi>
Cambro-Brit. <nsi>de,</nsi> ‘to part;’ <nsi>dead,</nsi> ‘a parting.’]
<LEND>

<L>22093<pc>0408-a<k1>dAta<k2>dAta<h>2
2. {%dāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, divided; reaped; (see
Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 46.)
<LEND>

<L>22094<pc>0408-a<k1>dAti<k2>dAti<h>2
2. {%dāti, is,%}¦ f. cutting, destroying; distribution.
{%—Dāti-vāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (Sāy.) splitting the
clouds or yielding water or giving strength or giving
riches, (as if fr. 1. {%dā;%} see 1. {%dāti,%} p. 407, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>22095<pc>0408-a<k1>dAtu<k2>dAtu
{%Dātu, u,%}¦ n., Ved. a part, division, allotted portion
or task; (at the end of an adj. comp. after a nume-
ral = fold, e. g. {%sahasra-dātu,%} thousand-fold.)
<LEND>

<L>22096<pc>0408-a<k1>dAtf<k2>dAtf<h>2
2. {%dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (for 1. {%dātṛ%} see p. 407, col. 2),
Ved. cutting off, mowing; cropping (grass); a cutter.
<LEND>

<L>22097<pc>0408-a<k1>dAtra<k2>dAtra
{%Dātra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. anything allotted or fallen
to one's share, share, possession; an instrument for
cutting or chopping wood &c., a sort of sickle or
large knife, a bill-hook or hatchet with a curved
point, commonly called a Dā.
<LEND>

<L>22098<pc>0408-a<k1>dAna<k2>dAna<h>2
2. {%dāna, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. {%dāna%} see p. 407, col. 2),
Ved. distribution (especially of food); a meal; a sacri-
ficial meal; distributing, communicating, liberality;
part, share, possession; a distributer; ({%am%}), n. cut-
ting off, dividing; pasture; the fluid flowing from
an elephant's temples when in rut; [cf. 1. {%dāna.%}]
{%—Dānāpnas (˚na-ap˚), ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having
abundant shares (or gifts, fr. 1. {%dāna%}). {%—Dānaukas%}
{%(˚na-ok˚), ās,%} m., Ved. delighting in the sacrificial
meal; (Sāy.) ‘the abode of liberality, munificent,’
epithet of Indra, (as if fr. 1. {%dāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>22099<pc>0408-a<k1>dAnava<k2>dAnava
{%Dānava, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a class of demons, a giant,
a Titan; (according to a later conception the Dānavas,
who are implacable enemies of the Devas, are children
of Danu and Kaśyapa, see {%danu,%} p. 401; the Daityas
and Dānavas are often identified, and both of them
are called Asuras); ({%as, ī, am%}), belonging to the
Dānavas, peculiar to the Dānavas, &c. {%—Dānava-%}
{%guru, us,%} m. ‘the preceptor of the Dānavas,’ N. of
the regent of the planet Venus. {%—Dānava-pati, is,%}
m. the king of the Dānavas. {%—Dānava-pūjita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} worshipped by the Dānavas; ({%as%}), m. the
regent of the planet Venus. {%—Dānava-priyā,%} f. the
betel plant. {%—Dānava-sūdana, as, ā, am,%} destroy-
ing the Dānavas. {%—Dānavāri (˚va-ari), is,%} m. an
enemy of the Dānavas; an epithet of Indra; of
Śiva; ({%ayas%}), m. pl. the gods. {%—Dānavendra (˚va-%}
{%in˚), as,%} m. the chief of the Dānavas.
<LEND>

<L>22100<pc>0408-a<k1>dAnaveya<k2>dAnaveya
{%Dānaveya, as,%}¦ m. a Dānava or demon.
<LEND>

<L>22101<pc>0408-a<k1>dAnu<k2>dAnu<h>2
2. {%dānu, us, us, u%}¦ (for 1. see p. 407, col. 3), valiant;
a victor, conqueror, destroyer; ({%us%}), m. a class of
demons; ({%u%}), n. a fluid, a drop, dew; [cf. {%ārdra-d˚,%}
{%jīra-d˚.%}] {%—Dānu-citra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. shining
with dew, brilliant with moisture; (Sāy.) wonderfully
destructive, wonderfully liberal, marvellous by gifts,
(as if fr. 1. {%dā.%}) {%—Dānu-da, as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving
drops, trickling. {%—Dānunas-patī,%} m. du. (fr. the
gen. sing. of 2. {%dānu%}), Ved. ‘the lords of dew,’ epithet
of Mitra-varuṇa and of the Aśvins; (Sāy.) lords of
munificence, (as if fr. 1. {%dā.%}) {%—Dānu-pinva, as,%}
[Page0408-b+ 80]
&c., Ved. swelling with drops. {%—Dānu-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. having many oblations; liquid, fluid,
trickling; (Sāy.) malignant, injurious; having gifts,
liberal, suited to a giver, (as if fr. 1. {%dā.%})
<LEND>

<L>22102<pc>0408-b<k1>dAman<k2>dAman<h>2
2. {%dāman, ā, ā,%}¦ m. f. (for 1. {%dāman%} see p. 407,
col. 3; for 3. {%dāman%} see below), an allotment, share.
<LEND>

<L>22103<pc>0408-b<k1>dAya<k2>dAya<h>2
2. {%dāya, as,%}¦ m. [cf. 1. {%dāya,%} p. 407, col. 3], share,
portion, separate property, inheritance, patrimony
(e. g. {%dāyād upāgata,%} fallen to one's share by in-
heritance); a part (in {%śata-d˚,%} q. v.); distributing,
dividing, breaking; loss, destruction; irony; place,
site, (some of the meanings here given as connected
with rt. 3. {%dā%} may perhaps be referred to rt. 1. {%dā;%}
cf. 1. {%dāya.%}) {%—Dāya-kāla, as,%} m. the time of
dividing an inheritance. {%—Dāya-krama-saṅgraha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a work on the law of inheritance.
{%—Dāya-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a part of the Smṛti-
tattva. {%—Dāyatattva-kṛt, t,%} m., N. of an author
mentioned in the Mitrodaya by Mitra-miśra. {%—Dāya-%}
{%bandhu, us,%} m. ‘a friend or partner in the inherit-
ance,’ a brother. {%—Dāya-bhāga, as,%} m. partition or
portioning of inheritance, division of property among
heirs, apportioning, inheritance; N. of a work on
the law of inheritance. {%—Dāyabhāga-ṭīkā,%} f., N. of
a commentary on the Dāya-bhāga by Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Dāyabhāga-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a work by
Raghu-nandana. {%—Dāya-vibhāga, as,%} m. portion-
ing of inheritance, division of property amongst
heirs, portion. {%—Dāyāda (˚ya-āda), as,%} m. ‘the
receiver of a portion or heritage,’ an heir, claimant,
candidate, pretender (with gen. or loc. of thing); a
son, a kinsman near or remote, a distant descendant;
({%ā, ī%}), f. an heiress, daughter. {%—Dāyāda-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having an heir. {%—Dāyādya, am,%} n. inherit-
ance. {%—Dāyādya-tā,%} f. the state of being an inheritor
or near relation, near relationship, affinity. {%—Dāyā-%}
{%pavartana (˚ya-ap˚), am,%} n. forfeiture of property,
privation. {%—Dāyārha (˚ya-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} claim-
able or claiming inheritance.
<LEND>

<L>22104<pc>0408-b<k1>dAyaka<k2>dAyaka<h>2
2. {%dāyaka, as,%}¦ m. a heir, inheritor, kinsman.
<LEND>

<L>22105<pc>0408-b<k1>dAyAdava<k2>dAyAdava
{%Dāyādava, as,%}¦ m. an inheritor, heir, kinsman (?).
<LEND>

<L>22106<pc>0408-b<k1>dita<k2>dita<h>1
1. {%dita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, torn, divided.
<LEND>

<L>22107<pc>0408-b<k1>dina<k2>dina<h>1
1. {%dina, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. {%dina%} see p. 412, col. 3),
cut, split, destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>22108<pc>0408-b<k1>dA<k2>dA<h>4
{#dA#} 4¦. {%dā,%} cl. 4. P. {%dyati, dātum,%} to bind;
(this root does not occur separately, and is
not given in the Dhātu-pāṭha); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δέ-ω, δί-δη-μι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δέ-σι-ς, δε-τἠ, δε-σ-μό-ς, διά-δη-μα;</lang> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>ti-an,</nsi> ‘to tie.’]
<LEND>

<L>22109<pc>0408-b<k1>dAma<k2>dAma
{%Dāma%}¦ (at the end of comp.) = 3. {%dāman%} below;
[cf. {%ud-d˚%} and {%srag-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22110<pc>0408-b<k1>dAman<k2>dAman<h>3
3. {%dāman, a,%}¦ n. (said to be also {%ā,%} f.), a string,
cord, thread, rope, fetter, fillet; a girdle; a chaplet,
wreath or garland for the forehead; a large bandage;
a particular constellation. The word {%dāman%} may
be used at the end of an adj. comp., e. g. {%uru-%}
{%dāman,%} having a large garland; and according to
Pāṇini IV. 1, 27, when a numeral precedes, the fem.
must end in {%ī,%} e. g. {%dvi-dāmnī,%} having two cords:
it also occurs at the end of proper names, e. g.
{%āśā-d˚,%} q. v.; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κρή-δεμνον.</lang>] {%—Dāma-%}
{%kaṇṭha, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having a rope round the
neck; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
descendants of this man. {%—Dāma-granthi, is,%} m. a
name assumed by Nakula; [cf. {%granthika.%}] {%—Dā-%}
{%ma-candra, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Dāma-jāta-%}
{%śrī, īs,%} m., N. of a prince (occurring only on coins).
 — 2. {%dāman-vat, ān, atī, at%} (for 1. see p. 407, col. 3),
furnished with cords &c. {%—Dāma-siṃha, as,%} m., N.
of a prince. {%—Dāmāñcana (˚ma-añ˚), am,%} n. a foot-
rope for horses &c.; (also {%dāmāñcala, am,%} n.) {%—Dā-%}
{%mādy-upākhyāna (˚ma-ād˚), am,%} n., N. of the
fourteenth chapter of the Vāsiṣṭha-rāmāyaṇa, com-
monly called Yoga-vāsiṣṭha. {%—Dāmodara (˚ma-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m., N. of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu (‘having a
cord round the belly,’ Yaśodā his foster-mother
having in vain passed a rope round his body, whilst
a child, to keep him in confinement); N. of the
twelfth month; of the ninth Arhat of the past
Ut-sarpiṇī; of two kings of Kaśmīra; of a poet
[Page0408-c+ 79]
in the Bhoja-prabandha by Ballāla; of the editor of
the drama called Mahā-nāṭaka; of the author of a
medical work; of the father of Malhaṇa and of
several other men; of a river. {%—Dāmodara-gupta,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Dāmodara-datta, as,%} m.,
N. of the father of Padma-nātha-datta. {%—Dāmodara-%}
{%deva, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Dāmodara-pad-%}
{%dhati, is,%} f., N. of an astronomical work. {%—Dāmo-%}
{%darāraṇya (˚ra-ar˚), am,%} n. ‘Kṛṣṇa's wood,’ N.
of a forest. {%—Dāmoṣṇīṣa (˚ma-uṣ˚), as,%} m., N.
of an old sage; (also read {%dāmoṣṇīva%} and {%dāmoṣ-%}
{%ṇīśa.%}) {%—Dāmoṣṇīṣi, is,%} m. a patronymic from
Dāmoṣṇīṣa. {%—Dāmoṣṇīṣya, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Dāmoṣṇīṣi.
<LEND>

<L>22111<pc>0408-c<k1>dAmanI<k2>dAmanI
{%Dāmanī,%}¦ f. [cf. {%dāmana,%} p. 409, col. 3], a mul-
titude of ropes or strings for tying cattle (especially
calves).
<LEND>

<L>22112<pc>0408-c<k1>dAmanIka<k2>dAmanIka
{%Dāmanīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ at the end of an adj.
comp. {%= dāmanī%} above.
<LEND>

<L>22113<pc>0408-c<k1>dAmA<k2>dAmA
{%Dāmā,%}¦ f. a string, cord, &c., = 3. {%dāman,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22114<pc>0408-c<k1>dita<k2>dita<h>2
2. {%dita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound; [cf. {%saṃ-dita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22115<pc>0408-c<k1>dA<k2>dA<h>5
{#dA#} 5¦. {%dā,%} cl. 1. A. {%dayate, dātum,%} to pro-
tect, defend, guard; (according to native
authorities the proper form of this rt. is {%de,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>22116<pc>0408-c<k1>datta<k2>datta
{%Datta, as, ā, am,%}¦ protected, defended.
<LEND>

<L>22117<pc>0408-c<k1>dA<k2>dA<h>6
6. {%dā, ās,%}¦ f. protection, defence.
<LEND>

<L>22118<pc>0408-c<k1>dA<k2>dA<h>7
{#dA#} 7¦. {%dā,%} cl. 1. P. {%dāyati, dātum,%} to
clean, purify; (according to native authori-
ties the proper form of this rt. is {%dai,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>22119<pc>0408-c<k1>dA<k2>dA<h>8
8. {%dā, ās,%}¦ f. cleansing, purifying.
<LEND>

<L>22120<pc>0408-c<k1>dAta<k2>dAta<h>3
3. {%dāta, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%ava-dāta%}], cleansed, cleaned,
washed, purified; (see Pāṇ. VII. 4, 46.)
<LEND>

<L>22121<pc>0408-c<k1>dAna<k2>dAna<h>3
3. {%dāna, am,%}¦ n. purification; [cf. 1. {%ava-dāna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22122<pc>0408-c<k1>dAka<k2>dAka
{#dAka#}¦ {%dāka.%} See under. rt. 1. {%dā.%}
<LEND>

<L>22123<pc>0408-c<k1>dAkza<k2>dAkza
{#dAkza#}¦ {%dākṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dakṣa%}), relat-
ing to Dakṣa; relating to Dākṣi; ({%as%}), m. or
({%am%}), n. the south; {%dākṣasyāyanam (˚ya-ay˚)%}
{%= dakṣiṇāyanam,%} the progress of the sun towards
the south; the winter solstice; the sacrifice per-
formed at this time; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the disciples
of a particular school.
<LEND>

<L>22124<pc>0408-c<k1>dAkzaka<k2>dAkzaka
{%Dākṣaka, as,%}¦ &c., inhabited by the Dākṣis;
({%am%}), n. a multitude of the descendants of Dakṣa.
<LEND>

<L>22125<pc>0408-c<k1>dAkzAyaRa<k2>dAkzAyaRa
{%Dākṣāyaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming from the
Dakṣa family, of or relating to Dakṣa; ({%as%}), m.
a son or distant descendant of Dakṣa; a particular
kind of sacrifice [cf. {%dākṣāyaṇa-yajña%}]; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
any of the daughters of Dakṣa; of Aditi; of Diti; of
Kadrū; of Vi-natā; of the nymph and asterism
Rohiṇī; of Su-rasā, mother of the Nāgas; of Jayā
and Vi-jayā; of Svadhā; of Durgā, wife of Śiva; of
the wife of Dharma, mentioned in the Vāmana-
Purāṇa; N. of the plant Croton Polyandrum, {%=%}
{%dantī; (ṇyas),%} f. pl. the twenty-seven lunar man-
sions considered mythologically as the daughters of
Dakṣa and wives of the Moon; ({%am%}), n. the pos-
terity of Dakṣa; gold or a gold ornament (as an
ear-ring &c.); {%= dākṣasyāyanam,%} the winter sol-
stice; the sacrifice performed at this time. {%—Dā-%}
{%kṣāyaṇa-bhakta, am,%} n. the district inhabited by
the Dākṣas. {%—Dākṣāyaṇa-yajña, as,%} m., N. of
a kind of sacrifice said to be a modification of the
Darśapaurṇamāsa (extending through fifteen instead
of thirty years). {%—Dākṣāyaṇayajñika, as, ā, am,%}
or {%dākṣāyaṇayajñin, ī, inī, i,%} belonging to the
Dākṣāyaṇa sacrifice. {%—Dākṣāyaṇī-pa, as,%} or {%dā-%}
{%kṣāyaṇī-pati, is,%} m. ‘husband of Dākṣāyaṇī,’
epithet of the Moon; of Śiva. {%—Dākṣāyaṇī-ra-%}
{%maṇa, as,%} m. ‘delighting in Dākṣāyaṇī,’ epithet
of the Moon. {%—Dākṣāyaṇy-agni-praveśa, as,%} m.,
N. of the tenth chapter of the Uttara-khaṇḍa of the
Śiva-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>22126<pc>0408-c<k1>dAkzAyaRin<k2>dAkzAyaRin
{%Dākṣāyaṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having gold, wearing
golden ornaments; ({%ī%}), m. a Brāhman student wear-
ing golden ear-rings.
<LEND>

<L>22127<pc>0408-c<k1>dAkzAyaRya<k2>dAkzAyaRya
{%Dākṣāyaṇya, as,%}¦ m. the son of the Dākṣā
yaṇī Aditi, the sun.
<LEND>

<L>22128<pc>0408-c<k1>dAkzAyiRI<k2>dAkzAyiRI
{%Dākṣāyiṇī,%}¦ f. wrong form for {%dākṣāyaṇī%} above.
<LEND>

<L>22129<pc>0408-c<k1>dAkzi<k2>dAkzi
{%Dākṣi, is,%}¦ m. a son of Dakṣa; ({%ī%}), f. a daughter
[Page0409-a+ 76]
of Dakṣa. {%—Dākṣi-kanthā,%} f., N. of a village in
the north of India in the country of the Vāhlikas
or Balkh. {%—Dākṣikanthīya, as, ā, am,%} produced
or born in Dākṣi-kanthā, relating to Dākṣi-kanthā.
{%—Dākṣi-karṣa, as,%} m., N. of a village. {%—Dā-%}
{%kṣikārṣuka, as, ī, am,%} coming from or relating
to Dākṣi-karṣa. {%—Dākṣi-kūla, am,%} n., N. of a
village. {%—Dākṣi-grāma, as,%} m., N. of a village.
{%—Dākṣigrāmīya, as, ā, am,%} coming from or
relating to Dākṣi-grāma. {%—Dākṣi-nagara, am,%}
n., N. of a town. {%—Dākṣi-palada%} and {%dākṣi-%}
{%prastha, as,%} m., N. of places. {%—Dākṣi-hrada,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a lake. {%—Dākṣihradīya, as, ā, am,%}
relating to the above lake. {%—Dākṣī-putra, as,%} m.
‘the son of Dākṣī,’ Pāṇini.
<LEND>

<L>22130<pc>0409-a<k1>dAkzeya<k2>dAkzeya
{%Dākṣeya, as,%}¦ m. ‘the son of Dākṣī,’ a metro-
nymic of Pāṇini; ({%ī%}), f. ‘the daughter of Dākṣī (?).’
<LEND>

<L>22131<pc>0409-a<k1>dAkzya<k2>dAkzya
{%Dākṣya, am,%}¦ n. cleverness, dexterity, skill, abi-
lity, capability, fitness; probity, integrity.
<LEND>

<L>22132<pc>0409-a<k1>dAkzAyya<k2>dAkzAyya
{#dAkzAyya#}¦ {%dākṣāyya, as,%} m. a vulture; [cf.
{%dakṣāyya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22133<pc>0409-a<k1>dAkziRa<k2>dAkziRa
{#dAkziRa#}¦ {%dākṣiṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dakṣiṇā%}),
belonging or relating to a sacrificial gift or to a gift
in general; relating or belonging to the south;
({%am%}), n. a collection of sacrificial gifts; ({%āni%}), n.
pl., N. of a Kāṇḍa in the Taittirīya-saṃhitā. {%—Dā-%}
{%kṣiṇaśāla, as,%} &c. (fr. {%dakṣiṇa + śālā%}), relating
to a hall or room situated to the south.
<LEND>

<L>22134<pc>0409-a<k1>dAkziRAtya<k2>dAkziRAtya
{%Dākṣiṇātya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%dakṣiṇā,%} ind.),
southerly, southern, belonging to or produced in
the south; belonging to or living in the Dekhan,
situated in the Dekhan; {%dākṣiṇātyā bhāṣā,%} the
language spoken in the south; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
preceptor mentioned in the Ānanda-laharī; the cocoa-
nut; ({%as, am%}), m. or n. (?), the south; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the inhabitants of the Dekhan; N. of several precep-
tors mentioned in the Kāma-sūtra by Vātsyāyana.
<LEND>

<L>22135<pc>0409-a<k1>dAkziRika<k2>dAkziRika
{%Dākṣiṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%dakṣiṇā%}), connected
with a sacrificial gift.
<LEND>

<L>22136<pc>0409-a<k1>dAkziRIya<k2>dAkziRIya
{%Dākṣiṇīya = dakṣiṇīya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>22137<pc>0409-a<k1>dAkziRya<k2>dAkziRya<h>1
1. {%dākṣiṇya, as,%}¦ &c. (fr. {%dakṣiṇā%}), belonging
or relating to a sacrificial gift; meriting a sacrificial
gift or reward.
<LEND>

<L>22138<pc>0409-a<k1>dAkziRya<k2>dAkziRya<h>2
2. {%dākṣiṇya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%dakṣiṇa%}), civility, cour-
tesy, politeness, conciliatory conduct, propitiation,
kindness, obsequiousness, concord, harmony, agree-
ment; honesty, sincerity, candour; cleverness, talent;
(probably) the ritual of the right-hand Sāktas (?);
N. of a Tantra.
<LEND>

<L>22139<pc>0409-a<k1>dAgavyAyani<k2>dAgavyAyani
{#dAgavyAyani#}¦ {%dāgavyāyani,%} a patronymic
from Dagu.
<LEND>

<L>22140<pc>0409-a<k1>dAqaka<k2>dAqaka
{#dAqaka#}¦ {%dāḍaka, as,%} m. a tooth, tusk; [cf.
{%dāḍhā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22141<pc>0409-a<k1>dAqima<k2>dAqima
{#dAqima#}¦ {%dāḍima, as, ī, am,%} m. f. n. (said to
be fr. rt. {%dal%}), the pomegranate tree, (according to
some the m. f. applies to the tree, and the n. to the
fruit); small cardamoms; ({%as, ī, am%}), being on the
pomegranate tree. {%—Dāḍima-pattraka, as,%} m. or
{%dāḍima-puṣpa%} or {%dāḍima-puṣpaka, as,%} m. the
plant Soymida Febrifuga or Amoora Rohitaka {%(=%}
{%rohitaka)%}. {%—Dāḍima-priya, as,%} m. ‘fond of
pomegranates,’ a parrot. {%—Dāḍima-bhakṣaṇa, as,%}
m. ‘eating pomegranates,’ a parrot. {%—Dāḍimī-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} planted with pomegranate trees. {%—Dā-%}
{%ḍimī-sāra, as,%} m. {%= dāḍima,%} the pomegranate tree.
<LEND>

<L>22142<pc>0409-a<k1>dAqimba<k2>dAqimba
{%Dāḍimba, as,%}¦ m. {%= dāḍima,%} the pomegranate tree.
<LEND>

<L>22143<pc>0409-a<k1>dAqI<k2>dAqI
{#dAqI#}¦ {%dāḍī,%} f. a kind of plant and its fruit;
[cf. {%doḍī%} and {%dāli.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22144<pc>0409-a<k1>dAQA<k2>dAQA
{#dAQA#}¦ {%dāḍhā,%} f. {%= daṃṣṭrā,%} a large tooth,
tusk; wish, desire; a number, multitude.
<LEND>

<L>22145<pc>0409-a<k1>dAQikA<k2>dAQikA
{%Dāḍhikā,%}¦ f. {%= daṃṣṭrikā,%} the beard, the whiskers;
(Manu VIII. 283.)
<LEND>

<L>22146<pc>0409-a<k1>dARqa<k2>dARqa
{#dARqa#}¦ {%dāṇḍa, as, ī, am,%} relating to a stick
or staff, relating to punishment, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. a par-
ticular game with sticks. {%—Dāṇḍagrāhika, as,%} m.
a patronymic from Daṇḍa-graha. {%—Dāṇḍapātā,%} f.
[Page0409-b+ 73]
(fr. {%daṇḍa-pāta%}), scil. {%tithi,%} a particular festival,
the day of full moon in the month Phālguna, on
which sticks are thrown; [cf. {%tailampātā%} and {%śyai-%}
{%nampātā.%}] {%—Dāṇḍapāyana, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Daṇḍa-pa. {%—Dāṇḍamāthika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%daṇḍa-mātha%}), churning with a straight stick or
staff. {%—Dāṇḍājinika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%daṇḍājina%}),
carrying a staff and hide as mere outward signs of
religion; ({%as%}), m. a cheat, rogue, an hypocrite.
<LEND>

<L>22147<pc>0409-b<k1>dARqaki<k2>dARqaki
{%Dāṇḍaki, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Daṇḍaka;
({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a race belonging to the
Tri-gartas.
<LEND>

<L>22148<pc>0409-b<k1>dARqakIya<k2>dARqakIya
{%Dāṇḍakīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the Dāṇḍakis.
<LEND>

<L>22149<pc>0409-b<k1>dARqAyana<k2>dARqAyana
{%Dāṇḍāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Daṇḍa (?).
{%—Dāṇḍāyanasthalaka, as, ī, am,%} relating to
or coming from Dāṇḍāyana-sthalī. {%—Dāṇḍāyana-%}
{%sthalī,%} f., N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>22150<pc>0409-b<k1>dARqika<k2>dARqika
{%Dāṇḍika, as, ī, am,%}¦ inflicting punishment,
punishing; ({%as%}), m. a chastiser, punisher.
<LEND>

<L>22151<pc>0409-b<k1>dARqikya<k2>dARqikya
{%Dāṇḍikya, am,%}¦ n. punishing, the state of being
a punisher (?).
<LEND>

<L>22152<pc>0409-b<k1>dARqin<k2>dARqin
{%Dāṇḍin, inas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of the disciples of the
school of Daṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>22153<pc>0409-b<k1>dARqinAyana<k2>dARqinAyana
{%Dāṇḍināyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Daṇḍin.
<LEND>

<L>22154<pc>0409-b<k1>dAta<k2>dAta
{#dAta#}¦ {%dāta, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school of the
Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>22155<pc>0409-b<k1>dAtf<k2>dAtf
{#dAtf#}¦ {%dātṛ.%} See p. 407, col. 2; p. 408, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22156<pc>0409-b<k1>dAttAmitrIya<k2>dAttAmitrIya
{#dAttAmitrIya#}¦ {%dāttāmitrīya, as, ā, am,%} relat-
ing to or coming from Dattāmitra or Dattāmitrā.
<LEND>

<L>22157<pc>0409-b<k1>dAtteya<k2>dAtteya
{%Dātteya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Dattā, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22158<pc>0409-b<k1>dAtyUha<k2>dAtyUha
{#dAtyUha#}¦ {%dātyūha, as,%} m. a gallinule; the
Cātaka, a sort of cuckoo, Cuculus Melanoleucus;
a cloud (the water of which the Cātaka is said to
drink).
<LEND>

<L>22159<pc>0409-b<k1>dAtyUhaka<k2>dAtyUhaka
{%Dātyūhaka, as,%}¦ m. a familiar diminutive of {%dā-%}
{%tyūha,%} a little gallinule.
<LEND>

<L>22160<pc>0409-b<k1>dAtyOha<k2>dAtyOha
{%Dātyauha, as,%}¦ m. (according to Pāṇ. VII. 3, 1, fr.
{%ditya-vāh%}), a gallinule; ({%as, ī, am%}), relating to or
produced in the vehicle of a demon (?).
<LEND>

<L>22161<pc>0409-b<k1>dAda<k2>dAda
{#dAda#}¦ {%dāda, dādin,%} &c. See p. 407, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22162<pc>0409-b<k1>dAdABAI<k2>dAdABAI
{#dAdABAI#}¦ {%dādābhāï,%} N. of the author of
the Kiraṇāvalī (a commentary on the Indian astro-
nomical work Sūrya-siddhānta).
<LEND>

<L>22163<pc>0409-b<k1>dADika<k2>dADika
{#dADika#}¦ {%dādhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dadhi%}), made
of or from Dadhi or coagulated milk; mixed with
it, sprinkled with it; carrying about or selling coagu-
lated milk; eating anything with coagulated milk;
({%am%}), n. a kind of broth or gruel made of coagu-
lated milk mixed with other substances.
<LEND>

<L>22164<pc>0409-b<k1>dADikra<k2>dADikra
{%Dādhikra, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. relating to Dadhi-krā.
<LEND>

<L>22165<pc>0409-b<k1>dADitTa<k2>dADitTa
{#dADitTa#}¦ {%dādhittha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dadhittha%}),
coming from or belonging to the Feronia Elephan-
tum; ({%am%}), n. the resin of this tree.
<LEND>

<L>22166<pc>0409-b<k1>dADIca<k2>dADIca
{#dADIca#}¦ {%dādhīca, as,%} m. (fr. {%dadhyañc%}),
Ved. a patronymic of Cyavana.
<LEND>

<L>22167<pc>0409-b<k1>dADfvi<k2>dADfvi
{#dADfvi#}¦ {%dādhṛvi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. {%dhṛ%}), Ved.
holding, bearing.
<LEND>

<L>22168<pc>0409-b<k1>dADfzi<k2>dADfzi
{#dADfzi#}¦ {%dādhṛṣi, is, is, i%} (fr. the Intens.
of rt. {%dhṛṣ%}), Ved. courageous, bold; overbearing,
overpowering.
<LEND>

<L>22169<pc>0409-b<k1>dAn<k2>dAn
{#dAn#}¦ {%dān,%} cl. 1. P. A. or cl. 10. P. {%dāna-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to cut off: Desid. P. A. {%dīdaṃ-%}
{%sati, -te,%} to straighten, make straight; to be straight;
(this verb is by some regarded as a nominal fr. 2.
{%dāna;%} cf. 2. {%dan.%})
<LEND>

<L>22170<pc>0409-b<k1>dAna<k2>dAna
{#dAna#}¦ {%dāna,%} &c. See under rts. 1. and 3. {%dā.%}
<LEND>

<L>22171<pc>0409-b<k1>dAnava<k2>dAnava
{#dAnava#}¦ {%dānava.%} See {%dānu.%}
<LEND>

<L>22172<pc>0409-b<k1>dAnta<k2>dAnta<h>1
{#dAnta#} 1¦. {%dānta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dam%}),
tamed, broken in, subdued, daunted, bridled, re-
strained; tame, mild; patient of privations or aus-
terity, &c.; resigned; liberal (fr. rt. 1. {%dā?%}); ({%as%}),
m. a tamed ox or steer; a donor, giver (fr. rt. 1. {%dā%});
N. of a plant, {%= damanaka, = vaḍa, = vaṭa,%} Ficus
[Page0409-c+ 75]
Indica; N. of a son of Bhīma, king of Vidarbha;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a school of the Atharva-veda;
({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>22173<pc>0409-c<k1>dAnti<k2>dAnti
{%Dānti, is,%}¦ f. self-restraint; the patient endurance
of religious austerities or privations; subjection, hu-
miliation.
<LEND>

<L>22174<pc>0409-c<k1>dAntvA<k2>dAntvA
{%Dāntvā,%}¦ ind. having subdued, tamed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>22175<pc>0409-c<k1>dAnta<k2>dAnta<h>2
{#dAnta#} 2¦. {%dānta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%danta%}), dental,
made of ivory; ‘completed by Danta (?),’ epithet of a
well situated on the northern or southern bank of the
river Vipāśā; (see Pāṇ. IV. 2, 74, Schol.)
<LEND>

<L>22176<pc>0409-c<k1>dAntika<k2>dAntika
{%Dāntika, as, ī, am,%}¦ made of ivory.
<LEND>

<L>22177<pc>0409-c<k1>dABI<k2>dABI
{#dABI#}¦ {%dābhī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%dabh?%}), Ved. hurt-
ing, injuring (?).
<LEND>

<L>22178<pc>0409-c<k1>dABya<k2>dABya
{%Dābhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be disturbed or obstructed;
to be governed or ruled.
<LEND>

<L>22179<pc>0409-c<k1>dAmacarita<k2>dAmacarita
{#dAmacarita#}¦ {%dāma-carita%} or {%śrī-dāma-carita%}
or {%-caritra, am,%} n. ‘the adventures of Śrī-dāman’
(or Śrī-dāma ?), N. of a drama in five acts.
<LEND>

<L>22180<pc>0409-c<k1>dAmana<k2>dAmana
{#dAmana#}¦ {%dāmana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%damana%}), re-
lating to the Dona or Artemisia flower. {%—Dāmana-%}
{%parvan, a,%} n. the fourteenth of the light half of the
month Caitra, a festival on which Artemisia flowers
are gathered.
<LEND>

<L>22181<pc>0409-c<k1>dAmani<k2>dAmani
{%Dāmani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Damana;
({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>22182<pc>0409-c<k1>dAmanIya<k2>dAmanIya
{%Dāmanīya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%dāmani%}), a prince of the
Dāmanis.
<LEND>

<L>22183<pc>0409-c<k1>dAmalipta<k2>dAmalipta
{#dAmalipta#}¦ {%dāmalipta, am,%} n., N. of a town
or country, the modern district of Tumlook, {%=%}
{%tāmalipta;%} [cf. {%tāmralipta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22184<pc>0409-c<k1>dAmoda<k2>dAmoda
{#dAmoda#}¦ {%dāmoda, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school
of the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>22185<pc>0409-c<k1>dAmpatya<k2>dAmpatya
{#dAmpatya#}¦ {%dāmpatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dam-patī%}),
matrimony, the marriage-state, the matrimonial or
conjugal relation.
<LEND>

<L>22186<pc>0409-c<k1>dAmBika<k2>dAmBika
{#dAmBika#}¦ {%dāmbhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dambha,%}
q. v.), deceitful, hypocritical; proud, imperious, os-
tentatious; sanctimonious; ({%as%}), m. a cheat; a
hypocrite; a kind of crane, Ardea Nivea.
<LEND>

<L>22187<pc>0409-c<k1>dAy<k2>dAy
{#dAy#}¦ {%dāy%} (a form of rt. 1. {%dā,%} given by
some grammarians; cf. {%ā-dāyamāna%}
under 1. {%ā-dā%}), cl. 1. A. {%dāyate,%} &c., to give.
<LEND>

<L>22188<pc>0409-c<k1>dAya<k2>dAya
{#dAya#}¦ {%dāya.%} See under rts. 1. {%dā%} at p. 407,
col. 3, and 3. {%dā%} at p. 408, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22189<pc>0409-c<k1>dAra<k2>dAra
{#dAra#}¦ {%dāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%dṝ%}), a rent, cleft,
gap, hole; a ploughed field; a wife, (usually occurring
in the m. pl. {%ās%} or in comp.: an exceptional form {%dārā,%}
f. sing., occurs in one or two passages; and in Pañca-
tantra I. 450, the neut. pl. {%dārāṇi%}); {%dārān kṛ,%} to
take a wife, marry; [cf. {%kṛta-d˚.%}] {%—Dāra-kar-%}
{%man, a,%} n. or {%dāra-kriyā,%} f. taking a wife, marry-
ing, marriage; [cf. {%dāra-parigraha.%}] {%—Dāra-%}
{%gava, am,%} n. wife and cows. {%—Dāra-grahaṇa, am,%}
n. ‘taking a wife,’ marriage. {%—Dāra-parigraha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘taking a wife,’ marriage. {%—Dāraparigra-%}
{%hin, ī, iṇī, i,%} ‘taking a wife,’ marrying. {%—Dāra-%}
{%lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. a characteristic sign or decisive
mark of wife-hood. {%—Dāra-saṅgraha, as,%} m. ‘taking
a wife,’ marrying, marriage. {%—Dārāṇukramaṇa%}
{%(˚ra-aṇ˚), am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-
sarva-sva. {%—Dārādhīna (˚ra-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
dependent on a wife, in the power of a wife. {%—Dā-%}
{%ropasaṅgraha (˚ra-up˚), as,%} m. ‘taking a wife,’
marrying, marriage.
<LEND>

<L>22190<pc>0409-c<k1>dAraka<k2>dAraka
{%Dāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ breaking, tearing, splitting;
({%as%}), m. a boy, son, child, infant; a young animal;
a village hog; the charioteer of Kṛṣṇa; ({%ikā%}), f. a
rent, cleft, gap, chap; a daughter; a harlot; ({%au%}), m.
du. a boy and a girl. {%—Dārakācārya (˚ka-āc˚), as,%}
m. ‘a preceptor of boys,’ a schoolmaster. {%—Dārikā-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. the gift of a daughter in marriage.
<LEND>

<L>22191<pc>0409-c<k1>dAraRa<k2>dAraRa
{%Dāraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ tearing, splitting, tearing
asunder; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā; ({%am%}), n. the
act of tearing, rending, dividing; opening, bursting,
[Page0410-a+ 81]
flying open; a means of opening; the clearing-nut
plant, Strychnos Potatorum; [cf. {%kataka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22192<pc>0410-a<k1>dArava<k2>dArava
{%Dārava, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. 2. {%dāru%} below), wooden,
made of wood, coming from or relating to wood.
<LEND>

<L>22193<pc>0410-a<k1>dAri<k2>dAri
{%Dāri, is, is, i,%}¦ tearing, causing to burst, splitting
[cf. {%veṇu-d˚%}]; ({%is%}), f. cutting, tearing, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>22194<pc>0410-a<k1>dArita<k2>dArita
{%Dārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn, rent, divided.
<LEND>

<L>22195<pc>0410-a<k1>dArin<k2>dArin
{%Dārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ tearing, splitting; ({%ī%}), m. (fr.
{%dāra%}), a husband; a polygamist.
<LEND>

<L>22196<pc>0410-a<k1>dArI<k2>dArI
{%Dārī,%}¦ f. a cleft, gap; a chap.
<LEND>

<L>22197<pc>0410-a<k1>dAru<k2>dAru<h>2
2. {%dāru, us, us%}¦ or {%vī, u%} (for 1. {%dāru%} see p. 408,
col. 1), tearing, rending; a tearer, breaker, destroyer;
({%us%}), m., Ved. ‘the destroyer of cities,’ an epithet of
Indra; ({%us, u%}), m. n. (usually n.), a piece of wood,
wood, timber; a block; a lever; a bolt; ({%u%}), n. a
sort of pine, Pinus Devadāru; ore, metal in its
natural state; [cf. {%taru, dru;%} Zend <nsi>dāuru,</nsi> ‘wood;’
Gr. <lang n="greek">δόρυ, δούρατα</lang> for <lang n="greek">δόρϝατα, δορήϊος, δουρ-ειο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δουράτ-εο-ς;</lang> Goth. <nsi>triu,</nsi> ‘tree;’ Old Sax. <nsi>trio,</nsi>
‘timber;’ Eng. <nsi>tree;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>dre†vo,</nsi> ‘tree;’ Russ.
<nsi>dérevo, drova;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>dervà;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>doireach,</nsi>
‘woody.’] {%—Dāru-kaccha, as, am,%} m. n. (?), N. of
a district. {%—Dārukacchaka,%} relating to the above
district. {%—Dāru-kadalī,%} f. a wild uneatable plantain
{%(= vana-kadalī)%}. {%—Dāru-karṇin, ī,%} m. ‘having
wooden ear-rings,’ a N. of Bhavila. {%—Dāru-gandhā,%}
f. a kind of perfume (commonly {%cīḍā%}). {%—Dāru-%}
{%garbhā,%} f. a wooden puppet, a doll. {%—Dāru-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced from wood, made of wood, wooden;
({%as%}), m. a kind of drum. {%—Dāru-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Dāru-niśā,%} f. Curcuma Zanthor-
rhizon {%(= dārvī)%}. {%—Dāru-pattrī,%} f. a plant, {%=%}
{%hiṅgu-pattrī%}. {%—Dāru-pātra, am,%} n. a wooden
vessel. {%—Dāru-pītā,%} f. a plant, {%= dārvī%}. {%—Dāru-%}
{%putrikā%} or {%dāru-putrī,%} f. a wooden doll or puppet.
{%—Dāru-phala, as, am,%} m. n. (?), Pistachio (tree
and nut). {%—Dāru-maya, as, ī, am,%} wooden, made
of wood (e. g. {%dāru-mayī yoṣā%} or {%strī%} or {%nārī,%}
‘a wooden woman,’ a doll). {%—Dāru-mukhyāhvayā%}
or {%dāru-mukhyāhvā (˚ya-āh˚),%} f. a lizard. {%—Dāru-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n. a wooden puppet moved by strings.
{%—Dāru-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Dāru-%}
{%vaha, as, ā, am,%} bearing or carrying timber. {%—Dāru-%}
{%sitā,%} f. cinnamon in sticks. {%—Dāru-strī,%} f. a wooden
doll; [cf. {%dāru-maya.%}] {%—Dāru-haridrā,%} f. a species
of Curcuma, {%= dārvī%}. {%—Dāru-hastaka, as,%} m. a
wooden spoon or ladle. {%—Dāru-āghāṭa, as,%} m. or
{%dārv-āghāta, as,%} m. the woodpecker. {%—Dārv-%}
{%āhāra, as,%} m. a collector of wood.
<LEND>

<L>22198<pc>0410-a<k1>dAruka<k2>dAruka
{%Dāruka, as,%}¦ m., N. of Kṛṣṇa's charioteer, who
was son of Satyaka; N. of an incarnation of Śiva;
({%ā%}), f. a wooden figure; a doll, puppet; ({%am%}), n.
a sort of pine, Pinus Devadāru. {%—Dārukā-vana,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a wood containing a famous Liṅga.
{%—Dārukeśvara-tīrtha%} ({%˚ka%} or {%˚kā-īś˚%}), {%am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>22199<pc>0410-a<k1>dAruki<k2>dAruki
{%Dāruki, is,%}¦ m., N. of Pra-dyumna's charioteer,
who was son of Dāruka.
<LEND>

<L>22200<pc>0410-a<k1>dAruRa<k2>dAruRa
{%Dāruṇa, as, ā%}¦ or rarely {%ī, am%} (perhaps not
directly fr. rt. {%dṝ,%} but rather fr. 2. {%dāru%} above),
hard, harsh (opposed to {%mṛdu%}), rough, sharp,
severe (as speech); cruel, pitiless, heart-rending; ter-
rible, terrific, frightful, dreadful, fearful, grievous;
shocking, atrocious, dire; agonising, painful; intense,
violent, severe, great; ({%as, am%}), m. n. harshness,
severity, hard-heartedness, cruelty, horror, horrible-
ness; ({%as%}), m., N. of the plant Plumbago Zeylanica
{%(= citraka). Dāruṇa%} at the beginning of comp.
or before a verb expresses excellence or superiority;
[cf. {%kāṣṭha%} and see {%dāruṇādhyāpaka%} below.]
{%—Dāruṇa-karman, a,%} n. violent treatment (as of
diseases). {%—Dāruṇa-tā,%} f. harshness, roughness,
frightfulness, direness, severity, intensity. {%—Dāruṇa-%}
{%vapus, us, us, us,%} of frightful shape. {%—Dāruṇā-%}
{%kṛti (˚ṇa-āk˚), is, is, i,%} of terrible or dreadful
form. {%—Dāruṇātman (˚ṇa-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} hard-
hearted, cruel. {%—Dāruṇādhyāpaka (˚ṇa-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an energetic or indefatigable teacher; [cf.
{%dāruṇa%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>22201<pc>0410-a<k1>dAruRaka<k2>dAruRaka
{%Dāruṇaka, am,%}¦ n. ‘harshness,’ N. of a particular
disease affecting the roots of the hair.
<LEND>
[Page0410-b+ 70]

<L>22202<pc>0410-b<k1>dAruRAya<k2>dAruRAya
{%Dāruṇāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%dāruṇāyate,%} &c., to act
harshly or cruelly, to be unmerciful.
<LEND>

<L>22203<pc>0410-b<k1>dAruRya<k2>dAruRya
{%Dāruṇya, am,%}¦ n. harshness (as of a sound &c.);
cruelty, dreadfulness, direness, severity, &c.
<LEND>

<L>22204<pc>0410-b<k1>dArva<k2>dArva
{%Dārva, as, ī, am,%}¦ wooden, made of wood; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people to the north-east of Madhya-
deśa, generally associated with the Abhi-sāras; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of several plants, {%= dāru-haridrā, dāru-%}
{%niśā,%} Curcuma Aromatica or Curcuma Xanthorrhiza;
a particular species of collyrium extracted from an
infusion of the Curcuma Xanthorrhiza; a species
of pine, {%= deva-dāru;%} turmerick; a species of pot-
herb, Go-jihvā. {%—Dārvi-pattrikā,%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= go-jihvā%}. {%—Dārvī-kvāthodbhava (˚tha-ud˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a particular kind of collyrium prepared from
an infusion of Curcuma Aromatica or Curcuma
Xanthorrhiza.
<LEND>

<L>22205<pc>0410-b<k1>dArvaka<k2>dArvaka
{%Dārvaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or coming from
Dārva.
<LEND>

<L>22206<pc>0410-b<k1>dArvikA<k2>dArvikA
{%Dārvikā,%}¦ f. a sort of collyrium prepared from
an infusion of Curcuma Aromatica; N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%go-jihvā.%}
<LEND>

<L>22207<pc>0410-b<k1>dAraka<k2>dAraka
{#dAraka#}¦ {%dāraka, dāraṇa,%} &c. See p. 409, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>22208<pc>0410-b<k1>dArada<k2>dArada
{#dArada#}¦ {%dārada, as, ī, am,%} coming from
the country of the Darads, (a various reading has
{%darada%}); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people, (probably
only a wrong form for {%darada%}); ({%as%}), m. a kind of
poison brought from the above country; quicksilver;
the ocean; ({%as, am%}), m. n. vermilion.
<LEND>

<L>22209<pc>0410-b<k1>dArabaliBuj<k2>dArabaliBuj
{#dArabaliBuj#}¦ {%dāra-bali-bhuj,%} incorrect form
for {%dvāra-bali-bhuj,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22210<pc>0410-b<k1>dArita<k2>dArita
{#dArita#}¦ {%dārita,%} &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22211<pc>0410-b<k1>dAridra<k2>dAridra
{#dAridra#}¦ {%dāridra, am,%} n. (fr. {%daridra%}), poverty,
indigence, (perhaps a wrong form for {%dāridrya%}
below.)
<LEND>

<L>22212<pc>0410-b<k1>dAridrya<k2>dAridrya
{%Dāridrya, am,%}¦ n. poverty, indigence.
<LEND>

<L>22213<pc>0410-b<k1>dAru<k2>dAru
{#dAru#}¦ {%dāru.%} See col. 1. and p. 408, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22214<pc>0410-b<k1>dAruRa<k2>dAruRa
{#dAruRa#}¦ {%dāruṇa.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22215<pc>0410-b<k1>dArodara<k2>dArodara
{#dArodara#}¦ {%dārodara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%darodara%}),
connected with gambling.
<LEND>

<L>22216<pc>0410-b<k1>dArGasattra<k2>dArGasattra
{#dArGasattra#}¦ {%dārghasattra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dīrgha-%}
{%sattra%}), connected with a long continued sacrifice,
performing such a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>22217<pc>0410-b<k1>dArQacyuta<k2>dArQacyuta
{#dArQacyuta#}¦ {%dārḍhacyuta, as,%} m. (fr. {%dṛḍha-%}
{%cyuta%}), a patronymic, (also read {%dauryācyuta%});
({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>22218<pc>0410-b<k1>dArQya<k2>dArQya
{#dArQya#}¦ {%dārḍhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dṛḍha%}), hard-
ness, fixedness, tightness, stability; strength, energy;
confirmation, corroboration.
<LEND>

<L>22219<pc>0410-b<k1>dArteya<k2>dArteya
{#dArteya#}¦ {%dārteya, as, ī, am,%} leathern, made
of leather; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from Dṛti, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22220<pc>0410-b<k1>dArdura<k2>dArdura
{#dArdura#}¦ {%dārdura, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dardura%}), re-
lating to a cloud, frog, &c.; ({%am%}), n. a conch-shell
or muscle, the valve of which opens to the right;
lac; water.
<LEND>

<L>22221<pc>0410-b<k1>dArdurika<k2>dArdurika
{%Dārdurika, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a frog, &c.
<LEND>

<L>22222<pc>0410-b<k1>dArBa<k2>dArBa
{#dArBa#}¦ {%dārbha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%darbha%}), made
of Darbha grass.
<LEND>

<L>22223<pc>0410-b<k1>dArBAyaRa<k2>dArBAyaRa
{%Dārbhāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Darbha;
(see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 102.)
<LEND>

<L>22224<pc>0410-b<k1>dArBi<k2>dArBi
{%Dārbhi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Darbha; (see
Pāṇ. IV. 1, 102.)
<LEND>

<L>22225<pc>0410-b<k1>dArBya<k2>dArBya
{%Dārbhya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic from Darbha,
applied to Śyāvāśva; [cf. {%dālbhya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22226<pc>0410-b<k1>dArva<k2>dArva
{#dArva#}¦ {%dārva.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>22227<pc>0410-b<k1>dArvawa<k2>dArvawa
{#dArvawa#}¦ {%dārvaṭa, am,%} n. (fr. the Pers. <lang n="arabic">دربار</lang>),
a court or council-house; [cf. {%darbhaṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22228<pc>0410-b<k1>dArvaRqa<k2>dArvaRqa
{#dArvaRqa#}¦ {%dārvaṇḍa, as,%} m. a peacock.
<LEND>

<L>22229<pc>0410-b<k1>dArvan<k2>dArvan
{#dArvan#}¦ {%dārvan, ā,%} m., N. of a son of Uśī-
nara; [cf. {%darvā.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0410-c+ 71]

<L>22230<pc>0410-c<k1>dArvAGAwa<k2>dArvAGAwa
{#dArvAGAwa#}¦ {%dārv-āghāṭa.%} See 2. {%dāru,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22231<pc>0410-c<k1>dArvIhOmika<k2>dArvIhOmika
{#dArvIhOmika#}¦ {%dārvīhaumika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%darvī-homa%}), relating to an oblation made with
a ladle.
<LEND>

<L>22232<pc>0410-c<k1>dArSa<k2>dArSa
{#dArSa#}¦ {%dārśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%darśa%}), relating
to the new moon or the new moon sacrifice; ({%as%}),
m., scil. {%yajña,%} the new moon sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>22233<pc>0410-c<k1>dArSanika<k2>dArSanika
{%Dārśanika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%darśana%}), seeing far;
familiar with the Darśanas or philosophical systems.
<LEND>

<L>22234<pc>0410-c<k1>dArSapOrRamAsika<k2>dArSapOrRamAsika
{%Dārśapaurṇamāsika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%darśa-%}
{%pūrṇa-māsa%}), belonging to the Darśa-pūrṇa-māsa
sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>22235<pc>0410-c<k1>dArSika<k2>dArSika
{%Dārśika, as, ī, am,%}¦ or {%dārśya, as, ā, am,%} relat-
ing to the new moon or the new moon sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>22236<pc>0410-c<k1>dArzada<k2>dArzada
{#dArzada#}¦ {%dārṣada, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dṛṣad%}),
ground on a flat stone (as meal &c.); stony, of
stone, mineral.
<LEND>

<L>22237<pc>0410-c<k1>dArzadvata<k2>dArzadvata
{#dArzadvata#}¦ {%dārṣadvata, am,%} n. (fr. {%dṛṣad-%}
{%vatī%}), N. of a Sattra.
<LEND>

<L>22238<pc>0410-c<k1>dArzwAnta<k2>dArzwAnta
{#dArzwAnta#}¦ {%dārṣṭānta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dṛṣṭānta%}),
explained by an example or simile or case in point;
illustrated by metaphor or figure.
<LEND>

<L>22239<pc>0410-c<k1>dArzwAntika<k2>dArzwAntika
{%Dārṣṭāntika, as, ī, am,%}¦ explained by an illus-
tration or simile; illustrated, any thing which is the
subject of an illustration or simile; suitable to be
used in illustration; one who uses an example or
simile as a proof.
<LEND>

<L>22240<pc>0410-c<k1>dAla<k2>dAla
{#dAla#}¦ {%dāla, am,%} n. a sort of wild or unpre-
pared honey, (according to some produced by a pecu-
liar kind of small bee; see {%dala-ja%}); ({%ā%}), f. {%= dālikā,%}
{%deva-dālikā,%} colocynth; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant, {%=%}
{%deva-dālī; (as),%} m. a sort of grain, = Paspalum
Frumentaceum.
<LEND>

<L>22241<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlaki<k2>dAlaki
{#dAlaki#}¦ {%dālaki, is,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Śaka-pūrṇi.
<LEND>

<L>22242<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlana<k2>dAlana
{#dAlana#}¦ {%dālana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%dal%}), crum-
bling or decay (of the teeth), tooth-ache.
<LEND>

<L>22243<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlaBya<k2>dAlaBya
{#dAlaBya#}¦ {%dālabhya,%} a wrong form for Dāl-
bhya, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22244<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlava<k2>dAlava
{#dAlava#}¦ {%dālava, as,%} m. a sort of poison.
<LEND>

<L>22245<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlikA<k2>dAlikA
{#dAlikA#}¦ {%dālikā,%} f. {%= dālā, deva-dālikā,%}
colocynth.
<LEND>

<L>22246<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlima<k2>dAlima
{#dAlima#}¦ {%dālima, as,%} m. the pomegranate;
[cf. {%dāḍima.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22247<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlBa<k2>dAlBa
{#dAlBa#}¦ {%dālbha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dālbhya%} below),
relating to or coming from Dālbhya.
<LEND>

<L>22248<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlBi<k2>dAlBi
{%Dālbhi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%dalbha%}), a patronymic of Vaka.
<LEND>

<L>22249<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlBya<k2>dAlBya
{%Dālbhya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%dalbha%}), a patronymic of
Keśin; of Caikitāyana; N. of a grammarian. {%—Dāl-%}
{%bhya-ghoṣa, as,%} m., N. of an ancient sage. {%—Dāl-%}
{%bhya-pariśiṣṭa, am,%} n., N. of a poetical work.
<LEND>

<L>22250<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlByaka<k2>dAlByaka
{%Dālbhyaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient sage.
<LEND>

<L>22251<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlmAyaRi<k2>dAlmAyaRi
{#dAlmAyaRi#}¦ {%dālmāyaṇi,%} probably a wrong
form for {%dālbhāyani%} or {%dārbhāyaṇi.%}
<LEND>

<L>22252<pc>0410-c<k1>dAlmi<k2>dAlmi
{#dAlmi#}¦ {%dālmi, is,%} m., N. of Indra; [cf.
{%dalmi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22253<pc>0410-c<k1>dAva<k2>dAva
{#dAva#}¦ {%dāva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%du%}), a forest
conflagration, a forest on fire; fire in general, heat;
a forest; [cf. {%antar-d˚%} and {%dava.%}] {%—Dāva-dahana-%}
{%jvālā-kalāpa,%} the mass or sheet of flame arising from
the conflagration of a forest. {%—Dāvadahanajvālā-%}
{%kalāpāya,%} Nom. A. {%-yate,%} &c., to resemble the
sheet of flame of a burning forest. {%—Dāva-pa,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. one who keeps watch over a forest on
fire. {%—Dāva-latā,%} f. a creeper in a burning wood.
{%—Dāva-vivarjita, as, ā, am,%} free from fire.
{%—Dāva-su, us,%} m., N. of an Āṅgirasa. {%—Dāvasu-%}
{%nidhana, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Dāvāgni (˚va-%}
{%ag˚), is,%} or {%dāvānala (˚va-an˚), as,%} m. a forest on
fire, a forest conflagration, fire in a wood; [cf.
{%davāgni.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0411-a+ 77]

<L>22254<pc>0411-a<k1>dAvika<k2>dAvika
{#dAvika#}¦ {%dāvika, as,%} &c. (fr. {%devikā%}), coming
from the river Devikā; (Pāṇ. VII. 3, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>22255<pc>0411-a<k1>dAvikakUla<k2>dAvikakUla
{%Dāvikakūla%}¦ (fr. {%devikā-kūla%}), see Pāṇ. VII. 3, 1.
<LEND>

<L>22256<pc>0411-a<k1>dAS<k2>dAS<h>1
{#dAS#} 1¦. {%dāś%} (apparently occurring only
in Ṛg-veda), cl. 1. P. A. {%dāśati, -te,%}
(rarely cl. 2. 5. P.) {%dāṣṭi, dāśnoti,%} (according to
Vopa-deva also) cl. 10. A. {%dāśayate, dadāśa,%} (Ved.
forms are {%dadāśati, dadāśat,%} part. {%dāśivas%} and
{%dāśvas,%} dat. sing. {%dāśuṣe%} or {%dadāśuṣe%}), {%dāśitum,%}
Ved. to honour or serve a god (dat. or acc.) with
any offering (inst.); to offer any thing (acc.), make
an oblation; to grant, give, bestow [cf. rt. {%dās%}];
cl. 5. {%dāśnoti,%} &c., to hurt, injure, kill [cf. rts.
{%dās%} and {%das%}]: Caus. P. {%dāśayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%adadāsat,%} to offer: Desid. {%didāśiṣati, -te:%} Intens.
{%dādāśyate, dādāṣṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>22257<pc>0411-a<k1>dAS<k2>dAS<h>2
2. {%dāś,%}¦ worshipping, making oblations (?); [cf.
{%dū-ḍāś.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22258<pc>0411-a<k1>dASa<k2>dASa
{%Dāśa, as,%}¦ m. [cf. {%dāsa%} with which {%daśa%} is inter-
changed], Ved. presenting oblations, honouring the
gods with offerings [cf. {%puro-ḍāśa%}]; a fisherman,
ferryman, boatman, mariner; the son of a Niṣāda by
a woman of the Āyogava caste; a servant, = 1. {%dāsa,%}
col. 2; ({%ī%}), f. a fisherwoman; a female slave. {%—Dā-%}
{%śa-nandinī%} or {%dāsa-nandinī,%} f. ‘the fisherman's
daughter,’ epithet of Satya-vatī, who was the mother
of the poet Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>22259<pc>0411-a<k1>dASaka<k2>dASaka
{%Dāśaka,%}¦ (probably) a fisherman, (occurring only
in {%dāśaka-putra.%})
<LEND>

<L>22260<pc>0411-a<k1>dASu<k2>dASu
{%Dāśu, us, us, u,%}¦ giving, &c.; see {%a-d˚%}. {%—Dāśv-%}
{%adhvara,%} Ved. presenting oblations, honouring the
gods with sacrifices; (Sāy.) the oblation of the
giver of the sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>22261<pc>0411-a<k1>dASuri<k2>dASuri
{%Dāśuri, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. making oblations or offerings.
<LEND>

<L>22262<pc>0411-a<k1>dASeya<k2>dASeya
{%Dāśeya%}¦ or {%dāseya, as,%} m. (fr. {%dāśī%}), the son of
a fisherman's wife; ({%ī%}), f. ‘the daughter of a fisher-
man's wife,’ epithet of Satya-vatī, mother of Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>22263<pc>0411-a<k1>dASera<k2>dASera
{%Dāśera, as,%}¦ m. a fisherman; a camel.
<LEND>

<L>22264<pc>0411-a<k1>dASeraka<k2>dASeraka
{%Dāśeraka, as,%}¦ m. a fisherman; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people, {%= maru-bhū;%} [cf. {%daśeraka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22265<pc>0411-a<k1>dASva<k2>dASva
{%Dāśva, as, ā, am%}¦ (corrupted fr. {%dāśvas%}), liberal,
giving, a giver, donor.
<LEND>

<L>22266<pc>0411-a<k1>dASvas<k2>dASvas
{%Dāśvas%}¦ (rarely {%dāśivas%}), {%vān, uṣī, vas,%} Ved.
honouring or serving the gods with offerings, bestow-
ing, offering, giving, granting (with acc. or compounded
with the thing given). In the Ṛg-veda {%dāśvas%} is
often a general expression for a faithful worshipper
of the gods or a religious and pious man, especially
when connected with {%marta, martya,%} and {%jana.%}
<LEND>

<L>22267<pc>0411-a<k1>dASat<k2>dASat
{#dASat#}¦ {%dāśat,%} wrong form for {%daśat.%}
<LEND>

<L>22268<pc>0411-a<k1>dASataya<k2>dASataya
{#dASataya#}¦ {%dāśataya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%daśataya%}),
belonging to the Ṛg-veda which consists of ten
divisions or Maṇḍalas.
<LEND>

<L>22269<pc>0411-a<k1>dASapura<k2>dASapura
{#dASapura#}¦ {%dāśapura, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%daśa-pura%}),
coming from Daśa-pura; ({%am%}), n. a fragrant grass
related to the Cyperus Rotundus; (also {%dāśapūra.%})
<LEND>

<L>22270<pc>0411-a<k1>dASaPalI<k2>dASaPalI
{%Dāśaphalī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%daśa-phala%}), N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>22271<pc>0411-a<k1>dASaraTa<k2>dASaraTa
{%Dāśaratha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%daśa-ratha%}), belonging
to Daśa-ratha, coming from Daśa-ratha, a descendant
of Daśa-ratha; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic of Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>22272<pc>0411-a<k1>dASaraTi<k2>dASaraTi
{%Dāśarathi, is,%}¦ m. ‘descendant of Daśa-ratha,’ a
patronymic of Rāma; of Lakṣmaṇa, the younger
brother of Rāma; of Catur-aṅga; (with Jainas) N.
of the eighth Black Vāsu-deva; ({%ī%}), m. du. Rāma
and Lakṣmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>22273<pc>0411-a<k1>dASarAjYa<k2>dASarAjYa
{%Dāśarājña, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%daśan + rājan%}), Ved.
‘the fight with ten kings,’ a famous battle fought by
Su-dās.
<LEND>

<L>22274<pc>0411-a<k1>dASarUpya<k2>dASarUpya
{%Dāśarūpya%}¦ (fr. {%daśan + rūpa%}), N. of a Grāma.
<LEND>

<L>22275<pc>0411-a<k1>dASavAja<k2>dASavAja
{%Dāśavāja, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%daśan + vāja%}); in {%kaut-%}
{%saṃ dāśavājam,%} N. of a Sāman; [cf. {%pāñcavāja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22276<pc>0411-a<k1>dASaSiras<k2>dASaSiras
{%Dāśaśiras,%}¦ n. (perhaps for {%dāśaśirasa%} fr. {%daśa-%}
{%śiras%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>22277<pc>0411-a<k1>dASArRa<k2>dASArRa
{%Dāśārṇa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%daśārṇa%}), containing
the word Daśārṇa, treating of it (as an {%anu-vāka%}
or {%adhyāya%}); ({%as%}), m. a prince of the Daśārṇas;
({%ās%}), m. pl. {%= daśārṇa,%} N. of a people. {%—Dā- %}
[Page0411-b+ 77]
{%śārṇa-rāja, as,%} m. or {%dāśārṇeśa (˚ṇa-īśa), as,%}
m. a king of the Daśārṇas.
<LEND>

<L>22278<pc>0411-b<k1>dASArRaka<k2>dASArRaka
{%Dāśārṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ coming from or relat-
ing to or belonging to the Daśārṇas.
<LEND>

<L>22279<pc>0411-b<k1>dASArha<k2>dASArha
{%Dāśārha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%daśārha,%} q. v.), contain-
ing the word Daśārha, treating of it (as an {%adhyāya%}
or {%anu-vāka%}); belonging to Daśārha, i. e. to Kṛṣṇa;
({%as%}), m. a prince of the Daśārhas; an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa; a Daśārha king of Mathurā; ({%ī%}), f. a
princess of the Daśārhas; ({%ās%}), m. pl. = the Da-
śārhas.
<LEND>

<L>22280<pc>0411-b<k1>dASArhaka<k2>dASArhaka
{%Dāśārhaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl. {%= daśārhās%} above.
<LEND>

<L>22281<pc>0411-b<k1>dASASvameDa<k2>dASASvameDa
{%Dāśāśvamedha, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (perhaps a wrong
reading for {%daśāśvamedhās%}), ten horse-sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>22282<pc>0411-b<k1>dASOdanika<k2>dASOdanika
{%Dāśaudanika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%daśan + odana%}), N.
of a particular sacrificial rite; ({%ī%}), f. the offering made
to the priests at this rite; [cf. {%pañcaudanika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22283<pc>0411-b<k1>dASameya<k2>dASameya
{#dASameya#}¦ {%dāśameya.%} See {%dāsameya.%}
<LEND>

<L>22284<pc>0411-b<k1>dASarma<k2>dASarma
{#dASarma#}¦ {%dāśarma, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>22285<pc>0411-b<k1>dASaspatya<k2>dASaspatya
{#dASaspatya#}¦ {%dāśaspatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%daśas%} or
{%dāśas ? + pati;%} cf. {%daśasya%} and rt. 1. {%dāś%}), N. of
a Sāman, (perhaps ‘the lord of pious oblations.’)
<LEND>

<L>22286<pc>0411-b<k1>dASivas<k2>dASivas
{#dASivas#}¦ {%dāśivas, dāśvas.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22287<pc>0411-b<k1>dASura<k2>dASura
{#dASura#}¦ {%dāśura%} or {%dāśūra, as,%} m., N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>22288<pc>0411-b<k1>dASeya<k2>dASeya
{#dASeya#}¦ {%dāśeya, dāśera.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22289<pc>0411-b<k1>dAs<k2>dAs
{#dAs#}¦ {%dās%} (generally occurring in con-
nection with the prep. {%abhi,%} connected
with rts. 1. {%dāś, das, daṃś, daṃs%}), cl. 1. P. A.
{%dāsati, -te, dadāsa, -se, dāsitā,%} &c., to give; cl.
5. P. {%dāsnoti,%} &c., Ved. to hurt, injure, wound,
kill; [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">ληΐη, ληΐς, λεΐζομαι, ληϊστής,</lang>
the {%d%} being changed into {%l,%} as in rt. {%lā%} fr. rt. {%dā;%}
probably also Gr. <lang n="greek">λά-τρο-ν, λά-τρις;</lang> Lat. <nsi>la-tro.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>22290<pc>0411-b<k1>dAsa<k2>dAsa<h>1
1. {%dāsa, as,%}¦ m. a general N. applied in the Veda
to certain evil beings or demons, hostile to the
human race and to Indra, (those defeated by Indra
have also special names, e. g. Namuci, Pipru, Śambara,
Varcin, &c.); a savage, a barbarian, (opposed in the
Veda to {%ārya,%} &c.; cf. {%dasyu%}); a slave, servant, (in
this sense occurring at the end of the names of
Sūdras and Kāya-sthas; cf. also {%kāli-dāsa%}); one to
whom gifts may be made; {%= dāśa,%} a fisherman,
boatman; ({%ī%}), f. a female servant or slave, servant-
maid; whore, harlot, (in this sense having the
accent on the first syllable); N. of a plant, {%=%}
{%nīlājhiṇṭī, = kāka-jaṅghā, = nīlāmlāna;%} an altar;
N. of a river; ({%as, ī, am%}), belonging to the
Dāsas, i. e. to demons, barbarians, &c.; consisting
of the Dāsas, &c.; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δοῦλος</lang> derived in a
similar manner from <lang n="greek">δοῦν,</lang> ‘to give or serve.’] {%—Dā-%}
{%sa-jana, as,%} m. a slave; {%= dāsī,%} a female servant.
{%—Dāsa-jīvana, am,%} n. ‘slave-life,’ the work or
business of a slave. {%—Dāsa-tā,%} f. or {%dāsa-tva, am,%}
n. the condition of a slave, slavery, servitude. {%—Dā-%}
{%sa-dāsī,%} f. the female slave of a slave. {%—Dāsa-%}
{%nandinī = dāśa-nandinī,%} q. v. {%—Dāsa-patnī,%} f.,
Ved. having the demons as masters, being in the
power of the demons; (Sāy.) having Dāsa, i. e. the
destroyer, or Vṛtra as husband; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δέσποινα.</lang>]
{%—Dāsa-pravarga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according to
Sāy.) having a multitude of servants, having a large
number of slaves; [cf. {%pra-varga.%}] {%—Dāsa-bhārya,%}
{%am,%} n. servants and wives. {%—Dāsa-bhāva, as,%} m.
the condition of a slave, slavery, servitude. {%—Dāsa-%}
{%mitra, as,%} m. ‘friend of a slave,’ N. of a man.
{%—Dāsamitrāyaṇa, as,%} or {%dāsamitri, is,%} m. a
patronymic from Dāsa-mitra. {%—Dāsamitrāyaṇa-%}
{%bhakta%} or {%dāsamitri-bhakta, am,%} n., N. of the
district inhabited by the Dāsamitrāyaṇas or Dāsa-
mitris. {%—Dāsamitrika, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} relating to
or coming from Dāsa-mitra. {%—Dāsa-mithuna, am,%}
n., Ved. a couple of slaves or servants. {%—Dāsa-varga,%}
{%as,%} m. the whole collection of slaves, all the servants.
{%—Dāsa-veśa, as,%} m., Ved. (according to Sāy.) the
destruction of the demons. {%—Dāsa-śarman, ā,%} m.,
N. of a scholiast on the Śrauta-sūtras of Śāṅkhāyana.
[Page0411-c+ 75]
{%—Dāsasya-kula, am,%} n. (see Pāṇ. VI. 3, 21), the
common people, low people, the mob. {%—Dāsānu-%}
{%dāsa (˚sa-an˚), as,%} m. a slave of a slave, a servant
of servants; (sometimes applied by a humble speaker
to himself.) {%—Dāsī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%—karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to make any one a slave or a female slave;
to enslave. {%—Dāsī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made a slave.
{%—Dāsī-tva, am,%} n. the state of a female slave.
{%—Dāsī-dāna-vidhi, is,%} m. ‘the rules for giving
female slaves,’ N. of the 146th chapter of the
Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa or second part of the Bha-
viṣya-Purāṇa. {%—Dāsī-dāsa, am,%} n. female slaves
and slaves, female servants and servants. {%—Dāsī-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. ‘the son of a female slave’ (used as
an abusive expression), = a low wretch, a miscreant.
{%—Dāsī-māṇavaka, am,%} n. female slaves and boys.
{%—Dāsī-śrotriya, as,%} m. a Brāhman (conversant
with the Vedas) who goes after a female slave. {%—Dā-%}
{%sī-sabha, am,%} n. an assembly of female slaves or
servants. {%—Dāsī-suta, as,%} m. the son of a female
slave. {%—Dāsyāḥ-putra, as,%} m. the son of a female
slave; ({%ī%}), f. the daughter of a female slave; [cf.
{%dāsī-putra.%}] {%—Dāsyāḥ-sadṛśī,%} f. behaving like a
female slave. {%—Dāsyāḥ-suta, as,%} m. {%= dāsī-suta,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22291<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsaka<k2>dAsaka
{%Dāsaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; of a son of Bha-
jamāna.
<LEND>

<L>22292<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsakAyana<k2>dAsakAyana
{%Dāsakāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Dāsaka.
<LEND>

<L>22293<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsanu<k2>dAsanu
{%Dāsanu, us,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a semi-divine being
associated with Kṛśānu.
<LEND>

<L>22294<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsAya<k2>dAsAya
{%Dāsāya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%dāsāyati, -te,%} &c., to be-
come a slave.
<LEND>

<L>22295<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsAyana<k2>dAsAyana
{%Dāsāyana, as,%}¦ m. the son of a slave or of a man
called Dāsa.
<LEND>

<L>22296<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsikA<k2>dAsikA
{%Dāsikā,%}¦ f. a female slave or servant.
<LEND>

<L>22297<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsI<k2>dAsI
{%Dāsī,%}¦ f. See under 1. {%dāsa,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22298<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsIka<k2>dAsIka
{%Dāsīka%}¦ for {%dāsī,%} at the end of comp. (e. g. {%triṃ-%}
{%śad-dāsīka,%} having thirty female slaves).
<LEND>

<L>22299<pc>0411-c<k1>dAseya<k2>dAseya<h>1
1. {%dāseya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%dāsī%}), the son of a female
slave, a slave, servant, {%= dāśeya,%} q. v.; ({%as, ī, am%}),
born of a slave.
<LEND>

<L>22300<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsera<k2>dAsera
{%Dāsera, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%dāsī%}), the son of a female
slave, a slave, servant, {%= dāśera,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22301<pc>0411-c<k1>dAseraka<k2>dAseraka
{%Dāseraka, as,%}¦ m. {%= dāsera; (ās),%} m. pl., N. of
a people to the north of Madhya-deśa, {%= daśe-%}
{%raka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22302<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsya<k2>dAsya
{%Dāsya, am,%}¦ n. servitude, slavery, service. {%—Dāsya-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. servitude, slavery. {%—Dāsya-vṛtti, is,%}
f. the business of a slave or servant.
<LEND>

<L>22303<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsvat<k2>dAsvat
{%Dāsvat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. disposed to give, giv-
ing, liberal.
<LEND>

<L>22304<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsa<k2>dAsa<h>2
{#dAsa#} 2¦. {%dāsa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%daṃs,%}
q. v.), a knowing man; a knower of the universal
spirit.
<LEND>

<L>22305<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsa<k2>dAsa<h>3
{#dAsa#} 3¦. {%dāsa, as,%} m. {%= dāśa,%} a fisherman, &c.
<LEND>

<L>22306<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsanIya<k2>dAsanIya
{#dAsanIya#}¦ {%dāsanīya%} for {%dāsamīya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22307<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsapUra<k2>dAsapUra
{#dAsapUra#}¦ {%dāsapūra, am,%} n. {%= dāśapūra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22308<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsamIya<k2>dAsamIya
{#dAsamIya#}¦ {%dāsamīya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people; [cf. {%dāsameya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22309<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsameya<k2>dAsameya
{#dAsameya#}¦ {%dāsameya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people to the north of Madhya-deśa; (also written
{%dāśameya;%} cf. {%dāsamīya.%})
<LEND>

<L>22310<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsasaras<k2>dAsasaras
{#dAsasaras#}¦ {%dāsasaras, as,%} n., N. of a Sāman;
(also read {%dāśaśiras.%})
<LEND>

<L>22311<pc>0411-c<k1>dAsita<k2>dAsita
{#dAsita#}¦ {%dāsita.%} See under rt. {%das.%}
<LEND>

<L>22312<pc>0411-c<k1>dAha<k2>dAha
{#dAha#}¦ {%dāha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%dah%}), burning,
combustion, conflagration; glowing redness (as of
the sky; cf. {%dig-dāha%}); cauterizing, cautery (in
surgery); the sensation of burning, internal heat; the
heat of a fever, feverish or morbid heat [cf. {%antar-d˚,%}
{%gṛha-d˚, geha-d˚%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people;
(a various reading for {%vaideha,%} q. v.) {%—Dāha-%}
{%kāṣṭha, am,%} n. a kind of Agallochum used as a
perfume; [cf. {%dāhāgura.%}] {%—Dāha-jvara, as,%} m.
inflammatory fever. {%—Dāha-maya, as, ī, am,%} con-
sisting in burning or heat. {%—Dāhamaya-tva, am,%}
[Page0412-a+ 74]
n. the state of consisting in burning, &c. {%—Dāha-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} burning, heated, on fire. {%—Dāha-%}
{%sara, as,%} m. or {%dāha-saras, as,%} n. or {%dāha-sthala,%}
{%am,%} n. a place where dead bodies are burnt. {%—Dāha-%}
{%haraṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} removing heat; ({%am%}), n.
the root of Andropogon Muricatus, (a fragrant grass,
the root of which when woven into screens and kept
wet tempers the hot winds, {%= vīraṇa-mūla.%}) {%—Dā-%}
{%hāguru (˚ha-ag˚), u,%} n. {%= dāha-kāṣṭha,%} q. v.
{%—Dāhātmaka (˚ha-āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} of an in-
flammable nature, easily kindled or burning, com-
bustible. {%—Dāhādhikāra (˚ha-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of
a chapter of a medical work by Vṛnda on cauter-
izing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>22313<pc>0412-a<k1>dAhaka<k2>dAhaka
{%Dāhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ burning, kindling, setting
on fire; causing heat or combustion; incendiary,
inflammatory; cauterizing, caustic; ({%as%}), m. the
plant Plumbago Zeylanica ({%= citraka = rakta-ci-%}
{%traka%}).
<LEND>

<L>22314<pc>0412-a<k1>dAhana<k2>dAhana
{%Dāhana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), causing to burn,
burning, inflaming, reducing to ashes; cauterizing.
{%—Dāhanāguru%} for {%dahanāguru,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22315<pc>0412-a<k1>dAhanIya<k2>dAhanIya
{%Dāhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be burnt, combustible.
<LEND>

<L>22316<pc>0412-a<k1>dAhin<k2>dAhin
{%Dāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ burning, setting on fire, burning
hot; tormenting, paining; [cf. {%gehe-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22317<pc>0412-a<k1>dAhuka<k2>dAhuka
{%Dāhuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ burning, inflaming.
<LEND>

<L>22318<pc>0412-a<k1>dAhya<k2>dAhya
{%Dāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be burnt, inflammable,
combustible.
<LEND>

<L>22319<pc>0412-a<k1>dikam<k2>dikam
{#dikam#}¦ {%dikam,%} ind. given by some as an
indeclinable under the Gaṇa {%cādi.%}
<LEND>

<L>22320<pc>0412-a<k1>dikka<k2>dikka
{#dikka#}¦ {%dikka, as,%} m. {%= karabha,%} a young
elephant ?; (also read {%dhikka%} and {%vikka.%})
<LEND>

<L>22321<pc>0412-a<k1>dikkanyA<k2>dikkanyA
{#dikkanyA#}¦ {%dik-kanyā,%} 2. {%dik-kara, dik-karikā,%}
{%dik-karin,%} &c. See under the compounds of 2. {%diś.%}
<LEND>

<L>22322<pc>0412-a<k1>dikkara<k2>dikkara<h>1
{#dikkara#} 1¦. {%dikkara, as,%} m. (for 2. see p. 414,
col. 3), a youth; ({%ī%}), f. a young woman; [cf. {%ḍikkarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22323<pc>0412-a<k1>diganta<k2>diganta
{#diganta#}¦ {%dig-anta, dig-antara, dig-ambara.%}
See under the compounds of 2. {%diś.%}
<LEND>

<L>22324<pc>0412-a<k1>digDa<k2>digDa
{#digDa#}¦ {%digdha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dih%}),
smeared, anointed, plastered; soiled, polluted, defiled;
({%as%}), m. oil, ointment, unguent, oily substance; a
name of fire; a poisoned arrow; a tale true or false.
{%—Digdha-saha-śaya, as, ā, am,%} lying in the
midst of mud (?). {%—Digdha-hasta, as, ā, am,%} having
the hands smeared or soiled. {%—Digdhāṅga (˚dha-%}
{%aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having the limbs anointed.
<LEND>

<L>22325<pc>0412-a<k1>diNka<k2>diNka
{#diNka#}¦ {%diṅka, as,%} m. a nit, the egg of a
louse or bug ({%= utkuṇa-ḍimbha%}).
<LEND>

<L>22326<pc>0412-a<k1>diNnAga<k2>diNnAga
{#diNnAga#}¦ {%diṅ-nāga, diṅ-maṇḍala, diṅ-mā-%}
{%taṅga.%} See under the compounds of 2. {%diś.%}
<LEND>

<L>22327<pc>0412-a<k1>diRqi<k2>diRqi
{#diRqi#}¦ {%diṇḍi, is,%} m. or {%diṇḍan, ā,%} m., N. of
one of the attendants of Skanda; [cf. {%ḍhuṇḍhi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22328<pc>0412-a<k1>diRqIya<k2>diRqIya
{#diRqIya#}¦ {%diṇḍīya, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>22329<pc>0412-a<k1>diRqIra<k2>diRqIra
{#diRqIra#}¦ {%diṇḍīra, as,%} m. cuttle-fish bone
held to be indurated sea-foam; (also read {%hiṇḍīra;%}
cf. {%ḍiṇḍīra.%})
<LEND>

<L>22330<pc>0412-a<k1>dita<k2>dita
{#dita#}¦ {%dita.%} See under rt. 3. {%dā%} at p. 408,
col. 2, and 4. {%dā%} at p. 408, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>22331<pc>0412-a<k1>diti<k2>diti
{#diti#}¦ {%diti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. 3. {%dā%} or {%do%}), cut-
ting, splitting, dividing; distributing, liberality, (in
this sense also fr. rt. 1. {%dā%}); Liberality personified;
({%is%}), f., N. of a divine female, (probably a N. formed
to answer to A-diti, as Sura to A-sura, and without
any distinct character: in epic poetry Diti is a
daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa; the race
of Daityas or implacable enemies of the gods are
described as her progeny or derived from her through
her son Hiraṇya-kaśipu; but the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa I.
21, describes Indra as dividing the embryo in the
womb of Diti, through fear of his future enemies,
and forming the forty-nine Maruts from the divided
pieces); ({%is%}), m., N. of a king; a king. {%—Diti-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘a son of Diti,’ a Daitya, an enemy of the
gods. {%—Ditijārāti (˚ja-ar˚), is,%} m. ‘the enemy of
[Page0412-b+ 72]
the Daityas,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Diti-tanaya%}
or {%diti-nandana%} or {%diti-suta, as,%} m. ‘a son of
Diti,’ a Daitya. {%—Diti-rūpa-rākṣasī-vadha, as,%}
m., N. of the twenty-first chapter of the Krīḍā-
khaṇḍa or second part of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Diti-%}
{%śoka-praśama, as,%} m., N. of the sixth chapter of
the Bhūmi-khaṇḍa or second part of the Padma-
Purāṇa. {%—Diti-sambodhana, am,%} n., N. of the
ninth chapter of the Bhūmi-khaṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>22332<pc>0412-b<k1>ditya<k2>ditya
{%Ditya, as,%}¦ m. ‘a son of Diti,’ a Daitya; (a wrong
form for {%daitya.%})
<LEND>

<L>22333<pc>0412-b<k1>dityavah<k2>dityavah
{#dityavah#}¦ {%ditya-vah%} or {%ditya-vāh, -vāṭ,%} m.
(inst. {%dityauhā%}), {%dityauhī,%} f. ({%ditya%} probably a
corruption of {%dvitīya%}), Ved. a two-year-old steer or
cow; [cf. {%turya-vah%} and {%dātyauha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22334<pc>0412-b<k1>dityOhI<k2>dityOhI
{%Dityauhī.%}¦ See above under {%ditya-vah.%}
<LEND>

<L>22335<pc>0412-b<k1>ditsA<k2>ditsA
{#ditsA#}¦ {%ditsā,%} f. (fr. the Desid. of rt. 1. {%dā%}),
desire or intention of giving.
<LEND>

<L>22336<pc>0412-b<k1>ditsu<k2>ditsu
{%Ditsu, us, us, u,%}¦ ready or wishing to give, willing
to grant (with acc.); ready to perform (e. g. {%śrād-%}
{%dham,%} the funeral ceremony; cf. {%a-ditsu%}).
<LEND>

<L>22337<pc>0412-b<k1>ditsya<k2>ditsya
{%Ditsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ what one is willing to give or
ready to grant.
<LEND>

<L>22338<pc>0412-b<k1>diditsu<k2>diditsu
{%Diditsu, us, us, u, = ditsu,%}¦ ready or wishing to
give away; (an irregular form with double redupli-
cation.)
<LEND>

<L>22339<pc>0412-b<k1>didamBizu<k2>didamBizu
{#didamBizu#}¦ {%didambhiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. the
Desid. of rt. {%dambh%}), intending or wishing to de-
ceive; [cf. {%dhipsu%} and {%dipsu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22340<pc>0412-b<k1>didivi<k2>didivi
{#didivi#}¦ {%didivi, is, i,%} m. n. heaven, the sky.
See {%dīdivi.%}
<LEND>

<L>22341<pc>0412-b<k1>didIvi<k2>didIvi
{#didIvi#}¦ {%didīvi, is,%} m. boiled rice.
<LEND>

<L>22342<pc>0412-b<k1>didfkzamARa<k2>didfkzamARa
{#didfkzamARa#}¦ {%didṛkṣamāṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr.
the Desid. of rt. 1. {%dṛś%}), wishing to see.
<LEND>

<L>22343<pc>0412-b<k1>didfkzA<k2>didfkzA
{%Didṛkṣā,%}¦ f. desire of seeing, wish to see. {%—Di-%}
{%dṛkṣā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a desire to see.
<LEND>

<L>22344<pc>0412-b<k1>didfkzu<k2>didfkzu
{%Didṛkṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of seeing (with
acc.); wishing or desiring to examine, desirous of
inspecting.
<LEND>

<L>22345<pc>0412-b<k1>didfkzeRya<k2>didfkzeRya
{%Didṛkṣeṇya%}¦ or {%didṛkṣeya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
what one likes or wishes to see, conspicuous, at-
tracting.
<LEND>

<L>22346<pc>0412-b<k1>didevizat<k2>didevizat
{#didevizat#}¦ {%dideviṣat, an, antī, at%} (fr. the
Desid. of rt. 2. {%div%}), wishing to play or sport.
<LEND>

<L>22347<pc>0412-b<k1>diddA<k2>diddA
{#diddA#}¦ {%diddā,%} f., N. of a princess of Kaś-
mīra. {%—Diddā-kṣema, as,%} m. ‘having affection for
Diddā,’ an epithet of Kṣema-gupta. {%—Diddā-pāla,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Diddā-pura, am,%} n., N.
of a town built by Diddā. {%—Diddā-svāmin, ī,%} m.,
N. of a temple built by Diddā.
<LEND>

<L>22348<pc>0412-b<k1>didyu<k2>didyu
{#didyu#}¦ {%didyu, us,%} m. (fr. 2. {%div%} or 2. {%dī%} or
1. {%dyu ?%}), Ved. a missile weapon, arrow; (Sāy.) a
shining weapon; the sky, heaven.
<LEND>

<L>22349<pc>0412-b<k1>didyut<k2>didyut
{%Didyut, t,%}¦ f., Ved. an arrow, a missile (especially
the missiles of the gods and the thunderbolt of Indra);
N. of an Apsaras; ({%t, t, t%}), shining, blazing, bright,
(in this last sense derived by some fr. rt. 3. {%dyut.%})
<LEND>

<L>22350<pc>0412-b<k1>didyotizu<k2>didyotizu
{#didyotizu#}¦ {%didyotiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. the
Desid. of rt. 3. {%dyut%}), wishing to shine.
<LEND>

<L>22351<pc>0412-b<k1>diDakz<k2>diDakz
{#diDakz#}¦ {%didhakṣ, k, k, k%} (fr. the Desid. of
rt. 1. {%dah%}), wishing or intending to burn.
<LEND>

<L>22352<pc>0412-b<k1>diDakzamARa<k2>diDakzamARa
{%Didhakṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to burn.
<LEND>

<L>22353<pc>0412-b<k1>diDakzayat<k2>diDakzayat
{%Didhakṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ desiring to burn.
<LEND>

<L>22354<pc>0412-b<k1>diDakzA<k2>diDakzA
{%Didhakṣā,%}¦ f. desire or wish to burn or consume
by fire.
<LEND>

<L>22355<pc>0412-b<k1>diDakzu<k2>diDakzu
{%Didhakṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ intending to burn or
destroy, desirous of burning.
<LEND>

<L>22356<pc>0412-b<k1>diDi<k2>diDi
{#diDi#}¦ {%didhi, is,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%dhā%}), firmness,
stability, fixed state of mind or being; (probably a
wrong form.)
<LEND>

<L>22357<pc>0412-b<k1>diDikz<k2>diDikz
{#diDikz#}¦ {%didhikṣ, k, k, k%} (fr. the Desid. of
rt. 1. {%dih%}), intending to smear.
<LEND>
[Page0412-c+ 79]

<L>22358<pc>0412-c<k1>diDizAyya<k2>diDizAyya
{#diDizAyya#}¦ {%didhiṣāyya, as,%} m. (fr. the
Desid. of rt. 1. {%dhā%}), ‘to be tried to be gained,’ an
epithet of Agni; (Sāy.) a supporter; ({%as%}), m. a
pretended friend (?); [cf. {%dadhiṣāyya,%} which is
by some considered as another reading.]
<LEND>

<L>22359<pc>0412-c<k1>diDizu<k2>diDizu
{%Didhiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. wishing or trying to
gain or obtain; ({%us%}), m. a suitor; a husband; the
second husband of a woman twice married; ({%us%} or
{%didhiṣū, ūs%}), f. a virgin widow remarried; an
elder sister unmarried having a younger married
sister; [cf. {%agre-d˚%} and {%edidhiṣuḥ-pati.%}] {%—Di-%}
{%dhiṣū-pati, is,%} m. the husband of a woman re-
married.
<LEND>

<L>22360<pc>0412-c<k1>diDIzU<k2>diDIzU
{%Didhīṣū,%}¦ f. {%= didhiṣū.%}
<LEND>

<L>22361<pc>0412-c<k1>dina<k2>dina<h>1
{#dina#} 1¦. {%dina.%} See rt. 3. {%dā,%} p. 408, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22362<pc>0412-c<k1>dina<k2>dina<h>2
{#dina#} 2¦. {%dina, as, am,%} m. n. (probably for
{%divana%} and related to 3. {%div%} fr. rt. 2. {%div,%} said to
be fr. rt. {%do%}), a day; [cf. {%dur-d˚, puru-d˚, madh-%}
{%yan-d˚, su-d˚;%} cf. also Lith. <nsi>die†na,</nsi> f. ‘a day;’
Slav. <nsi>deny,</nsi> ‘a day;’ Lat. <nsi>peren-dinus, peren-dina-</nsi>
<nsi>tio, peren = para;</nsi> perhaps Goth. <nsi>sin-teins,</nsi> ‘daily,’
<nsi>sin = sam.</nsi>] {%—Dina-kara, as, ī, am,%} making day
or light; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%ṭīkā,%} N. of a commentary on
the Bhāṣā-pariccheda; ({%as%}), m. the sun; N. of
the author of the work Candrārkī. {%—Dinakara-%}
{%tanaya, as,%} m. ‘the son of the Sun,’ the planet
Saturn. {%—Dinakara-deva, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
{%—Dinakarātmajā (˚ra-āt˚),%} f. ‘the daughter of
the Sun,’ an epithet of the Yamunā or Jumnā river.
{%—Dina-kartṛ, tā,%} m. or {%dina-kṛt, t,%} m. ‘the
day-maker,’ the sun. {%—Dina-keśara%} or {%dina-kesara%}
or {%dina-keśava, as,%} m. ‘the hair of the day,’ the
darkness. {%—Dina-kṣaya, as,%} m. ‘the decline of
day,’ the evening, {%= tithi-kṣaya;%} N. of a chapter
in the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dina-jyotis, is,%} n. ‘day-
light,’ sunshine. {%—Dina-duḥkhita, as, ā, am,%} af-
flicted by day, sorrowing by day; ({%as%}), m. the bird
Cakra-vāka, the ruddy goose. {%—Dina-nakta, am,%}
n. day and night. {%—Dina-pati, is,%} m. ‘the lord of
the day,’ the sun. {%—Dina-praṇī, īs,%} m. ‘the bringer
of day,’ the sun; [cf. {%tithi-praṇī.%}] {%—Dina-ban-%}
{%dhu, us,%} m. ‘the friend of the day,’ the sun. {%—Dina-%}
{%bala, as,%} m. ‘the strength of the day,’ N. of the
fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, eleventh, and twelfth
signs of the zodiac collectively. {%—Dina-maṇi, is,%}
m. ‘the jewel of day,’ the sun. {%—Dina-mala, am,%} n.
‘day-refuse (?),’ a month. {%—Dina-mūrdhan, ā,%} m.
‘the head of the day,’ the eastern mountain behind
which the sun is supposed to rise; [cf. {%udaya.%}]
{%—Dina-ratna, am,%} n. ‘the jewel of the day,’ the
sun. {%—Dina-rāśi, is,%} m. ‘the sum or collective
amount of days,’ i. e. the number of solar days
which have elapsed from one given point of time to
another. {%—Dina-vyāsa-dala, am,%} n. ‘half-diameter
or radius of the sky,’ i. e. the radius of a circle made
by an asterism in its daily revolution. {%—Dināṃśa%}
{%(˚na-aṃśa), as,%} m. ‘any portion of a day,’ i. e. a
watch, an hour, morning, forenoon, afternoon, &c.
{%—Dināgama (˚na-āg˚), as,%} m. day-break. {%—Di-%}
{%nāṇḍa (˚na-aṇḍa?), am,%} n. ‘day-egg,’ i. e. dark-
ness, (the egg or embryo whence day proceeds.)
{%—Dinātyaya (˚na-at˚), as,%} m. ‘the decline of
day,’ evening. {%—Dinādi (˚na-ādi), is,%} m. ‘day-
break,’ dawn. {%—Dinādhīśa (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m.
‘the lord of day,’ the sun. {%—Dinānta (˚na-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘end of day,’ sun-set, evening. {%—Dināntaka%}
{%(˚na-an˚), as,%} m. ‘day-destroyer,’ darkness. {%—Di-%}
{%nārambha (˚na-ār˚), as,%} m. ‘day-break,’ morning.
{%—Dinārdha (˚na-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘the half of the
day,’ noon. {%—Dināvasāna (˚na-av˚), am,%} n. ‘close
of day,’ evening. {%—Dināstra (˚na-as˚), am,%} n.
‘day-missile,’ N. of a magical formula. {%—Dinī-kṛ,%}
cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to reduce
to days. {%—Dineśa (˚na-īśa), as,%} m. ‘the lord of
day,’ the sun; the regent of a day. {%—Dineśātmaja%}
{%(˚śa-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘the son of the Sun,’ the planet
Mercury. {%—Dineśvara (˚na-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘the lord
of the day,’ the sun. {%—Dinaika (˚na-eka), as,%} m.
one day.
<LEND>
[Page0413-a+ 73]

<L>22363<pc>0413-a<k1>dinikA<k2>dinikA
{%Dinikā,%}¦ f. a day's wages, hire for a day or by
the day.
<LEND>

<L>22364<pc>0413-a<k1>dinnAgrAma<k2>dinnAgrAma
{#dinnAgrAma#}¦ {%dinnā-grāma, as,%} m., N. of a
village of the Khāśakas.
<LEND>

<L>22365<pc>0413-a<k1>dinv<k2>dinv
{#dinv#}¦ {%dinv,%} cl. 1. P. {%dinvati,%} &c., to be
glad, to gladden; to please, to be pleased;
[cf. {%dhinv%} and {%jinv.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22366<pc>0413-a<k1>dip<k2>dip
{#dip#}¦ {%dip,%} cl. 1. A. {%depate,%} &c., to drop;
(various reading for {%tip.%})
<LEND>

<L>22367<pc>0413-a<k1>dipsu<k2>dipsu
{#dipsu#}¦ {%dipsu, us, us, u%} (fr. the Desid. of rt.
{%dabh%}), Ved. intending to hurt or injure; [cf. {%dhipsu%}
and {%didambhiṣu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22368<pc>0413-a<k1>dimp<k2>dimp
{#dimp#}¦ {%dimp,%} cl. 10. A. {%dimpayate,%} &c.,
to accumulate, order, direct; [cf. {%ḍip.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22369<pc>0413-a<k1>dimB<k2>dimB
{#dimB#}¦ {%dimbh,%} cl. 10. A. {%dimbhayate,%} &c.,
to accumulate; P. {%dimbhayati,%} &c., to
order, command, direct; to incite.
<LEND>

<L>22370<pc>0413-a<k1>diya<k2>diya
{#diya#}¦ {%diya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. to be given,
deserving of a gift, (according to Durga on Nirukta
III. 15 {%= deya%} or {%dānārha.%})
<LEND>

<L>22371<pc>0413-a<k1>dir<k2>dir
{#dir#}¦ {%dir%} (fr. rt. {%dṝ%}), ‘a fracture’ in {%ka-%}
{%laśa-dir,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22372<pc>0413-a<k1>diripaka<k2>diripaka
{#diripaka#}¦ {%diripaka, as, am,%} m. or n. (?),
a ball for playing with.
<LEND>

<L>22373<pc>0413-a<k1>dilIpa<k2>dilIpa
{#dilIpa#}¦ {%dilī-pa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. {%dilī,%}
a name for the ancient Hāstina-pura or modern
Delhi, + {%pa,%} a protector), N. of a king and ancestor
of Rāma, son of Aṃśu-mat and father of Bhagī-
ratha; [cf. {%dailīpi.%}] {%—Dilīpa-carita, am,%} n., N.
of the fifth chapter of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa or fourth
part of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Dilīpa-rāj, ṭ,%} m. the
king of Dilīpa. {%—Dilīpa-vara-lābha, as,%} m., N. of
the sixth chapter of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>22374<pc>0413-a<k1>dilIra<k2>dilIra
{#dilIra#}¦ {%dilīra, as,%} m. {%= śilīndhraka,%} a
mushroom.
<LEND>

<L>22375<pc>0413-a<k1>dilha<k2>dilha
{#dilha#}¦ {%dilha, as,%} m., N. of a man; [cf.
{%dihlā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22376<pc>0413-a<k1>div<k2>div<h>1
{#div#} 1¦. {%div,%} cl. 1. P. {%devati,%} cl. 10. P.
{%devayati, -yitum,%} to cause to lament, to
pain, vex; to ask, beseech, beg; A. ({%-te%}), to suffer
pain, lament, wail, mourn audibly.
<LEND>

<L>22377<pc>0413-a<k1>div<k2>div<h>2
{#div#} 2¦. {%div,%} cl. 4. P. {%dīvyati, dideva%}
(2nd sing. {%didevitha,%} part. {%didivas,%} or
according to Vopa-deva {%dudyūvas%}), {%deviṣyati, ade-%}
{%vīt, devitum%} (Ind. part. {%devitvā%} or {%dyūtvā%}), to shine
(perhaps originally to shoot forth as a ray of light),
to be bright or splendid [cf. 3. {%div,%} 2. {%dī, dīp, dev,%}
1. {%dyut%}]; to cast, throw; to cast dice, play with
dice, gamble (with inst., e. g. {%akṣair dīvyati,%}
he plays with dice: but with gen. of the stake
played for, e. g. {%śatasya dīvyati,%} he plays for a
hundred; or sometimes with inst., e. g. {%tena dha-%}
{%nena dīvyāmi tvayā,%} I will play with thee for this
money; or even with dat. or in the Brāhmaṇas with
acc., e. g. {%gāṃ dīvyeyus,%} they may play for a cow);
to lay a wager, make a bet (with dat. of the thing
betted upon); to play, sport, joke; to trifle with,
make sport of, play upon, rally (with acc.); to play
with, squander, make light of (as property &c. with
gen.); to sell; to buy (?); to have free play or
scope; to praise (e. g. {%Brāhmaṇaṃ dīvyati,%} he
praises the Brāhman; cf. {%paṇate,%} he bets; {%paṇā-%}
{%yati,%} he praises); to be glad, rejoice; to be mad or
drunk with pride, passion, &c.; to be sleepy; to
wish for, desire to gain; to go; [cf. rt. 1. {%dyu%}]:
Caus. {%devayati, -yitum, adīdivat,%} to cause to play
with dice: Desid. {%dideviṣati%} and {%dudyūṣati:%}
Caus. of the Desid. {%dudyūṣayati,%} &c., to cause
any one to wish to play: Intens. {%dedivīti, dedeti,%}
{%dedīvyate;%} [cf. {%dyūta,%} ‘play:’ probably Lat. <nsi>ludo,</nsi>
<nsi>jocus; Jupiter, Jovis,</nsi> for <nsi>Dyupiter, Dyovis:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>yu§kas,</nsi> ‘joke;’ <nsi>yu§koyu,</nsi> ‘I joke:’ perhaps also Lith.
<nsi>źibu,</nsi> ‘I shine.’]
<LEND>
[Page0413-b+ 81]

<L>22378<pc>0413-b<k1>div<k2>div<h>3
3. {%div, dyaus,%}¦ m. f. (in the Veda usually m.,
rarely f., but in later Sanskrit only f. In the Veda
the acc. sing. is {%dyām%} and {%divam;%} inst. {%divā;%} dat.
{%dyave,%} Mahā-bh. I. 3934, and {%dive;%} abl. and gen.
{%dyos%} and {%divas;%} loc. {%dyavi%} and {%divi:%} nom., acc.,
voc. du. {%dyāvā,%} and in Ṛg-veda IV. 56, 5, {%dyavī,%} cf.
{%dyāvā-pṛthivī,%} heaven and earth: nom. pl. {%dyāvas;%}
acc. {%dyūn;%} inst. {%dyubhis.%} According to native gram-
marians the base of this noun is both {%div%} and {%dyo,%} the
nom. and voc. sing. being formed from {%dyo%} as {%gaus%}
fr. {%go,%} the base {%div%} remaining before vowel termina-
tions, and the form {%dyu%} being used before termina-
tions beginning with consonants and at the beginning
of a comp., see 3. {%dyu;%} Vopa-deva gives the acc.
{%dyām%} as well as {%divam.%} In Mahā-bh. VIII. 4658,
the base {%dyo%} occurs in the comp. {%dyo-salileṣu;%}
cf. {%dyo%}); heaven, the sky, air, atmosphere (e. g.
{%dyaur bhūmir āpaśca,%} air, earth, and water); the
place where the Soma is produced (apparently used
in this sense in the Sāma-veda); day, the day
(generally in pl., see 3. {%dyu,%} except in such forms
as {%divā,%} by day; {%dive dive, dyavi dyavi,%} daily,
every day; {%ahar-dive,%} &c.); daylight, light, bright-
ness, brilliancy, glow (generally in inst. pl., e. g.
{%pari-bhūṣati dyubhis,%} he adorns with splendor);
fire, the glow of fire; [in the Veda ‘the Sky’ is
generally regarded as a masculine deity, being called
in certain passages {%dyauṣ-pitṛ%} or the universal
father, the Earth being regarded as ‘the mother;’
while the daughter of ‘the Sky’ is Uṣas or the
dawn. In Vedic cosmology there are three Skies,
an upper, a middle, and a lower. As a feminine
personification, Dyaus is the daughter of Prajā-pati.
The inst. c. {%divā,%} ‘by day,’ ‘the day,’ is often used in
comp. or as a subst.; so also {%divam%} acc., {%divas%} gen.,
and {%divi%} loc. are used in comp. as in the examples
given below; cf. {%eka-dyu;%} cf. also {%dyo, di-na, a-dya,%}
{%deva:%} Zend {%dīv,%} ‘to shine;’ <nsi>daêva,</nsi> ‘demon:’ Gr.
<lang n="greek">Ζεύς</lang> {%= dyaus;%} <lang n="greek">Διός</lang> {%= divas;%} <lang n="greek">ἔν-δι-ο-ς, εὐ-δί-α,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δία-λος, δέελο-ς, δῆλος, Διώνη, πρώϊ-ζος, χθι-ζός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἤδη, δέ-α-το, δο-ά-σσα-το:</lang> Lat. <nsi>Diov-i-s, Jovis,</nsi>
<nsi>Ju-piter, deu-s, dīvu-s, sub-dio, Diana, die-s,</nsi>
<nsi>bi-du-u-m, nū-diu-s, inter-diū, nun-dinœ, jam,</nsi>
<nsi>dum, dudum:</nsi> Old Iceland. <nsi>tīvar,</nsi> ‘gods, heroes:’
Old Germ. <nsi>Zio:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>deva-s,</nsi> ‘god;’ <nsi>dënà,</nsi> ‘day:’
Slav. <nsi>dĭ-nă,</nsi> ‘day.’] {%—Divaḥ-śyenī,%} f. epithet of par-
ticular sacrifices or oblations. {%—Divaṅ-gama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} going or rising or leading to heaven. {%—Divas-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘the lord of heaven,’ epithet of
Indra; also of Nahuṣa and of Viṣṇu; N. of the
Indra of the thirteenth Manv-antara. {%—Divā-kara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the day-maker,’ the sun; N. of one of the
sons of Garuḍa, (often mentioned with Niśā-kara, who
is another son of Garuḍa); a crow [cf. {%divāṭana%}];
a flower, the sun-flower, Calotropis Gigantea [cf.
{%arka%}]; N. of a prince, (also read {%divārka%}); of the
founder of the Sūrya-bhakta sect; of a poet; of a
pupil of Śaṅkarācārya, and of several other men.
{%—Divākara-vatsa, as,%} m., N. of the author of
the Kakṣyā-stotra hymn. {%—Divākara-suta, as,%} m.
‘the son of the Sun,’ the planet Saturn; ({%ā%}), f. ‘the
daughter of the Sun,’ an epithet of the river Yamunā.
{%—Divā-kīrtti, is,%} m. a man of low or impure
caste, a Caṇḍāla; a barber; an owl; (the barber not
being allowed to operate at night; or {%divākīrtti%}
may be fr. {%divā + akīrtti,%} the Caṇḍāla and owl
only coming abroad by night.) {%—Divā-kīrtya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} to be recited or pronounced at day-time;
({%am%}), n., N. of certain recitations and songs; fur-
nished with a recitation which must be performed at
day-time; ({%as%}), m. a Caṇḍāla; [cf. the preceding.]
{%—Divā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done by day. {%—Divā-%}
{%cara, as, ā, am,%} or {%divā-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} going
about by day (as certain animals). {%—Divāṭana (˚vā-%}
{%aṭ˚), as, ā, am,%} wandering about by day; ({%as%}), m.
a crow. {%—Divā-tana, as, ī, am,%} or {%divā-tara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. daily, diurnal, of or belonging to the day.
{%—Divā-niśam,%} ind. day and night. {%—Divāndha%}
{%(˚vā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} blind by day; ({%as%}), m. an
owl; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of bird {%(= valgulā)%}. {%—Divān-%}
{%dhakī,%} f. the musk-rat. {%—Divā-puṣṭa, as,%} m. the
[Page0413-c+ 81]
sun (‘nourished by the day,’ appearing in its full
splendor in day-time). {%—Divā-pradīpa, as,%} m. ‘a
lamp by day,’ i. e. an obscure man. {%—Divā-bhīta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} timid by day; ({%as%}), m. an owl; a thief
or house-breaker; the white lotus, or perhaps any
such flower (the petals of which open at night and
close in the day-time). {%—Divā-bhīti, is,%} m. ‘having
fear by day,’ an owl. {%—Divā-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
turned into day, become bright as the day. {%—Divā-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. ‘the jewel of the day,’ the sun.
{%—Divā-madhya, am,%} n. midday, noon. {%—Divā-%}
{%manya, as, ā, am,%} thinking one's self the day.
{%—Divā-maithunin, ī, inī, i,%} cohabiting by day.
{%—Divā-rātram,%} ind. day and night. {%—Divā-rātri,%}
{%is,%} f. day or night. {%—Divārka (˚vā-ar˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a prince. {%—Divāvasāna (˚va-av˚), am,%} n.
the end of day, close of day. {%—Divā-vasu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. eminent or excellent by day; (Sāy.)
having splendid oblations. {%—Divā-śaya, as, ā, am,%}
sleeping by day. {%—Divāśaya-tā,%} f. sleeping in the
day-time. {%—Divā-sañcara, as, ā, am, = divā-cara,%}
walking about by day. {%—Divā-supta, as, ā, am,%}
asleep by day. {%—Divā-svapana, am,%} n. sleeping
by day. {%—Divā-svapna, as,%} m. sleep by day (con-
sidered as noxious). {%—Divā-svāpa, as,%} m. sleep
by day; ({%as, ā, am%}), sleeping by day; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of bird {%(= valgulā)%}. {%—Divi-kṣaya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} living in the sky. {%—Divi-kṣit, t, t, t,%} Ved.
living in the sky or in heaven. {%—Divi-gata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} being in the sky or in heaven. {%—Divi-cara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} or {%divi-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} moving in the sky,
celestial, an inhabitant of the sky. {%—Divi-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} born in heaven, of heavenly origin, heavenly,
celestial; ({%as%}), m. ‘an inhabitant of the sky,’ a
deity, a god. {%—Divi-jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. born or
produced in the sky. {%—Divi-jāta, as, ā, am,%} born
or produced in the sky or heaven; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a son of Purū-ravas. {%—Div-it, t, t, t,%} Ved. going to
the sky. {%—Divit-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. going in
or to the sky, heavenly; (Sāy.) {%= dīpti-mat,%} shining;
({%-matā%}), ind. turned towards heaven; [cf. {%it-van.%}]
{%—Divi-yaj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. offering oblation or wor-
ship to heaven. {%—Divi-yoni, is, is, i,%} born in the
sky, Ved. having origin in heaven. {%—Divi-ratha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Bhumanyu; also of Dadhi-
vāhana; also of Khanapāna (who like Dadhi-vāhana
is the grandfather of Dharma-ratha; cf. {%diva-ratha%}).
{%—Divi-śrit, t, t, t%} (rt. {%śri%}), Ved. taking up one's
abode in heaven. {%—Divi-ṣad, t, t, t,%} Ved. living in
the sky; ({%t%}), m. an inhabitant of the sky, a deity.
{%—Divi-ṣṭambha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. resting on the
sky. {%—Div-iṣṭi, is,%} f., Ved. ‘eagerness or ardour
for heaven,’ devotion, practising devotion, any reli-
gious rite, sacrifice; [cf. {%gaviṣṭi.%}] {%—Divi-ṣṭha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} situated or dwelling in heaven, heavenly,
celestial. {%—Divi-sad%} and {%divi-stha,%} see {%divi-ṣad%} and
{%divi-ṣṭha%}. {%—Divi-spṛś, k, k, k,%} or {%divi-spṛśat,%}
{%an, atī%} or {%antī, at,%} touching or reaching the sky or
heaven, pervading the sky; [cf. {%diva-spṛś.%}] {%—Divo-%}
{%jā, ās, ās, am,%} produced in heaven. {%—Divo-dāsa, as,%}
m. ‘slave of heaven,’ N. of a man with the surname
Bharad-vāja (celebrated in the Ṛg-veda for his
liberality, and the assistance rendered to him by
Indra and the Aśvins against Śambara; his father is
called in the Veda Vadhryaśva, but in the later lite-
rature Bhadhrasva or Badhryāśva or Bahvaśva &c.,
and his son is Mitrayu or Mitrāyu); N. of the father
of Su-dās; N. of a king of Kāśi or Benares with
the surname Dhanvantari, founder of the Indian
school of medicine &c.; N. of several other men;
[cf. {%daivodāsi.%}] {%—Divodāseśvara-liṅga (˚sa-īś˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga mentioned in the Skanda-
Purāṇa. {%—Divodāsopākhyāna (˚sa-up˚), am,%} n.
‘the episode of Divo-dāsa,’ N. of the twenty-third
chapter of the Svarga-khaṇḍa or third part of the
Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Divo-duh, dhuk, k, k,%} Ved. milk-
ing from the sky. {%—Divo-ruc, k, k, k,%} Ved. shining
from heaven.
<LEND>

<L>22379<pc>0413-c<k1>diva<k2>diva
{%Diva, am,%}¦ n. = 3. {%div,%} heaven, sky, atmosphere;
paradise; a day; a wood, thicket; (often at the
end of comp.; cf. {%ahar-d˚, tri-d˚, naktan-d˚;%} cf.
[Page0414-a+ 81]
also Lat. <nsi>divum, sub-divo.</nsi>) {%—Diva-kṣas, ās, ās,%}
{%as%} ({%kṣas%} fr. rt. 2. {%kṣi%}), Ved. living in heaven,
heavenly; ({%ās%}), m. epithet of Indra; [cf. {%dyu-kṣa.%}]
{%—Diva-darśa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school of the
Atharva-veda. {%—Diva-ratha,%} wrong reading for {%divi-%}
{%ratha,%} q. v. {%—Divas-pṛthivyau,%} f. du. heaven and
earth. {%—Diva-spṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. touching or reach-
ing the sky, pervading the sky; ({%k%}), m. an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Divokas, ās,%} m. an inhabitant of heaven,
a deity; the Cātaka; [cf. {%divaukas.%}] {%—Divod-%}
{%bhava (˚va-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} born or produced in
heaven or the sky, of heavenly origin; ({%ā%}), f. car-
damoms. {%—Divolkā (˚va-ul˚),%} f. ‘firebrand in the
sky,’ a meteor; [cf. {%divyolkā.%}] {%—Divaukas (˚va-%}
{%ok˚), ās,%} m. an inhabitant of heaven, a deity; the
Cātaka, Cuculus Melanoleucus; a deer; a bee; an
elephant; [cf. {%divokas.%}] {%—Divaukasa, as,%} m. an
inhabitant of heaven, a deity.
<LEND>

<L>22380<pc>0414-a<k1>divan<k2>divan
{%Divan, ā,%}¦ m. a day; [cf. {%prati-d˚%}].
<LEND>

<L>22381<pc>0414-a<k1>divasa<k2>divasa
{%Divasa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the sky, heaven; a day
(generally {%as,%} m.); [cf. Lat. <nsi>dies;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>zies-tac;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>tiwes-daeg;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>tues-day;</nsi>
perhaps also Cambro-Brit. <nsi>diev</nsi> and Hib. <nsi>dia,</nsi> ‘day.’]
{%—Divasa-kara, as,%} m. or {%divasa-kṛt, t,%} m. ‘the
day-maker,’ the sun. {%—Divasa-cara, as, ā, am,%}
going about in the day-time, (opposed to {%niśā-cara.%})
{%—Divasa-nātha, as,%} m. ‘the lord of day,’ the sun.
{%—Divasa-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘the supporter of day,’ the
sun. {%—Divasa-mukha, am,%} n. ‘the beginning of
day,’ day-break, dawn. {%—Divasa-mudrā,%} f. ‘day's
coin,’ a day's wages. {%—Divasa-vigama, as,%} m. the
departure of day. {%—Divasātyaya (˚sa-at˚), as,%} m.
‘the passing away of day,’ evening. {%—Divasāntara%}
{%(˚sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} only one day old. {%—Diva-%}
{%sāvasāna (˚sa-av˚), am,%} n. ‘the close of day,’
evening. {%—Divaseśvara (˚sa-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘the lord
of day,’ the sun.
<LEND>

<L>22382<pc>0414-a<k1>divA<k2>divA
{%Divā,%}¦ ind. by day, see 3. {%div,%} p. 413, col. 2;
{%a-divā,%} not by day.
<LEND>

<L>22383<pc>0414-a<k1>divi<k2>divi
{%Divi, is,%}¦ m. the blue jay, {%= kikīdivi.%}
<LEND>

<L>22384<pc>0414-a<k1>divI<k2>divI
{%Divī,%}¦ f. a species of insect, {%= upa-jihvā, upadīkā.%}
<LEND>

<L>22385<pc>0414-a<k1>divya<k2>divya<h>1
1. {%divya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%divyati,%} &c., to long for heaven.
<LEND>

<L>22386<pc>0414-a<k1>divya<k2>divya<h>2
2. {%divya, as, ā, am,%}¦ divine, heavenly, celestial, (op-
posed to {%pārthiva, kṣamya, bhauma,%} &c.); super-
natural, wonderful, brilliant (as heaven); charming,
beautiful, agreeable; ({%as%}), m. barley; a fragrant
resin, bdellium; a kind of animal ({%= dhanvina%});
N. of a prince; ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants, Emblica
Officinalis ({%= harītakī%}), Terminalia Chebula, Aspara-
gus Racemosus ({%= śatāvarī%}); cumin-seed ({%= mahā-%}
{%medā, brāhmī, sthūla-jīraka%}); a kind of perfume
({%= śveta-dūrvā, surā%}); N. of an Apsaras; ({%am%}),
n. divine or celestial nature, divinity; the celestial
regions, the sky, heaven; an ordeal, (of which ten
kinds are enumerated, viz. 1. Tulā, cf. {%tulā-parī-%}
{%kṣā;%} 2. Agni, ‘touching fire;’ 3. Jala, ‘immersion
in water;’ 4. Viṣa, ‘poison;’ 5. Kośa, q. v.;
6. Taṇḍula, ‘chewing rice-grains and ejecting them,’
if they appear dry or blood-stained, they are a proof of
guilt; 7. Tapta-māṣa, ‘taking a Māṣa weight of
gold out of heated oil;’ 8. Phāla, ‘holding a hot
plough-share;’ 9. Dharmādharma, ‘drawing con-
cealed images of Virtue and Vice out of a vessel
filled with earth;’ 10. Tulasī, ‘holding the leaves of
holy basil and after repeating a form of oath swallow-
ing them’); an oath, adjuration, solemn declaration
or promise; cloves; a sort of sandal; N. of a
grammar. {%—Divya-kaṭa, am,%} n., N. of a town.
{%—Divya-kānana-darśana, as, ā, am,%} in aspect
like to a celestial grove. {%—Divya-kārin, ī,%} m. under-
going an ordeal, taking an oath. {%—Divya-kuṇḍa,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the heavenly lake,’ N. of a lake on the
mountain Kṣobhaka in Kāma-rūpa. {%—Divya-gan-%}
{%dha, as, ā, am,%} having a divine odour; ({%as%}), m.
sulphur; ({%ā%}), f. large cardamoms; a kind of vege-
table, {%= mahā-cañcū; (am),%} n. cloves. {%—Divya-%}
{%gāyana, as,%} m. a divine songster, a Gandharva or
heavenly minstrel. {%—Divya-cakṣus, us,%} n. a divine
eye, prophetic or supernatural vision, the faculty of
seeing what is invisible by the human eye; ({%us, us,%}
{%us%}), having divine or prophetic visions, heavenly-eyed;
[Page0414-b+ 80]
blind, i. e. using the mental instead of the physical eye;
({%us%}), m. a monkey; a kind of perfume. {%—Divya-%}
{%jñāna, am,%} n. supernatural knowledge. {%—Divya-%}
{%tattva, am,%} n. ‘heavenly truth,’ N. of a work.
{%—Divya-tā,%} f. heavenliness, heavenly or divine nature.
{%—Divya-tejas, ās,%} f. ‘having heavenly splendor,’
a kind of plant; [cf. {%brāhmī.%}] {%—Divya-darśana-%}
{%viśruta, as, ā, am,%} renowned for a divine aspect.
{%—Divya-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} having a divine vision.
{%—Divya-dṛś, k, k, k,%} ‘seeing heavenly things,’
observing heavenly phenomena; ({%k%}), m. an astrologer.
{%—Divya-deha, as,%} m. a celestial body. {%—Divya-%}
{%dohada, am,%} n. divine desire, the object of a deity's
desire; ({%as, ā, am%}), fit for an offering or oblation.
{%—Divya-dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having a divine nature.
{%—Divya-nadī,%} f. a heavenly stream. {%—Divya-%}
{%nārī,%} f. a divine female, an Apsaras. {%—Divya-%}
{%pañcāmṛta (˚ca-am˚), am,%} n. ‘the five divine
ambrosias,’ viz. ghee, milk, coagulated milk, honey,
and sugar. {%—Divya-pāṭala,%} ‘having a heavenly
pale-red colour,’ a kind of plant. {%—Divya-puṣpa,%}
{%as,%} m. fragrant oleander, {%= karavīra; (ā),%} f. a
kind of plant {%(= mahā-droṇā)%}. {%—Divyapuṣpikā,%}
f. a kind of Calotropis {%(= lohita-varṇārka-%}
{%vṛkṣa)%}. {%—Divya-prabhāva, as, ā, am,%} having
celestial power. {%—Divya-praśna, as,%} m. inquiry
into celestial phenomena, augury. {%—Divya-māna,%}
{%as,%} m. measuring the time according to the days
and years of the gods. {%—Divya-mānuṣa, as,%} m.
a demi-god, a being half divine and half human, a
semi-divine being; ({%as, ā, am%}), divine and human.
{%—Divya-yamunā,%} f. ‘the heavenly Jumnā,’ N. of
a river in Kāma-rūpa. {%—Divya-ratna, am,%} n. ‘the
heavenly gem,’ the fabulous gem Cintā-maṇi. {%—Divya-%}
{%ratha, as,%} m. ‘a heavenly car,’ the car or vehicle
of any deity. {%—Divya-rasa, as,%} m. ‘the divine fluid,’
quicksilver. {%—Divya-latā,%} f. ‘the divine creeper,’
N. of the plant Sanseviera Zeylanica {%(= mūrvā).%}
{%—Divya-vastra, as, ā, am,%} ‘having heavenly
clothes,’ clothed in celestial raiment, divinely dressed;
({%as%}), m. a plant, commonly Sūrya-śobhā, a sort of
sun-flower. {%—Divya-vākya, am,%} n. a celestial voice.
{%—Divya-śrotra, am,%} n. ‘a heavenly ear,’ an ear
which hears everything. {%—Divya-sānu, us,%} m.
‘divine eminence,’ N. of one of the Viśve-Devās.
{%—Divya-sāra, as,%} m. ‘having divine juice or resin,’
N. of the tree Shorea Robusta. {%—Divya-strī,%} f. a
divine female, an Apsaras. {%—Divyāṃśu (˚ya-aṃśu),%}
{%us,%} m. the sun, ‘having heavenly rays.’ {%—Div-%}
{%yāṅganā (˚ya-aṅ˚),%} f. a divine woman. {%—Divyā-%}
{%divya (˚ya-a-div˚), as, ā, am,%} divine and not divine,
partly human, partly divine; ({%ā%}), f. a demi-goddess
(as Sītā, heroine of the Rāmāyaṇa). {%—Divyāvadāna%}
{%(˚ya-av˚), am,%} n. ‘heavenly achievements,’ N. of a
Buddhist collection of legends. {%—Divyodaka (˚ya-%}
{%ud˚), am,%} n. ‘heavenly water,’ rain-water, dew, &c.
{%—Divyopapāduka (˚ya-up˚), as, ī, am,%} divinely
born, of heavenly birth or origin, celestial, divine.
{%—Divyaugha (˚ya-ogha), as,%} m. ‘having divine
energy,’ N. of particular forms of Śiva (worshipped
by the Tāntrikas).
<LEND>

<L>22387<pc>0414-b<k1>divyaka<k2>divyaka
{%Divyaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of serpent; another
species of animal, {%= dhanvina;%} [cf. 2. {%divya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22388<pc>0414-b<k1>divyelaka<k2>divyelaka
{%Divyelaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of serpent ({%= divyaka ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>22389<pc>0414-b<k1>dIv<k2>dIv
{%Dīv%}¦ (acc. {%dyuvam,%} dat. {%dīve%} and {%dyuve%}), Ved.
gambling, gaming, playing with dice.
<LEND>

<L>22390<pc>0414-b<k1>dIvana<k2>dIvana
{%Dīvana, am,%}¦ n. gambling, playing with dice;
[cf. {%devana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22391<pc>0414-b<k1>dIvi<k2>dIvi
{%Dīvi, is,%}¦ m. the blue jay; [cf. {%divi,%} col. 1.]
<LEND>

<L>22392<pc>0414-b<k1>dIvyat<k2>dIvyat
{%Dīvyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ playing, sporting, gambling.
<LEND>

<L>22393<pc>0414-b<k1>dIvyamAna<k2>dIvyamAna
{%Dīvyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ playing, sporting; throw-
ing, darting, shooting.
<LEND>

<L>22394<pc>0414-b<k1>divira<k2>divira
{#divira#}¦ {%divira, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Divira-kiśora, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>22395<pc>0414-b<k1>diS<k2>diS<h>1
{#diS#} 1¦. {%diś,%} cl. 3. and in later Sanskrit
cl. 6. P. (rarely A.) {%dideṣṭi, diśati, -te,%}
{%dideśa, didiśe, dekṣyati, -te, adikṣat, adik-%}
{%ṣata%} (Ved. {%adiṣṭa%}), {%deṣṭum,%} to point out, show,
exhibit, produce, bring forward (as a witness in a
court of justice); to assign; to bestow upon (with
[Page0414-c+ 81]
gen.); grant, give, deliver; to pay (tribute); to
direct, order, command (with inf.); to point to,
denote: Pass. {%diśyate:%} Caus. {%deśayati, -yitum,%}
{%adīdiśat,%} to show, point out, assign; to teach, com-
municate, tell, inform; to direct, order, command,
govern; to confer: Desid. {%didikṣati, -te,%} to wish
to show, &c.: Intens. {%dediśyate, dedeṣṭi,%} (A.)
to exhibit exceedingly, show, show one's self, &c.;
(P.) to order or direct urgently; [cf. Zend <nsi>diś;</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">δείκ-νυ-μι, δείκελος, δείξ-ις, δεῖγμα, δίκ-η,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δικ-εῖν, δίκτνον, δειδίσκομαι, δίσκος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>in-dic-</nsi>
<nsi>are, ju-dex, causi-dic-us, dic-ere;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>teih-an,</nsi>
<nsi>taikns, taiknyan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>tihian, tihhan,</nsi>
<nsi>taecan, tácn, tácen, tier</nsi> for <nsi>tihher, tiid, tíd;</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>zeig-ōn, zīt</nsi> for <nsi>zig-ti, zeinyan;</nsi> probably also
Lith. <nsi>źénklas,</nsi> ‘a sign.’]
<LEND>

<L>22396<pc>0414-c<k1>diS<k2>diS<h>2
2. {%diś, k,%}¦ f. direction pointed at, point of the
compass, quarter of the sky, cardinal point, quarter,
region, place, space, part (e. g. {%diśi diśi,%} in all direc-
tions, in every quarter; {%digbhyas,%} from all regions
or quarters; {%diśodiśas,%} hither and thither: the four
chief quarters or cardinal points are {%prācī,%} east;
{%dakṣiṇā,%} south; {%pratīcī,%} west; and {%udīcī,%} north:
sometimes five are enumerated, i. e. the preceding
four with {%dhruvā,%} q. v.: sometimes six or seven are
given, but oftener eight, i. e. the four cardinal and the
four intermediate quarters, S. E., S. W., N. W., and N. E.,
cf. {%upa-diś:%} or sometimes ten, viz. the preceding
eight with {%tiryak,%} horizontally, and {%ūrdhvam,%}
perpendicularly, or {%adhas,%} underneath, and {%ūrdh-%}
{%vam,%} overhead: {%diśo daśa,%} towards the ten quarters,
i. e. in all directions; {%diśām patis,%} ‘the lord of the
quarters,’ is a N. of Soma and Rudra in the Veda,
cf. {%dik-pati%} below; in Viṣṇu-Purāṇa I. VIII. the
collective {%diśas,%} ‘the regions or quarters,’ is men-
tioned as one of the wives of the eight manifestations
of Rudra); the numeral ten; side, party, people;
a foreign or distant quarter or region, cf. {%dig-%}
{%āgata;%} a hint, reference; precept, order, manner;
manner of thinking, point of view, method of con-
sidering a subject; the mark of a bite; N. of a
river. {%—Dik-kanyā,%} f. a region of the sky con-
sidered as a virgin or mistress. {%—2. dik-kara, as,%} m.
{%= aruṇa,%} q. v. {%= śambhu,%} q. v.; ({%as, ī, am%}), juve-
nile, youthful; [cf. 1. {%dikkara%} {{atp->at p.||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} 412, col. 1.] {%—Dik-%}
{%kara-vāsinī,%} f., N. of a goddess; [cf. {%dik-kāminī%}
and {%dik-sundarī.%}] {%—Dikkarikā,%} f. (fr. the next),
N. of a river. {%—Dik-karin, ī,%} m. ‘elephant of the
quarter,’ an elephant of one of the eight quarters or
points, i. e. a mythical elephant standing in one of the
four or eight regions of the sky and supporting with
the others the earth; [cf. {%dig-ibha, dig-gaja, dig-%}
{%dantin, dig-vāraṇa, diṅ-nāga, diṅ-mātaṅga,%}
{%diśā-gaja.%}] {%—Dik-kāntā,%} f. or {%dik-kāminī,%} f. {%=%}
{%dik-kanyā%}. {%—Dik-kumāra, ās,%} m. pl. the youths
of the quarters; (with Jainas) a class of deities be-
longing to the Bhavanādhīśas. {%—Dik-cakra, am,%} n.
the circuit of the quarters of the compass, the horizon;
the compass, the whole world; [cf. {%diṅ-maṇḍala.%}]
{%—Dik-taṭa, as,%} m. the horizon, the line of the
horizon. {%—Dik-tas,%} ind. from the regions of the
sky. {%—Dik-pati, is,%} or {%dik-pāla, as,%} m. the regent
or guardian of a quarter of the world, (the guardian
of the eight points are Indra of the east, Agni of the
south-east, Yama of the south, Nirṛti of the south-
west, Varuṇa of the west, Vāyu or Marut of the
north-west, Kuvera of the north, Iśāna or Śiva of the
north-east; these are generally regarded as identical
with the regents of the quarters, but other lists sub-
stitute Sūrya ‘the sun’ and Candra or Soma ‘the moon’
for Nirṛti and Iśāna, and others again give the sun
and moon and the six planets; cf. Manu V. 96, VII.
303.) {%—Dik-patha, as,%} m. ‘the path of the horizon,’
the surrounding region or quarter. {%—Dik-pravi-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. a point, direction, quarter; [cf. {%dig-%}
{%bhāga%} and {%dig-vibhāga.%}] {%—Dik-śūla, am,%} n.
‘stake of the sky,’ any inauspicious planetary con-
junction as for the sun and Venus to be in the west,
&c.; N. of particular days on which it is not
allowed to travel in certain directions. {%—Dikśūla-%}
{%lakṣaṇa, āni,%} n. pl., N. of a chapter of the
[Page0415-a+ 80]
Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dik-sama, as, ā, am,%} having
the same direction. {%—Dik-sundarī,%} f. {%= dik-%}
{%kanyā%}. {%—Dik-srakti, is, is, i,%} having the angles
or corners towards the four cardinal points. {%—Dik-%}
{%svāmin, ī,%} m. {%= dik-pati%}. {%—Dig-anta, as,%} m. the
end of the horizon or of space, remote distance; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), being at the end of the horizon or in
the remote distance. {%—Dig-antara, am,%} n. another
region, a distant quarter, a foreign country; space,
the atmosphere. {%—Dig-ambara, as, ā, am,%} ‘sky-
clothed,’ having only the sky or atmosphere for
raiment, clad by the regions of space, unclad, un-
clothed, stark naked; ({%as%}), m. a naked mendicant
(especially of the Jaina or Bauddha sect; cf. 1. {%kṣa-%}
{%paṇa%}); a mendicant or ascetic in general; an epithet
of Śiva; also of Skanda; darkness; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet
of Durgā; [cf. {%dig-vastra%} and {%dig-vāsas.%}] {%—Dig-%}
{%ambaraka, as,%} m. a naked mendicant (especially of
the Jaina sect). {%—Digambara-tva, am,%} n. entire
nakedness. {%—Dig-āgata, as, ā, am,%} come from a
distant region or country. {%—Dig-ibha, as,%} m. {%= dik-%}
{%karin,%} q. v. {%—Dig-īśvara, as,%} m. {%= dik-pati,%} q. v.
{%—Dig-gaja, as,%} m. {%= dik-karin,%} q. v. {%—Dig-gra-%}
{%haṇa, am,%} n. observation of and fixing the quarters
of the compass. {%—Dig-jaya, as,%} m. the conquest of
various countries in all directions; [cf. {%dig-vijaya.%}]
{%—Dig-dantin, ī,%} m. {%= dik-karin,%} q. v. {%—Dig-%}
{%darśana, am,%} n. the act of looking to every side, a
general survey. {%—Dig-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} looking
round on all sides, taking a general view. {%—Dig-%}
{%dāha, as,%} m. preternatural redness of the horizon,
as if on fire; (also called {%diśāṃ dāhas.%}) {%—Dig-de-%}
{%vatā,%} f. the deity of a quarter, {%= dik-pati,%} q. v.
{%—Dig-deśa, as,%} m. the country in various direc-
tions, various regions, distant countries. {%—Dig-dai-%}
{%vata, am,%} n. {%= dig-devatā,%} q. v. {%—Dig-nāga,%} see
{%diṅ-nāga%}. {%—Dig-bhāga, as,%} m. a point, direction,
quarter; {%dig-bhāgeṣu,%} loc. pl. in all directions;
[cf. {%dik-pravibhāga%} and {%dig-vibhāga.%}] {%—Dig-%}
{%bhrama, as,%} m. or {%dig-bhramaṇa, am,%} n. a wan-
dering about in every direction. {%—Dig-maṇḍala,%}
see {%diṅ-maṇḍala%}. {%—Dig-lābha, as,%} m. profit or
gain in a distant region. {%—Dig-vastra, as, ā, am,%}
or {%dig-vāsas, ās, ās, as, = dig-ambara%}. {%—Dig-%}
{%vāraṇa, as,%} m. {%= dik-karin%}. {%—Dig-vijaya, as,%} m.
‘the subjugation of various countries in all directions,’
N. of a part of the Mahā-bhārata (Sabhā-parva 983,
describing the victories of the four younger Pāṇḍavas
and the subjugation of all the neighbouring princes
of India under their eldest brother Yudhi-ṣṭhira,
which led to his performance of the Rāja-sūya
sacrifice); N. of a work by Śaṅkarācārya showing
the superiority of the Vedānta over the other systems
of philosophy. {%—Digvijaya-krama, as,%} m. invasion
of various countries, going forth to conquer the
whole world. {%—Dig-vidik-stha, as, ā, am,%} situated
towards the cardinal and intermediate points, encom-
passing. {%—Dig-vidhāna, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of
the Tantra-sāra. {%—Dig-vibhāga, as,%} m. {%= dig-%}
{%bhāga,%} q. v. {%—Dig-vibhāvita, as, ā, am,%} celebrated
or known in all quarters. {%—Dig-vilokana, am,%} n.
looking vacantly towards the sky, gazing vacantly
in the air. {%—Dig-vyāpin, ī, inī, i,%} spreading through
all space or every quarter. {%—Diṅ-nāga, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%dik-karin;%} N. of a Buddhist author; (also read
{%dig-nāga.%}) {%—Diṅ-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the circle of
the quarters of the compass, the horizon, the com-
pass, all regions or quarters; [cf. {%dik-cakra;%} also
read {%dig-m˚.%}] {%—Diṅ-mātaṅga, as,%} m. {%= dik-karin,%}
q. v. {%—Diṅ-mārga, as,%} m. a country road, a road to
a distant country. {%—Diṅ-mukha, as, ī, am,%} facing
any point or quarter; ({%am%}), n. ‘face of the sky,’
any quarter or part of the heavens, ({%diṅ-mukheṣu,%}
loc. pl. in all regions); a place. {%—Diṅ-mūḍha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} confused about the quarters of the compass,
not able to find out the bearings of any place; any-
thing or place about the direction of which one is
doubtful. {%—Diṅ-moha, as,%} m. perplexity about the
quarters of the compass or the exact situation and
bearings of any place, mistaking the way or direction.
{%—Diśo-daṇḍa, as,%} m. ({%diśo%} for {%diśas,%} gen. case),
[Page0415-b+ 78]
‘the staff of a quarter of the sky,’ a particular appear-
ance in the sky; [cf. {%daṇḍa.%}] {%—Diśo-bhāga, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who runs away or takes to his heels.
<LEND>

<L>22397<pc>0415-b<k1>diSa<k2>diSa
{%Diśa, am,%}¦ ind. = 2. {%diś,%} at the end of adv. comp.
(Pāṇ. V. 4, 107).
<LEND>

<L>22398<pc>0415-b<k1>diSas<k2>diSas
{%Diśas, ās,%}¦ f. a region, quarter, &c.; [cf. 2. {%diś.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22399<pc>0415-b<k1>diSA<k2>diSA
{%Diśā,%}¦ f. direction, region, quarter or point of the
compass; N. of a wife of Rudra; [cf. {%antara-d˚%}
and {%avāntara-d˚.%}] {%—Diśā-gaja, as,%} m. {%= dik-ka-%}
{%rin,%} q. v. {%—Diśā-cakṣus, us,%} m. ‘sky-vision,’
N. of a son of Garuḍa. {%—Diśā-pāla, as,%} m. ‘the
guardian of a quarter,’ the elephant of a quarter;
[cf. {%dik-pāla%} and {%dik-karin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22400<pc>0415-b<k1>diSya<k2>diSya
{%Diśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to the
quarters of the sky or to the horizon; situated towards
any particular point, lying in a particular tract or
quarter, bearing in a particular direction or towards a
particular point of the compass [cf. {%pūrva-d˚%}]; N. of a
particular kind of brick used in constructing an altar.
<LEND>

<L>22401<pc>0415-b<k1>dizwa<k2>dizwa
{%Diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ shown, pointed out, appointed,
assigned (e. g. {%diṣṭā gatis,%} ‘the assigned way,’ i. e.
death); delineated, described, referred to; directed,
ordered, prescribed, advised, enjoined; fixed, settled;
resigned to destiny or fate; ({%am%}), n. allotment,
assignment, appointment, decree; assigned place or
portion, fate, destiny, good or ill luck; direction,
order, command, aim, object; ({%as%}), m. time; a
sort of Curcuma [cf. {%dāru-haridrā%}]; N. of one of
the sons of Manu Vaivasvata. {%—Diṣṭānta (˚ṭa-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the appointed end’ or ‘the end of one's
appointed life,’ death, dying.
<LEND>

<L>22402<pc>0415-b<k1>dizwi<k2>dizwi
{%Diṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. pointing out, assigning, allotting,
prescribing, assignment, direction, injunction, instruc-
tion, precept, order, command; auspicious juncture,
good fortune, happiness; a sort of measure of length;
({%ṭyā%}), ind. an expression of joy or congratulation,
thank heaven! how fortunate! mayest thou be
fortunate! hail! I congratulate you! bravo! auspi-
ciously, fortunately, luckily; [cf. {%ku-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22403<pc>0415-b<k1>dizRu<k2>dizRu
{#dizRu#}¦ {%diṣṇu, us, us, u%} (for {%deṣṇu%} fr. rt.
1. {%dā%}), giving, one who gives, a giver, donor.
<LEND>

<L>22404<pc>0415-b<k1>dih<k2>dih<h>1
{#dih#} 1¦. {%dih,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%degdhi, digdhe,%}
{%dideha, didihe, dhekṣyati, -te, adhik-%}
{%ṣat, adhikṣata, adigdha, degdhum,%} to anoint,
smear, plaster, spread over; to soil; pollute, defile;
to increase, augment, accumulate: Caus. {%dehayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%adīdihat:%} Desid. {%didhikṣati, -te,%}
Ved. {%dhīkṣate,%} to wish to anoint or to anoint one's
self: Intens. {%dedihyate, dedegdhi:%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τείχος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τοῖχος, θιγγάνω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>tingere,</nsi> probably <nsi>fingere,</nsi>
<nsi>figulus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>deigan, ga-dikis, daigs;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>díc, deag, tigel, tigul;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>ziagal,</nsi>
<nsi>zehom</nsi> = Caus. {%dehayāmi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22405<pc>0415-b<k1>dih<k2>dih<h>2
2. {%dih, dhik,%}¦ f. smearing, anointing, soiling, pol-
lution.
<LEND>

<L>22406<pc>0415-b<k1>dihlA<k2>dihlA
{#dihlA#}¦ {%dihlā,%} f., N. of a woman; [cf.
{%dilha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22407<pc>0415-b<k1>dI<k2>dI<h>1
{#dI#} 1¦. {%dī%} [cf. rt. {%ḍī%}], cl. 4. P. {%dīyati,%} &c.,
Ved. to poise one's self in the air, soar, fly,
(also used of the motions of deities, especially of the
Aśvins and their vehicle): Intens. {%dedīyate,%} Ved.
inf. of Intens. {%dedīyitavai,%} to hasten or fly away;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δίνω, δινέω;</lang> perhaps <lang n="greek">δίω, δίεμαι.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>22408<pc>0415-b<k1>dI<k2>dI<h>2
{#dI#} 2¦. {%dī%} (an anomalous reduplicated rt.
sometimes given in the form {%dīdī%} or {%dīdi;%}
cf. rt. 1. {%dhī%} and {%dīdhī%}), cl. 3. P. 3rd pl. {%dīdyati,%}
{%adīdet,%} 2nd impv. {%dīdihi%} or {%didīhi, dīdiyus,%}
{%dīdāya, dīdayati, dīdayat,%} Ved. to shine, be
bright (especially used of fire), to shine forth, excel;
to shine upon, bestow by shining; to seem or appear
good or eminent, to please, be admired; [cf. 2. {%div,%}
{%dīp:%} Gr. <lang n="greek">δέαται, δέατο;</lang> perhaps <lang n="greek">δῆλος.</lang>.]
<LEND>

<L>22409<pc>0415-b<k1>dIti<k2>dIti
{%Dīti, is,%}¦ f. splendor, brightness; [cf. {%su-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22410<pc>0415-b<k1>dIdi<k2>dIdi
{%Dīdi, is, is, i,%}¦ or {%dīdī, īs, īs, i,%} shining. {%—Dīdy-%}
{%agnī,%} m. du., Ved. (according to Sāy.) ‘having
bright fires,’ ‘bright with sacrificial fires,’ epithet of
the Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>22411<pc>0415-b<k1>dIditi<k2>dIditi
{%Dīditi, is,%}¦ f. splendor, brightness; [cf. {%su-d˚.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0415-c+ 80]

<L>22412<pc>0415-c<k1>dIdivi<k2>dIdivi
{%Dīdivi, is, is, i%}¦ (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%div%}), shining;
risen, ascended (as a star); ({%is%}), m. epithet of Agni;
of Bṛhas-pati, the planet Jupiter; heaven [cf. {%di-%}
{%divi%}]; ({%is, i%}), m. n. or ({%is, is%}), m. f. boiled rice,
food; final emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>22413<pc>0415-c<k1>dI<k2>dI<h>3
{#dI#} 3¦. {%dī,%} cl. 4. A. {%dīyate, didīye, dāsyate,%}
{%adāsta, dātum,%} to decay, waste away, be
ruined; to waste, diminish: Caus. {%dāpayati, -yitum:%}
Desid. {%didīṣate, didāsate.%}
<LEND>

<L>22414<pc>0415-c<k1>dI<k2>dI<h>4
4. {%dī, īs,%}¦ f. decay, ruin, wasting, destruction. {%—Dī-%}
{%da, as, ā, am,%} causing destruction, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>22415<pc>0415-c<k1>dIna<k2>dIna
{%Dīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ scarce, scanty (Ved.); poor,
indigent, needy, afflicted, distressed, ruined, mise-
rable, wretched, dejected, downcast, melancholy;
frightened, afraid, timid [cf. {%pari-d˚%}]; ({%am%}), n.
distress, wretchedness [cf. {%dainya%}]; the plant Ta-
bernæmontana Coronaria; ({%am%}), ind. miserably;
({%ā%}), f. the female of a mouse or shrew. {%—Dīna-%}
{%cetana, as, ā, am,%} ‘distressed or dejected in mind,’
distressed, dejected. {%—Dīna-tā,%} f. scarcity, rarity
(Ved.); wretchedness, distress, weakness. {%—Dīna-%}
{%dakṣa, as, ā, am,%} of weak understanding. {%—Dīna-%}
{%dāsa, as,%} m. a name applied to a Śūdra. {%—Dīna-%}
{%dhī, īs, īs, i,%} ‘having melancholy thoughts,’ de-
jected, helpless. {%—Dīna-manas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%dīna-%}
{%mānasa, as, ā, am,%} ‘afflicted in mind,’ distressed,
dejected, downcast. {%—Dīna-mukha, as, ī, am,%} ‘hav-
ing a dejected countenance,’ of melancholy aspect.
{%—Dīna-locana, as,%} m. a cat. {%—Dīna-vatsala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} kind to the poor. {%—Dīna-vadana = dīna-mukha.%}
{%—Dīna-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} ‘having a bad colour,’
discoloured. {%—Dīnānukampana (˚na-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘compassionating the poor,’ kind to the poor.
<LEND>

<L>22416<pc>0415-c<k1>dInaka<k2>dInaka
{%Dīnaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ wretched, distressed; ({%am%}),
ind. in a wretched manner, miserably.
<LEND>

<L>22417<pc>0415-c<k1>dIkz<k2>dIkz
{#dIkz#}¦ {%dīkṣ%} (a rt. formed fr. the Desid.
of rt. {%dakṣ,%} and signifying originally
‘to wish to make one's self fit or competent’), cl. 1.
A. {%dīkṣate, didīkṣe, dīkṣiṣyate, dīkṣitum,%}
to prepare or consecrate one's self for the perform-
ance of a sacred rite, especially of the Soma offering;
to dedicate one's self; to sacrifice, perform a sacrifice;
to shave one's head, to be shaved; to introduce or
initiate a pupil, invest with the sacred thread; to
instruct in the rules or principles of religious observ-
ances; to practise self-restraint, to announce the
performance of a vow: Caus. {%dīkṣayati%} or {%dīkṣā-%}
{%payati,%} &c., to prepare, make ready, consecrate,
initiate; to determine: Desid. {%didīkṣiṣate.%}
<LEND>

<L>22418<pc>0415-c<k1>dIkzaka<k2>dIkzaka
{%Dīkṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a priest, a spiritual guide.
<LEND>

<L>22419<pc>0415-c<k1>dIkzaRa<k2>dIkzaRa
{%Dīkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. preparing or consecrating one's
self, consecration; initiating; causing one's self to be
consecrated.
<LEND>

<L>22420<pc>0415-c<k1>dIkzaRIya<k2>dIkzaRIya
{%Dīkṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be consecrated or
initiated; (fr. {%dīkṣaṇa%}) relating or belonging to
Dīkṣaṇa or initiation, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. a particular rite
or sacrifice, that preceded by the Dīkṣā; [cf. {%dīk-%}
{%ṣaṇīyeṣṭi%} and {%adhvara-dīkṣaṇīyā.%}] {%—Dīkṣa-%}
{%ṇīyeṣṭi (˚ya-iṣ˚), is,%} f. the sacrifice of consecration
or initiation, {%= dīkṣaṇīyā.%}
<LEND>

<L>22421<pc>0415-c<k1>dIkzayitf<k2>dIkzayitf
{%Dīkṣayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ consecrating, a conse-
crator, one who initiates.
<LEND>

<L>22422<pc>0415-c<k1>dIkzA<k2>dIkzA
{%Dīkṣā,%}¦ f. preparation or consecration for a reli-
gious ceremony; a ceremony preliminary to a sacrifice,
initiation, dedication; receiving the initiatory Mantra;
undertaking religious observances for the attainment
of a certain object, religious rites for a special purpose;
sacrificing, offering oblations, dedicating one's self to
a particular object (as to battle) or to a person (as to
a god), self-devotion; Initiation personified as the
wife of Soma or of Rudra Ugra (one of the eight
manifestations of Rudra) or of Rudra Vāma-deva.
{%—Dīkṣā-krama-ratna, am,%} n. ‘the jewel of the
regular order of initiation,’ N. of a work treating of
initiation. {%—Dīkṣā-tattva, am,%} n. ‘the essence of
initiation,’ N. of another work on consecration or
initiation. {%—Dīkṣānta (˚ṣā-an˚), as,%} m. ‘the end
of a Dīkṣā,’ {%= ava-bhṛtha,%} a supplementary sacri-
fice made to atone for any defects in a preceding
one. {%—Dīkṣā-pati, is,%} m., Ved. ‘the lord of
[Page0416-a+ 75]
consecration,’ i. e. the Soma. {%—Dīkṣā-pāla, as,%}
m., Ved. ‘guardian of initiation,’ epithet of Agni
and Viṣṇu. {%—Dīkṣā-phala, am,%} n. ‘the fruit of
initiation,’ N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva.
{%—Dīkṣā-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting in initiation.
<LEND>

<L>22423<pc>0416-a<k1>dIkzita<k2>dIkzita
{%Dīkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ initiated, consecrated; pre-
pared for a sacrifice; one who has received initiation
or by whom the preparatory ceremonies have been
observed; performed (as the Dīkṣā ceremony);
prepared for, made ready for, ready, &c.; {%dīkṣitaṃ%}
{%kṛ,%} to initiate a person, instruct any one in rules or
principles; ({%as%}), m. a priest engaged in a Dīkṣā or
in a particular sacrifice; a pupil, (often at the end of
a name, especially of a Brāhman, after the name of
another person, to denote his initiation by that person
or his being a pupil of that person, e. g. {%bhaṭṭoji-d˚,%}
{%bhānujī-d˚, apyaya-d˚,%} &c., and the preceding
name is sometimes omitted, leaving Dīkṣita to
stand alone.) {%—Dīkṣita-vasana, am,%} n., Ved. the
garment of an initiated person. {%—Dīkṣita-vimita,%}
{%am,%} n. a temporary dwelling erected for a person about
to be initiated; [cf. {%prācīna-vaṃśa.%}] {%—Dīkṣita-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n. the vow of an initiated person.
<LEND>

<L>22424<pc>0416-a<k1>dIkzitAyanI<k2>dIkzitAyanI
{%Dīkṣitāyanī,%}¦ f., N. of the wife of Dīkṣita
Yajña-datta.
<LEND>

<L>22425<pc>0416-a<k1>dIkzitf<k2>dIkzitf
{%Dīkṣitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a consecrator, a spiritual father,
one who initiates, the communicator of the initiatory
Mantra or prayer.
<LEND>

<L>22426<pc>0416-a<k1>dIkzin<k2>dIkzin
{%Dīkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) being
initiated, one who has been initiated; [cf. {%gaṇa-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22427<pc>0416-a<k1>dIdI<k2>dIdI
{#dIdI#}¦ {%dīdī%} or {%dīdi.%} See rt. 2. {%dī,%} p. 415.
<LEND>

<L>22428<pc>0416-a<k1>dIDI<k2>dIDI<h>1
{#dIDI#} 1¦. {%dīdhī%} (connected with rt. 2.
{%dī%}), cl. 2. A. {%dīdhīte%} (3rd pl. {%dīdhyate%}),
&c., Caus. {%dīdhayati,%} &c., to shine, to be bright, to
seem, appear.
<LEND>

<L>22429<pc>0416-a<k1>dIDiti<k2>dIDiti<h>1
1. {%dīdhiti, is,%}¦ f. brightness, splendor, light; a
ray [cf. {%amṛta-d˚%}]; a finger, (connected by Vedic
commentators with rt. 1. {%dhā%} or 3. {%dhī%}); N. of
a commentary on the Tattva-cintā-maṇi by Śiro-
maṇi treating of the Nyāya doctrines. {%—Dīdhiti-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} having splendor, shining, brilliant;
({%ān%}), m. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>22430<pc>0416-a<k1>dIDyAna<k2>dIDyAna
{%Dīdhyāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>22431<pc>0416-a<k1>dIDI<k2>dIDI<h>2
{#dIDI#} 2¦. {%dīdhī%} (a reduplicated form of
1. {%dhī%} and connected with rt. {%dhyai%}),
cl. 2. A. {%dīdhīte,%} &c., to perceive, think, reflect upon,
be intent upon; wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>22432<pc>0416-a<k1>dIDiti<k2>dIDiti<h>2
2. {%dīdhiti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. religious reflection, devo-
tion; divine inspiration; prayer; religious rites;
(Sāy.) a son-in-law ({%= dhartṛ, jāmātṛ,%} connected
with 1. {%dhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>22433<pc>0416-a<k1>dIna<k2>dIna
{#dIna#}¦ {%dīna, as, ā, am,%} See p. 415, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>22434<pc>0416-a<k1>dInAra<k2>dInAra
{#dInAra#}¦ {%dīnāra, as,%} m. (fr. the Gr. <lang n="greek">δηνάριον,</lang>
{%= denarius,%} said to be fr. rt. 3. {%dī%}), a coin, a
gold coin; a weight of gold (variously stated as 2
Kāṣṭhas, 1 Pala of 32 Rettis or the large Pala of
108 Su-varṇas); a gold ornament; a seal.
<LEND>

<L>22435<pc>0416-a<k1>dIp<k2>dIp
{#dIp#}¦ {%dīp,%} cl. 4. A. (ep. also P.) {%dīpyate,%}
{%-ti, didīpe, dīpiṣyate, adīpi%} or {%adī-%}
{%piṣṭa, dīpitum,%} to blaze, burn with a bright flame,
shine, be bright or luminous; to burn, glow, be in-
flamed or excited (as with anger); to be illustrious:
Caus. {%dīpayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%adidīpat%} or {%adī-%}
{%dipat,%} to kindle, set on fire, inflame; illuminate,
irradiate, make bright, make illustrious; excite, raise:
Desid. {%didīpiṣate:%} Intens. {%dedīpyate, dedīpti,%} to
be very bright, to shine intensely; to blaze fiercely,
be all on fire or in flames; [cf. {%tap, div,%} 2. {%dī,%} 1.
{%dīdhī;%} Lith. <nsi>źibbu,</nsi> ‘to shine;’ Lat. <nsi>limpidus?</nsi>].
<LEND>

<L>22436<pc>0416-a<k1>dIpa<k2>dIpa
{%Dīpa, as,%}¦ m. a light, lamp, lantern; [cf. {%jagad-d˚.%}]
{%—Dīpa-kiṭṭa, am,%} n. ‘the sediment of a lamp,’
lamp-black, soot. {%—Dīpa-kūpī,%} f. ‘lamp-well,’ the
wick of a lamp. {%—Dīpa-khaṭvā,%} f. a bedstead upon
which the sun shines, (perhaps for {%dīpta-kh˚.%}) {%—Dīpa-%}
{%kharī,%} f. the wick of a lamp. {%—Dīpaṅ-kara, as,%}
[Page0416-b+ 81]
m. ‘light-maker,’ N. of a Buddha. {%—Dīpaṅkara-%}
{%jñāna, as,%} m. ‘having the knowledge of a Buddha,’
N. of a man. {%—Dīpa-dāna, am,%} n. ‘giving light,’
N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dīpa-%}
{%dāna-vidhi, is,%} m., N. of the 115th chapter of the
Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa or second part of the Bha-
viṣya-Purāṇa. {%—Dīpa-dhvaja, as, am,%} m. n. ‘lamp-
sign,’ lamp-black, the condensed smoke or soot of a
lamp. {%—Dīpa-nirvāṇa-gandha, as,%} m. the smell of
an extinguished lamp. {%—Dīpa-pādapa, as,%} m. ‘a
lamp-tree,’ a candlestick, lamp-stand; [cf. {%dīpa-%}
{%vṛkṣa.%}] {%—Dīpa-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘lamp-flower,’ N.
of the plant Michelia Champaka {%(= campaka).%}
{%—Dīpa-bhājana, am,%} n. ‘vessel of light,’ a lamp.
{%—Dīpa-mālā,%} f. a row of lamps; an illumination;
[cf. {%dīpālī%} and {%dīpāvali.%}] {%—Dīpamālikotsava%}
{%(˚ka-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘the feast of illumination,’ N. of
the 125th chapter of the Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa;
[cf. {%dīpālī.%}] {%—Dīpa-māhātmya, am,%} n. ‘the glory
of the Dīpa,’ N. of a chapter of the Bhaviṣya-
Purāṇa. {%—Dīpa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} ‘containing lights,’
illuminating, making bright; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a river
in Kāmākhyā. {%—Dīpa-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. ‘lamp-tree,’
the stand or stem of a lamp, a candlestick; a light;
a lantern; Pinus Longifolia or Deodora {%(= deva-%}
{%dāru)%}. {%—Dīpa-śatru, us,%} m. ‘the enemy of a
lamp,’ a moth. {%—Dīpa-śikhā,%} f. the flame of a
lamp; lamp-black (especially as used for darkening
the eyelashes, &c.). {%—Dīpa-śṛṅkhalā,%} f. a row or
string of lamps. {%—Dīpānvita (˚pa-an˚), ā,%} f., scil.
{%tithi,%} ‘furnished with lamps,’ N. of the Dīwālī
festival; (see the next.) {%—Dīpārādhana (˚pa-ār˚),%}
{%am,%} n. worshipping an idol by waving a light before
it. {%—Dīpālī (˚pa-ālī),%} f. ‘a row of lamps,’ the day
of new moon in the month Āśvina or Kārttika
(September-October), on which day there is a fes-
tival with nocturnal illuminations in honour of
Kārttikeya; (this festival or feast of lights is com-
monly called Dīwālī.) {%—Dīpāvali (˚pa-āv˚), is,%} f.
‘a row of lamps,’ a nocturnal illumination, the
Dīwālī festival; (see the preceding.) {%—Dīpotsava%}
{%(˚pa-ut˚), as,%} m. the festival of lights; (see the
preceding.)
<LEND>

<L>22437<pc>0416-b<k1>dIpaka<k2>dIpaka
{%Dīpaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} kindling, inflaming;
illuminating, making bright or luminous, illustrating,
beautifying, making illustrious; exciting, rendering
intense (as a feeling &c.); stimulating, tonic, exciting
appetite, digestive; skilful in managing a lamp; ({%as%}),
m. a light, lamp; N. of two plants promoting diges-
tion, Ptychotis Ajowan ({%= yavānī%}) and Celosia
Cristata [cf. {%dīpya%}]; a bird of prey, falcon; N. of a
Rāga; an epithet of Kāma (‘the inflamer’); N. of
a son of Garuḍa; of a man; of a poet; ({%ikā%}), f.
a light, lamp, lantern; moonlight; the plant Pty-
chotis Ajowan; the root of Calmus; N. of one of
the Rāgiṇīs or female personifications of the musical
modes; ‘the illustrator,’ in which sense often at the
end of the titles of books, see {%gūḍhārtha-d˚, trai-%}
{%lokya-d˚; (am),%} n. saffron; a figure of rhetoric
(dilating upon an idea or accumulating expressions
to strengthen it; various kinds of this figure are
given, as {%kāraka-dīpaka, mālā-dīpaka,%} &c.); a
kind of metre containing 4 × 10 syllabic instants.
{%—Dīpikā-taila, am,%} n. the oil of the plant Pty-
chotis Ajowan. {%—Dīpikā-prakāśa, as,%} m. (also
called Nīla-kaṇṭhī), ‘the illuminator of the illustra-
tor,’ N. of a commentary on the Tarka-dīpikā by
Nīla-kaṇṭha. {%—Dīpikā-vivaraṇa, am,%} n. ‘explana-
tion of the Dīpikā,’ N. of a lost commentary on the
Pūrva-mīmāṃsārtha-saṅgraha by Nṛ-siṃha.
<LEND>

<L>22438<pc>0416-b<k1>dIpana<k2>dIpana
{%Dīpana, as, ī, am,%}¦ kindling, inflaming, setting on
fire, burning, causing light or heat; digestive, tonic,
stimulating [cf. {%agni-d˚%} and {%anala-d˚%}]; N. of
several plants with digestive properties, {%= mayūra-%}
{%śikhā, = śāliñca-śāka;%} Cassia Sophora ({%= kāsa-%}
{%marda%}); an onion; ({%ī%}), f., N. of several plants, =
Ptychotis Ajowan, {%= pāṭhā, = methikā;%} N. of a
chapter of the Tantra-sāra or of a mystical formula
therein described; ({%am%}), n. the act of kindling or
setting on fire, inflaming; lighting, illuminating,
making bright [cf. {%tattva-d˚%}]; kindling the digestive
[Page0416-c+ 81]
fire, promoting digestion; a digestive, stimulant,
tonic; saffron; the root of the plant Tabernæmontana
Coronaria.
<LEND>

<L>22439<pc>0416-c<k1>dIpanIya<k2>dIpanIya
{%Dīpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be lighted or set on
fire; inflammable; to be excited or stimulated; relat-
ing to tonic medicines, serving to promote digestion;
({%as%}), m. an aromatic seed, Ptychotis Ajowan; ({%am%}),
n. a stimulating drug, a digestive.
<LEND>

<L>22440<pc>0416-c<k1>dIpayat<k2>dIpayat
{%Dīpayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ setting on fire, inflaming;
illuminating.
<LEND>

<L>22441<pc>0416-c<k1>dIpita<k2>dIpita
{%Dīpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set on fire, inflamed; excited;
illuminated, irradiated; manifested.
<LEND>

<L>22442<pc>0416-c<k1>dIpitf<k2>dIpitf
{%Dīpitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an illuminator, enlightener;
irradiating, shining.
<LEND>

<L>22443<pc>0416-c<k1>dIpin<k2>dIpin
{%Dīpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ kindling, setting on fire, inflam-
ing; illuminating, shining.
<LEND>

<L>22444<pc>0416-c<k1>dIpta<k2>dIpta
{%Dīpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ blazing, flaming, being in
flames, flashing, radiant, illuminated, luminous, bright,
glittering; glowing, hot; burning, burnt; (as a term
of augury) irradiated by the sun, exposed to the
glare of sunshine, (this is considered inauspicious, the
opposite expression being {%śānta,%} q. v.); situated on
the inauspicious side, inauspicious in general; clear,
shrill ? (opposed to {%pūrṇa,%} q. v., as a term of augury);
({%as%}), m. a lion (from its bright colour); a lime, a
citron tree (from its golden colour); a particular
disease, inflammation of the nose; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
several plants with bright red flowers, Methonica
Superba, Cardiospermum Halicacabum {%(= jyotiṣ-%}
{%matī), = sātalā;%} red arsenic; ({%am%}), n. Asa Fœtida;
gold. {%—Dīpta-kiraṇa, as, ā, am,%} ‘having glowing
rays,’ epithet of the Sun. {%—Dīpta-kīrtti, is,%} m. ‘of
splendid renown,’ epithet of Skanda. {%—Dīpta-ketu,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘bright-bannered,’ N. of a king; of a son
of Manu Dakṣasāvarṇi. {%—Dīpta-jihvā,%} f. ‘red-
tongued,’ a fox. {%—Dīpta-tapas, ās, ās, as,%} fervent
in devotion, of glowing piety. {%—Dīpta-tejas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} brilliant or radiant with glory. {%—Dīpta-piṅgala,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘bright and yellowish,’ a lion. {%—Dīpta-%}
{%puṣpā,%} f. ‘having bright flowers,’ the plant Tragia
Involucrata (the flowers of which are of a bright
greenish colour). {%—Dīpta-rasa, as,%} m. ‘having a
yellow liquid,’ an earth-worm. {%—Dīpta-roman, ā,%}
m. ‘red-haired,’ N. of one of the Viśve-Devās.
{%—Dīpta-locana, as,%} m. ‘bright-eyed,’ ‘having
glittering eyes,’ a cat. {%—Dīpta-loha, as,%} m. ‘the
shining metal,’ brass, bell-metal. {%—Dīpta-varṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘red-coloured,’ epithet of Skanda. {%—Dīpta-%}
{%śakti, is,%} m. ‘having a glittering spear,’ epithet of
Skanda. {%—Dīptāṃśu (˚ta-aṃ˚), us, us, u,%} having
burning rays; ({%us%}), m. the sun. {%—Dīptākṣa (˚ta-%}
{%ak˚), as, ī, am,%} having glittering eyes, bright-eyed;
({%as%}), m. a cat; a peacock; N. of a minister of the
king of the owls, Ari-mardana; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people. {%—Dīptāgni (˚ta-ag˚), is,%} m. blazing fire;
({%is, is, i%}), set on fire, kindled (as fire); having the
gastric fire well kindled, i. e. digesting well; ({%is%}),
m. an epithet of Agastya; [cf. {%dahrāgni%} and
{%satyāgni.%}] {%—Dīptāgni-tā,%} f. goodness of digestion;
[cf. the preceding.] {%—Dīptāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
‘having a brilliant body,’ a peacock. {%—Dīptātman%}
{%(˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having a flaming or fiery nature.
{%—Dīptānala-dyuti (˚ta-an˚), is, is, i,%} having the
brilliancy of glowing fire. {%—Dīptoda (˚ta-uda), am,%}
n. ‘having brilliant water,’ N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Dīpto-%}
{%pala (˚ta-up˚), as,%} m. ‘the flaming stone,’ the sun
gem ({%= sūrya-kānta%}); a crystalline lens. {%—Dīp-%}
{%taujas (˚ta-oj˚), ās, ās, as,%} glowing with energy.
<LEND>

<L>22445<pc>0416-c<k1>dIptaka<k2>dIptaka
{%Dīptaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of disease of the nose
[cf. {%dīpta%}]; ({%am%}), n. gold.
<LEND>

<L>22446<pc>0416-c<k1>dIpti<k2>dIpti
{%Dīpti, is,%}¦ f. brightness, brilliancy, splendor, light,
glow, lustre; clearness, brilliancy of beauty (in a
woman), extreme loveliness; the flash-like flight of an
arrow; lac; brass, bell-metal; ({%is%}), m. (?), N. of one
of the Viśve-Devās. {%—Dīpti-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%}
irradiating, illuminating. {%—Dīpti-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
having brightness, splendid, brilliant, lustrous, radiant,
shining, blazing, flaming; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a son of
Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>22447<pc>0416-c<k1>dIptika<k2>dIptika
{%Dīptika, as,%}¦ m. a species of plant; [cf. {%dugdha-%}
{%paṣāṇa.%}] {%—Dīptikeśvara-tīrtha%} ({%˚ka%} or {%˚kā-īś˚%}),
[Page0417-a+ 80]
{%am,%} n. ‘the Tīrtha of the lord of Dīptika or Dīpti-
kā (?),’ N. of a Tīrtha mentioned in the Śiva-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>22448<pc>0417-a<k1>dIpya<k2>dIpya
{%Dīpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be kindled or inflamed,
inflammable; to be stimulated; promoting digestion,
digestive; ({%as%}), m. the plants Celosia Cristata, Pty-
chotis Ajowan; cumin-seed; ({%am%}), n. white cumin-
seed.
<LEND>

<L>22449<pc>0417-a<k1>dIpyaka<k2>dIpyaka
{%Dīpyaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (?), N. of several plants,
cumin, Ptychotis Ajowan, Celosia Cristata, Apium
Involucratum; ({%as%}), m. a figure of rhetoric; [cf.
{%dīpaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22450<pc>0417-a<k1>dIpyamAna<k2>dIpyamAna
{%Dīpyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, blazing, glow-
ing, radiant.
<LEND>

<L>22451<pc>0417-a<k1>dIpra<k2>dIpra
{%Dīpra, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, brilliant, radiant,
luminous, irradiating; ({%as%}), m. fire. {%—Dīprāstra-%}
{%dhara (˚ra-as˚), as, ā, am,%} armed with shining
weapons, well accoutred.
<LEND>

<L>22452<pc>0417-a<k1>dIrGa<k2>dIrGa
{#dIrGa#}¦ {%dīrgha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dṛh,%} origin-
ally {%dargh;%} compar. {%drāghīyas%} or {%dīrgha-tara;%}
superl. {%drāghiṣṭha%} or {%dīrgha-tama%}), long (as
space or time), reaching far, lasting long; long (as
the quantity of a vowel); lofty, high, tall; deep;
({%as%}), m. a long vowel; a camel; N. of several plants,
= Saccharum Sara ({%= śara%}) or a similar kind of
grass {%(= utkaṭa), = rāma-śara;%} Shorea Robusta
({%= latā-śāla%}); the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth
sign of the zodiac; a mystical N. of the letter {%a;%}
N. of a prince of Magadha; ({%ā%}), f. a long lake or
oblong tank [cf. {%dīrghikā%}]; a plant related to the
Hemionitis Cordifolia ({%= dīrgha-pattrā%}); a mystical
N. of the letter {%n; (am),%} n., N. of a Sāman; ({%am%}),
ind. for a long time, long; far; deeply; [cf. Zend
<nsi>darĕgha:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">δολιχός, ἐν-δελεχής:</lang> Russ. <nsi>dolog,</nsi>
‘long;’ <nsi>dolga = dīrghā:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>ilga-s, d</nsi> being
dropped; <nsi>isz-drykens, isz-dryke†lis,</nsi> ‘grown long:’
perhaps Lat. <nsi>longus;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>lang.</nsi>] {%—Dīrgha-kaṇā,%}
f. white cumin. {%—Dīrgha-kaṇṭaka%} or {%dīrgha-%}
{%kaṇṭa, as,%} m. ‘long-thorned,’ N. of a plant {%(=%}
{%varvūra)%}. {%—Dīrgha-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. ‘long-necked,’
N. of a Dānava; (variously read {%dīrgha-bāhu.%})
{%—Dīrghakaṇṭhaka, as,%} m. ‘long-necked,’ a sort
of crane, the Vaka, Ardea Nivea. {%—Dīrgha-kan-%}
{%daka, am,%} n. ‘having long bulbs,’ a kind of radish
{%(= mūlaka); (ikā),%} f. Curculigo Orchioides {%(=%}
{%muṣalī)%}. {%—Dīrgha-kandhara, as,%} m. ‘long-
necked,’ a sort of crane, Ardea Nivea. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%karṇa, as,%} m. ‘long-ear,’ N. of a cat. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%kāṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘having long joints,’ N. of a kind of
grass, Scirpus Kysoor {%(= kaśeru); (ā),%} f. a para-
sitical plant {%(= pātāla-garudī)%}. {%—Dīrgha-kāya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a long body, tall. {%—Dīrgha-kāla,%}
{%am,%} n. a long time, a long period. {%—Dīrghakāla-%}
{%jīvin, ī, inī, i,%} long-lived. {%—Dīrgha-kāṣṭha, am,%}
n. a long piece of timber, a spar, a beam. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%kīla, as,%} m. or {%dīrghakīlaka, as,%} m. ‘having a
long stem,’ the tree Alangium Hexapetalum {%(=%}
{%aṅkoṭa)%}. {%—Dīrgha-kūraka, am,%} n. ‘long rice,’ a
kind of rice {%(= rājānna)%}. {%—Dīrgha-keśa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} long-haired; ({%as%}), m. a bear; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people to the north-east of Madhya-deśa.
{%—Dīrgha-kośā%} or {%dīrgha-koṣī%} or {%dīrgha-koṣikā%}
or {%dīrgha-kośikā,%} f. a kind of muscle shell, a cockle.
{%—Dīrgha-gati, is,%} m. ‘making long journeys,’ a
camel. {%—Dīrgha-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going far, flying
far (as an arrow). {%—Dīrgha-granthi, is,%} m. ‘having
long knots or joints,’ Scindapsus Officinalis {%(= gaja-%}
{%pippalī)%}. {%—Dīrgha-grīva, as, ā, am,%} long-necked;
({%as%}), m. a camel; a kind of curlew {%(= nīla-krauñca);%}
{%(ās),%} m. pl., N. of a people in the north-east of
Madhya-deśa. {%—Dīrgha-ghāṭika, as,%} m. ‘long-
necked,’ a camel. {%—Dīrgha-cañcu, us,%} m. ‘long-
beaked,’ a kind of bird, = Marāṭhī <nsi>rukhauḍā</nsi>;
[cf. {%dīrgha-śira.%}] {%—Dīrgha-caturaśra, as, ā, am,%}
shaped like an oblong square or parallelogram.
{%—Dīrgha-cchada, as, ā, am,%} long-leaved; ({%as%}),
m. the tree Tectona Grandis; sugar-cane. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%jaṅgala, as,%} m. a kind of fish (commonly {%bhaṅ-%}
{%gāna%}). {%—Dīrgha-jaṅgha, as, ā, am,%} long-legged,
spindle-shanked; ({%as%}), m. a camel; a crane, Ardea
Nivea; N. of a Yakṣa. {%—Dīrgha-jānuka, as,%} m.
[Page0417-b+ 81]
‘long-kneed,’ Ardea Sibirica. {%—Dīrgha-jihva, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} long-tongued; ({%as%}), m. a snake; N. of a
Dānava; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a Rākṣasī; one of the
Mātṛs attending on Skanda; ({%ī%}), f., Ved., N. of an
evil spirit. {%—Dīrgha-jihvya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. long-
tongued. {%—Dīrgha-jīva, as,%} m. long life. {%—Dīr-%}
{%ghajīvi-tā,%} f. longevity. {%—Dīrgha-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%}
long-lived, living long. {%—Dīrgha-tanu, us, vī, u,%}
‘having a long body,’ tall, long; ({%vī%}), f. ‘long and
narrow,’ N. of a plant. {%—Dīrgha-tantu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. forming a long thread or row. {%—Dīrghatapa-%}
{%ākhyāna, am,%} n. ‘the story of the long penance,’ N.
of a chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Dīrghatapaḥ-%}
{%svarga-gamana, am,%} n. ‘going to heaven by long
penance,’ N. of a chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Dīr-%}
{%gha-tapas, ās, ās, as,%} performing long penances;
({%ās%}), m., N. of a son of Kāśya and grandfather or
father of Dhanvantari; also of a Muni in Kāmpilya,
epithet of the sage Gautama. {%—Dīrgha-tama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} the longest, farthest; ({%am%}), ind. for the longest
time. {%—Dīrgha-tamas, ās,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi with
the patronymic Aucathya and metronymic Māma-
teya, author of some hymns of the Ṛg-veda; (he
was the father of Kakṣī-vat, and was born blind
through a curse pronounced on him by Bṛhas-pati;
in some Purāṇas he is described as the father of
Dhanvantari, and has by Su-deṣṇā, wife of Bali, five
sons, viz. Aṅga, Baṅga, Kaliṅga, Puṇḍra, and
Suhma); {%dīrghatamaso'rkaḥ%} or {%vratam,%} N. of a
Sāman; ({%asas%}), m. pl. the descendants of Dīrgha-
tamas; [cf. {%dīrgha-tapas%} and {%dairghatamasa.%}]
{%—Dīrgha-tara, as, ā, am,%} longer, farther. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%taru, us,%} m. ‘the high tree,’ the Tāl or palm tree.
{%—Dīrgha-tā,%} f. or {%dīrgha-tva, am,%} n. length,
longness. {%—Dīrgha-timiṣā,%} f. a kind of cucumber,
Cucumis Utilissimus; [cf. {%timiṣa.%}] {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%tuṇḍā,%} f. ‘long-snouted,’ the musk-rat. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%tṛṇa, as,%} m. ‘long grass,’ a species of grass {%(=%}
{%pallivāha)%}. {%—Dīrgha-daṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘having a long
stem,’ the palm tree; the castor-oil tree, Ricinus Com-
munis; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of small shrub {%(= go-rakṣī).%}
{%—Dīrghadaṇḍaka, as,%} m. {%= dīrgha-daṇḍa,%} Ri-
cinus Communis. {%—Dīrghadarśi-tā,%} f. or {%dīrgha-%}
{%darśi-tva, am,%} n. the faculty of seeing far, long-
sightedness, far-sightedness, providence. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%darśin, ī, inī, i,%} far-seeing, long-sighted, fore-cast-
ing, provident, sagacious, wise; ({%ī%}), m. a bear; a
vulture; N. of a monkey; [cf. {%dūra-darśin.%}]
{%—Dīrghadarśi-vas, vān,%} m. a far-seeing man, one
who is long-sighted. {%—Dīrgha-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%}
far-seeing, far-sighted, provident, shrewd, deep; ({%is%}),
m. a sagacious or penetrating man. {%—Dīrgha-dru,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘the high tree,’ the palm tree. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. ‘lofty-tree,’ Bombax Heptaphyllum
{%(= śālmali)%}. {%—Dīrgha-dveṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} cherish-
ing long hatred or an old grudge, implacable. {%—Dīr-%}
{%gha-nakha, as, ā, am,%} having long nails; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the tree Diospyros
Embryopteris. {%—Dīrgha-nāda, as, ā, am,%} ‘long-
sounding,’ sounding or crying to a long distance,
making a long-continued noise; ({%as%}), m. a dog;
a cock; a conch-shell. {%—Dīrgha-nāla, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing a long stalk,’ N. of several kinds of grass, {%=%}
{%vṛtta-guṇḍa%} and {%yāvanāla; (am),%} n. {%= dīrgha-%}
{%rohiṣaka%}. {%—Dīrgha-nidrā,%} f. long sleep; death.
{%—Dīrgha-niśvasya,%} ind. sighing or having sighed
deeply, having fetched a long drawn breath. {%—Dīr-%}
{%gha-niśvāsa, as,%} m. a long or deep drawn breath,
a sigh. {%—Dīrgha-nītha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Dīrgha-pakṣa, as,%} m. ‘long-winged,’ the fork-
tailed shrike. {%—Dīrgha-paṭolikā,%} f. a kind of cucur-
bitaceous plant (‘having a long fruit’). {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%pattra, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} long-leaved; ({%as%}), m. a kind
of sugar-cane; the palm tree, {%= rāja-palāṇḍu, =%}
{%viṣṇu-kanda, = hari-darbha, = kundara, = ku-%}
{%pīlu; (ā),%} f. a kind of plant related to the Hemio-
nitis Cordifolia, {%= hrasva-jambu, = gandha-pattrā;%}
Pandanus Odoratissimus, {%= ḍoḍī; (ī),%} f. {%= palāśī,%}
{%= mahā-cañcu%}. {%—Dīrghapattraka, as,%} m., N. of
several plants, = a kind of sugar-cane, a kind of garlic
({%= rakta-lasuna%}); Ricinus Communis, Barringtonia
[Page0417-c+ 81]
Acutangula ({%= hijjala%}); a kind of reed {%(= vetasa),%}
{%= karīra,%} Capparis Aphylla, {%= jalaja-madhūka;%}
{%(ikā),%} f. Desmodium Gangeticum ({%= śāla-parṇī%});
Aloe Indica {%(= ghṛta-kumārī), = palāśī%}. {%—Dīr-%}
{%gha-pad%} or {%dīrgha-pād, -pāt, -padī, -pat,%} long-
footed, long-legged; ({%t%}), m. a heron. {%—Dīrgha-parṇa,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} long-leaved; ({%ī%}), f. a species of plant re-
lated to the Hemionitis Cordifolia. {%—Dīrgha-parvan,%}
{%ā,%} m. ‘having long knots or joints,’ sugar-cane. {%—Dīr-%}
{%gha-pallava, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having long shoots
or tendrils; ({%as%}), m. Crotolaria Juncea {%(= śaṇa).%}
{%—Dīrgha-pavana, as, ā, am,%} long-winded; ({%as%}),
m. an elephant; [cf. {%dīrgha-māruta.%}] {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%pāṭha, as,%} m. ‘the long reading,’ a peculiar manner
of reading or writing the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā in which
the letters are often doubled. {%—Dīrgha-pāda, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} long-footed, long-legged; ({%as%}), m. a heron; [cf.
{%dīrgha-pad.%}] {%—Dīrgha-pādapa, as,%} m. ‘the lofty
tree,’ the cocoa-nut tree; the areca-nut tree. {%—Dīr-%}
{%gha-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} long-backed; ({%as%}), m.
a snake. {%—Dīrgha-prajña, as, ā, am,%} having a
far-seeing mind; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%prayajyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. persevering in offerings
and sacrifices; ({%ū%}), m. du. epithet of Viṣṇu-Varuṇa
as receiving constant offerings. {%—Dīrgha-prayatna,%}
{%as,%} m. persevering effort. {%—Dīrgha-prasadman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} Ved. inhabiting an extensive district; (Sāy.)
having extensive sacrificial halls, epithet of the earth.
{%—Dīrgha-phala, as, ā, am,%} having long fruit;
({%as%}), m., N. of several plants, Cathartocarpus (Cassia)
Fistula; Butea Frondosa; Asclepias Gigantea; ({%ā%}),
f. {%= jatukā,%} a vine with reddish grapes, {%= meṣa-%}
{%śṛṅgī,%} a kind of cucumber. {%—Dīrghaphalaka,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a plant, {%= agastya%}. {%—Dīrgha-bālā,%}
f. ‘long-tailed,’ the bos grunniens; [cf. {%camara%} and
{%cāmara.%}] {%—Dīrgha-bāhu, us, us, u,%} long-armed;
({%us%}), m., N. of one of the attendants on Śiva; of a
Dānava, (also read {%dīrgha-kaṇṭha%}); of a son of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of Dilīpa and father of
Raghu; of a grandson of Dilīpa. {%—Dīrgha-bāhu-%}
{%garvita, as, ā, am,%} proud of having long arms;
({%as%}), m., N. of a demon. {%—Dīrgha-bhuja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} long-armed; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the attend-
ants on Śiva. {%—Dīrgha-māruta, as, ī, am,%} long-
winded; ({%as%}), m. an elephant; [cf. {%dīrgha-pa-%}
{%vana.%}] {%—Dīrgha-mukha, as, ī, am,%} long-mouthed,
long-beaked, long-faced; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Yakṣa (?);
({%ī%}), f. the musk-rat. {%—Dīrgha-mūla, am,%} n. ‘long-
root,’ the root of Andropogon Muricatus; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), having long roots; ({%as%}), m., N. of several
plants, {%= moraṭa,%} a kind of Vilva tree; ({%ā%}), f.
Desmodium Gangeticum; Ichnocarpus Frutescens;
({%ī%}), f. Alhagi Maurorum; Leea Hirta; Solanum
Indicum. {%—Dīrghamūlaka, am,%} n. a kind of radish;
({%ikā%}), f. Desmodium Gangeticum. {%—Dīrgha-yajña,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} performing a long sacrifice; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a king of Ayodhyā. {%—Dīrgha-yaśas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. renowned far and wide; having abundant
food. {%—Dīrgha-yātha, as,%} m. (?), Ved. a long
course or journey; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a long
course. {%—Dīrgha-yāma, as, ā, am,%} having long
watches (as the night). {%—Dīrgha-raṅgā,%} f. ‘having
a lasting colour,’ turmeric. {%—Dīrgha-rata, as,%} m.
‘long in copulation,’ a dog; [cf. {%dīrgha-surata.%}]
{%—Dīrgha-rada, as,%} m. ‘long-tusked,’ a hog.
{%—Dīrgha-rasana, as,%} m. ‘long-tongued,’ a serpent.
{%—Dīrgha-rāgā,%} f. {%= dīrgha-raṅgā%}. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%rātram,%} ind. ({%rātra%} for {%rātri,%} see Gram. 778),
for a long night, for a long time or period.
{%—Dīrgha-rāva, as, ī, am,%} making a long-con-
tinued noise, yelling, howling, {%= dīrgha-nāda;%}
{%(as),%} m., N. of a jackal. {%—Dīrgha-rūpa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a long form, having the form of a long
vowel. {%—Dīrgha-rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} long ill, long sick.
{%—Dīrgha-roma, as,%} m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra. {%—Dīrgha-roman, ā, ā, a,%} long-haired;
({%ā%}), m. a bear; N. of one of the attendants on Śiva.
{%—Dīrgha-rohiṣaka, am,%} n. a kind of fragrant
grass. {%—Dīrgha-locana, as, ā, am,%} long-eyed; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dīrgha-lohita-%}
{%yaṣṭikā,%} f. ‘having a long red stem,’ red sugar-cane.
[Page0418-a+ 81]
{%—Dīrgha-vaṃśa, as, ā, am,%} having a long reed;
having a long lineage, being of an ancient family;
({%as%}), m. a kind of sugar-cane; [cf. {%nala.%}] {%—Dīr-%}
{%gha-vaktra, as,%} m. ‘long-faced,’ an elephant. {%—Dīr-%}
{%gha-vacchikā%} or {%dīrgha-varchikā,%} f. ({%vacchikā%}
probably {%= vatsa,%} a young animal), an alligator,
a kind of crocodile. {%—Dīrgha-vat,%} ind. like a
long vowel. {%—Dīrgha-varṇa, as,%} m. a long vowel.
{%—Dīrgha-vartman, a,%} n. a long road, a long
journey. {%—Dīrgha-varṣābhū, ūs,%} f., N. of a plant,
{%= śveta-punar-navā%}. {%—Dīrgha-vṛkṣa, as,%} m.
‘the lofty tree,’ the palm tree. {%—Dīrgha-vṛnta, as,%}
m. ‘long-stalked,’ the tree Calosanthes Indica; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a plant, {%= indra-cirbhitī%}. {%—Dīrgha-vṛn-%}
{%taka, as,%} m. ‘long-stalked,’ Calosanthes Indica; a
variety of it; ({%ikā%}), f. Mimosa Octandra. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%śara, as,%} m. ‘having a long reed,’ Andropogon
Bicolor. {%—Dīrgha-śākha, as, ā, am,%} having long
branches; ({%as%}), m. Shorea Robusta; a sort of hemp.
{%—Dīrghaśākhikā,%} f., N. of a shrub, {%= nīlāmlī.%}
{%—Dīrgha-śimbika, as,%} m. ‘having a long pod,’ a
kind of plant, {%= kṣava%}. {%—Dīrgha-śira, as,%} m.
({%śira = śiras%}), ‘having a long head or beak,’ a
kind of bird, = Marāṭhī <nsi>rukhauḍā</nsi>; [cf. {%dīrgha-%}
{%cañcu.%}] {%—Dīrgha-śūkaka, am,%} n. ‘having long
awns or beards,’ a sort of rice. {%—Dīrgha-śmaśru,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. long-bearded. {%—Dīrgha-śravas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} Ved. renowned far and wide; ({%ās%}), m., N.
of a son of Dīrgha-tamas; of another man. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%śrut, t, t, t,%} Ved. ‘long-hearing,’ hearing from afar;
audible or perceptible from afar or at a long dis-
tance; renowned far and wide, heard of everywhere.
{%—Dīrghaśrut-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being audible
at a long distance. {%—Dīrgha-saktha, as, ā, am%}
({%saktha%} for {%sakthi;%} see Gram. 778), long-thighed,
spindle-legged. {%—Dīrgha-sattra, am,%} n. ‘a long-con-
tinued Soma sacrifice,’ N. of a place of pilgrimage.
{%—Dīrghasattrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} occupied with a long-
continued Soma rite. {%—Dīrgha-sandhya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} performing long prayers or rites at the different
twilights. {%—Dīrghasandhya-tva, am,%} n. long-con-
tinued observance of the twilight rites, the continued
repetition of the twilight prayer. {%—Dīrgha-sasya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having long fruits,’ the tree Diospyros
Embryopteris. {%—Dīrgha-surata, as,%} m. {%= dīrgha-%}
{%rata%}. {%—Dīrgha-sūtra, as, ā, am,%} ‘spinning a long
yarn,’ working slowly, procrastinating, slow, dilatory,
tedious. {%—Dīrghasūtra-tā,%} f. or {%dīrghasūtra-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. procrastination, dilatoriness, irresolution,
tediousness. {%—Dīrghasūtrin, ī, iṇī, i, = dīrgha-%}
{%sūtra,%} dilatory, irresolute, procrastinating. {%—Dīrgha-%}
{%skandha, as,%} m. ‘long-stemmed,’ the palm tree.
{%—Dīrgha-svara, as,%} m. a long vowel; a long note,
a minim or semibreve. {%—Dīrghākāra (˚gha-āk˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} long-formed, oblong. {%—Dīrghāgama%}
{%(˚gha-āg˚), as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Dīr-%}
{%ghāṅghri (˚gha-aṅ˚), is,%} m. ‘having long roots,’
Desmodium Gangeticum. {%—Dīrghā-dhī, īs, īs, i,%}
Ved. having a far-seeing mind; (Sāy.) making long
prayers or oblations. {%—Dīrghādhva (˚gha-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. (?), a long way, a long journey. {%—Dīrghā-%}
{%dhva-ga, as, ā, am,%} going long journeys; ({%as%}),
m. a camel; a letter-carrier, messenger, courier or
express. {%—Dīrghāpāṅga (˚gha-ap˚), as, ā, am,%}
having long outer corners (of the eyes). {%—Dīrghā-%}
{%pekṣin (˚gha-ap˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} regarding from afar,
very regardful or considerate. {%—Dīrghāpsas (˚gha-%}
{%ap˚), ās, ās, as,%} Ved. long-shaped, having a long
fore part (as a waggon). {%—Dīrghāmaya (˚gha-%}
{%ām˚), as, ā, am,%} long ill, long sick, affected with
a chronic disease. {%—Dīrghāyu (˚gha-āy˚), us,%}
{%us, u,%} long-lived, wished to be long-lived. {%—Dīr-%}
{%ghāyu-tva, am,%} n. long-livedness; [cf. {%dīrghā-%}
{%yuṣ-ṭva.%}] {%—Dīrghāyudha (˚gha-āy˚), as,%} m. (?),
a long weapon, spear, a javelin; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having long weapons; ({%as%}), m. a hog. {%—Dīr-%}
{%ghāyu-śocis, is, is, i,%} Ved. having a long-lived
splendor, i. e. one which lasts through a long life.
{%—Dīrghāyuṣ-ṭva, am,%} n. long-livedness, a long
life; [cf. {%dīrghāyu-tva.%}] {%—Dīrghāyuṣya, as,%}
m., N. of a tree, {%= śveta-mandāraka; (am),%} n.
[Page0418-b+ 77]
long-livedness. {%—Dīrghāyus (˚gha-āy˚), us, us,%}
{%us,%} long-lived [cf. {%āyuṣ-mat%}]; ({%us%}), m. a crow;
N. of two trees, {%= jīvaka%} and {%śālmali,%} Bombax
Heptaphyllum; an epithet of Mārkaṇḍeya; [cf. {%dīr-%}
{%ghāyu.%}] {%—Dīrghāraṇya (˚gha-ar˚), am,%} n., Ved.
a long tract of wild or desert country. {%—Dīrghā-%}
{%larka (˚gha-al˚), as,%} m., N. of a tree, {%= śveta-%}
{%mandāraka%}. {%—Dīrghāsya (˚gha-ās˚), as, ā, am,%}
long-faced; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a people to the north-
east of Madhya-deśa. {%—Dīrghāhan (˚gha-ah˚), ā,%}
{%hnī, a,%} having long days. {%—Dīrghī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A.
{%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to lengthen, prolong;
to lead away to a distant place. {%—Dīrghī-bhāva, as,%}
m. the becoming long, the lengthening (of a vowel).
{%—Dīrghī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become
long, lengthen. {%—Dīrghī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become
long, lengthened. {%—Dīrghervāru (˚gha-ir˚), us,%} m.
a kind of cucumber {%(= ḍaṅgarī)%}. {%—Dīrghocchvāsa%}
{%(˚gha-uc˚), am,%} n. ‘having a long breath,’ epithet
of the body.
<LEND>

<L>22453<pc>0418-b<k1>dIrGikA<k2>dIrGikA
{%Dīrghikā,%}¦ f. a long or oblong lake or pond; [cf.
{%tridaśa-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22454<pc>0418-b<k1>dIrRa<k2>dIrRa
{#dIrRa#}¦ {%dīrṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dṝ%}), torn,
rent, sundered; frightened, afraid.
<LEND>

<L>22455<pc>0418-b<k1>dIv<k2>dIv
{#dIv#}¦ {%dīv, dīvi, dīvyat,%} &c. See under rt.
2. {%div%} at p. 414, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22456<pc>0418-b<k1>du<k2>du<h>1
{#du#} 1¦. {%du%} (the original form of this rt.
was probably {%dū%}), cl. 1. P. {%davati, dudāva%}
(2nd sing. {%dudavitha,%} 1st du. {%duduviva%}), {%dotā,%}
{%doṣyati, adāvīt, adauṣīt, dotum,%} to go, move:
Caus. {%dāvayati,%} &c., to cause to go; [cf. rt. 1. {%dru.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22457<pc>0418-b<k1>dUta<k2>dUta
{%Dūta.%}¦ See p. 426, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22458<pc>0418-b<k1>dUna<k2>dUna<h>1
1. {%dūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone; going, moving. {%—Dūna-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having gone.
<LEND>

<L>22459<pc>0418-b<k1>du<k2>du<h>2
{#du#} 2¦. {%du%} (also written {%dū,%} see 1. {%dū%}), cl.
5. P. 4. A. {%dunoti, dūyate%} (ep. also {%dūyati%}),
{%dudāva, doṣyati, adauṣīt, dotum,%} to be burnt,
be consumed with internal heat, be consumed by
pain or sorrow, to be agitated or disturbed, to be
distressed; (cl. 5. P.) to burn, consume with fire;
to cause pain by internal heat or fever; to cause
anxiety or sorrow or distress; to afflict: Caus. P.
{%dāvayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%adūdavat,%} to burn, cause
pain: Desid. {%dudūṣati:%} Intens. {%dodūyate, dodoti;%}
[cf. Lith. <nsi>dowyu,</nsi> ‘I vex,’ = Caus. {%dāvayāmi;%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀ-δύνη, ὀ-δυνάω, δαύω, δεδανμένος, δαυλός,</lang>
probably <lang n="greek">δυή;</lang> Lat. <nsi>doleo</nsi> fr. <nsi>doveo;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>tynan;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>leirim,</nsi> ‘I pain,’ probably = Caus.
{%dāvayāmi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22460<pc>0418-b<k1>dut<k2>dut
{%Dut, t,%}¦ f. pain, anxiety, uneasiness. {%—Dud-da, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} or {%dud-dādin, ī, inī, i,%} giving or causing
pain, cruel, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>22461<pc>0418-b<k1>duta<k2>duta
{%Duta, as, ā, am%}¦ (?), pained, afflicted.
<LEND>

<L>22462<pc>0418-b<k1>dunvat<k2>dunvat
{%Dunvat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ afflicting, causing pain or
sorrow, injuring.
<LEND>

<L>22463<pc>0418-b<k1>dUna<k2>dUna<h>2
2. {%dūna.%}¦ See under 1. {%dū,%} p. 426, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22464<pc>0418-b<k1>duH<k2>duH
{#duH#}¦ {%duḥ,%} euphonically substituted for {%dus%}
in {%duḥkha%} (see the next) and in comps. like {%duḥ-%}
{%prajña, duḥ-śaṃsa,%} &c. See under {%dus%} at p. 424.
<LEND>

<L>22465<pc>0418-b<k1>duHKa<k2>duHKa
{#duHKa#}¦ {%duḥkha, am,%} n. (more properly written
{%duṣ-kha,%} and said to be fr. {%dus + kha,%} q. v.; cf.
{%duḥ%} above and {%su-kha;%} the word {%duḥkha%} does
not occur in the earliest literature), uneasiness,
unhappiness, pain, sorrow, affliction, distress, misery,
anguish, agony; difficulty, trouble; ({%as%}), m. Unhap-
piness or Pain personified as son of Naraka and
Vedanā; ({%as, ā, am%}), painful, disagreeable, unpleasant,
uncomfortable, uneasy, difficult; ({%am%}), ind. difficultly,
scarcely, hardly; ({%ena%}), ind. with difficulty; diffi-
cultly; ({%āt%}), ind. with difficulty, hardly; [cf. Hib.
<nsi>diuic,</nsi> ‘pain, sorrow, grief;’ perhaps <nsi>doilghe,</nsi> ‘sore,
hard;’ <nsi>doilgheas,</nsi> ‘sorrow.’] {%—Duḥkha-kara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} causing pain; afflicting, occasioning sorrow
or trouble. {%—Duḥkha-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} going with
pain, distressed. {%—Duḥkha-cchinna, as, ā, am,%} cut
with difficulty, tough, hard; pierced by sorrow,
pained, distressed. {%—Duḥkha-cchedya, as, ā, am,%} to
[Page0418-c+ 81]
be cut with difficulty, hard to be divided, tough, hard;
to be conquered or overcome with difficulty; to be
pierced or pained by affliction, &c. {%—Duḥkha-jāta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} suffering pain, feeling pain, distressed.
{%—Duḥkha-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%} living in pain or distress.
{%—Duḥkha-tara, am,%} n. greater pain, a greater
evil; a very great evil; ({%as, ā, am%}), more painful
or disagreeable; ({%am%}), ind. more painfully or disa-
greeably. {%—Duḥkha-tā,%} f. unhappiness, misery, pain,
discomfort, painful state. {%—Duḥkha-dagdha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} burnt or tormented by affliction, pained, dis-
tressed. {%—Duḥkha-duḥkhena,%} ind. with great diffi-
culty. {%—Duḥkha-dohyā,%} f. (a cow) difficult to be
milked. {%—Duḥkha-nivaha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to
be borne. {%—Duḥkha-parītāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} whose limbs are surrounded or filled with pain.
{%—Duḥkha-parītātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} whose soul
is affected with anguish. {%—Duḥkha-prāya%} or {%duḥ-%}
{%kha-bahula, as, ā, am,%} full of trouble, suffering
excessively, abounding with distress or trouble, &c.
{%—Duḥkha-bhāgin, ī, inī, i,%} having pain as one's
portion, suffering pain, unhappy. {%—Duḥkha-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} consisting in suffering, one whose nature
is made up of suffering. {%—Duḥkhamaya-tva, am,%}
n. a condition made up of suffering. {%—Duḥkha-%}
{%mokṣa, as,%} m. deliverance from pain. {%—Duḥkha-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. occurrence or presence of trouble or
pain, &c. {%—Duḥkha-labdhikā,%} f. ‘gained with
difficulty,’ N. of a princess. {%—Duḥkha-labhya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} to be obtained or effected with difficulty,
hardly procurable. {%—Duḥkha-loka, as,%} m. ‘the
world of pain,’ {%= saṃsāra%} or the world as a scene of
constant suffering and transmigration. {%—Duḥkha-%}
{%vyābhāṣita, as, ā, am,%} pronounced with difficulty.
{%—Duḥkha-śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a difficult temper, i. e.
hard to manage, bad-tempered, irritable. {%—Duḥkha-%}
{%śīla-tva, am,%} n. irritability of temper. {%—Duḥkha-%}
{%śoka-samanvita, as, ā, am,%} filled with pain and
sorrow. {%—Duḥkha-saṃyoga, as,%} m. occurrence or
presence of pain, distress, &c. {%—Duḥkha-saṃvar-%}
{%dhita, as, ā, am,%} reared with difficulty. {%—Duḥkha-%}
{%saṃsthiti, is, is, i,%} in a wretched condition, poor,
miserable. {%—Duḥkha-saṃsparśa, as, ā, am, =%}
{%duḥkha-sparśa%}. {%—Duḥkha-sañcāra, as, ā, am,%}
passing unhappily (as time). {%—Duḥkha-samāyukta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} accompanied with pain, affected by
anguish. {%—Duḥkha-sāgara, as,%} m. ‘an ocean of
trouble or pain,’ great sorrow; the world. {%—Duḥkha-%}
{%sparśa, as, ā, am,%} unpleasant or hard to the touch.
{%—Duḥkha-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} removing pain. {%—Duḥ-%}
{%khā-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} causing pain, afflicting.
{%—Duḥkhā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to cause
pain to any one (with acc.); to distress. {%—Duḥkhā-%}
{%cāra (˚kha-āc˚), as, ā, am,%} of a difficult temper or
disposition; hard to manage. {%—Duḥkhātīta (˚kha-%}
{%at˚), as, ā, am,%} freed or escaped from pain. {%—Duḥ-%}
{%khānta (˚kha-an˚), as,%} m. ‘the end of pain or
trouble’ (with the Māheśvaras), final emancipation or
the acquisition of superhuman powers and freedom
of will. {%—Duḥkhānvita (˚kha-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
accompanied with pain, filled with grief, pained,
afflicted, distressed. {%—Duḥkhārta (˚kha-ār˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} afflicted by pain, pained, distressed. {%—Duḥkhā-%}
{%līḍha (˚kha-āl˚), as, ā, am,%} consumed with grief.
{%—Duḥkhopeta (˚kha-up˚), as, ā, am,%} affected by
pain, suffering distress, &c.
<LEND>

<L>22466<pc>0418-c<k1>duHKaya<k2>duHKaya
{%Duḥkhaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%duḥkhayati, -yitum,%} to
pain, cause pain, afflict, distress; (also given as a rt.
of the 10th cl. and even cl. 1. {%duḥkhati,%} &c.)
<LEND>

<L>22467<pc>0418-c<k1>duHKAya<k2>duHKAya
{%Duḥkhāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%duḥkhāyate,%} &c., to feel
pain, be distressed.
<LEND>

<L>22468<pc>0418-c<k1>duHKita<k2>duHKita
{%Duḥkhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pained, suffering pain,
distressed, afflicted, unhappy, poor, indigent; ({%am%}),
n. pain, distress, trouble. {%—Duḥkhita-citta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} afflicted at heart, grieved in mind.
<LEND>

<L>22469<pc>0418-c<k1>duHKin<k2>duHKin
{%Duḥkhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having pain, pained, sorrow-
ing, afflicted, grieved; difficult, painful.
<LEND>

<L>22470<pc>0418-c<k1>duHKIya<k2>duHKIya
{%Duḥkhīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%duḥkhīyati,%} &c., to feel pain,
be distressed.
<LEND>

<L>22471<pc>0418-c<k1>duHKya<k2>duHKya
{%Duḥkhya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%duḥkhyati,%} &c., to cause
pain.
<LEND>
[Page0419-a+ 73]

<L>22472<pc>0419-a<k1>duHpa<k2>duHpa
{#duHpa˚#}¦ {%duḥ-pa˚, duḥ-pra˚, duḥ-prā˚, duḥ-%}
{%pre˚,%} &c. See the comp. under {%dus%} at p. 424.
<LEND>

<L>22473<pc>0419-a<k1>duHPAlikutTa<k2>duHPAlikutTa
{#duHPAlikutTa#}¦ {%duḥphālikuttha%} (a word said
to be borrowed fr. the Arabic), N. of the twelfth
Yoga (in astrology).
<LEND>

<L>22474<pc>0419-a<k1>duHSa<k2>duHSa
{#duHSa˚#}¦ {%duḥ-śa˚, duḥ-ṣa˚, duḥ-sa˚.%} See the
comp. under {%dus%} at p. 424.
<LEND>

<L>22475<pc>0419-a<k1>duHsADin<k2>duHsADin
{#duHsADin#}¦ {%duḥ-sādhin.%} See 1. {%dur,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>22476<pc>0419-a<k1>dukUla<k2>dukUla
{#dukUla#}¦ {%dukūla, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 2.
{%du%}), a species of plant; ({%am%}), n. woven silk, very
fine cloth or raiment made of the inner bark of this
plant, (opposed to {%valkala;%} also read {%dugūla.%})
<LEND>

<L>22477<pc>0419-a<k1>dugDa<k2>dugDa
{#dugDa#}¦ {%dugdha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%duh%}),
milked; milked out, extracted, sucked out so as to
be impoverished; milked together, collected, filled,
full; ({%am%}), n. milk, the milky juice of plants, sap
[cf. {%go-rakṣa-d˚%}]; milking, (in {%dugdha-bandha-%}
{%ka%}); ({%ī%}), f. a medicinal plant, a kind of Asclepias,
{%= kṣīrāvikā, = dugdha-pāṣāṇa%}. {%—Dugdha-kū-%}
{%pikā,%} f. a sort of cake made of ground rice and
mixed with milk &c. (‘having a milk-well ?’).
{%—Dugdha-tā,%} f. or {%dugdha-tva, am,%} n. milkiness,
milky nature. {%—Dugdha-tālīya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dugdha%}
and {%tāla ?%}), the froth of milk, syllabub; the skim of
milk or cream; milk and mangoes, mango fool.
{%—Dugdha-dā,%} f. giving milk, milk-giver, milch.
{%—Dugdha-pācana, am,%} n. a kind of salt ({%= vaj-%}
{%raka%}); a vessel for boiling milk. {%—Dugdha-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. a milk-pan. {%—Dugdha-pāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
drinking milk. {%—Dugdha-pāṣāṇa, as,%} m. a species
of plant, {%= dugdha-pāṣāṇaka, dugdhāśman, dug-%}
{%dhī; kṣīrin, kṣīra-kṣava, gomedha-sannibha,%}
{%dīptika, vajrābha%}. {%—Dugdha-pucchī,%} f. a kind of
plant, {%= niśā, bhaṅgā, sevakālu,%} commonly {%dug-%}
{%dha-peyā%}. {%—Dugdha-poṣya, as, ā, am,%} a suckling,
a child &c. living on its mother's milk. {%—Dugdha-%}
{%phena, as,%} m. the froth or skim of milk, syllabub,
cream; ({%ī%}), f. a small medicinal shrub, {%= gojā-parṇī,%}
{%payaḥ-phenī, payasvinī, phena-dugdha, lūtāri.%}
{%—Dugdha-bandhaka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the
post to which a cow is fastened before being milked.
{%—Dugdha-vatī,%} f. giving milk. {%—Dugdha-vījā,%} f.
rice mixed with milk. {%—Dugdha-samudra, as,%} m.
the sea of milk. {%—Dugdhākṣa (˚dha-ak˚), as,%} m.
‘having milk-white eyes,’ a particular kind of precious
stone (opal ?). {%—Dugdhāgra (˚dha-ag˚), am,%} n. the
upper part, surface or skim of milk, cream. {%—Dug-%}
{%dhābdhi (˚dha-ab˚), is,%} m. the sea of milk. {%—Dug-%}
{%dhābdhi-tanayā,%} f. ‘the daughter of the sea of milk,’
epithet of the goddess Lakṣmī. {%—Dugdhāmbudhi%}
{%(˚dha-am˚), is,%} m. the sea of milk. {%—Dugdhāmra%}
{%(˚dha-am˚) = dugdha-tālīya,%} q. v. {%—Dugdhāśman%}
{%(˚dha-aś˚), ā,%} m. {%= dugdha-pāṣāṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22478<pc>0419-a<k1>dugDikA<k2>dugDikA
{%Dugdhikā,%}¦ f. a sort of Asclepias, A. Rosea, {%=%}
{%kṣīrāvī, = uttamā;%} (the Hindī derivative Dūdhi is
also applied to Euphorbia Hirta and Thymifolia.)
<LEND>

<L>22479<pc>0419-a<k1>dugDin<k2>dugDin
{%Dugdhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having milk, milky, milch.
<LEND>

<L>22480<pc>0419-a<k1>dugDinikA<k2>dugDinikA
{%Dugdhinikā,%}¦ f. a species of plant, {%= raktāpā-%}
{%mārga%} or a red kind of Achyranthes Aspera.
<LEND>

<L>22481<pc>0419-a<k1>dugDvA<k2>dugDvA
{%Dugdhvā,%}¦ ind. having milked; having pressed or
squeezed out.
<LEND>

<L>22482<pc>0419-a<k1>duGa<k2>duGa
{%Dugha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) milk-
ing; yielding, granting; ({%ā%}), f. a milch-cow; [cf.
{%kāma-d˚, gharma-d˚, droṇa-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22483<pc>0419-a<k1>ducCaka<k2>ducCaka
{#ducCaka#}¦ {%ducchaka, as,%} m. a kind of perfume,
{%= gandha-kuṭī, = vihārādyavakāśaka (?).%}
<LEND>

<L>22484<pc>0419-a<k1>ducCunA<k2>ducCunA
{#ducCunA#}¦ {%ducchunā,%} f. (fr. {%dus + śuna?%}), Ved.
misfortune, calamity; injury, evil, often personified as
a malicious being or evil spirit; [cf. {%a-ducchuna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22485<pc>0419-a<k1>ducCunAya<k2>ducCunAya
{%Ducchunāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%ducchunāyate,%} &c., Ved.
to wish to injure or hurt, to be evil disposed.
<LEND>

<L>22486<pc>0419-a<k1>duqi<k2>duqi
{#duqi#}¦ {%duḍi, is,%} f. {%= duli,%} a small tortoise; a
female tortoise.
<LEND>
[Page0419-b+ 69]

<L>22487<pc>0419-b<k1>duRquka<k2>duRquka
{#duRquka#}¦ {%duṇḍuka, as, ā, am,%} fraudulent,
dishonest, bad-hearted.
<LEND>

<L>22488<pc>0419-b<k1>duRquBa<k2>duRquBa
{#duRquBa#}¦ {%duṇḍubha, as, ā, am, = ḍuṇḍubha,%} a
kind of lizard without feet; a kind of snake described
as not venomous, {%= rājila;%} [cf. {%dundubha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22489<pc>0419-b<k1>duRquBi<k2>duRquBi
{%Duṇḍubhi, is,%}¦ m. f. a species of venomous animal;
a kind of snake; [cf. {%dundubhika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22490<pc>0419-b<k1>dutTotTadavIra<k2>dutTotTadavIra
{#dutTotTadavIra#}¦ {%dutthotthadavīra,%} (in astro-
logy) N. of the thirteenth Yoga.
<LEND>

<L>22491<pc>0419-b<k1>duda<k2>duda
{#duda#}¦ {%duda, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>22492<pc>0419-b<k1>duduha<k2>duduha
{#duduha#}¦ {%duduha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%duh?%}), N.
of a prince, father of Pra-cetas.
<LEND>

<L>22493<pc>0419-b<k1>dudda<k2>dudda
{#dudda#}¦ {%dud-da.%} See {%dut,%} rt. 2. {%du,%} p. 418.
<LEND>

<L>22494<pc>0419-b<k1>dudyUzu<k2>dudyUzu
{#dudyUzu#}¦ {%dudyūṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. the Desid. of
rt. 2. {%div%}), wishing to play, wishing to brandish.
<LEND>

<L>22495<pc>0419-b<k1>dudruma<k2>dudruma
{#dudruma#}¦ {%dudruma, as,%} m. (said to be fr. {%du =%}
{%dus + druma%}), a green onion; [cf. {%dur-druma.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22496<pc>0419-b<k1>duDi<k2>duDi
{#duDi#}¦ {%dudhi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dhū ?%}), Ved.
violent, impetuous, injurious; [cf. {%dudhita%} and
{%dudhra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22497<pc>0419-b<k1>duDita<k2>duDita
{%Dudhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. troubled, perplexed,
turbid.
<LEND>

<L>22498<pc>0419-b<k1>duDUzat<k2>duDUzat
{%Dudhūṣat, an, atī, at%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), trying,
wishing or endeavouring to shake.
<LEND>

<L>22499<pc>0419-b<k1>duDra<k2>duDra
{%Dudhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= dudhi,%} powerful,
violent, impetuous, terrible; (Sāy.) restraining wicked
enemies. {%—Dudhra-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. doing dreadful
acts, rendering excited, exciting, impetuous, boisterous;
({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet of the Maruts. {%—Dudhra-vāc,%}
{%k, k, k,%} Ved. speaking in an excited or uncontrolled
manner.
<LEND>

<L>22500<pc>0419-b<k1>duDukzu<k2>duDukzu
{#duDukzu#}¦ {%dudhukṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. the Desid.
of rt. 2. {%duh%}), wishing or intending to milk.
<LEND>

<L>22501<pc>0419-b<k1>dundama<k2>dundama
{#dundama#}¦ {%dundama, as,%} m. a sort of drum, {%=%}
{%dundubhi%} below.
<LEND>

<L>22502<pc>0419-b<k1>dundu<k2>dundu
{#dundu#}¦ {%dundu, us,%} m. (an onomatopoetic
word), a sort of drum; an epithet of Vasu-deva who
was the father of Kṛṣṇa; [cf. {%ānaka-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22503<pc>0419-b<k1>dunduBa<k2>dunduBa
{#dunduBa#}¦ {%dundubha, as,%} m. a species of water-
snake described as not venomous [cf. {%duṇḍubha%} and
{%duṇḍubhi%}]; an epithet of Śiva; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a Vedic school, {%= dundubhi,%} a kind of drum
(occurring in the comp. {%anaka-d˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>22504<pc>0419-b<k1>dunduBi<k2>dunduBi
{#dunduBi#}¦ {%dundubhi, is,%} m. (fr. {%dundu,%} imita-
tive sound), a sort of large kettle-drum; a sort of
poison; N. of the fifty-sixth year in the Jupiter cycle
of sixty years; an epithet of Varuṇa; Kṛṣṇa; N. of
an Asura; of a Rakṣas; of a son of Andhaka and
grandson of Anu; of a man considered as a son of
Śiva; ({%is%}), f. a drum; a particular throw of the dice
in gambling; twice three dots or spots on a die or
a pair of dice with three spots on each; ({%ī%}), f. ‘a
kettle-drum,’ N. of a Gandharvī; [cf. {%karṇa-d˚.%}]
{%—Dundubhi-grīva, as, ā, am,%} having a neck like
a kettle-drum (an ox). {%—Dundubhi-nirhrāda, as,%}
m. ‘having the sound of a kettle-drum,’ N. of a
Dānava. {%—Dundubhi-vadha, as,%} m., N. of the
eighty-ninth chapter of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Dun-%}
{%dubhi-svana, as,%} m. ‘emitting the sound of a kettle-
drum,’ a kind of magical formula or spell against the
evil spirits supposed to possess weapons. {%—Dundubhi-%}
{%svara, as,%} m. ‘sounding like a kettle-drum,’ N. of
a man. {%—Dundubhisvara-rāja, as,%} m., N. of several
Buddhas. {%—Dundubhīśvara (˚bhi-īś˚), as,%} m., N.
of a Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>22505<pc>0419-b<k1>dunduBika<k2>dunduBika
{%Dundubhika, as,%}¦ m. a kind of venomous insect.
<LEND>

<L>22506<pc>0419-b<k1>dunduBya<k2>dunduBya
{%Dundubhya,%}¦ only in the comp. {%cakra-dundu-%}
{%bhya%} (scil. {%mantra%}), Ved. ‘relating to Cakra and
Dundubhi.’
<LEND>
[Page0419-c+ 75]

<L>22507<pc>0419-c<k1>dundumA<k2>dundumA
{#dundumA#}¦ {%dundumā,%} f. (an onomatopoetic
word), a particular sound, sound in general.
<LEND>

<L>22508<pc>0419-c<k1>dundumAya<k2>dundumAya
{%Dundumāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%dundumāyate, -yitum,%}
to sound.
<LEND>

<L>22509<pc>0419-c<k1>dundumAyita<k2>dundumAyita
{%Dundumāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded; ({%am%}), n. a
particular sound, sound.
<LEND>

<L>22510<pc>0419-c<k1>dundumAra<k2>dundumAra
{#dundumAra#}¦ {%dundumāra, as,%} m. a sort of red
worm; the smoke of a house; a cat, {%= dhundhu-%}
{%māra.%}
<LEND>

<L>22511<pc>0419-c<k1>dunvat<k2>dunvat
{#dunvat#}¦ {%dunvat.%} See rt. 2. {%du,%} p. 418, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22512<pc>0419-c<k1>duPAra<k2>duPAra
{#duPAra#}¦ {%duphāra,%} N. of a place mentioned
in the Romaka-siddhānta.
<LEND>

<L>22513<pc>0419-c<k1>dumela<k2>dumela
{#dumela#}¦ {%dumela, am,%} n. a particular high
number.
<LEND>

<L>22514<pc>0419-c<k1>dummadumAka<k2>dummadumAka
{#dummadumAka#}¦ {%dummadumāka, as,%} m., N. of a
Grāma.
<LEND>

<L>22515<pc>0419-c<k1>dur<k2>dur<h>1
{#dur#} 1¦. {%dur,%} f., Ved. (occurring only in
nom. and acc. pl. {%duras%}), {%= dvār,%} a door; (at the
end of a comp. the form {%dura%} is used, see 2. {%dura.%})
{%—Duḥ-sādhin, ī,%} m. a door-keeper.
<LEND>

<L>22516<pc>0419-c<k1>dur<k2>dur<h>2
{#dur#} 2¦. {%dur,%} ind. a prefix substituted for
{%dus,%} q. v., at the beginning of a compound before
vowels and soft consonants; (for the comps. begin-
ning {%duḥ, duś, duṣ, dus,%} see under {%dus.%}) {%—Dur-%}
{%akṣa, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%akṣa%}), a loaded or fraudulent
die or dice; ({%as, ī, am%}), (fr. 4. {%akṣa%}), weak-eyed.
{%—Dur-atikrama, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be sur-
passed or overcome, difficult to be conquered, uncon-
querable; difficult of performance or accomplish-
ment, insurmountable; difficult to be escaped from,
inevitable; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Brāhman regarded as
a son of Śiva. {%—Dur-atyaya, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be passed or surpassed, hard to be overcome;
difficult to be escaped from; difficult to be attained;
difficult to be passed through or fathomed. {%—Dur-%}
{%atyayānukramaṇa (˚ya-an˚), as, ā, am,%} whose
ways are past finding out (God). {%—Dur-atyetu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. difficult to be overcome &c., = the
preceding. {%—Dur-adṛṣṭa, am,%} n. bad luck, ill
fate, misfortune. {%—Dur-admanī,%} f., Ved. bad or
noxious food. {%—Dur-adhiga, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be attained &c., see the next. {%—Dur-adhigama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be attained or reached, unat-
tainable, hard to be traversed; not to be overcome,
insurmountable; difficult to be read through or stu-
died. {%—Dur-adhiṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%} badly managed
or executed; ({%am%}), n. improper residence at a place.
{%—Dur-adhīta, as, ā, am,%} badly read or learnt,
studied with difficulty. {%—Dur-adhyaya, as, ā, am,%}
difficult of attainment; difficult of perusal, hard to
be studied. {%—Dur-adhyayana, am,%} n. reading or
studying badly or with difficulty. {%—Dur-adhyava-%}
{%sāya, as,%} m. a bad or foolish undertaking; (wrongly
read {%durādhyavasāya.%}) {%—Dur-adhva, as,%} m. a
bad road. {%—Dur-anupālana, as, ā, am,%} difficult to
be kept or preserved. {%—Dur-anubodha, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be recollected. {%—Dur-anuṣṭhita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} badly done or performed. {%—Dur-anuṣṭheya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be accomplished. {%—Dur-anta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} whose end is difficult to be reached,
having no end, infinite; ending ill, ending in misery,
having a bad end, miserable, unhappy. {%—Dur-an-%}
{%taka%} = the preceding; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva.
{%—Duranta-kṛt, t, t, t,%} doing what is endless,
(perhaps) suffering endless pains. {%—Duranta-moha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} whose infatuation has a bad ending or
has no end. {%—Duranta-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} possessed
of endless energy. {%—Duranta-śakti, is, is, i,%} having
endless power. {%—Dur-anvaya, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be passed along (as a road &c.), difficult to be
followed; difficult to be carried out, hard to be
comprehended or attained; ({%as%}), m. a false concord
(in gram.); a consequence wrongly deduced from
given premises. {%—Dur-anveṣya, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be searched. {%—Dur-apacāra, as, ā, am,%} difficult
[Page0420-a+ 81]
to be displeased or offended. {%—Dur-abhigraha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} difficult to be laid hold of; ({%as%}), m. Achy-
ranthes Aspera [cf. {%apāmārga%}]; ({%ā%}), f. Mucuna
Pruritus; Alhagi Maurorum. {%—Dur-abhimānin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} badly or disagreeably proud. {%—Dur-avagama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be understood, incomprehen-
sible. {%—Dur-avagraha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
kept back or restrained; disagreeable. {%—Durava-%}
{%graha-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} speaking disagreeably. {%—Dur-%}
{%avagrāhya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be apprehended
or reached. {%—Dur-avabodha, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be understood, unintelligible. {%—Duravabodha-tā,%}
f. unintelligibleness. {%—Dur-avaroha, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be descended. {%—Dur-avavada, am,%}
adj. n. difficult to be spoken against or censured.
{%—Dur-avasita, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be con-
ceived (?). {%—Dur-avastha, as, ā, am,%} badly situated,
poorly circumstanced; ({%ā%}), f. bad situation, miserable
condition, evil case. {%—Dur-avāpa, as, ā, am,%} dif-
ficult to be reached, gained, attained or obtained;
difficult to be acquired; difficult to be fulfilled.
{%—Dur-avekṣita, am,%} n. an improper look, a for-
bidden glance. {%—Dur-ahna, as,%} m. a bad day; [cf.
{%dur-dina.%}] {%—Dur-ākṛti, is, is, i,%} badly formed;
deformed, disfigured, misshapen. {%—Dur-ākranda,%}
{%am,%} ind. crying miserably; [cf. {%dur-ākrośa.%}]
{%—Dur-ākrama, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be ascended
or passed; hard to be approached, attacked or assailed;
invincible. {%—Dur-ākramaṇa, am,%} n. unfair attack;
difficult approach. {%—Dur-ākrānta, as, ā, am,%} un-
justly attacked; difficult of access. {%—Dur-ākrośa, as,%}
m. a miserable cry; ({%am%}), ind. crying miserably;
[cf. {%dur-ākranda.%}] {%—Dur-āgata, as, ā, am,%} badly
come, arrived with difficulty, unhappily arrived; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a man. {%—Dur-āgama, as,%} m. bad income,
improper gain, illegal accession (of property &c.).
{%—Dur-āgraha, as, ā, am,%} obstinate retention of an
opinion, wicked or foolish obstinacy, pertinacity,
head-strongness. {%—Dur-ācara, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be practised, hard to be performed; difficult to
be treated or cured, incurable. {%—Dur-ācarita, am,%}
n. bad practice or performance, bad treatment. {%—Dur-%}
{%ācāra, as,%} m. bad behaviour, ill conduct, bad man-
ners, wickedness; ({%as, ā, am%}), difficult to be
practised or managed; ill-conducted, badly behaved;
addicted to evil practices, wicked, depraved, profligate.
{%—Dur-āḍhya, as, ā, am,%} not rich or opulent, not
abounding. {%—Dur-āḍhyaṅkara, as, ī, am,%} difficult
to be made rich. {%—Dur-āḍhyambhava, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to become rich; ({%am%}), n. becoming rich
with difficulty. {%—Durātma-tā,%} f. (fr. the following),
mean-spiritedness, baseness, wickedness. {%—Dur-āt-%}
{%man, ā, ā, a,%} bad-hearted, evil-natured, mean-spirited,
ill-conditioned, low, vile, wicked, bad; ({%ā%}), m. a
rascal, scoundrel, villain, wretch. {%—Durātma-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} = the preceding. {%—Dur-ādāna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. difficult to be laid hold of or apprehended.
{%—Dur-ādeya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be taken
away or seized. {%—Dur-ādhana, as,%} m., N. of one
of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; (probably a
wrong form for {%dur-ādhara.%}) {%—Dur-ādhara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} difficult to be withstood, not to be restrained,
irresistible; difficult to be subdued or overpowered;
({%as%}), m., N. of one of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra; [cf. the preceding.] {%—Dur-ādharṣa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} difficult to be attacked, not to be assailed,
unassailable, hard to be approached or attacked; not
to be assaulted or molested with impunity, dangerous;
intractable, haughty; ({%as%}), m. white mustard; ({%ā%}),
f. a kind of plant ({%= kuṭumbinī%}); [cf. {%dur-dharṣa%}
and {%duṣ-pradharṣa.%}] {%—Dur-ādhāra, as,%} m. ‘not
to be confined, illimitable,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Dur-%}
{%ādhi, is, is, i,%} painful, distressing. {%—Dur-ādhī, īs,%}
{%īs, i%} (rt. {%dhyai%}), Ved. intending or meditating evil,
malignant. {%—Dur-ānama, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
bent, hard to bend (as a bow). {%—Dur-āpa, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be obtained, difficult of attainment; diffi-
cult to be approached; hard to be overcome; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Dur-āpana, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
difficult to be attained, difficult to be overtaken.
{%—Dur-āpādana, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be accom-
[Page0420-b+ 81]
plished, hard to be brought about. {%—Dur-āpūra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} difficult to be filled or fulfilled or satisfied.
{%—Dur-ābādha, as, ā, am,%} not to be molested, not
to be assaulted with impunity; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Śiva. {%—Dur-āmnāya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
handed down. {%—Dur-āyya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. difficult
to be attained; (probably for {%dur-āpya.%}) {%—Dur-%}
{%ārakṣya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be protected;
[cf. {%ā-rakṣya.%}] {%—Dur-ārādhya, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be won over or propitiated, hard to be conciliated,
difficult to be worshipped. {%—Dur-āri-han, ā,%} m. (fr.
{%dur-ari-han%}), ‘killing wicked enemies,’ epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Dur-āruha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
ascended or mounted; ({%as%}), m. a cocoa-nut tree;
Ægle Marmelos {%(= vilva); (ā),%} f. Phœnix Sylvestris
{%(= kharjūrī)%}. {%—Dur-ārūḍha, as, ā, am,%} ascended
with difficulty. {%—Dur-āroha, as, ā, am,%} diffi-
cult of ascent; ({%as%}), m. the palm tree, the date
tree; ({%ā%}), f. the silk-cotton tree {%(= śālmalī; =%}
{%śrī-vallī)%}. {%—Dur-ārohaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to
be ascended. {%—Dur-ālakṣya, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be observed or perceived; [cf. 1. {%ā-lakṣya.%}]
{%—Durālakṣya-tama, as, ā, am,%} most difficult
to be perceived. {%—Dur-ālabha%} or {%dur-ālamba, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} difficult to be laid hold of or handled, unfit
to be touched; difficult of attainment; ({%ā%}), f. the
prickly Alhagi Maurorum; [cf. {%kṣudra-d˚.%}] {%—Dur-%}
{%ālāpa, as,%} m. a curse; imprecation; abuse, scur-
rilous or abusive language. {%—Dur-āloka, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be perceived; not to be looked at,
painfully bright, dazzling; ({%as%}), m. dazzling splendor.
{%—Dur-āvarta, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be turned
(from an opinion &c.). {%—Dur-āvaha, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be brought, difficult to be led towards.
{%—Dur-āvāra, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be covered or
surrounded; difficult to be shut in or kept together;
hard to be filled up; difficult to be restrained or
stopped or kept back. {%—Dur-āvya, as, ā, am%}
(perhaps for {%dur-avya%} fr. rt. {%av%}), Ved. dis-
pleasing. {%—1. dur-āśa, as,%} m., N. of an Ekāha;
[cf. {%dur-ṇaśa, dū-ṇaśa, dū-ṇāśa.%}] — 2. {%dur-āśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having bad expectations; ({%ā%}), f. bad
hope or expectation. {%—Dur-āśaya, as,%} m. a bad
resting-place or asylum; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a bad
place of rest or refuge, having a difficult shelter or
asylum; having evil thoughts or designs, evil-minded,
malicious. {%—Dur-āśir, īr, īr, īr,%} Ved. badly mixed
(as Soma). {%—Dur-āsa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
driven out or expelled. {%—Dur-āsada, as, ā, am,%}
difficult of access or attainment, difficult to be ap-
proached; difficult to be met with or found; hard
to be borne; unequaled, unparalleled, unrivaled;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; mystical N. of a sword.
{%—Durāsada-jaya, as,%} m., N. of the forty-second
chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa or second part of the
Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Durāsadopākhyāna (˚da-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the fortieth chapter of the Krīḍā-
khaṇḍa or second part of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Dur-%}
{%āsaha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be accomplished.
{%—Dur-āsita, am,%} n. bad or unbecoming manner
of sitting. {%—Dur-āhā,%} ind. (opposed to and formed
like {%sv-āhā%}), Ved. ill luck, misfortune. {%—Dur-i,%} cl. 1.
A. {%dur-ayate%} or {%dul-ayate,%} &c., to go badly, to
go wrong? (this verb is given by grammarians, but
seems only to occur in its derivatives). {%—Dur-ita,%}
{%am,%} n. bad course, difficulty, danger, damage; evil
ways, evil, sin, Evil or Sin personified; ({%as, ā, am%}),
difficult, bad; sinful, wicked; [cf. {%dur-iti, dur-%}
{%gata, dur-gati.%}] {%—Durita-kṣaya, as,%} m., N. of a
son of Mahā-vīrya and father of Trayyāruṇi. {%—Dur-%}
{%ita-damanī,%} f., N. of a tree. {%—Duritāri (˚ta-ari),%}
{%is,%} f. ‘the enemy of sin,’ N. of a female deity of
the Jainas (accompanying the third Arhat of the
present Ava-sarpiṇī). {%—Dur-iti, is,%} f., Ved. bad
course; difficulty, distress, trouble; [cf. {%dur-ita%} and
{%dur-gati.%}] — 1. {%dur-iṣṭa, am,%} n. ({%iṣṭa%} fr. rt. 3.
{%iṣ%}), ‘bad wish,’ curse, malediction, imprecation, a spell
for the injury of another person; [cf. {%dur-īṣaṇā.%}]
 — 2. {%dur-iṣṭa, as, ā, am%} ({%iṣṭa%} fr. rt. {%yaj%}),
badly sacrificed, defective in a sacrifice, (opposed to
{%sv-iṣṭa.%}) {%—Duriṣṭa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} performing a
[Page0420-c+ 81]
magic spell to injure another. {%—Dur-iṣṭi, is,%} f.,
Ved. defect or failure in a sacrifice. {%—Duriṣṭha,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (superl. fr. 2. {%dur%}), very bad, very wicked;
({%am%}), n. great crime, extreme wickedness. {%—Dur-%}
{%īśa, as,%} m. a bad master. {%—Dur-īṣaṇā,%} f. ({%īṣaṇā%}
being a wrong form for {%eṣaṇā%}), ‘bad wish,’ curse,
cursing, imprecation; an evil eye; [cf. 1. {%dur-iṣṭa.%}]
{%—Dur-ukta, as, ā, am,%} badly spoken, uttered
wrongly, harshly or injuriously spoken, harshly address-
ed; ({%am%}), n. injurious speech, reproach, hard or harsh
words, rough or offensive words. {%—Dur-ukti, is,%} f.
harsh or injurious speech, offensive speech; personi-
fied as a daughter of Krodha and Hiṃsā and sister and
wife of Kali, (their children are Bhaya and Mṛtyu.)
{%—Dur-uccheda, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be extir-
pated or destroyed. {%—1. dur-uttara, as, ā, am%} (see
1. {%ut-tara,%} p. 149), unanswerable. {%—2. dur-uttara,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (see {%ut-tṝ,%} p. 150), difficult to be crossed,
hard to pass, difficult to be come out of or escaped
from. {%—Dur-utsaha%} or {%dur-utsāha, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be borne; difficult to be resisted, irre-
sistible. {%—Dur-udaya, as, ā, am,%} rising into view
or appearing with difficulty, not easily manifested.
{%—Dur-udāhara, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be articu-
lated or pronounced. {%—Dur-udvaha, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be borne or suffered; unbearable, burthen-
some. {%—Dur-upakrama, as, ā, am,%} difficult of
access or approach; difficult of cure. {%—Dur-upa-%}
{%cāra, as, ā, am,%} difficult of approach; unmanage-
able; difficult of cure. {%—Dur-upalakṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} difficult to be perceived. {%—Dur-upasarpin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} approaching incautiously. {%—Dur-upasthāna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult of approach, unapproachable,
unattainable. {%—Dur-upāya, as,%} m. a bad expedient.
{%—Dur-ūha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be inferred or
perceived or understood; abstruse. {%—Durūha-tā,%} f.
abstruseness. {%—Dur-eva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. evil-affected,
ill-disposed, malignant; (Sāy.) going badly, having
evil ways; difficult to be approached, unassailable;
({%as%}), m. a wicked person, a criminal. {%—Dur-okam,%}
ind., Ved. unwillingly, reluctantly. {%—Dur-oṣa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. slow, lazy [cf. {%oṣam%}]; (Sāy.) diffi-
cult to be burnt; dwelling in houses; [cf. Zend
<nsi>dūraoṣa.</nsi>] {%—Dur-oṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. slow,
lazy; whose anger is difficult to be overcome.
{%—Dur-ga, as, ā, am,%} difficult of access or approach,
almost impassable or inaccessible, impervious, imper-
meable; difficult of attainment, unattainable; difficult
to be understood; ({%as%}), m. bdellium; N. of an
Asura (supposed to have been slain by the goddess
Durgā, according to some she received her name
from him); N. of a man; of a grammarian and
lexicographer and commentator on Yāska's Nirukta;
an abridged form for {%durgādāsa, durga-gupta,%}
{%durga-siṃha,%} &c.; ({%ā%}), f., N. of two rivers; ‘the
inaccessible goddess,’ N. of the daughter of Hima-vat
and wife of Śiva, (also called Umā, Pārvatī, &c.,
and mother of Kārttikeya and Gaṇeśa; in her cha-
racter of Durgā she is a goddess of terrific form
and irascible temper, particularly worshipped at the
Durgā-pūjā held in Bengal in the month of Aśvin
or about October); N. of a princess; the indigo
plant; a creeping shrub, Clitoria Ternatea; a singing
bird, {%= śyāmā; (am),%} n. a difficult or narrow passage
over a stream or a mountain or through a wood
&c., a defile, narrow pass, gorge; a place difficult of
access, a citadel, fort, fortress, stronghold, castle, crag,
Droog or hill-fort, (in the sense of ‘an inaccessible
place’ often at the end of a compound after a word
indicating that by which the difficulty is caused,
see {%giri-d˚, dhanva-d˚, vāri-d˚%}); rough ground,
roughness; difficulty, adversity, distress, danger.
{%—Durga-karman, a,%} n. fortification; difficult
work. {%—Durga-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%} building a
fort; making difficult or impassable; ({%as%}), m. the
Bhojpatra or birch tree. {%—Durga-gupta, as,%} m.
(for {%durgā-g˚%}), N. of a grammarian. {%—Durga-%}
{%ghāta, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a fort. {%—Dur-%}
{%ga-ghnā,%} f. ‘remover of difficulties,’ epithet of
Durgā. {%—Durga-ṭīkā,%} f. ‘Durga's commentary’ on
Yāska's Nirukta &c.; (according to some authorities
[Page0421-a+ 81]
Durga = Durga-gupta; according to others = Durga-
siṃha.) {%—Dur-gata, as, ā, am,%} ‘one whose affairs
go badly,’ unfortunate, in bad circumstances, poor,
indigent, in trouble; distressed; suffering pain or
affliction; [cf. {%dur-ita.%}] {%—Durgata-tā,%} f. ill luck,
bad circumstances, distress, poverty, misery. {%—Durga-%}
{%taraṇī,%} f. ‘conveying over difficulties,’ an epithet of
Sāvitrī. {%—Durga-tā,%} f. impassableness, difficulty of
being crossed. {%—Dur-gati, is,%} f. bad circumstances,
misfortune, poverty, straits, indigence, want; a dif-
ficult path or situation; hell. {%—Durgati-nāśinī,%} f.
‘removing distress,’ an epithet of Durgā. {%—Durga-%}
{%nivāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling in a fortress or strong-
hold. {%—Dur-gandha, as,%} m. a bad smell, bad odour,
stink; ({%as, ā, am%}), ill-smelling, ill-scented; ({%as%}),
m. any ill-smelling substance; the mango tree ({%=%}
{%āmra%}), an onion; ({%am%}), n. sochal-salt. {%—Durgan-%}
{%dha-tā,%} f. badness of smell, stink. {%—Durgandhi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} or {%durgandhin, ī, inī, i,%} ill-smelling, stinking.
{%—Durga-pati, is,%} m. or {%durga-pāla, as,%} m. the
commandant or governor of a fortress. {%—Durga-%}
{%pura, am,%} n. a fortified town, citadel. {%—Durga-%}
{%puṣpī,%} f., N. of a plant (commonly {%keśa-puṣṭā%}).
{%—Dur-gama, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be traversed
or travelled over, difficult of access or approach,
impassable, inaccessible, impervious, unattainable,
difficult of attainment, difficult to be understood;
({%as, am%}), m. n. a difficult situation; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a son of Vasu-deva and Pauravī; also of Dhṛta.
{%—Dur-gamanīya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be traversed,
hard to be passed, impassable. {%—Durga-mārga, as,%}
m. a difficult pass or way, a defile. {%—Durgamā-%}
{%śu-bodhinī (˚ma-āś˚),%} f., N. of a commentary by
Mālāṅka on the Mālatī-mādhava. {%—Dur-gala, as,%}
m., N. of a people. {%—Durga-laṅghana, as, ī, am,%}
making one's way through difficult places, surmount-
ing or overcoming difficulties; ({%as%}), m. a camel.
{%—Durga-vākya-prabodha, as,%} m. ‘knowledge of
difficult words,’ N. of a grammatical work. {%—Durga-%}
{%vyasana, am,%} n. defect in a fortress (e. g. its being
ill-guarded &c.). {%—Durga-śaila, as,%} m. ‘an inacces-
sible mountain,’ N. of a mountain. {%—Durga-sañ-%}
{%cara%} or {%durga-sañcāra, as,%} m. difficult passage,
defile passing through an almost impervious or inacces-
sible place; a bridge, pontoon, or contrivance for pass-
ing a river, defile, &c. {%—Durga-sampad, t,%} f. ex-
cellence or perfection of a fortress. {%—Durga-siṃha,%}
{%as,%} m. (for {%durgā-s˚%}), N. of a king; of a gram-
marian; of an astronomer; ({%ī%}), f., N. of Durga-siṃha's
commentary on the Kātantra; [cf. {%durga-ṭīkā.%}]
{%—Durga-sena, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Dur-%}
{%gaha, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%gāh%}), Ved. difficult to be
entered or passed through or fathomed; ({%āni%}), n. pl.
impassable or dangerous places, intolerable evils,
dangers; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; [cf. {%daurgaha.%}]
{%—Durgākramaṇa (˚ga-āk˚), am,%} n. the taking of a
fort. {%—Dur-gāḍha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be fathomed
or investigated; [cf. {%dur-gādha%} and {%dur-gāhya.%}]
{%—Durgā-datta, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Vṛtta-muktāvali (a modern work on Prākṛt prosody).
{%—Durgā-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a commentator on
the grammar and collection of roots by Vopa-deva
(this commentary is called the Dhātu-dīpikā); N. of
a physician; of a prince. {%—Dur-gādha, as, ā, am,%}
unfathomable. {%—Durgādhikārin (˚ga-adh˚), ī,%} m.
or {%durgādhyakṣa (˚ga-adh˚), as,%} m. the governor
of a fortress. {%—Durgā-navamī,%} f. the ninth day of
the light half of the month Kārttika (sacred to
Durgā and the first day of the Treta-yuga). {%—Durgān-%}
{%tarātithi (˚ra-at˚), is, is, i,%} guest of the interior
of a stronghold, a prisoner. {%—Durgā-pūjā,%} f. the
festival in honour of the goddess Durgā, held in
Bengal in the month Aśvin or about October; N. of
a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Durgāpūjā-%}
{%prakaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-
sarva-sva. {%—Durgā-prayoga, as,%} m., N. of a chapter
of the Tantra-sāra. {%—Durgā-bhakti-taraṅgiṇī,%} f.,
N. of a work on the worship of Durgā. {%—Durgā-%}
{%manu, us,%} m., N. of the eleventh chapter of the
Śāradātilaka by Lakṣmaṇa. {%—Durgā-mahattva,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the greatness of Durgā,’ N. of a work.
[Page0421-b+ 81]
{%—Durgā-māhātmya, am,%} n. {%= devī-māhātmya.%}
{%—Durgā-yantra, am,%} n., N. of a mystical diagram
in the Tantra-sāra. {%—Durgārādhana-māhātmya%}
{%(˚gā-ār˚), am,%} n., N. of the fourteenth chapter of the
Śakti-ratnākara treating of the mystical worship of
Durgā. {%—Durgārohaṇa (˚ga-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} diffi-
cult to be ascended. {%—Durgāvarodha (˚ga-av˚), as,%}
m. investing or besieging a fortress. {%—Durgā-vākya,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the 118th chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa
or second part of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Durgā-vi-%}
{%lāsa, as,%} m., N. of a poem. {%—Durgāśrayaṇa (˚ga-%}
{%āś˚), am,%} n. taking refuge in a fortress. {%—Durgā-%}
{%stuti, is,%} f. ‘praise of Durgā,’ N. of a chapter of the
Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Durgā-stotra, am,%} n., N. of the
sixty-third chapter of the Prakṛti-khaṇḍa or second
part of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Dur-gāhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be fathomed or forded, unfathom-
able; [cf. {%dur-gāḍha.%}] {%—Durgāhya-tva, am,%} n.
unfathomableness. {%—Durgāhva (˚ga-āh˚), as,%} m.
bdellium. {%—Durgi, is,%} f. {%= durgā%}. {%—Dur-gṛbhi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. difficult to be seized or laid hold of. {%—Dur-%}
{%gṛbhi-śvan, ā,%} m. (Sāy.) whose pervasion of space
is difficult to be apprehended. {%—Durgṛbhīya%} (fr.
the preceding), Nom. A. {%durgṛbhīyate,%} &c., Ved.
to be difficult to seize or lay hold of. {%—Durgot-%}
{%sava (˚gā-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘festival of Durgā,’ N. of
a treatise; N. of a chapter of the Tithi-tattva-
ṭīka by Kāśī-rāma. {%—Durgotsava-tattva, am,%} n.,
N. of a work by Raghu-nandana. {%—Dur-goṣṭhī,%}
f. evil association, secret alliance, conspiracy. {%—Dur-%}
{%graha, as,%} m. seizing badly; a spasm, cramp;
an evil demon (causing diseases); ({%as, ā, am%}),
difficult to be conquered or gained; difficult to
be obtained or accomplished; hard to be understood.
{%—Dur-grāhya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be seized,
hard to be caught or laid hold of; difficult to be
imprisoned; difficult to be gained or obtained; diffi-
cult to be understood or investigated. {%—Durgrāhya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of being difficult to be seized,
&c. {%—Durgrāhya-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} whose heart
is difficult to be gained. {%—Dur-ghaṭa, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be accomplished, difficult, impossible,
unattainable; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. or n. (?), N. of a
work. {%—Durghaṭa-ghātana,%} ‘removing difficulties,’
N. of a commentary on the Saṅkṣipta-sāra. {%—Dur-%}
{%ghaṭa-tva, am,%} n. the state of being difficult to be
accomplished. {%—Durghaṭa-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a
commentary. {%—Dur-ghaṇa, as, ā, am,%} too crowded
or closely packed. {%—Dur-ghoṣa, as, ā, am,%} uttering
a harsh or disagreeable sound, harsh-sounding, roar-
ing, bellowing; ({%as%}), m. a harsh or disagreeable
cry; a bear. {%—Dur-jana, as,%} m. a bad man, a
wicked wretch, a mischievous person, a scoundrel, a
villain; ({%as, ā, am%}), bad, wicked, vile; malicious,
mischief-making. {%—Durjana-tā,%} f. or {%durjana-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. wickedness, villainy. {%—Durjana-dūṣita-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} having a mind corrupted by the
wicked. {%—Durjana-nindā,%} f. ‘censure of the wicked,’
N. of the twenty-second chapter of the Śārṅgadhara-
paddhati. {%—Durjana-mukha-capeṭikā,%} f. ‘a box
on the ear for perverse men,’ N. of a controversial
work. {%—Durjanāya,%} Nom. A. {%durjanāyate,%} &c.,
to become a wicked man, to become wicked. {%—Dur-%}
{%jaya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be subdued or overcome,
hard to win or conquer, invincible; difficult to be
obtained; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava; of an assem-
blage of Dānavas; of a Rakṣas; of several heroes;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a place. {%—Dur-jayanta, as,%} m., N.
of a mountain. {%—Dur-jara, as, ā, am,%} difficult to
be made old, ever youthful; difficult of digestion,
indigestible, hard; difficult to be enjoyed; ({%as%} or
{%am%}), m. or n. (?), N. of a place. {%—Dur-jāta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} badly or inauspiciously born or produced,
wretched, unhappy; bad-natured, bad; of a bad kind;
not genuine, false; ({%am%}), n. misfortune, calamity;
disparity, impropriety. {%—Dur-jāti, is,%} f. misfortune;
ill condition; ({%is, is, i%}), bad-natured, vile, wicked;
low, outcast. {%—Dur-jātīya, as, ā, am,%} bad-natured,
vile. {%—Dur-jīva, as, ā, am,%} difficult to live;
({%am%}), n. a difficult life. {%—Dur-jñāna, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be known. {%—Durjñāna-tva, am,%} n. the
[Page0421-c+ 81]
state of being difficult to be known. {%—Dur-jñeya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be known or understood, hard
to be discovered; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Dur-ṇaya, as,%} m. bad conduct, impropriety,
impolicy, &c. (see {%dur-naya%}). {%—Dur-ṇaśa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. unattainable, inaccessible; [cf. {%dū-ṇaśa%}
and {%dū-ṇāśa.%}] {%—Dur-ṇaṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} unattained.
{%—Durṇāma-cātana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. driving away
or averting the demons called Dur-ṇāman. {%—Dur-%}
{%ṇāman, ā, mnī, a,%} having a bad name; ({%ā%}), m., N.
of certain demons hostile to man and causing diseases
&c.; (according to a scholiast) N. of a worm; [cf.
{%dur-nāman.%}] {%—Durṇāma-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} Ved.
destroying the demons called Dur-ṇāman. {%—Dur-%}
{%ṇihitaiṣin (˚ta-eṣ˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} tracing out what
is badly kept. {%—Dur-ṇīta, as, ā, am,%} ill-behaved,
ill-governed; impolitic; untoward, froward; ({%am%}),
n. misconduct, impolicy; [cf. {%dur-nīta.%}] {%—Dur-%}
{%ṇīti, is,%} f. bad policy, misconduct, injustice, mal-
administration; [cf. {%dur-nīti.%}] {%—Dur-datta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} badly given. {%—Dur-dama, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be subdued; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Vasu-deva
and Rohiṇī; of a prince, son of Bhadra-śreṇya; of
a Brāhman. {%—Dur-damana, as, ā, am,%} difficult to
be subdued; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince, son of Śatā-
nīka. {%—Dur-damya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be sub-
dued, untamable, indomitable, obstinate. {%—Dur-%}
{%darśa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be seen; disagreeable
or painful to the sight, dazzling; [cf. {%dur-dṛśa.%}]
{%—Durdarśa-tā,%} f. the state of being disagreeable
to the sight, loathsomeness. {%—Durdarśatāya,%}
Nom. A. {%durdarśatāyate,%} &c., to have a bad or
disgusting appearance. {%—Dur-darśana, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be seen; disagreeable to the sight, looking
badly. {%—Dur-daśā,%} f. a bad situation, misfortune,
calamity. {%—Dur-dānta, as, ā, am,%} badly tamed,
untamable, intractable, difficult or hard to be re-
strained or disciplined; ({%as%}), m. a calf; strife,
quarrel. {%—Dur-dina, am,%} n. a rainy or cloudy day,
a wet day, bad weather, rainy weather, a cloud, a
shower; ({%as, ā, am%}), cloudy, rainy, clouded, over-
cast, lowering, dark. {%—Durdina-grasta-bhāskara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the sun obscured by dark clouds.
{%—Durdināya,%} Nom. A. {%durdināyate,%} &c., to
become covered with clouds, to be cloudy. {%—Dur-%}
{%divasa, as,%} m. a dark or rainy day; [cf. {%dur-%}
{%dina.%}] {%—Dur-duhā,%} f. difficult to be milked (a cow).
{%—Dur-dṛś, k, k, k,%} seeing badly. {%—Dur-dṛśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be seen or looked at or met
with; disagreeable to the sight, disgusting; [cf.
{%dur-darśa.%}] {%—Dur-dṛśīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
a bad aspect, looking bad or ill. {%—Dur-dṛṣṭa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ill-seen (literally or figuratively), ill-examined,
imperfectly investigated; looked at with an evil eye.
{%—Dur-daiva, am,%} n. hard fate, bad luck, unlucky
destiny, misfortune. {%—Durdaiva-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
unlucky, pursued or overtaken by misfortune, unhappy.
{%—Dur-dyūta, am,%} n. a bad or unfair game. {%—Dur-%}
{%dyūta-devin, ī, inī, i,%} playing a bad or unfair game.
{%—Dur-druma, as,%} m. a green onion. {%—Dur-dhara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be carried, borne, or suffered;
irresistible, hard to be obstructed or restrained; dif-
ficult to be accomplished [cf. {%aṅkuśa-d˚%}]; difficult
to be kept in mind or recollected; ({%as%}), m. quick-
silver; N. of two plants, {%= ṛṣabha%} and {%bhallā-%}
{%taka;%} a kind of hell; N. of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra [cf. {%dur-dharṣa%}]; of one of Śambara's
generals; N. of Mahiṣa. {%—Durdharā-yogādhyāya%}
{%(˚ga-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the Mīna-rāja-
jātaka, an astrological work attributed to Yavane-
śvara. {%—Dur-dharītu%} or {%dur-dhartu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. irresistible, unrestrainable. {%—Dur-dharma, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having or obeying bad laws. {%—Dur-dharṣa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be laid hold of or assaulted,
secure from assault, not to be touched or violated,
inviolable, difficult of attainment or approach, diffi-
cult to be mastered or overpowered; inaccessible;
dangerous; haughty, distant; fearful, dreadful, awful;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra [cf. {%dur-%}
{%dhara%}]; of a mountain in Kuśa-dvīpa; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of two plants, {%= nāga-damanī, = kanthārī;%} [cf.
[Page0422-a+ 81]
{%dur-ādharṣa%} and {%duṣ-pradarṣa.%}] {%—Durdhar-%}
{%ṣa-kumāra-bhūta, as,%} m. ‘who has become a
youth of inviolable (sanctity),’ N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Dur-dharṣaṇa = dur-dharṣa,%} q. v. {%—Dur-%}
{%dharṣa-tā,%} f. or {%durdharṣa-tva, am,%} n. difficulty
of being touched or of being conquered, intangibility,
inviolability. {%—Dur-dhā, ās,%} f. bad order, derange-
ment; [cf. {%dur-dhita.%}] {%—Dur-dhārya, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be borne or suffered; (with {%manasā,%} diffi-
cult to be kept in mind or recollection.) {%—Dur-%}
{%dhita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. badly placed or arranged,
loosely arranged, not in order, untidy. {%—Dur-dhī,%}
{%īs, īs, i,%} weak-minded, stupid, silly; [cf. {%dūḍhī.%}]
{%—Dur-dhur, ūr, ūr, ūr,%} Ved. unfitted for drawing
vehicles; (Sāy.) difficult to be restrained. {%—Dur-%}
{%naya, as,%} m. bad conduct, imprudent or impolitic
behaviour, injustice; (often incorrectly written {%dur-%}
{%ṇaya,%} but cf. {%dur-ṇāman%} and {%durṇihitaiṣin.%})
{%—Dur-nāmaka, am,%} n. ‘having a bad name,’
hemorrhoids, piles. {%—Dur-nāman, ā,%} m., N. of a
Yakṣa; N. of a chapter of the Brahma-Purāṇa;
({%ā%} and {%mnī%}), f. a cockle, scollop, kind of muscle;
({%a%}), n. piles or hemorrhoids; [cf. {%dur-ṇāman.%}]
{%—Durnāmāri (˚ma-ari), i,%} n. ‘enemy of hemor-
rhoids, i. e. destroying them,’ the bulbous root of
Amorphophallus Campanulatus. {%—Dur-nigraha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} difficult of restraint, irrepressible, ungovern-
able. {%—Dur-nimita, as, ā, am,%} badly or carelessly
put to the ground (as the feet). {%—Dur-nimitta,%}
{%am,%} n. a bad omen; a bad pretext. {%—Dur-niyantu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. difficult to be checked or held back;
(Sāy. in one passage) bad restrainer (as if gen. c. of
{%niyantṛ%}). {%—Dur-nirīkṣa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to
be looked at or seen. {%—Dur-nirīkṣya, as, ā, am,%}
difficult or hard to be looked at, scarcely visible.
{%—Dur-nivartya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be turned
back (as a flying army). {%—Dur-nivāra%} or {%dur-%}
{%nivārya, as, ā, am,%} unrestrainable, difficult to be
kept back, stopped, checked, hindered or contra-
dicted, difficult to suppress, irrepressible; invincible,
unconquerable. {%—Durnivāra-tva, am,%} n. irrepressi-
bleness, unrestrainableness. {%—Dur-nivṛtta, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be returned from. {%—Dur-niṣkramaṇa%}
or {%dur-niṣprapatana%} or {%dur-niḥsaraṇa, am,%} n.
coming out or escaping with difficulty, difficult
escape. {%—Dur-nīta, as, ā, am,%} badly managed, ill-
conducted, ill-governed, improperly or unjustly de-
cided, wrong; ({%am%}), n. a bad act, misconduct,
imprudent conduct, impolicy; ill luck; [cf. {%dur-%}
{%naya%} and {%duṣ-praṇīta.%}] {%—Durnīta-bhāva, as,%}
m. bad behavious, misconduct, imprudent conduct.
{%—Dur-nīti, is,%} f. maladministration, impolicy, &c.;
see {%dur-ṇīti%}. {%—Dur-nṛpa, as,%} m. a bad king.
{%—Dur-baddha, as, ā, am,%} badly fastened. {%—Dur-%}
{%bala, as, ā, am,%} of little strength, weak, feeble,
thin, emaciated, impotent, scanty; ({%as%}), m. circum-
cised, having the glans penis void of prepuce, (also
written {%dur-vala%}); a kind of bird, {%= bhāṇḍīka,%}
(also written {%dur-vala;%} cf. {%durbalika%}); ({%ā%}), f. a
species of plant {%(= ambu-śirīṣikā)%}. {%—Durbala-tā,%}
f. weakness, feebleness, thinness. {%—Durbalāgni (˚la-%}
{%ag˚), is, is, i,%} having a weak digestion. {%—Durbalāg-%}
{%ni-tā,%} f. weakness of digestion. {%—Durbalāyāsa (˚la-%}
{%āy˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘weak of effort,’ ineffective. {%—Dur-%}
{%balika%} or {%durvalika, as,%} m. a kind of bird, {%=%}
{%dur-bala%}. {%—Durbalīyas, ān, asī, as,%} weaker,
feeble. {%—Durbalendrīya (˚la-in˚), as, ā, am,%}
having feeble (i. e. unrestrained) organs of sense.
{%—Dur-bāla, as, ā, am,%} bald-headed, red-haired;
void of prepuce; (various reading for {%dur-bala.%})
{%—Dur-bīriṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bristly, rough (as a
beard). {%—Dur-buddhi, is,%} f. weak-mindedness,
silliness; ({%is, is, i%}), weak-minded, silly, foolish;
perverse, evil-minded, badly disposed; ignorant.
{%—Dur-budha, as, ā, am,%} little-minded, weak-
minded, silly. {%—Dur-bodha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to
be understood, unintelligible, unfathomable. {%—Dur-%}
{%brāhmaṇa, as,%} m. a bad Brāhman. {%—Dur-bhakṣa%}
or {%dur-bhakṣya, as, ā, am,%} to be eaten with
difficulty. {%—Dur-bhaga, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
gained or obtained; unfortunate, unlucky; ({%ā%}), f. a
[Page0422-b+ 81]
wife disliked by her husband; a bad or ill-tempered
woman, a shrew; (personified) = Old Age, daughter
of Time; [cf. {%daurbhāgya%} and {%daurbhagineya.%}]
{%—Durbhaga-tva, am,%} n. the being unlucky or
unfortunate, ill luck, ill fortune. {%—Dur-bhagna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} badly broken. {%—Dur-bhaṅga, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be broken, difficult to be loosened. {%—Dur-%}
{%bhara, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be borne, insupport-
able, burdensome, troublesome; hard to be main-
tained or supported. {%—Dur-bhāgya, as, ā, am,%}
unfortunate, unlucky; ({%am%}), n. ill luck. {%—Dur-bhā-%}
{%vanā,%} f. an evil thought; bad inclination. {%—Dur-%}
{%bhāvya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be kept in the
memory or to be imagined. {%—Dur-bhāṣita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} badly spoken or uttered. {%—Dur-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} speaking ill, abusing, insulting. {%—Dur-bhikṣa,%}
{%am,%} n. scarcity of provisions, dearth, famine; want in
general; (also wrongly read {%dur-bhikṣya.%}) {%—Dur-%}
{%bhikṣa-tva, am,%} n. a state of famine, scarcity of
food. {%—Durbhikṣa-vyasana, am,%} n. the horrors of
famine. {%—Durbhikṣavyasanin, ī, inī, i,%} afflicted
by famine. {%—Dur-bhida, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
broken or torn asunder or destroyed. {%—Dur-bhiṣa-%}
{%jya, am,%} n., Ved. difficult cure. {%—Dur-bhūta, am,%} n.,
Ved. ill luck, bad fortune; damage. {%—Dur-bhṛti, is,%}
f., Ved. scanty maintenance or subsistence. {%—Dur-%}
{%bheda%} or {%dur-bhedya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
broken or divided or torn asunder, not easily dis-
united or separated, firm. {%—Dur-bhrātṛ, tā,%} m. a
bad brother; [cf. {%daurbhrātra.%}] {%—Dur-makha,%}
see {%a-durmakha%}. {%—Dur-maṅgala, as, ā, am,%}
inauspicious. {%—Dur-mati, is,%} f., Ved. bad disposi-
tion of mind, evil intention, envy, hatred; ({%is, is, i%}),
weak-minded, silly, ignorant, simple; a blockhead;
evil-minded, malicious, wicked; ({%is%}), m., N. of a
demon; N. of the fifty-fifth year of the cycle of
Jupiter which lasts sixty years. {%—Durmatī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} done unadvisedly or through bad advice.
{%—Dur-mada, as,%} m. a mad conception or imagin-
ation or illusion; ({%as, ā, am%}), drunken, fierce,
ferocious, seized by a mad illusion, infatuated; ({%as%}),
m., N. of one of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra;
of a son of Dhṛta and father of Pra-cetas; of a son
of Bhadra-sena and father of Dhanaka; N. of a son of
Vasu-deva and Rohiṇī or Pauravī. {%—Durmada-vīra-%}
{%mānin, ī, inī, i,%} fancying (one's self) a hero in
(one's) foolish pride. {%—Durmadāndha (˚da-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘blinded by mad illusion,’ besotted.
{%—Dur-manas, as,%} n. bad disposition or perversity
of mind, evil intention; ({%ās, ās, as%}), distressed or
troubled in mind, depressed in spirit, discouraged,
sad, melancholy, meditating sorrowfully; [cf. Zend
<nsi>dus-mananh;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">δυσ-μενής.</lang>] {%—Durmanāya,%}
Nom. A. {%durmanāyate,%} &c., to be or become
troubled in mind or sad, to meditate sorrowfully.
{%—Dur-manuṣya, as,%} m. a wicked man, a bad or
mischievous man. {%—Dur-mantu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
difficult to be understood. {%—Dur-mantra, as,%} m. or
{%dur-mantraṇā,%} f. bad advice, evil or bad counsel.
{%—Dur-mantrita, as, ā, am,%} imprudently advised;
({%am%}), n. an imprudent advice. {%—Dur-mantrin, ī,%}
m. an evil adviser, a bad counsellor or minister; an
unlucky minister; ({%ī, iṇī, i%}), having bad counsellors
or ministers. {%—Dur-manman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. badly
disposed, evil-minded. {%—Dur-mara, as, ā, am,%} not
easily dying, dying hardly, tenacious of life; ({%am%}),
n. difficult death, dying with difficulty, a hard
death; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of grass, {%= dūrvā, = śveta-%}
{%dūrvā%}. {%—Dur-maraṇa, am,%} n. any violent or un-
natural death. {%—Durmara-tva, am,%} n. the state of
dying with difficulty, a hard death. {%—Dur-marāyu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. not to be killed or made to die
easily, not easy to be destroyed. {%—Dur-maryāda,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having evil ways or courses, wicked.
{%—Durmaryāda-tā,%} f. misconduct, wickedness.
{%—Dur-marṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unbearable, insup-
portable, not to be suffered; not to be forgotten;
obstinate, angry, hostile; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of the
Asura Bali. {%—Dur-marṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to
be endured or borne, hard to be managed; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of one of the 100 sons
[Page0422-c+ 81]
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of Sṛñjaya. {%—Dur-%}
{%marṣita, as, ā, am,%} instigated to enmity, made
hostile, stirred up. {%—Dur-mallikā%} or {%dur-mallī,%} f. a
minor drama, a comedy, a farce. {%—Dur-mātsarya,%}
{%am,%} n. evil envy. {%—Dur-māyin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%dur-%}
{%māyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. using bad arts; (Sāy.) using
bad weapons. {%—Dur-mitra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. un-
friendly; ({%as%}), m., N. of an author of a Ṛg-veda
hymn; of a prince; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman. {%—Dur-%}
{%mitriya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unfriendly. {%—Dur-milā,%}
f., N. of two kinds of metre, one consisting of 4 × 32
syllabic instants, the other consisting of 4 × 8 anapests.
{%—Durmilikā,%} f., N. of a metre consisting of 4 × 32
syllabic instants. {%—Dur-mukha, as, ī, am,%} having
a bad countenance or an ugly face, hideous; foul-
mouthed, abusive, scurrilous; ({%as%}), m. a horse; N.
of a prince of the Pañcālas; of one of the 100 sons
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of an astronomer; of an ascetic; of
a Rakṣas; of one of the principal Nāgas or serpents;
N. of a Yakṣa; of a monkey; of a general of the
Asura Mahiṣa; N. of the twenty-ninth year of the
cycle of Jupiter which consists of sixty years; [cf.
{%daurmukhi.%}] {%—Dur-muhūrta, as, am,%} m. n. an
inauspicious hour or moment. {%—Dur-mūlya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} high-priced, dear; ({%am%}), n. anything of high
price or value. {%—Dur-medha, as, ā, am,%} or more
correctly {%dur-medhas, ās, ās, as,%} dull-witted, simple-
minded, silly, stupid, ignorant, uninformed. {%—Dur-%}
{%medha-tva, am,%} n. dulness or weakness of intellect,
foolishness, stupidity. {%—Dur-medhāvin, ī, inī, i,%}
{%= dur-medha%} above. {%—Dur-maitra, as,%} &c., un-
friendly, hostile, an enemy. {%—Dur-moca, as, ā, am,%}
hard to unloose. {%—Dur-moha, as%} or {%ā,%} m. or f.,
N. of a tree, {%= kāka-tuṇḍī%}. {%—Dur-yavana, am,%}
ind. the bad Yavanas. {%—Dur-yaśas, as,%} n. ill repute,
dishonour, disgrace. {%—Dur-yāman, ā,%} m. ‘going
badly,’ N. of a prince; (also read {%dur-dama.%}) {%—Dur-%}
{%yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. difficult to be yoked. {%—Dur-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. bad contrivance, clumsy artifice, bad or
inauspicious conjunction. {%—Dur-yodha, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be conquered. {%—Dur-yodhana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} difficult to be conquered, invincible; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of the eldest of the Kuru princes and leader in
the war against his cousins the Pāṇḍavas and Kṛṣṇa,
described in the Mahā-bhārata; N. of a son of
Su-durjaya; [cf. {%su-yodhana.%}] {%—Duryodhana-tā,%}
f. the state of being difficult to be conquered, invin-
cibility, difficulty of being attacked. {%—Duryodhana-%}
{%vīrya-jñāna-mudrā,%} f. ‘the mark of the knowledge
of invincible heroism,’ a peculiar position of the
hands. {%—Dur-yoni, is, is, i,%} of low or impure
origin. {%—Dur-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} badly marked.
{%—Dur-lakṣya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be observed,
hardly visible. {%—Dur-laṅghana%} or {%dur-laṅghya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be surmounted or transgressed,
insurmountable, not to be overcome. {%—Durlaṅ-%}
{%ghana-śakti, is,%} f. of insurmountable power. {%—Dur-%}
{%labha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be obtained, hard to
be attained, difficult of attainment or accomplish-
ment, difficult to be found or met with, scarce, rare;
excellent, eminent; dear, beloved; difficult (with an
inf., e. g. {%ratho durlabhaḥ samāroḍhum,%} a chariot
difficult to be mounted); ({%as%}), m. a kind of
plant, = Curcuma Amhaldi or Zerumbet, {%= karbura,%}
{%kacchura;%} N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of two plants,
{%= śveta-kaṇṭa-kārī%} and {%dur-ālabhā%}. {%—Dur-la-%}
{%bhaka, as,%} m., N. of a king of Kaśmīra, also called
Pratāpāditya. {%—Durlabha-tara, as, ā, am,%} extremely
difficult of attainment, more hard to be obtained. {%—Dur-%}
{%labha-tva, am,%} n. difficulty of attainment, scarceness,
rarity. {%—Durlabha-vardhana, as,%} m., N. of a king
of Kaśmīra. {%—Durlabha-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a
temple built by Durlabha-vardhana. {%—Dur-lalita%} or
{%durlalitaka, as, ā, am,%} ill-bred, ill-mannered, un-
civil; spoilt, wayward, naughty; ({%am%}), n. ill-breed-
ing, waywardness, rudeness. {%—Dur-lasita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ill-mannered; (various reading for {%dur-lalita;%}
cf. {%dur-vilasita.%}) {%—Dur-lābha, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be obtained, {%= dur-labha%}. {%—Dur-lekhya, am,%}
n. a false or forged document. {%—Dur-vaca, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} difficult to be uttered, hard to be spoken, difficult
[Page0423-a+ 81]
to be explained, not to be spoken about; anything
about which it is difficult or disagreeable to speak;
speaking ill or improperly, abusing; ({%am%}), n. abuse,
censure; evil or unlucky speech. {%—Dur-vacana,%}
{%am,%} n. a harsh expression, abusive language. {%—Dur-%}
{%vacas, as,%} n. evil speech, bad language, insult,
abuse; ({%ās, ās, as%}), using bad or abusive language;
difficult to be explained or answered; [cf. {%dur-%}
{%vaca.%}] {%—Durvacas-tva, am,%} n. bad or abusive
language; difficulty of being answered. {%—Dur-va-%}
{%daka, as, ā, am,%} speaking or uttering badly or
indistinctly, uttering incoherently, stammering. {%—Dur-%}
{%varāha, as,%} m., Ved. a wild hog (?). {%—Dur-varṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of a bad or inferior colour, bad-coloured;
of a bad or low species or class; ({%am%}), n. silver,
(opposed to {%su-varṇa,%} gold); the fragrant bark of
Feronia Elephantum (commonly Elabāluka). {%—Dur-%}
{%varṇaka, am,%} n. silver. {%—Dur-vartu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. difficult to be kept back or restrained, irre-
sistible. {%—Dur-vala,%} see {%dur-bala%}. {%—Dur-vasa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be inhabited or resided in;
difficult to be passed or spent (as time). {%—Dur-%}
{%vasati, is,%} f. a difficult dwelling, painful residence.
{%—Dur-vaha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be borne or
supported. {%—Dur-vākya, am,%} n. harsh or abusive
language. {%—Durvāg-bhava, as,%} m. the being abusive,
abusiveness, the use of bad language. {%—Dur-vāc, k,%}
f. evil speech, bad words, abuse; inelegant language
or utterance; ({%k, k, k%}), having a bad voice, speaking
ill, using bad language. {%—Dur-vācya, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be uttered or spoken; abusive, harsh (as
words); ({%am%}), n. any harsh or bad or ill-omened
speech, inauspicious news; censure, abuse. {%—Dur-%}
{%vāda, as,%} m. calumnious report, slander, defamation,
calumny; ({%as, ā, am%}), one who speaks badly or
incorrectly or ungrammatically, one who utters
abusive or unbecoming language. {%—Dur-vānta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has vomited badly or on whom
an emetic has not had the desired effect. {%—Dur-%}
{%vāra%} or {%dur-vāraṇa%} or {%dur-vāraṇīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} difficult to be restrained or stopped, not
to be repressed or checked, irresistible. {%—Durvā-%}
{%ra-tva, am,%} n. irrepressibleness, unrestrainableness.
{%—Dur-vārita, as, ā, am,%} badly restrained or
obstructed. {%—Dur-vārttā,%} f. bad news, sad intelli-
gence. {%—Dur-vārya = dur-vāra%} above. {%—Durvār-%}
{%ya-tā,%} f. unrestrainableness, irrepressibleness. {%—Dur-%}
{%vāsanā,%} f. bad inclination, evil propensity; a chimera.
{%—Dur-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%} badly clad, ill-dressed,
unclothed, denuded, naked; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi
or saint (who was a son of Atri by Anasūyā and an
incarnation of a portion of Śiva; he became notorious
for his irascible temperament). {%—Durvāseśvara-%}
{%liṅga (˚sa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga; N. of the
eighty-fifth chapter of the Kāśī-khaṇḍa of the
Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Durvāso-darpa-bhaṅga, as,%} m.
‘the humbling of the pride of Dur-vāsas,’ N. of
the fiftieth chapter of the Kṛṣṇa-khaṇḍa of the
Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Durvāsopaniṣad (˚sa-%}
{%up˚), t,%} f. ‘the mystical doctrine of Dur-vāsa (?),’ N. of
the thirty-fourth to the forty-first chapters of the
Jñāna-khaṇḍa of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Durvāso-mata-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n., N. of a work mentioned in the
commentary to the Ānanda-laharī or ‘wave of
pleasure’ by Gaurī-kānta-sārva-bhauma. {%—Durvāso-%}
{%vākya, am,%} n., N. of the ninety-ninth chapter of
the Uttara-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Durvāso-%}
{%śāpa-kathana, am,%} n. ‘the tale of the curse of
Dur-vāsas,’ N. of the thirty-eighth chapter of the
Uttara-khaṇḍa or fifth part of the Padma-Purāṇa.
{%—Dur-vāhita, am,%} n. a heavy load or burden.
{%—Dur-vikatthana, as, ā, am,%} boasting in an
arrogant or offensive manner. {%—Dur-vigāha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} difficult to be fathomed or penetrated or reached,
unfathomable; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the 100 sons
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dur-vigāhya, as, ā, am, = dur-%}
{%vigāha%} above. {%—Dur-vicintya, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be imagined, inconceivable, inscrutable. {%—Dur-%}
{%viceṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} behaving badly, ill-behaved, mis-
conducted. {%—Dur-vijñāna, am,%} n. comprehending
or understanding with difficulty; ({%as, ā, am%}), difficult
[Page0423-b+ 81]
to be understood or comprehended; having an evil
mind. {%—Dur-vijñeya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
understood or perceived, unintelligible. {%—Dur-vi-%}
{%tarka%} or {%durvitarkya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
reasoned about or discussed, difficult to be under-
stood. {%—Dur-vida, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be known
or discovered. {%—Dur-vidagdha, as, ā, am,%} ‘badly
burned,’ i. e. imperfectly skilled, unskilled, raw, scantily
versed, stupid, silly; wholly ignorant; foolishly puffed
up. {%—Dur-vidatra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ill-disposed,
envious, ungracious. {%—Dur-vidya, as, ā, am,%} unin-
formed, uneducated. {%—Dur-vidvas, vān, duṣī,%}
{%vas,%} Ved. evil-minded, ill-disposed, malignant. {%—Dur-%}
{%vidha, as, ā, am%} (‘acting badly,’ ‘of a bad nature’),
mean, low, base; wicked, malevolent; poor, badly
circumstanced, pauper, indigent; stupid, foolish, silly,
(? for {%dur-vidya.%}) {%—Dur-vidhi, is,%} m. ‘bad fate,’
bad luck, misfortune. {%—Dur-vinaya, as,%} m. impru-
dent conduct, bad behavious. {%—Dur-vinīta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ill-conducted, badly behaved, badly educated,
ill-mannered, unrefined, mean, wicked; stubborn,
obstinate, restive (as a horse); ({%as%}), m. a wicked
wretch, reprobate, ruffian; N. of a sage (associated
with Dur-vāsas, Kaṇva, Kātyāyana). {%—Durvinītaka%}
{%= dur-vinīta%}. {%—Dur-vipāka, as,%} m. a bad end or
result, evil consequences of acts done either in this or
a former birth. {%—Dur-vibhāga, ās,%} m. pl. ‘difficult
to be disunited,’ N. of a people. {%—Dur-vibhāvya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be conceived, incomprehensible,
inconceivable. {%—Dur-vibhāṣa, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be pronounced or uttered; ({%am%}), n. harsh or
offensive words, abuse. {%—Dur-vimocana, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be set free or liberated; ({%as%}), m., N. of
one of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dur-viro-%}
{%cana, as,%} m. ‘shining badly (?),’ N. of one of the
100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dur-vilasita, am,%} n.
a rude or ill-mannered trick, rudeness, naughtiness,
a wayward act; [cf. {%dur-lasita.%}] {%—Dur-vivaktṛ,%}
{%tā, trī, tṛ,%} declaring badly, answering wrongly.
{%—Dur-vivāha, as,%} m. a bad marriage, mesalliance.
{%—Dur-viśa, as, ā, am,%} hard to be entered, difficult
to be trod or walked upon. {%—Dur-viṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} bad-tempered (?); ill-natured, malignant; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Dur-viṣaha, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be borne or supported, intolerable, in-
supportable, difficult to be subdued or overcome,
irresistible; difficult to be performed; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva; N. of one of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra; (also read {%dur-visaha;%} cf. {%duḥ-ṣaha,%}
{%duḥ-saha, duṣ-prasaha.%}) {%—Dur-viṣahya, as,%}
{%ā, am, = dur-viṣaha%}. {%—Dur-vṛtta, am,%} n. bad
conduct, misconduct, ill-behaviour, mean practices;
({%as, ā, am%}), behaving badly, misbehaved, vile,
wicked, criminal, leading a low or infamous life,
following disreputable habits or business, cheating,
roguish, a cheat, rogue, blackguard. {%—Dur-vṛtti,%}
{%is,%} f. bad circumstances, distress, misery, want, indi-
gence; disreputable conduct, bad practices; fraud.
{%—Dur-vṛṣṭi, is,%} f. insufficient rain, drought,
dryness, aridity. {%—1. dur-veda, as, ā, am%} (rt. 1. {%vid%}),
having bad or little knowledge, unlearned; difficult
to be known. {%—2. dur-veda, as, ā, am%} (rt. 3. {%vid%}),
difficult to be found. {%—Dur-vyavasthāpaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deciding badly, giving a bad or unfavourable
judgment. {%—Dur-vyavahāra, as,%} m. a wrong judg-
ment (in law). {%—Dur-vyāhṛta, as, ā, am,%} spoken
badly or ill; ({%am%}), n. a bad or unfit expression.
{%—Dur-vrajita, as,%} m. a bad or improper gait, bad
manner of going. {%—Dur-vrata, as, ā, am,%} disobe-
dient, not conforming to rules; [cf. {%daurvratya.%}]
{%—Dur-haṇa%} or {%dur-hana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. difficult
to be killed, difficult to be destroyed or overcome,
hard to be overpowered, irresistible; ({%ṇā%}), f., Ved.
ill luck, misfortune. {%—Durhaṇāyat, an, antī, at,%}
or {%durhaṇāyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. seeking to destroy,
intending injury, meditating evil or damage. {%—Dur-%}
{%haṇā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. fatal, pernicious. {%—Dur-%}
{%haṇu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having deformed jaws. {%—Dur-%}
{%hana,%} see {%dur-haṇa%}. {%—Dur-hārd, t, t, t,%} Ved. ill-
disposed; [cf. {%dur-hṛd%} and {%daurhārda.%}] {%—Dur-%}
{%hita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unfriendly, hostile, trouble-
[Page0423-c+ 70]
some. {%—Dur-huta, am,%} n. a badly offered sacrifice.
{%—Dur-hṛṇāyat, an, antī, at,%} or {%durhṛṇāyu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. whose fury is difficult to restrain or
be borne. {%—Dur-hṛd, t, t, t,%} bad-hearted, hard-
hearted, ill-disposed, inimical; ({%t%}), m. an enemy;
[cf. {%dur-hārd%} and {%daurhārda.%}] {%—Dur-hṛdaya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} evil-minded, bad-hearted; [cf. {%daur-%}
{%hṛdaya.%}] {%—Dur-hṛṣīka, as, ā, am,%} having
defective organs of sense, badly restraining the
senses; [cf. {%durbalendriya%} and {%dur-bala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22517<pc>0423-c<k1>durasya<k2>durasya
{%Durasya%}¦ (probably connected with 2. {%dur%}), Nom.
P. {%durasyati,%} &c., Ved. to wish to hurt, desire to
injure.
<LEND>

<L>22518<pc>0423-c<k1>durasyu<k2>durasyu
{%Durasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. wishing to do harm,
desirous of inflicting injury.
<LEND>

<L>22519<pc>0423-c<k1>dura<k2>dura<h>1
{#dura#} 1¦. {%dura, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according to
Sāy. fr. rt. 1. {%dā%}), a giver, granter; (perhaps rather to
be derived fr. rt. {%dṝ,%} one who opens, unlocks.)
<LEND>

<L>22520<pc>0423-c<k1>dura<k2>dura<h>2
{#dura#} 2¦. {%dura%} = 1. {%dur%} (occurring only in
{%śata-dura,%} q. v.). {%—Dura-dabhna, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
deceiving or illuding doors, i. e. not to be kept in
or restrained by bolts and bars.
<LEND>

<L>22521<pc>0423-c<k1>duroRa<k2>duroRa
{%Duroṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. residence, dwelling, home.
{%—Duroṇa-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. residing in a house.
<LEND>

<L>22522<pc>0423-c<k1>duroRAyu<k2>duroRAyu
{%Duroṇāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. fond of the house;
(Sāy.) frequenting the sacrificial hall.
<LEND>

<L>22523<pc>0423-c<k1>durya<k2>durya
{%Durya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to the door
or house; ({%ās%}), m. or f. pl. a residence; (perhaps
‘the posts of the door;’ cf. Lat. <nsi>fores.</nsi>)
<LEND>

<L>22524<pc>0423-c<k1>duryoRa<k2>duryoRa
{%Duryoṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a residence, dwelling-place,
{%= duroṇa%} (?); Sāy. {%= saṅgrāma,%} battle, or {%(dus +%}
{%yoni) = Duryoni,%} N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>22525<pc>0423-c<k1>durAka<k2>durAka
{#durAka#}¦ {%durāka, as,%} m., N. of a barbarous
tribe.
<LEND>

<L>22526<pc>0423-c<k1>duru<k2>duru
{#duru#}¦ {%duru, us,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>22527<pc>0423-c<k1>duruHPa<k2>duruHPa
{#duruHPa#}¦ {%duruḥpha,%} (in astrology) N. of the
fifteenth Yoga; (also read {%durapha%} and {%durupha.%})
<LEND>

<L>22528<pc>0423-c<k1>duruDarA<k2>duruDarA
{#duruDarA#}¦ {%durudharā,%} f. (a word borrowed
fr. the Gr. <lang n="greek">δορυφορία</lang>), a peculiar position of the
moon.
<LEND>

<L>22529<pc>0423-c<k1>durodara<k2>durodara
{#durodara#}¦ {%durodara, as,%} m. (probably for
{%darodara,%} q. v., and connected with rt. {%dṝ;%} accord-
ing to others perhaps fr. {%duras,%} acc. pl. of 1. {%dur,%}
q. v., + {%dara,%} piercing or breaking the doors; cf.
{%dura-dabhna%} under 2. {%dura%}), one who plays at
dice, a gamester; a dice-box; a stake; ({%am%}), n.
(according to a commentator also {%as,%} m.), playing,
gaming, a game at dice.
<LEND>

<L>22530<pc>0423-c<k1>durdara<k2>durdara
{%Durdara, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably for {%dardara,%} q. v.),
tearing; distressing; a kind of drug, {%= ṛṣabha;%}
[cf. {%daridra%} and {%dur-dhara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22531<pc>0423-c<k1>durga<k2>durga
{#durga#}¦ {%dur-ga, dur-gā,%} &c. See p. 420, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>22532<pc>0423-c<k1>durgi<k2>durgi
{#durgi#}¦ {%durgi = dur-gā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22533<pc>0423-c<k1>durdurUwa<k2>durdurUwa
{#durdurUwa#}¦ {%durdurūṭa%} or {%durduruṭa, as,%} m. (said
to be fr. 2. {%dur,%} ‘vile,’ repeated), an expression of
reproach; an atheist, {%= karaṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>22534<pc>0423-c<k1>durDurUwa<k2>durDurUwa
{%Durdhurūṭa%}¦ or {%durdhuruṭa, as,%} m. a pupil
who does not obey his teacher without exercising
his own judgment.
<LEND>

<L>22535<pc>0423-c<k1>durdritA<k2>durdritA
{#durdritA#}¦ {%durdritā,%} f. a kind of creeping
plant.
<LEND>

<L>22536<pc>0423-c<k1>durv<k2>durv
{#durv#}¦ {%durv,%} cl. 1. P. {%dūrvati,%} &c., to hurt,
injure, kill; [cf. rt. {%dhurv.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22537<pc>0423-c<k1>durvAri<k2>durvAri
{#durvAri#}¦ {%durvāri, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a tribe
of the Kāmbojas.
<LEND>

<L>22538<pc>0423-c<k1>durvAsas<k2>durvAsas
{#durvAsas#}¦ {%dur-vāsas.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22539<pc>0423-c<k1>dul<k2>dul
{#dul#}¦ {%dul,%} cl. 10. P. {%dolayati,%} &c., to
swing, heave upwards, raise, throw up,
whirl, shake to and fro, cause to oscillate or vibrate,
excite; [cf. {%tul, dola, dolāya.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0424-a+ 76]

<L>22540<pc>0424-a<k1>dulA<k2>dulA
{%Dulā,%}¦ f., Ved. ‘shaking,’ N. of an Iṣṭakā or
sacrificial brick.
<LEND>

<L>22541<pc>0424-a<k1>dulayate<k2>dulayate
{#dulayate#}¦ {%dul-ayate = dur-ayate.%} See {%dur-i,%}
p. 420, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22542<pc>0424-a<k1>duli<k2>duli
{#duli#}¦ {%duli, is,%} m., N. of a Muni or saint;
({%is, ī%}), f. a small or female tortoise; [cf. {%dauleya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22543<pc>0424-a<k1>duliduha<k2>duliduha
{#duliduha#}¦ {%duliduha, as,%} m., N. of a prince;
of a son of An-amitra and father of Dilīpa.
<LEND>

<L>22544<pc>0424-a<k1>duvanya<k2>duvanya
{#duvanya#}¦ {%duvanya%} (perhaps fr. rt. 1. {%du%}), Ved.
worshipping. {%—Duvanya-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. (Sāy.)
dwelling among worshippers, abiding with the de-
vout; [cf. {%duvas%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>22545<pc>0424-a<k1>duvas<k2>duvas
{%Duvas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. worship, honour, reverence;
(Sāy.) wealth; ({%ās, ās, as%}), active, moving rest-
lessly. {%—Duvas-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to worship. {%—Duvas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
worshipping; enjoying or receiving worship. {%—Du-%}
{%vo-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to
worship.
<LEND>

<L>22546<pc>0424-a<k1>duvasana<k2>duvasana
{%Duvasana, as, ā, am,%}¦ active, moving; (Sāy.)
adorable, worthy of worship.
<LEND>

<L>22547<pc>0424-a<k1>duvasya<k2>duvasya<h>1
1. {%duvasya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%duvasyati,%} &c., Ved. to
honour, worship, celebrate, acknowledge, reward;
to present with, give as a reward.
<LEND>

<L>22548<pc>0424-a<k1>duvasya<k2>duvasya<h>2
2. {%duvasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (according to Sāy.)
worthy of worship or honour.
<LEND>

<L>22549<pc>0424-a<k1>duvasyu<k2>duvasyu
{%Duvasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. honouring, worshipping,
respectful.
<LEND>

<L>22550<pc>0424-a<k1>duvoyA<k2>duvoyA
{%Duvoyā,%}¦ f., Ved. worship; (only occurring in inst.
{%duvoyā,%} in worship.)
<LEND>

<L>22551<pc>0424-a<k1>duvoyu<k2>duvoyu
{%Duvoyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. honouring, worshipping;
({%u%}), ind. reverently; out of acknowledgment.
<LEND>

<L>22552<pc>0424-a<k1>duS<k2>duS
{#duS#}¦ {%duś,%} euphonically substituted for {%dus%}
in comp. like {%duś-cakṣas.%} See bottom of col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>22553<pc>0424-a<k1>duScikya<k2>duScikya
{#duScikya#}¦ {%duścikya, am,%} n. (in astrology) N.
of the third lunar mansion.
<LEND>

<L>22554<pc>0424-a<k1>duz<k2>duz<h>1
{#duz#} 1¦. {%duṣ,%} euphonically substituted for
{%dus%} in {%duṣ-kara%} &c. See p. 425, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22555<pc>0424-a<k1>duz<k2>duz<h>2
{#duz#} 2¦. {%duṣ,%} cl. 4. P. (ep. also A.) {%duṣ-%}
{%yati, -te, dudoṣa, dokṣyati, aduṣat%}
(according to Vopa-deva also {%adukṣat%}), {%doṣṭum,%}
to become bad or corrupted, to be ruined, to perish,
suffer damage, to be soiled; to be or become
depraved or defiled or impure, to be violated (as a
woman), to be contaminated by a crime, to sin, to
commit a mistake, to be wrong; to be faithless or
unchaste (as a wife): Caus. {%dūṣayati%} (ep. also
{%-te%}), {%-yitum,%} to corrupt, spoil, make bad, cause to
perish, hurt, destroy, lay waste, to make unclean or
impure, to soil, defile, contaminate, vitiate, taint; to
dishonour or violate (as a girl or the wife of another);
to cause evil or misfortune (in astrology); to corrupt
the morals, deprave, demoralize; to adulterate; to
falsify; to rescind, abrogate, annul, retract; to object,
refute, disprove; to find fault with, speak ill of,
accuse, blame, abuse, contemn; (it is to be observed
that {%dūṣyate,%} Pass. of the Caus., may often more cor-
rectly be read where {%duṣyate%} is given in the printed
editions of epic poems, the sense of {%dūṣyate%} being
the same; according to Pāṇ. VI. 4, 91, another form
of the Caus., viz. {%doṣayati,%} &c., is optionally used in
speaking of moral corruption, e. g. {%kāmo dūṣayati%}
or {%doṣayati cittam,%} lust corrupts the mind.)
<LEND>

<L>22556<pc>0424-a<k1>duzwa<k2>duzwa
{%Duṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ become bad, spoiled, cor-
rupted, reduced to a bad state, injured, damaged,
ruined, spoiled, vitiated, contaminated, diseased,
tainted, infected, degraded; depraved; violated;
corrupt, vicious, wicked; bad, evil; faulty, guilty,
convicted, culpable; having evil intentions, ill-affected;
roguish, low, vile; worthless; painful; ({%ā%}), f. a bad
woman, a harlot, an unchaste woman; ({%am%}), n. sin,
an offence, crime, guilt; a kind of Costus, Costus
Speciosus, {%= kuṣṭha%}. {%—Duṣṭa-gaja, as,%} m. a
vicious elephant. {%—Duṣṭa-caritra, as, ā, am,%} ill-
conducted. {%—Duṣṭa-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} practising evil
deeds, wicked, criminal. {%—Duṣṭa-cetas, ās, ās, as,%}
[Page0424-b+ 78]
evil-minded, malevolent, bad-hearted. {%—Duṣṭa-tā,%}
f. or {%duṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. badness, wickedness; per-
versity, falsehood; contamination, defilement, viola-
tion. {%—Duṣṭa-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} or {%duṣṭa-buddhi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} having bad thoughts, evil-minded, evil-
affected. {%—Duṣṭa-bhāva, as, ā, am,%} evil-natured, of
a wicked or depraved nature, innately bad or wicked.
{%—Duṣṭabhāva-tā,%} f. wickedness, innate depravity.
{%—Duṣṭa-mati, is, is, i,%} evil-minded, wicked,
depraved. {%—Duṣṭa-mānasa, as, ī, am,%} evil-minded,
depraved in mind. {%—Duṣṭa-vāc, k, k, k,%} speaking
evil, uttering bad language. {%—Duṣṭa-vṛṣa, as,%}
m. a bad or vicious ox, a strong but stubborn ox
which refuses to draw. {%—Duṣṭa-vraṇa, as,%} m. a
dull boil or sore, an obstinate tumor; a sinus.
{%—Duṣṭātman (˚ṭa-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} of a bad nature,
evil-minded, wicked. {%—Duṣṭānvita (˚ṭa-an˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} defiled, rendered impure.
<LEND>

<L>22557<pc>0424-b<k1>duzwi<k2>duzwi
{%Duṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. corruption, corruptness, depravity.
<LEND>

<L>22558<pc>0424-b<k1>duzwIya<k2>duzwIya
{%Duṣṭīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%duṣṭīyati,%} &c., to become
bad or corrupted (?).
<LEND>

<L>22559<pc>0424-b<k1>duzwa<k2>duzwa
{#duzwa#}¦ {%duṣṭa.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22560<pc>0424-b<k1>duzWu<k2>duzWu
{#duzWu#}¦ {%duṣṭhu.%} See p. 425, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22561<pc>0424-b<k1>duzyanta<k2>duzyanta
{#duzyanta#}¦ {%duṣyanta.%} See p. 425, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>22562<pc>0424-b<k1>dus<k2>dus
{#dus#}¦ {%dus,%} ind. (related to rt. 2. {%duṣ,%} and
reckoned by Pāṇini among the Upa-sargas), a particle
and prefix to nouns and rarely to verbs, implying
evil, bad, badly, wicked, wickedly, difficult, hard, with
difficulty, slight, inferior, &c., and sometimes equiva-
lent to the English prefix {%in-%} or {%un-;%} [cf. rt. 2. {%duṣ;%}
rt. 1. {%dviṣ:%} Zend <nsi>dush, dus-mananh, dush-i-ti:</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">δυς</lang> e. g. <lang n="greek">δυσ-μενής:</lang> Goth. <nsi>tus</nsi> in <nsi>tuz-veryan:</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>zur-:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>do, do-dhail,</nsi> ‘bad luck;’
<nsi>do-dhuine,</nsi> ‘a bad man;’ <nsi>do-dheanta,</nsi> ‘hard to be
done;’ <nsi>do-bhasuighte,</nsi> ‘immortal.’] {%Dus%} becomes
{%dur,%} q. v., before vowels and soft consonants; becomes
{%dū,%} q. v., before {%r;%} remains unchanged before {%t, th%}
(not however in the earlier language where {%s%} becomes
{%ṣ%} and the following {%t, th%} are changed to {%ṭ, ṭh%});
becomes {%duṣ%} and rarely {%duḥ%} before {%k, kh%} [cf. {%duḥ-%}
{%kha%}], {%p, ph;%} becomes {%duḥ%} and rarely {%dus, duś, duṣ%}
before {%s, ś,%} and {%ṣ.%} Those compounds in which {%dus%}
becomes {%dur%} and {%dū%} will be found under {%dur%} and
{%dū%} respectively. The other compounds formed with
{%dus%} are as follow. {%—Duḥ-paca, duḥ-patana, duḥ-%}
{%pattra, duḥ-prajña,%} &c., see {%duṣ-paca,%} &c., p. 425,
col. 2. {%—Duḥ-śaṃsa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. wishing evil,
malevolent, malicious, wicked. {%—Duḥ-śaka%} or {%duḥ-%}
{%śakta, as, ā, am,%} or {%duḥ-śakti, is, is, i,%} having no
power, possessed of little power, powerless. {%—Duḥ-%}
{%śala, as,%} m., N. of one of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the only daughter of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra, (she was the wife of king Jayad-ratha.)
{%—Duḥ-śasta, as, ā, am,%} badly recited; ({%am%}), n.
a bad recitation. {%—Duḥ-śāka, am,%} ind. the luckless
Śākas (see Pāṇ. II. 1, 6). {%—Duḥ-śāsa, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be controlled. {%—Duḥ-śāsana, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be governed, intractable, difficult to be
managed; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the 100 sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Duḥ-śāsu, us, us, u,%} Ved. wishing
evil, malevolent. {%—Duḥ-śīma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%=%}
{%duṣ-prāpa,%} difficult to be attained; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a man?; [cf. {%su-śīma.%}] {%—Duḥ-śīla, as, ā, am,%}
badly disposed, ill-behaved, reprobate, abandoned.
{%—Duḥśīla-tā,%} f. bad behaviour, badness of disposi-
tion. {%—Duḥ-śṛṅgī,%} f. a disloyal wife. {%—Duḥ-śeva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘badly propitious,’ envious; (Sāy.)
difficult to serve (as if {%seva%}); delighting in evil.
{%—Duḥ-śodha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be cleaned.
{%—Duḥ-śoṣa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be dried.
{%—Duḥ-śruta, as, ā, am,%} badly or wrongly heard.
{%—Duḥ-ṣanta, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Bharata; [cf. {%dauḥṣanti;%} later forms are {%duṣ-%}
{%manta, duṣyanta, duṣvanta, duḥṣvanta.%}]
{%—Duḥ-ṣama, as, ā, am,%} unlike, uneven; adverse,
unlucky, unfortunate; wrong; ({%am%}), ind. unevenly,
improperly; at a wrong time; ({%ā%}), f. (with Jainas)
N. of two spokes in the wheel of time, viz. the fifth
[Page0424-c+ 81]
in the Ava-sarpiṇī, and the second in the Ut-sarpiṇī;
[cf. {%duḥ-sama.%}] {%—Duḥṣama-suṣamā,%} f. ‘both
unfortunate and fortunate’ (but with a preponderance
of misfortune), N. of two spokes in the Jaina wheel
of time, viz. the fourth in the Ava-sarpiṇī, and the
third in the Ut-sarpiṇī. {%—Duḥ-ṣaha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. difficult to be borne, irresistible; [cf. {%duḥ-saha.%}]
{%—Duḥ-ṣupta, as, ā, am,%} sleeping badly, having
bad dreams. {%—Duḥ-ṣṭuta%} and {%duḥ-ṣṭuti,%} see {%du-%}
{%ṣṭuta, du-ṣṭuti,%} p. 425, col. 2. {%—Duḥ-ṣvapnya,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. ‘causing bad dreams,’ evil dream, pain;
(Sāy.) poverty; [cf. {%jāgra-d˚, svapna-d˚, dauḥ-%}
{%ṣvapnya, duḥ-svapna.%}] {%—Duḥ-saṃlakṣya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} difficult to be observed or recognised. {%—Duḥ-%}
{%saṃskāra, as,%} m. a bad custom or practice. {%—Duḥ-%}
{%saktha, as, ā, am,%} or {%duḥ-sakthi, is, is, i,%} having
deformed thighs. {%—Duḥ-saṅga, as,%} m. bad inclina-
tion, evil attachment. {%—Duḥ-sañcāra, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be passed. {%—Duḥ-sañcintya, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be conceived or imagined. {%—Duḥ-sattva,%}
{%am,%} n. an evil being, noxious creature, ferocious
animal. {%—Duḥsattva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} filled with or
infested by evil beings or ferocious animals. {%—Duḥ-%}
{%santuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} unsatisfied, discontented.
{%—Duḥ-sandhāna%} or {%duḥ-sandheya, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be joined together or united or reconciled.
{%—Duḥ-sama, as, ā, am,%} unequal, uneven, unlucky,
unfit, improper, evil, bad, unseasonable; [cf. {%duḥ-%}
{%ṣama.%}] {%—Duḥ-samatikrama, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be surmounted, insurmountable. {%—Duḥ-samī-%}
{%kṣya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be observed or per-
ceived. {%—Duḥ-sampāda%} or {%duḥ-sampādya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} difficult to be reached or attained. {%—Duḥ-%}
{%saha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be borne, unbearable,
irresistible; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the 100 sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of Puru-kutsa and father
of Sam-bhūti; of an evil demon; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet
of Śrī; N. of a shrub ({%= nāga-damanī%}); [cf. {%duḥ-%}
{%ṣaha, dur-viṣaha, duṣ-prasaha.%}] {%—Duḥ-sa-%}
{%hāya, as, ā, am,%} having evil companions or asso-
ciates. {%—Duḥ-sākṣin, ī,%} m. a false witness. {%—Duḥ-%}
{%sādhya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be accomplished;
difficult to be managed; difficult to be cured; diffi-
cult to be conquered. {%—Duḥ-sevya, as, ā, am,%} diffi-
cult to be used or dealt with, hard to be managed,
intractable. {%—Duḥ-strī,%} f. a bad woman. {%—Duḥ-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} ‘standing badly,’ badly fixed,
unsteady, disquieted; badly circumstanced, suffering
pain or affliction, distressed, unhappy; unwell, ill,
badly situated, ill-conditioned, poor, miserable; igno-
rant, unwise, a fool; ({%am%}), ind. badly, ill, unwell;
in bad circumstances. {%—Duḥ-sthita, as, ā, am, =%}
{%duḥ-stha%} above; ({%am%}), n. an improper manner
of standing. {%—Duḥ-sthiti, is,%} f. instability, unsteadi-
ness; ill condition, bad fortune, unhappiness. {%—Duḥ-%}
{%stheya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be stood; ({%am%}), n.
difficult standing or position. {%—Duḥ-snāna, am,%} n.
defective or inauspicious ablution. {%—Duḥ-sparśa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} difficult or unfit to be touched or laid hold
of, unpleasant to the touch; ({%as%}), m. the prickly
plant Alhagi Maurorum {%(= latā-karañja); (ā),%} f.,
N. of several plants, Solanum Jacquini [cf. {%kṣudra-%}
{%d˚%}]; Alhagi Maurorum, Mucuna Pruritus, Cassyta
Filiformis. {%—Duḥ-spṛśa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
touched; [cf. {%duḥ-sparśa.%}] {%—Duḥ-spṛṣṭa%} or {%du-%}
{%spṛṣṭa, am,%} n. slight contact, the slight action of
the tongue which produces the sounds {%y, r, l, v;%}
{%(as),%} m. a sound produced by this slight motion of
the tongue. {%—Duḥ-sphoṭa, as,%} m. ‘difficult to be
burst,’ a sort of weapon. {%—Duḥ-svana, as, ā, am,%}
sounding badly, cacophonous. {%—Duḥ-svapna, as,%} m. a
bad dream. {%—Duḥsvapna-darśana, as, ā, am,%} seeing
a bad dream. {%—Duḥsvapna-nāśa, as,%} m. the removal
of bad dreams. {%—Duḥsvapna-nāśana, as, ā, am,%}
removing bad dreams. {%—Duḥsvapna-pratibodhana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be awakened from sleep.
{%—Duḥsvapnopaśānti (˚na-up˚), is,%} f. the cessa-
tion of a bad dream. {%—Duś-cakṣas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. evil-eyed. {%—Duś-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati,%}
{%-ritum,%} to act wrongly or badly towards (with
acc. of person), to behave badly. {%—Duś-cara, as, %}
[Page0425-a+ 81]
{%ā, am,%} difficult to be gone to or approached,
unattainable, inaccessible, difficult to be passed or
spent (as time); difficult to be performed or accom-
plished; going with trouble or difficulty; acting ill,
behaving wickedly; ({%as%}), m. a bear (as moving
slowly); a bivalve shell. {%—Duścara-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
practising very difficult penance. {%—Duścara-tva, am,%}
n. inaccessibility, difficulty of being approached or
practised. {%—Duś-carita, as, ā, am,%} misbehaving,
wicked, abandoned; ({%am%}), n. misbehaviour, misdoing,
ill-conduct, wickedness; ({%āni%}), n. pl. (with Buddhists)
the ten chief sins, viz. murder, theft, adultery, lying,
calumny, lewdness, evil speech, covetousness, envy,
heresy. {%—Duścaritin, ī, inī, i,%} performing wicked
actions. {%—Duś-carman, ā, ā, a,%} affected with
disease of the skin, leprous; a circumcised man,
one whose prepuce is naturally or artificially wanting;
[cf. {%dauścarmya.%}] {%—Duś-cāritra, as, ā, am,%} or
{%duś-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} badly conducted, misbehaving.
{%—Duś-cikitsa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be cured,
incurable. {%—Duś-cikitsā,%} f. (in medic.) wrong
treatment. {%—Duś-cikitsita%} or {%duś-cikitsya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} difficult to be cured. {%—Duścikitsya-tama, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} most difficult to be cured. {%—Duścikitsya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. difficulty of being cured, incurableness.
{%—Duś-cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. thinking evil. {%—Duś-cintya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be thought about or under-
stood. {%—Duś-ceṣṭita, as, ā, am,%} misbehaving,
doing or designing evil; ({%am%}), n. evil purpose or
action, misconduct, error. {%—Duś-cyavana%} or {%duś-%}
{%cyāva%} or {%duś-cyāvana, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
felled or brought to the ground, unshaken, unmov-
able; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Indra; (another etymo-
logy for the latter meaning is based upon the legend,
that Indra having raised his arm to hurl his thunder-
bolt at Cyavana, had it fixed in that position by the
curse of the saint.) {%—Duś-chada, as, ā, am,%}
‘covering badly,’ forming a bad garment; difficult
to be clothed, hardly covered, tattered. {%—Duś-chid,%}
{%t, t, t,%} difficult to be cut or destroyed. {%—Duś-%}
{%chinna, as, ā, am,%} badly cut or separated, badly
extracted. {%—Duṣ-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} difficult
or hard to be done or performed or accomplished;
difficult to be reached or attained; difficult, arduous
(with inf., e. g. {%duṣkaraṃ kartum,%} difficult
to perform); difficult to be borne or supported;
doing badly or with difficulty, acting badly, wicked,
bad; ({%am%}), n. difficult or painful act, a difficult
task, a difficulty; atmosphere, ether; the tree of
plenty?; ({%am%}), ind. hardly, scarcely (with following
{%yadi%}). {%—Duṣkarakāri-tā,%} f. the state of experi-
encing difficulties. {%—Duṣkara-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} ex-
periencing difficulties, suffering what is hard to
be borne. {%—Duṣkara-caryā,%} f. ‘the performance
of difficulties,’ N. of the seventeenth chapter of the
Lalita-vistara which describes Śākya-muni as the
performer of difficult tasks. {%—Duṣ-karaṇa, am,%} n.
anything difficult to be done or performed, a diffi-
cult task. {%—Duṣ-karṇa, as,%} m., N. of one of the
100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; (also read {%duḥ-karṇa.%})
{%—Duṣ-karman, a,%} n. evil act, crime, wickedness,
sin; any difficult or painful act; ({%ā, ā, a%}), acting
wickedly, wicked, criminal. {%—Duṣ-kalevara, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. ‘the bad or miserable body,’ i. e. the
body considered as the seat of diseases &c. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%kāyastha-kula, am,%} n. the miserable writer-caste.
{%—Duṣ-kāla, as,%} m. ‘bad or all-destroying time,’
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Duṣ-kīrtti, is, is, i,%} dis-
honourable. {%—Duṣ-kula, am,%} n. a low family or
race; ({%as, ā, am%}), of a low family, low-born; [cf.
{%dauṣkula, dauṣkuleya, dauṣkulya.%}] {%—Duṣ-%}
{%kula-tā,%} f. lowness of origin, meanness of birth or
family. {%—Duṣkulīna, as, ā, am,%} of a low or
degraded family or race, low-born; ({%as%}), m. a sort of
perfume, commonly called Chora. {%—Duṣ-kṛt, t, t, t,%}
Ved. an evil-doer, offender, wicked, criminal. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done wrongly or wickedly, done
with difficulty or pain, badly organized, badly applied
(e. g. {%duṣkṛtā pūjā,%} badly applied worship);
({%am%}), n. evil action, misdeed, sin, crime, guilt.
{%—Duṣkṛta-karman, ā, ā, a,%} acting wickedly,
[Page0425-b+ 81]
wicked, reprobate, a criminal; ({%a%}), n. a wicked deed,
wickedness. {%—Duṣkṛta-vahiṣkṛta, as, ā, am,%}
free from sin. {%—Duṣkṛtātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%}
evil-minded, wicked, base. {%—Duṣ-kṛti, is, is, i,%}
or {%duṣkṛtin, ī, inī, i,%} acting wickedly, an evil-
doer. {%—Duṣ-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. badly
ploughed, ill-cultivated. {%—Duṣ-krama, as, ā, am,%}
difficult of access; going ill; ill-arranged, unme-
thodical. {%—Duṣ-kriyā,%} f. evil act, a misdemeanour.
{%—Duṣ-krīta, as, ā, am,%} badly purchased, bought
too dearly. {%—Duṣ-kha,%} see {%duḥkha%} at p. 418,
col. 2. {%—Duṣ-khadira, as,%} m. a tree related to
the Acacia Catechu {%(= khadira)%}. {%—Duṣ-ṭanu, us,%}
{%vī, u,%} Ved. having an ugly body, having an odious
form. {%—Duṣ-ṭara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. difficult to be
crossed or passed, hard to be overcome, unconquer-
able, invincible, irresistible; not to be subdued; not
to be surpassed or excelled; difficult to be endured;
[cf. the later form {%dus-tara.%}] {%—Duṣ-ṭarītu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. {%= duṣ-ṭara; (us),%} m. epithet of Indra;
N. of a man. {%—Du-ṣṭuta, am,%} n. (for {%duḥ-ṣṭuta%}),
Ved. faulty recitation of the Stotra. {%—Du-ṣṭuti, is,%}
f. (for {%duḥ-ṣṭuti%}), Ved. a faulty or bad hymn.
{%—Duṣṭhu, us, us, u%} (for {%duḥ-sthu%}), ‘standing
badly,’ ill-behaved, depraved; ({%u%}), ind. ill, bad;
improperly, incorrectly; [cf. {%dauṣṭhava%} and {%su-%}
{%ṣṭhu.%}] {%—Duṣ-paca, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
digested. {%—Duṣ-patana, am,%} n. falling badly,
(formed to explain {%apa-bhraṃśa.%}) {%—Duṣ-pattra,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of perfume, commonly called Chora;
(also read {%duḥ-pattra.%}) {%—Duṣ-pada, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. (according to Sāy. {%= duṣ-prapadana%}), not
to be reached or overtaken. {%—Duṣ-parājaya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} difficult to be conquered; ({%as%}), m., N.
of one of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%parigraha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be seized or kept.
{%—Duṣ-pariṇāma, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
finished or ended. {%—Duṣ-parihantu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. difficult to be destroyed or disturbed. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%parīkṣya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be investigated or
examined. {%—Duṣparśa,%} see {%duḥ-sparśa%}. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%pāna, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be drunk. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%pāra, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be crossed or passed
over; difficult to be accomplished or performed.
{%—Duṣ-pārṣṇigraha, as, ā, am,%} having a dan-
gerous enemy in the rear; (also read {%duḥ-pārṣṇi-%}
{%grāha.%}) {%—Duṣ-pīta, as, ā, am,%} badly drunk.
{%—Duṣ-putra, as,%} m. a bad son. {%—Duṣ-puruṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. a bad man; (also read {%duḥ-puruṣa;%} cf.
{%dauṣpuruṣya.%}) {%—Duṣ-pūra, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be filled or satiated or satisfied. {%—Duṣ-prakampa%}
or {%duṣ-prakampya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
shaken or agitated, immovable. {%—Duṣ-prakāśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘lighting badly,’ obscure, dark. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%prakṛti, is, is, i,%} evil-natured, bad-tempered.
{%—Duṣ-prajas, ās, ās, as (prajas = prajā),%} hav-
ing bad offspring. {%—Duṣ-prajña, as, ā, am,%}
having a weak intellect, weak-minded, stupid; [cf.
{%duḥprajña.%}] {%—Duṣprajña-tva, am,%} n. stupidity.
{%—Duṣ-prajñāna, am,%} n. want of understanding,
weak intellect; ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. weak in intellect,
stupid. {%—Duṣ-praṇīta, as, ā, am,%} badly led, badly
conducted or trained, ill-managed; ({%am%}), n. im-
prudent or impolitic conduct; ill luck, evil fortune;
[cf. {%dur-nīta.%}] {%—Duṣ-pratara, as, ā, am,%} diffi-
cult to be passed over or crossed. {%—Duṣ-pratigraha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be taken or laid hold of.
{%—Duṣ-prativāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
warded off or averted. {%—Duṣ-prativīkṣaṇīya%} or
{%duṣ-prativīkṣya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be looked
at, one whose glance is unbearable. {%—Duṣ-pra-%}
{%dharṣa, as, ā, am,%} not to be assailed or meddled
with; difficult to be attacked; secure from assaults,
intangible, not to be touched; ({%as%}), m., N. of one
of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
two prickly plants which cannot be touched, {%=%}
{%kharjūrī,%} Phœnix Sylvestris; {%= dur-ālabhā,%} Alhagi
Maurorum; [cf. {%dur-ādharṣa%} and {%dur-dharṣa.%}]
{%—Duṣ-pradharṣaṇa, as, ī, am, = duṣ-pra-%}
{%dharṣa; (as),%} m., N. of one of the 100 sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the plant Melongena
[Page0425-c+ 78]
Incurva; [cf. {%vārtākī.%}] {%—Duṣ-pradharṣiṇī,%} f.
(wrong form for {%duṣ-pradharṣaṇī,%} according to
some) {%= kaṇṭakārī, = bṛhatī%}. {%—Duṣ-pradhṛ-%}
{%ṣya, as, ā, am, = duṣ-pradharṣa%}. {%—Duṣ-pra-%}
{%padana, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be overtaken or
attained. {%—Duṣ-pramaya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to
be measured, immeasurable. {%—Duṣ-pralambha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be deceived; (according to
others) difficult of attainment. {%—Duṣ-pravāda, as,%}
m. calumnious report, slander, defamation. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%pravṛtti, is,%} f. bad news, sad intelligence. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%praveśa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be entered; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of tree, {%= kanthārī%}. {%—Duṣ-prasaha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} difficult to be borne or supported or suffered,
hard to endure or resist, irresistible; terrible, frightful;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Jaina teacher; [cf. {%duṣ-prasā-%}
{%ha, dur-viṣaha, duḥ-saha, duḥ-ṣaha.%}] {%—Duṣ-%}
{%prasāda%} or {%duṣ-prasādana, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be propitiated or conciliated or appeased. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%prasādhana%} (perhaps wrongly read for {%duṣ-pra-%}
{%sādana%}) or {%duṣ-prasādhya, as, ā, am,%} difficult
to be managed or dealt with (as a bad-tempered
man). {%—Duṣ-prasāha, as, ā, am, = duṣ-pra-%}
{%saha%}. {%—Duṣ-praharṣa, as,%} m. ‘bad rejoicing,’
N. of one of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%prāpa%} or {%duṣ-prāpaṇa%} or {%duṣ-prāpya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} difficult of attainment, hard to attain, difficult
to be reached, unattainable, remote. {%—Duṣ-prāvī,%}
{%īs, īs, i,%} Ved. difficult of access, unfavourable, un-
friendly. {%—Duṣ-prīti, is,%} f. displeasure. {%—Duṣ-%}
{%prekṣa%} or {%duṣ-prekṣaṇīya%} or {%duṣ-prekṣya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be looked at, disagreeable to
the sight. {%—Duṣmanta, as,%} m. another form for
{%duṣyanta%} below; [cf. {%dauṣmanta, dauṣmanti,%}
{%suṣmanta.%}] {%—Duṣyanta, as,%} m. (a later form
for {%duḥ-ṣanta,%} q. v.), N. of a prince of the lunar
line or descendant of Puru, husband of Śakuntalā
and father of Bharata; [cf. {%dauṣyanta%} and {%dauṣ-%}
{%yanti.%}] {%—Duṣvanta, as,%} m. another form for
{%duṣyanta,%} q. v.; [cf. {%dauṣvanti%} and {%duḥ-ṣvanta.%}]
{%—Duṣvapnya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= duḥ-ṣvapnya,%}
q. v. {%—Dus-tapa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be endured
(as a penance). {%—Dus-tara, as, ā, am,%} or {%dus-%}
{%taraṇa, as, ī, am,%} or {%dus-taraṇīya,%} or {%dus-tāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%dus-tīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
crossed or passed over, hard to be traversed, impassa-
ble, hard to be subdued, invincible; [cf. the older
form {%duṣ-ṭara.%}] {%—Dus-tarka, as,%} m. false reason-
ing, bad reasoning, wrong argument. {%—Dustarka-%}
{%mūla, as, ā, am,%} founded on false or wrong reason-
ing. {%—Dus-tarkya, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be sup-
posed or reasoned about. {%—Dus-toṣa, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be satisfied. {%—Dus-tyaja%} or {%dus-tyājya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be relinquished or quitted.
{%—Dustha, dusthita, duspṛṣṭa,%} see {%duḥ-stha,%}
{%duḥ-spṛṣṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>22563<pc>0425-c<k1>dussaTa<k2>dussaTa
{#dussaTa#}¦ {%dussatha, as,%} m. a cock; a dog;
(perhaps for {%duḥ-saktha.%})
<LEND>

<L>22564<pc>0425-c<k1>dussani<k2>dussani
{#dussani#}¦ {%dussani, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>22565<pc>0425-c<k1>duh<k2>duh<h>1
{#duh#} 1¦. {%duh%} (connected with rt. {%tuh%}), cl.
1. P. {%dohati, dudoha, aduhat,%} and {%adohīt,%}
to hurt, pain, give pain, distress, torment.
<LEND>

<L>22566<pc>0425-c<k1>duh<k2>duh<h>2
{#duh#} 2¦. {%duh%} (the original form of this rt.
was probably {%dugh,%} cf. {%dugha%}), cl. 2. P. A.
{%dogdhi, dugdhe%} (2nd sing. {%dhokṣi, dhukṣe%}); Impf.
P. {%adhok%} (1st du. {%aduhva%}); Impv. P. {%dogdhu%}
(2nd sing. {%dugdhi,%} A. {%dhukṣva%}), {%dudoha, duduhe%}
(3rd pl. P. {%duduhus;%} Bhāg. -Purāṇa V. 15, 9, {%du-%}
{%dūhus%}), {%dhokṣyati, -te, adhukṣat, adhukṣata,%}
and {%adugdha:%} (Vedic and irregular forms are, {%dog-%}
{%dhe; dhukṣasva; duhām;%} 3rd sing. {%duhe;%} 3rd pl.
{%duhre, duhate,%} and {%duhrate; aduhran; dohat;%}
{%duhus; dhukṣan, dhukṣata; duhīyat;%} part.
{%duhāna%} and {%dughāna%}); Inf. {%dogdhum,%} Ved. {%dog-%}
{%dhos, dohase,%} to milk; to milk out, squeeze out; to
extract (as the juice of the Soma); to draw anything
out of another thing (with two acc., e. g. {%prāṇān%}
{%duhann ivātmānam,%} as it were drawing the life out
[Page0426-a+ 78]
of himself); to make a profit or extract gain out of
anything (with acc.); to enjoy; to give milk (A., in
this sense also cl. 4. {%duhyati, -te%}); to yield milk or
any desired object (A.), to grant desires (A.): Pass.
{%duhyate,%} Aor. {%adohi,%} to be milked, to be drawn
or extracted from: Caus. P. {%dohayati%} (rarely {%-te%}),
{%-yitum,%} Aor. {%adūduhat,%} to cause to milk or to be
milked, to cause to yield milk or any desired object;
to milk, milk out from, extract: Desid. {%dudhukṣati,%}
{%-te,%} to wish to milk, to wish to milk out or enjoy
[cf. {%dudhukṣu%}]: Intens. {%doduhyate, dodogdhi;%}
[cf. Goth. <nsi>tiuhan;</nsi> Them. <nsi>tuh, tiuha, tauh,</nsi>
<nsi>tuhum,</nsi> ‘to draw:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>tucian, teon, teoge:</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>ziuhan, ziug (gaziug), zaugyan:</nsi> Mod.
Germ. <nsi>ziehen:</nsi> Lat. <nsi>duc-ere:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>diugaim,</nsi> ‘I
drink off;’ <nsi>diughailfainn,</nsi> ‘sucking:’ Scot. <nsi>deog-</nsi>
<nsi>hail,</nsi> ‘to suckle.’]
<LEND>

<L>22567<pc>0426-a<k1>duh<k2>duh<h>3
3. {%duh, dhuk, k, k,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) milking,
yielding milk; yielding, granting (e. g. {%kāma-d˚,%}
{%go-d˚, gharma-d˚, ghṛta-d˚,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>22568<pc>0426-a<k1>duha<k2>duha
{%Duha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) milking;
yielding, granting (e. g. {%kāma-d˚, go-d˚;%} cf. {%dur-%}
{%duhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>22569<pc>0426-a<k1>duhat<k2>duhat
{%Duhat, an, atī, at,%}¦ milking; yielding, granting,
parting with.
<LEND>

<L>22570<pc>0426-a<k1>duhitf<k2>duhitf
{%Duhitṛ, tā,%}¦ f. a daughter (either as drawing milk
from the mother or as milking the cows, ‘the
milk-maid of the family’); [cf. Zend <nsi>dugh-dhar;</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">θύγ-ά-τηρ;</lang> Goth. <nsi>dauh-tar;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>toh-</nsi>
<nsi>tar;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>dush-ti;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>duk-te†</nsi> for <nsi>dukter;</nsi> the
original form must have been <nsi>dhugh-atar.</nsi>] {%—Du-%}
{%hituḥ-pati, is,%} m. a daughter's husband, son-in-law.
{%—Duhitṛ-tva, am,%} n. the state of being a daughter,
the condition of a daughter. {%—Duhitṛ-pati, is,%} m.
a daughter's husband. {%—Duhitṛ-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
having a daughter, possessing a daughter.
<LEND>

<L>22571<pc>0426-a<k1>duhya<k2>duhya
{%Duhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be milked, milkable.
<LEND>

<L>22572<pc>0426-a<k1>duhyu<k2>duhyu
{#duhyu#}¦ {%duhyu,%} a wrong form for {%druhyu.%}
<LEND>

<L>22573<pc>0426-a<k1>dU<k2>dU<h>1
{#dU#} 1¦. {%dū,%} generally written {%du.%} See 2. {%du,%}
p. 418, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22574<pc>0426-a<k1>dU<k2>dU
{%Dū, ūs, ūs, u,%}¦ burning with eagerness (?) in {%a-dū;%}
{%(ūs),%} f. pain, distress. {%—Dū-da, as, ā, am,%} giving
pain, afflicting, harassing.
<LEND>

<L>22575<pc>0426-a<k1>dUtaka<k2>dUtaka<h>1
1. {%dūtaka, as,%}¦ m. a N. of Agni in the form of
a forest conflagration; [cf. {%dava%} and {%dāva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22576<pc>0426-a<k1>dUna<k2>dUna<h>2
2. {%dūna, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. {%dūna%} see under rt. 1.
{%du%} at p. 418), burnt, inflamed; pained, afflicted,
distressed, fatigued; agitated. {%—Dūna-mānasa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} distressed in mind.
<LEND>

<L>22577<pc>0426-a<k1>dU<k2>dU<h>2
{#dU#} 2¦. {%dū%} at the beginning of some comps.
{%= dur%} for {%dus,%} as in the following examples.
{%—Dū-ḍabha%} or {%dū-ḷabha, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%dur%} for
{%dus + labha%}), difficult to be deceived, not to be
deceived. {%—Dū-ḍāś, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ%} (fr. {%dur%} for {%dus + dāś%}),
not offering oblations, not worshipping. {%—Dū-ḍāśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. = the preceding. {%—Dū-ḍhī, īs, īs,%}
{%i%} (fr. {%dur%} for {%dus + dhī%}), Ved. of an evil disposition.
{%—Dū-ḍhya, as, ā, am,%} incorrect form for the
preceding. {%—Dū-ṇaśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%dus + naś%}),
Ved. unattainable, inaccessible; [cf. {%dur-āśa, dur-%}
{%ṇaśa, dū-ṇāśa.%}] {%—Dū-ṇāśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%dus%}
{%+ nāśa,%} attainment), Ved. unattainable, inacces-
sible [cf. {%dur-ṇaśa%}]; ({%as%}), m., N. of an Ekāha;
({%as, ā, am%}), (fr. {%nāśa,%} destruction), imperishable, not
to be destroyed, not ceasing, perpetual. {%—Dū-rakta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} badly coloured or dyed. {%—Dū-rakṣya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} difficult to be guarded or preserved.
{%—Dū-rādha, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be accom-
plished. {%—Dū-rūḍha, as, ā, am,%} badly grown; badly
or imperfectly cicatrized. {%—Dūrūḍha-tva, am,%} n.
the state of being badly grown; bad or imperfect
cicatrization. {%—Dū-roha, as, ā, am,%} ascending or
climbing with difficulty. {%—Dū-rohaṇa, as, ā, am,%}
difficult to be ascended; ({%am%}), n., N. of a difficult
ritual recitation in which a verse is recited in seven
ways, (first only one Pāda, then one half of the verse,
then three Pādas, then the whole verse, then three
Pādas again, then one half of the verse, and then
[Page0426-b+ 77]
one Pāda again.) {%—Dūrohaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} recited
or recitable in the manner described above.
<LEND>

<L>22578<pc>0426-b<k1>dUta<k2>dUta
{#dUta#}¦ {%dūta, as,%} m. (probably fr. rt. 1. {%du,%} to go;
cf. {%dūra%}), a messenger, carrier of intelligence, envoy,
ambassador, go-between, negotiator, cf. {%agni-d˚, tvā-%}
{%d˚, yama-d˚;%} ({%ī%} or {%dūti, is%}), f. a female messenger,
confidante, procuress, go-between, &c. [cf. {%kāma-d˚%}];
a kind of bird; [cf. {%sārikā.%}] {%—Dūta-karman, a,%} n.
business or duty of a messenger. {%—Dūta-ghnī,%} f. ‘the
killer of messengers,’ a plant resembling the Kadamba,
{%= kadamba-puṣpī%}. {%—Dūta-tva, am,%} n. the office
of an ambassador, condition of an envoy. {%—Dūta-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} ‘having an ambassador as mouth,’
speaking by an ambassador. {%—Dūta-mocana, am,%}
n. ‘the liberating of a messenger,’ N. of the fifty-
sixth chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa or second part of
the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Dūta-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘the
characteristic mark of a messenger,’ N. of a chapter of
the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dūtāṅgada (˚ta-aṅ˚), am,%}
n. ‘Aṅgada as messenger,’ N. of a play. {%—Dūtī-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the office of a confidante, condition or func-
tion of a procuress. {%—Dūtī-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘the
characteristic of go-betweens,’ N. of a chapter of
the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dūty-upahāsa, as,%} m. ‘the
joking of go-betweens,’ N. of the 109th chapter of
the Śārṅgadhara-paddhati.
<LEND>

<L>22579<pc>0426-b<k1>dUtaka<k2>dUtaka<h>2
2. {%dūtaka, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see col. 1. under rt. 1.
{%dū%}), a messenger, ambassador [cf. {%deva-d˚%}]; ({%ikā%}),
f. a female messenger, go-between, &c.; a gadding,
gossiping, mischief-making woman; [cf. {%kāma-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22580<pc>0426-b<k1>dUtIkA<k2>dUtIkA
{%Dūtīkā,%}¦ f. {%= dūtikā%} under 2. {%dūtaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>22581<pc>0426-b<k1>dUtya<k2>dUtya
{%Dūtya, am,%}¦ n. the rank or employment or office
of an ambassador; an embassy, a message; [cf.
{%dautya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22582<pc>0426-b<k1>dUna<k2>dUna
{#dUna#}¦ {%dūna.%} See col. 1. and rt. 1. {%du%} at
p. 418.
<LEND>

<L>22583<pc>0426-b<k1>dUpra<k2>dUpra
{#dUpra#}¦ {%dūpra, as, ā, am,%} strong.
<LEND>

<L>22584<pc>0426-b<k1>dUr<k2>dUr
{#dUr#}¦ {%dūr,%} N. of the Prāṇa or vital breath
regarded as a deity.
<LEND>

<L>22585<pc>0426-b<k1>dUra<k2>dUra
{#dUra#}¦ {%dūra, as, ā, am%} (probably connected
with {%dūta%} and rt. 1. {%du,%} but said to be fr. rt. {%i%} with
prefix {%dur%} and affix {%ra,%} the rt. being then dropped,
see Uṇ.-sūt. II. 20; compar. {%davīyas,%} superl. {%da-%}
{%viṣṭha,%} q. v.), distant, far from (with abl. or gen.);
remote, long (e. g. {%gatvā dūram adhvānam,%} having
gone a long journey), a long way off; ({%am%}), n. distance,
farness, remoteness, a long way, a long distance. The
various cases of {%dūra%} are used adverbially, as follow:
({%am%}), ind. far, to a distance, far away, far or distant from
(with abl. or gen., e. g. {%grāmāt%} or {%grāmasya dū-%}
{%ram,%} far from the village), to a great height, aloft,
high above; to a great depth below, far below,
deeply; highly, in a high degree; {%dūraṃ kṛ,%} to
make distant, distance, surpass, exceed; ({%eṇa%}), ind.
far, in a distant place, from afar, by far, by a long
way; ({%āt%}), ind. from a distance, from afar, far from
(with abl., e. g. {%dūrād āvasathāt,%} far from the
fire-temple), afar, in a remote degree; a long way
back, from a remote period; ({%e%}), ind. in a distant
place, far, far away. {%—Dūra-ādiś, k, k, k%} (for {%dūre-%}
{%ādiś%}), Ved. announcing or proclaiming to a distance.
{%—Dūra-ādhī, īs, īs, i%} (for {%dūre-ādhī%}), whose
thoughts are in the distance or far away. {%—Dūra-%}
{%upabdas%} (for {%dūre-up˚%}), Ved. sounding to a dis-
tance; (perhaps ind.) {%—Dūra-ga, as, ā, am,%} going
far or to a distance, receding, being far, remote.
{%—Dūra-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone far away. {%—Dūra-%}
{%gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going far; ({%ī%}), m. an arrow.
{%—Dūra-gṛha, as, ā, am,%} whose house is distant.
{%—Dūra-grahaṇa, am,%} n. seizing or perceiving
objects from afar (a supernatural faculty). {%—Dūraṅ-%}
{%karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} making far, making distant,
removing. {%—Dūraṅ-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone to a
distance, far removed, distant. {%—Dūraṅ-gama, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} going far away or to a distance; ({%ā%}), f., scil.
{%bhūmi,%} one of the ten stages in the life of a Śrā-
vaka. {%—Dūra-cara, as, ā, am,%} going to a distance,
[Page0426-c+ 81]
walking far off. {%—Dūra-ja, as, ā, am,%} born in a
distant place, a native of a distant place. {%—Dūra-%}
{%tara, as, ā, am,%} farther; ({%e%}), ind. at some distance
from, far from (with abl.). {%—Dūra-tas,%} ind. from
afar, from a distance, at a distance from, aloof from,
far off, afar, far, at a distance; [cf. {%a-d˚.%}] {%—Dūra-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%dūra-tva, am,%} n. remoteness, distance,
farness. {%—Dūra-darśana, as, ā, am,%} far-seeing;
to be seen only from afar; ({%am%}), n. long-sight-
edness; foresight; ({%as%}), m. a vulture. {%—Dūra-dar-%}
{%śin, ī, inī, i,%} far-seeing, long-sighted; ({%ī%}), m. a
vulture, N. of a vulture who was prime-minister of
Citra-varṇa; a Pandit, learned man, doctor, teacher; a
prophet, seer, sage; [cf. {%dīrgha-d˚.%}] {%—Dūra-dṛś, k,%}
{%k, k,%} far-seeing, long-sighted; ({%k%}), m. a vulture; a
learned man. {%—Dūra-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. far-sightedness,
long-sightedness; foresight, discernment. {%—Dūra-%}
{%pāta, as,%} m. a long flight; falling from a great
height; ({%as, ā, am%}), shooting from afar, discharging
(missiles) from a distance; [cf. {%dūrāp˚.%}] {%—Dūra-%}
{%pātana, am,%} n. the act of shooting to a distance,
discharging (missiles) from afar. {%—Dūrapāti-tā,%} f.
or {%dūrapāti-tva, am,%} n. state or property of taking
a long flight. {%—Dūra-pātin, ī, inī, i,%} flying far,
having a long flight, flying a long way; one whose
(arrows) fly far, discharging (missiles) to a distance; [cf.
{%dūrāp˚%} and {%dūreṣu-p˚.%}] {%—Dūra-pātra, as, ā, am,%}
having a wide channel or bed (as a river). {%—Dūra-%}
{%pāra, as, ā, am,%} having the opposite shore far off
(as a river); very broad; difficult to be crossed, hard
of attainment; ({%as%}), m. a broad river which is diffi-
cult to be crossed; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of the Ganges;
[cf. {%duṣ-pāra.%}] {%—Dūra-bandhu, us, us, u,%} having
one's kinsmen distant, banished from wife and
kindred. {%—Dūra-bhāj, k, k, k,%} possessing distance,
distant. {%—Dūra-bhāva, as,%} m. farness, remoteness,
distance. {%—Dūra-bhinna, as, ā, am,%} struck or
wounded from a distance; wounded deeply. {%—Dūra-%}
{%bheda, as,%} m. striking from a distance. {%—Dūra-mūla,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of grass, Saccharum Munjia {%(= muñja).%}
{%—Dūram-bhaviṣṇu, us, us, u,%} and {%dūram-bhā-%}
{%vuka, as, ā, am,%} being far away, proceeding to a
distance. {%—Dūra-yāyin, ī, inī, i,%} going far. {%—Dūra-%}
{%vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being in the distance, far removed.
{%—Dūra-vastraka, as, ā, am,%} having the clothes
removed, naked. {%—Dūra-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} residing
in a distant land, outlandish. {%—Dūra-vidāritānana%}
{%(˚ta-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} having the mouth stretched
widely open. {%—Dūra-vibhinna, as, ā, am,%} ‘far-
separated,’ unconnected by the ties of nature. {%—Dū-%}
{%ra-vilambin, ī, inī, i,%} hanging far down. {%—Dūra-%}
{%vedhin, ī, inī, i,%} piercing or striking from afar,
missile, projectile (as weapons &c.). {%—Dūra-saṃ-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} being in the distance, remote, dis-
tant. {%—Dūra-saṃsthāna, am,%} n. residing or residence
at a distance. {%—Dūra-sūrya, as, ā, am,%} having the
sun distant. {%—Dūra-stha, as, ā, am,%} or {%dūra-%}
{%sthita, as, ā, am,%} or {%dūra-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} situ-
ated at a distance, standing afar off, remote, far off.
{%—Dūrastha-tva, am,%} n. the state of being remote.
{%—Dūra-svarga, as, ā, am,%} having heaven distant.
{%—Dūrād-āgata, as, ā, am,%} come from a distance.
{%—Dūrāntara (˚ra-an˚), am,%} n. a wide space, a
long interval. {%—Dūrāntarita (˚ra-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
separated by a wide space. {%—Dūrāpāta (˚ra-āp˚), as,%}
m. shooting from afar, discharging from a distance;
[cf. {%dūra-p˚.%}] {%—Dūrāpātin (˚ra-āp˚), ī, inī, i,%}
shooting or discharging (missiles) from afar; [cf.
{%dūra-p˚.%}] {%—Dūrāplāva (˚ra-āp˚), as, ā, am,%}
jumping or leaping far. {%—Dūrārūḍha (˚ra-ār˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} mounted high, advanced or reaching far,
intense. {%—Dūrārtha (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. remote or
recondite object. {%—Dūrāvasthita (˚ra-av˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} standing or being afar off. {%—Dūrī-karaṇa, am,%}
n. the act of making distant, removing, placing at a
distance. {%—Dūrī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to make distant, remove to a distance,
expel, banish, distance, exceed, excel. {%—Dūrī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} made distant, removed, placed to a dis-
tance or afar off. {%—Dūrī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
{%-bhavitum,%} to become distant, move away, retire,
[Page0427-a+ 74]
go back. {%—Dūrī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become distant,
removed, remote, far off. {%—Dūre-anta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. ending in the remote distance, boundless; ({%e%}),
f. du. epithet of heaven and earth. {%—Dūre-amitra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. whose enemies are far away.
{%—Dūre-artha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. whose aim is far
off; (Sāy.) going far or widely sought. {%—Dūre-%}
{%gavyūti, is, is, i,%} Ved. whose range or sphere
reaches to a distance or is in the distance. {%—Dūre-%}
{%cara, as, ā, am,%} going or travelling far, being far
away, distant, remote. {%—Dūre-tya, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%dūre%} with affix {%tya,%} Pāṇ. IV. 2. 104), being far off,
being distant, come from afar. {%—Dūre-dṛś, k, k,%}
{%k,%} Ved. visible in remote places, far-seeing. {%—Dūre-%}
{%bhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. shining to a distance. {%—Dūre-%}
{%yama, as, ā, am,%} one from whom Yama the god of
death is distant, one from whom he is far removed.
{%—Dūreritekṣaṇa (˚ra-īrita-īkṣ˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘one who sends his glances far apart,’ squinting,
squint-eyed. {%—Dūre-vadha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. far-
striking, hitting at a distance. {%—Dūre-śravas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} far-renowned; ({%ās%}), m., see {%daureśravasa.%}
{%—Dūre-śruta,%} see {%daureśruta%}. {%—Dūreṣupātin%}
{%(˚ra-iṣ˚), ī, inī, i,%} discharging or shooting arrows
to a distance; [cf. {%dūra-pātin.%}] {%—Dūre-heti, is, is,%}
{%i,%} whose arrows or missile weapons fly to a distance.
{%—Dūronnamita (˚ra-un˚), as, ā, am,%} raised aloft,
stretched far out.
<LEND>

<L>22586<pc>0427-a<k1>dUraka<k2>dUraka
{%Dūraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ remote, distant, &c., {%= dūra.%}
<LEND>

<L>22587<pc>0427-a<k1>dUrakta<k2>dUrakta
{#dUrakta#}¦ {%dū-rakta, dū-rakṣya, dū-roha,%} &c.
See 2. {%dū,%} p. 426, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22588<pc>0427-a<k1>dUrya<k2>dUrya
{#dUrya#}¦ {%dūrya, am,%} n. feces, ordure; a kind
of Curcuma ({%= śaṭī%}).
<LEND>

<L>22589<pc>0427-a<k1>dUrva<k2>dUrva
{#dUrva#}¦ {%dūrva, as,%} m., N. of a prince who was
son of Nṛpañ-jaya and father of Ṭimi.
<LEND>

<L>22590<pc>0427-a<k1>dUrvA<k2>dUrvA
{#dUrvA#}¦ {%dūrvā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%durv%}),
bent grass, panic grass, commonly Panicum Dactylon;
[cf. {%ali-d˚, gaṇḍā-d˚, granthi-d˚.%}] {%—Dūrvā-kāṇḍa,%}
{%am,%} n. a quantity or heap of Dūrvā grass. {%—Dūrvā-%}
{%kṣī (˚vā-ak˚),%} f., N. of the wife of Vṛka. {%—Dūrvā-%}
{%vaṇa%} or {%dūrvā-vana, am,%} n. a thicket of Dūrvā
grass. {%—Dūrvā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} intertwined or
joined with Dūrvā grass. {%—Dūrvāṣṭamī (˚vā-aṣ˚),%}
f., N. of a festival on the eighth day of the light
half of the month Bhādra on which the Dūrvā is
worshipped as a deity. {%—Dūrvā-soma, as,%} m. a
species of Soma plant. {%—Dūrveṣṭakā (˚vā-iṣ˚),%} f.
Dūrvā grass used like bricks in erecting an altar.
<LEND>

<L>22591<pc>0427-a<k1>dUrSa<k2>dUrSa
{#dUrSa#}¦ {%dūrśa, am,%} n., Ved. a kind of woven
cloth or vesture; [cf. {%dūśya%} and {%dūṣya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22592<pc>0427-a<k1>dUlAsa<k2>dUlAsa
{#dUlAsa#}¦ {%dūlāsa, as,%} m. (?), a bow.
<LEND>

<L>22593<pc>0427-a<k1>dUlikA<k2>dUlikA
{#dUlikA#}¦ {%dūlikā%} and {%dūlī,%} f. the indigo
plant; [cf. {%tūlī, dolā, taru-dūlikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22594<pc>0427-a<k1>dUSya<k2>dUSya
{#dUSya#}¦ {%dūśya, am,%} n. {%= dūṣya,%} a tent.
<LEND>

<L>22595<pc>0427-a<k1>dUza<k2>dUza
{#dUza#}¦ {%dūṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. the Caus. of rt.
2. {%duṣ%}), defiling, polluting, contaminating, corrupt-
ing, (generally at the end of comp.; cf. {%kora-d˚%} and
{%paṅkti-d˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>22596<pc>0427-a<k1>dUzaka<k2>dUzaka
{%Dūṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ making bad, corrupting,
polluting, contaminating, vitiating, spoiling, violating,
dishonouring, disgracing, seducing, making mischief,
hurting [cf. {%carma-dūṣikā%}]; committing an offence
against, offending, trespassing; disfiguring; acting
against a command or precept; an offender, a seducer,
corrupter, any infamous or wicked person; sinful,
wicked (as an action); {%Vedānāṃ dūṣakas,%} one
who vitiates or is a disparager of the Vedas; ({%ikā%}),
f. a pencil or paint-brush; impurity or secretion of
the eyes, rheum of the eyes [cf. {%dūṣīkā%}]; a kind
of rice.
<LEND>

<L>22597<pc>0427-a<k1>dUzaRa<k2>dUzaRa
{%Dūṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ corrupting, spoiling, ruining,
destroying, vitiating, contaminating, dishonouring,
violating; offending against; counteracting [cf. {%arā-%}
{%ti-d˚, kṛtyā-d˚, khara-d˚, viṣa-d˚%}]; ({%as%}), m., N.
[Page0427-b+ 79]
of a Rakṣas or Rākṣasa who was one of the
generals of Rāvaṇa; of a Daitya slain by Śiva; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a deity, the wife of Bhauvana and mother of
Tvaṣṭṛ; ({%am%}), n. the act of spoiling or corrupting,
ruining, vitiating, contaminating, hurting; violating
(a contract), breaking (an agreement), dishonouring
or violating a woman; slighting, speaking ill of any
one, abusing, finding fault, censuring, disparaging,
blaming, detracting, throwing doubts upon, criticising,
objecting, refuting, rendering suspected; objection,
adverse argument; fault, defect, offence, guilt, sin,
blame; [cf. {%artha-d˚%} and {%doṣa.%}] {%—Dūṣaṇāri%}
{%(˚ṇa-ari), is,%} m. ‘the enemy of Dūṣaṇa,’ epithet
of Rāma. {%—Dūṣaṇāvaha (˚ṇa-āv˚), as, ā, am,%}
occasioning guilt.
<LEND>

<L>22598<pc>0427-b<k1>dUzaRIya<k2>dUzaRIya
{%Dūṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ corruptible, liable to be
vitiated, &c., {%= dūṣya.%}
<LEND>

<L>22599<pc>0427-b<k1>dUzayat<k2>dUzayat
{%Dūṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making bad, corrupting,
defiling, &c.
<LEND>

<L>22600<pc>0427-b<k1>dUzayARa<k2>dUzayARa
{%Dūṣayāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ vitiating, defiling, spoiling.
<LEND>

<L>22601<pc>0427-b<k1>dUzayitf<k2>dUzayitf
{%Dūṣayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ or {%dūṣayitnu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} a corrupter, one who dishonours or deflowers or
violates (a girl).
<LEND>

<L>22602<pc>0427-b<k1>dUzi<k2>dUzi
{%Dūṣi, is, is, i,%}¦ (at the end of comp.) corrupting,
ruining, destroying [cf. {%arāti-d˚, ātma-d˚, kṛtyā-%}
{%d˚%}]; ({%is%}), f., Ved. a poisonous substance; ({%is, ī%}),
f. {%= dūṣikā, dūṣīkā,%} the rheum of the eyes.
{%—Dūṣī-viṣa, am,%} n. a vegetable poison that
ceases to act because it has become old or decomposed
{%(dūṣita)%}. {%—Dūṣīviṣāri (˚ṣa-ari), is,%} m. a
kind of antidote. {%—Dūṣy-udara, am,%} n. a disease
of the abdomen caused by poisonous substances.
{%—Dūṣyudarin, ī, iṇī, i,%} affected with the above
disease.
<LEND>

<L>22603<pc>0427-b<k1>dUzita<k2>dUzita
{%Dūṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ corrupted, spoiled, conta-
minated; violated, hurt, injured; demoralized;
disgraced; blamed, censured; calumniated, falsely
accused, often at the end of comp., see {%manyu-d˚,%}
{%śatrūpajāpa-d˚; (ā),%} f. a girl who has been violated
or deflowered.
<LEND>

<L>22604<pc>0427-b<k1>dUzin<k2>dUzin
{%Dūṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ corrupting, contaminating,
violating.
<LEND>

<L>22605<pc>0427-b<k1>dUzIkA<k2>dUzIkA
{%Dūṣīkā,%}¦ f. the secretion or rheum of the eyes;
[cf. {%dūṣikā%} under {%dūṣaka, dūṣi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22606<pc>0427-b<k1>dUzya<k2>dUzya
{%Dūṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ corruptible, liable to be
corrupted or defiled or contaminated; liable to be
ruined, to be seduced or dishonoured, deserving
censure, condemnable; reprehensible, culpable, con-
temptible, vile, bad; ({%as%}), m. a wicked man; ({%am%}),
n. matter, pus, poison; ({%am%}), n. clothes or a kind
of cloth; cotton, calico; a tent (in this sense perhaps
for {%dūśya;%} cf. {%dūrśa%}); ({%ā%}), f. an elephant's leathern
girth; [cf. {%cūṣā%} and {%kakṣyā.%}] {%—Dūṣya-yukta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} associated with a vile rascal.
<LEND>

<L>22607<pc>0427-b<k1>dUzyat<k2>dUzyat
{%Dūṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ offending, insulting (for
{%dūṣayat ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>22608<pc>0427-b<k1>dUsa<k2>dUsa
{#dUsa#}¦ {%dūsa, am,%} n. (considered as an affix),
milk, (occurring in {%avi-dūsa,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>22609<pc>0427-b<k1>df<k2>df
{#df#}¦ {%dṛ,%} cl. 6. A. {%driyate,%} &c., to honour,
worship, (only occurring with prep. {%ā;%} cf.
{%ā-dṛ%} at p. 120, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>22610<pc>0427-b<k1>dfta<k2>dfta
{%Dṛta,%}¦ respected, honoured; ({%ā%}), f. cumin.
<LEND>

<L>22611<pc>0427-b<k1>dfMh<k2>dfMh
{#dfMh#}¦ {%dṛṃh%} (connected and sometimes
identified with rt. {%dṛh%}), cl. 1. P. {%dṛṃhati,%}
{%dadṛṃha, dṛṃhitum,%} to make firm, fix, strengthen,
confirm; to make fast, fasten; to fortify; cl. 1. A.
{%dṛṃhate,%} to be firm or fixed; to grow, increase:
Caus. {%dṛṃhayati, -yitum:%} Desid. {%didṛṃhiṣati:%}
Intens. {%darīdṛṃhyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>22612<pc>0427-b<k1>dfMha<k2>dfMha
{%Dṛṃha%}¦ in {%bhūmi-dṛṃha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22613<pc>0427-b<k1>dfMhaRa<k2>dfMhaRa
{%Dṛṃhaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. making firm or fast,
strengthening, fastening, fortifying; means of strength-
ening; [cf. {%keśa-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22614<pc>0427-b<k1>dfMhita<k2>dfMhita
{%Dṛṃhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made firm or fast, fixed,
strengthened, fortified; grown, increased.
<LEND>

<L>22615<pc>0427-b<k1>dfMhitf<k2>dfMhitf
{%Dṛṃhitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who makes firm,
a strengthener.
<LEND>

<L>22616<pc>0427-b<k1>dfQa<k2>dfQa
{%Dṛḍha%}¦ or Ved. {%dṛḷha, as, ā, am,%} fixed, firm,
hard, strong, solid, massive; firmly fastened, shut
[Page0427-c+ 81]
fast; tough; difficult to be bent (as a bow), compact;
tight, close, dense, without interstices, (opposed
to {%bhinna%}); durable; confirmed, established; not
giving way, stubborn; certain, sure, not subject to
vacillations; secure; reliable; steady, persevering;
great, intense, excessive, severe, violent, mighty,
powerful, important; (in mathematics) reduced to
the last term or smallest number by a common
divisor; ({%as%}), m. a term in music; N. of a son of
the thirteenth Manu; of one of the sons of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a Buddhist goddess, ‘the
goddess of the earth;’ ({%am%}), n. anything fixed or
firm or solid; a stronghold, fortress; iron; ({%am%}),
ind. firmly, fast, much, in a high degree, excessively;
thoroughly, very well. {%—Dṛḍha-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m.
‘having hard thorns,’ a kind of plant, {%= kṣudra-%}
{%phalaka,%} commonly {%dhalāṅkadā; (ā),%} f. the wild
date tree, Phœnix Sylvestris. {%—Dṛḍha-kāṇḍa, as,%}
m. ‘having a strong stem,’ a bamboo; ({%ā%}), f. a kind
of creeping plant, {%= pātāla-garuḍī; (am),%} n. a kind
of fragrant grass {%(= dīrgha-rohiṣaka)%}. {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} ‘acting firmly,’ resolute, persevering,
determined. {%—Dṛḍha-krodha, as, ā, am,%} having
violent anger. {%—Dṛḍha-kṣatra, as,%} m. ‘having
strong prowess,’ N. of one of the 100 sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dṛḍha-kṣurā,%} f. ‘having hard
blades,’ a kind of grass, {%= valva-jā%}. {%—Dṛḍha-gā-%}
{%trikā,%} f. ‘having hard particles,’ granulated sugar.
{%—Dṛḍha-granthi, is,%} m. ‘having hard knots,’ a
bamboo. {%—Dṛḍha-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} seizing firmly,
i. e. pursuing an object with untiring energy. {%—Dṛ-%}
{%ḍha-cchada, as,%} m. ‘having hard leaves,’ a kind
of fragrant grass, {%= dīrgha-rohiṣaka%}. {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%cyuta%} or {%dṛḷha-cyuta%} or {%dṛḍhācyuta, as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Agastya or author of a hymn of the
Ṛg-veda; [cf. {%dārḍha-cyuta.%}] {%—Dṛḍha-jñāna, am,%}
n. certain knowledge, firm conviction. {%—Dṛḍha-tara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} firmer, harder. {%—Dṛḍha-taru, us,%} m.
‘the strong tree,’ Grislea Tomentosa {%(= dhava).%}
{%—Dṛḍha-tā,%} f. or {%dṛḍha-tva, am,%} n. firmness,
hardness, solidity, strength; steadiness, perseverance.
{%—Dṛḍha-tṛṇa, as,%} m. ‘the strong grass,’ a kind
of grass, Saccharum Munjia; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of grass, {%=%}
{%valva-jā%}. {%—Dṛḍha-toraṇārgala, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing the bars of the gates firmly fastened. {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%tvac, k,%} m. ‘having tough bark,’ a kind of reed, {%=%}
{%yāvanālaśara%}. {%—Dṛḍha-daṃśaka, as,%} m. ‘having
strong teeth or a hard biter,’ a shark. {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%dasyu, us,%} m., N. of an old sage, also named
Idhma-vāha, (son of Dṛḍha-cyuta; cf. {%dṛḍhasyu.%})
{%—Dṛḍha-dvāra, as, ā, am,%} having strong gates,
having the gates well-secured. {%—Dṛḍha-dhana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having secure wealth,’ an epithet of Śākya-
muni. {%—Dṛḍha-dhanus, us,%} m. ‘having a strong
bow,’ N. of a prince who was an ancestor of Śākya-
muni; (also read {%dṛḍha-hanu, dṛḍha-hanu, dṛḍhāśva.%}) {%—Dṛ-%}
{%ḍha-dhanvan, ā, ā, a,%} having a strong bow; ({%ā%}),
m. a good archer; (perhaps) N. of a man. {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%dhanvin, ī, inī, i,%} having a strong bow, a strong
or sure archer; (perhaps) furnished with strong
archers. {%—Dṛḍha-dhur, ūr, ūr, ūr,%} having a strong
pole or beam; able to bear a weight or load.
{%—Dṛḍha-nābha, as,%} m., N. of a spell or for-
mula for restraining magical weapons. {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%niścaya, as, ā, am,%} ‘having a fixed determination,’
certain, confirmed, corroborated, undoubted. {%—Dṛ-%}
{%ḍha-nīra, as,%} m. ‘having strong juice,’ the cocoa-
nut tree. {%—Dṛḍha-netra, as,%} m. ‘strong-eyed,’
N. of one of the sons of Viśvā-mitra. {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%nemi, is,%} m. ‘having a strong circle or wheel (?),’
N. of a prince who was a son of Satya-dhṛti. {%—Dṛ-%}
{%ḍha-pattra, as,%} m. ‘having strong leaves,’ a bamboo;
({%ī%}), f. a kind of grass, {%= valva-jā%}. {%—Dṛḍha-pāda,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘firm on the feet,’ epithet of Brahmā; ({%ā%}),
f. a kind of plant, {%= yava-tiktā; (ī),%} f. Flacourtia
Cataphracta. {%—Dṛḍha-pratijña, as, ā, am,%} keep-
ing a promise, firm to a promise, faithful to an
agreement. {%—Dṛḍha-pratyaya, as,%} m. firm confi-
dence. {%—Dṛḍha-praroha, as,%} m. ‘growing strongly,’
the holy fig-tree {%(= plakṣa)%}. {%—Dṛḍhaprahāri-tā,%}
f. hard striking &c. {%—Dṛḍha-prahārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
[Page0428-a+ 81]
striking hard, hitting strongly or firmly, shooting
surely. {%—Dṛḍha-phala, as,%} m. ‘having a hard fruit,’
the cocoa-nut. {%—Dṛḍha-baddha, as, ā, am,%} firmly
bound, tied tightly. {%—Dṛḍha-bandhana-baddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} caught fast in a snare. {%—Dṛḍha-ban-%}
{%dhinī,%} f. ‘winding closely round a tree or stem,’ a
kind of creeper, Echites Frutescens {%(= śyāmā).%}
{%—Dṛḍha-bala, as,%} m., N. of a medical author.
{%—Dṛḍha-bhakti, is, is, i,%} ‘firm in devotion,’ faith-
ful, devoted. {%—Dṛḍha-mati, is, is, i,%} firm-minded,
strong-willed, firm, devoted. {%—Dṛḍha-manyu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} violent in anger or grief. {%—Dṛḍha-muṣṭi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} ‘having a hard fist,’ close-fisted, one whose
hand is difficult to be opened; one who does not
open his hand, miserly, niggardly; ({%is%}), m. a sword,
any weapon furnished with a hilt or handle; [cf.
{%gāḍha-muṣṭi.%}] {%—Dṛḍhamuṣṭi-tā,%} f. firmness or
tightness of grasp. {%—Dṛḍha-mūla, as,%} m. ‘having
a hard root,’ the cocoa-nut; a kind of grass, Saccha-
rum Munjia ({%= muñja%}); another kind of grass {%(=%}
{%manthānaka)%}. {%—Dṛḍha-raṅgā,%} f. ‘having a fast
colour,’ a sort of white substance, {%= sphaṭī,%} com-
monly {%phaṭkirī%} (sulphate of alumine?). {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%ratha, as,%} m. ‘having a strong chariot,’ N. of one
of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of
Jayad-ratha and father of Viśva-jit; (with Jainas)
N. of the father of the tenth Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī. {%—Dṛḍharathāśraya (˚tha-āś˚), as,%}
m. ‘having a firm chariot-seat,’ N. of one of
the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dṛḍha-ruci,%}
‘of great glory,’ N. of a Varṣa. {%—Dṛḍha-latā,%} f.
‘having strong branches,’ a kind of plant, {%= pātāla-%}
{%garuḍī%}. {%—Dṛḍha-loman, ā, ā, a,%} coarse-haired,
having coarse bristles; ({%ā%}), m. a wild hog; coarse
hair, bristles. {%—Dṛḍha-vajra, as,%} m. ‘having a
strong thunderbolt,’ N. of a king of the Asuras.
{%—Dṛḍha-varman, ā,%} m. ‘having strong armour,’
N. of one of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
{%—Dṛḍha-valkala, as,%} m. ‘having a hard bark,’
Artocarpus Locucha ({%= lakuca%}); the areca-palm
{%(= pūga)%}. {%—Dṛḍha-valkā,%} f. ‘hard-barked,’ a
kind of plant, {%= amba-ṣṭhā%}. {%—Dṛḍha-vikrama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having great fortitude. {%—Dṛḍha-vīja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having hard seeds,’ Cassia Tora ({%= cakra-%}
{%marda%}); Zizyphus Jujuba, {%= varvūra,%} a kind of
plant. {%—Dṛḍha-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. ‘the firm tree,’
the cocoa-nut. {%—Dṛḍha-vedhana, am,%} n. piercing
strongly, striking firmly. {%—Dṛḍha-vairin, ī,%} m. a
relentless foe. {%—Dṛḍha-vrata, as, ā, am,%} ‘having
firm vows,’ strictly observing religious vows or obli-
gations, firm in religious austerity, having a firm
resolution, persevering, persistent, strict, firm, faithful,
(sometimes used in comp., e. g. {%bhartṛ-dṛḍha-%}
{%vratā,%} q. v.) {%—Dṛḍha-śaktika, as, ā, am,%} of
great power or great strength of will. {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%sandha, as,%} m. ‘firm or faithful to engagements,’ N.
of one of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%sandhi, is, is, i,%} firmly united, closely joined or
allied; strong-knit, thick-set; close, compact, with-
out interstices, well fixed. {%—Dṛḍha-sūtrikā,%} f.
‘having strong fibres,’ a plant from the fibres of
which bow-strings are made, Sanseviera Zeylanica;
[cf. {%mūrvā.%}] {%—Dṛḍha-sena, as,%} m. ‘possessing a
strong army,’ N. of a prince. {%—Dṛḍha-sauhṛda,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} firm in friendship, constant. {%—Dṛḍha-%}
{%skandha, as,%} m. ‘strong-stemmed,’ a plant, a sort
of Mimusops {%(= kṣīrikā)%}. {%—Dṛḍha-sthūṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having firm posts or columns. {%—Dṛḍha-hanu,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘possessing strong jaws,’ N. of a prince;
[cf. {%dṛḍha-dhanus.%}] {%—Dṛḍha-hasta, as,%} m.
‘strong-handed,’ N. of one of the 100 sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dṛḍhākṣa (˚ḍha-ak˚), as,%} m.
‘strong-eyed,’ N. of a prince. {%—Dṛḍhāṅga (˚ḍha-%}
{%aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} firm-bodied, hard-limbed, stout,
stalwart; ({%am%}), n. a diamond. {%—Dṛḍhānutāpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} deeply penitent. {%—Dṛḍhāyu%} or {%dṛ-%}
{%ḍhāyus (˚ḍha-āy˚), us,%} m. ‘having a firm life,’
N. of a prince; of a son of Purū-ravas and Urvaśī;
N. of one of the seven sages of the south; of a son
of the third Manu Sāvarṇa. {%—Dṛḍhāyudha (˚ḍha-%}
{%āy˚), as, ā, am,%} having strong weapons; ({%as%}), m.
[Page0428-b+ 71]
epithet of Śiva; N. of one of the 100 sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dṛḍhārti (˚ḍha-ar˚), is,%} f. the
strong end of a bow; great pain. {%—Dṛḍhāśva%}
{%(˚ḍha-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘having a strong horse,’ N. of a
son of Dhundhu-māra; of a son of Kāśya. {%—Dṛ-%}
{%ḍhī-karaṇa, am,%} n. or {%dṛḍhī-kāra, as,%} m. making
strong or firm, fixing firmly, corroboration, confir-
mation. {%—Dṛḍhī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to make firm or fast; to fix, fasten,
make strong, strengthen; to fasten tightly together;
to corroborate, confirm. {%—Dṛḍhī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P.
{%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to become strong or fixed.
{%—Dṛḍheṣudhi (˚ḍha-iṣ˚), is,%} m. ‘having a
strong quiver,’ N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>22617<pc>0428-b<k1>dfQaya<k2>dfQaya
{%Dṛḍhaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%dṛḍhayati, -yitum,%} to
make firm, to fasten, confirm, strengthen, fortify,
intensify; [cf. {%draḍhaya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22618<pc>0428-b<k1>dfQavya<k2>dfQavya
{%Dṛḍhavya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Ṛṣi; (a wrong
form for {%dṛḍhāyu,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>22619<pc>0428-b<k1>dfQasyu<k2>dfQasyu
{%Dṛḍhasyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient sage, also
called Idhma-vāha; [cf. {%dṛḍha-dasyu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22620<pc>0428-b<k1>dfQeyu<k2>dfQeyu
{%Dṛḍheyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of one of the seven sages
of the west.
<LEND>

<L>22621<pc>0428-b<k1>dfka<k2>dfka
{#dfka#}¦ {%dṛka, am,%} n. a hole, opening.
<LEND>

<L>22622<pc>0428-b<k1>dfkARa<k2>dfkARa
{#dfkARa#}¦ {%dṛkāṇa%} or {%dṛkkāṇa%} or {%drekkāṇa%} or
{%dreṣkāṇa, as,%} m. (fr. the Gr. <lang n="greek">δέκανος</lang>), the third
part of a sign of the zodiac or a demi-god presiding
over it.
<LEND>

<L>22623<pc>0428-b<k1>dfkkarRa<k2>dfkkarRa
{#dfkkarRa#}¦ {%dṛk-karṇa, dṛk-karma,%} &c. See
under 2. {%dṛś,%} p. 429, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22624<pc>0428-b<k1>dfkza<k2>dfkza
{#dfkza#}¦ {%dṛkṣa, as, ī, am,%} looking, appearing,
having any aspect or appearance; (occurring in
comp. with certain pronominal bases, see {%amū-d˚,%}
{%ī-d˚, kī-d˚, tā-d˚;%} cf. 2. {%dṛś%} and {%dṛśa.%})
<LEND>

<L>22625<pc>0428-b<k1>dfgaDyakza<k2>dfgaDyakza
{#dfgaDyakza#}¦ {%dṛg-adhyakṣa.%} See under 2.
{%dṛś,%} p. 429, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22626<pc>0428-b<k1>dfgBU<k2>dfgBU
{#dfgBU#}¦ {%dṛgbhū, ūs,%} f. a thunderbolt; the
sun, a serpent; [cf. {%dṛnbhū, dṛmbhū, dṛnphū,%}
{%dṛmphū.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22627<pc>0428-b<k1>dfNnIraja<k2>dfNnIraja
{#dfNnIraja#}¦ {%dṛṅ-nīraja, dṛṅ-maṇḍala.%} See
under 2. {%dṛś,%} p. 429, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>22628<pc>0428-b<k1>dfqaka<k2>dfqaka
{#dfqaka#}¦ {%dṛḍaka, as,%} m. a fire-place or hole
made in the ground for cooking (?).
<LEND>

<L>22629<pc>0428-b<k1>dfQa<k2>dfQa
{#dfQa#}¦ {%dṛḍha.%} See under rt. {%dṛṃh%} at p. 427.
<LEND>

<L>22630<pc>0428-b<k1>dfti<k2>dfti
{#dfti#}¦ {%dṛti, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%dṝ;%}
cf. {%kṛtti%} fr. rt. 2. {%kṛt%}), a skin of leather, a leather
bag for holding water and other fluids; a cloud
(Ved.); skin, hide; a pair of bellows; a fish; N.
of a man with the patronymic Aindroti or Aindrota;
[cf. {%dārteya;%} cf. also rt. {%dṝ;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">δέρ-ω, δείρ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δέρ-μα;</lang> Angl. Sax. <nsi>teld,</nsi> ‘a tent;’ Old Germ. <nsi>gi-</nsi>
<nsi>zelt</nsi> = Mod. Germ. <nsi>zelt,</nsi> ‘a tent.’] {%—Dṛti-dhāraka,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of plant, {%= ānandī,%} commonly {%āka-%}
{%napātā%}. {%—Dṛti-hari, is, is, i,%} carrying a leather
skin or leather bags (as cattle); ({%is%}), m. a dog.
{%—Dṛti-hāra, as, ā, am,%} carrying a leather skin
or bag; ({%as%}), m. a carrier of skins or bags, a water-
carrier, &c.
<LEND>

<L>22631<pc>0428-b<k1>dfDra<k2>dfDra
{#dfDra#}¦ {%dṛdhra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhṛ%}), Ved.
seizing or fastening tightly.
<LEND>

<L>22632<pc>0428-b<k1>dfn<k2>dfn
{#dfn#}¦ {%dṛn,%} ind. an interjection; (probably
an artificial word made to explain {%dṛnbhū,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>22633<pc>0428-b<k1>dfnPU<k2>dfnPU
{#dfnPU#}¦ {%dṛnphū%} or {%dṛnbhū, ūs,%} m. (said to
be fr. rt. {%dṛmph%} or {%dṛmp,%} q. v.), a thunderbolt;
the sun; f. a snake in general; a wheel; [cf. {%dṛg-%}
{%bhū, dṛmphū, dṛmbhū,%} and see Gram. 126. <nsi>c.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>22634<pc>0428-b<k1>dfp<k2>dfp<h>1
{#dfp#} 1¦. {%dṛp%} or {%dṛph%} (connected with rt.
{%dṛmp%} next col.), cl. 6. P. {%dṛpati, dṛphati,%}
{%dṛmphati,%} &c., to pain, inflict pain, torture.
<LEND>

<L>22635<pc>0428-b<k1>dfp<k2>dfp<h>2
{#dfp#} 2¦. {%dṛp,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%darpati%} and
{%darpayati,%} &c., to light, kindle, inflame.
<LEND>
[Page0428-c+ 76]

<L>22636<pc>0428-c<k1>dfp<k2>dfp<h>3
{#dfp#} 3¦. {%dṛp,%} cl. 4. P. {%dṛpyati, dadarpa,%}
{%darpitā, darptā, draptā, drapsyati, adṛ-%}
{%pat, adrāpsīt%} or {%adārpsīt, adarpīt, darpitum,%}
{%darptum%} and {%draptum,%} to be mad; to be foolish;
to be extravagant or wild; to be arrogant or insolent;
to be vain or proud; to be wildly delighted: Caus.
{%darpayati, -yituṃ,%} to make mad or proud or arro-
gant; [cf. rt. {%tṛp;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">δόρπος.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>22637<pc>0428-c<k1>dfpta<k2>dfpta
{%Dṛpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ mad, wild, proud, arrogant.
{%—Dṛpta-bālāki, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a man with
the patronymic Gārgya.
<LEND>

<L>22638<pc>0428-c<k1>dfpyat<k2>dfpyat
{%Dṛpyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being proud or arrogant.
<LEND>

<L>22639<pc>0428-c<k1>dfpra<k2>dfpra
{%Dṛpra, as, ā, am,%}¦ proud, arrogant; strong,
powerful.
<LEND>

<L>22640<pc>0428-c<k1>dfB<k2>dfB<h>1
{#dfB#} 1¦. {%dṛbh,%} cl. 6. 1. 10. P. {%dṛbhati,%}
{%darbhati, darbhayati, dadarbha,%} &c.,
to string together, arrange, tie, fasten.
<LEND>

<L>22641<pc>0428-c<k1>darBa<k2>darBa
{%Darbha, as,%}¦ m. See p. 403, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22642<pc>0428-c<k1>dfbDa<k2>dfbDa<h>1
1. {%dṛbdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ strung, tied, connected.
<LEND>

<L>22643<pc>0428-c<k1>dfbDi<k2>dfbDi
{%Dṛbdhi, is,%}¦ f. stringing together, arranging.
<LEND>

<L>22644<pc>0428-c<k1>dfB<k2>dfB<h>2
{#dfB#} 2¦. {%dṛbh,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%darbhati%} and
{%darbhayati,%} &c., to fear, be afraid.
<LEND>

<L>22645<pc>0428-c<k1>dfbDa<k2>dfbDa<h>2
2. {%dṛbdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ afraid, frightened.
<LEND>

<L>22646<pc>0428-c<k1>dfBIka<k2>dfBIka
{#dfBIka#}¦ {%dṛbhīka, as,%} m. (fancifully derived
by Sāyaṇa fr. rt. {%dṝ%} with 2. {%bhī,%} ‘fear,’ and 1. {%kṛ%}),
Ved., N. of a demon slain by Indra.
<LEND>

<L>22647<pc>0428-c<k1>dfmicaRqeSvara<k2>dfmicaRqeSvara
{#dfmicaRqeSvara#}¦ {%dṛmicaṇḍeśvara,%} N. of a
Liṅga; (said to be a various reading for {%kṛmi-%}
{%caṇḍeśvara.%})
<LEND>

<L>22648<pc>0428-c<k1>dfmp<k2>dfmp
{#dfmp#}¦ {%dṛmp%} or {%dṛmph%} or {%dṛnph,%} cl. 6. P.
{%dṛmpati%} or {%dṛmphati,%} to pain, inflict
pain, torture.
<LEND>

<L>22649<pc>0428-c<k1>dfmPU<k2>dfmPU
{%Dṛmphū%}¦ or {%dṛmbhū, ūs,%} f. (said to be fr. the
preceding rt.), a snake in general; [cf. {%dṛnphū,%}
{%dṛnbhū, dṛgbhū.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22650<pc>0428-c<k1>df|a<k2>df|a
{#df|a#}¦ {%dṛḷha.%} See {%dṛḍha,%} p. 427, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22651<pc>0428-c<k1>dfvan<k2>dfvan
{#dfvan#}¦ {%dṛvan, ā,%} &c., or {%as, ā, am%} (accord-
ing to Mahī-dh. fr. rt. {%dṝ%}), Ved. piercing (as an
arrow).
<LEND>

<L>22652<pc>0428-c<k1>dfS<k2>dfS<h>1
{#dfS#} 1¦. {%dṛś%} (this rt. forms the Pres.,
Impf., Pot., and Impv. fr. a rt. {%paś,%} said
to be a weakened form of rt. {%spaś%}), cl. 1. P. {%paś-%}
{%yati, dadarśa%} (rarely {%dadṛśe,%} 2nd sing. P. {%dadar-%}
{%śitha%} or {%dadraṣṭha,%} Ved. {%dadṛkṣe,%} part. {%dadṛ-%}
{%śvas%} or {%dadṛśivas%} or {%darśivas,%} q. v.), {%draṣṭā,%}
{%drakṣyati, adarśat, adrākṣīt%} (Vedic forms
{%adrāk, adṛkṣata, adṛśram%}), {%draṣṭum,%} Ved.
inf. {%dṛśe, dṛśaye,%} to see, look at, view, behold,
be a spectator; regard, consider; to perceive; visit,
wait upon; to see with the mind, learn, know,
understand; to notice, inspect; to discover, examine,
search, investigate, decide; to see by divine intuition
(as the hymns of the Veda, which were said to be ‘seen’
by the Ṛṣis); to look on while anything occurs which
cannot be prevented: Pass. {%dṛśyate%} (rarely with
P. terminations {%dṛśyati%}), to be seen, to become
visible, appear in sight, be manifested; to appear
like, look like, look; to be found, to occur (as in a
book); to be regarded or considered: Caus. P. A.
{%darśayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%adīdṛśat, adadar-%}
{%śat,%} to cause any one (acc. or gen. or dat. or also
according to grammarians inst.) to see anything (acc.);
to show; to point out, prove, demonstrate; to make
visible; to produce (as in a court of justice); to
pay; (A.) to show one's self, appear, show one's
self to any one (acc. or gen. or inst.), show any-
thing belonging to one's self: Desid. A. {%didṛkṣate,%}
&c., to wish to see, desire to see: Intens. {%darī-%}
{%dṛśyate, dardarṣṭi;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δέρκ-ω, ἔ-δρακ-ο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δέ-κορκ-α, δράκος, ὑπό-δραξ, ὑπο-δρα, δράκων:</lang>
Goth. <nsi>ga-tarh-yan:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>torht:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>zorht-yan,</nsi> ‘to manifest:’ Hib. <nsi>dearcaim,</nsi> ‘I see;’
<nsi>dreach,</nsi> ‘form, looking-glass:’ Lith. <nsi>zerkolas,</nsi> ‘a
mirror:’ Russ. <nsi>serkolo:</nsi> Old Pruss. <nsi>en-deirit,</nsi> ‘to
consider.’]
<LEND>

<L>22653<pc>0428-c<k1>dfS<k2>dfS<h>2
2. {%dṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ (at the end of comp.) one who
[Page0429-a+ 81]
sees or views; seeing, viewing; a seer, overseer, super-
intendent; seeing with the mind, discerning, knowing,
looking like [cf. {%ī-d˚, tā-d˚, kī-d˚%}]; ({%k%}), f. seeing,
viewing, perceiving; sight, view, the eye; the
aspect of a planet, the place in which a planet is
observed; [cf. {%dṛṣṭi, a-d˚, ahar-d˚, tri-d˚,%} &c.]
{%—Dṛk-karṇa, as,%} m. ‘whose eyes are his ears,’
a snake, (in the opinion of the Hindūs the snake has
no visible external ear); [cf. {%dṛk-śruti.%}] {%—Dṛk-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. an operation by which any planet of
a certain latitude ({%vi-kṣepa%}) is referred to a point
on the ecliptic, the operation for apparent longitude.
{%—Dṛk-krodha, as,%} m. the wrathfulness of the
aspect (of a planet &c.). {%—Dṛk-kṣaya, as,%} m.
decay of sight, growing dim-sighted. {%—Dṛk-kṣepa,%}
{%as,%} m. the sine of the zenith-distance of the highest
or central point of the ecliptic at a given time.
{%—Dṛk-tulya, as, ā, am,%} according or coincident with
an observed spot (in astron.). {%—Dṛktulya-tā,%} f. coin-
cidence or accordance (of a planet) with its observed
place. {%—Dṛk-patha, as,%} m. ‘the path of the sight,’
the range of the sight; {%dṛk-patham i,%} to appear,
become visible. {%—Dṛk-pāta, as,%} m. the letting fall
a glance, a look; a downward glance. {%—Dṛk-%}
{%prasādā,%} f. a blue stone used for a collyrium and
the collyrium prepared from it {%(= kulatthā, kulat-%}
{%thāñjana)%}. {%—Dṛk-priyā,%} f. ‘delight of the sight,’
beauty, splendor. {%—Dṛk-śakti, is,%} f. the power of
sight, the faculty of perception (comprehending, ac-
cording to the Māheśvaras, {%darśana, śravaṇa,%}
{%manana, vi-jñāna,%} and {%sarva-jña-tva%}). {%—Dṛk-%}
{%śruti, is,%} m. ‘hearing with the eyes,’ a snake.
{%—Dṛg-adhyakṣa, as,%} m. ‘ruler of the sight,’
the sun. {%—Dṛg-gati, is,%} or {%dṛggati-jyā%} or {%dṛg-%}
{%gati-jīvā,%} f. the cosine of the zenith-distance or the
sine of the highest or central point of the ecliptic
at a given time. {%—Dṛg-gocara, as,%} m. the range
of sight. {%—Dṛg-gola, as,%} m. {%= dṛṅ-maṇḍala.%}
{%—Dṛg-jala, am,%} n. ‘eye-water,’ tears. {%—Dṛg-%}
{%jyā,%} f. the sine of the zenith-distance or the cosine
of the altitude. {%—Dṛg-bhakti, is,%} f. a look of love,
an amorous glance. {%—Dṛg-ruj, k,%} f. disease of the
eye. {%—Dṛg-lambana, am,%} n. vertical parallax.
{%—Dṛg-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} having poison in the
eyes, poisoning by the mere look; ({%as%}), m. a Nāga
or serpent; [cf. {%dṛṣṭi-viṣa.%}] {%—Dṛg-vṛtta,%}
{%am,%} n. a vertical circle. {%—Dṛṅ-nīraja, as, ā, am,%}
one whose eyes are like the lotus. {%—Dṛṅ-maṇḍala,%}
{%am,%} n. a small circle on the axis of the earth within
the greater circles of the armillary sphere, accom-
panying each planetary circle or orbit.
<LEND>

<L>22654<pc>0429-a<k1>dfSa<k2>dfSa
{%Dṛśa, as,%}¦ m. seeing, looking [cf. {%ī-d˚, kī-d˚, tā-%}
{%d˚,%} &c.]; ({%ā%}), f. the eye; ({%am%}), ind. = 2. {%dṛś,%} at the
end of adv. comp. {%—Dṛśākāṅkṣya (˚śā-āk˚), am,%}
n. ‘the desire of the eye,’ a lotus, a species of Nelum-
bium. {%—Dṛśopama (˚śā-up˚), am,%} n. ‘resembling
the eye,’ the white lotus, Nelumbium Speciosum.
<LEND>

<L>22655<pc>0429-a<k1>dfSati<k2>dfSati
{%Dṛśati, is,%}¦ f., Ved. looking.
<LEND>

<L>22656<pc>0429-a<k1>dfSAna<k2>dfSAna
{%Dṛśāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. seeing; ({%as%}), m. a
ruler, a Loka-pāla or protector of the world, a god
presiding over one of the quarters; N. of a Ṛṣi
with the patronymic Bhārgava; a spiritual teacher;
a Brāhman; N. of a demon, also called Vi-rocana;
({%am%}), n. light, brightness.
<LEND>

<L>22657<pc>0429-a<k1>dfSAlU<k2>dfSAlU
{%Dṛśālū%}¦ (?), {%us,%} m. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>22658<pc>0429-a<k1>dfSi<k2>dfSi
{%Dṛśi, is,%}¦ f. seeing, viewing; (the dat. {%dṛśaye%}
being used in the Veda as an infinitive; cf. 1. {%dṛś%});
({%is, ī%}), f. the eye; a Śāstra.
<LEND>

<L>22659<pc>0429-a<k1>dfSIka<k2>dfSIka
{%Dṛśīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. worthy of regard, con-
spicuous; ({%am%}), n. the becoming manifest, appear-
ance; ({%ā%}), f. appearance; [cf. {%citra-d˚%} and {%dur-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22660<pc>0429-a<k1>dfSenya<k2>dfSenya
{%Dṛśenya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. visible, conspicuous.
<LEND>

<L>22661<pc>0429-a<k1>dfSya<k2>dfSya<h>1
1. {%dṛśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be seen, visible; to be
looked at; to be looked at with pleasure, beautiful,
pleasing; ({%as%}), m. (in arithmetic) a given or known
quantity or number; ({%am%}), n., N. of a town; [cf. {%a-d˚.%}]
{%—Dṛśya-tā,%} f. or {%dṛśya-tva, am,%} n. visibility, vision,
sight. {%—Dṛśya-pura,%} N. of a town, = 1. {%dṛśya,%} q. v.
{%—Dṛśya-sthāpita, as, ā, am,%} anything placed so as
to be visible. {%—Dṛśyādṛśya (˚ya-ad˚), as, ā, am,%}
visible and invisible; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Sinībālī.
<LEND>
[Page0429-b+ 81]

<L>22662<pc>0429-b<k1>dfSya<k2>dfSya<h>2
2. {%dṛśya,%}¦ ind. (ep. for {%dṛṣṭvā%}), having seen.
<LEND>

<L>22663<pc>0429-b<k1>dfSvan<k2>dfSvan
{%Dṛśvan, ā, varī, a,%}¦ (at the end of comp.) seeing,
a seer; conversant with.
<LEND>

<L>22664<pc>0429-b<k1>dfzwa<k2>dfzwa
{%Dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen, looked at, beheld,
perceived, viewed, observed, noticed; visible, appa-
rent, observable; considered, regarded; treated of;
appearing, manifested; occurring, found; experienced,
suffered, endured; seen in the mind, devised, ima-
gined, learned, known; understood; foreseen; allot-
ted, destined; declared, fixed, determined, decided,
approved of, acknowledged, valid; {%dṛṣṭam bha-%}
{%yam,%} a really seen or obvious danger or calamity;
({%am%}), n. perception, observation. {%—Dṛṣṭa-kar-%}
{%man, ā, ā, a,%} one whose actions are seen or proved,
tried by practice. {%—Dṛṣṭa-kaṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} one
who has experienced calamity or suffered misery.
{%—Dṛṣṭa-kūṭa, am,%} n. a riddle, an enigma.
{%—Dṛṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. the state of having been
looked at or examined or read (e. g. {%Śāstra-dṛṣṭa-%}
{%tvāt,%} because the Śāstras have been examined).
{%—Dṛṣṭa-duḥkha, as, ā, am,%} having seen or
experienced misfortune. {%—Dṛṣṭa-doṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} found out or detected in a fault, one whose
faults are apparent or manifest, regarded as guilty;
found out, exposed, detected. {%—Dṛṣṭa-naṣṭa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} seen and (immediately afterwards) lost to
view, appeared and disappeared. {%—Dṛṣṭa-pūrva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} seen before. {%—Dṛṣṭa-pratyaya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having confidence manifested. {%—Dṛṣṭa-%}
{%bhakti, is, is, i,%} whose service has been beheld.
{%—Dṛṣṭa-rajas, ās,%} f. a girl arrived at puberty
(‘who has experienced the menstrual discharges;’ cf.
{%rajas%}). {%—Dṛṣṭa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having seen or
beheld. {%—Dṛṣṭa-vīrya%} or {%dṛṣṭa-sāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one whose strength has been proved or experi-
enced. {%—Dṛṣṭa-vyatikara, as, ā, am,%} one who
has seen or experienced a misfortune, one who
foresees evil. {%—Dṛṣṭādṛṣṭa (˚ṭa-ad˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who has seen what has not been seen, seen
for the first time; seen and not seen. {%—Dṛṣṭānta%}
{%(˚ṭa-an˚), as, am,%} m. n. ‘the end or aim of what
is seen,’ or ‘of what is in view,’ an example, com-
parison, illustration, parable, allegory, type; a Śāstra;
science; a particular high number; death, dying;
[cf. {%diṣṭānta.%}] {%—Dṛṣṭānta-śataka, am,%} n. a
hundred examples. {%—Dṛṣṭāntita, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%dṛṣṭānta%}), adduced as an example or comparison,
chosen as an illustration. {%—Dṛṣṭārtha (˚ṭa-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the aim or object apparent, having
the scope or meaning obvious, practical, (opposed
to {%a-dṛṣṭārtha,%} ‘speculative,’ and applied to the
Upa-vedas which are practical sciences); one who
discerns the meaning of anything or has a clear idea
about it; one who sees the state of the case. {%—Dṛṣ-%}
{%ṭārtha-tattva-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing the true
state or circumstances of a case.
<LEND>

<L>22665<pc>0429-b<k1>dfzwi<k2>dfzwi
{%Dṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. seeing, viewing; seeing with the
mental eye; knowing; sight, the faculty of seeing;
the eye, look, the sight of the eye, the pupil; (in
astrol.) aspect of the stars (e. g. {%śubha-d˚,%} q. v.);
the mind's eye, intellect, wisdom, knowledge; con-
sideration, regard; view, notion; (with Buddhists
generally) ‘a wrong view.’ {%—Dṛṣṭi-kṛt, t,%} or
{%dṛṣṭi-kṛta, am,%} n. ‘suitable to the faculty of
seeing,’ the plant Hibiscus Mutabilis. {%—Dṛṣṭi-%}
{%kṣepa, as,%} m. ‘throwing the sight,’ a glance, look.
{%—Dṛṣṭi-guṇa, am,%} n. ‘an object for the sight,’
a mark for archers &c., a target, butt. {%—Dṛṣṭi-%}
{%guru, us,%} m. ‘the lord or master of sight,’ an epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Dṛṣṭi-gocara, as,%} m. the range
or compass of the sight; ({%as, ā, am%}), within the
range of sight, in sight, visible. {%—Dṛṣṭi-nipāta,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘falling of the sight,’ looking at or on, a
look, a glance. {%—Dṛṣṭi-pa, as, ā, am,%} drinking
with the eyes. {%—Dṛṣṭi-patha, as,%} or {%dṛṣṭi-%}
{%pathin, -panthās,%} m. the path or range of sight.
{%—Dṛṣṭi-pāta, as,%} m. ‘falling of the sight,’ a
look, a glance. {%—Dṛṣṭi-pūta, as, ā, am,%} purified
or kept pure by the sight, i. e. watched that no
impropriety is committed or impurity contracted.
{%—Dṛṣṭi-prasāda, as,%} m. the favour of a look.
[Page0429-c+ 77]
{%—Dṛṣṭi-phala, am,%} n. ‘the results or conse-
quences of the aspect of the planets,’ N. of the
seventeenth or eighteenth Adhyāya in Varāha-mihi-
ra's Bṛhat-saṃhitā. {%—Dṛṣṭi-bandhu, us,%} m. ‘the
friend of sight,’ a fire-fly. {%—Dṛṣṭi-maṇḍala, am,%}
n. the circle or circuit of the sight. {%—Dṛṣṭi-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having eyes or intellect, wise, a con-
naisseur. {%—Dṛṣṭi-vāṇa, as,%} m. ‘eye-arrow,’ a
glance, leer. {%—Dṛṣṭi-vāda, as,%} m., N. of the last
of the twelve sacred writings of the Jainas. {%—Dṛṣṭi-%}
{%vikṣepa, as,%} m. ‘casting the eye obliquely,’ an
oblique look, a side glance, leer. {%—Dṛṣṭi-vidyā,%}
f. the science of vision, optics. {%—Dṛṣṭi-vibhrama,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the wandering of the eye,’ a coquettish or
amorous glance. {%—Dṛṣṭi-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} ‘hav-
ing poison in the eyes,’ poisoning by the mere look;
({%as%}), m. a snake.
<LEND>

<L>22666<pc>0429-c<k1>dfzwin<k2>dfzwin
{%Dṛṣṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having an insight into or
familiar with anything; having the looks or thoughts
directed upon anything.
<LEND>

<L>22667<pc>0429-c<k1>dfzwvA<k2>dfzwvA
{%Dṛṣṭvā,%}¦ ind. having seen, having beheld.
<LEND>

<L>22668<pc>0429-c<k1>dfSad<k2>dfSad
{#dfSad#}¦ {%dṛśad, dṛśad-vatī, = dṛṣad, dṛ-%}
{%ṣad-vatī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>22669<pc>0429-c<k1>dfzad<k2>dfzad
{#dfzad#}¦ {%dṛṣad, t,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%dṝ%}),
a rock, large stone, mill-stone, flat stone for grinding
condiments upon, the lower mill-stone on which the
upper or Upalā rests [cf. {%upalā%}]; a sacrificial vessel.
{%—Dṛṣadi-māṣaka, as,%} m. (with the eastern
people) a tax raised from mill-stones. {%—Dṛṣad-%}
{%upala, am,%} n. a grindstone for grinding condiments.
{%—Dṛṣad-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having stones or rocks,
stony, rocky; ({%ān%}), m., N. of the father of Varāṅgī
who was the wife of Saṃyāti; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a
river which flows into the Saras-vatī, forming the
eastern boundary of the Āryāvarta or holy land of the
Hindūs, and running to the north-east of Delhi, (also
read {%dṛśad-vatī%}); N. of several women, (also written
{%dṛśad-vatī%}); the mother of Aṣṭaka and wife of
Viśvā-mitra; the mother of Pratardana and wife of Divo-
dāsa; the mother of Śivi Auśīnara and wife of Nṛpa;
the mother of Prasena-jit with the epithet Haimavatī
(probably as N. of a river); an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>22670<pc>0429-c<k1>dfzada<k2>dfzada
{%Dṛṣada = dṛṣad%}¦ in comp. (as in {%dṛṣadolū-%}
{%khala (˚da-ul˚),%} Hari-v. 6509).
<LEND>

<L>22671<pc>0429-c<k1>dfzadya<k2>dfzadya
{%Dṛṣadya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%dṛṣadyate, dṛṣadyitā,%}
{%dṛṣaditā,%} to be stony (?), Schol. to Pāṇ. VI. 4, 50.
<LEND>

<L>22672<pc>0429-c<k1>dfzkARa<k2>dfzkARa
{#dfzkARa#}¦ {%dṛṣkāṇa (?) = dṛkāṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>22673<pc>0429-c<k1>dfzwa<k2>dfzwa
{#dfzwa#}¦ {%dṛṣṭa.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22674<pc>0429-c<k1>dfzyA<k2>dfzyA
{#dfzyA#}¦ {%dṛṣyā,%} f. {%= dūṣyā,%} the girdle of
an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>22675<pc>0429-c<k1>dfh<k2>dfh
{#dfh#}¦ {%dṛh%} (connected with rt. {%dṛṃh%}), cl.
1. P. {%darhati, dṛṃhati, dadarha, dar-%}
{%hiṣyati, darhitum,%} to fix, fasten, make firm or
strong, make immovable; (A.) to be fixed or fastened;
to be firm; to grow, increase, prosper: Caus. {%dṛṃ-%}
{%hayati,%} &c., to make firm, to fix; to keep, hold
fast; to become fixed or strong, be firm.
<LEND>

<L>22676<pc>0429-c<k1>dfhita<k2>dfhita
{%Dṛhita%}¦ or {%dṛṃhita, as, ā, am,%} grown, increased.
<LEND>

<L>22677<pc>0429-c<k1>dF<k2>dF
{#dF#}¦ {%dṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%dṛṇāti, dadāra%} (3rd du.
{%dadaratus%} or {%dadratus,%} 3rd pl. {%dadarus%}
or {%dadrus%}), {%dartā, dariṣyati%} and {%darīṣyati,%}
{%adārīt, daritum%} or {%darītum,%} to burst, break or
burst asunder, split open; to cause to burst, tear,
rend, divide, sunder, pull to pieces: Pass. {%dīryate%}
(ep. also {%dīryati%}), to be split, burst, break open;
to separate, be dispersed or scattered (as soldiers in
a battle); to be afraid, to fear: Caus. P. {%darayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to split, tear, pull to pieces, break open; (in
the later language) {%dārayati, -te,%} &c., to tear asunder,
divide by splitting or digging; cause to run away, dis-
perse, scatter: Desid. {%didīrṣati, didariṣati, dida-%}
{%rīṣati:%} Intens. {%dedīryate, dardarīti%} (1st sing. {%dar-%}
{%darīmi,%} 2nd {%dardarṣi%}), 2nd sing. Impv. P. {%dardṛhi%}
(according to Sāy. also {%dādṛhi%}), 3rd sing. {%dardartu;%}
2nd sing. Aor. {%adardar, dardar, dard,%} 2nd du.
{%adardṛtam,%} 3rd pl. {%adardirus,%} to rend or tear in
pieces, split, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0430-a+ 77]

<L>22678<pc>0430-a<k1>de<k2>de
{#de#}¦ {%de%} [cf. rt. 5. {%dā%}], cl. 1. A. {%dayate,%}
{%digye, dāsyate, adita, dātum,%} to preserve,
protect; to cherish, take compassion on: Pass. {%dīyate:%}
Caus. {%dāpayati,%} &c.: Desid. {%ditsate:%} Intens. {%dedī-%}
{%yate, dādeti.%}
<LEND>

<L>22679<pc>0430-a<k1>deuliya<k2>deuliya
{#deuliya#}¦ {%deüliya,%} N. of a Grāma.
<LEND>

<L>22680<pc>0430-a<k1>deNgapAla<k2>deNgapAla
{#deNgapAla#}¦ {%deṅga-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>22681<pc>0430-a<k1>dedIpyamAna<k2>dedIpyamAna
{#dedIpyamAna#}¦ {%dedīpyamāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. the
Intens. of rt. {%dīp%}), shining intensely, glowing, blazing.
<LEND>

<L>22682<pc>0430-a<k1>deya<k2>deya
{#deya#}¦ {%deya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dā%}), to be
given or presented, to be granted or allowed; fit or
proper for a gift; to be shown; to be given in
matrimony; to be delivered; to be returned; to be
paid (as a debt, wages, taxes, &c.); to be placed,
put, applied, laid; ({%am%}), n. a gift, oblation; water (?);
[cf. {%a-d˚%} and {%bala-d˚.%}] {%—Deya-dharma, as,%} m.
‘the duty of giving,’ charity, beneficence.
<LEND>

<L>22683<pc>0430-a<k1>dev<k2>dev
{#dev#}¦ {%dev%} (related to rt. 1. {%div%}), cl. 1. A.
{%devate, dideve, devitum,%} to throw, cast;
to sport, play, gamble; to lament; to shine.
<LEND>

<L>22684<pc>0430-a<k1>devana<k2>devana<h>1
1. {%devana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the above rt. or fr. rt. 1.
{%div%}), lamentation, wailing, grief, sorrow. (For 2.
{%devana%} see p. 433, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>22685<pc>0430-a<k1>deva<k2>deva
{#deva#}¦ {%deva, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%div%}), divine,
celestial, heavenly, (applied in the Veda to devotion,
prayer, the human mind, &c., as standing in some
relationship to the supernatural world or as being
of high excellence, but in the later language occurring
rarely as an adjective); ({%as%}), m. an inhabitant of
heaven, a deity, god, (sometimes applied even to
evil beings if superhuman; the gods are often reckoned
as thirty-three in number, or eleven for each of the
three worlds, cf. {%tri-daśa;%} in the Brāhmaṇas they
are distributed under three heads, viz. eight Vasus,
eleven Rudras, and twelve Ādityas, to which the
two Aśvins must be added to make up the number
thirty-three; the expression {%viśve devās,%} which meant
originally ‘all the gods,’ became the name of a
peculiar class of deities, to which the third oblation
had to be offered; the Jainas divide the gods into
four classes, viz. Bhavanādhīśa, Vyantara, Jyotiṣka,
and Vaimānika); a N. of Indra, the giver of rain; a
cloud; the twenty-second Arhat of the future Jaina
Ut-sarpiṇī; one occupied with divine things, a god
on the earth, a divine man, a Brāhman, a priest; a
god among men, a king, prince [cf. {%kṣiti-deva%}];
a title of honour, ‘His Majesty,’ ‘His Honour,’ &c.;
a husband's brother, cf. {%devṛ%} and {%devara;%} a fami-
liar abbreviation of the name Deva-datta. {%Deva%} is
often found at the end of names of Brāhmans, and
at the end of a comp. it may mean ‘having as one's
deity’ (e. g. {%Puruṣottama-deva,%} having Viṣṇu as
one's deity); at the beginning of a comp. it may
mean ‘divine.’ According to some lexicographers,
{%deva%} is said to have the following additional meanings,
 — a fool, a dolt; a child; a man following any par-
ticular line or business; a spear-man, a lancer;
emulation, wish to excel or overcome; sport, play;
({%ā%}), f., N. of two plants, Hibiscus Mutabilis ({%=%}
{%padma-cāriṇī%}) and Marsilea Quadrifolia {%(= aśana-%}
{%parṇī); (ī),%} f. a female deity, goddess; a N. of
Sarasvatī; of Durgā [cf. {%mahā-deva%}]; of Sāvitrī; of
Uṣas; of the nymph Urvaśī; of a nymph beloved
by the Sun; of the mother of the eighteenth Arhat
of the present Ava-sarpiṇī; a queen, one who has
been consecrated as well as the king (in theatrical
language chiefly); the daughter of a king, a princess;
a respectful epithet or title applied to a lady of
the first rank; a kind of bird [cf. {%śyāmā%}]; N. of
several plants, Sanseviera Roxburghiana, Medicago
Esculenta, Trigonella Corniculata, {%= liṅginī, = ban-%}
{%dhyā, = karkoṭakī, = śāli-parṇī, = mahā-droṇī,%}
{%= pāṭhā, = nāgara-mustā, = mṛgervāru, = harī-%}
{%takī, = atasī; (am),%} n. an organ of sense; [cf. Old
Pruss. <nsi>deiwas;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>diewas,</nsi> ‘a god;’ Lat. <nsi>deus;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">θεός;</lang> Hib. <nsi>dia,</nsi> ‘a god.’] {%—Deva-ṛṣabha, as,%} m. ‘a
bull among the gods,’ N. of a son of Dharma and
[Page0430-b+ 81]
Bhānu. {%—Deva-ṛṣi, is,%} m. ‘a Ṛṣi among the gods,
a divine saint,’ an epithet of Nārada; [cf. {%devarṣi%}
and {%deva-brahman.%}] {%—Deva-kanyakā%} or {%deva-%}
{%kanyā,%} f. a celestial or divine maiden, a nymph.
{%—Deva-kardama, as,%} m. ‘divine paste,’ a fragrant
paste of sandal, agallochum, camphor, and safflower.
{%—Devakarma-kṛt, t, t, t,%} doing religious acts,
offering oblations or worship to the gods. {%—Deva-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. a religious act or rite or oblation to
the gods, worship of the gods; [cf. {%deva-kārya%} and
{%deva-kṛtya.%}] {%—Deva-kalaśa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Deva-kavaca, as, am,%} m. n. divine armour.
{%—Deva-kāñcana, as,%} m. (?), ‘divine gold,’ the tree
Bauhinia Purpurea. {%—Devakātmajā (˚ka-āt˚),%} f.
‘the daughter of Devaka,’ i. e. the mother of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Deva-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. loving the gods,
pious. {%—Deva-kārya, am,%} n. {%= deva-karman,%} wor-
ship of or oblation to the gods, a religious rite in
general, anything relating to or coming from the
gods, a divine command. {%—Deva-kāṣṭha, am,%} n.
‘divine wood,’ a kind of pine, Pinus Devadāru. {%—De-%}
{%va-kirī,%} f. (fr. rt. 2. {%kṛ%}), N. of a Rāgiṇī regarded
as wife of Megha-rāga; [cf. {%deva-girī, deśa-karī,%}
{%goṇḍa-kirī.%}] {%—Deva-kilviṣa, as,%} m., Ved. an
offence against the gods. {%—Deva-kīrtti, is,%} m., N.
of an astronomer. {%—Deva-kuṭa, am,%} n. ‘the house
of the gods,’ a temple. {%—Deva-kuṇḍa, am,%} n. a
natural spring. {%—Deva-kuru, avas,%} m. pl., N. of a
people and the district inhabited by them, (usually asso-
ciated with the name Uttara-kuru.) {%—Deva-kurumbā,%}
f., N. of a plant, {%= mahā-droṇā%}. {%—Deva-kula, am,%}
n. {%= prāsāda,%} a temple; [cf. {%daṇḍa-d˚.%}] {%—Deva-%}
{%kulyā,%} f. ‘the river of the gods,’ personified as a
daughter of Pūrṇiman and grand-daughter of Marīci;
N. of the wife of Ud-gītha. {%—Deva-kusuma, am,%}
n. ‘the flower of the gods,’ cloves. {%—Deva-kūṭa,%}
‘the divine peak,’ N. of a mountain; N. of Adam's
Peak. {%—Deva-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. made or done
or performed by the gods. {%—Deva-kṛtya, am,%} n. a
religious act directed to the gods; anything relating
to the gods, a divine command. {%—Deva-kośa, as,%}
m., Ved. divine cask or receptacle. {%—Deva-kṣatra,%}
{%am,%} n. divine dominion; ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. under
the dominion of the gods; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince
who was a son of Deva-rāta. {%—Deva-kṣetra, am,%}
n., Ved. the domain of the gods. {%—Deva-kṣema,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of the Vijñāna-kāya; [cf.
{%deva-śarman.%}] {%—Deva-khāta, as, ā, am,%} ‘dug
by the gods,’ i. e. hollow by nature; ({%am%}), n. a
cave or natural hollow among mountains; a natural
pond or reservoir. {%—Devakhātaka, am,%} n. a natural
pond or one in front of a temple; a natural cavern,
a grotto. {%—Devakhāta-vila, am,%} n. ‘a chasm dug
by the gods,’ a cavern, a chasm, a natural receptacle
of water or reservoir. {%—Deva-gaṇa, as,%} m. a troop
or class of gods. {%—Devagaṇa-deva, as,%} m., N. of a
poet. {%—Deva-gaṇikā,%} f. ‘a divine courtezan,’ an Ap-
saras. {%—Devagaṇeśvara (˚ṇa-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of
the troop of gods,’ an epithet of Indra. {%—Deva-%}
{%gandharva, ās,%} m. pl. the divine Gandharvas
(superior to the human Gandharvas; cf. {%manuṣya-%}
{%gandharva%}); ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Nārada; ({%am%}),
n. a mode of singing; [cf. {%chālikya%} and {%deva-%}
{%gāndhāra.%}] {%—Deva-gandhā,%} f. ‘having divine
fragrance,’ a kind of fragrant medicinal plant {%(=%}
{%mahā-modā)%}. {%—Deva-garjana, am,%} n. ‘celestial
roaring,’ thunder. {%—Deva-garbha, as,%} m. a divine
child, the offspring of a god [cf. {%deva-śiśu%}]; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a river in Kuśa-dvīpa. {%—Deva-gāndhāra,%}
{%as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. a peculiar mode of singing, a
kind of song [cf. {%chālikya%}]; ({%ī%}), f. one of the
Rāgiṇīs or female personifications of the modes of
music, who was wife of Śrī-rāga. {%—Deva-gāyana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘a songster of the gods,’ a celestial chorister,
a Gandharva. {%—Deva-giri, is,%} m. ‘the divine hill,’ N.
of a mountain, (periphrastically expressed in Megha-
dūta 43. as {%deva-pūrvo giris,%} and according to
a commentator so called because thought to be the
domicile of Kārttikeya); N. of the town Daulat-
ābād which is situated between mountains. {%—Deva-%}
{%girī,%} f. ({%girī%} fr. rt. 1. {%gṝ%}), N. of a Rāgiṇī or
[Page0430-c+ 81]
one of the female personifications of the modes of
music; (according to some) the wife of Vasanta-rāga;
(according to others) the wife of Nāga-dhvani who
was a son of Hiṇḍola-rāga; (according to others)
the wife of Naṭa-kalyāṇa; [cf. {%deva-kirī.%}] {%—Deva-%}
{%gupta, as, ā, am,%} guarded or protected by a god or
by gods; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Deva-guru, us,%}
m. ‘the father of the gods,’ an epithet of Kaśyapa;
‘the preceptor of the gods,’ an epithet of Bṛhas-pati.
{%—Deva-guhī,%} f., N. of a place on the river Saras-
vatī. {%—Deva-guhya, am,%} n. a secret only known by
the gods; [cf. {%deva-rahasya.%}] {%—Deva-gṛha, am,%}
n. ‘the house of the gods,’ a celestial or planetary
sphere; a temple, chapel, oratory; the palace of king.
{%—Deva-gopā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. ‘having the gods
for guardians,’ guarded by the gods; ({%ā%}), f. a divine
protectress. {%—Deva-graha, as,%} m. a class of demons
who cause harmless madness. {%—Devaṅ-gama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. going to the gods. {%—Deva-cakra, as,%} m.
a divine wheel, a circle of the gods; a peculiar kind
of magical circle. {%—Deva-carita, am,%} n. the course
of action or practices of the gods. {%—Deva-caryā,%} f.
worship or service of the gods. {%—Devacaryopaśo-%}
{%bhita (˚yā-up˚), as, ā, am,%} beautified by the service
of the gods (as an hermitage). {%—Deva-cikitsaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a divine physician; ({%au%}), m. du. the two
Aśvins or sons of Aśvinī who were considered
physicians of heaven; see {%aśvin%}. {%—Deva-cchanda,%}
{%as,%} m. a garland or necklace of pearls &c. (composed
of 100 or 103 or 81 or 108 strings). {%—Deva-%}
{%cchanda-prāsāda, as,%} m. a temple consecrated to a
god. {%—Deva-cchandas, as,%} n. or {%deva-cchandasa,%}
{%am,%} n. a divine metre. {%—Deva-ja, as, ā, am,%} god-
born, born or produced by gods [cf. {%deva-jā%}]; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a prince who was a son of Saṃyama.
{%—Deva-jagdha%} or {%devajagdhaka, am,%} n. a kind
of fragrant grass, {%= kat-tṛṇa%}. {%—Deva-jana, as,%} m.,
Ved. the gods collectively, a troop or collection of
deities, any collection of superhuman beings (as of
serpents; cf. {%daivajana%} and {%itara-jana%}). {%—Deva-%}
{%jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. born or produced by gods; [cf.
{%deva-ja.%}] {%—Deva-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= deva-jā;%}
{%(am),%} n. a class or race of gods. {%—Deva-jāmi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. peculiar to the gods; ({%is%}), f. a sister of
the gods. {%—Deva-juṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. agreeable
to the gods. {%—Deva-jūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. incited
by the gods, inspired; gained by the gods. {%—Deva-%}
{%tara, as,%} m., N. of a man; [cf. {%deva-taras.%}]
{%—Deva-taratha, as,%} m., N. of a teacher. {%—Deva-%}
{%taras, ās,%} m., N. of a teacher (with the patronymic
Śāvasāyana); [cf. {%daivatarasa.%}] {%—Deva-taru, us,%}
m. ‘the tree of the gods,’ the divine tree, the holy
fig-tree; one of the trees of Svarga or paradise,
the tree of plenty, (a general N. for the five trees
{%mandāra, pārijātaka, santāna, kalpa-vṛkṣa,%}
and {%hari-candana%}); the old tree of a village, held
sacred by the villagers and usually the place of their
assembling; [cf. 2. {%caitya%} and {%dyu-taru.%}] {%—Deva-%}
{%tā,%} f. the state or nature of a deity, divine dignity
or power, divinity; a deity or divine being, a god;
the image of a deity; an idol; an organ of sense;
({%ā%}), ind., Ved. in the nature of a god; among
the gods, to the gods; [cf. {%a-d˚%} and {%gṛha-d˚.%}]
{%—Devatāgāra (˚tā-āg˚)%} or {%devatā-gṛha, am,%} n.
‘the house of the gods,’ a temple, chapel. {%—Devatā-%}
{%jit, t,%} m. ‘the conqueror of a deity,’ N. of a son of
Sumati and grandson of Bharata. {%—Deva-tāḍa, as,%}
m. a kind of grass, Lipeocercis Serrata, (also {%deva-%}
{%tāḍī,%} f. and {%deva-tāḍaka, as,%} m.); ({%as%}), m. {%=%}
{%ghoṣaka,%} Luffa Fœtida or a similar plant; fire;
an epithet of Rāhu; [cf. {%tāḍa%} and {%deva-dālī.%}]
{%—Deva-tāt,%} f. (occurring only in dat. and loc.), Ved.
divine service. {%—Deva-tāti, is,%} f., Ved. {%= deva-tāt,%}
divine service; divinity, the gods collectively. {%—Deva-%}
{%tātmā (˚tā-āt˚),%} f. the mother of the gods; [cf.
{%devātmā.%}] {%—Devatādhipa (˚tā-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘the
ruler or chief of the gods,’ an epithet of Indra.
{%—Devatādhyāya (˚tā-adh˚), am,%} n., scil. {%brāh-%}
{%maṇa,%} N. of a Brāhmaṇa. {%—Devatānukrama (˚tā-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. or {%devatānukramaṇī,%} f. an index of
the deities to which the hymns of the Vedas are
[Page0431-a+ 81]
addressed. {%—Devatā-pratimā,%} f. the image of a
god, an idol. {%—Devatābhyarcana (˚tā-abh˚), am,%}
n. the act of worshipping an idol, worship of a deity.
{%—Devatābhyarcana-para, as, ā, am,%} devoted to
the worship of a deity. {%—Devatā-maya, as, ī, am,%}
containing all the gods, made up of all the deities.
{%—Devatā-mithuna, am,%} n. the cohabitation of
deities. {%—Devatāyatana (˚tā-āy˚), am,%} n. or {%deva-%}
{%tālaya (˚tā-āl˚), as,%} m. or {%devatā-veśman, a,%} n.
the dwelling or sanctuary of a god, a temple, chapel.
{%—Devatā-snāna, am,%} n. the ablution of an idol.
{%—Deva-tīrtha, am,%} n. ‘the Tīrtha of the gods,’ N. of
a bathing-place; the right moment for the (worship
of the) gods; the part of the hands sacred to the
gods, i. e. the tips of the fingers. {%—Deva-tta, as, ā,%}
{%am%} ({%tta = datta,%} Gram. 533. <nsi>a</nsi>), Ved. given by the
gods. {%—Deva-trā,%} ind., Ved. among the gods, to the
gods. {%—Deva-tva, am,%} n. the state of a deity, divinity,
the abstract attribute of divine being, divine dignity;
identification with a deity, deification. {%—Deva-datta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} given by the gods, god-given, granted by
the gods; ({%as%}), m., N. of the conch-shell of Arjuna;
one of the vital airs, that which is exhaled in yawning;
a common N. for men, (often used in grammatical
and other examples and then equivalent to ‘any one,’
‘a certain person, &c.’); N. of a cousin of Śākya-
muni; of a son of Uru-śravas and father of Agni-
veśya; of a son of the Brāhman Govinda-datta; of
a son of Hari-datta; of a son of the king Jaya-datta;
of the author of a commentary; of a Nāga; of a
Grāma of the Bāhīkas; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the mother of
Deva-datta who was the cousin of Śākya-muni.
{%—Devadattaka, ās,%} m. pl. the band led by Deva-
datta. {%—Devadattāgraja (˚ta-ag˚), as,%} m. ‘the
elder brother of Deva-datta,’ an epithet of Śākya-
muni. {%—Deva-dattīya, ās,%} m. pl. the pupils of
Deva-datta. {%—Deva-dantin, ī,%} m. an epithet of Śiva?
(see Kathā-sarit-s. III. 5). {%—Deva-darśa, as,%} m.,
N. of a teacher of the Atharva-veda. {%—Deva-dar-%}
{%śana, as, ā, am,%} seeing the gods, visiting them,
familiar with them; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Nārada.
{%—Deva-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} seeing the gods, having
intercourse with them; ({%inas%}), m. pl., N. of a
school of the Atharva-veda. {%—Deva-dānī,%} f. a species
of creeper, {%= ghoṣakākṛti%}. {%—Deva-dāru, us,%} m. a
species of pine, Pinus Deodora or Deodar; (in Bengal
it is usually applied to the Uvaria Longifolia, and in
the peninsula to another tree, Erythrosylon Sideroxy-
loides.) {%—Devadāru-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of
the wood of the Deva-dāru tree. {%—Deva-dālikā%} or
{%deva-dālī,%} f. a kind of cucurbitaceous plant; [cf.
{%dālikā%} and {%mahā-kāla.%}] {%—Deva-dāsa, as,%} m. a
servant of a god or of the gods (especially slaves or
servants who serve in a temple or Buddhist monas-
tery); N. of the son of a merchant who was the
brother of Śārṅga-dhara's mother; N. of the son of a
Kāli-dāsa; ({%ī%}), f. a courtezan (especially one employed
as a dancer &c. in a temple); the wild citron tree
({%= vana-vīja-pūraka;%} cf. {%deva-dūtī%}). {%—Deva-%}
{%dāsa-deva, as,%} m., N. of a poet, (perhaps the
brother of Śārṅga-dhara's mother.) {%—Deva-dīpa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the lamp of the gods,’ ‘the divine light,’ the
eye; [cf. {%daiva-dīpa%} and {%deha-dīpa.%}] {%—Deva-%}
{%dundubhi, is,%} m. a divine or celestial drum; holy
basil with red flowers; an epithet of Indra. {%—Deva-%}
{%dūta%} or {%deva-dūtaka, as,%} m. a messenger of the
gods, a divine envoy, an angel; ({%ī%}), f. a female
messenger of the gods, the wild citron tree. {%—Deva-%}
{%deva, as,%} m. (‘the god of the gods’), ‘the chief of
the gods,’ epithet of Brahmā; of Rudra or Śiva; of
Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu; of Gaṇeśa; ({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet
of the Brāhmans. {%—Devadeveśa (˚va-īś˚), as,%} m.
‘the lord among the chiefs of the gods,’ epithet of
Śiva; [cf. {%deveśa.%}] {%—Deva-dyumna, as,%} m., N. of
a son of Devatā-jit and father of Parameṣṭhin.
{%—Deva-droṇī,%} f. an idol procession, a procession
with idols, (originally perhaps ‘the ablution of idols;’
cf. {%droṇī.%}) {%—Devadryañc%} (fr. {%deva%} and rt. {%añc%}),
{%aṅ, drīcī, ak,%} ‘turned towards or approaching the
gods,’ adoring a deity. {%—Deva-dharma, as,%} m. a
religious duty or office. {%—Deva-dhānī,%} f. ‘the resi-
[Page0431-b+ 81]
dence of the gods,’ N. of Indra's city on the Māna-
sottara, to the east of Meru. {%—Deva-dhānya, am,%}
n. ‘god's grain,’ a sort of grain cultivated in many
parts of Hindūstān, Andropogon Saccharatus, Andro-
pogon or Holcus Sorghum (commonly {%dedhān, jo-ār%}).
{%—Deva-dhūpa, as,%} m. a fragrant resin or bdellium
used for incense. {%—Deva-nakṣatra, as,%} m., N. of
a prince, (a various reading for {%deva-kṣatra%}); ({%am%}),
n., N. of the first fourteen Nakṣatras on the southern
quarter, (opposed to the Yama-nakṣatras on the
northern.) {%—Deva-nadī,%} f. ‘the divine river,’ epithet
of several sacred rivers. {%—Deva-nandin, ī,%} m., N. of
one of Indra's door-keepers. {%—Deva-nala, as,%} m. a
kind of reed, Arundo Bengalensis; [cf. {%deva-nāla.%}]
{%—Deva-nāgarī,%} f. ‘the divine city writing,’ N. of
the character in which Sanskrit is usually written,
(probably from its having originated in some city.)
{%—Deva-nātha, as,%} m. ‘the lord of the gods,’ an
epithet of Śiva. {%—Deva-nābha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Deva-nāma, a,%} n. the N. of a god. {%—Deva-%}
{%nāman, ā,%} m. ‘having divine names,’ N. of the
seven Varṣas in Kuśa-dvīpa. {%—Deva-nāyaka, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Deva-nāla, as,%} m. {%= deva-nala,%}
q. v. {%—Deva-nikāya, as, ā, am,%} living with the
gods or in heaven; ({%as%}), m. the residence of a
divinity, a paradise, heaven. {%—Deva-nid, t, t, t,%}
Ved. hating the gods, a god-hater. {%—Deva-nindaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a reviler of the gods, a heretic, an unbeliever,
atheism. {%—Deva-nindā,%} f. reviling the gods, infidelity,
heresy, atheism. {%—Deva-nirmita, as, ā, am,%} ‘god-
made,’ god-created, natural. {%—Deva-nītha, as,%} m. a
formula consisting of seventeen Pādas. {%—Deva-pañ-%}
{%carātra, as,%} m., N. of a Pañcāha. {%—Deva-pati, is,%}
m. ‘the lord of the gods,’ an epithet of Indra;
({%ayas%}), m. pl. the most excellent of the gods. {%—De-%}
{%vapati-mantrin, ī,%} m. ‘Indra's counsellor,’ an epi-
thet of Bṛhas-pati, the planet Jupiter. {%—Deva-%}
{%patnī,%} f. having a god as husband; ({%ī%}), f. the wife
of a deity; sweet potato {%(= madhv-āluka)%}. {%—Deva-%}
{%patha, as,%} m. the way of the gods, the celestial
path or way, heaven, the firmament; N. of a place
of pilgrimage. {%—Devapatha-tīrtha, am,%} n. ‘the
Tīrtha of the way to heaven,’ N. of a particular
Tīrtha. {%—Devapathīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to or
coming from Deva-patha above. {%—Deva-pada%} or
{%deva-pāda, am,%} n. the foot of a god or king, the
royal presence, a honorific term for a king, = ‘His
Majesty.’ {%—Deva-pariṣad, t,%} f. an assembly of
deities. {%—Deva-parṇa, am,%} n. ‘the divine leaf,’ N.
of a medicinal plant {%(= sura-parṇa)%}. {%—Deva-pallī-%}
{%paṭṭana, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a place.
{%—Deva-paśu, us,%} m. any animal consecrated to a
deity. {%—Deva-pātra, am,%} n. ‘cup of the gods,’ a
divine drink. {%—Deva-pāda,%} see {%deva-pada%}. {%—Deva-%}
{%pāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. constituting the beverage of
the gods, drunk by the gods. {%—Deva-pāla, as,%} m.
‘god-defender,’ N. of several princes; N. of a
mountain. {%—Deva-pālita, as,%} m. ‘god-protected,’
N. of a man. {%—Deva-pīyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. reviling
or despising the gods. {%—Deva-putra, as,%} m. the
son of a god; ({%ī%} or {%ikā%}), f. a kind of plant, {%=%}
{%pṛkkā; (as, ā, am),%} having gods as children.
{%—Devaputra-māra, as,%} m., N. of one of the four
Buddhist Māras. {%—Deva-pur, ūr,%} f., Ved. ‘the city
of the gods,’ a divine fortress, the residence of Indra.
{%—Deva-pura, am,%} n. ‘the city of the gods,’ the
residence of Indra {%(= amara-vatī)%}. {%—Deva-purā,%}
f., Ved. a divine fortress, a stronghold of the gods.
{%—Deva-pūjaka, as,%} m. a worshipper of the gods.
{%—Deva-pūjā,%} f. worship of the gods. {%—Deva-%}
{%pūjya, as,%} m. ‘to be honoured by the gods,’ an
epithet of Bṛhas-pati, the planet Jupiter. {%—Deva-%}
{%pratikṛti, is,%} f. or {%deva-pratimā,%} f. the image of
a deity, an idol. {%—Deva-pratiṣṭhā-tattva, am,%} n.,
N. of a work. {%—Deva-prayāga, as,%} m. ‘the divine
place of sacrifice,’ N. of a sacred bathing-place.
{%—Deva-praśna, as,%} m. enquiring of the gods,
consulting the deities, fortune-telling, astrology; [cf.
{%daiva-praśna.%}] {%—Deva-prasāda, as,%} m. ‘having
the divine favour,’ N. of a man. {%—Deva-prasūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. produced by the gods. {%—Deva- %}
[Page0431-c+ 81]
{%prastha, as,%} m., N. of the city of Sena-vindu.
{%—Deva-priya, as, ā, am,%} ‘dear to the gods,’ an
epithet of Śiva; ({%as%}), m., N. of two plants, {%= pīta-%}
{%bhṛṅga-rāja%} and {%vaka-puṣpa%}. {%—Deva-psaras-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very pleasing to the gods or
propitiatory of the gods. {%—Deva-badhū, ūs,%} f. the
wife of a god. {%—Deva-bandhu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
related to the gods; ({%us%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
{%—Deva-balā,%} f. ‘having divine strength,’ N. of
a plant, a kind of Balā, {%= mahā-balā, jyeṣṭha-%}
{%balā, saha-devī%}. {%—Deva-bali, is,%} m. an oblation to
the gods; (also read {%deva-vali,%} q. v.) {%—Deva-bāhu,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘the arm of the gods,’ N. of an ancient Ṛṣi;
of a son of Hṛdīka. {%—Deva-bodha, as,%} m. ‘having
the knowledge of the gods,’ N. of a commentator
on the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Deva-bodhi, is,%} m. ‘god-
inspired,’ N. of a poet. {%—Devabodhi-sattva, as,%} m.,
N. of a Buddhist saint. {%—Deva-brahman, ā,%} m. ‘a
Brāhman among the gods,’ an epithet of Nārada;
[cf. {%deva-ṛṣi.%}] {%—Deva-brāhmaṇa, as,%} m. a
Brāhman esteemed by the gods, a venerable Brāhman.
{%—Devabrāhmaṇa-nindaka, as,%} m. a despiser of
the gods and Brāhmans. {%—Deva-bhakta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. distributed by the gods. {%—Deva-bhakti, is,%} f.
the service of the gods, religion, piety. {%—Deva-bha-%}
{%vana, am,%} n. ‘the residence of the gods,’ heaven,
paradise; a temple; the holy fig-tree {%(= aśvattha).%}
{%—Deva-bhāga, as,%} m. ‘the portion or allotment of
the gods,’ the northern hemisphere, (opposed to
{%asura-bhāga,%} the southern hemisphere); N. of a
teacher with the epithet Śrauta or Śrautarṣa; N. of
a son of Śūra and brother of Vasu-deva. {%—Deva-%}
{%bhīti, is,%} f. fear of the gods. {%—Deva-bhū, ūs,%} m. a
divine being, a god, a deity; Svarga or paradise.
{%—Deva-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become a god. {%—Deva-%}
{%bhūti, is,%} m., N. of the last prince of the Śuṅga
dynasty; ({%is%}), f. the Gaṅgā of the sky. {%—Deva-%}
{%bhūmi, is,%} m. ‘having a divine domain,’ {%= deva-%}
{%bhūti%}. {%—Deva-bhūya, am,%} n. divinity, godhead;
inferior deification or identification with a deity.
{%—Deva-bhojya, am,%} n. ‘the food of the gods,’
Amṛta, nectar. {%—Deva-bhrāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘shining like a
god,’ N. of a son of Mahya, son of Vivas-vat (i. e.
of the Sun). {%—Deva-mañjara, am,%} n. the jewel of
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa suspended on his breast; [cf.
{%kaustubha.%}] {%—Deva-maṇi, is,%} m., Ved. a divine
amulet; the jewel on Kṛṣṇa's breast; a twist of
hair on a horse's neck; N. of a drug belonging to
the Aṣṭa-varga ({%= mahā-medā%}); an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Deva-mata, as,%} m. ‘god-approved,’ N. of a
Ṛṣi; [cf. {%daivamati.%}] {%—Deva-maya, as, ī, am,%}
containing the gods, made up of all the gods.
{%—Deva-malimluc, k,%} m., N. of an Asura. {%—Deva-%}
{%māta, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Deva-mātṛ, tā,%} f.
‘the mother of the gods,’ an epithet of Aditi {%(=%}
{%dākṣāyaṇī)%}. {%—Deva-mātṛka, as, ā, am,%} fostered
or watered by the clouds (or by Indra, the giver of
rain), as corn, land, &c., deprived of every other
kind of water (‘having the clouds as foster-mother;’
cf. {%nadī-mātṛka.%}) {%—Deva-mādana, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. ‘gladdening or inspiring the gods,’ an epithet
of Soma. {%—Deva-māna, am,%} n. the residence of
the gods, dwelling of the gods. {%—Deva-mānaka,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= deva-maṇi%}. {%—Deva-māyā,%} f. an illusion
created by a god or gods. {%—Deva-mārga, as,%} m.
‘the way of the gods,’ (according to commentators
a facetious expression for the penis or anus.) {%—Deva-%}
{%māsa, as,%} m. ‘the divine month or month of the
gods,’ the eighth month of pregnancy. {%—Deva-mitra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the gods as friends; ({%as%}), m., N.
of an ancient preceptor with the epithet Śākalya; of
the father of Viṣṇu-putra of the family of Vatsa
[cf. {%daivamitri%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda. {%—Deva-mithuna, am,%} n., Ved.
cohabitation of the gods. {%—Deva-miśra, as,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Deva-mīḍha, as,%} m., N. of a Yādava,
grandfather of Vasu-deva; of a descendant of Nimi and
Jaraka. {%—Deva-mīḍhuṣa, as,%} m. the grandfather
of Vasu-deva. {%—Deva-muni, is,%} m. a heavenly or
divine Muni; N. of a son of Iraṃmada and author
of a hymn of the Ṛg-veda. {%—Deva-yaj, k, k, k,%}
[Page0432-a+ 81]
or {%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ%} (?), making oblations or sacrifices to
the gods, a worshipper of the gods. {%—Deva-ya-%}
{%jana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. worshipping the gods, making
oblations to them; serving for an oblation or con-
stituting an oblation to the gods; ({%am%}), n. the place
where a sacrifice is performed. {%—Deva-yaji, is, is,%}
{%i,%} worshipping the gods, making oblations or sacri-
ficing to them; ({%is%}), m. a worshipper of the gods;
a Muni. {%—Deva-yajña, as,%} m. a sacrifice to the
superior gods performed by oblations to Fire or
through Fire to the other gods; the Homa or
burnt sacrifice (one of the five great sacrifices men-
tioned in Manu III. 84, 85); N. of a man. {%—Deva-%}
{%yajya, am,%} n. or {%deva-yajyā,%} f. (inst. {%-yajyā%}), Ved.
worshipping the gods, a sacrifice. {%—Deva-yā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. going to the gods, desirous of them,
honouring them. {%—Deva-yājin, ī, inī, i,%} making
sacrifices to the gods; ({%ī%}), m., N. of one of the
attendants of Skanda; N. of a Dānava. {%—Deva-%}
{%yājñika, as,%} m., N. of an author, {%= yājñika-deva.%}
{%—Deva-yātu, us,%} m. ‘a heavenly Yātu,’ N. of a
class of Yātus; (also read {%deva-yāta;%} cf. {%daiva-%}
{%yātaka%} and {%daivayātavaka.%}) {%—Deva-yātrā,%} f. an
idol procession, any sacred festival when the images
of gods are carried in procession. {%—Devayātrin, ī,%}
m., N. of a Dānava; [cf. {%deva-yājin.%}] {%—Deva-%}
{%yāna, as, ī, am,%} Ved. going to the gods, following
them; serving as a way to the gods (especially
applied to the paths by which the gods descend
from heaven, and sacrifices ascend to them), the
ways leading to the gods; ({%am%}), n. the car or vehicle
of a god; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Uśanas or
wife of Yayāti and mother of Yadu and Turvasu.
{%—Deva-yāvan, ā, varī, a,%} Ved. going to the gods.
{%—Deva-yukta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. yoked by the gods
(as horses). {%—Deva-yuga, am,%} n. ‘the age of the
gods,’ the first age of the world; any age or period
of the gods comprising the four ages of mankind,
(two of these ages or Yugas form a day and night
of Brahmā; cf. {%kṛta-yuga.%}) {%—Deva-yoni, is,%}
m. f. the place of origin of a god, a divine birth-
place; epithet of the wood used for kindling fire;
({%is, is, i%}), of divine origin; ({%is%}), m. a being of
divine origin; a superhuman being, a demi-god or
demon. {%—Deva-yoṣā,%} f. the wife of a god. {%—Deva-%}
{%rakṣita, as, ā, am,%} guarded by a god or by the
gods; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Devaka; of a prince
of the Kośalas; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter of Devaka
and one of the wives of Vasu-deva. {%—Deva-rata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. delighting in the gods, pious. {%—Deva-%}
{%ratha, as,%} m. the car or vehicle of a deity, a car
for carrying the images of the gods in a procession
[cf. {%daivaratha%}]; N. of a man. {%—Devarathāhnya,%}
{%am,%} n. a day's journey for the chariot of a god (of
the Sun). {%—Deva-rahasya, am,%} n. a secret of the
gods, divine mystery; [cf. {%deva-guhya.%}] {%—Deva-rāj,%}
{%ṭ,%} m. ‘the king of the gods,’ an epithet of Indra;
of Nahuṣa. {%—Deva-rāja, as,%} m. a divine ruler;
king of the gods; an epithet of Indra; of a king;
of a Ṛṣi; of a Buddha; of a commentator on the
Naighaṇṭuka; (the full name is {%devarāja-yajvan,%}
q. v.; cf. {%daivarājaka%} and {%daivarājika.%}) {%—Deva-%}
{%rājan, ā,%} m. a prince of a Brāhmanical family.
{%—Devarāja-yajvan, ā,%} m., N. of a commentator
on the three chapters of Vedic synonyms, usually
called the Naighaṇṭuka portion of the Nighaṇṭus,
incompletely explained by Yāska; N. of the grand-
father of this commentator. {%—Devarāja-sama-%}
{%dyuti, is, is, i,%} equal in glory to the king of the
gods. {%—Deva-rājya, am,%} n. sovereignty over the
gods; [cf. {%daivarājya.%}] {%—Deva-rāta, as, ā, am,%}
‘god-given;’ ({%as%}), m. the N. given to Śunaḥ-śepha
after being received into the family of Viśvā-mitra;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of Śunaḥ-śepha; N. of a
king who was the son of Su-ketu and descendant of
Nimi; N. of a king who was the son of Karambhi;
an epithet of Parikṣit [cf. {%daivarāti%}]; a sort of
crane. {%—Deva-rāṣṭra, am,%} n. the empire of the
gods; N. of an empire in the Dekhan. {%—Deva-%}
{%rūpin, ī, iṇī, i%} (fr. {%deva-rūpa%}), of divine form,
godlike. {%—Devarṣi (deva-ṛṣi), is,%} m. a Ṛṣi,
[Page0432-b+ 81]
a saint of the celestial class, as Nārada, Atri, Marīci,
Bharad-vāja, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bhṛgu, Vasish-
ṭha, Pra-cetas, Bharata, Kaṇāda, and others. {%—De-%}
{%varṣi-tva, am,%} n. state or rank of a divine Ṛṣi.
{%—Devarṣi-varya, as,%} m. chief of sages. {%—Deva-%}
{%latā,%} f. double jasmine {%(= nava-mallikā)%}. {%—De-%}
{%va-lāṅgulikā,%} f., N. of a plant; [cf. {%vṛścikālī.%}]
{%—Deva-liṅga, am,%} n. the image or statue of a
deity. {%—Deva-lekhā,%} f., N. of a princess. {%—Deva-%}
{%loka, as,%} m. the particular sphere or heaven of any
divinity; heaven or paradise; any one of the seven
superior worlds (from the earth to the highest or
Satya-loka, in opposition to those below the earth;
{%deva-loke gata,%} gone to the world of the gods, one
who has died). {%—Deva-vaktra, am,%} n. ‘the mouth
of the gods,’ an epithet of fire or its deity Agni (as
eating or consuming the oblations made to the gods).
 — 1. {%deva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} guarded by the gods,
surrounded by them, (also read {%devā-vat%}); ({%ān%}), m.,
N. of the grandfather of Su-dās; of a son of A-krūra;
of Devaka who was a son of Āhuka; of the twelfth
Manu; [cf. {%deva-vāyu.%}] — 2. {%deva-vat,%} ind. like a
god. {%—Deva-vadha, as,%} m., Ved. a weapon of the
gods. {%—Deva-vadhū, ūs,%} f. the wife of a god.
{%—Deva-vanda, as, ā, am,%} Ved. praising the gods.
{%—Deva-vara, as,%} m. a superior or supreme deity;
({%am%}), n. a divine boon or blessing. {%—Deva-vart-%}
{%man, a,%} n. ‘the path of the gods,’ the atmosphere.
{%—Deva-vardhaki, is,%} m. ‘the builder or architect
of the gods,’ an epithet of Viśva-karman or of Tvash-
ṭṛ the carpenter of the gods. {%—Deva-vardhana, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Devaka. {%—Deva-varman, a,%}
n. the armour of the gods, divine armour. {%—Deva-%}
{%varṣa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a Varṣa in
the Dvīpa Śālmala. {%—Deva-vallabha, as,%} m. the
tree Rottlera Tinctoria. {%—Deva-vāṇī,%} f. a divine
voice, a voice from heaven. {%—Deva-vāta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. agreeable to the gods; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Bhārata; [cf. {%daivavāta.%}] {%—Deva-vāyu, us,%} m.,
N. of the son of the twelfth Manu; [cf. 1. {%deva-vat.%}]
{%—Deva-vāhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. carrying the gods
(as a horse). {%—Deva-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing the gods.
{%—Deva-vidyā,%} f. the doctrine or science of the
gods, divine science; (according to a commentator {%=%}
{%nirukta,%} q. v.) {%—Deva-vibhāga, as,%} m. the division
or quarter of the gods, the northern hemisphere;
[cf. {%deva-bhāga.%}] {%—Deva-viś, ṭ,%} or {%deva-viśā,%} f.,
Ved. a divine person, a deity, the gods collectively.
{%—Deva-vī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. gratifying the gods.
{%—Devavī-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very much liked
by the gods. {%—Deva-vīti, is,%} f., Ved. a feast or meal
or enjoyment prepared for the gods; N. of one of
the nine daughters of Meru and wife of one of the
nine sons of Agnīdhra. {%—Deva-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. ‘the
divine tree,’ a common N. of the Mandāra and
other fabulous trees of heaven or paradise; the tree
Alstonia Scholaris; a plant yielding a fragrant resin,
bdellium {%(= guggulu)%}. {%—Deva-vṛtti, is,%} m. the
commentary of Deva ({%= Puruṣottama-deva%}) on
the Uṇādi-sūtras. {%—Deva-vyacas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
affording space for the gods, receiving the gods.
{%—Deva-vrata, am,%} n. a religious observance; any
religious obligation or vow; the favourite food of the
gods; ({%as, ā, am%}), devoted to the gods, religious;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Bhīṣma; of Kārttikeya.
{%—Deva-vratin, ī, inī, i,%} obeying the divine com-
mands, serving the gods. {%—Deva-śakti, is,%} m. ‘having
the power of a god,’ ‘having divine strength,’ N. of
a king. {%—Devaśata-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a work
mentioned in the Śūdra-dharma-tattva by Kamalā-
kara. {%—Deva-śatru, us,%} m. an enemy of the gods;
an Asura; a Rakṣas; ({%us, us, u%}), Ved. having
the gods as enemies. {%—Deva-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of
several persons; of an old sage; of a Buddhist
author, (wrongly written {%deva-sarman%}); of a minister
of Jayāpīḍa who was king of Kāśmīra; [cf. {%daiva-%}
{%śarmi.%}] {%—Deva-śas,%} ind., Ved. deity after deity.
{%—Deva-śilpin, ī,%} m. ‘the artist of the gods,’ an
epithet of Tvaṣṭṛ. {%—Deva-śiśu, us,%} m. the child
of a god; [cf. {%deva-garbha.%}] {%—Deva-śiṣṭa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. taught or directed by the gods. {%—Deva- %}
[Page0432-c+ 81]
{%śunī,%} f., Ved. ‘the divine female dog,’ an epithet of
Saramā. {%—Deva-śūra, as,%} m. ‘the divine hero,’ N.
of a man. {%—Deva-śekhara, as,%} m. ‘the diadem of
the gods,’ a kind of plant, {%= damanaka%}. {%—Deva-%}
{%śeṣa, am,%} n. the remnants of a sacrifice offered to
the gods. {%—Deva-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of a Bhārata;
of a son of Yama and author of hymns of the Ṛg-
veda. {%—Deva-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. approaching the
gods, worshipping. {%—Devaśrī-garbha, as,%} m., N.
of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Deva-śrut, t, t, t,%} Ved. audible
to the gods, heard by the gods. {%—Deva-śruta, as,%}
m. (with Jainas) N. of the sixth Arhat of the future
Ut-sarpiṇī; a god ({%= īśvara%}); N. of Nārada; a
sacred treatise or branch of scripture. {%—Deva-śrū,%}
{%ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. known to the gods. {%—Deva-śreṇī,%} f.
the plant Sanseviera Zeylanica {%(= mūrvā)%}. {%—Deva-%}
{%śreṣṭha, as,%} m., N. of a son of the twelfth Manu.
{%—Deva-sakha, as,%} m., Ved. a friend or companion
of the gods. {%—Deva-saṅgīta-yonin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘fur-
nishing sources of amusement or entertainment to the
gods,’ N. of the Nāradas who appear as messengers.
{%—Deva-sattra, am,%} n. a festival or sacrifice of long
continuance in honour of the gods. {%—Deva-sattva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the nature of a god, godlike.
{%—Deva-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. living among the gods.
{%—Deva-sadana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. serving as a seat
or residence for the gods. {%—Deva-sadman, a,%} n. the
seat or residence of a god. {%—Deva-sandha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} connected with the gods, divine. {%—Deva-san-%}
{%nidhi, is,%} m. presence of the gods. {%—Deva-sabhā,%}
f. an assembly of the gods; a gambling-house; [cf.
the next.] {%—Devasabhya, as,%} m. the keeper of a
gambling-house; a gambler; a frequenter of gambling-
houses or clubs; an attendant on a deity. {%—Deva-%}
{%sarasa, am,%} n. ‘the pool of the gods,’ N. of a
place. {%—Deva-sarṣapa, as,%} m. ‘divine mustard,’
a kind of mustard. {%—Deva-saha, as,%} m. ‘the
strength of the gods,’ N. of a mountain; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of plant, {%= saha-devī, daṇḍotpalā, = bhikṣā-%}
{%sūtra%} (or {%bhikṣu-sūtra ?%}). {%—Deva-sāt,%} ind. to a
god or gods, to the nature of a deity; {%devasād-bhū,%}
to become changed into a god. {%—Deva-sāyujya,%}
{%am,%} n. conjunction with the gods, reception among
the gods, absorption into or identification with a
deity; inferior deification, the state or being of the
inferior gods. {%—Deva-sāvarṇi, is,%} m., N. of the
thirteenth Manu. {%—Deva-siṃha, as,%} m. ‘the lion
of the gods,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Deva-sunda, as,%}
m., N. of a lake. {%—Deva-sumati, is,%} f. the favour
of the gods. {%—Deva-sumanas,%} ‘divine flower,’ a
species of flower. {%—Deva-suṣi, is,%} m. a tube or
cavity which leads to the gods; (the heart has five,
viz. {%prāṇa, vyāna, apāna, samāna,%} and {%udāna.%})
{%—Deva-sū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. an epithet applied to
eight deities, viz. Agni gṛha-pati, Soma vanas-pati,
Savitṛ satya-prasava, Rudra paśu-pati, Bṛhas-pati
vācas-pati, Indra jyeṣṭha, Mitra satya, and Varuṇa
dharma-pati. {%—Deva-sūda, am,%} n., N. of a village.
{%—Deva-sūri, is,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Deva-%}
{%sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} let go or discharged by a god;
caused or created by the gods; ({%ā%}), f. an intoxicating
drink, a kind of spirituous liquor. {%—Deva-sena, as,%}
m., N. of a king of Śrāvastī; of Pauṇḍra-vardhana;
of a Buddhist Arhat; ({%ā%}), f. an army or host of
celestials; N. of a daughter of Prajā-pati or niece
of Indra and wife of Skanda who is the leader of
the hosts of heaven, (she is worshipped by the race
of Jātukārṇya); N. of a daughter of Indra. {%—Deva-%}
{%senā-pati, is,%} m. ‘the commander of the hosts of
heaven,’ an epithet of Skanda. {%—Devasenā-priya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the beloved of Deva-senā,’ epithet of Skanda.
{%—Deva-stut, t, t, t,%} Ved. praising the gods.
{%—Deva-strī,%} f. the wife of a deity. {%—Deva-sthāna,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an ancient Ṛṣi [cf. {%daivasthāni%}];
({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Devasyatvaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} containing the words {%devasya tvā%} (as an
Adhyāya or Anu-vāka). {%—Deva-sva, am,%} n. the
property of the gods, property applicable to religious
purposes or endowments &c. {%—Devasvāpaharaṇa%}
{%(˚sva-ap˚), am,%} n. ‘plunder of sacred property,’
sacrilege. {%—Deva-svāmin, ī,%} m. ‘the lord of the
[Page0433-a+ 81]
gods,’ N. of several Brāhmans; N. of an astrologer;
of a commentator on the Āpastamba. {%—Deva-havis,%}
{%is,%} n., Ved. an oblation to the gods. {%—Deva-havya,%}
{%am,%} n. an oblation to the gods; ({%as%}), m., N. of an
ancient Ṛṣi. {%—Deva-hiṃsaka, as,%} m. an enemy
of the gods. {%—Deva-hita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. arranged
or appointed or settled by the gods. {%—Deva-hiti, is,%}
f., Ved. divine ordinance or arrangement. {%—Deva-hū,%}
{%ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. invoking the gods, devoted to the
gods; ({%ūs%}), m., N. of a man; ({%ūs%}), f., scil. {%dvār,%}
N. of the northern aperture of the human body, i. e.
of the left ear (which is turned northwards if the face
is directed towards the east; cf. {%pitṛ-hū%}), {%—Deva-%}
{%hū-tama, as, ā, am,%} most devoted to the gods;
very pious. {%—Deva-hūti, is%} or {%ī,%} f., Ved. invocation
of the gods; N. of a magical formula with which
the gods are invoked; N. of a daughter of Manu
Svayam-bhū and wife of Kardama. {%—Deva-hūya, am,%}
n., Ved. {%= deva-hūti,%} invocation of the gods. {%—De-%}
{%va-heḍana%} or {%deva-heḷana, am,%} n., Ved. disre-
garding the gods, an offence against them. {%—Deva-%}
{%heti, is,%} f., Ved. the weapon of a god, a divine
weapon. {%—Deva-hotra, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Yogeśvara, a partial incarnation ({%aṃśa%}) of Hari.
{%—Deva-hrada, am,%} n. ‘the divine lake,’ N. of a
sacred bathing-place. {%—Devāṃśa (˚va-aṃ˚), am,%} n.
a portion of a god, a partial incarnation of a god.
{%—Devākrīḍa (˚va-āk˚), as,%} m. the playing-place
or pleasure-grove of the gods. {%—Devāgāra (˚va-ag˚%}
or {%-āg˚%}), {%as, am,%} m. n. ‘the dwelling of a god,’ a
temple. {%—Devāṅga (˚va-aṅ˚), as,%} m., N. of an
emanation from the body of the god Sadāśiva, (said
to be the inventor of the art of weaving.) {%—Devāṅga-%}
{%caritra, am,%} n. ‘the adventures or story of Devāṅga,’
N. of a book. {%—Devāṅganā (˚va-aṅ˚),%} f. a divine
female, courtezan of Svarga. {%—Devājīva, as,%} m. or
{%devājīvin (˚va-āj˚), ī,%} m. an attendant upon an
idol, a low Brāhman, subsisting by attendance upon
an image and upon the offerings made to it. {%—De-%}
{%vāñc (˚va-añc), āṅ, ācī, āk,%} Ved. approaching the
gods; directed towards them; worshipping them.
{%—Devāñjana (˚va-añ˚), am,%} n., Ved. divine un-
guent or ointment. {%—Devāṭa%} ({%˚va-aṭa%} or {%-āṭa%}), {%as,%}
m., N. of a sacred bathing-place; [cf. {%patnyāṭa.%}]
{%—Devātithi (˚va-at˚), is,%} m. ‘the guest of the
gods,’ N. of a descendant of Kaṇva and author of
a hymn of the Ṛg-veda; of a prince or son of
A-krodhana or Krodhana by Karambhā; (also read
{%deva-tithi.%}) {%—Devātideva (˚va-at˚), as,%} m., a god
surpassing or excelling all other gods; epithet of
Viṣṇu; of Śākya-muni. {%—Devātman (˚va-āt˚), ā,%}
m. the divine soul; the holy fig-tree or Ficus Reli-
giosa; ({%ā, ā, a%}), being of divine nature, containing
a divinity; one with or identified with a deity;
belonging to a deity, consecrated, sacred. {%—Devātma-%}
{%śakti, is,%} f. the power of the divine soul. {%—Devātmā%}
{%(˚va-āt˚),%} f. the mother of the gods; [cf. {%deva-%}
{%tātmā.%}] {%—Devādhideva (˚va-adh˚), as,%} m. a god
over all other gods, an Arhat of the Jainas. {%—Devā-%}
{%dhipa (˚va-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘the king of the gods,’
an epithet of Indra; N. of a king identified with the
Asura Nikumbha. {%—Devānām-priya, as, ā, am,%} ‘the
beloved of the gods,’ simple, foolish; ({%as%}), m. a fool,
an idiot; a goat; an ascetic, one who relinquishes
or abandons the world; [cf. the Prākṛt N. of a
Buddhist king, {%Devānam-piyatissa.%}] {%—Devānīka%}
{%(˚va-an˚), am,%} n. an army of celestials; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a prince who was the son of Kṣema-dhanvan;
of a son of the eleventh Manu; of a mountain.
{%—Devānukrama, as,%} m. ‘the series of the gods,
enumeration of the gods in order,’ N. of a work
supposed to be written by Śaunaka, (serving as an
index to the deities to whom hymns are addressed.)
{%—Devānucara, as,%} or {%devānuyāyin (˚va-an˚), ī,%}
m. a follower or attendant of a god. {%—Devānta%}
{%(˚va-an˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of Hṛdīka. {%—De-%}
{%vāntaka (˚va-an˚), as,%} m., N. of a Rakṣas; of
a Daitya. {%—Devāntaka-vadha, as,%} m. ‘the destruc-
tion of Devāntaka,’ N. of the seventy-first chapter of
the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa or second part of the Gaṇeśa-
Purāṇa. {%—Devāndhas (˚va-an˚), as,%} n. divine
[Page0433-b+ 81]
food, ambrosia. {%—Devānna (˚va-an˚), am,%} n.
divine food, ambrosia; rice or food that has been
first presented to an idol. {%—Devāpi (˚va-āpi), is,%}
m. ‘the friend of the gods,’ N. of a Ṛṣi who was
son of Ṛṣṭi-ṣeṇa; (according to a later legend he
is a son of king Pratīpa, resigns his kingdom, retires
to the woods, becomes a Brāhman, and is supposed
to be still alive near the Su-meru mountain; cf.
{%daivāpa.%}) {%—Devābhīṣṭa (˚va-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
desired by the gods, sacred or dedicated to a deity;
({%ā%}), f. betel, piper betel {%(= tāmbūlī)%}. {%—Devāya-%}
{%tana (˚va-āy˚), am,%} n. ‘the dwelling of a god,’ a
temple; [cf. {%devatāyatana.%}] {%—Devāyudha (˚va-%}
{%āy˚), am,%} n. ‘the weapon of a god,’ a divine weapon,
Indra's bow, the rainbow. {%—Devāyuṣa (˚va-āy˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the life-time of a god. {%—Devāraṇya (˚va-%}
{%ar˚), am,%} n. a divine grove, the forest of the gods.
{%—Devārādhana (˚va-ār˚), am,%} n. or {%devārā-%}
{%dhanā,%} f. worship of the gods. {%—Devāri (˚va-ari),%}
{%is,%} m. ‘an enemy of the gods,’ an Asura. {%—Devārcaka%}
{%(˚va-ar˚), as,%} m. a worshipper of the gods. {%—De-%}
{%vārcana (˚va-ar˚), am,%} n. or {%devārcanā,%} f. the
worship of the gods; idolatry. {%—Devārpaṇa (˚va-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} received among the gods, considered
as a god. {%—Devārya (˚va-ār˚), as,%} m., N. of the
last Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī. {%—Devārha%}
{%(˚va-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy of the gods, divine;
({%as%}), m. a kind of medicinal plant; ({%ā%}), f. a species
of plant, {%= deva-balā, = saha-devī%}. {%—Devālaya%}
{%(˚va-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘the residence of the gods,’
heaven; a temple. {%—Devā-vat, ān, atī, at, = deva-%}
{%vat,%} q. v. {%—Devāvatāra (˚va-av˚), as,%} m. ‘the
place of descent of a god (?),’ N. of a place. {%—Devā-%}
{%vasatha (˚va-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘the habitation of a
deity,’ a temple. {%—Devāvāsa (˚va-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘the
residence of a god or gods,’ a temple; an epithet of
the tree Ficus Religiosa. {%—Devāvī (˚va-avī), īs, īs,%}
{%i,%} Ved. gladdening or satisfying the gods, agreeable
to the gods. {%—Devā-vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. gladdening
or satisfying the gods; ({%t%}), m., N. of a mountain;
(also read {%devā-vṛdha.%}) {%—Devā-vṛdha, as,%} m.,
N. of a prince who was father of Babhru [cf. {%daivā-%}
{%vṛdha%}]; of a mountain; [cf. {%devā-vṛdh.%}] {%—De-%}
{%vāśva (˚va-aś˚), as,%} m. the horse of a god, a divine
horse; Indra's horse Uccaiḥ-śravas. {%—Devāsura (˚va-%}
{%as˚), ās,%} m. pl. the gods and the Asuras; [cf. {%dai-%}
{%vāsura.%}] {%—Devāsura-guru, us,%} m. ‘the preceptor
of the gods and Asuras,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Devāsura-%}
{%namaskṛta, as,%} m. ‘worshipped by the gods and
Asuras,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Devāsura-mahāmātra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the chief of the gods and Asuras,’ epithet of
Śiva. {%—Devāsura-mahāśraya (˚hā-āś˚), as,%} m.
‘the great refuge of the gods and Asuras,’ epithet of
Śiva. {%—Devāsura-maheśvara (˚hā-īś˚), as,%} m.
‘the great lord of the gods and Asuras,’ epithet of
Śiva. {%—Devāsura-yuddha, am,%} n. the battle between
the gods and Asuras. {%—Devāsura-vara-prada, as,%}
m. ‘conferring boons on the gods and Asuras,’ epithet
of Śiva. {%—Devāsura-saṅgrāma, as,%} m. the war
between the gods and Asuras. {%—Devāsureśvara%}
{%(˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘the lord of the gods and Asuras,’
epithet of Śiva. {%—Devāhāra (˚va-āh˚), as,%} m. ‘food
of the gods,’ divine food, ambrosia. {%—Devāhvaya%}
{%(˚va-āh˚), as,%} m. ‘called Deva,’ N. of a prince.
{%—Devi-dāsa, as,%} m. (for {%devī-d˚%}), ‘the slave of
the goddess,’ N. of a man; N. of a commentator on
the Mugdha-bodha. {%—Devī-koṭa, as,%} m. {%= śonita-%}
{%pura,%} N. of a town (the city of Vāṇa, probably
Devicotta on the Coromandel coast). {%—Devī-garbha-%}
{%gṛha, as,%} m. ‘a house containing an image of the
goddess Durgā,’ a shrine of the goddess Durgā.
{%—Devī-gṛha, am,%} n. a temple of the goddess
(Durgā); the apartment of a queen. {%—Devī-tantra,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the Tantra of the goddess (Durgā),’ N. of
a Tantra. {%—Devī-tva, am,%} n. ‘the state of being a
goddess,’ the rank of a goddess; the rank of a queen.
{%—Devī-datta, as,%} m., N. of the father of Rāma-
sevaka and grandfather of Kṛṣṇa-mitra. {%—Devīn-%}
{%dhiyaka, as, ā, am,%} containing the words {%devīṃ%}
{%dhiyā%} (as an Anu-vāka or Adhyāya). {%—Devī-pāda-%}
{%dvaya, am,%} n. ‘the two feet of the goddess, i. e. of
[Page0433-c+ 81]
Durgā,’ N. of a holy bathing-place. {%—Devī-purāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa. {%—Devī-bhavana, am,%}
n. the temple of the goddess (Durgā). {%—Devī-bhā-%}
{%gavata-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa. {%—Devī-%}
{%mahādeva, am,%} n., N. of a play. {%—Devī-mahiman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a work, (perhaps = the following.)
{%—Devī-māhātmya, am,%} n. ‘the majesty of Durgā,’
N. of a section of the Mārkaṇḍeya-Purāṇa. {%—Devīr-%}
{%āpasaka, as, ā, am,%} containing the words {%devīr%}
{%āpaḥ%} (as an Anu-vāka or Adhyāya). {%—Devī-sūkta,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the hymn of the goddess,’ N. of a hymn to
Durgā. {%—Devej (˚va-ij), ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} sacrificing to the
gods, worshipping them. {%—Devejya (˚va-ij˚), as,%}
m. ‘the preceptor of the gods,’ an epithet of Bṛhas-
pati, the planet Jupiter. {%—Deveddha (˚va-iddha),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. kindled by the gods. {%—Devendra%}
{%(˚va-in˚), as,%} m. ‘the chief of the gods,’ an epithet
of Indra; of Śiva; N. of a man. {%—Devendra-bud-%}
{%dhi, is,%} m. ‘having the intellect of the chief of the
gods,’ N. of a learned Buddhist. {%—Devendra-sa-%}
{%maya, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist work; of a part of
the Suvarṇa-prabhāsa. {%—Deveśa (˚va-īśa), as,%} m.
‘the chief of the gods,’ an epithet of Brahmā; of
Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of Indra; ({%ī%}), f. ‘the queen of the
gods,’ epithet of Durgā; of Devakī who was mother
of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Deveśa-tīrtha, am,%} n. ‘the Tīrtha of
the chief of the gods,’ N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Deve-śaya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘resting or reposing on a god,’ epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Deveśvara (˚va-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘the sovereign
of the gods,’ an epithet of Śiva; N. of an author.
{%—Deveśvara-paṇḍita, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—De-%}
{%veṣita (˚va-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. sent or impelled
by the gods. {%—Deveṣṭa (˚va-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%}
wished by the gods, acceptable to the gods; ({%as, ā%}),
m. f. a sort of drug (reckoned among the Aṣṭa-
varga, {%= mahā-medā%}); bdellium; ({%ā%}), f. the wild
lime tree {%(= vana-vījapūraka)%}. {%—Devainasa (˚va-%}
{%en˚), am,%} n., Ved. the curse of the gods. {%—Devod-%}
{%yāna (˚va-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘the grove of the gods,’ a
sacred grove, a garden near a temple or consecrated
to a deity. {%—Devopāsaka (˚va-up˚), as,%} m. a
worshipper of the gods. {%—Devaukas (˚va-ok˚), as,%}
n. ‘the residence of the gods,’ the mountain Meru.
{%—Devy-āgama, as,%} m. ‘the arrival of the goddess,’
N. of a work. {%—Devy-upaniṣad, t,%} f., N. of an
Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>22686<pc>0433-c<k1>devaka<k2>devaka
{%Devaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ who or what sports or
plays; divine, celestial, godlike, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a
god, deity, (at the end of an adj. comp.); N. of a
man; of a Gandharva; of a prince, son of Āhuka
and father of Devakī who was mother of Kṛṣṇa;
of a son of Yudhi-ṣṭhira and Yaudheyī or Pauravī
[cf. {%devikā%}]; a familiar diminutive for Deva-datta,
q. v.; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the inhabitants of a Varṣa
in Krauñca-dvīpa; ({%ikā%}), f. a diminutive of Devī;
N. of a class of goddesses of an inferior order; ({%ās%}),
f. pl. the oblations made to the aforesaid goddesses
(viz. to Anu-matī, Rākā, Sinīvālī, Kuhū, and to
Dhātṛ); N. of the wife of Yudhi-ṣṭhira and mother
of Yaudheya; of a river; of a country [? cf. {%dāvika%}];
the thorn-apple {%(= dhustūrā); (akā),%} f. a familiar
diminutive for Deva-dattā, q. v.; ({%akī%}), f., N. of a
daughter of Devaka, (she was the wife of Vasu-deva
and mother of Kṛṣṇa); N. of Aditi; of Dākṣāyaṇī.
{%—Devakī-nandana%} or {%devaki-nandana%} or {%devakī-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. or {%devakī-sūnu, us,%} m. ‘the son of
Devakī,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Devakī-mātṛ, tā,%}
f. the mother of Devakī.
<LEND>

<L>22687<pc>0433-c<k1>devakIya<k2>devakIya
{%Devakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ divine, godlike, belonging
or relating to a divinity; [cf. {%devakya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22688<pc>0433-c<k1>devakya<k2>devakya
{%Devakya, as, ā, am,%}¦ divine, godlike; correspond-
ing to the number of the gods; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of the
metre Anuṣṭubh; [cf. {%devakīya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22689<pc>0433-c<k1>devatya<k2>devatya
{%Devatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.)
having as one's deity; sacred to a deity [cf. {%eka-d˚,%}
{%kiṃ-d˚, daivatya%}]; ({%ā%}), f., Ved. (perhaps) N. of a
particular species of animal.
<LEND>

<L>22690<pc>0433-c<k1>devan<k2>devan
{%Devan, ā,%}¦ m. a husband's brother; [cf. {%devṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22691<pc>0433-c<k1>devana<k2>devana<h>2
2. {%devana, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see rt. {%dev,%} p. 430,
col. 1), a die, dice for gambling; ({%ā%}), f. sport, wanton
sport or pastime; service; ({%am%}), n. shining, splendor,
[Page0434-a+ 79]
lustre, beauty; gaming, gambling, a game at dice;
sport, play, pastime; a play or pleasure-ground, a
garden; a lotus; praise; emulation, desire to excel
or overcome; affair, business, profession; going,
motion.
<LEND>

<L>22692<pc>0434-a<k1>devayat<k2>devayat
{%Devayat, an, antī, at%}¦ (from a Nom. {%devaya%}),
Ved. following the gods, serving the gods, religious;
desirous of divinity (?); shining (?); [cf. {%a-d˚%} and
{%devāyat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22693<pc>0434-a<k1>devayu<k2>devayu
{%Devayu, us, ū, u,%}¦ Ved. loving the gods, devoted
to the gods, pious, virtuous, righteous; frequenting
sacred festivals; ({%us%}), m. a deity; [cf. {%a-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22694<pc>0434-a<k1>devara<k2>devara
{%Devara%}¦ or {%devaraka, as,%} m. a husband's brother,
especially his younger brother; a beloved person; a
husband; [cf. Lith. <nsi>de†weris;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">δαήρ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>levir</nsi>
for <nsi>devir;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>dever;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>tacur, tacor;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>zeihur.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>22695<pc>0434-a<k1>devala<k2>devala
{%Devala, as,%}¦ m. an attendant upon an idol; a
Brāhman of an inferior order who subsists upon the
offerings made to the idols he attends, and who
conducts various ceremonies for hire; a holy or
virtuous man; N. of a descendant of Kaśyapa, author
of the hymns of the ninth Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda;
an epithet of Asita, (according to other authorities
a son of Asita); N. of an astronomer; of a legislator;
of the son of Pratyūṣa; of the elder brother of
Dhaumya; of the husband of Eka-parṇā; of the
father of Sannati who was wife of Brahma-datta; of
the grandfather of Pāṇini; of a son of Kṛśāśva by
Dhiṣaṇā, wrongly identified with Nārada, with
whom Asita Devala is sometimes associated.
<LEND>

<L>22696<pc>0434-a<k1>devalaka<k2>devalaka
{%Devalaka, as,%}¦ m. the attendant on an idol. See
the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>22697<pc>0434-a<k1>devAyat<k2>devAyat
{%Devāyat = devayat%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>22698<pc>0434-a<k1>devAlA<k2>devAlA
{%Devālā,%}¦ f. one of the female personifications of
music.
<LEND>

<L>22699<pc>0434-a<k1>devika<k2>devika
{%Devika, as, ī, am,%}¦ appertaining to or derived
from a deity, divine; ({%as%}), m. a familiar diminutive
of Deva-datta; ({%ā%}), f., see under {%devaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>22700<pc>0434-a<k1>devitf<k2>devitf
{%Devitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a dice-player, gamester, dicer.
<LEND>

<L>22701<pc>0434-a<k1>devitvA<k2>devitvA
{%Devitvā,%}¦ ind. having played.
<LEND>

<L>22702<pc>0434-a<k1>devin<k2>devin
{%Devin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ gambling, a gambler, gamester.
<LEND>

<L>22703<pc>0434-a<k1>deviya<k2>deviya
{%Deviya, as,%}¦ m. a familiar diminutive of Deva-
datta.
<LEND>

<L>22704<pc>0434-a<k1>devila<k2>devila
{%Devila, as, ā, am,%}¦ appertaining to a deity, divine;
virtuous, pious, just; ({%as%}), m. a familiar diminutive
of Deva-datta.
<LEND>

<L>22705<pc>0434-a<k1>devIka<k2>devIka
{%Devīka%}¦ for {%devī,%} a queen &c. (at the end of an
adj. comp.; cf. {%sa-d˚.%}) {%—Devīka-vaca, am,%} n. ‘the
prayer of Durgā,’ N. of a mystical book treating of
the worship of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>22706<pc>0434-a<k1>devf<k2>devf
{%Devṛ, ā,%}¦ m. a husband's brother, especially his
younger brother; the husband of a woman previously
married. {%—Devṛ-kāma, as, ā, am,%} loving the
brother of one's husband.
<LEND>

<L>22707<pc>0434-a<k1>devya<k2>devya
{%Devya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. divine dignity or power,
rank, godhead.
<LEND>

<L>22708<pc>0434-a<k1>devakaqa<k2>devakaqa
{#devakaqa#}¦ {%devakaḍa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N.
of a Grāma.
<LEND>

<L>22709<pc>0434-a<k1>devawa<k2>devawa
{#devawa#}¦ {%devaṭa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%dev,%}
q. v.), an artist, artisan.
<LEND>

<L>22710<pc>0434-a<k1>devawwI<k2>devawwI
{#devawwI#}¦ {%devaṭṭī,%} f. a sort of gull, Larus
Ridibundus ({%= gaṅgācillī%}).
<LEND>

<L>22711<pc>0434-a<k1>deSa<k2>deSa
{#deSa#}¦ {%deśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%diś%}), any place
or spot shown or pointed out; place or spot in
general, region, country (whether inhabited or unin-
habited, e. g. {%deśam āvas%} or {%niviś,%} to settle in a place;
{%ātmīya-deśa,%} one's own country); a province, part,
department, side, portion; an institute, ordinance; {%deśa%}
occurs at the end of some comps., the fem. ending in
{%ā;%} [cf. {%a-d˚, eka-d˚, vi-d˚,%} &c.] {%—Deśa-kāla, au,%}
m. du. place and time. {%—Deśa-kālajña, as, ā, am,%}
knowing the (proper) place and time. {%—Deśa-%}
{%kāla-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing place and time. {%—Deśa-%}
{%kāla-vibhāga, as,%} m. apportioning of place and time.
{%—Deśa-kāla-vyavasthita, as, ā, am,%} regulated by
place and time. {%—Deśa-ja%} or {%deśa-jāta, as, ā, am,%}
‘country-born,’ native, indigenous; born in the right
place; produced in the right country (as a horse, ele-
[Page0434-b+ 80]
phant, &c.); of genuine descent; genuine; [cf. {%deśya.%}]
{%—Deśa-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing the district, familiar
with places. {%—Deśa-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} seen or
experienced in a country; customary in a country;
considered locally, judged as to place. {%—Deśa-dharma,%}
{%as,%} m. local law, local rights or customs, the law or
usage of any country. {%—Deśa-nirṇaya, as,%} m.
‘description of countries,’ N. of a work. {%—Deśa-%}
{%bhāṣā,%} f. the dialect of a country. {%—Deśa-bhra-%}
{%maṇa, am,%} n. wandering about, peregrination, tour.
{%—Deśa-rāja-carita, am,%} n. ‘history of native
princes,’ N. of a work. {%—Deśa-rūpa, am,%} n. ‘the
being in the right place,’ conformity with place, pro-
priety, fitness. {%—Deśa-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} residing in a
country. {%—Deśa-vṛtta, am,%} n. a circle depending
upon its relative position with regard to the spot
from which it is observed. {%—Deśa-vyavahāra, as,%}
m. local usage, custom of the country. {%—Deśa-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} situated or living in a country. {%—Deśā-%}
{%cāra (˚śa-āc˚), as,%} m. local usage or custom. {%—De-%}
{%śātithi (˚śa-at˚), is,%} m. ‘a guest in a country,’ a
foreigner. {%—Deśāntara (˚śa-an˚), am,%} n. another
country, abroad, foreign parts; longitude or difference
of longitude; the distance from the chief meridian.
{%—Deśāntara-phala, am,%} n. the equation for dif-
ference of meridian. {%—Deśāntara-bhāṇḍānayana%}
{%(˚ḍa-ān˚), am,%} n. importing wares from foreign coun-
tries. {%—Deśāntarin, ī, iṇī, i,%} belonging to another
country, foreign, a foreigner. {%—Deśāpekṣa (˚śa-%}
{%ap˚), as, ā, am,%} spying or inspecting a land.
<LEND>

<L>22712<pc>0434-b<k1>deSaka<k2>deSaka
{%Deśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ who or what shows, points
out, describes, directs, teaches, &c.; a shower, indi-
cator; ({%as%}), m. a ruler, governor; a guide, instructor.
<LEND>

<L>22713<pc>0434-b<k1>deSanA<k2>deSanA
{%Deśanā,%}¦ f. direction, command, instruction, doctrine.
<LEND>

<L>22714<pc>0434-b<k1>deSika<k2>deSika
{%Deśika, as, ā, am,%}¦ familiar with a place, a guide;
({%as%}), m. a Guru or spiritual teacher; a traveller,
stranger, sojourner; [cf. {%daiśika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22715<pc>0434-b<k1>deSita<k2>deSita
{%Deśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ directed, commanded; shown,
pointed out; advised, instructed.
<LEND>

<L>22716<pc>0434-b<k1>deSin<k2>deSin
{%Deśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ showing, pointing out, instructing,
guiding; of or belonging to a country; ({%inī%}), f. the
index or fore-finger.
<LEND>

<L>22717<pc>0434-b<k1>deSI<k2>deSI
{%Deśī,%}¦ f., scil. {%bhāṣā,%} the dialect of a country; N.
of a Rāgiṇī, (according to Hanu-mat) wife of the
Rāga Dīpaka. {%—Deśī-koṣa, as,%} m. a vocabulary of
the dialect of a country.
<LEND>

<L>22718<pc>0434-b<k1>deSIya<k2>deSIya
{%Deśīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ peculiar or belonging to a
country or province, provincial, native; (at the end
of a comp.) inhabiting any country (e. g. {%Māgadha-%}
{%deśīyas,%} an inhabitant of Māgadha); bordering upon,
contiguous, not very distant from, almost (in this
sense regarded by Indian grammarians as an affix,
see {%pañca-varṣaka-d˚, paṭu-d˚,%} &c.). {%—Deśīya-%}
{%bhāṣā,%} f. the dialect of a country, native dialect.
{%—Deśīya-varāḍī,%} N. of a Rāga ?; (also read {%deśī-%}
{%varāḍī.%})
<LEND>

<L>22719<pc>0434-b<k1>deSya<k2>deSya
{%Deśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pointed out, to be ordered
or proved; being in a place or on the spot, present
at any transaction (and so witnessing it); belonging
to or being in a country, local, provincial, inhabiting
or coming from a country, (often at the end of a comp.,
e. g. {%nānā-d˚,%} coming from various countries; {%tad-d˚,%}
inhabiting the same country); born in or belonging
to one's own country, native; born at the right place
or in the right country, of genuine descent; genuine
[cf. {%deśa-ja%}]; contiguous, not far from, almost [cf.
{%deśīya%} above, and see {%vitasti-d˚, śiśu-d˚, paṭu-d˚,%}
&c.]; ({%as%}), m. an eye-witness of anything, one who
was on the spot; the inhabitant of a country; ({%am%}),
n. the proposition, the statement or exhibition of a
question or argument; the fact or thing to be proved
or substantiated; [cf. {%a-d˚.%}] {%—Deśya-bhikṣu, us,%}
m. a native mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>22720<pc>0434-b<k1>dezwavya<k2>dezwavya
{%Deṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pointed out or shown
or declared.
<LEND>

<L>22721<pc>0434-b<k1>dezwf<k2>dezwf
{%Deṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who shows or directs or
points out, an indicator; ({%ṭrī%}), f., N. of a divine
female ({%= dharmādy-upadeśa-kartrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>22722<pc>0434-b<k1>dezwra<k2>dezwra
{%Deṣṭra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. direction, order; promise.
<LEND>

<L>22723<pc>0434-b<k1>deSakArI<k2>deSakArI
{#deSakArI#}¦ {%deśakārī,%} f., N. of a Rāgiṇī or
[Page0434-c+ 77]
musical mode, (according to Hanu-mat) the wife of
the Rāga Megha; [cf. {%deva-kirī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22724<pc>0434-c<k1>deSAKa<k2>deSAKa
{#deSAKa#}¦ {%deśākha%} and {%deśāga, as,%} m., N. of
a Rāga; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a Rāgiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>22725<pc>0434-c<k1>dezWa<k2>dezWa
{#dezWa#}¦ {%deṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (superl. fr. 1. {%dā%}),
Ved. giving the most, most liberal, greatest giver.
<LEND>

<L>22726<pc>0434-c<k1>dezRa<k2>dezRa
{%Deṣṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. giving, a gift; [cf. {%ku-%}
{%māra-d˚, cāru-d˚, tuvi-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22727<pc>0434-c<k1>dezRu<k2>dezRu<h>1
1. {%deṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ liberal, giving, a donor.
<LEND>

<L>22728<pc>0434-c<k1>dezRu<k2>dezRu<h>2
{#dezRu#} 2¦. {%deṣṇu, us, us, u%} (fr. 3. {%dā%} or 4. {%dā ?%}),
difficult of subjection, intractable, ungovernable.
<LEND>

<L>22729<pc>0434-c<k1>dezRu<k2>dezRu<h>3
{#dezRu#} 3¦. {%deṣṇu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. 7. {%dā%}), a
washerman.
<LEND>

<L>22730<pc>0434-c<k1>deha<k2>deha
{#deha#}¦ {%deha, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. 1. {%dih,%} be-
cause it defiles or perhaps rather because it envelopes
the soul), the body; ({%ī%}), f. a mound, bank, rampart,
surrounding wall; [cf. Goth. <nsi>leik,</nsi> ‘dead body;’ Old
Germ. <nsi>līh;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>leiche.</nsi>] {%—Deha-kara, as,%}
m. ‘the former of the body,’ a father. {%—Deha-%}
{%kartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘creating the bodies, i. e. body and
life,’ an epithet of the Sun; a father. {%—Deha-kṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} forming the body; ({%t%}), m. a father; epithet of
Śiva. {%—Deha-koṣa, as,%} m. the covering of the
body; skin, epidermis; a feather, wing; [cf. {%deha-dhi.%}]
{%—Deha-kṣaya, as,%} m. decay of the body, sickness,
disease. {%—Deha-gata, as, ā, am,%} ‘gone into a body,’
incarnate. {%—Deha-grahaṇa, am,%} n. assuming a body
or visible form. {%—Deha-cyuta, as, ā, am,%} separated
or detached from the body (as excrement or the spirit).
{%—Deha-ja, as,%} m. ‘born of the body,’ a son. {%—Deha-%}
{%tantra, as, ā, am,%} see {%tantra,%} p. 362, col. 1. {%—Deha-%}
{%tyāga, as,%} m. resigning or relinquishing the body,
dying; death in general, voluntary death. {%—Deha-da,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘what gives a body or life (?),’ quicksilver
{%(= pāra-da)%}. {%—Deha-dīpa, as,%} m. ‘lamp of the
body,’ the eye. {%—Deha-dharma, as,%} m. the function
or law of the body. {%—Deha-dhāraka, am,%} n. ‘sup-
porter of the body,’ a bone. {%—Deha-dhāraṇa, am,%} n.
‘supporting the body,’ living, life (e. g. {%pūrvasmin%}
{%deha-dhāraṇe,%} in a former life or existence). {%—Deha-%}
{%dhi, is,%} m. ‘sustaining the body,’ a wing; [cf.
{%deha-koṣa.%}] {%—Deha-dhṛṣ, k,%} m. ‘carrying or
sustaining the body,’ air, wind; ({%dhṛk%} is by some
derived fr. rt. {%dhṛ%} or {%dṛh.%}) {%—Deha-bhāj, k, k, k,%}
possessed of a body, corporeal; ({%k%}), m. a being
possessed of a body or of life, especially a man.
{%—Deha-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘possessed of a body,’ an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Deha-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} ‘carrying a body,’
embodied, corporeal; ({%t%}), m. a living being, especially
a man; an epithet of Śiva; life, vitality. {%—Deha-%}
{%mātrāvaśeṣita (˚tra-av˚), as, ā, am,%} destitute of
all except the body, having merely the body left.
{%—Deha-mānin, ī, inī, i,%} proud of the body. {%—De-%}
{%ham-bhara, as, ā, am,%} intent upon nourishing
the body, minding only one's own body, an epi-
cure, gluttonous. {%—Deha-yātrā,%} f. ‘departure of the
body,’ dying, death; nourishment, food, prolonging
bodily life. {%—Deha-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. a mole, spot
or mark upon the body. {%—Deha-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
furnished with a body, embodied; ({%ān%}), m. a living
being, a man; the soul. {%—Deha-vāyu, us,%} m. an air
of the body, a vital air; [cf. {%apāna, udāna, prāṇa,%}
{%vyāna, samāna.%}] {%—Deha-visarjana, am,%} n. quitting
the body, death. {%—Deha-śaṅku, us,%} m. (according
to a commentator) a column or pillar of stone.
{%—Deha-sañcāriṇī,%} f. a daughter. {%—Deha-sāra, as,%}
m. ‘essence of the body,’ marrow. {%—Deha-svabhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. bodily temperament. {%—Dehātma-vāda, as,%}
m. materialism; see the next. {%—Dehātma-vādin%}
{%(˚ha-āt˚), ī, inī, i,%} one who asserts that the body
and soul are one, a materialist, a Cārvāka. {%—Dehān-%}
{%tara (˚ha-an˚), am,%} n. another body, another
embodied state (in the doctrine of metempsychosis).
{%—Dehāntara-prāpti, is,%} f. ‘obtaining another body,’
transmigration. {%—Dehāvaraṇa (˚ha-āv˚), am,%} n.
‘screen for the body,’ armour; dress. {%—Deheśvara%}
{%(˚ha-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of the body,’ the soul. {%—Dehod- %}
[Page0435-a+ 77]
{%bhava%} or {%dehodbhūta (˚ha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} born
in the body, innate.
<LEND>

<L>22731<pc>0435-a<k1>dehalA<k2>dehalA
{%Dehalā,%}¦ f. spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>22732<pc>0435-a<k1>dehali<k2>dehali
{%Dehali, is,%}¦ or {%dehalī,%} f. the threshold of a door, the
sill or lower part of the wooden frame of a door or a
raised terrace in front of it. {%—Dehalī-mukta-puṣpa,%}
{%am,%} n. a flower dropped on the threshold.
<LEND>

<L>22733<pc>0435-a<k1>dehikA<k2>dehikA
{%Dehikā,%}¦ f. a sort of ant or insect which throws
up the earth; [cf. {%ud-dehikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22734<pc>0435-a<k1>dehin<k2>dehin
{%Dehin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a body, corporeal, em-
bodied; ({%ī%}), m. living, a living being, especially a
man; the spirit, soul (enveloped in the body); ({%inī%}),
f. the earth.
<LEND>

<L>22735<pc>0435-a<k1>dE<k2>dE
{#dE#}¦ {%dai,%} cl. 1. P. {%dāyati,%} &c., to purify,
cleanse; to protect; [cf. rts. 5. {%dā%} and {%de.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22736<pc>0435-a<k1>dEkza<k2>dEkza
{#dEkza#}¦ {%daikṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dīkṣā%}), relating
to initiation, inauguration, &c.
<LEND>

<L>22737<pc>0435-a<k1>dEteya<k2>dEteya
{#dEteya#}¦ {%daiteya, as,%} m. (fr. {%diti%}), a son of
Diti, an Asura, an enemy of the gods, (especially)
epithet of Rāhu; ({%as, ī, am%}), proceeding from or
belonging to the Daiteyas.
<LEND>

<L>22738<pc>0435-a<k1>dEtya<k2>dEtya
{%Daitya, as,%}¦ m. a son of Diti, a demon; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), belonging or relating to the Daityas; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of fragrant plant ({%= murā%}); a perfume; a drug
({%= caṇḍauṣadhi%}); spirituous liquor. {%—Daitya-%}
{%guru, us,%} m. ‘the preceptor of the Daityas,’ an
epithet of Śukra, the regent of the planet Venus.
{%—Daitya-dānava-mardana, as,%} m. ‘subduer or
crusher of Daityas and Dānavas,’ a title of Indra.
{%—Daitya-deva, as,%} m. ‘the god of the Daityas,’
an epithet of Varuṇa, deity of the waters; Air or Wind
personified. {%—Daitya-dvīpa, as,%} m. ‘refuge or pro-
tector of the Daityas (?),’ N. of a son of Garuḍa.
{%—Daitya-nisūdana, as,%} m. ‘the destroyer of the
Daityas,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Daitya-pa, as,%} or
{%daitya-pati, is,%} m. ‘the prince of the Daityas,’ epi-
thet of Bali. {%—Daitya-purodhas, ās,%} or {%daitya-pu-%}
{%rohita,%} or {%daitya-pūjya, as,%} m. ‘family priest of the
Daityas, to be honoured by them,’ epithet of Śukra,
regent of Venus. {%—Daitya-mātṛ, tā,%} f. ‘mother
of the Daityas,’ epithet of Diti. {%—Daitya-meda-%}
{%ja, as,%} m. ‘produced from the marrow of a Daitya,’
a kind of bdellium {%(= bhūmija-guggulu); (ā),%} f.
the earth (supposed to be produced from the Meda
or marrow of the Daityas Madhu and Kaiṭabha).
{%—Daitya-yuga, am,%} n. an age of the demons
(consisting of 12000 divine years or the sum of the
four Yugas or ages of man). {%—Daitya-senā,%} f., N.
of a daughter of Prajā-pati and sister of Deva-senā.
{%—Daityāri (˚ya-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of the
Daityas,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu; a god in general.
{%—Daityāhorātra (˚ya-ah˚), as,%} m. a day and
night of the demons (being a year of mortals).
{%—Daityejya (˚ya-ij˚), as,%} m. ‘preceptor of the
Daityas,’ an epithet of Śukra who is the regent of
Venus; [cf. {%daitya-guru.%}] {%—Daityendra (˚ya-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘a prince of the Daityas,’ an epithet of
Pātāla-ketu. {%—Daityendra-pūjya, as,%} m. ‘to be
honoured by the chief of the Daityas,’ an epithet
of Śukra, regent of Venus.
<LEND>

<L>22739<pc>0435-a<k1>dEDizavya<k2>dEDizavya
{#dEDizavya#}¦ {%daidhiṣavya, as,%} m. (fr. {%didhiṣū%}),
the son of a woman by her second husband (?) .
<LEND>

<L>22740<pc>0435-a<k1>dEna<k2>dEna<h>1
{#dEna#} 1¦. {%daina, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dina%}), relating
to a day, diurnal, daily.
<LEND>

<L>22741<pc>0435-a<k1>dEnandina<k2>dEnandina
{%Dainandina, as, ī, am,%}¦ happening daily, diurnal,
quotidian. {%—Dainandina-pralaya, as,%} n. destruc-
tion of the world after the lapse of fifteen years of
Brahmā's age.
<LEND>

<L>22742<pc>0435-a<k1>dEnika<k2>dEnika
{%Dainika, as, ī, am,%}¦ diurnal, relating daily to a
day; ({%ī%}), f. a day's hire or wages.
<LEND>

<L>22743<pc>0435-a<k1>dEna<k2>dEna<h>2
{#dEna#} 2¦. {%daina%} or {%dainya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dīna%}),
wretchedness, feebleness, weakness, affliction, sorrow,
grief, depression, low-spiritedness; poverty, humble-
ness, a poor and pitiable state, miserable state; mean-
ness, covetousness.
<LEND>

<L>22744<pc>0435-a<k1>dEnAra<k2>dEnAra
{#dEnAra#}¦ {%daināra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dīnāra%}), bought
with a Dīnār, of the value of a Dīnār.
<LEND>
[Page0435-b+ 78]

<L>22745<pc>0435-b<k1>dEpa<k2>dEpa
{#dEpa#}¦ {%daipa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dīpa%}), relating or
belonging to a lamp.
<LEND>

<L>22746<pc>0435-b<k1>dEyAMpAti<k2>dEyAMpAti
{#dEyAMpAti#}¦ {%daiyāmpāti, is,%} m., Ved. a patro-
nymic from Dyāmpāta, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22747<pc>0435-b<k1>dErGa<k2>dErGa
{#dErGa#}¦ {%dairgha, am,%} n. (fr. {%dīrgha%}), length.
{%—Dairghatama, as,%} m. (fr. {%dīrgha-tama%}), a
patronymic of Dhanvantari. {%—Dairghatamasa, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} relating to Dīrgha-tamas; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic
from Dīrgha-tamas. {%—Dairghavaratra, as,%} m. (fr.
{%dīrgha-varatrā%}), scil. {%kūpa,%} a well in which a long
rope is used. {%—Dairgha-śravasa, as, ī, am,%} relating
to Dīrgha-śravas.
<LEND>

<L>22748<pc>0435-b<k1>dErGya<k2>dErGya
{%Dairghya, am,%}¦ n. length, longness. {%—Dairghya-%}
{%saṃyuta, as, ā, am,%} possessing length, lengthy.
<LEND>

<L>22749<pc>0435-b<k1>dElIpi<k2>dElIpi
{#dElIpi#}¦ {%dailīpi, is,%} m. a patronymic from
Dilīpa, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22750<pc>0435-b<k1>dEva<k2>dEva
{#dEva#}¦ {%daiva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%deva;%} only the fem.
{%daivī%} occurs in the Ṛg-veda), of or belonging to a
deity or divinity, coming from the gods, divine,
celestial; royal; ({%as%}), m. (with or without {%vivāha%}),
one of the forms of marriage, the gift of a daughter
at a sacrifice to the officiating priest; a patronymic of
Atharvan; ({%am%}), n. a deity [cf. {%kula-d˚%}]; a religious
offering or rite, an oblation to the gods; divine
power, destiny, fortune, chance, fate, accident (e. g.
{%daivāt,%} ind. by chance, accidentally); the part of
the hands sacred to the gods, i. e. the tips of the
fingers [cf. {%tīrtha%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a division of medicine,
the medical use of charms, prayers, &c.; [cf. {%a-d˚.%}]
{%—Daiva-karman, a,%} n. offering oblations to the
gods, worship of the gods, a religious rite. {%—Daiva-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} caused by destiny, fated; formed
by nature, natural. {%—Daiva-kovida, as, ā, am,%}
acquainted with the destinies of men; ({%as, ā%}), m. f.
a fatalist, astrologer, fortune-teller. {%—Daiva-gati, is,%}
f. course of destiny, fortune. {%—Daiva-cintaka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘reflecting on fate or the destiny of men,’ an
epithet of Śiva; ({%as%}), m. an astrologer, a fatalist.
{%—Daiva-cintana, am,%} n. or {%daiva-cintā,%} f. fatalism,
reliance on fate; foretelling fate by astrology (?).
{%—Daiva-jña, as, ā, am,%} acquainted with fate,
knowing the destinies of men, foretelling, prophetic;
({%as%}), m. an astrologer; ({%ā%}), f. a female fortune-teller.
{%—Daivajña-tva, am,%} n. fatalism, astrology. {%—Dai-%}
{%vajña-vilāsa, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Daivajña-san-%}
{%muni, is,%} m., N. of an astrologer. {%—Daiva-tantra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} subject to fate. {%—Daiva-tas,%} ind. by fate
or destiny, through fortune, by chance. {%—1. daiva-%}
{%datta, as, ā, am,%} granted by fate or fortune;
(for 2. see col. 3.) {%—Daiva-dīpa, as,%} m. ‘the
heavenly lamp,’ the eye; [cf. {%deva-dīpa%} and {%deha-%}
{%dīpa.%}] {%—Daiva-dur-vipāka, as,%} m. ‘the hard or
cruel ripening of destiny,’ hardness of fortune, unpro-
pitiousness of fate. {%—Daiva-doṣa, as,%} m. the fault
or evil result of destiny; badness of fate. {%—Daiva-%}
{%para, as, ā, am,%} trusting to fate, believing in pre-
destination, a fatalist; fated, willed, predestined.
{%—Daiva-praśna, as,%} m. inquiring of fate, fortune-
telling, astrology; (according to the lexicographers)
a supernatural and prophetic voice heard at night;
[cf. {%upa-śruti%} and {%deva-praśna.%}] {%—Daiva-yuga,%}
{%as,%} m. an age of the gods or immortals; [cf.
{%daitya-yuga.%}] {%—Daiva-yoga, as,%} m. a fortuitous
combination, the occurrence of any unforeseen event,
the intervention of destiny, fortune, chance; ({%ena%})
or ({%āt%}), ind. through the influence of fortune, by
chance, accidentally. {%—Daiva-rakṣita, as, ā, am,%}
guarded by destiny. {%—Daiva-ratha, as,%} m. a divine
chariot; (perhaps wrongly for {%deva-ratha.%}) {%—Daiva-%}
{%rājya, am,%} n. dominion over the gods; [cf. {%deva-%}
{%rājya.%}] {%—Daiva-lekhaka, as,%} m. a fortune-teller,
an astrologer. {%—Daiva-laukika, as, ī, am,%} celestial
and worldly. {%—Daiva-vaśa, as, am,%} m. n. the will
or power of destiny; {%daiva-vaśāt,%} by chance, by
accident, fatally. {%—Daiva-vāṇī,%} f. a voice from
heaven. {%—Daiva-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing the destiny
of man, acquainted with astrology, an astrologer.
{%—Daiva-sampanna, as, ā, am,%} favoured by destiny.
[Page0435-c+ 76]
{%—Daivasampanna-tā,%} f. the state of being favoured
by destiny. {%—Daiva-hata, as, ā, am,%} stricken by
destiny, fate-stricken. {%—Daiva-hataka, as, ā, am,%}
beaten or struck by destiny; ({%am%}), n. a blow of
destiny; [cf. {%daivopahataka.%}] {%—Daivātyaya (˚va-%}
{%at˚), as,%} m. danger or evil resulting from unusual
natural phenomena. {%—Daivādhīna (˚va-adh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} depending on fate, subject to fate. {%—Daivā-%}
{%nurodhin (˚va-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} subject or obedient
to the gods. {%—Daivāyatta (˚va-āy˚), as, ā, am,%}
dependant upon destiny. {%—Daivāhorātra (˚va-ah˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a day of the gods, the human year; [cf.
{%daityāhorātra.%}] {%—Daivoḍhā (˚va-ūḍhā),%} f. a
woman married according to the Daiva ritual; [cf.
above.] {%—Daivodyāna (˚va-ud˚), am,%} n. a divine
grove, a grove or garden of the gods. {%—Daivopa-%}
{%hata%} or {%daivopahataka (˚va-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
struck by fate, ill-fated, unfortunate, unlucky.
<LEND>

<L>22751<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvaka<k2>dEvaka
{%Daivaka%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) {%= daiva,%}
a deity, &c.; ({%ī%}), f. {%= devakī,%} N. of the mother of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Daivakī-nandana, as,%} m. ‘the son of
Daivakī’ or ‘Devakī's joy,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa; (also
read {%devakī-nandana.%})
<LEND>

<L>22752<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvata<k2>dEvata
{%Daivata, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%devatā%}), of or relating to
a god or to the gods, especially relating to the
peculiar deity honoured by any religious rite or a
hymn &c., belonging to such a deity, divine; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. (usually n.), a god, a deity, (often col-
lectively) the deities, especially as celebrated in any
hymn, a number of gods; an idol; (at the end of
an adj. comp.) having as one's deity, worshipping as
one's deity. {%—Daivata-kāṇḍa%} or {%daivata, am,%} n.
that part (books 7-12) of Yāska's Nirukta in which
the names or epithets of deities collected in the fifth
Adhyāya of the Nighaṇṭus are explained. {%—Daivata-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘the prince of the gods,’ an epithet of
Indra. {%—Daivata-para, as, ā, am,%} a worshipper of the
gods. {%—Daivata-pratimā,%} f. the image of a deity.
<LEND>

<L>22753<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvatya<k2>dEvatya
{%Daivatya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%devatā%}), having as one's
deity, addressed to some deity, sacred to a deity;
[cf. {%devatya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22754<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvalaka<k2>dEvalaka
{%Daivalaka, as,%}¦ m. the servant or worshipper of
an evil spirit, an attendant on an idol (?); [cf.
{%devalaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22755<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvAt<k2>dEvAt
{%Daivāt,%}¦ ind. by chance, by accident, fatally. See
{%daiva.%}
<LEND>

<L>22756<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvAtiTa<k2>dEvAtiTa
{%Daivātitha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%devātithi%}), relating
to Devātithi.
<LEND>

<L>22757<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvika<k2>dEvika
{%Daivika, as, ī, am,%}¦ peculiar to the gods, relating
to the deities, divine, deific; performed in honour
of the gods; ({%am%}), n. an inevitable accident.
<LEND>

<L>22758<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvin<k2>dEvin
{%Daivin, ī,%}¦ m. an astrologer.
<LEND>

<L>22759<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvya<k2>dEvya
{%Daivya, as, vī%}¦ or {%vyā, am,%} divine; ({%am%}), n.
divine power or effect; fortune, fate.
<LEND>

<L>22760<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvajana<k2>dEvajana
{#dEvajana#}¦ {%daivajana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%deva-jana%}),
Ved. belonging to the gods collectively.
<LEND>

<L>22761<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvadatta<k2>dEvadatta<h>2
{#dEvadatta#} 2¦. {%daivadatta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%deva-datta;%}
for 1. see under {%daiva,%} col. 2), being in the village
Deva-datta; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the disciples of Deva-datta.
<LEND>

<L>22762<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvadattika<k2>dEvadattika
{%Daivadattika, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} relating to Deva-
datta.
<LEND>

<L>22763<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvadarSanin<k2>dEvadarSanin
{#dEvadarSanin#}¦ {%daivadarśanin, inas,%} m. pl. the
adherents or disciples of Deva-darśana.
<LEND>

<L>22764<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvadArava<k2>dEvadArava
{#dEvadArava#}¦ {%daivadārava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%deva-%}
{%dāru%}), made of the tree Deva-dāru, being upon it.
<LEND>

<L>22765<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvayAtaka<k2>dEvayAtaka
{#dEvayAtaka#}¦ {%daivayātaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%deva-%}
{%yāta%}), inhabited by the Deva-yātas.
<LEND>

<L>22766<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvayAtavaka<k2>dEvayAtavaka
{#dEvayAtavaka#}¦ {%daivayātavaka, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%deva-yātu%}), inhabited by the Deva-yātus.
<LEND>

<L>22767<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvayAneya<k2>dEvayAneya
{#dEvayAneya#}¦ {%daivayāneya, as,%} m. (fr. {%deva-%}
{%yānī%}), a patronymic from Deva-yānī.
<LEND>

<L>22768<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvarAti<k2>dEvarAti
{#dEvarAti#}¦ {%daivarāti, is,%} m. (fr. {%deva-rāta%}), a
descendant of Deva-rāta; a patronymic of Janaka;
a N. of Yājñavalkya.
<LEND>

<L>22769<pc>0435-c<k1>dEvavAta<k2>dEvavAta
{#dEvavAta#}¦ {%daivavāta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%deva-vāta%}),
relating to Deva-vāta; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Sṛñjaya.
<LEND>
[Page0436-a+ 70]

<L>22770<pc>0436-a<k1>dEvAkari<k2>dEvAkari
{#dEvAkari#}¦ {%daivākari, is,%} m. (fr. {%divākara%}),
‘the son of the Sun,’ a patronymic of Yama and Śani
or the planet Saturn; ({%ī%}), f. ‘the daughter of the Sun,’
an epithet of Yamunā or the river Jumnā.
<LEND>

<L>22771<pc>0436-a<k1>dEvAdika<k2>dEvAdika
{#dEvAdika#}¦ {%daivādika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%div-ādi%}),
belonging to the class of roots which begins with
{%div,%} i. e. to the fourth class.
<LEND>

<L>22772<pc>0436-a<k1>dEvAvfDa<k2>dEvAvfDa
{#dEvAvfDa#}¦ {%daivāvṛdha, as,%} m. (fr. {%devā-vṛ-%}
{%dha%}), a patronymic of Babhru.
<LEND>

<L>22773<pc>0436-a<k1>dEvAsura<k2>dEvAsura
{#dEvAsura#}¦ {%daivāsura, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%deva-asura%}),
relating to the gods and Asuras; (with {%vaira%}) the
natural enmity perpetually subsisting between the
gods and Asuras; containing the word {%devāsura%}
(as an Adhyāya or Anu-vāka; cf. {%devāsura%}).
<LEND>

<L>22774<pc>0436-a<k1>dEvodAsa<k2>dEvodAsa
{#dEvodAsa#}¦ {%daivodāsa, as, ī, am,%} relating to
Divo-dāsa; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from Divo-dāsa.
{%—Daivodāsi, is,%} m. a patronymic of Pratardana,
and of Parucchepa.
<LEND>

<L>22775<pc>0436-a<k1>dESika<k2>dESika
{#dESika#}¦ {%daiśika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%deśa%}), belong-
ing or relating to a place, local, provincial; relating
or having reference to space; belonging to a country,
national; produced in any place or country; acquainted
with any place or country; teaching, directing, show-
ing, pointing out [cf. {%deśika%} and {%deśya%}]; ({%as%}), m.
a guide; a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>22776<pc>0436-a<k1>dEzwika<k2>dEzwika
{#dEzwika#}¦ {%daiṣṭika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%diṣṭa%}), fated,
predestined; ({%as%}), m. a predestinarian, a fatalist.
{%—Daiṣṭika-tā,%} f. or {%daiṣṭika-tva, am,%} n. fatalism,
predestinarianism.
<LEND>

<L>22777<pc>0436-a<k1>dEhika<k2>dEhika
{#dEhika#}¦ {%daihika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%deha%}), cor-
poreal, bodily.
<LEND>

<L>22778<pc>0436-a<k1>dEhya<k2>dEhya
{%Daihya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in the body; ({%as%}), m.
the soul (enclosed by the body).
<LEND>

<L>22779<pc>0436-a<k1>do<k2>do
{#do#}¦ {%do%} (sometimes written {%dā,%} see 3. {%dā,%}
p. 408, col. 1), cl. 4. 2. P. {%dyati, dāti,%}
{%dadau, dāsyati, adāsīt%} and {%adāt, dātum,%} to cut,
divide; to reap, mow; to untie, loosen: Pass. {%dīyate%}
and {%dāyate,%} Aor. 3rd sing. {%adāyi:%} Desid. {%ditsati%}
and {%didāsati:%} Intens. {%dedīyate%} and {%dādāyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>22780<pc>0436-a<k1>doga<k2>doga
{#doga#}¦ {%doga, as,%} m. a bull (?).
<LEND>

<L>22781<pc>0436-a<k1>dogDavya<k2>dogDavya
{#dogDavya#}¦ {%dogdhavya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%duh%}),
to be milked.
<LEND>

<L>22782<pc>0436-a<k1>dogDukAma<k2>dogDukAma
{%Dogdhu-kāma, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the inf. {%dogdhum%}
{%+ kāma%}), wishing to milk.
<LEND>

<L>22783<pc>0436-a<k1>dogDf<k2>dogDf
{%Dogdhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ a milker, who or what
milks; one who performs anything from interested
motives or who makes profit out of (with acc.);
yielding milk or desirable objects of any kind;
({%dhā%}), m. a cowherd; a calf; a poet, panegyrist, one
who writes verses for hire or reward; ({%dhrī%}), f. a cow
which yields milk; a wet-nurse who has much milk;
a female who yields or grants anything (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>22784<pc>0436-a<k1>doGa<k2>doGa
{%Dogha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. milking; ({%as%}), m. milking.
<LEND>

<L>22785<pc>0436-a<k1>doqI<k2>doqI
{#doqI#}¦ {%doḍī,%} f. a species of plant and its
fruit; [cf. {%ḍodī%} and {%dāḍī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22786<pc>0436-a<k1>dodulyamAna<k2>dodulyamAna
{#dodulyamAna#}¦ {%dodulyamāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. the
Intens. of rt. {%dul%}), swinging backwards and forwards,
being swung repeatedly or violently.
<LEND>

<L>22787<pc>0436-a<k1>doDa<k2>doDa
{#doDa#}¦ {%dodha, as,%} m. (fr. {%dogdhṛ?%}), a calf.
<LEND>

<L>22788<pc>0436-a<k1>doDaka<k2>doDaka
{#doDaka#}¦ {%dodhaka%} or {%dodhaka-vṛtta, am,%} n. a
kind of metre consisting of four lines of eleven
syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>22789<pc>0436-a<k1>doDUyamAna<k2>doDUyamAna
{#doDUyamAna#}¦ {%dodhūyamāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. the
Intens. of rt. 1. {%dhū%}), shaking or trembling violently.
<LEND>

<L>22790<pc>0436-a<k1>doman<k2>doman
{#doman#}¦ {%doman, a,%} n. (fr. rt. 2. {%du%}), pain,
inconvenience, (occurring only in {%a-doma-da,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>22791<pc>0436-a<k1>doraka<k2>doraka
{#doraka#}¦ {%doraka, as, ikā,%} m. f. a string for
fastening the wires of a lute.
<LEND>

<L>22792<pc>0436-a<k1>dola<k2>dola
{#dola#}¦ {%dola, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%dul%}), swinging,
rocking, oscillating; a festival on the fourteenth of
[Page0436-b+ 80]
the month Phālguna (February — March) when figures
of the juvenile Kṛṣṇa are swung in an ornamental
swing; a swing, litter; a peculiar position of the
closed hand; ({%ā%}), f. a litter, a swinging cradle or cot
or hammock, a dooly, palanquin, sedan, a swing,
swinging; fluctuation, incertitude, doubt; the indigo
plant. {%—Dolākula-dhī (˚lā-āk˚), īs, īs, i,%} or {%dolā-%}
{%cala-cittavṛtti, is, is, i,%} whose mind is agitated like
a swing. {%—Dolādhirūḍha (˚lā-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
mounted on a swing; restless, disquieted. {%—Dolā-%}
{%yātrā,%} f. ‘the swing festival,’ N. of a festival in
honour of Kṛṣṇa when figures of him and his
consort Rādhā are carried about in a litter or swung
in an ornamental swing.
<LEND>

<L>22793<pc>0436-b<k1>dolAya<k2>dolAya
{%Dolāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%dolāyate,%} &c., to swing, rock
about like a swing, shake, toss, move to and fro,
fluctuate, oscillate, be unsteady.
<LEND>

<L>22794<pc>0436-b<k1>dolAyamAna<k2>dolAyamAna
{%Dolāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ oscillating, swinging,
rocking, tossing, being swung backwards and for-
wards; vacillating, wavering; perplexed, doubting.
{%—Dolāyamāna-mati, is, is, i,%} wavering in mind,
with a wavering mind.
<LEND>

<L>22795<pc>0436-b<k1>dolAyita<k2>dolAyita
{%Dolāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ swinging about, oscillating,
moving to and fro, rocking. {%—Dolāyita-śravaṇa-%}
{%kuṇḍala, as, ā, am,%} whose ear-rings swing to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>22796<pc>0436-b<k1>dolikA<k2>dolikA
{%Dolikā,%}¦ f. a litter, swing; a cradle.
<LEND>

<L>22797<pc>0436-b<k1>dolita<k2>dolita
{%Dolita, as, ā, am,%}¦ swung, shaken, rocked, tossed
backwards and forwards.
<LEND>

<L>22798<pc>0436-b<k1>doza<k2>doza
{#doza#}¦ {%doṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%duṣ%}), fault,
vice, defect, deficiency, want, blemish, blame, accu-
sation, reproach (with rt. {%gam,%} to accuse, e. g. {%do-%}
{%ṣeṇa māṃ gacchati,%} he accuses me); a bad or
noxious quality; badness, wickedness, sinfulness;
offence, transgression, sin, guilt, crime; damage,
harm, detriment; bad consequence, detrimental effect
(e. g. {%mātṛ-doṣāt,%} q. v.); morbid affection, morbid
element, disease; disorder of the three humors of
the human body, defect in the functions of {%vāyu%}
or wind, {%pitta%} or bile, and {%śleṣman%} or phlegm
(e. g. {%tridoṣa-kṛt,%} causing disorder of the three
humors); a N. applied to the three fluid elements or
humors themselves (as causing diseases when in a state
of derangement); evening, dusk, darkness, Evening
personified as one of the eight Vasus and husband of
Night; refutation; a calf; (1. {%doṣā%}), f. evening,
darkness, night; Night personified (regarded with
Prabhā as wife of Puṣpārṇa and mother of Pra-
doṣa or Evening, Niśitha or Midnight, and Vyuṣṭa
or Day-break); {%doṣām,%} ind. in the evening;
{%doṣā,%} old inst. in the evening, at dusk, at night;
[cf. {%anna-d˚, tvag-d˚, doṣas, pra-doṣa, prati-%}
{%doṣam.%}] {%—Doṣa-kara, as, ī, am,%} or {%doṣa-kārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%doṣa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing evil or harm,
hurtful. {%—Doṣa-kalpana, am,%} n. attributing blame,
reprehending, condemning. {%—Doṣa-grasta, as, ā, am,%}
involved in guilt, convicted, guilty. {%—Doṣa-grāhin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} fault-finding, censorious, vituperative, malicious,
malignant; [cf. {%guṇa-grāhin.%}] {%—Doṣa-ghna, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} removing vitiation or disease of the humors.
{%—Doṣa-jña, as, ā, am,%} acquainted with what is
noxious or dangerous, discerning sins, understanding
diseases, knowing faults, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a physician;
a Pandit, teacher, discerning man. {%—Doṣa-tas,%}
ind. from a fault or defect; {%doṣato brū,%} to accuse
of a fault. {%—Doṣa-traya, am,%} n. vitiation of the
three humors, or wind, bile, and phlegm; any com-
bination of three defects. {%—Doṣatraya-hara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} removing vitiation of the three humors.
{%—Doṣa-tva, am,%} n. faultiness, deficiency. {%—Doṣa-%}
{%dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. looking at faults, fault-finding. {%—Doṣa-%}
{%prasaṅga, as,%} m. attaching blame, attribution of
blame, censure, condemnation. {%—Doṣa-bala-pra-%}
{%vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} proceeding from the influence
of bad humors (a disease). {%—Doṣa-bhāj, k, k, k,%}
possessing faults, wrong, faulty, doing wrong, being
defective or to blame. {%—Doṣa-bhīti, is,%} f. fear of
offence. {%—Doṣa-bheda, as,%} m. a peculiar modifi-
cation of disease of the three humors. {%—Doṣa-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having faults, faulty, defective, blemished,
deficient; guilty of an offence; detrimental, con-
[Page0436-c+ 80]
nected with crime or guilt, sinful, wicked; noxious,
dangerous. {%—Doṣa-śamana, as, ā, am,%} allaying
disorder of the humors. {%—Doṣa-sthāna, am,%} n. the
seat of disorder of the humors. {%—Doṣa-hara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} removing disease of the humors. {%—Doṣākara%}
{%(˚ṣa-āk˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} ‘a mine of faults,’ full of
defects, faulty; {%(˚ṣā-ka˚), as,%} m. ‘the night-maker,’
epithet of the Moon. {%—Doṣā-kleśī,%} f. ‘fading in
the evening,’ a kind of plant {%(= vana-varvarikā).%}
{%—Doṣākṣara (˚ṣa-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘a word of
blame,’ accusation, censure. {%—Doṣā-tana, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%doṣā,%} ind.), nocturnal, at evening, nightly.
{%—Doṣā-tilaka, as,%} m. ‘the ornament of the
night,’ a lamp. {%—Doṣānuvāda (˚ṣa-an˚), as,%} m.
talking over faults, tale-bearing. {%—Doṣā-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having become night, turned into night.
{%—Doṣā-manya, as, ā, am,%} considering one's self
as night, regarding as night; [cf. {%divā-manya.%}]
{%—Doṣāropa (˚ṣa-ār˚), as,%} m. imputing fault,
accusation. {%—Doṣā-vastṛ, tā,%} m. (generally occur-
ring in loc. {%doṣā-vastar%}), Ved. ‘illuminating the
darkness or shining in the evening,’ an epithet of
Agni; (Sāy.) by night and day. {%—Doṣāsya (˚ṣā-%}
{%ās˚), as,%} m. ‘the face of the night,’ a lamp. {%—Do-%}
{%ṣaikadṛś (˚ṣa-ek˚), k, k, k,%} seeing only defects,
fault-finding, censorious, malevolent. {%—Doṣocchrāya%}
{%(˚ṣa-uc˚),%} or {%doṣopacaya (˚ṣa-up˚), as,%} m. the
rise or undue accumulation of vitiated humors.
<LEND>

<L>22799<pc>0436-c<k1>dozaka<k2>dozaka
{%Doṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a calf.
<LEND>

<L>22800<pc>0436-c<k1>dozaRa<k2>dozaRa
{%Doṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. imputation of a crime, accu-
sation.
<LEND>

<L>22801<pc>0436-c<k1>dozala<k2>dozala
{%Doṣala, as, ā, am,%}¦ of a faulty nature, defective,
corrupt.
<LEND>

<L>22802<pc>0436-c<k1>dozas<k2>dozas
{%Doṣas, as,%}¦ n. evening, darkness.
<LEND>

<L>22803<pc>0436-c<k1>dozika<k2>dozika
{%Doṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ faulty, defective, bad; ({%as%}),
m. sickness, disease.
<LEND>

<L>22804<pc>0436-c<k1>dozin<k2>dozin
{%Doṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ becoming defiled or impure or
contaminated; faulty, defective; criminal, wicked, bad.
<LEND>

<L>22805<pc>0436-c<k1>dozan<k2>dozan
{#dozan#}¦ {%doṣan,%} m. n. (defective; substituted
for {%dos,%} q. v., in certain cases), the fore-arm, the
lower part of the fore-foot of an animal, the arm in
general. {%—Doṣaṇi-śriṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} leaning or hanging
on the arm.
<LEND>

<L>22806<pc>0436-c<k1>dozaRya<k2>dozaRya
{%Doṣaṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to the arm,
seated in the arm (as a disease).
<LEND>

<L>22807<pc>0436-c<k1>dozA<k2>dozA<h>2
2. {%doṣā,%}¦ f. the arm. (For 1. {%doṣā%} see col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>22808<pc>0436-c<k1>dos<k2>dos
{%Dos, s,%}¦ m. n. (nom. sing. {%dos,%} du. m. {%doṣau,%} n.
{%doṣī,%} acc. pl. {%doṣas%} or {%doṣṇas,%} inst. sing. {%doṣā%}
or {%doṣṇā,%} du. {%dorbhyām,%} loc. pl. {%doḥṣu,%} Gram.
166. {%d%}), the fore-arm, the arm; the part of an arc de-
fining its sine; the side of a triangle or square, [cf. {%bāhu%}
and {%bhuja.%}] {%—Doḥ-sahasra-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘thousand-
armed,’ N. of a king also called Kārtavīrya. {%—Dor-%}
{%āndolana, am,%} n. swinging the arm. {%—Dor-gaḍu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} having a crippled arm, crooked-armed.
{%—Dor-graha, as, ā, am,%} ‘seizing with the arms,’
strong, powerful; ({%as%}), m. pain in the arm. {%—Dor-%}
{%jyā,%} f. the sine of the base. {%—Dor-daṇḍa, as,%} m. the
arm; [cf. {%daṇḍa.%}] {%—Dor-nikartana, am,%} n. ampu-
tation of the arm. {%—Dor-madhya, am,%} n. the middle
of the arm. {%—Dor-mūla, am,%} n. ‘the root of the
arm,’ the armpit. {%—Doṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having
arms. {%—Do-stha%} (for {%doḥ-stha%}), placed on the
arm; ({%as%}), m. ‘standing near the arm,’ a servant
[cf. {%pārśva-stha%}]; service; a player, one who plays
or sports; play, sport.
<LEND>

<L>22809<pc>0436-c<k1>doha<k2>doha
{#doha#}¦ {%doha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%duh%}), milking;
milk; a milk-pail; making profit out of anything,
satisfaction, success. {%—Doha-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
desirous of being milked. {%—Doha-ja, am,%} n. ‘pro-
duced by milking,’ milk. {%—Dohadohīya, am,%} n.
(fr. {%doha-doha%}), N. of a Sāman. {%—Dohāpanaya%}
{%(˚ha-ap˚), as,%} m. milk.
<LEND>

<L>22810<pc>0436-c<k1>dohana<k2>dohana
{%Dohana, as, ā, am,%}¦ milking, a milker; giving or
yielding milk or other desirable objects; ({%ī%}), f. a
milk-vessel, milk-pail; ({%am%}), n. milking, the result
of milking; a milk-pail; [cf. {%go-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22811<pc>0436-c<k1>dohanIya<k2>dohanIya
{%Dohanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ proper to be milked.
<LEND>

<L>22812<pc>0436-c<k1>dohas<k2>dohas
{%Dohas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. milking; (the dat. {%dohase%} is
used as an inf. of rt. 2. {%duh.%})
<LEND>
[Page0437-a+ 71]

<L>22813<pc>0437-a<k1>dohita<k2>dohita
{%Dohita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to yield milk, milked.
<LEND>

<L>22814<pc>0437-a<k1>dohin<k2>dohin
{%Dohin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ milking; giving milk, granting or
yielding desirable objects; a milker.
<LEND>

<L>22815<pc>0437-a<k1>dohIyas<k2>dohIyas
{%Dohīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ giving much milk, yielding
abundance of milk.
<LEND>

<L>22816<pc>0437-a<k1>dohya<k2>dohya
{%Dohya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be milked, milkable; ({%as%}),
m. (?) a cow; [cf. {%duhya, duḥkha-d˚, sukha-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22817<pc>0437-a<k1>dohaqikA<k2>dohaqikA
{#dohaqikA#}¦ {%dohaḍikā,%} f. a kind of Prākṛt
metre consisting of thirty-five syllables, (commonly
called {%dohā.%})
<LEND>

<L>22818<pc>0437-a<k1>dohada<k2>dohada
{#dohada#}¦ {%dohada, as, am,%} m. n. (a Prākṛt
form for {%daurhṛda;%} cf. {%dauhṛda%}), the longing
of a pregnant woman, that craving after particular
objects which is regarded as a sign of impregnation;
(sometimes) the desired object itself; pregnancy;
the desire of plants at budding time to be touched
by the foot of a beautiful girl, (poetically imagined
to cause the production of blossoms); violent or
morbid desire, desire in general, wish; a kind of
incense used as a manure. {%—Dohada-lakṣaṇa, am,%}
n. ‘having longing desire as its mark,’ the fetus,
the embryo, (sometimes confounded with the womb
itself); the period of passing from one season of life
to another (as from childhood to youth, from youth
to manhood). {%—Dohada-vatī,%} f. or {%dohadānvitā%}
{%(˚da-an˚),%} f. ‘possessing the desire of a pregnant
woman,’ a pregnant woman longing for anything;
[cf. {%dohala%} and {%divya-dohada.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22819<pc>0437-a<k1>dohadin<k2>dohadin
{%Dohadin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ eagerly longing for, desirous
of, craving after.
<LEND>

<L>22820<pc>0437-a<k1>dohala<k2>dohala
{%Dohala, as,%}¦ m. {%= dohada,%} longing, wish, desire,
craving after; ({%ī%}), f. the Aśoka tree. {%—Dohala-vatī%}
{%= dohada-vatī.%}
<LEND>

<L>22821<pc>0437-a<k1>dOHSaleya<k2>dOHSaleya
{#dOHSaleya#}¦ {%dauḥśaleya, as,%} m. probably a
metronymic from Duḥ-śalā.
<LEND>

<L>22822<pc>0437-a<k1>dOHSAsani<k2>dOHSAsani
{#dOHSAsani#}¦ {%dauḥśāsani, is,%} m. (fr. {%duḥ-śā-%}
{%sana%}), a patronymic from Duḥ-śāsana.
<LEND>

<L>22823<pc>0437-a<k1>dOHSIlya<k2>dOHSIlya
{#dOHSIlya#}¦ {%dauḥśīlya, am,%} n. (fr. {%duḥ-śīla%}),
bad inclination or custom, bad character, badness of
disposition, wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>22824<pc>0437-a<k1>dOHzvapnya<k2>dOHzvapnya
{#dOHzvapnya#}¦ {%dauḥṣvapnya, am,%} n. (fr. {%duṣ-%}
{%svapna%}), Ved. evil dreams; [cf. {%duḥ-ṣvapnya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22825<pc>0437-a<k1>dOHsADika<k2>dOHsADika
{#dOHsADika#}¦ {%dauḥsādhika, as,%} m. (the first
syllable fr. {%dvār ?%}), a door-keeper, a warder, a
porter; a beadle; the superintendent of a village;
[cf. {%duḥ-sādhin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22826<pc>0437-a<k1>dOHstra<k2>dOHstra
{#dOHstra#}¦ {%dauḥstra, am,%} n. (fr. {%duḥ-strī%}), dis-
cord or wrangling contention between women.
<LEND>

<L>22827<pc>0437-a<k1>dOkUla<k2>dOkUla
{#dOkUla#}¦ {%daukūla%} or {%daukūlaka, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%dukūla%}), covered with fine silk, see {%dukūla; (am),%}
n. cloth made of Dukūla, silk cloth.
<LEND>

<L>22828<pc>0437-a<k1>dOgUla<k2>dOgUla
{%Daugūla = daukūla%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>22829<pc>0437-a<k1>dOtya<k2>dOtya
{#dOtya#}¦ {%dautya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dūta%}), the state of
a messenger, an embassy or message, mission; the
office of a messenger; function of an ambassador.
<LEND>

<L>22830<pc>0437-a<k1>dOrAtmya<k2>dOrAtmya
{#dOrAtmya#}¦ {%daurātmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-ātman%}),
evil-mindedness, badness of soul, wickedness, depravity,
mischievousness.
<LEND>

<L>22831<pc>0437-a<k1>dOrita<k2>dOrita
{#dOrita#}¦ {%daurita, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-ita%}), mischief.
<LEND>

<L>22832<pc>0437-a<k1>dOruDara<k2>dOruDara
{#dOruDara#}¦ {%daurudhara, as, ī, am,%} relating to
the lunar mansion called Durudhara, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22833<pc>0437-a<k1>dOreSravasa<k2>dOreSravasa
{#dOreSravasa#}¦ {%daureśravasa, as,%} m. (fr. {%dūre-%}
{%śravas%}), a patronymic of the priest of the serpents
called Pṛthu-śravas.
<LEND>

<L>22834<pc>0437-a<k1>dOreSruta<k2>dOreSruta
{%Daureśruta, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%dūre-śruta%}), a patro-
nymic of the serpent-priest Timirgha.
<LEND>

<L>22835<pc>0437-a<k1>dOrga<k2>dOrga
{#dOrga#}¦ {%daurga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dur-ga%}), relating
to Durga or Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>22836<pc>0437-a<k1>dOrgasiMha<k2>dOrgasiMha
{%Daurgasiṃha, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to or com-
posed by Durga-siṃha.
<LEND>

<L>22837<pc>0437-a<k1>dOrgAyaRa<k2>dOrgAyaRa
{%Daurgāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Durga.
<LEND>
[Page0437-b+ 66]

<L>22838<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrgya<k2>dOrgya
{%Daurgya, am,%}¦ n. difficulty, inaccessibility.
<LEND>

<L>22839<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrgatya<k2>dOrgatya
{#dOrgatya#}¦ {%daurgatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-gata%}),
misfortune, bad circumstances, want, wretchedness,
distress.
<LEND>

<L>22840<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrganDi<k2>dOrganDi
{#dOrganDi#}¦ {%daurgandhi, is,%} m. or {%daurgandhya,%}
{%am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-gandha%}), bad or disagreeable smell,
badness of smell, fetor.
<LEND>

<L>22841<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrjana<k2>dOrjana
{#dOrjana#}¦ {%daurjana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dur-jana%}),
consisting of wicked men.
<LEND>

<L>22842<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrjanya<k2>dOrjanya
{%Daurjanya, am,%}¦ n. wickedness, maliciousness,
depravity, vileness.
<LEND>

<L>22843<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrjIvitya<k2>dOrjIvitya
{#dOrjIvitya#}¦ {%daurjīvitya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-jī-%}
{%vita%}), a miserable life, a wretched state of existence.
<LEND>

<L>22844<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrbala<k2>dOrbala
{#dOrbala#}¦ {%daurbala%} or {%daurbalya, am,%} n. (fr.
{%dur-bala%}), impotency, feebleness, weakness, debility.
<LEND>

<L>22845<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrBAgiReya<k2>dOrBAgiReya
{#dOrBAgiReya#}¦ {%daurbhāgiṇeya, as,%} m. (fr. {%dur-%}
{%bhagā%}), the son of a woman disliked by her husband;
({%ī%}), f. the daughter of such a woman.
<LEND>

<L>22846<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrBAgya<k2>dOrBAgya
{%Daurbhāgya, am,%}¦ n. ill luck, misfortune, bad
condition; the unhappiness of a woman resulting
from the dislike of her husband.
<LEND>

<L>22847<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrBrAtra<k2>dOrBrAtra
{#dOrBrAtra#}¦ {%daurbhrātra, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-bhrā-%}
{%tṛ%}), a bad understanding between brothers.
<LEND>

<L>22848<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrmadya<k2>dOrmadya
{#dOrmadya#}¦ {%daurmadya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-mada%}),
a drunken brawl, a fight, battle.
<LEND>

<L>22849<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrmanasya<k2>dOrmanasya
{#dOrmanasya#}¦ {%daurmanasya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-%}
{%manas%}), evil-mindedness, evil disposition; mental
pain, discomposure of mind, affliction, distress;
despair.
<LEND>

<L>22850<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrmantrya<k2>dOrmantrya
{#dOrmantrya#}¦ {%daurmantrya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-%}
{%mantra%}), bad consultation or counsel, evil advice.
<LEND>

<L>22851<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrmitri<k2>dOrmitri
{#dOrmitri#}¦ {%daurmitri, is,%} f. a metronymic
from Dur-mitrā, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22852<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrmuKi<k2>dOrmuKi
{#dOrmuKi#}¦ {%daurmukhi, is,%} m. a patronymic
from Dur-mukha.
<LEND>

<L>22853<pc>0437-b<k1>dOryoDana<k2>dOryoDana
{#dOryoDana#}¦ {%dauryodhana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dur-yo-%}
{%dhana%}), belonging or relating to Dur-yodhana &c.
<LEND>

<L>22854<pc>0437-b<k1>dOryoDani<k2>dOryoDani
{%Dauryodhani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Dur-
yodhana, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22855<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrlaBya<k2>dOrlaBya
{#dOrlaBya#}¦ {%daurlabhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-labha%}),
difficulty of attainment, rarity, scarceness.
<LEND>

<L>22856<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrvacasya<k2>dOrvacasya
{#dOrvacasya#}¦ {%daurvacasya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-%}
{%vacas%}), evil speech, bad language.
<LEND>

<L>22857<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrvAsa<k2>dOrvAsa
{#dOrvAsa#}¦ {%daurvāsa%} or {%daurvāsasa, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%dur-vāsas%}), belonging to or composed by Dur-vā-
sas; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%purāṇam,%} N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>22858<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrvIRa<k2>dOrvIRa
{#dOrvIRa#}¦ {%daurvīṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%dūrvā%}), the
sap or juice of bent grass; a clean leaf.
<LEND>

<L>22859<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrvratya<k2>dOrvratya
{#dOrvratya#}¦ {%daurvratya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-vrata%}),
Ved. disobedience, ill conduct.
<LEND>

<L>22860<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrhArda<k2>dOrhArda
{#dOrhArda#}¦ {%daurhārda, am,%} n. (fr. {%dur-hṛd%}),
badness of heart; hard-heartedness; evil disposition
of mind, enmity.
<LEND>

<L>22861<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrhfda<k2>dOrhfda
{%Daurhṛda, am,%}¦ n. evil disposition of mind,
enmity; the longing of pregnant women, (perhaps
originally the disgust felt by pregnant women for
certain things); longing, desire.
<LEND>

<L>22862<pc>0437-b<k1>dOrhfdaya<k2>dOrhfdaya
{%Daurhṛdaya, am,%}¦ n. evil disposition of mind,
enmity.
<LEND>

<L>22863<pc>0437-b<k1>dOleya<k2>dOleya
{#dOleya#}¦ {%dauleya, as,%} m. (fr. {%duli%}), a turtle
or tortoise.
<LEND>

<L>22864<pc>0437-b<k1>dOlmi<k2>dOlmi
{#dOlmi#}¦ {%daulmi, is,%} m. an epithet of Indra;
[cf. {%dalmi%} and {%dālmi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22865<pc>0437-b<k1>dOvArika<k2>dOvArika
{#dOvArika#}¦ {%dauvārika, as,%} m. (fr. {%dvār%} or
{%dvāra%}), a door-keeper, warder, porter; the door-
keeper of paradise (?).
<LEND>
[Page0437-c+ 69]

<L>22866<pc>0437-c<k1>dOvAlika<k2>dOvAlika
{#dOvAlika#}¦ {%dauvālika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people.
<LEND>

<L>22867<pc>0437-c<k1>dOScarmya<k2>dOScarmya
{#dOScarmya#}¦ {%dauścarmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%duś-car-%}
{%man%}), a disease of the skin, a defect in the gene-
rative organs (supposed to be a disease of the
prepuce or paraphimosis).
<LEND>

<L>22868<pc>0437-c<k1>dOScarya<k2>dOScarya
{#dOScarya#}¦ {%dauścarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%duś-cara%}),
acting wickedly, evil conduct, wickedness; a bad deed.
<LEND>

<L>22869<pc>0437-c<k1>dOzka<k2>dOzka
{#dOzka#}¦ {%dauṣka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dos%}), one who
swims or crosses a stream by the help of his arms.
<LEND>

<L>22870<pc>0437-c<k1>dOzkula<k2>dOzkula
{#dOzkula#}¦ {%dauṣkula%} or {%dauṣkuleya, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%duṣ-kula%}), sprung from a bad or low or
contemptible family or race.
<LEND>

<L>22871<pc>0437-c<k1>dOzkulya<k2>dOzkulya
{%Dauṣkulya, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprung from a bad or low
family; ({%am%}), n. lowness of origin, low extraction.
<LEND>

<L>22872<pc>0437-c<k1>dOzkftya<k2>dOzkftya
{#dOzkftya#}¦ {%dauṣkṛtya, am,%} n. (fr. {%duṣ-kṛta%}),
bad conduct, badness of conduct, wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>22873<pc>0437-c<k1>dOzwya<k2>dOzwya
{#dOzwya#}¦ {%dauṣṭya, am,%} n. (fr. {%duṣṭa%}), de-
pravity, badness, wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>22874<pc>0437-c<k1>dOzWava<k2>dOzWava
{#dOzWava#}¦ {%dauṣṭhava, am,%} n. (fr. {%du-ṣṭhu%}),
badness, wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>22875<pc>0437-c<k1>dOzmanta<k2>dOzmanta
{#dOzmanta#}¦ {%dauṣmanta, as,%} or {%dauṣmanti, is,%}
m. (fr. {%duṣ-manta%}), ‘the son of Dush-manta,’ a patro-
nymic of Bharata, the first sole monarch of India.
<LEND>

<L>22876<pc>0437-c<k1>dOzyanta<k2>dOzyanta
{%Dauṣyanta, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Dushyanta.
<LEND>

<L>22877<pc>0437-c<k1>dOzyanti<k2>dOzyanti
{%Dauṣyanti%}¦ or {%dauṣvanti%} or {%dauḥṣanti, is,%}
m. a patronymic of Bharata.
<LEND>

<L>22878<pc>0437-c<k1>dOhitra<k2>dOhitra
{#dOhitra#}¦ {%dauhitra, as,%} m. (fr. {%duhitṛ%}), a
daughter's son; a term applied to a rhinoceros; ({%ī%}),
f. a daughter's daughter; ({%am%}), n. sesamum-seed;
ghee from a brownish cow (?) . {%—Dauhitra-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having or possessing a daughter's son.
<LEND>

<L>22879<pc>0437-c<k1>dOhitraka<k2>dOhitraka
{%Dauhitraka, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to a daughter's
son.
<LEND>

<L>22880<pc>0437-c<k1>dOhitrAyaRa<k2>dOhitrAyaRa
{%Dauhitrāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. the son of a daughter's son.
<LEND>

<L>22881<pc>0437-c<k1>dOhfda<k2>dOhfda
{#dOhfda#}¦ {%dauhṛda, am,%} n. (see {%daurhṛda%}),
the longing or desire of pregnant women for certain
things, pregnancy; [cf. {%dohada.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22882<pc>0437-c<k1>dOhfdinI<k2>dOhfdinI
{%Dauhṛdinī,%}¦ f. a woman who has the longing
which attends pregnancy, a pregnant woman.
<LEND>

<L>22883<pc>0437-c<k1>dya<k2>dya
{#dya#}¦ {%dya.%} See {%a-dya.%}
<LEND>

<L>22884<pc>0437-c<k1>dyas<k2>dyas
{#dyas#}¦ {%dyas.%} See {%sa-dyas.%}
<LEND>

<L>22885<pc>0437-c<k1>dyA<k2>dyA
{#dyA#}¦ {%dyā,%} f. {%= jyā,%} the sinew of a bow, a
bow-string; (in Śatapatha-Br. XIV. 6, 8, 2, {%u-dya%}
{%= uj-jya.%})
<LEND>

<L>22886<pc>0437-c<k1>dyAmpAta<k2>dyAmpAta
{#dyAmpAta#}¦ {%dyāmpāta, as,%} m. (fr. {%dyām,%} acc.
sing. of {%dyo, + pāta%}), N. of a man; [cf. {%dayāmpāti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22887<pc>0437-c<k1>dyAvA<k2>dyAvA
{#dyAvA#}¦ {%dyāvā%} (according to Sāy., Ṛg-veda
VII. 65, 2) {%= dyāvā-pṛthivī,%} du. heaven and earth.
{%—Dyāvā-kṣame%} or {%dyāvā-kṣāmā%} or {%dyāvā-%}
{%pṛthivī%} or {%dyāvā-pṛthivyau%} or {%dyāvā-bhūmī%} or
{%dyāvā-bhūmyau,%} f. du. (the comp. consisting of
two Vedic duals which may even be separated by
intermediate words), heaven and earth. {%—Dyāvā-%}
{%pṛthivī-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. connected with
heaven and earth.
<LEND>

<L>22888<pc>0437-c<k1>dyAvApfTivIya<k2>dyAvApfTivIya
{%Dyāvāpṛthivīya%}¦ or {%dyāvāpṛthivya, as, ā, am,%}
relating to heaven and earth, sacred to them.
<LEND>

<L>22889<pc>0437-c<k1>dyu<k2>dyu<h>1
{#dyu#} 1¦. {%dyu,%} cl. 2. P. {%dyauti, dudyāva,%}
{%dyoṣyati, adyauṣīt, dyotum,%} to advance
towards or against, approach, assail, attack; [cf.
{%didyu,%} rt. 2. {%div.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22890<pc>0437-c<k1>dyut<k2>dyut<h>1
1. {%dyut, t, t, t,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) advancing
against, assaulting.
<LEND>

<L>22891<pc>0437-c<k1>dyu<k2>dyu<h>2
{#dyu#} 2¦. {%dyu,%} sharpness, in {%a-dyu,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>22892<pc>0437-c<k1>dyu<k2>dyu<h>3
{#dyu#} 3¦. {%dyu, us,%} m. (connected with 3. {%div,%}
q. v.), a N. of Agni or fire; ({%u%}), n. a day, bright-
ness; heaven, sky, ether, paradise; {%dyu%} is the form
of 3. {%div,%} used before terminations beginning with
[Page0438-a+ 81]
consonants and in comp., see 3. {%div; dyubhis =%}
{%upa-dyubhis,%} in the course of days, in the course of
time; [cf. Lat. <nsi>nu-diu-s;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>an-diu,</nsi> ‘to-day.’]
{%—Dyu-kṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%dyu%} and {%kṣa%} = 3.
{%kṣi ?%}), Ved. heavenly, celestial; light, brilliant; ({%as%}),
m. epithet of Varuṇa; of Aryaman; of Indra; of
Agni; of Soma. {%—Dyukṣa-vacas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
uttering heavenly words. {%—Dyu-ga, as,%} m. ‘going
in the sky,’ a bird; [cf. {%khe-cara.%}] {%—Dyu-gaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. a given term of days (as a month &c.).
{%—Dyu-gat,%} ind. ({%gat%} fr. rt. {%gam%}), Ved. pervading
the sky, going through the sky; (according to
Naigh. II. 15), quickly. {%—Dyu-cara, as, ā, am,%}
‘going or moving in heaven,’ an inhabitant of heaven.
{%—Dyu-jaya, as,%} m. conquering or gaining heaven;
attainment of heaven. {%—Dyu-taru, us,%} m. the tree
of heaven; [cf. {%deva-taru.%}] {%—Dyu-dala, as%} or {%am,%}
m. or n. (?), ‘dividing of the sky,’ noon. {%—Dyu-%}
{%dhuni, is,%} f. ‘the river of heaven,’ the Ganges.
{%—Dyu-nadī,%} f. ‘the river of heaven,’ the Ganges.
{%—Dyunadī-saṅgama, as,%} m. ‘the confluence of
the river of the sky,’ N. of a place of pilgrimage
mentioned in the Rasika-ramaṇa by Raghu-nātha.
{%—Dyu-nivāsa, as,%} m. ‘heavenly abode,’ heaven;
an inhabitant of heaven, a deity. {%—Dyunivāsa-%}
{%bhūya, am,%} n. the becoming a deity. {%—Dyu-nivā-%}
{%sin, ī,%} m. ‘an inhabitant of heaven,’ a deity; a
pious person. {%—Dyu-niś, au,%} f. du. or {%dyu-niśa,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%dyu-niśe,%} n. du. day and night; {%dyu-%}
{%niśam%} or {%dyu-niśi,%} for a day and night, by day
and night. {%—Dyu-pati, is,%} m. ‘the lord of heaven,’
the sun; an epithet of Indra. {%—Dyu-patha, as,%} m.
‘the path of heaven,’ the upper part of the sky.
{%—Dyu-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘the jewel of the sky,’ the
sun; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Dyu-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. bright, light, brilliant; clear, loud, heard from
afar; serene; brisk, energetic, strong; excellent,
conspicuous; ({%ān%}), m. an epithet of Agni; of Soma;
of Brahmā; of the chariot of the gods; N. of a son
of Vasiṣṭha; of Divo-dāsa (= Pra-tardana); of Manu
Svārociṣa; ({%at%}), ind. clearly, brightly. {%—Dyumat-%}
{%sena, as,%} m., N. of a prince of Śālva, father of Satya-
vat. {%—Dyumad-gāman, ā,%} m., Ved. one who sings
distinctly (rt. {%gai%}) or one who walks (rt. {%gam%}) within
the sacred enclosure. {%—Dyu-maya, as, ī, am,%} light,
clear; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Tvaṣṭṛ and wife
of the Sun. {%—Dyu-mārga, as,%} m. the path of the
sky or air. {%—Dyu-yoṣit, t,%} f. ‘a heavenly woman,’
an Apsaras. {%—Dyu-loka, as,%} m. the heavenly world;
[cf. {%pṛthivī-loka, antarikṣa-loka, dyaur-loka.%}]
{%—Dyu-ṣad, t,%} m. (fr. {%dyu-sad%}), an inhabitant of
heaven, a god, deity; a planet. {%—Dyu-sad = dyu-%}
{%ṣad%}. {%—Dyu-sadman, ā,%} m. ‘an inhabitant of
heaven,’ a god. {%—Dyu-saras,%} n. the lake of heaven.
{%—Dyu-sarit, t,%} f. or {%dyu-sindhu, us,%} f. ‘the river
of heaven,’ the Ganges.
<LEND>

<L>22893<pc>0438-a<k1>dyumna<k2>dyumna
{%Dyumna, am,%}¦ n. splendor, glory, majesty; clear-
ness or serenity of mind, enthusiasm, inspiration;
energy, ability, strength, power; wealth, property,
substance; N. of a Sāman; (Sāy.) sacrificial offering,
oblation; ({%as%}), m., N. of an author of a Ṛg-veda
hymn; of a son of Manu and Naḍvalā; [cf. {%abhiṣṭi-%}
{%d˚, indra-d˚, ṛta-d˚, tuvi-d˚.%}] {%—Dyumna-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. inspired, sounding clearly; having
wealth, rich, powerful; (Sāy.) accompanied by obla-
tions. {%—Dyumna-vardhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. in-
creasing strength. {%—Dyumna-śravas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. producing a strong or clear sound; (Sāy.) having
splendid food or offerings. {%—Dyumna-sah%} or {%dyum-%}
{%na-sāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. bearing or bringing strength;
(Sāy.) carrying off or taking away wealth. {%—Dyumna-%}
{%sāti, is,%} f., Ved. receiving inspiration or power;
(Sāy.) obtaining food or glory. {%—Dyumna-hūti, is,%}
f., Ved. inspired invocation; (Sāy.) invocation cha-
racterized by oblations or accompanied by offerings.
{%—Dyumnodā, ās, ās, am%} (fr. {%dyumnas = dyum-%}
{%na ?%} and {%dā%}), Ved. granting splendor.
<LEND>

<L>22894<pc>0438-a<k1>dyumnin<k2>dyumnin
{%Dyumnin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. majestic; strong, spiritual;
inspired, courageous; (Sāy.) having wealth, having
food or oblations; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Vasiṣṭha
and author of a hymn of the Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>
[Page0438-b+ 79]

<L>22895<pc>0438-b<k1>dyuvan<k2>dyuvan
{%Dyuvan, ā,%}¦ m. the sun; heaven.
<LEND>

<L>22896<pc>0438-b<k1>dyus<k2>dyus
{%Dyus,%}¦ a contraction of {%divas,%} the gen. sing. of 3. {%div,%}
day; [cf. {%adhare-dyus, anyatare-d˚, apare-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22897<pc>0438-b<k1>dyo<k2>dyo
{%Dyo, aus,%}¦ f. (considered by native grammarians as
another form of the base 3. {%div,%} forming in the
nom. {%dyaus,%} as {%gaus%} fr. {%go,%} and used in a few
comp.), the sky, heaven, paradise, &c.; see 3. {%div.%}
{%—Dyo-kāra, as,%} m. ‘a maker of brightness,’ a
goldsmith (?), a N. applied to some sort of handicraft.
{%—Dyo-bhūmi, is,%} m. ‘moving between heaven and
earth (?),’ a bird; ({%ī%}), f. du. heaven and earth.
{%—Dyo-ṣad, t,%} m. (fr. {%dyo + sad%}), ‘sitting in
heaven,’ a deity, a celestial. {%—Dyaur-dā, ās, ās, am%}
({%dyaur%} for {%dyaus,%} nom. of {%dyo%}), giving heaven.
{%—Dyaur-loka, as,%} m. ({%dyaur%} for {%dyaus,%} nom. of
{%dyo%}), the heavenly world. {%—Dyau-saṃśita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. impelled or incited by heaven.
<LEND>

<L>22898<pc>0438-b<k1>dyuka<k2>dyuka
{#dyuka#}¦ {%dyuka, as,%} m. an owl. {%—Dyukāri (˚ka-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. ‘the owl's enemy,’ a crow; (wrong forms
for {%dyūka%} and {%dyūkāri.%})
<LEND>

<L>22899<pc>0438-b<k1>dyut<k2>dyut<h>1
{#dyut#} 1¦. {%dyut,%} occurring in the Atharva-
veda, and said to mean ‘to be broken, to
break;’ it occurs IV. 12, 2, XII. 3, 22, in the past
part. {%dyutta, as, ā, am,%} broken: Caus. {%dyotayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to break.
<LEND>

<L>22900<pc>0438-b<k1>dyut<k2>dyut<h>2
{#dyut#} 2¦. {%dyut,%} cl. 1. A. {%dyotate, didyute%}
(Pāṇ. VII. 4, 67; part. {%didyutāna%}), {%dyo-%}
{%tiṣyate, adyotiṣṭa%} and {%adyutat%} (Ved. {%adyaut,%}
{%adidyutat%}), {%dyotitum,%} to shine, to be bright
or brilliant: Caus. P. {%dyotayati,%} &c., Aor. {%adi-%}
{%dyutat,%} to make bright or brilliant, illuminate, irra-
diate; to cause to appear or become manifest, to
enlighten, cause to understand; to express, mean:
Desid. {%didyutiṣate%} and {%didyotiṣate:%} Intens. {%de-%}
{%dyutyate, dedyotti,%} Ved. Intens. {%davidyotti, davi-%}
{%dyot,%} 3rd pl. {%davidyutati,%} part. {%davidyutat;%} [cf.
rt. {%jyut,%} which is probably derived fr. {%dyut%} with
change of {%d%} to {%j.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22901<pc>0438-b<k1>dyut<k2>dyut<h>3
3. {%dyut, t,%}¦ f., Ved. shining, splendor, a ray of light.
<LEND>

<L>22902<pc>0438-b<k1>dyutadyAman<k2>dyutadyAman
{%Dyutad-yāman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. having a shining
or brilliant path.
<LEND>

<L>22903<pc>0438-b<k1>dyutAna<k2>dyutAna
{%Dyutāna, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Ṛṣi with the patro-
nymic Māruta or Māruti, who is author of a hymn
of the Ṛg-veda; N. of the hymn ascribed to him.
<LEND>

<L>22904<pc>0438-b<k1>dyuti<k2>dyuti
{%Dyuti, is,%}¦ f. splendor, brightness, brilliancy, lustre,
beauty; light, a ray of light; majesty, dignity;
Splendor personified as a deity; ({%is%}), m., N. of one
of the Saptarṣis under the reign of Manu Meru-
sāvarṇa IV; of a son of Manu Tāmasa. {%—Dyuti-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} producing splendor, illuminating,
shining, handsome; ({%as%}), m. the polar star or (in
mythology) the divine sage Dhruva. {%—Dyuti-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} resplendent, bright, brilliant; majestic,
dignified; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a prince of the Madras
and father-in-law of Saha-deva; of a prince of the
Śālvas and father of Ṛcīka; of a son of Madirāśva
and father of Su-vīra; of a son of Priya-vrata and
king of Krauñca-dvīpa; of a son of Prāṇa (or Pāṇḍu);
of one of the seven sages under the first Manu
Meru-sāvarṇa or under Manu Dākṣasāvarṇi; N. of
a son of Manu Svayam-bhuva; N. of a mountain.
{%—Dyuti-mati, is, is, i,%} of brilliant understanding,
clear-minded.
<LEND>

<L>22905<pc>0438-b<k1>dyutita<k2>dyutita
{%Dyutita, as, ā, am,%}¦ illuminated, enlightened,
shining; [cf. {%dyotita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22906<pc>0438-b<k1>dyutitvA<k2>dyutitvA
{%Dyutitvā%}¦ or {%dyotitvā,%} ind. (Pāṇ. 1. 2, 26), having
become bright or brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>22907<pc>0438-b<k1>dyutilA<k2>dyutilA
{%Dyutilā,%}¦ f. the plant Hemionitis Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>22908<pc>0438-b<k1>dyota<k2>dyota
{%Dyota, as,%}¦ m. light, lustre, brilliance; sunshine;
heat; [cf. {%kha-d˚%} and {%cintya-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22909<pc>0438-b<k1>dyotaka<k2>dyotaka
{%Dyotaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining; illuminating [cf.
{%kha-d˚%}]; making clear, explaining; meaning, signifi-
cant, expressing, expressive of. {%—Dyotaka-tva, am,%}
n. the power or faculty of expressing, expressiveness.
<LEND>

<L>22910<pc>0438-b<k1>dyotana<k2>dyotana
{%Dyotana, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} shining, bright, bril-
liant; illuminating, enlightening [cf. {%kha-d˚%}]; ex-
plaining, meaning; ({%as%}), m. a lamp; N. of a prince;
({%am%}), n. shining; illumination; making manifest,
explaining, showing; sight, seeing.
<LEND>
[Page0438-c+ 77]

<L>22911<pc>0438-c<k1>dyotanaka<k2>dyotanaka
{%Dyotanaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ making manifest, ex-
plaining; ({%ikā%}), f. explanation.
<LEND>

<L>22912<pc>0438-c<k1>dyotani<k2>dyotani
{%Dyotani, is,%}¦ f., Ved. splendor, brightness.
<LEND>

<L>22913<pc>0438-c<k1>dyotamAna<k2>dyotamAna
{%Dyotamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, being bright,
brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>22914<pc>0438-c<k1>dyotayamAna<k2>dyotayamAna
{%Dyotayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ illuminating, enlighten-
ing, irradiating.
<LEND>

<L>22915<pc>0438-c<k1>dyotita<k2>dyotita
{%Dyotita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shone upon, illustrated, illu-
minated, &c., {%= dyutita,%} q. v. {%—Dyotita-prabha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} resplendent.
<LEND>

<L>22916<pc>0438-c<k1>dyotin<k2>dyotin
{%Dyotin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ shining, brilliant, splendid.
<LEND>

<L>22917<pc>0438-c<k1>dyotis<k2>dyotis
{%Dyotis, is,%}¦ n. light, brightness; a star. {%—Dyotir-%}
{%iṅgaṇa, as,%} m. a shining insect, fire-fly. {%—Dyotiṣ-%}
{%patha, as,%} m. ‘the path of the stars,’ the upper
part of the sky; (also read {%jyotiṣ-patha.%})
<LEND>

<L>22918<pc>0438-c<k1>dyotya<k2>dyotya
{%Dyotya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made clear or expressed
or explained.
<LEND>

<L>22919<pc>0438-c<k1>dyOta<k2>dyOta
{%Dyauta, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>22920<pc>0438-c<k1>dyOtAna<k2>dyOtAna
{%Dyautāna, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%dyutāna%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>22921<pc>0438-c<k1>dyOttra<k2>dyOttra
{%Dyauttra, am,%}¦ n. light, splendor; forked lightning.
<LEND>

<L>22922<pc>0438-c<k1>dyuta<k2>dyuta
{#dyuta#}¦ {%dyuta, am,%} n. (in astrology) N. of the
seventh mansion; (also read {%dyuna%} or {%dyūna,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>22923<pc>0438-c<k1>dyuna<k2>dyuna
{#dyuna#}¦ {%dyuna = dyuta%} and 2 {%dyūna.%}
<LEND>

<L>22924<pc>0438-c<k1>dyU<k2>dyU
{#dyU#}¦ {%dyū, ūs, ūs, u%} (fr. rt. 2. {%div%}), playing,
sporting with, delighting in, (used at the end of a
comp., see {%akṣa-d˚, eka-d˚, kama-d˚%}); going
after, (explained by some native commentators as
derived fr. 1. {%dyu.%})
<LEND>

<L>22925<pc>0438-c<k1>dyUta<k2>dyUta
{%Dyūta, as, am%}¦ (past part. pass. of 2. {%div%}), gam-
bled; ({%as, am%}), m. n. play, gaming, gambling,
playing with dice or any inanimate object; (figura-
tively) a battle or fight (the end of a battle being as
uncertain as that of a game); the prize won, that
which is gained in battle; [cf. {%akṣa-d˚.%}] {%—Dyūta-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. a gambler. {%—Dyūta-kāra%} or {%dyūta-%}
{%kāraka, as,%} m. the keeper of a gaming-house; a
gambler. {%—Dyūta-kṛt, t,%} m. a gambler. {%—Dyūta-%}
{%krīḍā,%} f. playing at dice, gambling. {%—Dyūta-tā,%} f.
gambling, gaming, playing with dice. {%—Dyūta-par-%}
{%van, a,%} n., N. of a section of the Sabhā-parva of
the Mahā-bhārata, comprising Adhyāyas 45-69.
{%—Dyūta-pūrṇimā,%} f. or {%dyūta-paurṇamī%} (or more
correctly {%-paurṇimī%}), f. the day of full moon in the
month Kārttika (October — November), the night of
which is spent in games of chance in honour of
Lakṣmī, goddess of fortune. {%—Dyūta-pratipad, t,%}
f. the first day of the bright half of the month
Kārttika kept as a festival and celebrated by gambling.
{%—Dyūta-priya, as, ā, am,%} fond of gambling.
{%—Dyūta-bhūmi, is,%} f. gambling-ground, playing-
place. {%—Dyūta-viśeṣa, ās,%} m. pl. ‘the different
sorts of play,’ N. of a chapter in the Kāma-sūtra by
Vātsyāyana. {%—Dyūta-vīja, am,%} n. a cowrie, a small
shell used as a coin and in playing. {%—Dyūta-vṛtti,%}
{%is,%} m. a gambler by profession or the keeper of a
gaming-house. {%—Dyūta-vaitaṃsika, as,%} m. one who
lives by exhibiting fights between animals (?) . {%—Dyū-%}
{%ta-sabhā,%} f. a gaming-house, assembly of gamblers.
{%—Dyūta-samāja, as,%} m. an assembly of gamblers,
a gaming-house. {%—Dyūta-samāhvaya-prakaraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘a treatise on the lawsuits arising from
gambling,’ N. of a chapter of the legal work Su-bo-
dhinī by Viśveśvara. {%—Dyūtādhikārin (˚ta-adh˚),%}
{%ī,%} m. the keeper of a gaming-house.
<LEND>

<L>22926<pc>0438-c<k1>dyUtvA<k2>dyUtvA
{%Dyūtvā,%}¦ ind. having played or gambled.
<LEND>

<L>22927<pc>0438-c<k1>dyUna<k2>dyUna<h>1
{#dyUna#} 1¦. {%dyūna, as, ā, am%} (past part. pass.
of 1. {%div%} or of 2. {%div,%} but not in the sense ‘to
gamble’), lamenting, sorrowful; playing (but not
with dice); [cf. {%pari-dyūna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22928<pc>0438-c<k1>dyUna<k2>dyUna<h>2
{#dyUna#} 2¦. {%dyūna, am,%} n. the seventh mansion
or sign of the zodiac reckoning from that which the
sun enters; [also {%dyūnaka%} in comp.; cf. {%dyuta%}
and {%dyuna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22929<pc>0438-c<k1>dyE<k2>dyE<h>1
{#dyE#} 1¦. {%dyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%dyāyati, dadyau,%} &c.,
to despise, reprove, treat with contempt; to
disfigure.
<LEND>

<L>22930<pc>0438-c<k1>dyE<k2>dyE<h>2
2. {%dyai,%}¦ ind. fie! for shame!
<LEND>
[Page0439-a+ 72]

<L>22931<pc>0439-a<k1>dyo<k2>dyo
{#dyo#}¦ {%dyo.%} See p. 438, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>22932<pc>0439-a<k1>dyota<k2>dyota
{#dyota#}¦ {%dyota, dyotita,%} &c. See p. 438, cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>22933<pc>0439-a<k1>dyOzpitf<k2>dyOzpitf
{#dyOzpitf#}¦ {%dyauṣ-pitṛ.%} See 3. {%div,%} p. 413.
<LEND>

<L>22934<pc>0439-a<k1>drakawa<k2>drakawa
{#drakawa#}¦ {%drakaṭa%} or {%dragaḍa, as,%} m. a kettle-
drum with which sleepers are awakened.
<LEND>

<L>22935<pc>0439-a<k1>draNkzaRa<k2>draNkzaRa
{#draNkzaRa#}¦ {%draṅkṣaṇa, am,%} n. a measure or
weight, {%= tolaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>22936<pc>0439-a<k1>draNga<k2>draNga
{#draNga#}¦ {%draṅga, as, ā,%} m. f. a town, city;
[cf. {%udraṅga%} and {%traṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22937<pc>0439-a<k1>draQaya<k2>draQaya
{#draQaya#}¦ {%draḍhaya%} (fr. {%dṛḍha%}), Nom. P. {%dra-%}
{%ḍhayati, -yitum,%} to make firm, fasten, tighten;
confirm, corroborate, affirm, assert; [cf. {%dṛḍhaya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22938<pc>0439-a<k1>draQika<k2>draQika
{%Draḍhika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>22939<pc>0439-a<k1>draQiman<k2>draQiman
{%Draḍhiman, ā,%}¦ m. firmness, hardness; heaviness;
affirmation, assertion.
<LEND>

<L>22940<pc>0439-a<k1>draQizWa<k2>draQizWa
{%Draḍhiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (superl.) very hard,
hardest, firmest, tightest.
<LEND>

<L>22941<pc>0439-a<k1>draQIyas<k2>draQIyas
{%Draḍhīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ (compar.) harder, firmer,
hardest.
<LEND>

<L>22942<pc>0439-a<k1>draDas<k2>draDas
{#draDas#}¦ {%dradhas, as,%} n., Ved. a garment (?) .
<LEND>

<L>22943<pc>0439-a<k1>drapsa<k2>drapsa
{#drapsa#}¦ {%drapsa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%dru%} or rt.
2. {%drā?%}), dripping, falling in drops, flowing as
liquid; ({%as%}), m. (according to some only used as a
subst.), a drop (as of Soma &c.); a drop of fire, i. e.
a spark, (the moon is considered in the Veda as a
bright drop; cf. {%indu%}); diluted sour milk, thin
coagulated milk, diluted curds; [cf. {%trapsya;%} Angl.
Sax. <nsi>dropa;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>trofo, trauf, traufi.</nsi>]
{%—Drapsa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. sprinkled with
drops, besprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>22944<pc>0439-a<k1>drapsin<k2>drapsin
{%Drapsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. dripping, falling in drops,
flowing thickly; distilling; gushing (as rain &c.).
<LEND>

<L>22945<pc>0439-a<k1>drapsya<k2>drapsya
{%Drapsya, am,%}¦ n. thin coagulated milk, diluted
sour milk, diluted curds.
<LEND>

<L>22946<pc>0439-a<k1>drabudDa<k2>drabudDa
{#drabudDa#}¦ {%drabuddha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>22947<pc>0439-a<k1>dram<k2>dram
{#dram#}¦ {%dram,%} cl. 1. P. {%dramati, dadrāma,%}
{%dramiṣyati, dramitum,%} to run, go,
move, run about: Caus. {%dramayati, -yitum:%} Desid.
{%didramiṣati:%} Intens. {%dandramyate%} or {%dandran-%}
{%ti,%} to run to and fro; [cf. rt. 2. {%dru;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">δρέμ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἔ-δραμ-ο-ν, δέ-δρομ-α, δρόμος.</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>22948<pc>0439-a<k1>dramiwa<k2>dramiwa
{#dramiwa#}¦ {%dramiṭa%} or {%dramita, as,%} m., N. of a
serpent-king.
<LEND>

<L>22949<pc>0439-a<k1>dramila<k2>dramila
{#dramila#}¦ {%dramila, as,%} m., N. of a country;
of a lexicographer [cf. {%drimila%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a school.
<LEND>

<L>22950<pc>0439-a<k1>dramma<k2>dramma
{#dramma#}¦ {%dramma%} (fr. Gr. <lang n="greek">δραχμή</lang>), a drachma.
<LEND>

<L>22951<pc>0439-a<k1>drava<k2>drava
{#drava#}¦ {%drava, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%dru%}), run-
ning (as a horse); flowing, fluid; dropping, dripping,
distilling, oozing; liquid; fused, liquefied, melted;
({%as%}), m. going, motion, quick motion, walking
about; flight, retreat; play, sport, amusement; the
act of dropping, distilling, trickling, exudation;
fusion, fluid condition of a substance, liquefaction,
fluidity; a liquid substance; juice, essence; decoction.
{%—Drava-ja, as,%} m. a treacle. {%—Drava-tā,%} f. or
{%drava-tva,%} or {%dravatvaka, am,%} n. fluidity, fusibility,
fusion, natural or artificial fluid condition of a sub-
stance, wetness, distillation; ductility. {%—Drava-%}
{%dravya, am,%} n. a fluid substance. {%—Drava-rasā,%}
f. ‘having fluid essence,’ lac; gum; extract. {%—Dra-%}
{%vādhāra (˚va-ādh˚), as,%} m. ‘fluid-holder,’ a small
vessel or receiver. {%—Dravī-karaṇa, am,%} n. lique-
fying, melting. {%—Dravī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to liquefy, dissolve, melt. {%—Dravī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} liquefied, melted. {%—Dravī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bha-%}
{%vati, -bhavitum,%} to become fluid. {%—Dravī-bhūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} become fluid, liquefied, melted, fused.
{%—Dravetara (˚va-it˚), as, ā, am,%} other than fluid,
hard, solid, congealed. {%—Dravottara (˚va-ut˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} chiefly fluid, very fluid.
<LEND>
[Page0439-b+ 81]

<L>22952<pc>0439-b<k1>dravaka<k2>dravaka
{%Dravaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ running.
<LEND>

<L>22953<pc>0439-b<k1>dravaRa<k2>dravaRa
{%Dravaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ running, going; flowing,
dropping, exuding; heat.
<LEND>

<L>22954<pc>0439-b<k1>dravat<k2>dravat
{%Dravat, an, antī, at,%}¦ running, flowing, going;
trickling, oozing; ({%antī%}), f. a river in general; the
plant Anthericum Tuberosum; ({%at%}), ind. quickly,
speedily. {%—Dravac-cakra, as, ā, am%} (for {%dravat-%}
{%cakra%}), having rapid wheels. {%—Dravat-pattrī,%} f. a
kind of plant {%(= śimṛḍī)%}. {%—Dravat-pāṇi, ayas,%}
m. pl., Ved. ‘swift of foot,’ epithet of the horses of
the Aśvins; ({%ī%}), m. du. ‘possessed of quick-footed
horses,’ (Sāy.) ‘having nimble hands (to seize the
oblation),’ epithet of the Aśvins. {%—Dravad-aśva, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. drawn by swift horses (as a carriage).
<LEND>

<L>22955<pc>0439-b<k1>dravatya<k2>dravatya
{%Dravatya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%dravatyati,%} &c., to become
fluid.
<LEND>

<L>22956<pc>0439-b<k1>dravamARa<k2>dravamARa
{%Dravamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowing, fluid, melted.
<LEND>

<L>22957<pc>0439-b<k1>dravara<k2>dravara
{%Dravara, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. running quickly.
<LEND>

<L>22958<pc>0439-b<k1>dravasya<k2>dravasya
{%Dravasya%}¦ (fr. an unused {%dravas%}), Nom. P. {%dra-%}
{%vasyati, -yitum,%} to harass one's self, take great
pains; to attend upon or serve any person.
<LEND>

<L>22959<pc>0439-b<k1>dravi<k2>dravi
{%Dravi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a smelter, one who melts metal.
<LEND>

<L>22960<pc>0439-b<k1>draviRa<k2>draviRa
{%Draviṇa, am,%}¦ n. (thought by some to be con-
nected with 4. {%dru%}), any valuable possession, property,
substance, goods, wealth, gold, money; thing, matter,
material; that of which anything consists; substan-
tiality; strength, power; N. of a Sāman; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a son of Vasu Dhara (or Dhava); of a son of
Pṛthu; of a mountain; ({%ās%}), m. pl. wealth (in
Bhāg.-Purāṇa V. 14, 12); the inhabitants of a
Varṣa in Krauñca-dvīpa. {%—Draviṇa-nāśana, as,%}
m. ‘destroying vigour,’ the plant Hyperanthera Mo-
ringa {%(= śobhāñjana)%}. {%—Draviṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessing goods or property, rich; strong, powerful.
{%—Draviṇādhipati (˚ṇa-adh˚), is,%} m. or {%dravi-%}
{%ṇeśvara (˚ṇa-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of wealth,’ an
epithet of Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>22961<pc>0439-b<k1>draviRaka<k2>draviRaka
{%Draviṇaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Vasu Agni;
[cf. {%draviṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22962<pc>0439-b<k1>draviRas<k2>draviRas
{%Draviṇas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. property, possession, goods,
substance; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a son of Pṛthu; (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 7, 10, {%draviṇas%} is for
{%draviṇa,%} and means ‘moving, ever moving,’ as
applied to Agni.) {%—Draviṇas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
possessed of goods or wealth, procuring wealth.
{%—Draviṇo-da, as, ā, am,%} or {%draviṇo-dā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} or {%draviṇo-das,%} granting wealth or any desired
good; ({%as%} or {%ās%}), m. an epithet of Agni; of Tvaṣṭṛ.
{%—Draviṇo-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. {%= draviṇo-da.%}
<LEND>

<L>22963<pc>0439-b<k1>draviRasyu<k2>draviRasyu
{%Draviṇasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desiring goods or
wealth; (Sāy.) desiring sacrificial offerings; ({%us%}),
m. an epithet of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>22964<pc>0439-b<k1>dravitf<k2>dravitf
{%Dravitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. a runner, running.
<LEND>

<L>22965<pc>0439-b<k1>dravitnu<k2>dravitnu
{%Dravitnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. running, making haste.
<LEND>

<L>22966<pc>0439-b<k1>dravya<k2>dravya<h>1
1. {%dravya, am,%}¦ n. (thought by some to be con-
nected with 4. {%dru%}), a substance, thing, object; the
ingredients or materials of anything; medicinal sub-
stance or drug; the receptacle or substratum of pro-
perties &c., elementary substance (nine kinds of
which are reckoned in the Nyāya philosophy, viz.
{%pṛthivī,%} earth; {%ap,%} water; {%tejas,%} fire; {%vāyu,%} air;
{%ākāśa,%} ether; {%kāla,%} time; {%diś,%} space; {%ātman,%}
soul; and {%manas,%} mind: the Jainas recognize only
six, viz. {%jīva, dharma, a-dharma, pudgala, kāla,%}
and {%ākāśa%}); an object possessed, a possession, wealth,
property, goods, wares, chattels, money; a fit object;
(according to lexicographers {%dravya%} may also mean)
bell-metal, brass; ointment; anointing, plastering;
spirituous liquor; modesty, propriety; a stake, wager.
{%—Dravya-gaṇa, as,%} m. a class of similar substances
(in medicine &c.). {%—Dravya-guṇa, as,%} m. ‘the
quality of medicinal substances,’ N. of a chapter of
the Purāṇa-sarva-sva by Halāyudha. {%—Dravya-tas,%}
ind. in substance, according to substance, &c. {%—Dra-%}
{%vya-tva, am,%} n. substantiality, substance. {%—Dravya-%}
{%dvaita, am,%} n. duality of substance, instrumental
cause (?). {%—Dravya-niścaya, as,%} m. ‘enquiry into
the (elementary) substances,’ N. of a chapter of
Bhaṭṭotpala's commentary to Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-
saṃhitā. {%—Dravya-parigraha, as,%} m. the possession
of property or wealth. {%—Dravya-pūjā,%} f. ‘adoration
[Page0439-c+ 76]
of substance,’ N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva.
{%—Dravya-prakarṣa, as,%} m. the excellence of a
matter. {%—Dravya-prakṛti, is,%} f. the nature of a
matter. {%—Dravya-prayojana, am,%} n. use or employ-
ment of any article. {%—Dravya-maya, as, ī, am,%}
material, substantial; having or holding any substance;
consisting of wealth. {%—Dravya-yajña, as,%} m. offer-
ing oblations, material sacrifice, &c. {%—Dravya-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having property, possessed of substance,
rich, wealthy; inherent in the substance. {%—Dravya-%}
{%vardhana, as,%} m. ‘wealth-increaser,’ N. of an author
of a work on augury. {%—Dravya-vācaka,%} a substan-
tive. {%—Dravya-vṛddhi, is,%} f. increase of wealth.
{%—Dravya-śuddhi, is,%} f. cleansing of soiled or de-
filed articles, purification of inanimate objects; N. of
a work. {%—Dravyaśuddhi-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a com-
mentary on the Dravya-śuddhi by Puruṣottama.
{%—Dravya-saṃskāra, as,%} m. consecration of articles
for sacrifice, purification or cleansing of soiled or defiled
articles. {%—Dravya-sañcaya, as,%} m. accumulation of
property, a store of worldly goods. {%—Dravya-sāra-%}
{%saṅgraha, as,%} m. ‘collection of the essence of sub-
stances,’ N. of a philosophical work. {%—Dravya-%}
{%siddhi, is,%} f. acquirement of property or wealth;
effecting an object by means of wealth. {%—Dravya-%}
{%hasta, as, ā, am,%} holding anything in the hand.
{%—Dravyātmaka (˚ya-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} substantial,
containing a substance. {%—Dravyātma-kāryasiddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. effecting one's object by means of wealth.
{%—Dravyāntara (˚ya-an˚), am,%} n. another thing.
{%—Dravyārjana (˚ya-ar˚), am,%} n. acquiring property,
gain or acquisition of wealth. {%—Dravyaugha (˚ya-%}
{%ogha), as,%} m. a stream of wealth, abundance of property.
<LEND>

<L>22967<pc>0439-c<k1>dravyaka<k2>dravyaka
{%Dravyaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= dravya-vāhaka,%} a carrier or
taker of anything.
<LEND>

<L>22968<pc>0439-c<k1>draviqa<k2>draviqa
{#draviqa#}¦ {%draviḍa, as,%} m., N. of a people and
district on the east coast of the Dekhan, (the people
are regarded as degraded Kṣatriyas; the name is said
to be derived from Draviḍa son of Vṛṣabha-svāmin);
({%ī%}), f., N. of a Rāgiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>22969<pc>0439-c<k1>dravya<k2>dravya<h>2
{#dravya#} 2¦. {%dravya, as, ā, am%} (fr. 4. {%dru%}),
derived from or relating to a tree; ({%am%}), n. lac,
the animal dye; extract, gum, resin. (For 1. {%dravya%}
see col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>22970<pc>0439-c<k1>drazwavya<k2>drazwavya
{#drazwavya#}¦ {%draṣṭavya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dṛś%}),
to be seen, visible, apparent; to be perceived or recog-
nized, perceptible; to be understood; to be examined
or investigated; to be regarded or considered as.
<LEND>

<L>22971<pc>0439-c<k1>drazwukAma<k2>drazwukAma
{%Draṣṭu-kāma, as, ā, am%}¦ ({%draṣṭu%} for {%draṣṭum,%}
inf. of rt. 1. {%dṛś%}), wishing to see, desirous of seeing.
<LEND>

<L>22972<pc>0439-c<k1>drazwumanas<k2>drazwumanas
{%Draṣṭu-manas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ having a mind to
see, wishing to see.
<LEND>

<L>22973<pc>0439-c<k1>drazwuSakya<k2>drazwuSakya
{%Draṣṭu-śakya, as, ā, am,%}¦ able to be seen.
<LEND>

<L>22974<pc>0439-c<k1>drazwf<k2>drazwf
{%Draṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ a seer, spectator; one who
examines or investigates or decides in a court of law,
a judge; appearing, any person or thing that appears.
{%—Draṣṭṛ-tva, am,%} n. the faculty of seeing.
<LEND>

<L>22975<pc>0439-c<k1>draha<k2>draha
{#draha#}¦ {%draha, as,%} m. a deep lake.
<LEND>

<L>22976<pc>0439-c<k1>drahyat<k2>drahyat
{#drahyat#}¦ {%drahyat%} (fr. rt. {%dṛh%}), ind., Ved.
firmly, strongly.
<LEND>

<L>22977<pc>0439-c<k1>drA<k2>drA<h>1
{#drA#} 1¦. {%drā%} or {%drai,%} q. v., cl. 4. 2. P. {%drā-%}
{%yati, drāti,%} &c., to sleep.
<LEND>

<L>22978<pc>0439-c<k1>drA<k2>drA<h>2
{#drA#} 2¦. {%drā%} (connected with rts. 2. {%dru%} and
{%dram%}), cl. 2. P. {%drāti, dadrau, drāsyati,%}
{%drātum,%} to run, make haste; run away, fly; to be
ashamed or spoiled: Caus. P. {%drāpayati, -yitum,%}
{%adidrapat,%} to cause to run: Intens. {%dādrāyate,%}
{%dādrāti, dādreti;%} Old Intens. {%daridrāti,%} see {%da-%}
{%ridrā;%} [cf. rt. 2. {%dru,%} rt. {%dram:%} Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀπο-δρᾶ-ναι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δι-δρά-σκ-ω, δρα-σ-μό-ς, ἄ-δρα-σ-το-ς; δρᾱ-π-έτη-ς</lang>
fr. Caus. {%drā-p-aya-ti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22979<pc>0439-c<k1>drAk<k2>drAk
{%Drāk,%}¦ ind. (fr. rt. 2. {%drā + añc%}), quickly, speedily,
instantly, immediately, shortly, soon. {%—Drāg-bhṛ-%}
{%taka, am,%} n. water just drawn from the well.
<LEND>

<L>22980<pc>0439-c<k1>drARa<k2>drARa
{%Drāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ flown, run away.
<LEND>

<L>22981<pc>0439-c<k1>drAkzA<k2>drAkzA
{#drAkzA#}¦ {%drākṣā,%} f. a vine, grape; ({%as, ī, %}
[Page0440-a+ 75]
{%am%}), made of grapes; [cf. Hib. <nsi>dearc,</nsi> ‘a berry;’
perhaps Old Germ. <nsi>drūbo;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>traube;</nsi>
Lat. <nsi>racemus</nsi> with dropped <nsi>d.</nsi>] {%—Drākṣā-prastha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a town. {%—Drākṣā-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
furnished with grapes. {%—Drākṣā-rasa, as,%} m. grape-
juice, wine. {%—Drākṣā-latā,%} f. a vine, vine-tendril.
<LEND>

<L>22982<pc>0440-a<k1>drAK<k2>drAK
{#drAK#}¦ {%drākh,%} cl. 1. P. {%drākhati,%} &c., to
become dry or arid; to be able or com-
petent or sufficient; to adorn; to prohibit or pre-
vent; [cf. rts. {%dhrākh%} and 1. {%tṛṣ;%} Old Germ.
<nsi>truk-an;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>drig, dryg, drī;</nsi> Old Iceland.
<nsi>thurka,</nsi> ‘to dry.’]
<LEND>

<L>22983<pc>0440-a<k1>drAG<k2>drAG
{#drAG#}¦ {%drāgh,%} cl. 1. A. {%drāghate,%} &c. (pro-
bably a Nom. fr. {%dīrgha,%} but regarded as
a separate rt.), to be able or competent; to stretch,
lengthen; to exert one's self; to be tired or fatigued;
to tire, vex, torment; to roam about, stroll.
<LEND>

<L>22984<pc>0440-a<k1>drAGaya<k2>drAGaya
{%Drāghaya%}¦ (fr. {%dīrgha%}), Nom. P. {%drāghayati,%}
&c., to lengthen, extend, stretch; to tarry, delay, to
be slow or dilatory.
<LEND>

<L>22985<pc>0440-a<k1>drAGita<k2>drAGita
{%Drāghita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lengthened, made long.
<LEND>

<L>22986<pc>0440-a<k1>drAGiman<k2>drAGiman
{%Drāghiman, ā,%}¦ m. length; a degree of longitude.
{%—Drāghima-vat, ān, atī, at,%} long, lengthy.
<LEND>

<L>22987<pc>0440-a<k1>drAGizWa<k2>drAGizWa
{%Drāghiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (superl. fr. {%dīrgha%}),
longest, very long.
<LEND>

<L>22988<pc>0440-a<k1>drAGIyas<k2>drAGIyas
{%Drāghīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. fr. {%dīrgha%}),
longer, very or exceedingly long.
<LEND>

<L>22989<pc>0440-a<k1>drAGman<k2>drAGman
{%Drāghman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= drāghiman.%}
<LEND>

<L>22990<pc>0440-a<k1>drANkz<k2>drANkz
{#drANkz#}¦ {%drāṅkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%drāṅkṣati,%} &c.,
to utter a discordant sound; to croak, to
caw &c. (as a bird); to desire, wish, long for; [cf.
{%dhrāṅkṣ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22991<pc>0440-a<k1>drANgavaDa<k2>drANgavaDa
{#drANgavaDa#}¦ {%drāṅgavadha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>22992<pc>0440-a<k1>drAq<k2>drAq
{#drAq#}¦ {%drāḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%drāḍate,%} &c., to
divide, split, pierce, pull to pieces, &c.; to
go to pieces; [cf. {%dhrāḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>22993<pc>0440-a<k1>drApa<k2>drApa
{#drApa#}¦ {%drāpa, as,%} m. mud, mire; heaven, sky;
a fool, blockhead, an idiot; a N. of Śiva with his hair
twisted or matted; a small shell, Cypræa Moneta.
<LEND>

<L>22994<pc>0440-a<k1>drApi<k2>drApi<h>1
{#drApi#} 1¦. {%drāpi, is,%} m., Ved. a mantle,
garment.
<LEND>

<L>22995<pc>0440-a<k1>drApi<k2>drApi<h>2
{#drApi#} 2¦. {%drāpi, is,%} m. (according to Mahī-
dhara fr. the Caus. of rt. 2. {%drā%}), Ved. ‘one who
causes to run,’ epithet of Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>22996<pc>0440-a<k1>drAmila<k2>drAmila
{#drAmila#}¦ {%drāmila, as,%} m. (fr. {%dramila%}), ‘born
in Dramila,’ N. of the Muni Cāṇakya; (also {%dromiṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>22997<pc>0440-a<k1>drAyuDa<k2>drAyuDa
{#drAyuDa#}¦ {%drāyudha%} (?), a peculiar species of
horse.
<LEND>

<L>22998<pc>0440-a<k1>drAva<k2>drAva
{#drAva#}¦ {%drāva, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%dru%}), flight,
retreat; speed, going quickly; running, flowing;
fusing, liquefaction; heat. {%—Drāva-kara, am,%} n. a
kind of borax, a flux.
<LEND>

<L>22999<pc>0440-a<k1>drAvaka<k2>drAvaka
{%Drāvaka, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing to
run; solvent; captivating, enchanting; cunning;
({%as%}), m. a flux to assist the fusion of metals; a kind
of stone, a loadstone; a thief; a wit, wag, sharp or
clever man; a libertine, a lecher; a kind of Rasa or
sentiment; ({%ikā%}), f. saliva (as ‘flowing’); ({%am%}),
n. bee's wax (as ‘melting’); a drug employed in
diseases of the spleen. {%—Drāvaka-kanda, as,%} m. a
kind of bulbous plant ({%= taila-kanda%}).
<LEND>

<L>23000<pc>0440-a<k1>drAvaRa<k2>drAvaRa
{%Drāvaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ putting to flight, causing to
run or retreat; fusing; ({%am%}), n. the act of causing to
fly or retreat, putting to flight; fusing, distilling;
the fruit of Strychnos Potatorum, used for purifying
water; the clearing-nut.
<LEND>

<L>23001<pc>0440-a<k1>drAvayatsaKa<k2>drAvayatsaKa
{%Drāvayat-sakha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. causing a com-
panion to go quickly; carrying a rider quickly away.
<LEND>

<L>23002<pc>0440-a<k1>drAvayARa<k2>drAvayARa
{%Drāvayāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (part. fr. the Caus.), put-
ting to flight, causing to run.
<LEND>

<L>23003<pc>0440-a<k1>drAvayitnu<k2>drAvayitnu
{%Drāvayitnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. causing to run or to
make haste.
<LEND>

<L>23004<pc>0440-a<k1>drAvita<k2>drAvita
{%Drāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to run or fly, put to
flight, chased, driven away; melted, liquefied; softened.
<LEND>

<L>23005<pc>0440-a<k1>drAvya<k2>drAvya
{%Drāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made to run, to be set
[Page0440-b+ 76]
in motion, to be put to flight; fusible, liquefiable, to
be made fluid.
<LEND>

<L>23006<pc>0440-b<k1>drAviqa<k2>drAviqa
{#drAviqa#}¦ {%drāviḍa, as, ī, am,%} Drāviḍian, be-
longing to the Draviḍas, a Draviḍa; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
Draviḍa people and their country (properly the coast
of Coromandel from Madras to Cape Comorin, or the
country in which Tamul is spoken); ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman
of Drāviḍa or rather of the south, (the name is applied
to a class of Brāhmanical tribes called the five Drāviḍa
Brāhmans, comprehending all those of the peninsula,
i. e. Drāviḍa, Karṇāta, Gujerāta, Mahārāṣṭra or
Marāṭha, and Telinga); a patronymic from Draviḍa;
N. of a scholiast of the Amara-koṣa; a particular
number; Curcuma Zedoaria {%(= vedha-mukhya, =%}
{%karcūra); (ī),%} f. cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>23007<pc>0440-b<k1>drAviqaka<k2>drAviqaka
{%Drāviḍaka, as,%}¦ m. zedoary, Curcuma Zedoaria;
({%am%}), n. black salt {%(= viḍ-lavaṇa)%}. {%—Drāviḍa-%}
{%bhūtika, as,%} m. Curcuma Zedoaria.
<LEND>

<L>23008<pc>0440-b<k1>drAviRodasa<k2>drAviRodasa
{#drAviRodasa#}¦ {%drāviṇodasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dra-%}
{%viṇo-das%}), Ved. coming from or belonging to those
who present gifts, i. e. from sacrificers; relating to
Draviṇo-das, i. e. Agni.
<LEND>

<L>23009<pc>0440-b<k1>drAvita<k2>drAvita
{#drAvita#}¦ {%drāvita.%} See under {%drāva,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>23010<pc>0440-b<k1>drAh<k2>drAh
{#drAh#}¦ {%drāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%drāhate,%} &c., to wake;
to deposit, pledge, put or cast down.
<LEND>

<L>23011<pc>0440-b<k1>drAhyAyaRa<k2>drAhyAyaRa
{#drAhyAyaRa#}¦ {%drāhyāyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of an
author of certain Kalpa-sūtras. {%—Drāhyāyaṇa-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n. the Sūtras of Drāhyāyaṇa. {%—Drāhyāyaṇa-%}
{%sūtra-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a commentary on the
preceding work by Dhanvin.
<LEND>

<L>23012<pc>0440-b<k1>drAhyAyaRaka<k2>drAhyAyaRaka
{%Drāhyāyaṇaka, am,%}¦ n. the Sūtras of Drāhyāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>23013<pc>0440-b<k1>drAhyAyaRi<k2>drAhyAyaRi
{%Drāhyāyaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Drāh-
yāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>23014<pc>0440-b<k1>drAhyAyaRIya<k2>drAhyAyaRIya
{%Drāhyāyaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to Drāhyā-
yaṇa, composed by him.
<LEND>

<L>23015<pc>0440-b<k1>drimila<k2>drimila
{#drimila#}¦ {%drimila, as,%} m., N. of a lexicogra-
pher; (various reading for {%dramila,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>23016<pc>0440-b<k1>dru<k2>dru<h>1
{#dru#} 1¦. {%dru,%} cl. 5. P. {%druṇoti,%} &c., to hurt,
injure, wound or kill; to repent; to go; [cf.
Old Germ. <nsi>drug, ga-driuzit, ar-driuzit.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23017<pc>0440-b<k1>dru<k2>dru<h>2
{#dru#} 2¦. {%dru%} (connected with rts. 1. {%drā%} and
{%dram%}), cl. 1. P. (in the poetry of the later
language also A.) {%dravati, -te, dudrāva, dudruve,%}
{%droṣyati, -te, adudruvat%} (Ved. {%adudrot, dudra-%}
{%vat%}), {%drotum,%} to run, make haste, run away, retreat,
fly; to run up to, rush, attack, assault quickly (with
acc.); to move, go; to become fluid, dissolve, melt;
to distil or ooze; to drop: Caus. P. (ep. also A.) {%drā-%}
{%vayati (-te),%} Aor. {%adudravat%} or {%adidravat,%} &c., to
cause to run or flow; to cause to run away, put to
flight; to make fluid, melt; Ved. A. {%dravayate,%} &c.,
to run, flow: Desid. {%dudrūṣati;%} Desid. of Caus. {%du-%}
{%drāvayiṣati%} or {%didrāvayiṣati:%} Intens. {%dodrū-%}
{%yate, dodroti;%} [cf. Goth. <nsi>drib,</nsi> ‘to drive,’ fr. <nsi>drā-</nsi>
<nsi>vayati:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>driopan, dropa:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>trofo, trauf, traufi, triufan:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>drebo,</nsi> ‘I trem-
ble;’ <nsi>drimba,</nsi> ‘it drops;’ <nsi>pa-dribbà,</nsi> ‘running of the
eyes:’ Hib. <nsi>driogaim,</nsi> ‘I trickle;’ <nsi>drabh,</nsi> ‘a chariot:’
probably Germ. <nsi>tau,</nsi> ‘dew,’ from original <nsi>trau,</nsi> ‘the
river Drau:’ probably also Lat. <nsi>gruere</nsi> in <nsi>in-gruere</nsi>
and <nsi>ruere.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23018<pc>0440-b<k1>dru<k2>dru<h>3
3. {%dru, us, us, u,%}¦ at the end of a comp., cf. {%mita-%}
{%d˚, raghu-d˚, śata-d˚; (us),%} f. going, motion.
<LEND>

<L>23019<pc>0440-b<k1>druta<k2>druta
{%Druta, as, ā, am,%}¦ quick, speedy, swift; quickly
pronounced and therefore indistinct; flown, escaped,
run or running away; scattered, diffused; liquid,
dissolved, melted, fluid; ({%as%}), m. a scorpion; a tree
[cf. {%druṇa%} and {%druma%}]; ({%am%}), ind. quickly, rapidly,
instantly, immediately, without delay. {%—Druta-tara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} quicker, swifter; ({%am%}), ind. very quickly,
as quickly as possible. {%—Drutatara-gati, is, is, i,%}
having a very swift course, quicker in motion. {%—Druta-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. melting, fusion. {%—Druta-pada, as, ā, am,%}
quick of step, going quickly; ({%am%}), ind. a quick pace
or step, quickly; ({%am%}), n. a kind of metre consisting
of four lines of twelve syllables each. {%—Druta-bodha, %}
[Page0440-c+ 80]
{%as,%} m. ‘quick understanding,’ N. of a grammar.
{%—Drutabodhikā,%} f., N. of a modern commentary
on the Raghu-vaṃśa. {%—Druta-madhyā,%} f. ‘quick
in the middle,’ a kind of metre consisting of two
lines of twenty-three syllables each. {%—Druta-varāha-%}
{%kula, am,%} n. a herd of flying boars. {%—Druta-%}
{%vikrama, as, ā, am,%} having a quick step. {%—Druta-%}
{%vilambita, as, ā, am,%} quick and slow alternately;
({%am%}), n. or {%druta-vilambitaka, am,%} n. a kind of
metre consisting of four lines of twelve syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>23020<pc>0440-c<k1>druti<k2>druti
{%Druti, is,%}¦ f., N. of the wife of Nakta and mother
of Gaya.
<LEND>

<L>23021<pc>0440-c<k1>dru<k2>dru<h>4
{#dru#} 4¦. {%dru, us, u,%} m. n. {%= dāru%} (said to be fr.
rt. {%dṝ%}), wood, any implement made of wood, as a
cup or an oar; ({%us%}), m. (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%dru,%} to
go or grow), a tree; a branch; [cf. 2. {%dāru;%} Zend
<nsi>dru, dāuru,</nsi> ‘wood, spear;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">δρῦ-ς, δρῠ-μά, δρῡ-μό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δρυ-τόμο-ς, δέν-δρε-ο-ν, δρία, δόρυ, δούρειος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δουράτ-εο-ς, δρύτη, δροίτη;</lang> Goth. <nsi>triu, triv-ein-s,</nsi>
‘wooden;’ Old Sax. <nsi>trio,</nsi> ‘wood, tree;’ Eng. <nsi>tree;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>dre†vo,</nsi> ‘tree;’ Lith. <nsi>derva.</nsi>] {%—Dru-kilima,%}
{%am,%} n. a tree, a sort of pine, Pinus Deva-dāru; [cf.
{%kilima.%}] {%—Dru-ghaṇa%} or {%dru-ghana, as,%} m. a
wooden mace, mallet, hammer; an iron weapon
made like a carpenter's hammer; an axe, a hatchet;
a kind of plant [cf. {%bhūmi-campaka%}]; an epithet
of Brahmā. {%—Dru-ghnī,%} f. a hatchet for cutting
wood. {%—Dru-ṇasa, as, ī, am,%} ‘having a nose like
a tree,’ large-nosed. {%—Dru-ṇaha%} or {%dru-naha, as,%}
m. a scabbard, the sheath of a sword. {%—Dru-pada,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. a pillar or post of wood, a pillar in
general; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king of the Pāñcālas, he
was the son of Pṛṣata and was father of Dhṛ-
ṣṭa-dyumna, of Śikhaṇḍin, of Śikhaṇḍinī, and of
Kṛṣṇā the wife of the Pāṇḍu princes, hence called
Draupadī; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a Ṛc; ({%ī%}), f. having large
feet. {%—Drupadātmajā (˚da-āt˚),%} f. ‘daughter of
Dru-pada,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇā or Draupadī, some-
times identified with Umā. {%—Drupadāditya (˚da-%}
{%ād˚), as,%} m. a form of the Sun. {%—Dru-padī,%} f. a splay-
footed female. {%—Dru-mat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished
with wood. {%—Dru-ṣad, t, t, t,%} or {%dru-ṣadvan,%}
{%ā, varī, a%} (fr. {%dru-sad%}), Ved. sitting in or on a
piece of wood or a tree. {%—Dru-sallaka, as,%} m. a
kind of tree. {%—Drv-anna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one
whose food is wood.
<LEND>

<L>23022<pc>0440-c<k1>druma<k2>druma
{%Druma, as,%}¦ m. (said by some to be for {%druhma%}
fr. rt. {%dṛh%}), a tree in general; a tree of Svarga or
paradise; N. of a prince of the Kim-puruṣas; a
prince of the Yakṣas; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Dru-%}
{%ma-kinnara-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a prince of the
Gandharvas. {%—Druma-kinnara-rāja, as,%} m., N.
of Druma who was king of the Kin-naras. {%—Druma-%}
{%kinnararāja-paripṛcchā,%} f. ‘the questioning of
Druma, king of the Kin-naras,’ N. of a Buddhist
work. {%—Druma-nakha, as,%} m. ‘tree-nail,’ a thorn.
{%—Druma-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of wood,
wooden. {%—Druma-ratna-śākhā-prabha, as,%} m.,
N. of a prince of the Kin-naras. {%—Druma-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} overgrown with trees, woody. {%—Druma-%}
{%valka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the bark of a tree.
{%—Druma-vyādhi, is,%} m. ‘tree-disease,’ lac, resin.
{%—Druma-śīrṣa, am,%} n. ‘tree-head,’ a sort of
decoration on the upper part of a building or wall.
{%—Druma-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. ‘the best of trees,’ epi-
thet of the palm tree {%(= tāla)%}. {%—Druma-ṣaṇḍa,%}
{%am,%} n. an assemblage of trees; [cf. {%taru-ṣaṇḍa%}
and {%taru-khaṇḍa.%}] {%—Druma-sena, as,%} m., N. of
a king (identified with the Asura Gaviṣṭha). {%—Dru-%}
{%māmaya (˚ma-ām˚), as,%} m. ‘tree-disease,’ lac, the
animal dye, resin; [cf. {%druma-vyādhi.%}] {%—Drumāri%}
{%(˚ma-ari), is,%} m. ‘the enemy of trees,’ an epithet of
the elephant. {%—Drumālaya (˚ma-āl˚), as,%} m. a place
of shelter or dwelling in trees. {%—Drumāśraya (˚ma-%}
{%āś˚), as, ā, am,%} seeking shelter or dwelling in trees;
({%as%}), m. a lizard, chameleon. {%—Drumeśvara (˚ma-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. ‘the king of trees,’ an epithet of the
Pārijāta; the palm tree; an epithet of the Moon.
{%—Drumotpala (˚ma-ut˚), as,%} m. the tree Pteros-
permum Acerifolium ({%= karṇi-kāra%}).
<LEND>
[Page0441-a+ 79]

<L>23023<pc>0441-a<k1>drumara<k2>drumara
{%Drumara, as,%}¦ m. a thorn.
<LEND>

<L>23024<pc>0441-a<k1>drumAya<k2>drumAya
{%Drumāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%drumāyate,%} &c., to pass or
be counted or considered as a tree.
<LEND>

<L>23025<pc>0441-a<k1>drumiRI<k2>drumiRI
{%Drumiṇī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%drumin%} derived fr. {%druma%}), an
assemblage of trees, a forest.
<LEND>

<L>23026<pc>0441-a<k1>drumila<k2>drumila
{%Drumila, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Dānava who was prince
of Saubha &c.; [cf. {%dramila%} and {%drimila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23027<pc>0441-a<k1>druvaya<k2>druvaya
{%Druvaya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a wooden vessel, the wooden
part of a drum; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a measure.
<LEND>

<L>23028<pc>0441-a<k1>druq<k2>druq
{#druq#}¦ {%druḍ,%} cl. 1. and 6. P. {%droḍati%} and
{%druḍati,%} &c., to sink, perish; [cf. rt. {%drūḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23029<pc>0441-a<k1>druR<k2>druR
{#druR#}¦ {%druṇ,%} cl. 6. P. {%druṇati,%} &c., to make
crooked or curved, to bend; to go, move,
approach; to hurt, injure, kill.
<LEND>

<L>23030<pc>0441-a<k1>druRa<k2>druRa
{%Druṇa, as,%}¦ m. a scorpion; a bee; a rogue, cheat;
({%ī%}), f. a small or female tortoise; an oval vessel or
basin of wood &c. (shaped like a boat and used for
pouring or baling out water; cf. {%droṇa%} and {%droṇī%});
a bucket, a basket; a centipede; ({%ā%}), f. a bow-string;
({%am%}), n. a bow; a sword, scimitar; [cf. {%dru-ṇaha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23031<pc>0441-a<k1>druRi<k2>druRi
{%Druṇi, is,%}¦ f. {%= druṇī, droṇī,%} an oval water-basin
of wood or stone &c.; a bucket, basket.
<LEND>

<L>23032<pc>0441-a<k1>drumm<k2>drumm
{#drumm#}¦ {%drumm,%} cl. 1. P. {%drummati,%} &c.,
Ved. to go.
<LEND>

<L>23033<pc>0441-a<k1>druh<k2>druh<h>1
{#druh#} 1¦. {%druh,%} cl. 4. P. (ep. also A.) {%druh-%}
{%yati, dudroha, drohiṣyati, dhrokṣyati,%}
{%adruhat, drohitum, drogdhum%} and {%droḍhum,%} to
hurt, seek to hurt or injure or grieve, seek to do
harm, to plot revengefully or maliciously, to contrive,
machinate or meditate mischief (with dat., but also
with gen., loc., acc.); to bear malice or hatred: Caus.
{%drohayati, -yitum:%} Desid. {%dudrohiṣati, dudru-%}
{%hiṣati, dudhrukṣati;%} [cf. rt. 1. {%drū:%} Goth. <nsi>driu-</nsi>
<nsi>gan, dulgs:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>trucyan:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>triu-</nsi>
<nsi>gan, drawyan:</nsi> Lett. <nsi>draudeht,</nsi> ‘to menace:’ Lat.
<nsi>trux, atrox:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>driuch,</nsi> ‘anger;’ <nsi>droch,</nsi> ‘evil.’]
<LEND>

<L>23034<pc>0441-a<k1>drugDa<k2>drugDa
{%Drugdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured, plotted against; an
injurer; ({%am%}), n. offence, injury.
<LEND>

<L>23035<pc>0441-a<k1>druh<k2>druh<h>2
2. {%druh, dhruk,%}¦ or (according to the grammarians)
{%dhruṭ,%} (at the end of a comp.) injuring, having injured,
hurting, acting as an enemy against; (in the older
language often also in its uncompounded state) one
who hurts or injures, an evil or hostile being or
spirit; ({%k%}), f. injury, damage. {%—Druhan-tara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. conquering one who injures or an evil spirit.
<LEND>

<L>23036<pc>0441-a<k1>druhA<k2>druhA
{%Druhā,%}¦ f., Ved. (according to Sāy. inst. sing. of 2.
{%druh%}), injury, damage.
<LEND>

<L>23037<pc>0441-a<k1>druhu<k2>druhu
{%Druhu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. = 2. {%druh,%} injuring, hurting.
<LEND>

<L>23038<pc>0441-a<k1>druhya<k2>druhya
{%Druhya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his
descendants.
<LEND>

<L>23039<pc>0441-a<k1>druhyat<k2>druhyat
{%Druhyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ injuring, hurting, attacking,
assailing, defying; tyrannizing over, oppressing.
<LEND>

<L>23040<pc>0441-a<k1>druhyu<k2>druhyu
{%Druhyu, avas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people; (in epic
poetry Druhyu is with Yadu a son of Yayāti, some-
times wrongly written {%duhyu.%})
<LEND>

<L>23041<pc>0441-a<k1>druhvan<k2>druhvan
{%Druhvan, ā, varī, a,%}¦ Ved. hurting, injuring;
[cf. {%a-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23042<pc>0441-a<k1>drogDavya<k2>drogDavya
{%Drogdhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be injured or hurt.
<LEND>

<L>23043<pc>0441-a<k1>drogDf<k2>drogDf
{%Drogdhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ an injurer, one who
seeks to hurt, malevolent.
<LEND>

<L>23044<pc>0441-a<k1>droGa<k2>droGa
{%Drogha, as,%}¦ m. injury, damage; [cf. {%a-d˚.%}]
{%—Drogha-mitra, as,%} m., Ved. a mischievous friend.
{%—Drogha-vacas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%drogha-vāc, k, k,%}
{%k,%} Ved. using injurious or malicious words; [cf. {%a-d.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23045<pc>0441-a<k1>droha<k2>droha
{%Droha, as,%}¦ m. injury, insidious wounding, hostile
action, mischief, malice, perfidy, treachery, trespass;
wrong, offence; rebellion; [cf. {%a-d˚.%}] {%—Droha-%}
{%cintana, am,%} n. injurious design, malice prepense;
the wish or thought or attempt to injure. {%—Droha-%}
{%buddhi, is, is, i,%} maliciously minded, malevolent,
one whose mind is set on mischief. {%—Droha-vṛtti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} malicious, wicked; [cf. {%a-d˚.%}] {%—Drohāṭa%}
({%˚ha-aṭa%} or {%-āṭa%}), {%as,%} m. a false man; a religious
impostor, an impostor; a hunter, deer-killer; a sort
of metre, the Doha or stanza of Hindī poetry.
<LEND>

<L>23046<pc>0441-a<k1>drohita<k2>drohita
{%Drohita, as, ā, am%}¦ (adj. fr. {%droha%} above), hostile,
maliciously inclined.
<LEND>

<L>23047<pc>0441-a<k1>drohin<k2>drohin
{%Drohin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ hurting, harming, injuring, en-
deavouring to hurt, malignant, malicious; rebellious.
<LEND>
[Page0441-b+ 73]

<L>23048<pc>0441-b<k1>druha<k2>druha
{#druha#}¦ {%druha, as,%} m. a son; a lake [cf. {%draha%}];
({%ī%}), f. a daughter.
<LEND>

<L>23049<pc>0441-b<k1>druhaRa<k2>druhaRa
{#druhaRa#}¦ {%druhaṇa%} or {%druhiṇa, as,%} m. (said to
be either fr. rt. 1. {%druh%} or {%= dru-ghaṇa%}), an epithet
of Brahmā; of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>23050<pc>0441-b<k1>drU<k2>drU<h>1
{#drU#} 1¦. {%drū,%} cl. 9. P. {%drūṇāti,%} &c., to raise
the arm or hand in order to strike, &c.; cl. 5.
P. {%drūṇoti,%} &c., to hurt, injure, wound, kill; to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>23051<pc>0441-b<k1>drU<k2>drU<h>2
{#drU#} 2¦. {%drū, ūs,%} m. f. ? (said to be fr. rt. 2.
{%dru%}), gold; taking any shape at will.
<LEND>

<L>23052<pc>0441-b<k1>drUGaRa<k2>drUGaRa
{#drUGaRa#}¦ {%drū-ghaṇa, as,%} m. {%= dru-ghana,%} a
sort of hatchet, an iron club; an epithet of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>23053<pc>0441-b<k1>drURa<k2>drURa
{#drURa#}¦ {%drūṇa, as,%} m. {%= druṇa,%} a scorpion;
({%am%}), n. a bow.
<LEND>

<L>23054<pc>0441-b<k1>drUq<k2>drUq
{#drUq#}¦ {%drūḍ%} or {%drūḷ,%} cl. 1. P. {%drūḷati,%} &c.,
Ved. to go; [cf. rt. {%druḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23055<pc>0441-b<k1>drek<k2>drek
{#drek#}¦ {%drek%} [cf. rt. {%dhrek%}], cl. 1. A. {%drekate,%}
&c., to sound; to manifest joy or high
spirits by noise; to grow, increase.
<LEND>

<L>23056<pc>0441-b<k1>drekka<k2>drekka
{#drekka#}¦ {%drekka%} or {%drekkāṇa%} or {%dreṣkāṇa =%}
{%dṛkāṇa,%} q. v. {%—Dreṣkāṇādhyāya (˚ṇa-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the chapter on the Dṛkāṇas,’ N. of a chapter
of the Bṛhaj-jātaka by Varāha-mihira.
<LEND>

<L>23057<pc>0441-b<k1>dreSya<k2>dreSya
{#dreSya#}¦ {%dreśya, as, ā, am%} (probably fr. a form
{%driś%} for rt. 1. {%dṛś%}), visible, {%= dṛśya.%}
<LEND>

<L>23058<pc>0441-b<k1>drE<k2>drE
{#drE#}¦ {%drai,%} cl. 1. P. {%drāyati,%} &c., to sleep;
[cf. 1. {%drā;%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">δαρθ-άν-ω, ἔ-δραθ-ο-ν;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>dor-mi-o;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>dre†-m-a-ti,</nsi> ‘to sleep;’ Old
Sax. <nsi>drom;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>dream;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>traum.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23059<pc>0441-b<k1>droRa<k2>droRa
{#droRa#}¦ {%droṇa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 2.
{%dru%}), a wooden vessel or cup, a bucket, a tub; a
trough; a Soma vessel; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a measure of
capacity, = 4 Āḍhakas, = 16 Puṣkalas, = 128 Kuñcis,
= 1024 Muṣṭis, or = 200 Palas, = (1/20) Kumbha, or =
(1/16) Khārī, = 4 Āḍhakas, or = 2 Āḍhakas, = (1/2) Śūrpa,
= 64 Śeras, or = 32 Śeras; a measure for measuring
fields, as much land as is sown with a droṇa of corn;
({%as%}), m. a lake or large piece of water of 400 poles
length; a cloud abounding in water; a peculiar kind
of cloud (from which the rain streams forth as from
a bucket); a raven, or perhaps the carrion-crow [cf.
{%droṇa-kāka%}]; a scorpion [cf. {%druṇa%}]; a small tree
bearing white flowers, commonly Ghalaghasiyā and
Halakasiyā; N. of a man; N. of a Brāhman said to
have been generated by Bharad-vāja in a bucket or
wooden vessel, (he was called Droṇācārya as military
preceptor of both the Kuru and Pāṇḍu princes; after-
wards he became king of a part of Pāñcāla and
general of the Kurus against the Pāṇḍu princes; he
was husband of Kṛpī and father of Aśvatthāman);
N. of one of the four sons of Maṇḍa-pāla and Jaritā
(who were born as birds); N. of one of the eight
Vasus (whose children by Abhi-mati were Harṣa,
Śoka, and Bhaya); N. of a Brāhman; N. of a
mountain; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of shrub [cf. {%droṇa-%}
{%puṣpī%}]; N. of a daughter of Siṃha-hanu; ({%ī%}), f.
any oval vessel made of wood &c. (shaped like a
boat and used for holding or pouring out water, as a
bathing-tub, a baling-vessel, a basin, bucket, a water-
ing-pot, &c.); a trough or trough-like rack for
feeding cattle; a measure of capacity, = 2 Śūrpas, =
128 Śeras; the hollow of two mountains, the valley
or chasm between them; N. of two plants, the
indigo plant and a sort of coloquintida ({%= indra-%}
{%cirbhiṭī%}); N. of a country; of a river; a kind of
salt brought from Droṇī; [cf. {%droṇī-lavaṇa, dro-%}
{%ṇīja, droṇeya;%} cf. also Zend <nsi>draona.</nsi>] {%—Droṇa-%}
{%kalaśa, as,%} m. a large wooden vessel for the Soma.
{%—Droṇa-kāka%} or {%droṇa-kākala, as,%} m. a raven;
[cf. {%droṇa.%}] {%—Droṇa-kṣīrā,%} f. a cow yielding a
droṇa of milk. {%—Droṇa-gandhikā,%} f. a kind of
plant. {%—Droṇa-ghā,%} f. (corrupted fr. {%droṇa-dughā%}),
[Page0441-c+ 79]
{%= droṇa-dughā,%} a cow yielding a droṇa of milk.
{%—Droṇa-cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. arranged in the form of
a droṇa. {%—Droṇa-dugdhā%} or {%droṇa-dughā,%} f. a
cow yielding a droṇa, i. e. much milk. {%—Droṇa-padī,%}
f. having feet like a droṇa (oval-shaped ?). {%—Droṇa-%}
{%parṇī,%} f. the tree Musa Sapientum. {%—Droṇa-par-%}
{%van, a,%} n. ‘the Droṇa section,’ N. of the seventh
book of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Droṇa-puṣpī,%} f. a
kind of small shrub ({%= kumbha-yoni, kurumbā,%}
{%kurumbikā, kharva-pattrā, citra-pattrikā, cit-%}
{%rākṣupa, su-puṣpā,%} commonly {%gūmā%}); another
plant ({%= go-śīrṣaka,%} commonly {%ghalaghasiyā%}).
{%—Droṇa-maya, as, ī, am,%} full of droṇas, consisting
only of a droṇa. {%—Droṇa-mānā,%} f. {%= droṇa-dug-%}
{%dhā,%} q. v. {%—Droṇa-mukha, am,%} n. the capital of a
district, the chief of 400 villages; the end of a
valley; (also read {%droṇī-mukha.%}) {%—Droṇa-megha,%}
{%as,%} m. a peculiar kind of cloud from which the rain
streams forth as from a watering-pot; [cf. {%droṇa.%}]
{%—Droṇam-paca, as, ā, am,%} ‘one who cooks a
droṇa,’ i. e. liberal in entertaining. {%—Droṇa-vṛṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} f. a peculiar kind of rain streaming forth from a
cloud as from a droṇa; [cf. {%droṇa%} and {%droṇa-%}
{%megha.%}] {%—Droṇa-śarma-pada, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Droṇa-sāc, k, k, k,%} Ved. fixed on or
belonging to a droṇa. {%—Droṇa-siṃha, as,%} m., N.
of a prince of the Vallabhī dynasty. {%—Droṇa-stūpa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Stūpa (said to be so called as con-
taining a droṇa holding certain relics of Śākya-muni).
{%—Droṇācārya (˚ṇa-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of Droṇa,
son of Bharad-vāja, as Ācārya or teacher of the
Kuru and Pāṇḍu princes. {%—Droṇāsa (˚ṇa-āsa), as,%}
m. ‘whose mouth is shaped like a droṇa (?),’ N.
of a demon who causes diseases; ({%āsa = āsan?,%}
perhaps {%= dīrgha-nāsa;%} cf. {%dru-ṇasa.%}) {%—Droṇā-%}
{%hāva (˚ṇa-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. using the box of
a chariot for a droṇa. {%—Droṇī-ja, am,%} n. {%= droṇī-%}
{%lavaṇa%}. {%—Droṇī-dala, as,%} m. Pandanus Odoratis-
simus. {%—Droṇī-padī,%} f. {%= droṇa-padī%}. {%—Droṇī-%}
{%mukha, as,%} m. {%= droṇa-mukha%}. {%—Droṇī-lavaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of salt coming from Droṇī. {%—Droṇo-%}
{%dana (˚ṇa-od˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of Siṃha-hanu
and uncle of Śākya-muni. {%—Droṇy-aśva, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having clouds ({%droṇī%}) for horses; (Sāy.) quickly
pervading. {%—Droṇy-āmaya, as,%} m. a disease of the
interior of the body, (the body being compared to a
hollow droṇī.)
<LEND>

<L>23060<pc>0441-c<k1>droRaka<k2>droRaka
{%Droṇaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl. ‘the inhabitants of a valley,’
N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>23061<pc>0441-c<k1>droRi<k2>droRi
{%Droṇi, is,%}¦ f. [cf. {%droṇī%} under {%droṇa%} above], any
oval vessel made of wood &c. in the shape of a
boat and used for holding and pouring out water, as
a tub, bucket, baling-vessel, watering-pot, &c.; N.
of a country.
<LEND>

<L>23062<pc>0441-c<k1>droRikA<k2>droRikA
{%Droṇikā,%}¦ f. a tub, bucket, trough, &c.; (meta-
phorically) the tongue bent in the form of a droṇa
(by which the sound {%ṣ%} is produced); the indigo
plant.
<LEND>

<L>23063<pc>0441-c<k1>droReya<k2>droReya
{%Droṇeya, am,%}¦ n. {%= droṇī-lavaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>23064<pc>0441-c<k1>droRya<k2>droRya
{%Droṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to a bucket,
tub, trough, rack, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23065<pc>0441-c<k1>drORa<k2>drORa
{%Drauṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ containing a droṇa.
<LEND>

<L>23066<pc>0441-c<k1>drORAyana<k2>drORAyana
{%Drauṇāyana, as,%}¦ m. or {%drauṇāyani, is,%} m. a
patronymic of Aśvatthāman son of Droṇa.
<LEND>

<L>23067<pc>0441-c<k1>drORi<k2>drORi
{%Drauṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Aśvatthāman; of
Vyāsa in a future Dvāpara.
<LEND>

<L>23068<pc>0441-c<k1>drORika<k2>drORika
{%Drauṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ containing a droṇa; sown
with a droṇa of grain (as a field); ({%ī%}), f. a vessel
holding a droṇa by measure.
<LEND>

<L>23069<pc>0441-c<k1>drORI<k2>drORI
{%Drauṇī,%}¦ f. (a wrong form for {%droṇī%}), a trough,
tub, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23070<pc>0441-c<k1>dromiRa<k2>dromiRa
{#dromiRa#}¦ {%dromiṇa, as,%} m. {%= drāmila,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23071<pc>0441-c<k1>drOGaRa<k2>drOGaRa
{#drOGaRa#}¦ {%draughaṇa, as, ī, am,%} an adj. formed
fr. {%dru-ghaṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23072<pc>0441-c<k1>drOpada<k2>drOpada
{#drOpada#}¦ {%draupada, as,%} m. (fr. {%dru-pada%}), in
{%draupadāditya,%} a form of the Sun; ({%ī%}), f. a patro-
nymic of Kṛṣṇā, wife of the Pāṇḍu princes. {%—Drau-%}
{%padi-ja, as,%} m. (for {%draupadī-ja%}), a son of Draupadī.
{%—Draupadī-pramātha, as,%} m. the forcible abduc-
[Page0442-a+ 78]
tion of Draupadī; [cf. {%draupadī-haraṇa.%}] {%—Drau-%}
{%padī-vastrāharaṇa (˚ra-āh˚), am,%} n. ‘the seizure
of Draupadī's garments,’ N. of a poem by an unknown
author on the story told in Sabhā-p. 2186. {%—Drau-%}
{%padī-haraṇa, am,%} n. ‘forcible abduction of Draupadī,’
N. of a section of the Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 15492.
<LEND>

<L>23073<pc>0442-a<k1>drOpadeya<k2>drOpadeya
{%Draupadeya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of any of the
five sons of the five Pāṇḍu princes, viz. of Prati-
vindhya, son of Yudhi-ṣṭhira; of Suta-soma, son of
Bhīma; of Śruta-kīrtti or Śruta-karman, son of
Arjuna; of Śatānīka, son of Nakula; and of Śruta-
sena, son of Saha-deva.
<LEND>

<L>23074<pc>0442-a<k1>drOhya<k2>drOhya
{#drOhya#}¦ {%drauhya, as,%} m. (fr. {%druhya%}), a patro-
nymic from Druhya.
<LEND>

<L>23075<pc>0442-a<k1>drOhyava<k2>drOhyava
{%Drauhyava, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Druhyu.
<LEND>

<L>23076<pc>0442-a<k1>dva<k2>dva
{#dva#}¦ {%dva.%} See {%dvā%} and {%dvi.%}
<LEND>

<L>23077<pc>0442-a<k1>dvaka<k2>dvaka
{%Dvaka, au,%}¦ du. (fem. {%dvake%} or {%dvike%}), Ved. two
and two, two by two.
<LEND>

<L>23078<pc>0442-a<k1>dvanda<k2>dvanda
{#dvanda#}¦ {%dvanda, am,%} n. (fr. {%dvandva%}), a pair,
a couple; ({%as%}), m. a clock or plate on which the
hours are struck.
<LEND>

<L>23079<pc>0442-a<k1>dvandva<k2>dvandva
{#dvandva#}¦ {%dvandva, am,%} n. (a reduplicated form
fr. {%dva%}), a pair, brace, couple; a couple of animals
of different sexes, male and female; any two things
taken together, any pair of qualities or conditions
which are the opposite of one another (e. g. heat and
cold, happiness and misery, &c.); strife, contention,
bickering, dispute, quarrel, contest, fight; a fight
between two persons, a duel; doubt, uncertainty;
a stronghold, fortress; a secret; using sacrificial
vessels ?; ({%as%}), m. (rarely n.) a form of compound or
grammatical combination ({%samāsa%}) uniting two or
more words which if uncompounded would be in the
same case and connected by the conjunction ‘and,’
(this form of compound was called {%dvandva%} as
originally combining couples or pairs of things,
e. g. {%Rāma-lakṣmaṇau,%} Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa;
{%pāṇi-pādam,%} hand and foot); ({%as%}), m., N. of
several Ekāhas; the sign of the zodiac Gemini; a
species of disease, a complication of two disorders, a
compound affection of two humors [cf. {%nir-d˚%}];
({%am%} or {%ena%}), ind. two by two. {%—Dvandva-cara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} going about or living in couples; ({%as%}),
m. the ruddy goose, Anas Casarca. {%—Dvandva-cā-%}
{%rin, ī, iṇī, i,%} living in couples; ({%ī%}), m. the ruddy
goose. {%—Dvandva-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced or pro-
ceeding from morbid affection of two humors; pro-
ceeding from a pair &c.; arising from a quarrel,
occasioned by a dispute. {%—Dvandva-duḥkha, am,%}
n. pain arising from alternations (as of heat and cold,
pleasure and pain, &c.). {%—Dvandva-bhāva, as,%} m.
antagonism, discord. {%—Dvandva-bhinna, am,%} n.
separation of the sexes. {%—Dvandva-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
become doubtful, hesitating, irresolute. {%—Dvandva-%}
{%moha, as,%} m. trouble excited by doubt. {%—Dvandva-%}
{%yuddha, am,%} n. a duel, single combat. {%—Dvan-%}
{%dvayuddha-varṇana, am,%} n. ‘description of the
single combat,’ N. of the forty-first chapter of the
Krīḍā-khaṇḍa or second part of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa.
{%—Dvandva-yodhin, ī, inī, i,%} fighting in couples
or by single combat. {%—Dvandva-śas,%} ind. two by
two, in couples. {%—Dvandva-sahiṣṇu-tva, am,%} n.
ability of supporting opposites (as happiness and
misery &c.). {%—Dvandvātīta (˚va-at˚), as, ā, am,%}
gone beyond or freed from pairs of opposite worldly
affections. {%—Dvandvī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} engaged in
single combat or close fighting.
<LEND>

<L>23080<pc>0442-a<k1>dvandvin<k2>dvandvin
{%Dvandvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ forming a couple; opposed to
one another; contradictory, quarrelsome, antagonistic.
<LEND>

<L>23081<pc>0442-a<k1>dvaya<k2>dvaya
{#dvaya#}¦ {%dvaya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dva;%} in Śiśupāla-b.
III. 57. {%dvaye%} nom. pl. m. occurs), twofold, double,
of two kinds or sorts; ({%ī%}), f. a pair; ({%am%}), n. a pair,
couple, two things, both, a brace (chiefly used at end
of comps., e. g. {%go-dvayam,%} a couple of oxen); the
masc. and fem. gender (in grammar); twofold nature,
untruthfulness. {%—Dvaya-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} double-
tongued, insincere. {%—Dvaya-hīna, as, ā, am,%} desti-
tute of both (masc. and fem.) genders, i. e. neuter.
[Page0442-b+ 80]
{%—Dvayāgni (˚ya-ag˚), is,%} m. a kind of tree, =
{%pāṭhin, hrasvāgni,%} commonly {%rāñcitā,%} Plumbago
Zeylanica. {%—Dvayātiga (˚ya-at˚), as, ā, am,%} one
who has passed beyond or overcome the two bad
qualities, passion and ignorance, or who has sur-
mounted the several pairs of affection which disturb
the mind; ({%as%}), m. a saint, a holy or virtuous man.
{%—Dvayātmaka (˚ya-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} having a
twofold nature, appearing in a twofold manner.
<LEND>

<L>23082<pc>0442-b<k1>dvayat<k2>dvayat
{%Dvayat, dvayas.%}¦ See {%a-d˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>23083<pc>0442-b<k1>dvayAvin<k2>dvayAvin
{%Dvayāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. false, dishonest.
<LEND>

<L>23084<pc>0442-b<k1>dvayu<k2>dvayu
{%Dvayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. false, dishonest; [cf. {%a-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23085<pc>0442-b<k1>dvara<k2>dvara
{#dvara#}¦ {%dvara, as, ā, am,%} or {%dvari, is, is, i,%} or
{%dvarin, ī, iṇī, i%} (fr. rt. {%dvṛ%}), Ved. obstructing.
<LEND>

<L>23086<pc>0442-b<k1>dvA<k2>dvA
{#dvA#}¦ {%dvā,%} old nom. du. m. fr. {%dva = dvi,%}
two (in comp. before other numerals and before {%ja%}
and {%para%}). {%—Dvācatvāriṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the 42nd.
{%—Dvā-catvāriṃśat, t,%} or {%dvā-catvāriṃśati, is,%} f.,
42. {%—Dvā-ja, as,%} m. a son of two fathers, (formed
to explain one derivation of {%bhara-dvāja,%} which is
however more properly deduced from {%bharat%} and
{%vāja.%}) {%—Dvātriṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the 32nd; consist-
ing of 32. {%—Dvā-triṃśat, t,%} f., 32. {%—Dvātriṃśad-%}
{%akṣarin, ī,%} m. a book or composition written in
Ślokas (consisting of 32 syllables). {%—Dvātriṃśad-%}
{%rātra, am,%} n., scil. {%sattram,%} a sacrifice lasting 32
days. {%—Dvātriṃśal-lakṣaṇopeta (˚ṇa-up˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘having 32 auspicious marks or spots upon the
body,’ illustrious, great. {%—Dvātriṃśikā,%} f. occurring
in the compound {%Bharaṭaka-dvātriṃśikā,%} q. v.
{%—Dvādaśa, as, ī, am,%} the 12th (e. g. {%dvādaśo%}
{%bhāgaḥ,%} the 12th part); consisting of 12, divided
into 12 parts; accompanied by or increased by 12;
({%ī%}), f., scil. {%rātri%} or {%tithi,%} the 12th day of the half
month; ({%am%}), n. a collection or aggregate of 12;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δώ-δεκα;</lang> Lat. <nsi>duo-decim;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>da-deug;</nsi>
Hindūst. {%bā-rah%} through change of {%d%} into {%r;%} Lith.
<nsi>dwy-lika</nsi> through change of {%d%} into {%l;%} Goth. <nsi>tva-lif</nsi>
through change of the guttural into the labial; Eng.
<nsi>twelve;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>zwö-lf.</nsi>] {%—Dvādaśaka, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} the 12th; containing 12, consisting of 12,
amounting to 12; ({%am%}), n. the aggregate of 12.
{%—Dvādaśa-kapāla, as, ī, am,%} having 12 skulls.
{%—Dvādaśa-kara, as, ā, am,%} possessed of 12
hands or rays; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Kārttikeya; of
Bṛhas-pati. {%—Dvādaśa-gava, as, ī, am,%} having 12
oxen or cows. {%—Dvādaśa-tā,%} f. or {%dvādaśa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the aggregate of 12. {%—Dvādaśa-dhā,%} ind.
into or in 12 parts or ways, twelvefold. {%—Dvā-%}
{%daśan, a,%} m. f. n. pl., 12. {%—Dvādaśa-pattraka,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Yoga or particular religious observ-
ance in which the 12 syllables {%oṃ namo bhagavate%}
{%vāsudevāya%} are connected with the 12 signs of the
zodiac and with the 12 months. {%—Dvādaśa-bhuja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having 12 arms; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of
Skanda's attendants. {%—Dvādaśama, as, ī, am,%} the
12th; [cf. {%dvādaśa.%}] {%—Dvādaśa-mahā-vākya-%}
{%vivaraṇa, am,%} n. ‘the explanation of the 12 great
words,’ N. of a philosophical work by Vaikuṇṭha-purī.
{%—Dvādaśa-mūla, as,%} m. ‘having 12 roots or
sources (?),’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Dvādaśa-rātra,%}
{%am,%} n. a period of 12 nights (or days); ({%as, ā, am%}),
lasting 12 nights (or days). {%—Dvādaśarca (˚śa-%}
{%ṛca), as, ā, am,%} containing 12 verses (Ṛcs).
{%—Dvādaśa-liṅgodbhava (˚ga-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘the
origin of the 12 Liṅgas,’ N. of a chapter of the
Vrata-prakāśa by Viśva-nātha. {%—Dvādaśa-locana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} twelve-eyed; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Kārttikeya. {%—Dvādaśa-vārṣika, as, ī, am,%} 12
years old or lasting 12 years. {%—Dvādaśavārṣika-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n. a vow for 12 years. {%—Dvādaśa-%}
{%vidha, as, ā, am,%} twelvefold. {%—Dvādaśa-śata,%}
{%am,%} n., 112. {%—Dvādaśaśata-tama, as, ī, am,%} the
112th. {%—Dvādaśa-sāhasra, as, ī, am,%} consisting
of 12000 (years). {%—Dvādaśāṃśu (˚śa-aṃ˚), us, us,%}
{%u,%} having 12 rays; ({%us%}), m. an epithet of Bṛhas-
pati; the planet Jupiter over which Bṛhas-pati
presides; [cf. {%dvādaśa-kara%} and {%dvā-daśārcis.%}]
{%—Dvādaśākṛti (˚śa-āk˚), is, is, i,%} having 12
shapes. {%—Dvādaśākṣa (˚śa-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} twelve-
[Page0442-c+ 80]
eyed; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Kārttikeya; N. of
one of the attendants of Kārttikeya; a Buddha; [cf.
{%dvādaśākhya.%}] {%—Dvādaśākṣara (˚śa-akṣ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} containing 12 syllables; [cf. {%dvādaśa-%}
{%pattraka.%}] {%—Dvādaśākṣara-mantra, am,%} n. a
prayer of 12 syllables addressed to Viṣṇu (viz. {%oṃ%}
{%namo bhagavate vāsudevāya%}). {%—Dvādaśākhya%}
{%(˚śa-ākh˚), as,%} m. a Buddha; [cf. {%dvādaśākṣa.%}]
{%—Dvādaśāṅgī (˚śa-aṅ˚),%} f. the collective sacred
writings of the Jainas (consisting of 12 parts). {%—Dvā-%}
{%daśāṅgula (˚śa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a measure of 12
fingers. {%—Dvādaśātman (˚śa-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} appear-
ing in 12 forms; ({%ā%}), m. or {%dvādaśātmaka, as,%}
m. the sun (as identified with the 12 Ādityas or the
sun in each month of the year). {%—Dvādaśāditya-%}
{%tīrtha (˚śa-ād˚), am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-
place. {%—Dvādaśādityāśrama (˚śa-āditya-āś˚), as,%}
m., N. of a sacred hermitage. {%—Dvādaśādhyāyī%}
{%(˚śa-adh˚),%} f., N. of Jaimini's Mīmāṃsā consisting
of 12 Adhyāyas. {%—Dvādaśānyika (˚śa-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who has made 12 mistakes in reading.
{%—Dvādaśāyus (˚śa-āy˚), us,%} m. ‘whose life lasts
12 years,’ a dog. {%—Dvādaśāra (˚śa-ara), as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having 12 spokes (as the wheel or cycle of the
year). {%—Dvādaśāratni (˚śa-ar˚), is, is, i,%} being
12 cubits long. {%—Dvādaśārcis (˚śa-ar˚), is, is, is,%}
containing 12 rays; ({%is%}), m. an epithet of Bṛhas-
pati or the planet Jupiter; [cf. {%dvādaśa-kara%} and
{%dvādaśāṃśu.%}] {%—Dvādaśāśra%} or (less correctly)
{%dvādaśāsra, am,%} n. or {%dvādaśāśri, is,%} f. or {%dvā-%}
{%daśāśrī (˚śa-aś˚),%} f. a dodecagon, a dodecagonal
figure. {%—Dvādaśāha (˚śa-aha), as,%} m. a period
of 12 days; ({%as, ā, am%}), lasting 12 days; ({%as%}),
m. a particular ceremony lasting 12 days; [cf.
{%bharata-d˚.%}] {%—Dvādaśāhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvā-%}
{%daśan + ahan%}), relating to or coming from a
period of 12 days. {%—Dvādaśika,%} taking place
or happening on the 12th day or on the 12th
day of a half month. {%—Dvādaśin, ī, inī, i,%} consist-
ing of 12, divided into 12. {%—Dvādaśī-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a sacred bathing-place mentioned in the
Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Dvādaśī-vrata, am,%} n. a peculiar
religious observance on the 12th day of a half month.
{%—Dvānavata, as, ī, am,%} the 92nd. {%—Dvā-navati,%}
{%is,%} f. {%= dvi-navati,%} 92. {%—Dvāpañcāśa, as, ī, am,%}
the 52nd; accompanied by 52, increased by 52.
{%—Dvā-pañcāśat, t,%} f., 52. {%—Dvāpara, as, am,%}
m. n. that die or side of a die which is marked with
two spots or points; the Die personified; ‘the age
with the number two,’ N. of the third of the four
Yugas or ages of the world, comprising 2400 years,
(the Yuga itself = 2000, each twilight = 200 years);
the Age personified as a god; doubt, uncertainty.
{%—Dvāviṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the 22nd; consisting of
22. {%—Dvā-viṃśati, is,%} f., 22. {%—Dvāviṃśati-tama,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the 22nd. {%—Dvāviṃśati-dhā,%} in 22 parts
or ways, twenty-two-fold. {%—Dvāviṃśati-śata, am,%} n.,
122. {%—Dvāviṃśatiśata-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 122nd.
{%—Dvāṣaṣṭa, as, ī, am,%} the 62nd; accompanied
by or joined with 62; [cf. {%dvi-ṣaṣṭi.%}] {%—Dvā-%}
{%ṣaṣṭi, is,%} f., 62. {%—Dvāṣaṣṭi-tama, as, ī, am,%}
the 62nd. {%—Dvāsaptata, as, ī, am,%} the 72nd.
{%—Dvāsaptati, is,%} f., 72; [cf. {%dvi-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23087<pc>0442-c<k1>dvAdaSan<k2>dvAdaSan
{#dvAdaSan#}¦ {%dvā-daśan.%} See {%dvā,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23088<pc>0442-c<k1>dvAr<k2>dvAr
{#dvAr#}¦ {%dvār, r,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%dvṛ%}),
Ved. a gate, door, entrance; access, way; expedient,
means, opportunity; {%dvārā,%} inst. c., at the end of a
comp. = by means of, by; [cf. 1. {%dur,%} 2. {%dura;%} Zend
<nsi>dvara-m,</nsi> ‘gate, palace;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">θύρα, θύρ-ε-τρο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θύρασι, θυρί-ς, θυρ-εό-ς, θαιρό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>for-ē-s, foris,</nsi>
<nsi>foras;</nsi> Umbr. <nsi>vero,</nsi> ‘gate,’ for <nsi>dvero;</nsi> perhaps also
<lang n="greek">πύλη</lang> and <nsi>porta, d</nsi> being dropped and <nsi>v</nsi> changed
into <nsi>p,</nsi> as in Zend <nsi>aspa</nsi> = <lang n="greek">ἵππος</lang> from Sanskrit {%aśva;%}
Goth. <nsi>daur;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>duru, dyr;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>tor;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>dverĭ,</nsi> ‘gate, door;’ Lith. <nsi>dùr-ys,</nsi> ‘door;’
Hib. <nsi>dor, doras,</nsi> ‘a door, gate.’] {%—Dvāḥ-stha%} or
{%dvā-stha%} or {%dvāḥ-sthita%} or {%dvā-sthita, as, ā, am,%}
standing at the gate or door; ({%as%}), m. a door-keeper,
porter, warder. {%—Dvār-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having many
doors; ({%atī%}), f. {%= dvāra-vatī,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0443-a+ 80]

<L>23089<pc>0443-a<k1>dvAra<k2>dvAra
{%Dvāra, am,%}¦ n. a door, gate, gateway, passage,
entrance, opening (cf. {%vaktra-dvāra%} and {%sahasra-%}
{%d˚;%} the body is sometimes called {%nava-dvāram%}
{%puram,%} a city with nine gates or openings); a
way, means, medium, vehicle, (the Māheśvaras hold
that there are six Dvāras or means of obtaining
a wished-for object); ({%eṇa%}), ind. by means of,
by; with regard to, according to; ({%ī%}), f. a door;
[cf. {%a-d˚.%}] {%—Dvāra-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. ‘door-
thorn,’ the bolt of a door; a door, gate. {%—Dvā-%}
{%ra-kapāṭa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the leaf or
fold of a door, the panel of a door. {%—Dvāra-tā,%}
f. a gate, door, an entrance, way, access. {%—Dvāra-%}
{%darśin, ī,%} m. ‘watching the door,’ a door-keeper.
{%—Dvāra-dātu (?), us,%} m. a species of tree, {%= vara-%}
{%dātu, bhūmi-saha%}. {%—Dvāra-dāru, us,%} m. (?), ‘hav-
ing wood fit for a door,’ the tree Tectona Grandis,
teak. {%—Dvāra-nāyaka, as,%} m. or {%dvāra-pa, as,%} m.
a door-keeper, porter, warder. {%—Dvāra-paṭṭa, as,%}
m. the panel or surface of a door; the curtain of a
door. {%—Dvāra-pati, is,%} m. a door-keeper, warder;
N. of a kingdom (?). {%—Dvāra-pāla, as,%} m. a door-
keeper, warder; an epithet of various Yakṣas and
of sacred places connected with them. {%—Dvāra-pā-%}
{%laka, as,%} m. a door-keeper; ({%ikā%}), f. a metronymic
from Dvāra-pālī. {%—Dvāra-piṇḍī,%} f. the threshold of
a door. {%—Dvāra-pidhāna%} or {%dvārāpidhāna (˚ra-%}
{%ap˚), as,%} m. the bolt of a door. {%—Dvāra-bali-bhuj, k,%}
m. ‘eating the offering (of food) scattered before the
door,’ the bird Ardea Nivea; a crow; a sparrow.
{%—Dvāra-bāhu, us,%} m. ‘door-arm,’ a door-post, jamb.
{%—Dvāra-mahima-varṇana, am,%} n. ‘description
of the glory of the dvāra,’ N. of the 127th chapter
of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa or second part of the Gaṇeśa-
Purāṇa. {%—Dvāra-yantra, am,%} n. ‘door-implement
or door-restrainer,’ a lock, bolt. {%—Dvāra-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having many doors; ({%atī%}), f., N. of the
capital of Kṛṣṇa; [cf. {%dvārakā%} and {%dvār-vatī.%}]
{%—Dvāravatī-nirmāṇa, am,%} n. ‘the construction of
Dvāra-vatī,’ N. of the 116th Adhyāya of the Vārāha-
Purāṇa. {%—Dvāra-vartman, a,%} n. a gateway. {%—Dvā-%}
{%ra-vṛtta, am,%} n. black pepper. {%—Dvāra-śākhā,%} f.
the leaf of a door, division of a door. {%—Dvāra-stam-%}
{%bha, as,%} m. a door-post. {%—Dvāra-stha, as, ā, am,%}
standing at the door; ({%as%}), m. a door-keeper, porter.
{%—Dvārādhipa%} or {%dvārādhyakṣa (˚ra-adh˚), as,%}
m. ‘superintendent of the door,’ a door-keeper, porter,
warder, chamberlain. {%—Dvārābhimānin (˚ra-abh˚),%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} assuming the character of the (sacrificial)
doors. {%—Dvārā-vatī,%} f. {%= dvāra-vatī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23090<pc>0443-a<k1>dvAraka<k2>dvAraka
{%Dvāraka = dvāra%}¦ above; ({%ā%} or {%ikā%}), f. ‘the city
with many gates,’ N. of the capital of Kṛṣṇa (on
the western point of Guzerāt, supposed to have been
submerged by the sea). {%—Dvārakā-dāsa, as,%} m.
‘slave of Dvārakā,’ N. of a man. {%—Dvārakā-pra-%}
{%veśa, as,%} m. ‘the entrance into Dvārakā,’ N. of the
103rd chapter of the Kṛṣṇa-khaṇḍa or fourth part
of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Dvārakā-māhāt-%}
{%mya, am,%} n. ‘the glory of Dvārakā,’ N. of a part
of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Dvārakārambha (˚kā-ār˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the commencement of Dvārakā,’ N. of the
102nd chapter of the Kṛṣṇa-khaṇḍa of the Brahma-
vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Dvārakeśa (˚kā-īśa), as,%} m. ‘the
lord of Dvārakā,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>23091<pc>0443-a<k1>dvArika<k2>dvArika
{%Dvārika, as,%}¦ m. a door-keeper, warder; N. of
one of the eighteen attendants of the Sun; ({%ikā%}), f.,
see {%dvāraka.%}
<LEND>

<L>23092<pc>0443-a<k1>dvArin<k2>dvArin
{%Dvārin, ī,%}¦ m. a door-keeper, porter, warder.
<LEND>

<L>23093<pc>0443-a<k1>dvArya<k2>dvArya
{%Dvārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a door, being at
a door; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%sthūṇā,%} a door-post.
<LEND>

<L>23094<pc>0443-a<k1>dvi<k2>dvi
{#dvi#}¦ {%dvi, dvau,%} m. du., {%dve,%} f. n. du. (the
old dual form is {%dvā,%} q. v., from the original base
{%dva%}), two, both. In native lexicons {%dvayos%} = ‘in
two genders,’ i. e. in the masc. and fem. gender;
[the original form was {%dva,%} as shown in nom. du.
{%dvau:%} Zend {%dva,%} ‘two;’ {%bi-%} in comp., e. g. {%bi-tya,%}
‘the second:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">δύο, δύω, δυάκις, δοιοί, δί-τυλος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δίς</lang> for <lang n="greek">δϝίς,</lang> ‘twice;’ <lang n="greek">δεύ-τερο-ς</lang> from {%dva-tara-s;%}
<lang n="greek">δοιή,</lang> ‘doubt;’ <lang n="greek">δί-α, δίζω, δισσός,</lang> ‘double;’ <lang n="greek">δώ-δεκα:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>duo, bis</nsi> for <nsi>dvis; bi-</nsi> in comp., e. g. <nsi>bi-farius;</nsi>
[Page0443-b+ 81]
<nsi>vē-</nsi> in comp., e. g. <nsi>vē-sanus; dis-</nsi> in comp., e. g. <nsi>dis-</nsi>
<nsi>plicere; bi-ni, du-plex, du-b-ius, du-ellum, be-l-</nsi>
<nsi>lum:</nsi> Umbr. <nsi>du-r,</nsi> ‘two:’ Goth. <nsi>tvai, tvōs,</nsi> f.,
<nsi>tva,</nsi> n., <nsi>tweiflyan, tvi-standan, dis-dailyan:</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>twa, twi, tweogan:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>zer</nsi> or <nsi>zar</nsi> in
comp.: Slav. <nsi>dŭva:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>dù, dvi,</nsi> f. ‘two:’ Hib.
<nsi>da, do, di.</nsi>] {%—Dvi-ka, as, ā, am,%} having two {%ks%}
in one's name; ({%as%}), m. a crow ({%= kāka%}); the ruddy
goose, Anas Casarca {%(= koka, cakra-vāka)%}. {%—Dvi-%}
{%kakāra, as,%} m. the bird with the two {%ks%} in its name,
the crow {%(= kāka)%}. {%—Dvi-kakud, t,%} or {%dvika-%}
{%pṛṣṭha, as,%} m. the camel (‘two-humped,’ ‘two-
backed’). {%—Dvi-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} doing two things,
making two or twofold. {%—Dvi-kāṇḍa, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of two parts, (but the fem. is in {%ā%} if
measure is denoted, Pāṇ. IV. 1, 23.) {%—Dvi-kārṣā-%}
{%paṇa%} or {%dvi-kārṣāpaṇika, as, ī, am,%} worth two
Kārṣāpaṇas. {%—Dvi-kubja, as, ā, am,%} having two
humps. {%—Dvi-khaṇḍikā,%} f. a couplet. {%—Dvi-khā-%}
{%rīka, as, ā, am,%} worth two Khārīs. {%—Dvi-khura, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} cloven-hoofed, cloven-footed. {%—Dvi-gat, t,%} m.,
N. of a Bhārgava. {%—Dvi-gu, us,%} m., scil. {%samāsa,%} a
compound word in which the first member of the
compound is a numeral; (the word {%dvi-gu,%} ‘having
two cows or worth two cows,’ is itself an example
of this class of compounds, a single example often
serving in native grammatical terminology as the
name for the whole class.) {%—Dvi-guṇa, as, ā, am,%}
double, twofold, of two kinds, twice as much or as
large; multiplied by two, doubled. {%—Dviguṇa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the state of being twofold, duplication.
{%—Dviguṇā-karṇa, as, ā, am,%} having an ear divided
into two parts by a slit (as a mark to distinguish
cattle). {%—Dviguṇā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to plough twice. {%—Dviguṇā-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} twice ploughed; (also read {%dviguṇī-kṛta.%})
{%—Dviguṇita, as, ā, am,%} doubled, double, multi-
plied by two; folded, invested, enveloped. {%—Dvi-%}
{%guṇī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} doubled, increased. {%—Dvi-%}
{%guṇī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} doubled, augmented. {%—Dvi-%}
{%cakra, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Dvi-caturaśraka%}
or {%-asraka, as,%} m., N. of a particular gesture or
posture. {%—Dvi-catur-ghna, as, ī, am,%} multiplied by
two and four. {%—Dvicatvāriṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the 42nd.
{%—Dvi-catvāriṃśat, t,%} f., 42; [cf. {%dvā-catvāriṃśat.%}]
{%—Dvicatvāriṃśika, as,%} &c., consisting of 42.
{%—Dvi-caraṇa, as, ā, am,%} two-legged, having two
legs, bipedal. {%—Dvi-cchinna, as, ā, am,%} cut into two,
bisected. {%—Dvi-ja, as, ā, am,%} twice-born; ({%as%}),
m. a man of any one of the first three classes, a
Brāhman, Kṣatriya, or Vaiśya (whose investiture
with the Yajñopavīta or sacrificial cord at the age of
puberty constitutes religiously and metaphorically their
second birth, see {%upa-naya,%} p. 164, col. 3); a
Brāhman; any oviparous animal (as a bird, a snake,
a fish, &c., born first in the shell and next produced
from it); a tooth (which falls out and grows again);
coriander seed {%(= tumburu); (ā),%} f. a kind of
fragrant plant, {%= reṇukā;%} Clerodendrum Siphonan-
thus ({%= bhārgī%}); kundur or gum olibanum ({%=%}
{%pālaṅkī%}); [cf. {%dvi-jā.%}] {%—Dvija-kutsita, as,%} m.
‘the tree despised by the Brāhmans,’ Cordia Latifolia
and Myxa {%(= śleṣmāntaka)%}. {%—Dvija-ketu, us,%}
m. a kind of citron. {%—Dvija-cchattra, am,%} n., N.
of a place. {%—Dvija-jetṛ, tā,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
{%—Dvija-tva, am,%} n. ‘the state of being twice-
born,’ the condition or rank of a Brāhman. {%—Dvija-%}
{%dāsa, as,%} m. ‘the slave of the twice-born,’ a servant
of the first three classes, a Śūdra. {%—Dvija-deva, as,%}
m. ‘a god among the twice-born,’ a Brāhman.
{%—Dvijadeva-deva, as,%} m. ‘a god among the
Brāhmans,’ a very pious or excellent Brāhman.
{%—Dvija-niṣevita, as, ā, am,%} inhabited by birds.
{%—Dvi-janman, ā, ā, a,%} having a double birth or
birthplace, having two natures; regenerate; ovipa-
rous; ({%ā%}), m. a member of the first three classes,
especially a Brāhman; a bird, any oviparous animal;
a tooth; [cf. {%dvi-ja%} and {%dvi-jāti.%}] {%—Dvija-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘lord of the twice-born’ (i. e. according to
some ‘lord of the Brāhmans;’ but according to others
the moon is said to be ‘the chief of the twice-born,’
[Page0443-c+ 81]
as produced in the first instance from the eye of
Atri and again from the ocean of milk at its churning
by the gods and demons); the moon; [cf. {%dvija-%}
{%rāja, dvijeśa, dvijeśvara.%}] {%—Dvija-prapā,%} f. the
trench round the foot of a tree into which water is
poured; a trough near a well for watering birds,
cattle, &c. {%—Dvija-priya, as, ā, am,%} dear to a man
of the first three classes, especially to a Brāhman;
({%ā%}), f. the Soma plant, Asclepias Acida. {%—Dvija-ban-%}
{%dhu, us,%} m. ‘a mere twice-born man,’ i. e. a member
of the first three classes not invested with the sacred
string, or one merely called a Dvi-ja, but not so in
fact; [cf. {%kṣatra-bandhu.%}] {%—Dvija-bruva, as,%}
m. ‘merely called twice-born,’ i. e. a Brāhman
merely by name or by birth and not by observance
of spiritual duties. {%—Dvija-malla, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Dvija-mukhya, as,%} m. ‘the most excellent
among the twice-born,’ a Brāhman. {%—Dvija-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the king of the twice-born,’ the moon [cf.
{%dvija-pati%}]; ‘the king of the birds,’ an epithet of
Garuḍa; ‘the king of the serpents,’ an epithet of
Ananta (as a synonym of the moon); camphor.
{%—Dvijarṣabha (˚ja-ṛṣ˚), as,%} m. ‘the bull
among the twice-born,’ i. e. the best of the twice-
born, a Brāhman. {%—Dvija-liṅgin, ī, inī, i,%} wearing
the insignia of a Brāhman; ({%ī%}), m. a Kṣatriya or
man of the military tribe; an impostor, a pretended
Brāhman who wears the distinguishing badge of that
tribe without belonging to it. {%—Dvija-vara, as,%} m.
‘the best among the twice-born,’ a Brāhman. {%—Dvija-%}
{%varya, as,%} m. an excellent or superior Brāhman. {%—Dvi-%}
{%ja-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘whose vehicle is the bird (Garuḍa),’
epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. {%—Dvija-vraṇa, as,%} m.
gum-boil, tooth-ache {%(= dantārbuda)%}. {%—Dvija-%}
{%śapta, as,%} m. ‘the pulse cursed by the Brāhmans,’
i. e. prohibited on some occasions, Dolichos Catjang
({%= rāja-māṣa%}); (also read {%dvija-sapta.%}) {%—Dvija-%}
{%śuśrūṣā,%} f. service of the twice-born, service done to
the first three classes, especially to the Brāhmans by
the fourth or Śūdras. {%—Dvija-śreṣṭha%} or {%dvija-%}
{%sattama, as,%} m. ‘the best of the twice-born,’ a
Brāhman. {%—Dvija-sevaka, as,%} m. ‘a servant of the
twice-born,’ a servant of the first three classes, a
Śūdra or man of the fourth and servile class; [cf.
{%dvijopāsaka.%}] {%—Dvija-sevā,%} f. ‘the service of the
twice-born,’ service of the first three classes, especially
of the Brāhmans by the fourth or Śūdras. {%—Dvija-%}
{%sneha, as,%} m. ‘the favourite of Brāhmans,’ N. of
the Butea Frondosa. {%—Dvi-jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
twice-born, doubly born; [cf. {%dvi-ja.%}] {%—Dvijāgrya%}
{%(˚ja-ag˚), as,%} m. ‘chief of the twice-born,’ a Brāh-
man. {%—Dvijāṅgikā%} and {%dvijāṅgī (˚ja-aṅ˚),%} f. a
kind of medicinal plant, {%= kaṭukā%}. {%—Dvi-jāti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} twice-born; ({%is%}), m. a man of either of the
first three classes, especially a Brāhman; any oviparous
animal (as a bird, snake, &c.); [cf. {%dvi-ja%} and {%dvi-%}
{%janman.%}] {%—Dvijāti-jana-vatsala, as, ā, am,%}
friendly to the Brāhman race. {%—Dvijāti-mukhya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the chief among the twice-born,’ a Brāhman.
{%—Dvijāti-sāt,%} ind. as a present for Brāhmans.
{%—Dvijātīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to the first three
or twice-born classes; of twofold nature, of mixed
origin or breed, mongrel; ({%as%}), m. a mule. {%—Dvi-%}
{%jāni, is, is, i,%} Ved. having two wives. {%—Dvijānu-%}
{%loma (˚ja-an˚), am,%} n. the regular order or series
of the first three twice-born classes. {%—Dvijāyanī,%} f.
the thread or cord worn over the shoulder and
marking the first three twice-born classes. {%—Dvijā-%}
{%laya (˚ja-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘the residence of birds,’ the
hollow trunk of a tree; the residence of Brāhmans.
{%—Dvi-jihva, as, ā, am,%} two-tongued, double-
tongued (literally or figuratively), insincere; ({%as%}),
m. a peculiar disease of the tongue; a snake; an
informer, a rogue, scoundrel, bad man; a thief; N.
of a Rakṣas; (also read {%dvi-jihba.%}) {%—Dvijihva-tā,%}
f. ‘the state of having two tongues,’ insincerity,
dishonesty. {%—Dvijendraka (˚ja-in˚), as,%} m. {%= dvija-%}
{%ketu,%} q. v. {%—Dvijeśa (˚ja-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of the
twice-born,’ the moon; [cf. {%dvija-pati, dvija-rāja,%}
{%dvijeśvara.%}] {%—Dvijeśvara (˚ja-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘the
lord of the twice-born,’ epithet of the Moon, see
[Page0444-a+ 81]
{%dvija-pati;%} of Śiva. {%—Dvijottama (˚ja-ut˚), as,%}
m. ‘servant of the twice-born,’ best of the twice-
born, a Brāhman. {%—Dvijopāsaka (˚ja-up˚), as,%} m.
‘servant of the twice-born,’ a servant of the first
three classes, a Śūdra; [cf. {%dvija-sevaka.%}] {%—Dvi-%}
{%jyā,%} f. the sine or chord of an arc. {%—Dvijyā-mārga,%}
{%am,%} n. a horizontal line. {%—Dvi-ṭha, as,%} m., N. of the
symbol Visarga (as having two points); N. of Svāhā,
wife of Agni. {%—1. dvi-tā,%} f. {%= dvi-tva%} below; [cf.
p. 445, col. 3.] {%—Dvi-tra, ās, ās, āṇi,%} pl. two or
three. {%—Dvi-tri-catura, as,%} &c., happening two or
three or four times; ({%am%}), ind. twice or thrice or four
times. {%—Dvi-tva, am,%} n. doubleness, the number two,
a pair, couple; duality; the dual; reduplication (of a
letter or word). {%—Dvidaṇḍi,%} ind. (fr. {%dvi-daṇḍa%}),
with two sticks, stick against stick, single-stick,
quarter-staff. {%—Dvidaṇḍin, ī,%} m. ‘carrying two
staves,’ a kind of mendicant. {%—Dvi-dat, an, atī, at,%}
having two teeth (as a mark of age); [cf. Lat.
<nsi>bi-dens.</nsi>] {%—Dvi-danta, as, ī, am,%} having two teeth.
{%—Dvi-dala, as, ā, am,%} ‘having two parts,’ split in
two, two-leafed; ({%ā%}), f. Bauhinia Tomentosa. {%—Dvi-%}
{%daśa, ās,%} m. pl. twenty, two tens. {%—Dvi-dāmnī,%} f.
(a cow) tied with two ropes. {%—Dvi-diva, as, ā, am,%}
lasting two days; ({%as%}), m. a ceremony or festival that
lasts two days. {%—Dvi-devata, as, ā, am,%} belonging
to or sacred to two deities; ({%am%}), n. the constellation
Viśākhā; (also read {%dvi-daivatyā.%}) {%—Dvi-devatya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating or belonging to two deities.
{%—Dvi-deha, as,%} m. ‘two-bodied, double-bodied,’
epithet of the god Gaṇeśa (having the head of an ele-
phant with the figure of a man; cf. {%dvi-śarīra%} and
{%dvi-dhātu%}). {%—Dvi-daivatyā,%} f. the constellation
Viśākhā (Indra and Agni jointly presiding over this
asterism; cf. {%dvi-devata%}). {%—Dvi-dha, as, ā, am,%}
divided in two, split asunder. {%—Dvi-dhā,%} ind. in a
twofold manner, in two parts, of two kinds or sorts,
in two ways, in two directions, divided; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">δίχα, διχθά, δισσός.</lang>] {%—Dvidhā-karaṇa, am,%} n.
the act of making twofold, dividing into two parts,
splitting, arranging in two ways, &c. {%—Dvidhākāra%}
{%(˚dhā-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} of a twofold form, in a two-
fold manner. {%—Dvidhā-gati, is,%} m. ‘going in two
ways or by water and land,’ a crab; a crocodile.
{%—Dvi-dhātu, us, us, u,%} having two natures or two
roots &c.; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Gaṇeśa; [cf.
{%dvi-deha.%}] {%—Dvidhātmaka (˚dhā-āt˚), am,%} n. a
nutmeg (as being of two kinds ?). {%—Dvidhā-lekhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} to be written in two ways; ({%as%}), m. the
tree Phœnix Paludosa ({%= hintāla%}), the marshy date
tree. {%—Dvi-nagnaka, as,%} m. a circumcised man,
one having no prepuce. {%—Dvinavata, as, ī, am%} (fr.
the following), the 92nd. {%—Dvi-navati, is,%} f., 92.
{%—Dvinavati-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 92nd. {%—Dvi-%}
{%nāman, ā, mnī, a,%} having two names. {%—Dvi-ni-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Dvi-niṣka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%dvinaiṣkika, as, ī, am,%} bought &c. with
two Niṣkas. {%—Dvi-pa, as,%} m. ‘drinking twice,’
an elephant, (the elephant imbibing fluids by his
trunk and thence conveying them into his mouth);
the tree Mesua Ferrea; [cf. {%gandha-d˚%} and {%dvi-%}
{%pāyin.%}] {%—Dvipañcamūlī,%} f. {%= daśa-mūla,%} q. v.
{%—Dvipañcāśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvi-pañcāśat%}), the
52nd. {%—Dvi-pañcāśat, t,%} f., 52. {%—Dvipañcāśat-%}
{%tama, as, ī, am,%} the 52nd. {%—Dvi-paṇya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} worth two Paṇas. {%—Dvi-pattraka, as%} or {%am,%}
m. or n. (?), a kind of bulbous plant {%(= caṇḍāla-%}
{%kanda)%}. {%—Dvi-patha, am,%} n. a cross-way, a place
where two roads meet; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of metre.
{%—Dvi-pad%} or {%dvi-pād, -pāt, -pāt%} or {%-padī, -pat,%}
two-footed, bipedal; ({%pāt%}), m. a biped, a man;
a god; a demon; a bird; ({%pat%}), n. men collec-
tively; ({%t, t, t%}), consisting of two Padas; m. a
metre of two Padas; ({%padī%}), f. a kind of Prākṛt
metre; [cf. Lat. <nsi>bi-pes;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">δί-πους.</lang>] (According
to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 9, the fem. must be {%dvi-padā%} when
agreeing with {%ṛc,%} e. g. {%dvi-padā ṛk,%} ‘a verse con-
taining two Pādas,’ but {%dvi-padī strī,%} ‘a woman with
two feet.’) {%—Dvi-pada, as, ā, am,%} two-footed, bi-
pedal; containing two Padas; ({%as%}), m. a biped, (con-
temptuously) a man; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%ṛc,%} a verse con-
[Page0444-b+ 81]
sisting of two Padas; a kind of Prākṛt metre; (in
mathem.) binomial; containing two words; a pecu-
liar sign of the zodiac; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of jasmine [cf.
{%dvi-puṭī%}]; ({%am%}), n. a combination of two words.
{%—Dvipada-pati, is,%} m. ‘the lord of bipeds,’ a king,
prince. {%—Dvipada-rāśi, is,%} f. any one of the signs
Gemini, Libra, Aquarius, Virgo, and half of Sagitta-
rius. {%—Dvipadāntara%} or {%dvipadābhyāsa (˚da-an˚,%}
{%˚da-abh˚), am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Dvi-padikā,%} f.
double amount (?); a kind of Prākṛt metre ({%= dvi-%}
{%padī%}); a peculiar manner of singing. {%—Dvipa-%}
{%mada, as,%} m. the juice exuding from the elephant's
temples. {%—Dvi-parṇa, as, ī, am,%} two-leaved, oppo-
site-leaved; ({%ī%}), f. wild jew's thorn {%(= vana-koli).%}
{%—Dvipāt-tva, am,%} n. or {%dvipāt-tā,%} f. two-footed-
ness, the state of a biped; bipartiteness. {%—Dvi-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. a couple of vessels. {%—Dvi-pād,%} see {%dvi-pad.%}
{%—Dvi-pāda, as, ī, am,%} two-footed, bipedal, a biped.
{%—Dvi-pādya, as, ā, am,%} worth double; bought
&c. with two quarters, double; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a
double penalty, an amercement of twice the common
amount. {%—Dvi-pāyin, ī,%} m. ‘drinking twice,’ an
elephant; [cf. {%dvi-pa.%}] {%—Dvipāsya (˚pa-ās˚), as,%}
m. ‘having the face of an elephant,’ an epithet of
Gaṇeśa. {%—Dvi-puṭa, as, ī, am,%} folded double, having
two folds; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of jasmine. {%—Dvi-puruṣa,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having the length of two men;
({%as, ā, am%}), worth two men, Pāṇ. IV. 1, 24;
({%am%}), ind. through two generations. {%—Dvi-pṛṣṭha,%}
{%as,%} m. (with Jainas) the second black Vāsu-deva.
{%—Dvipendra (˚pa-in˚), as,%} m. ‘prince of elephants,’
a large elephant. {%—Dvipendra-dāna, am,%} n. or
{%dvipendra-mada, as,%} m. the liquor flowing from
the temples of a large elephant in rut. {%—Dvi-pra-%}
{%tika, as, ī, am,%} bought &c. with two Kārṣāpaṇas.
{%—Dvi-bandhu, us,%} m. ‘having two friends (?),’
Ved., N. of a man. {%—Dvi-barha-jman, ā,%} m., Ved.
having a double course; (Sāy.) whose course is
spread through two. {%—Dvi-barhas, ās,%} m., Ved.
doubly close or thick, strong; doubled (as opposed to
single); (Sāy.) mighty in two places, mightily ex-
panded in the two worlds; (the form {%dvi-barhās%}
appears also as neut. and as an adverb.) {%—Dvi-bāhu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} two-armed. {%—Dvi-bāhuka, as,%} m. ‘the
two-armed one,’ N. of one of the attendants of Śiva.
{%—Dvi-bhuja, as, ā, am,%} two-armed; ({%as%}), m. an angle.
{%—Dvi-bhūma, as, ā, am,%} having two floors. {%—Dvi-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} made or consisting of two (parts).
{%—Dvi-mātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} Ved. having two mothers;
(Sāy.) the measurer of the two worlds. {%—Dvimātṛ-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} having two mothers, born from two
mothers, born in two ways, having different mothers
(thus Gaṇeśa was the son of Pārvatī, but according
to one legend was formed of the scurf and impurities
of her body; cf. {%dvaimātura%}). {%—Dvi-mātra%} or
{%dvimātrika, as, ā, am,%} containing two syllabic in-
stants (as a long vowel). {%—Dvi-mārgī,%} f. a cross-way,
a place where two roads meet. {%—Dvi-māṣya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} worth two Māṣas. {%—Dvi-mīḍha, as,%} m., N.
of a son of Hastin (Bṛhat) and grandson of Su-hotra.
{%—Dvi-mukha, as, ā, am,%} two-faced, having two
mouths; ({%as%}), m. a sort of snake; ({%as%}), m. a kind
of serpent, Amphisbœna, a kind of worm {%(= kṛmi);%}
{%(ā),%} f. a leech; a small water-jar with two mouths
{%(= karkarī)%}. {%—Dvimukhāhi (˚kha-ahi), is,%} m. ‘a
snake with two mouths,’ a peculiar kind of serpent
{%(= ahīraṇi)%}. {%—Dvimukhoraga (˚kha-ur˚), as,%} m.
a kind of serpent; see above. {%—Dvi-muni,%} ind.
produced by two sages; [cf. {%tri-muni.%}] {%—Dvi-mu-%}
{%sali%} or {%dvi-muṣali,%} ind. with two clubs or maces,
club against club (in fighting). {%—Dvi-mūrdha, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} two-headed. {%—Dvi-mūrdhan, ā, ā, a,%} two-
headed, bicipital; ({%ā%}), m., N. of an Asura. {%—Dvi-%}
{%yamunam,%} ind., N. of a place. {%—Dvi-yodha, as,%}
m. ‘fighting with two,’ epithet of the charioteer of
Kṛṣṇa; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of metre consisting of four
lines of six syllables each. {%—Dvi-ra, as,%} m. a bee;
[cf. {%dvi-repha.%}] {%—Dvi-rada, as, ā, am,%} two-
toothed, two-tusked; ({%as%}), m. an elephant. {%—Dvira-%}
{%da-karāgra (˚ra-ag˚), am,%} n. the tip of an elephant's
trunk. {%—Dviradāntaka (˚da-an˚), as,%} m. ‘destroyer
[Page0444-c+ 81]
of the elephant,’ the lion. {%—Dviradārāti (˚da-ar˚),%}
{%is,%} m. ‘enemy of the elephant,’ N. of the fabulous
animal Śarabha. {%—Dviradāśana (˚da-aś˚), as,%} m.
‘food of the elephant,’ epithet of the Ficus Religiosa.
{%—Dvi-rasana, as, ā, am,%} double-tongued, having a
forked tongue; ({%as%}), m. a snake in general. {%—Dvi-%}
{%rāja, am,%} n., Ved. the battle between the two kings.
{%—Dvi-rātra, as, ā, am,%} lasting two nights; ({%as%}),
m. a period of two nights or days. {%—Dvirātrīṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} lasting two nights; to be accomplished
in two nights. {%—Dvi-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} biform, of
two forms, twofold; bicolour; bipartite; having a
different shape; spelt or written in two ways;
({%as%}), m. variety of interpretation or reading; a
word that may be correctly spelt in two ways.
{%—Dvirūpa-koṣa,%} ‘the treasury of words written in
two ways,’ a dictionary of words spelt in two ways.
{%—Dvirūpa-tā,%} f. doubleness of form, a double form
or manner of expression. {%—Dvi-retas, ās, ās, as,%}
doubly impregnating (as the male ass which impreg-
nates the she-ass and mare); receiving double im-
pregnation (as a mare which is impregnated by the
horse and male ass). {%—Dvi-repha, as,%} m. the insect
with two {%r%}s in its name ({%= bhramara%}), a large black
bee. {%—Dvirepha-gaṇa-sammitā,%} f. ‘resembling a
multitude of bees,’ a kind of rose. {%—Dvirepha-mālā,%}
f. or {%dvirepha-vṛnda, as,%} m. a flight or swarm of
bees. {%—Dvi-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} twofold, of two
kinds. {%—Dvi-laya,%} ‘double-time (?),’ a term in music.
{%—Dvi-vaktra, as, ā, am,%} having two mouths, two-
faced; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Dvi-vacana,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%dvi-vacas, as,%} n. the dual, the termina-
tions of the dual. {%—Dvivacanānta (˚na-an˚), as,%}
m. a dual termination. {%—Dvi-vajraka, as,%} m. a
column with sixteen angles or sides. {%—Dvi-varṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} two-coloured, bicolour; ({%am%}), n. dou-
bling of a consonant. {%—Dvivarṇa-ratha, as,%} m.
‘having a bicolour chariot,’ N. of one of the ances-
tors of Śākya-muni. {%—Dvi-varṣa, as, ā, am,%} two
years old &c.; ({%ā%}), f. a cow two years old. {%—Dvi-%}
{%varṣaka, as, ikā, am,%} or {%dvivarṣīṇa,%} or {%dvi-%}
{%vārṣika, as, ī, am,%} biennial, two years old, of two
years standing. {%—Dvi-vāhikā,%} f. a swing, a swinging
cot, a litter. {%—Dvi-viṃśatikīna, as, ā, am,%} worth
twice twenty. {%—Dvi-vida, as,%} m., N. of a monkey
(slain by Viṣṇu, or Viṣṇu in the form of Kṛṣṇa
or of Bala-rāma; but according to other legends an
ally of Rāma and, like Mainda, a son of the Aśvins).
{%—Dvividāri (˚da-ari), is,%} m. ‘the enemy of Dvi-
vida,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Dvi-vidha, as, ā, am,%}
of two sorts, biform, of two kinds or ways, bipartite.
{%—Dvi-vindu, us,%} m. ‘consisting of two points,’ the
symbol Visarga. {%—Dvi-vista, as, ā, am,%} or {%dvi-%}
{%vaistika, as, ī, am,%} worth two Vistas. {%—Dvi-veda,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%dvivedin, ī, inī, i,%} studying two
Vedas, familiar with two Vedas. {%—Dviveda-gaṅga,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a commentator. {%—Dvi-veśarā,%} f. a
kind of light carriage drawn by mules. {%—Dvi-śata,%}
{%am,%} n., 200; 102; ({%as, ī, am%}), the 200th; con-
sisting of 200, containing 200. {%—Dviśataka,%} worth
200, bought for 200. {%—Dviśata-tama, as, ī, am,%}
the 200th. {%—Dvi-śatikā,%} f. an aggregate or amount
of 200. {%—Dviśatya, as, ā, am, = dviśataka%}. {%—Dvi-%}
{%śapha, as, ā, am,%} cloven-footed, bisulcous; ({%as%}), m.
any cloven-footed animal. {%—Dvi-śarīra, as,%} m. ‘two-
bodied, double-bodied,’ epithet of Gaṇeśa; [cf. {%dvi-%}
{%deha.%}] {%—Dvi-śavas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having twofold
strength. {%—Dvi-śas,%} ind. two by two, in couples, by
pairs. {%—Dvi-śāṇa%} or {%dvi-śāṇya, as, ā, am,%} worth
two Śāṇas; [cf. {%dvaiśāṇa.%}] {%—Dvi-śāla, as, ā, am,%}
containing two rooms (as a house). {%—Dvi-śīrṣa%} or
{%dvi-śīrṣaka, as, ā, am,%} two-headed, bicipital; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Agni. {%—Dvi-śūrpa%} or {%dviśaurpika,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} worth two Śūrpas or winnowing baskets.
{%—Dvi-śṛṅgikā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= meḍhra-%}
{%vallī%}. {%—Dvi-śṛṅgin, ī, iṇī, i,%} two-horned; ({%ī%}), f.
a sort of fish, commonly called Marmaka. {%—Dvi-%}
{%ṣaṃhita, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%dvi + saṃh˚%}), twice folded
(as a skin). {%—Dvi-ṣandhi%} or {%dvi-sandhi, is, is, i,%}
admitting a twofold Sandhi. {%—Dvi-ṣaṣ, ṭ,%} m. f. n. pl.
twice six, twelve. {%—Dvi-ṣaṣṭa, as, ī, am,%} the 62nd.
[Page0445-a+ 81]
{%—Dvi-ṣaṣṭi, is,%} f., 62; [cf. {%dvā-ṣaṣṭi.%}] {%—Dvi-%}
{%ṣaṣṭi-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 62nd. {%—Dvi-ṣāṣ-%}
{%ṭika, as, ī, am,%} consisting of 62; worth 62, &c.
{%—Dvi-ṣāhasra, as, ī, am,%} Ved. {%= dvi-sāhasra,%}
q. v. {%—Dvi-ṣūkta, as, ā, am,%} having two Sūktas.
{%—Dvi-ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} staying in two places.
{%—Dviṣṭha-tā,%} f. the state of staying in two places.
{%—Dvi-sandhi,%} see {%dvi-ṣandhi%}. {%—Dvisaptata, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} the 72nd. {%—Dvi-saptati, is,%} f., 72; [cf.
{%dvā-saptati.%}] {%—Dvisaptati-tama, as, ī, am,%} the
72nd. {%—Dvisapta-dhā,%} ind. into or in 14 parts, in
14 ways. {%—Dvisaptāha (˚ta-aha), as,%} m. a fort-
night. {%—Dvi-sama, as, ā, am,%} consisting of two
equal portions, having two equal sides. {%—Dvisama-%}
{%tribhuja, as,%} m. an isosceles triangle. {%—Dvi-saha-%}
{%sra, am,%} n., 2000; ({%as,%} &c.), worth 2000. {%—Dvisa-%}
{%hasrākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} having 2000 eyes;
({%as%}), m. ‘the two-thousand-eyed one,’ the great serpent
Śeṣa who is regarded as sovereign of the serpent-
race and who formed the couch of Viṣṇu. {%—Dvi-%}
{%sāṃvatsarika, as, ī, am,%} lasting two years or in-
tended for two years. {%—Dvisāptatika, as, ī, am,%}
having the value of 72. {%—Dvi-sāhasra%} or {%dvi-ṣā-%}
{%hasra, as, ī, am,%} having the value of 2000, con-
sisting of 2000. {%—Dvi-sītya, as, ā, am,%} twice
furrowed, twice ploughed (first lengthways and then
across). {%—Dvi-suvarṇa%} or {%dvisauvarṇika, as,%} &c.,
worth two Su-varṇas. {%—Dvi-stana, as, ā, am,%} two-
breasted, two-uddered. {%—Dvi-svabhāva, as, ā, am,%}
having a double nature, of two characters. {%—Dvi-han,%}
{%ā,%} m. ‘striking twice or with tusks and teeth,’ an
elephant. {%—Dvi-halya, as, ā, am,%} twice ploughed;
[cf. {%dvi-sītya.%}] {%—Dvi-hāyana, as, ī, am,%} two years
old; ({%ī%}), f. a cow two years old. {%—Dvi-hiṅkāra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Dvi-hīna, as, ā, am,%}
destitute of both genders (i. e. of the masc. and
fem.), neuter; ({%am%}), n. the neuter gender. {%—Dvi-%}
{%hṛdaya, ā,%} f. ‘having two hearts,’ a pregnant
woman. {%—Dvi-hotṛ, tā,%} m. ‘a double Hotṛ,’ epithet
of Agni. {%—Dvīḍa (dvi-iḍa), am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Dvīndriya (dvi-in˚), am,%} n. two organs of
sense; ({%as, ā, am%}), having two organs of sense
(touch and taste). {%—Dvīndriya-grāhya, as, ā, am,%}
perceptible by two senses (by sight and touch &c.).
{%—Dvīpa,%} see col. 3. {%—Dvy-aṃśa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), two parts. {%—Dvy-akṣa, as, ī, am,%} two-
eyed, binocular. {%—Dvy-akṣara, as, ā, am,%} two-
syllabled, dissyllabic; ({%am%}), n. a dissyllable, a word
of two syllables. {%—Dvy-agra, as, ā, am,%} two-pointed,
ending in two extremities. {%—Dvy-aṅgula, am,%} n.
two fingers’ length; ({%as, ā, am%}), measuring two
fingers. {%—Dvy-añjala, am,%} n. or {%dvy-añjali,%} n. two
Añjalis or handfuls; ({%as, ī, am%}), measuring &c. two
Añjalis or handfuls. {%—Dvy-aṇuka, am,%} n. the aggre-
gation or combination of two atoms, (the first step in
the formation of substances when they become per-
ceptible.) {%—Dvy-anya, as, ā, am,%} accompanied &c.
by two others; ({%am%}), n. two others collectively.
{%—Dvy-artha, as, ā, am,%} having two senses or
interpretations, ambiguous, equivocal; having two
objects; ({%as%}), m. double meaning, double entendre.
{%—Dvy-aśīta, as, ī, am,%} the 82nd. {%—Dvy-aśīti,%}
{%is,%} f., 82. {%—Dvyaśīti-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 82nd.
{%—Dvy-aṣṭa, am,%} n. copper. {%—Dvyaṣṭa-sahasra,%}
{%am,%} n., 16000. {%—Dvy-aha, as,%} m. a period of two
days (loc. {%dvy-ahni%}); ({%as, ā, am%}), lasting two days;
({%as%}), m. a ceremony or festival lasting two days.
{%—Dvyahīna, as, ā, am,%} of or belonging to two
days, relating to a ceremony which lasts two days.
{%—Dvy-ātmaka, as, ā, am,%} having a double nature,
comprising two, being two; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the signs
of the zodiac Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces.
{%—Dvy-āmuṣyāyaṇa, as,%} m. descended from two
persons, standing in the relationship of an Āmuṣyā-
yaṇa to two people; a son of two fathers, a boy
who remains heir to his father though adopted by
another. {%—Dvy-āyuṣa, am,%} n. a double life, two
lives. {%—Dvyāhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvy-aha%}), returning
the third day, produced &c. in two days. {%—Dvy-%}
{%udātta, as, ā, am,%} doubly accented; ({%am%}), n. a
word so accented. {%—Dvy-ṛca, as,%} m., Ved. a strophe
[Page0445-b+ 81]
consisting of two verses. {%—Dvy-ekāntara (˚ka-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having two or one between, separated by
one or two, one or two off. {%—Dvyoga, as, ā, am%}
(for {%dvi-yoga%}), drawn by two pairs (as a carriage).
{%—Dvy-opaśa, as, ā, am,%} having two superfluous
(syllables &c.); having two appendages.
<LEND>

<L>23095<pc>0445-b<k1>dvika<k2>dvika
{%Dvika, as, ā, am,%}¦ consisting of two, twofold, a
pair; the second; happening the second time; in-
creased by two (e. g. {%dvikaṃ śatam,%} 102, i. e. two
per cent).
<LEND>

<L>23096<pc>0445-b<k1>dvita<k2>dvita
{%Dvita, as,%}¦ m., N. of an Āptya (supposed to be
the author of a Ṛg-veda hymn; in epic poetry,
Ekata, Dvita, and Trita are children of Gautama or
of Brahmā or Prajā-pati); N. of a descendant of
Atri; [cf. {%trita.%}] {%—Dvita-vana, as,%} m., N. of a
man; [cf. {%dvaitavana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23097<pc>0445-b<k1>dvitaya<k2>dvitaya
{%Dvitaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ consisting of two, divided
into two parts, twofold, double; {%dvitaye%} or {%dvita-%}
{%yās,%} m. pl. two, both (e. g. {%te dvitaye,%} these two
or these two classes of things); ({%am%}), n. a pair,
two.
<LEND>

<L>23098<pc>0445-b<k1>dvitIya<k2>dvitIya
{%Dvitīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ second, the second; form-
ing the half or second part of anything; ({%as%}),
m. the second person, the second in a family, i. e.
a son; a companion, fellow, partner (e. g. {%Kṛṣṇa-%}
{%dvitīya,%} accompanied by Kṛṣṇa; cf. {%a-dv˚, dha-%}
{%nur-dv˚, chāyā-dv˚%}); the second letter (in a class),
the hard or aspirated consonant in each of the five
classes; ({%ā%}), f. a female companion, a wife (‘a second
self’); the second day of a half month; (scil. {%vi-%}
{%bhakti%}) the second case, the accusative, the termina-
tions of this case, a word standing in this case;
(with {%bhāga%}) the second half; ({%am%}), n. the half;
({%am%}), ind. for the second time, a second time, again.
{%—Dvitīya-tā,%} f. or {%dvitīya-tva, am,%} n. the state of
being second, the condition or quality or rank of a
second. {%—Dvitīya-triphalā,%} f. the second set of three
fruits, viz. the grape, the date, and the gambhārī. {%—Dvi-%}
{%tīya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having as a second or companion.
{%—Dvitīya-vayas, ās, ās, as,%} having arrived at the
second period of life. {%—Dvitīya-svara, am,%} n., N.
of a Sāman. {%—Dvitīyā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kurute, -kartum,%} to plough twice. {%—Dvitīyā-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} twice ploughed (as a field). {%—Dvitīyā-%}
{%bhā (˚ya-ābhā),%} f. a scitamineous plant, Curcuma
Xanthorrhiza ({%= dāru-haridrā%}).
<LEND>

<L>23099<pc>0445-b<k1>dvitIyaka<k2>dvitIyaka
{%Dvitīyaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā%} (?), {%am,%} the second,
happening the second time; returning every second
day; [cf. {%dvaitīyaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23100<pc>0445-b<k1>dvitIyika<k2>dvitIyika
{%Dvitīyika, as, ā, am,%}¦ second.
<LEND>

<L>23101<pc>0445-b<k1>dvitIyin<k2>dvitIyin
{%Dvitīyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ standing in the second place
or rank; [cf. {%tritīyin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23102<pc>0445-b<k1>dvis<k2>dvis
{%Dvis,%}¦ ind. twice; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δίς;</lang> Zend <nsi>bis;</nsi> Lat.
<nsi>bis, dis-</nsi> in <nsi>dis-cedo</nsi> &c.; probably also Goth.
prefix <nsi>mis-</nsi> and <nsi>missa-</nsi> in <nsi>missa-dēths, missa-</nsi>
<nsi>leiks.</nsi>] {%—Dviḥ-svara, as, ā, am,%} doubly accented.
{%—Dvir-aṃsaka, as, ā, am,%} having two shoulders.
{%—Dvir-abhyasta, as, ā, am,%} twice repeated. {%—Dvir-%}
{%abhyāsākūpāra (˚sa-āk˚), am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Dvir-aśana, am,%} n. eating twice a day. {%—Dvir-%}
{%āgamana, am,%} n. ‘twice coming,’ the ceremony of
the second entrance or approach of the bride to her
husband's house after a visit to that of her father.
{%—Dvir-āpa, as,%} m. ‘drinking twice, i. e. with trunk
and mouth,’ the elephant; [cf. {%dvīpa.%}] {%—Dvir-āvṛtti,%}
{%is,%} f. repetition of an act. {%—Dvir-āṣāḍha, as,%} m. an
intercalary Āṣāḍha month. {%—Dvir-īḍa, as, ā, am,%}
containing the word {%īḍa%} twice. {%—Dvir-ukta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} twice spoken, twice said, repeated, doubled,
reduplicated; said or told in two ways; ({%am%}), n.
repetition. {%—Dvir-ukti, is,%} f. saying twice, repe-
tition, tautology; (in grammar) repetition of a
syllable; twofold way of expression or of spelling
a word; variety of narration, telling anything in
two ways. {%—Dvirukti-prakriyā,%} f., N. of a chapter
of the Madhya-siddhānta-kaumudī by Varada-rāja.
{%—Dvir-udātta, as, ā, am,%} doubly accented. {%—Dvir-%}
{%ūḍhā,%} f. a woman who has been twice married.
{%—Dvir-bhāva, as,%} m. doubling, reduplication.
{%—Dvir-vacana, am,%} n. repetition, reduplication.
{%—Dvis-tāvā,%} f. (fr. {%dvis + tāvat%}), exceeding twice
[Page0445-c+ 77]
the usual measure; (only used with {%vedi;%} cf. {%tris-%}
{%tāvā.%})
<LEND>

<L>23103<pc>0445-c<k1>dveDA<k2>dveDA
{%Dve-dhā%}¦ (fr. {%dvaya;%} cf. {%tre-dhā%}) {%= dvi-dhā,%} in
two parts, into two parts, in a twofold way, twice;
[cf. {%dvaidha%} and {%dvaidham.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23104<pc>0445-c<k1>dvitA<k2>dvitA<h>2
{#dvitA#} 2¦. {%dvitā,%} ind. (a particle of affirma-
tion or emphasis = the Greek <lang n="greek">δή, δῆτα,</lang> and occurring
only in the Ṛg-veda), Ved. indeed, certainly, ex-
actly, really, precisely, surely, especially; (native
commentators derive the word from {%dvi%} and trans-
late it ‘in two ways, twofold,’ &c.; cf. 1. {%dvi-tā,%}
p. 444, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>23105<pc>0445-c<k1>dviz<k2>dviz<h>1
{#dviz#} 1¦. {%dviṣ,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%dveṣṭi, dviṣṭe,%}
{%didveṣa, dvekṣyati, dveṣṭum%} (Ved.
{%dveṣṭos%}), to hate, show hatred against (with acc., dat.,
or gen.), to dislike, be hostile or unfriendly: Pass. {%dviṣ-%}
{%yate:%} Caus. {%dveṣayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%adidviṣat:%}
Desid. {%didvikṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%dedviṣyate, dedve-%}
{%ṣṭi, dedviṣīti;%} [cf. rt. 2. {%duṣ, dus; dvis,%} im-
plying division: Zend <nsi>ḍbiṣ,</nsi> ‘to hate:’ Gr. base
<lang n="greek">ὀδυς, οδ-ώδυς-ται, ὠδυσ-ά-μην, ὀδυσσά-μενο-ς, ὠδυ-σίν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">Ὀδυσ-εύ-ς;</lang> perhaps also <lang n="greek">μισέω</lang> = Caus. {%dve-%}
{%ṣayāmi, d%} being dropped and {%v%} changed to {%m.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23106<pc>0445-c<k1>dviz<k2>dviz<h>2
2. {%dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ hostile, hating, disliking; ({%ṭ%}), m.
an enemy, a foe; ({%ṭ%}), f., Ved. hostility, dislike,
hatred. {%—Dviṭ-sevā,%} f. service of a foe, secret agree-
ment with an enemy; treachery. {%—Dviṭsevin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} serving an enemy, having a secret under-
standing with an enemy, traitor.
<LEND>

<L>23107<pc>0445-c<k1>dviza<k2>dviza
{%Dviṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
hostile, hating; ({%as%}), m. an enemy; [cf. {%anṛta-d˚,%}
{%ṛṣi-d˚, brahma-d˚.%}] {%—Dviṣa-tā,%} f. hostility,
enmity, hostile behaviour, hating. {%—Dviṣan-tapa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} punishing or harassing an enemy, reveng-
ing, retaliating.
<LEND>

<L>23108<pc>0445-c<k1>dvizat<k2>dvizat
{%Dviṣat, an, atī, at,%}¦ hating or detesting, hostile,
inimical, unfriendly; ({%an%}), m. an enemy, foe. {%—Dvi-%}
{%ṣatī-tāpa, as, ā, am%} (?), vexing or harassing an
enemy.
<LEND>

<L>23109<pc>0445-c<k1>dvizwa<k2>dvizwa<h>1
1. {%dviṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see below), hated,
disliked, odious; hostile.
<LEND>

<L>23110<pc>0445-c<k1>dveza<k2>dveza
{%Dveṣa, as,%}¦ m. (opposed to {%rāga, kāma, icchā%}),
hatred, hate, dislike, abhorrence; repugnance; malig-
nity, enmity; [cf. {%a-d˚%} and {%tulasī-d˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23111<pc>0445-c<k1>dvezaRa<k2>dvezaRa
{%Dveṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ hating, disliking, inimical,
hostile; ({%as%}), m. an enemy; ({%am%}), n. hate, hatred
against (with gen.), enmity, dislike.
<LEND>

<L>23112<pc>0445-c<k1>dvezaRIya<k2>dvezaRIya
{%Dveṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be hated.
<LEND>

<L>23113<pc>0445-c<k1>dvezas<k2>dvezas
{%Dveṣas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. dislike, hatred, hostility; a
mischievous man, an enemy; [cf. {%a-d˚, tarad-d˚,%}
{%rakṣas.%}] {%—Dveṣo-yut, t, t, t,%} Ved. removing hos-
tility, remover of sin; (Sāy.) filled with hatred.
<LEND>

<L>23114<pc>0445-c<k1>dvezin<k2>dvezin
{%Dveṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ hating, disliking, hostile, inimi-
cal; ({%ī%}), m. a hater, foe, an enemy; [cf. {%kriyā-d˚%}
and {%gajāsura-d˚.%}] {%—Dveṣi-dveṣa-para, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} filled with hatred towards enemies.
<LEND>

<L>23115<pc>0445-c<k1>dvezwf<k2>dvezwf
{%Dveṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who hates, a hater,
disliking, hating, inimical, an enemy, foe. {%—Dveṣ-%}
{%ṭṛ-tva, am,%} n. hatred, hostility.
<LEND>

<L>23116<pc>0445-c<k1>dvezya<k2>dvezya
{%Dveṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be hated; disagreeable,
hateful, odious, detestable; ({%as%}), m. an enemy, a
foe. {%—Dveṣya-tā,%} f. aversion, dislike, disfavour;
odiousness, detestableness.
<LEND>

<L>23117<pc>0445-c<k1>dvizaRqika<k2>dvizaRqika
{#dvizaRqika#}¦ {%dviṣaṇḍika, as,%} m. a garment
which protects from wind and cold; (the right
reading is perhaps {%dvikhaṇḍika%} fr. {%dvi-khaṇḍa.%})
<LEND>

<L>23118<pc>0445-c<k1>dvizadA<k2>dvizadA
{#dvizadA#}¦ {%dviṣadā,%} f. Polianthes Tuberosa.
<LEND>

<L>23119<pc>0445-c<k1>dvizA<k2>dvizA
{#dvizA#}¦ {%dviṣā,%} f. cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>23120<pc>0445-c<k1>dvizwa<k2>dvizwa<h>2
{#dvizwa#} 2¦. {%dviṣṭa, am,%} n. (for {%dvy-aṣṭa%}),
copper. (For 1. {%dviṣṭa%} see above.)
<LEND>

<L>23121<pc>0445-c<k1>dvIpa<k2>dvIpa
{#dvIpa#}¦ {%dvīpa, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. {%dvi + ap,%}
water), an island, peninsula, any land surrounded by
water, a sandbank; a place of refuge, shelter, protec-
tion, a protector; a division of the terrestrial world
(of which according to different authorities there are
seven or four or nine or thirteen and which are
situated round the mountain Meru like the leaves
[Page0446-a+ 76]
encircling a lotus flower; each Dvīpa is separated from
the next by a distinct circumambient ocean: the seven
Dvīpas, reckoning from the central one, are Jambu,
Plaksha or Go-medaka, Śālmalī, Kuśa, Krauñca,
Śāka, and Puṣkara: according to Mahā-bhārata,
Bhīṣma-parva 208, there are four Dvīpas, viz.
Bhadrāśva, Ketu-māla, Jambu-dvīpa, and Uttarāḥ
kuravas. In Viṣṇu-Purāṇa II. 3. nine Dvīpas are
enumerated, which are sometimes joined with the
above-named four, so as to make thirteen in all);
a tiger's skin?; (according to some) cubebs; [cf.
{%dvīpa-sambhava.%}] {%—Dvīpa-karpūraka%} or {%dvīpa-%}
{%karpūraja (?), as,%} m. camphor from China. {%—Dvī-%}
{%pa-kumāra, ās,%} m. pl. (with Jainas) N. of a class
of deities belonging to the Bhavana-patis. {%—Dvīpa-%}
{%kharjūra%} or {%dvīpa-ja, am,%} n. a kind of fruit tree,
{%= mahā-pārevata%}. {%—Dvīpa-chandira,%} N. of a place
mentioned in the Tarka-bhāṣā-prakāśikā by Cinna-
bhaṭṭa. {%—Dvīpa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding in
islands; ({%ān%}), m. the ocean; a river; ({%tī%}), f. a river;
the earth. {%—Dvīpa-śatru, us,%} m. Asparagus Race-
mosus ({%= śatāvarī;%} cf. the right form {%dvīpi-śatru%}
and {%dvīpikā%}). {%—Dvīpa-śreṣṭha, as, am,%} m. n.
best of islands. {%—Dvīpa-sambhava, as,%} m. the
largest sort of raisin [cf. {%dvīpya%}]; Vernonia Anthel-
minthica; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of date.
<LEND>

<L>23122<pc>0446-a<k1>dvIpikA<k2>dvIpikA
{%Dvīpikā,%}¦ f. Asparagus Racemosus; [cf. {%dvīpa-%}
{%śatru%} and {%dvīpya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23123<pc>0446-a<k1>dvIpin<k2>dvIpin
{%Dvīpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having islands; having spots
like islands; ({%ī%}), m. a tiger, an ounce or panther,
leopard; ({%inī%}), f. a kind of plant, {%= vaṭa-pattrī.%}
{%—Dvīpi-karṇi, is,%} m. ‘having the ear of a tiger,’
N. of a king; [cf. {%manda-karṇi.%}] {%—Dvīpi-nakha,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of perfume; [cf. {%vyāghra-nakha%} and
{%vyāla-nakha.%}] {%—Dvīpi-śatru, us,%} m. the plant
Asparagus Racemosus.
<LEND>

<L>23124<pc>0446-a<k1>dvIpya<k2>dvIpya
{%Dvīpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ living on an island, an islander;
({%as%}), m. the largest sort of raisin, cubebs; a sort of
crow; N. of Vyāsa [cf. {%dvaipāyana%}]; ({%ā%}), f. Aspa-
ragus Racemosus; [cf. {%dvīpikā%} and {%dvīpi-śatru.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23125<pc>0446-a<k1>dvf<k2>dvf
{#dvf#}¦ {%dvṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%dvarati,%} &c., to obstruct;
to cover; to disregard; to appropriate.
<LEND>

<L>23126<pc>0446-a<k1>dveDA<k2>dveDA
{#dveDA#}¦ {%dve-dhā.%} See p. 445, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23127<pc>0446-a<k1>dveza<k2>dveza
{#dveza#}¦ {%dveṣa.%} See p. 445, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23128<pc>0446-a<k1>dvesata<k2>dvesata
{#dvesata#}¦ {%dvesata, as, ā, am,%} having the same
length above and below the navel; (also read {%dva-%}
{%yasata.%})
<LEND>

<L>23129<pc>0446-a<k1>dvEgata<k2>dvEgata
{#dvEgata#}¦ {%dvaigata, am,%} n. (fr. {%dvi-gat%}), Ved.,
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>23130<pc>0446-a<k1>dvEguRika<k2>dvEguRika
{#dvEguRika#}¦ {%dvaiguṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvi-%}
{%guṇa%}), one who requires the double or cent per cent
interest; ({%as%}), m. an usurer, money-lender.
<LEND>

<L>23131<pc>0446-a<k1>dvEguRya<k2>dvEguRya
{%Dvaiguṇya, am,%}¦ n. the double, double amount,
double value or measure, double the amount; duality;
doubling; the possession of two out of the three
qualities.
<LEND>

<L>23132<pc>0446-a<k1>dvEjAta<k2>dvEjAta
{#dvEjAta#}¦ {%dvaijāta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvi-jāti%}), be-
longing to the twice-born, consisting of twice-born
men, belonging to one of the three higher classes.
<LEND>

<L>23133<pc>0446-a<k1>dvEta<k2>dvEta
{#dvEta#}¦ {%dvaita, am,%} n. (fr. 1. {%dvi-tā%}), duality,
the state of being doubled, duplicity, dualism in philo-
sophy, the assertion of two principles (as of spirit
and matter, God and the universe, &c.); doubt.
{%—Dvaita-nirṇaya, as,%} m. ‘the decision or discus-
sion of duality,’ N. of a philosophical work by Vācas-
pati-miśra. {%—Dvaita-pariśiṣṭa, am,%} n. ‘the re-
mainder of discussions on duality,’ N. of a work by
Keśava. {%—Dvaita-bhṛta, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a philo-
sophical school. {%—Dvaita-vādin, ī,%} m. ‘an assertor
of dualism,’ a philosopher who asserts the two prin-
ciples or the existence of the soul as separate from
the Supreme Being. {%—Dvaita-viveka, as,%} m. ‘dis-
crimination of duality,’ N. of a part of the Pañca-
daśī by Bhāratī-tīrtha. {%—Dvaita-vaitathyopaniṣad%}
{%(˚ya-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>23134<pc>0446-a<k1>dvEtavana<k2>dvEtavana
{%Dvaitavana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%dvita-vana%}), Ved. a
[Page0446-b+ 73]
patronymic of the king Dhvasan; ({%as, ī, am%}), be-
longing or relating to Dhvasan Dvaitavana.
<LEND>

<L>23135<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEtIyaka<k2>dvEtIyaka
{%Dvaitīyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ returning every second
day, second; [cf. {%dvitīyaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23136<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEDa<k2>dvEDa
{#dvEDa#}¦ {%dvaidha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvi-dhā%}), two-
fold, double; ({%am%}), n. duality, duplicity, double exist-
ence or nature, twofold form or state, a double re-
source, secondary array or reserve; division or sepa-
ration into two parts; disunion, diversity, difference,
variance, contest, conflict, a duel; doubt, uncertainty;
a dilemma; contradiction, dispute; ({%am%}), ind. in
two parts, into two portions; in two ways, doubly.
{%—Dvaidhā-karaṇa, am,%} n. making into two, sepa-
rating into two parts, disuniting. {%—Dvaidhī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} separated, made twofold, divided into
two, sundered; brought into a dilemma. {%—Dvaidhī-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. twofold form or state, a double state,
duality, duplicity, double nature, the nature or pro-
perty of being two or distinct; separation into two,
difference; contest, dispute, doubt, dilemma, uncer-
tainty; sowing dissension or causing the separation
of allies, dividing an army into two detachments,
making peace with one and waging war with another
(one of the six kinds of military tactics); falsehood.
{%—Dvaidhī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to
become separated or divided into two parts, to be
disunited. {%—Dvaidhī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} separated
into two, divided, disunited.
<LEND>

<L>23137<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEDya<k2>dvEDya
{%Dvaidhya, am,%}¦ n. ‘the state of being twofold,’
double nature, duplicity; diversity, variance, discre-
pancy; falsehood.
<LEND>

<L>23138<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEpa<k2>dvEpa
{#dvEpa#}¦ {%dvaipa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvīpa%}), being or
living on an island, an islander; occurring on an
island; (fr. {%dvīpin%}), belonging to a tiger or panther,
made of a tiger's skin, covered with it; ({%as%}), m. a
car covered or hung with a tiger's skin.
<LEND>

<L>23139<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEpaka<k2>dvEpaka
{%Dvaipaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ living on an island, an
islander.
<LEND>

<L>23140<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEpAyana<k2>dvEpAyana
{%Dvaipāyana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%dvīpa%}), ‘the island-
born,’ N. of Vyāsa, author or compiler of the Vedas
and Purāṇas, (the place of his nativity being a small
island in the Ganges); ({%as, ī, am%}), relating to
Dvaipāyana.
<LEND>

<L>23141<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEpya<k2>dvEpya
{%Dvaipya, as, ā%}¦ or {%-pī, am%} (fr. {%dvīpa%}), of or
relating to an island or peninsula, the inhabitant of
an island or of the coast, an islander.
<LEND>

<L>23142<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEpakza<k2>dvEpakza
{#dvEpakza#}¦ {%dvaipakṣa, am,%} n. (fr. {%dvi-pakṣa%}),
two factions or parties.
<LEND>

<L>23143<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEpada<k2>dvEpada
{#dvEpada#}¦ {%dvaipada, as,%} m. (fr. {%dvi-pada%}), a
combination or compound of two words. {%—Dvai-%}
{%pada-śas,%} ind. in a compound or combination of
two words.
<LEND>

<L>23144<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEpadika<k2>dvEpadika
{%Dvaipadika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%dvi-padā%}), familiar
with the Dvi-padā.
<LEND>

<L>23145<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEparAka<k2>dvEparAka
{#dvEparAka#}¦ {%dvaiparāka, as,%} m. (fr. {%dvi-parāka%}),
N. of a Tri-rātra.
<LEND>

<L>23146<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEpArAyaRika<k2>dvEpArAyaRika
{#dvEpArAyaRika#}¦ {%dvaipārāyaṇika, as, ī, am,%} one
who performs the Pārāyaṇa twice.
<LEND>

<L>23147<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEBAvya<k2>dvEBAvya
{#dvEBAvya#}¦ {%dvaibhāvya, am,%} n. double nature,
division or separation into two.
<LEND>

<L>23148<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEmAtura<k2>dvEmAtura
{#dvEmAtura#}¦ {%dvaimātura, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvi-%}
{%mātṛ%}), having two mothers, i. e. a natural mother
and a step-mother; having another mother, having
two different mothers (as two brothers); ({%as%}), m.
an epithet of Gaṇeśa [cf. {%dvimātṛ-ja%}]; of Jarā-
sandha.
<LEND>

<L>23149<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEmAtfka<k2>dvEmAtfka
{%Dvaimātṛka, as, ī, am,%}¦ nourished by rain and
rivers (as a country; cf. {%devamātṛka%} and {%nadī-%}
{%matṛka%}).
<LEND>

<L>23150<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEmitri<k2>dvEmitri
{#dvEmitri#}¦ {%dvaimitri, is, is, i%} (fr. {%dvi-mitra%}),
born of two friends.
<LEND>

<L>23151<pc>0446-b<k1>dvEyahnika<k2>dvEyahnika
{#dvEyahnika#}¦ {%dvaiyahnika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvi-%}
{%ahan%}), of or belonging to two days.
<LEND>
[Page0446-c+ 64]

<L>23152<pc>0446-c<k1>dvEyogya<k2>dvEyogya
{#dvEyogya#}¦ {%dvaiyogya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dvi-yoga%}),
a combination of two.
<LEND>

<L>23153<pc>0446-c<k1>dvEraTa<k2>dvEraTa
{#dvEraTa#}¦ {%dvairatha, am,%} n. (fr. {%dvi-ratha%}),
‘chariot-duel,’ a single combat in chariots, single
combat in general; ({%as, ī, am%}), relating to a single
combat in chariots; ({%as%}), m. an adversary.
<LEND>

<L>23154<pc>0446-c<k1>dvErAjya<k2>dvErAjya
{#dvErAjya#}¦ {%dvairājya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dvi-rājan%}), a
dominion divided between two princes.
<LEND>

<L>23155<pc>0446-c<k1>dvErAtrika<k2>dvErAtrika
{#dvErAtrika#}¦ {%dvairātrika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvi-%}
{%rātra%}), of or belonging to a period of two nights.
<LEND>

<L>23156<pc>0446-c<k1>dvEvarzika<k2>dvEvarzika
{#dvEvarzika#}¦ {%dvaivarṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvi-%}
{%varṣa%}), biennial, happening after two years.
<LEND>

<L>23157<pc>0446-c<k1>dvEviDya<k2>dvEviDya
{#dvEviDya#}¦ {%dvaividhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dvi-vidha%}),
the state of being twofold, duality, twofold manner
or character, duplicity, diversity, variance.
<LEND>

<L>23158<pc>0446-c<k1>dvESARa<k2>dvESARa
{#dvESARa#}¦ {%dvaiśāṇa, as, ī, am,%} worth two
Śāṇas; [cf. {%dvi-śāṇa%} and {%dviśāṇya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23159<pc>0446-c<k1>dvEzaRIyA<k2>dvEzaRIyA
{#dvEzaRIyA#}¦ {%dvaiṣaṇīyā,%} f. (fr. {%dveṣaṇīya%}), a
sort of betel pepper.
<LEND>

<L>23160<pc>0446-c<k1>dvEsamika<k2>dvEsamika
{#dvEsamika#}¦ {%dvaisamika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dvi-samā%}),
two years old.
<LEND>

<L>23161<pc>0446-c<k1>dvEhAyana<k2>dvEhAyana
{#dvEhAyana#}¦ {%dvaihāyana, am,%} n. (fr. {%dvi-hā-%}
{%yana%}), the age of two years, the state of being two
years old.
<LEND>

<L>23162<pc>0446-c<k1>dvyaMSa<k2>dvyaMSa
{#dvyaMSa#}¦ {%dvy-aṃśa,%} for this and other comps.
beginning with {%dvy%} see under {%dvi,%} p. 445, col. 1.
<LEND>
<H>{#Da#}

<L>23163<pc>0446-c<k1>Da<k2>Da<h>1
{#Da#} 1¦. {%dha,%} the nineteenth consonant of the
alphabet and the fourth of the fourth or dental class,
being the aspirate of {%d%} and pronounced like <nsi>dh</nsi> in
<nsi>madhouse</nsi>. {%—Dha-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%dh.%}
<LEND>

<L>23164<pc>0446-c<k1>Da<k2>Da<h>2
{#Da#} 2¦. {%dha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dhā%}), placing,
putting; holding, containing, possessing, having; caus-
ing, &c.; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Brahmā; epithet
of Kuvera; virtue, moral merit; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the
residence of Kṛṣṇa; ({%am%}), n. wealth, property.
<LEND>

<L>23165<pc>0446-c<k1>Dak<k2>Dak<h>1
{#Dak#} 1¦. {%dhak,%} ind. (probably fr. rt. 1. {%dah%}),
an exclamation of wrath.
<LEND>

<L>23166<pc>0446-c<k1>Dak<k2>Dak<h>2
{#Dak#} 2¦. {%dhak,%} see {%uśa-dhak;%} cf. 2. {%dah.%}
<LEND>

<L>23167<pc>0446-c<k1>Dakit<k2>Dakit
{#Dakit#}¦ {%dhakit,%} ind. {%= dhik,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23168<pc>0446-c<k1>Dakk<k2>Dakk
{#Dakk#}¦ {%dhakk,%} cl. 10. P. {%dhakkayati,%} &c.,
to destroy or annihilate.
<LEND>

<L>23169<pc>0446-c<k1>Dawa<k2>Dawa
{#Dawa#}¦ {%dhaṭa, as,%} m. (probably a Prākṛt form
of {%dhartṛ,%} derived from the nom. sing. {%dhartā%} and
rt. {%dhṛ,%} like {%bhaṭ, bhāṭa, bhāṭaka, bhāṭi%} fr. rt.
{%bhṛ;%} cf. {%tulā-dhaṭa%} and {%tulayā dhṛ%} under {%tulā%}),
a balance, the scale of a balance, a pair of scales;
the sign of the zodiac Libra; ordeal by the balance;
({%ī%}), f. old cloth or raiment; a piece of cloth worn
over the privities. {%—Dhaṭī-dāna, am,%} n. giving old
cloth to a woman after impregnation.
<LEND>

<L>23170<pc>0446-c<k1>Dawaka<k2>Dawaka
{#Dawaka#}¦ {%dhaṭaka, as,%} m. a kind of weight
equal to 14 Vallas or 42 Raktikās.
<LEND>

<L>23171<pc>0446-c<k1>Dawin<k2>Dawin
{#Dawin#}¦ {%dhaṭin, ī,%} m. an epithet of Śiva,
(perhaps a wrong reading for {%ghaṭin;%} cf. {%ghaṇṭa,%}
{%ghaṇṭin, ghaṭighaṭa%}); ({%inī%}), f. a cotton cloth or
string fastened round the loins; [cf. {%dhaṭī%} under
{%dhaṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23172<pc>0446-c<k1>Dawotkaca<k2>Dawotkaca
{#Dawotkaca#}¦ {%dhaṭotkaca, as,%} m., N. of a man;
(probably for {%ghaṭotkaca.%})
<LEND>

<L>23173<pc>0446-c<k1>Daqi<k2>Daqi
{#Daqi#}¦ {%dhaḍi,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>23174<pc>0446-c<k1>DaR<k2>DaR
{#DaR#}¦ {%dhaṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhaṇati,%} &c., to
sound; [cf. rt. 1. {%dhan, dhvaṇ,%} 2. {%dhvan,%}
{%dhraṇ.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0447-a+ 79]

<L>23175<pc>0447-a<k1>DattUra<k2>DattUra
{#DattUra#}¦ {%dhattūra, as,%} m. or {%dhattūraka, as,%}
{%ā,%} m. f. the white thorn-apple, Datura Alba; [cf.
{%dhustūra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23176<pc>0447-a<k1>Dan<k2>Dan<h>1
{#Dan#} 1¦. {%dhan,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhanati,%} &c., to
sound; [cf. rt. 2. {%dhvan%} and {%dhaṇ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23177<pc>0447-a<k1>Dan<k2>Dan<h>2
{#Dan#} 2¦. {%dhan%} (related to rt. {%dhanv%}), cl.
3. P. {%dadhanti,%} &c., Ved. to cause to
move or run, to put in motion; to bear fruit,
produce crops of grain, &c.: Caus. P. A. {%dhana-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to move or run, to put in
motion; to move, run.
<LEND>

<L>23178<pc>0447-a<k1>Dana<k2>Dana
{%Dhana, am,%}¦ n. (connected with 2. {%dhan,%} but said to
be fr. rt. 1. {%dhā%}), the reward given to a victor in a com-
bat, spoil taken from an enemy, booty, prey; a gift;
the prize or thing won in a game, ({%dhanam bhṛ,%} to
carry off the prize, to carry off booty); a contest or
struggle for any prize, a match; anything valuable;
property of any description, wealth, treasure, riches,
money, gold, chattels, wealth in cattle or herds, abound-
ing in anything, possessions in general [cf. {%strī-%}
{%dh˚, dhānya-dh˚, vidyā-dh˚%}]; a valued object, an
object of affection or endearment, capital (opposed
to {%vṛddhi,%} interest); surplus, residue, the affirma-
tive quantity or plus (in arithmetic, opposed to
{%ṛṇa, kṣaya, vyaya, hāni%}); (in astrology) N. of
the second mansion; [cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">εὐ-θενής.</lang>]
{%—Dhana-kāma%} or {%dhana-kāmya, as, ā, am,%}
desirous of money, avaricious, covetous. {%—Dhana-%}
{%keli, is, is, i,%} sporting with riches or treasures; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Kuvera. {%—Dhana-krītī%} (according
to some also {%dhana-krītā%}), f. a woman bought with
money. {%—Dhana-kṣaya, as,%} m. loss of money or
property; ‘one who has lost his money,’ N. of a
man. {%—Dhana-garva, as,%} m. ‘one who has pride
in riches, purse-proud,’ N. of a man. {%—Dhana-gar-%}
{%vita, as, ā, am,%} proud of riches, purse-proud.
{%—Dhana-gupta, as, ā, am%} (for {%gupta-dhana%}),
one who guards his property carefully; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a merchant's son. {%—Dhanagupta-tā,%} f. careful
guarding of property. {%—Dhana-cchū, ūs,%} m. the
numidian crane (said to {%= kareṭavyā,%} but the name
suggests an analogy to the Dhaneśa of the spoken
dialects or the Indian Buceros). {%—Dhana-cyuta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} fallen from affluence, reduced to poverty,
poor. {%—Dhana-jāta, as, ā, am,%} arising from wealth,
produced by wealth; ({%āni%}), n. pl. all kinds of valu-
able objects or possessions. {%—Dhana-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved.
conquering booty, victorious in a fight; acquiring
treasures; ({%t%}), m., N. of an Ekāha. {%—Dhanañ-%}
{%jaya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. conquering booty, victorious
in battle; wealth-acquiring; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Soma; a N. of fire; a particular vital air which is
supposed to nourish the body; the plant Plumbago
Zeylanica; N. of a Brāhman; an epithet of Arjuna,
third son of Pāṇḍu; the plant Terminalia Arjuna;
N. of a serpent-demon; of a Vyāsa; of a king of
Kaliṅga; of a king of Kausthala-pura; of a merchant;
of a lexicographer; of the author of the Dharma-
pradīpa; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of the Brāhman
Dhanañ-jaya. {%—Dhanañjaya-nighaṇṭu, us,%} m. ‘the
vocabulary of Dhanañ-jaya,’ N. of a dictionary men-
tioned in the commentary Prauḍha-manoramā by
Bhaṭṭojī-dīkṣita. {%—Dhanañjaya-vijaya, as,%} m.
‘the victory of Dhanañ-jaya (or Arjuna),’ N. of a
drama. {%—Dhanañjaya-saṅgraha, as,%} m., N. of a
work mentioned in the Saṃskāra-tattva by Raghu-
nandana. {%—Dhana-tama, am,%} n., scil. {%dāyam,%} an
exceedingly rich donation. {%—Dhana-tṛṣṇā,%} f.
thirst for riches, covetousness. {%—Dhana-tyaj, k, k, k,%}
resigning wealth. {%—Dhana-da, as, ā, am,%} giving
money or property, granting wealth, munificent, wealth-
yielding, liberal, tributary; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Kuvera, god of riches; N. of a Guhyaka or a being
attending on Kuvera; N. of a mountain; the plant
Barringtonia Acutangula {%(= hijjala); (ā),%} f., N. of
one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda; of a Tantra
deity; [cf. {%dhana-dā.%}] {%—Dhana-daṇḍa, as,%} m.
fine, amercement. {%—Dhanada-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of
a Tīrtha mentioned in the Revā-māhātmya. {%—Dha- %}
[Page0447-b+ 81]
{%na-datta, as,%} m. ‘wealth-given,’ N. of several
persons. {%—Dhanada-deva, as,%} m. {%= dhana-deva,%}
N. of a poet. {%—Dhana-darpa, as,%} m. pride of
wealth. {%—Dhanada-stotra, am,%} n. ‘praise of the
liberal,’ N. of a small work. {%—Dhana-dā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} Ved. giving rewards, granting spoil; granting
riches or treasures; [cf. {%dhana-da.%}] {%—Dhanadākṣī%}
{%(˚da-akṣi),%} f. a kind of tree, {%= kuverākṣī, latā-%}
{%karañja%}. {%—Dhanadānuja (˚da-an˚), as,%} m. the
younger brother of Kuvera, an epithet of Rāvaṇa.
{%—Dhanadā-pūjā-yantra, am,%} n., N. of a mystical
diagram given in the Tantra-sāra. {%—Dhanadā-man-%}
{%tra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a particular prayer mentioned
in the Tantra-sāra. {%—Dhana-dāyin, ī, inī, i,%} grant-
ing treasures; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Agni. {%—Dha-%}
{%nadāvāsa (˚da-āv˚), as,%} m. the residence of Kuvera,
epithet of the mountain Kailāsa. {%—Dhana-deva, as,%}
m., N. of a man, {%= dhanada-deva,%} N. of a poet.
{%—Dhanadeśvara (˚da-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of wealth-
givers,’ an epithet of Kuvera. {%—Dhanadeśvara-tīr-%}
{%tha, am,%} n., N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Dhana-%}
{%dhānī,%} f. a receptacle for valuable articles, a treasury,
storehouse. {%—Dhana-dhānya, am,%} n., N. of a spell
for restraining certain magical weapons. {%—Dhanadhā-%}
{%nyādhika (˚ya-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} rich in money and
grain. {%—Dhanan-dadā,%} f. ‘granting treasures,’ one
of the Śaktis or female personifications of divine
power peculiar to the Buddhas. {%—Dhana-pati, is,%}
m. ‘the lord of riches or treasures,’ epithet of Indra,
and especially of Kuvera. {%—Dhana-pāla, as,%} m.,
Ved. a guardian of treasure, a treasurer; N. of a
merchant; of a poet; of a lexicographer. {%—Dhana-%}
{%piśācikā%} or {%dhana-piśācī,%} f. avarice, thirst for
wealth. {%—Dhana-priya, as, ā, am,%} fond of wealth;
({%ā%}), f. the plant Ardisia Solanacea {%(= kāka-jambū).%}
{%—Dhana-bhakṣa, as,%} m., Ved. enjoying a reward,
enjoyment of booty or wealth; (Sāy.) desirous of
distributing wealth or possessing wealth (in cattle &c.).
{%—Dhana-mada, as, ā, am,%} proud, inflated with
the pride of wealth, purse-proud; ({%as%}), m. pride or
intoxication of wealth. {%—Dhana-mitra, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing wealth as a friend,’ N. of a merchant. {%—Dhana-%}
{%mūla, am,%} n. principal, capital; ({%as, ā, am%}), pro-
ceeding from wealth, founded on wealth. {%—Dhana-%}
{%mohana, as,%} m., N. of a merchant's son. {%—Dhanarca%}
{%(˚na-ṛca?), as, ā, am,%} Ved. perhaps incorrectly for
{%dhanarja (˚na-ṛja),%} striving after a reward (?).
{%—Dhanarṇa (˚na-ṛṇa), am,%} n. positive and
negative quantities (in mathematics). {%—Dhana-lub-%}
{%dha, as, ā, am,%} or {%dhana-lobhin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘greedy
of wealth,’ avaricious, covetous, miserly, mercenary.
{%—Dhana-lobha, as,%} m. ‘desire of wealth,’ covet-
ousness, avarice. {%—Dhana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} wealthy,
opulent, rich; ({%atī%}), f. the constellation Dhaniṣṭhā;
N. of a merchant's daughter; [cf. probably Lat.
<nsi>dives.</nsi>] {%—Dhana-vibhāga, as,%} m. distribution of
property. {%—Dhana-vṛddhi, is,%} f. increase of pro-
perty. {%—Dhana-vyaya, as,%} m. ‘the spending of
money,’ expenditure, extravagance. {%—Dhana-sañ-%}
{%caya, as,%} m. collection of riches. {%—Dhanasañcayin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} rich; one who has amassed wealth; ({%ī%}),
m. a rich man. {%—Dhana-sani, is, is, i,%} Ved. grant-
ing a reward, giving riches. {%—Dhana-sampatti, is,%}
f. accumulation of wealth. {%—Dhana-sā, ās, ās, am,%}
Ved. granting a reward, distributing gifts or treasures;
acquiring or conquering booty. {%—Dhana-sāti, is,%} f.,
Ved. acquisition of wealth or treasure. {%—Dhana-sū,%}
{%ūs,%} m. ‘producing wealth,’ the fork-tailed shrike.
{%—Dhana-stha, as, ā, am,%} ‘living in wealth,’
rich, wealthy. {%—Dhana-sthāna, am,%} n. a recepta-
cle for riches, a treasury. {%—Dhanasthānādhikārin%}
{%(˚na-adh˚), ī,%} m. the superintendant of a treasury,
a treasurer. {%—Dhana-spṛt, t,%} m., Ved. carrying away
or conquering booty; (Sāy.) gratifying with wealth;
epithet of Agni; of Indra. {%—Dhana-hara, as, ā%} or
{%ī, am,%} carrying off wealth, stealing property, a thief;
receiving property, inheriting, an heir; ({%ī%}), f. a kind
of perfume commonly called Chora. {%—Dhana-harin%}
or {%dhana-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} stealing property, a thief;
inheriting property, an heir. {%—Dhana-hīna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deprived of wealth; reduced to poverty, poor.
[Page0447-c+ 81]
{%—Dhana-hṛt, t, t, t,%} a stealer of property, a thief;
({%t%}), m. f. n. (?), a kind of bulbous plant {%(= caṇḍāla-%}
{%kanda)%}. {%—Dhanāgama (˚na-āg˚), as,%} m. accession
of wealth, gain. {%—Dhanāḍhya (˚na-āḍh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} opulent, wealthy. {%—Dhanādāna (˚na-ād˚),%}
{%am,%} n. acceptance of money. {%—Dhanādhana-ni-%}
{%bandhana (˚na-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} contingent on
the possession or non-possession of wealth. {%—Dhanā-%}
{%dhāra (˚na-ādh˚), as,%} m. a treasury, storehouse.
{%—Dhanādhikāra (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m. title or right
to property. {%—Dhanādhikārin (˚na-adh˚), ī, iṇī,%}
m. f. an heir, an heiress, one who has a right or title
to property; ({%ī%}), m. a treasurer; a collector. {%—Dha-%}
{%nādhikṛta (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘any one placed
over treasures,’ a treasurer. {%—Dhanādhigoptṛ (˚na-%}
{%adh˚), tā,%} m. ‘the guardian of treasure,’ an epithet
of Kuvera. {%—Dhanādhipa, as,%} or {%dhanādhipati%}
{%(˚na-adh˚), is,%} m. ‘the lord of treasure,’ an epithet of
Kuvera; a treasurer. {%—Dhanādhipatya (˚na-adh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the dominion or superintendance over
treasure. {%—Dhanādhyakṣa (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m. an
overseer of treasure, a treasurer; an epithet of
Kuvera; of Śiva; [cf. {%koṣādhyakṣa.%}] {%—Dha-%}
{%nāndha (˚na-an˚), as, ā, am,%} blinded by riches.
{%—Dhanāpahāra (˚na-ap˚), as,%} m. ‘taking away
of property,’ fine, amercement; plunder. {%—Dha-%}
{%nāyus (˚na-āy˚), us,%} m., N. of a son of Dṛḍhāyus.
{%—Dhanārgha (˚na-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. deserving
a reward, worthy of wealth. {%—Dhanārcita (˚na-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} wealthy, opulent. {%—Dhanārjana%}
{%(˚na-ar˚), am,%} n. acquisition of property or of wealth.
{%—Dhanārthin (˚na-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} desiring wealth,
wealth-seeking, a seeker of riches, covetous, miserly.
{%—Dhanāśā (˚na-āśā),%} f. longing after wealth, de-
sire of riches. {%—Dhaneśa (˚na-īśa), as,%} m. the lord
of treasure, a rich man; an epithet of Kuvera; N.
of the teacher of Vopa-deva. {%—Dhaneśvara (˚na-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of treasure,’ an epithet of Kuvera;
N. of a Brāhman; of a teacher of Vopa-deva; ({%ī%}),
f. a female possessor of riches; the wife of Kuvera.
{%—Dhanaiśvarya (˚na-aiś˚), am,%} n. the dominion
over treasure. {%—Dhanaiṣin (˚na-eṣ˚), ī, iṇī, i,%}
longing for riches, wishing or claiming property;
({%ī%}), m. a creditor who claims his money. {%—Dhano-%}
{%pacaya (˚na-up˚), as,%} m. accumulation of wealth.
{%—Dhanoṣman%} ({%˚na-uṣ˚%} or {%-ūṣ˚%}), {%ā,%} m. burning
desire for wealth or treasure.
<LEND>

<L>23179<pc>0447-c<k1>Danaka<k2>Danaka
{%Dhanaka, as,%}¦ m. avarice, covetousness, desire for
riches; N. of a Yādava, son of Dur-dama or Dur-
mada; of another man.
<LEND>

<L>23180<pc>0447-c<k1>DanAya<k2>DanAya
{%Dhanāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%dhanāyati,%} &c., to wish for
wealth, long for riches, be desirous of anything
(with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>23181<pc>0447-c<k1>DanAyA<k2>DanAyA
{%Dhanāyā,%}¦ f. the desire of obtaining riches, covet-
ousness.
<LEND>

<L>23182<pc>0447-c<k1>Danika<k2>Danika
{%Dhanika, as, ā, am,%}¦ rich, wealthy, opulent;
pious, virtuous, excellent; ({%as%}), m. a wealthy man;
a money-lender, a creditor, owner; a husband;
coriander; N. of a poet; ({%ikā%}), f. a virtuous or
excellent woman; a wife, young woman; a tree,
see {%priyaṅgu.%}
<LEND>

<L>23183<pc>0447-c<k1>Danin<k2>Danin
{%Dhanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing wealth or treasures,
opulent, wealthy, rich, well off; ({%ī%}), m. a rich man;
a creditor; the possessor of anything; N. of a
messenger of the Kapas, Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p.
7333.
<LEND>

<L>23184<pc>0447-c<k1>DanizWa<k2>DanizWa
{%Dhaniṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ very rich; (superl. of
2. {%dhan%}), Ved. very swift; ({%ā%}), f. the more modern
N. of the Nakṣatra Śraviṣṭhā or twenty-third
lunar mansion, (it comprises four stars, apparently
<lang n="greek">α, β, γ,</lang> and <lang n="greek">δ</lang> Delphini, and is figured by a drum
or tabor.)
<LEND>

<L>23185<pc>0447-c<k1>DanIkA<k2>DanIkA
{%Dhanīkā,%}¦ f. {%= dhanikā,%} f. a young woman.
<LEND>

<L>23186<pc>0447-c<k1>DanIya<k2>DanIya
{%Dhanīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%dhanīyati,%} &c., to wish for
riches.
<LEND>

<L>23187<pc>0447-c<k1>DanIyaka<k2>DanIyaka
{%Dhanīyaka%}¦ or {%dhaneyaka, am,%} n. coriander
seed, {%= dhanyāka.%}
<LEND>

<L>23188<pc>0447-c<k1>DanU<k2>DanU<h>1
1. {%dhanū, ūs,%}¦ m. a store of grain. (For 2. {%dhanū%}
see p. 448, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>23189<pc>0447-c<k1>Daneyu<k2>Daneyu
{%Dhaneyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva.
<LEND>

<L>23190<pc>0447-c<k1>Danya<k2>Danya
{%Dhanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ bringing wealth, bestowing
[Page0448-a+ 79]
opulence (Ved.); opulent, wealthy, rich; fortunate,
happy, blest, lucky, auspicious; good; virtuous;
({%as%}), m. a fortunate or virtuous man; an infidel,
atheist; N. of a spell for using or restraining magi-
cal weapons; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f. a nurse; Emblic
Myrobalan; coriander; ({%am%}), n. treasure, wealth;
coriander. {%—Dhanya-tā,%} f. or {%dhanya-tva, am,%} n.
good fortune, fortunate condition, good luck; opu-
lence. {%—Dhanyam-manya, as, ā, am,%} considering
one's self happy, thinking one's self fortunate.
{%—Dhanya-vāda, as,%} m. thanksgiving, thankful-
ness, thanks, praise, applause. {%—Dhanya-stotra, am,%}
n. ‘the praise of the blessed,’ N. of a short philo-
sophical poem ascribed to Śaṅkarācārya.
<LEND>

<L>23191<pc>0448-a<k1>Danyaka<k2>Danyaka
{%Dhanyaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>23192<pc>0448-a<k1>DanyAka<k2>DanyAka
{%Dhanyāka, am,%}¦ n. a plant bearing a small pun-
gent seed used by the Hindūs as a condiment,
Coriandrum Sativum.
<LEND>

<L>23193<pc>0448-a<k1>Danasyaka<k2>Danasyaka
{#Danasyaka#}¦ {%dhanasyaka, as,%} m. the plant
Asteracantha Longifolia ({%= go-kṣura%}).
<LEND>

<L>23194<pc>0448-a<k1>DanASrI<k2>DanASrI
{#DanASrI#}¦ {%dhanāśrī, īs%} (?), f., N. of a Rāgiṇī;
(according to Hanu-mat, the third wife of Śrī-rāga.)
<LEND>

<L>23195<pc>0448-a<k1>Danu<k2>Danu
{#Danu#}¦ {%dhanu, us,%} m. or 2. {%dhanū, ūs,%} f. (fr.
{%dhan%} = rt. {%han,%} to kill, or according to some fr.
rt. {%tan,%} to stretch; the full form is {%dhanus%} below),
a bow; a measure of four Hastas or cubits; the
sign of the zodiac Sagittarius; a kind of tree, =
{%piyāla,%} Semecarpus Anacardium; ({%us%}), f. a dry
sandbank, a sandy shore; [cf. {%dhanus, dhanvan;%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">θίς; θινός.</lang>] {%—Dhanu-ketakī,%} f. a kind of flower.
{%—Dhanu-gupta, as,%} m., N. of a tree. {%—Dhanu-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m., N. of one of the ancestors of Śākya-
muni. {%—1. dhanv-antara, am,%} n. (for 2. see under
{%dhanvan,%} col. 2), an extent or distance of a Dhanu
or four Hastas.
<LEND>

<L>23196<pc>0448-a<k1>Danuza<k2>Danuza
{%Dhanuṣa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>23197<pc>0448-a<k1>Danuzka<k2>Danuzka
{%Dhanuṣka%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) =
{%dhanus,%} a bow [cf. {%sa-dh˚%}]; ({%am%}), n. a small bow.
<LEND>

<L>23198<pc>0448-a<k1>Danus<k2>Danus
{%Dhanus, us,%}¦ m. n. (generally n.), a bow; a measure
of length equal to four Hastas or = (1/2000) Gavyūti;
({%us%}), n. an arc or part of a circle; an arc or
quadrant for obtaining by observation the altitude
of the sun and the zenith-distance; the sign of
the zodiac Sagittarius; a kind of tree, {%= piyāla;%} a
desert, arid land; ({%us, us, us%}), armed with a bow;
({%us%}), m. a N. of Śiva. {%—Dhanuḥ-kāṇḍa, am,%} n. a
bow and arrow. {%—Dhanuḥ-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. a portion
of a bow; the stick or any other part of a bow.
{%—Dhanuḥ-paṭa, as,%} m. the Piyal tree, Bucha-
nania Latifolia; (also read {%dhanuṣ-paṭa.%}) {%—Dha-%}
{%nuḥ-śata, am,%} n., 100 Dhanus or 400 Hastas or
cubits. {%—Dhanuḥ-śākhā,%} f. {%= dhanur-guṇa,%} q. v.
{%—Dhanuḥ-śālā,%} f. the place where bows are kept,
bow-room. {%—Dhanuḥ-śreṇī,%} f., N. of two plants, {%=%}
{%dhanur-guṇā%} or {%dhanu-śreṇī%} and {%mahendra-%}
{%vāruṇī%}. {%—Dhanuḥ-stambha, as,%} m. (?), a kind of
spasmodic contraction of the body. {%—Dhanur-ākāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%dhanur-ākṛti, is, is, i,%} bow-shaped,
formed like a bow, curved, bent. {%—Dhanur-guṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. a bow-string; ({%ā%}), f. a plant from the leaves
of which a tough thread is extracted of which bow-
strings were formerly made; Sanseviera Zeylanica,
S. Roxburghiana. {%—Dhanur-graha, as, ā, am,%}
bearing a bow, an archer; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of
the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra [cf. {%dhanur-dhara%}];
the art of managing a bow. {%—Dhanur-grāha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘bearing a bow,’ an archer. {%—Dhanur-jyā,%} f.
a bow-string. {%—Dhanurjyā-tala-śabda, as,%} m. the
mere twanging noise of the bow-string. {%—Dhanur-%}
{%durga = dhanva-durga%} under {%dhanvan,%} col. 2.
{%—Dhanur-druma, as,%} m. the bamboo used for
bows. {%—Dhanur-dvitīya, as, ā, am,%} furnished with
a bow. {%—Dhanur-dhara, as, ā, am,%} bearing a bow,
armed with a bow, an archer, a bowyer; ({%as%}), m.
the sign of the zodiac Sagittarius; N. of one of the
100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dhanur-dhārin, ī,%}
m. or {%dhanur-bhṛt, t,%} m. an archer, a bowyer.
{%—Dhanur-madhya, am,%} n. the middle part of a
bow {%(= lastaka)%}. {%—Dhanur-maha, as,%} m. a fes-
[Page0448-b+ 79]
tival or ceremony performed at the consecration of
a bow; (a various reading has {%dhanur-makha.%})
{%—Dhanur-mārga, as,%} m. a line curved like a bow,
a curve. {%—Dhanur-mālā,%} f. a plant from the leaves
of which bow-strings were made; [cf. {%dhanur-guṇā.%}]
{%—Dhanur-yāsa, as,%} m. the plant Hedysarum Alhagi
{%(= dhanvayāsa)%}. {%—Dhanur-latā,%} f. the moon-plant
{%(= soma-vallī)%}. {%—Dhanur-vaktra, as,%} m., N. of
one of Skanda's attendants; (probably a wrong form
for {%dhanur-vakra.%}) {%—Dhanur-vāta, as,%} m. a kind
of disease. {%—Dhanur-vidyā,%} f. the science of archery,
skill in archery. {%—Dhanur-vṛkṣa, as,%} m., N. of
several plants used for making bows, as the bam-
boo, Ficus Religiosa, Semecarpus Anacardium; a
measure of four cubits; an arc, a portion of the cir-
cumference of a circle; [cf. {%dhanu%} and {%dhanus.%}]
{%—Dhanur-veda, as,%} m. ‘knowledge of archery,
the science of archery,’ N. of a treatise on archery
(regarded as an Upa-veda connected with the Yajur-
veda and ascribed to Viśvā-mitra or according to others
to Bhṛgu). {%—Dhanurveda-para%} or {%dhanurveda-%}
{%parāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%} devoted to the science of
archery. {%—Dhanur-vedin, ī, inī, i,%} versed in the
Dhanur-veda; ({%ī%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Dhanur-%}
{%hasta, as, ā, am,%} bow in hand, bearing a bow.
{%—Dhanuṣākṣa (˚ṣā-ak˚), as,%} m. ({%dhanuṣā%}
probably inst. c. of {%dhanus%}), N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Dha-%}
{%nuṣ-kara, as,%} m. a bow-maker; ({%as, ā, am%}),
carrying a bow in the hand, armed with a bow, an
archer, bowyer; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant; (also read
{%dhānuṣ-kari.%}) {%—Dhanuṣ-kāra, as,%} or {%dhanuṣ-%}
{%kṛt, t,%} m. a bow-maker. {%—Dhanuṣ-paṭa, as,%} m.
a kind of tree, {%= piyāla%}. {%—Dhanuṣ-pāṇi, is, is, i,%}
‘bow-handed,’ armed with a bow, an archer. {%—Dha-%}
{%nuṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished or armed with a bow,
bearing a bow, an archer, bowman, bowyer; ({%ān%}),
m., N. of a mountain to the north of Madhya-deśa;
({%atī%}), f., N. of the tutelary deity in the family of
Vyāghra-pād. {%—Dhanuṣmat-tā,%} f. archery.
<LEND>

<L>23199<pc>0448-b<k1>Danya<k2>Danya
{#Danya#}¦ {%dhanya.%} See p. 447, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23200<pc>0448-b<k1>Danv<k2>Danv
{#Danv#}¦ {%dhanv,%} cl. 1. P. A. (allied to rts.
{%dhav%} and {%dhāv%} and 2. {%dhan%}), Ved. {%dhan-%}
{%vati, -te, dadhanve,%} &c., to run; to flow; to cause
to run or flow.
<LEND>

<L>23201<pc>0448-b<k1>Danutf<k2>Danutf
{%Dhanutṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (fr. rt. {%dhanv%} or 2. {%dhan%}),
Ved. running, flowing, flowing quickly; (Sāy.) en-
riching by crops of grain; causing to flow.
<LEND>

<L>23202<pc>0448-b<k1>Danva<k2>Danva
{#Danva#}¦ {%dhanva, am,%} n. (a curtailed form of
{%dhanvan%} below; said to be fr. rt. {%dhanv%}), a bow,
(in the classical language almost always at the end
of an adj. comp.; cf. {%priya-dh˚%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of
a man. {%—Dhanva-dhi, is,%} m. a bow-case, anything
in which a bow is kept.
<LEND>

<L>23203<pc>0448-b<k1>Danvan<k2>Danvan
{%Dhanvan, a,%}¦ n. a bow, (in the later language
generally at the end of a comp.; cf. {%avatata-dh˚,%}
{%asthi-dh˚, ugra-dh˚, kṛta-dh˚, kṣipra-dh˚,%}
{%kṣema-dh˚,%} &c.); ({%ā, a%}), m. n. (in the earlier
language n. only), a dry soil, a country scantily sup-
plied with water, a desert, a waste; a firm spot, land,
ground, shore; the plant Alhagi Maurorum which
grows in a dry soil; (Sāy.) the sky, rain-water; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">θέναρ:</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>ten-ar:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>denu,</nsi>
‘valley:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>tenne,</nsi> ‘thrashing-floor;’ <nsi>duene,</nsi>
‘down.’] {%—Dhanva-cara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. going
in a desert land; (Sāy.) going like an archer or
warrior armed with a bow. {%—Dhanva-cyut, t, t, t,%}
Ved. agitating or moving the soil; (Sāy.) flowing
with rain-water. {%—Dhanva-ja, as, ā, am,%} growing
on dry soil, produced on waste or barren land.
{%—Dhanva-taru, us,%} m. a kind of Soma plant.
{%—Dhanva-durga, am,%} n. inaccessible by reason
of a surrounding desert. {%—2. dhanvan-tara, as,%}
m. (for 1. see col. 1) {%= dhanvan-tari,%} a N. of
Śiva. {%—Dhanvan-tari, is,%} m. (for {%dhanvani-%}
{%tari%}), ‘moving in a curve,’ N. of a form of the
Sun; of a deity to whom oblations were offered in
the north-east quarter, (the deity Dhanvantari was
honoured with morning and evening oblations along
with Soma, Vanas-pati, Agni-Soma, Indra-Agni,
[Page0448-c+ 78]
Heaven and Earth, Indra, the Viśve-devās, and
Brahmā); the physician of the gods (who was pro-
duced at the churning of the ocean, holding a cup
of Amṛta in his hands; author of the Āyur-veda);
a celebrated physician also called Divo-dāsa, king of
Kāśi, (said to be the same as the preceding in
another existence, and considered to be the founder
of the Hindū school of medicine; also read {%dhān-%}
{%vantari%}); N. of the author of a medical dictionary
(perhaps the same as the Dhanvantari mentioned
among the nine gems of the court of Vikramāditya).
{%—Dhanvantari-grastā,%} f. ‘the plant eaten by
Dhanvantari,’ Helleborus Niger, a medicinal plant;
[cf. {%kaṭukī.%}] {%—Dhanvantari-darpa-bhaṅga, as,%}
m. ‘the breaking of Dhanvantari's pride,’ N. of the
fifty-second chapter of the Kṛṣṇa-khaṇḍa of the
Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Dhanvantari-nighaṇṭu,%}
{%us,%} m. the vocabulary of Dhanvantari. {%—Dhanvan-%}
{%tari-yajña, as,%} m. the sacrifice of Dhanvantari.
{%—Dhanvantarīya, as, ā, am,%} composed by Dhan-
vantari; (also read {%dhānvantarīya.%}) {%—Dhanva-%}
{%yavāsa%} or {%dhanvayavāsaka%} or {%dhanva-yāsa, as,%}
m. Alhagi Maurorum. {%—Dhanvā-sah%} or {%dhanvā-%}
{%sāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. skilled in archery.
<LEND>

<L>23204<pc>0448-c<k1>Danvanya<k2>Danvanya
{%Dhanvanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in dry soil or
barren land.
<LEND>

<L>23205<pc>0448-c<k1>DanvAyana<k2>DanvAyana
{%Dhanvāyana,%}¦ bearing bows (?), in {%bhīma-dhan-%}
{%vāyanī.%} See {%bhīma-dhanvāyana.%}
<LEND>

<L>23206<pc>0448-c<k1>DanvAyin<k2>DanvAyin
{%Dhanvāyin%}¦ or {%dhanvāvin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. carrying
or bearing a bow.
<LEND>

<L>23207<pc>0448-c<k1>Danvin<k2>Danvin
{%Dhanvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ armed with a bow, an archer,
a bowman, (at the end of comp., e. g. {%iṣu-dh˚,%}
furnished with arrow and bow); cunning, shrewd, a
wag, wit, sharp or shrewd fellow; ({%ī%}), m. the sign of
the zodiac Sagittarius; an epithet of Śiva; of Viṣṇu;
of Arjuna; N. of a son of Manu Tāmasa; N. of a
commentator on the Drāhyāyaṇa-sūtras; several
plants, Terminalia Arjuna, Mimusops Elengi ({%=%}
{%vakula%}); Alhagi Maurorum. {%—Dhanvi-bhāṣya,%}
{%am,%} n. the commentary of Dhanvin.
<LEND>

<L>23208<pc>0448-c<k1>DanvaNga<k2>DanvaNga
{#DanvaNga#}¦ {%dhanvaṅga%} or {%dhanvana, as,%} m. a
fruit tree called in the modern languages of India
‘Dhāmani, Dhāmana, Dhāminī, and Dhunin;’ ({%am%}),
n. the fruit of this tree. {%—Dhanvana-cchada, as,%}
m. the tree Grewia Asiatica; (also read {%dhanvaga;%}
cf. {%dhānvana.%})
<LEND>

<L>23209<pc>0448-c<k1>Danvantari<k2>Danvantari
{#Danvantari#}¦ {%dhanvan-tari.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23210<pc>0448-c<k1>Danvina<k2>Danvina
{#Danvina#}¦ {%dhanvina, as,%} m. a kind of animal.
<LEND>

<L>23211<pc>0448-c<k1>Dama<k2>Dama
{#Dama#}¦ {%dhama, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhmā%}),
blowing (fire, a trumpet, tube, &c.); smelting, fusing,
melting, (generally at the end of a comp.; cf. {%karan-%}
{%dh˚, jalan-dh˚, ghaṭin-dh˚%}); ({%as%}), m. the moon;
an epithet of Kṛṣṇa; of Yama; of Brahma, the
supreme spirit.
<LEND>

<L>23212<pc>0448-c<k1>Damaka<k2>Damaka
{%Dhamaka, as,%}¦ m. ‘a blower,’ a blacksmith (as
blowing the forge).
<LEND>

<L>23213<pc>0448-c<k1>DamaDama<k2>DamaDama
{%Dhamadhama, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%dhmā%} with redupli-
cation), ‘the blower,’ N. of a demon that causes
disease; N. of one of the attendants of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda; ({%ā%}),
ind. blowing repeatedly or the sort of sound made by
blowing with a bellows or a trumpet.
<LEND>

<L>23214<pc>0448-c<k1>Damana<k2>Damana
{%Dhamana, as, ā, am,%}¦ blowing (a bellows or wind
instrument, trumpet, &c.); cruel; ({%as%}), m. a kind
of reed, Arundo Tibialis or Karka ({%= naḍa, nala%});
a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>23215<pc>0448-c<k1>Damani<k2>Damani
{%Dhamani, is,%}¦ and in the later language also {%dha-%}
{%manī,%} f. a reed, a pipe, (perhaps also) the act of
blowing (a wind instrument); a tube or canal of the
human body; any tubular vessel, as a vein, nerve, &c.,
(in the Hindū medical system there are twenty-four
chief tubular vessels, which starting from the heart
carry the {%rasa%} or chyle through the body; according
to another system the starting-point of these vessels
is the navel, whence they branch out and perform
various functions); the throat, neck; ({%ī%}), f. a sort
of perfume ({%= haṭṭa-vilāsinī%} and {%nalikā%}); tur-
meric ({%= haridrā%}); another plant, {%= pṛśni-parṇī; %}
[Page0449-a+ 77]
{%(is),%} f., N. of the mother of Vātāpi and Ilvala, and
wife of Hrāda.
<LEND>

<L>23216<pc>0449-a<k1>DamanIla<k2>DamanIla
{%Dhamanīla, as, ā, am,%}¦ full-veined, large-veined,
having prominent veins.
<LEND>

<L>23217<pc>0449-a<k1>Damara<k2>Damara
{%Dhamara%}¦ or {%dhamātra%} (also read {%dhemātra%}),
a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>23218<pc>0449-a<k1>Dami<k2>Dami
{%Dhami, is, is, i,%}¦ blowing, puffing; ({%is%}), f. the
act of blowing.
<LEND>

<L>23219<pc>0449-a<k1>Damita<k2>Damita
{%Dhamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. blown, kindled.
<LEND>

<L>23220<pc>0449-a<k1>Damyat<k2>Damyat
{%Dhamyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ or {%dhamyamāna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} being blown; being melted.
<LEND>

<L>23221<pc>0449-a<k1>Dammawa<k2>Dammawa
{#Dammawa#}¦ {%dhammaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>23222<pc>0449-a<k1>Dammala<k2>Dammala
{#Dammala#}¦ {%dhammala, as,%} m. the breast orna-
mented with gold or jewels; [cf. {%dhammilla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23223<pc>0449-a<k1>DammikA<k2>DammikA
{#DammikA#}¦ {%dhammikā,%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>23224<pc>0449-a<k1>Dammilla<k2>Dammilla
{#Dammilla#}¦ {%dhammilla, as,%} m. the braided and
ornamented hair of a woman tied round the head
and intermixed with flowers, pearls, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23225<pc>0449-a<k1>Dammillaka<k2>Dammillaka
{%Dhammillaka = dhammilla%}¦ at end of comp.
(e. g. {%srasta-dhammillakā vadhūs,%} a woman with
loosened braided hair).
<LEND>

<L>23226<pc>0449-a<k1>Daya<k2>Daya
{#Daya#}¦ {%dhaya, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhe%}),
drinking, sipping, sucking, (often at the end of a
comp., e. g. {%āsyan-dhaya, ghaṭin-dh˚, stanan-dh˚,%}
&c.); ({%ā%}), f. a little girl (?).
<LEND>

<L>23227<pc>0449-a<k1>Dara<k2>Dara
{#Dara#}¦ {%dhara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhṛ%}),
holding, bearing, carrying; wearing; possessing, hav-
ing, possessed of, containing, keeping, sustaining,
preserving, observing, (often compounded with its
object; cf. {%aṃśu-dh˚, akṣa-dh˚, aśruti-dh˚, asṛg-%}
{%dh˚, kakṣa-dh˚,%} &c.); ({%as%}), m. a mountain [cf.
{%kṣiti-dh˚, bhū-dh˚, mahī-dh˚%}]; a flock of cotton;
a frivolous or dissolute man ({%= viṭa%}), N. of one of
the Vasus; of a hero on the side of the Pāṇḍavas;
of the king of the tortoises; of the father of Padma-
prabha, the sixth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī;
({%ā%}), f. ‘the bearer, supporter,’ the earth, the ground;
the uterus or womb; a vein or tubular vessel of the
body; marrow; a mass of gold or heap of valuables
(representing the earth and given to Brāhmans); N.
of one of the wives of Kaśyapa, mother of the land and
water-birds, (probably = the Earth.) {%—Dhara-paṭṭa%}
or {%dhara-sena, as,%} m., N. of a prince of the Ballabhī
or Vallabhī dynasty. {%—Dhara-saṃstha, as, ā, am,%}
equal to a mountain, huge as a mountain, &c. {%—Dha-%}
{%rā-kadamba, as,%} m. the Kadamba tree, Nauclea
Cadamba; [cf. {%dhārā-kadamba.%}] {%—Dharātmaja%}
{%(˚rā-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘son of the earth,’ the planet Mars
or its regent. {%—Dharā-dhara, as, ā, am,%} ‘bearing
or sustaining the earth, prop of the earth,’ an epi-
thet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa; ({%as%}), m. a mountain.
{%—Dharādhārā (˚rā-ādh˚?),%} f. the earth. {%—Dha-%}
{%rādhipa (˚rā-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘sovereign of the earth,’
a king. {%—Dharāntara-cara, as, ā, am,%} walking
in the interior of the earth; (probably a wrong read-
ing for {%dhārāntara-cara,%} q. v.) {%—Dharā-pati, is,%}
m. ‘lord of the earth,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Dha-%}
{%rā-putra, as,%} m. ‘son of the earth,’ the planet
Mars. {%—Dharā-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘enjoying or possessing
the earth,’ a king. {%—Dharā-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘sustaining
the earth,’ a mountain. {%—Dharāmara (˚rā-am˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘a god or immortal on the earth,’ a Brāhman.
{%—Dharā-śaya, as, ī, am,%} sleeping on the earth,
lying on the ground. {%—Dharā-sūnu, us,%} m. ‘son of
the earth,’ the planet Mars. {%—Dharoddhāra (˚rā-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. deliverance of the world. {%—Dharo-%}
{%pastha (˚rā-up˚), as,%} m. surface of the earth.
<LEND>

<L>23228<pc>0449-a<k1>DaraRa<k2>DaraRa
{%Dharaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ bearing, holding; preserving;
({%as%}), m. a dike, a bank, a ridge of land answering
the purpose of a bridge &c., the side of a mountain;
the world; the sun; the female breast; rice, corn;
the Himālaya considered as king of mountains; N.
of a king of the Nāgas; ({%ī%} or {%dharaṇi, is%}), f. the
earth, the soil, the ground, the Earth personified as
the wife of Dhruva; a tubular vessel of the body, a
vein; a kind of bulbous plant, an esculent root, {%=%}
{%dhāraṇīyā, dhīra-pattrī, kandālu, kandāḍhya, %}
[Page0449-b+ 81]
{%daṇḍa-kandaka, vana-kanda, su-kandaka;%} the
silk-cotton tree, {%= śālmali;%} a beam or rafter for a
roof; N. of a dictionary (generally called {%dharaṇi%}
or {%dharaṇi-kośa%}); ({%am%}), n. the act of holding,
seizing, possessing, keeping, bearing, supporting, sup-
port; bringing, procuring; a support, fastening,
prop, stay; security; a sort of weight variously
reckoned as = 10 Palas, = 16 silver Māṣakas, =
1 silver Purāṇa, = (1/10) Śatamāna, = 19 Niṣpāvas, =
(2/5) Karṣa, = (1/10) Pala, = 24 Raktikās; a particular
high number. {%—Dharaṇa-priyā,%} f., N. of the
goddess executing the commands of the nineteenth
Arhat. {%—Dharaṇi-goṇiga, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Dharaṇi-ja, as,%} m. ‘the son of the earth,’ an
epithet of Aṅgiras or the planet Mars. {%—Dharaṇi-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m. ‘the bearer of the earth,’ an epithet
of Viṣṇu; [cf. {%dharaṇī-dhara.%}] {%—Dharaṇi-%}
{%maṇḍa,%} N. of a place. {%—Dharaṇi-stha, as, ā, am,%}
being or staying on earth. {%—Dharaṇī-kanda, as,%}
m. an esculent root or bulb {%(= dharaṇī)%}. {%—Dha-%}
{%raṇī-kīlaka, as,%} m. a mountain. {%—Dharaṇī-tala,%}
{%am,%} n. the surface of the earth. {%—Dharaṇī-talaśrī,%}
{%īs,%} m., N. of a king of the Kin-naras. {%—Dharaṇī-%}
{%dhara, as, ī, am,%} ‘bearing or sustaining the earth,’
epithet of the mythical elephants which are fabled
to support the earth; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śeṣa; of
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa; of Śiva; a mountain; a tor-
toise; a king; N. of several persons; of a man of
the family of Maunin and son of Maheśvara; of the
father of Śaśi-dhara; of the father of Vāsu-deva and
grandfather of the author Hari-nātha; of the father
of Dayā-śaṅkara; of a scholiast on Manu; of a
Bodhi-sattva; (sometimes read {%dharaṇi-dhara%} or
{%dharaṇīn-dhara.%}) {%—Dharaṇī-dhṛt, t,%} m. ‘sup-
porting the earth,’ an epithet of Śeṣa. {%—Dharaṇī-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the earth,’ a king. {%—Dharaṇī-%}
{%pūra, as,%} m. the ocean (as ‘surrounding the earth’).
{%—Dharaṇī-plava, as,%} m. the ocean (‘in which
the earth floats’). {%—Dharaṇī-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} bearing or
supporting the earth; ({%t%}), m. a mountain; a king;
(also read {%dharaṇi-bhṛt.%}) {%—Dharaṇī-maṇḍala,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the sphere of the earth,’ the globe. {%—Dha-%}
{%raṇī-ruha, as,%} m. ‘growing on the earth,’ a tree;
[cf. {%kṣiti-ruh%} and {%kṣiti-ruha.%}] {%—Dharaṇīśvara%}
{%(˚ṇi-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of the earth,’ an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Dharaṇīśvara-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of the
lords of the earth,’ N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Dha-%}
{%raṇī-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of the earth,’ an epithet of
Aṅgiras or the planet Mars; ({%ā%}), f. ‘the daughter
of the earth,’ an epithet of Sītā, wife of Rāma (as
produced from the soil by Janaka when he was
ploughing a spot to prepare it for a sacrifice).
<LEND>

<L>23229<pc>0449-b<k1>DaraRi<k2>DaraRi
{%Dharaṇi, is.%}¦ See above under {%dharaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>23230<pc>0449-b<k1>DaraRIya<k2>DaraRIya
{%Dharaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be held or kept, to be
borne or carried; supportable.
<LEND>

<L>23231<pc>0449-b<k1>DariRi<k2>DariRi
{%Dhariṇi, is,%}¦ m. (?), N. of an Agastya.
<LEND>

<L>23232<pc>0449-b<k1>DaritrI<k2>DaritrI
{%Dharitrī,%}¦ f. a female bearer, supporter; the earth.
<LEND>

<L>23233<pc>0449-b<k1>Dariman<k2>Dariman
{%Dhariman, ā,%}¦ m. a balance, a pair of scales, a
weight; form, figure, semblance; [cf. {%dharīman.%}]
{%—Dharima-meya, as, ā, am,%} measurable by weight.
<LEND>

<L>23234<pc>0449-b<k1>DarIman<k2>DarIman
{%Dharīman = dharman%}¦ (only occurring in the
loc. {%dharīmaṇi%}), Ved. according to custom or law
or precept; (Sāy.) containing the essence of the
earth (as an altar); a vessel for holding anything.
<LEND>

<L>23235<pc>0449-b<k1>DaruRa<k2>DaruRa<h>1
1. {%dharuṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 451, col. 3), Ved.
carrying, holding, supporting, one who supports or
keeps; ({%as%}), m. the supposed author of a hymn of the
Ṛg-veda; an epithet of Brahmā; heaven, paradise;
water; opinion, conception; ({%as, ī, am%}), containing
in one's self, spacious; a place where anything is
preserved or kept; ({%am%}), n. a basis, foundation,
support, prop, stay; the firm soil of the earth; any-
thing that is undermost or innermost; a receptacle,
reservoir; water. {%—Dharuṇa-hvara, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. trembling in its innermost foundations ?; (Sāy.)
obstructing the flow of waters.
<LEND>

<L>23236<pc>0449-b<k1>DarRasa<k2>DarRasa
{%Dharṇasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%dharṇasi%} or {%dharṇi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. bearing, supporting, sustaining; a
supporter; strong, energetic, powerful, able; full of
spirit (as Soma); firm, durable; ({%dharṇasi%} in Naigh.
II. 9. is one of the synonyms of {%bala,%} strength.)
<LEND>
[Page0449-c+ 81]

<L>23237<pc>0449-c<k1>Dartavya<k2>Dartavya
{%Dhartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be upheld or supported;
to be held, had or possessed; to be placed or fixed.
<LEND>

<L>23238<pc>0449-c<k1>Dartf<k2>Dartf
{%Dhartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ holding, bearing, supporting;
({%tā%}), m. a bearer, supporter, preserver.
<LEND>

<L>23239<pc>0449-c<k1>Dartra<k2>Dartra
{%Dhartra, am,%}¦ n. a prop, a stay; a house; a sacri-
fice; virtue, moral merit.
<LEND>

<L>23240<pc>0449-c<k1>Darma<k2>Darma<h>1
1. {%dharma, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (rarely n.; the older
form which occurs in the Ṛg-veda is {%dharman,%} q. v.;
for 2. {%dharma%} see p. 451, col. 3), that which is to be
held fast or kept, ordinance, statute, law, usage, practice,
custom, the customary observances of caste, sect, &c.;
religion, piety; prescribed course of conduct, duty,
(thus ‘giving alms’ &c. is the {%dharma%} of the house-
holder, ‘administering justice’ of a king, ‘piety’ of a
Brāhman, ‘courage’ of a Kṣatriya); right, justice,
equity, anything right, proper, or just; virtue, mora-
lity, morals, merit, good works; nature, character,
the peculiar state or condition of anything; an
essential or characteristic quality, mark, peculiarity;
manner, resemblance; any sacrifice; a peculiar kind
of sacrifice; an Upaniṣad; religious abstraction,
devotion ({%= yoga%}); associating with the virtuous;
a bow; a drinker of Soma juice; Right, Justice,
Law, or Virtue personified (as born from the right
breast of Brahmā, and having Śama, Kāma, and
Harṣa as his offspring); or personified as a Bull;
or personified as a Dove; a N. of Yama (the Hindū
Pluto, ruler of the lower regions, god of justice, and
judge of the dead); one of the attendants of the god
of the Sun; Justice or Virtue identified with Viṣṇu;
also identified with Prajā-pati, and said to be son-in-
law of Dakṣa; N. of the fifteenth Arhat of the
present Ava-sarpiṇī, descended from Ikṣvāku, son of
Bhānu and Su-vratā; N. of a son of Anu and father
of Ghṛta; of a son of Gāndhāra and father of
Dhṛta; of a son of Haihaya and father of Netra;
of a son of Pṛthu-śravas and father of Uśanas; of a
son of Su-vrata; of a son of Dīrgha-tapas; of a
prince of Kaśmīra; of a lexicographer; (in astrology)
N. of the ninth mansion; {%dharmāt%} or {%dharmeṇa,%}
ind. according to right, rightly, justly, according to
rule, according to the nature of anything. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-kathaka, as,%} m. a propounder of the law.
{%—Dharma-kathā,%} f. a discourse upon law, &c.
{%—Dharma-karman, a,%} n. a work of duty or piety;
any virtuous or pious action. {%—Dharma-kāma, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} loving justice, observing right or duty; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of the demon Pāpīyas; of a god of
the Bodhi tree. {%—Dharma-kāmārtha-sambaddha%}
{%(˚ma-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} joined with or containing
virtue, pleasure, and wealth. {%—Dharma-kāya, as,%} m.
‘the body of law or of abstract existence,’ epithet of one
of the three bodies of a Buddha; ({%as%}), m. a Buddha;
a Jina or Jaina saint; an epithet of Avalokiteśvara.
{%—Dharma-kāra, as,%} m. a doer or observer of the
law; N. of a person. {%—Dharma-kāraṇa, am,%} n.
cause of virtue. {%—Dharma-kārya, am,%} n. any act of
duty or religion (as digging a well, building a temple,
&c.); pious act, good work, virtuous conduct. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-kīrtti, is,%} m. ‘glory of religion,’ N. of a poet; of
a logician; of a king mentioned in the twenty-first
chapter of the Vṛhan-nāradīya-Purāṇa. {%—Dharma-%}
{%kīla, as,%} m. royal edict or order, decree, grant.
{%—Dharma-kīlaka, as,%} m. the command of a
Brāhman. {%—Dharma-kūpa, as,%} m. ‘the holy well,’
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—1. dharma-kṛt, t, t, t%} (for 2.
see under {%dharman%}), fulfilling duty, one who acts
justly or practises virtue. {%—Dharma-kṛtya, am,%} n.
fulfilment of duty, virtue; any moral or religious
observance. {%—Dharma-ketu, us,%} m. ‘having justice
for a banner or symbol,’ N. of a son of Su-ketu and
father of Satya-ketu; N. of a Buddha; of a Jaina
deified saint. {%—Dharma-kośa%} or {%dharma-koṣa, as,%}
m. the treasury of law or duties; the collective body
of laws or duties. {%—Dharmakośa-vyākhyā,%} f. ‘the
explanation of the treasury of law,’ N. of a Buddhist
work. {%—Dharma-kriyā,%} f. observance of duties,
acting according to law, righteous conduct, any reli-
gious act or pious work. {%—Dharma-kṣetra, am,%} n.
the department or province of the law; a plain in
the north-west of India near Delhi (the scene of the
[Page0450-a+ 81]
great battle between the Kurus and Pāṇḍus, com-
monly called Kuru-kṣetra); ({%as%}), m. a man of piety
and virtue. {%—Dharma-gañja, as,%} m. ‘treasury of
law or religion,’ N. of a library. {%—Dharma-gaveṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘seeking virtue &c.,’ N. of a man. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-gahanābhyudgata-rāja (˚na-abh˚), as,%} m.
‘a prince who has threaded the labyrinth of the
law,’ N. of a Buddha. {%—Dharma-gupta, as,%} m.
‘protected by the law,’ N. of several persons; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a Buddhist school. {%—Dharmagupta-miśra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author mentioned in the Saṅkṣepa-
śaṅkara-jaya by Mādhava. {%—Dharma-grantha, as,%}
m. book of the law, sacred scriptures. {%—Dharma-gra-%}
{%haṇa, am,%} n. observance of moral or religious precepts,
accepting or following the law. {%—Dharma-ghaṭa, as,%}
m. a jar of fragrant water offered daily in the month
Vaiśākha. {%—Dharma-ghna, as, ī, am,%} ‘destroying
law or right,’ contrary to law or duty, immoral,
unlawful; ({%as%}), m. (?), the plant Terminalia Belle-
rica (so called because the seeds are used as dice).
{%—Dharma-cakra, am,%} n. ‘the wheel or circle of
religion or law,’ (an expression used to denote the
vast range of Dharma); a kind of mythical weapon;
({%as%}), m. ‘having the wheel of Dharma,’ a Buddha.
{%—Dharmacakra-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘holding the wheel
of Dharma,’ a Buddha or Jaina. {%—Dharma-caraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%dharma-caryā,%} f. observance of the law,
performance of duty. {%—Dharma-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
observing the law, fulfilling one's duties, practising
virtue, virtuous, dutiful, moral; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a
Buddhist deity; epithet of Śiva; ({%iṇī%}), f. a female
helpmate in the fulfilment of duties, especially a
wife, an honest wife, a virtuous woman. {%—Dharma-%}
{%cintaka, as, ā, am,%} reflecting on the law, studying
duty, familiar with it. {%—Dharma-cintana, am,%} n.
or {%dharma-cintā,%} f. pondering on the law or duty,
study of virtue, consideration of moral duties, virtuous
reflection. {%—Dharma-cinti, is, is, i,%} reflecting on
the law or duty; an epithet of Śākya-muni; (perhaps
wrongly for {%dharma-cintin.%}) {%—Dharma-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} produced by a sense of duty; ({%as%}), m. ‘son
of Dharma, judge of the dead,’ an epithet of Yudhi-
ṣṭhira. {%—Dharma-jijñāsā,%} f. ‘inquiry into the law,’
N. of a Pariśiṣṭa ascribed to Kātyāyana. {%—Dharma-%}
{%jīvana, as, ā, am,%} living by fulfilment of prescribed
duties, a Brāhman who lives according to the rules
of his class, one who practises the outward acts of the
law. {%—Dharma-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing the law
or what is right, knowing one's duty, conversant with
virtue. {%—Dharma-jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge of
moral, legal, and religious duty. {%—Dharma-tattva,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Mīmāṃsā work by Kamalākara.
{%—Dharmatattva-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing the truths
of law or religion. {%—Dharma-tas,%} ind. according to
law or to rule, rightly, justly, religiously, righteously,
virtuously; from a virtuous motive. {%—Dharma-tīr-%}
{%tha, am,%} n. ‘the holy Tīrtha,’ N. of a sacred place
of pilgrimage. {%—Dharma-tyāga, as,%} m. abandon-
ment of religion, apostacy. {%—Dharma-trāta, as,%} m.
‘protected by the law,’ N. of a Buddhist author.
{%—Dharma-tva, am,%} n. religion, virtue, righteous-
ness, morality, piety; inherent nature, peculiar pro-
perty. {%—Dharma-da, as, ā, am,%} giving or granting
virtue; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the attendants of
Skanda. {%—Dharma-datta, as,%} m. ‘given by religion,’
N. of a writer on rhetoric. {%—Dharma-darśana,%}
{%am,%} n. seeing or knowing duty or the law. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-dāna, am,%} n. a gift made from a sense of duty
(without regard to self-interest). {%—Dharma-dāra,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. a lawful wife; [cf. {%dharma-patnī.%}]
{%—Dharma-dāsa, as,%} m. ‘the slave of duty,’ N. of
a poet, author of the Vidagdha-mukha-maṇḍana.
{%—Dharma-dinnā,%} f. ‘given by religion,’ ({%dinna%}
in Pāli {%= datta%}), N. of a female. {%—Dharma-dīpikā,%}
f., N. of a work. {%—Dharma-dughā,%} f. a cow
milked for the fulfilment of religious duty. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-dṛḍhābhedya-sunilambha (˚ḍha-abh˚), as,%}
m., N. of a king of the Garuḍas. {%—Dharma-dṛś,%}
{%k, k, k,%} seeing the right, regarding piety. {%—Dharma-%}
{%dravī,%} f. ‘having law or virtue for its waters,’ the
Ganges. {%—Dharma-drohin, ī, iṇī, i,%} violating the
[Page0450-b+ 81]
law or right; ({%ī%}), m. a Rākṣasa. {%—Dharma-dve-%}
{%ṣin, ī,%} m. the plant Terminalia Bellerica; see
{%dharma-ghna%}. {%—Dharma-dhara, as,%} m. ‘sup-
porter of the law,’ N. of a king of the Kin-naras.
{%—Dharma-dhātu, us,%} m. ‘the element of law or
of existence,’ one of the eighteen Dhātus of the
Buddhists; a Buddha (‘whose Dhātu is Dharma’).
{%—Dharmadhātu-vāg-īśvara, as,%} m., N. of a deity.
{%—Dharma-dhṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. observing the law.
{%—Dharma-dhṛṣ, k,%} m. ({%dhṛk%} is also referred to
rt. {%dhṛ%} or to rt. {%dṛh%}), ‘supporter of the law or
right,’ N. of a son of Śva-phalka; [cf. {%dharma-bhṛt.%}]
{%—Dharma-dhvaja, as, ā, am,%} ‘whose banner is
virtue,’ one who hangs out the flag of religion for
selfish purposes, one who makes a livelihood by
assumed devotion, a religious hypocrite or impostor;
({%as%}), m., N. of the Sun; of a king of Mithilā, son
of Kuśa-dhvaja and father of Amita-dhvaja and
Kṛta-dhvaja; N. of a brother of Kuśa-dhvaja; of a
king of Kāṅkana-pura. {%—Dharma-dhvajin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} ‘hoisting the flag or colours of religion,’ a religious
hypocrite or impostor, one who makes a livelihood
by assumed devotion. {%—Dharma-nada, am,%} n., N.
of a sacred lake; (according to a legend, a meta-
morphosis of the god Dharma.) {%—Dharma-nan-%}
{%dana, as,%} m. ‘Dharma's joy, a son of the god
Dharma,’ properly an epithet of Yudhi-ṣṭhira, but
applied in Bhāg.-Purāṇa I. 9, 12, to all the sons of
Pāṇḍu; [cf. {%dharma-ja, dharma-putra, dharma-%}
{%suta.%}] {%—Dharma-nandin, ī,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
who translated certain sacred writings into Chinese.
{%—Dharma-nātha, as,%} m. legal protector, rightful
lord. {%—Dharma-nābha, as,%} m. ‘the centre of the
law,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of a king. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-nibandha, as,%} m. attachment to virtue or re-
ligion, piety, virtue. {%—Dharma-nibandhin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} pious, attached to virtue, engaged in religious
duties, holy. {%—Dharma-niveśa, as,%} m. religious
devotion. {%—Dharma-niṣpatti, is,%} f. fulfilment or
discharge of duty, moral or religious observance.
{%—Dharma-netra, as,%} m. ‘law-eyed,’ N. of a grand-
son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of Taṃsu and father
of Dush-manta (Dushyanta). {%—Dharma-paṭṭa, as,%}
m. the band of law or duty. {%—Dharma-pati, is,%} m.,
Ved. the lord or guardian of order and law. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-pattana, am,%} n. ‘the city of the law,’ epithet
of the city of Śrāvantī [cf. {%dharma-paṭṭana%}];
pepper. {%—Dharma-pattra, am,%} n. the plant Ficus
Glomerata. {%—Dharma-patnī,%} f. a lawful wife, a
man's first wife, a wife of the same caste with her
husband and married conformably to the established
law. {%—Dharma-patha, as,%} m. the way of duty or
virtue, virtuous course; N. of a merchant. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-pathin, -panthās,%} m. the way of duty or virtue.
{%—Dharma-para, as, ā, am,%} intent on virtue,
devoted to duty; pious, righteous. {%—Dharma-pā-%}
{%ṭhaka, as,%} m. a teacher of law, a lawyer. {%—Dharma-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m. ‘protector or guardian of the law,’
metaphorical expression for ‘punishment’ or for ‘a
sword;’ N. of a minister of king Daśa-ratha; of a
learned Buddhist; of a prince. {%—Dharma-pālaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} observing the law, dutiful. {%—Dharma-%}
{%pāśa, as,%} m. ‘the noose of the god of justice,’ N. of
a mythical weapon. {%—Dharma-pīṭha,%} ‘the seat of
law,’ N. of a place in Vārāṇasī. {%—Dharma-pīḍā,%} f.
an offence against the law, transgressing the law or
right. {%—Dharma-putra, as,%} m. a lawful son, a son
begot from a sense of duty (not from sensual pleasure);
‘son of the god Dharma,’ epithet of Yudhi-ṣṭhira;
({%au%}), m. du. epithet of the Ṛṣis Nara and Nārā-
yaṇa. {%—Dharma-pura, am,%} n. ‘the city of the
law,’ N. of a town situated on the Narmadā river.
{%—Dharma-purāṇa, am,%} n. ‘the Purāṇa of law,’
N. of a work. {%—Dharma-pracāra, as,%} m. ‘the
course of law or right,’ metaphorical expression for
‘a sword.’ {%—Dharma-pradīpa, as,%} m. ‘light of the
law,’ N. of a work composed by Dhanañ-jaya.
{%—Dharmapradīpa-vyākhyāna, am,%} n. ‘the ex-
planation of the lamp of law,’ N. of a commentary
to the preceding work. {%—Dharma-pradhāna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} eminent in piety. {%—Dharma-prabhāsa, as,%}
[Page0450-c+ 81]
m. ‘illuminator of the law,’ N. of a Buddha. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-pravaktṛ, tā,%} m. a teacher or expounder of
the law. {%—Dharma-pravacana, am,%} n. enuncia-
tion of the law, the act of propounding the law.
{%—Dharma-prastha, as,%} m. ‘the table-land of the
god Dharma,’ N. of a place. {%—Dharma-priya, as,%}
m. ‘a friend of the law,’ N. of a Buddhist scholar.
{%—Dharma-bala, as,%} m. ‘the strength of law,’ N. of
a man. {%—Dharma-bāṇijika, as,%} m. one who tries
to make a profit out of his virtue like a merchant.
{%—Dharma-buddhi, is, is, i,%} virtuously-minded,
virtuous; ({%is%}), m., N. of a king. {%—Dharma-bha-%}
{%ginī,%} f. a lawful sister, a female that has the rights of
a sister; ‘a sister in respect of religion,’ i. e. as be-
longing to the same religion; [cf. {%dharma-bhrātṛ.%}]
{%—Dharma-bhāgin, ī, inī, i,%} possessed of religion
or virtue; ({%inī%}), f. a virtuous wife. {%—Dharma-bhā-%}
{%ṇaka, as,%} m. ‘an expounder of the law;’ a lecturer,
a public reader of the Mahā-bhārata and other sacred
works which are read aloud and explained to large
assemblies of Hindūs at particular seasons. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-bhikṣuka, as,%} m. a mendicant from virtuous
motives. {%—Dharma-bhīruka, as, ā, am,%} tremblingly
alive to duty. {%—Dharma-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘a supporter
of law, a maintainer of justice,’ (often an epithet of
a king); a virtuous person; N. of a son of Śva-phalka.
{%—Dharma-bhṛta, as,%} m., N. of one of the sons
of the thirteenth Manu. {%—Dharma-bhrātṛ, tā,%}
m. ‘a brother in respect of religion,’ a fellow religious
student, any one regarded as a brother from discharg-
ing the same religious duties; [cf. {%dharma-bhaginī.%}]
{%—Dharma-mati, is,%} m. ‘virtuous-minded,’ N. of a
prince; of a god; of the Bodhi tree. {%—Dharma-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of law or virtue, made
up or replete with virtue, moral, righteous. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-mahāmātra, as,%} m. a minister in matters of
religion. {%—Dharma-mātra, as, ā, am,%} depending
only on custom. {%—Dharma-mārga, as,%} m. the path
of virtue. {%—Dharma-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a Bud-
dhist. {%—Dharma-mīmāṃsā-saṅgraha, as,%} m. ‘an
abridgment of the inquiry into Dharma,’ N. of a
Mīmāṃsā work by Kṛṣṇa-deva. {%—Dharma-mūla,%}
{%am,%} n. the foundation of Hindū law and religion,
the Vedas. {%—Dharma-meghā,%} f., N. of one of the
ten Bhūmis with Buddhists. {%—Dharma-yuga, am,%}
n. ‘the age of religion,’ the Kṛta-yuga. {%—Dharma-%}
{%yuj, k, k, k,%} righteous, pious, just. {%—Dharma-rak-%}
{%ṣitā,%} f., N. of a female. {%—Dharma-rati, is, is, i,%}
‘delighting in justice or virtue,’ N. of one of the sons
of the demon Pāpīyas. {%—Dharma-ratna, am,%} n.
‘gem of the law,’ N. of a work. {%—Dharma-ratha, as,%}
m. ‘whose chariot is dharma,’ N. of a son of Sagara;
of Divi-ratha. {%—Dharma-rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘the king of
justice,’ epithet of Yama; of Yudhi-ṣṭhira; of a
king of the herons, son of Kaśyapa and an Apsaras.
{%—Dharma-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of justice,’ an epi-
thet of Yama; an epithet of Yudhi-ṣṭhira; a king
in general; a Buddha. {%—Dharmarāja-tā,%} f. the rank
or title of Dharma-rāja. {%—Dharmarāja-dīkṣita,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of the Vedānta-paribhāṣā.
{%—Dharma-rājan, ā,%} m. ‘king of justice,’ epithet
of Yudhi-ṣṭhira. {%—Dharmarāja-purogama, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having Yudhi-ṣṭhira for a leader; headed
by Yudhi-ṣṭhira. {%—Dharma-rājikā,%} f. a Stūpa.
{%—Dharma-ruci, is,%} m., N. of a god of the Bodhi
tree; N. of a man. {%—Dharma-rodhin, ī, inī, i,%}
opposed to law or virtue, illegal, immoral. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. an essential mark or character-
istic of ethics or law, as place, time, &c. {%—Dharma-%}
{%lopa, as,%} m. irreligion. {%—Dharma-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
endowed with virtue, virtuous, pious, upright, just,
lawful; accompanied by Dharma; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a
Mudrā; N. of a queen. {%—Dharma-vatsala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} tenderly alive to duty, loving piety. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘abiding in duty,’ righteous.
{%—Dharma-vardhana, as, ā, am,%} ‘increasing right
or virtue,’ an epithet of Śiva; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
king of Śrāvastī; of a poet; ({%am%}), n., N. of a town.
{%—Dharma-varman, a,%} n. ‘shield or armour of jus-
tice or virtue,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Dharma-vāda,%}
{%as,%} m. discussion or argument about law or duty.
[Page0451-a+ 81]
{%—Dharma-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} discussing the law or
duty. {%—Dharma-vāsara, as,%} m. ‘day of religious
duties,’ the day of full moon, peculiar sacrifices being
performed on this day. {%—Dharma-vāhana, as,%} m.
‘whose vehicle is the bull, considered as a personi-
fication of virtue,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Dharma-%}
{%vāhya, as, ā, am,%} ‘outside the law,’ contrary to
what is right. {%—Dharma-vicāra-saṅgraha, as,%} m.,
N. of an abridgment of the Mīmāṃsā-sūtras by the
Muni Jaimini. {%—Dharma-vid, t, t, t,%} acquainted with
the law, duty-knowing, endued with a sense of
justice, virtuous, pious, moral. {%—Dharma-vidyā,%} f.
knowledge of the law or right; [cf. {%dhārmavidya.%}]
{%—Dharma-vidhi, is,%} m. legal precept or injunction.
{%—Dharma-viplava, as,%} m. ‘confusion or violation
of duty,’ immorality, wickedness. {%—Dharma-vivar-%}
{%dhana, as,%} m. ‘promoter of law or right,’ epithet
of a son of Aśoka, {%= kunāla%}. {%—Dharma-viveka,%}
{%as,%} m. investigation of right or virtue. {%—Dharma-%}
{%viveka-vākya, am,%} n., N. of a short poem ascribed
to Halāyudha. {%—Dharma-vivecana, am,%} n. judicial
investigation. {%—Dharma-vṛtti, is,%} f. ‘explanation
of the law,’ N. of a chapter of the Śārṅgadhara-
paddhati. {%—Dharma-vṛddha, as,%} m. ‘advanced
in virtue,’ N. of a son of Śva-phalka; [cf. {%dharma-%}
{%dhṛṣ%} and {%dharma-bhṛt.%}] {%—Dharma-vaitaṃsika,%}
{%as,%} m. one who gives away money unlawfully ac-
quired in the hope of appearing generous. {%—Dhar-%}
{%ma-vyādha, as,%} m. ‘the hunter versed in law,’ N.
of a Brāhman changed into a hunter in consequence
of a curse; of a Brāhman-killer (born as a hunter
from the body of Vasu, king of Kaśmīra). {%—Dharma-%}
{%śarīra, am,%} n. ‘religious or sacred relic,’ a term
applied to certain small Buddhist Stūpas. {%—Dharma-%}
{%śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Dharma-śālā,%}
f. a court of justice, a tribunal; a charitable insti-
tution, a hospital. {%—Dharma-śāsana%} or {%dharma-%}
{%śāstra, am,%} n. ‘a law-book,’ a code of laws, the
body or code of Hindū law, jurisprudence, any work
on the subject. {%—Dharma-śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a
virtuous disposition, virtuous, just, pious; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a female. {%—Dharma-śreṣṭhin, ī,%} m., N. of a
Buddhist Arhat. {%—Dharma-saṃśrita, as, ā, am,%}
‘following or seeking virtue,’ virtuous, just, pious.
{%—Dharma-saṃhitā,%} f. a code or collection of law,
especially the work of some saint or divine person
(as Manu, Yājñavalkya, &c.). {%—Dharma-saṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. addiction to justice or virtue; hypocrisy.
{%—Dharma-saṅgīti, is,%} f. a discussion about the
law; (with Buddhists) a council; N. of a work.
{%—Dharma-saṅgraha, as,%} m. ‘collection of laws,
legal compilation,’ N. of a Buddhist work on law.
{%—Dharma-santāna-sū, ūs, ūs, u,%} producing vir-
tuous offspring or actions. {%—Dharma-sabhā,%} f. a
court of justice, tribunal. {%—Dharma-sahāya, as,%}
m. a companion in the fulfilment of religious duties.
{%—Dharma-sādhana, am,%} n. ‘means of performing
duty,’ any act or virtue essential to a system of
duties. {%—Dharma-sārathi, is,%} m., N. of a son of
Tri-kakud. {%—Dharma-sāvarṇi, is,%} m., N. of the
eleventh Manu. {%—Dharma-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Dharma-suta, as,%} m. ‘the son of the god
Dharma,’ an epithet of Yudhi-ṣṭhira. {%—Dharma-%}
{%sū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. promoting order or justice; ({%ūs%}),
m. the fork-tailed shrike. {%—Dharma-sūtra, am,%} n.
a Sūtra work treating on law and custom; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a son of Su-vrata. {%—Dharma-setu, us,%} m.
‘barrier of justice,’ epithet of Śiva; N. of a son of
Āryaka. {%—Dharma-sena, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Dharma-skandha, as,%} m. ‘collection of laws,’
N. of a work by Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana.
{%—Dharma-stha, as,%} m. ‘abiding in the law,’ a
judge. {%—Dharma-sthala, am,%} n. ‘the place of
justice,’ N. of a town. {%—Dharma-sthavira, as,%} m.
‘firm in law,’ N. of a man. {%—Dharma-svāmin, ī,%}
m. ‘the lord of law and right,’ epithet of Buddha;
N. of a sanctuary built by Dharma, king of Kaś-
mīra. {%—Dharma-hantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} transgress-
ing the law or justice. {%—Dharmākara (˚ma-āk˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘mine of virtue or law,’ N. of a disciple of
Buddha Lokeśvara-rāja; of the ninety-ninth Buddha;
[Page0451-b+ 81]
of a Buddhist translator. {%—Dharmāgama (˚ma-āg˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a law-book. {%—Dharmāṅgada (˚ma-aṅ˚), as,%}
m., N. of a man; of a prince, son of Priyaṅ-kara.
{%—Dharmāṅgā (˚ma-aṅ˚),%} f. a heron. {%—Dharmā-%}
{%cārya (˚ma-āc˚), as,%} m. a teacher of law or of
customs. {%—Dharmācārya-stuti, is,%} f. ‘praise of the
teacher of the law,’ N. of a work. {%—Dharmātmaja%}
{%(˚ma-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘the son of Dharma,’ an epithet
of Yudhi-ṣṭhira. {%—Dharmātma-tā,%} f. pious-minded-
ness, justice, virtue. {%—Dharmātman (˚ma-āt˚), ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} just, virtuous, pious-minded, virtuously-minded,
of a virtuous disposition, pious, fulfilling duties;
({%ā%}), m. a saint, a pious or virtuous person; an
epithet of Kumāra-pāla. {%—Dharmāditya (˚ma-ād˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist king. {%—Dharmādharma%}
{%(˚ma-adh˚), au,%} m. du. right and wrong, justice
and injustice. {%—Dharmādharma-parīkṣā,%} f. or
{%-parīkṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘test of right and wrong,’ a kind
of ordeal by drawing lots or slips of black and white
paper. {%—Dharmādharma-senā-hanana, am,%} n.,
N. of the 120th chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the
Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Dharmādhikaraṇa (˚ma-adh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. administration of the laws; a court of justice;
({%as%}), m. a judge, magistrate. {%—Dharmādhikaraṇa-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. a court of justice. {%—Dharmādhika-%}
{%raṇika, as,%} m. or {%dharmādhikaraṇin, ī,%} m. ‘pre-
siding over justice,’ a judge, an administrator of the
law. {%—Dharmādhikāra (˚ma-adh˚), as,%} m. admin-
istration of justice, the office of a judge; N. of a
work. {%—Dharmādhikārin, ī,%} m. or {%dharmādhi-%}
{%kṛta, as,%} m. a chief officer of justice, an adminis-
trator of the law, lord-chief-justice, magistrate, a
judge. {%—Dharmādhiṣṭhāna (˚ma-adh˚), am,%} n.
a court of justice. {%—Dharmādhyakṣa (˚ma-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘overseer of justice,’ minister of justice, a
magistrate, a judge. {%—Dharmādhvan (˚ma-adh˚),%}
{%ā,%} m. the way of justice or virtue. {%—Dharmānuṣ-%}
{%ṭhāna (˚ma-an˚), am,%} n. virtuous or moral conduct,
acting according to law. {%—Dharmānusāra (˚ma-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. conformity to law or virtue, course or
practice of duty. {%—Dharmānusmṛty-upasthāna,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist Āgama. {%—Dharmāndhu%}
{%(˚ma-an˚), us,%} m. ‘the well of Dharma, the holy
well,’ N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Dharmāpeta (˚ma-ap˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} departing from virtue, wicked, immoral,
unrighteous; ({%am%}), n. injustice, immorality, vice.
{%—Dharmābhimanas (˚ma-abh˚), ās, ās, as,%} di-
recting the mind to virtue or religion, virtuous.
{%—Dharmābhiṣeka-kriyā (˚ma-abh˚),%} f. any ab-
lution prescribed as a religious duty. {%—Dharmām-%}
{%bhodhi (˚ma-am˚), is,%} m. ‘the ocean of laws,’ N.
of a work. {%—Dharmāyatana (˚ma-āy˚), am,%} n.
knowledge of {%dharma%} by means of {%manas%} (?).
{%—Dharmāraṇya (˚ma-ar˚), am,%} n. ‘grove of
religion,’ a sacred grove, a wood inhabited by her-
mits or ascetics; N. of a sacred forest in Madhya-
deśa, into which Dharma is said to have retired; N.
of a town founded by Amūrta-rajas. {%—Dharmārtha-%}
{%kāma-mokṣa (˚ma-ar˚), ās,%} m. pl. religious merit,
wealth, pleasure, and final emancipation, (the four
ends or objects of existence.) {%—Dharmārtha-dar-%}
{%śin, ī, inī, i,%} having an eye to duty and interest
or to religion and wealth. {%—Dharmārtha-prati-%}
{%baddha-tā,%} f. attachment to duty and interest or to
religion and wealth. {%—Dharmārtham,%} ind. for reli-
gious purposes; according to right or duty, in a just
manner, according to prescript. {%—Dharmārthīya,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (fr. {%dharma-artha%}), relating to law or
duty. {%—Dharmālīka (˚ma-al˚), as, ā, am,%} having
a false character. {%—Dharmāloka-mukha (˚ma-āl˚),%}
{%am,%} n. introduction to the understanding of the
{%dharma%} of Śākya-muni. {%—Dharmāśoka (˚ma-aś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the Aśoka of justice,’ epithet of king Aśoka,
grandson of Candra-gupta, (after he had adopted the
Buddhist faith.) {%—Dharmāśrita (˚ma-āś˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} seeking virtue, just, virtuous. {%—Dharmāsana%}
{%(˚ma-ās˚), am,%} n. the throne of justice, judgment-
seat, the bench. {%—Dharmāsana-gata, as, ā, am,%}
seated on the judgment-seat. {%—Dharmāstikāya%}
{%(˚ma-as˚), as,%} m. (with Jainas) the category or
predicament of virtue. {%—Dharmendra (˚ma-in˚), %}
[Page0451-c+ 78]
{%as,%} m. ‘lord of justice,’ epithet of Yama. {%—Dhar-%}
{%mepsu (˚ma-īp˚), us, us, u,%} wishing to acquire
religious merit. {%—Dharmeśa (˚ma-īśa), as,%} m.
‘lord of justice,’ epithet of Yama. {%—Dharmeśvara%}
{%(˚ma-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of justice,’ epithet of Yama;
N. of a Buddhist deity; of a commentator on Yājña-
valkya. {%—Dharmeśvara-tīrtha, am,%} n. ‘the Tīrtha
of the lord of justice,’ N. of a place of pilgrimage.
{%—Dharmeśvara-liṅga, am,%} n. ‘the Liṅga of the
lord of justice,’ N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Dhar-%}
{%moccaya (˚ma-uc˚), as,%} m. ‘collection of law,’ N.
of a place (in which Śākya-muni is said to have
instructed the deities called Tuṣitas). {%—Dharmot-%}
{%tara (˚ma-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘chiefly characterized by
virtue,’ N. of a Buddhist teacher. {%—Dharmottarīya,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. the disciples of Dharmottara. {%—Dharmo-%}
{%padeśa (˚ma-up˚), as,%} m. instruction in law or duty,
a discourse on religion, moral or religious instruction;
the laws, the collective body of laws. {%—Dharmopa-%}
{%deśaka (˚ma-up˚), as,%} m. a teacher of the law, a
Guru or spiritual preceptor. {%—Dharmopadeśanā%}
{%(˚ma-up˚),%} f. instruction in the law, advice relating
to it. {%—Dharmopadha (˚ma-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
making a pretence of religion, hypocritical. {%—Dhar-%}
{%mopeta (˚ma-up˚), as, ā, am,%} endowed with vir-
tues, virtuous, moral.
<LEND>

<L>23241<pc>0451-c<k1>Darma<k2>Darma<h>2
2. {%dharma,%}¦ Nom. P. {%dharmati,%} &c., to become
law. (For 1. {%dharma%} see p. 449, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>23242<pc>0451-c<k1>Darmaka<k2>Darmaka
{%Dharmaka%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) =
1. {%dharma; (as),%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>23243<pc>0451-c<k1>Darman<k2>Darman
{%Dharman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. bearer, maintainer, sup-
porter, arranger; N. of a son of Bṛhad-rāja and
father of Kṛtañ-jaya; ({%a%}), n. (the older form for the
later {%dharma;%} and even in the later language used
as a substitute for {%dharma%} at the end of adj.
comps.), support, prop; (Sāy.) religious rite (Ved.);
law, order, custom; religion, duty; mode, manner;
quality, characteristic mark, natural order [cf. {%kṣa-%}
{%tra-dh˚, kṣema-dh˚, jaya-dh˚,%} &c.]; {%dharmaṇā,%}
inst. sing. or {%dharmabhis,%} inst. pl., Ved. in order,
according to rule, regularly, naturally. {%—2. dharma-%}
{%kṛt, t,%} m., Ved. ‘a maintainer of order or a per-
former of religious rites,’ epithet of Indra; (for 1.
see p. 449, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>23244<pc>0451-c<k1>Darmayu<k2>Darmayu
{%Dharmayu, us, us, u,%}¦ righteous, virtuous.
<LEND>

<L>23245<pc>0451-c<k1>DarmAya<k2>DarmAya
{%Dharmāya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%dharmāyati, -te,%} &c.,
to become law.
<LEND>

<L>23246<pc>0451-c<k1>Darmin<k2>Darmin
{%Dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ virtuous, religious, pious, just;
obeying the law, knowing one's duties, having duties;
endowed with any peculiar property or faculty; (often
at the end of comp.) subject to particular laws (e. g.
{%vināśa-dh˚,%} q. v.); having the peculiar qualities or
properties or nature of anything, having anything as
a characteristic mark [cf. {%eka-dh˚%}]; following the
habits of any person; ({%ī%}), m., N. of the fourteenth
Vyāsa; ({%iṇī%}), f. a kind of perfume; [cf. {%dhārmi-%}
{%ṇeya.%}] {%—Dharmi-tva, am,%} n. virtuousness, justice,
devotion to one's duties, virtue.
<LEND>

<L>23247<pc>0451-c<k1>DarmizWa<k2>DarmizWa
{%Dharmiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%dharmin%}),
very pious or virtuous; completely according to law,
completely harmonizing or agreeing with law or
virtue, lawful. {%—Dharmiṣṭha-tā,%} f. great virtuous-
ness, righteousness.
<LEND>

<L>23248<pc>0451-c<k1>DarmIyas<k2>DarmIyas
{%Dharmīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%dharmin%}),
more virtuous &c.; very pious or moral &c.
<LEND>

<L>23249<pc>0451-c<k1>Darmeyu<k2>Darmeyu
{%Dharmeyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva.
<LEND>

<L>23250<pc>0451-c<k1>Darmya<k2>Darmya
{%Dharmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ lawful, legal, conformable
to justice or law or custom or morality, consistent
with duty; usual; just, righteous; legitimate; en-
dowed with particular qualities (e. g. {%tad-dharmya,%}
endowed with those qualities); suitable to any person
or thing (with gen.). {%—Dharmya-vivāha, as,%} m.
legal marriage (of which there are various kinds
described in Manu III. 22).
<LEND>

<L>23251<pc>0451-c<k1>DaruRa<k2>DaruRa<h>2
{#DaruRa#} 2¦. {%dharuṇa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%dhe?%}),
Ved. a sucking calf; (for 1. {%dharuṇa%} see p. 449,
col. 2; cf. {%dhāru.%})
<LEND>

<L>23252<pc>0451-c<k1>Darkawa<k2>Darkawa
{#Darkawa#}¦ {%dharkaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>
[Page0452-a+ 73]

<L>23253<pc>0452-a<k1>Darbaka<k2>Darbaka
{#Darbaka#}¦ {%dharbaka, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Ajāta-śatru.
<LEND>

<L>23254<pc>0452-a<k1>Darma<k2>Darma
{#Darma#}¦ {%dharma.%} See p. 449, col. 3; p. 451, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23255<pc>0452-a<k1>DarmaRa<k2>DarmaRa
{#DarmaRa#}¦ {%dharmaṇa, as,%} m. a kind of snake;
a kind of tree.
<LEND>

<L>23256<pc>0452-a<k1>DarmIputra<k2>DarmIputra
{#DarmIputra#}¦ {%dharmīputra, as,%} m. an actor, a
player; (also read {%dhātrī-putra.%})
<LEND>

<L>23257<pc>0452-a<k1>Darza<k2>Darza
{#Darza#}¦ {%dharṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%dhṛṣ%}), bold-
ness, insolence, overbearing conduct, daringness, im-
pudence, licentiousness, pride, arrogance; impatience;
violation (of a woman); injury, wrong, insult; re-
straint; a eunuch; [cf. {%dharṣa-vara.%}] {%—Dharṣa-%}
{%kāriṇī,%} f. a violated virgin. {%—Dharṣa-vara, as,%}
m. a eunuch superintending the women's apartments;
(probably wrong reading for {%varṣa-dhara.%})
<LEND>

<L>23258<pc>0452-a<k1>Darzaka<k2>Darzaka
{%Dharṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ attacking, assailing, assault-
ing, violating, overbearing; seducing; ({%as%}), m. a se-
ducer, adulterer; a dancer, actor; mime, mummer.
<LEND>

<L>23259<pc>0452-a<k1>DarzaRa<k2>DarzaRa
{%Dharṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ offending, hurting, injur-
ing, assaulting; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. assault, affront, insult,
outrage; offence; violation, rape, seduction; bad
treatment; overbearingness; contempt, disrespect,
contumely, abuse; arrogance; copulation; ({%ī%}), f. or
({%is%}), f. a wanton or unchaste woman, a harlot.
<LEND>

<L>23260<pc>0452-a<k1>DarzaRIya<k2>DarzaRIya
{%Dharṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ liable to be attacked or
assaulted, easily assailable or conquerable, violable.
<LEND>

<L>23261<pc>0452-a<k1>Darzita<k2>Darzita
{%Dharṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ violated; overpowered,
overcome, smitten, ill-treated; ({%am%}), n. contumely,
pride, insolence; copulation, cohabitation; ({%ā%}), f. an
unchaste woman.
<LEND>

<L>23262<pc>0452-a<k1>Darzin<k2>Darzin
{%Dharṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ attacking, assaulting, ill-treat-
ing, treating badly; audacious, overbearing; proud,
arrogant; cohabiting; ({%iṇī%}), f. a disloyal or unchaste
woman, a harlot; [cf. {%dharṣaṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23263<pc>0452-a<k1>DalaRqa<k2>DalaRqa
{#DalaRqa#}¦ {%dhalaṇḍa, as,%} m. a kind of small
thorny tree, commonly called Dhala-āṅkaḍā.
<LEND>

<L>23264<pc>0452-a<k1>Dalila<k2>Dalila
{#Dalila#}¦ {%dhalila,%} N. of a valley in which
the capital of Udyāna is said to have been situated.
<LEND>

<L>23265<pc>0452-a<k1>Dav<k2>Dav
{#Dav#}¦ {%dhav%} (connected with rts. 1. {%dhāv%}
and {%dhanv%}), cl. 1. A. {%dhavate,%} &c., Ved.
to run, flow; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">θέ-ω, θεύσομαι, θοός, βοη-θέ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νω-θής.</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>23266<pc>0452-a<k1>Dava<k2>Dava<h>1
{#Dava#} 1¦. {%dhava, as,%} m. the plant Grislea
Tomentosa ({%= madhura-tvaca%}).
<LEND>

<L>23267<pc>0452-a<k1>Dava<k2>Dava<h>2
{#Dava#} 2¦. {%dhava, as,%} m. (said by some to be
fr. rt. 1. {%dhū?%}), a man; a husband [cf. {%sa-dhavā%}
and {%vi-dhavā%}]; a possessor, master, lord; a rogue,
a cheat; N. of a Vasu (probably incorrect for
{%dhara%}).
<LEND>

<L>23268<pc>0452-a<k1>DavanI<k2>DavanI
{#DavanI#}¦ {%dhavanī,%} f. a kind of plant, Desmo-
dium Gangeticum or a similar species.
<LEND>

<L>23269<pc>0452-a<k1>Davara<k2>Davara
{#Davara#}¦ {%dhavara, am,%} n. a particular high
number.
<LEND>

<L>23270<pc>0452-a<k1>Davala<k2>Davala
{#Davala#}¦ {%dhavala, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
2. {%dhāv%}), white, dazzling white, of a shining white
colour; handsome, beautiful; ({%as%}), m. white (the
colour); an old bull, an excellent ox; a kind of
camphor ({%= cīna-karpūra%}); the plant Grislea To-
mentosa ({%= dhava%}); N. of one of the elephants of
the quarters; N. of a Rāga or mode of music,
(according to Bharata, the eighth son of Hindola-
rāga); ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a white cow; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of
disease (perhaps only whiteness of the hair); N. of
a river; ({%am%}), n. white pepper; a kind of metre
consisting of 4 × 18 short syllables and 1 long ({%=%}
{%dhavalāṅka;%} cf. {%udaya-dh˚%}). {%—Dhavala-giri,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘the white or snowy mountain’ (commonly
<nsi>dhoula-giri</nsi> or <nsi>dola-gir</nsi>), N. of one of the highest
peaks of the great snowy range of the Himālayas,
lat. 29. 11, long. 82. 59. {%—Dhavala-gṛha, am,%} n.
a house whitened with chunam or stucco, a palace.
{%—Dhavala-tva, am,%} n. whiteness. {%—Dhavala-%}
{%pakṣa, as,%} m. ‘white-winged,’ a goose; the light
[Page0452-b+ 80]
half of the month, the fortnight of the moon's in-
crease. {%—Dhavala-purāṇa-samuccaya, as,%} m., N.
of a work. {%—Dhavala-mṛttikā,%} f. ‘white earth,’
chalk. {%—Dhavala-yāvanāla, as,%} m. white Yāvanāla.
{%—Dhavalāṅka (˚la-aṅ˚), am,%} n. {%= dhavala,%} a
species of the Ati-dhṛti metre. {%—Dhavalī-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} made white, whitened, whited. {%—Dhavalī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become white. {%—Dhavalotpala%}
{%(˚la-ut˚), am,%} n. the white esculent water-lily.
<LEND>

<L>23271<pc>0452-b<k1>Davalita<k2>Davalita
{%Dhavalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made dazzling white,
whitened, white.
<LEND>

<L>23272<pc>0452-b<k1>Davaliman<k2>Davaliman
{%Dhavaliman, ā,%}¦ m. whiteness, white colour, white.
<LEND>

<L>23273<pc>0452-b<k1>DavARaka<k2>DavARaka
{#DavARaka#}¦ {%dhavāṇaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%dhū%}),
air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>23274<pc>0452-b<k1>Davitavya<k2>Davitavya
{%Dhavitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be fanned.
<LEND>

<L>23275<pc>0452-b<k1>Davitra<k2>Davitra
{%Dhavitra, am,%}¦ n. a Paṅkhā or fan (made of ante-
lope's skin or leather, and used especially for blowing
a sacrificial fire).
<LEND>

<L>23276<pc>0452-b<k1>DA<k2>DA<h>1
{#DA#} 1¦. {%dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%dadhāti, dhatte%}
(1st pl. {%dadhmas,%} 2nd {%dhattha,%} 3rd {%da-%}
{%dhati;%} 1st sing. A. {%dadhe,%} 2nd {%dhatse,%} 3rd {%dhatte,%}
2nd du. {%dadhāthe,%} 3rd du. {%dadhāte,%} 3rd pl. {%dadha-%}
{%te%}); Impf. {%adadhāt, adhatta%} (2nd du. P. {%adhat-%}
{%tam,%} 2nd pl. {%adhatta,%} 3rd pl. {%adadhus;%} 2nd sing.
A. {%adhatthās,%} 3rd pl. {%adadhata%}); Pot. {%dadhyāt,%}
{%dadhīta;%} Impv. {%dadhātu, dhattām%} (2nd sing.
{%dhehi,%} 2nd du. {%dhattam,%} 3rd du. {%dhattām,%} 2nd pl.
{%dhatta,%} 3rd pl. {%dadhatu;%} 2nd sing. A. {%dhatsva,%}
2nd pl. {%dhaddhvam,%} 3rd pl. {%dadhatām%}); Perf.
{%dadhau, dadhe%} (2nd sing. {%dadhitha%} or {%dadhātha,%}
1st pl. {%dadhima,%} 2nd pl. {%dadha,%} 3rd pl. {%dadhus;%}
3rd pl. A. {%dadhire%}); Fut. {%dhātā; dhāsyati, -te;%}
Aor. {%adhāt, adhita%} (3rd pl. A. {%adhiṣata%}); Prec.
{%dheyāt, dhāsīṣṭa;%} (Ved. forms are, Pres. 1st pl.
P. {%dadhmasi,%} 3rd pl. {%dadhanti,%} 2nd sing. A. {%da-%}
{%dhase,%} 3rd sing. {%dadhe%} or {%dadhate,%} 3rd du. {%dadhete,%}
2nd pl. {%dadhidhve;%} Impf. 2nd sing. P. {%dadhas,%}
3rd sing. {%dadhat, dadhāt,%} 1st pl. {%dadhāma,%} 3rd
pl. {%dadhan;%} Leṭ, Impf. 2nd du. P. {%dadhathas;%}
Pot. 1st sing. {%dheyām,%} 2nd sing. {%dhāyīs,%} 1st pl.
{%dhema,%} 2nd pl. {%dhetana;%} Impv. 3rd sing. {%dhātu,%}
2nd pl. {%dhāta, dhattana, dadhāta, dadhātana,%}
3rd pl. {%dhāntu, dadhantu,%} 2nd sing. A. {%dhiṣva;%}
Perf. 2nd sing. A. {%dhiṣe,%} 3rd pl. {%dadhre, dhire;%}
Aor. 1st sing. P. {%dhām,%} 2nd sing. {%dhās,%} 3rd sing.
{%dhāt,%} with {%prati%} also {%dhat,%} 3rd pl. {%dhus;%} 1st pl.
A. {%adhīmahi, dhīmahi,%} see under 1. {%dhī;%} Leṭ,
Aor. 3rd sing. P. {%dhāti,%} 2nd du. P. {%dhāsathas,%} A.
{%dhethe, dhaithe,%} 1st pl. A. {%dhāmahe,%} 2nd pl. P.
{%dhāsatha,%} 3rd pl. {%dhāsus%}); {%dhātum%} (Ved. inf.
{%dhātave, dhātavai, dhātos, dhai%} in {%vayo-dhai,%}
{%dhām%} in {%prati-dhām, dhiyadhyai%}), to put, place,
set, lay; put in, lay on or upon (with loc., e. g.
{%teṣu daṇḍaṃ dadhāti,%} he lays the stick on them,
i. e. punishes them); to place in any state or con-
dition; to bring, convey, lead towards (Ved.); to
cause to obtain, cause (Ved.); to fix upon, direct
towards (with dat. or loc.), fix or direct the mind
({%manas%} or {%matim%}), fix the thoughts or attention
({%samādhim%}) on (dat., or loc.), make up the mind
to do anything (dat., loc., or inf.), to resolve upon; to
bestow anything (acc.) upon a person (loc., dat., gen.),
grant, confer, present, give; to put in possession; to
appoint, fix, constitute; to make, render, produce,
generate; to cause, create; to perform, do, under-
take; to hold, take hold of, seize; to keep, pre-
serve; to bear, wear, put on (clothes); to sustain,
support, maintain; to accept, take, receive, obtain,
get; to conceive (in the womb); to take possession
of, assume, have, possess; to show, exhibit (A.); to
incur, undergo: Pass. {%dhīyate,%} to be put or placed
or laid; to be arranged; to be contained in; to be
fixed (as the thoughts), to resolve (e. g. {%me dhīyate%}
{%matis,%} my opinion or resolution is): Caus. {%dhāpa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%adīdhipat,%} generally with pre-
positions [cf. {%antar-dhā, api-dhā, abhi-dhā, ava-%}
{%dhā,%} &c.]: Desid. {%dhitsati, -te%} (Ved. {%didhiṣati%}),
to wish to give or present (Ved.); to wish to place
or put; to wish to obtain, strive to gain, &c.:
Intens. {%dedhīyate, dādhāti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>dā,</nsi> ‘to
[Page0452-c+ 81]
put, make;’ <nsi>dā-ta-m,</nsi> ‘law;’ <nsi>dā-man,</nsi> ‘creature:’
Gr. <lang n="greek">τί-θη-μι, θέ-μα, θέ-σι-ς, θε-σ-μός, θέ-μι-ς</lang>
<lang n="greek">θεμός, θε-μέ-λιο-ν, θέ-με-θλο-ν, θής, θῆσσα, θή-κη,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θῶκος, θᾶκος:</lang> Lat. <nsi>fămulus, familia, -do</nsi> in
<nsi>ab-do, con-do, per-do, ven-do, pessum-do, cre-do</nsi>
{%= śrad-dadhāmi:%} Osc. <nsi>faa-ma,</nsi> ‘house (?),’ <nsi>fam-</nsi>
<nsi>el = familia:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ga-dêd-s, dê-ths,</nsi> ‘deed,’ in
<nsi>missa-dêths,</nsi> ‘a crime;’ <nsi>dôm-s,</nsi> ‘judgment:’ Angl.
Sax. <nsi>don,</nsi> ‘to do;’ <nsi>dema,</nsi> ‘a judge;’ <nsi>dom,</nsi> ‘judg-
ment:’ Old Sax. <nsi>dō-m,</nsi> ‘I do,’ {%= dadhāmi:%} Old
Germ. <nsi>tō-m,</nsi> ‘I do:’ Old Eng. <nsi>-de</nsi> in <nsi>ask-e-de =</nsi> ‘ask-
did:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>-te</nsi> in <nsi>such-te:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>de-mi, de-</nsi>
<nsi>du,</nsi> ‘I put:’ Slav. <nsi>de-yun,</nsi> ‘I do;’ <nsi>de-lo,</nsi> ‘work:’
Hib. <nsi>deanaim,</nsi> ‘I do;’ <nsi>dan,</nsi> ‘work.’]
<LEND>

<L>23277<pc>0452-c<k1>DA<k2>DA<h>2
2. {%dhā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.)
placing; holding; containing, having; causing, &c.,
see {%kiye-dhā, cano-dhā, dhāma-dhā, dhiyan-dhā,%}
&c.; ({%ās%}), m. a placer; a holder, container, possessor,
&c.; a N. of Brahmā; of Bṛhas-pati; ({%ās%}), f. the
act of placing or holding, &c., (at the end of comp.,
cf. {%tiro-dhā%} and {%dur-dhā.%}) The affix {%dhā%} after
numerals is thought by some to be an old inst. from
this {%dhā;%} [cf. the use of 1. {%dhātu%} after numerals.]
<LEND>

<L>23278<pc>0452-c<k1>DAka<k2>DAka
{%Dhāka, as,%}¦ m. an ox; a receptacle, reservoir ({%=%}
{%ā-dhāra%} or according to another reading {%ā-hāra%});
food, boiled rice; a post.
<LEND>

<L>23279<pc>0452-c<k1>DAtu<k2>DAtu<h>1
1. {%dhātu, us,%}¦ m. (for 2. {%dhātu%} see p. 453, col. 3),
that which is placed or laid, a deposit, layer (Ved.);
a constituent or essential part, an ingredient, (thus
{%guṇa,%} string, is the {%dhātu%} of a rope made of several
strings); part, portion, (sometimes used at the end of
an adj. comp. like the English ‘fold,’ see {%tri-dhātu,%}
{%sapta-dh˚%}); an element, primary or elementary
substance, primitive matter (of which five are usually
reckoned or with Brahma six, thus enumerated by
Yājñavalkya III. 145: 1. {%Brahma,%} the eternal spirit;
2. {%kha%} or {%ākāśa,%} ether; 3. {%anila,%} air; 4. {%tejas,%}
fire; 5. {%jala,%} water; 6. {%bhū,%} earth: the Buddhists
substitute {%Vijñāna%} for {%Brahma:%} the eighteen ele-
ments or {%dhātu-lokas%} of the southern Buddhists are
the five organs of sense with {%manas,%} the six qualities
observed by these, and six ideas produced by these
six qualities); constituent element or essential ingre-
dient of the body, primary or essential fluid or juice,
a secretion, (the number of which is variously given
as seven or ten; these Dhātus are distinct from the
five elements of which the body also consists, and
are sometimes regarded as Rasas, i. e. secretions or
fluids; they are chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow,
and semen, to which must be added hair, skin, and
sinews, if ten are reckoned); a humor or affection of
the body (viz. phlegm, wind, and bile); a bone;
(according to some) any one of the five organs of
sense; any one of the five properties or qualities of
the elements observed by the organs of sense (viz.
sound, tangibility, colour, flavour, smell, see under
{%guṇa%}); a primary element of the earth or of moun-
tains, a mineral, fossil, metal, ore; a fluid mineral
of a red colour; the primary element of words, a
verbal root; [cf. {%upa-dh˚, kāma-dh˚, giri-dh˚,%}
&c.] {%—Dhātu-kāya, as,%} m. ‘body of elements,’ N.
of a Buddhist work by Pūrṇa. {%—Dhātu-kāśīśa%} or
{%dhātu-kāsīsa, am,%} n. red sulphate of iron. {%—Dhātu-%}
{%kuśala, as, ā, am,%} skilled in metals, a metallurgist,
mineralogist. {%—Dhātu-kriyā,%} f. metallurgy, minera-
logy. {%—Dhātu-kṣaya, as,%} m. waste of the bodily
humors, any mortal disease. {%—Dhātukṣaya-kāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. a consumptive cough. {%—Dhātu-garbha, as,%}
m. a receptacle for Buddhist relics, a dagop, (according
to some {%da-gop = dhātu-gopa.%}) {%—Dhātu-grāhin,%}
{%ī,%} m. calamine. {%—Dhātu-ghoṣā,%} f., N. of a work
on the verbal roots. {%—Dhātu-ghna, am,%} n. sour
gruel prepared from the fermentation of rice-water.
{%—Dhātu-candrikā,%} f. ‘elucidation of roots,’ N. of
a grammatical work by Kavi-candra. {%—Dhātu-ja =%}
{%dhātuka,%} bitumen. {%—Dhātu-dīpikā,%} f. ‘elucidation
of roots,’ N. of a commentary by Durgā-dāsa on
Vopa-deva's collection of roots. {%—Dhātu-drāvaka,%}
‘dissolving metals,’ borax, tinkal. {%—Dhātu-nāśana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘destroying the humors,’ sour gruel; [cf.
{%dhātu-ghna.%}] {%—Dhātu-nyāya-mañjāṣā,%} f., N. of
[Page0453-a+ 81]
a work on the radicals. {%—Dhātu-pa, as,%} m. the
alimentary juice or chyle, the chief of the seven
elementary ingredients of the body. {%—Dhātu-pā-%}
{%ṭha, as,%} m. ‘recital of roots,’ a list or collection of
roots compiled and arranged according to Pāṇini's
system, (the most important and well-known Dhātu-
pāṭha is ascribed to Pāṇini himself.) {%—Dhātu-pārā-%}
{%yaṇa%} or {%dhātu-pārāyaṇīya, am,%} n., N. of a work
on verbal roots. {%—Dhātu-puṣṭi, is,%} f. nutrition of
the bodily humors. {%—Dhātu-puṣpī%} and {%dhātu-pu-%}
{%ṣpikā,%} f. a plant, {%= dhātṛ-puṣpī%}. {%—Dhātu-pra-%}
{%dīpa, as,%} m., N. of a commentary by Maitreya-
rakṣita on the Dhātu-pāṭha. {%—Dhātupradīpa-dī-%}
{%pikā%} or {%dhātupradīpa-ṭīkā,%} f., N. of a commentary
on the preceding work. {%—Dhātu-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘bear-
ing metals,’ a mountain; ({%t, t, t%}), promoting the
elementary juices or secretions, robust. {%—Dhātu-%}
{%mañjarī,%} f., N. of a commentary by Kāśī-nātha on
the Dhātu-pāṭha. {%—Dhātu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} con-
taining or possessing elements or elementary sub-
stances, abounding in minerals or metals. {%—Dhātu-%}
{%mat-tā,%} f. richness in metals &c. {%—Dhātu-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} consisting of or abounding in metals,
metallic. {%—Dhātu-mala, am,%} n. impure excretion
from the essential fluids of the body; lead (the most
impure of metals). {%—Dhātu-mākṣika, am,%} n. a
mineral substance, sulphuret of iron. {%—Dhātu-mārin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘dissolving metals,’ sulphur; ({%iṇī%}), f. borax.
{%—Dhātu-ratna-mālā,%} f., N. of a medical work by
Deva-datta. {%—Dhātu-ratnāvalī,%} f. ‘a necklace or
string of roots,’ N. of a metrical collection of roots
by Rādhā-kṛṣṇa. {%—Dhātu-rājaka, am,%} n. ‘the
chief of the essential fluids of the body,’ semen, the
seminal fluid. {%—Dhātu-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a
work. {%—Dhātu-vallabha, am,%} n. ‘friend of metals,’
borax (used as a flux). {%—Dhātu-vāda, as,%} m. metal-
lurgy, mineralogy. {%—Dhātuvādin, ī,%} m. an assayer,
miner, mineralogist, metallurgist. {%—Dhātu-vikāra,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= dhātu-kṣaya%}. {%—Dhātu-viṣ, ṭ,%} f. {%= dhātu-%}
{%mala,%} lead. {%—Dhātu-vṛtti, is,%} f. a commentary on
the roots. {%—Dhātu-vairin, ī,%} m. ‘enemy of metals,’
sulphur. {%—Dhātu-śekhara, am,%} n. ‘chief of mine-
rals,’ green sulphate of iron or green vitriol. {%—Dhātu-%}
{%śodhana%} or {%dhātu-sambhava,%} lead. {%—Dhātu-sā-%}
{%mya, am,%} n. equilibrium of the bodily humors, good
health. {%—Dhātu-han,%} ‘killing metals,’ sulphur.
{%—Dhātūpala (˚tu-up˚), as,%} m. ‘the stone among
metals,’ chalk. {%—Dhātv-artha, as,%} m. ‘having the
sense of a root,’ i. e. a verb.
<LEND>

<L>23280<pc>0453-a<k1>DAtuka<k2>DAtuka
{%Dhātuka%}¦ (at the end of comp.) {%= dhātu;%} bitumen.
<LEND>

<L>23281<pc>0453-a<k1>DAtf<k2>DAtf
{%Dhātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who places or lays, a founder
[cf. Lat. <nsi>con-ditor</nsi>], maker, creator, originator,
author; orderer, arranger; bearer, supporter, main-
tainer, preserver; N. of a divine being who is the
creator, arranger, maintainer, and manager of all
things, (strictly perhaps without any distinct and
definite place in the Hindū mythological system, but
rather the personification of the various ideas and
functions inherent in the rt. 1. {%dhā;%} he is not
mentioned in the older hymns of the Ṛg-veda, but
is invoked in the tenth Maṇḍala, and agrees in many
points with Tvaṣṭṛ and Prajā-pati; he is described
as promoting generation, presiding over matri-
mony and domestic life, preserving health, curing
diseases and broken limbs, granting riches, ordering
times and seasons, &c.; not only is he associated
with Tvaṣṭṛ and Prajā-pati, but with Savitṛ and
Bṛhas-pati; sometimes with Mitra, Viṣṇu, and
Aryaman, and occasionally identified with Prajā-pati:
in one Brāhmaṇa Dhātṛ and Aryaman are declared
to be the first-born children of Aditi: in epic poetry
Dhātṛ is one of the twelve Ādityas, and in post-vedic
mythology the name Dhātṛ is applicable to Prajā-pati
and to Brahmā as ‘creator and maintainer of the
world;’ in the Bhagavad-gītā it is applied to Kṛṣṇa
in the same sense; elsewhere Dhātṛ and Vidhātṛ
are associated as sons of Brahmā, the goddess
Lakṣmī being then their sister, and in another
place as children of Bhṛgu and Khyāti); one of the
seven sages of the fourth Manv-antara; one of the
forty-nine winds; the paramour of a married woman,
[Page0453-b+ 81]
an adulterer; N. of the forty-fourth year in the cycle
of Jupiter. {%—Dhātṛ-putra, as,%} m. ‘Brahmā's son,’
especially an epithet of Sanat-kumāra. {%—Dhātṛ-%}
{%puṣpikā%} or {%dhātṛ-puṣpī,%} f. Grislea Tomentosa.
{%—Dhātṛ-bhavana, am,%} n. Brahmā's heaven.
<LEND>

<L>23282<pc>0453-b<k1>DAtra<k2>DAtra
{%Dhātra, am,%}¦ n. a vessel for holding anything, a
receptacle; ({%as, ī, am%}), belonging to Dhātṛ.
<LEND>

<L>23283<pc>0453-b<k1>DAtrI<k2>DAtrI
{%Dhātrī,%}¦ f. See under 2. {%dhātu,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23284<pc>0453-b<k1>DAna<k2>DAna
{%Dhāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (at the end of comp.), con-
taining [cf. {%uda-dh˚%}]; ({%am%}), n. a receptacle, reser-
voir, seat, (at the end of comp., see {%agni-dh˚, aila-%}
{%dh˚,%} &c.); ({%ī%}), f. a receptacle, anything which holds
or contains, a place where anything is kept, seat, (at
the end of comp., see {%aṅgāra-dh˚, khale-dh˚,%}
{%jīva-dh˚, matsya-dh˚,%} &c.); the site of a habit-
ation, N. of a tree ({%= pīlu%}); coriander; N. of a
river; ({%ās%}), f. pl. corn, grain; fried barley or rice;
grain fried and reduced to powder; coriander, Cori-
andrum Sativum ({%= dhanyāka%}); a bud, shoot.
{%—Dhānā-cūrṇa, am,%} n. the meal or flour of fried
barley or rice &c. {%—Dhānāntarvat (˚nā-an˚), ān,%}
m., N. of a Gandharva. {%—Dhānā-pūpa, as,%} m. a
cake of fried barley &c. {%—Dhānā-bharjana, am,%} n.
the frying or parching of grain. {%—Dhānā-muṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} f. a handful of grain. {%—Dhānā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. accompanied by grain (as the Soma). {%—Dhānā-%}
{%soma, as,%} m., Ved. Soma with grain.
<LEND>

<L>23285<pc>0453-b<k1>DAnaka<k2>DAnaka
{%Dhānaka, am,%}¦ n. {%= dhanyāka,%} coriander.
<LEND>

<L>23286<pc>0453-b<k1>DAnAkA<k2>DAnAkA
{%Dhānākā, ās,%}¦ f. pl. grain, corn; fried barley or
parched rice; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>23287<pc>0453-b<k1>DAnI<k2>DAnI
{%Dhānī,%}¦ f. See under {%dhāna%} above.
<LEND>

<L>23288<pc>0453-b<k1>DAneya<k2>DAneya
{%Dhāneya%}¦ or {%dhāneyaka, am,%} n. {%= dhanyāka,%}
{%dhānyāka,%} coriander; Coriandrum Sativum.
<LEND>

<L>23289<pc>0453-b<k1>DAnya<k2>DAnya
{%Dhānya, as, ā, am,%}¦ consisting of grain or corn,
made of grain, &c.; ({%am%}), n. grain, corn in general,
rice (Oryza Sativa); a measure equal to four sesamum-
seeds; coriander; Cyperus Rotundus {%(= paripela);%}
{%(ā),%} f. coriander. {%—Dhānya-kartana, am,%} n. ‘the
cutting of corn,’ N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-
sarva-sva. {%—Dhānya-kalka, am,%} n. bran; chaff; straw.
{%—Dhānya-koṣa, as,%} m. a granary, storehouse of corn
or rice. {%—Dhānya-koṣṭhaka, am,%} n. a granary, a
basket or cupboard or small shed of matting &c. for
keeping rice, &c. {%—Dhānya-kṣetra, am,%} n. a
corn-field, rice-field. {%—Dhānya-camasa, as,%} m. rice
flattened by threshing after it has been steeped and
fried in the husk. {%—Dhānya-tilvila, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. abounding in corn. {%—Dhānya-tvac, k,%} f. the
husk of corn or rice. {%—Dhānya-da, as, ā, am,%}
giving or distributing rice. {%—Dhānya-dhana, am,%}
n. property in grain; {%dhānya-dhanatas,%} on account
of possessing grain &c. {%—Dhānya-dhenu, us,%} f. a
heap of rice (like a cow) to be presented to Brāh-
mans. {%—Dhānya-parvata-dāna-vidhi, is,%} m. ‘rules
for giving heaps of grain,’ N. of the 156th chapter
of the Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa. {%—Dhānya-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} abounding with rice, made of grain. {%—Dhānya-%}
{%mātṛ, tā,%} m. a measurer of corn. {%—Dhānya-māya,%}
{%as,%} m. a corn-chandler, corn-dealer, &c. {%—Dhānya-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. ‘the prince of grains,’ barley. {%—Dhā-%}
{%nya-ropaṇa, am,%} n. ‘the planting of corn or rice,’
N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dhānya-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding in grain, rich in corn.
{%—Dhānya-vani%} (?), a heap of grain. {%—Dhānya-%}
{%vapana, am,%} n. ‘the sowing of corn or rice,’ N. of
a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dhānya-var-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n. lending grain at interest, usury with
grain, receiving an usurious return for a load of seed-
corn supplied to peasants. {%—Dhānya-vīja, am,%} n.
coriander. {%—Dhānya-vīra, as,%} m. ‘the chief of
grain,’ a sort of pulse, Phaseolus Max. {%(= māṣa).%}
{%—Dhānya-śīrṣaka, am,%} n. the ear or spike of
corn. {%—Dhānya-śūka, am,%} n. the awn or beard of
corn. {%—Dhānya-śaila-dāna, am,%} n. ‘the giving of
a heap of corn or rice,’ N. of the eighty-second
chapter of the Matsya-Purāṇa. {%—Dhānya-saṅgraha,%}
{%as,%} m. a store or magazine of grain. {%—Dhānya-sāra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the essence of grain,’ threshed corn. {%—Dhā-%}
{%nyā-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. preparing corn; (Sāy.) a culti-
vator of grain. {%—Dhānyācala (˚ya-ac˚), as,%} m. a
pile of grain for presentation to Brāhmans. {%—Dhā- %}
[Page0453-c+ 79]
{%nyāda (˚ya-ada), as, ā, am,%} eating corn, feeding on
corn. {%—Dhānyāmla (˚ya-am˚), am,%} n. sour gruel
made of the fermentation of rice-water. {%—Dhānyāri%}
{%(˚ya-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of corn,’ a mouse, rat.
{%—Dhānyārtha (˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m. wealth in rice or
grain. {%—Dhānyāsthi (˚ya-as˚), i,%} n. ‘the kernel of
grain,’ threshed corn. {%—Dhānyottama (˚ya-ut˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the best of grain, rice.
<LEND>

<L>23290<pc>0453-c<k1>DAnyaka<k2>DAnyaka
{%Dhānyaka%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp. for {%dhā-%}
{%nya%}), grain, corn; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%am%}), n.
{%= dhānya, dhānyāka, dhanyāka,%} coriander.
<LEND>

<L>23291<pc>0453-c<k1>DAnyAka<k2>DAnyAka
{%Dhānyāka, am,%}¦ n. {%= dhānyaka,%} coriander.
<LEND>

<L>23292<pc>0453-c<k1>DAma<k2>DAma
{%Dhāma, am,%}¦ n. {%= dhāman,%} abode, &c.; ({%ās%}), m.,
N. of a class of superhuman beings.
<LEND>

<L>23293<pc>0453-c<k1>DAman<k2>DAman
{%Dhāman, a,%}¦ n. a dwelling-place, house, abode,
home, residence; domain; site, especially the site of
the sacred fire and the Soma; (in the sacrificial
formulas and in the Brāhmaṇas generally with {%priya,%}
e. g. {%priyaṃ dhāma,%} favourite residence, also = any
favourite thing or person); the inmates of a house,
the members of a family, domestics; a class; a troop,
host, race; the body; law, rule (Ved.); state or con-
dition; manner, fashion, mode, form, tone (Ved.);
effect, power, strength, ability, faculty; majesty,
dignity, glory, light, splendor, radiance, brilliancy
[cf. {%dhyāman%}]; (Sāy.) property, wealth; a band,
fetter, (wrong reading for 3. {%dāman%}); ({%ā%}), m., N.
of one of the Saptarṣis in the fourth Manv-antara;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">θέ-μα;</lang> Lat. <nsi>do-mu-s;</nsi> Osc. <nsi>faa-ma;</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>dai-m,</nsi> ‘a house, church, people;’ Old Germ. <nsi>do-m;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. and Eng. <nsi>dom =</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>thum</nsi> as
affix of abstract nouns; Slav. <nsi>do-mŭ.</nsi>] {%—Dhāma-%}
{%keśin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘having rays for hair,’ epithet of the
Sun. {%—Dhāma-cchad, t,%} m., Ved. ‘covering his
residence or changing his abode,’ epithet of Agni as
giver of rain, (also applied to the Vashat-kāra); N.
of a verse in the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā containing the
word {%dhāma-cchad%} (18. 76). {%—Dhāma-dhā, ās,%}
m., Ved. the causer of order, a creator; (Sāy.) a
bearer, supporter. {%—Dhāma-nidhi, is,%} m. ‘treasure
of splendor,’ the sun. {%—Dhāma-bhāj, k, k, k,%} Ved.
possessing sites or seats. {%—Dhāma-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} splendid, luminous, eminent, exalted, illustrious,
heroic. {%—Dhāma-śas,%} ind., Ved. according to (their)
several abodes, in (their) several places, according to
order. {%—Dhāma-sāc, k, k, k,%} attached to or keeping a
particular place; (Sāy.) possessing splendor or riches.
<LEND>

<L>23294<pc>0453-c<k1>DAya<k2>DAya
{%Dhāya, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%dhāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}
having, possessing, holding, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23295<pc>0453-c<k1>DAyas<k2>DAyas<h>1
1. {%dhāyas, as,%}¦ n. sustaining, supporting, bearing.
(For 2. {%dhāyas%} see p. 454, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>23296<pc>0453-c<k1>DAyu<k2>DAyu<h>1
1. {%dhāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. liberal; (Sāy.) possessing
power, supporting. (For 2. {%dhāyu%} see p. 454, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>23297<pc>0453-c<k1>DAyya<k2>DAyya
{%Dhāyya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a Puro-hita or family
priest?; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%ṛc,%} an additional verse inserted
in certain hymns.
<LEND>

<L>23298<pc>0453-c<k1>DAsi<k2>DAsi<h>1
1. {%dhāsi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. a dwelling-place, seat, home;
(Sāy.) a holder, bearer, maintainer; food.
<LEND>

<L>23299<pc>0453-c<k1>DAwI<k2>DAwI
{#DAwI#}¦ {%dhāṭī,%} f. assault, assaulting or con-
fronting an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>23300<pc>0453-c<k1>DARaka<k2>DARaka
{#DARaka#}¦ {%dhāṇaka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%dhā%}), a weight of gold, a gold coin, part of a
Dīnāra [cf. {%dhānaka%}]; ({%ikā%}), f., Ved. pudendum
muliebre (?).
<LEND>

<L>23301<pc>0453-c<k1>DAtaki<k2>DAtaki
{#DAtaki#}¦ {%dhātaki, is,%} m., N. of one of the
two sons of Vītihotra Praiyavrata, king of a Varṣa of
Puṣkara-dvīpa; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Grislea Tomentosa.
<LEND>

<L>23302<pc>0453-c<k1>DAtu<k2>DAtu<h>2
{#DAtu#} 2¦. {%dhātu, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. {%dhe;%} for 1.
{%dhātu%} see p. 452, col. 3), Ved. to be drunk or
sucked in?; (Sāy.) sustainer, supporter, (fr. rt. 1.
{%dhā%}); ({%us%}), m. anything to be drunk or sucked,
milk, &c.; ({%us%}), f. a milch cow.
<LEND>

<L>23303<pc>0453-c<k1>DAtrikA<k2>DAtrikA
{%Dhātrikā,%}¦ f. the plant Emblica Officinalis.
<LEND>

<L>23304<pc>0453-c<k1>DAtrI<k2>DAtrI
{%Dhātrī,%}¦ f. a wet-nurse, foster-mother, nurse,
mother; the earth; Emblica Myrobalan, Emblica
Officinalis. {%—Dhātrī-putra, as,%} m. the son of a
nurse, a foster-brother; an actor; (a various reading
for {%dharmī-putra.%}) {%—Dhātrī-phala, am,%} n. the
fruit of the Emblic Myrobalan.
<LEND>
[Page0454-a+ 70]

<L>23305<pc>0454-a<k1>DAtreyikA<k2>DAtreyikA
{%Dhātreyikā,%}¦ f. a foster-sister, (sometimes employed
as a sort of confidante); a nurse, foster-mother, wet-
nurse (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>23306<pc>0454-a<k1>DAtreyI<k2>DAtreyI
{%Dhātreyī,%}¦ f. the daughter of a nurse, a foster-
sister, (sometimes employed as a sort of confidante);
a wet-nurse (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>23307<pc>0454-a<k1>DAyas<k2>DAyas<h>2
2. {%dhāyas, ās, ās, as%}¦ (for 1. {%dhāyas%} see p. 453,
col. 3), Ved. nourishing, fostering, sustaining, (often in
comp., e. g. {%ari-dh˚, kāru-dh˚, go-dh˚, bhūri-dh˚,%}
&c.); drinking, sipping; the act of fostering, nourish-
ing, satiating, (used only in dat. {%dhāyase%} in the sense
of an infinitive.)
<LEND>

<L>23308<pc>0454-a<k1>DAyu<k2>DAyu<h>2
2. {%dhāyu, us, us, u%}¦ (for 1. {%dhāyu%} see p. 453,
col. 3), Ved. feeding, eating, fond of eating; (Sāy.)
holding, supporting, (as if fr. rt. 1. {%dhā.%})
<LEND>

<L>23309<pc>0454-a<k1>DAru<k2>DAru
{%Dhāru, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. drinking, sucking, a
drinker, sucker.
<LEND>

<L>23310<pc>0454-a<k1>DAsi<k2>DAsi<h>2
2. {%dhāsi, is,%}¦ m. (for 1. {%dhāsi%} see p. 453, col. 3), Ved.
a milk-beverage, a drink; nourishment in general.
<LEND>

<L>23311<pc>0454-a<k1>DAsyu<k2>DAsyu
{%Dhāsyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desirous of drinking or
of eating.
<LEND>

<L>23312<pc>0454-a<k1>DAtf<k2>DAtf
{#DAtf#}¦ {%dhātṛ.%} See p. 453, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>23313<pc>0454-a<k1>DAtrI<k2>DAtrI
{#DAtrI#}¦ {%dhātrī.%} See 2. {%dhātu,%} p. 453, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23314<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnaka<k2>DAnaka
{#DAnaka#}¦ {%dhānaka,%} a copper coin worth about
twopence.
<LEND>

<L>23315<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnada<k2>DAnada
{#DAnada#}¦ {%dhānada, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dhana-da%}),
relating to Dhana-da, i. e. Kuvera, ‘giver of riches.’
<LEND>

<L>23316<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnurdaRqika<k2>DAnurdaRqika
{#DAnurdaRqika#}¦ {%dhānurdaṇḍika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%dhanus%} and {%daṇḍa%}), living by bow and club.
<LEND>

<L>23317<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnuzka<k2>DAnuzka
{#DAnuzka#}¦ {%dhānuṣka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dhanus%}),
armed with a bow, one who carries a bow, a bowyer,
bowman, archer; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Achyranthes Aspera
({%= apāmārga%}).
<LEND>

<L>23318<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnuzkari<k2>DAnuzkari
{%Dhānuṣkari,%}¦ N. of a plant; (probably a wrong
reading for {%dhanuṣkarī.%})
<LEND>

<L>23319<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnuzya<k2>DAnuzya
{%Dhānuṣya, as,%}¦ m. ‘suitable for bows,’ a bamboo.
<LEND>

<L>23320<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnta<k2>DAnta
{#DAnta#}¦ {%dhānta%} (or {%dhvānta?%}), a mystical
name of the letter {%n.%}
<LEND>

<L>23321<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnDA<k2>DAnDA
{#DAnDA#}¦ {%dhāndhā,%} f. small cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>23322<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnva<k2>DAnva
{#DAnva#}¦ {%dhānva, as,%} m. (probably fr. {%dhanvan%}),
a patronymic of Asita, chief of the Asuras; (also read
{%dhānvana.%})
<LEND>

<L>23323<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnvana<k2>DAnvana<h>1
{#DAnvana#} 1¦. {%dhānvana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dhan-%}
{%van%}), situated in a desert.
<LEND>

<L>23324<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnvana<k2>DAnvana<h>2
{#DAnvana#} 2¦. {%dhānvana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dhan-%}
{%vana%}), made of the wood of the tree Dhanvana
(as bows).
<LEND>

<L>23325<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnvantara<k2>DAnvantara
{#DAnvantara#}¦ {%dhānvantara, as, ī, am,%} or {%dhān-%}
{%vantarīya,%} or {%dhānvantarya,%} &c. (fr. {%dhanvan-%}
{%tari%}), relating to or proceeding from Dhanvantari;
sacred to the sun.
<LEND>

<L>23326<pc>0454-a<k1>DAnvapata<k2>DAnvapata
{#DAnvapata#}¦ {%dhānvapata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dhanva-%}
{%pati%}), relating to or proceeding from Dhanva-pati.
<LEND>

<L>23327<pc>0454-a<k1>DAmaka<k2>DAmaka
{#DAmaka#}¦ {%dhāmaka, as,%} m. a sort of weight
({%= māṣaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>23328<pc>0454-a<k1>DAman<k2>DAman
{#DAman#}¦ {%dhāman.%} See p. 453, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23329<pc>0454-a<k1>DAmanikA<k2>DAmanikA
{#DAmanikA#}¦ {%dhāmanikā,%} f. (fr. {%dhamanī%}), the
plant Solanum Jacquini.
<LEND>

<L>23330<pc>0454-a<k1>DAmanI<k2>DAmanI
{#DAmanI#}¦ {%dhāmanī,%} f. the plant Hemionitis
Cordifolia; any tubular vessel of the body; [cf.
{%dhamanī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23331<pc>0454-a<k1>DAmArgava<k2>DAmArgava
{#DAmArgava#}¦ {%dhāmārgava, as,%} m. a sort of
plant ({%= ghoṣaka%}) with white flowers, Luffa Fœtida
or a similar plant; Achyranthes Aspera.
<LEND>

<L>23332<pc>0454-a<k1>DAra<k2>DAra
{#DAra#}¦ {%dhāra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhṛ,%} but in
some of its senses apparently connected with rt. 1.
{%dhāv%}), holding, bearing, supporting, containing, (at
the end of a comp., see {%asṛg-dh˚, karṇa-dh˚,%}
{%jala-dh˚, tulā-dh˚%}); continuing, streaming down in
a continuous line, raining hard, flowing, dripping, (in
[Page0454-b+ 81]
these senses said to be connected with rt. 1. {%dhāv%});
({%as%}), m. ‘a supporter, holder,’ epithet of Viṣṇu;
a sudden and violent shower of rain; snow, hail;
frost (?); a deep place, depth; debt; a boundary,
limit, line; a sort of stone; ({%ā%}), f. the flowing or
dropping of any fluid, (said to be connected with rt.
1. {%dhāv%}); a stream or current of water, a line of
descending fluid; a water-course, a torrent, a flood, a
hard shower falling in large drops or in hail, a shower,
the dripping of any liquid, a drop, (often at the end
of a comp., cf. {%asṛg-dh˚%}); a leak, a hole in a
pitcher &c. letting out the water; the pace of a
horse (of which five are enumerated, cf. {%dhorita,%}
{%valgita, pluta, ut-tejita, ut-terita%}); the margin
or border of anything, the sharp edge of a sword or
any cutting instrument, the edge of anything, (often
at the end of a comp.; cf. {%ardha-dh˚, asi-dh˚,%}
{%kṣura-dh˚, khaṇḍa-dh˚, khara-dh˚%}); the edge of
a mountain or precipice; the circumference or peri-
phery of a wheel; a garden-wall, fence, hedge; any
continuous line or series, the line of a family; the
van or front line of an army [cf. {%dhārāṅkura%}];
the tip of the ear, ear-lap; the highest point, excel-
lence, pre-eminence; a multitude; fame; night; tur-
meric; likeness; custom, usage (?); N. of a town;
of a sacred bathing-place; ({%am%}), n. rain-water (?).
{%—Dhāra-pūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. purified with streams
of water; clear as water (?). {%—Dhāra-vāka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. (Sāy.) sustaining or reciting praises.
{%—Dhārā-kadamba%} or {%dhārā-kadambaka, as,%} m.
a kind of Kadamba tree; N. of a poet. {%—Dhārā-%}
{%gṛha, am,%} n. a bath-room with flowing water, shower-
bath. {%—Dhārāgra (˚rā-ag˚), am,%} n. the broad-
edged head of an arrow. {%—Dhārāṅkura (˚rā-aṅ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a drop of rain; hail; advancing before the
line of an army to defy the enemy. {%—Dhārāṅga (˚rā-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. a sacred bathing-place; a sword, scimitar.
{%—Dhārāṭa (˚rā-aṭa), as,%} m. the Cātaka bird; a
horse; a cloud; a furious elephant or one in rut
(when juice exudes from his temples). {%—Dhārā-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m. ‘containing showers,’ a cloud; ‘hav-
ing an edge,’ a sword. {%—Dhārādhirūḍha (˚rā-%}
{%adh˚), as, ā, am,%} elevated to the highest point,
raised to the highest pitch. {%—Dhārā-dhvani, is,%} m.
the sound of falling rain or flowing water. {%—Dhārā-%}
{%nipāta%} or {%dhārā-pāta, as,%} m. a fall of rain, pelting
shower; a stream of water. {%—Dhārāntara-cara (˚rā-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} moving among the showers; flying
amid the clouds (as the Cātaka bird). {%—Dhārā-phala,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a tree with prickly fruits {%(= madana).%}
{%—Dhārā-yantra, am,%} n. ‘machine for sprinkling
water,’ a fountain; a watering-can, a sprinkling vase
or ewer, a sort of censer. {%—Dhārā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having an edge, edged; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a town.
{%—Dhārā-vani, is,%} m. wind, air. {%—Dhārā-vara,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. ‘fond of showers,’ epithet of the Maruts;
(Sāy.) covering (the sky) with showers or preventing
the stability of stationary objects, i. e. moving them.
{%—Dhārā-varṣa, as, am,%} m. n. a stream or torrent
of rain, a hard shower. {%—Dhārā-viṣa, as,%} m.
‘having a poisoned edge,’ a crooked sword, a scimitar,
sabre. {%—Dhārāśru (˚rā-aś˚), u,%} n. a flood of tears.
{%—Dhārā-sampāta, as,%} m. a hard shower, a heavy
fall of rain. {%—Dhārāsāra (˚rā-ās˚), as,%} m. a heavy
downfall of rain, a hard shower. {%—Dhārā-snuhī,%} f.,
N. of a plant {%(= tridhāra-snuhī)%}. {%—Dhāroṣṇa%}
{%(˚rā-uṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} warm from the cow (as milk).
<LEND>

<L>23333<pc>0454-b<k1>DAraka<k2>DAraka
{%Dhāraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ holding, containing, pos-
sessing, bearing, carrying, (at the end of a comp.,
see {%kula-dh˚, deha-dh˚, nāma-dh˚%}); ({%as%}), m. a
receptacle or vessel of any kind, a trunk or box (for
holding clothes &c.), a water-pot; ({%ā%}), f. the vulva
of a female.
<LEND>

<L>23334<pc>0454-b<k1>DAraRa<k2>DAraRa
{%Dhāraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ holding, bearing, carrying.
keeping, sustaining, preserving, maintaining, protect-
ing; possessing, having, assuming; keeping in re-
membrance; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Kaśyapa; of
a prince of the Candra-vatsas; ({%au%}), m. du. the two
female breasts; ({%ā%}), f. the act of holding, supporting,
bearing, maintaining, preserving, keeping, holding
fast, keeping back; keeping in remembrance, retain-
[Page0454-c+ 81]
ing in the mind, a good memory; memory; keeping
the mind collected, holding the breath suspended
and all the natural wants restrained; steady or im-
movable abstraction of mind; fortitude, firmness,
steadiness, resolution; continuance in rectitude, keep-
ing in the right way; fixed precept or injunction, a
settled rule, certainty, conclusion; understanding, in-
tellect; conviction; ({%ās%}), f. pl. the four days fol-
lowing the eighth day in the light half of month
Jyaiṣṭha; ({%ī%}), f. any tubular vessel of the body; a
mystical verse or charm or collection of such verses
among the Buddhists; a row or line, (wrong reading
for {%dhoraṇī%}); N. of a daughter of Svadhā [cf. {%dhā-%}
{%riṇī%}]; ({%am%}), n. the act of holding, bearing, uphold-
ing, supporting, sustaining; possessing, possession;
containing; keeping, maintaining; observing, hold-
ing fast; keeping in the memory; immovable ab-
straction of the mind; restraining; (in grammar)
keeping back, i. e. pronouncing imperfectly; [cf.
{%aṅka-dh˚, asu-dh˚, garbha-dh˚, chattra-dh˚,%}
{%daṇḍa-dh˚, deha-dh˚,%} &c.] {%—Dhāraṇa-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. a receptacle for the sieve (?) of a Buddhist
mendicant; a vessel for holding anything. {%—Dhā-%}
{%raṇa-yantra, am,%} n., N. of certain amulets. {%—Dhā-%}
{%raṇā-maya, as, ī, am,%} depending on or connected
with abstraction of the mind. {%—Dhāraṇā-yoga, as,%}
m. deep devotion. {%—Dhāraṇā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pos-
sessing memory, connected with memory. {%—Dhā-%}
{%raṇī-mati, is,%} m. (?), N. of a Samādhi. {%—Dhāraṇī-%}
{%mukha-sarva-jagat-praṇidhi-sandhāraṇa-gar-%}
{%bha, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Dhāraṇī-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist work.
<LEND>

<L>23335<pc>0454-c<k1>DAraRaka<k2>DAraRaka
{%Dhāraṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ holding, containing; ({%as%}),
m. a debtor.
<LEND>

<L>23336<pc>0454-c<k1>DAraRIya<k2>DAraRIya
{%Dhāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be held or retained,
to be maintained, borne, sustained, possessed, &c.;
to be adhered to; ({%ā%}), f. {%= dharaṇī-kanda,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23337<pc>0454-c<k1>DAraya<k2>DAraya
{%Dhāraya, as, ā, am,%}¦ holding, possessing, having,
keeping.
<LEND>

<L>23338<pc>0454-c<k1>DArayat<k2>DArayat
{%Dhārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ having, possessing; hold-
ing as doctrine, believing, maintaining, asserting, pro-
fessing; acquainted with, versed in. {%—Dhārayat-%}
{%kavi, is, is, i,%} Ved. supporting or cherishing sages;
(Sāy.) supporting or bearing water. {%—Dhārayat-%}
{%kṣiti, is, is, i,%} Ved. bearing or sustaining creatures;
(Sāy.) one who has prepared ground (for an altar).
{%—Dhārayad-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. ‘possessing the
quality of sustaining or supporting,’ an epithet of
the Ādityas.
<LEND>

<L>23339<pc>0454-c<k1>DArayARa<k2>DArayARa
{%Dhārayāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ bearing, holding, sup-
porting, containing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23340<pc>0454-c<k1>DArayitavya<k2>DArayitavya
{%Dhārayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be borne, to be
kept or retained; to be perceived or understood.
<LEND>

<L>23341<pc>0454-c<k1>DArayitf<k2>DArayitf
{%Dhārayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a holder, bearer; holding,
keeping, keeping back, restraining; ({%ī%}), f. {%= dhari-%}
{%trī,%} the earth.
<LEND>

<L>23342<pc>0454-c<k1>DArayizRu<k2>DArayizRu
{%Dhārayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ capable of holding,
bearing, maintaining, sustaining. {%—Dhārayiṣṇu-tā,%}
f. capability of bearing or supporting, patience.
<LEND>

<L>23343<pc>0454-c<k1>DArayu<k2>DArayu
{%Dhārayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. flowing, streaming,
dropping.
<LEND>

<L>23344<pc>0454-c<k1>DArA<k2>DArA
{%Dhārā,%}¦ f. See under {%dhāra,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>23345<pc>0454-c<k1>DAri<k2>DAri
{%Dhāri, is, is, i,%}¦ holding, maintaining, carrying,
bearing.
<LEND>

<L>23346<pc>0454-c<k1>DArikA<k2>DArikA
{%Dhārikā,%}¦ f. a division of time, = 6 Kṣaṇas, =
(1/2) Muhūrta.
<LEND>

<L>23347<pc>0454-c<k1>DArita<k2>DArita
{%Dhārita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), borne, sup-
ported, maintained; ({%am%}), n. a horse's trot; (wrong
reading for {%dhorita, dhauritaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>23348<pc>0454-c<k1>DArin<k2>DArin
{%Dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ carrying, bearing, wearing, hav-
ing, holding, keeping, possessing; sustaining, main-
taining, preserving, keeping in one's memory, ob-
serving [cf. {%jaṭā-dh˚, daṇḍa-dh˚, dhanur-dh˚%}];
having an edge, edged; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a tree [cf.
{%pīlu%}]; ({%iṇī%}), f. the earth; Bombax Heptaphyllum
({%= śālmalī%}); N. of a daughter of Svadhā [cf. {%dhā-%}
{%raṇī%}]; ({%iṇyas%}), f. pl. a collective N. of the seventy-four
wives of the gods; (with Jainas) N. of a deity who
executes the commands of the eighteenth Arhat of the
present Ava-sarpiṇī; N. of the wife of Agni-mitra.
<LEND>

<L>23349<pc>0454-c<k1>DArya<k2>DArya
{%Dhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be held or maintained,
[Page0455-a+ 77]
to be borne or carried, bearable; to be imposed (as
a punishment); to be worn; to be suffered, support-
able; to be upheld or preserved; to be contained;
to be kept or detained; to be kept in the memory;
to be directed steadily towards; to be kept back or
restrained [cf. {%a-dhārya%} and {%dur-dh˚%}]; ({%as%} or {%am%}),
m. or n. (?), Ved. water; ({%am%}), n. clothes, garments.
{%—Dhārya-tva, am,%} n. the being held or borne or
worn; capability or fitness for the same.
<LEND>

<L>23350<pc>0455-a<k1>DAryamARa<k2>DAryamARa
{%Dhāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being held, borne,
maintained, &c. {%—Dhāryamāṇa-tva, am,%} n. pos-
sessions, property.
<LEND>

<L>23351<pc>0455-a<k1>DArtarAzwra<k2>DArtarAzwra
{#DArtarAzwra#}¦ {%dhārtarāṣṭra, as, ī, am,%} belonging
to Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; ({%as%}), m. a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra,
especially a patronymic of Dur-yodhana who was his
eldest son; a kind of snake [cf. {%dhṛta-rāṣṭra%}];
(fr. {%dhṛta-rāṣṭrī%}), a sort of goose with black legs
and bill. {%—Dhārtarāṣṭra-padī,%} f., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>23352<pc>0455-a<k1>DArtarAzwri<k2>DArtarAzwri
{%Dhārtarāṣṭri, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>23353<pc>0455-a<k1>DArteya<k2>DArteya
{#DArteya#}¦ {%dhārteya, ās,%} m. pl. (perhaps fr.
{%dhṛta%}), N. of a warlike tribe; ({%as%}), m. a prince of
this tribe.
<LEND>

<L>23354<pc>0455-a<k1>DArma<k2>DArma
{#DArma#}¦ {%dhārma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dharma%}), relat-
ing to justice or virtue, belonging to Dharma or the
god of justice.
<LEND>

<L>23355<pc>0455-a<k1>DArmapata<k2>DArmapata
{%Dhārmapata, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Dharma-pati.
<LEND>

<L>23356<pc>0455-a<k1>DArmapattana<k2>DArmapattana
{%Dhārmapattana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%dharma-pattana%}),
black pepper.
<LEND>

<L>23357<pc>0455-a<k1>DArmavidya<k2>DArmavidya
{%Dhārmavidya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%dharma-vidyā%}),
knowing the law, familiar with it, a lawyer, a jurist.
<LEND>

<L>23358<pc>0455-a<k1>DArmika<k2>DArmika
{%Dhārmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ righteous, just, fulfilling
or performing duties, virtuous, religious, pious; rest-
ing on right, conformable to justice. {%—Dhārmika-tā,%}
f. or {%dhārmika-tva%} or {%dhārmikya, am,%} n. righteous-
ness, justice, virtuousness.
<LEND>

<L>23359<pc>0455-a<k1>DArmiRa<k2>DArmiRa
{%Dhārmiṇa, am,%}¦ n. an assemblage of virtuous men.
<LEND>

<L>23360<pc>0455-a<k1>DArmiReya<k2>DArmiReya
{%Dhārmiṇeya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Dhar-
miṇī.
<LEND>

<L>23361<pc>0455-a<k1>DArmyAyaRa<k2>DArmyAyaRa
{%Dhārmyāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Dharmya.
<LEND>

<L>23362<pc>0455-a<k1>DArzwa<k2>DArzwa
{#DArzwa#}¦ {%dhārṣṭa, as, ī, am,%} or {%dhārṣṭika, as,%}
{%ī, am%} (fr. {%dhṛṣṭa,%} rt. {%dhṛṣ%}), proceeding or
descended from Dhṛṣṭa.
<LEND>

<L>23363<pc>0455-a<k1>DArzwadyumna<k2>DArzwadyumna
{%Dhārṣṭadyumna, as,%}¦ m. or {%dhārṣṭadyumni,%}
{%is,%} m. a patronymic from Dhṛṣṭa-dyumna.
<LEND>

<L>23364<pc>0455-a<k1>DArzwya<k2>DArzwya
{%Dhārṣṭya, am,%}¦ n. violence, boldness, daringness,
audacity, arrogance, impudence, rudeness.
<LEND>

<L>23365<pc>0455-a<k1>DArzRaka<k2>DArzRaka
{%Dhārṣṇaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%dhṛṣṇu%}), descended
from Dhṛṣṇu; (the more correct form would be
{%dhārṣṇava.%})
<LEND>

<L>23366<pc>0455-a<k1>DAv<k2>DAv<h>1
{#DAv#} 1¦. {%dhāv%} (connected with rts. {%dhav%}
and {%dhanv%}), cl. 1. P. and sometimes
A. {%dhāvati, -te, dadhāva, -e, dhāviṣyati, -te,%}
{%adhāvīt, adhāviṣṭa, dhāvitum,%} to flow, stream or
flow forth, flow towards; to give milk (as a cow);
to run, proceed quickly, advance, run away, run
towards, advance against; to rush against, assault;
run a race; run away, flee; to go, move, glide:
Caus. {%dhāvayati,%} &c., Aor. {%adīdhavat,%} to cause to
run, make run, drive, impel, push on; {%dhāvayati%}
{%rathena,%} he drives in a chariot: Desid. {%didhāvi-%}
{%ṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%dādhāvyate:%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">θέ-ω, θεύ-σομαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θο-ό-ς, θοάζ-ω, βοη-θό-ος;</lang> Hib. <nsi>deifir,</nsi> ‘haste.’]
<LEND>

<L>23367<pc>0455-a<k1>DAvaka<k2>DAvaka<h>1
1. {%dhāvaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ running, flowing, going
quickly, running in advance, expeditious; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of an author in the pay of king Śrī-harṣa; (also
read {%Bhāsaka;%} he is said to have composed the
Ratnāvalī for Śrī-harṣa.)
<LEND>

<L>23368<pc>0455-a<k1>DAvat<k2>DAvat
{%Dhāvat, an, antī, at,%}¦ running, going quickly,
running away.
<LEND>

<L>23369<pc>0455-a<k1>DAvana<k2>DAvana<h>1
1. {%dhāvana, am,%}¦ n. running, galloping, flowing,
moving; attack, assault; ({%as%}), m., N. of a spell for
using or restraining magical weapons.
<LEND>

<L>23370<pc>0455-a<k1>DAvamAna<k2>DAvamAna
{%Dhāvamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ running, going quickly.
<LEND>

<L>23371<pc>0455-a<k1>DAvita<k2>DAvita<h>1
1. {%dhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ running, running off or
away; running towards, advanced against.
<LEND>

<L>23372<pc>0455-a<k1>DAvitf<k2>DAvitf
{%Dhāvitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a runner; running.
<LEND>
[Page0455-b+ 75]

<L>23373<pc>0455-b<k1>DAvin<k2>DAvin
{%Dhāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ running, going quickly.
<LEND>

<L>23374<pc>0455-b<k1>DAv<k2>DAv<h>2
{#DAv#} 2¦. {%dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%dhāvati, -te,%}
{%dadhāva, -e, dhāviṣyati, -te, adhāvīt,%}
{%adhāviṣṭa, dhāvitum,%} to rub, rub off, cleanse,
clean, wash, purify, polish, brighten, make pure or
bright; A. to rub one's self with anything, to rub into
one's person: Caus. {%dhāvayati,%} &c., Aor. {%adī-%}
{%dhavat,%} to cleanse, wash: Desid. {%didhāviṣati, -te:%}
Intens. {%dādhāvyate;%} [cf. probably Goth. <nsi>daupya</nsi>
= Old Sax. <nsi>dopyu</nsi> = Mod. Germ. <nsi>taufe,</nsi> ‘I baptize,’
= Caus. {%dhāvayāmi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23375<pc>0455-b<k1>DAva<k2>DAva
{%Dhāva, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleansing, washing, making
bright, polishing, (at the end of an adj. comp.; cf.
{%caila-dh˚%} and {%asi-dh˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>23376<pc>0455-b<k1>DAvaka<k2>DAvaka
{%Dhāvaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ washing, cleansing; ({%as%}),
m. a washerman, a dhobī.
<LEND>

<L>23377<pc>0455-b<k1>DAvana<k2>DAvana<h>2
2. {%dhāvana, am,%}¦ n. rubbing off, washing off, cleans-
ing, purifying; rubbing with anything, (in comp.,
e. g. {%mīna-dhāvana-toya, manaḥśilā-candana-%}
{%dh˚,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>23378<pc>0455-b<k1>DAvani<k2>DAvani
{%Dhāvani, is, ī,%}¦ f. a sort of creeping plant, Hedy-
sarum Lagopodioides.
<LEND>

<L>23379<pc>0455-b<k1>DAvanikA<k2>DAvanikA
{%Dhāvanikā,%}¦ f. a kind of prickly nightshade, {%=%}
{%kaṇṭa-kārikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>23380<pc>0455-b<k1>DAvita<k2>DAvita<h>2
2. {%dhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ purified, cleansed, clean.
<LEND>

<L>23381<pc>0455-b<k1>DOta<k2>DOta
{%Dhauta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleansed, &c. See p. 460,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23382<pc>0455-b<k1>DAvalya<k2>DAvalya
{#DAvalya#}¦ {%dhāvalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dhavala%}),
whiteness, white (the colour).
<LEND>

<L>23383<pc>0455-b<k1>DAsas<k2>DAsas
{#DAsas#}¦ {%dhāsas, ās,%} m., Ved. a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>23384<pc>0455-b<k1>Di<k2>Di<h>1
{#Di#} 1¦. {%dhi%} (allied to rt. 1. {%dhā%}), cl. 6. P.
{%dhiyati, didhāya, dheṣyati, adhaiṣīt,%}
{%dhetum,%} to have, hold, keep, possess.
<LEND>

<L>23385<pc>0455-b<k1>Di<k2>Di<h>2
2. {%dhi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. 1. {%dhā%}), what holds, con-
tains or preserves; any receptacle, (only at the end
of a comp., e. g. {%ambu-dhi, ambho-dhi, iṣu-dhi,%}
{%utsa-dhi, uda-dhi, jala-dhi,%} &c.)
<LEND>

<L>23386<pc>0455-b<k1>Dita<k2>Dita<h>1
1. {%dhita, as, ā, am%}¦ (earlier form of {%hita%} fr. rt.
1. {%dhā%}), put, placed, arranged, given, caused; re-
solved; [cf. {%dur-dh˚%} and {%nema-dh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23387<pc>0455-b<k1>DitAvan<k2>DitAvan
{%Dhitāvan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. abounding in gifts (?).
(According to Sāy. Ṛg-veda III. 27, 2, {%dhitāvā-%}
{%nam = dhita-vānam = nihita-dhanam,%} laying up
or granting wealth; III. 40, 3, {%= nihita-haviṣkam,%}
[a sacrifice] in which oblations are offered.)
<LEND>

<L>23388<pc>0455-b<k1>Diti<k2>Diti
{%Dhiti%}¦ in {%nema-dh˚, mitra-dh˚,%} &c., q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23389<pc>0455-b<k1>Di<k2>Di<h>3
{#Di#} 3¦. {%dhi%} or {%dhinv,%} cl. 5. P. {%dhinoti, di-%}
{%dhinva, dhinvitum,%} to satisfy (Ved.); to
delight, please.
<LEND>

<L>23390<pc>0455-b<k1>Dita<k2>Dita<h>2
2. {%dhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfied, pleased.
<LEND>

<L>23391<pc>0455-b<k1>Di<k2>Di<h>4
{#Di#} 4¦. {%dhi%} sometimes = 2. {%adhi,%} as {%pi = api%}
and {%va = ava.%}
<LEND>

<L>23392<pc>0455-b<k1>Dik<k2>Dik
{#Dik#}¦ {%dhik,%} ind. (said to be connected with
rt. 1. {%dih%}), an interjection of reproach, menace or
displeasure, = fie! shame! out upon! what a pity!
&c.; (generally followed by the acc., sometimes by
the nom. or voc., and rarely by the gen., e. g. {%dhik%}
{%tvām,%} shame upon thee! {%dhig iyam daridratā,%}
shame upon this poverty!) {%—Dhik-pāruṣya, am,%}
n. abuse, reproach, excessive reviling. {%—Dhig-daṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. reprimand, censure.
<LEND>

<L>23393<pc>0455-b<k1>Dikkf<k2>Dikkf
{%Dhik-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to reproach,
censure, reprimand, curse (with acc.). {%—Dhik-kāra,%}
{%as,%} m. or {%dhik-kriyā,%} f. reproach, contempt, cen-
sure, disrespect. {%—Dhik-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} reproached,
reviled, censured, condemned, cursed; ({%am%}), n. a
reproach, contempt, curse.
<LEND>

<L>23394<pc>0455-b<k1>Dikz<k2>Dikz
{#Dikz#}¦ {%dhikṣ%} (perhaps a Desid. form of
rt. 1. {%dah,%} cf. rt. {%dhukṣ%}), cl. 1. A.
{%dhikṣate,%} &c., to kindle; to live; to be weary or
harassed.
<LEND>

<L>23395<pc>0455-b<k1>DigvaRa<k2>DigvaRa
{#DigvaRa#}¦ {%dhigvaṇa, as,%} m. (perhaps a Prā-
kṛt form of {%dhik-varṇa%}), a man of a low or mixed
caste, sprung from a Brāhman and a female of the
tribe called Āyogava.
<LEND>
[Page0455-c+ 75]

<L>23396<pc>0455-c<k1>Ditsya<k2>Ditsya
{%Dhitsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be wished to be placed,
&c.; desirable to be given or created, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23397<pc>0455-c<k1>Dita<k2>Dita<h>1
{#Dita#} 1¦. and 2. {%dhita.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23398<pc>0455-c<k1>Dinv<k2>Dinv
{#Dinv#}¦ {%dhinv.%} See rt. 3. {%dhi,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23399<pc>0455-c<k1>Dipsu<k2>Dipsu
{#Dipsu#}¦ {%dhipsu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of rt.
{%dambh%}), wishing to trick or deceive, deceptive.
<LEND>

<L>23400<pc>0455-c<k1>DiyaYjinva<k2>DiyaYjinva
{#DiyaYjinva#}¦ {%dhiyañ-jinva, dhiyāya, dhiyā-%}
{%vasu.%} See p. 456, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>23401<pc>0455-c<k1>Diz<k2>Diz<h>1
{#Diz#} 1¦. {%dhiṣ%} (thought by some to be
an abbreviated form of a Vedic Desid.
{%didhiṣ%} derived fr. rt. 1. {%dhā;%} connected with rt. 1.
{%dhī%}), cl. 3. P. {%didheṣṭi,%} &c., to sound, emit a
sound; to praise, celebrate by hymns (?).
<LEND>

<L>23402<pc>0455-c<k1>Diz<k2>Diz<h>2
2. {%dhiṣ,%}¦ f. (only occurring in inst. {%dhiṣā%} and
probably connected with rt. 1. {%dhī%}), fixing the mind,
attention (?), intelligence (?), devotion; (Sāy.) {%= dhi-%}
{%ṣaṇā,%} knowledge, understanding; action; praise,
hymn.
<LEND>

<L>23403<pc>0455-c<k1>DizaRa<k2>DizaRa
{%Dhiṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. {%dhiṣ%} substi-
tuted for rt. {%dhṛṣ%}), ‘the intelligent one,’ N. of
Bṛhas-pati, preceptor of the gods and regent of the
planet Jupiter, the planet Jupiter itself [cf. {%dhiṣa-%}
{%ṇādhipa%} and {%dhī-mat%}]; any Guru or spiritual pre-
ceptor; epithet of a Nārāyaṇa; N. of an astronomer;
of an evil spirit or demon; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of Soma-
vessel, a cup, goblet, bowl; a Soma press; (accord-
ing to some commentators) the Soma juice itself and
its effects; (metaphorically {%dhiṣaṇe,%} f. du. the two
cups or bowls, i. e. the two worlds or heaven and
earth; and {%dhiṣaṇās,%} f. pl. the three worlds or
heaven, earth, and the intermediate atmosphere); a
female divinity presiding over prosperity and gain,
(sometimes reckoned among the wives of the gods);
{%= vāc,%} speech, praise, hymn; = 2. {%dhī,%} intelligence,
intellect, understanding, knowledge; N. of the wife
of Havir-dhāna, daughter of Agni; of the wife of
Kṛśāśva and mother of Veda-śira, Devala, Vayuna,
and Manu; ({%am%}), n. a dwelling-place, abode, seat,
site, resting-place [cf. {%dhiṣṇya%}]; understanding,
intellect. {%—Dhiṣaṇādhipa, as,%} m. ‘lord of the
planet Jupiter,’ epithet of Bṛhas-pati.
<LEND>

<L>23404<pc>0455-c<k1>DizaRya<k2>DizaRya
{%Dhiṣaṇya,%}¦ an adj. formed by Yāska (Nir. VIII.
3) to explain {%dhiṣṇya.%}
<LEND>

<L>23405<pc>0455-c<k1>DizaRyat<k2>DizaRyat
{%Dhiṣaṇyat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. a Nom. {%dhiṣaṇya%}
which only occurs in the part.), attentive, devout (?);
(Sāy.) desiring to praise.
<LEND>

<L>23406<pc>0455-c<k1>Dizwya<k2>Dizwya
{%Dhiṣṭya, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed on a fire-altar (?);
(wrong reading for {%dhiṣṇya,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>23407<pc>0455-c<k1>DizWya<k2>DizWya
{%Dhiṣṭhya, am,%}¦ n. site, seat, place, (wrong reading
for {%dhiṣṇya,%} q. v.); ({%as%}), m. fire; the planet
Venus (?). {%—Dhiṣṭhya-pa, as,%} m. world-protector.
<LEND>

<L>23408<pc>0455-c<k1>DizRiya<k2>DizRiya
{%Dhiṣṇiya%}¦ for {%dhiṣṇya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23409<pc>0455-c<k1>DizRIya<k2>DizRIya
{%Dhiṣṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. intended for or
belonging to the Dhiṣṇyas, i. e. certain receptacles
or places for fire.
<LEND>

<L>23410<pc>0455-c<k1>DizRya<k2>DizRya
{%Dhiṣṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. only perceptible by
the mind; (Sāy. {%= dhārṣṭya-yukta%}), endowed with
fortitude; intelligent, thoughtful, devout, pious;
(Sāy.) to be praised or meditated upon; worthy of a
high station; placed upon the heaps of earth used
for side-altars; see below. In Ṛg-veda III. 22, 3,
Sāy. explains {%dhiṣṇyā%} by {%prāṇās%} = the divinities
presiding over the vital airs; ({%as%}), m. a place for
the sacrificial fire, a sort of inferior or side-altar,
(generally a heap of earth covered with sand on which
the fire is placed, and of which eight are enumerated,
cf. {%āgnīdhrīya, mārjālīya,%} &c.); an epithet of
Uśanas, the planet Venus; power, strength; ({%am%}),
n. a site, seat, place, abode, spot, region, house; a
star, asterism, (looking like the fire on the side-altars);
a meteor.
<LEND>

<L>23411<pc>0455-c<k1>DI<k2>DI<h>1
{#DI#} 1¦. {%dhī%} (sometimes given in the redu-
plicated form {%dīdhī;%} the later forms of {%dhī%}
are 1. {%dhā, dhyā, dhyai,%} q. v., with which such
Vedic forms as {%dhīmahi%} are connected by native
[Page0456-a+ 79]
commentators), cl. 2. A. {%dīdhīte,%} &c., to shine,
appear (see {%dīdhī%}); cl. 1. P. (fr. rt. {%dhyai%}), {%dhyā-%}
{%yati,%} &c. (see {%dhyai%}), to perceive, think, reflect;
to wish, desire. (A root {%dhī,%} cl. 4. A. {%dhīyate,%}
&c., which is properly Pass. of rt. 1. {%dhā,%} is given
in the Dhātu-pāṭha and is said to have the following
senses, — to contain, hold; to slight, disregard; to
accomplish; to propitiate.)
<LEND>

<L>23412<pc>0456-a<k1>DiyasAna<k2>DiyasAna
{%Dhiyasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ reflecting, meditating
upon, fixing the mind upon.
<LEND>

<L>23413<pc>0456-a<k1>DiyAya<k2>DiyAya
{%Dhiyāya%}¦ (fr. 2. {%dhī%}), Nom. A. {%dhiyāyate,%} &c.,
Ved. to fix the mind upon; to be devout, practise
devotion; (Sāy.) to wish for praise.
<LEND>

<L>23414<pc>0456-a<k1>DiyAya<k2>DiyAya
{%Dhiyāya, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the preceding), Ved. reflect-
ing, devout, pious; (Sāy.) wishing to understand.
<LEND>

<L>23415<pc>0456-a<k1>DI<k2>DI<h>2
2. {%dhī, īs,%}¦ f. thought, idea, notion, intention;
understanding, wisdom, intellect, intelligence, intel-
lectual power, mind; knowledge, science, art; reli-
gious reflection, devotion, prayer; a religious rite,
sacrifice; Intelligence personified (as the wife of Rudra
in the form Manyu); (in astrology) the fifth house
from the Lagna; ({%iyas%}), f. pl. Holy Thoughts per-
sonified; [cf. {%itthā-dhī, udāra-dhī, dur-dhī, dū-%}
{%ḍhī, su-dhī,%} &c.] {%—Dhiyañ-jinva, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
exciting pious reflection or promoting devotion;
(Sāy.) to be propitiated by pious rites; ({%ā%}), m. du.
epithet of the Aśvins. {%—Dhiyan-dhā, ās, ās, am,%}
Ved. reflecting, devout, pious, wise; (Sāy.) celebrating
sacred rites. {%—Dhiyā-jur, ūr, ūr, ūr,%} Ved. worn
out or grown old in the performance of religious
duties. {%—Dhiyām-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the thoughts,’
the soul; an epithet of Mañju-ghoṣa. {%—Dhiyā-%}
{%vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. abounding in devotion, very
devout; (Sāy.) recompensing religious rites by wealth.
{%—Dhī-javana, as, ā, am,%} or {%dhī-jū, ūs, ūs, u,%}
Ved. infusing spirit, inspiring; (Sāy.) rapid as thought.
{%—Dhīndriya (dhī-in˚), as,%} m. an organ of per-
ception ({%= buddhīndriya%} and opposed to {%karmen-%}
{%driya,%} see {%indriya%}). {%—Dhī-mat, ān, atī, at,%} pos-
sessed of understanding, endowed with intelligence,
intellectual, intelligent, wise, learned, sensible; ({%ān%}),
m. an epithet of Bṛhas-pati, preceptor of the gods;
N. of a son of Virāj; of a son of Purū-ravas. {%—Dhī-%}
{%mantrin, ī,%} m. a minister for counsel (as distinguished
fr. {%karma-mantrin,%} a minister for action). {%—Dhī-%}
{%maraṇa, as,%} m. (with preceding {%miśra%}), N. of a
man. {%—Dhī-raṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. delighting in
devotion; (Sāy.) whose speech is with praise, a
devout worshipper. {%—Dhī-rāja, as,%} m., N. of one of
the attendants of Śiva. {%—Dhī-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
intelligent, pious, religious. {%—Dhī-śakti, is,%} f. power
of the mind, mental or intellectual faculty (as atten-
tion, comprehension, &c.). {%—Dhī-sakha, as,%} m. a
wise counsellor, an adviser, mentor, minister; a tutor
or friendly adviser. {%—Dhī-saciva, as,%} m. a minister
for counsel, a counsellor, minister; a wise or prudent
adviser. {%—Dhī-harā,%} f. a kind of sweet gourd.
<LEND>

<L>23416<pc>0456-a<k1>DIta<k2>DIta<h>1
1. {%dhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reflected on, thought about.
<LEND>

<L>23417<pc>0456-a<k1>DIti<k2>DIti<h>1
1. {%dhīti, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. {%dhīti%} see col. 2), Ved.
thought, notion, reflection, idea; devotion, prayer;
({%ayas%}), f. pl. understanding, wisdom; (Sāy.) the
fingers.
<LEND>

<L>23418<pc>0456-a<k1>DItika<k2>DItika
{%Dhītika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Buddhist patriarch.
<LEND>

<L>23419<pc>0456-a<k1>DIdA<k2>DIdA<h>1
1. {%dhīdā,%}¦ f. (for 2. {%dhīdā%} see col. 2), understand-
ing, intellect.
<LEND>

<L>23420<pc>0456-a<k1>DIvan<k2>DIvan
{%Dhīvan, ā, varī, a,%}¦ Ved. clever, skilful; ({%ā%}),
m. an artizan, artificer, a worker in brass; a fisher-
man; [cf. the next.]
<LEND>

<L>23421<pc>0456-a<k1>DIvara<k2>DIvara
{%Dhīvara, as,%}¦ m. a fisherman, fisher; ({%ī%}), f. a
fisherman's wife; a sort of harpoon for catching fish;
a receptacle for fish, a fish-basket; ({%am%}), n. iron;
[cf. {%tīvra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23422<pc>0456-a<k1>DIvaraka<k2>DIvaraka
{%Dhīvaraka, as,%}¦ m. a fisherman, fisher.
<LEND>

<L>23423<pc>0456-a<k1>DIkz<k2>DIkz
{#DIkz#}¦ {%dhīkṣ%} (perhaps Desid. of rt. 1.
{%dih%}), cl. 1. A. {%dhīkṣate,%} &c., Ved. to
wish to anoint.
<LEND>

<L>23424<pc>0456-a<k1>DIta<k2>DIta<h>2
{#DIta#} 2¦. {%dhīta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhe%}), drunk,
sucked, sucked in, sucked out. {%—Dhīta-rasa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the juice sucked out or extracted.
<LEND>
[Page0456-b+ 76]

<L>23425<pc>0456-b<k1>DIti<k2>DIti<h>2
2. {%dhīti, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. {%dhīti%} see col. 1), drink-
ing; (according to the commentators), thirst.
<LEND>

<L>23426<pc>0456-b<k1>DIdA<k2>DIdA<h>2
{#DIdA#} 2¦. {%dhīdā,%} f. (probably a Prākṛt form
for {%duhitā%}), a daughter, a virgin, a maiden. (For
1. {%dhīdā%} see col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>23427<pc>0456-b<k1>DIna<k2>DIna
{#DIna#}¦ {%dhīna, am,%} n. iron (?).
<LEND>

<L>23428<pc>0456-b<k1>DIra<k2>DIra
{#DIra#}¦ {%dhīra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhṛ,%} but said
to be fr. rt. 1. {%dhā%} and certainly connected with
this latter rt.), steady, holding firmly, steadfast, en-
during, durable, lasting, constant, continual; firm,
determined, resolute, persevering, persistent; strong,
energetic, courageous; brave, bold, daring, head-
strong, self-controlled, strong-minded, self-possessed,
composed, calm, collected; sedate, grave, solemn,
sober; deep, grave, hollow, low, dull (as sound);
emitting a long or prolonged sound; lazy, dull,
slow; gentle, soft (as a breeze); well-conducted,
well-behaved, well-bred; (fr. 1. {%dhā = %} 1. {%dhī%}), in-
telligent, wise, prudent; sensible, learned, skilful,
clever, shrewd; ({%as%}), m. the ocean, sea; ‘the wise
one,’ epithet of a Buddha; of Bali; of several men;
a species of medicinal plant, {%= ṛṣabha; (ā),%} f. a
woman who, although jealous of a husband or lover,
suppresses all expression of resentment in his pre-
sence; an intoxicating beverage; N. of several medi-
cinal plants, {%= kākolī, = mahā-jyotiṣmatī, = kṣī-%}
{%ra-kākolī, śveta-vacā, medā,%} Rosa Glandulifera;
({%am%}), n. saffron; ({%am%}), ind. firmly, steadily,
resolutely, steadfastly. {%—Dhīra-govinda-śarman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of the author of the modern work Āthar-
vaṇa-rahasya. {%—Dhīra-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} strong-
minded, self-possessed, courageous. {%—Dhīra-tā,%} f. or
{%dhīra-tva, am,%} n. firmness, fortitude, energy, courage;
suppression; the female property of suppressing
violent expression of jealousy; refusal. {%—Dhīra-%}
{%dhvani, is,%} m. a deep sound. {%—Dhīra-pattrī,%} f. a
kind of bulbous plant {%(= dharaṇī-kanda)%}. {%—Dhīra-%}
{%praśaṃsā,%} f. ‘the praise of the firm or of the wise,’
N. of the thirteenth chapter of the Śārṅgadhara-
paddhati. {%—Dhīra-praśānta, as,%} m. the hero of a
poem or play who is both brave and calm or mild (?).
{%—Dhīra-lalita, as,%} m. the hero of a poem or play
who is firm and brave but reckless and sportive at
the same time; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a metre consisting of
four lines of sixteen syllables each. {%—Dhīra-skan-%}
{%dha, as,%} m. ‘strong-shouldered,’ a buffalo. {%—Dhīrā-%}
{%dhīrā (˚ra-adh˚),%} f. a mistress or wife who having
cause for jealousy pursues a middle course between
suppression and expression of resentment, a jealous
woman who alternately expresses and conceals her
jealousy. {%—Dhīreśa-miśra (˚ra-īśa-m˚), as,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Dhīreśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of the
father of Jyotir-īśvara, author of the Dhūrta-samā-
gama. {%—Dhīrodātta (˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m. the hero of
a poem or play who is brave and noble-minded.
{%—Dhīroddhata (˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m. the hero of a
poem or play who is brave but haughty. {%—Dhīroṣ-%}
{%ṇin (˚ra-uṣ˚), ī,%} m., N. of one of the Viśve-devās.
<LEND>

<L>23429<pc>0456-b<k1>DIrAvI<k2>DIrAvI
{%Dhīrāvī,%}¦ f., N. of a plant ({%= pītaśiṃśapā%}).
<LEND>

<L>23430<pc>0456-b<k1>DIrya<k2>DIrya
{%Dhīrya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. 1. {%dhā%} = 1. {%dhī%}), Ved.
intelligent, wise, clever; ({%am%}), n. intelligence, pru-
dence.
<LEND>

<L>23431<pc>0456-b<k1>DIlawI<k2>DIlawI
{#DIlawI#}¦ {%dhīlaṭī,%} f. (probably a Prākṛt
form for {%duhitṛ%}), a daughter.
<LEND>

<L>23432<pc>0456-b<k1>DIvara<k2>DIvara
{#DIvara#}¦ {%dhīvara.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>23433<pc>0456-b<k1>Du<k2>Du<h>1
{#Du#} 1¦. {%dhu%} = rt. 1. {%dhū,%} to shake, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23434<pc>0456-b<k1>Du<k2>Du<h>2
2. {%dhu, us,%}¦ f. shaking, trembling.
<LEND>

<L>23435<pc>0456-b<k1>Duta<k2>Duta
{%Dhuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, agitated, moved
quickly to and fro; abandoned, deserted, left.
{%—Dhuta-pāpa, as, ā, am,%} purified from sin.
<LEND>

<L>23436<pc>0456-b<k1>Duna<k2>Duna
{%Dhuna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking. See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23437<pc>0456-b<k1>Dunana<k2>Dunana
{%Dhunana, am,%}¦ n. shaking, agitation.
<LEND>

<L>23438<pc>0456-b<k1>DunAna<k2>DunAna
{%Dhunāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking, agitating.
<LEND>

<L>23439<pc>0456-b<k1>Duni<k2>Duni
{%Dhuni, is, is, i.%}¦ See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23440<pc>0456-b<k1>Dunvat<k2>Dunvat
{%Dhunvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ shaking, agitating.
<LEND>

<L>23441<pc>0456-b<k1>DunvAna<k2>DunvAna
{%Dhunvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking, agitating.
<LEND>
[Page0456-c+ 76]

<L>23442<pc>0456-c<k1>Duvana<k2>Duvana
{%Dhuvana, as,%}¦ m., Ved. fire; ({%am%}), n. shaking,
agitation; place of execution.
<LEND>

<L>23443<pc>0456-c<k1>Duvitra<k2>Duvitra
{%Dhuvitra, am,%}¦ n. a sort of fan (made of deer-skin
and especially used to kindle or excite a sacrificial
fire); [cf. {%dhavitra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23444<pc>0456-c<k1>Duka<k2>Duka
{#Duka#}¦ {%dhuka, as, ā,%} m. f. a kind of plant
(commonly Bhuyabora or Rānabora, {%bora = badara%}).
<LEND>

<L>23445<pc>0456-c<k1>Dukz<k2>Dukz
{#Dukz#}¦ {%dhukṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%dhukṣate,%} &c., to
kindle; to be weary; to live.
<LEND>

<L>23446<pc>0456-c<k1>DuNkzA<k2>DuNkzA
{#DuNkzA#}¦ {%dhuṅkṣā,%} f., Ved. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>23447<pc>0456-c<k1>Duna<k2>Duna
{#Duna#}¦ {%dhuna, as, ā, am%} (variously derived fr.
rt. 2. {%dhvan%} or rt. 1. {%dhu%}), Ved. sounding, roaring;
shaking, agitating, (only in comp.) {%—Dhuneti (˚na-%}
{%iti), is, is, i,%} having a roaring or blustering course;
having an agitating or destructive course.
<LEND>

<L>23448<pc>0456-c<k1>Dunaya<k2>Dunaya
{%Dhunaya%}¦ (fr. {%dhuni%} below), Nom. P. A. {%dhuna-%}
{%yati, -te,%} &c., Ved. to sound, roar, to flow with a
roaring noise; to flow.
<LEND>

<L>23449<pc>0456-c<k1>Duni<k2>Duni
{%Dhuni, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. sounding, roaring, blustering;
(Sāy.) shaking, agitating, causing to tremble, (fr. rt.
1. {%dhu%}); ({%is%}), m. epithet of the Soma; N. of a
demon slain by Indra; ({%is%} or {%dhunī%}), f. a river [cf.
{%nadī%}]; ({%ayas%}), m. pl. ‘the agitators,’ an epithet of
the Maruts. {%—Dhuni-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. roaring,
sounding; (Sāy.) agitated, trembling. {%—Dhuni-%}
{%vrata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. habitually roaring or bluster-
ing; (Sāy.) whose function is the agitation or shaking
(of trees &c.). {%—Dhunī-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of the
rivers,’ the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>23450<pc>0456-c<k1>DunDu<k2>DunDu
{#DunDu#}¦ {%dhundhu, us,%} m., N. of an Asura slain
by Kuvalāśva (or Kuvalayāśva), father of Sunda; (a
various reading for {%Cuñcu%} who was a descendant of
Tri-śaṅku.) {%—Dhundhu-māra, as,%} m. ‘the slayer
of Dhundhu,’ epithet of Kuvalāśva (Kuvalayāśva), a
son of Tri-śaṅku and father of Yuvanāśva; a house-
lizard ({%? = gṛhālika%}); an insect, coccinella ({%=%}
{%indra-gopa, śakra-gopa%}); a kind of plant ({%=%}
{%gṛha-dhūma%}); the smoke of a house (?), cf.
{%dundu-māra%}. {%—Dhundhumāropākhyāna (˚ra-%}
{%up˚), am,%} n. ‘the episode of Dhundhu-māra,’ N. of
the seventeenth chapter of the Svarga-khaṇḍa or
third part of the Padma-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>23451<pc>0456-c<k1>Dur<k2>Dur
{#Dur#}¦ {%dhur, ūr,%} f. (fr. rt. {%dhṛ?,%} in Mahā-bh.
Anuśāsana-p. 2876. {%dhur%} is masc.), that part of a
yoke which rests on the shoulder; a yoke; a bur-
den, load (literally and metaphorically); the peg or
pin at both ends of an axle for fastening the nave
of the wheel; the foremost part of the pole, where
the yoke is fixed; the pole itself, the shaft, the fore-
most or highest place, the top, the place of honour;
a finger; N. of six verses of the Bahish-pavamāna
which are to be sung in a peculiar manner; (some
lexicographers add the following meanings) agitation,
trembling; reflection, recollection; a spark of fire; a
part, a portion; wealth; a N. of the Ganges; {%dhuri,%}
ind. at the head of, {%= agre;%} [cf. {%dhūr, dur-dhur,%}
{%dṛḍha-dhur.%}] {%—Dhuran-dhara, as, ī, am,%} bear-
ing the yoke, bearing a burden, fit to be harnessed;
bearing a burden with patience, (figuratively) laden
with good qualities or with weighty duties, &c.; ({%as%}),
m. a beast of burden; a man of business; a chief,
leader; an epithet of Śiva; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people; N. of a Rakṣas; the tree Grislea Tomen-
tosa. {%—Dhur-gata, dhur-vaha, dhur-voḍhṛ,%} incor-
rect forms for {%dhūr-gata, dhūr-vaha, dhūr-voḍhṛ;%}
see under 2. {%dhūr,%} p. 458, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23452<pc>0456-c<k1>Dura<k2>Dura
{%Dhura, as,%}¦ m. at end of comp. {%= dhur,%} a yoke,
pole; burden; pin at the end of an axle &c.; (1.
{%dhurā%}), f. a burden, load. {%—Dhurā-vaha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} bearing a burden ({%= dhūr-vaha%}).
<LEND>

<L>23453<pc>0456-c<k1>DurIRa<k2>DurIRa
{%Dhurīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit to be harnessed; bearing
a burden or able to bear one, laden with, abounding
with (qualities, duties, &c.); ({%as%}), m. a beast of
burden; a man of business; a leader, chief; [cf.
{%uttara-dh˚, eka-dh˚, dakṣiṇa-dh˚, sarva-dh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23454<pc>0456-c<k1>DurIya<k2>DurIya
{%Dhurīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ able to bear a burden, fit
[Page0457-a+ 77]
for a load, suited to a burden; charged with important
duties; ({%as%}), m. a beast of burden; a man of business
or one entrusted with weighty affairs.
<LEND>

<L>23455<pc>0457-a<k1>Durya<k2>Durya
{%Dhurya%}¦ or (sometimes wrongly spelt) {%dhūrya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fit to be harnessed, fit for a burden, able
to bear one, &c.; standing at the head, holding the
first place, foremost, best; a leader; ({%as%}), m. a
beast of burden, a horse or bullock attached to the
shaft, shafter; a leader, chief (e. g. {%kula-dhurya,%} the
chief or leader of a family); a minister, a chargé
d'affaires; a kind of medicinal plant, {%= ṛṣabha;%}
{%(am),%} n. the fore-part of the pole.
<LEND>

<L>23456<pc>0457-a<k1>DurA<k2>DurA<h>2
{#DurA#} 2¦. {%dhurā,%} ind. (for 1. see {%dhura,%} p. 456,
col. 3), violently, hurtfully, (perhaps fr. rt. {%dhurv%} or
{%dhūrv.%})
<LEND>

<L>23457<pc>0457-a<k1>Durv<k2>Durv
{#Durv#}¦ {%dhurv%} [cf. rt. {%dhūrv%}], cl. 1. P. {%dhur-%}
{%vati,%} &c., to hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>23458<pc>0457-a<k1>DuvakA<k2>DuvakA
{#DuvakA#}¦ {%dhuvakā,%} f. the introductory stanza
of a song, forming afterwards the burden of each
verse; [cf. {%dhruvakā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23459<pc>0457-a<k1>DuSulyA<k2>DuSulyA
{#DuSulyA#}¦ {%dhuśulyā%} (?), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>23460<pc>0457-a<k1>Dustura<k2>Dustura
{#Dustura#}¦ {%dhustura%} or {%dhustūra, as,%} m. the
thorn-apple, Datura Fastuosa; [cf. {%dhattūra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23461<pc>0457-a<k1>DU<k2>DU<h>1
{#DU#} 1¦. {%dhū,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%dhūnoti, dhūnute,%}
(in the later language also) {%dhunoti, dhu-%}
{%nute;%} cl. 6. P. {%dhuvati;%} cl. 9. P. A. {%dhunāti, dhu-%}
{%nīte, dudhāva, dudhuve, dhoṣyati%} and {%dhaviṣ-%}
{%yati, -te, adhāvīt%} and {%adhauṣīt,%} (cl. 6. Aor.
{%adhuvīt%}), {%adhoṣṭa%} and {%adhaviṣṭa, dhotum%} and
{%dhavitum,%} to shake, shake off, remove; to agitate,
cause to tremble; to treat (a person) roughly, hurt,
injure; to blow away, destroy; to kindle, excite,
fan (a fire &c.); to shake off from one's self,
liberate one's self from (A.); to strive against, re-
sist: Pass. {%dhūyate:%} Caus. {%dhāvayati%} and {%dhūna-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to shake: Desid. {%dudhūṣati, -te:%}
Intens. {%dodhūyate, dodhoti, dodhavīti,%} to shake or
agitate violently, shake in a threatening manner, shake
out, shake down from; to be shaken violently, totter
exceedingly (A.); [cf. Zend <nsi>dun-man,</nsi> ‘mist, fog:’
Gr. <lang n="greek">θύ-ω, θύ-ν-ω, θυά-ω, θυά-ζω, θῦ-νο-ς, θύ-ελλα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θυά-(δ)-ς, θυι-ά-ς, θυ-μό-ς, θῦ-μα, θυ-σία, θύ-ος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θυή-εις, θύ-μο-ν:</lang> Lat. <nsi>fū-mu-s, sub-fī-o, sub-fī-</nsi>
<nsi>men:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>daun-s,</nsi> ‘smell:’ Old Iceland. <nsi>du-s-t</nsi>
= Eng. <nsi>dust:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>tun-s-t,</nsi> ‘storm;’ <nsi>tou-m,</nsi>
‘smoke:’ Slav. <nsi>du-na-ti,</nsi> ‘to breathe;’ <nsi>dy-mŭ,</nsi>
‘smoke;’ <nsi>du-chŭ,</nsi> ‘breath;’ <nsi>du-sha,</nsi> ‘soul:’ Lith. <nsi>dú-</nsi>
<nsi>mai,</nsi> ‘smoke;’ <nsi>du-ma-s, dū-mà,</nsi> ‘thought, mind.’]
<LEND>

<L>23462<pc>0457-a<k1>DU<k2>DU<h>2
2. {%dhū, ūs,%}¦ f. shaking, agitating.
<LEND>

<L>23463<pc>0457-a<k1>DUka<k2>DUka
{%Dhūka, as,%}¦ m. air or wind; a rogue, cheat; time;
a kind of plant ({%= vakula%}).
<LEND>

<L>23464<pc>0457-a<k1>DUta<k2>DUta
{%Dhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, shaken off, removed,
agitated; fanned, rinsed, cleansed (in this sense said
to be an old form for {%dhauta,%} q. v.); deserted, aban-
doned; reproached, reviled; judged, discriminated;
({%am%}), n. (?), good behaviour; ({%ā%}), f. a wife. {%—Dhūta-%}
{%kalmaṣa, as, ā, am,%} one whose sins are shaken
off, free from sin, pure. {%—Dhūta-pāpa, as, ā, am,%}
one who has shaken off his sins; removing or
destroying sin; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; of the daughter
of the ascetic Veda-śiras. {%—Dhūtapāpa-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Dhūtapāpeśvara-tīrtha (˚pa-%}
{%īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Dhūta-%}
{%pāpman, ā, ā, a, = dhūta-pāpa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23465<pc>0457-a<k1>DUti<k2>DUti
{%Dhūti, is,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘a shaker, agitator,’ N. of an
Āditya; ({%is%}), f. shaking, moving to and fro, fanning;
({%ayas%}), m. pl. epithet of the Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>23466<pc>0457-a<k1>DUtvA<k2>DUtvA
{%Dhūtvā,%}¦ ind. having shaken or shaken off; having
agitated.
<LEND>

<L>23467<pc>0457-a<k1>DUna<k2>DUna
{%Dhūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, agitated; distressed
by heat or thirst.
<LEND>

<L>23468<pc>0457-a<k1>DUnana<k2>DUnana
{%Dhūnana, as,%}¦ m. wind; ({%am%}), n. the act of
shaking, agitation.
<LEND>

<L>23469<pc>0457-a<k1>DUnaya<k2>DUnaya
{%Dhūnaya%}¦ (fr. {%dhūna%}), Nom. P. A. {%dhūnayati,%}
{%-te,%} &c. (generally considered as the Caus. of rt. 1.
{%dhū%}), to shake, agitate, move to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>23470<pc>0457-a<k1>DUni<k2>DUni
{%Dhūni, is,%}¦ f. shaking agitating.
<LEND>
[Page0457-b+ 81]

<L>23471<pc>0457-b<k1>DUpa<k2>DUpa
{%Dhūpa, as,%}¦ m. (by native authorities derived fr.
a rt. {%dhūp,%} q. v.), incense, frankincense, perfume,
aromatic vapour or smoke, the vapour proceeding
from fragrant gum or resin, (often in pl. {%dhūpās%});
fragrant powder; [cf. {%kṛtrima-dh˚, {{kḷṛipta->kḷpta||20161122|Jim Funderburk.|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/320|lṛi is mw72 coding of vocalic 'l'}}-dh˚,%}
{%kha-dh˚,%} &c.] {%—Dhūpa-dāna, am,%} n. ‘the giving
of incense,’ N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva
by Halāyudha. {%—Dhūpa-dhūpita, as, ā, am,%} made
fragrant or fumigated with incense. {%—Dhūpa-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. a vessel for incense, censer; a perfume box.
{%—Dhūpa-vṛkṣa%} or {%dhūpavṛkṣaka, as,%} m.
‘incense-tree,’ a species of pine, Pinus Longifolia.
{%—Dhūpāguru (˚pa-ag˚), u,%} n. a kind of Agallo-
chum used for incense. {%—Dhūpāṅga (˚pa-aṅ˚), as,%}
m. turpentine. {%—Dhūpārha (˚pa-ar˚), am,%} n. a
black kind of Agallochum used or fit for incense.
<LEND>

<L>23472<pc>0457-b<k1>DUpaka<k2>DUpaka
{%Dhūpaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= dhūpa%} in {%kṛtrima-dh˚%} and
other adj. comp.; a preparer of perfumes or incense,
a perfumer [cf. {%dhūpika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23473<pc>0457-b<k1>DUpana<k2>DUpana
{%Dhūpana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%dhūpaya%}), incensing, fumi-
gation, perfuming; perfume, incense, the aromatic
vapour produced from gums or resins. {%—Dhūpanāṅga%}
{%(˚na-aṅ˚), as,%} m. {%= dhūpāṅga,%} turpentine (?).
<LEND>

<L>23474<pc>0457-b<k1>DUpaya<k2>DUpaya
{%Dhūpaya%}¦ (fr. {%dhūpa,%} but native authorities recog-
nise a rt. {%dhūp,%} q. v.), Nom. P. {%dhūpayati, -yitum,%}
to fumigate, perfume, incense, make fragrant; (in
astron.) to obscure with mist, to be about to eclipse;
to speak; to shine; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">τύφ-ω, τῦφ-ο-ς, τυφ-ών,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τυφώς, τυφεδών, Τυμφρηστός (?), τυφλό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τυφεδανός, τυφεδών:</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>dimpf-en,</nsi> ‘to
smoke:’ Lith. <nsi>dump-iù,</nsi> ‘I fan or blow a fire;’
<nsi>dùmp-les,</nsi> ‘bellows.’]
<LEND>

<L>23475<pc>0457-b<k1>DUpAya<k2>DUpAya
{%Dhūpāya%}¦ (fr. {%dhūpa,%} but native authorities give
a rt. {%dhūp,%} q. v.), Nom. P. {%dhūpāyati, -yitum,%} to
fumigate, perfume with incense; [cf. {%dhūpaya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23476<pc>0457-b<k1>DUpAyita<k2>DUpAyita
{%Dhūpāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ incensed, perfumed, fumi-
gated, scented with incense; vexed, pained.
<LEND>

<L>23477<pc>0457-b<k1>DUpi<k2>DUpi
{%Dhūpi, is,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a class of divine beings
presiding over rain (?).
<LEND>

<L>23478<pc>0457-b<k1>DUpika<k2>DUpika
{%Dhūpika, as,%}¦ m. a preparer of perfumes or in-
cense, a perfumer; [cf. {%dhūpaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23479<pc>0457-b<k1>DUpita<k2>DUpita
{%Dhūpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ scented, perfumed, incensed;
suffering pain or fatigue.
<LEND>

<L>23480<pc>0457-b<k1>DUpya<k2>DUpya
{%Dhūpya, am,%}¦ n. (?), the claw of a particular ani-
mal which when burned emits a fragrant perfume;
[cf. Pers. <nsi>nāḳhuni ḳhwuṣ.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23481<pc>0457-b<k1>DUma<k2>DUma
{%Dhūma, as,%}¦ m. (connected by some with rt. 1. {%dhmā%}),
smoke, vapour, incense; mist, haze; breath (Ved.); a
cloud; (in medic.) smoke as a sternutatory in five
forms; {%= go-dhūma, = śilārasa,%} a kind of incense; a
place prepared for the building of a house; N. of a
man; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant ({%= dhīrāvī%}); [cf. {%go-dh˚,%}
{%cariṣṇu-dh˚, tṛṣṭa-dh˚:%} cf. also rt. 1. {%dhmā;%} Gr.
<lang n="greek">θῡ-μό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>fū-mu-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>daum, toum,</nsi>
‘fume;’ Lith. <nsi>dū-mai,</nsi> ‘smoke;’ Slav. <nsi>dü-mŭ,</nsi>
‘smoke;’ Hib. <nsi>dluimh,</nsi> ‘cloud, darkness.’] {%—Dhū-%}
{%ma-ketana, as, ā, am,%} ‘smoke-marked,’ whose ensign
or mark is smoke; ({%as%}), m. fire or its deity; a
meteor, a comet; Ketu or the personified descending
node. {%—Dhūma-ketu, us, us, u,%} Ved. ‘whose sign
is smoke,’ known or to be known from smoke;
({%us%}), m. fire; a comet or falling star, the personi-
fied descending node; N. of a son of Kṛśāśva by
Arcis; of Tṛṇa-vindu by Alambuṣā. {%—Dhūma-%}
{%gandhi, is, is, i,%} Ved. smelling of smoke. {%—Dhūma-%}
{%gandhika, am,%} n. a kind of grass {%(= rohiṣa-%}
{%tṛṇa)%}. {%—Dhūma-jāṅgaja (dhūma-ja-aṅ˚), am,%}
n. ammoniac. {%—Dhūma-jāla, am,%} n. a multitude or
mass of clouds or smoke. {%—Dhūma-darśin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} Ved. seeing smoke or vapour (as a person affected
with a peculiar disease of the eye). {%—Dhūma-dhvaja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘whose banner or symbol is smoke,’ fire.
{%—Dhūma-pa, as, ā, am,%} drinking or inhaling
only smoke; [cf. {%dhūma-prāśa.%}] {%—Dhūma-pa-%}
{%tha, as,%} m. ‘the way of smoke,’ sacrifice; seeking
salvation by works; [cf. {%dhūma-vartman.%}] {%—Dhū-%}
{%ma-pāna, am,%} n. inhaling smoke or vapour; smoking
tobacco. {%—Dhūmapāna-vidhi, is,%} m. ‘the rule of
inhaling smoke,’ N. of the twenty-eighth chapter of
the Śārṅgadhara-saṃhitā. {%—Dhūma-prabhā,%} f., N.
of one of the seventeen divisions of hell where smoke
[Page0457-c+ 81]
takes the place of light. {%—Dhūma-prāśa, as, ā, am,%}
‘smoke-eating,’ feeding only on smoke, as a hermit;
[cf. {%dhūma-pa.%}] {%—Dhūma-maṅgaja,%} various reading
for {%dhūma-jāṅgaja,%} q. v. {%—Dhūma-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} consisting of smoke or vapour, smoky. {%—Dhū-%}
{%ma-mahiṣī,%} f. fog, mist. {%—Dhūma-yoni, is,%} m.
‘engendered from smoke or vapour,’ a cloud. {%—Dhū-%}
{%ma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} smoky; smoking, steaming;
containing the word {%dhūma%}. {%—Dhūmavat-tva, am,%}
n. smokiness. {%—Dhūma-varcas, ās,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Dhūma-varṇa, as,%} m. ‘smoke-coloured,’ N.
of a king of the serpents. {%—Dhūma-vartman, a,%}
n. ‘the path of smoke,’ sacrifice; seeking salvation
by works. {%—Dhūma-śikha, as, ā, am,%} ‘smoke-
crested’ (said of flame or a tongue of fire). {%—Dhūma-%}
{%saṃhati, is,%} f. a quantity of smoke, a mass or cloud
of smoke. {%—Dhūmākāra (˚ma-āk˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the form or appearance of smoke. {%—Dhū-%}
{%mākṣa (˚ma-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} Ved. having dim,
dark or troubled (?) eyes. {%—Dhūmāṅga (˚ma-aṅ˚)%}
{%= śiṃśapā%}. {%—Dhūmābha (˚ma-ābha), as, ā, am,%}
of a smoky appearance or colour, of a purple colour;
({%as%}), m. purple. {%—Dhūmā-vatī,%} f., N. of a place of
pilgrimage. {%—Dhūmāvatī-mantra, as,%} m. or {%dhū-%}
{%māvatī-manu, us,%} m., N. of certain magical for-
mulas. {%—Dhūmāvali (˚ma-āv˚), is,%} f. a wreath or
cloud of smoke. {%—Dhūmottha (˚ma-ut˚), am,%} n.
{%= vajra-kṣāra,%} ammoniac; [cf. {%dhūma-jāṅgaja.%}]
{%—Dhūmodgāra (˚ma-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘the issuing of
smoke or vapour,’ N. of a kind of disease. {%—Dhū-%}
{%mopahata (˚ma-up˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘smoke-struck,’
suffocated with smoke. {%—Dhūmorṇā (˚ma-ūr˚),%} f.,
N. of the wife of Yama; of the wife of Mārkaṇ-
ḍeya; [cf. {%dhūmrorṇā.%}] {%—Dhūmorṇā-pati, is,%} m.
‘husband of Dhūmorṇā,’ epithet of Yama, ruler of
the dead.
<LEND>

<L>23482<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmaka<k2>DUmaka
{%Dhūmaka, as, ā, am, = dhūma%}¦ at the end of
a comp.; ({%ikā%}), f. smoke, vapour, fog. {%—Dhū-%}
{%maka-puṣpā,%} f. a species of plant (compared to
smoke).
<LEND>

<L>23483<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmaya<k2>DUmaya
{%Dhūmaya%}¦ (fr. {%dhūma%}), Nom. P. {%dhūmayati,%}
&c., to cover with smoke, obscure with mist: Pass.
{%dhūmyate,%} &c., to be obscured with vapour or mist;
to be about to be eclipsed, to be darkened; [cf.
{%dhūmāya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23484<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmala<k2>DUmala
{%Dhūmala, as, ā, am,%}¦ smoke-coloured, of a
smoky hue, brownish red, of a purple colour; ({%as%}),
m. a colour compounded of black and red, purple;
a kind of musical instrument.
<LEND>

<L>23485<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmasa<k2>DUmasa
{%Dhūmasa, as,%}¦ m. the plant Tectona Grandis;
({%ī%}), f. a sort of cake made of pulse steeped in water
and dried in the sun.
<LEND>

<L>23486<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmAya<k2>DUmAya
{%Dhūmāya%}¦ (fr. {%dhūma%}), Nom. P. A. {%dhūmāyati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to smoke, be covered or obscured with
smoke, to steam: Caus. P. {%dhūmāyayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to smoke or to be covered with smoke,
mist, vapour, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23487<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmAyana<k2>DUmAyana
{%Dhūmāyana, am,%}¦ n. smoking, steaming; (in
medic.) heat, fever, feverishness.
<LEND>

<L>23488<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmAyita<k2>DUmAyita
{%Dhūmāyita, am,%}¦ n. the act of smoking.
<LEND>

<L>23489<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmikA<k2>DUmikA
{%Dhūmikā.%}¦ See {%dhūmaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>23490<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmita<k2>DUmita
{%Dhūmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ obscured with smoke, mist,
&c., darkened; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%diś,%} that quarter towards
which the sun turns first.
<LEND>

<L>23491<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmin<k2>DUmin
{%Dhūmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ smoking, steaming; ({%inī%}), f.,
N. of one of the seven tongues of Agni; of the
wife of Aja-mīḍha; of another woman.
<LEND>

<L>23492<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmyamAna<k2>DUmyamAna
{%Dhūmyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being obscured with
mist &c., being obscured.
<LEND>

<L>23493<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmyA<k2>DUmyA
{%Dhūmyā,%}¦ f. thick smoke, a volume or cloud of
smoke. {%—Dhūmyāṭa (˚yā-aṭa), as,%} m. the fork-
tailed shrike.
<LEND>

<L>23494<pc>0457-c<k1>DUmra<k2>DUmra
{%Dhūmra, as, ā, am,%}¦ smoky, smoke-coloured,
grey; (according to the lexicographers) dark-red or
the colour of fire seen through smoke; of a deep
purple colour, purple; (metaphorically) dark, lurid,
obscured; ({%as%}), m. a mixture of red and black;
purple (the colour); incense. ({%= turuṣka%}); N. of
one of Skanda's attendants; of a Dānava; of a Muni;
of a monkey or bear [cf. {%dhūmrāyaṇa%} and {%dhau-%}
{%mrāyaṇa%}]; an epithet of Śiva; of Parāśara; (in
[Page0458-a+ 79]
astrology) N. of the twenty-eighth Yoga; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of gourd ({%= śaśāṇḍulī%}); epithet of Durgā; of
the mother of Vasu-dhara; ({%am%}), n. sin, vice,
wickedness; [cf. {%tāmra-dh˚.%}] {%—Dhūmra-ketu, us,%}
m. ‘grey-bannered,’ N. of a son of Bharata; of
Tṛṇa-vindu. {%—Dhūmra-keśa, as,%} m. ‘dark-haired,’
N. of a son of Pṛthu and Arcis; of a son of
Kṛśāśva and Arcis [cf. {%dhūma-ketu%}]; of a son of
Danu. {%—Dhūmra-giri, is,%} m. ‘the smoky moun-
tain,’ N. of a mountain. {%—Dhūmra-dhī, īs, īs,%}
{%i,%} ‘whose intellect is dim’ or ‘whose devotion is
obscured,’ devoted to works. {%—Dhūmra-nīkāśa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. of a deep dark-red colour. {%—Dhūmra-%}
{%pattrā,%} f. ‘having grey or dark-red leaves,’ N. of a
shrub {%(= dhūmrāhvā, su-labhā, svayam-bhuvā,%}
{%gṛdhra-pattrā, gṛdhrāṇī, kṛmi-ghnī, śrīma-%}
{%lāpahā)%}. {%—Dhūmra-mūlikā,%} f. ‘having a grey or
dark-red root,’ a kind of grass {%(= śūlī)%}. {%—Dhūmra-%}
{%ruc, k, k, k,%} of a purple hue, of a deep-red colour.
{%—Dhūmra-rohita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. dark-red, deep
purple. {%—Dhūmra-locana, as,%} m. ‘dark-eyed,’ a
pigeon; N. of a general of the Asura Śumbha.
{%—Dhūmra-lohita, as, ā, am,%} dark-red, deep purple.
{%—Dhūmra-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} smoky-coloured,
dark-red, deep purple; ({%as%}), m. incense; N. of a
son of Aja-mīḍha and Dhūminī; N. of a mountain;
({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the seven tongues of Fire;
flame. {%—Dhūmra-varṇaka, as,%} m. ‘the dark-
coloured one,’ a kind of animal living in caves, a
fox; [cf. {%kokaḍa.%}] {%—Dhūmravarṇā-manu,%} N. of
a magical formula. {%—Dhūmra-śūka, as,%} m. ‘having
grey bristles,’ a camel; (also read {%dhūmra-śūla.%})
{%—Dhūmra-saṃrakta-locana, as, ā, am,%} having
dark-red or greyish-red eyes. {%—Dhūmrākṣa (˚ra-%}
{%ak˚), as, ī, am,%} grey-eyed; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Ra-
kṣas; of a son of Hema-candra, grandson of Tṛṇa-
vindu [cf. {%dhūmrāśva%}]; of a king of the Niṣadhas.
{%—Dhūmrākṣi (˚ra-ak˚), is,%} m. a pearl of a bad
colour. {%—Dhūmrāṭa (˚ra-aṭa), as,%} m. the fork-
tailed shrike; [cf. {%dhūmyāṭa.%}] {%—Dhūmrānīka (˚ra-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m., N. of one of the seven sons of Medhā-
tithi and a Varṣa called after him. {%—Dhūmrābha-%}
{%(˚ra-ābha), as,%} m. air, wind, atmosphere (some-
times of a smoky or dark-red hue?). {%—Dhūmrāśva%}
{%(˚ra-as˚), as,%} m. ‘having dark horses,’ N. of a son
of Su-candra (son of Hema-candra) and father of
Sṛñjaya; [cf. {%dhūmrākṣa.%}] {%—Dhūmrāhvā (˚ra-%}
{%āh˚),%} f. {%= dhūmra-pattrā%}. {%—Dhūmrorṇā (˚ra-ūr˚),%}
f. {%= dhūmorṇā%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>23495<pc>0458-a<k1>DUmraka<k2>DUmraka
{%Dhūmraka, as,%}¦ m. ‘the grey animal,’ a camel;
({%ikā%}), f. the plant Dalbergia Sissoo ({%= śiṃśapā%}).
<LEND>

<L>23496<pc>0458-a<k1>DUmrAyaRa<k2>DUmrAyaRa
{%Dhūmrāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%dhūmra%}), a patronymic
from Dhūmra; [cf. {%dhaumrāyaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23497<pc>0458-a<k1>DUmriman<k2>DUmriman
{%Dhūmriman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. dark-red (the colour),
darkness of colour; obscurity.
<LEND>

<L>23498<pc>0458-a<k1>DUyamAna<k2>DUyamAna
{%Dhūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being shaken or agitated
or fanned.
<LEND>

<L>23499<pc>0458-a<k1>DUli<k2>DUli
{%Dhūli, is,%}¦ m. f. or {%dhūlī,%} f. (perhaps connected
with rt. {%dhvas%} or {%dhvaṃs,%} cf. {%dhūsara%}), dust; powder;
[cf. {%gandha-dh˚, go-dh˚%}]; a particular number.
{%—Dhūli-kuṭṭima, am,%} n. or {%dhūli-kedāra, as,%}
m. a mound, rampart of earth. {%—Dhūli-gucchaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the red fragrant vegetable powder thrown
about at the spring festival called the Holi. {%—Dhūli-%}
{%dhūmra, as, ā, am,%} dark-red or dark with dust.
{%—Dhūli-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘dust-marked,’ ‘whose
sign is dust,’ air or wind. {%—Dhūli-puṣpikā,%} f. the
plant Pandanus Odoratissimus; [cf. {%ketakī.%}] {%—Dhūli-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} covered with dust. {%—Dhūli-muṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} m. f. a handful of dust. {%—Dhūlimuṣṭi-pra-%}
{%kṣepa, as,%} m. the throwing of handfuls of dust.
{%—Dhūlī-kadamba%} or {%dhūlī-kadambaka%} or {%dhūli-%}
{%kadamba%} or {%dhūli-kadambaka, as,%} m. the plant
Dalbergia Ougeinensis ({%= tiniśa%}); a species of the
Kadamba tree, Nauclea Cordifolia ({%= nīpa%}); Cap-
paris Trifoliata {%(= varuṇa)%}. {%—Dhūlī-paṭala, as,%} m.
a cloud of dust.
<LEND>

<L>23500<pc>0458-a<k1>DUlikA<k2>DUlikA
{%Dhūlikā,%}¦ f. fog, mist, (from its dust-like appearance.)
<LEND>

<L>23501<pc>0458-a<k1>DURa<k2>DURa
{#DURa#}¦ {%dhūṇa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the resin
of the Shorea Robusta; [cf. {%dhūnaka.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0458-b+ 73]

<L>23502<pc>0458-b<k1>DUnaka<k2>DUnaka
{%Dhūnaka, as,%}¦ m. the resin of the Shorea Robusta
or resin in general; [cf. {%dhūrṇa%} and {%dhūṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23503<pc>0458-b<k1>DUp<k2>DUp
{#DUp#}¦ {%dhūp,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhūpāyati,%} &c., cl.
10. P. {%dhūpayati,%} &c. See {%dhūpaya%}
and {%dhūpāya,%} p. 457, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23504<pc>0458-b<k1>DUpa<k2>DUpa
{%Dhūpa.%}¦ See p. 457, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23505<pc>0458-b<k1>DUma<k2>DUma
{#DUma#}¦ {%dhūma, dhūmra.%} See p. 457, cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>23506<pc>0458-b<k1>DUr<k2>DUr<h>1
{#DUr#} 1¦. {%dhūr%} (connected with rt. {%dhūrv%}),
cl. 4. A. {%dhūryate,%} &c., to hurt or kill;
to move or approach.
<LEND>

<L>23507<pc>0458-b<k1>DUr<k2>DUr<h>2
{#DUr#} 2¦. {%dhūr%} for {%dhur%} (q. v.) at the begin-
ning of a comp. {%—Dhūr-gata, as, ā, am,%} standing
on or going along the pole or fore-part of a chariot;
standing at the head, taking the first place, preceding,
foremost. {%—Dhūr-jaṭi, is,%} m., in one place also {%dhūr-%}
{%jaṭin, ī,%} m. (fr. {%dhur%} and {%jaṭi = jaṭā%}), ‘whose matted
locks are like a burden,’ an epithet of Rudra-Śiva;
N. of a medical author. {%—Dhūr-dhara, as, ā, am,%}
bearing a load or burden, managing affairs; ({%as%}),
m. a beast of burden; [cf. {%dhuran-dhara.%}] {%—Dhūr-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a load, laden. {%—Dhūr-vaha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} bearing a load, carrying a burden;
managing affairs; ({%as%}), m. a beast of burden.
{%—Dhūr-voḍhṛ, ḍhā, ḍhrī, ḍhṛ,%} bearing a load,
the carrier of a burden. {%—Dhūr-ṣad, t, t, t,%} Ved.
standing under the yoke, drawing a load; resting on
the yoke; moving, promoting. {%—Dhūr-ṣāh, ṭ, ṭ,%}
{%ṭ,%} Ved. bearing the yoke.
<LEND>

<L>23508<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrya<k2>DUrya
{%Dhūrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ for {%dhurya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23509<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrRa<k2>DUrRa
{#DUrRa#}¦ {%dhūrṇa = dhūṇa = dhūnaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>23510<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrta<k2>DUrta
{#DUrta#}¦ {%dhūrta.%} See under rt. {%dhūrv%} below.
<LEND>

<L>23511<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrv<k2>DUrv
{#DUrv#}¦ {%dhūrv%} (connected with rts. {%dhurv,%}
{%dhvṛ, dhūr, hvṛ%}), cl. 1. P. {%dhūrvati, du-%}
{%dhūrva, dhūrviṣyati, adhūrvīt, dhūrvitum,%} Ved.
to bend, cause to fall, hurt, injure: Desid. {%dudhūr-%}
{%ṣati,%} to wish to hurt.
<LEND>

<L>23512<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrta<k2>DUrta
{%Dhūrta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cunning, crafty, dishonest,
knavish, fraudulent, subtle; mischievous, injurious;
({%as%}), m. a rogue, cheat, swindler; a gamester; (in
amatory language) a gay deceiver, a lover or
gallant; the thorn-apple, Datura [cf. {%kitava%} and
{%krūra-dhūrta%}]; a kind of perfume [cf. {%coraka%}];
({%ā%}), f. a sort of nightshade; ({%am%}), n. rust
or iron-filings; black salt ({%= khaṇḍa-lavaṇa;%}
cf. {%kṣema-dhūrta%}). {%—Dhūrta-kitava, as,%} m. a
gamester. {%—Dhūrta-kṛt, t,%} m. {%= dhūrta,%} dishonest,
a knave, rogue, cheat; ({%t%}), m. thorn-apple. {%—Dhūrta-%}
{%carita, am,%} n. ‘the actions of rogues,’ N. of a
work. {%—Dhūrta-jantu, us,%} m. ‘the cunning creature,’
man. {%—Dhūrta-tā,%} f. or {%dhūrta-tva, am,%} n. knavery,
craftiness, roguery, knavishness, shrewdness. {%—Dhūr-%}
{%ta-traya, am,%} n. three rogues, a trio of swindlers.
{%—Dhūrta-nartaka, am,%} n. ‘rogues as actors,’ N.
of a comedy by Sāma-rāja. {%—Dhūrta-pralāpa, as,%}
m. the talk or confabulation of rogues. {%—Dhūrta-%}
{%maṇḍala, as,%} m. a party of rogues or gamblers.
{%—Dhūrta-mānuṣā,%} f., N. of a plant {%(= rāsnā).%}
{%—Dhūrta-racanā,%} f. a cunning plot, roguery.
{%—Dhūrta-rāja, as,%} m. the chief of rogues. {%—Dhūr-%}
{%ta-samāgama, am,%} n. ‘assemblage of rogues,’ N. of
a comedy by Jyotir-īśvara. {%—Dhūrta-svāmin, ī,%} m.
‘lord of the rogues,’ N. of a commentator on
Āpastamba.
<LEND>

<L>23513<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrtaka<k2>DUrtaka
{%Dhūrtaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ cunning, a cheat, a rogue;
({%as%}), m. a jackal; N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>23514<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrti<k2>DUrti
{%Dhūrti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. injury, damage.
<LEND>

<L>23515<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrtila<k2>DUrtila
{%Dhūrtila%}¦ in {%akṣa-dh˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23516<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrvan<k2>DUrvan
{%Dhūrvan, a,%}¦ n., Ved. causing to fall, bending.
<LEND>

<L>23517<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrvA<k2>DUrvA
{#DUrvA#}¦ {%dhūrvā,%} f., Ved. {%= dūrvā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23518<pc>0458-b<k1>DUrvI<k2>DUrvI
{#DUrvI#}¦ {%dhūrvī,%} f. the fore-part or pole of a
carriage, {%= dhur,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23519<pc>0458-b<k1>DUlaka<k2>DUlaka
{#DUlaka#}¦ {%dhūlaka, am,%} n. poison.
<LEND>

<L>23520<pc>0458-b<k1>DUli<k2>DUli
{#DUli#}¦ {%dhūli.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>
[Page0458-c+ 78]

<L>23521<pc>0458-c<k1>DUS<k2>DUS
{#DUS#}¦ {%dhūś%} or {%dhūṣ%} or {%dhūs%} (perhaps a
Prākṛt form of {%dhṛṣ%} for {%hṛṣ%}), cl. 10.
P. {%dhūśayati, dhūṣayati, dhūsayati,%} &c., to
make splendid or elegant; to embellish.
<LEND>

<L>23522<pc>0458-c<k1>DUzara<k2>DUzara
{#DUzara#}¦ {%dhūṣara,%} a wrong spelling for {%dhū-%}
{%sara%} below.
<LEND>

<L>23523<pc>0458-c<k1>DUsara<k2>DUsara
{#DUsara#}¦ {%dhūsara, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhvas%} for
{%dhvaṃs,%} cf. {%dhvasira;%} but said to be fr. rt. 1. {%dhū%}
and connected with {%dhūli,%} q. v.), of a dusty or
greyish or dusty-white colour, grey; ({%as%}), m. grey
(the colour); a jackass, a donkey; a camel; a pigeon;
an oilman; anything of a grey tint; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
small shrub, {%= pāṇḍura-phalī; (ī),%} f., N. of a Kin-
narī or female chorister of heaven. {%—Dhūsara-ccha-%}
{%dā,%} f. a kind of plant, {%= śveta-vuhnā%}. {%—Dhūsara-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. grey colour, paleness; (also read {%dhū-%}
{%ṣara-tva.%}) {%—Dhūsara-pattrikā,%} f. the plant Tragia
Involucrata [cf. {%uṣṭra-dhūsara, pucchikā%}]; a kind
of Heliotropium ({%= hasti-śuṇḍī%}).
<LEND>

<L>23524<pc>0458-c<k1>DUsaraka<k2>DUsaraka
{%Dhūsaraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>23525<pc>0458-c<k1>DUsarita<k2>DUsarita
{%Dhūsarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made grey, greyish.
<LEND>

<L>23526<pc>0458-c<k1>DUstUra<k2>DUstUra
{#DUstUra#}¦ {%dhūstūra, as,%} m. {%= dhustūra,%} the
thorn-apple, Datura Metel and Fastuosa.
<LEND>

<L>23527<pc>0458-c<k1>Df<k2>Df
{#Df#}¦ {%dhṛ%} (allied to rt. {%bhṛ,%} which is pro-
bably the more ancient form), cl. 1. P. A.
{%dharati, -te, dadhāra%} (Ved. {%dādhāra%}), {%dadhre%}
(part. {%dadhrāṇa%}), {%dhariṣyati, -te, adhārṣīt,%}
{%adhṛta, dhartum,%} and more commonly cl. 10.
(identical with Caus. but with the same senses as
cl. 1.) {%dhārayati, -te,%} Pot. {%dhārayet, -ta%} (Mahā-
bh. Anuśāsana-p. 5007. {%dhārayīta%}), {%dhārayāmāsa,%}
{%dharayiṣyati, -te, adīdharat, -ta%} (Vedic forms
{%dīdharat, didhṛtam, didhṛta, ni-dīdhar%}), {%dhā-%}
{%rayitum,%} to hold, bear, carry; hold up, support,
sustain, maintain; carry on; to hold in, hold back,
keep back, restrain, stop, detain, curb, resist; to hold
in one's possession, keep, possess, have; to keep, retain
(in one's service); to hold fast, preserve; to hold, con-
tain; to lay hold of, seize, recover; to hold, observe,
practise; to wear, use (as clothes &c.); to bear,
undergo, suffer; to hold out, hold on, endure, con-
tinue, continue to live; (A.) to hold one's place, stand
firm, remain; to fix, place, deposit; to destine for,
assign or present anything (acc.) to any person (dat.);
to allot, assign, confer; (A.) to destine a person (acc.)
to anything (dat.); (cl. 10.) to owe anything (acc.)
to any person (dat. or gen.); to weigh in a balance;
to prolong (in pronunciation); to cite, quote. The
above meanings of {%dhṛ%} (cl. 1. or more frequently
cl. 10. identified with Caus.) may be variously ex-
tended by connecting it with various nouns, e. g.
{%garbhaṃ dhṛ,%} to conceive, to become pregnant,
(in this sense the older language uses rt. {%bhṛ%});
{%daṇḍaṃ dhṛ,%} to carry a stick, use force, chastise
(with loc. of the pers.); {%damaṃ dhṛ,%} to punish
(with loc. of the pers.); {%ātmānaṃ%} or {%jīvitaṃ%} or
{%prāṇān%} or {%śarīraṃ%} or {%gātraṃ%} or {%dehaṃ dhṛ,%} to
maintain the soul, preserve the vital spirits, body,
&c., to continue to live, survive; {%mano%} or {%māna-%}
{%saṃ%} or {%matiṃ%} or {%cittaṃ%} or {%buddhiṃ dhṛ,%} to fix
the mind, direct the thoughts or attention upon,
resolve; {%vrataṃ dhṛ,%} to observe or keep a vow,
&c. [cf. {%dhṛta-vrata%}]; {%tapo dhṛ,%} to undergo or
perform penance; {%dhāraṇāṃ dhṛ,%} to practise self-
control; {%tulayā dhṛ%} (or without {%tulayā%}), to hold
in a balance, weigh, measure; {%śirasā%} or {%mūrdhni%}
{%dhṛ,%} to bear on the head, honour highly; {%manasā%}
{%dhṛ%} (or without {%manasā%}), to bear in mind, recollect,
remember; {%samaye dhṛ,%} to bring to an agreement,
cause to make a compact; {%antare dhṛ,%} to deposit
anything as surety, to give bail, to pledge: Pass. or
cl. 6. A. {%dhṛyate%} (ep. also {%dhṛyati%}), to be firm or
fixed, to be supported or maintained, to be preserved;
to exist, live, continue to live, remain alive, survive;
to remain, continue; to undertake, resolve upon
(with dat. or acc. of the thing or with inf.): Caus.
{%dhārayati, -te%} (with the meanings of cl. 1. and
cl. 10.): Pass. of Caus. {%dhāryate,%} to be held or
[Page0459-a+ 81]
supported, to be maintained or preserved; to con-
tinue to live (with inst., e. g. {%tena na dhāryate,%} it
is not lived by him): Desid. {%didhīrṣati, -te,%}
{%didhariṣate, didhārayiṣati,%} to wish to hold or
keep, to try to support or maintain, &c.: Intens.
{%dedhrīyate, dardharti%} (Ved. {%dādharti%}), to hold
very fast, lay hold of firmly, bear firmly, &c.; [cf.
1. {%dharma, dhīra, dhruva, dhur, dhurya;%}
Zend <nsi>dar,</nsi> ‘to hold;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">θρή-σα-σθαι, θρᾶ-ν-ος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θρῆν-υ-ς, θρόνο-ς, θέρ-μα, θέλ-ω, ἐ-θέλ-ω;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>frē-tu-s, frē-nu-m, fir-mu-s, for-ma;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>drag-an, dreog-an;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>trag-an;</nsi> Mod.
Germ. <nsi>trag-en.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23528<pc>0459-a<k1>Dfk<k2>Dfk
{%Dhṛk%}¦ (at end of comp., and only occurring in
nom. sing. {%dhṛk,%} and more probably to be referred
to rt. {%dhṛṣ%} or to rt. {%dṛh%}), bearing, carrying, sup-
porting, sustaining, suffering, wearing, possessing,
having, &c.; [cf. {%kāla-rūpa-dh˚, śakti-dh˚, śa-%}
{%rīra-dh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23529<pc>0459-a<k1>Dft<k2>Dft
{%Dhṛt, t, t, t%}¦ (at end of comp.), a holder, bearer,
possessor; bearing, carrying, possessing, having, ob-
serving, &c.; [cf. {%carṣaṇī-dh˚, dharaṇī-dh˚,%}
{%dharma-dh˚, nitya-dh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23530<pc>0459-a<k1>Dfta<k2>Dfta
{%Dhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ held, borne, carried, main-
tained, supported; contained; possessed; kept, re-
tained, detained; laid hold of, seized, grasped, griped;
worn, used; observed, practised; weighed; placed,
deposited; holding, bearing, continuing, enduring,
existing, standing; intent upon, i. e. resolved or
determined to do anything (with dat. or loc., e. g.
{%jaye dhṛtas,%} resolved on victory); firm, prepared,
ready; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of the thirteenth Manu;
of a descendant of Druhyu and son of Dharma [cf.
{%dhārteya%}]; ({%am%}), n. a peculiar manner of fighting;
({%am%}), ind. firmly, slowly, solemnly. {%—Dhṛta-ka-%}
{%naka-māla, as, ā, am,%} wearing a golden collar or
wreath. {%—Dhṛta-kārmukeṣu (˚ka-iṣu), us, us,%}
{%u,%} armed with bow and arrows. {%—Dhṛta-dakṣa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. of enduring intelligence; (Sāy.) of
enduring strength, possessing vigour. {%—Dhṛta-%}
{%daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} carrying the stick, inflicting
punishment; one on whom punishment has been
inflicted. {%—Dhṛta-dīdhiti, is,%} m. ‘constant in
splendor,’ fire; [cf. {%ghṛta-dīdhiti.%}] {%—Dhṛta-devā,%}
f., N. of a daughter of Devaka. {%—Dhṛta-paṭa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} covered or overspread with a cloth &c.
{%—Dhṛta-matī,%} f., N. of a river; (wrong form for
{%dhṛti-matī.%}) {%—Dhṛta-rājan, ā,%} m., N. of a man;
[cf. {%dhārtarajña.%}] {%—Dhṛta-rāṣṭra, as, ā, am,%}
whose empire is firm or who holds the kingdom;
({%as%}), m. a good king; N. of a Nāga, also called
Airāvata; of a Deva-gandharva, sometimes identified
with king Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of the Daitya Bali;
of a king of Kāśī; (according to the Mahā-bhārata)
N. of the eldest son of Vyāsa by the widow of Vicitra-
vīrya, (he was brother of Pāṇḍu and Vidura, and as
the first-born was entitled to the throne of Hāstina-
pura, but being born blind, he at first renounced the
sovereignty in favour of Pāṇḍu; afterwards, on the
retirement of Pāṇḍu to the woods, Dhṛta-rāṣṭra
was called to undertake the government, which he
did with the assistance of Bhīṣma as his regent; he
was husband of Gāndhārī and father of 100 sons, the
eldest of whom was named Dur-yodhana; he is some-
times identified with Dhṛta-rāṣṭra and with Haṃsa,
two chiefs of the Gandharvas); N. of a son of
Janam-ejaya; a kind of bird, perhaps a sort of goose;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra, whose names
are enumerated in Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 4540; ({%ī%}), f.,
N. of a daughter of Tāmrā, mother of the geese and
other water-birds, {%= haṃsa-patnī, = haṃsa-padī;%}
[cf. {%dhārtarāṣṭra%} and {%dhārtarāṣṭri.%}] {%—Dhṛta-%}
{%rāṣṭra-ja, as,%} m. ‘sprung from Dhṛta-rāṣṭra,’ epi-
thet of any son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Dhṛta-varman,%}
{%ā,%} m. ‘bearing armour or mail, mailed,’ N. of a
warrior on the side of the Kurus. {%—Dhṛta-vrata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. of fixed law or order; keeping
vows or engagements, devoted, attached, faithful;
(Sāy.) accepting pious acts, performing religious
rites; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Varuṇa; of Indra; of
Rudra; of Savitṛ; of Agni; of a son of Dhṛti;
[Page0459-b+ 80]
({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet of the Ādityas. {%—Dhṛta-śa-%}
{%rīra, as, ā, am,%} continuing to live or exist, existing.
{%—Dhṛta-śrī, īs,%} f., N. of a metre consisting of
four lines of twenty-one syllables each. {%—Dhṛta-%}
{%sandhi, is,%} m. ‘keeping agreements or compacts,’
N. of a son of Su-sandhi and father of Bharata.
{%—Dhṛta-siṃha, as,%} m. a various reading for {%dhṛti-%}
{%siṃha,%} q. v. {%—Dhṛta-heti, is, is, i,%} ‘bearing weapons,’
armed. {%—Dhṛtātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} firm-
minded, self-possessed, steady, calm, collected. {%—Dhṛ-%}
{%tāmbhas (˚ta-am˚), ās, ās, as,%} containing water.
{%—Dhṛteṣudhi (˚ta-iṣ˚), is, is, i,%} carrying a
quiver.
<LEND>

<L>23531<pc>0459-b<k1>Dftaka<k2>Dftaka
{%Dhṛtaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Buddhist patriarch.
<LEND>

<L>23532<pc>0459-b<k1>Dftavat<k2>Dftavat
{%Dhṛta-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ having taken or con-
veyed or held or resolved; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>23533<pc>0459-b<k1>Dfti<k2>Dfti
{%Dhṛti, is,%}¦ f. holding, holding fast, laying hold of,
seizing, having, possessing; supporting, maintaining;
firmness (e. g. {%dhṛtiṃ kṛ,%} to show firmness, stand
firm); constancy, steadiness, steadfastness, fortitude,
energy, resolution; strong will, self-command; will,
command (Ved.); satisfaction, happiness, pleasure,
contentment; N. of certain evening oblations offered
at the Aśva-medha; a sacrifice, offering; N. of a
Vedic metre of seventy-two syllables; (in the later
language) any metre consisting of 4×18 syllables;
a metre composed of the Upendra-vajrā and Indra-
vajrā; N. of one of the astrological Yogas; Reso-
lution or Satisfaction personified as a daughter of
Dakṣa and wife of Dharma, (regarded as one of the
Vasu-patnīs or as a form of Dākṣāyaṇī in Piṇḍā-
raka); N. of one of the sixteen Kalās of the Moon;
N. of a goddess, daughter of a Kalās of Prakṛti and
wife of Kapila; N. of the wife of Rudra-manu; N.
of the thirteenth of the sixteen Mātṛkās; ({%is%}), m.,
N. of one of the Viśve-Devās; of a preceptor,
Dhṛti Aindrota; of a son of Vi-jaya and father of
Dhṛta-vrata; of a son of Vīta-havya and father of
Bahulāśva; of a son of Babhru; [cf. {%a-dh˚%} and
{%kṣmā-dh˚.%}] {%—Dhṛti-paripūrṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
Bodhi-sattva. {%—Dhṛti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} steadfast,
firm, steady, calm, determined, resolute; satisfied,
content; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a form of Agni; of a son
of Manu Raivata; of Manu Sāvarṇa; of one of the
Saptarṣis in the thirteenth Manv-antara; of a son
of Kīrtti-mat, son of Aṅgiras; of a son of Yavīnara;
of a Brāhman; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a river, also read
{%dhṛta-vatī; (at),%} n., N. of a Varṣa in Kuśa-
dvīpa. {%—Dhṛtimat-tā,%} f. steadfastness, steadiness,
calmness, &c. {%—Dhṛti-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting
of steadfastness or constancy; consisting of content-
ment. {%—Dhṛti-muṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} ‘fortitude-stealing,’
who or what robs one of one's steadfastness, dis-
composing, agitating. {%—Dhṛti-siṃha, as,%} m., N.
of a man said to have assisted Puruṣottama in com-
posing the Hārāvalī; (also read {%dhṛta-siṃha.%})
<LEND>

<L>23534<pc>0459-b<k1>Dftvan<k2>Dftvan
{%Dhṛtvan, ā,%}¦ m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; of Brahmā;
a clever man; virtue, morality; the sea; the sky
[cf. {%kṣema-dh˚%}]; ({%arī%}), f. the earth.
<LEND>

<L>23535<pc>0459-b<k1>DftvA<k2>DftvA
{%Dhṛtvā,%}¦ ind. having held, having laid hold of or
seized; having taken, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23536<pc>0459-b<k1>Dfj<k2>Dfj
{#Dfj#}¦ {%dhṛj%} or {%dhṛñj%} (connected with rts.
{%dhraj%} and {%dhrij%}), cl. 1. P. {%dharjati,%}
{%dhṛñjati,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>23537<pc>0459-b<k1>Dfz<k2>Dfz
{#Dfz#}¦ {%dhṛṣ,%} cl. 1. 5. P. {%dharṣati, dhṛṣ-%}
{%ṇoti, dadharṣa%} (part. {%dadhṛṣvas%}),
{%dharṣiṣyati, adharṣīt%} (Vedic forms {%dadhar-%}
{%ṣīt, dadharṣat, dadharṣati%}), {%dharṣitum,%} to
be bold or courageous; to be confident or presump-
tuous, to be proud or overbearing; to be impudent
or impatient; to have courage to do anything, to
dare, venture (with inf., e. g. {%dhṛṣṇumaḥ praṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} we dare to ask); to dare to attack, &c. (with
acc. of the person); to insult, overbear, treat with
indignity: Pass. {%dhṛṣyate,%} to be attacked or in-
sulted, to be subdued or overpowered: Caus. {%dhar-%}
{%ṣayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%adadharṣat%} or {%adīdhṛṣat,%}
to dare to attack, to overbear, insult, treat with indig-
nity, violate (a woman); offend, injure; assail, over-
power, overcome, conquer, destroy; (A.) to surpass (?):
[Page0459-c+ 81]
Desid. {%didharṣiṣati:%} Intens. {%darīdhṛṣyate,%}
{%darīdharṣṭi;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>daresh,</nsi> ‘to dare;’ <nsi>darshi,</nsi>
‘strong:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">θρασ-ύ-ς, θράσ-ος, θάρσ-ος, θαρσ-έ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θαῤῥέω, θαρσ-ύνω, Θερσ-ίτη-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>fortis:</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>ga-daurs-an,</nsi> ‘to dare:’ Slav. <nsi>drĭz-a-ti, drĭz-na-ti,</nsi>
‘to dare:’ Lith. <nsi>dras-ù-s,</nsi> ‘courageous;’ <nsi>dras-à,</nsi>
‘courage:’ Hib. <nsi>das-ached,</nsi> ‘fierceness.’]
<LEND>

<L>23538<pc>0459-c<k1>Dfzaj<k2>Dfzaj
{%Dhṛṣaj, k, k, k (?) ,%}¦ Ved. assailing, attacking,
destroying.
<LEND>

<L>23539<pc>0459-c<k1>Dfzat<k2>Dfzat
{%Dhṛṣat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} pres. part., Ved. bold,
daring, courageous, confident; ({%atā%}), ind. boldly,
courageously. {%—Dhṛṣad-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
of a brave race, heroic. {%—Dhṛṣad-vin, ī, inī, i,%}
Ved. bold, courageous. {%—Dhṛṣan-manas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. brave-hearted.
<LEND>

<L>23540<pc>0459-c<k1>Dfzita<k2>Dfzita
{%Dhṛṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bold, courageous, brave, daring.
<LEND>

<L>23541<pc>0459-c<k1>Dfzu<k2>Dfzu
{%Dhṛṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ bold, proud; clever; ({%us%}),
m. a heap, multitude.
<LEND>

<L>23542<pc>0459-c<k1>Dfzwa<k2>Dfzwa
{%Dhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ bold, daring, courageous,
confident; insolent, impudent, rude, saucy, shame-
less; forward, intrusive, presumptuous; profligate,
abandoned; obtained?; ({%as%}), m. a faithless hus-
band; N. of a son of Manu Vaivasvata, (also read
{%dhṛṣṇu;%} cf. {%dhārṣṭa%}); of a son of Kunti; of a
son of Bhajamāna; ({%as%}), m., N. of a spell for using
or restraining magical weapons; ({%ā%}), f. a disloyal or
unchaste woman; ({%am%}), ind. boldly, courageously,
fearlessly; (it is said that {%dhṛṣṭa%} may be used at the
end of a comp. to give a bad sense to the word with
which it is compounded); [cf. Angl. Sax. <nsi>thriste;</nsi>
Swed. <nsi>dristig;</nsi> Old Iceland. <nsi>dreiss;</nsi> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>dreist.</nsi>] {%—Dhṛṣṭa-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a king of
Cedi; of a king of Videhā or Mithilā, son of Su-
dhṛti; of a son of Satya-dhṛti; of a son of Su-
kumāra; of the father of Su-kumāra; of a son of
Dhṛṣṭa-dyumna; of a king of the Kaikayas; of a
son of Manu. {%—Dhṛṣṭa-tama, as, ā, am,%} very
bold or daring, most confident or courageous.
{%—Dhṛṣṭa-tā,%} f. or {%dhṛṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. bold-
ness, courage, impudence. {%—Dhṛṣṭa-dyumna, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Dru-pada (killed by Aśvatthāman
while asleep). {%—Dhṛṣṭa-dhī, īs,%} or {%dhṛṣṭa-%}
{%buddhi, is,%} m. ‘bold-minded,’ N. of a man.
{%—Dhṛṣṭa-parākrama, as, ā, am,%} of daring
valour. {%—Dhṛṣṭa-mānin, ī, inī, i,%} having a high
opinion of one's self. {%—Dhṛṣṭa-ratha, as,%} m., N.
of a prince. {%—Dhṛṣṭa-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a
son of Śvaphalka. {%—Dhṛṣṭokta (˚ṭa-uk˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Arjuna Kārttavīrya; (also read
{%dhṛṣṇokta.%})
<LEND>

<L>23543<pc>0459-c<k1>Dfzwaka<k2>Dfzwaka
{%Dhṛṣṭaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>23544<pc>0459-c<k1>Dfzwi<k2>Dfzwi
{%Dhṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. (according to Mahī-
dhara) bold; ({%is%}), m. a pair of tongs; N. of a son
of Hiraṇya-kaśipu; of a minister of king Daśa-ratha;
({%is%}), f. boldness.
<LEND>

<L>23545<pc>0459-c<k1>DfzRa<k2>DfzRa
{%Dhṛṣṇa, as,%}¦ &c., a wrong reading for {%dhṛṣṭa,%}
q. v. {%—Dhṛṣṇokta (˚ṇa-uk˚), as,%} &c., a wrong
reading for {%dhṛṣṭokta,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23546<pc>0459-c<k1>DfzRaj<k2>DfzRaj
{%Dhṛṣṇaj, k, k, k,%}¦ bold, confident; impudent,
shameless.
<LEND>

<L>23547<pc>0459-c<k1>DfzRi<k2>DfzRi
{%Dhṛṣṇi, is,%}¦ m. a ray of light.
<LEND>

<L>23548<pc>0459-c<k1>DfzRu<k2>DfzRu
{%Dhṛṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ courageous, bold, confident,
valiant; impudent, shameless; strong, powerful,
(applied in the Veda to Indra, Soma, the Maruts,
and the horses of Indra); ({%u%}), ind. in a bold or
confident or powerful way; firmly, strongly; with
force [cf. {%dadhṛk%}]; ({%us%}), m., N. of a son of
Manu Vaivasvata [cf. {%dhṛṣṭa%}]; of a son of Manu
Sāvarṇa; of a son of Kavi; of a son of Ku-
kura; {%Kaśyapasya dhṛṣṇu,%} N. of a Sāman.
{%—Dhṛṣṇu-tva, am,%} n. boldness, confidence.
{%—Dhṛṣṇu-ṣeṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having an
overpowering weapon; (Sāy.) having a conquering
or overpowering host, leading a valiant army (as a
drum). {%—Dhṛṣṇv-ojas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. of over-
powering strength, endowed with resistless might,
(applied to Indra and the Maruts.)
<LEND>

<L>23549<pc>0459-c<k1>DfzRuka<k2>DfzRuka
{%Dhṛṣṇuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a prince; [cf. {%dhṛṣ-%}
{%ṭaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23550<pc>0459-c<k1>DfzRuyA<k2>DfzRuyA
{%Dhṛṣṇuyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. in a bold or powerful
manner, firmly.
<LEND>
[Page0460-a+ 79]

<L>23551<pc>0460-a<k1>Dfzya<k2>Dfzya
{%Dhṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ assailable, to be attacked;
conquerable.
<LEND>

<L>23552<pc>0460-a<k1>Dfzad<k2>Dfzad
{#Dfzad#}¦ {%dhṛṣad,%} Ved. {%= dṛṣad,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23553<pc>0460-a<k1>DF<k2>DF
{#DF#}¦ {%dhṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%dhṛṇāti,%} &c., to be old,
grow old; (various reading for rt. 1. {%jṝ.%})
<LEND>

<L>23554<pc>0460-a<k1>De<k2>De
{#De#}¦ {%dhe,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhayati, dadhau, dhās-%}
{%yati, adhāt, adhāsīt, adadhat,%} Prec. {%dhe-%}
{%yāt, dhātum,%} to suck, drink, to suck in, drink in,
absorb; appropriate; to suck out, draw away, take
away: Caus. {%dhāpayati, -yitum,%} to give suck,
suckle, nourish: Desid. {%dhitsati,%} to wish to suck;
[cf. {%dadhi, dhātrī,%} 2. {%dhāyas, dhāru,%} 2. {%dhāsi:%}
Zend <nsi>daēnu,</nsi> ‘female:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">θῆ-σθαι, θη-λή, θη-λώ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θηλα-μών, τήθη, τι-θή-νη, τί-τθο-ς, θῆ-λυ-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">γαλα-θη-νό-ς, Τη-θύ-ς, ϴέ-τι-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>fī-liu-s, fī-</nsi>
<nsi>li-a, fē-lā-re, fē-mina:</nsi> Umbr. <nsi>fe-liu = filius:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>dadd-ya</nsi> = Old Germ. <nsi>tā-u,</nsi> ‘I suck;’ <nsi>tila,</nsi>
‘female breast;’ <nsi>tuta, tutta</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>teat:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>do-</nsi>
<nsi>ya,</nsi> ‘to suck;’ <nsi>doilica,</nsi> ‘nurse;’ <nsi>de†-te,</nsi> ‘child;’
<nsi>de†-va,</nsi> ‘virgin:’ Hib. <nsi>daif,</nsi> ‘drink.’]
<LEND>

<L>23555<pc>0460-a<k1>Dena<k2>Dena
{%Dhena, as,%}¦ m. the ocean, a male river; ({%ā%}), f.,
Ved. a milch cow; a mare (?); a river; speech;
voice; N. of the wife of Bṛhas-pati; ({%ās%}), f. pl.
any beverage made of milk; [cf. {%dhenu, go.%}] (In
Ṛg-veda I. 2, 3, {%dhenā%} may possibly be an epithet
of the horses of Vāyu.)
<LEND>

<L>23556<pc>0460-a<k1>Denu<k2>Denu
{%Dhenu, us,%}¦ f. a milch cow, a cow that has lately
calved, (sometimes compounded with the names of
other animals to denote the female of a species,
see {%khaḍga-dh˚, go-dh˚, vaḍava-dh˚%}); the earth
[cf. {%go%}]; a gift, offering, present to Brāhmans, (pro-
perly a milch cow so presented, but applied also to)
any gift supposed to be formed in the shape of a cow
or to be offered in its stead, (in this sense {%dhenu%} is
generally at the end of a compound, e. g. {%ghṛta-dh˚,%}
an offering of ghee; {%jala-dh˚,%} an oblation of water;
cf. {%lavaṇa-dh˚, ratna-dh˚, suvarṇa-dh˚:%} occasion-
ally it is uncompounded, e. g. {%tilānām dhenuḥ,%} an
offering of sesamum-seeds); ({%avas%}), f. pl. any
beverage made of milk; ({%u%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
({%Dhenu%} at the end of a comp. may form a diminutive,
the female being weaker than the male; cf. {%asi-%}
{%dh˚, khaḍga-dh˚, putrī, putrikā.%}) {%—Dhenu-go-%}
{%duha, am,%} n. cow and milker. {%—Dhenu-dugdha,%}
{%am,%} n. cow's milk; a kind of gourd, {%= cirbhiṭa.%}
{%—Dhenudugdha-kara, as,%} m. carrot, Daucus Ca-
rota. {%—Dhenu-makṣikā,%} f. a horse-fly, gad-fly.
{%—Dhenu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessing cows,
rich in cattle; containing or giving nourishing beve-
rage; containing the word {%dhenu; (atī),%} f., N. of
the wife of Deva-dyumna. {%—Dhenum-bhavyā,%} f.
(probably) about to become a milch cow.
<LEND>

<L>23557<pc>0460-a<k1>Denuka<k2>Denuka
{%Dhenuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of an Asura or demon in the
shape of a donkey (killed by Kṛṣṇa or according to
other authorities by Rāma); a kind of coitus [cf. {%dhai-%}
{%nuka%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a milch cow; a gift, offering, see
{%dhenu%} above; a female animal in general (as a she-
elephant, a woman, &c., see {%dhenu%} above); also
used like {%dhenu%} at the end of comps. to form dimi-
nutives (e. g. {%asi-dh˚,%} a knife, from {%asi,%} a sword); a
vein which when cut bleeds only at intervals; N. of
the wife of Kīrtti-mat who was a son of Aṅgiras;
({%am%}), n., N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Dhenuka-%}
{%vadha, as,%} m. ‘the killing of Dhenuka,’ N. of
the twenty-third chapter of the Kṛṣṇa-khaṇḍa or
fourth part of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Dhe-%}
{%nuka-sūdana, as,%} m. ‘the slayer of Dhenuka,’ an
epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Dhenukā-dugdha, am,%} n.
cow's milk; N. of a plant, {%= dhenu-dugdha%}. {%—Dhe-%}
{%nukāri (˚ka-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of Dhenuka,’ an
epithet of Kṛṣṇa; a kind of small tree, = Nagesar.
<LEND>

<L>23558<pc>0460-a<k1>DenuzwarI<k2>DenuzwarI
{%Dhenuṣṭarī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%dhenus,%} nom. case of {%dhenu,%}
with the comparative affix), a milch cow ceasing to
give milk.
<LEND>

<L>23559<pc>0460-a<k1>DenuzyA<k2>DenuzyA
{%Dhenuṣyā,%}¦ f. a cow whose milk has been
pledged; a cow tied up to be milked (?).
<LEND>

<L>23560<pc>0460-a<k1>Denuzyita<k2>Denuzyita
{%Dhenuṣyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (probably) one who has
pledged the milk of his cows and therefore cannot
make use of it himself.
<LEND>
[Page0460-b+ 71]

<L>23561<pc>0460-b<k1>DenUka<k2>DenUka
{%Dhenūka%}¦ in {%bahu-dh˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23562<pc>0460-b<k1>DEnuka<k2>DEnuka
{%Dhainuka, am,%}¦ n. a herd of cows; a kind of
coitus.
<LEND>

<L>23563<pc>0460-b<k1>DemAtra<k2>DemAtra
{#DemAtra#}¦ {%dhemātra,%} a particular high number;
(a various reading for {%dhamātra.%})
<LEND>

<L>23564<pc>0460-b<k1>Deya<k2>Deya
{#Deya#}¦ {%dheya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%dhā%}), to be
held or taken &c.; to be created; what is created or
produced; (at the end of comps. the neut. is con-
sidered as an affix, Pān. V. 4, 36, vārt.; cf. {%nāma-%}
{%dheya, bhāga-dh˚, mitra-dh˚, rūpa-dh˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>23565<pc>0460-b<k1>DezWa<k2>DezWa
{%Dheṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. giving the most;
(Sāy.) the best supporter, firmest stay.
<LEND>

<L>23566<pc>0460-b<k1>DErya<k2>DErya<h>1
{#DErya#} 1¦. {%dhairya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dhīra%}), firmness,
durability, steadiness, stability, strength, consistency,
constancy; calmness; gravity; patience; fortitude,
courage; inflexibility; precision of diction; (Ved.)
intelligence, forethought. {%—Dhairya-kalita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} assuming firmness or composure, endowed with
calmness. {%—Dhairya-dhvaṃsa, as,%} m. failure of
courage. {%—Dhairya-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
{%—Dhairya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of firmness or
patience, firm, steady. {%—Dhairya-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} of
steady conduct, steadily behaved.
<LEND>

<L>23567<pc>0460-b<k1>DEvata<k2>DEvata
{#DEvata#}¦ {%dhaivata, as,%} m. the sixth note of
the gamut.
<LEND>

<L>23568<pc>0460-b<k1>DEvatya<k2>DEvatya
{#DEvatya#}¦ {%dhaivatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%dhīvan,%} Pāṇ.
VI. 4, 174), cleverness, skilfulness (?).
<LEND>

<L>23569<pc>0460-b<k1>DEvara<k2>DEvara
{#DEvara#}¦ {%dhaivara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%dhīvara%}),
belonging or relating to a fisherman.
<LEND>

<L>23570<pc>0460-b<k1>DoIkavi<k2>DoIkavi
{#DoIkavi#}¦ {%dhoī-kavi, is,%} m., N. of a poet men-
tioned in the Śārṅgadhara-paddhati; [cf. {%dhoyin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23571<pc>0460-b<k1>Doqa<k2>Doqa
{#Doqa#}¦ {%dhoḍa, as,%} m. a sort of snake, com-
monly Dhora, a kind of water-snake.
<LEND>

<L>23572<pc>0460-b<k1>Doyin<k2>Doyin
{#Doyin#}¦ {%dhoyin, ī,%} m. or {%dhoyī, īs,%} m., N.
of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>23573<pc>0460-b<k1>Dor<k2>Dor
{#Dor#}¦ {%dhor,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhorati, dudhora,%}
{%dhoritum,%} to run well, to trot, to be
quick or alert, to have good paces: Caus. {%dhorayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%adudhorat.%}
<LEND>

<L>23574<pc>0460-b<k1>DoraRa<k2>DoraRa
{%Dhoraṇa, am,%}¦ n. a vehicle in general, any means
of conveyance (as a horse, an elephant, a car, &c.);
a horse's trot; going well or quickly; ({%ī%}), f. or
({%dhoraṇi, is%}), f. an uninterrupted series; tradition.
<LEND>

<L>23575<pc>0460-b<k1>Dorita<k2>Dorita
{%Dhorita%}¦ or {%dhoritaka, am,%} n. a horse's trot;
[cf. {%dhauritaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23576<pc>0460-b<k1>DOta<k2>DOta
{#DOta#}¦ {%dhauta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%dhāv%}),
washed, cleansed, cleaned, purified, washed off;
polished, brightened, whetted; white, bright, silvered,
shining; ({%am%}), n. silver. {%—Dhauta-kaṭa, as,%} m. a
bag of coarse cloth, a sack made of kind of mat-
ting. {%—Dhauta-koṣaja%} or {%dhauta-kauṣeya%} or
{%dhauta-kauśeya, am,%} n. bleached or purified silk
{%(= pattrorṇa)%}. {%—Dhauta-khaṇḍī,%} f. sugar-candy.
{%—Dhauta-balī,%} f. {%= dhautāñjalī,%} (probably rather
{%dhautāñjanī,%} q. v.) {%—Dhauta-mūlaka, as,%} m., N.
of a prince of the Cīnas. {%—Dhauta-śila, am,%} n.
‘bright stone,’ crystal, rock-crystal. {%—Dhautāñjanī,%}
f. a sort of collyrium, {%= tryaṅkaṭa%} or {%tryaṅgaṭa.%}
{%—Dhautāpāṅga, as, ā, am,%} having the corners of
the eyes brightened.
<LEND>

<L>23577<pc>0460-b<k1>DOtaya<k2>DOtaya
{#DOtaya#}¦ {%dhautaya, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
kind of salt ({%= saindhava%}).
<LEND>

<L>23578<pc>0460-b<k1>DOtarI<k2>DOtarI
{#DOtarI#}¦ {%dhautarī,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%dhū%}), Ved.
(according to Sāy.) shaking, agitating, causing to
tremble.
<LEND>

<L>23579<pc>0460-b<k1>DOti<k2>DOti
{#DOti#}¦ {%dhauti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%dhāv%}), Ved. a
spring, well; river, rivulet.
<LEND>

<L>23580<pc>0460-b<k1>DOnDumAra<k2>DOnDumAra
{#DOnDumAra#}¦ {%dhaundhumāra, as, ī, am,%} treating
of Dhundhu-māra (as an episode).
<LEND>

<L>23581<pc>0460-b<k1>DOnDumAri<k2>DOnDumAri
{%Dhaundhumāri, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from
Dhundhu-māra.
<LEND>
[Page0460-c+ 76]

<L>23582<pc>0460-c<k1>DOmaka<k2>DOmaka
{#DOmaka#}¦ {%dhaumaka, as,%} m. (fr. {%dhūma%}), N. of
a district.
<LEND>

<L>23583<pc>0460-c<k1>DOmata<k2>DOmata
{%Dhaumata,%}¦ myrrh.
<LEND>

<L>23584<pc>0460-c<k1>DOmatAyana<k2>DOmatAyana
{%Dhaumatāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic (?).
<LEND>

<L>23585<pc>0460-c<k1>DOmatAyanaka<k2>DOmatAyanaka
{%Dhaumatāyanaka, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from
Dhaumatāyana.
<LEND>

<L>23586<pc>0460-c<k1>DOmAyana<k2>DOmAyana
{%Dhaumāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Dhūma.
<LEND>

<L>23587<pc>0460-c<k1>DOmIya<k2>DOmIya
{%Dhaumīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ smoky.
<LEND>

<L>23588<pc>0460-c<k1>DOmya<k2>DOmya
{%Dhaumya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Dhūma;
N. of an ancient Ṛṣi; a son of Vyāghra-pāda;
a younger brother of Devala and family priest of the
Pāṇḍavas; a pupil of Vālmīki. {%—Dhaumya-śikṣā,%}
f. ‘the science of Dhaumya,’ N. of a chapter of the
Purāṇa-sarva-sva.
<LEND>

<L>23589<pc>0460-c<k1>DOmra<k2>DOmra
{%Dhaumra, as,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient Ṛṣi; N. of
a class of demons; ({%am%}), n. grey (the colour), grey-
ness; a place for building prepared in a peculiar
way; [cf. {%dhūma.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23590<pc>0460-c<k1>DOmrAyaRa<k2>DOmrAyaRa
{%Dhaumrāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Dhūmra;
[cf. {%dhūmrāyaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23591<pc>0460-c<k1>DOra<k2>DOra
{#DOra#}¦ {%dhaura, as,%} m. Grislea Tomentosa.
{%—Dhaurāditya-tīrtha (˚ra-ād˚), am,%} n., N. of
a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>23592<pc>0460-c<k1>DOritaka<k2>DOritaka
{#DOritaka#}¦ {%dhauritaka, am,%} n. a horse's trot;
[cf. {%dhorita%} and {%dhoritaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23593<pc>0460-c<k1>DOreya<k2>DOreya
{#DOreya#}¦ {%dhaureya%} or {%dhaureyaka, as, ī, am,%}
(fr. {%dhur%}), fit to be harnessed, fit for a burden,
capable of drawing or bearing a load (either a
vehicle or beast, &c.); ({%as%}), m. a beast of burden;
a horse.
<LEND>

<L>23594<pc>0460-c<k1>DOrtaka<k2>DOrtaka
{#DOrtaka#}¦ {%dhaurtaka, am,%} n. (fr. {%dhūrta%}),
roguery, knavery, fraud.
<LEND>

<L>23595<pc>0460-c<k1>DOrtika<k2>DOrtika
{%Dhaurtika, as, ī, am,%}¦ cheating, dishonest, roguish,
knavish, fraudulent, &c.; ({%am%}), n. fraud, dishonesty.
<LEND>

<L>23596<pc>0460-c<k1>DOrteya<k2>DOrteya
{%Dhaurteya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a warlike tribe;
({%as%}), m. a prince of this tribe.
<LEND>

<L>23597<pc>0460-c<k1>DOrtya<k2>DOrtya
{%Dhaurtya, am,%}¦ n. fraud, dishonesty.
<LEND>

<L>23598<pc>0460-c<k1>DOrya<k2>DOrya
{#DOrya#}¦ {%dhaurya, am,%} n. a horse's trot, {%=%}
{%dhorita,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>23599<pc>0460-c<k1>DOvaki<k2>DOvaki
{#DOvaki#}¦ {%dhauvaki, is,%} m. (fr. {%dhuvakā%}), a
metronymic from Dhuvakā.
<LEND>

<L>23600<pc>0460-c<k1>DmA<k2>DmA<h>1
{#DmA#} 1¦. {%dhmā,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhamati, dadhmau,%}
{%dhmāsyati%} (ep. {%dhamiṣyati%}), {%adhmāsīt,%}
{%dhmātum,%} to blow (as wind or breath), breathe out,
exhale; to blow (a conch-shell, trumpet, or any wind
instrument), to produce sound by blowing; to blow
a fire, excite fire by blowing; to excite sparks; to
manufacture by blowing, melt, smelt; to blow away
from one's self, cast, throw: Pass. {%dhmāyate,%} ep.
and Ved. {%dhamyate, dhmāyati,%} to be blown, to be
melted, &c.: Caus. {%dhmāpayati,%} &c., to cause to
blow or melt, to consume by fire, burn: Desid.
{%didhmāsati:%} Intens. {%dedhmīyate, dādhmāti (dā-%}
{%dhmāyate),%} to be blown violently; [cf. Lat. <nsi>flā-</nsi>
<nsi>re;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>blayan, blāhan, blāsan,</nsi> ‘blow;’
Gr. <lang n="greek">σμώ-νη, σμώ-ς ?</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>23601<pc>0460-c<k1>Dma<k2>Dma
{%Dhma, as, ā, am,%}¦ blowing; [cf. {%tūṇava-dh˚%} and
{%śaṅkha-dh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23602<pc>0460-c<k1>DmA<k2>DmA<h>2
2. {%dhmā, ās,%}¦ m. (?), blowing. {%—Dhmā-kāra, as,%}
m. a blacksmith, a smith.
<LEND>

<L>23603<pc>0460-c<k1>DmAta<k2>DmAta
{%Dhmāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ blown (as a wind instru-
ment), blown into, blown up, inflated, blown by a
bellows (a fire &c.), inflamed, puffed, excited.
<LEND>

<L>23604<pc>0460-c<k1>DmAtavya<k2>DmAtavya
{%Dhmātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be blown, to be ex-
cited or kindled.
<LEND>

<L>23605<pc>0460-c<k1>DamAtf<k2>DamAtf
{%Dhamātṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. a blower, smelter (of
metal); ({%tṛ%}), n. a contrivance for blowing or
melting.
<LEND>

<L>23606<pc>0460-c<k1>DmAna<k2>DmAna
{%Dhmāna, am,%}¦ n. blowing, puffing, swelling.
<LEND>

<L>23607<pc>0460-c<k1>DmApita<k2>DmApita
{%Dhmāpita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), reduced to
ashes, burnt to cinder.
<LEND>

<L>23608<pc>0460-c<k1>DmAyat<k2>DmAyat
{%Dhmāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ or {%dhmāyamāna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} being blown; being melted, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23609<pc>0460-c<k1>DmANkz<k2>DmANkz
{#DmANkz#}¦ {%dhmāṅkṣ%} (various reading for
{%dhvāṅkṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%dhmāṅkṣati,%}
&c., to crow or caw; to desire; [cf. {%dhrākṣ.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0461-a+ 77]

<L>23610<pc>0461-a<k1>DmANkza<k2>DmANkza
{%Dhmāṅkṣa, as,%}¦ m. a crow, &c.; (wrong form
for {%dhvāṅkṣa,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>23611<pc>0461-a<k1>DmAman<k2>DmAman
{#DmAman#}¦ {%dhmāman, ā,%} m. wrong reading for
{%dhyāman,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23612<pc>0461-a<k1>DyA<k2>DyA
{#DyA#}¦ {%dhyā, dhyāta, dhyāna.%} See under rt.
{%dhyai%} below.
<LEND>

<L>23613<pc>0461-a<k1>DyAma<k2>DyAma
{#DyAma#}¦ {%dhyāma, as, ā, am,%} dark-coloured,
black; ({%am%}), n. a fragrant grass in general or a
particular kind of it; the plant Artemisia Indica
{%(= damanaka)%}. {%—Dhyāmī-karaṇa, am,%} n. mak-
ing dark-coloured, blackening. {%—Dhyāmī-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} made dark-coloured, blackened.
<LEND>

<L>23614<pc>0461-a<k1>DyAmaka<k2>DyAmaka
{%Dhyāmaka, am,%}¦ n. a particular kind of grass
({%= rohiṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>23615<pc>0461-a<k1>DyuzitASva<k2>DyuzitASva
{#DyuzitASva#}¦ {%dhyuṣitāśva, as,%} m., N. of a
prince; (a various reading for {%vyuṣitāśva.%})
<LEND>

<L>23616<pc>0461-a<k1>DyE<k2>DyE
{#DyE#}¦ {%dhyai%} [cf. the older form 1. {%dhī%}], cl.
1. P. (ep. also A.) {%dhyāyati%} (ep. also {%dhyāti,%}
2nd sing. Impv. {%dhyāhi%}), Pot. {%dhyāyet, dadhyau,%}
{%dhyātā, dhyāsyati, adhyāsīt, dhyātum,%} to think
of, have in mind, imagine, contemplate, ponder,
meditate, think on, meditate on, reflect upon (with
or without {%manasā%} or {%manasi%} or {%cetasā%} or {%dhiyā%}),
to call to mind, recollect: Caus. {%dhyāpayati, -yitum:%}
Desid. {%didhyāsati:%} Intens. {%dādhyāyate, dādhyāti,%}
{%dādhyeti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">θέα, θεά-ο-μαι,</lang> related to {%dhyai,%}
as Lat. <nsi>vid-ere</nsi> to Sanskrit {%vid,%} ‘to know;’ or as
Zend {%budh,%} ‘to see,’ to Sanskrit {%budh,%} ‘to know.’]
<LEND>

<L>23617<pc>0461-a<k1>DyA<k2>DyA
{%Dhyā, ās,%}¦ f. thinking, thought, meditation.
<LEND>

<L>23618<pc>0461-a<k1>DyAta<k2>DyAta
{%Dhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thought of, meditated on.
<LEND>

<L>23619<pc>0461-a<k1>DyAtavya<k2>DyAtavya
{%Dhyātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thought of or re-
flected upon.
<LEND>

<L>23620<pc>0461-a<k1>DyAtf<k2>DyAtf
{%Dhyātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who reflects upon or
meditates; a thinker, reflector.
<LEND>

<L>23621<pc>0461-a<k1>DyAtva<k2>DyAtva
{%Dhyātva, am,%}¦ n. thought, reflection.
<LEND>

<L>23622<pc>0461-a<k1>DyAtvA<k2>DyAtvA
{%Dhyātvā,%}¦ ind. having thought of or reflected,
having pondered or recollected, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23623<pc>0461-a<k1>DyAna<k2>DyAna
{%Dhyāna, am,%}¦ n. meditation, thought, reflection,
especially profound and abstract religious contem-
plation; divine intuition or discernment; mental
representation of the personal attributes of a deity;
({%as%}), m., N. of the eleventh day in the light half in
Brahmā's month. {%—Dhyāna-gamya, as, ā, am,%}
attainable by meditation or reflection. {%—Dhyāna-%}
{%gocara, as,%} m., N. of a class of Buddhist deities;
[cf. {%dhyānāvacara.%}] {%—Dhyāna-japya, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a race. {%—Dhyāna-tatpara, as, ā, am,%} lost in
thought, absorbed in meditation, reflecting, medi-
tative. {%—Dhyāna-dīpa, as,%} m. ‘the lamp of medi-
tation,’ N. of a work. {%—Dhyāna-dyuti, is,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Dhyāna-niṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} engaged
in meditation, contemplative, lost in thought. {%—Dhyā-%}
{%na-para, as, ā, am, = dhyāna-tatpara%}. {%—Dhyāna-%}
{%pāramitā,%} f., see {%pāramitā%}. {%—Dhyāna-phala, am,%}
n. ‘the fruit of meditation,’ N. of a chapter of the
Purāṇa-sarva-sva by Halāyudha. {%—Dhyāna-bhaṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. interruption of thought or meditation.
{%—Dhyāna-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of reflection
or meditation. {%—Dhyāna-mātra, am,%} n. mere re-
flection, thought alone. {%—Dhyāna-mudrā,%} f. the
prescribed attitude in which to meditate on the deity.
{%—Dhyāna-yoga, as,%} m. profound meditation, the
performance of religious abstraction, (also explained
as a Dvandva, meditation and abstraction); N. of a
kind of magic mentioned in the Yoga-ratna-mālā,
‘destroying one's enemies by images formed in the
mind.’ {%—Dhyāna-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘the mark of
meditation,’ N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva.
{%—Dhyāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} occupied in or intent
on religious meditation. {%—Dhyāna-vindūpaniṣad%}
{%(˚du-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad belonging to
the Atharva-veda. {%—Dhyāna-stha, as, ā, am,%} ab-
sorbed in meditation; lost in thought. {%—Dhyānā-%}
{%vacara (˚na-av˚), ās,%} m. pl., N. of a class of
Buddhist deities; [cf. {%dhyāna-gocara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23624<pc>0461-a<k1>DyAnika<k2>DyAnika
{%Dhyānika, as, ā, am,%}¦ proceeding from religious
meditation, sought or obtained by pious contemplation.
<LEND>
[Page0461-b+ 74]

<L>23625<pc>0461-b<k1>DyAnin<k2>DyAnin
{%Dhyānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ contemplative, engaged in
religious meditation, meditating.
<LEND>

<L>23626<pc>0461-b<k1>DyAnibudDa<k2>DyAnibudDa
{%Dhyāni-buddha, as,%}¦ m. (probably fr. {%dhyāni,%}
patronymic fr. {%dhyāna;%} cf. {%mānuṣi-buddha%}),
a spiritual or mental Buddha, an incorporeal Buddha
resulting from meditation, (their number is given as
five or six or ten or more.)
<LEND>

<L>23627<pc>0461-b<k1>DyAniboDisattva<k2>DyAniboDisattva
{%Dhyāni-bodhi-sattva, as,%}¦ m. (with Buddhists) an
incorporeal son of a Dhyāni-buddha.
<LEND>

<L>23628<pc>0461-b<k1>DyAnIya<k2>DyAnIya
{%Dhyānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (according to Vopa-deva
26. 25, fut. pass. part.), to be meditated upon.
<LEND>

<L>23629<pc>0461-b<k1>DyAman<k2>DyAman
{%Dhyāman, ā,%}¦ m. measure; light; ({%a%}), n. medi-
tation.
<LEND>

<L>23630<pc>0461-b<k1>DyAyat<k2>DyAyat
{%Dhyāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ thinking of, considering,
reflecting, meditating upon; supposing, imagining.
<LEND>

<L>23631<pc>0461-b<k1>DyAyamAna<k2>DyAyamAna
{%Dhyāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being reflected on,
being meditated upon.
<LEND>

<L>23632<pc>0461-b<k1>Dyeya<k2>Dyeya
{%Dhyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be meditated upon, to be
pondered or contemplated; fit for meditation; to be
imagined.
<LEND>

<L>23633<pc>0461-b<k1>Dra<k2>Dra
{#Dra#}¦ {%dhra, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%dhṛ%}), {%= dhara%}
(at the end of some comps., e. g. {%aṃsa-dhrī, mahī-%}
{%dhra,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>23634<pc>0461-b<k1>Draj<k2>Draj
{#Draj#}¦ {%dhraj%} or {%dhrañj,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhrajati%}
or {%dhrañjati%} or {%dhṛñjati,%} &c., Ved. to
move, go, glide (as a bird &c.); [cf. rt. {%dhṛj,%}
{%dhrij, dhvaj, dhvañj.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23635<pc>0461-b<k1>Drajas<k2>Drajas
{%Dhrajas, as,%}¦ n. (?), Ved. {%= dhraji%} below.
<LEND>

<L>23636<pc>0461-b<k1>Draji<k2>Draji
{%Dhraji, is,%}¦ f., Ved. the gliding course or motion
of the wind, &c. {%—Dhrajī-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
gliding, moving.
<LEND>

<L>23637<pc>0461-b<k1>DrAji<k2>DrAji
{%Dhrāji, is,%}¦ f., Ved. the gliding course of the
wind, &c.; impulse; whirlwind, gale.
<LEND>

<L>23638<pc>0461-b<k1>DraR<k2>DraR
{#DraR#}¦ {%dhraṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhraṇati,%} &c., to
sound (as a drum or other instrument);
[cf. rt. {%dhaṇ,%} 2. {%dhvan,%} 3. {%dhārā;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">θρέ-ο-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θρό-ο-ς, θρῆ-νο-ς, θρῦ-λο-ς, θρύλλος, θόρυ-βο-ς, τεν-θρη-δών,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀν-θρη-δών, τον-θρύ-ς, τον-θορύζω;</lang> Goth.
<nsi>drun-yu-s,</nsi> ‘voice;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>dran,</nsi> ‘a drone;’
Mod. Germ. <nsi>drönen.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23639<pc>0461-b<k1>Dras<k2>Dras
{#Dras#}¦ {%dhras,%} cl. 9. and 10. P. {%dhrasnāti,%}
{%dhrāsayati, -yitum,%} to glean; to throw
or toss up, cast upward; [cf. {%udhras.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23640<pc>0461-b<k1>DrA<k2>DrA
{#DrA#}¦ {%dhrā,%} cl. 2. and 1. P. {%dhrāti%} or {%dhrati,%}
{%dhrayati,%} &c., Ved. to go, (Naigh. II. 14.)
<LEND>

<L>23641<pc>0461-b<k1>DrAK<k2>DrAK
{#DrAK#}¦ {%dhrākh,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhrākhati,%} &c.,
to be dry or arid, &c., = rt. {%drākh.%}
<LEND>

<L>23642<pc>0461-b<k1>DrAG<k2>DrAG
{#DrAG#}¦ {%dhrāgh,%} cl. 1. A. {%dhrāghate,%} &c., to
be able or competent, &c., = rt. {%drāgh.%}
<LEND>

<L>23643<pc>0461-b<k1>DrANkz<k2>DrANkz
{#DrANkz#}¦ {%dhrāṅkṣ%} [cf. rt. {%dhmāṅkṣ,%}
{%dhavāṅkṣ, drāṅkṣ%}], cl. 1. P. {%dhrāṅ-%}
{%kṣati,%} &c., to utter the sound of birds, to crow,
caw, &c.; to desire.
<LEND>

<L>23644<pc>0461-b<k1>DrAq<k2>DrAq
{#DrAq#}¦ {%dhrāḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%dhrāḍate,%} &c., to
divide, split, &c., = rt. {%drāḍ.%}
<LEND>

<L>23645<pc>0461-b<k1>DrAqi<k2>DrAqi
{%Dhrāḍi, is,%}¦ m. gathering or plucking flowers.
<LEND>

<L>23646<pc>0461-b<k1>Dri<k2>Dri
{#Dri#}¦ {%dhri%} (fr. rt. {%dhṛ%}) in {%a-dhri,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23647<pc>0461-b<k1>DriyamARa<k2>DriyamARa
{%Dhriyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being held or sustained;
being withheld or checked or suppressed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23648<pc>0461-b<k1>Drij<k2>Drij
{#Drij#}¦ {%dhrij,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhrejati,%} &c., to go
or move, &c., = rt. {%dhraj.%}
<LEND>

<L>23649<pc>0461-b<k1>Drija<k2>Drija
{%Dhrija%}¦ in {%a-dhrija, as, ā, am,%} unrestrainable.
<LEND>

<L>23650<pc>0461-b<k1>Dru<k2>Dru<h>1
{#Dru#} 1¦. {%dhru%} (connected with rt. {%dhṛ%}), cl. 1.
6. P. {%dhravati, dhruvati, dudhrāva,%} &c., to
be firm or fixed, to stand firm; to go, move; to ascer-
tain, know with certainty; to kill: Caus. {%dhrāva-%}
{%yati:%} Desid. {%dudhrūṣati, dudhruviṣati:%} Intens.
{%dodhrūyate;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>drūtas,</nsi> ‘firm;’ Goth. <nsi>traua,</nsi>
‘I trust,’ = Caus.]
<LEND>

<L>23651<pc>0461-b<k1>Druti<k2>Druti
{%Dhruti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. (Sāy.) fixed destiny, settled course
of fate; (according to modern scholars) misleading,
leading astray, corrupting, seduction, (fr. rt. {%dhvṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>23652<pc>0461-b<k1>Druva<k2>Druva
{%Dhruva, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed, firm, remaining fixed
in one place, firmly fixed, fast, immovable, stable,
[Page0461-c+ 81]
enduring, constant, lasting, permanent, continual, per-
petual, eternal, invariable, unchangeable, inevitable;
certain, sure, well-ascertained; firm, strong, fixed,
settle (as a day); fixed (in astrology, as a {%karaṇa,%}
q. v.; the fixed Karaṇas are four, viz. Śakuni, Nāga,
Catuṣpada, and Kiṃstughna or Kintu-ghna (?): the
seven A-dhruvāṇi are given under {%karaṇa:%} some of
the Nakṣatras are also called Dhruvāṇi, see {%nakṣa-%}
{%tra%}); fixed (in anatomy, as certain members or
organs of the body which cannot be severed without
causing death, those which are separable being called
{%a-dhruva,%} q. v.); tenacious, retentive (e. g. {%dhruvā%}
{%smṛtiḥ,%} a retentive memory); ({%as%}), m. the polar
star or the north pole itself (personified in mythology
as son of Uttāna-pāda and grandson of the first
Manu); the pole of any great circle (especially either
of the celestial poles); polar longitude, the distance
of a planet from the beginning of the sidereal zodiac;
a constant arc; N. of one of the twenty-seven
astronomical Yogas or the Yoga star of the twelfth
lunar asterism (supposed to = ß Leonis?); a knot (?);
the trunk of a lopped tree or pollard, a post, stake;
the Indian fig-tree; the tip or point of the nose (?); a
sort of bird, {%= śarāri,%} (perhaps incorrectly for {%sma-%}
{%rāri,%} meaning Śiva); the introductory stanza of a
poem or song (‘the constantly recurring verse,’ which
is repeated as a kind of burden or chorus); time,
epoch, era, any fixed period from which dates are
computed; an epithet of Brahmā; of Viṣṇu [cf.
{%dhruvākṣara%}]; of Śiva; N. of one of the serpents
supporting the earth; N. of one of the Vasus; of a
son of Vasu-deva and Rohiṇī; of an Āṅgirasa, sup-
posed to be the author of a Ṛg-veda hymn (Ṛg-
veda X. 173); of a son of Nahuṣa; of a hero on
the side of the Pāṇḍus; of a son of Ranti-nāra (or
Ranti-bhāra); ({%ā%}), f. the largest of the three sacri-
ficial ladles (made in the shape of the Indian fig-leaf
and of the wood of the Flacourtia Sapida?); the plant
Desmodium Gangeticum; the plant Sanseviera Zey-
lanica, a small tree from the fibres of which bow-
strings are made ({%= mūrvā%}); a virtuous woman; a
cow which stands quiet when milked; scil. {%diś,%} the
point of the heavens directly under the feet, the
point of the lower hemisphere directly opposite to
the zenith; ({%am%}), n. ‘the enduring sound,’ a sound
heard or supposed to be heard after the Abhinidhāna,
probably the mere prolongation of the preceding
sound; heaven, sky, atmosphere; ({%am%}), ind. cer-
tainly, surely, assuredly; eternally; ({%āya%}), ind. for
ever. (According to grammarians, {%dhruva%} at the
end of a comp. may give a bad sense to the word
with which it is compounded, Pāṇ. II. 1, 53); [cf.
Hib. <nsi>dearbh,</nsi> ‘sure, true;’ Goth. <nsi>triggvs;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>treowe, for-truwyan;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>triu, triuwi,</nsi>
<nsi>ga-triu, ga-triuwi, ga-triwi,</nsi> = Mod. Germ. <nsi>treu,</nsi>
<nsi>treue, ge-treu,</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>true, trusty.</nsi>] {%—Dhruva-ketu,%}
{%us,%} m. a kind of meteor. {%—Dhruva-kṣit, t, t, t,%}
Ved. resting firmly, abiding fixedly; abiding in the
fixed (sacrifice). {%—Dhruva-kṣiti, is, is, i,%} Ved.
having a firm position or abode. {%—Dhruva-kṣema,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. abiding in fixed habitations, having
enduring mansions; firmly fixed. {%—Dhruva-gati,%}
{%is,%} f. a firm position; ({%is, is, i%}), going firmly.
{%—Dhruva-carita, am,%} n., N. of the twelfth and
thirteenth chapters of the Svarga-khaṇḍa or third
part of the Padma-Purāṇa; N. of the sixty-second
chapter of the Liṅga-Purāṇa; of a chapter of the
Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dhruva-cyut, t, t, t,%} Ved. caus-
ing to fall or shaking the immovable (mountains).
{%—Dhruva-tārā,%} f. or {%dhruva-tāraka, am,%} n. the
polar star. {%—Dhruva-paṭu, us,%} m., N. of a king of
Vallabhī or Ballabhī; [cf. {%dhruva-sena.%}] {%—Dhruva-%}
{%yoni, is, is, i,%} Ved. having a firm resting-place.
{%—Dhruva-ratnā,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda. {%—Dhruva-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n.
‘the mark of recurring stanzas,’ N. of a chapter
of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Dhruva-sad, t, t, t,%}
Ved. resting on firm ground, abiding in a firm
place. {%—Dhruva-sandhi, is,%} m., N. of a prince, son
of Su-sandhi or Su-ṣandhi and father of Bharata.
{%—Dhruva-siddhi, is,%} m. ‘through whom conva-
[Page0462-a+ 77]
lescence is sure,’ N. of a physician at the court of
Agni-mitra. {%—Dhruva-sena, as,%} m., N. of two Bal-
labhī princes; [cf. {%dhruva-paṭu.%}] {%—Dhruvākṣara%}
{%(˚va-akṣ˚), as,%} m. ‘fixed and eternal,’ epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Dhruvāvarta (˚va-āv˚), as,%} m. the point
on the crown of the head from which the hairs radiate.
{%—Dhruvāśva (˚va-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>23653<pc>0462-a<k1>Druvaka<k2>Druvaka
{%Dhruvaka, as,%}¦ m. polar longitude; the trunk of
a lopped tree; a post, pale, stake; the introductory
or recurring stanza of a song, see {%dhruva;%} N. of
one of the attendants of Skanda; ({%ā%}), f. the intro-
ductory stanza and burden of a song [cf. {%dhuvakā%}];
N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>23654<pc>0462-a<k1>Druvase<k2>Druvase
{%Dhruvase%}¦ (an infinitive form from {%dhruvas%} which
may be derived from {%dhruva%}), Ved. in order to rest;
(Sāy.) for a firm seat.
<LEND>

<L>23655<pc>0462-a<k1>Druvi<k2>Druvi
{%Dhruvi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. firmly fixed, firm.
<LEND>

<L>23656<pc>0462-a<k1>DrOva<k2>DrOva
{%Dhrauva, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to Dhruva or the
polar star; being in the ladle called Dhruvā.
<LEND>

<L>23657<pc>0462-a<k1>DrOvya<k2>DrOvya
{%Dhrauvya, am,%}¦ n. fixedness, firmness, immovable-
ness, uninterrupted rest; duration; certainty, necessity;
({%as,%} &c.), conferring duration or fixedness.
<LEND>

<L>23658<pc>0462-a<k1>Dru<k2>Dru<h>2
{#Dru#} 2¦. {%dhru%} (said to be fr. rt. {%dhvṛ%}) in
{%a-smṛta-dhru,%} not disappointing desire; (Sāy.) not
remembering injury.
<LEND>

<L>23659<pc>0462-a<k1>Drut<k2>Drut
{%Dhrut%}¦ in {%varuṇa-dhrut,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23660<pc>0462-a<k1>Druv<k2>Druv
{#Druv#}¦ {%dhruv,%} cl. 6. P. {%dhruvati,%} &c., to
stand firm; to go, move; (various reading
for rt. 1. {%dhru.%})
<LEND>

<L>23661<pc>0462-a<k1>DrU<k2>DrU
{#DrU#}¦ {%dhrū,%} cl. 6. P. {%dhruvati,%} &c., = rt. 1.
{%dhru%} and {%dhruv.%}
<LEND>

<L>23662<pc>0462-a<k1>Drek<k2>Drek
{#Drek#}¦ {%dhrek,%} cl. 1. A. {%dhrekate,%} &c., to
sound; to grow or increase; to be exhi-
larated or elevated with joy; to manifest elevation
or hilarity by noise; [cf. {%drek.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23663<pc>0462-a<k1>DrE<k2>DrE
{#DrE#}¦ {%dhrai,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhrāyati,%} &c., to be
satisfied or pleased; [cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">τρέφ-ω</lang>
= Caus. {%dhrāpayāmi,%} <lang n="greek">θρέψις, τρόφις, ταρφύς.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>23664<pc>0462-a<k1>DvaMs<k2>DvaMs
{#DvaMs#}¦ {%dhvaṃs%} (sometimes written {%dhvas%}),
cl. 1. A. {%dhvaṃsate%} (ep. also {%-ti%}), {%da-%}
{%dhvaṃse, dhvaṃsiṣyate, adhvaṃsiṣṭa, adhvasat,%}
{%dhvaṃsitum,%} to fall down, fall to pieces, fall to dust,
be reduced to powder, decay, to be ruined; perish;
to become eclipsed; to scatter or sprinkle over, cover
with; to be covered or sprinkled with dust; (the
imperative {%dhvaṃsa, dhvaṃsata,%} = ‘be gone,’ ‘away
with you,’ ‘vanish’): Pass. {%dhvasyate,%} to be destroyed,
perish, &c.: Caus. {%dhvaṃsayati,%} to cause to fall,
fell, throw down, cause to perish, destroy; to inter-
rupt; {%dhvasayati,%} &c., Ved. to scatter, disperse
(darkness &c.): Desid. {%didhvaṃsiṣate:%} Intens. {%da-%}
{%nīdhvasyate%} and {%danīdhvaṃsti, danīdhvaṃsīti;%}
[cf. Goth. <nsi>drus,</nsi> ‘to fall;’ <nsi>drausya</nsi> = ‘I fall,’ = Caus.
{%dhvaṃsayāmi:%} Old Germ. <nsi>troryu,</nsi> ‘I gush.’]
<LEND>

<L>23665<pc>0462-a<k1>DvaMsa<k2>DvaMsa
{%Dhvaṃsa, as,%}¦ m. falling down, perishing, destruc-
tion, demolition; vanishing, ceasing to exist, loss, ruin;
({%ī%}), f. a mote in a sun-beam.
<LEND>

<L>23666<pc>0462-a<k1>DvaMsaka<k2>DvaMsaka
{%Dhvaṃsaka, as, ā, am%}¦ (at the end of a comp.),
destroying, causing to fall or perish, removing.
<LEND>

<L>23667<pc>0462-a<k1>DvaMsana<k2>DvaMsana
{%Dhvaṃsana, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to fall, destroying,
demolishing, ruining; scattering, dispersing; sprinkling;
({%am%}), n. perishing, dying; loss, destruction, ruin;
falling; going.
<LEND>

<L>23668<pc>0462-a<k1>DvaMsanIya<k2>DvaMsanIya
{%Dhvaṃsanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ liable to destruction,
capable of being ruined.
<LEND>

<L>23669<pc>0462-a<k1>DvaMsayitvA<k2>DvaMsayitvA
{%Dhvaṃsayitvā,%}¦ ind. having destroyed; having
interrupted.
<LEND>

<L>23670<pc>0462-a<k1>DvaMsi<k2>DvaMsi
{%Dhvaṃsi, is,%}¦ m. (1/100) part of a Muhūrta.
<LEND>

<L>23671<pc>0462-a<k1>DvaMsita<k2>DvaMsita
{%Dhvaṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to fall, destroyed,
demolished, ruined, lost.
<LEND>

<L>23672<pc>0462-a<k1>DvaMsin<k2>DvaMsin
{%Dhvaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling, perishing, being
destroyed, decaying; causing to fall, destroying,
destructive; ({%ī%}), m. a Pīlu tree (said to grow in
mountainous districts).
<LEND>

<L>23673<pc>0462-a<k1>Dvaj<k2>Dvaj<h>1
{#Dvaj#} 1¦. {%dhvaj%} or {%dhvañj,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhvajati,%}
{%dhvañjati,%} &c., to go, move; [cf. perhaps
Lat. <nsi>vagus, vagari.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page0462-b+ 81]

<L>23674<pc>0462-b<k1>Dvaj<k2>Dvaj<h>2
2. {%dhvaj = dhvaja%}¦ in {%kṛta-dh˚,%} Ṛg-veda VII.
83, 2.
<LEND>

<L>23675<pc>0462-b<k1>Dvaja<k2>Dvaja
{%Dhvaja, as,%}¦ rarely {%am,%} n. (connected with rt.
1. {%dhvaj%} and perhaps with rt. 1. {%dhū%}), a banner,
standard, flag-staff, flag, ensign, pennon; (meta-
phorically) a distinguished or eminent personage
(e. g. {%kula-dhvaja,%} the head or ornament of a
family); a mark, emblem, sign, symbol, character-
istic mark [cf. {%kajjala-dh˚, dharma-dh˚, dhūma-%}
{%dh˚, dhūli-dh˚, vṛṣabha-dh˚,%} &c.]; the attribute
of a deity; the sign of any trade; the sign of
a distillery or of a tavern [cf. {%surā-dh˚%}]; the
business there carried on; the penis &c., the organ
of generation (of any animal, male or female); a
skull carried on a staff as a mark of ascetics and
Yogis; a house situated to the east of any object;
a place prepared in a peculiar way for building; (in
prosody) an iambic; (in Vedic grammar) N. of a
peculiar kind of Krama-pāṭha; (in astronomy) N.
of a Yoga; N. of a Grāma situated towards the
north; ({%as%}), m. one who prepares or sells spirituous
liquors; (according to some) pride, hypocrisy.
{%—Dhvaja-gṛha, am,%} n. a room in which banners
are kept or from which flags wave. {%—Dhvaja-grīva,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having a neck erect as a banner,’ N. of a
Rakṣas. {%—Dhvaja-druma, as,%} m. the palm tree
(used for making flag-staffs, {%= tāla%}). {%—Dhvaja-na-%}
{%vamī,%} f., N. of a particular festival. {%—Dhvaja-paṭa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘banner-cloth,’ the cloth of the flag, a flag.
{%—Dhvaja-praharaṇa, as,%} m. ‘striking banners or
flags,’ air, wind, gale. {%—Dhvaja-bhaṅga%} or {%dhvaja-%}
{%pāta, as,%} m. ‘fall or impotence of the male organ,’
inability to procreate children; fracture or fall of a
banner. {%—Dhvaja-yantra, am,%} n. ‘banner-instru-
ment,’ any contrivance to which a flag-staff is fastened.
{%—Dhvaja-yaṣṭi, is,%} f. a flag-staff. {%—Dhvaja-rājin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} displaying flags or ensigns. {%—Dhvaja-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} decorated or adorned with flags; having
a mark or sign, bearing the mark of a criminal,
branded; ({%ān%}), m. an ensign, a standard-bearer; a
distiller, a vendor of spirituous liquors; a Brāhman
who having slain another carries the skull of the
murdered man with him to places of pilgrimage by
way of penance; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a divine female;
N. of a divine attendant of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Dhvaja-%}
{%stambha, as,%} m. a flag-staff. {%—Dhvajāṃśuka (˚ja-%}
{%aṃ˚), am,%} n. ‘banner-cloth,’ a flag. {%—Dhvajāgra-%}
{%keyūra (˚ja-ag˚), am,%} n. ‘the ring on the top of a
standard,’ N. of a kind of abstract contemplation
(among Buddhists). {%—Dhvajāgra-niśā-maṇi (˚ja-%}
{%ag˚), is,%} m. ‘the moon (night-jewel) of the standard-
top,’ N. for a peculiar method of numeration.
{%—Dhvajāgra-vatī (˚ja-ag˚),%} f. ‘furnished with a
standard-top,’ N. for a mode of reckoning. {%—Dhva-%}
{%jāroha,%} probably a wrong reading for {%gajāroha,%}
q. v. {%—Dhvajāhṛta (˚ja-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} robbed
or taken possession of at the standard, i. e. on the
battle-field. {%—Dhvajī-karaṇa, am,%} n. raising a
standard, hoisting a flag; making anything a plea,
setting up as a claim or right. {%—Dhvajī-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to set up a standard,
hoist a flag; to use as a mark, sign, or pretext.
{%—Dhvajī-kṛtya,%} ind. having raised a standard;
having made a plea or pretext. {%—Dhvajocchrāya%}
{%(˚ja-uc˚), as,%} m. erecting a banner; erection of the
male organ. {%—Dhvajotthāna (˚ja-ut˚), am,%} n.
‘erection of a flag,’ a festival in honour of Indra,
the twelfth day of the light half of the month
Bhādra.
<LEND>

<L>23676<pc>0462-b<k1>Dvajika<k2>Dvajika
{%Dhvajika%}¦ in {%dharma-dhvajika,%} a hypocrite who
only makes a pretence of religion; [cf. {%dharma-%}
{%dhvaja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23677<pc>0462-b<k1>Dvajin<k2>Dvajin
{%Dhvajin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ furnished with or bearing a
flag, carrying a flag or standard, hoisting an ensign;
(at end of comp.) having as a mark or sign; ({%ī%}), m.
a standard-bearer; one having an emblem or sign;
a distiller or vendor of spirituous liquors; a car,
chariot, carriage; a mountain; a snake; a peacock;
a horse; a Brāhman; ({%inī%}), f. ‘a bannered host,’
an army. {%—Dhvajinī-pati, is,%} m. the leader of
an army.
<LEND>
[Page0462-c+ 77]

<L>23678<pc>0462-c<k1>DvaYj<k2>DvaYj
{#DvaYj#}¦ {%dhvañj.%} See rt. 1. {%dhvaj,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>23679<pc>0462-c<k1>DvaR<k2>DvaR
{#DvaR#}¦ {%dhvaṇ%} (connected with rt. 2. {%dhvan%}),
cl. 1. P. {%dhvaṇati,%} &c., to sound.
<LEND>

<L>23680<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvan<k2>Dvan<h>1
{#Dvan#} 1¦. {%dhvan%} (related to rt. {%dhvaṃs%}),
Ved. to become covered or shut up, cover
one's self, &c.: Caus. {%dhvanayati, -yitum,%} to en-
velope, wrap up.
<LEND>

<L>23681<pc>0462-c<k1>DvAnta<k2>DvAnta<h>1
1. {%dhvānta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see under 2. {%dhvan%}
below), covered, enveloped, dark; ({%am%}), n. darkness,
night. {%—Dhvānta-citta, as,%} m. ‘perceived in the
dark (?),’ a fire-fly; (also read {%dhvānta-vitta.%}) {%—Dhvān-%}
{%ta-jāla, am,%} n. ‘the net of darkness or the cover of
night,’ a veil (?). {%—Dhvānta-śātrava, as,%} m. ‘enemy
of darkness,’ N. of the tree Cassia Fistula; the sun
or any luminary. {%—Dhvāntārāti (˚ta-ar˚), is,%} m.
‘enemy of darkness,’ the sun or any luminary.
{%—Dhvāntonmeṣa (˚ta-un˚), as,%} m. ‘flashing or
twinkling in the darkness,’ a fire-fly.
<LEND>

<L>23682<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvan<k2>Dvan<h>2
{#Dvan#} 2¦. {%dhvan%} (connected with rts. {%dhvaṇ%}
and {%dhraṇ%}), cl. 1. P. {%dhvanati, da-%}
{%dhvāna, dhvanitum,%} to sound, produce a sound,
utter sounds, buzz, roar, echo, reverberate: Caus. P.
{%dhvanayati%} and {%dhvānayati,%} &c., to sound, cause
to sound; [cf. Goth. <nsi>drun-yu-s,</nsi> ‘sound;’ Angl.
Sax. <nsi>dyn-an, dyne.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23683<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvana<k2>Dvana
{%Dhvana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a wind; sound, tune; N.
of a man. {%—Dhvana-modin, ī,%} m. ‘delighting by its
sound,’ the humble-bee.
<LEND>

<L>23684<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvanat<k2>Dvanat
{%Dhvanat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sounding, making a noise.
<LEND>

<L>23685<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvanana<k2>Dvanana
{%Dhvanana, am,%}¦ n. sounding; hinting at.
<LEND>

<L>23686<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvanayat<k2>Dvanayat
{%Dhvanayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to sound or
resound, resounding, echoing with; ({%an%}), m., N. of
a wind.
<LEND>

<L>23687<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvani<k2>Dvani
{%Dhvani, is,%}¦ m. sound, echo, noise; tone, tune;
thunder; the sound of a drum; an inarticulate sound,
a mere empty sound without reality; a word; allu-
sion, hint, figurative allusion, implied meaning,
poetical style; N. of a work. {%—Dhvani-kāra, as,%}
or {%dhvani-kṛt, t,%} m. the author of the work called
Dhvani. {%—Dhvani-graha, as,%} m. ‘apprehending
sounds,’ the ear; hearing. {%—Dhvani-tva, am,%} n.
figurative allusion, poetical style. {%—Dhvani-nātha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Dhvani-nālā,%} f., N. of
several musical instruments, {%= kāhalā,%} a sort of
trumpet; the Vīṇā or lute; a pipe, fife. {%—Dhvani-%}
{%bodhaka%} or {%dhvani-bodhana, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of the grass Rohisha. {%—Dhvani-vikāra, as,%} m.
a change of voice (caused by fright or grief, &c.).
{%—Dhvany-artha, as,%} m. the meaning or truth
implied.
<LEND>

<L>23688<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvanita<k2>Dvanita
{%Dhvanita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, making a noise
(as a drum); alluded to, implied, figuratively or
rhetorically expressed; ({%am%}), n. sound, thunder.
<LEND>

<L>23689<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvanya<k2>Dvanya
{%Dhvanya, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>23690<pc>0462-c<k1>DvAna<k2>DvAna
{%Dhvāna, as,%}¦ m. humming, murmuring, one of the
seven kinds of speech or {%vācaḥ sthānāni,%} (a degree
louder than {%upāṃśu,%} q. v.); sound or tone in general.
<LEND>

<L>23691<pc>0462-c<k1>DvAnita<k2>DvAnita
{%Dhvānita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to sound, made
resonant.
<LEND>

<L>23692<pc>0462-c<k1>DvAnta<k2>DvAnta<h>2
2. {%dhvānta, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a wind. (For 1.
{%dhvānta%} see under 1. {%dhvan%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>23693<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvas<k2>Dvas
{#Dvas#}¦ {%dhvas.%} See rt. {%dhvaṃs,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>23694<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvas<k2>Dvas
{%Dhvas, dhvat%}¦ (fr. rt. {%dhvaṃs%}), (at the end of
certain comps.) causing to fall, throwing down.
<LEND>

<L>23695<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvasan<k2>Dvasan
{%Dhvasan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a king of the Matsyas.
<LEND>

<L>23696<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvasani<k2>Dvasani
{%Dhvasani, is,%}¦ m., Ved. the sprinkler; sprinkling,
scattering (as a cloud).
<LEND>

<L>23697<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvasanti<k2>Dvasanti
{%Dhvasanti, is,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>23698<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvasira<k2>Dvasira
{%Dhvasira, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sprinkled, spattered,
covered; (Sāy.) destroyed; [cf. {%dhūsara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23699<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvasta<k2>Dvasta
{%Dhvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen; destroyed, perished,
hurt, lost; covered, eclipsed, disappeared. {%—Dhvas-%}
{%tākṣa (˚ta-akṣa), as, ī, am,%} having the eyes
sunk (as in death).
<LEND>

<L>23700<pc>0462-c<k1>Dvasti<k2>Dvasti
{%Dhvasti, is,%}¦ f. ceasing, destruction, cessation (of
all the consequences of actions), one of the four states
to which the Yogin attains.
<LEND>
[Page0463-a+ 74]

<L>23701<pc>0463-a<k1>Dvasman<k2>Dvasman
{%Dhvasman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. polluting, darkening;
(Sāy.) destroying, destructive; causing destruction.
{%—Dhvasman-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. covered?;
(Sāy.) whose faults or imperfections are destroyed;
({%at%}), n. (according to Yāska) water.
<LEND>

<L>23702<pc>0463-a<k1>Dvasra<k2>Dvasra
{%Dhvasra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sprinkling, spattering;
scattering, liberal; (Sāy.) destructive; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a king.
<LEND>

<L>23703<pc>0463-a<k1>DvAkzA<k2>DvAkzA
{#DvAkzA#}¦ {%dhvākṣā,%} f., N. of a plant and its
fruit.
<LEND>

<L>23704<pc>0463-a<k1>DvANkz<k2>DvANkz
{#DvANkz#}¦ {%dhvāṅkṣ%} [cf. rts. {%dhmāṅkṣ%} and
{%dhrāṅkṣ%}], cl. 1. P. {%dhvāṅkṣati,%}
&c., to utter the cry of birds, to caw, croak, crow,
&c.; to desire.
<LEND>

<L>23705<pc>0463-a<k1>DvANkza<k2>DvANkza
{%Dhvāṅkṣa, as,%}¦ m. a crow; (according to some)
any aquatic bird, as a crane, gull, &c., feeding on fish,
= Ardea Nivea; (sometimes used at the end of a
comp. to express contempt, e. g. {%tīrtha-dhvāṅkṣa,%}
a crow at a sacred bathing-place, i. e. a man in the
wrong place); a beggar (on account of his insatia-
bleness); an impudent fellow; N. of one of the Nāgas
({%= takṣaka%}); a house?; (in astronomy) N. of
a Yoga; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant, {%= kākolī, kakko-%}
{%likā, laghu-kāvaḷī;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>duis,</nsi> ‘a crow.’]
{%—Dhvāṅkṣa-jaṅghā,%} f., N. of a plant, {%= kāka-%}
{%jaṅghā%}. {%—Dhvāṅkṣa-jambū, ūs,%} f. {%= kāka-jambū.%}
{%—Dhvāṅkṣa-tuṇḍa-phala,%} a kind of plant the
fruit of which resembles the beak of a crow, (com-
monly called Thora-śvetakāvaḷī.) {%—Dhvāṅkṣa-%}
{%tuṇḍā, ī,%} f. {%= dhvāṅkṣa-tuṇḍa-phala; (ī),%} f. {%=%}
{%kāka-nāsā%}. {%—Dhvāṅkṣa-dantī%} or {%dhvāṅkṣa-%}
{%nakhī,%} f. {%= kāka-tuṇḍī%}. {%—Dhvāṅkṣa-nāman, ā%}
or {%a,%} m. or n. (?), a dark species of Uḍumbara;
({%nāmnī%}), f. {%= kākodumbarikā%}. {%—Dhvāṅkṣa-nā-%}
{%śinī,%} f. {%= hapuṣā (?)%}. {%—Dhvāṅkṣa-nāsā,%} f. and
{%dhvāṅkṣa-nāsikā,%} f. {%= kāka-nāsā%}. {%—Dhvāṅkṣa-%}
{%puṣṭa, as,%} m. the Kokila or Indian cuckoo, {%=%}
{%kāka-puṣṭa%}. {%—Dhvāṅkṣa-mācī,%} f. {%= kāka-mācī,%}
{%= laghu-kāvaḷī%}. {%—Dhvāṅkṣa-rāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
cawing like a crow, having a voice like a crow.
{%—Dhvāṅkṣa-vallī,%} f. {%= kāka-nāsā, = dhvāṅkṣa-%}
{%dantī, = karañja%}. {%—Dhvāṅkṣādanī (˚ṣa-ad˚),%}
f. {%= dhvāṅkṣa-dantī%}. {%—Dhvāṅkṣārāti (˚ṣa-%}
{%ar˚), is,%} m. ‘enemy of crows,’ an owl.
<LEND>

<L>23706<pc>0463-a<k1>DvANkzikA<k2>DvANkzikA
{%Dhvāṅkṣikā,%}¦ f. {%= kākolī.%}
<LEND>

<L>23707<pc>0463-a<k1>DvANkzolikA<k2>DvANkzolikA
{%Dhvāṅkṣolikā%}¦ or {%dhvāṅkṣolī,%} f. a medicinal
plant, {%= kākolī.%}
<LEND>

<L>23708<pc>0463-a<k1>DvAnta<k2>DvAnta
{#DvAnta#}¦ {%dhvānta.%} For 1. and 2. {%dhvānta%}
see p. 462, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23709<pc>0463-a<k1>Dvf<k2>Dvf
{#Dvf#}¦ {%dhvṛ%} (connected with rts. {%hvṛ%} and
{%dhūrv%}), cl. 1. P. {%dhvarati, dadhvāra, dhva-%}
{%riṣyati, adhvārṣīt%} (3rd du. Aor. A. {%adhvari-%}
{%ṣātām%} or {%adhvṛṣātām%}); Prec. {%dhvariṣīṣṭa%}
or {%dhvṛṣīṣṭa, dhvartum,%} to bend, make crooked,
cause to fall, fell; to kill: Caus. {%dhvārayati, -yi-%}
{%tum:%} Desid. {%dudhvūrṣati, didhvariṣati:%} Intens.
{%dādhvaryate;%} [cf. {%a-dhvara,%} 2. {%dhru;%} probably
Angl. Sax. <nsi>thwer, thweorh, thwir, thwur, dwelian,</nsi>
<nsi>dol, dweorg, for-dwilman;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>dwer-an,</nsi>
<nsi>ga-dwor, twar-ōn, dwerh;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>dvals;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">θόλ-ο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θάλ-α-μο-ς.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>23710<pc>0463-a<k1>Dvaras<k2>Dvaras
{%Dhvaras, ās,%}¦ m. f., Ved. ‘destructive, hurtful,
injurious,’ N. of certain female demons or noxious
beings.
<LEND>

<L>23711<pc>0463-a<k1>Dvarya<k2>Dvarya
{%Dhvarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bent, made crooked, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23712<pc>0463-a<k1>Dvft<k2>Dvft
{%Dhvṛt, t, t, t%}¦ (at the end of a comp.), causing to
fall, felling, killing.
<LEND>

<L>23713<pc>0463-a<k1>DvraR<k2>DvraR
{#DvraR#}¦ {%dhvraṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%dhvraṇati,%} &c., to
sound; (a various reading for {%dhraṇ.%})
<LEND>
<H>{#na#}

<L>23714<pc>0463-a<k1>na<k2>na<h>1
{#na#} 1¦. {%na,%} the twentieth consonant of the
alphabet, and the fifth letter of the fourth or dental
class, having much the sound of the English <nsi>n</nsi> in
<nsi>tenth</nsi>. {%—Na-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%na.%}
<LEND>
[Page0463-b+ 79]

<L>23715<pc>0463-b<k1>na<k2>na<h>2
{#na#} 2¦. {%na,%} ind. a particle of negation equi-
valent to ‘not,’ ‘no,’ ‘nor,’ ‘neither’ [cf. {%no, na-%}
{%nu, na-hi, na-tarām%}], and in the Veda a particle of
comparison; it is used as a negative particle in wishing,
requesting, and commanding (e. g. {%na mā garan%}
{%nadyaḥ,%} let not the waters swallow me; {%nāvaman-%}
{%yeta kañcana,%} let him not despise any one), but not
in prohibition before an imperative, and not before
the aorist when it has lost its augment and stands for
an imperative (in both which cases {%mā,%} q. v., is used).
When joined with the potential, {%na%} may often have
the sense of ‘that not,’ ‘lest,’ ‘for fear lest’ (e. g.
{%na tvāṃ śapet,%} lest he should curse thee). In
argumentative writings {%na%} often comes at the end of
a hypothetical argument in the sense ‘not so’ (e. g.
{%nanu na kiñcin mānam iti cen na,%} now if it be
said that there is no proof, not so). Two {%nas%} are
not unfrequently used in the same sentence to intensify
an affirmation (e. g. {%na khalu na tat kariṣyāmi,%}
I will most certainly do that; {%na tu jātu na,%} most
assuredly), or any other negative particle may be
joined with {%na%} with the same effect (e. g. {%nādaṇḍyo%}
{%'sti,%} he is not to go unpunished, i. e. he must cer-
tainly be punished). When a negation has to be
repeated in successive clauses of a sentence or in
successive sentences, {%na%} may be simply repeated or
may be strengthened by one of the particles {%uta, ca,%}
{%api, cāpi, vā, athavā%} (e. g. {%nāham asyāraṇyasya%}
{%devatā na cāpy asya gireḥ,%} I am not the deity of
this forest nor of this mountain), or the negative is
not expressed in the second clause but represented
by {%vā%} or {%api vā%} or {%ca%} standing alone (e. g. {%na hṛṣ-%}
{%yati glāyati vā,%} he neither rejoices nor desponds),
or two clauses may have the negative particle and
not a third (e. g. {%na deveṣu na Yakṣeṣu mānu-%}
{%ṣeṣv api cānyeṣu tādṛg rūpavatī dṛṣṭa-%}
{%pūrvā,%} neither among gods nor Yakṣas nor other
mortals has so beautiful a female been before seen).
{%Na%} is sometimes placed before round or collective
numbers to denote a deficiency, the deficient number
being prefixed in the inst. or abl. case (e. g. {%ekayā%}
or {%ekena na viṃśatiḥ,%} not twenty by one, i. e. nine-
teen; {%pañcabhir na catvāri śatāni,%} 395). When
{%na%} is the negative of the simple idea expressed by a
word, it may be regarded as compounded with it,
and is then identical with 3. {%a,%} q. v. (e. g. {%na-vidvas,%}
unwise; {%nādhīta,%} unread; {%na-kiñcana,%} q. v.) {%Na%}
is often joined with other particles, e. g. {%na ca, na%}
{%cāpi, nāpi, nota, na vā, naiva, na caiva, nāpi%}
{%ca, na tu, na tveva, na tveva tu, na cet%} (see
{%ced%}), {%na khalu, na ha%} (after this last a verb is
said to retain its accent if used in the future with an
imperative sense, Pāṇ. VIII. 1, 31). {%Na%} is frequently
used in early Vedic composition as a particle of com-
parison = ‘like,’ ‘as,’ ‘as it were’ (e. g. {%tvā nāvaṃ%}
{%na dhīmahi,%} we meditate on thee like a boat; cf.
3. {%a,%} which also in a few instances = ‘like’); it is also
found in this sense in the later artificial poems; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>ne, non;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">νη</lang> in <lang n="greek">νη-κηδής;</lang>
Lith. <nsi>ne;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>ne;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ni, ne, nei;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>na;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>ni;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>ni.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23716<pc>0463-b<k1>na<k2>na<h>3
{#na#} 3¦. {%na, as,%} m. a N. of Buddha; binding,
tying, a band; one who is praised; a N. of Gaṇeśa
({%= dvi-raṇḍa?%}); a jewel, pearl; war; giving, a
gift; welfare, prosperity; ({%ā%}), f. the navel; a musical
instrument; knowledge; ({%as, ā, am%}), thin, spare;
vacant, empty; identical, same, like; unvexed, un-
wearied; undivided, unbroken.
<LEND>

<L>23717<pc>0463-b<k1>na<k2>na<h>4
{#na#} 4¦. {%na,%} (in prosody) a tribrach or foot
of three short syllables.
<LEND>

<L>23718<pc>0463-b<k1>naMS<k2>naMS
{#naMS#}¦ {%naṃś,%} the base of many forms of rt.
2. {%naś,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23719<pc>0463-b<k1>naMSa<k2>naMSa
{%Naṃśa, as,%}¦ m. (?), Ved. (according to Sāy.) {%=%}
{%nāśana,%} removal, removing, destruction; (but per-
haps fr. rt. 1. {%naś%}), acquisition.
<LEND>

<L>23720<pc>0463-b<k1>naMSana<k2>naMSana
{%Naṃśana, am,%}¦ n. (?), destruction, in {%svapna-n˚,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23721<pc>0463-b<k1>naMSuka<k2>naMSuka
{%Naṃśuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ injurious, destructive; going
astray, being lost; small, minute.
<LEND>
[Page0463-c+ 76]

<L>23722<pc>0463-c<k1>naMzwavya<k2>naMzwavya
{%Naṃṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ destructible, to be injured
or killed.
<LEND>

<L>23723<pc>0463-c<k1>naMzwf<k2>naMzwf
{%Naṃṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ a destroyer, destructive;
perishing, being lost.
<LEND>

<L>23724<pc>0463-c<k1>naHkzudra<k2>naHkzudra
{#naHkzudra#}¦ {%naḥ-kṣudra.%} See under 3. {%nas.%}
<LEND>

<L>23725<pc>0463-c<k1>nak<k2>nak
{#nak#}¦ {%nak,%} ind. (probably fr. rt. 2. {%naś%}),
Ved. night; [cf. 1. {%nakta,%} 2. {%niś, niśā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23726<pc>0463-c<k1>nakta<k2>nakta<h>1
1. {%nakta, am,%}¦ n., {%ā,%} f. (in the Veda {%naktā%} is regarded
as f. du.), night; eating only at night as a sort of
penance; a species of poisonous plant, {%= kalikāru;%}
{%(as),%} m., N. of a son of Pṛthu; of Pṛthu-ṣeṇa and
Ākūtī; ({%am%}), ind. by night, at night; [cf. 2. {%niś,%}
{%niśā;%} Zend <nsi>nakhturu</nsi> or <nsi>nakhtru,</nsi> ‘nocturnal;’
Gr. <lang n="greek">νύξ, νύκτωρ, νύκτερο-ς, νυκτερ-ινό-ς, νύχιο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νυκτερί-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>nox, noctu, nocturnu-s, noctua;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>nahts;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>naht, niht;</nsi> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>nacht;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>night;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>noṣtĭ;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>nocyi;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>nakti-s;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>nochd.</nsi>] {%—Nakta-cārin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} going or moving about at night; ({%ī%}), m. an
owl; a cat; a thief; a goblin, a Rakṣas; (also read
{%naktañ-cārin,%} which is the better form.) {%—Naktañ-%}
{%cara, as, ī, am,%} going or walking about at night;
({%as%}), m. any creature or animal that goes about
at night; a nocturnal fiend, a goblin, demon, evil
spirit, Rakṣas; a thief; the bdellium tree, see
{%guggula; (ī),%} f. a female demon. {%—Naktañcare-%}
{%śvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m. the lord of the night-rovers
or goblins. {%—Naktañ-caryā,%} f. walking or moving
about at night, wandering by night. {%—Naktañ-cārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} walking about at night, (opposed to {%divā-%}
{%cārin, divā-cara%}); ({%ī%}), m. a cat; [cf. {%nakta-%}
{%cārin.%}] {%—Naktañ-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. grown or
produced at night. {%—Naktan-dina, am,%} n. night
and day; ({%am%}), ind. by night and day. {%—Naktan-%}
{%divam,%} ind. by night and day. {%—Nakta-bhojana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘eating at night,’ supper. {%—Nakta-mukhā,%}
f. evening, night; (a wrong reading for {%nakta-%}
{%muṣā.%}) {%—Naktam-prabhava, as, ā, am,%} pro-
duced at night; (also read {%nakta-prabhava.%})
{%—Nakta-vrata, am,%} n. fasting by day and eating
at night; any religious rite or obligation observed
at night. {%—Naktāndha (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} blind
at night. {%—Naktāndhya (˚ta-an˚), am,%} n. blind-
ness at night. {%—Naktoṣāsā (˚ta-uṣ˚),%} f. du., Ved.
night and morning.
<LEND>

<L>23727<pc>0463-c<k1>naktan<k2>naktan
{%Naktan, a,%}¦ n., Ved. night.
<LEND>

<L>23728<pc>0463-c<k1>naktam<k2>naktam
{%Naktam,%}¦ ind. by night, at night. See under
1. {%nakta%} above.
<LEND>

<L>23729<pc>0463-c<k1>naktayA<k2>naktayA
{%Naktayā,%}¦ ind., Ved. at night.
<LEND>

<L>23730<pc>0463-c<k1>nakti<k2>nakti
{%Nakti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. night; [cf. Lith. <nsi>nakti-s,</nsi>
‘night.’]
<LEND>

<L>23731<pc>0463-c<k1>naka<k2>naka
{#naka#}¦ {%naka, as,%} m., N. of a son of Dāruka;
({%am%}), n. in {%Bharad-vājasya nakam,%} N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>23732<pc>0463-c<k1>nakiYcana<k2>nakiYcana
{#nakiYcana#}¦ {%na-kiñcana, as, ā, am,%} having
nothing, very poor, beggarly; [cf. {%a-kiñcana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23733<pc>0463-c<k1>nakim<k2>nakim
{%Na-kim,%}¦ ind. not, not at all; [cf. {%na-kīm%} and
{%mā-kīm.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23734<pc>0463-c<k1>nakis<k2>nakis
{%Na-kis,%}¦ ind. ({%kis%} is said to be an old nom. sing.
m. of {%ki,%} see {%kim%} and cf. Lat. <nsi>quis</nsi>), Ved. not, not
at all, never, (a little stronger than in the simple {%na%});
no one, nobody; (also written {%na-kir.%})
<LEND>

<L>23735<pc>0463-c<k1>nakIm<k2>nakIm
{%Na-kīm,%}¦ ind., Ved. not, not at all, never; [cf.
{%na-kim%} and {%mā-kīm.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23736<pc>0463-c<k1>nakuca<k2>nakuca
{#nakuca#}¦ {%nakuca, as,%} m. a various reading for
{%lakuca,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23737<pc>0463-c<k1>nakuwa<k2>nakuwa
{#nakuwa#}¦ {%nakuṭa, am,%} n. the nose; [cf. {%nar-%}
{%kuṭaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23738<pc>0463-c<k1>nakula<k2>nakula
{#nakula#}¦ {%nakula, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%na-kula,%} without
a family?), rejected from a family or race (?), disgraced (?),
coloured like the ichneumon?; ({%as%}), m. the Bengal
mungoose or Viverra Ichneumon (similar to the pole-
cat and hostile to mice and serpents, from the poison
of which it protects itself by a medicinal plant, cf.
{%gandha-n˚%} and {%jala-n˚%}); a son; N. of a Vedic
poet with the patronymic Vāma-deva or Vāma-devya
[Page0464-a+ 76]
or Vaiśvāmitra; N. of a Sāman ({%Nakulasya Vāma-%}
{%devasya preṅkhas%}); N. of a son of Pāṇḍu or
rather of the Aśvins by Pāṇḍu's wife Mādrī, he was
twin-brother of Saha-deva, and fourth of the five
Pāṇḍu princes; N. of a physician mentioned in the
Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa, author of a work on horses;
an epithet of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. a female ichneumon;
several plants, Salmalia Malabarica, {%= kukkuṭī;%} Nar-
dostachys Jatamansi, {%= jaṭāmāṃsī;%} saffron, {%= śaṅ-%}
{%khinī;%} a mystical N. of the letter {%h%} [cf. {%nakulīśa%}];
({%ā%}), f. an epithet of the wife of Śiva; (also read
{%a-kulā,%} q. v.) {%—Nakula-tva, am,%} n. the state or
condition of an ichneumon. {%—Nakulāḍhyā (˚la-%}
{%āḍh˚),%} f. a plant {%(= gandha-nākulī)%}. {%—Naku-%}
{%lāndha-tā (˚la-an˚),%} f. or {%nakulāndhya, am,%} n. a
kind of disease of the eye in which the eye becomes
like that of an ichneumon and all objects have a
variegated appearance; [cf. {%nākulāndhya.%}] {%—Na-%}
{%kulīśa (˚lī-īśa), as,%} or (according to others) {%na-%}
{%kuleśa (˚la-īśa), as,%} m. a form of Bhairava re-
garded as an attendant on or emanation from Śiva;
the letter {%h%} used mystically in the Tantras; [cf.
{%nakulī.%}] {%—Nakulīśa-yoga-pārāyaṇa, am,%} n., N.
of a Yoga work. {%—Nakuleṣṭā%} or {%nakuleṣṭakā%}
{%(˚la-iṣ˚),%} f. ‘liked by the ichneumon,’ a plant, {%=%}
{%nākulī, gandha-nākulī,%} (the mungoose if wounded
in a conflict with a poisonous snake is supposed to
prevent the effects of the venom by the use of
this plant.)
<LEND>

<L>23739<pc>0464-a<k1>nakulaka<k2>nakulaka
{%Nakulaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), an ornament
shaped like an ichneumon.
<LEND>

<L>23740<pc>0464-a<k1>nakk<k2>nakk
{#nakk#}¦ {%nakk,%} cl. 10. P. {%nakkayati,%} &c., to
destroy, kill, annihilate.
<LEND>

<L>23741<pc>0464-a<k1>nakta<k2>nakta<h>2
{#nakta#} 2¦. {%nakta%} or {%nakla%} (?), {%am,%} n. (for 1.
{%nakta%} see p. 463, col. 3), = <lang n="arabic">نقل</lang> N. of the fifth
Yoga (in astronomy).
<LEND>

<L>23742<pc>0464-a<k1>naktaka<k2>naktaka
{#naktaka#}¦ {%naktaka, as,%} m. dirty or ragged
cloth; a rag, wiper, handkerchief, &c.; (a various
reading for {%laktaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>23743<pc>0464-a<k1>naktamAla<k2>naktamAla
{#naktamAla#}¦ {%naktamāla%} or {%naktamālaka, as,%}
m. the tree Pongamia Glabra or Dalbergia Arborea
or Galeduba Arborea.
<LEND>

<L>23744<pc>0464-a<k1>nakra<k2>nakra
{#nakra#}¦ {%nakra, as,%} m. (derived in Pāṇ. VI. 3,
75, fr. {%na-kra%}), a crocodile, an alligator [cf. {%nākra%}];
the sign of the zodiac Scorpio; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. the
nose; (according to others) a peculiar disease of the
nose {%(= nāsā-jvara, āhaka-jvara); (am),%} n. the
upper timber of a door-frame; ({%ā%}), f. a swarm of
bees or wasps. {%—Nakra-rāj, ṭ,%} or {%nakra-rāja, as,%}
or {%nakra-hāraka, as,%} m. ‘king of the Nakras,
seizer of the Nakras,’ a shark or any other large sea
animal.
<LEND>

<L>23745<pc>0464-a<k1>nakz<k2>nakz
{#nakz#}¦ {%nakṣ%} (connected with rt. 1. {%naś,%}
cf. {%inakṣ%}), cl. 1. P. A. {%nakṣati, -te,%}
&c., Ved. to come near, come to, approach, visit,
meet with, attain, gain, obtain; [cf. Lat. <nsi>nanciscor,</nsi>
<nsi>nactum.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23746<pc>0464-a<k1>nakzat<k2>nakzat
{%Nakṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ approaching. {%—Nakṣad-%}
{%dābha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. striking down any one that
approaches; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>23747<pc>0464-a<k1>nakzatra<k2>nakzatra
{%Nakṣatra, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the above rt. in the sense
of ‘coming or ascending;’ derived by some fr.
{%nakṣa = nakta + tra,%} i. e. guarding the night, but
this would not apply to the sun; also by some fr.
{%na + kṣatra,%} decaying ?), a star in general (also
applied to the sun), a constellation, an asterism in the
moon's path, a lunar mansion, of which, according
to the earlier reckoning, twenty-seven are enume-
rated, but in the later astrology more usually twenty-
eight, distinct in name, figure, and number of stars,
(the usual names are as follow: 1. Śraviṣṭhā or
Dhaniṣṭhā; 2. Śata-bhiṣaj; 3. Pūrva-Bhādra-
padā; 4. Uttara-Bhādrapadā; 5. Revatī; 6. Aśvinī;
7. Bharaṇī; 8. Kṛttikā; 9. Rohiṇī or Brāhmī;
10. Mṛga-śiras or Āgrahāyaṇī; 11. Ārdrā; 12.
Punar-vasū or Yāmakau; 13. Puṣya or Sidhya;
[Page0464-b+ 81]
14. Āśleṣā; 15. Maghā; 16. Pūrva-Phalgunī;
17. Uttara-Phalgunī; 18. Hasta; 19. Citrā; 20.
Svātī; 21. Viśākhā or Rādhā; 22. Anurādhā; 23.
Jyeṣṭhā; 24. Mūla; 25. Pūrvā Aṣāḍhā; 26.
Uttarā Aṣāḍhā; 27. Abhijit; 28. Śravaṇa. In the
Taittirīya-Brāhmaṇa, Śraviṣṭhās is given for 1;
Pūrve Proṣṭha-padās for 3; Uttare Proṣṭha-padās
for 4; Aśva-yujau for 6; Apabharaṇīs or Bharaṇīs
for 7; Kṛttikās for 8; Invakās or Mṛga-śīrṣam
for 10; Bāhū and Ārdrā for 11; Tiṣyas for
13; Āśleṣās or Āśreṣās for 14; Maghās for
15; Pūrve Phalgunī or Phalgunīs for 16; Uttare
Phalgunī for 17; Niṣṭyā or in the Taittirīya-
Saṃhitā also Svātī for 20; Viśākhe for 21; Anu-
rādhās for 22; Rohiṇī or Jyeṣṭha-ghnī or Jyeṣṭhā
for 23; Mūla-barhaṇī or in the Taittirīya-Saṃhitā
also Vicṛtau for 24; Pūrvā Aṣāḍhās for 25;
Uttarā Aṣāḍhās or Abhijit for 26; Śroṇā for 27:
the names of the months Māgha, Phālguna, Caitra,
Vaiśākha, Jyeṣṭha, Āṣāḍha, Śrāvaṇa, Bhādra,
Āśvina, Kārttika, Mārgaśīrṣa, and Pauṣa were
derived from the names of the corresponding twelve
lunar mansions; according to some, certain Nakṣatras
are called {%dhruvāṇi,%} fixed, viz. Rohiṇī and the three
double asterisms Uttara-Phalgunī, Uttarā Aṣāḍhā,
and Uttara-Bhādrapadā. In the Vedas the asterisms
are considered to be the abodes of the gods or the
visible forms of pious persons after death, see Sāyaṇa
on Ṛg-veda I. 50, 2; in the later mythology the
lunar mansions are regarded as the wives of the
moon and daughters of Dakṣa; according to the
Jainas, the sun, moon, Grahas or planets, Nakṣatras,
and Tārās or stars form the Jyotiṣkas); a pearl;
[cf. {%deva-n˚%} and {%yama-n˚.%}] {%—Nakṣatra-kalpa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Pari-śiṣṭa belonging to the Atharva-
veda and treating of the lunar mansions. {%—Nakṣa-%}
{%tra-kānti-vistāra, as,%} m. ‘spreading brilliance (like
that) of the Nakṣatras or constellations,’ the white
Yāvanāla flower. {%—Nakṣatra-kūrma-cāra, as,%} m.,
N. of a chapter of Bhaṭṭotpala's commentary to Varā-
ha-mihira's Bṛhat-Saṃhitā. {%—Nakṣatrakūrma-vi-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. distribution of countries supposed to
be under the dominion of the different lunar man-
sions. {%—Nakṣatra-graha-yuty-adhikāra, as,%} m.
‘the chapter of the conjunction of asterisms and
planets,’ N. of a chapter of the Sūrya-siddhānta.
{%—Nakṣatra-cakra, am,%} n. a particular diagram
for astrological calculations; the sphere of the fixed
stars; the lunar asterisms collectively. {%—Nakṣatra-%}
{%cintāmaṇi, is,%} m. ‘Nakṣatra gem’ (see {%cintā-%}
{%maṇi%}), N. of a work on lunar mansions. {%—Nakṣa-%}
{%tra-jā, ās,%} m., Ved. ‘star-born,’ son of the stars.
{%—Nakṣatra-tārā-rājāditya (˚ja-ād˚), as,%} m.
the sun as king of the stars and lunar asterisms;
(with Buddhists) N. of a particular kind of religious
meditation. {%—Nakṣatra-darśa, as,%} m., Ved. ‘star-
gazer,’ one who looks at the stars. {%—Nakṣatra-%}
{%dāna-vidhi, is,%} m. ‘rules about the Nakṣatra
offering,’ N. of the 153rd chapter of the Bhaviṣ-
yottara-Purāṇa. {%—Nakṣatra-dohada-śāntika, am,%}
n., N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Nakṣa-%}
{%tra-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of the lunar mansions,’ the
moon. {%—Nakṣatra-nirṇaya, as,%} m. ‘determin-
ation of the Nakṣatras,’ N. of a chapter of the
Tantra-sāra; N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva.
{%—Nakṣatra-nemi, is,%} m. the pole star; the
moon; an epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%is%}), f. the last of
the asterisms, Revatī, containing thirty-two stars.
{%—Nakṣatra-nyāsa, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the
Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Nakṣatra-pa, as,%} m. ‘protector
or lord of the lunar asterisms,’ the moon. {%—Nakṣa-%}
{%tra-patha, as,%} m. ‘the path of the Nakṣatras or
stars,’ the starry sky. {%—Nakṣatra-pāṭhaka, as,%}
m. ‘reader of the stars,’ an astrologer. {%—Nakṣatra-%}
{%puruṣa, as,%} m. (in astrology) the figure of a man's
body on the limbs of which the various lunar aste-
risms are distributed (e. g. Mūla on the feet, Jyeṣṭhā
on the neck, &c., cf. {%kāla-puruṣa;%} in this sense
also written {%nakṣatra-puruṣaka%}); a ceremony
in which such a figure is worshipped; N. of the
eightieth chapter of the Vāmana-Purāṇa. {%—Nakṣa- %}
[Page0464-c+ 80]
{%trapuruṣa-vrata, am,%} n. ‘the vow Nakṣatra-
puruṣa,’ N. of the fifty-third chapter of the Matsya-
Purāṇa. {%—Nakṣatra-pūjita, as, ā, am,%} ‘star-
honoured,’ favoured by the constellations. {%—Nakṣa-%}
{%tra-prakaraṇa, am,%} n. ‘the Nakṣatra chapter,’ N.
of the second chapter of the Cintā-maṇi Śāraṇikā
by Daśa-bala. {%—Nakṣatra-phala, am,%} n. ‘the
result obtained from the observation or influence of
the lunar mansions,’ N. of a work on the lunar
mansions. {%—Nakṣatra-bhakti, is,%} f. ‘distribution
of the Nakṣatras or explanation of the relation in
which they stand to each other,’ N. of the fifteenth
Adhyāya of Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-Saṃhitā; [cf.
{%nakṣatra-vyūha.%}] {%—Nakṣatra-mārga, as,%} m.
the path of the Nakṣatras. {%—Nakṣatra-mālā,%} f. a
ring or group of stars; the table of the asterisms in
the moon's path, the asterisms collectively; a necklace
containing twenty-seven pearls; a kind of dance.
{%—Nakṣatra-yājaka, as, ā, am,%} offering oblations
to the lunar mansions; [cf. {%graha-yajña.%}] {%—Nakṣa-%}
{%tra-yoga, as,%} m. the conjunction of the moon with
the lunar mansions. {%—Nakṣatra-yogin, ī, inī, i,%}
connected with the lunar mansions; ({%inyas%}), f. pl.
the chief stars in the lunar asterisms. {%—Nakṣatra-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. ‘the king of the asterisms,’ the moon;
N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Nakṣatrarāja-vikrīḍita,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘moon-sport,’ N. of a particular kind of
abstract contemplation. {%—Nakṣatra-loka, as,%} m.
the starry region, the firmament; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
world of the Nakṣatras. {%—Nakṣatra-vartman, a,%}
n. ‘the path of the Nakṣatras,’ the sky. {%—Nakṣa-%}
{%tra-vidyā,%} f. ‘star-knowledge,’ astronomy. {%—Nakṣa-%}
{%tra-vīthī,%} f. the path of the Nakṣatras. {%—Nakṣatra-%}
{%vṛṣṭi, is,%} f. ‘star-shower,’ falling or shooting stars.
{%—Nakṣatra-vyūha, as,%} m. {%= nakṣatra-bhakti,%}
q. v. {%—Nakṣatra-śavas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. equal to
the Nakṣatras in number?; (Sāy.) going to the
gods. {%—Nakṣatra-śuddhi-prakaraṇa, am,%} n., N.
of the first chapter of the Vivāha-vṛndāvana by Keśa-
vārka, a work on the different lunar mansions re-
garded as favourable or unfavourable to marriage.
{%—Nakṣatra-samuccaya, as,%} m. ‘the assemblage
of the Nakṣatras,’ N. of an astrological work by Lalla-
vārāha-suta. {%—Nakṣatra-sūcaka, as,%} m. ‘star-indi-
cator,’ an astrologer. {%—Nakṣatreśa (˚ra-īśa), as,%}
m. ‘lord of the Nakṣatras,’ the moon. {%—Nakṣatre-%}
{%ṣṭakā (˚ra-iṣ˚),%} f., Ved., N. of certain sacrificial
bricks. {%—Nakṣatreṣṭi (˚ra-iṣ˚), is,%} f. a sacrifice
or oblation to the asterisms.
<LEND>

<L>23748<pc>0464-c<k1>nakzatrin<k2>nakzatrin
{%Nakṣatrin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘bearing the stars (?),’ an
epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>23749<pc>0464-c<k1>nakzatriya<k2>nakzatriya
{%Nakṣatriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
the Nakṣatras or to the stars in general, containing
a number equal to that of the Nakṣatras, i. e. twenty-
seven.
<LEND>

<L>23750<pc>0464-c<k1>nakzya<k2>nakzya
{%Nakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be approached or attained.
<LEND>

<L>23751<pc>0464-c<k1>naK<k2>naK
{#naK#}¦ {%nakh%} or {%naṅkh,%} cl. 4. and 1. P.
{%nakhyati, nakhati%} and {%naṅkhati,%} &c.,
Ved. to move, go.
<LEND>

<L>23752<pc>0464-c<k1>naKa<k2>naKa
{#naKa#}¦ {%nakha, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%nah,%} perhaps fr. {%nagh%} for rt. {%aṅgh = aṅk,%} to
move in a curve; in Pāṇ. VI. 3, 75, derived fr. {%na +%}
{%kha%}), a nail of a finger or of a toe, a claw, talon, the
spur of a cock; an expression for the number twenty;
({%as%}), m. a part, portion; ({%am, ī%}), n. f. a particular
perfume, a dried substance of a brown colour and of
the shape of a nail, apparently a dried shell-fish ({%=%}
{%śukti%}) used as a perfume, see {%dhūpya; (ī),%} f. a vege-
table perfume different from the above though known
by the same name, {%nakhī;%} [cf. Lith. <nsi>naga-s,</nsi>
‘nail;’ Slav. <nsi>nogŭ-tĭ</nsi> = Russ. <nsi>nogotĭ;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔ-νυξ;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>unguis, ungula;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>nagal;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>naegel;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>ionga,</nsi> perhaps for <nsi>nionga.</nsi>]
{%—Nakha-kuṭṭa, as,%} m. ‘a nail-cutter,’ a barber.
{%—Nakha-khādin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘eating the nails,’
biting the nails. {%—Nakha-guccha-phalā,%} f. {%= nakha-%}
{%niṣpāva%}. {%—Nakha-cheda, as,%} m. nail-paring, nail-
cutting. {%—Nakha-jāha, am,%} n. the root of a nail.
{%—Nakha-dāraṇa, as,%} m. ‘tearing with the nails,’
a falcon, a hawk. {%—Nakha-nikṛntana, as%} or {%am,%}
[Page0465-a+ 80]
m. or n. (?), a pair of nail-scissors. {%—Nakha-niṣ-%}
{%pāva, as,%} m. or {%nakha-niṣpāvikā%} or {%nakha-%}
{%niṣpāvī,%} f. a kind of pulse. {%—Nakha-pada, am,%}
n. the mark of a finger-nail, a scratch. {%—Nakha-%}
{%parṇī,%} f. a species of plant {%(= vṛścikā)%}. {%—Nakha-%}
{%puñja-phalā,%} f. {%= nakha-niṣpāva%}. {%—Nakha-%}
{%puṣpī,%} f. a species of grass {%(= pṛkkā)%}. {%—Nakha-%}
{%pūrvikā%} or {%nakha-phalinī,%} f. {%= nakha-niṣpāva.%}
{%—Nakha-bhinna, as, ā, am,%} ‘nail-divided,’ scratched
or torn off with a nail. {%—Nakha-muca, as,%} m. ‘nail-
looser,’ a bow. {%—Nakham-paca, as, ā, am,%} nail-
scalding, nail-scorching. {%—Nakha-rajanī,%} f. a species
of plant and its fruit. {%—Nakha-rañjanī,%} f. a nail-
parer. {%—Nakha-lekhaka, as,%} m. a nail-painter.
{%—Nakha-lekhā,%} f. a scratch; nail-painting. {%—Na-%}
{%kha-vilekha, as,%} m. a scratch; nail-painting (?).
{%—Nakha-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} having venom in the
nails or claws. {%—Nakha-viṣkira, as, ā, am,%} tearing
or rending with the claws; ({%as%}), m. a bird of prey.
{%—Nakha-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a species of plant {%(=%}
{%nīla-vṛkṣa)%}. {%—Nakha-vraṇa, am,%} n. ‘nail-wound,’
a scratch. {%—Nakha-śaṅkha, as,%} m. a small shell.
{%—Nakhāṃśu (˚kha-aṃ˚), us,%} m. elegance or bright-
ness of the finger-nails. {%—Nakhāṅka (˚kha-aṅ˚),%}
{%am,%} n. ‘nail-mark,’ a scratch; a sort of perfume {%(=%}
{%vyāghra-nakhī)%}. {%—Nakhāṅga (˚kha-aṅ˚), am,%} n.
a kind of perfume {%(= nalī)%}. {%—Nakhā-nakhi,%} ind.
nail against nail, (a fight with) mutual scratching,
scratching one another. {%—Nakhāyudha (˚kha-āy˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘claw-armed,’ using the nails or claws as
weapons; ({%as%}), m. an animal which uses its claws
as weapons, any beast or bird having talons; a tiger;
a lion; a cock; a monkey, &c. {%—Nakhāyudha-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the state of being claw-armed or of using claws
as weapons. {%—Nakhāri (˚kha-ari), is,%} m., N. of
one of the attendants of Śiva. {%—Nakhāli, is,%} m. or
{%nakhālikā (˚kha-āl˚),%} f. a small shell; [cf. {%nakha-%}
{%śaṅkha.%}] {%—Nakhāśin (˚kha-āś˚), ī,%} m. ‘eating
with claws,’ an owl (as using its claws in feeding).
<LEND>

<L>23753<pc>0465-a<k1>naKaka<k2>naKaka
{%Nakhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga-rāja.
<LEND>

<L>23754<pc>0465-a<k1>naKara<k2>naKara
{%Nakhara, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaped like a claw, any
pointed and curved instrument (as a knife, sword,
&c.); ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. a finger-nail, claw; ({%ī%}),
f. a kind of perfume {%(= nakhī, = kṣudra-nakhī).%}
{%—Nakharāyudha (˚ra-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘claw-
armed,’ using claws as weapons; ({%as%}), m. a lion,
tiger, any beast of prey; a cock. {%—Nakharāhva%}
{%(˚ra-ah˚), as,%} m. fragrant oleander ({%= kara-%}
{%vīra%}).
<LEND>

<L>23755<pc>0465-a<k1>naKAlu<k2>naKAlu
{%Nakhālu, us,%}¦ m. {%= nakha-vṛkṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23756<pc>0465-a<k1>naKin<k2>naKin
{%Nakhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having nails, armed with claws
or talons, clawed; thorny, prickly; ({%ī%}), m. an
animal or a beast with claws, especially the lion.
<LEND>

<L>23757<pc>0465-a<k1>naga<k2>naga
{#naga#}¦ {%na-ga, as,%} m. (fr. {%na-ga,%} not moving,
or said to be fr. rt. 1. {%dah%} through change of {%d%} into
{%n,%} Uṇādi-s. V. 61), a mountain; a symbolical ex-
pression for the number seven (because of the seven
principal mountains; cf. {%kula-parvata%}); a tree; a
plant in general; a serpent; the sun; ({%as, ā, am%}),
not moving, immovable; [cf. {%a-ga.%}] {%—Naga-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} mountain, mountaineer; ({%as%}), m. ‘mountain-
born,’ an elephant; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant {%(=%}
{%kṣudra-pāṣāṇa-bhedā)%}. {%—Naga-nadī,%} f. ‘moun-
tain-river,’ N. of a river. {%—Naga-nandinī,%} f. an
epithet of the goddess Durgā (‘daughter of the
mountain,’ Durgā being in one of her characters
the daughter of the personified Himālaya). {%—Naga-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘chief of mountains,’ the Himālaya range
of mountains. {%—Naga-bhid, t,%} m. ‘rock-splitter’ or
‘tree-splitter,’ a species of plant ({%= pāṣāṇa-bheda-%}
{%na%}), Plectanthrus Scutellaroides; an axe; a crow; Indra.
{%—Naga-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} ‘mountain-born,’ mountain,
mountaineer; ({%ūs%}), m. a species of plant, {%= kṣudra-%}
{%pāṣāṇa-bhedā,%} (more probably fem. like {%naga-jā.%})
{%—Naga-mūrdhan, ā,%} m. the crest or brow of a
mountain. {%—Naga-randhra-kara, as,%} m. ‘rending
the mountains,’ an epithet of Kārttikeya. {%—Naga-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing mountains, abounding in
trees. {%—Naga-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘whose vehicle is
a mountain, mountain-borne,’ an epithet of Śiva.
[Page0465-b+ 80]
{%—Naga-svarūpiṇī,%} f. a kind of metre consisting
of four lines of eight syllables each. {%—Nagāgra%}
{%(˚ga-ag˚), am,%} n. the summit or top of a mountain.
{%—Nagāṭana (˚ga-aṭ˚), as,%} m. ‘moving about on
trees,’ a monkey. {%—Nagādhipa (˚ga-adh˚), as,%} m.
‘chief of mountains,’ the Himālaya. {%—Nagādhirāja%}
{%(˚ga-adh˚), as,%} m. = the preceding. {%—Nagāri (˚ga-%}
{%ari), is,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Nagāvāsa (˚ga-āv˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘living on trees,’ a peacock. {%—Nagāśraya%}
{%(˚ga-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} living in or frequenting moun-
tains; ({%as%}), m. a species of bulbous plant growing
on mountains {%(= hasti-kanda)%}. {%—Nagāhvaya (˚ga-%}
{%āh˚), as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Nagendra (˚ga-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘chief of mountains,’ the Himālaya, Kailāsa.
{%—Nageśa (˚ga-īśa), as,%} m. ‘chief of mountains,’
N. of a particular mountain. {%—Nagocchrāya (˚ga-%}
{%uc˚), as,%} m. heighth or elevation of a mountain.
{%—Nagaukas (˚ga-ok˚), ās,%} m. ‘inhabiting a moun-
tain or tree;’ a lion; the fabulous animal Śarabha;
a bird in general; a crow; [cf. {%agaukas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23758<pc>0465-b<k1>nagaRA<k2>nagaRA
{#nagaRA#}¦ {%nagaṇā,%} f. a plant, Cardiospermum
Halicacabum; (also read {%nagnā.%})
<LEND>

<L>23759<pc>0465-b<k1>nagara<k2>nagara
{#nagara#}¦ {%nagara, am, ī%} (fr. {%na-ga?%}), n. f. a
town, city, (often appended to the names of cities in
India or standing alone as a name.) According to
Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 39, the initial {%n%} cannot be cerebralized
[cf. {%giri-nagara%}]; at the end of adj. comps. the
fem. may end in {%ā%} (e. g. {%sa-grāma-nagarā medinī,%}
the earth with its villages and cities). {%—Nagara-%}
{%kāka, as,%} m. ‘a crow in a town,’ an expression of
contempt; [cf. {%nagara-vāyasa.%}] {%—Nagara-koṭi,%}
N. of a place; N. of a town at the foot of the Himā-
laya, Nagar-kot. {%—Nagara-ghāta, as, ā, am,%} town-
destroying; ({%as%}), m. an elephant. {%—Nagara-ghā-%}
{%taka, as,%} m. the destroyer of a city. {%—Nagara-jana,%}
{%as,%} m. towns-folk; a citizen. {%—Nagara-dvāra, am,%}
n. the gate of a town, city-gate. {%—Nagara-dhana-vi-%}
{%hāra, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist monastery. {%—Nagara-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. the chief of a town. {%—Nagara-pura,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Nagara-pradakṣiṇā,%} f.
carrying an idol round a city in procession; [cf. {%pra-%}
{%dakṣiṇā.%}] {%—Nagara-prānta, as,%} m. the outskirts
of a town. {%—Nagara-mardin, ī,%} m. ‘town-crusher,’
N. of a man. {%—Nagara-mālin, ī, inī, i,%} garlanded
with cities. {%—Nagara-mustā,%} f. {%= nagarotthā;%} [cf.
{%nāgara-mustā.%}] {%—Nagara-rakṣā,%} f. superintend-
ence or government of a town. {%—Nagararakṣā-%}
{%dhikṛta (˚kṣā-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} appointed to
the government of a town. {%—Nagara-rakṣin,%}
{%ī,%} m. the governor or superintendent of a town,
civic-guard, town-watchman. {%—Nagara-vāyasa, as,%}
m. {%= nagara-kāka%}. {%—Nagara-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} in-
habiting towns, dwelling in cities, citizen. {%—Nagara-%}
{%vāhya, as, ā, am,%} situated without the town. {%—Naga-%}
{%ra-sammita, as, ā, am,%} equal to a town. {%—Nagara-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} city-dwelling; a resident in a city,
a townsman, citizen, burgess. {%—Nagara-svarūpiṇī,%}
f. a species of the Anu-ṣṭubh metre. {%—Nagara-%}
{%hāra, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), ‘town-taking,’ N. of
a kingdom. {%—Nagarādhikṛta (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m.
the superintendent or governor of a town. {%—Nagarā-%}
{%dhipa (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m. or {%nagarādhipati, is,%}
m. the chief magistrate of a town, head police-officer.
{%—Nagarādhyakṣa (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m. the over-
seer or superintendent of a town. {%—Nagarābhyāśa%}
{%(˚ra-abh˚), as,%} m. the neighbourhood of a city.
{%—Nagarī-nirodha, as,%} m., N. of the sixty-third
chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa or second part of the
Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Nagarī-yukti, is,%} f., N. of a
chapter of the Yukti-kalpa-taru ascribed to king
Bhoja. {%—Nagarī-rakṣin, ī,%} m. {%= nagara-rakṣin.%}
{%—Nagarī-vaka, as,%} m. ‘town-crane,’ a crow.
{%—Nagarotthā (˚ra-utthā),%} f. a species of plant, {%=%}
{%nagara-mustā;%} [cf. {%nāgarotthā.%}] {%—Nagaropānta%}
{%(˚ra-up˚), am,%} n. suburb, skirts of a town. {%—Naga-%}
{%raukas (˚ra-ok˚), ās,%} m. the inhabitant of a town,
townsman. {%—Nagarauṣadhi (˚ra-oṣ˚), is,%} f. the
plantain, Musa Sapientum ({%= kadalī%}).
<LEND>

<L>23760<pc>0465-b<k1>nagarAya<k2>nagarAya
{%Nagarāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%nagarāyate,%} &c., to have
the appearance of a town, look like a town.
<LEND>
[Page0465-c+ 72]

<L>23761<pc>0465-c<k1>nagarin<k2>nagarin
{%Nagarin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>23762<pc>0465-c<k1>nagarIya<k2>nagarIya
{%Nagarīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a town, civic,
city, urban.
<LEND>

<L>23763<pc>0465-c<k1>nagna<k2>nagna
{#nagna#}¦ {%nagna.%} See under rt. {%naj%} below.
<LEND>

<L>23764<pc>0465-c<k1>nagnahu<k2>nagnahu
{#nagnahu#}¦ {%nagnahu, us,%} m. or {%nagnahū, ūs,%} m.
ferment, a drug used for fermenting spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>23765<pc>0465-c<k1>nagnA<k2>nagnA<h>1
{#nagnA#} 1¦. {%nagnā,%} f. (for 2. {%nagnā%} see {%nagna%}
below), Ved. speech; (a various reading for {%nanā,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>23766<pc>0465-c<k1>naGamAra<k2>naGamAra
{#naGamAra#}¦ {%nagha-māra, as,%} m. (fr. {%nagha,%} a
disease? and {%māra%}), Ved. an expression for the
plant {%kuṣṭha.%}
<LEND>

<L>23767<pc>0465-c<k1>naGAriza<k2>naGAriza
{%Naghā-riṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. an epithet of
plants.
<LEND>

<L>23768<pc>0465-c<k1>naGuza<k2>naGuza
{#naGuza#}¦ {%naghuṣa, as,%} m. {%= nahuṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23769<pc>0465-c<k1>naNK<k2>naNK
{#naNK#}¦ {%naṅkh.%} See rt. {%nakh,%} p. 464, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23770<pc>0465-c<k1>naNga<k2>naNga
{#naNga#}¦ {%naṅga, as,%} m. a lover, paramour.
<LEND>

<L>23771<pc>0465-c<k1>naciketas<k2>naciketas
{#naciketas#}¦ {%na-ciketas, ās,%} or {%na-ciketa, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Vājaśravasa; [cf. {%nāciketa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23772<pc>0465-c<k1>nacira<k2>nacira
{#nacira#}¦ {%na-cira, as, ā, am,%} not long (in time),
not of long duration; ({%am%}), ind. not long, for
a short time; ({%eṇa%} or {%āt%} or {%āya%}), ind. in no long
time, in a short time, quickly, speedily, shortly, soon;
[cf. {%a-cira%} and {%māciram.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23773<pc>0465-c<k1>nacyuta<k2>nacyuta
{#nacyuta#}¦ {%na-cyuta = a-cyuta,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23774<pc>0465-c<k1>naj<k2>naj
{#naj#}¦ {%naj%} (allied to rt. {%laj = lajj,%} of which
it appears to be another form only found in
the past pass. part. {%nagna%} below), cl. 1. A. {%najate,%}
&c., to be ashamed, be modest or bashful.
<LEND>

<L>23775<pc>0465-c<k1>nagna<k2>nagna
{%Nagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ naked, nude, bare; uncultivated,
uninhabited, desolate; ({%as%}), m. a naked mendicant;
a N. of Śiva; a hypocrite (whose nakedness is a
mere pretence); a Buddhist mendicant, {%= kṣapa-%}
{%ṇaka;%} a bard accompanying an army; (2. {%nagnā%}),
f. a naked, wanton woman; a girl before menstru-
ation (and therefore allowed to go naked; cf. {%nag-%}
{%nikā%}); the plant Cardiospermum Halicacabum; [cf.
{%nagaṇā,%} 1. {%nagnā%} above; Lith. <nsi>nōga-s,</nsi> ‘naked;’
Russ. <nsi>nagiĭ;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>nago-ta,</nsi> ‘nakedness;’ Goth.
<nsi>naqvaths;</nsi> Old Iceland. <nsi>nakt-r;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>nacud,</nsi>
<nsi>nacod, genacyan;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>nachat;</nsi> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>nackt;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>nochd;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>nudus.</nsi>] {%—Nagnaṅ-%}
{%karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} making naked. {%—Nagna-jit, t,%}
m., N. of a prince of the Gandhāras, father of one
of Kṛṣṇa's wives; N. of an author of a work on
architecture; of a poet. {%—Nagna-tā,%} f. or {%nagna-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. nakedness, nudity. {%—Nagnam-bha-%}
{%viṣṇu, us, us, u,%} or {%nagnam-bhāvuka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} becoming naked, uncovering one's self in a
shameless manner. {%—Nagna-vṛtti, is,%} f. ‘the men-
dicant's commentary,’ N. of a commentary on the
Uṇādi-sūtras. {%—Nagna-vrata-dhara, as,%} m. ‘observ-
ing the vow of a naked mendicant,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Nagnāṭa%} or {%nagnāṭaka (˚na-aṭ˚), as,%} m. a man
who wanders about naked, especially a Buddhist or
Jaina religious mendicant. {%—Nagnī-karaṇa, am,%} n.
making naked, undressing, stripping. {%—Nagnī-kṛ,%}
cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to render
naked, to convert into a naked mendicant. {%—Nagnī-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made naked, undressed, stripped;
converted into a naked mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>23776<pc>0465-c<k1>nagnaka<k2>nagnaka
{%Nagnaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ naked, wanton; ({%as%}),
m. a naked mendicant, especially a Buddhist or Jaina
ascetic; a bard; ({%ikā%}), f. a naked or wanton woman;
a girl before menstruation.
<LEND>

<L>23777<pc>0465-c<k1>nagnikA<k2>nagnikA
{%Nagnikā,%}¦ f. a naked woman; a girl before men-
struation or about ten years old.
<LEND>

<L>23778<pc>0465-c<k1>naY<k2>naY
{#naY#}¦ {%nañ,%} ind. (in grammar) the technical
term for the negative particle {%na,%} q. v., negation.
{%—Nañ-artha-nirṇaya, as,%} m. ‘inquiry into the
meaning of the negative particle,’ N. of a chapter of
the grammatical work Vaiyākarṇa-bhūṣaṇa-sāra by
Koṇḍa-bhaṭṭa. {%—Nañ-vāda-ṭippaṇī,%} f. ‘commentary
[Page0466-a+ 78]
to the chapter of negation,’ N. of a grammatical work
by Raghu-deva.
<LEND>

<L>23779<pc>0466-a<k1>naw<k2>naw
{#naw#}¦ {%naṭ%} (a corrupted form of the original
rt. {%nṛt%}), cl. 1. P. {%naṭati, nanāṭa, naṭiṣ-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to dance, to dance or perform as an actor,
to act; to injure by any deceptive trick; cl. 10. P.
{%nāṭayati,%} &c., to represent anything (acc.) drama-
tically or by pantomime; to act; to drop or fall; to
injure; to speak or shine.
<LEND>

<L>23780<pc>0466-a<k1>nawa<k2>nawa
{%Naṭa, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%nam,%} Uṇādi-s.
IV. 104), a dancer, mime, actor, &c.; (in modern
times) N. for a particular caste, the son of a degraded
Kṣatriya by a woman of the second caste; the tree
Calosanthes Indica [cf. {%kuṭannaṭa%}]; Jonesia Asoka
({%= aśoka%}); a sort of reed, Arundo Tibialis, or latterly
called Arundo Karka ({%= kiṣku-parvan%}); a subor-
dinate mode of music; N. of a man who with his
brother Bhaṭa built a Vihāra; ({%ā%}), f. a species of
shrub, Cæsalpina Banducella; ({%ī%}), f. an actress, a
dancer, a Nauch girl; a courtezan, harlot; a species
of fragrant plant ({%= nalī%}); red arsenic; N. of a
Rāgiṇī. {%—Naṭa-gati, is,%} f. a kind of metre con-
sisting of four times fourteen syllables. {%—Naṭa-%}
{%caryā,%} f. the performance of an actor. {%—Naṭa-tā,%}
f. the office or state of a player, condition of an
actor. {%—Naṭa-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m. a Rāga or mode
of music, (according to some) the sixth, (or according
to others) a subdivision of that called Dīpaka or of
Megha. {%—Naṭa-pattrikā,%} f. Solanum Melongena.
{%—Naṭa-parṇa, am,%} n. the skin (?). {%—Naṭa-bha-%}
{%ṭika-vihāra, as,%} m. ‘the temple of Naṭa and
Bhaṭa,’ N. of a temple on the mountain Uru-muṇḍa.
{%—Naṭa-bhūṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘actor's ornament or
pigment,’ orpiment. {%—Naṭa-maṇḍana, am,%} n.
‘actor's ornament,’ yellow orpiment. {%—Naṭa-raṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘actor's’ stage, a theatrical stage,’ a meta-
phorical N. for anything illusory. {%—Naṭa-vaṭu, us,%}
m. ({%vaṭu%} said to be fr. rt. {%vaṭ%}), the son of an actor,
a young actor. {%—Naṭa-vara, as,%} m. a chief dancer
or actor. {%—Naṭa-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. a chief or excel-
lent dancer or actor. {%—Naṭa-sañjñaka, as,%} m. yellow
orpiment; an actor, a dancer, &c.; [cf. {%naṭa-bhū-%}
{%ṣaṇa%} and {%naṭa-maṇḍana.%}] {%—Naṭa-sūtra, am,%} n.
rules or directions for actors. {%—Naṭāntikā (˚ṭa-an˚),%}
f. shame, modesty; (also read {%naṭāndhikā.%}) {%—Naṭī-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. the son of a dancing girl. {%—Naṭeśvara%}
{%(˚ṭa-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘the lord of dancers,’ an epithet
of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>23781<pc>0466-a<k1>nawaka<k2>nawaka
{%Naṭaka, as,%}¦ m. an actor. {%—Naṭaka-melaka, am,%}
n. ‘the company of actors,’ N. of a comedy.
<LEND>

<L>23782<pc>0466-a<k1>nawana<k2>nawana
{%Naṭana, am,%}¦ n. (derived fr. {%nartana%}), the act of
dancing or representing dramatically, pantomime,
&c.; a dance.
<LEND>

<L>23783<pc>0466-a<k1>nawita<k2>nawita
{%Naṭita, am,%}¦ n. acting, representation.
<LEND>

<L>23784<pc>0466-a<k1>nawI<k2>nawI
{%Naṭī,%}¦  f. an actress, &c. See under {%naṭa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>23785<pc>0466-a<k1>nawyA<k2>nawyA
{%Naṭyā,%}¦ f. a company of actors.
<LEND>

<L>23786<pc>0466-a<k1>nawwapawwagrAma<k2>nawwapawwagrAma
{#nawwapawwagrAma#}¦ {%naṭṭa-paṭṭa-grāma, as,%} m., N.
of a village.
<LEND>

<L>23787<pc>0466-a<k1>naq<k2>naq
{#naq#}¦ {%naḍ%} (connected with rt. {%naṭ = nṛt%}),
cl. 10. P. {%nāḍayati,%} &c., to fall.
<LEND>

<L>23788<pc>0466-a<k1>naqa<k2>naqa
{%Naḍa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (the n. does not seem to
occur), a species of reed, Arundo Tibialis or Karka;
(Ved. written {%naḷa;%} cf. {%nala%}); ({%as%}), m. a particular
tribe whose employment is making a sort of glass
bracelets; N. of a prince with the patronymic
Naiṣidha; (according to the commentator) = Nala
Naiṣadha; N. of a Nāga; [cf. Lith. <nsi>néndre†,</nsi> ‘a
reed.’] {%—Naḍa-prāya, as, ā, am,%} abounding in
reeds. {%—Naḍa-bhakta, am,%} n. a place abounding in
reeds. {%—Naḍa-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of reeds,
made of reeds. {%—Naḍa-mīna, as,%} m. a small fish, a
species of sprat frequenting reedy places {%(= nala-%}
{%mīna)%}. {%—Naḍa-vana, am,%} n. a thicket of reeds; N.
of a place. {%—Naḍa-saṃhati, is,%} f. a collection or
quantity of reeds. {%—Naḍāgāra (˚ḍa-āg˚), am,%} n.
a hut of reeds. {%—Naḍā-giri, is,%} m., N. of an
elephant.
<LEND>

<L>23789<pc>0466-a<k1>naqaka<k2>naqaka
{%Naḍaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (?), the hollow of a bone.
<LEND>
[Page0466-b+ 78]

<L>23790<pc>0466-b<k1>naqakIya<k2>naqakIya
{%Naḍakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ abounding in reeds (as a
field &c.).
<LEND>

<L>23791<pc>0466-b<k1>naqasa<k2>naqasa
{%Naḍasa, as, ī, am,%}¦ covered with reeds.
<LEND>

<L>23792<pc>0466-b<k1>naqinI<k2>naqinI
{%Naḍinī,%}¦ f. a quantity of reeds, a reed bed.
<LEND>

<L>23793<pc>0466-b<k1>naqila<k2>naqila
{%Naḍila, as, ā, am,%}¦ reedy, covered with reeds.
<LEND>

<L>23794<pc>0466-b<k1>naqyA<k2>naqyA
{%Naḍyā,%}¦ f. a quantity of reeds, a bed of reeds.
<LEND>

<L>23795<pc>0466-b<k1>naqvat<k2>naqvat
{%Naḍvat, ān, atī, at%}¦ ({%naḍ%} for {%naḍa%}), covered
with reeds, abounding in reeds.
<LEND>

<L>23796<pc>0466-b<k1>naqvala<k2>naqvala
{%Naḍvala, as, ā, am%}¦ ({%naḍ%} for {%naḍa%}), abounding
in reeds, reedy; ({%am%}), n. a quantity of reeds, a
reed bed; ({%ā%}), f. a quantity of reeds; N. of the wife
of Manu Cākṣuṣa; (also written {%navalā;%} cf. {%nāḍ-%}
{%valeya.%})
<LEND>

<L>23797<pc>0466-b<k1>naqvABU<k2>naqvABU
{%Naḍvā-bhū, ūs,%}¦ f. a house or hut of reeds (?).
<LEND>

<L>23798<pc>0466-b<k1>naqaha<k2>naqaha
{#naqaha#}¦ {%naḍaha, as, ā, am,%} lovely, beautiful,
desirable.
<LEND>

<L>23799<pc>0466-b<k1>nat<k2>nat
{#nat#}¦ {%nat, t, t, t%} (fr. rt. {%nam%}), bowing, bowing
one's self, (at the end of comp.)
<LEND>

<L>23800<pc>0466-b<k1>nata<k2>nata
{%Nata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, bowed, inclined, inclining;
depressed, sunk; crooked, curved; ({%am%}), n. the
zenith-distance at meridian transit; hour-angle or
the distance of any planet from the meridian; ({%as%}),
m. the plant Tabernæmontana Coronaria {%(= tagara,%}
{%tagara-pādī)%}. {%—Nata-kandhara, as, ā, am,%}
‘bowing the neck,’ bowing. {%—Nata-jyā,%} f. the sign
of the hour-angle. {%—Nata-druma, as,%} m. {%= latā-%}
{%śāla (?)%}. {%—Nata-nāḍī%} or {%nata-nāḍikā,%} f. hour-
angle or the distance in time of any planet from the
meridian; any hour of birth after noon or before
midnight. {%—Nata-nāsika, as, ā, am,%} having a
depressed or flattened nose, flat-nosed. {%—Nata-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. (in astronomy) zenith-distance.
{%—Nata-bhrū, ūs, ūs, u,%} bending the brow, frown-
ing. {%—Nata-mukha, as, ī, am,%} bending down the
face, looking down. {%—Nata-mūrdhan, ā, ā, a,%}
bending or hanging down the head. {%—Natāṃśa%}
{%(˚ta-aṃ˚), as,%} m. (in astronomy) zenith-distance.
{%—Natāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} bowing the
limbs, bending the body, bent, curved, bowed,
stooping; ({%ī%}), f. a woman. {%—Natonnata-bhrū (˚ta-%}
{%un˚), ūs, ūs, u,%} depressing and elevating the eye-
brows, frowning.
<LEND>

<L>23801<pc>0466-b<k1>nati<k2>nati
{%Nati, is,%}¦ f. bending, bowing, stooping; curvature,
crookedness; a bow, a courtesy, modest behaviour;
(in grammar) the change of a dental letter to a
cerebral; parallax in latitude.
<LEND>

<L>23802<pc>0466-b<k1>natamaMhas<k2>natamaMhas
{#natamaMhas#}¦ {%na-tam-aṃhas,%} the beginning of
a particular holy text.
<LEND>

<L>23803<pc>0466-b<k1>natarAm<k2>natarAm
{#natarAm#}¦ {%natarām,%} ind. (fr. {%na%} with the affix
of the compar.), Ved. a strong negative particle
equivalent to ‘not at all,’ ‘never.’
<LEND>

<L>23804<pc>0466-b<k1>nad<k2>nad
{#nad#}¦ {%nad%} (allied to rt. {%nard%}), cl. 1. P.
(ep. rarely A.) {%nadati (-te), nanāda,%}
{%nadiṣyati, anadīt%} and {%anādīt, naditum,%} to vi-
brate; to sound, resound, thunder (as a cloud); to
roar, shout, cry, speak (often with the acc. of words
denoting sound, e. g. {%śabdam, svanam, nādam,%}
{%nādān, ravān,%} &c., thus {%nadanto bhairavān nā-%}
{%dān,%} uttering frightful cries): Caus. P. {%nadayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cause to vibrate or shake (Ved.); {%nāda-%}
{%yati, -te,%} &c., to cause to sound or resound, fill with
noise, make resonant: Intens. {%nānadīti, nānadyate,%}
to vibrate or shake violently (Ved.); to make a
tremulous sound, to cry, roar (especially used of the
lion), howl; to sound violently; [cf. rts. {%vad,%}
{%nard;%} Cambro-Brit. <nsi>nadu,</nsi> ‘to cry.’]
<LEND>

<L>23805<pc>0466-b<k1>nada<k2>nada
{%Nada, as,%}¦ m., Ved. who or what sounds or makes
a noise; a horse; a cloud (which thunders); a praiser;
N. of a verse of the Ṛg-veda beginning with
{%nadam%} (Ṛg-veda VIII. 58, 2); a river (the per-
sonification of which is male, as the Brahma-putra,
Sone, Indus, &c.); any flowing water; ({%ī%}), f. a
torrent, a river (the common personification of rivers
being female); a kind of metre consisting of four
lines of fourteen syllables each; (in grammar) a N.
for crude bases ending in {%ī%} or {%ū,%} if like {%nadī%} they
are invariably feminine (and not like {%grāma-ṇī%}
which is both masc. and fem., see Pāṇini I. 4, 3).
[Page0466-c+ 80]
At the end of an adverbial compound {%nada%} becomes
{%nadam%} and {%nadī%} becomes {%nadi%} [cf. {%upa-nadam,%}
{%upa-nadi,%} and see Pāṇini V. 4, 110]. {%—Nada-%}
{%nadī-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the male and female
(personified) rivers,’ the ocean, sea. {%—Nada-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘king of the rivers,’ the Sindhu, father of Śrī.
{%—Nadī-kadamba, as,%} m., N. of a plant. {%—Nadī-%}
{%kānta, as,%} m. ‘lover of the rivers,’ the ocean; a small
tree, Vitex Negundo; another sort of tree, Baring-
tonia Acutangula; ({%ā%}), f. ‘beloved by rivers,’ the
rose-apple, Eugenia Jambolana; a shrub, Leea Hirta;
a species of creeper. {%—Nadī-kāśyapa, as,%} m., N.
of a contemporary of Śākya-muni. {%—Nadī-kūla,%}
{%am,%} n. the bank or shore of a river. {%—Nadīkūla-%}
{%priya, as,%} m. ‘fond of river-banks,’ a species of
reed, Calamus Rotang. {%—Nadī-ja, as, ā, am,%} river-
born, water-born, aquatic; ({%as%}), m. ‘son of the
river,’ an epithet of Bhīṣma; several plants, Ter-
minalia Arjuna; a species of reed ({%= yāvanāla-śara%});
Baringtonia Acutangula; a species of grain ({%= nadī-%}
{%niṣpāva%}); antimony; ({%ā%}), f. Premna Spinosa or
Longifolia; ({%am%}), n. a lotus. {%—Nadī-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} knowing the course of rivers. {%—Nadī-tara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} crossing a river. {%—Nadītara-sthāna%} or
{%nadītara-sthala, am,%} n. ‘a place for crossing a
river,’ a landing-place, ferry, Ghāt. {%—Nadī-tīra, am,%}
n. the bank of a river. {%—Nadī-datta, as,%} m., N. of
a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Nadī-doha, as,%} m. a river-toll or
tribute. {%—Nadī-dhara, as, ā, am,%} ‘bearing the
river Ganges,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Nadīna (˚dī-%}
{%ina), as,%} m. ‘lord of the rivers,’ the ocean; Varuṇa,
the god of the ocean; N. of a son of Saha-deva and
father of Jagat-sena. {%—Nadī-niṣpāva, as,%} m. a
species of grain {%(= kaṭu-niṣpāva)%}. {%—Nadī-paṅka,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. ‘river-mud,’ the marshy bank of a
river. {%—Nadī-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the rivers,’ an
epithet of the ocean; (metaphorically) the water of
the ocean, sea-water (Ved.). {%—Nadī-pūra, as,%} m.
a river which has overflown its banks. {%—Nadī-%}
{%bhava, am,%} n. river-salt. {%—Nadī-mātṛka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} nourished or watered by rivers (as land, rice,
&c.); well-irrigated, possessing rivers. {%—Nadī-mu-%}
{%kha, am,%} n. the mouth of a river; a kind of grain;
[cf. {%nandī-mukha.%}] {%—Nadī-raya, as,%} m. the
stream or current of a river. {%—Nadī-vaṅka, as,%} m.
the bend or arm of a river. {%—Nadī-vaṭa, as,%} m. a
species of tree {%(= vaṭi)%}. {%—Nadī-vṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
stream-obstructing. {%—Nadī-vega, as,%} m. the stream
or flow of a river. {%—Nadī-velā,%} f. the current or
tide of a river. {%—Nadīśa (˚dī-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of
the rivers,’ the ocean. {%—Nadī-ṣṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%nadī + sna%}), bathing &c. in rivers; knowing the
dangerous spots in rivers or their depth, course, &c.;
(hence) versed in, experienced, clever in general.
{%—Nadī-sarja, as,%} m. the tree Terminalia Arjuna.
{%—Nady-ambu-jīvana, as, ā, am,%} deriving its
sustenance from river-water. {%—Nady-āmra, as,%} m.
a species of plant ({%= samaṣṭhilā%}).
<LEND>

<L>23806<pc>0466-c<k1>nadat<k2>nadat
{%Nadat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sounding, resounding, mak-
ing a noise or cry, roaring.
<LEND>

<L>23807<pc>0466-c<k1>nadaTu<k2>nadaTu
{%Nadathu, us,%}¦ m. noise, sound; roaring; crying;
din.
<LEND>

<L>23808<pc>0466-c<k1>nadana<k2>nadana
{%Nadana, as, ā, am%}¦ (formed by Yāska to explain
{%nada%}), sounding (as water).
<LEND>

<L>23809<pc>0466-c<k1>nadaniman<k2>nadaniman
{%Nadaniman, ā (?),%}¦ m., Ved. sounding, humming,
murmuring.
<LEND>

<L>23810<pc>0466-c<k1>nadanu<k2>nadanu
{%Nadanu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. noise, roaring, sounding;
the sound of approbation; thunder (?); a cloud;
a lion; (according to the Naighaṇṭuka) {%= saṅ-%}
{%grāma,%} war, battle; (Sāy.) {%= na-danu,%} not giving.
{%—Nadanu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of
sound, loud-sounding, roaring.
<LEND>

<L>23811<pc>0466-c<k1>nadi<k2>nadi
{%Nadi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a crier, caller, one who calls
out; (Sāy.) praise.
<LEND>

<L>23812<pc>0466-c<k1>nadikA<k2>nadikA
{%Nadikā,%}¦ f. in {%ku-nadikā,%} an insignificant rivulet.
<LEND>

<L>23813<pc>0466-c<k1>nadeyI<k2>nadeyI
{%Nadeyī,%}¦ f. the plant Premna Herbacea; (wrong
form for {%nādeyī?%}).
<LEND>

<L>23814<pc>0466-c<k1>nadya<k2>nadya
{%Nadya, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected with a river.
<LEND>

<L>23815<pc>0466-c<k1>nadAla<k2>nadAla
{#nadAla#}¦ {%nadāla, am,%} n. a potsherd, the
fragment of a broken pitcher, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0467-a+ 76]

<L>23816<pc>0467-a<k1>nadI<k2>nadI
{#nadI#}¦ {%nadī.%} See rt. {%nad,%} p. 466, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23817<pc>0467-a<k1>nadfSya<k2>nadfSya
{#nadfSya#}¦ {%na-dṛśya, as, ā, am,%} not to be
seen, invisible. {%—Nadṛśya-tva, am,%} n. invisibility.
<LEND>

<L>23818<pc>0467-a<k1>nadDa<k2>nadDa
{#nadDa#}¦ {%naddha, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. 1. {%nah%}),
bound, tied, bound on, bound round, put on, fastened,
joined, connected; covered, inlaid, embroidered, inter-
woven; ({%am%}), n. a tie, fastening, band, bond, knot.
{%—Naddha-vimokṣa, as,%} m. deliverance from
fastenings or fetters.
<LEND>

<L>23819<pc>0467-a<k1>nadDi<k2>nadDi
{%Naddhi, is,%}¦ f. binding, fastening; [cf. {%barsa-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23820<pc>0467-a<k1>nadDrI<k2>nadDrI
{%Naddhrī,%}¦ f. a strip of leather, a leather thong.
<LEND>

<L>23821<pc>0467-a<k1>nanandf<k2>nanandf
{#nanandf#}¦ {%nanandṛ%} or {%nanāndṛ, ā,%} f. (said to
be fr. rt. {%nand%}), a husband's sister, a sister-in-law.
{%—Nanāndṛ-pati%} or {%nanānduḥ-pati, is,%} m. the
husband of a husband's sister.
<LEND>

<L>23822<pc>0467-a<k1>nanA<k2>nanA
{#nanA#}¦ {%nanā,%} f., Ved. a familiar expression
for ‘mother,’ corresponding to {%tata,%} q. v.; (according
to the Naighaṇṭuka I. 11) {%= vāc,%} speech.
<LEND>

<L>23823<pc>0467-a<k1>nanu<k2>nanu
{#nanu#}¦ {%na-nu,%} ind. (fr. 2. {%na + nu%}), a strong
negative particle = ‘not at all’ (Ved.); a particle of
interrogation = the Latin {%nonne,%} ‘not?’ ‘is not?’
‘are not?’ ‘does he not?’ often a particle of affir-
mation = ‘is it not so?’ i. e. ‘it certainly must be
so,’ hence = ‘certainly,’ ‘assuredly,’ or with an impe-
rative = ‘pray,’ ‘do,’ ‘just,’ ‘well,’ ‘do now,’ &c., or
sometimes with an interrogative pronoun (e. g. {%nanu%}
{%ko bhavān,%} pray who art thou?); in argumentative
writings often a mere inceptive particle = ‘now then,’
‘but then,’ ‘but’ (e. g. {%nanu na kiñcin mānam%}
{%iti cen na,%} now if it be said that there is no proof,
not so); {%nanv astu tathāpi,%} ‘well, be it so, never-
theless;’ {%nanu ca,%} ‘and (is it) not so?’ ‘is not then?’
‘there can be no doubt.’ According to native lexi-
cographers {%nanu%} is also a vocative particle = ‘ho,’
‘hallo;’ a particle implying kindness, conciliation, &c.,
= ‘pray,’ ‘good friend;’ a responsive particle; a parti-
cle of reproach, perplexity, &c.
<LEND>

<L>23824<pc>0467-a<k1>nantf<k2>nantf
{#nantf#}¦ {%nantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%} (fr. rt. {%nam%}), bend-
ing, bowing, stooping; (in grammar) Ved. changing
a dental to a cerebral.
<LEND>

<L>23825<pc>0467-a<k1>nantavya<k2>nantavya
{%Nantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bent or bowed, to
be saluted, to be revered or honoured.
<LEND>

<L>23826<pc>0467-a<k1>nantva<k2>nantva
{%Nantva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be bent or bowed,
to be humbled.
<LEND>

<L>23827<pc>0467-a<k1>nand<k2>nand
{#nand#}¦ {%nand%} (thought by some to be for
{%nanad,%} a reduplicated form of rt. {%nad,%} to
utter sounds of approbation; the intial {%n%} is never
cerebralized), cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%nandati (-te),%}
{%nananda, nandiṣyati, anandīt, nanditum,%} to
be pleased or satisfied with, to be contented with, be
glad of anything (with inst., rarely abl.): Caus. {%nan-%}
{%dayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ananandat,%} to make glad,
gladden: Desid. {%ninandiṣati:%} Intens. {%nānand-%}
{%yate, nānanti.%}
<LEND>

<L>23828<pc>0467-a<k1>nanda<k2>nanda
{%Nanda, as,%}¦ m. happiness, pleasure, joy, felicity,
prosperity; a flute eleven inches long; N. of one
of the two drums of Yudhi-ṣṭhira; of one of the
nine inestimable gems or treasures of Kuvera; an
epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of one of Skanda's attendants;
of a Buddhist deity, (also read {%nandana%}); of a
Nāga [cf. {%nandaka%}]; of a Nāga-rāja; of an attend-
ant on Dakṣa; of a son of king Dhṛta-rāṣṭra [cf.
{%nandaka%}]; of a brother of Śākya-muni [cf. {%nan-%}
{%daka%}]; of a son of Vasu-deva; of a cowherd who
was the foster-father of Kṛṣṇa and apparently also
of Durgā; of a leader of the Sātvatas; of a king of
Pāṭali-putra, cut off by the machinations of Candra-
gupta's minister Cāṇakya, and founder of the Nanda
dynasty; of a Buddhist writer on law [cf. {%nanda-%}
{%paṇḍita%}]; of a mountain [cf. {%nandi-giri%}]; ({%ā%}),
f. Delight, Felicity (personified as the wife of Har-
sha, cf. {%nandi%}), prosperity, happiness, joy; a small
earthen water-jar [cf. {%nandikā%}]; a husband's sister
[cf. {%nanāndṛ%}]; N. of one of the seven or five small
Kumārīs or staffs of Indra's standard, (according to
a commentator {%nandā%} and {%upa-nandā%}); the first,
[Page0467-b+ 81]
sixth, or eleventh day of the fortnight, considered as
three auspicious Tithis [cf. {%nandikā%}]; an epithet of
Gaurī; a form of Dākṣāyaṇī; N. of an Apsaras,
(also read {%kāmyā%}); of the eldest daughter of Vi-
bhīṣaṇa; N. of a girl connected with Śākya-muni,
(also read {%nandī%}); of the mother of the tenth Arhat
of the present Ava-sarpiṇī; N. of a wife of Gopāla-
varman; of a river flowing near Kuvera's city Alakā,
(often mentioned with {%apara-nandā;%} cf. {%nandā-%}
{%tīrtha%}); ({%ī%}), f. the tree Cedrela Toona [cf. {%nandī-%}
{%vṛkṣa%}]; an epithet of Durgā; N. of Indra's resi-
dence, {%= amarā-vatī;%} [cf. {%ā-n˚, alaka-n˚, go-n˚.%}]
{%—Nanda-kiśora, as,%} m., N. of the author of a
supplement to Vopa-deva's Mugdha-bodha. {%—Nanda-%}
{%gopa, as,%} m. the cowherd Nanda. {%—Nandagopa-%}
{%kumāra, as,%} m. ‘son of the cowherd Nanda,’ epi-
thet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Nanda-gopitā,%} f., N. of a plant,
see {%rāsnā%}. {%—Nanda-nandana, as,%} m. ‘the foster-
son of the cowherd Nanda,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Nanda-nandanī,%} f. ‘daughter of the cowherd
Nanda,’ epithet of Durgā. {%—Nanda-paṇḍita, as,%}
m., N. of a writer on jurisprudence. {%—Nanda-padra,%}
N. of a town. {%—Nanda-pāla, as,%} m. ‘guardian of
the treasure Nanda,’ epithet of Varuṇa. {%—Nanda-%}
{%putrī,%} f. ‘daughter of the cowherd Nanda,’ epithet
of Durgā. {%—Nanda-putrotsava (˚ra-ut˚), as,%} m.,
N. of the ninth chapter of the Kṛṣṇa-khaṇḍa or
fourth part of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Nanda-%}
{%prayāga, as,%} m., N. of a place mentioned in the
Rasika-ramaṇa by Raghu-nātha (at the confluence
of two rivers containing the word {%nanda%} in their
names). {%—Nanda-balā,%} f., N. of a girl connected
with Śākya-muni. {%—Nanda-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Nanda-vardhana, as,%} m. ‘joy-increaser,’
N. of a poet mentioned in the Śārṅgadhara-pad-
dhati. {%—Nanda-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Nandā-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha (the river
Nandā?). {%—Nandātmaja (˚da-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘son of
the cowherd Nanda,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa; ({%ā%}), f.
‘daughter of the cowherd Nanda,’ epithet of Durgā.
{%—Nandā-purāṇa, am,%} n. ‘the Purāṇa treating of
Nandā,’ N. of an Upa-Purāṇa. {%—Nandā-prācī-%}
{%māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of the eighteenth chapter
of the Sṛṣṭi-khaṇḍa or first part of the Padma-
Purāṇa. {%—Nandāśrama (˚da-āś˚), as,%} m., N. of a
hermitage. {%—Nandā-hrada-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
sacred bathing-place. {%—Nandī-pura, am,%} n., N. of
a town mentioned in the Kathārṇava. {%—Nandī-%}
{%vṛkṣa, as,%} m., N. of several plants, {%= nandi-%}
{%vṛkṣa,%} Cedrela Toona; {%= meṣa-śriṅgī,%} Thespe-
sia Populneoides; {%= sthālī%}. {%—Nandī-saras, as,%} n.,
N. of Indra's lake.
<LEND>

<L>23829<pc>0467-b<k1>nandaka<k2>nandaka
{%Nandaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ rejoicing, making happy or
glad, causing pleasure, gladdening; rejoicing or de-
lighting in; rejoicing a family; joyful; ({%as%}), m.
a frog ({%= nandana%}); N. of Kṛṣṇa's sword; of a
Nāga [cf. {%nanda%}]; of one of Skanda's attendants;
of a son of king Dhṛta-rāṣṭra [cf. {%nanda%}]; of a
Śākya [cf. {%nanda%}]; of a bull; of a village; (ac-
cording to some also) happiness, pleasure ({%= ānanda%});
N. of the foster-father of Kṛṣṇa, {%= nanda; (ikā),%}
f. a small water-jar [cf. {%nandā%}]; N. of three auspi-
cious Tithis, the first, sixth, and eleventh, (according
to the Tithi-tattva) the sixth Tithi [cf. {%nandā%}]; N.
of Indra's pleasure-ground.
<LEND>

<L>23830<pc>0467-b<k1>nandaki<k2>nandaki
{%Nandaki, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%nand?%}), long pepper.
<LEND>

<L>23831<pc>0467-b<k1>nandakin<k2>nandakin
{%Nandakin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘the possessor of Nandaka,’
an epithet of Kṛṣṇa-Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>23832<pc>0467-b<k1>nandaTu<k2>nandaTu
{%Nandathu, us,%}¦ m. happiness, joy, felicity, pros-
perity.
<LEND>

<L>23833<pc>0467-b<k1>nandana<k2>nandana
{%Nandana, as, ā, am,%}¦ delighting, rejoicing, glad-
dening, pleasing, making glad or happy; ({%as%}), m.
‘rejoicing (a father),’ a son; ‘the rejoicer,’ an epi-
thet of Viṣṇu; an epithet of Śiva; a frog [cf. {%nan-%}
{%daka%}]; a species of plant with a poisonous fruit,
(according to commentators also f.); N. of one of
Skanda's attendants; of a Siddha; of a Buddhist
deity, (also read {%nanda%}); of the seventh of the nine
white Jaina Balas; of a mountain; of the twenty-
sixth year in a Jupiter cycle of sixty years; of a par-
ticular form of temple; ({%ā%}), f. ‘rejoicing (a mother),’
[Page0467-c+ 81]
a daughter; ({%am%}), n. a grove or garden frequented
by the gods, especially Indra's pleasure-ground or
elysium [cf. {%nāndana%}]; N. of a sword ({%= asi-%}
{%ratna,%} cf. {%nandaka%}); N. of a species of the Dhṛti
metre (four times eighteen syllables); rejoicing,
gladdening; joy, felicity; [cf. Hib. <nsi>naoidhin,</nsi> ‘an
infant.’] {%—Nandana-kānana, am,%} n. ‘the divine
pleasure-grove,’ N. of a wood mentioned in the
Rasika-ramaṇa by Raghu-nātha. {%—Nandana-ja,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘produced in elysium,’ yellow sandal-wood.
{%—Nandana-mālā,%} f. ‘joy-causing garland,’ N. of a
garland worn by Kṛṣṇa. {%—Nandana-vana, am,%} n.
the pleasure-grove of the gods; [cf. {%nandana,%} n.]
<LEND>

<L>23834<pc>0467-c<k1>nandanaka<k2>nandanaka
{%Nandanaka, as,%}¦ m. (at the end of a comp.)
a son.
<LEND>

<L>23835<pc>0467-c<k1>nandanta<k2>nandanta
{%Nandanta, as, ī, am,%}¦ delighting, making happy;
({%as%}), m. a son; a friend; a king, a prince; ({%ī%}), f. a
daughter; [cf. {%nandayanta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23836<pc>0467-c<k1>nandayat<k2>nandayat
{%Nandayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ rejoicing, delighting,
making glad.
<LEND>

<L>23837<pc>0467-c<k1>nandayanta<k2>nandayanta
{%Nandayanta, as, ī, am,%}¦ making happy, rejoicing,
delighting; (also read {%nandanta.%})
<LEND>

<L>23838<pc>0467-c<k1>nandAyanIya<k2>nandAyanIya
{%Nandāyanīya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a pupil of Bāṣkali.
<LEND>

<L>23839<pc>0467-c<k1>nandi<k2>nandi
{%Nandi, is,%}¦ m. (for {%nandī%} see under {%nanda%}),
‘the happy one,’ epithet of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; N. of
an attendant of Śiva [cf. {%nandin%} and {%nandikeśvara%}];
N. of a man; of a Gandharva; (according to some
also) the speaker of the prologue or prelude to a
drama or one who pronounces the benediction, see
{%nāndī, nāndin; (is, i),%} m. n. gambling, gaming;
({%is%}), f. joy, delight, pleasure, happiness, prosperity,
welfare, (in these senses said to be also m. n.); Joy
personified as a daughter of Heaven or as the wife of
Kāma and mother of Harṣa. {%—Nandi-kuṇḍa, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n., N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Nandi-%}
{%kṣetra, am,%} n., N. of a district frequented by the
gods. {%—Nandi-giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain; [cf.
{%nandi-devī.%}] {%—Nandigiri-māhātmya, am,%} n. ‘the
glory of Nandi-giri,’ N. of a work. {%—Nandi-%}
{%gupta, as,%} m., N. of a prince of Kaśmīra. {%—Nandi-%}
{%grāma, as,%} m., N. of a village (near the modern
Daulatābād, where Bharata resided during Rāma's
banishment). {%—Nandigrāma-darśana, am,%} n.
‘description of the village Nandi-grāma,’ the twenty-
ninth chapter of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa of the Padma-
Purāṇa. {%—Nandi-ghoṣa, as,%} m. cry of joy ({%=%}
{%vandi-ghoṣa%}); the proclamation of a panegyrist
or herald; the chariot of Arjuna. {%—Nandi-taru, us,%}
m. {%= dhava,%} the tree Grislea Tomentosa. {%—Nandi-%}
{%tūrya, am,%} n. a musical instrument played on joyful
occasions. {%—Nandi-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ī%}), ? the
common N. of one of the loftiest Himalayan peaks.
{%—Nandi-purāṇa, am,%} n. ‘the Purāṇa of Nandi,’
N. of part of the Kedāra-kalpa. {%—Nandi-mukha =%}
{%nandī-mukha,%} a species of rice [cf. {%nadī-mukha%}];
N. of a man. {%—Nandimukha-sughoṣa, as,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Nandimukhasughoṣāvadāna (˚ṣa-%}
{%av˚),%} N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Nandi-rudra, as,%}
m., N. of Śiva in a joyful or serene form. {%—Nandi-%}
{%vardhana, as, ā, am,%} increasing pleasure, promoting
happiness; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; a son [cf.
{%nandana%}]; a friend; the end of a half month,
i. e. the day of full moon or new moon; N. of a
particular form of temple ({%= nandin%}); N. of a
prince, son of Udāvasu or of Janaka, (in this sense
also read {%nandi-vardha%}); N. of a place. {%—Nandi-%}
{%vāralaka, as,%} m. a species of fish. {%—Nandi-vṛkṣa%}
or {%nandi-vṛkṣaka, as,%} m. the tree Cedrela Toona;
[cf. {%nandī-vṛkṣa.%}] {%—Nandi-vega, ās,%} m. pl., N.
of a people. {%—Nandi-ṣeṇa%} or {%nandi-sena, as,%} m.,
N. of one of Skanda's attendants. {%—Nandiṣeṇeśvara%}
{%(˚ṇa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga. {%—Nandī-mukha,%}
{%as,%} m. ({%nandī%} for {%nandi?%}), ‘having joy on the
face,’ an epithet of Śiva; a species of aquatic bird;
a species of rice [cf. {%nandi-mukha, nadī-mukha,%}
{%nāndī-mukhī%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of manes or
deceased ancestors who are worshipped on festival
occasions [cf. {%nāndī-mukha%}]; ({%ī%}), f. sleep (in which
the face shows joy), drowsiness; a species of the
Ati-śakvarī metre; (more correctly {%nāndī-mukha.%})
{%—Nandīśa (˚di-īśa), as,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's
[Page0468-a+ 79]
attendants [cf. {%nandi, nandin%}]; N. of Śiva; a kind
of time in music {%(= nandīśvara)%}. {%—Nandīśvara%}
{%(˚di-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of joy,’ an epithet of Śiva;
N. of Nandin, the leader of Śiva's attendants; N. of
one of Kuvera's attendants; N. of a place held sacred
by the Jainas; a kind of time in music {%(= nandīśa).%}
{%—Nandīśvara-purāṇa = nandi-purāṇa%}. {%—Nan-%}
{%dīśvara-yogopākhyāna (˚ga-up˚), am,%} n., N. of
the thirty-first and thirty-second chapters of the
Uttara-khaṇḍa of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Nandīśvarot-%}
{%patti (˚di-īś˚, ˚ra-ut˚), is,%} f. ‘the birth of Śiva,’
N. of the forty-second chapter of the Liṅga-Purāṇa.
{%—Nandy-āvarta, as,%} m. a particular kind of
diagram [cf. {%nandikāvarta%}]; a sort of palace or
temple built in the shape of the above diagram or in
the form of a quadrangle without a western gate, (in
this sense also {%am,%} n.); a species of large fish; a
kind of tree; the shrub Tabernæmontana Corona-
ria ({%= tagara, = bhagavad-druma%}), probably the
sacred fig-tree; a species of shell called so because
of its convolutions {%(āvarta)%}. {%—Nandy-upapurāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. {%= nandi-purāṇa%}. {%—Nandy-upākhyāna,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the episode of Nandi,’ N. of the forty-fifth
to the fiftieth chapter of the Uttara-khaṇḍa of the
Śiva-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>23840<pc>0468-a<k1>nandika<k2>nandika
{%Nandika, as,%}¦ m. the Tūn tree (Cedrela Toona),
the wood of which resembles mahogany and is used
for furniture &c. [cf. {%nandī, nandī-vṛkṣa%}]; N.
of one of Śiva's attendants; N. of a pupil of Śākya-
muni, chief of the village Uru-vilvā. {%—Nandikā-%}
{%cārya-tantra (˚ka-āc˚),%} N. of a medical work.
{%—Nandikāvarta (˚ka-āv˚), as,%} m. a kind of
diagram ({%= nandy-āvarta%}); a species of plant.
{%—Nandikeśa (˚ka-īśa), as,%} m., N. of a temple or
holy place. {%—Nandikeśa-liṅga, am,%} n., N. of the
thirty-ninth chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Nandi-%}
{%keśvara (˚ka-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's chief
attendants [cf. {%nandin, nandi%}]; N. of an author.
{%—Nandikeśvara-kāśikā,%} f., N. of a Vedānta work
by Nandikeśvara treating of the first of Pāṇini's gram-
matical aphorisms as containing the dogmas of the Ve-
dānta belief. {%—Nandikeśvara-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of
a sacred bathing-place mentioned in the Śiva-Purāṇa.
{%—Nandikeśvara-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of an Upa-
Purāṇa. {%—Nandikeśvara-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of a work
mentioned in the Tantra-sāra. {%—Nandikeśvarā-%}
{%bhiṣeka (˚ra-abh˚), as,%} m., N. of the forty-third
and forty-fourth chapters of the Liṅga-Purāṇa.
{%—Nandikeśvarotpatti (˚ra-ut˚), is,%} f., N. of the
twenty-first chapter of the Uttara-khaṇḍa of the
Śiva-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>23841<pc>0468-a<k1>nandin<k2>nandin
{%Nandin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (at the end of a comp.), rejoic-
ing, gladdening; happy, delighted; delighting in,
liking; making happy, gladdening; ({%ī%}), m. ‘rejoicing
(a father),’ a son; the speaker of the prelude or bene-
diction at the opening of a drama [cf. {%nāndin%}]; N.
of several plants, the Indian fig-tree, Thespesia Popul-
neoides, Phaseolus Radiatus; N. of a particular form
of temple [cf. {%nandi-vardhana%}]; N. of a being
attending on Śiva and (commonly) of the bull on
which he rides [cf. {%nandi, nandīśa, nandikeś-%}
{%vara%}]; N. of a Buddhist saint and teacher; ({%inī%}),
f. ‘rejoicing (a mother),’ a daughter; a husband's
sister ({%= nanāndṛ%}); holy basil ({%= tulasī%}); Nar-
dostachys Jatamansi ({%= jaṭāmāṃsi%}); a kind of per-
fume ({%= reṇukā%}); a fabulous cow, daughter of
Surabhi, related to the cow of plenty, and the property
of the sage Vasiṣṭha; an epithet or a form of Durgā;
an epithet of Gaṅgā or the Ganges; N. of one of
the Mātṛs attending on Skanda; of a place; of a
river (also called Vala-jā). {%—Nandinī-tanaya%} or
{%nandinī-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of Nandinī,’ epithet of
Vyāḍi. {%—Nandinī-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred
bathing-place.
<LEND>

<L>23842<pc>0468-a<k1>nandI<k2>nandI
{%Nandī,%}¦ f. See under {%nanda%} and {%nandi.%}
<LEND>

<L>23843<pc>0468-a<k1>nandya<k2>nandya
{%Nandya%}¦ (fr. {%nanda%}), Nom. P. {%nandyati,%} &c., to
be glad, to rejoice.
<LEND>

<L>23844<pc>0468-a<k1>nandalAla<k2>nandalAla
{#nandalAla#}¦ {%nandalāla, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>23845<pc>0468-a<k1>nandIka<k2>nandIka
{#nandIka#}¦ {%nandīka, as,%} m. (?), a cock.
<LEND>
[Page0468-b+ 76]

<L>23846<pc>0468-b<k1>nandIwa<k2>nandIwa
{#nandIwa#}¦ {%nandīṭa, as,%} m. a bald-headed man.
<LEND>

<L>23847<pc>0468-b<k1>nannama<k2>nannama
{#nannama#}¦ {%nannama%} (fr. rt. {%nam%}) in {%ku-n˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23848<pc>0468-b<k1>nannamyamAna<k2>nannamyamAna
{%Nannamyamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Intens.),
bending or bowing very low.
<LEND>

<L>23849<pc>0468-b<k1>naparAjit<k2>naparAjit
{#naparAjit#}¦ {%na-parājit, t,%} m. ‘having no
conquerer,’ ‘not overpowered (?),’ an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>23850<pc>0468-b<k1>napAt<k2>napAt
{#napAt#}¦ {%napāt%} and {%naptṛ, tā,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s.
II. 96. derived fr. {%na%} + rt. {%pat,%} ‘to fall;’ in Pāṇini
VI. 3, 75, fr. {%na + pāt%} fr. rt. 3. {%pā,%} ‘to protect,’
according to which latter derivation {%napāt, naptṛ%}
are for {%na-pātṛ,%} ‘not the protector,’ allied to {%na-%}
{%pitṛ,%} ‘not the father;’ but a more probable deriva-
tion is fr. rt. 1. {%nabh,%} an older form of rt. 1. {%nah,%} ‘to
connect,’ a descendant being ‘the connecting relative;’
in the earlier Vedic language the strong cases are
formed fr. {%napāt,%} the weak fr. {%naptṛ,%} e. g. acc.
sing. {%napātam,%} dat. sing. {%naptre;%} in the later
Sanskrit all the cases come fr. {%naptṛ%}), a descendant,
offspring in general, a son, &c. (Ved.); a grandson,
a son's son, (in the later language restricted to this
meaning); N. of one of the Viśve-devās; (according
to Mahī-dhara on Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā XIX. 56. {%na-%}
{%pātaḥ = deva-yāna-pathaḥ,%} the path of the gods;
according to Sāyaṇa on Ṛg-veda X. 15, 3, {%napātaḥ%}
{%= vināśābhāvaḥ); (tī),%} f., Ved. a daughter; a
granddaughter, (in Atharva-veda IX. 1, 3, {%napti%});
{%naptī%} and {%naptyā,%} f. du. = (in Sāma-veda) ‘the two
pieces of wood for pressing out the Soma,’ or =
‘heaven and earth;’ or in Ṛg-veda IX. 9, 1, = ‘the
hands;’ {%naptyaḥ,%} f. pl. in Ṛg-veda I. 50, 9, = ‘the
female horses of the chariot,’ i. e. ‘the daughters of
the chariot,’ (according to Sāy. so called ‘because
with them the chariot does not fall’); in Ṛg-veda
IX. 14, 5, {%naptyaḥ%} is said to = ‘rays’ or ‘fingers;’
horses as ‘granddaughters of the chariot;’ the fingers,
the hands; ({%trī%}), f. a granddaughter, ({%naptrī,%} f., and
not {%naptī,%} is the only form used in classical Sanskrit);
[cf. {%tanū-napāt, pra-napāt:%} Zend {%naptar, napat,%}
‘descendant;’ {%napt-i,%} ‘kindred;’ {%naptya,%} ‘a family:’
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀ-νεψιό-ς</lang> for <lang n="greek">ἁ-νεπτιό-ς,</lang> quasi {%con-nepot-iu-s,%}
<lang n="greek">νέπ-ο-δες:</lang> Lat. <nsi>nepō(t)-s,</nsi> f. <nsi>nept-i-s:</nsi> Old Iceland.
<nsi>nefi,</nsi> ‘brother;’ <nsi>nift,</nsi> ‘sister:’ Old Germ. <nsi>nefo,</nsi>
‘grandson, cousin;’ <nsi>niftila,</nsi> ‘female cousin:’ Goth.
<nsi>nithyi-s,</nsi> m. ‘cousin;’ <nsi>nith-yō,</nsi> f. ‘a female cousin:’
Slav. <nsi>netii,</nsi> ‘a brother's son:’ Boh. <nsi>neti,</nsi> base <nsi>neter,</nsi>
‘a female cousin.’]
<LEND>

<L>23851<pc>0468-b<k1>napAtka<k2>napAtka
{%Napātka, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to a
grandson; (applied to a particular sacrificial fire, {%=%}
{%tṛtīyo 'gnis.%})
<LEND>

<L>23852<pc>0468-b<k1>naptfkA<k2>naptfkA
{%Naptṛkā,%}¦ f. a species of bird.
<LEND>

<L>23853<pc>0468-b<k1>napuMs<k2>napuMs
{#napuMs#}¦ {%na-puṃs, -pumān,%} m. not a man, a
eunuch.
<LEND>

<L>23854<pc>0468-b<k1>napuMsa<k2>napuMsa
{%Na-puṃsa, as,%}¦ m. not a male, a eunuch.
<LEND>

<L>23855<pc>0468-b<k1>napuMsaka<k2>napuMsaka
{%Na-puṃsaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. neither man nor
woman, a hermaphrodite; a eunuch, an impotent or
imbecile man, a coward; ({%am%}), n. a word in the
neuter gender; the neuter gender. {%—Napuṃsaka-%}
{%pāda, as,%} m., N. of the eighth chapter of Durgā-
dāsa's commentary on Vopa-deva's Mugdha-bodha,
called Su-bodhā. {%—Napuṃsaka-liṅga-saṅgraha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the grammatical work
Nāma-liṅgānuśāsana by Amara-siṃha.
<LEND>

<L>23856<pc>0468-b<k1>naptf<k2>naptf
{#naptf#}¦ {%naptṛ, naptī, naptrī.%} See {%napāt%} above.
<LEND>

<L>23857<pc>0468-b<k1>naB<k2>naB<h>1
{#naB#} 1¦. {%nabh,%} cl. 1. A. {%nabhate,%} &c., Ved.
to burst, to be torn or rent asunder; to
hurt, injure, destroy, ({%nebhe%} occurs in Bhaṭṭi-kāvya
XIV. 33); cl. 4. 9. P. {%nabhyati, nabhnāti,%} &c., to
hurt, injure: Caus. P. {%nabhayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to burst, tear open.
<LEND>

<L>23858<pc>0468-b<k1>naB<k2>naB<h>2
2. {%nabh, p,%}¦ f., Ved. (according to Sāy.) hurt,
injury, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>23859<pc>0468-b<k1>naBanu<k2>naBanu
{%Nabhanu, us,%}¦ m. and {%ū, ūs,%} f., Ved. a spring,
river, (water which bursts forth.)
<LEND>

<L>23860<pc>0468-b<k1>naBanya<k2>naBanya<h>1
1. {%nabhanya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%nabhana%}), Ved. burst-
ing out, breaking or coming forth (as a hymn or as
a horse). According to Sāy. = ‘being in the sky,’
[Page0468-c+ 80]
‘ethereal;’ ‘injuring,’ ‘destroying;’ ‘a hymn.’ (For
2. {%nabhanya%} see under {%nabha%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>23861<pc>0468-c<k1>naBanva<k2>naBanva
{%Nabhanva, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a river; (according to
modern scholars the form is {%nabhanu.%})
<LEND>

<L>23862<pc>0468-c<k1>naBa<k2>naBa
{#naBa#}¦ {%nabha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%nah%}
with affix {%bha,%} but rather fr. {%nabh%} an older form of
1. {%nah,%} ‘to bind,’ ‘connect,’ as ‘connecting heaven
and earth;’ according to others fr. rt. 1. {%nabh,%} ‘to
rend asunder or be broken up into clouds’), {%= nabhas,%}
the sky, atmosphere; the month Śrāvaṇa (July — 
August); N. of a son of Manu Svārociṣa or of the
third Manu (mentioned together with Nabhasya);
N. of one of the seven sages of the sixth Manv-
antara; N. of a demon, son of Vipra-citti by Siṃhikā;
N. of a son of Nala (Niṣadha) and father of Puṇ-
ḍarīka [cf. {%nabhas%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a spitting-pot (for
{%nabhās?%}); N. of the city of the Sun; [cf. Zend
<nsi>nap-ta,</nsi> ‘moist, wet;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">νέφ-ος, νεφ-έλη, ξυν-νέ-νοφε,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νεφό-ω,</lang> probably <lang n="greek">δνόφος, ἰο-δνέφής,</lang>
<lang n="greek">γνό-φος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>nūb-ē-s, nūbilu-s, nēbula,</nsi> probably <nsi>Nep-</nsi>
<nsi>tū-nu-s, nimbu-s</nsi> for <nsi>nembu-s;</nsi> Old Iceland. <nsi>nifl-</nsi>
<nsi>heim-r;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>nib-ul;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>neb-el;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>ge-nip,</nsi> ‘a cloud;’ Slav. <nsi>neb-o,</nsi> base <nsi>neb-</nsi>
<nsi>es,</nsi> ‘sky;’ Lith. <nsi>debes-i-s,</nsi> ‘a cloud,’ through change
of <nsi>n</nsi> into <nsi>d,</nsi> as in <nsi>dewyni,</nsi> ‘nine;’ Hib. <nsi>neamh,</nsi>
‘heaven;’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>nev,</nsi> ‘heaven.’] {%—Nabha-%}
{%ga, as,%} m. ‘going on the sky,’ N. of a son of Manu
Vaivasvata; [cf. {%nabhāga, nābhāga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23863<pc>0468-c<k1>naBanya<k2>naBanya<h>2
2. {%nabhanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (according to Sāy.)
being in the sky, ethereal, heavenly; (see col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>23864<pc>0468-c<k1>naBas<k2>naBas
{%Nabhas, as,%}¦ n. fog, vapour; a cloud; sky, atmo-
sphere, ether or heaven; ether as one of the five ele-
ments; N. of a month in the rainy season ({%= śrā-%}
{%vaṇa%}) or July-August, (according to lexicographers in
this sense m.); period of life, age; the vapour or
fluidity of the Soma (Ved.); water (Ved.); the sun
(according to Nir. II. 14); ({%ās%}), m. a cloud, the
rains or the rainy season; the nose, smell; the fibres
in the root of a lotus or a rope made of lotus fibres;
a spitting-pot; N. of a prince, son of Nala and father
of Puṇḍarīka; ({%asī%}), n. du. both worlds, heaven and
earth. {%—Nabhaḥ-ketana, am,%} n. ‘sky-banner,’ the
sun. {%—Nabhaḥ-krānta, as,%} or {%nabhaḥ-krāntin, ī,%}
m. ‘going in the sky’ (from the lion-like shape
of certain clouds), a lion. {%—Nabhaḥ-pāntha, as,%}
m. ‘sky-traveller,’ the sun. {%—Nabhaḥ-prabheda,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a descendant of Vi-rūpa and author of
a Ṛg-veda hymn (X. 112). {%—Nabhaḥ-prāṇa, as,%}
m. ‘sky-breath,’ air, wind; [cf. {%kha-śvāsa, nabhaḥ-%}
{%śvāsa.%}] {%—Nabhaḥ-śrit, t, t, t,%} reaching to the sky,
attaining heaven. {%—Nabhaḥ-śvāsa, as,%} m. ‘sky-
breath,’ air, wind; [cf. {%nabhaḥ-prāṇa.%}] {%—Nabhaḥ-%}
{%sad, t,%} m. ‘inhabiting the sky,’ a god; a star.
{%—Nabhaḥ-saras, as,%} n. ‘sky-lake,’ the clouds.
{%—Nabhaḥ-sarit,%} f. ‘sky-river,’ the milky-way ({%=%}
{%deva-patha%}); the celestial Ganges. {%—Nabhaḥ-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘situated in heaven,’ celestial, aerial,
heavenly, ethereal. {%—Nabhaḥ-sthala, as,%} m. ‘whose
residence is the sky,’ an epithet of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. the
sky. {%—Nabhaḥ-sthita, as, ā, am,%} abiding in heaven
or in the sky; ({%as%}), m. a division of the infernal
regions, a hell. {%—Nabhaḥ-spṛś, k, k, k,%} or {%nabhaḥ-%}
{%spṛśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘sky-touching,’ reaching to
the sky. {%—Nabhaś-cakṣus, us,%} m. ‘eye of the
sky,’ the sun. {%—Nabhaś-camasa, as,%} m. ‘drinking
vessel of heaven,’ the moon; a variegated cake ({%=%}
{%citra-pūpa%}); magic, conjuring. {%—Nabhaś-cara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} ‘sky-going,’ going in the air; ({%as%}), m. an
inhabitant of heaven, a god; a Vidyā-dhara or demi-
god so called. {%—Nabhas-tala, am,%} n. ‘the bottom
of the clouds,’ the lower region of the sky, nether
sky; the sky, atmosphere; (in astronomy) N. of the
tenth solar mansion. {%—Nabhas-maya, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. vaporous, vapory, filled with vapour, exhaling
vapour, misty, hazy; (Sāy.) bright as the sun.
 — 1. {%nabhas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} vaporous, filled with
vapour, misty, cloudy; young; ({%ān%}), m. air, wind;
({%atī%}), f., N. of the wife of Antar-dhāna and mother
of Havir-dhāna. {%—2. nabhas-vat,%} ind. like vapour.
{%—Nabho-ga, as, am,%} m. n. (?), a star; ({%as%}), m.,
[Page0469-a+ 77]
N. of one of the seven sages of the tenth Manv-
antara. {%—Nabho-gaja, as,%} m. ‘an elephant in the
sky,’ a cloud. {%—Nabho-gati, is,%} f. going through
the sky, going in the air, soaring, flying. {%—Nabho-%}
{%jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. produced from vapour. {%—Nabho-%}
{%jū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. impelling the clouds; (Sāy.)
pervading or traversing the sky. {%—Nabho-da, as,%}
m., N. of one of the Viśve-devās. {%—Nabho-duha,%}
‘milking the sky;’ or {%nabho-dvīpa,%} ‘sky-island;’ or
{%nabho-dhūma,%} ‘sky-smoke;’ or {%nabho-dhvaja, as,%}
m. ‘sky-banner,’ a cloud. {%—Nabho-dṛṣṭi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} blind; looking up to heaven. {%—Nabho-nadī,%} f.
‘sky-river,’ the celestial Ganges. {%—Nabho-maṇi, is,%}
m. ‘sky-jewel,’ the sun. {%—Nabho-maṇḍala, am,%}
n. ‘sky-circle,’ the firmament; the atmosphere.
{%—Nabhomaṇḍala-dīpa, as,%} m. ‘light of the sky,’
the moon. {%—Nabho 'mbu-pa, as,%} m. ‘drinking the
water of the sky or rain-water,’ the bird Cātaka,
Cuculus Melanoleucus. {%—Nabho-yoni, is,%} m. ‘whose
birthplace is the sky,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Nabho-%}
{%rajas, as,%} n. ‘sky-dust (?),’ darkness. {%—Nabho-rūpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the form or colour of the
clouds, dark-coloured. {%—Nabho-reṇu, us,%} f. fog,
mist, vapour. {%—Nabho-laya, as,%} m. ‘having its
abode in the sky,’ smoke. {%—Nabho-lih, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} ‘sky-
licking,’ lofty, towering, rising to the clouds. {%—Nabho-%}
{%vaṭa, as,%} m. ‘the expanse of the sky,’ the atmo-
sphere. {%—Nabho-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing or possessing
heaven or the sky. {%—Nabho-vīthī,%} f. ‘sky-road,’ the
path of the sun. {%—Nabhaukas%} ({%nabha%} for {%nabhas%}
{%+ okas%}), inhabiting the atmosphere or heaven.
<LEND>

<L>23865<pc>0469-a<k1>naBasa<k2>naBasa
{%Nabhasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. vapourish, vapoury,
filled with vapour, misty; ({%as%}), m. heaven, air,
atmosphere; the rainy season; the ocean; N. of
one of the seven sages in the tenth Manv-antara; of
a Dānava; (also read {%rabhasa.%}) {%—Nabhasaṅ-%}
{%gama, as,%} m. ‘sky-goer,’ a bird.
<LEND>

<L>23866<pc>0469-a<k1>naBasya<k2>naBasya
{%Nabhasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ vapoury, filled with vapour,
misty, foggy; ({%as%}), m., N. of a month of the rainy
season (= Bhādra, August-September); N. of a son
of Manu Svārociṣa or of the third Manu [cf. {%nabha%}];
epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>23867<pc>0469-a<k1>naBAka<k2>naBAka
{%Nabhāka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi by whom
three hymns of the Ṛg-veda (VIII. 39-41) are
supposed to have been composed, see {%nābhāka;%}
{%(am),%} n. (said to be {%= nabhas%} and to be derived
fr. 2. {%na%} + rt. 1. {%bhā%} + aff. {%āka%}), darkness; a cloud;
the sky. {%—Nabhāka-vat%} in Ṛg-veda VIII. 40 = the
hymn of Nabhāka.
<LEND>

<L>23868<pc>0469-a<k1>naBya<k2>naBya<h>1
1. {%nabhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ foggy, misty, cloudy.
<LEND>

<L>23869<pc>0469-a<k1>naBAga<k2>naBAga
{#naBAga#}¦ {%nabhāga, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Manu Vaivasvata; [cf. {%nabha-ga, nābhāga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23870<pc>0469-a<k1>naBi<k2>naBi
{#naBi#}¦ {%nabhi, is,%} m. (?), a wheel.
<LEND>

<L>23871<pc>0469-a<k1>naBIta<k2>naBIta
{#naBIta#}¦ {%na-bhīta, as, ā, am,%} not afraid, un-
daunted, dauntless. {%—Nabhīta-vat,%} ind. in a fearless
manner, fearlessly.
<LEND>

<L>23872<pc>0469-a<k1>naBya<k2>naBya<h>2
{#naBya#} 2¦. {%nabhya, am,%} n. (said to be fr. {%nabha%}
for {%nābhi%}), Ved. the centre part of a wheel, the
nave; the middle. {%—Nabhya-stha, as, ā, am,%}
standing in the middle; belonging to the nave of
a wheel, fit for a nave; {%nabhyaṃ tailam,%} oil for
greasing the nave of a wheel.
<LEND>

<L>23873<pc>0469-a<k1>naBrAj<k2>naBrAj
{#naBrAj#}¦ {%na-bhrāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘not shining,’ a
dark cloud.
<LEND>

<L>23874<pc>0469-a<k1>nam<k2>nam
{#nam#}¦ {%nam,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%namati, -te%} (the
Ātmane-pada being generally used in the
intransitive sense), {%nanāma, neme%} (2nd sing. {%ne-%}
{%mitha%} or {%nanantha,%} ep. 3rd pl. A. {%ava-nanāmire,%}
Ved. 1st sing. P. {%nānāma%}), {%nantā, naṃsyati, na-%}
{%miṣyati, anaṃsīt, anaṃsta%} (Ved., Aor. 3rd sing.
{%anān;%} Leṭ, 1st sing. {%naṃsai,%} Ṛg-veda III. 33, 10),
{%nantum%} (Ved. inf. {%ni-name%}), to bow to, make or
pay obeisance to (with dat., gen., and acc.); to bow,
bow down, subject or submit one's self; to bend;
to be bent or curved; to sink; (in grammar) to
change a dental letter into a cerebral; to sound;
Pass. {%namyate:%} Caus. {%namayati%} and (with prep.)
[Page0469-b+ 81]
{%nāmayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%anīnamat,%} to cause to
bow, bend, curve, make curved, (with {%dhanus%} or
{%cāpam%}) to bend a bow; to cause to sink or de-
cline; to ward off; to turn away from; (in grammar)
to change a dental into a cerebral: Desid. {%ninaṃ-%}
{%sati:%} Intens. {%nannamīti, nannanti, nannamyate,%}
to bow, be bent, bend very low; [cf. Zend <nsi>nemanh</nsi>
{%= namas, nim-ata,%} ‘grass:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">νέμ-ω, νέμ-ο-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νωμά-ω, νομ-ή, νέμ-η-σι-ς, νεμ-έ-τωρ, νομ-εύ-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νέμ-ε-σι-ς, νόμο-ς, νομίζ-ω, νόμισ-μα, νέμ-ος, Νε-μέα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νομ-ό-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>Nŭma, Nŭm-i-tor, nŭm-e-ru-s,</nsi>
<nsi>Numerius, nĕm-us:</nsi> Goth. and Angl. Sax. <nsi>nim-an,</nsi>
‘to take,’ originally ‘to subdue:’ Old Germ. <nsi>nām-a,</nsi>
‘prey:’ Lith. <nsi>náma-s,</nsi> ‘a house;’ <nsi>nú§m-a-s,</nsi> ‘gain:’
Lett. <nsi>nom-a,</nsi> ‘interest:’ probably Hib. <nsi>naomh,</nsi> ‘a
saint, sacred;’ <nsi>naomhachd,</nsi> ‘holiness.’]
<LEND>

<L>23875<pc>0469-b<k1>namat<k2>namat
{%Namat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bending, bowing, stooping.
<LEND>

<L>23876<pc>0469-b<k1>namata<k2>namata
{%Namata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, bowed, crooked, curved;
({%as%}), m. a master, lord (?); an actor, mime; smoke;
a cloud; ({%am%}), n. felt, woollen stuff; [cf. {%nāmatika,%}
1. {%navata.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23877<pc>0469-b<k1>namana<k2>namana
{%Namana, as,%}¦ m. one who causes to bend or bow;
({%am%}), n. bowing down, sinking; [cf. {%gṛha-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23878<pc>0469-b<k1>namanIya<k2>namanIya
{%Namanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bowed down to,
one to whom one must pay obeisance, venerable.
<LEND>

<L>23879<pc>0469-b<k1>namayat<k2>namayat
{%Namayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bending, causing to bow
down, inclining.
<LEND>

<L>23880<pc>0469-b<k1>namayizRu<k2>namayizRu
{%Namayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. bowing, bending.
<LEND>

<L>23881<pc>0469-b<k1>namas<k2>namas
{%Namas, as,%}¦ n. (often treated as an indeclinable
interjection or exclamation), bowing, bending, making
a bow, a bow, salutation, reverential salutation, paying
honour (in gesture or words); adoration, obeisance
(performed by joining the palms and inclining the
head; often used in connection with the N. of a
deity in the dat., e. g. {%Rāmāya namas,%} salutation
or glory or reverence to Rāma); food (Ved.); giving,
presenting, a gift, present; a thunderbolt (Ved.);
an inarticulate cry (said to be m. ?). {%—Nama-ukti,%}
{%is,%} f., Ved. uttering a salutation, paying homage or
obeisance. {%—Namas-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} worshipping
or adoring (the gods); a worshipper, pious. {%—Na-%}
{%mas-kāra, as,%} m. uttering the interjection or excla-
mation {%namas,%} bowing, respectful or reverential
address or salutation, adoration, obeisance; a sort of
poison; ({%ī%}), f. a sensitive plant. {%—Namaskāra-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing the Namas-kāra. {%—Na-%}
{%mas-kārya, as, ā, am,%} to be bowed down to, one
to whom one must pay obeisance, before whom one
must say {%namas;%} to be worshipped. {%—Namas-kṛ,%}
cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to utter the exclamation
{%namas%} (sometimes with dat., loc., and acc.). {%—Na-%}
{%mas-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} worshipped, reverenced,
adored. {%—Namas-kṛtya%} or {%namas-kṛtvā,%} ind. hav-
ing saluted reverentially. {%—Namas-kriyā,%} f. reve-
rential salutation, bowing, worshipping, adoration.
{%—Namas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. paying adoration
or homage, worshipping, adoring; inspiring vene-
ration; (Sāy.) abounding in food. {%—Namas-vin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} paying homage, worshipping, reverential,
respectful. {%—Namo-guru, us,%} m. a spiritual teacher.
{%—Namo-vāka, as,%} m., Ved. uttering the {%namas%}
or obeisance in general. {%—Namo-vṛkti, is,%} f., Ved.
reverential cleansing (of the Barhis). {%—Namo-vṛdh,%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. honoured by adoration; (Sāy.) food-
augmenting, increasing food; ({%ā%}), m. du. ‘delighting
in adoration,’ epithet of Mitra-Varuṇa.
<LEND>

<L>23882<pc>0469-b<k1>namasa<k2>namasa
{%Namasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ favourable, kindly disposed;
({%as%}), m. agreement (?).
<LEND>

<L>23883<pc>0469-b<k1>namasAna<k2>namasAna
{%Namasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. paying obeisance,
worshipping.
<LEND>

<L>23884<pc>0469-b<k1>namasita<k2>namasita
{%Namasita, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably corrupted from
{%namasyita%}), reverenced, respected, worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>23885<pc>0469-b<k1>namasya<k2>namasya<h>1
1. {%namasya%}¦ (fr. {%namas%}), Nom. P. (ep. also A.)
{%namasyati (-te),%} &c., to pay homage, make obei-
sance, worship (with acc.); to act humbly or defe-
rentially.
<LEND>

<L>23886<pc>0469-b<k1>namasya<k2>namasya<h>2
2. {%namasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be worshipped or
adored, one to whom obeisance must be made,
venerable, respectable, entitled to salutation or civility;
reverential, respectful, humble; ({%ā%}), f. reverence,
respect, worship, adoration.
<LEND>
[Page0469-c+ 74]

<L>23887<pc>0469-c<k1>namasya<k2>namasya<h>3
3. {%namasya,%}¦ ind. having paid homage, having
worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>23888<pc>0469-c<k1>namasyat<k2>namasyat
{%Namasyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ saluting reverentially,
making obeisance, bowing to, paying adoration.
<LEND>

<L>23889<pc>0469-c<k1>namasyita<k2>namasyita
{%Namasyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reverenced, respected,
worshipped; [cf. {%namasita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23890<pc>0469-c<k1>namasyu<k2>namasyu
{%Namasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. paying homage, making
obeisance, worshipping; ({%us%}), m., N. of a son of
Pravīra, descendant of Puru.
<LEND>

<L>23891<pc>0469-c<k1>namita<k2>namita
{%Namita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bowed, bent down, making
salutation or obeisance.
<LEND>

<L>23892<pc>0469-c<k1>namya<k2>namya
{%Namya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bowed down to, vene-
rable; changeable to a cerebral letter; ({%ā%}), f. the
night (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>23893<pc>0469-c<k1>namra<k2>namra
{%Namra, as, ā, am,%}¦ bowing, bowing down, in-
clining, ({%mūrdhnā namraḥ,%} bowing the head, lit.
with the head); bent, bowed, inclined; curved,
crooked; hanging down; sunk; making obeisance;
lowly, submissive, reverential, humble; worshipping,
adoring; devoted to; ({%ā%}), m. du., Ved. epithet of
two verses addressed to Agni. {%—Namra-tā,%} f. or
{%namra-tva, am,%} n. the state of being bowed or
bent, bowing, bowing or hanging down, obeisance,
adoration, respect, devotion; submissiveness, humble-
ness, humility, meekness; condescension. {%—Namra-%}
{%prakṛti, is, is, i,%} of a gentle or submissive dispo-
sition. {%—Namra-mukha, as, ī, am,%} having the face
bent down, looking down. {%—Namra-mūrti, is, is,%}
{%i,%} having the form bent, stooping, bowed. {%—Nam-%}
{%rāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} bowing or bending the
body, bowed, bent, stooping. {%—Namrī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} bowed down, bent down, humbled.
<LEND>

<L>23894<pc>0469-c<k1>namraka<k2>namraka
{%Namraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ bowed down, bent, stoop-
ing; ({%as%}), m. a species of reed ({%= vetasa%}).
<LEND>

<L>23895<pc>0469-c<k1>namrita<k2>namrita
{%Namrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent down, bowed down,
made to sink.
<LEND>

<L>23896<pc>0469-c<k1>namAtra<k2>namAtra
{#namAtra#}¦ {%na-mātra, as, am,%} m. n. (?), a par-
ticular high number; [cf. {%nahi-mātra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23897<pc>0469-c<k1>nami<k2>nami
{#nami#}¦ {%nami = nemi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23898<pc>0469-c<k1>namI<k2>namI
{#namI#}¦ {%namī,%} m., Ved., N. of a Ṛṣi; (ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 53, 7), foe-prostrating
(applied to the thunderbolt).
<LEND>

<L>23899<pc>0469-c<k1>namuca<k2>namuca
{#namuca#}¦ {%namuca, as,%} m., N. of an ancient
sage; (also read {%unmucu, pramucu, mucu, un-%}
{%muca, vimuca.%})
<LEND>

<L>23900<pc>0469-c<k1>namuci<k2>namuci
{#namuci#}¦ {%na-muci, is,%} m. ‘not loosing the
heavenly waters’ (i. e. confining the clouds and pre-
venting the flow of rain), N. of a demon vanquished
and slain by Indra and the Aśvins; N. of the god
of love. {%—Namuci-dviṣ, ṭ,%} ‘enemy of Namuci;’ or
{%Namuci-sūdana, as,%} ‘destroyer of Namuci;’ or {%Na-%}
{%muci-han, ā,%} m. ‘killer of Namuci,’ epithets of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>23901<pc>0469-c<k1>namura<k2>namura
{#namura#}¦ {%na-mura, as, am,%} m. n. (?), Ved. not
dying (?).
<LEND>

<L>23902<pc>0469-c<k1>nameru<k2>nameru
{#nameru#}¦ {%nameru, us,%} m. the tree Eleocarpus
Ganitrus ({%= rudrākṣa, = sura-punnāga%}).
<LEND>

<L>23903<pc>0469-c<k1>namEya<k2>namEya
{#namEya#}¦ {%namaiya, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>23904<pc>0469-c<k1>namb<k2>namb
{#namb#}¦ {%namb,%} cl. 1. P. {%nambati,%} &c., to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>23905<pc>0469-c<k1>namra<k2>namra
{#namra#}¦ {%namra.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>23906<pc>0469-c<k1>naya<k2>naya<h>1
{#naya#} 1¦. {%nay,%} cl. 1. A. {%nayate, neye, nayi-%}
{%tum,%} to go, move; to protect; [cf. rt.
1. {%nī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23907<pc>0469-c<k1>naya<k2>naya
{#naya#}¦ {%naya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%nī%}), guiding,
leading, directing, managing; manner of conducting
one's self, behaviour, conduct, course of conduct, way
of life, management; prudent conduct or behaviour,
good management; prudence, reason; polity, policy,
political wisdom, state-policy, political economy,
statesmanship, civil administration, government; any
work on policy or political economy; Prudence or
Policy personified as a son of Dharma and Kriyā;
plan, design; leading thought, maxim, principle;
opinion, system, course, method; philosophical
[Page0470-a+ 79]
system; the philosophical part of the Veda (?); a
kind of game; a sort of dice or men for playing this
game [cf. {%naya-pīṭhī%}]; a move in this game (?);
N. of a son of the thirteenth Manu; {%(as, ā, am), =%}
{%netṛ,%} leading, guiding, conducting; a leader, guide;
{%= nyāya,%} fit, right, proper. {%—Naya-kovida, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} skilled in policy, prudent. {%—Naya-ga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} following a system. {%—Naya-cakṣus, us,%}
{%us, us,%} having political foresight, wise, prudent.
{%—Naya-jā,%} f., N. of the wife of king Brahma-dāsa,
father of Nārāyaṇa, who composed the Praśnārṇava.
{%—Naya-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing polity, prudent;
knowing any system, a follower of any system.
{%—Naya-netṛ, tā,%} m. a master in policy or politics.
{%—Naya-pāla, as,%} m. ‘protector of policy,’ N. of a
man; of a king. {%—Naya-pīṭhī,%} f. the board or cloth
on which dice or men are moved in play. {%—Naya-%}
{%prayoga, as,%} m. policy, political wisdom or address.
{%—Naya-locana, am,%} n. ‘the eye of policy,’ N. of
a work. {%—Naya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} familiar with
policy, versed in polity, prudent; containing any
form of rt. 1. {%nī%} (as a Ṛk). {%—Naya-vid, t, t, t,%}
or {%naya-viśārada, as, ā, am,%} m. knowing polity,
skilled in policy, a politician, statesman. {%—Naya-%}
{%śālin, ī, inī, i,%} possessing political wisdom, endowed
with prudence. {%—Naya-śāstra, am,%} n. any work on
policy or political economy, the doctrine of polity.
{%—Naya-sāra, as,%} m. ‘essence of polity,’ N. of a
treatise. {%—Naya-siddhi, is,%} f. political success, ac-
complishing anything by good management.
<LEND>

<L>23908<pc>0470-a<k1>nayaka<k2>nayaka
{%Nayaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ a skilful manager, clever in
policy or political administration.
<LEND>

<L>23909<pc>0470-a<k1>nayat<k2>nayat
{%Nayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ leading, guiding; tending
or conducing to; informing, certifying, giving evi-
dence, obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>23910<pc>0470-a<k1>nayana<k2>nayana
{%Nayana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. the
pupil of the eye; ({%am%}), n. leading, guiding, con-
ducting, managing; governing, directing, ruling;
leading or bringing to, drawing; (with {%kālasya%}),
passing or spending (time); attaining, obtaining;
‘the guiding or leading organ,’ the eye. {%—Nayana-%}
{%gocara, as, ā, am,%} perceptible by the eye, within
the range of vision, visible, apparent. {%—Nayana-%}
{%cchada, as,%} m. ‘eye-covering,’ an eyelid. {%—Na-%}
{%yana-jala, am,%} n. ‘eye-water,’ tears. {%—Nayana-%}
{%patha, as,%} m. range or field of sight. {%—Nayana-%}
{%puṭa, as, am,%} m. n. (?), the eyelid. {%—Nayana-vāri,%}
{%i,%} n. ‘eye-water,’ tears. {%—Nayana-viṣaya, as,%} m.
‘field of vision, range of sight,’ the horizon. {%—Na-%}
{%yana-salila, am,%} n. ‘eye-water,’ tears. {%—Naya-%}
{%nāñjana (˚na-añ˚), am,%} n. any ointment for the
eye. {%—Nayanānanda (˚na-ān˚)%} or {%nayanānanda-%}
{%śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a commentator on the Amara-
koṣa. {%—Nayanāmoṣin (˚na-ām˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} ‘sight-
stealing,’ blinding. {%—Nayanotsava (˚na-ut˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘eye-festival,’ any lovely or desired object; a
lamp. {%—Nayanoda (˚na-uda), am,%} n. eye-water;
[cf. {%nayana-salila.%}] {%—Nayanopānta (˚na-up˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the outer angle or corner of the eye, the
canthus. {%—Nayanauṣadha (˚na-oṣ˚), am,%} n.
‘eye-medicament,’ green sulphate of iron or that
salt in a state of partial decomposition by exposure
to the atmosphere (used as a collyrium).
<LEND>

<L>23911<pc>0470-a<k1>nayitavya<k2>nayitavya
{%Nayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be conducted or brought.
<LEND>

<L>23912<pc>0470-a<k1>nayizWa<k2>nayizWa
{%Nayiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. leading in the best
manner.
<LEND>

<L>23913<pc>0470-a<k1>nayuta<k2>nayuta
{#nayuta#}¦ {%nayuta, as, am,%} m. n. (?), 100,000
millions.
<LEND>

<L>23914<pc>0470-a<k1>nayyagroDa<k2>nayyagroDa
{#nayyagroDa#}¦ {%nayyagrodha, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%nya-%}
{%grodha%}), Ved. relating to or produced from the
sacred fig-tree; (also read {%naiyagrodha.%})
<LEND>

<L>23915<pc>0470-a<k1>nara<k2>nara
{#nara#}¦ {%nara, as,%} m. (for etymology see the
simple form {%nṛ%}), a man, a male, a person; a man
or piece at chess, draughts, &c.; the pin or gnomon
of a sun-dial; (in grammar) person, personal ter-
mination [cf. {%puruṣa%}]; a sort of measure, a man's
length; the original or eternal Man, the divine
imperishable spirit pervading the universe (always
associated with Nārāyaṇa which as a patronymic from
[Page0470-b+ 81]
Nara = ‘son of the original Man;’ in Manu Nara
is apparently identified with Nārāyaṇa, see 1. 10, where
the waters are called Nārā as produced from Nara or the
eternal spirit [according to Kullūka = Paramātman,
Brahman], which spirit is thence also called Nārāyaṇa
as ‘having his first place of motion on the waters;’ but
in the more systematic mythology Nara and Nārāyaṇa
are distinct, the former being regarded as a sage or
patriarch, ‘the best of men’ or ‘chief man,’ while the
latter is a god; in epic poetry they are the sons of
Dharma by Mūrti or A-hiṃsā and are emanations
of Viṣṇu, Arjuna being identified with Nara, and
Kṛṣṇa with Nārāyaṇa; in some places Nara and
Nārāyaṇa are called {%devau,%} ‘the two gods,’ or
{%pūrva-devau,%} ‘the two original gods,’ or {%ṛṣī,%}
‘the two sages,’ or {%purāṇāv ṛṣi-sattamau,%} ‘the
two most ancient and best of sages,’ or {%tāpasau,%} ‘the
two ascetics,’ or {%mahā-munī,%} ‘the two great Munis’);
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of certain mythical beings allied to the
Gandharvas and Kin-naras, qq. vv. (thought by some
to be a kind of centaur, half horse, half man); N.
of one of the ten horses of the moon; N. of a son
of Manu Tāmasa; of a son of Viśvā-mitra; N. of a
son of Gaya and father of Virāj; of a son of Su-
dhṛti and father of Kevala; N. of a son of Bhavan-
manyu (Manyu) and father of Saṅkṛti; N. of two
kings of Kaśmīra; ({%ī%}), f. a woman, {%= nārī; (am),%}
n. a kind of fragrant grass, {%= rāma-karpūra;%} [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀνήρ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>Nero, Neriene;</nsi> probably Hib.
<nsi>naoi,</nsi> ‘a man,’ but see {%nṛ.%}] {%—Nara-kapāla, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a man's skull. {%—Nara-kīlaka, as,%} m. the
murderer of his spiritual preceptor. {%—Nara-keśarin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘man-lion,’ ‘half man, half lion,’ Viṣṇu in his
fourth Ava-tāra; [cf. {%nara-siṃha.%}] {%—Nara-grāha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘man-crocodile,’ ‘half man, half crocodile,’
N. of a kind of Kirāta. {%—Nara-tā,%} f. or {%nara-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. humanity, manhood, human condition. {%—Na-%}
{%ra-troṭakācārya (˚ka-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Nara-datta, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman, a nephew
of the Ṛṣi Asita; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a goddess executing
the commands of the twentieth Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī; one of the sixteen Vidyā-devīs. {%—Nara-%}
{%deva, as,%} m. ‘a god among men,’ a sovereign, king.
{%—Naradeva-tva, am,%} n. kingship, royalty, kingly
rank. {%—Naradeva-deva, as,%} m. a god among the
gods of men or kings. {%—Naradeva-putra, as,%} m.
the son of a man and a god. {%—Nara-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m.
‘enemy of men,’ a Rakṣas. {%—Nara-nagara, am,%}
n., N. of a town. {%—Nara-nātha, as,%} m. ‘protector
of men,’ a king, a prince. {%—Naranātha-mārga, as,%}
m. ‘king's road, royal road,’ the chief road, high
street. {%—Naranāthāsana (˚tha-ās˚), am,%} n. the
throne or dignity of a king. {%—Nara-nāyaka, as,%}
m. ‘leader of men,’ a king, a prince. {%—Nara-nārā-%}
{%yaṇa, as,%} m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa; ({%au%}), m. du.
Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, see {%nara%} above. {%—Naran-dhi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘man-containing,’ the world, (a word given
by Mahī-dhara to explain the etymology of {%naran-%}
{%dhiṣa%} below.) {%—Naran-dhiṣa, as,%} m., Ved. ‘ob-
serving men (?),’ an epithet of Viṣṇu; of Pūṣan;
(according to Mahī-dhara on Vājasaneyi-s. VIII. 55.
this comp. is either {%narandhi-ṣa,%} ‘destroying the
world,’ see {%naran-dhi%} above, or {%na-randhiṣa,%}
‘not injuring,’ i. e. ‘a protector;’ in XXII. 20. he
explains {%naran-dhiṣa%} by ‘man-praising.’) {%—Nara-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of men,’ a king, sovereign; N. of
one of the four mythical kings of Jambu-dvīpa.
{%—Narapati-jaya-caryā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Nara-%}
{%pati-patha, as,%} m. ‘king's road,’ the chief road,
high street. {%—Narapati-vijaya, as,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Nara-paśu, us,%} m. ‘man-beast,’ a brute in
human form, a beast-like man. {%—Nara-pāla, as,%}
m. ‘protector of men,’ a king, a prince. {%—Nara-%}
{%puṅgava, as,%} m. an excellent hero. {%—Nara-priya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} favourable or friendly to manking; ({%as%}),
m. a species of tree {%(= nīla-vṛkṣa)%}. {%—Nara-bali,%}
{%is,%} m. a human sacrifice; [cf. {%nara-medha, puru-%}
{%ṣa-medha.%}] {%—Nara-brahma-deva, as,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Nara-bhuj, k, k, k,%} man-eating. can-
nibal. {%—Nara-bhū, ūs,%} f. or {%nara-bhūmi, is,%} f. ‘the
land of men, birthplace of men,’ Bhārata-varṣa,
[Page0470-c+ 81]
i. e. India or the central part of the known con-
tinent. {%—Nara-mānikā%} or {%nara-māninī,%} f. a man-
like woman, a woman with a beard; [cf. {%nara-%}
{%mālinī.%}] {%—Nara-mālā,%} f. a string or girdle of skulls.
{%—Nara-mālinī,%} f. {%= nara-māninī%} (of which it is
probably a corruption). {%—Nara-mūrchana, am,%} n.,
N. of the eighty-ninth chapter of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa
of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Nara-medha, as,%} m. a
human sacrifice, the sacrifice of a man; [cf. {%nṛ-%}
{%bali, puruṣa-medha.%}] {%—Naram-manya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} considered as a man, passing for a man. {%—Nara-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n. ‘instrument with a gnomon,’ a sun-
dial. {%—Nara-yāna, am,%} n. a carriage drawn by
men; (in Pañca-tantra III. 248. {%nara-yāṇa%} with
cerebral {%ṇ%} = ‘a man-vehicle, a man serving as a
vehicle for carrying another.’) {%—Nara-ratha, as,%} m.
a wrong form for {%nava-ratha%}. {%—Nara-rāja, as,%}
m. ‘king of men,’ a king. {%—Nararājya, am,%} n.
‘empire over men,’ kingship, royalty, kingdom.
{%—Nara-rūpa, as, ī, am,%} formed like a man, man-
like; ({%am%}), n. the form of a man, human form.
{%—Nara-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having the human form.
{%—Nararṣabha (˚ra-ṛṣ˚), as,%} m. ‘man-bull,’
chief of men, a prince. {%—Nara-loka, as,%} m. the
world of men, the earth; mortals, men. {%—Naraloka-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m. ‘protector of men,’ a king. {%—Naraloka-%}
{%vīra, as,%} m. ‘a hero among men,’ a human hero.
{%—Nara-vat,%} ind. like a man. {%—Nara-vara, as,%}
m. an excellent or illustrious man. {%—Naravara-%}
{%vṛṣabha, as,%} m. an excellent hero (like a bull).
{%—Naravarottama (˚ra-ut˚), as,%} m. the best of
excellent men. {%—Nara-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a
prince of Mālava in the twelfth century. {%—Nara-%}
{%vāhana, as, ā, am,%} borne or carried by men, drawn
by men; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Kuvera; N. of a
prince, successor of Śāli-vāhana; of a prince of the
Dārvābhisāras; of a minister of king Kṣema-gupta.
{%—Naravāhana-janana, am,%} n., N. of the fourth
section of the Kathā-sarit-sāgara by Soma-deva.
{%—Naravāhana-datta, as,%} m., N. of a son of king
Udayana. {%—Nara-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%} carried or drawn
by men (as a vehicle). {%—Nara-viṣvaṇa, as,%} m.
‘man-devourer,’ a Rakṣas, an imp or goblin.
{%—Nara-vīra, as,%} m. ‘a hero of a man,’ an heroic
man, a hero or brave man. {%—Naravīra-loka, as,%}
m. the bravest of men; mankind in general. {%—Nara-%}
{%vyāghra%} or {%nara-śārdūla, as,%} m. ‘man-tiger,’ an
eminent man; the most illustrious of men. {%—Nara-%}
{%śṛṅga, am,%} n. ‘man's horn,’ i. e. anything chime-
rical or impossible. {%—Nara-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. the
best of men. {%—Nara-saṃsarga, as,%} m. intercourse
of men, human society. {%—Nara-sakha, as,%} m.
‘friend of Nara,’ an epithet of Nārāyaṇa. {%—Nara-%}
{%saṅghārāma (˚gha-ār˚), as,%} m. (?), N. of a Buddhist
monastery. {%—Nara-sāra, as,%} m. a particular sub-
stance or article of commerce, sal ammoniac (?).
{%—Nara-siṃha, as,%} m. ‘man-lion,’ a lion among
men, a great warrior, a man of eminence or power,
a chief; ‘the lion-headed man’ or Viṣṇu in his
fourth Ava-tāra when he descended to fight with
Hiraṇya-kaśipu; N. of the father of king Bhairava;
of several authors and princes; [cf. {%nāra-siṃha, nṛ-%}
{%siṃha, nara-hari.%}] {%—Narasiṃha-deva, as,%} m. ‘a
god among the men-lions,’ N. of several princes.
{%—Narasiṃha-dvādaśī-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a par-
ticular ceremony performed in the month Phālguna;
N. of the forty-second chapter of the Vārāha-Purāṇa.
{%—Narasiṃha-paṇḍita, as,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Narasiṃha-pārijāta,%} N. of a work by Nara-
siṃha. {%—Narasiṃha-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a
Purāṇa. {%—Narasiṃha-manu,%} N. of the sixteenth
chapter of the Śāradā-tilaka by Lakṣmaṇa. {%—Nara-%}
{%siṃha-yantra, am,%} n., N. of a mystical diagram
described in the Tantra-sāra. {%—Narasiṃha-saras-%}
{%vatī,%} m., N. of a commentator on the Vedānta-
sāra. {%—Narasiṃha-sahasra-nāmāni,%} n. pl. ‘the
thousand names of the man-lion,’ i. e. of Viṣṇu,
N. of a work. {%—Nara-skandha, as,%} m. a multitude
or body of men. {%—Nara-haya, am,%} n. (with {%yud-%}
{%dha%}), a fight between man and horse; [cf. {%devā-%}
{%sura.%}] {%—Nara-hari, is,%} m. Viṣṇu as ‘the man-lion’
[Page0471-a+ 80]
in his fourth Ava-tāra [cf. {%nara-siṃha%}]; N. of a
man. {%—Narahari-deva, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Narāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), as, am,%} m. n. ‘male-
member,’ the penis; ({%as%}), m. eruption on the face.
{%—Narācī (˚ra + ācī%} fr. {%añc%}), f., Ved. a species of
plant (?); N. of a wife of Kṛṣṇa; a kind of metre,
(see under {%nārāca.%}) {%—Narādhama (˚ra-adh˚), as,%}
m. a low or vile man, a wretch. {%—Narādhāra (˚ra-%}
{%ādh˚), as,%} m. ‘asylum or receptacle of men,’ an epi-
thet of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. the earth. {%—Narādhipa (˚ra-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of men,’ a prince, king, monarch;
the tree Cathartocarpus Fistula; [cf. {%rāja-vṛkṣa.%}]
{%—Narādhipati (˚ra-adh˚), is,%} m. ‘lord of men,’
a king, a prince. {%—Narānta (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m., N.
of a son of Hṛdīka. {%—Narāntaka (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m.
‘man-destroyer,’ death; N. of a Rākṣasa, son of
Rāvaṇa. {%—Narāntaka-nigraha-varṇana, am,%} n.
‘description of the subjugation of Narāntaka,’ N. of
the fifty-ninth chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the
Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Narāntaka-nirgama, as,%} m.
‘the coming forth of Narāntaka,’ N. of the fifty-
seventh chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-
Purāṇa. {%—Narāyaṇa (˚ra-ay˚), as,%} m. {%= nārāyaṇa,%}
a N. of Viṣṇu, &c. {%—Narāśa (˚ra-āśa), as,%} m.
‘man-eater,’ a Rakṣas, an imp or demon. {%—Narā-%}
{%śaṃsa (˚ra-āś˚), as,%} m., Ved. ‘the desire of men,
desired of men (?),’ a mystical N. of Agni (invoked
in the Āprī hymns with Tanū-napāt, another mystical
epithet of Fire, or taking the place of Tanū-napāt in
these hymns, see {%ā-prī%}). {%—Narāśana (˚ra-aś˚), as,%}
m. ‘man-eater,’ a Rakṣas or demon. {%—Naretara%}
{%(˚ra-it˚), as,%} m. a being differing from men; a higher
being than a man; a lower being, an animal, a
beast-like man. {%—Narendra (˚ra-in˚), as,%} m. ‘lord
of men,’ a king, a prince, an anointed sovereign; a
physician, a dealer in antidotes; a juggler (?); a con-
veyer of news or intelligence (?); N. of a man; a
species of tree ({%= narādhipa%}); a kind of metre
consisting of four lines of twenty-one syllables each.
{%—Narendra-tva, am,%} n. kingship, royalty. {%—Na-%}
{%rendra-druma, as,%} m. the tree Narendra. {%—Na-%}
{%rendra-putra, as,%} m. a prince. {%—Narendra-mārga,%}
{%as,%} m. the king's high-road, a royal or main road,
high street. {%—Narendra-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a
temple or holy place built by and called after Naren-
drāditya. {%—Narendrācārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of
a grammarian. {%—Narendrāditya (˚ra-ād˚), as,%} m.,
N. of two princes of Kaśmīra. {%—Narendrāhva (˚ra-%}
{%āh˚), as, am,%} m. n. (?), a kind of Aloë {%(= kāṣṭhā-%}
{%guru)%}. {%—Nareśa%} or {%nareśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m.
‘lord of men,’ a king, a prince. {%—Nareśvara-viveka,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Śaiva work by Parameṣṭhin. {%—Nare-%}
{%ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. serving as a standing-place
for men?; (Sāy.) resting on conducting (wheels).
{%—Narottama (˚ra-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘best of men,’ an
epithet of Viṣṇu; of Buddha; N. of a scholiast of
the Adhyātma-rāmāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>23916<pc>0471-a<k1>narya<k2>narya
{%Narya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. manly, human, (often
with {%apas,%} a manly deed, a heroic deed); strong,
powerful; suitable or agreeable to men (as food);
({%as%}), m. a man, a person; an epithet of Indra; of
Agni Gārhapatya; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), m. du., scil.
{%ubhā śaṃsā,%} the two objects of desire, i. e. heaven
and earth [cf. {%narāśaṃsa%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet of
the Maruts; ({%am%}), n. a manly act, manly deed; a
gift for men. {%—Naryāpas (˚ya-ap˚), ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. performing manly deeds; (Sāy.) performing
deeds agreeable or suitable to men.
<LEND>

<L>23917<pc>0471-a<k1>naraka<k2>naraka
{#naraka#}¦ {%naraka, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%nṝ%}), hell, the place of torment (distinguished fr.
{%pātāla,%} the lower regions, q. v.), including a num-
ber of places of torture of various descriptions, gene-
rally said to be twenty-one in number [cf. {%nāraka%}];
(Hell is sometimes personified as a son of Anṛta and
Nirṛti or Nikṛti); ({%as%}), m., N. of a demon, a son of
Bhūmi or Earth (therefore called Bhauma, haunting
Prāg-jyotiṣa and slain there by Kṛṣṇa); N. of a
man; N. of a district; of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Na-%}
{%raka-kuṇḍa, am,%} n. a pit or abyss in hell wherein
the wicked are tormented, (eighty-six such are enume-
[Page0471-b+ 74]
rated). {%—Naraka-jit, t,%} m. ‘vanquisher of the demon
Naraka,’ epithet of Viṣṇu-Kṛṣṇa. {%—Naraka-de-%}
{%vatā,%} f. ‘the deity of hell,’ Nirṛti; Misfortune per-
sonified as a goddess. {%—Naraka-bhūmi, is,%} f. a
division of hell, (of which seven are enumerated.)
{%—Naraka-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} ‘hell-formed,’ hellish.
{%—Naraka-varga, as,%} m. ‘the hell chapter,’ N.
of a chapter of Amara-siṃha's Nāma-liṅgānuśāsana.
{%—Naraka-varṇana, am,%} n. ‘description of hell,’
N. of a chapter of the Revā-māhātmya. {%—Naraka-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} living or being in hell; ({%ā%}), f. the
river of hell, Vaitaraṇī. {%—Naraka-svarga-prāpti-%}
{%prakāra-varṇana, am,%} n. ‘description of the mode
of obtaining heaven and hell,’ N. of the eighth
chapter of the Māgha-māhātmya. {%—Narakāntaka%}
{%(˚ka-an˚), as,%} m. ‘destroyer of the demon Naraka,’
an epithet of Kṛṣṇa-Viṣṇu. {%—Narakāmaya (˚ka-%}
{%ām˚), as,%} m. the soul after death; a ghost or spirit.
{%—Narakāri (˚ka-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of the
demon Naraka,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa-Viṣṇu.
{%—Narakāvāsa (˚ka-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘one whose abode
is hell,’ an inhabitant of hell. {%—Narakaukas (˚ka-%}
{%ok˚), ās,%} m. an inhabitant of hell.
<LEND>

<L>23918<pc>0471-b<k1>narakAya<k2>narakAya
{%Narakāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%narakāyate,%} &c., to repre-
sent a hell; to resemble or be similar to hell.
<LEND>

<L>23919<pc>0471-b<k1>naraNga<k2>naraNga
{#naraNga#}¦ {%naraṅga, as,%} m. pimples on the face
{%(= varaṇḍaka); (am),%} n. the penis; (wrong form
for {%narāṅga,%} see col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>23920<pc>0471-b<k1>narada<k2>narada
{#narada#}¦ {%narada, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a par-
ticular substance or article of commerce, a kind of
perfume ? [cf. {%nalada%}]; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>23921<pc>0471-b<k1>naradika<k2>naradika
{%Naradika, as, ī, am,%}¦ dealing in the substance
called Narada.
<LEND>

<L>23922<pc>0471-b<k1>narAyaRa<k2>narAyaRa
{#narAyaRa#}¦ {%narāyaṇa, narendra.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>23923<pc>0471-b<k1>narizwA<k2>narizwA
{#narizwA#}¦ {%nariṣṭā,%} f., Ved. joking, chatter-
ing; sport, pastime; [cf. {%narma, narman.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23924<pc>0471-b<k1>narizyat<k2>narizyat
{#narizyat#}¦ {%na-riṣyat, an,%} m., N. of a son
of Manu Vaivasvata.
<LEND>

<L>23925<pc>0471-b<k1>narizyanta<k2>narizyanta
{%Nariṣyanta, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Marutta.
<LEND>

<L>23926<pc>0471-b<k1>narIya<k2>narIya
{#narIya#}¦ {%narīya, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Bhaṅga-kāra; (also read {%nāreya.%})
<LEND>

<L>23927<pc>0471-b<k1>naruRa<k2>naruRa
{#naruRa#}¦ {%naruṇa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%nṝ%}), Ved.
(according to a commentator) a leader.
<LEND>

<L>23928<pc>0471-b<k1>narkuwaka<k2>narkuwaka
{#narkuwaka#}¦ {%narkuṭaka, am,%} n. a nose [cf. {%na-%}
{%kuṭa%}]; a kind of metre consisting of four lines of
seventeen syllables each; [cf. {%nardaṭaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23929<pc>0471-b<k1>narta<k2>narta
{#narta#}¦ {%narta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%nṛt,%} the initial
{%n%} of which is not liable to become {%ṇ%}), dancing;
({%as%}), m. dancing, dance.
<LEND>

<L>23930<pc>0471-b<k1>nartaka<k2>nartaka
{%Nartaka, as,%}¦ m. a dancer, a player of any de-
scription; an actor, gesticulator, mime, mummer;
a bard, herald; an elephant; a peacock; a species
of reed [cf. {%poṭagala%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a female dancer,
actress, singing girl; a female elephant; a peahen;
a kind of perfume ({%= nalikā;%} cf. {%naṭī%}); ({%as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fr. the Caus.), causing to dance; ({%as%}), m. a
dancing-master.
<LEND>

<L>23931<pc>0471-b<k1>nartana<k2>nartana
{%Nartana, as,%}¦ m. a dancer; ({%am%}), n. the act of
dancing, gesticulating, acting, performing on the
stage; [cf. {%nartanā-gṛha.%}] {%—Nartana-priya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} fond of dancing; ({%as%}), m. a peacock. {%—Nar-%}
{%tana-śālā,%} f. or {%nartanāgāra%} ({%˚na-ag˚%} or {%-āg˚%}),
{%am,%} n. or {%nartanā-gṛha, am,%} n. a dancing-room.
{%—Naratana-sthāna, am,%} n. a dancing-place.
<LEND>

<L>23932<pc>0471-b<k1>nartayitf<k2>nartayitf
{%Nartayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. ‘one who causes to dance,’ a
dancing-master.
<LEND>

<L>23933<pc>0471-b<k1>nartita<k2>nartita
{%Nartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ danced; made to dance;
dandled; dancing.
<LEND>

<L>23934<pc>0471-b<k1>nartin<k2>nartin
{%Nartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ dancing; [cf. {%vaṃśa-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23935<pc>0471-b<k1>nartU<k2>nartU
{%Nartū, ūs,%}¦ f. a female dancer or actress.
<LEND>

<L>23936<pc>0471-b<k1>nard<k2>nard
{#nard#}¦ {%nard%} (connected with rt. {%nad%}), cl.
1. P. (ep. also A.) {%nardati (-te), nanarda,%}
{%narditā, nardiṣyati, anardīt, narditum,%} to
bellow, roar, shriek, sound; to go, move; [cf. pro-
[Page0471-c+ 77]
bably Hib. <nsi>nuail-im,</nsi> ‘I roar, howl;’ <nsi>nuail,</nsi> ‘roar-
ing, howling.’]
<LEND>

<L>23937<pc>0471-c<k1>narda<k2>narda
{%Narda, as, ā, am,%}¦ bellowing, roaring, sounding;
[cf. {%go-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23938<pc>0471-c<k1>nardat<k2>nardat
{%Nardat, an, antī, at,%}¦ roaring, sounding; praising
aloud; proclaiming.
<LEND>

<L>23939<pc>0471-c<k1>nardana<k2>nardana
{%Nardana, as,%}¦ m. ‘one who roars,’ N. of a Nāga-
rāja; ({%am%}), n. sounding, roaring, making a noise;
celebrating, praising aloud.
<LEND>

<L>23940<pc>0471-c<k1>nardanIya<k2>nardanIya
{%Nardanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sounded; to be
celebrated or praised aloud.
<LEND>

<L>23941<pc>0471-c<k1>nardamAna<k2>nardamAna
{%Nardamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shouting, roaring.
<LEND>

<L>23942<pc>0471-c<k1>nardita<k2>nardita
{%Nardita, as, ā, am,%}¦ roared, sounded, bellowed;
celebrated, loudly praised; ({%am%}), n. sound, roar,
bellow, bellowing; ({%as%}), m. a kind of die or a throw
at dice, the chief die, (commonly {%nādī%} or {%nāndī,%}
perhaps ‘an ace,’ cf. {%vṛṣa,%} a N. for the chief die
in Nala VII. 6.)
<LEND>

<L>23943<pc>0471-c<k1>nardin<k2>nardin
{%Nardin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sounding, roaring, making a
noise; [cf. {%gehe-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23944<pc>0471-c<k1>nardawaka<k2>nardawaka
{#nardawaka#}¦ {%nardaṭaka, am,%} n. a kind of metre
consisting of four lines of seventeen syllables each;
(wrongly written {%nardhaṭaka;%} cf. {%narkuṭaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>23945<pc>0471-c<k1>nardabuda<k2>nardabuda
{#nardabuda#}¦ {%nardabuda%} or {%nardavuda, as,%} m.,
Ved. an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>23946<pc>0471-c<k1>narDawaka<k2>narDawaka
{#narDawaka#}¦ {%nardhaṭaka,%} wrong form for {%nar-%}
{%daṭaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>23947<pc>0471-c<k1>narb<k2>narb
{#narb#}¦ {%narb,%} cl. 1. P. {%narbati,%} &c., to go,
move; [cf. rt. {%namb.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23948<pc>0471-c<k1>narma<k2>narma
{#narma#}¦ {%narma, as,%} m., Ved. sport, pastime;
[cf. {%nariṣṭā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23949<pc>0471-c<k1>narmaWa<k2>narmaWa
{%Narmaṭha, as,%}¦ m. a jester; a rake, lecher, liber-
tine; sport, amusement; coition; the nipple; the
chin.
<LEND>

<L>23950<pc>0471-c<k1>narman<k2>narman
{%Narman, a,%}¦ n. sport, play, amusement, pastime;
diversion; jest, joke, ({%narmāṇi kṛ,%} to joke); wit,
humour; ({%aṇā%}), ind. in jest, by way of jest. {%—Nar-%}
{%ma-kīla, as,%} m. a husband. {%—Narma-garbha, as,%}
m. a secret lover. {%—Narma-da, as, ā, am,%} delight-
ing, making happy, giving or causing pleasure; ({%as%}),
m. a jester; the associate or companion of a person's
sports or amusements; N. of the son of Lāḍana;
({%ā%}), f. the Narma-dā or modern Nerbudda river,
which, rising in the Vindhya mountains, runs west-
ward to the gulf of Cambay, (personified as the wife
of Puru-kutsa and mother of Trasa-dasyu); a sister
of the Uragas or serpents; a daughter of the Soma-
pas; a species of plant (see {%pṛkkā%}). {%—Narmadā-%}
{%taṭa-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a district mentioned in
the Ratna-koṣa. {%—Narmadā-tīra-gamana, am,%}
n., N. of the seventeenth chapter of the Uttara-
kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Narmadā-tīrtha, am,%}
n. a sacred bathing-place on the Narma-dā; [cf.
{%nārmada.%}] {%—Narmadā-māhātmya, am,%} n. ‘the
glory of Narma-dā,’ N. of the 173rd-181st chapter
of the Matsya-Purāṇa. {%—Narmadeśvara (˚dā-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a form of Śiva. {%—Narmadeśvara-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of several sacred bathing-places. {%—Nar-%}
{%madeśvara-māhātmya, am,%} n. ‘the glory of Śiva,’
N. of a chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Narmadeśva-%}
{%ra-liṅga, am,%} n., N. of the ninety-second chapter
of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Narma-dyuti, is, is,%}
{%i,%} bright with joy, cheerful, happy, merry; ({%is%}),
f. enjoyment of a joke or any amusement. {%—Narma-%}
{%vatī,%} f., N. of a comedy. {%—Narma-saciva, as,%} m.
‘amusement-companion,’ an associate or promoter of
the amusements of a prince or man of rank. {%—Nar-%}
{%ma-sācivya, am,%} n. superintendence of a prince's
amusements. {%—Narma-suhṛd, t,%} m. {%= narma-sa-%}
{%civa%}. {%—Narma-sphūrja, as,%} m. happiness or amuse-
ment ending in alarm (?). {%—Narma-sphoṭa, as,%} m.
slight or inferior amusement (?).
<LEND>

<L>23951<pc>0471-c<k1>narmaya<k2>narmaya
{%Narmaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%narmayati,%} &c., to make
happy or gladden by jests or sports, exhilarate by
jesting and wit.
<LEND>

<L>23952<pc>0471-c<k1>narmawa<k2>narmawa
{#narmawa#}¦ {%narmaṭa, as,%} m. a potsherd; the sun.
<LEND>

<L>23953<pc>0471-c<k1>narmarA<k2>narmarA
{#narmarA#}¦ {%narmarā,%} f. a cavity, a valley; a
[Page0472-a+ 79]
bellows; an old woman past menstruation; a species
of plant ({%= saralā%}).
<LEND>

<L>23954<pc>0472-a<k1>narya<k2>narya
{#narya#}¦ {%narya.%} See p. 471, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>23955<pc>0472-a<k1>nal<k2>nal
{#nal#}¦ {%nal,%} cl. 1. P. {%nalati,%} &c., to smell;
to pain (?); to bind (?); cl. 10. P. {%nāla-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to speak or shine; to bind or confine,
(the two meanings ‘smelling’ and ‘binding’ have
probably arisen from a confusion between {%gandhe%}
and {%bandhe%} in the Dhātu-pāṭha.)
<LEND>

<L>23956<pc>0472-a<k1>nala<k2>nala
{#nala#}¦ {%nala, as,%} m. (for {%naḍa,%} q. v.), a species
of reed, Amphidonax Karka, eight to twelve feet
high [cf. {%naḍa, nāla, deva-nala%}]; N. of a king of
the Niṣadhas or of the country called Niṣadha, son
of Vīra-sena and husband of Damayantī and hero of
the celebrated tale called Nala and Damayantī; a son
of Niṣadha and father of Nabha or Nabhas; a
descendant of the latter Nala, son of Su-dhanvan and
father of Uktha [cf. {%naḍa%}]; N. of a son of Yadu;
N. of a monkey-chief, son of Tvaṣṭṛ or Viśva-
karman, who made a bridge for Rāma from the
continent to Laṅkā; N. of a Daitya; N. of a
medical author; (in astrology) N. of a particular
form of constellation in which all the planets or stars
are grouped in double mansions; a deified proge-
nitor, wrongly written for {%nalva; (ī),%} f. a kind of
fragrant substance, a perfume ({%= naṭī%}); red arsenic,
{%= manaḥ-silā, kunaṭī; (am),%} n. the blossom of
Nelumbium Speciosum (?); smell, odour; [cf. rt. {%nal.%}]
{%—Nala-kānana, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people, (this
word may perhaps be separated into {%nalaka-ānana;%}
also read {%nala-kālaka, nabha-kānana.%}) {%—Nala-%}
{%kīla, as,%} m. the knee. {%—Nala-kūbara%} and {%nala-%}
{%kūvara, as,%} m., N. of a son of Kuvera. {%—Nala-%}
{%campū, ūs,%} f., N. of a work by Tri-vikrama-bhaṭṭa,
also called Damayantī-kathā, describing the fortunes
of Nala and Damayantī in a highly artificial mixed
style, half prose, half verse; [cf. {%campū.%}] {%—Nala-%}
{%da, am, ā,%} n. f. Indian spikenard, Nardostachys Ja-
tamansi {%(= jaṭāmāṃsī); (am),%} n. the root of Andro-
pogon Muricatus ({%= uśīra%}); the honey or nectar
of a flower; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter of Raudrāśva.
{%—Nala-paṭṭikā,%} f. a sort of mat made with reeds,
a coarse mat. {%—Nala-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
{%—Nala-mīna, as,%} m. a species of sprat or (according
to some) a shrimp or prawn; (also read {%tala-mīna.%})
{%—Nala-setu, us,%} m. ‘Nala's bridge,’ the causeway
constructed by the monkey Nala, (a name given to
the rocks between Ramisseram and Ceylon, com-
monly called Adam's bridge.) {%—Naleśvara-tīrtha%}
{%(˚la-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Na-%}
{%lottama (˚la-ut˚), as,%} m. a species of reed {%(= deva-%}
{%nala)%}. {%—Nalodaya (˚la-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘Nala's rise,’
N. of an artificial poem ascribed to Kāli-dāsa and
describing the restoration of the fallen Nala to pros-
perity and power. {%—Nalopakhyāna (˚la-up˚), am,%}
n. ‘the story of Nala (and Damayantī),’ N. of a
celebrated episode of the Mahā-bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>23957<pc>0472-a<k1>nalaka<k2>nalaka
{%Nalaka, am,%}¦ n. a bone (hollow like a reed),
any long bone of the body; the tibia; the radius of
the arm; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of fragrant substance ({%=%}
{%nalī,%} commonly {%pavārī%} or {%panṭhārī%}); the legu-
minous plant Dolichos Lablab; the plant Polianthes
Tuberosa; Dæmia Extensa.
<LEND>

<L>23958<pc>0472-a<k1>nalakinI<k2>nalakinI
{%Nalakinī,%}¦ f. (fr. an unused {%nalakin%}), the knee-cap
or knee-pan; the leg.
<LEND>

<L>23959<pc>0472-a<k1>naladika<k2>naladika
{%Naladika, as, ī, am,%}¦ dealing in Indian spikenard.
<LEND>

<L>23960<pc>0472-a<k1>nalita<k2>nalita
{%Nalita, as,%}¦ m. a species of vegetable, (commonly
{%nālitā.%})
<LEND>

<L>23961<pc>0472-a<k1>nalina<k2>nalina
{%Nalina, am,%}¦ n. (connected with {%nala,%} its stalk
being hollow like that of a reed), a lotus flower or
water-lily, Nelumbium Speciosum or Nymphæa Ne-
lumbo; the indigo plant; water; ({%ī%}), f. a lotus,
Nelumbium Speciosum, the flexible stalk of the water-
lily; an assemblage of the Nelumbium Speciosum or
of lotus flowers; a pond in which the lotus grows or
may grow, a place abounding in lotuses, ({%nalinī%} is
to {%nalina%} as {%abjinī%} to {%abja, paṅkajinī%} to {%paṅka-%}
{%ja,%} and {%padminī%} to {%padma%}); the Ganges of heaven
or rather an arm of it; a mystical N. of one of the
[Page0472-b+ 79]
nostrils ({%= nalikā%}); a kind of fragrant substance;
the fermented and intoxicating juice of the cocoa-nut;
N. of the wife of Aja-mīḍha and mother of Nīla;
({%as%}), m. the Indian crane (as a synonym of {%puṣ-%}
{%kara%}); a species of shrub {%(= kṛṣṇa-pāka-phala).%}
{%—Nalina-dala, am,%} n. a leaf of the lotus flower;
[cf. {%nalinī-dala, nava-nalina-dalāya.%}] {%—Nalinī-%}
{%khaṇḍa, am,%} n. an assemblage of the Nelumbium
Speciosum. {%—Nalinī-dala, am,%} n. a leaf of the
lotus plant; [cf. {%nalina-dala.%}] {%—Nalinī-nandana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the divine garden near the Nalinī (?),’ N. of
a garden of Kuvera. {%—Nalinī-padma-koṣa, as,%}
m., N. of a particular position of the hands in
dancing. {%—Nalinī-ruha, as, ā, am,%} what comes
forth or has come forth from a Nelumbium Speci-
osum; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Brahmā; ({%am%}), n.
the fibres of the stalk of Nelumbium Speciosum.
{%—Naline-śaya, as,%} m. ({%naline,%} loc. sing.), ‘reclin-
ing on a lotus,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>23962<pc>0472-b<k1>nalinIka<k2>nalinIka
{%Nalinīka%}¦ at the end of comp. {%= nalinī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23963<pc>0472-b<k1>nalla<k2>nalla
{#nalla#}¦ {%nalla,%} wrongly for {%nalva.%}
<LEND>

<L>23964<pc>0472-b<k1>nalva<k2>nalva
{#nalva#}¦ {%nalva, as,%} m. a furlong, a measure
of distance = 400 or 104 (?) cubits; (wrongly read
{%nalla, nala.%}) {%—Nalva-vartmaga, as, ā, am,%} going
the distance of a Nalva; ({%ā%}), f. a spreading plant; the
orange tree ({%= kākāṅgī%} for {%nāraṅga?%}).
<LEND>

<L>23965<pc>0472-b<k1>nava<k2>nava<h>1
{#nava#} 1¦. {%nava, as, ā, am%} (probably connected
with the particle 1. {%nu,%} q. v., or less probably with
{%nu%} for prep. {%anu,%} or by some derived fr. rt. 4. {%nu,%}
to praise), new, fresh, recent, young, modern; ({%as%}),
m. a crow; a species of plant ({%= rakta-punar-navā%});
N. of a son of Uśīnara and Navā; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a wife of Uśīnara and mother of Nava; ({%am%}), ind.
recently, newly, lately, a short time ago, not long
since, just, (the crude {%nava%} is prefixed to a past pass.
part. in this sense, see {%nava-baddha%}); [for 2. {%nava%}
see p. 473, col. 1: cf. Zend {%nava:%} Gr. <lang n="greek">νέο-ς,</lang>
for <lang n="greek">νέϝο-ς, νεός, νειός, νε-αρό-ς, νε-ᾱν, νεᾱν-ία-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νέ-ᾱξ, νε-οσσό-ς, νε-οττ-ία, νε-οχ-μό-ς, νε-βρό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νέ-ατο-ς, νεί-αιρα, νει-ρό-ν:</lang> Lat. <nsi>novu-s, Noviu-s,</nsi>
<nsi>nov-īciu-s, nov-āli-s, nov-ellu-s, nov-āre, nov-er-ca,</nsi>
<nsi>nū-nt-iu-s, de-nuo, nū-per:</nsi> Osk. <nsi>Nuv-la, Nuceria:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>niu-yi-s,</nsi> ‘new;’ <nsi>niuyi-tha,</nsi> ‘newness:’ Angl.
Sax. <nsi>niwe, neow, niwa:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>naú-ye-s,</nsi> ‘new;’
<nsi>nauyó-ka-s,</nsi> ‘a novice:’ Slav. <nsi>nov-ŭ,</nsi> ‘new:’ Hib.
<nsi>nua, nuadh.</nsi>] {%—Nava-kārikā,%} f. a bride, a woman
newly married, (probably wrong reading for {%nava-%}
{%varikā%}); a new Kārikā or comment. {%—Nava-kālikā,%}
f. (fem. of {%nava-kālaka%}), a young woman, either
one recently married or one in whom menstruation
has lately commenced. {%—Nava-kṛt,%} wrongly for {%nava-%}
{%gat%}. {%—Nava-gat, t, t, t,%} Ved. first-born (?). {%—1. na-%}
{%va-graha, as, ā, am%} (for 2. see under {%navan%}),
lately caught; [cf. {%nava-baddha.%}] {%—Nava-cchāttra,%}
{%as,%} m. a new scholar, a student, novice. {%—Nava-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} recently born, lately produced, new, young
(e. g. {%nava-jaḥ śaśī,%} the new moon or the moon
just becoming visible). {%—Nava-jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
lately produced, new, young. {%—Nava-jāta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. born anew, new-born, fresh, new. {%—Nava-%}
{%tara, as, ā, am%} (compar.), newer, younger, fresher,
&c.; [cf. {%navīyas.%}] {%—Nava-tā,%} f. or {%nava-tva, am,%}
n. freshness, novelty. {%—Nava-dala, am,%} n. the fresh
leaf of a lotus flower, any young leaf. {%—Nava-dvīpa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the new island,’ N. of a place now called
Nuddea, sixty miles from Calcutta, in the district of
Burdwan on the right bank of the Bhāgīrathī or
great western branch of the Ganges at the point where
it is joined by the Jellinghee. {%—Nava-nagara, am,%}
n. ‘the new town,’ N. of a town. {%—Nava-nalina-%}
{%dalāya%} (fr. {%nava-nalina-dala%}), Nom. A. {%nava-%}
{%nalina-dalāyate,%} &c., to resemble the leaf of a
fresh lotus blossom. {%—Navanalinadalāyamāna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} resembling the leaf of a fresh lotus
flower. {%—Nava-nī, īs,%} f. or {%nava-nīta, am,%} n. fresh
butter. {%—Navanītaka, am,%} n. clarified butter. {%—Na-%}
{%vanīta-dhenu, us,%} f. a quantity of butter presented
to Brāhmans, see {%dhenu%}. {%—Nava-parṇādi-bhak-%}
{%ṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘eating of new leaves &c.,’ N. of a
[Page0472-c+ 81]
chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Nava-pallava,%}
{%am,%} n. a new shoot, young sprout. {%—Nava-prasūtā,%}
f. a woman who has lately brought forth (a child).
{%—Nava-prāśana, as,%} m. eating of new rice or new
barley. {%—Nava-phalikā,%} f. a bride, a newly-married
woman; a girl in whom menstruation has recently
begun. {%—Nava-baddha, as, ā, am,%} lately caught,
recently bound. {%—Nava-mallikā,%} f. Arabian jasmine,
Jasminum Sambac; (also read {%nava-mālikā.%}) {%—Na-%}
{%va-mālikā,%} f. many-flowered Nykanthes, Jasminum
Sambac ({%= nava-mallikā%}); N. of a daughter of
Dharma-vardhana, king of Śrāvasti. {%—Nava-mālinī,%}
f. a kind of metre consisting of four lines of twelve
syllables each. {%—Nava-megha, as,%} m. a new cloud
or one just appearing. {%—Nava-yajña, as,%} m. sacrifice
or oblation of the first-fruits of the harvest; [cf. {%nā-%}
{%vayajñika, navaśasyeṣṭi, nava-śasya.%}] {%—Nava-%}
{%yauvana, am,%} n. fresh or incipient youth, bloom of
youth, prime; ({%as, ā, am%}), being in the bloom of
youth; ({%ā%}), f. a young woman. {%—Navayauvana-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} blooming with the freshness of
youth. {%—Nava-raktaka, am,%} n. a newly-dyed gar-
ment. {%—Nava-rajas, ās,%} f. a girl who has only recently
menstruated. {%—Nava-vadhū, ūs,%} f. a bride, a newly-
married woman; a daughter-in-law. {%—Nava-varikā,%}
f. a newly-married woman; [cf. {%nava-kārikā.%}]
{%—Nava-vastra, am,%} n. new cloth. {%—Nava-vāstva,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved., N. of a man or of an evil spirit.
{%—Nava-śaśi-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘bearing the new moon
(on his brow),’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Nava-śasya,%}
{%am,%} n. the first-fruits of the year's harvest, the grain
first matured. {%—Navaśasyeṣṭi (˚ya-iṣ˚), is,%} f.
‘sacrifice of first-fruits,’ a sacrifice performed on
eating the first matured rice or grain of the year;
(wrongly written {%navasasyeṣṭi;%} cf. {%nava-yajña.%})
{%—Nava-śrāddha, am,%} n. the first series of Śrāddhas
collectively, or funeral offerings on the first, third,
fifth, seventh, ninth, and eleventh days after a person's
demise. {%—Nava-saṅghārāma (˚gha-ār˚), as,%} m., N.
of a monastery. {%—Nava-sū, ūs,%} f., Ved. a cow that has
recently calved. {%—Nava-sūtikā,%} f. a milch cow; a
woman recently delivered. {%—Navāṅkura (˚va-aṅ˚),%}
N. of a work. {%—Navānna (˚va-an˚), am,%} n. new
rice, new grain, the first-fruits; the grain first
ripened, rice or grain recently matured; a cere-
mony observed on first eating the new rice, &c.
{%—Navānna-bhakṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘eating of new
grain,’ N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva.
{%—Navānna-sthālī-pākāmantra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of
a work. {%—Navānneṣṭi (˚na-iṣ˚), is,%} f. sacrifice
of the first-fruits, see {%navaśasyeṣṭi%}. {%—Navāmbara%}
{%(˚va-am˚), am,%} n. new and unbleached cloth.
{%—Navāmbu (˚va-am˚),%} n. fresh water. {%—Navārma%}
{%(˚va-ar˚), am,%} n., N. of a place. {%—Navāha (˚va-%}
{%aha), as,%} m. a new day, the first day of a fortnight.
{%—Navī-karaṇa, am,%} n. making new, doing anew,
renewing. {%—Navī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to make new, renew, restaurate, revive.
{%—Navī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done or made anew,
renewed, revived. {%—Navī-bhāva, as,%} m. becoming
young or new, renovation. {%—Navī-bhūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} become new, renewed, revived. {%—Navetara%}
{%(˚va-it˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘other than new,’ old. {%—Na-%}
{%voḍhā (˚va-ūḍhā),%} f. a newly-married woman, a
bride. {%—Navoddhṛta (˚va-ud˚), am,%} n. fresh
butter; [cf. {%nava-nīta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23966<pc>0472-c<k1>navaka<k2>navaka<h>1
1. {%navaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ = 1. {%nava,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>23967<pc>0472-c<k1>navizWa<k2>navizWa
{%Naviṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. the newest, youngest,
last; ({%am%}), ind. (?), at last.
<LEND>

<L>23968<pc>0472-c<k1>navIna<k2>navIna
{%Navīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ = 1. {%nava,%} new, fresh, recent,
modern. {%—Navīna-candra, as,%} m. the new moon.
{%—Navīna-mata-vicāra, as,%} m. ‘inquiring into
new opinions,’ N. of a philosophical work by Hari-
rāma. {%—Navīna-vedantin, ī,%} m. a modern Vedānta
philosopher.
<LEND>

<L>23969<pc>0472-c<k1>navIyas<k2>navIyas
{%Navīyas%}¦ or {%navyas, ān, asī, as%} (compar. of
1. {%nava%}), Ved. new, fresh, young, recent, who has
done anything or shown himself recently; very new;
({%as%}), ind. recently, lately; ({%ase%} or {%asā%}), ind. anew.
<LEND>

<L>23970<pc>0472-c<k1>navya<k2>navya<h>1
1. {%navya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. new, fresh, young;
({%as%}), m. a species of plant, {%= rakta-punar-navā;%}
[Page0473-a+ 79]
[cf. Lith. <nsi>nauya-s;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>niuyi-s.</nsi>] {%—Navya-mata-%}
{%vicāra, as,%} m. {%= navīna-mata-vicāra%}. {%—Navya-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like new, ever new (?).
<LEND>

<L>23971<pc>0473-a<k1>navyas<k2>navyas
{%Navyas.%}¦ See {%navīyas,%} p. 472, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>23972<pc>0473-a<k1>nava<k2>nava<h>2
{#nava#} 2¦. {%nava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 4. {%nu%}), praise;
panegyric, celebration. (For 1. {%nava%} see p. 472,
col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>23973<pc>0473-a<k1>navana<k2>navana
{%Navana, am,%}¦ n. the act of praising, laudation.
<LEND>

<L>23974<pc>0473-a<k1>navizwi<k2>navizwi
{%Naviṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. a song of praise, hymn;
(Sāy.) a new sacrifice or oblation, (as if fr. 1. {%nava.%})
<LEND>

<L>23975<pc>0473-a<k1>navya<k2>navya<h>2
2. {%navya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be praised, praise-
worthy, laudable, deserving of praise. {%—Navya-var-%}
{%dhamāna, as,%} m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>23976<pc>0473-a<k1>navata<k2>navata<h>1
{#navata#} 1¦. {%navata, as,%} m. (for 2. see col. 2),
an elephant's painted or variegated housings; woollen
cloth; a cover, blanket, wrapper.
<LEND>

<L>23977<pc>0473-a<k1>navan<k2>navan
{#navan#}¦ {%navan,%} m. f. n. pl. (said to be fr. rt.
4. {%nu%}), nine; [cf. Zend <nsi>navan,</nsi> ‘nine:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐννέα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἔνα-το-ς, ἔννα-το-ς, εἴνατο-ς, ἐννά-κις, ἐνάκις,</lang>
<lang n="greek">εἰνάκις, ἐνα-κόσιοι, ἐννα-κόσιοι, ἐνενή-κοντα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐννή-κοντα:</lang> Lat. <nsi>novem, nōnu-s, nov-iens, nōnā-ginta,</nsi>
<nsi>non-genti:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>niun,</nsi> ‘nine;’ <nsi>niun-da,</nsi> ‘the
ninth:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>nigan,</nsi> ‘nine:’ Old Germ. <nsi>niun:</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>neun:</nsi> Old Pruss. <nsi>nevīn-ts,</nsi> ‘the ninth:’
Slav. <nsi>devan-tĭ,</nsi> ‘nine:’ Lith. <nsi>devyn-i,</nsi> ‘nine,’ <nsi>n</nsi>
changed into <nsi>d</nsi> as in <nsi>debes-i-s,</nsi> ‘a cloud,’ from Sanskrit
{%nabhas%}; <nsi>devī1n-ta-s,</nsi> ‘the ninth:’ Hib. <nsi>naoi,</nsi> ‘nine:’
Cambro-Brit. <nsi>naw,</nsi> ‘nine.’] {%—Navakāṇḍikā-bhā-%}
{%ṣya, am,%} n. ‘commentary of nine sections,’ N. of a
commentary on Kātyāyana's Śrāddha-sūtras by Nīlā-
sura. {%—Nava-kṛtvas,%} ind., 9 times. {%—2. nava-%}
{%graha, ās,%} m. pl. the 9 planets, or sun, moon,
five planets, and the ascending and descending nodes.
{%—Navagraha-mantra, ās,%} m. pl. ‘hymns or prayers
to the 9 planets (?),’ N. of a work. {%—Navagraha-%}
{%śānti, is,%} f. propitiation of the 9 planets. {%—Nava-%}
{%gva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ninefold, consisting of 9;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a mythological family often
associated with that of Aṅgiras and described as
sharing in Indra's battles, regulating the worship of
the gods, &c.; ({%as%}), m. one of the family called
Nava-gvas; [cf. {%daśa-gva, daśagvin.%}] {%—Navacat-%}
{%vāriṃśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. the following), the 49th.
{%—Nava-catvāriṃśat, t,%} f., 49. {%—Nava-tantu, us,%}
m., N. of a son of Viśvā-mitra. {%—Navatriṃśa, as,%}
{%ī, am%} (fr. the following), the 39th. {%—Nava-triṃśat,%}
{%t,%} f., 39. {%—Nava-daśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. the follow-
ing), the 19th; consisting of 19. {%—Nava-daśan, a,%}
m. f. n. pl., 19. {%—Nava-dīdhiti, is,%} m. ‘nine-rayed,’
Mars, the planet or its deified regent; [cf. {%navārcis.%}]
{%—Nava-durgā,%} f. Durgā in her 9 forms (viz.
{%kumārikā, tri-mūrti, kalyāṇī, rohiṇī, kālī, caṇ-%}
{%ḍikā, śāmbhavī, durgā, bhadrā%}). {%—Nava-dolā,%}
f. a litter borne by 9 men. {%—Nava-dvāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘nine-doored,’ having 9 gates; an epithet of
the body, which has 9 apertures or outlets, as the
nostrils, ears, mouth, &c.; [cf. {%nava-mukha.%}] {%—Na-%}
{%va-dhā,%} ind. divided into 9 parts, ninefold, in 9
ways, 9 times. {%—Nava-navati, is,%} f., 99; (in the
Veda the number 99 is used for any large number.)
{%—Navanavati-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 99th. {%—Nava-%}
{%pañcāśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. the following), the 59th. {%—Na-%}
{%va-pañcāśat, t,%} f., 59. {%—Nava-pad, -pāt, -padī,%}
{%pat,%} Ved. having 9 feet, consisting of 9 feet. {%—Nava-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. the 9th part, especially of an asterism
or of a lunar mansion; [cf. {%navāṃśa.%}] {%—Nava-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} having 9 apertures or openings;
[cf. {%nava-dvāra.%}] {%—Nava-raṅga, am,%} n. gift to five
and acceptance by four persons of the best Kāyastha
families (?). {%—Navaraṅga-kula, as, ā, am,%} having
the privilege of marrying into 9 distinct families (?).
{%—Nava-ratna, am,%} n., 9 precious gems, viz. a
pearl, ruby, topaz, diamond, emerald, lapis lazuli, coral,
sapphire, and one called Go-meda, (these 9 jewels are
supposed to be related to the 9 planets); the 9 jewels,
i. e. the 9 men of letters at the court of Vikramā-
ditya were Dhanvantari, Kṣapaṇaka, Amara-siṃha,
Śaṅku, Vetāla-bhaṭṭa, Ghaṭa-karpara, Kāli-dāsa, Vara-
ruci, and Varāha-mihira; N. of a collection of 9 verses.
[Page0473-b+ 77]
{%—Nava-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Bhīma-ratha
and father of Daśa-ratha. {%—Nava-rātra, as,%} m. or
{%navarātrika, am,%} n. a period of 9 days; a Soma
sacrifice with 9 Sutyā days; 9 days in the middle of
the Gavām-ayana; ({%am%}), n. the period of 9 days
from the first of the light half of month Āśvina to
the 9th, devoted to the worship of Durgā. {%—Nava-%}
{%rāśika,%} the rule of proportion with 9 terms com-
prising four proportions. {%—Navarca (˚va-ṛca), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. consisting of 9 verses. {%—Navaviṃśa,%}
{%as, ī, am%} (fr. the following), the 29th. {%—Nava-%}
{%viṃśati, is,%} f., 29. {%—Nava-vidha, as, ā, am,%} nine-
fold, consisting of 9 parts. {%—Nava-vyūha, as,%} m.
an epithet of Viṣṇu; [cf. {%catur-vyūha.%}] {%—Nava-%}
{%śakti, is,%} m. ‘having 9 faculties,’ an epithet of Śiva
or Viṣṇu. {%—Nava-śata, am,%} n., 109. {%—Navaśata-%}
{%tama, as, ī, am,%} the 109th. {%—Nava-śas,%} ind., 9 by
9, by nines. {%—Nava-śāyaka, as,%} m. a N. given to any
of 9 inferior classes, viz. cowherd, gardener, oilman,
weaver, confectioner, water-carrier, potter, blacksmith,
and barber. {%—Nava-ṣaṭka, as, ā, am,%} consisting
of 9 × 6 (strings &c.). {%—Nava-ṣaṣṭi, is,%} f., 69.
{%—Navaṣaṣṭi-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 69th. {%—Na-%}
{%va-saptati, is,%} f., 79. {%—Navasaptati-tama, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} the 79th. {%—Nava-saptadaśa, as,%} m., N. of an
Atirātra (‘containing 9 Saptadaśa-stotras’). {%—Nava-%}
{%sāhasāṅka-carita, am,%} n. ‘the 9 or the new (fr.
1. {%nava%}) deeds of king Sāhasāṅka,’ N. of a Campū
composed by Śrī-harṣa. {%—Navāṃśa%} or {%navāṃśaka%}
{%(˚va-āṃ˚), as,%} m. a 9th, a 9th part, especially of an
asterism or lunar mansion; [cf. {%nava-bhāga.%}] {%—Na-%}
{%vāṃśaka-pa, as,%} m. the regent of a Navāṃśaka.
{%—Navāṃśa-nātha, as,%} m. the regent of a Navāṃśa.
{%—Navāṅgā (˚va-aṅ˚),%} f. a species of plant {%(=%}
{%karkaṭa-śṛṅgī)%}. {%—Navāyasa (˚va-āy˚), am,%} n. a
medicinal preparation of iron, containing 9 parts of
iron. {%—Navārcis (˚va-ar˚), is,%} m. ‘nine-rayed,’ the
planet Mars or its deified personification. {%—Navāśīti%}
{%(˚va-aś˚), is,%} f., 89. {%—Navāśīti-tama, as, ī, am,%}
the 89th. {%—Navāha (˚va-aha), as,%} m. a period of
9 days; a Soma sacrifice with 9 Sutyā days; 9 days
in the middle of the Gavām-ayana; [cf. {%nava-%}
{%rātra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23978<pc>0473-b<k1>nava<k2>nava<h>3
3. {%nava = navan,%}¦ nine, in {%tri-ṇava,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23979<pc>0473-b<k1>navaka<k2>navaka<h>2
2. {%navaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ consisting of 9; ({%am%}), n.
the aggreagate of nine, nine.
<LEND>

<L>23980<pc>0473-b<k1>navata<k2>navata<h>2
2. {%navata, as, ī, am,%}¦ the 90th; [cf. {%eka-n˚, catur-%}
{%ṇ˚, catur-n˚, tri-n˚, dvā-n˚, dvi-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23981<pc>0473-b<k1>navati<k2>navati
{%Navati, is%}¦ (according to lexicographers also {%na-%}
{%vatī%}), f., 90. {%—Navati-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 90th.
{%—Navati-dhanus, us,%} m., N. of an ancestor of
Śākya-muni. {%—Navati-dhā,%} ind. ninetyfold. {%—Na-%}
{%vati-ratha, as,%} m., N. of an ancestor of Śākya-
muni. {%—Navati-śas,%} ind. by nineties, ninety by
ninety.
<LEND>

<L>23982<pc>0473-b<k1>navatika<k2>navatika
{%Navatika,%}¦ f. (fr. {%navati%}), a paint-brush containing
90 hairs.
<LEND>

<L>23983<pc>0473-b<k1>navama<k2>navama
{%Navama, as, ī, am,%}¦ the 9th; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%tithi,%}
the 9th day of a lunar half month. {%—Navamāṃśa%}
{%(˚ma-aṃ˚), as,%} m. {%= navāṃśa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>23984<pc>0473-b<k1>navamaka<k2>navamaka
{%Navamaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ the 9th.
<LEND>

<L>23985<pc>0473-b<k1>navin<k2>navin
{%Navin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ consisting of 9, composed of 9.
<LEND>

<L>23986<pc>0473-b<k1>navapattrikA<k2>navapattrikA
{#navapattrikA#}¦ {%nava-pattrikā,%} f. (fr. 1. or 2.
{%nava?%}), a particular sport described in the Kāma-sūtra
by Vātsyāyana.
<LEND>

<L>23987<pc>0473-b<k1>navara<k2>navara
{#navara#}¦ {%navara,%} a particular number.
<LEND>

<L>23988<pc>0473-b<k1>navaram<k2>navaram
{#navaram#}¦ {%navaram,%} ind. only.
<LEND>

<L>23989<pc>0473-b<k1>navipulA<k2>navipulA
{#navipulA#}¦ {%na-vipulā,%} f. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>23990<pc>0473-b<k1>navedas<k2>navedas
{#navedas#}¦ {%navedas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. cognizant,
observing, perceiving; appreciating; an observer; ap-
preciator (with gen. of the object); [cf. {%ko-vida.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23991<pc>0473-b<k1>navya<k2>navya<h>1
{#navya#} 1¦. and 2. {%navya,%} See p. 472, col. 3;
and col. 1. of this page.
<LEND>

<L>23992<pc>0473-b<k1>naS<k2>naS<h>1
{#naS#} 1¦. {%naś%} (related to rt. {%nakṣ;%} cf. rt.
1. {%aś%}), cl. 1. P. A. {%naśati, -te,%} Aor.
{%ānaṭ%} or {%ānak,%} &c. (Pāṇ. VI. 4, 73, but these forms
may be referred to rt. 1. {%aś%}), Ved. to reach, attain,
[Page0473-c+ 80]
obtain; to meet with, find; Caus. {%naśayati,%} &c., to
cause to obtain or meet with; [cf. Lat. <nsi>nanciscor.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23993<pc>0473-c<k1>naSa<k2>naSa<h>1
1. {%naśa%}¦ in {%dū-ṇaśa, dur-ṇaśa,%} q. v.; [cf. 1.
{%nāśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23994<pc>0473-c<k1>naS<k2>naS<h>2
{#naS#} 2¦. {%naś,%} cl. 1. 4. (more usually cl.
4.) P. {%naśati, naśyati%} (ep. also {%-te%}),
{%nanāśa%} (3rd pl. {%neśus%}), {%naśitā, naṃṣṭā%} (accord-
ing to Vopa-deva also {%naṅgdhā%}), {%naśiṣyati, naṅk-%}
{%ṣyati, anaśat, aneśat, naśitum, naṃṣṭum,%} to be
lost, disappear, to become invisible, to vanish; to
perish, be destroyed, wane; to escape, run away;
to come to nothing, be frustrated, be unsuccessful:
Caus. {%nāśayati%} (ep. also A. {%nāśayate%}), {%-yitum,%}
Aor. {%anīnaśat,%} to cause to disappear, make invisible;
to cause to perish, suffer to perish, destroy, efface;
to violate, deflower; to cause to be lost, to lose; to
forget; to extinguish (as a fire); to drive away, cause
to fly away; to disappear (in {%mā vyāghrā nīnaśur%}
{%vanāt,%} let not the tigers disappear from the forest,
Mahā-bh. Udyoga-p. 862): Desid. {%ninaśiṣati, ni-%}
{%naṅkṣati:%} Intens. {%nānaśyate, nānaṃṣṭi;%} [cf.
Zend <nsi>naśu,</nsi> ‘a corpse;’ <nsi>naś-ista,</nsi> ‘very destructive:’
Gr. <lang n="greek">νέκ-υ-ς, νέκυ-ια, νεκ-ρό-ς,</lang> probably <lang n="greek">νόσο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νοῦσο-ς</lang> for <lang n="greek">νοξο-ς,</lang> like <lang n="greek">συν</lang> for <lang n="greek">ξυν:</lang> Lat. <nsi>nex, nec-</nsi>
<nsi>are, noc-ēre, noxa, per-nicies, ve-ne-nu-m</nsi> for <nsi>ve-</nsi>
<nsi>nec-nu-m:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>nau-s, navi-s,</nsi> ‘a corpse,’ for <nsi>nag-</nsi>
<nsi>u-s</nsi> or <nsi>nah-u-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>23995<pc>0473-c<k1>naS<k2>naS<h>3
3. {%naś, k, k, k,%}¦ or {%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} disappearing; perishing;
[cf. {%jīva-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23996<pc>0473-c<k1>naSa<k2>naSa<h>2
2. {%naśa, as,%}¦ m. destruction; perishing; [cf. 2.
{%nāśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23997<pc>0473-c<k1>naSana<k2>naSana
{%Naśana, am,%}¦ n. disappearing, vanishing; perishing;
escaping.
<LEND>

<L>23998<pc>0473-c<k1>naSitf<k2>naSitf
{%Naśitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who disappears; perishing,
being lost; destroying, a destroyer; [cf. {%naṃṣṭṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>23999<pc>0473-c<k1>naSyat<k2>naSyat
{%Naśyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ perishing, decaying, being
destroyed; waning, wasting. {%—Naśyat-prasūti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} whose offspring perishes; ({%is%}), f. a woman
who brings forth a dead child. {%—Naśyatprasūtikā,%}
f. a female bearing a dead child.
<LEND>

<L>24000<pc>0473-c<k1>naSvara<k2>naSvara
{%Naśvara, as, ī, am,%}¦ perishing, perishable; de-
structible; transitory, evanescent, subject to decay;
destructive, mischievous. {%—Naśvara-tva, am,%} n.
perishableness, transitoriness; destructiveness.
<LEND>

<L>24001<pc>0473-c<k1>nazwa<k2>nazwa
{%Naṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ lost, disappeared, disappearing;
vanished, invisible, lost sight of; perished, destroyed,
ruined, spoiled, wasted, annihilated, dead; run away,
fled; depraved, debauched; deprived of (at the
beginning of a comp.). {%—Naṣṭa-candra, as,%}
m., N. of the fourth day in both halves of the
month Bhādra. {%—Naṣṭa-cetana, as, ā, am,%} one
who has lost consciousness, unconscious, fainted, in-
sensible, swooning away, losing one's senses. {%—Naṣ-%}
{%ṭa-ceṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} one who has lost the power
of motion; unconscious, fainted, insensible. {%—Naṣ-%}
{%ṭaceṣṭa-tā,%} f. unconsciousness, insensibility, faint-
ing, swooning. {%—Naṣṭa-janman, a,%} n. ‘the lost
nativity,’ subsequent calculation or casting of a lost
nativity. {%—Naṣṭa-jātaka, am,%} n. {%= naṣṭa-jan-%}
{%man;%} N. of the thirteenth Adhyāya in Varāha-
mihira's Laghu-jātaka. {%—Naṣṭa-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%}
one who has lost his sight, blind. {%—Naṣṭa-mati,%}
{%is, is, i,%} one who has lost his intellects. {%—Naṣṭa-%}
{%mārgaṇa, am,%} n. seeking any lost object. {%—Naṣṭa-%}
{%rājya, am,%} n., N. of a district to the north-east of
Madhya-deśa. {%—Naṣṭa-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} one whose
form is lost or no more seen; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%anu-%}
{%ṣṭubh,%} a variety of the Anu-ṣṭubh. {%—Naṣṭa-%}
{%viṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (a snake &c.) that has lost
(its) venom. {%—Naṣṭa-vīja, as, ā, am,%} destitute
of the seminal secretion, without the power of pro-
creating, impotent. {%—Naṣṭa-vedana, as, ī, am,%}
finding a lost object. {%—Naṣṭa-saṃsmṛti, is, is, i,%}
one who has lost his memory, unmindful, forgetful.
{%—Naṣṭa-sañjña, as, ā, am,%} one who has lost
his consciousness. {%—Naṣṭa-smṛti, is, is, i,%} one
who has lost his memory, forgetful. {%—Naṣṭāgni%}
{%(˚ṭa-ag˚), is,%} m. a Brāhman or householder whose
fire has been extinguished or who has lost his conse-
crated fire. {%—Naṣṭātaṅkam (˚ṭa-āt˚),%} ind. without
[Page0474-a+ 76]
anxiety or fear. {%—Naṣṭātman (˚ṭa-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%}
deprived of mind or sense. {%—Naṣṭāpti-sūtra (˚ṭa-%}
{%āp˚), am,%} n. booty, plunder. {%—Naṣṭārtha (˚ṭa-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has lost his property, reduced
to poverty. {%—Naṣṭāśaṅka (˚ṭa-āś˚), as, ā, am,%}
destitute of fear, fearless, dauntless. {%—Naṣṭāsu%}
{%(˚ṭa-asu), us, us, u,%} Ved. one whose vital spirits
have disappeared. {%—Naṣṭendu-kalā (˚ṭa-in˚),%} f. the
day of new moon when it rises invisible. {%—Naṣṭen-%}
{%driya (˚ṭa-in˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has lost his
organs of sense, deprived of one's senses. {%—Naṣ-%}
{%ṭaiṣin (˚ṭa-eṣ˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} seeking any lost object.
{%—Naṣṭaiṣya, am,%} n. the act of seeking what
has been lost.
<LEND>

<L>24002<pc>0474-a<k1>nazwi<k2>nazwi
{%Naṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. loss, destruction, ruin.
<LEND>

<L>24003<pc>0474-a<k1>naSAka<k2>naSAka
{#naSAka#}¦ {%naśāka, as,%} m. a species of crow.
<LEND>

<L>24004<pc>0474-a<k1>nazwa<k2>nazwa
{#nazwa#}¦ {%naṣṭa.%} See p. 473, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>24005<pc>0474-a<k1>nas<k2>nas<h>1
{#nas#} 1¦. {%nas%} (the alternative form for {%asmān%}
acc. pl., for {%asmabhyam%} dat. pl., and for {%asmākam%}
gen. pl. of the first personal pronoun {%asmad,%} q. v.),
us, to us, of us; ({%nas%} is an enclitic and has no
accent.)
<LEND>

<L>24006<pc>0474-a<k1>nas<k2>nas<h>2
{#nas#} 2¦. {%nas,%} cl. 1. A. {%nasate, nese, nasitā,%}
&c., Ved. to approach, to go towards, to
join; to copulate (especially as husband and wife);
(said to mean also) to be crooked or curved; to bend;
to be fraudulent; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">νέ-ο-μαι, νίσ-σ-ο-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νόσ-το-ς,</lang> probably also <lang n="greek">ναίω</lang> for <lang n="greek">νασ-_y_-ω, ἔ-νασ-σα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐ-νάσ-θη-ν.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>24007<pc>0474-a<k1>nas<k2>nas<h>3
{#nas#} 3¦. {%nas,%} f. (probably fr. rt. {%snā,%} to
bathe, or {%snu,%} to flow, the initial {%s%} being dropped;
cf. {%nau; nas%} is defective in nom. voc. sing. du. and
pl., acc. sing. du., but may be optionally substituted for
{%nāsikā,%} q. v., in the acc. pl. and remaining cases, e. g.
{%nasas%} or {%nāsikās, nasā%} or {%nāsikayā, nobhyām%} or
{%nāsikābhyām;%} only the weak cases {%nasā, nasi, na-%}
{%sos,%} however, appear to occur), the nose; [cf. {%nāsā,%}
{%nāsikā;%} Lat. <nsi>nasus, naris.</nsi>] {%—Naḥ-kṣudra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} small-nosed. {%—Nastaḥ-karman, a,%} n. ‘the put-
ting into the nose,’ taking snuff. {%—Nas-tas,%} ind. from
the nose, into the nose. {%—Nasy-ota, as, ā, am,%} (fr.
{%nasi%} loc. sing. + {%ota%}), led by a string through the
septum of the nose, fastened by the nose, furnished
with a nose-ring; an ox or other animal led by a
string through the septum of the nose. {%—Nas-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a nose.
<LEND>

<L>24008<pc>0474-a<k1>nasa<k2>nasa
{%Nasa%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) = 3. {%nas,%} the
nose, see {%un-n˚, urū-ṇ˚, kumbhī-n˚, khara-ṇ˚,%}
{%go-n˚, dru-ṇ˚,%} &c.; ({%ā%}), f. the nose.
<LEND>

<L>24009<pc>0474-a<k1>nasi<k2>nasi
{%Nasi,%}¦ the nose (?), in {%kumbhī-n˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24010<pc>0474-a<k1>nasta<k2>nasta
{%Nasta, as,%}¦ m. the nose; ({%ā%}), f. a hole bored
in the septum of the nose, cf. {%nastaka, nas-%}
{%tita; (am),%} n. a sternutatory, snuff. {%—Nasta-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. a kind of instrument used by the
Bhikṣus for injecting the nose. {%—Nasta-tas,%} ind.
(perhaps only {%= nas-tas%} with reduplicated affix {%tas%}),
from the nose, out of the nose. {%—Nastota (˚ta-%}
{%ota), as,%} m. an ox led by a string through his nose;
(also read {%nasy-ota;%} see under 3. {%nas.%})
<LEND>

<L>24011<pc>0474-a<k1>nastaka<k2>nastaka
{%Nastaka, as,%}¦ m. a hole bored in the septum or
bridge of the nose of cattle for draught.
<LEND>

<L>24012<pc>0474-a<k1>nastita<k2>nastita
{%Nastita, as, ā, am,%}¦ nozzled, having a hole bored
in the septum of the nose, an ox or any other
draught animal with a string through its nose, (the
sort of rein usually employed in India.)
<LEND>

<L>24013<pc>0474-a<k1>nasya<k2>nasya
{%Nasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to the
nose, nasal, in the nose; ({%ā%}), f. the nose; the string
through the nose of an animal [cf. {%nāsya%}]; ({%am%}),
n. the hairs in the nose; a sternutatory, snuff.
{%—Nasya-vidhi, is,%} m. ‘rules about sternutatories,’
N. of the twenty-seventh chapter of the medical
work Śārṅgadhara-saṃhitā.
<LEND>

<L>24014<pc>0474-a<k1>nasaMvid<k2>nasaMvid
{#nasaMvid#}¦ {%na-saṃvid, t,%} f. unconsciousness;
forgetfulness.
<LEND>

<L>24015<pc>0474-a<k1>nasukara<k2>nasukara
{#nasukara#}¦ {%na-sukara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} not easy
to be done.
<LEND>
[Page0474-b+ 78]

<L>24016<pc>0474-b<k1>nah<k2>nah<h>1
{#nah#} 1¦. {%nah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%nahyati, -te, na-%}
{%nāha, nehe, naddhā, natsyati, -te, anāt-%}
{%sīt, anaddha, naddhum,%} to bind, tie, bind on, bind
round, put on, gird round, bind together; A. to put
on one's self, dress, put on armour, arm one's self:
Caus. {%nāhayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%anīnahat,%} to cause
to bind or tie together, to cause to put on: Desid.
{%ninatsati, -te:%} Intens. {%nānahyate, nānaddhi;%} [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">νέ-ω, νή-θ-ω, νῆ-μα, νῆ-σι-ς, νῆ-τρο-ν, νέ-ω,</lang>
Intens. <lang n="greek">νη-νέ-ω, νη-έ-ω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>ne-o, ne-men, ne-</nsi>
<nsi>tu-s, nec-t-o, nexu-s:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>nā-an, nāw-an,</nsi>
<nsi>nāh-an,</nsi> ‘to sew;’ <nsi>nā-dal,</nsi> ‘needle;’ <nsi>nah,</nsi> ‘near:’
Goth. <nsi>nethla,</nsi> ‘a needle;’ <nsi>nēhva,</nsi> ‘near:’ Angl. Sax.
<nsi>naedl,</nsi> ‘needle;’ <nsi>neah, neh-st, nearra:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>nigh:</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>näh-en, nad-el, nah, nach, ge-nug:</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>nasgaim,</nsi> ‘I bind;’ <nsi>nas,</nsi> ‘a tie.’]
<LEND>

<L>24017<pc>0474-b<k1>nah<k2>nah<h>2
2. {%nah, t,%}¦ f., Ved. a bond, tie; [cf. {%akṣā-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24018<pc>0474-b<k1>naha<k2>naha
{%Naha%}¦ in {%dru-ṇaha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24019<pc>0474-b<k1>nahana<k2>nahana
{%Nahana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a bolt, a nail or connecting
beam in a wall.
<LEND>

<L>24020<pc>0474-b<k1>nahyamAna<k2>nahyamAna
{%Nahyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being bound, tied, or
fettered.
<LEND>

<L>24021<pc>0474-b<k1>nahi<k2>nahi
{#nahi#}¦ {%na-hi,%} ind. for not, surely not, cer-
tainly not, by no means, not at all; {%na-nahi,%} cer-
tainly not; ({%nahi%} is sometimes strengthened in the
Veda by other particles, e. g. {%nahy aṅga, nahi nu,%}
{%nahi sma.%}) {%—Nahi-mātra, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a particular high number; [cf. {%na-mātra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24022<pc>0474-b<k1>nahus<k2>nahus
{#nahus#}¦ {%nahus, us,%} m. a man, one who does
not belong to one's own immediate community, a
neighbour [cf. {%nābhi;%} Mod. Germ. <nsi>nahe</nsi>]; (collec-
tively) the neighbourhood.
<LEND>

<L>24023<pc>0474-b<k1>nahuza<k2>nahuza
{%Nahuṣa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= nahus,%} a man; N. of a
son of Manu and author of a Ṛg-veda hymn; N. of
an ancient king, one of the lunar race, son of Āyus
and grandson of Purū-ravas, father of Yayāti, who
took possession of Indra's throne in heaven for a
time, but was afterwards deposed and changed into a
serpent; (according to others) a son of Ambarīṣa,
father of Nābhāga; N. of a serpent-demon; N. of a
Marut; an epithet of Kṛṣṇa-Viṣṇu; [cf. {%naghu-%}
{%ṣa, nāhuṣa, nāhuṣi.%}] {%—Nahuṣa-carita, am,%}
n. ‘the life of Nahuṣa,’ N. of the 112th chapter
of the Bhūmi-khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Na-%}
{%huṣākhya (˚ṣa-ākh˚), am,%} n. the plant Taber-
næmontana Coronaria {%(= tagara-puṣpa)%}. {%—Na-%}
{%huṣātmaja (˚ṣa-āt˚), as,%} m., N. of a king, the
son of Nahuṣa, also called Yayāti.
<LEND>

<L>24024<pc>0474-b<k1>nahuzwara<k2>nahuzwara
{%Nahuṣṭara, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. nearer (?), nearer
than a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>24025<pc>0474-b<k1>nahuzya<k2>nahuzya
{%Nahuṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to a de-
scendant of Nahus, belonging to a man in general,
human; ({%as%}), m. a man.
<LEND>

<L>24026<pc>0474-b<k1>nA<k2>nA
{#nA#}¦ {%nā,%} ind. {%= na,%} no, not.
<LEND>

<L>24027<pc>0474-b<k1>nAka<k2>nAka
{#nAka#}¦ {%nāka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. {%na + a-%}
{%ka,%} where there is no unhappiness), heaven, the
vault or ceiling of heaven, the upper sky, the firma-
ment, sky, atmosphere, ether, paradise, (often in the
Veda with {%divo,%} gen. of 3. {%div,%} or with {%uttama%} or
{%tṛtīya;%} cf. {%tri-nāka, tri-diva:%} in Vājasaneyi-
saṃhitā XVII. 67, the scale upwards is given as
follows, 1. {%Pṛthivī,%} earth; 2. {%Antarīkṣa,%} atmo-
sphere; 3. {%Div,%} sky; 4. {%Divo-nāka,%} upper sky;
5. {%Svar-jyotis,%} heaven of light or sphere of the
luminaries); the sun (?) ; N. of a Maudgalya; N. of
a mythical weapon of Arjuna; ({%as, ā, am%}), ‘pain-
less (?),’ N. of a dynasty. {%—Nāka-cara, as, ā, am,%}
walking in the sky (as the Pitṛs). {%—Nāka-nātha,%}
{%as,%} m. or {%nāka-nāthaka, as,%} m. ‘guardian of the
sky,’ an epithet of Indra. {%—Nāka-nāyaka, as,%} m.
‘chief of the sky,’ an epithet of Indra. {%—Nākanā-%}
{%yaka-purohita, as,%} m. ‘Indra's chief priest,’ an
epithet of Bṛhas-pati. {%—Nāka-pāla, as,%} m. guardian
or lord of the sky. {%—Nāka-pṛṣṭha, am,%} n. ‘sky-
ceiling,’ the upper sky, the uppermost heaven. {%—Nā-%}
{%ka-pṛṣṭhya, as, ā, am,%} being in the highest
heaven. {%—Nāka-loka, as,%} m. the heavenly world.
{%—Nāka-vanitā,%} f. ‘a nymph of heaven,’ an Apsaras.
[Page0474-c+ 78]
{%—Nāka-sad, t, t, t,%} resting in the firmament, in-
habiting the sky; ({%t%}), m. an inhabitant of heaven,
a deity; ({%as%}), m. pl., N. of nine Ekāhas; ({%t%}), f., N.
of an Iṣṭakā. {%—Nākāpagā (˚ka-āp˚),%} f. the river
of heaven, the heavenly Gaṅgā. {%—Nākeśa (˚ka-īśa),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the lord of the sky,’ an epithet of Indra.
{%—Nākeśvara (˚ka-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘the lord of heaven,’
a god. {%—Nākaukas (˚ka-ok˚), ās,%} m. ‘whose dwell-
ing is the sky,’ an inhabitant of heaven, a god.
<LEND>

<L>24028<pc>0474-c<k1>nAkin<k2>nAkin
{%Nākin, ī,%}¦ m. a deity, god (as dwelling in Nāka).
{%—Nāki-nātha, as,%} m. ‘chief of the gods,’ an epi-
thet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>24029<pc>0474-c<k1>nAku<k2>nAku
{#nAku#}¦ {%nāku, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%nam%}),
an ant-hill or mole-hill, a burrow; a mountain; N.
of a Muni or saint. {%—Nāku-sadman, ā,%} m. a snake.
<LEND>

<L>24030<pc>0474-c<k1>nAkula<k2>nAkula
{#nAkula#}¦ {%nākula, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nakula%}), re-
lating or belonging to an ichneumon, ichneumon-like,
similar to an ichneumon; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from
Nakula [cf. {%nākuli%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people;
({%ī%}), f. the ichneumon plant, a particular plant sup-
posed to furnish the ichneumon or mungoose with
an antidote when bitten in a conflict with a snake
[cf. {%gandha-nākulī, nakuleṣṭā%}]; a sort of pepper,
Piper Chaba ({%= cavya%}); the root of the Seemul tree
({%= kukkuṭī-kanda%}) and several other plants, as {%ya-%}
{%va-tiktā, śveta-kaṇṭa-kārī, sarpa-gandhā%}. {%—Nā-%}
{%kulāndhya (˚la-an˚), am,%} n. ‘ichneumon blindness,’
a kind of weakness of sight.
<LEND>

<L>24031<pc>0474-c<k1>nAkuli<k2>nAkuli
{%Nākuli, is,%}¦ m. a descendant of Nakula, a patro-
nymic of Śatānīka.
<LEND>

<L>24032<pc>0474-c<k1>nAkra<k2>nAkra
{#nAkra#}¦ {%nākra, as,%} m., Ved. an aquatic animal;
[cf. {%nakra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24033<pc>0474-c<k1>nAkzatra<k2>nAkzatra
{#nAkzatra#}¦ {%nākṣatra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nakṣatra%}),
belonging to the constellations or lunar asterisms,
starry, sidereal; ({%am%}), n. a month computed by the
moon's passage through the twenty-seven mansions,
or one of thirty days of sixty Ghaṭis each.
<LEND>

<L>24034<pc>0474-c<k1>nAkzatrika<k2>nAkzatrika
{%Nākṣatrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
the lunar asterisms, sidereal; ({%as%}), m. a month of
twenty-seven days, each day being the period of the
moon's passage through a lunar asterism; ({%ī%}), f. the
state or condition to which a person is subjected
agreeably to the asterism presiding over his nativity.
<LEND>

<L>24035<pc>0474-c<k1>nAga<k2>nAga
{#nAga#}¦ {%nāga, as,%} m. (perhaps for original
{%snāga;%} Angl. Sax. <nsi>snaca;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>snake;</nsi> or connected
with {%naga,%} a mountain, or {%nagna,%} naked; said to be
fr. rt. 1. {%dah%} through change of {%d%} into {%n%}), a snake in
general, especially the spectacle-snake or cobra capella,
Coluber; a Nāga or fabulous serpent-demon so
called, having a human face with the tail of a ser-
pent, (the race of these beings is said to have sprung
from Kadrū, wife of Kaśyapa [or from Su-rasā], in
order to people Pātāla, one of the regions below the
earth, their city is called Bhoga-vatī); an elephant;
a shark ({%= tantu-nāga%}); a cruel or tyrannical
person; (at the end of a comp.) ‘an elephant of a
man,’ any great or pre-eminent person; N. of several
plants, the small tree with fragrant blossoms, Mesua
Roxburghii [cf. {%nāga-keśara%}]; Rottlera Tinctoria
({%= pun-nāga%}); a Cyperus ({%= mustaka%}); Piper
Betel; a poisonous plant (see {%nāga-stokaka%}); a
cloud; a peg or nail projecting from a wall to hang
anything upon; one of the five airs of the body,
that which is expelled by eructation; N. of the
number seven, (probably to be referred to seven
mythical serpents, but eight principal Nāgas are
mentioned); N. of a Sādhya; of a Buddhist teacher;
of a king of Āryāvarta, contemporary of Samudra-
gupta; N. of a dynasty consisting of nine or seven
princes; N. of several men; N. of a mountain; of
a district; ({%ī%}), f. a female Nāga; a female elephant;
({%am%}), n. tin; lead; one of the astronomical periods
called Karaṇas, (it is one of those termed {%dhruva,%}
q. v., or invariable, and corresponds to the last half of
Amāvāsya or new moon); the effects of that period
on anything done or happening during it; ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), formed or consisting of snakes, serpentine,
snaky; relating to serpents or serpent-demons;
[Page0475-a+ 81]
elephantine, belonging to or resembling an elephant;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman; [cf. {%kṣiti-n˚.%}] {%—Nāga-%}
{%kanda, as,%} m. a kind of bulbous plant {%(= hasti-%}
{%kanda)%}. {%—Nāga-kanyakā,%} f. a serpent-virgin.
{%—Nāga-karṇa, as,%} m. a kind of Ricinus {%(= rak-%}
{%tairaṇḍa, hasti-karṇa)%}. {%—Nāga-kiñjalka, am,%} n.
the blossom of Mesua Roxburghii. {%—Nāga-kumāra,%}
{%as,%} m. a prince of the serpent-demons; N. of a class
of deities among the Bhavanādhīśas guarding the
treasures of Kuvera. {%—Nāga-keśa, as,%} m., N. of a
minister of king Nageśa. {%—Nāga-keśara%} or {%nāga-%}
{%kesara, as,%} m. a small tree with fragrant blossoms
(commonly Nageśar), Mesua Roxburghii or Ferrea;
({%am%}), n. the blossom of this tree. {%—Nāga-khaṇḍa,%}
N. of one of the nine divisions of Bhārata-varṣa.
{%—Nāga-gandhā,%} f. a species of bulbous plant ({%=%}
{%nākulī%} or {%sarpa-gandhā%}). {%—Nāga-garbha, am,%}
n. red lead. {%—Nāga-cūḍa, as,%} m. ‘snake-crested’ or
‘whose top-knot consists of snakes,’ an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Nāga-cchattrā,%} f. a kind of plant, Tiaridium
Indicum. {%—Nāga-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by or born
from a Nāga, &c.; ({%am%}), n. red lead; tin. {%—Nāga-%}
{%jihvā,%} f. ‘snake-tongue,’ a species of plant, Asclepias
Pseudosarsa; (see {%śārivā.%}) {%—Nāga-jihvikā,%} f. red
arsenic. {%—Nāga-jīvana, am,%} n. tin. {%—Nāgajīvana-%}
{%śatru, us,%} m. ‘enemy of tin,’ orpiment. {%—Nāga-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Nāga-datta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} given by Nāgas or serpents; ({%as%}), m., N. of
one of the 100 sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; N. of a man
related to Śākya-muni; of a king of Āryāvarta,
contemporary of Samudra-gupta. {%—Nāga-danta, as,%}
m. elephant's tusk or ivory, the tooth or tusk of an
elephant; a shelf, peg, or bracket projecting from
a wall and used to hang things upon; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
an Apsaras; ({%ī%}), f. a species of sun-flower, Helio-
tropium Indicum; a harlot. {%—Nāgadantaka, as,%}
m. ivory; a wooden peg or bracket projecting from
a wall, a shelf; ({%ikā%}), f. a plant, commonly called
Rāma-dūti, Tragia Involucrata. {%—Nāga-damanī,%} f.
a particular plant {%(= jambū, jāmbavatī, vṛkkā).%}
{%—Nāga-dalopama (˚la-up˚), am,%} n. the tree
Xylocarpus Granatum. {%—Nāga-dāśaka, as,%} m., N.
of a prince. {%—Nāga-deṇṭikā,%} f. the betel plant.
{%—Nāga-deva, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Nāga-%}
{%dru, us,%} m. a species of Euphorbia used in offerings
to the snake-goddess Manasā {%(= samanta-dugdha).%}
{%—Nāga-dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of a Dvīpa in Jambū-
khaṇḍa or Bhārata-varṣa. {%—Nāga-nakṣatra, am,%}
n., N. of the three asterisms forming the Nāga-
vīthi (?). {%—Nāga-nātha, as,%} m. the king of the ser-
pents, a serpent-chief; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Liṅga sacred
to Śiva; (also called {%nāganātheśa-liṅga.%}) {%—Nāga-%}
{%nābha, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Nāga-nāmaka, am,%}
n. tin. {%—Nāga-nāman, ā,%} m. holy basil {%(= tulasī).%}
{%—Nāga-nāyaka, as,%} m. the leader or chief of the
Nāgas or snakes. {%—Nāga-nāsā,%} f. the trunk or pro-
boscis of an elephant. {%—Nāganāsorū (˚sā-ūrū), ūs,%}
f. a woman whose thighs taper like the trunk of an
elephant; [cf. {%karabhorū,%} p. 205, col. 2.] {%—Nāga-%}
{%niryūha, as,%} m. {%= niryūha%} and {%nāga-danta,%} a
large pin or bracket projecting from a wall like a
shelf. {%—Nāga-pañcamī,%} f. a particular festival, the
fifth day in the light half of month Śrāvaṇa;
the fifth day in the dark half of month Āṣāḍhā.
{%—Nāga-pati, is,%} m. a serpent-chief. {%—Nāga-pat-%}
{%trā,%} f. {%= nāga-damanī%}. {%—Nāga-pattrī,%} f. a species
of plant {%(= lakṣmaṇā)%}. {%—Nāga-pada, as,%} m. a
kind of coitus. {%—Nāga-parṇī,%} f. the betel plant.
{%—Nāga-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a man; a prince of
Sāśikya. {%—Nāga-pāśa, as,%} m. a sort of magical noose
or lasso used in battle to entangle an enemy; ‘the
serpent-noose,’ an epithet of the weapon of Varuṇa,
regent of the waters; a kind of coitus. {%—Nāga-%}
{%pāśaka, as,%} m. a kind of coitus. {%—Nāga-pura,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘elephant's town,’ ancient Delhi {%(= gaja-%}
{%pura, hāstina-pura)%}. {%—Nāga-puṣpa, as,%} m.
several plants, = Rottlera Tinctoria ({%= pun-nāga%});
Mesua Roxburghii ({%= nāga-kesara%}); Michelia
Champaka {%(= campaka); (am),%} n. the blossom of
this plant; ({%ī%}), f. {%= nāga-damanī%}. {%—Nāgapuṣpa-%}
{%phalā,%} f. the plant Benincasa Cerifera {%(= kuṣ- %}
[Page0475-b+ 81]
{%māṇḍī)%}. {%—Nāga-puṣpikā,%} f. yellow jasmine {%(=%}
{%svarṇa-yūthī)%}. {%—Nāga-phala, as,%} m. the plant
Trichosanthes Diœca; ({%ā%}), f. a various reading for
{%nāga-balā%}. {%—Nāga-badhū, ūs,%} f. a female ele-
phant. {%—Nāga-bandhaka, as,%} m. an elephant-
catcher. {%—Nāga-bandhu, us,%} m. ‘elephant-friend,
liked by elephants,’ the holy fig-tree, Ficus Religiosa
{%(= aśvattha)%}. {%—Nāga-bala, as,%} m. ‘having the
strength of an elephant,’ an epithet of Bhīma; ({%ā%}),
f. the plant Uraria Lagopodioides; ({%am%}), n. a par-
ticular high number. {%—Nāga-buddha, as,%} m. or
{%nāga-bodhi, is,%} m., N. of a Buddhist teacher.
{%—Nāga-buddhi, is,%} m., N. of a medical author.
{%—Nāga-bodha, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Nāga-%}
{%bhaginī,%} f. ‘serpent's sister,’ N. of the goddess Manasā;
[cf. {%nāga-mātṛ.%}] {%—Nāga-bhid, t,%} m. ‘elephant-
destroyer,’ a species of snake, Amphisbæna; (also
written {%nāga-bhṛt, = ḍuṇḍu.%}) {%—Nāga-bhūṣaṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘decorated with serpents,’ an epithet of
Śiva; [cf. {%nāga-cūḍa.%}] {%—Nāga-bhoga, as,%} m. a
species of serpent. {%—Nāga-maṇḍalika, as,%} m. a
snake-keeper; a snake-catcher. {%—Nāga-matī,%} f. the
plant Ocimum Sanctum. {%—Nāga-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of or in elephants. {%—Nāga-malla, as,%}
m. ‘an athlete among the elephants,’ an epithet of
Indra's elephant Airāvata. {%—Nāga-mātṛ, tā,%} f.
‘mother of serpent-demons,’ an epithet of Su-rasā; an
epithet of the goddess Manasā (supposed to preside
over snakes); red arsenic. {%—Nāga-māra, as,%} m. a
species of pot-herb, also Keśa-rāja. {%—Nāga-mudra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist Sthavira {%(= nāga-sena).%}
{%—Nāga-yaṣṭi, is,%} f. or {%nāga-yaṣṭikā,%} f. a gradu-
ated pole or post for showing the depth of water in
a newly dug pond, a boring-rod or stick driven into
the earth. {%—Nāga-rakta, am,%} n. red lead. {%—Nāga-%}
{%raṅga, as,%} m. the orange, (usually applied to the
Silhet orange, Citrus Aurantium.) {%—Nāga-raṭṭa, as,%}
m. a various reading for {%nāga-vaṭṭa,%} q. v. {%—Nāga-%}
{%rāj, ṭ,%} m. a serpent-king, a chief of the Nāgas.
{%—Nāga-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of the serpents,’ an epithet
of Ananta or of Vāsuki, chief of the serpents; a king
among the elephants, a large elephant. {%—Nāgarāja-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. the trunk of the king of elephants.
{%—Nāga-rājan, ā,%} m. a serpent-king. {%—Nāga-ruka,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= nāga-raṅga,%} the orange-tree. {%—Nāga-reṇu,%}
{%us,%} m. red lead. {%—Nāga-latā,%} f. the penis; N. of a
woman. {%—Nāga-lekhā,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Nāga-%}
{%loka, as,%} m. the Nāga world or one of the regions
below the earth, otherwise called Pātāla, the world of
the serpent-demons, the abode of serpents or the
race of serpents collectively. {%—Nāga-vaṭṭa, as,%} m.,
N. of a man; [cf. {%nāga-raṭṭa.%}] {%—Nāga-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} consisting of snakes; possessed of elephants. {%—Nā-%}
{%ga-vadhū,%} see {%nāga-badhū%}. {%—Nāga-vana, am,%} n.
‘serpent-wood,’ N. of a place. {%—Nāga-vartman, ā,%}
m., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Nāga-vallarī%} or {%nāga-%}
{%valli, is, ī,%} or {%nāga-vallikā,%} f. Piper Betel, the
betel plant. {%—Nāga-vārika, as,%} m. a royal elephant;
an elephant-driver or keeper; a peacock; an epithet
of Garuḍa, the bird of Viṣṇu; the chief person in a
court or assembly. {%—Nāga-vāsa, as,%} m. ‘abode of
snakes,’ N. of a lake supposed to have been formed
originally by the valley of Nepal. {%—Nāga-vīthī,%} f. a
row of serpents; the serpents' path, that part of the
moon's path which contains the asterisms Svāti or
(according to others) Aśvinī, Bharaṇī, and Kṛttikā;
N. of a daughter of Yāmī who was the daughter of
Dakṣa and wife of Dharma; of a daughter of Kaś-
yapa by Yāminī. {%—Nāga-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a species
of tree. {%—Nāga-śata, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Nāga-śrī, īs,%} f., N. of a queen. {%—Nāga-sam-%}
{%bhava, am,%} n. minium or red lead. {%—Nāga-sam-%}
{%bhūta,%} ‘produced from serpents,’ epithet of a sort of
pearl. {%—Nāga-sāhvaya, as, ā, am,%} called after
elephants, (generally with {%nagara%} = ‘elephant's town,’
i. e. Hāstina-pura.) {%—Nāga-sugandhā,%} f. the ich-
neumon plant ({%= su-gandhā, sarpa-sugandhā,%}
{%bhujaṅgākṣī;%} cf. {%nākulī%}). {%—Nāga-sena, as,%} m.,
N. of a Buddhist Sthavira; a king of Āryāvarta and
contemporary of Samudra-gupta. {%—Nāga-stokaka,%}
{%am,%} n. a species of poisonous plant. {%—Nāga-sthala,%}
[Page0475-c+ 79]
N. of a village near Mathurā. {%—Nāga-sphotā%} or
rather {%nāga-sphoṭā,%} f. two plants ({%= dantī%} and {%nāga-%}
{%dantī%}). {%—Nāga-svarūpiṇī,%} f. a kind of metre con-
sisting of four lines of eight syllables each. {%—Nāga-%}
{%hanu, us,%} m. a kind of perfume {%(= nakha)%}. {%—Nāga-%}
{%hantrī,%} f. a species of plant ({%= bandhyā-karko-%}
{%ṭakī;%} cf. {%nāgārāti%}). {%—Nāga-hrada, am,%} n. a
lake inhabited by snakes or serpent-demons. {%—Nā-%}
{%gākhya (˚ga-ākh˚), as,%} m. {%= nāga-kesara,%} Mesua
Roxburghii. {%—Nāgāṅga, am,%} n. Hāstina-pura. {%—Nā-%}
{%gāṅganā (˚ga-aṅ˚),%} f. a female elephant; the pro-
boscis of an elephant; [cf. {%nāgāñjanā.%}] {%—Nāgāñ-%}
{%calā (˚ga-añ˚),%} f. {%= nāga-yaṣṭi,%} q. v. {%—Nāgāñ-%}
{%janā,%} f. the female of an elephant ({%= nāga-yaṣṭi,%}
q. v.). {%—Nāgādhipa (˚ga-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘the ser-
pent-prince,’ an epithet of Śeṣa. {%—Nāgādhipati%}
{%(˚ga-adh˚), is,%} m. ‘serpent-chief,’ an epithet of
Virūḍhaka. {%—Nāgādhirāja (˚ga-adh˚), as,%} m. the
king or chief of the elephants. {%—Nāgānanda%}
{%(˚ga-ān˚), as%} or {%am,%} m. n. (?), or {%nāgānanda-nā-%}
{%ṭaka, am,%} n., N. of a play ascribed to king Harṣa.
{%—Nāgāntaka (˚ga-an˚), as,%} m. ‘destroyer of
serpents,’ an epithet of Garuḍa, the bird of Viṣṇu.
{%—Nāgābhibhu, us,%} or {%-bhū (˚ga-abh˚), ūs,%} m., N.
of a Buddha. {%—Nāgārāti (˚ga-ar˚), is,%} m. a species
of plant ({%= bandhyā-karkoṭakī;%} cf. {%nāga-hantrī%}).
{%—Nāgāri (˚ga-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of serpents,’
epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Nāgārūḍha (˚ga-ār˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} mounted or riding upon an elephant. {%—Nāgār-%}
{%juna (˚ga-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of an ancient Buddhist
teacher of the rank of a Bodhi-sattva, said to be
the author of the Yoga-ratna-mālā or Āścarya-ratna-
mālā; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a rock-cavern. {%—Nāgālābu%}
{%(˚ga-al˚), us,%} f. a species of gourd {%(= kumbha-%}
{%tumbi)%}. {%—Nāgāśana (˚ga-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘snake-
eater,’ a peacock; an epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Nā-%}
{%gāhva (˚ga-āh˚), am,%} n. ‘the town called after
elephants,’ Hāstina-pura; ({%ā%}), f. a species of bulbous
plant ({%= lakṣmaṇā;%} cf. {%nāga-pattrī%}). {%—Nāgāh-%}
{%vaya (˚ga-āh˚), as,%} m. a species of plant; an epithet
of Tathāgata-bhadra. {%—Nāgendra (˚ga-in˚), as,%}
m. a serpent-prince, serpent-chief; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
river. {%—Nāgeśa (˚ga-īśa), as,%} m., N. of a prince;
an epithet of Patañjali; {%Nāgeśa%} or {%Nāgeśa-bhaṭṭa,%}
N. of a grammarian, see {%Nāgojī; (am),%} n., N. of a
Liṅga in Dārukā-vana. {%—Nāgeśvara (˚ga-īś˚), as,%}
m., N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the deity Manasā;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Liṅga. {%—Nāgeśvara-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of several sacred bathing-places. {%—Nāgodara%}
{%(˚ga-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of a medical author; ({%am%}),
n. a medical term for a peculiar disease of preg-
nancy, dissolution of the fetus in the womb; a
breast-plate, a cuirass. {%—Nāgodbheda (˚ga-ud˚), as,%}
m., N. of a sacred spot where the river Saras-vatī
re-appears.
<LEND>

<L>24036<pc>0475-c<k1>nAgaka<k2>nAgaka
{%Nāgaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>24037<pc>0475-c<k1>nAgin<k2>nAgin
{%Nāgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having serpents, covered with
or surrounded by serpents; snaky.
<LEND>

<L>24038<pc>0475-c<k1>nAgoda<k2>nAgoda
{%Nāgoda, am,%}¦ n. armour for the front of the body;
[cf. {%nāgodara%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>24039<pc>0475-c<k1>nAgapEya<k2>nAgapEya
{#nAgapEya#}¦ {%nāgapaiya, as,%} m., N. of a poet
mentioned in the Śārṅgadhara-paddhati.
<LEND>

<L>24040<pc>0475-c<k1>nAgammA<k2>nAgammA
{#nAgammA#}¦ {%nāgammā,%} f., N. of a female poet.
<LEND>

<L>24041<pc>0475-c<k1>nAgara<k2>nAgara
{#nAgara#}¦ {%nāgara, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%nagara%}), town-
born, town-bred, city, citizen; relating or belonging to
a town, civic; spoken in a town or city; polite, civil;
clever, sharp, knowing; bad, vile; nameless; ({%as%}), m. a
citizen; {%= paura,%} a term for a prince engaged in war
under certain circumstances and (in astrology) applied
to a planet in a state of opposition to other planets; a
husband's brother; an orange; a lecturer; denial of
knowledge; hardship, toil, fatigue; desire of final
beatitude; ({%ī%}), f. the Nāgarī or Deva-nāgarī (q. v.)
character in which Sanskrit is commonly written; a
species of Euphorbia ({%= snuhī%}); a clever or crafty
or intriguing woman; ({%am%}), n. dry ginger; the root
of Cyperus Pertenuis; a sort of coitus. {%—Nāgara-%}
{%khaṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a section of the Skanda-
Purāṇa. {%—Nāgara-ghana, as,%} m. or {%nāgara-mustā,%}
[Page0476-a+ 74]
f. a species of grass, Cyperus. {%—Nāgarāhva (˚ra-%}
{%āh˚), am,%} n. dry ginger. {%—Nāgarotthā (˚ra-ut˚),%}
f. {%= nāgara-mustā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24042<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgaraka<k2>nAgaraka
{%Nāgaraka, as, ī, am,%}¦ living in a town, (op-
posed to {%āraṇyaka%}); clever, cunning; ({%as%}), m. a
citizen; the chief of the police or of a town; an
artist; a thief, (a various reading for {%nāgarika%});
({%am%}), n. dry ginger; [cf. {%nāgara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24043<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgarika<k2>nAgarika
{%Nāgarika, as, ī, am,%}¦ town-born, town-bred;
living in or inhabiting a town; produced from a
town; polite; clever, cunning; ({%as%}), m. a citizen,
the chief of a town, superintendant of police; ({%am%}),
n. the toll raised from a town. {%—Nāgarika-pura,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Nāgarika-bala, am,%} n.
the guard of a police-officer.
<LEND>

<L>24044<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgareyaka<k2>nAgareyaka
{%Nāgareyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ city, citizen.
<LEND>

<L>24045<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgarya<k2>nAgarya
{%Nāgarya, am,%}¦ n. town-life, shrewdness.
<LEND>

<L>24046<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgaramardi<k2>nAgaramardi
{#nAgaramardi#}¦ {%nāgaramardi, is,%} m. (fr. {%nagara-%}
{%mardin%}), a patronymic from Nagara-mardin.
<LEND>

<L>24047<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgarIwa<k2>nAgarIwa
{#nAgarIwa#}¦ {%nāgarīṭa, as,%} m. a libertine, rake,
blackguard; (probably for {%nāgavīṭa%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>24048<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgavIwa<k2>nAgavIwa
{%Nāgavīṭa, as,%}¦ m. a rake; intriguer, match-maker.
<LEND>

<L>24049<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgaSuRqI<k2>nAgaSuRqI
{#nAgaSuRqI#}¦ {%nāgaśuṇḍī,%} f. a species of gourd;
(also read {%nāmaśuṇḍī.%})
<LEND>

<L>24050<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgulI<k2>nAgulI
{#nAgulI#}¦ {%nāgulī,%} f., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>24051<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgojI<k2>nAgojI
{#nAgojI#}¦ {%nāgojī%} or {%nāgoji%} or {%nāgoji-bhaṭṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a modern grammarian, also called
{%nāgeśa-bhaṭṭa,%} author of a Vivaraṇa or interpreta-
tion of Kaiyaṭa's commentary on Patañjali, of a
grammar called Paribhāṣendu-śekhara, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24052<pc>0476-a<k1>nAgnajita<k2>nAgnajita
{#nAgnajita#}¦ {%nāgnajita, as,%} m. (fr. {%nagna-jit%}),
a descendant of Nagna-jit; ({%ī%}), f., N. of one of the
wives of Kṛṣṇa; (wrongly spelt {%nagnajitī.%})
<LEND>

<L>24053<pc>0476-a<k1>nAcika<k2>nAcika
{#nAcika#}¦ {%nācika, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Viśvā-mitra.
<LEND>

<L>24054<pc>0476-a<k1>nAciketa<k2>nAciketa
{#nAciketa#}¦ {%nāciketa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%na-ciketa,%}
q. v.), relating to Na-ciketa or Na-ciketas; ({%as%}), m.
a synonym of fire, (wrongly written {%nāciketu%}); N.
of an ancient sage, son of Uddālaki; [cf. {%na-ciketa,%}
{%tri-ṇāciketa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24055<pc>0476-a<k1>nAcIna<k2>nAcIna
{#nAcIna#}¦ {%nācīna, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>24056<pc>0476-a<k1>nAjjaka<k2>nAjjaka
{#nAjjaka#}¦ {%nājjaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>24057<pc>0476-a<k1>nAwa<k2>nAwa
{#nAwa#}¦ {%nāṭa, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%naṭ%}),
dancing, acting, a dance; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga-
rāja; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people, {%= karṇāṭaka,%}
the Carnatic; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%bhāṣā,%} the language
spoken by the Nāṭas. {%—Nāṭāmra (˚ṭa-am˚), as,%} m.
the water-melon, Cucurbita Citrullus.
<LEND>

<L>24058<pc>0476-a<k1>nAwaka<k2>nAwaka
{%Nāṭaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ dancing, acting; ({%am%}), n. a
play, drama; the first of the ten pieces of dramatic
compositions of the first order; ({%as%}), m. an actor,
dancer, mime; N. of a mountain in Kāmākhyā;
({%ikā%}), f. a kind of play, see below; ({%akī%}), f. the
court of Indra. {%—Nāṭaka-prapañca, as,%} m. course
or arrangement of a drama. {%—Nāṭaka-ratna-koṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘treasure of jewels of plays,’ N. of a work.
{%—Nāṭaka-vidhi, is,%} m. mimic art, dramatic action.
{%—Nāṭakāvatāra (˚ka-av˚), as,%} m., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>24059<pc>0476-a<k1>nAwakIya<k2>nAwakIya
{%Nāṭakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ dramatic.
<LEND>

<L>24060<pc>0476-a<k1>nAwakeya<k2>nAwakeya
{%Nāṭakeya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>24061<pc>0476-a<k1>nAwAra<k2>nAwAra
{%Nāṭāra, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%naṭī%}), the son of an actress;
[cf. {%nāṭera, nāṭeya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24062<pc>0476-a<k1>nAwikA<k2>nAwikA
{%Nāṭikā,%}¦ f. a short or light comedy, the first of the
Upa-rūpakas or dramas of the second order.
<LEND>

<L>24063<pc>0476-a<k1>nAwitaka<k2>nAwitaka
{%Nāṭitaka, am,%}¦ n. a mimic representation, a gesture.
<LEND>

<L>24064<pc>0476-a<k1>nAweya<k2>nAweya
{%Nāṭeya, as,%}¦ m. the son of an actress or dancing-
girl.
<LEND>

<L>24065<pc>0476-a<k1>nAwera<k2>nAwera
{%Nāṭera, as,%}¦ m. {%= nāṭeya;%} [cf. {%nāṭāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24066<pc>0476-a<k1>nAwya<k2>nAwya
{%Nāṭya, am,%}¦ n. dancing, mimic or dramatic repre-
sentation, a play; action on the stage, the science or
art of dancing or acting, scenic art, the union of song,
pantomime dance and instrumental music; the cos-
tume of an actor; ({%as%}), m. an actor, mime. {%—Nāṭya-%}
{%darpaṇa, am,%} n. ‘mirror of acting,’ N. of a work.
[Page0476-b+ 78]
{%—Nāṭya-dharmikā%} or {%nāṭya-dharmī,%} f. the rules
of dramatic representation. {%—Nāṭya-priya, as,%} m.
‘fond of dancing,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Nāṭya-%}
{%locana-kāra, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the
Nāma-liṅgānuśāsana by Amara-siṃha. {%—Nāṭya-śālā,%}
f. a room or building for dramatic exhibitions, a
theatre, a dancing-room, (according to some it should
be built near the gate of a palace.) {%—Nāṭya-śāstra,%}
{%am,%} n. any book on dancing or dramatic repre-
sentation. {%—Nāṭyācārya (˚ya-āc˚), as,%} m. a danc-
ing-master. {%—Nāṭyokti (˚ya-uk˚), is,%} f. dramatic
phraseology.
<LEND>

<L>24067<pc>0476-b<k1>nAqa<k2>nAqa
{#nAqa#}¦ {%nāḍa, am,%} n. {%= nāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>24068<pc>0476-b<k1>nAqapit<k2>nAqapit
{#nAqapit#}¦ {%nāḍapit,%} Ved., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>24069<pc>0476-b<k1>nAqAyana<k2>nAqAyana
{#nAqAyana#}¦ {%nāḍāyana, as,%} m. (fr. {%naḍa%}), a
patronymic from Naḍa.
<LEND>

<L>24070<pc>0476-b<k1>nAqAyanaka<k2>nAqAyanaka
{%Nāḍāyanaka,%}¦ relating to Nāḍāyana.
<LEND>

<L>24071<pc>0476-b<k1>nAqi<k2>nAqi
{#nAqi#}¦ {%nāḍi, is,%} or {%nāḍī,%} f. (fr. {%naḍa,%} q. v.),
the tubular stalk or culm of any plant; the hollow
stalk of a lotus, &c.; any tubular organ of the body
(as an artery, vein, intestine, &c.); any pipe or tube,
a flute; a fistulous sore, fistula, sinus [cf. {%nāḍī-%}
{%vraṇa%}]; the pulse either at the hand or feet, &c.;
a measure of time = (1/60) of a sidereal day or (1/2) Mu-
hūrta; a period or hour of twenty-four minutes; the
box of a wheel (Ved.); a sort of bent grass; a juggling
trick, deception. {%—Nāḍi-cīra, am,%} n. a small reed
or tube round which the woof is wound, (it is then
used as a shuttle.) {%—Nāḍin-dhama, as, ā, am,%}
causing movement of the intestines (as fright), terri-
fying; ({%as%}), m. a goldsmith; (also read {%nāḍīn-%}
{%dhama.%}) {%—Nāḍin-dhaya, as, ī, am,%} drinking or
sucking through a tube. {%—Nāḍi-pattra, am,%} n. an
esculent root, Arum Colocasia. {%—Nāḍi-maṇḍala,%}
{%am,%} n. the celestial equator. {%—Nāḍī-kalāpaka, as,%}
m. a species of plant ({%= gaṇḍinī%} in Hindī). {%—Nāḍī-%}
{%caraṇa, as,%} m. ‘whose feet or legs are like stalks,’
a bird. {%—Nāḍī-jaṅgha, as,%} m. ‘having stalk-like
legs,’ a crow; N. of a fabulous crane; N. of a holy
teacher or saint; [cf. {%nāli-jaṅgha.%}] {%—Nāḍī-ta-%}
{%raṅga, as,%} m. {%= kākola;%} a sort of poison; an astro-
loger; a ravisher, debaucher ({%= rata-hiṇḍaka;%} cf.
{%nārī-taraṅgaka%}). {%—Nāḍī-tikta, as,%} m. a species
of Nimba growing in Nepal {%(= nepāla-nimba).%}
{%—Nāḍī-datta, as,%} m. {%= nāḍikā-datta,%} q. v. {%—Nā-%}
{%ḍī-deha, as,%} m. ‘thin-bodied like a tube or stalk,’
N. of one of the attendants of Śiva ({%= bhṛṅgin;%}
cf. {%nāḍī-vigraha%}). {%—Nāḍī-nakṣatra, am,%} n. the
planet of a person's nativity {%(= janma-nakṣatra).%}
{%—Nāḍīn-dhama = nāḍin-dhama,%} q. v. {%—Nāḍī-%}
{%parīkṣā,%} f. feeling the pulse; N. of a medical work.
{%—Nāḍī-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a pharmaceutical
work commented on by Śaṅkara-sena. {%—Nāḍī-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} abounding with blood-vessels. {%—Nāḍī-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n. any tubular instrument. {%—Nāḍī-%}
{%vigraha, as,%} m., N. of Bhṛṅgin, one of Śiva's chief
attendants; [cf. {%nāḍī-deha.%}] {%—Nāḍī-vraṇa, as,%}
m. an ulcer, a fistula, fistulous sore, sinus. {%—Nāḍī-%}
{%śāka, as,%} m. a species of vegetable {%(= nāḍīka).%}
{%—Nāḍī-śuddhi, is,%} f., N. of a Yoga work. {%—Nāḍī-%}
{%saṅkhyā,%} f., N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva.
{%—Nāḍī-sañcāra, as,%} m., N. of the forty-second
chapter of the Jñāna-khaṇḍa of the Śiva-Purāṇa.
{%—Nāḍī-sneha, as,%} m. a N. of Bhṛṅgin; see {%nāḍī-%}
{%vigraha%}. {%—Nāḍī-hiṅgu, u,%} n. {%= hiṅgu-nāḍikā,%} the
resin of the plant Gardenia Gummifera?; ({%us%}), m.
a plant ({%= vaṃśa-pattrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>24072<pc>0476-b<k1>nAqika<k2>nAqika
{%Nāḍika, am,%}¦ n. the plant Ocimum Sanctum {%(=%}
{%kāla-śāka); (ā),%} f. a hollow stalk or stalk in
general; any tubular organ of the body (as an artery,
vein, intestine, &c.); a fistulous sore; a ray of the
sun (supposed to be hollow); an Indian hour or twenty-
four minutes = (1/60) of a sidereal day = (1/2) Muhūrta; a
measure of length = (1/2) Daṇḍa, (also read {%nārikā%});
a piece of metal on which the hours are struck, an
Indian clock, a gong. {%—Nāḍikā-datta, as,%} m., N.
of an author mentioned in the Saṃskāra-tattva by
Raghu-nandana; [cf. {%nāḍī-datta.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0476-c+ 75]

<L>24073<pc>0476-c<k1>nAqIka<k2>nAqIka
{%Nāḍīka, as,%}¦ m. a species of pot-herb (= com-
monly {%pāṭśāk%}); Corchorus Olitorius; ({%ā%}), f. the
wind-pipe or throat.
<LEND>

<L>24074<pc>0476-c<k1>nAqikela<k2>nAqikela
{#nAqikela#}¦ {%nāḍikela%} or {%nāḍīkela, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%nārikela,%} the cocoa-nut palm.
<LEND>

<L>24075<pc>0476-c<k1>nAqIca<k2>nAqIca
{#nAqIca#}¦ {%nāḍīca, as,%} m. an esculent root,
Colocasia Antiquorum.
<LEND>

<L>24076<pc>0476-c<k1>nAqvaleya<k2>nAqvaleya
{#nAqvaleya#}¦ {%nāḍvaleya, as,%} m. a metronymic
from Naḍvalā.
<LEND>

<L>24077<pc>0476-c<k1>nARaka<k2>nARaka
{#nARaka#}¦ {%nāṇaka, am,%} n. a coin or anything
stamped with an impression. {%—Nāṇaka-parīkṣā,%} f.
‘the testing of coin,’ assaying. {%—Nāṇaka-parīkṣin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘coin-tester,’ an assayer, assay-master.
<LEND>

<L>24078<pc>0476-c<k1>nAticira<k2>nAticira
{#nAticira#}¦ {%nāti-cira, as, ā, am,%} not very
long (in time), of no long duration; ({%āt%} or {%e%}), ind.
in no very long time, soon.
<LEND>

<L>24079<pc>0476-c<k1>nAtidUra<k2>nAtidUra
{#nAtidUra#}¦ {%nāti-dūra (na-ati-d˚), as, ā, am,%}
not very distant; ({%e%}), ind. not far from (with abl. or
gen.); ({%am%}), ind. not very far, no great distance,
not far away. {%—Nātidūra-nirīkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} not
seeing very far, not far-sighted.
<LEND>

<L>24080<pc>0476-c<k1>nAtiBinna<k2>nAtiBinna
{#nAtiBinna#}¦ {%nāti-bhinna (na-ati-bh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} not very different from (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>24081<pc>0476-c<k1>nAtivAda<k2>nAtivAda
{#nAtivAda#}¦ {%nātivāda (na-at˚), as,%} m. avoid-
ing opprobrious or abusive language, abstaining from
reproof.
<LEND>

<L>24082<pc>0476-c<k1>nAtra<k2>nAtra
{#nAtra#}¦ {%nātra, am,%} n. (for {%nāntra%}), praise,
eulogium; surprise, wonder; ({%as%}), m. Śiva; a sage.
<LEND>

<L>24083<pc>0476-c<k1>nAT<k2>nAT
{#nAT#}¦ {%nāth%} (allied to rt. {%nādh%} and gene-
rally identified with it), cl. 1. P. {%nāthati,%}
{%nanātha, nāthitā, nāthiṣyati, anāthīt, nāthitum,%}
to ask, solicit, beg for anything (with dat. or gen. of
the object or with two acc.); to have power; to be
master; to harass, destroy (?); to be sick or ill (?);
(in the Veda only the part. {%nāthita%} and {%nādha-%}
{%māna%} fr. {%nādh%} appear to occur); [cf. rt. {%nādh;%}
Old Germ. <nsi>nōt,</nsi> ‘necessity;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>noth;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>nead, neod</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>need;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>nauth-</nsi>
<nsi>yan,</nsi> ‘to force.’]
<LEND>

<L>24084<pc>0476-c<k1>nATa<k2>nATa
{%Nātha, am,%}¦ n. refuge, help; ({%as%}), m. a protector,
patron, master, leader, ruler, lord, (often at the end
of a comp., see {%jīvita-n˚, parjanya-n˚, ku-n˚;%} and
often used at the end of names of gods and men,
see {%govinda-n˚, jagan-n˚, trailokya-n˚%}); a hus-
band [cf. {%a-n˚%}]; a possessor [cf. {%sa-nātha,%} possessed
of]; a rope passed through the nose of a draft ox
[cf. {%nātha-hari%}]; N. of an author; [cf. {%a-n˚, ku-%}
{%n˚, govinda-n˚.%}] {%—Nātha-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
seeking for help or protection, seeking a refuge.
{%—Nātha-kumāra, as,%} m., N. of a poet mentioned
in the Śārṅgadhara-paddhati. {%—Nātha-tva, am,%} n.
the office or dignity of a protector or patron, pro-
tectorship, patronage. {%—Nātha-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having a patron or protector, having a master, de-
pendant, subservient, subject; ({%atī%}), f. having a
husband. {%—Nātha-vid, t, t, t,%} or {%nātha-vindu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. possessing or granting protection. {%—Nā-%}
{%tha-hari, is, is, i,%} carrying a master, any animal
bridled by the nose. {%—Nātha-hāra, as, ī, am,%} taking
or carrying a master, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24085<pc>0476-c<k1>nATamAna<k2>nATamAna
{%Nāthamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. seeking help.
asking, begging.
<LEND>

<L>24086<pc>0476-c<k1>nATAya<k2>nATAya
{%Nāthāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%nāthāyati, -yitum,%} to be-
come a protector or patron, to grant a request.
<LEND>

<L>24087<pc>0476-c<k1>nATita<k2>nATita
{%Nāthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who needs help, needy,
oppressed.
<LEND>

<L>24088<pc>0476-c<k1>nATin<k2>nATin
{%Nāthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a protector or master.
<LEND>

<L>24089<pc>0476-c<k1>nAda<k2>nAda
{#nAda#}¦ {%nāda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%nad%}), a loud
sound, cry, sounding, roaring, bellowing, crying, a
sound or tone in general, (sometimes at the end of
an adj. comp., e. g. {%dāruṇa-nāda, as, ā, am,%}
sounding dreadfully); (in the Yoga) the nasal sound
represented by a semicircle and used as an abbre-
viation or hieroglyphic in mystical words; one who
praises. {%—Nāda-tā,%} f. the quality of sounding.
[Page0477-a+ 73]
{%—Nāda-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa treating
of musical sounds. {%—Nāda-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pro-
nounced with sound (as letters), sonant. {%—Nāda-%}
{%vindūpaniṣad (˚du-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upa-
niṣad.
<LEND>

<L>24090<pc>0477-a<k1>nAdi<k2>nAdi
{%Nādi, is, is, i,%}¦ sounding, roaring.
<LEND>

<L>24091<pc>0477-a<k1>nAdin<k2>nAdin
{%Nādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ who or what sounds, sounding,
resonant, sounding aloud, pronounced with sound (as
a letter); roaring, bellowing, braying, (often at the
end of a comp.; cf. {%khara-n˚, gardabha-n˚%}); ({%ī%}),
m., N. of a Dānava; of a Brāhman metamorphosed
into an antelope.
<LEND>

<L>24092<pc>0477-a<k1>nAdara<k2>nAdara
{#nAdara#}¦ {%nādara (na-ād˚), as,%} m. disrespect,
disregard, inattention.
<LEND>

<L>24093<pc>0477-a<k1>nAdika<k2>nAdika
{#nAdika#}¦ {%nādika,%} N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>24094<pc>0477-a<k1>nAdiga<k2>nAdiga
{#nAdiga#}¦ {%nādiga, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>24095<pc>0477-a<k1>nAdeya<k2>nAdeya<h>1
{#nAdeya#} 1¦. {%nādeya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nadī%}), com-
ing from or belonging to a river, river-born, fluvial,
fluviatic, aquatic, marine; ({%as%}), m. the reed Saccha-
rum Spontaneum ({%= kāśa%}); Calamus Rotang {%(=%}
{%vānīra); (ī),%} f. several plants, a species of reed
growing usually near water, Calamus Fasciculatus ({%=%}
{%ambu-vetasa, = jala-vānīra%}); the orange-tree ({%=%}
{%bhūmi-jambūka, bhūmi-jambū,%} or {%bhū-jambū%});
Sesbania Ægyptiaca ({%= jayā%}); the China rose {%(=%}
{%japā, javā, = vyaṅguṣṭha, = agni-mantha, kā-%}
{%ka-jambū); (am),%} n. rock-salt ({%= saindhava%});
antimony ({%= sauvīrāñjana%}).
<LEND>

<L>24096<pc>0477-a<k1>nAdya<k2>nAdya
{%Nādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming from a river, fluvial,
river-born.
<LEND>

<L>24097<pc>0477-a<k1>nAdeya<k2>nAdeya<h>2
{#nAdeya#} 2¦. {%nādeya%} (for {%na ādeya%}), not to be
taken, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24098<pc>0477-a<k1>nAD<k2>nAD
{#nAD#}¦ {%nādh%} ({%= nāth,%} q. v.), cl. 1. A. {%nā-%}
{%dhate, nanādhe, nādhiṣyate, nādhi-%}
{%tum,%} to ask, beg for, crave, &c. See rt. {%nāth.%}
<LEND>

<L>24099<pc>0477-a<k1>nADamAna<k2>nADamAna
{%Nādhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. seeking help,
asking, begging.
<LEND>

<L>24100<pc>0477-a<k1>nADas<k2>nADas
{%Nādhas, as,%}¦ n. (probably {%= nātha%}), Ved. refuge,
help.
<LEND>

<L>24101<pc>0477-a<k1>nAna<k2>nAna
{#nAna#}¦ {%nāna, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>24102<pc>0477-a<k1>nAnada<k2>nAnada
{#nAnada#}¦ {%nānada, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%nad%}), N. of a
Sāman; [cf. {%nānanda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24103<pc>0477-a<k1>nAnanda<k2>nAnanda
{#nAnanda#}¦ {%nānanda, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%nand%}), scil.
{%indrasya,%} N. of a Sāman; [cf. {%nānada.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24104<pc>0477-a<k1>nAnardamAna<k2>nAnardamAna
{#nAnardamAna#}¦ {%nānardamāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. the
Intens. of rt. {%nard%}), sounding loudly, roaring lustily.
<LEND>

<L>24105<pc>0477-a<k1>nAnA<k2>nAnA
{#nAnA#}¦ {%nānā,%} ind. (probably a reduplication
of the negative particle {%na%} or of the pronominal
affix {%na%} in {%a-na%} &c.), in different or various ways,
in different places, manifoldly, differently, variously;
distinctly, separately; (when used as an adj. at the
beginning of a comp. = ) of different kinds, of dif-
ferent classes, various, sundry, different, manifold,
diverse; (according to Pāṇ. II. 3, 32) {%= vinā,%} without
(with gen., abl., inst.). {%—Nānā-kanda, as,%} m. a
species of bulbous plant {%(= piṇḍālu)%}. {%—Nānākāra%}
{%(˚nā-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} of different forms or manifold
kinds, multiform, various. {%—Nānā-kāram,%} ind. hav-
ing done variously. {%—Nānā-graha, as,%} m. taking
separately, (used to explain {%ava-graha.%}) {%—Nānā-%}
{%jātīya, as, ā, am,%} of various kinds or sorts, belonging
to different classes, &c. {%—Nānātma-vādin, ī, inī, i,%}
maintaining the Sāṅkhya doctrine that each individual
being has a soul distinct from the universal spirit.
{%—Nānātyaya (˚nā-at˚), as, ā, am,%} of different
kinds, manifold. {%—Nānā-tva, am,%} n. variety, diver-
sity, difference, manifoldness, (opposed to {%eka-tva,%}
{%aikya.%}) {%—Nānā-dānāni,%} n. pl. ‘various presents,’
N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Nānā-%}
{%deśya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to or coming from
different districts or countries. {%—Nānā-dharman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having different customs or character-
istics. {%—Nānā-dhātu-śata, am,%} n. a hundred various
[Page0477-b+ 75]
minerals. {%—Nānādhātu-samākīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}
filled with various minerals. {%—Nānā-dhī, īs, īs, i,%}
Ved. having different intentions. {%—Nānā-dhvani,%}
{%is,%} m. a musical instrument of more than one tone.
{%—Nānā-nāma-nirūpaṇa, am,%} n., N. of the tenth
chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa.
{%—Nānā-pakṣi-gaṇākīrṇa (˚ṇa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%}
filled with flocks of various birds. {%—Nānāpakṣi-%}
{%niṣevita, as, ā, am,%} frequented by various birds.
{%—Nānā-pada, am,%} n., Ved. a different or separate
or independent word. {%—Nānāpada-stha, as,%} m.,
Ved. (an accent) standing on distinct words or on a
separate word (?). {%—Nānā-prabhṛti, is, is, i,%} Ved.
beginning differently, (opposed to {%nānodarka.%})
{%—Nānā-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of the great-grandfather
of Raṅga-nātha, a commentator on Kāli-dāsa's Vikra-
morvaśī. {%—Nānā-mṛga-gaṇa, ās,%} m. pl. flocks of
various animals. {%—Nānā-ratham,%} ind., Ved. in
many chariots, in various cars. {%—Nānā-rasa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of different flavours, variously flavoured. {%—Nānā-%}
{%rāga, as, ā, am,%} variegated, of many colours.
{%—Nānā-rūpa, āṇi,%} n. pl. various forms, different
shapes; ({%as, ā, am%}), of different forms or shapes,
of various kinds, multiform, various. {%—Nānārūpa-%}
{%tā,%} f., Ved. multiformity, diversity of form, various-
ness. {%—Nānārtha (˚nā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having a
different aim or object, containing something else
(as a new sentence or thing); having different mean-
ings (as a word). {%—Nānārtha-koṣa, as,%} m. a
dictionary which contains words with different mean-
ings. {%—Nānārtha-dhvani-mañjarī,%} f. ‘a cluster or
nosegay of words with different meanings,’ N. of a
dictionary by an anonymous author. {%—Nānārtha-rat-%}
{%na-tilaka,%} N. of a dictionary, {%= anekārtha-tilaka.%}
{%—Nānārtharatna-mālā,%} f. ‘necklace of words of
different meanings,’ N. of a glossary. {%—Nānārtha-%}
{%saṅgraha, as,%} m. ‘collection of words with dif-
ferent meanings,’ N. of a dictionary by Ajaya-pāla.
{%—Nānā-varṇa, ās,%} m. pl. different colours; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), many-coloured, variegated. {%—Nānā-vidha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of various sorts, of sundry kinds, in
various ways, multiform, manifold. {%—Nānā-vīrya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having different effects, having manifold
efficacy. {%—Nānāvīrya-tā,%} f., Ved. the state of having
manifold efficacy. {%—Nānā-sūrya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
illuminated by different suns.
<LEND>

<L>24106<pc>0477-b<k1>nAnAnam<k2>nAnAnam
{%Nānānam,%}¦ ind., Ved. {%= nānā,%} differently, sepa-
rately, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24107<pc>0477-b<k1>nAnAndra<k2>nAnAndra
{#nAnAndra#}¦ {%nānāndra, as,%} m. (fr. {%nanāndṛ%}),
a husband's sister's son, a sister-in-law's son.
<LEND>

<L>24108<pc>0477-b<k1>nAnuzWeya<k2>nAnuzWeya
{#nAnuzWeya#}¦ {%nānuṣṭheya (na-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
not to be performed, improper, unusual, not right.
<LEND>

<L>24109<pc>0477-b<k1>nAnU<k2>nAnU
{#nAnU#}¦ {%nānū, ūs,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>24110<pc>0477-b<k1>nAnta<k2>nAnta
{#nAnta#}¦ {%nānta (na-an˚), as, ā, am, = an-anta,%}
endless.
<LEND>

<L>24111<pc>0477-b<k1>nAntarIyaka<k2>nAntarIyaka
{#nAntarIyaka#}¦ {%nāntarīyaka (na-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
inseparable, invariably connected.
<LEND>

<L>24112<pc>0477-b<k1>nAntra<k2>nAntra
{#nAntra#}¦ {%nāntra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%nam%}), praise,
eulogy; [cf. {%nātra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24113<pc>0477-b<k1>nAnda<k2>nAnda
{#nAnda#}¦ {%nānda, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nanda%}), relating
to Nanda.
<LEND>

<L>24114<pc>0477-b<k1>nAndana<k2>nAndana
{#nAndana#}¦ {%nāndana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%nand%} or
{%nandana%}), Ved. a pleasure-garden, a paradise,
elysium; [cf. {%nandana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24115<pc>0477-b<k1>nAndin<k2>nAndin
{#nAndin#}¦ {%nāndin, ī,%} m. the speaker of the
benediction before the commencement of a play.
<LEND>

<L>24116<pc>0477-b<k1>nAndI<k2>nAndI
{#nAndI#}¦ {%nāndī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%nand%}), joy, satis-
faction; prosperity; eulogium or praise of a deity,
or a prayer recited in benedictory verses at the open-
ing of a religious ceremony or of a drama, (generally
a kind of blessing pronounced as a prologue to a
Nāṭaka or play; cf. {%nandī.%}) {%—Nāndī-kara, as,%}
m. the speaker of the benediction at the opening of
a drama; (also with the vowel {%ī%} made short, {%nāndi-%}
{%kara.%}) {%—Nāndī-nināda, as,%} m. a shout of joy.
[Page0477-c+ 75]
{%—Nāndī-paṭa, as,%} m. {%= nāndī-mukha,%} the lid or
cover of a well. {%—Nāndī-pura, am,%} n., N. of a
town in the East. {%—Nāndīpuraka, as,%} &c., coming
from or relating to the town Nāndī-pura. {%—Nāndī-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} (with {%pitaras%} or {%pitṛ-gaṇas%})
the class of manes of deceased progenitors to whom
the Nāndī-mukha Śrāddha is offered; ({%am%}), n. (with
or without {%śrāddha%}) a Śrāddha or commemorative
offering to the manes preliminary to any joyous
occasion, as initiation, marriage, &c., in which nine
balls of meat are offered to the deceased father,
paternal grandfather, and great-grandfather; to the
maternal grandfather, great-grandfather, and great-
great-grandfather; and to the mother, paternal grand-
mother, and paternal great-grandmother; ({%as%}), m. {%=%}
{%nāndī-paṭa,%} the lid or cover of a well; ({%ī%}), f. a female
ancestor sharing in the above Śrāddha; a kind of grain
reckoned among the Ku-dhānyas; a kind of metre
consisting of four lines of fourteen syllables each;
[cf. {%nandī-mukha.%}] {%—Nāndī-rava, as,%} m. a cry
of joy. {%—Nāndī-vādin, ī,%} m. the speaker of the
prologue or introduction to a drama; a drummer,
one who beats a drum at festivals. {%—Nāndī-śrāddha,%}
{%am,%} n. {%= nāndī-mukhaṃ śrāddham,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24117<pc>0477-c<k1>nAndIka<k2>nAndIka
{%Nāndīka, as,%}¦ m. a post in a door-way set up for
good luck; (also read as du. {%nāndīkau.%})
<LEND>

<L>24118<pc>0477-c<k1>nAnduka<k2>nAnduka
{#nAnduka#}¦ {%nānduka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>24119<pc>0477-c<k1>nApi<k2>nApi
{#nApi#}¦ {%nāpi (na-api),%} ind. not even. See {%na.%}
<LEND>

<L>24120<pc>0477-c<k1>nApita<k2>nApita
{#nApita#}¦ {%nāpita, as,%} m. (according to some
a corruption of {%snāpitṛ,%} one who bathes), a barber,
a shaver; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of a barber; [cf. {%vaptṛ.%}]
{%—Nāpita-vāstu, u,%} n. a barber's dwelling. {%—Nā-%}
{%pitavāstuka, as, ī, am,%} belonging to or coming
from the dwelling of a barber. {%—Nāpita-śālā%} or
{%nāpita-śālikā,%} f. a barber's shop.
<LEND>

<L>24121<pc>0477-c<k1>nApitAyani<k2>nApitAyani
{%Nāpitāyani, is,%}¦ m. the son or offspring of a
barber.
<LEND>

<L>24122<pc>0477-c<k1>nApitya<k2>nApitya
{%Nāpitya, as,%}¦ m. the son of a barber; ({%am%}), n.
the trade or business of a barber.
<LEND>

<L>24123<pc>0477-c<k1>nAB<k2>nAB
{#nAB#}¦ {%nābh, p,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%nabh%}), Ved.
an opening, aperture, mouth (?); a rent (?); (Sāy.)
destructive, obstructing.
<LEND>

<L>24124<pc>0477-c<k1>nABa<k2>nABa
{#nABa#}¦ {%nābha.%} See p. 478, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>24125<pc>0477-c<k1>nABaka<k2>nABaka
{#nABaka#}¦ {%nābhaka, as,%} m. a myrobalan, Ter-
minalia Chebula.
<LEND>

<L>24126<pc>0477-c<k1>nABasa<k2>nABasa
{#nABasa#}¦ {%nābhasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nabhas%}),
celestial, heavenly, appearing in the sky; (with
{%yoga%}) N. of certain constellations, (according to
Bhaṭṭotpala there are thirty-two, divided into four
classes, viz. three Āśraya-yogas, two Dala-yogas,
twenty Ākṛti-yogas, and seven Saṅkhyā-yogas.)
{%—Nābhasa-yogādhyāya (˚ga-adh˚), as,%} m., N.
of the twelfth chapter of the Bṛhaj-jātaka, an astro-
logical work by Varāha-mihira.
<LEND>

<L>24127<pc>0477-c<k1>nABAka<k2>nABAka
{#nABAka#}¦ {%nābhāka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nabhāka%}),
belonging to or composed by Nabhāka; ({%as%}), m. (like
{%nabhāka%}), Ved., N. of a Ṛṣi of the Kaṇva family.
<LEND>

<L>24128<pc>0477-c<k1>nABAga<k2>nABAga
{#nABAga#}¦ {%nābhāga, as,%} m. (fr. {%nabha-ga%}), N.
of a son of Manu Vaivasvata; a patronymic of Am-
barīṣa [cf. {%nābhāgi%}]; a son of Manu and father of
Ambarīṣa, &c.; a son of Nabha-ga or Nabhāga and
father of Ambarīṣa; a son of Śruta and father of
Ambarīṣa; of a son of Nediṣṭha or Ariṣṭa or
Diṣṭa and father of Bhalandana; of a son of Yayāti,
grandson of Ambarīṣa, and father of Aja; [cf.
{%nabhāga, nābhā-nediṣṭha.%}] {%—Nābhāga-diṣṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Manu Vaivasvata; [cf. {%nā-%}
{%bhā-nediṣṭha, nābhāga, diṣṭa.%}] {%—Nābhāga-%}
{%dheya,%} perhaps {%= nābhāga-bhāgadheya,%} one who
has the same lot or destiny as Nābhāga. {%—Nābhāga-%}
{%nediṣṭha, as,%} m. and {%nābhāgāriṣṭa (˚ga-ar˚), as,%}
m., N. of a son of Manu Vaivasvata; [cf. {%nābhāga,%}
{%ariṣṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24129<pc>0477-c<k1>nABAgi<k2>nABAgi
{%Nābhāgi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Ambarīṣa.
<LEND>

<L>24130<pc>0477-c<k1>nABi<k2>nABi
{#nABi#}¦ {%nābhi, is,%} or {%nābhī,%} f. (according to
[Page0478-a+ 80]
lexicographers also m.; probably fr. {%nabh,%} an older
form of rt. 1. {%nah,%} to bind, connect), the navel;
any navel-like cavity; the nave of a wheel (e. g.
{%tri-nābhi cakram,%} a three-naved wheel, a wheel
with a triple nave or centre, Ṛg-veda I. 164, 2);
the centre, focus, central point, middle, point of
junction or that which holds the parts of anything
together, point of concentration, chief point, chief,
head, (hence {%nābhir nṛpa-maṇḍalasya%} in Raghu-v.
XVIII. 19 = the chief of the circle of kings); the
close connection of relations, near relationship, com-
munity of race or family; home; a near relation;
musk {%(= mṛga-nābhi); (is),%} m. a sovereign, a
lord paramount; a chief; a Kṣatriya or Hindū of
the regal and military tribe; N. of a grandson of
Priya-vrata [cf. {%nābhi-gupta, nābhi-varṣa%}], son
of Agnīdhra and father of Ṛṣabha; of the father of
Ṛṣabha, first Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī; [cf.
{%nābha,%} 2. {%nabhya, anya-n˚, ghana-n˚,%} &c.: cf.
also Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀμφ-αλό-ς, ὅμφαξ:</lang> Lat. <nsi>umb-il-īcu-s,</nsi>
<nsi>umbo:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>nab-a,</nsi> ‘nave;’ <nsi>nabulo,</nsi> ‘navel:’
Angl. Sax. <nsi>nafu, nafela:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>nabe, na-</nsi>
<nsi>bel:</nsi> Lett. <nsi>nabba,</nsi> ‘navel:’ Lith. <nsi>namba,</nsi> ‘navel.’]
{%—Nābhā-nediṣṭha, as,%} m. ({%nābhā%} loc. sing. for
{%nābhau%}), N. of a son of Manu Vaivasvata and
author of two Ṛg-veda hymns, (Ṛg-veda X. 61,
62.) {%—Nābhānediṣṭha, as, ī, am,%} or {%nābhāne-%}
{%dhiṣṭhīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to or composed by
Nābhā-nediṣṭha; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%sūktam,%} N. of a
Vedic hymn. {%—Nābhi-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. ruptured or
protruded navel (= commonly {%goṇḍa%}). {%—Nābhi-gu-%}
{%ḍaka, as,%} m. a protruding or ruptured navel. {%—Nā-%}
{%bhi-gupta, as,%} m. (?), ‘protected by Nābhi,’ N. of
a Varṣa in Kuśa-dvīpa, (the king of Kuśa-dvīpa was
Hiraṇya-retas, a son of Priya-vrata, who divided the
seven Varṣas of his Dvīpa among his seven sons;
Nābhi was probably the N. of one of these seven
sons; cf. {%nābhi-varṣa.%}) {%—Nābhi-golaka, as,%} m.
a protruding or ruptured navel {%(= nābhi-guḍaka).%}
{%—Nābhi-cchedana, am,%} n. cutting or separating
the umbilical cord. {%—Nābhi-ja, as,%} m. or {%nābhi-%}
{%janman, ā,%} m. an epithet of Brahmā, (this deity
appearing on the lotus which sprang from the navel
of Viṣṇu.) {%—Nābhi-dvāra, am,%} n. the aperture
of the navel. {%—Nābhi-nāḍī,%} f. or {%nābhi-nālā,%} f. or
{%nābhi-nāla, am,%} n. the umbilical cord; [cf. {%gar-%}
{%bha-nāḍī.%}] {%—Nābhi-bhū, ūs,%} m. ‘born from the
navel,’ an epithet of Brahmā; [cf. {%nābhi-ja.%}] {%—Nā-%}
{%bhi-mūla, am,%} n. the part of the body immediately
under the navel. {%—Nābhi-vardhana, am,%} n. division
of the umbilical cord; rupture of the navel, umbilical
hernia; corpulency. {%—Nābhi-varṣa, as, am,%} m. n.
the Varṣa governed by Nābhi, son of Āgnīdhra {%(=%}
{%Bhārata-varṣa)%}. {%—Nābhy-āvarta, as,%} m. the cavity
of the navel.
<LEND>

<L>24131<pc>0478-a<k1>nABa<k2>nABa
{%Nābha%}¦ (substituted for {%nābhi%} at the end of an
adj. comp.), the navel (e. g. {%abja-nābha, as,%} m.
‘lotus-naveled,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu; cf. {%un-n˚,%}
{%ūrṇa-n˚, kañja-n˚, kāla-n˚%}); the nave of a
wheel; the centre or central point of anything;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; N. of a son of Śruta
and father of Sindhu-dvīpa.
<LEND>

<L>24132<pc>0478-a<k1>nABika<k2>nABika
{%Nābhika, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.)
{%= nābhi%} (e. g. {%ṣaṇ-ṇābhika,%} having six naves);
({%ā%}), f. a cavity shaped like a navel; a species of
plant, Achyranthes Atropurpurea {%(= kaṭabhī)%}. {%—Nā-%}
{%bhika-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town of the Uttara-
kurus.
<LEND>

<L>24133<pc>0478-a<k1>nABila<k2>nABila
{%Nābhila, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or coming from
a navel; [cf. {%nābhīla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24134<pc>0478-a<k1>nABIla<k2>nABIla
{%Nābhīla, am,%}¦ n. the groin of a woman; a promi-
nent or ruptured navel; the cavity of the navel; pain.
<LEND>

<L>24135<pc>0478-a<k1>nABeya<k2>nABeya
{%Nābheya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Ṛṣabha, first
Arhat of the Jainas.
<LEND>

<L>24136<pc>0478-a<k1>nABya<k2>nABya
{%Nābhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ proceeding from the navel,
being in the navel, umbilical, of or relating to
the navel; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; [cf.
{%nābha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24137<pc>0478-a<k1>nABijAta<k2>nABijAta
{#nABijAta#}¦ {%nābhijāta (na-abhijāta), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} not well-born, not noble, low-bred, ignoble.
<LEND>
[Page0478-b+ 78]

<L>24138<pc>0478-b<k1>nABimAna<k2>nABimAna
{#nABimAna#}¦ {%nābhimāna (na-abh˚), as,%} m. ab-
sence of pride, humbleness.
<LEND>

<L>24139<pc>0478-b<k1>nAma<k2>nAma
{#nAma#}¦ {%nāma,%} ind. See under {%nāman%} below.
<LEND>

<L>24140<pc>0478-b<k1>nAmatika<k2>nAmatika
{#nAmatika#}¦ {%nāmatika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%namata%}),
dressed in woollen cloth.
<LEND>

<L>24141<pc>0478-b<k1>nAmaDeya<k2>nAmaDeya
{#nAmaDeya#}¦ {%nāma-dheya.%} See under {%nāman.%}
<LEND>

<L>24142<pc>0478-b<k1>nAman<k2>nAman
{#nAman#}¦ {%nāman, a,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%jñā,%} the initial
{%j%} being lost; said to be fr. rt. {%mnā%}), a mark by
which anything is known, sign, token (Ved.); form,
manner, mode, character, personal character, nature,
species (Ved.); name, appellation, (especially a per-
sonal name, as opposed to {%gotra,%} a family name);
merely the name (as opposed to the reality); (in
grammar) appellative, common name for a class of
objects, noun, word (e. g. {%megha-nāman,%} [every]
noun or word denoting cloud); substance, essence,
(in the Mīmāṃsā phil. opposed to {%guṇa,%} accidental
quality); water (according to Naigh. 1. 11); {%nāmnā%}
{%vac%} or {%nāma grah,%} to address by name, mention or
call upon by name; {%nāma kṛ%} or {%nāma dā%} or
{%nāma dhā%} or {%nāmnā kṛ%} or {%nāmnā vi-dhā,%} to give
a name, to name, call (e. g. {%Sāvitrīti nāmāsyāś%}
{%cakruḥ,%} they called her name Sāvitrī; {%Lakṣmaṇam%}
{%iti nāma kṛtavān,%} he named him Lakṣmaṇa;
{%tāṃ Duḥkha-labdhikāṃ nāmnā cakāra,%} he called
her Duḥkha-labdhikā). {%Nāman%} often occurs at
the end of an adj. comp., in which case the fem. is
generally {%nāmnī%} (e. g. {%Viṣṇu-śarma-nāmā paṇ-%}
{%ḍitaḥ,%} a sage named Viṣṇu-śarman; {%nadī-nāmnī%}
{%kanyā,%} a girl with the name of a river); but the
fem. may be also {%nāmā%} from {%nāman%} and {%nāmā%}
from a base {%nāma,%} which is rarely substituted for
{%nāman%} at the end of a comp. ({%Nāma,%} acc. sing.
used as an adverb =) namely, by name (e. g. {%Mā-%}
{%dhavo nāma Brāhmaṇaḥ,%} a Brāhman, Mādhava by
name); indeed, certainly, forsooth, really, of course,
even, probably, possibly, perhaps, agreed, granted,
granting (e. g. {%astu nāma sa dhanī me kiñcid%}
{%dadhāti,%} granting [which I doubt] that this rich man
will offer me something). {%Nāma%} as an emphatic
particle may have some of the above senses, but is
often untranslatable by any single equivalent English
word. It is frequently placed after interrogative
pronouns (e. g. {%kiṃ nāma, kathaṃ nāma, kadā%}
{%nāma, ko nāma%}), when it may be translated by
‘then,’ ‘indeed,’ &c.; {%api nāma%} at the beginning
of a sentence = perhaps, probably, would that! oh
that! of course; {%mā nāma =%} may it not be that,
perhaps, but I hope not; {%nanu nāma,%} certainly,
evidently; after an imperative {%nāma%} = I care not,
no matter, if you like, &c. According to native
lexicographers {%nāma%} implies certainty, possibility,
anger, reproach, consent, promise, recollection, sur-
prise, pretence, &c.; [cf. Zend <nsi>nāman:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὄνο-μα(τ),</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀν-ώνυ-μο-ς, νώνυμν-ο-ς, ὀνομαίνω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὀνο-μάζω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>co-gnō-men, i-gnō-min-ia, nō-men,</nsi>
<nsi>nōmin-ā-re, nam, quis-nam, quem-nam</nsi> = Sanskrit
{%kaṃ nāma%}, <nsi>nem-pe</nsi> = Sanskrit {%nāma api:%} Umbr.
<nsi>nume, nome,</nsi> dat. sing. <nsi>nomn-e:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>namō,</nsi>
gen. sing. <nsi>namin-s, namn-yan, ga-namn-yan,</nsi>
‘to name:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>nāmen, nāme:</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>nāma, nemn-an:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>name:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>i-man,</nsi>
‘name;’ <nsi>imen-ova-ti,</nsi> ‘to name:’ Scot. <nsi>ainm,</nsi>
‘name:’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>env,</nsi> ‘name.’] {%—Nāma-%}
{%karaṇa, as,%} m. a nominal affix; ({%am%}), n. giving
a name, naming a child after birth. {%—Nāma-kar-%}
{%man, a,%} n. the ceremony of naming a child after
birth. {%—Nāma-graha, as,%} m. or {%nāma-grahaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. or (Ved.) {%nāma-grāha, as,%} m. addressing or
mentioning by name. {%—Nāma-grāham,%} ind., Ved.
by mentioning the name, by naming. {%—Nāma-tas,%}
ind., see col. 3. {%—Nāma-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Nāma-dvādaśī,%} f. a religious ceremony, wor-
shipping Durgā daily under one of her twelve appel-
lations (Gaurī, Kālī, Umā, Bhadrā, Durgā, Kānti,
Sarasvatī, Maṅgalā, Vaiṣṇavī, Lakṣmī, Śivā, and
Nārāyaṇī). {%—Nāma-dha, as,%} or {%nāma-dhā, ās,%} m.,
Ved. one who gives a name, a name-giver. {%—Nāma- %}
[Page0478-c+ 80]
{%dhātu, us,%} m. a verbal base derived from a noun, a
nominal verb. {%—Nāma-dhāraka, as, ā, am,%} bearing
only the name, being anything only by name (e. g.
{%puruṣo nāma-dhārakaḥ,%} one who is a man only
in name). {%—Nāma-dheya, am,%} n. a name, a title,
an appellation, (sometimes at the end of a comp.,
e. g. {%kin-n˚,%} see under {%kim; pun-n˚,%} see under
{%puṃs%}); the ceremony of giving a name to a child.
{%—Nāmadheya-karaṇa, am,%} n. giving a name,
naming. {%—Nāmadheya-tas,%} ind. by name. {%—Nāma-%}
{%nāmika, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Nāma-ni-%}
{%dhāna, am,%} n. ‘a collection of nouns,’ N. of a
glossary. {%—Nāma-niyata-praveśa, as,%} m., N. of a
Samādhi. {%—Nāma-nirdeśa, as,%} m. pointing out by
name. {%—Nāma-pārāyaṇa, am,%} n. ‘a complete col-
lection of nouns,’ N. of a glossary. {%—Nāma-mātra,%}
{%am,%} n. the mere name, a mere name; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having only the name; ({%eṇa%}), ind. by the mere
name, merely, nominally. {%—Nāmamātrāvaśeṣita%}
{%(˚ra-av˚), as, ā, am,%} having only the name left.
{%—Nāma-mālā,%} f. a vocabulary, nomenclature; N. of
a Prākṛt glossary of synonyms. {%—Nāma-mudrā,%} f.
a seal-ring, signet-ring with a name (engraved on it).
{%—Nāma-yajña, as,%} m. a sacrifice only in name.
{%—Nāma-liṅga, am,%} n. ‘the gender of nouns,’ N.
of a work treating thereof. {%—Nāmaliṅgānuśāsana%}
{%(˚ga-an˚), am,%} n. the rules of gender or lessons on
the gender of nouns. {%—Nāma-varjita, as, ā, am,%} desti-
tute of name, nameless, stupid. {%—Nāma-vācaka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} expressing a name; (in grammar) a pro-
per name. {%—Nāma-vidhi, is,%} m. ‘name-rule,’ N. of
the twenty-third chapter of the Jñāna-khaṇḍa of the
Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Nāma-vismṛti, is,%} f. forgetting the
name (of any one). {%—Nāma-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing only the name left, deceased, dead; ({%as%}), m.
name as the only thing left, dying, death; [cf.
{%ālekhya-śeṣa, kīrtti-śeṣa.%}] {%—Nāma-saṅkīrtana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘name-glorification,’ N. of the fourteenth
chapter of the Jñāna-khaṇḍa of the Śiva-Purāṇa.
{%—Nāma-saṅgraha, as,%} m. a collection of words
(exclusive of verbs). {%—Nāma-sāroddhāra (˚ra-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a commentary on Hema-candra's
Abhidhāna-cintā-maṇi. {%—Nāmākhyātika (˚ma-%}
{%ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} relating to nouns and verbs.
{%—Nāmāṅka (˚ma-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} marked with
a name. {%—Nāmāṅka-śobhita (˚ma-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%}
adorned with the mark of the name or with name
and cipher. {%—Nāmādeśam (˚ma-ād˚),%} ind. by
announcing one's name. {%—Nāmānuśāsana (˚ma-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. ‘the rules about nouns,’ N. of a lexi-
cographical work. {%—Nāmāparādha (˚ma-ap˚), as,%}
m. abusing (a respectable person) by name, calling
names. {%—Nāmārtha-nirṇaya (˚ma-ar˚), as,%} m.
‘inquiry into the bases of nouns,’ N. of a chapter of
the Vaiyākaraṇa-bhūṣaṇa-sāra by Koṇḍa-bhaṭṭa.
{%—Nāmāvali (˚ma-āv˚), is,%} f. a list of names
(especially of a god). {%—Nāmāṣṭamī-vidhāna%}
{%(˚ma-aṣ˚), am,%} n., N. of the twenty-fourth chap-
ter of the Jñāna-khaṇḍa of the Śiva-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>24143<pc>0478-c<k1>nAmaka<k2>nAmaka
{%Nāmaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (at the end of an adj.
comp.) {%= nāman,%} e. g. {%kṛta-nāmaka,%} one to whom
a name has been given, having a name, named;
[cf. {%a-n˚, añjana-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24144<pc>0478-c<k1>nAmatas<k2>nAmatas
{%Nāma-tas,%}¦ ind. by name, namely, with the name,
with respect to the name; (in Bhāgavata-Purāṇa
V. 12, 8, used for the abl. c. of {%nāman%}); {%nāmatas%}
is sometimes redundantly joined with {%nāma%} (e. g.
{%Bāhuko nāma nāmataḥ,%} namely Bāhuka by name);
{%nāmataḥ kṛ,%} to give a name, to name, call.
<LEND>

<L>24145<pc>0478-c<k1>nAmaTA<k2>nAmaTA
{%Nāma-thā,%}¦ ind., Ved. by name.
<LEND>

<L>24146<pc>0478-c<k1>nAmika<k2>nAmika
{%Nāmika, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to a name or to
a noun.
<LEND>

<L>24147<pc>0478-c<k1>nAmi<k2>nAmi
{#nAmi#}¦ {%nāmi, is,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>24148<pc>0478-c<k1>nAmita<k2>nAmita
{#nAmita#}¦ {%nāmita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%nam%}),
bent, bent down, bowed.
<LEND>

<L>24149<pc>0478-c<k1>nAmin<k2>nAmin
{%Nāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ bending; (in grammar) changing
a dental to a cerebral, a N. given to all the vowels
except {%a%} and {%ā;%} [cf. {%bhāvin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24150<pc>0478-c<k1>nAmya<k2>nAmya
{%Nāmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bent (as a bow &c.),
bendable, pliable, pliant.
<LEND>
[Page0479-a+ 79]

<L>24151<pc>0479-a<k1>nAmba<k2>nAmba
{#nAmba#}¦ {%nāmba, as,%} m., Ved. a species of
grain, (also read {%āmba%}); ({%as, ī, am%}), consisting of
Nāmba.
<LEND>

<L>24152<pc>0479-a<k1>nAya<k2>nAya
{#nAya#}¦ {%nāya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%nī%}), a leader,
guide, driver (e. g. in {%aśva-n˚, go-n˚%}); perhaps N.
of a man; {%= naya,%} guiding, directing (morally or
physically); policy; means, expedient.
<LEND>

<L>24153<pc>0479-a<k1>nAyaka<k2>nAyaka
{%Nāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ guiding, leading, con-
ducting; ({%as%}), m. a guide, leader, conductor [cf.
{%ku-n˚%}]; a chief, lord, head; pre-eminent, principal;
(with or without {%sainyasya%}) a general, a com-
mander; (in erotic or dramatic poetry) the lover or
hero in a drama &c., a husband; the central gem of
a necklace; a paradigm or example (in grammar);
an epithet of Śākya-muni; N. of a Brāhman; ({%ikā%}),
f. a mistress; a wife; the heroine in a drama &c., a
noble lady; an inferior form or Śakti of Durgā, (of
which there are eight, viz. Ugra-caṇḍā, Pra-caṇḍā,
Caṇḍogrā, Caṇḍa-nāyikā, Ati-caṇḍā, Cāmuṇḍā,
Caṇḍā, and Caṇḍā-vatī; cf. {%kula-n˚.%}) {%—Nāyaka-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. leadership, headship, chieftainship.
{%—Nāyaka-ratna, am,%} n., N. of a commentary
on Pārtha-sārathi's Nyāya-ratna-mālā by Rāmānuja.
{%—Nāyakādhipa (˚ka-adh˚), as,%} m. the chief of
leaders, a king, sovereign, prince.
<LEND>

<L>24154<pc>0479-a<k1>nAyin<k2>nAyin
{%Nāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ leading, conducting; [cf. {%ayu-%}
{%ta-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24155<pc>0479-a<k1>nAra<k2>nAra
{#nAra#}¦ {%nāra, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%nara%}), proceeding
from men, relating or belonging to men, human,
mortal; spiritual (?); ({%as%}), m. a man (?); a calf;
({%as%} or, according to some, {%am, ā%}), m. n. f. water,
(probably only a form invented to explain {%nārā-%}
{%yaṇa;%} cf. {%nīra,%} <lang n="greek">νάω, νηρός, Νηρεύς</lang>); ({%am%}), n. a
multitude or assemblage of men; dry ginger; ({%ī%}),
f. a woman, a wife, (in the older language also
with short {%i, nāri%}); a female or any object regarded
as feminine; a kind of metre consisting of four
lines of three long syllables each; N. of a daughter
of Meru; ({%yas%}), f. pl. a sacrifice, oblation (Ved.).
{%—Nāra-kīṭa, as,%} m. a species of worm ({%= aśma-%}
{%kīṭa%}); a deceiver, one who disappoints expectations
excited by himself. {%—Nāra-jīvana, am,%} n. gold.
{%—Nārī-kavaca, as,%} m. ‘having women for armour,’
an epithet of Mūlaka, king of the solar line and son
of Aśmaka. {%—Nārī-tīrtha, āni,%} n. pl. ‘bathing-
places of women,’ N. of five sacred bathing-places.
{%—Nārī-dūṣaṇa, am,%} n. a woman's vice, any great
fault in women, (six are usually reckoned, viz.
drinking spirits, keeping bad company, quitting a
husband, rambling abroad, sleeping and dwelling
in a strange house.) {%—Nārī-nātha, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing a woman for possessor or owner (e. g. {%nārī-%}
{%nāthaṃ gṛham,%} a house having a woman for its
possessor). {%—Nārī-parāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%} devoted to
women. {%—Nārī-prasaṅga, as,%} m. libertinism,
lechery. {%—Nārī-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of
women. {%—Nārī-mukha, as,%} m., N. of a people to
the south-east of Madhya-deśa. {%—Nārī-yāna, am,%}
n. a woman's conveyance, a litter, &c. {%—Nārī-ratna,%}
{%am,%} n. a jewel of a woman, an excellent woman.
{%—Nārī-vākya, am,%} n. the word of a wife.
{%—Nārīṣṭā (˚rī-iṣ˚),%} f. ‘dear to women,’ Arabian
jasmine. {%—Nārī-ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} accompanying
women (?), fond of them (?).
<LEND>

<L>24156<pc>0479-a<k1>nArAyaRa<k2>nArAyaRa
{%Nārāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%nara,%} q. v.; sometimes de-
rived fr. {%nāra + ayana%}), ‘son of Nara or the original
man,’ patronymic of the personfied Puruṣa or first
living being, author of the Puruṣa hymn; he is often
associated with Nara or the original man, and identified
with Brahmā (in Manu I. 9, 11) and with Viṣṇu or
Kṛṣṇa; in Hari-vaṃśa 4601 Urvaśī is described as
springing from his thigh; elsewhere he is regarded
as a Kāśyapa or Āṅgirasa [cf. {%mahā-n˚, ardha-n˚%}];
chief of the Sādhyas; the eighth of the nine black
Vāsu-devas (with Jainas); the Puruṣa hymn, com-
posed by Nārāyaṇa (Ṛg-veda X. 90); N. of the
second month, reckoning from Mārgaśīrṣa; N. of
a son of Ajāmila; of Bhūmi-mitra; of Nara-hari;
N. of several men, authors and commentators; a
[Page0479-b+ 79]
mystical N. of the letter {%ā; (as, ī, am),%} relating or
belonging to Nārāyaṇa or Kṛṣṇa, (the warriors in
Kṛṣṇa's army are called Nārāyaṇāḥ in Udyoga-
parva 147); (with {%kṣetra%}) a term applied to the
ground on the banks of the Ganges for a distance of
four Hastas or cubits from the water; (with {%taila%})
a sort of oil to which efficacy is ascribed in medicine;
({%ī%}), f. epithet of Lakṣmī, the goddess of prosperity
and wife of Viṣṇu; epithet of Durgā; epithet and
patronymic of Indra-senā, wife of Mudgala; epithet
of the Ganges or of the Gaṇḍakī (?); the plant Aspa-
ragus Racemosus. {%—Nārāyaṇa-kaṇṭha, as,%} m., N.
of an author. {%—Nārāyaṇa-kalpa, as,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Nārāyaṇa-kṣetra, am,%} n. four cubits on
either side of the Ganges; see above. {%—Nārāyaṇa-%}
{%gītā,%} f., N. of a work containing the principles of the
sect founded by Rāmānanda. {%—Nārāyaṇa-gupta, as,%}
m., N. of a Gupta prince. {%—Nārāyaṇa-cakravartin,%}
{%ī,%} m., N. of a grammarian. {%—Nārāyaṇa-tāra, as,%} m.,
N. of an author; (also read {%nārāyaṇa-tārā.%}) {%—Nārā-%}
{%yaṇa-tīrtha, as,%} m., N. of an author; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of a bathing-place. {%—Nārāyaṇa-taila, am,%} n.
an oil expressed from various plants of great reputed
efficacy in many complaints. {%—Nārāyaṇa-dāsa-%}
{%siddha, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Nārāyaṇa-deva,%}
{%as,%} m. the god Nārāyaṇa; N. of an author. {%—Nārā-%}
{%yaṇa-daiva-vid, t,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Nārāyaṇa-%}
{%paṇḍita, as,%} m., N. of a learned man. {%—Nārāyaṇa-%}
{%priya, as,%} m. ‘the friend of Nārāyaṇa,’ an epithet
of Śiva; yellow sandal-wood {%(= pīta-candana).%}
{%—Nārāyaṇa-bali, is,%} m. ‘an oblation to Nārāyaṇa,’
N. of a peculiar funeral ceremony. {%—Nārāyaṇa-%}
{%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Nārāyaṇa-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of or in Nārāyaṇa.
{%—Nārāyaṇa-varman, a,%} n. ‘armour of Nārā-
yaṇa,’ N. of a poem in praise of Kṛṣṇa, forming
part of the sixth book of the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa.
{%—Nārāyaṇa-śrī-garbha, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-
sattva. {%—Nārāyaṇa-saras, as,%} n. Nārāyaṇa's lake.
{%—Nārāyaṇa-sarasvatī, īs,%} m., N. of a commen-
tator. {%—Nārāyaṇa-sūri, is,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Nārāyaṇāśrama (˚ṇa-āś˚), as,%} m. Nārāyaṇa's
hermitage; N. of the author of the commentary
Bheda-dhikkāra-satkriyā. {%—Nārāyaṇāstra (˚ṇa-%}
{%as˚), am,%} n. ‘weapon of Nārāyaṇa,’ a mystical
weapon. {%—Nārāyaṇendra (˚ṇa-in˚), as,%} m., N. of
a commentator. {%—Nārāyaṇopaniṣad (˚ṇa-up˚), t,%}
f. the Upaniṣad treating of Nārāyaṇa. {%—Nārāya-%}
{%ṇopādhyāya (˚ṇa-up˚), as,%} m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>24157<pc>0479-b<k1>nArAyaRi<k2>nArAyaRi
{%Nārāyaṇi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Viśvā-mitra.
<LEND>

<L>24158<pc>0479-b<k1>nArAyaRIya<k2>nArAyaRIya
{%Nārāyaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ referring or relating to
Nārāyaṇa, treating of him; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%upaniṣad,%}
N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Nārāyaṇīya-tantra, am,%}
n., N. of a Tantra.
<LEND>

<L>24159<pc>0479-b<k1>nArika<k2>nArika
{%Nārika, as, ī, am,%}¦ watery, aqueous; spiritual;
({%nārikā%} wrong reading for {%nāḍikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>24160<pc>0479-b<k1>nArIka<k2>nArIka
{%Nārīka%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. {%= nārī;%}
{%(am),%} n. (in the Sāṅkhya phil.) one of the nine
kinds of Tuṣṭi.
<LEND>

<L>24161<pc>0479-b<k1>nAreya<k2>nAreya
{%Nāreya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%nārī%}), N. of a son of
Bhaṅga-kāra.
<LEND>

<L>24162<pc>0479-b<k1>nAraka<k2>nAraka
{#nAraka#}¦ {%nāraka, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%naraka%}), re-
lating to hell, happening in hell, being or abiding
in hell, hellish, infernal, ({%nārakī nirvṛtiḥ,%} the
death suffered in hell); ({%as%}), m. an inhabitant of
the infernal regions; hell or the infernal regions.
<LEND>

<L>24163<pc>0479-b<k1>nArakika<k2>nArakika
{%Nārakika, as, ī, am,%}¦ hellish, infernal; ({%as%}), m.
an inhabitant of hell.
<LEND>

<L>24164<pc>0479-b<k1>nArakin<k2>nArakin
{%Nārakin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ hellish, infernal, being in
hell, condemned to or deserving hell; ({%ī%}), m. an
inhabitant of hell.
<LEND>

<L>24165<pc>0479-b<k1>nArakIya<k2>nArakIya
{%Nārakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ hellish; ({%as%}), m. an in-
habitant of hell.
<LEND>

<L>24166<pc>0479-b<k1>nAraNga<k2>nAraNga
{#nAraNga#}¦ {%nāraṅga, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%nṝ,%} but probably a corruption of {%nāga-raṅga,%} q. v.),
the orange-tree; the juice of the pepper plant; a liber-
tine, a catamite; a living being, an animal; a twin,
one of twins; ({%am%}), n. a carrot, Daucus Carota {%(= gar-%}
{%jara)%}. {%—Nāraṅga-pattraka, as,%} m. yellow carrot.
<LEND>
[Page0479-c+ 75]

<L>24167<pc>0479-c<k1>nArada<k2>nArada
{#nArada#}¦ {%nārada, as,%} m. (etymology uncer-
tain), N. of a Ṛṣi or rather Devarṣi (i. e. Ṛṣi
among the gods) regarded in the Veda as a descendant
of Kaṇva and author of certain hymns of the Ṛg-
veda (VIII. 13, IX. 104, 105), often associated in
the later mythology with Parvata, (he appears on the
earth, like Mercury, as a messenger from the gods to
men or vice versâ, and is reckoned among the ten
Prajā-patis as a son of Brahmā (Manu I. 35), from whose
forehead he is said to have been produced; in the
modern mythology he is a friend of Kṛṣṇa and is
regarded as inventor of the Vīṇā or lute; in epic
poetry he is occasionally called a Deva-gandharva,
‘divine Gandharva,’ or a Gandharva-rājan, ‘king of
the Gandharvas,’ or simply Gandharva); N. of a
son of Viśvā-mitra; of an author; of a mountain;
({%ā%}), f. a species of sugar-cane, {%= ikṣu-mūla; (as,%}
{%ī, am),%} relating to Nārada, composed by him, &c.
{%—Nārada-pañca-rātra, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Nārada-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa.
{%—Nāradapurāṇa-sūcana, am,%} n., N. of the sixty-
fifth chapter of the Vārāha-Purāṇa. {%—Nārada-pra-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. ‘Nārada chapter,’ N. of the 129th
chapter of the Kṛṣṇa-khaṇḍa or fourth section of
the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Nārada-vākya, am,%}
n. ‘speech of Nārada,’ N. of the sixty-seventh chapter
of the Uttara-kāṇḍa or seventh section of the Rāmā-
yaṇa. {%—Nārada-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of a musical work.
{%—Nārada-sanatkumāra-vāda, as,%} m. ‘discourse
of Nārada and Sanatkumāra,’ N. of the 103rd chapter
of the Uttara-khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Nā-%}
{%rada-samāgama, as,%} m. ‘arrival of Nārada,’ N. of
the twenty-first chapter of the Uttara-kāṇḍa of the
Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Nāradeśvara-tīrtha (˚da-īś˚), am,%}
n., N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Nāradopadeśa%}
{%(˚da-up˚), as,%} m. ‘the advice of Nārada,’ N. of the
first chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-
Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>24168<pc>0479-c<k1>nAradin<k2>nAradin
{%Nāradin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Viśvā-mitra.
<LEND>

<L>24169<pc>0479-c<k1>nAradIya<k2>nAradIya
{%Nāradīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to Nārada, com-
posed by Nārada, &c.; ({%am%}), n. (with or without
{%purāṇa%}), N. of a Purāṇa. {%—Nāradīya-mahā-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n., N. of a place. {%—Nāradīyopapu-%}
{%rāṇa (˚ya-up˚), am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>24170<pc>0479-c<k1>nAradIyaka<k2>nAradIyaka
{%Nāradīyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or proceeding
from Nārada; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>24171<pc>0479-c<k1>nAradvasava<k2>nAradvasava
{#nAradvasava#}¦ {%nāradvasava (?), am,%} n., N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>24172<pc>0479-c<k1>nArasiMha<k2>nArasiMha
{#nArasiMha#}¦ {%nārasiṃha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nara-%}
{%siṃha%}), referring or belonging to Viṣṇu in his man-
lion Ava-tāra or incarnation; ({%as%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu;
of a man; of a town. {%—Nārasiṃha-tantra, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tantra. {%—Nārasiṃha-purāṇa, am,%} n., N.
of a Purāṇa. {%—Nārasiṃhopapurāṇa (˚ha-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>24173<pc>0479-c<k1>nArAca<k2>nArAca
{#nArAca#}¦ {%nārāca, as,%} m. an iron arrow, an
arrow in general; a water-elephant ({%= jalebha,%}
{%ambu-hastin%}); a bad or cloudy day (?); a species
of the Dhṛti metre, also called Narāca, consisting of
4 times 8 iambics; ({%nārācī%} or {%nārācikā%}), f. a gold-
smith's scales, a fine or assay balance.
<LEND>

<L>24174<pc>0479-c<k1>nArAyaRa<k2>nArAyaRa
{#nArAyaRa#}¦ {%nārāyaṇa.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>24175<pc>0479-c<k1>nArASaMsa<k2>nArASaMsa
{#nArASaMsa#}¦ {%nārāśaṃsa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%narā-%}
{%śaṃsa%}), Ved. laudatory or eulogistic praise of a man
or men, (hence a tale or legend which eulogizes a
liberal patron is called Nārāśaṃsī or Nārāśaṃsam);
sacred to or belonging to Agni-narāśaṃsa, relating to
him, containing him, (applied to certain Soma liba-
tions, at which Narāśaṃsa's name is mentioned;
applied also to the Pitṛs because reference is made
to them at these libations.)
<LEND>

<L>24176<pc>0479-c<k1>nArASarya<k2>nArASarya
{#nArASarya#}¦ {%nārāśarya, as,%} m., N. of a man;
(also read {%pārāśarya.%})
<LEND>

<L>24177<pc>0479-c<k1>nArikera<k2>nArikera
{#nArikera#}¦ {%nārikera%} or {%nārikela, as,%} m. or
{%nārikeli, is%} and {%ī,%} f. the cocoa-nut tree, the cocoa-
nut. {%—Nārikela-dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of an island.
<LEND>
[Page0480-a+ 69]

<L>24178<pc>0480-a<k1>nAriNgakanda<k2>nAriNgakanda
{#nAriNgakanda#}¦ {%nāriṅga-kanda, as,%} or {%am,%} m.
or n. (?), the yellow carrot; [cf. {%nāraṅga-pat-%}
{%traka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24179<pc>0480-a<k1>nArI<k2>nArI
{#nArI#}¦ {%nārī,%} f. See {%nāra,%} p. 479, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>24180<pc>0480-a<k1>nArIkela<k2>nArIkela
{#nArIkela#}¦ {%nārīkela, as, ī,%} m. f. the cocoa-
nut; ({%ī%}), f. fermented liquor made from the water
or milk of the cocoa-nut.
<LEND>

<L>24181<pc>0480-a<k1>nArIca<k2>nArIca
{#nArIca#}¦ {%nārīca, am,%} n. an esculent root
(= commonly {%nālitā%}), Corchorus Capsularis; [cf.
{%nāḍīkā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24182<pc>0480-a<k1>nArItaraNgaka<k2>nArItaraNgaka
{#nArItaraNgaka#}¦ {%nārī-taraṅgaka, as,%} m. a liber-
tine, a catamite; [cf. {%nāḍī-taraṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24183<pc>0480-a<k1>nAruntuda<k2>nAruntuda
{#nAruntuda#}¦ {%nāruntuda (na-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
not causing wounds, not hurting.
<LEND>

<L>24184<pc>0480-a<k1>nArtika<k2>nArtika
{#nArtika#}¦ {%nārtika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%narta%}), re-
lating to or connected with dancing (?).
<LEND>

<L>24185<pc>0480-a<k1>nArpatya<k2>nArpatya
{#nArpatya#}¦ {%nārpatya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nṛ-pati%}),
kingly, relating to royalty.
<LEND>

<L>24186<pc>0480-a<k1>nArmata<k2>nArmata
{#nArmata#}¦ {%nārmata, as,%} m. (fr. {%nṛ-mat%}), a
patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>24187<pc>0480-a<k1>nArmada<k2>nArmada
{#nArmada#}¦ {%nārmada, as,%} m. (fr. {%narma-dā%}), a
metronymic from Narma-dā.
<LEND>

<L>24188<pc>0480-a<k1>nArmara<k2>nArmara
{#nArmara#}¦ {%nārmara, as,%} m. (fr. {%nṛ-mara%}), Ved.
‘man-slayer,’ N. of a demon.
<LEND>

<L>24189<pc>0480-a<k1>nArmiRa<k2>nArmiRa
{#nArmiRa#}¦ {%nārmiṇa, as, ī, am%} (perhaps fr.
{%narmin%} or {%narmiṇa,%} which may be a N. derived
fr. {%narma%} or {%narman%}), Ved. (Sāy.) delightful, joy-
ful ({%= narma-vat%}).
<LEND>

<L>24190<pc>0480-a<k1>nArmeDa<k2>nArmeDa
{#nArmeDa#}¦ {%nārmedha, am,%} n. (fr. {%nṛ-medha%}),
Ved., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>24191<pc>0480-a<k1>nArya<k2>nArya
{#nArya#}¦ {%nārya, as,%} m. (fr. {%narya%}), Ved. pro-
bably N. of a person.
<LEND>

<L>24192<pc>0480-a<k1>nAryaNga<k2>nAryaNga
{#nAryaNga#}¦ {%nāryaṅga, as,%} m. {%= nāraṅga,%} the
orange-tree.
<LEND>

<L>24193<pc>0480-a<k1>nAryatikta<k2>nAryatikta
{#nAryatikta#}¦ {%nārya-tikta = anārya-tikta,%} Aga-
thotes Chirayta ({%= kirāta-tikta%}).
<LEND>

<L>24194<pc>0480-a<k1>nArzada<k2>nArzada
{#nArzada#}¦ {%nārṣada, as,%} m. (fr. {%nṛ-ṣad%}), Ved.
a patronymic of Kaṇva; N. of a demon (?).
<LEND>

<L>24195<pc>0480-a<k1>nAla<k2>nAla
{#nAla#}¦ {%nāla, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nala%}), consisting
of reeds, made of a reed or reeds; ({%ā%} or {%ī, am%}), f. n.
a hollow or tubular stalk, especially the stalk of the
lotus [cf. {%khara-n˚%}], of a pot-herb, &c.; ({%am%}), n.
any pipe or tube or tubular vessel of the body, the
windpipe, urethra, &c.; a handle; {%= tāla, āla,%}
yellow orpiment; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; ({%ī%}), f. an
instrument for perforating an elephant's ear; a piece
of metal on which the hours are struck ({%= ghaṭī%});
a period of twenty-four minutes; a lotus flower.
{%—Nāla-vaṃśa, as,%} m. {%= nala,%} a reed.
<LEND>

<L>24196<pc>0480-a<k1>nAlaka<k2>nAlaka
{%Nālaka%}¦ for {%nāla%} in {%cāru-nālaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24197<pc>0480-a<k1>nAlakinI<k2>nAlakinI
{%Nālakinī = nālīkinī,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24198<pc>0480-a<k1>nAlAyita<k2>nAlAyita
{%Nālāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. an unused Nom. {%nā-%}
{%lāya%}), representing the handle (of an axe).
<LEND>

<L>24199<pc>0480-a<k1>nAli<k2>nAli
{%Nāli, is,%}¦ f. {%= nāḍī,%} any tubular vessel of the body.
<LEND>

<L>24200<pc>0480-a<k1>nAlika<k2>nAlika
{%Nālika, as,%}¦ m. a buffalo; ({%ā%}), f. a stalk, the stalk
of a lotus, a tube, see {%gandha-n˚, kapāla-n˚;%} a
species of pot-herb ({%= nālitā%}); a species of plant
({%= carma-kaṣā%}); an instrument for piercing an
elephant's ear; {%= nāḍī,%} a period of twenty-four
minutes; ({%am%}), n. a lotus flower [cf. {%nālīka%}];
myrrh; a kind of wind instrument, (perhaps) a flute;
a peculiar manner of sitting.
<LEND>

<L>24201<pc>0480-a<k1>nAlinI<k2>nAlinI
{%Nālinī,%}¦ f. (fr. an unused form {%nālin,%} which is de-
rived fr. {%nāla%}), a mystical N. of one nostril.
<LEND>

<L>24202<pc>0480-a<k1>nAlIka<k2>nAlIka
{%Nālīka, as,%}¦ m. an arrow ({%= nārāca,%} but in the
epic poetry different from it); a dart, a javelin, a
pike; body, limb (?); a lotus; the fibrous stalk of
the lotus; ({%am%}), n. an assemblage of lotus flowers.
<LEND>

<L>24203<pc>0480-a<k1>nAlIkinI<k2>nAlIkinI
{%Nālīkinī,%}¦ f. (fr. an unused form {%nālīkin,%} which
[Page0480-b+ 73]
is derived fr. {%nālīka%}), a multitude or assemblage
of lotus flowers, a lotus lake.
<LEND>

<L>24204<pc>0480-b<k1>nAlanda<k2>nAlanda
{#nAlanda#}¦ {%nālanda,%} N. of a village near Rāja-
gṛha containing a celebrated Buddhist monastery.
<LEND>

<L>24205<pc>0480-b<k1>nAlandara<k2>nAlandara
{%Nālandara,%}¦ N. of a Buddhist monastery.
<LEND>

<L>24206<pc>0480-b<k1>nAlikera<k2>nAlikera
{#nAlikera#}¦ {%nālikera, as,%} m. the cocoa-nut
tree, the cocoa-nut; N. of a district to the south-east
of Madhya-deśa.
<LEND>

<L>24207<pc>0480-b<k1>nAlikela<k2>nAlikela
{%Nālikela, am,%}¦ n. the cocoa-nut; (various reading
for {%nālikera.%})
<LEND>

<L>24208<pc>0480-b<k1>nAlijaNGa<k2>nAlijaNGa
{#nAlijaNGa#}¦ {%nāli-jaṅgha, as,%} m. a raven or
the carrion-crow; [cf. {%nāḍī-jaṅgha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24209<pc>0480-b<k1>nAlitA<k2>nAlitA
{#nAlitA#}¦ {%nālitā,%} f. an esculent root, Arum
Colocasia.
<LEND>

<L>24210<pc>0480-b<k1>nAlIpa<k2>nAlIpa
{#nAlIpa#}¦ {%nālīpa, as,%} m. {%= kadambaka;%} per-
haps for {%kaḍambaka,%} the stalk of a pot-herb.
<LEND>

<L>24211<pc>0480-b<k1>nAlIvraRa<k2>nAlIvraRa
{#nAlIvraRa#}¦ {%nālī-vraṇa, as,%} m. a fistulous or
{{sinous->sinus||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} sore ({%= nāḍī-vraṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>24212<pc>0480-b<k1>nAva<k2>nAva<h>1
{#nAva#} 1¦. {%nāva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 4. {%nu%}), Ved. a
shout of joy or triumph.
<LEND>

<L>24213<pc>0480-b<k1>nAva<k2>nAva<h>2
{#nAva#} 2¦. {%nāva%} = 2. {%nau,%} q. v., a boat, a ship,
in Dvigu comps. after numerals and {%ardha%} (e. g.
{%dvi-nāvam,%} two boats; {%ardha-n˚,%} q. v., Pāṇ. V.
4, 99, 100). {%—Nāvāja (˚va-aja), as,%} m., Ved. the
steerer of a boat, a sailor. {%—Nāvopajīvana (˚va-%}
{%up˚), as,%} m. a sailor.
<LEND>

<L>24214<pc>0480-b<k1>nAvika<k2>nAvika
{%Nāvika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to a vessel, ship,
boat, &c.; ({%as%}), m. (said to be fr. rt. {%nud%}), the
helmsman of a vessel, the steersman, pilot; a pas-
senger on board ship, a navigator, a sailor; ({%am%}),
n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>24215<pc>0480-b<k1>nAvin<k2>nAvin
{%Nāvin, ī,%}¦ m. a boatman, shipman, sailor.
<LEND>

<L>24216<pc>0480-b<k1>nAvya<k2>nAvya<h>1
1. {%nāvya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%nāvyati,%} &c., to wish for a ship.
<LEND>

<L>24217<pc>0480-b<k1>nAvya<k2>nAvya<h>2
2. {%nāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ navigable; belonging to a
boat; attainable or accessible by a boat or ship; ({%ā%}),
f., Ved. a navigable river.
<LEND>

<L>24218<pc>0480-b<k1>nAvanIta<k2>nAvanIta
{#nAvanIta#}¦ {%nāvanīta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nava-nīta%}),
mild.
<LEND>

<L>24219<pc>0480-b<k1>nAvamika<k2>nAvamika
{#nAvamika#}¦ {%nāvamika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%navama%}),
the ninth.
<LEND>

<L>24220<pc>0480-b<k1>nAvayajYika<k2>nAvayajYika
{#nAvayajYika#}¦ {%nāvayajñika%} (fr. {%nava-yajña%}),
with {%kāla,%} the time of offering the first-fruits &c.
of the harvest.
<LEND>

<L>24221<pc>0480-b<k1>nAvAkAra<k2>nAvAkAra
{#nAvAkAra#}¦ {%nāvākāra, nāvāroha.%} See 2. {%nau.%}
<LEND>

<L>24222<pc>0480-b<k1>nAvya<k2>nAvya<h>3
{#nAvya#} 3¦. {%nāvya, am,%} n. (fr. 1. {%nava%}), new-
ness, novelty.
<LEND>

<L>24223<pc>0480-b<k1>nASa<k2>nASa<h>1
{#nASa#} 1¦. {%nāśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%naś%}), Ved.
attainment, obtaining; [cf. {%dū-ṇāśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24224<pc>0480-b<k1>nASa<k2>nASa<h>2
{#nASa#} 2¦. {%nāśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%naś%}), dis-
appearance; destruction, annihilation, ruin, loss;
death; misfortune; abandonment, desertion; flight,
retreat; (in arithmetic) elimination; [cf. {%karma-n˚,%}
{%graha-n˚, citta-n˚, dū-ṇāśa.%}] {%—Nāśa-tas,%} ind. {%=%}
{%nāśāt,%} from death.
<LEND>

<L>24225<pc>0480-b<k1>nASaka<k2>nASaka
{%Nāśaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroying, destructive, anni-
hilating, causing to perish; [cf. {%ku-n˚, kṛta-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24226<pc>0480-b<k1>nASana<k2>nASana
{%Nāśana, as, ī, am,%}¦ destroying, annihilating,
causing to be lost, causing to perish, removing,
(commonly in comp. with the object; cf. {%duḥsvap-%}
{%na-n˚%}); ({%am%}), n. destruction, removing, removal,
expulsion; ruin, perishing; forgetting.
<LEND>

<L>24227<pc>0480-b<k1>nASanIya<k2>nASanIya
{%Nāśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ liable to be destroyed,
destructible.
<LEND>

<L>24228<pc>0480-b<k1>nASayat<k2>nASayat
{%Nāśayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ destroying, annihilating,
removing.
<LEND>

<L>24229<pc>0480-b<k1>nASayitf<k2>nASayitf
{%Nāśayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. a destroyer, remov-
ing, a remover.
<LEND>

<L>24230<pc>0480-b<k1>nASita<k2>nASita
{%Nāśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroyed, ruined, suffered to
perish, lost.
<LEND>

<L>24231<pc>0480-b<k1>nASin<k2>nASin
{%Nāśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ destructive, destroying, a de-
stroyer; removing; perishing, perishable, being lost
or destroyed; [cf. {%anartha-n˚, kuṣṭha-n˚, kṣa-%}
{%ya-n˚.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0480-c+ 79]

<L>24232<pc>0480-c<k1>nASI<k2>nASI
{%Nāśī,%}¦ f., N. of a river near Benares.
<LEND>

<L>24233<pc>0480-c<k1>nASuka<k2>nASuka
{%Nāśuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. disappearing, perishing,
being lost.
<LEND>

<L>24234<pc>0480-c<k1>nASya<k2>nASya
{%Nāśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ liable to be destroyed, de-
structible.
<LEND>

<L>24235<pc>0480-c<k1>nAzwika<k2>nAzwika
{%Nāṣṭika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%naṣṭa%}), belonging or
relating to anything lost; ({%as%}), m. the owner of
anything lost, the former owner of a lost chattel.
<LEND>

<L>24236<pc>0480-c<k1>nAzwrA<k2>nAzwrA
{%Nāṣṭrā,%}¦ f., Ved. danger, destruction; an evil
spirit, a demon.
<LEND>

<L>24237<pc>0480-c<k1>nAs<k2>nAs<h>1
{#nAs#} 1¦. {%nās,%} cl. 1. A. {%nāsate, nanāse,%}
{%nāsitum,%} to sound.
<LEND>

<L>24238<pc>0480-c<k1>nAs<k2>nAs<h>2
{#nAs#} 2¦. {%nās,%} Ved. the nose, in {%nāsā,%} du.
(Ṛg-veda II. 39, 6); [cf. 3. {%nas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24239<pc>0480-c<k1>nAsA<k2>nAsA
{%Nāsā,%}¦ f. (said by some to be fr. rt. {%snā%} = rt. {%snu%}),
the nose, (originally perhaps {%nāsā,%} sing. = a nostril;
{%nāse,%} du. = the two nostrils or the nose); a pro-
boscis, the trunk of an elephant [cf. {%gaja-n˚%}]; a
piece of wood over a door projecting like a nose,
the upper timber of a door [cf. {%nakra%}]; the plant
Gendarussa Vulgaris ({%= vāsaka%}); [cf. Lat. <nsi>nāsus,</nsi>
<nsi>nāris</nsi> for <nsi>nāsis;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>nāsa;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>nāse;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>nāse;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>nōsŭ;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>nōsis;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">νῆ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">σος;</lang> Hib. <nsi>neas,</nsi> ‘a promontory,’ <nsi>ness</nsi> in Dunge-ness.]
{%—Nāsāgra (˚sā-ag˚), as,%} m. the point or tip of
the nose. {%—Nāsā-chidra, am,%} n. a nostril. {%—Nāsā-%}
{%chinnī,%} f. a species of bird with a divided beak {%(=%}
{%pūrṇikā)%}. {%—Nāsā-jvara, as,%} m. a kind of disease
of the nose {%(= nakra)%}. {%—Nāsā-dakṣiṇāvarta%}
{%(˚ṇa-āv˚), as,%} m. wearing the nose-ring in the right
nostril by rich women who have children (?). {%—Nāsā-%}
{%dāru,%} n. {%= nāsā,%} a piece of wood over a door pro-
jecting like a nose; the upper timber of a door-frame.
{%—Nāsā-nāha, as,%} m. thickening of the membrane
of the nose, stoppage of the nostrils. {%—Nāsāntika,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nāsā-anta%}), reaching to the nose; [cf.
{%keśāntika.%}] {%—Nāsā-pariśoṣa, as,%} m. heat and
dryness of the nose. {%—Nāsā-parisrāva, as,%} m. ‘nose-
flow,’ running at the nose, a running cold. {%—Nāsā-%}
{%pāka, as,%} m. a kind of disease of the nose attended
with inflammation. {%—Nāsā-puṭa, as,%} m. ‘nose-cup,’
the outside of the nostril, the nostril. {%—Nāsāpuṭa-%}
{%maryādā,%} f. the septum of the nose. {%—Nāsā-pra-%}
{%tīnāha, as,%} m. {%= nāsā-nāha,%} thickening of the
membrane of the nose, stoppage of the nostrils.
{%—Nāsā-rakta-pitta, am,%} n. bleeding of the nose.
{%—Nāsā-randhra, am,%} n. ‘nose-aperture,’ the
nostril. {%—Nāsārśas (˚sā-ar˚), ās,%} m. polypus of the
nose. {%—Nāsā-vaṃśa, as,%} m. the bridge of the nose.
{%—Nāsā-vāmāvarta (˚ma-āv˚), as,%} m. wearing the
nose-ring in the left nostril, a mark of sorrow or
distress. {%—Nāsā-vivara, as,%} m. ‘nose-cavity,’ a
nostril. {%—Nāsā-śoṣa, as,%} m. dryness of the nostrils.
{%—Nāsā-saṃvedana, as,%} m. Momordica Charantia
{%(= kāṇḍīra-latā)%}. {%—Nāsā-srāva, as,%} m. {%= nāsā-%}
{%parisrāva,%} ‘nose-flow,’ running at the nose, a
running cold.
<LEND>

<L>24240<pc>0480-c<k1>nAsAlu<k2>nAsAlu
{%Nāsālu, us,%}¦ m. a tree, commonly Kāyaphal.
See {%kaṭphala,%} p. 196, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>24241<pc>0480-c<k1>nAsikA<k2>nAsikA
{%Nāsikā,%}¦ f. the nose, (originally {%nāsikā,%} sing. = a
nostril; {%nāsike,%} du. = the two nostrils or the nose);
the trunk of an elephant; a proboscis; any nose-
shaped object [cf. {%carma-n˚%}]; a projection, the
upper timber of a door; an epithet of the nymph
Aśvinī; [cf. {%a-nāsika, kāka-nāsikā, carma-n˚.%}]
{%—Nāsika-tryambaka-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sa-
cred bathing-place mentioned in the Rasika-ramaṇa.
{%—Nāsikan-dhama, as, ā, am%} ({%nāsikam%} for acc.
sing. {%nāsikām%}), blowing or breathing through the
nose, snoring, &c. {%—Nāsikan-dhaya, as, ī, am%}
({%nāsikam%} for acc. sing. {%nāsikām%}), drinking through
the nose. {%—Nāsika-vat, ān, atī, at%} (for {%nāsikā-%}
{%vat%}), Ved. having a nose. {%—Nāsikāgra (˚ka-ag˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the tip of the nose. {%—Nāsikā-pāka, as,%} m.
{%= nāsā-pāka,%} a kind of disease or inflammation of
the nose. {%—Nāsikā-puṭa, as,%} m. {%= nāsā-puṭa,%}
‘nose-cup,’ the outside of the nostril, the nostril.
{%—Nāsikā-mala, am,%} n. the mucus of the nose,
snot.
<LEND>
[Page0481-a+ 75]

<L>24242<pc>0481-a<k1>nAsikya<k2>nAsikya
{%Nāsikya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in the nose; uttered
through the nose, nasal; ({%as%}), m. any nasal sound; a
peculiar nasal sound related to the so-called Yamas;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people in Dakṣiṇā-patha;
({%au%}), du. {%= nāsatyau,%} the two sons of Aśvinī, the
Aśvins; ({%am%}), n. the nose; N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>24243<pc>0481-a<k1>nAsikyaka<k2>nAsikyaka
{%Nāsikyaka, am,%}¦ n. the nose.
<LEND>

<L>24244<pc>0481-a<k1>nAsya<k2>nAsya
{%Nāsya, am,%}¦ n. a nose-cord, the rein of a draught-ox
passed through the septum of the nostrils; (perhaps
collectively) noses, a multitude of noses (?); [cf.
{%nasya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24245<pc>0481-a<k1>nAsatya<k2>nAsatya
{#nAsatya#}¦ {%nāsatya, as,%} m. (derived by native
commentators fr. {%na + a-satya,%} ‘not untrue,’ or fr.
{%nāsā%} + affix {%tya,%} or still more improbably fr. {%nā,%}
nom. of {%nṛ = netṛ + satya%}), N. of one of the
Aśvins, the other being then called Dasra; ({%au%}), m.
du. the common N. of the two Aśvins, see {%aśvinau;%}
{%(ā),%} f. the constellation Aśvinī; ({%as, ā, am%}), re-
ferring or relating to the Nāsatyas; [cf. Zend <nsi>nā-</nsi>
<nsi>onhaitya.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>24246<pc>0481-a<k1>nAsamOjasa<k2>nAsamOjasa
{#nAsamOjasa#}¦ {%nāsamaujasa (na-as˚), as,%} m.,
N. of the brother of Asamaujas and son of Kambala-
barhiṣa.
<LEND>

<L>24247<pc>0481-a<k1>nAsikA<k2>nAsikA
{#nAsikA#}¦ {%nāsikā.%} See p. 480, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>24248<pc>0481-a<k1>nAsIra<k2>nAsIra
{#nAsIra#}¦ {%nāsīra, am,%} n. advancing or skir-
mishing in front of an army, leaving the line and
defying or challenging the enemy by shouts and
gestures; ({%as%}), m. the van or a champion who
advances before the line; (also read {%nāsira.%})
<LEND>

<L>24249<pc>0481-a<k1>nAsti<k2>nAsti
{#nAsti#}¦ {%nāsti (na-asti),%} ind. non-existence,
not so, it is not. {%—Nāsti-tā,%} f. or {%nāsti-tva, am,%} n.
non-existence. {%—Nāsti-vāda, as,%} m. “assertion of ‘it
is not’ or of non-existence,” infidelity.
<LEND>

<L>24250<pc>0481-a<k1>nAstika<k2>nAstika
{%Nāstika, as, ī, am,%}¦ atheistical, unbelieving, infidel,
an unbeliever, applied by the orthodox Hindūs to
any one who denies the divine authority of the
Vedas and a future life, or doubts the legends of the
Purāṇas; [cf. {%āstika.%}] {%—Nāstika-tā,%} f. or {%nāstika-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. or {%nāstikya, am,%} n. infidelity, disbelief,
atheism, denial of the deity, of a future state, of the
authority of the Vedas, &c.; Buddhism, heresy, &c.
{%—Nāstika-mata, am,%} n. an atheistical opinion.
<LEND>

<L>24251<pc>0481-a<k1>nAstida<k2>nAstida
{#nAstida#}¦ {%nāstida%} or (according to others)
{%nāstitada, as,%} m. the mango tree ({%= āmra%}).
<LEND>

<L>24252<pc>0481-a<k1>nAha<k2>nAha
{#nAha#}¦ {%nāha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%nah%}), binding,
confinement; a trap, a snare for catching deer &c.;
obstruction in any organ or secretion of the body, as
costiveness &c.
<LEND>

<L>24253<pc>0481-a<k1>nAhala<k2>nAhala
{#nAhala#}¦ {%nāhala, as,%} m. a man of a bar-
barous or outcast tribe; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a non-
Āryan people ({%= mleccha%}).
<LEND>

<L>24254<pc>0481-a<k1>nAhuza<k2>nAhuza<h>1
{#nAhuza#} 1¦. {%nāhuṣa, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%nahus%}), Ved.
neighbouring, being in the vicinity, neighbourly?;
(Sāy.) human, belonging to men; ({%as%}), m. a
neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>24255<pc>0481-a<k1>nAhuza<k2>nAhuza<h>2
{#nAhuza#} 2¦. {%nāhuṣa, as,%} m. (fr. {%nahuṣa%}), a
patronymic of Yayāti; N. of a serpent-demon; [cf.
{%nahuṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24256<pc>0481-a<k1>nAhuzi<k2>nAhuzi
{%Nāhuṣi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Yayāti.
<LEND>

<L>24257<pc>0481-a<k1>ni<k2>ni
{#ni#}¦ {%ni%} (an indeclinable prefix to verbs and
nouns, used as a preposition except in one passage
in Atharva-veda X. 8, 7, where it stands alone as an
adverb), in, into, within; down, under, back; on,
upon. As a prefix to nouns {%ni%} appears sometimes to
be a curtailed form of {%nis%} in its sense of ‘without,’
‘deprived of’ (e. g. in {%ni-kilviṣa, ni-khila,%} q. v.),
but the idea of negation in such compounds may pos-
sibly be derived from the meanings ‘down,’ ‘down-
wards,’ ‘back,’ which properly belong to {%ni;%} occasion-
ally, however, {%ni%} is inaccurately written for {%niḥ (=%}
{%nis),%} as in {%ni-śabda%} for {%niḥ-śabda;%} according to
native lexicographers the senses in which {%ni%} may be
used are expressed by the following Sanskrit words,
{%kṣepa, bhṛśārtha, nityārtha, dāna, san-ni-%}
{%dhāna, upa-rama, saṃ-śraya, ā-śraya, rāśi, %}
[Page0481-b+ 70]
{%mokṣa, antar-bhāva, adho-bhāva, bandhana,%}
{%kauśala, ni-veśa, vi-ny-āsa;%} [{%ni%} is thought by
some to be for primitive {%ani;%} cf. {%an-tar, an-tarā;%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐν, ἐνί, εἰν, εἰς, ἐς for ἐν-ς, ἐν-τό-ς, ἔν-δο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἔσ-ω, ἔνεροι, ἔνερ-θε, ὑπ-ένερ-θε, ἐνέρ-τερο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἔντερο-ν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>en-do, in-du, in, in-ter, in-trā, in-</nsi>
<nsi>ter-ior, in-tumu-s, in-tus;</nsi> Umbr. <nsi>en, an-der;</nsi>
Osk. <nsi>an-ter;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>in, inna, innuma, inna-</nsi>
<nsi>thrō, un-dar;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>nieder;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>in,</nsi>
<nsi>nidhan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>24258<pc>0481-b<k1>niMs<k2>niMs
{#niMs#}¦ {%niṃs%} (thought by some to be a con-
traction of {%ninaṃs,%} old Desid. of rt. {%nam%}),
cl. 2. A. {%niṃste%} (2nd sing. {%niṃsse,%} 2nd sing. Impv.
{%niṃssva%}), {%niniṃse, niṃsitum,%} &c., Ved. to touch,
kiss, salute. (After {%pra%} the initial {%n%} is optionally
cerebralized, cf. {%pra-ṇiṃsitavya, pra-niṃsitavya,%}
{%pari-ṇiṃsaka;%} cf. also rt. {%nikṣ.%})
<LEND>

<L>24259<pc>0481-b<k1>niH<k2>niH
{#niH#}¦ {%niḥ,%} euphonically substituted for {%nis,%}
q. v., before {%ś, ṣ, s,%} and rarely before {%k, kh, p, ph.%}
<LEND>

<L>24260<pc>0481-b<k1>niHka<k2>niHka
{#niHka˚#}¦ {%niḥ-ka˚, niḥ-kā˚,%} &c. See under
{%niṣ-ka˚, niṣ-kā˚,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>24261<pc>0481-b<k1>niHkzatra<k2>niHkzatra
{#niHkzatra#}¦ {%niḥ-kṣatra%} or {%niḥ-kṣatriya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} destitute of the military tribe, having no
warrior-caste.
<LEND>

<L>24262<pc>0481-b<k1>niHkzip<k2>niHkzip
{#niHkzip#}¦ {%niḥ-kṣip,%} probably for {%ni-kṣip,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24263<pc>0481-b<k1>niHkzipta<k2>niHkzipta
{%Niḥ-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or sent away;
spent (as time), passed.
<LEND>

<L>24264<pc>0481-b<k1>niHkzipya<k2>niHkzipya
{%Niḥ-kṣipya,%}¦ ind. having thrown or sent away;
having spent (as time); having wiped away (as tears).
<LEND>

<L>24265<pc>0481-b<k1>niHkzepa<k2>niHkzepa
{%Niḥ-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. throwing, sending, putting
away; spending, passing (time); wiping away (as
tears).
<LEND>

<L>24266<pc>0481-b<k1>niHpa<k2>niHpa
{#niHpa˚#}¦ {%niḥ-pa˚%} and {%niḥ-pha˚.%} See under
{%niṣ-pa˚%} and {%niṣ-pha˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>24267<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSaMsaya<k2>niHSaMsaya
{#niHSaMsaya#}¦ {%niḥ-śaṃsaya,%} wrongly spelt for
{%niḥ-saṃśaya.%}
<LEND>

<L>24268<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSaNka<k2>niHSaNka
{#niHSaNka#}¦ {%niḥ-śaṅka, as, ā, am,%} free from
fear, fearless, without misgiving or apprehension,
having no cares, free from risk; ({%am%}), ind. fearlessly,
without fear or care, without anxiety. {%—Niḥśaṅka-%}
{%supta, as, ā, am,%} sleeping without care, sleeping
calmly and securely.
<LEND>

<L>24269<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSaNkita<k2>niHSaNkita
{%Niḥ-śaṅkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from fear or care,
free from risk, secure.
<LEND>

<L>24270<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSabda<k2>niHSabda
{#niHSabda#}¦ {%niḥ-śabda, as, ā, am,%} noiseless,
soundless, not making a noise; ({%as, am%}), m. n. (?),
soundlessness, silence, a calm; ({%am%}), ind. without
noise, noiselessly; [cf. {%ni-śabda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24271<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSama<k2>niHSama
{#niHSama#}¦ {%niḥ-śama, as,%} m. uneasiness, dis-
composure, anxiety.
<LEND>

<L>24272<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSayAna<k2>niHSayAna
{#niHSayAna#}¦ {%niḥ-śayāna, as, ā, am,%} not sleep-
ing, not lying down.
<LEND>

<L>24273<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSaraRa<k2>niHSaraRa
{#niHSaraRa#}¦ {%niḥ-śaraṇa, as, ā, am,%} without
protection or refuge, defenceless, unprotected.
<LEND>

<L>24274<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSarkara<k2>niHSarkara
{#niHSarkara#}¦ {%niḥ-śarkara, as, ā, am,%} free from
stones or pebbles (as a bathing-place).
<LEND>

<L>24275<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSalAka<k2>niHSalAka
{#niHSalAka#}¦ {%niḥ-śalāka, as, ā, am,%} free from
talking birds (as parrots, jays, or crows); solitary, private.
<LEND>

<L>24276<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSalya<k2>niHSalya
{#niHSalya#}¦ {%niḥ-śalya, as, ā, am,%} freed from
an arrow; free from spikes or thorns; ({%am%}), ind.
without an arrow; unthorny; without pain or diffi-
culty; without reluctance, willingly.
<LEND>

<L>24277<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSas<k2>niHSas
{#niHSas#}¦ {%niḥ-śas,%} f., Ved. refusing, declin-
ing; (Sāy.) disinclination, absence of wish or desire,
dislike ({%= niḥ-śaṃsana%}).
<LEND>

<L>24278<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSastra<k2>niHSastra
{#niHSastra#}¦ {%niḥ-śastra, as, ā, am,%} without
arms, unarmed, weaponless.
<LEND>

<L>24279<pc>0481-b<k1>niHSAs<k2>niHSAs
{#niHSAs#}¦ {%niḥ-śās (nis-ś˚),%} cl. 2. P. {%-śāsti,%}
{%-śāsitum,%} Ved. to order off or away; to expel.
<LEND>
[Page0481-c+ 72]

<L>24280<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSiz<k2>niHSiz
{#niHSiz#}¦ {%niḥ-śiṣ (nis-ś˚),%} Caus. {%-śeṣayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to take away or destroy completely, con-
sume entirely, annihilate; (also regarded as a Nom.
fr. {%niḥ-śeṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>24281<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSeza<k2>niHSeza
{%Niḥ-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no remainder, with-
out remainder, completely spent, complete, entire,
whole, (often in the sense of an adverb at the be-
ginning of a comp. before a participle, e. g. {%niḥ-%}
{%śeṣa-bhagna,%} completely broken); ({%am%} or {%eṇa%}),
ind. completely, totally; {%niḥśeṣaṃ kṛ,%} to destroy
or consume completely; [cf. {%a-śeṣa.%}] {%—Niḥśeṣa-%}
{%tas,%} ind. without remainder, completely, totally.
{%—Niḥśeṣa-tā,%} f. complete destruction.
<LEND>

<L>24282<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSezaRa<k2>niHSezaRa
{%Niḥ-śeṣaṇa, as, ā, am, = niḥ-śeṣa.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>24283<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSezita<k2>niHSezita
{%Niḥ-śeṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having nothing left, com-
pletely consumed or finished, destroyed, annihilated;
(wrongly read {%ni-śeṣita.%})
<LEND>

<L>24284<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSukra<k2>niHSukra
{#niHSukra#}¦ {%niḥ-śukra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. without
brilliancy; without virile energy, impotent.
<LEND>

<L>24285<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSUka<k2>niHSUka
{#niHSUka#}¦ {%niḥ-śūka, as,%} m. beardless rice
without any awn.
<LEND>

<L>24286<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSeza<k2>niHSeza
{#niHSeza#}¦ {%niḥ-śeṣa.%} See {%niḥ-śiṣ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>24287<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSoka<k2>niHSoka
{#niHSoka#}¦ {%niḥ-śoka, as, ā, am,%} free from
sorrow or care.
<LEND>

<L>24288<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSoDya<k2>niHSoDya
{#niHSoDya#}¦ {%niḥ-śodhya, as, ā, am,%} not to be
purified, not requiring cleansing; clean, pure.
<LEND>

<L>24289<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSmaSru<k2>niHSmaSru
{#niHSmaSru#}¦ {%niḥ-śmaśru, us, us, u,%} beardless;
(wrongly read {%ni-śmaśru.%})
<LEND>

<L>24290<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSrama<k2>niHSrama
{#niHSrama#}¦ {%niḥ-śrama.%} See {%ni-śrama.%}
<LEND>

<L>24291<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSrayaRI<k2>niHSrayaRI
{#niHSrayaRI#}¦ {%niḥ-śrayaṇī%} or {%niḥ-śrayiṇī,%} f. a
ladder, a staircase, steps, &c.; [cf. {%ni-śrayaṇī, ni-%}
{%śrayiṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24292<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSreRi<k2>niHSreRi
{%Niḥ-śreṇi, is, ī,%}¦ f. a ladder or staircase, a flight of
stairs or steps; the wild date tree.
<LEND>

<L>24293<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSreRikA<k2>niHSreRikA
{%Niḥśreṇikā,%}¦ f. a species of grass.
<LEND>

<L>24294<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSrI<k2>niHSrI
{#niHSrI#}¦ {%niḥ-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} deprived of happi-
ness or prosperity, unfortunate. {%—Niḥśrī-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} made unfortunate, rendered unhappy.
<LEND>

<L>24295<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSrIka<k2>niHSrIka
{%Niḥśrīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ deprived of beauty (as a
dead body), deprived of happiness, &c.; one whose
happiness is destroyed, unhappy, inglorious; (also
read {%ni-śrīka.%}) {%—Niḥśrīka-tā,%} f. absence of good
fortune, want of good luck.
<LEND>

<L>24296<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSreRi<k2>niHSreRi
{#niHSreRi#}¦ {%niḥ-śreṇi.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>24297<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSreyasa<k2>niHSreyasa
{#niHSreyasa#}¦ {%niḥ-śreyasa, as, ī, am,%} having
nothing better or superior, the best, most excellent;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; ({%am%}), n. final beatitude,
ultimate bliss or supreme felicity in the life to come,
happiness, welfare; knowledge which brings deliver-
ance, learning; belief, faith, devotedness; appre-
hension, conception.
<LEND>

<L>24298<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSvas<k2>niHSvas
{#niHSvas#}¦ {%niḥ-śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śvasiti, -śvasi-%}
{%tum,%} to breathe out, expire, sigh.
<LEND>

<L>24299<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSvasana<k2>niHSvasana
{%Niḥ-śvasana, am,%}¦ n. breathing out, sighing.
<LEND>

<L>24300<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSvasita<k2>niHSvasita
{%Niḥ-śvasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ breathed out, sighed;
sighing, breathing out; ({%am%}), n. sighing, expiration,
a sigh.
<LEND>

<L>24301<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSvasya<k2>niHSvasya
{%Niḥ-śvasya,%}¦ ind. having sighed, sighing, breath-
ing out.
<LEND>

<L>24302<pc>0481-c<k1>niHSvAsa<k2>niHSvAsa
{%Niḥ-śvāsa, as,%}¦ m. breathing out, expiration;
breath, sighing, a sigh; (often read {%ni-śvāsa.%}) {%—Niḥ-%}
{%śvāsa-parama, as, ā, am,%} chiefly engaged in sigh-
ing, melancholy, sorrowful. {%—Niḥśvāsa-saṃhitā,%} f.,
N. of a code of laws supposed to have been revealed
by Rudra-Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>24303<pc>0481-c<k1>niHzamam<k2>niHzamam
{#niHzamam#}¦ {%niḥ-ṣamam,%} ind. (fr. {%nis + sa-%}
{%mam%}), at the wrong time, unseasonably.
<LEND>

<L>24304<pc>0481-c<k1>niHziD<k2>niHziD
{#niHziD#}¦ {%niḥ-ṣidh, t,%} f. (fr. {%nis + sidh =%}
{%sādh%}), granting, bestowing; grant, oblation, gift,
donation; (Sāy.) hindrance, obstruction; destroying,
destructive, adverse.
<LEND>

<L>24305<pc>0481-c<k1>niHziDvan<k2>niHziDvan
{%Niḥ-ṣidhvan, ā, arī, a%}¦ (fr. {%nis + sidhvan%}),
[Page0482-a+ 69]
Ved. granting, presenting; (Sāy.) coming to com-
plete perfection.
<LEND>

<L>24306<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsaMSaya<k2>niHsaMSaya
{#niHsaMSaya#}¦ {%niḥ-saṃśaya, as, ā, am,%} un-
doubted, infallible, unerring, certain; not doubting,
not doubtful; ({%am%}), ind. without doubt, doubtless,
infallibly, certainly, surely.
<LEND>

<L>24307<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsaNkakza<k2>niHsaNkakza
{#niHsaNkakza#}¦ {%niḥ-saṅkakṣa, as, ā, am,%} not per-
plexed, not confused; (also written {%ni-saṅkakṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>24308<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsaNKya<k2>niHsaNKya
{#niHsaNKya#}¦ {%niḥ-saṅkhya, as, ā, am,%} innu-
merable, numberless.
<LEND>

<L>24309<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsaNga<k2>niHsaNga
{#niHsaNga#}¦ {%niḥ-saṅga, as, ā, am,%} unattached,
unobstructed; not attached, not devoted, regardless,
indifferent to (with loc.); free from worldly attach-
ment or selfish desires, unselfish, disinterested; un-
connected, separated; ({%ena%} or {%am%}), ind. without
attachment, without interest, unselfishly, without
further reflection; (also written {%niḥ-ṣaṅga;%} cf.
{%a-saṅga.%}) {%—Niḥsaṅga-tā,%} f. or {%niḥsaṅga-tva, am,%}
n. absence of attachment, unselfishness, disinterested-
ness, indifference.
<LEND>

<L>24310<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsaYcAra<k2>niHsaYcAra
{#niHsaYcAra#}¦ {%niḥ-sañcāra, as, ā, am,%} not mov-
ing, not walking about, not leaving one's home.
<LEND>

<L>24311<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsaYjYa<k2>niHsaYjYa
{#niHsaYjYa#}¦ {%niḥ-sañjña, as, ā, am,%} senseless,
insensible, unconscious.
<LEND>

<L>24312<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsattva<k2>niHsattva
{#niHsattva#}¦ {%niḥ-sattva, as, ā, am,%} without
courage or strength, unenergetic, weak, impotent;
insignificant, low, mean; non-existent, unsubstantial;
deprived of living beings; ({%am%}), n. absence of power,
want of energy; insignificance; non-existence.
<LEND>

<L>24313<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsatya<k2>niHsatya
{#niHsatya#}¦ {%niḥ-satya, as, ā, am,%} untrue, false.
{%—Niḥsatya-tā,%} f. insincerity, falsehood, untruth.
<LEND>

<L>24314<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsantati<k2>niHsantati
{#niHsantati#}¦ {%niḥ-santati, is, is, i,%} destitute
of offspring, childless.
<LEND>

<L>24315<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsantAna<k2>niHsantAna
{%Niḥ-santāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ destitute of posterity,
childless.
<LEND>

<L>24316<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsandigDa<k2>niHsandigDa
{#niHsandigDa#}¦ {%niḥ-sandigdha, as, ā, am,%} un-
doubted, not doubtful, certain; ({%am%}), ind. without
any doubt, certainly.
<LEND>

<L>24317<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsandeha<k2>niHsandeha
{%Niḥ-sandeha, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from uncertainty,
doubtless, undoubted, certain; ({%am%}), ind. without
any doubt, certainly.
<LEND>

<L>24318<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsanDi<k2>niHsanDi
{#niHsanDi#}¦ {%niḥ-sandhi, is, is, i,%} having no
joints, having no joints perceptible, well knit, com-
pact, close, firm.
<LEND>

<L>24319<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsapatna<k2>niHsapatna
{#niHsapatna#}¦ {%niḥ-sapatna, as, ā, am,%} having
no rival, not sharing the possession of anything with
another; not claimed by another, belonging exclu-
sively to one possessor; having no enemies.
<LEND>

<L>24320<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsampAta<k2>niHsampAta
{#niHsampAta#}¦ {%niḥ-sampāta, as, ā, am,%} afford-
ing no passage, blocked up; ({%as%}), m. thick dark-
ness, midnight.
<LEND>

<L>24321<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsambanDa<k2>niHsambanDa
{#niHsambanDa#}¦ {%niḥ-sambandha, as, ā, am,%} with-
out relatives.
<LEND>

<L>24322<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsambADa<k2>niHsambADa
{#niHsambADa#}¦ {%niḥ-sambādha, as, ā, am,%} not
contracted, large, spacious.
<LEND>

<L>24323<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsamBrama<k2>niHsamBrama
{#niHsamBrama#}¦ {%niḥ-sambhrama, as, ā, am,%} not
perplexed or flurried, unembarrassed.
<LEND>

<L>24324<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsaraRa<k2>niHsaraRa
{#niHsaraRa#}¦ {%niḥ-saraṇa.%} See under {%niḥ-sṛ,%}
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>24325<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsalila<k2>niHsalila
{#niHsalila#}¦ {%niḥ-salila, as, ā, am,%} waterless,
having no water.
<LEND>

<L>24326<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsaha<k2>niHsaha
{#niHsaha#}¦ {%niḥ-saha, as, ā, am,%} unable to bear
or support or resist, impatient; powerless, weak;
intolerable, unbearable, irresistible. {%—Niḥsaha-tā,%} f.
or {%niḥsaha-tva, am,%} n. inability to bear or support;
impatience, unendurance.
<LEND>

<L>24327<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsahAya<k2>niHsahAya
{#niHsahAya#}¦ {%niḥ-sahāya, as, ā, am,%} without
helpers or associates, unassisted.
<LEND>

<L>24328<pc>0482-a<k1>niHsADvasa<k2>niHsADvasa
{#niHsADvasa#}¦ {%niḥ-sādhvasa, as, ā, am,%} fearless,
[Page0482-b+ 70]
bold; ({%am%}), ind. fearlessly, boldly. {%—Niḥsādhvasa-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. fearlessness, boldness.
<LEND>

<L>24329<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsAmarTya<k2>niHsAmarTya
{#niHsAmarTya#}¦ {%niḥ-sāmarthya, as, ā, am,%} unfit,
unsuitable.
<LEND>

<L>24330<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsAmAnya<k2>niHsAmAnya
{#niHsAmAnya#}¦ {%niḥ-sāmānya, as, ā, am,%} extra-
ordinary, uncommon, unusual, special.
<LEND>

<L>24331<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsAra<k2>niHsAra<h>1
{#niHsAra#} 1¦. {%niḥ-sāra, as, ā, am%} (for 2. {%niḥ-%}
{%sāra%} see under {%niḥ-sṛ%} below), sapless, pithless,
worthless, vain, vapid, unsubstantial; ({%as%}), m. the plant
Trophis Aspera; a kind of time in music; ({%ā%}), f.
the pisang, Musa Sapientum {%(= kadalī)%}. {%—Niḥsāra-%}
{%tā,%} f. saplessness, worthlessness, vanity.
<LEND>

<L>24332<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsAla<k2>niHsAla
{#niHsAla#}¦ {%niḥ-sāla, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being
out of the house.
<LEND>

<L>24333<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsIman<k2>niHsIman
{#niHsIman#}¦ {%niḥ-sīman, ā, ā, a,%} immeasurable,
having no boundaries or limits.
<LEND>

<L>24334<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsuKa<k2>niHsuKa
{#niHsuKa#}¦ {%niḥ-sukha, as, ā, am,%} joyless, sad,
unhappy; disagreeable, distressing.
<LEND>

<L>24335<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsf<k2>niHsf
{#niHsf#}¦ {%niḥ-sṛ (nis-s˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati,%}
{%-sartum,%} to go out, come forth, issue, slip out,
depart, withdraw: Caus. {%-sārayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to go out or away, turn out, expel.
<LEND>

<L>24336<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsara<k2>niHsara
{%Niḥ-sara, as, ā, am,%}¦ issuing out. {%—Niḥsara-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. {%= pitta-roga.%}
<LEND>

<L>24337<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsaraRa<k2>niHsaraRa
{%Niḥ-saraṇa, am,%}¦ n. going forth or out, coming
forth, exit; the egress or outlet from a house,
market-place, town, &c., the gate, the gate-way;
a means or expedient, a remedy; departure, dying,
death; final beatitude.
<LEND>

<L>24338<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsAra<k2>niHsAra<h>2
2. {%niḥ-sāra, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. {%niḥ-sāra%} see above),
going forth or out.
<LEND>

<L>24339<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsAraRa<k2>niHsAraRa
{%Niḥ-sāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. driving out, expelling, turn-
ing out; the egress or outlet from a building, town,
&c., a passage, road of ingress or egress.
<LEND>

<L>24340<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsArita<k2>niHsArita
{%Niḥ-sārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned out, made to come
out, expelled, dismissed.
<LEND>

<L>24341<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsArya<k2>niHsArya
{%Niḥ-sārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be turned out, to be
excluded or expelled.
<LEND>

<L>24342<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsfta<k2>niHsfta
{%Niḥ-sṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forth or out, broken
forth; having departed (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>24343<pc>0482-b<k1>niHstamBa<k2>niHstamBa
{#niHstamBa#}¦ {%niḥ-stambha, as, ā, am,%} without
posts or columns, having no pillars.
<LEND>

<L>24344<pc>0482-b<k1>niHstuti<k2>niHstuti
{#niHstuti#}¦ {%niḥ-stuti, is, is, i%} (also read {%ni-%}
{%stuti%}), praising nothing, without praising (anything).
<LEND>

<L>24345<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsneha<k2>niHsneha
{#niHsneha#}¦ {%niḥ-sneha, as, ā, am,%} without
unction, not greasy or unctuous, dry; without love
or affection, insensible, cold, unfeeling; not longing
for, indifferent; not loved, uncared for, hated; ({%ā%}),
f. linseed, Linum Usitatissimum. {%—Niḥsneha-phalā,%}
f. a species of Solanum with white flowers.
<LEND>

<L>24346<pc>0482-b<k1>niHspanda<k2>niHspanda
{#niHspanda#}¦ {%niḥ-spanda, as, ā, am,%} motionless.
<LEND>

<L>24347<pc>0482-b<k1>niHspfha<k2>niHspfha
{#niHspfha#}¦ {%niḥ-spṛha, as, ā, am%} (often written
{%ni-spṛha%}), free from desire; disregarding, indiffer-
ent to (with abl.); content, unenvious.
<LEND>

<L>24348<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsyanda<k2>niHsyanda
{#niHsyanda#}¦ {%niḥ-syanda.%} See {%ni-syanda.%}
<LEND>

<L>24349<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsru<k2>niHsru
{#niHsru#}¦ {%niḥ-sru (nis-s˚),%} Caus. {%-srāvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to flow out or off, to empty.
<LEND>

<L>24350<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsrava<k2>niHsrava
{%Niḥ-srava, as,%}¦ m. remainder, surplus, overplus
(with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>24351<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsrAva<k2>niHsrAva
{%Niḥ-srāva, as,%}¦ m. causing to flow out, expending,
expense; the moisture or water of boiled rice; [cf.
{%ni-srāva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24352<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsva<k2>niHsva
{#niHsva#}¦ {%niḥ-sva, as, ā, am,%} deprived of one's
own, having no property, indigent, poor. {%—Niḥsva-%}
{%tā,%} f. poverty. {%—Niḥsvī-kṛta%} or {%niḥsvī-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} deprived of one's property, impoverished.
<LEND>

<L>24353<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsvana<k2>niHsvana
{#niHsvana#}¦ {%niḥ-svana, as,%} m. (fr. {%svan%} with
{%nis%}), sound, noise, voice; [cf. {%ni-svana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24354<pc>0482-b<k1>niHsvaBAva<k2>niHsvaBAva
{#niHsvaBAva#}¦ {%niḥ-svabhāva, as, ā, am,%} void of
peculiarities, without peculiar properties.
<LEND>
[Page0482-c+ 73]

<L>24355<pc>0482-c<k1>niHsvAdu<k2>niHsvAdu
{#niHsvAdu#}¦ {%niḥ-svādu, us, us%} or {%dvī, u,%} taste-
less, void of flavour, insipid, unsavoury.
<LEND>

<L>24356<pc>0482-c<k1>niHsvADyAya<k2>niHsvADyAya
{#niHsvADyAya#}¦ {%niḥ-svādhyāya, as, ā, am,%} not
muttering prayers, not repeating texts. {%—Niḥsvā-%}
{%dhyāya-vaṣaṭkāra, as, ā, am,%} neither repeating
holy texts nor sacrificing.
<LEND>

<L>24357<pc>0482-c<k1>nikakza<k2>nikakza
{#nikakza#}¦ {%ni-kakṣa, as,%} m., Ved. the armpit.
<LEND>

<L>24358<pc>0482-c<k1>nikawa<k2>nikawa
{#nikawa#}¦ {%ni-kaṭa, as, ā, am,%} situated at the
side, near, proximate, close by; without neighbours,
kinless?; ({%as, am%}), m. n. proximity; ({%e%}), ind. in
the neighbourhood, at hand. {%—Nikaṭī-bhūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} approached.
<LEND>

<L>24359<pc>0482-c<k1>nikaTita<k2>nikaTita
{#nikaTita#}¦ {%ni-kathita, as, ā, am,%} told, re-
lated (?).
<LEND>

<L>24360<pc>0482-c<k1>nikaTitin<k2>nikaTitin
{%Nikathitin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who has told.
<LEND>

<L>24361<pc>0482-c<k1>nikam<k2>nikam
{#nikam#}¦ {%ni-kam,%} cl. 10. A. {%-kāmayate, -ca-%}
{%kame,%} &c., to long for, wish for, have a desire for,
lust after (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>24362<pc>0482-c<k1>nikAma<k2>nikAma
{%Ni-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. desirous of, longing
for, vehemently desiring, (often at the beginning of
a comp. in the sense of {%ni-kāmam,%} ind.); ({%as%}), m.
desire, wish; ({%am%}), ind. according to wish or desire,
willingly, according to pleasure or to one's satisfaction,
to one's heart's content; {%yadā nikāmam,%} if you
please, if you like. {%—Nikāma-kāma, as, ā, am,%}
covetous. {%—Nikāma-varṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} raining ac-
cording to wish.
<LEND>

<L>24363<pc>0482-c<k1>nikAman<k2>nikAman
{%Ni-kāman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. desirous of, longing for.
<LEND>

<L>24364<pc>0482-c<k1>nikAmana<k2>nikAmana
{%Ni-kāmana, am,%}¦ n. desire, longing after.
<LEND>

<L>24365<pc>0482-c<k1>nikAmayamAna<k2>nikAmayamAna
{%Ni-kāmayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ longing for, wish-
ing for.
<LEND>

<L>24366<pc>0482-c<k1>nikara<k2>nikara
{#nikara#}¦ {%ni-kara, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ%} with {%ni%}),
a heap, pile; a flock or multitude; a bundle; pith,
sap, essence; suitable gift, a honorarium; a treasure,
the best of anything, a treasure belonging to Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>24367<pc>0482-c<k1>nikAra<k2>nikAra<h>1
1. {%ni-kāra, as,%}¦ m. piling up or winnowing corn;
tossing or lifting up.
<LEND>

<L>24368<pc>0482-c<k1>nikaza<k2>nikaza
{#nikaza#}¦ {%ni-kaṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kaṣ%} for
{%karṣ = kṛṣ%} with {%ni%}), the touchstone, the streak
of gold or test made on it [cf. {%ni-kāṣa%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of the mother of Rāvaṇa or of the mother of the
Piśitāśana fiends or imps in general. {%—Nikaṣāt-%}
{%maja (˚ṣā-āt˚), as,%} m. a Rākṣasa, a sort of
demon; [cf. {%kaṣā-putra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24369<pc>0482-c<k1>nikazaRa<k2>nikazaRa
{%Ni-kaṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (?), the touchstone.
<LEND>

<L>24370<pc>0482-c<k1>nikazA<k2>nikazA
{%Ni-kaṣā,%}¦ ind. near to (with acc.), proximate;
in the middle, betwixt, between (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>24371<pc>0482-c<k1>nikazAya<k2>nikazAya
{%Nikaṣāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%nikaṣāyate,%} &c., to be
used or serve as a touchstone.
<LEND>

<L>24372<pc>0482-c<k1>nikasa<k2>nikasa
{#nikasa#}¦ {%ni-kasa, nikasātmaja = ni-kaṣa%} and
{%nikaṣātmaja,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24373<pc>0482-c<k1>nikARam<k2>nikARam
{#nikARam#}¦ {%ni-kāṇam,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%kaṇ%} with
{%ni%}), having closed the eyes; {%nikāṇam akṣi jal-%}
{%pati%} or {%akṣi-nikāṇaṃ jalpati,%} he speaks with
closed eyes.
<LEND>

<L>24374<pc>0482-c<k1>nikAya<k2>nikAya
{#nikAya#}¦ {%ni-kāya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%ci%} with {%ni%}),
a heap, an assemblage, a group, class, association or
set of persons who perform like duties; a congre-
gation, a school; a flock, multitude in general; a
house, dwelling-place, habitation, hiding-place; the
body; (according to Mahī-dhara) the air, wind
(Ved.); a butt, aim, mark; the universal Soul,
Supreme Being. {%—Nikāyāntarīya (˚ya-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} belonging to another assemblage or school.
<LEND>

<L>24375<pc>0482-c<k1>nikAyin<k2>nikAyin
{%Ni-kāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ an epithet of particular oblations
or sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>24376<pc>0482-c<k1>nikAyya<k2>nikAyya
{%Ni-kāyya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (?), a dwelling, house.
<LEND>

<L>24377<pc>0482-c<k1>nikAra<k2>nikAra<h>1
{#nikAra#} 1¦. and 2. {%ni-kāra.%} For 1. see above;
for 2. see under {%ni-kṛ,%} p. 483, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>24378<pc>0482-c<k1>nikArin<k2>nikArin
{#nikArin#}¦ {%ni-kārin.%} See p. 483, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>24379<pc>0482-c<k1>nikAvalgA<k2>nikAvalgA
{#nikAvalgA#}¦ {%nikāvalgā,%} f., N. of a woman,
(perhaps rather two names, {%nikā%} and {%valgā.%})
<LEND>

<L>24380<pc>0482-c<k1>nikASa<k2>nikASa
{#nikASa#}¦ {%ni-kāśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kāś%} with {%ni%}),
[Page0483-a+ 73]
the horizon; appearance, sight; (at the end of an
adj. comp.) having the appearance of, similar, like;
[cf. {%nī-kāśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24381<pc>0483-a<k1>nikAzam<k2>nikAzam
{#nikAzam#}¦ {%ni-kāṣam,%} ind. having pounded
or mixed together.
<LEND>

<L>24382<pc>0483-a<k1>nikAsa<k2>nikAsa
{#nikAsa#}¦ {%ni-kāsa = ni-kāśa, nī-kāśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>24383<pc>0483-a<k1>nikilbiza<k2>nikilbiza
{#nikilbiza#}¦ {%ni-kilbiṣa, am,%} n., Ved. freeing
from sin, deliverance from evil.
<LEND>

<L>24384<pc>0483-a<k1>nikuciti<k2>nikuciti
{#nikuciti#}¦ {%ni-kuciti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%kuñc%} with
{%ni%}), contraction ?; [cf. Pāṇ. I. 2, 18.]
<LEND>

<L>24385<pc>0483-a<k1>nikucyakarRi<k2>nikucyakarRi
{%Nikucya-karṇi,%}¦ ind. with the ears hanging down.
<LEND>

<L>24386<pc>0483-a<k1>nikuYcaka<k2>nikuYcaka
{%Ni-kuñcaka, as,%}¦ m. a measure of capacity equal
to (1/4) of a Kuḍava; a species of reed ({%= vānīra%}).
<LEND>

<L>24387<pc>0483-a<k1>nikuYcita<k2>nikuYcita
{%Ni-kuñcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ contracted.
<LEND>

<L>24388<pc>0483-a<k1>nikuYja<k2>nikuYja
{#nikuYja#}¦ {%ni-kuñja, as, am,%} m. n. {%= kuñja,%} an
arbour, a bower, a place overgrown with shrubs and
creepers, a thicket.
<LEND>

<L>24389<pc>0483-a<k1>nikuYjikAmlA<k2>nikuYjikAmlA
{%Nikuñjikāmlā (˚kā-am˚),%}¦ f. a species of plant
({%= kuñjikā, kuñja-vallarī%}).
<LEND>

<L>24390<pc>0483-a<k1>nikumBa<k2>nikumBa
{#nikumBa#}¦ {%ni-kumbha, as,%} m. the plant Croton
Polyandrum; N. of a Dānava who, like Kumbha,
was son of Pra-hlāda, (he was father of Sunda and
Upa-sunda); N. of a Rakṣas; of a son of Kumbha-
karṇa; of an attendant of Śiva; of one of Skanda's
attendants; N. of one of the Viśve Devāḥ, (also
read {%viskumbhu%}); N. of a hero on the side of the
Kurus; N. of a king of Ayodhyā, son of Hary-aśva
and father of Saṃhatāśva; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Croton
Polyandrum. {%—Nikumbhākhya-jīva (˚bha-ākh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a plant, Croton Jamalgota ({%= jaya-pāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>24391<pc>0483-a<k1>nikumBita<k2>nikumBita
{%Ni-kumbhita, am,%}¦ n. a kind of time in music.
<LEND>

<L>24392<pc>0483-a<k1>nikumBilA<k2>nikumBilA
{%Ni-kumbhilā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%kumbha,%} a jar?), a place
where oblations are offered; a grove at the western
gate of Laṅkā for the performance of sacrificial rites;
(according to another commentator) an image of
Bhadra-kālī on the west side of Laṅkā; (also,
according to some, {%ni-kumbhilas,%} m., and {%ni-kum-%}
{%bhilam,%} n.)
<LEND>

<L>24393<pc>0483-a<k1>nikurumba<k2>nikurumba
{#nikurumba#}¦ {%ni-kurumba%} or {%ni-kurumbaka, am,%}
n. a flock, mass, multitude; (also read {%ni-kuramba,%}
{%-ni-kurūmba, ni-kurumbha.%})
<LEND>

<L>24394<pc>0483-a<k1>nikulInikA<k2>nikulInikA
{#nikulInikA#}¦ {%ni-kulīnikā,%} f. a family art or
one inherited by birth, any skill or skilful act pecu-
liar to a race.
<LEND>

<L>24395<pc>0483-a<k1>nikUla<k2>nikUla
{#nikUla#}¦ {%ni-kūla, as, ā, am,%} going down
hill, (opposed to {%ut-kūla%}); standing on a declivity
or bank.
<LEND>

<L>24396<pc>0483-a<k1>nikf<k2>nikf
{#nikf#}¦ {%ni-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} Ved. to put down, bring down, lower,
humiliate, subdue, overcome, overpower, depreciate,
debase; to act in a low or base manner, to treat ill;
(in the post-Vedic literature only occurring in the
past part. {%ni-kṛta,%} q. v.): Desid. {%ni-cikīrṣati,%} to
wish to subdue.
<LEND>

<L>24397<pc>0483-a<k1>nikartavya<k2>nikartavya
{%Ni-kartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be acted badly or
basely, to be injured; ({%asmākaṃ tair nikartavyam,%}
a wrong is to be done us by them.)
<LEND>

<L>24398<pc>0483-a<k1>nikAra<k2>nikAra<h>2
2. {%ni-kāra, as,%}¦ m. putting down, bringing down,
humiliation, subjugation; injury, insult, wrong, offence;
wickedness, malice, abuse, reproach, disrespect; op-
position, contradiction.
<LEND>

<L>24399<pc>0483-a<k1>nikAraRa<k2>nikAraRa
{%Ni-kāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>24400<pc>0483-a<k1>nikArin<k2>nikArin
{%Ni-kārin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved. an injurer, oppressor.
<LEND>

<L>24401<pc>0483-a<k1>nikfta<k2>nikfta
{%Ni-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought down, lowered,
cast down, humbled, humiliated; insulted, offended;
afflicted; injured; tricked, cheated, deceived; re-
moved, set aside, dismissed; dishonest, wicked, per-
verse; low, base, vile; ({%am%}), n. lowering, humbling,
humiliation; (also read {%ni-kṛti.%}) {%—Nikṛta-prajña,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} evil-minded. {%—Nikṛta-mati, is, is, i,%}
depraved in mind.
<LEND>

<L>24402<pc>0483-a<k1>nikfti<k2>nikfti
{%Ni-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. low conduct, baseness, wicked-
ness, dishonest practice, dishonesty, fraud, deception,
[Page0483-b+ 73]
deceit, cheating; offence, insult; abuse, reproach;
rejection, removal; poverty, indigence; wickedness,
a wicked person (personified as a daughter of
A-dharma and Hiṃsā, or Nirṛti); ({%is, is, i%}),
base, low, dishonest, wicked; ({%is%}), m., N. of one
of the eight Vasus. {%—Nikṛti-prajña, as, ā, am,%}
versed in dishonesty, well acquainted with vice.
<LEND>

<L>24403<pc>0483-b<k1>nikftin<k2>nikftin
{%Nikṛtin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. {%ni-kṛta%}), {%= ni-kṛti,%} dis-
honest, low, base, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>24404<pc>0483-b<k1>nikftyA<k2>nikftyA
{%Ni-kṛtyā,%}¦ f. wickedness, dishonesty, fraud, &c.,
{%= ni-kṛti.%}
<LEND>

<L>24405<pc>0483-b<k1>nikftvan<k2>nikftvan
{%Ni-kṛtvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. acting basely, deceitful.
<LEND>

<L>24406<pc>0483-b<k1>nikft<k2>nikft
{#nikft#}¦ {%ni-kṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛntati, -kartitum,%}
to cut down, hew down, cut away, cut or chop off,
cut through, cut asunder, cut to pieces, massacre;
tear off, tear away, wear away; A. ({%-te%}), to cut one-
self (or one's nails &c.); to cut down &c.: Caus.
{%-kartayati,%} &c., to cause to cut or cut down.
<LEND>

<L>24407<pc>0483-b<k1>nikartana<k2>nikartana
{%Ni-kartana, am,%}¦ n. cutting down, cutting to
pieces, cutting off.
<LEND>

<L>24408<pc>0483-b<k1>nikftta<k2>nikftta
{%Ni-kṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off, cut up. {%—Nikṛtta-%}
{%mūla, as, ā, am,%} cut up by the roots.
<LEND>

<L>24409<pc>0483-b<k1>nikfntana<k2>nikfntana
{%Ni-kṛntana, as, ī, am,%}¦ cutting down, cutting
off, destroying; ({%as%}), m., N. of a hell; ({%am%}), n.
massacring, cutting, cutting off, destruction; an in-
strument for cutting.
<LEND>

<L>24410<pc>0483-b<k1>nikfz<k2>nikfz
{#nikfz#}¦ {%ni-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%-karṣati, -kṛ-%}
{%ṣati, -karṣṭum%} or {%-kraṣṭum,%} to draw down,
drag down; to tear asunder (?). In Mahā-bh. 1.
3616. {%ni-kṛṣyate%} may mean ‘is drawn down by
the stream of a river.’
<LEND>

<L>24411<pc>0483-b<k1>nikarzaRa<k2>nikarzaRa
{%Ni-karṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. an open space for recreation,
a sort of play-ground in or near a town; a court at
the entrance of a house; a neighbourhood.
<LEND>

<L>24412<pc>0483-b<k1>nikfzwa<k2>nikfzwa
{%Ni-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ debased, low, base, vile,
vulgar; despised, outcast; near; ({%am%}), n. vicinity,
proximity. {%—Nikṛṣṭāśaya (˚ṭa-āś˚), as, ā, am,%}
having base intentions. {%—Nikṛṣṭāśaya-tā,%} f. the
state of one who has base intentions, base disposition
of mind; jealousy. {%—Nikṛṣṭopādhi-tā (˚ṭa-up˚),%}
f. a state of base or low deception.
<LEND>

<L>24413<pc>0483-b<k1>nikecAya<k2>nikecAya
{#nikecAya#}¦ {%ni-kecāya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%ci%} with
{%ni%}), piling or collecting repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>24414<pc>0483-b<k1>niketa<k2>niketa
{#niketa#}¦ {%ni-keta%} or {%ni-ketaka, as,%} m. {%= ketana,%}
a house, mansion, habitation; a mark, countersign.
<LEND>

<L>24415<pc>0483-b<k1>niketana<k2>niketana
{#niketana#}¦ {%ni-ketana, as,%} m. an onion; ({%am%}),
n. {%= ni-keta,%} a house, mansion, abode, habitation,
temple.
<LEND>

<L>24416<pc>0483-b<k1>nikocaka<k2>nikocaka
{#nikocaka#}¦ {%ni-kocaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kuñc%}
with {%ni%}), the tree Alangium Decapetalum; ({%am%}),
n. the fruit of this tree.
<LEND>

<L>24417<pc>0483-b<k1>nikocana<k2>nikocana
{%Ni-kocana, am,%}¦ n. contracting, contraction, com-
pression.
<LEND>

<L>24418<pc>0483-b<k1>nikoWaka<k2>nikoWaka
{#nikoWaka#}¦ {%ni-koṭhaka, as,%} m. {%= ni-kocaka%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>24419<pc>0483-b<k1>nikoTaka<k2>nikoTaka
{#nikoTaka#}¦ {%ni-kothaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kuth%} with
{%ni%}), N. of a teacher with the epithet Bhāyajātya.
<LEND>

<L>24420<pc>0483-b<k1>nikoSya<k2>nikoSya
{#nikoSya#}¦ {%ni-kośya, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
Ved. a particular part of the entrails of sacrificial
animals; [cf. {%kośya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24421<pc>0483-b<k1>niktahasta<k2>niktahasta
{#niktahasta#}¦ {%nikta-hasta.%} See rt. {%nij,%} p. 485.
<LEND>

<L>24422<pc>0483-b<k1>nikrand<k2>nikrand
{#nikrand#}¦ {%ni-krand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krandati, -kran-%}
{%ditum,%} Ved. to utter a cry in a direction downwards
(as a bird on a tree): Caus. {%-krandayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to cause to roar &c.
<LEND>

<L>24423<pc>0483-b<k1>nikram<k2>nikram
{#nikram#}¦ {%ni-kram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krāmati, -kra-%}
{%mitum,%} to set the foot on the ground, put down the
feet; to enter; to tread down (with acc.)
<LEND>

<L>24424<pc>0483-b<k1>nikramaRa<k2>nikramaRa
{%Ni-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. putting down the feet,
treading down; the place where the foot is put,
foot-step, foot-fall.
<LEND>

<L>24425<pc>0483-b<k1>nikrIq<k2>nikrIq
{#nikrIq#}¦ {%ni-krīḍ,%} Caus. {%-krīḍayati,%} &c., to
play, sport.
<LEND>
[Page0483-c+ 74]

<L>24426<pc>0483-c<k1>nikrIqa<k2>nikrIqa
{%Ni-krīḍa, as,%}¦ m. play, sport; {%marutāṃ nikrīḍaḥ,%}
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>24427<pc>0483-c<k1>nikvaRa<k2>nikvaRa
{#nikvaRa#}¦ {%ni-kvaṇa%} or {%ni-kvāṇa, as,%} m. a
musical tone or sound; any sound.
<LEND>

<L>24428<pc>0483-c<k1>nikz<k2>nikz
{#nikz#}¦ {%nikṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%nikṣati,%} &c., to
pierce (Ved.); to kiss.
<LEND>

<L>24429<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzaRa<k2>nikzaRa
{%Nikṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. kissing.
<LEND>

<L>24430<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzA<k2>nikzA
{#nikzA#}¦ {%nikṣā,%} f. a nit; (a wrong form for
{%likṣā.%})
<LEND>

<L>24431<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzip<k2>nikzip
{#nikzip#}¦ {%ni-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣipati, -te,%}
{%-kṣeptum,%} to throw down, cast or put down, throw
upon, put or lay down; put in, pour in; to deliver
anything (acc.) to a person (loc.); to give or hand
over, grant; to deposit, commit, deliver to any one's
charge, intrust; to install, appoint, establish; to lay
aside, give up, leave off, cast off, repel; to encamp:
Caus. {%-kṣepayati,%} &c., to cause to put down, to
cause to be set down in writing.
<LEND>

<L>24432<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzipat<k2>nikzipat
{%Ni-kṣipat, an, antī%}¦ or {%atī, at,%} throwing down
or on, placing in or upon.
<LEND>

<L>24433<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzipta<k2>nikzipta
{%Ni-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown down or upon,
put down, laid down or on, placed into, thrust into;
deposited, pawned, pledged; rejected, abandoned,
foregone, given or thrown away; sent, sent off or
away. {%—Nikṣipta-vāda, as, ā, am,%} one who has
ceased talking or left off boasting.
<LEND>

<L>24434<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzipya<k2>nikzipya
{%Ni-kṣipya,%}¦ ind. having placed or laid down or
upon; having given in charge, having intrusted or
deposited in a place of safety.
<LEND>

<L>24435<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzepa<k2>nikzepa
{%Ni-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. throwing upon, casting on
(with loc.); a deposit, pledge, trust, anything de-
posited without a seal in trust or as a compensation,
anything pawned; abandoning, parting with, throw-
ing away; sending or putting away; wiping, drying;
in {%nikṣepa-lipi%} probably N. of a country; [cf.
{%ut-kṣepa, pra-kṣepa, vi-kṣepa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24436<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzepaRa<k2>nikzepaRa
{%Ni-kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. putting down (the feet); a
means by which or place in which anything is kept.
<LEND>

<L>24437<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzepita<k2>nikzepita
{%Ni-kṣepita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be put down
or set down in writing, committed to writing, in-
scribed.
<LEND>

<L>24438<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzeptf<k2>nikzeptf
{%Ni-kṣeptṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what places or
deposits, delivers to one's care; ({%tā%}), m. a depositor,
a pawner or pledger.
<LEND>

<L>24439<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzepya<k2>nikzepya
{%Ni-kṣepya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be deposited, to be
thrust into.
<LEND>

<L>24440<pc>0483-c<k1>nikzuBA<k2>nikzuBA
{#nikzuBA#}¦ {%ni-kṣubhā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%kṣubh%} with
{%ni%}), N. of the mother of Maga.
<LEND>

<L>24441<pc>0483-c<k1>niKan<k2>niKan
{#niKan#}¦ {%ni-khan,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-khanati, -te,%}
{%-khanitum,%} to dig into (the ground), bury; to dig
in or up, root up; to infix, pierce (with an arrow
&c.), to fix, implant.
<LEND>

<L>24442<pc>0483-c<k1>niKanana<k2>niKanana
{%Ni-khanana, am,%}¦ n. digging in, burying.
<LEND>

<L>24443<pc>0483-c<k1>niKAta<k2>niKAta
{%Ni-khāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dug in, buried; dug up,
excavated; fixed in the ground as a stake.
<LEND>

<L>24444<pc>0483-c<k1>niKAnita<k2>niKAnita
{%Ni-khānita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), infixed,
dug in, fixed.
<LEND>

<L>24445<pc>0483-c<k1>niKarba<k2>niKarba
{#niKarba#}¦ {%ni-kharba%} or {%ni-kharva, as, ā, am,%}
dwarfish, a dwarf; ({%am%}), n. a billion; [cf. {%kharva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24446<pc>0483-c<k1>niKarvaka<k2>niKarvaka
{%Ni-kharvaka, am,%}¦ n., 1000 millions.
<LEND>

<L>24447<pc>0483-c<k1>niKarvawa<k2>niKarvawa
{%Ni-kharvaṭa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Rakṣas.
<LEND>

<L>24448<pc>0483-c<k1>niKid<k2>niKid
{#niKid#}¦ {%ni-khid,%} cl. 6. P., Ved. {%-khidati,%}
{%-khettum,%} to press down; (Sāy.) to cut off, remove.
<LEND>

<L>24449<pc>0483-c<k1>niKila<k2>niKila
{#niKila#}¦ {%ni-khila, as, ā, am%} (probably for
{%niḥ-khila%}), complete, all, whole, entire; ({%ena%}), ind.
completely, totally; [cf. {%khila, a-kh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24450<pc>0483-c<k1>niKuryapa<k2>niKuryapa
{#niKuryapa#}¦ {%nikhurya-pa%} (?), {%as,%} m., Ved. an
epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>24451<pc>0483-c<k1>nigaqa<k2>nigaqa
{#nigaqa#}¦ {%ni-gaḍa, as, am,%} m. n. (probably fr.
rt. {%gaḍ%} = rt. {%gal;%} cf. {%ni-gala%}), an iron chain for
the feet, a fetter, especially the chain used to secure
the hind feet of an elephant or a noose for catching
the feet and throwing an animal down, a fetter or
shackle in general, gyves.
<LEND>
[Page0484-a+ 74]

<L>24452<pc>0484-a<k1>nigaqana<k2>nigaqana
{%Ni-gaḍana, am,%}¦ n. putting in irons or fetters,
binding, fettering.
<LEND>

<L>24453<pc>0484-a<k1>nigaqaya<k2>nigaqaya
{%Nigaḍaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%nigaḍayati,%} &c., to put in
irons or fetters, to bind, fetter.
<LEND>

<L>24454<pc>0484-a<k1>nigaqayitvA<k2>nigaqayitvA
{%Nigaḍayitvā,%}¦ ind. having fettered.
<LEND>

<L>24455<pc>0484-a<k1>nigaqita<k2>nigaqita
{%Ni-gaḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ chained, bound, tied, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24456<pc>0484-a<k1>nigaRa<k2>nigaRa
{#nigaRa#}¦ {%ni-gaṇa, as,%} m. the smoke of a burnt
offering or sacrificial fire; [cf. {%ni-garaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24457<pc>0484-a<k1>nigad<k2>nigad
{#nigad#}¦ {%ni-gad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gadati,%} &c., to
recite, proclaim, declare, communicate, tell, speak,
say, shout out; to speak to, address any one (with
acc.), to tell anything to any one (with two acc.); to
enumerate; to call: Pass. {%-gadyate,%} &c., to be re-
cited, to be named or called: Caus. {%-gādayati,%} &c.,
to cause to recite, tell, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24458<pc>0484-a<k1>nigada<k2>nigada
{%Ni-gada%}¦ or {%ni-gāda, as,%} m. reciting, audible
recitation of prayers or charms; a prayer or sacrificial
formula recited aloud; mention, mentioning; speech,
speaking, discourse; N. of a teacher with the epithet
Pārṇavalki.
<LEND>

<L>24459<pc>0484-a<k1>nigadat<k2>nigadat
{%Ni-gadat, an, antī, at,%}¦ reciting, addressing,
speaking, saying, speaking to.
<LEND>

<L>24460<pc>0484-a<k1>nigadita<k2>nigadita
{%Ni-gadita, as, ā, am,%}¦ recited, told, said, spoken;
({%am%}), n. speech. {%—Nigadita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one
who has spoken, having spoken.
<LEND>

<L>24461<pc>0484-a<k1>nigadya<k2>nigadya
{%Ni-gadya,%}¦ ind. having told, having declared.
<LEND>

<L>24462<pc>0484-a<k1>nigAda<k2>nigAda
{%Ni-gāda, as,%}¦ m. speech, discourse, recitation, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24463<pc>0484-a<k1>nigAdin<k2>nigAdin
{%Ni-gādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ reciting, telling, speaking, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24464<pc>0484-a<k1>nigam<k2>nigam
{#nigam#}¦ {%ni-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%}
to settle down upon (Ved.); to enter (acc. or loc.);
inire feminam (Ved.); to go to any place or state,
to undergo, become (e. g. {%śāntiṃ ni-gam,%} to be-
come pacified); to be inserted: Caus. {%-gamayati,%}
to cause to go in, to insert.
<LEND>

<L>24465<pc>0484-a<k1>nigama<k2>nigama
{%Ni-gama, as,%}¦ m. insertion, especially of the name
of a deity into a liturgical formula; the place or
passage in a book where a word occurs, especially
a passage of the Vedas or the actual word quoted
from such a passage; the Veda or the Vedic text;
the root (as the source from which a word comes);
a sacred precept, the words of a god or holy man;
certainty, assurance; a town, a city; a market, a
fair; a road, a market road; trade, traffic; a camp
or caravan of itinerant merchants, a merchant; {%=%}
{%luṇḍī; (am),%} n. a particular number.
<LEND>

<L>24466<pc>0484-a<k1>nigamana<k2>nigamana
{%Ni-gamana, am,%}¦ n. insertion, quotation of words
(from the Veda &c.) or the word &c. quoted; the
conclusion in a syllogism, the deduction; going in
or into.
<LEND>

<L>24467<pc>0484-a<k1>nigamin<k2>nigamin
{%Nigamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ familiar with or versed in the
Vedas or in holy writ.
<LEND>

<L>24468<pc>0484-a<k1>nigara<k2>nigara
{#nigara#}¦ {%ni-gara, ni-garaṇa,%} &c. See {%ni-gṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>24469<pc>0484-a<k1>nigarh<k2>nigarh
{#nigarh#}¦ {%ni-garh,%} cl. 10. P. {%-garhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to disdain, despise.
<LEND>

<L>24470<pc>0484-a<k1>nigal<k2>nigal
{#nigal#}¦ {%ni-gal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-galati,%} &c., to
fall down (?).
<LEND>

<L>24471<pc>0484-a<k1>nigala<k2>nigala
{%Ni-gala, as, am,%}¦ m. n. {%= ni-gaḍa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24472<pc>0484-a<k1>nigA<k2>nigA
{#nigA#}¦ {%ni-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti,%} &c., to go
into, enter, attach one's self to; to come or get into
any state &c.; to nestle.
<LEND>

<L>24473<pc>0484-a<k1>nigu<k2>nigu
{#nigu#}¦ {%ni-gu, us,%} m. {%= manas,%} the mind, the
faculty of feeling and reasoning; (according to others)
dirt, excrement [cf. rt. 4. {%gu%}]; a root; painting;
({%us, us, u%}), pleasing, charming.
<LEND>

<L>24474<pc>0484-a<k1>nigut<k2>nigut
{#nigut#}¦ {%ni-gut, t,%} m. (probably fr. rt. 3. {%gu%}
with {%ni%}), Ved. (according to Sāy.) an enemy; [cf.
{%naiguta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24475<pc>0484-a<k1>niguh<k2>niguh
{#niguh#}¦ {%ni-guh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-gūhati, -te,%}
{%gūhitum,%} to cover, conceal, hide: Caus. {%-gūhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to cover or hide.
<LEND>

<L>24476<pc>0484-a<k1>nigUQa<k2>nigUQa
{%Ni-gūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ hidden, concealed; profound,
recondite, mysterious, obscure; ({%am%}), ind. privately,
secretly. {%—Nigūḍha-kārya, as, ā, am,%} secret in
operation. {%—Nigūḍha-tara, as, ā, am,%} well con-
[Page0484-b+ 77]
cealed or hidden. {%—Nigūḍha-niścaya, as, ā, am,%}
whose resolve or determination is concealed. {%—Ni-%}
{%gūḍha-roman, ā, ā, a,%} having concealed hair.
{%—Nigūḍhārtha (˚ḍha-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having a
hidden sense or purpose, difficult to be understood,
abstruse, occult.
<LEND>

<L>24477<pc>0484-b<k1>nigUQaka<k2>nigUQaka
{%Ni-gūḍhaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of wild bean; [cf.
{%vana-mudga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24478<pc>0484-b<k1>nigUhaka<k2>nigUhaka
{%Ni-gūhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ hiding, concealing.
<LEND>

<L>24479<pc>0484-b<k1>nigUhana<k2>nigUhana
{%Ni-gūhana, am,%}¦ n. hiding, concealing.
<LEND>

<L>24480<pc>0484-b<k1>nigUhanIya<k2>nigUhanIya
{%Ni-gūhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be hidden or con-
cealed; to be covered or protected or defended.
<LEND>

<L>24481<pc>0484-b<k1>nigfhIta<k2>nigfhIta
{#nigfhIta#}¦ {%ni-gṛhīta.%} See {%ni-grah%} below.
<LEND>

<L>24482<pc>0484-b<k1>nigF<k2>nigF
{#nigF#}¦ {%ni-gṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-girati%} and {%-gilati,%}
&c., to swallow, swallow up, swallow down, ingur-
gitate, devour: Caus. Pass. {%-gāryate%} and {%-gālyate:%}
Intens., Ved. {%-jegilyate, -galgalīti,%} to swallow with
a gurgling sound.
<LEND>

<L>24483<pc>0484-b<k1>nigara<k2>nigara
{%Ni-gara, as,%}¦ m. swallowing, devouring.
<LEND>

<L>24484<pc>0484-b<k1>nigaraRa<k2>nigaraRa
{%Ni-garaṇa, am,%}¦ n. swallowing, devouring, deglu-
tition; ({%as%}), m. the throat, the gullet, esophagus;
the smoke of a burnt offering; [cf. {%ni-gaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24485<pc>0484-b<k1>nigalana<k2>nigalana
{%Ni-galana = ni-garaṇa.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>24486<pc>0484-b<k1>nigAra<k2>nigAra
{%Ni-gāra, as,%}¦ m. swallowing, swallowing down,
devouring.
<LEND>

<L>24487<pc>0484-b<k1>nigAraka<k2>nigAraka
{%Ni-gāraka, as, ikā, am, = ni-gālaka,%}¦ swallowing.
<LEND>

<L>24488<pc>0484-b<k1>nigAla<k2>nigAla
{%Ni-gāla, as,%}¦ m. the throat or neck of a horse;
[cf. {%gala, ni-garaṇa.%}] {%—Nigāla-vat, ān,%} m. a horse.
<LEND>

<L>24489<pc>0484-b<k1>nigAlaka<k2>nigAlaka
{%Ni-gālaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ swallowing, devouring.
<LEND>

<L>24490<pc>0484-b<k1>nigIrRa<k2>nigIrRa
{%Ni-gīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ swallowed; (metaphorically)
left out, omitted, not expressed; ({%a-nigīrṇa,%} ex-
pressed.)
<LEND>

<L>24491<pc>0484-b<k1>nigIryamARa<k2>nigIryamARa
{%Ni-gīryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being swallowed down;
(with act. sense?), swallowing, devouring.
<LEND>

<L>24492<pc>0484-b<k1>nigE<k2>nigE
{#nigE#}¦ {%ni-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gātum,%} to
accompany with song; to sing, chant; to proclaim,
announce.
<LEND>

<L>24493<pc>0484-b<k1>nigIta<k2>nigIta
{%Ni-gīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sung, chanted; said.
<LEND>

<L>24494<pc>0484-b<k1>nigranT<k2>nigranT
{#nigranT#}¦ {%ni-granth,%} cl. 9. P. {%-grathnāti,%} &c.,
to intertwine, interweave.
<LEND>

<L>24495<pc>0484-b<k1>nigranTana<k2>nigranTana
{%Ni-granthana, am,%}¦ n. (probably a corruption of
{%ni-kranthana;%} cf. {%krath, krathana%}), killing, de-
stroying, slaughter; [cf. {%nir-granthana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24496<pc>0484-b<k1>nigrah<k2>nigrah
{#nigrah#}¦ {%ni-grah,%} in the older language {%ni-%}
{%grabh,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte, -gṛhṇāti,%}
{%-ṇīte, -grahītum,%} to hold down, keep down, de-
press, keep under, keep in check; to keep back,
hold back, stop, obstruct, restrain, suppress, con-
fine; to seize, catch, apprehend, hold, hold fast; to
oppress, overpower, subdue, conquer; to chastise,
punish, tame; to draw together, contract, close (as the
eyes): Caus. {%-grāhayati,%} to cause to be apprehended
or seized: Caus. of the Desid. {%-jighṛkṣayati,%} to
cause any one to desire to keep under or suppress.
<LEND>

<L>24497<pc>0484-b<k1>nigfhIta<k2>nigfhIta
{%Ni-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ seized, arrested; held
back, restrained, confined, subdued, checked; harassed,
assailed, attacked.
<LEND>

<L>24498<pc>0484-b<k1>nigfhIti<k2>nigfhIti
{%Ni-gṛhīti, is,%}¦ f. restraint, check; overpowering.
<LEND>

<L>24499<pc>0484-b<k1>nigfhItf<k2>nigfhItf
{%Ni-gṛhītṛ,%}¦ wrong form for {%ni-grahītṛ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24500<pc>0484-b<k1>nigfhRat<k2>nigfhRat
{%Ni-gṛhṇat, an, atī, at,%}¦ seizing, taking; keeping,
suppressing, restraining.
<LEND>

<L>24501<pc>0484-b<k1>nigfhya<k2>nigfhya<h>1
1. {%ni-gṛhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be held back; to
be punished, punishable; deserving chastisement or
reproof.
<LEND>

<L>24502<pc>0484-b<k1>nigfhya<k2>nigfhya<h>2
2. {%ni-gṛhya,%}¦ ind. having taken; having arrested
or confined; having restrained or suppressed.
<LEND>

<L>24503<pc>0484-b<k1>nigraha<k2>nigraha
{%Ni-graha, as,%}¦ m. keeping down, holding down,
keeping under, keeping back, keeping in check,
coercion, restraining, binding, restraint, subjugation,
subduing, restraint of the appetite &c., abstinence;
obstruction, suppression, putting down; seizing,
catching, confinement, capture, arrest; the arresting
or suppressing of disease, cure; taking down, hum-
bling, punishing, punishment, chastisement, rebuke,
rebuff, reprimand, blame; aversion, dislike, disgust;
(in the Nyāya phil.) putting down in argument, fault
in a syllogism, flaw in an argument, failure in proof;
[Page0484-c+ 76]
any place for catching hold of, a handle; a boundary,
a limit; N. of Śiva and of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Nigraha-sthāna, am,%} n. the predicament of
rebuke for failure in argument.
<LEND>

<L>24504<pc>0484-c<k1>nigrahaRa<k2>nigrahaRa
{%Ni-grahaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ holding down, holding
back, suppressing; ({%am%}), n. subduing, suppression;
capture, confinement, prison; defeat, punishment.
<LEND>

<L>24505<pc>0484-c<k1>nigrahItavya<k2>nigrahItavya
{%Ni-grahītavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be chastised or
punished, punishable.
<LEND>

<L>24506<pc>0484-c<k1>nigrahItf<k2>nigrahItf
{%Ni-grahītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who seizes or lays
hold of; one who keeps back or prevents; seizing,
restraining, binding.
<LEND>

<L>24507<pc>0484-c<k1>nigrABa<k2>nigrABa
{%Ni-grābha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. pressing down; N. of a
verse recited when the Soma plants are pressed.
<LEND>

<L>24508<pc>0484-c<k1>nigrABya<k2>nigrABya
{%Ni-grābhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved., with {%āpas,%} the water
with which the Soma plants are sprinkled before they
are pressed.
<LEND>

<L>24509<pc>0484-c<k1>nigrAha<k2>nigrAha
{%Ni-grāha, as,%}¦ m. punishment, chastisement, (used
in imprecations, e. g. {%nigrāhas te bhūyāt,%} confusion
seize thee, &c.)
<LEND>

<L>24510<pc>0484-c<k1>nigrAhya<k2>nigrAhya
{%Ni-grāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be suppressed or
punished, punishable.
<LEND>

<L>24511<pc>0484-c<k1>niGa<k2>niGa
{#niGa#}¦ {%ni-gha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%han%} with {%ni%}),
as high as broad; (anything) whose height and cir-
cumference are equal; a round or circle, a ball; sin.
{%—Nighānigha (˚gha-an˚), as, ā, am,%} of different
forms or sizes.
<LEND>

<L>24512<pc>0484-c<k1>niGaRwa<k2>niGaRwa
{#niGaRwa#}¦ {%ni-ghaṇṭa%} (said to be fr. rt. {%gam%}
or {%han%} or {%hṛ%} with {%ni;%} gender doubtful), a word;
a glossary or collection of words or names, (in this
sense properly pl.); often the collection of Vedic words
explained in the Nirukta, see {%ni-ghaṇṭu%} below.
<LEND>

<L>24513<pc>0484-c<k1>niGaRwi<k2>niGaRwi
{%Ni-ghaṇṭi,%}¦ probably only a wrong form for {%ni-%}
{%ghaṇṭa%} or {%ni-ghaṇṭu.%}
<LEND>

<L>24514<pc>0484-c<k1>niGaRwikA<k2>niGaRwikA
{%Ni-ghaṇṭikā,%}¦ f. a species of bulbous plant ({%=%}
{%gulañca-kanda%}).
<LEND>

<L>24515<pc>0484-c<k1>niGaRwu<k2>niGaRwu
{%Ni-ghaṇṭu, us,%}¦ m. (or {%ni-ghaṇṭuka%}), any vocabu-
lary or collection of words or names, but especially a
N. of the Vedic glossary explained by Yāska in his
Nirukta, (in this sense usually pl. {%nighaṇṭavas%} as
embracing five chapters.) {%—Nighaṇṭu-bhāṣya, am,%}
n. ‘commentary on part of the Nighaṇṭus,’ N. of a
work by Deva-rāja on the three chapters of synonyms
incompletely treated by Yāska. {%—Nighaṇṭu-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘king of glossaries,’ N. of a medical lexicon
commonly called Abhidhāna-cūḍā-maṇi.
<LEND>

<L>24516<pc>0484-c<k1>niGarza<k2>niGarza
{#niGarza#}¦ {%ni-gharṣa.%} See {%ni-ghṛṣ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>24517<pc>0484-c<k1>niGasa<k2>niGasa
{#niGasa#}¦ {%ni-ghasa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ghas%} with
{%ni%}), eating; food, victuals.
<LEND>

<L>24518<pc>0484-c<k1>niGAta<k2>niGAta
{#niGAta#}¦ {%ni-ghāta, as,%} m. (fr. the Caus. of
rt. {%han%} with {%ni%}), a blow, stroke; suppression of
accent, absence of accent.
<LEND>

<L>24519<pc>0484-c<k1>niGAtam<k2>niGAtam
{%Ni-ghātam,%}¦ ind. having struck.
<LEND>

<L>24520<pc>0484-c<k1>niGAti<k2>niGAti
{%Ni-ghāti, is,%}¦ f. an iron club or mace or hammer (?).
<LEND>

<L>24521<pc>0484-c<k1>niGAtin<k2>niGAtin
{%Ni-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ striking down, killing, de-
stroying.
<LEND>

<L>24522<pc>0484-c<k1>niGuz<k2>niGuz
{#niGuz#}¦ {%ni-ghuṣ%} (rt. 2. {%ghuṣ = ghṛṣ%} with
{%ni%}), Caus. P. {%-ghoṣayati, -yitum,%} to tread down,
trample under foot, crush, pound, grind.
<LEND>

<L>24523<pc>0484-c<k1>niGuzwa<k2>niGuzwa
{#niGuzwa#}¦ {%ni-ghuṣṭa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%ghuṣ%}
with {%ni%}), sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>24524<pc>0484-c<k1>niGfz<k2>niGfz
{#niGfz#}¦ {%ni-ghṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gharṣati,%} &c.,
to rub into, rub down, rub, pound, grind, triturate;
graze, chafe, abrade, wear away by rubbing, excoriate.
<LEND>

<L>24525<pc>0484-c<k1>niGarza<k2>niGarza
{%Ni-gharṣa, as,%}¦ m. rubbing, friction, pounding,
crushing.
<LEND>

<L>24526<pc>0484-c<k1>niGarzaRa<k2>niGarzaRa
{%Ni-gharṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. rubbing, friction, grinding,
trituration; [cf. {%nir-gharṣaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24527<pc>0484-c<k1>niGfzwa<k2>niGfzwa
{%Ni-ghṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed, ground; chafed,
worn, grazed, abraded, excoriated; subdued.
<LEND>

<L>24528<pc>0484-c<k1>niGfzva<k2>niGfzva
{%Ni-ghṛṣva, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed off, abraded,
excoriated; small, insignificant; ({%as%}), m. a hoof;
wind; an ass or a mule; a boar; a road; ({%am%}), n.
the mark of a hoof (?).
<LEND>

<L>24529<pc>0484-c<k1>niGna<k2>niGna
{#niGna#}¦ {%ni-ghna, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%ni-han%}), depend-
ant, subservient, docile; dependant on a substantive
[Page0485-a+ 72]
(as an adjective); (after a numeral) multiplied with;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of An-araṇya and father of An-
amitra; of a son of An-amitra.
<LEND>

<L>24530<pc>0485-a<k1>niGnaka<k2>niGnaka
{%Nighna-ka, as, ā, am, = ni-ghna,%}¦ dependant.
<LEND>

<L>24531<pc>0485-a<k1>niGnat<k2>niGnat
{%Ni-ghnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ smiting, slaying, killing,
destroying, overcoming.
<LEND>

<L>24532<pc>0485-a<k1>niGnAna<k2>niGnAna
{%Ni-ghnāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ slaying, killing.
<LEND>

<L>24533<pc>0485-a<k1>nicakra<k2>nicakra
{#nicakra#}¦ {%ni-cakra, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>24534<pc>0485-a<k1>nicaNkuRa<k2>nicaNkuRa
{#nicaNkuRa#}¦ {%ni-caṅkuṇa%} for {%ni-cuṅkuṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24535<pc>0485-a<k1>nicandra<k2>nicandra
{#nicandra#}¦ {%ni-candra, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>24536<pc>0485-a<k1>nicamana<k2>nicamana
{#nicamana#}¦ {%ni-camana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%cam%} with
{%ni%}), sipping, taking liquid into the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>24537<pc>0485-a<k1>nicaya<k2>nicaya
{#nicaya#}¦ {%ni-caya.%} See under 1. {%ni-ci%} below.
<LEND>

<L>24538<pc>0485-a<k1>nicaNkuRa<k2>nicaNkuRa
{#nicaNkuRa#}¦ {%ni-caṅkuṇa%} for {%ni-cuṅkuṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24539<pc>0485-a<k1>nicAy<k2>nicAy
{#nicAy#}¦ {%ni-cāy,%} cl. 1. P. {%-cāyati,%} &c. (oc-
curring only in the form {%ni-cāyya%}), Ved. to regard with
reverence, honour, worship; to see; [cf. rt. 4. {%ci.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24540<pc>0485-a<k1>nicAyya<k2>nicAyya
{%Ni-cāyya,%}¦ ind. having seen, having observed.
<LEND>

<L>24541<pc>0485-a<k1>nici<k2>nici<h>1
{#nici#} 1¦. {%ni-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -cinute,%}
{%-cetum,%} to pile up, heap up.
<LEND>

<L>24542<pc>0485-a<k1>nicaya<k2>nicaya
{%Ni-caya, as,%}¦ m. piling up, heaping up; collection,
heap, multitude, quantity, store, stock, provisions (e. g.
{%ṣaṇ-māsa-nicaya,%} provisioned for six months);
assemblage, assemblage or collection of parts con-
stituting a whole (e. g. {%śarīra-nicaya,%} the assem-
blage of parts of which the body consists; {%vadhū-%}
{%nicaya,%} a collection of women); certainty, ascertain-
ment (in this sense for {%niś-caya,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>24543<pc>0485-a<k1>nicayin<k2>nicayin
{%Ni-cayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ heaped up, containing a
quantity, full of, abounding in.
<LEND>

<L>24544<pc>0485-a<k1>nicAya<k2>nicAya
{%Ni-cāya, as,%}¦ m. a heap (as a measure).
<LEND>

<L>24545<pc>0485-a<k1>nicita<k2>nicita
{%Ni-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ piled up, heaped up, full of,
filled; covered, overspread; raised up; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a warrior-tribe [cf. {%naicitya%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a river.
<LEND>

<L>24546<pc>0485-a<k1>nicekAya<k2>nicekAya
{%Ni-cekāya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. the Intens.), continual or
repeated piling up.
<LEND>

<L>24547<pc>0485-a<k1>niceya<k2>niceya
{%Ni-ceya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be piled or heaped up.
<LEND>

<L>24548<pc>0485-a<k1>nici<k2>nici<h>2
{#nici#} 2¦. {%ni-ci,%} cl. 3. P. {%-ciketi, -cikāya,%}
&c., Ved. to observe, perceive, recognise: Desid.,
Ved. {%-cikīṣate,%} to observe, watch, guard.
<LEND>

<L>24549<pc>0485-a<k1>nicira<k2>nicira
{%Ni-cira, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. attentive, observant,
vigilant; ({%ā%}), m. du. epithet of Mitra-Varuṇa; (Sāy.)
excessively ancient ({%= nitarāṃ cirantanau%}).
<LEND>

<L>24550<pc>0485-a<k1>nicetf<k2>nicetf
{%Ni-cetṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. an observer; observing,
paying attention.
<LEND>

<L>24551<pc>0485-a<k1>nicikI<k2>nicikI
{#nicikI#}¦ {%nicikī,%} f. an excellent cow ({%=%}
{%naicikī,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>24552<pc>0485-a<k1>nicira<k2>nicira
{#nicira#}¦ {%ni-cira.%} See under 2. {%ni-ci%} above.
<LEND>

<L>24553<pc>0485-a<k1>nicuNkuRa<k2>nicuNkuRa
{#nicuNkuRa#}¦ {%ni-cuṅkuṇa, as, ā, am,%} (fr. Intens.
of rt. {%kuṇ?%}), Ved. roaring, murmuring; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a Vāruṇi; (often read {%ni-caṅkuṇa%} or {%ni-%}
{%cāṅkuṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>24554<pc>0485-a<k1>nicumpuRa<k2>nicumpuRa
{#nicumpuRa#}¦ {%ni-cumpuṇa, as, ā, am,%} (rt. {%cup?%}),
Ved. an epithet of Soma (because, according to Yāska,
{%nicamanena prīṇāti%}); of the Ava-bhṛtha; of the sea
(because, according to Yāska, {%nicamanena pūryate%});
moving about?; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Śaunaḥśepha.
<LEND>

<L>24555<pc>0485-a<k1>nicula<k2>nicula
{#nicula#}¦ {%ni-cula, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%cul%} with {%ni%}),
the tree Barringtonia Acutangula, commonly called
Hijjal, {%= vetasa; = ni-cola,%} an upper garment, over-
coat; (also read {%ni-cūla.%})
<LEND>

<L>24556<pc>0485-a<k1>niculaka<k2>niculaka
{%Ni-culaka, am,%}¦ n. an outer garment; a breast-
plate, a cuirass.
<LEND>

<L>24557<pc>0485-a<k1>nicola<k2>nicola
{%Ni-cola, as,%}¦ m. a cover, wrapper, veil, surtout.
<LEND>

<L>24558<pc>0485-a<k1>nicolaka<k2>nicolaka
{%Ni-colaka, as,%}¦ m. a sort of jacket, bodice, mantle,
but especially a soldier's jacket serving as a cuirass or
breast-plate; ({%am%}), n. {%= ni-culaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>24559<pc>0485-a<k1>nicft<k2>nicft<h>1
{#nicft#} 1¦. {%ni-cṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-cṛtati, -carti-%}
{%tum,%} to insert, infix, fix into.
<LEND>

<L>24560<pc>0485-a<k1>nicft<k2>nicft<h>2
2. {%ni-cṛt, t,%}¦ f. a defective metre; [cf. {%ati-n˚,%}
{%ni-vṛt.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0485-b+ 72]

<L>24561<pc>0485-b<k1>niceru<k2>niceru
{#niceru#}¦ {%ni-ceru, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. {%car%} with {%ni%}),
Ved. gliding; creeping; an epithet of the Ava-bhṛtha.
<LEND>

<L>24562<pc>0485-b<k1>nicCavi<k2>nicCavi
{#nicCavi#}¦ {%nicchavi, is,%} f., N. of a district ({%=%}
{%tīra-bhukti%}), the modern Tirhut; [cf. {%licchavi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24563<pc>0485-b<k1>nicCidra<k2>nicCidra
{#nicCidra#}¦ {%ni-cchidra%} for {%niś-chidra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24564<pc>0485-b<k1>nicCivi<k2>nicCivi
{#nicCivi#}¦ {%nicchivi, is,%} m., N. of one of the
degraded castes sprung from the outcast or Vrātya
Kṣatriyas (see Manu X. 22; their occupation appears
to have been the public exhibition of gymnastic
performances &c., as they are classed with the
Jhallas, Mallas, and others).
<LEND>

<L>24565<pc>0485-b<k1>nicCeda<k2>nicCeda
{#nicCeda#}¦ {%ni-ccheda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%chid%} with
{%ni%}), cutting off; (in arithmetic) leaving no common
measure, reduced by the common divisor to the least
term so as not to allow of further reduction (in
this sense for {%niś-cheda%}).
<LEND>

<L>24566<pc>0485-b<k1>nij<k2>nij
{#nij#}¦ {%nij,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%nenekti%} (3rd pl.
{%nenijati%}), {%nenikte, nineja, ninije,%}
{%nektā, nekṣyati, -te, anijat, anaikṣīt, anikta,%}
{%nektum,%} to wash, clean, cleanse, purify; A. to wash
or clean one's self; to nourish: Pass. {%nijyate,%} &c.,
to be washed: Caus. {%nejayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%anīni-%}
{%jat:%} Desid. {%ninikṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%nenijyate,%}
{%nenijīti, nenekti;%} [cf. rt. {%niñj:%} Zend <nsi>śnizh,</nsi> ‘to
snow:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">νίζ-ω, νίπ-τ-ω, χέρ-νιβ-α</lang> (acc.) <lang n="greek">νίπ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">τρο-ν, νῐ́φ-α</lang> (acc.), <lang n="greek">νιφ-ά(δ)-ς, νῐφ-ετό-ς, νῑ́φει:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>Nep-tūnu-s</nsi> = <lang n="greek">νιπτόμενο-ς,</lang> ‘bathing;’ <nsi>ning-</nsi>
<nsi>i-t, ningu-i-t, ningu-i-s, nix,</nsi> base <nsi>niv</nsi> for <nsi>nigv:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>snaivs,</nsi> ‘snow:’ Old Germ. <nsi>sneo,</nsi> ‘snow;’
<nsi>sniwit,</nsi> ‘it snows:’ Lith. <nsi>snig-ti, sning-ti,</nsi> ‘to
snow;’ <nsi>snḗg-a-s,</nsi> ‘snow;’ <nsi>snaig-alà,</nsi> ‘a flake of
snow:’ Slav. <nsi>sne†g-ŭ,</nsi> ‘snow:’ Hib. <nsi>nigh-im,</nsi> ‘I
wash;’ <nsi>nigh-te,</nsi> ‘washed,’ = Sanskrit {%nikta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24567<pc>0485-b<k1>nikta<k2>nikta
{%Nikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ washed, cleaned, cleansed,
rinsed; sprinkled. {%—Nikta-hasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
clean-handed, having clean hands.
<LEND>

<L>24568<pc>0485-b<k1>nija<k2>nija
{#nija#}¦ {%ni-ja, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%jan%} with {%ni%}),
innate, native, congenital, indigenous; own, of one's
own party or country; proper, peculiar; continual, per-
petual; ({%ās%}), m. pl. one's own people. {%Ni-ja%} is used
in later Sanskrit as a reflexive possessive pronoun, like
{%sva,%} for ‘my own,’ ‘his own,’ ‘our own,’ &c.; and
frequently for simple ‘my,’ ‘his,’ ‘our,’ &c. {%—Nija-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. one's own work, any duty pertaining
to one's self. {%—Nija-karma-bandhana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fettered by one's own works. {%—Nija-ghāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘devouring his own,’ N. of a demon. {%—Nija-%}
{%dhṛti, is,%} f., N. of a river in Śāka-dvīpa. {%—Nija-%}
{%mukta, as, ā, am,%} (according to the commentators)
{%= svabhāva-mukta,%} liberated in own nature, essen-
tially liberated (?). {%—Nija-lābha-pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}
engrossed in self-interest, self-satisfied. {%—Nija-sva,%}
{%am,%} n. own property. {%—Nijārtham (˚ja-ar˚),%} ind.
for one's own sake, for one's self.
<LEND>

<L>24569<pc>0485-b<k1>nijaGni<k2>nijaGni
{#nijaGni#}¦ {%ni-jaghni, is, is, i%} (fr. {%ni-han%}), Ved.
striking down, overpowering; [cf. {%jaghni.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24570<pc>0485-b<k1>nijAnukA<k2>nijAnukA
{#nijAnukA#}¦ {%ni-jānukā,%} f. (fr. {%ni-jānu%}), Ved.
shaking or trembling of the knees (?).
<LEND>

<L>24571<pc>0485-b<k1>nijiGfkzayat<k2>nijiGfkzayat
{#nijiGfkzayat#}¦ {%ni-jighṛkṣayat, an, antī, at%}
(Caus. of Desid. of rt. {%grah%} with {%ni%}), causing to be
desirous of overpowering or excelling.
<LEND>

<L>24572<pc>0485-b<k1>nijurv<k2>nijurv
{#nijurv#}¦ {%ni-jurv%} or {%ni-jūrv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jūrvati,%}
&c., to consume by fire; (Sāy.) to destroy, kill.
<LEND>

<L>24573<pc>0485-b<k1>nijur<k2>nijur
{%Ni-jur, ūr,%}¦ f., Ved. killing, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>24574<pc>0485-b<k1>nijuhnUzu<k2>nijuhnUzu
{#nijuhnUzu#}¦ {%ni-juhnūṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid.
of rt. {%hnu%} with {%ni%}), wishing to conceal or deny.
<LEND>

<L>24575<pc>0485-b<k1>niYj<k2>niYj
{#niYj#}¦ {%niñj,%} cl. 2. A. {%nikte,%} &c., = rt.
{%nij,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24576<pc>0485-b<k1>niwala<k2>niwala
{#niwala#}¦ {%ni-ṭala%} or {%ni-ṭāla, am,%} n. the fore-
head. {%—Niṭalākṣa (˚la-akṣa), as,%} m. ‘having
an eye on the forehead,’ an epithet of Śiva; (incor-
rectly spelt {%niṭilākṣa.%})
<LEND>
[Page0485-c+ 70]

<L>24577<pc>0485-c<k1>niqI<k2>niqI
{#niqI#}¦ {%ni-ḍī,%} cl. 1. 4. A. {%-ḍayate%} and {%-ḍīyate,%}
&c., to fly down.
<LEND>

<L>24578<pc>0485-c<k1>niqIna<k2>niqIna
{%Ni-ḍīna, am,%}¦ n. the downward flight or swoop of
a bird or a peculiar mode of flying.
<LEND>

<L>24579<pc>0485-c<k1>niRij<k2>niRij
{#niRij#}¦ {%ni-ṇij, k%} (according to Sāy. fr. {%ni-%}
{%nij,%} to purify), milk; (according to modern scholars
this word may be an adverb related to {%ni-ṇya.%})
<LEND>

<L>24580<pc>0485-c<k1>niRqikA<k2>niRqikA
{#niRqikA#}¦ {%niṇḍikā,%} f. a species of convol-
vulus, {%= tiṇḍī;%} (probably wrongly for {%tiṇḍikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>24581<pc>0485-c<k1>niRya<k2>niRya
{#niRya#}¦ {%ni-ṇya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ni%}), Ved. in-
terior, hidden, concealed, secret, mysterious, (in
Ṛg-veda 1. 32, 10, {%= nir-nāmadheya,%} nameless,
according to Sāy.); ({%am%}), n. a secret, a mystery;
({%am%}), ind. secretly, mysteriously.
<LEND>

<L>24582<pc>0485-c<k1>nitatatapam<k2>nitatatapam
{#nitatatapam#}¦ {%nitatatapam,%} ind., Ved. an ono-
matopoetic word to denote the speech of a stutterer.
<LEND>

<L>24583<pc>0485-c<k1>nitan<k2>nitan
{#nitan#}¦ {%ni-tan,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-tanoti, -nute,%}
{%-tanitum,%} Ved. to pervade, penetrate, pierce; to
cause to grow downwards (as a shoot, root, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>24584<pc>0485-c<k1>nitatnI<k2>nitatnI
{%Ni-tatnī,%}¦ f., Ved. a species of plant; N. of an
Iṣṭakā; N. of one of the seven stars of the asterism
Kṛttikā.
<LEND>

<L>24585<pc>0485-c<k1>nitAna<k2>nitAna
{%Ni-tāna, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the shoot of a plant which
grows downwards; N. of a man with the patronymic
Māruta.
<LEND>

<L>24586<pc>0485-c<k1>nitap<k2>nitap
{#nitap#}¦ {%ni-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -taptum,%}
Ved. to emit heat downwards; to consume.
<LEND>

<L>24587<pc>0485-c<k1>nitam<k2>nitam
{#nitam#}¦ {%ni-tam,%} Caus. P. {%-tamayati,%} &c., Ved.
to choke, suffocate.
<LEND>

<L>24588<pc>0485-c<k1>nitAnta<k2>nitAnta
{%Ni-tānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ extraordinary, excessive,
exceeding, much, considerable; ({%am%}), ind. exceed-
ingly, excessively, very, much, in a high degree.
{%—Nitāntāvṛkṣa (˚ta-av˚), as, ā, am,%} excessively
treeless.
<LEND>

<L>24589<pc>0485-c<k1>nitamba<k2>nitamba
{#nitamba#}¦ {%ni-tamba, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%tamb,%} probably connected with rt. {%stambh%}), the
buttocks or posteriors, especially of a woman, (in
this sense generally {%nitambau,%} m. du.); the cir-
cumference of the hip and loins; the ridge or side
or protuberant flank or swell of a mountain [cf. {%giri-%}
{%nitamba%}]; a precipice; the sloping bank or shore
of a river; the shoulder; a particular position of the
hands in dancing; ({%ā%}), f. a form of Durgā. {%—Ni-%}
{%tamba-tā,%} f. the state of having large hips. {%—Ni-%}
{%tamba-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having beautiful buttocks or
hips, <lang n="greek">καλλίπυγος;</lang> ({%tī%}), f. a woman. {%—Nitamba-%}
{%vimba, as, ā, am,%} having Vimba-like hips.
<LEND>

<L>24590<pc>0485-c<k1>nitambin<k2>nitambin
{%Nitambin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (at the end of a comp.),
having buttocks; having beautiful hips; having
graceful slopes, having beautiful sides (as a moun-
tain); ({%inī%}), f. a woman with large and handsome
hips.
<LEND>

<L>24591<pc>0485-c<k1>nitamBU<k2>nitamBU
{#nitamBU#}¦ {%nitambhū, ūs,%} m., N. of a person
mentioned in Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 1765; (per-
haps for {%nityam-bhū.%})
<LEND>

<L>24592<pc>0485-c<k1>nitarAm<k2>nitarAm
{#nitarAm#}¦ {%ni-tarām,%} ind. (fr. {%ni%} with the
comparative affix), downwards, towards the lower
part (Ved.); in a low tone (Ved.); completely,
wholly, entirely; much, extremely, excessively, in a
high degree; in an especial manner, always, con-
tinually, eternally; at all events; certainly; [cf. Angl.
Sax. <nsi>nidher;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>nidar.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>24593<pc>0485-c<k1>nitala<k2>nitala
{#nitala#}¦ {%ni-tala, am,%} n. one of the seven
divisions of the lower regions. See {%pātāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>24594<pc>0485-c<k1>nitAnta<k2>nitAnta
{#nitAnta#}¦ {%ni-tānta.%} See {%ni-tam%} above.
<LEND>

<L>24595<pc>0485-c<k1>nitikta<k2>nitikta
{#nitikta#}¦ {%ni-tikta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%tij%} with
{%ni%}), Ved. excited, roused up.
<LEND>

<L>24596<pc>0485-c<k1>nitikti<k2>nitikti
{%Ni-tikti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. excitement, haste, speed;
({%i%}), ind. quickly, speedily; (Sāy.) = 3rd sing. Pres.
of rt. {%tij = tīkṣṇī-karoti,%} he sharpens.
<LEND>
[Page0486-a+ 78]

<L>24597<pc>0486-a<k1>nitud<k2>nitud
{#nitud#}¦ {%ni-tud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-tudati, -te, -tot-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to pierce, penetrate, pierce into; to goad;
(Sāy.) to incite or pain vehemently, or to issue forth
({%= nitarāṃ vyathayati%} or {%nir-gacchati%}).
<LEND>

<L>24598<pc>0486-a<k1>nitoda<k2>nitoda
{%Ni-toda, as,%}¦ m. piercing, a prick, puncture, hole.
<LEND>

<L>24599<pc>0486-a<k1>nitodin<k2>nitodin
{%Ni-todin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. piercing, penetrating.
<LEND>

<L>24600<pc>0486-a<k1>nitfd<k2>nitfd
{#nitfd#}¦ {%ni-tṛd,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-tṛṇatti, -tṛntte,%}
{%-tarditum,%} Ved. to pierce, penetrate, cleave in two.
<LEND>

<L>24601<pc>0486-a<k1>nitF<k2>nitF
{#nitF#}¦ {%ni-tṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-tirati, -taritum, -ta-%}
{%rītum,%} Ved. to dispel, subdue, overpower, obstruct.
<LEND>

<L>24602<pc>0486-a<k1>nitoSana<k2>nitoSana
{#nitoSana#}¦ {%ni-tośana, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%tuś%}
with {%ni%}), Ved. sprinkling, distributing, granting;
({%as%}), m. a distributer, granter.
<LEND>

<L>24603<pc>0486-a<k1>nitya<k2>nitya
{#nitya#}¦ {%nitya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ni%}), own (Ved.);
continual, perpetual, regularly repeated, constant,
uninterrupted, endless, eternal, everlasting; invariable,
regular, fixed, regularly prescribed, inevitable, not op-
tional, (opposed to {%kāmya%} &c.); necessary, obligatory,
essential; ordinary, usual, (opposed to {%naimittika,%}
unusual, produced by an unusual cause); constantly
dwelling in, perpetually engaged in, (often at the end
of a comp., e. g. {%araṇya-nitya,%} constantly dwelling
in a forest; {%tapo-nitya,%} engaged in constant penance);
(with {%samāsa%}) a necessary compound which cannot
be resolved without losing its meaning, because the
separate ideas have merged in one, as in {%Jamad-agni;%}
(with {%svarita%}) {%= jātya,%} the primary or independent
Svarita, as opposed to the secondary or dependent;
({%as%}), m. the ocean; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Durgā; a
Śakti or form of Durgā; an epithet of the goddess Ma-
nasā; ({%am%}), n. constant and indispensable rite or act;
({%am%}), ind. always, ever, daily, constantly, continually,
perpetually, everlastingly, eternally; {%na nityam,%} not
always, never, (in Manu VI. 8. {%nityam an-ādātā%} =
never a receiver.) {%—Nitya-karman, a,%} n. or {%nitya-%}
{%kriyā,%} f. constant act or duty, as observance of the
five great sacrifices or any daily and necessary rite.
{%—Nitya-kṛtya, am,%} n. regular and necessary act
or ceremony; daily or regular act or routine. {%—Nitya-%}
{%gati, is, is, i,%} moving continually; ({%is%}), m. air or
wind, the god of wind. {%—Nitya-jāta, as, ā, am,%}
constantly born. {%—Nitya-tā,%} f. perpetuity, eternity,
continuance, continual repetition, (as {%maithuna-%}
{%nityatā,%} continually repeated coitus); perseverance;
necessity. {%—Nitya-tva, am,%} n. invariableness, per-
petuity, eternity; endurance; inevitableness, neces-
sity. {%—Nitya-dā,%} ind. always, ever, perpetually, con-
stantly, eternally, at all times. {%—Nitya-dāna, am,%} n.
daily alms-giving. {%—Nitya-dhṛt, t, t, t,%} constantly
bearing or maintaining, observing daily duties (?).
{%—Nitya-dhṛta, as, ā, am,%} constantly maintained
or kept up. {%—Nitya-nātha-siddha, as,%} m., N. of
an author. {%—Nitya-niyama, as,%} m. fixed rule,
constant observance. {%—Nitya-naimittika, am,%} or
{%nitya-naimittikaṃ karma,%} n. any regularly re-
curring occasional act or ceremony or any rite con-
stantly performed to accomplish some object, as
Śrāddhas at fixed lunar periods. {%—Nitya-parivṛta,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Nitya-parīkṣaṇa, am,%}
n. constant investigation or inspection. {%—Nitya-pūjā-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n. a kind of amulet. {%—Nitya-pralaya,%}
{%as,%} m. the constant dissolution of living beings.
{%—Nitya-bhāva, as,%} m. the state of being eternal,
eternity. {%—Nitya-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed of or
consisting of anything eternal, eternal. {%—Nitya-%}
{%yukta, as, ā, am,%} always busy, ever engaged in.
{%—Nitya-yauvana, am,%} n. perpetual youth; ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), ever or always young; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of
Draupadī. {%—Nityartu (˚ya-ṛ), us, us, u,%} regularly
recurring at the seasons, annual. {%—Nitya-vatsa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. always possessing a calf; ({%ā%}), f. a par-
ticular form of Sāma supplication; ({%am%}), n., N. of
several Sāmans. {%—Nitya-vitrasta, as,%} m. ‘constantly
scared,’ N. of an antelope. {%—Nitya-vaikuṇṭha, as,%}
m., N. of a particular residence of Viṣṇu, the
heaven of Viṣṇu. {%—Nitya-vyaya, as, ā, am,%} always
expending, constantly disbursing; ({%ā%}), f. always ex-
pending, ever laying out. {%—Nitya-śaṅkita, as, ā, %}
[Page0486-b+ 75]
{%am,%} perpetually alarmed, always suspicious. {%—Nitya-%}
{%śaya, as, ā, am,%} always sleeping or reclining. {%—Nitya-%}
{%śas,%} ind. always, continually, constantly, eternally.
{%—Nitya-saṃhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} always exulting
or triumphant; always rivalling one another, (in this
sense {%saṃhṛṣṭa = saṅghṛṣṭa.%}) {%—Nitya-sama,%}
{%as,%} m. the assertion that all things remain the same (?).
{%—Nitya-samāsa,%} see {%nitya%}. {%—Nitya-siddha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘ever perfect,’ a Jaina predicate of the soul.
{%—Nitya-stotra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. receiving perpetual
praise, constantly lauded. {%—Nitya-snāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
constantly bathing or making ablutions. {%—Nityāna-%}
{%dhyāya (˚ya-an˚), as,%} m. invariable suspension of
repetition of the Vedas, (a term applied to periods
when the perusal of the Vedas is invariably prohibited,
as the day of full moon, new moon, the eighth and
fourteenth days of the half month.) {%—Nityānanda%}
{%(˚ya-ān˚), as,%} m. eternal happiness. {%—Nityānanda-%}
{%rasodadhi (˚sa-ud˚), is,%} m. ‘ocean of the essence of
eternal joy,’ God. {%—Nityānandāśrama (˚da-āś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a commentator. {%—Nityānitya (˚ya-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} eternal and perishable, permanent and
temporary. {%—Nityāyukta (˚ya-āy˚), as,%} m., N. of a
Bodhi-sattva; (also read {%nityoyukta;%} cf. {%nityo-%}
{%dyukta.%}) {%—Nityāritra (˚ya-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having (its) own oars, ever fitted with oars (i. e.
according to Sāy. with priests). {%—Nityotkṣipta-%}
{%hasta (˚ya-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘who always raises his hand,’
N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Nityodita (˚ya-ud˚), as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Nityodyukta (˚ya-ud˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a Bodhi-sattva; [cf. {%nityāyukta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24604<pc>0486-b<k1>nityaj<k2>nityaj
{#nityaj#}¦ {%ni-tyaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tyajati, -tyaktum,%}
Ved. to scare or drive away.
<LEND>

<L>24605<pc>0486-b<k1>nid<k2>nid<h>1
{#nid#} 1¦. {%nid,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%nedati, nedate,%}
{%nineda, ninide%} or {%ninede, neditā,%} &c.,
to be near [cf. rt. {%ned, nedīyas, nediṣṭha%}]; to
ridicule, blame, reproach, censure, &c., (in this sense
properly a separate rt., the form of which is usually
{%nind,%} q. v.): Desid., Ved. {%ninitsati,%} to wish to
reproach or depreciate; [cf. rt. {%nind;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">ὄ-νειδ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">ο-ς</lang>, probably <lang n="greek">λοίδ-ο-ρο-ς;</lang> Goth. <nsi>ga-nait-yan, nai-</nsi>
<nsi>teins,</nsi> probably <nsi>neith;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>neiz-yan;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>naet-an, naet-ing, nidh, ge-nidhe,</nsi> ‘hatred;’
Mod. Germ. <nsi>neid,</nsi> ‘envy.’]
<LEND>

<L>24606<pc>0486-b<k1>nid<k2>nid<h>2
2. {%nid, t,%}¦ f., Ved. mocking, ridiculing, despising,
censure, contempt; ({%t%}), m. one who ridicules or con-
temns, a blamer, an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>24607<pc>0486-b<k1>nidA<k2>nidA<h>1
1. {%nidā,%}¦ f., Ved. blame, contempt.
<LEND>

<L>24608<pc>0486-b<k1>nidAna<k2>nidAna<h>1
1. {%nidāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. ({%= nidyamāna%}),
reproached, ridiculed. (For 2. see 3. {%ni-dā,%} col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>24609<pc>0486-b<k1>nidyamAna<k2>nidyamAna
{%Nidyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being reproached, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24610<pc>0486-b<k1>nida<k2>nida
{#nida#}¦ {%ni-da, am,%} n. (said to be fr. {%ni-do%}),
poison, venom.
<LEND>

<L>24611<pc>0486-b<k1>nidaRqa<k2>nidaRqa
{#nidaRqa#}¦ {%ni-daṇḍa, as,%} m., according to a
commentator {%= nihita-daṇḍa,%} a stick put aside or laid
down; ({%as, ā, am%}), one who has put down a stick
(i. e. not using force), one who has laid down a staff.
<LEND>

<L>24612<pc>0486-b<k1>nidatta<k2>nidatta
{#nidatta#}¦ {%ni-datta.%} See 2. {%ni-dā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>24613<pc>0486-b<k1>nidadru<k2>nidadru
{#nidadru#}¦ {%nida-dru, us,%} m. (said to be fr. {%nida%}
{%+ dru%}), a man.
<LEND>

<L>24614<pc>0486-b<k1>nidarSana<k2>nidarSana
{#nidarSana#}¦ {%ni-darśana.%} See {%ni-dṛś,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>24615<pc>0486-b<k1>nidah<k2>nidah
{#nidah#}¦ {%ni-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dagdhum,%}
to burn down, consume by fire.
<LEND>

<L>24616<pc>0486-b<k1>nidAGa<k2>nidAGa
{%Ni-dāgha, as,%}¦ m. (according to native lexicogra-
phers also {%am,%} n.), heat, warmth; the hot season
(May and June), summer; internal heat, sweat,
perspiration; N. of a man; N. of a son of Pulastya;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of the former person.
{%—Nidāgha-kara, as,%} m. ‘heat causer’ or ‘hot-
rayed,’ the sun. {%—Nidāgha-kāla, as,%} m. ‘the time
of heat,’ the hot season, two months previous to the
rains, about May and June. {%—Nidāgha-sindhu, us,%}
m. a river in hot weather, one nearly dry.
<LEND>

<L>24617<pc>0486-b<k1>nidA<k2>nidA<h>2
{#nidA#} 2¦. {%ni-dā%} (rt. 1. {%dā%}), cl. 3. P. {%-dadāti,%}
&c., Ved. to give. (For 1. {%nidā%} see above.)
<LEND>
[Page0486-c+ 76]

<L>24618<pc>0486-c<k1>nidatta<k2>nidatta
{%Ni-datta, as, ā, am,%}¦ given, given absolutely; [cf.
{%nītta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24619<pc>0486-c<k1>nidA<k2>nidA<h>3
{#nidA#} 3¦. {%ni-dā%} (rt. 4. {%dā,%} to bind), cl. 4. P.
{%-dyati,%} &c., Ved. to fasten.
<LEND>

<L>24620<pc>0486-c<k1>nidAtf<k2>nidAtf
{%Ni-dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who fastens or ties
up; (Sāy.) a restrainer, obstructer, (as if fr. rt. 3. {%dā.%})
<LEND>

<L>24621<pc>0486-c<k1>nidAna<k2>nidAna<h>2
2. {%ni-dāna, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. {%nidāna%} see col. 2),
a band, a rope, a halter; a rope for tying up a calf
&c.; a first or original cause, a primary or remote
cause [cf. {%ni-bandhana%}]; original form, essence,
({%nidānena,%} ind. originally, essentially, properly);
the cause of a disease, inquiry into the causes of
disease, pathology, i. e. study of the symptoms with
a view to trace the remote or proximate causes, (re-
garded as a department of medical science; the six-
teen Nidānas being the title of the sixteen divisions
into which it is divided; cf. {%nidāna-sthāna%}); N.
of a work on metres and Vedic Stomas (see {%nidāna-%}
{%sūtra%}); end, termination, cessation; purification,
purity, correctness; claiming the reward of peni-
tential acts. {%—Nidāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. founded
on a cause, essential. {%—Nidāna-sūtra, am,%} n. a work
in ten Prapāṭhakas on metres and Vedic Stomas.
{%—Nidāna-sthāna, am,%} n. one of the five depart-
ments of medical science, inquiry into the causes of
diseases, pathology.
<LEND>

<L>24622<pc>0486-c<k1>nidita<k2>nidita
{%Ni-dita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. preserved, concealed;
(Sāy.) completely bound or fettered ({%= nitarām%}
{%baddha%}).
<LEND>

<L>24623<pc>0486-c<k1>nidAGa<k2>nidAGa
{#nidAGa#}¦ {%ni-dāgha.%} See {%ni-dah,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>24624<pc>0486-c<k1>nidigDa<k2>nidigDa
{#nidigDa#}¦ {%ni-digdha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dih%}
with {%ni%}), smeared, anointed, plastered; clinging to;
({%ā%}), f. small cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>24625<pc>0486-c<k1>nidigDikA<k2>nidigDikA
{%Nidigdhikā,%}¦ f. {%= kaṇṭa-kārikā,%} a species of prickly
nightshade, Solanum Jacquini [cf. {%nir-digdhikā, nir-%}
{%dagdhikā%}]; cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>24626<pc>0486-c<k1>nidiDyAsana<k2>nidiDyAsana
{#nidiDyAsana#}¦ {%ni-didhyāsana, am,%} n. (fr. the
Desid. of rt. {%dhyai%}), profound and repeated medi-
tation.
<LEND>

<L>24627<pc>0486-c<k1>nidiDyAsu<k2>nidiDyAsu
{%Ni-didhyāsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desiring to meditate upon.
<LEND>

<L>24628<pc>0486-c<k1>nidiDyeya<k2>nidiDyeya
{%Ni-didhyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be deeply meditated
upon.
<LEND>

<L>24629<pc>0486-c<k1>nidiS<k2>nidiS
{#nidiS#}¦ {%ni-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%}
to order, point out, &c.; (perhaps for {%nir-diś%} and
apparently only used in the derivatives below.)
<LEND>

<L>24630<pc>0486-c<k1>nidizwa<k2>nidizwa
{%Ni-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ ordered, directed; advised,
enjoined; explained, pointed out.
<LEND>

<L>24631<pc>0486-c<k1>nideSa<k2>nideSa
{%Ni-deśa, as,%}¦ m. order, command, direction, in-
struction; speech, speaking, narration, conversation;
vicinity, proximity, neighbourhood; {%= bhājana,%} a
vessel, vase; ({%e%}), ind. in the vicinity, near. {%—Nideśa-%}
{%kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} executing orders, obedient, servile.
<LEND>

<L>24632<pc>0486-c<k1>nideSin<k2>nideSin
{%Ni-deśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ showing, directing, ordering,
pointing out; ({%inī%}), f. a region, quarter, point of
the compass.
<LEND>

<L>24633<pc>0486-c<k1>nideSya<k2>nideSya
{%Ni-deśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be ordered, to be told.
<LEND>

<L>24634<pc>0486-c<k1>nidezwf<k2>nidezwf
{%Ni-deṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ who or what points out
or orders; explaining, advising, commanding.
<LEND>

<L>24635<pc>0486-c<k1>nidI<k2>nidI
{#nidI#}¦ {%ni-dī,%} cl. 3. P. (see rt. 2. {%dī%}), Ved.
to shine down upon; (Sāy. {%= nitarām pra-kāś,%} to
shine exceedingly.)
<LEND>

<L>24636<pc>0486-c<k1>niduSa<k2>niduSa
{#niduSa#}¦ {%niduśa, as,%} m. a fish.
<LEND>

<L>24637<pc>0486-c<k1>nidfS<k2>nidfS
{#nidfS#}¦ {%ni-dṛś,%} Caus. {%-darśayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to see, to show, point, to point out; to
introduce, cause to enter; to impart knowledge,
communicate, teach; advise; to appear (in a vision)
to any person (acc.).
<LEND>

<L>24638<pc>0486-c<k1>nidarSaka<k2>nidarSaka
{%Ni-darśaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ seeing into, perceiving;
seeing; pointing out, proclaiming, announcing.
<LEND>

<L>24639<pc>0486-c<k1>nidarSana<k2>nidarSana
{%Ni-darśana, as, ī, am,%}¦ pointing to, showing,
foreshowing, prognosticating, indicating; proclaim-
ing, announcing, teaching; suiting, pleasing?; ({%ā%}),
f. a simile, a comparison; ({%am%}), n. seeing, look-
ing into, view, insight, sight, vision (e. g. {%svapna-%}
{%nidarśana,%} a vision in sleep); pointing to; showing;
evidence; an example or illustration; a designation
[Page0487-a+ 78]
of the third member of a complete syllogism (usually
called {%ud-āharaṇa,%} q. v.); a foreboding, prognostic,
sign, mark, omen; a scheme, system; injunction, pre-
cept, ordinance, scriptural authority; authority, text.
<LEND>

<L>24640<pc>0487-a<k1>nidarSita<k2>nidarSita
{%Ni-darśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ illustrated, exemplified.
<LEND>

<L>24641<pc>0487-a<k1>nidarSin<k2>nidarSin
{%Ni-darśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ seeing, viewing, having an
insight into, familiar with, knowing.
<LEND>

<L>24642<pc>0487-a<k1>nideSa<k2>nideSa
{#nideSa#}¦ {%ni-deśa.%} See {%ni-diś,%} p. 486, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>24643<pc>0487-a<k1>nidrA<k2>nidrA<h>1
{#nidrA#} 1¦. {%ni-drā%} or {%ni-drai,%} cl. 1. 2. P. A.
{%-drāyati, -te, -drāti,%} &c., to fall asleep, sleep.
<LEND>

<L>24644<pc>0487-a<k1>nidrA<k2>nidrA<h>2
2. {%ni-drā,%}¦ f. (said to be fr. rt. {%nind%} + affix {%ra%}),
sleep, slumber, sleepiness, sloth; (in flowers the
budding state is considered as sleep. hence {%nidrāṃ%}
{%tyaj%} = to bloom); a mystical N. of the letter {%bh.%}
{%—Nidrā-daridra, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Nidrān-%}
{%dha (˚rā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} blind with sleep. {%—Ni-%}
{%drā-bhaṅga, as,%} m. rousing from sleep, awaking;
[cf. {%bhagna-nidra.%}] {%—Nidrā-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting in sleep. {%—Nidrā-yoga, as,%} m. sleep
and deep meditation; [cf. {%yoga-nidrā.%}] {%—Nidrā-%}
{%lasa (˚rā-al˚), as, ā, am,%} slothful from drowsi-
ness, fast asleep, sleepy. {%—Nidrā-vṛkṣa, as,%} m.
darkness. {%—Nidrā-sañjanana, am,%} n. ‘producing
drowsiness,’ phlegm, the phlegmatic humor.
<LEND>

<L>24645<pc>0487-a<k1>nidrARa<k2>nidrARa
{%Ni-drāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sleeping, asleep, sleepy,
drowsy; shut up, closed (as a bud or blossom).
<LEND>

<L>24646<pc>0487-a<k1>nidrAt<k2>nidrAt
{%Ni-drāt, ān, ātī%}¦ or {%āntī, āt,%} sleeping.
<LEND>

<L>24647<pc>0487-a<k1>nidrAyamARa<k2>nidrAyamARa
{%Ni-drāyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sleeping, asleep.
<LEND>

<L>24648<pc>0487-a<k1>nidrAlu<k2>nidrAlu
{%Ni-drālu, us, us, u,%}¦ sleeping, sleepy, drowsy,
slothful; ({%us%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%us%}), f. the
plant Solanum Melongena; another plant ({%= vana-%}
{%varvarikā%}); a kind of perfume {%(= nalī)%}. {%—Ni-%}
{%drālu-tva, am,%} n. sleepiness, drowsiness.
<LEND>

<L>24649<pc>0487-a<k1>nidrita<k2>nidrita
{%Nidrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sleeping, asleep. {%—Nidrita-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having slept.
<LEND>

<L>24650<pc>0487-a<k1>niDana<k2>niDana
{#niDana#}¦ {%ni-dhana, am,%} n. (in some senses
apparently fr. 1. {%ni-dhā%} below, but in others more
probably fr. {%dhan =%} rt. {%han,%} to kill, with {%ni;%} cf.
{%pra-dhana%}), settling down in a residence, residence,
place of residence, domicile, resting-place, receptacle
(Ved.); race, family; conclusion, end; dying, death,
destruction, loss, disappearance, annihilation, (in
these senses also rarely {%ni-dhanas,%} m., see Hari-
vaṃśa 4846); the concluding passage or words at
the end of a Sāman which is sung in chorus, (several
words are used for this purpose, e. g. {%svar-jyotiḥ,%}
{%vaṣaṭ, vratam, īm, nām,%} &c.); the finale in music;
({%am%}), n., N. of the eighth mansion; ({%as%}), m. the
head of a family; ({%as, ā, am%}), without money,
poor, (in this sense for {%nir-dhana%}); [cf. rt. {%han;%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">θάν-α-το-ς;</lang> Hib. <nsi>nidh, nith,</nsi> ‘manslaughter,
battle.’] {%—Nidhana-kāma, am,%} n., Ved., N. of several
Sāmans. {%—Nidhana-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} causing death,
destroying, destructive. {%—Nidhana-kriyā,%} f. a funeral
ceremony. {%—Nidhana-tā,%} f. poverty, indigence.
{%—Nidhana-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of the end or
of destruction. {%—Nidhana-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
become final or like a finale in music. {%—Nidhana-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a finale in music.
<LEND>

<L>24651<pc>0487-a<k1>niDA<k2>niDA<h>1
{#niDA#} 1¦. {%ni-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put down, lay down, put or
lay into, fix in, deposit, lodge, bury; (with {%manas%})
to fix or direct the thoughts upon or towards
(dat.); resolve, determine; (with {%kriyām%}) to direct
one's labours, use efforts; to appoint; to lay aside,
put away, remove, relinquish; lay up, treasure up,
put into a safe place; to preserve for one's self (A.);
to deliver, intrust, commit, present; (with {%hṛdaye%}
or {%manasi%}) to keep in mind, bear in mind, re-
member, lay to heart, keep close; to keep down,
keep back, restrain; to end, close; to place in any
state, render: Pass. {%-dhīyate,%} to be place on or in,
to be deposited, be situated in or on, be absorbed
into, to rest in: Caus. {%-dhāpayati,%} &c., to cause to
be put or laid on or into, to cause to be deposited
or preserved; to appoint: Intens. (?), Ved. 3rd sing.
{%-dedhyat.%}
<LEND>

<L>24652<pc>0487-a<k1>niDA<k2>niDA<h>2
2. {%ni-dhā,%}¦ f., Ved. laying snares; a net; a collection
[Page0487-b+ 79]
of snares, a snare. {%—Nidhā-pati, is,%} m. the possessor
or bearer of snares.
<LEND>

<L>24653<pc>0487-b<k1>niDAtavya<k2>niDAtavya
{%Ni-dhātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be put down or de-
posited; to be delivered; to be directed towards; to
be concealed.
<LEND>

<L>24654<pc>0487-b<k1>niDAtf<k2>niDAtf
{%Ni-dhātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. a depositor, one who
deposits, keeps, conceals, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24655<pc>0487-b<k1>niDAna<k2>niDAna
{%Ni-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. putting down, laying down,
depositing, ({%daṇḍa-nidhāna,%} putting down or laying
aside the stick, i. e. not using force, = mildness,
clemency); keeping, preserving; a place where any-
thing is laid, a vessel in which anything is deposited,
a receptacle; a place of cessation or rest; anything
laid up, a treasure, a divine treasure (especially be-
longing to Kuvera, god of wealth); store, hoard,
property, possessions, wealth. {%—Nidhāneśa (˚na-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of treasure,’ a Yakṣa.
<LEND>

<L>24656<pc>0487-b<k1>niDAnya<k2>niDAnya
{%Ni-dhānya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. fit for being laid
or put down.
<LEND>

<L>24657<pc>0487-b<k1>niDApaka<k2>niDApaka
{%Ni-dhāpaka, as,%}¦ m. one who causes to be put
down or deposited; a weapon (?); burnt timber (?),
charcoal (?); the castor-oil plant (?).
<LEND>

<L>24658<pc>0487-b<k1>niDApya<k2>niDApya
{%Ni-dhāpya,%}¦ ind. having caused to be placed or
fixed in, having installed or appointed.
<LEND>

<L>24659<pc>0487-b<k1>niDAya<k2>niDAya
{%Ni-dhāya,%}¦ ind. having fixed or placed in or on,
({%manasi nidhāya,%} fixing or laying up in the mind,
reflecting.)
<LEND>

<L>24660<pc>0487-b<k1>niDi<k2>niDi
{%Ni-dhi, is,%}¦ m. setting down or serving up food
&c. (Ved.); the lower part or bottom of the Ukhā
(Ved.); a place where anything is laid or deposited,
a receptacle, ({%apāṃ nidhiḥ,%} the receptacle of waters,
the ocean, sea; also N. of a Sāman; sometimes
{%nidhi%} alone stands for ‘the ocean’); a place for
storing up, a storehouse, treasury, granary, a nest, &c.;
(figuratively) a treasure-house of good qualities, a
man endowed with many good qualities; a treasure,
store, hoard, any collection of wealth or valuables;
a divine treasure belonging to Kuvera, (nine of which
are enumerated, viz. the Padma, Mahā-padma,
Śaṅkha, Makara, Kacchapa, Mukunda, Nanda, Nīla,
and Kharba; their nature is not exactly defined,
though some of them appear to be precious gems;
according to the Tāntrika system they are personified
and worshipped as demi-gods, attendant either upon
Kuvera who is sometimes called {%Nidhīnam adhi-%}
{%paḥ,%} ‘lord of the Nidhis,’ or upon Lakṣmī, the
goddess of prosperity); N. of a particular medicinal
plant, commonly Jīvikā; a kind of perfume {%(=%}
{%nalikā); daivo nidhiḥ,%} ‘the divine treasure,’ N. of
a particular philosophical doctrine. {%—Nidhi-gopa,%}
{%as,%} m. guardian of treasure. {%—Nidhi-nātha, as,%} m.
or {%nidhi-prabhu, us,%} m. or {%nidhīśvara (˚dhi-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘lord of treasures,’ an epithet of Kuvera.
{%—Nidhi-pa, as,%} m. guardian of treasure; [cf.
{%nidhi-pā.%}] {%—Nidhi-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of treasures,’
an epithet of Kuvera; N. of a rich merchant.
{%—Nidhipati-datta, as,%} m., N. of a merchant.
{%—Nidhi-pā, ās,%} Ved., or {%nidhi-pāla, as,%} m.
guardian of treasure. {%—Nidhi-pālita, as,%} m., N.
of a merchant. {%—Nidhi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. pos-
sessing treasure, forming a store. {%—Nidhīśa%} or {%ni-%}
{%dhīśvara (˚dhi-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of treasures,’ an
epithet of Kuvera. {%—Nidhy-arthin, ī, inī, i,%} treasure
seeking.
<LEND>

<L>24661<pc>0487-b<k1>niDIyamAna<k2>niDIyamAna
{%Ni-dhīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being laid down or
deposited, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24662<pc>0487-b<k1>niDeya<k2>niDeya
{%Ni-dheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be placed in or on, to
be deposited.
<LEND>

<L>24663<pc>0487-b<k1>nihita<k2>nihita
{%Ni-hita, as, ā, am,%}¦ put down, deposited, &c.
See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>24664<pc>0487-b<k1>niDi<k2>niDi
{#niDi#}¦ {%ni-dhi.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>24665<pc>0487-b<k1>niDU<k2>niDU
{#niDU#}¦ {%ni-dhū,%} cl. 5. 6. P. A. {%-dhūnoti, -dhū-%}
{%nute%} (in the later language also {%-dhunoti, -dhunute%}),
{%-dhuvati, -dhotum, -dhavitum,%} to throw down, give
or deliver over (Ved.); shake to and fro, agitate.
<LEND>

<L>24666<pc>0487-b<k1>niDuvana<k2>niDuvana
{%Ni-dhuvana, am,%}¦ n. shaking about, agitation,
trembling; coition, sexual intercourse; pleasure, en-
joyment; sport, play, pastime.
<LEND>

<L>24667<pc>0487-b<k1>niDf<k2>niDf
{#niDf#}¦ {%ni-dhṛ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-dhārayati, -yitum%}
[Page0487-c+ 73]
(Ved. {%-dīdhar%}), to place down or in, deposit in;
determine; establish; render (Ved.); to keep, pre-
serve; (Sāy.) to establish firmly; to conceive in the
womb: Pass. {%-dhāryate%} (Ved. {%-dadhre%}), to be placed
in or deposited; to bend down, to stoop (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>24668<pc>0487-c<k1>niDAraya<k2>niDAraya
{%Ni-dhāraya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. placing in or on,
depositing.
<LEND>

<L>24669<pc>0487-c<k1>niDArayat<k2>niDArayat
{%Ni-dhārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ (Sāy.) abiding in.
<LEND>

<L>24670<pc>0487-c<k1>niDfti<k2>niDfti
{%Ni-dhṛti, is,%}¦ m., N. of a prince, a son of Vṛṣṇi;
[cf. {%nir-vṛti, ni-vṛtti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24671<pc>0487-c<k1>niDyE<k2>niDyE
{#niDyE#}¦ {%ni-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati, -dhyā-%}
{%tum,%} to observe, perceive (Ved.); to meditate on,
be absorbed in meditation; to think of, reflect on;
remember: Desid. {%-didhyāsati, -te,%} to wish to
meditate on; think of attentively (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>24672<pc>0487-c<k1>nidiDyAsana<k2>nidiDyAsana
{%Ni-didhyāsana, am,%}¦ n. profound meditation,
deep and repeated consideration, thinking of or re-
calling repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>24673<pc>0487-c<k1>nidiDyAsitavya<k2>nidiDyAsitavya
{%Ni-didhyāsitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be reflected or
meditated upon.
<LEND>

<L>24674<pc>0487-c<k1>nidiDyAsu<k2>nidiDyAsu
{%Ni-didhyāsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of meditating on.
<LEND>

<L>24675<pc>0487-c<k1>niDyAta<k2>niDyAta
{%Ni-dhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ meditated on, thought on,
imagined.
<LEND>

<L>24676<pc>0487-c<k1>niDyAna<k2>niDyAna
{%Ni-dhyāna, am,%}¦ n. intuition, looking at, seeing,
beholding, sight.
<LEND>

<L>24677<pc>0487-c<k1>niDruva<k2>niDruva
{#niDruva#}¦ {%ni-dhruva, as,%} m., N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl. his descendants; [cf. {%naidhruva, nai-%}
{%dhruvi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24678<pc>0487-c<k1>niDruvi<k2>niDruvi
{#niDruvi#}¦ {%ni-dhruvi, is, is, i,%} Ved. constant,
persevering, faithful; ({%is%}), m., N. of a Kāśyapa and
author of a Ṛg-veda hymn (IX. 63).
<LEND>

<L>24679<pc>0487-c<k1>niDvAna<k2>niDvAna
{#niDvAna#}¦ {%ni-dhvāna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%dhvan%}
with {%ni%}), sound.
<LEND>

<L>24680<pc>0487-c<k1>ninaNkzu<k2>ninaNkzu
{#ninaNkzu#}¦ {%ninaṅkṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. 2. {%naś%}), wishing or expecting to perish or die.
<LEND>

<L>24681<pc>0487-c<k1>ninad<k2>ninad
{#ninad#}¦ {%ni-nad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nadati,%} &c., to
sound, make a sound, cry out; to resound: Caus.
P. {%-nādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to sound or resound,
fill with noise, cries, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24682<pc>0487-c<k1>ninada<k2>ninada
{%Ni-nada%}¦ or {%ni-nāda, as,%} m. sound, noise, cry,
buzzing, humming, crying.
<LEND>

<L>24683<pc>0487-c<k1>ninAdita<k2>ninAdita
{%Ni-nādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to sound, filled with
noise or cries; ({%am%}), n. a sound.
<LEND>

<L>24684<pc>0487-c<k1>ninAdin<k2>ninAdin
{%Ni-nādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sounding, resounding, ringing,
crying; causing to sound, playing (as a musical
instrument).
<LEND>

<L>24685<pc>0487-c<k1>ninayana<k2>ninayana
{#ninayana#}¦ {%ni-nayana.%} See {%ni-nī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>24686<pc>0487-c<k1>ninartaSatru<k2>ninartaSatru
{#ninartaSatru#}¦ {%ninarta-śatru, us,%} m., N. of a
son of An-ādhṛṣṭi.
<LEND>

<L>24687<pc>0487-c<k1>ninard<k2>ninard
{#ninard#}¦ {%ni-nard,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nardati, -nardi-%}
{%tum,%} to sound; prolong a note in chanting; [cf.
{%ava-nard.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24688<pc>0487-c<k1>ninarda<k2>ninarda
{%Ni-narda, as,%}¦ m. prolonging a note in chanting,
trilling.
<LEND>

<L>24689<pc>0487-c<k1>ninardat<k2>ninardat
{%Ni-nardat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sounding; prolonging
a cadence.
<LEND>

<L>24690<pc>0487-c<k1>ninah<k2>ninah
{#ninah#}¦ {%ni-nah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-nahyati, -te,%}
{%-naddhum,%} Ved. to fasten, tie; [cf. {%nīnāha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24691<pc>0487-c<k1>ninadDa<k2>ninadDa
{%Ni-naddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ fastened, tied fast.
<LEND>

<L>24692<pc>0487-c<k1>ninAhya<k2>ninAhya
{%Ni-nāhya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a water-jar; (according to
the commentaries) a water-jar put into the ground.
<LEND>

<L>24693<pc>0487-c<k1>ninitsu<k2>ninitsu
{#ninitsu#}¦ {%ninitsu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of rt.
{%nid%}), Ved. wishing to censure or blame.
<LEND>

<L>24694<pc>0487-c<k1>ninI<k2>ninI
{#ninI#}¦ {%ni-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati, -te, -ne-%}
{%tum,%} to lead to, carry or bring towards, bring near,
bring, fetch; to incline, bend; to pour on or into
(Ved.); to carry out, perform, accomplish, cause; to
spend (time).
<LEND>

<L>24695<pc>0487-c<k1>ninayana<k2>ninayana
{%Ni-nayana, am,%}¦ n. carrying out, performing,
accomplishing; performance; pouring down.
<LEND>

<L>24696<pc>0487-c<k1>ninIzA<k2>ninIzA
{#ninIzA#}¦ {%ninīṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. 1. {%nī%}),
wishing to bring, desire or intention of carrying or
taking or leading away.
<LEND>
[Page0488-a+ 76]

<L>24697<pc>0488-a<k1>ninIzu<k2>ninIzu
{%Ninīṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous to take or lead, wishing
to bring; wishing to spend (as time).
<LEND>

<L>24698<pc>0488-a<k1>ninftta<k2>ninftta
{#ninftta#}¦ {%ni-nṛtta, as, ā, am,%} repeated (as a
portion of a verse or syllable; lit. danced again).
{%—Ninṛtta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having repetition (as
above).
<LEND>

<L>24699<pc>0488-a<k1>ninftti<k2>ninftti
{%Ni-nṛtti, is,%}¦ f. repetition.
<LEND>

<L>24700<pc>0488-a<k1>nind<k2>nind
{#nind#}¦ {%nind%} (sometimes written {%nid,%} q. v.),
cl. 1. P. {%nindati%} (rarely A. {%-te%}), {%nininda,%}
{%nindiṣyati, anindīt, ninditum,%} to blame, censure,
reprimand, contemn, despise, ridicule.
<LEND>

<L>24701<pc>0488-a<k1>ninda<k2>ninda
{%Ninda%}¦ in {%ninda-tala, as, ī, am, = nindita-%}
{%hasta,%} having a maimed or defective hand; (some-
times read {%nimna-tala.%})
<LEND>

<L>24702<pc>0488-a<k1>nindaka<k2>nindaka
{%Nindaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ blaming, defaming, re-
proachful, abusive, scurrilous, censorious; one who
ridicules or blames, a scorner.
<LEND>

<L>24703<pc>0488-a<k1>nindat<k2>nindat
{%Nindat, an, antī, at,%}¦ blaming, censuring, abusing,
ridiculing.
<LEND>

<L>24704<pc>0488-a<k1>nindana<k2>nindana
{%Nindana, am,%}¦ n. reproach, censure, blame.
<LEND>

<L>24705<pc>0488-a<k1>nindanIya<k2>nindanIya
{%Nindanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ blamable, liable to reproof
or censure or blame, reprehensible; [cf. {%a-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24706<pc>0488-a<k1>nindA<k2>nindA
{%Nindā,%}¦ f. blame, censure, reproach, reproof, abuse,
defamation, scorn, reviling; injury, injuring, wicked-
ness; [cf. {%nidā.%}] {%—Nindā-stuti, is,%} f. praise which
involves reproof, ironical praise, irony.
<LEND>

<L>24707<pc>0488-a<k1>nindita<k2>nindita
{%Nindita, as, ā, am,%}¦ blamed, abused, reviled,
reproved, despised, rejected; low, despicable, worthy
of being reviled; prohibited, forbidden.
<LEND>

<L>24708<pc>0488-a<k1>ninditf<k2>ninditf
{%Ninditṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who ridicules or
blames or despises.
<LEND>

<L>24709<pc>0488-a<k1>nindin<k2>nindin
{%Nindin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ blaming, censuring, reproaching.
<LEND>

<L>24710<pc>0488-a<k1>nindu<k2>nindu
{%Nindu, us,%}¦ f. a woman bearing a dead child.
<LEND>

<L>24711<pc>0488-a<k1>nindya<k2>nindya
{%Nindya, as, ā, am,%}¦ blamable, to be censured or
reproached, despicable, reprehensible, bad, vile; for-
bidden, prohibited; [cf. {%a-n.%}] {%—Nindya-tā,%} f. or
{%nindya-tva, am,%} n. blamableness, infamy, con-
temptibleness.
<LEND>

<L>24712<pc>0488-a<k1>ninv<k2>ninv
{#ninv#}¦ {%ninv%} (or according to some {%sinv%}),
cl. 1. P. {%ninvati,%} &c., to wet or sprinkle;
or to attend, wait on, worship ?; (the two mean-
ings have probably arisen from a confusion between
{%secane%} and {%sevane.%})
<LEND>

<L>24713<pc>0488-a<k1>nipa<k2>nipa
{#nipa#}¦ {%ni-pa.%} See under 2. {%ni-pā,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>24714<pc>0488-a<k1>nipakzati<k2>nipakzati
{#nipakzati#}¦ {%ni-pakṣati, is,%} f., Ved. the
second rib.
<LEND>

<L>24715<pc>0488-a<k1>nipaWa<k2>nipaWa
{#nipaWa#}¦ {%ni-paṭha, as,%} m. or {%nipaṭhana, am,%} n.
(fr. rt. {%paṭh%} with {%ni%}), reading, recitation, studying.
<LEND>

<L>24716<pc>0488-a<k1>nipaWita<k2>nipaWita
{%Ni-paṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ read, recited, studied,
(hence {%nipaṭhitin,%} Pāṇ. V. 2, 88.)
<LEND>

<L>24717<pc>0488-a<k1>nipaWiti<k2>nipaWiti
{%Ni-paṭhiti, is,%}¦ f. reading, recitation, study.
<LEND>

<L>24718<pc>0488-a<k1>nipAWa<k2>nipAWa
{%Ni-pāṭha, as,%}¦ m. {%= ni-paṭha,%} reading, study of the
sacred books or public perusal of popular poems.
<LEND>

<L>24719<pc>0488-a<k1>nipat<k2>nipat
{#nipat#}¦ {%ni-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -patitum,%} to
fly down, fall down, tumble down, settle down, fall,
descend, alight, throw one's self down; to fall upon,
throw one's self upon, assault, assail, fall into, rush
into, rush in, flow in, disembogue into, discharge
into; fall into ruin; to fall into (any state or con-
dition); to fall into (a place), enter, insert one's self,
become fixed in; to befall, happen, take place; to
fall to the share of (with loc.): Caus. {%-pātayati,%}
{%-apīpatat, -yitum,%} to cause to fall down, throw
down, fell, cast down, cause to fall on (e. g. to cause
a stick to fall on any one = strike with a stick); to
hurl down; to cast, throw, hurl, throw into; to let in,
inlay, emboss; to direct (the eyes &c.) upon; to spit
on, spit out; to ruin, kill, destroy (with abl.); to
raise or levy a tribute from (with {%karān%} and abl. c.,
in Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 3313); (in grammar) to put
down as a special or irregular form, to give as an
irregularity, consider as anomalous or irregular; ({%ni-%}
{%pātyate%} is put down or mentioned as a special rule
or irregular form.)
<LEND>

<L>24720<pc>0488-a<k1>nipatat<k2>nipatat
{%Ni-patat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flying down, falling down,
falling, descending, alighting, prostrating one's self, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0488-b+ 76]

<L>24721<pc>0488-b<k1>nipatana<k2>nipatana
{%Ni-patana, am,%}¦ n. flying down, falling down,
falling, descending; alighting, flying.
<LEND>

<L>24722<pc>0488-b<k1>nipatita<k2>nipatita
{%Ni-patita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen down, fallen; de-
scended, alighted.
<LEND>

<L>24723<pc>0488-b<k1>nipatya<k2>nipatya
{%Ni-patya,%}¦ ind. having fallen down, having pros-
trated one's self, having descended or alighted. {%—Ni-%}
{%patya-rohiṇī,%} f. falling and ascending (?).
<LEND>

<L>24724<pc>0488-b<k1>nipatyA<k2>nipatyA
{%Ni-patyā,%}¦ f. any slippery ground; a field of battle.
<LEND>

<L>24725<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAta<k2>nipAta
{%Ni-pāta, as,%}¦ m. falling down, falling, descending,
coming down, alighting; falling upon, attacking;
casting, hurling; death, dying; accidental occurrence
or mention; putting down as irregular or exceptional,
irregular form, irregularity (e. g. {%pūrva-nipāta,%}
irregular occurrence of a word at the beginning
instead of at the end of a compound; {%para-nipāta,%}
irregular placing of a word at the end instead of
beginning); the opposite extremity, the lower end;
(in grammar) a particle, the term for all adverbs in-
cluding conjunctions and interjections, (called {%nipāta%}
as falling into the sentence in various senses, i. e.
taking their place after other words to modify the
sense in various ways.) {%—Nipāta-tva, am,%} n. the
state of being a particle. {%—Nipāta-pratīkāra, as,%}
m. the repelling of assaults.
<LEND>

<L>24726<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAtaka<k2>nipAtaka
{%Ni-pātaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. {%= pātaka,%} a bad deed,
a sin.
<LEND>

<L>24727<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAtana<k2>nipAtana
{%Ni-pātana, as, ā, am,%}¦ throwing down, overthrow-
ing, killing, destroying; ({%am%}), n. causing to descend
or fall, throwing down, overthrowing; beating,
knocking down; putting on; touching with; killing,
destroying; (in grammar) putting down as an irre-
gularity, accidental mention or use of a word; a form
which by its rare occurrence shows itself to be irre-
gular; irregularity, exception; falling down, hurrying
down, flying down.
<LEND>

<L>24728<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAtanIya<k2>nipAtanIya
{%Ni-pātanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cast down or over-
thrown, caused to fall (e. g. {%daṇḍo nipātanīyas,%}
the stick must be caused to fall, punishment must
be inflicted).
<LEND>

<L>24729<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAtita<k2>nipAtita
{%Ni-pātita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to fall or descend;
beaten down; killed; irregular, excepted.
<LEND>

<L>24730<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAtin<k2>nipAtin
{%Ni-pātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling down, flying down or on,
alighting; striking down, destroying, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>24731<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAtya<k2>nipAtya
{%Ni-pātya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cast down or over-
thrown; to be put down or mentioned as an irregu-
larity.
<LEND>

<L>24732<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAtyamAna<k2>nipAtyamAna
{%Ni-pātyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being thrown down,
being precipitated.
<LEND>

<L>24733<pc>0488-b<k1>nipalASam<k2>nipalASam
{#nipalASam#}¦ {%ni-palāśam,%} ind., Ved. (Sāy.)
without speaking, i. e. like a tree without foliage (or
as a leafless tree moves without rustling).
<LEND>

<L>24734<pc>0488-b<k1>nipA<k2>nipA<h>1
{#nipA#} 1¦. {%ni-pā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-pāti, -pātum,%} &c.,
to guard, protect, defend; observe, watch over: Caus.
{%-pālayati, -yitum,%} to protect, guard, govern.
<LEND>

<L>24735<pc>0488-b<k1>nipA<k2>nipA<h>2
{#nipA#} 2¦. {%ni-pā,%} cl. 1. and 2. P. {%-pibati%} or
{%-pivati, -pātum,%} to drink in, imbibe, suck in; to
absorb, dry up: Caus. P. {%-pāyayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to imbibe or suck in.
<LEND>

<L>24736<pc>0488-b<k1>nipa<k2>nipa
{%Ni-pa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a water-jar; ({%as%}), m. the
Kadamba tree, Nauclea Cadamba ({%= kadamba%}).
<LEND>

<L>24737<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAna<k2>nipAna
{%Ni-pāna%}¦ or {%nipānaka, am,%} n. drinking, im-
bibing; any reservoir of water, any place or trough
near a well for watering cattle; a well, pool; a
milk-pail. {%—Nipāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having reser-
voirs or ponds, abounding in pools, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24738<pc>0488-b<k1>nipIta<k2>nipIta
{%Ni-pīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ drunk in, drunk up, absorbed,
imbibed, dried up.
<LEND>

<L>24739<pc>0488-b<k1>nipIti<k2>nipIti
{%Ni-pīti, is,%}¦ f. drinking.
<LEND>

<L>24740<pc>0488-b<k1>nipIyamAna<k2>nipIyamAna
{%Ni-pīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being drunk in or
imbibed.
<LEND>

<L>24741<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAka<k2>nipAka
{#nipAka#}¦ {%ni-pāka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%pac%} with {%ni%}),
cooking, maturing, ripening.
<LEND>

<L>24742<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAWa<k2>nipAWa
{#nipAWa#}¦ {%ni-pāṭha.%} See {%ni-paṭha,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>24743<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAta<k2>nipAta
{#nipAta#}¦ {%ni-pāta.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>24744<pc>0488-b<k1>nipAda<k2>nipAda
{#nipAda#}¦ {%ni-pāda, as,%} m., Ved. low ground,
a valley; (Sāy.) high and low ground.
<LEND>
[Page0488-c+ 71]

<L>24745<pc>0488-c<k1>nipiz<k2>nipiz
{#nipiz#}¦ {%ni-piṣ,%} cl. 7. P., Ved. {%-pinaṣṭi,%}
{%-peṣṭum,%} to crush.
<LEND>

<L>24746<pc>0488-c<k1>nipIq<k2>nipIq
{#nipIq#}¦ {%ni-pīḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pīḍayati, -yitum,%}
to press close to or against, press together, squeeze;
to embrace; to impress; to cause pain, afflict,
plague, trouble; (in astronomy) to eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>24747<pc>0488-c<k1>nipIqana<k2>nipIqana
{%Ni-pīḍana, am,%}¦ n. squeezing, pressing; hurting,
giving pain; ({%ā%}), f. oppression.
<LEND>

<L>24748<pc>0488-c<k1>nipIqayat<k2>nipIqayat
{%Ni-pīḍayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ pressing, pressing to-
gether; ({%dantān dantair nipīḍayan,%} gnashing
the teeth.)
<LEND>

<L>24749<pc>0488-c<k1>nipIqita<k2>nipIqita
{%Ni-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ squeezed, pressed, embraced;
pained, hurt. {%—Nipīḍitālaktaka-vat (˚ta-al˚),%} ind.
like pressed lac.
<LEND>

<L>24750<pc>0488-c<k1>nipIqya<k2>nipIqya
{%Ni-pīḍya,%}¦ ind. having pressed; having pressed
against or upon; having embraced; having hurt.
<LEND>

<L>24751<pc>0488-c<k1>nipIy<k2>nipIy
{#nipIy#}¦ {%ni-pīy,%} cl. 1. P., Ved. {%-pīyati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to revile, abuse, treat with contempt.
<LEND>

<L>24752<pc>0488-c<k1>nipu<k2>nipu
{#nipu#}¦ {%nipu, us,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>24753<pc>0488-c<k1>nipuRa<k2>nipuRa
{#nipuRa#}¦ {%ni-puṇa, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%puṇ%} with {%ni;%} perhaps fr. rt. {%puṣ%} + affix {%na,%} through
which dialectically {%puṇṇa = puṇa%}), clever, adroit,
skilful, skilled in, conversant with (loc. and gen.);
experienced; kind or friendly towards (with loc. or
with {%prati%}); sharp, acute, fine, delicate; complete,
perfect, accurate; ({%am%} or {%ena%}), ind. skilfully, cleverly,
sharply; completely, perfectly, totally, exactly, care-
fully; in a delicate manner. {%—Nipuṇa-tara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} more clever, perfect, &c.; ({%am%}), ind. cleverly;
perfectly. {%—Nipuṇa-tas,%} ind. cleverly, skilfully;
completely. {%—Nipuṇa-tā,%} f. skilfulness, cleverness,
conversancy, adroitness, versatility; carefulness, accu-
racy. {%—Nipuṇa-dṛś, k, k, k,%} sharp-sighted, clever,
knowing.
<LEND>

<L>24754<pc>0488-c<k1>nipuRikA<k2>nipuRikA
{%Nipuṇikā,%}¦ f. ‘the clever one,’ N. of a waiting-
maid in the Vikramorvaśī.
<LEND>

<L>24755<pc>0488-c<k1>nipuT<k2>nipuT
{#nipuT#}¦ {%ni-puth,%} Caus. {%-pothayati, -yitum,%}
to dash down.
<LEND>

<L>24756<pc>0488-c<k1>nipur<k2>nipur
{#nipur#}¦ {%ni-pur, ūr,%} f., Ved. (according to
Mahī-dhara) {%= sūkṣma-deha,%} the subtle body.
<LEND>

<L>24757<pc>0488-c<k1>nipUta<k2>nipUta
{#nipUta#}¦ {%ni-pūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. strained,
filtered, purified.
<LEND>

<L>24758<pc>0488-c<k1>niprahan<k2>niprahan
{#niprahan#}¦ {%ni-pra-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -han-%}
{%tum,%} to kill (with gen. of the object).
<LEND>

<L>24759<pc>0488-c<k1>nipriyAya<k2>nipriyAya
{#nipriyAya#}¦ {%nipriyāya%} (fr. {%ni-priya%}), Nom.
A. {%nipriyāyate,%} &c., Ved. to keep in one's pos-
session, not to be willing to give up.
<LEND>

<L>24760<pc>0488-c<k1>niPalA<k2>niPalA
{#niPalA#}¦ {%ni-phalā,%} f. the plant Cardiosper-
mum Halicacabum ({%= jyotiṣmatī%}).
<LEND>

<L>24761<pc>0488-c<k1>niPAlana<k2>niPAlana
{#niPAlana#}¦ {%ni-phālana, am,%} n. (probably
incorrect for {%ni-bhālana%}), seeing, sight.
<LEND>

<L>24762<pc>0488-c<k1>niPena<k2>niPena
{#niPena#}¦ {%ni-phena, am,%} n. {%= a-phena,%} opium.
<LEND>

<L>24763<pc>0488-c<k1>nibadDa<k2>nibadDa
{#nibadDa#}¦ {%ni-baddha.%} See under {%ni-bandh.%}
<LEND>

<L>24764<pc>0488-c<k1>nibanD<k2>nibanD
{#nibanD#}¦ {%ni-bandh,%} cl. 9. P. {%-badhnāti, -band-%}
{%dhum,%} to bind on, bind, tie, fasten, tie together; to
fetter, enchain, imprison, ensnare; to attach, to join,
unite, connect; compose (in writing), record, write;
to construct; to draw together, contract (e. g. {%bhru-%}
{%kuṭīm,%} the brow); to fix, hold fast, confine, restrain,
obstruct, stop, close up, restrict; to fix on, place or
put upon, impose; to put together, form, acquire;
(with {%padam%}) to put the foot upon, i. e. to under-
take anything; to fix or direct upon; to appoint,
commission, charge; to place, locate; to destroy,
(Mahā-bh. Virāṭa-p. 982; cf. rt. {%vadh.%})
<LEND>

<L>24765<pc>0488-c<k1>nibadDa<k2>nibadDa
{%Ni-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound in or on, bound;
fastened, tied, connected, bound or sewed together,
fastened to; caught (as in a net), fettered, enchained,
chained to, dependant on; connected, coherent; shut
up, closed, stopped, obstructed; confined, costive;
checked, restrained, restricted to; bound over or
[Page0489-a+ 75]
called as a witness (Manu VIII. 76); composed, written;
fixed in, inlaid (as with gold or jewels), enchased, set,
inserted; committed, intrusted; enveloped, enclosed,
involved, covered with; constructed of, formed of,
consisting of; accompanied by, furnished or endowed
with; relating to, contained or involved in.
<LEND>

<L>24766<pc>0489-a<k1>nibandDf<k2>nibandDf
{%Ni-banddhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ who or what
ties or binds, a binder, fastener; ({%dhā%}), m. a com-
poser, writer, author; a commentator; (also written
{%ni-bandhṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>24767<pc>0489-a<k1>nibanDa<k2>nibanDa
{%Ni-bandha, as,%}¦ m. binding on, binding, fastening,
tying, attachment, attachment to, intentness on; com-
posing, writing down, recording; restraint, obstruc-
tion, confinement, constipation, suppression of urine,
strangury; a band, bond, fetter; fixed property, not
movable or fluctuating; a grant of property, an assign-
ment of cattle or money for support; foundation,
origin, root, cause, reason; any literary composition
or treatise; a commentary or explanation of technical
rules [cf. {%grantha%}]; N. of a particular work; the
plant Azadirachta Indica; ({%am%}), n. song, singing.
{%—Nibandha-dāna, am,%} n. grant of property, as-
signment or gift of a corrody. {%—Nibandha-saṅ-%}
{%graha, as,%} m., N. of a commentary on Su-śruta's
medical work.
<LEND>

<L>24768<pc>0489-a<k1>nibanDana<k2>nibanDana
{%Ni-bandhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ binding, fastening,
fettering; ({%ī%}), f. band, bond, fetter; ({%am%}), n. the
act of fastening to, binding together, ligation; con-
structing, building (as a bridge &c.); checking, re-
straining, confining; band, fetter; that to which
anything is fastened or on which it rests; a receptacle;
the part of a lute where the strings are fastened, the
tie or peg of a lute; cause, origin, reason, motive,
condition; (in grammar) syntax; a composition; a
commentary; a grant, an assignment.
<LEND>

<L>24769<pc>0489-a<k1>nibanDika<k2>nibanDika
{%Ni-bandhika.%}¦ See {%aśva-n˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>24770<pc>0489-a<k1>nibanDita<k2>nibanDita
{%Ni-bandhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound, fastened, con-
fined, tied.
<LEND>

<L>24771<pc>0489-a<k1>nibanDin<k2>nibanDin
{%Ni-bandhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ binding, confining; joined
or connected by or with, hanging together, cohering;
causing, being a cause or having a reason.
<LEND>

<L>24772<pc>0489-a<k1>nibarhaRa<k2>nibarhaRa
{#nibarhaRa#}¦ {%ni-barhaṇa.%} See {%ni-bṛh%} below.
<LEND>

<L>24773<pc>0489-a<k1>nibala<k2>nibala
{#nibala#}¦ {%nibala, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
particular number.
<LEND>

<L>24774<pc>0489-a<k1>nibAD<k2>nibAD
{#nibAD#}¦ {%ni-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate, -bādhi-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to press down or together, force in; to
cramp, contract, confine, obstruct; to oppress.
<LEND>

<L>24775<pc>0489-a<k1>nibADa<k2>nibADa
{%Ni-bādha, as,%}¦ m. obstruction, in {%a-n˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24776<pc>0489-a<k1>nibA|a<k2>nibA|a
{#nibA|a#}¦ {%ni-bāḷha, as, ā, am%} (according
to some fr. rt. {%baṃh,%} according to Sāy. fr. rt. {%bāh =%}
{%vāh,%} to endeavour), Ved. forced down, thrown into.
<LEND>

<L>24777<pc>0489-a<k1>nibuD<k2>nibuD
{#nibuD#}¦ {%ni-budh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bodhati, -te,%}
{%-bodhitum,%} to learn or hear anything (acc.) from
any one (gen. or with {%sakāśāt%}); to attend to, listen
to, (often occurring in the impv. {%ni-bodha%}); to
know, consider: Caus. {%-bodhayati,%} &c., to cause to
know or learn, to inform, give to understand.
<LEND>

<L>24778<pc>0489-a<k1>nibodDavya<k2>nibodDavya
{%Ni-boddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be learnt; to be
considered or regarded.
<LEND>

<L>24779<pc>0489-a<k1>nibfh<k2>nibfh
{#nibfh#}¦ {%ni-bṛh%} (also written {%ni-vṛh,%} q. v.),
cl. 1. P. {%-barhati, -barhitum, -barhayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to throw down, destroy, annihilate, extirpate,
eradicate.
<LEND>

<L>24780<pc>0489-a<k1>nibarhaRa<k2>nibarhaRa
{%Ni-barhaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroying, &c.; ({%am%}),
n. destruction, annihilation, &c. See {%ni-varhaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>24781<pc>0489-a<k1>niBa<k2>niBa
{#niBa#}¦ {%ni-bha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%bhā%} with
{%ni%}), like, resembling, similar, (only at the end of a
comp.; sometimes pleonastically after adjectives, e. g.
{%cāru-nibhānana,%} handsome-faced; and occasionally
with another word meaning ‘like,’ e. g. {%naga-nibho-%}
{%pama,%} like a mountain); ({%as, am%}), m. n. appear-
ance, light, manifestation; pretence, pretext, fraud,
sham, trick, disguise. {%—Nibha-tā,%} f. similarity, likeness.
<LEND>

<L>24782<pc>0489-a<k1>niBaYj<k2>niBaYj
{#niBaYj#}¦ {%ni-bhañj,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhanakti, -bhaṅk-%}
{%tum,%} to break or dash to pieces, break asunder.
<LEND>
[Page0489-b+ 73]

<L>24783<pc>0489-b<k1>niBartsana<k2>niBartsana
{#niBartsana#}¦ {%ni-bhartsana,%} wrong reading for
{%nir-bhartsana.%}
<LEND>

<L>24784<pc>0489-b<k1>niBal<k2>niBal
{#niBal#}¦ {%ni-bhal,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-bhālayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to perceive, see.
<LEND>

<L>24785<pc>0489-b<k1>niBAlana<k2>niBAlana
{%Ni-bhālana, am,%}¦ n. seeing, sight, perception;
[cf. {%ni-phālana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24786<pc>0489-b<k1>niBasad<k2>niBasad
{#niBasad#}¦ {%ni-bhasad (?),%} having the hinder
parts directed downwards (?). See {%bhasad.%}
<LEND>

<L>24787<pc>0489-b<k1>niBid<k2>niBid
{#niBid#}¦ {%ni-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhintte, -bhettum,%} to break or divide asunder: Pass.
{%-bhidyate,%} to be opened, to open.
<LEND>

<L>24788<pc>0489-b<k1>niBIma<k2>niBIma
{#niBIma#}¦ {%ni-bhīma, as, ā, am,%} terrible, fright-
ful. {%—Nibhīma-vikrama, as, ā, am,%} of terrible
valour, of formidable prowess.
<LEND>

<L>24789<pc>0489-b<k1>niBUta<k2>niBUta
{#niBUta#}¦ {%ni-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} past, gone.
<LEND>

<L>24790<pc>0489-b<k1>niBUyapa<k2>niBUyapa
{#niBUyapa#}¦ {%nibhūyapa, as,%} m., Ved. epithet
of Viṣṇu, (meaning unknown.)
<LEND>

<L>24791<pc>0489-b<k1>niBf<k2>niBf
{#niBf#}¦ {%ni-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bharati, -bhartum,%}
&c., to bear or put down, (apparently only used in
the part. {%ni-bhṛta%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>24792<pc>0489-b<k1>niBfta<k2>niBfta
{%Ni-bhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ borne or placed down, deposited
in a low place, lowered; concealed, hidden, secret,
occult, unperceived, imperceptible; modest, humble,
unassuming; mild, gentle; lonely, solitary; still, silent;
firm, unmoved, immovable; resolute, decided, firmly
attached, faithful; filled with, full of, (Bhāgavata-Purāṇa
X. 32, 20, {%= pūrṇa, vyāpta%}); ({%am%}), n. humility,
modesty, meekness [cf. {%naibhṛtya%}]; ({%am%}), ind.
covertly, secretly, privately, apart, unobservedly, im-
perceptibly, in a corner, out of sight. {%—Nibhṛtāgata%}
{%(˚ta-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} secretly arrived. {%—Nibhṛtāt-%}
{%man (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} resolute-minded, resolute.
{%—Nibhṛtārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having a
secret meaning, occult.
<LEND>

<L>24793<pc>0489-b<k1>niBraMS<k2>niBraMS
{#niBraMS#}¦ {%ni-bhraṃś,%} Caus. {%-bhrāśayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to cause to fall off, to strike or break off.
<LEND>

<L>24794<pc>0489-b<k1>nima<k2>nima
{#nima#}¦ {%nima, as,%} m. a pin, stake (?).
<LEND>

<L>24795<pc>0489-b<k1>nimajj<k2>nimajj
{#nimajj#}¦ {%ni-majj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-majjati, -maṅk-%}
{%tum,%} to sink into, sink down, dive, plunge into,
immerse one's self, bathe, be immersed or submerged
(e. g. {%akṣi nimajjati,%} the eye sinks; {%ciraṃ ni-%}
{%mamajja,%} he remained long under the water); to be
drowned; to penetrate into; to disappear, perish; to
immerse or submerge in water, cause to sink (e. g. into
hell, Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 4156): Caus. P. {%-majjayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to dive, immerse, dip, plunge (any-
thing) into water, submerge, drown; (figuratively)
to cause to plunge or penetrate into a battle, lead
into the thick of a fight.
<LEND>

<L>24796<pc>0489-b<k1>nimagna<k2>nimagna
{%Ni-magna, as, ā, am,%}¦ plunged or immersed in,
dipped into, fallen into (water &c.), submerged,
sunk; gone down, set (as the sun); forcibly entered
into or penetrated; (with {%para-lokāya%}) entered
into the other world; sunk in, depressed, not
prominent; overwhelmed, covered. {%—Nimagna-nā-%}
{%bhi, is, is, i,%} having a depressed navel. {%—Nimagna-%}
{%madhyā,%} f. a woman having a depressed (and there-
fore slender) waist.
<LEND>

<L>24797<pc>0489-b<k1>nimagnaka<k2>nimagnaka
{%Ni-magnaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ hiding one's self, lurking.
<LEND>

<L>24798<pc>0489-b<k1>nimajjat<k2>nimajjat
{%Ni-majjat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} bathing, diving,
plunging in, sinking.
<LEND>

<L>24799<pc>0489-b<k1>nimajjaTu<k2>nimajjaTu
{%Ni-majjathu, us,%}¦ m. the act of diving or entering
into, plunging; (with {%talpe%}) going to bed, sleeping.
<LEND>

<L>24800<pc>0489-b<k1>nimajjana<k2>nimajjana
{%Ni-majjana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to enter or plunge
into (with gen.), immersing, absorbing; ({%am%}), n.
bathing, diving, immersion, sinking.
<LEND>

<L>24801<pc>0489-b<k1>nimajjamAna<k2>nimajjamAna
{%Ni-majjamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sinking, plunging
into; immersed; being drowned.
<LEND>

<L>24802<pc>0489-b<k1>nimajjita<k2>nimajjita
{%Ni-majjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ plunged into the water,
drowned.
<LEND>

<L>24803<pc>0489-b<k1>nimad<k2>nimad
{#nimad#}¦ {%ni-mad,%} Caus. P. {%-mādayati, -yitum,%}
to pronounce distinctly but slowly.
<LEND>

<L>24804<pc>0489-b<k1>nimada<k2>nimada
{%Ni-mada, as,%}¦ m. pronunciation which is distinct
[Page0489-c+ 77]
but slow, one of the seven degrees of pronunciation
({%vācaḥ sthānāni%}).
<LEND>

<L>24805<pc>0489-c<k1>nimantr<k2>nimantr
{#nimantr#}¦ {%ni-mantr,%} cl. 10. A. {%-mantrayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to invite, summon, call (to a feast), entertain.
<LEND>

<L>24806<pc>0489-c<k1>nimantraka<k2>nimantraka
{%Ni-mantraka, as,%}¦ m. one who summons or
invites, an inviter.
<LEND>

<L>24807<pc>0489-c<k1>nimantraRa<k2>nimantraRa
{%Ni-mantraṇa, am,%}¦ n. inviting, invitation; sum-
moning, calling; a summons. {%—Nimantraṇa-pattra,%}
{%am,%} n. a written summons, a note of invitation.
<LEND>

<L>24808<pc>0489-c<k1>nimantrita<k2>nimantrita
{%Ni-mantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ invited, summoned,
convoked; bidden to a feast, entertained.
<LEND>

<L>24809<pc>0489-c<k1>nimantrya<k2>nimantrya
{%Ni-mantrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be invited, to be called.
<LEND>

<L>24810<pc>0489-c<k1>nimanyu<k2>nimanyu
{#nimanyu#}¦ {%ni-manyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. not angry,
unresentful, appeased.
<LEND>

<L>24811<pc>0489-c<k1>nimaya<k2>nimaya
{#nimaya#}¦ {%ni-maya.%} See {%ni-me,%} p. 490, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>24812<pc>0489-c<k1>nimA<k2>nimA
{#nimA#}¦ {%ni-mā%} [cf. {%ni-me%}], cl. 2. 3. P. A.
{%-māti, -mimīte, -mātum,%} to measure; to adjust.
<LEND>

<L>24813<pc>0489-c<k1>nimAtavya<k2>nimAtavya<h>1
1. {%ni-mātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be measured, &c.;
[the {%ni-mātavya%} which occurs in Manu X. 94. is to
be referred to {%ni-me,%} q. v.]
<LEND>

<L>24814<pc>0489-c<k1>nimAna<k2>nimAna
{%Ni-māna, am,%}¦ n. measure. See {%a-n˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>24815<pc>0489-c<k1>nimita<k2>nimita<h>1
1. {%ni-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ measured out. See {%dur-n˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>24816<pc>0489-c<k1>nimeya<k2>nimeya<h>1
1. {%ni-meya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see {%ni-me%}), to be
measured, measurable, anything the measure or value
of which can be fixed.
<LEND>

<L>24817<pc>0489-c<k1>nimi<k2>nimi<h>1
{#nimi#} 1¦. {%nimi, is,%} m., N. of several kings of
Videha; of a son of Dattātreya; of a son of Ikṣvāku,
(this Nimi lost his body through the curse of
Vaśiṣṭha, and when the gods were willing to restore
it, requested that instead of receiving his former
shape he might occupy the eyes of all living creatures;
the request was granted, and in consequence of the
presence of Nimi, men's eyelids are ever opening
and shutting; cf. {%ni-miṣa,%} and see Viṣṇu-Purāṇa
IV. 5); N. of the twenty-first Jaina Arhat of the
present Ava-sarpiṇī; of a son of Bhajamāna; of
Daṇḍa-pāṇi; of a Dānava; closing or winking of
the eyes, twinkling. {%—Nimin-dhara, as,%} m. (fr.
{%nimim%} acc. sing. + {%dhara%}), N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>24818<pc>0489-c<k1>nimi<k2>nimi<h>2
{#nimi#} 2¦. {%ni-mi,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-minoti, -minute,%}
&c., to fix in, dig in; to fix, erect.
<LEND>

<L>24819<pc>0489-c<k1>nimita<k2>nimita<h>2
2. {%ni-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed in, fixed, erected.
<LEND>

<L>24820<pc>0489-c<k1>nimitta<k2>nimitta
{#nimitta#}¦ {%ni-mitta, am,%} n. (probably con-
nected with {%ni-mā%} above), a mark, an aim; an
archer's butt, target; sign, token; prognostic, pre-
sage, omen [cf. {%dur-n˚%}]; cause, motive, reason,
instrumental or efficient cause, (opposed to {%upā-dāna,%}
the material cause); {%nimitta%} is used at the end of
a comp. in the sense ‘having as a motive or cause,’
‘caused or produced by,’ ‘occasioned by,’ e. g. {%viṣa-%}
{%nimittā pīḍā,%} pain caused by poison; ({%am%} acc.,
{%ena%} inst., {%āya%} dat., {%āt%} abl., {%asya%} gen., {%e%} loc.),
because of, on account of, for the sake of, for the
purpose of, through. {%—Nimitta-kāraṇa, am,%} n. an
instrumental or efficient cause, (especially the Deity
considered as the agent in creation.) {%—Nimitta-%}
{%kāraṇa-tā,%} f. the state of being the efficient cause.
{%—Nimitta-kāla, as,%} m. the period or moment of
time which may be regarded as causing any event;
any given or specific time. {%—Nimitta-kṛt, t,%} m.
‘omen-maker,’ a crow, raven. {%—Nimitta-jña, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} acquainted with omens. {%—Nimitta-jñāna,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘knowledge of causes or signs,’ N. of the fifty-
eighth chapter of the Kāma-sūtra by Vātsyāyana.
{%—Nimitta-tas,%} ind. by or from a special cause or
reason. {%—Nimitta-tā,%} f. or {%nimitta-tva, am,%} n. the
state of being a cause, causality, instrumentality.
{%—Nimitta-dharma, as,%} m. expiation; any occa-
sional or special penance, rite, or obligation. {%—Ni-%}
{%mitta-nidāna, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Nimitta-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become a cause or reason, being
a cause or means. {%—Nimitta-mātra, am,%} n. the
mere efficient cause or instrument. {%—Nimitta-vid,%}
{%t,%} m. ‘omen-knower,’ an astrologer. {%—Nimitta-%}
{%vedhin, ī, inī, i,%} hitting an aim, piercing the mark.
{%—Nimitta-hetu, us,%} m. an efficient cause. {%—Ni-%}
{%mittahetu-tva, am,%} n. the being an instrumental
[Page0490-a+ 77]
or efficient cause. {%—Nimittārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as,%} m.
the infinitive mood (in grammar). {%—Nimittāvṛtti%}
{%(˚ta-āv˚), is,%} f. dependance upon a special cause or
occasion. {%—Nimittī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -ku-%}
{%rute, -kartum,%} to make anything a cause, to use as
a cause or means. {%—Nimittī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
{%-vitum,%} to become a cause or reason for (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>24821<pc>0490-a<k1>nimittaka<k2>nimittaka
{%Ni-mittaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of an adj.
comp.), caused or occasioned or produced by; ({%am%}),
n. kissing, a kiss.
<LEND>

<L>24822<pc>0490-a<k1>nimittAyamAna<k2>nimittAyamAna
{%Nimittāyamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. an unused Nominal
verb {%nimittāya%}), causing, producing.
<LEND>

<L>24823<pc>0490-a<k1>nimittin<k2>nimittin
{%Nimittin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ operated on or influenced by
a cause, having a cause or reason.
<LEND>

<L>24824<pc>0490-a<k1>nimiSla<k2>nimiSla
{#nimiSla#}¦ {%ni-miśla, as, ā, am,%} Ved. devoted
to, attached to (with loc.); (Sāy.) commixed, com-
mingling, mixing with, being mixed. {%—Nimiśla-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most attached to (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>24825<pc>0490-a<k1>nimiz<k2>nimiz<h>1
{#nimiz#} 1¦. {%ni-miṣ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-miṣati, -me-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to shut the eyelids, wink, twinkle, blink.
<LEND>

<L>24826<pc>0490-a<k1>nimiz<k2>nimiz<h>2
2. {%ni-miṣ, ṭ,%}¦ f., Ved. winking or twinkling of the
eye; shutting the eyes, falling asleep [cf. {%nimi%}];
{%a-nimiṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} never closing or winking the eyes;
({%ṭ%}), m. a god; [cf. Nala V. 24.]
<LEND>

<L>24827<pc>0490-a<k1>nimiza<k2>nimiza
{%Ni-miṣa, as,%}¦ m. twinkling, winking, shutting
the eye; the twinkling of an eye considered as a
measure of time, a moment; morbid twinkling of the
eyes; N. of a son of Garuḍa (Mahā-bh. Udyoga-parva
3595); an epithet of Viṣṇu, (also {%a-nimiṣa.%})
{%—Nimiṣāntara (˚ṣa-an˚), am,%} n. the interval
of a moment; ({%eṇa%}), ind. in a twinkling, in the
interval of a moment.
<LEND>

<L>24828<pc>0490-a<k1>nimizat<k2>nimizat
{%Ni-miṣat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} winking, blinking,
closing the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>24829<pc>0490-a<k1>nimeza<k2>nimeza
{%Ni-meṣa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. twinkling of the eyes,
(opposed to {%un-meṣa%}); a momentary space of
time, a moment, a twinkling of the eye considered
as a measure of time; morbid twinkling of the eye,
morbid closing of the eyelid; N. of a mythical
being; {%nimeṣaṃ nimeṣam,%} every moment. {%—Ni-%}
{%meṣa-kṛt, t,%} f. ‘twinkler,’ lightning. {%—Nimeṣa-%}
{%tas,%} ind., Ved. with regard to the shutting of the
eyes, (according to Mahī-dhara gen. sing. of the
pres. part.) {%—Nimeṣa-dyut, t,%} or {%nimeṣa-ruc, k,%}
m. a fire-fly. {%—Nimeṣa-mātra, am,%} n. only a twink-
ling, merely an instant; ({%eṇa%}), ind. in a twinkling,
in an instant of time, in barely a moment. {%—Nime-%}
{%ṣārdhāt (˚ṣa-ar˚),%} ind. in half a twinkling of the
eye, i. e. in less than an instant.
<LEND>

<L>24830<pc>0490-a<k1>nimezaka<k2>nimezaka
{%Ni-meṣaka, as,%}¦ m. twinkling of the eye; a fire-fly.
<LEND>

<L>24831<pc>0490-a<k1>nimezaRa<k2>nimezaRa
{%Ni-meṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing twinkling &c.
<LEND>

<L>24832<pc>0490-a<k1>nimih<k2>nimih
{#nimih#}¦ {%ni-mih,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mehati,%} &c., to
urine, sprinkle down urine.
<LEND>

<L>24833<pc>0490-a<k1>nimIl<k2>nimIl
{#nimIl#}¦ {%ni-mīl,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mīlati, -mīlitum,%}
to shut or close the eyes, fall asleep, sleep; to close (as
flowers); to die, disappear; Caus. {%-mīlayati, -yitum,%}
to cause (one) to shut the eyes, to close; to kill.
<LEND>

<L>24834<pc>0490-a<k1>nimIlat<k2>nimIlat
{%Ni-mīlat, an, antī, at,%}¦ closing the eyes, winking
the eyelids, twinkling.
<LEND>

<L>24835<pc>0490-a<k1>nimIlana<k2>nimIlana
{%Ni-mīlana, am,%}¦ n. shutting the eyelids, winking
or twinkling of the eyes, winking; closing the eyes
in death; (figuratively) dying, death; (in astronomy)
immersion, complete obscuration, a total eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>24836<pc>0490-a<k1>nimIlA<k2>nimIlA
{%Ni-mīlā,%}¦ f. shutting the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>24837<pc>0490-a<k1>nimIlikA<k2>nimIlikA
{%Ni-mīlikā,%}¦ f. shutting the eyes, winking, twink-
ling, blinking, conniving at anything; fraud, trick.
<LEND>

<L>24838<pc>0490-a<k1>nimIlita<k2>nimIlita
{%Ni-mīlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ closed, shut (as the eye),
winked, blinked; blinded, darkened, obscured; [cf.
{%rajo-nimīlita.%}] {%—Nimīlitākṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} having the eyes closed.
<LEND>

<L>24839<pc>0490-a<k1>nimIlin<k2>nimIlin
{%Ni-mīlin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ closing the eyes, having the
eyelids shut.
<LEND>

<L>24840<pc>0490-a<k1>nimIv<k2>nimIv
{#nimIv#}¦ {%ni-mīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mīvati,%} &c., to
press on, press down.
<LEND>

<L>24841<pc>0490-a<k1>nimISvara<k2>nimISvara
{#nimISvara#}¦ {%nimīśvara, as,%} m. (with Jainas)
N. of the sixteenth Arhat of the present Ut-sarpiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>24842<pc>0490-a<k1>nimUlam<k2>nimUlam
{#nimUlam#}¦ {%ni-mūlam,%} ind. down to the root.
<LEND>
[Page0490-b+ 74]

<L>24843<pc>0490-b<k1>nimfj<k2>nimfj
{#nimfj#}¦ {%ni-mṛj,%} cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi%} (cl. 6. Ved.
{%-mṛjati, -te%}), {%-mārjitum, -mārṣṭum,%} to rub in,
rub upon, wipe, wipe off, wipe away, to cleanse
one's self (A.); to lead to, attach to: Intens., Ved.
{%-māmṛje,%} to wipe away, cleanse; to destroy:
Desid., Ved. {%-mimṛkṣati,%} (in Ṛg-veda I. 64, 4,
Sāy. considers {%ni-mimṛkṣuḥ%} as a Vedic redupli-
cated perf. {%= ni-mṛṣṭāḥ sthitā babhūvuḥ;%} accord-
ing to some the meaning is ‘to flash down.’)
<LEND>

<L>24844<pc>0490-b<k1>nimfgra<k2>nimfgra
{%Ni-mṛgra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. devoted, attached to;
(Sāy.) excessively purifying or cleansing.
<LEND>

<L>24845<pc>0490-b<k1>nimfR<k2>nimfR
{#nimfR#}¦ {%ni-mṛṇ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛṇati,%} &c., to
dash down, strike down.
<LEND>

<L>24846<pc>0490-b<k1>nimfd<k2>nimfd
{#nimfd#}¦ {%ni-mṛd,%} cl. 9. P. {%-mṛdnāti, -mardi-%}
{%tum,%} to crush, dash to pieces; to rub off.
<LEND>

<L>24847<pc>0490-b<k1>nime<k2>nime
{#nime#}¦ {%ni-me%} [cf. {%ni-mā%}], cl. 1. A. {%-mayate,%}
{%mātum,%} to change, exchange for (with inst.), barter.
<LEND>

<L>24848<pc>0490-b<k1>nimaya<k2>nimaya
{%Ni-maya, as,%}¦ m. barter, change, exchange.
<LEND>

<L>24849<pc>0490-b<k1>nimAtavya<k2>nimAtavya<h>2
2. {%ni-mātavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see {%ni-mā%}),
to be exchanged or bartered.
<LEND>

<L>24850<pc>0490-b<k1>nimeya<k2>nimeya<h>2
2. {%ni-meya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 1. see {%ni-mā%}), to be ex-
changed; ({%as%}), m. barter, exchange; [cf. {%naimeya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24851<pc>0490-b<k1>nimeza<k2>nimeza
{#nimeza#}¦ {%ni-meṣa.%} See under 1. {%ni-miṣ,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>24852<pc>0490-b<k1>nimna<k2>nimna
{#nimna#}¦ {%nimna, am,%} n. (fr. {%ni%} or perhaps
rather fr. rt. {%nam%} with {%ni%} or according to others fr.
rt. {%man%} or rt. {%mnā%} with {%ni%}), depth, low ground, low-
land; a slope, declivity; gap, chasm or cavity in the
ground; a depression, deepening; ({%as, ā, am%}), deep,
profound (literally or figuratively); low (as ground),
depressed, sunk; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince. {%—Nimna-%}
{%ga, as, ā, am,%} going low or deep, going downwards,
descending; ({%ā%}), f. a river, mountain-stream; [cf.
{%giri-n˚.%}] {%—Nimna-gata, as, ā, am,%} going in deep
or low places; ({%am%}), n. a low place. {%—Nimna-tala,%}
see under {%ninda-tala%}. {%—Nimna-tā,%} f. or {%nimna-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. depth, lowness, profundity. {%—Nimna-%}
{%deśa, as,%} m. or {%nimna-bhāga, as,%} m. a low or deep
place. {%—Nimnonnata (˚na-un˚), as, ā, am,%} low
and high, depressed and elevated, up and down.
<LEND>

<L>24853<pc>0490-b<k1>nimnEs<k2>nimnEs
{%Nimnais,%}¦ ind., Ved. in deep places, low, down-
wards; [cf. {%uccais, nīcais.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24854<pc>0490-b<k1>nimba<k2>nimba
{#nimba#}¦ {%nimba%} or {%nimbaka, as,%} m. (said to
be fr. rt. {%nī%}), a tree with bitter fruits, Azadirachta
Indica, the Nimb or Neemb tree, (the leaves of this
tree are chewed at funeral ceremonies); [cf. {%giri-n˚,%}
{%tṛṇa-n˚.%}] {%—Nimba-taru, us,%} m. the tree Erythrina
Fulgens or (according to others) Melia Sempervirens,
(it is considered as one of the trees of paradise.)
{%—Nimba-rajas, as,%} n. a particular high number;
[cf. {%mahā-n˚.%}] {%—Nimba-vatī,%} f., N. of a woman.
{%—Nimba-vīja, as,%} m. a tree {%(= rājādanī)%}. {%—Nim-%}
{%bārka-karavīrārcana-vrata (˚ba-ar˚, ˚ra-ar˚), am,%}
n., N. of a particular vow; N. of the seventy-seventh
chapter of the Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>24855<pc>0490-b<k1>nimbUka<k2>nimbUka
{#nimbUka#}¦ {%nimbūka, as,%} m. the common lime,
Citrus Acida; (also read {%nisbū.%})
<LEND>

<L>24856<pc>0490-b<k1>nimluc<k2>nimluc
{#nimluc#}¦ {%ni-mluc%} (Ved. {%ni-mruc%}), cl. 1. P.
{%-mlocati,%} &c., to set, disappear (as the sun).
<LEND>

<L>24857<pc>0490-b<k1>nimrukti<k2>nimrukti
{%Ni-mrukti,%}¦ Ved., or in later Sanskrit {%ni-mlukti,%}
{%is,%} f. sunset, setting of the sun, disappearance.
<LEND>

<L>24858<pc>0490-b<k1>nimruc<k2>nimruc
{%Ni-mruc, k,%}¦ f., Ved. sunset, setting of the sun,
evening; ({%k, k, k%}), slack, loose.
<LEND>

<L>24859<pc>0490-b<k1>nimloca<k2>nimloca
{%Ni-mloca, as,%}¦ m. setting of the sun, sunset.
<LEND>

<L>24860<pc>0490-b<k1>nimlocanI<k2>nimlocanI
{%Ni-mlocanī,%}¦ f. (fr. an unused form {%ni-mlocana%}),
N. of the city of Varuṇa situated on the mountain
Mānasottara towards the west.
<LEND>

<L>24861<pc>0490-b<k1>nimloci<k2>nimloci
{%Ni-mloci, is,%}¦ m., N. of a prince, son of Bhajamāna.
<LEND>

<L>24862<pc>0490-b<k1>niyata<k2>niyata
{#niyata#}¦ {%ni-yata.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>24863<pc>0490-b<k1>niyantr<k2>niyantr
{#niyantr#}¦ {%ni-yantr,%} cl. 10. P. {%-yantrayati,%} &c.,
to restrain, [apparently only used in the derivatives.]
<LEND>

<L>24864<pc>0490-b<k1>niyantraRa<k2>niyantraRa
{%Ni-yantraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of restraining, restraint,
checking; governing, guiding; defining, definition.
<LEND>

<L>24865<pc>0490-b<k1>niyantrita<k2>niyantrita
{%Ni-yantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ restrained, curbed, checked;
governed, guided.
<LEND>
[Page0490-c+ 80]

<L>24866<pc>0490-c<k1>niyam<k2>niyam
{#niyam#}¦ {%ni-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati, -yantum,%}
to check, curb, restrain, hold back, suppress, stop;
to hold in (as the breath &c.); govern, control, rule,
direct, regulate; to punish; to restrict; to bind,
confine, fasten; to conceal; to attain, obtain; to
assume; to present, offer; to place or fix upon:
Caus. {%-yamayati, -yitum,%} to restrain, curb, check.
<LEND>

<L>24867<pc>0490-c<k1>niyata<k2>niyata
{%Ni-yata, as, ā, am,%}¦ checked, curbed, restrained,
held in; governed, controlled, subdued, submissive,
self-governed; abstemious, self-denying, temperate;
attentive, intent upon; fixed, constant, steady, per-
manent, incessant; ascertained, certain, destined,
settled, sure; inevitable; positive, definite; perme-
able, what may be spread through or over?; ({%am%}),
n. elementary or crude matter, the recipient of attri-
butes or properties; ({%am%}), ind. always, constantly,
decidedly, positively, surely, certainly, inevitably; for-
cibly. {%—Niyata-mānasa, as, ā, am,%} of subdued
mind or spirit. {%—Niyata-viṣaya-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}
steadily abiding in one's own sphere. {%—Niyatātman%}
{%(˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} self-regulated, self-controlled, self-
restrained. {%—Niyatāhāra (˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%}
abstemious in food, temperate. {%—Niyatendriya (˚ta-%}
{%in˚), as, ā, am,%} having the passions subdued or
restrained.
<LEND>

<L>24868<pc>0490-c<k1>niyati<k2>niyati
{%Ni-yati, is,%}¦ f. restraint, restriction; the fixed
order of things, necessity, destiny, fate, luck, good or
bad fortune; a religious duty or obligation; self-
command, self-restraint; ({%Niyati%} is sometimes per-
sonified as a goddess, she and Āyati being regarded
as daughters of Meru and wives of Dhātṛ and Vi-
dhātṛ); ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>24869<pc>0490-c<k1>niyantavaya<k2>niyantavaya
{%Ni-yantavaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be restrained, checked,
controlled, tamed; to be forced.
<LEND>

<L>24870<pc>0490-c<k1>niyantu<k2>niyantu
{%Ni-yantu%}¦ in {%dur-n˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>24871<pc>0490-c<k1>niyantf<k2>niyantf
{%Ni-yantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what holds in,
restrains, curbs, governs, guides, tames, &c.; re-
straining; ({%tā%}), m. a restrainer, charioteer, driver,
coachman; a ruler, governor, master; a punisher.
{%—Niyantṛ-tva, am,%} n. restraint, government, abi-
lity to rule, power of restraining, controlling faculty.
<LEND>

<L>24872<pc>0490-c<k1>niyama<k2>niyama
{%Ni-yama, as,%}¦ m. restraining, holding back, check-
ing, keeping back; taming, subduing, preventing,
confining; restraint, restriction, restriction to (with
loc.); limitation; fixing, defining, definition; keeping
down, lowering (as the tone of the voice); fixed
rule or law, necessity, obligation; rule, precept (e. g.
{%strīṇām Prākṛta-bhāṣaṇam eva niyamaḥ,%} the
usage of women is to speak only Prākṛt); certainty,
ascertainment; agreement, contract, engagement,
assent, promise, vow; any self-imposed restraint or
religious observance voluntarily practised, as fast-
ing, watching, pilgrimage, praying, &c.; voluntary
penance, meritorious or supererogatory piety; a lesser
vow, minor observance (as opposed to {%yama,%} a greater
vow which must always be observed); (in rhetoric)
a common-place in poetry, any conventional expres-
sion or usual comparison (as notice of the birch in
describing the Himālaya, of the sandal tree in de-
scribing the Malaya mountains, of the peacock's cry
in the rains, of the koïl in spring, &c.); Necessity
or Fixed Law personified as a son of Dharma by
Dhṛti; ({%ena%} or {%āt%}), ind. by a fixed rule, necessarily,
surely, certainly. {%—Niyama-niṣṭhā,%} f. rigid ob-
servance of prescribed rites. {%—Niyama-pattra, am,%}
n. a written agreement or stipulation. {%—Niyama-%}
{%para, as, ā, am,%} observing fixed rules; relating to
or corroborative of a rule. {%—Niyama-pāla, as,%} m.
‘observer of vows,’ N. of a sage from whom the
Nepalese derive the name of their country, (properly
Nipāl.) {%—Niyama-bhaṅga, as,%} m. breach of a
stipulation or contract. {%—Niyama-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
practising or observing religious observances; ({%atī%}), f.
(a woman) having the monthly courses. {%—Niyama-%}
{%sthiti, is,%} f. a state of self-restraint, steady observance
of religious obligations, asceticism.
<LEND>

<L>24873<pc>0490-c<k1>niyamana<k2>niyamana
{%Ni-yamana, as, ī, am,%}¦ regulating, controlling,
subduing, taming, overpowering; ({%am%}), n. subduing,
checking, restraining; humiliation, coercion; binding;
restriction, limitation; precept, fixed practice or rule.
<LEND>
[Page0491-a+ 77]

<L>24874<pc>0491-a<k1>niyamita<k2>niyamita
{%Ni-yamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ checked, restrained, sup-
pressed, bound, confined; governed, guided; fixed,
regulated, prescribed, stipulated, agreed upon.
<LEND>

<L>24875<pc>0491-a<k1>niyamya<k2>niyamya<h>1
1. {%ni-yamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be checked or re-
strained, restrainable, tamable.
<LEND>

<L>24876<pc>0491-a<k1>niyamya<k2>niyamya<h>2
2. {%ni-yamya,%}¦ ind. having restrained, having
guided, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24877<pc>0491-a<k1>niyAma<k2>niyAma
{%Ni-yāma, as,%}¦ m. {%= ni-yama,%} restraint; religious
vow, penance, fasting, &c., especially if an act of
supererogation; {%= ni-yāmaka,%} a boatman, sailor; [cf.
{%nir-yāma.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24878<pc>0491-a<k1>niyAmaka<k2>niyAmaka
{%Ni-yāmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ restraining, checking, con-
trolling, subduing, suppressing, overpowering; re-
strictive, limiting; defining more closely; guiding,
governing, who or what regulates or restrains; a re-
strainer, ruler, master; ({%as%}), m. a charioteer; a boat-
man, a sailor, but variously applied to one who rows
or steers, a pilot, a helmsman; [cf. {%nir-yāma.%}] {%—Ni-%}
{%yāmaka-tā,%} f. controllership, power of restraining,
restraint; exact definition, explanation.
<LEND>

<L>24879<pc>0491-a<k1>niyAmana<k2>niyAmana
{%Ni-yāmana, am,%}¦ n. taming, checking, restraining;
(probably incorrectly for {%ni-yamana.%})
<LEND>

<L>24880<pc>0491-a<k1>niyayin<k2>niyayin
{#niyayin#}¦ {%ni-yayin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt. {%yā%} with
{%ni%}), Ved. driving over, passing over (as a carriage).
<LEND>

<L>24881<pc>0491-a<k1>niyAna<k2>niyAna
{%Ni-yāna, am,%}¦ n., Ved. way, access.
<LEND>

<L>24882<pc>0491-a<k1>niyava<k2>niyava
{#niyava#}¦ {%ni-yava.%} See under 2. {%ni-yu%} below.
<LEND>

<L>24883<pc>0491-a<k1>niyAtana<k2>niyAtana
{#niyAtana#}¦ {%ni-yātana, am,%} n. causing to fall
or descend; (wrong reading for {%ni-pātana,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>24884<pc>0491-a<k1>niyu<k2>niyu<h>1
{#niyu#} 1¦. {%ni-yu,%} cl. 3. P. {%-yuyoti,%} &c., Ved.
to repel, keep off.
<LEND>

<L>24885<pc>0491-a<k1>niyu<k2>niyu<h>2
{#niyu#} 2¦. {%ni-yu,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yauti,%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-yunāti, -nīte, -yavitum,%} to join, yoke, harness;
to mix; to bestow.
<LEND>

<L>24886<pc>0491-a<k1>niyava<k2>niyava
{%Ni-yava, as,%}¦ m. compact order, continuous line or
series; (Sāy.) mixing, mixture.
<LEND>

<L>24887<pc>0491-a<k1>niyut<k2>niyut
{%Ni-yut, t,%}¦ f., Ved. series, line, row; (Sāy.) a
horse, steed (as harnessed to a car), especially one of
the horses of Vāyu called Niyuts; praise, a praiser;
({%as%}), f. pl. series of words [cf. {%grantha, ni-ban-%}
{%dhana%}], verses, a poem; (Sāy.) a team of horses,
especially the Niyuts or horses of Vāyu; N. of a
wife of Rudra in one of his different forms. {%—Niyut-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. forming a series; flowing
continuously, as the Soma; drawn by a line of horses,
as Vāyu or Indra, or the Maruts; (Sāy.) possessing
the Niyut steeds, possessing horses; containing the
word {%niyut%} or {%niyut-vat%} (as a verse or hymn).
{%—Niyud-ratha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one whose car is
drawn by a line or team of horses; (Sāy.) having a
harnessed chariot.
<LEND>

<L>24888<pc>0491-a<k1>niyuta<k2>niyuta
{%Ni-yuta, am,%}¦ n. (according to some lexicographers
also m.), a million; a hundred thousand; 100 Ayutas
= 10, 000 Koṭis.
<LEND>

<L>24889<pc>0491-a<k1>niyutvatIya<k2>niyutvatIya
{%Ni-yutvatīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to
Niyut-vat (Vāyu).
<LEND>

<L>24890<pc>0491-a<k1>niyuj<k2>niyuj
{#niyuj#}¦ {%ni-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti, -yuṅkte,%}
{%-yoktum,%} to join to, attach or fasten to; to put to
(horses), yoke, harness; to place over, appoint, elect
or depute any one to any office or duty (with acc.
of the person and loc. of the thing or business); to
give authority, authorize; to assign, employ, engage;
to commit, intrust, commission; to enjoin, order,
command; to constrain, urge, coerce, compel; to
harass: Caus. (or cl. 10.) {%-yojayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to be attached, cause to be placed or put, to fasten;
to appoint, commission, charge, employ; to order,
command, direct, prescribe; to urge, instigate, coerce;
to perform, make, place in any state (e. g. {%sandehe,%}
in jeopardy); to offer, present with, endow.
<LEND>

<L>24891<pc>0491-a<k1>niyukta<k2>niyukta
{%Ni-yukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fastened to; engaged in,
attached to; directed, enjoined, commanded; autho-
rized, appointed; ascertained; ({%as%}), m. a functionary,
official.
<LEND>

<L>24892<pc>0491-a<k1>niyuktaka<k2>niyuktaka
{%Ni-yuktaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ appointed, elected, placed
in authority.
<LEND>

<L>24893<pc>0491-a<k1>niyukti<k2>niyukti
{%Ni-yukti, is,%}¦ f. injunction, order, command; ap-
pointment, commission, charge, office.
<LEND>
[Page0491-b+ 77]

<L>24894<pc>0491-b<k1>niyujya<k2>niyujya
{%Ni-yujya,%}¦ ind. having joined or attached; having
put to or harnessed; having appointed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24895<pc>0491-b<k1>niyujyamAna<k2>niyujyamAna
{%Ni-yujyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being appointed,
being engaged or employed.
<LEND>

<L>24896<pc>0491-b<k1>niyuYjAna<k2>niyuYjAna
{%Ni-yuñjāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ appointing, authorizing,
enjoining, constituting, appointing to an office.
<LEND>

<L>24897<pc>0491-b<k1>niyoktavya<k2>niyoktavya
{%Ni-yoktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be appointed or autho-
rized, to be employed, ordered, &c.
<LEND>

<L>24898<pc>0491-b<k1>niyoktf<k2>niyoktf
{%Ni-yoktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who joins or fastens
or attaches; ({%tā%}), m. a ruler, lord master.
<LEND>

<L>24899<pc>0491-b<k1>niyoga<k2>niyoga
{%Ni-yoga, as,%}¦ m. attaching or fastening to; appli-
cation, use, employment, appointment, injunction,
direction, order, command, commission, charge,
precept; any trust or appointed task or duty, any
business or function committed to one's charge;
effort, exertion; certainty, ascertainment; necessity;
({%āt%} or {%ena%}), ind. according to order or command,
necessarily, certainly, surely. {%—Niyoga-karaṇa, am,%}
n. making a command, commanding. {%—Niyoga-tas,%}
ind. according to order or command. {%—Niyoga-%}
{%pāśa, as,%} m. a fastening, (probably) a halter. {%—Ni-%}
{%yoga-prayojana, am,%} n. the object or business of
any appointment, authorized act or duty. {%—Niyoga-%}
{%vidhi, is,%} m. the form or rule of appointing to any
act or duty. {%—Niyogārtha (˚ga-ar˚), as,%} m. the
object of an authorized act or appointment.
<LEND>

<L>24900<pc>0491-b<k1>niyogin<k2>niyogin
{%Ni-yogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ appointed, authorized, invested
with authority, employed, engaged in any duty,
attached to any business; ({%ī%}), m. a functionary, an
official, officer, man in office, a minister, a deputy,
an agent, &c. {%—Niyogy-artha-grahopāya (˚ha-%}
{%up˚), as,%} m. the resource of confiscating the property
of men in office.
<LEND>

<L>24901<pc>0491-b<k1>niyogya<k2>niyogya
{%Ni-yogya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be enjoined or prescribed;
fit to be appointed or authorized, able or qualified
for a duty [cf. {%ni-yojya%}]; ({%as%}), m. (according to Vopa-
deva) a master.
<LEND>

<L>24902<pc>0491-b<k1>niyojana<k2>niyojana
{%Ni-yojana, am,%}¦ n. tying or fastening (as an
animal to the Yūpa or sacrificial post); uniting,
attaching to; that with which anything is fastened
or tied (Ved.); ordering, prescribing, commanding,
directing; urging, impelling; appointing (e. g. {%kri-%}
{%yāsu,%} to affairs); ({%ī%}), f. a halter.
<LEND>

<L>24903<pc>0491-b<k1>niyojanIya<k2>niyojanIya
{%Ni-yojanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attached or joined
to, to be appointed or authorized.
<LEND>

<L>24904<pc>0491-b<k1>niyojayitavya<k2>niyojayitavya
{%Ni-yojayitavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), to be
appointed, to be commanded or urged or directed.
<LEND>

<L>24905<pc>0491-b<k1>niyojita<k2>niyojita
{%Ni-yojita, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined or attached to, con-
nected with, adapted to; appointed, authorized,
commissioned; directed, ordered; impelled, urged,
instigated.
<LEND>

<L>24906<pc>0491-b<k1>niyojya<k2>niyojya
{%Ni-yojya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be fastened or attached
to; fit to be appointed or employed in; to be ordered,
commanded, directed, instigated; proper to be en-
joined; ({%as%}), m. a functionary, official, employé,
servant.
<LEND>

<L>24907<pc>0491-b<k1>niyuta<k2>niyuta
{#niyuta#}¦ {%ni-yuta.%} See under 2. {%ni-yu,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>24908<pc>0491-b<k1>niyutsA<k2>niyutsA
{#niyutsA#}¦ {%ni-yutsā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. {%yudh%}
with {%ni%} without reduplication), N. of the wife of
Pra-stāva and mother of Vi-bhu.
<LEND>

<L>24909<pc>0491-b<k1>niyudDa<k2>niyudDa
{%Ni-yuddha, am,%}¦ n. (fr. rt. {%yudh%} with {%ni%}), fight-
ing, especially fighting on foot, close fight or combat,
personal struggle. {%—Niyuddha-bhū, ūs,%} f. a battle-
field, a place where close fighting has taken place.
<LEND>

<L>24910<pc>0491-b<k1>niyodDf<k2>niyodDf
{%Ni-yoddhṛ, dhā,%}¦ m. a combatant, a wrestler, a
boxer; a cock.
<LEND>

<L>24911<pc>0491-b<k1>niyoDaka<k2>niyoDaka
{%Ni-yodhaka, as,%}¦ m. a fighter, combatant, wrestler,
pugilist.
<LEND>

<L>24912<pc>0491-b<k1>niyoga<k2>niyoga
{#niyoga#}¦ {%ni-yoga.%} See under {%ni-yuj%} above.
<LEND>

<L>24913<pc>0491-b<k1>nir<k2>nir
{#nir#}¦ {%nir%} euphonically substituted for {%nis,%}
q. v., before vowels and soft consonants.
<LEND>

<L>24914<pc>0491-b<k1>niraMSa<k2>niraMSa
{#niraMSa#}¦ {%nir-aṃśa, as, ā, am,%} having no part
or fraction remaining, whole. {%—Niraṃśa-tva, am,%}
n. the state of having no part or fraction over,
wholeness, completeness.
<LEND>

<L>24915<pc>0491-b<k1>niraMSu<k2>niraMSu
{#niraMSu#}¦ {%nir-aṃśu, us, us, u,%} having no rays,
rayless.
<LEND>
[Page0491-c+ 68]

<L>24916<pc>0491-c<k1>nirakza<k2>nirakza
{#nirakza#}¦ {%nir-akṣa, as, ā, am,%} having no dice;
having no latitude; ({%as%}), m. (in astronomy) the
place of no latitude, i. e. the terrestrial equator.
{%—Nirakṣa-deśa, as,%} m. a first meridian, as Laṅkā;
a place where the sun is always vertical and the days
and nights are equal; the equatorial region.
<LEND>

<L>24917<pc>0491-c<k1>niragni<k2>niragni
{#niragni#}¦ {%nir-agni, is, is, i,%} or {%niragnika, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having no fire, having lost or neglected the
consecrated fire.
<LEND>

<L>24918<pc>0491-c<k1>niraGa<k2>niraGa
{#niraGa#}¦ {%nir-agha, as, ā, am,%} sinless, blame-
less, free from fault or imperfection.
<LEND>

<L>24919<pc>0491-c<k1>niraNkuSa<k2>niraNkuSa
{#niraNkuSa#}¦ {%nir-aṅkuśa, as, ā, am,%} unchecked
(lit. not held by a hook), uncontrolled, unruly, self-
willed, unfettered, independant, completely free;
({%am%}), ind. freely. {%—Niraṅkuśa-tā,%} f. or {%niraṅkuśa-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. unruliness, independance, self-will, wil-
fulness.
<LEND>

<L>24920<pc>0491-c<k1>niraNga<k2>niraNga
{#niraNga#}¦ {%nir-aṅga, as, ā, am,%} having no re-
sources, deprived of expedients.
<LEND>

<L>24921<pc>0491-c<k1>niraj<k2>niraj
{#niraj#}¦ {%nir-aj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ajati, -ajitum%} (Ved.
inf. {%-aje%}), Ved. to drive or bring out, extricate, re-
move; to issue out.
<LEND>

<L>24922<pc>0491-c<k1>nirajina<k2>nirajina
{#nirajina#}¦ {%nir-ajina, as, ā, am,%} without a
skin or hide, skinless.
<LEND>

<L>24923<pc>0491-c<k1>niraYCana<k2>niraYCana
{#niraYCana#}¦ {%ni-rañchana, am,%} n. (fr. {%rañch =%}
{%lañch%} with {%ni%}), a mark or knot in a measuring line.
<LEND>

<L>24924<pc>0491-c<k1>niraYjana<k2>niraYjana<h>1
{#niraYjana#} 1¦. {%nir-añjana, as, ā, am,%} without
collyrium or ointment, unstained, untinged, unblack-
ened, unpainted; free from falsehood; artless; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Śiva; N. of one of the attendants
of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Durgā; the day of
full moon.
<LEND>

<L>24925<pc>0491-c<k1>niraYjana<k2>niraYjana<h>2
{#niraYjana#} 2¦. {%ni-rañjana, as, ā, am,%} void of
passion or emotion, (applied to the Supreme Being.)
<LEND>

<L>24926<pc>0491-c<k1>niraR<k2>niraR
{#niraR#}¦ {%ni-raṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-raṇati, -raṇitum,%}
Ved. to rejoice, delight in.
<LEND>

<L>24927<pc>0491-c<k1>nirata<k2>nirata
{#nirata#}¦ {%ni-rata.%} See {%ni-ram,%} p. 492, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>24928<pc>0491-c<k1>niratiSaya<k2>niratiSaya
{#niratiSaya#}¦ {%nir-atiśaya, as, ā, am,%} unsur-
passed. {%—Niratiśaya-tva, am,%} n. the state of being
unsurpassed, unsurpassedness.
<LEND>

<L>24929<pc>0491-c<k1>niratyaya<k2>niratyaya
{#niratyaya#}¦ {%nir-atyaya, as, ā, am,%} free from
danger, dangerless, secure, infallible, completely
successful, faultless, unblamable.
<LEND>

<L>24930<pc>0491-c<k1>niraDizWAna<k2>niraDizWAna
{#niraDizWAna#}¦ {%nir-adhiṣṭhāna, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing no fixed resting-place, having no solid basis.
<LEND>

<L>24931<pc>0491-c<k1>niraDva<k2>niraDva
{#niraDva#}¦ {%nir-adhva, as, ā, am,%} (probably)
one who has lost his way.
<LEND>

<L>24932<pc>0491-c<k1>niranukroSa<k2>niranukroSa
{#niranukroSa#}¦ {%nir-anukrośa, as,%} m. absence of
compassion, hard-heartedness, unmercifulness; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), uncompassionate, without pity, pitiless, merci-
less; hard-hearted towards any person or thing (with
loc.). {%—Niranukrośa-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} acting without
compassion or pitilessly. {%—Niranukrośa-tā,%} f. piti-
lessness, unmercifulness; hard-heartedness, cruelty.
{%—Niranukrośa-yukta, as, ā, am,%} uncompassionate,
ruthless, hard-hearted.
<LEND>

<L>24933<pc>0491-c<k1>niranuga<k2>niranuga
{#niranuga#}¦ {%nir-anuga, as, ā, am,%} unattended,
without retinue or followers.
<LEND>

<L>24934<pc>0491-c<k1>niranugraha<k2>niranugraha
{#niranugraha#}¦ {%nir-anugraha, as, ā, am,%} unfa-
vourable, unkind, ungracious.
<LEND>

<L>24935<pc>0491-c<k1>niranunAsika<k2>niranunAsika
{#niranunAsika#}¦ {%nir-anunāsika, as, ā, am,%} not
marked with the nasal symbol called Anunāsika
(Gram. 7), not nasal.
<LEND>

<L>24936<pc>0491-c<k1>niranumAna<k2>niranumAna
{#niranumAna#}¦ {%nir-anumāna, as, ā, am,%} without
inference, not binding one's self to conclusions or
consequences.
<LEND>

<L>24937<pc>0491-c<k1>niranuroDa<k2>niranuroDa
{#niranuroDa#}¦ {%nir-anurodha, as, ā, am,%} unfa-
vourable, unfriendly, unkind, ungracious, unamiable.
<LEND>
[Page0492-a+ 71]

<L>24938<pc>0492-a<k1>nirantara<k2>nirantara
{#nirantara#}¦ {%nir-antara, as, ā, am,%} without any
intermediate space, having no intervening space,
granting no room or free space, having no interval,
closely contiguous, close; closely connected, conti-
nuous; uninterrupted, continual, constant; without
interstices, completely filled, compact, dense, coarse,
gross; persevering, faithful, true (as a friend); un-
concealed, not hidden from view; not other or dif-
ferent, similar, identical; ({%am%}), ind. without inter-
vening space, without interval, without interruption,
constantly, incessantly, continually; closely, tightly,
firmly; immediately. {%—Nirantarābhyāsa (˚ra-abh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. constant repetition or study, continual reading
to one's self; diligent and uninterrupted exercise or
practice.
<LEND>

<L>24939<pc>0492-a<k1>nirantarAla<k2>nirantarAla
{#nirantarAla#}¦ {%nir-antarāla, as, ā, am,%} without
an intervening space, without intervals or interstices;
close, contracted, narrow. {%—Nirantarāla-tā,%} f. close
contiguity, closeness, compactness, narrowness.
<LEND>

<L>24940<pc>0492-a<k1>niranDas<k2>niranDas
{#niranDas#}¦ {%nir-andhas, ās, ās, as,%} foodless,
without food, hungry.
<LEND>

<L>24941<pc>0492-a<k1>niranna<k2>niranna
{#niranna#}¦ {%nir-anna, as, ā, am,%} foodless, want-
ing food, hungry, starving; giving no food.
<LEND>

<L>24942<pc>0492-a<k1>niranvaya<k2>niranvaya
{#niranvaya#}¦ {%nir-anvaya, as, ā, am,%} having no
offspring or descendants, childless; unconnected with,
unrelated; not agreeing with the context (of a sen-
tence); without logical connection, without regular
order or sequence, unmethodical; without being seen
or observed, out of sight, not visibly committed
(Manu VIII. 332).
<LEND>

<L>24943<pc>0492-a<k1>nirapa<k2>nirapa
{#nirapa#}¦ {%nir-apa, as, ā, am,%} waterless, desti-
tute of water.
<LEND>

<L>24944<pc>0492-a<k1>nirapatrapa<k2>nirapatrapa
{#nirapatrapa#}¦ {%nir-apatrapa, as, ā, am,%} shame-
less, impudent; bold, confident.
<LEND>

<L>24945<pc>0492-a<k1>niraparADa<k2>niraparADa
{#niraparADa#}¦ {%nir-aparādha, as,%} m. faultless-
ness, innocence; ({%as, ā, am%}), unoffending, inoffen-
sive, innocent, faultless, guiltless, blameless. {%—Nir-%}
{%aparādha-tā,%} f. faultlessness, innocence. {%—Nirapa-%}
{%rādha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} faultless, innocent.
<LEND>

<L>24946<pc>0492-a<k1>nirapavarta<k2>nirapavarta
{#nirapavarta#}¦ {%nir-apavarta, as, ā, am,%} not re-
turning or turning back; (in arithmetic) leaving no
common measure, not to be divided by a common
divisor, reduced to the lowest terms.
<LEND>

<L>24947<pc>0492-a<k1>nirapavAda<k2>nirapavAda
{#nirapavAda#}¦ {%nir-apavāda, as, ā, am,%} free from
censure, without reproof, blameless.
<LEND>

<L>24948<pc>0492-a<k1>nirapAya<k2>nirapAya
{#nirapAya#}¦ {%nir-apāya, as, ā, am,%} free from
destruction or decay, imperishable, eternal, free from
detriment or loss, free from harm or evil; infallible.
<LEND>

<L>24949<pc>0492-a<k1>nirapekza<k2>nirapekza
{#nirapekza#}¦ {%nir-apekṣa, as, ā, am,%} disregard-
ing, not taking notice of (with loc.); careless, negli-
gent, without desire, indifferent; not expecting any-
thing from another; independant of, unconnected or
unconcerned with; (often without any object) re-
gardless, indifferent (to praise or blame); without
purpose or hope; ({%ā%}), f. indifference; disregard,
the absence of expectation; ({%am%}), n. without regard,
regardlessly, accidentally. {%—Nirapekṣa-tā,%} f. or
{%nirapekṣa-tva, am,%} n. disregard, indifference;
independance; relationlessness.
<LEND>

<L>24950<pc>0492-a<k1>nirapekzita<k2>nirapekzita
{%Nir-apekṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disregarded; regardless.
<LEND>

<L>24951<pc>0492-a<k1>nirapekzin<k2>nirapekzin
{%Nir-apekṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ disregarding, indifferent,
not expecting anything.
<LEND>

<L>24952<pc>0492-a<k1>nirapekzya<k2>nirapekzya
{%Nir-apekṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be regarded.
<LEND>

<L>24953<pc>0492-a<k1>niraBiBava<k2>niraBiBava
{#niraBiBava#}¦ {%nir-abhibhava, as, ā, am,%} not
subject to defeat or humiliation, not disgraced; not to
be surpassed.
<LEND>

<L>24954<pc>0492-a<k1>niraBimAna<k2>niraBimAna
{#niraBimAna#}¦ {%nir-abhimāna%} or {%nir-abhīmāna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} exempt from pride, free from self-con-
ceit, devoid of egotism; unconscious.
<LEND>

<L>24955<pc>0492-a<k1>niraBilAza<k2>niraBilAza
{#niraBilAza#}¦ {%nir-abhilāṣa, as, ā, am,%} having
no desire for, not intent upon, indifferent.
<LEND>
[Page0492-b+ 71]

<L>24956<pc>0492-b<k1>niraBra<k2>niraBra
{#niraBra#}¦ {%nir-abhra, as, ā, am,%} cloudless; ({%e%}),
ind. in a cloudless sky, when the sky is unclouded.
<LEND>

<L>24957<pc>0492-b<k1>niram<k2>niram
{#niram#}¦ {%ni-ram,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ramate, -rantum,%}
Ved. to delight in, be delighted; to rest, repose,
desist: Caus. {%-rāmayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%-arīramat,%}
Ved. to gladden; to cause to rest or abide.
<LEND>

<L>24958<pc>0492-b<k1>nirata<k2>nirata
{%Ni-rata, as, ā, am,%}¦ engaged or interested in;
attached or devoted to; pleased, delighted; rested,
ceased.
<LEND>

<L>24959<pc>0492-b<k1>nirati<k2>nirati
{%Ni-rati, is,%}¦ f. delighting in; attachment to.
<LEND>

<L>24960<pc>0492-b<k1>niramaRa<k2>niramaRa
{%Ni-ramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. delighting in; resting; (in
Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa XIII. 4, 2, 5, {%ni-ramaṇa%} is
by some separated into {%nir-amaṇa%} and explained to
mean ‘exhausted,’ ‘worn out.’)
<LEND>

<L>24961<pc>0492-b<k1>niramarza<k2>niramarza
{#niramarza#}¦ {%nir-amarṣa, as, ā, am,%} not im-
patient; patient, apathetic, devoid of energy.
<LEND>

<L>24962<pc>0492-b<k1>niramitra<k2>niramitra
{#niramitra#}¦ {%nir-amitra, as, ā, am,%} without
foes, free from enemies; ({%as%}), m., N. of several
persons; of a son of Nakula; of a king of Tri-garta;
of a son of Khaṇḍa-pāṇi or Daṇḍa-pāṇi, (also {%nir-%}
{%āmitra%}); of a son of Ayutāyus; of a sage, con-
sidered as a son of Śiva, (also {%nir-āmitra.%})
<LEND>

<L>24963<pc>0492-b<k1>nirambara<k2>nirambara
{#nirambara#}¦ {%nir-ambara, as, ā, am,%} undressed,
naked.
<LEND>

<L>24964<pc>0492-b<k1>nirambu<k2>nirambu
{#nirambu#}¦ {%nir-ambu, us, us, u,%} abstaining from
water, not drinking; waterless, destitute of water.
<LEND>

<L>24965<pc>0492-b<k1>niraya<k2>niraya
{#niraya#}¦ {%nir-aya, as,%} m. ‘without happiness,’
hell [cf. {%tiryan-niraya%}]; Niraya or Hell personified
as a child of fear and death; (according to some
{%nir-aya,%} in the sense of ‘hell,’ is fr. {%nir-i%} and means
‘exit,’ ‘egress from life.’)
<LEND>

<L>24966<pc>0492-b<k1>nirayaRa<k2>nirayaRa
{%Nir-ayaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. egression.
<LEND>

<L>24967<pc>0492-b<k1>nirargala<k2>nirargala
{#nirargala#}¦ {%nir-argala, as, ā, am,%} unbarred,
without a bolt or hindrance, unobstructed, unrestrained,
unimpeded; irresistible; ({%am%}), ind. without bolt or
bar; without restraint or constraint, freely.
<LEND>

<L>24968<pc>0492-b<k1>nirarTa<k2>nirarTa
{#nirarTa#}¦ {%nir-artha, as,%} m. loss, detriment;
nonsense; ({%as, ā, am%}), destitute of wealth, poor;
useless; meaningless, unmeaning, nonsensical, pur-
poseless, vain; (a consonant is called {%nir-artha,%} not
fulfilling its purpose if it is not followed by a vowel.)
{%—Nirartha-tā,%} f. senselessness, nonsense.
<LEND>

<L>24969<pc>0492-b<k1>nirarTaka<k2>nirarTaka
{%Nir-arthaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā%} or {%akī (?), am,%} not
fulfilling one's aim or object, purposeless, useless, vain,
unprofitable; having no reasonable sense, unmeaning,
nonsensical; a consonant which is not followed by a
vowel; ({%am%}), ind. without a purpose, uselessly, in
vain. {%—Nirarthaka-tva, am,%} n. uselessness, vanity.
<LEND>

<L>24970<pc>0492-b<k1>nirard<k2>nirard
{#nirard#}¦ {%nir-ard,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ardati, -arditum,%}
Ved. to stream forth, flow out.
<LEND>

<L>24971<pc>0492-b<k1>nirarbuda<k2>nirarbuda
{#nirarbuda#}¦ {%nir-arbuda, as,%} m.? (with Bud-
dhists) N. of a hell in which the wicked are punished
by excessive cold.
<LEND>

<L>24972<pc>0492-b<k1>nirava<k2>nirava
{#nirava#}¦ {%nir-ava, as, ā, am?%} (occurring only
in the gen. sing. {%nir-avasya,%} which might be the
ind. part. of rt. {%so%} with preps. {%nir%} and {%ava;%} said by
others to be {%= ni = nis + rava, as,%} m. loss of voice;
but according to Sāy.) Ved. having no protector or
uttering praise.
<LEND>

<L>24973<pc>0492-b<k1>niravakASa<k2>niravakASa
{#niravakASa#}¦ {%nir-avakāśa, as, ā, am,%} without
free space; having no room for moving freely,
wanting an opportunity, without leisure.
<LEND>

<L>24974<pc>0492-b<k1>niravagraha<k2>niravagraha
{#niravagraha#}¦ {%nir-avagraha, as, ā, am,%} without
obstruction or obstacle, unrestrained, unchecked, un-
controlled; irresistible; free, independant; self-willed,
unmanageable, headstrong.
<LEND>

<L>24975<pc>0492-b<k1>niravatta<k2>niravatta
{#niravatta#}¦ {%nir-ava-tta, nir-ava-tti.%} See un-
der {%nir-ava-do,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>24976<pc>0492-b<k1>niravaday<k2>niravaday
{#niravaday#}¦ {%nir-ava-day,%} cl. 1. A. {%-dayate,%}
Ved. to distribute, allot a share or shares.
<LEND>

<L>24977<pc>0492-b<k1>niravado<k2>niravado
{#niravado#}¦ {%nir-ava-do%} [cf. 3. {%dā%}], cl. 2. 4. P.,
[Page0492-c+ 72]
Ved. {%-dāti%} and {%-dyati, -dātum,%} to distribute, allot
a share, give any one his share, to satisfy a claim; to
divide completely among.
<LEND>

<L>24978<pc>0492-c<k1>niravatta<k2>niravatta
{%Nir-ava-tta, as, ā, am,%}¦ distributed, completely
divided or allotted.
<LEND>

<L>24979<pc>0492-c<k1>niravatti<k2>niravatti
{%Nir-ava-tti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. allotment or distribution
of shares.
<LEND>

<L>24980<pc>0492-c<k1>niravadya<k2>niravadya
{#niravadya#}¦ {%nir-avadya, as, ā, am,%} unblamable,
blameless, faultless, unobjectionable, unexceptionable;
({%am%}), n. (or {%ā?%}), f. unblamableness, blamelessness,
faultlessness; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. or n. (?), a particular high
number. {%—Niravadya-tva, am,%} n. blamelessness,
unblamableness, excellence. {%—Niravadya-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} unblamable, blameless.
<LEND>

<L>24981<pc>0492-c<k1>niravaDi<k2>niravaDi
{#niravaDi#}¦ {%nir-avadhi, is, is, i,%} without bounds
or boundaries, unlimited.
<LEND>

<L>24982<pc>0492-c<k1>niravayava<k2>niravayava
{#niravayava#}¦ {%nir-avayava, as, ā, am,%} without
limbs or members, without component parts, not
consisting of parts, indivisible. {%—Niravayava-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. indivisibility.
<LEND>

<L>24983<pc>0492-c<k1>niravaroDa<k2>niravaroDa
{#niravaroDa#}¦ {%nir-avarodha, as, ā, am,%} unre-
strained, unobstructed, unopposed.
<LEND>

<L>24984<pc>0492-c<k1>niravalamba<k2>niravalamba
{#niravalamba#}¦ {%nir-avalamba, as, ā, am,%} having
no prop or stay; unsupported; not affording support;
not depending or relying on.
<LEND>

<L>24985<pc>0492-c<k1>niravalambana<k2>niravalambana
{%Nir-avalambana, am,%}¦ n. want of a prop, want
of reliance, want of a person or thing to depend
upon.
<LEND>

<L>24986<pc>0492-c<k1>niravaSeza<k2>niravaSeza
{#niravaSeza#}¦ {%nir-avaśeṣa, as, ā, am,%} without
a residue, complete, whole; ({%eṇa%}), ind. completely,
totally, fully, particularly, circumstantially. {%—Nir-%}
{%avaśeṣa-tas,%} ind. completely, &c. ({%= niravaśe-%}
{%ṣeṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>24987<pc>0492-c<k1>niravasAda<k2>niravasAda
{#niravasAda#}¦ {%nir-avasāda, as, ā, am,%} not cast
down, cheerful, good-humoured.
<LEND>

<L>24988<pc>0492-c<k1>niravaskfta<k2>niravaskfta
{#niravaskfta#}¦ {%nir-avaskṛta, as, ā, am,%} cleansed,
clean?; [cf. {%avas-kara, an-avaskara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24989<pc>0492-c<k1>niravastAra<k2>niravastAra
{#niravastAra#}¦ {%nir-avastāra, as, ā, am,%} without
a bed or coverlet; not strewn (with leaves &c.), bare.
<LEND>

<L>24990<pc>0492-c<k1>niravahAlikA<k2>niravahAlikA
{#niravahAlikA#}¦ {%nir-avahālikā,%} f. a fence, a
hedge, an outer wall; [cf. {%avahālikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>24991<pc>0492-c<k1>niravinda<k2>niravinda
{#niravinda#}¦ {%niravinda, as,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain.
<LEND>

<L>24992<pc>0492-c<k1>niravekz<k2>niravekz
{#niravekz#}¦ {%nir-avekṣ (-ava-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-īkṣate, -īkṣitum,%} to perceive.
<LEND>

<L>24993<pc>0492-c<k1>niravekzya<k2>niravekzya
{%Nir-avekṣya,%}¦ ind. having perceived or observed.
<LEND>

<L>24994<pc>0492-c<k1>niravyaya<k2>niravyaya
{#niravyaya#}¦ {%nir-avyaya, as, ā, am,%} undecaying,
eternal.
<LEND>

<L>24995<pc>0492-c<k1>niraS<k2>niraS
{#niraS#}¦ {%nir-aś,%} cl. 9. P. {%-aśnāti,%} &c., Ved.
to eat up, consume entirely.
<LEND>

<L>24996<pc>0492-c<k1>niraSita<k2>niraSita
{%Nir-aśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ eaten up, completely con-
sumed.
<LEND>

<L>24997<pc>0492-c<k1>niraSana<k2>niraSana
{#niraSana#}¦ {%nir-aśana, as, ā, am,%} abstaining
from food; ({%am%}), n. going without food, fasting.
<LEND>

<L>24998<pc>0492-c<k1>nirazwa<k2>nirazwa
{#nirazwa#}¦ {%nir-aṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%aś%} or
{%akṣ%} with {%nis%}), Ved. deprived of vigour, exhausted;
(Sāy.) {%= nir-ākṛta,%} driven away, scattered, dispersed.
<LEND>

<L>24999<pc>0492-c<k1>niras<k2>niras
{#niras#}¦ {%nir-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati, -asitum,%} to
cast out, throw away, drive away, banish, expel, evict,
drive back, send back; to keep off; to turn out (of
doors); to reject, repudiate, decline, refuse; to re-
move; to tear out, strip off; to stretch out (e. g.
{%hastau nirasyati%} or {%-te,%} he stretches out the hands);
to annihilate, destroy, subdue.
<LEND>

<L>25000<pc>0492-c<k1>nirasana<k2>nirasana
{%Nir-asana, as, ī, am,%}¦ expelling, removing, re-
jecting; vomiting, spitting out; ({%am%}), n. expelling,
ejecting; expulsion, removal, rejection, denial, con-
tradiction, refusal, disallowance; vomiting forth,
spitting out; suppressing, checking; killing, destroy-
ing, destruction, extermination.
<LEND>

<L>25001<pc>0492-c<k1>nirasanIya<k2>nirasanIya
{%Nir-asanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thrown out, to be
driven away or expelled.
<LEND>
[Page0493-a+ 75]

<L>25002<pc>0493-a<k1>nirasta<k2>nirasta
{%Nir-asta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cast out or away, expelled;
thrown out or away, cast off; thrown off (as from a
horse); driven away, expelled, banished; rejected,
repudiated, abandoned, deserted; disallowed; re-
futed; sent forth, sent away; deprived of, removed;
shot off, discharged (as an arrow); spit out; uttered
hurriedly or rapidly (as a speech or word); torn out
or away; destroyed; broken (as an agreement);
suppressed, checked; ({%am%}), n. rejecting; dropping
or leaving out, not pronouncing (regarded as a fault
in pronunciation). {%—Nirasta-bheda, as, ā, am,%}
having all difference removed, identical. {%—Nirasta-%}
{%rāga, as, ā, am,%} one who has abandoned worldly
desires or has devoted himself to religious penance.
<LEND>

<L>25003<pc>0493-a<k1>nirasya<k2>nirasya<h>1
1. {%nir-asya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be expelled or driven
out.
<LEND>

<L>25004<pc>0493-a<k1>nirasya<k2>nirasya<h>2
2. {%nirasya,%}¦ ind. having cast out, thrown out or
ejected, having expelled.
<LEND>

<L>25005<pc>0493-a<k1>nirasyat<k2>nirasyat
{%Nir-asyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ ejecting, throwing out;
expelling; abandoning, neglecting, scattering, de-
stroying, &c.
<LEND>

<L>25006<pc>0493-a<k1>nirasyamAna<k2>nirasyamAna
{%Nir-asyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being thrown out or
expelled; being abandoned; being suppressed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>25007<pc>0493-a<k1>nirAsa<k2>nirAsa
{%Nir-āsa, as,%}¦ m. throwing out, casting out, ejection,
expulsion, removal, abandonment; dropping (a sound
or letter &c.); vomiting; opposing, contradiction,
refutation. {%—Nirāsa-guṭikā,%} f. a pill to produce
vomiting; (also written {%nirāśa-guṭikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>25008<pc>0493-a<k1>nirAsana<k2>nirAsana
{%Nir-āsana, am,%}¦ n. {%= nir-asana,%} p. 492, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>25009<pc>0493-a<k1>nirasa<k2>nirasa
{#nirasa#}¦ {%ni-rasa, as, ā, am, = nī-rasa,%} without
flavour, tasteless, insipid, dry; ({%as%}), m. want of
flavour, insipidity; want of juice, dryness; want of
passion or feeling; ({%ā%}), f. a species of grass ({%= niḥ-%}
{%śreṇikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>25010<pc>0493-a<k1>nirastra<k2>nirastra
{#nirastra#}¦ {%nir-astra, as, ā, am,%} weaponless,
unarmed; (fought) without weapons (as a battle).
<LEND>

<L>25011<pc>0493-a<k1>nirasTi<k2>nirasTi
{#nirasTi#}¦ {%nir-asthi, is, is, i,%} having no bones,
boneless.
<LEND>

<L>25012<pc>0493-a<k1>nirah<k2>nirah
{#nirah#}¦ {%nir-ah,%} only in perf. {%nir-āha,%} Ved.
to utter, pronounce, express.
<LEND>

<L>25013<pc>0493-a<k1>nirahaNkAra<k2>nirahaNkAra
{#nirahaNkAra#}¦ {%nir-ahaṅkāra, as, ā, am,%} free
from egotism, devoid of selfishness, free from pride,
humble, lowly.
<LEND>

<L>25014<pc>0493-a<k1>nirahaNkfta<k2>nirahaNkfta
{%Nir-ahaṅkṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no self-con-
sciousness, without individuality or personality; un-
selfish.
<LEND>

<L>25015<pc>0493-a<k1>nirahaNkfti<k2>nirahaNkfti
{%Nir-ahaṅkṛti, is, is, i,%}¦ free from egotism or
selfishness.
<LEND>

<L>25016<pc>0493-a<k1>nirahaNkriya<k2>nirahaNkriya
{%Nir-ahaṅkriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no individu-
ality or personality, without self-consciousness.
<LEND>

<L>25017<pc>0493-a<k1>nirahaNkriyA<k2>nirahaNkriyA
{%Nir-ahaṅkriyā,%}¦ f. absence of egotism or selfishness.
<LEND>

<L>25018<pc>0493-a<k1>niraham<k2>niraham
{#niraham#}¦ {%nir-aham%} or {%nir-ahammati, is, is,%}
{%i,%} devoid of self-conceit, free from selfishness.
<LEND>

<L>25019<pc>0493-a<k1>nirAka<k2>nirAka
{#nirAka#}¦ {%nirāka, as,%} m. cooking; sweat; the
recompense of a bad action; (wrong reading for
{%ni-pāka.%})
<LEND>

<L>25020<pc>0493-a<k1>nirAkaraRa<k2>nirAkaraRa
{#nirAkaraRa#}¦ {%nir-ākaraṇa.%} See under {%nir-%}
{%ā-kṛ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>25021<pc>0493-a<k1>nirAkANkza<k2>nirAkANkza
{#nirAkANkza#}¦ {%nir-ākāṅkṣa, as, ā, am,%} expect-
ing nothing, wishing nothing, free from desire;
wanting nothing to fill up or make complete (as the
sense of a sentence or word).
<LEND>

<L>25022<pc>0493-a<k1>nirAkANkzin<k2>nirAkANkzin
{%Nirākāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ expecting nothing, wish-
ing or wanting nothing.
<LEND>

<L>25023<pc>0493-a<k1>nirAkAra<k2>nirAkAra<h>1
{#nirAkAra#} 1¦. {%nir-ākāra, as, ā, am%} (for 2. see
{%nir-ā-kṛ,%} col. 2), devoid of form, deprived of one's
natural form; without external appearance; formless,
shapeless, deformed; disguised; unassuming; not
claiming anything for one's self, modest; ({%as%}), m.
heaven, Viṣṇu; Śiva; the universal Spirit, God.
<LEND>

<L>25024<pc>0493-a<k1>nirAkfti<k2>nirAkfti<h>1
1. {%nir-ākṛti, is, is, i,%}¦ formless, shapeless, de-
formed, ugly; ({%is%}), m. a person who has not duly
gone through a course of study, (especially applied
however to the religious student who has not duly
read the Vedas); one who neglects the five great
[Page0493-b+ 73]
religious obligations, who does not worship the gods,
&c.; a Brāhman who neglects the duties of his caste
({%ākṛti%}) by not going through a regular course of
study.
<LEND>

<L>25025<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkASa<k2>nirAkASa
{#nirAkASa#}¦ {%nir-ākāśa, as, ā, am,%} having no
free space, leaving no room, completely filled.
<LEND>

<L>25026<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkula<k2>nirAkula
{#nirAkula#}¦ {%nir-ākula, as, ā, am,%} unconfused,
not disordered; unperplexed; unbewildered; clear;
steady, calm; perspicuous; ({%am%}), n. calmness, per-
spicuity, clearness.
<LEND>

<L>25027<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkf<k2>nirAkf
{#nirAkf#}¦ {%nir-ā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -ku-%}
{%rute, -kartum,%} to separate or divide off (Ved.); to
push away, turn or drive away, repudiate, keep away,
keep off, banish, expel, eject, remove, reject; to
refuse; to oppose, obstruct, contradict; to disallow;
to omit, intermit; to frustrate; to contemn, spurn.
<LEND>

<L>25028<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkaraRa<k2>nirAkaraRa
{%Nir-ākaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. repudiating, expelling, turn-
ing out, turning away, throwing off; removing,
banishing; repudiation, obstruction, opposition, con-
tradiction, rejection; refutation, reply; contempt,
disesteem; forgetting; neglecting the chief sacrificial
or religious duties.
<LEND>

<L>25029<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkarizRu<k2>nirAkarizRu
{%Nir-ākariṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ expelling, repudiating,
a repudiator; obstructive, obstructing, hindering from
(with abl.); spurning, disdaining, despising; seeking
to remove from (with abl.), envying any person
anything (abl.); forgetful. {%—Nirākariṣṇu-tā,%} f.
the state of being a repudiator; envy, malevolence.
<LEND>

<L>25030<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkartf<k2>nirAkartf
{%Nir-ākartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a repudiator, repudi-
ating; a despiser, contemner (as of the gods).
<LEND>

<L>25031<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkAra<k2>nirAkAra<h>2
2. {%nir-ākāra, as,%}¦ m. rebuke, reproach, censure,
blame. (For 1. {%nir-ākāra%} see col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>25032<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkfta<k2>nirAkfta
{%Nir-ākṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ pushed away, driven away,
repudiated, expelled, banished, ejected, rejected, re-
moved, set aside, turned away, turned out; thrown
off; divorced; refused, denied; refuted, replied to;
contemned, despised, spurned, made light of; de-
prived of. {%—Nirākṛtānyottara (˚ta-anya-ut˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} refuting every answer, irrefutable, irrefragable.
{%—Nirākṛtānyottara-tva, am,%} n. irrefutableness,
irrefragableness.
<LEND>

<L>25033<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkfti<k2>nirAkfti<h>2
2. {%nir-ākṛti, is,%}¦ f. repudiation, rejection; refusal,
disallowance; obstruction, obstacle, impediment, in-
terruption; contradiction, opposition; ({%is, is, i%}),
impeding, obstructing; annihilating, destroying; ({%is%}),
m., N. of a son of the first Manu Sāvarṇi.
<LEND>

<L>25034<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkftin<k2>nirAkftin
{%Nir-ākṛtin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (probably) repudiating,
impeding, obstructing; avoiding; making no exertion
either to do or avoid.
<LEND>

<L>25035<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkriyA<k2>nirAkriyA
{%Nir-ākriyā,%}¦ f. repudiation, expulsion, removal;
contradiction, denial, refutation.
<LEND>

<L>25036<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkfti<k2>nirAkfti<h>1
{#nirAkfti#} 1¦. and 2. {%nir-ākṛti.%} See under
1. {%nir-ākāra,%} col. 1, and under {%nir-ā-kṛ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>25037<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkranda<k2>nirAkranda
{#nirAkranda#}¦ {%nir-ākranda, as, ā, am,%} not com-
plaining; a place where no sound can be heard.
<LEND>

<L>25038<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkram<k2>nirAkram
{#nirAkram#}¦ {%nir-ā-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-kramate, -krāntum%} and {%-kramitum,%} to come
forth, to go out of.
<LEND>

<L>25039<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkriyA<k2>nirAkriyA
{#nirAkriyA#}¦ {%nir-ākriyā.%} See {%nir-ā-kṛ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>25040<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAkroSa<k2>nirAkroSa
{#nirAkroSa#}¦ {%nir-ākrośa, as, ā, am,%} unaccused,
unreviled.
<LEND>

<L>25041<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAga<k2>nirAga
{#nirAga#}¦ {%ni-rāga, as, ā, am,%} passionless, dis-
passionate.
<LEND>

<L>25042<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAgama<k2>nirAgama
{#nirAgama#}¦ {%nir-āgama, as, ā, am,%} not founded
on revelation, not resting on scripture.
<LEND>

<L>25043<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAgas<k2>nirAgas
{#nirAgas#}¦ {%nir-āgas, ās, ās, as,%} sinless, fault-
less, innocent.
<LEND>

<L>25044<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAgraha<k2>nirAgraha
{#nirAgraha#}¦ {%nir-āgraha, as, ā, am,%} not insist-
ing upon, not peremptory or obstinate.
<LEND>

<L>25045<pc>0493-b<k1>nirAcAra<k2>nirAcAra
{#nirAcAra#}¦ {%nir-ācāra, as, ā, am,%} without
approved usages or customs, lawless, barbarian, (espe-
cially applied to those people who have not the ordi-
nances of the Vedas or distinction of castes.)
<LEND>
[Page0493-c+ 69]

<L>25046<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAjIvya<k2>nirAjIvya
{#nirAjIvya#}¦ {%nir-ājīvya, as, ā, am,%} not yield-
ing subsistence, not granting a livelihood.
<LEND>

<L>25047<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAqambara<k2>nirAqambara
{#nirAqambara#}¦ {%nir-āḍambara, as, ā, am,%} without
drums. {%—Nirāḍambara-sundara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%}
(perhaps) beautiful in itself, not requiring a drum to
attract attention or not requiring ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>25048<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAtaNka<k2>nirAtaNka
{#nirAtaNka#}¦ {%nir-ātaṅka, as, ā, am,%} not feeling
pain or uneasiness, without ailment, well, comfort-
able; not causing pain or ailment or disagreeable
feelings; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>25049<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAtapa<k2>nirAtapa
{#nirAtapa#}¦ {%nir-ātapa, as, ā, am,%} not pene-
trated by the sun's rays, shady; ({%ā%}), f. the night.
<LEND>

<L>25050<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAtmaka<k2>nirAtmaka
{#nirAtmaka#}¦ {%nir-ātmaka, as, ā, am,%} or {%nir-%}
{%ātman, ā, ā, a,%} or {%nirātma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
no separate soul or no individual existence.
<LEND>

<L>25051<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAdara<k2>nirAdara
{#nirAdara#}¦ {%nir-ādara, as, ā, am,%} showing no
respect, disrespectful.
<LEND>

<L>25052<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAdAna<k2>nirAdAna
{#nirAdAna#}¦ {%nir-ādāna, as, ā, am,%} taking
nothing, not taking, one from whom nothing is
taken; an epithet of Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>25053<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAdizwa<k2>nirAdizwa
{#nirAdizwa#}¦ {%nir-ādiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} paid off
(as a debt).
<LEND>

<L>25054<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAdeSa<k2>nirAdeSa
{%Nir-ādeśa, as,%}¦ m. complete payment or discharge
of a debt.
<LEND>

<L>25055<pc>0493-c<k1>nirADA<k2>nirADA
{#nirADA#}¦ {%nir-ā-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte,%} &c., Ved. to take out of, take away.
<LEND>

<L>25056<pc>0493-c<k1>nirADAna<k2>nirADAna
{#nirADAna#}¦ {%nir-ādhāna, as, ā, am,%} without a
receptacle.
<LEND>

<L>25057<pc>0493-c<k1>nirADAra<k2>nirADAra
{#nirADAra#}¦ {%nir-ādhāra, as, ā, am,%} without a
receptacle; without a fulcrum or support.
<LEND>

<L>25058<pc>0493-c<k1>nirADi<k2>nirADi
{#nirADi#}¦ {%nir-ādhi, is, is, i,%} free from anxiety,
undisturbed by care.
<LEND>

<L>25059<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAnanda<k2>nirAnanda
{#nirAnanda#}¦ {%nir-ānanda, as, ā, am,%} joyless,
sad, sorrowful; not delighting. {%—Nir-ānanda-kara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} causing no pleasure, causing care or
sorrow.
<LEND>

<L>25060<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAntra<k2>nirAntra
{#nirAntra#}¦ {%nir-āntra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. evisce-
rated, disembowelled; having the entrails hanging
out.
<LEND>

<L>25061<pc>0493-c<k1>nirApad<k2>nirApad
{#nirApad#}¦ {%nir-āpad, t,%} f. freedom from mis-
fortune or calamity, a prosperous condition, security;
({%t, t, t%}), free from calamity or misfortune, prosperous,
fortunate.
<LEND>

<L>25062<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAbADa<k2>nirAbADa
{#nirAbADa#}¦ {%nir-ābādha, as, ā, am,%} undis-
turbed, unmolested, unvexed, secure from disturb-
ance; unobstructed; not disturbing, not molesting,
not injuring, not paining; frivolously or not really
vexatious. {%—Nir-ābādha-kara, as, ā, am,%} not
causing injury or pain.
<LEND>

<L>25063<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAmaya<k2>nirAmaya
{#nirAmaya#}¦ {%nir-āmaya, as, am,%} m. n. freedom
from illness, health, happiness, welfare; ({%as, ā, am%}),
free from illness, healthy, well, hale, recovered from
sickness, free from disease; free from taint, pure;
guileless; free from defects or failings; infallible;
not liable to failure or miscarriage; complete, full;
({%as%}), m. a wild goat; a hog, a boar; N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>25064<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAmarda<k2>nirAmarda
{#nirAmarda#}¦ {%nir-āmarda, as,%} m. ‘not oppress-
ing,’ N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>25065<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAmAlu<k2>nirAmAlu
{#nirAmAlu#}¦ {%nir-āmālu, us,%} m. (fr. {%nirāma-%}
{%ālu?%}), the wood apple, Feronia Elephantum; [cf.
{%kapittha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25066<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAmitra<k2>nirAmitra
{#nirAmitra#}¦ {%nir-āmitra.%} See {%nir-amitra.%}
<LEND>

<L>25067<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAmin<k2>nirAmin
{#nirAmin#}¦ {%ni-rāmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. remain-
ing, staying in; (Sāy.) delighting in.
<LEND>

<L>25068<pc>0493-c<k1>nirAmiza<k2>nirAmiza
{#nirAmiza#}¦ {%nir-āmiṣa, as, ā, am,%} fleshless,
without meat or prey; not receiving wages; having
no sensual desires, free from covetousness. {%—Nirā-%}
{%miṣāśin (˚ṣa-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%} not feeding on
meat; living without meat; free from sensual desires.
<LEND>
[Page0494-a+ 70]

<L>25069<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAya<k2>nirAya
{#nirAya#}¦ {%nir-āya, as, ā, am,%} having no in-
come or revenue, profitless, yielding no income or
profit. {%—Nir-āya-vyaya-vat, ān,%} m. having neither
income nor expenditure, an idler who lives by clan-
destine means.
<LEND>

<L>25070<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAyata<k2>nirAyata<h>1
{#nirAyata#} 1¦. {%nir-āyata, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%yam%}
with {%ā%} and {%nis%}), stretched out, extended.
<LEND>

<L>25071<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAyata<k2>nirAyata<h>2
{#nirAyata#} 2¦. {%nir-āyata, as, ā, am,%} unex-
tended, contracted, compact.
<LEND>

<L>25072<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAyAsa<k2>nirAyAsa
{#nirAyAsa#}¦ {%nir-āyāsa, as, ā, am,%} not causing
trouble, not requiring efforts, not fatiguing; easily
attainable, easy.
<LEND>

<L>25073<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAyuDa<k2>nirAyuDa
{#nirAyuDa#}¦ {%nir-āyudha, as, ā, am,%} weapon-
less, disarmed, unarmed, defenceless.
<LEND>

<L>25074<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAramBa<k2>nirAramBa
{#nirAramBa#}¦ {%nir-ārambha, as, ā, am,%} not un-
dertaking enterprises, not enterprising, abstaining
from all work.
<LEND>

<L>25075<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAlaka<k2>nirAlaka
{#nirAlaka#}¦ {%nirālaka, as,%} m. a species of fish.
<LEND>

<L>25076<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAlamba<k2>nirAlamba
{#nirAlamba#}¦ {%nir-ālamba, as, ā, am,%} having no
prop or support, not resting or depending on another,
independent, self-supported, not relying on another,
standing alone, friendless; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man
mentioned in the Śaṅkara-vijaya; ({%ā%}), f. spikenard,
{%= ākāśa-māṃsī; (am),%} ind. without support, in-
dependently. {%—Nirālambopaniṣad (˚ba-up˚), t,%}
f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>25077<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAlambana<k2>nirAlambana
{%Nir-ālambana, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no prop,
without support, not resting on another.
<LEND>

<L>25078<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAlasya<k2>nirAlasya
{#nirAlasya#}¦ {%nir-ālasya, as, ā, am,%} not slothful.
<LEND>

<L>25079<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAloka<k2>nirAloka
{#nirAloka#}¦ {%nir-āloka, as, ā, am,%} not looking
about, not moving the eye, without moving the eyes;
deprived of light, dark; invisible, uninvestigable (?);
an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>25080<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAvarza<k2>nirAvarza
{#nirAvarza#}¦ {%nir-āvarṣa, as, ā, am,%} unpene-
trated by rain, protecting from rain.
<LEND>

<L>25081<pc>0494-a<k1>nirASa<k2>nirASa
{#nirASa#}¦ {%nir-āśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis%} + 1. {%ā-śā;%}
cf. {%ā-śaṃs%}), without hope, hopeless, despairing of
(with loc., dat., or with {%prati%} and acc., e. g. {%sva-%}
{%jīvite%} or {%sva-jīvitāya%} or {%sva-jīvitam prati nir-%}
{%āśaḥ,%} despairing of one's own life); depriving of all
hope; [cf. {%nairāśya.%}] {%—Nirāśa-tva, am,%} n. hope-
lessness, despair. {%—Nirāśī-bhāva, as,%} m. hopeless-
ness, despair. {%—Nirāśī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become
hopeless; despairing.
<LEND>

<L>25082<pc>0494-a<k1>nirASaka<k2>nirASaka
{%Nir-āśaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ desponding, despairing of
(with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>25083<pc>0494-a<k1>nirASin<k2>nirASin
{%Nir-āśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hopeless. {%—Nirāśi-tva, am,%}
n. {%= nirāśa-tva,%} hopelessness.
<LEND>

<L>25084<pc>0494-a<k1>nirASaNka<k2>nirASaNka
{#nirASaNka#}¦ {%nir-āśaṅka, as, ā, am,%} fearless;
({%am%}), ind. fearlessly, without fear or hesitation.
<LEND>

<L>25085<pc>0494-a<k1>nirASis<k2>nirASis
{#nirASis#}¦ {%nir-āśis, īs, īs, is%} (see {%ā-śās%}),
having no wishes or hopes; without a blessing.
<LEND>

<L>25086<pc>0494-a<k1>nirASrama<k2>nirASrama
{#nirASrama#}¦ {%nir-āśrama, as, ā, am,%} or {%nir-%}
{%āśramin; ī, iṇī, i,%} not being in one of the four
periods or orders of a Brāhman's life.
<LEND>

<L>25087<pc>0494-a<k1>nirASraya<k2>nirASraya
{#nirASraya#}¦ {%nir-āśraya, as, ā, am,%} supportless,
without prop or stay, not resting or depending on,
unsupported, self-supported, without shelter or refuge,
unprotected, destitute; not deep (as a wound?).
<LEND>

<L>25088<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAsa<k2>nirAsa
{#nirAsa#}¦ {%nir-āsa, as,%} m. See under {%nir-as%}
at p. 493, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25089<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAsitva<k2>nirAsitva
{#nirAsitva#}¦ {%nirāsi-tva%} incorrect reading for
{%nirāśi-tva.%}
<LEND>

<L>25090<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAspada<k2>nirAspada
{#nirAspada#}¦ {%nir-āspada, as, ā, am,%} restless,
having no place of rest, homeless; portionless.
<LEND>

<L>25091<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAsvAda<k2>nirAsvAda
{#nirAsvAda#}¦ {%nir-āsvāda, as, ā, am,%} tasteless,
flavourless, unsavoury, yielding no enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>25092<pc>0494-a<k1>nirAsvAdya<k2>nirAsvAdya
{%Nir-āsvādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unsavoury, giving no
enjoyment. {%—Nirāsvādya-tama, as, ā, am,%} most
unsavoury.
<LEND>
[Page0494-b+ 72]

<L>25093<pc>0494-b<k1>nirAhAra<k2>nirAhAra
{#nirAhAra#}¦ {%nir-āhāra, as,%} m. want of food,
not eating, fasting; ({%as, ā, am%}), foodless, fasting,
abstaining from food, without food, having nothing
to eat. {%—Nirāhāra-tā,%} f. foodlessness, fasting.
<LEND>

<L>25094<pc>0494-b<k1>nirAhAvat<k2>nirAhAvat
{#nirAhAvat#}¦ {%nir-āhā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} for {%nir-%}
{%āhāva-vat,%} without invocation.
<LEND>

<L>25095<pc>0494-b<k1>niri<k2>niri
{#niri#}¦ {%nir-i,%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti,%} &c., {%-etum,%} to go
out, come forth, go off, depart.
<LEND>

<L>25096<pc>0494-b<k1>niriNga<k2>niriNga
{#niriNga#}¦ {%nir-iṅga, as, ā, am,%} immovable,
not moving to and fro, not flickering.
<LEND>

<L>25097<pc>0494-b<k1>niriNginI<k2>niriNginI
{#niriNginI#}¦ {%niriṅginī,%} f. a veil.
<LEND>

<L>25098<pc>0494-b<k1>niricCa<k2>niricCa
{#niricCa#}¦ {%nir-iccha, as, ā, am,%} without wish
or desire, indifferent.
<LEND>

<L>25099<pc>0494-b<k1>nirindriya<k2>nirindriya
{#nirindriya#}¦ {%nir-indriya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. im-
potent, destitute of manly vigour or of strength (in
general); barren; having lost the use of a limb;
imperfect, mutilated, maimed, infirm, weak, frail;
(in Manu IX. 18) without evidence or means of
certain knowledge (according to Kullūka {%= pramāṇa-%}
{%rahita%}).
<LEND>

<L>25100<pc>0494-b<k1>nirinDana<k2>nirinDana
{#nirinDana#}¦ {%nir-indhana, as, ā, am,%} destitute
of fuel.
<LEND>

<L>25101<pc>0494-b<k1>nirI<k2>nirI
{#nirI#}¦ {%ni-rī,%} cl. 9. P. {%-riṇāti, -retum,%} Ved.
to attack.
<LEND>

<L>25102<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIkz<k2>nirIkz
{#nirIkz#}¦ {%nir-īkṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-īkṣate, -īkṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to look at, look towards, behold, gaze at, look
about, regard, observe, view, contemplate, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>25103<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIkzaka<k2>nirIkzaka
{%Nir-īkṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking at, seeing, view-
ing, observing, visiting.
<LEND>

<L>25104<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIkzaRa<k2>nirIkzaRa
{%Nir-īkṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking at, regarding;
({%am%}), ṇ. look; looking at, regarding, seeing; ex-
pecting; the aspect of the planets.
<LEND>

<L>25105<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIkzat<k2>nirIkzat
{%Nir-īkṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ or {%nir-īkṣamāṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} looking at, regarding, expecting, hoping.
<LEND>

<L>25106<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIkzA<k2>nirIkzA
{%Nir-īkṣā,%}¦ f. looking at, regarding; considera-
tion; hope, expectation; ({%ayā%}), ind. in respect of,
in relation to, as to (e. g. {%balābala-nirīkṣayā,%} in
respect of strength and weakness; cf. {%dur-nirīkṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>25107<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIkzin<k2>nirIkzin
{%Nir-īkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ seeing, looking, viewing;
[cf. {%nātidūra-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25108<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIkzya<k2>nirIkzya<h>1
1. {%nir-īkṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked at or
regarded; to be considered; [cf. {%dur-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25109<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIkzya<k2>nirIkzya<h>2
2. {%nir-īkṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked at or viewed
or scanned.
<LEND>

<L>25110<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIkzyamARa<k2>nirIkzyamARa
{%Nir-īkṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being looked at or
regarded; looking, (Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 7694.)
<LEND>

<L>25111<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIti<k2>nirIti
{#nirIti#}¦ {%nir-īti, is, is, i,%} free from calami-
ties or afflictions, painless.
<LEND>

<L>25112<pc>0494-b<k1>nirItika<k2>nirItika
{%Nir-ītika, as, ā, am,%}¦ not inauspicious, not prog-
nosticating calamity, auspicious.
<LEND>

<L>25113<pc>0494-b<k1>nirISa<k2>nirISa
{#nirISa#}¦ {%nir-īśa = nir-īṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>25114<pc>0494-b<k1>nirISvara<k2>nirISvara
{#nirISvara#}¦ {%nir-īśvara, as, ā, am,%} godless,
atheistic. {%—Nirīśvara-vāda, as,%} m. godlessness,
atheism. {%—Nirīśvara-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} atheistical.
<LEND>

<L>25115<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIza<k2>nirIza
{#nirIza#}¦ {%nir-īṣa, am,%} n. the body of a
plough (without the pole and ploughshare; also
read {%nir-īśa%}).
<LEND>

<L>25116<pc>0494-b<k1>nirIha<k2>nirIha
{#nirIha#}¦ {%nir-īha, as, ā, am,%} inactive, effort-
less; desireless, not wishful, indifferent, unanxious.
{%—Nirīha-tā,%} f. or {%nirīha-tva, am,%} n. or {%nir-īhā,%}
f. indifference, absence of desire or effort. {%—Nirīhā-%}
{%vasthā (˚hā-av˚),%} f. a state of indifference.
<LEND>

<L>25117<pc>0494-b<k1>nirukta<k2>nirukta
{#nirukta#}¦ {%nir-ukta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vac%} with
{%nis%}), uttered, pronounced, expressed, explained, de-
fined; loud, distinct; ({%am%}), n. explanation or ety-
mological interpretation of a word; N. of one of the
six Vedāṅgas or works considered as connected with
the Vedas; glossarial explanation of obscure terms,
(especially those occurring in the Vedas); N. of a
well-known commentary on the Nighaṇṭus by Yāska;
[cf. {%nairukta, nairuktika.%}] {%—Nirukta-kāra, as,%}
m. ‘Nirukta-composer,’ N. or epithet of a com-
[Page0494-c+ 73]
mentator on Kāli-dāsa's Megha-dūta. {%—Nirukta-%}
{%kṛt, t,%} m. epithet of a pupil of Śāka-pūrṇi. {%—Ni-%}
{%rukta-ja, as,%} m., N. of a class of sons enumerated
in Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 2615. {%—Nirukta-pari-%}
{%śiṣṭa, am,%} n., N. of a work supplementary to the
Nirukta. {%—Nirukta-vat, ān,%} m. ‘possessing the Ni-
rukta, author of the Nirukta,’ an epithet of Yāska.
{%—Nirukta-vṛtti, is,%} f. ‘commentary on the Ni-
rukta,’ N. of a commentary on Yāska's Nirukta by
Durgācārya.
<LEND>

<L>25118<pc>0494-c<k1>nirukti<k2>nirukti
{%Nir-ukti, is,%}¦ f. explanation, etymological inter-
pretation of words; (in rhetoric) an artificial or
poetical explanation of the derivation of a word (e. g.
deriving {%doṣā-kara,%} ‘the moon,’ from {%doṣā +%}
{%ākara%} instead of {%doṣā + kara%}); {%= nir-ukta,%} Yāska's
commentary on the Nighaṇṭus.
<LEND>

<L>25119<pc>0494-c<k1>nirucyamAna<k2>nirucyamAna
{%Nir-ucyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being uttered or
expressed.
<LEND>

<L>25120<pc>0494-c<k1>nirukz<k2>nirukz
{#nirukz#}¦ {%nir-ukṣ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-ukṣati,%} &c.,
Ved. to remove by sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>25121<pc>0494-c<k1>nirucCvAsa<k2>nirucCvAsa
{#nirucCvAsa#}¦ {%nir-ucchvāsa, as,%} m. absence of
breath, not breathing; ({%as, ā, am%}), without breath-
ing, not breathing, breathless; narrow, contracted,
crowded; ({%am%}), n. (?) a particular hell where the
wicked cannot breathe. {%—Nirucchvāsa-nipīḍita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} pained by not breathing (?).
<LEND>

<L>25122<pc>0494-c<k1>niruja<k2>niruja
{#niruja#}¦ {%ni-ruja, as, ā, am,%} for {%nī-ruja,%}
healthy, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>25123<pc>0494-c<k1>niruttara<k2>niruttara
{#niruttara#}¦ {%nir-uttara, as, ā, am,%} having no
superior; answerless, without a reply, unable to
answer, silenced, posed; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Tantra.
{%—Niruttara-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra.
<LEND>

<L>25124<pc>0494-c<k1>nirutpAta<k2>nirutpAta
{#nirutpAta#}¦ {%nir-utpāta, as, ā, am,%} free from
portents.
<LEND>

<L>25125<pc>0494-c<k1>nirutsava<k2>nirutsava
{#nirutsava#}¦ {%nir-utsava, as, ā, am,%} without
festivals, having no festivities.
<LEND>

<L>25126<pc>0494-c<k1>nirutsAha<k2>nirutsAha
{#nirutsAha#}¦ {%nir-utsāha, as,%} m. absence of
exertion, want of energy, indolence, pusillanimity;
({%as, ā, am%}), without energy, devoid of energy, un-
dertaking nothing, without courage, indolent, indif-
ferent. {%—Nirutsāha-tā,%} f. want of energy, cowardice.
<LEND>

<L>25127<pc>0494-c<k1>nirutsuka<k2>nirutsuka
{#nirutsuka#}¦ {%nir-utsuka, as, ā, am,%} careless,
indifferent, unconcerned; calm, tranquil, unanxious,
unregretful, having no vehement desire for; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of Manu Raivata; one of the
Saptarṣis under the thirteenth Manu.
<LEND>

<L>25128<pc>0494-c<k1>nirudaka<k2>nirudaka
{#nirudaka#}¦ {%nir-udaka, as, ā, am,%} waterless,
devoid of water.
<LEND>

<L>25129<pc>0494-c<k1>nirudyama<k2>nirudyama
{#nirudyama#}¦ {%nir-udyama, as, ā, am,%} effortless,
inactive, lazy, at rest.
<LEND>

<L>25130<pc>0494-c<k1>nirudyoga<k2>nirudyoga
{#nirudyoga#}¦ {%nir-udyoga, as, ā, am,%} making
no efforts, lazy, listless, idle; disheartened; cause-
less (?).
<LEND>

<L>25131<pc>0494-c<k1>nirudvigna<k2>nirudvigna
{#nirudvigna#}¦ {%nir-udvigna%} or {%nir-udvega, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unexcited, undisturbed, free from perturbation,
fearless, sedate, calm. {%—Nirudvigna-manas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} undisturbed in mind.
<LEND>

<L>25132<pc>0494-c<k1>niruD<k2>niruD
{#niruD#}¦ {%ni-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ruṇaddhi,%}
{%-runddhe, -roddhum,%} to shut in, shut, obstruct,
stop, hinder, prevent, restrain, check; to confine; to
keep off, remove; to accomplish (?): Caus. {%-rodha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to be shut or obstructed.
<LEND>

<L>25133<pc>0494-c<k1>nirudDa<k2>nirudDa
{%Ni-ruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ stopped, obstructed, re-
strained, checked, hindered, opposed; confined, im-
prisoned; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince. {%—Niruddha-%}
{%kaṇṭha, as, ā, am,%} having the breath obstructed,
suffocated. {%—Niruddha-guda, as,%} m. contraction or
obstruction of the rectum. {%—Niruddha-prakaśa,%}
{%as,%} m. stricture of the urethra. {%—Niruddha-śama-%}
{%vṛtti, is, is, i,%} ‘whose state of repose is interrupted,’
wearied, tired.
<LEND>

<L>25134<pc>0494-c<k1>nirunDat<k2>nirunDat
{%Ni-rundhat, an, atī, at,%}¦ checking, hindering,
suppressing, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0495-a+ 69]

<L>25135<pc>0495-a<k1>nirunDAna<k2>nirunDAna
{%Ni-rundhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ obstructing, opposing,
hindering, preventing; depriving of, &c.
<LEND>

<L>25136<pc>0495-a<k1>nirodDavya<k2>nirodDavya
{%Ni-roddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shut in or confined,
to be fenced, to be enclosed with a fence or hedge.
<LEND>

<L>25137<pc>0495-a<k1>niroDa<k2>niroDa
{%Ni-rodha, as,%}¦ m. shutting in, confinement, locking
up, imprisonment; enclosing, covering up; check,
restraint, coercion, suppression, hindrance, prevention,
obstruction, opposition; annihilation, destruction;
(in dramatic language) disappointment, frustration of
hope; hurting, injuring ({%= ni-graha%}); aversion,
disfavour, dislike; (with Buddhists) suppression or
annihilation of pain (one of the four principles); N.
of a man.
<LEND>

<L>25138<pc>0495-a<k1>niroDaka<k2>niroDaka
{%Ni-rodhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ obstructive, obstructing,
confining, hindering.
<LEND>

<L>25139<pc>0495-a<k1>niroDana<k2>niroDana
{%Ni-rodhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ confining, obstructing;
({%as%}), m. (with {%avaṭa%}) N. of a hell; ({%am%}), n. con-
finement, imprisonment; keeping back, restraining,
keeping down, coercion; denying; (in dramatic
language) disappointment, frustration of hope.
<LEND>

<L>25140<pc>0495-a<k1>niroDin<k2>niroDin
{%Ni-rodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ obstructing, hindering.
<LEND>

<L>25141<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupakrama<k2>nirupakrama
{#nirupakrama#}¦ {%nir-upakrama, as, ā, am,%} having
no beginning, without a commencement.
<LEND>

<L>25142<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupadrava<k2>nirupadrava
{#nirupadrava#}¦ {%nir-upadrava, as, ā, am,%} free
from hostile attacks, free from ravages, not visited
by calamity or affliction, free from adversity or
danger, lucky, happy, undisturbed, unharmed, un-
molested; free from national distress, free from
tyranny; causing no affliction or adversity; peaceful,
secure; not inauspicious (as a star). {%—Nirupadrava-%}
{%tā,%} f. absence of calamity or danger, security.
<LEND>

<L>25143<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupadruta<k2>nirupadruta
{%Nir-upadruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ not visited by calamities;
not boding evil (as a star).
<LEND>

<L>25144<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupaDi<k2>nirupaDi
{#nirupaDi#}¦ {%nir-upadhi, is, is, i,%} without guile,
guileless, honest, secure.
<LEND>

<L>25145<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupapatti<k2>nirupapatti
{#nirupapatti#}¦ {%nir-upapatti, is, is, i,%} unfit, un-
suitable. {%—Nirupapatti-tva, am,%} n. unfitness, un-
suitableness.
<LEND>

<L>25146<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupapada<k2>nirupapada
{#nirupapada#}¦ {%nir-upapada, as, ā, am,%} not con-
nected with a subordinate word; [cf. {%upa-pada.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25147<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupaplava<k2>nirupaplava
{#nirupaplava#}¦ {%nir-upaplava, as, ā, am,%} free
from calamity or disturbance, free from trouble or
alarm; unharmed; not causing adversity; an epithet
of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>25148<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupaBoga<k2>nirupaBoga
{#nirupaBoga#}¦ {%nir-upabhoga, as, ā, am,%} not
enjoying, destitute of enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>25149<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupama<k2>nirupama
{#nirupama#}¦ {%nir-upama, as, ā, am,%} peerless,
matchless, without a compeer or equal, unequalled,
incomparable; ({%as%}), m. a species of poisonous animal
({%= gaudheraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>25150<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupala<k2>nirupala
{#nirupala#}¦ {%nir-upala, as, ā, am,%} stoneless,
free from stones.
<LEND>

<L>25151<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupalepa<k2>nirupalepa
{#nirupalepa#}¦ {%nir-upalepa, as, ā, am,%} un-
smeared, free from ointment.
<LEND>

<L>25152<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupasarga<k2>nirupasarga
{#nirupasarga#}¦ {%nir-upasarga, as, ā, am,%} free
from portents, not portentous.
<LEND>

<L>25153<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupaskfta<k2>nirupaskfta
{#nirupaskfta#}¦ {%nir-upaskṛta, as, ā, am,%} uncor-
rupted, inartificial, pure.
<LEND>

<L>25154<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupahata<k2>nirupahata
{#nirupahata#}¦ {%nir-upahata, as, ā, am,%} unhurt,
uninjured, not afflicted; auspicious.
<LEND>

<L>25155<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupAKya<k2>nirupAKya
{#nirupAKya#}¦ {%nir-upākhya, as, ā, am,%} not
perceptible by the eyes, invisible, immaterial; unreal,
false, non-existent.
<LEND>

<L>25156<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupADika<k2>nirupADika
{#nirupADika#}¦ {%nir-upādhika, as, ā, am,%} without
attributes or qualities.
<LEND>

<L>25157<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupAya<k2>nirupAya
{#nirupAya#}¦ {%nir-upāya, as, ā, am,%} without
expedients, remediless, helpless; unsuccessful.
<LEND>

<L>25158<pc>0495-a<k1>nirupekza<k2>nirupekza
{#nirupekza#}¦ {%nir-upekṣa, as, ā, am,%} not neg-
lectful; free from trick or fraud.
<LEND>
[Page0495-b+ 75]

<L>25159<pc>0495-b<k1>nirupti<k2>nirupti
{#nirupti#}¦ {%nir-upti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%vap%} with {%nis%}),
= 1. {%nir-vāpa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>25160<pc>0495-b<k1>nirupya<k2>nirupya
{%Nir-upya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be scattered or sprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>25161<pc>0495-b<k1>nirubj<k2>nirubj
{#nirubj#}¦ {%nir-ubj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-ubjati,%} &c., Ved.
to press down, cause to flow down, send down, let
loose.
<LEND>

<L>25162<pc>0495-b<k1>niruzRIza<k2>niruzRIza
{#niruzRIza#}¦ {%nir-uṣṇīṣa, as, ā, am,%} without
a turban or head-dress, bare-headed.
<LEND>

<L>25163<pc>0495-b<k1>niruzman<k2>niruzman
{#niruzman#}¦ {%nir-uṣman, ā, ā, a,%} devoid of
heat, cold. {%—Niruṣma-tva, am,%} n. absence of heat,
coldness.
<LEND>

<L>25164<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUQa<k2>nirUQa<h>1
{#nirUQa#} 1¦. {%ni-rūḍha, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ni-ruh%}),
inherent, conventional, accepted (as the familiar
meaning of words in opposition to their etymological
sense); ({%as%}), m. (in rhetoric) the force or application
of words according to their natural or received
meanings; (in logic) the inherence of any property
in the term implying it (as of redness in the word
red &c.).
<LEND>

<L>25165<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUQa<k2>nirUQa<h>2
{#nirUQa#} 2¦. {%nir-ūḍha, ā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%vah%} with
{%nis%}), unmarried.
<LEND>

<L>25166<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUp<k2>nirUp
{#nirUp#}¦ {%ni-rūp,%} cl. 10. P. {%-rūpayati, -yitum,%}
to perform; to represent, enact, act dramatically; to
see, perceive, look at, look into; to observe, con-
sider, reflect upon; to investigate, examine, look
out for, discover, search; to ascertain; to select,
choose, appoint; to resolve, determine.
<LEND>

<L>25167<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUpaRa<k2>nirUpaRa
{%Ni-rūpaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ defining, determining;
({%am%}), n. form, shape; sight, seeing; looking for,
searching; looking into, investigation, determination,
definition; ascertaining, defining, (in these senses
also {%ni-rūpaṇā.%})
<LEND>

<L>25168<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUpaRIya<k2>nirUpaRIya
{%Ni-rūpaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked for; to be
searched into or examined, to be investigated.
<LEND>

<L>25169<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUpayat<k2>nirUpayat
{%Ni-rūpayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ looking for, investi-
gating, considering.
<LEND>

<L>25170<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUpita<k2>nirUpita
{%Ni-rūpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen, beheld; discovered,
found; appointed, elected, chosen, deputed; consi-
dered, weighed; ascertained, determined, resolved.
<LEND>

<L>25171<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUpiti<k2>nirUpiti
{%Ni-rūpiti, is,%}¦ f. definition (of an idea), ascertain-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>25172<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUpya<k2>nirUpya<h>1
1. {%ni-rūpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be seen or defined or
ascertained.
<LEND>

<L>25173<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUpya<k2>nirUpya<h>2
2. {%ni-rūpya,%}¦ ind. having seen or considered.
{%—Nirūpya-tā,%} f. or {%nirūpya-tva, am,%} n. ascer-
taining, determining.
<LEND>

<L>25174<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUzman<k2>nirUzman
{#nirUzman#}¦ {%nir-ūṣman.%} See {%nir-uṣman.%}
<LEND>

<L>25175<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUh<k2>nirUh
{#nirUh#}¦ {%nir-ūh%} [cf. rt. 1. {%ūh%}], cl. 1. P. A.
{%-ūhati, -te,%} &c., Ved. inf. {%nir-ūhitavai,%} to push
out, draw out, remove: Caus. {%-ūhayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to draw out or purge.
<LEND>

<L>25176<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUQa<k2>nirUQa<h>3
3. {%nir-ūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn out, purged,
eviscerated; (for 2. {%nir-ūḍha%} see above.) {%—Nir-%}
{%ūḍha-paśu-prayoga, as,%} m., N. of a treatise on
particular sacrifices, (see the next.) {%—Nirūḍha-%}
{%paśu-bandha, as,%} m. ‘the offering or oblation of an
eviscerated animal,’ N. of one of the regular Havir-
yajñas.
<LEND>

<L>25177<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUQi<k2>nirUQi
{%Nir-ūḍhi, is,%}¦ f. (also to be referred to rt. {%vah%}
with {%nis%}), fame, celebrity, renown.
<LEND>

<L>25178<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUha<k2>nirUha<h>1
1. {%nir-ūha, as,%}¦ m. a purging clyster; an enema
not of an oily kind, {%= ni-graha?;%} (for 2. {%nir-%}
{%ūha%} see below.) {%—Nirūha-vasti-vidhi, is,%} m., N.
of the twenty-fifth chapter of the Śārṅga-dhara-saṃ-
hitā, a medical work by Śārṅga-dhara. {%—Nirūhā-%}
{%dhikāra (˚ha-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of a chapter of a
medical work by Vṛnda.
<LEND>

<L>25179<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUhaRa<k2>nirUhaRa<h>1
1. {%nir-ūhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. causing to purge with a
clyster; administering enemas not of an oily kind.
(For 2. {%nir-ūhaṇa%} see below.)
<LEND>

<L>25180<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUhita<k2>nirUhita
{%Nir-ūhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ purged.
<LEND>

<L>25181<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUha<k2>nirUha<h>2
{#nirUha#} 2¦. {%nir-ūha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%ūh%} with
{%nis%}), logic, disputation; certainty, ascertainment.
(For 1. {%nir-ūha%} see above; for 3. see next col.)
<LEND>

<L>25182<pc>0495-b<k1>nirUhaRa<k2>nirUhaRa<h>2
2. {%nir-ūhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. ascertainment.
<LEND>
[Page0495-c+ 72]

<L>25183<pc>0495-c<k1>nirUha<k2>nirUha<h>3
{#nirUha#} 3¦. {%nir-ūha, as,%} m. (for 1. and 2.
see col. 2), a sentence having no ellipsis, a complete
sentence.
<LEND>

<L>25184<pc>0495-c<k1>nirf<k2>nirf
{#nirf#}¦ {%nir-ṛ,%} cl. 3. P. {%-iyarti,%} &c., Ved. to
go out from, depart from, liberate one's self from
(with abl.); to be excluded, to become deprived of
(with abl.); Caus. {%nir-arpayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to go to pieces or decay, to dissolve.
<LEND>

<L>25185<pc>0495-c<k1>nirfta<k2>nirfta
{%Nir-ṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dissolved, decaying; debili-
tated; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>25186<pc>0495-c<k1>nirfti<k2>nirfti
{%Nir-ṛti, is,%}¦ f. decay, dissolution, destruction, anni-
hilation, calamity, evil, adversity; imprecation, curse;
Decay or Destruction personified (goddess of death
and corruption; she is described as binding mortals
with her cords, and is often associated with Mṛtyu,
A-rāti, and similar beings; she is variously regarded
as the wife of A-dharma, mother of Bhaya, Mahā-
bhaya, and Mṛtyu, or as a daughter of A-dharma and
Hiṃsā and mother of Naraka and Bhaya; she is
regent of the south-west or south-western quarter
and of the asterism Mūla); ({%is%}), f. the bottom or
lower depths of the earth (perhaps regarded as the
seat of putrefaction; cf. {%nairṛta%}); ({%is, is, i%}), free
from adversity, (in this sense {%nir%} is a privative.)
<LEND>

<L>25187<pc>0495-c<k1>nirfTa<k2>nirfTa
{%Nir-ṛtha, as,%}¦ m. destruction, the Destroyer (i. e.
Nirṛtha personified); an epithet of a particular Agni;
(according to some) the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>25188<pc>0495-c<k1>nirfC<k2>nirfC
{#nirfC#}¦ {%nir-ṛch,%} cl. 6. P. {%-ṛcchati,%} &c.,
Ved. to go out from, fall from, be excluded from
(with abl.); to go or cleave asunder.
<LEND>

<L>25189<pc>0495-c<k1>nire<k2>nire
{#nire#}¦ {%nir-e (nir-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%nir-aiti,%} Ved.
to come forth from, to go off, depart, make way for.
<LEND>

<L>25190<pc>0495-c<k1>nireka<k2>nireka
{#nireka#}¦ {%ni-reka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ric%} with {%ni%}),
Ved. a lasting possession (?), wealth, property; ({%e%}),
ind. lastingly, for ever; (Sāy.) in poverty or want; in
donation or gifts; (according to Mahī-dhara) not
empty.
<LEND>

<L>25191<pc>0495-c<k1>nireBa<k2>nireBa
{#nireBa#}¦ {%ni-rebha, as, ā, am,%} soundless, noise-
less.
<LEND>

<L>25192<pc>0495-c<k1>nirodDavya<k2>nirodDavya
{#nirodDavya#}¦ {%ni-roddhavya, ni-rodha,%} &c. See
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25193<pc>0495-c<k1>nirgata<k2>nirgata
{#nirgata#}¦ {%nir-gata.%} See {%nir-gam%} below.
<LEND>

<L>25194<pc>0495-c<k1>nirganDa<k2>nirganDa
{#nirganDa#}¦ {%nir-gandha, as, ā, am,%} inodorous,
scentless, unfragrant, void of smell. {%—Nirgandha-tā,%}
f. absence of smell, want of fragrance, scentlessness.
{%—Nirgandha-puṣpī,%} f. the silk-cotton tree ({%=%}
{%śālmali%}), Bombax Heptaphyllum.
<LEND>

<L>25195<pc>0495-c<k1>nirganDana<k2>nirganDana
{#nirganDana#}¦ {%nirgandhana, am,%} n. {%= nirgran-%}
{%thana,%} killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>25196<pc>0495-c<k1>nirgam<k2>nirgam
{#nirgam#}¦ {%nir-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} to go out, come forth, depart from (with abl.),
set out; to come out or appear (as a bud); to go
away, disappear; to be freed from (with abl.); to enter
into any state, undergo (with acc.): Desid. {%-jigami-%}
{%ṣati,%} to wish to go out.
<LEND>

<L>25197<pc>0495-c<k1>nirga<k2>nirga
{%Nir-ga, as,%}¦ m. country, region; place or province.
<LEND>

<L>25198<pc>0495-c<k1>nirgata<k2>nirgata
{%Nir-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone out, come forth, come
out, appeared; gone away, departed; disappeared,
extinct; freed from. {%—Nirgata-viśaṅka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} freed from fear, fearless.
<LEND>

<L>25199<pc>0495-c<k1>nirgama<k2>nirgama
{%Nir-gama, as,%}¦ m. going forth or out, setting out,
going away, receding; departure, vanishing; exit,
issue, outlet; a door; [cf. {%jala-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25200<pc>0495-c<k1>nirgamana<k2>nirgamana
{%Nir-gamana, am,%}¦ n. going out or forth.
<LEND>

<L>25201<pc>0495-c<k1>nirgarva<k2>nirgarva
{#nirgarva#}¦ {%nir-garva, as, ā, am,%} free from
pride, humble, lowly.
<LEND>

<L>25202<pc>0495-c<k1>nirgal<k2>nirgal
{#nirgal#}¦ {%nir-gal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-galati,%} &c., to
trickle or flow out; to dissolve, melt. {%—Nir-galita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} flowed out, poured forth; dissolved,
melted.
<LEND>

<L>25203<pc>0495-c<k1>nirgavAkza<k2>nirgavAkza
{#nirgavAkza#}¦ {%nir-gavākṣa, as, ā, am,%} window-
less, without windows.
<LEND>
[Page0496-a+ 69]

<L>25204<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgA<k2>nirgA
{#nirgA#}¦ {%nir-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti%} (or {%-jagāti%}),
{%-gātum,%} Ved. to go out, come forth.
<LEND>

<L>25205<pc>0496-a<k1>nirguRa<k2>nirguRa
{#nirguRa#}¦ {%nir-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} stringless (as
a bow); devoid of all qualities or properties; without
attributes; having no epithet; devoid of good
qualities or virtues, bad, worthless, vicious; ({%as%}), m.
the Supreme Being (as without qualities of any kind).
{%—Nirguṇa-tā,%} f. or {%nirguṇa-tva, am,%} n. absence
of qualities, want of properties, freedom from all
qualities (as an attribute of the Supreme Being);
absence or want of good qualities, wickedness, vicious-
ness, baseness. {%—Nirguṇātmaka (˚ṇa-āt˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having no qualities.
<LEND>

<L>25206<pc>0496-a<k1>nirguRwI<k2>nirguRwI
{#nirguRwI#}¦ {%nirguṇṭī%} or {%nirguṇḍī%} or {%nirguṇḍi,%}
{%is,%} f. the shrub Vitex Negundo; another plant ({%=%}
{%nīla-śephālikā%}); the root of a lotus.
<LEND>

<L>25207<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgup<k2>nirgup
{#nirgup#}¦ {%nir-gup,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gopāyati,%} &c., to
guard, protect.
<LEND>

<L>25208<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgulma<k2>nirgulma
{#nirgulma#}¦ {%nir-gulma, as, ā, am,%} free from
bushes, destitute of shrubs.
<LEND>

<L>25209<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgUQa<k2>nirgUQa
{#nirgUQa#}¦ {%nir-gūḍha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%guh%} with
{%nis%}), the hollow of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>25210<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgfha<k2>nirgfha
{#nirgfha#}¦ {%nir-gṛha, as, ā, am,%} houseless,
homeless.
<LEND>

<L>25211<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgF<k2>nirgF
{#nirgF#}¦ {%nir-gṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-girati%} or {%-gilati,%} &c.,
to vomit forth. {%—Nir-gīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} vomited
forth.
<LEND>

<L>25212<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgOrava<k2>nirgOrava
{#nirgOrava#}¦ {%nir-gaurava, as, ā, am,%} destitute
of respect; without dignity, undignified, affable; ({%am%}),
ind. without pride, condescendingly, affably.
<LEND>

<L>25213<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgranTa<k2>nirgranTa
{#nirgranTa#}¦ {%nir-grantha, as, ā, am,%} freed from
all ties or hindrances; a saint, a devotee who has
withdrawn from the world and lives either as a
hermit or a beggar wandering about naked; pos-
sessionless, poor, a pauper, beggar [cf. {%grantha,%} said
to mean ‘riches’]; ({%as%}), m. an idiot; a fool; a
gambler; N. of a man, son of Jñāti. {%—Nirgrantha-%}
{%śāstra, am,%} n., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>25214<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgranTaka<k2>nirgranTaka
{%Nir-granthaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ unattended, unac-
companied; abandoned, deserted; fruitless; clever,
expert, conversant; ({%as%}), m. a religious mendicant;
a naked devotee; a gambler; ({%as, am%}), m. n. (?),
Buddhism (because the Buddhists appeared as religious
mendicants, especially as ascetics).
<LEND>

<L>25215<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgranTi<k2>nirgranTi
{%Nir-granthi, is, is, i,%}¦ free from knots, knotless.
<LEND>

<L>25216<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgranTika<k2>nirgranTika
{%Nir-granthika, as,%}¦ m. a naked mendicant, an
ascetic; ({%as, ā, am%}), clever, conversant; {%= hīna,%}
destitute (?).
<LEND>

<L>25217<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgranTana<k2>nirgranTana
{#nirgranTana#}¦ {%nir-granthana, am,%} n. killing,
slaughter; [cf. {%ni-granthana, ni-gandhana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25218<pc>0496-a<k1>nirgrAhya<k2>nirgrAhya
{#nirgrAhya#}¦ {%nir-grāhya, as, ā, am,%} to be traced
or found out, perceivable.
<LEND>

<L>25219<pc>0496-a<k1>nirGawa<k2>nirGawa
{#nirGawa#}¦ {%nir-ghaṭa, am,%} n. a fair or crowded
market, a free market, a wharf or ghaut where no
toll is levied, a place where there is no quay or stairs,
(in this sense {%nir%} is a privative.)
<LEND>

<L>25220<pc>0496-a<k1>nirGaRwa<k2>nirGaRwa
{#nirGaRwa#}¦ {%nir-ghaṇṭa%} or {%nir-ghaṇṭaka, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a vocabulary, a collection of words, {%=%}
{%ni-ghaṇṭu,%} (perhaps for {%nir-granthaka,%} ‘singling
out the words of a sentence and writing them down
in their independent form.’)
<LEND>

<L>25221<pc>0496-a<k1>nirGAta<k2>nirGAta
{#nirGAta#}¦ {%nir-ghāta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%han%} with
{%nis%}), destruction; a violent gust of wind, hurricane,
whirlwind; the noise of contending vapours in the
sky; an earthquake; a thunder-stroke; any severe
stroke.
<LEND>

<L>25222<pc>0496-a<k1>nirGAtana<k2>nirGAtana
{%Nir-ghātana, am,%}¦ n. forcing out, bringing out.
<LEND>

<L>25223<pc>0496-a<k1>nirGAtya<k2>nirGAtya
{%Nir-ghātya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be forced or brought
out.
<LEND>
[Page0496-b+ 73]

<L>25224<pc>0496-b<k1>nirGuzwa<k2>nirGuzwa
{#nirGuzwa#}¦ {%nir-ghuṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ghuṣ%}
with {%nis%}), sounded, resounded.
<LEND>

<L>25225<pc>0496-b<k1>nirGoza<k2>nirGoza
{%Nir-ghoṣa, as,%}¦ m. sound in general, noise, a
loud noise, rattling, trampling; ({%as, ā, am%}), sound-
less, noiseless, (in this sense {%nir%} is a privative.)
{%—Nirghoṣākṣara-vimukta (˚ṣa-akṣ˚), as,%}
m., N. of a Samādhi.
<LEND>

<L>25226<pc>0496-b<k1>nirGUriRI<k2>nirGUriRI
{#nirGUriRI#}¦ {%nir-ghūriṇī,%} f. a river, (perhaps
a wrong reading for {%nir-jhariṇī.%})
<LEND>

<L>25227<pc>0496-b<k1>nirGfRa<k2>nirGfRa
{#nirGfRa#}¦ {%nir-ghṛṇa, as, ā, am,%} unmerciful,
pitiless, cruel; shameless, immodest; ({%am%}), ind.
without pity, pitilessly. {%—Nirghṛṇa-tā,%} f. or {%nir-%}
{%ghṛṇa-tva, am,%} n. pitilessness, unmercifulness, hard-
heartedness, cruelty.
<LEND>

<L>25228<pc>0496-b<k1>nirGfRA<k2>nirGfRA
{%Nir-ghṛṇā,%}¦ f. unmercifulness, cruelty.
<LEND>

<L>25229<pc>0496-b<k1>nirGfz<k2>nirGfz
{#nirGfz#}¦ {%nir-ghṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gharṣati,%} &c.,
to rub against or on (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>25230<pc>0496-b<k1>nirGarzaRa<k2>nirGarzaRa
{%Nir-gharṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. rubbing, friction.
<LEND>

<L>25231<pc>0496-b<k1>nirGarzaRaka<k2>nirGarzaRaka
{%Nirgharṣaṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what rubs,
a rubber, rubbing, a rubbing, a dentifrice fit for
cleaning the teeth.
<LEND>

<L>25232<pc>0496-b<k1>nirGfzya<k2>nirGfzya
{%Nir-ghṛṣya,%}¦ ind. having rubbed, having rubbed
on.
<LEND>

<L>25233<pc>0496-b<k1>nirGoza<k2>nirGoza
{#nirGoza#}¦ {%nir-ghoṣa.%} See {%nir-ghuṣṭa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>25234<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjana<k2>nirjana
{#nirjana#}¦ {%nir-jana, as, ā, am,%} unpeopled, de-
populated, uninhabited, unfrequented, lonely, de-
serted, desolate; ({%am%}), n. a solitude, desert. {%—Nir-%}
{%jana-tā,%} f. or {%nirjana-tva, am,%} n. depopulation,
the state of being unpeopled or deserted. {%—Nirjana-%}
{%vana, am,%} n. a lonely or unfrequented forest.
<LEND>

<L>25235<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjara<k2>nirjara<h>1
{#nirjara#} 1¦. {%nir-jara, as, ā, am,%} (for 2. see
{%nir-jṝ,%} col. 3), not becoming old, young, fresh;
imperishable, immortal, undecaying; ({%as%}), m. an
immortal, a deity, god; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Cocculus
Cordifolius; Anethum Graveloens, {%= tattva-bhid;%}
{%(am),%} n. ambrosia, the food of the gods. {%—Nir-%}
{%jara-sarṣapa, as,%} m. a species of mustard ({%=%}
{%deva-sarṣapa%}).
<LEND>

<L>25236<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjaras<k2>nirjaras
{%Nir-jaras,%}¦ optionally substituted for 1. {%nir-jara%}
in certain cases. (See Pāṇ. VII. 2, 101.)
<LEND>

<L>25237<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjarAyu<k2>nirjarAyu
{#nirjarAyu#}¦ {%nir-jarāyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. skin-
less (as a snake which has cast its skin).
<LEND>

<L>25238<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjarjalpa<k2>nirjarjalpa
{#nirjarjalpa#}¦ {%nir-jarjalpa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (ac-
cording to Mahī-dhara, probably because of its simi-
larity to {%jarjara,%} =) ragged, tattered; (another read-
ing has {%nir-jālmaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>25239<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjala<k2>nirjala
{#nirjala#}¦ {%nir-jala, as, ā, am,%} waterless, desti-
tute of water, dry, desert; not mixed with water
(as buttermilk); ({%as%}), m. a desert, waste. {%—Nirjala-%}
{%toyadābha (˚da-ābhā), as, ā, am,%} of the colour of
a waterless cloud, i. e. white, of a fair complexion.
{%—Nirjalaikādaśī (˚la-ek˚),%} f., N. of the eleventh
day in the light half of month Jyaiṣṭha, on which
even the drinking of water is forbidden.
<LEND>

<L>25240<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjAta<k2>nirjAta
{#nirjAta#}¦ {%nir-jāta, as, ā, am,%} come forth,
appeared, visible.
<LEND>

<L>25241<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjAlmaka<k2>nirjAlmaka
{#nirjAlmaka#}¦ {%nir-jālmaka.%} See {%nir-jarjalpa.%}
<LEND>

<L>25242<pc>0496-b<k1>nirji<k2>nirji
{#nirji#}¦ {%nir-ji,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-jayati, -te, -jetum,%}
to conquer, win, gain, acquire, subdue, vanquish;
to overcome in play.
<LEND>

<L>25243<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjaya<k2>nirjaya
{%Nir-jaya, as,%}¦ m. conquest, complete victory, van-
quishing, subduing; [cf. {%manyu-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25244<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjita<k2>nirjita
{%Nir-jita, as, ā, am,%}¦ conquered, completely van-
quished, thoroughly subdued, overcome; won, ac-
quired, gained; claimed; unconquered. {%—Nirjita-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Nirjitāri-gaṇas%}
{%(˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has conquered hosts
of enemies. {%—Nirjitendriya (˚ta-in˚), as, ā, am,%}
of subdued passions or feelings. {%—Nirjitendriya-%}
{%grāma, as,%} m. ‘one who has subdued the whole
assemblage of his organs,’ a Muni, a saint.
<LEND>

<L>25245<pc>0496-b<k1>nirjiti<k2>nirjiti
{%Nir-jiti, is,%}¦ f. conquest, complete victory, sub-
duing, subjugation.
<LEND>
[Page0496-c+ 73]

<L>25246<pc>0496-c<k1>nirjitya<k2>nirjitya
{%Nir-jitya,%}¦ ind. having conquered or won or gained.
<LEND>

<L>25247<pc>0496-c<k1>nirjetf<k2>nirjetf
{%Nir-jetṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a conquerer, vanquisher.
<LEND>

<L>25248<pc>0496-c<k1>nirjihva<k2>nirjihva
{#nirjihva#}¦ {%nir-jihva, as, ā, am,%} tongueless,
without a tongue.
<LEND>

<L>25249<pc>0496-c<k1>nirjIva<k2>nirjIva
{#nirjIva#}¦ {%nir-jīva, as,%} m. lifelessness, death;
({%as, ā, am%}), lifeless, inanimate, dead. {%—Nirjīva-%}
{%kāraṇa, am,%} n. a cause of death, a fatal blow.
<LEND>

<L>25250<pc>0496-c<k1>nirjIvita<k2>nirjIvita
{%Nir-jīvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lifeless, dead, inanimate.
<LEND>

<L>25251<pc>0496-c<k1>nirjuzwa<k2>nirjuzwa
{#nirjuzwa#}¦ {%nir-juṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%juṣ%}
with prep. {%nis%}), frequented, inhabited.
<LEND>

<L>25252<pc>0496-c<k1>nirjF<k2>nirjF
{#nirjF#}¦ {%nir-jṝ,%} Caus. {%-jarayati, -yitum,%} to
wear down, wear away, rub to pieces, crush.
<LEND>

<L>25253<pc>0496-c<k1>nirjara<k2>nirjara<h>2
2. {%nir-jara, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely wearing down
or destroying. (For 1. {%nir-jara%} see col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>25254<pc>0496-c<k1>nirjYAti<k2>nirjYAti
{#nirjYAti#}¦ {%nir-jñāti, is, is, i,%} destitute of
relations; having no kinsfolk.
<LEND>

<L>25255<pc>0496-c<k1>nirjvara<k2>nirjvara
{#nirjvara#}¦ {%nir-jvara, as, ā, am,%} feverless,
healthy.
<LEND>

<L>25256<pc>0496-c<k1>nirJara<k2>nirJara
{#nirJara#}¦ {%nir-jhara, as, ī, am,%} m. f. n. (perhaps
fr. {%jhar%} for rt. {%kṣar%} with {%nis%}), a waterfall, cataract,
cascade, mountain-torrent, the precipitous descent of
water from mountains, &c. [cf. {%jhara%}]; ({%as%}), m.
burning chaff; an elephant; a horse of the Sun
[cf. {%nir-ṇara%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a river [cf. {%nir-jhariṇī;%} cf.
also {%nilimpa-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25257<pc>0496-c<k1>nirJarin<k2>nirJarin
{%Nir-jharin, ī,%}¦ m. a mountain; ({%iṇī%}), f. a torrent,
river.
<LEND>

<L>25258<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRaya<k2>nirRaya
{#nirRaya#}¦ {%nir-ṇaya.%} See under {%nir-ṇī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>25259<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRara<k2>nirRara
{#nirRara#}¦ {%nir-ṇara, as,%} m. one of the horses
of the Sun; [cf. {%nir-jhara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25260<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRAma<k2>nirRAma
{#nirRAma#}¦ {%nirṇāma, as,%} m., Ved. the joint of
a wing.
<LEND>

<L>25261<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRij<k2>nirRij<h>1
{#nirRij#} 1¦. {%nir-ṇij,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-ṇenekti, -ṇe-%}
{%nikte,%} Ved. inf. {%nir-ṇije, nir-ṇijam,%} &c., to wash
off, wash, cleanse (A.); to wash one's self; to dress
one's self.
<LEND>

<L>25262<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRikta<k2>nirRikta
{%Nir-ṇikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ washed, purified, cleaned,
cleansed.
<LEND>

<L>25263<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRij<k2>nirRij<h>2
2. {%nir-ṇij, k,%}¦ f., Ved. a shining dress or ornament,
any bright garment [cf. {%adhi-n˚, aśva-n˚, ghṛta-%}
{%n˚%}]; purification, cleansing; (Sāy.) a form, shape;
well nourished (m. f. n.).
<LEND>

<L>25264<pc>0496-c<k1>nirReka<k2>nirReka
{%Nir-ṇeka, as,%}¦ m. washing, cleansing, cleaning;
ablution; expiation, atonement.
<LEND>

<L>25265<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRejaka<k2>nirRejaka
{%Nir-ṇejaka, as,%}¦ m. a washerman, washer.
<LEND>

<L>25266<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRejana<k2>nirRejana
{%Nir-ṇejana, am,%}¦ n. ablution; expiation, atonement
for an offence.
<LEND>

<L>25267<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRI<k2>nirRI
{#nirRI#}¦ {%nir-ṇī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ṇayati, -te, -ṇe-%}
{%tum,%} to lead or take away, carry away, carry off;
to trace out, investigate, find out, ascertain, educe,
elicit, to settle, come to a decision, decide.
<LEND>

<L>25268<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRaya<k2>nirRaya
{%Nir-ṇaya, as,%}¦ m. removing, removal; deciding,
rendering certain, complete ascertainment, decision,
certainty, determination, proof, affirmation, precise
definition, settlement; (in logic) deduction, inference,
conclusion, demonstration; application of a conclu-
sive argument; (in law) sentence, verdict; (in rhe-
toric) narration of events; discussion, consideration,
investigation. {%—Nirṇaya-kamalākara (˚la-āk˚), as,%}
m. ‘a lotus-bed of conclusions,’ N. of a Mīmāṃsā work.
{%—Nirṇaya-darpaṇa, am,%} n. ‘mirror of certainty,’
N. of a Vedānta work. {%—Nirṇaya-dīpa,%} ‘lamp of
certainty,’ N. of a work mentioned in the Śūdra-
dharma-tattva by Kamalākara-bhaṭṭa. {%—Nirṇaya-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work written about the middle
of the seventeenth century. {%—Nirṇaya-pāda, as,%}
m. a sentence, decree, verdict in law. {%—Nirṇaya-%}
{%sindhu,%} N. of a Mīmāṃsā work by Kamalākara-
bhaṭṭa; (also read {%nirṇeya-sindhu.%}) {%—Nirṇayā-%}
{%mṛta (˚ya-am˚), am,%} n. ‘nectar of certainty,’ N.
of a work.
<LEND>

<L>25269<pc>0496-c<k1>nirRayat<k2>nirRayat
{%Nir-ṇayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ concluding, deciding,
ascertaining.
<LEND>
[Page0497-a+ 72]

<L>25270<pc>0497-a<k1>nirRayana<k2>nirRayana
{%Nir-ṇayana, am,%}¦ n. ascertainment, certainty;
positive conclusion.
<LEND>

<L>25271<pc>0497-a<k1>nirRAyaka<k2>nirRAyaka
{%Nir-ṇāyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing or leading to
certainty, conclusive.
<LEND>

<L>25272<pc>0497-a<k1>nirRAyana<k2>nirRAyana
{%Nir-ṇāyana, am,%}¦ n. rendering certain; the outer
angle of the elephant's eye.
<LEND>

<L>25273<pc>0497-a<k1>nirRIta<k2>nirRIta
{%Nir-ṇīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ deduced, traced out, brought to
a conclusion, ascertained, settled, decided, proved.
<LEND>

<L>25274<pc>0497-a<k1>nirRetf<k2>nirRetf
{%Nir-ṇetṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ decisive, certifying, veri-
fying, leading to certainty, demonstrating, proving;
({%tā%}), m. one who pronounces a sentence, a judge;
a voucher; a guide. {%—Nirṇetṛ-tva, am,%} n. proof,
verification.
<LEND>

<L>25275<pc>0497-a<k1>nirReya<k2>nirReya
{%Nir-ṇeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be ascertained, to be
decided or determined.
<LEND>

<L>25276<pc>0497-a<k1>nirRud<k2>nirRud
{#nirRud#}¦ {%nir-ṇud,%} cl. 6. P. A. (sometimes
wrongly {%nir-nud%}), {%-ṇudati, -te, -ṇottum,%} to push
or drive out; to drive away, expel, reject, remove;
to repudiate.
<LEND>

<L>25277<pc>0497-a<k1>nirRoda<k2>nirRoda
{%Nir-ṇoda, as,%}¦ m. removal, banishment.
<LEND>

<L>25278<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaMS<k2>nirdaMS
{#nirdaMS#}¦ {%nir-daṃś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-daśati%} or {%-daṃ-%}
{%śati, -daṃṣṭum,%} to bite through, bite; (with {%dan-%}
{%tān%}) to gnash the teeth, grind the teeth.
<LEND>

<L>25279<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaMSin<k2>nirdaMSin
{%Nir-daṃśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ biting through; not biting,
(Ved., in this sense {%nir%} is a privative.)
<LEND>

<L>25280<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaSat<k2>nirdaSat
{%Nir-daśat, an, antī, at,%}¦ biting, biting through;
consuming.
<LEND>

<L>25281<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaSamAna<k2>nirdaSamAna
{%Nir-daśamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ biting through, biting;
gnashing or grinding (the teeth).
<LEND>

<L>25282<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaSya<k2>nirdaSya
{%Nir-daśya,%}¦ ind. having bitten, biting through.
<LEND>

<L>25283<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdagDa<k2>nirdagDa
{#nirdagDa#}¦ {%nir-dagdha.%} See {%nir-dah%} below.
<LEND>

<L>25284<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaqa<k2>nirdaqa
{#nirdaqa#}¦ {%nir-daḍa, as, ā, am,%} unkind, un-
feeling, unmerciful; devoid of pity or charity, re-
joicing over the faults of others; envious, slanderous,
abusive; useless, unnecessary; mad, intoxicated; vio-
lent; (sometimes spelt {%nir-daṭa;%} cf. {%nir-daya.%})
<LEND>

<L>25285<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaRqa<k2>nirdaRqa
{#nirdaRqa#}¦ {%nir-daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} not punishing.
<LEND>

<L>25286<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaya<k2>nirdaya
{#nirdaya#}¦ {%nir-daya, as, ā, am,%} pitiless, un-
merciful, unkind, cruel, hard-hearted; passionate;
excessive, violent; unpitied by any; ({%am%}), n. without
pity, unmercifully; passionately, violently, exces-
sively, much. {%—Nirdaya-tva, am,%} n. unmercifulness,
cruelty.
<LEND>

<L>25287<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdara<k2>nirdara
{#nirdara#}¦ {%nir-dara, as,%} or {%nir-dari, is,%} m. {%=%}
{%dara%} or {%dari,%} a cave, cavern; [according to some
{%nir-dara, as, ā, am, = nir-daya,%} pitiless, hard;
shameless; also {%nir-daram,%} ind. = excessively, and
{%nir-dara, am,%} n. = pith, essence.] {%—Nirdari-vāsin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} inhabiting a cave.
<LEND>

<L>25288<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdalana<k2>nirdalana
{#nirdalana#}¦ {%nir-dalana, am,%} n. splitting,
cleaving asunder, breaking.
<LEND>

<L>25289<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaSa<k2>nirdaSa
{#nirdaSa#}¦ {%nir-daśa, as, ā, am,%} more than ten
days old, what happened more than ten days ago;
[cf. {%a-n˚, nairdaśya.%}] {%—Nirdaśāha (˚śa-aha),%}
see {%a-n˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>25290<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaSat<k2>nirdaSat
{#nirdaSat#}¦ {%nir-daśat,%} &c. See {%nir-daṃś%} above.
<LEND>

<L>25291<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdaSana<k2>nirdaSana
{#nirdaSana#}¦ {%nir-daśana, as, ā, am,%} toothless.
{%—Nirdaśanākṣi-jihva (˚na-akṣ˚), as, ā, am,%}
deprived of teeth, eyes, and tongue.
<LEND>

<L>25292<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdasyu<k2>nirdasyu
{#nirdasyu#}¦ {%nir-dasyu, us, us, u,%} free from
robbers or bandits.
<LEND>

<L>25293<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdah<k2>nirdah
{#nirdah#}¦ {%nir-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dagdhum,%}
to burn out, burn up, consume by fire, destroy com-
pletely: Caus. {%-dāhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to burn
up or set on fire.
<LEND>

<L>25294<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdagDa<k2>nirdagDa
{%Nir-dagdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ burnt, burnt up; un-
burnt, (in this sense {%nir%} is a privative.)
<LEND>

<L>25295<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdagDikA<k2>nirdagDikA
{%Nir-dagdhikā,%}¦ f. {%= ni-digdhikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>25296<pc>0497-a<k1>nirdahana<k2>nirdahana
{%Nir-dahana, as, ī, am,%}¦ burning, burning up,
consuming; ({%as%}), m. the plant Semecarpus Ana-
cardium; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Sanseviera Roxburghiana;
({%am%}), n. burning.
<LEND>
[Page0497-b+ 72]

<L>25297<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdAha<k2>nirdAha
{%Nir-dāha, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%nir-dāhuka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. burning, consuming by fire.
<LEND>

<L>25298<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdAtf<k2>nirdAtf
{#nirdAtf#}¦ {%nir-dātṛ, tā,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%dā%} or {%do%}
with {%nis%}), a weeder, digger up of weeds; a reaper,
husbandman; [cf. {%nir-yātṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25299<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdArita<k2>nirdArita
{#nirdArita#}¦ {%nir-dārita.%} See {%nir-dṝ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>25300<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdigDa<k2>nirdigDa
{#nirdigDa#}¦ {%nir-digdha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%dih%}
with {%nis%}), anointed, smeared; well fed, corpulent,
stout, lusty.
<LEND>

<L>25301<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdigDikA<k2>nirdigDikA
{%Nir-digdhikā,%}¦ f. a various reading for {%nir-dag-%}
{%dhikā%} or {%ni-digdhikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>25302<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdiS<k2>nirdiS
{#nirdiS#}¦ {%nir-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%}
to point to, point out, show, direct, declare, announce,
tell, enjoin, order; to denote, indicate, mark; to
assign, destine; to enumerate, specify, particularize,
name; to foretel; to define, determine; to describe;
to recommend, advise, suggest; to denounce: Desid.
{%-didikṣati,%} to wish to point out or to define
more closely.
<LEND>

<L>25303<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdiSya<k2>nirdiSya
{%Nir-diśya,%}¦ ind. having pointed out, having shown,
explained, enjoined, &c.
<LEND>

<L>25304<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdizwa<k2>nirdizwa
{%Nir-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pointed out, shown,
specified, particularized; described, depicted; assigned;
ordered, directed; asserted, declared; ascertained,
determined.
<LEND>

<L>25305<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdeSa<k2>nirdeSa
{%Nir-deśa, as,%}¦ m. pointing out, directing, ordering,
order, command, direction; instruction; saying, tell-
ing, declaring; description, designation; depicting,
specifying, particularizing, giving particulars or details,
specification, special mention; certainty, ascertain-
ment; vicinity, proximity; a particular number;
[cf. {%ni-deśa.%}] {%—Nirdeśa-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} executing
orders, obedient.
<LEND>

<L>25306<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdeSaka<k2>nirdeSaka
{%Nir-deśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ pointing out, showing,
describing; ordering.
<LEND>

<L>25307<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdeSanIya<k2>nirdeSanIya
{%Nir-deśanīya%}¦ or {%nir-deśya, as, ā, am,%} to be
pointed out; assignable; to be determined; to be
arranged; to be described, to be defined or particu-
larized; to be proclaimed or foretold.
<LEND>

<L>25308<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdezwf<k2>nirdezwf
{%Nir-deṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ who or what shows,
explains, points out, defines, &c.; ({%ṭā%}), m. an
authority, a guide.
<LEND>

<L>25309<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdI<k2>nirdI
{#nirdI#}¦ {%nir-dī,%} cl. 4. P. {%-dīyati,%} &c., Ved. to
fly away.
<LEND>

<L>25310<pc>0497-b<k1>nirduHKa<k2>nirduHKa
{#nirduHKa#}¦ {%nir-duḥkha, as, ā, am,%} free from
pain, painless, not suffering pain; not causing pain.
{%—Nirduḥkha-tva, am,%} n. absence of pain; pain-
lessness.
<LEND>

<L>25311<pc>0497-b<k1>nirduh<k2>nirduh
{#nirduh#}¦ {%nir-duh,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-dogdhi, -dug-%}
{%dhe, -dogdhum,%} to milk out, extract, draw out,
produce; to withdraw.
<LEND>

<L>25312<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdugDa<k2>nirdugDa
{%Nir-dugdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ milked out, drawn out,
extracted.
<LEND>

<L>25313<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdF<k2>nirdF
{#nirdF#}¦ {%nir-dṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-dṛṇāti, -daritum, -da-%}
{%rītum,%} to tear or rend asunder, tear in pieces, split
asunder: Caus. {%-dārayati, -yitum,%} to tear or split
asunder; to root up, cause to be dug up.
<LEND>

<L>25314<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdArita<k2>nirdArita
{%Nir-dārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn asunder, rent; split
open, opened, unclosed; starting open.
<LEND>

<L>25315<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdeva<k2>nirdeva
{#nirdeva#}¦ {%nir-deva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. abandoned
by the gods, without the gods.
<LEND>

<L>25316<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdEnya<k2>nirdEnya
{#nirdEnya#}¦ {%nir-dainya, as, ā, am,%} free from
misery or wretchedness, happy, comfortable, at ease.
<LEND>

<L>25317<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdoza<k2>nirdoza
{#nirdoza#}¦ {%nir-doṣa, as, ā, am,%} faultless, with-
out defect or blemish; guiltless, innocent.
<LEND>

<L>25318<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdozIkfta<k2>nirdozIkfta
{%Nirdoṣī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleared from guilt.
<LEND>

<L>25319<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdravya<k2>nirdravya
{#nirdravya#}¦ {%nir-dravya, as, ā, am,%} immaterial;
without property, poor.
<LEND>

<L>25320<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdru<k2>nirdru
{#nirdru#}¦ {%nir-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -drotum,%}
Ved. to run out, run away.
<LEND>

<L>25321<pc>0497-b<k1>nirdroha<k2>nirdroha
{#nirdroha#}¦ {%nir-droha, as, ā, am,%} not malevo-
lent, not hostile, friendly; well-disposed; innocent.
<LEND>
[Page0497-c+ 71]

<L>25322<pc>0497-c<k1>nirdvandva<k2>nirdvandva
{#nirdvandva#}¦ {%nir-dvandva, as, ā, am,%} free from
either of two alternatives or indifferent in regard to
opposite pairs of feelings (as pleasure and pain),
neither glad nor sorry, &c.; not standing in mutual
relation, not dependant upon another, independant;
not striving together, free from envy or jealousy;
not causing disputes, uncontested, undisputed; not
double; not acknowledging two principles.
<LEND>

<L>25323<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDana<k2>nirDana
{#nirDana#}¦ {%nir-dhana, as, ā, am,%} without pro-
perty or money; poor, indigent; ({%as%}), m. an
old ox. {%—Nirdhana-tā,%} f. or {%nirdhana-tva, am,%}
n. absence of property, poverty, indigence.
<LEND>

<L>25324<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDarma<k2>nirDarma
{#nirDarma#}¦ {%nir-dharma, as,%} m. unrighteous-
ness; ({%as, ā, am%}), unjust, unrighteous, impious,
immoral, void of law, irreligious.
<LEND>

<L>25325<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDA<k2>nirDA
{#nirDA#}¦ {%nir-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadhāti, -dhātum,%}
Ved. to free from; to find out (?).
<LEND>

<L>25326<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDAra<k2>nirDAra
{#nirDAra#}¦ {%nir-dhāra,%} &c. See {%nir-dhṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>25327<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDArtarAzwra<k2>nirDArtarAzwra
{#nirDArtarAzwra#}¦ {%nir-dhārtarāṣṭra, as, ā, am,%}
having no descendants of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra, free from
them.
<LEND>

<L>25328<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDAv<k2>nirDAv<h>1
{#nirDAv#} 1¦. {%nir-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-te, -dhāvitum,%} to stream forth from, spring from;
to run out, escape from.
<LEND>

<L>25329<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDAv<k2>nirDAv<h>2
{#nirDAv#} 2¦. {%nir-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-te, -dhāvitum,%} to wash off, wash away, cleanse.
<LEND>

<L>25330<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDOta<k2>nirDOta
{%Nir-dhauta, as, ā, am,%}¦ washed off, cleansed,
polished, bright.
<LEND>

<L>25331<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDU<k2>nirDU
{#nirDU#}¦ {%nir-dhū,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-dhūnoti, -dhū-%}
{%nute%} (in later language also {%-dhunoti, -dhunute%}),
{%-dhotum%} and {%-dhavitum,%} to shake out, shake off,
remove; to drive away, expel, banish, repudiate,
disown; to shake, agitate, brandish, move about;
to harass, distress, torment, pain.
<LEND>

<L>25332<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDUta<k2>nirDUta
{%Nir-dhūta%}¦ or {%nir-dhuta, as, ā, am,%} shaken off,
shaken out, thrown out or off; removed; avoided;
departed; deserted, rejected; broken, divided; re-
futed, destroyed; deprived of, bereft; suffered, un-
dergone; ({%as%}), m. a man abandoned by his relatives
or friends. {%—Nirdhūta-pāpa, as, ā, am,%} one
whose sins are wholly shaken off or removed.
<LEND>

<L>25333<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDUma<k2>nirDUma
{#nirDUma#}¦ {%nir-dhūma, as, ā, am,%} smokeless.
{%—Nirdhūma-tva, am,%} n. smokelessness.
<LEND>

<L>25334<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDf<k2>nirDf
{#nirDf#}¦ {%nir-dhṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dharati, -te,%} cl.
10. or Caus. {%-dhārayati, -yitum,%} to take out from;
to separate one out of many, particularize; to de-
termine, define, state accurately; to ascertain.
<LEND>

<L>25335<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDAra<k2>nirDAra
{%Nir-dhāra, as,%}¦ m. or {%nir-dhāraṇa, am,%} n. taking
out from, separating or specifying one out of many,
particularizing individuals according to their degree
of merit; determining, defining, settling; certainty,
ascertainment.
<LEND>

<L>25336<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDAraRIya<k2>nirDAraRIya
{%Nir-dhāraṇīya%}¦ or {%nir-dhāritavya, as, ā, am,%}
to be ascertained; irresistible, (in this sense {%nir%} is
a privative.)
<LEND>

<L>25337<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDArita<k2>nirDArita
{%Nir-dhārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ determined, ascertained,
settled.
<LEND>

<L>25338<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDArya<k2>nirDArya
{%Nir-dhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be ascertained or
determined, ascertainable; not to be restrained, act-
ing resolutely or fearlessly, active, energetic, (in this
sense {%nir%} is a privative.)
<LEND>

<L>25339<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDAryamARa<k2>nirDAryamARa
{%Nir-dhāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being particular-
ized; being determined.
<LEND>

<L>25340<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDe<k2>nirDe
{#nirDe#}¦ {%nir-dhe,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhayati, -dhātum,%}
Ved. to drink up, suck up, absorb.
<LEND>

<L>25341<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDOta<k2>nirDOta
{#nirDOta#}¦ {%nir-dhauta.%} See 2. {%nir-dhāv%} above.
<LEND>

<L>25342<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDmA<k2>nirDmA
{#nirDmA#}¦ {%nir-dhmā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhamati, -dhmā-%}
{%tum,%} to blow away, blow out of.
<LEND>

<L>25343<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDmApana<k2>nirDmApana
{%Nir-dhmāpana, am,%}¦ n. blowing away.
<LEND>

<L>25344<pc>0497-c<k1>nirDyE<k2>nirDyE
{#nirDyE#}¦ {%nir-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati, -dhyā-%}
{%tum,%} to think of, reflect upon, meditate about.
<LEND>
[Page0498-a+ 69]

<L>25345<pc>0498-a<k1>nirDyAta<k2>nirDyAta
{%Nir-dhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thought of, reflected
upon, meditated.
<LEND>

<L>25346<pc>0498-a<k1>nirDyAya<k2>nirDyAya
{%Nir-dhyāya,%}¦ ind. having thought of, having re-
flected.
<LEND>

<L>25347<pc>0498-a<k1>nirnamaskAra<k2>nirnamaskAra
{#nirnamaskAra#}¦ {%nir-namaskāra, as, ā, am,%} not
respecting any one, uncourteous; unrespected, re-
spected by no one, despised by all.
<LEND>

<L>25348<pc>0498-a<k1>nirnara<k2>nirnara
{#nirnara#}¦ {%nir-nara, as, ā, am,%} abandoned by
men, deserted, desolate.
<LEND>

<L>25349<pc>0498-a<k1>nirnATa<k2>nirnATa
{#nirnATa#}¦ {%nir-nātha, as, ā, am,%} protectorless,
without a guardian or master or superior. {%—Nirnātha-%}
{%tā,%} f. the being without a master or guardian or pro-
tector, want of protection; widowhood; orphanage.
<LEND>

<L>25350<pc>0498-a<k1>nirnABi<k2>nirnABi
{#nirnABi#}¦ {%nir-nābhi, is, is, i,%} without the
navel, not reaching to the navel.
<LEND>

<L>25351<pc>0498-a<k1>nirnASana<k2>nirnASana
{#nirnASana#}¦ {%nir-nāśana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%naś%}
with {%nis%}), removing, expelling, banishing.
<LEND>

<L>25352<pc>0498-a<k1>nirnASin<k2>nirnASin
{%Nir-nāśin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (from an unused {%nir-nāśa%}),
removing, expelling, banishing.
<LEND>

<L>25353<pc>0498-a<k1>nirnidra<k2>nirnidra
{#nirnidra#}¦ {%nir-nidra, as, ā, am,%} sleepless.
{%—Nirnidra-tā,%} f. sleeplessness.
<LEND>

<L>25354<pc>0498-a<k1>nirnimitta<k2>nirnimitta
{#nirnimitta#}¦ {%nir-nimitta, as, ā, am,%} without
reason or motive, causeless, groundless; ({%am%}), n.
causelessly, without cause. {%—Nirnimitta-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced without a cause, whose cause is
invisible.
<LEND>

<L>25355<pc>0498-a<k1>nirnimeza<k2>nirnimeza
{#nirnimeza#}¦ {%nir-nimeṣa, as, ā, am,%} not
twinkling.
<LEND>

<L>25356<pc>0498-a<k1>nirniroDa<k2>nirniroDa
{#nirniroDa#}¦ {%nir-nirodha, as, ā, am,%} unob-
structed.
<LEND>

<L>25357<pc>0498-a<k1>nirnIqa<k2>nirnIqa
{#nirnIqa#}¦ {%nir-nīḍa, as, ā, am,%} having no nest.
<LEND>

<L>25358<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbadDa<k2>nirbadDa
{#nirbadDa#}¦ {%nir-baddha.%} See {%nir-bandh%} below.
<LEND>

<L>25359<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbanD<k2>nirbanD
{#nirbanD#}¦ {%nir-bandh,%} cl. 9. P. {%-badhnāti,%}
{%-banddhum,%} to fix or fasten upon, attach one's self
to, cling to, to insist upon, persist in; press upon;
to urge, importune.
<LEND>

<L>25360<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbadDa<k2>nirbadDa
{%Nir-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed upon, fastened
upon; directed on; clung to; pressed hard, urged.
<LEND>

<L>25361<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbanDa<k2>nirbanDa
{%Nir-bandha, as,%}¦ m. insisting upon (with loc.),
persistence, perseverance, pertinacity, intentness; ob-
stinacy; importunity, urgency, pressing or urging
anything, ({%nirbandhaṃ kṛ,%} to urge); accusing,
accusation; contest, dispute; caprice, fancy?; [cf.
{%ṇi-bandha.%}] {%—Nirbandha-pṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
urgently asked, importuned.
<LEND>

<L>25362<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbanDanIya<k2>nirbanDanIya
{%Nir-bandhanīya, am,%}¦ n. (perhaps) contest, dis-
pute.
<LEND>

<L>25363<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbanDin<k2>nirbanDin
{%Nir-bandhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ insisting upon (with loc.),
urgent, persisting in, intent upon.
<LEND>

<L>25364<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbanDu<k2>nirbanDu
{#nirbanDu#}¦ {%nir-bandhu, us, us, u,%} without re-
lations, without kindred, friendless.
<LEND>

<L>25365<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbarhaRa<k2>nirbarhaRa
{#nirbarhaRa#}¦ {%nir-barhaṇa, am,%} n. {%= ni-varhaṇa,%}
slaughter, killing, destroying, annihilation.
<LEND>

<L>25366<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbala<k2>nirbala
{#nirbala#}¦ {%nir-bala, as, ā, am,%} powerless, with-
out strength, impotent, weak, feeble.
<LEND>

<L>25367<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbAD<k2>nirbAD
{#nirbAD#}¦ {%nir-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate, -bā-%}
{%dhitum,%} Ved. to keep off, ward off, hold back.
<LEND>

<L>25368<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbADa<k2>nirbADa
{%Nir-bādha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a knob, prominence;
({%nirbādhe kṛ%} is perhaps a proverbial expression
meaning ‘to put on one side, set aside, remove.’)
<LEND>

<L>25369<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbADin<k2>nirbADin
{%Nirbādhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. furnished with knobs or
prominences.
<LEND>

<L>25370<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbudDi<k2>nirbudDi
{#nirbudDi#}¦ {%nir-buddhi, is, is, i,%} senseless,
witless, unwise, ignorant, stupid, out of one's wits.
<LEND>

<L>25371<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbusIkfta<k2>nirbusIkfta
{#nirbusIkfta#}¦ {%nirbusī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} freed
from chaff, husked.
<LEND>

<L>25372<pc>0498-a<k1>nirbrU<k2>nirbrU
{#nirbrU#}¦ {%nir-brū,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bravīti,%} &c., Ved.
to speak out, pronounce (loud or clearly); to inter-
pret, explain.
<LEND>
[Page0498-b+ 71]

<L>25373<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBakta<k2>nirBakta
{#nirBakta#}¦ {%nir-bhakta.%} See {%nir-bhaj%} below.
<LEND>

<L>25374<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBagna<k2>nirBagna
{#nirBagna#}¦ {%nir-bhagna.%} See {%nir-bhañj%} below.
<LEND>

<L>25375<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBaj<k2>nirBaj
{#nirBaj#}¦ {%nir-bhaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bhajati, -te,%}
{%-bhaktum,%} Ved. to exclude from participation or
coparceny (with abl.): Caus. {%-bhājayati, -yitum,%} to
exclude from sharing in, to disinherit.
<LEND>

<L>25376<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBakta<k2>nirBakta
{%Nir-bhakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ excluded from partici-
pation in; taken without eating (as medicine; in
this sense {%nir%} is a privative).
<LEND>

<L>25377<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBAjya<k2>nirBAjya
{%Nir-bhājya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be excluded from
participation in, to be debarred from sharing in.
<LEND>

<L>25378<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBaYj<k2>nirBaYj
{#nirBaYj#}¦ {%nir-bhañj,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhanakti,%}
{%-bhaṅktum,%} to break asunder, split asunder; to
defeat.
<LEND>

<L>25379<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBagna<k2>nirBagna
{%Nir-bhagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken in pieces; broken
down; bent. {%—Nir-bhajyamāna, as, ā, am,%} being
broken in pieces.
<LEND>

<L>25380<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBawa<k2>nirBawa
{#nirBawa#}¦ {%nir-bhaṭa, as, ā, am,%} hard, firm,
compact; (perhaps a wrong reading.)
<LEND>

<L>25381<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBaya<k2>nirBaya
{#nirBaya#}¦ {%nir-bhaya, as, ā, am,%} fearless, un-
daunted; free from danger, secure; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a son of the thirteenth Manu; ({%am%}), ind. fearlessly,
without danger.
<LEND>

<L>25382<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBara<k2>nirBara
{#nirBara#}¦ {%nir-bhara, as, ā, am%} [cf. {%bhara%}],
excessive, exceeding, vehement, violent; deep, sound
(as sleep); ardent; beyond measure, much; (at the
end of a comp.) full of, filled with; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. essence?; ({%am%}), ind. excessively, exceed-
ingly, very much; soundly, deeply.
<LEND>

<L>25383<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBarts<k2>nirBarts
{#nirBarts#}¦ {%nir-bharts,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-bhartsa-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} to threaten, menace, abuse, re-
buke, reprimand, chide, blame, deride.
<LEND>

<L>25384<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBartsana<k2>nirBartsana
{%Nir-bhartsana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. threatening, threat,
menace; abuse, reviling, reproach, blame; malignity;
red paint, lac. {%—Nirbhartsana-daṇḍa-mohita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} bewildered by the threat of punishment.
<LEND>

<L>25385<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBartsita<k2>nirBartsita
{%Nir-bhartsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ threatened, menaced;
reviled, abused.
<LEND>

<L>25386<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBartsya<k2>nirBartsya
{%Nir-bhartsya,%}¦ ind. having threatened; having
reviled or reproached.
<LEND>

<L>25387<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBas<k2>nirBas
{#nirBas#}¦ {%nir-bhas,%} cl. 3. P. {%-babhasti, -bap-%}
{%sati,%} &c., Ved. to bite off, chew.
<LEND>

<L>25388<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBA<k2>nirBA
{#nirBA#}¦ {%nir-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -bhātum,%}
to shine forth, appear, arise, proceed.
<LEND>

<L>25389<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBAta<k2>nirBAta
{%Nir-bhāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shone forth, shining forth,
appeared, arisen.
<LEND>

<L>25390<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBAgya<k2>nirBAgya
{#nirBAgya#}¦ {%nir-bhāgya, as, ā, am,%} unlucky,
unfortunate.
<LEND>

<L>25391<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBAjya<k2>nirBAjya
{#nirBAjya#}¦ {%nir-bhājya.%} See {%nir-bhaj%} above.
<LEND>

<L>25392<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBAs<k2>nirBAs
{#nirBAs#}¦ {%nir-bhās,%} Caus. {%-bhāsayati, -yitum,%}
to illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>25393<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBAsita<k2>nirBAsita
{%Nir-bhāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ illuminated, illumined.
<LEND>

<L>25394<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBid<k2>nirBid
{#nirBid#}¦ {%nir-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhintte, -bhettum,%} to cleave or split asunder, break
in two, rend, divide, separate, open; to break through,
pierce, penetrate, wound; to put out (the eyes); to
break down, destroy; to divulge, betray; to find
out, detect, discover; to excavate: Pass. {%-bhidyate,%}
to be broken asunder, to cleave or split open (intrans.);
to burst asunder.
<LEND>

<L>25395<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBidya<k2>nirBidya
{%Nir-bhidya,%}¦ ind. having broken through, having
pierced or penetrated.
<LEND>

<L>25396<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBinna<k2>nirBinna
{%Nir-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken asunder, pierced,
divided. {%—Nirbhinna-tanu, us, us, u,%} having the
body pierced through or transfixed.
<LEND>

<L>25397<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBeda<k2>nirBeda
{%Nir-bheda, as,%}¦ m. breaking or splitting asunder,
bursting, dividing, a split, rent; the bed or channel
of a river; the issue or termination of an affair,
event.
<LEND>

<L>25398<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBedin<k2>nirBedin
{%Nir-bhedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ splitting asunder, piercing.
<LEND>

<L>25399<pc>0498-b<k1>nirBedya<k2>nirBedya
{%Nir-bhedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be split asunder; having
[Page0498-c+ 66]
no rent; missing an aim; disappointed; (in the last
three senses {%nir%} is a privative.)
<LEND>

<L>25400<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBIta<k2>nirBIta
{#nirBIta#}¦ {%nir-bhīta, as, ā, am,%} fearless, not
afraid.
<LEND>

<L>25401<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBuj<k2>nirBuj
{#nirBuj#}¦ {%nir-bhuj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-bhujati, -bhok-%}
{%tum,%} to bend on one side, bend awry, distort;
({%oṣṭhau nirbhujati,%} he distorts his lips, makes a
wry face.)
<LEND>

<L>25402<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBugna<k2>nirBugna
{%Nir-bhugna, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent awry, distorted;
not bent, straight, (in this sense {%nir%} is a privative.)
<LEND>

<L>25403<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBuja<k2>nirBuja
{%Nir-bhuja, as, ā, am,%}¦ a term applied to a kind
of Sandhi (or Saṃhitā).
<LEND>

<L>25404<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBU<k2>nirBU
{#nirBU#}¦ {%nir-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%}
Ved. to come out, move out, move.
<LEND>

<L>25405<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBUti<k2>nirBUti
{%Nir-bhūti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. disappearing, passing away.
<LEND>

<L>25406<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBf<k2>nirBf
{#nirBf#}¦ {%nir-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. 3. P. {%-bharati, -bi-%}
{%bharti, -bhartum,%} to take out, draw out.
<LEND>

<L>25407<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBfta<k2>nirBfta
{%Nir-bhṛta,%}¦ probably a wrong reading for {%ni-%}
{%bhṛta.%}
<LEND>

<L>25408<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBfti<k2>nirBfti
{#nirBfti#}¦ {%nir-bhṛti, is, is, i,%} without wages,
hireless.
<LEND>

<L>25409<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBeda<k2>nirBeda
{#nirBeda#}¦ {%nir-bheda, nir-bhedya.%} See {%nir-bhid.%}
<LEND>

<L>25410<pc>0498-c<k1>nirBoga<k2>nirBoga
{#nirBoga#}¦ {%nir-bhoga, as, ā, am,%} not devoted
to pleasure or enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>25411<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmakzika<k2>nirmakzika
{#nirmakzika#}¦ {%nir-makṣika, as, ā, am,%} free
from flies, free from tormentors, untroubled; ({%am%}),
n. the being free from flies; ({%am%}), ind. without flies.
<LEND>

<L>25412<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmaj<k2>nirmaj
{#nirmaj#}¦ {%nir-maj,%} Ved. (according to Sāy.)
completely pure (as cows).
<LEND>

<L>25413<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmajj<k2>nirmajj
{#nirmajj#}¦ {%nir-majj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-majjati,%} &c.,
to sink under, sink into; to inundate, deluge.
<LEND>

<L>25414<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmagna<k2>nirmagna
{%Nir-magna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sunk, sunk into, sunk
under, (opposed to {%un-magna.%})
<LEND>

<L>25415<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmajja<k2>nirmajja
{#nirmajja#}¦ {%nir-majja, as, ā, am,%} fatless, mar-
rowless, meagre.
<LEND>

<L>25416<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmaRqUka<k2>nirmaRqUka
{#nirmaRqUka#}¦ {%nir-maṇḍūka, as, ā, am,%} frogless,
destitute of frogs.
<LEND>

<L>25417<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmatsara<k2>nirmatsara
{#nirmatsara#}¦ {%nir-matsara, as, ā, am,%} without
envy, unenvious, free from envy or passion.
<LEND>

<L>25418<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmatsya<k2>nirmatsya
{#nirmatsya#}¦ {%nir-matsya, as, ā, am,%} fishless,
destitute of fish. {%—Nirmatsya-tā,%} f. absence of fish,
the having no fish.
<LEND>

<L>25419<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmaTa<k2>nirmaTa
{#nirmaTa#}¦ {%nir-matha, nir-mathana.%} See under
{%nir-manth%} below.
<LEND>

<L>25420<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmada<k2>nirmada
{#nirmada#}¦ {%nir-mada, as, ā, am,%} unintoxicated,
sober, quiet; not proud, humble; not in rut (as an
elephant).
<LEND>

<L>25421<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmaDya<k2>nirmaDya
{#nirmaDya#}¦ {%nir-madhya, as, ā, am,%} having no
middle; ({%ā%}), f. {%= nalikā,%} a fragrant substance; [cf.
{%nir-mathyā%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>25422<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmanaska<k2>nirmanaska
{#nirmanaska#}¦ {%nir-manaska, as, ā, am,%} mindless,
having no Manas. {%—Nirmanaska-tā,%} f. the having
no Manas.
<LEND>

<L>25423<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmanuja<k2>nirmanuja
{#nirmanuja#}¦ {%nir-manuja, as, ā, am,%} abandoned
by men (as a forest), desolate, uninhabited.
<LEND>

<L>25424<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmanuzya<k2>nirmanuzya
{#nirmanuzya#}¦ {%nir-manuṣya, as, ā, am,%} un-
peopled, uninhabited, deserted by men, without a
man; ({%mātaṅgo nirmanuṣyas,%} an elephant with-
out riders.)
<LEND>

<L>25425<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmantra<k2>nirmantra
{#nirmantra#}¦ {%nir-mantra, as, ā, am,%} unaccom-
panied by holy texts or the recitation of sacred verses
(as the Gandharva marriage).
<LEND>

<L>25426<pc>0498-c<k1>nirmanT<k2>nirmanT
{#nirmanT#}¦ {%nir-manth%} or {%nir-math,%} cl. 1. 9. P.
{%-mathati, -manthati, -mathnāti,%} &c., to stir about,
agitate, churn, shake about, toss about roughly or
violently; to rub, elicit fire by rubbing; to strike,
[Page0499-a+ 76]
beat violently, thresh, bruise, crush, stamp to pieces,
grind, break in pieces, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>25427<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmaTa<k2>nirmaTa
{%Nir-matha, as,%}¦ m. stirring, rubbing. {%—Nirmatha-%}
{%dāru = nirmantha-dāru.%}
<LEND>

<L>25428<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmaTana<k2>nirmaTana
{%Nir-mathana, am,%}¦ n. stirring, churning, rubbing,
rubbing two pieces of wood together to light a fire.
<LEND>

<L>25429<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmaTita<k2>nirmaTita
{%Nir-mathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stirred about, agitated,
churned.
<LEND>

<L>25430<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmaTya<k2>nirmaTya<h>1
1. {%nir-mathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be stirred about or
rubbed; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of fragrant substance, {%=%}
{%nalikā;%} [cf. {%nir-madhyā%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>25431<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmaTya<k2>nirmaTya<h>2
2. {%nir-mathya,%}¦ ind. having churned; having ground;
having discriminated or particularized.
<LEND>

<L>25432<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmaTyamAna<k2>nirmaTyamAna
{%Nir-mathyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being shaken or
tossed about roughly.
<LEND>

<L>25433<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmanTa<k2>nirmanTa
{%Nir-mantha, as,%}¦ m. rubbing. {%—Nirmantha-dāru,%}
{%us, u,%} m. n. or {%nirmantha-kāṣṭha, am,%} n. the
wood used for kindling fire by friction; a churning-
stick.
<LEND>

<L>25434<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmanTana<k2>nirmanTana
{%Nir-manthana, am,%}¦ n. rubbing, churning; sepa-
rating, distinguishing, discriminating.
<LEND>

<L>25435<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmanTya<k2>nirmanTya
{%Nir-manthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be stirred, to be
churned; to be excited by friction (as fire); to be
distinguished or discriminated.
<LEND>

<L>25436<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmATin<k2>nirmATin
{%Nir-māthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crushing or stamping to
pieces, churning, rubbing.
<LEND>

<L>25437<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmanyu<k2>nirmanyu
{#nirmanyu#}¦ {%nir-manyu, us, us, u,%} free from
anger or resentment; ({%us%}), m., N. of a hunter.
<LEND>

<L>25438<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmama<k2>nirmama
{#nirmama#}¦ {%nir-mama, as, ā, am,%} unselfish, dis-
interested; regardless, indifferent to (with loc.); free
from all connection with the outer world; an epithet
of Śiva; ({%as%}), m. (with Jainas) N. of the fifteenth
Arhat of the future Ut-sarpiṇī. {%—Nirmama-tā,%} f. or
1. {%nirmama-tva, am,%} n. unselfishness, disregard of
worldly interests, indifference towards (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>25439<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmamatva<k2>nirmamatva<h>2
2. {%nir-mamatva, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from selfishness,
indifferent.
<LEND>

<L>25440<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmaryAda<k2>nirmaryAda
{#nirmaryAda#}¦ {%nir-maryāda, as, ā, am,%} boundless,
having no limits, immeasurable, innumerable; trans-
gressing the boundaries of right, unrestrained, unruly,
wicked, criminal, sinful, impious; confused; ({%am%}),
n. confusion, disturbance of boundaries or rules;
N. of a kind of fight; ({%am%}), ind. confusedly,
topsy-turvy.
<LEND>

<L>25441<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmala<k2>nirmala
{#nirmala#}¦ {%nir-mala, as, ā, am,%} spotless, free
from spots or dirt or impurities, stainless, unsullied,
clear, clean, pure, limpid; shining, splendent, bright;
virtuous; ({%am%}), n. talc; the remains of an offering
made to a deity. {%—Nirmala-gada, as, ā, am,%}
having a bright mace. {%—Nirmala-tā,%} f. or {%nirmala-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. stainlessness, purity, cleanness (physical
or moral). {%—Nirmalī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} freed from
impurity, cleansed, cleared. {%—Nirmalopala (˚la-%}
{%up˚), as,%} m. crystal.
<LEND>

<L>25442<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmAlya<k2>nirmAlya
{%Nir-mālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ stainless, clean, &c., {%=%}
{%nir-mala; (ā),%} f. a species of medicinal plant, see
{%pṛkkā; (am),%} n. stainlessness, purity, cleanness, clear-
ness; the remains of an offering to a deity, flowers
left at a sacrificial ceremony; remains in general.
{%—Nirmālya-tā,%} f. {%= nirmala-tā.%}
<LEND>

<L>25443<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmaSaka<k2>nirmaSaka
{#nirmaSaka#}¦ {%nir-maśaka, as, ā, am,%} free from
gnats or musquitoes.
<LEND>

<L>25444<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmA<k2>nirmA<h>1
{#nirmA#} 1¦. {%nir-mā,%} cl. 2. P., 3. and 4. A., {%-māti,%}
{%-mimīte, -māyate, -mātum,%} to build, make, form,
fabricate; to produce, create; to compose; to cause:
Caus. {%-māpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be made or
built.
<LEND>

<L>25445<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmA<k2>nirmA<h>2
2. {%nir-mā,%}¦ f. value, measure, equivalent.
<LEND>

<L>25446<pc>0499-a<k1>nirmARa<k2>nirmARa
{%Nir-māṇa, am,%}¦ n. measuring or meting out,
measure; reach, extent, ({%eka-nirmāṇa, as, ā, am,%}
of the same measure; {%kakudodagra-nirmāṇa,%} as
high as the top of a mountain; {%avyakta-nirmāṇo%}
{%bālas,%} a boy who has not yet reached his full
growth, not yet full grown); forming, making, pro-
ducing, creating, production, fabrication, manufacture,
formation, creation, building; composing, composi-
[Page0499-b+ 72]
tion, work; a building; a part; (with Buddhists) trans-
formation; the best of anything, pith, marrow,
essence; ({%ā%}), f. propriety, decorum, fitness. {%—Nir-%}
{%māṇa-rata, ās,%} m. pl. ‘delighting in creating or
building,’ N. of a particular class of gods. {%—Nir-%}
{%māṇa-rati, is, is, i,%} delighting in creating; ({%ayas%}),
m. pl., N. of a class of deities in the eleventh Manv-
antara; (with Buddhists) delighting in transforma-
tion; [cf. {%nirvāṇa-ruci.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25447<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmAtf<k2>nirmAtf
{%Nir-mātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a maker, builder, creator,
former, producer; building, fabricating, forming, &c.
{%—Nirmātṛ-tva, am,%} n. creatorship, the condition
of a maker or builder or producer.
<LEND>

<L>25448<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmita<k2>nirmita
{%Nir-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ constructed, manufactured,
produced, built, fashioned, fabricated, formed, made;
artificial; meted out; ({%ās%}), m. pl. (with Buddhists) N.
of a class of deities, ‘the transformed.’
<LEND>

<L>25449<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmiti<k2>nirmiti
{%Nir-miti, is,%}¦ f. formation, production, creation,
fabrication, manufacture, artificial production; making.
<LEND>

<L>25450<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmAMsa<k2>nirmAMsa
{#nirmAMsa#}¦ {%nir-māṃsa, as, ā, am,%} fleshless,
emaciated.
<LEND>

<L>25451<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmAKya<k2>nirmAKya
{#nirmAKya#}¦ {%nir-mākhya, as,%} m., N. of a man;
(probably a wrong form, also read {%tigmātman%} and
{%nirmād.%})
<LEND>

<L>25452<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmATin<k2>nirmATin
{#nirmATin#}¦ {%nir-māthin.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25453<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmAna<k2>nirmAna
{#nirmAna#}¦ {%nir-māna, as, ā, am,%} without self-
confidence, free from pride.
<LEND>

<L>25454<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmAnuza<k2>nirmAnuza
{#nirmAnuza#}¦ {%nir-mānuṣa, as, ā, am,%} unpeopled,
uninhabited, abandoned by men, desolate; ({%e%}), ind.
in a solitary place.
<LEND>

<L>25455<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmArga<k2>nirmArga<h>1
{#nirmArga#} 1¦. {%nir-mārga, as, ā, am,%} roadless,
pathless. (For 2. {%nir-mārga%} see under {%nir-mṛj.%})
<LEND>

<L>25456<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmAlI<k2>nirmAlI
{#nirmAlI#}¦ {%nir-mālī,%} f. {%= nir-mālyā.%}
<LEND>

<L>25457<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmAlya<k2>nirmAlya
{#nirmAlya#}¦ {%nir-mālya.%} See under {%nir-mala,%}
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25458<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmuc<k2>nirmuc
{#nirmuc#}¦ {%nir-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati, -te,%}
{%-moktum,%} to loosen, free from, liberate.
<LEND>

<L>25459<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmukta<k2>nirmukta
{%Nir-mukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ loosed, set free, liberated,
disjoined, sundered, separated, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a snake
which has lately cast his skin.
<LEND>

<L>25460<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmukti<k2>nirmukti
{%Nir-mukti, is,%}¦ f. liberation, deliverance; [cf.
{%śāpa-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25461<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmoka<k2>nirmoka
{%Nir-moka, as,%}¦ m. setting loose or free, liberat-
ing; a hide or skin, especially the cast off skin or
slough of a snake [cf. {%sarpa-n˚%}]; armour, mail;
sky, heaven, atmosphere; N. of a son of the eighth
Manu; of one of the Saptarṣis under the thirteenth
Manu; [cf. {%nir-moha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25462<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmoktf<k2>nirmoktf
{%Nir-moktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who solves or
liberates, a liberator, looser, solver (of doubts).
<LEND>

<L>25463<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmocana<k2>nirmocana
{%Nir-mocana, am,%}¦ n. liberation, deliverance.
<LEND>

<L>25464<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmuwa<k2>nirmuwa
{#nirmuwa#}¦ {%nir-muṭa, as,%} m. a tree bearing
large blossoms ({%= vanas-pati%}); the sun; a rogue;
({%as, am%}), m. n. a large and free market or fair.
<LEND>

<L>25465<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmUla<k2>nirmUla
{#nirmUla#}¦ {%nir-mūla, as, ā, am,%} rootless, de-
prived of roots (as a tree); baseless, without origin,
unfounded; eradicated. {%—Nirmūla-tā,%} f. rootless-
ness, baselessness.
<LEND>

<L>25466<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmUlana<k2>nirmUlana
{%Nir-mūlana, am,%}¦ n. uprooting, eradicating, ex-
tirpating.
<LEND>

<L>25467<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmUlaya<k2>nirmUlaya
{%Nir-mūlaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%nirmūlayati, -yitum,%} to
uproot, eradicate, extirpate, annihilate.
<LEND>

<L>25468<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmfj<k2>nirmfj
{#nirmfj#}¦ {%nir-mṛj,%} cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi, -mār-%}
{%jitum%} and {%-mārṣṭum,%} to wipe off, wipe out, rub
out, sweep out, strip off.
<LEND>

<L>25469<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmArga<k2>nirmArga<h>2
2. {%nir-mārga, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see above), rubbing
or stripping off, wiping off; that which is stripped
or wiped off, refuse.
<LEND>

<L>25470<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmArguka<k2>nirmArguka
{%Nir-mārguka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. drawing off,
withdrawing, separating.
<LEND>

<L>25471<pc>0499-b<k1>nirmArjana<k2>nirmArjana
{%Nir-mārjana, am,%}¦ n. wiping off, sweeping,
cleaning.
<LEND>
[Page0499-c+ 70]

<L>25472<pc>0499-c<k1>nirmfzwa<k2>nirmfzwa
{%Nir-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed out, wiped off
or out, swept.
<LEND>

<L>25473<pc>0499-c<k1>nirmeGa<k2>nirmeGa
{#nirmeGa#}¦ {%nir-megha, as, ā, am,%} cloudless.
{%—Nirmeghāśrama (˚gha-āś˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>25474<pc>0499-c<k1>nirmeDa<k2>nirmeDa
{#nirmeDa#}¦ {%nir-medha, as, ā, am,%} without un-
derstanding, stupid, dull. {%—Nirmedhāśrama (˚dha-%}
{%āś˚), as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>25475<pc>0499-c<k1>nirmoka<k2>nirmoka
{#nirmoka#}¦ {%nir-moka, nir-moktṛ,%} &c. See
under {%nir-muc,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>25476<pc>0499-c<k1>nirmokza<k2>nirmokza
{#nirmokza#}¦ {%nir-mokṣa, as,%} m. (rt. {%mokṣ%}),
liberation from, deliverance.
<LEND>

<L>25477<pc>0499-c<k1>nirmoha<k2>nirmoha
{#nirmoha#}¦ {%nir-moha, as, ā, am,%} ‘free from
illusion,’ an epithet of Śiva; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son
of the fifth Manu; of one of the Saptarṣis under
the thirteenth Manu; [cf. {%nir-moka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25478<pc>0499-c<k1>nirmretuka<k2>nirmretuka
{#nirmretuka#}¦ {%nir-mretuka, as, ā, am%} (perhaps
fr. {%mrai = mlai%} with {%nis%}), Ved. fading away,
withering; (also read {%nir-metuka, nir-mṝtuka.%})
<LEND>

<L>25479<pc>0499-c<k1>nirmlukti<k2>nirmlukti
{#nirmlukti#}¦ {%nir-mlukti.%} See {%ni-mlukti,%} p. 490.
<LEND>

<L>25480<pc>0499-c<k1>niryat<k2>niryat<h>1
{#niryat#} 1¦. {%nir-yat, an, atī, at%} (fr. {%nir-i%}),
going forth, coming out, issuing.
<LEND>

<L>25481<pc>0499-c<k1>niryat<k2>niryat<h>2
{#niryat#} 2¦. {%nir-yat,%} cl. 10. P. {%-yātayati,%} &c.,
to give back, restore, make restitution; to forgive,
pardon, set free.
<LEND>

<L>25482<pc>0499-c<k1>niryAtaka<k2>niryAtaka
{%Nir-yātaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ bearing away, carrying
away, removing.
<LEND>

<L>25483<pc>0499-c<k1>niryAtana<k2>niryAtana
{%Nir-yātana, am,%}¦ n. giving back, returning, de-
livering, restitution, delivery of a deposit, replacing
anything lost; gift, donation; payment of a debt;
requital, revenge; killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>25484<pc>0499-c<k1>niryAtita<k2>niryAtita
{%Nir-yātita, as, ā, am,%}¦ restored, given back,
retaliated, requited; taken away.
<LEND>

<L>25485<pc>0499-c<k1>niryAtya<k2>niryAtya
{%Nir-yātya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given back or
restored or delivered (as a deposit &c.).
<LEND>

<L>25486<pc>0499-c<k1>niryatna<k2>niryatna
{#niryatna#}¦ {%nir-yatna, as, ā, am,%} inactive, lazy,
listless. {%—Niryatna-tā,%} f. inactivity.
<LEND>

<L>25487<pc>0499-c<k1>niryantraRa<k2>niryantraRa
{#niryantraRa#}¦ {%nir-yantraṇa, as, ā, am,%} without
restraint, unrestrained, unobstructed, uncontrolled,
unconfined, unrestricted, self-willed, independant;
({%am%}), n. absence of restraint, independance; ({%am%}),
ind. without restraint, unrestrainedly. {%—Niryantraṇa-%}
{%pradeśāvasthita (˚śa-av˚), as, ā, am,%} being at a
place where no restraint is needed.
<LEND>

<L>25488<pc>0499-c<k1>niryantrita<k2>niryantrita
{%Nir-yantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ uncontrolled, unre-
strained, self-willed.
<LEND>

<L>25489<pc>0499-c<k1>niryaSaska<k2>niryaSaska
{#niryaSaska#}¦ {%nir-yaśaska, as, ā, am,%} without
fame or reputation, inglorious.
<LEND>

<L>25490<pc>0499-c<k1>niryA<k2>niryA<h>1
{#niryA#} 1¦. {%nir-yā,%} f., Ved. any disturbance
of the regular course of a rite, any defect.
<LEND>

<L>25491<pc>0499-c<k1>niryA<k2>niryA<h>2
{#niryA#} 2¦. {%nir-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to go out, issue, set out: Caus. {%-yāpayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to go out.
<LEND>

<L>25492<pc>0499-c<k1>niryARa<k2>niryARa
{%Nir-yāṇa, am,%}¦ n. going forth or out, exit, issue,
setting out, departure; vanishing, disappearance;
departure from life, dying, death; eternal emanci-
pation, final beatitude, (probably confounded with
1. {%nir-vāṇa,%} q. v.); the outer corner of an elephant's
eye [cf. {%nir-ṇāyana%}]; iron; a rope for tying cattle
or for binding a calf's feet, a foot-rope.
<LEND>

<L>25493<pc>0499-c<k1>niryAta<k2>niryAta
{%Nir-yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone out, gone forth, issued,
departed.
<LEND>

<L>25494<pc>0499-c<k1>niryAti<k2>niryAti
{%Nir-yāti, is,%}¦ f. going out, exit, departing, dying.
<LEND>

<L>25495<pc>0499-c<k1>niryApaRa<k2>niryApaRa
{%Nir-yāpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), expelling,
expulsion, banishing.
<LEND>

<L>25496<pc>0499-c<k1>niryAya<k2>niryAya
{%Nir-yāya,%}¦ ind. having gone out or departed.
<LEND>

<L>25497<pc>0499-c<k1>niryiyAsu<k2>niryiyAsu
{%Nir-yiyāsu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), trying or
wishing to go out.
<LEND>

<L>25498<pc>0499-c<k1>niryAtf<k2>niryAtf
{#niryAtf#}¦ {%nir-yātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} a husband-
man, reaper, weeder; (wrong reading for {%nir-%}
{%dātṛ,%} q. v.)
<LEND>
[Page0500-a+ 66]

<L>25499<pc>0500-a<k1>niryAdava<k2>niryAdava
{#niryAdava#}¦ {%nir-yādava, as, ā, am,%} freed from
the Yādavas, without the Yādavas.
<LEND>

<L>25500<pc>0500-a<k1>niryAma<k2>niryAma
{#niryAma#}¦ {%niryāma, as,%} m. a sailor, pilot,
boatman ({%= niyāmaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>25501<pc>0500-a<k1>niryAsa<k2>niryAsa
{#niryAsa#}¦ {%nir-yāsa, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%yas%}
with {%nis%}), exudation of trees or plants, juice, gum,
resin, milk, &c.; extract, decoction, infusion; any
thick fluid substance; [cf. {%agni-n˚, tantu-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25502<pc>0500-a<k1>niryukti<k2>niryukti
{#niryukti#}¦ {%nir-yukti, is,%} f. disunion; want of
connection or government (in grammar); unfitness,
inappropriateness, impropriety.
<LEND>

<L>25503<pc>0500-a<k1>niryuktika<k2>niryuktika
{%Nir-yuktika, as, ā, am,%}¦ detached, disunited;
unconnected, unmeaning, illogical, not founded on
sound reasoning; inappropriate, improper. {%—Nir-%}
{%yuktika-tva, am,%} n. inappropriateness; illogicalness.
<LEND>

<L>25504<pc>0500-a<k1>niryUTa<k2>niryUTa
{#niryUTa#}¦ {%nir-yūtha, as, ā, am,%} separated from
the herd (as an elephant &c.), strayed from the flock.
<LEND>

<L>25505<pc>0500-a<k1>niryUza<k2>niryUza
{#niryUza#}¦ {%nir-yūṣa, as,%} m. extract, juice, &c.,
{%= nir-yāsa = nir-yūha.%}
<LEND>

<L>25506<pc>0500-a<k1>niryUha<k2>niryUha
{#niryUha#}¦ {%nir-yūha, as,%} m. (probably for {%nir-%}
{%vyūha%}), a prominence, projection (also {%am,%} n.), perhaps
a kind of turret-like ornament on columns or gates,
a pinnacle, turret; a chaplet, crest, head-ornament,
the crest of a helmet; a peg or bracket projecting
from a wall to hang or place anything upon [cf.
{%nāga-niryūha%}]; wood placed in a wall for doves to
build their nests upon; a door, gate (also n.); extract,
juice, decoction, &c.; [cf. {%nir-yāsa, nir-yūṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25507<pc>0500-a<k1>niryoga<k2>niryoga
{#niryoga#}¦ {%nir-yoga, as,%} m. (perhaps) a deco-
ration, ornament.
<LEND>

<L>25508<pc>0500-a<k1>niryogakzema<k2>niryogakzema
{#niryogakzema#}¦ {%nir-yogakṣema, as, ā, am,%} free
from care or anxiety about property.
<LEND>

<L>25509<pc>0500-a<k1>nirlakzaRa<k2>nirlakzaRa
{#nirlakzaRa#}¦ {%nir-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} having
no special marks, undistinguished, unimportant, insig-
nificant; unmarked, unspotted.
<LEND>

<L>25510<pc>0500-a<k1>nirlakzya<k2>nirlakzya
{#nirlakzya#}¦ {%nir-lakṣya, as, ā, am,%} not to be
observed or perceived, unobservable.
<LEND>

<L>25511<pc>0500-a<k1>nirlajja<k2>nirlajja
{#nirlajja#}¦ {%nir-lajja, as, ā, am,%} shameless, im-
modest, impudent, brazen. {%—Nirlajja-tā,%} f. shame-
lessness, impudence.
<LEND>

<L>25512<pc>0500-a<k1>nirliNga<k2>nirliNga
{#nirliNga#}¦ {%nir-liṅga, as, ā, am,%} having no
characteristic or distinguishing marks, not to be de-
fined (as {%ātman, brahman%}).
<LEND>

<L>25513<pc>0500-a<k1>nirlipta<k2>nirlipta
{#nirlipta#}¦ {%nir-lipta, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%lip%}
with {%nis%}), unsmeared, unanointed; undefiled, uncon-
taminated; ({%as%}), m., N. of Kṛṣṇa; a sage.
<LEND>

<L>25514<pc>0500-a<k1>nirlepa<k2>nirlepa
{%Nir-lepa, as, ā, am,%}¦ unanointed, unsmeared,
free from fatty substances; stainless, spotless, sinless;
({%as%}), m. a sage.
<LEND>

<L>25515<pc>0500-a<k1>nirluYcana<k2>nirluYcana
{#nirluYcana#}¦ {%nir-luñcana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%luñc%}
with {%nis%}), pulling out or off, tearing off, peeling.
<LEND>

<L>25516<pc>0500-a<k1>nirluRWana<k2>nirluRWana
{#nirluRWana#}¦ {%nir-luṇṭhana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%luṇṭh%}
with {%nis%}), robbing, plundering; pulling out, tearing
off, (in the latter sense a wrong reading for {%nir-%}
{%luñcana,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>25517<pc>0500-a<k1>nirleKana<k2>nirleKana
{#nirleKana#}¦ {%nir-lekhana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%likh%}
with {%nis%}), a scraper, instrument for scraping; [cf.
{%jihvā-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25518<pc>0500-a<k1>nirloBa<k2>nirloBa
{#nirloBa#}¦ {%nir-lobha, as, ā, am,%} free from
desire, unavaricious.
<LEND>

<L>25519<pc>0500-a<k1>nirloma<k2>nirloma
{#nirloma#}¦ {%nir-loma, as, ā, am,%} devoid of
hair, hairless, smooth.
<LEND>

<L>25520<pc>0500-a<k1>nirlvayanI<k2>nirlvayanI
{#nirlvayanI#}¦ {%nir-lvayanī,%} f. the cast off skin
of a snake; (wrong reading for {%nir-vlayanī,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>25521<pc>0500-a<k1>nirvaMSa<k2>nirvaMSa
{#nirvaMSa#}¦ {%nir-vaṃśa, as, ā, am,%} without lineage
or posterity, childless.
<LEND>
[Page0500-b+ 73]

<L>25522<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvaktavya<k2>nirvaktavya
{#nirvaktavya#}¦ {%nir-vaktavya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%vac%} with {%nis%}), to be interpreted or explained.
<LEND>

<L>25523<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvacana<k2>nirvacana<h>1
1. {%nir-vacana, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see below), pro-
nunciation; a proverbial expression, proverb; inter-
pretation, etymological explanation, etymology; vo-
cabulary, index; [cf. 1. {%ni-vacana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25524<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvacanIya<k2>nirvacanIya
{%Nir-vacanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be defined more
closely, to be interpreted or explained, to be described
or related.
<LEND>

<L>25525<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvAcya<k2>nirvAcya<h>1
1. {%nir-vācya, as, ā, am, = nir-vacanīya.%}¦ (For
2. see under {%nir-vākya,%} p. 501, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>25526<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvacana<k2>nirvacana<h>2
{#nirvacana#} 2¦. {%nir-vacana, as, ā, am%} (for 1.
see above), not speaking, silent; unobjectionable,
unblamable, blameless; ({%am%}), ind. silently; [cf. 2.
{%ni-vacana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25527<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvaRa<k2>nirvaRa
{#nirvaRa#}¦ {%nir-vaṇa%} or {%nir-vana, as, ā, am,%}
being out of a wood, ranging in the open country;
free from woods; bare, open, (in this sense {%nir%} is
a privative.)
<LEND>

<L>25528<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvatsaSiSupuNgava<k2>nirvatsaSiSupuNgava
{#nirvatsaSiSupuNgava#}¦ {%nir-vatsa-śiśupuṅgava, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} deprived of calves and young bulls.
<LEND>

<L>25529<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvad<k2>nirvad
{#nirvad#}¦ {%nir-vad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vadati, -te,%}
{%-vaditum,%} to speak out, to blame; to deny.
<LEND>

<L>25530<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvAda<k2>nirvAda<h>1
1. {%nir-vāda, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. {%nir-vāda%} see p. 501, col.
1), obloquy, censure, blame, reproach; rumour, report;
asseveration, affirmation, decision of a controversy.
<LEND>

<L>25531<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvana<k2>nirvana
{#nirvana#}¦ {%nir-vana.%} See {%nir-vaṇa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>25532<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvap<k2>nirvap
{#nirvap#}¦ {%nir-vap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vapati, -te,%}
{%-vaptum,%} to pour out, sprinkle, drop, scatter; to
offer sacrifical food, present funeral oblations or
libations to the Manes of deceased ancestors; to
present, deliver; to perform.
<LEND>

<L>25533<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvapaRa<k2>nirvapaRa
{%Nir-vapaṇa, am,%}¦ n. pouring out, sprinkling,
offering, especially the presentation of funeral offer-
ings to the Manes, libation, oblation; spending,
bestowing presents; gift, donation, alms; a ladle or
vessel for pouring; ({%as, ī, am%}), relating to libations;
scattering, pouring out, bestowing.
<LEND>

<L>25534<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvApa<k2>nirvApa<h>1
1. {%nir-vāpa, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see p. 501, col. 1),
scattering, strewing, pouring out; offering, giving,
bestowing; offering oblations, especially funeral obla-
tions in honour of a deceased ancestor; gift, alms.
<LEND>

<L>25535<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvApaRa<k2>nirvApaRa<h>1
1. {%nir-vāpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see p. 501, col. 1),
scattering, throwing or pouring out, casting in, sow-
ing; offering, presenting funeral oblations; gift, giving.
<LEND>

<L>25536<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvApita<k2>nirvApita<h>1
1. {%nir-vāpita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 501, col. 1),
offered in oblation, scattered, poured out.
<LEND>

<L>25537<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvApya<k2>nirvApya<h>1
1. {%nir-vāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 3. see p. 501, col. 1),
to be scattered or offered.
<LEND>

<L>25538<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvApya<k2>nirvApya<h>2
2. {%nir-vāpya,%}¦ ind. having offered funeral cakes.
<LEND>

<L>25539<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvayanI<k2>nirvayanI
{#nirvayanI#}¦ {%nir-vayanī,%} f. the cast off skin
of a snake; (a various reading for {%nir-vlayanī;%}
cf. {%nir-lvayanī.%})
<LEND>

<L>25540<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvara<k2>nirvara
{#nirvara#}¦ {%nir-vara,%} a various reading for {%nir-%}
{%dara.%}
<LEND>

<L>25541<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvaruRatA<k2>nirvaruRatA
{#nirvaruRatA#}¦ {%nirvaruṇa-tā,%} f. or {%nirvaruṇa-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. deliverance from Varuṇa's power.
<LEND>

<L>25542<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvarR<k2>nirvarR
{#nirvarR#}¦ {%nir-varṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-varṇayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to look at, contemplate.
<LEND>

<L>25543<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvarRana<k2>nirvarRana
{%Nir-varṇana, am,%}¦ n. looking at, regarding,
sight, seeing.
<LEND>

<L>25544<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvarRanIya<k2>nirvarRanIya
{%Nir-varṇanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked at or
regarded.
<LEND>

<L>25545<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvarRya<k2>nirvarRya
{%Nir-varṇya,%}¦ ind. having looked at, having re-
garded.
<LEND>

<L>25546<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvartaka<k2>nirvartaka
{#nirvartaka#}¦ {%nir-vartaka, nir-vartana,%} &c. See
under {%nir-vṛt,%} p. 502, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25547<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvas<k2>nirvas
{#nirvas#}¦ {%nir-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati, -vastum,%}
to dwell, finish dwelling; to dwell abroad: Caus.
{%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} to expel from home, banish.
<LEND>

<L>25548<pc>0500-b<k1>nirvAsa<k2>nirvAsa
{%Nir-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. leaving or abandoning one's
home, residing far from one's native place; expulsion,
banishment; killing.
<LEND>
[Page0500-c+ 79]

<L>25549<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvAsana<k2>nirvAsana<h>1
1. {%nir-vāsana, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. {%nir-vāsana%} see
p. 501, col. 1), expelling or driving from home,
banishing, banishment, expulsion; hurting, injuring,
killing, slaughter, annihilation; [cf. {%ud-vāsana,%}
{%-pra-vāsana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25550<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvAsanIya<k2>nirvAsanIya
{%Nir-vāsanīya%}¦ or {%nir-vāsya, as, ā, am,%} to be
expelled or banished.
<LEND>

<L>25551<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvAsita<k2>nirvAsita
{%Nir-vāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ expelled, banished, driven
from home.
<LEND>

<L>25552<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvasu<k2>nirvasu
{#nirvasu#}¦ {%nir-vasu, us, us, u,%} destitute of
wealth or property, poor. {%—Nirvasu-tva, am,%} n.
poverty, destitution.
<LEND>

<L>25553<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvah<k2>nirvah
{#nirvah#}¦ {%nir-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vahati, -te,%}
{%-voḍhum,%} to bring or carry out, bring one's self out
of, extricate one's self: Caus. P. {%-vāhayati, -yitum,%}
to carry out, carry on, perform, accomplish, effect,
fulfil, settle; to pass, spend (time &c.).
<LEND>

<L>25554<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvahaRa<k2>nirvahaRa
{%Nir-vahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. end, issue, completion; the
closing scene or catastrophe of a drama, the con-
clusion; carrying on, (for {%nir-vāhaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>25555<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvahitf<k2>nirvahitf
{%Nir-vahitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ separating, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>25556<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvAha<k2>nirvAha
{%Nir-vāha, as,%}¦ m. carrying on, accomplishing, per-
forming, managing, accomplishment, management;
completion, end; narrating, describing; supporting,
maintaining; subsisting on; sufficiency, adequacy,
competent provision or means of living; steadfastness;
[cf. {%nairvāhika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25557<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvAhaka<k2>nirvAhaka
{%Nir-vāhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ accomplishing, per-
forming, effecting; ({%am%}), n. application or connec-
tion of cause and effect (?).
<LEND>

<L>25558<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvAhaRa<k2>nirvAhaRa
{%Nir-vāhaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ carrying out, effecting;
carrying away, removing; ({%am%}), n. accomplishment,
completion; the catastrophe or closing scene of a
drama ({%= nir-vahaṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>25559<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvAhin<k2>nirvAhin
{%Nir-vāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ leading out, carrying out;
discharging (as a wound).
<LEND>

<L>25560<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvAhya<k2>nirvAhya
{%Nir-vāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be carried on or
accomplished or performed.
<LEND>

<L>25561<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvA<k2>nirvA
{#nirvA#}¦ {%nir-vā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vāti, -vātum,%} to
cease to blow; (cl. 4. {%-vāyati,%} &c.), to be extin-
guished; to be refreshed: Caus. {%-vāpayati, -yitum,%}
to extinguish, put out; to refresh, cool, allay, make
happy, delight.
<LEND>

<L>25562<pc>0500-c<k1>nirvARa<k2>nirvARa<h>1
1. {%nir-vāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. {%nir-vāṇa%} see p. 501,
col. 1), blown out, gone out, put out, extinguished
(as a fire); lost, disappeared; liberated from exist-
ence (lit. having the fire of life extinguished); dead,
deceased, defunct; set (as a planet); calmed, quieted,
({%a-nirvāṇa,%} an elephant not yet tamed or one
just caught and wild); immersed, plunged; ({%am%}), n.
blowing out, extinguishing, extinction, (in this and
some of the following senses {%nir-vāṇam%} is not the
neut. of the pass. part. but formed fr. {%nir-vā%} with
affix {%ana%}), becoming extinguished, disappearance,
setting, vanishing from sight, ({%nirvāṇaṃ kṛ,%} to
act as if nothing had happened, not to keep one's
promise); extinction of the flame of life, dissolution,
liberation, eternal bliss, final emancipation from
matter and reunion with the deity, union with the
Supreme Spirit; (with Buddhists and Jainas) absolute
extinction or annihilation, complete extinction of
individual existence; perfect and perpetual calm,
repose; complete satisfaction or pleasure, highest
felicity; desisting, leaving off, cessation; vacuity,
vacuum; union, association, blending, confluence; of-
fering oblations, (perhaps wrongly for 1. {%nir-vāpaṇa%});
bathing of an elephant (because he draws in water
with his trunk and then blows it out over his body);
instructing in sciences; ‘Deliverance,’ N. of an Upa-
niṣad; [cf. {%apa-n˚, pari-n˚.%}] {%—Nirvāṇa-purāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. offering oblations to the dead. {%—Nirvāṇa-%}
{%prakaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of the fourth chapter of
the Vāsiṣṭha-rāmāyaṇa, commonly called Yoga-
vāsiṣṭha. {%—Nirvāṇa-bhūyiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} almost
all vanished or departed. {%—Nirvāṇa-maṇḍapa,%} N.
of a temple. {%—Nirvāṇa-mantra, am,%} n., N. of a
mystical formula. {%—Nirvāṇa-mastaka, as,%} m. libe-
ration, deliverance. {%—Nirvāṇa-ruci, ayas,%} m. pl.
‘delighting in final beatitude,’ N. of a class of
[Page0501-a+ 73]
deities under the eleventh Manu; [cf. {%nirmāṇa-rati.%}]
{%—Nirvāṇa-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} having complete
felicity as its characteristic mark. {%—Nirvāṇa-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of certain Buddhist Sūtras.
<LEND>

<L>25563<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvARin<k2>nirvARin
{%Nir-vāṇin, ī,%}¦ m. (with Jainas) N. of the second
Arhat of the past Ut-sarpiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>25564<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAta<k2>nirvAta<h>1
1. {%nir-vāta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see below), ceased
to blow.
<LEND>

<L>25565<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvApa<k2>nirvApa<h>2
2. {%nir-vāpa, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see under {%nir-vap,%}
p. 500, col. 2), putting out, extinguishing (as a fire).
<LEND>

<L>25566<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvApaRa<k2>nirvApaRa<h>2
2. {%nir-vāpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. see under {%nir-vap,%}
p. 500, col. 2), putting out (as a fire or light),
extinguishing, quenching; extinction, annihilation;
slaughter, killing; (in medicine) refrigerant; cooling,
refreshing.
<LEND>

<L>25567<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvApayitf<k2>nirvApayitf
{%Nir-vāpayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ extinguishing, refri-
gerant, one who allays.
<LEND>

<L>25568<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvApita<k2>nirvApita<h>2
2. {%nir-vāpita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see under {%nir-%}
{%vap,%} p. 500, col. 2), extinguished, put out, quenched;
allayed, cooled; killed.
<LEND>

<L>25569<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvApya<k2>nirvApya<h>3
3. {%nir-vāpya,%}¦ ind. (for 1. and 2. see under {%nir-%}
{%vap,%} p. 500, col. 2), having extinguished or quenched;
having refreshed or delighted.
<LEND>

<L>25570<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAka<k2>nirvAka
{#nirvAka#}¦ {%nirvāka, as,%} m. in {%karṇa-nirvāka,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>25571<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAkya<k2>nirvAkya
{#nirvAkya#}¦ {%nir-vākya, as, ā, am,%} speechless.
<LEND>

<L>25572<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAc<k2>nirvAc
{%Nir-vāc, k, k, k,%}¦ silent, mute, dumb.
<LEND>

<L>25573<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAcya<k2>nirvAcya<h>2
2. {%nir-vācya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see under {%nir-%}
{%vaktavya,%} p. 500, col. 2), improper to be said;
unobjectionable, blameless, not to be found fault with
or censured.
<LEND>

<L>25574<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAYc<k2>nirvAYc
{#nirvAYc#}¦ {%nirvāñc, āṅ, ācī, āk%} (according to
the commentator fr. {%nir-ava-añc%}), outward, exterior.
<LEND>

<L>25575<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvARa<k2>nirvARa<h>2
{#nirvARa#} 2¦. {%nir-vāṇa, as, ā, am%} (for 1. see
under {%nir-vā,%} p. 500, col. 3), having no arrows.
<LEND>

<L>25576<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvARI<k2>nirvARI
{#nirvARI#}¦ {%nir-vāṇī,%} f. (with Jainas) N. of a
deity who executes the commands of the sixteenth
Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>25577<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAta<k2>nirvAta<h>2
{#nirvAta#} 2¦. {%nir-vāta, as, ā, am%} (for 1. see
above), free from wind, sheltered from wind, not
windy, calm, still; ({%as%}), m. a calm, a place sheltered
from wind. {%—Nirvāta-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing
sheltered from the wind.
<LEND>

<L>25578<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAda<k2>nirvAda<h>2
{#nirvAda#} 2¦. {%nir-vāda, as,%} m. (for 1. {%nir-vāda%}
see under {%nir-vad,%} p. 500, col. 2), absence of
dispute or railing.
<LEND>

<L>25579<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAnara<k2>nirvAnara
{#nirvAnara#}¦ {%nir-vānara, as, ā, am,%} free from
monkeys.
<LEND>

<L>25580<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvApa<k2>nirvApa<h>1
{#nirvApa#} 1¦. and 2. {%nir-vāpa.%} See p. 500,
col. 2, and above.
<LEND>

<L>25581<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAyasa<k2>nirvAyasa
{#nirvAyasa#}¦ {%nir-vāyasa, as, ā, am,%} free from
crows.
<LEND>

<L>25582<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvArya<k2>nirvArya
{#nirvArya#}¦ {%nir-vārya, as, ā, am,%} irresistible,
not to be opposed or resisted; acting fearlessly or
determinedly.
<LEND>

<L>25583<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAsana<k2>nirvAsana<h>2
{#nirvAsana#} 2¦. {%nir-vāsana, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis%}
{%+ vāsanā;%} for 1. {%nir-vāsana%} see under {%nir-vas,%}
p. 500, col. 2), without fancy or imagination.
<LEND>

<L>25584<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvAha<k2>nirvAha
{#nirvAha#}¦ {%nir-vāha, nir-vāhaṇa.%} See {%nir-vah.%}
<LEND>

<L>25585<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvikalpa<k2>nirvikalpa
{#nirvikalpa#}¦ {%nir-vikalpa, as, ā, am,%} not ad-
mitting an alternative; recognising no such distinc-
tions as that of subject and object; being without
determination; ({%am%}), ind. without hesitation or
vacillation, without wavering, without reflection.
<LEND>

<L>25586<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvikalpaka<k2>nirvikalpaka
{%Nir-vikalpaka%}¦ or {%nir-vikalpana, as, ā, am,%} not
admitting an alternative, free from differences, having
no mutual dependence; not capable of mutual relation;
undeliberative; conditioned; ({%am%}), n. knowledge not
depending upon or derived from the senses.
<LEND>

<L>25587<pc>0501-a<k1>nirvikAra<k2>nirvikAra
{#nirvikAra#}¦ {%nir-vikāra, as, ā, am,%} or {%nir-%}
{%vikāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} unchanged, unaltered, un-
changeable, immutable, uniform. {%—Nirvikāra-tā,%} f.
unchangeableness, uniformity.
<LEND>
[Page0501-b+ 69]

<L>25588<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvikAsa<k2>nirvikAsa
{#nirvikAsa#}¦ {%nir-vikāsa, as, ā, am,%} not yet
opened or expanded (as a blossom), unblown. {%—Nir-%}
{%vikāsa-tva, am,%} n. the being not yet opened or
expanded.
<LEND>

<L>25589<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvikram<k2>nirvikram
{#nirvikram#}¦ {%nir-vi-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-kramate, -kramitum,%} to go out of, come out of.
<LEND>

<L>25590<pc>0501-b<k1>nirviGna<k2>nirviGna
{#nirviGna#}¦ {%nir-vighna, as, ā, am,%} unobstructed,
uninterrupted, untroubled, secure from impediments;
({%am%}), n. absence of obstruction or impediment;
({%am%} or {%ena%}), ind. unobstructedly, freely, securely.
<LEND>

<L>25591<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvicAra<k2>nirvicAra
{#nirvicAra#}¦ {%nir-vicāra, as, ā, am,%} not re-
flecting or considering; ({%am%}), ind. without reflection,
without consideration, inconsiderately.
<LEND>

<L>25592<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvicikitsa<k2>nirvicikitsa
{#nirvicikitsa#}¦ {%nir-vicikitsa, as, ā, am,%} with-
out reflecting much; ({%am%}), ind. without much or
long reflection.
<LEND>

<L>25593<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvicezwa<k2>nirvicezwa
{#nirvicezwa#}¦ {%nir-viceṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} motion-
less, insensible, unresisting.
<LEND>

<L>25594<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvitarka<k2>nirvitarka
{#nirvitarka#}¦ {%nir-vitarka, as, ā, am,%} unreflect-
ing, inconsiderate.
<LEND>

<L>25595<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvid<k2>nirvid
{#nirvid#}¦ {%nir-vid,%} cl. 4. A. {%-vidyate,%} &c., to
be disgusted with one's self, to disparage or despise
one's self, be ashamed of one's self, to be disgusted,
to be despondent.
<LEND>

<L>25596<pc>0501-b<k1>nirviRRa<k2>nirviRRa
{%Nir-viṇṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ despondent, depressed;
disgusted with anything (gen.); loathing; self-dis-
paraged, overcome with fear or sorrow; emaciated
with grief; decayed, impaired; abused, degraded;
humble; known, certain. {%—Nirviṇṇa-cetas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} depressed in mind, broken in spirit, humble-
minded, meek, resigned, desponding.
<LEND>

<L>25597<pc>0501-b<k1>nirveda<k2>nirveda<h>1
1. {%nir-veda, as,%}¦ m. disgust, loathing, feeling dis-
gust for (with gen. or loc., e. g. {%jīvite nirvedaḥ,%}
disgust for life); satiety, loathsomeness; despondency,
self-disparagement; humility; grief; complete indif-
ference, disregard of worldly objects; despair, despera-
tion; shame. {%—Nirveda-vat, ān, atī, at,%} disgusted
(with worldly concerns); full of despondency; in-
different.
<LEND>

<L>25598<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvidya<k2>nirvidya
{#nirvidya#}¦ {%nir-vidya, as, ā, am,%} unlearned,
destitute of knowledge, uneducated.
<LEND>

<L>25599<pc>0501-b<k1>nirviDitsa<k2>nirviDitsa
{#nirviDitsa#}¦ {%nir-vidhitsa, as, ā, am,%} not
wishing to do, having no designs, free from desire.
<LEND>

<L>25600<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvinoda<k2>nirvinoda
{#nirvinoda#}¦ {%nir-vinoda, as, ā, am,%} without
amusement, without pastime, void of solace or
diversion.
<LEND>

<L>25601<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvinDya<k2>nirvinDya
{#nirvinDya#}¦ {%nir-vindhya, as, ā, am,%} living on
the outside or other side of the Vindhyas; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a river rising in the Vindhya hills or of one
rising in the Ṛkṣa mountains.
<LEND>

<L>25602<pc>0501-b<k1>nirviBAs<k2>nirviBAs
{#nirviBAs#}¦ {%nir-vi-bhās,%} Caus. {%-bhāsayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to illuminate, enlighten.
<LEND>

<L>25603<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvimarSa<k2>nirvimarSa
{#nirvimarSa#}¦ {%nir-vimarśa, as, ā, am,%} not con-
sidering, unreflecting, devoid of reflection; (also
written {%nir-vimarṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>25604<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvivara<k2>nirvivara
{#nirvivara#}¦ {%nir-vivara, as, ā, am,%} having no
opening or rent, without interval or interstice, close,
contiguous. {%—Nirvivara-tā,%} f. want of interstice,
contiguousness (as of the female breasts); want of
enmity; agreement, understanding.
<LEND>

<L>25605<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvivah<k2>nirvivah
{#nirvivah#}¦ {%nir-vi-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vahati,%}
{%-te, -voḍhum,%} to carry out, export; to expel.
<LEND>

<L>25606<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvivAda<k2>nirvivAda
{#nirvivAda#}¦ {%nir-vivāda, as, ā, am,%} not con-
tending or disagreeing, agreeing with each other;
({%am%}), n. absence of contention or controversy. {%—Nir-%}
{%vivādī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made to agree.
<LEND>

<L>25607<pc>0501-b<k1>nirvivitsu<k2>nirvivitsu
{#nirvivitsu#}¦ {%nir-vivitsu, us, us, u%} (fr. the
Desid. of rt. {%vid%} with {%nis%}), desirous to find (?).
<LEND>

<L>25608<pc>0501-b<k1>nirviveka<k2>nirviveka
{#nirviveka#}¦ {%nir-viveka, as, ā, am,%} indiscreet,
[Page0501-c+ 72]
undiscriminating, wanting discrimination or judg-
ment, foolish. {%—Nirviveka-tva, am,%} n. want of
discrimination or judgment, indiscretion.
<LEND>

<L>25609<pc>0501-c<k1>nirviS<k2>nirviS
{#nirviS#}¦ {%nir-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati, -veṣṭum,%}
to enter into, to meet with, enjoy (with acc., e. g.
{%madhuṃ nirviviśuḥ,%} they enjoyed wine); to ex-
perience; to embellish; to reward.
<LEND>

<L>25610<pc>0501-c<k1>nirviSat<k2>nirviSat
{%Nir-viśat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} entering in or into;
attaining, obtaining; engaging in; marrying.
<LEND>

<L>25611<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvizwa<k2>nirvizwa
{%Nir-viṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ attained, arrived at, met
with; obtained, gained, experienced, earned, received;
engaged in, occupied by, staying in; married.
<LEND>

<L>25612<pc>0501-c<k1>nirveSa<k2>nirveSa
{%Nir-veśa, as,%}¦ m. entering into, gaining, obtaining;
wages, hire, employment; payment, returning pay-
ment [cf. {%ni-veśya%}]; expiation, atonement, ({%a-nir-%}
{%veśa,%} one who has not expiated his sins); enjoyment,
eating; fainting, swooning, syncope.
<LEND>

<L>25613<pc>0501-c<k1>nirveSanIya<k2>nirveSanIya
{%Nir-veśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gained or enjoyed.
<LEND>

<L>25614<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvezwavya<k2>nirvezwavya
{%Nir-veṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be entered into; to
be rewarded, to be paid; to be embellished.
<LEND>

<L>25615<pc>0501-c<k1>nirviSaNka<k2>nirviSaNka
{#nirviSaNka#}¦ {%nir-viśaṅka, as, ā, am,%} or {%nir-%}
{%viśaṅkita, as, ā, am,%} fearless, undaunted, confident.
<LEND>

<L>25616<pc>0501-c<k1>nirviSeza<k2>nirviSeza
{#nirviSeza#}¦ {%nir-viśeṣa, as,%} m. absence of
difference, no difference; ({%as, ā, am%}), showing no
difference, making no difference, not differing, with-
out distinction; undiscriminating; indiscriminate;
same, like, (at the end of an adj. comp.; cf. {%nīlot-%}
{%pala-n˚%}); ({%am%} or {%eṇa%}), ind. without difference,
indifferently, indiscriminately, without distinction,
equally, ({%sva-gṛha-nirviśeṣeṇa,%} just the same as in
one's own house.) {%—Nirviśeṣa-tva, am,%} n. absence
of difference, want of distinction, indiscriminateness.
{%—Nirviśeṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} showing no differ-
ence, undistinguished, indiscriminate. {%—Nirviśeṣā-%}
{%kṛti (˚ṣa-āk˚), is, is, i,%} whose forms are pre-
cisely alike.
<LEND>

<L>25617<pc>0501-c<k1>nirviSezaRa<k2>nirviSezaRa
{%Nir-viśeṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no attributes.
<LEND>

<L>25618<pc>0501-c<k1>nirviza<k2>nirviza
{#nirviza#}¦ {%nir-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} without venom,
poisonless (as serpents); ({%ā%} and {%ī%}), f. a species of
grass, Kyllingia Monocephala, used as an antidote.
<LEND>

<L>25619<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvizaNga<k2>nirvizaNga
{#nirvizaNga#}¦ {%nir-viṣaṅga, as, ā, am,%} not
attached to anything, indifferent.
<LEND>

<L>25620<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvizaya<k2>nirvizaya
{#nirvizaya#}¦ {%nir-viṣaya, as,%} m. no residence;
any place not deserving the name of a residence;
({%as, ā, am%}), expelled or driven away from one's
residence or home, banished; having no sphere of
action, not attached to any object, objectless; sepa-
rated from sensual objects, not attached to them (as
mind). {%—Nirviṣaya-tva, am,%} n. non-attachment
to any object. {%—Nirviṣayākāra (˚ya-āk˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} not deserving the name of a dwelling-place.
{%—Nirviṣayī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} expelled from one's
place of residence. {%—Nirviṣayoparāga (˚ya-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} unharmed by objects of sense.
<LEND>

<L>25621<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvizARa<k2>nirvizARa
{#nirvizARa#}¦ {%nir-viṣāṇa, as, ā, am,%} destitute
of horns or tusks, tuskless (as an elephant).
<LEND>

<L>25622<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvihaNga<k2>nirvihaNga
{#nirvihaNga#}¦ {%nir-vihaṅga, as, ā, am,%} without
birds, free from birds.
<LEND>

<L>25623<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvihAra<k2>nirvihAra
{#nirvihAra#}¦ {%nir-vihāra, as, ā, am,%} having no
pleasure, deprived of pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>25624<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvIja<k2>nirvIja
{#nirvIja#}¦ {%nir-vīja, as, ā, am,%} seedless; im-
potent; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of grape without seeds or stones
({%= kākalī-drākṣā,%} commonly called {%kiṣmiṣ%}).
{%—Nirvīja-tva, am,%} n. seedlessness, impotence.
<LEND>

<L>25625<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvIra<k2>nirvIra
{#nirvIra#}¦ {%nir-vīra, as, ā, am,%} deprived of
men or heroes; unheroic, cowardly; ({%ā%}), f. a woman
whose husband and children are dead, a childless
widow; N. of a river; ({%am%}), n., N. of a place of
pilgrimage.
<LEND>

<L>25626<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvIruD<k2>nirvIruD
{#nirvIruD#}¦ {%nir-vīrudh, t, t, t,%} deprived of
plants.
<LEND>

<L>25627<pc>0501-c<k1>nirvIrya<k2>nirvIrya
{#nirvIrya#}¦ {%nir-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} powerless,
[Page0502-a+ 72]
unmanly, without manly courage, spiritless, tame,
feeble, impotent. {%—Nirvīrya-tā,%} f. unmanliness,
powerlessness.
<LEND>

<L>25628<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvf<k2>nirvf
{#nirvf#}¦ {%nir-vṛ,%} apparently only occurring in
the derivatives below.
<LEND>

<L>25629<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvfta<k2>nirvfta
{%Nir-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfied, contented, happy,
pleased, enraptured, tranquil, at ease, secure, free
from cares, free from anxiety and troubles, free from
occupation or interest, emancipated; ended, termi-
nated, ceased.
<LEND>

<L>25630<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvfti<k2>nirvfti
{%Nir-vṛti, is,%}¦ f. complete satisfaction, contentment,
tranquillity, bliss, happiness, gladness, pleasure; final
emancipation or liberation from existence; freedom;
rest, repose; setting, disappearance, death, destruc-
tion; completion, accomplishment (for {%nir-vṛtti%});
ceasing, abstaining from (for {%ni-vṛtti%}); incivility,
impropriety (for {%nir-vṛtti%}); ({%is%}), m., N. of a man;
of a son of Vṛṣṇi; (the forms {%nir-vṛti, nir-%}
{%vṛtti,%} and {%ni-vṛtti%} are often incorrectly confounded
together.)
<LEND>

<L>25631<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvfkza<k2>nirvfkza
{#nirvfkza#}¦ {%nir-vṛkṣa, as, ā, am,%} treeless.
<LEND>

<L>25632<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvft<k2>nirvft
{#nirvft#}¦ {%nir-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. (also P. in Fut.
Cond. and Aor.) {%-vartate, -vartitum,%} to be completed
or accomplished, to be effected; to draw back, recede,
desist, cease, not to be done, not to take place, (in
these senses probably for {%ni-vṛt,%} q. v.): Caus.
{%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to complete, accomplish, finish,
perform, produce, create.
<LEND>

<L>25633<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvartaka<k2>nirvartaka
{%Nir-vartaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), com-
pleting, accomplishing, performing, finishing, ending,
executing; desisting; [cf. {%ni-vartaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25634<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvartana<k2>nirvartana
{%Nir-vartana, am,%}¦ n. accomplishment, completion,
execution; desisting (for {%ni-vartana%}).
<LEND>

<L>25635<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvartanIya<k2>nirvartanIya
{%Nir-vartanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be completed or
accomplished.
<LEND>

<L>25636<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvartin<k2>nirvartin
{%Nir-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ accomplishing, performing,
executing; behaving rudely or uncivilly, uncivil.
<LEND>

<L>25637<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvartya<k2>nirvartya<h>1
1. {%nir-vartya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accomplished, per-
formable, to be pronounced or uttered, pronounceable.
{%—Nirvartya-tva, am,%} n. performableness; pro-
nounceableness.
<LEND>

<L>25638<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvartya<k2>nirvartya<h>2
2. {%nir-vartya,%}¦ ind. having accomplished, having
performed or finished; having ceased, (for {%ni-vartya.%})
<LEND>

<L>25639<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvftta<k2>nirvftta
{%Nir-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ finished, completely done,
accomplished. {%—Nirvṛtta-śatru, us,%} m., N. of a
prince of the Kaliṅgas; (probably wrongly for {%ni-%}
{%vṛtta-śatru;%} cf. {%ninarta-śatru.%})
<LEND>

<L>25640<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvftti<k2>nirvftti
{%Nir-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. completion, termination, con-
clusion; (in grammar) cessation of the influence of
one rule over another; result, fruit, reward; impro-
priety, incivility [cf. {%nir-vartin%} above]; final beati-
tude (for {%nir-vṛti%}); abstaining from action, inac-
tivity (for {%ni-vṛtti%}); ({%is, is, i%}), having no occu-
pation, destitute, (in this sense {%nir%} is a privative.)
<LEND>

<L>25641<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvfta<k2>nirvfta
{#nirvfta#}¦ {%nir-vṛta, nir-vṛti.%} See under {%nir-%}
{%vṛ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>25642<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvfz<k2>nirvfz
{#nirvfz#}¦ {%nir-vṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-varṣati, -var-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to cease to rain.
<LEND>

<L>25643<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvfzwi<k2>nirvfzwi
{%Nir-vṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. cessation of rain, want of rain.
<LEND>

<L>25644<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvfza<k2>nirvfza
{#nirvfza#}¦ {%nir-vṛṣa, as, ā, am,%} deprived of
bulls.
<LEND>

<L>25645<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvega<k2>nirvega
{#nirvega#}¦ {%nir-vega, as, ā, am,%} without violent
motion or impetuosity, not waving, quiet, calm.
<LEND>

<L>25646<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvetana<k2>nirvetana
{#nirvetana#}¦ {%nir-vetana, as, ā, am,%} not receiv-
ing wages, unsalaried.
<LEND>

<L>25647<pc>0502-a<k1>nirveda<k2>nirveda<h>2
{#nirveda#} 2¦. {%nir-veda, as, ā, am%} (for 1. {%nir-%}
{%veda%} see under {%nir-vid,%} p. 501, col. 2), not having
the Vedas, infidel, unscriptural.
<LEND>

<L>25648<pc>0502-a<k1>nirveDima<k2>nirveDima
{#nirveDima#}¦ {%nir-vedhima%} (fr. {%vyadh%} with {%nis%}),
with {%karṇa,%} a peculiar deformity of the ear.
<LEND>

<L>25649<pc>0502-a<k1>nirvepana<k2>nirvepana
{#nirvepana#}¦ {%nir-vepana, as, ā, am,%} not trem-
bling, not flickering (as the flame of a lamp).
<LEND>
[Page0502-b+ 69]

<L>25650<pc>0502-b<k1>nirveSa<k2>nirveSa
{#nirveSa#}¦ {%nir-veśa.%} See under {%nir-viś,%} p. 501,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>25651<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvezwana<k2>nirvezwana
{#nirvezwana#}¦ {%nir-veṣṭana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%veṣṭ%}
with {%nis%}), a small reed used as a shuttle, a weaver's
shuttle.
<LEND>

<L>25652<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvEra<k2>nirvEra
{#nirvEra#}¦ {%nir-vaira, am,%} n. absence of enmity;
({%as, ā, am%}), free from enmity, without enmity,
living in peace, peaceable; ({%as%}), m., N. of a hunter;
({%am%}), ind. peaceably, without enmity. {%—Nirvaira-tā,%}
f. freedom from enmity, peaceableness, concord.
<LEND>

<L>25653<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvEriRa<k2>nirvEriRa
{%Nir-vairiṇa, am,%}¦ n. absence of enmity, concord.
<LEND>

<L>25654<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvoQf<k2>nirvoQf
{#nirvoQf#}¦ {%nir-voḍhṛ, ḍhā, ḍhrī, ḍhṛ,%} car-
rying or leading away, who or what carries away;
separating, dividing; [cf. {%nir-vahitṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25655<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyaYjana<k2>nirvyaYjana
{#nirvyaYjana#}¦ {%nir-vyañjana, as, ā, am,%} without
condiment; straightforward; ({%e%}), ind. in a straight-
forward or downright manner; plainly, without
verbosity; silently (?).
<LEND>

<L>25656<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyaTa<k2>nirvyaTa
{#nirvyaTa#}¦ {%nir-vyatha, as, ā, am,%} free from
pain; quiet, unmoved, calm.
<LEND>

<L>25657<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyaTana<k2>nirvyaTana
{%Nir-vyathana, am,%}¦ n. a hole, chasm (a place of
rest); freedom from pain; paining, afflicting, (in
this sense {%nir%} is a prep.)
<LEND>

<L>25658<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyapekza<k2>nirvyapekza
{#nirvyapekza#}¦ {%nir-vyapekṣa, as, ā, am,%} disre-
garding, indifferent to (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>25659<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyalIka<k2>nirvyalIka
{#nirvyalIka#}¦ {%nir-vyalīka, as, ā, am,%} not caus-
ing pain, not hurting, not offending; not feeling
pain, without pain, pleased, doing willingly or sin-
cerely, sincere, genuine, undissembling; ({%am%}), ind.
sincerely, readily. {%—Nirvyalīka-tas,%} ind. sincerely.
<LEND>

<L>25660<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyAkula<k2>nirvyAkula
{#nirvyAkula#}¦ {%nir-vyākula, as, ā, am,%} not
troubled or disquieted, not excited, calm. {%—Nir-%}
{%vyākula-tā,%} f. freedom from trouble, calmness;
({%tayā%}), ind. with complete calmness, quite calmly.
<LEND>

<L>25661<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyAGra<k2>nirvyAGra
{#nirvyAGra#}¦ {%nir-vyāghra, as, ā, am,%} free from
tigers, not infested by tigers.
<LEND>

<L>25662<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyAja<k2>nirvyAja
{#nirvyAja#}¦ {%nir-vyāja, as, ā, am,%} without de-
ceit, candid, upright, straightforward, honest, plain,
exact; ({%am%}), ind. honestly, exactly, plainly. {%—Nirvyāja-%}
{%tā,%} f. honesty, plainness, candour. {%—Nirvyājī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} made plain, freed from deceit or illusion.
<LEND>

<L>25663<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyADi<k2>nirvyADi
{#nirvyADi#}¦ {%nir-vyādhi, is, is, i,%} free from
sickness, healthy, strong.
<LEND>

<L>25664<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyApAra<k2>nirvyApAra
{#nirvyApAra#}¦ {%nir-vyāpāra, as, ā, am,%} without
employment or business, free from occupation, un-
occupied, not busy, at leisure.
<LEND>

<L>25665<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyUh<k2>nirvyUh
{#nirvyUh#}¦ {%nir-vy-ūh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ūhati, -te,%}
&c., to push out, carry out, lead or bring away, re-
move; to arrange, put in order, perform, accomplish.
<LEND>

<L>25666<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyUQa<k2>nirvyUQa
{%Nir-vyūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ finished, completed;
abandoned, left, deserted; ({%am%}), n. various reading
for {%nir-vāha,%} completion.
<LEND>

<L>25667<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyUQi<k2>nirvyUQi
{%Nir-vyūḍhi, is,%}¦ f. end, completion; the top,
highest point or degree.
<LEND>

<L>25668<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvyUha<k2>nirvyUha
{%Nir-vyūha, as,%}¦ m. a turret; a helmet or its
ornament, a crest; a pinnacle (?); a door, gate; a
pin or peg in a wall to hang things upon; decoction;
[cf. {%nir-yūha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25669<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvraRa<k2>nirvraRa
{#nirvraRa#}¦ {%nir-vraṇa, as, ā, am,%} without
wounds, unhurt; undamaged; without notches or
rents.
<LEND>

<L>25670<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvrata<k2>nirvrata
{#nirvrata#}¦ {%nir-vrata, as, ā, am,%} neglecting
religious observances, not observing vows.
<LEND>

<L>25671<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvraska<k2>nirvraska
{#nirvraska#}¦ {%nir-vraska, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vraśc%}
with {%nis%}), uprooted, extirpated.
<LEND>

<L>25672<pc>0502-b<k1>nirvlayanI<k2>nirvlayanI
{#nirvlayanI#}¦ {%nir-vlayanī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%vlī%} with
{%nis%}). See {%nir-lvayanī,%} p. 500, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25673<pc>0502-b<k1>nirhan<k2>nirhan
{#nirhan#}¦ {%nir-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -hantum,%}
Ved. to strike out, expel.
<LEND>
[Page0502-c+ 71]

<L>25674<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhasta<k2>nirhasta
{#nirhasta#}¦ {%nir-hasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. handless,
without hands; [cf. {%nairhasta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25675<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhAda<k2>nirhAda
{#nirhAda#}¦ {%nir-hāda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%had%} with
{%nis%}), evacuation, voiding excrement; [cf. {%nir-hāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25676<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhAra<k2>nirhAra
{#nirhAra#}¦ {%nir-hāra.%} See under {%nir-hṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>25677<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhima<k2>nirhima
{#nirhima#}¦ {%nir-hima, am,%} n. cessation of winter.
<LEND>

<L>25678<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhf<k2>nirhf
{#nirhf#}¦ {%nir-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te, -har-%}
{%tum,%} to draw out from, extract, tear out, pull out,
root up; to carry out (a dead body), to carry or
take away; to export (goods); to change or mix
together (clothes &c.).
<LEND>

<L>25679<pc>0502-c<k1>nirharaRa<k2>nirharaRa
{%Nir-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. taking forth or out, drawing
out, extracting, rooting up, taking away, removing,
removal; setting aside, carrying away, carrying out
dead bodies to be burnt, carrying a corpse to the
funeral pyre.
<LEND>

<L>25680<pc>0502-c<k1>nirharaRIya<k2>nirharaRIya
{%Nir-haraṇīya%}¦ or {%nir-hartavya, as, ā, am,%} to
be taken away or removed; to be drawn out, &c.
<LEND>

<L>25681<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhAra<k2>nirhAra
{%Nir-hāra, as,%}¦ m. extracting, drawing out, rooting
up, destroying, destruction; putting forth or out;
carrying away, carrying out a corpse or dead body
to the funeral pile to be burnt; taking away, re-
moving, abstracting; setting aside; accumulation of
a private store of wealth, a hoard; evacuation of any
of the natural excrements of the body, (opposed to
{%ā-hāra;%} cf. {%nir-hāda, nī-hāra%}); giving away (?);
diffusive fragrance; completion.
<LEND>

<L>25682<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhAraka<k2>nirhAraka
{%Nir-hāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ carrying out (a dead
body to the funeral pile), one who carries out or
extracts or removes.
<LEND>

<L>25683<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhAraRa<k2>nirhAraRa
{%Nir-hāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), causing (a
dead body) to be carried out.
<LEND>

<L>25684<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhArin<k2>nirhArin
{%Nir-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ taking forth or out, carrying
out; diffusively fragrant, spreading wide (as odour);
having wealth.
<LEND>

<L>25685<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhfta<k2>nirhfta
{%Nir-hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ extracted, drawn out, taken
or carried forth or out.
<LEND>

<L>25686<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhfti<k2>nirhfti
{%Nir-hṛti, is,%}¦ f. bringing away, taking out of
one's way, removal.
<LEND>

<L>25687<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhftya<k2>nirhftya<h>1
1. {%nir-hṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be taken out;
to be left out or omitted.
<LEND>

<L>25688<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhftya<k2>nirhftya<h>2
2. {%nir-hṛtya,%}¦ ind. having taken forth or out, having
extracted.
<LEND>

<L>25689<pc>0502-c<k1>nirheti<k2>nirheti
{#nirheti#}¦ {%nir-heti, is, is, i,%} weaponless, un-
armed.
<LEND>

<L>25690<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhetu<k2>nirhetu
{#nirhetu#}¦ {%nir-hetu, us, us, u,%} causeless, reason-
less, having no cause or reason. {%—Nirhetu-tva, am,%}
n. causelessness.
<LEND>

<L>25691<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhrAda<k2>nirhrAda
{#nirhrAda#}¦ {%nir-hrāda%} or {%ni-hrāda, as,%} m. (fr.
rt. {%hrād%} with {%nis%}), a sound in general. {%—Nirhrāda-%}
{%bhīta, as, ā, am,%} terrified by a sound or noise.
<LEND>

<L>25692<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhrAdin<k2>nirhrAdin
{%Nir-hrādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sounding, resounding, roaring.
<LEND>

<L>25693<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhrAsa<k2>nirhrAsa
{#nirhrAsa#}¦ {%nir-hrāsa, as,%} m. abbreviation,
shortening (of a vowel).
<LEND>

<L>25694<pc>0502-c<k1>nirhrIka<k2>nirhrIka
{#nirhrIka#}¦ {%nir-hrīka, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis + hrī%}),
not shy, without shame, bold, daring.
<LEND>

<L>25695<pc>0502-c<k1>nil<k2>nil
{#nil#}¦ {%nil,%} cl. 6. P. {%nilati,%} &c., to un-
derstand with difficulty, to be impassable
or impenetrable; [cf. {%ni-lī%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>25696<pc>0502-c<k1>nilay<k2>nilay
{#nilay#}¦ {%nil-ay (= nir-ay),%} cl. 1. A. {%-ayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to go out; [cf. rt. {%i%} and rt. {%ay.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25697<pc>0502-c<k1>nilayana<k2>nilayana<h>1
1. {%nil-ayana, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see under {%ni-lī%}
below), the act of going out.
<LEND>

<L>25698<pc>0502-c<k1>nilimpa<k2>nilimpa
{#nilimpa#}¦ {%ni-limpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%lip%} with
{%ni%}), Ved., N. of a particular class of supernatural
beings; a troop of Maruts; a god in general; ({%ā%}),
f. a cow. {%—Nilimpa-nirjharī,%} f. the river of the
gods, the Gaṅgā.
<LEND>

<L>25699<pc>0502-c<k1>nilimpikA<k2>nilimpikA
{%Nilimpikā,%}¦ f. a cow.
<LEND>

<L>25700<pc>0502-c<k1>nilI<k2>nilI
{#nilI#}¦ {%ni-lī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate, -letum%} and
{%-lātum,%} to lie down, settle down, alight; to hide
[Page0503-a+ 75]
one's self, disappear, conceal one's self from (with
abl.); to sink down, perish, ({%ni-lilyire,%} they perished,
Mahā-bh. Sauptika-p. 399.)
<LEND>

<L>25701<pc>0503-a<k1>nilaya<k2>nilaya
{%Ni-laya, as,%}¦ m. hiding one's self; a hiding-place;
the lair or den of animals, a nest; dwelling, abode,
residence, house, habitation; (often at the end of a
comp. in the sense of) having one's residence,
living, residing in (e. g. {%Kailāsa-nilaya,%} residing
in Kailāsa).
<LEND>

<L>25702<pc>0503-a<k1>nilayana<k2>nilayana<h>2
2. {%ni-layana, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. see p. 502, col. 3),
settling in a place, alighting; place of refuge, dwelling-
place, dwelling, habitation.
<LEND>

<L>25703<pc>0503-a<k1>nilAyitA<k2>nilAyitA
{%Nilāyi-tā,%}¦ f. dwelling, residing in, the being
domesticated.
<LEND>

<L>25704<pc>0503-a<k1>nilAyin<k2>nilAyin
{%Ni-lāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ dwelling in, inhabiting.
<LEND>

<L>25705<pc>0503-a<k1>nilIna<k2>nilIna
{%Ni-līna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fused in or into; involved, en-
compassed, surrounded, shut or wrapt up, embraced,
destroyed, perished; transformed, changed; full.
<LEND>

<L>25706<pc>0503-a<k1>nilInaka<k2>nilInaka
{%Nilīnaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (?), N. of a village in
the north country; [cf. {%nailīnaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25707<pc>0503-a<k1>nilIyamAna<k2>nilIyamAna
{%Ni-līyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ hiding, lying concealed.
<LEND>

<L>25708<pc>0503-a<k1>nivakzas<k2>nivakzas
{#nivakzas#}¦ {%ni-vakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. (pro-
bably) an epithet of the sacrificial animal (implying
some peculiarity of colour &c.).
<LEND>

<L>25709<pc>0503-a<k1>nivacana<k2>nivacana<h>1
{#nivacana#} 1¦. {%ni-vacana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%vac%}
with {%ni%}), Ved. expression, address; a proverbial
expression; [cf. 1. {%nir-vacana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25710<pc>0503-a<k1>nivacana<k2>nivacana<h>2
{#nivacana#} 2¦. {%ni-vacana, as, ā, am (ni = nis),%}
(Pāṇ. 1. 4, 76), not speaking; [cf. 2. {%nir-vacana.%}]
{%—Nivacane-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to
obstruct the speech, to cease to speak. {%—Nivacane-%}
{%kṛtya%} or {%nivacane-kṛtvā,%} ind. having ceased to
speak.
<LEND>

<L>25711<pc>0503-a<k1>nivat<k2>nivat
{#nivat#}¦ {%ni-vat, t,%} f. (fr. {%ni%}), Ved. a steep
place, a valley; ({%tā%}), ind. downhill, downwards.
<LEND>

<L>25712<pc>0503-a<k1>nivaD<k2>nivaD
{#nivaD#}¦ {%ni-vadh,%} a defective verb (see {%vadh%}),
to kill.
<LEND>

<L>25713<pc>0503-a<k1>nivanA<k2>nivanA
{#nivanA#}¦ {%ni-vanā,%} ind., Ved. downwards,
downhill; [cf. {%ni-vatā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25714<pc>0503-a<k1>nivap<k2>nivap
{#nivap#}¦ {%ni-vap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vapati, -te,%}
{%-vaptum,%} to scatter seed, sow; to offer, make offer-
ings of cakes &c. to the Manes; to kill.
<LEND>

<L>25715<pc>0503-a<k1>nivapana<k2>nivapana
{%Ni-vapana, am,%}¦ n. pouring out, scattering or
throwing down; sowing; oblations or gifts in
honour of deceased ancestors, an offering to the
Manes; [cf. {%nir-vapaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25716<pc>0503-a<k1>nivApa<k2>nivApa
{%Ni-vāpa, as,%}¦ m. seed, grain, seed corn; an oblation
or offering to the Manes of deceased parents or
relatives, a libation or offering of water &c. at the
Śrāddha; gift, offering in general.
<LEND>

<L>25717<pc>0503-a<k1>nivApaka<k2>nivApaka
{%Ni-vāpaka, as,%}¦ m. a sower.
<LEND>

<L>25718<pc>0503-a<k1>nivApin<k2>nivApin
{%Nivāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ pouring out, throwing or scat-
tering down, sowing.
<LEND>

<L>25719<pc>0503-a<k1>nyupta<k2>nyupta
{%Ny-upta, ny-upya.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>25720<pc>0503-a<k1>nivara<k2>nivara
{#nivara#}¦ {%ni-vara.%} See {%ni-vṛ,%} p. 504, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25721<pc>0503-a<k1>nivarta<k2>nivarta
{#nivarta#}¦ {%ni-varta, ni-vartana,%} &c. See {%ni-%}
{%vṛt,%} p. 504, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25722<pc>0503-a<k1>nivarhaRa<k2>nivarhaRa
{#nivarhaRa#}¦ {%ni-varhaṇa.%} See {%ni-vṛh,%} p. 504.
<LEND>

<L>25723<pc>0503-a<k1>nivas<k2>nivas<h>1
{#nivas#} 1¦. {%ni-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati, -vastum,%}
to dwell, inhabit, reside, lodge, live in (with loc.);
to sojourn, pass time, pass the night; to roost.
<LEND>

<L>25724<pc>0503-a<k1>nivasat<k2>nivasat
{%Ni-vasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dwelling in, inhabiting.
<LEND>

<L>25725<pc>0503-a<k1>nivasati<k2>nivasati
{%Ni-vasati, is,%}¦ f. a habitation, abiding, abode,
house, residence.
<LEND>

<L>25726<pc>0503-a<k1>nivasaTa<k2>nivasaTa
{%Ni-vasatha, as,%}¦ f. a village.
<LEND>

<L>25727<pc>0503-a<k1>nivasana<k2>nivasana<h>1
1. {%ni-vasana, am,%}¦ n. a dwelling, house, a habita-
tion. (For 2. see under 2. {%ni-vas,%} col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>25728<pc>0503-a<k1>nivastavya<k2>nivastavya
{%Ni-vastavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be lived; to be spent.
<LEND>

<L>25729<pc>0503-a<k1>nivAsa<k2>nivAsa<h>1
1. {%ni-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see under 2. {%ni-vas,%}
col. 2), living, dwelling, residing; passing the night;
a place of residence, dwelling-place, abode, house;
night-quarters. {%—Nivāsa-bhūmi, is,%} f. place of
residence. {%—Nivāsa-bhūya, am,%} n. habitation; in-
habiting. {%—Nivāsa-rājan, ā,%} m. the king of the
country in which one dwells.
<LEND>
[Page0503-b+ 76]

<L>25730<pc>0503-b<k1>nivAsana<k2>nivAsana<h>1
1. {%ni-vāsana, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see under 2. {%ni-vas%}
below), living, residing [cf. {%jagan-n˚%}]; sojourn;
passing or spending time.
<LEND>

<L>25731<pc>0503-b<k1>nivAsin<k2>nivAsin<h>1
1. {%ni-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ dwelling, abiding in, inhabit-
ing, an inhabitant, resident.
<LEND>

<L>25732<pc>0503-b<k1>nivas<k2>nivas<h>2
{#nivas#} 2¦. {%ni-vas,%} cl. 2. A. {%-vaste, -vasitum,%}
to put on or wear (clothes), dress; to change one's
clothes: Caus. or cl. 10. P. {%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} to
put on (a garment?).
<LEND>

<L>25733<pc>0503-b<k1>nivasana<k2>nivasana<h>2
2. {%ni-vasana, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. see under 1. {%ni-vas,%}
col. 1), putting on (a garment), cloth, clothes, raiment;
an under garment.
<LEND>

<L>25734<pc>0503-b<k1>nivAsa<k2>nivAsa<h>2
2. {%ni-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see under 1. {%ni-vas,%}
col. 1), dress (e. g. in {%carma-nivāsa,%} dressed in a
skin).
<LEND>

<L>25735<pc>0503-b<k1>nivAsana<k2>nivAsana<h>2
2. {%ni-vāsana, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. see under 1. {%ni-vas,%}
above), (with Buddhists) a kind of raiment.
<LEND>

<L>25736<pc>0503-b<k1>nivAsaya<k2>nivAsaya
{%Ni-vāsaya%}¦ (fr. 2. {%ni-vāsa%}), Nom. P. {%nivāsayati,%}
&c., to put on (a garment), to cover.
<LEND>

<L>25737<pc>0503-b<k1>nivAsin<k2>nivAsin<h>2
2. {%ni-vāsin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (at the end of a comp.),
dressed in, wearing, clothed, covered.
<LEND>

<L>25738<pc>0503-b<k1>nivah<k2>nivah
{#nivah#}¦ {%ni-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vahati, -te,%}
{%-voḍhum,%} to bring or lead near; to carry, to support.
<LEND>

<L>25739<pc>0503-b<k1>nivaha<k2>nivaha
{%Ni-vaha, as,%}¦ m. a multitude, quantity, heap, (in
this sense also {%ās,%} m. pl.); N. of one of the seven
winds; one of the seven tongues of fire.
<LEND>

<L>25740<pc>0503-b<k1>nivAha<k2>nivAha
{%Ni-vāha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. leading down, (opposed to
{%abhy-avaroha.%})
<LEND>

<L>25741<pc>0503-b<k1>nivAta<k2>nivAta<h>1
{#nivAta#} 1¦. {%ni-vāta, as, ā, am (ni = nis),%}
protected against or sheltered from the wind, not
reached by the wind, not windy, calm [cf. 2. {%nir-%}
{%vāta%}]; ({%am%}), n. a place sheltered from or inac-
cessible to the wind, a sheltered spot, (sometimes
used at the end of a comp. of which the first member
expresses the sheltering object, see Pāṇ. VI. 2, 8);
a calm.
<LEND>

<L>25742<pc>0503-b<k1>nivAta<k2>nivAta<h>2
{#nivAta#} 2¦. {%ni-vāta, as, ā, am%} ({%ni + vāta%} fr.
{%van%}), unimpeded, unhurt, uninjured; secure, safe
(as in an asylum); well armed, accoutred in strong
mail; ({%as%}), m. an asylum, a refuge, a dwelling, &c.;
an impenetrable coat of mail; ({%am%}), n. security, a
secure spot; strong armour. {%—Nivāta-kavaca, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} whose armour or mail is impenetrable, wear-
ing an impenetrable coat of mail; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
demon, the grandson of Hiraṇya-kaśipu; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a class of Dānavas or Daityas.
<LEND>

<L>25743<pc>0503-b<k1>nivApa<k2>nivApa
{#nivApa#}¦ {%ni-vāpa,%} &c. See {%ni-vap,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25744<pc>0503-b<k1>nivAra<k2>nivAra
{#nivAra#}¦ {%ni-vāra.%} See {%ni-vṛ,%} p. 504, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25745<pc>0503-b<k1>nivASa<k2>nivASa
{#nivASa#}¦ {%ni-vāśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vāś%} with
{%ni%}), Ved. bellowing, roaring, sounding.
<LEND>

<L>25746<pc>0503-b<k1>niviqa<k2>niviqa
{#niviqa#}¦ {%ni-viḍa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%viḍa = vila,%}
a hole, with {%ni = nis%}), without spaces or interstices,
close, contiguous, coarse, large, bulky; gross, thick,
impervious, impenetrable, dense, firm; crooked-
nosed; ({%as%}), m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>25747<pc>0503-b<k1>niviqaya<k2>niviqaya
{%Niviḍaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%niviḍayati,%} &c., to make
tight.
<LEND>

<L>25748<pc>0503-b<k1>niviqIsa<k2>niviqIsa
{%Ni-viḍīsa, as, ā, am,%}¦ compact, close; coarse,
gross; crooked-nosed (?).
<LEND>

<L>25749<pc>0503-b<k1>nivirIsa<k2>nivirIsa
{%Ni-virīsa%}¦ or {%ni-virīśa = ni-viḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>25750<pc>0503-b<k1>nivid<k2>nivid<h>1
{#nivid#} 1¦. {%ni-vid,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vetti, -veda, -ve-%}
{%ditum,%} to tell, communicate, proclaim: Caus. {%-veda-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to make known, tell, communicate,
report, represent, betray, relate (with dat., loc., or gen.
of the person); to present, offer, give, deliver.
<LEND>

<L>25751<pc>0503-b<k1>nivid<k2>nivid<h>2
2. {%ni-vid, t,%}¦ f., Ved. instruction, information, direc-
tion, communication, precept, doctrine; invocation;
N. of certain sentences or short formularies inserted
in a liturgy and containing epithets or short invoca-
tions of the gods (e. g. {%Agniḥ suṣamit, hotā deva-%}
{%vṛtaḥ%}); (Sāy.) speech, a short text of the Veda.
{%—Nivid-dhāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. containing the
Nivids; ({%am%}), n. (according to Sāy.) inserting the
Nivids. {%—Nividdhānīya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. containing
the Nivids.
<LEND>

<L>25752<pc>0503-b<k1>nivedaka<k2>nivedaka
{%Ni-vedaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ communicating, relating.
<LEND>
[Page0503-c+ 78]

<L>25753<pc>0503-c<k1>nivedana<k2>nivedana
{%Ni-vedana, as, ā, am,%}¦ proclaiming, announcing;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; ({%am%}), n. making
known, proclaiming, apprizing, publishing, relating,
communicating, announcement, communication; in-
formation; representation; delivering, giving, en-
trusting; an offering, oblation; dedication.
<LEND>

<L>25754<pc>0503-c<k1>nivedayizu<k2>nivedayizu
{%Ni-vedayiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid. of the
Caus. without reduplication), wishing to make known
or report, intending to relate about.
<LEND>

<L>25755<pc>0503-c<k1>nivedita<k2>nivedita
{%Ni-vedita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made known, announced,
reported, communicated, stated, told; represented;
delivered, addressed, entrusted, presented, given.
<LEND>

<L>25756<pc>0503-c<k1>nivedin<k2>nivedin
{%Ni-vedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ communicating, reporting,
relating, proclaiming.
<LEND>

<L>25757<pc>0503-c<k1>nivedya<k2>nivedya<h>1
1. {%ni-vedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be communicated or
related; fit to be reported; ({%am%}), n. an oblation,
offering food to an idol, (probably for {%naivedya.%})
<LEND>

<L>25758<pc>0503-c<k1>nivedya<k2>nivedya<h>2
2. {%ni-vedya,%}¦ ind. having respectfully announced
or made known.
<LEND>

<L>25759<pc>0503-c<k1>nivirIsa<k2>nivirIsa
{#nivirIsa#}¦ {%ni-virīsa.%} See {%ni-viḍa,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25760<pc>0503-c<k1>nivivftsat<k2>nivivftsat
{#nivivftsat#}¦ {%ni-vivṛtsat, ni-vivṛtsu.%} See
p. 504, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>25761<pc>0503-c<k1>niviS<k2>niviS
{#niviS#}¦ {%ni-viś,%} cl. 6. A. {%-viśate%} (ep. also
P. {%-viśati%}), {%-veṣṭum,%} to enter; to alight, descend;
to sit down, take a seat; to lie down; to settle
down, to encamp; to settle, take a wife; to be fixed
or intent on (with loc.): Caus. {%-veśayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to enter, introduce, place in or on; to cause
to sit down; to cause to settle or dwell, cause to lie
down or encamp; to cause to marry; to put or
place down; to found (a city); to enter (in writing),
mark down (letters, lines, &c.), inscribe (on a tablet),
depict; (with {%manas%}) to apply the mind to, fix the
mind on (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>25762<pc>0503-c<k1>nivizwa<k2>nivizwa
{%Ni-viṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ entered, gone in or into;
seated, sitting upon; situated or placed in or on,
fixed on, intent upon; arranged.
<LEND>

<L>25763<pc>0503-c<k1>nivizwi<k2>nivizwi
{%Ni-viṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. entering (a female), copu-
lation.
<LEND>

<L>25764<pc>0503-c<k1>niveSa<k2>niveSa
{%Ni-veśa, as,%}¦ m. entering, entrance; settling in a
place, encamping, halting; dwelling-place, habita-
tion; halting-place, place of lying, camp, palace, the
residence of a king or general, ({%niveśaṃ kṛ,%} to take
up one's residence, settle, encamp); depositing, de-
livering; founding (a household), settling, marrying,
marriage; founding (a town); impression, mark,
copy; military array; ornament, dress, decoration.
{%—Niveśa-deśa, as,%} m. a dwelling-place. {%—Niveśa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at%} (at the end of a comp.), lying in or
on, resting on.
<LEND>

<L>25765<pc>0503-c<k1>niveSana<k2>niveSana
{%Ni-veśana, as, ī, am,%}¦ entering; placing or laying
down, lodging, providing with a resting-place; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a Vṛṣṇi; ({%am%}), n. entering, entrance;
sitting down, encamping, settling, putting or laying
down, ({%niveśanaṃ kṛ,%} to settle, encamp); entering
(in writing), inscribing; founding (a household), mar-
rying, marriage; resting-place, habitation, dwelling-
place, abode, dwelling, house; a nest; a camp; a
town or city; [cf. {%a-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25766<pc>0503-c<k1>niveSanIya<k2>niveSanIya
{%Ni-veśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be entered; to be
fixed; to be engaged in.
<LEND>

<L>25767<pc>0503-c<k1>niveSayat<k2>niveSayat
{%Ni-veśayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to enter, intro-
ducing, sending in or into.
<LEND>

<L>25768<pc>0503-c<k1>niveSita<k2>niveSita
{%Ni-veśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to enter, introduced;
placed in or upon; turned to or towards, fixed upon,
directed on; sent into, entered into, engaged in.
<LEND>

<L>25769<pc>0503-c<k1>niveSin<k2>niveSin
{%Ni-veśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ resting in, being in, situated
on, lying near; resting on.
<LEND>

<L>25770<pc>0503-c<k1>niveSya<k2>niveSya<h>1
1. {%ni-veśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be founded (as a town);
to be married (as a man); to be returned or paid.
<LEND>

<L>25771<pc>0503-c<k1>niveSya<k2>niveSya<h>2
2. {%ni-veśya,%}¦ ind. having placed in or on, having
made to remain or dwell.
<LEND>

<L>25772<pc>0503-c<k1>nivezwavya<k2>nivezwavya
{%Ni-veṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be married (applied
to a man); ({%am%}), n. to be married, (used impersonally,
e. g. {%mahākule niveṣṭavyaṃ sadṛśe vā,%} one
should marry into a high family or an equal).
<LEND>

<L>25773<pc>0503-c<k1>niviSeza<k2>niviSeza
{#niviSeza#}¦ {%ni-viśeṣa, as, ā, am,%} not differ-
ent, alike; ({%as%}), m. want of difference.
<LEND>
[Page0504-a+ 77]

<L>25774<pc>0504-a<k1>nivIta<k2>nivIta
{#nivIta#}¦ {%ni-vīta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vye%} with
{%ni%}), having the sacred Brāhmanical thread suspended
round the neck; ({%am%}), n. wearing the Brāhmanical
thread round the neck; the Brāhmanical thread so
worn; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. a veil, mantle, a
wrapper ({%= ni-vṛta%}).
<LEND>

<L>25775<pc>0504-a<k1>nivItin<k2>nivItin
{%Nivītin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wearing the sacred thread sus-
pended round the neck; ({%ī%}), m. a Brāhman with
the cord so suspended.
<LEND>

<L>25776<pc>0504-a<k1>nivIrya<k2>nivIrya
{#nivIrya#}¦ {%ni-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} impotent ({%=%}
{%nir-vīrya,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>25777<pc>0504-a<k1>nivf<k2>nivf
{#nivf#}¦ {%ni-vṛ,%} cl. 5. 9. 1. P. A. {%-vṛṇoti,%}
{%-ṇute, -vṛṇāti, -ṇīte, -varati, -te, -varitum, -va-%}
{%rītum,%} to surround, defend, restrain: Caus. {%-vāra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to surround, protect; to keep off,
ward off, prohibit, hinder, prevent, hold back from,
stop, withhold, forbid, interdict, exclude, obstruct,
oppose: Caus. Pass. {%-vāryate,%} to be interdicted,
to be withheld.
<LEND>

<L>25778<pc>0504-a<k1>nivara<k2>nivara
{%Ni-vara, as,%}¦ m., Ved. covering, protection, a
protector; (Sāy.) a preventer, obstructer; ({%ā%}), f. a
virgin, an unmarried girl, (in this sense probably fr.
{%ni,%} ‘not,’ + {%vara,%} ‘a husband.’)
<LEND>

<L>25779<pc>0504-a<k1>nivAra<k2>nivAra
{%Ni-vāra, as,%}¦ m. keeping off, warding off, defend-
ing, preventing, hindering, opposition, impediment;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>25780<pc>0504-a<k1>nivAraka<k2>nivAraka
{%Ni-vāraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ keeping off, defending,
able to keep off.
<LEND>

<L>25781<pc>0504-a<k1>nivAraRa<k2>nivAraRa
{%Ni-vāraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ keeping off, preventing,
defending; ({%am%}), n. keeping back or off, preventing,
defending, hindering, opposing; prohibition, an im-
pediment; contemning (?).
<LEND>

<L>25782<pc>0504-a<k1>nivAraRIya<k2>nivAraRIya
{%Ni-vāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be kept off or de-
fended, to be checked or hindered, &c.
<LEND>

<L>25783<pc>0504-a<k1>nivArayat<k2>nivArayat
{%Ni-vārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ preventing, opposing,
hindering.
<LEND>

<L>25784<pc>0504-a<k1>nivArita<k2>nivArita
{%Ni-vārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ hindered, forbidden, pre-
vented, checked, opposed.
<LEND>

<L>25785<pc>0504-a<k1>nivArya<k2>nivArya<h>1
1. {%ni-vārya = ni-vāraṇīya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>25786<pc>0504-a<k1>nivArya<k2>nivArya<h>2
2. {%ni-vārya,%}¦ ind. having suppressed, having for-
bidden.
<LEND>

<L>25787<pc>0504-a<k1>nivAryamARa<k2>nivAryamARa
{%Ni-vāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being prevented or
hindered.
<LEND>

<L>25788<pc>0504-a<k1>nivfta<k2>nivfta
{%Ni-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, enclosed, en-
compassed; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. ({%= ni-vīta%}), a
veil, a mantle, a wrapper.
<LEND>

<L>25789<pc>0504-a<k1>nivfti<k2>nivfti
{%Ni-vṛti, is,%}¦ f. covering, enclosing.
<LEND>

<L>25790<pc>0504-a<k1>nivfj<k2>nivfj
{#nivfj#}¦ {%ni-vṛj,%} cl. 7. 1. P. {%-vṛṇakti, -var-%}
{%jati, -varjitum,%} Ved. to immerse, drown; to over-
throw; to pour out; to extirpate.
<LEND>

<L>25791<pc>0504-a<k1>nivft<k2>nivft<h>1
{#nivft#} 1¦. {%ni-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. (also P. in Fut.
Cond. and Aor.) {%-vartate, -vartitum,%} to turn back,
return, retreat, retire, go back, turn back or away
from (with abl.); to recoil; to escape from (with
abl.), run away; to cease from, desist from, abstain
or refrain from (with abl.); to refuse, decline; to
cease; to come to an end, be accomplished; to be
finished, stop, set (as the sun); not to occur; to be
withheld; to be forbidden; to be reversed; to be
occupied or engaged in: Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to return; to bring back; to turn away,
keep back from, restrain; to cause to desist; to drive
back, repel; to accomplish, perform, bring to an
end, (for {%nir-vṛt.%})
<LEND>

<L>25792<pc>0504-a<k1>nivarta<k2>nivarta
{%Ni-varta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. causing to return or
turn back.
<LEND>

<L>25793<pc>0504-a<k1>nivartaka<k2>nivartaka
{%Ni-vartaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ returning, turning or
coming back, flying; desisting from, stopping, ceasing;
bringing back, causing to cease, abolishing, expelling,
removing. {%—Nivartaka-tva, am,%} n. the state of one
who turns back, &c.
<LEND>

<L>25794<pc>0504-a<k1>nivartana<k2>nivartana
{%Ni-vartana, as, ā, am,%}¦ turning back, ceasing, ceas-
ing to exist, disappearing; causing to return; ({%am%}), n.
returning, turning or coming back, return; ceasing,
not happening, not occurring; desisting or abstaining
from (with abl.); desisting from work, inactivity,
(opposed to {%pra-vartana%}); repenting, reforming;
[Page0504-b+ 79]
causing to come back, bringing back; turning back
(the hair); a means of returning (Ved.); keeping
back from (with abl.); a measure of land, 20 rods
or 200 cubits or 40,000 Hastas square. {%—Nivartana-%}
{%stūpa, as,%} m., N. of a Stūpa erected at the spot
where the charioteer of Buddha returned.
<LEND>

<L>25795<pc>0504-b<k1>nivartanIya<k2>nivartanIya
{%Ni-vartanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought back;
to be made to turn back, to be kept back or diverted
or hindered.
<LEND>

<L>25796<pc>0504-b<k1>nivartamAna<k2>nivartamAna
{%Ni-vartamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ turning back, re-
turning.
<LEND>

<L>25797<pc>0504-b<k1>nivartayitavya<k2>nivartayitavya
{%Ni-vartayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be kept back,
to be restrained, to be diverted.
<LEND>

<L>25798<pc>0504-b<k1>nivartita<k2>nivartita
{%Ni-vartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned back or away,
brought back, made to desist. {%—Nivartita-pūrva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has turned away before.
<LEND>

<L>25799<pc>0504-b<k1>nivartitavya<k2>nivartitavya
{%Ni-vartitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought back.
<LEND>

<L>25800<pc>0504-b<k1>nivartin<k2>nivartin
{%Ni-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ turning back, returning, flying,
({%saṅgrāmād a-nivartin,%} not turning back from the
fight, i. e. not flying); leaving off, abstaining from;
allowing to return, causing to turn back.
<LEND>

<L>25801<pc>0504-b<k1>nivartya<k2>nivartya
{%Ni-vartya,%}¦ ind. having turned or brought back,
having induced to desist; having desisted or refrained
from; having repented; having repaid; [cf. {%dur-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25802<pc>0504-b<k1>nivivftsat<k2>nivivftsat
{%Ni-vivṛtsat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), wishing
to return or desist.
<LEND>

<L>25803<pc>0504-b<k1>nivivftsu<k2>nivivftsu
{%Ni-vivṛtsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of turning back,
wishing to desist.
<LEND>

<L>25804<pc>0504-b<k1>nivft<k2>nivft<h>2
2. {%ni-vṛt,%}¦ f. {%= ni-cṛt,%} q. v.; [cf. {%ati-n˚, pāda-n˚,%}
{%atipāda-n˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25805<pc>0504-b<k1>nivftta<k2>nivftta
{%Ni-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ returned, returning, turned
back; gone, departed; vanished; ceased, refrained
from, abstained, stopped, desisted, prohibited; abstain-
ing from worldly acts, &c.; abstaining, abstracted or
abstained from or independent of worldly acts or
motives, abstracted from this world, quiet; desisting
from or repenting of any improper conduct; finished,
completed, whole; ({%am%}), n. return; [cf. {%dur-n˚.%}]
{%—Nivṛtta-kāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} without further
cause or motive; ({%as%}), m. a virtuous man, one
uninfluenced by worldly desires. {%—Nivṛtta-kṛṣi-%}
{%gorakṣa, as, ā, am,%} ceasing from agriculture and the
tending of cattle. {%—Nivṛtta-deva-kārya, as, ā, am,%}
ceasing from sacrificial rites or offerings to the gods.
{%—Nivṛtta-māṃsa, as, ā, am,%} one who abstains
from eating meat. {%—Nivṛtta-yajña-svādhyāya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ceasing from sacrifices and the repetition of
prayers. {%—Nivṛtta-rāga, as, ā, am,%} of subdued
appetites or passions. {%—Nivṛtta-vṛtti, is, is, i,%}
quitting any practice or occupation. {%—Nivṛtta-%}
{%hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} with relenting heart. {%—Nivṛt-%}
{%tātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā,%} m. ‘one whose spirit is ab-
stracted,’ a sage; an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>25806<pc>0504-b<k1>nivftti<k2>nivftti
{%Ni-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. returning, return; disappearing,
disappearance, ceasing, cessation, suspension, abstain-
ing from action, inactivity, (opposed to {%pra-vṛtti%});
ceasing to be active, ceasing to be valid or binding
(as a rule); leaving off, desisting from (with abl.);
resigning, discontinuance of worldly acts, cessation of
emotions, separation from the world, abstinence;
repose, rest; felicity, bliss, beatitude, (wrongly for
{%nir-vṛtti%}); denial, refusal; abolition, prevention;
completion; ({%is%}), m., N. of a son of Vṛṣṇi; of a
son of Dharma, king of Magadha; [cf. {%nir-vṛtti,%}
{%ni-dhṛti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25807<pc>0504-b<k1>nivfh<k2>nivfh
{#nivfh#}¦ {%ni-vṛh%} [cf. {%ni-bṛh%}], Caus. {%-varha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to throw down; to annihilate; to
extirpate.
<LEND>

<L>25808<pc>0504-b<k1>nivarhaRa<k2>nivarhaRa
{%Ni-varhaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroying, extirpating,
annihilating, removing; ({%am%}), n. destruction, eradi-
cation, annihilation, killing, removing; [cf. {%ni-bar-%}
{%haṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25809<pc>0504-b<k1>nivarhita<k2>nivarhita
{%Ni-varhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroyed, annihilated,
eradicated.
<LEND>

<L>25810<pc>0504-b<k1>nivedaka<k2>nivedaka
{#nivedaka#}¦ {%ni-vedaka, ni-vedana,%} &c. See
under 1. {%ni-vid,%} p. 503, cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>25811<pc>0504-b<k1>nivezwa<k2>nivezwa
{#nivezwa#}¦ {%ni-veṣṭa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%veṣṭ%} with
{%ni%}), a cover, envelope; {%Vasiṣṭhasya niveṣṭas,%}
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>
[Page0504-c+ 77]

<L>25812<pc>0504-c<k1>nivezwana<k2>nivezwana
{%Ni-veṣṭana, am,%}¦ n. covering, enveloping, clothing.
<LEND>

<L>25813<pc>0504-c<k1>nivezya<k2>nivezya
{#nivezya#}¦ {%ni-veṣya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%viṣ%} with
{%ni%}), Ved. a whirlpool, a water-spout; a whirlwind
or any similar phenomenon [cf. {%stanayitnu%}]; a part
of the upper or fore-part of an animal, the vertebra?;
(according to Mahī-dhara) eddy or hoar-frost; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), whirling, belonging to a whirlpool or eddy.
<LEND>

<L>25814<pc>0504-c<k1>nivyADa<k2>nivyADa
{#nivyADa#}¦ {%ni-vyādha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vyadh%}
with {%ni%}), Ved. an opening, aperture, a window.
<LEND>

<L>25815<pc>0504-c<k1>nivyADin<k2>nivyADin
{%Ni-vyādhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. piercing, opening.
<LEND>

<L>25816<pc>0504-c<k1>nivyUQa<k2>nivyUQa
{#nivyUQa#}¦ {%ni-vyūḍha, am,%} n. perseverance,
resolution.
<LEND>

<L>25817<pc>0504-c<k1>niS<k2>niS<h>1
{#niS#} 1¦. {%niś,%} euphonically substituted for
{%nis%} before {%c, ch,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>25818<pc>0504-c<k1>niS<k2>niS<h>2
{#niS#} 2¦. {%niś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-neśati,%} &c., to
meditate upon, meditate profoundly, to
be absorbed in meditation.
<LEND>

<L>25819<pc>0504-c<k1>niS<k2>niS<h>3
{#niS#} 3¦. {%niś,%} f. (perhaps connected with
{%nak%} fr. rt. 2. {%naś,%} or merely a curtailed form of {%niśā%}
below, which may be connected with {%ni-śītha%} and
so derived fr. rt. {%śī%} with {%ni;%} the form {%niś%} is
defective in nom. voc. sing. du. and pl., acc. sing.
du., but may be optionally substituted for {%niśā%} in
acc. pl. and remaining cases, e. g. {%niśas%} or {%niśās,%}
{%niśā%} or {%niśayā, niḍbhyām%} [according to some also
{%nijbhyām%}] or {%niśābhyām,%} &c.), night; {%niśi niśi,%}
every night; {%mahā-niśi,%} at midnight.
<LEND>

<L>25820<pc>0504-c<k1>niSa<k2>niSa
{%Niśa, am,%}¦ n. (at the end of a comp.) {%= niśā,%}
night (e. g. {%ahar-niśam,%} ind. day and night; {%divā-%}
{%niśam,%} ind. day and night; cf. also {%a-niśa.%})
<LEND>

<L>25821<pc>0504-c<k1>niSA<k2>niSA
{%Niśā,%}¦ f. night; a vision, dream; turmeric, Cur-
cuma (of two species, {%= haridrā%} and {%dāru-haridrā,%}
probably C. Zedoaria and C. Longa; a collective N.
of the asterisms Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer,
Sagittarius, and Capricorn; cf. {%niśā-bala.%}) {%—Niśā-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. ‘the night-maker,’ the moon, (regarded
with {%Divā-kara%} as a son of Garuḍa); a symbolical
expression for the numeral one; a cock. {%—Niśā-%}
{%kara-kalā-mauli, is,%} m. ‘bearing a crescent as
diadem,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Niśā-kāla, as,%} m.
the time of night. {%—Niśā-ketu, us,%} m. ‘night-sign,’
the moon. {%—Niśā-kṣaya, as,%} m. the close of night.
{%—Niśā-gaṇa, as,%} m. a number of nights. {%—Niśā-%}
{%gama (˚śā-āg˚), as,%} m. the coming on or com-
mencement of night. {%—Niśā-gṛha, as,%} m. a bed-
room, sleeping-room. {%—Niśā-cara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%}
going or moving about by night, nocturnal, night-
walking; ({%as%}), m. a Rākṣasa, a fiend, an imp or
goblin; an epithet of Śiva [cf. {%niśācara-pati%}]; a
jackal; an owl; a snake; the ruddy goose, Cakra-
vāka; a thief; a ghost, an evil spirit; ({%ī%}), f. a she-
devil, a female fiend; a woman who goes to an as-
signation, a harlot, whore; a sort of perfume, (see
{%keśinī.%}) {%—Niśācara-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of night-
walkers,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Niśācareśa (˚ra-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of the Rākṣasas,’ an epithet of
Rāvaṇa. {%—Niśā-carman, a,%} n. ‘the skin of night,’
darkness. {%—Niśā-chada, as,%} m. a species of plant.
{%—Niśā-jala, am,%} n. ‘the water of night,’ hoar-
frost, frost, dew. {%—Niśāṭa (˚śā-aṭa), as,%} m. ‘roving
by night,’ an owl; a demon, a ghost. {%—Niśāṭaka,%}
{%as,%} m. bdellium ({%= guggulu,%} connected with {%ni-%}
{%śāṭa,%} an owl; cf. {%kauśika,%} = owl and bdellium,
{%ulūkhala, ulūkhalaka%}). {%—Niśāṭana (˚śā-aṭ˚), as,%}
m. ‘night-rover,’ an owl; ({%ī%}), f. a species of moth.
{%—Niśātikrama (˚śā-at˚), as,%} m. the passing away
of night. {%—Niśātyaya (˚śā-at˚), as,%} m. the close of
night, day-break. {%—Niśā-darśin, ī,%} m. ‘seeing at
night,’ an owl. {%—Niśādi (˚śā-ādi), is,%} f. the begin-
ning of night, evening, twilight. {%—Niśādhīśa (˚śā-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of night,’ the moon. {%—Niśā-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of night,’ the moon. {%—Niśā-%}
{%nārāyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Niśā-niśam,%}
ind. night by night, every night, always. {%—1. ni-%}
{%śānta (˚śā-an˚), as, am,%} m. n. (for 2. {%ni-śānta%}
see under {%ni-śam,%} p. 505, col. 1), the end of
night, break of day. {%—Niśāndha (˚śā-an˚), %}
[Page0505-a+ 75]
{%as, ā, am,%} blind at night; ({%ā%}), f. a species of
creeper {%(= jatukā)%}. {%—Niśā-pati, is,%} m. ‘husband
of the night,’ the moon; camphor. {%—Niśā-putra,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. ‘the sons of night,’ N. of certain demons.
{%—Niśā-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘the flower of night,’ the
white water-lily; hoar-frost, dew. {%—Niśā-prāṇe-%}
{%śvara, as,%} m. ‘husband of night,’ the moon.
{%—Niśā-bala, as,%} m. a collective N. of the signs of
the zodiac Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Sagit-
tarius, and Capricorn. {%—Niśā-bhaṅgā,%} f. a species
of plant {%(= dugdha-pucchī)%}. {%—Niśā-maṇi, is,%} m.
‘jewel of the night,’ the moon; [cf. {%dhvajāgra-%}
{%niśāmaṇi.%}] {%—Niśā-mukha, am,%} n. the beginning
of night. {%—Niśā-mṛga, as,%} m. ‘night-animal,’ a
jackal. {%—1. niśā-raṇa, am,%} n. a nocturnal battle; (for
2. see {%ni-śaraṇa%} below.) {%—Niśā-ratna, am,%} n. (or,
according to some, {%as%} m.), ‘the jewel of the night,’
the moon. {%—Niśārdhakāla (˚śā-ardha-k˚), as,%} m.
the first part of the night (opposed to the following).
{%—Niśāvasāna (˚śā-av˚), am,%} n. the close or end
of night, the second part of the night (opposed to
the preceding). {%—Niśā-vihāra, as,%} m. a night-
walker, a nocturnal imp or goblin, a Rākṣasa.
{%—Niśā-vṛnda, am,%} n. a number of nights. {%—Niśā-%}
{%vedin, ī,%} m. ‘knowing the night,’ a cock. {%—Niśā-%}
{%hasa, as,%} m. ‘night-smiler,’ the white water-lily
which opens its petals at night. {%—Niśāhvā (˚śā-%}
{%āh˚),%} f. turmeric. {%—Niśi-pāla, as,%} m. a kind of
metre consisting of four lines of fifteen syllables
each. {%—Niśi-puṣpā%} or {%niśi-puṣpī%} or {%niśipuṣ-%}
{%pikā,%} f. the tree Nyctanthes Arbor Tristis. {%—Niśeśa%}
{%(˚śa-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of night,’ the moon. {%—Ni-%}
{%śaita (˚śa-eta), as,%} m. ‘shining at night,’ the crane,
Ardea Nivea. {%—Niśotsarga (˚śā-ut˚), as,%} m. the
end of night, day-break. {%—Niśopaśāya (˚śā-up˚),%}
{%as,%} m. resting at night.
<LEND>

<L>25822<pc>0505-a<k1>niSaWa<k2>niSaWa
{#niSaWa#}¦ {%ni-śaṭha, as, ā, am,%} not false,
candid, honest; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Vṛṣṇi, a son of
Bala-rāma by Revatī; (also written {%ni-ṣaṭha, ni-%}
{%saṭha, ni-satha.%})
<LEND>

<L>25823<pc>0505-a<k1>niSad<k2>niSad
{#niSad#}¦ {%ni-śad,%} Caus. {%-śātayati, -yitum,%} Ved.
to kill.
<LEND>

<L>25824<pc>0505-a<k1>niSabda<k2>niSabda
{#niSabda#}¦ {%ni-śabda, as, ā, am,%} speechless,
silent; [cf. {%niḥ-śabda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25825<pc>0505-a<k1>niSam<k2>niSam
{#niSam#}¦ {%ni-śam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śāmyati, -śamitum,%}
to observe, see; to hear, listen: Caus. {%-śāmayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to observe, perceive, see; to hear, listen.
<LEND>

<L>25826<pc>0505-a<k1>niSamana<k2>niSamana
{%Ni-śamana, am,%}¦ n. looking at; seeing, sight;
hearing; becoming aware of.
<LEND>

<L>25827<pc>0505-a<k1>niSamya<k2>niSamya
{%Ni-śamya,%}¦ ind. having perceived, having heard,
hearing.
<LEND>

<L>25828<pc>0505-a<k1>niSAnta<k2>niSAnta<h>2
2. {%ni-śānta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. {%niśānta%} see under
{%niśā,%} p. 504, col. 3), tranquillized, quiet, tranquil,
patient; ({%am%}), n. a house, dwelling, habitation.
{%—Niśānta-nārī,%} f. a house-wife.
<LEND>

<L>25829<pc>0505-a<k1>niSAntIya<k2>niSAntIya
{%Niśāntīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
a house (?).
<LEND>

<L>25830<pc>0505-a<k1>niSAma<k2>niSAma
{%Ni-śāma, as,%}¦ m. observing, perceiving.
<LEND>

<L>25831<pc>0505-a<k1>niSAmana<k2>niSAmana
{%Ni-śāmana, am,%}¦ n. sight, seeing; looking at,
beholding; looking at repeatedly; observing, hearing;
a shadow, reflection.
<LEND>

<L>25832<pc>0505-a<k1>niSAmayat<k2>niSAmayat
{%Ni-śāmayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ perceiving, hearing.
<LEND>

<L>25833<pc>0505-a<k1>niSAmya<k2>niSAmya
{%Ni-śāmya,%}¦ ind. having seen; having heard; having
tranquillized; having put out (as a light).
<LEND>

<L>25834<pc>0505-a<k1>niSaraRa<k2>niSaraRa
{#niSaraRa#}¦ {%ni-śaraṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%śṝ%} with
{%ni%}), killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>25835<pc>0505-a<k1>niSAraRa<k2>niSAraRa<h>2
2. {%ni-śāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%śṝ%} with {%ni%}), killing,
slaughter, slaying.
<LEND>

<L>25836<pc>0505-a<k1>niSAruka<k2>niSAruka
{%Ni-śāruka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of Rūpaka (see under
{%dṛḍha%}); ({%am%}), n. an air, a sort of musical compo-
sition played as an accompaniment to dancing.
<LEND>

<L>25837<pc>0505-a<k1>niSAta<k2>niSAta
{#niSAta#}¦ {%ni-śāta.%} See under {%ni-śo,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>25838<pc>0505-a<k1>niSAda<k2>niSAda
{#niSAda#}¦ {%ni-śāda, as,%} m. a man of low caste;
(see {%niṣāda.%}) {%—Niśāda-tva, am,%} n. the state or
condition of a man of low caste. {%—Niśādā-putra, %}
[Page0505-b+ 69]
{%as,%} m. (?), a pestle. {%—Niśādā-śilā,%} f. a mortar, a
slab for grinding.
<LEND>

<L>25839<pc>0505-b<k1>niSAmaya<k2>niSAmaya
{#niSAmaya#}¦ {%ni-śāmaya = śṛṇu,%} listen, (impv.
of Caus. of {%ni-śam,%} col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>25840<pc>0505-b<k1>niSAyin<k2>niSAyin
{#niSAyin#}¦ {%ni-śāyin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt. {%śī%} with
{%ni%}), lying down in, sleeping in (?).
<LEND>

<L>25841<pc>0505-b<k1>niSAvana<k2>niSAvana
{#niSAvana#}¦ {%niśāvana, as,%} m. hemp. See
{%śaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>25842<pc>0505-b<k1>niSi<k2>niSi
{#niSi#}¦ {%ni-śi%} [cf. {%ni-śo%}], cl. 5. P. A. {%-śinoti,%}
{%-nute, -śetum,%} to sharpen; to stimulate, excite;
to kill.
<LEND>

<L>25843<pc>0505-b<k1>niSita<k2>niSita
{%Ni-śita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sharpened, whetted, pointed,
stimulated; ({%am%}), n. iron.
<LEND>

<L>25844<pc>0505-b<k1>niSiti<k2>niSiti
{%Ni-śiti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. excitement, stimulation, en-
couragement.
<LEND>

<L>25845<pc>0505-b<k1>niSitA<k2>niSitA
{#niSitA#}¦ {%ni-śitā,%} f., Ved. night; [cf. {%ni-%}
{%śītha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25846<pc>0505-b<k1>niSiTa<k2>niSiTa
{#niSiTa#}¦ {%ni-śitha, as,%} m. (for {%ni-śītha%}), N. of
one of the three sons of Doṣā (Night); (some read
this word in Bhāgavata-Purāṇa IV. 13, 14, {%ni-śītha.%})
<LEND>

<L>25847<pc>0505-b<k1>niSITa<k2>niSITa
{#niSITa#}¦ {%ni-śītha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śī%} with {%ni%}),
midnight, the time of sleep, night in general.
<LEND>

<L>25848<pc>0505-b<k1>niSITinI<k2>niSITinI
{%Ni-śīthinī,%}¦ f. night. {%—Niśīthinī-nātha, as,%} m.
‘husband of night,’ the moon.
<LEND>

<L>25849<pc>0505-b<k1>niSITyA<k2>niSITyA
{%Ni-śīthyā,%}¦ f. night.
<LEND>

<L>25850<pc>0505-b<k1>niSumBa<k2>niSumBa
{#niSumBa#}¦ {%ni-śumbha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śumbh%}
with {%ni%}), killing, slaughter; N. of a Dānava, brother
of Śumbha, slain by Durgā; (also written {%ni-%}
{%sumbha.%}) {%—Niśumbha-mathanī,%} f. or {%niśumbha-%}
{%mardinī,%} f. ‘destroyer of Niśumbha,’ an epithet of
Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>25851<pc>0505-b<k1>niSumBana<k2>niSumBana
{%Ni-śumbhana, am,%}¦ n. killing, slaying, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>25852<pc>0505-b<k1>niSumBin<k2>niSumBin
{%Ni-śumbhin, ī,%}¦ m. an epithet of Vajra-ṭīka; an
inferior deity of the Buddhists.
<LEND>

<L>25853<pc>0505-b<k1>niSuzma<k2>niSuzma
{#niSuzma#}¦ {%ni-śuṣma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. not
sparkling (as fire), not coruscating, (opposed to {%uc-%}
{%chuṣma.%})
<LEND>

<L>25854<pc>0505-b<k1>niSfmBa<k2>niSfmBa
{#niSfmBa#}¦ {%ni-śṛmbha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śrambh%}
with {%ni%}), Ved. stepping firmly?; (Sāy.) fastened to
(a car), harnessed.
<LEND>

<L>25855<pc>0505-b<k1>niSEta<k2>niSEta
{#niSEta#}¦ {%niśaita.%} See under {%niśā,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25856<pc>0505-b<k1>niSo<k2>niSo
{#niSo#}¦ {%ni-śo%} [cf. {%ni-śi%}], cl. 4. P. {%-śyati,%}
{%-śātum,%} to sharpen, whet, polish.
<LEND>

<L>25857<pc>0505-b<k1>niSAta<k2>niSAta
{%Ni-śāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sharpened, whetted, sharp;
polished, burnished, varnished.
<LEND>

<L>25858<pc>0505-b<k1>niSAna<k2>niSAna
{%Ni-śāna, am,%}¦ n. sharpening; (also read {%ni-śāṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>25859<pc>0505-b<k1>niScakzus<k2>niScakzus
{#niScakzus#}¦ {%niś-cakṣus, us, us, us,%} eyeless,
blind.
<LEND>

<L>25860<pc>0505-b<k1>niScat<k2>niScat
{#niScat#}¦ {%niś-cat (nis-cat),%} Caus. A. {%-cāta-%}
{%yate, -yitum,%} Ved. to scare or drive away.
<LEND>

<L>25861<pc>0505-b<k1>niScatvAriMSa<k2>niScatvAriMSa
{#niScatvAriMSa#}¦ {%niś-catvāriṃśa, as, ī, am,%} with-
out forty.
<LEND>

<L>25862<pc>0505-b<k1>niScapraca<k2>niScapraca
{#niScapraca#}¦ {%niśca-praca,%} (perhaps) backwards
and forwards; [cf. {%āca-parāca%} under 2. {%āca.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25863<pc>0505-b<k1>niScar<k2>niScar
{#niScar#}¦ {%niś-car (nis-car),%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati,%}
{%-caritum,%} to come forth, issue, go out, arise, pro-
ceed, appear, be produced; to rise (as sounds): Caus.
{%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to issue or come forth.
<LEND>

<L>25864<pc>0505-b<k1>niScara<k2>niScara
{%Niś-cara, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of the Saptarṣis in
the eleventh Manv-antara.
<LEND>

<L>25865<pc>0505-b<k1>niScAraka<k2>niScAraka
{%Niś-cāraka, am,%}¦ n. evacuation by stool; air,
wind; obstinacy, wilfulness.
<LEND>

<L>25866<pc>0505-b<k1>niScala<k2>niScala
{#niScala#}¦ {%niś-cala, as, ā, am,%} immovable,
not moving, stock-still, still, fixed, steady; not
subject to motion or fluctuation, invariable, un-
changeable; ({%ā%}), f. the earth; Desmodium Gange-
ticum {%(= śāla-parṇī)%}. {%—Niścala-mati, is, is, i,%}
steady-minded, of unshaken mind. {%—Niścalāṅga%}
{%(˚la-aṅ˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having immovable limbs,
[Page0505-c+ 73]
firm-bodied, firm; ({%as%}), m. a species of crane,
Ardea Nivea; a rock, mountain.
<LEND>

<L>25867<pc>0505-c<k1>niSci<k2>niSci
{#niSci#}¦ {%niś-ci%} ({%nis-ci,%} see rt. 2. {%ci%}), cl. 3. P.
{%-ciketi,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -nute, -cetum,%} Ved. to
ascertain, investigate, know thoroughly, arrive at a
certain decision, decide, regard as decided, to fix
upon, determine, resolve.
<LEND>

<L>25868<pc>0505-c<k1>niScaya<k2>niScaya
{%Niś-caya, as,%}¦ m. ascertainment, investigation,
inquiry, a fixed opinion, a firm conviction, accurate
or certain knowledge, certainty, positiveness, positive
conclusion, determination, resolution, resolve, decision;
settled purpose, fixed intention, design, purpose, aim,
({%iti niścayaḥ,%} this is a fixed opinion or established
conclusion; {%niścayaṃ jñātum,%} to ascertain the cer-
tainty; {%niścayaṃ kṛ,%} to decide, come to a deter-
mination; cf. {%pāpa-n˚, maraṇa-n˚, eka-n˚%}); ‘re-
moval of fallacy or deception,’ N. of a figure in
rhetoric; ({%ena%} or {%āt%}), ind. certainly. {%—Niścaya-%}
{%datta, as,%} m., N. of a merchant. {%—Niścaya-rūpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having (only) the appearance of cer-
tainty, uncertain, wrong.
<LEND>

<L>25869<pc>0505-c<k1>niScayin<k2>niScayin
{%Niś-cayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ decided, determined, resolved.
<LEND>

<L>25870<pc>0505-c<k1>niScAyaka<k2>niScAyaka
{%Niś-cāyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what ascertains
or determines, one who is certain about anything,
determining, decisive.
<LEND>

<L>25871<pc>0505-c<k1>niScita<k2>niScita
{%Niś-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ascertained, determined,
settled, concluded, decided, established, certain, one
who has come to a conclusion or formed a fixed
opinion; sentenced, pronounced; ({%am%}), n. certainty,
decision, conclusion; ({%am%}), ind. decidedly, positively;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>25872<pc>0505-c<k1>niSciti<k2>niSciti
{%Niś-citi, is,%}¦ f. ascertainment, fixing, determining,
settling.
<LEND>

<L>25873<pc>0505-c<k1>niScitya<k2>niScitya
{%Niś-citya,%}¦ ind. having ascertained, having con-
cluded or decided, having made out for certain, having
settled or come to a final decision, feeling assured or
convinced.
<LEND>

<L>25874<pc>0505-c<k1>niScIyamAna<k2>niScIyamAna
{%Niś-cīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in the course of
ascertainment, being under investigation, being con-
cluded.
<LEND>

<L>25875<pc>0505-c<k1>niScitta<k2>niScitta
{#niScitta#}¦ {%niś-citta, as,%} m., N. of a Samādhi.
<LEND>

<L>25876<pc>0505-c<k1>niScinta<k2>niScinta
{#niScinta#}¦ {%niś-cinta, as, ā, am,%} unthinking,
thoughtless, inconsiderate, void of reflection, careless,
unconcerned; [cf. {%naiścintya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25877<pc>0505-c<k1>niScukkaRa<k2>niScukkaRa
{#niScukkaRa#}¦ {%niś-cukkaṇa, am,%} n. (said to be
fr. rt. {%cukk%}), a sort of tooth-powder prepared from
sulphate of iron &c. which destroys the tartar but
blackens the teeth; (also written {%niś-cukvaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>25878<pc>0505-c<k1>niScft<k2>niScft
{#niScft#}¦ {%niś-cṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-cṛtati, -cartitum,%}
Ved. to loosen, untie.
<LEND>

<L>25879<pc>0505-c<k1>niScetana<k2>niScetana
{#niScetana#}¦ {%niś-cetana, as, ā, am,%} without
consciousness, unconscious, unreasonable.
<LEND>

<L>25880<pc>0505-c<k1>niScetas<k2>niScetas
{#niScetas#}¦ {%niś-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} out of one's
mind, not in one's right senses.
<LEND>

<L>25881<pc>0505-c<k1>niScezwa<k2>niScezwa
{#niScezwa#}¦ {%niś-ceṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} motionless,
powerless, helpless; incapable of motion or effort;
({%am%}), ind. without motion.
<LEND>

<L>25882<pc>0505-c<k1>niScezwA<k2>niScezwA
{%Niś-ceṣṭā,%}¦ f. motionlessness. {%—Niśceṣṭā-ka-%}
{%raṇa, as, ā, am,%} causing motionlessness; epithet of
one of the arrows of the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>25883<pc>0505-c<k1>niScOra<k2>niScOra
{#niScOra#}¦ {%niś-caura, as, ā, am,%} free from
robbers.
<LEND>

<L>25884<pc>0505-c<k1>niScyavana<k2>niScyavana
{#niScyavana#}¦ {%niś-cyavana, as,%} m. ‘unperish-
ing,’ a form of fire; N. of one of the Saptarṣis in
the second Manv-antara.
<LEND>

<L>25885<pc>0505-c<k1>niSCandas<k2>niSCandas
{#niSCandas#}¦ {%niś-chandas, ās, ās, as,%} not
studying holy writ; {%niśchandaḥ kulam,%} a family in
which the Vedas are not studied.
<LEND>

<L>25886<pc>0505-c<k1>niSCidra<k2>niSCidra
{#niSCidra#}¦ {%niś-chidra, as, ā, am,%} having no
rent or openings, without holes, having no holes,
without weak points or defects, having no weak side;
unhurt, uninterrupted.
<LEND>

<L>25887<pc>0505-c<k1>niSCeda<k2>niSCeda
{%Niś-cheda, as, ā, am,%}¦ indivisible, without division.
<LEND>
[Page0506-a+ 74]

<L>25888<pc>0506-a<k1>niSraTya<k2>niSraTya
{#niSraTya#}¦ {%ni-śrathya,%} ind. having fastened
or harnessed.
<LEND>

<L>25889<pc>0506-a<k1>niSrama<k2>niSrama
{#niSrama#}¦ {%ni-śrama, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śram%} with
{%ni%}), labour bestowed upon anything, continued
practice.
<LEND>

<L>25890<pc>0506-a<k1>niSrayaRI<k2>niSrayaRI
{#niSrayaRI#}¦ {%ni-śrayaṇī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%śri%} with {%ni%}),
a ladder, staircase; (also written {%niḥ-śrayaṇī, niḥ-%}
{%śrayiṇī,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>25891<pc>0506-a<k1>niSreRI<k2>niSreRI
{%Ni-śreṇī,%}¦ f. a ladder, staircase; (other forms of the
word are {%ni-śreṇi,%} f., {%niḥ-śreṇī,%} and {%niḥ-śreṇi,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>25892<pc>0506-a<k1>niSrIka<k2>niSrIka
{#niSrIka#}¦ {%ni-śrīka%} for {%niḥ-śrīka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>25893<pc>0506-a<k1>niSvas<k2>niSvas
{#niSvas#}¦ {%ni-śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śvasiti, -śvasitum,%}
to draw in the breath, inspire; to sigh.
<LEND>

<L>25894<pc>0506-a<k1>niSvasya<k2>niSvasya
{%Ni-śvasya,%}¦ ind. having drawn in the breath,
having sighed.
<LEND>

<L>25895<pc>0506-a<k1>niSvAsa<k2>niSvAsa
{%Ni-śvāsa, as,%}¦ m. inspiration, inhaling, sighing.
{%—Niśvāsa-praśvāsa, au,%} m. du. inspiration and
expiration, respiration.
<LEND>

<L>25896<pc>0506-a<k1>niz<k2>niz<h>1
{#niz#} 1¦. {%niṣ,%} euphonically substituted for
{%nis%} before {%k, kh, ṭ,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>25897<pc>0506-a<k1>niz<k2>niz<h>2
{#niz#} 2¦. {%niṣ%} [cf. rt. {%nikṣ%}], cl. 1. P.
{%neṣati,%} &c., to moisten, sprinkle.
<LEND>

<L>25898<pc>0506-a<k1>nizaNga<k2>nizaNga
{#nizaNga#}¦ {%ni-ṣaṅga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sañj%} with
{%ni%}), clinging to, attachment; union, meeting, associ-
ation; a quiver; a sword (?).
<LEND>

<L>25899<pc>0506-a<k1>nizaNgaTi<k2>nizaNgaTi
{%Ni-ṣaṅgathi, is, is, i,%}¦ embracing; ({%is%}), m.
embracing, an embrace [cf. {%svañj%}]; a bowman; a
charioteer; a car; grass; the shoulder. {%—Niṣaṅga-%}
{%dhi, is,%} m., Ved. (according to commentators) the
sheath of a sword, a scabbard.
<LEND>

<L>25900<pc>0506-a<k1>nizaNgin<k2>nizaNgin
{%Niṣaṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a quiver; ({%ī%}), m. an
archer, bowman; N. of one of the hundred sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>25901<pc>0506-a<k1>nizaYja<k2>nizaYja
{#nizaYja#}¦ {%ni-ṣañja%} in {%ku-n˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>25902<pc>0506-a<k1>nizaWa<k2>nizaWa
{#nizaWa#}¦ {%ni-ṣaṭha.%} See {%ni-śaṭha,%} p. 505.
<LEND>

<L>25903<pc>0506-a<k1>nizad<k2>nizad<h>1
{#nizad#} 1¦. {%ni-ṣad (ni-sad),%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%{{-śhī-->-ṣī-||20161213|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 316-318|}}%}
{%dati, -ṣattum,%} to sit down, lie down, recline; to
settle down, sink down; to dwell; to be afflicted,
suffer pain: Caus. {%-ṣādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
sit down.
<LEND>

<L>25904<pc>0506-a<k1>nizaRRa<k2>nizaRRa
{%Ni-ṣaṇṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seated, sitting, perched,
placed in or on, rested, reclined, resting or leaning
on, reclining; supported; sunk down, afflicted, dis-
tressed; gone to.
<LEND>

<L>25905<pc>0506-a<k1>nizaRRaka<k2>nizaRRaka
{%Ni-ṣaṇṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ sitting, seated; ({%am%}),
n. a seat; a species of pot-herb, Marsilea Dentata.
<LEND>

<L>25906<pc>0506-a<k1>nizatti<k2>nizatti
{%Ni-ṣatti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. sitting down idly, remaining
inactive or indifferent, indolence.
<LEND>

<L>25907<pc>0506-a<k1>nizatsnu<k2>nizatsnu
{%Ni-ṣatsnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. sitting fast, firmly
settled or fixed.
<LEND>

<L>25908<pc>0506-a<k1>nizad<k2>nizad<h>2
2. {%ni-ṣad, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. sitting inactive; ({%t%}), f.
sitting, especially near the altar at a sacrificial rite;
N. of a kind of composition mentioned with Upa-
niṣad in Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 1613.
<LEND>

<L>25909<pc>0506-a<k1>nizada<k2>nizada
{%Ni-ṣada, as,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient king, (probably
a wrong reading for {%niṣadha%}); {%= ni-ṣāda,%} a musical
note.
<LEND>

<L>25910<pc>0506-a<k1>nizadana<k2>nizadana
{%Ni-ṣadana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. sitting down, reclining;
dwelling, residing; a seat.
<LEND>

<L>25911<pc>0506-a<k1>nizadyA<k2>nizadyA
{%Ni-ṣadyā,%}¦ f. a small bed or couch; the hall of
a merchant; a market-place.
<LEND>

<L>25912<pc>0506-a<k1>nizadvara<k2>nizadvara
{%Ni-ṣadvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. seated (near the
altar), sitting lazily; ({%as%}), m. mud, mire (in which
one sinks); the god of love; ({%ī%}), f. ‘the time of
rest,’ night.
<LEND>

<L>25913<pc>0506-a<k1>nizAda<k2>nizAda
{%Ni-ṣāda, as,%}¦ m., N. of certain wild aboriginal
tribes in India not belonging to the Āryan race, and
described as hunters, fishermen, robbers, &c.; (ac-
cording to Mahī-dhara) a N. of the Bhillas (a wild
mountain tribe whose progenitor is said by a legend
to have sprung from the thigh of Vena); a man of
a degraded tribe in general, an outcast (especially
the son of a Brāhman by a Śūdra woman); the first
of the seven musical notes or more properly the last
[Page0506-b+ 76]
or highest of the scale, corresponding to B of our
scale; N. of a Kalpa; [cf. {%naiṣāda, naiṣādaka,%}
{%naiṣādikā, naiṣādi.%}] {%—Niṣāda-karṣu, us,%}
m., N. of a district; [cf. {%naiṣāda-karṣuka.%}]
{%—Niṣāda-vat,%} n., N. of a musical note, = B of
our scale.
<LEND>

<L>25914<pc>0506-b<k1>nizAdita<k2>nizAdita
{%Ni-ṣādita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), made to
sit down; afflicted.
<LEND>

<L>25915<pc>0506-b<k1>nizAdin<k2>nizAdin
{%Ni-ṣādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sitting down, lying down, re-
clining, resting; ({%ī%}), m. an elephant-keeper or driver.
<LEND>

<L>25916<pc>0506-b<k1>nizIdat<k2>nizIdat
{%Ni-ṣīdat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sitting down, sitting
on; settling or sinking down; resting in or on.
<LEND>

<L>25917<pc>0506-b<k1>nizedivas<k2>nizedivas
{%Ni-ṣedivas, vān, duṣī, vat,%}¦ seated in or upon,
reclined.
<LEND>

<L>25918<pc>0506-b<k1>nizaDa<k2>nizaDa
{#nizaDa#}¦ {%niṣadha, as,%} m., N. of a mountain
or chain of mountains forming one of the principal
ranges of the earth, and described as lying immedi-
ately south of Ilāvṛta and north of the Himālaya;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people and their country
governed by Nala; the sovereign of the Niṣadhas;
N. of a son of Janam-ejaya; of Kuśa the father of
Nala; a peculiar position of the closed hand; a
musical note [cf. {%ni-ṣāda%}]; ({%as, ā, am%}), hard,
solid; ({%ā%}), f., N. of Nala's capital, the city of the
Niṣadhas; N. of a river rising in the Vindhya
mountains. {%—Niṣadha-vaṃśa, as,%} m. the race of
Niṣadha. {%—Niṣadhādhipa (˚dha-adh˚), as,%} m.
or {%niṣadhādhipati (˚dha-adh˚), is,%} m. or {%niṣa-%}
{%dheśvara (˚dha-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of Niṣadha,’
epithet of Nala; [cf. {%naiṣadha, naiṣadhya.%}]
{%—Niṣadhāśva (˚dha-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a son
of Kuru. {%—Niṣadhendra-kāvya, am,%} n. ‘the poem
of the prince of the Niṣadhas,’ N. of a poem.
<LEND>

<L>25919<pc>0506-b<k1>nizamam<k2>nizamam
{#nizamam#}¦ {%ni-ṣamam,%} ind. (fr. {%ni + sama%}),
see Pāṇ. VI. 2, 121, Schol.
<LEND>

<L>25920<pc>0506-b<k1>nizarga<k2>nizarga
{#nizarga#}¦ {%ni-ṣarga, as,%} m. a various reading
for {%ni-ṣaṅga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>25921<pc>0506-b<k1>nizAda<k2>nizAda
{#nizAda#}¦ {%ni-ṣāda.%} See 1. {%ni-ṣad,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25922<pc>0506-b<k1>nizic<k2>nizic
{#nizic#}¦ {%ni-ṣic (ni-sic),%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-ṣiñcati,%}
{%-te, -ṣektum,%} to sprinkle, pour upon or into, infuse,
instil, irrigate: Caus. {%-ṣecayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to sprinkle or irrigate.
<LEND>

<L>25923<pc>0506-b<k1>nizikta<k2>nizikta
{%Ni-ṣikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled upon, poured
into, infused, instilled, irrigated. {%—Niṣikta-pā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. protecting the infused (semen).
<LEND>

<L>25924<pc>0506-b<k1>nizeka<k2>nizeka
{%Ni-ṣeka, as,%}¦ m. sprinkling, infusion, aspersion;
distilling; effusion; seminal infusion, impregnation;
the ceremony performed upon impregnation; irriga-
tion; water for washing, (but according to others)
seminal impurity; what is poured upon the ground,
dirty water, swill.
<LEND>

<L>25925<pc>0506-b<k1>nizektavya<k2>nizektavya
{%Ni-ṣektavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sprinkled or
poured into, to be watered.
<LEND>

<L>25926<pc>0506-b<k1>nizecana<k2>nizecana
{%Ni-ṣecana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. pouring out, sprinkling,
watering, irrigation.
<LEND>

<L>25927<pc>0506-b<k1>nizecitf<k2>nizecitf
{%Ni-ṣecitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who sprinkles or
pours into, an instiller, infuser.
<LEND>

<L>25928<pc>0506-b<k1>niziD<k2>niziD
{#niziD#}¦ {%ni-ṣidh (ni-sidh),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṣe-%}
{%dhati, -ṣeddhum, -ṣedhitum,%} to prohibit, forbid,
restrain, keep off, ward off, keep back, prevent,
remove: Caus. {%-ṣedhayati, -yitum,%} to prohibit,
keep off.
<LEND>

<L>25929<pc>0506-b<k1>nizidDa<k2>nizidDa
{%Ni-ṣiddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ prohibited, forbidden,
kept back, restrained, warded off, prevented.
<LEND>

<L>25930<pc>0506-b<k1>nizidDi<k2>nizidDi
{%Ni-ṣiddhi, is,%}¦ f. prohibition, warding off, keep-
ing off, defence.
<LEND>

<L>25931<pc>0506-b<k1>nizedDavya<k2>nizedDavya
{%Ni-ṣeddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be kept back or
obstructed.
<LEND>

<L>25932<pc>0506-b<k1>nizedDf<k2>nizedDf
{%Ni-ṣeddhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ keeping back,
obstructing, who or what restrains or prevents or
prohibits.
<LEND>

<L>25933<pc>0506-b<k1>nizedDra<k2>nizedDra
{%Ni-ṣeddhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%a-niṣeddhra,%} having
no impeder or subduer.
<LEND>

<L>25934<pc>0506-b<k1>nizeDa<k2>nizeDa
{%Ni-ṣedha, as,%}¦ m. warding off, keeping off, hin-
dering, stopping, obstructing, prevention, prohibition;
negation, denial; discontinuance, contrariety to or
[Page0506-c+ 74]
deviation from rule, exception; N. of several
Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>25935<pc>0506-c<k1>nizeDaka<k2>nizeDaka
{%Ni-ṣedhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ keeping back, obstruct-
ing, preventing, prohibiting, forbidding.
<LEND>

<L>25936<pc>0506-c<k1>nizeDana<k2>nizeDana
{%Ni-ṣedhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of warding off or
defending, prevention.
<LEND>

<L>25937<pc>0506-c<k1>nizeDin<k2>nizeDin
{%Ni-ṣedhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ defending, keeping back;
excelling, surpassing.
<LEND>

<L>25938<pc>0506-c<k1>nizeDya<k2>nizeDya
{%Ni-ṣedhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be kept back or pro-
hibited or hindered.
<LEND>

<L>25939<pc>0506-c<k1>niziDa<k2>niziDa
{#niziDa#}¦ {%ni-ṣidha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people; (various reading for {%niṣadha;%} cf. {%nai-%}
{%ṣidha.%})
<LEND>

<L>25940<pc>0506-c<k1>nizUd<k2>nizUd
{#nizUd#}¦ {%ni-ṣūd (ni-sūd),%} Caus. {%-ṣūdayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to kill, slay.
<LEND>

<L>25941<pc>0506-c<k1>nizUdana<k2>nizUdana
{%Ni-ṣūdana, am,%}¦ n. killing, slaughter; [cf. {%ni-%}
{%sūdana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25942<pc>0506-c<k1>nizev<k2>nizev
{#nizev#}¦ {%ni-ṣev (ni-sev),%} cl. 1. A. {%-ṣevate,%}
{%-ṣevitum,%} to wait upon, serve, attend, follow;
attach or devote one's self to; to honour, worship,
adore; to pursue, practise, perform, observe, cultivate;
to frequent, inhabit, visit; to enjoy; to employ.
<LEND>

<L>25943<pc>0506-c<k1>nizeva<k2>nizeva
{%Ni-ṣeva, as, ā, am,%}¦ practising, exercising, fol-
lowing, devoted to [cf. {%hrī-n˚%}]; ({%ā%}), f. exercising,
practice, service; worship, adoration.
<LEND>

<L>25944<pc>0506-c<k1>nizevaka<k2>nizevaka
{%Ni-ṣevaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ practising, following,
devoted to; frequenting, inhabiting; enjoying.
<LEND>

<L>25945<pc>0506-c<k1>nizevaRa<k2>nizevaRa
{%Ni-ṣevaṇa, am,%}¦ n. waiting on, serving, service,
attaching one's self to, worshipping, worship, adora-
tion; practice, performance, adherence to; living in,
inhabiting, enjoying, using, use, familiarity with.
<LEND>

<L>25946<pc>0506-c<k1>nizevaRIya<k2>nizevaRIya
{%Ni-ṣevaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be served or attended
to, to be followed or observed; to be obeyed.
<LEND>

<L>25947<pc>0506-c<k1>nizevita<k2>nizevita
{%Ni-ṣevita, as, ā, am,%}¦ visited, frequented; ob-
served, practised; served, honoured, obeyed.
<LEND>

<L>25948<pc>0506-c<k1>nizevitavya<k2>nizevitavya
{%Ni-ṣevitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be practised or
observed; to be used or enjoyed; (also read {%ni-%}
{%sevitavya.%})
<LEND>

<L>25949<pc>0506-c<k1>nizevitf<k2>nizevitf
{%Ni-ṣevitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who attaches or
devotes himself to anything, an observer, practiser,
cultivator, &c.
<LEND>

<L>25950<pc>0506-c<k1>nizevin<k2>nizevin
{%Ni-ṣevin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ practising, observing, enjoying.
<LEND>

<L>25951<pc>0506-c<k1>nizevya<k2>nizevya
{%Ni-ṣevya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be observed, to be
honoured, to be visited or frequented; to be enjoyed.
<LEND>

<L>25952<pc>0506-c<k1>nizk<k2>nizk
{#nizk#}¦ {%niṣk%} (probably a Nominal verb
artificially formed fr. {%niṣka%} below),
cl. 10. A. {%niṣkayate,%} &c., to measure, weigh.
<LEND>

<L>25953<pc>0506-c<k1>nizka<k2>nizka
{%Niṣka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (said to be fr. rt. {%sad%} with
preposition {%ni%} and affix {%ka%}), a golden ornament for
the neck or breast; a golden ornament of a certain
weight, used as money; a weight of gold varying in
value at different times, = 1 Dīnāra of 32 small or
16 large Rettis, = 1 Karṣa or Su-varṇa of 16
Māṣas, = 1 Pāla of 4 or 5 Su-varṇas, = 1 larger
Pāla or Dīnāra variously reckoned at 108 or 150
Su-varṇas, = 4 Māṣas, = 16 Drammas; a weight of
silver of 4 Su-varṇas; gold in general, a golden
vessel; ({%as%}), m. a Cāṇḍāla; ({%ā%}), f. a measure of
length; [cf. {%naiṣkika, naiṣkaśatika, naiṣka-%}
{%sahasrika.%}] {%—Niṣka-kaṇṭha, as, ī, am,%} wearing
a golden ornament round the neck; ({%am%}), n. a
golden ornament of the neck. {%—Niṣka-grīva, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. wearing a gold ornament round the
neck.
<LEND>

<L>25954<pc>0506-c<k1>nizkin<k2>nizkin
{%Niṣkin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. having an ornament
round the neck.
<LEND>

<L>25955<pc>0506-c<k1>nizkaRwaka<k2>nizkaRwaka
{#nizkaRwaka#}¦ {%niṣ-kaṇṭaka, as, ā, am, =%}
{%a-kaṇṭaka,%} thornless, free from thorns or enemies;
free from danger or trouble.
<LEND>

<L>25956<pc>0506-c<k1>nizkaRWa<k2>nizkaRWa
{#nizkaRWa#}¦ {%niṣ-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. a species of
tree, Capparis Trifoliata.
<LEND>

<L>25957<pc>0506-c<k1>nizkanizWa<k2>nizkanizWa
{#nizkanizWa#}¦ {%niṣ-kaniṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} or
{%niṣkaniṣṭhaka, as, ā, am,%} having the little finger
stretched out.
<LEND>
[Page0507-a+ 71]

<L>25958<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkanda<k2>nizkanda
{#nizkanda#}¦ {%niṣ-kanda, as, ā, am,%} without
edible or esculent roots, having no bulbous roots.
<LEND>

<L>25959<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkapawa<k2>nizkapawa
{#nizkapawa#}¦ {%niṣ-kapaṭa, as, ā, am,%} guileless,
free from deceit or fraud.
<LEND>

<L>25960<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkampa<k2>nizkampa
{#nizkampa#}¦ {%niṣ-kampa, as, ā, am,%} not shaking,
not tremulous, motionless, immovable. {%—Niṣkam-%}
{%pa-tā,%} f. motionlessness, immovableness.
<LEND>

<L>25961<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkamBa<k2>nizkamBa
{#nizkamBa#}¦ {%ni-ṣkambha%} in {%vajra-niṣkambha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of one of the sons of Garuḍa.
<LEND>

<L>25962<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkamBu<k2>nizkamBu
{%Ni-ṣkambhu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a particular divine
being (= Viśva).
<LEND>

<L>25963<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkaruRa<k2>nizkaruRa
{#nizkaruRa#}¦ {%niṣ-karuṇa, as, ā, am,%} pitiless,
unmerciful, merciless, cruel. {%—Niṣkaruṇī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} rendered pitiless, made or become heart-
less or cruel.
<LEND>

<L>25964<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkarUza<k2>nizkarUza
{#nizkarUza#}¦ {%niṣ-karūṣa, as, ā, am,%} not
dirty, free from dirt.
<LEND>

<L>25965<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkartf<k2>nizkartf
{#nizkartf#}¦ {%niṣ-kartṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. {%= iṣ-%}
{%kartṛ,%} p. 143, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25966<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkarman<k2>nizkarman
{#nizkarman#}¦ {%niṣ-karman, ā, ā, a,%} inactive;
exempt from or neglecting religious or worldly
acts, &c.
<LEND>

<L>25967<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkarza<k2>nizkarza
{#nizkarza#}¦ {%niṣ-karṣa,%} &c. See under {%niṣ-%}
{%kṛṣ,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>25968<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkala<k2>nizkala
{#nizkala#}¦ {%niṣ-kala, as, ā, am,%} without
parts, undivided, indivisible; waned, diminished,
decayed; impotent, seedless, barren; maimed, in-
firm; ({%as%}), m. a receptacle; pudendum muliebre; N.
of Brahmā; a fancied personification of Brahmā for
religious ceremonies; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. an elderly woman
past childbearing or in whom menstruation has
ceased. {%—Niṣkala-tva, am,%} n. undividedness, indi-
visibility, the state of the absolute Brahma.
<LEND>

<L>25969<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkalaNka<k2>nizkalaNka
{#nizkalaNka#}¦ {%niṣ-kalaṅka, as, ā, am,%} stainless,
spotless, sinless, immaculate, unblemished. {%—Niṣka-%}
{%laṅka-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place.
<LEND>

<L>25970<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkalmaza<k2>nizkalmaza
{#nizkalmaza#}¦ {%niṣ-kalmaṣa, as, ā, am,%} spot-
less, sinless. {%—Niṣkalmaṣī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
become spotless or sinless.
<LEND>

<L>25971<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkazAya<k2>nizkazAya
{#nizkazAya#}¦ {%niṣ-kaṣāya, as, ā, am,%} free
from dirt or impure passions; ({%as%}), m., N. of the
thirteenth Arhat of the future Ut-sarpiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>25972<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkas<k2>nizkas
{#nizkas#}¦ {%niṣ-kas%} ({%nis-kas;%} sometimes in-
correctly spelt {%niṣ-kaś%}), Caus. {%-kāsayati, -yitum,%}
to drive out, expel, turn out.
<LEND>

<L>25973<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkAsa<k2>nizkAsa
{%Niṣ-kāsa, as,%}¦ m. exit, egress; a portico, veranda,
(wrongly spelt {%niṣ-kāśa%}); the day-break; waning,
disappearance; (also a wrong reading for {%niṣ-%}
{%kāṣa,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>25974<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkAsita<k2>nizkAsita
{%Niṣ-kāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ expelled, dismissed,
turned out; gone forth or out, issued; placed, de-
posited; placed over, appointed, stationed; reviled,
reproached; opened out, blown, expanded.
<LEND>

<L>25975<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkAsin<k2>nizkAsin
{%Niṣ-kāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ who or what expels; ({%inī%}),
f. a female slave not restrained by her master.
<LEND>

<L>25976<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkAma<k2>nizkAma
{#nizkAma#}¦ {%niṣ-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desireless,
free from wish or desire, disinterested, unselfish;
({%am%}), ind. without wish or desire; unwillingly.
{%—Niṣkāma-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} acting disinterestedly
or without desire, unselfish in one's conduct.
<LEND>

<L>25977<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkAraRa<k2>nizkAraRa
{#nizkAraRa#}¦ {%niṣ-kāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} cause-
less, needless, unnecessary; free from motive, disinter-
ested, groundless, without a reason, not proceeding
from any cause; ({%am%}), ind. without any special
motive, without a reason, causelessly, without any
secondary view; [cf. {%ni-kāraṇa.%}] {%—Niṣkāraṇa-%}
{%vairin, ī, iṇī, i,%} groundlessly hostile.
<LEND>

<L>25978<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkAruza<k2>nizkAruza
{#nizkAruza#}¦ {%niṣ-kāruṣa, as, ā, am,%} of a
noble race, not degraded (?).
<LEND>

<L>25979<pc>0507-a<k1>nizkAlaka<k2>nizkAlaka
{#nizkAlaka#}¦ {%niṣ-kālaka, as,%} m. a penitent
shaven and smeared with ghee or clarified butter.
<LEND>
[Page0507-b+ 71]

<L>25980<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkAlana<k2>nizkAlana
{#nizkAlana#}¦ {%niṣ-kālana, as,%} m. (fr. {%kal%}
with {%nis%}), driving away (cattle).
<LEND>

<L>25981<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkAlika<k2>nizkAlika
{#nizkAlika#}¦ {%niṣ-kālika, as, ā, am,%} one
who has no more time (to live), one whose time is
over or whose term of life is elapsed; ({%am%}), ind.
without delay.
<LEND>

<L>25982<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkASa<k2>nizkASa
{#nizkASa#}¦ {%niṣ-kāśa, as,%} m. issue, egress;
a portico, veranda; [cf. {%niṣ-kāsa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25983<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkASita<k2>nizkASita
{%Niṣ-kāśita, as, ā, am.%}¦ See {%niṣ-kāsita,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>25984<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkAza<k2>nizkAza
{#nizkAza#}¦ {%niṣ-kāṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kaṣ%}
with {%nis%}), Ved. the scrapings from a caldron or
pan; (also written {%niṣ-kāsa.%})
<LEND>

<L>25985<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkiYcana<k2>nizkiYcana
{#nizkiYcana#}¦ {%niṣ-kiñcana, as, ā, am,%} having
nothing, very poor. {%—Niṣkiñcana-tva, am,%} n.
poverty, indigence.
<LEND>

<L>25986<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkirIya<k2>nizkirIya
{#nizkirIya#}¦ {%niṣ-kirīya, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%niṣ-%}
{%kira,%} which is fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ%} with {%nis%}), N. of a race.
<LEND>

<L>25987<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkilviza<k2>nizkilviza
{#nizkilviza#}¦ {%niṣ-kilviṣa, as, ā, am,%} sin-
less, faultless; [cf. {%ni-kilbiṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25988<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkuwa<k2>nizkuwa
{#nizkuwa#}¦ {%niṣ-kuṭa, as,%} m. a pleasure-grove
near a house, (in this sense also {%am,%} n.); a field;
the hollow of a tree [cf. {%niṣ-kuha%}]; a door; the
female apartments, Zenana; N. of a country (?);
({%am%}), n., N. of a hole of a peculiar form in the
frame of a bedstead; (also read {%niḥ-kuha.%})
<LEND>

<L>25989<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkuwi<k2>nizkuwi
{%Niṣ-kuṭi, is, ī,%}¦ f. large cardamoms; [cf. {%nis-%}
{%truṭī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>25990<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkuwikA<k2>nizkuwikA
{%Niṣkuṭikā,%}¦ f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
on Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>25991<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkutUhala<k2>nizkutUhala
{#nizkutUhala#}¦ {%niṣ-kutūhala, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing no curiosity, incurious.
<LEND>

<L>25992<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkumBa<k2>nizkumBa
{#nizkumBa#}¦ {%niṣ-kumbha, as,%} m. {%= ni-kumbha,%}
Croton Polyandrum; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the mother of
the Magas.
<LEND>

<L>25993<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkula<k2>nizkula
{#nizkula#}¦ {%niṣ-kula, as, ā, am,%} having no
family or kindred, left alone in the world; {%niṣ-%}
{%kulaṃ kṛ,%} to make (any one) without family, cut
off entirely, exterminate. {%—Niṣkula-tā,%} f. loss of
family, dying out, perishing. {%—Niṣkulā-kṛ%} or
{%niṣkulī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to extir-
minate one's family; to strip off the husk, to husk,
shell. {%—Niṣkulā-kṛtya,%} ind. having stripped off
the husk; (also read {%niḥkulā-kṛtya.%}) {%—Niṣkulī-%}
{%kṛtya,%} ind. having husked or shelled; (also read
{%niḥkulī-kṛtya.%})
<LEND>

<L>25994<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkulIna<k2>nizkulIna
{%Niṣ-kulīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ of low family, plebeian.
<LEND>

<L>25995<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkuz<k2>nizkuz
{#nizkuz#}¦ {%niṣ-kuṣ (nis-kuṣ),%} cl. 9. P.
{%-kuṣṇāti, -koṣitum%} and {%-koṣṭum,%} to pull off or
out, strip off, tear off or out, extract; to injure or
hurt by tearing; to husk, shell.
<LEND>

<L>25996<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkuzita<k2>nizkuzita
{%Niṣ-kuṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn off, stripped off,
extracted, forced or drawn out, torn, lacerated; ex-
pelled; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Marut; (also read {%niṣ-%}
{%karṣin.%})
<LEND>

<L>25997<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkoza<k2>nizkoza
{%Niṣ-koṣa, as,%}¦ m. tearing out, stripping off the
husk, shelling.
<LEND>

<L>25998<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkozaRa<k2>nizkozaRa
{%Niṣ-koṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. tearing off or out, strip-
ping off, drawing out, extracting, extirpating; taking
away, husking, shelling.
<LEND>

<L>25999<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkozaRaka<k2>nizkozaRaka
{%Niṣ-koṣaṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for picking, used
as a picker, serving for a tooth-pick.
<LEND>

<L>26000<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkozitavya<k2>nizkozitavya
{%Niṣ-koṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be stripped off or
extracted, to be forced or drawn out; to be taken
away; to be expelled.
<LEND>

<L>26001<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkuha<k2>nizkuha
{#nizkuha#}¦ {%niṣ-kuha, as,%} m. {%= niṣ-kuṭa,%} the
hollow of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>26002<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkUja<k2>nizkUja
{#nizkUja#}¦ {%niṣ-kūja, as, ā, am,%} noiseless,
soundless.
<LEND>

<L>26003<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkUwa<k2>nizkUwa
{#nizkUwa#}¦ {%niṣ-kūṭa, as, ā, am,%} free from
deceit or fraud, guileless.
<LEND>

<L>26004<pc>0507-b<k1>nizkf<k2>nizkf
{#nizkf#}¦ {%niṣ-kṛ (nis-kṛ),%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-ka- %}
[Page0507-c+ 75]
{%roti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to bring out, extract (Ved.);
to take away, do away, remove, expel, exclude, drive
away; to break in pieces, destroy; to prepare,
equip, arrange, accomplish, finish; to absolve, acquit;
to restore, cure.
<LEND>

<L>26005<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkAraRa<k2>nizkAraRa
{%Niṣ-kāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. removing, taking away,
doing away; killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>26006<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkfta<k2>nizkfta
{%Niṣ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ done away, taken away,
removed, expelled; absolved, pardoned, acquitted;
disregarded; ({%am%}), n. expiation, atonement; a fixed
place, place of rendezvous.
<LEND>

<L>26007<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkfti<k2>nizkfti
{%Niṣ-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. expiation, atonement; absolution,
pardon; acquittance, compensation, discharge of a
debt or obligation; removal, doing away; restoration,
cure; escaping from, avoiding; disregarding, neglect-
ing; (Niṣkṛti personified is a sister of Lobha and
daughter of Dambha by Māyā); bad conduct, roguery,
(various reading for {%ni-kṛti%}); ({%is%}), m. a form of
Agni.
<LEND>

<L>26008<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkft<k2>nizkft
{#nizkft#}¦ {%niṣ-kṛt (nis-kṛt),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-kṛntati, -kartitum,%} to cut off, to cut out; to
divide, separate; to cut through, hew asunder,
massacre; to loosen.
<LEND>

<L>26009<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkfpa<k2>nizkfpa
{#nizkfpa#}¦ {%niṣ-kṛpa, as, ā, am,%} pitiless, mer-
ciless, cruel.
<LEND>

<L>26010<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkfz<k2>nizkfz
{#nizkfz#}¦ {%niṣ-kṛṣ (nis-kṛṣ),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-karṣati, -karṣṭum%} and {%-kraṣṭum,%} to draw out,
extract; to tear out, tear in pieces, rend asunder;
Caus. {%-karṣayati, -yitum,%} to tear in pieces, destroy,
annihilate.
<LEND>

<L>26011<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkarza<k2>nizkarza
{%Niṣ-karṣa, as,%}¦ m. drawing out, extracting; the
essence of anything, chief point, main point; measur-
ing; certainty, ascertainment; ({%āt%}), ind. succinctly.
<LEND>

<L>26012<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkarzaRa<k2>nizkarzaRa
{%Niṣ-karṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. drawing out, extracting;
pulling off, drawing off, taking off; deducting.
<LEND>

<L>26013<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkarzin<k2>nizkarzin
{%Niṣ-karṣin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of one of the Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>26014<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkfzwa<k2>nizkfzwa
{%Niṣ-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn forth, pulled
out, extracted.
<LEND>

<L>26015<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkevala<k2>nizkevala
{#nizkevala#}¦ {%niṣ-kevala, as, ā, am,%} belonging
exclusively.
<LEND>

<L>26016<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkevalya<k2>nizkevalya
{%Niṣ-kevalya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging exclusively;
N. of a particular Uktha (q. v.) connected with the
midday oblation and belonging to Indra exclusively.
<LEND>

<L>26017<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkEvalya<k2>nizkEvalya
{%Niṣkaivalya, as, ā, am,%}¦ mere, pure, absolute.
<LEND>

<L>26018<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkOrava<k2>nizkOrava
{#nizkOrava#}¦ {%niṣ-kaurava, as, ā, am,%} deprived
of or freed from the Kauravas.
<LEND>

<L>26019<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkOSAmbi<k2>nizkOSAmbi
{#nizkOSAmbi#}¦ {%niṣ-kauśāmbi, is, is, i,%} one
who has left Kauśāmbī.
<LEND>

<L>26020<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkram<k2>nizkram
{#nizkram#}¦ {%niṣ-kram (nis-kram),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-krāmati, -kramate, -kramitum%} or {%-krāmitum,%} to
go out, come forth, go from home, depart; to make
an exit from the stage: Caus. {%-krāmayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to go out or depart, to drive out, expel, to deliver.
<LEND>

<L>26021<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkrama<k2>nizkrama
{%Niṣ-krama, as,%}¦ m. going out, coming forth;
departing from (with abl.); exit; degradation, loss
of caste, inferiority of tribe, family, &c.; any intel-
lectual faculty (as intelligence, attention, comprehen-
sion, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>26022<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkramaRa<k2>nizkramaRa
{%Niṣ-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. going forth or out; taking
a child for the first time out of the house in the
fourth month after birth to see the sun, (considered
as an essential ceremony, Manu II. 34.)
<LEND>

<L>26023<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkramaRikA<k2>nizkramaRikA
{%Niṣ-kramaṇikā,%}¦ f. the ceremony of taking a
child out of the house for the first time in its
fourth month to see the sun.
<LEND>

<L>26024<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkramaRita<k2>nizkramaRita
{%Niṣ-kramaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ a child taken out
for the first time in the fourth month after birth.
<LEND>

<L>26025<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkramya<k2>nizkramya
{%Niṣ-kramya,%}¦ ind. having gone out, going forth.
<LEND>

<L>26026<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkrAnta<k2>nizkrAnta
{%Niṣ-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone out, departed,
come forth; (in dramatic language) exit, exeunt.
<LEND>

<L>26027<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkraya<k2>nizkraya
{#nizkraya#}¦ {%niṣ-kraya.%} See {%niṣ-krī,%} p. 508.
<LEND>

<L>26028<pc>0507-c<k1>nizkriya<k2>nizkriya
{#nizkriya#}¦ {%niṣ-kriya, as, ā, am,%} inactive;
abstaining from ceremonial rites, not performing
religious ceremonies; ({%am%}), n. a term for Brahma
or the Supreme Spirit. {%—Niṣkriya-tā,%} f. inactivity,
[Page0508-a+ 72]
idleness, negligence. {%—Niṣkriyātma-tā (˚ya-āt˚),%}
f. non-performance of appointed acts, habitual neglect
of prescribed duties, inactivity, laziness, idleness.
<LEND>

<L>26029<pc>0508-a<k1>nizkrI<k2>nizkrI
{#nizkrI#}¦ {%niṣ-krī (nis-krī),%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-krī-%}
{%ṇāti, -ṇīte, -kretum,%} P. to buy off, to redeem or
ransom from (with abl.); A. to redeem or ransom
one's self.
<LEND>

<L>26030<pc>0508-a<k1>nizkraya<k2>nizkraya
{%Niṣ-kraya, as,%}¦ m. redemption, ransom; reward;
price, hire, wages; acquittance.
<LEND>

<L>26031<pc>0508-a<k1>nizkrayaRa<k2>nizkrayaRa
{%Niṣ-krayaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ redeeming, ransoming;
({%am%}), n. redemption, ransom.
<LEND>

<L>26032<pc>0508-a<k1>nizkrIti<k2>nizkrIti
{%Niṣ-krīti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. redeeming, redemption.
<LEND>

<L>26033<pc>0508-a<k1>nizkroDa<k2>nizkroDa
{#nizkroDa#}¦ {%niṣ-krodha, as, ā, am,%} free from
wrath, not angry, not angry with (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>26034<pc>0508-a<k1>nizkleSa<k2>nizkleSa
{#nizkleSa#}¦ {%niṣ-kleśa, as, ā, am,%} (with Bud-
dhists) free from (ten) moral faults. {%—Niṣkleśa-%}
{%leśa, as, ā, am,%} not suffering the least pain, quite
happy.
<LEND>

<L>26035<pc>0508-a<k1>nizkvaT<k2>nizkvaT
{#nizkvaT#}¦ {%niṣ-kvath (nis-kvath),%} Caus. {%-kvā-%}
{%thayati, -yitum,%} to boil down, thicken by boiling.
<LEND>

<L>26036<pc>0508-a<k1>nizkvATa<k2>nizkvATa
{%Niṣ-kvātha, as,%}¦ m. a decoction, broth, soup.
<LEND>

<L>26037<pc>0508-a<k1>nizKan<k2>nizKan
{#nizKan#}¦ {%niṣ-khan (nis-khan),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-khanati, -te, -khanitum,%} to dig out.
<LEND>

<L>26038<pc>0508-a<k1>nizKidam<k2>nizKidam
{#nizKidam#}¦ {%niṣ-khidam,%} Ved. probably for
{%ni-khidam,%} an inf. form of {%ni-khid.%}
<LEND>

<L>26039<pc>0508-a<k1>nizwakvan<k2>nizwakvan
{#nizwakvan#}¦ {%niṣ-ṭakvan, ā, arī, a%} (fr. rt. {%tak%}
with {%nis%}), Ved. escaping (?).
<LEND>

<L>26040<pc>0508-a<k1>nizwap<k2>nizwap
{#nizwap#}¦ {%niṣ-ṭap (nis-tap),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṭapati,%}
{%-ṭaptum,%} to singe, scorch; to heat thoroughly,
anneal, to purify by heat, free from impurities; to
roast; to fry; to toast.
<LEND>

<L>26041<pc>0508-a<k1>nizwapana<k2>nizwapana
{%Niṣ-ṭapana, am,%}¦ n. burning.
<LEND>

<L>26042<pc>0508-a<k1>nizwapta<k2>nizwapta
{%Niṣ-ṭapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ burnished, made bright;
well cooked, well dressed or done.
<LEND>

<L>26043<pc>0508-a<k1>nizwarkya<k2>nizwarkya
{#nizwarkya#}¦ {%niṣ-ṭarkya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%tark%}
with {%nis%}), Ved. to be opened by unscrewing, to be
loosened by untwisting.
<LEND>

<L>26044<pc>0508-a<k1>nizwavESya<k2>nizwavESya
{#nizwavESya#}¦ {%niṣṭa-vaiśya, as,%} m., N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>26045<pc>0508-a<k1>nizwAnaka<k2>nizwAnaka
{#nizwAnaka#}¦ {%ni-ṣṭānaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%stan%}
with {%ni = nis%}), roar, murmur, murmuring, rustling;
({%as, ā, am%}), speaking loud; causing to cry.
<LEND>

<L>26046<pc>0508-a<k1>nizwigrI<k2>nizwigrI
{#nizwigrI#}¦ {%niṣṭigrī,%} f., Ved., N. of the
mother of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>26047<pc>0508-a<k1>nizwur<k2>nizwur
{#nizwur#}¦ {%niṣ-ṭur, ūr, ūr, ūr%} (fr. rt. {%tṝ%} with
{%nis%}), Ved. one who has no conqueror, unconquered;
(Sāy.) an overcomer of enemies.
<LEND>

<L>26048<pc>0508-a<k1>nizwya<k2>nizwya
{#nizwya#}¦ {%niṣṭya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis%}), Ved. ex-
ternal, foreign, strange; exotic, coming from abroad;
({%as%}), m. a man of one of the outcast or barbarous
tribes, a Cāṇḍāla, a Mleccha; ({%ā%}), f. a particular
Nakṣatra also called Svātī.
<LEND>

<L>26049<pc>0508-a<k1>nizWa<k2>nizWa
{#nizWa#}¦ {%ni-ṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%sthā%} with
{%ni%} or in some senses with {%nis%}), staying or being in
or on, situated on, grounded on; depending on,
resting on, referring to, relating to; intent on, de-
voted to, attached to, practising; versed in, skilled
in; believing in; (1. {%ni-ṣṭhā%}), f. position, condition,
state, stand-point, basis, foundation; devotion or
attachment to, uniform practice or profession; ex-
celling in, conversancy with, skill, eminence, excel-
lence, perfection; believing in, faith; conclusion,
end, termination, (sometimes at the end of adj. comp.,
e. g. {%apabhraṃśa-niṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} ending in a
fall); the end or catastrophe of a drama, conclusion
of a fable, accomplishment, completion; culminating
point; disappearance, destruction, death, fixed time
of life; fixed or certain knowledge, ascertainment,
certainty; a technical term for the past participle
affixes {%ta%} and {%tavat%} (or with their indicatory letters
{%kta%} and {%ktavatu%}); asking, begging; suffering,
trouble, distress, anxiety. {%—Niṣṭhā-gata, as, ā, am,%}
[Page0508-b+ 74]
gone to perfection, attaining perfection, (a term
applied to a class of Buddhist deities.) {%—Niṣṭhānta%}
{%(˚ṭhā-an˚), as,%} m. end, conclusion. {%—Niṣṭhā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessed of complete knowledge, per-
fect, complete, consummate, fulfilling all religious
duties.
<LEND>

<L>26050<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWA<k2>nizWA<h>2
2. {%ni-ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am%}¦ ({%ni%} for {%nis%}), Ved. excel-
ling, eminent, leading; staying or being in {%(=%}
{%ni-ṣṭha); (ās),%} m. a leader, guide; (Sāy.) station,
position.
<LEND>

<L>26051<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWAna<k2>nizWAna
{%Ni-ṣṭhāna, am,%}¦ n. sauce, condiment.
<LEND>

<L>26052<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWAnaka<k2>nizWAnaka
{%Niṣṭhānaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>26053<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWAva<k2>nizWAva
{%Ni-ṣṭhāva, as, ā, am%}¦ ({%ni%} for {%nis%}), Ved. con-
cluding, deciding.
<LEND>

<L>26054<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWita<k2>nizWita
{%Ni-ṣṭhita, as, ā, am%}¦ ({%ni%} may be for {%nis%}),
staying in, being in or on; engaged in, attached to,
devoted to; versed in, skilled in, conversant with;
firm, fixed; certain, ascertained.
<LEND>

<L>26055<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWiv<k2>nizWiv
{#nizWiv#}¦ {%ni-ṣṭhiv%} or {%-ṣṭhīv,%} cl. 1. and 4. P.
{%-ṣṭhīvati, -ṣṭhīvyati, -ṣṭhevitum,%} to spit, spit
out, eject from the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>26056<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWIva<k2>nizWIva
{%Ni-ṣṭhīva, as, am,%}¦ m. n. spitting, spitting out.
<LEND>

<L>26057<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWIvana<k2>nizWIvana
{%Ni-ṣṭhīvana%}¦ or {%ni-ṣṭhīvita, am,%} n. spitting,
spitting out, ejecting anything from the mouth.
{%—Niṣṭhīvana-śarāva, as, am,%} m. n. a spitting-
box, spittoon.
<LEND>

<L>26058<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWeva<k2>nizWeva
{%Ni-ṣṭheva, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. or {%niṣṭhevana,%}
{%am,%} n. spitting, spitting out, ejecting anything from
the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>26059<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWyUta<k2>nizWyUta
{%Ni-ṣṭhyūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spit out, ejected from
the mouth, cast or thrown out; uttered; directed,
despatched (?).
<LEND>

<L>26060<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWyUti<k2>nizWyUti
{%Ni-ṣṭhyūti, is,%}¦ f. spitting, spitting out; (less
correctly written {%ni-ṣṭhūti.%})
<LEND>

<L>26061<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWura<k2>nizWura
{#nizWura#}¦ {%ni-ṣṭhura, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr.
rt. {%sthā%}), hard, rough, rugged; harsh, coarse, gruff,
cruel, severe, austere; contumelious (as speech).
{%—Niṣṭhura-tā,%} f. or {%niṣṭhura-tva, am,%} n.
harshness of speech, coarseness, reviling, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>26062<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWuraka<k2>nizWuraka
{%Niṣṭhuraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>26063<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWurika<k2>nizWurika
{%Niṣṭhurika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>26064<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWUrin<k2>nizWUrin
{%Niṣṭhūrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ rough, coarse; [cf. {%sthūrin,%}
{%sthūla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26065<pc>0508-b<k1>nizWyUti<k2>nizWyUti
{#nizWyUti#}¦ {%ni-ṣṭhyūti.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>26066<pc>0508-b<k1>nizRa<k2>nizRa
{#nizRa#}¦ {%ni-ṣṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%snā%} with
{%ni%}), clever, skilful, experienced; [cf. {%ni-śna, nadī-%}
{%ṣṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26067<pc>0508-b<k1>nizRAta<k2>nizRAta
{%Ni-ṣṇāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ deeply versed in, skilful,
clever, conversant, learned; perfect, superior; (in
law) agreed upon.
<LEND>

<L>26068<pc>0508-b<k1>nizpakva<k2>nizpakva
{#nizpakva#}¦ {%niṣ-pakva, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%pac%}
with {%nis%}), decocted, infused, boiled.
<LEND>

<L>26069<pc>0508-b<k1>nizpaNka<k2>nizpaNka
{#nizpaNka#}¦ {%niṣ-paṅka, as, ā, am,%} free from
mud or filth, pure.
<LEND>

<L>26070<pc>0508-b<k1>nizpat<k2>nizpat
{#nizpat#}¦ {%niṣ-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -patitum,%}
to fly out of (with abl.), rush out, jump out, hasten
out, come forth, issue, depart; to fall out; to fly
away; to spring from: Caus. {%-pātayati,%} &c., to
cause to fall out or fly out; to ruin; to destroy.
<LEND>

<L>26071<pc>0508-b<k1>nizpatat<k2>nizpatat
{%Niṣ-patat, an, antī, at,%}¦ issuing, going forth
or out.
<LEND>

<L>26072<pc>0508-b<k1>nizpatana<k2>nizpatana
{%Niṣ-patana, am,%}¦ n. going quickly forth, rushing
out; issuing quickly.
<LEND>

<L>26073<pc>0508-b<k1>nizpatizRu<k2>nizpatizRu
{%Niṣ-patiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ rushing or running
out, hastening out.
<LEND>

<L>26074<pc>0508-b<k1>nizpatAka<k2>nizpatAka
{#nizpatAka#}¦ {%niṣ-patāka, as, ā, am,%} having
no flag or banner. {%—Niṣpatāka-dhvaja, as,%} m. a
flag-staff without a banner.
<LEND>

<L>26075<pc>0508-b<k1>nizpatisutA<k2>nizpatisutA
{#nizpatisutA#}¦ {%niṣ-pati-sutā,%} f. having no
husband and no sons.
<LEND>

<L>26076<pc>0508-b<k1>nizpatti<k2>nizpatti
{#nizpatti#}¦ {%niṣ-patti.%} See 2. {%niṣ-pad,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26077<pc>0508-b<k1>nizpattra<k2>nizpattra
{#nizpattra#}¦ {%niṣ-pattra, as, ā, am,%} having no
leaves, leafless; without feathers, unfeathered; [cf. {%a-%}
{%niṣpattram%}]; ({%as, am%}), m. n. (?), the clove tree.
<LEND>
[Page0508-c+ 73]

<L>26078<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpattraka<k2>nizpattraka
{%Niṣ-pattraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ leafless; ({%ikā%}), f. the
plant Capparis Aphylla (see {%karīra%}).
<LEND>

<L>26079<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpattraya<k2>nizpattraya
{%Niṣ-pattraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%-pattrayati,%} &c., to
deprive of leaves, make leafless.
<LEND>

<L>26080<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpattrAkf<k2>nizpattrAkf
{%Niṣpattrā-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to pierce with an arrow so that the feathers
come through on the other side. {%—Niṣpattrā-%}
{%kṛti, is,%} f. causing excessive bodily pain.
<LEND>

<L>26081<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpad<k2>nizpad<h>1
{#nizpad#} 1¦. {%niṣ-pad%} or {%niṣpād, -pāt, -padī,%}
{%pāt,%} footless, having no feet.
<LEND>

<L>26082<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpada<k2>nizpada
{%Niṣ-pada, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no feet. {%—Niṣ-%}
{%pada-yāna, am,%} n. a vehicle moving without feet
(as a ship &c.).
<LEND>

<L>26083<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpad<k2>nizpad<h>2
{#nizpad#} 2¦. {%niṣ-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to come forth from, issue, spring from,
spring up, arise, be produced, be accomplished, be
brought about or effected; to be prepared; to become
ripe, ripen: Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to produce,
bring about, accomplish, effect, perform; to make
ripe, cause to ripen.
<LEND>

<L>26084<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpatti<k2>nizpatti
{%Niṣ-patti, is,%}¦ f. going forth or out, birth, pro-
duction; completion, conclusion, termination, con-
summation.
<LEND>

<L>26085<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpad<k2>nizpad<h>3
3. {%niṣ-pad, t,%}¦ f., Ved. excrement; (according to
Sāy. {%= nir-gacchat.%})
<LEND>

<L>26086<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpanna<k2>nizpanna
{%Niṣ-panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forth or out,
sprung up, arisen, born, descended, produced, brought
about, effected, completed, concluded, accomplished,
done, finished, ready.
<LEND>

<L>26087<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpAdaka<k2>nizpAdaka
{%Niṣ-pādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ performing, accom-
plishing, effective. {%—Niṣpādaka-tva, am,%} n. effec-
tiveness, power of achieving.
<LEND>

<L>26088<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpAdana<k2>nizpAdana
{%Niṣ-pādana, am,%}¦ n. doing, effecting, accom-
plishing; concluding; producing, causing, engen-
dering.
<LEND>

<L>26089<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpAdita<k2>nizpAdita
{%Niṣ-pādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ done, effected, made,
produced, prepared, achieved.
<LEND>

<L>26090<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpAdya<k2>nizpAdya
{%Niṣ-pādya%}¦ or {%niṣ-pādanīya%} or {%niṣ-pādi-%}
{%tavya, as, ā, am,%} to be effected or accomplished,
capable of being performed, achievable.
<LEND>

<L>26091<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpAdyamAna<k2>nizpAdyamAna
{%Niṣ-pādyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being effected or
done, being in the course of accomplishment or
completion.
<LEND>

<L>26092<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpanda<k2>nizpanda
{#nizpanda#}¦ {%ni-ṣpanda, as, ā, am%} ({%ni%} for {%nis%}
{%+ spanda%}), motionless, immovable.
<LEND>

<L>26093<pc>0508-c<k1>nizparAkrama<k2>nizparAkrama
{#nizparAkrama#}¦ {%niṣ-parākrama, as, ā, am,%} des-
titute of power or prowess, powerless, weak.
<LEND>

<L>26094<pc>0508-c<k1>nizparikara<k2>nizparikara
{#nizparikara#}¦ {%niṣ-parikara, as, ā, am,%} with-
out preparations.
<LEND>

<L>26095<pc>0508-c<k1>nizparigraha<k2>nizparigraha
{#nizparigraha#}¦ {%niṣ-parigraha, as, ā, am,%} with-
out property, having no property; ({%as%}), m. an
ascetic without family or dependants.
<LEND>

<L>26096<pc>0508-c<k1>nizparicCada<k2>nizparicCada
{#nizparicCada#}¦ {%niṣ-paricchada, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing no retinue or train, without a court.
<LEND>

<L>26097<pc>0508-c<k1>nizparidAha<k2>nizparidAha
{#nizparidAha#}¦ {%niṣ-paridāha, as, ā, am,%} not
liable to be burnt, incombustible.
<LEND>

<L>26098<pc>0508-c<k1>nizparIkza<k2>nizparIkza
{#nizparIkza#}¦ {%niṣ-parīkṣa, as, ā, am,%} not
examining or testing accurately.
<LEND>

<L>26099<pc>0508-c<k1>nizparIhAra<k2>nizparIhAra
{#nizparIhAra#}¦ {%niṣ-parīhāra, as, ā, am,%} not
avoiding; not observing caution; ({%am%}), ind. not so
as to avoid.
<LEND>

<L>26100<pc>0508-c<k1>nizparyanta<k2>nizparyanta
{#nizparyanta#}¦ {%niṣ-paryanta, as, ā, am,%} having
no limits, boundless, unbounded.
<LEND>

<L>26101<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpavaRa<k2>nizpavaRa
{#nizpavaRa#}¦ {%niṣ-pavaṇa.%} See {%niṣ-pū,%} p. 509.
<LEND>

<L>26102<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpA<k2>nizpA<h>1
{#nizpA#} 1¦. {%niṣ-pā%} ({%nis-pā,%} see rt. 1. {%pā%}),
cl. 1. 2. P. {%-pibati%} or {%-pivati, -pāti, -pātum,%} Ved.
to drink out, drink up, drink from (with abl.), to
empty by drinking, exhaust.
<LEND>

<L>26103<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpAna<k2>nizpAna
{%Niṣ-pāna, am,%}¦ n. drinking out, drinking up.
<LEND>

<L>26104<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpIta<k2>nizpIta
{%Niṣ-pīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ drunk up, dried up,
sucked up, exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>26105<pc>0508-c<k1>nizpA<k2>nizpA<h>2
{#nizpA#} 2¦. {%niṣ-pā%} ({%nis-pā,%} see rt. 3. {%pā%}),
cl. 2. P. {%-pāti, -pātum,%} to defend from (with abl.).
<LEND>
[Page0509-a+ 70]

<L>26106<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpAdaka<k2>nizpAdaka
{#nizpAdaka#}¦ {%niṣ-pādaka,%} &c. See under 2.
{%niṣ-pad,%} p. 508, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26107<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpApa<k2>nizpApa
{#nizpApa#}¦ {%niṣ-pāpa, as, ā, am,%} free from
sin, sinless, guiltless.
<LEND>

<L>26108<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpAra<k2>nizpAra
{#nizpAra#}¦ {%niṣ-pāra, as, ā, am,%} without boun-
daries, boundless, unlimited.
<LEND>

<L>26109<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpAlaka<k2>nizpAlaka
{#nizpAlaka#}¦ {%niṣ-pālaka, as, ā, am,%} without
protector or guardian, unprotected.
<LEND>

<L>26110<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpiS<k2>nizpiS
{#nizpiS#}¦ {%niṣ-piś (nis-piś),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-piṃśati, -te, -peśitum,%} Ved. to tear the flesh of an
animal from the skin.
<LEND>

<L>26111<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpiz<k2>nizpiz
{#nizpiz#}¦ {%niṣ-piṣ (nis-piṣ),%} cl. 7. P. {%-pi-%}
{%naṣṭi, -peṣṭum,%} to grind, crush, pound, bruise,
triturate; to rub, rub the hands; to gnash the teeth:
Caus. {%-peṣayati, -yitum,%} to destroy.
<LEND>

<L>26112<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpizwa<k2>nizpizwa
{%Niṣ-piṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ ground, pounded, pul-
verized, bruised, crushed, reduced to dust or powder;
beaten, oppressed.
<LEND>

<L>26113<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpeza<k2>nizpeza
{%Niṣ-peṣa, as,%}¦ m. or {%niṣ-peṣaṇa, am,%} n.
rubbing together, grinding, pulverizing, bruising;
striking, clashing, hitting or throwing against; the
noise or sound produced by striking or clashing;
[cf. {%naiṣpeṣika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26114<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpIqa<k2>nizpIqa
{#nizpIqa#}¦ {%niṣ-pīḍa, as, ā, am,%} pressed out ?
(probably incorrect for {%niṣ-pīta%}), sucked out.
<LEND>

<L>26115<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpIta<k2>nizpIta
{#nizpIta#}¦ {%niṣ-pīta.%} See 1. {%niṣ-pā,%} p. 508.
<LEND>

<L>26116<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpuqgala<k2>nizpuqgala
{#nizpuqgala#}¦ {%niṣ-puḍgala%} or {%niṣ-puṅgala, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} without personality (?); [cf. {%puṅgala, puḍ-%}
{%gala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26117<pc>0509-a<k1>nizputra<k2>nizputra
{#nizputra#}¦ {%niṣ-putra, as, ā, am,%} sonless,
childless.
<LEND>

<L>26118<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpurARa<k2>nizpurARa
{#nizpurARa#}¦ {%niṣ-purāṇa, as, ā, am,%} not
existing before, new.
<LEND>

<L>26119<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpuruza<k2>nizpuruza
{#nizpuruza#}¦ {%niṣ-puruṣa, as, ā, am,%} deprived
of men, without males, unpeopled, desolate; not
having produced male children; not male, feminine,
neuter; ({%as%}), m. a eunuch or impotent man; a
coward; [cf. {%naiṣpuruṣya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26120<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpulAka<k2>nizpulAka
{#nizpulAka#}¦ {%niṣ-pulāka, as, ā, am,%} free from
chaff or rather from bad or useless grain; ({%as%}),
m., N. of the fourteenth Arhat of the future Ut-
sarpiṇī. {%—Niṣpulākī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} freed from
chaff.
<LEND>

<L>26121<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpU<k2>nizpU
{#nizpU#}¦ {%niṣ-pū (nis-pū),%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-punāti,%}
{%-punīte, -pavitum,%} to cleanse, purify; to winnow, fan.
<LEND>

<L>26122<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpavaRa<k2>nizpavaRa
{%Niṣ-pavaṇa, am,%}¦ n. winnowing, fanning.
<LEND>

<L>26123<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpAva<k2>nizpAva
{%Niṣ-pāva, as,%}¦ m. fanning, winnowing, cleaning
corn, &c.; the wind caused by the winnowing sieve
or basket; wind, air; straw, chaff (?) {%= kaḍaṅgaka%}
or {%kaḍaṅga;%} a legume, a pod; a species of pulse,
Phaseolus Radiatus; Dolichos Sinensis or a similar
kind, {%= rāja-māṣa, = valla, = sitaśimbika, = śim-%}
{%bikā, = śveta-śimbī, = bola, = śimī,%} i. e. {%śimbī;%} ({%ī%}
or {%is%}), f. a species of pulse, commonly {%vāḍā,%} of which
there are two kinds, a green and a white one; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), indubitable, certain.
<LEND>

<L>26124<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpAvaka<k2>nizpAvaka
{%Niṣ-pāvaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of pulse, {%= valla%} or
{%śveta-śimbī; (ikā),%} f., cf. {%nakha-n˚, vṛtta-n˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>26125<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpAvala<k2>nizpAvala
{%Niṣ-pāvala,%}¦ an adj. formed fr. {%niṣ-pāva,%} Pāṇini
V. 2, 97.
<LEND>

<L>26126<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpF<k2>nizpF
{#nizpF#}¦ {%niṣ-pṝ%} or {%niṣ-pṛ (nis-pṝ),%} cl. 3. 9.
P. {%-piparti, -pṛṇāti, -paritum%} or {%-parītum,%} to
bring out, help out, extricate; to fill: Caus. {%-pāra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to lead or bring out, help out, extricate.
<LEND>

<L>26127<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpUrta<k2>nizpUrta
{%Niṣ-pūrta, as, ā, am,%}¦ poured out; filled.
<LEND>

<L>26128<pc>0509-a<k1>nizpOruza<k2>nizpOruza
{#nizpOruza#}¦ {%niṣ-pauruṣa, as, ā, am,%} devoid
of manhood, unmanly; (also written {%niḥ-pauruṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>26129<pc>0509-a<k1>nizprakampa<k2>nizprakampa
{#nizprakampa#}¦ {%niṣ-prakampa, as, ā, am,%} im-
movable, motionless; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the
Saptarṣis in the thirteenth Manv-antara.
<LEND>
[Page0509-b+ 66]

<L>26130<pc>0509-b<k1>nizprakAraka<k2>nizprakAraka
{#nizprakAraka#}¦ {%niṣ-prakāraka, as, ā, am,%}
without distinction of species or kind, without speci-
fication.
<LEND>

<L>26131<pc>0509-b<k1>nizprakASa<k2>nizprakASa
{#nizprakASa#}¦ {%niṣ-prakāśa, as, ā, am,%} not
transparent, not clear, lightless, dark.
<LEND>

<L>26132<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpracAra<k2>nizpracAra
{#nizpracAra#}¦ {%niṣ-pracāra, as, ā, am,%} not
going or moving away, remaining in one's place;
concentrated or fixed upon one point (as mind).
<LEND>

<L>26133<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpraRaya<k2>nizpraRaya
{#nizpraRaya#}¦ {%niṣ-praṇaya, as, ā, am,%} without
affection, cold.
<LEND>

<L>26134<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratApa<k2>nizpratApa
{#nizpratApa#}¦ {%niṣ-pratāpa, as, ā, am,%} void of
dignity, mean, base.
<LEND>

<L>26135<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratikAra<k2>nizpratikAra
{#nizpratikAra#}¦ {%niṣ-pratikāra.%} See {%niṣ-pra-%}
{%tīkāra%} below.
<LEND>

<L>26136<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratikriya<k2>nizpratikriya
{#nizpratikriya#}¦ {%niṣ-pratikriya, as, ā, am,%} in-
curable, irremediable, what cannot be remedied.
<LEND>

<L>26137<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratigraha<k2>nizpratigraha
{#nizpratigraha#}¦ {%niṣ-pratigraha, as, ā, am,%} not
accepting gifts. {%—Niṣpratigraha-tā,%} f. the state of
not accepting gifts, not taking presents.
<LEND>

<L>26138<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratiGa<k2>nizpratiGa
{#nizpratiGa#}¦ {%niṣ-pratigha, as, ā, am,%} not
impeded by obstacles, unhindered, unimpeded.
<LEND>

<L>26139<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratidvandva<k2>nizpratidvandva
{#nizpratidvandva#}¦ {%niṣ-pratidvandva, as, ā, am,%}
without adversaries or enemies, unopposed; having
no match, matchless, unequalled.
<LEND>

<L>26140<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratipakza<k2>nizpratipakza
{#nizpratipakza#}¦ {%niṣ-pratipakṣa, as, ā, am,%}
having no adversary, without an opponent. {%—Niṣ-%}
{%pratipakṣa-tā,%} f. the state of having no adversary.
<LEND>

<L>26141<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratiBa<k2>nizpratiBa
{#nizpratiBa#}¦ {%niṣ-pratibha, as, ā, am,%} having
no splendor, deprived of splendor; stupid, frigid,
dull, apathetic, ignorant.
<LEND>

<L>26142<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratiBAna<k2>nizpratiBAna
{#nizpratiBAna#}¦ {%niṣ-pratibhāna, as, ā, am,%} not
bold, cowardly, pusillanimous.
<LEND>

<L>26143<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratIkAra<k2>nizpratIkAra
{#nizpratIkAra#}¦ {%niṣ-pratīkāra, as, ā, am,%} with-
out obstacles, unobstructed, uninterrupted; ({%am%}), ind.
unobstructedly, uninterruptedly.
<LEND>

<L>26144<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratIpa<k2>nizpratIpa
{#nizpratIpa#}¦ {%niṣ-pratīpa, as, ā, am,%} not
turned backwards, directed forwards, looking straight-
forwards; {%niṣpratīpaṃ darśanam,%} an untroubled
or unconcerned look.
<LEND>

<L>26145<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpratyUha<k2>nizpratyUha
{#nizpratyUha#}¦ {%niṣ-pratyūha, as, ā, am,%} unob-
structed, unimpeded, irremediable; ({%am%}), ind. with-
out hindrance or obstacle, freely.
<LEND>

<L>26146<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpraDAna<k2>nizpraDAna
{#nizpraDAna#}¦ {%niṣ-pradhāna, as, ā, am,%} deprived
of a chief, destitute of leaders.
<LEND>

<L>26147<pc>0509-b<k1>nizprapaYca<k2>nizprapaYca
{#nizprapaYca#}¦ {%niṣ-prapañca, as, ā, am,%} without
extension or diffusion; without deceit, pure, honest.
{%—Niṣprapañcātman (˚ca-āt˚), ā,%} m. an epithet
of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>26148<pc>0509-b<k1>nizprapatana<k2>nizprapatana
{#nizprapatana#}¦ {%niṣ-prapatana%} in {%dur-n˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>26149<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpraBa<k2>nizpraBa
{#nizpraBa#}¦ {%niṣ-prabha, as, ā, am,%} deprived of
light or radiance, lustreless; gloomy, dark, obscure;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Niṣprabha-tā,%} f.
or {%niṣprabha-tva, am,%} n. obscurity, gloominess,
darkness.
<LEND>

<L>26150<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpraBAva<k2>nizpraBAva
{#nizpraBAva#}¦ {%niṣ-prabhāva, as, ā, am,%} power-
less. {%—Niṣprabhāva-tā,%} f. or {%niṣprabhāva-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. powerlessness.
<LEND>

<L>26151<pc>0509-b<k1>nizpramARaka<k2>nizpramARaka
{#nizpramARaka#}¦ {%niṣ-pramāṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}
wanting authority, without authority.
<LEND>

<L>26152<pc>0509-b<k1>nizprayatna<k2>nizprayatna
{#nizprayatna#}¦ {%niṣ-prayatna, as, ā, am,%} abstain-
ing from exertion or effort, inactive, inert.
<LEND>

<L>26153<pc>0509-b<k1>nizprayojana<k2>nizprayojana
{#nizprayojana#}¦ {%niṣ-prayojana, as, ā, am,%}
without motives, not influenced by any motive;
causeless, groundless, reasonless; useless, without an
object; needless, unnecessary, uncalled for; ({%am%}),
ind. causelessly, unnecessarily, without reason; (also
[Page0509-c+ 68]
written {%niḥ-prayojana.%}) {%—Niṣprayojana-tā,%} f. or
{%niṣprayojana-tva, am,%} n. uselessness.
<LEND>

<L>26154<pc>0509-c<k1>nizpravaRi<k2>nizpravaRi
{#nizpravaRi#}¦ {%niṣ-pravaṇi, is, is, i,%} or {%niṣ-%}
{%pravāṇi, is, is, i,%} or {%niṣ-pravāṇa, as, ī, am,%}
fresh from the loom, quite new and unbleached (as
cloth or linen).
<LEND>

<L>26155<pc>0509-c<k1>nizprARa<k2>nizprARa
{#nizprARa#}¦ {%niṣ-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%} one whose
breath has departed, breathless, lifeless, dead, quite
exhausted. {%—Niṣprāṇa-tā,%} f. lifelessness.
<LEND>

<L>26156<pc>0509-c<k1>nizprIti<k2>nizprIti
{#nizprIti#}¦ {%niṣ-prīti, is, is, i,%} joyless, feeling
no pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>26157<pc>0509-c<k1>nizplAva<k2>nizplAva
{#nizplAva#}¦ {%niṣ-plāva%} in {%kaṭu-n˚,%} incorrectly
for {%niṣ-pāva%} under {%niṣ-pū,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>26158<pc>0509-c<k1>nizPala<k2>nizPala
{#nizPala#}¦ {%niṣ-phala, as, ā, am,%} bearing no
fruit, fruitless, unfruitful, barren, useless, unprofitable,
vain; meaningless; unproductive, seedless, impotent;
({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a woman past childbearing or in whom
menstruation has ceased, (also read {%niṣkalā%}); ({%ā%}),
f. a species of Momordica. {%—Niṣphala-tva, am,%}
n. unfruitfulness, unproductiveness. {%—Niṣphalī-%}
{%kṛtya,%} ind. having made unfruitful.
<LEND>

<L>26159<pc>0509-c<k1>nizPalaya<k2>nizPalaya
{%Niṣ-phalaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%niṣphalayati,%} &c., to
make unfruitful, to render fruitless.
<LEND>

<L>26160<pc>0509-c<k1>nizPena<k2>nizPena
{#nizPena#}¦ {%niṣ-phena, as, ā, am,%} foamless,
without foam; (also written {%niḥ-phena.%})
<LEND>

<L>26161<pc>0509-c<k1>nizyanda<k2>nizyanda
{#nizyanda#}¦ {%ni-ṣyanda, ni-ṣyandin.%} See {%ni-%}
{%syanda, ni-syandin,%} p. 510, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26162<pc>0509-c<k1>nizyUta<k2>nizyUta
{#nizyUta#}¦ {%ni-ṣyūta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%siv%} with
{%ni%}), sewn on.
<LEND>

<L>26163<pc>0509-c<k1>nizzapin<k2>nizzapin
{#nizzapin#}¦ {%niṣṣapin, ī, iṇī, i%} (according to
the Nirukta fr. {%nis + sapa = pasa%}), Ved. libidinous,
lustful.
<LEND>

<L>26164<pc>0509-c<k1>nizzah<k2>nizzah
{#nizzah#}¦ {%niṣ-ṣah%} or {%niṣ-ṣāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved.
overpowering, expelling; (Sāy. {%= niḥsārayitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>26165<pc>0509-c<k1>nis<k2>nis
{#nis#}¦ {%nis,%} ind. (as a preposition or prefix
to verbs and their derivative nouns, expressing) out,
forth, outward, out of, out from, away, away from;
({%nis%} is used as an independent and separable adverb in
Atharva-veda VI. 18, 3; VII. 115, 3; XVI. 2, 1.)
{%Nis%} is also prefixed to nouns, not immediately con-
nected with verbs, in the sense ‘out of,’ ‘away
from’ [cf. {%nir-vana%}], but more commonly in the
sense of a privative or negative adverb = 3. {%a,%} ‘no,’
‘not,’ ‘without.’ In this latter signification it may
form either negative substantives (e. g. fr. {%artha,%} ad-
vantage, {%nir-artha,%} disadvantage) or more frequently
adjectives (e. g. fr. {%mala,%} a stain, {%nir-mala,%} stain-
less). {%Nis%} is liable to be euphonically changed to
{%nir, niḥ, niś, niṣ%} or {%nī%} [cf. {%nī-rasa,%} &c.] accord-
ing to the letter which follows it.
<LEND>

<L>26166<pc>0509-c<k1>nisaNkakza<k2>nisaNkakza
{#nisaNkakza#}¦ {%ni-saṅkakṣa.%} See {%niḥ-saṅkakṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>26167<pc>0509-c<k1>nisaYjYa<k2>nisaYjYa
{#nisaYjYa#}¦ {%ni-sañjña%} for {%niḥ-sañjña,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>26168<pc>0509-c<k1>nisampAta<k2>nisampAta
{#nisampAta#}¦ {%ni-sampāta, as,%} m. midnight;
(also {%niḥ-sampāta.%})
<LEND>

<L>26169<pc>0509-c<k1>nisara<k2>nisara
{#nisara#}¦ {%ni-sara, as,%} m., Ved. (according to
Mahī-dhara) a noun of agency fr. rt. {%sṛ%} with {%ni.%}
<LEND>

<L>26170<pc>0509-c<k1>nisarga<k2>nisarga
{#nisarga#}¦ {%ni-sarga.%} See under {%ni-sṛj,%} p. 510.
<LEND>

<L>26171<pc>0509-c<k1>nisarpa<k2>nisarpa
{#nisarpa#}¦ {%ni-sarpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sṛp%} with
{%ni%}). See {%naisarpa,%} p. 518, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26172<pc>0509-c<k1>nisinDu<k2>nisinDu
{#nisinDu#}¦ {%ni-sindhu, us,%} or {%nisindhuka, as,%}
m. a species of shrub, Vitex Negundo ({%= nirguṇḍī%});
[cf. {%sindhu, sindhuka, sindhu-vāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26173<pc>0509-c<k1>nisunda<k2>nisunda
{#nisunda#}¦ {%ni-sunda, as,%} m., N. of an Asura
slain by Kṛṣṇa; [cf. {%sunda, upa-sunda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26174<pc>0509-c<k1>nisumBa<k2>nisumBa
{#nisumBa#}¦ {%ni-sumbha.%} See {%ni-śumbha,%} p. 505.
<LEND>

<L>26175<pc>0509-c<k1>nisusUz<k2>nisusUz
{#nisusUz#}¦ {%ni-susūṣ, ūs, ūs, ūs%} (fr. the Desid.
of rt. {%su%} with {%ni%}). See Pāṇini VIII. 3, 117, and
cf. {%abhi-susūṣ.%}
<LEND>
[Page0510-a+ 68]

<L>26176<pc>0510-a<k1>nisUdaka<k2>nisUdaka
{#nisUdaka#}¦ {%ni-sūdaka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%sūd%}
with {%ni%}), one who kills, a killer, destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>26177<pc>0510-a<k1>nisUdana<k2>nisUdana
{%Ni-sūdana, as, ā, am,%}¦ killing, destroying, a
destroyer, (at the end of a comp.); ({%am%}), n. killing,
destroying, slaughter; (often incorrectly {%ni-ṣūdana.%})
<LEND>

<L>26178<pc>0510-a<k1>nisf<k2>nisf
{#nisf#}¦ {%ni-sṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati, -sartum,%} to
go forth, (apparently only occurring in the derivative
below.)
<LEND>

<L>26179<pc>0510-a<k1>nisfta<k2>nisfta
{%Ni-sṛta, as, ā, am, = niḥ-sṛta,%}¦ q. v., gone
forth, gone away, disappeared; ({%ā%}), f. the plant
Ipomœa Turpethum ({%= tri-vṛtā%}); N. of a river;
(a various reading for {%niś-citā.%})
<LEND>

<L>26180<pc>0510-a<k1>nisfj<k2>nisfj
{#nisfj#}¦ {%ni-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati, -sraṣṭum,%}
to let go, set free, dismiss, (apparently only used in
the derivatives below.)
<LEND>

<L>26181<pc>0510-a<k1>nisarga<k2>nisarga
{%Ni-sarga, as,%}¦ m. evacuation, voiding excrement;
giving away, presenting, bestowing, granting, showing
a favour; a grant; relinquishment, abandoning, set-
ting free; creation; the natural state, nature, natural
character, natural condition or form; exchange,
barter; {%nisargeṇa%} or {%nisargāt%} or {%nisarga-tas,%} by
nature, naturally, from one's natural state or condition.
{%—Nisarga-ja, as, ā, am,%} innate; inborn, produced
at creation, natural. {%—Nisarga-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}
naturally distinct. {%—Nisarga-vinīta, as, ā, am,%}
naturally discreet. {%—Nisarga-siddha, as, ā, am,%}
effected by nature, natural.
<LEND>

<L>26182<pc>0510-a<k1>nisfzwa<k2>nisfzwa
{%Ni-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ dismissed, delivered, de-
posited, given, bestowed, emancipated; allowed, per-
mitted; central, middle. {%—Nisṛṣṭārtha (˚ṭa-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} any one to whom the management of
an affair is intrusted; ({%as%}), m. a chargé d'affaires,
envoy, ambassador; messenger, agent, manager.
<LEND>

<L>26183<pc>0510-a<k1>nisevitavya<k2>nisevitavya
{#nisevitavya#}¦ {%ni-sevitavya%} for {%ni-ṣevitavya,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>26184<pc>0510-a<k1>nistakz<k2>nistakz
{#nistakz#}¦ {%nis-takṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-takṣati,%} &c.,
to form, create.
<LEND>

<L>26185<pc>0510-a<k1>nistattva<k2>nistattva
{#nistattva#}¦ {%nis-tattva, as, ā, am,%} not com-
prehended in the twenty-four Tattvas or principles,
(see {%tattva.%})
<LEND>

<L>26186<pc>0510-a<k1>nistanI<k2>nistanI
{#nistanI#}¦ {%ni-stanī,%} f. (according to some
fr. {%ni + stanī,%} a small breast), a pill, bolus, a sort
of force-meat ball.
<LEND>

<L>26187<pc>0510-a<k1>nistantu<k2>nistantu
{#nistantu#}¦ {%nis-tantu, us, us, u,%} having no off-
spring, childless.
<LEND>

<L>26188<pc>0510-a<k1>nistandra<k2>nistandra
{#nistandra#}¦ {%nis-tandra, as, ā, am,%} or {%nis-%}
{%tandri, is, is, i,%} not lazy or listless, fresh, healthy.
<LEND>

<L>26189<pc>0510-a<k1>nistabDa<k2>nistabDa
{#nistabDa#}¦ {%ni-stabdha, as, ā, am,%} paralyzed,
numbed, stiffened; stopped, fixed.
<LEND>

<L>26190<pc>0510-a<k1>nistamBa<k2>nistamBa
{%Ni-stambha.%}¦ See {%niḥ-stambha,%} p. 482, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26191<pc>0510-a<k1>nistamaska<k2>nistamaska
{#nistamaska#}¦ {%nis-tamaska, as, ā, am,%} free from
darkness, not gloomy, light.
<LEND>

<L>26192<pc>0510-a<k1>nistaraRa<k2>nistaraRa
{#nistaraRa#}¦ {%nis-taraṇa, nis-tāra,%} &c. See
under {%nis-tṝ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26193<pc>0510-a<k1>nistarkya<k2>nistarkya
{#nistarkya#}¦ {%nis-tarkya, as, ā, am,%} unimagin-
able, inconceivable.
<LEND>

<L>26194<pc>0510-a<k1>nistarhaRa<k2>nistarhaRa
{#nistarhaRa#}¦ {%nis-tarhaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%tṛh%}
with {%nis%}), crushing, destroying, killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>26195<pc>0510-a<k1>nistala<k2>nistala
{#nistala#}¦ {%nis-tala, as, ā, am,%} not flat, round,
globular; trembling, shaking, moving; down, below.
<LEND>

<L>26196<pc>0510-a<k1>nistimira<k2>nistimira
{#nistimira#}¦ {%nis-timira, as, ā, am,%} free from
darkness, clear, light.
<LEND>

<L>26197<pc>0510-a<k1>nistuti<k2>nistuti
{#nistuti#}¦ {%ni-stuti.%} See under {%niḥ-stuti,%} p. 482.
<LEND>

<L>26198<pc>0510-a<k1>nistud<k2>nistud
{#nistud#}¦ {%nis-tud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-tudati, -te,%}
{%-tottum,%} to pierce, prick, sting.
<LEND>

<L>26199<pc>0510-a<k1>nistoda<k2>nistoda
{%Nis-toda, as,%}¦ m. or {%nistodana, am,%} n. pricking,
piercing, stinging.
<LEND>

<L>26200<pc>0510-a<k1>nistuza<k2>nistuza
{#nistuza#}¦ {%nis-tuṣa, as, ā, am,%} freed from
[Page0510-b+ 72]
chaff or husk; (metaphorically) purified, cleansed;
simplified. {%—Nistuṣa-kṣīra, as,%} m. wheat. {%—Nis-%}
{%tuṣa-ratna, am,%} n. crystal.
<LEND>

<L>26201<pc>0510-b<k1>nistuzita<k2>nistuzita
{%Nis-tuṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ skinned, peeled, shelled,
husked, made thin, pared; left, abandoned, deserted.
<LEND>

<L>26202<pc>0510-b<k1>nistfRakaRwaka<k2>nistfRakaRwaka
{#nistfRakaRwaka#}¦ {%nis-tṛṇa-kaṇṭaka, as, ā, am,%}
cleared or freed from grass and thorns.
<LEND>

<L>26203<pc>0510-b<k1>nistF<k2>nistF
{#nistF#}¦ {%nis-tṝ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati, -taritum,%}
{%-tarītum,%} to come forth from, to rescue or free
one's self from, get out of, get clear of, escape,
be saved; to pass over, pass, cross; to pass through;
to pass or spend time; to accomplish, perform,
fulfil, settle; to overcome, overpower, master;
to expiate; {%abhiyogaṃ nis-tṝ,%} to clear one's self
from an accusation: Caus. {%-tārayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to pass over; to rescue, save, release, deliver,
liberate; to overcome, overpower: Desid. {%-titīr-%}
{%ṣati, -titariṣati, -titarīṣati,%} to wish to cross
or pass over.
<LEND>

<L>26204<pc>0510-b<k1>nistaraRa<k2>nistaraRa
{%Nis-taraṇa, am,%}¦ n. going out or forth, coming
out (of danger); crossing over or passing; rescue,
releasing, deliverance, getting rid of or free from;
means of success or rescue, an expedient, a plan.
<LEND>

<L>26205<pc>0510-b<k1>nistartavya<k2>nistartavya
{%Nis-tartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be overcome or
conquered or overpowered.
<LEND>

<L>26206<pc>0510-b<k1>nistAra<k2>nistAra
{%Nis-tāra, as,%}¦ m. crossing or passing over or
across, getting rid of or away from, release, escape,
rescue, preservation; final emancipation, salvation;
means, expedient; payment, discharge of a debt,
acquittance, requital. {%—Nistāra-vīja, am,%} n. a
means of crossing (the ocean of life), a cause of
final liberation.
<LEND>

<L>26207<pc>0510-b<k1>nistAraka<k2>nistAraka
{%Nis-tāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ rescuing, delivering; a
saviour.
<LEND>

<L>26208<pc>0510-b<k1>nistAraRa<k2>nistAraRa
{%Nis-tāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. passing or transporting over
or across, overcoming, conquering; liberating.
<LEND>

<L>26209<pc>0510-b<k1>nistitIrzat<k2>nistitIrzat
{%Nis-titīrṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ desirous or anxious
to cross (the ocean of life); wishing for salvation or
liberation.
<LEND>

<L>26210<pc>0510-b<k1>nistIrRa<k2>nistIrRa
{%Nis-tīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rescued, delivered, saved.
<LEND>

<L>26211<pc>0510-b<k1>nistejas<k2>nistejas
{#nistejas#}¦ {%nis-tejas, ās, ās, as,%} deprived of
strength or energy, destitute of fire or heat, powerless,
impotent; spiritless, dull; obscure.
<LEND>

<L>26212<pc>0510-b<k1>nistoya<k2>nistoya
{#nistoya#}¦ {%nis-toya, as, ā, am,%} deprived or
destitute of water, waterless.
<LEND>

<L>26213<pc>0510-b<k1>nistyaj<k2>nistyaj
{#nistyaj#}¦ {%nis-tyaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tyajati, -tyak-%}
{%tum,%} to drive away, expel.
<LEND>

<L>26214<pc>0510-b<k1>nistraMSa<k2>nistraMSa
{#nistraMSa#}¦ {%nis-traṃśa, as, ā, am,%} fearless;
(probably incorrect for {%nis-triṃśa%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>26215<pc>0510-b<k1>nistrapa<k2>nistrapa
{#nistrapa#}¦ {%nis-trapa, as, ā, am,%} shameless.
<LEND>

<L>26216<pc>0510-b<k1>nistriMSa<k2>nistriMSa
{#nistriMSa#}¦ {%nis-triṃśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis +%}
{%triṃśat%}), more than thirty; merciless, unfeeling,
unpitying, cruel (as a sword); ({%as%}), m. a sword, a
scimitar, falchion, a sacrificial knife, (so called because
more than thirty fingers in length.) {%—Nistriṃśa-%}
{%dhārin, ī,%} m. a sword-bearer, a swordsman or
soldier armed with a sword. {%—Nistriṃśa-pattraka,%}
{%as, ikā,%} m. f. a thorny species of Euphorbia, (An-
tiquorum or Tortilis). {%—Nistriṃśa-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} a
sword-bearer.
<LEND>

<L>26217<pc>0510-b<k1>nistriMSin<k2>nistriMSin
{%Nistriṃśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ bearing a sword, armed with
a sword.
<LEND>

<L>26218<pc>0510-b<k1>nistruwI<k2>nistruwI
{#nistruwI#}¦ {%nis-truṭī,%} f. cardamoms; [cf. {%truṭi,%}
{%niṣ-kuṭi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26219<pc>0510-b<k1>nistrEguRya<k2>nistrEguRya
{#nistrEguRya#}¦ {%nis-traiguṇya, as, ā, am,%} desti-
tute of the three qualities (viz. {%sattva, rajas,%} and
{%tamas;%} see {%guṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>26220<pc>0510-b<k1>nistrERapuzpaka<k2>nistrERapuzpaka
{#nistrERapuzpaka#}¦ {%nistraiṇapuṣpaka, as,%} m.
(fr. {%nis + straiṇa + puṣpa?%}), a species of thorn-
apple.
<LEND>

<L>26221<pc>0510-b<k1>nisnAva<k2>nisnAva
{#nisnAva#}¦ {%ni-snāva, as,%} m. (fr. {%ni-snu?%}),
residue of articles &c. after a sale or market.
<LEND>
[Page0510-c+ 72]

<L>26222<pc>0510-c<k1>nisnehaPalA<k2>nisnehaPalA
{#nisnehaPalA#}¦ {%nisneha-phalā.%} See {%niḥsneha-%}
{%phalā%} under {%niḥ-sneha,%} p. 482, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26223<pc>0510-c<k1>nispanda<k2>nispanda<h>1
{#nispanda#} 1¦. {%ni-spanda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%spand%}
with {%ni%}), throbbing, trembling motion.
<LEND>

<L>26224<pc>0510-c<k1>nispanda<k2>nispanda<h>2
{#nispanda#} 2¦. {%ni-spanda, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ni%} for
{%nis + spanda%}), immovable, still, steady; [cf. {%ni-%}
{%ṣpanda.%}] {%—Nispanda-tva, am,%} n. immovableness.
<LEND>

<L>26225<pc>0510-c<k1>nispfS<k2>nispfS
{#nispfS#}¦ {%ni-spṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. confiding;
caressing, fondling.
<LEND>

<L>26226<pc>0510-c<k1>nispfha<k2>nispfha
{#nispfha#}¦ {%ni-spṛha.%} See {%niḥ-spṛha,%} p. 482.
<LEND>

<L>26227<pc>0510-c<k1>nisyanda<k2>nisyanda
{#nisyanda#}¦ {%ni-syanda%} or {%ni-ṣyanda, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (fr. rt. {%syand%} with {%ni,%} or {%ni%} for {%nis%}), flowing
or trickling down, dripping, dropping; ({%as%}), m. a
trickling or flowing down, oozing, issuing, streaming,
dropping, distilling; a discharge (of any fluid), a
flux; a stream, any fluid that trickles down or drops;
trickling forth from, flowing out, flowing from;
necessary consequence or result; uttering.
<LEND>

<L>26228<pc>0510-c<k1>nisyandamAna<k2>nisyandamAna
{%Ni-syandamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ trickling, flowing,
oozing, issuing.
<LEND>

<L>26229<pc>0510-c<k1>nisyandin<k2>nisyandin
{%Ni-syandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ flowing or streaming or
trickling down or out.
<LEND>

<L>26230<pc>0510-c<k1>nisrava<k2>nisrava
{#nisrava#}¦ {%ni-srava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sru%} with
{%ni%}), flowing down, a stream, torrent; (perhaps for
{%niḥ-srava,%} flowing forth, streaming out.)
<LEND>

<L>26231<pc>0510-c<k1>nisrAva<k2>nisrAva
{%Ni-srāva, as,%}¦ m. flowing down, a stream, torrent;
the scum of boiled rice; [cf. {%niḥ-srāva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26232<pc>0510-c<k1>nisrAvin<k2>nisrAvin
{%Ni-srāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ flowing down.
<LEND>

<L>26233<pc>0510-c<k1>nisvana<k2>nisvana<h>1
{#nisvana#} 1¦. {%ni-svana, as, ā, am,%} Ved., various
reading for {%ni-svara,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>26234<pc>0510-c<k1>nisvana<k2>nisvana<h>2
{#nisvana#} 2¦. {%ni-svana, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%svan%}
with {%ni%}), noise, sound, voice, (often at the end of
comps. when the fem. is {%nisvanā;%} cf. {%ratha-n˚,%}
{%uddhatārṇava-n˚%}); ({%am%}), ind. with noise or
sound; [cf. {%niḥ-svana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26235<pc>0510-c<k1>nisvanita<k2>nisvanita
{%Ni-svanita, am,%}¦ n. a noise, sound, crying, a cry.
<LEND>

<L>26236<pc>0510-c<k1>nisvAna<k2>nisvAna
{%Ni-svāna, as,%}¦ m. noise, sound; the whistling
sound of an arrow.
<LEND>

<L>26237<pc>0510-c<k1>nisvara<k2>nisvara
{#nisvara#}¦ {%ni-svara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. soundless,
noiseless; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>26238<pc>0510-c<k1>nih<k2>nih
{#nih#}¦ {%nih,%} Ved. {%= ni-hantṛ%} (according to
Mahī-dhara).
<LEND>

<L>26239<pc>0510-c<k1>nihan<k2>nihan<h>1
{#nihan#} 1¦. {%ni-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -hantum,%}
to strike down, strike, kill, destroy; to strike in,
fix in, infix; to disregard, neglect: Caus. {%-ghāta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to kill, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>26240<pc>0510-c<k1>nihata<k2>nihata
{%Ni-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck down, stricken,
smitten, killed, slain, overcome; struck into, infixed;
attached, devoted. {%—Nihata-bhūyiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}
having the greater number killed. {%—Nihata-sena,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having (their) armies smitten or destroyed.
{%—Nihatoṣṭra (˚ta-uṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} having the
camels killed, whose camels have been slain.
<LEND>

<L>26241<pc>0510-c<k1>nihan<k2>nihan<h>2
2. {%ni-han, ā,%}¦ m. a killer, destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>26242<pc>0510-c<k1>nihanana<k2>nihanana
{%Ni-hanana, am,%}¦ n. killing, slaughter, murder.
<LEND>

<L>26243<pc>0510-c<k1>nihantavya<k2>nihantavya
{%Ni-hantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be struck down, to
be killed or destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>26244<pc>0510-c<k1>nihantf<k2>nihantf
{%Ni-hantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what kills or
destroys, a killer; destructive, murderous; one who
removes or dispels or hinders.
<LEND>

<L>26245<pc>0510-c<k1>nihanyamAna<k2>nihanyamAna
{%Ni-hanyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being struck down
or killed.
<LEND>

<L>26246<pc>0510-c<k1>nihava<k2>nihava
{#nihava#}¦ {%ni-hava.%} See {%ni-hve,%} p. 511, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>26247<pc>0510-c<k1>nihA<k2>nihA
{#nihA#}¦ {%ni-hā,%} Pass. {%-hīyate,%} &c., to be de-
prived of.
<LEND>

<L>26248<pc>0510-c<k1>nihAkA<k2>nihAkA
{%Nihākā,%}¦ f., Ved. a storm, whirlwind, &c.; (Sāy.)
an iguana, the Gangetic alligator.
<LEND>

<L>26249<pc>0510-c<k1>nihIna<k2>nihIna
{%Ni-hīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ low, vile, of low origin;
({%as%}), m. a low man, an outcast.
<LEND>

<L>26250<pc>0510-c<k1>nihiMsana<k2>nihiMsana
{#nihiMsana#}¦ {%ni-hiṃsana, am,%} n. killing,
slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>26251<pc>0510-c<k1>nihita<k2>nihita
{#nihita#}¦ {%ni-hita, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%ni-dhā%}),
[Page0511-a+ 77]
placed, laid, fixed, lodged, situated, deposited, de-
livered, given, intrusted; inserted, infixed, attached;
applied to; bestowed upon; treasured up; held;
laid (as dust by rain); uttered in a deep tone.
{%—Nihita-daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} one who lays aside the
rod, one who shows clemency. {%—Nihita-nayana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the eyes fixed or directed upon
(with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>26252<pc>0511-a<k1>nihIna<k2>nihIna
{#nihIna#}¦ {%ni-hīna.%} See under {%ni-hā,%} p. 510,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26253<pc>0511-a<k1>nihf<k2>nihf
{#nihf#}¦ {%ni-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te, -har-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to offer, give.
<LEND>

<L>26254<pc>0511-a<k1>nihAra<k2>nihAra
{%Ni-hāra, as,%}¦ m. {%= nī-hāra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>26255<pc>0511-a<k1>nihArin<k2>nihArin
{%Ni-hārin.%}¦ See {%nir-hārin%} under {%nir-hṛ,%} p. 502,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26256<pc>0511-a<k1>nihnu<k2>nihnu
{#nihnu#}¦ {%ni-hnu,%} cl. 2. A. {%-hnute, -hnotum,%} to
disown, deny, dissimulate, conceal, evade.
<LEND>

<L>26257<pc>0511-a<k1>nihnava<k2>nihnava
{%Ni-hnava, as,%}¦ m. denial, concealment, hushing
up, dissimulation; concealment in general, secrecy;
mistrust, doubt, suspicion; a secret; wickedness;
atonement, expiation; excuse, exculpation, depre-
cation; N. of a ceremony; N. of a Sāman. {%—Ni-%}
{%hnava-vādin, ī,%} m. a defendant or witness who
prevaricates or tries to hide the truth. {%—Nihnavot-%}
{%tara (˚va-ut˚), am,%} n. an evasive reply or defence.
<LEND>

<L>26258<pc>0511-a<k1>nihnuta<k2>nihnuta
{%Ni-hnuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ denied, disowned, evaded;
concealed, secreted.
<LEND>

<L>26259<pc>0511-a<k1>nihnuti<k2>nihnuti
{%Ni-hnuti, is,%}¦ f. denial or concealment of know-
ledge; dissimulation, reserve, secrecy; hiding, con-
cealment.
<LEND>

<L>26260<pc>0511-a<k1>nihnuvana<k2>nihnuvana
{%Ni-hnuvana, am,%}¦ n. denial or concealment of
knowledge; excuse, exculpation.
<LEND>

<L>26261<pc>0511-a<k1>nihnuvAna<k2>nihnuvAna
{%Ni-hnuvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ dissimulating, prevari-
cating, insinuating, using double entendre.
<LEND>

<L>26262<pc>0511-a<k1>nihrAda<k2>nihrAda
{#nihrAda#}¦ {%ni-hrāda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hrād%} with
{%ni%}), sound; (also read {%nir-hrāda.%}) {%—Nihrāda-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} sounding, making a noise.
<LEND>

<L>26263<pc>0511-a<k1>nihrAdin<k2>nihrAdin
{%Ni-hrādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sounding, pealing.
<LEND>

<L>26264<pc>0511-a<k1>nihve<k2>nihve
{#nihve#}¦ {%ni-hve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-hvayati, -te,%}
{%-hvātum,%} to invoke, call.
<LEND>

<L>26265<pc>0511-a<k1>nihava<k2>nihava
{%Ni-hava, as,%}¦ m. invocation, calling, summoning,
calling near; N. of a Sāman, ({%vasiṣṭhasya ni-%}
{%havas%} or {%vasiṣṭha-nihavas.%})
<LEND>

<L>26266<pc>0511-a<k1>nI<k2>nI<h>1
{#nI#} 1¦. {%nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%nayati, -te, anayat%} (ep.
also {%anayīt%}), {%nayeta%} (ep. also {%nayīta%}), {%nināya%}
(3rd pl. {%ninyus,%} anomalous form of Perf. {%nayām-%}
{%āsa%}), {%ninye, netā%} (ep. also {%nayitā%}), {%neṣyati, -te%}
(ep. also {%nayiṣyati%}), {%anaiṣīt, aneṣṭa%} (Ved. forms
{%neṣat, neṣati, neṣi, naiṣṭa, neṣṭa%}), {%netum%}
(ep. also {%nayitum%}), to lead, guide, conduct, ({%vyava-%}
{%hāraṃ nī,%} to conduct a process); to direct, govern;
to lead or bring away, carry away, to lead or bring
away to (with acc., dat., or loc.); to carry off for
one's self (A.); to marry; to bring a person (acc.)
into any state or condition (acc. or loc., e. g. {%nṛ-%}
{%patīn vaśam anayat,%} he brought the kings into
subjection; {%tāṃ duhitṛtve nayati,%} he brings her
into the state of a daughter: sometimes used with
a substantive in the same way as 1. {%kṛ,%} q. v., e. g.
{%vināśaṃ nī,%} to destroy; {%paritoṣaṃ nī,%} to gratify;
{%vikrayaṃ nī,%} to sell; {%duḥkhaṃ nī,%} to pain;
{%sākṣyaṃ nī,%} to admit as a witness; {%ādhānaṃ nī,%}
to give in pledge; {%Śūdratāṃ nī,%} to reduce to a
Śūdra: or with an adverb ending in {%sāt,%} e. g. {%bhas-%}
{%masād nī,%} to reduce to ashes); to lead away from,
exclude from; to draw (a line &c.); to trace, track;
to ascertain, investigate; to settle; to pass or spend
(time); to carry, bear; (with {%daṇḍam%}) to bear
the rod, inflict punishment; to guide in learning,
instruct (A.): Pass. {%nīyate,%} to be led, &c.: Caus.
{%nāyayati,%} &c., to cause to lead, &c.; to cause to
be carried away: Desid. {%ninīṣati, -te%} (Ved. {%nine-%}
{%ṣati%}), to wish to lead, &c.; to wish to take away;
to wish to bring to a state; to wish to exclude from
(with abl.); to wish to trace or ascertain, investigate
[cf. {%ninīṣā, ninīṣu%}]: Intens. {%nenīyate,%} to lead
as a captive, have in one's power, rule; [cf. Gr.
[Page0511-b+ 81]
<lang n="greek">νέ-ο-μαι, νίσσομαι, νῑσομαι;</lang> Lith. <nsi>neṣù;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>ne-</nsi>
<nsi>sun,</nsi> ‘I bear.’]
<LEND>

<L>26267<pc>0511-b<k1>nI<k2>nI<h>2
2. {%nī, īs,%}¦ m. a leader, a guide, (used at the end
of a comp.; cf. {%agra-ṇī, agre-ṇī, ṛta-nī, gāthā-%}
{%nī, grāma-ṇī, pada-nī,%} &c.)
<LEND>

<L>26268<pc>0511-b<k1>nIka<k2>nIka
{%Nīka, as,%}¦ m. a species of tree; ({%ā%}), f. a channel
for irrigation.
<LEND>

<L>26269<pc>0511-b<k1>nIta<k2>nIta<h>1
1. {%nīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ led, guided, conducted; brought,
reduced; gained, obtained; well-behaved, correct,
modest; ({%am%}), n. wealth; corn, grain; [cf. {%asu-n˚,%}
{%dur-n˚,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>26270<pc>0511-b<k1>nIti<k2>nIti
{%Nīti, is,%}¦ f. guiding, guidance, directing, direction,
management; manner of conducting one's self, con-
duct, propriety; right or moral or prudent behaviour,
prudent counsel, policy, political wisdom or science,
political economy, state policy, statesmanship, the
administration of government; moral philosophy,
ethics, precepts for prudent and moral behaviour,
prudence, Prudence or Polity personified [cf. {%naya%}];
leading or bringing to, obtaining, acquirement, acqui-
sition; presenting, offering; relation, support; [cf.
{%agra-ṇīti, adabdha-n˚, asu-n˚, ṛju-n˚,%} &c.] {%—Nīti-%}
{%kathā,%} f. any work on moral or political science, a
discourse on political economy. {%—Nīti-kuśala, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} conversant with political science, skilful in
human affairs, a good statesman. {%—Nīti-ghoṣa, as,%}
m., N. of the car of Bṛhas-pati. {%—Nīti-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} knowing what is right especially in government,
sagacious, politic, prudent; ({%as%}), m. a prudent
statesman or soldier, a politician. {%—Nīti-doṣa, as,%}
m. error of conduct, mistake in policy. {%—Nīti-%}
{%niṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} versed in political or moral
science. {%—Nīti-pradīpa, as,%} m. ‘the light of pru-
dent behaviour,’ N. of a collection of verses attributed
to Vetāla-bhaṭṭa. {%—Nīti-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a work
on morality or right behaviour. {%—Nīti-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} knowing the rules of moral or prudent
behaviour, moral, prudent, eminent for political
wisdom. {%—Nīti-ratna, am,%} n. ‘the jewel of mora-
lity,’ N. of a collection of verses attributed to Vara-
ruci. {%—Nīti-vākyāmṛta (˚ya-am˚), am,%} n. ‘nectar
of discourse on morality or prudent behaviour,’ N.
of a work. {%—Nīti-vid, t,%} m. a politician, any one
versed in political science, a statesman. {%—Nīti-vidyā,%}
f. moral or political science, political economy; [cf.
{%nīti-śāstra.%}] {%—Nīti-viṣaya, as,%} m. the sphere of
morality or prudent conduct. {%—Nīti-vīja, am,%} n. a
germ or source of intrigue. {%—Nīti-vedin, ī, inī, i,%}
knowing policy, a politician. {%—Nīti-vyatikrama, as,%}
m. error of conduct, transgression of the rules of
moral or political science. {%—Nīti-śataka, am,%} n. the
hundred verses on morality by Bhartṛ-hari. {%—Nīti-%}
{%śāstra, am,%} n. the science of ethics or politics, any
work on political ethics or morals. {%—Nīti-saṅka-%}
{%lana, am,%} n. ‘collection of rules for moral conduct
or prudent behaviour,’ N. of a modern work. {%—Nīti-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m. or {%am,%} n. the essence of political or
moral science; ({%am%}), n. a special work on this
subject by Ghaṭa-karpara.
<LEND>

<L>26271<pc>0511-b<k1>nItvA<k2>nItvA
{%Nītvā,%}¦ ind. having led or conducted or guided;
having taken; having passed or spent (as time).
<LEND>

<L>26272<pc>0511-b<k1>nITa<k2>nITa
{%Nītha, as,%}¦ m. (Ved. also n.) leading, guiding;
a leader, a guider; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., Ved. way,
trick; evasion, subterfuge; a mode in music; water;
[cf. {%dīrgha-n˚, deva-n˚.%}] {%—Nīthā-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved.
knowing ways, knowing the musical modes, skilled
in sacred song.
<LEND>

<L>26273<pc>0511-b<k1>nITya<k2>nITya
{%Nīthya.%}¦ See {%grāmaṇīthya,%} p. 304, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26274<pc>0511-b<k1>nIyamAna<k2>nIyamAna
{%Nīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being led or conducted or
conveyed, being carried or brought, being taken or
taken away; being traced or sought or obtained.
<LEND>

<L>26275<pc>0511-b<k1>netavya<k2>netavya
{%Netavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be led or guided or con-
ducted, to be led away, to be taken, to be carried.
<LEND>

<L>26276<pc>0511-b<k1>netf<k2>netf
{%Netṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ leading, conducting, guiding,
one who brings or leads to; ({%tā%}), m. a leader, guide,
conductor; a chief, master, owner; (with {%daṇḍasya%})
an inflicter of punishment [cf. {%daṇḍa-n˚%}]; the hero
of a drama or play; the plant Azadirachta Indica
({%= nimba%}); the numeral two; ({%trī%}), f. a female
leader; a river; a vein; an epithet of Lakṣmī.
{%—Netṛ-tva, am,%} n. the office or business of a
[Page0511-c+ 78]
leader &c., leadership. {%—Netṛ-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
containing the word {%netṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>26277<pc>0511-c<k1>netra<k2>netra
{%Netra, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who guides or leads, a
leader, guide; a substitute for {%netṛ%} at the end of a
comp. (e. g. {%bhavan-netra,%} having thee as com-
mander); ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Dharma and
father of Kunti; also a son of Su-mati; ({%am%}), n.
leading, conducting; the eye (as the instrument of
leading or guiding); symbolic expression for the
number two; the string with which a churning-stick
is whirled round; an enema-pipe; the root of a tree;
bleached or wove silk; a carriage. {%—Netra-kanī-%}
{%nikā,%} f. the pupil of the eye. {%—Netra-koṣa, as,%}
m. the eyeball; the bud of a flower. {%—Netra-go-%}
{%cara, as, ā, am,%} within the range of the sight,
visible. {%—Netra-cchada, as,%} m. the eyelid. {%—Netra-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} ‘eye-born,’ coming from the eyes; ({%am%}),
n. a tear. {%—Netra-jala, am,%} n. ‘eye-water,’ tears.
{%—Netra-tā,%} f. the state of being an eye; {%netratāṃ%}
{%yā,%} to become an eye. {%—Netra-tribhāga-brahma-%}
{%yaśasvin, ī,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Netra-paryanta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} as far as to the eye, up to the eye; ({%as%}),
m. the outer angle of the eye. {%—Netra-piṇḍa, as,%}
m. a cat (‘having full eyes’); the eyeball. {%—Netra-%}
{%puṣkarā,%} f. a species of plant; [cf. {%rudra-jaṭā.%}]
{%—Netra-manaḥ-svabhāvās,%} m. pl. eyes, mind,
and soul. {%—Netra-mīnā,%} f. a species of plant {%(=%}
{%yava-tiktā)%}. {%—Netra-muṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} stealing or cap-
tivating the eye. {%—Netra-yoni, is,%} m. an epithet of
Indra (as covered with marks resembling the female
organ, through the curse of Gautama, whose wife
Ahalyā he had attempted to seduce; the sage after-
wards relenting, changed these disgraceful marks on
the body of the deity to as many eyes); the moon
(as produced from the eye of Atri). {%—Netra-rañjana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘eye-colouring,’ collyrium. {%—Netra-ruj, k,%}
f. disease of the eyes. {%—Netra-roga, as,%} m. disease
of the eyes, ophthalmia; ({%as, ā, am%}), afflicted with
disease of the eyes. {%—Netraroga-tā,%} f. disease of the
eyes. {%—Netraroga-han, ā,%} m. a particular plant used
for diseases of the eyes, Tragia Involucrata. {%—Netra-%}
{%roman, a,%} n. the eyelash. {%—Netra-vasti, is,%} m. f.
a clyster-pipe with a bag. {%—Netra-vastra, am,%} n. a
veil over the eye. {%—Netra-vāri,%} n. ‘eye-water,’
tears. {%—Netra-viṣ, ṭ,%} f. excretion of the eyes.
{%—Netra-viṣa, as, ā, am,%} having poison in the
eyes. {%—Netra-stambha, as,%} m. rigidity of the eyes.
{%—Netrāñjana (˚ra-añ˚), am,%} n. ‘eye-ointment,’
collyrium. {%—Netrānta (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m. the outer
corner of the eye. {%—Netrābhiṣyanda (˚ra-abh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. running of the eyes. {%—Netrāmaya (˚ra-%}
{%ām˚), as,%} m. ophthalmia. {%—Netrāmbu (˚ra-am˚)%}
or {%netrāmbhas (˚ra-am˚), as,%} n. ‘eye-water,’
tears. {%—Netrāri (˚ra-ari), is,%} m. a species of plant
{%(= sīhuṇḍa)%}. {%—Netrotsava (˚ra-ut˚), am,%} n. ‘eye-
feast,’ any pleasing or beautiful object. {%—Netropama%}
{%(˚ra-up˚), am,%} n. the almond fruit (as resembling
eyes). {%—Netropama-phala, as,%} m. the almond
tree. {%—Netrauṣadha (˚ra-auṣ˚), am,%} n. medi-
cine for the eyes, collyrium, green sulphate of iron
used as collyrium; ({%ī%}), f. Odina Pinnata ({%= aja-%}
{%śṛṅgī%}).
<LEND>

<L>26278<pc>0511-c<k1>netrika<k2>netrika
{%Netrika, am,%}¦ n. a pipe, a clyster-pipe; a ladle.
<LEND>

<L>26279<pc>0511-c<k1>neya<k2>neya
{%Neya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be guided or led; to be
governed; to be passed or spent (as time); to be
led away; to be inflicted (e. g. {%neyo daṇḍas,%}
punishment must be inflicted). {%—Neya-pāla, as,%} m.,
N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>26280<pc>0511-c<k1>nI<k2>nI<h>3
{#nI#} 3¦. {%nī (ni i),%} cl. 2. P. {%ny-eti, ny-etum,%}
Ved. to go into, enter, come or fall into, change to;
[cf. {%ny-āya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26281<pc>0511-c<k1>nIta<k2>nIta<h>2
2. {%nīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ entered, gone to; (Sāy.) {%=%}
{%nitarām prāpta.%}
<LEND>

<L>26282<pc>0511-c<k1>nIkarzin<k2>nIkarzin
{#nIkarzin#}¦ {%nī-karṣin, ī, iṇī, i%} (fr. rt. {%kṛṣ%}
with {%ni%}), spreading the tail (as a peacock ?).
<LEND>

<L>26283<pc>0511-c<k1>nIkAra<k2>nIkAra
{#nIkAra#}¦ {%nī-kāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%kṛ%} with
{%ni%}), disrespect, contempt, vilifying, degrading.
<LEND>

<L>26284<pc>0511-c<k1>nIkASa<k2>nIkASa
{#nIkASa#}¦ {%nī-kāśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kāś%} with {%ni%}),
[Page0512-a+ 78]
appearance, look, air, mien; certainty, ascertainment;
({%as, ā, am%}), like, resembling, (at the end of comps.)
<LEND>

<L>26285<pc>0512-a<k1>nIkulaka<k2>nIkulaka
{#nIkulaka#}¦ {%nīkulaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>26286<pc>0512-a<k1>nIkleda<k2>nIkleda
{#nIkleda#}¦ {%nī-kleda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%klid%} with {%ni%}),
moistening, bedewing (?), Pāṇ. VI. 3, 122, Schol.
<LEND>

<L>26287<pc>0512-a<k1>nIkzaRa<k2>nIkzaRa
{#nIkzaRa#}¦ {%nīkṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%īkṣ%} with {%ni%}
or rt. {%nikṣ?%}), Ved. a stick for stirring up a caldron,
a kind of ladle, (Sāy. {%= pāka-parīkṣā-sādhanaṃ%}
{%kāṣṭham%}); [cf. {%nekṣaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26288<pc>0512-a<k1>nIca<k2>nIca
{#nIca#}¦ {%nīca, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ni + añc,%} cf. {%ucca;%}
said to be fr. rt. {%ci%} with {%ni%}), low, not high, short,
little, small, dwarfish; deep, lowered (as the voice),
pronounced without an accent; situated below, being
in a low position; low, vile, insignificant, inferior,
base, mean (as a man or action); ({%as%}), m. a kind
of perfume {%(= coraka); (am),%} n. (in astrology) the
lowest point of a planet (= <lang n="greek">ταπείνωμα</lang>), the seventh
house from the highest point; ({%āt%}), ind. from below,
from beneath; [cf. {%nīcais, ucca-nīca, ny-añc.%}] {%—Nī-%}
{%ca-kadamba, as,%} m., N. of a plant {%(= maṇḍīrī).%}
{%—Nīca-kula, am,%} n. a low family. {%—Nīca-ga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} going low or downwards, descending (as a
river); being in or belonging to a low man or
to a low class of men; low, vile, base; ({%ā%}), f. a
river; ({%am%}), n. water. {%—Nīca-gata, as, ā, am%}
being at the lowest point (as a planet). {%—Nīca-%}
{%gṛha, am,%} n. (in astrology) the house or station of
the heavens in which a planet stands at its lowest
point. {%—Nīca-jāti, is, is, i,%} of low birth. {%—Nica-tā,%}
f. or {%nīca-tva, am,%} n. (opposed to {%ucca-tā%}), lowness,
meanness, vileness, baseness, humbleness, inferiority,
a low situation. {%—Nīca-bhojya, as,%} m. ‘the food of
low men,’ an onion. {%—Nīca-meḍhra, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. one whose penis hangs low. {%—Nīca-yonin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} being of low origin, low-born. {%—Nīca-rata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} delighting in mean things. {%—Nīcarkṣa%}
{%(˚ca-ṛk˚), am,%} n. (?) {%= nīca-gṛha,%} q. v. {%—Nīca-%}
{%vajra, am,%} n. an inferior diamond, a sort of gem {%(=%}
{%vaikrānta)%}. {%—Nīcā-vayas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. one
whose strength has failed; (Sāy.) bending down the
body. {%—Nīcokti (˚ca-uk˚), is,%} f. a low or vulgar
expression. {%—Nīcocca-vṛtta (˚ca-uc˚), am,%} n. an
epicycle. {%—Nīcopagata (˚ca-up˚), as, ā, am,%} situ-
ated low in the sky.
<LEND>

<L>26289<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcaka<k2>nIcaka
{%Nīcaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ low, short, dwarfish; (low
as the voice), soft; vile, mean; ({%akā%}), f. an excel-
lent cow; ({%akī%}), f. the head of an ox.
<LEND>

<L>26290<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcakin<k2>nIcakin
{%Nīcakin, ī,%}¦ m. the head or top of anything, the head
of an ox; the owner of a good cow; [cf. {%naicika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26291<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcakEs<k2>nIcakEs
{%Nīcakais,%}¦ ind. (diminutive of {%nīcais%}), low, below,
little, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26292<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcA<k2>nIcA
{%Nīcā,%}¦ ind. low, below, down, downwards, (this word
may be regarded as the inst. c. of {%ny-añc,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>26293<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcAt<k2>nIcAt
{%Nīcāt,%}¦ ind. from below. See {%nīca.%}
<LEND>

<L>26294<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcAyamAna<k2>nIcAyamAna
{%Nīcāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. descending, flying
down (as a falcon).
<LEND>

<L>26295<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcIkf<k2>nIcIkf
{%Nīcī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to lower, to pronounce without an accent.
<LEND>

<L>26296<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcIna<k2>nIcIna
{%Nīcīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being low or below,
low, directed downwards or underneath, hanging
down, flowing down, cast down. {%—Nīcīna-bāra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. having its opening below (as a cloud).
<LEND>

<L>26297<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcEs<k2>nIcEs
{%Nīcais,%}¦ ind. low, below, down, downwards, under-
neath, beneath, deeply, deep, in the depths, in a
bent or inclined position, bowing low, humbly,
modestly; with a low or depressed or deep tone of
voice, in a low tone (i. e. {%an-udātta,%} q. v.), softly;
short, small, little, dwarfish; N. of a mountain, also
called {%Vāmana-giri%} and {%Kharva%} (Dwarfish); [cf.
{%uccais, nimnais, śanais.%}] {%—Nīcaiḥ-kara, as, ā%}
or {%ī, am,%} causing a low or deep tone, giving depth
of voice. {%—Nīcair-mukha, as, ī, am,%} with down-
cast countenance. {%—Nīcais-tarām,%} ind. in a low
tone, softly.
<LEND>

<L>26298<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcya<k2>nIcya<h>1
1. {%nīcya, as, ā, am,%}¦ living below; Ved. an epithet
of some nations in the West.
<LEND>

<L>26299<pc>0512-a<k1>nIcya<k2>nIcya<h>2
2. {%nīcya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%nīcyati,%} &c., to be in a low
situation, be a slave.
<LEND>
[Page0512-b+ 74]

<L>26300<pc>0512-b<k1>nIqa<k2>nIqa
{#nIqa#}¦ {%nīḍa%} (Ved. {%nīḷa%}), {%as, am,%} m. n. (per-
haps fr. rt. {%sad%} with {%ni,%} whence {%ni-ṣada = niṣḍa%}
{%= niḍḍa = nīḍa,%} or fr. rt. {%il%} with {%ni%}), a resting-place,
a place for lying down, a bird's nest; a bed, couch;
a lair, den; the interior or seat of a carriage or
chariot; a place, abode in general; [cf. Lat. <nsi>nīdus;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>nead;</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>nyth;</nsi> Germ. and Angl.
Sax. <nsi>nest.</nsi>] {%—Nīḍa-ja, as,%} m. ‘nest-born,’ a bird.
{%—Nīḍajendra (˚ja-in˚), as,%} m. ‘chief of the birds,’
an epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Nīḍodbhava (˚ḍa-ud˚), as,%}
m. ‘nest-born,’ a bird.
<LEND>

<L>26301<pc>0512-b<k1>nIqaka<k2>nIqaka
{%Nīḍaka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the nest of a
bird.
<LEND>

<L>26302<pc>0512-b<k1>nIqaya<k2>nIqaya
{%Nīḍaya%}¦ or {%nīḷaya,%} Nom. P. {%nīḍayati%} or {%nīḷa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Ved. (according to Sāy.) to bring
together, join together, cause to come to close fight-
ing; to bring to rest (?).
<LEND>

<L>26303<pc>0512-b<k1>nIqi<k2>nIqi
{%Nīḍi%}¦ or {%nīḷi, is,%} m., Ved. one who lives in the
same house (?).
<LEND>

<L>26304<pc>0512-b<k1>nIta<k2>nIta
{#nIta#}¦ {%nīta, nīti,%} &c. See p. 511, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26305<pc>0512-b<k1>nItamiSra<k2>nItamiSra
{#nItamiSra#}¦ {%nīta-miśra, as, ā, am (nīta =%}
{%nava-nīta),%} Ved. not yet become butter, (said of
{%dadhi.%})
<LEND>

<L>26306<pc>0512-b<k1>nItta<k2>nItta
{#nItta#}¦ {%nī-tta, as, ā, am%} (for {%ni-datta%} fr. rt.
1. {%dā%} with {%ni%}), Ved. given.
<LEND>

<L>26307<pc>0512-b<k1>nIDra<k2>nIDra
{#nIDra#}¦ {%nīdhra, am,%} n. the edge of thatch,
edge of a roof; a wood; the circumference of a
wheel; the moon; the constellation Revatī; (consi-
dered by some as a various reading for {%nīvra,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>26308<pc>0512-b<k1>nInAha<k2>nInAha
{#nInAha#}¦ {%nīnāha, as,%} m., Ved. anything
which encircles another (?).
<LEND>

<L>26309<pc>0512-b<k1>nIpa<k2>nIpa
{#nIpa#}¦ {%nīpa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ni-ap,%} but said to
be fr. rt. 1. {%nī%}), situated low, deep; ({%as%}), m. the
foot of a mountain; N. of a son of Kṛtin; the
tree Nauclea Cadamba ({%= kadamba = dhārā-ka-%}
{%dambaka = dharā-kadamba = dhūlī-kadamba%});
the plant Ixora Bandhuca ({%= bandhūka%}); a species
of Aśoka {%(= nīlāśoka); (am),%} n. the fruit of the
above plants; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a regal family
descended from Nīpa, son of Pāra. {%—Nīpa-rāja,%}
{%am,%} n. (?), the fruit (?) of the Nīpa. {%—Nīpātithi%}
{%(˚pa-at˚), is,%} m., N. of a descendant of Kaṇva and
author of a hymn of the Ṛg-veda (VIII. 34).
<LEND>

<L>26310<pc>0512-b<k1>nIpya<k2>nIpya
{%Nīpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being low or on the
ground.
<LEND>

<L>26311<pc>0512-b<k1>nImAnuya<k2>nImAnuya
{#nImAnuya#}¦ {%nīmānuya, as,%} m., N. of a Vaiṣ-
ṇava teacher.
<LEND>

<L>26312<pc>0512-b<k1>nIyamAna<k2>nIyamAna
{#nIyamAna#}¦ {%nīyamāna.%} See p. 511, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26313<pc>0512-b<k1>nIr<k2>nIr
{#nIr#}¦ {%nīr (ni-īr),%} Caus. P. {%nīrayati, -yitum,%}
to drive or impel into, urge forwards (to an aim);
to send forth, appoint (to a business).
<LEND>

<L>26314<pc>0512-b<k1>nIra<k2>nIra
{#nIra#}¦ {%nīra, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%nī%}),
water; juice, liquor, (sometimes written for {%nīḍa,%}
{%nīḷa,%} q. v.); ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince; [cf. {%kṣīra-%}
{%nīra, nāra;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">νηπός, Νηρεύς.</lang>] {%—Nīra-graha,%}
{%as,%} m. taking up water in a ladle; see under
{%graha.%} — 1. {%nīra-ja, as, ā, am%} (for 2. see below),
‘water-born,’ being in water, aquatic; ({%as%}), m. an
otter; a species of grass, {%= uśīrī; (as, am),%} m. n.
(according to the lexicographers only n.), a lotus
in general, the water-lily; ({%am%}), n. a species of
Costus, Costus Speciosus ({%= kuṣṭha%}); a pearl.
{%—Nīra-jāta, as, ā, am,%} ‘water-born,’ produced
from water, aquatic. {%—1. nīra-da, as,%} m. (for 2.
see col. 3), ‘giving water,’ a cloud; a species of
Cyperus. {%—Nīradin, ī, inī, i,%} cloudy. {%—Nīra-dhi%}
or {%nīra-nidhi, is,%} m. ‘the receptacle of waters,’ the
ocean; [cf. {%ab-dhi, toya-dhi,%} &c.] {%—Nīra-priya,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of reed {%(jala-vetasa)%}. {%—Nīra-%}
{%ruha, am,%} n. the water-lily, lotus. {%—Nīrākhu (˚ra-%}
{%ākhu), us,%} m. ‘water-rat,’ an otter.
<LEND>

<L>26315<pc>0512-b<k1>nIrakta<k2>nIrakta
{#nIrakta#}¦ {%nī-rakta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis + rakta%}),
colourless, faded, having the colour gone.
<LEND>

<L>26316<pc>0512-b<k1>nIraja<k2>nIraja<h>2
{#nIraja#} 2¦. {%nī-raja, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis + raja%}
[Page0512-c+ 72]
for {%rajas%}), free from dust; devoid of passion; (with
{%vi-raja%}) an epithet of Śiva. (For 1. {%nīra-ja%} see
under {%nīra,%} col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>26317<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrajas<k2>nIrajas
{%Nī-rajas, ās, ās, as%}¦ (fr. {%nis + rajas%}), free from
dust, having no pollen (as a flower); free from
passion; ({%ās%}), f. a woman not menstruating. {%—Nī-%}
{%rajas-tamasā,%} f. absence of passion and darkness.
<LEND>

<L>26318<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrajaska<k2>nIrajaska
{%Nī-rajaska, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from dust, not
accompanied by dust (as wind); free from passion,
pure.
<LEND>

<L>26319<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrajasva<k2>nIrajasva
{%Nī-rajasva, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from dust.
<LEND>

<L>26320<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrajIkf<k2>nIrajIkf
{%Nīrajī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make free from dust. {%—Nīrajī-kārita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} made free from dust, cleansed.
<LEND>

<L>26321<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrata<k2>nIrata
{#nIrata#}¦ {%nī-rata, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis + rata%}),
not delighting in, not attached to, indifferent.
<LEND>

<L>26322<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrada<k2>nIrada<h>2
{#nIrada#} 2¦. {%nī-rada, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis + rada%}),
toothless. (For 1. {%nīra-da%} see under {%nīra,%} col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>26323<pc>0512-c<k1>nIranDra<k2>nIranDra
{#nIranDra#}¦ {%nī-randhra, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis +%}
{%randhra%}), having no holes or openings, without
apertures or interstices, imperforate, close, uninter-
rupted; coarse, thick, gross. {%—Nīrandhra-tva, am,%}
n. closeness, close connection.
<LEND>

<L>26324<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrava<k2>nIrava
{#nIrava#}¦ {%nī-rava, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis + rava%}),
soundless.
<LEND>

<L>26325<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrasa<k2>nIrasa
{#nIrasa#}¦ {%nī-rasa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis + rasa%}),
without juice, sapless, dried up, withered; flavourless,
unsavoury, tasteless, devoid of taste, flat, dry; insipid;
vain; ({%as%}), m. the pomegranate. {%—Nīrasa-tā,%} f. the
state of being devoid of taste, tastelessness.
<LEND>

<L>26326<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrasana<k2>nIrasana
{#nIrasana#}¦ {%nī-rasana, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis + ra-%}
{%sanā%}), having no girdle.
<LEND>

<L>26327<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrAjana<k2>nIrAjana
{#nIrAjana#}¦ {%nī-rājana, am, ā,%} n. f. (fr. rt. {%rāj%}
with {%ni%}), lustration of arms (<nsi>lustratio exercitus</nsi>),
a military and religious ceremony held by kings or
generals on the nineteenth of Aśvin before taking the
field, (it consists in purifying the Puro-hita or chaplain,
the king's ministers, and various component parts of
the army during the recitation of sacred texts);
waving lights before an idol as an act of adoration,
(this may also be performed with a lotus, clean
cloth, or the leaves of various sacred plants; pros-
tration is considered as a fifth kind of adoration.)
<LEND>

<L>26328<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrindu<k2>nIrindu
{#nIrindu#}¦ {%nīrindu, us,%} m. a species of plant
({%= aśva-śākhoṭa%}), Trophis Aspera.
<LEND>

<L>26329<pc>0512-c<k1>nIruc<k2>nIruc
{#nIruc#}¦ {%nī-ruc, k, k, k%} (fr. {%nis + ruc%}), lustre-
less, dull, dim, faded.
<LEND>

<L>26330<pc>0512-c<k1>nIruj<k2>nIruj
{#nIruj#}¦ {%nī-ruj, k, k, k%} (fr. {%nis + ruj%}), free
from sickness; convalescent, well, in health; painless.
<LEND>

<L>26331<pc>0512-c<k1>nIruja<k2>nIruja
{%Nī-ruja, as, ā, am, = nī-ruj,%}¦ healthy, in health,
well, (sometimes written {%ni-ruja%}); ({%am%}), n. a
species of Costus, Costus Speciosus ({%= kuṣṭha%}).
<LEND>

<L>26332<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrUpa<k2>nIrUpa
{#nIrUpa#}¦ {%nī-rūpa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis + rūpa%}),
formless, shapeless, mis-shapen; ({%as%}), m. air, wind;
a god; ({%am%}), n. heaven, ether.
<LEND>

<L>26333<pc>0512-c<k1>nIreRuka<k2>nIreRuka
{#nIreRuka#}¦ {%nī-reṇuka, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis +%}
{%reṇu%}), dustless, free from dust.
<LEND>

<L>26334<pc>0512-c<k1>nIroga<k2>nIroga
{#nIroga#}¦ {%nī-roga, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%nis + roga%}),
free from sickness, healthy, well. {%—Nīroga-tā,%} f.
health.
<LEND>

<L>26335<pc>0512-c<k1>nIrogyatA<k2>nIrogyatA
{%Nīrogya-tā,%}¦ f. health, freedom from sickness,
(perhaps an error for {%nīroga-tā.%})
<LEND>

<L>26336<pc>0512-c<k1>nIroha<k2>nIroha
{#nIroha#}¦ {%nī-roha, as,%} m. (fr. {%nis + ruh%}), Ved.
shooting out, growing.
<LEND>

<L>26337<pc>0512-c<k1>nIl<k2>nIl
{#nIl#}¦ {%nīl%} (rather a Nom. derived fr.
{%nīla%} below), cl. 1. P. {%nīlati,%} &c., to be
of a dark colour; to dye dark, make or dye blue.
<LEND>

<L>26338<pc>0512-c<k1>nIla<k2>nIla
{%Nīla, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (probably fr. {%niś + la =%}
{%niśla = nilla = nīla;%} according to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 42,
the fem. form {%nīlā%} is used in relation to clothes &c.,
and {%nīlī%} in relation to plants, animals, &c.; in proper
names either form is allowed), of a dark colour,
[Page0513-a+ 81]
(especially dark-blue or black); dyed with indigo;
({%as%}), m. dark-blue or black (the colour); a gem,
the sapphire; the Indian fig-tree ({%= vaṭa%}); a species
of bird, the blue or hill Maina; an ox or bull of
a dark colour; one of the nine Nidhis or divine
treasures of Kuvera; N. of a man, the prince of
Māhiṣmatī; of a son of Yadu; of a historian of
Kaśmīra; an epithet of Mañju-śrī; N. of a Nāga;
of one of the monkey-chiefs attending on Rāma,
(said to be a son of Agni); the blue mountain, one
of the principal ranges of mountains dividing the
world into nine portions and lying immediately north
of Ilāvṛta or the central division [cf. {%nīlādri%}]; ({%ā%}),
f. the indigo plant, Indigofera Tinctoria [cf. {%nīlī%}];
a species of Boerhavia with blue blossoms ({%= nīla-%}
{%punar-navā%}); a species of blue fly [cf. {%nīlī%}]; the
two arteries in front of the neck, (in this sense {%nīle,%}
f. du.); a black and blue mark on the skin (either
from a bruise or a disease?); a Rāgiṇī or mode of
music, personified as the wife of Rāga Mallāra; ({%ī%}),
f. the indigo plant; another plant, Blyxa Saivala ({%=%}
{%śaivala;%} cf. {%jala-nīlī%}); a species of blue fly; a
kind of disease ({%= nīlī-roga, nīlikā%}); N. of the
wife of Aja-mīḍha [cf. {%nīlinī, nalinī%}]; ({%am%}), n.
darkness (Ved.); indigo, the dye; black salt ({%=%}
{%kāca-lavaṇa%}); blue vitriol ({%= tuttha%}); antimony
({%= sauvīrāñjana%}); poison ({%= tālīśa-pattra%}); a
peculiar position in dancing; a kind of metre con-
sisting of four times sixteen syllables; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>niger</nsi> for <nsi>nigro</nsi> = {%niś-ra.%}] {%—Nīla-kaṇā,%} f. a species
of cumin. {%—Nīla-kaṇṭha, as, ā, am,%} blue-necked;
({%as%}), m. a peacock; a species of gallinule or water-
hen ({%= dātyūha%}); a wag-tail; a sparrow; a blue-
necked jay; the plant Hyperanthera Moringa ({%=%}
{%pīta-sāra%}); an epithet of Śiva (as having a black
throat, so stained by the acrimony of the poison
which he swallowed on its production at the churn-
ing of the ocean); N. of several authors and com-
mentators; ({%am%}), n. a radish; [cf. {%kāla-kaṇṭha.%}]
{%—Nīlakaṇṭha-campū, ūs,%} f., N. of a work by
Nīlakaṇṭha Dīkṣita. {%—Nīlakaṇṭha-tīrtha, am,%}
n. ‘the bathing-place of Śiva,’ N. of a sacred Tīrtha.
{%—Nīlakaṇṭha-bhāratī,%} m., N. of an author men-
tioned in the Sarva-darśana-saṅgraha of Mādhavā-
cārya. {%—Nīlakaṇṭha-stava, as,%} m. ‘the praise of
Śiva,’ N. of the fifty-first chapter of the Jñāna-
khaṇḍa of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Nīlakaṇṭhākṣa%}
{%(˚ṭha-ak˚), am,%} n. the berry or seed of Elæocarpus
Ganitrus. {%—Nīla-kanda, as,%} m. a species of bulbous
plant {%(= mahiṣa-kanda-bheda)%}. {%—Nīla-kamala,%}
{%am,%} n. the blue water-lily. {%—Nīla-kāyika, ās,%} m.
pl. (with Buddhists) ‘blue-bodied’ or ‘dark-bodied,’
epithet of a class of deities. {%—Nīla-kuntalā,%} f., N.
of a female friend of Durgā. {%—Nīla-kuraṇṭaka,%}
{%as,%} m. or {%nīla-kusumā,%} f. or {%nīla-kuruṇṭaka,%} a
species of Barleria with blue blossoms (B. Cœrulea,
{%= nīla-jhiṇṭī%}). {%—Nīla-keśī,%} f. the indigo plant.
{%—Nīla-krāntā,%} f. a species of plant {%(= viṣṇu-%}
{%krāntā)%}. {%—Nīla-krauñca, as,%} m. a species of curlew
or heron. {%—Nīla-gaṅgā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Nīla-%}
{%gaṇeśa, as,%} m. the blue Gaṇeśa. {%—Nīla-garbha,%}
a young blue water-lily (?). {%—Nīla-giri-karṇikā,%} f.
a blue variety of Clitoria Ternatea. {%—Nīla-grīva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} blue-necked; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Rudra-Śiva or Mahā-deva, (see {%nīla-kaṇṭha%}); N.
of a king. {%—Nīla-ghora,%} a various reading for {%nīla-%}
{%pora,%} q. v. {%—Nīla-carman, a,%} n. the tree Xylo-
carpus Granatum. {%—Nīla-cchada, as,%} m. ‘dark-
leaved,’ the date tree; ‘blue-winged,’ an epithet
of Garuḍa. {%—Nīla-cchavī,%} a species of bird ({%=%}
{%kuku;%} the right form is probably {%nīla-cchavin, ī,%}
m.). {%—Nīla-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced in the blue
mountains; ({%am%}), n. blue steel; ({%ā%}), f. the river
Vitastā. {%—Nīla-jhiṇṭī,%} f. blue Barleria {%(= nīla-%}
{%kuraṇṭaka)%}. {%—Nīla-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra.
{%—Nīla-taru, us,%} m. the cocoa-nut tree. {%—Nīla-tā,%}
f. blueness, blackness, a blue or dark colour. {%—Nīla-%}
{%tāla, as,%} m. Xanthochymus Pictorius; Phœnix
Paludosa. {%—Nīla-dūrvā,%} f. a species of plant {%(=%}
{%haritā)%}. {%—Nīla-druma, as,%} m. a species of tree {%(=%}
{%nīlāsana)%}. {%—Nīla-dhvaja, as,%} m. Xanthochymus
[Page0513-b+ 81]
Pictorius; N. of a prince of Māhiṣmatī. {%—Nīla-%}
{%nakha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. black-clawed, having black
claws. {%—Nīla-nirguṇḍī,%} f. a species of Nirguṇḍī
with blue blossoms. {%—Nīla-niryāsaka, as,%} m. a
species of tree {%(= nīlāsana)%}. {%—Nīla-nīraja, am,%} n.
the blue water-lily. {%—Nīla-pakṣman, ā, ā, a,%} having
black eyelashes. {%—Nīla-paṅka, am,%} n. darkness;
({%as, am%}), m. n. black mud. {%—Nīla-paṭala, am,%} n. a
sort of dark film or membrane over the eye of a blind
person; a dark mass, a black coating or covering.
{%—Nīla-pattra, as, ā, am,%} dark-leaved, having black
or dark-blue leaves; ({%as%}), m., N. of several plants, Scir-
pus Kysoor; the pomegranate tree; ({%ā%}), f. Premna
Herbacea; ({%am%}), n. the blue water-lily. {%—Nīla-%}
{%padma, am,%} n. the blue water-lily. {%—Nīla-parṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. Grevia Orientalis; ({%ī%}), f. Vanda ({%= vandā%})
Roxburghii. {%—Nīla-pācana, am,%} n. steeping or
maceration of indigo. {%—Nīlapācana-bhāṇḍa, am,%}
n. a vessel for steeping indigo, an indigo vat. {%—Nīla-%}
{%piṅgala, as, ā, am,%} of a dark-brown colour.
{%—Nīla-piccha, as,%} m. ‘black-tailed,’ a falcon.
{%—Nīla-piṭa, as,%} m. (with Buddhists) a collection
of annals and royal edicts. {%—Nīla-piṣṭoḍī,%} f. a
species of shrub {%(= nīlāmlī)%}. {%—Nīla-punar-navā,%}
f. a species of Punar-navā with blue blossoms.
{%—Nīla-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Nīla-%}
{%purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa. {%—Nīla-puṣpa,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of Verbesina with blue flowers;
({%ā%}), f. a plant {%(= viṣṇu-krāntā); (ī),%} f. a plant
{%(= nīla-vuhnā); (am),%} n. a species of fragrant plant
{%(= granthi-parṇa)%}. {%—Nīla-puṣpikā,%} f. the indigo
plant; linseed, Linum Usitatissimum. {%—Nīla-pṛṣ-%}
{%ṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘black-backed,’ epithet of
Agni; ({%as%}), m. a species of fish, commonly called
Rohi, Cyprinus Denticulatus. {%—Nīla-pora, as,%} m.
a species of sugar-cane. {%—Nīla-bha, as,%} m. ‘having
a bluish or dark appearance,’ the moon; a cloud;
a bee; [cf. {%nīlābha.%}] {%—Nīla-bhū, ūs,%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Nīla-bhṛṅgarāja, as,%} m. a species of
Verbesina with blue blossoms. {%—Nīla-makṣā,%} f. a
species of blue fly or bee. {%—Nīla-maṇi, is,%} m. a
blue gem, the sapphire. {%—Nīla-mata, am,%} n., N. of
a poem in the Pauranic style, celebrating the sacred
places of Kaśmīra, and said to have been inspired
by Nīla the serpent-king. {%—Nīla-mallikā,%} f. Ægle
Marmelos. {%—Nīla-mādhava, as,%} m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa (as being of a dark colour).
{%—Nīla-māṣa, as,%} m. Dolichos Catjang. {%—Nīla-%}
{%mīlika, as,%} m. a fire-fly. {%—Nīla-mṛttikā,%} f. iron
pyrites; black earth or mould. {%—Nīla-mehin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} voiding dark or bluish urine. {%—Nīla-yaṣ-%}
{%ṭikā,%} f. a species of dark sugar-cane. {%—Nīla-ratna,%}
{%am,%} n. the sapphire. {%—Nīla-rāji, is,%} f. a dark line,
dark row, dark mass. {%—Nīla-rudropaniṣad (˚ra-%}
{%up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Nīla-rūpaka,%}
{%as,%} m. Thespesia Populneoides. {%—Nīla-loha, am,%}
n. blue steel. {%—Nīla-lohita, as, ā, am,%} dark-blue
mixed with red, purple, of a purple colour, dark-red;
({%as%}), m., N. of Rudra-Śiva; N. of a Kalpa; a
mixture of blue and red, a purple colour; ({%ā%}), f. a
species of vegetable ({%= bhūmi-jambu%}); N. of a
goddess, the wife of Śiva. {%—Nīla-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. blackish, dark; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Nīla-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} blue-coloured, blue, of a
blue colour; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. n. Grevia Orientalis;
radish. {%—Nīlavarṇa-śṛgāla-vat,%} ind. like the blue
jackal. {%—Nīla-vallī,%} f. Vanda Roxburghii. {%—Nīla-%}
{%vasana, as, ā, am,%} wearing dark-blue or black
garments; ({%as%}), m. the planet Saturn. {%—Nīla-%}
{%vastra, am,%} n. a blue or dark garment, dark-
coloured cloth; ({%as, ā, am%}), dressed in dark or blue
garments; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Bala-rāma; ({%ā%}),
f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Nīla-vānara, as,%} m. ‘the
blue monkey,’ a species of monkey. {%—Nīla-vāsas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} dressed in dark-blue clothes; ({%ās%}), m.
the planet Saturn. {%—Nīla-vīja, as,%} m. a species of
tree {%(= nīlāsana)%}. {%—Nīla-vuhnā,%} f. Convolvulus
Argenteus. {%—Nīla-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a species of
plant {%(= vātāri)%}. {%—Nīla-vṛnta, as,%} m. (?), a fan.
{%—Nīlavṛntaka, am,%} n. cotton. {%—Nīla-vṛṣa, as,%}
m. a dark-coloured bull; ({%ā%}), f. Solanum Melongena.
[Page0513-c+ 81]
{%—Nīla-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a kind of religious
ceremony. {%—Nīla-śikhaṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} having
black tufts or locks of hair. {%—Nīla-śigru, us,%} m.
Hyperanthera Moringa. {%—Nīla-ṣaṇḍa, as,%} m. a
dark-coloured bull at liberty. {%—Nīla-sandhyā,%} f. {%=%}
{%nīla-giri-karṇikā,%} q. v. {%—Nīla-sarasvatī,%} f., N.
of a goddess {%(= tārā)%}. {%—Nīlasarasvatī-manu,%} N. of
an incantation or magical formula. {%—Nīla-sindu-%}
{%vāra, as,%} m. Vitex Negundo. {%—Nīla-skandā%} or
{%nīla-skandhā%} or {%nīla-spandā,%} f. the dark Go-
karṇī. {%—Nīla-svarūpa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N.
of a metre consisting of four lines of eleven syllables
each. {%—Nīlākṣa (˚la-akṣa), as,%} m. ‘blue-eyed,’
a goose. {%—Nīlāṅkita-dala (˚la-aṅ˚), as%} or {%am,%}
m. or n. (?), a species of bulbous plant {%(= taila-%}
{%kanda)%}. {%—Nīlāṅga (˚la-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} dark-
bodied, having a dark-coloured or dark-blue body;
({%as%}), m. the Indian crane; the blue jay, Coracias
Indica. {%—Nīlāñjana (˚la-añ˚), am,%} n. antimony;
blue vitriol; ({%ā%}), f. lightning; ({%ī%}), f. a species of
shrub {%(= kālāñjanī)%}. {%—Nīlāñjasā (˚la-añ˚),%} f.
lightning [cf. {%nīlāñjanā%}]; N. of an Apsaras or
courtezan of Svarga; N. of a river. {%—Nīlādri (˚la-%}
{%ad˚), is,%} m. the mountain Nīla. {%—Nīlādri-kar-%}
{%ṇikā,%} f. or {%nīlāparājitā (˚la-ap˚),%} f. {%= nīla-giri-%}
{%karṇikā%}. {%—Nīlābja (˚la-ab˚), am,%} n. the blue
water-lily, a blue lotus. {%—Nīlābha (˚la-ābhā), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} blue-looking, blue; ({%as%}), m. a cloud; [cf.
{%nīla-bha.%}] {%—Nīlābhra (˚la-abh˚), as,%} m. a dark
cloud. {%—Nīlābhra-saṃvṛta (˚la-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
obscured or concealed by dark clouds. {%—Nīlāmbara%}
{%(˚la-am˚), as, ā, am,%} dressed in dark-blue cloth,
wearing a blue garment; ({%as%}), m. a demon, a
goblin; the planet Saturn; an epithet of Bala-rāma;
({%am%}), n. black or dark-blue raiment. {%—Nīlāmbu-%}
{%janman (˚la-am˚), a,%} n. the blue lotus. {%—Nīlām-%}
{%lāna (˚la-am˚), as,%} m. a species of plant (in Hindī
{%kālākorāṭhā%}) {%= dāsī = chādana%}. {%—Nīlāmlī (˚la-%}
{%am˚),%} f. a species of shrub. {%—Nīlāruṇa (˚la-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the dark-red’ or first dawn of day. {%—Nī-%}
{%lāli-kula-saṅkula (˚la-al˚),%} ‘full of swarms of
blue bees,’ the plant Rosa Glandulifera. {%—Nīlālu%}
{%(˚la-ālu), us,%} m. a species of bulbous plant {%(= asi-%}
{%tālu)%}. {%—Nīlāśī,%} f. the plant Vitex Negundo. {%—Nī-%}
{%lāśoka (˚la-aś˚), as,%} m. an Aśoka with blue blos-
soms. {%—Nīlāśman (˚la-aś˚), ā,%} m. a blue stone, a
sapphire. {%—Nīlāśva (˚la-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a dis-
trict. {%—Nīlāsana (˚la-as˚), as,%} m. a species of tree
({%= nīla-druma, nīla-niryāsaka,%} &c.). {%—Nīlāsura%}
{%(˚la-as˚), as,%} m., N. of the author of the commen-
tary Nava-kaṇḍikā-bhāṣya on Kātyāyana's Śrāddha-
sūtras. {%—Nīlī-rāga, as,%} m. an affection which is
unchangeable as the colour of indigo, unalterable
attachment; ({%as, ā, am%}), having the colour of the
indigo plant; ‘as unchangeable as the indigo colour,’
constant in affection; ({%as%}), m. a firm and constant
friend. {%—Nīlī-sandhāna, am,%} n. fermentation or
maceration of indigo. {%—Nīlīsandhāna-bhāṇḍa,%}
{%am,%} n. a vessel for steeping indigo, an indigo vat.
{%—Nīleśvara (˚la-īś˚),%} N. of a town on the Mala-
bar shore (<lang n="greek">Νελκύνδα</lang>). {%—Nīlotpala (˚la-ut˚), am,%} n.
a blue lotus, the blue water-lily, Nymphæa Cyanea.
{%—Nīlotpala-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed or consisting
of blue lotuses. {%—Nīlotpalin, ī,%} m. an epithet of
Mañju-śrī, one of the Jaina saints or teachers. {%—Nī-%}
{%loda (˚la-uda), as,%} m., N. of an ocean or river with
blue water. {%—Nīlopala (˚la-up˚), am,%} n. a blue
stone, lapis lazuli.
<LEND>

<L>26339<pc>0513-c<k1>nIlaka<k2>nIlaka
{%Nīlaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ blue, especially an epithet of the
third unknown quantity or of its square; ({%as%}), m.
the tree Terminalia Tomentosa ({%= aśana%}); a species
of bee (?); a species of antelope, A. Picta; a dark-
coloured horse; ({%ikā%}), f. a species of rank-grow-
ing aquatic plant; {%= śephālikā,%} Nyctanthes Arbor
Tristis; {%= nīlī,%} the indigo plant; {%= nīla-sinduvāra,%}
a species of medicinal plant; a slight malady, black
and blue marks on the body from bruises &c.; {%=%}
{%nīlikā-kāca;%} N. of a river; ({%am%}), n. black salt
({%= kāca-lavaṇa%}); blue steel; blue vitriol; [cf.
{%kaṇṭha-n˚, jīna-nīlikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26340<pc>0513-c<k1>nIlaNgu<k2>nIlaNgu
{%Nīlaṅgu, us,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%lag,%} to go,
[Page0514-a+ 74]
with {%ni%}), {%= nīlāṅgu,%} a species of worm growing in
the inside of animals; an insect in general; a large
bee; a species of fly ({%= bhramarālī%} or {%bhambha-%}
{%rālī%}); a jackal; {%= pra-sūna%} or {%pra-sūta,%} a bud (?).
<LEND>

<L>26341<pc>0514-a<k1>nIlANgu<k2>nIlANgu
{%Nīlāṅgu, us,%}¦ m. {%= nīlaṅgu.%}
<LEND>

<L>26342<pc>0514-a<k1>nIlAya<k2>nIlAya
{%Nīlāya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%nīlāyati, -te,%} &c., to be-
come blue or dark-coloured.
<LEND>

<L>26343<pc>0514-a<k1>nIlikA<k2>nIlikA
{%Nīlikā,%}¦ see under {%nīlaka,%} p. 513, col. 3. {%—Nīlikā-%}
{%kāca, as,%} m. a disease of the lens or crystalline
humor of the eye.
<LEND>

<L>26344<pc>0514-a<k1>nIlinI<k2>nIlinI
{%Nīlinī,%}¦ f. the indigo plant, Indigofera Tinctoria;
a species with blue blossoms; N. of the wife of
Aja-mīḍha.
<LEND>

<L>26345<pc>0514-a<k1>nIliman<k2>nIliman
{%Nīliman, ā,%}¦ m. blueness, blackness, darkness.
<LEND>

<L>26346<pc>0514-a<k1>nIv<k2>nIv
{#nIv#}¦ {%nīv%} [cf. rts. {%tīv, pīv, mīv%}], cl. 1. P.
{%nīvati, nīvitum,%} to become fat or cor-
pulent.
<LEND>

<L>26347<pc>0514-a<k1>nIva<k2>nIva
{#nIva#}¦ {%nīva, as,%} m. a species of tree; [cf.
{%nīpa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26348<pc>0514-a<k1>nIvan<k2>nIvan
{#nIvan#}¦ {%nīvan, ā,%} m., N. of one of the ten
horses of the Moon.
<LEND>

<L>26349<pc>0514-a<k1>nIvara<k2>nIvara
{#nIvara#}¦ {%nīvara, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%nī%}), trade, traffic; a trader; a religious mendicant;
a place suitable for the site of a habitation; mud;
({%am%}), n. water.
<LEND>

<L>26350<pc>0514-a<k1>nIvAka<k2>nIvAka
{#nIvAka#}¦ {%nīvāka, as,%} m. (fr. {%ni-vac%}), the
increased demand for grain in times of dearth;
dearth, scarcity.
<LEND>

<L>26351<pc>0514-a<k1>nIvAra<k2>nIvAra
{#nIvAra#}¦ {%nīvāra, as,%} m. rice growing wild or
without cultivation; ({%ās%}), m. pl. grains of wild rice;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>26352<pc>0514-a<k1>nIvAraka<k2>nIvAraka
{%Nīvāraka, as,%}¦ m. rice growing wild or without
cultivation.
<LEND>

<L>26353<pc>0514-a<k1>nIvi<k2>nIvi
{#nIvi#}¦ {%nīvi, is%} and {%ī,%} f. (probably fr. rt. {%vye%}
with {%ni%}), a cloth worn round a woman's waist or the
ends of the cloth passed round the loins so as to
hold the whole together; a petticoat; the tie or
encircling band of a woman's drawers; the outer tie
of a packet in which the offerings of a Śūdra at
funeral obsequies are presented; capital, principal,
stock; a stake at play, stake, wager. {%—Nīvi-bhārya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. to be worn in an apron, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26354<pc>0514-a<k1>nIvft<k2>nIvft
{#nIvft#}¦ {%nī-vṛt, t, t, t,%} m. f. n. (fr. {%vṛt%} with
{%ni%}), any inhabited country, a realm.
<LEND>

<L>26355<pc>0514-a<k1>nIvra<k2>nIvra
{#nIvra#}¦ {%nīvra, am,%} n. the edge of a thatch,
the edge or side of a sloping roof; a thatch, a roof;
a wood; the circumference of a wheel; the constel-
lation Revatī; the moon; [cf. {%nīdhra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26356<pc>0514-a<k1>nISAra<k2>nISAra
{#nISAra#}¦ {%nī-śāra, as,%} m. (fr. {%śṝ%} with {%ni%}),
a warm cloth or outer garment, a blanket; curtains,
musquito curtains; an outer tent or screen.
<LEND>

<L>26357<pc>0514-a<k1>nIzah<k2>nIzah
{#nIzah#}¦ {%nī-ṣah, āṭ, āṭ, āṭ%} (fr. {%sah%} with {%ni%}),
Ved. overpowering.
<LEND>

<L>26358<pc>0514-a<k1>nIhAra<k2>nIhAra
{#nIhAra#}¦ {%nī-hāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hṛ%} with {%ni?%}),
fog, mist; frost, hoar-frost, heavy dew; evacuation.
{%—Nīhāra-kara, as,%} m. ‘dew-maker’ or ‘cold-
rayed,’ the moon.
<LEND>

<L>26359<pc>0514-a<k1>nIhArAya<k2>nIhArAya
{%Nīhārāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%nīhārāyate,%} &c., to make
frost.
<LEND>

<L>26360<pc>0514-a<k1>nu<k2>nu<h>1
{#nu#} 1¦. {%nu,%} ind. (perhaps related to 1. {%nava;%}
cf. {%nūtana%}), written {%nū%} in Ved. at the beginning of
a verse and frequently in other places. (As an adverb
of time in Ved.), now, still (e. g. {%nū-ca purā-ca,%}
both now and heretofore; {%asti svin nu vīryaṃ tat%}
{%-te,%} hast thou still that power?). (As an inferential
particle in Ved. often beginning the last sentence of
a hymn), now therefore, now then, therefore, then
(e. g. {%nū no rāsva,%} do thou therefore give us):
(as an introductory particle, or in encouraging, in-
voking, inviting, summoning), now, then, pray,
come then (e. g. {%abhi nu mā cakṣamīthāḥ,%} pray
now [Sāy. quickly] have compassion upon me).
{%Nu%} is often employed in questions, both in Vedic and
classical Sanskrit, to strengthen an interrogative pro-
[Page0514-b+ 78]
noun or adverb (e. g. {%kadā nu,%} when indeed?
{%kathaṃ nu,%} how indeed? {%kva nu,%} where indeed?
{%kaṃ nu pṛcchāmi,%} whom can I possibly ask?
{%kiṃ nu syāt,%} what can that possibly be? {%kiṃ nu%}
{%khalu,%} why in the world?). {%Nu%} is also used inter-
rogatively in classical Sanskrit, without an interro-
gative pronoun, in sentences of two or more clauses
(e. g. {%svapno nu māyā nu mati-bhramo nu,%} was
it a dream? or an illusion of magic? or a mental
delusion?). {%Nu%} also serves as a particle of affirma-
tion, to express ‘indeed,’ ‘certainly,’ ‘surely’ (e. g.
{%ahaṃ nu akārṣam,%} Yes, I certainly did so), and
often gives emphasis to the word it follows without
being itself translateable, in which way it is frequently
connected in the Veda with other particles (e. g. with
{%cid%} in {%cin nu;%} with {%id%} in {%in nu;%} with {%adha%} in
{%adha nu;%} with {%gha%} in {%ghā nu,%} &c.); but in the
Veda {%nu%} sometimes means ‘never’ (especially in
the construction {%nū cit%} = never, nevermore; in other
passages it is said to = ‘from this time forward,’ ‘for
ever’). In classical Sanskrit {%nu%} is sometimes found
in connection with {%vā,%} ‘or;’ and in Rāmāyaṇa II.
72, 27, {%nu — nu%} may be translated ‘either’ — ‘or.’
According to native commentators on the Veda {%nu%}
often {%= kṣipram,%} quickly. According to native
lexicographers {%nu%} is used in the following senses:
{%pṛcchā, vikalpa, vitarka, anunaya, atīta, apa-%}
{%māna, hetu, apadeśa;%} [cf. {%nū-nam, nū-tana;%}
Zend {%nū,%} ‘just now;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">νύ, νῡ-νί, νῦν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>num,</nsi>
<nsi>nun-c;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>nu-h;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>nu;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>nyne,</nsi>
‘at present.’]
<LEND>

<L>26361<pc>0514-b<k1>nu<k2>nu<h>2
{#nu#} 2¦. {%nu, us,%} m. a weapon; time; a boat;
(probably only at the end of a comp.; cf. {%nau.%})
<LEND>

<L>26362<pc>0514-b<k1>nu<k2>nu<h>3
{#nu#} 3¦. {%nu,%} cl. 1. A. {%navate,%} &c., to go:
Caus. {%nāvayati,%} &c., (probably) to move
from a place, remove; (according to a Schol.) to
make new.
<LEND>

<L>26363<pc>0514-b<k1>nu<k2>nu<h>4
{#nu#} 4¦. {%nu,%} cl. 2, or {%nū,%} cl. 6. P. {%nauti, nu-%}
{%vati, nunāva, naviṣyati, nuviṣyati, anā-%}
{%vīt, anuvīt, navitum, nuvitum,%} to roar, cry, low,
bray, &c.; to sound; to shout; to exult; to praise,
commend (with acc.): Caus. {%nāvayati, anūnavat:%}
Desid. {%nunūṣati:%} Intens. {%nonūyate, nonoti,%} to
sound loudly, roar, be tumultuous.
<LEND>

<L>26364<pc>0514-b<k1>nu<k2>nu<h>5
5. {%nu, us,%}¦ f. praise, eulogium.
<LEND>

<L>26365<pc>0514-b<k1>nuta<k2>nuta
{%Nuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised, commended.
<LEND>

<L>26366<pc>0514-b<k1>nuti<k2>nuti
{%Nuti, is,%}¦ f. praise, laudation, eulogium, panegyric;
worship, reverence.
<LEND>

<L>26367<pc>0514-b<k1>nUta<k2>nUta<h>1
1. {%nūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised, eulogized, lauded,
hymned.
<LEND>

<L>26368<pc>0514-b<k1>nuq<k2>nuq
{#nuq#}¦ {%nuḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%nuḍati,%} &c., to hurt,
strike, kill.
<LEND>

<L>26369<pc>0514-b<k1>nud<k2>nud<h>1
{#nud#} 1¦. {%nud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%nudati, -te, nunoda,%}
{%nunude, notsyati, -te, anautsīt, anutta,%}
{%nottum,%} to push, push on, impel, incite, propel, urge
on, push away, drive away, repel, banish; to move,
remove; to throw, shoot, cast, send; to raise, lift up
(Ved.): Caus. {%nodayati, -yitum,%} to push on, incite,
excite: Intens. {%nonudyate, nonotti,%} to push or impel
or drive away repeatedly; [cf. Angl. Sax. <nsi>nyd-ian,</nsi>
‘to compel;’ <nsi>a-nydan,</nsi> ‘to repel;’ <nsi>niot-an:</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>niut-an:</nsi> perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">νύσσα.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>26370<pc>0514-b<k1>nutta<k2>nutta
{%Nutta, as, ā, am,%}¦ pushed away, despatched, sent,
ordered; ({%as%}), m. a plant, see {%lakuca.%}
<LEND>

<L>26371<pc>0514-b<k1>nud<k2>nud<h>2
2. {%nud, t, t, t%}¦ (at the end of a comp.), driving
away, removing, rejecting, repelling.
<LEND>

<L>26372<pc>0514-b<k1>nuda<k2>nuda
{%Nuda, as, ā, am%}¦ (at the end of a comp.), pushing,
impelling, driving away, removing.
<LEND>

<L>26373<pc>0514-b<k1>nudat<k2>nudat
{%Nudat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} urging forward.
<LEND>

<L>26374<pc>0514-b<k1>nudita<k2>nudita
{%Nudita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (ep.) {%= nutta, nunna.%}
<LEND>

<L>26375<pc>0514-b<k1>nunutsu<k2>nunutsu
{%Nunutsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of impelling or
inciting or removing.
<LEND>

<L>26376<pc>0514-b<k1>nunna<k2>nunna
{%Nunna, as, ā, am,%}¦ pushed, propelled; pushed
away; thrown, cast; dismissed, sent, despatched.
<LEND>

<L>26377<pc>0514-b<k1>nUta<k2>nUta<h>2
2. {%nūta, as, ā, am, = nutta%}¦ or {%nunna.%}
<LEND>

<L>26378<pc>0514-b<k1>nUtana<k2>nUtana
{#nUtana#}¦ {%nūtana, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%nu%} and con-
nected with 1. {%nava,%} q. v.), new, novel, recent, modern,
fresh, young, (opposed to {%pūrva, purāṇa,%} &c.);
[Page0514-c+ 78]
present; instantaneous, sudden; curious, strange.
{%—Nūtana-tā,%} f. or {%nūtana-tva, am,%} n. newness,
novelty.
<LEND>

<L>26379<pc>0514-c<k1>nUtanaya<k2>nUtanaya
{%Nūtanaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%nūtanayati,%} &c., to make
new, renew.
<LEND>

<L>26380<pc>0514-c<k1>nUtna<k2>nUtna
{%Nūtna, as, ā, am,%}¦ new, fresh, young, recent.
{%—Nūtna-vayas, ās, ās, as,%} in the bloom of youth,
in the spring of life.
<LEND>

<L>26381<pc>0514-c<k1>nUda<k2>nUda
{#nUda#}¦ {%nūda, as,%} m. the mulberry tree,
Morus Indica.
<LEND>

<L>26382<pc>0514-c<k1>nUnam<k2>nUnam
{#nUnam#}¦ {%nūnam,%} ind. (fr. 1. {%nu%}), now, at
present (Ved.); just now, just, exactly (Ved.); im-
mediately (Ved.); from this time forward, for
the future (Ved.); now then, therefore (Ved.);
probably, in all probability, perhaps; without doubt,
certainly, assuredly, surely, indeed. {%—Nūna-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. probability; ({%āt%}), ind. in all probability,
probably, indeed.
<LEND>

<L>26383<pc>0514-c<k1>nUpura<k2>nUpura
{#nUpura#}¦ {%nūpura, as, am,%} m. n. an ornament
for the toes or ancles or feet, an anklet; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a descendant of Ikṣvāku. {%—Nūpura-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} adorned with anklets or foot-ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>26384<pc>0514-c<k1>nf<k2>nf
{#nf#}¦ {%nṛ, nā,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%nī,%} cf. rt.
{%nṝ,%} see Gram. 128. <nsi>b;</nsi> the gen. pl. may be {%narām%}
or {%nṛṇām%} in Ved., but generally {%nṝṇām%} in classical
Sanskrit), a leader (said of gods), a man, person, mankind,
people (generally pl.); a piece at chess, &c.; the pin
or gnomon of a sun-dial; (in grammar) a masculine
word; a horse (Ved.); [cf. {%nara:%} Zend {%nar, nara,%}
‘a man;’ {%nairya,%} ‘manly:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀνήρ, ἠνορ-έη,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀγ-ήνωρ, ἄνθρ-ωπο-ς,</lang> ‘man's face:’ Sabin. <nsi>nero,</nsi>
‘brave;’ <nsi>ner-io,</nsi> ‘fortitude:’ Hib. <nsi>nearth</nsi> = Welsh
<nsi>nerth,</nsi> ‘virtue.’] {%—Nṛ-kukkura, as,%} m. ‘man-dog,’
a dog of a man. {%—Nṛ-keśarin%} or {%nṛ-kesarin, ī,%}
m. a being, half man and half lion; Viṣṇu in his
fourth Ava-tāra as man-lion. {%—Nṛ-ga, as,%} m., N.
of several persons; an old king; a grandson of Ogha-
vat; a son of Uśīnara by Nṛgā (he was ancestor of
the Yaudheyas); a son of Manu; the father of Su-
mati; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of Uśīnara and mother
of Nṛga. {%—Nṛga-śāpa, as,%} m. ‘the curse of
Nṛga,’ N. of the fiftieth chapter of the Uttara-kāṇḍa
of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Nṛgākhyāna (˚ga-ākh˚), am,%}
n. ‘the tale of Nṛga,’ an episode of the Mahā-bh.
Anuśāsana-p. 3452; N. of the twenty-fourth chapter
of the Pārtha Itihāsa-samuccaya. {%—Nṛgopākhyāna%}
{%(˚ga-up˚), am,%} n. ‘the episode of Nṛga,’ N. of the
forty-ninth chapter of the Uttara-kāṇḍa of the Rāmā-
yaṇa. {%—Nṛ-cakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. seeing or
observing men, (an epithet of the Sun, Savitṛ, Soma,
Agni, &c.); leading or guiding men; living among
men; (Sāy.) seeing men or injuring men; ({%ās%}), m.
‘waiting for men,’ a demon, a Rākṣasa, a goblin.
{%—Nṛ-cakṣus, us, us, us,%} seeing with human eyes;
({%us%}), m., N. of a prince, a grandson or son of
Su-nītha. {%—Nṛ-candra, as,%} m. ‘man-moon,’ N. of
a prince, son of Rantināra. {%—Nṛ-jagdha, as,%} m.
‘man-eater,’ a cannibal, a Rākṣasa. {%—Nṛ-jala, am,%}
n. human urine. {%—Nṛ-jāti, is,%} f. the human race.
{%—Nṛ-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. conquering men; (Sāy.)
conquering leaders; ({%t%}), m., N. of an Ekāha. {%—Nṛ-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} most manly. {%—Nṛ-deva, as,%}
m. ‘man-god,’ a god among men, a king. {%—Nṛ-%}
{%dharman, ā, ā, a,%} acting as a man, doing a man's
duty; ({%ā%}), m. a N. of Kuvera; ({%a%}), n. manly
quality or duty. {%—Nṛ-dhūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
shaken about or stirred by men (as the Soma).
{%—Nṛ-namana, am,%} n. the bending or bowing of
men (?). {%—Nṛ-pa, as,%} m. a protector of men, a
warrior, a prince, king, sovereign. {%—Nṛpa-kanda,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of onion {%(= rāja-palāṇḍu)%}. {%—Nṛ-%}
{%pa-kriyā,%} f. ‘king's act,’ government, dominion.
{%—Nṛpa-gṛha, am,%} n. ‘king's house,’ the habita-
tion of a prince, a palace. {%—Nṛpañ-jaya, as,%} m.,
N. of two princes, a son of Su-vīra and a son of
Medhāvin. {%—Nṛ-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of men,’ a
king, prince, sovereign, (also applied to gods); an
epithet of Kuvera. {%—Nṛpati-patha, as,%} m. (?),
[Page0515-a+ 81]
‘king's road,’ royal road, chief street. {%—Nṛpati-val-%}
{%labha, as,%} m. ‘king's favourite,’ a species of medi-
cinal plant. {%—Nṛpati-śāsana, am,%} n. a king's order,
edict. {%—Nṛ-patnī,%} f., Ved. a king's wife, queen.
{%—Nṛpa-tva, am,%} n. royalty, sovereignty, dominion;
{%nṛpatvaṃ kṛ,%} to reign. {%—Nṛpa-dīpa, as,%} m.
‘king-lamp,’ a king who is like a lamp. {%—Nṛpa-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. the plant Cathartocarpus (Cassia)
Fistula; a species of tree {%(= rājādanī)%}. {%—Nṛpa-%}
{%dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} king-hating. {%—Nṛpa-nīti, is,%} f. royal
policy, king-craft. {%—Nṛpa-priya, as,%} m. a thorny
species of bamboo, Bambusa Spinosa; a variety of Sac-
charum Sara; rice; a species of onion; the mango tree;
({%ā%}), f. the tree Pandanus Odoratissimus; a species of
date tree. {%—Nṛpapriya-phalā,%} f. Solanum Melon-
gena. {%—Nṛpa-badara, as,%} m. a species of jujube;
({%am%}), n. its fruit. {%—Nṛpa-mandira, am,%} n. a
king's residence, a royal palace. {%—Nṛpa-māṅgal-%}
{%yaka, am,%} n. Tabernæmontana Coronaria. {%—Nṛpa-%}
{%māna, as,%} m. (?), music played before kings when
eating or feasting; [cf. {%nṛpābhīra.%}] {%—Nṛpa-%}
{%lakṣman, a,%} n. a mark or symbol of a king, any
one of the royal insignia, especially the white
umbrella. {%—Nṛpa-liṅga, am,%} n. an emblem or
mark of royalty. {%—Nṛpaliṅga-dhara, as, ā, am,%}
assuming the insignia of sovereignty; taking (frau-
dulently) the emblem or marks of the royal or
military caste. {%—Nṛpa-vallabha, as, ā, am,%} dear
to a king; ({%as%}), m. the friend or favourite of a
king; a species of mango; ({%ā%}), f. a king's wife, a
queen; a species of plant. {%—Nṛpa-vṛkṣa, as,%}
m. {%= rāja-vṛkṣa%}. {%—Nṛpa-śāsana, am,%} n. a
royal edict. {%—Nṛ-paśu, us,%} m. ‘man-beast,’ a brute
of a man; a man serving as a sacrificial victim.
{%—Nṛpa-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. the best of kings.
{%—Nṛpa-saṃśraya, as,%} m. seeking the protection
of kings, service of princes. {%—Nṛpa-sabha, am,%} n.
an assembly of princes; a royal palace. {%—Nṛpa-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. a king's son, a prince; ({%ā%}), f. ‘a king's
daughter,’ the musk-rat. {%—Nṛpa-snuṣā,%} f. the
daughter-in-law of a king. {%—Nṛpāṃśa (˚pa-aṃ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. king's share, royal portion (i. e. a sixth, eighth,
or twelfth of grain, a sixth of fruit, a fiftieth of
merchandise &c.), royal revenue. {%—Nṛpākṛṣṭa%}
{%(˚pa-āk˚),%} a particular favourable position of the
pieces in the game Catur-aṅga (a kind of chess).
{%—Nṛpāṅgaṇa%} and {%nṛpāṅgana (˚pa-aṅ˚), am,%}
n. a royal court. {%—Nṛ-pāṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving
drink to men. {%—Nṛ-pātṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. the pro-
tector of men. {%—Nṛpātmaja (˚pa-āt˚), as, ā, am,%}
of royal birth; ({%as%}), m. a king's son, a prince; ({%ā%}),
f. a king's daughter, a princess; a bitter gourd.
{%—Nṛpādhama (˚pa-adh˚), as,%} m. a bad king.
{%—Nṛpādhvara (˚pa-adh˚), as,%} m. a sort of
sacrifice (the Rāja-sūya) held by a lord paramount
in which all the offices are performed by tributary
princes. {%—Nṛpānucara (˚pa-an˚), as,%} m. a king's
attendant, a minister. {%—Nṛpānna (˚pa-an˚), am,%}
n. ‘royal rice,’ a sort of rice. {%—Nṛpānyatva (˚pa-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. change of government. {%—Nṛpābhīra%}
{%(˚pa-ābh˚), am,%} n. music played at the royal meals.
{%—Nṛpāmaya (˚pa-ām˚), as,%} m. ‘king's disease or
evil,’ consumption. {%—Nṛ-pāyya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
protecting men; (Sāy.) to be drunk by the leaders or
gods, or to be protected by the leaders of the sacrifice.
{%—Nṛ-pāla, as,%} m. ‘protector of men,’ a king.
{%—Nṛpālaya (˚pa-āl˚), as,%} m. a king's residence,
a palace. {%—Nṛpāvarta (˚pa-āv˚), am,%} n. a kind
of gem {%(= rājāvarta)%}. {%—Nṛpāsana (˚pa-ās˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the seat of a king, a throne, a chair of state.
{%—Nṛpāspada (˚pa-ās˚), am,%} n. a king's resi-
dence, a palace. {%—Nṛpāhvaya (˚pa-āh˚), as,%} m.
a species of onion {%(= rāja-palāṇḍu)%}. {%—Nṛ-pīti,%}
{%is,%} f., Ved. the protection of men. {%—Nṛpecchā%}
{%(˚pa-ic˚),%} f. the royal pleasure. {%—Nṛ-peśas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. (according to Sāy. f.), ‘man-shaped,’ having
the form of men; (probably) formed or decorated
by men. {%—Nṛpocita (˚pa-uc˚), as, ā, am,%} suited
to a king, kingly, princely; ({%as%}), m. a species of
bean {%(= rāja-māṣa)%}. {%—Nṛ-bāhu, us,%} m., Ved.
a man's arm. {%—Nṛ-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘lord of
[Page0515-b+ 81]
men,’ a prince, sovereign. {%—Nṛ-maṇas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. propitious or well-disposed towards men,
honoured by men; epithet of Indra; (Sāy.) having
the mind turned towards men. {%—Nṛmaṇasya,%}
Nom. A. {%nṛmaṇasyate,%} Ved. to be friendly or
propitious to men. {%—Nṛ-maṇi, is,%} m., N. of a
demon said to seize on children; [cf. {%graha.%}]
{%—Nṛ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding in men; ({%ān%}),
m., N. of a man. {%—Nṛ-mara, as, ā, am,%} ‘man-
destroying,’ killing men. {%—Nṛ-māṃsa, am,%} n. the
flesh of men. {%—Nṛ-mādana, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
exhilarating or gladdening men. {%—Nṛ-mithuna,%}
{%am,%} n. the sign of the zodiac Gemini. {%—Nṛ-megha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘man-cloud,’ a man compared to a cloud or
who has qualities like that of a cloud yielding rain.
{%—Nṛ-medha, as,%} m. ‘man-sacrifice’ [cf. {%nṛ-yajña%}],
N. of a man, an Āṅgirasa and author of two hymns
of the Ṛg-veda. {%—Nṛ-yajña, as,%} m. ‘man-offer-
ing,’ the sacrifice to be offered to men, i. e. hospi-
tality. {%—Nṛ-yugma, am,%} n. the sign of the zodiac
Gemini. {%—Nṛ-loka, as,%} m. the world of men, the
earth. {%—1. nṛ-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having men,
manly, belonging to men, fit for men, consisting of
men, accompanied by men. {%—2. nṛ-vat,%} ind., Ved.
like a man, in a manly way, strongly, powerfully,
bravely; in abundance. {%—Nṛvat-sakhi, is, is, i,%} Ved.
having manly companions. {%—Nṛ-varāha, as,%} m.
‘man-boar,’ Viṣṇu in his boar incarnation (with
the figure of a man and the head of the wild boar).
{%—Nṛ-vāhaṇa, as, ā, am,%} or {%nṛ-vāhas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. carrying or bearing men; (Sāy.) conveying
leaders or chiefs (i. e. the Aśvins). {%—Nṛ-vīra, as,%}
m. ‘man-hero,’ a hero of a man, a hero among
men. {%—Nṛ-veṣṭana, as, ā, am,%} encircled with
(the bones of) men; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Nṛ-śaṃsa, as, ā, am,%} to be desired or praised
by men (Ved.); hurting or injuring men, malicious,
noxious, cruel, wicked, hurtful, injurious to mankind,
mischievous, base, destructive; [cf. Zend <nsi>nairya</nsi>
<nsi>śaṅgho.</nsi>] {%—Nṛśaṃsa-tā,%} f. mischievousness, mali-
ciousness, vileness, baseness. {%—Nṛśaṃsa-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} malicious, vile. {%—Nṛśaṃsa-vṛtta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} practising mischief. {%—Nṛśaṃsya, as, ā, am,%}
malicious, mischievous, vile; ({%am%}), n. injury to
man, maliciousness, mischievousness, vileness. {%—Nṛ-%}
{%śṛṅga, am,%} n. ‘man's horn,’ any chimerical or
impossible thing. {%—Nṛ-ṣad, t, t, t,%} Ved. dwelling
among men, (in some passages applied to {%caitanya,%}
consciousness, or {%buddhi,%} understanding); ({%t%}), m.,
N. of the father of Kaṇva; [cf. {%nārṣada.%}] {%—Nṛ-%}
{%ṣadana, am,%} n., Ved. an assemblage of men,
residence of men; (Sāy.) the hall of sacrifice, the
receptacle of oblations, the house of the sacrificing
priest. {%—Nṛ-ṣadvan, ā, arī, a,%} or {%nṛ-ṣadman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} Ved. sitting or living among men. {%—Nṛ-%}
{%ṣah%} or {%nṛ-ṣāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. overpowering or
overcoming men. {%—Nṛ-ṣahya%} or {%nṛ-ṣāhya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. overpowering men; (Sāy.) to be borne
by men; ({%am%}), n. the overpowering of men; battle
(as to be borne by men). {%—Nṛ-ṣā, ās, ās, am%}
(fr. {%nṛ + sā = san%}), Ved. granting or procuring
men. {%—Nṛ-ṣāc, k, k, k,%} Ved. serving men,
friendly or benevolent to men; an epithet of the
Maruts. {%—Nṛ-ṣāti, is,%} f., Ved. ‘capturing or
making spoil of men,’ i. e. battle, (in Ṛg-veda VII.
27, 1, {%nṛ-ṣātā%} is Ved. loc., but according to Sāy.
it is nom. c. of {%nṛ-ṣātṛ,%} benefactor of men.)
{%—Nṛ-ṣūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. impelled or incited
by men. {%—Nṛ-siṃha, as,%} m. ‘man-lion,’ a lion
among men, a chief, a noble, a great or illustrious
man; Viṣṇu in his fourth Ava-tāra or incarnation
in the shape of a man with the head and claws of a
lion [cf. {%nara-siṃha%}]; a kind of coitus; N. of
several men. {%—Nṛsiṃha-kavaca, am,%} n., N. of a
chapter of the Tantra-sāra. {%—Nṛsiṃha-caturdaśī,%}
f. the fourteenth day in the light half of the month
Vaiśākha (a festival). {%—Nṛsiṃha-campū, ūs,%} f., N.
of a work. {%—Nṛsiṃha-tāpanīya, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Nṛsiṃhatāpanīyo-%}
{%paniṣad-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a commentary on
the preceding Upaniṣad by Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Nṛ- %}
[Page0515-c+ 74]
{%siṃha-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
{%—Nṛsiṃha-prasāda, as,%} m., N. of an author
mentioned in the Śūdra-dharma-tattva. {%—Nṛsiṃha-%}
{%prādurbhāva, as,%} m. ‘the manifestation of the
man-lion,’ N. of the thirty-ninth to the forty-third
chapter of the Narasiṃha-Purāṇa. {%—Nṛsiṃha-bhaṭṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Nṛsiṃha-vana, as,%} m., N.
of a district in the north-west of Madhya-deśa.
{%—Nṛsiṃha-sarasvatī,%} m., N. of a commentator
on the Vedānta-sāra. {%—Nṛsiṃhācārya (˚ha-āc˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Nṛsiṃhāśrama (˚ha-%}
{%āś˚), as,%} m., N. of the author of the Prayoga-ratna.
{%—Nṛsiṃhīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to Nṛ-siṃha;
N. of a book. {%—Nṛ-sena, am, ā,%} n. f. an army
of men. {%—Nṛ-soma, as,%} m. ‘man-moon,’ any
illustrious or great man, a prince or chief. {%—Nṛ-han,%}
{%ā, ghnī, a,%} Ved. killing men. {%—Nṛ-hari, is,%} m.
Viṣṇu in his fourth Ava-tāra as the man-lion [cf.
{%nara-siṃha%}]; N. of a man. {%—Nr-asthi-mālin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} decorated with a garland of human bones;
({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>26385<pc>0515-c<k1>nfmRa<k2>nfmRa
{%Nṛmṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. manhood ({%virtus%}), power,
strength, wealth, ability, courage; ({%as, ā, am%}),
making happy; ({%as%}), m. ‘giving happiness,’ an epi-
thet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Nṛmṇa-vardhana, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. enhancing courage.
<LEND>

<L>26386<pc>0515-c<k1>nft<k2>nft<h>1
{#nft#} 1¦. {%nṛt,%} cl. 4. P. {%nṛtyati%} (ep. also {%-te%}),
{%nanarta, nartsyati%} and {%nartiṣyati,%}
{%anartīt, nartitum,%} to dance; to act on the stage;
represent (as an actor), gesticulate, play: Caus. {%nar-%}
{%tayati, -yitum,%} to cause to dance: Desid. {%ninṛt-%}
{%sati%} and {%ninartiṣati:%} Intens. {%narnartti, nar-%}
{%nṛtīti, narinartti, narinṛtīti, narīnartti, narī-%}
{%nṛtīti, narīnṛtyate,%} to dance about, dance with
vehement gesticulations; (P.) to cause to dance
about or to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>26387<pc>0515-c<k1>nft<k2>nft<h>2
2. {%nṛt, t,%}¦ f., Ved. dancing, gesticulation, gesture.
<LEND>

<L>26388<pc>0515-c<k1>nfti<k2>nfti
{%Nṛti, is,%}¦ f. dancing, acting, playing; (perhaps in
Ved.) lovely or grand appearance.
<LEND>

<L>26389<pc>0515-c<k1>nftu<k2>nftu
{%Nṛtu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. dancing, gesticulating,
lively, active, (generally as an epithet of Indra);
({%nṛtū, ūs%}), m. a dancer, an actor, a mime; the
earth; a worm; length.
<LEND>

<L>26390<pc>0515-c<k1>nftta<k2>nftta
{%Nṛtta, am,%}¦ n. dancing, acting, gesticulation.
{%—Nṛtta-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting in dance.
<LEND>

<L>26391<pc>0515-c<k1>nftya<k2>nftya
{%Nṛtya, am,%}¦ n. dancing, acting, dance, gesticula-
tion, pantomime. {%—Nṛtya-gīta-vādya, āni,%} n. pl.
dancing, singing, and instrumental music. {%—Nṛtya-%}
{%priya, as, ā, am,%} fond of dancing; ({%as%}), m. a
peacock; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
on Skanda. {%—Nṛtya-śālā,%} f. a dancing-room.
{%—Nṛtya-sarvasva, am,%} n. ‘the whole essence of
dancing,’ N. of a work. {%—Nṛtya-sthāna, am,%} n. a
place for dancing, a dancing-room.
<LEND>

<L>26392<pc>0515-c<k1>nftyat<k2>nftyat
{%Nṛtyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dancing.
<LEND>

<L>26393<pc>0515-c<k1>nfpIwa<k2>nfpIwa
{#nfpIwa#}¦ {%nṛpīṭa, am,%} n., Ved. a various
reading (in the Nighaṇṭus) for {%kṛpīṭa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>26394<pc>0515-c<k1>nfmaRA<k2>nfmaRA
{#nfmaRA#}¦ {%nṛmaṇā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>26395<pc>0515-c<k1>nF<k2>nF
{#nF#}¦ {%nṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%nṛṇāti, nanāra,%} &c., to
lead: Caus. {%narayati, nārayati,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>26396<pc>0515-c<k1>nekzaRa<k2>nekzaRa
{#nekzaRa#}¦ {%nekṣaṇa, am,%} n., Ved. a sharp
stick, a spear, a fork or similar cooking implement;
[cf. {%nīkṣaṇa, mekṣaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26397<pc>0515-c<k1>nega<k2>nega
{#nega#}¦ {%nega, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school of the
Sāma-veda; [cf. {%naigeya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26398<pc>0515-c<k1>nejaka<k2>nejaka
{#nejaka#}¦ {%nejaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%nij%}), a
washerman.
<LEND>

<L>26399<pc>0515-c<k1>nejana<k2>nejana
{%Nejana, am,%}¦ n. washing, cleansing.
<LEND>

<L>26400<pc>0515-c<k1>nejameza<k2>nejameza
{#nejameza#}¦ {%nejameṣa, as,%} m., N. of a demon
hurtful to children.
<LEND>

<L>26401<pc>0515-c<k1>netavya<k2>netavya
{#netavya#}¦ {%netavya, netṛ,%} &c. See p. 511, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26402<pc>0515-c<k1>netra<k2>netra
{#netra#}¦ {%netra, netrika,%} &c. See p. 511, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26403<pc>0515-c<k1>ned<k2>ned<h>1
{#ned#} 1¦. {%ned%} or {%net,%} ind. (fr. {%na + id,%} and
regarded in the Pada-pāṭha as two words), Ved. not,
[Page0516-a+ 77]
not indeed (Sāy. {%= naiva%}); that not; (see Pāṇ.
VIII. 1, 30; cf. Zend <nsi>noiḍ,</nsi> ‘not.’)
<LEND>

<L>26404<pc>0516-a<k1>ned<k2>ned<h>2
{#ned#} 2¦. {%ned%} [cf. rt. 1. {%nid%}], cl. 1. P. {%nedati,%}
&c., to censure, blame; to be near; to go.
<LEND>

<L>26405<pc>0516-a<k1>nedaya<k2>nedaya
{%Nedaya%}¦ (fr. {%neda,%} see {%nediṣṭha%}), Nom. P.
{%nedayati,%} &c., to bring near.
<LEND>

<L>26406<pc>0516-a<k1>nedayat<k2>nedayat
{%Nedayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bringing near, approxi-
mating.
<LEND>

<L>26407<pc>0516-a<k1>nedizWa<k2>nedizWa
{%Nediṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%neda%} which is
substituted for {%antika,%} near; probably allied to {%nad-%}
{%dha%} fr. rt. 1. {%nah%}), the nearest, next, very near;
({%am%}), ind. very nearly, next, in the first place; ({%āt%}),
ind. from the neighbourhood; ({%as%}), m. Alangium
Hexapetalum; N. of a son of Manu; [cf. Zend
<nsi>nazdista.</nsi>] {%—Nediṣṭha-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. the
nearest of all.
<LEND>

<L>26408<pc>0516-a<k1>nedizWin<k2>nedizWin
{%Nediṣṭhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ very near, very nearly
related.
<LEND>

<L>26409<pc>0516-a<k1>nedIyas<k2>nedIyas
{%Nedīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%neda%} which
is substituted for {%antika%}), nearer, very near, as
near as possible.
<LEND>

<L>26410<pc>0516-a<k1>nenya<k2>nenya
{#nenya#}¦ {%nenya, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens. of rt.
1. {%nī%}), taking or obtaining frequently (?).
<LEND>

<L>26411<pc>0516-a<k1>nepa<k2>nepa
{#nepa#}¦ {%nepa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%nī%}),
a family priest; ({%am%}), n. water.
<LEND>

<L>26412<pc>0516-a<k1>nepaTya<k2>nepaTya
{#nepaTya#}¦ {%nepathya, am,%} n. (for {%nar-pathya,%} i. e.
{%nṛ-pathya?;%} cf. {%vetana%} for {%vartana%}), an ornament,
embellishment, decoration, the costume of an actor,
attire, (in this sense said to be also m.); the part
of a stage behind the scenes (or rather behind the
curtain which was stretched across the stage and
served for scenes), the space behind the curtain or
scenes where the decorations were kept and where
the actors attired themselves; the postscenium; the
tiring-room; {%nepathye,%} loc. sing. (a voice) in the
postscenium or behind the scenes, (used in the plays
as a stage-direction, where anything is to be said by
an actor behind the scenes.)
<LEND>

<L>26413<pc>0516-a<k1>nepAla<k2>nepAla
{#nepAla#}¦ {%nepāla, as,%} m. (said to be con-
tracted fr. {%niyama-pāla,%} q. v., the N. of a sage);
N. of a country, Nepal; a species of sugar-cane;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the people inhabiting Nepal;
({%ī%}), f. red arsenic; the wild date tree or its fruit;
({%am%}), n. copper. {%—Nepāla-jā,%} f. or {%nepāla-jātā,%}
f. red arsenic. {%—Nepāla-nimba, as,%} m. ‘the Nepal
Nimba,’ a species of tree. {%—Nepāla-mūlaka, am,%}
n. a radish.
<LEND>

<L>26414<pc>0516-a<k1>nepAlaka<k2>nepAlaka
{%Nepālaka, am,%}¦ n. copper; ({%ikā%}), f. red arsenic.
<LEND>

<L>26415<pc>0516-a<k1>nEpAla<k2>nEpAla
{%Naipāla, as, ī, am,%}¦ produced &c. in Nepal;
({%as%}), m. a species of sugar-cane; the Nepal Nimba,
a species of tree; ({%ī%}), f. red arsenic; a species of
plant, Arabian jasmine, Jasminum Zambac and Nyc-
tanthes Arbor Tristis; the indigo plant.
<LEND>

<L>26416<pc>0516-a<k1>nEpAlika<k2>nEpAlika
{%Naipālika, as, ī, am,%}¦ produced in or brought
from Nepal; ({%am%}), n. copper.
<LEND>

<L>26417<pc>0516-a<k1>nEpAlIya<k2>nEpAlIya
{%Naipālīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ produced in or brought
from Nepal. {%—Naipālīya-devatā-kalyāṇa-pañca-%}
{%viṃśatikā,%} f., N. of a Buddhist work.
<LEND>

<L>26418<pc>0516-a<k1>nema<k2>nema
{#nema#}¦ {%nema, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%nam%} with {%e%}
instead of reduplication, but said to be fr. rt. 1. {%nī;%}
{%nema%} is one of the {%sarvādi%} or pronominals accord-
ing to Pāṇ. I. 1, 27, but the nom. pl. m. is either
{%neme%} or {%nemās%}), Ved. some, a few, several, (accord-
ing to Sāy. {%nema = alpa, katipaya; neme = ke-%}
{%cane,%} also {%= ete,%} these); the one, the other; half;
({%as%}), m. a part, portion; time, period, season; term,
boundary, limit; a fence, enclosure, a boundary wall
or hedge; the foundation of a wall; a hole, a chasm;
fraud, deceit; acting, dancing; evening; a root; food
(Ved.); upper part, above; ({%am%}), n. a particular
number; [cf. Zend <nsi>naima.</nsi>] {%—Nema-candra, as,%}
m. ‘the half moon,’ N. of a prince of Bengal. {%—Ne-%}
{%ma-dhita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. divided, set at variance;
({%ās%}), m. pl., scil. {%saṅgrāmāḥ,%} battles in which only
some are engaged; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%Indraḥ,%} the sharer of
half the oblation, the other half going to all the gods;
(see Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 72, 4.) {%—Nema-dhiti, is,%}
[Page0516-b+ 75]
f., Ved. battle, conflict, dispute. {%—Nema-nātha, as,%}
m., N. of a man who is also called Nitya-nātha.
{%—Nema-sāha, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Nemāditya%}
{%(˚ma-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a man, father of Trivi-
krama-bhaṭṭa, the author of the Damayantī-kathā.
<LEND>

<L>26419<pc>0516-b<k1>nemi<k2>nemi
{%Nemi, is, ī,%}¦ f. the circumference or ring or felly or
outer rim of a wheel; edge, rim; a windlass or frame-
work for the rope of a well; a thunderbolt, a circle or
circumference in general, the earth; ({%is%}), m. the
plant Dalbergia Ougeinensis; N. of a Daitya; (with
Jainas) N. of the twenty-second Arhat of the present
Ut-sarpiṇī; N. of a Cakra-vartin; a sacred place, as
Mathurā (?). {%—Nemi-cakra, as,%} m. a prince de-
scended from Parīkṣit, who is said to have removed
the capital of India to Kauśāmbi after the inunda-
tion of Hāstina-pura. {%—Nemin-dhara, as,%} m., N.
of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>26420<pc>0516-b<k1>nemin<k2>nemin
{%Nemin, ī,%}¦ m. the tree Dalbergia Ougeinensis;
(with Jainas) N. of the twenty-second Arhat of the
present Ut-sarpiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>26421<pc>0516-b<k1>nemanniz<k2>nemanniz
{#nemanniz#}¦ {%nemann-iṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. (perhaps)
following guidance?; (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
1. 56, 2), moving reverentially or bearing oblations.
<LEND>

<L>26422<pc>0516-b<k1>neya<k2>neya
{#neya#}¦ {%neya.%} See p. 511, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26423<pc>0516-b<k1>nela<k2>nela
{#nela#}¦ {%nela, as,%} or {%nelu, us,%} or {%nevala, as,%} m.
a particular number.
<LEND>

<L>26424<pc>0516-b<k1>nez<k2>nez
{#nez#}¦ {%neṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%neṣate, nineṣe,%} &c.,
to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>26425<pc>0516-b<k1>neza<k2>neza
{#neza#}¦ {%neṣa%} (fr. rt. 1. {%nī%}), forming a super-
lative {%neṣa-tama,%} occurring in the inst. pl. {%neṣa-%}
{%tamais,%} used adverbially in Ṛg-veda I. 141, 12, =
with the best guidance, by the most effective means;
(Sāy.) most conducive.
<LEND>

<L>26426<pc>0516-b<k1>nezan<k2>nezan
{%Neṣan, ā%}¦ or {%a,%} m. or n. (?), Ved. leading, con-
ducting; (Sāy.) {%neṣaṇi = netavye viṣaye.%}
<LEND>

<L>26427<pc>0516-b<k1>nezwf<k2>nezwf
{%Neṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. one of the chief officiating priests
at a Soma sacrifice, he who leads forward the wife of
the sacrificer and prepares the Surā. In Ṛg-veda I.
15, 3, Neṣṭṛ is said to be another name of Tvaṣṭṛ
from his having assumed upon some occasion the
function of the Neṣṭṛ priest.
<LEND>

<L>26428<pc>0516-b<k1>nezwra<k2>nezwra
{%Neṣṭra, am,%}¦ n. the Soma vessel of the Neṣṭṛ;
the office of the Neṣṭṛ.
<LEND>

<L>26429<pc>0516-b<k1>nezwrIya<k2>nezwrIya
{%Neṣṭrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the Neṣṭṛ
priest, relating to him.
<LEND>

<L>26430<pc>0516-b<k1>nezwa<k2>nezwa
{#nezwa#}¦ {%neṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%na + iṣṭa%}), not
wished for, undesired, disagreeable, unfavourable.
<LEND>

<L>26431<pc>0516-b<k1>nEHSreyasa<k2>nEHSreyasa
{#nEHSreyasa#}¦ {%naiḥśreyasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%niḥ-%}
{%śreyasa%}), leading to happiness or future beatitude;
({%am%}), n., N. of a wood in the world of Viṣṇu; N.
of a fabulous forest.
<LEND>

<L>26432<pc>0516-b<k1>nEHSreyasika<k2>nEHSreyasika
{%Naiḥśreyasika, as, ī, am,%}¦ leading to happiness,
conducive to future beatitude.
<LEND>

<L>26433<pc>0516-b<k1>nEHsnehya<k2>nEHsnehya
{#nEHsnehya#}¦ {%naiḥsnehya, am,%} n. (fr. {%niḥ-sneha%}),
absence of love, want of affection, coldness.
<LEND>

<L>26434<pc>0516-b<k1>nEHsvya<k2>nEHsvya
{#nEHsvya#}¦ {%naiḥsvya, am,%} n. (fr. {%niḥ-sva%}), ab-
sence of property, destitution, poverty.
<LEND>

<L>26435<pc>0516-b<k1>nEka<k2>nEka
{#nEka#}¦ {%naika, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%na + eka%}), not
one, more than one, several, manifold, various, nu-
merous, many. {%—Naika-cara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} going
about in troops or flocks, gregarious, living in society,
not living alone. {%—Naika-duḥkha-dā, ās, ās, am,%}
causing many sorrows. {%—Naika-dṛś, k,%} m., N. of
one of the sons of Viśvā-mitra. {%—Naika-pṛṣṭha,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Naika-bhāvāśraya%}
{%(˚va-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘not abiding in one condition,’
changeable, fickle, unsteady. {%—Naika-bheda, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of many kinds, various, multiform, manifold.
{%—Naika-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} multiform, of various
kinds, various. {%—Naika-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} many
coloured, of various colours. {%—Naika-śastra-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} consisting of a multitude of arrows or of
various missiles. {%—Naikātman (˚ka-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} of
manifold nature; ({%ā%}), m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>26436<pc>0516-b<k1>nEkaDA<k2>nEkaDA
{%Naikadhā,%}¦ ind. in many ways, in various ways,
[Page0516-c+ 70]
manifoldly, in many parts, in many directions, on
various sides.
<LEND>

<L>26437<pc>0516-c<k1>nEkaSas<k2>nEkaSas
{%Naikaśas,%}¦ ind. in great numbers, repeatedly, several
times, often.
<LEND>

<L>26438<pc>0516-c<k1>nEkawika<k2>nEkawika
{#nEkawika#}¦ {%naikaṭika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-kaṭa%}),
near, contiguous, neighbouring, living in the neigh-
bourhood.
<LEND>

<L>26439<pc>0516-c<k1>nEkawya<k2>nEkawya
{%Naikaṭya, am,%}¦ n. nearness, proximity, neighbour-
hood, vicinage.
<LEND>

<L>26440<pc>0516-c<k1>nEkatI<k2>nEkatI
{#nEkatI#}¦ {%naikatī,%} f., N. of a village in the
North of India.
<LEND>

<L>26441<pc>0516-c<k1>nEkazeya<k2>nEkazeya
{#nEkazeya#}¦ {%naikaṣeya, as,%} m. a child of
Nikaṣā, a Rākṣasa, fiend, goblin; N. of a race of
Rākṣasas; (also read {%naikaseya.%})
<LEND>

<L>26442<pc>0516-c<k1>nEkftika<k2>nEkftika
{#nEkftika#}¦ {%naikṛtika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-kṛti%}),
dishonest, wicked, low, vile, morose, harsh spoken;
fallacious, (Manu IV. 196.)
<LEND>

<L>26443<pc>0516-c<k1>nEKAnya<k2>nEKAnya
{#nEKAnya#}¦ {%naikhānya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ni-khāna,%}
see {%ni-khan%}), liable to be buried.
<LEND>

<L>26444<pc>0516-c<k1>nEgama<k2>nEgama
{#nEgama#}¦ {%naigama, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-gama%}), re-
lating to Vedic quotations or Vedic words, relating
or belonging to the Veda or holy writ, occurring in
it, Vedic; ({%as%}), m. an interpreter of the sacred
writings; an Upaniṣad or portion of the Vedas; a
way, road (?); a means, an expedient; prudent con-
duct; a citizen, a townsman; a trader, a merchant;
N. of an ancient teacher. {%—Naigama-kāṇḍa,%} N. of
the second part of the Nirukta, or of the fourth, fifth,
and sixth books of that work, where Yāska explains
the Nigamas or Vedic words collected in the fourth
Adhyāya of the Nighaṇṭus, (also called {%Aikapadika.%})
<LEND>

<L>26445<pc>0516-c<k1>nEgamika<k2>nEgamika
{%Naigamika, as, ī, am,%}¦ connected with or peculiar
to the Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>26446<pc>0516-c<k1>nEgameya<k2>nEgameya
{#nEgameya#}¦ {%naigameya, as,%} m. a form of Skanda,
(considered also as his son and play-fellow; cf. {%nai-%}
{%gameṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>26447<pc>0516-c<k1>nEgameza<k2>nEgameza
{#nEgameza#}¦ {%naigameṣa, as,%} m., N. of a demon
with the head of a ram, (supposed to seize or injure
children.)
<LEND>

<L>26448<pc>0516-c<k1>nEguta<k2>nEguta
{#nEguta#}¦ {%naiguta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nigut%}), Ved.
destroying enemies.
<LEND>

<L>26449<pc>0516-c<k1>nEgeya<k2>nEgeya
{#nEgeya#}¦ {%naigeya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school
of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>26450<pc>0516-c<k1>nEGaRwuka<k2>nEGaRwuka
{#nEGaRwuka#}¦ {%naighaṇṭuka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-%}
{%ghaṇṭu,%} q. v.), mentioned by the way; ({%am%}), n. ‘a
collection of words,’ N. of the whole five chapters of
the Vedic glossary commented upon by Yāska, but
especially of the first three chapters treating of
synonyms.
<LEND>

<L>26451<pc>0516-c<k1>nEcASAKa<k2>nEcASAKa
{#nEcASAKa#}¦ {%naicāśākha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nīcā +%}
{%śākhā%}), Ved. belonging to the low branches of the
community, i. e. belonging to the lower orders or
common people; ({%am%}), n. (perhaps) low or common
people; (Sāy.) N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>26452<pc>0516-c<k1>nEcika<k2>nEcika
{#nEcika#}¦ {%naicika, am,%} n. the head of an ox;
({%ī%}), f. an excellent cow, a cow exhibiting excellent
marks on her head.
<LEND>

<L>26453<pc>0516-c<k1>nEcitya<k2>nEcitya
{#nEcitya#}¦ {%naicitya, as,%} m. a prince of the
Nicitas.
<LEND>

<L>26454<pc>0516-c<k1>nEcula<k2>nEcula
{#nEcula#}¦ {%naicula, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-cula%}), belong-
ing to or produced by the Barringtonia Acutangula.
<LEND>

<L>26455<pc>0516-c<k1>nEja<k2>nEja
{#nEja#}¦ {%naija, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-ja%}), own,
one's own.
<LEND>

<L>26456<pc>0516-c<k1>nEtanDava<k2>nEtanDava
{#nEtanDava#}¦ {%naitandhava, as,%} m., N. of a place
on the Sarasvatī.
<LEND>

<L>26457<pc>0516-c<k1>nEtoSa<k2>nEtoSa
{#nEtoSa#}¦ {%naitośa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-tośa%}), Ved.
(perhaps) granting, giving.
<LEND>

<L>26458<pc>0516-c<k1>nEtya<k2>nEtya
{#nEtya#}¦ {%naitya, as, ā (?), am%} (fr. {%nitya%}), con-
tinual, perpetual, constant, regularly repeated; ({%am%}),
n. eternity, perpetuity.
<LEND>
[Page0517-a+ 70]

<L>26459<pc>0517-a<k1>nEtyaka<k2>nEtyaka
{%Naityaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ to be done always or regu-
larly and not only on certain occasions, (opposed to
{%naimittika%}); regularly recurring, constantly re-
peated; constant, indispensable, obligatory.
<LEND>

<L>26460<pc>0517-a<k1>nEtyika<k2>nEtyika
{%Naityika, as, ī, am,%}¦ invariable, constant, per-
petual, indispensable.
<LEND>

<L>26461<pc>0517-a<k1>nEdAGa<k2>nEdAGa
{#nEdAGa#}¦ {%naidāgha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-dāgha%}),
Ved. peculiar or belonging to the hot season, summer-
like, scorching; ({%as%}), m. summer time.
<LEND>

<L>26462<pc>0517-a<k1>nEdAGika<k2>nEdAGika
{%Naidāghika%}¦ or {%naidāghīya, as, ī, am,%} peculiar
to the summer, summer-like.
<LEND>

<L>26463<pc>0517-a<k1>nEdAna<k2>nEdAna
{#nEdAna#}¦ {%naidāna, as,%} m. (fr. {%ni-dāna%}), an
etymologist (who investigates the sources of words).
<LEND>

<L>26464<pc>0517-a<k1>nEdAnika<k2>nEdAnika
{%Naidānika, as,%}¦ m. a pathologist (who inquires
into the causes of diseases).
<LEND>

<L>26465<pc>0517-a<k1>nEdeSika<k2>nEdeSika
{#nEdeSika#}¦ {%naideśika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-deśa%}),
executing orders, a servant.
<LEND>

<L>26466<pc>0517-a<k1>nEdra<k2>nEdra
{#nEdra#}¦ {%naidra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-drā%}), sleepy,
soporific, somniferous, relating to or occurring in sleep.
<LEND>

<L>26467<pc>0517-a<k1>nEDana<k2>nEDana
{#nEDana#}¦ {%naidhana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-dhana%}),
subject to death, liable to decay, perishable, relating
to death, causing death; (in astrology with or with-
out {%gṛha%}) the eighth house, the house of death.
<LEND>

<L>26468<pc>0517-a<k1>nEDAna<k2>nEDAna
{#nEDAna#}¦ {%naidhāna, as, ī, am,%} relating to a
treasure, to a nest, &c.; ({%ī%}), f. a boundary where
articles of value are buried and dug up (?).
<LEND>

<L>26469<pc>0517-a<k1>nEDruvi<k2>nEDruvi
{#nEDruvi#}¦ {%naidhruvi, is,%} m. (patronymic fr.
{%ni-dhruva%}), an epithet of Kāśyapa.
<LEND>

<L>26470<pc>0517-a<k1>nEpa<k2>nEpa
{#nEpa#}¦ {%naipa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nīpa%}), belonging
or relating &c. to the Nauclea Cadamba.
<LEND>

<L>26471<pc>0517-a<k1>nEpAtika<k2>nEpAtika
{#nEpAtika#}¦ {%naipātika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-pāta%}),
only mentioned incidentally or by the way.
<LEND>

<L>26472<pc>0517-a<k1>nEpAtiTa<k2>nEpAtiTa
{#nEpAtiTa#}¦ {%naipātitha, am,%} n. (fr. {%nīpātithi%}),
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>26473<pc>0517-a<k1>nEpAla<k2>nEpAla
{#nEpAla#}¦ {%naipāla.%} See under {%nepāla,%} p. 516.
<LEND>

<L>26474<pc>0517-a<k1>nEpuRa<k2>nEpuRa
{#nEpuRa#}¦ {%naipuṇa%} or {%naipuṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ni-%}
{%puṇa%}), dexterity, cleverness, skill; artfulness; expe-
rience, exactness, strictness; anything which requires
skill, a delicate matter; totality, completeness, com-
pletion.
<LEND>

<L>26475<pc>0517-a<k1>nEbuka<k2>nEbuka
{#nEbuka#}¦ {%naibuka,%} N. of certain rites to be
performed at full moon.
<LEND>

<L>26476<pc>0517-a<k1>nEBftya<k2>nEBftya
{#nEBftya#}¦ {%naibhṛtya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ni-bhṛta%}),
modesty, humility.
<LEND>

<L>26477<pc>0517-a<k1>nEmantraRaka<k2>nEmantraRaka
{#nEmantraRaka#}¦ {%naimantraṇaka, am,%} n. (fr. {%ni-%}
{%mantraṇa%}), a banquet, feast.
<LEND>

<L>26478<pc>0517-a<k1>nEmaya<k2>nEmaya
{#nEmaya#}¦ {%naimaya, as,%} m. (fr. {%ni-maya%}), a
trader, a merchant.
<LEND>

<L>26479<pc>0517-a<k1>nEmitta<k2>nEmitta
{#nEmitta#}¦ {%naimitta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-mitta%}),
relating to or explanatory of signs, tokens, marks,
prognostics, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26480<pc>0517-a<k1>nEmittika<k2>nEmittika
{%Naimittika, as, ī, am,%}¦ produced by any cause;
connected with any particular cause, dependent on an
external cause; (opposed to {%nitya%}), produced by some
cause or by particular and unusual circumstances,
unusual, occasional, accidental; ({%as%}), m. an astro-
loger, a prophet; ({%am%}), n. an effect; occasional or
periodical act or rite. {%—Naimittika-karman, a,%} n.
or {%naimittika-kriyā,%} f. an occasional ceremony (as
observed on the birth of a child &c.).
<LEND>

<L>26481<pc>0517-a<k1>nEmiza<k2>nEmiza
{#nEmiza#}¦ {%naimiṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-miṣa%}),
momentary, transient, lasting for a twinkling; ({%am%}),
n., N. of a forest and sacred Tīrtha celebrated as the
residence of certain Ṛṣis to whom Sauti related
the Mahā-bhārata (Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 7275, Vana-p.
6079; the district was so called because in it the
sage Gaura-mukha destroyed an army of Asuras in
a twinkling); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of the
Naimiṣa wood. {%—Naimiṣa-kānana, am,%} n. the
Naimiṣa wood. {%—Naimiṣāraṇya (˚ṣa-ar˚), am,%}
[Page0517-b+ 69]
n. the Naimiṣa forest. {%—Naimiṣāraṇya-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place.
<LEND>

<L>26482<pc>0517-b<k1>nEmizAyana<k2>nEmizAyana
{%Naimiṣāyana, as, ī, am,%}¦ living in the Naimiṣa
forest.
<LEND>

<L>26483<pc>0517-b<k1>nEmizIya<k2>nEmizIya
{%Naimiṣīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the inhabitants of the
Naimiṣa forest; ({%as, ā, am%}), relating to the Nai-
misha forest.
<LEND>

<L>26484<pc>0517-b<k1>nEmizeya<k2>nEmizeya
{%Naimiṣeya, as, ī, am,%}¦ living in the Naimiṣa
forest.
<LEND>

<L>26485<pc>0517-b<k1>nEmeya<k2>nEmeya
{#nEmeya#}¦ {%naimeya, as,%} m. barter, exchange
({%= ni-maya%} under {%ni-me%}).
<LEND>

<L>26486<pc>0517-b<k1>nEmba<k2>nEmba
{#nEmba#}¦ {%naimba, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nimba%}), relating
to the Azadirachta Indica.
<LEND>

<L>26487<pc>0517-b<k1>nEyagroDa<k2>nEyagroDa
{#nEyagroDa#}¦ {%naiyagrodha%} or {%naiyyagrodha, as,%}
{%ī, am%} (fr. {%nyag-rodha%}), belonging to or made of
the Ficus Indica or Indian fig-tree; ({%am%}), n. the
fruit of the Indian fig-tree.
<LEND>

<L>26488<pc>0517-b<k1>nEyaNkava<k2>nEyaNkava
{#nEyaNkava#}¦ {%naiyaṅkava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ny-aṅku%}),
belonging to or coming from the antelope called
Nyaṅku, made of its skin, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26489<pc>0517-b<k1>nEyatya<k2>nEyatya
{#nEyatya#}¦ {%naiyatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ni-yata%}), re-
straint, self-command, self-government.
<LEND>

<L>26490<pc>0517-b<k1>nEyamika<k2>nEyamika
{#nEyamika#}¦ {%naiyamika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-yama%}),
according to rule, conformable to precept, regular,
enjoined; ({%am%}), n. regularity.
<LEND>

<L>26491<pc>0517-b<k1>nEyAya<k2>nEyAya
{#nEyAya#}¦ {%naiyāya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ny-āya%}),
treating of the Nyāya philosophy (q. v.), explaining
it, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26492<pc>0517-b<k1>nEyAyika<k2>nEyAyika
{%Naiyāyika, as, ī, am,%}¦ knowing the Nyāya
philosophy, knowing the laws of logic; ({%as%}), m. a
dialectician, logician (especially a follower of the
Nyāya philosophy).
<LEND>

<L>26493<pc>0517-b<k1>nEraYjanA<k2>nEraYjanA
{#nEraYjanA#}¦ {%nairañjanā,%} f. (fr. {%nir-añjana%}), N.
of a river falling into the Gaṅgā in Magadha (now
called Niladyan).
<LEND>

<L>26494<pc>0517-b<k1>nErantarya<k2>nErantarya
{#nErantarya#}¦ {%nairantarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nir-antara%}),
absence of interruption or interval, uninterruptedness,
close succession, continuousness, contiguity, closeness,
compactness; ({%eṇa%}), ind. without interval or inter-
ruption, constantly, incessantly, uninterruptedly.
<LEND>

<L>26495<pc>0517-b<k1>nErapekzya<k2>nErapekzya
{#nErapekzya#}¦ {%nairapekṣya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nir-%}
{%apekṣa%}), disregard, indifference.
<LEND>

<L>26496<pc>0517-b<k1>nErayika<k2>nErayika
{#nErayika#}¦ {%nairayika, as,%} m. (fr. {%nir-aya%}), an
inhabitant of hell.
<LEND>

<L>26497<pc>0517-b<k1>nErarTya<k2>nErarTya
{#nErarTya#}¦ {%nairarthya, am,%} n. meaninglessness,
senselessness, nonsense.
<LEND>

<L>26498<pc>0517-b<k1>nErASya<k2>nErASya
{#nErASya#}¦ {%nairāśya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nir-āśa%}),
hopelessness, despair; the absence of wish or expect-
ation, non-expectancy.
<LEND>

<L>26499<pc>0517-b<k1>nErAsya<k2>nErAsya
{#nErAsya#}¦ {%nairāsya, as,%} m. (fr. {%nir-āsa%}), N.
of a magical formula pronounced over weapons.
<LEND>

<L>26500<pc>0517-b<k1>nErukta<k2>nErukta
{#nErukta#}¦ {%nairukta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nir-ukta%}),
relating to the Nirukta (q. v.), explaining it; resting
on etymology, explained etymologically; ({%as%}), m.
one who knows the etymology or true derivation
of words.
<LEND>

<L>26501<pc>0517-b<k1>nEruktika<k2>nEruktika
{%Nairuktika, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who knows the
etymology or radical meaning of words, an etymo-
logist.
<LEND>

<L>26502<pc>0517-b<k1>nErujya<k2>nErujya
{#nErujya#}¦ {%nairujya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nī-ruja%}), health.
<LEND>

<L>26503<pc>0517-b<k1>nErUhika<k2>nErUhika
{#nErUhika#}¦ {%nairūhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%nir-%}
{%ūha%}), purging, cleaning out.
<LEND>

<L>26504<pc>0517-b<k1>nErfta<k2>nErfta
{#nErfta#}¦ {%nairṛta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nir-ṛti%}), be-
longing &c. to Nir-ṛti; south-western; belonging to
the Rākṣasas; relating to the lunar mansion Nairṛta
(Mūla); ({%as%}), m., N. of the ruler of the south-west
quarter; a child or offspring of Nir-ṛti, a demon,
imp, goblin, Rākṣasa; N. of a Rudra; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a people; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā; (with
[Page0517-c+ 69]
or without {%diś%}) the south-west quarter; ({%am%}), n.
the lunar mansion Mūla.
<LEND>

<L>26505<pc>0517-c<k1>nErfti<k2>nErfti
{%Nairṛti, is,%}¦ m., N. of a demon, a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>26506<pc>0517-c<k1>nErfteya<k2>nErfteya
{%Nairṛteya, as, ī, am,%}¦ descended from Nir-ṛti,
belonging to or connected with Nir-ṛti.
<LEND>

<L>26507<pc>0517-c<k1>nErftya<k2>nErftya
{%Nairṛtya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Nir-ṛti; south-
western; a sacrifice offered to Nir-ṛti.
<LEND>

<L>26508<pc>0517-c<k1>nErganDya<k2>nErganDya
{#nErganDya#}¦ {%nairgandhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nir-gan-%}
{%dha%}), absence of smell or odour, inodorousness.
<LEND>

<L>26509<pc>0517-c<k1>nErguRya<k2>nErguRya
{#nErguRya#}¦ {%nairguṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nir-guṇa%}),
absence of qualities or properties; freedom from
qualities; want of excellencies; absence of good
qualities; ({%as, ī, am%}), having no connection with
qualities.
<LEND>

<L>26510<pc>0517-c<k1>nErGfRya<k2>nErGfRya
{#nErGfRya#}¦ {%nairghṛṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nir-ghṛṇa%}),
pitilessness, unmercifulness, cruelty.
<LEND>

<L>26511<pc>0517-c<k1>nErdaSya<k2>nErdaSya
{#nErdaSya#}¦ {%nairdaśya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nir-daśa%}),
getting over the critical period of the first ten days
(of a new-born child), surmounting any dangerous
time or bad influence.
<LEND>

<L>26512<pc>0517-c<k1>nErdeSika<k2>nErdeSika
{#nErdeSika#}¦ {%nairdeśika, as, ī, am,%} servant,
servile.
<LEND>

<L>26513<pc>0517-c<k1>nErbADya<k2>nErbADya
{#nErbADya#}¦ {%nairbādhya%} (fr. {%nir-bādha%}), Ved.
(with {%havis%}) a sort of oblation.
<LEND>

<L>26514<pc>0517-c<k1>nErmalya<k2>nErmalya
{#nErmalya#}¦ {%nairmalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nir-mala%}),
stainlessness, spotlessness (physical and moral), clean-
ness, purity.
<LEND>

<L>26515<pc>0517-c<k1>nErlajjya<k2>nErlajjya
{#nErlajjya#}¦ {%nairlajjya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nir-lajja%}),
shamelessness, impudence.
<LEND>

<L>26516<pc>0517-c<k1>nErvAhika<k2>nErvAhika
{#nErvAhika#}¦ {%nairvāhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nir-%}
{%vāha%}), conducting or leading out, carrying (water
&c.) out; (with {%dvāra%}) a sluice.
<LEND>

<L>26517<pc>0517-c<k1>nErhasta<k2>nErhasta
{#nErhasta#}¦ {%nairhasta%} (fr. {%nir-hasta%}), Ved. ‘in-
tended for handless demons,’ N. of a particular
magical missile weapon.
<LEND>

<L>26518<pc>0517-c<k1>nElya<k2>nElya
{#nElya#}¦ {%nailya, am,%} n. (fr. {%nīla%}), blueness,
darkness of colour, blackness, dark-blue (the colour).
<LEND>

<L>26519<pc>0517-c<k1>nEvasaMjYAnAsaMjYAyatana<k2>nEvasaMjYAnAsaMjYAyatana
{#nEvasaMjYAnAsaMjYAyatana#}¦ {%naivasañjñānāsañjñā-%}
{%yatana, am,%} n. a place ({%āyatana%}) where there is
no ({%na-eva%}) thinking ({%sañjñāna%}) and no ({%na%}) not-
thinking ({%a-sañjñā%}).
<LEND>

<L>26520<pc>0517-c<k1>nEvasaYjYAsamADi<k2>nEvasaYjYAsamADi
{%Naiva-sañjñā-samādhi, is,%}¦ m. meditation in
which there is no reflection.
<LEND>

<L>26521<pc>0517-c<k1>nEvAra<k2>nEvAra
{#nEvAra#}¦ {%naivāra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%nīvāra%}), con-
sisting in or made of wild rice.
<LEND>

<L>26522<pc>0517-c<k1>nEviqya<k2>nEviqya
{#nEviqya#}¦ {%naiviḍya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ni-viḍa%}), close-
ness, denseness, compactness, thickness; substance;
a prolonged note or continuous sound.
<LEND>

<L>26523<pc>0517-c<k1>nEvida<k2>nEvida
{#nEvida#}¦ {%naivida, as, ī, am,%} having a Ni-
vid (q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>26524<pc>0517-c<k1>nEvedya<k2>nEvedya
{#nEvedya#}¦ {%naivedya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ni-vedya%}), an
offering of eatables presented to a deity or idol
(which may afterwards be distributed to his ministers
or worshippers, especially if presented to any form
of Viṣṇu).
<LEND>

<L>26525<pc>0517-c<k1>nEveSika<k2>nEveSika
{#nEveSika#}¦ {%naiveśika, am,%} n. (fr. {%ni-veśa%}),
any vessel or implement belonging to the furniture
of a house; a present to a Brāhman householder, a
girl so given, or ornaments with her, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26526<pc>0517-c<k1>nESa<k2>nESa
{#nESa#}¦ {%naiśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%niśā%}), nocturnal,
nightly, relating to the night; a person &c. doing
anything by night; done at night; to be observed
by night.
<LEND>

<L>26527<pc>0517-c<k1>nESAkara<k2>nESAkara
{%Naiśākara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%niśā-kara%}), caused by
or belonging to the moon, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26528<pc>0517-c<k1>nESika<k2>nESika
{%Naiśika, as, ī, am,%}¦ nocturnal, happening at night,
obtained in one night, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26529<pc>0517-c<k1>nEScalya<k2>nEScalya
{#nEScalya#}¦ {%naiścalya, am,%} n. fixedness, fixity,
immovableness.
<LEND>
[Page0518-a+ 72]

<L>26530<pc>0518-a<k1>nEScitya<k2>nEScitya
{#nEScitya#}¦ {%naiścitya, am,%} n. (fr. {%niś-cita%}), de-
termination, certainty; a fixed ceremony or festival
(as a birth, investiture, marriage, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>26531<pc>0518-a<k1>nEScintya<k2>nEScintya
{#nEScintya#}¦ {%naiścintya, am,%} n. (fr. {%niś-cinta%}),
freedom from anxiety, absence of care.
<LEND>

<L>26532<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzadika<k2>nEzadika
{#nEzadika#}¦ {%naiṣadika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-ṣad%}),
sitting, (not lying down.)
<LEND>

<L>26533<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzaDa<k2>nEzaDa
{#nEzaDa#}¦ {%naiṣadha, as, ī, am,%} relating to
Niṣadha; ({%as%}), m. a prince of the Niṣadhas,
especially an epithet of Nala; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the
people of Niṣadha; a species of plant used as food;
({%am%}), n. or {%naiṣadha-carita, am,%} n., N. of an
artificial epic poem by Śrī-harṣa, treating of Nala's
adventures. {%—Naiṣadhacarita-bhāva-dyotanikā,%}
f. ‘an explanation of the meaning of the Naiṣadha-
carita,’ N. of a commentary on the preceding poem.
{%—Naiṣadhānveṣaṇa (˚dha-an˚), am,%} n. the
seeking or searching for Naiṣadha, i. e. Nala.
<LEND>

<L>26534<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzaDIya<k2>nEzaDIya
{%Naiṣadhīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Nala Nai-
ṣadha; ({%am%}), n. (with or without {%carita%}) N. of
an artificial epic poem on Nala's adventures by
Śrī-harṣa.
<LEND>

<L>26535<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzaDya<k2>nEzaDya
{%Naiṣadhya, as, ī, am,%}¦ peculiar or belonging
to the Niṣadhas; ({%as%}), m. a prince of the Ni-
ṣadhas.
<LEND>

<L>26536<pc>0518-a<k1>nEziDa<k2>nEziDa
{%Naiṣidha, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of Naḍa, (an earlier
form of {%naiṣadha%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>26537<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzAda<k2>nEzAda
{#nEzAda#}¦ {%naiṣāda, as, ī, am,%} belonging to
the Niṣādas; ({%as%}), m. a Niṣāda; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
Niṣāda people.
<LEND>

<L>26538<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzAdi<k2>nEzAdi
{%Naiṣādi, is,%}¦ m. a prince of the Niṣādas.
<LEND>

<L>26539<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzkarmya<k2>nEzkarmya
{#nEzkarmya#}¦ {%naiṣkarmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%niṣ-kar-%}
{%man%}), idleness, inactivity; abstinence or exemption
from acts or their consequences; the salvation obtained
by abstraction in opposition to that obtained by
works.
<LEND>

<L>26540<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzkaSatika<k2>nEzkaSatika
{#nEzkaSatika#}¦ {%naiṣkaśatika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%niṣka-śata%}), worth a hundred Niṣkas, bought
with them, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26541<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzkasahasrika<k2>nEzkasahasrika
{%Naiṣkasahasrika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%niṣka-sa-%}
{%hasra%}), worth a thousand Niṣkas, bought with
them, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26542<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzkika<k2>nEzkika
{%Naiṣkika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%niṣka%}), bought with a
Niṣka, made of a Niṣka, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a Mint-
master, superintendent of a Mint.
<LEND>

<L>26543<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzkiYcanya<k2>nEzkiYcanya
{#nEzkiYcanya#}¦ {%naiṣkiñcanya, am,%} n. (fr. {%niṣ-%}
{%kiñcana%}), absence of property, poverty, destitution.
<LEND>

<L>26544<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzkftika<k2>nEzkftika
{#nEzkftika#}¦ {%naiṣkṛtika, as, ī, am,%} acting
wickedly, wicked, malignant, (probably incorrect for
{%naikṛtika%}); free from occupation, disengaged.
<LEND>

<L>26545<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzkramaRa<k2>nEzkramaRa
{#nEzkramaRa#}¦ {%naiṣkramaṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%niṣ-%}
{%kramaṇa%}), any oblation offered or rite performed
when a new-born child is taken out of the house for
the first time.
<LEND>

<L>26546<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzWika<k2>nEzWika
{#nEzWika#}¦ {%naiṣṭhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-ṣṭhā%}),
forming the end or conclusion, final, last; conclusive,
definitive, decided, accomplished, fixed, firm, con-
stant; highest, perfect, complete; completely versed
in or familiar with conversant; vowing perpetual
abstinence and chastity; belonging to the character
or office of a perpetual student; ({%as%}), m. a perpetual
religious student or Brāhman who continues with his
spiritual preceptor even after the prescribed term of
study is expired and observes the vow of chastity.
<LEND>

<L>26547<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzWya<k2>nEzWya
{%Naiṣṭhya, am,%}¦ n. constancy, steady adherence to
rule, firm belief.
<LEND>

<L>26548<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzWurya<k2>nEzWurya
{#nEzWurya#}¦ {%naiṣṭhurya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ni-ṣṭhura%}),
severity, cruelty, coarseness, harshness.
<LEND>

<L>26549<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzRihya<k2>nEzRihya
{#nEzRihya#}¦ {%naiṣṇihya, am,%} n. (apparently fr.
a form {%ni-ṣṇih = niḥ-snih%}), getting rid of, freeing
one's self from anything.
<LEND>

<L>26550<pc>0518-a<k1>nEzPalya<k2>nEzPalya
{#nEzPalya#}¦ {%naiṣphalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%niṣ- %}
[Page0518-b+ 73]
{%phala%}), unfruitfulness, fruitlessness, absence of fruit
or effect, barrenness, unprofitableness.
<LEND>

<L>26551<pc>0518-b<k1>nEsargika<k2>nEsargika
{#nEsargika#}¦ {%naisargika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ni-sarga%}),
natural, innate, inherent, constitutional, original;
(with Buddhists) cast off, put off.
<LEND>

<L>26552<pc>0518-b<k1>nEsarpa<k2>nEsarpa
{#nEsarpa#}¦ {%naisarpa, as,%} m. (fr. an unused form
{%ni-sarpa%}), N. of one of the nine treasures (with Jainas).
<LEND>

<L>26553<pc>0518-b<k1>nEstriMSika<k2>nEstriMSika
{#nEstriMSika#}¦ {%naistriṃśika, as,%} m. (fr. {%nis-%}
{%triṃśa%}), a swordsman, a soldier armed with a sword.
<LEND>

<L>26554<pc>0518-b<k1>no<k2>no
{#no#}¦ {%no,%} ind. (fr. {%na-u%}), and not (Ved.); not,
no (for {%na,%} but in epic poetry and later literature
{%no%} is generally only used for {%na%} to suit the verse).
{%No cet,%} if not; otherwise, else, unless; {%no vā,%} or not.
<LEND>

<L>26555<pc>0518-b<k1>not<k2>not
{#not#}¦ {%not%} or {%nod,%} ind., Ved. almost, nearly.
<LEND>

<L>26556<pc>0518-b<k1>nodana<k2>nodana
{#nodana#}¦ {%nodana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%nud%}), push-
ing, impelling, driving away, removing.
<LEND>

<L>26557<pc>0518-b<k1>nodin<k2>nodin
{%Nodin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ impelling, driving away, re-
moving.
<LEND>

<L>26558<pc>0518-b<k1>nodya<k2>nodya
{%Nodya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be impelled or driven away
or removed.
<LEND>

<L>26559<pc>0518-b<k1>noDas<k2>noDas
{#noDas#}¦ {%nodhas, ās,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 4.
{%nu%}), N. of a Ṛṣi with the epithet Gautama.
<LEND>

<L>26560<pc>0518-b<k1>noDA<k2>noDA
{#noDA#}¦ {%nodhā,%} ind. (contracted fr. {%nava-%}
{%dhā%}), ninefold, in nine parts.
<LEND>

<L>26561<pc>0518-b<k1>nopasTAtf<k2>nopasTAtf
{#nopasTAtf#}¦ {%nopasthātṛ (na-up˚), tā, trī, tṛ,%}
not at hand, absent, remote, far off.
<LEND>

<L>26562<pc>0518-b<k1>nO<k2>nO<h>1
{#nO#} 1¦. {%nau,%} the alternative form for the
acc., dat., and gen. of the 1st pers. pron., see {%asmad.%}
{%Nau%} is an enclitic in the Veda.
<LEND>

<L>26563<pc>0518-b<k1>nO<k2>nO<h>2
{#nO#} 2¦. {%nau, naus,%} f. (fr. rt. 4. {%nu%}), Ved.
speech; [cf. {%naviṣṭi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26564<pc>0518-b<k1>nO<k2>nO<h>3
{#nO#} 3¦. {%nau, naus,%} f. (probably fr. rt. {%snu,%}
but said to be fr. rt. 1. {%nud;%} in Ṛg-veda 1. 97, 8,
{%nāvayā%} is Vedic inst. for {%nāvā%}), a ship, a boat, a
vessel; (in astrology) N. of a peculiar appearance on
the moon; N. of a constellation; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ναῦς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ναύ-τη-ς, ναυ-τίλο-ς, ναυ-τίλλο-μαι, ναῦ-λο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ναῦ-σθ-λο-ν, ναυ-τία, ναυ-σία, ναυ-τιά-ω, ναυ-σιά-ω;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>nāvis, nau-ta, nāvita, nāv-igare, nav-ig-</nsi>
<nsi>iu-m;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>nacho;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>naca;</nsi> Bavarian
<nsi>naue,</nsi> ‘a ship;’ Old Iceland. <nsi>nau-st,</nsi> ‘a ship station,’
<nsi>Nōa-tūn;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>naoi, noi.</nsi>] {%—Nāv-ākāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} boat-shaped, cymbiform. {%—Nāv-āroha, as,%} m. a
passenger on board ship, a sailor. {%—Nau-karṇadhāra,%}
{%as,%} m. the steersman of a ship, a helmsman, pilot.
{%—Nau-karṇī,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda. {%—Nau-karman, a,%} n. ‘boat-
business,’ the occupation or business of a sailor.
{%—Nau-cara, as, ā, am,%} going in a ship, a
sailor. {%—Nau-jīvika, as,%} m. ‘living in ships or
boats,’ a sailor, boatman. {%—Nau-tārya, as, ā, am,%}
‘passable in a boat,’ navigable, to be traversed
in a vessel. {%—Nau-daṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘boat-pole,’ an
oar. {%—Nau-bandhana, am,%} n. ‘ship-binding,’ N.
of the highest peak of the Himālayas to which in the
great flood Manu fastened his ship. {%—Nau-bhū,%} cl. 1.
P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to be a ship, to have been
made a ship. {%—Nau-yāna, am,%} n. going in a ship,
navigation. {%—Nau-yāyin, ī, inī, i,%} going in a boat
or vessel, a passenger; freight. {%—Nau-vāha, as,%} m.
‘ship-conductor,’ a steersman, pilot, captain. {%—Nau-%}
{%vyasana, am,%} n. ship-wreck, naufrage.
<LEND>

<L>26565<pc>0518-b<k1>nOka<k2>nOka
{%Nauka%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) = 3. {%nau; (ā),%}
f. a small boat or ship; N. of a commentary on the
Mantra-mahodadhi by Mahī-dhara. {%—Naukākṛṣṭa%}
{%(˚kā-āk˚), am,%} n., N. of a favourable position of
the pieces in the game Catur-aṅga; [cf. {%nṛpā-%}
{%kṛṣṭa.%}] {%—Naukā-daṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘boat-pole,’ an
oar, a paddle.
<LEND>

<L>26566<pc>0518-b<k1>nODasa<k2>nODasa
{#nODasa#}¦ {%naudhasa, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>26567<pc>0518-b<k1>nyak<k2>nyak
{#nyak#}¦ {%nyak, ny-akṣa.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26568<pc>0518-b<k1>nyagroDa<k2>nyagroDa
{#nyagroDa#}¦ {%nyag-rodha.%} See under 2. {%ny-añc,%}
col. 3.
<LEND>
[Page0518-c+ 76]

<L>26569<pc>0518-c<k1>nyacCa<k2>nyacCa
{#nyacCa#}¦ {%nyaccha, am,%} n. a mole or spot upon
the body.
<LEND>

<L>26570<pc>0518-c<k1>nyaYc<k2>nyaYc<h>1
{#nyaYc#} 1¦. {%ny-añc,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-acati%} or {%-añ-%}
{%cati, -añcitum,%} Ved. to bend down, curve down.
<LEND>

<L>26571<pc>0518-c<k1>nyakkf<k2>nyakkf
{%Nyak-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make low,
lower, humble, humiliate, degrade, treat with dis-
respect or contempt, slight. {%—Nyak-karaṇa, am,%}
n. the act of lowering or degrading, treating with
disrespect or contempt. {%—Nyak-kāra, as,%} m. making
low, humiliation, humbling, contempt, disregard, dis-
respect. {%—Nyak-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} humbled, treated
with contempt or contumely.
<LEND>

<L>26572<pc>0518-c<k1>nyakna<k2>nyakna
{%Ny-akna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. bent down. {%—Nyak-%}
{%nāṅguli (˚na-aṅ˚), is, is, i,%} Ved. having the
fingers bent.
<LEND>

<L>26573<pc>0518-c<k1>nyakza<k2>nyakza
{%Ny-akṣa, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. rt. {%akṣ,%} which may be
connected with rt. {%ac = añc%}], low, inferior; whole,
entire; ({%as%}), m. a buffalo; an epithet of Paraśu-
rāma; ({%am%}), n. the whole; grass.
<LEND>

<L>26574<pc>0518-c<k1>nyagBU<k2>nyagBU
{%Nyag-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become low
or humble, to humble one's self: Caus. {%nyag-bhāva-%}
{%yati,%} to cause to become low, humiliate, treat with
disrespect. {%—Nyag-bhāva, as,%} m. humiliation, degra-
dation, debasement, contempt. {%—Nyag-bhāvana,%}
{%am,%} n. humbling, degrading, treating with contempt,
defiling. {%—Nyag-bhāvayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} one who
lowers or humbles; humbling.
<LEND>

<L>26575<pc>0518-c<k1>nyaNka<k2>nyaNka
{%Ny-aṅka, as,%}¦ m. a particular part of a carriage.
<LEND>

<L>26576<pc>0518-c<k1>nyaNku<k2>nyaNku
{%Ny-aṅku, us,%}¦ m. a deer, an antelope; N. of a
Muni; of a Cakra-vartin. {%—Nyaṅku-bhūruha, as,%}
m. the tree Calosanthes Indica. {%—Nyaṅku-śiras,%}
scil. {%kakubh,%} a sort of metre consisting of 11 + 12
+ 4 syllables. {%—Nyaṅku-sāriṇī,%} f., scil. {%bṛhatī,%} f. a
sort of metre, also called {%uro-bṛhatī,%} consisting of
8 + 12 + 8 + 8 syllables.
<LEND>

<L>26577<pc>0518-c<k1>nyaYc<k2>nyaYc<h>2
2. {%ny-añc, nyaṅ, nīcī, nyak%}¦ [cf. {%nīca,%} p. 512],
going downwards, turned or directed downwards, bent
down; lying on the face; low, vile, contemptible,
base; whole, entire; slow, lazy; {%nīcā,%} inst. c. on the
ground, (see p. 512, col. 1); ({%nyak%}), ind. downwards,
down, humbly. {%—Nyag-jāti, is, is, i,%} of a low or
inferior race, low born. {%—Nyag-rodha, as,%} m. ({%=%}
{%nyak-roha,%} growing downwards), the Indian fig-tree,
Ficus Indica; another tree [cf. {%śamī%}]; a fathom,
measured by the arms extended; N. of a son of
Ugra-sena; of a Brāhman, of a monastery, of a village;
({%ī%} or {%ā%}), f. Salvinia Cucculata; a medicinal plant
(commonly Mohānā). {%—Nyagrodha-parimaṇḍala,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being a fathom in circumference; ({%ā%}), f.
an elegant woman. {%—Nyagrodha-pāda, as,%} m., N.
of a man.
<LEND>

<L>26578<pc>0518-c<k1>nyaYcana<k2>nyaYcana
{%Ny-añcana, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. taking on one's lap;
({%ī%}), f. the lap; ({%am%}), n. a curve; a hollow, recess;
a hiding-place.
<LEND>

<L>26579<pc>0518-c<k1>nyaYcita<k2>nyaYcita
{%Ny-añcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or cast down,
bent down.
<LEND>

<L>26580<pc>0518-c<k1>nyaYj<k2>nyaYj
{#nyaYj#}¦ {%ny-añj,%} cl. 7. P. {%-anakti%} (Ved. also
A. {%-aṅkte%}), {%-añjitum%} or {%-aṅktum,%} to anoint, be-
smear; (A.) to creep in, to conceal or hide one's self.
<LEND>

<L>26581<pc>0518-c<k1>nyakta<k2>nyakta
{%Ny-akta, as, ā, am,%}¦ anointed, smeared; mixed up.
<LEND>

<L>26582<pc>0518-c<k1>nyaNga<k2>nyaNga
{%Ny-aṅga, as,%}¦ m. a mark, sign; sort, kind (e. g.
{%Avabhṛtha-nyaṅga,%} a sort of Avabhṛtha); ({%am%}),
n. low abuse (?).
<LEND>

<L>26583<pc>0518-c<k1>nyaYjalikA<k2>nyaYjalikA
{#nyaYjalikA#}¦ {%ny-añjalikā,%} f. an Añjali which
is directed downwards.
<LEND>

<L>26584<pc>0518-c<k1>nyanta<k2>nyanta
{#nyanta#}¦ {%ny-anta,%} m. n. (?), proximity; ({%ena%}),
ind., Ved. near, near to.
<LEND>

<L>26585<pc>0518-c<k1>nyaya<k2>nyaya
{#nyaya#}¦ {%ny-aya, as,%} m. (fr. 3. {%nī,%} i. e. rt. 5. {%i%}
with {%ni%}), destruction, loss, waste.
<LEND>

<L>26586<pc>0518-c<k1>nyayana<k2>nyayana
{%Ny-ayana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. entrance or receptacle.
<LEND>

<L>26587<pc>0518-c<k1>nyarRa<k2>nyarRa
{#nyarRa#}¦ {%ny-arṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ard%} or rt.
4. {%ṛ%} with {%ni%}), dissolved (Ved.); injured; asked,
solicited (?); gone (?).
<LEND>

<L>26588<pc>0518-c<k1>nyarTa<k2>nyarTa
{#nyarTa#}¦ {%ny-artha, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 4. {%ṛ%} with {%ni%}),
Ved. destruction, annihilation; (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
VII. 18, 9) not going in the usual course.
<LEND>
[Page0519-a+ 75]

<L>26589<pc>0519-a<k1>nyarpaya<k2>nyarpaya
{#nyarpaya#}¦ {%ny-arpaya,%} Caus. of {%ny-ṛ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>26590<pc>0519-a<k1>nyarbuda<k2>nyarbuda
{#nyarbuda#}¦ {%ny-arbuda, am,%} n., Ved. one hundred
millions.
<LEND>

<L>26591<pc>0519-a<k1>nyarbudi<k2>nyarbudi
{#nyarbudi#}¦ {%ny-arbudi, is,%} m., N. of a divine
being described as taking an active part in war.
<LEND>

<L>26592<pc>0519-a<k1>nyavagraha<k2>nyavagraha
{#nyavagraha#}¦ {%ny-avagraha, as,%} m. the accentless
vowel at the end of a Pūrva-pada.
<LEND>

<L>26593<pc>0519-a<k1>nyavacar<k2>nyavacar
{#nyavacar#}¦ {%ny-ava-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -ca-%}
{%ritum,%} to enter into, penetrate.
<LEND>

<L>26594<pc>0519-a<k1>nyas<k2>nyas
{#nyas#}¦ {%ny-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati, -asitum,%} to
throw down, cast down, lay down, set or put down
(with loc., e. g. {%bhūmau,%} on the ground); to lay
down, resign, give up (e. g. {%jīvitaṃ ny-as,%} to lay
down one's life); to bring forward, adduce, pro-
pound (as an argument &c.); to lay or put down or
place upon anything (with loc., e. g. {%citre ny-as,%} to
place in a picture, paint, depict; {%pathi ny-as,%} to lay
down on the road, give up an occupation, &c.; {%śirasy%}
{%ājñāṃ ny-as,%} to place a command on one's head,
i. e. receive a command with due reverence; {%śāpam%}
{%mayi nyasyati,%} he lays a curse upon me); to put
in, place within (with loc.), to deposit with any one
(loc.); to give into any one's keeping, make a de-
posit, intrust, deliver, consign, commit; to settle, fix,
appoint; to support: Caus. {%ny-āsayati,%} to cause to
put or lay down, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26595<pc>0519-a<k1>nyasana<k2>nyasana
{%Ny-asana, am,%}¦ n. casting or laying down, de-
positing; delivering, giving up.
<LEND>

<L>26596<pc>0519-a<k1>nyasta<k2>nyasta
{%Ny-asta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or cast down, laid
down, placed in or upon, put in, inserted, applied;
delivered, deposited, consigned; depicted (e. g. {%citra-%}
{%nyasta,%} committed to a picture, painted); rested
on, leaning, resting; given up, resigned, set aside.
{%—Nyasta-daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} ‘laying down the
rod,’ giving up all means of punishment. {%—Nyasta-%}
{%deha, as, ā, am,%} one who has laid down the body,
dead. {%—Nyasta-śastra, as, ā, am,%} one who has
laid down or resigned his weapons, laying down
arms; unarmed, defenceless; harmless; epithet of
the Manes or deified progenitors.
<LEND>

<L>26597<pc>0519-a<k1>nyasya<k2>nyasya<h>1
1. {%ny-asya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be deposited; to be ap-
pointed to any office (with loc.); to be delivered.
<LEND>

<L>26598<pc>0519-a<k1>nyasya<k2>nyasya<h>2
2. {%ny-asya,%}¦ ind. having put down, having laid
down, having deposited, having given up, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26599<pc>0519-a<k1>nyAsa<k2>nyAsa
{%Ny-āsa, as,%}¦ m. putting down, placing, settling,
planting or putting down (the feet), stepping, a
step; depositing; a deposit, pledge; delivering,
intrusting, committing, delivery; putting on colour
&c., painting; writing down, writing, impress, stamp,
mark; giving up, putting off or away, laying aside;
deserting, abandoning; lowering the tone of the
voice; bringing forward, adducing; striking or digging
in (the claws &c.), seizing (with the claws); con-
signing or intrusting anything to the mind; mental
appropriation or assignment of various parts of the
body to tutelary divinities (accompanied with certain
prayers and gesticulations); N. of a commentary on
the Kāśikā-vṛtti by Jinendra. {%—Nyāsa-dhārin, ī,%}
m. the holder of a deposit, a mortgagee. {%—Nyāsā-%}
{%pahnava (˚sa-ap˚), as,%} m. repudiation of a deposit.
{%—Nyāsī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make a deposit, deposit anything with a
person. {%—Nyāsoddyota (˚sa-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of a
grammatical work.
<LEND>

<L>26600<pc>0519-a<k1>nyAsin<k2>nyAsin
{%Ny-āsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who has abandoned all
worldly concerns; ({%ī%}), m. a Sannyāsī.
<LEND>

<L>26601<pc>0519-a<k1>nyahna<k2>nyahna
{#nyahna#}¦ {%ny-ahna%} (?), Ved. the closing day.
<LEND>

<L>26602<pc>0519-a<k1>nyAkf<k2>nyAkf
{#nyAkf#}¦ {%ny-ā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%}
Ved. to keep back, hold back.
<LEND>

<L>26603<pc>0519-a<k1>nyAkya<k2>nyAkya
{#nyAkya#}¦ {%nyākya, am,%} n. fried rice.
<LEND>

<L>26604<pc>0519-a<k1>nyAgroDamUla<k2>nyAgroDamUla
{#nyAgroDamUla#}¦ {%nyāgrodhamūla, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%nyagrodha-mūla%}), being or situated at the roots of
the Ficus Indica.
<LEND>

<L>26605<pc>0519-a<k1>nyAda<k2>nyAda
{#nyAda#}¦ {%nyāda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ad%} with {%ni%}),
eating, feeding.
<LEND>
[Page0519-b+ 80]

<L>26606<pc>0519-b<k1>nyADA<k2>nyADA
{#nyADA#}¦ {%ny-ā-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadhāti, -dhā-%}
{%tum,%} to fix in, place in, appoint; to put down.
<LEND>

<L>26607<pc>0519-b<k1>nyAya<k2>nyAya
{#nyAya#}¦ {%ny-āya, as,%} m. (fr. 3. {%nī,%} i. e. rt. 5. {%i%}
with {%ni%}), method, way, rule (lit. that to which any-
thing goes back or in which anything goes), model,
manner, system, plan, doctrine, right or fit or suitable
manner, that which is fitting, fitness, propriety,
right, justice, virtue, equity, law, a lawful act; (in
gram.) a general or universal rule, an axiom which
precedes and must be kept in view in the explanation
of special rules; a lawsuit, policy, good government;
decision in a lawsuit, judicial sentence, judgment; a
celebrated system of Hindū philosophy delivered by
Gautama or Gotama in a set of aphorisms divided
into five lectures; the proper way of stating an argu-
ment, logic, logical philosophy; a logical argument,
a complete argument or syllogism (consisting of five
members with the Naiyāyikas, viz. {%pratijñā, hetu,%}
{%udāharaṇa, upanaya, nigamana,%} and of three
members with the Vedāntins); likeness, analogy,
apposite illustration; {%nyāyena,%} in the way of, after
the manner of (e. g. {%līlā-nyāyena,%} by way of sport, as
if in sport; cf. {%nyāya-tas%} below). Placed after a
finite verb {%nyāyam%} is said by Pāṇini (VIII. 1, 27,
57) to express either censure or repetition. {%—Nyāya-%}
{%kalpalatikā,%} f., N. of a commentary. {%—Nyāya-kusu-%}
{%māñjali, is,%} m., N. of the aphorisms of Udayana;
[cf. {%kusumāñjali.%}] {%—Nyāya-kokila (?), as,%} m.,
N. of a Buddhist teacher. {%—Nyāya-kaustubha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a general work on the Nyāya
philosophy. {%—Nyāya-cūḍā-maṇi,%} N. of a confuta-
tion of the Nyāya system of philosophy in favour
of the Vedānta by Mādhava Sarasvatī. {%—Nyāya-%}
{%cūḍāmaṇi-prabhā,%} f., N. of a commentary on the
preceding work by Caṇḍīśvara. {%—Nyāya-tas,%} ind.
in a fitting manner, as is fitting; suitably, justly, fitly,
according to right or justice. {%—Nyāya-tā,%} f. or {%nyāya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. fitness, propriety. {%—Nyāya-dvāra-tāra-%}
{%ka-śāstra, am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Nyāya-%}
{%pañcānana, as,%} m. an epithet of Jaya-rāma; [cf.
{%pañcānana.%}] {%—Nyāya-bindu,%} N. of a commentary
on the Mīmāṃsā-sūtras by Vaidya-nātha. {%—Nyāya-%}
{%bodhinī,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Tarka-
saṅgraha by Go-vardhana Miśra. {%—Nyāya-bhāṣya,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a commentary on the Nyāya-sūtras
by the Ṛṣi Vātsyāyana. {%—Nyāya-bhāskara,%} N. of
a philosophical work. {%—Nyāya-bhūṣaṇa, am,%} n.,
N. of a work. {%—Nyāya-makaranda,%} N. of a work
on the Nyāya system controverted from the stand-
point of the Vedānta. {%—Nyāya-mālā-vistara, as,%}
m., N. of an introduction to the study of the
Mīmāṃsā philosophy. {%—Nyāya-ratnamālā,%} f., N.
of a work on the Mīmāṃsā. {%—Nyāya-līlāvatī,%} N.
of an elementary treatise on the Nyāya philosophy.
{%—Nyāya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} acting rightly, behaving
properly. {%—Nyāya-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} well behaved,
acting with propriety. {%—Nyāya-vāgīśa, as,%} m. an
epithet of Śrī-kṛṣṇa; of Dīkṣita-śrī-kaṇṭha-śarman.
{%—Nyāya-vihita, as, ā, am,%} prescribed by rule.
{%—Nyāya-śāstra, am,%} n. the philosophical system
of the Nyāya school; logic (as connected with this
school). {%—Nyāya-saṅkṣepa, as,%} m. or {%nyāya-%}
{%saṅgraha, as,%} m. or {%nyāya-sāra, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n., N. of certain compendious works on the Nyāya
philosophy. {%—Nyāya-sāriṇī,%} f. right or fit behaviour;
a woman acting or judging rightly. {%—Nyāya-sid-%}
{%dhānta-pañcānana, as,%} m. an epithet of Viśva-
nātha. {%—Nyāyasiddhānta-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a
work. {%—Nyāya-sūtra, am,%} n. the aphorisms of the
Nyāya philosophy by Gautama. {%—Nyāyācāra (˚ya-%}
{%āc˚), as, ā, am,%} acting justly, virtuous. {%—Nyāyā-%}
{%dhāra (˚ya-ādh˚), as,%} m. ‘receptacle of justice,’ a
term applied to any one who is a model of virtue or
propriety. {%—Nyāyānusāra-śāstra (˚ya-an˚), am,%}
n., N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Nyāyāmṛta (˚ya-%}
{%am˚), am,%} n. ‘nectar of Nyāya,’ N. of a Vedānta
work by Vyāsa Tīrtha Bindu. {%—Nyāyāmṛta-ta-%}
{%raṅginī,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Nyāyāmṛta
by Rāma Ācārya. {%—Nyāyārjita (˚ya-ar˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} obtained in a regular way. {%—Nyāyālaṅkāra- %}
[Page0519-c+ 75]
{%bhaṭṭa (˚ya-al˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Śrī-
govinda; also of Śrī-maheśvara. {%—Nyāyāvalī-dī-%}
{%dhiti (˚ya-āv˚), is,%} f., N. of a commentary on
Jaimini. {%—Nyāyopeta (˚ya-up˚), as, ā, am,%} accord-
ing to rule, right, admitted.
<LEND>

<L>26608<pc>0519-c<k1>nyAyin<k2>nyAyin
{%Nyāyin, ī, inī, ī,%}¦ right, fit; logical, rational.
<LEND>

<L>26609<pc>0519-c<k1>nyAyya<k2>nyAyya
{%Nyāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ regular, proper, just, right,
equitable, fit, suitable, adapted, (sometimes giving a
passive sense to the infin.); usual, customary. {%—Nyāy-%}
{%ya-tva, am,%} n. fitness, suitableness, propriety.
<LEND>

<L>26610<pc>0519-c<k1>nyAvyaD<k2>nyAvyaD
{#nyAvyaD#}¦ {%ny-ā-vyadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-vidhyati,%}
{%-vyaddhum,%} to cause to burst forth, let loose, set free.
<LEND>

<L>26611<pc>0519-c<k1>nyAsa<k2>nyAsa
{#nyAsa#}¦ {%ny-āsa.%} See under {%ny-as,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>26612<pc>0519-c<k1>nyuNKa<k2>nyuNKa
{#nyuNKa#}¦ {%nyuṅkha, as,%} m. a kind of Sāman, the
sixfold repetition of the triliteral name of God or
{%Om,%} [cf. {%nyūṅkha%}]; ({%as, ā, am%}), proper, right;
pleasing, agreeable.
<LEND>

<L>26613<pc>0519-c<k1>nyuc<k2>nyuc
{#nyuc#}¦ {%ny-uc,%} cl. 4. P. {%-ucyati,%} &c., Ved. to
rejoice in, delight in, take pleasure in; (Sāy.) to
assent to, agree to.
<LEND>

<L>26614<pc>0519-c<k1>nyocanI<k2>nyocanI
{%Ny-ocanī,%}¦ f., Ved. (probably) a kind of woman's
ornament; (Sāy.) a female servant or slave.
<LEND>

<L>26615<pc>0519-c<k1>nyocara<k2>nyocara
{%Ny-ocara, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (perhaps) belonging
to or fit for a place.
<LEND>

<L>26616<pc>0519-c<k1>nyutta<k2>nyutta
{#nyutta#}¦ {%ny-utta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%ud%} or {%und%}
with {%ni%}), dipped in, sprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>26617<pc>0519-c<k1>nyupta<k2>nyupta
{#nyupta#}¦ {%ny-upta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ni-vap,%} q. v.),
offered, presented (to the Manes of deceased ancestors).
<LEND>

<L>26618<pc>0519-c<k1>nyupya<k2>nyupya
{%Ny-upya,%}¦ ind. having offered, having presented
(cakes &c. to the Manes).
<LEND>

<L>26619<pc>0519-c<k1>nyubj<k2>nyubj
{#nyubj#}¦ {%ny-ubj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-ubjati,%} &c., to
bend down, press down, throw down.
<LEND>

<L>26620<pc>0519-c<k1>nyubja<k2>nyubja
{%Ny-ubja, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned or bent downwards,
lying on the face or with the face downwards;
looking downwards; bent, crooked; hump-backed,
crooked-backed (as the result of disease); convex;
({%as%}), m. the Nyag-rodha tree; a sort of ladle made
of Kuśa grass; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of the Averrhoa
Carambola; a vessel used at Śrāddhas. {%—Nyubja-%}
{%khaḍga, as,%} m. a crooked sword, a sabre.
<LEND>

<L>26621<pc>0519-c<k1>nyuz<k2>nyuz
{#nyuz#}¦ {%ny-uṣ%} [cf. rt. 1. {%uṣ%}], cl. 1. P. {%-oṣati,%}
&c., Ved. to burn down; (Sāy.) to consume utterly.
<LEND>

<L>26622<pc>0519-c<k1>nyUNKa<k2>nyUNKa
{#nyUNKa#}¦ {%nyūṅkha, as,%} m. the insertion of the
sound {%o%} in different places with variety of prosodial
length and accentuation in the recitation of hymns,
(this sound may be repeated any number of times in
the recitation of Mantras, or may be made long,
short, or prolated, or may have different accents.)
<LEND>

<L>26623<pc>0519-c<k1>nyUNKaya<k2>nyUNKaya
{%Nyūṅkhaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%nyūṅkhayati, -yitum,%} to
insert the Nyūṅkha, (occurring in fut. pass. part.
{%nyūṅkhanīya%} and {%nyūṅkhya%}); (A. {%-te%}), to make
a peculiar sound, to growl.
<LEND>

<L>26624<pc>0519-c<k1>nyUna<k2>nyUna
{#nyUna#}¦ {%ny-ūna, as, ā, am%} (see {%ūna%}), lessened,
diminished, shortened, made smaller, less, inferior,
deficient, defective, wanting, destitute, deprived of
(e. g. {%artha-nyūna,%} deprived of property, destitute
of wealth); imperfect or defective in some organ (e. g.
{%pāda-nyūna,%} having a defect in the feet); low, vile,
wicked, despicable, blamable; ({%am%}), ind. less; ({%am%}),
n. an euphemistic expression for the vulva. {%—Nyūna-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%nyūna-tva, am,%} n. inferiority, deficiency,
incompleteness. {%—Nyūna-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} deficient
in intellect, ignorant, foolish. {%—Nyūna-pañcāśad-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} n. ‘having but forty-nine properties of
human nature,’ an idiot. {%—Nyūnākṣara (˚na-ak˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} defective in letters or syllables. {%—Nyū-%}
{%nāṅga (˚na-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} defective in a limb or
organ, maimed, mutilated, imperfect. {%—Nyūnādhika%}
{%(˚na-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} less or more, unequal. {%—Nyū-%}
{%nādhika-vibhāga, as,%} m. unequal partition. {%—Nyū-%}
{%nendriya (˚na-in˚), as, ā, am,%} wanting some organ
or sense, deficient, imperfect (as blind, deaf, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>26625<pc>0519-c<k1>nyUnaya<k2>nyUnaya
{%Nyūnaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%nyūnayati, -yitum,%} or
{%nyūnī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to lessen, diminish, make less.
<LEND>
[Page0520-a+ 66]

<L>26626<pc>0520-a<k1>nyUh<k2>nyUh
{#nyUh#}¦ {%ny-ūh%} [cf. rt. 2. {%ūh%}], cl. 1. A. {%-ohate%}
or {%-ūhate,%} Ved. to attend to, observe; (Sāy.) to bear
up or support completely, (as if fr. rt. 1. {%ūh.%})
<LEND>

<L>26627<pc>0520-a<k1>nyf<k2>nyf
{#nyf#}¦ {%ny-ṛ%} [cf. rt. 4. {%ṛ%}], cl. 5. P. {%-ṛṇoti%} or
{%-ṛṇvati,%} &c., Ved. to put or place in; to infuse:
Caus. {%ny-arpayati, -yitum,%} to throw down, cast
down, overthrow.
<LEND>

<L>26628<pc>0520-a<k1>nyfYj<k2>nyfYj
{#nyfYj#}¦ {%ny-ṛñj%} [cf. rt. 2. {%ṛñj%}], cl. 6. A.
{%-ṛñjate,%} &c., Ved. to reach, attain, gain, obtain,
win; (Sāy.) to propitiate, befriend.
<LEND>

<L>26629<pc>0520-a<k1>nyfz<k2>nyfz
{#nyfz#}¦ {%ny-ṛṣ%} [cf. rt. 2. {%ṛṣ%}], cl. 6. P.
{%-ṛṣati,%} &c., Ved. to press down or under, suppress,
hide, cover; to put in; (Sāy.) to attain to.
<LEND>

<L>26630<pc>0520-a<k1>nyfzwa<k2>nyfzwa
{%Ny-ṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressed under; (Sāy.)
attained to, gained, endowed.
<LEND>

<L>26631<pc>0520-a<k1>nye<k2>nye
{#nye#}¦ {%ny-e (= ny-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%ny-aiti,%} &c.,
Ved. to come or fall into.
<LEND>

<L>26632<pc>0520-a<k1>nyokas<k2>nyokas
{#nyokas#}¦ {%ny-okas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. belonging
to home or one's native country, domestic, home-
bred; (Sāy.) dwelling in an eternal mansion, having
an eternal abode.
<LEND>

<L>26633<pc>0520-a<k1>nyocanI<k2>nyocanI
{#nyocanI#}¦ {%ny-ocanī, ny-ocara.%} See {%ny-uc.%}
<LEND>

<L>26634<pc>0520-a<k1>nyojas<k2>nyojas
{#nyojas#}¦ {%ny-ojas, ās, ās, as,%} powerful.
<LEND>

<L>26635<pc>0520-a<k1>nrasTimAlin<k2>nrasTimAlin
{#nrasTimAlin#}¦ {%nr-asthi-mālin.%} See p. 515,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26636<pc>0520-a<k1>nvE<k2>nvE
{#nvE#}¦ {%nvai%} for {%nu-vai,%} ind., Ved. indeed,
really, certainly.
<LEND>
<H>{#pa#}

<L>26637<pc>0520-a<k1>pa<k2>pa<h>1
{#pa#} 1¦. {%pa,%} the twenty-first consonant of
the Nāgarī alphabet and the first letter of the fifth
or labial class, having the sound of the English {%p.%}
{%—Pa-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%pa%}. {%—Pa-%}
{%varga, as,%} m. ‘the {%p%} series,’ the labial series of
consonants.
<LEND>

<L>26638<pc>0520-a<k1>pa<k2>pa<h>2
{#pa#} 2¦. {%pa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}), (at the
end of a comp.), drinking; [cf. {%aneka-pa, ājya-pa,%}
{%kṣīra-pa,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>26639<pc>0520-a<k1>pa<k2>pa<h>3
{#pa#} 3¦. {%pa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%pā%}), (at the
end of a comp.), guarding, protecting, ruling; ({%ā%}),
f. guarding, protection.
<LEND>

<L>26640<pc>0520-a<k1>pa<k2>pa<h>4
{#pa#} 4¦. {%pa, as,%} m. air, wind; a leaf; an egg.
<LEND>

<L>26641<pc>0520-a<k1>paMS<k2>paMS
{#paMS#}¦ {%paṃś%} or {%paṃs,%} cl. 1. and 10. P.
{%paṃśati, paṃsati, paṃśayati, paṃsayati,%}
&c., to destroy.
<LEND>

<L>26642<pc>0520-a<k1>pakaTa<k2>pakaTa
{#pakaTa#}¦ {%pakatha, as,%} m., N. of a man with
the patronymic Saubhara.
<LEND>

<L>26643<pc>0520-a<k1>pakkawI<k2>pakkawI
{#pakkawI#}¦ {%pakkaṭī,%} f. the tree Thespesia Po-
pulnea.
<LEND>

<L>26644<pc>0520-a<k1>pakkaRa<k2>pakkaRa
{#pakkaRa#}¦ {%pakkaṇa, as,%} m. the hut of a
Cāṇḍāla or of any outcast, the abode of a savage or
barbarian; (incorrectly read {%pakvaṇa;%} cf. {%pakvaśa.%})
<LEND>

<L>26645<pc>0520-a<k1>paktapOqa<k2>paktapOqa
{#paktapOqa#}¦ {%paktapauḍa, as,%} m. a species of
plant ({%= pañca-kṛtya, pañca-rakṣaka, var-%}
{%dhana;%} in Hindī <nsi>= pakhauḍā</nsi>).
<LEND>

<L>26646<pc>0520-a<k1>paktavya<k2>paktavya
{#paktavya#}¦ {%paktavya.%} See rt. 2. {%pac,%} p. 521.
<LEND>

<L>26647<pc>0520-a<k1>pakti<k2>pakti
{#pakti#}¦ {%pakti, pakva.%} See rt. 2. {%pac,%} p. 521.
<LEND>

<L>26648<pc>0520-a<k1>pakvaSa<k2>pakvaSa
{#pakvaSa#}¦ {%pakvaśa, as,%} m., N. of a barbarous
tribe; a Cāṇḍāla; [cf. {%pukkaśa, pukvasa, pakkaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26649<pc>0520-a<k1>pakvApakvA<k2>pakvApakvA
{#pakvApakvA#}¦ {%pakvāpakvā,%} an onomatopoetic
word imitative of the cry of birds.
<LEND>

<L>26650<pc>0520-a<k1>pakz<k2>pakz
{#pakz#}¦ {%pakṣ%} [cf. rt. 2. {%paś%}], cl. 1. 10. P.
{%pakṣati, pakṣayati,%} &c., to take, seize,
accept; to take a part or side; [cf. Zend <nsi>paś,</nsi> ‘to
bind:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πήγ-νυ-μι, ἐ-πάγ-η-ν, πῆγ-μα, πηγ-ό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πάγ-ο-ς, πάχ-νη, πάγ-η, πάσσ-αλο-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>pac-i-</nsi>
<nsi>sc-or, pāx, pac-i-o, pang-o, pig-nus, pā-lu-s:</nsi> Goth.
[Page0520-b+ 81]
<nsi>fah-an,</nsi> ‘to catch:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>fang-en:</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>fuog-a, ga-fuogi,</nsi> ‘apt;’ <nsi>gafag-yan,</nsi> ‘to
satisfy;’ <nsi>fah,</nsi> ‘a shelf:’ Bohem. <nsi>pás,</nsi> ‘a girdle;’
<nsi>pas-mo,</nsi> ‘yarn.’]
<LEND>

<L>26651<pc>0520-b<k1>pakza<k2>pakza
{%Pakṣa, as,%}¦ m. (probably connected with the pre-
ceding, but by some regarded as an unreduplicated
Desid. form of an unused rt. {%paj,%} fr. which {%pājas,%}
‘strength,’ may be derived; in Uṇādi-s. III. 69. {%pak-%}
{%ṣa%} is derived fr. rt. 1. {%paṇ%}), a wing, pinion, (in this
sense also {%am,%} n.); symbolical expression for the
number two; a feather, the feathers on both sides of
an arrow; the flank or side (of a man &c.), the
shoulder; the side of anything (as of a house, car-
riage, the head, hair, &c.); the wing or flank of an
army, &c.; the half of anything; the half of a lunar
month, a fortnight comprising fifteen days, (the half
from new moon to full moon was called {%pūrva%} or
{%āpūryamāṇa,%} later {%śukla%} or {%śuddha;%} the other half
was called {%apara%} or {%apa-kṣīyamāṇa,%} later {%kṛṣṇa%}
or {%tāmisra;%} and every half month is divided into
fifteen Tithis, named {%prathamā, dvitīyā,%} &c.); a
side, party, faction, a partisan, adherent, follower; a
class, multitude, host, set, troop, number of adherents
or friends (e. g. {%śatru-pakṣa,%} the enemy's side or
[as an adj.] being on the enemy's side; {%mahā-%}
{%pakṣa,%} one who has many adherents; {%deva-%}
{%pakṣa-varāḥ,%} the most distinguished adherents of
the gods; {%pakṣa-sammata,%} approved by a certain
set of people); one of two cases, one side of an
argument, an alternative, ({%pakṣe,%} on the other
alternative, on the other hand); a case in general,
a supposition, ({%pakṣāntare,%} in the other case, on
the other supposition); a thesis, a point under investi-
gation or discussion, a position advanced or argument
to be maintained; (in logic) the subject of a syl-
logism or conclusion or inference; place, position;
supposition, view, notion, idea, opinion (e. g. {%mu-%}
{%khyaḥ pakṣaḥ,%} an excellent idea); state, condition;
(in algebra) a primary division or the side of an
equation in a primary division. According to the
lexicographers the word has also the following mean-
ings: the wall of a house; a wall; an army; favour;
contradiction, opposition, rejoinder, reply; the ash-
pit of a fire-place, a royal elephant; a limb or
member of the body; the feathers of the tail of a
peacock, a tail; proximity, neighbourhood; a brace-
let; purity, perfection. In composition with words
signifying ‘hair,’ {%pakṣa%} is said to mean ‘quantity;’
see {%keśa-pakṣa;%} [cf. {%pūrva-p˚, uttara-p˚, eka-p˚,%}
{%kāka-p˚, kṛṣṇa-p˚,%} &c.: cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">παξ</lang> in
<lang n="greek">ἅπαξ;</lang> Goth. <nsi>fug-ls,</nsi> ‘a bird;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>Vogel;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>panksh-tis;</nsi> perhaps Lat. <nsi>passer</nsi> for <nsi>paxer.</nsi>]
{%—Pakṣa-gama, as, ā, am,%} moving with or by
means of wings, flying. {%—Pakṣa-gupta, as,%} m.
‘wing-protected,’ a species of bird. {%—Pakṣa-gra-%}
{%haṇa, am,%} n. choosing a party. {%—Pakṣa-grāha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%pakṣa-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} one who
chooses a party. {%—Pakṣa-ghāta = pakṣāghāta,%}
q. v. {%—Pakṣa-ghna, as, ī, am,%} a Tri-śālaka having
no hall towards the west. {%—Pakṣaṅ-gama, as, ā, am,%}
moving by means of wings, flying. {%—Pakṣa-cara, as,%}
m. an elephant strayed from the herd; the moon; an
attendant, a constant companion. {%—Pakṣa-cchid,%}
{%t,%} m. ‘cutter of the wings’ (of the mountains), an
epithet of Indra. {%—Pakṣa-ja, as, ā, am,%} or {%pakṣa-%}
{%janman, ā, ā, a,%} produced in a fortnight; ({%as%} or
{%ā%}), m. the moon. {%—Pakṣa-tā,%} f. or {%pakṣa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. partisanship, alliance; adherence to a party;
the being a part of; the taking up a side or argu-
ment; maintaining or defending a thesis; the essential
nature of a proposition; the being the subject of
a syllogism. {%—Pakṣa-dvaya, am,%} n. both sides of
an argument, &c.; a month (two fortnights). {%—Pak-%}
{%ṣa-dvāra, am,%} n. a side door, an inner or back
door, a private entrance. {%—Pakṣa-dhara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a side or wing, winged; taking the side
or adhering to the party of any one (gen.); belonging
to any party or faction, siding with any one (gen.);
({%as%}), m. a bird; a partisan, adherent; the moon; an
elephant that has strayed from the herd. {%—Pakṣa-%}
{%nāḍī,%} f. a quill. {%—Pakṣa-pāta, as,%} m. ‘falling of
[Page0520-c+ 81]
the feathers,’ the moulting of birds (considered to
proceed from fever); the act of taking the side or
adhering to the party of any one (gen.); siding with
any one (gen.); adopting a side or argument
whether right or wrong, attachment to a party,
partisanship, partiality for (with loc. or gen.); a
partisan, adherent. {%—Pakṣapāta-kṛta-sneha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} manifesting party attachment, sympathising.
{%—Pakṣapāti-tā,%} f. or {%pakṣapāti-tva, am,%} n.
partisanship, adherence to a side or party, partiality,
friendship, fellowship, faction, factiousness. {%—Pakṣa-%}
{%pātin, ī, inī, i,%} taking the side or adhering to the
party (of any one), siding with, favouring a party;
({%ī%}), m. a partisan, friend, adherent, follower. {%—Pak-%}
{%ṣa-pāli, is,%} m. a private or back door. {%—Pakṣa-%}
{%puṭa, as,%} m. a wing. {%—Pakṣa-poṣaṇa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} fostering or favouring a party, factious. {%—Pak-%}
{%ṣa-pradyota, am,%} n., N. of a peculiar position of
the hands in dancing. {%—Pakṣa-bala, am,%} n. strength
of wing. {%—Pakṣa-bhāga, as,%} m. the side or flank,
especially the flank of an elephant. {%—Pakṣa-bhukti,%}
{%is,%} f. the course traversed by the sun in a fortnight.
{%—Pakṣa-bheda, as,%} m. distinction between two
sides of an argument; the difference between the two
halves of a lunar month. {%—Pakṣa-mūla, am,%} n.
the root or articulation of a wing. {%—Pakṣa-racanā,%}
f. forming a party or faction. {%—Pakṣa-vañcitaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a peculiar position of the hands in dancing.
{%—Pakṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} winged; having flanks;
having a side or party, firmly adhering to or having
a predilection for any one; belonging to a good
family, of good extraction (?). {%—Pakṣa-vāda, as,%}
m. expression of opinion, stating a case; ex parte
statement. {%—Pakṣa-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘whose vehicles
are wings,’ a bird. {%—Pakṣa-vindu, us,%} m., ‘wing-
spot,’ a heron. {%—Pakṣa-vyāpin, ī, inī, i,%} em-
bracing the whole of an argument or thesis. {%—Pak-%}
{%ṣa-śas,%} ind. by or for half months or fortnights.
{%—Pakṣa-sundara, as,%} m. a species of tree; [cf.
{%lodhra.%}] {%—Pakṣa-hata, as, ā, am,%} paralysed on
one side. {%—Pakṣa-hara, as,%} m. a bird; (perhaps
a wrong reading for {%pakṣa-dhara,%} ‘possessing
wings.’) {%—Pakṣa-homa, as,%} m. (probably) an obla-
tion to be offered every half month. {%—Pakṣākāra%}
{%(˚ṣa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} wing-shaped. {%—Pakṣā-%}
{%ghāta (˚ṣa-āgh˚), as,%} m. ‘side-stroke,’ paralysis or
palsy of one side, hemiplegia; refutation of an argument
or view. {%—Pakṣānta (˚ṣa-an˚), as,%} m. the fifteenth
and last day of either half month, new or full moon;
the end of the wings of an army arranged in the
shape of a bird. {%—Pakṣāntara (˚ṣa-an˚), am,%}
n. another side or part, another or different view of
an argument, another supposition. {%—Pakṣābhāsa%}
{%(˚ṣa-ābh˚), as,%} m. a seeming or fallacious argu-
ment, a fallacy, a false plaint. {%—Pakṣāvasara%}
{%(˚ṣa-av˚), as,%} m. the last day of either half
month, day of new or full moon. {%—Pakṣāhati%}
{%(˚ṣa-āh˚), is,%} f. a stroke with the wings. {%—Pak-%}
{%ṣāhāra (˚ṣa-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} one who eats food
only once in a half month. {%—Pakṣī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to make anything
the subject of an argument or syllogism. {%—Pakṣod-%}
{%grāhin (˚ṣa-ud˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} showing partiality,
taking a side or adopting a party.
<LEND>

<L>26652<pc>0520-c<k1>pakzaka<k2>pakzaka
{%Pakṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a side door, a private or back
door; a side; a sidesman; an associate, a confederate
or partisan, (at the end of comps. used for {%pakṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>26653<pc>0520-c<k1>pakzati<k2>pakzati
{%Pakṣati, is,%}¦ f. the root or insertion of a wing, the
pit of a bird's wing; the first day of the half month.
<LEND>

<L>26654<pc>0520-c<k1>pakzas<k2>pakzas
{%Pakṣas, as,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pac%}), a wing;
the side part of a carriage; the leaf of a door; the
wing of an army; a half, a division; a half month;
the side or shore of a river; a side.
<LEND>

<L>26655<pc>0520-c<k1>pakzAlikA<k2>pakzAlikA
{%Pakṣālikā,%}¦ f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>26656<pc>0520-c<k1>pakzAlu<k2>pakzAlu
{%Pakṣālu, us,%}¦ m. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>26657<pc>0520-c<k1>pakzi<k2>pakzi
{%Pakṣi, is,%}¦ m. (curtailed form for {%pakṣin%}), a bird.
<LEND>

<L>26658<pc>0520-c<k1>pakzin<k2>pakzin
{%Pakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ winged, (figuratively) furnished
with wings; taking the side or adhering to the
party (of any one); siding with; ({%ī%}), m. a day
with the two nights enclosing it; the bird Garuḍa
[Page0521-a+ 79]
as one of the eighteen attendants of the Sun;
an arrow; an epithet of Śiva; ({%ī, iṇī%}), m. f. a
bird; ({%iṇī%}), f. (with or without {%rātri%}) a night with
the two days enclosing it; the day of full moon;
N. of a Śākinī; [cf. Lith. <nsi>pauksh-tis,</nsi> ‘a bird;’
Goth. <nsi>fug-ls,</nsi> ‘a bird;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>fug-ul;</nsi> Mod.
Germ. <nsi>Vogel;</nsi> probably Lat. <nsi>passer</nsi> for <nsi>paxer.</nsi>]
{%—Pakṣi-kīṭa, as,%} m. ‘bird-insect,’ an insect-
like bird, an insignificant species of bird. {%—Pakṣi-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place.
{%—Pakṣi-pati, is,%} m. ‘the prince of birds,’ an
epithet of Sampāti. {%—Pakṣipānīya-śālikā,%} f. a
trough or reservoir for watering birds, cattle, &c.
{%—Pakṣi-puṅgava, as,%} m. ‘a bull among the
birds,’ an epithet of Jaṭāyu. {%—Pakṣi-pravara, as,%}
m. ‘the most excellent among the birds,’ an epithet
of Garuḍa. {%—Pakṣi-bālaka, as,%} m. a young bird.
{%—Pakṣi-mṛga-tā,%} f. (fr. {%pakṣin%} and {%mṛga%}),
the form or condition of a bird or of a beast.
{%—Pakṣi-rāj, ṭ,%} or {%pakṣi-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of
the birds,’ an epithet of Garuḍa or of Jaṭāyu. {%—Pak-%}
{%ṣi-rājya, am,%} n. the sovereignty of the feathered
tribes. {%—Pakṣi-śālā,%} f. ‘bird-house,’ an aviary, a nest.
{%—Pakṣi-śāvaka, as,%} m. a young bird. {%—Pakṣi-%}
{%siṃha, as,%} m. ‘lion among the birds,’ an epithet
of Garuḍa, the bird and vehicle of Viṣṇu. {%—Pakṣi-%}
{%svāmin, ī,%} m. ‘lord or master of the birds,’ an
epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Pakṣīndra (˚ṣi-in˚), as,%} m.
‘prince of the birds,’ an epithet of Garuḍa.
<LEND>

<L>26659<pc>0521-a<k1>pakzila<k2>pakzila
{%Pakṣila, as,%}¦ m. (with {%svāmin%}) an epithet of
the saint Vātsyāyana. {%—Pakṣila-svāmin, ī,%} m. an
epithet of Vātsyāyana who is identified with Cāṇakya.
<LEND>

<L>26660<pc>0521-a<k1>pakzIya<k2>pakzIya
{%Pakṣīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (at the end of a comp.),
belonging to a side, siding with, taking the side
or adhering to the party of any one.
<LEND>

<L>26661<pc>0521-a<k1>pakzman<k2>pakzman
{%Pakṣman, a,%}¦ n. an eyelash; the filament of a
flower; the point of a thread, a thin thread; the
leaf of a flower; a wing; a whisker. {%—Pakṣma-%}
{%kopa%} or {%pakṣma-prakopa, as,%} m. irritation pro-
duced in the eye by the eyelashes turning inwards
(Entropium). {%—Pakṣmākṣa (˚ma-akṣa), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} having an eyelash or eyelashes in the eye
(suffering from Entropium).
<LEND>

<L>26662<pc>0521-a<k1>pakzmala<k2>pakzmala
{%Pakṣmala, as, ā, am,%}¦ having strong or long
eyelashes; having long or thick hair, hairy, shaggy.
<LEND>

<L>26663<pc>0521-a<k1>pakzya<k2>pakzya
{%Pakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. descended from Pakṣa
(i. e. according to Sāy. the Sun); changing every half
month; produced or occurring in a fortnight; be-
longing to a side, siding with, taking part with;
lateral.
<LEND>

<L>26664<pc>0521-a<k1>pakzRu<k2>pakzRu
{#pakzRu#}¦ {%pakṣṇu.%} See p. 522, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>26665<pc>0521-a<k1>pakzman<k2>pakzman
{#pakzman#}¦ {%pakṣman.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>26666<pc>0521-a<k1>paNka<k2>paNka
{#paNka#}¦ {%paṅka, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. 1. {%pac%} or {%pañc%}), mud, mire, dirt, clay; a slough, a
quagmire; ointment, unguent; moral impurity, sin;
[cf. {%niṣ-paṅka, nīla-p˚.%}] {%—Paṅka-karvaṭa, as,%}
m. soft mud, especially such as is left by the retiring
of floods or on the banks of a river, alluvium, a marsh,
a quagmire. {%—Paṅka-kīra, as,%} m. an aquatic bird, a
lap-wing. {%—Paṅka-krīḍa, as, ā, am,%} wallowing or
sporting in mud; ({%as%}), m. a pig; (also {%paṅka-%}
{%krīḍanaka, as,%} m.) {%—Paṅka-gaḍaka, as,%} m. or
{%paṅka-gati, is,%} f. a small fish, Macrognathus Pan-
calus. {%—Paṅka-grāha, as,%} m. the marine monster
Makara, q. v. {%—Paṅka-cchid, t,%} m. ‘mud-destroyer,’
Strychnos Potatorum (the fruit of which is used for
purifying foul water). {%—Paṅka-ja, am,%} n. ‘mud-
born,’ a species of lotus, Nelumbium Speciosum (or
rather its flower which closes in the evening); ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Brahmā, (incorrect for {%paṅkaja-%}
{%ja,%} ‘lotus-born’); ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā.
{%—Paṅkaja-janman, ā,%} m. ‘sprung from a lotus,’
an epithet of Brahmā. {%—Paṅkaja-nābha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘having a lotus springing from his navel,’ an
epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Paṅka-janman, a,%} n. {%= paṅka-%}
{%ja%}. {%—Paṅkaja-pattra, am,%} n. the leaf of a lotus.
{%—Paṅkajapattra-netra, as, ā, am,%} having
eyes like lotus-leaves. {%—Paṅkajāvalī (˚ja-āv˚),%} f. a
particular metre; [cf. {%paṅkāvalī.%}] {%—Paṅka-jit, t,%}
[Page0521-b+ 79]
m., N. of a son of Garuḍa. {%—Paṅkajinī,%} f. (fr.
{%paṅkajin%} which is fr. {%paṅka-ja%}), Nelumbium Spe-
ciosum (the plant itself), a group of such lotuses, a
lotus pool, a pool or pond where the lotus grows or
a place abounding with that flower; the flexible
stalk of a water-lily. {%—Paṅka-tā,%} f. the nature or
property of mud, muddiness. {%—Paṅka-digdha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} besmeared with mud, soiled with dirt.
{%—Paṅkadigdha-śarīra, as,%} m. ‘having a mud-
smeared body,’ N. of a Dānava; (also read as if two
names, {%paṅka-digdha%} and {%śarīra.%}) {%—Paṅkadig-%}
{%dhāṅga (˚dha-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘having mud-smeared
limbs,’ N. of a being attending on Skanda. {%—Paṅka-%}
{%prabhā,%} f. (with Jainas) N. of one of the seven
divisions of hell (where mud or mire takes the place
of light). {%—Paṅka-bhāj, k, k, k,%} sunk in the mire.
{%—Paṅka-bhāraka, as, ā, am,%} laden with mud,
muddy. {%—Paṅka-majjana, am,%} n. immersion in
mud. {%—Paṅka-maṇḍūka, as,%} m. a bivalve conch;
(also wrongly read {%-maṇḍūka.%}) {%—Paṅka-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} full of mud or mire, muddy. {%—Paṅka-ruh,%}
{%ṭ,%} or {%paṅka-ruha, am,%} n. ‘mud-growing,’ a lotus.
{%—Paṅka-vat, ān, atī, at,%} muddy, covered with
mud. {%—Paṅka-vāsa, as,%} m. ‘dwelling in mud,’
a crab. {%—Paṅka-śukti, is,%} f. ‘mud-shell,’ a par-
ticular species of muscle or cockle (the stair-case
shell, spinnet shell). {%—Paṅka-sūraṇa, as,%} m. ‘mud-
root,’ the fibrous edible root of a lotus; (also written
{%paṅka-śūraṇa, paṅka-ṣūraṇa.%}) {%—Paṅke-ja,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘born in the mud,’ a lotus. {%—Paṅke-ruha,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘growing in mud,’ a lotus; ({%as%}), m. the
Indian crane (as a synonym of {%puṣkara%}). {%—Paṅke-%}
{%śaya, as, ā, am,%} resting or dwelling in mud.
<LEND>

<L>26667<pc>0521-b<k1>paNkAra<k2>paNkAra
{%Paṅkāra, as,%}¦ m. the aquatic plant Blyxa Oc-
tandra or Vallisneria ({%= śaivala%}); the aquatic plant
Trapa Bispinosa ({%= jala-kubjaka%}); a dam, dike,
or raised bank forming a path amidst inundated fields;
stairs, steps, a ladder.
<LEND>

<L>26668<pc>0521-b<k1>paNkAvalI<k2>paNkAvalI
{%Paṅkāvalī,%}¦ f. {%= paṅkajāvalī%} (of which it may
be a contraction).
<LEND>

<L>26669<pc>0521-b<k1>paNkin<k2>paNkin
{%Paṅkin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (at the end of a comp.), muddy,
filled or covered with mud; [cf. {%mala-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26670<pc>0521-b<k1>paNkila<k2>paNkila
{%Paṅkila, as, ā, am,%}¦ muddy, dirty, clayey; ({%as%}),
m. a boat, canoe.
<LEND>

<L>26671<pc>0521-b<k1>paNkaRa<k2>paNkaRa
{#paNkaRa#}¦ {%paṅkaṇa,%} wrong form for {%pakkaṇa,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>26672<pc>0521-b<k1>paNkavAri<k2>paNkavAri
{#paNkavAri#}¦ {%paṅka-vāri.%} See {%pakva-vāri.%}
<LEND>

<L>26673<pc>0521-b<k1>paNkti<k2>paNkti
{#paNkti#}¦ {%paṅkti, is, ī,%} f. (connected with {%pañ-%}
{%can%}), a row or line or set of five, a collection of
five, the number five; a sort of fivefold metre con-
sisting of five Pādas of eight syllables each; (in the
later literature) any stanza of four times ten syllables
(or of four lines, each line consisting of ten syllables);
the number ten, (sometimes in comp., cf. {%Rāvaṇa-%}
{%śiraḥ-p˚, paṅkti-grīva, paṅkti-ratha%}); a line,
range, row, series; a group, flock, troop; a heap;
a row of people sitting down to a meal, a company,
society, assembly, party; a company of persons of
the same caste; the living generation; the earth;
cooking, maturing, (incorrectly for {%pakti%}); fame,
celebrity (for {%pakti%}); [cf. {%akṣara-p˚, āstāra-p˚,%}
{%pada-p˚, prastāra-p˚.%}] {%—Paṅkti-kaṇṭaka,%} ‘having
rows of thorns (?),’ a white-flowering Achyranthes.
{%—Paṅkti-grīva, as,%} m. ‘ten-necked,’ an epithet of
Rāvaṇa; [cf. {%paṅkti-ratha.%}] {%—Paṅkti-cara, as,%}
m. ‘going in lines,’ an osprey. {%—Paṅkti-dūṣa%} or
{%-dūṣaka, as, ā, am,%} defiling or contaminating any
society or company of persons; ({%as%}), m. an improper
person with whom to associate, (opposed to {%paṅkti-%}
{%pāvana.%}) {%—Paṅkti-doṣa, as,%} m. a bane of society,
anything which defiles or contaminates a company,
what spoils a society. {%—Paṅkti-pāvana, as, ā, am,%}
purifying a society or company of persons, (opposed
to {%paṅkti-dūṣa%}); ({%as%}), m. a respectable or emi-
nent person. {%—Paṅkti-ratha, as,%} m. ‘having ten
chariots,’ a N. of Daśa-ratha, the father of Rāma-
candra. {%—Paṅkti-rādhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. (a sacri-
fice) containing fivefold gifts; (Sāy.) abounding in
properly presented oblations. {%—Paṅkti-vīja, as,%} m.
[Page0521-c+ 79]
a species of plant {%(= varvūra)%}. {%—Paṅktī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} associated in groups. {%—Paṅkty-uttara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a Paṅkti at the end.
<LEND>

<L>26674<pc>0521-c<k1>paNktikA<k2>paNktikA
{%Paṅktikā,%}¦ f. a row, line, (in {%akṣara-paṅktikā,%}
a row of letters.)
<LEND>

<L>26675<pc>0521-c<k1>paNgu<k2>paNgu
{#paNgu#}¦ {%paṅgu, us, ūs%} or {%vī, u%} (perhaps fr.
{%apa-aṅga,%} said to be connected with rt. 1. {%khañj%}),
lame, crippled, halt, one who has lost his legs, &c.;
({%us%}), m. the planet Saturn (as moving slowly); an
epithet of Nirjita-varman. {%—Paṅgu-grāha, as,%} m.
the sea-monster Makara, q. v. [cf. {%paṅka-grāha, as,%}]; one
of the signs of the zodiac, see {%makara%}. {%—Paṅgu-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%paṅgu-tva, am,%} n. lameness, deformity,
mutilation. {%—Paṅgutva-hāriṇī,%} f. a species of shrub
({%= śimṛḍī%}).
<LEND>

<L>26676<pc>0521-c<k1>paNguka<k2>paNguka
{%Paṅguka, as, ā, am, = paṅgu,%}¦ lame.
<LEND>

<L>26677<pc>0521-c<k1>paNgula<k2>paNgula
{%Paṅgula, as, ā, am,%}¦ lame, crippled; ({%as%}), m. a
horse of a glassy or silvery white colour; ({%am?%}),
n. lameness (?).
<LEND>

<L>26678<pc>0521-c<k1>pac<k2>pac<h>1
{#pac#} 1¦. {%pac%} or {%pañc,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%pacati,%}
{%-te, pañcati, -te,%} &c., to make clear or
evident: Caus. {%pañcayati,%} &c., to explain or state
fully, amplify; to spread.
<LEND>

<L>26679<pc>0521-c<k1>paYcA<k2>paYcA
{%Pañcā,%}¦ f. spreading.
<LEND>

<L>26680<pc>0521-c<k1>pac<k2>pac<h>2
{#pac#} 2¦. {%pac,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%pacati, -te, pa-%}
{%pāca%} ({%papaktha%} or {%pecitha%}), {%pece%} (perf.
part. {%pecivas,%} f. {%pecuṣī%}), {%pakṣyati, -te, apākṣīt,%}
{%apakta%} (Vedic forms {%pakṣat, apeciran, peciran%}),
{%paktum%} (Ved. {%paktave%}), to cook, dress food, bake,
roast, boil; to melt (metals &c.); to bake or burn
(bricks); to digest; to ripen, mature, bring to
maturity; (figuratively) to bring to perfection or
completion; to develop anything (acc.) into another
state (acc.); to cook for one's self (A.): Pass. {%pac-%}
{%yate,%} to be cooked; to become ripe or mature, to
ripen; to arrive at completion or perfection (Mahā-
bh. Anuśāsana-p. 6205); to be developed; to be
inflamed: Caus. {%pācayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%apīpacat,%}
to cause to be cooked, to have cooked, have dressed
(as food), to cook; to cause to ripen, to bring to
maturity or perfection, bring to completion, bring to
an end; to cure, heal; (A. {%-te%}), to cause to cook
for one's self: Pass. of Caus. {%pācyate,%} to be cooked:
Desid. {%pipakṣati:%} Intens. {%pāpacyate, pāpacīti,%}
to be much cooked, to cook very much, burn exces-
sively; (figuratively) to be much afflicted: Desid. of
the Intens. {%pāpaciṣati, -te;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>pac,</nsi> ‘to
cook:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πέπ-ων, πεπ-τό-ς, πέψι-ς, πέπ-τω, πέμ-μα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πόπ-ανο-ν, ἕψ-ω</lang> for <lang n="greek">πέψ-ω, ὄψ-ο-ν, ὀπ-τό-ς</lang> for
<lang n="greek">ποπ-τό-ς, ὀπτάω, ἀρτο-κόπος, ἀρτο-πόπος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δρυ-πεπής, δρύ-πεψ:</lang> Lat. <nsi>coqu-o, coquu-s, cŭ-līna,</nsi>
<nsi>co-quina = pop-īna:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>pek-a,</nsi> ‘I cook;’ <nsi>pesh-ti,</nsi>
‘a stove:’ Lith. <nsi>kep-ti,</nsi> ‘to bake.’]
<LEND>

<L>26681<pc>0521-c<k1>paktavya<k2>paktavya
{%Paktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cooked or dressed,
to be baked; to be matured; to be digested.
<LEND>

<L>26682<pc>0521-c<k1>pakti<k2>pakti
{%Pakti, is,%}¦ f. cooking, preparing food; food or
any dish of cooked food (Ved.); digesting, digestion;
the place of digestion; becoming ripe, ripening;
development; respectability, dignity, fame. {%—Pakti-%}
{%śūla, am,%} n. violent pain or inflammation of the
bowels proceeding from indigestion, colic. {%—Pakti-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. the place of digestion.
<LEND>

<L>26683<pc>0521-c<k1>paktf<k2>paktf
{%Paktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what cooks, cooking,
a cook; digestive, promoting digestion; who or what
ripens, ripening.
<LEND>

<L>26684<pc>0521-c<k1>paktra<k2>paktra
{%Paktra, am,%}¦ n. the state of a householder who
possesses a sacred fire; the sacred fire perpetually
maintained by the householder.
<LEND>

<L>26685<pc>0521-c<k1>paktrima<k2>paktrima
{%Paktrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ prepared by cooking,
cooked; obtained by boiling (as salt); ripe, ripened,
matured.
<LEND>

<L>26686<pc>0521-c<k1>paktvA<k2>paktvA
{%Paktvā,%}¦ ind. having cooked or dressed; having
matured, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26687<pc>0521-c<k1>pakTa<k2>pakTa
{%Paktha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (according to Sāy.) one who
cooks the oblation; N. of a man protected by the
Aśvins; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>26688<pc>0521-c<k1>pakTin<k2>pakTin
{%Pakthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. (according to Sāy.)
cooking the oblation.
<LEND>

<L>26689<pc>0521-c<k1>pakva<k2>pakva
{%Pakva, as, ā, am%}¦ (past pass. part.), cooked,
[Page0522-a+ 81]
roasted, boiled, prepared on the fire, (opposed to
{%āma%}); warmed, ({%dvi-pakva,%} warmed up again);
baked or burnt (as bricks, porcelain, &c.); digested;
mature, ripe, ripened, matured (as fruits or corn or
as the milk in an udder); ready to discharge matter
or suppurate; ripe (as a boil); grey (as the hair);
come to perfection, accomplished, perfect, fully de-
veloped (as the understanding, character, &c.), shrewd,
experienced; ripe for destruction; on the eve of
decay, near to death, perishing, decaying; ({%am%}), n.
cooked food; [cf. {%niṣ-p˚, pari-p˚,%} &c.; cf. also Gr.
<lang n="greek">πέπ-ων, πεπ-ανό-ς, πέπ-ειρο-ς.</lang>] {%—Pakva-kaṣāya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having passion destroyed. {%—Pakva-kṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} cooking, maturing, dressing food; ({%t%}), m. the tree
Azadirachta Indica ({%= nimba%}), the leaves of which
are applied to certain swellings to induce suppuration.
{%—Pakva-keśa, as, ī, am,%} grey-haired. {%—Pakva-%}
{%tā,%} f. ripeness, maturity, greyness (of the hair).
{%—Pakva-rasa, as,%} m. wine or any intoxicating
liquor. {%—Pakva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has
cooked, &c. {%—Pakva-vāri,%} n. sour rice-gruel, the
water of boiled rice ({%= kāñjika%}); boiling water;
distilled water; (also read {%paṅka-vāri.%}) {%—Pakva-%}
{%sasyopamonnati (˚sya-upama-un˚) = rāja-ka-%}
{%damba%}. {%—Pakvātisāra (˚va-at˚), as,%} m. chronic
dysentery. {%—Pakvādhāna (˚va-ādh˚), am,%} n. or
{%pakvāśaya (˚va-āś˚), as,%} m. the receptacle for
digested food, the place of digestion, the stomach,
belly, abdomen; [cf. {%āmāśaya.%}] {%—Pakvānna (˚va-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. cooked or dressed food. {%—Pakveṣ-%}
{%ṭaka-cita, am,%} n. (a building) constructed with burnt
bricks, (Pāṇ. VI. 3, 65.) {%—Pakveṣṭakā (˚va-iṣ˚),%}
f. a burnt or baked brick.
<LEND>

<L>26690<pc>0522-a<k1>pakzRu<k2>pakzRu
{%Pakṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ who or what cooks or
matures, cooking, maturing.
<LEND>

<L>26691<pc>0522-a<k1>pac<k2>pac<h>3
3. {%pac, k, k, k%}¦ (at the end of a comp.), cooking,
baking.
<LEND>

<L>26692<pc>0522-a<k1>paca<k2>paca
{%Paca, as, ā, am,%}¦ cooking, baking, roasting;
digesting [cf. {%alpam-paca, iṣṭi-p˚, kim-p˚, duṣ-%}
{%p˚,%} &c.]; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. cooking, maturing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26693<pc>0522-a<k1>pacaka<k2>pacaka
{%Pacaka, as,%}¦ m. a cook, cooking, baking.
<LEND>

<L>26694<pc>0522-a<k1>pacat<k2>pacat
{%Pacat, an, antī, at,%}¦ cooking, boiling, roasting,
ripening, &c. {%—Pacat-puṭa, as,%} m. the tree Hibiscus
Phœniceus.
<LEND>

<L>26695<pc>0522-a<k1>pacata<k2>pacata
{%Pacata, as, ā, am,%}¦ cooked, dressed, boiled, ripe,
mature; ({%as%}), m. the sun; fire; a N. of Indra;
({%am%}), n. cooked food. {%—Pacata-bhṛjjatā,%} f. con-
tinual baking and roasting.
<LEND>

<L>26696<pc>0522-a<k1>pacatikalpa<k2>pacatikalpa
{%Pacati-kalpa, as, ā, am,%}¦ or ({%am%}), ind. almost
cooked or ripened, (also in a similar sense {%pacati-%}
{%deśya%} and {%pacati-deśīya.%})
<LEND>

<L>26697<pc>0522-a<k1>pacatya<k2>pacatya
{%Pacatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. cooked, dressed (as
food), ripe.
<LEND>

<L>26698<pc>0522-a<k1>pacana<k2>pacana
{%Pacana, as, ā, am,%}¦ cooking, roasting, maturing
[cf. {%eṇī-p˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. fire; ({%ā%}), f. becoming ripe,
ripening; ({%ī%}), f. the wild citron tree, {%= vana-vīja-%}
{%pūraka; (am),%} n. the act of cooking, a means or
instrument for cooking, fuel, a cooking utensil, a
vessel, a frying-pan, &c.; cooking, dressing, boiling;
ripening, maturing; becoming cooked, becoming ripe.
<LEND>

<L>26699<pc>0522-a<k1>pacanika<k2>pacanika
{%Pacanika%}¦ (gender doubtful), a pan.
<LEND>

<L>26700<pc>0522-a<k1>pacapaca<k2>pacapaca
{%Paca-paca, as, ā, am,%}¦ (probably) ‘continually
bringing to maturity,’ an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>26701<pc>0522-a<k1>pacaprakUwA<k2>pacaprakUwA
{%Paca-prakūṭā,%}¦ see Gaṇa Mayūra-vyaṃsakādi to
Pāṇ. II. 1, 72.
<LEND>

<L>26702<pc>0522-a<k1>pacamAna<k2>pacamAna
{%Pacamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cooking, in the act of
cooking or ripening.
<LEND>

<L>26703<pc>0522-a<k1>pacampacA<k2>pacampacA
{%Pacam-pacā,%}¦ f. (reduplicated form fr. rt. 2. {%pac%}), a
species of Curcuma, C. Aromatica or C. Xanthorrhiza.
<LEND>

<L>26704<pc>0522-a<k1>pacalavaRA<k2>pacalavaRA
{%Paca-lavaṇā,%}¦ f. constant boiling of salt, ({%paca%} is
2nd sing. impv., and the comp. belongs to the Gaṇa
Mayūra-vyaṃsakādi.)
<LEND>

<L>26705<pc>0522-a<k1>pacAna<k2>pacAna
{%Pacāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (anomalous form of the pres.
part. A.), cooking, preparing food, (see Mahā-bh.
Vana-p. 13239, and cf. {%kim-p˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>26706<pc>0522-a<k1>paci<k2>paci
{%Paci, is,%}¦ m. fire; cooking, maturing.
<LEND>

<L>26707<pc>0522-a<k1>pacelima<k2>pacelima
{%Pacelima, as, ā, am,%}¦ being soon cooked, cook-
ing or ripening quickly; fit to cook or ripen, fit to
be matured; ({%as%}), m. Phaseolus Mungo or a similar
species of bean; fire; the sun.
<LEND>

<L>26708<pc>0522-a<k1>paceluka<k2>paceluka
{%Paceluka, as,%}¦ m. a cook.
<LEND>
[Page0522-b+ 77]

<L>26709<pc>0522-b<k1>pacya<k2>pacya
{%Pacya, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming ripe, ripening, (see
{%kṛṣṭa-p˚%} and cf. {%pākya.%})
<LEND>

<L>26710<pc>0522-b<k1>pacyamAna<k2>pacyamAna
{%Pacyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being cooked, being in
the act of ripening, being baked, being melted,
being under digestion, being matured.
<LEND>

<L>26711<pc>0522-b<k1>pAcyamAna<k2>pAcyamAna
{%Pācyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being cooked.
<LEND>

<L>26712<pc>0522-b<k1>pacCabda<k2>pacCabda
{#pacCabda#}¦ {%pac-chabda, paj-ja,%} &c. See under
3. {%pad,%} p. 529, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26713<pc>0522-b<k1>pajJawikA<k2>pajJawikA
{#pajJawikA#}¦ {%pajjhaṭikā,%} f. a kind of metre;
a small bell.
<LEND>

<L>26714<pc>0522-b<k1>pajra<k2>pajra
{#pajra#}¦ {%pajra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (perhaps) stout,
fat, corpulent, in good condition, in good plight;
wealthy, rich; (Sāy.) powerful, strong, rich in food;
{%pajrāyā garbhaḥ,%} ‘the son or child of the fat one,’
= the Soma; ({%ās%}), m. pl. (according to Sāy.) an epi-
thet of the Aṅgirasas or of the family of Kakṣīvat;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Pajra-hoṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
Ved. (perhaps) having rich oblations; (Sāy.) for whom
the acclamation of praise ({%ghoṣa%}) is prepared.
<LEND>

<L>26715<pc>0522-b<k1>pajriya<k2>pajriya
{%Pajriya, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of Kakṣīvat.
<LEND>

<L>26716<pc>0522-b<k1>paYc<k2>paYc
{#paYc#}¦ {%pañc.%} See rt. 1. {%pac,%} p. 521, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26717<pc>0522-b<k1>paYcan<k2>paYcan
{#paYcan#}¦ {%pañcan, a,%} m. f. n. pl. (said to be fr. rt.
{%pañc;%} originally the spreading out of the hand to re-
present the number by the five fingers), five. In the
Veda {%pañca svasāraḥ,%} the five sisters = the fingers;
{%dviḥ pañca svasāraḥ%} = the ten fingers; {%pañca kṣi-%}
{%tīnām,%} the five classes of dwellers on the earth = the
four castes and the Niṣādas, Ṛg-veda 1. 7, 9;
[cf. 1. {%kṣiti, carṣaṇi, kṛṣṭi, jana;%} cf. also
Ved. {%pañca-tha%} = Zend <nsi>pukh-dha</nsi> = Gr. <lang n="greek">πέμπ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">το-ς;</lang> Zend <nsi>pañcan;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">πέντε,</lang> Æol. <lang n="greek">πέμπε;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>quinque, quinc-tu-s</nsi> or <nsi>quin-tu-s, Quinct-īli-s;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>fimf;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>fünf;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pan-ti;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>cuig;</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>pump.</nsi>] {%—Pañca-kapāla,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} Ved. prepared or offered in five cups or
bowls, a particular ceremony in which ghee is offered
in five cups. {%—Pañca-karṇa, as, ā, am,%} (perhaps)
branded in the ear with the number five (as cattle),
see Pāṇ. VI. 3, 115. {%—Pañca-karpaṭa, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a people. {%—Pañca-karman, a,%} n. (in medi-
cine) five kinds of treatment, viz. giving emetics,
purging, giving sternutatories, and administering
enemas of two kinds, oily and not oily. {%—Pañca-%}
{%kaṣāya, as,%} m. (?), a decoction from the fruits of
five plants, the Jambu, Śālmali, Vāṭyāla, Vakula,
and Badara; (for the five Kaṣāyas of the Buddhists
see under {%kaṣāya.%}) {%—Pañcakaṣāya-ja%} or {%pañca-%}
{%kaṣāyottha (˚ya-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} produced from
the above decoction. {%—Pañca-kāpittha, as, ī, am,%}
prepared with the five products of the Kapittha tree
or Feronia Elephantum, (perhaps leaves, blossom,
fruit, gum, and bark.) {%—Pañca-kṛtya, as,%} m. a
species of plant {%(= pakta-pauḍa)%}. {%—Pañca-kṛt-%}
{%vas,%} ind. five times. {%—Pañca-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m.
‘having five black spots,’ a species of poisonous
insect. {%—Pañca-kṛṣṇalaka, as, ā, am,%} compris-
ing five Kṛṣṇalas. {%—Pañca-koṇa, as,%} m. ‘having
five angles,’ a pentagon. {%—Pañca-kola, am,%} n. the
five spices, viz. long pepper ({%kaṇā%}), its root ({%kaṇā-%}
{%mūla%}), Chai or Piper Chaba ({%cavya%}), plumbago
({%agni%}), and dry ginger {%(nāgara)%}. {%—Pañca-koṣa,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. the five sheaths or cases supposed to invest
the soul; see under {%kośa%}. {%—Pañca-krama,%} N. of a
work ascribed to Nāgārjuna. {%—Pañca-krośa-mā-%}
{%hātmya, am,%} n., N. of a poem. {%—Pañca-krośī,%} f.
(probably) a distance of five Krośas. {%—Pañca-%}
{%kṣāra, am,%} n. {%= pañca-lavaṇa%}. {%—Pañca-khaṭva,%}
{%am, ī,%} n. f. a collection of five bedsteads. {%—Pañca-%}
{%gaṅga, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a place (Mahā-bh. Droṇa-
p. 2095). {%—Pañca-gaṇa-yoga, as,%} m. a collective
name of the five plants Vidārī-gandhā, Bṛhatī,
Pṛśni-parṇī, Nidigdhikā, and Śva-daṃṣṭrā. {%—Pañca-%}
{%gata, as, ā, am,%} (in algebra) raised to the fifth
power, (lit. arrived at five.) {%—Pañca-gava, am, ī,%}
n. f. a collection of five cows. {%—Pañcagava-dhana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} whose property consists of five cows.
{%—Pañca-gavya, am,%} n. five products of the cow,
[Page0522-c+ 81]
viz. milk, coagulated or sour milk, butter, urine, and
cow-dung. {%—Pañca-gu, us, us, u,%} bought with five
cows. {%—Pañca-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} five times, fivefold.
{%—Pañca-gupta, as, ā, am,%} covered or protected
in a fivefold manner, having five members covered
or concealed; ({%as%}), m. a tortoise, turtle (as drawing
in its four feet and head under its shell; cf. {%pañ-%}
{%cāṅga-gupta%}); the materialistic system of the Cār-
vākas. {%—Pañca-gupti-rasā,%} f. a species of vegetable,
Medicago Esculenta (Trigonella Corniculata). {%—Pañ-%}
{%ca-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. taken or taken up five
times. {%—Pañca-goṇi, is, is, i,%} containing five
Droṇas (?), see Pāṇ. I. 2, 50. {%—Pañca-grāmī,%} f.
a collection of five villages. {%—Pañca-catvāriṃśa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the 45th. {%—Pañca-catvāriṃśat, t,%}
f., 45. {%—Pañca-candra, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Pañca-cāmara, am,%} n., N. of a metre consisting
of four lines of sixteen syllables each; of another
metre of four lines each containing nineteen syllables.
{%—Pañca-citika, as, ā, am,%} Ved. piled up in five
tiers or layers. {%—Pañca-cīra, as,%} m. a Buddhist
saint and legislator, also named Mañju-śrī, appa-
rently the teacher of Buddhism in Nepal. {%—Pañca-%}
{%cūḍa, as, ā, am,%} ‘five-crested,’ having five tufts of
hair; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras or nymph of heaven.
{%—Pañca-cola,%} N. of a part of the Himālaya range.
{%—Pañca-jana, ās,%} m. pl. the five kinds or classes
of beings, viz. gods, men, Gandharvas and Apsarasas,
serpents, and Pitṛs; man, mankind; N. of a demon
who lived in the sea in the form of a conch shell
which was formed of his bones, (he was slain by
Kṛṣṇa, who took the conch shell, thence called
Pāñcajanya, and used it as his horn, see Viṣṇu-
Purāṇa V. 21); N. of a son of Saṃhrāda by Kṛti;
of a Prajā-pati; of a son of Sagara by Keśinī; of a
son of Sṛñjaya and father of Soma-datta; ({%ī%}), f. an
assemblage or aggregate of five persons; N. of a
daughter of Viśva-rūpa and wife of Bharata. {%—Pañ-%}
{%cajanālaya (˚na-āl˚), as, ā, am,%} an epithet of the
Ābhīras, (perhaps so called as living where the
demon Pañca-jana lived.) {%—Pañcajanīna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} devoted to the five races; ({%as%}), m. an actor, a
mimic, a buffoon; the chief of five men. {%—Pañca-%}
{%janīya, as, ā, am,%} consecrated to or intended for
the five classes of beings. {%—Pañca-jñāna, as,%} m.
‘possessing the five kinds of knowledge,’ a Buddha
or Buddhist sanctified teacher. {%—Pañca-takṣa, am,%}
{%ī,%} n. f. a collection of five carpenters. {%—Pañca-tattva,%}
{%am,%} n. the five elements collectively, see under
{%tattva;%} (in the Tantras) the five essentials (all
beginning with {%ma,%} cf. {%pañca-ma-kāra%}), viz. wine
({%madya%}), meat ({%māṃsa%}), fish ({%matsya%}), mystic
intertwining of the fingers ({%mudrā%}), and sexual
intercourse {%(maithuna)%}. {%—Pañca-tantra, am,%} n.,
N. of a well-known collection of moral stories and
fables in five books or chapters ({%tantra%}) from which
the author of the Hitopadeśa drew a large portion of
his materials. {%—Pañcatantraka, am,%} n., N. of a
work consisting of five sections, (see the preceding.)
{%—Pañca-tanmātra, am,%} n. the five subtile rudi-
ments of the five elements; see {%tan-mātra%}. {%—Pañ-%}
{%ca-tapas, ās,%} m. an ascetic who in the hot weather
sits between four fires placed towards the four quarters
with the burning sun above (Manu VI. 23). {%—Pañ-%}
{%ca-tā,%} f. or {%pañca-tva, am,%} n. fivefoldness, fivefold
state; the aggregate of five, a collection of five
things; the five elements collectively (viz. earth, air,
fire, water, and ākāśa); separation into the five ele-
ments of which the body consists, death, dissolu-
tion. {%—Pañca-tāra, as, ā, am,%} five-starred. {%—Pañ-%}
{%ca-tikta, am,%} n. five bitter things (viz. Nimba,
Amṛtā, Vṛṣa, Paṭola, and Nidigdhikā). {%—Pañca-%}
{%tīrthī,%} f. any five principal places of pilgrimage
(especially Viśrānti, Śaukara, Naimiṣa, Prayāga,
and Puṣkara); N. of a sacred bathing-place;
bathing on the day of the equinox (?). {%—Pañca-%}
{%triṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the 35th. {%—Pañca-triṃśat, t,%}
f. or {%pañca-triṃśati, is,%} f., 35. {%—Pañca-tva,%} see
{%pañca-tā%} above. {%—Pañca-daka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of
a people. {%—Pañca-daśa, as, ī, am,%} the 15th; con-
sisting of 15; joined with or increased by 15 (e. g.
[Page0523-a+ 81]
{%pañca-daśaṃ sahasram,%} 1015); containing or
representing the Pañca-daśa Stoma or connected
with it; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%tithi,%} the 15th day of a half
month, the day of full or new moon; N. of a
book (belonging to the Uttara-mīmāṃsā) consist-
ing of 15 chapters. {%—Pañcadaśa-kṛtvas,%} ind.,
15 times. {%—Pañcadaśa-dhā,%} ind. in or into 15
parts or ways. {%—Pañca-daśan, a,%} m. f. n. pl.,
15. {%—Pañcadaśama, as, ī, am,%} the 15th.
{%—Pañcadaśa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing the
Pañca-daśa Stoma. {%—Pañcadaśāha (˚śa-aha), as,%}
m. a period of 15 days. {%—Pañcadaśāhika, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} lasting 15 days. {%—Pañcadaśin, ī, inī, i,%}
consisting of 15, or of 15 parts. {%—Pañcadaśī-%}
{%samāsa, as,%} m., N. of a work by Rāma-kṛṣṇa.
{%—Pañca-dāman, ā, mnī, a,%} Ved. having five
cords. {%—Pañca-dīrgha, am,%} n. the five long parts
of the body (viz. the arms, eyes, belly [according to
the Buddhists, the knees], nose, and breast). {%—Pañ-%}
{%ca-dhā,%} ind. in five ways, in five parts, fivefold.
{%—Pañca-nakha, as, ā, am,%} five-clawed, having
five nails; ({%as%}), m. any animal having five claws or
toes; an elephant; a tiger; a tortoise. {%—Pañca-%}
{%nada, am,%} n. (according to Pāṇ. II. 1, 20, an
Avyayī-bhāva comp.), the Pañjāb or country of five
rivers, viz. the Śata-dru (Sutluj), Vipāśā (Beas),
Irā-vatī (Ravee), Candra-bhāgā (Chenab), and
Vitastā (Jhelum or Behut); N. of a river produced
by the junction of the five rivers of the Pañjāb and
which falls into the Sindhu; N. of a Tīrtha near
the spot where the Kiraṇā and Dhūta-pāpa fall into
the Ganges after the union of the latter river with
the Yamunā and Sarasvatī; ({%as%}), m. a prince of
Pañca-nada; N. of an Asura; N. of a preceptor;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of Pañca-nada. {%—Pañca-%}
{%nada-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place.
{%—Pañcanavata, as, ī, am,%} the 95th. {%—Pañca-%}
{%navati, is,%} f., 95. {%—Pañcanavati-tama, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} the 95th. {%—Pañca-nāman, ā, mnī, a,%} having
five names. {%—Pañca-nidhana, am,%} n., N. of a
Sāman. {%—Pañca-nimba, am,%} n. the five products
of the Azadirachta Indica (viz. the flowers, fruit,
leaves, bark, and root). {%—Pañca-nīrājana, am,%} n.
waving four things (viz. a lamp, lotus, cloth, mango
or betel leaf) before an idol and then falling pros-
trate. {%—Pañca-pakṣin, ī,%} m., N. of a small book
ascribed to Śiva containing prophecies, in which the
five vowels {%a, i, u, e, o%} are connected with five birds;
(also {%˚pakṣi%} or {%˚pakṣin,%} n.) {%—Pañca-pañca-%}
{%nakha, as,%} m. five species of animals allowed to be
killed and eaten, the hare, porcupine, alligator,
rhinoceros, and tortoise. {%—Pañca-pañcāśa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} the 55th. {%—Pañca-pañcāśat, t,%} f., 55. {%—Pañ-%}
{%ca-pañcin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. having five parts, fivefold.
{%—Pañca-pattra, as,%} m. ‘five-leaved,’ a species of
Caṇḍāla-kanda. {%—Pañca-pad%} or {%pañca-pād, pāt,%}
{%pāt%} or {%padī, pāt,%} consisting of five feet, steps, or
parts; ({%padī%}), f., N. of a river in Śāka-dvīpa.
{%—Pañca-pada, as, ā, am,%} Ved. containing five
Padas; ({%ī%}), f. ‘only five steps,’ a term expressive of
a cold unfriendly relationship, (opposed to {%sāpta-%}
{%padīna,%} q. v.); the five strong cases (viz. the nom.
voc. and acc. sing., the nom. voc. and acc. du., and
the nom. and voc. pl.). {%—Pañca-parṇikā%} or {%pañca-%}
{%parṇī,%} f. a species of small shrub {%(= go-rakṣī).%}
{%—Pañca-parvata, am,%} n. ‘the five mountains,’ N.
of five peaks of the Himālayas. {%—Pañca-pallava,%}
{%am,%} n. the aggregate of five sprigs or young shoots
of the Āmra, Jambū, Kapittha, Vīja-pūraka, and
Vilva; (according to others, of the Āmra, Aśvattha,
Vaṭa, Parkaṭī, and Yajñodumbara; or of the Panasa,
Āmra, Aśvattha, Vaṭa, and Vakula); Bél or Mar-
melos, citron, and wood-apple. {%—Pañca-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. five cups or vessels collectively; a Śrāddha in
which offerings are made in five vessels. {%—Pañca-%}
{%pāda, as, ā, am,%} consisting of or containing five
feet. {%—Pañca-pādikā%} or {%pañca-pādī,%} f., N. of
a treatise on the Uṇādi affixes consisting of five
sections; N. of a philosophical work by Sa-nan-
dana treating of the first four Brahma-sūtras. {%—Pañ-%}
{%capādikā-vivaraṇa, am,%} n. a commentary by
[Page0523-b+ 81]
Prakāśātman on Sa-nandana's Pañca-pādī. {%—Pañ-%}
{%ca-pitta, am,%} n. the gall or bile of five animals (viz.
the boar, goat, buffalo, fish, and peacock). {%—Pañca-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a city. {%—Pañcapuṣpa-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} formed of five flowers. {%—Pañca-prastha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having five elevations or rising grounds
(as a forest; perhaps N. of a forest). {%—Pañca-%}
{%prāṇa, ās,%} m. pl. the five vital airs, the five airs
supposed to be in the body. {%—Pañca-prāsāda, as,%}
m. a temple with four pinnacles and a steeple.
{%—Pañca-bandha, as,%} m. a fine equal to the fifth
part of anything lost or stolen. {%—Pañca-balā,%} f. the
five plants called Balā (viz. Balā, Nāga-b˚, Mahā-b˚,
Ati-b˚, and Rāja-b˚). {%—Pañca-bāṇa%} or {%pañca-vāṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having five arrows,’ epithet of the god of
love. {%—Pañca-bāhu, us,%} m. ‘five-armed,’ N. of one
of the attendants of Śiva. {%—Pañca-brahma, am,%} n.,
N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Pañca-bhadra, as, ā, am,%}
having five good qualities; consisting of five good
ingredients (as a sauce or a decoction); having five
auspicious marks or spotted on the chest, back, face,
and flanks (as a horse); vicious. {%—Pañca-bhuja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} five-armed, pentagonal; ({%as%}), m. a
pentagon. {%—Pañca-bhūta, am,%} n. the five ele-
ments, earth, air, fire, water, and ākāśa. {%—Pañca-%}
{%bhūta-parityakta, as, ā, am,%} deserted by the five
elements (as a dead body). {%—Pañcabhūtātman%}
{%(˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} consisting of the five elements,
formed of the five primary elements (as the body).
{%—Pañca-bhṛṅga,%} epithet of the five plants Deva-
dālī, Śamī, Bhaṅgā, Nirguṇḍī, and Tamāla-pattra.
{%—Pañca-bhautika%} incorrect reading for {%pāñca-%}
{%bhautika,%} q. v. {%—Pañca-ma-kāra, am,%} n. the five
essentials of the left-hand Tantra ritual, the words
for which begin with the letter {%m;%} see {%pañca-%}
{%tattva%}. {%—Pañca-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting or
formed of five, made up or consisting of the five
(elements). {%—Pañca-mahāpātakin, ī, inī, i,%} guilty
of the five great sins; see {%mahā-pātaka%}. {%—Pañca-%}
{%mahāyajña, ās,%} m. pl. the five great sacrifices of
the Hindūs; (see {%mahā-yajña.%}) {%—Pañca-mahiṣa,%}
{%am,%} n. the five products of the buffalo cow; [cf.
{%pañca-gavya.%}] {%—Pañca-māṣika%} or {%pañca-mā-%}
{%ṣaka, as,%} &c., consisting of five Māṣas, amounting
to five Māṣas (as a fine &c.). {%—1. pañca-māsya,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (for 2. see under {%pañcama%}), happening
every five months, containing five months; ({%as%}), m.
the Koïl or Indian cuckoo. {%—Pañca-mukha, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} five-faced or five-headed, (sometimes applied in
the Upaniṣads to Prajā-pati); ({%as%}), m. an epithet
of Śiva; a lion; an arrow with five points; ({%ī%}), f.
a species of plant, Gendarussa Vulgaris; [cf. {%pañca-%}
{%śikha, pañca-vaktra, pañcānana, pañcāsya.%}]
{%—Pañca-mudrā,%} f. five gestures to be made in
presenting offerings to an idol. {%—Pañca-muṣṭi, is,%}
{%ī,%} f. the plant Trigonella Corniculata. {%—Pañca-%}
{%mūtra, am,%} n. the urine of five female animals
(viz. the cow, goat, sheep, buffalo, and ass). {%—Pañca-%}
{%mūla, am,%} n. or {%pañca-mūlī,%} f. a collection or
group of five roots or plants with tuberous roots
(e. g. Vilva, Agni-mantha, Ṭuṇṭuka, Pāṭala, and
Kāśmarī; or Tri-kaṇṭaka, the two Bṛhatīs, Pṛthak-
parṇī, and Vidāri-gandha; the first is considered the
larger collection, the second the smaller; other
groups are also enumerated). {%—Pañca-yakṣā,%} f.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Pañca-yajña, ās,%} m. pl. the five
rites or sacrifices of a house-keeper; [cf. {%pañca-%}
{%mahāyajña.%}] {%—Pañcayajña-paribhraṣṭa, as,%} m.
a Brahman who omits to perform the five great sacri-
fices. {%—Pañca-yāma, as,%} m., N. of a son of Ātapa
(Sun-shine). {%—Pañca-yuga, am,%} n. a cycle of five
years, a lustrum. {%—Pañca-rakṣa,%} N. of two Prajñā-
pāramitās (q. v.) connected with each other. {%—Pañ-%}
{%ca-rakṣaka, as,%} m. a species of plant {%(= pakta-%}
{%pauḍa)%}. {%—Pañca-ratna, am,%} n. a collection of
five jewels or precious things, viz. gold, the diamond,
sapphire, ruby, and pearl, or (according to Gauḍa)
gold, silver, coral, pearl, and Rāga-paṭṭa; N. of a
collection of five verses on ethical subjects; ({%āni%}), n.
pl. the five gems or five most admired episodes of
the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Pañca-rasā,%} f. the Emblic
[Page0523-c+ 81]
Myrobalan tree {%(= āmalakī)%}. {%—Pañca-rātra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} lasting five nights or days; ({%am%}), n. a period
of five nights, N. of an Ahīna (q. v.) which lasts five
days; a general term for the sacred books of various
Vaiṣṇava sects; see {%pāñcarātra%}. {%—Pañca-rā-%}
{%traka, as, ā, am,%} lasting five nights (i. e. days).
{%—Pañcarātra-dīpikā,%} f. (probably) N. of a treatise
on the fabrication and right dimensions and deco-
ration of idols. {%—Pañca-rāśika, as, ā, am,%} relating
to the five ratios or proportions of numbers; ({%am%}),
n. the rule of five, the rule of proportion with five
terms, double rule of three (?). {%—Pañcarca (˚ca-%}
{%ṛca), am,%} n., Ved. a stanza consisting of five
verses. {%—Pañca-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} possessing
five characteristics (said of the Purāṇas, which ought
strictly to comprehend five topics, viz. the creation
of the universe, its destruction and renovation, the
genealogy of gods and patriarchs, the reigns of the
Manus, and the history of the solar and lunar races;
but few Purāṇas, except the Viṣṇu, conform to
this description, and even the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa di-
verges into other topics). {%—Pañca-lambaka, am,%}
n., N. of the fourteenth Lambaka in the Kathā-
sarit-sāgara. {%—Pañca-lavaṇa, am,%} n. five kinds of
salt (viz. Kāca, Saindhava, Sāmudra, Viḍa, and Sau-
varcala). {%—Pañca-lāṅgalaka, am,%} n. a gift of as
much land as can be cultivated with five ploughs.
{%—Pañca-loha, am,%} n. a metallic alloy containing
five metals (viz. copper, brass, tin, lead, and iron).
{%—Pañca-lohaka, am,%} n. the five metals (viz. gold,
silver, copper, tin, and lead). {%—Pañca-vaktra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} five-faced; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; N. of one
of the attendants of Skanda; a lion; ({%ā%}), f. epithet
of Durgā; [cf. {%pañca-mukha.%}] {%—Pañca-vaṭa, as,%}
m. ‘five-threaded,’ the Brāhmanical or sacrificial
cord worn across the breast or over the shoulder [cf.
{%pañcā-vaṭa%}]; N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f. the five fig-trees
(viz. Aśvattha, Vilva, Vaṭa, Dhātrī, and Aśoka); N. of
a part of the great southern forest where the Godā-
varī rises and where Rāma resided for a long period
of his banishment; (in Rāmāyaṇa 1. 3, 18, {%pañca-%}
{%vaṭa, am,%} n. occurs.) {%—Pañca-varga, as,%} m. a
class or group or series of five; the five essential
ingredients or constituent elements of the body, (see
1. {%dhātu%}); the five organs of sense; the five
sacrifices, &c., (according to some also {%pañca-vargī,%}
which may mean ‘five classes’); ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved.
proceeding in five lines or at five times. {%—Pañca-%}
{%varṇa, as, ā, am,%} five-coloured; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
mountain; ({%am%}), n., N. of a forest. {%—Pañca-var-%}
{%dhana, as,%} m. {%= pañca-rakṣaka%}. {%—Pañca-var-%}
{%ṣaka-deśīya, as, ā, am,%} nearly five years old.
{%—Pañca-varṣīya, as, ā, am,%} five years old.
{%—Pañca-valkala, am,%} n. a collection of the bark
of five kinds of trees, viz. the Indian, glomerous,
holy and waved-leaf fig-tree, and Calamus Rotang, a
sort of reed, (i. e. Nyag-rodha, Udumbara, Aśvattha,
Plaksha, and Vetasa; but other trees are sometimes
substituted.) {%—Pañca-vāṇa, as,%} m. ‘five-arrowed,’
a N. of Kāma-deva, the Indian Cupid. {%—Pañca-vā-%}
{%tīya, am,%} n., N. of an oblation offered to the five winds
at the Rāja-sūya. {%—Pañca-vārṣika, as, ī, am,%} re-
curring every five years. {%—Pañca-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%}
yoked with five, drawn by five (as a carriage &c.).
{%—Pañca-viṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the 25th; consisting of
25, containing 25; presenting the Pañca-viṃśa Stoma,
belonging to it, celebrated with it; ({%as%}), m. an epithet
of Viṣṇu regarded as the 25th Tattva. {%—Pañca-%}
{%viṃśaka, as, ī, am,%} the 25th; 25 years old ({%vayasā%}
{%pañca-viṃśakaḥ%}); consisting of 25. {%—Pañca-viṃśati,%}
{%is,%} f., 25. {%—Pañcaviṃśatikā,%} f. a collection of 25
stanzas or tales, &c.; [cf. {%vetāla-p˚.%}] {%—Pañcaviṃ-%}
{%śati-tama%} or {%pañcaviṃśatima, as, ī, am,%} the 25th.
{%—Pañca-vidha%} or {%pañcavidheya, as, ā, am,%} of
five kinds, fivefold. {%—Pañca-vidhāna-sūtra, am,%}
n., N. of a work belonging to the Sāma-veda.
{%—Pañca-vindu-prasṛta, am,%} n., N. of a particular
movement in dancing. {%—Pañca-vīja, am,%} n. a col-
lection of five kinds of seeds (viz. of Cardiospermum
Halicacabum, Trigonella Fœnum Græcum, Astera-
cantha Longifolia, Ligusticum Ajowan, and cumin-seed;
[Page0524-a+ 81]
or of Trapusa, Karkaṭī, Dāḍima, Padma, and Vānarī;
or of Sinapis Racemosa, Ligusticum Ajowan, cumin-
seed, sesamum from Chorasan, and poppy). {%—Pañca-%}
{%vīra-goṣṭha, am,%} n. (perhaps) an assembly-room
named ‘The Five Heroes,’ i. e. the five sons of Pāṇḍu.
{%—Pañca-vṛt%} or {%pañca-vṛtam,%} ind. fivefold, five
times. {%—Pañca-śata, am,%} n., 105; 500; ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), amounting to 500 (as a fine); fined 500
(paṇas). {%—Pañcaśata-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 105th.
{%—Pañca-śara, as, ā, am,%} ‘five-arrowed,’ armed
with five arrows; ({%as%}), m., N. of Kāma-deva, the
god of love. {%—Pañca-śas,%} ind. by fives, five by five.
{%—Pañca-śasya, am,%} n. (or more correctly {%pañca-%}
{%sasya%}), five species of grain, viz. Dhānya, Mudga,
Tila, Yava, and Śveta-sarṣapa (or Māṣa). {%—Pañca-%}
{%śākha, as,%} m. ‘five-branched,’ the hand (<lang n="greek">πέντοζον</lang>).
{%—Pañca-śāradīya, as,%} m., N. of a Pañcāha
representing five years. {%—Pañca-śikha, as, ā, am,%}
‘five-crested,’ having five tufts of hair on the head;
({%as%}), m. a lion; N. of a Sāṅkhya teacher (a pupil
of Āsuri); N. of an attendant of Śiva; N. of a
Gandharva. {%—Pañca-śīrṣa, as, ā, am,%} five-headed;
({%as%}), m., N. of a mountain. {%—Pañca-śukla, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having five white (spots); ({%as%}), m. a species of
venomous insect. {%—Pañca-śūraṇa, am,%} n. the five
Śūraṇas (Śūraṇa = the bulbous root of Amorpho-
phallus Campanulatus), a collective name of five
bulbous plants; (this word may also be used as an
adj.) {%—Pañca-śairīṣaka, am,%} n. the five products
of the Acacia Śirīṣa, leaf, flower, fruit, bark, root.
{%—Pañca-śaila, as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Pañca-%}
{%ṣa, ās, ās, āṇi,%} pl. (fr. {%pañcan + ṣaṣ%}), five or
six. {%—Pañca-ṣaṣṭa, as, ī, am,%} the 65th. {%—Pañca-%}
{%ṣaṣṭi, is,%} f., 65. {%—Pañcaṣaṣṭi-tama, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} the 65th. {%—Pañca-saṭa, as, ā, am,%} five-
tailed (as a badge of slavery?). {%—Pañca-sattra,%} N. of
a place. {%—Pañca-saptata, as, ī, am,%} the 75th.
{%—Pañca-saptati, is,%} f., 75. {%—Pañcasaptati-tama,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the 75th. {%—Pañca-saptan, a,%} m. f. n. pl.
five times seven or 35. {%—Pañca-sāyaka,%} N. of a
work. {%—Pañca-siddhāntikā,%} f., N. of an astrono-
mical work by Varāha-mihira, founded on the five
older astronomical works, and called by Varāha-mihira
himself Karaṇa. {%—Pañca-siddhauṣadhika (˚dha-%}
{%oṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} consisting of five kinds of medi-
cinal plants. {%—Pañca-sugandhaka, am,%} n. a col-
lection of five kinds of aromatic vegetable substances,
cloves ({%lavaṅga%}), nutmeg ({%jātī-phala%}), camphor
({%karpūra%}), aloe wood ({%a-guru%}), and kakkola (q. v.).
{%—Pañca-sūtrī,%} f. the five Sūtras. {%—Pañca-sūnā,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. the five things in a house by which
animal life may be accidentally destroyed, the fire-
place, the slab on which condiments are ground, the
broom, the pestle and mortar, and the water-pot.
{%—Pañca-skandhaka,%} N. of a work. {%—Pañca-%}
{%srotas,%} five streams (probably {%= pañca-nada%}).
{%—Pañca-svarā,%} f., N. of an astrological work in
seven chapters on fortune-telling and the averting of
good or bad luck by Prajāpati-dāsa-vaidya. {%—Pañca-%}
{%svarodaya (˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of an astronomical
work ascribed to Rudra. {%—Pañca-svastyayana,%} N.
of a Vedic work accentuated in an unusual manner
and resembling a Brāhmaṇa in its subject-matter.
{%—Pañca-hasta,%} N. of a place. {%—Pañca-hāyana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} five years old. {%—Pañca-hotra, as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Manu Rohita. {%—Pañca-hrada-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Pañ-%}
{%cāṃśa (˚ca-aṃ˚), as,%} m. the fifth part, a fifth.
{%—Pañcākṣara (˚ca-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} consisting
of five syllables, five-syllabled. {%—Pañcākhyāna (˚ca-%}
{%ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} consisting of five tales; ({%am%}), n.
another name of the Pañca-tantra. {%—Pañcāgni (˚ca-%}
{%ag˚), i,%} n. a collection of five fires, the five sacred
fires (viz. Anvāhārya-pacana, Gārhapatya, Āhava-
nīya, Sabhya, and Āvasathya, generally in comp.);
five mystic fires supposed to be present in the body;
({%is%}), m. a householder who maintains the five sacred
fires, one who keeps the five fires constantly burning
({%= agni-hotrī,%} see Manu III. 185); one who is ac-
quainted with the doctrine of the five mystic fires.
{%—Pañcāgni-tva, am,%} n. a collection or aggregate
[Page0524-b+ 81]
of five fires or of five passions (which inflame men's
minds), &c. {%—Pañcāgni-vidyā-prakaraṇa, am,%}
n., N. of a sacred work of the Vājasaneyins. {%—Pañ-%}
{%cāṅga, as, ī, am,%} five-limbed, five-membered, having
five parts or subdivisions, consisting of five members
or parts, &c.; {%pañcāṅgaḥ praṇāmaḥ,%} obeisance
made with the arms, knees, head, voice, and look;
({%as%}), m. a tortoise or turtle [cf. {%pañcāṅga-gupta%}];
a horse with five spots in various parts of his body
{%(= pañca-bhadra); (ī),%} f. a bit for horses; a kind
of bandage; ({%am%}), n. five parts of a tree (viz. root,
bark, leaf, flower, and fruit); five limbs or members
of the body (in comp.); five modes of devotion,
(said to be silent prayer, burnt offerings, libations,
bathing idols, and feeding Brāhmans); any aggregate
of five parts; a calendar or almanac treating of five
things, viz. solar days, lunar days, asterisms, Yogas,
and Karaṇas. {%—Pañcāṅga-gupta, as,%} m. a tortoise
or turtle ({%= pañca-gupta,%} q. v.). {%—Pañcāṅga-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. a calendar or almanac, (see above.)
{%—Pañcāṅga-śuddhi, is,%} f. the propitious or
favourable state of five important points, the solar
day, lunar day, Nakṣatra, Yoga, and Karaṇa.
{%—Pañcāṅgika (˚ca-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} five-limbed,
five-membered. {%—Pañcāṅguri (˚ca-aṅ˚), is, is, i,%}
Ved. five-fingered, having five fingers. {%—Pañcāṅgula%}
{%(˚ca-aṅ˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} five fingers long, measuring
five fingers; ({%as%}), m. the castor-oil plant, Ricinus
Communis; ({%ī%}), f. a species of shrub. {%—Pañcāṅguli%}
{%(˚ca-aṅ˚), is, is, i,%} five-fingered, having five fingers
or finger-like divisions. {%—Pañcāja (˚ca-āja), am,%}
n. the five products of the goat; [cf. {%pañca-gavya.%}]
{%—Pañcātapā (˚ca-āt˚),%} f. doing penance with five
fires or with four fires and the sun, (see under {%tapas.%})
{%—Pañcātmaka (˚ca-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} consisting of
the five elements, (said of the body.) {%—Pañcādhikā%}
(according to the Ṛg-veda Anukramaṇī) = 25 (i. e.
20 + 5). {%—Pañcānana (˚ca-ān˚), as, ī, am,%} five-
faced, (hence {%= aty-ugra,%} very fierce, very passionate,
&c.); ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; a lion; (often at
the end of names of learned men to express respect,
e. g. {%Nyāya-pañcānana, Nyāya-siddhānta-p˚,%}
&c.); ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Pañcānanda-%}
{%māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Pañcānu-%}
{%gāna (˚ca-an˚), am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Pañcāp-%}
{%saras (˚ca-ap˚), as,%} n., N. of a lake or pool sup-
posed to have been produced by an ascetic named
Mandakarṇi (Śātakarṇi) through the power of his
penance, (so called because under it Mandakarṇi
formed a secret chamber for five Apsarasas who had
seduced him from his devotions, see Rāmāyaṇa III.
15, 11; Raghu-v. XIII. 38.) {%—Pañcābja-maṇḍala%}
{%(˚ca-ab˚), am,%} n., N. of a mystical circle. {%—Pañcā-%}
{%mṛta (˚ca-am˚), am,%} n. the five kinds of divine
food (viz. milk, coagulated or sour milk, butter,
honey, and sugar); the aggregate of any five drugs
of supposed efficacy; ({%as, ā, am%}), consisting of five
ingredients (as a medicine); ({%am%}), n., N. of a
Tantra. {%—Pañcāmnāya (˚ca-ām˚), ās,%} m. pl. five
Śāstras supposed to have proceeded from the five
mouths of Śiva, constituting the basis of the Tantra
ritual. {%—Pañcāmla (˚ca-ām˚), am,%} n. the aggregate
of five acid plants, the jujube, pomegranate, sorrel,
spondias, and citron. {%—Pañcārcis (˚ca-ar˚), is,%}
m. the planet Mercury. {%—Pañcārtha-bhāṣya-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f., N. of a chapter of the Sarva-darśana-
saṅgraha by Mādhavācārya. {%—Pañcā-vaṭa, as,%} m.
the sacrificial cord as worn crossed upon the breast with
the ends hanging over the shoulders; [cf. {%pañca-%}
{%vaṭa.%}] {%—Pañcāvatta (˚ca-av˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
divided into five parts. {%—Pañcāvatta-tā,%} f. or {%pañ-%}
{%cāvatta-tva, am,%} n. fivefold division. {%—Pañcā-%}
{%vattin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. that which is divided into five
parts or has a fivefold division; that which divides
into five parts. {%—Pañcāvattīya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
divided into five portions, offered in five portions.
{%—Pañcāvayava, as, ā, am,%} five-limbed, five-
membered; {%pañcāvayavaṃ vākyam,%} a five-mem-
bered argument, a syllogism. {%—Pañcāvastha (˚ca-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. a corpse (resolved into the five ele-
ments). {%—Pañcāvi (˚ca-avi), is, ī, i,%} Ved. reckoning
[Page0524-c+ 81]
five lambing times, i. e. five times six months.
{%—Pañcāvika (˚ca-āv˚), am,%} n. the five products
of the sheep; [cf. {%pañca-gavya, pañcāja.%}] {%—Pañ-%}
{%cāśīta (˚ca-aś˚), as, ī, am,%} the 85th. {%—Pañcāśīti%}
{%(˚ca-aś˚), is,%} f., 85. {%—Pañcāśīti-tama, as, ī, am,%}
the 85th. {%—Pañcāsya (˚ca-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} five-
faced, five-headed; five-pointed (as an arrow); ({%as%}),
m. a lion. {%—Pañcāha (˚ca-aha), as,%} m. a period
of five days; ({%as, ā, am%}), lasting five days; ({%as%}),
m. a Soma oblation with five Sutyā days. {%—Pañcā-%}
{%hika, as, ā, am,%} containing five feast days or fes-
tivals. {%—Pañcī-karaṇa-vārttika, am,%} n., N. of a
philosophical work by Sureśvara. {%—Pañcī-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to render fivefold
&c., cause anything to contain all the five elements.
{%—Pañcedhmīya (˚ca-idh˚), as, ā, am,%} (a nocturnal
rite) in which five torches &c. are used. {%—Pañcen-%}
{%dra (˚ca-in˚), as,%} m. one who has the five Indrāṇīs
as his deity. {%—Pañcendra-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} like
five Indras. {%—Pañcendriya (˚ca-in˚), am,%} n. the
five organs of sense (viz. the eye, ear, nose, tongue,
and skin) or the five organs of action (viz. hands,
feet, larynx, and organs of generation and excretion);
({%as, ā, am%}), having five organs of sense. {%—Pañceṣu%}
{%(˚ca-iṣ˚), us,%} m. ‘five-arrowed,’ N. of Kāma-deva,
the Hindū Cupid. {%—Pañconā%} (according to the Ṛg-
veda Anukramaṇī) = 15 (i. e. 20 — 5). {%—Pañcoṣman%}
{%(˚ca-uṣ˚), āṇas,%} m. pl. the five digestive fires
supposed to be in the body. {%—Pañcaudana (˚ca-%}
{%od˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. prepared with fivefold pulp
of mashed grain, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26718<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcaka<k2>paYcaka
{%Pañcaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ consisting of five, relating
to five, made of five, bought with five &c., taking
five per cent; ({%as%}), m. any collection or aggregate
of five; N. of one of the attendants of Skanda;
({%ikā%}), f., N. of each book of the Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa
(as consisting of five Adhyāyas); N. of a game
played with five shells; ({%am%}), n. an aggregate of five,
<lang n="greek">πεντάς;</lang> a field of battle.
<LEND>

<L>26719<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcat<k2>paYcat
{%Pañcat, t,%}¦ f. an aggregate of five,
<LEND>

<L>26720<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcataya<k2>paYcataya
{%Pañcataya, as, ī, am,%}¦ fivefold, having five parts
or limbs, five.
<LEND>

<L>26721<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcaTa<k2>paYcaTa
{%Pañcatha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. the fifth.
<LEND>

<L>26722<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcaTu<k2>paYcaTu
{%Pañcathu, us,%}¦ m. time; the Koïl or Indian
cuckoo.
<LEND>

<L>26723<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcaDA<k2>paYcaDA
{%Pañca-dhā,%}¦ ind. See p. 523, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>26724<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcanI<k2>paYcanI
{%Pañcanī,%}¦ f. a chequered cloth for playing at
draughts, &c.; [cf. {%pañcamī, pañcārī, pañcālī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26725<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcama<k2>paYcama
{%Pañcama, as, ī, am,%}¦ the fifth; forming the fifth
part, constituting a fifth part, beautiful, brilliant,
pleasing; dexterous, clever; ({%as%}), m. the fifth or in
later times the seventh note of the Hindū musical
scale, (so called because, according to the Hindūs, its
tone is produced by air drawn from five parts of the
body, the navel, breast, throat, heart, and forehead);
one of the Rāgas or musical modes; N. of the
twenty-first Kalpa (called after the musical note);
the fifth consonant of a Varga, i. e. a nasal; ({%ī%}), f.,
scil. {%tithi,%} the fifth day of the half month; the
termination of the fifth or ablative case, a word in
the ablative; an epithet of Draupadī, the wife of
the five Pāṇḍu princes [cf. {%pāñcālī%}]; a chequered
cloth for playing at draughts &c., a chess-board ({%=%}
{%śāri-śṛṅkhalā%}); N. of a river; ({%am%}), n. a fifth,
the fifth part; copulation as the fifth of the Tattvas
of the Tāntrikas, see under {%pañca-tattva; (am),%}
ind. for the fifth time, fifthly. {%—Pañcama-bhāgīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} belonging to the fifth part. {%—Pañcama-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having the fifth (of anything).
{%—Pañcama-sāra-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of a musical
work. {%—Pañcamāra (˚ma-ara), as,%} m. the fifth
spoke in the wheel of time (with Jainas); N. of
a son of Bala-deva. {%—2. pañcamāsya (˚ma-ās˚),%}
{%as,%} m. (for 1. see p. 523, col. 2), the Indian cuckoo
or Koïl (as producing the fifth note of the scale with
its mouth or throat).
<LEND>

<L>26726<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcamaka<k2>paYcamaka
{%Pañcamaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī (?), am,%} fifth, the fifth.
<LEND>

<L>26727<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcamin<k2>paYcamin
{%Pañcamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ being in the fifth year of
one's age.
<LEND>

<L>26728<pc>0524-c<k1>paYcArI<k2>paYcArI
{%Pañcārī,%}¦ f. a chequered cloth for playing at
draughts; [cf. {%pañcanī, pañcamī, pañcālī.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0525-a+ 76]

<L>26729<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcASa<k2>paYcASa
{%Pañcāśa, as, ī, am,%}¦ the 50th; having 50 added
(e. g. {%pañcāśaṃ śatam,%} 150; {%pañcāśaṃ saha-%}
{%sram,%} 1050).
<LEND>

<L>26730<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcASaka<k2>paYcASaka
{%Pañcāśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ 50; ({%ikā%}), f. a collec-
tion or aggregate of 50; [cf. {%śloka-pañcāśikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26731<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcASat<k2>paYcASat
{%Pañcāśat, t,%}¦ f., 50; ({%ardha-pañcāśat,%} 25;
{%ekona-pañcāśat,%} 49; cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πεντήκοντα;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>quinquaginta;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>caogat.</nsi>) {%—Pañcāśac-chas,%}
ind. ({%pañcāśat + śas%}), by fifties, fifty by fifty. {%—Pañ-%}
{%cāśad-bhāga, as,%} m. the 50th part.
<LEND>

<L>26732<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcASati<k2>paYcASati
{%Pañcāśati, is,%}¦ f., 50.
<LEND>

<L>26733<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcASatka<k2>paYcASatka
{%Pañcāśatka, as, ā, am,%}¦ 50 years old.
<LEND>

<L>26734<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcASattama<k2>paYcASattama
{%Pañcāśat-tama, as, ī, am,%}¦ the 50th.
<LEND>

<L>26735<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcASadDA<k2>paYcASadDA
{%Pañcāśad-dhā,%}¦ ind. in 50 parts; {%ekona-pañcā-%}
{%śaddhā,%} in 49 parts.
<LEND>

<L>26736<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcikA<k2>paYcikA
{%Pañcikā,%}¦ f. a game played with five dice.
<LEND>

<L>26737<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcin<k2>paYcin
{%Pañcin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. divided into five, con-
sisting of five, fivefold.
<LEND>

<L>26738<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcAla<k2>paYcAla
{#paYcAla#}¦ {%pañcāla, ās,%} m. pl. (said to be fr.
rt. 1. {%pac%} or {%pañc%}), N. of a warrior-tribe and their
country in the north of India; ({%as%}), m. a prince of
the Pañcālas; N. of a man brought by Viśvak-sena
to the childless Gaṇḍūṣa; N. of a Nāga-rāja; a
particular venomous insect; ({%as, am%}), m. n., N. of
a metre consisting of twelve syllables; ({%ī%}), f. a doll,
puppet; a style of singing; a chequered cloth for
playing at draughts &c. {%—Pañcāla-caṇḍa, as,%} m.,
N. of a teacher. {%—Pañcāla-pada-vṛṭṭi, is,%} f., N.
of a particular rhythm. {%—Pañcāla-rāja, as,%} or
{%pañcāla-rājan, ā,%} m. a king of Pañcāla.
<LEND>

<L>26739<pc>0525-a<k1>paYcAlaka<k2>paYcAlaka
{%Pañcālaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the Pañcālas;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the Pañcālas; ({%as%}), m. a species of
venomous insect; ({%ikā%}), f. a doll, a puppet; a kind
of song.
<LEND>

<L>26740<pc>0525-a<k1>paYCIhila<k2>paYCIhila
{#paYCIhila#}¦ {%pañchīhila, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>26741<pc>0525-a<k1>paYj<k2>paYj
{#paYj#}¦ {%pañj,%} a Sautra root occurring in
grammatical Sūtras only, but not in the
Dhātu-pāṭha, said to have the sense of ‘enclosing,’
and artificially formed on account of {%pañjara%} below.
<LEND>

<L>26742<pc>0525-a<k1>paYjara<k2>paYjara
{%Pañjara, am,%}¦ n. (probably connected with {%paj%} in
Ved. {%pajra, pājas%}), a cage, an aviary, a dove-cot,
&c.; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a skeleton; the ribs; ({%as%}),
m. the body; the Kali-yuga; a purificatory cere-
mony performed on cows; ({%am%}), n. certain prayers
and formularies with which a deity is, as it were,
caught and confined; [cf. {%pāñjarya;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">πήγνυμι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πάγη;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pango.</nsi>] {%—Pañjara-śuka, as,%} m. a parrot
in a cage, a caged parrot. {%—Pañjarākheṭa (˚ra-%}
{%ākh˚), as,%} m. a sort of basket or wicker trap in
which fish are caught.
<LEND>

<L>26743<pc>0525-a<k1>paYjaraka<k2>paYjaraka
{%Pañjaraka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a cage, an aviary;
({%ikā%}), f. peculiar prayers and formularies, (see under
{%pañjara.%})
<LEND>

<L>26744<pc>0525-a<k1>paYjaka<k2>paYjaka
{#paYjaka#}¦ {%pañjaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>26745<pc>0525-a<k1>paYjala<k2>paYjala
{#paYjala#}¦ {%pañjala, as,%} m. a species of bulbous
plant ({%= kola-kanda%}).
<LEND>

<L>26746<pc>0525-a<k1>paYji<k2>paYji
{#paYji#}¦ {%pañji, is, ī,%} f. the ball or roll of
cotton from which the thread is spun; an almanac,
calendar; a journal; (perhaps) a register. {%—Pañjī-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. a Kāyastha or scribe; an almanac-
maker.
<LEND>

<L>26747<pc>0525-a<k1>paYjikA<k2>paYjikA
{%Pañjikā,%}¦ f. the ball or roll of cotton from which
the thread is spun; a perpetual commentary which
explains and analyses every word; a calendar, an
almanac; a journal, a book in which receipts and
expenditure are entered; the register or record of
human actions kept by Yama (the judge of the
dead). {%—Pañjikā-kāraka, as,%} m. a writer, a man
of the Kāyastha tribe; an almanac-maker.
<LEND>

<L>26748<pc>0525-a<k1>paw<k2>paw
{#paw#}¦ {%paṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%paṭati, paṭitum,%} to go,
move: Caus. or cl. 10. P. {%pāṭayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to split, cleave, tear, tear up, tear asunder,
tear open, divide, pierce, penetrate; to break, to
eradicate, remove; to pluck out; to cause to be
torn up; to speak; to shine; {%paṭayati, -yitum,%} to
string; to surround, encircle, encompass, clothe; to
[Page0525-b+ 78]
distribute (?): Pass. of the Caus. {%pāṭyate,%} to be split
open, cleave asunder (intransitively).
<LEND>

<L>26749<pc>0525-b<k1>pawa<k2>pawa
{%Paṭa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (perhaps connected with
{%pattra,%} and usually {%paṭas,%} m. in the sense of
‘cloth,’ &c.), woven cloth, cloth, a piece of cloth,
a garment, raiment; fine cloth; a veil or screen; a
piece of cloth or tablet or plate on which any-
thing may be written or painted [cf. {%paṭṭa,%} col.
3]; ({%as%}), m. a species of tree, (see {%piyāla%}); a
species of bird; anything well made or polished,
{%= puras-kṛta; (ī),%} f. cloth, a particular sort of
cloth, coarse thick cloth, canvas; the curtain of a
stage; a screen of cloth surrounding a tent, an outer
tent; a coloured or chintz garment (?); ({%am%}), n. a
thatch, a roof {%(= paṭala)%}. {%—Paṭa-kāra, as,%} m. a
weaver; a painter. {%—Paṭa-kuṭī,%} f. a tent; a tent of
woollen cloth. {%—Paṭa-caura, as,%} m. a cloth-stealer,
a shop-lifter. {%—Paṭa-maṇḍapa, as,%} m. ‘canvas
house,’ a tent. {%—Paṭa-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of
cloth; ({%am%}), n. a tent, a canvas house; a petticoat (?).
{%—Paṭa-vāpa, as,%} m. a tent, (for {%paṭa-vāsa.%})
{%—Paṭa-vāsa, as,%} m. a tent; a petticoat; perfumed
powder. {%—Paṭa-vāsaka, as,%} m. perfumed powder.
{%—Paṭa-veśman, a,%} n. a tent. {%—Paṭākṣepa (˚ṭa-%}
{%ak˚), as,%} m. not tossing the stage curtain, not
pushing it aside, (probably the correct reading would
be {%a-paṭī-kṣepa.%}) {%—Paṭī-kṣepa, as,%} m. tossing
aside the stage curtain, (denoting in theatrical lan-
guage a hurried entrance on the stage.) {%—Paṭotaja%}
{%(˚ṭa-ut˚), am,%} n. a tent; sunshine (?).
<LEND>

<L>26750<pc>0525-b<k1>pawaka<k2>pawaka
{%Paṭaka, as,%}¦ m. cotton cloth; a camp, encamp-
ment; the half of a village, (for {%pāṭaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>26751<pc>0525-b<k1>pawara<k2>pawara
{%Paṭara, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (Ved.) a ray (of sun-
light); ({%as%}), m., N. of the third of the seven suns,
(see Viṣṇu-Purāṇa VI. 2, where the names of the
seven suns are given as Ārāga, Bhrāja, Paṭala,
Pataṅga, Svamābhāk, Jyotiṣmat, and Sa-vibhāsa);
an epithet of Varuṇa.
<LEND>

<L>26752<pc>0525-b<k1>pawaraka<k2>pawaraka
{%Paṭaraka, as,%}¦ m. a species of plant ({%= gundra%}).
<LEND>

<L>26753<pc>0525-b<k1>pawala<k2>pawala
{%Paṭala, am,%}¦ n. a roof, thatch, (in this sense the
fem. form {%paṭalī%} is also given); a cover, covering,
veil, coating, an enclosing or surrounding skin or
membrane (especially over the eyes), a film over
the eyes; a basket; a heap, mass, number, quantity
or multitude, (often at the end of a comp. with
words denoting ‘cloud,’ e. g. {%jalada-paṭala,%} a
mass of clouds; the fem. forms {%paṭalī%} and {%paṭalā%}
are also given); train, retinue; a mark on the
forehead or other parts of the body with sandal-wood
(either as an ornament or sectarian mark); a spot,
circle, district (?); ({%as%}), m. ‘cataract of the eye,’ N.
of one of the seven suns at the end of the world; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. a section, chapter, or portion of a book
(especially of the Ṛg-veda Prātiśākhya); ({%as, ī%}),
m. f. a tree; a stalk; a book (?); (in law) the filing
of suits, (gender doubtful.) {%—Paṭala-prānta, as,%} m.
the edge of a thatch.
<LEND>

<L>26754<pc>0525-b<k1>pawalaka<k2>pawalaka
{%Paṭalaka%}¦ (gender doubtful), a heap, &c. See
{%paṭala%} above.
<LEND>

<L>26755<pc>0525-b<k1>pawi<k2>pawi
{%Paṭi, is,%}¦ f. (for {%paṭī,%} cf. {%paṭa%}), a kind of cloth;
a species of aquatic plant ({%= kumbhikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>26756<pc>0525-b<k1>pawikA<k2>pawikA
{%Paṭikā,%}¦ f. woven cloth.
<LEND>

<L>26757<pc>0525-b<k1>pawaccara<k2>pawaccara
{#pawaccara#}¦ {%paṭaccara, as,%} m. (probably fr.
{%paṭat + cara, paṭ%} being an imitative sound, per-
haps of creeping stealthily), a thief, a robber [cf.
{%pātaccara%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%am%}),
n. old or ragged clothes.
<LEND>

<L>26758<pc>0525-b<k1>pawat<k2>pawat
{#pawat#}¦ {%paṭat,%} ind. the sound {%paṭat.%}
<LEND>

<L>26759<pc>0525-b<k1>pawatkakanTa<k2>pawatkakanTa
{#pawatkakanTa#}¦ {%paṭatka-kantha, am,%} n., N. of a
town, (Pāṇ. VI. 2, 125.)
<LEND>

<L>26760<pc>0525-b<k1>pawapawA<k2>pawapawA
{#pawapawA#}¦ {%paṭa-paṭā,%} ind. an imitative sound.
<LEND>

<L>26761<pc>0525-b<k1>pawaBAkza<k2>pawaBAkza
{#pawaBAkza#}¦ {%paṭabhākṣa, as,%} m. an instru-
ment for looking (at any object), an optical instru-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>26762<pc>0525-b<k1>pawaha<k2>pawaha
{#pawaha#}¦ {%paṭaha, as, am,%} m. n. (but com-
monly m.; probably fr. {%paṭa + ha,%} rt. {%pan%}), a
kettle-drum, drum, war-drum, tabor; ({%as%}), m. be-
ginning, undertaking; hurting, injuring, killing.
[Page0525-c+ 74]
{%—Paṭaha-ghoṣaka, as,%} m. a crier who beats a
drum before making a proclamation. {%—Paṭaha-%}
{%tā,%} f. the noise or function of a drum. {%—Paṭaha-%}
{%dhvani, is,%} m. the sound of a drum; ({%is, is, i%}),
sounding like a drum. {%—Paṭaha-bhramaṇa, am,%} n.
going about with a drum to call people together.
<LEND>

<L>26763<pc>0525-c<k1>pawAka<k2>pawAka
{#pawAka#}¦ {%paṭāka, as,%} m. a bird [cf. {%paiṭāka%}];
({%ā%}), f. a flag, banner ({%= patākā%}).
<LEND>

<L>26764<pc>0525-c<k1>pawAlukA<k2>pawAlukA
{#pawAlukA#}¦ {%paṭālukā,%} f. a leech; [cf. {%jalukā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26765<pc>0525-c<k1>pawi<k2>pawi
{#pawi#}¦ {%paṭi.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26766<pc>0525-c<k1>pawizWa<k2>pawizWa
{#pawizWa#}¦ {%paṭiṣṭha, paṭīyas.%} See {%paṭu%} below.
<LEND>

<L>26767<pc>0525-c<k1>pawisa<k2>pawisa
{#pawisa#}¦ {%paṭisa, as,%} m. (incorrect for {%paṭ-%}
{%ṭiśa?%}), a sort of weapon.
<LEND>

<L>26768<pc>0525-c<k1>pawIra<k2>pawIra
{#pawIra#}¦ {%paṭīra, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%paṭ%}),
a ball for playing with; the god of love; sandal-
wood; ({%am%}), n. Catechu ({%= khadira%}); the belly;
anything that can be carried off or taken away ({%=%}
{%haraṇīya%}); a sieve; height; a radish; a field; a
cloud; bamboo manna; rheumatism; catarrh.
<LEND>

<L>26769<pc>0525-c<k1>pawu<k2>pawu
{#pawu#}¦ {%paṭu, us, us%} or {%vī, u%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%paṭ%}), sharp, pointed (as a ray of light); clear, shrill,
ringing, sharp-sounding, clear-sounding, crackling,
rustling (said of sound); pungent, acid, hot; sharp,
clever, smart, dexterous, skilful, crafty, sly, cunning;
sensible, intellectual; busy, active, violent, strong,
intense; harsh, hard, rough, fierce; hale, healthy;
cruel, unmerciful, unfeeling; contumelious (as speech
&c.); eloquent, loquacious, talkative [cf. {%vāk-paṭu%}];
blown, expanded; apt, disposed; ({%us%}), m. the tree
Trichosanthes Diœca; the leaf of the Trichosanthes
Diœca; the plant Momordica Charantia; a kind of
perfume ({%= coraka%}); N. of a man; ({%avas%}), m. pl.,
N. of a people; ({%us, u%}), m. n. a mushroom;
({%u%}), n. salt. {%—Paṭu-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} tolerably
clever, pretty skilful. {%—Paṭu-jātīya, as, ā, am,%} of
a clever sort, pretty clever or skilful. {%—Paṭu-tara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} more sharp, sharper, keener, clearer;
more clever, &c. {%—Paṭu-tā,%} f. cleverness; elo-
quence; [cf. {%vāk-p˚.%}] {%—Paṭu-tṛṇaka, am,%} n. a
species of pungent grass. {%—Paṭu-tva, am,%} n. sharp-
ness, keenness (as of sight), cleverness, skilfulness,
eloquence. {%—Paṭu-deśīya%} or {%paṭu-deśya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} tolerably sharp, almost clever, cleverish. {%—Paṭu-%}
{%pattrikā,%} f. a species of shrub {%(= kṣudra-cañcu).%}
{%—Paṭu-parṇikā,%} f. a species of plant {%(= kṣīriṇī).%}
{%—Paṭu-parṇī,%} f. Bryonia Grandis, a species of
cucurbitaceous plant. {%—Paṭu-mat, ān,%} m., N. of a
prince. {%—Paṭu-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Paṭu-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} very clever.
<LEND>

<L>26770<pc>0525-c<k1>pawiman<k2>pawiman
{%Paṭiman, ā,%}¦ m. sharpness, &c. (Pāṇ. V. 1, 122,
VI. 4, 155.)
<LEND>

<L>26771<pc>0525-c<k1>pawizWa<k2>pawizWa
{%Paṭiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ very sharp or clever,
sharpest, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26772<pc>0525-c<k1>pawIyas<k2>pawIyas
{%Paṭīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ sharper, more clever.
<LEND>

<L>26773<pc>0525-c<k1>pawuka<k2>pawuka
{%Paṭuka, as,%}¦ m. Trichosanthes Diœca.
<LEND>

<L>26774<pc>0525-c<k1>pawuSa<k2>pawuSa
{#pawuSa#}¦ {%paṭuśa, as,%} m., N. of a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>26775<pc>0525-c<k1>pawusa<k2>pawusa
{#pawusa#}¦ {%paṭusa, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>26776<pc>0525-c<k1>pawola<k2>pawola
{#pawola#}¦ {%paṭola, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%paṭ%}), a species of cucumber, commonly Palwal,
Trichosanthes Diœca, {%= paṭu; (am),%} n. the fruit of
the above; a sort of cloth, a kind of chintz [cf.
{%paṭa%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a small cucumber, either the same as
above or another species, Luffa Acutangula ({%=%}
{%kośātakī%}).
<LEND>

<L>26777<pc>0525-c<k1>pawolaka<k2>pawolaka
{%Paṭolaka, as,%}¦ m. a muscle or oyster ({%= śukti%})
compared to the shape of the Trichosanthes; ({%ikā%}),
f. {%= paṭolī,%} a species of cucumber.
<LEND>

<L>26778<pc>0525-c<k1>pawOra<k2>pawOra
{#pawOra#}¦ {%paṭaura, as,%} m., Ved. (according to
the Pada-pāṭha {%= paṭa + ūra%}), a particular member
of the body (?).
<LEND>

<L>26779<pc>0525-c<k1>pawwa<k2>pawwa
{#pawwa#}¦ {%paṭṭa, as,%} m. (probably for {%pattra%}),
a slab [cf. {%śilā-p˚%}], tablet (for painting), plate (of
metal for inscription or engraving royal edicts, grants,
&c.); a patent, document, royal grant or order
[Page0526-a+ 77]
(written on copper, stone, &c. {%= nṛpa-śāsana%}); a
stone for grinding with, a muller (?); {%= paṭa,%} cloth,
coloured cloth, fine cloth, woven silk ({%= kauṣeya%});
a strip (e. g. {%nirmoka-paṭṭās,%} strips of cast off skin);
a bandage, ligature, swath, cloth bound round a
sore, &c.; a frontlet, fillet or cloth worn round the
head, turban, (of which five kinds are enumerated,
viz. those of the king, queen, prince, general,) and
the prasāda-paṭṭa or turban of honour worn as a
token of royal favour); a coloured silk turban; a
diadem; an upper or outer garment; a plant com-
monly called Pāt (Corchorus Olitorius) from the
fibres of which or jute a coarse sackcloth and cordage
are prepared (?); a place where four roads meet ({%=%}
{%catuṣ-patha%}); a shield (?); a chair, stool (?); N.
of various men; ({%ī%}), f. an ornament of the forehead;
a martingale, horse's girth ({%= tala-sāraka%}); N. of
a certain species of the Lodhra or Lodh plant ({%=%}
{%kramuka, rodhra, lodhra, paṭṭikā-lodhra%}); red
Lodh, Symplocos Racemosa; ({%am%}), n. a city, town,
village, (probably the Pattah of the South; cf. {%paṭ-%}
{%ṭana, pattana;%} cf. also {%aṃśu-p˚.%}) {%—Paṭṭa-ja,%}
{%am,%} n. a sort of cloth, probably a kind of canvas or
sackcloth. {%—Paṭṭa-devī,%} f. a queen (decorated with
the tiara), the principal wife of a king. {%—Paṭṭa-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. or {%paṭṭa-bandhana, am,%} n. bind-
ing or crowning the head with a fillet or tiara.
{%—Paṭṭa-mahiṣī,%} f. the principal wife of a king;
[cf. {%paṭṭa-devī.%}] {%—Paṭṭa-raṅga, am,%} n. a plant
used in dying, Cæsalpina Sappan. {%—Paṭṭa-rañjana%}
or {%paṭṭa-rañjanaka, am,%} n. Cæsalpina Sappan.
{%—Paṭṭa-rājñī,%} f. the principal queen. {%—Paṭṭa-%}
{%vastra, as, ā, am,%} or {%paṭṭa-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%}
attired in coloured cloth or wove silk. {%—Paṭṭa-śāka,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a species of pot-herb, commonly also
Nālita or Lalita, Corchorus Capsularis. {%—Paṭṭa-%}
{%sūtra-kāra, as,%} m. a silk-weaver, (designation of a
class of Hindūs who are feeders of silk-worms and silk-
twisters.) {%—Paṭṭābhiṣeka (˚ṭa-abh˚), as,%} m. the
consecration of the tiara. {%—Paṭṭārhā (˚ṭa-ar˚),%} f.
‘worthy of the turban,’ the principal queen. {%—Paṭṭo-%}
{%pādhyāya (˚ṭa-up˚), as,%} m. the writer of royal grants
or patents and other similar documents.
<LEND>

<L>26780<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwaka<k2>pawwaka
{%Paṭṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a plate of metal (usually copper)
for inscription or engraving royal edicts; a cloth, ban-
dage; a document (said to be also {%am,%} n.); ({%ikā%}), f.
a tablet, plate; a document; a bandage, frontlet,
ribbon, a piece of cloth; a piece of wove silk, cloth
used for a turban; a species of tree ({%= paṭṭikākhya,%}
{%paṭṭī%}); N. of a woman. {%—Paṭṭikākhya (˚kā-ākh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a species of tree {%(= paṭṭī)%}. {%—Paṭṭikā-lodhra,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of Lodhra {%(= paṭṭī, kramuka).%}
{%—Paṭṭikā-vāyaka, as,%} m. a silk-weaver, ribbon-
weaver.
<LEND>

<L>26781<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwikAra<k2>pawwikAra
{%Paṭṭi-kāra, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a silk-weaver (?).
<LEND>

<L>26782<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwin<k2>pawwin
{%Paṭṭin, ī,%}¦ m. red Lodh.
<LEND>

<L>26783<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwila<k2>pawwila
{%Paṭṭila, as,%}¦ m. a species of plant ({%= pūtika-%}
{%raja%}), Cæsalpina Bonducella.
<LEND>

<L>26784<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwiloDra<k2>pawwiloDra
{%Paṭṭi-lodhra%}¦ or {%paṭṭi-lodhraka, as,%} m. a species
of tree, the bark of which is used as an astringent;
the red species of Lodh, Symplocos Racemosa.
<LEND>

<L>26785<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwolikA<k2>pawwolikA
{%Paṭṭolikā,%}¦ f. a title deed, a Paṭṭa, a lease, &c.;
a written legal opinion.
<LEND>

<L>26786<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwana<k2>pawwana
{#pawwana#}¦ {%paṭṭana, am%} and {%ī,%} n. f. a city; [cf.
{%pattana;%} cf. also {%deva-pallī-p˚, dharma-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26787<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwalA<k2>pawwalA
{#pawwalA#}¦ {%paṭṭalā,%} f. a district, a community.
<LEND>

<L>26788<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwava<k2>pawwava
{#pawwava#}¦ {%paṭṭava%} (probably for {%paṭṭa-ja%}), a
kind of cloth.
<LEND>

<L>26789<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwAra<k2>pawwAra
{#pawwAra#}¦ {%paṭṭāra,%} N. of a district.
<LEND>

<L>26790<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwi<k2>pawwi
{#pawwi#}¦ {%paṭṭi, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(also spelt {%patti.%})
<LEND>

<L>26791<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwikA<k2>pawwikA
{#pawwikA#}¦ {%paṭṭikā.%} See under {%paṭṭaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>26792<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwiSa<k2>pawwiSa
{#pawwiSa#}¦ {%paṭṭiśa, as,%} m. a sort of weapon, a
kind of axe; a spear with a sharp edge.
<LEND>

<L>26793<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwiSin<k2>pawwiSin
{%Paṭṭiśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ armed with a Paṭṭiśa.
<LEND>

<L>26794<pc>0526-a<k1>pawwisa<k2>pawwisa
{%Paṭṭisa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of weapon with three
points.
<LEND>
[Page0526-b+ 76]

<L>26795<pc>0526-b<k1>pawwISa<k2>pawwISa
{%Paṭṭīśa, as,%}¦ m. (probably for {%paṭṭiśa%}), a kind of
weapon used by Śiva; (in Hari-vaṃśa 10658, Śiva
is called Triśūla-paṭṭīśa-dhara.)
<LEND>

<L>26796<pc>0526-b<k1>pawweraka<k2>pawweraka
{#pawweraka#}¦ {%paṭṭeraka,%} the plant Cyperus Hex-
astachyus Communis.
<LEND>

<L>26797<pc>0526-b<k1>paW<k2>paW
{#paW#}¦ {%paṭh,%} cl. 1. P. (Ved. and ep. also A.)
{%paṭhati, -te, papāṭha, paṭhiṣyati, apā-%}
{%ṭhīt%} or {%apaṭhīt, paṭhitum,%} to read or repeat aloud,
recite in a clear voice, rehearse, speak distinctly,
declaim; to repeat or pronounce the name of a god,
to invoke (with acc.), to read or recite to one's self,
to peruse, study; to teach; to mention (in a book),
cite, quote; to express, describe, denote, declare;
to learn from (with abl.): Caus. {%pāṭhayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%apīpaṭhat, apīpaṭhata,%} to cause to read; to
teach to read or to pronounce; to teach, instruct:
Intens. {%pāpaṭhyate, pāpaṭhīti,%} to recite often or
repeatedly, to read diligently, study assiduously.
<LEND>

<L>26798<pc>0526-b<k1>paWaka<k2>paWaka
{%Paṭhaka, as,%}¦ m. a reader, reciter.
<LEND>

<L>26799<pc>0526-b<k1>paWat<k2>paWat
{%Paṭhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ reciting, reading.
<LEND>

<L>26800<pc>0526-b<k1>paWana<k2>paWana
{%Paṭhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of reciting or reading,
mentioning.
<LEND>

<L>26801<pc>0526-b<k1>paWanIya<k2>paWanIya
{%Paṭhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit to be read or studied,
legible, readable.
<LEND>

<L>26802<pc>0526-b<k1>paWamaYjarI<k2>paWamaYjarI
{%Paṭha-mañjarī%}¦ or {%paṭha-samañjarī,%} f., N. of a
Rāgiṇī, one of the wives of Śrī-rāga.
<LEND>

<L>26803<pc>0526-b<k1>paWi<k2>paWi
{%Paṭhi, is,%}¦ f. reading, reciting, perusal.
<LEND>

<L>26804<pc>0526-b<k1>paWita<k2>paWita
{%Paṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ recited, repeated; read,
perused, studied. {%—Paṭhitāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚),%} N. of a
kind of girdle.
<LEND>

<L>26805<pc>0526-b<k1>paWitavya<k2>paWitavya
{%Paṭhitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be read, what may
or ought to be read.
<LEND>

<L>26806<pc>0526-b<k1>paWiti<k2>paWiti
{%Paṭhiti, is,%}¦ f., N. of a particular figure of speech.
<LEND>

<L>26807<pc>0526-b<k1>paWitf<k2>paWitf
{%Paṭhitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ reciting, reading, a reader.
<LEND>

<L>26808<pc>0526-b<k1>paWyamAna<k2>paWyamAna
{%Paṭhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being recited or read.
<LEND>

<L>26809<pc>0526-b<k1>paWarvan<k2>paWarvan
{#paWarvan#}¦ {%paṭharvan, ā,%} m., Ved., N. of a man,
(Ṛg-veda I. 112, 17.)
<LEND>

<L>26810<pc>0526-b<k1>paq<k2>paq
{#paq#}¦ {%paḍ = pad,%} foot, in the inst. pl.
{%paḍbhis;%} and in {%paḍ-gṛbhi, is,%} m., N. of a
demon or of a man. {%—Paḍ-bīśa%} or {%paḍ-vīśa%} or
{%paḍ-viṃśa, am,%} n., Ved. a fetter (especially for the
foot of a horse); the place of fettering.
<LEND>

<L>26811<pc>0526-b<k1>paR<k2>paR<h>1
{#paR#} 1¦. {%paṇ%} (connected with rt. {%pan,%} q. v.),
cl. 1. A. and 10. P. A. {%paṇate, paṇāyati,%}
{%-te, peṇe%} or {%paṇāyāñ-cakre, apaṇīt, apaṇiṣṭa%}
or {%apaṇāyiṣṭa,%} to honour, praise.
<LEND>

<L>26812<pc>0526-b<k1>paRasya<k2>paRasya
{%Paṇasya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%paṇasyati, -yitum,%} to
honour; [cf. {%panasya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26813<pc>0526-b<k1>paRAyita<k2>paRAyita
{%Paṇāyita%}¦ or {%paṇita, as, ā, am,%} praised.
<LEND>

<L>26814<pc>0526-b<k1>paRitavya<k2>paRitavya
{%Paṇitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised.
<LEND>

<L>26815<pc>0526-b<k1>paRya<k2>paRya
{%Paṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured or praised.
<LEND>

<L>26816<pc>0526-b<k1>paR<k2>paR<h>2
{#paR#} 2¦. {%paṇ%} (probably for original {%parṇ%}
fr. rt. {%par%} or {%pṝ%}), cl. 1. A. (ep. also P.)
{%paṇate, -ti, peṇe, paṇiṣyate, apaṇiṣṭa, paṇi-%}
{%tum,%} to deal in, barter, purchase, buy; to negotiate,
bargain, transact business (Ved.); to bet or stake at
play (with gen. of the thing staked, e. g. {%śatasya%}
{%paṇate,%} he stakes a hundred); to play for (with
gen.); to stake anything or any person (acc.) on a
game; to risk or hazard (a battle &c.); to win
anything (inst.) from any one (acc.) at play; [cf.
{%baṇij:%} Gr. <lang n="greek">πέπνημι:</lang> Lith. <nsi>pantas:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>feil; phant.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>26817<pc>0526-b<k1>paRa<k2>paRa
{%Paṇa, as,%}¦ m. play, gaming, playing with dice,
playing for a stake; a game played for a stake, a
bet, a wager, ({%paṇaṃ kṛ,%} to make a bet); the thing
staked or deposited; a sum played for; a compact,
contract, agreement; stipulation, treaty; wages, hire;
reward; expense of an expedition; a sum (reckoned
in coins or shells); a weight of copper (Manu VII.
126); a particular coin (= twenty Māṣas = four
Kākinīs); a particular measure; a handful of any-
thing; a commodity for sale; price; wealth, pro-
perty; business; a publican or distiller; a house,
dwelling (?). {%—Paṇa-kāla, as,%} m. gaming-time,
time for playing. {%—Paṇa-granthi, is,%} m. a fair,
[Page0526-c+ 79]
market. {%—Paṇa-tā,%} f. or {%paṇa-tva, am,%} n. the state
or condition of a pledge or stake; price, value.
{%—Paṇa-bandha, as,%} m. making a treaty, making
peace, pacification. {%—Paṇa-strī,%} f. or {%paṇāṅganā%}
{%(˚ṇa-aṅ˚),%} f. a venal woman, a prostitute, harlot.
{%—Paṇārpaṇa (˚ṇa-ar˚), am,%} n. making an
agreement, engagement, contract. {%—Paṇārha (˚ṇa-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} fit to be laid as a wager. {%—Pa-%}
{%ṇāsthi (˚ṇa-as˚), i,%} n. Cypræa Moneta, the small
shell used as a die and as a coin, a cowrie.
<LEND>

<L>26818<pc>0526-c<k1>paRana<k2>paRana
{%Paṇana, am,%}¦ n. the act of bartering, purchasing;
traffic; sale, selling; betting.
<LEND>

<L>26819<pc>0526-c<k1>paRanIya<k2>paRanIya
{%Paṇanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be laid as a wager,
negotiable.
<LEND>

<L>26820<pc>0526-c<k1>paRasa<k2>paRasa
{%Paṇasa, as,%}¦ m. a commodity, an article of sale
or commerce ({%= panasa,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>26821<pc>0526-c<k1>paRAyA<k2>paRAyA
{%Paṇāyā,%}¦ f. (probably an incorrect form), business,
affair, transaction, buying and selling, &c.; profits
and receipts of trade; a market-place.
<LEND>

<L>26822<pc>0526-c<k1>paRi<k2>paRi
{%Paṇi, is,%}¦ m. (lit. ‘a negotiator or tradesman, one who
barters and traffics’), a miser, a niggard; one who is
sparing of sacrificial oblations; an impious man who
gives nothing to the gods, a Śūdra sacrificing priest;
N. of a class of envious demons watching over
treasures, (they are defeated by the gods and the
Aṅgirasas; sometimes the word {%paṇi%} is only an
epithet of the Asuras who are supposed to steal
cows and hide them in mountain-caverns.)
<LEND>

<L>26823<pc>0526-c<k1>paRika<k2>paRika
{%Paṇika, as, ā, am,%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp.
(e. g. {%pañcāśat-paṇika,%} [a fine] consisting of fifty
Paṇas).
<LEND>

<L>26824<pc>0526-c<k1>paRita<k2>paRita
{%Paṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ transacted as business; betted;
({%am%}), n. a bet, wager, stake.
<LEND>

<L>26825<pc>0526-c<k1>paRitavya<k2>paRitavya
{%Paṇitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bought, vendible, fit
or intended for sale; to be transacted, negotiable.
<LEND>

<L>26826<pc>0526-c<k1>paRitf<k2>paRitf
{%Paṇitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who transacts business
or traffics or sells; ({%tā%}), m. a trader, dealer.
<LEND>

<L>26827<pc>0526-c<k1>paRya<k2>paRya
{%Paṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sold, saleable, vendible;
to be transacted as business; ({%am%}), n. an article of
trade, a ware, commodity; trade, traffic, business; ({%ā%}), f.
heart-pea, Cardiospermum Halicacabum; [cf. {%piṇyā.%}]
{%—Paṇya-tā,%} f. saleableness, the being an article of
trade. {%—Paṇyan-dha%} or {%paṇyan-dhā,%} a species of
grass, Panicum Verticillatum. {%—Paṇya-pati, is,%} m.
a possessor of many wares, a great merchant, large
trader. {%—Paṇyapati-tva, am,%} n. the state or con-
dition of a great merchant. {%—Paṇya-phala-tva, am,%}
n. prosperity or profit in trade. {%—Paṇya-bhūmi, is,%}
f. a place where goods are stored, a warehouse.
{%—Paṇya-mūlya, am,%} n. the price of a commodity.
{%—Paṇya-yoṣit, t,%} f. a venal woman, prostitute,
wanton woman, courtezan, harlot, whore. {%—Paṇya-%}
{%vikraya-śālā,%} f. a place for buying and selling, a
market-place, bazar. {%—Paṇya-vikrayin, ī,%} m. a
seller of goods, a trader, merchant. {%—Paṇya-vilā-%}
{%sinī,%} f. a venal woman, a harlot; a kind of fragrant
substance, the claw of an animal or something
similar. {%—Paṇya-vīthikā,%} f. or {%paṇya-vīthī,%} f. a
place of sale, market; a stall, shop. {%—Paṇya-śālā,%}
f. a market, bazar, shop, a warehouse. {%—Paṇya-%}
{%strī,%} f. or {%paṇyāṅganā (˚ya-aṅ˚),%} f. a venal woman,
harlot, courtezan, prostitute. {%—Paṇyājira (˚ya-aj˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a market. {%—Paṇyājīva (˚ya-āj˚), as,%} m. a
trader, tradesman; ({%am%}), n. a market, fair (?). {%—Paṇ-%}
{%yājīvaka (˚ya-āj˚), am,%} n. a market; (also, accord-
ing to some, {%paṇya-jīvaka.%}) {%—Paṇyān-dhā,%} f. {%=%}
{%paṇyan-dhā,%} q. v. {%—Paṇyārha (˚ya-ar˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fit for sale, saleable, vendible.
<LEND>

<L>26828<pc>0526-c<k1>paRaPara<k2>paRaPara
{#paRaPara#}¦ {%paṇaphara, am,%} n. (fr. <lang n="greek">ἐπαναφορά</lang>),
the house following upon a Kendra, q. v. (in astrol.).
<LEND>

<L>26829<pc>0526-c<k1>paRava<k2>paRava
{#paRava#}¦ {%paṇava, as,%} m. (probably for {%pra-%}
{%ṇava%}), a sort of musical instrument, a small drum
or tabor or a kind of cymbal, one used to accompany
singing; also ({%ā%}), f. a kind of metre consisting of
four lines of ten or five syllables each.
<LEND>

<L>26830<pc>0526-c<k1>paRavin<k2>paRavin
{%Paṇavin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing a drum; ({%ī%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>26831<pc>0526-c<k1>paRq<k2>paRq
{#paRq#}¦ {%paṇḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%paṇḍate,%} to go,
move; cl. 10. P. {%paṇḍayati,%} &c., to
[Page0527-a+ 79]
collect, heap together, pile up; cl. 1. P. {%paṇḍati;%}
cl. 10. P. {%paṇḍayati,%} to destroy, annihilate.
<LEND>

<L>26832<pc>0527-a<k1>paRqa<k2>paRqa
{%Paṇḍa, as,%}¦ or {%paṇḍu, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 2.
{%paṇ%}), a eunuch, impotent man [cf. {%paṇḍra, ṣaṇḍa%}];
({%ā%}), f. wisdom, intelligence, understanding; science,
learning. {%—Paṇḍāpūrva (˚ḍa-ap˚), am,%} n. non-
occurrence of the results of fate or destiny (?).
<LEND>

<L>26833<pc>0527-a<k1>paRqaka<k2>paRqaka
{%Paṇḍaka%}¦ or {%paṇḍaga, as,%} m. (probably fr. {%paṇ-%}
{%ḍraka%}), a eunuch; N. of one of the sons of the
third Manu Sāvarṇa.
<LEND>

<L>26834<pc>0527-a<k1>paRqita<k2>paRqita
{%Paṇḍita, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%paṇḍā%}], learned, wise;
shrewd, skilled, clever, educated; ({%as%}), m. a scholar,
learned or wise man, learned Brāhman, teacher, phi-
losopher, Pandit; an adept, proficient; N. of a man;
incense. {%—Paṇḍita-jātīya, as, ā, am,%} somewhat
clever, rather learned. {%—Paṇḍita-tā,%} f. or {%paṇḍita-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. learning, knowledge, wisdom, skilful-
ness, cleverness. {%—Paṇḍita-buddhi, is, is, i,%} philo-
sophically minded. {%—Paṇḍita-maṇḍala, am,%} n.
an assembly or circle of learned men. {%—Paṇḍita-%}
{%mānika, as, ā, am,%} or {%paṇḍita-mānin, ī, inī, i,%}
or {%paṇḍitam-manya, as, ā, am,%} fancying one's self
learned or clever; an ignorant and conceited person,
a pedant who thinks himself a Pandit. {%—Paṇḍi-%}
{%tam-manyamāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. fancying one's
self learned. {%—Paṇḍita-rāja, as,%} m. ‘the prince of
the learned,’ an epithet of a great scholar. {%—Paṇḍita-%}
{%vādin, ī, inī, i,%} pretending to be wise. {%—Paṇḍita-%}
{%sabhā,%} f. an assembly of Pandits or literati.
<LEND>

<L>26835<pc>0527-a<k1>paRqitaka<k2>paRqitaka
{%Paṇḍitaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ wise, learned; ({%as%}), m. a
learned man; N. of one of the sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>26836<pc>0527-a<k1>paRqitAya<k2>paRqitAya
{%Paṇḍitāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%paṇḍitāyate,%} &c., to be-
come learned or wise.
<LEND>

<L>26837<pc>0527-a<k1>paRqitAyamAna<k2>paRqitAyamAna
{%Paṇḍitāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming wise or
learned.
<LEND>

<L>26838<pc>0527-a<k1>paRqitiman<k2>paRqitiman
{%Paṇḍitiman, ā,%}¦ m. wisdom, learning, scholarship.
<LEND>

<L>26839<pc>0527-a<k1>paRqra<k2>paRqra
{#paRqra#}¦ {%paṇḍra%} or {%paṇḍraka, as,%} m. a eunuch.
<LEND>

<L>26840<pc>0527-a<k1>pat<k2>pat<h>1
{#pat#} 1¦. {%pat,%} cl. 4. A. {%patyate,%} &c., Ved.
to share in, partake of (with loc.); to be
master of; to rule, control, possess, be in possession
of (with acc. or inst.); to be fit for, serve for (with
dat.); [cf. Lat. <nsi>potior.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>26841<pc>0527-a<k1>pat<k2>pat<h>2
{#pat#} 2¦. {%pat,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%patati,%}
{%-te, papāta%} (1st pl. {%petima,%} Ved. {%pap-%}
{%tima;%} 3rd pl. {%petus,%} Ved. {%paptus;%} part. {%petivas,%}
Ved. {%paptivas;%} fem. {%petuṣī%}), {%patitā, patiṣyati,%}
{%apaptat, patitum,%} to fly, soar or move rapidly
through the air; to go, move, move downwards,
alight, sink down, throw one's self down, to throw
or cast one's self at (rarely with acc. for loc., e. g.
{%papāta caranau tasyāḥ,%} he threw himself at her
feet); to sink or set (as the sun); to fall, fall down,
fall off, fall away; come down, descend (with loc. or
acc., e. g. {%papāta narendrāṇām madhye,%} he de-
scended in the midst of the princes; {%pata bhūmim%}
{%avāk-śirāḥ,%} fall headlong to the earth, Rāmāyaṇa
I. 60, 17); to go down into hell (e. g. {%narake%}
{%patanty ete juhvataḥ,%} such sacrificers go down into
hell, Manu XI. 37); to fall (in a moral sense), lose
one's caste, forfeit rank or position (e. g. {%para-%}
{%dharmeṇa jīvan sadyaḥ patati jāti-taḥ,%} he who
lives by the duties of another class immediately
loses caste, Manu X. 97); to fall on, be directed
to, light upon (e. g. {%prasāda-saumyāni satāṃ%}
{%suhṛj-jane patanti cakṣūṃṣi,%} the eyes of the
good soft with kindness are directed on a friendly
person, Śakuntalā, verse 161); to fall upon, fall
or devolve to one's lot or share; to fall in or
into, be in, (see {%patita%}); to fall out, happen, occur,
come to pass: Caus. P. {%patayati,%} &c., Ved. to
fly or hasten away; A. {%patayate,%} &c., Ved. to put
to flight, throw down; P. A. {%pātayati, -te,%} &c., to
let fly, fling, hurl; to cause to fall, to fell, cause to
sink down or alight, let fall, drop, throw or strike
down (e. g. {%daṇḍaṃ daṇḍyeṣu pātayet,%} let him
cause punishment to fall on those who deserve it,
i. e. let him inflict punishment on the guilty; {%vāyuḥ%}
{%pātayan mahā-drumān,%} a wind which throws
down lofty trees); to overthrow, ruin; to pour out,
[Page0527-b+ 81]
shed; to dash out, knock out, strike out; to
hew down, lay low (e. g. {%pātayiṣyāmi Rākṣa-%}
{%sam,%} I will lay the Rākṣasa low); to throw in,
put in or into, cause to enter; to cause to fall
(morally), cause to lose caste, cause to sin; (with
{%pāvakam%}) to set on fire; (with {%cakṣus, dṛṣṭim,%}
&c.) to cast or direct the eyes, look or glance upon;
(with {%śāpa, a-yaśas,%} &c.) to lay a curse or reproach
upon; (with {%sthānāt%}) to cause any one to lose his
rank or position, cause to fall, bring into misfortune;
(with {%argha-tas%}) to depreciate, lower the value of
anything; (with or without {%ātmānam%}) to throw one's
self; (in arithmetic) to subtract; to set in motion,
set on foot (? see Rāja-taraṅgiṇī V. 173): Desid.
{%pipatiṣati, pitsati,%} to wish or expect to fall, be
about to fall (e. g. {%kūlam pipatiṣati,%} the bank is
about to fall in): Intens. {%panīpatyate, panīpatīti,%}
see Pāṇ. VII. 4, 84; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πέτ-ο-μαι, ὠκυ-πέτ-ης,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ποτά-ο-μαι, πτε-ρό-ν, πτέρυξ, πτ-ίλο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πί-πτ-ω, πιτ-νέ-ω, πτῶ-μα, πτῶ-σι-ς, πότ-μο-ς, πέτα-λον,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ποτή, ἵπταμαι:</lang> Lat. <nsi>pet-o, im-pet-u-s, pen-</nsi>
<nsi>na, acci-pit-er:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>fedara, fedah</nsi> or
<nsi>fetah,</nsi> ‘wing;’ <nsi>find-an</nsi> = Goth. <nsi>finth-an:</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>put-i-ca,</nsi> ‘a bird;’ <nsi>pe-ro,</nsi> ‘a feather:’ Hib. <nsi>faoth,</nsi>
<nsi>faodh,</nsi> ‘a fall:’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>pyd-u,</nsi> ‘to fall.’]
<LEND>

<L>26842<pc>0527-b<k1>pat<k2>pat<h>3
3. {%pat, t, t, t,%}¦ flying, falling; [cf. {%akṣi-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26843<pc>0527-b<k1>pata<k2>pata
{%Pata, as,%}¦ m. flying, flight; going, falling, alight-
ing. {%—Pata-ga, as,%} m. a winged or flying animal,
a bird; N. of one of the five fires in the Svadhā-
kāra. {%—Pataṅ-ga, as, ā, am,%} flying; ({%as%}), m. a
bird; (according to Naigh. I. 14) a horse; a flying
insect, a grasshopper, a butterfly or moth (especially
one attracted by a light), a bee; the sun; N. of
one of the seven suns; a ball for playing with;
(according to Sāy.) a spark; (according to Mahī-
dhara) a Piśāca; a species of rice; quicksilver; ‘the
Flier,’ a N. of Kṛṣṇa; N. of a son of Prajā-pati;
N. of a mountain; N. of a village, also called
Pataṅga-grāma; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a caste in
Plaksha-dvīpa; ({%ī%}), f., N. of one of the wives of
Tārkṣa, and mother of the Patagas or flying ani-
mals; ({%am%}), n. quicksilver; a species of sandal-wood.
{%—Pataṅ-gama, as,%} m. a small grasshopper; a
butterfly; a bird. {%—Pataṅgara, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
bird-like, like a bird. {%—Pataṅga-vat,%} ind. like a
bird. {%—Pataṅgikā,%} f. a small bird; a kind of small
bee. {%—Pataṅgin, ī, inī,%} m. f. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>26844<pc>0527-b<k1>pataka<k2>pataka
{%Pataka, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what falls or de-
scends, &c.; ({%as%}), m. an astronomical table.
<LEND>

<L>26845<pc>0527-b<k1>patat<k2>patat
{%Patat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flying, alighting, descending,
coming down, falling, &c.; ({%an%}), m. a bird. {%—Pa-%}
{%tad-graha, as,%} m. ‘receiving what falls,’ a spittoon;
the reserve of an army. {%—Patad-grāha, as,%} m. a
spittoon, spitting-pot. {%—Patad-bhīru, us,%} m. ‘ter-
rible to birds,’ a hawk, falcon.
<LEND>

<L>26846<pc>0527-b<k1>patatra<k2>patatra
{%Patatra, am,%}¦ n. a wing, pinion; a feather; a
vehicle; [cf. {%pattra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26847<pc>0527-b<k1>patatri<k2>patatri
{%Patatri, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%patatrin%}), a bird; (Ved.) N.
of a particular fire; N. of a warrior on the side of
the Kurus. {%—Patatri-ketana, as,%} m. ‘characterized
by a bird,’ Viṣṇu. {%—Patatri-rāja, as,%} m. the king
of the birds, Viṣṇu's bird Garuḍa.
<LEND>

<L>26848<pc>0527-b<k1>patatrin<k2>patatrin
{%Patatrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ winged, feathered, flying;
(Ved.) an epithet of a particular form of fire, of the
vehicle of the Aśvins, &c.; ({%ī%}), m. a bird; a horse;
the horse in the Aśva-medha sacrifice (Rāmāyaṇa I.
13); an arrow; ({%iṇī%}), n. du., Ved. day and night;
[cf. {%pātatriṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26849<pc>0527-b<k1>patana<k2>patana
{%Patana, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what flies, falls, goes
down, descends; falling, alighting, &c.; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a Rākṣasa; ({%am%}), n. the act of flying down,
falling, alighting, descending, falling down, throwing
one's self down or into; setting (as the sun), going
down (to hell), slackening, hanging down, becoming
flaccid (said of the breasts); falling from dignity,
virtue, &c.; neglect of the duties of caste, apostasy;
ruin; death; (with {%garbhasya%}) miscarriage; (in
arithmetic) subtraction; the latitude of a planet.
{%—Patana-dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having the quality
of or subject to the law of falling.
<LEND>

<L>26850<pc>0527-b<k1>patanIya<k2>patanIya
{%Patanīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%patana%}), leading to a
[Page0527-c+ 81]
fall, causing the loss of caste; ({%am%}), n. a degrading
crime, a crime which causes loss of caste.
<LEND>

<L>26851<pc>0527-c<k1>patantaka<k2>patantaka
{%Patantaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ epithet of a kind of
Aśva-medha performed in a hurried manner.
<LEND>

<L>26852<pc>0527-c<k1>patama<k2>patama
{%Patama, as,%}¦ m. a bird; a grasshopper; the
moon; [cf. {%patasa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26853<pc>0527-c<k1>patayAlu<k2>patayAlu
{%Patayālu, us, ū, u,%}¦ flying, falling, liable to fall.
<LEND>

<L>26854<pc>0527-c<k1>patayizRu<k2>patayizRu
{%Patayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ or {%patayiṣṇuka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. flying.
<LEND>

<L>26855<pc>0527-c<k1>patara<k2>patara
{%Patara, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%pataru, us, us, u,%} Ved.
flying, fugitive.
<LEND>

<L>26856<pc>0527-c<k1>patasa<k2>patasa
{%Patasa, as,%}¦ m. a bird; a grasshopper; the moon.
<LEND>

<L>26857<pc>0527-c<k1>patAka<k2>patAka
{%Patāka, as,%}¦ m. (‘flying’), a flag or banner, (perhaps
incorrect for {%patākā%}); a particular position of the
hand or of the fingers of the hand; ({%ā%}), f. a flag,
pennant, pennon, banner; a flag-staff; an emblem
carried as an ensign or banner, a symbol, sign,
mark; a particular high number; an episode or
episodical incident in a drama; good fortune, auspi-
ciousness. {%—Patāka-dhvaja-mālin, ī, inī, i,%} gar-
landed with flags and banners. {%—Patākāṃśuka (˚kā-%}
{%aṃ˚), am,%} n. a flag. {%—Patākā-sthānaka, am,%} n.
(in dramatic language) intimation of an episodical
incident.
<LEND>

<L>26858<pc>0527-c<k1>patAkika<k2>patAkika
{%Patākika, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a flag or banner,
carrying a banner.
<LEND>

<L>26859<pc>0527-c<k1>patAkin<k2>patAkin
{%Patākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a flag or banner,
bearing a flag, adorned with flags; ({%ī%}), m. an ensign,
a standard-bearer, colour-bearer; a figure used in
divination, a scheme for casting a nativity; a flag;
N. of a warrior on the side of the Kurus; ({%inī%}), f.
an army; N. of a particular divinity.
<LEND>

<L>26860<pc>0527-c<k1>patApata<k2>patApata
{%Patāpata, as, ā, am,%}¦ going to fall, inclined to
fall; going much or frequently.
<LEND>

<L>26861<pc>0527-c<k1>patita<k2>patita
{%Patita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen, alighted; dropped,
prostrate, sprung from; fallen (in a moral sense),
wicked, abandoned, one who has committed a heinous
sin; fallen in battle, defeated, overthrown; degraded,
outcast; gone; fallen into, occurring in, being in (e. g.
{%avaṃśa-patita,%} being in a low family; {%madhya-%}
{%patita,%} being between); ({%am%}), n. flying. {%—Patita-%}
{%sāvitrīka, as,%} m. a man of the first three classes
whose investiture with the thread or initiation into
sacred knowledge ({%upa-nayana%}) has not been duly
performed or not performed at all, (this can happen
to a Brāhman after his sixteenth, to a Kṣatriya after
his twenty-second, and to a Vaiśya after his twenty-
fourth year.) {%—Patita-sthita, as, ā, am,%} lying on
the ground. {%—Patitekṣita (˚ta-īkṣ˚), as, ā, am,%}
looked at by an outcast. {%—Patitotpanna (˚ta-ut˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} sprung from an outcast.
<LEND>

<L>26862<pc>0527-c<k1>patitavya<k2>patitavya
{%Patitavya, am,%}¦ n. going down to hell.
<LEND>

<L>26863<pc>0527-c<k1>patitvA<k2>patitvA
{%Patitvā,%}¦ ind. having flown; having fallen or
fallen down or alighted.
<LEND>

<L>26864<pc>0527-c<k1>patizWa<k2>patizWa
{%Patiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. flying most or best.
<LEND>

<L>26865<pc>0527-c<k1>patIyas<k2>patIyas
{%Patīyas,%}¦ ind. (originally the neut. of a compara-
tive of {%pat%}), quickly, speedily.
<LEND>

<L>26866<pc>0527-c<k1>patera<k2>patera
{%Patera, as, ā, am,%}¦ flying, falling; going, moving;
({%as%}), m. a bird; a hole, pit; a particular measure
({%= āḍhaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>26867<pc>0527-c<k1>pattra<k2>pattra
{%Pattra%}¦ (sometimes spelt {%patra%}), {%am,%} n. (accord-
ing to some also {%as,%} m.), the wing of a bird,
pinion, feather, the feather of an arrow; a vehicle
in general [cf. {%patatra%}], a chariot, car, cart, horse,
camel, &c. (perhaps in these senses connected with
2. {%pad%}); the leaf of a tree (regarded as its plumage),
the leaf of a flower, the leaf of a particular fragrant
plant or of a species of plant with fragrant leaves
({%= gandha-pattra%}); the leaf of the Cassia ({%=%}
{%teja-pattra%}); a leaf prepared for writing on, a
leaf written on, paper (e. g. {%tat pattram āropayati,%}
he commits that to paper); a letter, any written
document, (in the latter sense also {%pattrī,%} f.); the
leaf of a book; gold-leaf, &c., any thin leaf or
plate of metal or gold-leaf [cf. {%paṭṭa%}]; the blade
of a sword, knife, &c. [cf. {%asi-p˚%}]; staining the
person as a decoration, lines and figures painted on
the face by means of musk and other fragrant sub-
stances; a knife, dagger; [cf. {%acchinna-p˚, uktha-%}
{%p˚,%} &c.: cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">πτε-ρό-ν, πτέρυξ, πτ-ίλο-ν;</lang>
Old Germ. <nsi>fedara, fedah,</nsi> ‘a wing;’ Angl. Sax.
[Page0528-a+ 81]
<nsi>feher;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>feder;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>feather.</nsi>] {%—Pat-%}
{%tra-kāhalā,%} f. the noise made by the flapping of
wings or rustling of leaves. {%—Pattra-kṛcchra, as,%}
m. a sort of penance, drinking an infusion of the
leaves of various plants and Kuśa grass for a given
time; [cf. {%parṇa-kṛcchra.%}] {%—Pattra-gupta, as,%}
m. a kind of bird [cf. {%pakṣa-gupta%}]; a species of
plant {%(= tri-kaṇṭa)%}. {%—Pattra-ghanā,%} f. a species
of plant with full leaves, Acacia Rugata {%(= sātalā).%}
{%—Pattra-cchedaka, as,%} m. a leaf-cutter, a parti-
cular trade. {%—Pattra-cchedya, am,%} n. (perhaps)
plucked feathers. {%—Pattra-jhaṅkāra, as,%} m. the
current of a river (or the rustling of leaves?); other
authorities read {%pura-saṃskāra%} and {%pattra-saṃ-%}
{%skāra%}. {%—Pattra-taṇḍulā,%} f. a woman; a species of
barley; ({%ī%}), f. a species of plant ({%= taṇḍulī%} and
{%yava-tiktā%}). {%—Pattra-taru, us,%} m. a species of tree
{%(= duṣ-khadira)%}. {%—Pattra-dāraka, as,%} m. ‘leaf-
divider,’ a saw. {%—Pattra-nāḍikā,%} f. the fibre or
vein of a leaf. {%—Pattra-paraśu%} or {%pattra-parśu,%}
{%us,%} m. a fine file or saw used by silversmiths, &c.
{%—Pattra-pāṭha, as,%} m. the perusal of a writing.
{%—Pattra-pāla, as,%} m. a large knife, a long dagger;
({%ī%}), f. the feathered part of an arrow. {%—Pattra-%}
{%pāśyā,%} f. an ornament on the forehead, a piece of
gold-leaf or a painted mark on the forehead. {%—Pat-%}
{%tra-piśācikā,%} f. a sort of cap or cover for the head
made of leaves (used as a protection against rain).
{%—Pattra-puṣpa, as,%} m. a species of plant, a red
sort of Tulasī or basil, Ocymum Pilosum; ({%ā%}), f.
holy basil, Ocymum Sanctum; holy basil with small
leaves. {%—Pattra-puṣpaka, as,%} m. a species of
birch; [cf. {%bhūrja-pattra.%}] {%—Pattra-prakāśa, as,%}
m. a title given to certain astronomical tables. {%—Pat-%}
{%tra-bandha, as,%} m. adorning with leaves, flowers,
&c., decorating with nosegays or garlands. {%—Pattra-%}
{%bāla, as,%} m. an oar, especially a large one used as a
rudder. {%—Pattra-bhaṅga, as,%} m. or {%pattra-bhaṅgi,%}
{%is,%} f. or {%pattra-bhaṅgī,%} f. drawing lines or figures
on the face and person with fragrant pigments of
sandal, musk, &c., as an ornament. {%—Pattra-mañ-%}
{%jarī,%} f. {%= pattra-bhaṅga%}. {%—Pattra-māla, as,%} m.
the plant Calamus Rotang {%(= vetasa)%}. {%—Pattra-%}
{%mūlaka, as, ā, am,%} resembling leaves and roots.
{%—Pattra-yauvana, am,%} n. a young leaf, sprout.
{%—Pattra-rañjana, am,%} n. embellishing a page,
illuminating, gilding. {%—Pattra-ratha, as,%} m. ‘using
wings as a vehicle,’ a bird. {%—Pattraratha-śreṣṭha%}
or {%pattrarathendra (˚tha-in˚), as,%} m. ‘chief of
birds,’ a N. of Garuḍa or the bird of Viṣṇu. {%—Pat-%}
{%trarathendra-ketu, us,%} m. ‘characterized by the
chief of birds,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Pattra-rekhā,%}
f. {%= pattra-lekhā,%} q. v. {%—Pattra-latā,%} f. {%= pattra-%}
{%bhaṅga,%} q. v.; a long knife or poniard. {%—Pattra-%}
{%lavaṇa, am,%} n. ‘leaf-salt,’ a kind of drug made of
certain leaves mixed with salt. {%—Pattra-lekhā,%} f.
drawing lines or figures on the face or person by
means of fragrant pigments consisting of sandal,
saffron, musk, &c.; N. of a woman. {%—Pattra-%}
{%vallarī,%} f. {%= pattra-bhaṅga,%} q. v. {%—Pattra-valli,%}
{%is%} and {%ī,%} f. {%= pattra-bhaṅga,%} q. v.; ({%ī%}), f., N. of two
plants ({%= rudra-jaṭā%} and {%palāśī%}). {%—Pattra-vāja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} feathered, furnished with feathers (as an
arrow). {%—Pattra-vāha, as,%} m. ‘feather-bearing,’
an arrow; a bird (‘wing-bearing’); a letter-carrier,
postman. {%—Pattra-viśeṣaka = pattra-bhaṅga,%}
q. v. {%—Pattra-vṛścika, as,%} m. a species of veno-
mous reptile. {%—Pattra-veṣṭa, as,%} m. an ornament
for the ear, a kind of ear-ring {%(= tāṭaṅka)%}. {%—Pat-%}
{%tra-śavara, as,%} m. a Śavara who decorates himself
with feathers, a barbarian or mountaineer who wears
peacock feathers as a decoration. {%—Pattra-śāka, as,%}
m. a species of vegetable consisting chiefly of leaves;
({%am%}), n. leaves and vegetables. {%—Pattra-śirā,%} f.
the vein or fibre of a leaf. {%—Pattra-śṛṅgī,%} f. or
{%pattra-śreṇī,%} f. the plant Anthericum Tuberosum.
{%—Pattra-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. the tree Ægle Mar-
melos {%(= vilva)%}. {%—Pattra-saṃskāra, as,%} m. the
current of a river; [cf. {%pattra-jhaṅkāra.%}] {%—Pat-%}
{%tra-sundara,%} a species of plant {%(= tikta-śāka).%}
{%—Pattra-sūci, is,%} f. ‘leaf-needle,’ a thorn. {%—Pat- %}
[Page0528-b+ 76]
{%tra-hima, am,%} n. cold, wintry or snowy weather.
{%—Pattrākhya (˚ra-ākh˚), am,%} n. Cassia leaf; the
leaf of the Flacourtia Cataphracta. {%—Pattrāṅga%}
{%(˚ra-aṅ˚), am,%} n. (sometimes written {%pattraṅga%}),
red sanders, Pterocarpus Santolinus; red or sappan
wood; a species of birch ({%= bhūrja%}); another plant
{%(= padmaka)%}. {%—Pattrāṅguli (˚ra-aṅ˚), is,%} f.
drawing lines or figures with the finger on the
forehead, throat, neck &c. with coloured sandal, saf-
fron, or any other substance. {%—Pattrāñjana (˚ra-%}
{%añ˚), am,%} n. ink; blacking. {%—Pattrāḍhya (˚ra-%}
{%āḍh˚), am,%} n. the root of long pepper; a species of
grass. {%—Pattrāmlā (˚ra-am˚),%} f. a species of sorrel
{%(= cukrikā)%}. {%—Pattrālī (˚ra-ālī),%} f. {%= pattra-%}
{%bhaṅga, pattrāvalī,%} q. v. {%—Pattrālu (˚ra-ālu), us,%}
m. a species of bulbous plant, {%= kāsālu;%} a species of
sugar-cane {%(= ikṣu-darbha)%}. {%—Pattrāvali (˚ra-%}
{%āv˚), is,%} f. red chalk, a row of leaves; decorating
the person with lines of paint, &c.; ({%ī%}), f. a row or
number of leaves; drawing lines or figures on the
face or person with coloured and fragrant pigments,
as with saffron, sandal, &c.; a mixture of young Aś-
vattha leaves with barley and honey. {%—Pattrāhāra%}
{%(˚ra-āh˚), as,%} m. feeding on leaves. {%—Pattreśvara-%}
{%tīrtha (˚ra-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-
place. {%—Pattropaskara (˚ra-up˚), as,%} m. the plant
Cassia Sophora {%(= kāsa-marda)%}. {%—Pattrorṇa (˚ra-%}
{%ūr˚), as,%} m. the tree Calosanthes Indica; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a people; ({%am%}), n. wove silk, cloth,
or a garment made of it; (perhaps also) cotton.
{%—Pattrollāsa (˚ra-ul˚), as,%} m. the bud or eye
of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>26868<pc>0528-b<k1>pattraka<k2>pattraka
{%Pattraka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Achyranthes Triandra
the leaves of which are eaten as a vegetable; ({%ikā%}),
f. a leaf for writing upon, a leaf on which any-
thing has been written; a letter, document, &c.;
({%am%}), n. a leaf; the leaf of the Laurus Cassia;
painting lines or figures on the body by way of
decoration; (at the end of a comp.) leaf, wing;
[cf. {%ajina-pattrikā, ali-p˚.%}] {%—Pattrikākhya (˚kā-%}
{%ākh˚), as,%} m. a species of camphor. {%—Pattrikā-%}
{%praveśa, as,%} m. a festival on the seventh day of the
month Aśvina.
<LEND>

<L>26869<pc>0528-b<k1>pattraRA<k2>pattraRA
{%Pattraṇā,%}¦ f. feathering an arrow, putting feathers
on an arrow, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26870<pc>0528-b<k1>pattraya<k2>pattraya
{%Pattraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pattrayati,%} &c., to feather.
<LEND>

<L>26871<pc>0528-b<k1>pattrin<k2>pattrin
{%Pattrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ winged, feathered, having
pages or leaves; ({%ī%}), m. an arrow; a bird, falcon; a
mountain; possessing a carriage or driving in one;
a chariot; a tree; N. of various plants, the wine-
palm {%(= gaṅgā-pattrī, = śveta-kiṇihī); (iṇī),%} f. a
sprout, shoot. {%—Pattri-vāha, as,%} m. a bird; [cf.
{%pattra-vāha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26872<pc>0528-b<k1>patman<k2>patman
{%Patman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. flight.
<LEND>

<L>26873<pc>0528-b<k1>patya<k2>patya
{%Patya,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) falling.
<LEND>

<L>26874<pc>0528-b<k1>patvan<k2>patvan
{%Patvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦  Ved. flying; ({%a%}), n. flying,
flight; [cf. {%āśu-p˚, raghu-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26875<pc>0528-b<k1>patsala<k2>patsala
{%Patsala, as,%}¦ m. a way, road.
<LEND>

<L>26876<pc>0528-b<k1>pata<k2>pata
{#pata#}¦ {%pata, as, ā, am,%} cherished, well fed,
protected, (said to {%= puṣṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>26877<pc>0528-b<k1>pataYcala<k2>pataYcala
{#pataYcala#}¦ {%patañcala, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>26878<pc>0528-b<k1>pataYcikA<k2>pataYcikA
{#pataYcikA#}¦ {%patañcikā,%} f. a bow-string.
<LEND>

<L>26879<pc>0528-b<k1>pataYjala<k2>pataYjala
{#pataYjala#}¦ {%patañjala, as,%} m., N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>26880<pc>0528-b<k1>pataYjali<k2>pataYjali
{#pataYjali#}¦ {%patañjali, is,%} m. (said to be de-
rived fr. {%pata,%} falling, and {%añjali,%} the joined hands;
Patañjali, according to a legend, having fallen from
heaven in the shape of a small snake into the hands
of the saint Pāṇini as he was joining his hands in
reverence); N. of a saint or Muni teacher of the
Yoga philosophy, (thence called Pātañjala); N. of
the celebrated author of the Mahā-bhāṣya or great
commentary on Pāṇini; a N. of the poet Vara-ruci.
<LEND>

<L>26881<pc>0528-b<k1>pati<k2>pati
{#pati#}¦ {%pati, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 3. {%pā,%}
to protect, but connected with rt. 1. {%pat%} and pro-
bably for original {%pātan%}), a master, owner, possessor,
[Page0528-c+ 81]
proprietor, lord, ruler, governor, sovereign; one
who presides over, (often applied to tutelary deities
or regents, e. g. {%oṣadhīnām patiḥ,%} the Moon
as guardian or lord of medicinal plants; {%saritām%}
{%patiḥ,%} the Ocean as lord of the rivers; {%vaca-%}
{%sām patiḥ,%} Bṛhas-pati as lord of speech; some-
times at the end of a comp., cf. {%oṣadhi-p˚,%}
{%bṛhas-p˚, vācas-p˚, vanas-p˚%}); a husband; a
root; going, motion, flight ? (in these senses pro-
bably connected with rt. 2. {%pat%}); ({%is%}), f. a female
possessor, mistress (e. g. {%grāmasya patiḥ,%} the
mistress of a village); a wife (at the end of a non-
adj. comp., e. g. {%vṛddha-pati = vṛddha-patnī,%}
the wife of an old man, Pāṇ. IV. 1, 34); [cf.
{%aṃśu-p˚, dam-patī, dvāra-p˚, nṛ-p˚, pṛthivī-p˚,%}
{%prajā-p˚:%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">πόσι-ς</lang> for <lang n="greek">πότι-ς</lang>
<lang n="greek">δεσπό-τη-ς, δεσ-πόσ-υνο-ς, δεσ-πόζ-ω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>com-po(t)-s,</nsi>
<nsi>im-po(t)-s, pot-is, possum</nsi> for <nsi>potis-sum, pot-es-</nsi>
<nsi>tā(t)-s:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pat-s,</nsi> ‘husband;’ <nsi>vḗsz-pat-s,</nsi> ‘lord,
ruler:’ Slav. <nsi>gos-podju,</nsi> ‘lord:’ Russ. <nsi>gos-podin,</nsi>
‘lord:’ Goth. <nsi>fath-s,</nsi> ‘lord;’ <nsi>bruth-fath-s,</nsi> ‘bride-
groom.’] {%—Patiṃ-vara, ā,%} f. a woman who chooses
her husband for herself, a young woman who has
the privilege of choosing her husband [cf. {%svayaṃ-%}
{%vara%}]; the plant Nigella Indica. {%—Pati-kāma, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. wishing for a husband. {%—Pati-gaṇita-%}
{%ṭīkā,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Līlāvatī.
{%—Pati-ghātinī,%} f., Ved. a woman who murders
her husband. {%—Pati-ghna, as, ī, am,%} killing a
husband or surviving him; ({%ī%}), f. a woman who
murders her husband, a husband-killer; a line on
the hand indicating that a woman will be faithless
or treacherous to her husband. {%—Patighnī-lakṣaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the mark of a husband-killer. {%—Pati-tva%} or
Ved. {%pati-tvana, am,%} n. mastership, lordship; the
conjugal or marital state, wedlock, matrimony, mar-
riage. {%—Pati-darśana-lālasa, as, ā, am,%} longing
to see one's husband. {%—Pati-devatā%} or {%pati-devā,%}
f. regarding a husband as a divinity, honouring a
husband above all others. {%—Pati-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved.
hating a husband. {%—Pati-dharma, as,%} m. duty
towards a husband. {%—Patidharma-vatī,%} f. fulfilling
duties towards a husband, fulfilling the duties of a
wife, faithfully devoted to a husband. {%—Pati-prāṇā,%}
f. a faithful wife (‘whose husband is her life’). {%—Pati-%}
{%yāna, as, ā, am,%} leading to a husband. {%—Pati-%}
{%rājya-vinākṛta, as, ā, am,%} excluded from a
husband's kingdom. {%—Pati-rip, p, p, p,%} Ved. hos-
tile to or hating a husband. {%—Pati-laṅghana, am,%}
n. injuring a husband; disregarding a former hus-
band by marrying another. {%—Pati-lālasa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} longing for a husband. {%—Pati-loka, as,%} m.
‘husband's world,’ the sphere of a husband in a
future life. {%—Pati-vatī,%} f., Ved. a woman who pos-
sesses a husband, a married woman. {%—Pati-vatnī,%}
f. a woman who possesses a husband, a married
woman, a wife whose husband is living. {%—Pati-%}
{%vidya, am,%} n., Ved. finding or procuring a husband.
{%—Pati-vedana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. finding or pro-
curing a husband; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Aryaman;
({%au%}), m. du. a particular part of the body (‘attracting
a husband?’); ({%am%}), n. procuring a husband (by
means of magical arts). {%—Pati-vrata, am,%} n. loyalty
or fidelity to a husband; ({%ā%}), f. a devoted and
virtuous wife (faithful to her husband). {%—Pati-%}
{%vratā-tva, am,%} n. loyalty or fidelity to a husband.
{%—Pati-śokākula (˚ka-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} agitated
or confounded with grief for a husband. {%—Pati-%}
{%sevā,%} f. devotion to a husband.
<LEND>

<L>26882<pc>0528-c<k1>patIya<k2>patIya
{%Patīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%patīyati,%} &c., to wish for a
husband; (perhaps also) to become strong.
<LEND>

<L>26883<pc>0528-c<k1>patIyantI<k2>patIyantI
{%Patīyantī,%}¦ f. a woman wishing or fit for a
husband.
<LEND>

<L>26884<pc>0528-c<k1>patnI<k2>patnI
{%Patnī,%}¦ f. (sometimes for the sake of the metre and
in a few comps. shortened to {%patni%}), a female pos-
sessor, a mistress (Ved.); a wife (even applied in
one or two instances to the female of an animal, as
in Ṛg-veda I. 140, 6, to a cow, but according to
Sāy. {%patnī%} here {%= pālayitrī%}); (in astrology) N. of
the seventh house. Adjective comps. ending in
{%pati%} may remain unchanged in the fem. or may
[Page0529-a+ 72]
substitute {%patnī%} by Vārt. to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 34 (e. g.
{%vṛddha-patnī%} or {%vṛddha-pati,%} a woman who
has an old husband); but the form {%patnī%} only is
allowed in such comps. as {%sa-patnī,%} a woman who
has the same husband with another; {%eka-patnī,%} a
woman who is faithful to one husband; [cf. {%jīva-p˚;%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">πότ-νια, δέσ-ποινα.</lang>] {%—Patnī-tva, am,%} n. wife-
hood, the condition of a wife, matrimony; ({%pat-%}
{%nītve grah,%} to take as a wife.) {%—Patnī-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. having a wife or accompanied by
wives. {%—Patnī-śālā,%} f. a hut, tent, or room erected
near the place of sacrifice for the wives and domestic
use of the sacrificer. {%—Patnī-saṃyāja, ās,%} m. pl.,
Ved. the four Ājya oblations offered to Soma,
Tvaṣṭṛ, the wives of the gods, and Agni-gṛhapati.
{%—Patnī-saṃyājana, am,%} n. performing the Patnī-
saṃyāja. {%—Patnī-sannahana, am,%} n. girding a
wife; the girdle of a wife. {%—Patny-āṭa, as,%} m. a
gynæceum, the private or women's apartments.
<LEND>

<L>26885<pc>0529-a<k1>patnIka<k2>patnIka
{%Patnīka,%}¦ a substitute for {%patnī%} at the end of a
comp.; [cf. {%a-p˚, bahu-p˚, sa-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26886<pc>0529-a<k1>patkAzin<k2>patkAzin
{#patkAzin#}¦ {%pat-kāṣin.%} See 3. {%pad,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26887<pc>0529-a<k1>pattaNga<k2>pattaNga
{#pattaNga#}¦ {%pattaṅga, as, am,%} m. n. (probably
a corruption of {%pattrāṅga%}), red sandal or sanders;
({%am%}), n. Cæsalpina Sappan.
<LEND>

<L>26888<pc>0529-a<k1>pattana<k2>pattana
{#pattana#}¦ {%pattana, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%pat%}), a town, city; [cf. Lat. <nsi>op-pidum.</nsi>] {%—Pattana-%}
{%baṇij, k,%} m. a town-tradesman, one who carries on
his business in a town. {%—Pattanādhipati (˚na-%}
{%adh˚), is,%} m. ‘governor of a city,’ N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>26889<pc>0529-a<k1>pattaraNga<k2>pattaraNga
{#pattaraNga#}¦ {%patta-raṅga = paṭṭa-raṅga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>26890<pc>0529-a<k1>pattalA<k2>pattalA
{#pattalA#}¦ {%pattalā,%} f. a circuit, district.
<LEND>

<L>26891<pc>0529-a<k1>pattas<k2>pattas
{#pattas#}¦ {%pat-tas,%} ind. See 3. {%pad,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26892<pc>0529-a<k1>patti<k2>patti
{#patti#}¦ {%patti.%} See under rt. 2. {%pad,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26893<pc>0529-a<k1>pattUra<k2>pattUra
{#pattUra#}¦ {%pattūra, as,%} m. a kind of vegetable,
Achyranthes Triandra; ({%am%}), n. red sandal or
sanders.
<LEND>

<L>26894<pc>0529-a<k1>pattra<k2>pattra
{#pattra#}¦ {%pattra,%} &c. See p. 527, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26895<pc>0529-a<k1>pattraNga<k2>pattraNga
{#pattraNga#}¦ {%pattraṅga.%} See {%pattrāṅga,%} p. 528.
<LEND>

<L>26896<pc>0529-a<k1>pattrala<k2>pattrala
{#pattrala#}¦ {%pattrala, am,%} n. thin or skim milk.
<LEND>

<L>26897<pc>0529-a<k1>patni<k2>patni
{#patni#}¦ {%patni, is,%} f., for {%patnī.%} See p. 528,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26898<pc>0529-a<k1>patman<k2>patman
{#patman#}¦ {%patman, patsala.%} See p. 528, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26899<pc>0529-a<k1>patsaNgin<k2>patsaNgin
{#patsaNgin#}¦ {%pat-saṅgin, pat-sukha,%} &c. See
under 3. {%pad,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26900<pc>0529-a<k1>paT<k2>paT
{#paT#}¦ {%path%} (connected with rt. {%panth,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. P. {%pathati, papātha, apa-%}
{%thīt, pathitum,%} to go, move; cl. 10. P. {%pāthayati,%}
&c., to throw, cast, send.
<LEND>

<L>26901<pc>0529-a<k1>paTa<k2>paTa
{%Patha, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pat;%} generally
only at the end of a comp.), a path, way, road,
course, reach; [cf. {%a-patha, aja-p˚, adarśana-p˚,%}
&c.; cf. also Zend {%pathan,%} ‘way;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πάτο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πατέ-ω, πόντο-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pon(t)-s, ponti-fex;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>patĭ,</nsi> ‘way;’ Old Germ. <nsi>pad, fad, phat;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>padh, päd;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>fath,</nsi> ‘a district, field.’]
{%—Patha-kalpanā,%} f. juggling tricks, conjuring.
{%—Patha-darśaka, as,%} m. ‘way-shower,’ a guide,
conductor. {%—Pathātithi (˚tha-at˚), is,%} m. a traveller,
wayfarer. {%—Pathe-ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. standing
in the way or on the road.
<LEND>

<L>26902<pc>0529-a<k1>paTaka<k2>paTaka
{%Pathaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ knowing the way, a guide.
<LEND>

<L>26903<pc>0529-a<k1>paTat<k2>paTat
{%Pathat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going, travelling; ({%an%}), m.
a road.
<LEND>

<L>26904<pc>0529-a<k1>paTika<k2>paTika
{%Pathika, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} knowing the way,
going on a road; ({%as%}), m. a traveller, wayfarer; a
guide, one who knows the way. {%—Pathika-santati%}
or {%pathika-saṃhati, is,%} f. or {%pathika-sārtha, as,%}
m. a collection or company of travellers, a caravan.
{%—Pathikāśraya (˚ka-āś˚), as,%} m. an asylum for
travellers, an inn.
<LEND>

<L>26905<pc>0529-a<k1>paTikA<k2>paTikA
{%Pathikā,%}¦ f. a kind of vine with red grapes.
<LEND>
[Page0529-b+ 80]

<L>26906<pc>0529-b<k1>paTin<k2>paTin
{%Pathin, panthās,%}¦ m. (nom. voc. sing. {%panthās%} fr.
a base {%panthas,%} the other strong cases fr. {%panthan,%}
acc. pl. and other weak cases fr. {%path,%} middle cases
fr. {%pathin,%} see Gram. 162; Ved. acc. sing. is {%pan-%}
{%thām%} for {%panthānam,%} nom. pl. {%panthās%} or {%pan-%}
{%thāsas%} or {%pathayas%} for {%panthānas%}), a path, way,
road, course; a path in morals or religion, sect, doc-
trine; a division of hell (Manu IV. 90); {%panthā-%}
{%naḥ santu te śivāḥ,%} may thy ways be happy! a
happy journey to thee! {%pathi ny-as,%} see under
{%ny-as%}). {%—Pathan-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing
the word {%pathin%}. {%—Pathi-kāra, as,%} m. ‘road-
maker,’ N. of a man (?). {%—Pathi-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
making a road, constructing a path, preparing a way
or ways; guiding, a guide; ({%t%}), m. an epithet of
Agni. {%—Pathi-deya, am,%} n. a toll levied on public
roads. {%—Pathi-druma, as,%} m. the tree Acacia
Catechu. {%—Pathi-prajña, as, ā, am,%} acquainted
with roads. {%—Pathi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} containing the
word {%pathin%}. {%—Pathi-madhye,%} ind. in the middle
of the road. {%—Pathi-rakṣi, is, is, i,%} Ved. or {%pathi-%}
{%rakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. protecting ways or roads.
{%—Pathi-vāhaka, as,%} m. a fowler, bird-catcher; a
porter, burden-bearer; ({%as, ā, am%}), cruel, hard.
{%—Pathi-ṣad, t, t, t,%} Ved. sitting in the way; an
epithet of Rudra; of the dogs of Yama. {%—Pathi-%}
{%ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. standing in the way or on
the road. {%—Pathi-stha, as, ā, am,%} being on the
way, going.
<LEND>

<L>26907<pc>0529-b<k1>paTila<k2>paTila
{%Pathila, as,%}¦ m. a traveller, wayfarer.
<LEND>

<L>26908<pc>0529-b<k1>paTya<k2>paTya
{%Pathya, as, ā, am%}¦ (lit. belonging to a road,
suitable for the way or course of anything), proper,
fit, suitable, salutary, wholesome, agreeing with,
(often said in a medical sense of diet, regimen, &c.);
according to rule, containing elements or leading
forms; ({%as%}), m. Terminalia Chebula or Citrina;
N. of a teacher of the Atharva-veda; ({%ā%}), f. a path,
way, road, ({%pathyā revatī,%} f., Ved. ‘the rich path,’
personified as a deity of happiness and welfare); the
tree Terminalia Chebula or Citrina; other plants
({%= mṛgervāru, cirbhiṭā, bandhyā, karkoṭakī%});
N. of several metres, a sort of Bṛhatī; a kind of
Paṅkti; a kind of Āryā; a kind of Vaktra; ({%am%}),
n. a species of salt; [cf. {%a-pathya.%}] {%—Pathya-śāka,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of vegetable. {%—Pathyāpathya%}
{%(˚ya-ap˚), am,%} n. ‘wholesome and unwholesome,’
the class of things that are considered beneficial or
hurtful in disease. {%—Pathyāśin (˚ya-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%}
eating or an eater of wholesome diet.
<LEND>

<L>26909<pc>0529-b<k1>pad<k2>pad<h>1
{#pad#} 1¦. {%pad,%} cl. 1. P. {%padati,%} &c., various
reading for rt. {%bad,%} to stand fast or fixed.
<LEND>

<L>26910<pc>0529-b<k1>pad<k2>pad<h>2
{#pad#} 2¦. {%pad,%} cl. 4. A. (ep. also P.) {%pad-%}
{%yate, pede, patsyate, apādi, pattum,%} to
fall (Ved.); to fall down or drop with fatigue
(Ved.); to perish (Ved.); to fall out (Ved.); to go,
to go to (with acc.); to attain, obtain, participate in,
gain; to turn one's self towards, observe: Caus. P. A.
{%pādayati, -te,%} to cause to fall (Ved.); to cause to
go, &c.; {%padayate,%} to go: Desid. {%pitsate:%} Intens.
{%panīpadyate, panīpadīti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>pad,</nsi> ‘to
go;’ <nsi>padh-a,</nsi> ‘a foot:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πέδ-ο-ν, πεδ-ίο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πέδ-η, πέδ-ιλο-ν, πεζό-ς, πέζ-α, πού-ς, base ποδ-,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πηδά-ω, ὀ-παδό-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>Ped-u-m, ped-ica, com-</nsi>
<nsi>pe(d)-s, ped-ūle, pe(d)-s, ped-e(t)-s, ped-es-ter,</nsi>
<nsi>tri-pod-are, tri-pud-iu-m:</nsi> Old Iceland. <nsi>fet-ill,</nsi>
‘fetter:’ Goth. <nsi>fōt-u-s,</nsi> ‘foot:’ Old Germ. <nsi>fezz-il,</nsi>
‘fetter;’ <nsi>fuoz,</nsi> ‘foot:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>fuss:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>foot:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>pád-a-s,</nsi> ‘a sole;’ <nsi>ped-à,</nsi> ‘a foot-mark:’
Hib. <nsi>faoidh-im,</nsi>  ‘I go;’ <nsi>faidh,</nsi> ‘departure.’]
<LEND>

<L>26911<pc>0529-b<k1>patti<k2>patti
{%Patti, is,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. 2. {%pad%} or fr. 3. {%pad,%} col. 3),
a footman, foot-soldier, infantry; a pedestrian; a
hero; ({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a people [cf. {%paṭṭi%}];
({%is%}), f. the smallest division of an army (= (1/3) of a
{%senā-mukha%}) or a company consisting of one chariot,
one elephant, three horsemen and five foot-soldiers,
(according to others {%= senā-mukha%} = fifty-five foot-
soldiers); going, moving, walking. {%—Patti-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. the business or operations of infantry. {%—Patti-%}
{%kāya, as,%} m. infantry. {%—Patti-gaṇaka, as,%} m. an
officer whose business is to number or muster the
[Page0529-c+ 81]
infantry. {%—Patti-paṅkti, is,%} f. a line of infantry.
{%—Patti-saṃhati, is,%} f. a body of infantry, an
assemblage of foot-soldiers; infantry.
<LEND>

<L>26912<pc>0529-c<k1>pattika<k2>pattika
{%Pattika, as, ā, am,%}¦ going on foot, pedestrian.
<LEND>

<L>26913<pc>0529-c<k1>pattin<k2>pattin
{%Pattin, ī,%}¦ m. a foot-soldier, footman.
<LEND>

<L>26914<pc>0529-c<k1>pad<k2>pad<h>3
3. {%pad%}¦ or {%pād, pāt,%} m. a foot; a step; a fourth
part, quarter; [cf. {%pāda.%}] {%—Pac-chabda, as,%} m.
({%pad + śabda%}), the noise of feet or of footsteps.
{%—Pac-chas,%} ind. ({%pad%} + affix {%śas%}), Pāda by Pāda,
stanza by stanza, foot by foot. {%—Pac-chauca, am,%}
n. ({%pad + śauca%}), cleansing or purifying the feet.
{%—Paj-ja, as,%} m. ({%pad + ja%}), ‘born from the feet
(of Brahmā),’ a Śūdra. {%—Pat-kāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
rubbing the feet, scratching the feet; going on foot,
pedestrian; ({%ī%}), m. a footman, foot-soldier. {%—Pat-%}
{%tas,%} ind., Ved. from the feet; on foot. {%—Pat-%}
{%saṅgin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. sticking or adhering to the
feet. {%—Pat-sukha, as, ā, am,%} pleasant to the feet.
{%—Patsutaḥ-śī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. lying at the feet.
{%—Patsu-tas,%} ind. (fr. loc. pl. of 3. {%pad + tas%}), Ved.
at the feet. {%—Pad-anuṣaṅga, as,%} m., Ved. any-
thing added or appended to a Pada or quarter of a
verse; [cf. {%padānuṣaṅga.%}] {%—Padi-baddha, as,%}
{%ā, am%} (fr. loc. sing. of rt. 3. {%pad + baddha%}), tied
or bound by the feet. {%—Pad-ga, as, ā, am,%} going
on foot, pedestrian; ({%as%}), m. a foot-soldier. {%—Pad-%}
{%ghoṣa, as,%} m., Ved. the sound of footsteps.
{%—Pad-dhati, is, ī,%} f. ({%pad + hati%}), a way, path,
road; a line, row, range; N. of a class of writings,
(described as guide-books or commentaries or a kind
of manual detailing the mode of performing certain
rites and ceremonies and collecting the texts relating
to them); a family name, a surname, title, or per-
haps more accurately the characteristic word denoting
caste or occupation in comps. which are used as
proper names (as {%gupta%} at the end of Vaiśya names,
and {%dāsa%} at the end of Śūdra names). {%—Paddhati-%}
{%cintāmaṇi, is,%} m. or {%paddhati-bhūṣaṇa, am,%}
n., N. of a work on astronomy. {%—Pad-dhima, am,%}
n. ({%pad + hima%}), coldness of the feet. {%—Pad-ratha,%}
{%as,%} m. a footman, foot-soldier. {%—Pad-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having feet; running; ({%at%}), n. an animal that
uses its feet for locomotion. {%—Pan-naddhā%} or {%pan-%}
{%naddhrī,%} f. a shoe, boot. {%—Pan-niṣka, as,%} m. one
quarter of a Niṣka. {%—Pan-nejanī, nyas,%} f. pl.
(with {%āpas%}) a bath for the feet. {%—Pan-miśra =%}
{%pāda-miśra,%} Pāṇ. VI. 3, 56.
<LEND>

<L>26915<pc>0529-c<k1>pada<k2>pada
{%Pada, am,%}¦ n. a step, pace, stride (e. g. {%padāt%}
{%padaṃ calitum,%} to move on a step from any
position; {%pade pade,%} at every step, everywhere, on
every occasion; {%madhyamaṃ Vaiṣṇavam padam,%}
Viṣṇu's middle stride, i. e. the air); a footstep,
footprint, footmark, trace, track, vestige, mark (e. g.
{%Viṣṇos trīṇi padāni,%} the three footprints of
Viṣṇu, said to mean the space between the eye-
brows, but probably the N. of a constellation;
{%Viṣṇoḥ padam,%} ‘Viṣṇu's footprint,’ N. of a place;
{%kararuha-pada,%} the mark of finger-nails, cf. {%na-%}
{%kha-p˚, daśana-p˚; padam anuvidheyam ma-%}
{%hatām,%} the footsteps of the great are to be followed);
a sign, token, characteristic; a particular measure of
length (= 12 or 15 fingers' breadth, or (1/2) or (1/3) or (2/7)
of a Pra-krama); a footing, stand-point, standing-
place, position, station, site (e. g. {%bhrāmayitvā%}
{%padāt padam,%} having caused to wander from place
to place; {%padam ā-tan,%} to spread or extend one's
position); an abode, home; a place, post, office,
rank, degree, dignity (e. g. {%ślāghya-padam prāpya,%}
having obtained an honourable position); a busi-
ness, affair, matter, ({%padaṃ kṛ,%} to have dealings
with any one, with loc. or acc. of the person or
with {%prati%}); an object, thing; occasion, cause,
subject (e. g. {%sandeha-padeṣu vastuṣu,%} in mat-
ters which are subjects of doubt; {%aṣṭādaśa vya-%}
{%vahāra-padāni,%} eighteen titles of law or occasions
of litigation); pretext ({%= apa-deśa%}); a part, por-
tion, division [cf. {%tri-pada%}]; a plot of ground; a
square on a chess-board; a foot, (according to Hema-
candra in this sense also {%as,%} m.; {%padena,%} on foot;
{%padaṃ kṛ,%} to set foot in or on; {%kariṣyasi%}
{%padam punar āśrame,%} thou shalt again set foot
[Page0530-a+ 81]
in the hermitage; {%mūrdhni padaṃ kṛ,%} to set the
foot upon the head of any one, i. e. to conquer or
overcome; {%hṛdaye%} or {%citte padaṃ kṛ,%} to take
possession of any one's heart or mind; {%padaṃ kṛ%}
may also mean ‘to put confidence in’); a portion
of a verse, quarter or line of a stanza, ({%Vasiṣṭhasya%}
{%padaṃ,%} N. of a Sāman); a word; (according to
Pāṇini) a complete word, i. e. an inflected word or a
{%prātipadika,%} q. v., with the case-terminations added,
(also in Pāṇini's system) the base of a noun before all
case-terminations beginning with consonants except
those of the strong cases, and before all the Taddhita
affixes beginning with consonants except {%y;%} a mode
of writing the Vedas in which the several words are
detached from one another [cf. {%pada-pāṭha%}]; (in
arithmetic) any one in a set of numbers the sum of
which is required; the last of a series, a period in an
arithmetical progression; a square root; a quadrant;
protection; ({%as%}), m. a ray of light. At the end of
comps. the fem. form is {%padā;%} [cf. {%a-p˚, anu-p˚,%}
{%duṣ-p˚, niṣ-p˚.%}] {%—Pada-kāra, as,%} m. the author
of the Pada-pāṭha; one who divides or separates
compound words. {%—Pada-kāla, as,%} m. {%= pada-%}
{%pāṭha%}. {%—Pada-kṛt, t,%} m. {%= pada-kāra%}. {%—Pada-%}
{%kṛtya,%} N. of a commentary on the Tarka-saṅgraha
by Candraja-siṃha. {%—Pada-krama, as,%} m. a series
of steps, pace, walking [cf. {%citra-pada-kramam%}];
a series of quarters of verses; a particular method of
reading or writing the Vedas, see {%krama; (ās),%} m.
pl. the Pada-pāṭha and the different Krama-pāṭhas.
{%—Padakramaka, am,%} n. the Pada-pāṭha and
Krama-pāṭha. {%—Pada-ga, as, ā, am,%} going on foot
or with the feet; ({%as%}), m. a footman, a foot-soldier,
&c. {%—Pada-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone on foot, described
or recorded in a line or stanza. {%—Pada-gati, is,%}
f. going on foot, manner of going, gait. {%—Pada-%}
{%gotra, am,%} n. a family supposed to preside over a
particular class of words. {%—Pada-catur-ūrdhva,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of metre in which every Pada is four
syllables longer than the preceding. {%—Pada-can-%}
{%drikā,%} f. ‘elucidation of words’ [cf. {%candrikā%}]; N.
of a commentary by Rāja-mukuṭa on the Amara-
koṣa. {%—Pada-cihna, am,%} n. a footmark, foot-
print, footstep. {%—Pada-ccheda, as,%} m. separation of
words (in speaking), resolving a sentence into its
elementary parts; parsing. {%—Pada-cyuta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fallen from a position or office, dismissed from
a place or official station. {%—Pada-jāta, am,%} n. a
class of words. {%—Pada-jña, as, ā, am,%} Ved. know-
ing places, knowing the footmarks (of the cows),
knowing degress. {%—Pada-jyotis,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Pada-tā,%} f. the original form of a word. {%—Pada-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of a word. {%—Pada-dārḍhya,%}
{%am,%} n. fixedness or security of text. {%—Pada-devatā,%}
f. a deity supposed to preside over a particular class
of words. {%—Pada-nidhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
the Nidhana at the end of every quarter of a verse
(as a Sāman). {%—Pada-nī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. one who
guides the steps of another, a guide. {%—Pada-nyāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. putting down the feet, stepping, step, foot-
fall, tread; pace, footmark; position of the feet in
a particular attitude; conduct, procedure (?); writing
down verses or quarters of verses; the plant Astera-
cantha Longifolia Nees {%(= go-kṣura)%}. {%—Pada-%}
{%paṅkti, is,%} f. a series or row of footsteps or foot-
marks; a kind of metre consisting of five Padas of
five syllables each; an Iṣṭakā or sacred brick called
after this metre; a series of words. {%—Pada-pad-%}
{%dhati, is,%} f. a series of footsteps or footmarks.
{%—Pada-pāṭha, as,%} m. a particular method of
reading and writing the text of the Vedas, by which
each word is written and pronounced in its original
form, separately and independently, i. e. without
regard to its connection with the following or pre-
ceding word and without regard to the rules of
Sandhi. {%—Pada-pāta, as,%} m. foot-fall, tread, step,
pace. {%—Pada-pūraṇa, as, ā, am,%} filling out a
verse, serving to complete a verse. {%—Pada-bandha,%}
{%as,%} m. a footstep, step. {%—Pada-bhañjana, am,%} n.
separating the words of a line or sentence, analysing
words, explanation of obscure or obsolete words,
[Page0530-b+ 81]
etymology. {%—Pada-bhañjikā,%} f. a commentary
which separates the words from each other and
analyses the compounds into their parts; a register,
a journal, a calendar or almanac. {%—Pada-bhraṃśa,%}
{%as,%} m. dismissal from an office. {%—Pada-mañjarī,%}
f., N. of a commentary by Haradatta-miśra on the
Kāśikā vṛtti; N. of Loka-nātha's commentary on
the Amara-koṣa. {%—Pada-mālā,%} f. ‘word-wreath,’
a form of magical words, a magical formula, an
incantation. {%—Pada-yopana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. stop-
ping or obstructing the steps; ({%am%}), n. a fetter for
the feet. {%—Pada-vākya-ratnākara (˚na-āk˚), as,%}
m., N. of a grammatical work by Gokula-nātha.
{%—Pada-vāya, as,%} m., Ved. a leader, &c.; [cf.
{%padavī.%}] {%—Pada-vikṣepa, as,%} m. step, pace,
walking; a horse's paces. {%—Pada-vigraha%} or
{%pada-viccheda, as,%}  m. separation of words, di-
viding words. {%—Pada-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. knowing
places; familiar with anything. {%—Pada-viṣṭambha,%}
{%as,%} m. tread, step, stamp with the foot. {%—Pada-vī,%}
{%īs,%} m., Ved. a leader, guide, one who precedes
another; ({%pada-vī%} or according to some also {%pada-%}
{%vi, is%}), f. a road, path, way, track (e. g. {%mokṣa-%}
{%padavī,%} the way to final beatitude; {%payasaḥ pa-%}
{%davī,%} a water-course, canal; {%artha-padavīṃ gam,%}
to go the way of profit, to consult one's interest;
{%smaraṇa-padavīṃ gata,%} gone to the way of
memory, i. e. living only in the memory, dead;
{%hāsya-padavīṃ gam,%} to go the way of laughter,
i. e. to become a subject of ridicule); station, situa-
tion, degree, rank, post, office; place, site. {%—Pada-%}
{%vīya, am,%} n., Ved. seeking for the track or traces
of anything. {%—Pada-vṛtti, is,%} f. the hiatus between
two words in a sentence. {%—Pada-vṛddhi, is,%} f.
increase of rank or station. {%—Pada-vyākhyāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the interpretation of words. {%—Pada-śas,%} ind.
step by step, gradually, by degrees. {%—Pada-śreṇi,%}
{%is,%} f. a series of steps. {%—Pada-ṣṭhīva, am,%} n. the
feet and knees. {%—Pada-saṃhitā,%} f. {%= pada-pāṭha,%}
q. v. {%—Pada-saṅghāṭa%} or {%pada-saṅghāta, as,%} m.
connecting those words together which in the Saṃ-
hitā are separated by a kind of refrain; a writer, an
annotator, one who collects or classifies words. {%—Pa-%}
{%da-sadhātu, u,%} n. a manner of singing. {%—Pada-%}
{%sandhi, is,%} m. the euphonic combination of words.
{%—Pada-samūha, as,%} m. a series of words or parts
of verses; {%= pada-pāṭha,%} q. v. {%—Pada-stobha,%} N.
of a work. {%—Pada-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing on
one's feet, going on foot; being in an official position,
having rank, fixed in a station or office. {%—Pada-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. footprint, footmark. {%—Pada-sthita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} standing on one's feet, going on foot.
{%—Padāṅka (˚da-aṅ˚), as,%} m. footmark, footprint.
{%—Padāṅka-dūta,%} ‘the messenger of the footmark
(Kṛṣṇa),’ N. of a poem. {%—Padāṅgī (˚da-aṅ˚),%} f.
a species of plant {%(= haṃśa-padī)%}. {%—Padāṅguṣṭha%}
{%(˚da-aṅ˚), as,%} m. the great toe; [cf. {%pādāṅguṣṭha.%}]
{%—Padāji (˚da-āji), is,%} m. a footman, foot-soldier.
{%—Padādi (˚da-ādi), is,%} m. the beginning of the
line of a stanza; the beginning or first letter of a
word. {%—Padādyavid, t,%} m. (either {%padādi-avid,%}
one who does not know the beginning of verses, or
{%padādya-vid,%} one who knows only the first parts of
a verse or of a word), a bad student. {%—Padādhya-%}
{%yana (˚da-adh˚), am,%} n. the study of the Vedas
according to the Pada-pāṭha. {%—Padānuga (˚da-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} following at one's heels, following
closely after (with gen.); suitable, agreeable to;
({%as%}), m. a companion, follower. {%—Padānurāga%}
{%(˚da-an˚), as,%} m. a servant; an army. {%—Padānu-%}
{%śāsana (˚da-an˚), am,%} n. the science of words,
grammar. {%—Padānuṣaṅga (˚da-an˚), as,%} m.
anything added or appended to a Pada; [cf. {%pad-%}
{%anuṣaṅga.%}] {%—Padānusvāra (˚da-an˚), am,%} n.,
Ved., N. of a Sāman (?). {%—Padānta (˚da-an˚), as,%}
m. the end of a line in a stanza; the end of a word;
({%as, ā, am%}), having the word Pada at the end,
ending in the word Pada. {%—Padāntara (˚da-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. an interval of one step (e. g. {%padāntare%}
{%sthitvā,%} stopping after taking one step; {%a-padān-%}
{%tara,%} not having an interval of one step, closely
[Page0530-c+ 81]
connected; {%a-padāntaram,%} ind. without any interval,
immediately upon, closely, without a pause). {%—Pa-%}
{%dānta-śuddhāśuddhīya (˚dha-aś˚), am,%} n., N. of
a Sāman. {%—Padāntīya%} or {%padāntya, as, ā, am,%}
being at the end of a word, final. {%—Padābhilāṣin%}
{%(˚da-abh˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} wishing for an office. {%—Pa-%}
{%dāmbhoja (˚da-am˚), am,%} n. ‘lotus-foot,’ the foot
of a mistress or divinity; (there are many similar
compounds, as {%padāravinda,%} q. v.) {%—Padāyatā%}
{%(˚da-āy˚),%} f. a shoe; [cf. {%pan-naddhā.%}] {%—Padā-%}
{%ravinda (˚da-ar˚), am,%} n. ‘lotus-foot,’ the foot
of a mistress, of a divinity, &c. {%—Padārtha (˚da-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m. the meaning of a word, the thing cor-
responding to a word, a thing, object; a head or
topic (of which sixteen are enumerated by the
Naiyāyikas, viz. proof, that which is to be known
and proven, doubt, motive, example, dogmatic
truth, the member of a regular argument or syllo-
gism, reasoning by reductio ad absurdum, ascertain-
ment, disquisition, controversy, cavil, fallacious rea-
son, perversion, futility, and occasion for rebuke);
category or predicament in logic (of which seven
are enumerated by the Vaiśeṣikas, viz. {%dravya,%} sub-
stance; {%guṇa,%} quality; {%karman,%} action; {%sāmānya,%}
genus; {%viśeṣa,%} difference; {%samavāya,%} co-inherence;
{%a-bhāva,%} non-existence); the sense of another word
which is not expressed but has to be supplied, (see
Pāṇ. I. 4, 96.) {%—Padārtha-kaumudī,%} f., N. of a
commentary on the Amara-koṣa. {%—Padārtha-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f., N. of an introduction to the study of
logic by Koṇḍa-bhaṭṭa. {%—Padārtha-dharma-saṅ-%}
{%graha, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Padārtha-prakāśa,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= padārtha-mālā,%} q. v. {%—Padārtha-bodha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a work on the Nyāya philosophy.
{%—Padārtha-mālā,%} f., N. of an elementary treatise
on the Nyāya philosophy. {%—Padārthamālā-dī-%}
{%pikā,%} f., N. of a Nyāya work. {%—Padārtha-viveka,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a work on the categories of the
Vaiśeṣikas. {%—Padāvalī (˚da-āv˚),%} f. a series of
lines in stanzas, a series of words; N. of a grammar.
{%—Padāvṛtti (˚da-āv˚), is,%} f. the repetition of a
word. {%—Padāsana (˚da-ās˚), am,%} n. a footstool.
{%—Padāhata (˚da-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} kicked. {%—Pa-%}
{%dodāharaṇa (˚da-ud˚), am,%} n. an example taken
from the Pada-pāṭha. {%—Padopahata (˚da-up˚),%}
see Pāṇ. VI. 3, 52.
<LEND>

<L>26916<pc>0530-c<k1>padaka<k2>padaka
{%Padaka, am,%}¦ n. a step; a position; an office;
({%as%}), m. a Niṣka or weight of gold; an ornament
of the neck; ({%as, ā, am%}), familiar with the Pada-
pāṭha.
<LEND>

<L>26917<pc>0530-c<k1>padana<k2>padana
{%Padana, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what goes or moves.
<LEND>

<L>26918<pc>0530-c<k1>padanIya<k2>padanIya
{%Padanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be investigated.
<LEND>

<L>26919<pc>0530-c<k1>padAta<k2>padAta
{%Padāta, as,%}¦ m. (properly {%pada + āta%}), a foot-
man, pedestrian.
<LEND>

<L>26920<pc>0530-c<k1>padAti<k2>padAti
{%Padāti, is, is, i%}¦ (properly {%pada + āti%}), going or
being on foot; ({%is%}), m. a pedestrian, footman,
foot-soldier, peon; N. of a son of Janam-ejaya.
{%—Padāti-jana, as,%} m. a footman, pedestrian.
{%—Padātijana-saṅkula, as, ā, am,%} mingled with
footmen or pedestrians. {%—Padāti-mātra, as,%} m.
only a foot-soldier. {%—Padāty-adhyakṣa, as,%} m.
the commander-in-chief of the infantry.
<LEND>

<L>26921<pc>0530-c<k1>padAtika<k2>padAtika
{%Padātika, as,%}¦ m. a footman, foot-soldier, peon.
<LEND>

<L>26922<pc>0530-c<k1>padAtin<k2>padAtin
{%Padātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having foot-soldiers; going on
foot, being on foot; ({%ī%}), m. a foot-soldier.
<LEND>

<L>26923<pc>0530-c<k1>padAtIya<k2>padAtIya
{%Padātīya, as,%}¦ m. a foot-soldier, footman, pedestrian.
<LEND>

<L>26924<pc>0530-c<k1>padAra<k2>padAra
{%Padāra, as,%}¦ m. the dust of the feet; a boat ({%=%}
{%pādālinda%}).
<LEND>

<L>26925<pc>0530-c<k1>padAsa<k2>padAsa
{%Padāsa, am,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. {%pada%} + 1. {%āsa%}),
with {%Vasiṣṭhasya,%} N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>26926<pc>0530-c<k1>padi<k2>padi
{%Padi, is,%}¦ m. (according to the Nirukta {%= gantu%}),
Ved. an animal which uses its feet for locomotion;
a bird; a particular kind of animal (?).
<LEND>

<L>26927<pc>0530-c<k1>padika<k2>padika
{%Padika, as, ā, am,%}¦ going on foot, pedestrian;
one Pada long; containing only one division; ({%as%}),
m. a footman, foot-soldier; ({%am%}), n. the point of
the foot.
<LEND>

<L>26928<pc>0530-c<k1>padeka<k2>padeka
{%Padeka, as,%}¦ m. a hawk, falcon.
<LEND>

<L>26929<pc>0530-c<k1>padekftya<k2>padekftya
{%Pade-kṛtya%}¦ (or {%pade kṛtvā%}), ind. having placed
in a position, (Pāṇ. I. 4, 76.)
<LEND>

<L>26930<pc>0530-c<k1>padvan<k2>padvan
{%Padvan, ā,%}¦ m. a road, path, way.
<LEND>
[Page0531-a+ 79]

<L>26931<pc>0531-a<k1>panna<k2>panna
{%Panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen, gone down or down-
wards, sunk, descended; gone; ({%as%}), m. downward
motion, falling, descent, fall; creeping on the ground.
{%—Panna-ga, as,%} m. ‘creeping along the ground,’
a snake, serpent, serpent-demon or Nāga; a species
of plant {%(= padma-kāṣṭha); (ā),%} f. a female
serpent, a female serpent-demon; ({%ī%}), f. a species of
shrub {%(= sarpiṇī)%}. {%—Pannaga-keśara, as,%} m.
Mesua Roxburghii. {%—Pannaga-nāśana, as,%} m.
‘serpent-destroyer,’ an epithet of Garuḍa, the bird
and vehicle of Viṣṇu. {%—Pannaga-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} formed or consisting of serpents. {%—Pannagāri%}
{%(˚ga-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of serpents,’ an epithet
of Garuḍa; N. of a teacher; (also read {%panna-%}
{%gāni.%}) {%—Pannagāśana (˚ga-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘serpent-
devourer,’ an epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Pannāgāra (˚na-%}
{%ag˚%} or {%āg˚%}), {%as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>26932<pc>0531-a<k1>padavI<k2>padavI
{#padavI#}¦ {%pada-vī.%} See p. 530, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>26933<pc>0531-a<k1>padDati<k2>padDati
{#padDati#}¦ {%pad-dhati.%} See 3. {%pad,%} p. 529, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26934<pc>0531-a<k1>padma<k2>padma
{#padma#}¦ {%padma, as, am,%} m. n. (perhaps for an
original {%pad-mat,%} rich in stalks, but said to be
fr. rt. 2. {%pad%}), a lotus, lotus-flower, especially the
Nelumbium Speciosum (not the plant itself, but the
flower which closes towards the evening; often con-
founded with the water-lily or Nymphæa Alba); a
lotus-like ornament; the form or figure of a lotus;
a N. given by the Tāntrikas to the six divisions of
the upper part of the body called Cakras, (see
{%cakra%}); a particular mark or mole on the human
body; a spot; red or coloured marks on the face
and trunk of an elephant; N. of a particular part of
a column or pillar; an army arrayed in the form of
a lotus; a particular posture of the body in religious
meditation; one of the personified treasures of
Kuvera as worshipped by the Tāntrikas; a particular
high number, 1000 billions; N. of a constellation;
(with Buddhists) N. of a particular hell (characterized
by coldness); a species of fragrant plant ({%= padma-%}
{%kāṣṭha%}); the root of the Nelumbium Speciosum;
a species of bdellium; a particular fragrant substance;
lead; ({%as%}), m. a kind of temple; a kind of coitus;
one of the eight treasures connected with the magical
art called Padminī; a species of plant; an elephant;
a species of serpent; a Nāga; N. of one of the
attendants of Skanda; (with Jainas) N. of the ninth
Cakra-vartin in Bhārata; an epithet of Rāma (the
son of Daśa-ratha by his wife Kauśalyā); N. of a prince
of Kaśmīra (founder of Padma-pura and of a temple,
see {%padma-svāmin%}); of a man; of a Brāhman; of a
mythical elephant [cf. {%mahā-padma%}]; of a monkey;
of a mountain; ({%ā%}), f. ‘the lotus-hued one,’ an
epithet of Śrī, the goddess of fortune and wife of
Viṣṇu [cf. {%padma-śrī%}]; N. of two plants, Clero-
dendrum Siphonanthus and Hibiscus Mutabilis;
cloves; the flower of Carthamus Tinctoria; N. of
the mother of Muni-suvrata, the twentieth Arhat of
the present Ava-sarpiṇī; N. of a female serpent-
demon (= the goddess Manasā, wife of the sage
Jarat-kāru; cf. {%padma-priyā%}); N. of a daughter
of king Bṛhad-ratha and wife of Kalki; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), lotus-hued, being of the colour of a lotus.
{%—Padma-kara, as,%} m. a lotus-like hand, a hand
like a lotus; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a lotus in the
hand, holding a lotus; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Śrī;
({%as%}), m., N. of the sun. {%—Padma-karṇika%} (per-
haps incorrect for {%padma-karṇikā%}), the capsule or
pericarp of a lotus or the central part of an army
arrayed in that form. {%—Padma-kalikā,%} f. an un-
blown lotus. {%—Padma-kāṣṭha, am,%} n. a fragrant
wood used in medicine and described as cooling and
tonic ({%= kedāra-ja, padma-vṛkṣa,%} &c.). {%—Pad-%}
{%ma-kīṭa, as,%} m. a species of venomous insect.
{%—Padma-kūṭa, am,%} n. ‘lotus-peak,’ N. of the
palace of Su-bhīmā. {%—Padma-ketana, as,%} m. ‘cha-
racterized by a lotus,’ N. of a son of Garuḍa.
{%—Padma-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a Ketu. {%—Padma-%}
{%keśara, as, am,%} m. n. the filament of a lotus.
{%—Padma-kośa%} or {%padma-koṣa, as,%} m. the
[Page0531-b+ 81]
calyx of a lotus; a particular position of the fingers
resembling the calyx of a lotus. {%—Padma-kṣetra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of one of four districts in Orissa held espe-
cially sacred. {%—Padma-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. a quantity
of lotuses, a spot abounding with them. {%—Padma-%}
{%gandha, as, ā, am,%} or {%padma-gandhi, is, is, i,%}
lotus-scented, smelling like a lotus, fragrant as a
lotus. {%—Padma-garbha, as, ā, am,%} ‘lotus-born,’
sprung from a lotus; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Brahmā;
of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; the sun; N. of a man; of a
Bodhi-sattva; of a Brāhman who was changed into a
swan. {%—Padma-gṛhā,%} f. ‘lotus-housed,’ ‘living in
a lotus,’ an epithet of Lakṣmī. {%—Padma-cāriṇī,%} f.
a small tree, Hibiscus Mutabilis. {%—Padma-ja, as,%}
m. ‘lotus-born,’ an epithet of Brahmā. {%—Padma-%}
{%tantu, us,%} m. the fibrous stalk of a lotus or the
fibre of a lotus-stalk. {%—Padma-darśana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} looking like a lotus; ({%as%}), m. the resin of the
Pinus Longifolia; N. of a man. {%—Padma-nandin,%}
{%ī,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Padma-nābha,%} having
a lotus springing from his navel; ({%as%}), m. an epi-
thet of Viṣṇu (so called because the lotus containing
Brahmā, the future creator, sprang from his navel);
N. of the eleventh month (reckoned from Mārga-
śīrṣa); N. of a Nāga; of one of the 100 sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of the first Arhat of the future Ut-
sarpiṇī; of various other men; of a magical formula
pronounced over weapons. {%—Padmanābha-datta,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a grammarian and lexicographer, father
of Vijñāneśvara. {%—Padmanābha-bīja, am,%} n. the
algebra of Padma-nābha. {%—Padmanābha-bhaṭṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the father of the commentator Vijñā-
neśvara. {%—Padma-nābhi, is,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu,
(see {%padma-nābha.%}) {%—Padma-nāla, am,%} n. a
lotus-stalk. {%—Padma-nibhekṣaṇa (˚bha-īkṣ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having lotus-like eyes, whose eyes are
like a lotus. {%—Padma-nimīlana, am,%} n. the closing
of a lotus. {%—Padma-netra, as,%} m. ‘lotus-eyed,’
N. of a future Buddha. {%—Padma-pattra, am,%} n. a
lotus-leaf, the petal of a lotus; Costus Speciosus.
{%—Padmapattra-nibhekṣaṇa (˚bha-īkṣ˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having eyes like lotus-leaves. {%—Padma-pada%}
or {%padma-pāda, as,%} m., N. of an author, the pupil
of Śaṅkara. {%—Padma-parṇa, am,%} n. Costus Spe-
ciosus. {%—Padma-pāṇi, is,%} m. ‘lotus-handed,’ ‘holding
a lotus in his hand,’ an epithet of Brahmā; of Viṣṇu;
the sun; N. of a particular Buddha; epithet of the
Bodhi-sattva Avalokiteśvara. {%—Padma-pādācārya%}
{%(˚da-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Padma-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a city founded by Padma.
{%—Padma-purāṇa, am,%} n. ‘Lotus-purāṇa,’ N. of a
Purāṇa describing the period during which the world
was a lotus. {%—Padma-puṣpa, as,%} m. the plant
Pterospermum Acerifolium; a species of small bird
{%(= pikāṅga)%}. {%—Padma-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a
future Buddha; of a divine being; (with Jainas) of
the sixth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī. {%—Padma-%}
{%priyā,%} f. an epithet of the goddess Manasā, wife of
Jarat-kāru. {%—Padma-bandha, as,%} m. an artificial
arrangement of the words of a verse in a figure
representing a lotus-flower, (the several syllables being
distributed on the eight petals of the flower and a
syllable to be repeated before each group of syllables
being written on the part representing the pericarp.)
{%—Padma-bandhu, us,%} m. ‘friend of the lotus,’
an epithet of the Sun; a bee. {%—Padma-bīja, am,%}
n. a lotus-seed, the seed of a lotus. {%—Padmabījābha%}
{%(˚ja-ābh˚), am,%} n. ‘resembling the lotus-seed,’ the
seed of Euryala Ferox. {%—Padma-bhava, as, ā, am,%}
‘lotus-born,’ ‘produced from a lotus,’ an epithet of
Brahmā. {%—Padma-bhāsa, as,%} m. ‘brilliant with a
lotus,’ or ‘bright as a lotus,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu;
[cf. {%padma-hāsa.%}] {%—Padma-bhū, ūs,%} m. ‘lotus-
born,’ an epithet of Brahmā. {%—Padma-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} made or consisting of lotus-flowers. {%—Padma-%}
{%mālin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘lotus-garlanded,’ wearing a gar-
land of lotuses; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a Rakṣas; ({%inī%}), f.
an epithet of Śrī. {%—Padma-mihira, as,%} m., N. of
the writer of a history of Kaśmīra. {%—Padma-%}
{%mukhī,%} f. a species of prickly nightshade, Alhagi
Maurorum. {%—Padma-yoni, is,%} or {%padma-yonin, %}
[Page0531-c+ 81]
{%ī,%} m. ‘lotus-born,’ ‘sprung from a lotus,’ an epithet of
Brahmā; N. of a man. {%—Padma-ratha, as,%} m.,
N. of two princes. {%—Padma-rāga, as, ā, am,%}
lotus-hued, of the colour of a lotus; ({%as%}), m. a
ruby; ({%ī%}), f., N. of one of the tongues of Fire.
{%—Padmarāga-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or consisting
of rubies. {%—Padma-rāja, as,%} m., N. of two persons.
{%—Padma-rūpa, ā,%} f. ‘lotus-hued,’ an epithet of
Śrī. {%—Padma-rekhā,%} f. a line in the palm of the
hand indicating the acquisition of great wealth.
{%—Padma-lāñchana, as,%} m. ‘marked or symbol-
ized by a lotus,’ a king; an epithet of Brahmā;
an epithet of Kuvera; the sun; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet
of the goddess Śrī; an epithet of Sarasvatī; an epi-
thet of Tārā. {%—Padma-lekhā,%} f., N. of a woman.
{%—Padma-locana, as, ā, am,%} lotus-eyed. {%—Padma-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} full of lotuses, abounding in lotus-
flowers; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a wife of A-śoka. {%—Padma-%}
{%varṇa, as, ā, am,%} lotus-hued, lotus-coloured; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of Yadu. {%—Padmavarṇaka, am,%}
n. Costus Speciosus. {%—Padma-vāsā,%} f. ‘dwelling in
a lotus,’ an epithet of Śrī (as having dwelt at the
creation within the petals of a lotus). {%—Padma-vā-%}
{%hinī,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Padma-viṣaya, as,%} m.,
N. of a country. {%—Padma-vṛkṣa, am,%} n. {%=%}
{%padma-kāṣṭha,%} q. v. {%—Padma-vṛṣabha-vikrā-%}
{%min, ī,%} m., N. of a future Buddha. {%—Padma-%}
{%vyūha, as,%} m., N. of a Sam-ādhi. {%—Padma-śas,%}
ind. by thousands of billions. {%—Padma-śrī, īs,%} m.,
N. of a Bodhi-sattva; ({%īs%}), f., N. of two princesses.
{%—Padmaśrī-garbha, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Padma-ṣaṇḍa, am,%} n. a quantity or multitude of
lotuses; [cf. {%padma-khaṇḍa.%}] {%—Padma-saṅkāśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} lotus-like, resembling a lotus. {%—Padma-%}
{%samāsana, as,%} m. ‘having a seat like a lotus,’
an epithet of Brahmā. {%—Padma-sambhava, as,%} m.
‘sprung from a lotus,’ an epithet of Brahmā; N. of
a Buddhist scholar. {%—Padma-saras, as,%} n. ‘lotus-
lake,’ N. of various lakes. {%—Padma-sūtra, am,%} n.
a garland of lotuses. {%—Padma-sena, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Padma-saugandhika, as, ī, am,%} fragrant
as a lotus. {%—Padma-snuṣā,%} f. ‘daughter-in-law of
a lotus,’ an epithet of Gaṅgā; of Śrī; of Durgā.
{%—Padma-svastika, as, am,%} m. n. a mystical mark
consisting of lotus-flowers; (according to the scholiast)
a four-cornered sort of painting. {%—Padma-svāmin,%}
{%ī,%} m., N. of a sacred edifice built by Padma. {%—Pad-%}
{%ma-hāsa, as,%} m. ‘smiling like a lotus or with a
lotus,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu; [cf. {%padma-bhāsa.%}]
{%—Padmākara (˚ma-āk˚), as,%} m. a lotus-pool; a
large deep tank or pond abounding in lotuses.
{%—Padmākara-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a scholar.
{%—Padmākāra (˚ma-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} lotus-
shaped, shaped like a lotus. {%—Padmākṣa (˚ma-%}
{%akṣa), as, ī, am,%} lotus-eyed, having eyes like a
lotus; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of a man;
({%am%}), n. the seed of the lotus. {%—Padmāṭa (˚ma-%}
{%āṭa), as,%} m. Cassia Tora. {%—Padmāntara (˚ma-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. a lotus-leaf, the petal of a lotus. {%—Pad-%}
{%mālaya (˚ma-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘dwelling in a lotus,’
an epithet of Brahmā; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Śrī.
{%—Padmāsana (˚ma-ās˚), am,%} n. a lotus-seat, a
seat or throne in the shape of a lotus, especially one
on which idols are placed; a particular posture in
religious meditation, sitting with the thighs crossed
with one hand resting on the left thigh, the other
held up with the thumb upon the heart, and the
eyes directed to the tip of the nose; a kind of coitus;
({%as, ā, am%}), ‘sitting in a lotus,’ an epithet of Brahmā;
of Śiva; of the goddess Manasā; sitting in the
position called Padmāsana; ({%as%}), m. the sun. {%—Pad-%}
{%māhvā (˚ma-āh˚),%} f. {%= padma-cāriṇī,%} q. v. {%—Pad-%}
{%me-śaya, as, ā, am,%} reclining or sleeping on a
lotus; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Padmot-%}
{%tama (˚ma-ut˚), as,%} m., N. of a future Buddha.
{%—Padmottara (˚ma-ut˚), as,%} m. the plant Car-
thamus Tinctorius; N. of a man; of a Buddha.
{%—Padmottarātma-ja (˚ra-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘son of
Padmottara,’ (with Jainas) epithet of the ninth
Cakra-vartin in Bhārata. {%—Padmodbhava (˚ma-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘sprung from a lotus,’ an epithet
[Page0532-a+ 79]
of Brahmā, of the goddess Manasā; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a man; origin of the lotus (?). {%—Padmodbhava-%}
{%prādurbhāva (˚ma-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘the manifestation
of Brahmā on the lotus,’ N. of the ninth chapter of
the first part of the Kūrma-purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>26935<pc>0532-a<k1>padmaka<k2>padmaka
{%Padmaka, as,%}¦ m. an army arrayed in the form
of a lotus-flower; N. of several men; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. red or coloured spots on the skin of an ele-
phant; Costus Speciosus or Arabicus; ({%am%}), n. a par-
ticular posture in sitting; a species of tree and its
wood which is used for various purposes ({%= padma-%}
{%kāṣṭha = kuṣṭha,%} Costus Speciosus or Arabicus).
{%—Padmakāmalaka-plakṣa-kadamboḍumbarā-%}
{%vṛta (˚ka-ām˚, ˚ba-uḍ˚, ˚ra-āv˚), as, ā, am,%}
filled with lotuses, Emblic Myrobalans, fig-trees, Nau-
clea Kadambas and Uḍumbaras (a kind of fig-tree).
<LEND>

<L>26936<pc>0532-a<k1>padmakin<k2>padmakin
{%Padmakin, ī,%}¦ m. the Indian birch tree ({%=%}
{%bhūrja%}), the bark of which is used for writing
upon, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26937<pc>0532-a<k1>padmAvata<k2>padmAvata
{%Padmāvata, as,%}¦ m., N. of a kingdom founded by
Padma-varṇa.
<LEND>

<L>26938<pc>0532-a<k1>padmAvatI<k2>padmAvatI
{%Padmāvatī,%}¦ f. Hibiscus Mutabilis; a kind of
Prākṛt metre; an epithet of Lakṣmī; N. of one
of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda; an epithet of
the goddess Manasā; N. of a divine being executing
the orders of the twenty-third Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī; N. of a wife of king Śṛgāla; of a
wife of Yudhi-ṣṭhira, king of Kaśmīra; of the wife
of Jaya-deva; of a poetess; of a wife of king Vīra-
bāhu; of king Naya-pāla; of a city; of a river;
of the seventeenth Lambaka of the Kathā-sarit-
sāgara. {%—Padmāvatī-priya, as,%} m. ‘husband of
Padmāvatī,’ an epithet of Jarat-kāru.
<LEND>

<L>26939<pc>0532-a<k1>padmin<k2>padmin
{%Padmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing lotuses; spotted or
having coloured marks (as an elephant); ({%ī%}), m. an
elephant; ({%inī%}), f. a lotus, Nelumbium Speciosum,
(the whole plant, whereas {%padma%} is properly only
the flower; the same difference exists between
{%abja%} and {%abjinī, nalina%} and {%nalinī,%} &c.); a mul-
titude of lotuses or lake abounding in them; a lotus-
pool, a pool or pond (especially one deep enough for
the growth of the lotus); the fibrous stalk of a lotus;
a female elephant; a particular magical art; a woman
of the first and most excellent of the four classes into
which the sex is distinguished; N. of a woman. {%—Pad-%}
{%minī-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m., N. of a kind of leprosy.
{%—Padminī-kānta, as,%} m. ‘beloved of the lotuses,’
an epithet of the Sun, (so called because the Nelum-
bium Speciosum closes towards the evening.) {%—Pad-%}
{%minī-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. a multitude of lotuses, a place
abounding in lotuses or district in which they grow.
{%—Padminī-vallabha, as,%} m. ‘friend of the lotuses,’
an epithet of the Sun. {%—Padminīśa (˚nī-īśa), as,%}
m. ‘lord of the lotuses,’ the Sun.
<LEND>

<L>26940<pc>0532-a<k1>padya<k2>padya
{#padya#}¦ {%padya, as, ā, am%} (fr. 3. {%pad%} or {%pada%}),
relating to or belonging to the foot; paining or
hurting or coming in contact with the feet; bearing
traces of the feet, marked with footprints, measuring
a Pada in length, (at the end of a comp. with a
preceding numeral, e. g. {%daśa-padya,%} ten Padas
long); consisting of Padas, formed of parts of verses;
consisting of one Pada; belonging to a word; final;
({%as%}), m. a Śūdra (as sprung from the feet of
Brahmā); a part of a word, a verbal element;
({%ā%}), f. a way, path, road; ({%ās%}), f. pl., Ved. footsteps,
paces; ({%am%}), n. a verse, metre, poetry. {%—Padya-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of verses. {%—Padya-%}
{%veṇī,%} f., N. of a collection of poems by Veṇī-
datta. {%—Padya-saṅgraha, as,%} m. a collection of
verses, N. of a collection of twenty verses ascribed
to Kavi-bhaṭṭa.
<LEND>

<L>26941<pc>0532-a<k1>padra<k2>padra
{#padra#}¦ {%padra, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%pad%}),
a village; the entrance into a village; the earth;
a particular district.
<LEND>

<L>26942<pc>0532-a<k1>padva<k2>padva
{#padva#}¦ {%padva, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%pad%}),
the abode or world of human beings; a road; a
car; ({%nisarga-padva, as, ī, am,%} naturally inclined
to, feeling attracted towards.)
<LEND>

<L>26943<pc>0532-a<k1>padvan<k2>padvan
{#padvan#}¦ {%padvan.%} See p. 530, col. 3.
<LEND>
[Page0532-b+ 73]

<L>26944<pc>0532-b<k1>pan<k2>pan
{#pan#}¦ {%pan,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%panāyati, -te,%} (Ved.
{%panayati, -te%}), {%pene, panitā%} or {%panā-%}
{%yitā, panitum%} or {%panāyitum%} (mostly Ved.), to be
worthy of admiration; to admire; to regard with
surprise or wonder; to praise; to acknowledge,
recognise; (A.) to rejoice at, be glad of, con-
gratulate one's self upon (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>26945<pc>0532-b<k1>panayAyya<k2>panayAyya
{%Panayāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. worthy of admira-
tion, admirable; astonishing, surprising.
<LEND>

<L>26946<pc>0532-b<k1>panasya<k2>panasya
{%Panasya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%panasyate,%} &c., Ved. to
show one's self worthy of admiration, be admirable.
<LEND>

<L>26947<pc>0532-b<k1>panasyu<k2>panasyu
{%Panasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. showing one's self
worthy of admiration, boasting; an epithet of the
Maruts, of Indra, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26948<pc>0532-b<k1>panAyita<k2>panAyita
{%Panāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised.
<LEND>

<L>26949<pc>0532-b<k1>panAyya<k2>panAyya
{%Panāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. worthy of admiration,
admirable, surprising.
<LEND>

<L>26950<pc>0532-b<k1>panita<k2>panita
{%Panita, as, ā, am,%}¦ admired, praised.
<LEND>

<L>26951<pc>0532-b<k1>panitf<k2>panitf
{%Panitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ acknowledging with praise,
praising.
<LEND>

<L>26952<pc>0532-b<k1>panipnat<k2>panipnat
{%Panipnat, at, atī, at%}¦ (pres. part. of the Intens.),
Ved. showing one's self worthy of admiration or praise.
<LEND>

<L>26953<pc>0532-b<k1>panizwama<k2>panizwama
{%Paniṣṭama, as, ā, am%}¦ (perhaps for {%paniṣṭha-%}
{%tama,%} cf. {%nediṣṭha-tama%}), Ved. highly praised;
(but Sāy. takes it for 1st pers. pl. {%= stumaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>26954<pc>0532-b<k1>panizwi<k2>panizwi
{%Paniṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. (perhaps) admiration, praise.
<LEND>

<L>26955<pc>0532-b<k1>panizWa<k2>panizWa
{%Paniṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. very wonderful,
exceedingly glorious or praiseworthy.
<LEND>

<L>26956<pc>0532-b<k1>panIyas<k2>panIyas
{%Panīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. more wonderful or
praiseworthy, very wonderful.
<LEND>

<L>26957<pc>0532-b<k1>panu<k2>panu
{%Panu, us,%}¦ or {%panū, ūs,%} Ved. admiration, praise.
<LEND>

<L>26958<pc>0532-b<k1>panya<k2>panya
{%Panya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. praiseworthy; astonishing.
<LEND>

<L>26959<pc>0532-b<k1>panyas<k2>panyas
{%Panyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. {%= panīyas,%} more won-
derful, very wonderful.
<LEND>

<L>26960<pc>0532-b<k1>panasa<k2>panasa
{#panasa#}¦ {%panasa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%pan%}), the bread-fruit or Jaka tree, Artocarpus Inte-
grifolia; a thorn; a species of serpent; N. of a
monkey; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a malady, pustular and phleg-
monoid inflammation of the skin or external organs;
a female monkey; a female demon; ({%am%}), n. the
bread-fruit, fruit of the Jaka tree. {%—Panasa-tālikā%}
or (according to some) {%panasa-nālikā,%} f. the bread-
fruit tree.
<LEND>

<L>26961<pc>0532-b<k1>panasikA<k2>panasikA
{%Panasikā,%}¦ f. a kind of disease, pustules on the
ears and neck.
<LEND>

<L>26962<pc>0532-b<k1>panizpada<k2>panizpada
{#panizpada#}¦ {%paniṣpada, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens.
of {%spand%}), Ved. quivering, palpitating.
<LEND>

<L>26963<pc>0532-b<k1>panT<k2>panT
{#panT#}¦ {%panth,%} cl. 1. and 10. P. {%panthati,%}
{%panthayati,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>26964<pc>0532-b<k1>panTaka<k2>panTaka
{#panTaka#}¦ {%panthaka, as, ā, am,%} produced in
or on the way; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>26965<pc>0532-b<k1>pandara<k2>pandara
{#pandara#}¦ {%pandara, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>26966<pc>0532-b<k1>panna<k2>panna
{#panna#}¦ {%panna.%} See p. 531, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>26967<pc>0532-b<k1>pannadDA<k2>pannadDA
{#pannadDA#}¦ {%pan-naddhā.%} See p. 529, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>26968<pc>0532-b<k1>papi<k2>papi
{#papi#}¦ {%papi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}), drinking,
who or what drinks; ({%is%}), m. the moon.
<LEND>

<L>26969<pc>0532-b<k1>papIti<k2>papIti
{%Papīti, is,%}¦ f. (fr. Intens. of rt. 1. {%pā%}), mutual or
reciprocal drinking, drinking alike or together.
<LEND>

<L>26970<pc>0532-b<k1>papI<k2>papI
{#papI#}¦ {%papī, īs,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%pā,%} to cherish),
the sun; the moon.
<LEND>

<L>26971<pc>0532-b<k1>papu<k2>papu
{%Papu, us,%}¦ m. a fosterer, protector; ({%us%}), f. a
nurse, foster-mother.
<LEND>

<L>26972<pc>0532-b<k1>papuri<k2>papuri
{#papuri#}¦ {%papuri, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. {%pṝ%}), Ved.
liberal, giving, granting; abundant.
<LEND>

<L>26973<pc>0532-b<k1>papfkzeRya<k2>papfkzeRya
{#papfkzeRya#}¦ {%papṛkṣeṇya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%prach%}), Ved. to be wished or longed for, desirable.
<LEND>

<L>26974<pc>0532-b<k1>papri<k2>papri<h>1
{#papri#} 1¦. {%papri, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pṛ%}), lead-
ing over, delivering, saving.
<LEND>

<L>26975<pc>0532-b<k1>papri<k2>papri<h>2
{#papri#} 2¦. {%papri, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. 2. {%pṛ%}), Ved.
giving, granting.
<LEND>

<L>26976<pc>0532-b<k1>paPaka<k2>paPaka
{#paPaka#}¦ {%paphaka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Paphaka-naraka, ās,%} m. pl. the descendants of
Paphaka and Naraka.
<LEND>
[Page0532-c+ 77]

<L>26977<pc>0532-c<k1>pabbeka<k2>pabbeka
{#pabbeka#}¦ {%pabbeka, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Kedāra who composed the Vṛtta-ratnākara.
<LEND>

<L>26978<pc>0532-c<k1>pamarA<k2>pamarA
{#pamarA#}¦ {%pamarā,%} f. a kind of fragrant sub-
stance.
<LEND>

<L>26979<pc>0532-c<k1>pampasya<k2>pampasya
{#pampasya#}¦ {%pampasya%} (probably fr. an unused
{%pampas,%} grief), Nom. P. {%pampasyati,%} to feel pain.
<LEND>

<L>26980<pc>0532-c<k1>pampA<k2>pampA
{#pampA#}¦ {%pampā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. 3. {%pā%}),
N. of a river in the south of India; (according to a
Scholiast) N. of a lake.
<LEND>

<L>26981<pc>0532-c<k1>pamb<k2>pamb
{#pamb#}¦ {%pamb,%} cl. 1. P. {%pambati,%} &c., to
go, move; [cf. rt. {%kamp, bamb, mamb,%}
{%namb, khamb, gamb, ghamb, camb, tamb.%}]
<LEND>

<L>26982<pc>0532-c<k1>pay<k2>pay
{#pay#}¦ {%pay,%} cl. 1. A. {%payate,%} &c., to go,
move.
<LEND>

<L>26983<pc>0532-c<k1>payas<k2>payas
{#payas#}¦ {%payas, as,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%pī%} or rt. {%pinv;%}
but said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pā,%} to drink), juice, fluid,
vital spirit, power, strength (Ved.); water, rain;
milk; semen virile; N. of a Sāman; N. of a Virāj;
night (Ved.). {%—Payaḥ-kandā,%} f. Batatas Paniculata
{%(= kṣīra-vidārī)%}. {%—Payaḥ-payoṣṇī,%} f. {%= pa-%}
{%yoṣṇī,%} q. v. {%—Payaḥ-pāna, am,%} n. drinking milk,
a draught of milk. {%—Payaḥ-pūra, as,%} m. a pool,
lake. {%—Payaḥ-phenī,%} f. a species of small shrub
{%(= dugdha-phenī)%}. {%—Payaś-caya, as,%} m. a reser-
voir, piece of water, lake. {%—Payas-pa, as,%} m.
‘milk-drinker,’ a cat; night. {%—Payas-pā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} Ved. milk-drinking, drinking milk. {%—Payas-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. full of sap or juice, succulent,
juicy, liquid; full of strength or of milk, milky,
containing water or milk or semen; ({%vatyas%}), f. pl.
rivers (Ved.). {%—Payas-vala, as, ā, am,%} rich in
milk, yielding milk abundantly; ({%as%}), m. a goat.
{%—Payas-vin, ī, inī, i,%} abounding in sap or milk,
juicy, succulent, milky; ({%inī%}), f. a milch cow; a
she-goat; a river; N. of a river; the night; N. of
various plants containing milky juice ({%= kākolī,%}
{%kṣīra-kākolī, dugdha-phenī, kṣīra-vidārī%});
N. of a deity. {%—Payo-gaḍa, as,%} m. ‘water-drop (?),’
hail; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. n. an island. {%—Payo-graha,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. an oblation of milk. {%—Payo-ghana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘water-lump,’ hail. {%—Payo-janman, ā,%} m.
‘birthplace of water,’ a cloud. {%—Payo-da, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} yielding milk; ({%as%}), m. ‘water-giver,’ a cloud;
N. of a son of Yadu; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the
Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Payoda-suhṛd, t,%}
m. ‘friend of the clouds,’ the peacock. {%—Payo-%}
{%duh, dhuk, k, k,%} Ved. milking; giving semen (?).
{%—Payo-dhara, as,%} m. ‘water-holder,’ a cloud;
‘containing milk,’ a woman's breast; an udder; the
root of Scirpus Kysoor; a species of sugar-cane ({%=%}
{%koṣa-kāra%}); the cocoa-nut; a species of Cyperus;
(in prosody) an amphibrach. {%—Payo-dhas, ās,%} m. a
rain-cloud; a piece of water, pond, lake; the ocean.
{%—Payo-dhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. sucking milk (as a
calf). {%—Payo-dhārā,%} f. a stream of water; N. of a
river. {%—Payodhārā-gṛha, am,%} n. {%= dhārā-gṛha,%}
a bath-room with flowing water, shower-bath. {%—Pa-%}
{%yo-dhi, is,%} m. ‘receptacle of waters,’ the ocean.
{%—Payodhika, am,%} n. ‘sea-foam,’ cuttle-fish bone.
{%—Payo-nidhana, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Payo-%}
{%nidhi, is,%} m. ‘receptacle of waters,’ the ocean.
{%—Payo-mukha, as, ā, am,%} having milk on the
surface, milk-faced. {%—Payo-muc, k, k, k,%} yielding
or giving milk; ({%k%}), m. ‘water-discharging,’ a cloud.
{%—Payo-'mṛta-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Payo-rāśi, is,%} f. a piece of water, the ocean.
{%—Payo-latā,%} f. the plant Batatas Paniculata. {%—Pa-%}
{%yo-vāha, as,%} m. ‘water-bearer,’ a cloud. {%—Payo-%}
{%vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. full of sap, superabounding with
water, overflowing. {%—Payo-vrata, am,%} n. the act of
subsisting on mere milk in consequence of a vow,
(regarded as an expiation for receiving an unsuitable
present, if continued for a month with prayer and
residence in a cow-house); offering milk to Viṣṇu
and subsisting upon it for twelve days; also for one
or for three days as a religious act; ({%as, ā, am%}),
one who subsists upon mere milk in consequence of
[Page0533-a+ 80]
a vow. {%—Payoṣṇi-jātā,%} f. an epithet of the river
Sarasvatī. {%—Payoṣṇī,%} f. (fr. {%payas%} and {%uṣṇa%}),
‘warm as milk,’ N. of a river that rises in the
Vindhya mountain.
<LEND>

<L>26984<pc>0533-a<k1>payasa<k2>payasa
{%Payasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. full of juice or sap;
({%am%}), n. water; milk.
<LEND>

<L>26985<pc>0533-a<k1>payasya<k2>payasya<h>1
1. {%payasya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%payasyati, -te,%} &c., to
flow, be fluid.
<LEND>

<L>26986<pc>0533-a<k1>payasya<k2>payasya<h>2
2. {%payasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ made of milk (curds,
butter, cheese, &c.), milky; watery; ({%as%}), m. a cat;
N. of one of the sons of Aṅgiras; ({%ā%}), f. coagulated
milk, curds (made by mixing sour with hot sweet
milk); a shrub, Asclepias Rosea; N. of various
plants ({%= dugdhikā, kākolī, kṣīri-kākolī, svarṇa-%}
{%kṣīrī, arka-puṣpikā,%} and {%kutumbinī-kṣupa%});
any plant yielding a milky sap, as the Euphorbia,
the Asclepias, &c.
<LEND>

<L>26987<pc>0533-a<k1>payAya<k2>payAya
{%Payāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%payāyate,%} &c., to be fluid.
<LEND>

<L>26988<pc>0533-a<k1>payora<k2>payora
{%Payora, as,%}¦ m. {%= khadira,%} Acacia Catechu.
<LEND>

<L>26989<pc>0533-a<k1>para<k2>para
{#para#}¦ {%para, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pṛ,%} or per-
haps fr. {%apa + ra;%} declined optionally as a prono-
minal in abl. loc. sing. m. n. and nom. voc. pl. m.,
when it denotes relative position, e. g. abl. {%paras-%}
{%māt%} and {%parāt,%} loc. {%parasmin%} and {%pare,%} nom.
pl. m. {%pare%} and {%parās,%} Ved. {%parāsas,%} see Gram.
238. {%a%}), distant, remote, removed; opposite, ulterior,
beyond, further, on the other side of (with abl. or
rarely with gen., e. g. {%Sarayvāḥ pare tīre,%} on the
opposite or further bank of the Sarayū); past, ante-
cedent, earlier, previous, former (Ved.); long past,
ancient; subsequent, succeeding, following, future,
next, after (with abl.); added; (at the end of a
comp.) having as a following letter or sound (e. g.
{%ta-para,%} having {%t%} as a following letter, followed by
{%t%}); exceeding, left, remaining; very high or excel-
lent, distinguished, pre-eminent, highest, greatest,
longest, most excellent, best, supreme, principal,
chief, most complete, utmost (= Lat. <nsi>summus,</nsi> e. g.
{%param Brahman,%} the Supreme Spirit); highest,
latest (e. g. {%paraḥ kālaḥ,%} the highest or latest
times; {%param āyuḥ,%} the highest or last stage of
human life; used at the end of comps. to denote hav-
ing anything as the highest object, completely devoted
to or occupied with or engaged or engrossed in or
intent upon, e. g. {%cintā-para,%} occupied with reflec-
tion; {%dhyāna-para,%} engaged in meditation, whose
highest object is meditation; {%sukha-para,%} extremely
glad or happy; {%śoka-para,%} filled with grief, whose
principal occupation is grief); strange, a stranger,
other, another, different, varying, foreign, alien,
inimical, hostile, estranged, adverse; exceeding,
having a remainder or surplus (e. g. {%paraṃ śatam,%}
more than a hundred); left over, left as a remainder;
concerned or anxious for (with loc.); ({%as%}), m. an
enemy, foe, adversary; (sc. {%graha%}) a subsidiary
Soma-graha (Ved.); N. of a king of Kośala with
the patronymic Āṭṇāra (Ved.); N. of a prince; (sc.
{%prāsāda%} or {%vāsa%}) N. of the palace of Mitra-vindā;
({%as, am%}), m. n. the Supreme, Supreme Spirit, soul
of the universe, the Absolute; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant
({%= bandhyā-karkoṭakī%}); N. of a river; ({%am%}), n.
the highest or culminating point, acme, highest
degree; final beatitude; the secondary or more
remote meaning of a word; (in logic) one species of
common property, that which comprehends many
objects, genus; existence (regarded as the common
property of all things); ({%am%}), ind. beyond, over
(with abl., e. g. {%paraṃ vijñānāt,%} beyond human
knowledge); after (with abl., e. g. {%astamayāt pa-%}
{%ram,%} after sunset; {%mattaḥ param,%} after me; {%ataḥ%}
{%param,%} after this, after that, farther from hence,
farther from here, farther on, hereupon, hereafter,
next; {%nāsmāt param,%} no more of this, enough;
{%tataḥ param,%} after that, thereupon); thereupon,
thereafter (without an abl.); but, however; other-
wise; rather; in a high degree, excessively, ex-
ceedingly, beyond measure, completely; most wil-
lingly; at the most, at the utmost; only; {%yadi%}
{%param,%} if at all, perhaps, at any rate; ({%eṇa%}), ind.
farther, beyond (with acc., e. g. {%pareṇāsmān pa- %}
[Page0533-b+ 81]
{%raihi,%} pass by us); on the other side, thereupon;
afterwards; after (with abl. or gen.); ({%pare%}), ind.
afterwards, in future, farther; thereupon; [cf. {%pāra,%}
{%parā;%} Zend <nsi>para,</nsi> ‘before;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πέρᾱ, πέρας,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πέρᾱν, περαίνω, περαῖο-ς, περά-τη, Πειραιεύ-ς, πεῖ-ραρ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀ-περείσ-ιο-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>peren-die, per-egre, per-</nsi>
<nsi>per-a-m;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>fairra,</nsi> ‘far;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>far;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>pol-ŭ,</nsi> ‘the opposite border.’] {%—Para-kar-%}
{%man, a,%} n. another's work, service for others.
{%—Parakarma-nirata, as,%} m. engaged in service
for another, a servant. {%—Para-kalatra, am,%} n.
another's wife. {%—Parakalatrābhigamana (˚ra-%}
{%abh˚), am,%}  n. approaching the wife of another,
intriguing with another man's wife, adultery. {%—Pa-%}
{%ra-kārya, am,%} n. another's business, the affair of
another. {%—Para-kṛti, is,%} f. the action or history
of another. {%—Para-krama, as,%} m. Krama of the
subsequent or second letter of a conjunction of con-
sonants, (see {%krama.%}) {%—Para-krāthin, ī,%} m., N. of
a hero in the Mahā-bhārata who fought on the side
of the Kurus. {%—Para-krānti, is,%} f. the greatest
declination, inclination of the ecliptic. {%—Para-%}
{%kṣudrās,%} f. pl. (probably) those verses of the
Veda which are the shortest or excessively short.
{%—Para-kṣetra, am,%} n. another's field; another
man's wife; another's body. {%—Para-gata, as, ā, am,%}
being with another, present with another, relating to
another. {%—Para-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} belonging or
relating to another, beneficial to another. {%—Para-%}
{%guṇa, as, ā, am,%} advantageous or beneficial to
another or to an enemy. {%—Para-gṛha-vāsa, as,%} m.
dwelling in the house of another. {%—Para-granthi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘the extreme point of a limb,’ an articulation, a
joint. {%—Para-glāni, is,%} f. reduction or subjugation
of an enemy. {%—Para-cakra, am,%} n. the army of
an enemy; a hostile prince. {%—Para-citta-jñāna,%}
{%am,%} n. knowing the thoughts of another. {%—Para-%}
{%cchanda, as,%} m. the will of another; dependance;
({%as, ā, am%}), depending upon or subject to the will
of another, dependant, subjected, subservient. {%—Pa-%}
{%racchanda-vat, ān, atī, at,%} dependant on the will
of another, subjected, subservient. {%—Para-cchidra,%}
{%am,%} n. a fault or flaw or defect in another. {%—Para-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} ‘born of another,’ strange, a stranger,
(see {%para-jāta.%}) {%—Para-jana, as,%} m. another per-
son, a stranger, (opposed to {%sva-jana.%}) {%—Para-%}
{%janman, a,%} n. a future birth. {%—Parajanmika, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} relating to a future birth or life. {%—Para-%}
{%jāta, as, ā, am,%} born of another, nourished or
maintained by a stranger, dependant on others for
sustenance, adopted, fostered by strangers; dependant,
servile, subjected; ({%as%}), m. a servant. {%—Para-jita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} conquered or subdued by another;
nourished by a stranger, (for {%para-jāta,%} q. v.) {%—Pa-%}
{%rañ-ja, as,%} m. an oil-press; froth, foam; the blade
of a sword or knife, (in these three senses also read
{%parāñja,%} q. v.); a sword or scymitar; ({%ā%}), f. the
sound of instruments at a festival; ({%am%}), n. Indra's
sword. {%—Parañ-jana, as,%} m. an epithet of Varuṇa,
‘regent of the waters.’ {%—Parañ-jaya, as, ā, am,%} foe-
conquering; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Varuṇa. {%—Para-%}
{%taḥ-poṣa, as, ā, am,%} receiving food from another,
nourished by another. {%—Para-taṅgaṇa, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a people. {%—Para-tantra, am,%} n. a rule,
ritual or formula for another rite; ({%as, ā, am%}), de-
pendant upon another, dependant, subject to another,
subservient, obedient. {%—Para-tama, as, ā, am,%}
highest, greatest, most excellent; farthest, &c. {%—Pa-%}
{%ra-tara, as, ā, am,%} greater, higher, more; farther,
&c. {%—Para-tas,%} ind. through or from another,
(often taking the place of the abl. of {%para,%} e. g.
{%parato 'pi paraścāsi,%} and thou art greater than the
greatest or higher than the highest; {%svakāt parato%}
{%vā gṛhāt,%} from his own house or that of another);
farther, afterwards, behind, (often used in native
grammars after locatives with the omission of the
substantive verb, e. g. {%śasādau parataḥ [sati],%}
when the termination beginning with {%śas%} follows);
after, over, beyond (with abl.); otherwise, differ-
ently. {%—Para-tā,%} f. comprehensiveness, absolute-
ness; highest degree. {%—Para-tāpana, as,%} m. ‘pain-
[Page0533-c+ 81]
ing enemies,’ N. of a Marut. {%—Para-tīrthika,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Para-tra,%} ind. else-
where, in another place, in a future state, in another
world, in the other or next world; hereafter, in
futurity; farther on, in the sequel (of a book).
{%—Paratra-bhīru, us,%} m. ‘one who stands in awe
of futurity,’ a pious or religious man. {%—Para-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the being distant or remote; the state of being
consequent, consequence, the following (as of another
letter in grammar), posteriority; separateness, differ-
ence, distinction; hostility; the being more excel-
lent; (in logic) the nature of common or generic
property; priority of place or time, proximity.
{%—Para-dāra, ās,%} m. pl. another's wife. {%—Para-%}
{%dāra-gamana%} or {%paradārābhigamana (˚ra-abh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. approaching the wife of another, adultery,
adulterous intercourse or intrigue. {%—Paradārābhi-%}
{%marṣa (˚ra-abh˚), as,%} m. contact with the wife
of another, intriguing with another's wife. {%—Para-%}
{%dārin, ī,%} m. committing adultery with another man's
wife, an adulterer. {%—Paradāropasevana, am,%} n.
or {%paradāropasevā (˚ra-up˚),%} f. intriguing with
another's wife. {%—Para-duḥkha, am,%} n. the pain or
sorrow of another. {%—Para-devatā,%} f. the supreme
or highest deity. {%—Para-deśa, as,%} m. a foreign
country, the country of an enemy, (opposed to
{%sva-deśa.%}) {%—Paradeśa-sevin, ī, inī, i,%} frequenting
foreign countries, living abroad, travelling, a traveller.
{%—Paradeśin, ī, inī, i,%} foreign, exotic; ({%ī%}), m.
a foreigner; one residing abroad. {%—Para-doṣa-%}
{%kīrtana, am,%} n. the proclaiming of others' faults,
scandal, calumny, censoriousness. {%—Para-dravya,%}
{%am,%} n. another's property, the goods of another.
{%—Paradravyāpahāraka (˚ya-ap˚), as,%} m. one
who carries off the property of another, a thief,
robber. {%—Para-droha-karma-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} injuring
another in deed or thought. {%—Para-drohin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} tyrannizing over another or over others; tyranni-
cal. {%—Para-dveṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} hating others, hostile
to another, inimical, adverse. {%—Para-dhana, am,%}
n. another's wealth. {%—Paradhanāsvādana-sukha%}
{%(˚na-ās˚), am,%} n. feeding luxuriously at another's
expense. {%—Para-dharma, as,%} m. another's duty or
business, the duties of another caste. {%—Para-%}
{%dhyāna, am,%} n. intent meditation, absorption or
abstraction in contemplation. {%—Para-nindā,%} f. revil-
ing others. {%—Para-nipāta, as,%} m. (in gram.) the
irregular posteriority of a word in a compound; [cf.
{%pūrva-nipāta.%}] {%—Para-nirmita-vaśa-vartin, ī,%} m.
‘obedient to the will of those who are transformed
by others,’ an epithet of a class of Buddhist deities.
{%—Paran-tapa, as, ā, am,%} paining enemies, vexing
or annoying others, subduing a foe, (said of heroes);
({%as%}), m. a conqueror; N. of one of the sons of
Manu Tāmasa; of a prince of Magadha. {%—Para-%}
{%pakṣa, as,%} m. the side or party of an enemy or
adversary, &c.; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Anu.
{%—Para-patnī,%} f. the wife of another or of a stranger.
{%—Para-pada, am,%} n. high station, eminence;
final emancipation. {%—Para-parigraha, as,%} m.
‘another's retinue,’ the family or dependants of
another. {%—Para-pāka, as,%} m. anything cooked by
another, another's food, the meal of a stranger.
{%—Parapāka-nivṛtta, as,%} m. one who cooks his
own food without observing the expiatory sacrifice
for the five Sūnās or places of destruction of animal
life. {%—Parapāka-rata, as,%} m. ‘constant at another's
meals,’ one who lives upon others but observes the
due ceremonies before cooking. {%—Parapāka-ruci,%}
{%is,%} m. a constant guest at others' tables. {%—Para-%}
{%piṇḍa, am,%} n. another's cake, food given by another.
{%—Parapiṇḍāda (˚ḍa-āda), as, ā, am,%} ‘taking
another's food,’ feeding at another's cost or upon
another's food; ({%as%}), m. a servant. {%—Para-purañ-%}
{%jaya, as, ā, am,%} ‘conquering an enemy's city or
cities,’ an epithet of heroes. {%—Para-puruṣa, as,%}
m. ‘the Supreme Spirit,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu;
another man, a stranger, the husband of another
woman. {%—Para-puṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} fostered or nou-
rished by a stranger; ({%as%}), m. the Kokila or Indian
cuckoo; ({%ā%}), f. a female cuckoo; a harlot, a whore;
[Page0534-a+ 81]
a parasitical plant; N. of a daughter of a king of
Kauśāmbi. {%—Parapuṣṭa-mahotsava, as,%} m.
‘great feast or joy of the cuckoo,’ the mango tree.
{%—Para-pūrvā,%} f. a woman who has had a former
husband. {%—Parapūrvā-pati, is,%} m. the husband of
a woman who has had a previous husband. {%—Para-%}
{%pauravatantava, as,%} m., N. of a son of Viśvā-
mitra. {%—Para-prayojana, as, ā, am,%} for the use
of others. {%—Para-preṣya-tva, am,%} n. service of
another, servitude, slavery. {%—Para-brahman, a,%} n.
the Supreme Spirit or Brahma; N. of an Upaniṣad.
{%—Para-bhāga, as,%} m. superior merit; good for-
tune, prosperity; excellence, supremacy; the last
part, residue, remainder. {%—Parabhāga-tā,%} f. superior
excellence, supremacy. {%—Para-bhāgya, am,%} n. an-
other's wealth or prosperity. {%—Parabhāgyopajīvin%}
{%(˚ya-up˚), ī, inī, i,%} living upon another's fortune.
{%—Para-bhāṣā,%} f. a foreign language. {%—Para-%}
{%bhukta, as, ā, am,%} possessed or enjoyed by another.
{%—Para-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} following or subsequent,
(said of words.) {%—Para-bhūmi, is,%} f. a foreign or
hostile country. {%—Parabhūmi-ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}
living or being in a foreign or hostile country.
{%—Para-bhūṣaṇa, am,%} n. another's ornament;
({%as%}), m. scil. {%sandhi,%} peace purchased by ceding the
entire produce of a country; (also a wrong reading for
{%pari-bhūṣaṇa.%}) {%—Para-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} nourishing
another; ({%t%}), m. a crow, (said to nourish the Indian
cuckoo.) {%—Para-bhṛta, as, ā, am,%} cherished or
nourished by a stranger, fostered, adopted; ({%as%}), m.
the Indian cuckoo, (supposed to leave its eggs in the
nest of the crow to be hatched.) {%—Para-bhṛtya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} to be nourished or supported by another.
{%—Para-bhedaka, as, ā, am,%} ‘foe-breaker,’ de-
stroying or subduing a foe. {%—Para-maṇi, is,%} m.,
N. of a prince. {%—Para-mata, am,%} n. another's
opinion, different opinion or doctrine, heterodoxy,
heresy. {%—Paramata-kālānala (˚la-an˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a pupil of Śaṅkara. {%—Param-adbhuta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} very wonderful. {%—Para-manyu, us,%} m., N.
of a son of Kakṣeya; (also read {%para-manthu.%})
{%—Para-marma-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing the secret
plans or intentions of another, knowing another's
character or disposition, able to dive into the recesses
of another's heart. {%—Para-mātra,%} (with Buddhists)
a particular high number; (also read {%para-mantra.%})
{%—Para-mṛtyu, us,%} m. a crow, (probably a corrupt
word; cf. {%para-bhṛt.%}) {%—Param-pada, am,%} n.
final or eternal felicity; a high station; the abode
of Viṣṇu. {%—Param-para, as, ā, am,%} one fol-
lowing the other, proceeding from one to another
(as from father to son &c.); successive, repeated;
({%am%}), ind. one after the other, successively, in
continuous succession; ({%as%}), m. a great great-
grandson, a great-grandson or one of his descendants;
a species of deer; ({%ā%}), f. an uninterrupted series,
a row, regular series, succession, continuous ar-
rangement, order, method; race, progeny, lineage;
mediate or indirect condition; injury, killing,
hurting. {%—Parampara-tas,%} ind. successively, in
continuous succession, mutually. {%—Param-parāka,%}
{%am,%} n. immolating an animal at a sacrifice. {%—Pa-%}
{%ramparā-prāpta, as, ā, am,%} received by tradition.
{%—Param-parīṇa, as, ā, am,%} hereditary, obtained
by inheritance or descent; traditional. {%—Para-ra-%}
{%maṇa, as,%} m. ‘a strange lover,’ a married woman's
gallant, a paramour. {%—Para-rūpa, am,%} n. the fol-
lowing sound, the sound which comes last or in the
second place. {%—Para-loka, as,%} m. the next world,
the other world, paradise. {%—Paraloka-gama, as,%}
m. or {%paraloka-yāna, am,%} n. going to the other
world, death, dying. {%—Paraloka-bādha, ā,%} f. loss
of paradise. {%—Para-lokārthin (˚ka-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%}
seeking a future state, a candidate for immortality.
 — 1. {%para-vat, ān, atī, at,%} dependant upon another,
being under the command of another, ready or
willing to obey or serve (with inst. or loc., e. g.
{%bhrātrā%} or {%bhrātari paravān,%} one who obeys his
brother); subject to another; deprived of strength;
devoted to. {%—2. para-vat,%} ind. like a stranger.
{%—Paravat-tā,%} f. submissiveness, obedience. {%—Pa- %}
[Page0534-b+ 81]
{%ra-vaśa, as, ā, am,%} subject to another, depending
on the will of another, dependant, subservient, sub-
ject; deceived. {%—Para-vaśya, as, ā, am,%} subject to
the will of another, dependant, subservient, subject.
{%—Paravaśya-tā,%} f. dependance on another. {%—Pa-%}
{%ra-vācya, as, ā, am,%} blamable by others; ({%am%}),
n. fault, defect. {%—Paravācya-tā,%} f. condition of
being an object of censure to another. {%—Para-vāṇi,%}
{%is,%} m. a judge, ruler; a year; N. of the peacock on
which the god Kārttikeya rides. {%—Para-vāda, as,%}
m. ‘other's talk,’ the statement or speech of others,
popular rumour or report, slander; an adverse
reason, objection, refutation, controversy. {%—Para-%}
{%vādin, ī,%} m. one who makes an adverse statement
or raises an objection, a controversialist. {%—Para-%}
{%vīra-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} killing hostile heroes, the
slayer of the warriors or champions of the enemy, an
epithet of brave warriors. {%—Para-veśman, a,%} n. the
dwelling of the Supreme. {%—Para-vyūha-vināśana,%}
{%as,%} m. the destroyer of an enemy's ranks. {%—Para-%}
{%vrata, as,%} m. an epithet of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Para-%}
{%śāsana, am,%} n. the order of another. {%—Para-śuci,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a son of Manu Auttama. {%—Para-śvas,%}
ind. the day after to-morrow; (incorrectly for {%paraḥ-%}
{%śvas;%} see {%paras.%}) {%—Para-saṅgata, as, ā, am,%}
associated with another or with others; fighting
or engaged with another. {%—Para-sañcāraka, ās,%}
m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Para-sañjñaka, as,%} m.
‘called supreme,’ the soul. {%—Para-sambandha, as,%}
m. relation or connection with another. {%—Para-%}
{%sambandhin, ī, inī, i,%} related to another; belonging
to another. {%—Para-savarṇa%} or {%para-sasthāna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} homogeneous with a following letter. {%—Para-%}
{%sāt,%} ind. into the hands of another. {%—Parasāt-%}
{%kṛtā,%} f. a woman just given away in marriage.
{%—Para-sevā,%} f. service of another. {%—Para-strī,%} f.
the wife of another, an unmarried woman depending
upon another (as upon her father &c.). {%—Para-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. another or a strange place. {%—Paras-%}
{%para%} (sing. only, but without nom. sing.), one
another, each other, (often at the beginning of a
comp., e. g. {%paraspara-sthitau,%} m. du. standing
opposite to one another); mutual, mutually inter-
changed or interchangeable; (in Mahā-bh. Śānti-p.
2420. the nom. pl. {%parasparās,%} like one another,
occurs); ({%am, eṇa, āt, asya%}), ind. one another,
each other, with one another, from each other,
against one another, to one after another, one after
the other, mutually, reciprocally; ({%tas%}), ind. one
another, one after another, mutually, reciprocally.
{%—Paraspara-jña, as,%} m. knowing one another, a
friend, an intimate. {%—Paraspara-sukhaiṣin (˚kha-%}
{%eṣ˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} seeking one another's happiness.
{%—Paraspara-hata, as, ā, am,%} killed by one
another. {%—Parasparānumati (˚ra-an˚), is,%} f.
mutual concurrence or assent. {%—Parasparām,%} ind.
one another, one after another, mutually. {%—Paras-%}
{%paropakāra (˚ra-up˚), as,%} m. mutual assistance or
benefit, offensive and defensive alliance. {%—Paras-%}
{%paropakārin, ī,%} m. ‘mutually assisting,’ an ally;
an associate, a helper. {%—Parasmai-pada, am,%} n.
‘word to another’ or ‘word for another,’ the form
of a word which relates to another, (a term applied
to the terminations of the active verb); the active
or transitive verb; [cf. {%ātmane-pada.%}] {%—Paras-%}
{%maipadin, ī, inī, i,%} taking the active terminations.
{%—Parasmai-bhāṣā,%} f. {%= parasmai-pada,%} q. v.
{%—Para-sva, am,%} n. another's property. {%—Parasva-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. another's right. {%—Parasvatvāpādana%}
{%(˚va-āp˚), am,%} n. conferring a right upon another
as by gift &c. {%—Parasva-haraṇa, am,%} n. seizing
another's property. {%—Parasvādāyin (˚va-ād˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} taking or seizing another's property, extortion-
ary, an extortioner. {%—Parasvopajīvika (˚va-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%parasvopajīvin, ī, inī, i,%} living upon
the property of others, dependant. {%—Para-haṃsa,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= parama-haṃsa,%} q. v. {%—Para-han, ā,%}
{%ghnī, a,%} killing enemies; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a prince.
{%—Para-hita, as, ā, am,%} friendly to others, bene-
volent; good or profitable for another; ({%am%}), n.
the welfare of another. {%—Parahita-rakṣita, as,%}
[Page0534-c+ 81]
m., N. of a commentator on the Pañca-krama.
{%—Parāgama (˚ra-āg˚), as,%} m. the arrival or
attack of an enemy. {%—Parāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), am,%} n.
the hinder or back part of the body. {%—Parāṅ-%}
{%gada, as,%} m. (fr. {%para-aṅga-da,%} giving form
to another, Śiva forming with Durgā a deity, half
male and half female, or according to others restoring
the body of an enemy, i. e. Kāma-deva, to shape, after
having reduced it to ashes in a rage), a N. of Śiva.
{%—Parācita (˚ra-āc˚), as, ā, am,%} cherished or
fostered by another or by a stranger; ({%as%}), m. a
slave, servant. {%—Parāt-para, as, ā, am,%} superior
to the best. {%—Parātman (˚ra-āt˚), ā,%} m. the
Supreme Spirit; ({%ā, ā, a%}), one who has directed his
mind towards the Supreme; (perhaps) one who con-
siders himself the Supreme. {%—Parātma-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} fixed on the supreme good. {%—Parādhikāra%}
{%(˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m. another's office or post. {%—Parā-%}
{%dhikāra-carcā,%} f. interference with another's con-
cerns, officiousness. {%—Parādhīna (˚ra-ādh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} depending on another, dependant, subject,
subservient. {%—Parādhīna-tā,%} f. or {%parādhīna-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. dependance upon another, subjection. {%—Pa-%}
{%rānta (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m. the most extreme or remote
end, final death; ({%ās%}), m. pl. ‘living at the greatest
distance,’ N. of a people. {%—Parānna (˚ra-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the food of another, food supplied by or
belonging to another; ({%as, ā, am%}), eating the food
of another, living at another's expense, sponging;
a servant. {%—Parānna-paripuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
nourished by the food of another. {%—Parānnapari-%}
{%puṣṭa-tā,%} f. living on the food of another. {%—Pa-%}
{%rānna-bhojin, ī, inī, i,%} eating the food of another,
living at another's cost. {%—Parāpara (˚ra-ap˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} the more distant and near, far and near,
remote and proximate, prior and posterior, before
and behind, earlier and later (as cause and effect),
higher and lower, best and worst; ({%as%}), m. a Guru
of an intermediate class, a term applied in the
Tantras to the goddess Durgā; ({%am%}), n. (in logic)
community of property intermediate between the
greatest and smallest numbers, species (as being
between genus and individual); a species of plant
{%(= parūṣaka)%}. {%—Parāpara-guru, us,%} m. a par-
ticular Guru; [cf. the preceding.] {%—Parāpara-tā,%}
f. or {%parāpara-tva, am,%} n. higher and lower
degree, absolute and relative state; priority and
posteriority; the state of the better and the
worse; the state of comprising and not comprising;
the condition of being both a genus and a species.
{%—Parāparaitṛ (˚ra-et˚), tā, trī, tṛ,%} Ved. going
after another, going in a line (to the next world).
 — 1. {%parāmṛta (˚ra-am˚), am,%} n. rain; (for 2.
see s.v. at p. 537, col. 2.) {%—Parāyatta (˚ra-āy˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} dependant upon another, subject to
another, subservient. {%—Parāyus (˚ra-āy˚), us, us,%}
{%us,%} one who has reached the highest age or 100 years;
({%us%}), m. an epithet of Brahmā. {%—Parārtha (˚ra-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m. the highest advantage or interest; the
chief meaning or importance; the highest object
(euphemistic expression for sexual intercourse); the
profit or interest of another; ({%am%} or {%e%}), ind. for the
sake of another, for the good of another; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), having another object or meaning; designed
for another, done for another. {%—Parārtha-niṣṭha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fixed on the supreme good. {%—Parārtha-%}
{%vādin, ī, inī, i,%} talking of the affairs of others, offi-
cious, intermeddling. {%—Parārdha (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m.
the more remote or opposite or other side or half, the
ulterior part, the other part; ({%as, am%}), m. n. the high-
est number, the number 100,000,000,000,000,000
or a hundred thousand billions; (according to others)
a lac of lac of krores or a number equal to half the
term of Brahmā's life or as many mortal days as are
equal to fifty of his years; ({%as, ā, am%}), the most
excellent, (in this sense incorrectly for {%parārdhya.%})
{%—Parārdhya, as, ā, am,%} being on the more
remote or opposite or other side, being on the
farther side or half, being on the following side or
half; most remote, the most distant in number, of
the highest possible number or value, highest in rank
[Page0535-a+ 81]
or quality, most highly esteemed, most costly, most
excellent, most beautiful, finest, best; more excellent
than (with abl.); ({%am%}), n. a maximum; an im-
mense or infinite number; (at the end of a comp.)
amounting to an infinite number, amounting at
the most to. {%—Parārbuda (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. a spe-
cies of fire-fly. {%—Parāvajñā (˚ra-av˚),%} f. insulting
another, indignity offered to another. {%—Parāvara%}
{%(˚ra-av˚), as, ā, am,%} far and near, distant and
near, remote and proximate, earlier and later, prior
and subsequent, higher and lower, highest and lowest;
handed down from earlier to later times, traditional,
each successive or every succeeding (one); all-inclu-
sive, all-including; ({%ās%}), m. pl. ancestors and de-
scendants; ({%am%}), n. the remote and near, the far
and near, the earlier and later, cause and effect,
motive and consequence; the whole extent of an
idea; totality; the universe. {%—Parāvara-tva, am,%}
n. state of being higher and lower or superior and
inferior. {%—Parāvara-dṛś, k, k, k,%} knowing both
the past and the future. {%—Parāvasatha-śāyin%}
{%(˚ra-av˚), ī, inī, i,%} sleeping in another's house.
{%—Parāviddha (˚ra-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘pierced or
wounded by another,’ ‘frightened by another’ (?), an
epithet of Viṣṇu; of Kuvera; (perhaps rather {%parā-%}
{%viddha%} fr. {%parā-vyadh.%}) {%—Parāśraya (˚ra-āś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. dependance upon another; the retreat of
enemies; ({%as, ā, am%}), dependant or relying upon
another; ({%ā%}), f. a parasitical plant. {%—Parāśrita%}
{%(˚ra-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} dependant, subject. {%—Parā-%}
{%saṅga (˚ra-ās˚), as,%} m. dependance on another
or on something else, dependance. {%—Parāskandin%}
{%(˚ra-ās˚), ī,%} m. ‘assailing another,’ a thief, robber.
{%—Parāha (˚ra-aha), as,%} m. the next day. {%—Pa-%}
{%rāhata (˚ra-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} struck by another,
assailed, attacked. {%—Parāhṇa (˚ra-ah˚), as,%} m.
the afternoon, the latter part of the day; (the
word is also spelt {%parāhna.%}) {%—Paretara (˚ra-it˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} other than hostile, faithful, friendly.
{%—Pare-dyavi%} or {%pare-dyus,%} ind. on the next day,
to-morrow. {%—Pare-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%} of higher
value than life, more precious than life. {%—Pareśa%}
{%(˚ra-īśa), as,%} m. ‘the supreme or highest lord,’ an
epithet of Brahmā; of Viṣṇu. {%—Pareṣṭi (˚ra-%}
{%iṣ˚), is,%} m. ‘having the highest worship (?),’ an
epithet of Brahmā. {%—Paraidhita (˚ra-edh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} nourished by a stranger, maintained by
others; ({%as%}), m. a servant; the Koïl or Indian
cuckoo. {%—Paroḍhā (˚ra-ūḍhā),%} f. the wife of
another. {%—Parotkarṣa (˚ra-ut˚), as,%} m. another's
superiority. {%—Parodita (˚ra-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} ut-
tered by an enemy, &c.; ({%am%}), n. clamour, menace.
{%—Paropakāra (˚ra-up˚), as,%} m. the assisting others,
doing good to another, beneficence, benevolence,
charity. {%—Paropakārin (˚ra-up˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} assisting
others, supporting others, beneficent, charitable, kind
to others. {%—Paropakāraikarasa (˚ra-ek˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} wholly devoted to the service of another; ({%ā%}),
f. a wife wholly devoted to her husband. {%—Paropa-%}
{%kṛta (˚ra-up˚), as, ā, am,%} helped or befriended by
another; brought by another. {%—Paropajāpa (˚ra-%}
{%up˚), as,%} m. the dissension of enemies, causing
dissension among enemies. {%—Paropadeśa (˚ra-%}
{%up˚), as,%} m. giving advice to others, counselling
others, admonishing or instructing another, the in-
struction of others. {%—Paroparuddha (˚ra-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} besieged by an enemy, blockaded, in-
vested.
<LEND>

<L>26990<pc>0535-a<k1>paraka<k2>paraka
{%Paraka, as, ā, am, = para,%}¦ at the end of an
adj. comp. (e. g. {%iti-śabda-paraka,%} followed by the
word {%iti%}).
<LEND>

<L>26991<pc>0535-a<k1>parakIya<k2>parakIya
{%Parakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to another or
to a stranger, another, strange, hostile; ({%ā%}), f. the
mistress or wife of another, i. e. one of the three
objects of love, according to the Śriṅgāra or ama-
tory doctrine.
<LEND>

<L>26992<pc>0535-a<k1>parama<k2>parama
{%Parama, as, ā, am%}¦ (superlative of {%para%}), most
distant, last; highest, first, most excellent or dis-
tinguished, best, greatest, chief, primary, principal,
superior; exceeding; extreme; worst; more excel-
lent (with abl. {%Śivāt paramaḥ,%}  more excellent than
[Page0535-b+ 81]
Śiva); adequate, sufficient; ({%am%}), n. the utmost or
highest; the chief part, the most prominent part;
(at the end of an adj. comp.) amounting at the
highest to, consisting chiefly or principally of, occu-
pied only with; ({%am%}), ind. (a particle of assent,
affirmation, or agreement) yes, very well, well; (in
a comp. before an adj. or part.) excessively, ex-
tremely, very, much, in the highest degree, to a great
degree, excellently; [cf. Lith. <nsi>pirma,</nsi> ‘the first;’
probably Lat. <nsi>prīmu-s,</nsi> but cf. {%pra;%} Goth. <nsi>fruma,</nsi>
‘first.’] {%—Parama-krānti, is,%} f. {%= para-krānti.%}
{%—Paramakrānti-jyā,%} f. the sine of the greatest
declination. {%—Parama-krodhin, ī, inī, i,%} extremely
angry; ({%ī%}), m., N. of one of the Viśve-devas.
{%—Parama-gati, is,%} f. any chief object or refuge
(as a god, a protector); final beatitude. {%—Parama-%}
{%gava, as,%} m. an excellent bull or cow. {%—Parama-%}
{%gahana, as, ā, am,%} very mysterious or profound.
{%—Parama-cetas, as,%} n. the entire heart, all the
heart. {%—Parama-jā,%} f., Ved. (according to the
Scholiast) {%= pra-kṛti,%} (probably for {%parāvataḥ?%}).
{%—Parama-jyā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. ‘holding supreme
power,’ an epithet of Indra. {%—Parama-tas,%} ind. in
the highest degree, excessively; still worse. {%—Pa-%}
{%rama-tā,%} f. the highest position or rank; highest
end or aim. {%—Parama-dāruṇa, as, ā, am,%} very
dreadful. {%—Parama-duḥkhita, as, ā, am,%} deeply
afflicted. {%—Parama-durmedhas, ās, ās, as,%} exceed-
ingly stupid. {%—Parama-dru, us,%} m. Amyris Agal-
locha. {%—Parama-nanda, as,%} m., N. of a teacher;
(perhaps a wrong reading for {%paramānanda.%})
{%—Parama-pada, am,%} n. the highest rank, high
station, excellence; final beatitude. {%—Parama-pa-%}
{%rama, as, ā, am,%} highest or most excellent of all.
{%—Parama-puruṣa, as,%} m. the Supreme Spirit.
{%—Paramapuruṣa-prārthanā-mañjarī,%} f., N. of
a collection of prayers addressed to Viṣṇu and other
deities. {%—Parama-brahma-cāriṇī,%} f. an epithet of
Durgā. {%—Parama-brahman, a,%} n. the Supreme
Spirit. {%—Parama-bhāsvara, as, ā, am,%} excessively
radiant. {%—Parama-manyu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} deeply
distressed. {%—Parama-mahat, ān, atī, at,%} infinitely
great. {%—Parama-rasa, as,%} m. ‘most excellent
beverage,’ buttermilk mixed with water. {%—Parama-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. a supreme monarch. {%—Paramarṣi%}
{%(˚ma-ṛ˚), is,%} m. ‘greatest sage,’ a Ṛṣi or divine
sage of a peculiar order or division. {%—Parama-%}
{%vismita, as, ā, am,%} greatly surprized or amazed.
{%—Parama-śobhana, as, ā, am,%} exceedingly bril-
liant or beautiful. {%—Parama-saṃhṛṣṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} exceedingly rejoiced. {%—Parama-svadharman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} most exact in the observance of the duties
of one's own (caste or tribe). {%—Parama-haṃsa, as,%}
m. an ascetic of the highest order, a religious man
who has subdued all his senses by abstract medi-
tation. {%—Paramahaṃsa-priyā,%} f., N. of a work
ascribed to Vopa-deva. {%—Paramahaṃsopaniṣad,%}
{%t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Paramākhya (˚ma-%}
{%ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} called supreme, considered as
the highest. {%—Paramāṅganā (˚ma-aṅ˚),%} f. an ex-
cellent woman, a beautiful woman. {%—Paramāṇu%}
{%(˚ma-aṇ˚), us,%} m. an infinitesimal particle, an
atom, the invisible base of all aggregate bodies,
(of which thirty are said to form a mote in a
sun-beam); the sun's passage past an atom of
matter, an infinitesimal division of time; ({%u%}), n. the
eighth part of a Mātrā. {%—Paramāṇu-tā,%} f. infinite
minuteness, the state of an atom. {%—Paramāṇv-%}
{%aṅgaka, as,%} m. ‘subtle-bodied,’ an epithet of
Viṣṇu (as being smaller than the smallest as well
as greater than the greatest). {%—Paramātmaka%}
{%(˚ma-āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} of the highest nature, the
highest, greatest {%(= summus)%}. {%—Paramātman%}
{%(˚ma-āt˚), ā,%} m. the Supreme Spirit, soul of the
universe. {%—Paramādvaita (˚ma-ad˚), as,%} m. ‘the
highest without a duplicate,’ ‘peerless,’ an epithet
of Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n. pure unitarianism. {%—Paramā-%}
{%nanda (˚ma-ān˚), as,%} m. supreme felicity, the
Supreme Spirit, soul of the universe; N. of the
reputed author of the Caitanya-candrodaya, (also
called Kari-karṇa-pūra or Purī-dāsa.) {%—Paramānna %}
[Page0535-c+ 81]
{%(˚ma-an˚), am,%} n. ‘best food,’ rice boiled in milk
with sugar (offered to gods or to the Manes). {%—Pa-%}
{%ramāpakrama (˚ma-ap˚), as,%} m. {%= para-krānti.%}
{%—Paramāpad (˚ma-āp˚), t,%} f. the greatest mis-
fortune. {%—Paramāpama (˚ma-ap˚), as,%} m. ‘great-
est declination,’ the inclination of a planet's orbit to
the ecliptic; the sine of the sun's greatest declina-
tion. {%—Paramāyuṣa (˚ma-āy˚), as,%} m. the plant
Terminalia Tomentosa. {%—Paramāyus (˚ma-āy˚),%}
{%us, us, us,%} reaching or attaining to a very advanced
age (Ved.); the longest period of life either in men
or animals. {%—Paramārtha (˚ma-ar˚), as,%} m. the
highest or most sublime truth, the whole truth, real
truth, reality, truth; spiritual knowledge; any excel-
lent or important aim or object; the best sense; the
best kind of wealth; ({%āt%} or {%ena%}), ind. in reality.
{%—Paramārtha-tas,%} ind. in reality, in the true
sense of the word. {%—Paramārtha-tā,%} f. the highest
truth, reality. {%—Paramārtha-dharma-vijaya, as,%}
m., N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Paramārtha-nir-%}
{%vṛti-satya-nirdeśa, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
work. {%—Paramārtha-prapā,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary by Sūrya-paṇḍita on the Bhagavad-gītā. {%—Pa-%}
{%ramārtha-matsya, as,%} m. a real fish, really a fish.
{%—Paramārtha-vid, t,%} f. one who knows the
highest truth, a philosopher. {%—Paramārtha-vinda,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} acquiring knowledge of truth, obtaining
the best kind of wealth, &c. {%—Paramārtha-satya,%}
{%am,%} n. the real truth, the entire or whole truth.
{%—Paramārtha-sāra, as,%} m., N. of a book. {%—Pa-%}
{%ramārtha-supta, as, ā, am,%} really asleep. {%—Para-%}
{%mārhata (˚ma-ār˚), as,%} m. ‘the most excellent
follower of Jina,’ an epithet of Kumāra-pāla. {%—Pa-%}
{%ramāvaṭika (˚ma-āv˚), ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school.
{%—Paramāvadhi (˚ma-av˚), is,%} m. utmost term
or limit. {%—Paramāha (˚ma-aha), as,%} m. an excel-
lent day. {%—Paramekṣu (˚ma-ikṣu), us,%} m., N. of
a son of Anu. {%—Parameśa (˚ma-īśa), as,%} m. ‘su-
preme lord,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Parameśvara%}
{%(˚ma-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘supreme lord,’ (said of rich or
illustrious men and of princes and of gods); an
epithet of Viṣṇu; of Indra; of a Jina; (most fre-
quently) of Śiva; the Supreme Being; ({%ī%}), f. an epi-
thet of Durgā; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%liṅga,%} N. of a Liṅga
sacred to Śiva. {%—Parameśvara-tantra, am,%} n., N. of
a work. {%—Parameṣu (˚ma-iṣu?), us,%} m., N. of a
son of Anu. {%—Parame-ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} standing
at the top, supreme, superior; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Brahmā; a deity. {%—Parame-ṣṭhi, is,%} m. (con-
nected with {%parame-ṣṭhin%}), ‘standing at the head,’
a superior, a chief god of the Jainas. {%—Parameṣṭhi-%}
{%tā,%} f. supremacy, superiority. {%—{{Parameshṭhińa->Parame-ṣṭhin||20161202|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 308-310|dental nasal}}, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} standing at the head or top, highest, chief,
principal; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Agni or of any
supreme deity; a N. of Prajā-pati; of a son of
Prajā-pati; of Brahmā; of Śiva; of Viṣṇu; of
Garuḍa; of Manu Cakṣus; (with Jainas) an Arhat
or superior deity; a Guru or spiritual teacher; N. of
a son of Aja-mīḍha; of a son of Indra-dyumna (or
of Deva-dyumna); a kind of Virāj; a kind of Śāla-
grāma stone; ({%inau%}), m. du. an epithet of Viṣṇu
and Śrī; ({%inī%}), f. a species of culinary plant ({%=%}
{%brāhmī;%} cf. {%pārameṣṭhya.%}) {%—Parameṣṭhina,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= parame-ṣṭhin%}. {%—Paramaiś-%}
{%varya (˚ma-aiś˚), am,%} n. supremacy.
<LEND>

<L>26993<pc>0535-c<k1>paramaka<k2>paramaka
{%Paramaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ the most excellent,
highest, best, greatest, extreme.
<LEND>

<L>26994<pc>0535-c<k1>paramika<k2>paramika
{%Paramika, as, ā, am, = parama,%}¦ col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>26995<pc>0535-c<k1>paras<k2>paras
{%Paras,%}¦ ind., Ved. beyond, further, (opposed to
{%arvāk%}), on the other or opposite side, further on,
far away, away, at a distance; in future, hereafter,
afterwards, after; (with acc.) on the other side,
beyond, over against, more than; (with inst.) beyond,
away from, higher or more than; (with inst.)
without; (with abl.) beyond, on the other side of;
without, exclusive of, with the exception of, except.
{%—Para-uru, us, vī, u,%} Ved. broad on the outside,
broad above or at the top. {%—Para-ṛk-śata-gātha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. containing in addition 100 verses
of the Veda as well as Gāthās. {%—Paraḥ-kṛṣṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} more than black or dark, extremely
[Page0536-a+ 76]
dark. {%—Paraḥ-puṃsā,%} f., Ved. a woman who is not
satisfied with her husband. {%—Paraḥ-puruṣa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} higher than a man. {%—Paraḥ-śata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} more than 100; containing more than 100
verses, &c. {%—Paraḥ-śvas,%} ind. the day after to-
morrow. {%—Paraḥ-ṣaṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. more
than 60. {%—Paraḥ-sahasra, as, ā, am,%} more than
1000. {%—Paraḥ-sāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. ‘having super-
fluous or surplus Sāmans,’ N. of certain sacrificial days.
{%—Paraś-catvāriṃśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. more than 40.
{%—Paras-taram%} or {%paras-tarām,%} ind., Ved. further
away, further. {%—Paras-tāt,%} ind. (with gen.) on
the other side, beyond, further on, towards,
(opposed to {%avas-tāt, arvāk%}); higher than; from
afar off, from above, from before or behind (Ved.);
aside, apart; under (Ved.); hereafter, afterwards,
later, (opposed to {%pūrvam.%}) {%—Paras-pa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. protecting; ({%am%}), n. protection. {%—Pa-%}
{%raspa-tva, am,%} n. protection. {%—Paras-pā, ās,%} m. a
protector, protecting. {%—Paro'ṃhu (˚as-aṃ˚), us, vī,%}
{%u,%} Ved. narrow on the outside or at the top. {%—Pa-%}
{%ro'kṣa,%} see s.v.
<LEND>

<L>26996<pc>0536-a<k1>parAri<k2>parAri
{%Parāri,%}¦ ind. the year before last.
<LEND>

<L>26997<pc>0536-a<k1>parAritna<k2>parAritna
{%Parāritna, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī (?), am,%} belonging to the
year before last.
<LEND>

<L>26998<pc>0536-a<k1>paraRa<k2>paraRa
{#paraRa#}¦ {%paraṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pṛ%}), Ved.
crossing [cf. {%aritra-paraṇa%}]; ({%am%}), n. reading, (a
wrong form for {%pāraṇa%}); N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>26999<pc>0536-a<k1>paratarkuka<k2>paratarkuka
{#paratarkuka#}¦ {%paratarkuka%} or {%paratarkaka, as,%}
m., Ved. a beggar; [cf. {%tarkuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27000<pc>0536-a<k1>paramAra<k2>paramAra
{#paramAra#}¦ {%paramāra, as,%} m., N. of a son of
the Ṛṣi Śaunaka (ancestor of Bhoja-deva).
<LEND>

<L>27001<pc>0536-a<k1>pararu<k2>pararu
{#pararu#}¦ {%pararu, us,%} m. a species of pot-herb,
Eclipta Prostrata; (another reading has {%pavaru.%})
<LEND>

<L>27002<pc>0536-a<k1>paraSa<k2>paraSa
{#paraSa#}¦ {%paraśa, am,%} n. a species of gem.
<LEND>

<L>27003<pc>0536-a<k1>paraSu<k2>paraSu
{#paraSu#}¦ {%para-śu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śo%} and {%para,%}
but said to be fr. rt. {%śṝ%} and {%para,%} hurting another),
a hatchet, the axe of a wood-cutter, a battle-axe;
a thunderbolt; N. of a prince; [cf. {%parśu;%} Gr.
<lang n="greek">πέλεκυ-ς, πέλεκ-ρα, πέλεκκο-ν, πέλεκκο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πελεκ-ᾶς.</lang>] {%—Paraśu-dhara, as,%} m. a soldier armed with
an axe; N. of Gaṇeśa; of Paraśu-rāma. {%—Paraśu-%}
{%pāṇi, is, is, i,%} ‘axe in hand,’ armed with an axe.
{%—Paraśu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having an axe.
{%—Paraśu-rāma, as,%} m. ‘Rāma with the axe,’
an epithet of Rāma, son of the saint Jamad-agni,
(the first of the three Rāmas and the sixth Avatāra
or descent of the deity Viṣṇu who appeared in the
world for the purpose of repressing the tyranny and
punishing the violence of the Kṣatriya or military
caste; he seems to typify the tribe of Brāhmans and
their contests with the Kṣatriyas); N. of a modern
prince by whose orders the Paraśurāma-prakāśa was
composed. {%—Paraśurāma-pratāpa, as,%} m., N. of
a book mentioned in the Śūdra-dharma-tattva. {%—Pa-%}
{%raśurāma-prādurbhāva, as,%} m. ‘the manifestation
of Paraśu-rāma,’ N. of the forty-fifth chapter of the
Narasiṃha-Purāṇa. {%—Paraśurāmāvatāra (˚ma-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. ‘the descent of Paraśu-rāma,’ i. e. the
incarnation of Viṣṇu in the form of Paraśu-rāma,
N. of a chapter of the Khaṇḍa-praśasti (a poem
ascribed to Hanu-mat). {%—Paraśurāmāvatāra-ka-%}
{%thana, am,%} n. ‘story of the descent of Paraśu-
rāma,’ N. of the fiftieth chapter of the Uttara-
khaṇḍa or fifth part of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Pa-%}
{%raśu-vana, am,%} n. ‘forest of axes,’ N. of a hell
(containing a forest the leaves of which are axes).
<LEND>

<L>27004<pc>0536-a<k1>paraSavya<k2>paraSavya
{%Paraśavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit or proper for a hatchet
or axe; [cf. {%pāraśavya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27005<pc>0536-a<k1>paraSvaDa<k2>paraSvaDa
{%Paraśvadha, as,%}¦ m. an axe, a hatchet; [cf.
{%pāraśvadha, pāraśvadhika.%}] {%—Paraśvadhāyu-%}
{%dha (˚dha-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} armed with an axe.
<LEND>

<L>27006<pc>0536-a<k1>paraSvaDin<k2>paraSvaDin
{%Paraśvadhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ provided or furnished
with an axe.
<LEND>

<L>27007<pc>0536-a<k1>paraSvaDa<k2>paraSvaDa
{#paraSvaDa#}¦ {%paraśvadha%} or {%parasvadha.%} See
above.
<LEND>
[Page0536-b+ 75]

<L>27008<pc>0536-b<k1>parasvat<k2>parasvat
{#parasvat#}¦ {%parasvat, ān,%} m., Ved. a species
of animal, (perhaps) the wild ass; [cf. {%pārasvata.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27009<pc>0536-b<k1>parA<k2>parA
{#parA#}¦ {%parā%} (connected with {%para, paras,%}
and {%pra,%} probably an old inst. sing. of {%para,%} and
used as an indeclinable and inseparable prefix to
verbs and nouns in the sense of) away, off; back,
backward; inverted order; aside; to, towards; over,
on. According to native lexicographers the senses
in which {%parā%} may be used are expressed by the
following Sanskrit words: {%ābhimukhya, prātilomya,%}
{%gati, vi-krama, dharṣaṇa, hiṃsā (vadha), vi-%}
{%mokṣa, bhṛśam, pratyā-vṛtti, bhaṅga, an-%}
{%ādara,%} and {%nyag-bhāva;%} [cf. {%pareṇa, para-tas,%}
{%pare:%} Zend <nsi>para:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">παρά, παραί, πάρ, πάλιν:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>per, pereo = parā-i, perdo = parā-dā:</nsi> Osc.
<nsi>perum,</nsi> ‘without:’ Goth. <nsi>fra-, fair:</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>for:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>far-, fer:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>ver-:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>par-,</nsi> ‘back, again;’ <nsi>per,</nsi> ‘through:’ Hib.
<nsi>frea, far-,</nsi> ‘back, again.’]
<LEND>

<L>27010<pc>0536-b<k1>parAtaram<k2>parAtaram
{%Parā-taram,%}¦ ind., Ved. further away.
<LEND>

<L>27011<pc>0536-b<k1>parAka<k2>parAka
{#parAka#}¦ {%parāka.%} See under {%parāñc,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>27012<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkASa<k2>parAkASa
{#parAkASa#}¦ {%parā-kāśa, as,%} m., Ved. distant
view, remote expectation.
<LEND>

<L>27013<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkf<k2>parAkf
{#parAkf#}¦ {%parā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%}
to set aside, reject, disregard.
<LEND>

<L>27014<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkaraRa<k2>parAkaraRa
{%Parā-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of setting aside,
rejection, disregarding, disdaining.
<LEND>

<L>27015<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkurvat<k2>parAkurvat
{%Parā-kurvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ setting aside, throwing
off, rejecting, disdaining.
<LEND>

<L>27016<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkfta<k2>parAkfta
{%Parā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ set aside, rejected, thrown
off, disdained.
<LEND>

<L>27017<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkfz<k2>parAkfz
{#parAkfz#}¦ {%parā-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-karṣati,%}
{%-karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to draw or drag away; to
draw down; to censure, revile.
<LEND>

<L>27018<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkF<k2>parAkF
{#parAkF#}¦ {%parā-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -karitum,%}
{%-karītum,%} to throw away, lose.
<LEND>

<L>27019<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkIrya<k2>parAkIrya
{%Parā-kīrya,%}¦ ind. having thrown away; having
forfeited.
<LEND>

<L>27020<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkram<k2>parAkram
{#parAkram#}¦ {%parā-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-kramati%}
(ep. for {%-krāmati%}), {%-kramate, -kramitum, -krāntum,%}
to march forward, advance; to march against, attack;
to turn back; to display courage or spirit, display
strength or heroism; show zeal, excel, distinguish
one's self.
<LEND>

<L>27021<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkrama<k2>parAkrama
{%Parā-krama, as,%}¦ m. marching or going forth,
advancing against, attacking, attack; heroism, prowess,
valour, courage, power, strength, forcible means;
exertion; attempt, endeavour, effort, enterprise;
a N. of Viṣṇu; N. of a warrior on the side of the
Kurus; of a Vidyā-dhara prince, (associated with
Ā-krama, Vi-krama, and Saṅ-krama.) {%—Parākra-%}
{%ma-keśarin, ī,%} m., N. of a prince, son of Vikrama-
keśarin. {%—Parākrama-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing
the strength (of an enemy). {%—Parākrama-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} valorous, spirited, heroic, courageous,
possessed of power or strength.
<LEND>

<L>27022<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkramin<k2>parAkramin
{%Parā-kramin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ spirited, showing or dis-
playing courage or strength, exerting power.
<LEND>

<L>27023<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkrAnta<k2>parAkrAnta
{%Parā-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned back (e. g. {%pa-%}
{%lāyane,%} in flight); advanced; valorous, strong, pow-
erful, vigorous, bold, valiant, active, energetic.
<LEND>

<L>27024<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkrAntf<k2>parAkrAntf
{%Parā-krāntṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ displaying valour, show-
ing courage or strength, exerting power, heroic, a hero.
<LEND>

<L>27025<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkzip<k2>parAkzip
{#parAkzip#}¦ {%parā-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣipati,%}
{%-te, -kṣeptum,%} to tear away from, to wrest away,
to throw over, upset.
<LEND>

<L>27026<pc>0536-b<k1>parAkzipta<k2>parAkzipta
{%Parā-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ upset, thrown upside
down; wrested away. {%—Parākṣipta-manas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} having the mind carried away or enraptured.
<LEND>

<L>27027<pc>0536-b<k1>parAKyA<k2>parAKyA
{#parAKyA#}¦ {%parā-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti, -khyā-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to see afar off.
<LEND>

<L>27028<pc>0536-b<k1>parAga<k2>parAga
{#parAga#}¦ {%parāga, as,%} m. the pollen or farina
of a flower; dust in general; fragrant powder used
after bathing; sandal; an eclipse of the sun or
moon; fame, celebrity; independance, following
[Page0536-c+ 77]
one's own inclinations; N. of a mountain. {%—Parāga-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} or {%parāgin, ī, iṇī, i,%} laden with
pollen.
<LEND>

<L>27029<pc>0536-c<k1>parAgam<k2>parAgam
{#parAgam#}¦ {%parā-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to go away, pass away, depart; to die.
<LEND>

<L>27030<pc>0536-c<k1>parAgata<k2>parAgata
{%Parā-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ departed, dead; spread,
expanded; covered with, filled with, full of.
<LEND>

<L>27031<pc>0536-c<k1>parAgA<k2>parAgA
{#parAgA#}¦ {%parā-gā,%} cl. 2. 3. P. {%-gāti, -jigāti,%}
{%gātum,%} Ved. to go away, pass by or on one side,
to escape.
<LEND>

<L>27032<pc>0536-c<k1>parANgava<k2>parANgava
{#parANgava#}¦ {%parāṅgava, as,%} m. the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>27033<pc>0536-c<k1>parANmuKa<k2>parANmuKa
{#parANmuKa#}¦ {%parāṅ-mukha.%} See under {%parāñc.%}
<LEND>

<L>27034<pc>0536-c<k1>parAcar<k2>parAcar
{#parAcar#}¦ {%parā-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -cari-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to go away, depart, retreat, retire.
<LEND>

<L>27035<pc>0536-c<k1>parAji<k2>parAji
{#parAji#}¦ {%parā-ji,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-jayati, -te,%}
{%-jetum,%} to conquer, win, vanquish, overthrow; to
defeat in a lawsuit; to lose anything (acc.), be
deprived of; to be conquered; to succumb, submit;
to be overcome by (with abl., see Pāṇ. I. 4, 26).
<LEND>

<L>27036<pc>0536-c<k1>parAjaya<k2>parAjaya
{%Parā-jaya, as,%}¦ m. conquest, victory, mastering,
conquering, overpowering; defeat, being overcome
by (with abl.); loss, losing (at play or in a lawsuit);
deprivation; turning away from, desertion.
<LEND>

<L>27037<pc>0536-c<k1>parAjayamAna<k2>parAjayamAna
{%Parā-jayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ overcoming, sur-
passing, defeating; being deprived of, losing.
<LEND>

<L>27038<pc>0536-c<k1>parAjit<k2>parAjit
{%Parā-jit, t,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Rukma-kavaca.
<LEND>

<L>27039<pc>0536-c<k1>parAjita<k2>parAjita
{%Parā-jita, as, ā, am,%}¦ conquered, defeated, over-
come; overthrown, overpowered, defeated (at play),
cast (in a lawsuit), condemned by law.
<LEND>

<L>27040<pc>0536-c<k1>parAjizRu<k2>parAjizRu
{%Parā-jiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ victorious; being con-
quered, defeated.
<LEND>

<L>27041<pc>0536-c<k1>parAYc<k2>parAYc
{#parAYc#}¦ {%parāñc%} or {%parāc, āṅ, ācī, āk%} (fr. rt.
1. {%añc%} with {%parā,%} opposed to {%arvāñc%} or {%arvāc%} and
{%praty-añc%}), directed towards (Ved.); turned away,
averted; turning the back upon, having any one
behind, standing behind; departing or retiring from
(e. g. {%parāñcaḥ pitaraḥ,%} the departed Manes);
not returning, irrevocable, (in these senses generally
Ved.); situated beyond or on the other side (e. g.
{%amuṣmāt parāñco lokāḥ,%} the worlds situated be-
yond that); distant; directed outwards or towards the
outer world (e. g. {%parāñci khāni,%} the senses directed
outwards); ({%āk%} or Ved. {%āṅ%}), ind. away, away from, in
vain, to no purpose; outwards, towards the outer world.
{%—Parāk-tva, am,%} n., Ved. not turning back; non-re-
currence. {%—Parāk-puṣpī,%} f. Achyranthes Aspera ({%=%}
{%apāmārga;%} cf. {%pratya-puṣpī%}). {%—Parāg-dṛś, k,%}
{%k, k,%} having the eye turned towards the outer world.
{%—Parāṅ-manas, ās, ās, as,%} having the mind or
thoughts directed backwards. {%—Parāṅ-mukha, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} having the face turned away or averted,
turning the back upon; averted, turned away;
turning away from, averse from (with loc.); disin-
clined towards, not caring about, regardless of (with
loc. gen. or acc. with {%prati%}); avoiding, shunning;
({%as%}), m. a spell or magical formula pronounced over
weapons. {%—Parāṅmukha-tā,%} f. or {%parāṅmukha-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. turning away or averting the face;
disinclination, repugnance, dislike, aversion, disgust.
{%—Parāṅmukhaya,%} Nom. P. {%parāṅmukhayati,%}
to turn round, turn back or away. {%—Parāṅmukhī-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to
cause any one to turn back or avert the face, cause
to retreat, put to flight. {%—Parāṅmukhī-bhū,%} cl. 1.
P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to turn away the face,
turn the back upon, take to flight, retreat.
<LEND>

<L>27042<pc>0536-c<k1>parAka<k2>parAka
{%Parāka,%}¦ distance from, (generally in loc. {%parāke,%}
at a distance, or abl. {%parākāt,%} from a distance or at
a distance); ({%as%}), m., N. of a Tri-rātra; N. of a
sort of penance or religious vow of an expiatory kind,
(said to consist in fasting for twelve days and nights
and keeping the mind attentive and organs subdued);
a sacrificial sword or scimitar; a kind of disease; a
species of animal; ({%as, ā, am%}), small. {%—Parākāt-%}
{%tāt,%} ind. from a distance.
<LEND>

<L>27043<pc>0536-c<k1>parAcIna<k2>parAcIna
{%Parācīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned away, turned in an
opposite direction, averted, averse from, disinclined
[Page0537-a+ 69]
to, not minding, not caring about; being on the
opposite side, situated on the other side, being
beyond; ({%am%}), ind. away from, beyond, after;
more than.
<LEND>

<L>27044<pc>0537-a<k1>parAcEs<k2>parAcEs
{%Parācais,%}¦ ind., Ved. away, aside, at the side of.
<LEND>

<L>27045<pc>0537-a<k1>parAYcana<k2>parAYcana
{%Parāñcana, am,%}¦ n. turning away from, bending
aside.
<LEND>

<L>27046<pc>0537-a<k1>parAYcin<k2>parAYcin
{%Parāñcin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. not returning, not
recurring.
<LEND>

<L>27047<pc>0537-a<k1>parAYja<k2>parAYja
{#parAYja#}¦ {%parāñja, as,%} m. an oil-mill; froth
or foam; the blade of a sword or knife; [cf.
{%parañ-ja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27048<pc>0537-a<k1>parARa<k2>parARa
{#parARa#}¦ {%parāṇa, am,%} n., in {%vāyoḥ parāṇam,%}
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>27049<pc>0537-a<k1>parARI<k2>parARI
{#parARI#}¦ {%parā-ṇī (parā-nī),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ṇa-%}
{%yati, -te, -ṇetum,%} to lead back.
<LEND>

<L>27050<pc>0537-a<k1>parARutti<k2>parARutti
{#parARutti#}¦ {%parā-ṇutti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%nud%} with
{%parā%}), Ved. driving away, expulsion, expelling,
removing.
<LEND>

<L>27051<pc>0537-a<k1>parAtaMsa<k2>parAtaMsa
{#parAtaMsa#}¦ {%parā-taṃsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%taṃs%}
with {%parā%}), the being thrust or pushed aside.
<LEND>

<L>27052<pc>0537-a<k1>parAtaram<k2>parAtaram
{#parAtaram#}¦ {%parā-taram.%} See {%parā,%} p. 536.
<LEND>

<L>27053<pc>0537-a<k1>parAtras<k2>parAtras
{#parAtras#}¦ {%parā-tras,%} Caus. {%-trāsayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to scare away, drive away.
<LEND>

<L>27054<pc>0537-a<k1>parAdana<k2>parAdana
{#parAdana#}¦ {%parādana, as,%} m. a horse of the
Persian breed.
<LEND>

<L>27055<pc>0537-a<k1>parAdA<k2>parAdA
{#parAdA#}¦ {%parā-dā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dadāti, -dātum,%}
Ved. to give up, give over, deliver, surrender, hand
over; to give away, throw away, squander; to give
away or exchange for (with dat.); to exclude from,
(Bhāgavata-Purāṇa IV. 6, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>27056<pc>0537-a<k1>parAtta<k2>parAtta
{%Parātta, as, ā, am,%}¦ given over, &c. (See Schol.
on Pāṇ. VII. 4, 47.)
<LEND>

<L>27057<pc>0537-a<k1>parAdadi<k2>parAdadi
{%Parādadi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. giving up, giving over,
delivering over.
<LEND>

<L>27058<pc>0537-a<k1>parAdAna<k2>parAdAna
{%Parā-dāna, am,%}¦ n., Ved. giving up, surrendering,
giving away.
<LEND>

<L>27059<pc>0537-a<k1>parAdiS<k2>parAdiS
{#parAdiS#}¦ {%parā-diś,%} cl. 3. P. {%-dideṣṭi,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} Ved. to order off or command (any-
thing), to be removed.
<LEND>

<L>27060<pc>0537-a<k1>parAdfS<k2>parAdfS
{#parAdfS#}¦ {%parā-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati,%}
{%-draṣṭum,%} Ved. to perceive, observe, behold.
<LEND>

<L>27061<pc>0537-a<k1>parAdru<k2>parAdru
{#parAdru#}¦ {%parā-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -drotum,%}
to run away from, flee away, escape.
<LEND>

<L>27062<pc>0537-a<k1>parADi<k2>parADi
{#parADi#}¦ {%parādhi, is,%} m. hunting, the chase.
<LEND>

<L>27063<pc>0537-a<k1>parADmA<k2>parADmA
{#parADmA#}¦ {%parā-dhmā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhamati,%}
{%-dhmātum,%} Ved. to blow away.
<LEND>

<L>27064<pc>0537-a<k1>parAnasA<k2>parAnasA
{#parAnasA#}¦ {%parānasā,%} f. the practice of medi-
cine, administering remedies, medical treatment.
<LEND>

<L>27065<pc>0537-a<k1>parApa<k2>parApa
{#parApa#}¦ {%parāpa, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. (fr. {%parā%}
{%+ ap%}), a place &c. whence water has retired; ({%am%}),
n., see Schol. on Pāṇ. VI. 3, 97.
<LEND>

<L>27066<pc>0537-a<k1>parApat<k2>parApat
{#parApat#}¦ {%parā-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -pati-%}
{%tum,%} to fly away, escape; to depart; to fall out;
to fail: Caus. {%-pātayati,%} to chase or drive away.
<LEND>

<L>27067<pc>0537-a<k1>parApatat<k2>parApatat
{%Parā-patat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flying away; coming
back quickly.
<LEND>

<L>27068<pc>0537-a<k1>parApAtuka<k2>parApAtuka
{%Parā-pātuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. miscarrying,
abortive.
<LEND>

<L>27069<pc>0537-a<k1>parApur<k2>parApur
{#parApur#}¦ {%parā-pur, ūr,%} f., Ved. (according
to the Commentator) a great body.
<LEND>

<L>27070<pc>0537-a<k1>parApU<k2>parApU
{#parApU#}¦ {%parā-pū,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-punāti, -pu-%}
{%nīte, -pavitum,%} Ved. to purify, cleanse away,
lustrate.
<LEND>

<L>27071<pc>0537-a<k1>parAprAsAdamantra<k2>parAprAsAdamantra
{#parAprAsAdamantra#}¦ {%parāprāsāda-mantra, as,%} m.
{%= prāsāda-parāmantra,%} N. of a kind of mystical
prayer.
<LEND>

<L>27072<pc>0537-a<k1>parAbaba<k2>parAbaba
{#parAbaba#}¦ {%parābaba, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>27073<pc>0537-a<k1>parABikza<k2>parABikza
{#parABikza#}¦ {%parā-bhikṣa, as, ā, am%} (probably
[Page0537-b+ 77]
a wrong reading for {%para-bhikṣa%}), living upon
alms received from others.
<LEND>

<L>27074<pc>0537-b<k1>parABid<k2>parABid
{#parABid#}¦ {%parā-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhintte, -bhettum,%} to pierce, wound.
<LEND>

<L>27075<pc>0537-b<k1>parABU<k2>parABU
{#parABU#}¦ {%parā-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavi-%}
{%tum%} (Ved. inf. {%parā-bhuve%}), to pass away, vanish,
disappear; to perish, be lost, succumb, yield; to
overcome, conquer; to harm, hurt, injure (with
acc.): Caus. {%-bhāvayati, -yitum,%} to overthrow,
conquer, subdue, destroy; (A.) to vanish, perish,
sustain a loss.
<LEND>

<L>27076<pc>0537-b<k1>parABava<k2>parABava
{%Parā-bhava, as,%}¦ m. passing away, vanishing, dis-
appearance, coming to an end, dissolution, separation;
defeat, discomfiture, overthrow, mortification, humi-
liation, vexation, injury, contempt, disrespect, disre-
gard; destruction; N. of the fortieth (or fourteenth)
year in Jupiter's cycle of sixty years. {%—Parābhava-%}
{%pada, am,%} n. an object of contempt.
<LEND>

<L>27077<pc>0537-b<k1>parABAva<k2>parABAva
{%Parā-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. defeat, overthrow, discom-
fiture.
<LEND>

<L>27078<pc>0537-b<k1>parABAvuka<k2>parABAvuka
{%Parā-bhāvuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ approaching decline
or destruction, about to pass away.
<LEND>

<L>27079<pc>0537-b<k1>parABUta<k2>parABUta
{%Parā-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ defeated, discomfited,
overcome; degraded, humbled, treated with con-
tempt.
<LEND>

<L>27080<pc>0537-b<k1>parABUti<k2>parABUti
{%Parā-bhūti, is,%}¦ f. defeat, overthrow, humiliation;
injury.
<LEND>

<L>27081<pc>0537-b<k1>parABf<k2>parABf
{#parABf#}¦ {%parā-bhṛ,%} cl. 3. P. A., Ved. {%-bibharti,%}
{%-bibhṛte,%} &c., occurring only in the past pass. part.
{%parā-bhṛta, as, ā, am,%} taken off, put aside, hidden,
concealed.
<LEND>

<L>27082<pc>0537-b<k1>parAmfta<k2>parAmfta<h>2
{#parAmfta#} 2¦. {%parā-mṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one
who has overcome death or is no longer subject to-
death. (For 1. {%parāmṛta%} see p. 534, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>27083<pc>0537-b<k1>parAmfS<k2>parAmfS
{#parAmfS#}¦ {%parā-mṛś%} (sometimes incorrectly
spelt {%parā-mṛṣ%}), cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati, -marṣṭum,%}
{%-mraṣṭum,%} to stroke, rub, touch, take hold of,
grasp, clutch, seize, take; to handle roughly, violate
(a woman), ravish, seduce; to have reference, point
to: Pass. {%-mṛśyate,%} to be touched; to be referred
to, to be meant.
<LEND>

<L>27084<pc>0537-b<k1>parAmarSa<k2>parAmarSa
{%Parā-marśa, as,%}¦ m. (sometimes incorrectly spelt
{%parā-marṣa%}), seizing, dragging, pulling (e. g. {%ke-%}
{%śa-p˚,%} dragging by the hair); bending or drawing
a bow; injuring, any act of violence, violation,
assault, attack; affection (by disease &c.); remem-
bering, recollection; reflection, consideration, thought;
discrimination, judgment; (in logic) inference, con-
clusion; drawing conclusions from analogy or expe-
rience, knowledge of the minor premiss in its con-
nection with the major.
<LEND>

<L>27085<pc>0537-b<k1>parAmarSana<k2>parAmarSana
{%Parā-marśana, am,%}¦ n. recollection, remember-
ing; reflection, consideration.
<LEND>

<L>27086<pc>0537-b<k1>parAmarSin<k2>parAmarSin
{%Parā-marśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ calling or bringing to
mind, reminding, referring to.
<LEND>

<L>27087<pc>0537-b<k1>parAmfzwa<k2>parAmfzwa
{%Parā-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ touched, handled,
seized, grasped, roughly treated, violated; afflicted
by (disease &c.); weighed, considered, judged;
connected with, referred to; endured.
<LEND>

<L>27088<pc>0537-b<k1>parAyaRa<k2>parAyaRa
{#parAyaRa#}¦ {%parāyaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 5. {%i%} with
{%parā,%} or in some senses fr. {%para + ayana%}), going
away, departure (Ved.); way of departure, exit
(Ved.); final end or aim, last resort or refuge;
principal object, chief aim or purport; essence, sum,
summary; {%parāyaṇaṃ kṛ,%} to do one's utmost, to
do all one can; (often at the end of a comp. with
fem. {%ā,%} in the sense of) making anything one's chief
object, wholly devoted to, zealously engaged in,
wholly occupied with, intent on, affected by, wholly
possessed by; (according to some authorities {%parā-%}
{%yaṇam,%} n., has also the sense of a religious order or
division); ({%as%}), m., N. of a pupil of Yājñavalkya;
({%as, ā, am%}), principal, being the chief or final end
or aim, attached to, adhering to (with acc.); con-
nected with; dependant on, subject to; leading to,
conducive to. {%—Parāyaṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} occupying
the principal or highest point, most elevated.
<LEND>
[Page0537-c+ 70]

<L>27089<pc>0537-c<k1>parAyatta<k2>parAyatta
{#parAyatta#}¦ {%parāyatta.%} See p. 534, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>27090<pc>0537-c<k1>parAru<k2>parAru
{#parAru#}¦ {%parāru, us,%} m. a species of gourd,
Momordica Charantia; [cf. {%kāravella.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27091<pc>0537-c<k1>parAruka<k2>parAruka
{#parAruka#}¦ {%parāruka, as,%} m. a stone or rock;
(another reading has {%pavāruka.%})
<LEND>

<L>27092<pc>0537-c<k1>parArTa<k2>parArTa
{#parArTa#}¦ {%parārtha, parārdha, parārdhya.%} See
p. 534, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>27093<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvac<k2>parAvac
{#parAvac#}¦ {%parā-vac,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vakti, -vaktum,%}
Ved. to contradict.
<LEND>

<L>27094<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvAka<k2>parAvAka
{%Parā-vāka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. contradiction.
<LEND>

<L>27095<pc>0537-c<k1>parokta<k2>parokta
{%Parokta (˚rā-uk˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. contradicted.
<LEND>

<L>27096<pc>0537-c<k1>parocya<k2>parocya
{%Parocya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be contradicted.
<LEND>

<L>27097<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvat<k2>parAvat
{#parAvat#}¦ {%parā-vat, t,%} f., Ved. distance; (op-
posed to {%arvā-vat.%})
<LEND>

<L>27098<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvata<k2>parAvata
{#parAvata#}¦ {%parāvata, am,%} n. a species of plant
({%= parūṣaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>27099<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvara<k2>parAvara
{#parAvara#}¦ {%parāvara.%} See p. 535, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27100<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvarta<k2>parAvarta
{#parAvarta#}¦ {%parā-varta.%} See 1. {%parā-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>27101<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvasu<k2>parAvasu
{#parAvasu#}¦ {%parā-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. keeping
off wealth; ({%us%}), m., N. of the fortieth year in
Jupiter's cycle of sixty years [cf. {%parā-bhava%}]; N.
of a Gandharva (associated with Viśvā-vasu); also
of a son of Raibhya (associated with Arvā-vasu).
<LEND>

<L>27102<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvaha<k2>parAvaha
{#parAvaha#}¦ {%parā-vaha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vah%} with
{%parā%}), N. of one of the seven winds, (the other
six being called {%ā-vaha, ud-vaha, pari-vaha, pra-%}
{%vaha, vi-vaha,%} and {%saṃ-vaha.%})
<LEND>

<L>27103<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvAka<k2>parAvAka
{#parAvAka#}¦ {%parā-vāka.%} See {%parā-vac%} above.
<LEND>

<L>27104<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvfj<k2>parAvfj<h>1
{#parAvfj#} 1¦. {%parā-vṛj,%} cl. 7. 1. P. {%-vṛṇakti,%}
{%-varjati, -varjitum,%} to lose; to depart, depart
from life.
<LEND>

<L>27105<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvfj<k2>parAvfj<h>2
2. {%parā-vṛj, k,%}¦ m., Ved. banished (from society),
humbled, miserable, an outcast (?); (according to
the Scholiast) N. of a person.
<LEND>

<L>27106<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvft<k2>parAvft<h>1
{#parAvft#} 1¦. {%parā-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. (P. in Fut.,
Cond., and Aor.) {%-vartate, -vartitum,%} to turn back,
return, to turn round.
<LEND>

<L>27107<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvarta<k2>parAvarta
{%Parā-varta, as,%}¦ m. turning back, turning round;
retreat; reversal of a sentence; exchange, barter;
restoration.
<LEND>

<L>27108<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvartana<k2>parAvartana
{%Parā-vartana, am,%}¦ n. turning back, turning
round.
<LEND>

<L>27109<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvartin<k2>parAvartin
{%Parā-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ turning back, turning
round, taking to flight (in battle).
<LEND>

<L>27110<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvartya<k2>parAvartya
{%Parā-vartya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be turned back, to
be exchanged; to be reversed (as a sentence); to
be given back or restored. {%—Parāvartya-vyava-%}
{%hāra, as,%} m. appeal (in law).
<LEND>

<L>27111<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvft<k2>parAvft<h>2
2. {%parā-vṛt, t,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Rukma-kavaca.
<LEND>

<L>27112<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvftta<k2>parAvftta
{%Parā-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned back, returned,
fled, retreated; turned round, revolved; exchanged;
reversed (as a judgment); given back, restored.
<LEND>

<L>27113<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvftti<k2>parAvftti
{%Parā-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. turning back, turning round,
revolving; returning, retreating, return; exchange,
barter; reversion of a sentence or judgment; restora-
tion of property; recoiling; not taking effect.
<LEND>

<L>27114<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvedI<k2>parAvedI
{#parAvedI#}¦ {%parāvedī,%} f. {%= bṛhatī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>27115<pc>0537-c<k1>parAvyADa<k2>parAvyADa
{#parAvyADa#}¦ {%parā-vyādha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vyadh%}
with {%parā%}), a stone's throw, the range of any missile.
<LEND>

<L>27116<pc>0537-c<k1>parASara<k2>parASara
{#parASara#}¦ {%parā-śara.%} See {%parā-śṝ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>27117<pc>0537-c<k1>parASas<k2>parASas
{#parASas#}¦ {%parā-śas, as,%} f. (fr. rt. {%śaṃs%} with
{%parā%}), Ved. (perhaps) calumny, defamation.
<LEND>

<L>27118<pc>0537-c<k1>parASF<k2>parASF
{#parASF#}¦ {%parā-śṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-śṛṇāti, -śaritum,%}
{%-śarītum,%} to kill, destroy; to repel.
<LEND>

<L>27119<pc>0537-c<k1>parASara<k2>parASara
{%Parā-śara, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a destroyer; N. of a
Nāga; N. of a son of Vasiṣṭha or of a son of
Śakti and grandson of Vasiṣṭha; (according to
the epic poems) the father of Vyāsa, (he was author
of certain hymns in the Ṛg-veda [I. 65 — 73 and
part of IX. 97] and is also described as a law-giver.)
[Page0538-a+ 76]
{%—Parāśara-darśana, am,%} n., N. of the 134th
chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa.
{%—Parāśara-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Parāśara-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a poet, author
of the Guṇa-ratna-kośa-stotra. {%—Parāśara-bhāṣya,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work mentioned in the Śūdra-
dharma-tattva. {%—Parāśara-smṛti, is,%} f., N. of a
law-book. {%—Parāśarasmṛti-vyākhyā,%} f., N. of
a commentary on the preceding law-book by
Mādhava. {%—Parāśareśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m., N.
of a Liṅga. {%—Parāśareśvara-tīrtha, am,%} n., N.
of a sacred bathing-place mentioned in the Śiva-
Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>27120<pc>0538-a<k1>parASarin<k2>parASarin
{%Parāśarin, ī,%}¦ m. a beggar, a wandering mendi-
cant; [cf. {%pārāśarin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27121<pc>0538-a<k1>parASvas<k2>parASvas
{#parASvas#}¦ {%parā-śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śvasiti, -śva-%}
{%situm,%} to put trust in, confide in (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>27122<pc>0538-a<k1>parASvasya<k2>parASvasya
{%Parā-śvasya,%}¦ ind. having put trust or confidence
in (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>27123<pc>0538-a<k1>parAs<k2>parAs
{#parAs#}¦ {%parās (parā-as),%} cl. 4. P. {%parās-%}
{%yati, parāsitum,%} to throw away, cast aside (Ved.);
expose (a new-born child, Ved.); to expel; to
abandon, leave; to throw back, reject, repudiate.
<LEND>

<L>27124<pc>0538-a<k1>parAsa<k2>parAsa
{%Parāsa, as,%}¦ m. the range or distance of anything
thrown; ({%am%}), n. tin.
<LEND>

<L>27125<pc>0538-a<k1>parAsana<k2>parAsana
{%Parāsana, am,%}¦ n. killing, slaughter, massacre.
<LEND>

<L>27126<pc>0538-a<k1>parAsin<k2>parAsin
{%Parāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ throwing, measuring the dis-
tance of anything thrown.
<LEND>

<L>27127<pc>0538-a<k1>parAsisizu<k2>parAsisizu
{%Parāsisiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous to throw or cast
or send; wishing to overcome.
<LEND>

<L>27128<pc>0538-a<k1>parAsta<k2>parAsta
{%Parāsta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown; expelled; defeated.
<LEND>

<L>27129<pc>0538-a<k1>parAsya<k2>parAsya
{%Parāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thrown or cast away.
<LEND>

<L>27130<pc>0538-a<k1>parAsu<k2>parAsu
{#parAsu#}¦ {%parāsu (parā-asu), us, us, u,%} one
whose vital spirit is departing or departed, dying, at
the point of death, expiring, lifeless, dead. {%—Pa-%}
{%rāsu-karaṇa, as, ā, am,%} causing death, killing.
{%—Parāsu-tā,%} f. or {%parāsu-tva, am,%} n. death, ex-
tinction; apathy, want of spirit, spiritlessness.
<LEND>

<L>27131<pc>0538-a<k1>parAskandin<k2>parAskandin
{#parAskandin#}¦ {%parāskandin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. {%parā%}
{%+ āskandin%}), a robber, thief.
<LEND>

<L>27132<pc>0538-a<k1>parAstotra<k2>parAstotra
{#parAstotra#}¦ {%parā-stotra,%} N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>27133<pc>0538-a<k1>parAhan<k2>parAhan
{#parAhan#}¦ {%parā-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -hantum,%}
to overthrow, strike down, throw away, cast away,
drive away, drive on, impel.
<LEND>

<L>27134<pc>0538-a<k1>parAhata<k2>parAhata
{%Parā-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck down or back;
driven back, repelled, repulsed; struck, assailed;
driven on; ({%am%}), n. a stroke.
<LEND>

<L>27135<pc>0538-a<k1>pari<k2>pari
{#pari#}¦ {%pari%} (an indeclinable particle and
prefix to verbs and their derivative nouns; often
{%parī%} in composition; allied to {%para, parā, pra%}),
round, around, about, round about; further, in
addition to; against, opposite to, in the way; much,
excessively.
<div n="P"/>(As a separable preposition, especially in the Veda),
around, about (with acc., e. g. {%madhyan-dinam pari,%}
about midday); against, opposite to, towards, to (with
acc., e. g. {%vṛkṣam pari,%} in the direction of a
tree; {%tvā pari,%} against thee); to the share of (with
acc., e. g. {%yan mām pari syāt,%} what may fall to
my lot); beyond, more than (with acc., e. g. {%dai-%}
{%vīm pari vāk,%} a voice more than divine); after,
successively, severally (with acc. distributively, e. g.
{%vṛkṣaṃ vṛkṣam pari siñcati,%} he waters tree
after tree); from, away from, out of (with abl. after
verbs of motion, e. g. {%samudrād uta vā divaḥ%}
{%pari,%} out of sea or sky); outside of, except, with
exception of (with abl., e. g. {%pari Trigartebhyaḥ,%}
round about or outside Tri-garta); after the lapse
or expiration of (with abl., e. g. {%pari saṃvatsarāt,%}
after the lapse of a full year); in consequence of,
on account of, for the sake of (with abl., e. g.
{%Rakṣasaḥ pari,%} on account of the Rakṣas);
according to, in accordance with (with abl., e. g.
{%dharmaṇaḥ pari,%} according to the ordinance);
above, over (Ved. according to the Scholiast {%= adhi,%}
{%upari%}).
[Page0538-b+ 72]
<div n="P"/>(As an adverbial prefix to nouns not immediately
connected with verbs), very, excessively (e. g. {%pary-%}
{%aśru,%} very tearful; {%pari-durbala,%} excessively weak).
<div n="P"/>At the beginning of an adverbial comp. {%pari%}
implies outside, without, except, exclusive of (e. g.
{%pari-trigartam,%} outside Trigarta, Pāṇ. II. 1. 12,
VI. 2, 33; and according to Pāṇ. II. 1, 10, it may
be used in this sense at the end of an adverbial
comp., but only after {%akṣa, śalākā,%} and a numeral).
At the beginning of an adjective comp., according
to Pāṇ. (II. 2, 18, Vārt. 7), {%pari%} may be used in
the sense of {%pari-glāna,%} exhausted, (but {%pary-%}
{%adhyayana%} is said to mean ‘one to whom study is
repugnant.’) Native lexicographers explain the senses
of {%pari%} by the following Sanskrit words: {%ā-liṅgana,%}
{%doṣākhyāna (doṣa-kīrtana), nir-asana (ni-%}
{%vasana), pūjā, bhūṣaṇa, vyādhi, vy-āpti, upa-%}
{%rama, śoka, śeṣa, ati-śaya, tyāga, ni-yama;%}
[cf. Zend <nsi>pairi;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">περί, πέριξ, περι-σσό-ς, -περ;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>per-</nsi> in adj., e. g. <nsi>per-idoneus:</nsi> probably Old
Germ. <nsi>furi;</nsi> Old Iceland. <nsi>fyri;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>für;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>faoi,</nsi> ‘about, round.’]
<LEND>

<L>27136<pc>0538-b<k1>parikaTA<k2>parikaTA
{#parikaTA#}¦ {%pari-kathā,%} f. a work of fiction,
tale, story, the history or adventures of any fabulous
person.
<LEND>

<L>27137<pc>0538-b<k1>parikampa<k2>parikampa
{#parikampa#}¦ {%pari-kampa, as,%} m. trembling
violently, great fear or terror.
<LEND>

<L>27138<pc>0538-b<k1>parikampin<k2>parikampin
{%Pari-kampin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ trembling violently.
<LEND>

<L>27139<pc>0538-b<k1>parikara<k2>parikara
{#parikara#}¦ {%pari-kara, pari-karman.%} See under
{%pari-kṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>27140<pc>0538-b<k1>parikartana<k2>parikartana
{#parikartana#}¦ {%pari-kartana.%} See 1. {%pari-kṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>27141<pc>0538-b<k1>parikarza<k2>parikarza
{#parikarza#}¦ {%pari-karṣa.%} See 1. {%pari-kṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>27142<pc>0538-b<k1>parikal<k2>parikal<h>1
{#parikal#} 1¦. {%pari-kal%} (see rt. 2. {%kal%}), cl. 10.
P. {%-kālayati,%} &c., to drive about, chase, persecute.
<LEND>

<L>27143<pc>0538-b<k1>parikal<k2>parikal<h>2
{#parikal#} 2¦. {%pari-kal%} (see rt. 3. {%kal%}), cl. 10.
P. {%-kalayati,%} &c., to see, observe; to consider as,
regard as.
<LEND>

<L>27144<pc>0538-b<k1>parikalkana<k2>parikalkana
{#parikalkana#}¦ {%pari-kalkana, am,%}  n. deceit,
cheating; [cf. {%kalkana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27145<pc>0538-b<k1>parikANkzita<k2>parikANkzita
{#parikANkzita#}¦ {%pari-kāṅkṣita, as,%} m. a de-
votee, a religious ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>27146<pc>0538-b<k1>parikAyana<k2>parikAyana
{#parikAyana#}¦ {%parikāyana (?), ās,%} m. pl., N.
of a school.
<LEND>

<L>27147<pc>0538-b<k1>parikIrRa<k2>parikIrRa
{#parikIrRa#}¦ {%pari-kīrṇa.%} See {%pari-kṝ,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>27148<pc>0538-b<k1>parikIrtana<k2>parikIrtana
{#parikIrtana#}¦ {%pari-kīrtana.%} See {%pari-kṝt.%}
<LEND>

<L>27149<pc>0538-b<k1>parikup<k2>parikup
{#parikup#}¦ {%pari-kup,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-kupyati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to become greatly moved or excited, to
suffer violent emotion, to be in a rage, be very
angry: Caus. {%-kopayati, -yitum,%} to excite violently;
to make very angry.
<LEND>

<L>27150<pc>0538-b<k1>parikopa<k2>parikopa
{%Pari-kopa, as,%}¦ m. great or violent anger.
<LEND>

<L>27151<pc>0538-b<k1>parikUwa<k2>parikUwa
{#parikUwa#}¦ {%pari-kūṭa, am,%} n. a barrier, a
trench before the gate of a town forming a sort of
covered way; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga-rāja.
<LEND>

<L>27152<pc>0538-b<k1>parikf<k2>parikf
{#parikf#}¦ {%pari-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -ku-%}
{%rute, -kartum,%} to surround; [cf. {%pari-ṣ-kṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27153<pc>0538-b<k1>parikara<k2>parikara
{%Pari-kara, as, ī, am,%}¦ who or what helps or
assists, a helper; ({%as%}), m. attendants, dependants,
retinue, train, followers (in these senses also {%ās,%} m.
pl.); a multitude, crowd; preparation ({%parikaram%}
{%bandh%} or {%kṛ,%} to make preparations); beginning,
commencement, effort; a girdle for confining a
loose garment, a girth, zone, sash, a cloth worn
round the loins; (in dramatic language) covert or
indirect intimation of coming events in the plot of
a drama, the germ of the Vīja; (in rhetoric) a par-
ticular figure, the employment of allusive epithets;
discrimination, judgment.
<LEND>

<L>27154<pc>0538-b<k1>parikartf<k2>parikartf
{%Pari-kartṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a priest who performs the
marriage ceremony for a younger brother whose
elder brother is not yet married.
<LEND>

<L>27155<pc>0538-b<k1>parikarman<k2>parikarman
{%Pari-karman, ā,%}¦ m. a servant, an assistant, a
[Page0538-c+ 76]
slave; ({%a%}), n. the act of surrounding or attending on
(any one), worship, adoration; personal decoration,
dressing, painting, or perfuming the body; perfum-
ing the person after bathing; cleansing, purifying;
a means of purification; preparation; arithmetical
computation or operation. {%—Parikarmāṣṭaka%}
{%(˚ma-aṣ˚), am,%} n. the eight fundamental rules of
arithmetic, viz. addition, subtraction, multiplication,
division, finding the square, extracting the square root,
finding the cube and extracting the cube root.
<LEND>

<L>27156<pc>0538-c<k1>parikarmaya<k2>parikarmaya
{%Pari-karmaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%parikarmayati,%} &c.,
to anoint, decorate, adorn.
<LEND>

<L>27157<pc>0538-c<k1>parikarmin<k2>parikarmin
{%Pari-karmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ adorning, decorating,
&c.; ({%ī, iṇī%}), m. f. an assistant, a servant, slave.
<LEND>

<L>27158<pc>0538-c<k1>parikfta<k2>parikfta
{%Pari-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, (Mahā-bh.
Anuśāsana-p. 5044.)
<LEND>

<L>27159<pc>0538-c<k1>parikriyA<k2>parikriyA
{%Pari-kriyā,%}¦ f. surrounding, inclosing, inclosing
with a fence or ditch, intrenching; attending to (a
sacred fire &c.), attention; (in dramatic language)
allusion to future action, {%= pari-kara.%}
<LEND>

<L>27160<pc>0538-c<k1>parikft<k2>parikft<h>1
{#parikft#} 1¦. {%pari-kṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛntati,%}
{%-kartitum,%} to cut round, clip, cut off; to exclude
from.
<LEND>

<L>27161<pc>0538-c<k1>parikartana<k2>parikartana
{%Pari-kartana, as, ā, am,%}¦ cutting up, cutting to
pieces; ({%am%}), n. cutting, cutting off or round, a cir-
cular incision; cutting out, shelling; a shooting pain.
<LEND>

<L>27162<pc>0538-c<k1>parikartikA<k2>parikartikA
{%Pari-kartikā,%}¦ f. sharp shooting pain, especially in
the rectum.
<LEND>

<L>27163<pc>0538-c<k1>parikft<k2>parikft<h>2
{#parikft#} 2¦. {%pari-kṛt,%} cl. 7. P. {%-kṛṇatti,%}
{%-kartitum,%} to wind round.
<LEND>

<L>27164<pc>0538-c<k1>parikfSa<k2>parikfSa
{#parikfSa#}¦ {%pari-kṛśa, as, ā, am,%} very thin,
emaciate, wasted.
<LEND>

<L>27165<pc>0538-c<k1>parikfz<k2>parikfz<h>1
{#parikfz#} 1¦. {%pari-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-karṣati,%}
{%-karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to draw or drag about,
to carry about with one; to lead (an army); to
ponder, reflect constantly upon; cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṛṣati,%}
{%-te,%} (Ved.) to draw or make furrows, to plough:
Caus. {%-karṣayati, -yitum,%} to drag to and fro, tor-
ment, harass, vex, trouble.
<LEND>

<L>27166<pc>0538-c<k1>parikarza<k2>parikarza
{%Pari-karṣa, as,%}¦ m. or {%pari-karṣaṇa, am,%} n.
dragging about.
<LEND>

<L>27167<pc>0538-c<k1>parikarzita<k2>parikarzita
{%Pari-karṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dragged about; ha-
rassed, tortured (e. g. {%kāma-p˚,%} tortured with love).
<LEND>

<L>27168<pc>0538-c<k1>parikarzin<k2>parikarzin
{%Pari-karṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ dragging away, carrying
off, carrying about (to every place).
<LEND>

<L>27169<pc>0538-c<k1>parikfzwa<k2>parikfzwa
{%Pari-kṛṣṭa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>27170<pc>0538-c<k1>parikF<k2>parikF
{#parikF#}¦ {%pari-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -karitum,%}
{%-karītum,%} to scatter or strew about, scatter round,
besprinkle; to surround; to deliver over.
<LEND>

<L>27171<pc>0538-c<k1>parikIrRa<k2>parikIrRa
{%Pari-kīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread, diffused, scattered
around or about; surrounded, crowded about.
<LEND>

<L>27172<pc>0538-c<k1>parikFt<k2>parikFt
{#parikFt#}¦ {%pari-kṝt,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kīrtayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to proclaim on all sides, announce, relate,
communicate; to celebrate, praise, glorify; to pro-
pound; to declare, pronounce; to account; to call,
name: Pass. {%-kīrtyate,%} to be called.
<LEND>

<L>27173<pc>0538-c<k1>parikIrtana<k2>parikIrtana
{%Pari-kīrtana, am,%}¦ n. proclaiming aloud, pro-
claiming, stating, saying, telling, talking of; boast-
ing; naming.
<LEND>

<L>27174<pc>0538-c<k1>parikIrtita<k2>parikIrtita
{%Pari-kīrtita, as, ā, am,%}¦ proclaimed, promul-
gated, announced; vaunted, boasted of; said, de-
clared, called.
<LEND>

<L>27175<pc>0538-c<k1>parikxp<k2>parikxp
{#parikxp#}¦ {%pari-kḷp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kalpate, -kal-%}
{%pitum, -kalptum%} (the simple verb appears only to
occur in the part.): Caus. {%-kalpayati, -yitum,%} to
fix, settle, decide, determine; to destine for; to per-
form, execute, effect, accomplish, make, form, invent;
to contrive, arrange; to distribute; to invite.
<LEND>

<L>27176<pc>0538-c<k1>parikalpana<k2>parikalpana
{%Pari-kalpana, am,%}¦ n. deciding, fixing, settling,
agreeing upon; making, inventing, forming, con-
triving, performing; furnishing, providing, dividing,
distributing; ({%ā%}), f. making, forming, assuming a
form or shape; contrivance; reckoning.
<LEND>

<L>27177<pc>0538-c<k1>parikalpita<k2>parikalpita
{%Pari-kalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ settled, decided, agreed
upon; made, invented; contrived, arranged; distri-
buted, divided; provided with, furnished with.
<LEND>
[Page0539-a+ 74]

<L>27178<pc>0539-a<k1>parikalpya<k2>parikalpya
{%Pari-kalpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be settled, to be
calculated.
<LEND>

<L>27179<pc>0539-a<k1>parikxpta<k2>parikxpta
{%Pari-kḷpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ existing or occurring
here and there, distributed.
<LEND>

<L>27180<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrand<k2>parikrand
{#parikrand#}¦ {%pari-krand,%} Caus. P. {%-krandayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} Ved. to cry or make a noise round about.
<LEND>

<L>27181<pc>0539-a<k1>parikram<k2>parikram
{#parikram#}¦ {%pari-kram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krāmati, -kra-%}
{%mitum, -krāntum,%} to step or walk round or about,
circumambulate, go round, roam about for pleasure,
roam over, walk through, visit (with acc.); to out-
strip, overtake: Intens. {%-caṅkramīti,%} to move or
walk about continually, turn round perpetually.
<LEND>

<L>27182<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrama<k2>parikrama
{%Pari-krama, as,%}¦ m. walking round or about,
walking for pleasure, circumambulating, going about,
going over, passing over, roaming, walking, going;
pervading, penetrating; succession; series, order.
{%—Parikrama-saha, as,%} m. ‘one who bears running
about,’ a goat.
<LEND>

<L>27183<pc>0539-a<k1>parikramaRa<k2>parikramaRa
{%Pari-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. walking about,
going or roaming about.
<LEND>

<L>27184<pc>0539-a<k1>parikramat<k2>parikramat
{%Pari-kramat, an, antī, at,%}¦ moving or wander-
ing about.
<LEND>

<L>27185<pc>0539-a<k1>parikramya<k2>parikramya
{%Pari-kramya,%}¦ ind. having walked round or about.
<LEND>

<L>27186<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrAnta<k2>parikrAnta
{%Pari-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ walked round, stepped
upon; ({%am%}), n. the place or spot on which any one
has walked about or stepped, foot-steps, foot-prints,
traces.
<LEND>

<L>27187<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrAnti<k2>parikrAnti
{%Pari-krānti, is,%}¦ f. moving round, revolution,
circumrotation.
<LEND>

<L>27188<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrAmat<k2>parikrAmat
{%Pari-krāmat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going or moving
round or about.
<LEND>

<L>27189<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrAmam<k2>parikrAmam
{%Pari-krāmam,%}¦ ind., Ved. going about, [cf. {%a-pa-%}
{%rikrāmam.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27190<pc>0539-a<k1>parikriyA<k2>parikriyA
{#parikriyA#}¦ {%pari-kriyā,%} f. See {%pari-kṛ,%} p. 538.
<LEND>

<L>27191<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrI<k2>parikrI<h>1
{#parikrI#} 1¦. {%pari-krī,%} cl. 9. P. {%-krīṇāti, -kre-%}
{%tum,%} to purchase, buy, give in exchange, ac-
quire, gain (with inst. or dat. of the price, e. g.
{%śatena%} or {%śatāya pari-krī,%} to buy for a hundred);
to hire, engage for hire or for stipulated wages; A.
{%-krīṇīte, -kretum,%} to recompense, reward.
<LEND>

<L>27192<pc>0539-a<k1>parikraya<k2>parikraya
{%Pari-kraya, as,%}¦ m. hire, wages; redemption,
purchasing or purchasing back, buying off; a parti-
cular kind of treaty, a peace purchased with money.
<LEND>

<L>27193<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrayaRa<k2>parikrayaRa
{%Pari-krayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. engaging for hire, hiring.
<LEND>

<L>27194<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrI<k2>parikrI<h>2
2. {%pari-krī,%}¦ Ved., N. of the second Sādyaskra.
<LEND>

<L>27195<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrIRAna<k2>parikrIRAna
{%Pari-krīṇāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ purchasing, buying.
<LEND>

<L>27196<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrIta<k2>parikrIta
{%Pari-krīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ purchased, bought; hired.
<LEND>

<L>27197<pc>0539-a<k1>parikrIq<k2>parikrIq
{#parikrIq#}¦ {%pari-krīḍ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krīḍati,%}
{%-te, -krīḍitum,%} to play about.
<LEND>

<L>27198<pc>0539-a<k1>parikruD<k2>parikruD
{#parikruD#}¦ {%pari-krudh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-krudhyati,%}
{%-kroddhum,%} to fly into a rage or passion, to become
enraged.
<LEND>

<L>27199<pc>0539-a<k1>parikruS<k2>parikruS
{#parikruS#}¦ {%pari-kruś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati,%}
{%-kroṣṭum,%} to go about crying, to wail, lament.
<LEND>

<L>27200<pc>0539-a<k1>pariklam<k2>pariklam
{#pariklam#}¦ {%pari-klam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-klāmyati,%}
{%-klamitum,%} to be tired out or exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>27201<pc>0539-a<k1>pariklAnta<k2>pariklAnta
{%Pari-klānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ very tired, tired out,
exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>27202<pc>0539-a<k1>pariklid<k2>pariklid
{#pariklid#}¦ {%pari-klid,%} cl. 4. P. {%-klidyati, -kle-%}
{%ditum, -klettum,%} to be very wet or damp.
<LEND>

<L>27203<pc>0539-a<k1>pariklinna<k2>pariklinna
{%Pari-klinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ very wet, excessively
moist or humid.
<LEND>

<L>27204<pc>0539-a<k1>parikleda<k2>parikleda
{%Pari-kleda, as,%}¦ m. humidity, wetness, dampness.
<LEND>

<L>27205<pc>0539-a<k1>parikledin<k2>parikledin
{%Pari-kledin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wetting, moistening; wet.
<LEND>

<L>27206<pc>0539-a<k1>parikliS<k2>parikliS
{#parikliS#}¦ {%pari-kliś,%} cl. 9. P. {%-kliśnāti, -kle-%}
{%śitum, -kleṣṭum,%} to pain, torment, harass, vex;
cl. 4. P. A. {%-kliśyati, -te,%} to suffer, feel pain; to be
vexed or troubled or harassed.
<LEND>

<L>27207<pc>0539-a<k1>parikliSa<k2>parikliSa
{%Pari-kliśa, as,%}¦ m. (?), vexation, trouble.
<LEND>

<L>27208<pc>0539-a<k1>pariklizwa<k2>pariklizwa
{%Pari-kliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ much vexed or annoyed,
sorely troubled, pained, harassed, exhausted, fatigued;
({%am%}), n. pain, suffering, vexation; ({%am%}), ind. with
a feeling of uneasiness or reluctance, unwillingly.
<LEND>

<L>27209<pc>0539-a<k1>parikleSa<k2>parikleSa
{%Pari-kleśa, as,%}¦ m. hardship, fatigue.
<LEND>
[Page0539-b+ 73]

<L>27210<pc>0539-b<k1>pariklezwf<k2>pariklezwf
{%Pari-kleṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ causing pain or trouble,
a tormentor, torturer.
<LEND>

<L>27211<pc>0539-b<k1>parikvaRana<k2>parikvaRana
{#parikvaRana#}¦ {%pari-kvaṇana, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%kvaṇ%} with {%pari%}), loud-sounding, loud.
<LEND>

<L>27212<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzan<k2>parikzan
{#parikzan#}¦ {%pari-kṣan%} or {%pari-kṣaṇ,%} cl. 8. P.
A. {%-kṣaṇoti, -kṣaṇute, -kṣaṇitum,%} to wound,
hurt, injure.
<LEND>

<L>27213<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzata<k2>parikzata
{%Pari-kṣata, as, ā, am,%}¦ wounded, hurt, injured,
abraded, cut, scratched; killed.
<LEND>

<L>27214<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzati<k2>parikzati
{%Pari-kṣati, is,%}¦ f. wounding, injury, lesion.
<LEND>

<L>27215<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzaya<k2>parikzaya
{#parikzaya#}¦ {%pari-kṣaya.%} See {%pari-kṣi%} below.
<LEND>

<L>27216<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzar<k2>parikzar
{#parikzar#}¦ {%pari-kṣar,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kṣarati,%}
{%-kṣaritum,%} to stream or flow round, flow or stream
towards.
<LEND>

<L>27217<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzal<k2>parikzal
{#parikzal#}¦ {%pari-kṣal,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kṣālayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to wash out, rinse, wash off.
<LEND>

<L>27218<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzAlana<k2>parikzAlana
{%Pari-kṣālana, am,%}¦ n. water for washing.
<LEND>

<L>27219<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzava<k2>parikzava
{#parikzava#}¦ {%pari-kṣava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kṣu%}
with {%pari%}), Ved. (ill-omened) sneezing.
<LEND>

<L>27220<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzA<k2>parikzA
{#parikzA#}¦ {%pari-kṣā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%kṣai%} with
{%pari?%}), clay, mud, dirt.
<LEND>

<L>27221<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzARa<k2>parikzARa
{%Pari-kṣāṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. that which is charred
or burnt to a cinder.
<LEND>

<L>27222<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzAma<k2>parikzAma
{#parikzAma#}¦ {%pari-kṣāma, as, ā, am%} (said to
be fr. rt. {%kṣai%} with {%pari%}), excessively emaciated or
wasted away, dried up, fallen away.
<LEND>

<L>27223<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzi<k2>parikzi
{#parikzi#}¦ {%pari-kṣi%} (see rt. 4. {%kṣi%}), cl. 5. 9.
P. {%-kṣiṇoti, -kṣiṇāti, -kṣetum,%} to destroy, put an
end to: Pass. {%-kṣīyate,%} to waste away, decay, become
exhausted; to be brought low; to become poor.
<LEND>

<L>27224<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzaya<k2>parikzaya
{%Pari-kṣaya, as,%}¦ m. disappearing, ceasing, failure,
ruin; dissolution, decay, waste, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>27225<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzIRa<k2>parikzIRa
{%Pari-kṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ vanished, disappeared;
quite decayed, wasted, emaciated, worn away; ex-
hausted; brought low; entirely ruined; diminished,
decreased; lost, destroyed; (in law) insolvent.
<LEND>

<L>27226<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzit<k2>parikzit
{#parikzit#}¦ {%pari-kṣit%} or {%parī-kṣit%} (see rt. 2.
{%kṣi%}), Ved. spreading round or about, extending;
(‘living about or among mankind’), an epithet of
Agni; ({%au%}), du. an epithet of heaven and earth; ({%t%}),
m., N. of an ancient king, a son of Abhi-manyu and
father of Janam-ejaya; of a son of Kuru and father
of another Janam-ejaya; of a son of A-vikṣit and
brother of Janam-ejaya; of a king of A-yodhyā.
<LEND>

<L>27227<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzip<k2>parikzip
{#parikzip#}¦ {%pari-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣipati,%}
{%-te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw over or beyond; to put
or lay or wind round; to throw about, surround,
encircle, embrace; to overlay; to fetter; to throw
or put into.
<LEND>

<L>27228<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzipta<k2>parikzipta
{%Pari-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown about, scattered,
diffused; surrounded, encircled, intrenched; over-
spread, overlaid; struck; left, abandoned.
<LEND>

<L>27229<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzepa<k2>parikzepa
{%Pari-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. throwing about, moving to
and fro; scattering, spreading, diffusion; surround-
ing, encircling, circumfluence; an encircling belt or
boundary, that by which anything is surrounded;
being surrounded; abandoning, leaving.
<LEND>

<L>27230<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzepaka<k2>parikzepaka
{%Pari-kṣepaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what scatters
or disperses or surrounds.
<LEND>

<L>27231<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzepin<k2>parikzepin
{%Pari-kṣepin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ who or what throws
about, scatters, or distributes, &c.
<LEND>

<L>27232<pc>0539-b<k1>parikzIva<k2>parikzIva
{#parikzIva#}¦ {%pari-kṣīva, as, ā, am,%} drunk,
quite intoxicated.
<LEND>

<L>27233<pc>0539-b<k1>pariKaRqaya<k2>pariKaRqaya
{#pariKaRqaya#}¦ {%pari-khaṇḍaya,%} Nom. P. {%-khaṇ-%}
{%ḍayati, -yitum,%} to make small, humiliate, conquer.
<LEND>

<L>27234<pc>0539-b<k1>pariKan<k2>pariKan
{#pariKan#}¦ {%pari-khan,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-khanati,%}
{%-te, -khanitum,%} to dig round, dig up.
<LEND>

<L>27235<pc>0539-b<k1>pariKA<k2>pariKA
{%Pari-khā,%}¦ f. a moat, ditch, trench or fosse
round a town or fort; N. of a village in the North
country. {%—Parikhā-sthita, as, ā, am,%} secure, im-
pregnable.
<LEND>

<L>27236<pc>0539-b<k1>pariKAta<k2>pariKAta
{%Pari-khāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dug round; ({%as%}), m. a
furrow, rut.
<LEND>
[Page0539-c+ 75]

<L>27237<pc>0539-c<k1>pariKid<k2>pariKid
{#pariKid#}¦ {%pari-khid,%} cl. 4. P. {%-khidyati,%}
{%-khettum,%} to be depressed, to feel uneasy or dis-
turbed, to be afflicted: Caus. {%-khedayati, -yitum,%}
to trouble, afflict, injure, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>27238<pc>0539-c<k1>pariKinna<k2>pariKinna
{%Pari-khinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ depressed, afflicted,
exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>27239<pc>0539-c<k1>pariKeda<k2>pariKeda
{%Pari-kheda, as,%}¦ m. lassitude, fatigue, sleepiness,
exhaustion, being worn out.
<LEND>

<L>27240<pc>0539-c<k1>pariKyA<k2>pariKyA
{#pariKyA#}¦ {%pari-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. (in the non-
conjugational tenses also A.) {%-khyāti, -khyātum,%}
to look round or about, look at, perceive (Ved.);
to observe, regard, consider; to overlook, disregard
(Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>27241<pc>0539-c<k1>pariKyAta<k2>pariKyAta
{%Pari-khyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ regarded as; called,
named; celebrated, famous.
<LEND>

<L>27242<pc>0539-c<k1>pariKyAti<k2>pariKyAti
{%Pari-khyāti, is,%}¦ f. reputation, fame, celebrity.
<LEND>

<L>27243<pc>0539-c<k1>parigaRa<k2>parigaRa
{#parigaRa#}¦ {%pari-gaṇa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a house.
<LEND>

<L>27244<pc>0539-c<k1>parigaRaya<k2>parigaRaya
{#parigaRaya#}¦ {%pari-gaṇaya,%} Nom. P. {%-gaṇayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to count over, reckon up completely, enu-
merate one by one; to calculate, reckon, consider,
reflect.
<LEND>

<L>27245<pc>0539-c<k1>parigaRana<k2>parigaRana
{%Pari-gaṇana, am,%}¦ n. or {%pari-gaṇanā,%} f. com-
plete or accurate enumeration, accurate calculation or
statement.
<LEND>

<L>27246<pc>0539-c<k1>parigaRanIya<k2>parigaRanIya
{%Pari-gaṇanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be enumerated
completely, to be stated accurately.
<LEND>

<L>27247<pc>0539-c<k1>parigaRita<k2>parigaRita
{%Pari-gaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ enumerated, calculated,
reckoned; {%a-parigaṇita, as, ā, am,%} not counted,
innumerable; {%a-parigaṇita-tva, am,%} n. the state
of not being enumerated, innumerableness.
<LEND>

<L>27248<pc>0539-c<k1>parigaRya<k2>parigaRya
{%Pari-gaṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ calculable, to be calculated
or enumerated, to be stated with accuracy.
<LEND>

<L>27249<pc>0539-c<k1>parigam<k2>parigam
{#parigam#}¦ {%pari-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} to go round, walk or step round; to wander
over; to encircle, surround, embrace, inclose; to
spread on all sides, extend everywhere, extend
towards; to go away, depart, die; to come to or
attain any state or condition (e. g. {%śāntim pari-%}
{%gam,%} to become appeased): Caus. {%-gamayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to go round, to pass or spend (time).
<LEND>

<L>27250<pc>0539-c<k1>pariga<k2>pariga
{%Pari-ga, as, ā, am,%}¦ going round, surrounding.
<LEND>

<L>27251<pc>0539-c<k1>parigata<k2>parigata
{%Pari-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone round, encircled,
surrounded, encompassed; diffused, spread; over-
whelmed, distressed, overcome; filled, possessed of,
affected by, afflicted with; known, understood; ob-
tained, gained; performed; forgotten; obstructed.
<LEND>

<L>27252<pc>0539-c<k1>parigama<k2>parigama
{%Pari-gama, as,%}¦ m. or {%pari-gamana, am,%} n.
going round, surrounding; spreading, extending;
knowing, ascertaining; obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>27253<pc>0539-c<k1>parigamita<k2>parigamita
{%Pari-gamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought, conducted,
driven.
<LEND>

<L>27254<pc>0539-c<k1>parigarj<k2>parigarj
{#parigarj#}¦ {%pari-garj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-garjati, -gar-%}
{%jitum,%} to roar, cry.
<LEND>

<L>27255<pc>0539-c<k1>parigarvita<k2>parigarvita
{#parigarvita#}¦ {%pari-garvita, as, ā, am,%} very
proud.
<LEND>

<L>27256<pc>0539-c<k1>parigarh<k2>parigarh
{#parigarh#}¦ {%pari-garh,%} cl. 1. P. A., cl. 10. P.
{%-garhati, -te, -garhayati, -garhitum, -garhayitum,%}
to blame greatly, censure, despise, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>27257<pc>0539-c<k1>parigarhaRa<k2>parigarhaRa
{%Pari-garhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. excessive blame, censure.
<LEND>

<L>27258<pc>0539-c<k1>parigal<k2>parigal
{#parigal#}¦ {%pari-gal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-galati, -galitum,%}
to fall down or drop on all sides; to sink down.
<LEND>

<L>27259<pc>0539-c<k1>parigalita<k2>parigalita
{%Pari-galita, as, ā, am,%}¦ tumbled down; sunk;
flowing, fluid; melted.
<LEND>

<L>27260<pc>0539-c<k1>parigA<k2>parigA
{#parigA#}¦ {%pari-gā,%} cl. 2. 3. P. {%-gāti, -jigāti,%}
{%gātum,%} to go round, go round in a circle; to spread
everywhere or in all directions, permeate, pervade,
overspread; to come near, approach, reach, come
upon; to go out of the way; to disregard; to inves-
tigate, ascertain, obtain knowledge of.
<LEND>

<L>27261<pc>0539-c<k1>pariguRaya<k2>pariguRaya
{#pariguRaya#}¦ {%pari-guṇaya,%} Nom. P. {%-guṇa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to repeat, reiterate.
<LEND>

<L>27262<pc>0539-c<k1>parigup<k2>parigup
{#parigup#}¦ {%pari-gup,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gopāyati, -gop-%}
{%tum,%} to protect: Desid. A. {%-jugupsate,%} to beware
of, be on one's guard against (with abl.).
<LEND>
[Page0540-a+ 79]

<L>27263<pc>0540-a<k1>parigE<k2>parigE
{#parigE#}¦ {%pari-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gātum,%}
to go about or walk round singing, to sing or cele-
brate everywhere, proclaim to all the world.
<LEND>

<L>27264<pc>0540-a<k1>parigIti<k2>parigIti
{%Pari-gīti, is,%}¦ f. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>27265<pc>0540-a<k1>parigrah<k2>parigrah
{#parigrah#}¦ {%pari-grah%} (Ved. {%pari-grabh%}), cl.
9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti, -ṇīte%} (Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -ṇīte%}),
{%-grahītum,%} to take hold of, lay hold of on both
sides; embrace, surround, encircle, enfold, envelop;
fence round, hedge round; to wrap round, put
round; to put on (as a dress or ornament), to
dress; to seize, clutch, hold, grasp, catch, take or
carry along with one; to support; to take possession
of, master, overpower, overturn; to take (in war);
to accept, receive; to conceive, comprehend; to
take (food); to take upon one's self, undertake, un-
dergo; to receive (hospitably or kindly); to take
(a wife), marry; to take (by the hand), assist; to
have regard to, conform to, follow, adopt; to surpass,
excel; (in Ved. gram.) to enclose ({%iti%}) between a
word twice repeated, (see under {%pari-graha.%})
<LEND>

<L>27266<pc>0540-a<k1>parigfhIta<k2>parigfhIta
{%Pari-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken hold of on both
sides, grasped, clutched; embraced, surrounded;
taken, accepted; admitted, consented to, assented
to; followed, obeyed; opposed, checked.
<LEND>

<L>27267<pc>0540-a<k1>parigfhIti<k2>parigfhIti
{%Pari-gṛhīti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. grasping, comprehension;
summing up.
<LEND>

<L>27268<pc>0540-a<k1>parigfhItf<k2>parigfhItf
{%Pari-gṛhītṛ,%}¦ incorrect form for {%pari-grahītṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>27269<pc>0540-a<k1>parigfhya<k2>parigfhya<h>1
1. {%pari-gṛhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or
accepted, to be regarded, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. a woman.
<LEND>

<L>27270<pc>0540-a<k1>parigfhya<k2>parigfhya<h>2
2. {%pari-gṛhya,%}¦ ind. having taken or seized; in
company with, together with, along with, along;
considering, regarding. {%—Parigṛhya-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. containing the word {%pari-gṛhya.%}
<LEND>

<L>27271<pc>0540-a<k1>parigraha<k2>parigraha
{%Pari-graha, as,%}¦ m. laying hold of, seizing,
grasping; surrounding, encircling; embracing, span-
ning; enclosing, fencing round (the Vedi or sacrificial
altar by means of three lines or furrows); wrapping
round, putting on (a dress &c.); assuming (a form or
shape); comprehension; taking together, summing
up, sum, totality; taking, accepting, receiving, ac-
ceptance [cf. {%a-parigraha%}]; anything received, a
present; assenting to, assent; taking possession of,
attaining, obtaining; possession, property (e. g. {%ar-%}
{%tha-p˚,%} possession of wealth; {%prāṇa-p˚,%} possession
of vital spirit or life; {%parigraham pari-tyajya,%}
having given up all one's property); choosing,
selecting; claiming, claim; admitting or receiving
any one (into one's house), entertaining; an enter-
tainer; taking the hand, assisting, assistance; taking a
wife (lit. taking her by the hand), marrying, marriage;
a wife; a husband; honouring, favouring; reverence,
homage; grace, favour, patronage, ({%tvat-parigrahāt,%}
by thy favour); apprehending, understanding, com-
prehension, conception; undertaking, performing;
subjugation, making subservient; dominion; chas-
tising, punishing, punishment; connection, concern,
relation; adherents, dependants, attendants, train,
retinue, family, suite, the seraglio of a prince, house-
hold; a house, an abode; taking away, removing;
an eclipse of the sun; root, origin; a curse, im-
precation, oath; the rear or reserve of an army,
(various reading for {%prati-graha%}); (in Ved. gram.)
the double mention of a word both before and after
{%iti;%} the form which precedes the word {%iti%}. {%—Pari-%}
{%graha-tva, am,%} n. state of a wife, condition of
being a wife, marriage. {%—Parigraha-dvitīya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} accompanied by one's wife or family. {%—Pa-%}
{%rigraha-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of a family.
{%—Parigraha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of wealth,
having property.
<LEND>

<L>27272<pc>0540-a<k1>parigrahaka<k2>parigrahaka
{%Pari-grahaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ grasping, taking hold
of; undertaking.
<LEND>

<L>27273<pc>0540-a<k1>parigrahaRa<k2>parigrahaRa
{%Pari-grahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. wrapping round, putting on.
<LEND>

<L>27274<pc>0540-a<k1>parigrahin<k2>parigrahin
{%Pari-grahin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ possessing, attached to
worldly possessions or property.
<LEND>

<L>27275<pc>0540-a<k1>parigrahItf<k2>parigrahItf
{%Pari-grahītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ taking hold of; one
who assists, an assister, assisting; one who receives
(another into his house), an adoptive father; ({%tā%}),
m. a husband.
<LEND>
[Page0540-b+ 71]

<L>27276<pc>0540-b<k1>parigrAha<k2>parigrAha
{%Pari-grāha, as,%}¦ m. the fencing round (of the
Vedi or sacrificial altar with three lines or furrows;
if of the northern altar, called {%uttara-parigrāha;%}
if of the eastern, {%pūrva-parigrāha%}).
<LEND>

<L>27277<pc>0540-b<k1>parigrAhya<k2>parigrAhya
{%Pari-grāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be treated kindly or
hospitably, to be addressed with kind words.
<LEND>

<L>27278<pc>0540-b<k1>pariglE<k2>pariglE
{#pariglE#}¦ {%pari-glai,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-glāyati (-te), -glātum,%} to be wearied out, be
exhausted; to feel repugnance to or aversion from
(with dat.).
<LEND>

<L>27279<pc>0540-b<k1>pariglAna<k2>pariglAna
{%Pari-glāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ wearied out, languid,
exhausted; averse from.
<LEND>

<L>27280<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGa<k2>pariGa
{#pariGa#}¦ {%pari-gha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%han%} with
{%pari%}), an iron beam or bar used for locking or
shutting a gate [cf. {%argala%}]; a bar, obstacle, hin-
drance (figuratively); an iron bludgeon or stick
studded with iron, an iron club; a child which
assumes a peculiar cross-position in birth; a line of
clouds crossing the sun at sun-rise or sun-set; the
gate of a palace, of a town, of a house; (in astron.)
N. of the nineteenth Yoga; killing, striking, de-
stroying, a blow; a pitcher, water-jar; a glass
pitcher; N. of one of Skanda's attendants; N. of a
Cāṇḍāla; of a certain virtuous man; ({%au%}), m. du.
two birds flying one on each side of a traveller
(regarded as an omen). {%—Parigha-prāṃśu-bāhu,%}
{%us,%} m. one whose arm is as long as an iron beam.
{%—Parigha-bāhu, us,%} m. one whose brawny arm
resembles a knotty club. {%—Parighopama (˚gha-%}
{%up˚), as, ā, am,%} resembling an iron club.
<LEND>

<L>27281<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGAta<k2>pariGAta
{%Pari-ghāta, as,%}¦ m. killing, striking; removing
out of the way, getting rid of; a club, an iron
bludgeon.
<LEND>

<L>27282<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGAtana<k2>pariGAtana
{%Pari-ghātana, am,%}¦ n. striking, hurting, killing;
a club or bludgeon armed with iron.
<LEND>

<L>27283<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGAtin<k2>pariGAtin
{%Pari-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ destroying, annihilating;
setting at nought; transgressing (e. g. in {%nṛpājñā-%}
{%parighātin,%} transgressing the commands of a king).
<LEND>

<L>27284<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGaw<k2>pariGaw
{#pariGaw#}¦ {%pari-ghaṭ,%} Caus. P. {%-ghāṭayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to strike, sound; to cause to vibrate (as the
strings of a musical instrument).
<LEND>

<L>27285<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGaww<k2>pariGaww
{#pariGaww#}¦ {%pari-ghaṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-ghaṭṭayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to stir round or about; to press or touch on
all sides; to rub; to stir up; to open.
<LEND>

<L>27286<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGawwana<k2>pariGawwana
{%Pari-ghaṭṭana, am,%}¦ n. stirring round, stirring up.
<LEND>

<L>27287<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGawwita<k2>pariGawwita
{%Pari-ghaṭṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stirred about, touched
or rubbed repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>27288<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGarGara<k2>pariGarGara
{#pariGarGara#}¦ {%pari-gharghara (?),%} a low mur-
muring sound.
<LEND>

<L>27289<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGarmya<k2>pariGarmya
{#pariGarmya#}¦ {%pari-gharmya, as,%} m. a vessel for
preparing the hot sacrificial beverage.
<LEND>

<L>27290<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGAta<k2>pariGAta
{#pariGAta#}¦ {%pari-ghāta.%} See under {%pari-gha.%}
<LEND>

<L>27291<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGUrR<k2>pariGUrR
{#pariGUrR#}¦ {%pari-ghūrṇ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ghūrṇati,%}
{%-te, -ghūrṇitum,%} to whirl about, shake to and fro,
flutter, tremble.
<LEND>

<L>27292<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGfz<k2>pariGfz
{#pariGfz#}¦ {%pari-ghṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gharṣati,%}
{%-gharṣitum,%} to rub or pound to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>27293<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGfzwika<k2>pariGfzwika
{%Pari-ghṛṣṭika, as, ā, am,%}¦ (perhaps) one who
eats only what is pounded (?).
<LEND>

<L>27294<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGoza<k2>pariGoza
{#pariGoza#}¦ {%pari-ghoṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ghuṣ%}
with {%pari%}), sound, noise; thunder; improper speech.
<LEND>

<L>27295<pc>0540-b<k1>pariGrA<k2>pariGrA
{#pariGrA#}¦ {%pari-ghrā,%} cl. 1. A. {%-jighrate, -ghrā-%}
{%tum,%} to kiss passionately, cover with kisses.
<LEND>

<L>27296<pc>0540-b<k1>parijiGramARa<k2>parijiGramARa
{%Pari-jighramāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (Mahā-bh. Strī-p.
616), kissing passionately.
<LEND>

<L>27297<pc>0540-b<k1>paricakra<k2>paricakra
{#paricakra#}¦ {%pari-cakra, as,%} m., N. of a section
of the Dvā-viṃśaty-avadānaka; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>27298<pc>0540-b<k1>paricakz<k2>paricakz
{#paricakz#}¦ {%pari-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe%}
(see rt. {%cakṣ%}), to overlook, pass over, despise;
to reject; to declare (guilty), report, proclaim; to
speak of, mention, relate; to admit, own, acknow-
[Page0540-c+ 77]
ledge; to call, name; to address (with acc.); to
answer.
<LEND>

<L>27299<pc>0540-c<k1>paricakzA<k2>paricakzA
{%Pari-cakṣā,%}¦ f., Ved. rejection, disapproval, dis-
approbation.
<LEND>

<L>27300<pc>0540-c<k1>paricakzya<k2>paricakzya
{%Pari-cakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be despised or
disapproved.
<LEND>

<L>27301<pc>0540-c<k1>paricaturdaSa<k2>paricaturdaSa
{#paricaturdaSa#}¦ {%pari-caturdaśa, as,%} m. or {%pari-%}
{%caturdaśan, a,%} m. f. n. pl. fully fourteen.
<LEND>

<L>27302<pc>0540-c<k1>paricapala<k2>paricapala
{#paricapala#}¦ {%pari-capala, as, ā, am,%} always
moving about, very volatile.
<LEND>

<L>27303<pc>0540-c<k1>paricar<k2>paricar
{#paricar#}¦ {%pari-car,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-carati (-te), -caritum%} (ep. {%-cartum%}), to move or
walk about, roam about, go round (with acc.); to
attend upon, attend to, wait upon, serve, honour
(with acc.): Caus. P. {%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to sur-
round; A. {%-cārayate,%} to beset; to be served or
waited upon.
<LEND>

<L>27304<pc>0540-c<k1>paricara<k2>paricara
{%Pari-cara, as, ā, am,%}¦ roaming about; moving,
flowing; movable (as certain verses which may be
put at the beginning, middle, or end of a hymn);
an attendant, companion, servant, assistant; a guard,
patrol, city watchman, body-guard; a commander-in-
chief (?); attendance, homage, service.
<LEND>

<L>27305<pc>0540-c<k1>paricaraRa<k2>paricaraRa
{%Pari-caraṇa, as,%}¦ m. an assistant, a servant;
({%am%}), n. going about; serving, attending upon,
attention to.
<LEND>

<L>27306<pc>0540-c<k1>paricaraRIya<k2>paricaraRIya
{%Pari-caraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be served or
attended on; belonging to attendance, &c.
<LEND>

<L>27307<pc>0540-c<k1>paricaritavya<k2>paricaritavya
{%Pari-caritavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attended on
or served or worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>27308<pc>0540-c<k1>paricaritf<k2>paricaritf
{%Pari-caritṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who serves or
attends upon, an attendant, servant.
<LEND>

<L>27309<pc>0540-c<k1>paricarya<k2>paricarya
{%Pari-carya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attended upon or
served or honoured; ({%ā%}), f. waiting upon, attend-
ance, service, dependance; devotion, veneration,
adoration, worship. {%—Paricaryā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
attended upon, waited upon, honoured, respected.
<LEND>

<L>27310<pc>0540-c<k1>paricAra<k2>paricAra
{%Pari-cāra, as,%}¦ m. attendance, service, homage; a
place for walking; an attendant, assistant, a servant.
<LEND>

<L>27311<pc>0540-c<k1>paricAraka<k2>paricAraka
{%Pari-cāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ attending; ({%as%}), m.
an assistant, a servant, attendant, guard; ({%ikā%}), f. a
female attendant, waiting-maid.
<LEND>

<L>27312<pc>0540-c<k1>paricAraRa<k2>paricAraRa
{%Pari-cāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. attending upon, attendance,
serving.
<LEND>

<L>27313<pc>0540-c<k1>paricArika<k2>paricArika
{%Pari-cārika, as,%}¦ m. an attendant, assistant, a
servant; ({%ās%}), m. pl. fried grain; ({%ikā%}), f. a female
attendant or servant, a waiting-maid.
<LEND>

<L>27314<pc>0540-c<k1>paricArin<k2>paricArin
{%Pari-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going about in all directions,
moving about, movable; attending on, serving, paying
homage to; ({%ī%}), m. an attendant, a servant.
<LEND>

<L>27315<pc>0540-c<k1>paricArya<k2>paricArya
{%Pari-cārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be served or obeyed,
to be worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>27316<pc>0540-c<k1>paricartana<k2>paricartana
{#paricartana#}¦ {%pari-cartana.%} See {%pari-cṛt,%}
p. 541, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27317<pc>0540-c<k1>paricarmaRya<k2>paricarmaRya
{#paricarmaRya#}¦ {%paricarmaṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari-%}
{%carman%}), a strip of leather.
<LEND>

<L>27318<pc>0540-c<k1>parical<k2>parical
{#parical#}¦ {%pari-cal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-calati, -calitum,%}
to move, stir: Caus. {%-cālayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
move round, turn round.
<LEND>

<L>27319<pc>0540-c<k1>parici<k2>parici<h>1
{#parici#} 1¦. {%pari-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -nute,%}
{%-cetum,%} to pile up, heap up, accumulate; to collect;
to augment, increase; to gather in, acquire, obtain;
to fill with: Pass. {%-cīyate,%} to be increased or aug-
mented, to grow.
<LEND>

<L>27320<pc>0540-c<k1>paricaya<k2>paricaya<h>1
1. {%pari-caya, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see under 2. {%pari-ci,%}
p. 541, col. 1), heaping up, accumulation. {%—1. pari-%}
{%caya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} accumulated, collected; com-
plete, finished.
<LEND>

<L>27321<pc>0540-c<k1>paricayanIya<k2>paricayanIya<h>1
1. {%pari-cayanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be collected or
accumulated.
<LEND>

<L>27322<pc>0540-c<k1>paricAyya<k2>paricAyya
{%Pari-cāyya, as,%}¦ m., scil. {%agni,%} a sacrificial fire
arranged in a circle; raising the rent or revenue of
land (?).
<LEND>

<L>27323<pc>0540-c<k1>paricit<k2>paricit
{%Pari-cit, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. piling up or arranging all
around.
<LEND>

<L>27324<pc>0540-c<k1>paricita<k2>paricita<h>1
1. {%pari-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heaped, accumulated,
filled with.
<LEND>
[Page0541-a+ 76]

<L>27325<pc>0541-a<k1>paricetavya<k2>paricetavya<h>1
1. {%pari-cetavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be collected toge-
ther or accumulated.
<LEND>

<L>27326<pc>0541-a<k1>pariceya<k2>pariceya<h>1
1. {%pari-ceya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be collected all round
or from every side.
<LEND>

<L>27327<pc>0541-a<k1>parici<k2>parici<h>2
{#parici#} 2¦. {%pari-ci,%} cl. 3. P. {%-ciketi, -cetum,%}
Ved. to examine, investigate, search; to familiarize
one's self with, accustom one's self to, exercise one's
self in, practise; to become acquainted with: Caus. A.
{%-cāyayate, -yitum,%} to search, seek for.
<LEND>

<L>27328<pc>0541-a<k1>paricaya<k2>paricaya<h>2
2. {%pari-caya, as,%}¦ m. (for. 1. see under 1. {%pari-ci,%}
p. 540, col. 3), acquaintance, familiarity, familiar inter-
course, conversancy, intimacy; knowledge; recog-
nition; meeting with a friend; trial, practice, repe-
tition, frequent repetition. {%—Paricaya-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} intimately acquainted, accurately known.
<LEND>

<L>27329<pc>0541-a<k1>paricayanIya<k2>paricayanIya<h>2
2. {%pari-cayanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be known.
<LEND>

<L>27330<pc>0541-a<k1>paricita<k2>paricita<h>2
2. {%pari-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ known, acquainted or
familiar with. {%—Paricita-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} having
(its) place well known.
<LEND>

<L>27331<pc>0541-a<k1>pariciti<k2>pariciti
{%Pari-citi, is,%}¦ f. acquaintance, familiarity.
<LEND>

<L>27332<pc>0541-a<k1>paricetavya<k2>paricetavya<h>2
2. {%pari-cetavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be known, fit or
proper to be known.
<LEND>

<L>27333<pc>0541-a<k1>pariceya<k2>pariceya<h>2
2. {%pari-ceya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be known; to be
investigated or searched.
<LEND>

<L>27334<pc>0541-a<k1>paricint<k2>paricint
{#paricint#}¦ {%pari-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cintayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to think about, meditate on, reflect, con-
sider well; to call to mind, recollect, remember; to
think out, invent, devise.
<LEND>

<L>27335<pc>0541-a<k1>paricintaka<k2>paricintaka
{%Pari-cintaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ reflecting about, medi-
tating on (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>27336<pc>0541-a<k1>paricihnaya<k2>paricihnaya
{#paricihnaya#}¦ {%pari-cihnaya,%} Nom. P. {%-cihna-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to mark, sign, subscribe.
<LEND>

<L>27337<pc>0541-a<k1>paricihnita<k2>paricihnita
{%Pari-cihnita, as, ā, am,%}¦ marked, subscribed.
<LEND>

<L>27338<pc>0541-a<k1>paricud<k2>paricud
{#paricud#}¦ {%pari-cud,%} Caus. P. {%-codayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to set in motion, wield, brandish; to drive,
impel, urge, incite; to promote, further; to exhort.
<LEND>

<L>27339<pc>0541-a<k1>paricodita<k2>paricodita
{%Pari-codita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wielded, brandished;
impelled, incited.
<LEND>

<L>27340<pc>0541-a<k1>paricumb<k2>paricumb
{#paricumb#}¦ {%pari-cumb,%} cl. 1. P. {%-cumbati,%}
{%-cumbitum,%} to kiss heartily or passionately, cover
with kisses.
<LEND>

<L>27341<pc>0541-a<k1>paricumbana<k2>paricumbana
{%Pari-cumbana, am,%}¦ n. the act of kissing heartily
or passionately.
<LEND>

<L>27342<pc>0541-a<k1>paricft<k2>paricft
{#paricft#}¦ {%pari-cṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-cṛtati, -car-%}
{%titum,%} to wind round; to tie or fasten together.
<LEND>

<L>27343<pc>0541-a<k1>paricartana<k2>paricartana
{%Pari-cartana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the part of a horse's
harness from the girth to the breast and the tail.
<LEND>

<L>27344<pc>0541-a<k1>paricCad<k2>paricCad<h>1
{#paricCad#} 1¦. {%pari-cchad (pari-chad),%} cl. 10.
P. {%-cchādayati, -yitum,%} to envelop, wrap round,
cover, cover up, clothe; to conceal, disguise; to
surround with.
<LEND>

<L>27345<pc>0541-a<k1>paricCad<k2>paricCad<h>2
2. {%pari-cchad, t,%}¦ f. retinue, train, attendants;
paraphernalia; (at the end of a comp.) surrounded
by, provided with (see {%senā-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>27346<pc>0541-a<k1>paricCada<k2>paricCada
{%Pari-cchada, as,%}¦ m. a cover, covering, garment,
dress, clothes; surroundings, domestic utensils or
implements, goods and chattels, personal property,
furniture; court, retinue, train, attendants, family,
dependants; necessaries for travelling; parapher-
nalia, baggage; (at the end of a comp.) furnished or
provided with (e. g. {%anna-pāna-paricchada,%} pro-
vided with food and drink); adorned with.
<LEND>

<L>27347<pc>0541-a<k1>paricCanda<k2>paricCanda
{%Pari-cchanda, as,%}¦ m. retinue, train, suite, at-
tendants.
<LEND>

<L>27348<pc>0541-a<k1>paricCanna<k2>paricCanna
{%Pari-cchanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ invested, enveloped,
covered, covered over, clothed, clad; overlaid; con-
cealed, disguised; surrounded with (a retinue &c.).
<LEND>

<L>27349<pc>0541-a<k1>paricCid<k2>paricCid
{#paricCid#}¦ {%pari-cchid (pari-chid),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-cchinatti, -cchintte, -cchettum,%} to cut on both sides,
clip round, cut through, cut off, cut to pieces; to
wound, mutilate; to separate, divide, part; to limit
on all sides, define or fix accurately, define, discri-
minate, decide, determine; to form a just estimate
of, weigh duly, assure one's self; to avert, obviate.
<LEND>

<L>27350<pc>0541-a<k1>paricCitti<k2>paricCitti
{%Pari-cchitti, is,%}¦ f. accurate definition, limiting,
limit, measure; partition, separation.
<LEND>
[Page0541-b+ 74]

<L>27351<pc>0541-b<k1>paricCidya<k2>paricCidya
{%Pari-cchidya,%}¦ ind. having cut off; having fixed
or defined; having decided.
<LEND>

<L>27352<pc>0541-b<k1>paricCinna<k2>paricCinna
{%Pari-cchinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off, divided, de-
tached; reaped; confined, limited, small; obviated,
remedied.
<LEND>

<L>27353<pc>0541-b<k1>paricCeda<k2>paricCeda
{%Pari-ccheda, as,%}¦ m. cutting, severing, parting,
division, separation, discrimination (of false from true),
accurate distinction or definition; distinguishing be-
tween the good and the bad, the right and the
wrong, the expedient and inexpedient; discernment,
discretion; exact discrimination, determination, de-
cision; judgment, limit, boundary, moderation;
the division of a book, a section or chapter; a seg-
ment; obviating, remedying. {%—Pariccheda-kara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Sam-ādhi.
<LEND>

<L>27354<pc>0541-b<k1>paricCedaka<k2>paricCedaka
{%Pari-cchedaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ separating, defining,
determining; ({%am%}), n. limitation, limit, measure.
<LEND>

<L>27355<pc>0541-b<k1>paricCedana<k2>paricCedana
{%Pari-cchedana, am,%}¦ n. dividing, division; discri-
minating; the division of a book; joyful laughter (?).
<LEND>

<L>27356<pc>0541-b<k1>paricCedya<k2>paricCedya
{%Pari-cchedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accurately defined
or limited, definable; to be estimated; to be weighed,
to be measured.
<LEND>

<L>27357<pc>0541-b<k1>paricyu<k2>paricyu
{#paricyu#}¦ {%pari-cyu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-cyavate, -cyo-%}
{%tum,%} to fly off from (as arrows from a bow); to
depart or deviate from, to swerve from or transgress
(with abl.); to be displaced or ejected from (with
abl.); to be removed from, deprived of, lose, forfeit;
to be released or freed from, to escape; to descend
or come down; to stream round.
<LEND>

<L>27358<pc>0541-b<k1>paricyuta<k2>paricyuta
{%Pari-cyuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen from, swerved
from; deprived of, lost; ruined; streaming with,
surrounded by streams (as of blood).
<LEND>

<L>27359<pc>0541-b<k1>paricyuti<k2>paricyuti
{%Pari-cyuti, is,%}¦ f. falling down.
<LEND>

<L>27360<pc>0541-b<k1>parijana<k2>parijana
{#parijana#}¦ {%pari-jana, as,%} m. a surrounding
company of people, attendants, servants, followers,
family; suite, train, court, retinue (especially of
females); a single servant.
<LEND>

<L>27361<pc>0541-b<k1>parijanman<k2>parijanman
{#parijanman#}¦ {%pari-janman, ā,%} m. the moon;
fire; [cf. {%pari-jman.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27362<pc>0541-b<k1>parijap<k2>parijap
{#parijap#}¦ {%pari-jap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-japati, -japitum,%}
to whisper to, to whisper or mutter (prayers) in a
low voice, talk about.
<LEND>

<L>27363<pc>0541-b<k1>parijapita<k2>parijapita
{%Pari-japita, as, ā, am,%}¦ muttered, whispered,
prayed over in a low voice.
<LEND>

<L>27364<pc>0541-b<k1>parijalp<k2>parijalp
{#parijalp#}¦ {%pari-jalp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jalpati, -jal-%}
{%pitum,%} to chatter; prate about, talk about, speak
of (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>27365<pc>0541-b<k1>parijalpita<k2>parijalpita
{%Pari-jalpita, am,%}¦ n. the covert reproaches of a
mistress neglected or ill used by her lover.
<LEND>

<L>27366<pc>0541-b<k1>parijA<k2>parijA
{#parijA#}¦ {%pari-jā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%jan%} with {%pari%}),
Ved. place of origin, source.
<LEND>

<L>27367<pc>0541-b<k1>parijAqya<k2>parijAqya
{#parijAqya#}¦ {%pari-jāḍya, as, ā, am,%} (perhaps)
completely rigid or motionless.
<LEND>

<L>27368<pc>0541-b<k1>parijAtaka<k2>parijAtaka
{#parijAtaka#}¦ {%pari-jātaka, am,%} n., N. of a
work on domestic rites.
<LEND>

<L>27369<pc>0541-b<k1>pariji<k2>pariji
{#pariji#}¦ {%pari-ji,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-jayati, -te,%}
{%-jetum,%} to conquer, overpower.
<LEND>

<L>27370<pc>0541-b<k1>parijayya<k2>parijayya
{%Pari-jayya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be conquered, to be
mastered.
<LEND>

<L>27371<pc>0541-b<k1>parijF<k2>parijF
{#parijF#}¦ {%pari-jṝ,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-jīryati, -te,%}
{%-jaritum, -jarītum,%} to become worn out or old,
to wear out; to become withered, to fade; to be
digested.
<LEND>

<L>27372<pc>0541-b<k1>parijIrRa<k2>parijIrRa
{%Pari-jīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ worn out, old; withered.
<LEND>

<L>27373<pc>0541-b<k1>parijYA<k2>parijYA<h>1
{#parijYA#} 1¦. {%pari-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti, -jā-%}
{%nīte, -jñātum,%} to notice, observe, perceive, recognise;
to learn, become acquainted with, ascertain, make
sure of, know thoroughly, know exactly or accurately,
comprehend.
<LEND>

<L>27374<pc>0541-b<k1>parijYapti<k2>parijYapti
{%Pari-jñapti, is,%}¦ f. conversation, discourse; recog-
nition.
<LEND>

<L>27375<pc>0541-b<k1>parijYA<k2>parijYA<h>2
2. {%pari-jñā,%}¦ f. knowledge, accurate ascertainment.
<LEND>

<L>27376<pc>0541-b<k1>parijYAta<k2>parijYAta
{%Pari-jñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly known, ascer-
tained, learnt.
<LEND>
[Page0541-c+ 77]

<L>27377<pc>0541-c<k1>parijYAtf<k2>parijYAtf
{%Pari-jñātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who knows or per-
ceives, an observer, knower; wise, intelligent.
<LEND>

<L>27378<pc>0541-c<k1>parijYAna<k2>parijYAna
{%Pari-jñāna, am,%}¦ n. perception, thorough know-
ledge, learning, complete acquaintance, ascertainment,
experience, discrimination.
<LEND>

<L>27379<pc>0541-c<k1>parijYAya<k2>parijYAya
{%Pari-jñāya,%}¦ ind. having fully known or ascer-
tained, having become aware of.
<LEND>

<L>27380<pc>0541-c<k1>parijYeya<k2>parijYeya
{%Pari-jñeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be recognised or ascer-
tained; comprehensible; ({%a-parijñeya,%} incompre-
hensible.)
<LEND>

<L>27381<pc>0541-c<k1>parijman<k2>parijman
{#parijman#}¦ {%pari-jman, ā, ā, a%} (probably fr.
rt. {%gam%} with {%pari%}), Ved. running or walking or
driving round (said of the sun, of the chariot of the
Aśvins, and of the Aśvins themselves, but according
to the commentator applied to the wind); ({%ā%}), m.
the moon; fire; ({%an%}), ind. (Ved. loc. used as adv.),
on all sides, round about, everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>27382<pc>0541-c<k1>parijri<k2>parijri
{#parijri#}¦ {%pari-jri, is, is, i,%} Ved. running
round, hastening about, spreading everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>27383<pc>0541-c<k1>parijvan<k2>parijvan
{#parijvan#}¦ {%pari-jvan, ā,%} m. the moon; a sa-
crificer; a servant; fire; [? cf. {%pari-jman.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27384<pc>0541-c<k1>pariqI<k2>pariqI
{#pariqI#}¦ {%pari-ḍī,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ḍayate, -ḍīyate,%}
{%-ḍayitum,%} to fly round.
<LEND>

<L>27385<pc>0541-c<k1>pariqIna<k2>pariqIna
{%Pari-ḍīna%}¦ or {%pari-ḍīnaka, am,%} n. the flight of
a bird in circles, flying round.
<LEND>

<L>27386<pc>0541-c<k1>pariRam<k2>pariRam
{#pariRam#}¦ {%pari-ṇam,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ṇamati, -te,%}
{%-ṇantum,%} to stoop (as an elephant about to strike),
bend down, bend aside; to change into, be trans-
formed into (with inst.); to become ripe or mature,
ripen; to be digested; to become old, grow old; to
set (as the sun); to elapse (as time): Caus. {%-ṇama-%}
{%yati%} or {%-ṇāmayati,%} to make ripe, ripen, mature;
to bring to an end, pass (as the night); to bend
one's self down, stoop, bend to one side: Pass. of
Caus. {%-ṇāmyate,%} to become ripe, ripen.
<LEND>

<L>27387<pc>0541-c<k1>pariRata<k2>pariRata
{%Pari-ṇata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent down, bowed down,
curved, deflected; stooping; changed or transformed
into (with inst.); ripened, ripe, mature; digested;
full grown, advanced in age, perfected; set (as the
sun); elapsed; ({%as%}), m. an elephant stooping to
strike with his tusks or that gives a side blow with
the tusks; ({%am%}), n. capital, wealth accumulated for
the sake of profit (?). {%—Pariṇata-śarad, t,%} f. the
latter part of the autumn.
<LEND>

<L>27388<pc>0541-c<k1>pariRati<k2>pariRati
{%Pari-ṇati, is,%}¦ f. bending down, bowing; change,
alteration, transformation, transmutation; the be-
coming ripe, ripening, ripeness, maturity; conse-
quence, result, issue, effect; end, close, the last stage
or conclusion of anything; fulfilment.
<LEND>

<L>27389<pc>0541-c<k1>pariRamana<k2>pariRamana
{%Pari-ṇamana, am,%}¦ n. change, transformation,
changing into (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>27390<pc>0541-c<k1>pariRamayitf<k2>pariRamayitf
{%Pari-ṇamayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ causing to bend or
bow, bending; causing to ripen, bringing to maturity.
<LEND>

<L>27391<pc>0541-c<k1>pariRAma<k2>pariRAma
{%Pari-ṇāma, as,%}¦ m. change, alteration, transform-
ation; alteration of food, digestion; result, conse-
quence, issue, effect, event; end, close, termination,
last stage or state, conclusion [cf. {%duṣ-p˚%}]; advance
in age, growing old; lapse (of time); a particular
figure of speech by which the properties of any
object are transferred to that with which it is com-
pared; ({%e%}), ind. finally, lastly, in the end, afterwards;
at the close of life. {%—Pariṇāma-darśin, ī, inī, i,%}
looking forward to the issue or consequences (of any
act or event), prepared for a change, provident;
prudent. {%—Pariṇāma-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. foresight, pro-
vidence. {%—Pariṇāma-nirodha, as,%} m. obstruction
(of felicity caused) by human vicissitude, as birth,
growth, death, &c. {%—Pariṇāma-pathya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} suited to a future state or condition. {%—Pari-%}
{%ṇāma-śūla, as,%} m. pain resulting from the changes
of the food in indigestion, violent and painful indi-
gestion, flatulence with pain, colic.
<LEND>

<L>27392<pc>0541-c<k1>pariRAmaka<k2>pariRAmaka
{%Pari-ṇāmaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ effecting a change,
causing vicissitudes (as time).
<LEND>

<L>27393<pc>0541-c<k1>pariRAmika<k2>pariRAmika
{%Pariṇāmika, as, ā, am,%}¦ resulting from change,
produced by alteration.
<LEND>

<L>27394<pc>0541-c<k1>pariRAmin<k2>pariRAmin
{%Pari-ṇāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ changing, altering, subject
[Page0542-a+ 74]
to transformation, changeable. {%—Pariṇāmi-tva, am,%}
n. liability to change, mutability.
<LEND>

<L>27395<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRinaMsu<k2>pariRinaMsu
{%Pari-ṇinaṃsu, us, us, u,%}¦ about to stoop, about to
make a side thrust (with the tusks, as an elephant).
<LEND>

<L>27396<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRah<k2>pariRah
{#pariRah#}¦ {%pari-ṇah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-ṇahyati,%}
{%-te, -ṇaddhum,%} to bind round, tie round, gird,
wrap round; to encircle, span, embrace, surround.
<LEND>

<L>27397<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRadDa<k2>pariRadDa
{%Pari-ṇaddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound round, wrapped
round; of great span or compass, broad, large.
<LEND>

<L>27398<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRahana<k2>pariRahana
{%Pari-ṇahana, am,%}¦ n. binding round, girding on,
wrapping round.
<LEND>

<L>27399<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRAha<k2>pariRAha
{%Pari-ṇāha, as,%}¦ m. compass, circumference, extent,
width, breadth, circumference of a circle, periphery;
(sometimes spelt {%parī-ṇāha,%} q. v.) {%—Pariṇāha-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a wide compass or circum-
ference, round, large, big.
<LEND>

<L>27400<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRAhin<k2>pariRAhin
{%Pari-ṇāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a wide compass or
circumference, big, large; (at the end of a comp.)
having the circumference of (e. g. {%mattebha-kum-%}
{%bha-p˚,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>27401<pc>0542-a<k1>parIRah<k2>parIRah
{%Parī-ṇah, t,%}¦ f., Ved. encompassing, pervading,
spreading over; a trunk or chest on a carriage; N.
of a place on the Saras-vatī.
<LEND>

<L>27402<pc>0542-a<k1>parIRAha<k2>parIRAha
{%Parī-ṇāha, as,%}¦ m. {%= pari-ṇāha%} above; a piece
of common land encircling a village or city; an
epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>27403<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRiMsaka<k2>pariRiMsaka
{#pariRiMsaka#}¦ {%pari-ṇiṃsaka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%niṃs%} with {%pari%}), tasting, eating; kissing; an eater
({%= bhakṣayitṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>27404<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRiMsA<k2>pariRiMsA
{%Pariṇiṃsā,%}¦ f. tasting, eating; kissing.
<LEND>

<L>27405<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRiDA<k2>pariRiDA
{#pariRiDA#}¦ {%pari-ṇi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} Ved. to place or lay
round.
<LEND>

<L>27406<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRinaMsu<k2>pariRinaMsu
{#pariRinaMsu#}¦ {%pari-ṇinaṃsu.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>27407<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRimA<k2>pariRimA
{#pariRimA#}¦ {%pari-ṇi-mā%} (rt. 2. or 4. {%mā?%}),
cl. 3. A. {%-mimīte, -mātum,%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ.
VIII. 4, 17.
<LEND>

<L>27408<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRime<k2>pariRime
{#pariRime#}¦ {%pari-ṇi-me,%} cl. 1. A. {%-mayate,%}
{%mātum,%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 17.
<LEND>

<L>27409<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRirmA<k2>pariRirmA
{#pariRirmA#}¦ {%pari-ṇir-mā%} (rt. 4. {%mā%}), cl. 2. P.,
3. 4. A. {%-māti, -mimīte, -māyate, -mātum,%} to
mark off, to limit; to settle, determine.
<LEND>

<L>27410<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRizWA<k2>pariRizWA
{#pariRizWA#}¦ {%pari-ṇiṣṭhā,%} f. perfect skill or
conversancy.
<LEND>

<L>27411<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRihan<k2>pariRihan
{#pariRihan#}¦ {%pari-ṇi-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti,%}
{%-hantum,%} to strike.
<LEND>

<L>27412<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRiGnat<k2>pariRiGnat
{%Pari-ṇighnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ striking.
<LEND>

<L>27413<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRI<k2>pariRI
{#pariRI#}¦ {%pari-ṇī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ṇayati, -te%}
(anom. perf. in epic poetry, {%parīṇayām-āsa%}),
{%-ṇetum,%} to lead about, to lead or conduct round,
bear or carry round; (especially) to lead a bride
and bridegroom or a bride round the sacrificial fire
(with two acc.); to marry, (said of a bridegroom); to
lead forward; to trace out, discover, investigate:
Caus. {%-ṇāyayati, -yitum,%} to pass or spend (time).
<LEND>

<L>27414<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRaya<k2>pariRaya
{%Pari-ṇaya, as,%}¦ m. leading round, (especially)
leading the bride round the sacred fire, marriage,
({%nava-pariṇayā,%} a newly married woman.)
<LEND>

<L>27415<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRayana<k2>pariRayana
{%Pari-ṇayana, am,%}¦ n. the act of leading round,
(especially) leading round the sacred fire; marrying,
marriage.
<LEND>

<L>27416<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRAya<k2>pariRAya
{%Pari-ṇāya, as,%}¦ m. leading round; moving a
piece at chess, draughts, &c.; a move (at chess).
<LEND>

<L>27417<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRAyaka<k2>pariRAyaka
{%Pari-ṇāyaka, as,%}¦ m. a leader, guide, ({%a-pari-%}
{%ṇāyaka,%} being without a guide); a husband.
<LEND>

<L>27418<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRIta<k2>pariRIta
{%Pari-ṇīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ led round; married; (in
Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 13739, probably) completed,
finished, executed.
<LEND>

<L>27419<pc>0542-a<k1>pariRetf<k2>pariRetf
{%Pari-ṇetṛ, tā,%}¦ m. ‘one who leads round,’ a
husband.
<LEND>

<L>27420<pc>0542-a<k1>pariReya<k2>pariReya
{%Pari-ṇeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be led round; ({%ā%}), f. to
be led round the fire (as a bride), to be married.
<LEND>

<L>27421<pc>0542-a<k1>paritakana<k2>paritakana
{#paritakana#}¦ {%pari-takana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%tak%}
with {%pari%}), running round or about.
<LEND>
[Page0542-b+ 74]

<L>27422<pc>0542-b<k1>paritakmya<k2>paritakmya
{%Pari-takmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. causing anxiety or
uneasiness, insecure, unsafe, perilous, dangerous; ({%ā%}),
f. error; night, darkness.
<LEND>

<L>27423<pc>0542-b<k1>paritaq<k2>paritaq
{#paritaq#}¦ {%pari-taḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-ṭādayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to touch, strike against, strike.
<LEND>

<L>27424<pc>0542-b<k1>paritan<k2>paritan
{#paritan#}¦ {%pari-tan%} (see rt. 3. {%tan%}), cl. 5. P.
A. {%-tanoti, -tanute, -tanitum,%} Ved. to stretch round,
clasp round, embrace, surround.
<LEND>

<L>27425<pc>0542-b<k1>paritatnu<k2>paritatnu
{%Pari-tatnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. stretching round,
embracing, clasping round, surrounding.
<LEND>

<L>27426<pc>0542-b<k1>parItat<k2>parItat
{%Parī-tat, t, t, t,%}¦ spread all around, extended in
every direction.
<LEND>

<L>27427<pc>0542-b<k1>paritap<k2>paritap
{#paritap#}¦ {%pari-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -taptum,%}
to burn or scorch all round, burn excessively, set on
fire, kindle; to feel or suffer pain; to mortify the
body, undergo penance, practise austerities: Pass.
{%-tapyate%} (rarely {%-tapyati%}), to feel or suffer pain;
to undergo penance, mortify the flesh: Caus. {%-tāpa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to scorch; to cause great pain, tor-
ment, torture.
<LEND>

<L>27428<pc>0542-b<k1>paritapta<k2>paritapta
{%Pari-tapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded with heat,
heated, scorched, burnt; tormented.
<LEND>

<L>27429<pc>0542-b<k1>paritapti<k2>paritapti
{%Pari-tapti, is,%}¦ f. great pain or sorrow, anguish,
torture.
<LEND>

<L>27430<pc>0542-b<k1>paritApa<k2>paritApa
{%Pari-tāpa, as,%}¦ m. glow, heat, scorching heat;
pain, anguish, grief, sorrow, affliction; fear, trembling;
N. of a particular hell.
<LEND>

<L>27431<pc>0542-b<k1>paritApin<k2>paritApin
{%Pari-tāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ burning hot, very hot;
causing much pain or sorrow, causing anguish, tor-
turing, tormenting.
<LEND>

<L>27432<pc>0542-b<k1>paritam<k2>paritam
{#paritam#}¦ {%pari-tam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-tāmyati, -ta-%}
{%mitum,%} to gasp for breath, to be oppressed.
<LEND>

<L>27433<pc>0542-b<k1>paritark<k2>paritark
{#paritark#}¦ {%pari-tark,%} cl. 10. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-tarkayati, -te, -yitum,%} to think about, reflect about,
ponder upon; to reflect, consider; to examine (judi-
cially).
<LEND>

<L>27434<pc>0542-b<k1>paritarkaRa<k2>paritarkaRa
{%Pari-tarkaṇa, am,%}¦ n. consideration, reflection;
pondering upon (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>27435<pc>0542-b<k1>paritarkita<k2>paritarkita
{%Pari-tarkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thought about; examined;
({%a-paritarkita,%} not examined, unexpected.)
<LEND>

<L>27436<pc>0542-b<k1>paritarj<k2>paritarj
{#paritarj#}¦ {%pari-tarj,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-tarjati, -te,%} &c., to threaten, menace.
<LEND>

<L>27437<pc>0542-b<k1>paritas<k2>paritas
{#paritas#}¦ {%pari-tas,%} ind. (fr. {%pari%}), around,
round about, all around, on all sides, on every side, to
all sides, everywhere, in every direction, from all parts;
round (as a prep. with acc. or gen.).
<LEND>

<L>27438<pc>0542-b<k1>paritApa<k2>paritApa
{#paritApa#}¦ {%pari-tāpa.%} See {%pari-tap%} above.
<LEND>

<L>27439<pc>0542-b<k1>paritAraRIya<k2>paritAraRIya
{#paritAraRIya#}¦ {%pari-tāraṇīya, as, ā, am%} (fr.
rt. {%tṝ%} with {%pari%}), to be delivered or liberated, to be
saved or redeemed.
<LEND>

<L>27440<pc>0542-b<k1>paritikta<k2>paritikta
{#paritikta#}¦ {%pari-tikta, as, ā, am,%} extremely
bitter; ({%as, am%}), m. or n. (?), Melia Azedarach.
<LEND>

<L>27441<pc>0542-b<k1>paritud<k2>paritud
{#paritud#}¦ {%pari-tud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-tudati, -te,%}
{%-tottum,%} to trample down, stamp upon, pound.
<LEND>

<L>27442<pc>0542-b<k1>parituz<k2>parituz
{#parituz#}¦ {%pari-tuṣ,%} cl. 4. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-tuṣyati, -te, -toṣṭum,%} to be quite satisfied with
(with gen. or loc.); to feel complete satisfaction, be
much pleased, be very glad: Caus. {%-toṣayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to satisfy completely, to please much or gratify;
to appease; to flatter.
<LEND>

<L>27443<pc>0542-b<k1>parituzwa<k2>parituzwa
{%Pari-tuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely satisfied,
much pleased, delighted, very glad. {%—Parituṣṭāt-%}
{%man (˚ṭa-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} contented in mind.
<LEND>

<L>27444<pc>0542-b<k1>parituzwi<k2>parituzwi
{%Pari-tuṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. complete satisfaction, content-
ment, delight.
<LEND>

<L>27445<pc>0542-b<k1>paritoza<k2>paritoza
{%Pari-toṣa%}¦ (rarely {%parī-toṣa%}), {%as,%} m. complete
satisfaction, gratification, contentment, pleasure, de-
light, glee; delight in (with loc. or gen., e. g. {%guṇini%}
{%paritoṣaḥ,%} delight in a virtuous person). {%—Pari-%}
{%toṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} satisfied, contented, glad.
<LEND>

<L>27446<pc>0542-b<k1>paritozaRa<k2>paritozaRa
{%Pari-toṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfying, gratifying,
who or what satisfies or makes content; ({%am%}), n.
satisfying, satisfaction, gratification.
<LEND>

<L>27447<pc>0542-b<k1>paritozayitf<k2>paritozayitf
{%Pari-toṣayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who satisfies
[Page0542-c+ 77]
completely, who or what gratifies, pleasing or making
very glad.
<LEND>

<L>27448<pc>0542-c<k1>paritozin<k2>paritozin
{%Pari-toṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ completely satisfied, con-
tented.
<LEND>

<L>27449<pc>0542-c<k1>paritfd<k2>paritfd
{#paritfd#}¦ {%pari-tṛd,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-tṛṇatti,%}
{%tṛntte, -tarditum,%} Ved. to pierce through, pierce
(with a spear), thrust through.
<LEND>

<L>27450<pc>0542-c<k1>paritfp<k2>paritfp
{#paritfp#}¦ {%pari-tṛp,%} cl. 4. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-tṛpyati, -te, -tarpitum, -tarptum, -traptum,%} to
be completely satisfied or contented: Caus. {%-tarpa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to satiate or satisfy completely, sate;
to relish; to refresh.
<LEND>

<L>27451<pc>0542-c<k1>paritarpaRa<k2>paritarpaRa
{%Pari-tarpaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfying, sating, con-
tenting; ({%am%}), n. the act of satisfying, gratification.
<LEND>

<L>27452<pc>0542-c<k1>paritarpita<k2>paritarpita
{%Pari-tarpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfied completely,
sated; refreshed.
<LEND>

<L>27453<pc>0542-c<k1>parityaj<k2>parityaj
{#parityaj#}¦ {%pari-tyaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tyajati, -tyak-%}
{%tum,%} to abandon, forsake, desert, leave, discard, dis-
miss, repudiate, disown, reject; to quit (a place); to
give up, give away, surrender, abdicate, renounce,
resign; (with {%deham%}) to forsake the body, die;
(with {%prāṇān%}) to resign the breath, give up the
ghost; (with {%nāvam%}) to disembark; to shake off
(as sleep); to leave over, leave a remainder; to leave
a space or interval; to let go; to leave out; to put
aside, neglect, disregard: Pass. {%-tyajyate,%} to be de-
prived of, bereft of (with inst.); to lose: Caus.
{%-tyājayati, -yitum,%} to deprive a person (acc.) of
anything (acc.); to rob, take away anything from
any one (with two acc.).
<LEND>

<L>27454<pc>0542-c<k1>parityakta<k2>parityakta
{%Pari-tyakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, quitted, deserted,
abandoned; bereft of, deprived of, robbed of (with
inst.); left, wanting; let go; let fly or discharged
(as an arrow).
<LEND>

<L>27455<pc>0542-c<k1>parityaktf<k2>parityaktf
{%Pari-tyaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who abandons or
deserts, leaving, abandoning, a forsaker.
<LEND>

<L>27456<pc>0542-c<k1>parityaj<k2>parityaj
{%Pari-tyaj, k, k, k,%}¦ forsaking, deserting, aban-
doning; giving up, resigning; a forsaker.
<LEND>

<L>27457<pc>0542-c<k1>parityajana<k2>parityajana
{%Pari-tyajana, am,%}¦ n. the act of abandoning,
giving away, distributing.
<LEND>

<L>27458<pc>0542-c<k1>parityajya<k2>parityajya<h>1
1. {%pari-tyajya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be abandoned or
forsaken or deserted; to be given up or resigned.
<LEND>

<L>27459<pc>0542-c<k1>parityajya<k2>parityajya<h>2
2. {%pari-tyajya,%}¦ ind. having abandoned, &c.; leav-
ing a space, at a distance from (with acc.); with the
exception of, excepting.
<LEND>

<L>27460<pc>0542-c<k1>parityAga<k2>parityAga
{%Pari-tyāga, as,%}¦ m. abandoning, abandonment,
leaving, quitting, desertion, repudiation, divorce, re-
jection; discarding, resigning, renouncing, renuncia-
tion, abdication, letting go, giving up, giving away,
liberality; sacrificing, sacrifice; neglecting, neglect,
omission; loss, privation; separation from. {%—Pari-%}
{%tyāga-sena, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>27461<pc>0542-c<k1>parityAgin<k2>parityAgin
{%Parityāgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ abandoning, quitting, for-
saking, resigning, renouncing.
<LEND>

<L>27462<pc>0542-c<k1>parityAjana<k2>parityAjana
{%Pari-tyājana, am,%}¦ n. causing to abandon or
give up.
<LEND>

<L>27463<pc>0542-c<k1>parityAjya<k2>parityAjya
{%Pari-tyājya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be abandoned or for-
saken, to be left or deserted; to be given up or
resigned, to be renounced; to be omitted.
<LEND>

<L>27464<pc>0542-c<k1>paritrasta<k2>paritrasta
{#paritrasta#}¦ {%pari-trasta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2.
{%tras%} with {%pari%}), terrified, frightened, afraid, much
alarmed.
<LEND>

<L>27465<pc>0542-c<k1>paritrAsa<k2>paritrAsa
{%Pari-trāsa, as,%}¦ m. terror, fright, fear.
<LEND>

<L>27466<pc>0542-c<k1>paritrE<k2>paritrE
{#paritrE#}¦ {%pari-trai%} (by some written {%pari-trā%}),
cl. 1. A. {%-trāyate, -trātum,%} to rescue, save, protect,
defend; {%paritrāyatām%} or {%paritrāyadhvam,%} help!
to the rescue!
<LEND>

<L>27467<pc>0542-c<k1>paritrARa<k2>paritrARa
{%Pari-trāṇa, am,%}¦ n. protecting, protection, pre-
serving, rescuing, rescue, deliverance, preservation,
defence, means of defence or protection; self-defence;
abstaining from; the hair of the body (?).
<LEND>

<L>27468<pc>0542-c<k1>paritrAta<k2>paritrAta
{%Pari-trāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ protected; rescued, saved,
preserved.
<LEND>

<L>27469<pc>0542-c<k1>paritrAtavya<k2>paritrAtavya
{%Pari-trātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be rescued or pre-
served, to be protected or defended.
<LEND>

<L>27470<pc>0542-c<k1>paritrAtf<k2>paritrAtf
{%Pari-trātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a protector, defender,
rescuer.
<LEND>
[Page0543-a+ 73]

<L>27471<pc>0543-a<k1>paritvar<k2>paritvar
{#paritvar#}¦ {%pari-tvar,%} cl. 1. A. {%-tvarate, -tva-%}
{%ritum,%} to hasten towards.
<LEND>

<L>27472<pc>0543-a<k1>paridaMSita<k2>paridaMSita
{#paridaMSita#}¦ {%pari-daṃśita, as, ā, am,%} com-
pletely armed, covered with mail, armed cap-a-pie.
<LEND>

<L>27473<pc>0543-a<k1>paridara<k2>paridara
{#paridara#}¦ {%pari-dara.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>27474<pc>0543-a<k1>paridazwa<k2>paridazwa
{#paridazwa#}¦ {%pari-daṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} bitten to
pieces, bitten. {%—Paridaṣṭa-dacchada, as, ā, am,%}
biting the lips.
<LEND>

<L>27475<pc>0543-a<k1>paridah<k2>paridah
{#paridah#}¦ {%pari-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dag-%}
{%dhum,%} to burn round, scorch round, burn entirely,
consume by fire; to dry up: Pass. {%-dahyate,%} to be
burnt or wholly consumed, to burn.
<LEND>

<L>27476<pc>0543-a<k1>paridagDa<k2>paridagDa
{%Pari-dagdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ burnt, scorched.
<LEND>

<L>27477<pc>0543-a<k1>paridahana<k2>paridahana
{%Pari-dahana, am,%}¦ n. burning, scorching.
<LEND>

<L>27478<pc>0543-a<k1>paridAha<k2>paridAha
{%Pari-dāha, as,%}¦ m. burning, combustion; mental
anguish, pain, sorrow.
<LEND>

<L>27479<pc>0543-a<k1>paridAhin<k2>paridAhin
{%Pari-dāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ burning, scorching, hot.
<LEND>

<L>27480<pc>0543-a<k1>paridA<k2>paridA<h>1
{#paridA#} 1¦. {%pari-dā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadāti,%}
{%-datte, -dātum,%} to give, give away entirely, sur-
render, deliver up; to intrust, deposit with (with
gen., dat., or loc. of the person); to present; to
lend: Caus. {%-dāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be
delivered or given up.
<LEND>

<L>27481<pc>0543-a<k1>paridA<k2>paridA<h>2
2. {%pari-dā,%}¦ f., Ved. giving one's self up to the
favour or protection of another; surrender; devotion.
<LEND>

<L>27482<pc>0543-a<k1>paridAna<k2>paridAna
{%Pari-dāna, am,%}¦ n. devotion; barter, exchange;
restitution of a deposit.
<LEND>

<L>27483<pc>0543-a<k1>paridAya<k2>paridAya
{%Pari-dāya,%}¦ ind. having given up or surrendered.
<LEND>

<L>27484<pc>0543-a<k1>paridAyin<k2>paridAyin
{%Pari-dāyin, ī,%}¦ m. a father (or another relation)
who marries his daughter or ward to a man whose
elder brother is not yet married.
<LEND>

<L>27485<pc>0543-a<k1>parItta<k2>parItta<h>1
1. {%parī-tta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for {%pari-datta%}), given,
given up; entirely given away, delivered up. (For 2.
{%parī-tta%} see {%pari-do,%} col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>27486<pc>0543-a<k1>paridA<k2>paridA<h>3
{#paridA#} 3¦. {%pari-dā.%} See {%pari-do,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>27487<pc>0543-a<k1>paridiv<k2>paridiv
{#paridiv#}¦ {%pari-div%} or {%pari-dev%} (see rts. 1.
{%div%} and {%dev%}), cl. 1. 10. P. {%-devati, -devayati%} (rarely
A. {%-te%}), {%-yitum,%} to wail, lament, cry; to bewail,
bemoan, weep for (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>27488<pc>0543-a<k1>parideva<k2>parideva
{%Pari-deva, as,%}¦ m. lamentation, wailing, crying.
<LEND>

<L>27489<pc>0543-a<k1>paridevaka<k2>paridevaka
{%Pari-devaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ lamenting, who or
what laments or complains.
<LEND>

<L>27490<pc>0543-a<k1>paridevana<k2>paridevana
{%Pari-devana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. lamentation, bewailing,
complaint.
<LEND>

<L>27491<pc>0543-a<k1>paridevita<k2>paridevita
{%Pari-devita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lamented, bewailed;
plaintive, lamenting, miserable; ({%am%}), n. lamentation,
wailing, complaint.
<LEND>

<L>27492<pc>0543-a<k1>paridevin<k2>paridevin
{%Pari-devin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ lamenting, bewailing.
<LEND>

<L>27493<pc>0543-a<k1>paridyUna<k2>paridyUna
{%Pari-dyūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sorrowful, sad, miserable.
<LEND>

<L>27494<pc>0543-a<k1>paridiS<k2>paridiS
{#paridiS#}¦ {%pari-diś,%} cl. 3. 6. P. {%-dideṣṭi,%}
{%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%} to announce, make known; to
signify (the existence of anything).
<LEND>

<L>27495<pc>0543-a<k1>paridizwa<k2>paridizwa
{%Pari-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ made known, known.
<LEND>

<L>27496<pc>0543-a<k1>paridih<k2>paridih
{#paridih#}¦ {%pari-dih,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-degdhi,%}
{%-digdhe, -degdhum,%} Ved. to coat or cover over,
smear over.
<LEND>

<L>27497<pc>0543-a<k1>paridIna<k2>paridIna
{#paridIna#}¦ {%pari-dīna, as, ā, am,%} excessively
dejected or downcast, much afflicted. {%—Paridīna-%}
{%sattva, as, ā, am,%} distressed in mind.
<LEND>

<L>27498<pc>0543-a<k1>paridurbala<k2>paridurbala
{#paridurbala#}¦ {%pari-durbala, as, ā, am,%} ex-
tremely weak or decrepit.
<LEND>

<L>27499<pc>0543-a<k1>paridfS<k2>paridfS
{#paridfS#}¦ {%pari-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati, -draṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to look at, see, view, look upon, behold, regard,
perceive; to regard mentally, consider, investigate,
search, find out; to know; to frequent: Pass.
{%-dṛśyate,%} to be observed or perceived; to appear,
become visible: Caus. {%-darśayati, -yitum,%} to show;
to set forth, expound, explain.
<LEND>

<L>27500<pc>0543-a<k1>paridrazwf<k2>paridrazwf
{%Pari-draṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ a spectator, looker
on; perceiver.
<LEND>

<L>27501<pc>0543-a<k1>paridF<k2>paridF
{#paridF#}¦ {%pari-dṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-dṛṇāti, -ṇīte,%}
&c., Ved. to rend or destroy on all sides: Pass.
{%-dīryate,%} to peel or drop off on all sides, to become
[Page0543-b+ 75]
dropsical (the skin swelling and appearing ready to
drop off).
<LEND>

<L>27502<pc>0543-b<k1>paridara<k2>paridara
{%Pari-dara, as,%}¦ m. a disease of the gums in which
the skin peels off and bleeds.
<LEND>

<L>27503<pc>0543-b<k1>paridIrRa<k2>paridIrRa
{%Pari-dīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rent on all sides.
<LEND>

<L>27504<pc>0543-b<k1>paridev<k2>paridev
{#paridev#}¦ {%pari-dev.%} See {%pari-div,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27505<pc>0543-b<k1>parido<k2>parido
{#parido#}¦ {%pari-do%} or 3. {%pari-dā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-dāti,%}
{%dātum,%} to cut or clip round.
<LEND>

<L>27506<pc>0543-b<k1>parItta<k2>parItta<h>2
2. {%parī-tta, as, ā, am,%}¦ clipped or cut round,
incomplete, limited, confined, &c.; see p. 552, col. 1.
(For 1. {%parī-tta%} see under 1. {%pari-dā,%} col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>27507<pc>0543-b<k1>paridyUna<k2>paridyUna
{#paridyUna#}¦ {%pari-dyūna.%} See {%pari-div,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27508<pc>0543-b<k1>paridru<k2>paridru
{#paridru#}¦ {%pari-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -drotum,%}
Ved. to run round.
<LEND>

<L>27509<pc>0543-b<k1>paridvIpa<k2>paridvIpa
{#paridvIpa#}¦ {%pari-dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of one of
the sons of Garuḍa.
<LEND>

<L>27510<pc>0543-b<k1>paridvezas<k2>paridvezas
{#paridvezas#}¦ {%pari-dveṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
hating, completely hostile.
<LEND>

<L>27511<pc>0543-b<k1>pariDarzaRa<k2>pariDarzaRa
{#pariDarzaRa#}¦ {%pari-dharṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%dhṛṣ%} with {%pari%}), assault, attack, injury, abuse,
ill-treatment, rough usage.
<LEND>

<L>27512<pc>0543-b<k1>pariDA<k2>pariDA
{#pariDA#}¦ {%pari-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to lay or put round, place or set
round; to put round one's self, wrap round, put on,
put on (a garment), dress (without a following acc.);
to clothe; to surround, envelop, encompass; to
cast (the eyes) round, turn the glance upon; (Ved.)
to conclude or close (the recitation of a hymn):
Caus. {%-dhāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to put or wrap
round, cause to put on, clothe with (with inst.);
clothe any one in (with two acc.): Desid. {%-dhitsate,%}
&c., to be about to put on, to wish to clothe one's
self.
<LEND>

<L>27513<pc>0543-b<k1>pariDAna<k2>pariDAna
{%Pari-dhāna%}¦ or {%parī-dhāna, am,%} n. putting
round, laying round (Ved.); wrapping round; put-
ting on (a garment), dressing, clothing; that which
is put on, a garment, (especially) an under garment,
clothes, vesture, ({%gagaṇa-paridhāna,%} stark naked;
cf. {%dig-ambara%}); closing or concluding (the reci-
tation of a hymn). {%—Paridhāna-valkala, am,%} n.
bark for clothing.
<LEND>

<L>27514<pc>0543-b<k1>pariDAnIya<k2>pariDAnIya
{%Paridhānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. forming the close
or conclusion; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%ṛc,%} a concluding or final
verse; ({%am%}), n. an under garment.
<LEND>

<L>27515<pc>0543-b<k1>pariDApana<k2>pariDApana
{%Pari-dhāpana, am,%}¦ n. causing to put on (a
garment).
<LEND>

<L>27516<pc>0543-b<k1>pariDApanIya<k2>pariDApanIya
{%Pari-dhāpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to investi-
ture or the causing any one to put on (a garment &c.).
<LEND>

<L>27517<pc>0543-b<k1>pariDAya<k2>pariDAya
{%Pari-dhāya, as,%}¦ m. train, retinue, attendants;
the hinder parts, posteriors; a receptacle for water,
reservoir.
<LEND>

<L>27518<pc>0543-b<k1>pariDAyaka<k2>pariDAyaka
{%Pari-dhāyaka, as,%}¦ m. a hedge, fence, enclosure.
<LEND>

<L>27519<pc>0543-b<k1>pariDi<k2>pariDi
{%Pari-dhi, is,%}¦ m. that by which anything is sur-
rounded or enclosed (said of the ocean as surrounding
the earth), a fence, hedge, wall; a misty halo or
circle round the sun or moon; a circle or disk of
light, a glory; the horizon; circumference, compass;
the circumference of a circle; the periphery of a
wheel; a circle surrounding the globe, a great
circle; epicycle; a frame of wood laid round a
sacrificial fire to keep it together, (commonly in
three pieces, called {%madhyama, dakṣiṇa, uttara%});
a covering; the branch of the tree to which the
victim at a sacrifice is tied (?); N. of a man. {%—Pa-%}
{%ridhi-stha, as, ā, am,%} situated on the horizon;
({%as%}), m. a number of sentinels posted in a circle;
a guard, body-guard; an aide-de-camp, an officer
attendant on a king or general. {%—Paridhī-pati-%}
{%khecara, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. (perhaps ‘the
bird presiding over the horizon,’ {%paridhī%} for {%pa-%}
{%ridhi?%}).
<LEND>

<L>27520<pc>0543-b<k1>pariDeya<k2>pariDeya
{%Pari-dheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be put round, wear-
able; ({%am%}), n. an under garment (?).
<LEND>

<L>27521<pc>0543-b<k1>parihita<k2>parihita
{%Pari-hita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stationed round; placed
round, invested, put on, clothed, covered.
<LEND>
[Page0543-c+ 70]

<L>27522<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDAraRa<k2>pariDAraRa
{#pariDAraRa#}¦ {%pari-dhāraṇa.%} See under {%pari-%}
{%dhṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>27523<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDAv<k2>pariDAv
{#pariDAv#}¦ {%pari-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. (rarely A.)
{%-dhāvati, -te, -dhāvitum,%} to flow or stream round,
to run round or about; go about; ({%mṛgayām pari-%}
{%dhāv,%} to go or move about hunting, to hunt);
to drive about; to stream through, run through;
to run or move round anything (with acc.); to run
towards or after, to pursue: Caus. {%-dhāvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to surround, encompass, encircle.
<LEND>

<L>27524<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDAvin<k2>pariDAvin
{%Pari-dhāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ running round; ({%ī%}), m.,
N. of the 46th (or 20th) of the 60 years' cycle
of Jupiter.
<LEND>

<L>27525<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDIra<k2>pariDIra
{#pariDIra#}¦ {%pari-dhīra, as, ā, am,%} very deep
(as a tone or sound).
<LEND>

<L>27526<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDUpita<k2>pariDUpita
{#pariDUpita#}¦ {%pari-dhūpita, as, ā, am,%} richly
perfumed or scented.
<LEND>

<L>27527<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDUsara<k2>pariDUsara
{#pariDUsara#}¦ {%pari-dhūsara, as, ā, am,%} quite grey.
<LEND>

<L>27528<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDf<k2>pariDf
{#pariDf#}¦ {%pari-dhṛ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-dhārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to carry about; to support, bear, suffer,
endure.
<LEND>

<L>27529<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDAraRa<k2>pariDAraRa
{%Pari-dhāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. carrying about, supporting,
suffering, enduring.
<LEND>

<L>27530<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDArya<k2>pariDArya
{%Pari-dhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be preserved or
maintained.
<LEND>

<L>27531<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDvaMs<k2>pariDvaMs
{#pariDvaMs#}¦ {%pari-dhvaṃs,%} cl. 1. A. {%-dhvaṃsate,%}
{%-dhvaṃsitum,%} to fall to pieces, fall away, decay;
to be destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>27532<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDvaMsa<k2>pariDvaMsa
{%Pari-dhvaṃsa, as,%}¦ m. distress, disaster, ruin,
trouble, toil; failing, failure; injury, destruction;
leaving one's caste, loss of caste, mixture of castes.
<LEND>

<L>27533<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDvaMsin<k2>pariDvaMsin
{%Pari-dhvaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling away, falling off;
destroying, ruining.
<LEND>

<L>27534<pc>0543-c<k1>pariDvasta<k2>pariDvasta
{%Pari-dhvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroyed, ruined;
covered.
<LEND>

<L>27535<pc>0543-c<k1>parinindA<k2>parinindA
{#parinindA#}¦ {%pari-nindā,%} f. strong censure,
severe blame.
<LEND>

<L>27536<pc>0543-c<k1>parinimna<k2>parinimna
{#parinimna#}¦ {%pari-nimna, as, ā, am,%} much de-
pressed, deeply hollowed.
<LEND>

<L>27537<pc>0543-c<k1>parinirji<k2>parinirji
{#parinirji#}¦ {%pari-nir-ji,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-jayati,%}
{%-te, -jetum,%} to conquer, overpower thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>27538<pc>0543-c<k1>parinirvapaRa<k2>parinirvapaRa
{#parinirvapaRa#}¦ {%pari-nirvapaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%vap%} with {%pari-nis%}), distributing, dispensing, giving.
<LEND>

<L>27539<pc>0543-c<k1>parinirvivapsA<k2>parinirvivapsA
{%Pari-nirvivapsā,%}¦ f. (fr. the Desid.), desire of
giving, a disposition to distribute, liberality.
<LEND>

<L>27540<pc>0543-c<k1>parinirvivapsu<k2>parinirvivapsu
{%Pari-nirvivapsu, us, us, u,%}¦ intending to give
much, desirous of giving.
<LEND>

<L>27541<pc>0543-c<k1>parinirvARa<k2>parinirvARa
{#parinirvARa#}¦ {%pari-nirvāṇa, as, ā, am,%} quite
extinguished, quite brought to an end; ({%am%}), n. the
final extinction of the individual; N. of a place
where Buddha disappeared.
<LEND>

<L>27542<pc>0543-c<k1>parinirvfti<k2>parinirvfti
{#parinirvfti#}¦ {%pari-nirvṛti, is,%} f. final libera-
tion; complete emancipation of the soul from the
body and exemption from future transmigration.
<LEND>

<L>27543<pc>0543-c<k1>pariniScaya<k2>pariniScaya
{#pariniScaya#}¦ {%pari-niścaya, as,%} m. fixed opinion
or resolution.
<LEND>

<L>27544<pc>0543-c<k1>parinizad<k2>parinizad
{#parinizad#}¦ {%pari-ni-ṣad,%} cl. 1. 6. P. (Ved.
also A.) {%-ṣīdati, -ṣattum,%} to sit round.
<LEND>

<L>27545<pc>0543-c<k1>parinizWA<k2>parinizWA
{#parinizWA#}¦ {%pari-niṣṭhā%} (fr. rt. {%sthā%} with {%pari%}
and {%ni%} or {%nis,%} see {%ni-ṣṭha%}), extreme limit, highest
point; complete accomplishment; complete know-
ledge or acquaintance, familiarity with anything.
<LEND>

<L>27546<pc>0543-c<k1>parinizWita<k2>parinizWita
{%Pari-niṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely skilled in
or acquainted with.
<LEND>

<L>27547<pc>0543-c<k1>parinEzWika<k2>parinEzWika
{%Pari-naiṣṭhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ the highest, utmost,
most perfect.
<LEND>

<L>27548<pc>0543-c<k1>parinyas<k2>parinyas
{#parinyas#}¦ {%pari-ny-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati, -asi-%}
{%tum,%} to stretch out, extend.
<LEND>

<L>27549<pc>0543-c<k1>parinyasta<k2>parinyasta
{%Pari-nyasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ stretched out, extended.
<LEND>

<L>27550<pc>0543-c<k1>parinyAsa<k2>parinyAsa
{%Pari-nyāsa, as,%}¦ m. completing the sense of a
[Page0544-a+ 73]
passage; (in dramatic language) alluding to the
development of the so-called seed or origin of the
dramatic plot, [cf. {%vīja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27551<pc>0544-a<k1>paripakva<k2>paripakva
{#paripakva#}¦ {%pari-pakva, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%pac%}
with {%pari%}), completely cooked or dressed; finally
baked; completely burnt (as a brick); digested; quite
ripe, mature; highly cultivated or educated, very
knowing or shrewd; near death or decay, approaching
the end, about to pass away, decaying. {%—Paripakva-%}
{%tā,%} f. the state of being completely cooked; diges-
tion; full maturity, perfection; shrewdness.
<LEND>

<L>27552<pc>0544-a<k1>paripAka<k2>paripAka
{%Pari-pāka, as,%}¦ m. being completely cooked or
dressed; digestion; ripening, maturity, perfection;
the fruit or consequence of an action, consequence;
cleverness, shrewdness, experience.
<LEND>

<L>27553<pc>0544-a<k1>paripAkin<k2>paripAkin
{%Pari-pākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ ripening, bringing to matu-
rity; cooking; digesting; ({%inī%}), f. the plant Ipo-
mœa Turpethum.
<LEND>

<L>27554<pc>0544-a<k1>paripAcana<k2>paripAcana
{%Pari-pācana, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%pari-pācayitṛ, tā,%}
{%trī, tṛ,%} cooking, bringing to maturity.
<LEND>

<L>27555<pc>0544-a<k1>paripaW<k2>paripaW
{#paripaW#}¦ {%pari-paṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paṭhati, -pa-%}
{%ṭhitum,%} to enumerate completely, detail, describe,
mention, name, represent.
<LEND>

<L>27556<pc>0544-a<k1>paripAWa<k2>paripAWa
{%Pari-pāṭha, as,%}¦ m. complete enumeration, de-
tail; ({%ena%}), ind. in detail, completely.
<LEND>

<L>27557<pc>0544-a<k1>paripAWaka<k2>paripAWaka
{%Pari-pāṭhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ enumerating in detail,
describing the contents.
<LEND>

<L>27558<pc>0544-a<k1>paripaRa<k2>paripaRa
{#paripaRa#}¦ {%pari-paṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 2. {%paṇ%}
with {%pari%}), capital, principal, stock.
<LEND>

<L>27559<pc>0544-a<k1>paripaRita<k2>paripaRita
{%Pari-paṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pledged, plighted, agreed,
promised.
<LEND>

<L>27560<pc>0544-a<k1>paripat<k2>paripat
{#paripat#}¦ {%pari-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -patitum,%}
to fly round or about, to run round or about, run in
all directions; to leap down, fall, throw one's self
upon, attack: Caus. {%-pātayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
fall down, shoot down, shoot off, throw into.
<LEND>

<L>27561<pc>0544-a<k1>paripatana<k2>paripatana
{%Pari-patana, am,%}¦ n. flying round or about.
<LEND>

<L>27562<pc>0544-a<k1>paripati<k2>paripati
{#paripati#}¦ {%pari-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the lord of
all around; (Sāy.) a protector; (according to Mahī-
dhara) flying about.
<LEND>

<L>27563<pc>0544-a<k1>paripad<k2>paripad
{#paripad#}¦ {%pari-pad, t,%} f., Ved. a snare, trap;
walking about; a creature, living being; (Sāy.) a
bird (as flying about).
<LEND>

<L>27564<pc>0544-a<k1>paripadin<k2>paripadin
{#paripadin#}¦ {%paripadin, ī,%} m. an enemy; (pro-
bably only a wrong reading for {%pari-parin.%})
<LEND>

<L>27565<pc>0544-a<k1>paripanTaka<k2>paripanTaka
{#paripanTaka#}¦ {%pari-panthaka, as,%} m. one who
obstructs the way, an antagonist, opponent, adver-
sary, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>27566<pc>0544-a<k1>paripanTam<k2>paripanTam
{%Pari-pantham,%}¦ ind. by the way, in the way.
<LEND>

<L>27567<pc>0544-a<k1>paripanTaya<k2>paripanTaya
{%Pari-panthaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%-panthayati, -yitum,%}
to obstruct the way, oppose, resist (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>27568<pc>0544-a<k1>paripanTika<k2>paripanTika
{%Pari-panthika, as,%}¦ m. an adversary, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>27569<pc>0544-a<k1>paripanTin<k2>paripanTin
{%Pari-panthin, ī,%}¦ m. an antagonist, opponent,
enemy; a robber, highwayman, bandit. {%—Pari-%}
{%panthi-tva, am,%} n. obstructing the way.
<LEND>

<L>27570<pc>0544-a<k1>paripara<k2>paripara
{#paripara#}¦ {%pari-para%} (probably fr. {%pari%} re-
peated), a tortuous course, roundabout way; [cf.
{%a-paripara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27571<pc>0544-a<k1>pariparin<k2>pariparin
{#pariparin#}¦ {%pari-parin, ī,%} m. (probably fr.
{%pari-pari%}), Ved. an antagonist, opponent, adversary.
<LEND>

<L>27572<pc>0544-a<k1>paripavana<k2>paripavana
{#paripavana#}¦ {%pari-pavana.%} See {%pari-pū,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>27573<pc>0544-a<k1>paripaSavya<k2>paripaSavya
{#paripaSavya#}¦ {%pari-paśavya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pari-%}
{%paśu%}), Ved. relating to the victim at a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>27574<pc>0544-a<k1>paripA<k2>paripA<h>1
{#paripA#} 1¦. {%pari-pā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-pibati, -pātum,%}
to drink before and after any one (Ved.); to drink
up, sip up.
<LEND>

<L>27575<pc>0544-a<k1>paripAna<k2>paripAna
{%Pari-pāna, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a drink, beverage.
<LEND>

<L>27576<pc>0544-a<k1>paripIta<k2>paripIta
{%Pari-pīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ drunk up, sipped up,
drunk together with (anything).
<LEND>

<L>27577<pc>0544-a<k1>paripA<k2>paripA<h>2
{#paripA#} 2¦. {%pari-pā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-pāti, -pātum,%}
to protect or defend on every side, to guard, main-
tain: Caus. {%-pālayati,%} &c., to protect, guard,
govern; to keep, maintain; to wait, expect.
<LEND>
[Page0544-b+ 73]

<L>27578<pc>0544-b<k1>paripARa<k2>paripARa
{%Pari-pāṇa, as, am,%}¦ m. n., Ved. protection, de-
fence, covert.
<LEND>

<L>27579<pc>0544-b<k1>paripAlaka<k2>paripAlaka
{%Pari-pālaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), guard-
ing, protecting, defending, maintaining, supporting,
sustaining; taking care of one's property.
<LEND>

<L>27580<pc>0544-b<k1>paripAlana<k2>paripAlana
{%Pari-pālana, am,%}¦ n. protecting, cherishing, de-
fending, maintaining, sustaining, keeping; protec-
tion, nurture.
<LEND>

<L>27581<pc>0544-b<k1>paripAlayitf<k2>paripAlayitf
{%Pari-pālayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a protector, defender.
<LEND>

<L>27582<pc>0544-b<k1>paripAlita<k2>paripAlita
{%Pari-pālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ protected, cherished.
<LEND>

<L>27583<pc>0544-b<k1>paripAlya<k2>paripAlya
{%Pari-pālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be protected or de-
fended, to be maintained or observed; to be governed.
<LEND>

<L>27584<pc>0544-b<k1>paripipAlayizA<k2>paripipAlayizA
{%Pari-pipālayiṣā,%}¦ f. (fr. the Desid. of Caus.),
desire of protecting or maintaining or sustaining.
<LEND>

<L>27585<pc>0544-b<k1>paripAka<k2>paripAka
{#paripAka#}¦ {%pari-pāka, pari-pākin, pari-pā-%}
{%cana.%} See {%pari-pakva,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27586<pc>0544-b<k1>paripAwala<k2>paripAwala
{#paripAwala#}¦ {%pari-pāṭala, as, ā, am,%} of a pale
red colour, pale red.
<LEND>

<L>27587<pc>0544-b<k1>paripAwI<k2>paripAwI
{#paripAwI#}¦ {%pari-pāṭī,%} f. succession, order,
method, arrangement; arithmetic.
<LEND>

<L>27588<pc>0544-b<k1>paripAWa<k2>paripAWa
{#paripAWa#}¦ {%pari-pāṭha.%} See {%pari-paṭh,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27589<pc>0544-b<k1>paripARqu<k2>paripARqu
{#paripARqu#}¦ {%pari-pāṇḍu, us, us, u,%} very light
or pale.
<LEND>

<L>27590<pc>0544-b<k1>paripAda<k2>paripAda
{#paripAda#}¦ {%pari-pāda.%} See Gaṇa to Pāṇ.
VI. 2, 184.
<LEND>

<L>27591<pc>0544-b<k1>paripArSva<k2>paripArSva
{#paripArSva#}¦ {%pari-pārśva, as, ā, am,%} being at
or by one's side, at the side, near; [cf. {%pāripār-%}
{%śvika.%}] {%—Paripārśva-cara, as, ī, am,%} going at or
by one's side. {%—Paripārśva-tas,%} ind. at or by the
side, at both sides of (with gen.). {%—Paripārśva-%}
{%vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being at the side, standing at or
close to one's side.
<LEND>

<L>27592<pc>0544-b<k1>paripiYjara<k2>paripiYjara
{#paripiYjara#}¦ {%pari-piñjara, as, ā, am,%} of a
brownish red colour.
<LEND>

<L>27593<pc>0544-b<k1>paripiz<k2>paripiz
{#paripiz#}¦ {%pari-piṣ,%} cl. 7. P. {%-pinaṣṭi,%}
{%-peṣṭum,%} to crush, trample; to beat, strike.
<LEND>

<L>27594<pc>0544-b<k1>paripizwa<k2>paripizwa
{%Pari-piṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushed, trampled down.
<LEND>

<L>27595<pc>0544-b<k1>paripizwaka<k2>paripizwaka
{%Pari-piṣṭaka, am,%}¦ n. lead.
<LEND>

<L>27596<pc>0544-b<k1>paripIq<k2>paripIq
{#paripIq#}¦ {%pari-pīḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pīḍayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to press all round, press together, compress,
squeeze; to hug, embrace; to torment greatly, tor-
ture, harass, vex; (in augury) to cover, cover up.
<LEND>

<L>27597<pc>0544-b<k1>paripIqana<k2>paripIqana
{%Pari-pīḍana, am,%}¦ n. squeezing or pressing out,
expressing; injuring, prejudicing.
<LEND>

<L>27598<pc>0544-b<k1>paripIqA<k2>paripIqA
{%Pari-pīḍā,%}¦ f. pressing; vexing, torturing, tor-
menting.
<LEND>

<L>27599<pc>0544-b<k1>paripIqita<k2>paripIqita
{%Pari-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressed; embraced;
tormented.
<LEND>

<L>27600<pc>0544-b<k1>paripIta<k2>paripIta
{#paripIta#}¦ {%pari-pīta.%} See 1. {%pari-pā,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27601<pc>0544-b<k1>paripucCaya<k2>paripucCaya
{#paripucCaya#}¦ {%pari-pucchaya,%} Nom. A. {%pari-%}
{%pucchayate,%} &c., to wag the tail.
<LEND>

<L>27602<pc>0544-b<k1>paripuw<k2>paripuw
{#paripuw#}¦ {%pari-puṭ,%} Pass. {%-puṭyate,%} &c., to
peel off, lose the bark or skin.
<LEND>

<L>27603<pc>0544-b<k1>paripuwana<k2>paripuwana
{%Pari-puṭana, am,%}¦ n. removing the peel or bark,
peeling, desquamation, peeling off; losing the bark
or skin. {%—Paripuṭana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} peeling
off, dropping off.
<LEND>

<L>27604<pc>0544-b<k1>paripowa<k2>paripowa
{%Pari-poṭa, as,%}¦ m. or {%pari-poṭaka, as,%} m. peeling
off, a particular disease of the ear. {%—Paripoṭa-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} peeling off, losing the skin.
<LEND>

<L>27605<pc>0544-b<k1>paripowana<k2>paripowana
{%Pari-poṭana, am,%}¦ n. peeling off, desquamation,
losing the bark or skin.
<LEND>

<L>27606<pc>0544-b<k1>paripuz<k2>paripuz
{#paripuz#}¦ {%pari-puṣ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-poṣayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to be cherished, to nourish, sustain,
foster.
<LEND>

<L>27607<pc>0544-b<k1>paripuzwa<k2>paripuzwa
{%Pari-puṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ nourished, cherished;
amply provided with, abounding in. {%—Paripuṣṭa-%}
{%tā,%} f. the being nourished or supported, receiving
nourishment.
<LEND>

<L>27608<pc>0544-b<k1>paripozaka<k2>paripozaka
{%Pari-poṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ nourishing, confirming,
encouraging, furthering.
<LEND>

<L>27609<pc>0544-b<k1>paripozaRa<k2>paripozaRa
{%Pari-poṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of nourishing,
furthering, promoting.
<LEND>
[Page0544-c+ 73]

<L>27610<pc>0544-c<k1>paripozaRIya<k2>paripozaRIya
{%Pari-poṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be nourished, to
be promoted.
<LEND>

<L>27611<pc>0544-c<k1>paripuzkarA<k2>paripuzkarA
{#paripuzkarA#}¦ {%pari-puṣkarā,%} f. the plant Cu-
cumis Maderaspattanus.
<LEND>

<L>27612<pc>0544-c<k1>paripU<k2>paripU
{#paripU#}¦ {%pari-pū,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-punāti, -nīte,%}
{%-pavitum,%} to purify completely, strain; to lustrate;
to become completely purified.
<LEND>

<L>27613<pc>0544-c<k1>paripavana<k2>paripavana
{%Pari-pavana, am,%}¦ n. cleaning, winnowing corn;
a winnowing-basket.
<LEND>

<L>27614<pc>0544-c<k1>paripUta<k2>paripUta
{%Pari-pūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ pure, purified; completely
winnowed, threshed, freed from chaff.
<LEND>

<L>27615<pc>0544-c<k1>paripUj<k2>paripUj
{#paripUj#}¦ {%pari-pūj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pūjayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to honour greatly, adore, worship.
<LEND>

<L>27616<pc>0544-c<k1>paripUjana<k2>paripUjana
{%Pari-pūjana, am,%}¦ n. or {%pari-pūjā,%} f. honouring
highly, worshipping, adoring.
<LEND>

<L>27617<pc>0544-c<k1>paripUjita<k2>paripUjita
{%Pari-pūjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ much honoured, served,
worshipped, adored.
<LEND>

<L>27618<pc>0544-c<k1>paripUrRa<k2>paripUrRa
{#paripUrRa#}¦ {%pari-pūrṇa.%} See {%pari-pṝ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>27619<pc>0544-c<k1>paripF<k2>paripF
{#paripF#}¦ {%pari-pṝ,%} Pass. {%-pūryate,%} &c., to fill
(intransitively), become completely full: Caus. {%-pūra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to fill completely (transitively), make
full, fill out, completely cover, wholly occupy.
<LEND>

<L>27620<pc>0544-c<k1>paripUraka<k2>paripUraka
{%Pari-pūraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ filling, fulfilling; caus-
ing fulness or prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>27621<pc>0544-c<k1>paripUraRa<k2>paripUraRa
{%Pari-pūraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of filling; perfecting,
rendering complete.
<LEND>

<L>27622<pc>0544-c<k1>paripUrRa<k2>paripUrRa
{%Pari-pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ quite full, entire, com-
plete, completely filled; fully satisfied, self-satisfied,
content. {%—Paripūrṇa-candra-vimala-prabha, as,%}
m. ‘having the spotless splendor of the full moon,’
N. of a Sam-ādhi. {%—Paripūrṇa-tā,%} f. or {%pari-%}
{%pūrṇa-tva, am,%} n. completion, completeness, en-
tireness, fulness; satiety or satisfaction. {%—Paripūrṇa-%}
{%sahasra-candra-vatī,%} f. ‘possessing a thousand full
moons,’ an epithet of Indra's wife. {%—Paripūrṇā-%}
{%mṛta-raśmi (˚ṇa-am˚), is,%} m. ‘having rays filled
with nectar,’ the moon. {%—Paripūrṇārtha (˚ṇa-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} full of meaning; ({%am%}), ind. with
deep emotion, affectionately. {%—Paripūrṇendu (˚ṇa-%}
{%in˚), us,%} m. the full moon.
<LEND>

<L>27623<pc>0544-c<k1>paripUrti<k2>paripUrti
{%Pari-pūrti, is,%}¦ f. fulness, completion.
<LEND>

<L>27624<pc>0544-c<k1>paripelava<k2>paripelava
{#paripelava#}¦ {%pari-pelava, as, ā, am,%} very fine
or small, very delicate; ({%am%}), n. a fragrant grass,
Cyperus Rotundus.
<LEND>

<L>27625<pc>0544-c<k1>paripela<k2>paripela
{%Pari-pela, am,%}¦ n. {%= pari-pelava,%} a fragrant grass,
Cyperus Rotundus.
<LEND>

<L>27626<pc>0544-c<k1>paripowa<k2>paripowa
{#paripowa#}¦ {%pari-poṭa.%} See {%pari-puṭ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>27627<pc>0544-c<k1>paripragrah<k2>paripragrah
{#paripragrah#}¦ {%pari-pra-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛh-%}
{%ṇāti, -ṇīte, -grahītum,%} Ved. to take round, to hand
or pass round.
<LEND>

<L>27628<pc>0544-c<k1>paripraC<k2>paripraC
{#paripraC#}¦ {%pari-prach,%} cl. 6. P. {%-pṛcchati,%}
{%-praṣṭum,%} to interrogate or ask any one about
anything (with two acc. or with acc. of the thing
and abl. of the person); to enquire about.
<LEND>

<L>27629<pc>0544-c<k1>paripfcCA<k2>paripfcCA
{%Pari-pṛcchā,%}¦ f. asking about, question, inquiry,
asking for.
<LEND>

<L>27630<pc>0544-c<k1>paripfcCya<k2>paripfcCya
{%Pari-pṛcchya,%}¦ ind. having inquired about (with
two acc.).
<LEND>

<L>27631<pc>0544-c<k1>paripraSna<k2>paripraSna
{%Pari-praśna, as,%}¦ m. question, interrogation, in-
quiry.
<LEND>

<L>27632<pc>0544-c<k1>paripramuc<k2>paripramuc
{#paripramuc#}¦ {%pari-pra-muc,%} cl. 6. A. {%-muñcate,%}
{%-moktum,%} Ved. to free one's self from.
<LEND>

<L>27633<pc>0544-c<k1>pariprApti<k2>pariprApti
{#pariprApti#}¦ {%pari-prāpti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%āp%} with
{%pari%} and {%pra%}), acquisition, obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>27634<pc>0544-c<k1>pariprepsu<k2>pariprepsu
{%Pari-prepsu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), wishing
to reach, desirous of obtaining; wishing to defend;
desiring, desirous, seeking.
<LEND>

<L>27635<pc>0544-c<k1>pariprArDa<k2>pariprArDa
{#pariprArDa#}¦ {%pari-prārdha, am,%} n., Ved. prox-
imity, nearness.
<LEND>

<L>27636<pc>0544-c<k1>pariprI<k2>pariprI
{#pariprI#}¦ {%pari-prī, īs, īs, i%} (fr. rt. {%prī%} with
{%pari%}), Ved. very dear or valued; (Sāy.) gratifying
on all sides or in every way ({%= paritaḥ prīṇa-%}
{%yitṛ%}).
<LEND>
[Page0545-a+ 77]

<L>27637<pc>0545-a<k1>paripruz<k2>paripruz
{#paripruz#}¦ {%pari-pruṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. sprinkling,
splashing.
<LEND>

<L>27638<pc>0545-a<k1>paripre<k2>paripre
{#paripre#}¦ {%pari-pre%} (fr. {%pari-pra-i%}), cl. 2. P.
{%-praiti, -praitum,%} Ved. to go round, flow round.
<LEND>

<L>27639<pc>0545-a<k1>pariprez<k2>pariprez
{#pariprez#}¦ {%pari-preṣ%} ({%pari-pra-iṣ,%} see rt.
1. {%iṣ%}), Caus. {%-praiṣayati, -yitum,%} to send forth,
dispatch, send away.
<LEND>

<L>27640<pc>0545-a<k1>pariprezaRa<k2>pariprezaRa
{%Pari-preṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. sending forth or away;
banishing, abandoning.
<LEND>

<L>27641<pc>0545-a<k1>pariprezita<k2>pariprezita
{%Pari-preṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sent forth, sent away,
dispatched; banished, abandoned.
<LEND>

<L>27642<pc>0545-a<k1>pariprezya<k2>pariprezya
{%Pari-preṣya, as,%}¦ m. a servant.
<LEND>

<L>27643<pc>0545-a<k1>pariplu<k2>pariplu
{#pariplu#}¦ {%pari-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, -plotum,%}
to swim about, float about, bathe; to flood, inun-
date; to overwhelm; to hover about, fly or soar
through; to jump or spring about; to revolve, move
in a circle; to move about, move restlessly; to go
astray; to hasten forward: Caus. {%-plāvayati, -yitum,%}
to flood, inundate, bathe, water.
<LEND>

<L>27644<pc>0545-a<k1>pariplava<k2>pariplava
{%Pari-plava, as, ā, am,%}¦ swimming about; swaying
or moving to and fro, running about, vibrating,
oscillating, undulating, waving, shaking, trembling,
movable, unsteady, restless; ({%as%}), m. inundation;
bathing, wetting, immersing; a ship, boat; oppres-
sion, tyranny; N. of a prince, son of Sukhī-bala
(Sukhī-vala, Sukhī-nala); ({%ā%}), f. a sort of spoon used
at sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>27645<pc>0545-a<k1>pariplavamAna<k2>pariplavamAna
{%Pari-plavamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ swimming about,
floating, moving to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>27646<pc>0545-a<k1>pariplAvya<k2>pariplAvya<h>1
1. {%pari-plāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ swimming about, floating
around, running (as water).
<LEND>

<L>27647<pc>0545-a<k1>pariplAvya<k2>pariplAvya<h>2
2. {%pari-plāvya,%}¦ ind. having flooded or inundated,
having bathed.
<LEND>

<L>27648<pc>0545-a<k1>paripluta<k2>paripluta
{%Pari-pluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ flooded, inundated; over-
whelmed; wetted, bathed, immersed; ({%ā%}), f. spirituous
liquor; ({%am%}), n. a spring or jump, skipping about.
<LEND>

<L>27649<pc>0545-a<k1>paribanD<k2>paribanD
{#paribanD#}¦ {%pari-bandh,%} cl. 9. A. {%-badhnīte,%}
{%-banddhum,%} to bind together, connect, bind on, bind
round one's self, put on (as a girdle); to encircle;
to stop, interrupt: Caus. {%-bandhayati, -yitum,%} to
tie round.
<LEND>

<L>27650<pc>0545-a<k1>paribadDa<k2>paribadDa
{%Pari-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound round, obstructed.
<LEND>

<L>27651<pc>0545-a<k1>paribAD<k2>paribAD<h>1
{#paribAD#} 1¦. {%pari-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate,%}
{%bādhitum,%} to ward off, keep off, to exclude, hinder,
obstruct, drive away, (Ved. according to Sāy. {%=%}
{%parito han%}); to protect from or defend against
(with abl., Ved.); to vex, disturb, annoy, molest,
harass, importune, pain: Desid. A. {%-bibādhiṣate,%}
Ved. to strive to keep or ward off or keep at a
distance.
<LEND>

<L>27652<pc>0545-a<k1>paribAD<k2>paribAD<h>2
2. {%pari-bādh, t,%}¦ f., Ved. hindrance, obstruction,
check; an obstructor, hinderer.
<LEND>

<L>27653<pc>0545-a<k1>paribADA<k2>paribADA
{%Pari-bādhā,%}¦ f. trouble, vexation, worry, annoy-
ance; fatigue, toil, hardship.
<LEND>

<L>27654<pc>0545-a<k1>paribfMh<k2>paribfMh
{#paribfMh#}¦ {%pari-bṛṃh%} or {%pari-bṛh%} (also written
{%pari-vṛṃh%} or {%pari-vṛh,%} q. v.), cl. 6. P. A. {%-bṛṃ-%}
{%hati%} or {%-bṛhati, -bṛṃhate%} or {%-bṛhate, -barhitum,%}
Ved. to embrace, encircle, surround, encompass; to
make strong or compact, fortify, strengthen; to in-
crease: Caus. {%-bṛṃhayati, -yitum,%} to make strong,
strengthen.
<LEND>

<L>27655<pc>0545-a<k1>paribarha<k2>paribarha
{%Pari-barha%}¦ or {%pari-varha, as,%} m. ‘that which
surrounds or encompasses,’ ‘surroundings,’ retinue,
train, attendants, dependants; royal insignia; furni-
ture, attire, trim; the necessaries of life; wealth,
property, substance. {%—Paribarha-vat%} or {%parivarha-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a suitable retinue, possessing
a proper train of attendants, provided with suitable
furniture, properly furnished.
<LEND>

<L>27656<pc>0545-a<k1>paribarhaRa<k2>paribarhaRa
{%Pari-barhaṇa%}¦ or {%pari-varhaṇa, am,%} n. retinue,
train; attire, trim; growth, aggrandizement; wor-
ship, adoration.
<LEND>

<L>27657<pc>0545-a<k1>paribfMhaRa<k2>paribfMhaRa
{%Pari-bṛṃhaṇa%}¦ or {%pari-vṛṃhaṇa, as, ī, am,%}
augmenting, increasing, enlarging; ({%am%}), n. pros-
perity, welfare; an additional work, appendix, sup-
plement.
<LEND>

<L>27658<pc>0545-a<k1>paribfMhita<k2>paribfMhita
{%Pari-bṛṃhita%}¦ or {%pari-bṛhita%} or {%pari-vṛṃhita%}
[Page0545-b+ 75]
or {%pari-vṛhita, as, ā, am,%} increased, augmented,
grown, thriven; strengthened by, connected with,
accompanied by, furnished with.
<LEND>

<L>27659<pc>0545-b<k1>paribfQa<k2>paribfQa
{%Pari-bṛḍha%}¦ or {%pari-vṛḍha, as, ā, am,%} firm,
fixed, dense, thick, solid, compact, ample, large; the
lord of all around, a superior, proprietor, owner.
{%—Parivṛḍha-tama, am,%} n., Ved., scil. {%Brahma,%}
the Supreme Spirit.
<LEND>

<L>27660<pc>0545-b<k1>paribrU<k2>paribrU
{#paribrU#}¦ {%pari-brū,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bravīti,%} &c., Ved.
to utter a spell or charm, lay under a spell, charm,
enchant.
<LEND>

<L>27661<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBakz<k2>pariBakz
{#pariBakz#}¦ {%pari-bhakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-bhakṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Ved. to drink off, drink up; to eat
up (what belongs to another), devour, consume.
<LEND>

<L>27662<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBakzaRa<k2>pariBakzaRa
{%Pari-bhakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. eating up, consuming.
<LEND>

<L>27663<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBakzita<k2>pariBakzita
{%Pari-bhakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ drunk up, deprived
of food (Ved.); devoured, consumed, gnawed; worn
away.
<LEND>

<L>27664<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBagna<k2>pariBagna
{#pariBagna#}¦ {%pari-bhagna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%bhañj%} with {%pari%}), broken, interrupted, disturbed,
stopped. {%—Paribhagna-krama, as, ā, am,%} stopped
in one's course, checked in one's progress.
<LEND>

<L>27665<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBaNga<k2>pariBaNga
{%Pari-bhaṅga, as,%}¦ m. breaking to pieces, shattering.
<LEND>

<L>27666<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBaj<k2>pariBaj
{#pariBaj#}¦ {%pari-bhaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhajati, -bhak-%}
{%tum,%} to divide.
<LEND>

<L>27667<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBajya<k2>pariBajya
{%Pari-bhajya,%}¦ ind. having divided.
<LEND>

<L>27668<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBaya<k2>pariBaya
{#pariBaya#}¦ {%pari-bhaya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%bhī%}
with {%pari%}), Ved. apprehension, fear.
<LEND>

<L>27669<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBarts<k2>pariBarts
{#pariBarts#}¦ {%pari-bharts,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-bhart-%}
{%sayati, -te, -yitum,%} to threaten, menace, treat harshly,
rate, scold, chide, reprimand.
<LEND>

<L>27670<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBartsat<k2>pariBartsat
{%Pari-bhartsat, an, antī, at,%}¦ threatening, chiding;
mocking, deriding.
<LEND>

<L>27671<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBartsana<k2>pariBartsana
{%Pari-bhartsana, am,%}¦ n. threatening, menacing.
<LEND>

<L>27672<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBartsita<k2>pariBartsita
{%Pari-bhartsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ threatened, chided.
<LEND>

<L>27673<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBartsyamAna<k2>pariBartsyamAna
{%Pari-bhartsyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being threatened.
<LEND>

<L>27674<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBAz<k2>pariBAz
{#pariBAz#}¦ {%pari-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate,%}
{%-bhāṣitum,%} to speak to, address, admonish; to
declare, teach, explain, interpret, define; to persuade,
exhort, encourage.
<LEND>

<L>27675<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBAzaRa<k2>pariBAzaRa
{%Pari-bhāṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking much,
declaring, explaining; ({%am%}), n. speaking, talking,
addressing, conversing with, chatting, gossiping;
speech, discourse; admonition, expression of censure
or contempt, reproof, abuse; rule, precept; agree-
ment (?).
<LEND>

<L>27676<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBAzaRIya<k2>pariBAzaRIya
{%Pari-bhāṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be addressed
or spoken to; reprehensible, liable to censure; de-
serving reproof.
<LEND>

<L>27677<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBAzA<k2>pariBAzA
{%Pari-bhāṣā,%}¦ f. speech; blame, censure, abuse;
an explanation, definition; (in gram.) an explanatory
Sūtra or rule mixed with the other rules of Pāṇini
and teaching the method of applying them, (these
Sūtras are a key to the system and are thought by
some to have been interpolated in later times, but
by others are ascribed to Pāṇini himself; there are
other Paribhāṣas by unknown authors); any general
definition applicable throughout; a table or list of
abbreviations or signs used in any work; (in medi-
cine) prognosis. {%—Paribhāṣā-prakaraṇa, am,%} n.,
N. of the second chapter of the Prauḍha-manoramā,
q. v. {%—Paribhāṣendu-śekhara (˚ṣā-in˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a grammatical work by Nāgeśa-bhaṭṭa ({%= nā-%}
{%gojī-bhaṭṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>27678<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBAzita<k2>pariBAzita
{%Pari-bhāṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ explained, said; formed
or used technically.
<LEND>

<L>27679<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBAzin<k2>pariBAzin
{%Pari-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ speaking, explaining.
<LEND>

<L>27680<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBAs<k2>pariBAs
{#pariBAs#}¦ {%pari-bhās,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāsate, -bhā-%}
{%situm,%} to appear (Ved.): Caus. {%-bhāsayati, -yitum,%}
to embellish, adorn.
<LEND>

<L>27681<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBid<k2>pariBid
{#pariBid#}¦ {%pari-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhintte, -bhettum,%} to split asunder, cleave open,
tear or dash to pieces, break through; to change,
disfigure, deform.
<LEND>

<L>27682<pc>0545-b<k1>pariBinna<k2>pariBinna
{%Pari-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ split or cleft open,
[Page0545-c+ 79]
cracked, cut into small pieces; changed, disfigured,
deformed.
<LEND>

<L>27683<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBuj<k2>pariBuj<h>1
{#pariBuj#} 1¦. {%pari-bhuj%} (see rt. 1. {%bhuj%}), cl.
6. P. {%-bhujati, -bhoktum,%} Ved. to span, encompass,
embrace.
<LEND>

<L>27684<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBugna<k2>pariBugna
{%Pari-bhugna, as, ā, am,%}¦ bowed, bent.
<LEND>

<L>27685<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBuj<k2>pariBuj<h>2
{#pariBuj#} 2¦. {%pari-bhuj%} (see rt. 3. {%bhuj%}), cl.
7. P. A. {%-bhunakti, -bhuṅkte, -bhoktum,%} to eat
up, eat, devour; to feed upon; to use, enjoy; to
neglect to feed: Caus. {%-bhojayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to
possess, enjoy, govern.
<LEND>

<L>27686<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBukta<k2>pariBukta
{%Pari-bhukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ eaten; enjoyed, possessed.
<LEND>

<L>27687<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBoktf<k2>pariBoktf
{%Pari-bhoktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ eating, enjoying, pos-
sessing, an eater, enjoyer; one who lives at another's
cost or uses another's property without his leave.
<LEND>

<L>27688<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBoga<k2>pariBoga
{%Pari-bhoga, as,%}¦ m. enjoyment, especially sexual
intercourse, possession, a means of enjoyment; living
at another's cost, using another's property without his
leave, illegal use of another's goods.
<LEND>

<L>27689<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBU<k2>pariBU<h>1
{#pariBU#} 1¦. {%pari-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bha-%}
{%vitum%} (Ved. inf. {%-bhve%}), to be round or about any-
thing, encompass, surround, embrace, enclose, contain
(Ved.); to circle round, go or fly round (Ved.); to
accompany (Ved.); to take care of (Ved.); to guide,
govern (Ved.); to be superior, surpass, overcome,
subdue, conquer; to pass round, pay no attention to,
treat with contempt or disrespect, despise; to disgrace;
to injure; to grieve; to disappear ({%= parā-bhū,%}
q. v.): Caus. {%-bhāvayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be
surrounded or pervaded; to cause to be saturated or
penetrated; to contain, include, comprehend; to
conceive, think, reflect, meditate, know, recognise
as; to make known.
<LEND>

<L>27690<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBava<k2>pariBava
{%Pari-bhava, as,%}¦ m. or {%pari-bhavana, am,%} n.
contumely, insult, injury, humiliation, degradation,
disrespect, contempt, disgrace; defeat, discomfiture.
{%—Paribhava-pada, am,%} n. an object or occasion
of contempt, a disgraceful situation, disgrace. {%—Pari-%}
{%bhava-vidhi, is,%} m. contumelious or insulting action,
humiliation. {%—Paribhavāspada (˚va-ās˚), am,%} n. a
position or situation of disgrace, object of contempt.
<LEND>

<L>27691<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBavanIya<k2>pariBavanIya
{%Pari-bhavanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be injured or
insulted, liable to be humiliated or despised or dis-
graced.
<LEND>

<L>27692<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBavin<k2>pariBavin
{%Pari-bhavin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ injuring, humiliating, treat-
ing with contumely or disrespect, ridiculing; suffering
disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>27693<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBAva<k2>pariBAva
{%Pari-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. {%= pari-bhava,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>27694<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBAvana<k2>pariBAvana
{%Pari-bhāvana, am,%}¦ n. cohesion, union; ({%ā%}), f.
thought.
<LEND>

<L>27695<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBAvita<k2>pariBAvita
{%Pari-bhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ contained, included;
penetrated; pervaded; conceived. {%—Paribhāvita-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of being included, inclusion.
<LEND>

<L>27696<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBAvin<k2>pariBAvin
{%Pari-bhāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ treating with contempt,
slighting, despising; putting to shame, mocking,
insulting, outvying, surpassing.
<LEND>

<L>27697<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBAvuka<k2>pariBAvuka
{%Pari-bhāvuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ contemning, shaming,
humbling.
<LEND>

<L>27698<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBAvya<k2>pariBAvya
{%Pari-bhāvya,%}¦ ind. having caused to be surrounded;
having reflected upon.
<LEND>

<L>27699<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBU<k2>pariBU<h>2
2. {%pari-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%}¦ Ved. surrounding, embrac-
ing, comprehending, pervading; overpowering; sur-
passing; guiding, governing.
<LEND>

<L>27700<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBUta<k2>pariBUta
{%Pari-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ treated with contempt or
disrespect, disregarded, despised; overpowered, con-
quered. {%—Paribhūta-gati-traya, as, ā, am,%} sur-
passing three times the age of man.
<LEND>

<L>27701<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBUti<k2>pariBUti
{%Pari-bhūti, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. overcoming, over-
powering; ({%is%}), f. superiority, superior power (Ved.);
contempt, insult, contumely, humiliation, disrespect,
injury.
<LEND>

<L>27702<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBUya<k2>pariBUya
{%Pari-bhūya,%}¦ ind. having treated with contempt,
having disgraced or despised; shaming, outvying;
experiencing disgrace.
<LEND>

<L>27703<pc>0545-c<k1>pariBUz<k2>pariBUz
{#pariBUz#}¦ {%pari-bhūṣ,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%-bhūṣati,%}
{%-bhūṣayati,%} &c., to wait upon, serve, attend; to
honour, revere; to take care of; to follow, observe;
to furnish, equip, fit out, prepare; to decorate; to
be beautiful, to shine.
<LEND>
[Page0546-a+ 73]

<L>27704<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBUzaRa<k2>pariBUzaRa
{%Pari-bhūṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m., scil. {%sandhi,%} peace ob-
tained by the cession of the whole revenue of a land.
<LEND>

<L>27705<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBUzita<k2>pariBUzita
{%Pari-bhūṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ decorated, adorned.
<LEND>

<L>27706<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBf<k2>pariBf
{#pariBf#}¦ {%pari-bhṛ,%} cl. 3. P. {%-bibharti, -bhar-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to pass beyond (Sāy. {%= ati-kram%}); to
extend beyond, extend.
<LEND>

<L>27707<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBedaka<k2>pariBedaka
{#pariBedaka#}¦ {%pari-bhedaka, as, ā, am,%} breaking
through.
<LEND>

<L>27708<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBraMS<k2>pariBraMS
{#pariBraMS#}¦ {%pari-bhraṃś,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-bhraśyati,%}
{%-te, -bhraṃśitum;%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhraṃśate, -bhraṃ-%}
{%śitum,%} to fall off, drop off; to fall, be cast down
(metaphorically); to run away, escape; to vanish,
disappear; to lose, be deprived of (with abl.); to
neglect, omit.
<LEND>

<L>27709<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBraMSa<k2>pariBraMSa
{%Pari-bhraṃśa, as,%}¦ m. falling from; escape,
escaping.
<LEND>

<L>27710<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBraMSana<k2>pariBraMSana
{%Pari-bhraṃśana, am,%}¦ n. falling from; losing, loss.
<LEND>

<L>27711<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBrazwa<k2>pariBrazwa
{%Pari-bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen off, dropped off;
fallen, cast down, degraded; escaped; vanished;
deprived of, void or devoid of (with abl. or some-
times inst.); lost; neglecting, omitting. {%—Pari-%}
{%bhraṣṭa-sukha, as, ā, am,%} fallen from happiness.
<LEND>

<L>27712<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBrajj<k2>pariBrajj
{#pariBrajj#}¦ {%pari-bhrajj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-bhṛjjati,%}
{%-bhraṣṭum, -bharṣṭum,%} to fry, roast: Caus. {%-bhar-%}
{%jayati, -yitum,%} to fry, roast, parch.
<LEND>

<L>27713<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBfzwa<k2>pariBfzwa
{%Pari-bhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fried, roasted, parched.
<LEND>

<L>27714<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBram<k2>pariBram
{#pariBram#}¦ {%pari-bhram,%} cl. 1. 4. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-bhramati (-te), bhramyati%} or {%bhrāmyati, -bhra-%}
{%mitum,%} to walk round about, wander round, rove or
roam about, ramble about, saunter; to fly round about,
hover or flutter round; to wander through, rove or
roam through, ramble through; to whirl round,
wheel or circle round, revolve; to encircle, describe
a circle round.
<LEND>

<L>27715<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBrama<k2>pariBrama
{%Pari-bhrama, as, ā, am,%}¦ flying round or about
[cf. {%khe-p˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. wandering, going about;
error; circumlocution, rambling discourse.
<LEND>

<L>27716<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBramaRa<k2>pariBramaRa
{%Pari-bhramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. turning round, revolving
(as of wheels); circumference.
<LEND>

<L>27717<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBramat<k2>pariBramat
{%Pari-bhramat, an, antī, at,%}¦ roaming or wander-
ing about, roving about; turning or whirling round,
revolving; describing circles.
<LEND>

<L>27718<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBramya<k2>pariBramya
{%Pari-bhramya,%}¦ ind. having roamed about, having
gone to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>27719<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBrAmyat<k2>pariBrAmyat
{%Pari-bhrāmyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ roaming about;
flying or fluttering about.
<LEND>

<L>27720<pc>0546-a<k1>pariBrAj<k2>pariBrAj
{#pariBrAj#}¦ {%pari-bhrāj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bhrājati,%}
{%-te, -bhrājitum,%} to shed brilliance all around, become
resplendent.
<LEND>

<L>27721<pc>0546-a<k1>parimaRqala<k2>parimaRqala
{#parimaRqala#}¦ {%pari-maṇḍala, as, ā, am,%} round,
circular, globular, spherical; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%maśaka,%}
a venomous species of gnat; ({%am%}), n. a circle, cir-
cumference; a ball, globe, sphere, orb; orbit. {%—Pari-%}
{%maṇḍala-tā,%} f. or {%parimaṇḍala-tva, am,%} n. round-
ness, rotundity, circularity.
<LEND>

<L>27722<pc>0546-a<k1>parimaRqalita<k2>parimaRqalita
{%Pari-maṇḍalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rounded, made round
or circular.
<LEND>

<L>27723<pc>0546-a<k1>parimaRqita<k2>parimaRqita
{#parimaRqita#}¦ {%pari-maṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} adorned
or decorated all round.
<LEND>

<L>27724<pc>0546-a<k1>pariman<k2>pariman
{#pariman#}¦ {%pari-man,%} cl. 8. A. {%-manute, -ma-%}
{%nitum,%} Ved. to despise, contemn, slight, neglect.
<LEND>

<L>27725<pc>0546-a<k1>parimantr<k2>parimantr
{#parimantr#}¦ {%pari-mantr,%} cl. 10. P. {%-mantrayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to charm or consecrate with sacred texts.
<LEND>

<L>27726<pc>0546-a<k1>parimantrita<k2>parimantrita
{%Pari-mantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ charmed, consecrated,
enchanted.
<LEND>

<L>27727<pc>0546-a<k1>parimanTara<k2>parimanTara
{#parimanTara#}¦ {%pari-manthara, as, ā, am,%} ex-
tremely slow or tardy.
<LEND>

<L>27728<pc>0546-a<k1>parimanda<k2>parimanda
{#parimanda#}¦ {%pari-manda, as, ā, am,%} very dull
or faint; very slow; very tired; very little; ({%am%}),
ind. very little, a little, not much. {%—Parimanda-tā,%}
f. fatigue, tiredness, tedium, ennui.
<LEND>

<L>27729<pc>0546-a<k1>parimanyu<k2>parimanyu
{#parimanyu#}¦ {%pari-manyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. wrath-
ful, angry, jealous (Sāy. {%= kopa-parivṛta%}).
<LEND>
[Page0546-b+ 77]

<L>27730<pc>0546-b<k1>parimara<k2>parimara
{#parimara#}¦ {%pari-mara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (fr. rt.
{%mṛ%} with {%pari%}), decaying, becoming decrepit; {%Brah-%}
{%maṇaḥ pari-maraḥ,%} ‘destruction round the Brah-
man, i. e. the magician’ (or, according to Colebrooke,
‘around air’), a magical rite for the destruction of
adversaries.
<LEND>

<L>27731<pc>0546-b<k1>parimarda<k2>parimarda
{#parimarda#}¦ {%pari-marda, pari-mardana.%} See
p. 547, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27732<pc>0546-b<k1>parimala<k2>parimala
{#parimala#}¦ {%pari-mala, as,%} m. ({%mala%} perhaps
fr. a lost rt. {%mal,%} to rub), fragrance, perfume,
(especially arising from the trituration of fragrant
substances); the pounding or trituration of perfumes;
a fragrant substance; a fragrant scent diffused during
coitus; copulation; a meeting of learned men; soil,
stain, dirt; N. of a poet; of a work; of a commen-
tary by Amara-candra on the Kāvya-kalpa-latā-vṛtti;
of a commentary by Apyāya-dīkṣita on the Vedānta-
kalpa-taru, (the complete title of which is Vedānta-
kalpa-taru-parimala.) {%—Parimala-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} laden
with perfumes, impregnated with sweet odours.
<LEND>

<L>27733<pc>0546-b<k1>parimalita<k2>parimalita
{%Pari-malita, as, ā, am,%}¦ perfumed; soiled, de-
spoiled of freshness or beauty.
<LEND>

<L>27734<pc>0546-b<k1>parimA<k2>parimA
{#parimA#}¦ {%pari-mā%} (see rt. 3. {%mā%}), cl. 2. P., 3.
4. A. {%-māti, -mimīte, -māyate, -mātum,%} to measure
round or about; to mete out; to fulfil (a period or
course); to measure, estimate, determine.
<LEND>

<L>27735<pc>0546-b<k1>parimARa<k2>parimARa
{%Pari-māṇa, am,%}¦ n. measuring, measure, duration,
length of time; compass, weight, number, value
(e. g. {%pratigraha-parimāṇa,%} the value of a gift
received). {%—Parimāṇa-tas,%} ind. by measure; in
weight. {%—Parimāṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} capable of
being measured, measurable.
<LEND>

<L>27736<pc>0546-b<k1>parimARaka<k2>parimARaka
{%Parimāṇaka, am,%}¦ n. compass, weight, quantity,
duration.
<LEND>

<L>27737<pc>0546-b<k1>parimARin<k2>parimARin
{%Pari-māṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having measure, measured.
<LEND>

<L>27738<pc>0546-b<k1>parimARIya<k2>parimARIya
{%Pari-māṇīya%}¦ or {%pari-mātavya, as, ā, am,%}
measurable, fit to be measured; requiring to be
ascertained as to quantity.
<LEND>

<L>27739<pc>0546-b<k1>parimita<k2>parimita
{%Pari-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ measured, meted; circum-
scribed, limited, adjusted; moderate, sparing; joined;
regulated. {%—Parimita-katha, as, ā, am,%} of measured
discourse, seldom speaking, saying little. {%—Parimita-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. limitedness, moderation, limited con-
dition. {%—Parimita-bhuj, k, k, k,%} eating sparingly,
abstemious. {%—Parimita-bhojana, am,%} n. moderation
in eating, abstemiousness. {%—Parimitābharaṇa (˚ta-%}
{%ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} moderately adorned. {%—Parimi-%}
{%tāyus (˚ta-āy˚), us, us, u,%} short-lived. {%—Parimi-%}
{%tāhāra (˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} eating little food,
eating moderately. {%—Parimiteccha-tā (˚ta-ic˚),%} f.
moderation in desire.
<LEND>

<L>27740<pc>0546-b<k1>parimiti<k2>parimiti
{%Pari-miti, is,%}¦ f. measure, quantity, limitation.
<LEND>

<L>27741<pc>0546-b<k1>parimeya<k2>parimeya
{%Pari-meya, as, ā, am,%}¦ measurable, to be measured;
calculable, capable of being counted, few; finite.
{%—Parimeya-tā,%} f. measurableness, calculableness.
<LEND>

<L>27742<pc>0546-b<k1>parimATin<k2>parimATin
{#parimATin#}¦ {%pari-māthin, ī, inī, i%} (rt. {%math%}
or {%manth%} with {%pari%}), torturing.
<LEND>

<L>27743<pc>0546-b<k1>parimAd<k2>parimAd
{#parimAd#}¦ {%pari-mād, t,%} f. or {%pari-māda, as,%}
m. (fr. rt. {%mad%} with {%pari%}), Ved., N. of sixteen
Sāmans which belong to the Mahā-vrata-stotra.
<LEND>

<L>27744<pc>0546-b<k1>parimArg<k2>parimArg
{#parimArg#}¦ {%pari-mārg,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%-mārgati,%}
{%mārgitum, -mārgayati, -yitum,%} to seek or search
about, search for, search through, seek, pursue, trace,
track, hunt about, investigate, grasp after, seek to
gain, ask for, beg for.
<LEND>

<L>27745<pc>0546-b<k1>parimArga<k2>parimArga<h>1
1. {%pari-mārga, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see under {%pari-%}
{%mṛj%}), searching or seeking about; searching for.
<LEND>

<L>27746<pc>0546-b<k1>parimArgaRa<k2>parimArgaRa
{%Pari-mārgaṇa, am,%}¦ n. tracing, tracking, search-
ing, seeking or looking for, seeking out.
<LEND>

<L>27747<pc>0546-b<k1>parimArgitavya<k2>parimArgitavya
{%Pari-mārgitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sought after.
<LEND>

<L>27748<pc>0546-b<k1>parimArgin<k2>parimArgin
{%Pari-mārgin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ tracing, tracking, seeking
for, going after, pursuing, hunting.
<LEND>

<L>27749<pc>0546-b<k1>parimi<k2>parimi
{#parimi#}¦ {%pari-mi%} (see rt. 1. {%mi%}), cl. 5. P. A.
{%-minoti, -nute,%} &c. Ved. to set or place round,
lay round.
<LEND>

<L>27750<pc>0546-b<k1>parimit<k2>parimit
{%Pari-mit, t,%}¦ f., Ved. the beam of a roof, a con-
necting beam or rafter (?).
<LEND>
[Page0546-c+ 75]

<L>27751<pc>0546-c<k1>parimilana<k2>parimilana
{#parimilana#}¦ {%pari-milana, am,%} n. touch, con-
tact, combination.
<LEND>

<L>27752<pc>0546-c<k1>parimilita<k2>parimilita
{%Pari-milita, as, ā, am,%}¦ mixed or combined
with, pervaded by (with inst.); filled, penetrated.
<LEND>

<L>27753<pc>0546-c<k1>parimih<k2>parimih
{#parimih#}¦ {%pari-mih,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mehati, -me-%}
{%ḍhum,%} Ved. to make water against.
<LEND>

<L>27754<pc>0546-c<k1>parimIQa<k2>parimIQa
{%Pari-mīḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sprinkled with urine.
<LEND>

<L>27755<pc>0546-c<k1>parimeha<k2>parimeha
{%Pari-meha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a magical rite in which
urine is sprinkled about.
<LEND>

<L>27756<pc>0546-c<k1>parimuKam<k2>parimuKam
{#parimuKam#}¦ {%pari-mukham,%} ind. round or
about the face, round, about (any person, &c.; Pāṇ.
IV. 4, 29).
<LEND>

<L>27757<pc>0546-c<k1>parimuc<k2>parimuc
{#parimuc#}¦ {%pari-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati,%}
{%-te, -moktum,%} to unloose, unfasten, set free, liberate;
to let go, give up, get rid of; to discharge, emit:
Pass. {%-mucyate,%} to loosen or free one's self; to let
go, get rid of; to neglect (?).
<LEND>

<L>27758<pc>0546-c<k1>parimukta<k2>parimukta
{%Pari-mukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ released, liberated. {%—Pa-%}
{%rimukta-bandhana, as, ā, am,%} released from bonds,
unbound, unfettered.
<LEND>

<L>27759<pc>0546-c<k1>parimucya<k2>parimucya
{%Pari-mucya,%}¦ ind. having released or liberated.
<LEND>

<L>27760<pc>0546-c<k1>parimuz<k2>parimuz
{#parimuz#}¦ {%pari-muṣ,%} cl. 9. 6. P. {%-muṣṇāti,%}
{%-muṣati, -moṣitum,%} to steal anything, rob, plunder
(with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>27761<pc>0546-c<k1>parimoza<k2>parimoza
{%Pari-moṣa, as,%}¦ m. stealing, theft, robbing.
<LEND>

<L>27762<pc>0546-c<k1>parimozaka<k2>parimozaka
{%Pari-moṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ stealing.
<LEND>

<L>27763<pc>0546-c<k1>parimozin<k2>parimozin
{%Pari-moṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ stealing; a thief, robber.
<LEND>

<L>27764<pc>0546-c<k1>parimuh<k2>parimuh
{#parimuh#}¦ {%pari-muh,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-muhyati,%}
{%-te, -mohitum, -moḍhum, -mogdhum,%} to be bewil-
dered or perplexed, to go astray, fail: Caus. A. {%-mo-%}
{%hayate%} (Pāṇ. 1. 3, 89); P. (ep.) {%-mohayati, -yitum,%}
to bewilder, perplex; to fascinate.
<LEND>

<L>27765<pc>0546-c<k1>parimugDa<k2>parimugDa
{%Pari-mugdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ lovely yet simple,
fascinating yet foolish. {%—Parimugdha-tā,%} f. grace-
fulness or loveliness combined with simplicity.
<LEND>

<L>27766<pc>0546-c<k1>parimUQa<k2>parimUQa
{%Pari-mūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ disturbed, perturbed,
perplexed, bewildered, troubled. {%—Parimūḍha-tā,%}
f. bewilderment, perplexity, trouble, error.
<LEND>

<L>27767<pc>0546-c<k1>parimohana<k2>parimohana
{%Pari-mohana, am,%}¦ n. the act of bewildering,
fascination, infatuation, beguiling.
<LEND>

<L>27768<pc>0546-c<k1>parimohita<k2>parimohita
{%Pari-mohita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bewildered, deprived of
consciousness or recollection.
<LEND>

<L>27769<pc>0546-c<k1>parimohin<k2>parimohin
{%Pari-mohin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ perplexing, fascinating,
bewitching; perplexed.
<LEND>

<L>27770<pc>0546-c<k1>parimUrRI<k2>parimUrRI
{#parimUrRI#}¦ {%pari-mūrṇī,%} f. (perhaps fr. rt. {%mṝ%}
with {%pari%}), Ved. worn out, decrepit (as a cow,
according to the commentator {%= vṛddhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>27771<pc>0546-c<k1>parimf<k2>parimf
{#parimf#}¦ {%pari-mṛ,%} cl. 6. A. {%-mriyate%} (Perf.
P. {%-mamāra%}), {%-martum,%} Ved. to die (in numbers)
round (any one).
<LEND>

<L>27772<pc>0546-c<k1>parimfg<k2>parimfg
{#parimfg#}¦ {%pari-mṛg,%} cl. 10. A. {%-mṛgayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to seek, search for, hunt about for.
<LEND>

<L>27773<pc>0546-c<k1>parimfgyamARa<k2>parimfgyamARa
{%Pari-mṛgyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being sought for.
<LEND>

<L>27774<pc>0546-c<k1>parimfj<k2>parimfj<h>1
{#parimfj#} 1¦. {%pari-mṛj,%} cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi,%}
{%mārjitum, -mārṣṭum,%} to wipe all round, wipe away,
wash, wash away, rinse (the mouth), clean, cleanse,
purify; to rub, polish; to wipe off, remove by rub-
bing, efface, remove; to touch lightly, touch, stroke:
Intens. {%-marmṛjyate,%} Ved. to sweep over; (Sāy.
{%= tejasā chad,%} to cover with radiance.)
<LEND>

<L>27775<pc>0546-c<k1>parimArga<k2>parimArga<h>2
2. {%pari-mārga, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see under {%pari-%}
{%mārg,%} col. 2), wiping off, cleaning; friction, touch.
<LEND>

<L>27776<pc>0546-c<k1>parimArgya<k2>parimArgya
{%Pari-mārgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cleaned or cleansed,
to be rubbed.
<LEND>

<L>27777<pc>0546-c<k1>parimArja<k2>parimArja
{%Pari-mārja, as, ā, am,%}¦ wiping off, cleaning,
washing; stroking, rubbing.
<LEND>

<L>27778<pc>0546-c<k1>parimArjana<k2>parimArjana
{%Pari-mārjana, am,%}¦ n. wiping off, cleaning; a
dish of honey and oil.
<LEND>

<L>27779<pc>0546-c<k1>parimfj<k2>parimfj<h>2
2. {%pari-mṛj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ or {%pari-mṛja, as, ā, am,%}
wiping or washing off, cleaning.
<LEND>

<L>27780<pc>0546-c<k1>parimfjya<k2>parimfjya<h>1
1. {%pari-mṛjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be wiped, to be
cleansed; to be touched.
<LEND>

<L>27781<pc>0546-c<k1>parimfjya<k2>parimfjya<h>2
2. {%pari-mṛjya,%}¦ ind. having wiped away, having
washed the mouth; having polished; having stroked.
<LEND>

<L>27782<pc>0546-c<k1>parimfzwa<k2>parimfzwa<h>1
1. {%pari-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wiped away, washed,
[Page0547-a+ 74]
cleaned, purified; rubbed, stroked. {%—Parimṛṣṭa-%}
{%paricchada, as, ā, am,%} trim, neat, spruce.
<LEND>

<L>27783<pc>0547-a<k1>parimfd<k2>parimfd
{#parimfd#}¦ {%pari-mṛd,%} cl. 9. P. {%-mṛdnāti, -mar-%}
{%ditum,%} to tread or trample down, crush, rub, grind;
to wear down, wear out; to rub off, wipe away (as
tears); to rub, stroke; cl. 1. P. {%-mardati, -mar-%}
{%ditum,%} to excel, surpass.
<LEND>

<L>27784<pc>0547-a<k1>parimarda<k2>parimarda
{%Pari-marda, as,%}¦ m. crushing, grinding, wearing
out; using up, consuming; destroying, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>27785<pc>0547-a<k1>parimardana<k2>parimardana
{%Pari-mardana, am,%}¦ n. rubbing, grinding; tram-
pling, destroying; embracing, pressing.
<LEND>

<L>27786<pc>0547-a<k1>parimfdita<k2>parimfdita
{%Pari-mṛdita, as, ā, am,%}¦ trodden or trampled
down; crushed, rubbed, ground; embraced, clasped.
<LEND>

<L>27787<pc>0547-a<k1>parimfdnat<k2>parimfdnat
{%Pari-mṛdnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ trampling down,
crushing; rubbing; wiping away.
<LEND>

<L>27788<pc>0547-a<k1>parimfS<k2>parimfS
{#parimfS#}¦ {%pari-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati, -marṣ-%}
{%ṭum, -mraṣṭum,%} to touch, handle, stroke, caress;
to grasp, seize; to examine, consider, reflect, ponder;
to investigate, inquire into, question; to observe,
discover: Intens. {%-marmarṣṭi,%} Ved. to encompass,
clasp, embrace.
<LEND>

<L>27789<pc>0547-a<k1>parimarSa<k2>parimarSa
{%Pari-marśa, as,%}¦ m. friction; contact; consider-
ation, reflection, examination.
<LEND>

<L>27790<pc>0547-a<k1>parimfSya<k2>parimfSya
{%Pari-mṛśya,%}¦ ind. having touched or handled;
having grasped; having examined or pondered;
having found or observed.
<LEND>

<L>27791<pc>0547-a<k1>parimfSyamAna<k2>parimfSyamAna
{%Pari-mṛśyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being touched;
being fanned (by the wind).
<LEND>

<L>27792<pc>0547-a<k1>parimfzwa<k2>parimfzwa<h>2
2. {%pari-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed, touched;
embraced, clasped; invested; spread; pervaded.
<LEND>

<L>27793<pc>0547-a<k1>parimfz<k2>parimfz
{#parimfz#}¦ {%pari-mṛṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-mṛṣyati,%}
{%-marṣitum,%} to be angry or incensed against (with
dat.); to envy.
<LEND>

<L>27794<pc>0547-a<k1>parimarza<k2>parimarza
{%Pari-marṣa, as,%}¦ m. envy, dislike, anger.
<LEND>

<L>27795<pc>0547-a<k1>parimfzyat<k2>parimfzyat
{%Pari-mṛṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ angry, incensed,
envying; (according to a Scholiast {%= asūyat.%})
<LEND>

<L>27796<pc>0547-a<k1>parimokz<k2>parimokz
{#parimokz#}¦ {%pari-mokṣ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-mokṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to set free, liberate, let go, discharge.
<LEND>

<L>27797<pc>0547-a<k1>parimokza<k2>parimokza
{%Pari-mokṣa, as,%}¦ m. setting free, liberating; libe-
ration, deliverance; escape; emptying, evacuation.
<LEND>

<L>27798<pc>0547-a<k1>parimokzaRa<k2>parimokzaRa
{%Pari-mokṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. liberation, deliverance
from (with gen.); untying.
<LEND>

<L>27799<pc>0547-a<k1>parimokzya<k2>parimokzya
{%Pari-mokṣya,%}¦ ind. having let go or released.
<LEND>

<L>27800<pc>0547-a<k1>parimowana<k2>parimowana
{#parimowana#}¦ {%pari-moṭana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%muṭ%}
with {%pari%}), Ved. snapping, cracking; (according to
a Scholiast {%= catācatā-śabda.%})
<LEND>

<L>27801<pc>0547-a<k1>parimlE<k2>parimlE
{#parimlE#}¦ {%pari-mlai,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-mlāyati,%}
{%-te, -mlātum,%} to fade or wither away; to wane; to
disappear; to faint.
<LEND>

<L>27802<pc>0547-a<k1>parimlAna<k2>parimlAna
{%Pari-mlāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ faded, withered, fainted,
fainting; languid; waned; diminished, impaired;
soiled, stained; ({%am%}), n. change of countenance by
fear or grief; soil, stain.
<LEND>

<L>27803<pc>0547-a<k1>parimlAyin<k2>parimlAyin
{%Pari-mlāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fading away; stained,
spotted; ({%ī%}), m., scil. {%liṅga-nāśa,%} a kind of disease
of the lens or pupil of the eye. {%—Parimlāyi-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. fading away, sinking.
<LEND>

<L>27804<pc>0547-a<k1>pariyajYa<k2>pariyajYa
{#pariyajYa#}¦ {%pari-yajña, as,%} m., Ved. a secon-
dary or accompanying rite, one which precedes or
follows another in any ritual; ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved.
constituting an accompanying or secondary rite.
<LEND>

<L>27805<pc>0547-a<k1>pariyatta<k2>pariyatta
{#pariyatta#}¦ {%pari-yatta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%yat%}
with {%pari%}), Ved. surrounded.
<LEND>

<L>27806<pc>0547-a<k1>pariyam<k2>pariyam
{#pariyam#}¦ {%pari-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati, -yan-%}
{%tum,%} to restrain: Caus. {%-yamayati, -yitum,%} to serve.
<LEND>

<L>27807<pc>0547-a<k1>pariyA<k2>pariyA
{#pariyA#}¦ {%pari-yā,%} Caus. P. {%-yāpayati, -yitum,%}
to go round, wait upon (?), circumambulate (as a mark
of respect); to protect (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>27808<pc>0547-a<k1>pariyogya<k2>pariyogya
{#pariyogya#}¦ {%pari-yogya, ās,%}  m. pl., N. of a
school.
<LEND>

<L>27809<pc>0547-a<k1>parirakz<k2>parirakz
{#parirakz#}¦ {%pari-rakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rakṣati,%}
{%-rakṣitum,%} to rescue, save, preserve; to guard well
or completely, protect; to govern, restrain; to keep,
conceal, keep secret.
<LEND>
[Page0547-b+ 73]

<L>27810<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzaka<k2>parirakzaka
{%Pari-rakṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ guarding, protect-
ing; a guardian, protector, keeper.
<LEND>

<L>27811<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzaRa<k2>parirakzaRa
{%Pari-rakṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ guarding, protecting,
a protector; ({%am%}), n. the act of guarding, defending,
preserving, preservation, keeping, protecting, pro-
tection, deliverance; saving, rescuing; maintaining;
care, caution.
<LEND>

<L>27812<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzaRIya<k2>parirakzaRIya
{%Pari-rakṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be completely
protected or preserved.
<LEND>

<L>27813<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzA<k2>parirakzA
{%Pari-rakṣā,%}¦ f. protection, preservation, keeping,
guarding.
<LEND>

<L>27814<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzita<k2>parirakzita
{%Pari-rakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ well guarded, well
preserved, well kept.
<LEND>

<L>27815<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzitavya<k2>parirakzitavya
{%Pari-rakṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be protected
or guarded, to be kept secret.
<LEND>

<L>27816<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzitin<k2>parirakzitin
{%Pari-rakṣitin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ keeping, guarding,
protecting (with loc., Gaṇa to Pāṇ. V. 2, 88).
<LEND>

<L>27817<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzitf<k2>parirakzitf
{%Pari-rakṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a protector, guardian;
keeping; protecting, &c.
<LEND>

<L>27818<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzin<k2>parirakzin
{%Pari-rakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ guarding, protecting,
defending; a defender.
<LEND>

<L>27819<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzya<k2>parirakzya
{%Pari-rakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be guarded or pre-
served, to be protected, to be kept secret.
<LEND>

<L>27820<pc>0547-b<k1>parirakzyamARa<k2>parirakzyamARa
{%Pari-rakṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being completely
defended.
<LEND>

<L>27821<pc>0547-b<k1>parirawana<k2>parirawana
{#parirawana#}¦ {%pari-raṭana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%raṭ%}
with {%pari%}) , crying, crying aloud.
<LEND>

<L>27822<pc>0547-b<k1>parirAwin<k2>parirAwin
{%Pari-rāṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crying, crying aloud,
screaming.
<LEND>

<L>27823<pc>0547-b<k1>pariraTya<k2>pariraTya
{#pariraTya#}¦ {%pari-rathya, am,%} n., Ved. or {%pari-%}
{%rathyā,%} f. a particular part of a chariot.
<LEND>

<L>27824<pc>0547-b<k1>pariranDita<k2>pariranDita
{#pariranDita#}¦ {%pari-randhita, as, ā, am,%} injured,
destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>27825<pc>0547-b<k1>pariraB<k2>pariraB
{#pariraB#}¦ {%pari-rabh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rabhate, -rab-%}
{%dhum,%} to embrace, clasp: Desid. A. {%-ripsate,%} to
wish or desire to embrace.
<LEND>

<L>27826<pc>0547-b<k1>parirabDa<k2>parirabDa
{%Pari-rabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ embraced, clasped,
encircled.
<LEND>

<L>27827<pc>0547-b<k1>pariraBamARa<k2>pariraBamARa
{%Pari-rabhamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ embracing.
<LEND>

<L>27828<pc>0547-b<k1>pariraByamARa<k2>pariraByamARa
{%Pari-rabhyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being embraced.
<LEND>

<L>27829<pc>0547-b<k1>pariramBa<k2>pariramBa
{%Pari-rambha, as,%}¦ m. embracing, an embrace.
<LEND>

<L>27830<pc>0547-b<k1>pariramBaRa<k2>pariramBaRa
{%Pari-rambhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. embracing, clasping.
<LEND>

<L>27831<pc>0547-b<k1>pariramBin<k2>pariramBin
{%Pari-rambhin, ī, iṇī, i%}¦ (at the end of a comp.),
clasped, girded, girt.
<LEND>

<L>27832<pc>0547-b<k1>pariripsamAna<k2>pariripsamAna
{%Pari-ripsamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing or trying
to embrace.
<LEND>

<L>27833<pc>0547-b<k1>pariram<k2>pariram
{#pariram#}¦ {%pari-ram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ramati, -rantum,%}
to be delighted.
<LEND>

<L>27834<pc>0547-b<k1>parirAj<k2>parirAj
{#parirAj#}¦ {%pari-rāj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-rājati, -te,%}
{%rājitum,%} to shine on all sides, be very resplendent.
<LEND>

<L>27835<pc>0547-b<k1>parirAwin<k2>parirAwin
{#parirAwin#}¦ {%pari-rāṭin.%} See {%pari-raṭana.%}
<LEND>

<L>27836<pc>0547-b<k1>parirAp<k2>parirAp
{#parirAp#}¦ {%pari-rāp, p, p, p%} (fr. rt. {%rap%} with
{%pari%}), Ved. crying or talking all round, a reviler
(Sāy. {%= pari-vadat, nindaka%}); ({%p%}), m. epithet of a
demon.
<LEND>

<L>27837<pc>0547-b<k1>parirApin<k2>parirApin
{%Pari-rāpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. whispering to, talking
over, persuading.
<LEND>

<L>27838<pc>0547-b<k1>pariroDa<k2>pariroDa
{#pariroDa#}¦ {%pari-rodha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%rudh%}
with {%pari%}), obstructing, keeping back, resistance.
<LEND>

<L>27839<pc>0547-b<k1>parila<k2>parila
{#parila#}¦ {%parila, as,%} m., N. of a man; [cf.
{%pārila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27840<pc>0547-b<k1>parilaGu<k2>parilaGu
{#parilaGu#}¦ {%pari-laghu, us, us, u,%} very light,
easy to digest.
<LEND>

<L>27841<pc>0547-b<k1>parilaNG<k2>parilaNG
{#parilaNG#}¦ {%pari-laṅgh,%} cl. 10. P. {%-laṅghayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to overleap, transgress, overstep.
<LEND>

<L>27842<pc>0547-b<k1>parilaNGana<k2>parilaNGana
{%Pari-laṅghana, am,%}¦ n. jumping or leaping to
and fro, jumping over.
<LEND>

<L>27843<pc>0547-b<k1>parilih<k2>parilih
{#parilih#}¦ {%pari-lih,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-leḍhi, -līḍhe,%}
{%-leḍhum,%} to lick all round, lick over, lick: Intens.
{%-lelihyate, -leleḍhi,%} to lick all round, lick repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>27844<pc>0547-b<k1>parilIQa<k2>parilIQa
{%Pari-līḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ licked all round, licked over.
<LEND>

<L>27845<pc>0547-b<k1>parilehin<k2>parilehin
{%Pari-lehin, ī,%}¦ m. a particular disease of the ear.
<LEND>

<L>27846<pc>0547-b<k1>parilup<k2>parilup
{#parilup#}¦ {%pari-lup,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-lumpati, %}
[Page0547-c+ 72]
{%te, -loptum,%} to interrupt, break through, disturb;
to suspend, diminish; to dispel.
<LEND>

<L>27847<pc>0547-c<k1>parilupta<k2>parilupta
{%Pari-lupta, as, ā, am,%}¦ interrupted, disturbed,
diminished, injured, lost. {%—Parilupta-sañjña, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one whose consciousness is suspended, un-
conscious, senseless.
<LEND>

<L>27848<pc>0547-c<k1>parilupyamAna<k2>parilupyamAna
{%Pari-lupyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being interrupted.
<LEND>

<L>27849<pc>0547-c<k1>parilopa<k2>parilopa
{%Pari-lopa, as,%}¦ m. injury; neglect, omission.
<LEND>

<L>27850<pc>0547-c<k1>pariluB<k2>pariluB
{#pariluB#}¦ {%pari-lubh,%} Caus. A. {%-lobhayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to entice, allure.
<LEND>

<L>27851<pc>0547-c<k1>parileKa<k2>parileKa
{#parileKa#}¦ {%pari-lekha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%likh%} with
{%pari%}), outline, delineation, sketch, figure, picture.
{%—Parilekhādhikāra (˚kha-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘section
on delineation,’ N. of the sixth chapter of the Sūrya-
siddhānta.
<LEND>

<L>27852<pc>0547-c<k1>parileKana<k2>parileKana
{%Pari-lekhana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. drawing lines round
about.
<LEND>

<L>27853<pc>0547-c<k1>parivakrA<k2>parivakrA
{#parivakrA#}¦ {%pari-vakrā,%} f., Ved. a circular
pit; (according to a Scholiast) N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>27854<pc>0547-c<k1>parivaYc<k2>parivaYc
{#parivaYc#}¦ {%pari-vañc,%} Caus. P. {%-vañcayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to deceive.
<LEND>

<L>27855<pc>0547-c<k1>parivaYcita<k2>parivaYcita
{%Pari-vañcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ deceived.
<LEND>

<L>27856<pc>0547-c<k1>parivatsaka<k2>parivatsaka
{#parivatsaka#}¦ {%pari-vatsaka, ās,%} m. pl. (fr.
{%vatsa%} with {%pari%}), N. of the descendants of Vatsa.
<LEND>

<L>27857<pc>0547-c<k1>parivatsara<k2>parivatsara
{#parivatsara#}¦ {%pari-vatsara, as,%} m. a full year,
a year; the second of a cycle of five years.
<LEND>

<L>27858<pc>0547-c<k1>parivatsarIRa<k2>parivatsarIRa
{%Pari-vatsarīṇa%}¦ or {%pari-vatsarīya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. relating to a full year; lasting a whole year.
<LEND>

<L>27859<pc>0547-c<k1>parivad<k2>parivad
{#parivad#}¦ {%pari-vad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vadati, -te,%}
{%-vaditum,%} to speak ill of, revile, calumniate, slander,
accuse.
<LEND>

<L>27860<pc>0547-c<k1>parivadat<k2>parivadat
{%Pari-vadat, an, antī, at,%}¦ speaking ill of, reviling,
slandering.
<LEND>

<L>27861<pc>0547-c<k1>parivadana<k2>parivadana
{%Pari-vadana, am,%}¦ n. reviling, accusing; crying
out, clamouring, screaming.
<LEND>

<L>27862<pc>0547-c<k1>parivAda<k2>parivAda
{%Pari-vāda, as,%}¦ m. abuse, reproach, reproof, cen-
sure, detraction; charge, accusation; an instrument
with which the Indian lute is played.
<LEND>

<L>27863<pc>0547-c<k1>parivAdaka<k2>parivAdaka
{%Pari-vādaka, as,%}¦ m. a complainant, accuser, plain-
tiff, calumniator; one who plays on the lute.
<LEND>

<L>27864<pc>0547-c<k1>parivAdin<k2>parivAdin
{%Pari-vādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ speaking ill of, reviling,
abusing, slandering, blaming; an accuser; calling
out, crying, screaming; censured, abused; ({%ī%}), m.
an accuser, plaintiff, reprover; ({%inī%}), f. a Vīṇā or
lute of seven strings.
<LEND>

<L>27865<pc>0547-c<k1>parivarta<k2>parivarta
{#parivarta#}¦ {%pari-varta.%} See p. 548, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>27866<pc>0547-c<k1>parivarDita<k2>parivarDita<h>1
{#parivarDita#} 1¦. {%pari-vardhita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%vardh,%} to cut, with {%pari;%} for 2. see under {%pari-%}
{%vṛdh,%} p. 548, col. 3), cut excavated.
<LEND>

<L>27867<pc>0547-c<k1>parivarman<k2>parivarman
{#parivarman#}¦ {%pari-varman, ā, ā, a,%} wearing a
coat of mail, clad in mail, armed.
<LEND>

<L>27868<pc>0547-c<k1>parivarha<k2>parivarha
{#parivarha#}¦ {%pari-varha, pari-varhaṇa.%} See
{%pari-barha, pari-barhaṇa,%} p. 545, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27869<pc>0547-c<k1>parivas<k2>parivas
{#parivas#}¦ {%pari-vas%} (see rt. 4. {%vas%}), cl. 10. P.
{%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to split, cut through.
<LEND>

<L>27870<pc>0547-c<k1>parivAsana<k2>parivAsana
{%Pari-vāsana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a shred, chip.
<LEND>

<L>27871<pc>0547-c<k1>parivasaTa<k2>parivasaTa
{#parivasaTa#}¦ {%pari-vasatha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 6.
{%vas%} with {%pari%}), a village.
<LEND>

<L>27872<pc>0547-c<k1>parivAsa<k2>parivAsa
{%Pari-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. abode, residence, stay, sojourn;
[cf. {%kāla-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27873<pc>0547-c<k1>parivAsita<k2>parivAsita
{%Pari-vāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ respectfully attentive to
superiors (?).
<LEND>

<L>27874<pc>0547-c<k1>parivah<k2>parivah
{#parivah#}¦ {%pari-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vahati, -te,%}
{%-voḍhum,%} to carry round, carry about.
<LEND>

<L>27875<pc>0547-c<k1>parivaha<k2>parivaha
{%Pari-vaha, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of the seven winds;
one of the seven tongues of fire.
<LEND>

<L>27876<pc>0547-c<k1>parivAha<k2>parivAha
{%Pari-vāha, as,%}¦ m. the overflowing of a tank, an
inundation, overflow natural or artificial; a water-
course or drain to carry off excess of water; [cf.
{%parī-vāha.%}] {%—Parivāha-vat, ān,%} m. ‘having a
channel,’ a tank, pool.
<LEND>

<L>27877<pc>0547-c<k1>parivAhita<k2>parivAhita
{%Pari-vāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ drained.
<LEND>
[Page0548-a+ 72]

<L>27878<pc>0548-a<k1>parivAhin<k2>parivAhin
{%Pari-vāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ overflowing, swimming
with.
<LEND>

<L>27879<pc>0548-a<k1>parivApa<k2>parivApa
{#parivApa#}¦ {%pari-vāpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vap%} with
{%pari%}), fried grains of rice; coagulated or thick sour
milk ({%= dadhi,%} Ved.); furniture; a train, retinue;
sowing; a reservoir, pool, pond, piece of water;
shaving, shearing.
<LEND>

<L>27880<pc>0548-a<k1>parivApaRa<k2>parivApaRa
{%Pari-vāpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. shaving, shearing.
<LEND>

<L>27881<pc>0548-a<k1>parivApita<k2>parivApita
{%Pari-vāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaven, shorn.
<LEND>

<L>27882<pc>0548-a<k1>parivApya<k2>parivApya
{%Pari-vāpya%}¦ or {%parī-vāpya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having or requiring or deserving fried grains of rice
or thickened milk.
<LEND>

<L>27883<pc>0548-a<k1>parivAra<k2>parivAra
{#parivAra#}¦ {%pari-vāra, pari-vāraṇa.%} See under
{%pari-vṛ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>27884<pc>0548-a<k1>parivAsas<k2>parivAsas
{#parivAsas#}¦ {%pari-vāsas, as,%} n., Ved. (pro-
bably) an upper garment; {%Aṅgirasām abhivāsaḥ-%}
{%parivāsasī,%} N. of two Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>27885<pc>0548-a<k1>pariviMSat<k2>pariviMSat
{#pariviMSat#}¦ {%pari-viṃśat, t,%} f. quite twenty,
full twenty, twenty at least.
<LEND>

<L>27886<pc>0548-a<k1>parivikrayin<k2>parivikrayin
{#parivikrayin#}¦ {%pari-vikrayin, ī, iṇī, i%} (fr. rt.
1. {%krī%} with {%pari-vi%}), selling or trading in (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>27887<pc>0548-a<k1>parivikzata<k2>parivikzata
{#parivikzata#}¦ {%pari-vikṣata, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%kṣan%} with {%pari-vi%}), sorely wounded, much hurt.
<LEND>

<L>27888<pc>0548-a<k1>parivikzoBa<k2>parivikzoBa
{#parivikzoBa#}¦ {%pari-vikṣobha, as,%} m. (fr. rt.
1. {%kṣubh%} with {%pari-vi%}), shaking violently, de-
stroying.
<LEND>

<L>27889<pc>0548-a<k1>parivicar<k2>parivicar
{#parivicar#}¦ {%pari-vi-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati,%}
{%-caritum,%} Ved. to stream forth in all directions.
<LEND>

<L>27890<pc>0548-a<k1>parivid<k2>parivid
{#parivid#}¦ {%pari-vid,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vetti, -veda,%}
{%-veditum,%} Ved. to know thoroughly, understand
fully; cl. 6. P. A. {%-vindati, -te, -veditum, -vettum,%}
to marry before an elder brother.
<LEND>

<L>27891<pc>0548-a<k1>pariviRRa<k2>pariviRRa
{%Pari-viṇṇa%}¦ or {%pari-vitta%} or {%pari-vitti, is,%} m.
an unmarried elder brother whose younger brother
is married. {%—Parivitti-tā,%} f. the marrying of a
younger brother before the elder.
<LEND>

<L>27892<pc>0548-a<k1>parivindaka<k2>parivindaka
{%Pari-vindaka, as,%}¦ m. a younger brother married
before the elder.
<LEND>

<L>27893<pc>0548-a<k1>parivindat<k2>parivindat
{%Pari-vindat, an,%}¦ m. an unmarried elder brother.
<LEND>

<L>27894<pc>0548-a<k1>parivividAna<k2>parivividAna
{%Pari-vividāna, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a married man
whose elder brother is still unmarried.
<LEND>

<L>27895<pc>0548-a<k1>parivettf<k2>parivettf
{%Pari-vettṛ, tā,%}¦ m. or {%pari-vedaka, as,%} m. a
younger brother married before the elder.
<LEND>

<L>27896<pc>0548-a<k1>pariveda<k2>pariveda
{%Pari-veda, as,%}¦ m. complete or accurate knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>27897<pc>0548-a<k1>parivedana<k2>parivedana<h>1
1. {%pari-vedana, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see p. 549, col. 1),
complete or accurate knowledge; discussion; anguish,
pain, misery; the marrying of a younger brother
before the elder; marriage; laying the fire on the
sacrificial fire-place; gain, acquisition; ({%ā%}), f. shrewd-
ness, wit; foresight, prudence.
<LEND>

<L>27898<pc>0548-a<k1>parivedanIyA<k2>parivedanIyA
{%Pari-vedanīyā%}¦ or {%pari-vedinī,%} f. the wife of a
younger brother who has married before the elder.
<LEND>

<L>27899<pc>0548-a<k1>parivedin<k2>parivedin
{%Pari-vedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ knowing, shrewd.
<LEND>

<L>27900<pc>0548-a<k1>parividDa<k2>parividDa
{#parividDa#}¦ {%pari-viddha, as,%} m. (perhaps fr.
{%pari-vyadh%}), an epithet of Kuvera; [cf. {%para-%}
{%viddha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27901<pc>0548-a<k1>pariviS<k2>pariviS
{#pariviS#}¦ {%pari-viś%} (often confounded with
{%pari-viṣ%} below), Caus. {%-veśayati, -yitum,%} to pro-
vide; to offer, present, (probably for {%pari-viṣ,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>27902<pc>0548-a<k1>pariveSas<k2>pariveSas
{%Pari-veśas, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>27903<pc>0548-a<k1>pariviSvas<k2>pariviSvas
{#pariviSvas#}¦ {%pari-vi-śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śvasiti,%}
{%-śvasitum,%} to confide completely, feel secure, be
fearless: Caus. {%-śvāsayati, -yitum,%} to comfort,
console.
<LEND>

<L>27904<pc>0548-a<k1>pariSvasta<k2>pariSvasta
{%Pari-śvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ feeling secure, confident.
<LEND>

<L>27905<pc>0548-a<k1>pariviz<k2>pariviz
{#pariviz#}¦ {%pari-viṣ,%} Caus. P. {%-veṣayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to surround; to present, offer, offer food;
to wait on; (sometimes erroneously written {%pari-%}
{%viś,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>27906<pc>0548-a<k1>parivizwa<k2>parivizwa
{%Pari-viṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, enclosed;
offered, presented.
<LEND>

<L>27907<pc>0548-a<k1>parivizwi<k2>parivizwi
{%Pari-viṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. service, attendance.
<LEND>
[Page0548-b+ 77]

<L>27908<pc>0548-b<k1>pariveza<k2>pariveza
{%Pari-veṣa, as,%}¦ m. (sometimes wrongly spelt
{%pari-veśa%}), preparation (of food); attendance, wait-
ing at meals, distributing food, serving up meals; a
circle, circlet, wreath, crown; the circumference of
a circle; the disk of the sun or moon; a halo round
the sun or moon; anything surrounding or protecting
(e. g. {%kṛtāṅgarakṣā-p˚,%} surrounded by a body-
guard); putting on, clothing, dressing. {%—Pariveṣa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a halo, surrounded by a halo.
<LEND>

<L>27909<pc>0548-b<k1>parivezaka<k2>parivezaka
{%Pari-veṣaka, as,%}¦ m. (sometimes wrongly {%pari-%}
{%veśaka%}), an attendant, waiter, one who serves up
meals.
<LEND>

<L>27910<pc>0548-b<k1>parivezaRa<k2>parivezaRa
{%Pari-veṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. attendance, waiting, serving
up meals, distributing food; surrounding, enclosing;
circumference; a halo round the sun or moon.
<LEND>

<L>27911<pc>0548-b<k1>parivezin<k2>parivezin
{%Pari-veṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ surrounded by a halo.
<LEND>

<L>27912<pc>0548-b<k1>parivezwavya<k2>parivezwavya
{%Pari-veṣṭavya%}¦ or {%pari-veṣya, as, ā, am,%} to
be served up; to be offered or presented.
<LEND>

<L>27913<pc>0548-b<k1>parivezwf<k2>parivezwf
{%Pari-veṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ a waiter; one who
serves up meals.
<LEND>

<L>27914<pc>0548-b<k1>parivizRu<k2>parivizRu
{#parivizRu#}¦ {%pari-viṣṇu,%} ind. {%= sarvato Viṣ-%}
{%ṇuḥ.%}
<LEND>

<L>27915<pc>0548-b<k1>parivihAra<k2>parivihAra
{#parivihAra#}¦ {%pari-vihāra, as,%} m. walking or
roaming about, walking for pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>27916<pc>0548-b<k1>parivihvala<k2>parivihvala
{#parivihvala#}¦ {%pari-vihvala, as, ā, am,%} ex-
tremely agitated, bewildered, beside one's self. {%—Pa-%}
{%rivihvala-tā,%} f. bewilderment.
<LEND>

<L>27917<pc>0548-b<k1>parivI<k2>parivI
{#parivI#}¦ {%pari-vī, pari-vīta.%} See under
{%pari-vye,%} p. 549, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27918<pc>0548-b<k1>parivf<k2>parivf
{#parivf#}¦ {%pari-vṛ,%} cl. 5. 9. 1. P. A. {%-vṛṇoti,%}
{%-ṇute, -vṛṇāti, -ṇīte, -varati, -te, -varitum, -va-%}
{%rītum,%} to surround, conceal: Caus. {%-vārayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to surround, cover, clothe.
<LEND>

<L>27919<pc>0548-b<k1>parivAra<k2>parivAra
{%Pari-vāra, as,%}¦ m. (also spelt {%parī-vāra%}), a cover,
covering; surroundings, train, suite, retinue, attend-
ants, dependants, subjects, followers; a sheath, scab-
bard. {%—Parivāra-tā,%} f. subjection, dependance. {%—Pa-%}
{%rivāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a great retinue.
{%—Parivāra-śobhin, ī, inī, i,%} rendered illustrious
by a retinue.
<LEND>

<L>27920<pc>0548-b<k1>parivAraRa<k2>parivAraRa
{%Pari-vāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. a cover, covering, envelope;
a train, retinue; keeping or warding off.
<LEND>

<L>27921<pc>0548-b<k1>parivArita<k2>parivArita
{%Pari-vārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ encompassed, surrounded,
encircled, enclosed, begirt.
<LEND>

<L>27922<pc>0548-b<k1>parivArya<k2>parivArya
{%Pari-vārya,%}¦ ind. having surrounded or encompassed.
<LEND>

<L>27923<pc>0548-b<k1>parivfta<k2>parivfta
{%Pari-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ encompassed, surrounded,
encircled, attended, invested; concealed; overspread,
pervaded; entirely gained or received; known;
({%am%}), n., Ved. a covered place or shed enclosed
with walls used as a place of sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>27924<pc>0548-b<k1>parivfti<k2>parivfti
{%Pari-vṛti, is,%}¦ f. surrounding, standing round.
<LEND>

<L>27925<pc>0548-b<k1>parivfMh<k2>parivfMh
{#parivfMh#}¦ {%pari-vṛṃh%} or {%pari-vṛh,%} also written
{%pari-bṛṃh%} or {%pari-bṛh,%} q. v., p. 545, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27926<pc>0548-b<k1>parivfMhaRa<k2>parivfMhaRa
{%Pari-vṛṃhaṇa.%}¦ See {%pari-bṛṃhaṇa,%} p. 545.
<LEND>

<L>27927<pc>0548-b<k1>parivfMhita<k2>parivfMhita
{%Pari-vṛṃhita%}¦ or {%pari-vṛhita.%} See {%pari-bṛṃ-%}
{%hita,%} p. 545, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>27928<pc>0548-b<k1>parivfQa<k2>parivfQa
{%Pari-vṛḍha, as,%}¦ m. a master, owner, &c. See
{%pari-bṛḍha,%} p. 545, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>27929<pc>0548-b<k1>parivraQiman<k2>parivraQiman
{%Pari-vraḍhiman, ā,%}¦ m. mastery, superiority.
<LEND>

<L>27930<pc>0548-b<k1>parivfj<k2>parivfj<h>1
{#parivfj#} 1¦. {%pari-vṛj,%} cl. 7. 1. P. {%-vṛṇakti,%}
{%-varjati, -varjitum,%} to leave, forsake, abandon,
shun, avoid, quit, cease, leave off: Caus. {%-varjayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to avoid, shun.
<LEND>

<L>27931<pc>0548-b<k1>parivarga<k2>parivarga
{%Pari-varga, as,%}¦ m., Ved. shunning, avoiding,
removing, discomfiting; {%a-parivargam,%} ind. without
omission, without intermission, completely.
<LEND>

<L>27932<pc>0548-b<k1>parivargya<k2>parivargya
{%Pari-vargya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be avoided.
<LEND>

<L>27933<pc>0548-b<k1>parivarjaka<k2>parivarjaka
{%Pari-varjaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ shunning, avoiding;
giving up, resigning, abstaining from.
<LEND>

<L>27934<pc>0548-b<k1>parivarjana<k2>parivarjana
{%Pari-varjana, am,%}¦ n. avoiding, shunning, giving
up, resigning, quitting; abstaining from; killing,
slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>27935<pc>0548-b<k1>parivarjanIya<k2>parivarjanIya
{%Pari-varjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ avoidable, to be
avoided.
<LEND>

<L>27936<pc>0548-b<k1>parivarjita<k2>parivarjita
{%Pari-varjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ abandoned, shunned;
deprived or devoid of.
<LEND>

<L>27937<pc>0548-b<k1>parivfkta<k2>parivfkta
{%Pari-vṛkta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. avoided, disliked,
[Page0548-c+ 79]
despised; ({%ā%} and {%ī%}), f. ‘the disliked or despised one,’
epithet of a wife lightly esteemed in comparison
with the favourite wife ({%mahiṣī, vāvātā%}).
<LEND>

<L>27938<pc>0548-c<k1>parivfj<k2>parivfj<h>2
2. {%pari-vṛj, k,%}¦ f., Ved. avoiding, removing, (Sāy.
{%= paritaḥ sva-sthāna-tyāga%}); purification, expi-
ation.
<LEND>

<L>27939<pc>0548-c<k1>parivft<k2>parivft
{#parivft#}¦ {%pari-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. (also P. in Fut.,
Cond., and Aor.), to turn round, roll or wheel
round, revolve; to be whirled; to hasten to and
fro, roam or wander about; to change (e. g. {%kṣa-%}
{%ṇena tat parivartate 'nyathā,%} that changes or turns
out to be different in a moment); to interchange;
to become, to be: Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to
exchange.
<LEND>

<L>27940<pc>0548-c<k1>parivarta<k2>parivarta
{%Pari-varta, as,%}¦ m. revolving, revolution (of a
planet &c.); a period or lapse or expiration of time,
especially of a Yuga (e. g. {%lokānām parivarte,%} at
the end of the world); a year; going or turning
back, flight, retreat, desertion; transmigration, re-
peated birth; change, exchange, barter (e. g. {%anna-%}
{%parivarta,%} change of diet; {%samudra-parivarta,%}
exchange of sealed goods); requital, return; a
chapter, section, book, canto; an abode, spot, place;
N. of one of the eight sons of Duḥ-saha (son of
Mṛtyu); N. of a king of the tortoises or the
tortoise incarnation.
<LEND>

<L>27941<pc>0548-c<k1>parivartaka<k2>parivartaka
{%Pari-vartaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ turning round, turning
back; causing to turn round or flow back; causing
to revolve; bringing to a close; requiting, exchanging;
leaving off a thing begun for some other object;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Duḥ-saha.
<LEND>

<L>27942<pc>0548-c<k1>parivartana<k2>parivartana
{%Pari-vartana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to turn round;
({%ī%}), f. epithet of a particular magical art; ({%am%}), n.
cutting, clipping (the hair, Ved.); (according to a
Scholiast) {%= preraṇa%} (Ved.); turning round, going
round, turning back, returning; moving to and fro;
whirling round, revolving; revolution, end of a
period of time; inverting, taking or putting anything
in a wrong direction; change, exchange, barter;
requital, return.
<LEND>

<L>27943<pc>0548-c<k1>parivartanIya<k2>parivartanIya
{%Pari-vartanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be exchanged,
capable of being exchanged.
<LEND>

<L>27944<pc>0548-c<k1>parivartikA<k2>parivartikA
{%Pari-vartikā,%}¦ f. contraction of the prepuce, phi-
mosis.
<LEND>

<L>27945<pc>0548-c<k1>parivartita<k2>parivartita
{%Pari-vartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned round, revolved;
returned, retreated; taken or put on in a wrong
direction; exchanged.
<LEND>

<L>27946<pc>0548-c<k1>parivartin<k2>parivartin
{%Pari-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ moving round, going
round, revolving; circling, going in a circle, being
constantly renewed, ever recurring; changing, passing
into; being or remaining or staying in a place or
near a person (e. g. {%Sugrīva-parivartin,%} being
about, i. e. in attendance on Su-grīva); flying, re-
treating; exchanging, requiting, recompensing; ({%inī%}),
f., scil. {%viṣṭuti,%} a hymn arranged according to the
recurring form <nsi>abc, abc, abc.</nsi>
<LEND>

<L>27947<pc>0548-c<k1>parivartman<k2>parivartman
{%Pari-vartman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. going or extending
round.
<LEND>

<L>27948<pc>0548-c<k1>parivftta<k2>parivftta
{%Pari-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ revolved, gone round;
turned back, retreated, retired, returned; exchanged,
bartered; finished, ended; ({%am%}), n. an embrace.
{%—Parivṛttārdha-mukha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ī, am,%}
having the face half turned round.
<LEND>

<L>27949<pc>0548-c<k1>parivftti<k2>parivftti
{%Pari-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. revolution, return; exchange,
barter; end, termination; surrounding, encompassing;
staying in a place, dwelling; contraction of the pre-
puce, phimosis; ({%tyā%}), ind. alternately; (sometimes
{%pari-vṛtti%} is a wrong reading for {%pari-vitti,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>27950<pc>0548-c<k1>parivftya<k2>parivftya
{%Pari-vṛtya,%}¦ ind. having turned round, having
revolved; having retreated or retired.
<LEND>

<L>27951<pc>0548-c<k1>parivfD<k2>parivfD
{#parivfD#}¦ {%pari-vṛdh%} [cf. {%pari-vṛṃh%}], cl. 1.
A. (also P. in Fut., Cond., and Aor.) {%-vardhate,%}
{%-vardhitum,%} to grow, grow up, increase: Caus.
{%-vardhayati, -yitum,%} to increase, augment; to
bring up, rear.
<LEND>

<L>27952<pc>0548-c<k1>parivarDana<k2>parivarDana
{%Pari-vardhana, am,%}¦ n. increasing, augmenting,
enlarging, multiplying; growing; rearing, breeding
(as of cattle).
<LEND>

<L>27953<pc>0548-c<k1>parivarDita<k2>parivarDita<h>2
2. {%pari-vardhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ increased, augmented.
<LEND>
[Page0549-a+ 74]

<L>27954<pc>0549-a<k1>parivfdDa<k2>parivfdDa
{%Pari-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown, increased.
{%—Parivṛddha-tā,%} f. increase, extension.
<LEND>

<L>27955<pc>0549-a<k1>parivfdDi<k2>parivfdDi
{%Pari-vṛddhi, is,%}¦ f. growth, increase.
<LEND>

<L>27956<pc>0549-a<k1>parivfsti<k2>parivfsti
{#parivfsti#}¦ {%pari-vṛsti, is,%} m. a wrong reading
for {%pari-vitti,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>27957<pc>0549-a<k1>parivedana<k2>parivedana<h>2
{#parivedana#} 2¦. {%pari-vedana, am,%} n. (probably
a various reading for {%pari-devana%}), complaining,
lamentation. (For 1. see p. 548, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>27958<pc>0549-a<k1>parivedita<k2>parivedita
{%Pari-vedita, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably for {%pari-devita%}),
lamented; ({%am%}), n. lamentation.
<LEND>

<L>27959<pc>0549-a<k1>pariveza<k2>pariveza
{#pariveza#}¦ {%pari-veṣa.%} See p. 548, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>27960<pc>0549-a<k1>parivezw<k2>parivezw
{#parivezw#}¦ {%pari-veṣṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-veṣṭate,%}
{%-veṣṭitum,%} to surround, encompass, encircle; to
wrap up, cover, clothe: Caus. {%-veṣṭayati, -yitum,%}
to surround; to wrap up, clothe; to embrace.
<LEND>

<L>27961<pc>0549-a<k1>parivezwana<k2>parivezwana
{%Pari-veṣṭana, am,%}¦ n. surrounding, encompassing;
circumference; a cover, covering; a ligature, bandage.
<LEND>

<L>27962<pc>0549-a<k1>parivezwita<k2>parivezwita
{%Pari-veṣṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, encompassed,
enclosed; beset, beleaguered; bound round, covered,
veiled, swathed.
<LEND>

<L>27963<pc>0549-a<k1>parivezwitf<k2>parivezwitf
{%Pari-veṣṭitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who sur-
rounds or encompasses.
<LEND>

<L>27964<pc>0549-a<k1>parivyakta<k2>parivyakta
{#parivyakta#}¦ {%pari-vyakta, as, ā, am,%} very clear
or distinct; ({%am%}), ind. very clearly or distinctly.
<LEND>

<L>27965<pc>0549-a<k1>parivyaD<k2>parivyaD
{#parivyaD#}¦ {%pari-vyadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-vidhyati,%}
{%-vyaddhum,%} to hit, strike, smite, wound.
<LEND>

<L>27966<pc>0549-a<k1>parivyADa<k2>parivyADa
{%Pari-vyādha, as,%}¦ m. a species of reed, Calamus
Fasciculatus; a species of tree, Pterospermum Aceri-
folium; N. of an ancient sage.
<LEND>

<L>27967<pc>0549-a<k1>parivyaya<k2>parivyaya
{#parivyaya#}¦ {%pari-vyaya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 5. {%i%} with
{%pari-vi%}), expense, cost; condiment, spices.
<LEND>

<L>27968<pc>0549-a<k1>parivye<k2>parivye
{#parivye#}¦ {%pari-vye,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vyayati, -te,%}
{%-vyātum,%} to surround, invest, wrap round, veil, cover,
put on, wrap one's self up.
<LEND>

<L>27969<pc>0549-a<k1>parivI<k2>parivI
{%Pari-vī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ Ved. wound round.
<LEND>

<L>27970<pc>0549-a<k1>parivIta<k2>parivIta
{%Pari-vīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, encompassed,
invested; overspread, pervaded; ({%am%}), n. the bow
of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>27971<pc>0549-a<k1>parivIya<k2>parivIya
{%Pari-vīya,%}¦ ind. wrapping round.
<LEND>

<L>27972<pc>0549-a<k1>parivyayaRa<k2>parivyayaRa
{%Pari-vyayaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. winding round,
covering.
<LEND>

<L>27973<pc>0549-a<k1>parivyayaRIya<k2>parivyayaRIya
{%Pari-vyayaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. relating to
wrapping round or binding on (as a verse).
<LEND>

<L>27974<pc>0549-a<k1>parivraj<k2>parivraj
{#parivraj#}¦ {%pari-vraj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vrajati, -vra-%}
{%jitum,%} to go or wander about, wander about as a
mendicant, lead the life of a religious mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>27975<pc>0549-a<k1>parivrajya<k2>parivrajya
{%Pari-vrajya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be roamed about or
walked for pleasure; ({%ā%}), f. strolling, wandering
about from place to place; religious wandering,
leading the life of a religious mendicant; ascetic
devotion, religious austerity, abandonment of the
world.
<LEND>

<L>27976<pc>0549-a<k1>parivrAj<k2>parivrAj
{%Pari-vrāj, ṭ,%}¦ or {%pari-vrāja, as,%} m. a vagrant,
wandering man, ascetic of the fourth and last religious
order, a mendicant devotee.
<LEND>

<L>27977<pc>0549-a<k1>parivrAjaka<k2>parivrAjaka
{%Pari-vrājaka, as, ikā,%}¦ m. f. a wandering religious
mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>27978<pc>0549-a<k1>parivrAji<k2>parivrAji
{%Pari-vrāji, is,%}¦ f. a species of plant, Sphæranthus
Mollis; [cf. {%tapo-dhanā, bhikṣu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>27979<pc>0549-a<k1>parivrAjya<k2>parivrAjya
{%Pari-vrājya, am,%}¦ n. religious mendicancy.
<LEND>

<L>27980<pc>0549-a<k1>parivraQiman<k2>parivraQiman
{#parivraQiman#}¦ {%pari-vraḍhiman.%} See under
{%pari-vṛṃh,%} p. 548, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>27981<pc>0549-a<k1>pariSaNk<k2>pariSaNk
{#pariSaNk#}¦ {%pari-śaṅk,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śaṅkate, -śaṅ-%}
{%kitum,%} to suspect of (with inst.); to distrust.
<LEND>

<L>27982<pc>0549-a<k1>pariSaNkanIya<k2>pariSaNkanIya
{%Pari-śaṅkanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be doubted or
distrusted; to be feared or apprehended; {%pariśaṅka-%}
{%nīyam,%} (used impersonally) distrust must be felt.
<LEND>

<L>27983<pc>0549-a<k1>pariSaNkin<k2>pariSaNkin
{%Pari-śaṅkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fearing, apprehending,
having apprehensions.
<LEND>

<L>27984<pc>0549-a<k1>pariSap<k2>pariSap
{#pariSap#}¦ {%pari-śap,%} cl. 1. 4. P. A. {%-śapati,%}
{%-te, -śapyati, -te, -śaptum,%} to curse, execrate.
<LEND>

<L>27985<pc>0549-a<k1>pariSApa<k2>pariSApa
{%Pari-śāpa, as,%}¦ m. cursing, reviling, anathema.
<LEND>

<L>27986<pc>0549-a<k1>pariSam<k2>pariSam
{#pariSam#}¦ {%pari-śam,%} Caus. P. {%-śamayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to allay, quench; to destroy.
<LEND>
[Page0549-b+ 73]

<L>27987<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSamita<k2>pariSamita
{%Pari-śamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ allayed, quenched; de-
stroyed.
<LEND>

<L>27988<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSASvata<k2>pariSASvata
{#pariSASvata#}¦ {%pari-śāśvata, as, ī, am,%} remain-
ing or continuing for ever, perpetually the same.
<LEND>

<L>27989<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSiz<k2>pariSiz
{#pariSiz#}¦ {%pari-śiṣ,%} Caus. P. {%-śeṣayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to leave over, leave (as a remainder); to leave
(a place), quit; with {%na,%} to destroy (e. g. {%Megha-%}
{%nādasya dhanur na pary-aśeṣayat,%} he did not
suffer to remain, i. e. he destroyed the bow of
Megha-nāda).
<LEND>

<L>27990<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSizwa<k2>pariSizwa
{%Pari-śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, remaining; finished;
({%am%}), n. a supplement, appendix. {%—Pariśiṣṭa-pra-%}
{%kāśa, as,%} m., N. of a work by Śrī-nātha-śarman.
<LEND>

<L>27991<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSeza<k2>pariSeza
{%Pari-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ left over, remaining
(Ved.); ({%as, am%}), m. n. remnant, remains, re-
mainder, residue, rest; sequel, supplement; conclu-
sion, completion, termination; ({%eṇa%}), ind. with
the residue or conclusion; to the very end, com-
pletely, in full. {%—Pariśeṣa-śāstra, am,%} n. a sup-
plementary work, an appendix.
<LEND>

<L>27992<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSezaRa<k2>pariSezaRa
{%Pari-śeṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. remainder, residue.
<LEND>

<L>27993<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSIlana<k2>pariSIlana
{#pariSIlana#}¦ {%pari-śīlana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%śīl%}
with {%pari%}), frequent touch or contact, intercourse,
correspondence, constant occupation, fond pursuit of
or attachment to (a subject), study.
<LEND>

<L>27994<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSuc<k2>pariSuc
{#pariSuc#}¦ {%pari-śuc,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-śocati (-te), -śocitum,%} to be deeply grieved, mourn,
lament, bewail.
<LEND>

<L>27995<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSuD<k2>pariSuD
{#pariSuD#}¦ {%pari-śudh,%} Caus. P. {%-śodhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to clear, clean, purify completely; to solve,
explain, clear up.
<LEND>

<L>27996<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSudDa<k2>pariSudDa
{%Pari-śuddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely cleansed,
cleaned, purified; acquitted, discharged; cleared off,
paid. {%—Pariśuddha-bhāva, as,%} m. cleansed; dis-
charged, paid.
<LEND>

<L>27997<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSudDi<k2>pariSudDi
{%Pari-śuddhi, is,%}¦ f. complete purification, becom-
ing perfectly clean; justification, acquittal, proving
innocent.
<LEND>

<L>27998<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSoDa<k2>pariSoDa
{%Pari-śodha, as,%}¦ m. cleansing, purifying, correct-
ing; discharging a debt or obligation, quittance.
<LEND>

<L>27999<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSoDana<k2>pariSoDana
{%Pari-śodhana, am,%}¦ n. purification; justification;
paying, discharging a debt.
<LEND>

<L>28000<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSuSrUzA<k2>pariSuSrUzA
{#pariSuSrUzA#}¦ {%pari-śuśrūṣā.%} See under {%pa-%}
{%ri-śru,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28001<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSuz<k2>pariSuz
{#pariSuz#}¦ {%pari-śuṣ,%} cl. 4. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-śuṣyati (-te), -śoṣṭum,%} to be thoroughly dried up,
become quite dry; to shrivel, wither; to pine, waste
away; to be afflicted: Caus. {%-śoṣayati, -yitum,%}
to emaciate.
<LEND>

<L>28002<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSuzka<k2>pariSuzka
{%Pari-śuṣka, as, ā, am,%}¦ perfectly dried up,
thoroughly dried, completely dry or parched;
withered, shriveled, shrunk (as a vein); hollow (as
the cheeks); {%pariśuṣkam māṃsam,%} meat fried in
ghee, washed and spiced. {%—Pariśuṣka-tālu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} having the palate dried up. {%—Pariśuṣka-%}
{%palāśa, as, ā, am,%} having withered foliage.
<LEND>

<L>28003<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSuzyat<k2>pariSuzyat
{%Pari-śuṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ drying up, evaporating.
<LEND>

<L>28004<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSoza<k2>pariSoza
{%Pari-śoṣa, as,%}¦ m. becoming completely dried
up, dryness, desiccation, evaporation.
<LEND>

<L>28005<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSozaRa<k2>pariSozaRa
{%Pari-śoṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drying up, parching;
({%am%}), n. drying, parching, emaciating.
<LEND>

<L>28006<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSozin<k2>pariSozin
{%Pari-śoṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ drying up, shriveling up,
becoming quite emaciated.
<LEND>

<L>28007<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSUnya<k2>pariSUnya
{#pariSUnya#}¦ {%pari-śūnya, as, ā, am,%} quite empty,
quite free from, totally devoid of.
<LEND>

<L>28008<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSfta<k2>pariSfta<h>1
{#pariSfta#} 1¦. {%pari-śṛta, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
ardent spirits; [cf. {%pari-srut, pari-srutā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28009<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSF<k2>pariSF
{#pariSF#}¦ {%pari-śṝ,%} Pass. {%-śīryate,%} to be cleft
or rent asunder, to be split.
<LEND>

<L>28010<pc>0549-b<k1>pariSrama<k2>pariSrama
{#pariSrama#}¦ {%pari-śrama, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śram%}
with {%pari%}), fatigue, distress; fatiguing occupation,
labour, exertion, trouble, pain. {%—Pariśramāpaha%}
{%(˚ma-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} relieving weariness.
<LEND>
[Page0549-c+ 73]

<L>28011<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSrAnta<k2>pariSrAnta
{%Pari-śrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly fatigued,
worn out, exhausted, wearied; one who has per-
formed acts of religious austerity.
<LEND>

<L>28012<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSrAnti<k2>pariSrAnti
{%Pari-śrānti, is,%}¦ f. fatigue, exhaustion; labour,
trouble.
<LEND>

<L>28013<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSrAma<k2>pariSrAma
{%Pari-śrāma, as,%}¦ m. fatigue, a fatiguing occu-
pation, exertion, toiling after.
<LEND>

<L>28014<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSraya<k2>pariSraya
{#pariSraya#}¦ {%pari-śraya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śri%} with
{%pari%}), an enclosure, fence (Ved.); a refuge, asylum;
an assembly, meeting.
<LEND>

<L>28015<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSrayaRa<k2>pariSrayaRa
{%Pari-śrayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. encompassing, surrounding
with a fence.
<LEND>

<L>28016<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSrit<k2>pariSrit
{%Pari-śrit, t,%}¦ f., Ved. ‘enclosure,’ epithet of certain
small stones laid round the hearth and other parts of
the altar.
<LEND>

<L>28017<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSrita<k2>pariSrita<h>2
2. {%pari-śrita, am,%}¦ n., Ved. {%= pari-vṛtam,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28018<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSru<k2>pariSru
{#pariSru#}¦ {%pari-śru,%} cl. 5. P. {%-śṛṇoti, -śrotum,%}
to hear.
<LEND>

<L>28019<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSuSrUzA<k2>pariSuSrUzA
{%Pari-śuśrūṣā,%}¦ f. complete or implicit obedience.
<LEND>

<L>28020<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSruta<k2>pariSruta
{%Pari-śruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ heard; ({%as%}), m., N. of
one of the attendants of Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>28021<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSlizwa<k2>pariSlizwa
{#pariSlizwa#}¦ {%pari-śliṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%śliṣ%} with {%pari%}), embraced, clasped.
<LEND>

<L>28022<pc>0549-c<k1>pariSleza<k2>pariSleza
{%Pari-śleṣa, as,%}¦ m. embracing, an embrace.
<LEND>

<L>28023<pc>0549-c<k1>parizaRqa<k2>parizaRqa
{#parizaRqa#}¦ {%pari-ṣaṇḍa,%} a particular part of
a house. {%—Pariṣaṇḍa-vārika,%} a servant.
<LEND>

<L>28024<pc>0549-c<k1>parizad<k2>parizad<h>1
{#parizad#} 1¦. {%pari-ṣad (pari-sad),%} cl. 1. 6. P.
{%-ṣīdati, -ṣattum,%} Ved. to sit round.
<LEND>

<L>28025<pc>0549-c<k1>parizad<k2>parizad<h>2
2. {%pari-ṣad, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. surrounding, besetting;
({%t%}), f. an assembly, meeting, audience, congregation,
council. {%—Pariṣat-tva, am,%} n. the state of con-
stituting a legal assembly; a legal assemblage of
councillors. {%—Pariṣad-vala, as, ā, am,%} surrounded
by a council; convoking assemblies; ({%as%}), m. a mem-
ber of an assembly, assessor, associate, spectator.
<LEND>

<L>28026<pc>0549-c<k1>parizada<k2>parizada
{%Pari-ṣada, as,%}¦ m. (a various reading for {%pāri-%}
{%ṣada%}), one of an assembly or congregation, a
councillor, assessor, a spectator at a play.
<LEND>

<L>28027<pc>0549-c<k1>parizadya<k2>parizadya
{%Pari-ṣadya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sought after
laboriously (Ved.); to be worshipped (Ved.); to be
avoided (Ved.); (according to Mahī-dhara) belonging
to an assembly; (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
VII. 4, 7, {%= pary-āpta%}), sufficient, adequate, com-
petent; ({%as%}), m. a member of an assembly, assessor,
hearer, spectator, guest.
<LEND>

<L>28028<pc>0549-c<k1>parizadvan<k2>parizadvan
{%Pari-ṣadvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. surrounding, en-
compassing, besetting.
<LEND>

<L>28029<pc>0549-c<k1>parizah<k2>parizah
{#parizah#}¦ {%pari-ṣah (pari-sah),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-ṣahate, -ṣahitum, -ṣoḍhum,%} to sustain, bear
up against.
<LEND>

<L>28030<pc>0549-c<k1>parizic<k2>parizic
{#parizic#}¦ {%pari-ṣic (pari-sic),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-ṣiñcati, -te, -ṣektum,%} to sprinkle round, scatter
about, diffuse: Caus. {%-ṣecayati%} (ep. {%-ṣiñcayati%}),
{%-yitum,%} to sprinkle round.
<LEND>

<L>28031<pc>0549-c<k1>parizeka<k2>parizeka
{%Pari-ṣeka, as,%}¦ m. sprinkling over, moistening;
a bath, bathing apparatus.
<LEND>

<L>28032<pc>0549-c<k1>parizecaka<k2>parizecaka
{%Pari-ṣecaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ pouring over, sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>28033<pc>0549-c<k1>parizecana<k2>parizecana
{%Pari-ṣecana, am,%}¦ n. pouring over, sprinkling;
water for watering tress.
<LEND>

<L>28034<pc>0549-c<k1>parizIvaRa<k2>parizIvaRa
{#parizIvaRa#}¦ {%pari-ṣīvaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%siv%}
with {%pari%}), Ved. sewing round, winding round.
<LEND>

<L>28035<pc>0549-c<k1>parizU<k2>parizU
{#parizU#}¦ {%pari-ṣū%} ({%pari-sū,%} see rt. 2. {%sū%}), cl.
6. P. {%-ṣuvati, -ṣavitum,%} Ved. to besiege, be-
leaguer.
<LEND>

<L>28036<pc>0549-c<k1>parizUta<k2>parizUta
{%Pari-ṣūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. besieged, beleaguered.
<LEND>

<L>28037<pc>0549-c<k1>parizUti<k2>parizUti
{%Pari-ṣūti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. oppression; (Sāy.) violence
({%= paritaḥ preraka upadravaḥ%}).
<LEND>

<L>28038<pc>0549-c<k1>parizoqaSa<k2>parizoqaSa
{#parizoqaSa#}¦ {%pari-ṣoḍaśa, as, ī, am,%} full six-
teen, quite sixteen.
<LEND>

<L>28039<pc>0549-c<k1>parizkand<k2>parizkand
{#parizkand#}¦ {%pari-ṣkand%} or {%pari-skand,%} cl. 1.
P. {%-ṣkandati, -ṣkantum,%} to leap about, spring
round or about.
<LEND>

<L>28040<pc>0549-c<k1>parizkaRRa<k2>parizkaRRa
{%Pari-ṣkaṇṇa%}¦ or {%pari-ṣkanna, as,%} m. a foster
[Page0550-a+ 75]
or adopted child, one nourished by a stranger; the
Koïl or Indian cuckoo (?).
<LEND>

<L>28041<pc>0550-a<k1>parizkanda<k2>parizkanda
{%Pari-ṣkanda%}¦ or {%pari-skanda, as,%} m. a foster
child, one nourished by a stranger; a servant; ({%au%}),
m. du. two servants running by the two sides of a
carriage; ({%am%}), n. going round or about (?).
<LEND>

<L>28042<pc>0550-a<k1>parizkandat<k2>parizkandat
{%Pari-ṣkandat%}¦ or {%pari-skandat, an, antī, at,%}
leaping about, jumping round, going round or about;
surrounding, circumambulating; wandering.
<LEND>

<L>28043<pc>0550-a<k1>parizkf<k2>parizkf
{#parizkf#}¦ {%pari-ṣ-kṛ%} ({%pari-kṛ%} with {%s%} inserted,
cf. {%pari-kṛ,%} p. 538, col. 2), cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kurute, -kartum,%} Ved. to prepare, fit out, equip;
to adorn, decorate; to polish, perfect; to cleanse.
<LEND>

<L>28044<pc>0550-a<k1>parizkara<k2>parizkara
{%Pari-ṣ-kara, as,%}¦ m. ornament, decoration.
<LEND>

<L>28045<pc>0550-a<k1>parizkAra<k2>parizkAra
{%Pari-ṣ-kāra, as,%}¦ m. surrounding (?); adorning,
ornament, decoration, embellishment; finishing,
polishing; cooking, dressing; cleansing, purification
by essential rites, initiation; domestic utensils, furni-
ture. {%—Pariṣkāra-cīvara,%} a kind of garment.
<LEND>

<L>28046<pc>0550-a<k1>parizkfta<k2>parizkfta
{%Pari-ṣ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, encom-
passed (?); prepared, equipped; adorned, decorated,
embellished; highly finished, polished; cooked,
dressed; cleansed, purified by initiatory rites. {%—Pa-%}
{%riṣkṛta-bhūmi, is,%} f. an altar or ground prepared
for a sacrifice or for the victim and sacrificial utensils.
<LEND>

<L>28047<pc>0550-a<k1>parizkfti<k2>parizkfti
{%Pari-ṣ-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. finishing, polishing; cleansing.
<LEND>

<L>28048<pc>0550-a<k1>parizkriyA<k2>parizkriyA
{%Pari-ṣ-kriyā,%}¦ f. adorning, decorating; ({%agni-p˚%}
is a various reading for {%agni-parikriyā,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>28049<pc>0550-a<k1>parizwi<k2>parizwi
{#parizwi#}¦ {%pari-ṣṭi, is,%} f. (according to some
fr. rt. 1. {%as%} with {%pari,%} but more probably fr. {%pari-%}
{%ṣṭhā%} below; cf. {%abhi-ṣṭi, upa-sti%}), Ved. obstruc-
tion, impediment; distress, dilemma; (Sāy.) searching
all round, (as if fr. rt. 3. {%iṣ%} with {%pari.%})
<LEND>

<L>28050<pc>0550-a<k1>parizwu<k2>parizwu
{#parizwu#}¦ {%pari-ṣṭu (pari-stu),%} cl. 2. P. {%-stauti,%}
{%-stotum,%} to praise, (Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 70.)
<LEND>

<L>28051<pc>0550-a<k1>parizwavanIya<k2>parizwavanIya
{%Pari-ṣṭavanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. intended for
the Pari-ṣṭavana.
<LEND>

<L>28052<pc>0550-a<k1>parizwuti<k2>parizwuti
{%Pari-ṣṭuti, is,%}¦ f. (fr. {%pari-stu%}), Ved. praise.
<LEND>

<L>28053<pc>0550-a<k1>parizwoma<k2>parizwoma
{%Pari-ṣṭoma, as,%}¦ m. an elephant's coloured hous-
ings; a coverlet; a cushion; [cf. {%pari-stoma.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28054<pc>0550-a<k1>parizwuB<k2>parizwuB
{#parizwuB#}¦ {%pari-ṣṭubh, p, p, p%} (fr. rt. {%stubh%}
with {%pari%}), Ved. uttering joyful cries or exulting on
every side; (Sāy.) {%= stutibhir yukta,%} endowed or
glorified with praises; ({%p%}), f. exultation, acclamation.
<LEND>

<L>28055<pc>0550-a<k1>parizwoBa<k2>parizwoBa
{%Pari-ṣṭobha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. embellishing a Sāman
with the so-called Stobhas.
<LEND>

<L>28056<pc>0550-a<k1>parizWala<k2>parizWala
{#parizWala#}¦ {%pari-ṣṭhala, am,%} n. surrounding
place or site.
<LEND>

<L>28057<pc>0550-a<k1>parizWA<k2>parizWA
{#parizWA#}¦ {%pari-ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. ob-
structing, hindering, an obstructor; ({%ās%}), f. obstruc-
tion, impediment.
<LEND>

<L>28058<pc>0550-a<k1>parizyanda<k2>parizyanda
{#parizyanda#}¦ {%pari-ṣyanda%} or {%pari-syanda, as,%}
m. (fr. rt. {%syand%} with {%pari%}), a stream, river; wet-
ness, moisture; a sand-bank, island (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>28059<pc>0550-a<k1>parizyandin<k2>parizyandin
{%Pari-ṣyandin%}¦ or {%pari-syandin, ī, inī, i,%} flow-
ing, streaming.
<LEND>

<L>28060<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvaYj<k2>parizvaYj
{#parizvaYj#}¦ {%pari-ṣvañj (pari-svañj),%} cl. 1.
A. {%-ṣvajate%} (rarely P. {%-ṣvajati%}), {%-ṣvaṅktum,%} to
embrace.
<LEND>

<L>28061<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvakta<k2>parizvakta
{%Pari-ṣvakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ embraced.
<LEND>

<L>28062<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvaNga<k2>parizvaNga
{%Pari-ṣvaṅga, as,%}¦ m. embracing, an embrace;
contact, touch.
<LEND>

<L>28063<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvajana<k2>parizvajana
{%Pari-ṣvajana, am,%}¦ n. embracing, an embrace.
<LEND>

<L>28064<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvajAna<k2>parizvajAna
{%Pari-ṣvajāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ embracing, (Rāmā-
yaṇa II. 83, 10.)
<LEND>

<L>28065<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvajya<k2>parizvajya<h>1
1. {%pari-ṣvajya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be embraced.
<LEND>

<L>28066<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvajya<k2>parizvajya<h>2
2. {%pari-ṣvajya,%}¦ ind. having embraced.
<LEND>

<L>28067<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvaYjana<k2>parizvaYjana
{%Pari-ṣvañjana, am,%}¦ n. embracing, an embrace.
<LEND>

<L>28068<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvaYjalya<k2>parizvaYjalya
{%Pari-ṣvañjalya, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), Ved. a
particular domestic utensil.
<LEND>

<L>28069<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvaYjIyas<k2>parizvaYjIyas
{%Pari-ṣvañjīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. clasping more
firmly.
<LEND>

<L>28070<pc>0550-a<k1>parizvazkita<k2>parizvazkita
{#parizvazkita#}¦ {%pari-ṣvaṣkita, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%ṣvaṣk%} with {%pari,%} probably) the act of leaping
about.
<LEND>
[Page0550-b+ 68]

<L>28071<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaMlih<k2>parisaMlih
{#parisaMlih#}¦ {%pari-saṃ-lih,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-leḍhi,%}
{%-līḍhe, -leḍhum,%} to lick all round, lick over, lick.
<LEND>

<L>28072<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaMvatsara<k2>parisaMvatsara
{#parisaMvatsara#}¦ {%pari-saṃvatsara, as,%} m. a
whole or full year; ({%āt%}), ind. after the expiration
of a whole year; ({%as, ā, am%}), a whole year old; one
who has waited a whole year; (in medicine) chronic.
<LEND>

<L>28073<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaMstu<k2>parisaMstu
{#parisaMstu#}¦ {%pari-saṃ-stu,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-stauti,%}
{%-stavīti, -stute, -stuvīte, -stotum,%} to praise.
<LEND>

<L>28074<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaMstUyamAna<k2>parisaMstUyamAna
{%Pari-saṃstūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being praised.
<LEND>

<L>28075<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaMsTita<k2>parisaMsTita
{#parisaMsTita#}¦ {%pari-saṃ-sthita, as, ā, am%} (fr.
rt. {%sthā%} with {%pari-sam%}), standing together on every
side.
<LEND>

<L>28076<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaMspfS<k2>parisaMspfS
{#parisaMspfS#}¦ {%pari-saṃ-spṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-spṛ-%}
{%śati, -spraṣṭum, -sparṣṭum,%} to touch, stroke.
<LEND>

<L>28077<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaMhA<k2>parisaMhA
{#parisaMhA#}¦ {%pari-saṃ-hā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-jihīte, -hā-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to lay aside, abandon (Sāy. {%= pari-tyaj%}).
<LEND>

<L>28078<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaMhfzwa<k2>parisaMhfzwa
{#parisaMhfzwa#}¦ {%pari-saṃ-hṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} very
glad, greatly rejoiced.
<LEND>

<L>28079<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaKya<k2>parisaKya
{#parisaKya#}¦ {%pari-sakhya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
being on friendly terms.
<LEND>

<L>28080<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaNkrIq<k2>parisaNkrIq
{#parisaNkrIq#}¦ {%pari-saṅ-krīḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krīḍati,%}
{%-krīḍitum,%} to play about, jest, amuse one's self.
<LEND>

<L>28081<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaNkrIqat<k2>parisaNkrIqat
{%Pari-saṅkrīḍat, an, antī, at,%}¦ playing about,
indulging in amusements.
<LEND>

<L>28082<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaNkzip<k2>parisaNkzip
{#parisaNkzip#}¦ {%pari-saṅ-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-kṣipati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to encompass, encircle.
<LEND>

<L>28083<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaNKyA<k2>parisaNKyA<h>1
{#parisaNKyA#} 1¦. {%pari-saṅ-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyā-%}
{%ti, -khyātum,%} to count over, count up, reckon up,
calculate, add together; to enumerate.
<LEND>

<L>28084<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaNKyA<k2>parisaNKyA<h>2
2. {%pari-saṅkhyā,%}¦ f. enumerating one by one,
computation; sum; total, a number; an exhaustive
enumeration, exclusive specification, limitation to
that which is enumerated or expressly mentioned;
recapitulation.
<LEND>

<L>28085<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaNKyAta<k2>parisaNKyAta
{%Pari-saṅkhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ counted, reckoned
up; enumerated, specified exclusively.
<LEND>

<L>28086<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaNKyAna<k2>parisaNKyAna
{%Pari-saṅkhyāna, am,%}¦ n. enumeration; total; a
number; exclusive specification; a correct judgment,
proper estimate.
<LEND>

<L>28087<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaNGuz<k2>parisaNGuz
{#parisaNGuz#}¦ {%pari-saṅ-ghuṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gho-%}
{%ṣati, -ghoṣitum,%} to make to resound on all sides,
to fill with cries.
<LEND>

<L>28088<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaNGuzwa<k2>parisaNGuzwa
{%Pari-saṅghuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ resonant on all sides.
<LEND>

<L>28089<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaYcakz<k2>parisaYcakz
{#parisaYcakz#}¦ {%pari-sañ-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe,%}
{%-caṣṭum,%} to enumerate; to avoid.
<LEND>

<L>28090<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaYcakzya<k2>parisaYcakzya
{%Pari-sañcakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be avoided,
avoidable.
<LEND>

<L>28091<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaYcara<k2>parisaYcara
{#parisaYcara#}¦ {%pari-sañcara, as,%} m. ‘a very diffi-
cult pass or defile,’ a critical period.
<LEND>

<L>28092<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaYci<k2>parisaYci
{#parisaYci#}¦ {%pari-sañ-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti,%}
{%-cinute, -cetum,%} to collect, accumulate.
<LEND>

<L>28093<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaYcita<k2>parisaYcita
{%Pari-sañcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ collected, accumulated.
<LEND>

<L>28094<pc>0550-b<k1>parisantap<k2>parisantap
{#parisantap#}¦ {%pari-san-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati,%}
{%-taptum,%} to be tormented or afflicted; to scorch,
singe.
<LEND>

<L>28095<pc>0550-b<k1>parisantapta<k2>parisantapta
{%Pari-santapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ scorched, singed.
<LEND>

<L>28096<pc>0550-b<k1>parisantapya<k2>parisantapya
{%Pari-santapya,%}¦ ind. having been tormented;
having scorched.
<LEND>

<L>28097<pc>0550-b<k1>parisantAna<k2>parisantAna
{#parisantAna#}¦ {%pari-santāna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3.
{%tan%} with {%pari-sam%}), Ved. a string, cord.
<LEND>

<L>28098<pc>0550-b<k1>parisaBya<k2>parisaBya
{#parisaBya#}¦ {%pari-sabhya, as,%} m. (fr. {%sabhā%} with
{%pari%}), a member of an assembly, an assessor.
<LEND>

<L>28099<pc>0550-b<k1>parisamanta<k2>parisamanta
{#parisamanta#}¦ {%pari-samanta, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), circumference, circuit.
<LEND>

<L>28100<pc>0550-b<k1>parisamAp<k2>parisamAp
{#parisamAp#}¦ {%pari-sam-āp,%} Pass. {%-āpyate,%} to
be fully completed, arrive at completion.
<LEND>

<L>28101<pc>0550-b<k1>parisamApana<k2>parisamApana
{%Pari-samāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of finishing
completely.
<LEND>
[Page0550-c+ 70]

<L>28102<pc>0550-c<k1>parisamApta<k2>parisamApta
{%Pari-samāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully completed, en-
tirely done or finished.
<LEND>

<L>28103<pc>0550-c<k1>parisamApti<k2>parisamApti
{%Pari-samāpti, is,%}¦ f. entire completion, end, con-
clusion.
<LEND>

<L>28104<pc>0550-c<k1>parisamutsuka<k2>parisamutsuka
{#parisamutsuka#}¦ {%pari-samutsuka, as, ā, am,%} very
anxious, greatly agitated or excited.
<LEND>

<L>28105<pc>0550-c<k1>parisamUh<k2>parisamUh
{#parisamUh#}¦ {%pari-sam-ūh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ūhati,%}
{%-te, -ūhitum,%} Ved. to heap or sweep together.
<LEND>

<L>28106<pc>0550-c<k1>parisamUhana<k2>parisamUhana
{%Pari-samūhana, am,%}¦ n. heaping up or sweeping
together.
<LEND>

<L>28107<pc>0550-c<k1>parisamBU<k2>parisamBU
{#parisamBU#}¦ {%pari-sam-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
{%-bhavitum,%} Ved. to arise, spring, be produced.
<LEND>

<L>28108<pc>0550-c<k1>parisara<k2>parisara
{#parisara#}¦ {%pari-sara.%} See {%pari-sṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>28109<pc>0550-c<k1>parisarpa<k2>parisarpa
{#parisarpa#}¦ {%pari-sarpa.%} See {%pari-sṛp%} below.
<LEND>

<L>28110<pc>0550-c<k1>parisahasra<k2>parisahasra
{#parisahasra#}¦ {%pari-sahasra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. a
full thousand, at least a thousand.
<LEND>

<L>28111<pc>0550-c<k1>parisAD<k2>parisAD
{#parisAD#}¦ {%pari-sādh,%} Caus. P. {%-sādhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to finish, complete, settle (a cause).
<LEND>

<L>28112<pc>0550-c<k1>parisADana<k2>parisADana
{%Pari-sādhana, am,%}¦ n. accomplishing, effecting,
finishing, bringing to a conclusion; arranging, set-
tling; determining, ascertaining.
<LEND>

<L>28113<pc>0550-c<k1>parisAntvana<k2>parisAntvana
{#parisAntvana#}¦ {%pari-sāntvana, am,%} n. the act
of consoling; conciliation.
<LEND>

<L>28114<pc>0550-c<k1>parisAman<k2>parisAman
{#parisAman#}¦ {%pari-sāman, a,%} n., Ved. a Sāman
which is occasionally inserted.
<LEND>

<L>28115<pc>0550-c<k1>parisiD<k2>parisiD
{#parisiD#}¦ {%pari-sidh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sedhati, -se-%}
{%dhitum,%} to go round, go about.
<LEND>

<L>28116<pc>0550-c<k1>parisidDikA<k2>parisidDikA
{%Pari-siddhikā,%}¦ f. a kind of rice-gruel.
<LEND>

<L>28117<pc>0550-c<k1>pariseDat<k2>pariseDat
{%Pari-sedhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going round, going
about.
<LEND>

<L>28118<pc>0550-c<k1>parisIman<k2>parisIman
{#parisIman#}¦ {%pari-sīman, ā,%} m. a boundary,
border, extreme term or limit.
<LEND>

<L>28119<pc>0550-c<k1>parisIrya<k2>parisIrya
{#parisIrya#}¦ {%pari-sīrya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari + sīra%}),
Ved. a leather thong on a plough.
<LEND>

<L>28120<pc>0550-c<k1>parisf<k2>parisf
{#parisf#}¦ {%pari-sṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati, -sartum,%}
to go or flow round.
<LEND>

<L>28121<pc>0550-c<k1>parisara<k2>parisara
{%Pari-sara, as,%}¦ m. standing-place, position, site;
verge, border, proximity, neighbourhood, environs,
ground on the border of a river or mountain or
contiguous to a town, &c.; width, breadth; death,
dying; rule, precept, prescribed mode; a god.
<LEND>

<L>28122<pc>0550-c<k1>parisaraRa<k2>parisaraRa
{%Pari-saraṇa, am,%}¦ n. running or moving about.
{%—Parisaraṇa-śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a restless dispo-
sition, constantly, moving about.
<LEND>

<L>28123<pc>0550-c<k1>parisaryA<k2>parisaryA
{%Pari-saryā,%}¦ f. running about, wandering or going
about, perambulation, circumambulation; near ap-
proach; service.
<LEND>

<L>28124<pc>0550-c<k1>parisAra<k2>parisAra
{%Pari-sāra, as,%}¦ m. going round or about, wan-
dering about, perambulation.
<LEND>

<L>28125<pc>0550-c<k1>parisAraka<k2>parisAraka
{%Pari-sāraka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a place near the
Sarasvatī.
<LEND>

<L>28126<pc>0550-c<k1>parisArin<k2>parisArin
{%Pari-sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ wandering or running about.
<LEND>

<L>28127<pc>0550-c<k1>parisfp<k2>parisfp
{#parisfp#}¦ {%pari-sṛp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarpati, -sarp-%}
{%tum, -sraptum,%} to go round, go to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>28128<pc>0550-c<k1>parisarpa<k2>parisarpa
{%Pari-sarpa, as,%}¦ m. going or walking about,
perambulation; going about in search of anything,
following, pursuing, going after; surrounding, en-
circling; a species of serpent; a species of worm
causing leprosy; N. of a mild form of leprosy.
<LEND>

<L>28129<pc>0550-c<k1>parisarpaRa<k2>parisarpaRa
{%Pari-sarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. creeping about, walking
about, running to and fro, constantly changing one's
place; a kind of disease ({%= vi-sarpa%}).
<LEND>

<L>28130<pc>0550-c<k1>parisarpin<k2>parisarpin
{%Pari-sarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going or moving or roam-
ing about.
<LEND>

<L>28131<pc>0550-c<k1>pariskand<k2>pariskand
{#pariskand#}¦ {%pari-skand, pari-skanda, pari-%}
{%skandat, pari-skanna.%} See {%pari-ṣkand.%}
<LEND>

<L>28132<pc>0550-c<k1>paristf<k2>paristf
{#paristf#}¦ {%pari-stṛ,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-stṛṇoti,%}
{%-ṇute,%} or {%pari-stṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-stṛṇāti, -ṇīte,%}
{%-startum, -staritum, -starītum,%} to spread, extend;
to strew round; to arrange; to envelop, cover.
<LEND>
[Page0551-a+ 74]

<L>28133<pc>0551-a<k1>paristara<k2>paristara
{%Pari-stara, as,%}¦ m. strewing round or heaping
together, strewing; a cover, covering (?).
<LEND>

<L>28134<pc>0551-a<k1>paristaraRa<k2>paristaraRa
{%Pari-staraṇa, am,%}¦ n. strewing round, strewing,
scattering about; a cover, covering (?).
<LEND>

<L>28135<pc>0551-a<k1>paristIrya<k2>paristIrya
{%Pari-stīrya,%}¦ ind. having strewed around (sacred
grass).
<LEND>

<L>28136<pc>0551-a<k1>paristfta<k2>paristfta
{%Pari-stṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread over, covered.
<LEND>

<L>28137<pc>0551-a<k1>paristoma<k2>paristoma
{#paristoma#}¦ {%pari-stoma, as,%} m. {%= pari-ṣṭoma.%}
<LEND>

<L>28138<pc>0551-a<k1>parisTA<k2>parisTA
{#parisTA#}¦ {%pari-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-tiṣṭhati,%}
{%-te, -sthātum,%} Ved. to stand round, encompass;
to obstruct (Sāy. {%= pari-vṛtya sthā%}).
<LEND>

<L>28139<pc>0551-a<k1>parisTAna<k2>parisTAna
{%Pari-sthāna, am,%}¦ n. or {%pari-sthiti, is,%} f. abode,
dwelling, residence; fixedness, solidity; fortitude,
firmness.
<LEND>

<L>28140<pc>0551-a<k1>parispand<k2>parispand
{#parispand#}¦ {%pari-spand,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-spandati,%}
{%-te, -spanditum,%} to tremble, throb, quiver, vibrate,
totter.
<LEND>

<L>28141<pc>0551-a<k1>parispanda<k2>parispanda
{%Pari-spanda, as,%}¦ m. beating, throbbing, vibra-
tion; motion, movement; pressure, crush; main-
tenance, provision; train, retinue (in this sense also
spelt {%pari-syanda%}); decoration of the hair.
<LEND>

<L>28142<pc>0551-a<k1>parispandat<k2>parispandat
{%Pari-spandat, an, antī, at,%}¦ trembling, quivering,
tottering.
<LEND>

<L>28143<pc>0551-a<k1>parispandana<k2>parispandana
{%Pari-spandana, am,%}¦ n. beating, throbbing, vibra-
tion, moving about, motion.
<LEND>

<L>28144<pc>0551-a<k1>parispandamAna<k2>parispandamAna
{%Pari-spandamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ throbbing, beat-
ing; moving tremulously, gently agitated, shaking,
trembling.
<LEND>

<L>28145<pc>0551-a<k1>parisparDin<k2>parisparDin
{#parisparDin#}¦ {%pari-spardhin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt.
{%spardh%} with {%pari%}), vying with, rivalling, emulating.
<LEND>

<L>28146<pc>0551-a<k1>parispfD<k2>parispfD
{%Pari-spṛdh, t,%}¦ f., Ved. a rival.
<LEND>

<L>28147<pc>0551-a<k1>parispfS<k2>parispfS
{#parispfS#}¦ {%pari-spṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-spṛśati,%}
{%-sparṣṭum, -spraṣṭum,%} to touch.
<LEND>

<L>28148<pc>0551-a<k1>parisPuwa<k2>parisPuwa
{#parisPuwa#}¦ {%pari-sphuṭa, as, ā, am,%} very clear
or manifest, quite evident or plain or distinct; fully
developed.
<LEND>

<L>28149<pc>0551-a<k1>parisPur<k2>parisPur
{#parisPur#}¦ {%pari-sphur,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sphurati,%}
{%-sphuritum,%} to throb, quiver.
<LEND>

<L>28150<pc>0551-a<k1>parisPuraRa<k2>parisPuraRa
{%Pari-sphuraṇa, am,%}¦ n. quivering, glancing, shoot-
ing; budding.
<LEND>

<L>28151<pc>0551-a<k1>parisPurat<k2>parisPurat
{%Pari-sphurat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} quivering; dart-
ing, glancing, gleaming, moving quickly or suddenly;
budding, expanding; bursting forth.
<LEND>

<L>28152<pc>0551-a<k1>parisPurita<k2>parisPurita
{%Pari-sphurita, as, ā, am,%}¦ quivering, glancing,
gleaming; opened, expanded; shot, glanced.
<LEND>

<L>28153<pc>0551-a<k1>parismApana<k2>parismApana
{#parismApana#}¦ {%pari-smāpana, am,%} n. (fr. Caus.
of rt. {%smi%} with {%pari%}), causing wonder, surprising,
outwitting.
<LEND>

<L>28154<pc>0551-a<k1>parisyanda<k2>parisyanda
{#parisyanda#}¦ {%pari-syanda, as,%} m. (also {%pari-%}
{%ṣyanda,%} q. v.), flow, stream, river; oozing, drop-
ping; train, retinue; decoration of the hair (=
{%pari-spanda%}).
<LEND>

<L>28155<pc>0551-a<k1>parisyandana<k2>parisyandana
{%Pari-syandana, am,%}¦ n. dropping, flowing, oozing.
<LEND>

<L>28156<pc>0551-a<k1>parisrajin<k2>parisrajin
{#parisrajin#}¦ {%pari-srajin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. wear-
ing a garland.
<LEND>

<L>28157<pc>0551-a<k1>parisrasA<k2>parisrasA
{#parisrasA#}¦ {%pari-srasā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%sraṃs%} with
{%pari%}), Ved. rubbish, lumber.
<LEND>

<L>28158<pc>0551-a<k1>parisru<k2>parisru
{#parisru#}¦ {%pari-sru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sravati, -srotum,%}
to flow round, flow, stream, trickle; to ask (?).
<LEND>

<L>28159<pc>0551-a<k1>parisrava<k2>parisrava
{%Pari-srava, as,%}¦ m. (erroneously written {%pari-%}
{%śrava%}), flowing, streaming, stream; a river, torrent;
birth (of a child); gliding down.
<LEND>

<L>28160<pc>0551-a<k1>parisravat<k2>parisravat
{%Pari-sravat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flowing down.
<LEND>

<L>28161<pc>0551-a<k1>parisrAva<k2>parisrAva
{%Pari-srāva, as,%}¦ m. ‘flowing,’ N. of a morbid
state ascribed to the overflowing of the moistures of
the body; efflux, effluxion. {%—Parisrāva-kalpa,%} a
kind of straining or filtering vessel.
<LEND>

<L>28162<pc>0551-a<k1>parisrAvaRa<k2>parisrAvaRa
{%Pari-srāvaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a straining or filtering vessel.
<LEND>

<L>28163<pc>0551-a<k1>parisrAvin<k2>parisrAvin
{%Pari-srāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ flowing; ({%ī%}), m., scil.
{%bhagan-dara,%} a form of fistula of the anus; ({%i%}),
n., scil. {%udara,%} an incurable form of intumescence
of the belly.
<LEND>

<L>28164<pc>0551-a<k1>parisrut<k2>parisrut
{%Pari-srut, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. streaming or flowing round
or over, foaming, fermenting; ({%t%}), f. a kind of
[Page0551-b+ 74]
intoxicating liquor prepared from herbs; dropping,
flowing. {%—Parisrun-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possess-
ing Pari-srut.
<LEND>

<L>28165<pc>0551-b<k1>parisruta<k2>parisruta
{%Pari-sruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowed, streamed round;
trickled, oozed; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of intoxicating liquor.
<LEND>

<L>28166<pc>0551-b<k1>parisvAra<k2>parisvAra
{#parisvAra#}¦ {%pari-svāra, as,%} m., Ved. a par-
ticular kind of singing.
<LEND>

<L>28167<pc>0551-b<k1>parihata<k2>parihata
{#parihata#}¦ {%pari-hata, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%han%}
with {%pari%}), loosed, loosened.
<LEND>

<L>28168<pc>0551-b<k1>pariharaRa<k2>pariharaRa
{#pariharaRa#}¦ {%pari-haraṇa.%} See {%pari-hṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>28169<pc>0551-b<k1>parihava<k2>parihava
{#parihava#}¦ {%pari-hava, as,%} m., Ved. (fr. rt. {%hve%}
with {%pari%}), crying or calling upon (?); invoking (?).
<LEND>

<L>28170<pc>0551-b<k1>parihas<k2>parihas
{#parihas#}¦ {%pari-has,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hasati, -hasitum,%}
to laugh at, ridicule, deride.
<LEND>

<L>28171<pc>0551-b<k1>parihasita<k2>parihasita
{%Pari-hasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ laughed at, ridiculed.
<LEND>

<L>28172<pc>0551-b<k1>parihAsa<k2>parihAsa
{%Pari-hāsa, as,%}¦ m. jesting, joking, mirth, merri-
ment, a jest, joke; laughter; laughing at, deriding,
ridiculing. {%—Parihāsa-kathā,%} f. an amusing story.
{%—Parihāsa-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Pari-%}
{%hāsa-vedin, ī,%} m. a jester, a wag, wit. {%—Parihāsa-%}
{%śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a gay or joyous disposition.
{%—Parihāsa-hari, is,%} m., N. of a temple of Viṣṇu;
[cf. {%parīhāsa-keśava.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28173<pc>0551-b<k1>parihAsya<k2>parihAsya
{%Pari-hāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ laughable, ridiculous.
<LEND>

<L>28174<pc>0551-b<k1>parihasta<k2>parihasta
{#parihasta#}¦ {%pari-hasta, as,%} m., Ved. a ring
for the hand, an amulet put round the hand to
secure the birth of a child.
<LEND>

<L>28175<pc>0551-b<k1>parihA<k2>parihA
{#parihA#}¦ {%pari-hā,%} Pass. {%-hīyate,%} to wane,
fail, waste away, decrease; to be wanting; to want
or be deficient in or be destitute of (with abl.); to
be deprived of or excluded from (with abl.); to be
abandoned; to be avoided or omitted; (in Mahā-bh.
Sabhā-p. 1460 the form {%pari-hāsyati%} occurs, said
to mean ‘will fail’): Caus. {%-hāpayati, -yitum,%} to
abandon.
<LEND>

<L>28176<pc>0551-b<k1>parihARa<k2>parihARa
{%Pari-hāṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. suffering loss, losing;
coming short of, being deficient, diminution, decrease.
<LEND>

<L>28177<pc>0551-b<k1>parihARi<k2>parihARi
{%Pari-hāṇi, is,%}¦ f. decrease, loss, deficiency.
<LEND>

<L>28178<pc>0551-b<k1>parihIRa<k2>parihIRa
{%Pari-hīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ waned, faded, wasted;
deserted by; deprived of, destitute of; wanting,
deficient in (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>28179<pc>0551-b<k1>parihIyamAna<k2>parihIyamAna
{%Pari-hīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ wasting away, dimin-
ishing, becoming emaciated.
<LEND>

<L>28180<pc>0551-b<k1>parihAwaka<k2>parihAwaka
{#parihAwaka#}¦ {%pari-hāṭaka, am,%} n. a ring worn
round the arm or leg, an armlet, anklet.
<LEND>

<L>28181<pc>0551-b<k1>parihAra<k2>parihAra
{#parihAra#}¦ {%pari-hāra.%} See {%pari-hṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>28182<pc>0551-b<k1>parihAsa<k2>parihAsa
{#parihAsa#}¦ {%pari-hāsa.%} See {%pari-has%} above.
<LEND>

<L>28183<pc>0551-b<k1>parihi<k2>parihi
{#parihi#}¦ {%pari-hi,%} cl. 5. P. {%-hinoti, -hetum,%}
Ved. to prepare.
<LEND>

<L>28184<pc>0551-b<k1>parihita<k2>parihita
{#parihita#}¦ {%pari-hita.%} See {%pari-dhā,%} p. 543.
<LEND>

<L>28185<pc>0551-b<k1>parihf<k2>parihf
{#parihf#}¦ {%pari-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te,%}
{%-hartum,%} to avoid, shun, pass by; to abandon,
desert, leave; to refute; to conceal; to embrace.
<LEND>

<L>28186<pc>0551-b<k1>pariharaRa<k2>pariharaRa
{%Pari-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. moving, carrying or placing
round or about (Ved.); avoiding; leaving, abandon-
ing; seizing, taking; refuting, repelling; disap-
pearing (?).
<LEND>

<L>28187<pc>0551-b<k1>pariharaRIya<k2>pariharaRIya
{%Pari-haraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shunned or
avoided, avoidable; to be taken away; to be repelled
or refuted or confuted. {%—Pariharaṇīya-tā,%} f. avoid-
ableness; disappearance, unattainableness; refuta-
tion (?).
<LEND>

<L>28188<pc>0551-b<k1>pariharat<k2>pariharat
{%Pari-harat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shunning, avoiding,
illuding; setting aside, taking away, humbling.
<LEND>

<L>28189<pc>0551-b<k1>pariharamARa<k2>pariharamARa
{%Pari-haramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ leaving, quitting;
taking, seizing; confuting; concealing.
<LEND>

<L>28190<pc>0551-b<k1>parihartavya<k2>parihartavya
{%Pari-hartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shunned or
avoided, to be abstained from; to be taken away;
to be confuted; (in Vedic grammar) to be constructed
with the {%pari-hāra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28191<pc>0551-b<k1>parihAra<k2>parihAra
{%Pari-hāra, as,%}¦ m. leading round; avoiding,
shunning, leaving, deserting, abandoning, giving up,
resigning; taking away, removing (e. g. {%virodha-%}
{%parihāra,%} removing a contradiction); repelling (a
[Page0551-c+ 79]
charge), confutation; seizing, keeping back; omit-
ting, concealing; reserve, concealment; omitting to
mention, leaving out; an extraordinary grant, ex-
emption from taxes, granting privileges, immunity;
bounty, largess; a circuit of common land round a
village or town; (in grammar) the repetition of a
word before and after {%iti%} ({%= pari-graha,%} q. v.);
contempt, disrespect; any objectionable thing or per-
son; objection; remedying or atoning for any im-
proper action. {%—Parihāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} avoid-
able.
<LEND>

<L>28192<pc>0551-c<k1>parihAraka<k2>parihAraka
{%Pari-hāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ repelling, refuting;
({%as%} or {%am%}), m. or n. ? (a various reading has
{%pari-haraka%}), an armlet; [cf. {%pari-hāṭaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28193<pc>0551-c<k1>parihArin<k2>parihArin
{%Pari-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ avoiding, shunning.
<LEND>

<L>28194<pc>0551-c<k1>parihArya<k2>parihArya
{%Pari-hārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shunned or avoided;
to be left undone; to be escaped from; to be taken
off or away; to be severed or separated; to be con-
structed with the {%pari-hāra; (as),%} m. a bracelet.
<LEND>

<L>28195<pc>0551-c<k1>parihfta<k2>parihfta
{%Pari-hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ avoided, shunned; aban-
doned, quitted; set aside, removed, rejected; taken
away, repelled, refuted; taken, seized.
<LEND>

<L>28196<pc>0551-c<k1>parihfti<k2>parihfti
{%Pari-hṛti, is,%}¦ f. shunning, avoiding, refuting.
<LEND>

<L>28197<pc>0551-c<k1>parihftya<k2>parihftya
{%Pari-hṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be avoided,
avoidable.
<LEND>

<L>28198<pc>0551-c<k1>parihfz<k2>parihfz
{#parihfz#}¦ {%pari-hṛṣ,%} Caus. P. {%-harṣayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to delight or gladden greatly, cause to rejoice.
<LEND>

<L>28199<pc>0551-c<k1>pariharzaRa<k2>pariharzaRa
{%Pari-harṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ greatly delighting.
<LEND>

<L>28200<pc>0551-c<k1>parihrut<k2>parihrut
{#parihrut#}¦ {%pari-hrut, t, t, t%} (fr. rt. {%hvṛ%} with
{%pari%}), Ved. causing to fall, destroying, injuring,
ruining.
<LEND>

<L>28201<pc>0551-c<k1>parihvft<k2>parihvft
{%Pari-hvṛt, t,%}¦ f., Ved. falling to the ground,
falling down, ruined.
<LEND>

<L>28202<pc>0551-c<k1>parihvfti<k2>parihvfti
{%Pari-hvṛti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. damage, injury, ruin.
<LEND>

<L>28203<pc>0551-c<k1>parI<k2>parI
{#parI#}¦ {%parī%} ({%pari-i,%} see rt. 5. {%i%}), cl. 2. P.
{%pary-eti, -etum,%} to go about, move in a circle, go
or flow round, walk round, circumambulate, roam
about; to encompass, encircle, include, grasp, span;
to run against; to reach, attain to; (with or without
{%manasā%}) to perceive, ponder: Intens., Ved. {%parīyate,%}
to revolve round, move round, move in a circle.
<LEND>

<L>28204<pc>0551-c<k1>parIta<k2>parIta
{%Parīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ encircling, surrounding; past,
elapsed, expired; departed; surrounded, encompassed;
filled; taken possession of, seized. {%—Parīta-tā,%} f.
the being surrounded or filled.
<LEND>

<L>28205<pc>0551-c<k1>parItin<k2>parItin
{%Parītin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (at the end of a comp.), =
{%parīta,%} filled with, seized by.
<LEND>

<L>28206<pc>0551-c<k1>parItya<k2>parItya
{%Parītya,%}¦ ind. having passed round or circum-
ambulated; having encompassed.
<LEND>

<L>28207<pc>0551-c<k1>parIyamARa<k2>parIyamARa
{%Parīyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being penetrated or
pervaded by.
<LEND>

<L>28208<pc>0551-c<k1>paryaya<k2>paryaya
{%Pary-aya, as,%}¦ m. revolution (of time), passing
away, lapse, expiration (e. g. {%kāla-paryayāt,%} after
the lapse of a certain time); waste or loss (of time);
change, mutation, alteration [cf. {%vāsa-p˚%}]; inver-
sion, irregular or inverted order, confusion; con-
trariety, opposition; deviation from enjoined or
customary observances, neglect of duty.
<LEND>

<L>28209<pc>0551-c<k1>paryayaRa<k2>paryayaRa
{%Pary-ayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. going round, walking round,
circumambulating, roving about; anything wound
round (an arrow or other object); a horse's saddle or
housings.
<LEND>

<L>28210<pc>0551-c<k1>paryAya<k2>paryAya
{%Pary-āya, as,%}¦ m. going or turning round, revolv-
ing, winding round; revolution, passing away (of
time), course, lapse, expiration; regular recurrence,
repetition; succession, turn; regular order, arrange-
ment, methodical disposition, method; a regularly
recurring series or formula, especially in the Ati-rātra
ceremony (Ved.); a strophe or clause of a hymn
(Ved.); a convertible term, synonym; a list of
synonyms; N. of a particular figure in rhetoric;
way, manner, mode, method of proceeding (e. g.
{%anena paryāyeṇa,%} in this manner); property,
quality, generic or specific character; opportunity,
occasion; formation, creation, manufacture, prepara-
tion, artificial production; comprehensiveness, ag-
gregation; {%paryāyeṇa,%} in succession, in turn, by
turns, by rotation, successively, alternately, (opposed
to {%yuga-pat.%}) {%—Paryāya-krama, as,%} m. order of
[Page0552-a+ 74]
succession, regular rotation or turn. {%—Paryāya-%}
{%cyuta, as, ā, am,%} one who has lost his turn, su-
perseded, supplanted. {%—Paryāya-ratna-mālā,%} f.
‘pearl-string of synonyms,’ N. of a lexicon. {%—Par-%}
{%yāya-vacana, am,%} n. a convertible term, synonym.
{%—Paryāya-vācaka, as, ā, am,%} expressing a cor-
responding notion. {%—Paryāya-vṛtti, is,%} f. alternate
course or action. {%—Paryāya-śabda, as,%} m. a con-
vertible term, synonym. {%—Paryāya-śayana, am,%}
n. alternate sleeping and watching. {%—Paryāya-śas,%}
ind. by phrases or sentences, &c. (Ved.); periodically;
in succession, by rotation, by turns, seriatim. {%—Par-%}
{%yāyānna (˚ya-an˚), am,%} n. food intended for an-
other, food that should have been given to some one
else (as that of a Śūdra to a Brāhman). {%—Paryā-%}
{%yārṇava (˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘ocean of synonyms,’ N.
of a lexicon. {%—Paryāyokta (˚ya-uk˚), am,%} n., N.
of a particular figure in rhetoric.
<LEND>

<L>28211<pc>0552-a<k1>paryAyika<k2>paryAyika
{%Paryāyika, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. composed in strophes.
<LEND>

<L>28212<pc>0552-a<k1>paryAyin<k2>paryAyin
{%Paryāyin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. embracing, including;
going round, encompassing (in a hostile manner);
periodical.
<LEND>

<L>28213<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkz<k2>parIkz
{#parIkz#}¦ {%parīkṣ (pari-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%-īkṣate,%}
{%-īkṣitum,%} to look round, inspect carefully, examine,
investigate, scrutinize; to observe, perceive: Caus.
{%-īkṣayati, -yitum,%} to cause to examine or inves-
tigate.
<LEND>

<L>28214<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkzaka<k2>parIkzaka
{%Parīkṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ trying, testing, examin-
ing; ({%as%}), m. a prover, examiner, experimenter,
investigator, judge.
<LEND>

<L>28215<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkzaRa<k2>parIkzaRa
{%Parīkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. trying, testing, experiment,
examination, putting to the test, trying, proving.
<LEND>

<L>28216<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkzaRIya<k2>parIkzaRIya
{%Parīkṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be tried or investi-
gated, fit to be brought to the test, to be submitted
to ordeal.
<LEND>

<L>28217<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkzA<k2>parIkzA
{%Parīkṣā,%}¦ f. investigation, examination, test, trial,
experiment, discrimination; trial by ordeal of various
kinds; N. of a commentary on Piṅgala's Chandaḥ-
śāstra.
<LEND>

<L>28218<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkzita<k2>parIkzita<h>1
1. {%parīkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ carefully inspected, tried,
examined, tested, proved.
<LEND>

<L>28219<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkzitavya<k2>parIkzitavya
{%Parīkṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be tried or tested,
to be examined or proved.
<LEND>

<L>28220<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkzin<k2>parIkzin
{%Parīkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ proving, testing, one who
tries or examines, an examiner.
<LEND>

<L>28221<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkzya<k2>parIkzya
{%Parīkṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be tried or tested; to
be examined or proved.
<LEND>

<L>28222<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkzit<k2>parIkzit
{#parIkzit#}¦ {%parī-kṣit, t,%} m. (connected with
and frequently written {%pari-kṣit%}), N. of a son of
Abhi-manyu and father of Janam-ejaya; of a son of
Kuru; of a son of An-aśvan and father of Bhīma-
sena; of a king of A-yodhyā.
<LEND>

<L>28223<pc>0552-a<k1>parIkzita<k2>parIkzita<h>2
2. {%parī-kṣita, as,%}¦ m. {%= parī-kṣit.%}
<LEND>

<L>28224<pc>0552-a<k1>parIjyA<k2>parIjyA
{#parIjyA#}¦ {%parījyā%} (for {%pari-ijyā,%} fr. rt. {%yaj%}
with {%pari%}), Ved. an accompanying or secondary
rite ({%= pari-yajña%}).
<LEND>

<L>28225<pc>0552-a<k1>parIRas<k2>parIRas
{#parIRas#}¦ {%parīṇas, ās,%} m. (probably fr. rt.
{%pṝ%}), Ved. plenty, abundance, wealth; (according to
Sāy.) {%= parito naddha; (asā),%} ind. {%= bahu,%} richly,
abundantly.
<LEND>

<L>28226<pc>0552-a<k1>parIRasa<k2>parIRasa
{%Parīṇasa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. plenty, abundance, wealth.
<LEND>

<L>28227<pc>0552-a<k1>parIRah<k2>parIRah
{#parIRah#}¦ {%parī-ṇah.%} See {%pari-ṇah,%} p. 542.
<LEND>

<L>28228<pc>0552-a<k1>parIRAha<k2>parIRAha
{%Parī-ṇāha = pari-ṇāha,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28229<pc>0552-a<k1>parIRAma<k2>parIRAma
{#parIRAma#}¦ {%parī-ṇāma = pari-ṇāma,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28230<pc>0552-a<k1>parIRAya<k2>parIRAya
{#parIRAya#}¦ {%parī-ṇāya = pari-ṇāya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28231<pc>0552-a<k1>parIta<k2>parIta
{#parIta#}¦ {%parīta,%} &c. See {%parī,%} p. 551, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28232<pc>0552-a<k1>parItat<k2>parItat
{#parItat#}¦ {%parī-tat.%} See {%pari-tan,%} p. 542.
<LEND>

<L>28233<pc>0552-a<k1>parItApa<k2>parItApa
{#parItApa#}¦ {%parī-tāpa, parī-toṣa, = pari-tāpa,%}
{%pari-toṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28234<pc>0552-a<k1>parIti<k2>parIti
{#parIti#}¦ {%parīti = puṣpāñjana,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28235<pc>0552-a<k1>parItta<k2>parItta<h>2
{#parItta#} 2¦. {%parī-tta%} (fr. {%pari-do,%} p. 543, col. 2,
or identified by some with 1. {%parī-tta,%} p. 543, col. 1),
cut round, incomplete, limited, circumscribed, not
too much, little. {%—Parītta-śubha, ās,%} m. pl. (with
[Page0552-b+ 66]
Buddhists) N. of the gods of the thirteenth order.
{%—Parīttābha (˚ta-ābha), ās,%} m. pl. (with Bud-
dhists) N. of the gods of the tenth order.
<LEND>

<L>28236<pc>0552-b<k1>parIdAha<k2>parIdAha
{#parIdAha#}¦ {%parī-dāha = pari-dāha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28237<pc>0552-b<k1>parIDAna<k2>parIDAna
{#parIDAna#}¦ {%parī-dhāna = pari-dhāna,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28238<pc>0552-b<k1>parIDAvin<k2>parIDAvin
{#parIDAvin#}¦ {%parī-dhāvin.%} See {%pari-dhāvin.%}
<LEND>

<L>28239<pc>0552-b<k1>parIDya<k2>parIDya
{#parIDya#}¦ {%parīdhya, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%indh%}
with {%pari%}), Ved. to be lighted or kindled.
<LEND>

<L>28240<pc>0552-b<k1>parIpAka<k2>parIpAka
{#parIpAka#}¦ {%parī-pāka = pari-pāka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28241<pc>0552-b<k1>parIpsat<k2>parIpsat
{#parIpsat#}¦ {%parīpsat, an, antī, at%} (pres. part.
of Desid. of rt. {%āp%} with {%pari%}), wishing to obtain,
striving to reach.
<LEND>

<L>28242<pc>0552-b<k1>parIpsamAna<k2>parIpsamAna
{%Parīpsamāna, as, ā, am, = parīpsat.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>28243<pc>0552-b<k1>parIpsA<k2>parIpsA
{%Parīpsā,%}¦ f. the desire of obtaining; the wish to
save or maintain or preserve; haste, hurry.
<LEND>

<L>28244<pc>0552-b<k1>parIpsu<k2>parIpsu
{%Parīpsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of obtaining, wishing
to save, desirous of maintaining or preserving.
<LEND>

<L>28245<pc>0552-b<k1>parIBAva<k2>parIBAva
{#parIBAva#}¦ {%parī-bhāva = pari-bhāva,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28246<pc>0552-b<k1>parIman<k2>parIman
{#parIman#}¦ {%parīman, ā%} or {%a,%} m. or n.? (fr.
rt. {%pṝ%}), Ved. bounty, plenty, plenteousness.
<LEND>

<L>28247<pc>0552-b<k1>parImARa<k2>parImARa
{#parImARa#}¦ {%parī-māṇa = pari-māṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28248<pc>0552-b<k1>parIyamARa<k2>parIyamARa
{#parIyamARa#}¦ {%parīyamāṇa.%} See {%parī,%} p. 551.
<LEND>

<L>28249<pc>0552-b<k1>parIra<k2>parIra
{#parIra#}¦ {%parīra, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%pṝ%}), fruit.
<LEND>

<L>28250<pc>0552-b<k1>parIraRa<k2>parIraRa
{#parIraRa#}¦ {%parīraṇa, as,%} m. a tortoise; a
stick or staff; {%= paṭṭa-śāṭaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>28251<pc>0552-b<k1>parIramBa<k2>parIramBa
{#parIramBa#}¦ {%parī-rambha, as,%} m. an embrace,
&c. See {%pari-rambha.%}
<LEND>

<L>28252<pc>0552-b<k1>parIvarta<k2>parIvarta
{#parIvarta#}¦ {%parī-varta, as,%} m. exchange, bar-
ter, &c. See {%pari-varta.%}
<LEND>

<L>28253<pc>0552-b<k1>parIvAda<k2>parIvAda
{#parIvAda#}¦ {%parī-vāda, as,%} m. reproof, censure,
abuse, &c. See {%pari-vāda.%}
<LEND>

<L>28254<pc>0552-b<k1>parIvAra<k2>parIvAra
{#parIvAra#}¦ {%parī-vāra, as,%} m. retinue, depend-
ants, family, &c. See {%pari-vāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>28255<pc>0552-b<k1>parIvAha<k2>parIvAha
{#parIvAha#}¦ {%parī-vāha, as,%} m. a drain, &c., see
{%pari-vāha;%} a scabbard (?).
<LEND>

<L>28256<pc>0552-b<k1>parIvettf<k2>parIvettf
{#parIvettf#}¦ {%parī-vettṛ = pari-vettṛ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28257<pc>0552-b<k1>parIveSa<k2>parIveSa
{#parIveSa#}¦ {%parī-veśa = pari-veṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28258<pc>0552-b<k1>parISAsa<k2>parISAsa
{#parISAsa#}¦ {%parī-śāsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%śas%}
with {%pari%}), Ved. anything cut out, an excision;
({%au%}), m. du. a kind of tongs used for raising a kettle
from the fire.
<LEND>

<L>28259<pc>0552-b<k1>parISeza<k2>parISeza
{#parISeza#}¦ {%parī-śeṣa = pari-śeṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28260<pc>0552-b<k1>parIz<k2>parIz
{#parIz#}¦ {%parīṣ%} [cf. rt. 3. {%iṣ%}], cl. 6. P. {%-ic-%}
{%chati, -eṣitum, -eṣṭum,%} Ved. to seek or search
about for.
<LEND>

<L>28261<pc>0552-b<k1>parIzwi<k2>parIzwi
{%Parīṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. investigation, research, inquiry,
(especially philosophical); service, attendance, rever-
ence, respect, homage, worship; willingness, readi-
ness, inclination.
<LEND>

<L>28262<pc>0552-b<k1>parIzeka<k2>parIzeka
{#parIzeka#}¦ {%parī-ṣeka = pari-ṣeka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28263<pc>0552-b<k1>parIsAra<k2>parIsAra
{#parIsAra#}¦ {%parī-sāra, as,%} m. {%= pari-sāra,%} q. v.;
near approach (?).
<LEND>

<L>28264<pc>0552-b<k1>parIhAra<k2>parIhAra
{#parIhAra#}¦ {%parī-hāra = pari-hāra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28265<pc>0552-b<k1>parIhAsa<k2>parIhAsa
{#parIhAsa#}¦ {%parī-hāsa = pari-hāsa,%} q. v. {%—Pa-%}
{%rīhāsa-keśava, as,%} m., N. of a temple of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>28266<pc>0552-b<k1>paru<k2>paru
{#paru#}¦ {%paru, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%pṝ%}), a
limb, member; a knot or joint in a reed; a moun-
tain; the ocean; the sky, paradise.
<LEND>

<L>28267<pc>0552-b<k1>paruSas<k2>paruSas
{%Paru-śas%}¦ or {%paruś-śas,%} Ved. limb by limb,
member by member.
<LEND>

<L>28268<pc>0552-b<k1>paruza<k2>paruza
{%Paruṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (in the earlier language, f.
{%paruṣṇī%}), containing knots, knotted (Ved.); spotted,
variegated, party-coloured; dirty; rough, rugged,
uneven, shaggy; keen, piercing (as the wind);
harsh, discordant; unkind, cruel, stern, hard, severe,
[Page0552-c+ 74]
abusive, contumelious; coarse, gross; churlish, cruel,
unkind; ({%as%}), m. a reed (Ved.); an arrow (Ved.);
{%= parūṣa,%} q. v.; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of riddle; ({%ṣṇī%}),
f., Ved. ‘much indented’ or ‘winding’ or ‘reedy,’
N. of one of the rivers of the Pañjāb, in later times
called Irā-vatī, and at the present day Rāvī; a
cloud?; ({%am%}), n. harsh and contumelious speech,
abuse; a species of Barleria with blue flowers; =
{%parūṣa,%} q. v.; ({%āṇi%}), n. pl. rough or harsh or
stern words. {%—Paruṣa-tva, am,%} n. roughness,
harshness. {%—Paruṣa-vacana, am,%} n. harsh language,
harsh or contumelious speech, reproach, abuse. {%—Pa-%}
{%ruṣa-vāc, k, k, k,%} harsh-spoken; ({%k%}), f. harsh or
contumelious speech. {%—Paruṣākṣara (˚ṣa-ak˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘harsh-worded,’ harsh. {%—Paruṣāhva%}
{%(˚ṣa-āh˚), as,%} m., Ved. a species of reed. {%—Paruṣī-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} spotted, soiled, stained; treated
roughly. {%—Paruṣetara (˚ṣa-it˚), as, ā, am,%} other
than rough, bright, light, beaming, mild. {%—Paru-%}
{%ṣokti (˚ṣa-uk˚), is,%} f. abusive or harsh language.
{%—Paruṣoktika, as,%} m. an abuser, one uttering
harsh and scurrilous language.
<LEND>

<L>28269<pc>0552-c<k1>paruzita<k2>paruzita
{%Paruṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ treated roughly or harshly,
subjected to rude treatment.
<LEND>

<L>28270<pc>0552-c<k1>paruziman<k2>paruziman
{%Paruṣiman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. a rough or shaggy
appearance.
<LEND>

<L>28271<pc>0552-c<k1>paruzya<k2>paruzya
{%Paruṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. party-coloured, varie-
gated, piebald.
<LEND>

<L>28272<pc>0552-c<k1>parus<k2>parus
{%Parus, us,%}¦ n., Ved. a knot or joint of a cane or
reed; a member of the body, limb; a joint, junction;
a part cut off, portion. {%—Paruḥ-sraṃsa, as,%} m., Ved.
fracture of a joint or limb.
<LEND>

<L>28273<pc>0552-c<k1>parUza<k2>parUza
{%Parūṣa%}¦ or {%parūṣaka, as,%} m. Grewia Asiatica
(from the berries of which a cooling beverage is pre-
pared; Bengāli {%phalasā;%} Hindūstānī <lang n="arabic">پهالسا</lang> ac-
cording to others) Xylocarpus Granatum = Bengāli,
{%paruṣa; (am),%} n. the fruit of this tree.
<LEND>

<L>28274<pc>0552-c<k1>parucCepa<k2>parucCepa
{#parucCepa#}¦ {%paru-cchepa, as,%} m. (perhaps irre-
gularly formed fr. {%parus + kṣepa%}), N. of a Ṛṣi,
son of Divo-dāsa and author of the hymns Ṛg-
veda I. 127 sqq.
<LEND>

<L>28275<pc>0552-c<k1>parut<k2>parut
{#parut#}¦ {%parut,%} ind. (fr. {%para + vat?,%} occur-
ring only in comp.), last year; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πέρυσι,</lang> Dor.
<lang n="greek">πέρυτι, πέρυτις:</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>vert, vernent, vern,</nsi>
‘last year:’ Goth. <nsi>fairni-s,</nsi> ‘old;’ <nsi>fairnyō yēr,</nsi> ‘the
old year.’]
<LEND>

<L>28276<pc>0552-c<k1>parudvAra<k2>parudvAra
{#parudvAra#}¦ {%parudvāra%} or {%parula, as,%} m. a
horse; [cf. Lat. <nsi>paraveredus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>28277<pc>0552-c<k1>paruza<k2>paruza
{#paruza#}¦ {%paruṣa.%} See under {%paru,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>28278<pc>0552-c<k1>pare<k2>pare
{#pare#}¦ {%pare%} ({%parā-i,%} see rt. 5. {%i%}), cl. 2, P.
{%paraiti, paraitum,%} to go away, run away; to go
to, set out for, approach; to go to the other world,
depart, die.
<LEND>

<L>28279<pc>0552-c<k1>pareta<k2>pareta
{%Pareta, as, ā, am,%}¦ departed, deceased, defunct,
dead; ({%as%}), m. a kind of spectre; a ghost, spirit.
{%—Pareta-bhūmi, is,%} f. ‘place of the departed,’ a
cemetery. {%—Pareta-rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘ruler of the dead,’
an epithet of Yama.
<LEND>

<L>28280<pc>0552-c<k1>pareti<k2>pareti
{%Pareti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. departure.
<LEND>

<L>28281<pc>0552-c<k1>parekz<k2>parekz
{#parekz#}¦ {%parekṣ (parā-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%pare-%}
{%kṣate, -ṣitum,%} Ved. to look at (anything at one's
side).
<LEND>

<L>28282<pc>0552-c<k1>paredyavi<k2>paredyavi
{#paredyavi#}¦ {%pare-dyavi, pare-dyus, pare-prāṇa.%}
See under {%para.%}
<LEND>

<L>28283<pc>0552-c<k1>parepa<k2>parepa
{#parepa#}¦ {%parepa, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%parā? + ap%}),
(any place) whence water has retired.
<LEND>

<L>28284<pc>0552-c<k1>pareman<k2>pareman
{#pareman#}¦ {%pareman,%} Ved. (perhaps) {%= parīman.%}
<LEND>

<L>28285<pc>0552-c<k1>parezwu<k2>parezwu
{#parezwu#}¦ {%pareṣṭu, us,%} or {%pareṣṭukā,%} f. a cow
which has often calved.
<LEND>

<L>28286<pc>0552-c<k1>paroMhu<k2>paroMhu
{#paroMhu#}¦ {%paro-'ṃhu.%} See under {%paras.%}
<LEND>

<L>28287<pc>0552-c<k1>parokza<k2>parokza
{#parokza#}¦ {%paro-'kṣa, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%paras +%}
{%4. akṣa,%} opposed to {%praty-akṣa,%} q. v.), beyond
the range of sight, out of sight, invisible, imper-
ceptible, escaping observation; unknown, strange,
[Page0553-a+ 77]
unintelligible; absent, past; ({%as%}), m. an ascetic,
religious hermit; N. of one of the sons of Anu; ({%ā%}),
f. past or completed action (in grammar perhaps
with {%vṛtti%}); ({%am%}), n. invisibility, absence, secrecy;
(in grammar) past time or tense. The acc., inst.,
abl., and loc. cases of {%parokṣa%} are used adverbially,
as follow: ({%am%}), ind. out of sight, behind one's
back, in the absence of, without the knowledge of
(in the earlier language with inst., in the later with
gen.); surreptitiously; ({%eṇa%}), ind., Ved. out of
sight, secretly, mysteriously, surreptitiously; ({%āt%}),
ind., Ved. secretly, without the knowledge of (with
inst.); ({%e%}), ind. behind one's back, in the absence
of, imperceptibly, surreptitiously; [cf. {%a-parokṣa.%}]
{%—Parokṣa-kṛtā,%} f., Ved., scil. {%ṛk,%} a hymn or
verse in which a deity is spoken of in the third
person, the first person being kept out of sight
(e. g. ‘Indra rules over heaven and earth,’ &c.). {%—Pa-%}
{%rokṣa-jit, t, t, t,%} conquering invisibly, an unseen
conqueror. {%—Parokṣa-tā,%} f. or {%parokṣa-tva, am,%}
n. the being beyond the sphere of observation, ob-
scurity, invisibility, imperceptibility; keeping one's
self as the first person out of sight, speaking of one's
self in the third person (Ved.). {%—Parokṣa-bhoga,%}
{%as,%} m. enjoyment or possession of anything in the
absence of the proprietor. {%—Parokṣa-manmatha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} inexperienced in love, a stranger to love.
{%—Parokṣa-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} whose life is unseen,
living out of sight; formed out of sight or unseen,
formed in obscurity; ({%is%}), f. an unseen life. {%—Pa-%}
{%rokṣārtha (˚ṣa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having an
unseen meaning, secret, recondite; ({%am%}), n. an
absent or invisible object.
<LEND>

<L>28288<pc>0553-a<k1>parogavyUti<k2>parogavyUti
{%Paro-gavyūti,%}¦ ind. (fr. {%paras + g˚%}), Ved. beyond
or outside the pasture land; (Sāy.) {%= krośa-dvayād%}
{%deśāt parastāt,%} further than a Gavyūti, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28289<pc>0553-a<k1>parobAhu<k2>parobAhu
{%Paro-bāhu,%}¦ ind. (fr. {%paras + b˚%}), Ved. beyond
the arm or reach.
<LEND>

<L>28290<pc>0553-a<k1>paromAtra<k2>paromAtra
{%Paro-mātra, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%paras + m˚%}), Ved.
immense, huge, vast.
<LEND>

<L>28291<pc>0553-a<k1>parorajas<k2>parorajas
{%Paro-rajas, ās, ās, as%}¦ (fr. {%paras + r˚%}), Ved.
being beyond the dust or above the world (Ved.);
untouched by passion.
<LEND>

<L>28292<pc>0553-a<k1>parolakza<k2>parolakza
{%Paro-lakṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. {%paras + l˚%}), over a
lakh, more than 100, 000.
<LEND>

<L>28293<pc>0553-a<k1>parovaram<k2>parovaram
{%Paro-'varam%}¦ (fr. {%paras + av˚%}), ind., Ved. from
top to bottom; from hand to hand; in succession,
one after another.
<LEND>

<L>28294<pc>0553-a<k1>parovarIRa<k2>parovarIRa
{%Paro-'varīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. {%paras + av˚%}), having
both superior and inferior, prior and subsequent, &c.
<LEND>

<L>28295<pc>0553-a<k1>parovarIyas<k2>parovarIyas
{%Paro-varīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (fr. {%paras + v˚%}), Ved.
broader on the outside or at the top; better than
good, most excellent of all; ({%as%}), n. the highest
happiness.
<LEND>

<L>28296<pc>0553-a<k1>parozRih<k2>parozRih
{%Paroṣṇih%}¦ (fr. {%paras + uṣ˚%}), {%k,%} f. a kind of
metre (consisting of 8 + 8 + 12 syllables).
<LEND>

<L>28297<pc>0553-a<k1>parokta<k2>parokta
{#parokta#}¦ {%parokta, parocya.%} See {%parā-vac.%}
<LEND>

<L>28298<pc>0553-a<k1>parozRI<k2>parozRI
{#parozRI#}¦ {%paroṣṇī,%} f. a cockroach, (some-
times wrongly written {%paroṣṭī%}); N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>28299<pc>0553-a<k1>parka<k2>parka
{#parka#}¦ {%parka%} in {%madhu-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28300<pc>0553-a<k1>parkawa<k2>parkawa
{#parkawa#}¦ {%parkaṭa, as,%} m. a heron [cf. {%vakoṭa%}];
({%am%}), n. regret, anxiety.
<LEND>

<L>28301<pc>0553-a<k1>parkawin<k2>parkawin
{%Parkaṭin, ī,%}¦ m. or {%parkaṭī,%} f. the waved-leaved
fig-tree, Ficus Infectoria; a fresh betel-nut.
<LEND>

<L>28302<pc>0553-a<k1>parjanI<k2>parjanI
{#parjanI#}¦ {%parjanī.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>28303<pc>0553-a<k1>parjanya<k2>parjanya
{#parjanya#}¦ {%parjanya, as,%} m. (perhaps fr. {%sphurj%}
for original {%sparj;%} but said to be fr. rt. {%pṛṣ;%}
sometimes wrongly written {%paryanya%}), a rain-cloud,
thunder-cloud, cloud; the muttering of clouds or
distant thunder; rain; Rain personified; the rain-
god, thunderer and fertilizer, i. e. Indra; N. of one
of the twelve Ādityas; of a Deva-gandharva; of
one of the seven Ṛṣis in several Manv-antaras; of
a Prajā-pati and father of Hiraṇya-roman; ({%ā%}), f. {%=%}
{%parjanī,%} col. 2. {%—Parjanya-krandya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. muttering like a rain-cloud or like Parjanya.
{%—Parjanya-jinvita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. animated by
[Page0553-b+ 80]
Parjanya; (Sāy.) {%= Parjanyena prīta,%} agreeable to
Parjanya. {%—Parjanya-nātha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
Parjanya as protector or patron. {%—Parjanya-patnī,%}
f., Ved. having Parjanya for a husband, wedded to
Parjanya (said of the earth). {%—Parjanya-retas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} Ved. generated or growing in the showers or
in the rainy season, (said of a reed or arrow; Sāy.
{%= parjanyo reto yasyāḥ.%}) {%—Parjanya-vṛddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. nourished by Parjanya (as the
Soma). {%—Parjanya-sūkta, am,%} n., N. of a hymn
contained in the Mantra-saṃhitā.
<LEND>

<L>28304<pc>0553-b<k1>parjanI<k2>parjanI
{%Parjanī,%}¦ f. the plant Cucumis Aromatica or Cu-
cumis Xanthorrhiza.
<LEND>

<L>28305<pc>0553-b<k1>parR<k2>parR
{#parR#}¦ {%parṇ%} (more properly regarded as
a Nom. fr. {%parṇa%} below), cl. 10. P.
{%parṇayati, -yitum,%} to be green or verdant.
<LEND>

<L>28306<pc>0553-b<k1>parRa<k2>parRa
{%Parṇa, am,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. rt. {%pṝ%}), a pinion,
feather, wing; the feather of an arrow; a leaf (re-
garded as the plumage of a tree); the Pān or betel
leaf; ({%as%}), m. Butea Frondosa (a beautiful sacred
tree with leaves from eight to sixteen inches in length,
of the wood of which particular sacrificial vessels
are made, in later times generally called {%palāśa%});
N. of a man; of a teacher; of a place; ({%ī%}), f. an
aquatic plant, Pistia Stratiotes; the leaf of the Asa
Fœtida (?); [cf. {%acchinna-p˚, aśva-p˚, uttāna-p˚,%}
&c.; cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">Πάρνης, Παρνασός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">Παρνασσός;</lang> perhaps Lat. <nsi>penna,</nsi> if not fr. rt. {%pat,%}
q. v., <nsi>frons;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>farn;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>fearn.</nsi>]
{%—Parṇa-kāra, as,%} m. {%= vāra-jīvī%} (commonly {%vā-%}
<nsi>rui</nsi>), a vender of betel leaves. {%—Parṇa-kuṭikā,%} f.
or {%parṇa-kuṭī,%} f. a hut made of leaves. {%—Parṇa-%}
{%kṛcchra, as,%} m. ‘leaf-penance,’ living for a time
upon an infusion of leaves and Kuśa grass as a religious
observance. {%—Parṇa-khaṇḍa, as,%} m. a tree without
apparent blossoms; a tree in general. {%—Parṇa-cīra-%}
{%paṭa, as, ā, am,%} clad in a garment made of strips
of leaves; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Parṇa-coraka, as,%}
m. a kind of perfume; [cf. {%coraka.%}] {%—Parṇa-dhi,%}
{%is,%} m., Ved. the part of an arrow to which the
feathers are fastened. {%—Parṇa-dhvas, t, t, t,%} causing
the falling of leaves. {%—Parṇa-nara, as,%} m. ‘man
of leaves,’ an effigy stuffed with leaves or the figure
of a man made of leaves and burnt in place of a lost
corpse. {%—Parṇa-nāla, as,%} m. a leaf-stalk, petiole.
{%—Parṇa-prātyika,%} N. of a locality (perhaps in-
correctly for {%parṇa-prāsika%}). {%—Parṇa-bhedinī,%} f.
the Priyaṅgu tree. {%—Parṇa-bhojana, as, ā, am,%}
feeding upon leaves; ({%as%}), m. any animal eating
leaves, a goat. {%—Parṇa-maṇi, is,%} m., Ved. a kind
of magical instrument (made of the wood of the
Parṇa tree ?). {%—Parṇa-maya, as, ī, am,%} Ved. made
of the wood of the Butea Frondosa. {%—Parṇa-%}
{%mācāla, as,%} m. the plant Averrhoa Carambola (=
{%karmaraṅga%}). {%—Parṇa-muc, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} causing leaves
to fall (as the wind). {%—Parṇa-mṛga, as,%} m. ‘leaf-
animal,’ any wild animal lodging in the boughs of
trees (as a monkey, sloth, squirrel, &c.). {%—Parṇa-%}
{%ruh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} causing the leaves to grow (as the
wind). {%—Parṇa-latā,%} f. the betel plant. {%—Parṇa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding in leaves, leafy. {%—Parṇa-%}
{%valka, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Parṇa-vallī,%} f. Butea
Frondosa ({%= palāśī-latā%}). {%—Parṇa-vādya, am,%}
n. ‘leaf-music,’ sounds produced by blowing into a
leaf. {%—Parṇa-vī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. ‘wing-borne,’
carried by wings. {%—Parṇa-vīṭikā,%} f. the Areca nut
cut in pieces, sprinkled with spices, and rolled up
in betel leaves. {%—Parṇa-śada%} or {%parṇa-śāda, as,%}
m., Ved. the falling of leaves. {%—Parṇa-śadya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. relating to the falling of leaves. {%—Par-%}
{%ṇa-śayyā,%} f. a couch of leaves, leafy couch. {%—Parṇa-%}
{%śara, as,%} m., Ved. a leaf-stalk, petiole; the stalk of
a Parṇa leaf. {%—Parṇa-śavara, ās,%} m., N. of a
people, (Śavaras living upon leaves.) {%—Parṇa-śālā,%}
f. ‘leaf-hut,’ an arbour or hut made of leaves and
grass, hermitage; N. of a great settlement of
Brāhmans between the Yamunā and Gaṅgā in
Madhya-deśa. {%—Parṇaśālāgra (˚lā-ag˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a mountain in Bhadrāśva. {%—Parṇa-śuṣ, ṭ,%}
{%ṭ, ṭ,%} drying or shriveling the leaves (as the wind).
[Page0553-c+ 76]
{%—Parṇa-saṃstara, as, ā, am,%} having leaves for
a bed, sleeping on leaves. {%—Parṇa-santara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having leaves for a bed, sleeping on leaves.
{%—Parṇāḍhaka (˚ṇa-āḍh˚), as,%} m., N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants. {%—Parṇāda%}
{%(˚ṇa-ada), as, ā, am,%} feeding upon leaves; ({%as%}),
m., N. of an ancient sage; of a Brāhman. {%—Parṇā-%}
{%śana (˚ṇa-aś˚), am,%} n. feeding on leaves; ({%as%}), m.
a cloud. {%—Parṇāsi (˚ṇa-asi), is,%} m. a species of
basil with small leaves, Ocymum Sanctum. {%—Par-%}
{%ṇāhāra (˚ṇa-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} feeding upon leaves.
{%—Parṇoṭaja (˚ṇa-uṭ˚), am,%} n. ‘leaf-hut,’ an an-
chorite's hut or cottage, a hermitage. {%—Parṇotsa%}
{%(˚ṇa-ut˚), as,%} m., N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>28307<pc>0553-c<k1>parRaka<k2>parRaka
{%Parṇaka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (according to Mahī-dhara)
{%= bhilla,%} q. v.; N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
his descendants; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of vegetable; N. of
an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>28308<pc>0553-c<k1>parRaya<k2>parRaya
{%Parṇaya, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of an enemy (according
to Sāy. an Asura) slain by Indra. {%—Parṇaya-ghna,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. the slaying of Parṇaya.
<LEND>

<L>28309<pc>0553-c<k1>parRala<k2>parRala
{%Parṇala, as, ā, am,%}¦  abounding in leaves, full of
leaves, leafy.
<LEND>

<L>28310<pc>0553-c<k1>parRasi<k2>parRasi
{%Parṇasi, is,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%pṝ%}), a house
upon or by the water; a summer-house (?); a lotus;
a vegetable; adorning, decoration, toilet.
<LEND>

<L>28311<pc>0553-c<k1>parRASa<k2>parRASa
{%Parṇāśa%}¦ or {%parṇāsa, as,%} m. a species of plant, a
kind of basil with small leaves, Ocymum Sanctum;
({%ā%}), f., N. of various rivers; [cf. {%pūrṇāśā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28312<pc>0553-c<k1>parRika<k2>parRika
{%Parṇika, as, ā, am,%}¦ selling or dealing in Parṇī.
<LEND>

<L>28313<pc>0553-c<k1>parRin<k2>parRin
{%Parṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ winged, plumed; leafy, having
leaves, leaved; ({%ī%}), m. a tree; Butea Frondosa;
({%inī%}), f. a species of plant; N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>28314<pc>0553-c<k1>parRila<k2>parRila
{%Parṇila, as, ā, am,%}¦ abounding in leaves, leafy.
<LEND>

<L>28315<pc>0553-c<k1>parRya<k2>parRya
{%Parṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. relating to leaves, leafy.
<LEND>

<L>28316<pc>0553-c<k1>parRAla<k2>parRAla
{#parRAla#}¦ {%parṇāla, as,%} m. a boat; a spade
or hoe; single combat.
<LEND>

<L>28317<pc>0553-c<k1>partf<k2>partf
{#partf#}¦ {%partṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pṛ%}), Ved.
a protector; protection, means of defence, (Sāy. =
{%pālana-sādhanam.%})
<LEND>

<L>28318<pc>0553-c<k1>pard<k2>pard
{#pard#}¦ {%pard,%} cl. 1. A. {%pardate,%} &c., to break
wind, fart; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πέρδ-ω, πέρδ-ο-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἔ-παρδ-ο-ν, πέ-πορδ-α, πορδ-ή, πέρδ-ιξ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pêd-o,</nsi>
<nsi>pêd-or, pôdex;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>firz-u;</nsi> Bohem. <nsi>prd-u;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>perd-z-u, pérs-ti, pī1rd-i-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>28319<pc>0553-c<k1>parda<k2>parda
{%Parda, as,%}¦ m. a fart; a quantity of hair, thick hair.
<LEND>

<L>28320<pc>0553-c<k1>pardana<k2>pardana
{%Pardana, am,%}¦ n. breaking wind, a fart.
<LEND>

<L>28321<pc>0553-c<k1>parp<k2>parp
{#parp#}¦ {%parp%} (a doubtful rt.; by some re-
garded as a Sautra rt.; cf. Uṇādi-s. IV. 81),
cl. 1. P. {%parpati,%} &c., to go or move.
<LEND>

<L>28322<pc>0553-c<k1>parpa<k2>parpa
{%Parpa, am,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pṛ%}), a wheel-
chair, a chair in which a cripple is moved about;
young grass; a house.
<LEND>

<L>28323<pc>0553-c<k1>parpawa<k2>parpawa
{%Parpaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a species of medicinal plant with
bitter leaves ({%= bheṣajāntara, tiktā kṣetra-par-%}
{%paṭī,%} apparently the Oldenlandia Biflora); a kind of
thin cake, {%= carpaṭī; (ī),%} f. a kind of fragrant
earth or a red aluminous earth (apparently a sort of
Bol, brought from Surāt or Su-rāṣṭra); a sort of
fragrant substance or perfume ({%= kṛṣṇā, cakra-%}
{%vartinī, jatukā,%} commonly called {%paparī%}); a thin
crisp cake made of any pulse. {%—Parpaṭa-druma%}
or {%parpaṭī-druma, as,%} m. bdellium.
<LEND>

<L>28324<pc>0553-c<k1>parpawaka<k2>parpawaka
{%Parpaṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of medicinal plant
with bitter leaves, (probably) Oldenlandia Biflora.
<LEND>

<L>28325<pc>0553-c<k1>parpika<k2>parpika
{%Parpika, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a cripple who moves about
by the aid of a chair.
<LEND>

<L>28326<pc>0553-c<k1>parparI<k2>parparI
{#parparI#}¦ {%parparī,%} f. a braid of hair.
<LEND>

<L>28327<pc>0553-c<k1>parparIka<k2>parparIka
{#parparIka#}¦ {%parparīka, as,%} m. (said to be fr.
rt. {%pṝ%} with reduplication), the sun; fire; a tank,
reservoir, piece of water.
<LEND>

<L>28328<pc>0553-c<k1>parParIka<k2>parParIka
{#parParIka#}¦ {%parpharīka, as,%} m., Ved. one who
tears to pieces or fills, (Sāy. {%= śatrūṇaṃ vidāra-%}
{%yitṛ%} or {%dhanādi-dānena pūrayitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>28329<pc>0553-c<k1>parb<k2>parb
{#parb#}¦ {%parb,%} cl. 1. P. {%parbati,%} &c., to go
or move.
<LEND>
[Page0554-a+ 73]

<L>28330<pc>0554-a<k1>parmAqi<k2>parmAqi
{#parmAqi#}¦ {%parmāḍi, is,%} m., N. of a prince of
Karṇāṭa, (also called Parmāṇḍi.)
<LEND>

<L>28331<pc>0554-a<k1>paryak<k2>paryak
{#paryak#}¦ {%pary-ak.%} See 2. {%pary-añc%} below.
<LEND>

<L>28332<pc>0554-a<k1>paryagu<k2>paryagu
{#paryagu#}¦ {%pary-agu%} in comp. with {%pārama-%}
{%haṃsya,%} Bhāgavata-Purāṇa IV. 21, 40; according to
a Scholiast {%= parito na gacchanti gāvo yasmāt,%} but
variously taken, see {%pāramahaṃsya-pari.%}
<LEND>

<L>28333<pc>0554-a<k1>paryagni<k2>paryagni
{#paryagni#}¦ {%pary-agni, is,%} m., Ved. circumam-
bient fire; a torch carried round the sacrificial
animal; the ceremony of carrying fire round the
sacrificial animal; {%paryagni kṛ,%} to carry fire round
any one (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>28334<pc>0554-a<k1>paryagnikfta<k2>paryagnikfta
{%Paryagni-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. encircled with
fire.
<LEND>

<L>28335<pc>0554-a<k1>paryagnikriyamARa<k2>paryagnikriyamARa
{%Paryagni-kriyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being
encircled with fire; ({%e%}), loc. during the encircling
with fire.
<LEND>

<L>28336<pc>0554-a<k1>paryaNka<k2>paryaNka
{#paryaNka#}¦ {%pary-aṅka.%} See under 1. {%pary-añc.%}
<LEND>

<L>28337<pc>0554-a<k1>paryaNK<k2>paryaNK
{#paryaNK#}¦ {%pary-aṅkh,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-aṅkhayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} Ved. to surround, clasp or encircle round.
<LEND>

<L>28338<pc>0554-a<k1>paryaNgya<k2>paryaNgya
{#paryaNgya#}¦ {%paryaṅgya, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%pari +%}
{%aṅga%}), Ved. being about or at the side.
<LEND>

<L>28339<pc>0554-a<k1>paryaYc<k2>paryaYc<h>1
{#paryaYc#} 1¦. {%pary-añc%} or {%pary-ac,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-añcati, -te, -añcitum,%} Ved. to turn round, revolve.
<LEND>

<L>28340<pc>0554-a<k1>paryaNka<k2>paryaNka
{%Pary-aṅka, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%pari + aṅka%} or perhaps
directly fr. 1. {%pary-añc%} above; also spelt {%paly-aṅka%}),
a bed, couch, sofa; a litter, palanquin; a cloth thrown
over the back, loins and knees while seated on the
hams in the Oriental manner; sitting upon the hams
(a particular posture especially practised by ascetics in
meditation); N. of a mountain (son of Vindhya).
{%—Paryaṅka-granthi-bandha, as,%} m. or {%-˚ban-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n. the bending of the legs in sitting on
the hams. {%—Paryaṅka-bandha, as,%} m. sitting in
the Paryaṅka posture ({%= vīrāsana%}). {%—Paryaṅka-%}
{%bandhana, am,%} n. binding a cloth round the back,
loins and knees while squatting on the hams. {%—Pary-%}
{%aṅka-bhogin, ī,%} m. ‘couch-serpent,’ a kind of ser-
pent. {%—Paryaṅka-stha, as, ā, am,%} sitting on a sofa.
<LEND>

<L>28341<pc>0554-a<k1>paryaYc<k2>paryaYc<h>2
2. {%pary-añc,%}¦ apparently only used in acc. sing.
neut. {%pary-ak,%} ind. round about, all round, in every
direction.
<LEND>

<L>28342<pc>0554-a<k1>paryaw<k2>paryaw
{#paryaw#}¦ {%pary-aṭ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-aṭati, -te, -aṭi-%}
{%tum,%} to roam or wander about, rove about.
<LEND>

<L>28343<pc>0554-a<k1>paryawa<k2>paryawa
{%Pary-aṭa, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>28344<pc>0554-a<k1>paryawana<k2>paryawana
{%Pary-aṭana, am,%}¦ n. wandering about, peregrina-
tion, roaming through.
<LEND>

<L>28345<pc>0554-a<k1>paryawita<k2>paryawita
{%Pary-aṭita, am,%}¦ n. wandering about.
<LEND>

<L>28346<pc>0554-a<k1>paryanubanDa<k2>paryanubanDa
{#paryanubanDa#}¦ {%pary-anubandha, as,%} m. binding
round.
<LEND>

<L>28347<pc>0554-a<k1>paryanuyoga<k2>paryanuyoga
{#paryanuyoga#}¦ {%pary-anuyoga, as,%} m. asking,
inquiring, question; blame, censure, reproach; con-
testing, disputing (?).
<LEND>

<L>28348<pc>0554-a<k1>paryanta<k2>paryanta
{#paryanta#}¦ {%pary-anta, as,%} m. an encircling
boundary, circuit, circumference; limit, edge, skirt,
border, verge, extremity; end, termination, close
(e. g. {%kāla-paryanta,%} the end or close of an ap-
pointed time; {%paryantāt paryantam,%} from one
end to the other); ({%as, ā, am%}), bounded, sur-
rounded by a boundary; extending in all directions;
(often at the end of comps., e. g. {%kṣura-pary-%}
{%antaṃ cakram,%} a discus with edges like a razor's;
{%samudra-paryantā pṛthivī,%} the ocean-bounded
earth or the earth extending to the ocean.) {%—Pary-%}
{%anta-deśa, as,%} m. a neighbouring or adjacent dis-
trict. {%—Paryanta-paryantam,%} ind. to the end of,
as far as. {%—Paryanta-parvata, as,%} m. an adjoining
hill. {%—Paryanta-bhū, ūs,%} f. ground contiguous to
the skirts of a river or mountain. {%—Paryanta-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} limitative, confining, adjoining, neighbour-
ing. {%—Paryanta-sthita, as, ā, am,%} bounding, con-
fining.
<LEND>

<L>28349<pc>0554-a<k1>paryantikA<k2>paryantikA
{%Paryantikā,%}¦ f. loss of all good qualities, depravity.
<LEND>
[Page0554-b+ 70]

<L>28350<pc>0554-b<k1>paryanya<k2>paryanya
{#paryanya#}¦ {%paryanya,%} incorrectly for {%parjanya,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28351<pc>0554-b<k1>paryanviz<k2>paryanviz
{#paryanviz#}¦ {%pary-anv-iṣ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-icchati,%}
{%-eṣṭum, -eṣitum,%} to seek for, search after.
<LEND>

<L>28352<pc>0554-b<k1>paryaya<k2>paryaya
{#paryaya#}¦ {%pary-aya, pary-ayaṇa.%} See under
{%parī,%} p. 551, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28353<pc>0554-b<k1>paryarzaRa<k2>paryarzaRa
{#paryarzaRa#}¦ {%pary-arṣaṇa.%} See under 2. {%pary-%}
{%ṛṣ,%} p. 555, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28354<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavakF<k2>paryavakF
{#paryavakF#}¦ {%pary-ava-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -ka-%}
{%ritum, -karītum,%} to scatter round or about, shed
over.
<LEND>

<L>28355<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavacCid<k2>paryavacCid
{#paryavacCid#}¦ {%pary-ava-cchid (˚chid),%} cl. 7. P.
A. {%-cchinatti, -cchintte, -cchettum,%} Ved. to cut off
on both sides or all round.
<LEND>

<L>28356<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavadAta<k2>paryavadAta
{#paryavadAta#}¦ {%pary-avadāta, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt.
{%dai%} or 7. {%dā%} with {%pary-ava%}), perfectly clean or
pure; [cf. 7. {%dā, ava-dāta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28357<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavado<k2>paryavado
{#paryavado#}¦ {%pary-ava-do%} or {%pary-avadā%} (see rt.
3. {%dā%}), cl. 2. 4. P. {%-dāti, -dyati, -dātum,%} Ved. to
cut off or slice all round.
<LEND>

<L>28358<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavaDAraRa<k2>paryavaDAraRa
{#paryavaDAraRa#}¦ {%pary-avadhāraṇa, am,%} n. pre-
cise determination, refining, subtilizing.
<LEND>

<L>28359<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavaroDa<k2>paryavaroDa
{#paryavaroDa#}¦ {%pary-avarodha, as,%} m. (fr. rt.
{%rudh%} with {%pary-ava%}), obstruction, hindrance.
<LEND>

<L>28360<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavaSeza<k2>paryavaSeza
{#paryavaSeza#}¦ {%pary-avaśeṣa, as,%} m. end, ter-
mination.
<LEND>

<L>28361<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavaSezita<k2>paryavaSezita
{%Pary-avaśeṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ regarded as the end
of all (i. e. God).
<LEND>

<L>28362<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavazwamB<k2>paryavazwamB
{#paryavazwamB#}¦ {%pary-ava-ṣṭambh,%} cl. 5. 9. P., 1.
A. {%-ṣṭabhnoti, -nāti, -ṣṭambhate, -ṣṭambhitum,%}
to surround; to surround with a view to obstruct.
<LEND>

<L>28363<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavazwabDa<k2>paryavazwabDa
{%Pary-avaṣṭabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, in-
vested.
<LEND>

<L>28364<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavazwamBana<k2>paryavazwamBana
{%Pary-avaṣṭambhana, am,%}¦ n. surrounding, in-
vesting.
<LEND>

<L>28365<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavaso<k2>paryavaso
{#paryavaso#}¦ {%pary-ava-so,%} cl. 4. P. {%-syati, -sā-%}
{%tum,%} to finish, complete, conclude; to endeavour.
<LEND>

<L>28366<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavasAna<k2>paryavasAna
{%Pary-avasāna, am,%}¦ n. end, termination, con-
clusion, issue.
<LEND>

<L>28367<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavasAnika<k2>paryavasAnika
{%Paryavasānika, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming to a close,
drawing to an end or conclusion.
<LEND>

<L>28368<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavasAyin<k2>paryavasAyin
{%Pary-avasāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ closing or ending with
(often in comps.). {%—Paryavasāyi-tva, am,%} n. ter-
mination, close.
<LEND>

<L>28369<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavasita<k2>paryavasita
{%Pary-avasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ finished, completed,
ended, terminated, concluded; perished, lost; re-
solved; {%lokāntaram pary-avasitaḥ,%} gone to another
world.
<LEND>

<L>28370<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavaskanda<k2>paryavaskanda
{#paryavaskanda#}¦ {%pary-avaskanda, as,%} m. jumping
or leaping down (from a carriage).
<LEND>

<L>28371<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavasTA<k2>paryavasTA<h>1
{#paryavasTA#} 1¦. {%pary-ava-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -sthātum,%} to be present or exist
everywhere; to rely upon: Caus. {%-sthāpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to raise, rouse.
<LEND>

<L>28372<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavasTA<k2>paryavasTA<h>2
2. {%pary-avasthā,%}¦ f. or {%pary-avasthāna, am,%} n.
opposition, resistance, contradiction.
<LEND>

<L>28373<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavasTAtf<k2>paryavasTAtf
{%Pary-avasthātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ opposing, obstruct-
ing, opposed to or against; ({%tā%}), m. an antagonist,
opponent, adversary, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>28374<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavasTita<k2>paryavasTita
{%Pary-avasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ opposed to, siding
with an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>28375<pc>0554-b<k1>paryave<k2>paryave
{#paryave#}¦ {%pary-ave%} ({%pary-ava-i,%} see rt. 5. {%i%}),
cl. 2. P. {%-avaiti, -avaitum,%} Ved. to turn round,
turn in the right direction; to pass, elapse.
<LEND>

<L>28376<pc>0554-b<k1>paryavekz<k2>paryavekz
{#paryavekz#}¦ {%pary-avekṣ (pary-ava-īkṣ),%} cl. 1.
A. {%-avekṣate, -kṣitum,%} to regard from every side,
regard (?).
<LEND>

<L>28377<pc>0554-b<k1>paryaS<k2>paryaS<h>1
{#paryaS#} 1¦. {%pary-aś,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-aśnoti, -nute,%}
{%aśitum,%} Ved. to arrive at, reach, attain (Sāy. =
{%parito vy-āp%}).
<LEND>
[Page0554-c+ 73]

<L>28378<pc>0554-c<k1>paryaS<k2>paryaS<h>2
{#paryaS#} 2¦. {%pary-aś,%} cl. 9. P. {%-aśnāti, -aśitum,%}
to eat.
<LEND>

<L>28379<pc>0554-c<k1>paryaSru<k2>paryaSru
{#paryaSru#}¦ {%pary-aśru, us, us, u,%} bathed in or
suffused with tears, shedding tears, tearful.
<LEND>

<L>28380<pc>0554-c<k1>paryas<k2>paryas<h>1
{#paryas#} 1¦. {%pary-as,%} cl. 2. P. {%-asti,%} Ved. to
be in the way; to surpass; to pass or spend (time);
(Sāy.) {%= parito bhū,%} to be everywhere about.
<LEND>

<L>28381<pc>0554-c<k1>paryas<k2>paryas<h>2
{#paryas#} 2¦. {%pary-as,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-asyati, -te,%}
{%-asitum,%} to throw or cast round, put or place round,
put on, spread round, diffuse; to surround, encircle,
encompass; to enchase; to entrap, ensnare; to turn
round, turn over; to turn away; to throw down,
overturn, upset: Pass. {%-asyate,%} to fall down, drop,
sink down: Caus. to cause to drop, to cause to roll
down or shed (as tears).
<LEND>

<L>28382<pc>0554-c<k1>paryasana<k2>paryasana
{%Pary-asana, am,%}¦ n. throwing about, moving to
and fro, wagging; casting, sending; putting off or
away.
<LEND>

<L>28383<pc>0554-c<k1>paryasta<k2>paryasta
{%Pary-asta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or cast round,
placed round, put on, diffused; surrounded, encom-
passed, ensnared; thrown off, thrown down; thrown
or tossed up; overturned, upset; dismissed, laid aside;
struck, killed; bound. {%—Paryasta-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. containing the notion expressed by the word
{%pary-asta%}. {%—Paryasta-vilocana, as, ā, am,%} or
{%paryastākṣa (˚ta-akṣa), as, ī, am,%} Ved. having
the eyes cast or directed round.
<LEND>

<L>28384<pc>0554-c<k1>paryasti<k2>paryasti
{%Pary-asti, is,%}¦ f. sitting upon the hams ({%= pary-%}
{%aṅka,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>28385<pc>0554-c<k1>paryastikA<k2>paryastikA
{%Paryastikā,%}¦ f. {%= pary-asti%} above.
<LEND>

<L>28386<pc>0554-c<k1>paryasyat<k2>paryasyat
{%Pary-asyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ scattering; oversetting,
upsetting; investing.
<LEND>

<L>28387<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAsa<k2>paryAsa
{%Pary-āsa, as,%}¦ m. edging, trimming (Ved.); end.
conclusion; epithet of particular concluding strophes
in certain hymns (Ved.); rotation, revolution; in-
verted order or position.
<LEND>

<L>28388<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAsana<k2>paryAsana
{%Pary-āsana, am,%}¦ n. revolution, circumvolution.
<LEND>

<L>28389<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAsita<k2>paryAsita
{%Pary-āsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ upset, subverted, reversed.
<LEND>

<L>28390<pc>0554-c<k1>paryastamayam<k2>paryastamayam
{#paryastamayam#}¦ {%pary-astamayam,%} ind., Ved.
about sunset.
<LEND>

<L>28391<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAkula<k2>paryAkula
{#paryAkula#}¦ {%pary-ākula, as, ā, am,%} filled, full;
turbid on all sides (as water), turbid; confounded,
confused, disordered, beside one's self, excited, agi-
tated, anxious, bewildered, infatuated. {%—Paryākula-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. confusion, bewilderment.
<LEND>

<L>28392<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAkf<k2>paryAkf
{#paryAkf#}¦ {%pary-ā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kurute, -kartum,%} Ved. to turn round.
<LEND>

<L>28393<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAkzip<k2>paryAkzip
{#paryAkzip#}¦ {%pary-ā-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣi-%}
{%pati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to wind round, turn.
<LEND>

<L>28394<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAgam<k2>paryAgam
{#paryAgam#}¦ {%pary-ā-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go round, perform a revolution, elapse;
to last or live through a space of time; to come to
an end or conclusion; to surround on every side,
encircle, ensnare, get into one's power.
<LEND>

<L>28395<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAgata<k2>paryAgata
{%Pary-āgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has finished
the course or career of life.
<LEND>

<L>28396<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAgal<k2>paryAgal
{#paryAgal#}¦ {%pary-ā-gal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-galati, -ga-%}
{%litum,%} to let fall in drops, drop, trickle.
<LEND>

<L>28397<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAgalat<k2>paryAgalat
{%Pary-āgalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dropping, falling,
trickling.
<LEND>

<L>28398<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAgA<k2>paryAgA
{#paryAgA#}¦ {%pary-ā-gā%} (occurring in Aor. {%pary-%}
{%āgāt,%} Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 8157), to perform a revo-
lution, elapse.
<LEND>

<L>28399<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAcar<k2>paryAcar
{#paryAcar#}¦ {%pary-ā-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -ca-%}
{%ritum,%} Ved. to come near, approach, resort to.
<LEND>

<L>28400<pc>0554-c<k1>paryAcAnta<k2>paryAcAnta
{#paryAcAnta#}¦ {%pary-ācānta, as, ā, am,%} sipped,
rinsed prematurely; (scil. {%annam%}) food left by a
person who has rinsed his mouth out.
<LEND>

<L>28401<pc>0554-c<k1>paryARa<k2>paryARa
{#paryARa#}¦ {%paryāṇa, am,%} n. (for {%pari-yāṇa%}), a
circuit (Ved.); a saddle, pack-saddle or cloth serving
for one.
<LEND>

<L>28402<pc>0554-c<k1>paryARah<k2>paryARah
{#paryARah#}¦ {%pary-ā-ṇah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-ṇahyati,%}
{%-te, -ṇaddhum,%} Ved. to cover up, cover.
<LEND>
[Page0555-a+ 72]

<L>28403<pc>0555-a<k1>paryARahana<k2>paryARahana
{%Pary-āṇahana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a covering.
<LEND>

<L>28404<pc>0555-a<k1>paryARI<k2>paryARI
{#paryARI#}¦ {%pary-ā-ṇī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ṇayati, -te,%}
{%-ṇetum,%} to lead round; to lead or bring forward.
<LEND>

<L>28405<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAtan<k2>paryAtan
{#paryAtan#}¦ {%pary-ā-tan,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-tanoti,%}
{%-nute, -tanitum,%} Ved. to spread round, encompass,
surround.
<LEND>

<L>28406<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAdA<k2>paryAdA
{#paryAdA#}¦ {%pary-ā-dā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-datte, -dātum,%}
to make one's own, appropriate, learn; to take pos-
session of; to take anything (acc.) away from (abl.);
to take off, remove; to seize, grasp.
<LEND>

<L>28407<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAdru<k2>paryAdru
{#paryAdru#}¦ {%pary-ā-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -dro-%}
{%tum,%} to run to and fro, hasten round about.
<LEND>

<L>28408<pc>0555-a<k1>paryADA<k2>paryADA
{#paryADA#}¦ {%pary-ā-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} Ved. to lay round, surround
with (fire).
<LEND>

<L>28409<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAp<k2>paryAp
{#paryAp#}¦ {%pary-āp,%} cl. 5. P. {%-āpnoti, -āptum,%}
to reach, obtain, gain (Ved.); to make an end of;
to be content: Desid. {%parīpsati,%} &c., to wish to
obtain or reach; to try to get at; to ask for, request,
desire; to wish to preserve, guard; to lie in wait
or ambush.
<LEND>

<L>28410<pc>0555-a<k1>paryApta<k2>paryApta
{%Pary-āpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtained, gained; finished,
ended, completed, complete, large, extensive, spacious;
full; able, adequate, enough, sufficient; many;
({%am%}), ind. willingly, readily; ably, powerfully; satis-
factorily. {%—Paryāpta-kala, as, ā, am,%} having full
digits (as the moon). {%—Paryāpta-kāma, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. one whose desires are under control. {%—Paryāp-%}
{%ta-tā,%} f. satisfaction, gratification. {%—Paryāpta-dak-%}
{%ṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} accompanied with liberal gifts.
{%—Paryāpta-bhoga, as, ā, am,%} possessing or en-
joying a sufficiency. {%—Paryāpta-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
able, capable.
<LEND>

<L>28411<pc>0555-a<k1>paryApti<k2>paryApti
{%Pary-āpti, is,%}¦ f. attaining, obtaining, acquisition;
end, conclusion, close; adequacy, competency, fitness,
dexterity; entireness, fulness, sufficiency, enough;
satisfaction, repletion, satiety; willingness, readiness;
protecting, preserving, guarding, warding off a blow,
self-defence; discrimination or distinction of objects
according to their natural properties.
<LEND>

<L>28412<pc>0555-a<k1>paryApat<k2>paryApat
{#paryApat#}¦ {%pary-ā-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -pa-%}
{%titum,%} to hasten forth, hurry away, run away.
<LEND>

<L>28413<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAplu<k2>paryAplu
{#paryAplu#}¦ {%pary-ā-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, -plo-%}
{%tum,%} to run round, encompass, encircle: Caus. {%-plā-%}
{%vayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to cause to float round.
<LEND>

<L>28414<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAplAva<k2>paryAplAva
{%Pary-āplāva, as,%}¦ m. revolution.
<LEND>

<L>28415<pc>0555-a<k1>paryApluta<k2>paryApluta
{%Pary-āpluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, encircled.
<LEND>

<L>28416<pc>0555-a<k1>paryABU<k2>paryABU
{#paryABU#}¦ {%pary-ā-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bha-%}
{%vitum,%} Ved. to turn round.
<LEND>

<L>28417<pc>0555-a<k1>paryABf<k2>paryABf
{#paryABf#}¦ {%pary-ā-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bharati, -bhar-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to extract.
<LEND>

<L>28418<pc>0555-a<k1>paryABfta<k2>paryABfta
{%Pary-ā-bhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. extracted.
<LEND>

<L>28419<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAmfS<k2>paryAmfS
{#paryAmfS#}¦ {%pary-ā-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati,%}
{%-marṣṭum, -mraṣṭum,%} to subdue, conquer, over-
power.
<LEND>

<L>28420<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAya<k2>paryAya
{#paryAya#}¦ {%pary-āya.%} See under {%parī,%} p. 551.
<LEND>

<L>28421<pc>0555-a<k1>paryArin<k2>paryArin
{#paryArin#}¦ {%pary-ārin, ī, iṇī, i%} (fr. rt. 4. {%ṛ%} with
{%pari%}), Ved. (perhaps) falling away, decaying, decrepit.
<LEND>

<L>28422<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAloc<k2>paryAloc
{#paryAloc#}¦ {%pary-ā-loc,%} cl. 10. P. {%-locayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to look after, attend to, consider (the in-
terests of another), ponder.
<LEND>

<L>28423<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAlocana<k2>paryAlocana
{%Pary-ālocana, am,%}¦ n. or {%pary-ālocanā,%} f. look-
ing round or about; circumspection, attentive observa-
tion, mature consideration or reflection, deliberating;
knowing, recognising.
<LEND>

<L>28424<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAvila<k2>paryAvila
{#paryAvila#}¦ {%pary-āvila, as, ā, am,%} very turbid,
much soiled.
<LEND>

<L>28425<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAvft<k2>paryAvft
{#paryAvft#}¦ {%pary-ā-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
{%-vartitum,%} to turn round, return: Caus. P. {%-varta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to roll round, turn round: Desid.
{%-vivṛtsati,%} Ved. to wish to roll round.
<LEND>

<L>28426<pc>0555-a<k1>paryAvarta<k2>paryAvarta
{%pary-āvarta, as,%}¦ m. return.
<LEND>
[Page0555-b+ 70]

<L>28427<pc>0555-b<k1>paryAvartana<k2>paryAvartana
{%Pary-āvartana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a hell; ({%am%}), n.
coming back, returning.
<LEND>

<L>28428<pc>0555-b<k1>paryAvartita<k2>paryAvartita
{%Pary-āvartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned round, sub-
verted, reversed.
<LEND>

<L>28429<pc>0555-b<k1>paryAvivftsat<k2>paryAvivftsat
{%Pary-āvivṛtsat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. wishing to
roll round.
<LEND>

<L>28430<pc>0555-b<k1>paryASvas<k2>paryASvas
{#paryASvas#}¦ {%pary-ā-śvas,%} Caus. P. {%-śvāsayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to comfort, console.
<LEND>

<L>28431<pc>0555-b<k1>paryAs<k2>paryAs
{#paryAs#}¦ {%pary-ās,%} cl. 2. A. {%-āste, -āsitum,%} to
sit round any one (acc.); to remain sitting, remain
inactive; to exclude one's self from (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>28432<pc>0555-b<k1>paryAsa<k2>paryAsa
{#paryAsa#}¦ {%pary-āsa, pary-āsana.%} See under
2. {%pary-as,%} p. 554, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28433<pc>0555-b<k1>paryAhAra<k2>paryAhAra
{#paryAhAra#}¦ {%pary-āhāra, as,%} m. a yoke worn
across the shoulders in carrying a load; conveying,
taking; a load; storing hay or grain; a ewer,
pitcher.
<LEND>

<L>28434<pc>0555-b<k1>paryuka<k2>paryuka
{#paryuka#}¦ {%paryuka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>28435<pc>0555-b<k1>paryukz<k2>paryukz
{#paryukz#}¦ {%pary-ukṣ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-ukṣati, -ukṣi-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to sprinkle round.
<LEND>

<L>28436<pc>0555-b<k1>paryukzaRa<k2>paryukzaRa
{%Pary-ukṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. sprinkling round; sprink-
ling; ({%ī%}), f. a vessel for sprinkling (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>28437<pc>0555-b<k1>paryutTAna<k2>paryutTAna
{#paryutTAna#}¦ {%pary-utthāna, am,%} n. standing
up, rising.
<LEND>

<L>28438<pc>0555-b<k1>paryutsuka<k2>paryutsuka
{#paryutsuka#}¦ {%pary-utsuka, as, ā, am,%} afficted,
sad, sorrowful, regretting; eagerly desirous, longing
for (with dat.).
<LEND>

<L>28439<pc>0555-b<k1>paryudaYcana<k2>paryudaYcana
{#paryudaYcana#}¦ {%pary-udañcana, am,%} n. debt.
<LEND>

<L>28440<pc>0555-b<k1>paryudayam<k2>paryudayam
{#paryudayam#}¦ {%pary-udayam,%} ind., Ved. about
sunrise.
<LEND>

<L>28441<pc>0555-b<k1>paryudas<k2>paryudas
{#paryudas#}¦ {%pary-ud-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati, -asi-%}
{%tum,%} to heap round about, to construct here and
there; to prohibit, object to; to expect, exclude.
<LEND>

<L>28442<pc>0555-b<k1>paryudasta<k2>paryudasta
{%Pary-udasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ heaped round; prohibited,
objected to (as a ceremony); excepted, excluded.
<LEND>

<L>28443<pc>0555-b<k1>paryudAsa<k2>paryudAsa
{%Pary-udāsa, as,%}¦ m. or {%pary-udāsana, am,%} n.
a prohibitive rule or precept, exception.
<LEND>

<L>28444<pc>0555-b<k1>paryudBfta<k2>paryudBfta
{#paryudBfta#}¦ {%pary-udbhṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
brought out, extracted; constructed, framed.
<LEND>

<L>28445<pc>0555-b<k1>paryudvij<k2>paryudvij
{#paryudvij#}¦ {%pary-ud-vij,%} cl. 7. P. {%-vinakti,%}
{%-vijitum,%} to suffer pain, suffer.
<LEND>

<L>28446<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupaveSana<k2>paryupaveSana
{#paryupaveSana#}¦ {%pary-upaveśana, am,%} n. sitting
about.
<LEND>

<L>28447<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupasTA<k2>paryupasTA
{#paryupasTA#}¦ {%pary-upa-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-tiṣ-%}
{%ṭhati, -te, -sthātum,%} to stand round, surround;
wait on, serve, minister; to be present.
<LEND>

<L>28448<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupasTAna<k2>paryupasTAna
{%Pary-upasthāna, am,%}¦ n. waiting upon, serving,
maintaining; rising, elevation.
<LEND>

<L>28449<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupasTita<k2>paryupasTita
{%Pary-upasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawing nigh, immi-
nent, impending.
<LEND>

<L>28450<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupaspfS<k2>paryupaspfS
{#paryupaspfS#}¦ {%pary-upa-spṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-spṛ-%}
{%śati, -spraṣṭum, -sparṣṭum,%} to touch or use for
ablution or bathing.
<LEND>

<L>28451<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupAs<k2>paryupAs
{#paryupAs#}¦ {%pary-upās (pary-upa-ās),%} cl. 2. A.
{%-āste, -āsitum,%} to sit round, surround, encompass,
encircle; to sit on or upon; to live around; to be
present at, partake of; to approach as an attendant
or worshipper, show reverence, worship.
<LEND>

<L>28452<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupAsaka<k2>paryupAsaka
{%Pary-upāsaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ worshipping, honouring,
a worshipper, one who honours or respects.
<LEND>

<L>28453<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupAsana<k2>paryupAsana
{%Pary-upāsana, am,%}¦ n. encamping or sitting
round; friendliness, amiability, courtesy; honour,
service, worship; joining in or concurrence with any
act of reverence.
<LEND>

<L>28454<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupAsitf<k2>paryupAsitf
{%Pary-upāsitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ moving round or
about; showing respect or honour; a worshipper.
<LEND>

<L>28455<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupAsIna<k2>paryupAsIna
{%Pary-upāsīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ seated or sitting upon.
<LEND>

<L>28456<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupta<k2>paryupta
{#paryupta#}¦ {%pary-upta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vap%} with
{%pari%}), sown; set (as a gem in a ring).
<LEND>

<L>28457<pc>0555-b<k1>paryupti<k2>paryupti
{%Pary-upti, is,%}¦ f. scattering seed, sowing.
<LEND>
[Page0555-c+ 76]

<L>28458<pc>0555-c<k1>paryuzaRa<k2>paryuzaRa
{#paryuzaRa#}¦ {%pary-uṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 6. {%vas%}
with {%pari%} or incorrectly for {%pary-eṣaṇa%}), service,
worship, adoration.
<LEND>

<L>28459<pc>0555-c<k1>paryuzita<k2>paryuzita
{%Pary-uṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having passed the night;
stale, not fresh; insipid; stupid, vain. {%—Paryuṣita-%}
{%bhojin, ī,%} m. the eater of stale food (said to become
a maggot or worm in the next birth).
<LEND>

<L>28460<pc>0555-c<k1>paryUh<k2>paryUh
{#paryUh#}¦ {%pary-ūh%} [cf. rt. 1. {%ūh%}], cl. 1. P. A.
{%-ūhati, -te, -ūhitum,%} Ved. to heap or pile round; to
surround or fortify with mounds or embankments.
<LEND>

<L>28461<pc>0555-c<k1>paryUhaRa<k2>paryUhaRa
{%Pary-ūhaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. sweeping or heaping
together.
<LEND>

<L>28462<pc>0555-c<k1>paryfz<k2>paryfz<h>1
{#paryfz#} 1¦. {%pary-ṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-arṣati, -ar-%}
{%ṣitum,%} Ved. to flow round, flow into.
<LEND>

<L>28463<pc>0555-c<k1>paryfz<k2>paryfz<h>2
{#paryfz#} 2¦. {%pary-ṛṣ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-ṛṣati, -arṣi-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to embrace, clasp round, support.
<LEND>

<L>28464<pc>0555-c<k1>paryarzaRa<k2>paryarzaRa
{%Pary-arṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. clasping round, sup-
porting, making firm.
<LEND>

<L>28465<pc>0555-c<k1>parye<k2>parye
{#parye#}¦ {%pary-e (pari-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -etum,%}
Ved. to roam about; to come back, return.
<LEND>

<L>28466<pc>0555-c<k1>paryetf<k2>paryetf
{#paryetf#}¦ {%pary-etṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%} (fr. {%parī%}), Ved.
overpowering, mastering; (Sāy.) {%= nāśaka,%} a de-
spoiler; {%= pari-gamayitṛ,%} a promoter.
<LEND>

<L>28467<pc>0555-c<k1>paryez<k2>paryez
{#paryez#}¦ {%pary-eṣ,%}  cl. 1. P. {%-eṣati, -eṣitum,%}
to seek about for.
<LEND>

<L>28468<pc>0555-c<k1>paryezaRa<k2>paryezaRa
{%Pary-eṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. search, inquiry, investigation;
({%ā%}), f. search, inquiry, research, investigation of duty
by reasoning; serving, waiting upon, service.
<LEND>

<L>28469<pc>0555-c<k1>paryezat<k2>paryezat
{%Pary-eṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ seeking about for.
<LEND>

<L>28470<pc>0555-c<k1>paryezwavya<k2>paryezwavya
{%Pary-eṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sought after, to
be sought.
<LEND>

<L>28471<pc>0555-c<k1>paryezwi<k2>paryezwi
{%Pary-eṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. searching for, inquiry.
<LEND>

<L>28472<pc>0555-c<k1>parv<k2>parv
{#parv#}¦ {%parv,%} cl. 1. P. {%parvati, parvitum,%} to
fill; [cf. rts. {%pṝ, pūrv, marv.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28473<pc>0555-c<k1>parva<k2>parva
{%Parva, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) =
{%parvan,%} p. 556, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>28474<pc>0555-c<k1>parvaka<k2>parvaka
{%parvaka, am,%}¦ n. the knee-joint.
<LEND>

<L>28475<pc>0555-c<k1>parvaRa<k2>parvaRa
{%Parvaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a demon; ({%ī%}), m. the
period of a change of the moon; a festival; (also
{%parvaṇikā%} and {%parvaṇīkā%}), a particular disease of
the so-called juncture ({%sandhi%}) of the eye; (at the
end of a comp.) {%= parvan,%} a knot.
<LEND>

<L>28476<pc>0555-c<k1>parvata<k2>parvata
{%Parvata, as,%}¦ m. (probably connected with {%parvan,%}
p. 556, col. 1, as ‘having crags or elevations’), a moun-
tain, mountain-range, height, hill, elevation, rock, (in
Ṛg-veda 1. 37, 7, V. 56, 4, {%parvata%} is joined as an
adj. with {%giri;%} and according to Sāy. {%= jagat-pūra-%}
{%kodaka-vat,%} laden with water filling the world, or
{%bahuvidha-parva-yukta,%} shelving, rugged); an
artificial mountain or heap (of grain, salt, saffron,
sugar, silver or gold presented to the Brāhmans); N. of
the presiding genius of the mountains (personified in
the Veda with Āptya, Rudra, and Ṛbhu as ruler of
the clouds, and associated with Indra, Savitṛ, the
Maruts, and other deities; in later times enumerated
among the eight Vasus); a fragment of rock, bowl-
der, stone, ({%adrayaḥ parvatāḥ,%} the stones with
which the Soma plant is pressed); a cloud (Ved.; in
some passages of the Ṛg-veda where {%parvata%} is
interpreted by {%adri,%} the sense ‘cloud’ seems equally
applicable, especially when the battles of Indra or
the deeds of the Maruts are described); a N. of the
number 7 (from the 7 principal mountains); a tree;
a kind of vegetable; a kind of fish (commonly
called Pāvdā, the Silurus Pabda); N. of a divine
Ṛṣi mentioned in several passages of the Mahā-bh.
(regarded as a companion of Nārada and messenger
of the gods, cf. Nala II. 14; he is the author of
Ṛg-veda VIII. 12, IX. 104, 105, where he has the
patronymics Kāṇva and Kāśyapa); N. of a son of
Paurṇamāsa (a son of Marīci and Sam-bhūti); of a
minister of king Purū-ravas; of a grammarian (?);
of an ape; ({%ī%}), f. (Ved.) a rock, stone; [cf. Serv.
<nsi>brdo,</nsi> ‘a mountain;’ perhaps Goth. <nsi>fairguni.</nsi>]
{%—Parvata-kāka, as,%} m. a raven. {%—Parvata-cyut,%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. ‘causing mountains (clouds) to totter or
[Page0556-a+ 81]
fall,’ an epithet of the Maruts. {%—Parvata-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} mountain-born; ({%ā%}), f. a river. {%—Parvata-%}
{%tṛṇa, am,%} n. ‘mountain-grass,’ a species of grass
{%(= tṛṇāḍhya)%}. {%—Parvata-pati, is,%} m. ‘moun-
tain-prince,’ lord of the mountains. {%—Parvata-%}
{%mocā,%} f. a species of plant ({%= giri-kadalī%}). {%—Par-%}
{%vata-rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘mountain-king,’ a lofty mountain,
‘the highest mountain-range,’ the Himālaya. {%—Par-%}
{%vata-rāja, as,%} m. ‘mountain-king,’ the Himālaya.
{%—Parvatarāja-kanyā,%} f. ‘daughter of the moun-
tain-king,’ N. of Pārvatī or Durgā (daughter of
Hima-vat, sovereign of the snowy mountains). {%—Par-%}
{%vatarāja-putrī,%} f. ‘daughter of the mountain-king,’
an epithet of Durgā. {%—Parvata-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}
living in the mountains; ({%ī%}), m. a mountaineer;
({%inī%}), f. nard, spikenard; a designation of Durgā; of
the Gāyatrī. {%—Parvata-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. the best of
mountains. {%—Parvata-stha, as, ā, am,%} situated on
a mountain or hill. {%—Parvatākāra (˚ta-āk˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} mountain-shaped, formed like a mountain.
{%—Parvatātmajā (˚ta-āt˚),%} f. ‘daughter of the
mountain,’ an epithet of Durgā. {%—Parvatādhārā%}
{%(˚ta-ādh˚),%} f. ‘receptacle of mountains,’ the earth.
{%—Parvatāri (˚ta-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of the moun-
tains,’ epithet of Indra (who clipped their wings).
{%—Parvatā-vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. delighting in moun-
tains; (Sāy.) ‘delighting in the stones used to press the
Soma plant’ or ‘produced in the mountains,’ an epi-
thet of Soma. {%—Parvatāśaya (˚ta-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘rest-
ing on the mountains,’ a cloud. {%—Parvatāśraya (˚ta-%}
{%āś˚), as, ā, am,%} living on the mountains, a moun-
taineer; ({%as%}), m. a fabulous animal, the Śarabha.
{%—Parvatāśrayin (˚ta-āś˚), ī,%} m. a dweller on the
mountains, mountaineer. {%—Parvatī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
{%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make into a mountain. {%—Par-%}
{%vateśvara (˚ta-īś˚), as,%} m. a lord of the mountains.
{%—Parvate-ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. ‘dwelling in
the heights,’ an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>28477<pc>0556-a<k1>parvataka<k2>parvataka
{%Parvataka%}¦ in {%eka-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28478<pc>0556-a<k1>parvatIya<k2>parvatIya
{%Parvatīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to a
mountain, mountainous, hilly; a mountaineer.
<LEND>

<L>28479<pc>0556-a<k1>parvatya<k2>parvatya
{%Parvatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to a moun-
tain or rock; produced in mountains.
<LEND>

<L>28480<pc>0556-a<k1>parvan<k2>parvan
{%Parvan, a,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. rt. {%pṝ,%} but con-
nected with {%parvata%} above), a knot or joint, espe-
cially of a cane or other plant; a joint of the body,
knuckle, limb, member; a break, pause, division,
section; book, chapter; (in Vedic grammar) a mem-
ber of a compound; a division of time, period,
fixed time (especially the Cāturmāsya festival), the
days of the four changes of the moon, i. e. the
full and change of the moon and the eighth and
fourteenth of each half month; the days of conjunction
and opposition or eclipse of the sun or moon; a sacrifice
performed on the occasion of a change of the moon; a
particular period of the year (as the equinox, solstice,
&c.); the moment of the sun's entering a new sign;
a festival, holiday; opportunity, occasion; a moment,
instant; [cf. {%parus.%}] {%—Parva-kāra, as, ā, am,%} or
{%parva-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} one who works on holidays;
(according to others) a Brāhman who for the sake of
gain performs on common days such ceremonies as
should be performed only on festivals. {%—Parva-kāla,%}
{%as,%} m. a periodic change of the moon; the time at
which the moon at its conjunction or opposition
passes through the node. {%—Parva-gāmin, ī,%} m. one
who has intercourse with his wife on festivals or holi-
days. {%—Parva-gupta, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Par-%}
{%va-dhi, is,%} m. ‘period-holder,’ the moon. {%—Parva-%}
{%nāḍī,%} f. ‘moment of the Parvan,’ moment of opposi-
tion or conjunction. {%—Parva-puṣpī%} or {%parva-puṣ-%}
{%pikā,%} f. a plant, {%= rāma-dūtī,%} Tiaridium Indicum (=
{%nāga-dantī%}). {%—Parva-pūrṇa-tā,%} f. preparations for
an assembly or festival; completion of a festival;
joining, uniting. {%—Parva-bheda, as,%} m. the fracture
of a joint. {%—Parva-mūla, am,%} n. the moment at
which the fourteenth day passes into the fifteenth
day of a month; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant ({%= śvetā%}).
{%—Parva-yoni, is, is, i,%} growing from joints or
knots; ({%is%}), m. a cane or reed, the sugar-cane, &c.
{%—Parva-ruh, ṭ,%} m. a pomegranate tree. {%—Parva- %}
[Page0556-b+ 75]
{%varja, as, ā, am,%} except the forbidden days of
a month. {%—Parva-vallī,%} f. a species of Dūrvā
({%= granthi-dūrvā, mūla-dūrvā%}). {%—Parva-śarka-%}
{%raka, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Parva-śas,%} ind.,
Ved. limb by limb, limb from limb, piece by
piece; {%parvaśaḥ kṛt,%} to cut to pieces. {%—Par-%}
{%va-sandhi, is,%} m. a joint; the full and change
of the moon, the junction of the fifteenth and
first of a lunar fortnight or the precise moment of
the full and change of the moon. {%—Parvāvadhi%}
{%(˚va-av˚), is,%} m. a particular period, the end of a
Parvan, &c. {%—Parvāsphoṭa (˚va-ās˚), as,%} m. a par-
ticular movement of the fingers (regarded as inde-
corous). {%—Parveśa (˚va-īśa), as,%} m., Ved. the regent
of an astronomical node.
<LEND>

<L>28481<pc>0556-b<k1>parvarIRa<k2>parvarIRa
{%Parvarīṇa, as,%}¦ m. {%= parṇa-vṛnta-rasa; =%}
{%garva; = māruta; = parṇa-śirā; = mṛtaka; =%}
{%dyūta-kambala; = pattra-cūrṇa-rasa; = parvan.%}
<LEND>

<L>28482<pc>0556-b<k1>parvata<k2>parvata
{#parvata#}¦ {%parvata, parvan.%} See under rt. {%parv.%}
<LEND>

<L>28483<pc>0556-b<k1>parvita<k2>parvita
{#parvita#}¦ {%parvita, as,%} m. a species of fish,
Silurus Pabda ({%= parvata%}).
<LEND>

<L>28484<pc>0556-b<k1>parSAna<k2>parSAna
{#parSAna#}¦ {%parśāna, as,%} m. (probably connected
with rts. {%parṣ%} and {%pṛṣ%}), Ved. a precipice, chasm;
a well; (Sāy.) {%= pārśva-sthāna,%} the side; {%= pīḍya-%}
{%māna,%} being oppressed; {%= spṛśyamāna; = vimar-%}
{%śana-kṣama;%} (according to the Naighaṇṭuka I.
10) a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>28485<pc>0556-b<k1>parSu<k2>parSu<h>1
1. {%parśu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. a rib; a curved knife,
pruning-hook, sickle; N. of a man; ({%avas%}), m. pl.,
N. of a warrior-tribe; ({%us%}), f. (according to the
Nirukta IV. 6) the supporting or side wall of a well
(Ṛg-veda I. 105, 8, but according to Sāy. {%= pār-%}
{%śvāsthi%}); N. of a woman. {%—Parśu-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} shaped like a curved knife.
<LEND>

<L>28486<pc>0556-b<k1>parSukA<k2>parSukA
{%Parśukā,%}¦ f. a rib.
<LEND>

<L>28487<pc>0556-b<k1>parSu<k2>parSu<h>2
{#parSu#} 2¦. {%parśu, us,%} m. (fr. {%pṛ,%} substituted
for rt. {%spṛś%}), {%= paraśu,%} an axe, hatchet. {%—Parśu-%}
{%pāṇi, is,%} m. ‘axe in hand, ’ an epithet of Gaṇeśa;
[cf. {%paraśu-dhara.%}] {%—Parśu-rāma = Paraśu-rā-%}
{%ma,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28488<pc>0556-b<k1>parSvaDa<k2>parSvaDa
{%Parśvadha, as,%}¦ m. {%= paraśvadha,%} an axe, hatchet.
<LEND>

<L>28489<pc>0556-b<k1>parz<k2>parz
{#parz#}¦ {%parṣ%} [cf. rts. {%pṛṣ, varṣ, sparṣ%}],
cl. 1. A. {%parṣate,%} &c., to grow wet, be-
come moist; to delight in, accept (Sāy. {%= svī-kṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>28490<pc>0556-b<k1>parza<k2>parza
{#parza#}¦ {%parṣa, as,%} m. (probably connected
with rt. {%pṛṣ%}), a bundle, sheaf.
<LEND>

<L>28491<pc>0556-b<k1>parzin<k2>parzin
{%Parṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. in {%iṣu-p˚,%} (probably)
carrying bundles (of arrows).
<LEND>

<L>28492<pc>0556-b<k1>parzaRi<k2>parzaRi
{#parzaRi#}¦ {%parṣaṇi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pṛ%}),
Ved. carrying over or across, ferrying across.
<LEND>

<L>28493<pc>0556-b<k1>parzan<k2>parzan
{%Parṣan, a,%}¦ n. (?), Ved. leading out, delivering.
<LEND>

<L>28494<pc>0556-b<k1>parzizWa<k2>parzizWa
{%Parṣiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. most mighty in
delivering or rescuing.
<LEND>

<L>28495<pc>0556-b<k1>parzad<k2>parzad
{#parzad#}¦ {%parṣad, t,%} f. {%= pariṣad,%} an assem-
bly, audience. {%—Parṣad-bhīru, us, us, u,%} Ved.
shy in society. {%—Parṣad-vala, as, ā, am, = pari-%}
{%ṣad-vala,%} surrounded by an assembly; ({%as%}), m. an
assistant at an assembly, a spectator.
<LEND>

<L>28496<pc>0556-b<k1>pal<k2>pal
{#pal#}¦ {%pal,%} cl. 1. P. {%palati, palitum,%} to
go, move; cl. 10. {%pālayati, -yitum,%} see
rt. 3. {%pā;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πάλλω, παλμό-ς, πάλο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πα-λάσσω, παλ-ύν-ω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pello, poll-en, pul-vi-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>28497<pc>0556-b<k1>pala<k2>pala
{%Pala, as,%}¦ m. {%= pāla%} (Gaṇa Jvalādi to Pāṇ. III.
1, 140); {%= palāla,%} straw; ({%am%}), n. a particular
weight (= 4 Karṣas = (1/100) of a Tulā); a particular
measure of fluids; a particular measure of time (=
{%vighaṭikā%}); flesh, meat; [cf. Lat. <nsi>palea;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>flesc, flœsc, flec;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>fleisk;</nsi> French
<nsi>paille;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>feol, feoile,</nsi> ‘flesh.’] {%—Pala-kṣāra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘flesh-fluid,’ blood. {%—Pala-gaṇḍa, as,%} m. a
mason, bricklayer, plasterer. {%—Palaṅ-kara, as,%} m.
‘flesh-maker,’ gall, bile. {%—Palaṅ-kaṣa, as,%} m.
‘flesh-hurter,’ a Rākṣasa, imp, goblin; bdellium;
a species of bdellium ({%= kaṇa-guggulu%}); ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of various plants ({%= go-kṣuraka,%} Asteracantha
[Page0556-c+ 73]
Longifolia; {%= kṣudra-gokṣuraka; = kiṃśuka,%}
Butea Frondosa; {%= muṇḍīrī,%} a species of climbing
plant; {%= rāsna; = mahā-śrāvaṇī,%} bdellium); {%= lāk-%}
{%ṣā,%} cochineal; a fly. {%—Pala-priya, as,%} m. ‘fond
of meat,’ a Rākṣasa; a raven. {%—Pala-bhā%} or {%pala-%}
{%vibhā,%} f. the equinoctial shadow at midday, the
midday shadow of a gnomon when the sun is in the
equinoctial points ({%= viṣṇuvat-prabhā%}). {%—Palāgni%}
{%(˚la-ag˚), is,%} m. ‘flesh-fire,’ bile, the bilious humor.
{%—Palāda (˚la-ada), as,%} m. ‘flesh-eater,’ a Rāk-
ṣasa; ({%ā%}), f. a Rākṣasī. {%—Palādana (˚la-ad˚),%}
{%as,%} or 1. {%palāśa (˚la-āś˚), as,%} or 1. {%palāśin%}
{%(˚la-āś˚), ī,%} m. ‘flesh-eater,’ a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>28498<pc>0556-c<k1>palada<k2>palada
{%Palada, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a particular material for
building, (perhaps) bundles of straw or reeds used
for roofing and wainscoting; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>28499<pc>0556-c<k1>palala<k2>palala
{%Palala, as,%}¦ m. a Rākṣasa; ground sesamum
seeds, a kind of sweetmeat made of ground sesamum
and sugar; mud, mire, clay; {%= pala,%} flesh, meat;
[cf. {%palvala;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">πηλό-ς, πήλ-ινο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">προ-πηλακ-ίζω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>păl-ū(d)s, palus-tri-s;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>poll,</nsi> ‘mire,
dirt.’] {%—Palala-jvara, as,%} m. gall, bile; [cf. {%pa-%}
{%lāgni, palaṅ-kara.%}] {%—Palala-priya, as,%} m. ‘fond
of flesh,’ a raven {%(= pala-priya)%}. {%—Palalāśaya%}
{%(˚la-āś˚), as,%} m. ‘flesh-receptacle,’ swelled neck,
goitre.
<LEND>

<L>28500<pc>0556-c<k1>palika<k2>palika
{%Palika, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp. after
a numeral), weighing or containing so many Palas.
<LEND>

<L>28501<pc>0556-c<k1>palakyA<k2>palakyA
{#palakyA#}¦ {%palakyā,%} f. a kind of vegetable
({%= pālaṅkya%}).
<LEND>

<L>28502<pc>0556-c<k1>palakza<k2>palakza
{#palakza#}¦ {%palakṣa, as, ā, am,%} (a secondary
form of {%balakṣa%}), Ved. white.
<LEND>

<L>28503<pc>0556-c<k1>palaNkawa<k2>palaNkawa
{#palaNkawa#}¦ {%palaṅkaṭa, as, ā, am,%} shy, bashful,
timid.
<LEND>

<L>28504<pc>0556-c<k1>palava<k2>palava
{#palava#}¦ {%palava, as,%} m. (said to be connected
with rt. {%pal,%} probably for {%plava%} fr. rt. {%plu%}), a snare
or basket of wicker-work for catching fish.
<LEND>

<L>28505<pc>0556-c<k1>palasa<k2>palasa
{#palasa#}¦ {%palasa, as,%} m. {%= panasa,%} the bread
fruit tree.
<LEND>

<L>28506<pc>0556-c<k1>palasti<k2>palasti
{#palasti#}¦ {%palasti, is, is, i,%} Ved. (according
to Sāy.) {%= palita,%} grey-haired.
<LEND>

<L>28507<pc>0556-c<k1>palANga<k2>palANga
{#palANga#}¦ {%palāṅga, as,%} m. Delphinus Gange-
ticus; (perhaps an error for {%capalāṅga.%})
<LEND>

<L>28508<pc>0556-c<k1>palARqu<k2>palARqu
{#palARqu#}¦ {%palāṇḍu, us, u,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. rt. {%pal%}), an onion. {%—Palāṇḍu-bhakṣita, as,%}
{%ā%} or {%ī, am,%} one who has eaten onions.
<LEND>

<L>28509<pc>0556-c<k1>palApa<k2>palApa
{#palApa#}¦ {%palāpa, as,%} m. a halter; an ele-
phant's temples.
<LEND>

<L>28510<pc>0556-c<k1>palApahA<k2>palApahA
{#palApahA#}¦ {%palāpahā,%} f. a kind of collyrium
({%= kulatthā;%} perhaps only an error for {%pra-%}
{%lāpa-hā%}).
<LEND>

<L>28511<pc>0556-c<k1>palAya<k2>palAya
{#palAya#}¦ {%palāya%} (fr. {%ay%} = rt. 5. {%i%} with {%palā =%}
{%parā%}), cl. 1. A. (ep. also P.) {%palāyate (-ti), -yitum,%}
to flee, run away, make off, take to one's heels,
scamper off; to escape; to cease, die away, sink
into oblivion.
<LEND>

<L>28512<pc>0556-c<k1>palAyaka<k2>palAyaka
{%Palāyaka, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ikā%} (?), {%am,%} fleeing, flying,
taking to flight; a fugitive, runaway, deserter.
<LEND>

<L>28513<pc>0556-c<k1>palAyat<k2>palAyat
{%Palāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ fleeing, running away.
<LEND>

<L>28514<pc>0556-c<k1>palAyana<k2>palAyana
{%Palāyana, am,%}¦ n. fleeing, running away, flight,
escape; a saddle ({%= palyayana, paryāṇa%}). {%—Pa-%}
{%lāyana-parāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%} occupied in flight,
fugitive. {%—Palāyana-manas, ās, ās, as,%} thinking
of flight. {%—Palāyana-viṣaya, as, ā, am,%} having
flight for an object, bent on flight.
<LEND>

<L>28515<pc>0556-c<k1>palAyamAna<k2>palAyamAna
{%Palāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fleeing, flying away,
taking to flight.
<LEND>

<L>28516<pc>0556-c<k1>palAyita<k2>palAyita
{%Palāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ flown, run away, fled,
retreated; defeated.
<LEND>

<L>28517<pc>0556-c<k1>palAyin<k2>palAyin
{%Palāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fleeing, flying, running away,
taking to flight.
<LEND>

<L>28518<pc>0556-c<k1>palAla<k2>palAla
{#palAla#}¦ {%palāla, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. rt. {%pal%}), straw; the stalk of the Sorghum,
[Page0557-a+ 73]
Indian millet; ({%as%}), m., Ved., N. of a demon (asso-
ciated with Anu-palāla and considered dangerous to
children); ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the seven Mātṛs
of Skanda; ({%ī%}), f. straw. {%—Palāla-dohada, as,%} m.
‘longing for straw,’ the mango tree (the fruit of
which is sometimes ripened in straw).
<LEND>

<L>28519<pc>0557-a<k1>palAva<k2>palAva
{#palAva#}¦ {%palāva, as,%} m., Ved. chaff, husks;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>palea.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>28520<pc>0557-a<k1>palASa<k2>palASa<h>2
{#palASa#} 2¦. {%palāśa, am,%} n. (for 1. see under
{%pala,%} rt. {%pal,%} p. 556, col. 2), a leaf, petal, foliage;
the blossom of the tree Butea Frondosa; ({%as%}),
m. Butea Frondosa; Curcuma Zedoaria; a N. of
ancient Behar or Magadha; ({%ī%}), f. cochineal; a
species of climbing plant {%(= pattra-vallī, parṇa-%}
{%vallī, palāśikā); (as, ā, am),%} green; unfeeling,
unmerciful, cruel; (at the end of a comp.) see Gaṇa
to Pāṇ. II. 1, 56. {%—Palāśa-pattra, am,%} n. the leaf
of the Butea Frondosa; a single leaf; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a Nāga. {%—Palāśa-parṇī,%} f. Physalis Flexuosa
({%= aśva-gandhā%}). {%—Palāśa-śātana, as,%} m. an
instrument for lopping foliage. {%—Palāśākhya (˚śa-%}
{%ākh˚), as,%} m. {%= nāḍī-hiṅgu,%} q. v.; Asa Fœtida.
{%—Palāśāntā (˚śa-an˚)%} or {%palāśāmbhā,%} f. =
{%gandha-pattra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28521<pc>0557-a<k1>palASaka<k2>palASaka
{%Palāśaka, as,%}¦ m. Butea Frondosa; Curcuma
Zedoaria ({%= śaṭī%}); N. of a place; ({%ikā%}), f. a species
of climbing plant ({%= palāśī%}).
<LEND>

<L>28522<pc>0557-a<k1>palASin<k2>palASin<h>2
2. {%palāśin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (for 1. see under {%pala,%} rt.
{%pal%}), leafy, covered with foliage, having luxuriant
foliage; ({%ī%}), m. a tree; a species of plant ({%= kṣīra-%}
{%vṛkṣa%}); N. of a city or a village (said to be the
modern Plassey); ({%inī%}), f., N. of a river issuing from
the Śukti-mat.
<LEND>

<L>28523<pc>0557-a<k1>paliknI<k2>paliknI
{#paliknI#}¦ {%paliknī,%} f. See {%palita%} below.
<LEND>

<L>28524<pc>0557-a<k1>paliGa<k2>paliGa
{#paliGa#}¦ {%paligha, as,%} m. a water-pot, pitcher,
glass water-vessel; a wall, rampart; the gate-way of
a building; an iron club or one studded with iron
({%= parigha%}).
<LEND>

<L>28525<pc>0557-a<k1>palita<k2>palita
{#palita#}¦ {%palita, as, paliknī, am%} (said to be
fr. rt. {%phal%} with substitution of {%p%} for {%ph;%} a doubtful
fem. form {%palitā%} is also given), grey, grey-haired,
hoary, old, aged; ({%as%}), m., N. of a mouse in Mahā-
bh. Śānti-p. 4933; ({%paliknī%}), f. a cow for the first
time with calf; ({%am%}), n. grey hair; a tuft of hair
({%= keśa-pāśa%}); much or ornamented hair; mud,
mire; heat, burning; benzoin; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πελ-ὀ-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πελ-ιό-ς, πελ-λό-ς, πελιδνό-ς, παλ-ιό-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>pall-</nsi>
<nsi>e-o, pall-idu-s, pallu-s:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>falo (fal-w-</nsi>
<nsi>er):</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>fealo, falu, fealwe, falewe:</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>plavŭ,</nsi> ‘white:’ Lith. <nsi>pàl-va-s,</nsi> ‘fallow;’ <nsi>pī1l-ka-s,</nsi>
‘ash-coloured.’] {%—Palitaṅ-karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} ren-
dering grey. {%—Palitam-bhaviṣṇu, us, us, u,%} or
{%palitam-bhāvuka, as, ā, am,%} becoming grey.
<LEND>

<L>28526<pc>0557-a<k1>palitin<k2>palitin
{%Palitin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having grey hair, grey-haired.
<LEND>

<L>28527<pc>0557-a<k1>paliyoga<k2>paliyoga
{#paliyoga#}¦ {%pali-yoga, as,%} m. {%= pari-yoga.%}
<LEND>

<L>28528<pc>0557-a<k1>palIjaka<k2>palIjaka
{#palIjaka#}¦ {%palījaka, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
demon.
<LEND>

<L>28529<pc>0557-a<k1>palpUl<k2>palpUl
{#palpUl#}¦ {%palpūl%} (considered by some as
a reduplicated form of rt. {%pal%}), cl.
10. P. {%palpūlayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to wash in lye
or water impregnated with alkaline salt; to wash,
cleanse; to tan.
<LEND>

<L>28530<pc>0557-a<k1>palpUlana<k2>palpUlana
{%Palpūlana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. lye, water impregnated
with alkaline salt.
<LEND>

<L>28531<pc>0557-a<k1>palpUlita<k2>palpUlita
{%Palpūlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. curried, tanned;
washed (in lye).
<LEND>

<L>28532<pc>0557-a<k1>palya<k2>palya
{#palya#}¦ {%palya, am,%} n. (perhaps fr. {%pala%}), a
sack for corn (probably containing a certain measure,
Ved.); a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>28533<pc>0557-a<k1>palyaNka<k2>palyaNka
{#palyaNka#}¦ {%paly-aṅka, as,%} m. {%= pary-aṅka,%} a
bed, couch, bedstead; a cloth thrown round the loins
while sitting ({%= pary-asti, paryastikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>28534<pc>0557-a<k1>palyaNg<k2>palyaNg
{#palyaNg#}¦ {%paly-aṅg%} (for {%pary-aṅg%}), Caus. P.
[Page0557-b+ 77]
{%-aṅgayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to cause to go round, stir
round: Pass. {%-aṅgyate,%} to turn round, revolve.
<LEND>

<L>28535<pc>0557-b<k1>palyay<k2>palyay
{#palyay#}¦ {%paly-ay%} (fr. {%ay%} = rt. 5. {%i%} with {%pali%}
{%= pari%}), cl. 1. A. {%-ayate,%} &c., Ved. to go round.
<LEND>

<L>28536<pc>0557-b<k1>palyayana<k2>palyayana
{%Paly-ayana, am,%}¦ n. {%= paryāṇa,%} a saddle, pack-
saddle; a rein, bridle.
<LEND>

<L>28537<pc>0557-b<k1>palyul<k2>palyul
{#palyul#}¦ {%palyul%} and {%palyūl%} (various
readings for {%palpūl,%} q. v.), cl. 10.
P. {%palyulayati, palyūlayati, -yitum,%} to wash,
&c.; to cut, cut off (in this sense perhaps for
{%pari-lū%}).
<LEND>

<L>28538<pc>0557-b<k1>pall<k2>pall
{#pall#}¦ {%pall%} [cf. rt. {%pal%}], cl. 1. P. {%pallati,%}
{%pallitum,%} to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>28539<pc>0557-b<k1>palla<k2>palla
{%Palla, as,%}¦ m. a large granary, barn.
<LEND>

<L>28540<pc>0557-b<k1>pallava<k2>pallava<h>1
1. {%pallava, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a sprout, shoot, twig,
sprig, spray, (literally and as a metaphorical expression
for the fingers, toes, and lips; cf. {%kara-p˚, oṣṭha-%}
{%p˚%}); a bud, blossom; a blade of grass; the extre-
mity of a robe, the loose end of a garment or scarf;
spreading, expansion; epithet of a particular position
of the hands in dancing; the red dye called {%a-lakta;%}
love, affection; a bracelet, armlet; unsteadiness
moral or physical (?); strength, power (?); a wood (?);
({%as%}), m. a libertine, catamite; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people. {%—Pallavagrāhi-tā,%} f. the picking up of
twigs or straws, the dealing with trifles; superficial
or diffusive knowledge. {%—Pallava-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
putting forth young shoots, sprouting in all directions;
twig-picking, straw-gathering; laying hold of trifles;
diffusive; superficial; ({%ī%}), m., scil. {%doṣa,%} the fault
of prolixity or diffusiveness or of mere superficial
knowledge. {%—Pallava-dru, us,%} m. the Aśoka tree.
{%—Pallava-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of young
shoots or twigs. {%—Pallavāṅkura (˚va-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
a leaf-bud. {%—Pallavāda (˚va-ada), as,%} m. ‘eating
young shoots,’ a deer. {%—Pallavādhāra (˚va-ādh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘receptacle or support of twigs,’ a branch.
{%—Pallavāpīḍita (˚va-āp˚), as, ā, am,%} bud-laden,
loaded with buds. {%—Pallavāstra (˚va-as˚), as,%} m.
‘having blossoms for missiles,’ an epithet of the
god of love.
<LEND>

<L>28541<pc>0557-b<k1>pallava<k2>pallava<h>2
2. {%pallava,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pallavati, pallavitum,%} to
put forth young shoots, sprout, bud.
<LEND>

<L>28542<pc>0557-b<k1>pallavaka<k2>pallavaka
{%Pallavaka, as,%}¦ m. a libertine, gallant, the paramour
of a harlot; a catamite; a species of fish, Cyprinus
Denticulatus; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of a female attendant.
<LEND>

<L>28543<pc>0557-b<k1>pallavaya<k2>pallavaya
{%Pallavaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pallavayati, -yitum,%} to
put forth young shoots, sprout; to cause to sprout,
to make diffuse or prolix (according to a Scholiast
{%= vistāraya%}).
<LEND>

<L>28544<pc>0557-b<k1>pallavika<k2>pallavika
{%Pallavika, as,%}¦ m. a libertine, gallant; a catamite;
a species of fish, Cyprinus Denticulatus.
<LEND>

<L>28545<pc>0557-b<k1>pallavita<k2>pallavita
{%Pallavita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprouting, having young
shoots; spread, extended; dyed red with lac, pos-
sessing the red dye; ({%as%}), m. the red dye of the
lac insect.
<LEND>

<L>28546<pc>0557-b<k1>pallavin<k2>pallavin
{%Pallavin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sprouting, having young shoots;
({%ī%}), m. a tree.
<LEND>

<L>28547<pc>0557-b<k1>palli<k2>palli
{%Palli, is,%}¦ or {%ī,%} f. a small village, especially a settle-
ment of wild tribes; a hut, house; any number of
houses, a station; a city (or rather an affix to words
forming the name of towns; it is especially used in
the Dekhan as in Trichinopoly = Triśira-pallī, &c.);
a small house-lizard; a creeping plant.
<LEND>

<L>28548<pc>0557-b<k1>pallikA<k2>pallikA
{%Pallikā,%}¦ f. a village, station [cf. {%ābhīra-p˚%}]; a
small house-lizard.
<LEND>

<L>28549<pc>0557-b<k1>palli<k2>palli
{#palli#}¦ {%palli.%} See under rt. {%pall%} above.
<LEND>

<L>28550<pc>0557-b<k1>pallivAha<k2>pallivAha
{#pallivAha#}¦ {%pallivāha, as,%} m. a species of
grass.
<LEND>

<L>28551<pc>0557-b<k1>palvala<k2>palvala
{#palvala#}¦ {%palvala, as,%} m. (connected with {%pa-%}
{%lita;%} said to be fr. rt. {%pal%}), a small tank, pond, pool;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πηλό-ς, πήλ-ινο-ς, προ-πηλακ-ίζω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pal-</nsi>
<nsi>u(d)-s, palus-tri-s;</nsi> perhaps Angl. Sax. <nsi>pol,</nsi> ‘a pool.’]
{%—Palvala-tīra, am,%} n. the bank or margin of a
pool. {%—Palvala-paṅka, as,%} m. the mud of a
pool. {%—Palvalāvāsa (˚la-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘living in
ponds,’ a tortoise.
<LEND>
[Page0557-c+ 80]

<L>28552<pc>0557-c<k1>palvalya<k2>palvalya
{%palvalya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. marshy, boggy.
<LEND>

<L>28553<pc>0557-c<k1>pav<k2>pav
{#pav#}¦ {%pav,%} cl. 1. A. {%pavate, pavitum,%} to
go; (a various reading for {%plav.%})
<LEND>

<L>28554<pc>0557-c<k1>pava<k2>pava
{#pava#}¦ {%pava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%pū%}), purification,
purity; winnowing corn; air, wind; a marsh; ({%ā%}),
f. purification; ({%am%}), n. cow-dung.
<LEND>

<L>28555<pc>0557-c<k1>pavat<k2>pavat
{%Pavat, an, antī, at,%}¦ purifying; pure.
<LEND>

<L>28556<pc>0557-c<k1>pavana<k2>pavana
{%Pavana, am,%}¦ n. the act of purifying, purification;
winnowing; an instrument for purifying, sieve,
strainer, &c.; water; ({%as%}), m. ‘the purifier,’ wind,
air, the wind of the body; Wind personified (as
regent of the Nakṣatra Svāti and of the North-west
region); a N. of the number five (Ved.); a house-
holder's sacred fire; N. of a son of Manu Uttama;
of the author of a Gāndharva-veda; ({%as, am%}), m.
n. a potter's kiln; ({%ī%}), f. a broom; N. of a river;
({%as, ā, am%}), clean, pure. {%—Pavana-kṣipta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} tempest-tossed. {%—Pavana-tanaya, as,%} m. ‘son
of the Wind,’ an epithet of Hanu-mat. {%—Pavana-vā-%}
{%hana, as,%} m. ‘having wind as a vehicle,’ fire. {%—Pa-%}
{%vana-vijaya, as,%} m. ‘victory over the wind or
breath,’ N. of a mystic work. {%—Pavana-vyādhi,%}
{%is,%} m. an epithet of Ud-dhava, the friend and
counsellor of Kṛṣṇa; morbid condition of wind,
rheumatism, &c. {%—Pavanātmaja (˚na-āt˚), as,%}
m. ‘son of the Wind;’ fire; an epithet of Hanu-
mat the monkey-hero. {%—Pavanāśa (˚na-āśa),%}
or {%pavanāśana (˚na-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘feeding on
air,’ a serpent, snake. {%—Pavanāśa-nāśa, as,%} m.
‘snake-destroyer,’ a peacock; Garuḍa the bird and
vehicle of Viṣṇu. {%—Pavanāśin (˚na-āś˚), ī,%} m.
‘feeding on air,’ a serpent. {%—Pavanāhata (˚na-%}
{%āh˚), as, ā, am,%} struck or shaken by the wind;
rheumatic. {%—Pavanodbhrānta-kārin (˚na-ud˚), ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} ‘agitating the air,’ epithet of a particular mode
of fighting. {%—Pavanodbhrānta-vīci, is, is,%} m. f.
a wave tossed up by the winds.
<LEND>

<L>28557<pc>0557-c<k1>pavamAna<k2>pavamAna
{%Pavamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being purified, being
strained (usually said of the Soma, Ved.); ({%as%}), m.
wind; N. of a particular Fire (associated with
Pāvaka and Śuci, and also regarded as a son of
Agni by Svāhā); epithet of the moon; epithet of
particular Stotras sung by the Sāma-ga at the Jyo-
tiṣṭoma (Ved.). {%—Pavamāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. having the Pavamāna-stotra. {%—Pavamāna-%}
{%havis, is,%} n. or {%pavamāneṣṭi (˚na-iṣ˚), is,%} f.,
Ved. offerings to Agni invoked under the title of
Pavamāna or Pāvaka or Śuci.
<LEND>

<L>28558<pc>0557-c<k1>pavayitf<k2>pavayitf
{%Pavayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who purifies or
cleans, a purifier, cleanser, cleansing.
<LEND>

<L>28559<pc>0557-c<k1>pavAkA<k2>pavAkA
{%Pavākā,%}¦ f. a storm, whirlwind.
<LEND>

<L>28560<pc>0557-c<k1>pavi<k2>pavi
{%Pavi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. the tire of a wheel; the
metallic point of a spear or arrow; a thunderbolt;
an arrow; speech; fire; [cf. {%ārdra-p˚, kṛṣṇa-p˚,%}
{%kṣura-p˚.%}] {%—Pavī-nasa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘having a
nose like a spear-head,’ epithet of a demon.
<LEND>

<L>28561<pc>0557-c<k1>pavita<k2>pavita
{%Pavita, as, ā, am,%}¦ purified, cleansed; ({%am%}), n.
black pepper.
<LEND>

<L>28562<pc>0557-c<k1>pavitf<k2>pavitf
{%Pavitṛ%}¦ or Ved. {%pavītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} one who
purifies or cleanses, a purifier, cleanser.
<LEND>

<L>28563<pc>0557-c<k1>pavitra<k2>pavitra
{%Pavitra, am,%}¦ n. a means of purification, instru-
ment for cleansing, filter, strainer, straining-cloth,
colander (made of thread or hair or straw plaited
or woven, for clarifying fluids, especially the Soma);
Kuśa grass (especially a couple of Kuśa leaves a
span long used at sacrifices to present offerings
upon or to sprinkle and purify ghee, &c.); a ring
of Kuśa grass worn on the fourth finger on par-
ticular occasions; a purifying prayer or Mantra;
water, rain; rubbing, cleansing; the vessel in
which the Argha is presented; copper; the
sacred thread, Brāhmanical cord; melted butter;
honey; any divinity as Agni &c.?; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a Soma-yāga belonging to the Rāja-sūya; the
sesame plant, Nageia Putranjiva; N. of a man (of
the family of Aṅgiras and the reputed author of
Ṛg-veda IX. 67, 73, 83, 107); ({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet
of a class of deities in the fourteenth Manv-antara;
({%ā%}), f., N. of various plants; basil; Indian saffron,
turmeric; {%= aśvatthī,%} q. v.; N. of a river (the
[Page0558-a+ 75]
Pabar, a little to the north-west of Hari-dwār); the
twelfth day of the light half of Śrāvaṇa (a festival in
honour of Viṣṇu); ({%as, ā, am%}), purifying, cleans-
ing; pure, clean; holy, sinless; averting evil; [cf.
Hib. <nsi>beathra,</nsi> ‘water;’ <nsi>fothragaim,</nsi> ‘I bathe,
cleanse;’ <nsi>fothragadh,</nsi> ‘a bath, well of purification.’]
{%—Pavitra-tā,%} f. or {%pavitra-tva, am,%} n. purity,
cleanness. {%—Pavitra-dhānya, am,%} n. ‘pure grain,’
barley. {%—Pavitra-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of the
Pavitra. {%—Pavitra-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} ‘pure-handed,’
having clean hands or holding Darbha grass in the
hand; ({%is%}), m., N. of an ancient sage. {%—Pavitra-%}
{%pūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. clarified with a strainer or co-
lander. {%—Pavitra-ratha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the
colander as a chariot (said of the Soma). {%—Pavitra-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having an instrument for
purifying (as a strainer or Darbha grass); purifying,
cleansing; being in the colander; holding Darbha
grass; an epithet of Agni; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a river.
{%—Pavitrāropaṇa (˚ra-ār˚), am,%} n. ‘putting on
the Pavitra,’ investiture with the Brāhmanical cord;
investing the image of Kṛṣṇa with the sacred
thread; N. of a festival on the twelfth day of the
light half of Śrāvaṇa. {%—Pavitrārohaṇa (˚ra-ār˚),%}
{%am,%} n. ‘putting on the Pavitra,’ investing with the
sacred thread, N. of a festival in honour of Durgā
on the eighth day of the light half of the month
Śrāvaṇa or Āṣāḍha. {%—Pavitrī-karaṇa, am,%} n.
purification, cleansing; the instrument or means of
purifying. {%—Pavitrī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -ku-%}
{%rute, -kartum,%} to purify, cleanse. {%—Pavitrī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} purified, cleansed, cleaned, sanctified.
{%—Pavitrī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to
become pure or clean.
<LEND>

<L>28564<pc>0558-a<k1>pavitraka<k2>pavitraka
{%Pavitraka, am,%}¦ n. a small strainer or colander,
the vessel in which an Argha or oblation is pre-
sented (?); pack-thread or a rope or net made of
pack-thread; ({%as%}), m., N. of several sacred plants,
Poa Cynosuroides ({%= kuśa%}); Artemisia Indica ({%=%}
{%damanaka%}); Ficus Religisa; Ficus Glomerata;
(at the end of a comp.) {%= pavitra.%}
<LEND>

<L>28565<pc>0558-a<k1>pavitraya<k2>pavitraya
{%Pavitraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pavitrayati, -yitum,%} to
cleanse, purify.
<LEND>

<L>28566<pc>0558-a<k1>pavitrita<k2>pavitrita
{%Pavitrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleansed, purified, clean, pure.
<LEND>

<L>28567<pc>0558-a<k1>pavitrin<k2>pavitrin
{%Pavitrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ purifying, cleansing; pure,
clean.
<LEND>

<L>28568<pc>0558-a<k1>pavIra<k2>pavIra
{%Pavīra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a weapon with a metallic
point, a lance, spear. {%—Pavīra-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. armed with a lance or spear; having a goad;
having a metallic share (said of a plough).
<LEND>

<L>28569<pc>0558-a<k1>pavIrava<k2>pavIrava
{%Pavīrava, as,%}¦ m., Ved. having a metallic share
(said of a plough); (Sāy.) {%= kuliśa%} or {%kuliśa-śabda,%}
a thunderbolt or the noise of a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>28570<pc>0558-a<k1>pavIru<k2>pavIru
{%Pavīru, us,%}¦ m., Ved. (probably) a flash of light-
ning, a thunderbolt; N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>28571<pc>0558-a<k1>pavyA<k2>pavyA
{%Pavyā,%}¦ f., Ved. purification, cleansing.
<LEND>

<L>28572<pc>0558-a<k1>pavanAla<k2>pavanAla
{#pavanAla#}¦ {%pavanāla, as,%} m. a species of grain,
Andropogon Saccharatus ({%= deva-dhānya;%} incor-
rectly for {%yavanāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>28573<pc>0558-a<k1>pavanezwa<k2>pavanezwa
{#pavanezwa#}¦ {%pavaneṣṭa, as,%} m. a large species
of Nimba tree; (probably incorrectly for {%yava-%}
{%neṣṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>28574<pc>0558-a<k1>pavanombuja<k2>pavanombuja
{#pavanombuja#}¦ {%pavanombuja, am,%} n. {%= parūṣa,%}
the Parush tree; (probably an incorrect form.)
<LEND>

<L>28575<pc>0558-a<k1>pavinda<k2>pavinda
{#pavinda#}¦ {%pavinda, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>28576<pc>0558-a<k1>pavItf<k2>pavItf
{#pavItf#}¦ {%pavītṛ.%} See {%pavitṛ,%} p. 557, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28577<pc>0558-a<k1>pavInasa<k2>pavInasa
{#pavInasa#}¦ {%pavī-nasa.%} See under {%pavi,%} p. 557.
<LEND>

<L>28578<pc>0558-a<k1>pavIra<k2>pavIra
{#pavIra#}¦ {%pavīra, am,%} n. See above.
<LEND>

<L>28579<pc>0558-a<k1>paS<k2>paS<h>1
{#paS#} 1¦. {%paś,%} for original {%spaś%} substituted
for rt. 1. {%dṛś,%} q. v., ‘to see,’ in certain
tenses; [cf. rt. {%spaś, spaśa:%} Zend {%śpaś,%} ‘to see,
guard;’ <nsi>śpaś,</nsi> ‘a spy:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">σκεπ</lang> by metathesis for
<lang n="greek">σπεκ</lang> in <lang n="greek">σκέπ-τ-ο-μαι, σκοπ-ή, σκοπιά, σκόπ-ελο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σκοπ-ό-ς, σκώψ:</lang> Lat. <nsi>spec-i-o, con-spici-o, specula,</nsi>
<nsi>speculum, specu-s, spec-to:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>speh-ō-m,</nsi>
[Page0558-b+ 80]
<nsi>spāh-i:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>späh-en:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>spega-s,</nsi> ‘a
spy:’ Hib. <nsi>faic-im,</nsi> ‘I see;’ <nsi>feach-aim,</nsi> ‘I look,
view;’ <nsi>faoch-og,</nsi> ‘an eye.’]
<LEND>

<L>28580<pc>0558-b<k1>paS<k2>paS<h>2
2. {%paś,%}¦ according to some the form {%paḍbhis%} in
Ṛg-veda IV. 2, 12, may be connected with a base
{%paś%} derived fr. rt. 1. {%paś%} in the sense of ‘sight,’
‘look,’ ‘eye.’
<LEND>

<L>28581<pc>0558-b<k1>paSu<k2>paSu<h>1
1. {%paśu,%}¦ ind. see! behold!
<LEND>

<L>28582<pc>0558-b<k1>paSya<k2>paSya<h>1
1. {%paśya,%}¦ Ved. or {%paśyaka, as, ā, am,%} seeing,
beholding, surveying, rightly understanding; [cf.
{%a-p˚, a-sūryam-paśyā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28583<pc>0558-b<k1>paSya<k2>paSya<h>2
2. {%paśya%}¦ (2nd sing. imperative of rt. 1. {%dṛś%}), lo!
behold! see! (an exclamation of wonder or admi-
ration.)
<LEND>

<L>28584<pc>0558-b<k1>paSyat<k2>paSyat
{%Paśyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ seeing, beholding, looking,
viewing, observing, remarking; regarding, consider-
ing; ({%antī%}), f. a courtezan, harlot; epithet of a
particular sound. {%—Paśyato-hara, as, ā, am,%} steal-
ing before a person's eyes or in the very sight of the
possessor; ({%as%}), m. a thief, pilferer (a term of re-
proach proverbially applied to the goldsmith &c.).
<LEND>

<L>28585<pc>0558-b<k1>paSyata<k2>paSyata
{%Paśyata, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. visible, conspicuous.
<LEND>

<L>28586<pc>0558-b<k1>paSyanA<k2>paSyanA
{%Paśyanā,%}¦ f., in {%a-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28587<pc>0558-b<k1>paS<k2>paS<h>3
{#paS#} 3¦. {%paś,%} cl. 10. P. {%pāśayati, -yitum,%}
to bind; [cf. Zend <nsi>paś,</nsi> ‘to bind;’ Gr.
<lang n="greek">πήγ-νυ-μι, ἐ-πάγ-ην, πῆγ-μα, πηγ-ό-ς, πάγ-ο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πάχ-νη, πάγ-η, πάσσ-αλα-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>pac-i-sc-or, pâx,</nsi>
<nsi>pac-i-o(n), pang-o, pig-nus, pâ-lu-s, com-pe-sc-o,</nsi>
<nsi>dis-pe-sc-o:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>fah-an,</nsi> ‘to catch;’ <nsi>fulla-fah-</nsi>
<nsi>jan,</nsi> ‘to fulfil;’ <nsi>fagr-s:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>fuog-a, ga-</nsi>
<nsi>fuogi, gafag-jan, fah:</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>fasgu,</nsi> ‘to
bind or tie in a bundle;’ <nsi>fasgiad,</nsi> ‘a ligation, a
tying in a bundle.’]
<LEND>

<L>28588<pc>0558-b<k1>paSavya<k2>paSavya
{%Paśavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
cattle, fit or suitable for cattle (as a meadow, pas-
turage, &c.); relating to a herd or drove; possessed
of cattle; brutish; (with {%kāma%}) sexual love, sexual
intercourse; ({%am%}), n. a herd or drove of cattle; a
stall for cattle.
<LEND>

<L>28589<pc>0558-b<k1>paSu<k2>paSu<h>2
2. {%paśu, us,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. 3. {%paś,%} ‘to bind,’ like
Lat. <nsi>bestia</nsi> fr. rt. {%bandh;%} also said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%paś;%} Vedic forms are du. {%paśvā,%} acc. pl. {%paśvas,%}
inst. {%paśvā,%} dat. {%paśve,%} gen. {%paśvas%}), cattle (both
singly and collectively), a herd, drove; any smaller
animal used as a sacrificial victim, a goat; an animal
in general, any domestic animal, ({%grāmyāḥ paśavaḥ,%}
domestic animals, of which five kinds are enumerated,
men, kine, horses, goats, and sheep, to which are
sometimes added mules and asses or camels and
dogs); a brute, beast, ({%āraṇyāḥ%} or {%vanyāḥ paśavaḥ,%}
wild beasts, beasts of the forest; sometimes said con-
temptuously of a man; cf. {%puruṣa-p˚%}); a mere
animal in sacred things, an uninitiated person; a
victim [cf. {%nṛ-p˚%}]; an oblation; a subordinate deity
and one of Śiva's followers; (with Māheśvaras and
Pāśupatas) soul, the Supreme Spirit, the divine soul of
the universe; Ficus Glomerata; ({%u%}), n., Ved. cattle; an
animal, beast; [cf. Lat. <nsi>pecu;</nsi> Old Pruss. <nsi>pecku;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>faih-u;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>fih-u;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>vieh,</nsi> ‘cat-
tle;’ perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">πῶῑ.</lang>] {%—Paśu-karman, a,%} n., Ved.
the act of offering the victim; sacrifice; copulation.
{%—Paśu-kalpa, as,%} m., Ved. the ritual of animal sa-
crifice. {%—Paśu-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. desirous of
possessing cattle. {%—Paśu-kriyā,%} f. the act of animal
sacrifice; acting like cattle, copulation. {%—Paśu-gā-%}
{%yatrī,%} f. a parody of the holy verse of the Vedas
whispered into the ear of an animal about to be
sacrificed ({%paśu-pāśāya vidmahe śiraś-chedāya%}
{%dhīmahi tan naḥ paśuḥ pracodayāt%}). {%—Paśu-%}
{%ghāta, am,%} n. slaughter of animals for sacrifice.
{%—Paśu-ghna, as, ī, am,%} slaughtering cattle. {%—Pa-%}
{%śu-caryā,%} f. acting like cattle; copulation. {%—Paśu-%}
{%cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. piled up with cattle (as a sacrificial
fire). {%—Paśu-jātīya, as, ā, am,%} pertaining to the
animal kingdom. {%—Paśu-tantra, as,%} m. {%= paśu-%}
{%kalpa,%} q. v. {%—Paśu-tā,%} f. or {%paśu-tva, am,%} n. the
condition or nature of an animal, bestiality, brutality;
the condition of a sacrificial animal, the being a sa-
crificial animal; the sacrifice of an animal. {%—Paśu-%}
{%tṛp, p, p, p,%} Ved. gratifying one's self with cattle,
[Page0558-c+ 81]
i. e. stealing cattle; (Sāy.) {%= paśūnāṃ tarpayitṛ,%}
feeding cattle. {%—Paśu-da, as, ā, am,%} making a
grant of cattle; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda. {%—Paśu-dā, ās, ās, am,%} mak-
ing a grant of cattle. {%—Paśu-devata, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. invoking cattle as a deity (said of a for-
mula or ceremony); ({%ā%}), f. the deity of the
victim, i. e. the deity to whom the sacrifice is
offered. {%—Paśu-dharma, as,%} m. the characteristics
of cattle, conduct of cattle, treatment of cattle;
promiscuous cohabitation; the marrying of widows;
({%eṇa%}), ind. like a beast. {%—Paśu-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord
of cattle,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Paśu-pa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} guarding or keeping cattle; ({%as%}), m. a herds-
man. {%—Paśu-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the animals’ (or
according to others ‘lord of a servant named Paśu’),
an epithet of the later Rudra (Rudra-Śiva) or of a
similar deity (often associated in the Veda with
Bhava, Śarva, Ugra, Rudra, Mahā-deva, Īśāna, and
others, who together with Bhīma are in later times
regarded as manifestations of the one deity Rudra);
= Śiva; N. of a scholiast; of a lexicographer; of Agni;
(according to one legend every deity acknowledged
himself to be a mere {%paśu%} or animal before his lord
and master Śiva, when they solicited him to destroy the
Asura Tri-pura.) {%—Paśupati-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Paśupati-śāstra, am,%} n. the sacred book
of the Pāśupatas revealed by Śiva. {%—Paśu-palvala,%}
{%am,%} n. a fragrant grass, Cyperus Rotundus (which
grows in pools frequented by cattle). {%—Paśu-pā, ās,%}
m., Ved. a keeper of herds, herdsman; an epithet of
Pūṣan; ({%ā%}), m. du. epithet of Pūṣan and Revatī.
{%—Paśu-pāla, as,%} m. a keeper of herds, herdsman;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people to the N. E. of Madhya-
deśa; ({%am%}), n. the country or kingdom of the Paśu-
pālas; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king (or perhaps a king of the
Paśu-pālas). {%—Paśu-pālaka, as,%} m. a herdsman;
({%ikā%}), f. a herdsman's wife. {%—Paśu-pālana, am,%}
n. tending or rearing cattle. {%—Paśu-pālya, am,%} n.
breeding cattle. {%—Paśu-pāśa, as,%} m. the cord with
which the victim is bound, binding the victim at a
sacrifice; an animal sacrifice; the chains which fetter
the individual soul, the world of sense. {%—Paśu-%}
{%pāśaka, as,%} m. a kind of coitus. {%—Paśu-preraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the driving of cattle. {%—Paśu-bandha, as,%}
m. an animal sacrifice; N. of an Ekāha. {%—Paśu-%}
{%bandhaka, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a rope for
tethering cattle. {%—Paśu-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘lord of
cattle,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Paśu-bheda, as,%} m. a
class or species of animals. {%—Paśu-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
connected with cattle or animals, relating to cattle or
animals; rich in cattle, rich in herds; connected
with animal sacrifices; containing the word {%paśu;%}
{%(at),%} n. possession of cattle. {%—Paśu-māra, as,%} m.
the manner of slaughtering cattle; ({%am, eṇa%}), ind.
according to the manner of slaughtering cattle.
{%—Paśu-māraka, as, ā, am,%} attended with the
sacrifice of animals, accompanied by immolation of
animals. {%—Paśu-mohanikā,%} f. ‘stupefying animals,’
a species of plant {%(= kaṭvī)%}. {%—Paśu-yajña, as,%} m.
an animal sacrifice. {%—Paśu-yāga, as,%} m. the sa-
crifice of animals. {%—Paśu-rakṣaṇa, am,%} n. the
tending of cattle. {%—Paśu-rakṣi, is, is, i,%} Ved.
keeping or tending cattle; ({%is%}), m. a herdsman.
{%—Paśu-rakṣin, ī,%} m. ‘tending cattle,’ a herdsman,
shepherd. {%—Paśu-rajju, us,%} f. a cord for tethering
cattle, a tether for animals. {%—Paśu-rāja, as,%} m.
‘monarch of the beasts,’ a lion. {%—Paśu-roman, a,%}
n. the hair of an animal. {%—Paśu-vat,%} ind. like an
animal, brutally; (Ved.) as in an animal (sacrifice).
{%—Paśu-vardhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. increasing
cattle, causing cattle to thrive; ({%am%}), n. the thriving
of cattle. {%—Paśu-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. providing cattle.
{%—Paśu-śīrṣa, am,%} n. the head of an animal.
{%—Paśu-śrapaṇa, am,%} n., Ved. cooking a sacrificial
animal; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%agni,%} the fire on which the
victim's flesh is cooked. {%—Paśu-ṣa, as, ā, am,%} or
{%paśu-ṣā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. bestowing cattle. {%—Paśu-%}
{%ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. existing or found in cattle.
{%—Paśu-sakha, as,%} m. ‘friend of cattle,’ N. of a
Śūdra. {%—Paśu-sani, is, is, i,%} Ved. bestowing cattle.
[Page0559-a+ 79]
{%—Paśu-samāmnāya, as,%} m. ‘enumeration of sa-
crificial animals,’ N. of a section of the Vājasaneyi-
saṃhitā. {%—Paśusamāmnāyika, as, ī, am,%} men-
tioned in books on animal sacrifices. {%—Paśu-sam-%}
{%bhava, as, ā, am,%} produced by animals (as flesh,
honey, butter, &c.). {%—Paśu-sādhana, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. leading or guiding cattle. {%—Paśu-sūtra, am,%}
n., N. of a work. {%—Paśu-harītakī,%} f. the fruit of
the Spondias Mangifera {%—Paśu-havya, am,%} n.
sacrifice of animals. {%—Paśu-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-ka-%}
{%roti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to transform into an animal;
to offer as a victim. {%—Paśva-iṣṭi, is, is, i%} (fr.
{%paśvas,%} acc. pl. of {%paśu%} and {%iṣṭi%}), Ved. wishing
for herds; ({%is%}), f. desire of cattle; (Sāy.) {%= agner%}
{%iṣṭiḥ,%} a fire offering, offering by fire. {%—Paśv-%}
{%ayana, am,%} n., Ved. a festival attended with animal
sacrifices. {%—Paśva-yantra, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%paśva%}
for {%paśvas + yantra%}), Ved. being within the cattle-
fold; (Sāy.) provided with the means of letting out
or extricating cattle. {%—Paśv-avadāna, am,%} n. sa-
crifice or offering of animals. {%—Paśv-ācāra, as,%} m.,
N. of a particular form of the worship of Devī.
{%—Paśv-ijyā,%} f., Ved. animal sacrifice. {%—Paśv-iṣ,%}
{%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. wishing for cattle; (Sāy.) driving cattle,
a cattle-driver. {%—Paśv-iṣṭakā,%} f., Ved. bricks in the
shape of animals. {%—Paśv-ekādaśinī,%} f. an aggregate
of eleven sacrificial animals.
<LEND>

<L>28590<pc>0559-a<k1>paSukA<k2>paSukA
{%Paśukā,%}¦ f. any small animal.
<LEND>

<L>28591<pc>0559-a<k1>paSca<k2>paSca
{#paSca#}¦ {%paśca, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pas = apas = apa%}
{%+ ca%} fr. rt. {%añc;%} cf. {%ucca, nīca, tiraścīna%}), being
behind; posterior, later; western, westerly; ({%a%}),
ind., Ved. afterwards; ({%ā%}), ind., Ved. behind, at the
back, abaft, after; afterwards, later; westward; ({%āt%}),
ind. from behind, from the back, behind ({%paścāt-%}
{%kṛ,%} to leave behind, surpass, excel), to or towards
the back, backwards (e. g. {%paścād apasarad yānam,%}
a carriage moving backwards); after, afterwards,
subsequently, at a later time, in later times, at last;
from the west, westward, to the west of; {%tataḥ%}
{%paścāt,%} thereupon, after that; {%uttarataḥ-paścāt,%}
from the north-west. As a prep. {%paścāt%} governs
the gen. or abl., e. g. {%rathasya paścāt,%} behind the
chariot; [cf. probably Lat. <nsi>post, pone</nsi> for <nsi>pos-ne,</nsi>
<nsi>postid-ea:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀπίσσω:</lang> Lith. <nsi>paskuy,</nsi> ‘afterwards;’
<nsi>paskuttinis, paskiausas,</nsi> ‘last:’ Old Pruss. <nsi>pans-</nsi>
<nsi>dan,</nsi> ‘afterwards:’ Hib. <nsi>feasd, feasda,</nsi> ‘hereafter,
henceforward, forthwith.’] {%—Paścāc-cara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} coming or approaching behind. {%—Paścāc-chra-%}
{%maṇa, as,%} m. a Buddhist priest who walks behind
another Buddhist priest in visiting the laity. {%—Paś-%}
{%cāt-karṇam,%} ind., Ved. behind the ear. {%—Paścāt-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. subsequent time; ({%e%}), ind. in later
times, afterwards. {%—Paścāt-tap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-tapati,%}
{%-te, -taptum,%} to feel pain after, regret, repent, feel
remorse. {%—Paścāt-tara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. later, pos-
terior. {%—Paścāt-tāpa, as,%} m. ‘after-pain,’ sorrow,
regret, repentance, remorse; {%paścāttāpaṃ kṛ,%} to
feel regret, repent. {%—Paścāt-tāpin, ī, inī, i,%} re-
gretting, repenting. {%—Paścāt-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. sitting
behind or towards the west. {%—Paścād-akṣam,%} ind.,
Ved. behind the axle-tree. {%—Paścād-apavarga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. closed or completed behind. {%—Paścād-%}
{%āgatya,%} ind. having returned. {%—Paścād-āyāt, ān,%}
{%ātī%} or {%āntī, āt,%} coming behind, following. {%—Paścā-%}
{%doṣa, as,%} m., Ved. the later part of the evening.
{%—Paścād-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} remaining behind,
following after. {%—Paścād-vāta, as,%} m., Ved. a wind
from behind, a west wind. {%—Paścānutāpa (˚ca-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. regret, repentance. {%—Paścānupūrvī%}
{%(˚ca-an˚),%} f. a repeated or recurring series. {%—Paś-%}
{%cān-nata, as, ā, am,%} sunk or depressed behind.
{%—Paścān-māruta, as,%} m. a wind blowing from
behind. {%—Paścārdha (˚ca-ar˚), as,%} m. the hinder
side or part; the remaining half or part; the west
side. {%—Paścārdhya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being on the
hinder side.
<LEND>

<L>28592<pc>0559-a<k1>paScAtAt<k2>paScAtAt
{%Paścātāt,%}¦ ind., Ved. from behind.
<LEND>

<L>28593<pc>0559-a<k1>paScima<k2>paScima
{%Paścima, as, ā, am,%}¦ being behind, hinder, hind-
most; latter, last (e. g. {%paścimā sandhyā,%} the
latter, i. e. the evening twilight; {%paścimā kriyā,%}
[Page0559-b+ 75]
the last rite, burning the dead); west, western,
westerly; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%diś,%} the west; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a Tantra; ({%ena%}), ind. behind (with acc.), after;
in the west; ({%e%}), ind. in the west; [cf. {%uttara-p˚,%}
{%dakṣiṇa-p˚.%}] {%—Paścima-jana, ās,%} m. pl., Ved.
the people in the west, the inhabitants of the western
districts of India. {%—Paścima-tantra, am,%} n., N. of
a Tantra. {%—Paścima-tas,%} ind. from behind. {%—Paś-%}
{%cima-darśana, am,%} n. a last look; {%paścima-dar-%}
{%śanaṃ draṣṭum,%} to see for the last time. {%—Paś-%}
{%cima-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a district mentioned in
the Romaka-Siddhānta. {%—Paścimānūpaka (˚ma-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Paścimābhimukha%}
{%(˚ma-abh˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} directed towards the
west. {%—Paścimārdha (˚ma-ar˚), as,%} m. the latter
half, the hinder part. {%—Paścimottara (˚ma-ut˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} north-westerly, north-western; ({%asyām%}),
loc. sing. f., scil. {%diśi,%} Ved. in the north-west; ({%e%}), ind.
in the north-west. {%—Paścimottara-dikpati, is,%} m.
the regent of the north-west, the god of wind, wind.
<LEND>

<L>28594<pc>0559-b<k1>paSya<k2>paSya
{#paSya#}¦ {%paśya, paśyat, paśyata.%} See under
rt. 1. {%paś,%} p. 558.
<LEND>

<L>28595<pc>0559-b<k1>paz<k2>paz
{#paz#}¦ {%paṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%paṣati, -te, pa-%}
{%ṣitum,%} a various reading for rt. {%spaś,%}
q. v.; cl. 10. P. {%paṣayati, -yitum,%} to bind; to
hinder; to touch; to go; {%pāṣayati, -yitum,%} a
various reading for rt. 3. {%paś,%} p. 558, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>28596<pc>0559-b<k1>pazWavAh<k2>pazWavAh
{#pazWavAh#}¦ {%paṣṭha-vāh, ṭ,%} m. (said to be fr.
{%paṣṭha = pṛṣṭha + vāh%}), Ved. a bull four years
old; ({%paṣṭhauhī%}), f. a heifer four years old,
(probably) a young cow.
<LEND>

<L>28597<pc>0559-b<k1>pas<k2>pas<h>1
{#pas#} 1¦. {%pas,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%pasati, -te, pa-%}
{%situm,%} a various reading for rt. {%spaś,%}
q. v.; cl. 10. P. {%pāsayati, -yitum,%} a various reading
for rt. 3. {%paś.%}
<LEND>

<L>28598<pc>0559-b<k1>pas<k2>pas<h>2
{#pas#} 2¦. {%pas,%} the pudenda.
<LEND>

<L>28599<pc>0559-b<k1>pasas<k2>pasas
{%Pasas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. membrum virile; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">πέος, πόσ-θη:</lang> Lat. <nsi>pên-is:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>visellin,</nsi>
‘penis:’ Lith. <nsi>pis-á,</nsi> ‘cunnus;’ <nsi>pís-ti,</nsi> ‘coire cum
muliere.’]
<LEND>

<L>28600<pc>0559-b<k1>pastya<k2>pastya
{#pastya#}¦ {%pastya, am,%} n., Ved. habitation, abode,
stall, stable; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a house, dwelling, residence;
household, family; (Sāy.) {%= daivyaḥ prajāḥ,%} divine
progeny; {%= manuṣya,%} a man; {%= ṛtv-ij,%} a priest;
({%ā%}), f. the goddess of domestic affairs; ({%as, ā, am%}),
to be approached by all, venerated (Sāy. {%= sarvair%}
{%gantavyaḥ%}). {%—Pastya-sad, t,%} m., Ved. a member
of a family; (Sāy.) {%= deva-yajana-lakṣaṇe gṛhe%}
{%niṣaṇṇaḥ,%} seated in the chamber of divine worship.
{%—Pastyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a fixed
habitation; filled with habitations, abounding in
dwellings or sacrificial halls (Sāy. {%= gṛha-vat, yajña-%}
{%gṛhopeta%}); belonging to the Soma press; ({%ān%}),
m. a householder, a wealthy man.
<LEND>

<L>28601<pc>0559-b<k1>paspfS<k2>paspfS
{#paspfS#}¦ {%paspṛś,%} Ved. in {%a-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28602<pc>0559-b<k1>pahlava<k2>pahlava
{#pahlava#}¦ {%pahlava, ās,%} m., N. of a people, the
Persians, (also spelt {%pahnava;%} in the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa
they are said to be a degraded Kṣatriya race con-
quered by Sagara and sentenced by him to wear
beards, see Wilson's Viṣṇu-Purāṇa, p. 375.)
<LEND>

<L>28603<pc>0559-b<k1>pahlikA<k2>pahlikA
{#pahlikA#}¦ {%pahlikā,%} f. Pistia Stratiotes (=
{%vāri-praśnī%}).
<LEND>

<L>28604<pc>0559-b<k1>pA<k2>pA<h>1
{#pA#} 1¦. {%pā,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%pibati%}
(in later works generally written {%pivati%}),
{%-te%} (Ved. {%pāti%}), {%papau, pāsyati, apāt, pātum%}
(Ved. {%pātave, pibadhyai%}), to drink, quaff (some-
times with gen. in Ved., e. g. {%madhvaḥ pibanti%}
{%gauryaḥ,%} the white cows drink of the sweet Soma
juice); to inhale, swallow (dust); to drink in,
imbibe (metaphorically, e. g. {%piban yaśo mūrtam%}
{%iva,%} drinking in as it were embodied glory); to
feast on (with the eyes or ears, e. g. {%taṃ sā papau%}
{%locanābhyām,%} she feasted on him with her eyes);
to drink up, absorb, swallow up; to drink intoxi-
cating liquors: Caus. {%pāyayati, -te, -yitum%} (Ved.
[Page0559-c+ 81]
{%-yitavai%}), to cause to drink, give to drink; to water
(horses or cattle): Desid. {%pipāsati%} (Ved. {%pipīṣati%}),
to wish to drink, thirst, thirst for, thirst after: Desid.
of Caus. {%pipāyayiṣati,%} to wish or intend to give
to drink: Intens. {%pepīyate,%} to drink greedily or
with avidity, drink repeatedly; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πί-ν-ω,</lang> Fut.
<lang n="greek">πί-ομαι, Aor. ἔ-πι-ο-ν, πῖθι,</lang> Perf. <lang n="greek">πέ-πω-κα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πό-το-ς, πό-μα, πῶ-μα, πό-σι-ς, πό-τη-ς, πο-τήρ-ιο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πῖ-νο-ν, πι-πί-σκ-ω, πῖ-σ-ος, Πῖσα, πίσ-τρα,</lang> Æol.
<lang n="greek">πώ-ν-ω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>po-tu-s, po-ti-o(n), po-tor, po-c-</nsi>
<nsi>ulu-m, pô-tare, bi-b-o, vini-bu-a</nsi> for <nsi>vini-bib-a,</nsi>
<nsi>ex-bu-res, im-bu-o:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>pi-ti,</nsi> ‘to drink:’ Old
Pruss. <nsi>pou-ton,</nsi> ‘to drink:’ Lith. <nsi>po-ta,</nsi> ‘tippling;’
<nsi>pḗ-na-s,</nsi> ‘milk;’ <nsi>pý-va-s,</nsi> ‘beer:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>beor:</nsi>
Old and Mod. Germ. <nsi>bier.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>28605<pc>0559-c<k1>pA<k2>pA<h>2
2. {%pā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) drink-
ing, quaffing; [cf. {%agre-pā, añjas-pā, ṛtu-pā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28606<pc>0559-c<k1>pAtavya<k2>pAtavya<h>1
1. {%pātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be drunk, drinkable.
<LEND>

<L>28607<pc>0559-c<k1>pAtf<k2>pAtf<h>1
1. {%pātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who drinks, a drinker.
<LEND>

<L>28608<pc>0559-c<k1>pAtra<k2>pAtra<h>1
1. {%pātra, am,%}¦ n. a drinking-vessel, goblet, bowl,
cup, plate, dish, jar, pot; a vessel in general; a
utensil; any kind of sacrificial vase or vessel (com-
prising various forms of cups, plates, spoons, ladles,
&c. so used); the channel or bed of a river; a
receptacle of any kind, anything which holds or
supports; (metaphorically) a receptacle, a recipient
or a person in whom any quality is contained [cf.
{%viśvāsa-p˚%}]; a fit or competent or worthy person,
a person worthy to receive gifts, worthy of, fit for
(with gen. or loc. or inf., e. g. {%pātraṃ hy eṣām%}
{%asi,%} for thou art worthy or these); a king's coun-
sellor or minister; an actor, dramatis persona; a
part in a play; propriety, fitness; an order, com-
mand; a leaf; ({%as%}), m. a vessel &c.; a measure of
capacity = 1 Āḍhaka; ({%ī%}), f. a vessel, plate, dish;
pot, barrel; a small or portable furnace; an epithet
of Durgā; [cf. perhaps Lat. <nsi>patera;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>fōdr;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>putraice,</nsi> ‘a vessel, pot.’] {%—Pātra-kaṭaka, as%}
or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the ring on which a beggar's
alms-dish is carried. {%—Pātra-tā,%} f. or {%pātra-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the property or capacity of a cup or vessel;
the being a receptacle for anything; capacity, fitness;
worthiness, merit, desert; dignity, honour; appro-
priate state or circumstance. {%—Pātra-pāṇi, is,%} m.
‘cup-handed,’ N. of a demon hurtful to children.
{%—Pātra-pāla, as,%} m. ‘vessel-guiding,’ a large
paddle used as a rudder (commonly called {%pātatu-%}
{%yāra%}). {%—Pātra-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} ‘become a re-
cipient,’ worthy of receiving anything from any one
(gen.); the object of a present or of respectful treat-
ment. {%—Pātra-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘taking care of utensils,’
a servant, scullion. {%—Pātra-bheda, as,%} m. breaking
a drinking-vessel or cup. {%—Pātra-melana, am,%} n.
the bringing together of the characters of a play.
{%—Pātra-varga, as,%} m. a company of actors. {%—Pātra-%}
{%saṃskāra, as,%} m. the current of a river; the cleaning of
a vessel or dish. {%—Pātra-sañcāra, as,%} m. (perhaps)
removing the dishes or arranging them after dinner
(or incorrect for {%pātra-saṃskāra%}). {%—Pātra-stha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} being in a dish. {%—Pātra-hasta, as, ā, am,%}
‘cup-handed,’ holding a vessel in the hand. {%—Pātrī-%}
{%nirṇejana, am,%} n., Ved. water for rinsing a vessel.
{%—Pātre-bahula, as, ā, am,%} constant at meals; a
parasite. {%—Pātre-samita, as, ā, am,%} constant at
meals, a parasite; a treacherous or hypocritical person.
{%—Pātropakaraṇa (˚ra-up˚), am,%} n. decorations
of an inferior class, as bells, chowries, vases, &c.
<LEND>

<L>28609<pc>0559-c<k1>pAtraka<k2>pAtraka
{%Pātraka, am,%}¦ n. a vessel, bowl, bason, dish;
({%ikā%}), f. a cup, a beggar's bowl or alms-dish.
<LEND>

<L>28610<pc>0559-c<k1>pAtrawIra<k2>pAtrawIra
{%Pātraṭīra, as,%}¦ m. an ex-minister; (according to
others) an able or competent minister; a vessel of
metal; mucus running from the nose; rust of iron;
fire; a heron; a crow.
<LEND>

<L>28611<pc>0559-c<k1>pAtraya<k2>pAtraya
{%Pātraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pātrayati, -yitum,%} to use as
a drinking-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>28612<pc>0559-c<k1>pAtrasAtkf<k2>pAtrasAtkf
{%Pātrasāt-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to pre-
sent a worthy person with anything.
<LEND>

<L>28613<pc>0559-c<k1>pAtrika<k2>pAtrika
{%Pātrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ measured out with any vessel
or with the measure Pātra; sown with as much as
will fill a Pātra; containing it, possessing it; fit, ade-
quate, appropriate; ({%am, ī%}), n. f. a vessel, cup, dish.
<LEND>
[Page0560-a+ 80]

<L>28614<pc>0560-a<k1>pAtrin<k2>pAtrin
{%Pātrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having a drinking-vessel or pro-
vided with a dish; having fit or worthy persons.
<LEND>

<L>28615<pc>0560-a<k1>pAtriya<k2>pAtriya
{%Pātriya%}¦ or {%pātrya, as, ā, am,%} worthy to partake
of a meal.
<LEND>

<L>28616<pc>0560-a<k1>pAtrIkf<k2>pAtrIkf
{%pātrī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make a
fitting receptacle or recipient, to make a worthy
object; to dignify, promote to honour.
<LEND>

<L>28617<pc>0560-a<k1>pAtrIRa<k2>pAtrIRa
{%Pātrīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ measured or sown or cooked
with a Pātra.
<LEND>

<L>28618<pc>0560-a<k1>pAtrIBU<k2>pAtrIBU
{%Pātrī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to be-
come a fitting recipient or worthy object.
<LEND>

<L>28619<pc>0560-a<k1>pAtrIya<k2>pAtrIya
{%Pātrīya, am,%}¦ n. a sacrificial vessel or utensil.
<LEND>

<L>28620<pc>0560-a<k1>pAtrIra<k2>pAtrIra
{%Pātrīra, as,%}¦ m. an oblation.
<LEND>

<L>28621<pc>0560-a<k1>pAtrIva<k2>pAtrIva
{%Pātrīva, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a kind of sacrificial vessel.
<LEND>

<L>28622<pc>0560-a<k1>pAna<k2>pAna<h>1
1. {%pāna, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see col. 2), drinking,
drinking spirituous liquors; enjoying; a drink,
beverage; a drinking-vessel, cup; a canal; ({%as%}),
m. a distiller, one who sells spirituous liquors,
a publican, inn-keeper; [cf. Lith. <nsi>péna-s,</nsi> ‘milk.’]
{%—Pāna-kumbha, as,%} m. a drinking-vessel. {%—Pāna-%}
{%goṣṭhikā%} or {%pāna-goṣṭhī,%} f. a drinking-party,
drinking-bout; a dram-shop, tavern, place where
people drink together. {%—Pāna-ja, as, ā, am,%} caused
by drinking (as a disease). {%—Pāna-doṣa, as,%} m.
the vice of drinking, drunkenness. {%—Pāna-pa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} a dram-drinker, drinker of spirituous liquors.
{%—Pāna-para, as, ā, am,%} addicted to drinking.
{%—Pāna-pātra, am,%} n. a drinking-vessel, glass, cup,
goblet. {%—Pāna-baṇij, k,%} m. a vender of spirits, a
distiller. {%—Pāna-bhājana, am,%} n. a drinking-vessel,
glass, goblet. {%—Pāna-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a drinking-
vessel. {%—Pāna-bhū, ūs,%} or {%pāna-bhūmi, is%} or {%ī,%} f.
a drinking-place, drinking-room, refreshment-room.
{%—Pāna-maṅgala, am,%} n. a drinking-party, drink-
ing-bout. {%—Pāna-mada, as,%} m. intoxication. {%—Pā-%}
{%na-rata, as, ā, am,%} addicted to drink, drinking,
drunken, a toper. {%—Pāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. abound-
ing in drink, rich in beverages. {%—Pāna-vibhrama, as,%}
m. ‘drink-giddiness,’ intoxication. {%—Pāna-śauṇḍa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} addicted to intoxication; ({%as%}), m. a hard
drinker. {%—Pānāgāra%} ({%˚na-ag˚%} or {%-āg˚%}), {%as,%} m. a
drinking-house, tavern. {%—Pānātyaya (˚na-at˚), as,%}
m. hard drinking, drinking; morbid state after in-
toxication.
<LEND>

<L>28623<pc>0560-a<k1>pAnaka<k2>pAnaka
{%Pānaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a draught, drink, beverage,
potion.
<LEND>

<L>28624<pc>0560-a<k1>pAnika<k2>pAnika
{%Pānika, as,%}¦ m. a vender of spirituous liquors.
<LEND>

<L>28625<pc>0560-a<k1>pAnila<k2>pAnila
{%Pānila, am,%}¦ n. a drinking-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>28626<pc>0560-a<k1>pAnIya<k2>pAnIya<h>1
1. {%pānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see col. 2), to
be drunk, drinkable; ({%am%}), n. a beverage, drink;
water. {%—Pānīya-kākikā,%} f. ‘sea-crow,’ the cormo-
rant. {%—Pānīya-nakula, as,%} m. ‘water-ichneumon,’
an otter. {%—Pānīya-pṛṣṭha-ja, as,%} m. ‘born on
the surface of the water,’ an aquatic plant, Pistia
Stratiotes. {%—Pānīya-phala, am,%} n. the seed of
Euryala Ferox. {%—Pānīya-mūlaka, am,%} n. the plant
Vernonia Anthelminthica. {%—Pānīya-varṇikā,%} f.
sand ({%= bālukā%}). {%—Pānīya-śālā%} or {%pānīya-śā-%}
{%likā,%} f. a place where water is distributed, a shed on
the road-side for providing passengers with water.
{%—Pānīya-śīta, as, ā, am,%} too cold to drink. {%—Pā-%}
{%nīyādhyakṣa (˚ya-adh˚), as,%} m. a superintendent
of the water. {%—Pānīyāmalaka (˚ya-ām˚), am,%} n.
a kind of fruit, Flacourtia Cataphracta. {%—Pānīyār-%}
{%tham (˚ya-ar˚),%} ind. for the sake of water. {%—Pānī-%}
{%yālu (˚ya-ālu), us,%} m. a species of tuberous plant
{%(= jalālu, kṣupālu)%}. {%—Pānīyāśrā (˚ya-aś˚),%} f.
a species of grass ({%= valvajā, dṛḍha-kṣurā%}).
<LEND>

<L>28627<pc>0560-a<k1>pAnta<k2>pAnta
{%Pānta, as,%}¦ m., Ved. = 1. {%pānīya,%} a drink, beverage;
(Sāy.) {%= pālana-svabhāva,%} nutritious (as if fr. rt.
3. {%pā%}).
<LEND>

<L>28628<pc>0560-a<k1>pA<k2>pA<h>3
{#pA#} 3¦. {%pā,%} cl. 2. P. {%pāti, papau, pāsyati,%}
{%apāsīt%} (Ved. forms {%pīpāya%} [Sāy. fr. {%pyai%}],
{%pāsati%}), {%pātum,%} to watch, keep, preserve, protect,
screen, shelter, defend against (with abl.); to rule,
govern; to beware of (with abl); to observe, notice,
attend to (Ved.); to oversee, take care of, tend
(Ved.); to keep, observe (in this sense also A., Ved.):
Caus. (or rt. {%pal%} or {%pāl,%} cl. 10; or Nom. fr. {%pāla%})
P. (ep. also A.) {%pālayati (-te), -yitum,%} to watch,
[Page0560-b+ 80]
keep, protect, screen, defend, be a guardian to; to
cherish; to rule, govern; to maintain, keep, observe
(as a promise or vow): Desid. {%pipāsati:%} Intens.
{%pāpāyate, pāpeti, pāpāti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πατ-έομαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐ-πᾱσάμην, πέ-πᾱμαι, ἄ-πασ-τος</lang> perhaps <lang n="greek">Πάν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πάτνη, πάθην, φάτνη, δεσ-πό-της,</lang> perhaps <lang n="greek">ἄνθρωπος</lang>
<lang n="greek">for ἄνδρο-πος</lang> {%= nṛ-pa%} (?): Lat. <nsi>pa</nsi> in <nsi>pâ-vi,</nsi>
<nsi>pa-bulum, pa-sc-or, pas-tor, Pă-le-s, pā-nis, pe-</nsi>
<nsi>n-us, penātes, penes, pene-tro:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>pit-a-ti,</nsi> ‘to
nourish:’ Russ. <nsi>pitáyu,</nsi> ‘I feed:’ Lith. <nsi>pō-nas,</nsi> ‘a
lord;’ <nsi>pé-nas,</nsi> ‘fodder, food;’ <nsi>pénù,</nsi> ‘I feed;’ <nsi>pë-</nsi>
<nsi>mú§,</nsi> ‘a shepherd;’ <nsi>pḗ-tu-s,</nsi> ‘midday:’ Goth. <nsi>fod-</nsi>
<nsi>yan,</nsi> ‘to feed;’ <nsi>fôd-ein-s,</nsi> ‘food:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>fod-a:</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>futter:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>food.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>28629<pc>0560-b<k1>pA<k2>pA<h>4
4. {%pā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) keep-
ing, protecting, guarding, screening; [cf. {%apāna-pā,%}
{%āprīta-pā, go-pā, tapuṣ-pā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28630<pc>0560-b<k1>pAt<k2>pAt<h>1
1. {%pāt, ān, ātī%}¦ or {%āntī, āt%} (for 2. see p. 563), guard-
ing, defending, preserving; a guardian, protector.
<LEND>

<L>28631<pc>0560-b<k1>pAta<k2>pAta<h>1
1. {%pāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. {%pāta%} see under 2. {%pāt%}),
watched, protected, preserved.
<LEND>

<L>28632<pc>0560-b<k1>pAtavya<k2>pAtavya<h>2
2. {%pātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 1. see p. 559, col. 3),
to be guarded or protected.
<LEND>

<L>28633<pc>0560-b<k1>pAtf<k2>pAtf<h>2
2. {%pātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (for 1. see p. 559, col. 3),
a defender, protector, defending (with gen. or acc.);
({%tā%}), m. a species of Ocymum ({%= gandha-pattra%}).
<LEND>

<L>28634<pc>0560-b<k1>pAtra<k2>pAtra<h>2
2. {%pātra, am,%}¦ n. a preservative from sin.
<LEND>

<L>28635<pc>0560-b<k1>pAna<k2>pAna<h>2
2. {%pāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 1. see col. 1) Ved.
observing, keeping; ({%am%}), n. protection, defence;
[cf. {%tanū-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28636<pc>0560-b<k1>pAnIya<k2>pAnIya<h>2
2. {%pānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 1. see col. 1), to be
cherished or protected, to be preserved.
<LEND>

<L>28637<pc>0560-b<k1>pAMSu<k2>pAMSu
{#pAMSu#}¦ {%pāṃśu, pāṃśana,%} &c., {%= pāṃsu, pāṃ-%}
{%sana,%} &c. below.
<LEND>

<L>28638<pc>0560-b<k1>pAMsu<k2>pAMsu
{#pAMsu#}¦ {%pāṃsu, us,%} m. (in later writings mostly
spelt {%pāṃśu;%} probably fr. rt. {%paṃs%} or {%paṃś,%} to
destroy), crumbling soil, dust, sand; a particle of
dust, grain of sand; dung, manure; a species of
plant ({%= parpaṭa%}); a kind of camphor; landed
property; [cf. Lat. <nsi>pulvis</nsi> for <nsi>pulcvis;</nsi> Cambro-
Brit. <nsi>pain,</nsi> ‘pollen, fine powder or dust.’] {%—Pāṃsu-%}
{%kāsīsa, am,%} n. sulphate of iron. {%—Pāṃsu-kulī,%} f.
‘multitude of dust,’ a high road, highway. {%—Pāṃsu-%}
{%kūla, am,%} n. a dust-heap, particularly a collection of
rubbish and rags out of which the Buddhist priests
make up their clothing; a legal document not made
out in any particular person's name. {%—Pāṃsukūla-%}
{%sīvana, am,%} n. ‘the sewing together of rags from a
dust-heap,’ N. of the place where Śākya-muni assumed
his priestly dress. {%—Pāṃsukūlika, as, ā, am,%} one
who wears clothes made of rags from a dust-heap.
{%—Pāṃsu-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} covered with dust,
dusty. {%—Pāṃsu-kṣāra = pāṃsu-ja,%} q. v. {%—Pāṃsu-%}
{%guṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%} covered with dust. {%—Pāṃsu-%}
{%catvara, am,%} n. hail. {%—Pāṃsu-candana, as,%} m.
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Pāṃsu-cāmara, as,%} m. a heap
of dust; a tent; a bank covered with Dūrvā grass;
praise; a small cucumber. {%—Pāṃsu-ja, am,%} n. ‘earth-
born,’ a kind of salt extracted from soil, rock or fossil
salt. {%—Pāṃsu-jālika, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Pāṃsu-dhūmra, as, ā, am,%} dark-red or dark
with dust; [cf. {%dhūli-dhūmra.%}] {%—Pāṃsu-dhvasta-%}
{%śiroruha, as, ā, am,%} having the hair soiled with
dust. {%—Pāṃsu-nipāta, as,%} m. a fall of dust. {%—Pāṃ-%}
{%su-paṭala, am,%} n. a coating or mass of dust.
{%—Pāṃsu-pattra, am,%} n. a kind of vegetable, Che-
nopodium Album. {%—Pāṃsu-bhava, as%} or {%am,%} m.
or n. (?) {%= pāṃsu-ja,%} q. v. {%—Pāṃsu-mardana, as,%}
m. ‘dust-destroying,’ an excavation for water round
the root of a tree. {%—Pāṃsu-rāgiṇī,%} f. a species of
plant ({%= mahā-madā%}). {%—Pāṃsu-rāṣṭra, am,%} n.,
N. of a country; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of its inhabitants.
{%—Pāṃsu-varṣa, as,%} m. a shower of dust, falling
dust. {%—Pāṃsu-samūhana, as, ī, am,%} collecting or
raising dust (as the wind). {%—Pāṃsutkara (˚su-ut˚),%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. {%= pāṃsu-varṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>28639<pc>0560-b<k1>pAMsaka<k2>pAMsaka
{%Pāṃsaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ vitiating, spoiling; con-
temptible, vile.
<LEND>

<L>28640<pc>0560-b<k1>pAMsana<k2>pAMsana
{%Pāṃsana, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} (at the end of a comp.)
defiling, disgracing, dishonouring; vitiating, spoiling,
[Page0560-c+ 80]
destructive; contemptible, wicked, bad, infamous;
({%am%}), n. contempt.
<LEND>

<L>28641<pc>0560-c<k1>pAMsava<k2>pAMsava
{%Pāṃsava, as, ā, am,%}¦ formed or consisting of dust;
({%as%}), m. a patronymic (Ved.); a kind of salt (in
this sense spelt {%pāṃśava%}).
<LEND>

<L>28642<pc>0560-c<k1>pAnsin<k2>pAnsin
{%Pānsin, ī, inī, i, = pāṃsana%}¦ (for which it is
probably only a wrong reading).
<LEND>

<L>28643<pc>0560-c<k1>pAMsuka<k2>pAMsuka
{%Pāṃsuka, ās,%}¦ m. pl. dust; ({%ā%}), f. a menstruous
woman; a fragrant plant, Pandanus Odoratissimus.
<LEND>

<L>28644<pc>0560-c<k1>pAMsura<k2>pAMsura
{%Pāṃsura, as, ā, am,%}¦ dusty (Ved.); a gad-fly; a
cripple carried or moving about in a chair.
<LEND>

<L>28645<pc>0560-c<k1>pAMsula<k2>pAMsula
{%Pāṃsula%}¦ or {%pāṃśula, as, ā, am,%} dusty, covered with
dust; sullied, defiled, disgraced; defiling, disgracing
(e. g. {%kula-pāṃsula,%} disgracing a family, a disgrace to
the family); ({%as%}), m. a wicked or profligate man, a
libertine, paramour, gallant; one of Śiva's weapons
(a sort of pole armed at the upper end with transverse
pieces representing the breast-bone and adjoining ribs
and surmounted by a skull); an epithet of Śiva; a
species of tree, Cæsalpinia Bonducella; ({%ā%}), f. a
menstruous woman; a licentious woman, ({%a-pāṃ-%}
{%śulā,%} a chaste woman); the earth; Pandanus Odo-
ratissimus.
<LEND>

<L>28646<pc>0560-c<k1>pAka<k2>pAka<h>1
{#pAka#} 1¦. {%pāka, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%pā,%} to drink), Ved. very young; sincere, simple,
genuine, inartificial, honest; ignorant; ({%as%}), m. the
young of animals, a child, an infant; N. of a Daitya
slain by Indra; an owl. {%—Pāka-trā,%} ind., Ved. in a
simple or honest way, in simplicity; (Sāy.) {%= vipakva-%}
{%prajñeṣu,%} towards the sincere-minded. {%—Pāka-%}
{%dūrvā,%} f., Ved. a species of plant. {%—Pāka-dviṣ, ṭ,%}
m. ‘the enemy of the Daitya Pāka,’ an epithet of
Indra. {%—Pāka-yajña, as,%} m. a simple or domestic
sacrifice (an oblation offered on building a house,
liberating a bull, &c.; according to Āpastamba this
term comprise the Aupāsana-homa, Vaiśvadeva, Pār-
vaṇa, Aṣṭakā, Śrāddha, Sarpa-bali, Īśāna-bali;
according to Baudhāyana, the Huta, Pra-huta,
Ā-huta, Śūla-gava, Bali-haraṇa, Praty-avarohaṇa, Ash-
ṭakā-homa; according to Gautama, the Aṣṭakā,
Pārvaṇa, Śrāddha, Śrāvaṇī, Āgrahāyaṇī, Caitrī,
Aśva-yujī); N. of a man. {%—Pākayajñika, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} relating to the Pāka-yajña; ({%as%}), m. a per-
former of the Pāka-yajña ceremony. {%—Pākayajñiya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating to the Pāka-yajña. {%—Pāka-vat,%}
ind., Ved. simply, honestly. {%—Pāka-śaṃsa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. honest-minded; (Sāy.) {%= paripakva-va-%}
{%cana, satya-bhāṣin,%} speaking sincerely. {%—Pāka-%}
{%śālā,%} f. ‘cook-house,’ a kitchen. {%—Pāka-śāsana, as,%}
m. ‘punisher of the Daitya Pāka or instructor of the
ignorant,’ an epithet of Indra. {%—Pākaśāsani, is,%}
m. (a patronymic fr. the preceding), an epithet of
Jayanta; of Arjuna. {%—Pāka-saṃsthā,%} f. {%= pāka-%}
{%yajña,%} q. v. {%—Pāka-sutvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. offering
Soma with a simple or sincere mind (Sāy. {%= vi-%}
{%pakvena manasā Somasyābhiṣotṛ%}). {%—Pāka-%}
{%sthāman, ā,%} m., Ved., N. of a man. {%—Pāka-han-%}
{%tṛ, tā,%} m. ‘slayer of the Daitya Pāka,’ an epithet
of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>28647<pc>0560-c<k1>pAkya<k2>pAkya
{%Pākya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. honesty, simplicity; ({%ā%}),
ind. in simplicity, in ignorance.
<LEND>

<L>28648<pc>0560-c<k1>pAka<k2>pAka<h>2
{#pAka#} 2¦. {%pāka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%pac%}), cook-
ing, baking, roasting, boiling, dressing food; burning
(bricks or earthenware); digestion, assimilation of
food; ripening, becoming ripe, ripeness; maturity,
perfect development (e. g. {%dhiyas,%} of the intellect),
development of consequences (as of an act done in a
former life or of any act); completion, perfection,
fulfilment, accomplishment [cf. {%phala-p˚%}]; greyness
of the hair, old age; inflammation, suppuration,
ripeness of a boil; an abscess, ulcer; a vessel in which
anything is cooked or dressed, cooking utensil (a
saucepan, boiler, &c.); the domestic fire; general
fear and panic resulting in national disaster or revo-
lution; the subversion of a country; [cf. {%a-p˚,%}
{%ikṣu-p˚, kṛṣṇa-p˚.%}] {%—Pāka-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m.
the Caronda tree, Carissa Carondas (‘bearing a black
fruit when ripe,’ also other similar compounds, as
{%pākakṛṣṇa-phala, kṛṣṇa-pāka%}). {%—Pāka-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} caused by cooking or roasting, produced
[Page0561-a+ 80]
by maturing; ({%am%}), n. ‘obtained by boiling,’ black
salt; flatulence. {%—Pākaja-tva, am,%} n. production by
warmth, capability of being affected by contact with
fire. {%—Pāka-pātra, am,%} n. a cooking utensil, a
boiler, &c. {%—Pāka-puṭī,%} f. a potter's kiln, pottery.
{%—Pāka-phala, as,%} m. the Caronda tree {%(= kṛṣṇa-%}
{%pāka-phala)%}. {%—Pāka-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a cooking
utensil. {%—Pāka-matsya, as,%} m. a species of fish; a
kind of fish-sauce; a species of venomous insect.
{%—Pāka-rañjana, am,%} n. the leaf of the Laurus
Cassia. {%—Pāka-rājeśvara (˚ja-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of
a writer on the art of cookery. {%—Pāka-śālā,%} f. ‘hall
for cooking,’ a kitchen. {%—Pāka-śuklā,%} f. chalk.
{%—Pāka-sthāna, am,%} n. ‘place for cooking,’ a
kitchen; (scil. {%kulālasya%}) a potter's kiln. {%—Pākā-%}
{%gāra%} ({%˚ka-ag˚%} or {%-āg˚%}), {%as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
‘cooking-room,’ a kitchen. {%—Pākātīsāra (˚ka-at˚),%}
{%as,%} m. chronic dysentery; [cf. {%āmātīsāra.%}] {%—Pā-%}
{%kādhyāya (˚ka-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘chapter on cooking,’
N. of a chapter of the Sannipāta-kalikā treating of
particular medical decoctions. {%—Pākāru (˚ka-aru),%}
{%us,%} m., Ved., N. of a particular disease.
<LEND>

<L>28649<pc>0561-a<k1>pAkala<k2>pAkala
{%Pākala, as, ā, am,%}¦ bringing to maturity; sup-
purative, causing suppuration in a boil; ({%as%}), m.
fever in an elephant; fire; wind; {%= vodhana-%}
{%dravya%} (probably an error for {%rādhana-dravya%});
({%ā%}), f. Bignonia Suaveolens; ({%ī%}), f. Cucumis Utilis-
simus; ({%am%}), n. Costus Speciosus.
<LEND>

<L>28650<pc>0561-a<k1>pAkali<k2>pAkali
{%Pākali, is,%}¦ f. a species of plant ({%= rohiṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>28651<pc>0561-a<k1>pAkin<k2>pAkin
{%Pākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) becoming
mature, ripening; being digested.
<LEND>

<L>28652<pc>0561-a<k1>pAkima<k2>pAkima
{%Pākima, as, ā, am,%}¦ cooked, dressed, ripened
(naturally or artificially); obtained by boiling or
evaporation (as salt).
<LEND>

<L>28653<pc>0561-a<k1>pAkuka<k2>pAkuka
{%Pākuka, as,%}¦ m. a cook.
<LEND>

<L>28654<pc>0561-a<k1>pAkya<k2>pAkya
{%Pākya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cooked or matured;
fit to cook, eatable; obtained by cooking or evapo-
ration; ({%am%}), n. a kind of salt; ({%as%}), m. saltpetre.
<LEND>

<L>28655<pc>0561-a<k1>pAcaka<k2>pAcaka
{%Pācaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ cooking, roasting, baking;
causing digestion, digestive, peptic, tonic; maturing,
bringing to maturity; ({%as, ikā%}), m. f. a cook; ({%as%}),
m. fire; ({%am%}), n. the bile which assists in digestion.
{%—Pācaka-strī,%} f. a female cook. {%—Pācikā-bhārya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a cook for a wife, married to a
cook.
<LEND>

<L>28656<pc>0561-a<k1>pAcana<k2>pAcana
{%Pācana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to cook or boil,
cooking, ripening; softening, relaxing, digestive;
suppurative; ({%as%}), m. fire; acidity, sourness; a
species of plant {%(= raktairaṇḍa); (ī),%} f. a species
of Myrobalan, Terminalia Chebula; ({%am%}), n. the
act of cooking or baking; ripening; causing a wound
to close; a styptic for closing wounds; a medicinal
preparation, infusion, decoction (of various drugs,
chiefly carminatives or gentle stimulants given to
bring the vitiated humors in fever &c. to maturity);
‘extraction by boiling,’ eliciting extraneous sub-
stances from a wound or ulcer by means of cata-
plasms &c.; a cataplasm; a sort of diet-drink;
dissolving; a dissolvent, digestive; penance, expi-
ation; ({%ikā%}), f. cooking, maturing.
<LEND>

<L>28657<pc>0561-a<k1>pAcanaka<k2>pAcanaka
{%Pācanaka, as,%}¦ m. borax; ({%am%}), n. a sort of
diet-drink; causing a wound to close (by means of
styptics &c.).
<LEND>

<L>28658<pc>0561-a<k1>pAcanIya<k2>pAcanIya
{%Pācanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cooked or digested;
dissolving, digestive.
<LEND>

<L>28659<pc>0561-a<k1>pAcala<k2>pAcala
{%Pācala, as,%}¦ m. whatever cooks, ripens, causes
digestion, &c.; a cook; fire; wind; a thing dressed
or matured without the aid of fire; ({%am%}), n. cook-
ing, maturing.
<LEND>

<L>28660<pc>0561-a<k1>pAcA<k2>pAcA
{%Pācā%}¦ or {%pāci, is,%} f. cooking, maturing.
<LEND>

<L>28661<pc>0561-a<k1>pAcya<k2>pAcya
{%Pācya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cooked; capable of
being matured.
<LEND>

<L>28662<pc>0561-a<k1>pAkza<k2>pAkza
{#pAkza#}¦ {%pākṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pakṣa%}), be-
longing to a half month, fortnightly, relating to a
side or party, &c.
<LEND>

<L>28663<pc>0561-a<k1>pAkzapAtika<k2>pAkzapAtika
{%Pākṣapātika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pakṣa-pāta%}),
favouring a party or faction, partial, factious.
<LEND>

<L>28664<pc>0561-a<k1>pAkzAyaRa<k2>pAkzAyaRa
{%Pākṣāyaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to or occurring
in a Pakṣa or fortnight, &c.
<LEND>

<L>28665<pc>0561-a<k1>pAkzika<k2>pAkzika
{%Pākṣika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pakṣa%} or {%pakṣin%}),
[Page0561-b+ 75]
belonging to a bird; belonging to a fortnight, fort-
nightly; belonging to an argument, &c.; favouring a
party or faction; subject to an alternative, that which
may or may not take place, possible but not necessary,
contingent, allowed but not prescribed; ({%as%}), m. a
fowler, bird-catcher; an alternative.
<LEND>

<L>28666<pc>0561-b<k1>pAKaRqa<k2>pAKaRqa
{#pAKaRqa#}¦ {%pākhaṇḍa, as,%} m. a heretic, hete-
rodox Hindū (adopting the exterior marks of the
classes, but not respecting the ordinances of the
Vedas; also {%pāṣaṇḍa,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>28667<pc>0561-b<k1>pAgala<k2>pAgala
{#pAgala#}¦ {%pāgala, as, ā, am,%} mad, deranged,
demented.
<LEND>

<L>28668<pc>0561-b<k1>pANkta<k2>pANkta
{#pANkta#}¦ {%pāṅkta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%paṅkti%}), con-
sisting of five parts, fivefold (Ved.); relating to or
composed in the Paṅkti metre; an epithet of a kind
of Soma; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%Sāman,%} N. of a Sāman.
{%—Pāṅkta-tā,%} f. or {%pāṅkta-tva, am,%} n., Ved. five-
foldness, fivefold nature or condition.
<LEND>

<L>28669<pc>0561-b<k1>pANktakAkuBa<k2>pANktakAkuBa
{%Pāṅktakākubha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. {%paṅkti-kakubh%}),
Ved. an epithet of a Pra-gātha consisting of the Paṅkti
and Kakubh metres.
<LEND>

<L>28670<pc>0561-b<k1>pANkteya<k2>pANkteya
{%Pāṅkteya%}¦ or {%pāṅktya, as, ā, am,%} fit to sit in
the general row at meals, fit to be associated with,
admissible into society, fit for respectable society.
<LEND>

<L>28671<pc>0561-b<k1>pANktra<k2>pANktra
{#pANktra#}¦ {%pāṅktra, as,%} m., Ved. (according to
Mahī-dhara) a kind of mouse.
<LEND>

<L>28672<pc>0561-b<k1>pANgulya<k2>pANgulya
{#pANgulya#}¦ {%pāṅgulya, am,%} n. (fr. {%paṅgula%}),
limping, halting, hobbling.
<LEND>

<L>28673<pc>0561-b<k1>pAcaka<k2>pAcaka
{#pAcaka#}¦ {%pācaka.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>28674<pc>0561-b<k1>pAcI<k2>pAcI
{#pAcI#}¦ {%pācī,%} f. a species of climbing plant.
<LEND>

<L>28675<pc>0561-b<k1>pAjas<k2>pAjas
{#pAjas#}¦ {%pājas, as,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 3.
{%pā%}), Ved. brightness, shining, glimmer, gleam, glit-
ter, sheen [cf. {%sahasra-p˚%}]; cheerfulness, freshness,
activity, strength, vigour, impetuosity; a shining sur-
face (said of the sky); ({%asī%}), n. du. ‘the two shining
surfaces,’ heaven and earth; (Sāy.) {%= balavatyau,%}
powerful (as an epithet of Dyāvā-kṣāmā); ({%āṃsi%}), n.
pl. glittering hues, glowing colours; (Sāy.) {%= balāni.%}
{%—Pājas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. brilliant, strong.
<LEND>

<L>28676<pc>0561-b<k1>pAjasya<k2>pAjasya
{#pAjasya#}¦ {%pājasya, am,%} n., Ved. the region
of the belly (of an animal); the flanks, side; [cf.
{%tri-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28677<pc>0561-b<k1>pAYcakapAla<k2>pAYcakapAla
{#pAYcakapAla#}¦ {%pāñcakapāla, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%pañca-kapāla%}), relating to or forming part of an
oblation offered in five cups.
<LEND>

<L>28678<pc>0561-b<k1>pAYcagatika<k2>pAYcagatika
{%Pāñcagatika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pañca-gati%}), con-
sisting of five forms of existence.
<LEND>

<L>28679<pc>0561-b<k1>pAYcajanI<k2>pAYcajanI
{%Pāñcajanī,%}¦ f. a patronymic of Asiknī the daughter
of the Prajā-pati Pañca-jana.
<LEND>

<L>28680<pc>0561-b<k1>pAYcajanya<k2>pAYcajanya
{%Pāñcajanya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%pañca-jana,%} q. v.),
containing or relating to the five classes or races of
men, extending over the five races (Ved.); ({%as%}), m.,
N. of the conch of Kṛṣṇa which was taken by him
from the demon Pañca-jana, see {%pañca-jana,%} p. 522;
fire; a species of fish ({%= poṭa-gala%}); N. of one of
the eight Upa-dvīpas in Jambu-dvīpa; ({%ā%}), f. a
patronymic of Asiknī; ({%am%}), n. (?), N. of a forest.
{%—Pāñcajanya-dhara, as,%} m. ‘bearing the conch
Pāñcajanya,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>28681<pc>0561-b<k1>pAYcadaSa<k2>pAYcadaSa
{%Pāñcadaśa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pañca-daśī%}), relating
to the fifteenth day of a month.
<LEND>

<L>28682<pc>0561-b<k1>pAYcadaSya<k2>pAYcadaSya
{%Pāñcadaśya, as, śī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
the fifteenth day of a month, used on the fifteenth day
of a half month; ({%am%}), n. the aggregate of fifteen.
<LEND>

<L>28683<pc>0561-b<k1>pAYcanaKa<k2>pAYcanaKa
{%Pāñcanakha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pañca-nakha%}), made
of the skin of an animal with five claws.
<LEND>

<L>28684<pc>0561-b<k1>pAYcanada<k2>pAYcanada
{%Pāñcanada, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pañca-nada%}), pre-
vailing in the land of the five rivers, observed in
Pañca-nada or the Pañjāb; ({%as%}), m. a prince of the
Pañjāb; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of the Pañjāb.
<LEND>

<L>28685<pc>0561-b<k1>pAYcaBOtika<k2>pAYcaBOtika
{%Pāñcabhautika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pañca-bhūta%}),
composed of or containing the five elements; (with
{%ā-dāna%}) the assumption of the five elements.
<LEND>

<L>28686<pc>0561-b<k1>pAYcamAhnika<k2>pAYcamAhnika
{%Pāñcamāhnika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pañcama + ahan%}),
Ved. belonging to the fifth day.
<LEND>
[Page0561-c+ 79]

<L>28687<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcamika<k2>pAYcamika
{%Pāñcamika, as, ī, am,%}¦ treated of in the fifth
(book).
<LEND>

<L>28688<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcayAjYika<k2>pAYcayAjYika
{%Pāñcayājñika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pañca-yajña%}), re-
lating or belonging to or included in the five great
sacrifices or ceremonies; ({%am%}), n. any one of the
five great sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>28689<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcarAtra<k2>pAYcarAtra
{%Pāñcarātra, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%pañca-rātra%}), N. of a
Vaiṣṇava sect following the doctrine of their sacred
book called Pañca-rātra. {%—Pāñcarātra-rahasya,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work mentioned in the Sarva-
darśana-saṅgraha by Mādhavācārya.
<LEND>

<L>28690<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcarAtryanibarhaRa<k2>pAYcarAtryanibarhaRa
{%Pāñcarātrya-nibarhaṇa, am,%}¦ n., N. of the eighth
chapter of the Śaṅkara-vijaya by Anantānanda-giri.
<LEND>

<L>28691<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcavarzika<k2>pAYcavarzika
{%Pāñcavarṣika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pañca-varṣa%}),
five years old.
<LEND>

<L>28692<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcavAja<k2>pAYcavAja
{%Pāñcavāja, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pañca-vāja%}), N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>28693<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcaviDya<k2>pAYcaviDya
{%Pāñcavidhya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pañca-vidhi%}), N. of a
Sūtra treating of the five Vidhis of the Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>28694<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcaSabdika<k2>pAYcaSabdika
{%Pāñcaśabdika, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pañca-śabda%}), music
of five kinds; musical instruments in general.
<LEND>

<L>28695<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcaSara<k2>pAYcaSara
{%Pāñcaśara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pañca-śara%}), belonging
to ‘the five-arrowed’ or the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>28696<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcArTika<k2>pAYcArTika
{%Pāñcārthika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%pañcan + artha%}), a
follower or votary of Paśu-pati or Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>28697<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcAla<k2>pAYcAla
{#pAYcAla#}¦ {%pāñcāla, as, ī, am,%} relating or be-
longing to the Pañcālas, dwelling in or ruling over
the country of the Pañcālas; ({%as%}), m. a prince of
the Pañcālas; the country of the Pañcālas; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the people of the Pañcālas; an association of
five guilds (viz. those of the carpenter, weaver, barber,
washerman, and shoe-maker); ({%ī%}), f. a princess of
the Pañcālas; a N. of Draupadī the wife of the
five Pāṇḍu princes; a doll, puppet; scil. {%rīti,%} epithet
of a particular poetical style; the melodious combina-
tion of five or six words. {%—Pāñcāla-deśa, as,%} m. the
country of the Pañcālas. {%—Pāñcāla-rāja, as,%} m. the
king of the Pañcālas.
<LEND>

<L>28698<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcAlaka<k2>pAYcAlaka
{%Pāñcālaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ belonging to the people
of the Pañcālas; ({%as%}), m. a sovereign of the Pañ-
cālas; ({%ikā%}), f. a princess of the Pañcālas; a doll,
puppet (sometimes written {%pāñcalikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>28699<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcAleya<k2>pAYcAleya
{%Pāñcāleya%}¦ or {%pāñcālya, as, ī, am,%} belonging to
the Pañcālas; ({%as%}), m. a prince of the Pañcālas.
<LEND>

<L>28700<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYci<k2>pAYci
{#pAYci#}¦ {%pāñci, is,%} m. (fr. {%pañcan%}), a patro-
nymic. {%—Pāñci-grāma, as,%} m., N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>28701<pc>0561-c<k1>pAYcika<k2>pAYcika
{%Pāñcika, as,%}¦ m., N. of the leader of the Yakṣas.
<LEND>

<L>28702<pc>0561-c<k1>pAw<k2>pAw
{#pAw#}¦ {%pāṭ,%} ind. an interjection used in call-
ing ({%sambodhane%}).
<LEND>

<L>28703<pc>0561-c<k1>pAwa<k2>pAwa
{#pAwa#}¦ {%pāṭa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%paṭ%}), breadth,
expanse, extension; (in geometry) the intersection of
a prolonged side and perpendicular or the figure
formed by such intersection; ({%ā%}), f. regular or suc-
cessive order, series, succession.
<LEND>

<L>28704<pc>0561-c<k1>pAwaka<k2>pAwaka
{%Pāṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a splitter, divider, one who cleaves
or tears asunder; the half of a village, part of a
village, a kind of village; a shore, bank; a flight of
steps leading to the water; a kind of musical instru-
ment; a long span ({%= mahā-kiṣku%}); expense or
loss of capital or stock; throwing dice.
<LEND>

<L>28705<pc>0561-c<k1>pAwana<k2>pAwana
{%Pāṭana, am,%}¦ n. splitting, cleaving, slitting up,
tearing up, breaking, cutting to pieces, destroying.
{%—Pāṭana-kriyā,%} f. lancing an abscess or ulcer.
<LEND>

<L>28706<pc>0561-c<k1>pAwala<k2>pAwala
{%Pāṭala, as, ā, am%}¦ (said by some to be connected
with {%pāṭa%} above), pale-red, of a pink or pale-red
colour; rose colour; pallid; ({%as, ī, am%}), made of
the Pāṭalī or forming a part of it; ({%as%}), m. a pale-
red hue, rose colour, redness; the trumpet-flower,
Bignonia Suaveolens (a tree with sweet-scented blos-
soms); a species of rice ripening in the rains; N. of
a man; ({%ā%}), f. Bignonia Suaveolens (both the tree
and its blossom); red Lodhra; a kind of fresh-water
fish; an epithet of Durgā; a form of Dākṣāyaṇī;
({%am, ā%}), n. f. the flower of the Bignonia Suaveolens;
saffron. {%—Pāṭala-gaṇḍa-lekha, as, ā, am,%} having
the complexion of the cheek reddened. {%—Pāṭala-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. a species of tree, Rottleria Tinctoria
({%= pun-nāga%}). {%—Pāṭala-puṣpa-sannibha, am,%}
n. a species of medicinal plant ({%= padma-kāṣṭha%}).
[Page0562-a+ 75]
{%—Pāṭalā-vatī,%} f., N. of a river; an epithet of
Durgā. {%—Pāṭalopala (˚la-up˚), am,%} n. a ruby.
<LEND>

<L>28707<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwalaka<k2>pAwalaka
{%Pāṭalaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ of a pale-red colour, pink.
<LEND>

<L>28708<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwali<k2>pAwali
{%Pāṭali, is, ī,%}¦ m. f. the trumpet-flower, Bignonia
Suaveolens; a species of rice; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a city;
of a daughter of king Mahendra-varman. {%—Pāṭali-%}
{%putra%} or {%pāṭali-putraka, am,%} n., N. of the capital
of Magadha near the confluence of the Śoṇa and the
Ganges, supposed to be the ancient Palibothra and
the modern Patna. {%—Pāṭaliputra-nāmadheya, am,%}
n., scil. {%nagara,%} a city called Pāṭali-putra.
<LEND>

<L>28709<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwalika<k2>pAwalika
{%Pāṭalika, as, ā, am,%}¦ knowing the secrets of
others; one who knows time and place; ({%as%}), m. a
pupil; ({%am%}), n., N. of a town ({%= pāṭali-putra%}).
<LEND>

<L>28710<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwaliman<k2>pAwaliman
{%Pāṭaliman, ā,%}¦ m. a pale-red or rose colour.
<LEND>

<L>28711<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwalyA<k2>pAwalyA
{%Pāṭalyā,%}¦ f. a multitude of Pāṭalā flowers.
<LEND>

<L>28712<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwita<k2>pAwita
{%Pāṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn, split, broken, divided;
epithet of a form of fracture of the leg.
<LEND>

<L>28713<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwI<k2>pAwI
{%Pāṭī,%}¦ f. arithmetic; a species of shrub ({%= balā%}).
{%—Pāṭī-gaṇita, am,%} n. arithmetic.
<LEND>

<L>28714<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwIra<k2>pAwIra
{%Pāṭīra, as,%}¦ m. a field; a pungent root, a kind
of radish; the pith or manna of the bamboo; a cloud;
a sieve, searce, cribble; tin; disease arising from
wind, catarrh; sandal.
<LEND>

<L>28715<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwaccara<k2>pAwaccara
{#pAwaccara#}¦ {%pāṭaccara, as,%} m. (fr. {%paṭaccara%}),
a thief, robber, shop-lifter.
<LEND>

<L>28716<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwala<k2>pAwala
{#pAwala#}¦ {%pāṭala.%} See p. 561, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28717<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwava<k2>pAwava
{#pAwava#}¦ {%pāṭava, as,%} m. (fr. {%paṭu%}), a son or
descendant of Paṭu; a pupil of Paṭu; ({%as, ī, am%}),
clever, sharp, dexterous; ({%am%}), n. sharpness, acute-
ness, intensity, energy; cleverness, skill, dexterity,
talent, eloquence; quickness, rashness, precipitation;
health.
<LEND>

<L>28718<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwavika<k2>pAwavika
{%Pāṭavika, as, ī, am,%}¦ clever, adroit, dexterous;
cunning, crafty, fraudulent.
<LEND>

<L>28719<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwahikA<k2>pAwahikA
{#pAwahikA#}¦ {%pāṭahikā,%} f. a small shrub, Abrus
Precatorius; [cf. {%guñja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28720<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwA<k2>pAwA
{#pAwA#}¦ {%pāṭā,%} f., Ved. a species of plant
({%= pāṭhā ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>28721<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwikAvAqi<k2>pAwikAvAqi
{#pAwikAvAqi#}¦ {%pāṭikāvāḍi,%} N. of a village
(probably Putcabarry).
<LEND>

<L>28722<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwin<k2>pAwin
{#pAwin#}¦ {%pāṭin, ī,%} m. a species of fish de-
scribed as having many teeth; [cf. {%pāṭhīna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28723<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwUra<k2>pAwUra
{#pAwUra#}¦ {%pāṭūra, as,%} m., Ved. a particular
part of an animal near the ribs.
<LEND>

<L>28724<pc>0562-a<k1>pAwya<k2>pAwya
{#pAwya#}¦ {%pāṭya, am,%} n. a kind of vegetable
({%= paṭṭa-śāka%}).
<LEND>

<L>28725<pc>0562-a<k1>pAWa<k2>pAWa
{#pAWa#}¦ {%pāṭha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%paṭh%}), recitation,
recital; reading, perusal, study; reading sacred texts,
studying the Vedas or scriptures; the text of a book.
{%—Pāṭha-ccheda, as,%} m. a break in recitation or in
a text; a pause, cæsura. {%—Pāṭha-doṣa, as,%} m. an
error in a text, a false reading. {%—Pāṭha-niściti, is,%}
f. determining or settling the text (of a passage).
{%—Pāṭha-bhū, ūs,%} f. ‘reading-place,’ a place where
the Vedas are read or studied. {%—Pāṭha-mañjarī,%} f.
a particular small bird, Graculus Religiosa. {%—Pāṭha-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. well-read, learned. {%—Pāṭha-%}
{%viccheda, as,%} m. {%= pāṭha-ccheda.%} {%—Pāṭha-śālā,%} f.
‘lecture-room,’ ‘hall of study,’ a college, school. {%—Pā-%}
{%ṭha-śālin, ī, inī,%} m. f. a scholar, pupil; ({%inī%}), f. =
{%pāṭha-mañjarī%}. {%—Pāṭhāntara (˚ṭha-an˚), am,%} n.
a variation of reading in a book or manuscript.
<LEND>

<L>28726<pc>0562-a<k1>pAWaka<k2>pAWaka
{%Pāṭhaka, as,%}¦ m. a reciter, reader, one who recites
or delivers; a student, pupil; a scholar, a scientific
person; a teacher, preceptor, lecturer, public reader
(of the Purāṇas or other sacred works), a Paṇḍit who
declares what is the law or custom according to the
scriptures; a spiritual teacher; the text of a book.
<LEND>

<L>28727<pc>0562-a<k1>pAWana<k2>pAWana<h>1
1. {%pāṭhana, am,%}¦ n. lecturing, teaching.
<LEND>

<L>28728<pc>0562-a<k1>pAWika<k2>pAWika
{%Pāṭhika, as, ā, am,%}¦ conformable to the text.
<LEND>

<L>28729<pc>0562-a<k1>pAWita<k2>pAWita
{%Pāṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused or taught to read or
recite; instructed, taught, lectured.
<LEND>

<L>28730<pc>0562-a<k1>pAWin<k2>pAWin
{%Pāṭhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who has read or studied
(any subject), a student; knowing, conversant with;
[Page0562-b+ 78]
({%ī%}), m. a Brāhman, especially one who has finished
his studies; Plumbago Zeylanica (also {%pāṭhī-kuṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>28731<pc>0562-b<k1>pAWIna<k2>pAWIna
{%Pāṭhīna, as,%}¦ m. a public reader or lecturer (on
the Purāṇas &c.); a kind of sheat-fish, Silurus
Pelorius or Boalis; a species of Moringa with red
blossoms ({%= guggalu%}).
<LEND>

<L>28732<pc>0562-b<k1>pAWya<k2>pAWya
{%Pāṭhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taught, needing in-
struction.
<LEND>

<L>28733<pc>0562-b<k1>pAWana<k2>pAWana<h>2
{#pAWana#} 2¦. {%pāṭhana, pāṭhanī,%} various read-
ings for {%pānaṭha, pānaṭhī.%}
<LEND>

<L>28734<pc>0562-b<k1>pAWA<k2>pAWA
{#pAWA#}¦ {%pāṭhā,%} f. a climbing plant possessing
various medicinal properties, Clypea Hernandifolia
(commonly called {%ākanādi%}); (according to others)
{%= pahāḍa-mūla,%} the root of Bignonia Suaveolens.
<LEND>

<L>28735<pc>0562-b<k1>pAqinI<k2>pAqinI
{#pAqinI#}¦ {%pāḍinī,%} f. an earthen pot; a boiler.
<LEND>

<L>28736<pc>0562-b<k1>pARa<k2>pARa<h>1
{#pARa#} 1¦. {%pāṇa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%paṇ%}), a stake
at play, a game; trade, traffic; a trader; praise.
<LEND>

<L>28737<pc>0562-b<k1>pARa<k2>pARa<h>2
{#pARa#} 2¦. {%pāṇa.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28738<pc>0562-b<k1>pARi<k2>pARi
{#pARi#}¦ {%pāṇi, is,%} m. (perhaps akin to {%parṇa;%}
said to be fr. rt. 2. {%paṇ%}), the hand (in this sense
frequently at the end of a comp. describing that
which is carried in the hand, e. g. {%darbha-pāṇi,%}
with Kuśa grass in the hand, carrying Kuśa grass;
cf. {%daṇḍa-p˚, śastra-p˚, samit-p˚%}); a hoof (Ved.);
a place of sale, shop, market; {%pāṇiṃ grah,%} to take
the hand of a girl in the marriage ceremony, to
marry. {%—Pāṇi-kacchapikā,%} f. ‘hand-tortoise,’ a
particular position of the fingers. {%—Pāṇi-karṇa, as,%}
m. ‘hand-eared,’ ‘having hands for ears,’ one of the
epithets of Śiva. {%—Pāṇikūrcan, ā,%} m., N. of one
of the attendants of Skanda. {%—Pāṇi-khāta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘dug with the hand,’ N. of a sacred bathing-
place. {%—Pāṇi-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%} taken by the
hand, seized; ({%ī%}), f. married according to the ritual,
a bride, wife. {%—Pāṇi-graha, as,%} m. or {%pāṇi-gra-%}
{%haṇa, am,%} n. taking by the hand, taking the hand,
marrying, marriage (the joining of the bride and
bridegroom's hands forming part of the ceremony).
{%—Pāṇigraha-kara, as,%} m. one who performs (the
ceremony of) taking the hand; a lawful husband.
{%—Pāṇigrahaṇika%} or {%pāṇigrahaṇīya, as, ī, am,%}
relating to marriage, matrimonial, nuptial; ({%am%}), n.
a wedding present. {%—Pāṇi-grahītṛ, tā,%} m. ‘hand-
taker,’ one who has married, a bridegroom, husband.
{%—Pāṇi-grāha, as,%} m. taking the hand, marriage;
one who has married, a bridegroom, husband.
{%—Pāṇi-gha, as,%} m. ‘striking with the hand,’ a
drummer, one who plays on a tabor or other hand-
instrument; a workman, handicraftsman. {%—Pāṇi-%}
{%ghāta, as,%} m. a blow with the hand; striking with
the hand, boxing; one who strikes with his hand, a
boxer. {%—Pāṇi-ghna, as,%} m., Ved. clapping the
hands. {%—Pāṇi-candra, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Pāṇi-cāpalya, am,%} n. fidgeting with the hands,
snapping the fingers, &c. {%—Pāṇi-ja, as,%} m. a finger-
nail. {%—Pāṇi-tala, am,%} n. the palm or flat of the
hand; a particular weight (= 2 Tolakas); ({%e%}), n. du.
the two palms. {%—Pāṇi-dharma, as,%} m. form of
marriage, manner of marrying. {%—Pāṇin-dhama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} blowing through the hands; with
{%adhvan,%} a journey in which a person blows into his
hands, (perhaps) cold, chilly; obscure, dark (as a
path, where a noise is made with the hands to
frighten away snakes &c.). {%—Pāṇin-dhaya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} drinking out of the hands. {%—Pāṇin-pallava, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. ‘hand-twig,’ the fingers. {%—Pāṇi-pātra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘hand-cupped,’ using the hand as a drinking-
vessel, drinking out of the hand. {%—Pāṇi-pāda, am,%}
n. the hands and feet. {%—Pāṇi-pīḍana, am,%} n. press-
ing the hand (of a bride), marriage. {%—Pāṇi-pūra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} filling the hand. {%—Pāṇipraṇayi-tā,%} f.
the state of being taken as a wife, wife-hood. {%—Pāṇi-%}
{%praṇayin, ī, inī, i,%} loved by the hand, being or
resting in the hand; ({%inī%}), f. ‘beloved of the
hand,’ a wife. {%—Pāṇi-pradāna, am,%} n. giving
the hand (in confirmation of a promise). {%—Pāṇi-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. union or junction of the hands (in
marrying). {%—Pāṇi-bhuj, k,%} m. the glomerous fig-
[Page0562-c+ 78]
tree, Ficus Glomerata. {%—Pāṇi-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessed of hands. {%—Pāṇi-marda, as,%} m. Carissa
Carandas ({%= kara-marda%}). {%—Pāṇi-mukta, am,%} n.,
scil. {%astra,%} a missile weapon, one thrown with the
hand, as a dart, spear. {%—Pāṇi-mukha, as, ī, am,%} Ved.
‘hand-mouthed,’ having the hand for a mouth. {%—Pāṇi-%}
{%mūla, am,%} n. the root of the hand, the extremity
of the arm. {%—Pāṇi-ruh, ṭ,%} or {%pāṇi-ruha, as,%} m. a
finger-nail. {%—Pāṇi-vāda, as,%} m. ‘playing with the
hand,’ one who plays a drum or tabour, a drummer;
({%am%}), n. clapping the hands together. {%—Pāṇi-%}
{%vādaka, as,%} m. ‘playing with the hand,’ one who
plays a drum or tabour, a drummer. {%—Pāṇi-saṅ-%}
{%grahaṇa, am,%} n. clasping the hand (in confirmation
of a promise), shaking hands. {%—Pāṇi-sargya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} unwound and let out of the hand (as a rope).
{%—Pāṇi-saryā%} (?), f. a rope or cord. {%—Pāṇi-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being in the hand, held in the hand.
{%—Pāṇi-svanika, as,%} m. one who plays musical
instruments with the hands. {%—Pāṇi-hatā,%} f., scil.
{%puṣkariṇī,%} N. of a lake (which the gods created
for Śākya-muni with a stroke of the hand). {%—Pāṇau-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. marriage. {%—Pāṇy-āsya, as, ā, am,%}
‘hand-mouthed,’ having the hand for a mouth; ({%as%}),
m. a Brāhman who reads the Vedas upon receiving
a gift at a Śrāddha.
<LEND>

<L>28739<pc>0562-c<k1>pARa<k2>pARa<h>2
2. {%pāṇa, as,%}¦ m. {%= pāṇi,%} the hand.
<LEND>

<L>28740<pc>0562-c<k1>pARika<k2>pARika
{%Pāṇika, as,%}¦ m. a merchant; N. of one of the
attendants of Skanda; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of song or
singing; a sort of spoon or ladle.
<LEND>

<L>28741<pc>0562-c<k1>pARin<k2>pARin
{%Pāṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. for
{%pāṇi%} [cf. {%śastra-p˚, śūla-p˚%}]; ({%inas%}), m. pl., N. of
a family reckoned among the Kauśikas.
<LEND>

<L>28742<pc>0562-c<k1>pARItala<k2>pARItala
{%Pāṇītala, am,%}¦ n. a particular measure (= 2 To-
lakas).
<LEND>

<L>28743<pc>0562-c<k1>pARya<k2>pARya<h>1
1. {%Pāṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see p. 563), belonging
to the hand (Ved.); a patronymic ({%= Kauṇḍinya%}).
<LEND>

<L>28744<pc>0562-c<k1>pARina<k2>pARina
{#pARina#}¦ {%pāṇina, as,%} m. said to {%= Pāṇini,%}
and according to some a patronymic from Paṇin.
<LEND>

<L>28745<pc>0562-c<k1>pARini<k2>pARini
{%Pāṇini, is,%}¦ m. (probably fr. {%pāṇina%} above), N.
of the most eminent Hindū grammarian (regarded
as an inspired Muni; according to one legend his
grandfather was an inspired legislator called Devala,
and his mother's name was Dākṣī, see {%dākṣeya;%}
the date at which he lived is a subject of controversy,
but he is generally placed in the middle of the
fourth century B. C.; from Śalātura, thought to
have been the dwelling-place of his ancestors, he is
said by some to have been called Śālāturīya; cf.
Pāṇ. IV. 3, 94).
<LEND>

<L>28746<pc>0562-c<k1>pARinIya<k2>pARinIya
{%Pāṇinīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to Pāṇini, written
or composed by Pāṇini; ({%as%}), m. a disciple or fol-
lower of Pāṇini, one who follows the system of
Pāṇini; an adherent or admirer of Pāṇini; ({%am%}),
n. (with or without {%vy-ākaraṇa%}) the grammar of
Pāṇini. {%—Pāṇinīya-darśana, am,%} n., N. of a
chapter of the Sarva-darśana-saṅgraha. {%—Pāṇinīya-%}
{%mata-darpaṇa, am,%} n. ‘mirror of the system of
Pāṇini,’ N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>28747<pc>0562-c<k1>pARItaka<k2>pARItaka
{#pARItaka#}¦ {%pāṇītaka, as,%} m., N. of a being
attendant upon Skanda; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people,
(a various reading for {%karīti.%})
<LEND>

<L>28748<pc>0562-c<k1>pARqaka<k2>pARqaka
{#pARqaka#}¦ {%pāṇḍaka, as,%} m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>28749<pc>0562-c<k1>pARqara<k2>pARqara
{#pARqara#}¦ {%pāṇḍara, pāṇḍava.%} See p. 563,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>28750<pc>0562-c<k1>pARqitya<k2>pARqitya
{#pARqitya#}¦ {%pāṇḍitya, am,%} n. (fr. {%paṇḍita%}),
scholarship, erudition, learning; cleverness, skill,
dexterity.
<LEND>

<L>28751<pc>0562-c<k1>pARqu<k2>pARqu
{#pARqu#}¦ {%pāṇḍu, us, us, u%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%paṇḍ%}), yellowish white, white, pale; ({%us%}), m. pale
or yellowish white colour; jaundice; N. of two
plants, Trichosanthes Diœca ({%= pāṇḍura-phalī%});
a white elephant; N. of a prince, a son of Vyāsa by
the wife of Vicitra-vīrya and brother of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra and Vidura; of a son of Janam-ejaya and
brother of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of Dhātṛ by
Āyatī (according to others he is called Prāṇa); of an
attendant of Śiva; of a Nāga-rāja; of a people in
[Page0563-a+ 81]
Madhya-deśa; ({%us%}), f. a species of plant, Glycine
Debilis (commonly called Maṣāṇi); [cf. Hib.
<nsi>buidhe,</nsi> ‘yellow.’] {%—Pāṇḍu-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. Achy-
ranthes Aspera {%(= apā-mārga)%}. {%—Pāṇḍu-kambala,%}
{%as,%} m. a white woollen covering or blanket; a warm
upper garment; the housings of a royal elephant; a
kind of stone (limestone or marble ?). {%—Pāṇḍu-%}
{%kambalin, ī, inī, i,%} covered with a white woollen
blanket; ({%ī%}), m. a carriage covered with a sort of
blanket; the housings of a royal elephant. {%—Pāṇ-%}
{%ḍu-karaṇa, am,%} or {%pāṇḍu-karman, a,%} n. (in
medicine) making or rendering white. {%—Pāṇḍu-%}
{%taru, us,%} m. Grislea Tomentosa ({%= dhava%}). {%—Pāṇ-%}
{%ḍu-tā,%} f. or {%pāṇḍu-tva, am,%} n. whitish-yellow
colour, paleness. {%—Pāṇḍu-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Pāṇḍu-dukūla, am,%} n. a white winding-
sheet. {%—Pāṇḍudukūla-sīvana, am,%} n. ‘sewing of
the white winding-sheet,’ N. of a place where
Śākya-muni made a white winding-sheet. {%—Pāṇḍu-%}
{%nāga, as,%} m. a white elephant; the plant Rottleria
Tinctoria. {%—Pāṇḍu-pattra-tā,%} f., Ved. the growing
yellow of leaves. {%—Pāṇḍu-pattrī,%} f. {%= reṇukā,%} a
species of fragrant substance. {%—Pāṇḍu-putra, as,%}
m. a son of Pāṇḍu, any one of the Pāṇḍava princes;
(there are many similar compounds, as {%Pāṇḍu-%}
{%nandana,%} &c.) {%—Pāṇḍu-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}
white-backed, having no distinguished or auspicious
mark on the body, one from whom nothing great
is to be expected. {%—Pāṇḍu-phala, as,%} m. ‘having
yellow fruit,’ Trichosanthes Diœca; ({%ā%}), f. a species
of gourd {%(= cirbhiṭā); (ī),%} f. {%= pāṇḍura-phalī.%}
{%—Pāṇḍu-bhāva, as,%} m. becoming yellowish-white.
{%—Pāṇḍu-bhūma, as, ā, am,%} having a white, chalky
soil; ({%as%}), m. a country with a light-coloured soil.
{%—Pāṇḍu-mṛttika, as, ā, am,%} having a white,
chalky soil, consisting of chalk; ({%ā%}), f. a pale soil;
the opal. {%—Pāṇḍu-mṛd, t,%} f. chalk, a chalky soil,
a country in which the soil is of a whitish colour.
{%—Pāṇḍu-raṅga, as,%} m. a kind of vegetable (com-
monly called {%pāṭarāṅgā%}). {%—Pāṇḍu-rāga, as,%} m.
Artemisia Indica; whiteness, pallor. {%—Pāṇḍu-roga,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘yellow disease,’ jaundice. {%—Pāṇḍurogin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} suffering from jaundice, jaundiced. {%—Pāṇḍu-%}
{%lekha, am,%} n. an outline or sketch made with a style
or with chalk. {%—Pāṇḍu-lomaśā%} or {%pāṇḍu-lomā,%} f.
Glycine Debilis. {%—Pāṇḍu-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} pale-
coloured, white; ({%as%}), m. whiteness. {%—Pāṇḍu-varma-%}
{%deva, as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Pāṇḍu-śarkarā,%}
f. light-coloured gravel (the disease). {%—Pāṇḍu-śar-%}
{%milā,%} f. an epithet of Draupadī the wife of the
sons of Pāṇḍu. {%—Pāṇḍu-sopāka, as,%} m. a particular
mixed caste, the offspring of a Caṇḍāla by a Vaidehī
mother (whose occupation, according to Manu X.
37, is working with bamboos and reeds, making
baskets, mats, &c.). {%—Pāṇḍv-āmaya, as,%} m. ‘yellow
disease,’ jaundice. {%—Pāṇḍvāmayin, ī, inī, i,%} suffer-
ing from jaundice, jaundiced.
<LEND>

<L>28752<pc>0563-a<k1>pARqara<k2>pARqara
{%Pāṇḍara, as, ā, am,%}¦ whitish-yellow, whitish,
white; ({%as%}), m. a species of plant ({%= maru-vaka%});
N. of a mountain; of a Nāga; of a sect; ({%am%}), n.
the blossom of the jasmine; red chalk, ruddle.
{%—Pāṇḍara-dvāra-go-pura, as, ā, am,%} having
white doors and city gates. {%—Pāṇḍara-puṣpikā,%} f.
a species of plant ({%= śītalā%}). {%—Pāṇḍara-bhikṣu,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘a white-robed mendicant,’ epithet of a par-
ticular sect.
<LEND>

<L>28753<pc>0563-a<k1>pARqaraka<k2>pARqaraka
{%Pāṇḍaraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga-rāja.
<LEND>

<L>28754<pc>0563-a<k1>pARqava<k2>pARqava
{%Pāṇḍava, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic, a son or descendant
of Pāṇḍu; a partisan of the sons of Pāṇḍu; N. of a
mountain; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the five reputed sons of
Pāṇḍu (Yudhi-ṣṭhira, Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula, and
Saha-deva; cf. {%Kuntī%} and {%Mādrī%}); the party or
adherents of the sons of Pāṇḍu; ({%as, ī, am%}), be-
longing to the sons of Pāṇḍu, connected with the
five Pāṇḍavas. {%—Pāṇḍava-nakula, as,%} m., N. of a
poet. {%—Pāṇḍava-vahni, ayas,%} m. pl. ‘the Pāṇḍava
fires,’ a N. applied to the three elder sons of Pāṇḍu
(‘kindled on the Araṇi, Pṛthā or Kuntī;’ cf. {%pṛthā-%}
{%raṇi%}). {%—Pāṇḍava-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. ‘best of the
sons of Pāṇḍu,’ an epithet of Yudhi-ṣṭhria. {%—Pāṇ-%}
{%ḍavābhīla (˚va-ābh˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>
[Page0563-b+ 80]

<L>28755<pc>0563-b<k1>pARqavAyana<k2>pARqavAyana
{%Pāṇḍavāyana, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the children of Pāṇḍu;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa the friend and ally of
the Pāṇḍu princes.
<LEND>

<L>28756<pc>0563-b<k1>pARqavIya<k2>pARqavIya
{%Pāṇḍavīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the children of
Pāṇḍu, happening to the Pāṇḍavas.
<LEND>

<L>28757<pc>0563-b<k1>pARqaveya<k2>pARqaveya
{%Pāṇḍaveya = pāṇḍava,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28758<pc>0563-b<k1>pARquka<k2>pARquka
{%Pāṇḍuka, as, ā, am, = pāṇḍu; (as),%}¦ m. a pale or
yellowish-white colour; the jaundice; N. of a prince
({%= Pāṇḍu%}); a species of rice; N. of one of the
nine treasures of the Jainas; ({%am%}), n., N. of a par-
ticular forest.
<LEND>

<L>28759<pc>0563-b<k1>pARqukin<k2>pARqukin
{%Pāṇḍukin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ suffering from jaundice,
jaundiced.
<LEND>

<L>28760<pc>0563-b<k1>pARqura<k2>pARqura
{%Pāṇḍura, as, ā, am,%}¦ whitish, white, pale, yel-
lowish-white; ({%as%}), m. a form of jaundice; a species
of plant ({%= maru-vaka%}); N. of a being attendant
upon Skanda; ({%ā%}), f. Glycine Debilis ({%= māṣa-%}
{%parṇī%}); ({%am%}), n. the white leprosy, vitiligo. {%—Pāṇ-%}
{%ḍura-tā,%} f. whiteness, white colour. {%—Pāṇḍura-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. ‘the pale tree,’ Wrightia Antidy-
senterica. {%—Pāṇḍura-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am, = pāṇḍu-%}
{%pṛṣṭha,%} q. v. {%—Pāṇḍura-phalī,%} f. a species of shrub
({%= pāṇḍu-phalī, pāṇḍu, dhūsarā,%} &c.). {%—Pāṇ-%}
{%ḍurekṣu (˚ra-ik˚), us,%} m. ‘pale sugar-cane,’ a
species of sugar-cane ({%= śvetekṣu%}).
<LEND>

<L>28761<pc>0563-b<k1>pARquriman<k2>pARquriman
{%Pāṇḍuriman, ā,%}¦ m. pale or white colour, paleness.
<LEND>

<L>28762<pc>0563-b<k1>pARqUka<k2>pARqUka
{%Pāṇḍūka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a species of rice; [cf.
{%pāṇḍuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28763<pc>0563-b<k1>pARqya<k2>pARqya
{%Pāṇḍya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people and of the
country in the Dekhan inhabited by them; ({%as%}), m.
a prince of the Pāṇḍyas; N. of a son of Ā-krīḍa;
N. of the mountain-range in the Pāṇḍya country.
{%—Pāṇḍya-deśa, as,%} m. the country of the Pāṇḍyas.
{%—Pāṇḍya-vāṭa,%} Ved., N. of a district in which
pearls are found.
<LEND>

<L>28764<pc>0563-b<k1>pARqva<k2>pARqva
{%Pāṇḍva, am,%}¦ n. an uncoloured woollen garment;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people in Madhya-deśa; (a
various reading for {%pāṇḍu%} and {%pāṇḍya.%})
<LEND>

<L>28765<pc>0563-b<k1>pARya<k2>pARya<h>2
{#pARya#} 2¦. {%pāṇya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%paṇ%}),
praiseworthy, excellent. (For. 1. {%pāṇya%} see p. 562,
col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>28766<pc>0563-b<k1>pAt<k2>pAt<h>2
{#pAt#} 2¦. {%pāt,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%pat%}), falling;
sin, wickedness. (For 1. see under rt. 3. {%pā.%})
<LEND>

<L>28767<pc>0563-b<k1>pAta<k2>pAta<h>2
2. {%pāta, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see under rt. 3. {%pā%}), flying,
mode of flying, flight; throwing one's self into or
down, falling, fall, downfall; alighting, descending;
a cast, throw, shot; a stroke (e. g. {%khaḍga-pāta,%} a
sword-stroke); shedding, discharging, emitting, pour-
ing out; destruction, dissolution; an attack, inroad,
incursion; falling out, happening, coming to pass;
defect, failing, fault, transgression; (in astrology) a
malignant aspect; the node in a planet's orbit; an
epithet of Rāhu; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a school of
the Yajur-veda. {%—Pātādhikāra (˚ta-adh˚), as,%} m.
‘chapter on malignant aspects,’ N. of the eleventh
chapter of the Sūrya-Siddhānta and of the thirteenth
of the Ārya-Siddhānta {%—Pātotpāta (˚ta-ut˚), ās,%}
m. pl. falls and rises, depressions and elevations,
ups and downs.
<LEND>

<L>28768<pc>0563-b<k1>pAtaka<k2>pAtaka
{%Pātaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to fall; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
‘that which causes to fall or sink,’ sin, crime. {%—Pā-%}
{%taka-yoga, as,%} m. incurring guilt, acting sinfully.
<LEND>

<L>28769<pc>0563-b<k1>pAtakin<k2>pAtakin
{%Pātakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ guilty of a crime, criminal,
wicked, sinful, a sinner.
<LEND>

<L>28770<pc>0563-b<k1>pAtana<k2>pAtana
{%Pātana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to fall, felling, laying
low, cutting down; ({%am%}), n. causing to fall, felling,
bringing down, throwing down, knocking down,
laying low; throwing (as dice); lowering, humbling;
removing, bringing away; causing to fall asunder,
dividing; nodding (?); (with {%daṇḍasya%}) causing the
rod to fall, chastising, punishing; (with {%jalaukasām%})
application of leeches; (with {%garbhasya%}) destroying
the fetus, causing an abortion.
<LEND>

<L>28771<pc>0563-b<k1>pAtanIya<k2>pAtanIya
{%Pātanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to fall or
alight, to be discharged or shot off.
<LEND>

<L>28772<pc>0563-b<k1>pAtayitf<k2>pAtayitf
{%Pātayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who causes to fall,
one who throws (dice &c.).
<LEND>

<L>28773<pc>0563-b<k1>pAtayitvA<k2>pAtayitvA
{%Pātayitvā,%}¦ ind. having made to fall; having
thrown or put down or in.
<LEND>

<L>28774<pc>0563-b<k1>pAtAla<k2>pAtAla
{%Pātāla, am,%}¦ n. (probably connected with 2. {%pāta,%}
[Page0563-c+ 78]
the termination is compared with {%āla = ālaya%} in
{%antar-āla;%} the names of the other hells point to
some connection with {%tala%}), one of the seven
regions under the earth and the abode of the Nāgas
or serpents and demons (seven such regions are
enumerated, viz. A-tala, Vi-tala, Su-tala, Rasā-tala,
Talātala, Mahā-tala, and Pātāla; but Pātāla is some-
times used as a general name for all: according to
the Mahā-bhārata, Pātāla is also a town in the
world of the serpent-race); an excavation, hole,
chasm; submarine fire; (in astrology) the fourth
sign from that in which the sun is present, the fourth
house; ({%as%}), m. a sort of apparatus for distillation
or for calcining and subliming metals (formed of two
earthen pots, the upper one inverted over the lower,
and the two joined together by their necks with
cement and placed in a hole containing fire); an
epithet of Jupiter's year of 361 days; N. of the
attendant of the fourteenth Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī. {%—Pātāla-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a Daitya
prince. {%—Pātāla-khaṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of the fourth
part of the Padma-Purāṇa and of a part of the
Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Pātāla-gaṅgā,%} f. the Ganges of
the lower regions. {%—Pātāla-garuḍī,%} f. or {%pātāla-%}
{%garuḍāhvaya (˚ḍa-āh˚), as,%} m. a species of creeper
({%= gāruḍī%}). {%—Pātāla-nilaya, as,%} or {%pātāla-vāsin,%}
{%ī,%} or {%pātālaukas (˚la-ok˚), ās,%} m. an inhabitant
of the nether world, a demon, Daitya, Asura; a
Nāga or serpent-demon. {%—Pātāla-bhogi-varga, as,%}
m., N. of a part of the Nāma-liṅgānuśāsana by
Amara-siṃha. {%—Pātāla-varṇana, am,%} n. ‘description
of hell,’ N. of the first chapter of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa
of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Pātāla-vijaya, as,%} m.
‘victory over hell,’ N. of the twenty-fourth and
twenty-fifth chapters of the Uttara-kāṇḍa of the
Rāmāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>28775<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtika<k2>pAtika
{%Pātika, as,%}¦ m. the Gangetic porpoise, Delphinus
Gangeticus ({%= śiśu-māra%}).
<LEND>

<L>28776<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtita<k2>pAtita
{%Pātita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to fall, felled, thrown
down, cast down, struck down; lowered, depressed,
humbled, overthrown.
<LEND>

<L>28777<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtitya<k2>pAtitya
{%Pātitya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%patita%}), the state of one
who is fallen or sunk, loss of position or caste,
degraded condition.
<LEND>

<L>28778<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtin<k2>pAtin
{%Pātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ flying, going to, going, alighting
on; falling, sinking; being included or contained
in; causing to fall, felling, throwing down; pouring
forth, discharging, emitting; [cf. {%antaḥ-p˚, eka-p˚,%}
{%garbha-p˚, daṇḍa-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28779<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtilI<k2>pAtilI
{%Pātilī,%}¦ f. a trap or snare for catching deer; a small
earthen vessel or pot, especially used by religious
mendicants; a woman of a particular class.
<LEND>

<L>28780<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtuka<k2>pAtuka
{%Pātuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ falling frequently or habitually,
apt or disposed to fall; falling, losing caste; going
to hell; ({%as%}), m. the declivity of a mountain, a
precipice; an aquatic animal of a large size; (figura-
tively) the water-elephant.
<LEND>

<L>28781<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtya<k2>pAtya<h>1
1. {%pātya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 564, col. 1),
to be felled, to be caused to fall, to be precipitated;
to be inflicted or imposed (as a penalty).
<LEND>

<L>28782<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtyamAna<k2>pAtyamAna
{%Pātyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being caused to fall,
being precipitated.
<LEND>

<L>28783<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtaNga<k2>pAtaNga
{#pAtaNga#}¦ {%pātaṅga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pataṅ-ga%}),
belonging or peculiar to a grasshopper or moth.
<LEND>

<L>28784<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtaNgi<k2>pAtaNgi
{%Pātaṅgi, is,%}¦ m. the son of the Sun, Saturn.
<LEND>

<L>28785<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtaYjala<k2>pAtaYjala
{#pAtaYjala#}¦ {%pātañjala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%patañjali%}),
composed by Patañjali; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%śāstra,%} the
Yoga system of philosophy (first taught by Patañjali).
{%—Pātañjala-darśana, am,%} n. ‘the system of Pa-
tañjali,’ N. of a chapter of the Sarva-darśana-saṅgraha
ascribed to Mādhavācārya. {%—Pātañjala-bhāṣya,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a philosophical work on the Yoga-
sūtras by Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>28786<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtaYjali<k2>pAtaYjali
{%Pātañjali, is,%}¦ m. a various reading for {%patañ-%}
{%jali,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28787<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtatriRa<k2>pAtatriRa
{#pAtatriRa#}¦ {%pātatriṇa, as, ī, am,%} containing
the word {%patatrin.%}
<LEND>

<L>28788<pc>0563-c<k1>pAtalya<k2>pAtalya
{#pAtalya#}¦ {%pātalya, am,%} n., Ved. a particular
[Page0564-a+ 72]
part of a carriage; (according to Sāy.) {%= kīlaka,%} a
yoke-pin.
<LEND>

<L>28789<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtavya<k2>pAtavya<h>1
{#pAtavya#} 1¦. and 2. {%pātavya.%} See under rts.
1. and 3. {%pā,%} pp. 559, 560.
<LEND>

<L>28790<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtasAha<k2>pAtasAha
{#pAtasAha#}¦ {%pātasāha, as,%} m. = <lang n="arabic">پادشاه</lang> a king.
<LEND>

<L>28791<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtARqinIya<k2>pAtARqinIya
{#pAtARqinIya#}¦ {%pātāṇḍinīya, ās,%} m. pl., N.
of a school of the Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>28792<pc>0564-a<k1>pAti<k2>pAti
{#pAti#}¦ {%pāti, is,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%pā;%} but con-
nected with rt. 1. {%pat%}), a master, lord, owner, pos-
sessor; a husband ({%= pati%}).
<LEND>

<L>28793<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtivratya<k2>pAtivratya
{%Pātivratya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pati-vratā%}), devotedness
or loyalty to a husband, conjugal fidelity.
<LEND>

<L>28794<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtnIvata<k2>pAtnIvata
{%Pātnīvata, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%patnī-vat%}), Ved. be-
longing to Agni-patnīvat, i. e. to Agni together with
the wives of the gods; containing the word {%patnīvat.%}
<LEND>

<L>28795<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtnISAla<k2>pAtnISAla
{%Pātnīśāla, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%patnī-śālā%}), Ved. being
or contained in the {%patnī-śālā.%}
<LEND>

<L>28796<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtya<k2>pAtya<h>2
2. {%pātya, am,%}¦ n. dominion. (For 1. {%pātya%} see
p. 563, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>28797<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtf<k2>pAtf
{#pAtf#}¦ {%pātṛ.%} See under rts. 1. and 3. {%pā.%}
<LEND>

<L>28798<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtyamAna<k2>pAtyamAna
{#pAtyamAna#}¦ {%pātyamāna.%} See p. 563, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28799<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtra<k2>pAtra<h>1
{#pAtra#} 1¦. and 2. {%pātra.%} See under rts. 1.
and 3. {%pā,%} pp. 559, 560.
<LEND>

<L>28800<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtrawa<k2>pAtrawa
{#pAtrawa#}¦ {%pātraṭa, as, ā, am,%} spare, emaciate,
thin; ({%as%}), m. a cup, pot; ragged garments.
<LEND>

<L>28801<pc>0564-a<k1>pAtrapAka<k2>pAtrapAka
{#pAtrapAka#}¦ {%pātra-pāka, as,%} m. decoction of
medicinal herbs; (incorrectly for {%pattra-pāka.%})
<LEND>

<L>28802<pc>0564-a<k1>pATa<k2>pATa
{#pATa#}¦ {%pātha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}),
fire; the sun; ({%am%}), n. water [cf. {%pītha%}]; N. of a
Sāman; {%= patha.%}
<LEND>

<L>28803<pc>0564-a<k1>pATas<k2>pATas
{%Pāthas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. a spot, place; food; air;
water. {%—Pātho-ja, am,%} n. ‘water-born,’ a lotus.
{%—Pātho-da, as,%} m. ‘water-giver,’ a cloud. {%—Pā-%}
{%tho-dhara, as,%} m. ‘water-bearer,’ a cloud. {%—Pā-%}
{%tho-dhi, is,%} m. ‘receptacle of waters,’ the ocean.
{%—Pātho-nidhi, is,%} m. ‘treasure-house of waters,’
the ocean. {%—Pātho-bhāj, k, k, k,%} Ved. possessing
room or space.
<LEND>

<L>28804<pc>0564-a<k1>pATis<k2>pATis
{%Pāthis, is,%}¦ m. the sea; the eye; ({%is%}), n. a blotch,
scab; water (?).
<LEND>

<L>28805<pc>0564-a<k1>pATya<k2>pATya
{%Pāthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in a spot or place;
(Sāy.) N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>28806<pc>0564-a<k1>pATeya<k2>pATeya
{#pATeya#}¦ {%pātheya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pathin%}), pro-
vender or provisions &c. for a journey, viaticum; the
sign of the zodiac Virgo ({%= pāthona%}). {%—Pātheya-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with provisions for a
journey, provisioned.
<LEND>

<L>28807<pc>0564-a<k1>pATona<k2>pATona
{#pATona#}¦ {%pāthona%} (corrupted fr. the Gr.
<lang n="greek">παρθένος</lang>), Ved. the sign of the zodiac Virgo.
<LEND>

<L>28808<pc>0564-a<k1>pATnya<k2>pATnya
{#pATnya#}¦ {%pāthnya, as,%} m., Ved. a patronymic
of Dadhīca.
<LEND>

<L>28809<pc>0564-a<k1>pAd<k2>pAd
{#pAd#}¦ {%pād%} (fr. rt. 2. {%pad%}), see 3. {%pad,%} p. 529;
used at the end of comps., cf. {%dvi-pād, tri-pād,%}
and see Gram. 145.
<LEND>

<L>28810<pc>0564-a<k1>pAda<k2>pAda
{%Pāda, as,%}¦ m. the foot (of men and animals;
sometimes added in token of respect to proper names
or titles of address, e. g. {%ākarṇayantu deva-pādāḥ,%}
let your Majesty listen; {%Kumārila-pādāḥ,%} the
venerable Kumārila); the foot or leg of an inanimate
object (as of a bedstead); a column, pillar; a foot as
a measure (= 12 Aṅgulis); the foot or root of a
tree; the foot of a mountain, a hill at the foot of
a mountain; the bottom (of a bag); a ray or beam
of light (rays being considered as the feet or hands
of the heavenly bodies); a quarter, a fourth part
(this sense is perhaps derived from the foot of a
quadruped being one out of four); a quarter of
a weight of gold (= 1(1/4) Paṇa); the fourth part of a
book, (the Adhyāyas in the Śaunakīyā Catur-adhyā-
yikā, in the Śārīraka-mīmāṃsā, and in Pāṇini's
grammar are divided severally into four Pādas, as
also the Dhanur-veda and the Vāyu-Purāṇa; while,
[Page0564-b+ 81]
on the other hand, the Adhyāyas in Vopa-deva's
grammar contain more than four Pādas); the fourth
part of a Śloka or of any verse; the line of a hymn
or stanza of the Ṛg-veda or of any stanza; the
quadrant of a circle; a part in general; [cf. Goth.
<nsi>fōtu-s,</nsi> ‘a foot:’ Lith. <nsi>páda-s,</nsi> ‘the sole of the
foot;’ <nsi>pénda-s,</nsi> ‘a vestige:’ probably Hib. <nsi>fadadh,</nsi>
‘kindling, lighting;’ <nsi>fadaidhim,</nsi> ‘I kindle, excite,
provoke.’] {%—Pāda-kaṭaka, as, am,%} m. n. or {%pāda-%}
{%kīlikā,%} f. an ornament for the feet or ankles, an
anklet. {%—Pāda-kṛcchra, as,%} m. ‘quarter-penance,’
a sort of penance (eating and fasting on alternate
nights). {%—Pāda-kṣepa, as,%} m. a footstep. {%—Pāda-%}
{%gaṇḍira, as,%} m. morbid enlargement of the legs
and feet. {%—Pāda-gṛhya%} or {%pāde-gṛhya,%} ind., Ved.,
see Gaṇa to Pāṇ. II. 1, 72. {%—Pāda-granthi, is,%} m.
‘foot-knot,’ the ankle. {%—Pāda-grahaṇa, am,%} n.
laying hold of or clasping the feet (of a Brāhman or
superior as a mark of respectful salutation). {%—Pāda-%}
{%ghṛta, am,%} n. melted butter for anointing the feet.
{%—Pāda-catura%} or {%pāda-catvara, as,%} m. a slan-
derer, calumniator; a goat; a sand-bank; hail; the
religious fig-tree, Ficus Religiosa. {%—Pāda-cāpalya,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘foot-unsteadiness,’ fidgeting or shuffling with
the feet. {%—Pāda-cāra, as,%} m. going on foot, walk-
ing; the daily position of the planets; ({%eṇa%}), ind. on
foot. {%—Pāda-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} going or walking on
foot, having feet for locomotion; fighting on foot;
({%ī%}), m. a footman, pedestrian, a foot-soldier. {%—Pāda-%}
{%cihna, am,%} n. foot-mark, foot-print. {%—Pāda-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘born from the foot (of Brahmā),’ a Śūdra,
man of the fourth and servile tribe. {%—Pāda-jala,%}
{%am,%} n. water for the feet; water in which the feet
have been washed; ({%as, ā, am%}), that of which a
fourth part is water, mixed with one fourth of water.
{%—Pāda-jāha, am,%} n. {%= pāda-mūla,%} that part of
the foot to which the leg is articulated, the tarsus.
{%—Pāda-tala, am,%} n. the sole or lower part of the
foot; ({%e%}), ind. under the feet. {%—Pāda-tas,%} ind. out
of the feet, from the feet, at or near the feet,
({%pādataḥ kṛ,%} to put down at the feet); at the
foot (of a bed); in the south-west (Manu III. 89,
according to Kullūka, this may also mean ‘at the
foot of the bed’); by or with a quarter; after a
quarter of a verse (Ved.); step by step, by degrees.
{%—Pāda-tra, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), or {%pāda-trā,%}
f. ‘foot-covering,’ a shoe. {%—Pāda-trāṇa, am,%} n.
‘foot-protecting,’ a boot, shoe. {%—Pāda-dārī%} or
{%pāda-dārikā,%} f. ‘foot-rending,’ a chap in the feet,
a chilblain. {%—Pāda-dāha, as,%} m. a burning sensation
in the feet (said to be in India an excruciating pain
difficult to remedy). {%—Pāda-dhāvana, am,%} n.
washing the feet. {%—Pāda-dhāvanikā,%} f. sand used
for rubbing the feet. {%—Pāda-nakha, as,%} m. a toe-
nail. {%—Pāda-nālikā,%} f. an ornament for the feet,
an anklet. {%—Pāda-nicṛt, t,%} f., scil. {%gāyatrī,%} a
defective metre, in which one syllable is wanting in
each Pāda; (also wrongly spelt {%pāda-nivṛt.%}) {%—Pā-%}
{%da-niṣka, as,%} m. {%= pan-niṣka,%} p. 529. {%—Pāda-%}
{%nyāsa, as,%} m. placing the feet, a dance or measured
step. {%—Pāda-pa, as,%} m. ‘imbibing nourishment
with the foot or root,’ a plant, tree; ‘protecting
the feet,’ (fr. rt. 3. {%pā%}) a foot-stool, cushion for the
feet; ({%ā%}), f. a shoe, slipper. {%—Pādapa-khaṇḍa, as,%}
m. a group or clump of trees. {%—Pāda-paddhati,%}
{%is,%} f. a line of footsteps, a track, trail. {%—Pāda-%}
{%padma, as,%} m. ‘foot-lotus,’ a foot beautiful as a lotus.
{%—Pāda-parighaṭṭana, am,%} n. trampling with the
feet, treading upon. {%—Pādapa-ruhā,%} f. a climbing
plant, parasitical plant. {%—Pāda-pālikā,%} f. an orna-
ment for the feet, an anklet. {%—Pāda-pāśa, as,%} m.
a foot-rope for cattle or horses; an anklet of small
bells, &c.; ({%ī%}), f. a chain for the feet, a fetter; a
foot-carpet or mat. {%—Pāda-pīṭha, am,%} n. a foot-
stool. {%—Pādapīṭhikā,%} f. any common or vulgar
trade, as that of a barber, &c.; white stone. {%—Pāda-%}
{%pīvī,%} f. a shoe; (incorrectly for {%pāda-pīṭhī%}?).
{%—Pāda-pūraṇa, as, ā, am,%} (Ved.) filling out a
part or line of a verse (as a particle), expletive; ({%am%}),
n. the filling out a line or the measure of a verse.
{%—Pāda-prakṣālana, am,%} n. ‘washing the feet,’
[Page0564-c+ 81]
N. of a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Pāda-%}
{%praṇāma, as,%} m. bowing to the feet, prostration.
{%—Pāda-pratiṣṭhāna, am,%} n. a foot-stool. {%—Pā-%}
{%da-pradhāraṇa, am,%} n. ‘foot-covering,’ a shoe.
{%—Pāda-prahāra, as,%} m. ‘foot-blow,’ a kick.
{%—Pāda-baddha, as, ā, am,%} bound or held toge-
ther by quarters of verses (as a metre). {%—Pāda-ban-%}
{%dha, as,%} m. any tie for the foot, a chain or fetter for
the feet. {%—Pāda-bandhana, am,%} n. a fetter for the
feet; a stock of cattle (so called from the foot-ropes
with which cattle are tied). {%—Pāda-bhāga, as,%} m. a
fourth part, quarter. {%—Pāda-bhāj, k, k, k,%} possessing
a quarter, being only a quarter. {%—Pāda-miśra,%} see
Pāṇ. VI. 3, 56. {%—Pāda-mudrā,%} f. the impression
of a footstep, foot-print, trace. {%—Pāda-mūla, am,%} n.
‘root of the foot,’ the part of the foot to which the
leg is articulated, tarsus; the sole of the foot; the
heel; a polite designation of a person; the foot of
a mountain. {%—Pāda-yuddha, am,%} n. ‘foot-fight,’
fighting on foot. {%—Pāda-rakṣa, as,%} m. a foot-
protector, foot-guard; ({%ās%}), m. pl. armed men who
run by the side of an elephant in battle to protect its
feet from wounds. {%—Pāda-rakṣaṇa, am,%} n. a cover
for the feet; a leather boot or shoe, a stocking.
{%—Pāda-rajas, as,%} n. the dust of the feet. {%—Pāda-%}
{%rajju, us,%} f. a tether or rope for the foot of an
elephant. {%—Pāda-rathī,%} f. ‘foot-vehicle,’ a shoe,
boot, slipper. {%—Pāda-rohaṇa, as,%} m. ‘growing
from roots,’ the Indian fig-tree. {%—Pāda-lagna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} sticking to the foot. {%—Pāda-lepa, as,%} m.
an unguent for the feet. {%—Pāda-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having feet, possessed of feet. {%—Pāda-vandana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘saluting the feet,’ respectful salutation. {%—Pā-%}
{%da-valmīka, as,%} m. morbid enlargement of the legs
and feet, elephantiasis. {%—Pāda-vigraha, as,%} m.
(probably) a mode of reading in which the divisions
in verses are carefully marked; ({%as, ā, am%}), hav-
ing a quarter of the compass or extent. {%—Pāda-%}
{%vidhāna, am,%} n. ‘the arrangement of the parts of a
verse,’ N. of a work ascribed to Śaunaka. {%—Pāda-%}
{%virajas, ās,%} f. a shoe, slipper, stocking (as keeping
{%rajas%} or dust from the feet?). {%—Pāda-vīthī,%} f.
a shoe; (probably an incorrect form, cf. {%pāda-%}
{%pīvī.%}) {%—Pāda-vṛtta, au,%} m. du., Ved. the two
component elements of the quarter of a verse, i. e.
the long and short syllable; ({%as%}), m. epithet of a
Svarita separated from the preceding Ud-ātta by a
hiatus. {%—Pāda-veṣṭanika, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a stocking. {%—Pāda-śabda, as,%} m. the sound or
noise of footsteps ({%= pac-chabda%}). {%—Pāda-śas,%} ind.
foot by foot; verse by verse, stanza by stanza; by a
fourth part. {%—Pāda-śākhā,%} f. ‘branch of the foot,’
a toe. {%—Pāda-śīlī,%} f. an ornament for the feet, an
anklet; (probably an incorrect form.) {%—Pāda-śu-%}
{%śrūṣā,%} f. obedience towards the feet (a respectful
expression for {%śuśrūṣā%}). {%—Pāda-śeṣa, am,%} n. a
quarter, fourth part. {%—Pāda-śaila, as,%} m. a hill at
the foot of or near a mountain. {%—Pāda-śotha, as,%}
m. swelling of the feet, gout. {%—Pāda-śauca, am,%} n.
cleaning the feet {%(= pac-chauca)%}. {%—Pāda-saṃ-%}
{%hitā.%} f. the union of words in a quarter of a verse.
{%—Pāda-sevana, am,%} n. or {%pāda-sevā,%} f. ‘foot-
salutation,’ showing respect by touching the feet,
service, duty. {%—Pāda-stambha, as,%} m. a supporting
beam, pillar, post. {%—Pāda-sphoṭa, as,%} m. ‘cracking
of the feet,’ chilblain, a sore or ulcer on the foot.
{%—Pāda-svedana, am,%} n. perspiration of the feet,
causing perspiration in the feet. {%—Pāda-hata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} struck with the feet, kicked, trodden on,
touched with the feet. {%—Pāda-harṣa, as,%} m. numb-
ness of the feet after pressure upon the crural nerves.
{%—Pāda-hāraka, as, ā, am,%} taken away with the
feet; ({%as%}), m. one who takes away or steals any-
thing with the feet (?). {%—Pāda-hīnāt,%} ind. without
division or transition; on a sudden, all at once. {%—Pādā-%}
{%kulaka (˚da-āk˚), as, am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of two
kinds of metres. {%—Pādāgra (˚da-ag˚), am,%} n. the
point or extremity of the foot. {%—Pādāghāta (˚da-%}
{%āgh˚), as,%} m. ‘a blow with the foot,’ a kick. {%—Pā-%}
{%dāṅka (˚da-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a foot-mark, footstep, foot-
print, vestige. {%—Pādāṅgada (˚da-aṅ˚), am, ī,%} n. f.
[Page0565-a+ 81]
an ornament for the feet or toes, an anklet. {%—Pā-%}
{%dāṅguli (˚da-aṅ˚), is, ī,%} f. ‘foot-finger,’ a toe.
{%—Pādāṅgulīyaka (˚da-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a ring worn
on one of the toes. {%—Pādāṅguṣṭha (˚da-aṅ˚), as,%}
m. the great toe. {%—Pādāṅguṣṭhāśritāvani (˚ṭha-%}
{%āś˚, ˚ta-av˚), is, is, i,%} ‘touching the ground with the
toes,’ on tiptoe. {%—Pādāṅguṣṭhikā,%} f. a ring worn
on the great toe. {%—Pādādhyāsa (˚da-adh˚), as,%} m.
treading upon, kicking. {%—Pādānata (˚da-ān˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} bowed or bent down to the feet, prostrate.
{%—Pādānudhyāta (˚da-an˚), as, ā, am,%} thought
of by the feet of such an one (a respectful expression
in inscriptions for ‘thought of by such an one’);
the son and successor of any one, rightful successor
of any one (‘thought of by his predecessor’). {%—Pā-%}
{%dānta (˚da-an˚), as,%} m. the extremity of the feet;
proximity to the feet; ({%e%}), ind. near the feet. {%—Pā-%}
{%dāntara (˚da-an˚), am,%} n. the interval of a step,
the distance of a foot; ({%e%}), ind. in immediate prox-
imity to, close to (with gen.); after the interval of a
step. {%—Pādāntika (˚da-an˚), am,%} n. proximity to
the feet, the neighbourhood of the feet. {%—Pādāmbu%}
{%(˚da-am˚), us, us, u,%} containing a fourth part of
water. {%—Pādāmbhas (˚da-am˚), as,%} n. ‘foot-water,’
water in which the feet have been washed. {%—Pādā-%}
{%ravinda (˚da-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘foot-lotus,’ the foot of
a deity, lover, &c. {%—Pādārghya (˚da-ar˚), am,%} n.
‘offering to the feet,’ a donation to Brāhmans or
venerable persons. {%—Pādārdha (˚da-ar˚), am,%} n.
half a quarter, an eighth; half a line of a stanza.
{%—Pādārpaṇa (˚da-ar˚), am,%} n. setting down the
feet. {%—Pādāvanejana (˚da-av˚), as, ī, am,%} used
for washing the feet (Ved.); washing the feet.
{%—Pādāvarta (˚da-āv˚), as,%} m. a wheel worked by
the feet for raising water from a well; a square foot.
{%—Pādāvasecana (˚da-av˚), am,%} n. washing the
feet; water for washing the feet, water in which the
feet have been washed. {%—Pādāṣṭhīla (˚da-aṣ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the ankle; contusion of the feet (?). {%—Pā-%}
{%dāsana (˚da-ās˚), am,%} n. a footstool. {%—Pādās-%}
{%phālana (˚da-ās˚), am,%} n. trampling or shuffling
of the feet, motion of the feet (as in wrestling or
struggling), floundering. {%—Pādāhata (˚da-āh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘struck with the foot,’ kicked, trodden,
touched by the foot. {%—Pādāhati (˚da-āh˚), is,%} f.
a blow with the foot, kick; treading, trampling.
{%—Pāde-gṛhya = pāda-gṛhya%}. {%—Pādotphāla%}
{%(˚da-ut˚), as,%} m. shuffling or moving the feet.
{%—Pādodaka (˚da-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘foot-water,’ water
for washing the feet, water in which the feet of a
Brāhman have been washed, water hallowed by the
washing of sacred feet. {%—Pādodaka-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a sacred bathing-place at Benares. {%—Pādo-%}
{%dara (˚da-ud˚), as,%} m. a serpent (‘using the belly
in place of feet’).
<LEND>

<L>28811<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdaka<k2>pAdaka
{%Pādaka, as,%}¦ m. a little foot (Ved.); ({%as, ikā,%}
{%am%}), making a quarter of anything (Ved.); at the
end of a comp. {%= pāda;%} [cf. {%tri-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28812<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdaya<k2>pAdaya
{%Pādaya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%pādayate, -yitum,%} to stretch
out the feet.
<LEND>

<L>28813<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdavika<k2>pAdavika
{%Pādavika, as,%}¦ m. a traveller.
<LEND>

<L>28814<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdAt<k2>pAdAt
{%Pādāt, t,%}¦ m. (properly {%pāda + at%}), a foot-soldier,
footman.
<LEND>

<L>28815<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdAta<k2>pAdAta
{%Pādāta, as,%}¦ m. (properly {%pāda + āta%}), a foot-
soldier, footman; ({%am%}), n. infantry.
<LEND>

<L>28816<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdAti<k2>pAdAti
{%Pādāti, is,%}¦ or {%pādātika,%} or {%pādāvika, as,%} m. =
{%padāti,%} a foot-soldier, man on foot, footman.
<LEND>

<L>28817<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdika<k2>pAdika
{%Pādika, as, ī, am,%}¦ lasting for a quarter of the
time, amounting to a quarter or fourth, a fourth;
{%pādikaṃ śatam,%} one quarter of a hundred, 25 per
cent; [cf. {%ardha-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28818<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdin<k2>pAdin
{%Pādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ footed, having feet; having a
fourth part or share, claiming or receiving a fourth
part; having four parts, as a stanza &c.; ({%ī%}), m. a
footed aquatic animal, an amphibious animal; the
heir to a fourth part of an estate.
<LEND>

<L>28819<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdina<k2>pAdina
{%Pādina, as,%}¦ m. a fourth part.
<LEND>

<L>28820<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdu<k2>pAdu
{%Pādu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. course, path (Sāy. {%= pādenā-%}
{%gamana%}).
<LEND>

<L>28821<pc>0565-a<k1>pAdukA<k2>pAdukA
{%Pādukā,%}¦ f. a wooden shoe, shoe, slipper [cf.
{%carma-p˚%}], ({%as, ā,%} or {%ī, am%}), going on foot, going
[Page0565-b+ 74]
with feet. {%—Pādukā-kāra, as,%} or {%pādukā-kṛt, t,%}
m. a shoemaker.
<LEND>

<L>28822<pc>0565-b<k1>pAdU<k2>pAdU
{%Pādū, ūs,%}¦ f. a shoe. {%—Pādū-kṛt, t,%} m. a shoe-
maker; (also spelt {%pādu-kṛt.%})
<LEND>

<L>28823<pc>0565-b<k1>pAdya<k2>pAdya
{%Pādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to the
foot; ({%am%}), n. (with or without {%udaka%}) water for
washing the feet. {%—Pādya-pātra, am,%} n. a metal
vessel for washing the feet.
<LEND>

<L>28824<pc>0565-b<k1>pAdakramika<k2>pAdakramika
{#pAdakramika#}¦ {%pādakramika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pada-%}
{%krama%}), one who reads or knows the Pada-krama,
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28825<pc>0565-b<k1>pAdapa<k2>pAdapa
{#pAdapa#}¦ {%pāda-pa.%} See p. 564, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>28826<pc>0565-b<k1>pAdAraka<k2>pAdAraka
{#pAdAraka#}¦ {%pādāraka, as,%} m. the knees or
ribs of a boat (supporting the deck on each side ?).
<LEND>

<L>28827<pc>0565-b<k1>pAdAlinda<k2>pAdAlinda
{#pAdAlinda#}¦ {%pādālinda, as, ā%} or {%ī,%} m. f. a
boat.
<LEND>

<L>28828<pc>0565-b<k1>pAdma<k2>pAdma
{#pAdma#}¦ {%pādma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%padma%}), relating
to the lotus, referring to or treating of the lotus;
({%as%}), m. a patronymic of Brahmā [cf. {%padma-%}
{%garbha, padma-yoni%}]; N. of a Mahā-kalpa.
{%—Pādma-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>28829<pc>0565-b<k1>pAna<k2>pAna<h>1
{#pAna#} 1¦. {%pāna, pānīya, pānta.%} See p. 560,
cols. 1, 2.
<LEND>

<L>28830<pc>0565-b<k1>pAna<k2>pAna<h>2
{#pAna#} 2¦. {%pāna, as,%} m. {%= apāna,%} breath,
breathing out, expiration.
<LEND>

<L>28831<pc>0565-b<k1>pAnasa<k2>pAnasa
{#pAnasa#}¦ {%pānasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%panasa%}), pre-
pared from the fruit of the Jaka or bread-fruit tree;
({%am%}), n. a spirituous liquor so prepared.
<LEND>

<L>28832<pc>0565-b<k1>pAnTa<k2>pAnTa
{#pAnTa#}¦ {%pāntha, as,%} m. (fr. {%pathin%}), a wan-
derer, traveller; ‘the wanderer in the sky,’ the sun.
<LEND>

<L>28833<pc>0565-b<k1>pAnnaga<k2>pAnnaga
{#pAnnaga#}¦ {%pānnaga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%panna-ga%}),
formed or consisting of snakes, having serpents, snaky.
<LEND>

<L>28834<pc>0565-b<k1>pAnnejana<k2>pAnnejana
{#pAnnejana#}¦ {%pānnejana, as, ī, am%} (fr. 3. {%pad +%}
{%nejana%}), Ved. used for washing the feet; ({%am%}), n.
a vessel in which the feet are washed, foot-bath.
<LEND>

<L>28835<pc>0565-b<k1>pApa<k2>pApa
{#pApa#}¦ {%pāpa, as, ā%} (or in the earlier language
{%ī%}), {%am%} (said to be fr. rt. 3. {%pā;%} according to some for
{%apāpa%} fr. rt. {%āp%} with {%apa%}), bad, wicked, vicious, sinful,
evil, mischievous, destructive; vile, low, abandoned;
(in astrology) boding evil, malignant, inauspicious;
({%as%}), m. a wicked man, wretch, profligate; N. of
a hell; ({%am%}), n. bad fortune, bad state, unhappiness;
evil, sin, vice, crime, wickedness, transgression, guilt
(e. g. {%pāpam avāpsyasi,%} thou wilt incur guilt); ({%am%}),
ind. badly, miserably, wrongly; ({%ayā%}), ind., Ved.
badly, wrongly, wickedly; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κάκο-ς:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>peccare:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pykiù,</nsi> ‘I am angry;’ <nsi>paika-s,</nsi>
<nsi>pikta-s,</nsi> ‘angry.’] {%—Pāpa-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%}
or {%pāpa-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or {%pāpa-karman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} or {%pāpa-karmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%pāpa-kārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%pāpa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} ‘wrong-doing,’ wicked,
sinful, criminal, an evil-doer, malefactor, villain.
{%—Pāpa-kṛta, am,%} n. or {%pāpa-kṛtyā,%} f. an evil
deed, bad action, sin, crime. {%—Pāpa-kṣaya, as,%}
m. the destruction of sin. {%—Pāpakṣaya-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Pāpakṣaya-mātra,%}
{%am,%} n. entire destruction (or expiation) of sins.
{%—Pāpa-gumpa, as,%} m. epithet of Bāla-kṛṣṇa;
(perhaps incorrectly for {%pāya-guṇḍa.%}) {%—Pāpa-go-%}
{%cara, as, ā, am,%} evidently involved in (the con-
sequences of) sin. {%—Pāpa-graha, as,%} m. a planet of
evil or malignant aspect (as Mars, Saturn, Rāhu,
Ketu); any ill-omened or inauspicious aspect of the
stars as the conjunction of the sun or Budha with
the moon in its last quarter; calamitous or fatal
destiny. {%—Pāpa-ghna, as, ī, am,%} destroying or
removing sin or evil deeds, expiating guilt; ({%as%}), m.
the sesamum plant; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Pāpa-%}
{%cara, as,%} m. ‘walking in sin,’ N. of a king. {%—Pāpa-%}
{%carya, as,%} m. a sinner; a fiend, Rākṣasa. {%—Pāpa-%}
{%cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} doing evil, sinful, wicked, criminal.
{%—Pāpa-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} evil-minded, being of an
evil disposition, wicked, vile. {%—Pāpa-celī%} or {%pāpa-%}
{%celikā,%} f. the plant Clypea Hernandifolia, a species
[Page0565-c+ 81]
of creeper (commonly called {%ākanādi%}). {%—Pāpa-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. springing from evil. {%—Pāpa-jīva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} leading an evil life, wicked, criminal.
{%—Pāpa-tara, as, ā, am,%} worse, more wicked, very
evil. {%—Pāpa-timira, as, ā, am,%} ‘sin-bedarkened,’
blinded by sin. {%—Pāpa-tva, am,%} n., Ved. evil con-
dition, misery, poverty. {%—Pāpa-da, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
bringing misfortune, inauspicious. {%—Pāpa-darśin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} looking at faults, malevolent. {%—Pāpa-%}
{%dṛśvan, ā, arī, a,%} seeing guilt, knowing an
act to be wicked. {%—Pāpa-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} evil-
eyed. {%—Pāpa-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} evil-minded. {%—Pāpa-%}
{%nakṣatra, am,%} n., Ved. an inauspicious constella-
tion. {%—Pāpa-nāpita, as,%} m. a vile or bad barber.
{%—Pāpa-nāman, ā, mnī, a,%} Ved. having a bad name.
{%—Pāpa-nāśana, as, ī, am,%} destroying the wicked;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; N. of a temple of
Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n., N. of a part of the Brahmāṇḍa-
Purāṇa. {%—Pāpa-nāśin, ī, inī, i,%} sin-destroying,
purifying. {%—Pāpa-nirati, is, is, i,%} wicked, vil-
lainous; a wretch; ({%is%}), f. attachment to evil, wicked-
ness. {%—Pāpa-niścaya, as, ā, am,%} having evil designs,
malevolent. {%—Pāpa-niṣkṛti, is,%} f. atonement for
sin. {%—Pāpa-pati, is,%} m. ‘sinful master,’ a para-
mour. {%—Pāpa-parājita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ignomi-
niously defeated. {%—Pāpa-puṇya, āni,%} n. pl. vicious
or virtuous (deeds). {%—Pāpa-puruṣa, as,%} m. a vil-
lainous man (a personification of all sin or archetype
of a sinner, whose head is Brāhmaṇicide, whose arms
are theft, and whose heart is wine-drinking, &c.; also
spelt {%pāpa-pūruṣa%}). {%—Pāpa-phala, as, ā, am,%}
having evil consequences, inauspicious. {%—Pāpa-bud-%}
{%dhi, is, is, i,%} evil-minded, wicked; ({%is%}), m., N. of
a man. {%—Pāpa-bhakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} devouring
the wicked; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Kāla-bhairava, a
son of Śiva. {%—Pāpa-bhañjana, as, ā, am,%} breaking
or destroying the wicked; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Brāhman.
{%—Pāpa-bhāva, as, ā, am,%} being of an evil dispo-
sition, evil-minded. {%—Pāpa-mati, is, is, i,%} evil-
minded, of a corrupt mind, sinful, graceless, ungodly,
depraved. {%—Pāpa-mitra, am,%} n. friend or com-
panion of sin, bad counsellor, seducer. {%—Pāpamitra-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. friendship with the wicked. {%—Pāpa-%}
{%mukta, as, ā, am,%} freed from sin, liberated from all
crime. {%—Pāpa-mocana, am,%} n. liberating form sin,
remission of guilt. {%—Pāpa-yakṣma, as,%} m., Ved.
‘the evil disease,’ consumption. {%—Pāpa-yoni, is,%} f. a
bad or low birthplace, birth in an inferior condition (as
in that of an animal; considered as the punishment
of sin). {%—Pāpa-rahita, as, ā, am,%} freed from sin.
sinless. {%—Pāpa-roga, as,%} m. any bad disease con-
sidered as the penalty of sin in a former life (as
leprosy, elephantiasis); small pox. {%—Pāparogin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} suffering from a bad disease as a penalty for
sin (committed in a former life). {%—Pāparddhi%}
{%(˚pa-ṛd˚), is,%} f. ‘sin-prosperity,’ getting a living by
hunting, the chase. {%—Pāpa-loka, as,%} m., Ved. the
evil world, the place of suffering, place of the wicked.
{%—Pāpalokya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to hell or the
world of the wicked, fiendish, infernal; belonging to
the wicked. {%—Pāpa-vasīyas, ān, asī, as,%} inverted;
confused; ({%as%}), n. inversion, confusion. {%—Pāpa-va-%}
{%sīyasa%} or {%pāpa-vasyasa, am,%} n., Ved. inversion, in-
verted order, confusion. {%—Pāpa-vāda, as,%} m., Ved. an
inauspicious cry. {%—Pāpa-vināśana, as, ī, am,%} sin-
destroying, destroying transgressions. {%—Pāpavinā-%}
{%śana-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Pāpa-%}
{%vinigraha, as,%} m. restraining or punishing wicked-
ness. {%—Pāpa-viniścaya, as, ā, am,%} intending evil,
resolved on wickedness or crime. {%—Pāpa-śamana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} palliating or removing crime; ({%am%}), n.
a sin offering; ({%ī%}), f. a species of tree; [cf. {%śamī.%}]
{%—Pāpa-śīla, as, ā, am,%} ill-disposed, prone to
evil, of bad character, wicked. {%—Pāpa-śodhana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} cleansing or washing away sins; ({%am%}),
n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Pāpa-saṃśamana, as, ā, am,%}
removing sin. {%—Pāpa-saṅkalpa, as, ā, am,%} evil-
minded, ill-intentioned. {%—Pāpa-sama, am,%} n., Ved.
a bad year. {%—Pāpa-sammita, as, ā, am,%} equal in
sin, of like guilt. {%—Pāpa-sūdana, as, ā, am,%} sin-
destroying. {%—Pāpasūdana-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
[Page0566-a+ 78]
Tīrtha. {%—Pāpa-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} sin-destroying,
destroying the wicked. {%—Pāpa-hara, as, ā, am,%}
removing evil, destroying sin; ({%am%}), n. a means of
removing evil; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Pāpākhyā%}
{%(˚pa-ākh˚),%} f., scil. {%gati,%} epithet of one of the seven
divisions of the planetary courses (according to the
Parāśara-tantra extending over the constellations
Hasta, Maitra, and Vi-śākhā). {%—Pāpāṅkuśā (˚pa-%}
{%aṅ˚),%} f., N. of the eleventh day in the light half
of the month Āśvina. {%—Pāpācāra (˚pa-āc˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ill-conducted, following evil courses, practising
evil, living an evil life, vicious. {%—Pāpātman (˚pa-%}
{%āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} evil-minded, wicked; ({%ā%}), m. a sinner,
reprobate, wretch; (opposed to {%dharmātman.%})
{%—Pāpādhama (˚pa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} the lowest of
the wicked, exceedingly low or wicked. {%—Pāpānuva-%}
{%sita (˚pa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} addicted to sin, sinful.
{%—Pāpānta (˚pa-an˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha
(‘where sins come to an end’). {%—Pāpāpanutti%}
{%(˚pa-ap˚), is,%} f. ‘removal of sins,’ expiation. {%—Pā-%}
{%pāvahīyam (˚pa-av˚),%} ind., Ved. wrongfully staying
away or remaining behind. {%—Pāpāśaya (˚pa-āś˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} evil-intentioned, wicked, sinful. {%—Pāpāha%}
{%(˚pa-aha˚), am,%} n., Ved. an unlucky day. {%—Pāpāhi%}
{%(˚pa-ahi), is,%} m. a snake, serpent. {%—Pāpokta (˚pa-%}
{%uk˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. addressed in ill-omened words.
<LEND>

<L>28836<pc>0566-a<k1>pApaka<k2>pApaka
{%Pāpaka, as, ikā%}¦ or {%akī, am,%} bad, evil, wicked;
({%am%}), n. evil, wrong, wickedness, sin; ({%as%}), m. a
wicked person, rascal; an evil or malignant planet.
<LEND>

<L>28837<pc>0566-a<k1>pApala<k2>pApala
{%Pāpala, as, ā, am,%}¦ imparting or incurring guilt;
({%am%}), n. a particular measure.
<LEND>

<L>28838<pc>0566-a<k1>pApin<k2>pApin
{%Pāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wicked, sinful, bad; a sinner,
criminal.
<LEND>

<L>28839<pc>0566-a<k1>pApizWa<k2>pApizWa
{%Pāpiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ worst, lowest, most wicked;
exceedingly bad, very wicked. {%—Pāpiṣṭha-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} worst, most wicked; worse, more wicked.
{%—Pāpiṣṭha-tara, as, ā, am,%} worse, more wicked;
the very worst; exceedingly wicked.
<LEND>

<L>28840<pc>0566-a<k1>pApIya<k2>pApIya
{%Pāpīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ worse, &c.; (a contracted
form of {%pāpīyas%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>28841<pc>0566-a<k1>pApIyas<k2>pApIyas
{%Pāpīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ worse, worse off, more
wretched or miserable; lower, poorer; more wicked;
very bad or wicked, very criminal; {%māraḥ pāpīyān,%}
(with Buddhists) the evil spirit, the devil; ({%as%}), m.
a wicked man, wretch, villain. {%—Pāpīyas-tara, as,%}
{%ā, am, = pāpīyas%}. {%—Pāpīyas-tva, am,%} n. the state
of being very wicked, great wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>28842<pc>0566-a<k1>pApman<k2>pApman
{%Pāpman, ā,%}¦ m. evil, unhappiness, evil plight,
suffering; crime, evil, sin, wickedness; ({%ā, ā, a%}),
injurious, hurtful, evil.
<LEND>

<L>28843<pc>0566-a<k1>pApApurI<k2>pApApurI
{#pApApurI#}¦ {%pāpāpurī,%} f. {%= pāvāpurī,%} f., N.
of a town near Rāja-gṛha.
<LEND>

<L>28844<pc>0566-a<k1>pAman<k2>pAman
{#pAman#}¦ {%pāman, ā,%} m. (fr. rt. {%pai%}), a kind
of skin disease, cutaneous eruption, herpes, scab.
{%—Pāma-ghna, as, ī, am,%} destroying the scab;
({%as%}), m. sulphur; ({%ī%}), f. a species of plant {%(= ka-%}
{%ṭukā)%}. {%—Pāma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} diseased with
herpes.
<LEND>

<L>28845<pc>0566-a<k1>pAmana<k2>pAmana
{%Pāmana, as, ā, am,%}¦ diseased with herpes. {%—Pā-%}
{%manam-bhāvuka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. becoming dis-
eased with herpes.
<LEND>

<L>28846<pc>0566-a<k1>pAmara<k2>pAmara
{%Pāmara, as, ā, am,%}¦ diseased with herpes, scabby;
wicked, vile; low, vulgar, base; stupid; ({%as%}), m. a
man of the lowest extraction, a man engaged in
any degrading occupation; an idiot, fool; a wicked
man; ({%am%}), n. evil, bad character, wickedness.
{%—Pāmaroddhārā (˚ra-ud˚),%} f. ‘removing herpes,’
a species of plant ({%= guḍūcī%}).
<LEND>

<L>28847<pc>0566-a<k1>pAmA<k2>pAmA
{%Pāmā,%}¦ f. herpes, scab (enumerated among the
forms of so-called mild leprosy). {%—Pāmāri (˚mā-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of the scab,’ sulphur.
<LEND>

<L>28848<pc>0566-a<k1>pAmpa<k2>pAmpa
{#pAmpa#}¦ {%pāmpa, as, ī, am,%} belonging to or
situated on the river Pampā.
<LEND>

<L>28849<pc>0566-a<k1>pAmpana<k2>pAmpana
{%Pāmpana, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to the
river Pampā.
<LEND>

<L>28850<pc>0566-a<k1>pAya<k2>pAya
{#pAya#}¦ {%pāya, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}), water.
{%—Pāya-guṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of the author of a com-
mentary on the Laghu-śabdendu-śekhara.
<LEND>
[Page0566-b+ 78]

<L>28851<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyaka<k2>pAyaka
{%Pāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ drinking; [cf. {%taila-%}
{%pāyikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28852<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyana<k2>pAyana
{%Pāyana, am,%}¦ n. the causing or giving to drink;
(Sāy.) = 1. {%pāna,%} a beverage; ({%ā%}), f. causing to drink;
watering, moistening.
<LEND>

<L>28853<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyin<k2>pAyin
{%Pāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) drinking;
[cf. {%kuṇḍa-p˚, kṣīra-p˚, candrikā-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28854<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyu<k2>pAyu<h>1
1. {%pāyu, us,%}¦ m. the anus. {%—Pāyu-kṣālana-%}
{%bhūmi, is,%} f. or {%pāyu-kṣālana-veśman, a,%} n. a
water-closet, privy. {%—Pāyu-bheda, as,%} m., Ved. (in
astrol.) N. of two ways in which an eclipse terminates.
<LEND>

<L>28855<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyya<k2>pAyya<h>1
1. {%pāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be drunk, to be caused
to drink; ({%am%}), n. water; drinking.
<LEND>

<L>28856<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyasa<k2>pAyasa
{#pAyasa#}¦ {%pāyasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%payas%}), pre-
pared with or made of milk or water; ({%as, am%}), m.
n. food prepared with milk, rice boiled in milk; an
oblation of milk, rice, and sugar; the resin of Pinus
Longifolia; turpentine; ({%am%}), n. milk; a kind of
divine beverage, nectar (Rām. I. 15, 8). {%—Pāyasa-%}
{%dagdha, as, ā, am,%} scalded by milk-porridge.
<LEND>

<L>28857<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyasika<k2>pAyasika
{%Pāyasika, as, ī, am,%}¦ fond of boiled milk, re-
lating to any mixture of milk, &c.
<LEND>

<L>28858<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyika<k2>pAyika
{#pAyika#}¦ {%pāyika, as,%} m. a foot-soldier, foot-
man; (probably a corruption of {%pādātika.%})
<LEND>

<L>28859<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyu<k2>pAyu<h>2
{#pAyu#} 2¦. {%pāyu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%pā;%} for 1.
see above), Ved. a guard, protector; N. of a man;
({%avas%}), m. pl. protecting powers or actions.
<LEND>

<L>28860<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyya<k2>pAyya<h>2
2. {%pāyya%}¦ (for 1. see above), protection (at the
end of a comp.; cf. {%nṛ-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>28861<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyya<k2>pAyya<h>3
{#pAyya#} 3¦. {%pāyya, am,%} n. measure; practice,
profession.
<LEND>

<L>28862<pc>0566-b<k1>pAyya<k2>pAyya<h>4
{#pAyya#} 4¦. {%pāyya, as, ā, am,%} low, vile, repre-
hensible, contemptible.
<LEND>

<L>28863<pc>0566-b<k1>pAra<k2>pAra
{#pAra#}¦ {%pāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%pṛ%} or rt. {%pṝ%}), cross-
ing [cf. {%duṣ-p˚%}]; the further shore or opposite bank of
a river; the further side, concluding bound; the end
or limit of anything, the utmost reach or extent;
quicksilver; N. of a sage, a son of Pṛthu-ṣeṇa and
father of Nīpa; of a son of Samara and father of
Pṛthu; of a son of Aṅga and father of Divi-ratha;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of deities under the ninth
Manu; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river (said to flow from the
Pāriyātra mountains or the central and western
portion of the Vindhya chain); ({%ī%}), f. a quantity of
water; a small water-jar, drinking-vessel, glass, cup;
a milk-pail; a rope for tying an elephant's feet;
pollen; ({%am%}), n. (according to some also {%as,%} m.),
the further or opposite end or bank of a river; the
totality of an object, the fullest extent (with gen.,
e. g. {%tamasas,%} of darkness; {%kāraṇānām,%} of tor-
tures); extremity, end, aim (in this sense also m.);
{%pāraṃ gam,%} to cross over; to fulfil (e. g. {%pratijñā-%}
{%yāḥ pāraṃ sa gataḥ,%} he fulfilled his promise);
to become proficient in; {%pāraṃ nī,%} to bring to
a close; [cf. {%para, param;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">πόρο-ς, πέρα</lang>
<lang n="greek">πέρᾱν, περαίνω, πείρω, περαῖο-ς, περά-τη, Πειραιεύ-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πέρας, πεῖραρ, ἀπειρέσ-ιο-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>per;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>per,</nsi>
‘across;’ Slav. <nsi>polŭ,</nsi> ‘the opposite bank.’] {%—Pāra-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} desirous of reaching the opposite
bank. {%—Pāra-ga, as, ā, am,%} going to the opposite
shore, crossing over, going through or over or across
or to the end, ferrying across, intending to cross; one
who has arrived at the end, accomplishing, one who
has accomplished or completely mastered, completely
familiar or conversant with, knowing thoroughly,
well versed in (with gen. or loc. or in a comp.,
e. g. {%Vedānām pāragaḥ,%} well versed in the Vedas;
{%pratijñā-p˚,%} fulfilling or keeping a promise); pro-
foundly learned; going over or beyond the world;
({%am%}), n. keeping, fulfilling. {%—Pāra-gata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%pāra-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} one who has reached
the opposite shore, passed over in safety, crossed;
passed beyond the world, pure, holy; ({%as%}), m. (with
Jainas) an Arhat or deified saint and teacher. {%—Pāra-%}
{%gati, is,%} f. going through, reading, studying through.
{%—Pāra-gamana, am,%} n. reaching the opposite
shore, crossing, going to the end. {%—Pāra-cara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} arriving at the opposite shore, crossing over.
[Page0566-c+ 81]
{%—Pāra-tas,%} ind., Ved. on the opposite bank, on
the further side. {%—Pāra-daṇḍaka, as,%} m. (perhaps
a Vṛddhied form fr. {%para + daṇḍaka%}), N. of a
country (part of Orissa). {%—Pāra-darśaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} showing the opposite bank. {%—Pāra-darśana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} beholding the opposite bank or shore,
able to survey all things. {%—Pāra-dṛśvan, ā, arī,%}
{%a,%} one who has seen the opposite bank, completely
familiar with, knowing thoroughly; long-sighted,
far-seeing, wise. {%—Pāra-dhvaja, ās,%} m. pl. ‘banners
of the further shore,’ N. of certain banners brought
from beyond the sea (from Ceylon) and borne in
procession by the kings of Kaśmīra. {%—Pāra-netṛ,%}
{%tā, trī, tṛ,%} bringing to the further shore. {%—Pāram-%}
{%ita, as, ā, am,%} gone to the opposite bank; crossed,
traversed; transcendant (as spiritual knowledge);
({%ā%}), f. (probably a contracted form for {%pāramita-%}
{%tā%}), coming to the opposite bank, complete attainment,
perfection (the Buddhists enumerate six or sometimes
ten Pāramitās or perfections as belonging to a Bodhi-
sattva). {%—Pārāpāra (˚ra-ap˚), am,%} n. {%= pārāvāra,%}
the nearer and further bank, both banks, (a various
reading for {%pārāvāra,%} q. v.); ({%as%}), m. the sea,
ocean. {%—Pārāyaṇa (˚ra-ay˚), am,%} n. going over,
going across; reading from one end to the other,
reading through, perusing, studying, study; reading
a Purāṇa or causing it to be read; the whole, totality,
entireness, completeness [cf. {%dhātu-p˚, nāma-p˚%}];
N. of a grammatical work; ({%ī%}), f. a N. of the
goddess Sarasvatī; an act, action; considering, medi-
tating; light. {%—Pārāyaṇa-māhātmya, am,%} n., N.
of a section. of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa of the Pādma-
Purāṇa. {%—Pārāyaṇika, as, ī, am,%} reading to (any
one), teaching how to pronounce; ({%as%}), m. a lec-
turer, reader of the Purāṇas; a pupil, scholar; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. epithet of a particular school of grammarians.
{%—Pārāyaṇīya, am,%} n., N. of a grammar. {%—Pā-%}
{%rāvāra (˚ra-av˚), am,%} n. the further and the
nearer bank or shore, the opposite banks (e. g.
{%pārāvārasya nauḥ,%} a boat which plies from one
side to the other); ({%as%}), m. the sea, ocean; [cf.
{%pārāpāra.%}] {%—Pārāvārīṇa, as, ā, am,%} on both
sides of a river, &c., one who goes to both sides.
{%—Pāre-gaṅgam,%} ind. on the other side of the
Gaṅgā, beyond the Ganges. {%—Pāre-viśoka,%} N. of a
place. {%—Pāre-sindhu,%} ind. on the other side of the
Sindhu, beyond the Indus.
<LEND>

<L>28864<pc>0566-c<k1>pAraka<k2>pAraka<h>1
1. {%pāraka, as, ī, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 567, col. 1),
carrying over, bearing across, saving, delivering (in
{%ugra-p˚,%} q. v.); enabling to cross (a river or the
world).
<LEND>

<L>28865<pc>0566-c<k1>pAraRa<k2>pAraRa<h>1
1. {%pāraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see p. 567, col.
1), bringing over, carrying across, saving, deli-
vering; ({%am%}), n. fulfilling, accomplishing; reading
through, reading, studying; the complete text (of a
book); ({%am, ā%}), n. f., also {%vrata-pāraṇa,%} concluding
a fast, eating or drinking after a fast, breakfast; [cf.
{%śoṇita-p˚.%}] {%—Pāraṇa-karman, a,%} n. exercise in
reading, mode of reading.
<LEND>

<L>28866<pc>0566-c<k1>pAraRIya<k2>pAraRIya
{%Pāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ having an attainable end,
capable of being completed or brought to an end.
<LEND>

<L>28867<pc>0566-c<k1>pAraya<k2>pAraya<h>1
1. {%pāraya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%pārayati, -te,%} &c., to
bring over, lead over; to be able; (this is also
regarded as the Caus. of rt. 1. {%pṛ,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>28868<pc>0566-c<k1>pAraya<k2>pAraya<h>2
2. {%pāraya, as, ā, am,%}¦ able, adequate, fit for.
<LEND>

<L>28869<pc>0566-c<k1>pArayat<k2>pArayat<h>1
1. {%pārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being able, competent.
<LEND>

<L>28870<pc>0566-c<k1>pArayizRu<k2>pArayizRu<h>1
1. {%pārayiṣṇu, us, us, u%}¦ (for 2. see s. v.), Ved.
bringing to a successful issue, causing to succeed,
victorious.
<LEND>

<L>28871<pc>0566-c<k1>pArIRa<k2>pArIRa
{%Pārīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being on the other or opposite
side; crossing to the other or opposite side; (at the
end of a comp.) completely familiar with, well
acquainted with [cf. {%trivarga-p˚%}]; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a man ({%= pāriṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>28872<pc>0566-c<k1>pArIya<k2>pArIya
{%Pārīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) com-
pletely familiar with, well acquainted with.
<LEND>

<L>28873<pc>0566-c<k1>pArya<k2>pArya
{%Pārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being on the opposite
side or bank; upper; last, final; giving the last
stroke, decisive (e. g. {%pārye dhane,%} Ved. in a decisive
battle); causing to succeed, helping through; effec-
tual, efficient; ({%am%}), n. end; decision.
<LEND>
[Page0567-a+ 73]

<L>28874<pc>0567-a<k1>pAraka<k2>pAraka<h>2
{#pAraka#} 2¦. {%pāraka, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%pṝ;%} for
1. see p. 566, col. 3), satisfying, pleasing; cherishing.
<LEND>

<L>28875<pc>0567-a<k1>pAraRa<k2>pAraRa<h>2
2. {%pāraṇa, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see p. 566, col. 3), satis-
fying, satisfaction; a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>28876<pc>0567-a<k1>pAraya<k2>pAraya<h>3
3. {%pāraya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 1. and 2. see p. 566,
col. 3), satisfying, filling.
<LEND>

<L>28877<pc>0567-a<k1>pArayat<k2>pArayat<h>2
2. {%pārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ satisfying, filling.
<LEND>

<L>28878<pc>0567-a<k1>pArayizRu<k2>pArayizRu<h>2
2. {%pārayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ gratifying, pleasing,
satisfying.
<LEND>

<L>28879<pc>0567-a<k1>pArakya<k2>pArakya
{#pArakya#}¦ {%pārakya, as, ā, am, = parakīya,%} be-
longing to another or a stranger, alien (opposed to
{%sva%}); intended for others, serving others; belonging
to an enemy, hostile, inimical; ({%as%}), m. an enemy;
({%am%}), n. doing anything for the sake of future hap-
piness, pious conduct.
<LEND>

<L>28880<pc>0567-a<k1>pAragrAmika<k2>pAragrAmika
{#pAragrAmika#}¦ {%pāragrāmika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%para + grāma%}), ‘belonging to another village,’ hos-
tile, inimical, ({%pāragrāmikaṃ vidhim ācikīrṣati,%}
he is about to perform hostile action, i. e. prepares
for hostilities.)
<LEND>

<L>28881<pc>0567-a<k1>pAraj<k2>pAraj
{#pAraj#}¦ {%pāraj, k,%} m. (said to be fr. {%pāra%}),
gold.
<LEND>

<L>28882<pc>0567-a<k1>pArajAyika<k2>pArajAyika
{#pArajAyika#}¦ {%pārajāyika, as,%} m. (fr. {%para +%}
{%jāyā%}), one who intrigues with another's wife, an
adulterer.
<LEND>

<L>28883<pc>0567-a<k1>pArawIwa<k2>pArawIwa
{#pArawIwa#}¦ {%pāraṭīṭa, as,%} m. (connected with
{%pāra?%}), a stone, rock; [cf. {%pārāruka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28884<pc>0567-a<k1>pAraRIya<k2>pAraRIya
{#pAraRIya#}¦ {%pāraṇīya.%} See p. 566, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28885<pc>0567-a<k1>pArata<k2>pArata<h>1
{#pArata#} 1¦. {%pārata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%para-tas%}),
see Vārttikā to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 104; (Ved.) N. of a
people or country.
<LEND>

<L>28886<pc>0567-a<k1>pArata<k2>pArata<h>2
{#pArata#} 2¦. {%pārata, as,%} m. quicksilver; [cf.
{%pārada.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28887<pc>0567-a<k1>pArataka<k2>pArataka
{%Pārataka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>28888<pc>0567-a<k1>pAratantrika<k2>pAratantrika
{#pAratantrika#}¦ {%pāratantrika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%para-%}
{%tantra%}), belonging to or enjoined by the religious
treatises of others.
<LEND>

<L>28889<pc>0567-a<k1>pAratantrya<k2>pAratantrya
{%Pāratantrya, am,%}¦ n. the being subject to another,
dependence, subservience, slavery.
<LEND>

<L>28890<pc>0567-a<k1>pAratrika<k2>pAratrika
{#pAratrika#}¦ {%pāratrika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%para-tra%}),
relating to another world, belonging to the next
world, advantageous in the future life.
<LEND>

<L>28891<pc>0567-a<k1>pAratrya<k2>pAratrya
{%Pāratrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the next world;
rewarded in a future state (according to Kullūka =
{%paraloka-phala%}).
<LEND>

<L>28892<pc>0567-a<k1>pArada<k2>pArada
{#pArada#}¦ {%pārada, as,%} m. quicksilver; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a barbarous people (described in Manu
X. 44. as a Kṣatriya tribe degraded to Śūdras by
neglect of duties; cf. 2. {%pārata%}).
<LEND>

<L>28893<pc>0567-a<k1>pAradaRqaka<k2>pAradaRqaka
{#pAradaRqaka#}¦ {%pāra-daṇḍaka.%} See {%pāra,%} p. 566.
<LEND>

<L>28894<pc>0567-a<k1>pAradArika<k2>pAradArika
{#pAradArika#}¦ {%pāradārika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%para-%}
{%dāra%}), intriguing with another's wife; relating to
another's wife; ({%as%}), m. an adulterer.
<LEND>

<L>28895<pc>0567-a<k1>pAradArin<k2>pAradArin
{%Pāradārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ intriguing with another's
wife; (perhaps incorrectly for {%para-dārin.%})
<LEND>

<L>28896<pc>0567-a<k1>pAradArya<k2>pAradArya
{%Pāradārya, am,%}¦ n. intriguing with another's
wife, adultery.
<LEND>

<L>28897<pc>0567-a<k1>pAradeSika<k2>pAradeSika
{%Pāradeśika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%para-deśa%}), outlandish,
foreign, abroad; ({%as%}), m. a traveller; a foreigner.
<LEND>

<L>28898<pc>0567-a<k1>pAradeSya<k2>pAradeSya
{%Pāradeśya, as, śī, am,%}¦ belonging to or coming
from a foreign country, foreign; ({%as%}), m. a traveller,
one who has gone to a foreign country; a foreigner;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>per-egrinus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>28899<pc>0567-a<k1>pAraDenu<k2>pAraDenu
{%Pāradhenu, us,%}¦ or {%pāradhenuka, as,%} m., N. of
a low mixed caste, an Āyogava (q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>28900<pc>0567-a<k1>pAramparIRa<k2>pAramparIRa
{%Pāramparīṇa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%param-parā%}),
passing from one to another, handed down from
father to son, hereditary.
<LEND>

<L>28901<pc>0567-a<k1>pAramparIya<k2>pAramparIya
{%Pāramparīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ handed down, tra-
ditional.
<LEND>

<L>28902<pc>0567-a<k1>pAramparya<k2>pAramparya
{%Pāramparya, as, ī, am,%}¦ one following the other;
({%am%}), n. uninterrupted series, continuous order or
hereditary succession; traditional instruction, tradition;
[Page0567-b+ 75]
intercession, intermediation; ({%eṇa%}), ind. successively.
{%—Pāramparya-kramāgata (˚ma-āg˚),%} or {%pāram-%}
{%paryāgata (˚ya-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} derived from
tradition. {%—Pāramparyopadeśa (˚ya-up˚), as,%} m.
traditional instruction.
<LEND>

<L>28903<pc>0567-b<k1>pAralokya<k2>pAralokya
{%Pāralokya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%para-loka%}), relating
to the next world.
<LEND>

<L>28904<pc>0567-b<k1>pAralOkika<k2>pAralOkika
{%Pāralaukika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the next
world (e. g. {%sahāyaḥ pāralaukikaḥ,%} a companion
on the way to the next world); epithet of a place
where pearls are found and of the pearls found
there (Ved.); ({%am%}), n. things or circumstances relat-
ing to the next world.
<LEND>

<L>28905<pc>0567-b<k1>pAravargya<k2>pAravargya
{%Pāravargya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. {%para + varga%}), be-
longing to another party, siding with the enemy.
<LEND>

<L>28906<pc>0567-b<k1>pAravaSya<k2>pAravaSya
{%Pāravaśya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%para-vaśa%}), dependence,
dependency.
<LEND>

<L>28907<pc>0567-b<k1>pArastrEReya<k2>pArastrEReya
{%Pārastraiṇeya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%para-strī%}), a son by
another's wife, an adulterine.
<LEND>

<L>28908<pc>0567-b<k1>pArahaMsya<k2>pArahaMsya
{%Pārahaṃsya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%para-haṃsa%}), re-
lating to an ascetic who has subdued all his senses;
[cf. {%pāramahaṃsya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28909<pc>0567-b<k1>pArAvarya<k2>pArAvarya
{%Pārāvarya, eṇa,%}¦ ind. (fr. {%parāvara%}), on all
sides, completely.
<LEND>

<L>28910<pc>0567-b<k1>pAraBfta<k2>pAraBfta
{#pAraBfta#}¦ {%pārabhṛta, am,%} n. a present, offer-
ing (incorrectly for {%prābhṛta%}).
<LEND>

<L>28911<pc>0567-b<k1>pAraBftIya<k2>pAraBftIya
{%Pārabhṛtīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
a present (incorrectly for {%prābhṛtīya%}); belonging
to a cuckoo (fr. {%para-bhṛta%}).
<LEND>

<L>28912<pc>0567-b<k1>pAramahaMsa<k2>pAramahaMsa
{#pAramahaMsa#}¦ {%pāramahaṃsa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pa-%}
{%rama-haṃsa%}), relating to Parama-haṃsa (Brahmā).
<LEND>

<L>28913<pc>0567-b<k1>pAramahaMsya<k2>pAramahaMsya
{%Pāramahaṃsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the Parama-
haṃsas or religious men who have subdued all their
senses by abstract meditation; ({%am%}), n. most sublime
ascetism or meditation. {%—Pāramahaṃsya-pari,%} ind.
relating to the most sublime meditation or speculation.
<LEND>

<L>28914<pc>0567-b<k1>pAramArTika<k2>pAramArTika
{%Pāramārthika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%paramārtha%}),
relating to a high or spiritual object, relating to
supreme truth; real, essential, true; one who cares
for truth, loving right; supremely good, excellent,
superior.
<LEND>

<L>28915<pc>0567-b<k1>pAramika<k2>pAramika
{%Pāramika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%parama%}), supreme,
chief, best.
<LEND>

<L>28916<pc>0567-b<k1>pArameSvara<k2>pArameSvara
{%Pārameśvara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%parameśvara%}), re-
lating or belonging to the supreme lord (Śiva),
coming from the supreme lord.
<LEND>

<L>28917<pc>0567-b<k1>pAramezWa<k2>pAramezWa
{%Pārameṣṭha, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Para-
meṣṭhin.
<LEND>

<L>28918<pc>0567-b<k1>pAramezWya<k2>pAramezWya
{%Pārameṣṭhya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%parameṣṭhin%}),
relating or belonging to the highest or supreme god
(Brahman), coming from the supreme deity; relating
to a king; ({%am%}), n. highest position, supremacy;
royal insignia.
<LEND>

<L>28919<pc>0567-b<k1>pAramita<k2>pAramita
{#pAramita#}¦ {%pāram-ita.%} See under {%pāra,%} p. 566.
<LEND>

<L>28920<pc>0567-b<k1>pAraya<k2>pAraya<h>1
{#pAraya#} 1¦. and 2. {%pāraya, pārayat, pāra-%}
{%yiṣṇu.%} See p. 566, col. 3, and col. 1. of this p.
<LEND>

<L>28921<pc>0567-b<k1>pAravata<k2>pAravata
{#pAravata#}¦ {%pāravata, as,%} m. {%= pārāvata,%} a
pigeon.
<LEND>

<L>28922<pc>0567-b<k1>pAravaSya<k2>pAravaSya
{#pAravaSya#}¦ {%pāravaśya.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>28923<pc>0567-b<k1>pAraSava<k2>pAraSava
{#pAraSava#}¦ {%pāraśava, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. {%pa-%}
{%raśu%}), iron (used for axes), an iron weapon; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a mixed caste, the son of a Brāhman by a
Śūdrā woman; a son by another's wife, an adulterine,
bastard; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people in the south-
west of Madhya-deśa; ({%as, ī, am%}), made of iron;
made or derived from an axe; (sometimes written
{%pārasava.%}) {%—Pāraśava-tva, am,%} n. the state of
being born of a Śūdrā woman.
<LEND>

<L>28924<pc>0567-b<k1>pAraSavya<k2>pAraSavya
{%Pāraśavya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic of Tirindira.
<LEND>

<L>28925<pc>0567-b<k1>pAraSIka<k2>pAraSIka
{#pAraSIka#}¦ {%pāraśīka = pārasīka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28926<pc>0567-b<k1>pAraSvaDa<k2>pAraSvaDa
{#pAraSvaDa#}¦ {%pāraśvadha%} or {%pāraśvadhika, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%paraśvadha%}), armed with an axe; ({%as%}), m.
a man armed with an axe, halbert-man, hatchet-man,
pioneer, &c.
<LEND>

<L>28927<pc>0567-b<k1>pAraSvaya<k2>pAraSvaya
{#pAraSvaya#}¦ {%pāraśvaya, as,%} m. gold (?).
<LEND>
[Page0567-c+ 73]

<L>28928<pc>0567-c<k1>pArasa<k2>pArasa
{#pArasa#}¦ {%pārasa, as, ī, am,%} Persian; ({%ī%}), f.
(with or without {%bhāṣā%}) the Persian language.
<LEND>

<L>28929<pc>0567-c<k1>pArasika<k2>pArasika
{%Pārasika, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the Persians; ({%as, ī, am%}),
Persian; ({%as%}), m. Persia (?).
<LEND>

<L>28930<pc>0567-c<k1>pArasIka<k2>pArasIka
{%Pārasīka, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the Persians; ({%as%}), m.
Persia; a Persian horse.
<LEND>

<L>28931<pc>0567-c<k1>pArasIkeya<k2>pArasIkeya
{%Pārasīkeya, as, ī, am,%}¦ Persian.
<LEND>

<L>28932<pc>0567-c<k1>pArasava<k2>pArasava
{#pArasava#}¦ {%pārasava.%} See {%pāraśava,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>28933<pc>0567-c<k1>pAraskara<k2>pAraskara
{#pAraskara#}¦ {%pāraskara, as,%} m. (fr. {%pāra + kara,%}
{%s%} being inserted; or fr. {%paras-kara%}), N. of the author
of certain Gṛhya-sūtras forming a supplement to Kā-
tyāyana's Śrauta-sūtras and of a Dharma-śāstra; N. of
a district; ({%as, ī, am%}), composed by Pāraskara. {%—Pā-%}
{%raskara-gṛhya-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a work on
domestic customs.
<LEND>

<L>28934<pc>0567-c<k1>pArastrEReya<k2>pArastrEReya
{#pArastrEReya#}¦ {%pārastraiṇeya, pārahaṃsya.%} See
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>28935<pc>0567-c<k1>pArApata<k2>pArApata
{#pArApata#}¦ {%pārāpata, as,%} m. {%= pārāvata,%} a
pigeon.
<LEND>

<L>28936<pc>0567-c<k1>pArApataka<k2>pArApataka
{#pArApataka#}¦ {%pārāpataka, as,%} m. a kind of
rice.
<LEND>

<L>28937<pc>0567-c<k1>pArAyaRa<k2>pArAyaRa
{#pArAyaRa#}¦ {%pārāyaṇa.%} See {%pāra,%} p. 566.
<LEND>

<L>28938<pc>0567-c<k1>pArAruka<k2>pArAruka
{#pArAruka#}¦ {%pārāruka, as,%} m. a rock; [cf.
{%pāraṭīṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28939<pc>0567-c<k1>pArAvata<k2>pArAvata
{#pArAvata#}¦ {%pārāvata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%parā-vat%}),
remote, coming or brought from a distance, of foreign
extraction (Ved.); ({%as%}), m., N. of a tribe on the
Yamunā; a turtle-dove, turtle-pigeon, dove, pigeon; a
kind of snake; N. of a Nāga of the race of Airāvata;
a monkey; a species of tree, Diospyros Embryopteris;
a mountain; N. of a class of deities under Manu
Svārociṣa; ({%ī%}), f. the fruit of the Lavalī plant
(Annona Reticulata ?); a form of song peculiar to
cowherds; N. of a river in the peninsula; ({%am%}),
n. the fruit of the tree Diospyros Embryopteris.
{%—Pārāvata-ghnī,%} f., Ved. (according to the Nirukta)
destroying both banks (an epithet of the Sarasvatī;
Sāy. {%= pārāvāra-ghātinī%} or {%= dūra-deśe vidyamā-%}
{%nasyāpi vṛkṣāder hantrī;%} but the right meaning
probably is), hitting the remote (demon), slaying from
afar. {%—Pārāvata-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a district men-
tioned in the Ratna-koṣa. {%—Pārāvata-padī,%} f. or
{%pārāvatāṅghri (˚ta-aṅ˚),%} ‘pigeon's foot,’ Cardios-
permum Halicacabum (so called from the form of the
leaf). {%—Pārāvatāṅghri-piccha, as,%} m. a pigeon.
<LEND>

<L>28940<pc>0567-c<k1>pArAvati<k2>pArAvati
{%Pārāvati, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Vasu-rocis.
<LEND>

<L>28941<pc>0567-c<k1>pArAvadaGnI<k2>pArAvadaGnI
{#pArAvadaGnI#}¦ {%pārāvada-ghnī,%} a wrong reading
for {%pārāvata-ghnī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28942<pc>0567-c<k1>pArAvara<k2>pArAvara
{#pArAvara#}¦ {%pārāvara.%} See p. 566, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>28943<pc>0567-c<k1>pArAvarya<k2>pArAvarya
{#pArAvarya#}¦ {%pārāvarya.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>28944<pc>0567-c<k1>pArASara<k2>pArASara
{#pArASara#}¦ {%pārāśara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%parāśara%}),
proceeding or derived from Parāśara or from Pārā-
śarya; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from Parāśara and
N. of the poet Vyāsa; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
school; ({%ī%}), f. a daughter of Parāśara; ({%am%}), n. the
rules of Pārāśara for the conduct of the mendicant
order. {%—Pārāśarī-putra, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
teacher. {%—Pārāśaropapurāṇa (˚ra-up˚), am,%} n.,
N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>28945<pc>0567-c<k1>pArASarakalpika<k2>pArASarakalpika
{%Pārāśarakalpika, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who studies
the Parāśara-kalpa; ({%as%}), m. a follower of Parāśara
the institutor of rules for the mendicant order.
<LEND>

<L>28946<pc>0567-c<k1>pArASari<k2>pArASari
{%Pārāśari, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>28947<pc>0567-c<k1>pArASarin<k2>pArASarin
{%Pārāśarin, ī,%}¦ m. a mendicant of the school of Parā-
śara or of Pārāśarya; a religious mendicant in general.
<LEND>

<L>28948<pc>0567-c<k1>pArASarya<k2>pArASarya
{%Pārāśarya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of the poet
Vyāsa; N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>28949<pc>0567-c<k1>pArikarmika<k2>pArikarmika
{#pArikarmika#}¦ {%pārikarmika, as,%} m. (fr. {%pari-%}
{%karman%}), one who takes charge of the lesser vessels
or utensils.
<LEND>

<L>28950<pc>0567-c<k1>pArikANkzin<k2>pArikANkzin
{#pArikANkzin#}¦ {%pārikāṅkṣin, ī,%} m. an ascetic
(who devotes himself to devout contemplation), a
contemplative saint, a Brāhman in the fourth period
[Page0568-a+ 70]
of life, a religious mendicant; (also {%pārikāṅkṣaka;%}
cf. {%pari-kāṅkṣita.%})
<LEND>

<L>28951<pc>0568-a<k1>pArikuwa<k2>pArikuwa
{#pArikuwa#}¦ {%pārikuṭa, as,%} m., Ved. an at-
tendant, servant.
<LEND>

<L>28952<pc>0568-a<k1>pArikzita<k2>pArikzita
{#pArikzita#}¦ {%pārikṣita, as, ī, am,%} epithet of
the verses of the Atharva-veda XX. 127, 7-10;
({%as%}), m. a patronymic of Janam-ejaya.
<LEND>

<L>28953<pc>0568-a<k1>pArikzitIya<k2>pArikzitIya
{%Pārikṣitīya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (according to the
commentator) the brother of Pari-kṣit.
<LEND>

<L>28954<pc>0568-a<k1>pAriKeya<k2>pAriKeya
{#pAriKeya#}¦ {%pārikheya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pari-khā%}),
surrounded by a ditch or fosse, belonging to a ditch.
<LEND>

<L>28955<pc>0568-a<k1>pArigrAmika<k2>pArigrAmika
{#pArigrAmika#}¦ {%pārigrāmika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pari-%}
{%grāmam%}), situated round a village.
<LEND>

<L>28956<pc>0568-a<k1>pArijAta<k2>pArijAta
{#pArijAta#}¦ {%pārijāta, as,%} m. (fr. {%pari + jāta%}),
the coral tree, Erythrina Indica (a splendid tree
losing its leaves in June and then covered with large
crimson flowers, sometimes identified with the Man-
dāra); the wood of this tree; N. of one of the five
trees of paradise (which was produced at the churning
of the ocean and came into the possession of Indra
from whom it was afterwards taken by Kṛṣṇa);
fragrance; N. of a Ṛṣi; N. of a Nāga of the race
of Airāvata. {%—Pārijāta-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of
flowers of the celestial Pārijāta. {%—Pārijāta-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} possessing the celestial Pārijāta. {%—Pārijāta-%}
{%sarasvatī-mantra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of certain magical
formulas. {%—Pārijāta-haraṇa, am,%} n. ‘carrying off
of the Pārijāta tree,’ N. of sections of the Hari-vaṃśa
and Viṣṇu-Purāṇa (describing the taking of the
Pārijāta tree by Kṛṣṇa from Indra); N. of a
comedy by Gopāla-dāsa.
<LEND>

<L>28957<pc>0568-a<k1>pArijAtaka<k2>pArijAtaka
{%Pārijātaka, as,%}¦ m. the coral tree, Erythrina Indica;
one of the five trees of paradise; N. of a sage.
<LEND>

<L>28958<pc>0568-a<k1>pAriRa<k2>pAriRa
{#pAriRa#}¦ {%pāriṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>28959<pc>0568-a<k1>pAriRAyya<k2>pAriRAyya
{#pAriRAyya#}¦ {%pāriṇāyya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pari-%}
{%ṇāya = pari-ṇaya%}), relating to marriage, obtained
on the occasion of marriage; ({%am%}), n. property or
paraphernalia received by a woman at the time of
marriage; marriage settlement.
<LEND>

<L>28960<pc>0568-a<k1>pAriRAhya<k2>pAriRAhya
{#pAriRAhya#}¦ {%pāriṇāhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari-ṇāha%}),
household furniture and utensils.
<LEND>

<L>28961<pc>0568-a<k1>pAritaTyA<k2>pAritaTyA
{#pAritaTyA#}¦ {%pāritathyā,%} f. (fr. {%pari + tathya?%}),
a string of pearls for binding the hair, a trinket worn
on the forehead where the hair is parted.
<LEND>

<L>28962<pc>0568-a<k1>pAritavat<k2>pAritavat
{#pAritavat#}¦ {%pārita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing
the word {%pārita%} or other forms of the Caus. of
rt. 1. {%pṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>28963<pc>0568-a<k1>pAritozika<k2>pAritozika
{#pAritozika#}¦ {%pāritoṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pari-%}
{%toṣa%}), gratifying, delighting, pleasing, making happy,
satisfactory, consolatory; ({%am%}), n. a reward, gratuity
(given as a token of satisfaction).
<LEND>

<L>28964<pc>0568-a<k1>pAriDvajika<k2>pAriDvajika
{#pAriDvajika#}¦ {%pāridhvajika, as,%} m. (fr. {%pari%}
{%+ dhvaja%}), a standard-bearer.
<LEND>

<L>28965<pc>0568-a<k1>pArindra<k2>pArindra
{#pArindra#}¦ {%pārindra, as,%} m. a lion ({%= pā-%}
{%rīndra%}).
<LEND>

<L>28966<pc>0568-a<k1>pAripanTika<k2>pAripanTika
{#pAripanTika#}¦ {%pāripanthika, as,%} m. (fr. {%pari-%}
{%pantham%}), a highwayman, robber, thief.
<LEND>

<L>28967<pc>0568-a<k1>pAripAwya<k2>pAripAwya
{#pAripAwya#}¦ {%pāripāṭya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari-pāṭī%}),
regularity, methodicalness, successiveness.
<LEND>

<L>28968<pc>0568-a<k1>pAripAtra<k2>pAripAtra
{#pAripAtra#}¦ {%pāripātra, as,%} m. (fr. {%pari +%}
{%pātra?%}), N. of one of the seven principal mountain
ranges of India (the central or western portion of
the Vindhya chain which skirts the province of
Malwa); N. of a son of Ahīna-gu; (also read {%pā-%}
{%riyātra.%})
<LEND>

<L>28969<pc>0568-a<k1>pAripAtraka<k2>pAripAtraka
{%Pāripātraka%}¦ or {%pāriyātraka, as,%} m., N. of a
mountain range, the central or western portion of
the Vindhya chain.
<LEND>

<L>28970<pc>0568-a<k1>pAripAtrika<k2>pAripAtrika
{%Pāripātrika%}¦ or {%pāriyātrika, as,%} m. an inhabitant
of the Pāripātra or Pāriyātra mountain range.
<LEND>
[Page0568-b+ 72]

<L>28971<pc>0568-b<k1>pAripAnTika<k2>pAripAnTika
{#pAripAnTika#}¦ {%pāripānthika, as,%} m. probably
only a wrong reading for {%pāripanthika,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28972<pc>0568-b<k1>pAripArSva<k2>pAripArSva
{#pAripArSva#}¦ {%pāripārśva, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari-%}
{%pārśva%}), retinue, attendants, followers.
<LEND>

<L>28973<pc>0568-b<k1>pAripArSvaka<k2>pAripArSvaka
{%Pāripārśvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ standing at the side,
attending on; ({%as%}), m. an attendant; an assistant of
the manager of a play; an actor who serves in place
of a chorus in the drama and is one of the inter-
locutors in the prologue; ({%ikā%}), f. a female attendant,
a chamber-maid.
<LEND>

<L>28974<pc>0568-b<k1>pAripArSvika<k2>pAripArSvika
{%Pāripārśvika, as, ī, am,%}¦ standing at the side,
belonging to a retinue; attending on; ({%as%}), m. an
attendant; an assistant of the manager of a play.
<LEND>

<L>28975<pc>0568-b<k1>pAripela<k2>pAripela
{#pAripela#}¦ {%pāripela, am,%} n. {%= paripelava,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>28976<pc>0568-b<k1>pAriplava<k2>pAriplava
{#pAriplava#}¦ {%pāriplava, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pari-%}
{%plava%}), swimming; moving to and fro, shaking,
unsteady, tremulous, trembling; perturbed, troubled
in mind; ‘moving in a circle,’ epithet of a particular
legend recited at the Aśva-medha and repeated at
certain intervals throughout the year (Ved.); ({%as%}),
m. a boat; N. of a sage (?) in the fifth Manv-antara;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Pāriplava-gata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} being in a boat. {%—Pāriplava-netra, as, ā, am,%}
having tremulous or swimming eyes.
<LEND>

<L>28977<pc>0568-b<k1>pAriplavIya<k2>pAriplavIya
{%Pāriplavīya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. an oblation accom-
panying the recitation of the Pāriplava legend.
<LEND>

<L>28978<pc>0568-b<k1>pAriplAvya<k2>pAriplAvya
{%Pāriplāvya, as,%}¦ m. a goose; ({%am%}), n. perplexity,
agitation; tremulousness.
<LEND>

<L>28979<pc>0568-b<k1>pAribarha<k2>pAribarha
{#pAribarha#}¦ {%pāribarha%} and {%pārivarha, as,%} m.
{%= pari-barha%} or {%pari-varha,%} q. v.; a wedding
present; N. of one of the sons of Garuḍa.
<LEND>

<L>28980<pc>0568-b<k1>pAriBadra<k2>pAriBadra
{#pAriBadra#}¦ {%pāribhadra, as,%} m. (fr. {%pari +%}
{%bhadra%}), the coral tree, Erythrina Indica; the Nimb
tree, Azadirachta Indica; a species of pine, Pinus
Devadāru; the Saral, Pinus Longifolia; N. of a son
of Yajña-bāhu; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Varṣa in Śālmala-
dvīpa named after Pāribhadra.
<LEND>

<L>28981<pc>0568-b<k1>pAriBadraka<k2>pAriBadraka
{%Pāribhadraka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Erythrina Fulgens;
the Nimb tree, Azadirachta Indica; ({%am%}), n. Costus
Speciosus or Arabicus.
<LEND>

<L>28982<pc>0568-b<k1>pAriBAvya<k2>pAriBAvya
{#pAriBAvya#}¦ {%pāribhāvya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari-bhū%}),
surety, security, bail ({%= prātibhāvya%}); a drug, a
species of Costus, Costus Speciosus or Arabicus.
<LEND>

<L>28983<pc>0568-b<k1>pAriBAzika<k2>pAriBAzika
{#pAriBAzika#}¦ {%pāribhāṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%pari-bhāṣā%}), universally received, generally current,
usual, common; technical (as a term).
<LEND>

<L>28984<pc>0568-b<k1>pArimARqalya<k2>pArimARqalya
{#pArimARqalya#}¦ {%pārimāṇḍalya, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%pari-maṇḍala%}), having the measure or being of the
size of an atom; ({%am%}), n. an atom (as a measure of
space), a mote in a sun-beam.
<LEND>

<L>28985<pc>0568-b<k1>pArimARya<k2>pArimARya
{#pArimARya#}¦ {%pārimāṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari-%}
{%māṇa%}), circumference, compass.
<LEND>

<L>28986<pc>0568-b<k1>pArimitya<k2>pArimitya
{#pArimitya#}¦ {%pārimitya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari-mita%}),
the being confined or limited, limitation.
<LEND>

<L>28987<pc>0568-b<k1>pArimuKika<k2>pArimuKika
{#pArimuKika#}¦ {%pārimukhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pari-%}
{%mukham%}), being before or round the face, being
near or present.
<LEND>

<L>28988<pc>0568-b<k1>pArimuKya<k2>pArimuKya
{%Pārimukhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being before or round
the face, being near or present; ({%am%}), n. the being
before the face, presence.
<LEND>

<L>28989<pc>0568-b<k1>pAriyAtra<k2>pAriyAtra
{#pAriyAtra#}¦ {%pāriyātra, as,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain; of a country; [cf. {%pāripātra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>28990<pc>0568-b<k1>pAriyAtraka<k2>pAriyAtraka
{%Pāriyātraka,%}¦ N. of a place mentioned in the
Romaka-Siddhānta.
<LEND>

<L>28991<pc>0568-b<k1>pAriyAnika<k2>pAriyAnika
{#pAriyAnika#}¦ {%pāriyānika, as,%} m. (fr. {%pari +%}
{%yāna%}), a travelling carriage.
<LEND>

<L>28992<pc>0568-b<k1>pArirakzika<k2>pArirakzika
{#pArirakzika#}¦ {%pārirakṣika, as,%} m. (fr. {%pari-%}
{%rakṣā%}), a Brāhman in the fourth period of life, an
ascetic or religious mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>28993<pc>0568-b<k1>pArivatsa<k2>pArivatsa
{#pArivatsa#}¦ {%pārivatsa, as,%} m. (fr. {%pari +%}
{%vatsa%}), a calf belonging (to the cows mentioned in
Hari-vaṃśa 11877).
<LEND>
[Page0568-c+ 69]

<L>28994<pc>0568-c<k1>pArivittya<k2>pArivittya
{#pArivittya#}¦ {%pārivittya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari-%}
{%vitta%}), the being unmarried while a younger brother
is married, the condition of an elder brother who is
unmarried while the younger is married.
<LEND>

<L>28995<pc>0568-c<k1>pArivettrya<k2>pArivettrya
{%Pārivettrya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pari-vettṛ%}), the marry-
ing of a younger brother before the elder; the being
unmarried while a younger brother is married.
<LEND>

<L>28996<pc>0568-c<k1>pArivrAjaka<k2>pArivrAjaka
{#pArivrAjaka#}¦ {%pārivrājaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pari-%}
{%vrājaka%}), intended for a religious mendicant; ({%am%}),
n. the wandering life of a religious mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>28997<pc>0568-c<k1>pArivrAjya<k2>pArivrAjya
{%Pārivrājya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pari-vrāj%}), the wandering
life of a religious mendicant; (also incorrectly written
{%pārivrajya.%})
<LEND>

<L>28998<pc>0568-c<k1>pAriSa<k2>pAriSa
{#pAriSa#}¦ {%pāriśa, as,%} m. a species of tree
({%= phalīśa,%} commonly called {%palāśa-pipula%} and
{%gaja-haṇḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>28999<pc>0568-c<k1>pAriSIla<k2>pAriSIla
{#pAriSIla#}¦ {%pāriśīla, as,%} m. a cake ({%= apūpa%}).
<LEND>

<L>29000<pc>0568-c<k1>pAriSezya<k2>pAriSezya
{#pAriSezya#}¦ {%pāriśeṣya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari-%}
{%śeṣa%}), that which is left over, a remainder; ({%āt%}), ind.
this alone remaining, there being no alternative.
<LEND>

<L>29001<pc>0568-c<k1>pArizad<k2>pArizad
{#pArizad#}¦ {%pāriṣad, t, t, t%} (fr. {%pari-ṣad%}),
one who is present at an assembly (?).
<LEND>

<L>29002<pc>0568-c<k1>pArizatka<k2>pArizatka
{%Pāriṣatka, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who studies or knows
what has been settled in an assembly (?).
<LEND>

<L>29003<pc>0568-c<k1>pArizada<k2>pArizada
{%Pāriṣada, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to an assembly
or council, one who belongs to an assembly or council;
({%as%}), m. a person present at an assembly or congre-
gation, a spectator; an assessor at a council; a king's
companion; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the retinue or attendants of
a god; ({%am%}), n. taking part in an assembly; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. or n. (?), N. of a village in the North.
<LEND>

<L>29004<pc>0568-c<k1>pArizadaka<k2>pArizadaka
{%Pāriṣadaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ done by an assembly.
<LEND>

<L>29005<pc>0568-c<k1>pArizadya<k2>pArizadya
{%Pāriṣadya, as, ā, am, = pariṣadaṃ sama-%}¦
{%vaiti, = pariṣadi sādhuḥ,%} one who is present at
an assembly, a spectator.
<LEND>

<L>29006<pc>0568-c<k1>pArisAraka<k2>pArisAraka
{#pArisAraka#}¦ {%pārisāraka, as, ī, am,%} containing
the word {%pari-sāraka.%}
<LEND>

<L>29007<pc>0568-c<k1>pArihArika<k2>pArihArika
{#pArihArika#}¦ {%pārihārika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pari-%}
{%hāra%}), taking away, seizing; surrounding; ({%as%}), m.
a maker of garlands; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of riddle.
<LEND>

<L>29008<pc>0568-c<k1>pArihArya<k2>pArihArya
{%Pārihārya, as,%}¦ m. a bracelet; ({%am%}), n. taking,
seizure.
<LEND>

<L>29009<pc>0568-c<k1>pArihAsya<k2>pArihAsya
{#pArihAsya#}¦ {%pārihāsya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pari-hāsa%}),
jest, joke, fun; ({%ena%}), ind. in fun.
<LEND>

<L>29010<pc>0568-c<k1>pArI<k2>pArI
{#pArI#}¦ {%pārī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%pṝ%}), a cup, drinking-
vessel, &c. See {%pāra,%} p. 566, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>29011<pc>0568-c<k1>pArIkzit<k2>pArIkzit
{#pArIkzit#}¦ {%pārīkṣit, t,%} m. {%= pārīkṣita,%} a
patronymic of Janam-ejaya.
<LEND>

<L>29012<pc>0568-c<k1>pArIkzita<k2>pArIkzita
{%Pārīkṣita, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or treating of
Parī-kṣit, derived from Parī-kṣit; ({%as%}), m. a
patronymic of Janam-ejaya; N. of a sovereign to
whom the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa or life of Kṛṣṇa is
supposed to have been addressed; N. of the successor
of the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>29013<pc>0568-c<k1>pArIRa<k2>pArIRa
{#pArIRa#}¦ {%pārīṇa.%} See p. 566, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>29014<pc>0568-c<k1>pArIRahya<k2>pArIRahya
{#pArIRahya#}¦ {%pārīṇahya, am,%} n. (fr. {%parī-ṇah%}),
household furniture or utensils; [cf. {%pāriṇāhya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29015<pc>0568-c<k1>pArIndra<k2>pArIndra
{#pArIndra#}¦ {%pārīndra, as,%} m. a lion ({%= pā-%}
{%rindra%}); a large snake, boa.
<LEND>

<L>29016<pc>0568-c<k1>pArIya<k2>pArIya
{#pArIya#}¦ {%pārīya.%} See p. 566, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>29017<pc>0568-c<k1>pArIraRa<k2>pArIraRa
{#pArIraRa#}¦ {%pārīraṇa, as,%} m. {%= parīraṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29018<pc>0568-c<k1>pAru<k2>pAru
{#pAru#}¦ {%pāru, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 3. {%pā%}),
the sun; fire ({%= peru%}).
<LEND>

<L>29019<pc>0568-c<k1>pArucCepa<k2>pArucCepa
{#pArucCepa#}¦ {%pārucchepa, as, ī, am,%} derived
from Parucchepa; {%Bhāradvājam Pārucchepam,%}
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>29020<pc>0568-c<k1>pArucCepi<k2>pArucCepi
{%Pārucchepi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Parucchepa.
<LEND>

<L>29021<pc>0568-c<k1>pAruzaka<k2>pAruzaka
{#pAruzaka#}¦ {%pāruṣaka, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a species of flower; [cf. {%parūṣaka.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0569-a+ 75]

<L>29022<pc>0569-a<k1>pAruzeya<k2>pAruzeya
{#pAruzeya#}¦ {%pāruṣeya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%paruṣa%}),
Ved. spotted, freckled.
<LEND>

<L>29023<pc>0569-a<k1>pAruzya<k2>pAruzya
{%Pāruṣya, am,%}¦ n. roughness [cf. {%tvak-p˚%}], harsh-
ness; harshness of language, abuse, reproach, con-
tumelious or scurrilous language, opprobrious or
unfriendly speech, insult; violence (in word or deed,
cf. {%daṇḍa-p˚, vāk-p˚%}); squalor; the forest or grove
of Indra; aloe wood or Agallochum; ({%as%}), m. a N.
of Bṛhas-pati, the planet Jupiter.
<LEND>

<L>29024<pc>0569-a<k1>pAruzRa<k2>pAruzRa
{#pAruzRa#}¦ {%pāruṣṇa, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
bird.
<LEND>

<L>29025<pc>0569-a<k1>pAregaNgam<k2>pAregaNgam
{#pAregaNgam#}¦ {%pāre-gaṅgam, pāre-viśoka, pāre-%}
{%sindhu.%} See under {%pāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>29026<pc>0569-a<k1>pAreraka<k2>pAreraka
{#pAreraka#}¦ {%pāreraka, as,%} m. a sword, sci-
mitar (?).
<LEND>

<L>29027<pc>0569-a<k1>pArokza<k2>pArokza
{#pArokza#}¦ {%pārokṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%parokṣa%}),
undiscernible, unintelligible, obscure, mysterious.
<LEND>

<L>29028<pc>0569-a<k1>pArokzya<k2>pArokzya
{%Pārokṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ undiscernible, invisible,
hidden; ({%am%}), n. mysteriousness, mystery.
<LEND>

<L>29029<pc>0569-a<k1>pArovarya<k2>pArovarya
{#pArovarya#}¦ {%pārovarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%paro-'va-%}
{%ram%}), tradition.
<LEND>

<L>29030<pc>0569-a<k1>pArGawa<k2>pArGawa
{#pArGawa#}¦ {%pārghaṭa, am,%} n. ashes, {%= arghaṭa;%}
[cf. {%pārpara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29031<pc>0569-a<k1>pArjanya<k2>pArjanya
{#pArjanya#}¦ {%pārjanya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%parjanya%}),
belonging to Parjanya.
<LEND>

<L>29032<pc>0569-a<k1>pArRa<k2>pArRa
{#pArRa#}¦ {%pārṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%parṇa%}), made
or consisting of leaves, leafy; raised from leaves (as
a tax); made of the wood of the Butea Frondosa;
({%as%}), m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>29033<pc>0569-a<k1>pArRavalki<k2>pArRavalki
{%Pārṇavalki, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%parṇa-valka%}), a patro-
nymic of Ni-gada.
<LEND>

<L>29034<pc>0569-a<k1>pArTa<k2>pArTa<h>1
{#pArTa#} 1¦. {%pārtha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pṛthi%}), Ved.
an epithet of twelve sacred texts, ascribed to Pṛthi
Vainya, repeated during the ceremony of unction in
the Rāja-sūya sacrifice; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic of
Tānva; ({%am%}), n., N. of several Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>29035<pc>0569-a<k1>pArTya<k2>pArTya
{%Pārthya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic from Pṛthi.
<LEND>

<L>29036<pc>0569-a<k1>pArTa<k2>pArTa<h>2
{#pArTa#} 2¦. {%pārtha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%pṛth%} for
{%prath%} and connected with {%pṛthu,%} wide), a prince,
king ({%= pārthiva%}); (fr. {%pṛthā%}), a metronymic
of Yudhi-ṣṭhira, Bhīma-sena, and Arjuna, especially
of the last; N. of a son of Paṅgu and king of
Kaśmīra; N. of a man; the plant Terminalia
Arjuna; ({%ās%}), m. pl. an epithet of the five sons
of Pāṇḍu. {%—Pārtha-ja, as,%} m. the son of Pārtha.
{%—Pārtha-pura, am,%} n., N. of a city near the con-
fluence of the Go-dāvarī and Vi-darbhā. {%—Pārtha-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of sons of Pṛthā.
{%—Pārtha-sārathi, is,%} m., N. of the author of the
Tantra-ratna. {%—Pārthasārathi-miśra, as,%} m., N.
of a commentator on Jaimini's Nyāya-sūtras. {%—Pār-%}
{%thānuga (˚tha-an˚), as, ā, am,%} followed by
(Pārtha, i. e.) Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>29037<pc>0569-a<k1>pArTava<k2>pArTava
{%Pārthava, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or peculiar to
Pṛthu; ({%am%}), n. width, greatness, immensity.
<LEND>

<L>29038<pc>0569-a<k1>pArTavi<k2>pArTavi
{%Pārthavi,%}¦ an earthy substance, rotten wood; (pro-
bably a wrong reading for {%pārthiva.%})
<LEND>

<L>29039<pc>0569-a<k1>pArTiva<k2>pArTiva
{%Pārthiva, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pṛthivī%} for {%pṛthvī,%} f.
of {%pṛthu%}), earthen, earthly, terrestrial, relating to
the earth, springing or derived from the earth, made
of earth, earthy; ruling or possessing the earth; fit
for kings or princes, royal, princely; {%a-pārthiva,%}
unearthly, i. e. heavenly, celestial; ({%as%}), m. a dweller
on the earth, inhabitant of the earth; a lord of the
earth, king, prince, sovereign, warrior; an earthen
vessel; the 19th (or 53rd) year in Jupiter's cycle of
60 years; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a patronymic; ({%ī%}), f. ‘earth-
born,’ an epithet of Sītā; of Lakṣmī; ({%am%}), n. an
earthy substance; ({%āni%}), n. pl., Ved. the regions of
the earth (Sāy. {%= pṛthivyām bhavāni sthānāni%}).
{%—Pārthiva-tā,%} f. or {%pārthiva-tva, am,%} n. the
dignity or rank of king, royalty. {%—Pārthiva-nan-%}
{%dinī,%} f. the daughter of a king. {%—Pārthivarṣabha%}
{%(˚va-ṛ˚), as,%} m. ‘king-bull,’ an excellent king.
{%—Pārthiva-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. best of kings, an
[Page0569-b+ 77]
excellent sovereign. {%—Pārthiva-sutā%} or {%pārthivāt-%}
{%majā (˚va-āt˚),%} f. the daughter of a king. {%—Pār-%}
{%thivādhama (˚va-adh˚), as,%} m. the lowest or
meanest of kings. {%—Pārthivendra (˚va-in˚), as,%}
m. the chief or greatest of princes.
<LEND>

<L>29040<pc>0569-b<k1>pArTakya<k2>pArTakya
{#pArTakya#}¦ {%pārthakya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pṛthak%}),
severalty, individuality, separation, separateness, sin-
gleness, difference, variety.
<LEND>

<L>29041<pc>0569-b<k1>pArTuraSma<k2>pArTuraSma
{#pArTuraSma#}¦ {%pārthuraśma, am,%} n. (fr. {%pṛthu-%}
{%raśmi%}), Ved. epithet of various Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>29042<pc>0569-b<k1>pArpara<k2>pArpara
{#pArpara#}¦ {%pārpara, as,%} m. a handful of rice;
consumption ({%= kṣaya-roga%}); a filament of the
Nauclea Cadamba; ashes; {%= kīnāśa; = gadāntara%}
(a kind of disease ?); a N. of Yama.
<LEND>

<L>29043<pc>0569-b<k1>pArya<k2>pArya
{#pArya#}¦ {%pārya.%} See p. 566, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>29044<pc>0569-b<k1>pAryantika<k2>pAryantika
{#pAryantika#}¦ {%pāryantika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pary-%}
{%anta%}), final, concluding, last.
<LEND>

<L>29045<pc>0569-b<k1>pArva<k2>pArva
{#pArva#}¦ {%pārva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%parvan%}), {%= pār-%}
{%vaṇa;%} (probably an incorrect form.)
<LEND>

<L>29046<pc>0569-b<k1>pArvaRa<k2>pArvaRa
{%Pārvaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
division of time or of the month; increasing, waxing
full (as the moon); ({%as%}), m. a kind of deer; the
general funeral ceremony to be offered to all the
Manes at the Parvan (or conjunction of the sun and
moon, at which double oblations are offered, three
cakes to the father, paternal grandfather and great-
grandfather, and three to the maternal grandfather,
his father and grandfather; and the crumbs of each
set to the remoter ancestors in each line).
<LEND>

<L>29047<pc>0569-b<k1>pArvAyanAntIya<k2>pArvAyanAntIya
{%Pārvāyanāntīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. {%parvan + aya-%}
{%nānta%}), occurring at the end of a Parvan or solstice
(as a sacrifice &c.).
<LEND>

<L>29048<pc>0569-b<k1>pArvata<k2>pArvata
{#pArvata#}¦ {%pārvata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%parvata%}),
being or living in the mountains, growing on or
coming from the mountains, consisting of moun-
tains, mountainous; ({%as%}), m. the tree Melia Sem-
pervirens {%(= mahā-nimba); (ī),%} f. a mountain
stream; a female cowherd or Gopī; a N. of Durgā
(as being the daughter of Hima-vat the king of the
snowy mountains); N. of a cave in mount Meru;
of various women (named after the goddess); an
epithet of Draupadī (incorrectly for {%pārṣatī%}); a
kind of fragrant earth; a red clay commonly called
Saurāṣṭrī or Surat earth; N. of various plants; the
olibanum tree, Boswellia Thurifera; Grislea To-
mentosa; = Celtis Orientalis; {%= kṣudra-pāṣāṇa-%}
{%bhedā; = jīvanī.%} {%—Pārvatī-kṣetra, am,%} n. ‘dis-
trict of Pārvatī (Durgā),’ N. of one of the four
especially sacred districts of Orissa. {%—Pārvatī-nan-%}
{%dana, as,%} m. ‘son of Pārvatī,’ an epithet of Kārtti-
keya. {%—Pārvatī-paścāttāpa-varṇana, am,%} n., N.
of the sixth chapter of the Gīta-gaṅgādhara, a poem
by Kalyāṇa. {%—Pārvatī-pravartana, am,%} n., N. of
the ninth chapter of the Gīta-girīśa, a poem by
Rāma. {%—Pārvatī-prasādana, am,%} n., N. of the
fifth chapter of the Gīta-gaṅgādhara. {%—Pārvatī-%}
{%mokṣaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Gaṇeśa-
Purāṇa. {%—Pārvatīśvara-liṅga (˚tī-īś˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a Liṅga. {%—Pārvatī-sampradāna, am,%} n.,
N. of a chapter of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>29049<pc>0569-b<k1>pArvatAyana<k2>pArvatAyana
{%Pārvatāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic; N. of a
chamberlain.
<LEND>

<L>29050<pc>0569-b<k1>pArvati<k2>pArvati
{%Pārvati, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Dakṣa.
<LEND>

<L>29051<pc>0569-b<k1>pArvatika<k2>pArvatika
{%Pārvatika, am,%}¦ n. a multitude of mountains,
mountain-range.
<LEND>

<L>29052<pc>0569-b<k1>pArvatIya<k2>pArvatIya
{%Pārvatīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ living or dwelling in the
mountains, mountainous; ({%as%}), m. a mountaineer;
epithet of a particular sovereign ruling in the moun-
tains; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a mountain tribe.
<LEND>

<L>29053<pc>0569-b<k1>pArvateya<k2>pArvateya
{%Pārvateya, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
the mountains, mountain-born; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
prince of mountaineers; a species of culinary plant
bearing a pungent fruit; ({%ī%}), f. the smaller or upper
mill-stone; ({%am%}), n. antimony ({%= sauvīrāñjana%}).
<LEND>

<L>29054<pc>0569-b<k1>pArSava<k2>pArSava<h>1
{#pArSava#} 1¦. {%pārśava, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%parśu%}),
a prince of the Parśus.
<LEND>

<L>29055<pc>0569-b<k1>pArSukA<k2>pArSukA
{%Pārśukā,%}¦ f. {%= parśukā,%} a rib.
<LEND>
[Page0569-c+ 81]

<L>29056<pc>0569-c<k1>pArSva<k2>pArSva
{%Pārśva, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the region of the ribs or
the part of the body below the armpit; the side,
flank (either of animate or inanimate objects); a
side of any square figure; a curved knife (Ved.);
({%as%}), m., N. of an ancient Buddhist teacher; (with
Jainas) N. of the twenty-third Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī; ({%au%}), m. du. heaven and earth; ({%am%}),
n. a multitude of ribs, the thorax; the extremity of
the fore-axle nearest the wheel to which the outside
horses of a four-horse chariot are attached; a fraudu-
lent or crooked expedient, dishonourable means;
({%āni%}), n. pl. the ribs (Ved.); ({%e%}), ind. at the side,
near, on, upon, (opposed to {%dūra-tas, dūre%});
aside; ({%ayos%}), ind. on both sides; ({%āt%}), ind. away
from; ({%am%}), ind. near to, to, towards; ({%as, ā, am%}),
near, proximate, by the side of. {%—Pārśva-ga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} going at the side (of any one), accompanying,
being in close proximity to, an attendant; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. attendants, retinue. {%—Pārśva-gata, as, ā, am,%}
being at the side, attending, accompanying, being
close to or beside; sheltered, screening. {%—Pārśva-%}
{%gamana, am,%} n. the act of going by the side,
accompanying. {%—Pārśva-cara, as,%} m. an attendant;
({%ās%}), m. pl. attendants, retinue. {%—Pārśva-tas,%} ind.
by or from the side, at the side, near, sideways,
aside. {%—Pārśva-da, as,%} m. ‘turning the side towards
another,’ an attendant; ({%ās%}), m. pl. attendants,
retinue. {%—Pārśva-dāha, as,%} m. a burning pain in
the side. {%—Pārśva-deśa, as,%} m. the region of the
ribs, the side. {%—Pārśva-druma, ās,%} m. pl. the
trees at the side, the trees on every side. {%—Pārśva-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m. (with Jainas) N. of an Arhat; the
Jaina pontiff. {%—Pārśvanātha-kāvya, am,%} n., N. of
a poem by Padma-sundara celebrating the preceding
Arhat. {%—Pārśva-parivartana, am,%} n. ‘the turning
round on the other side or from one side to the
other,’ epithet of a festival on the eleventh day of the
light half of the month Bhādra (Viṣṇu being sup-
posed to turn upon the other side in his sleep on
this day). {%—Pārśva-parivartin, ī, inī, i,%} being or
going by the side (of any one). {%—Pārśva-pippala,%}
{%am,%} n. a species of Harītakī (= Hindī {%gajahaḍ%}).
{%—Pārśva-bhāga, as,%} m. ‘side-portion,’ the side,
flank (of an elephant). {%—Pārśva-ruj, k,%} f. pain in
the side. {%—Pārśva-vaktra, as,%} m. whose face is in
his side,’ N. of a being attendant upon Śiva (Hari-
vaṃśa 14851). {%—Pārśva-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} standing
by the side, an attendant; situated at the side,
adjacent; ({%inas%}), m. pl. attendants, retinue. {%—Pār-%}
{%śva-vivartin, ī, inī, i,%} being by the side of, living
with. {%—Pārśva-śaya, as, ā, am,%} lying or sleeping
on the side; sleeping at the side. {%—Pārśva-śāyin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} ‘lying on the side,’ epithet of a particular
position of the moon. {%—Pārśva-śūla, as,%} m. a
shooting pain in the side, spasm of the chest, stitch;
pleurisy. {%—Pārśva-saṃstha, as, ā, am,%} lying on
the side. {%—Pārśva-sūtraka, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a kind of ornament. {%—Pārśva-stha, as, ā, am,%}
standing at the side or next to, being near or close
to, adjacent, proximate; ({%as%}), m. an associate, com-
panion; a stage manager's assistant (said to serve as
a sort of chorus to the Indian drama, being some-
times an actor in the prelude and interpreter of the
plot). {%—Pārśva-sthita, as, ā, am,%} standing at the
side, being near or close to. {%—Pārśvānucara (˚va-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. ‘attending at the side,’ an attendant,
body-servant, lackey. {%—Pārśvāyāta (˚va-āy˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has approached close to. {%—Pārśvā-%}
{%sanna (˚va-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} standing by the side,
standing next, present. {%—Pārśvāsīna (˚va-ās˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} sitting by the side. {%—Pārśvāsthi (˚va-as˚),%}
{%i,%} n. ‘side-bone,’ a rib. {%—Pārśvaikādaśī (˚va-ek˚),%}
f., N. of a particular festival ({%= pārśva-parivar-%}
{%tana%}). {%—Pārśvodara-priya (˚va-ud˚), as,%} m.
‘fond of (moving) sideways on the belly,’ a crab.
<LEND>

<L>29057<pc>0569-c<k1>pArSvaka<k2>pArSvaka
{%Pārśvaka, as,%}¦ m. a rib; ({%as, ā, am%}), one who
seeks wealth or other objects by dishonest or indirect
or side means; a pilferer, swindler.
<LEND>

<L>29058<pc>0569-c<k1>pArSvatIya<k2>pArSvatIya
{%Pārśvatīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. {%pārśva-tas%}), being
on or belonging to the side, situated at the side.
<LEND>

<L>29059<pc>0569-c<k1>pArSvika<k2>pArSvika
{%Pārśvika, as, ī, am,%}¦ lateral, belonging to the
[Page0570-a+ 72]
side; ({%as%}), m. a sidesman, partisan; an associate,
companion; a juggler; one who seeks money by
dishonest means; N. of an ancient Buddhist teacher.
<LEND>

<L>29060<pc>0570-a<k1>pArSvya<k2>pArSvya
{%Pārśvya, au,%}¦ m. du. heaven and earth (a various
reading for {%pārśvau%}).
<LEND>

<L>29061<pc>0570-a<k1>pArSava<k2>pArSava<h>2
{#pArSava#} 2¦. {%pārśava, as,%} m. a warrior armed
with an axe.
<LEND>

<L>29062<pc>0570-a<k1>pArSva<k2>pArSva
{#pArSva#}¦ {%pārśva.%} See p. 569, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>29063<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzaki<k2>pArzaki
{#pArzaki#}¦ {%pārṣaki, is,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>29064<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzata<k2>pArzata
{#pArzata#}¦ {%pārṣata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pṛṣata%}),
belonging to the spotted antelope, made of the skin
of the spotted antelope; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic of
Dru-pada and his son Dhṛṣṭa-dyumna; ({%ī%}), f. a
patronymic of Draupadī; an epithet of Durgā (in
this sense a wrong reading for {%pārvatī%}); N. of
two plants, Boswellia Thurifera; {%= jīvanī.%}
<LEND>

<L>29065<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzad<k2>pArzad
{#pArzad#}¦ {%pārṣad, t,%} f. (for {%pari-ṣada?%}), an
assembly; ({%das%}), m. pl. the attendants or retinue of
a god.
<LEND>

<L>29066<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzada<k2>pArzada
{%Pārṣada, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%parṣad%}), an associate,
companion, attendant; a train, retinue (especially of
a god); a person present in a congregation or
assembly, a spectator; (perhaps) a councillor, dis-
tinguished personage; ({%am%}), n. a text-book received
by any particular grammatical school, a N. given to
the Prātiśākhyas; N. of a work on ceremonies.
{%—Pārṣada-tā,%} f. the office of an attendant (espe-
cially of the attendant of a deity).
<LEND>

<L>29067<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzadIya<k2>pArzadIya
{%Pārṣadīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ conformable to the
received text-book of any particular grammatical
school.
<LEND>

<L>29068<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzadya<k2>pArzadya
{%Pārṣadya, as,%}¦ m. {%= pāriṣadya,%} a member of
an assembly or council, assessor; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
attendants or retinue of a god (especially of Śiva).
<LEND>

<L>29069<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzadvARa<k2>pArzadvARa
{#pArzadvARa#}¦ {%Pārṣadvāṇa, as,%} m. (fr. {%pṛṣad-%}
{%vāṇa%}), N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29070<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzikA<k2>pArzikA
{#pArzikA#}¦ {%Pārṣikā,%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>29071<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzI<k2>pArzI
{#pArzI#}¦ {%pārṣī%} (?), f. dung.
<LEND>

<L>29072<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzweya<k2>pArzweya
{#pArzweya#}¦ {%pārṣṭeya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pṛṣṭi%}),
being within the ribs.
<LEND>

<L>29073<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzWika<k2>pArzWika
{#pArzWika#}¦ {%pārṣṭhika, as, ī, am,%} Ved. being
after the manner of the Pṛṣṭhya (Ṣaḍ-aha).
<LEND>

<L>29074<pc>0570-a<k1>pArzRi<k2>pArzRi
{#pArzRi#}¦ {%pārṣṇi, is,%} m. f., rarely {%pārṣṇī,%} f.
(said to be fr. rt. {%pṛṣ%}), the heel; the extremity of
the fore-axle to which the outside horses of a four-
horse chariot are attached (the two inner horses being
harnessed to the {%dhur%} or chariot-pole); the rear of
an army; the back; a kick; enquiry, asking (?);
({%is%}), f. a foolish or licentious woman; a N. of
Kuntī the wife of Pāṇḍu. {%—Pārṣṇi-kṣema, as,%}
m., N. of a divinity. {%—Pārṣṇi-graha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} seizing from behind, threatening from behind;
({%as%}), m. a follower. {%—Pārṣṇi-grahaṇa, am,%} n.
attacking or threatening (an enemy) in the rear.
{%—Pārṣṇi-grāha, as, ā, am,%} attacking or menac-
ing (an enemy) in the rear; ({%as%}), m. an enemy in
the rear; a commander in the rear of an army;
an ally who supports a prince (Manu VII. 207).
{%—Pārṣṇi-tra, am,%} n. ‘rear-protecting,’ a rear-
guard, reserve, a body of forces in the rear. {%—Pārṣ-%}
{%ṇi-vāh, ṭ, ūhī, ṭ,%} or {%pārṣṇi-vāha, as, ā, am,%} draw-
ing (i. e. harnessed to) the extremities of the axle-
tree; ({%as%}), m. an outside horse. {%—Pārṣṇi-sārathi,%}
{%is,%} m. a charioteer who drives one of the outside
horses; ({%ī%}), m. du. the two charioteers who drive
the outer horses attached to the extremities of the
axle-tree.
<LEND>

<L>29075<pc>0570-a<k1>pAl<k2>pAl
{#pAl#}¦ {%pāl.%} See Caus. of rt. 3. {%pā.%}
<LEND>

<L>29076<pc>0570-a<k1>pAla<k2>pAla
{%Pāla, as,%}¦ m. a guard, guardian, protector,
nourisher, keeper; a herdsman; a protector of the
earth, a prince; a spitting-pot, spittoon; N. of a
Nāga of the race of Vāsuki; of a prince; ({%ī%}), f. a
[Page0570-b+ 72]
herdsman's wife; [cf. {%pāli.%}] {%—Pāla-kavi-rāja, as,%}
m., N. of a poet (also called Śrī-pāla-kavi-rāja).
{%—Pāla-kāvya, am,%} n. ‘the poem of Pāla,’ N. of a
work. {%—Pāla-ghna, as,%} m. a mushroom. {%—Pāla-%}
{%baṇij, k,%} m. {%= kanyā-pāla;%} (a wrong form for
{%pāna-baṇij.%}) {%—Pālī-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a par-
ticular religious observance.
<LEND>

<L>29077<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlaka<k2>pAlaka
{%Pālaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ guarding, protecting, nourish-
ing; ({%as%}), m. a guardian, protector, cherisher,
nourisher; a foster-father; a prince, ruler, sovereign;
a horse-keeper, a groom; one who maintains or
observes; N. of several princes; a species of plant
with a poisonous bulb, Plumbago Zeylanica; a
horse. {%—Pālaka-gotra, am,%} n. the family or tribe
of one's adoptive parents. {%—Pālakākhyā (˚ka-%}
{%ākh˚),%} f., N. of the mother of Dhanvantari.
<LEND>

<L>29078<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlana<k2>pAlana
{%Pālana, as, ī, am,%}¦ the act of protecting, guarding,
fostering, nourishing, cherishing; ({%am%}), n. guarding,
providing with a guardian, protecting, protection,
preserving, cherishing, fostering, nourishing; main-
taining, keeping, observing; the milk of a cow that
has recently calved.
<LEND>

<L>29079<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlanIya<k2>pAlanIya
{%Pālanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be guarded or protected,
to be cherished or nourished; fit to be preserved or
maintained; to be observed or respected.
<LEND>

<L>29080<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlayat<k2>pAlayat
{%Pālayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ guarding, protecting,
cherishing.
<LEND>

<L>29081<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlayitf<k2>pAlayitf
{%Pālayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ protecting, cherishing; a
protector, guardian.
<LEND>

<L>29082<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlita<k2>pAlita
{%Pālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ guarded, protected, cherished,
nourished; ({%as%}), m. a species of tree ({%= śākhoṭa%});
N. of a son of Parā-jit (or Parā-vṛt); ({%ā%}), f., N. of
one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>29083<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlin<k2>pAlin
{%Pālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ protecting, guarding, cherishing,
nourishing; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Pṛthu.
<LEND>

<L>29084<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlya<k2>pAlya
{%Pālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be protected or guarded, to
be cherished; being under (any one's) protection or
guardianship; to be observed or kept, to be main-
tained.
<LEND>

<L>29085<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlakApya<k2>pAlakApya
{#pAlakApya#}¦ {%pālakāpya, as,%} m., N. of an
ancient sage or Muni; a form of the divine physician
Dhanvantari.
<LEND>

<L>29086<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlakka<k2>pAlakka
{#pAlakka#}¦ {%pālakka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N.
of a country.
<LEND>

<L>29087<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlakyA<k2>pAlakyA
{#pAlakyA#}¦ {%pālakyā,%} f. the plant Beta Ben-
galensis.
<LEND>

<L>29088<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlaNka<k2>pAlaNka
{#pAlaNka#}¦ {%pālaṅka, as,%} m. the olibanum tree,
Boswellia Thurifera; a species of beet-root, Beta
Bengalensis; a hawk; ({%ī%}), f. the resin of the
olibanum tree, incense.
<LEND>

<L>29089<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlaNkya<k2>pAlaNkya
{%Pālaṅkya, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. gum olibanum, incense;
({%am, ā%}), n. f. the plant Beta Bengalensis.
<LEND>

<L>29090<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlaNgin<k2>pAlaNgin
{#pAlaNgin#}¦ {%pālaṅgin, inas,%} m. pl., N. of a
school called after a disciple of Vaiśampāyana.
<LEND>

<L>29091<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlala<k2>pAlala
{#pAlala#}¦ {%pālala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%palala%}), made
of powdered sesamum seed.
<LEND>

<L>29092<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlavI<k2>pAlavI
{#pAlavI#}¦ {%pālavī,%} f. a kind of vessel.
<LEND>

<L>29093<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlahari<k2>pAlahari
{#pAlahari#}¦ {%pālahari, is,%} m. (probably a patro-
nymic fr. {%palahara%}), N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29094<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlAgala<k2>pAlAgala
{#pAlAgala#}¦ {%pālāgala, as,%} m., Ved. a runner,
messenger; (according to others) a bearer of false
tidings; ({%ī%}), f. the fourth and least respected wife
of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>29095<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlAla<k2>pAlAla
{#pAlAla#}¦ {%pālāla, as, ī, am%} (probably incor-
rectly for {%pālvala%}), living in a marsh.
<LEND>

<L>29096<pc>0570-b<k1>pAlASa<k2>pAlASa
{#pAlASa#}¦ {%pālāśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%palāśa%}), com-
ing from or belonging to the tree Butea Frondosa,
made of the wood of the Butea Frondosa; green;
({%as%}), m. green (the colour). {%—Pālāśa-khaṇḍa%} and
{%pālāśa-ṣaṇḍa, as,%} m. an epithet of Magadha (a
country in India, the western part of Behar).
<LEND>

<L>29097<pc>0570-b<k1>pAli<k2>pAli
{#pAli#}¦ {%pāli, is,%} f. (fr. Caus. of rt. 3. {%pā?;%}
[Page0570-c+ 77]
said to be fr. rt. {%pal%}), the tip of the ear; an edge,
margin; a boundary, limit; the sharp side of any-
thing, the sharp edge or point of a sword or any
cutting instrument; a line, row, range; a raised
bank, dike, causeway, bridge; the lap, bosom; the
hip, haunch; a mark, spot, stain; a particular mea-
sure of capacity ({%= prastha%}); a louse; a woman
with a beard; prescribed food, maintenance of a
scholar during the period of his studies by his teacher;
praise, eulogium; a circumference; ({%ī%}), f. an edge,
margin; the sharp edge of a sword; a line, row,
range; a woman with a beard; a louse; a pot,
boiler; an oblong pond; a causeway, bridge. {%—Pā-%}
{%liṃ-hira, as,%} m. a kind of snake, (perhaps a
wrong reading for {%pāliṃ-hara,%} seizing by the tip
of the ear.)
<LEND>

<L>29098<pc>0570-c<k1>pAlikA<k2>pAlikA
{%Pālikā,%}¦ f. the tip of the ear; the sharp edge of
a cutting instrument; a sort of ladle or knife for
skimming milk, curds, &c.; a cheese or butter
knife.
<LEND>

<L>29099<pc>0570-c<k1>pAlitya<k2>pAlitya
{#pAlitya#}¦ {%pālitya, am,%} n. (fr. {%palita%}), grey-
ness (of age), hoariness.
<LEND>

<L>29100<pc>0570-c<k1>pAlinda<k2>pAlinda
{#pAlinda#}¦ {%pālinda, as,%} m. incense; a species
of jasmine, Jasminum Pubescens; ({%ī%}), f. a species of
creeper, Ichnocarpus Frutescens; {%= pālindhī.%}
<LEND>

<L>29101<pc>0570-c<k1>pAlinDI<k2>pAlinDI
{#pAlinDI#}¦ {%pālindhī,%} f. a species of Ipomœa
with dark blossoms.
<LEND>

<L>29102<pc>0570-c<k1>pAlIvata<k2>pAlIvata
{#pAlIvata#}¦ {%pālīvata, as,%} m. a species of tree.
<LEND>

<L>29103<pc>0570-c<k1>pAllavA<k2>pAllavA
{#pAllavA#}¦ {%pāllavā,%} f. (fr. {%pallava%}), scil. {%krīḍā,%}
a game played with twigs.
<LEND>

<L>29104<pc>0570-c<k1>pAlvala<k2>pAlvala
{#pAlvala#}¦ {%pālvala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%palvala%}),
coming from a tank or pool.
<LEND>

<L>29105<pc>0570-c<k1>pAvaka<k2>pAvaka
{#pAvaka#}¦ {%pāvaka, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pū%}),
(Ved.) pure, clear, bright, shining; (Sāy.) {%= śodhaka,%}
cleansing, purifying (said of Agni, Āditya, Sūrya, and
the Maruts; of water, of the dawn, of day and night,
&c.); ({%as%}), m. epithet of a particular Agni (in the
Purāṇas said to be a son of Agni Abhi-mānin and
Svāhā or of Antar-dhāna and Śikhaṇḍinī; cf. {%pava-%}
{%māna, śuci%}); fire in general; Agni or the god of
fire; social fire, a fire lighted in common; a fire
lighted on taking possession of a house; a species of
tree, Premna Integrifolia or Spinosa (see {%araṇi%}); a
species of plant, Plumbago Zeylanica ({%= citraka%});
Semecarpus Anacardium; a plant used as a vermifuge,
Carthamus Tinctorius ({%= viḍaṅga%}); a symbolical
expression for the number three (like all other words
for ‘fire’); epithet of a kind of Ṛṣi, a saint, a
person purified by religious abstraction, one who
purifies from sin; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of Agni. {%—Pāvaka-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. ‘having the name Pāvaka,’
an epithet of Agni; containing the word {%pāvaka.%}
{%—Pāvaka-varcas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. brightly resplen-
dent (as Agni). {%—Pāvaka-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
being of pure or brilliant aspect; (Sāy.) {%= agni-%}
{%samāna-tejaska,%} resembling the brilliance of fire.
{%—Pāvaka-śocis, is, is, is,%} (voc. anomalously {%-ce%}),
Ved. shining brightly. {%—Pāvakāraṇi (˚ka-ar˚), is,%}
m. the tree Premna Integrifolia or Spinosa (see
{%araṇi%}). {%—Pāvakeśvara (˚ka-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of
a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>29106<pc>0570-c<k1>pAvaki<k2>pAvaki
{%Pāvaki, is,%}¦ m. ‘son of Fire,’ an epithet of Skanda
or Kārttikeya; of Su-darśana; of Hari (?).
<LEND>

<L>29107<pc>0570-c<k1>pAvana<k2>pAvana
{%Pāvana, as, ī, am,%}¦ purifying, purificatory, expur-
gatory, freeing from sin, sanctifying; purified, pure,
holy; ({%as%}), m. fire (generally or for various cere-
monial purposes); incense; a species of Verbesina with
yellow flowers; a kind of demigod otherwise called
a Siddha; N. of one of the Viśve Devāḥ; an epithet
of the inspired poet Vyāsa; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Termi-
nalia Chebula; holy basil; a cow; N. of a river;
the Ganges or the goddess Gaṅgā; ({%am%}), n. the act
of cleansing, purifying, sanctifying, expiation, puri-
fication (by acts of austerity and devotion); a means
of purification; penance; water; cow-dung; the
seed of the plant Elæocarpus Ganitrus (of which
rosaries are made); a species of grass, Costus Speci-
[Page0571-a+ 78]
osus; a sectarial mark {%(= citraka)%}. {%—Pāvana-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the property of cleansing or purifying. {%—Pā-%}
{%vana-dhvani, is,%} m. a conch-shell.
<LEND>

<L>29108<pc>0571-a<k1>pAvamAna<k2>pAvamAna
{%Pāvamāna, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pavamāna%}), relating
to Soma juice while being purified or while pass-
ing through the strainer (Ved.); ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%ṛc,%} an
epithet of particular Vedic hymns (especially of Ṛg-
veda IX, Atharva-veda XIX. 71, 1); purificatory
water (?).
<LEND>

<L>29109<pc>0571-a<k1>pAvita<k2>pAvita
{%Pāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleansed, purified.
<LEND>

<L>29110<pc>0571-a<k1>pAvitra<k2>pAvitra
{%Pāvitra, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. ? (fr. {%pavitra%}), N.
of a metre, four times ¯¯¯¯˘˘˘˘¯ (perhaps
incorrectly for {%pavitra.%})
<LEND>

<L>29111<pc>0571-a<k1>pAvin<k2>pAvin
{%Pāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ cleansing, purifying (Mahā-bh.
Vana-p. 10543; perhaps only a wrong reading for
{%pāvanī%}).
<LEND>

<L>29112<pc>0571-a<k1>pAvya<k2>pAvya
{%Pāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cleansed or purified.
<LEND>

<L>29113<pc>0571-a<k1>pAvan<k2>pAvan<h>1
{#pAvan#} 1¦. {%pāvan, ā, arī, a%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}),
Ved. (at the end of a comp.) drinking; [cf. {%asṛk-%}
{%p˚, gharma-p˚, ghṛta-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29114<pc>0571-a<k1>pAvan<k2>pAvan<h>2
{#pAvan#} 2¦. {%pāvan, ā, arī, a%} (fr. rt. 3. {%pā%}),
Ved. (at the end of a comp.) protecting; [cf.
{%tanū-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29115<pc>0571-a<k1>pAvara<k2>pAvara
{#pAvara#}¦ {%pāvara, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the
die or side of a die which is marked with two points
({%= dvā-para,%} of which it is a corruption).
<LEND>

<L>29116<pc>0571-a<k1>pAvA<k2>pAvA
{#pAvA#}¦ {%pāvā%} or {%pāvā-purī%} (also {%pāpā-purī%}),
f., N. of a city near Rāja-gṛha.
<LEND>

<L>29117<pc>0571-a<k1>pAvIrava<k2>pAvIrava
{#pAvIrava#}¦ {%pāvīrava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pavīru%}),
Ved. proceeding from or belonging to the thunder-
bolt; (Sāy.) {%= pāvayitṛ, śodhayitṛ,%} purifying;
({%ī%}), f. ‘daughter of lightning,’ the noise of thunder.
<LEND>

<L>29118<pc>0571-a<k1>pASa<k2>pASa
{#pASa#}¦ {%pāśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%paś%}), a snare,
trap, noose, tie, fastening, cord, chain, fetter ({%kavaca-%}
{%p˚, jyā-p˚%}); a net or snare for catching birds and
beasts; a string or cord for fastening tame animals
[cf. {%paśū-p˚%}]; a noose or lasso employed as a
weapon [cf. {%dharma-p˚%}]; a die, dice ({%= pāśaka,%}
Raghu-v. VI. 18); selvage, edge, border (of anything
woven); (in astrology) epithet of a particular con-
stellation; (at the end of a comp.) expressive of
contempt or depreciation (e. g. {%chattra-pāśa, as,%}
m. a bad or shabby umbrella; cf. {%bhiṣak-p˚, rak-%}
{%ṣas-p˚, vaiyākaraṇa-p˚%}); abundance, quantity
(after a word signifying ‘hair;’ cf. {%keśa-p˚%}); expres-
sive of admiration [cf. {%karṇa-p˚%}]. {%—Pāśa-krīḍā,%}
f. play with dice, gambling. {%—Pāśa-dyumna, as,%}
m., Ved., N. of a man. {%—Pāśa-dhara, as,%} m.
‘holding a noose,’ an epithet of Varuṇa. {%—Pāśa-%}
{%pāṇi, is, is, i,%} noose in hand; ({%is%}), m. an epithet
of Varuṇa (regent of the waters represented as holding
in one hand a cord shaped like a sling or noose).
{%—Pāśa-baddha, as, ā, am,%} noosed, snared, en-
trapped, caught in a net, bound. {%—Pāśa-bandha, as,%}
m. a noose, snare, halter, net. {%—Pāśa-bandhaka,%}
{%as,%} m. one who snares birds, a bird-catcher. {%—Pāśa-%}
{%bandhana, am,%} n. a snare, fetter; ({%as, ā, am%}),
hanging in a snare. {%—Pāśa-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} noose-
bearing, bearing a noose; ({%t%}), m. any one armed with
a noose; an epithet of Varuṇa. {%—Pāśa-rajju, us,%} f.
a fetter, rope. {%—Pāśa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having or
possessing a noose. {%—Pāśa-hasta, as, ā, am,%}
‘snare in hand,’ holding a snare in the hand; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Yama. {%—Pāśānta (˚śa-an˚), as,%}
m. the back of a garment, (opposed to {%daśā.%})
{%—Pāśī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} tied, fettered; snared.
<LEND>

<L>29119<pc>0571-a<k1>pASaka<k2>pASaka
{%Pāśaka, as,%}¦ m. (at the end of a comp.) {%= pāśa,%}
a snare, trap, &c. [cf. {%kaṇṭha-p˚, daṇḍa-p˚%}];
a die (particularly the long sort used in playing
Chaupai). {%—Pāśaka-kevalī,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Pā-%}
{%śaka-pīṭha, am,%} n. a gaming-table.
<LEND>

<L>29120<pc>0571-a<k1>pASana<k2>pASana
{%Pāśana, am,%}¦ n. a noose, lasso, sling; a cord, lash.
<LEND>

<L>29121<pc>0571-a<k1>pASaya<k2>pASaya
{%Pāśaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pāśayati, -yitum,%} to bind;
[cf. rt. 3. {%paś,%} to which {%pāśayati%} is referred by
native grammarians.]
<LEND>

<L>29122<pc>0571-a<k1>pASika<k2>pASika
{%Pāśika, as,%}¦ m. one who snares animals, a bird-
catcher (Ved.); N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29123<pc>0571-a<k1>pASita<k2>pASita
{%Pāśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ tied, fettered, bound, snared.
<LEND>
[Page0571-b+ 77]

<L>29124<pc>0571-b<k1>pASin<k2>pASin
{%Pāśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a net or noose, armed
with a net or noose, laying snares; a deer-catcher,
fowler, trapper; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Varuṇa; of
Yama; N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Pāśi-vāṭa,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>29125<pc>0571-b<k1>pASyA<k2>pASyA
{%Pāśyā,%}¦ f. a number or multitude of nooses, a
collection of ropes; a net.
<LEND>

<L>29126<pc>0571-b<k1>pASava<k2>pASava
{#pASava#}¦ {%pāśava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%paśu%}), derived
from or belonging to cattle, relating or belonging to
animals (e. g. {%pāśavam māṃsam,%} animal food);
({%am%}), n. a flock, herd. {%—Pāśava-pālana, am,%} n.
‘nourishing flocks,’ pasturage or meadow grass.
<LEND>

<L>29127<pc>0571-b<k1>pASuka<k2>pASuka
{%Pāśuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. relating or belonging to
cattle, relating or belonging to the sacrificial animal.
<LEND>

<L>29128<pc>0571-b<k1>pASupata<k2>pASupata
{%Pāśupata, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming from or belonging
to Śiva Paśu-pati, relating or sacred to Śiva Paśu-
pati; ({%as%}), m. a follower and worshipper of Śiva in
one of his forms as the supreme deity of the Hindū
triad; the tree Æschynomene Grandiflora; a species
of plant ({%= vaka%}); N. of a place sacred to Śiva
Paśu-pati. {%—Pāśupata-yoga-prakaraṇa, am,%} n.,
N. of the eighth chapter of the first part of the
Liṅga-Purāṇa. {%—Pāśupata-vrata-vivaraṇa, am,%}
n., N. of the eighteenth chapter of the second part
of the Liṅga-Purāṇa. {%—Pāśupatāstra (˚ta-as˚),%}
{%am,%} n. Śiva's trident.
<LEND>

<L>29129<pc>0571-b<k1>pASupAlya<k2>pASupAlya
{%Pāśupālya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%paśu-pāla%}), the occu-
pation of a grazier or keeper of cattle, the breeding
and rearing of cattle.
<LEND>

<L>29130<pc>0571-b<k1>pASubanDaka<k2>pASubanDaka
{%Pāśubandhaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. {%paśu-bandha%}),
Ved. belonging to the slaughter of a sacrificial
animal.
<LEND>

<L>29131<pc>0571-b<k1>pASI<k2>pASI
{#pASI#}¦ {%pāśī,%} f. a stone (perhaps incorrectly
for {%pāṣī%}).
<LEND>

<L>29132<pc>0571-b<k1>pAScAttya<k2>pAScAttya
{#pAScAttya#}¦ {%pāścāttya%} and {%pāścātya, as, ā, am,%}
(fr. {%paścāt%}), hinder, behind; western; subsequent;
posterior, last; ({%am%}), n. the hinder part. {%—Pāś-%}
{%cāttya-nirṇayāmṛta (˚ya-am˚), am,%} n., N. of a
book on ritual, mentioned in the Saṃskāra-tattva
by Raghu-nandana. {%—Pāścāttyākara-sambhava%}
{%(˚ya-āk˚), am,%} n., N. of a species of salt coming
from the West ({%= romaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>29133<pc>0571-b<k1>pAzaka<k2>pAzaka
{#pAzaka#}¦ {%pāṣaka, as,%} m. an ornament for
the feet.
<LEND>

<L>29134<pc>0571-b<k1>pAzaRqa<k2>pAzaRqa
{#pAzaRqa#}¦ {%pāṣaṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} (sometimes
incorrectly spelt {%pākhaṇḍa%}), heretical, impious;
({%as%}), m. a heretic, a hypocrite, impostor, any one
who not conforming to the orthodox tenets of Hindū
faith assumes the external characteristics of tribe or
sect, a Jaina, Buddhist; ({%as, am%}), m. n. false
doctrine, heresy. {%—Pāṣaṇḍa-tā,%} f. heresy, hetero-
doxy, hypocrisy. {%—Pāṣaṇḍa-patha, as,%} m. the way
of heretics, false doctrine.
<LEND>

<L>29135<pc>0571-b<k1>pAzaRqaka<k2>pAzaRqaka
{%Pāṣaṇḍaka%}¦ or {%pāṣaṇḍika, as,%} m. a heretic.
<LEND>

<L>29136<pc>0571-b<k1>pAzaRqin<k2>pAzaRqin
{%Pāṣaṇḍin, ī,%}¦ m. a heretic, hypocrite; (also read
{%pāṣāṇḍin.%})
<LEND>

<L>29137<pc>0571-b<k1>pAzARqa<k2>pAzARqa
{%Pāṣāṇḍa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a heretic.
<LEND>

<L>29138<pc>0571-b<k1>pAzARa<k2>pAzARa
{#pAzARa#}¦ {%pāṣāṇa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%paṣ%}), a stone; ({%ī%}), f. a small stone used as a weight;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">βάσανος;</lang> Heb. <nsi>bāshān,</nsi> ‘basalt-land.’]
{%—Pāṣāṇa-gardabha, as,%} m. a hard swelling on
the maxillary joint. {%—Pāṣāṇa-caturdaśī,%} f. the
fourteenth day in the light half of the month Mārga-
śīrṣa (on which a festival of Gaurī is celebrated,
when cakes made of rice and shaped like large
pebbles are eaten). {%—Pāṣāṇa-caya-nibaddha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} surrounded with a coping of stone (as a
well). {%—Pāṣāṇa-dāraka%} or {%pāṣāṇa-dāraṇa, as,%}
m. a sort of hatchet or instrument for cutting stones,
a stone-cutter's chisel. {%—Pāṣāṇa-bheda%} or {%pāṣā-%}
{%ṇa-bhedana, as,%} or {%pāṣāṇa-bhedin, ī,%} m. the plant
Plectranthus Scutellarioides, used as a remedy for
stone in the bladder. {%—Pāṣāṇa-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of or made of stone. {%—Pāṣāṇa-sandhi,%}
{%is,%} m. a cave or chasm in a rock. {%—Pāṣāṇa-setu-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. a barrier or dam of stone. {%—Pā-%}
{%ṣāṇa-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} stone-hearted, cruel.
<LEND>
[Page0571-c+ 72]

<L>29139<pc>0571-c<k1>pAzI<k2>pAzI
{%Pāṣī,%}¦ f., Ved. (Sāy.) {%= śilā,%} a stone; {%= śakti,%} a
spear; [cf. {%pāśī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29140<pc>0571-c<k1>pAzya<k2>pAzya
{%Pāṣya, āṇi,%}¦ n. pl., Ved. stones, a rampart of
stones; ({%e%}), n. du. the two stones for pressing the
Soma.
<LEND>

<L>29141<pc>0571-c<k1>pAzWOha<k2>pAzWOha
{#pAzWOha#}¦ {%pāṣṭhauha, am,%} n. (fr. {%paṣṭha-%}
{%vāh%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>29142<pc>0571-c<k1>pAstya<k2>pAstya
{#pAstya#}¦ {%pāstya, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%pastya%}), be-
longing to a house and farm; (Sāy.) {%= gṛhe vasat,%}
dwelling in the house, the master of the house.
<LEND>

<L>29143<pc>0571-c<k1>pAhaRapura<k2>pAhaRapura
{#pAhaRapura#}¦ {%pāhaṇa-pura,%} N. of a place men-
tioned in the Śrīṣavāyaṇa portion of the Romaka-
Siddhānta.
<LEND>

<L>29144<pc>0571-c<k1>pAhAta<k2>pAhAta
{#pAhAta#}¦ {%pāhāta, as,%} m. the Indian mulberry
tree, Morus Indica ({%= brahma-dāru%}).
<LEND>

<L>29145<pc>0571-c<k1>pi<k2>pi<h>1
{#pi#} 1¦. {%pi,%} cl. 6. P. {%piyati, petum,%} to go,
move.
<LEND>

<L>29146<pc>0571-c<k1>pi<k2>pi<h>2
{#pi#} 2¦. {%pi.%} See under {%api.%}
<LEND>

<L>29147<pc>0571-c<k1>piMs<k2>piMs
{#piMs#}¦ {%piṃs,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%piṃsati, piṃ-%}
{%situm, piṃsayati, -yitum,%} to speak; to
shine.
<LEND>

<L>29148<pc>0571-c<k1>pika<k2>pika
{#pika#}¦ {%pika, as, ī,%} m. f. (probably for {%spika,%}
cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σπίζ-ω</lang>), the Indian cuckoo, Cuculus Indicus;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σίττη</lang> for <lang n="greek">σπίττη</lang> or <lang n="greek">ψίττη, σίττακος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ψίττακος, ψιττάκη, βίττακος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pîcus, pîca;</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>speh, speht.</nsi>] {%—Pika-bandhu, us,%} m. ‘friend
of the cuckoo,’ the mango tree. {%—Pika-bāndhava,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘friend of the cuckoo,’ the spring. {%—Pika-%}
{%rāga%} or {%pika-vallabha, as,%} m. ‘cuckoo's favourite,’
the mango tree. {%—Pika-vara, as,%} m. an excellent
cuckoo. {%—Pikākṣa (˚ka-akṣa), as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), ‘cuckoo's eye,’ a vegetable and perfume (com-
monly called {%rocanī%}). {%—Pikāṅga (˚ka-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a
small bird, commonly called Cātakīya. {%—Pikānanda%}
{%(˚ka-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘cuckoo's joy,’ the spring. {%—Pike-%}
{%kṣaṇā (˚ka-īk˚),%} f. ‘having eyes like the cuckoo's,’
the plant Asteracantha Longifolia or Capparis Spinosa
({%= kokilākṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>29149<pc>0571-c<k1>pikka<k2>pikka
{#pikka#}¦ {%pikka, as,%} m. an elephant twenty
years old ({%= vikka%}); a young elephant in general.
<LEND>

<L>29150<pc>0571-c<k1>pikkA<k2>pikkA
{#pikkA#}¦ {%pikkā,%} f., Ved. a collection or string
of thirteen pearls weighing a Dharaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>29151<pc>0571-c<k1>piNga<k2>piNga
{#piNga#}¦ {%piṅga, piṅgara, piṅgala.%} See under
rt. {%piñj,%} p. 572.
<LEND>

<L>29152<pc>0571-c<k1>picaRqa<k2>picaRqa
{#picaRqa#}¦ {%picaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. the belly;
a particular part or limb of an animal.
<LEND>

<L>29153<pc>0571-c<k1>picaRqaka<k2>picaRqaka
{%Picaṇḍaka = picaṇḍe kuśalaḥ,%}¦ see Gaṇa to Pāṇ.
V. 2, 64; ({%ikā%}), f. the calf of the leg; the instep.
<LEND>

<L>29154<pc>0571-c<k1>picaRqika<k2>picaRqika
{%Picaṇḍika, as, ā, am,%}¦ (probably) big-bellied.
<LEND>

<L>29155<pc>0571-c<k1>picaRqin<k2>picaRqin
{%Picaṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ or {%picaṇḍila, as, ā, am,%}
big-bellied, corpulent.
<LEND>

<L>29156<pc>0571-c<k1>piciRqa<k2>piciRqa
{%Piciṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. the belly or abdomen; a parti-
cular part of an animal. {%—Piciṇḍa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
big-bellied, corpulent.
<LEND>

<L>29157<pc>0571-c<k1>piciRqikA<k2>piciRqikA
{%Piciṇḍikā,%}¦ f. the calf of the leg; the instep.
<LEND>

<L>29158<pc>0571-c<k1>piciRqila<k2>piciRqila
{%Piciṇḍila, as, ā, am,%}¦ big-bellied, corpulent.
<LEND>

<L>29159<pc>0571-c<k1>picu<k2>picu
{#picu#}¦ {%picu, us,%} m. cotton; a sort of grain;
the plant Vangueria Spinosa; a Karṣa or weight of
two Tolas; a kind of leprosy; N. of an Asura;
Bhairava or one of the eight faces of Bhairava.
{%—Picu-tūla, am,%} n. cotton. {%—Picu-manda%} or
{%picu-marda, as,%} m. the Nimb tree, Azadirachta
Indica.
<LEND>

<L>29160<pc>0571-c<k1>picavya<k2>picavya
{%Picavya, as,%}¦ m. the cotton plant.
<LEND>

<L>29161<pc>0571-c<k1>picuka<k2>picuka
{%Picuka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Vangueria Spinosa; a
species of tree.
<LEND>

<L>29162<pc>0571-c<k1>picula<k2>picula
{%Picula, as,%}¦ m. cotton; the tamarisk, Tamarix
Indica; another plant, Barringtonia Acutangula; a
kind of cormorant or sea crow.
<LEND>

<L>29163<pc>0571-c<k1>picc<k2>picc
{#picc#}¦ {%picc,%} a various reading for rt. {%pich,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29164<pc>0571-c<k1>piccawa<k2>piccawa
{#piccawa#}¦ {%piccaṭa, as, ā, am,%} pressed flat,
[Page0572-a+ 76]
a substance pressed flat, cake [cf. {%tila-p˚%}]; ({%as%}), m.
inflammation of the eyes, ophthalmia; tin, lead.
<LEND>

<L>29165<pc>0572-a<k1>piccita<k2>piccita
{%Piccita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressed flat, squeezed; [cf.
{%cipiṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29166<pc>0572-a<k1>piccA<k2>piccA
{#piccA#}¦ {%piccā,%} f. a collection or string of
sixteen pearls weighing a Dharaṇa; [cf. {%pikkā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29167<pc>0572-a<k1>picciwa<k2>picciwa
{#picciwa#}¦ {%picciṭa%} or {%picciṭaka, as,%} m. a species
of venomous insect.
<LEND>

<L>29168<pc>0572-a<k1>picCorA<k2>picCorA
{#picCorA#}¦ {%picchorā,%} f., Ved. a pipe, flute.
<LEND>

<L>29169<pc>0572-a<k1>piC<k2>piC
{#piC#}¦ {%pich,%} cl. 10. P. {%picchayati, -yitum,%}
to split, cut, divide; cl. 6. P. {%picchati,%}
{%picchitum,%} to inflict pain; to obstruct, hinder.
<LEND>

<L>29170<pc>0572-a<k1>picCa<k2>picCa
{%Piccha, am,%}¦ n. a feather of a tail (especially of a
peacock); the tail of a peacock; the feathers of an
arrow; a wing; a crest; ({%as%}), m. a tail in general;
({%ā%}), f. the scum of boiled rice and of other grain;
the gum of the silk-cotton tree; the venomous
saliva of a snake; a multitude, heap; the calf of the
leg; a sheath, a coat or cover; the areca-nut, betel-
nut; a line, row, range; a diseased affection of a
horse's feet; a plantain, Musa Sapientum; the Śiśu
tree, Dalbergia Sissoo; armour, a sort of cuirass or
jacket; {%= picchila.%} {%—Piccha-bāṇa%} or {%piccha-vāṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘whose feathers are like arrows,’ a hawk.
{%—Piccha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a tail, tailed.
<LEND>

<L>29171<pc>0572-a<k1>picCaka<k2>picCaka
{%Picchaka, am,%}¦ n. a feather of a tail (at the
end of a comp.; cf. {%citra-p˚%}); ({%ikā%}), f. the feathers
of a peacock's tail tied in a bunch (used by conjurors).
<LEND>

<L>29172<pc>0572-a<k1>picCala<k2>picCala
{%Picchala, as, ā, am,%}¦ slimy, slippery, smeary;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga of the race of Vāsuki; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of various plants, Dalbergia Sissoo, Bombax
Heptaphyllum, Basella Lucida or Rubra; N. of a
river; (perhaps an incorrect form for {%picchila,%} q. v.)
{%—Picchala-dalā,%} f. the jujube, Zizyphus Jujuba.
<LEND>

<L>29173<pc>0572-a<k1>picCitikA<k2>picCitikA
{%Picchitikā,%}¦ f. {%= picchilā,%} the Śiśu tree, Dalbergia
Sissoo.
<LEND>

<L>29174<pc>0572-a<k1>picCila<k2>picCila
{%Picchila, as, ā, am,%}¦ slimy, lubricous, slippery,
smeary; having a tail; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. sauce
mixed with rice-gruel; sauce, gravy or condiments
with water or ghee; broth, soup; moist and split
pulse; ({%as%}), m. the plant Cordia Latifolia and Myxa;
the tamarisk, Tamarix Indica; ({%ā%}), f., N. of various
plants, Dalbergia Sissoo; Bombax Heptaphyllum,
the silk-cotton tree; a pot-herb, Basella Lucida or
Rubra; linseed, Linum Usitatissimum; Asteracantha
Longifolia; an esculent root, Arum Indicum; N. of
a river. {%—Picchila-cchadā,%} f. Basella Cordifolia.
{%—Picchila-tvac, k,%} m. an orange-tree; orange-peel;
a species of fruit tree ({%= dhanvana%}). {%—Picchila-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m. the gum of Bombax Heptaphyllum.
<LEND>

<L>29175<pc>0572-a<k1>picCilaka<k2>picCilaka
{%Picchilaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of fruit tree (=
{%dhanvana%}).
<LEND>

<L>29176<pc>0572-a<k1>piYCa<k2>piYCa
{%Piñcha, am,%}¦ n. a wing ({%= piccha%}).
<LEND>

<L>29177<pc>0572-a<k1>pijavana<k2>pijavana
{#pijavana#}¦ {%pijavana, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29178<pc>0572-a<k1>pijUla<k2>pijUla
{#pijUla#}¦ {%pijūla, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29179<pc>0572-a<k1>piYcadeva<k2>piYcadeva
{#piYcadeva#}¦ {%piñca-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29180<pc>0572-a<k1>piYj<k2>piYj
{#piYj#}¦ {%piñj,%} cl. 2. A. {%piṅkte, pipiñje,%}
{%piñjitā, piṅktum,%} to tinge, dye, colour
[cf. rt. 1. {%piś%}]; to sound; to touch; to join [cf. rt.
1. {%pṛc%}]; to adore; cl. 10. P. {%piñjayati, -yitum,%}
to kill, injure; to be strong; to give; to take; to
dwell; to shine; to speak; to emit a sound; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>ping-ere.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>29181<pc>0572-a<k1>piNga<k2>piNga
{%Piṅga, as, ā, am,%}¦ reddish-brown, tawny, bright
red, red, yellow; ({%as%}), m. tawny colour; (probably)
N. of a herb (Ved.); a buffalo; a rat, mouse; N.
of a man (Ved., cf. {%paiṅgi, paiṅgin%}); N. of one
of the attendants of the Sun; ({%ā%}), f. a bow-string
(Sāy. {%= piṅga-varṇā jyā%}); a kind of yellow pig-
ment [cf. {%go-rocanā%}]; the stalk of Ferula Asa Fœ-
tida; bamboo manna; turmeric, Indian saffron; an
epithet of Durgā (?); a tubular vessel of the human
body which according to the Yoga system is the
channel of respiration and circulation for one side;
({%ī%}), f. a species of Mimosa, Mimosa Suma; ({%am%}),
n. a young animal. {%—Piṅga-kapiśā,%} f. ‘tawny-
[Page0572-b+ 81]
brown,’ a species of cockroach. {%—Piṅga-cakṣus,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘tawny-eyed,’ a crab. {%—Piṅga-jaṭa, as,%} m.
‘having tawny braided hair,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Piṅga-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Piṅga-%}
{%locana, as, ā, am,%} ‘tawny-eyed,’ having brown eyes.
{%—Piṅga-sāra, as,%} m. yellow orpiment. {%—Piṅga-%}
{%sphaṭika, as,%} m. ‘yellow-crystal,’ a kind of gem (=
{%go-meda%}). {%—Piṅgākṣa (˚ga-ak˚), as, ī, am,%}
‘tawny-eyed,’ having reddish-brown eyes, red-eyed;
({%as%}), m. an ape; N. of Śiva; of a Rakṣas; of a wild
man; of a bird; of one of the four sons of Droṇa;
({%ī%}), f., N. of a divinity; of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda. {%—Piṅgāsya (˚ga-ās˚), as,%}
m. ‘tawny-faced,’ a species of fish, Pimelodius Pan-
gasius. {%—Piṅgekṣaṇa (˚ga-īk˚), as, ī, am,%} ‘tawny-
eyed,’ having reddish-brown eyes; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva. {%—Piṅgeśa (˚ga-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord
of the yellow hue,’ an epithet of fire.
<LEND>

<L>29182<pc>0572-b<k1>piNgara<k2>piNgara
{%Piṅgara, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29183<pc>0572-b<k1>piNgala<k2>piNgala
{%Piṅgala, as, ā, am,%}¦ reddish-brown, tawny, brown,
yellowish; ({%as%}), m. tawny colour, a dull brown or
yellow hue; fire; a monkey; an ichneumon; a
small kind of owl; a species of snake; a particular
vegetable poison; (with Jainas) N. of a treasure;
N. of one of Kuvera's divine treasures; of an
attendant of the Sun; the sun (?); an epithet of
Śiva or of a kindred being; N. of a Rudra; of a
Yakṣa; of an attendant of Śiva; of a Dānava; of
a fabulous being in the form of a Nāga (or serpent
of the lower regions, the reputed author of the Chaṇḍas
or treatise on prosody, regarded as one of the Vedāṅgas,
and describing Prākṛt as well as Sanskrit metres;
he is identified by some with Patañjali, the author
of the celebrated commentary on Pāṇini called the
Mahā-bhāṣya; by the Hindūs he is considered as a
Muni or inspired and divine personage); N. of
various ancient sages; N. of the fifty-first (or twenty-
fifth) year in a sixty years' cycle of Jupiter; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a species of bird, a kind
of owl; the Śiśu tree, Dalbergia Sissoo; a kind of
metal; a particular vessel of the body (the right of
three canals running from the os coccygis to the
head, which according to the anatomy of the Yoga
school of philosophy are the chief passages of breath
and air); the female elephant of the South quarter;
N. of a courtezan who became remarkable for her
piety; of an astrological house or period; heart-pea;
({%am%}), n. a particular metal ({%= rāja-rīti%}), brass; yellow
orpiment. {%—Piṅgala-chando-grantha-ṭīkā,%} f., N.
of a commentary by Citra-sena on Piṅgala's Chandaḥ-
śāstra. {%—Piṅgala-nāga, as,%} m. the serpent-demon
Piṅgala. {%—Piṅgala-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary on Piṅgala's Chandaḥ-śāstra. {%—Piṅgala-sāra-%}
{%vikāśinī,%} f. ‘explaining the substance of Piṅgala,’
N. of a commentary by Ravi-kara on Piṅgala's
Chandaḥ-śāstra. {%—Piṅgalākṣa (˚la-ak˚), as,%} m.
‘tawny-eyed,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Piṅgalā-tantra%}
and {%piṅgalāmṛta (˚la-am˚), am,%} n., N. of two
Tantras. {%—Piṅgaleśvara (˚la-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a
Liṅga; ({%ī%}), f. a form of Dākṣāyaṇī. {%—Piṅgaleś-%}
{%vara-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place.
<LEND>

<L>29184<pc>0572-b<k1>piNgalaka<k2>piNgalaka
{%Piṅgalaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (Ved.) reddish-brown,
tawny; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Yakṣa; N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind
of bee; a variety of the owl; a sort of crane; N. of
a woman.
<LEND>

<L>29185<pc>0572-b<k1>piNgalita<k2>piNgalita
{%Piṅgalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made reddish-brown,
become tawny.
<LEND>

<L>29186<pc>0572-b<k1>piNgASa<k2>piNgASa
{%Piṅgāśa, as,%}¦ m. the chief of a community of
wild tribes; the head man or proprietor of a village;
a kind of fish, Pimelodius Pangasius ({%= piṅgāsya%});
({%ī%}), f. the indigo plant; ({%am%}), n. virgin gold.
<LEND>

<L>29187<pc>0572-b<k1>piYja<k2>piYja
{%Piñja, as, ā, am,%}¦ confused, confounded, disturbed
in mind; ({%as%}), m. the moon; a species of camphor;
killing, slaughter; ({%ā%}), f. hurting, injuring, injury;
turmeric; cotton; a species of tree resembling the
vine-palm; a switch; ({%am%}), n. strength, power.
<LEND>

<L>29188<pc>0572-b<k1>piYjawa<k2>piYjawa
{%Piñjaṭa, as,%}¦ m. the concrete rheum of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>29189<pc>0572-b<k1>piYjana<k2>piYjana
{%Piñjana, am,%}¦ n. a bow or bow-shaped instrument
used for cleaning cotton.
<LEND>

<L>29190<pc>0572-b<k1>piYjara<k2>piYjara
{%Piñjara, as, ā, am,%}¦ reddish-yellow, yellow or
[Page0572-c+ 74]
tawny, of the colour of gold; ({%as%}), m. tawny-brown
or reddish-yellow colour, a mixture of red and
yellow; a horse (probably a bay or chesnut); N.
of a mountain; ({%am%}), n. gold; yellow orpiment;
the flower of Mesua Roxburghii; a cage; the ribs
or the cavity formed by them, the thorax; a
skeleton; [cf. {%pañjara.%}] {%—Piñjara-tā,%} f. yellowish-
red (the colour).
<LEND>

<L>29191<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjaraka<k2>piYjaraka
{%Piñjaraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga; ({%am%}), n.
orpiment.
<LEND>

<L>29192<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjarita<k2>piYjarita
{%Piñjarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ coloured reddish-yellow.
<LEND>

<L>29193<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjala<k2>piYjala
{%Piñjala, as, ā, am,%}¦ extremely perplexed or con-
founded, disturbed, overcome with terror or grief;
panic-struck, being in great disorder; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a river; ({%ī%}), f. two blades of Kuśa grass serving as
an implement to hold certain articles at a sacrifice;
({%am%}), n. the leaf of the Kuśa grass; the plant Cur-
cuma Zerumbet ({%haridrābha%}); yellow orpiment.
<LEND>

<L>29194<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjalaka<k2>piYjalaka
{%Piñjalaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%ut-piñjalaka,%} extremely
confounded or disturbed, being in great disorder.
<LEND>

<L>29195<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjAna<k2>piYjAna
{%Piñjāna, am,%}¦ n. gold.
<LEND>

<L>29196<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjikA<k2>piYjikA
{%Piñjikā,%}¦ f. a roll of cotton from which threads
are spun.
<LEND>

<L>29197<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjUla<k2>piYjUla
{%Piñjūla, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a bundle of stalks, a bundle
of grass, &c.; the wick of a lamp; (sometimes spelt
{%piñjula.%})
<LEND>

<L>29198<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjUlaka<k2>piYjUlaka
{%Piñjūlaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>29199<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjUza<k2>piYjUza
{%Piñjūṣa, as,%}¦ m. the wax of the ear ({%= peñjūṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>29200<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjewa<k2>piYjewa
{%Piñjeṭa, as,%}¦ m. the excretion or concrete rheum
of the eyes; [cf. {%piñjaṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29201<pc>0572-c<k1>piYjolA<k2>piYjolA
{#piYjolA#}¦ {%piñjolā,%} f. the noise or rustling
of leaves.
<LEND>

<L>29202<pc>0572-c<k1>piw<k2>piw
{#piw#}¦ {%piṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%peṭati, peṭitum,%} to
sound; to assemble or heap together.
<LEND>

<L>29203<pc>0572-c<k1>piwa<k2>piwa
{%Piṭa, as,%}¦ m. a basket for holding grain, a sort of
cupboard or granary made of bamboos or canes; a
basket, box; ({%am%}), n. a house, a hovel; a roof.
<LEND>

<L>29204<pc>0572-c<k1>piwaka<k2>piwaka
{%Piṭaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. (usually n.), a basket,
box; a large basket or receptacle of basket-work for
keeping grain &c., a granary; a collection of writings
[cf. {%tri-p˚%}]; a boil, blister, ulcer; a kind of orna-
ment on Indra's banner; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29205<pc>0572-c<k1>piwakyA<k2>piwakyA
{%Piṭakyā,%}¦ f. a multitude of baskets.
<LEND>

<L>29206<pc>0572-c<k1>piwAka<k2>piwAka
{%Piṭāka,%}¦ see Gaṇa to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 49; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a man; N. of a sage.
<LEND>

<L>29207<pc>0572-c<k1>piwaNkAkI<k2>piwaNkAkI
{#piwaNkAkI#}¦ {%piṭaṅkākī%} or {%piṭaṅkokī,%} f. the
plant Cucumis Colocynthis.
<LEND>

<L>29208<pc>0572-c<k1>piwaNkASa<k2>piwaNkASa
{#piwaNkASa#}¦ {%piṭaṅkāśa, as,%} m. a kind of fish,
a species of pike, Esax Scolopax, Silurus Pabda.
<LEND>

<L>29209<pc>0572-c<k1>piwwaka<k2>piwwaka
{#piwwaka#}¦ {%piṭṭaka, am,%} n. the tartar or excre-
tion of the teeth; [cf. {%kiṭṭa, kiṭṭaka, pippikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29210<pc>0572-c<k1>piwwaya<k2>piwwaya
{#piwwaya#}¦ {%piṭṭaya%} (fr. {%piṭṭa = piṣṭa?%}), Nom.
P. {%piṭṭayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to stamp or press into a
solid mass.
<LEND>

<L>29211<pc>0572-c<k1>piwwita<k2>piwwita
{%Piṭṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stamped into a solid mass,
pressed flat.
<LEND>

<L>29212<pc>0572-c<k1>piW<k2>piW
{#piW#}¦ {%piṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%peṭhati, peṭhitum,%} to
injure, hurt, kill; to feel pain or affliction.
<LEND>

<L>29213<pc>0572-c<k1>piWa<k2>piWa
{%Piṭha, as,%}¦ m. pain, distress.
<LEND>

<L>29214<pc>0572-c<k1>piWara<k2>piWara
{%Piṭhara, as, ī, am,%}¦ m. f. n. a pot, pan; ({%as%}),
m. an addition to a building shaped like a hollow
vessel, a hut made of bamboos and mats, or accord-
ing to some a kind of store-room or scullery; N.
of a particular Agni; N. of a Dānava; ({%am%}), n. a
churning-stick; the root of Cyperus Rotundus.
<LEND>

<L>29215<pc>0572-c<k1>piWaraka<k2>piWaraka
{%Piṭharaka, as,%}¦ m. (?), a pot, pan; N. of a Nāga.
{%—Piṭharaka-kapāla, as, am,%} m. n. a fragment of
a pot, potsherd.
<LEND>

<L>29216<pc>0572-c<k1>piWInas<k2>piWInas
{#piWInas#}¦ {%piṭhīnas, ās,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29217<pc>0572-c<k1>piqaka<k2>piqaka
{#piqaka#}¦ {%piḍaka, as,%} m. or {%piḍakā,%} f. a small
boil, pimple, papula, pustule. {%—Piḍakā-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having boils, pimples, &c.
<LEND>

<L>29218<pc>0572-c<k1>piqakin<k2>piqakin
{%Piḍakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having boils, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0573-a+ 81]

<L>29219<pc>0573-a<k1>piRq<k2>piRq
{#piRq#}¦ {%piṇḍ%} (probably akin to rt. {%piṣ;%}
considered by some as a Nom. fr. {%piṇḍa%}
below), cl. 1. A., 10. P. {%piṇḍate, piṇḍitum, piṇ-%}
{%ḍayati, -yitum,%} to roll into a lump or ball, to put
together, join, unite; to accumulate; to assemble.
<LEND>

<L>29220<pc>0573-a<k1>piRqa<k2>piRqa
{%Piṇḍa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (in most senses usually m.),
a round mass, ball, globe, lump, knob, clod (e. g.
{%ayaḥ-piṇḍa,%} a ball or lump of iron; {%agni-piṇḍau,%}
the knobs at the end of a pair of tongs; cf. {%netra-p˚,%}
{%mṛt-p˚%}); a roundish lump of food, a bite, morsel,
mouthful; a cake or ball of meal offered to the
Manes, a ball or lump of meat or rice mixed up with
milk, curds, flowers, &c., and offered at the several
Śrāddhas to the Manes by the nearest surviving
relations ({%= ni-vāpa%}); food; sustenance, means of
living, livelihood, subsistence [cf. {%para-piṇḍāda%}];
alms; flesh, meat; the embryo or fetus in an early
stage of gestation; the body; the projection of an
elephant's frontal sinus; a round button; anything
roundish, thick, gross, or solid; thickness (one of
the three dimensions in geometry); a heap, cluster,
quantity, collection; an object; a particular part of
a house; a sort of portico or shed in front of the
door; myrrh, incense, frankincense; the side imme-
diately below the armpit (?); Vangueria Spinosa; the
flower of the China rose; (in arithmetic) sum, total
amount; (in astronomy) a sine expressed in numbers
[cf. {%jyā-p˚%}]; the twenty-fourth part of the quadrant
of a circle, or 3° 45; N. of a man; ({%au%}), m. du. the
fleshy parts of the shoulder situated above the collar-
bone; ({%am%}), n. power, might; an army; iron;
fresh butter; ({%ī%}), f. a round mass, &c. ({%= piṇḍa,%} m.);
a long gourd, Cucurbita Lagenaria ({%= a-lābu%}); a
species of date tree; the flowering shrub Tabernæ-
montana Coronaria ({%= tagara%}); the plant Jonesia
Aśoka; a species of palm, Phœnix Dactylifera; the
nave of a wheel; performance of certain gesticulations
during the silent repetition of prayers while medi-
tating on real or divine knowledge; a house; N. of
a woman. {%—Piṇḍa-kanda, as,%} m. a species of
bulbous plant ({%= piṇḍālu%}). {%—Piṇḍa-kharjūra, as,%}
m. or {%piṇḍa-kharjūrikā%} or {%piṇḍa-kharjūrī,%} f. a
species of date tree. {%—Piṇḍa-gosa, as,%} m. gum
myrrh. {%—Piṇḍa-tarkuka, ās,%} m. pl., Ved. the
ancestors preceding the great-grandfather (who eat
the remnants of the oblations made to the Manes).
{%—Piṇḍa-tas,%} ind. from a ball or lump. {%—Piṇḍa-%}
{%taila, am,%} n. or {%piṇḍa-tailaka, as,%} m. incense,
olibanum. {%—Piṇḍa-tva, am,%} n. the being a lump or
ball; {%piṇḍatvaṃ gam,%} to attain the condition of a
lump. {%—Piṇḍa-da, as, ā, am,%} giving or qualified to
give the funeral cake to deceased ancestors; supplying
with bread or with the means of subsistence; ({%as%}),
m. the nearest male relation who offers the funeral
cake; a patron, master. {%—Piṇḍa-dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}
one who gives or is qualified to give the funeral
cake to deceased ancestors. {%—Piṇḍa-dāna, am,%} n.
offering a cake of meal (especially in the oblation to
the Manes); presentation of the obsequial cake; the
funeral oblation made to deceased ancestors on the
evening of new moon. {%—Piṇḍa-nirvapaṇa, am,%}
n. presenting obsequial cakes to the Manes, the
sacrifice to the Manes. {%—Piṇḍa-pada, am,%} n. a
kind of arithmetical calculation. {%—Piṇḍa-pāta, as,%}
m. giving alms. {%—Piṇḍapātika, as,%} m. one who
lives on alms. {%—Piṇḍa-pātra, am,%} n. the vessel in
which the obsequial cakes are offered to the Manes;
alms (lit. an alms-dish). {%—Piṇḍa-pāda%} or {%piṇḍa-%}
{%pādya, as,%} m. ‘thick-footed,’ an elephant. {%—Piṇḍa-%}
{%pitṛ-yajña, am,%} n., Ved. the oblation of obsequial
cakes to deceased ancestors on the evening of new
moon. {%—Piṇḍa-puṣpa, as,%} m. the tree Jonesia
Aśoka; the China rose; the pomegranate tree;
({%am%}), n. the blossom of the Aśoka tree; the flower
of the China rose; a lotus; the flower of the plant
Tabernæmontana Coronaria. {%—Piṇḍapuṣpaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of vegetable, Chenopodium Album.
{%—Piṇḍa-phala, as, ā, am,%} bearing (long) round
fruits; ({%ā%}), f. a bitter gourd. {%—Piṇḍa-bīja%} or {%piṇḍa-%}
{%vīja, as,%} m. a flowering shrub, Nerium (or Oleander)
Odorum. {%—Piṇḍabījaka, as,%} m. Pterospermum
[Page0573-b+ 81]
Acerifolium ({%= karṇikāra%}). {%—Piṇḍa-bhāj, k, k, k,%}
partaking of a funeral oblation, entitled to a share
in the funeral cake, eating or receiving the cakes
offered at a funeral ceremony; ({%jas%}), m. pl. de-
ceased ancestors, the Manes. {%—Piṇḍa-bhṛti, is,%}
f. means of subsistence, livelihood. {%—Piṇḍa-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} consisting of a lump (of clay). {%—Piṇḍa-%}
{%mātropajīvin (˚ra-up˚), ī, inī, i,%} subsisting on a
mere morsel. {%—Piṇḍa-mustā,%} f. a species of grass,
Cyperus Pertenuis. {%—Piṇḍa-mūla%} or {%piṇḍa-mū-%}
{%laka, am,%} n. a carrot, Daucus Carota {%(= garjara).%}
{%—Piṇḍa-yajña, as,%} m. the oblation of obsequial
cakes to deceased ancestors. {%—Piṇḍa-lepa, as,%} m.
the particles or fragments of the obsequial cakes
which cling to the hands, (these are offered to the
three ancestors preceding the great-grandfather.)
{%—Piṇḍa-lopa, as,%} m. an interruption in offering
the funeral cake; a neglect of the solemn obsequies
in honour of deceased ancestors. {%—Piṇḍa-vat,%} ind.
like a lump or ball. {%—Piṇḍa-sambandha, as,%} m.
relationship between a living person and one deceased
sufficiently near to qualify the former to offer the
obsequial cake to the latter; [cf. {%sa-piṇḍa.%}] {%—Piṇḍa-%}
{%sambandhin, ī, inī, i,%} qualified by near relationship
to a living person to receive the obsequial cake from
him at the oblation to the Manes. {%—Piṇḍa-sektṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m., N. of a Nāga. {%—Piṇḍa-stha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. ‘mingled in a lump,’ mixed or intermingled
together. {%—Piṇḍānvāhārya (˚ḍa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
to be eaten after the funeral cake has been offered
(Manu III. 123). {%—Piṇḍānvāhāryaka, am,%} n.
(with {%śrāddha%}) a meal in honour of the Manes
after offering the funeral cakes. {%—Piṇḍābhra (˚ḍa-%}
{%abh˚), am,%} n. hail. {%—Piṇḍāyasa (˚ḍa-ay˚), am,%}
n. steel. {%—Piṇḍālu (˚ḍa-ālu), us,%} m., N. of
two bulbous plants; {%= kanda-guḍūcī;%} an esculent
medicinal root described as sweet, cooling, and
diuretic (= Hindī <nsi>peḍālu</nsi> Bengālī <nsi>cuvaḍiālu;</nsi> in
this sense also {%piṇḍāluka, am,%} n.). {%—Piṇḍāśa%} or
{%piṇḍāśaka (˚ḍa-āś˚),%} or {%piṇḍāśana (˚ḍa-aś˚), as,%}
or {%piṇḍāśin (˚ḍa-āś˚), ī,%} m. ‘eating morsels,’ a beg-
gar. {%—Piṇḍāhvā (˚ḍa-āh˚),%} f. the resin of Gardenia
Gummifera ({%= nāḍī-hiṅgu%}). {%—Piṇḍī-khaṇḍa, as,%}
or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a small wood of Tabernæmontana
Coronaria trees (or of Aśoka trees). {%—Piṇḍī-jaṅgha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man or of his descendants. {%—Piṇḍī-%}
{%tagara, as,%} m. a species of Tabernæmontana Coro-
naria ({%= kapha-vardhana%}). {%—Piṇḍītagaraka, as,%}
m. Tabernæmontana Coronaria. {%—Piṇḍī-taru, us,%}
m. a species of tree ({%= mahā-p˚%}). {%—Piṇḍī-puṣpa,%}
{%am,%} n. Jonesia Aśoka. {%—Piṇḍī-lepa, as,%} m. a kind
of unguent. {%—Piṇḍī-śūra, as,%} m. ‘a cake-hero,’ a
cowardly boaster, cotquean, braggart. {%—Piṇḍodaka-%}
{%kriyā (˚ḍa-ud˚),%} f. an oblation of obsequial cakes
and water. {%—Piṇḍoddharaṇa (˚ḍa-ud˚), am,%} n.
participating in funeral offerings, presenting them to
common ancestors. {%—Piṇḍopaniṣad (˚ḍa-up˚), t,%}
f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>29221<pc>0573-b<k1>piRqaka<k2>piRqaka
{%Piṇḍaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a lump, lump of food; a
round swelling or protuberance [cf. {%mastaka-p˚%}];
the calf of the leg; incense, myrrh; a species of
bulbous plant ({%= piṇḍālu%}); a carrot, Daucus Carota;
(in astronomy) a sine expressed in numbers; ({%as%}),
m. a Piśāca, goblin, demon; ({%ikā%}), f. a globular
swelling or protuberance, a fleshy swelling (in the
shoulders, arms, legs, &c.), a wen (?); the calf of
the leg; the instep; the nave of a wheel; a stool
or seat of various shapes and dimensions; a base
or pedestal for the image of a deity or for a Liṅga
(Ved.); a kind of shrub ({%= śvetāmli%}).
<LEND>

<L>29222<pc>0573-b<k1>piRqana<k2>piRqana
{%Piṇḍana, am,%}¦ n. forming globes, taking a globular
form (as water); ({%as%}), m. a mound or bank.
<LEND>

<L>29223<pc>0573-b<k1>piRqaraka<k2>piRqaraka
{%Piṇḍaraka, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a bridge.
<LEND>

<L>29224<pc>0573-b<k1>piRqala<k2>piRqala
{%Piṇḍala, as,%}¦ m. a bridge, causeway, passage over a
stream or ravine, a mound, ridge, balk raised to form a
path across inundated fields; [cf. {%piṇḍana, piṇḍila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29225<pc>0573-b<k1>piRqasa<k2>piRqasa
{%Piṇḍasa, as,%}¦ m. a beggar, mendicant living upon
alms; [cf. {%piṇḍāśa%} under {%piṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29226<pc>0573-b<k1>piRqAta<k2>piRqAta
{%Piṇḍāta, as,%}¦ m. incense.
<LEND>

<L>29227<pc>0573-b<k1>piRqAra<k2>piRqAra
{%Piṇḍāra, as,%}¦ m. a beggar, religious mendicant;
a buffalo-herdsman, neatherd, cowherd; a species
[Page0573-c+ 76]
of tree, Flacourtia Sapida; Trewia Nudiflora; an
expression of censure; N. of a Nāga; ({%am%}), n.
a kind of vegetable (= Hindī {%piṇḍārā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29228<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqAraka<k2>piRqAraka
{%Piṇḍāraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga; N. of a
Vṛṣṇi; of a son of Vasu-deva and Rohiṇī; of a
river considered holy by the Hindūs; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a place of pilgrimage in Guzerat. {%—Piṇḍāraka-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place.
<LEND>

<L>29229<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqi<k2>piRqi
{%Piṇḍi, is,%}¦ f. the nave of a wheel ({%= piṇḍī,%}
{%piṇḍikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29230<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqika<k2>piRqika
{%Piṇḍika, as, ā, am,%}¦ having large calves (?). See
{%piṇḍikā%} under {%piṇḍaka,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>29231<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqita<k2>piRqita
{%Piṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rolled into a ball or lump,
pressed into a solid mass; thick, massy, lumpish;
formed into a mass, heaped together, collected;
mixed, intermingled with; united; added, multiplied;
counted, numbered; ({%as%}), m. incense.
<LEND>

<L>29232<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqin<k2>piRqin
{%Piṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing a body ({%= śarīrin%});
receiving cakes of meal (as ancestors &c.); possessing
the {%piṇḍa%} or funeral oblation; ({%ī%}), m. a beggar; an
offerer of obsequial oblations or cakes of meal to
the Manes.
<LEND>

<L>29233<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqila<k2>piRqila
{%Piṇḍila, as, ā, am,%}¦ having large calves ({%=%}
{%sthūla-jaṅgha%}); skilled in calculations; ({%as%}), m. a
skilful calculator or arithmetician, a calculator of nati-
vities, astrologer, astronomer; a bridge, mound, balk,
causeway; ({%ā%}), f. a species of cucumber, Cucumis
Maderaspatanus ({%= goḍumbā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29234<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqIkf<k2>piRqIkf
{%Piṇḍī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make into a lump or ball, press together,
unite, join together, mix or intermingle; to con-
centrate; to identify with (with {%saha%}). {%—Piṇḍī-ka-%}
{%raṇa, am,%} n. making into a lump or ball, heaping.
{%—Piṇḍī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made into a lump or
ball. {%—Piṇḍī-kṛtya,%} ind. having made into a lump
or ball; having concentrated.
<LEND>

<L>29235<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqItaka<k2>piRqItaka
{%Piṇḍītaka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Vangueria Spinosa;
a kind of shrub, Tabernæmontana Coronaria; a
species of basil ({%= phaṇijjhaka%}); ({%am%}), n. the
fruit of the tree Vangueria Spinosa.
<LEND>

<L>29236<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqIBU<k2>piRqIBU
{%Piṇḍī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to be
made into a lump or ball, to become a solid body.
{%—Piṇḍī-bhāva, as,%} m. the being rolled together
into a ball. {%—Piṇḍī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} formed into
a lump or ball, lumped, heaped.
<LEND>

<L>29237<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqIra<k2>piRqIra
{%Piṇḍīra, as, ā, am,%}¦ sapless, juiceless, arid, dry;
({%as%}), m. the pomegranate tree [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-p˚%}];
cuttle-fish bone; sea foam.
<LEND>

<L>29238<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqola<k2>piRqola
{%Piṇḍola, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29239<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqoli<k2>piRqoli
{%Piṇḍoli, is,%}¦ f. leavings of a meal, fragments
dropped from the mouth, orts.
<LEND>

<L>29240<pc>0573-c<k1>piRqipAla<k2>piRqipAla
{#piRqipAla#}¦ {%piṇḍipāla, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of a weapon with a single point; [cf. {%bhindi-%}
{%pāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29241<pc>0573-c<k1>piRyA<k2>piRyA
{#piRyA#}¦ {%piṇyā,%} f. heart-pea, Cardiosper-
mum Halicacabum ({%= paṇyā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29242<pc>0573-c<k1>piRyAka<k2>piRyAka
{#piRyAka#}¦ {%piṇyāka, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. rt. {%piṣ%}), the residue of seeds which have been
ground for oil; oil-cake; incense; saffron; Asa
Fœtida; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant.
<LEND>

<L>29243<pc>0573-c<k1>pitAmaha<k2>pitAmaha
{#pitAmaha#}¦ {%pitā-maha.%} See p. 574, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>29244<pc>0573-c<k1>pitu<k2>pitu
{#pitu#}¦ {%pitu, us,%} m., Ved. (fr. rt. {%pyai%}),
juice, drink; nourishment; (Sāy.) {%= pālakam an-%}
{%nam,%} nourishing food. {%—Pitu-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
bestowing or providing food. {%—Pitu-bhāj, k, k, k,%}
Ved. enjoying or partaking of food; (Sāy.) {%= an-%}
{%nārthin,%} seeking or earning food. {%—Pitu-bhṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} Ved. bringing food. {%—Pitu-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. accompanied by food, abounding in food, nou-
rishing. {%—Pitu-ṣaṇi, is, is, i,%} Ved. bestowing or
granting food. {%—Pitu-stoma, as,%} m. ‘praise of
food,’ N. of the hymn Ṛg-veda I. 187.
<LEND>

<L>29245<pc>0573-c<k1>pitUya<k2>pitUya
{%Pitūya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pitūyati, -yitum,%} Ved. to long
for food, desire food.
<LEND>

<L>29246<pc>0573-c<k1>pitf<k2>pitf
{#pitf#}¦ {%pitṛ, tā,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%pā%}), a father;
(in the Veda {%pitṛ%} is an epithet of Bṛhas-pati,
Varuṇa, Prajā-pati, and especially of heaven or the
[Page0574-a+ 81]
sky; {%antarā pitaram mātarañ-ca,%} between heaven
and earth; according to Sāy. {%pitṛ = pālaka,%} a
protector); ({%tarau%}), m. du. father and mother,
parents, (in the Veda an epithet of the Araṇis or
two pieces of wood regarded as the parents of Fire,
and of heaven and earth regarded as the parents of
all beings); ({%taras%}), m. pl. fathers, forefathers,
ancestors; a father and his brothers, father and
uncles, paternal ancestors; the spirits of departed an-
cestors, the Manes or spirits of the dead (they are of
two kinds, viz. either the spirits of the father, grand-
fathers, and great-grandfathers of an individual or the
progenitors of mankind generally, to both classes of
whom Śrāddhas or obsequial worship is paid and
oblations of food called Piṇḍas presented; they in-
habit a peculiar region, which, according to some, is
the Bhuvas or region of the air, according to others,
the orbit of the moon, and are considered as the
regents of the Nakṣatras Maghā and Mūla); [cf.
Zend <nsi>pita,</nsi> base <nsi>pa-tar:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">πα-τήρ, πάτρω-ς:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>pa-ter, Jup-piter:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>fa-dar:</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>fa-tar, fa-ter,</nsi> ‘father;’ <nsi>fataro,</nsi> ‘uncle:’
Angl. Sax. <nsi>faeder,</nsi> ‘father;’ <nsi>fadhu,</nsi> ‘aunt,
father's sister:’ Hib. <nsi>athair,</nsi> ‘father,’ for <nsi>pathair.</nsi>],
{%—Pitari-śūra, as,%} m. ‘a hero against his father,’
a cowardly boaster. {%—Pitā-putra, au,%} m. du. father
and son. {%—Pitāputra-virodha, as,%} m. a contest
between father and son. {%—Pitāputra-samāgama,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist Sūtra. {%—Pitāputrīya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} relating to father and son; containing the
words {%pitṛ%} and {%putra;%} (with {%sampradāna%}) the
transmission (of bodily capacities and powers) from
father to son. {%—Pitā-maha, as,%} m. a paternal
grandfather; a N. of Brahmā the great father of all;
N. of the author of a Dharma-śāstra; of the author
of an astronomical work; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the ancestors,
Manes; ({%ī%}), f. a paternal grandmother. {%—Pitāmaha-%}
{%saras, as,%} n. or {%pitāmahasya saras,%} N. of a place
of pilgrimage. {%—Pitā-sumati-saṃvāda, as,%} m., N.
of a part of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Pituḥ-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. a father's son. {%—Pituḥ-ṣvasṛ%} or
{%pituḥ-svasṛ, sā,%} f. a father's sister. {%—Pitṛ-karman,%}
{%a,%} or {%pitṛ-kārya, am,%} n. obsequial rites, sacrifice
offered to deceased ancestors. {%—Pitṛ-kalpa, as,%} m.
(perhaps) legends relating to ancestors; N. of a long
period of time, Brahmā's day of new moon. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%kānana, am,%} n. ‘grove of ancestors,’ a cemetery.
{%—Pitṛ-kulyā,%} f. ‘rivulet of the Pitṛs,’ N. of a
river rising in the Malaya mountains. {%—Pitṛ-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. committed against parents or an-
cestors (as sin). {%—Pitṛ-kṛtya, am,%} n. or {%pitṛ-%}
{%kriyā,%} f. obsequial rites, oblations offered to the
spirits of deceased ancestors. {%—Pitṛ-gaṇa, as,%} m.
the whole body of ancestors collectively, a group or
class of Manes or deceased progenitors who were
sons of the Ṛṣis or Prajā-patis, (the principal classes,
according to Manu III. 194-199, are the Soma-sads,
descended from Vi-rāj, the Agni-ṣvāttas from Marīci,
Barhi-shads from Atri, Soma-pās from Bhṛgu, Haviṣ-
mats from Aṅgiras, Ājya-pas from Pulastya, and
Su-kālins from Vasiṣṭha; there are also the Agni-
dagdhas and An-agnidagdhas, Kāvyas and Saumyas.)
{%—Pitṛ-gaṇā,%} f. an epithet of Durgā. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%gāthā, ās,%} f. pl. ‘songs of the ancestors,’ an epithet
of particular songs. {%—Pitṛ-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} be-
longing or pertaining to a father. {%—Pitṛ-gṛṇā,%} f.
probably a wrong reading for {%pitṛ-gaṇā,%} q. v.
{%—Pitṛ-gṛha, am,%} n. a father's house, paternal
mansion; ‘house of ancestors,’ a burial ground, ceme-
tery. {%—Pitṛ-graha, as,%} m. ‘the genius of the
Manes,’ N. of a demon causing disease. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%ghātaka, as,%} or {%pitṛ-ghātin, ī,%} m. ‘slaying a
father,’ a parricide. {%—Pitṛ-ceṭa, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Pitṛ-tama, as,%} m., Ved., in {%pitṛtamaḥ%}
{%pitrīṇāṃ,%} best of the ancestors (Sāy. {%= pāla-%}
{%kānām madhye atiśayena pālakaḥ,%} a defender in
the highest degree among defenders). {%—Pitṛ-tar-%}
{%paṇa, am,%} n. ‘refreshing the Manes,’ gifts in
honour of deceased progenitors, distributed at the
Śrāddhas or funeral ceremonies; an oblation to the
Manes; the act of throwing water out of the right
[Page0574-b+ 80]
hand at seasons of ablution as an offering to the
Manes or deceased ancestors in general; the part of
the hand between the thumb and fore-finger sacred
to the Manes; sesamum ({%= tila%}). {%—Pitṛ-tas,%} ind.,
Ved. from the father, on the father's side. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%tithi, is,%} f. day of new moon, a day sacred to the
Manes of either deceased parent, the day appointed
for obsequial rites to deceased ancestors. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n. ‘the place of pilgrimage for proge-
nitors,’ epithet of the city called Gayā (where the
performance of funeral sacrifices is peculiarly meri-
torious and efficacious); the part of the hand be-
tween the fore-finger and thumb sacred to the
Manes. {%—Pitṛtīrtha-māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of a
chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Pitṛ-tva, am,%} n.
fatherhood, paternity; the state or condition of a
Pitṛ or deified progenitor. {%—Pitṛ-datta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} given by a father (a term applied to a woman's
peculiar property); ({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%dayitā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Pitṛ-dāna%} or {%pitṛ-%}
{%dānaka, am,%} n. a gift in honour of deceased an-
cestors, an offering to the Manes. {%—Pitṛ-dāya,%}
{%as,%} m. property inherited from a father, patrimony.
{%—Pitṛ-deva, ās,%} m. pl. the Manes and the gods;
the divine Manes; ({%as, ā, am%}), worshipping a
father; relating to the worship of the Manes or
deceased ancestors. {%—Pitṛ-devata%} or {%pitṛ-devatya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the Manes for deities,
sacred to the Manes. {%—Pitṛ-daivata, as, ī, am,%}
relating to the worship of the Manes; governed or
presided over by the Manes; ({%am%}), n. epithet of the
tenth lunar asterism or Maghā. {%—Pitṛ-daivatya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating to the worship of the Manes;
({%am%}), n., N. of a sacrifice offered to the Manes on
the day called Aṣṭakā. {%—Pitṛ-dravya, am,%} n.
‘father's substance,’ patrimony. {%—Pitṛ-nāman, ā,%}
{%mnī, a,%} called after the father's name; [cf. {%mātṛ-%}
{%nāman.%}] {%—Pitṛ-pakṣa, as,%} m. paternal side,
paternal relationship; the half month of the Manes,
N. of the dark half in the Gauṇa Āśvina, so termed
as peculiarly appointed for the celebration of obse-
quial rites to the Pitṛs or Manes; a father's relations,
relatives by the father's side; ({%as, ā, am%}), being on
the father's side. {%—Pitṛ-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the
Manes,’ an epithet of Yama, regent of the dead;
({%ayas%}), m. pl. the Manes and the lords of creatures
(Prajā-patis). {%—Pitṛ-pada, am,%} n. the world or
state of the Manes. {%—Pitṛ-pātra, am,%} n. a cup or
other vessel used at obsequial rites. {%—Pitṛ-pitṛ, tā,%}
m. a father's father, paternal grandfather. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%pīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. drunk by ancestors or deceased
progenitors. {%—Pitṛ-pūjana, am,%} n. worship of the
Manes. {%—Pitṛ-paitāmaha, as, ī, am,%} inherited or
derived from father and grandfather; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
fathers and grandfathers, ancestors. {%—Pitṛpaitā-%}
{%mahika, as, ī, am,%} inherited or derived from father
and grandfather. {%—Pitṛ-prasū, ūs,%} f. a father's
mother; ‘mother of the Manes,’ twilight (the time
when the Manes of departed ancestors are abroad).
{%—Pitṛ-prāpta, as, ā, am,%} received from a father;
inherited patrimonially. {%—Pitṛ-priya, as,%} m. ‘dear
to the Pitṛs,’ a species of plant ({%= bhṛṅga-rāja%}).
{%—Pitṛ-bandhu, us,%} m. a kinsman by the father's
side, as the son of the paternal grandfather's sister,
of the paternal grandmother's sister, and of the
father's maternal uncle; ({%u%}), n. relationship by the
father's side. {%—Pitṛ-bāndhava, as,%} m. a kins-
man in the paternal line. {%—Pitṛ-bhakta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} dutifully attached to a father. {%—Pitṛ-bhakti,%}
{%is,%} f. filial duty to a father. {%—Pitṛbhakti-taraṅ-%}
{%giṇī,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Pitṛ-bhūti, is,%} m., N. of a
commentator on Kātyāyana's Śrauta-sūtras. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%bhojana, am,%} n. a father's food; food offered to the
Manes; ({%as, am%}), m. n. the plant Phaseolus Radi-
atus (a species of pulse {%= māṣa%}). {%—Pitṛ-bhrātṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m. a father's brother, paternal uncle. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} having a father, having an illus-
trious father; accompanied by the Manes, connected
with the Manes (as Soma or Yama); mentioning
the Manes or deceased ancestors. {%—Pitṛ-mandira,%}
{%am,%} n. a father's house, paternal mansion; ‘dwelling-
[Page0574-c+ 81]
place of ancestors,’ a cemetery. {%—Pitṛ-mātṛ-hīna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} destitute of father and mother, orphan.
{%—Pitṛ-medha%} or {%pitṛ-yajña, as,%} m. sacrifice
offered to the Manes, obsequial offerings. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%yāṇa,%} Ved. or {%pitṛ-yāna, as, ā, am,%} trodden by
the Manes; ({%am%}), n. the path trodden by the
Manes, the way leading to the Manes; the vehicle
of the Manes, a car to convey holy persons after their
decease to heaven. {%—Pitṛ-rāj, ṭ,%} or {%pitṛ-rāja, as,%}
or {%pitṛ-rājan, ā,%} m. ‘king of the Manes,’ an
epithet of Yama. {%—Pitṛ-rūpa, as,%} m., N. of a
Rudra. {%—Pitṛ-loka, as,%} m. a father's house, paternal
mansion; the world or sphere of the Manes (to
which various situations are ascribed, but principally
the Bhuvas region or mid-heaven). {%—Pitṛ-vaṃśa,%}
{%as,%} m. the paternal family. {%—1. pitṛ-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having a father, whose father is living. {%—2. pitṛ-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like a father; like the Manes; as if for the
Manes; as in the sacrifice offered to the Manes. {%—Pi-%}
{%tṛ-vana, am,%} n. ‘grove of ancestors,’ a cemetery, a
place where dead bodies are burnt or buried. {%—Pi-%}
{%tṛvane-cara, as, ī, am,%} haunting a cemetery; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Śiva; a goblin. {%—Pitṛ-vartin, ī,%}
m. ‘staying or abiding with ancestors,’ N. of a
Brāhman (= king Brahma-datta). {%—Pitṛ-vasati,%}
{%is,%} f. ‘abode of departed ancestors,’ a cemetery.
{%—Pitṛ-vāk-para, as, ā, am,%} attentive to the
voice of parents, obedient to parents. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%vitta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. acquired by ancestors; (Sāy.)
{%= pituḥ sakāśāl labdha,%} derived from a father,
patrimonial. {%—Pitṛ-vrata, as,%} m. a worshipper of
the Manes; ({%am%}), n. worship of ancestors, obsequial
rites. {%—Pitṛ-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a Dānava.
{%—Pitṛ-śravaṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bringing honour
to a father; (Sāy. {%= pitā prakhyāyate yena pu-%}
{%treṇa tādṛśaḥ.%}) {%—Pitṛ-śrāddha, am,%} n. a
funeral ceremony or obsequial rites in honour of
a father or deceased ancestor. {%—Pitṛ-ṣad, t, t,%}
{%t,%} Ved. living unmarried with a father or with
parents; ‘dwelling with the Manes,’ an epithet of
Rudra. {%—Pitṛ-ṣadana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. inhabited
by the Manes. {%—Pitṛ-ṣvasṛ, sā,%} f. a father's
sister, paternal aunt {%(= pituḥ-ṣvasṛ)%}. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%ṣvasrīya, as, ā,%} m. f. a father's sister's son or
daughter, a paternal aunt's son or daughter. {%—Pitṛ-%}
{%sannibha, as, ā, am,%} like a father, fatherly, paternal.
{%—Pitṛ-sāmānya, am,%} n. ancestors collectively.
{%—Pitṛ-sū, ūs,%} f. a father's mother; ‘mother of the
Manes,’ twilight; [cf. {%pitṛ-prasū.%}] {%—Pitṛ-sūkta,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Vedic hymn. {%—Pitṛ-sthāna, as,%}
m. a guardian; ({%am%}), n. the sphere of the Manes.
{%—Pitṛsthānīya, as,%} m. a guardian (who takes the
place of a parent). {%—Pitṛ-svasṛ, sā,%} f. an incorrect
form for {%pitṛ-ṣvasṛ.%} {%—Pitṛsvasrīya, as, ā,%} m.
f., see {%pitṛṣvasrīya.%} {%—Pitṛ-hatyā,%} f. the murder
of a father, parricide. {%—Pitṛ-han, ā,%} m. a parricide.
{%—Pitṛ-hū, ūs, ūs, u,%} invoking or dedicated to the
Pitṛs; ({%ūs%}), f., scil. {%dvār,%} N. of the southern aper-
ture of the human body, i. e. of the right ear; [cf.
{%deva-hū.%}] {%—Pitṛ-hūya, am,%} n., Ved. invoking or
summoning deceased ancestors. {%—Pitrarjita (˚tṛ-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} derived from a father; property
originally acquired by a father. {%—Pitrartham (˚tṛ-%}
{%ar˚),%} ind. for a father's sake.
<LEND>

<L>29247<pc>0574-c<k1>pitfka<k2>pitfka
{%Pitṛka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
paternal, parental, ancestral, relating or belonging to
parents or progenitors, obsequial.
<LEND>

<L>29248<pc>0574-c<k1>pitfvya<k2>pitfvya
{%Pitṛvya, as,%}¦ m. a father's brother, paternal uncle;
any elderly male relation; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πάτρω-ς;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>patruus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>29249<pc>0574-c<k1>pitrya<k2>pitrya
{%Pitrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ derived from a father, relating
to a father, paternal, patrimonial, ancestral, belonging
to a father or to progenitors, usual or customary with
a father; relating to deceased ancestors, consecrated
to the Manes, referring or devoted to the Manes,
obsequial; in Manu II. 59. {%pitryaṃ tīrtham%} = the
part of the hand sacred to deified progenitors, i. e.
the part between the fore-finger and thumb; ({%as%}),
m. the eldest brother (who takes the place of a
father); the month Māgha; ({%ā%}), f. the Nakṣatra
Maghā (presided over by the Manes); the day of
[Page0575-a+ 78]
full moon, the worship of the Manes on the day
of full moon; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%karma,%} the worship
of the Manes; the Nakṣatra Maghā; the part of
the hand between the fore-finger and thumb.
{%—Pitryā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. (perhaps) possess-
ing property inherited from a father; (Sāy.) =
{%pitṛ-mat,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29250<pc>0575-a<k1>pitta<k2>pitta
{#pitta#}¦ {%pitta, am,%} n. (etymology doubtful),
bile, the bilious humor, one of the three humors of
the body (the other two being {%vāta%} and {%kapha;%} it
is especially secreted between the stomach and
bowels, and thence flows through the liver, and
distributes itself in the spleen, heart, eyes, and skin;
its chief quality is heat); [cf. {%kūrma-p˚, go-p˚,%}
{%rakta-p˚, paittika.%}] {%—Pitta-koṣa, as,%} m. the
gall-bladder. {%—Pitta-kṣobha, as,%} m. excess and
disturbance of the bilious humor. {%—Pitta-gadin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} suffering from bilious complaints, bilious.
{%—Pitta-ghna, as, ī, am,%} ‘bile-destroying,’ anti-
bilious; ({%am%}), n. an antidote to bilious com-
plaints; ghee ?; ({%ī%}), f. a plant, Cocculus Cordifolius.
{%—Pitta-jvara, as,%} m. bilious fever. {%—Pitta-drā-%}
{%vin, ī, iṇī, i,%} ‘bile-dispersing,’ removing bile; ({%ī%}),
m. the sweet citron ({%= madhura-jambīra%}). {%—Pitta-%}
{%dhara, as, ā, am,%} containing bile, bilious. {%—Pitta-%}
{%nivarhaṇa, as, ā, am,%} destroying bile. {%—Pitta-%}
{%prakṛti, is, is, i,%} being of a bilious temperament.
{%—Pitta-prakopa, as,%} m. excess and vitiation of
the bilious humor. {%—Pitta-rakta, am,%} n. plethora;
[cf. {%rakta-pitta.%}] {%—Pitta-rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} suffering
from bilious complaints, bilious. {%—Pitta-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having bile, bilious. {%—Pitta-vāyu, us,%} m.
flatulence arising from excess and vitiation of the
bilious humor. {%—Pitta-vidagdha, as, ā, am,%} burnt
up by bile, impaired or destroyed by bile. {%—Pitta-%}
{%vināśana, as, ī, am,%} ‘bile-destroying,’ antibilious.
{%—Pitta-śamana, as, ī, am,%} ‘bile-alleviating,’
antibilious. {%—Pitta-syanda, as,%} m. a bilious form
of ophthalmia; [cf. {%pittābhiṣyanda.%}] {%—Pitta-%}
{%hara, as, ī, am,%} ‘bile-removing,’ antibilious. {%—Pit-%}
{%tātīsāra (˚ta-at˚), as,%} m. ‘bile-dysentery,’ a bilious
form of diarrhœa. {%—Pittātīsārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} suffering
from a bilious form of dysentery. {%—Pittābhiṣyanda%}
{%(˚ta-abh˚), as,%} m. a bilious form of ophthalmia;
[cf. {%pitta-syanda.%}] {%—Pittāri (˚ta-ari), is,%} m.
‘enemy of bile,’ i. e. anything antibilious; N. of
various plants and vegetable substances used to coun-
teract biliousness ({%= parpaṭa, lākṣā,%} and {%varvara%}).
{%—Pittopahata (˚ta-up˚), as, ā, am,%} impaired or
destroyed by bile.
<LEND>

<L>29251<pc>0575-a<k1>pittala<k2>pittala
{%Pittala, as, ā, am,%}¦ bilious, relating to the bilious
humor, secreting bile; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Jussiæa
Repens; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= mūrvā; (am),%} n.
brass, bell-metal; a species of birch tree (the bark of
which is used for writing upon; cf. {%bhūrja-pattra%}).
<LEND>

<L>29252<pc>0575-a<k1>pitTa<k2>pitTa
{#pitTa#}¦ {%pittha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29253<pc>0575-a<k1>pitsat<k2>pitsat
{#pitsat#}¦ {%pitsat, an, antī, at%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. 2. {%pat%}), being about to fly or fall, habitually
falling or coming down; ({%an%}), m. a bird; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ψίττακος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>psittacus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>29254<pc>0575-a<k1>pitsala<k2>pitsala
{%Pitsala, am,%}¦ n. a road, path, way.
<LEND>

<L>29255<pc>0575-a<k1>pitsu<k2>pitsu
{%Pitsu, us, us, u,%}¦ being about to fly or fall.
<LEND>

<L>29256<pc>0575-a<k1>pipatizat<k2>pipatizat
{%Pipatiṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ about to fly or fall,
inclined or addicted to falling repeatedly; ({%an%}), m.
a bird.
<LEND>

<L>29257<pc>0575-a<k1>pipatizA<k2>pipatizA
{%Pipatiṣā,%}¦ f. wish or inclination to come down
or fall.
<LEND>

<L>29258<pc>0575-a<k1>pipatizu<k2>pipatizu
{%Pipatiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ being about to fall; ({%us%}),
m. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>29259<pc>0575-a<k1>pidva<k2>pidva
{#pidva#}¦ {%pidva, as,%} m., Ved. a species of animal.
<LEND>

<L>29260<pc>0575-a<k1>piDA<k2>piDA
{#piDA#}¦ {%pi-dhā = api-dhā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29261<pc>0575-a<k1>pidaDat<k2>pidaDat
{%Pi-dadhat, at, atī, at,%}¦ covering, veiling, hiding.
<LEND>

<L>29262<pc>0575-a<k1>piDAtavya<k2>piDAtavya
{%Pi-dhātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be covered or hidden;
to be stopped up, to be shut or closed.
<LEND>

<L>29263<pc>0575-a<k1>piDAna<k2>piDAna
{%Pi-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. covering, stopping up, shut-
ting; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. or n. (?), a covering, cover,
concealment; a lid, top, cover; a sheath; a wrap-
per, cloak; [cf. Cambro-Brit. <nsi>fedon,</nsi> ‘a screen.’]
[Page0575-b+ 75]
{%—Pidhāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} provided with a cover,
covered with a lid.
<LEND>

<L>29264<pc>0575-b<k1>piDAnaka<k2>piDAnaka
{%Pidhānaka, as,%}¦ m. a cover, lid; a sheath, scab-
bard [cf. {%khaḍga-p˚%}].
<LEND>

<L>29265<pc>0575-b<k1>piDAya<k2>piDAya
{%Pi-dhāya,%}¦ ind. having covered.
<LEND>

<L>29266<pc>0575-b<k1>piDAyaka<k2>piDAyaka
{%Pi-dhāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ covering, hiding, con-
cealing. {%—Pidhāyaka-tā,%} f. the state or act of
covering.
<LEND>

<L>29267<pc>0575-b<k1>pihita<k2>pihita
{%Pi-hita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shut, covered, hidden, con-
cealed; filled with; ({%am%}), n. a particular figure of
speech, showing any person by insinuation that one
knows his secrets.
<LEND>

<L>29268<pc>0575-b<k1>pinasa<k2>pinasa
{#pinasa#}¦ {%pinasa, as,%} m. {%= pīnasa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29269<pc>0575-b<k1>pinah<k2>pinah
{#pinah#}¦ {%pi-nah = api-nah,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29270<pc>0575-b<k1>pinadDa<k2>pinadDa
{%Pi-naddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ tied on, put on, fastened,
bound; dressed, accoutred; wrapped, covered, con-
cealed; pierced, penetrated.
<LEND>

<L>29271<pc>0575-b<k1>pinadDaka<k2>pinadDaka
{%Pinaddhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ dressed, clothed,
covered.
<LEND>

<L>29272<pc>0575-b<k1>pinahya<k2>pinahya
{%Pi-nahya,%}¦ ind. having put on or dressed.
<LEND>

<L>29273<pc>0575-b<k1>pinAka<k2>pinAka
{#pinAka#}¦ {%pināka, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. rt. 3. {%pā%}), a staff, stick; a bow; the club or bow
of Rudra-Śiva; a trident or three-pronged spear;
the trident of Śiva; a shower or fall of dust, falling
dust; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of
stringed instrument, a sort of violin. {%—Pināka-%}
{%goptṛ, tā,%} m. ‘preserver of the Pināka,’ an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Pināka-dhṛk%} (see {%dhṛk%}), or {%pināka-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘bearer of the Pināka,’ an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Pināka-pāṇi, is,%} m. ‘Pināka in hand,’ an
epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>29274<pc>0575-b<k1>pinAki<k2>pinAki
{%Pināki, is, is, i%}¦ (occurring only in acc. sing.),
substituted for {%pinākin,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29275<pc>0575-b<k1>pinAkin<k2>pinAkin
{%Pinākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ armed with a Pināka; ({%ī%}), m.
an epithet of Rudra-Śiva; N. of one of the eleven
Rudras; ({%inī%}), f., N. of two rivers. {%—Pinākinī-%}
{%māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of a part of the Brahmāṇḍa-
Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>29276<pc>0575-b<k1>pinyAsa<k2>pinyAsa
{#pinyAsa#}¦ {%pinyāsa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
2. {%as%} with {%pi-ni%}), Asa Fœtida; [cf. {%piṇyāka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29277<pc>0575-b<k1>pinv<k2>pinv
{#pinv#}¦ {%pinv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%pinvati, -te,%}
{%pipinva, pipinve, pinviṣyati, -te,%}
{%pinvitum,%} Ved. to cause to swell, to distend, to cause
to overflow or run over, to cause to abound; to cause
to abound in milk (Ṛg-veda I. 112, 3, where,
according to Sāy., {%pinvathaḥ = payasā pūrita-%}
{%vantau%}); to sprinkle, wet, moisten, water; to dis-
charge, pour forth; to grant, bestow; (A.) to swell,
to be distended, to overflow; [cf. rt. {%pyai.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29278<pc>0575-b<k1>pinva<k2>pinva
{%Pinva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. causing to swell or flow;
[cf. {%dānu-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29279<pc>0575-b<k1>pinvana<k2>pinvana
{%Pinvana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a particular vessel used in
religious ceremonies.
<LEND>

<L>29280<pc>0575-b<k1>pinvantyapIyA<k2>pinvantyapIyA
{%Pinvantyapīyā,%}¦ f., Ved., scil. {%ṛc,%} an epithet of
the verse beginning {%pinvanty apo%} (Ṛg-veda I.
64, 6).
<LEND>

<L>29281<pc>0575-b<k1>pinvamAna<k2>pinvamAna
{%Pinvamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being swollen,
swelling, being full or filled.
<LEND>

<L>29282<pc>0575-b<k1>pipatizat<k2>pipatizat
{#pipatizat#}¦ {%pipatiṣat, pipatiṣā, pipatiṣu.%}
See under {%pitsat,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>29283<pc>0575-b<k1>pipavizu<k2>pipavizu
{#pipavizu#}¦ {%pipaviṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. 1. {%pū%}), wishing to purify.
<LEND>

<L>29284<pc>0575-b<k1>pipAWaka<k2>pipAWaka
{#pipAWaka#}¦ {%pipāṭhaka, as,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain.
<LEND>

<L>29285<pc>0575-b<k1>pipAsat<k2>pipAsat
{#pipAsat#}¦ {%pipāsat, an, antī, at%} (fr. Desid.
of rt. 1. {%pā%}), thirsting, thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>29286<pc>0575-b<k1>pipAsA<k2>pipAsA
{%Pipāsā,%}¦ f. thirst, desire to drink. {%—Pipāsā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} thirsting, thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>29287<pc>0575-b<k1>pipAsita<k2>pipAsita
{%Pipāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to drink, thirsty,
athirst.
<LEND>

<L>29288<pc>0575-b<k1>pipAsin<k2>pipAsin
{%Pipāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wishing to drink, thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>29289<pc>0575-b<k1>pipAsu<k2>pipAsu
{%Pipāsu, us, us, u,%}¦ thirsty, athirst.
<LEND>

<L>29290<pc>0575-b<k1>pipilI<k2>pipilI
{#pipilI#}¦ {%pipilī,%} f. {%= pipīli,%} an ant.
<LEND>

<L>29291<pc>0575-b<k1>pipizvat<k2>pipizvat
{#pipizvat#}¦ {%pipiṣvat, an, antī, at%} (fr. a rt.
{%pi%} for {%pī%}), Ved. (perhaps) swollen, overfull, super-
[Page0575-c+ 74]
abundant; (according to Sāy.) favourable to the hus-
bandman.
<LEND>

<L>29292<pc>0575-c<k1>pipItaka<k2>pipItaka
{#pipItaka#}¦ {%pipītaka, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman
who was the first to perform a particular ceremony
in honour of Viṣṇu on the twelfth day of the light
half of the month Vaiśākha; ({%ī%}), f. the twelfth day
of the light half of the month Vaiśākha (when giving
away water is an act of merit, so called after the
Brāhman Pipītaka).
<LEND>

<L>29293<pc>0575-c<k1>pipIla<k2>pipIla
{#pipIla#}¦ {%pipīla, as, ī,%} m. f. (perhaps a re-
duplicated form fr. rt. {%pīḍ%}), an ant.
<LEND>

<L>29294<pc>0575-c<k1>pipIlaka<k2>pipIlaka
{%Pipīlaka, as,%}¦ m. a large black ant; ({%ikā%}), f. the
common small red ant; a female ant. {%—Pipīlikā-%}
{%parisarpaṇa, am,%} n. the running about of ants.
<LEND>

<L>29295<pc>0575-c<k1>pipIlika<k2>pipIlika
{%Pipīlika, as,%}¦ m. an ant; ({%am%}), n. a kind of gold
supposed to be collected by ants. {%—Pipīlika-%}
{%madhya, as, ā, am,%} ‘thin in the middle like an
ant,’ N. of any metre the middle Pāda of which is
shorter than the preceding and following. {%—Pipī-%}
{%lika-madhyamā,%} f., N. of a species of the Anuṣṭubh
metre. {%—Pipīlikā-madhya, as, ā, am,%} a kind of
fasting (beginning on the day of full moon with
fifteen mouthfuls, decreasing by one daily until the
day of new moon, and after that increasing by one
daily until the next day of full moon).
<LEND>

<L>29296<pc>0575-c<k1>pipfcCizu<k2>pipfcCizu
{#pipfcCizu#}¦ {%pipṛcchiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid.
of rt. {%prach%}), about to ask or inquire, wishing to ask.
<LEND>

<L>29297<pc>0575-c<k1>pippakA<k2>pippakA
{#pippakA#}¦ {%pippakā,%} f., Ved. a species of bird;
[cf. {%pippīka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29298<pc>0575-c<k1>pippawA<k2>pippawA
{#pippawA#}¦ {%pippaṭā,%} f. a kind of sweetmeat.
<LEND>

<L>29299<pc>0575-c<k1>pippala<k2>pippala
{#pippala#}¦ {%pippala, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
3. {%pā%}), the holy fig-tree, Ficus Religiosa [cf. {%aśvat-%}
{%tha%}]; a kind of bird; a nipple (so called from its
similarity to a berry); the sleeve of a jacket or coat;
N. of a son of Mitra and Revatī; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a school of the Atharva-veda; ({%ās%}), f., N. of a
river; ({%ī%}), f. a berry; long pepper, Piper Longum
(both plant and berry; cf. {%kapi-p˚, jala-p˚, toya-p˚%});
({%am%}), n. a berry in general, the berry of the tree
Ficus Religiosa; sensual enjoyment; water; the
sleeve of a coat; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πίπερι, πέπερι;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>piper.</nsi>] {%—Pippalāda (˚la-ada˚), as,%} m. ‘eater
of berries,’ N. of an ancient teacher of the
Atharva-veda; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a school of the
Atharva-veda (also {%pippalādakās%}). {%—Pippalāda-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Pip-%}
{%palāda-śruti, is,%} f., N. of a work mentioned in
the Parāśara-smṛti. {%—Pippalā-vatī,%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Pippalī-mūla, am,%} n. the root of long
pepper. {%—Pippalī-lavaṇa, e,%} n. du. pepper and salt.
<LEND>

<L>29300<pc>0575-c<k1>pippalaka<k2>pippalaka
{%Pippalaka, am,%}¦ n. a nipple; sewing thread.
<LEND>

<L>29301<pc>0575-c<k1>pippalAyana<k2>pippalAyana
{%Pippalāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29302<pc>0575-c<k1>pippali<k2>pippali
{%Pippali, is,%}¦ f. long pepper; {%Vasiṣṭhasya pippali,%}
N. of a Sāman. {%—Pippali-śroṇi, is,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>29303<pc>0575-c<k1>pippalIkA<k2>pippalIkA
{%Pippalīkā,%}¦ f. a species of plant ({%= aśvatthī%}).
<LEND>

<L>29304<pc>0575-c<k1>pippalU<k2>pippalU
{#pippalU#}¦ {%pippalū, ūs,%} m. or f. (?), N. of a
man (or woman ?).
<LEND>

<L>29305<pc>0575-c<k1>pippikA<k2>pippikA
{#pippikA#}¦ {%pippikā,%} f. the tartar of the teeth;
[cf. {%piṭṭaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29306<pc>0575-c<k1>pippIka<k2>pippIka
{#pippIka#}¦ {%pippīka, as,%} m., Ved. a species of
animal, probably a bird; [cf. {%pippakā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29307<pc>0575-c<k1>piprIzA<k2>piprIzA
{#piprIzA#}¦ {%piprīṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. 1.
{%prī%}), Ved. desire of pleasing or showing kindness.
<LEND>

<L>29308<pc>0575-c<k1>piprIzu<k2>piprIzu
{%Piprīṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of pleasing, wishing
to give pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>29309<pc>0575-c<k1>pipru<k2>pipru
{#pipru#}¦ {%pipru, us,%} m. (fr. rt. {%pṝ?%}), Ved., N.
of a demon (who was conquered and whose strong-
holds were destroyed by Indra).
<LEND>

<L>29310<pc>0575-c<k1>piplu<k2>piplu
{#piplu#}¦ {%piplu, us,%} m. (perhaps for {%api-plu;%}
said to be fr. rt. {%pluṣ%} with {%api%}), a freckle, mark,
mole. {%—Piplu-karṇa, as, ā, am,%} having a mark on
the ear. {%—Piplu-pracchādana, as, ī, am,%} covering
or concealing a mole.
<LEND>

<L>29311<pc>0575-c<k1>piba<k2>piba
{#piba#}¦ {%piba%} or {%piva, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}),
[Page0576-a+ 76]
drinking, who or what drinks; [cf. {%tri-p˚.%}] {%—Piba-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing a form of the
verb {%pibati.%}
<LEND>

<L>29312<pc>0576-a<k1>pibat<k2>pibat
{%Pibat%}¦ or {%pivat, an, antī, at,%} drinking, who or
what drinks.
<LEND>

<L>29313<pc>0576-a<k1>pibdamAna<k2>pibdamAna
{#pibdamAna#}¦ {%pibdamāna, as, ā, am%} (perhaps
fr. a reduplicated form of rt. 2. {%pad%}), Ved. becoming
or being firm or solid, becoming or being hard or
compact.
<LEND>

<L>29314<pc>0576-a<k1>pibdana<k2>pibdana
{%Pibdana, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. firm, hard, solid,
compact; ({%am%}), n. (according to Sāy.) a Rakṣas.
<LEND>

<L>29315<pc>0576-a<k1>piyAru<k2>piyAru
{#piyAru#}¦ {%piyāru, us, us, u%} (fr. the Sautra rt.
1. {%pīy%}), Ved. censuring, blaming, deriding, mis-
chievous (Sāy. {%= hiṃsaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>29316<pc>0576-a<k1>piyAla<k2>piyAla
{#piyAla#}¦ {%piyāla, as,%} m. ({%= priyāla,%} q. v.,
but said to be fr. the Sautra rt. 1. {%pīy%}), the tree
Buchanania Latifolia (called in Hindī also Chironji,
whence it has been named Chironjia Sapida; in
Bengal it is commonly called Piya or Piyal); ({%am%}),
n. the fruit of Buchanania Latifolia.
<LEND>

<L>29317<pc>0576-a<k1>pil<k2>pil
{#pil#}¦ {%pil,%} cl. 10. P. {%pelayati, -yitum,%} to
throw, cast; to send; to incite; [cf.
rts. {%pel, vil.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29318<pc>0576-a<k1>pilu<k2>pilu
{%Pilu, us,%}¦ or {%piluka, as,%} m. a species of tree
({%= pīlu;%} cf. {%pailava%}).
<LEND>

<L>29319<pc>0576-a<k1>pilunI<k2>pilunI
{%Pilunī,%}¦ f. a species of plant ({%= mūrvā;%} a wrong
form for {%pilu-parṇī;%} cf. {%pīlu-parṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>29320<pc>0576-a<k1>pili<k2>pili
{#pili#}¦ {%pili, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29321<pc>0576-a<k1>pilindavatsa<k2>pilindavatsa
{#pilindavatsa#}¦ {%pilinda-vatsa, as,%} m., N. of a
disciple of Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>29322<pc>0576-a<k1>pilippila<k2>pilippila
{#pilippila#}¦ {%pilippila, as, ā, am,%} Ved. slip-
pery.
<LEND>

<L>29323<pc>0576-a<k1>pilla<k2>pilla
{#pilla#}¦ {%pilla, as, ā, am%} (said to be a substi-
tute for {%klinna%}), blear-eyed; ({%as%}), m. a bleared eye.
<LEND>

<L>29324<pc>0576-a<k1>pillakA<k2>pillakA
{%Pillakā,%}¦ f. a female elephant, (the elephant's eye
being usually moist.)
<LEND>

<L>29325<pc>0576-a<k1>piS<k2>piS<h>1
{#piS#} 1¦. {%piś,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%piṃśati, -te,%}
{%pipeśa, pipiśe, peśiṣyati, -te, apeśīt,%}
{%peśitum,%} Ved. to adorn, deck, decorate, embellish;
to prepare, make ready (especially meat, by cutting
it up and carving it); to shape, fashion, mould,
form; to be decomposed, to be reduced to consti-
tuent parts; to be organized; to light, enlighten:
Caus. {%peśayati,%} Aor. {%apīpiśat:%} Desid. {%pipiśiṣati,%}
{%pipeśiṣati;%} Intens. {%pepiśyate, pepeṣṭi,%} to be
richly adorned.
<LEND>

<L>29326<pc>0576-a<k1>piS<k2>piS<h>2
2. {%piś,%}¦ f. an ornament, decoration; (Sāy.) {%=%}
{%rūpaṃ hiraṇyādi.%}
<LEND>

<L>29327<pc>0576-a<k1>piSa<k2>piSa
{%Piśa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (according to Sāy.) {%= ruru,%} a
sort of deer (probably so called from its colour).
<LEND>

<L>29328<pc>0576-a<k1>piSaNga<k2>piSaNga
{%Piśaṅga, as, ī, am,%}¦ reddish, reddish-brown, of a
tawny or brown colour; ({%as%}), m. tawny colour; N.
of a serpent-demon. {%—Piśaṅga-tā,%} f. or {%piśaṅga-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the being of a tawny colour, tawniness.
{%—Piśaṅga-bhṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} Ved. (perhaps) having
red fangs; (Sāy.) {%= īṣad-rakta-varṇa,%} being of a
pale-red hue, tawny-coloured. {%—Piśaṅga-rāti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. giving reddish (i. e. golden) gifts (said of
Indra); (Sāy.) {%= bahurūpa-dhanendra,%} lord of
manifold wealth. {%—Piśaṅga-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
being of a reddish or yellow appearance; (Sāy.) =
{%hiraṇya-rūpa,%} golden-coloured. {%—Piśaṅga-san-%}
{%dṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. (according to Mahī-dhara) being
of a red or yellow colour; (according to Sāy.) =
{%nānā-rūpa,%} of various kinds. {%—Piśaṅgāśva (˚ga-%}
{%aś˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. having reddish or tawny
horses (said of the Maruts).
<LEND>

<L>29329<pc>0576-a<k1>piSaNgaka<k2>piSaNgaka
{%Piśaṅgaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of an attendant of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>29330<pc>0576-a<k1>piSaNgin<k2>piSaNgin
{%Piśaṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ brown, tawny.
<LEND>

<L>29331<pc>0576-a<k1>piSaNgila<k2>piSaNgila
{%Piśaṅgila, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved., N. of a colour (?);
(according to Mahī-dhara) {%= piśaṃ + gila.%}
<LEND>

<L>29332<pc>0576-a<k1>piSAca<k2>piSAca
{%Piśāca, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps fr. {%piśa%} for {%piśita,%}
‘flesh,’ and rt. 1. {%añc%}), N. of a class of demons
(perhaps originally a personification of the ignis
fatuus; in the Veda they are enumerated after gods,
men, Manes, Asuras, and Rākṣasas; in later times
[Page0576-b+ 80]
they are described as the children of Krodhā); a
sprite, fiend, goblin, ogre, malevolent being (some-
thing between an infernal imp and a ghost, always
described as fierce and malignant); N. of a Rakṣas;
({%ī%}), f. a female imp, a she-demon [cf. {%strī-p˚%}]; N.
of a daughter of Dakṣa and mother of the Piśācas;
a species of Valeriana {%(= gandha-māṃsī)%}. {%—Piśāca-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%piśāca-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition
of a Piśāca. {%—Piśāca-dru, us,%} m. a species of tree,
Trophis Aspera (the favourite haunt of the Piśācas).
{%—Piśāca-bādhā,%} f. demoniacal possession. {%—Pi-%}
{%śāca-bhāṣā,%} f. ‘Piśāca language,’ a gibberish or cor-
ruption of Sanskrit used in plays. {%—Piśāca-mocana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘release of the Piśāca,’ N. of a place of pilgrim-
age. {%—Piśācamocana-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place
of pilgrimage. {%—Piśāca-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a species of
tree, Trophis Aspera ({%= śākhoṭa%}). {%—Piśāca-sañ-%}
{%cāra, as,%} m. demoniacal possession. {%—Piśāca-sabha,%}
{%am,%} n. an assemblage of goblins or fiends; the place
or hall of their assembly, pandemonium. {%—Piśācā-%}
{%laya (˚ca-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘abode of Piśācas,’ N. of a
particular luminous phenomenon, phosphorescence.
{%—Piśācī-karaṇa, am,%} n. transforming into a
Piśāca. {%—Piśācoraga-rākṣasa (˚ca-ur˚), ās,%} m.
pl. Piśācas, serpents, and Rākṣasas.
<LEND>

<L>29333<pc>0576-b<k1>piSAcaka<k2>piSAcaka
{%Piśācaka, as,%}¦ m. a Piśāca; ({%ikā%}), f. {%= piśācī%}
(at the end of comps., e. g. {%gandha-p˚, dhana-p˚%});
N. of a river; scil. {%bhāṣā,%} the language of the Piśā-
cas. {%—Piśācaka-pura, am,%} n., N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>29334<pc>0576-b<k1>piSAcakin<k2>piSAcakin
{%Piśācakin, ī,%}¦ m. an epithet of Kuvera the god
of wealth (the treasures of this deity being guarded
by Piśācas and other malignant beings).
<LEND>

<L>29335<pc>0576-b<k1>piSAci<k2>piSAci
{%Piśāci, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a Piśāca.
<LEND>

<L>29336<pc>0576-b<k1>piSita<k2>piSita
{%Piśita, am,%}¦ n. flesh which has been cut up or
prepared, flesh, meat; a small piece; ({%ā%}), f. spikenard,
Nardostachys Jatamansi ({%= jaṭā-māṃsī%}). {%—Piśita-%}
{%bhuj, k, k, k,%} eating flesh; ({%k%}), m. one who eats
flesh. {%—Piśitāśa (˚ta-āśa), as, ā, am,%} eating flesh;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of flesh-eating demons, as Rāk-
ṣasas or Piśācas; a fiend; a cannibal. {%—Piśitāśana%}
{%(˚ta-aś˚), as, ī, am,%} flesh-eating, meat-eating; ({%as%}),
m. a demon, fiend, cannibal, Rakṣas, Piśāca (de-
scribed as a child of Ni-kaṣā); epithet of a wolf.
{%—Piśitāśin (˚ta-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%} eating flesh or
meat, carnivorous; ({%ī%}), m. a demon, goblin, can-
nibal; N. of an attendant of Śiva. {%—Piśitepsu%}
{%(˚ta-īp˚), us, us, u,%} desirous of flesh, eager for or
greedy after meat.
<LEND>

<L>29337<pc>0576-b<k1>piSI<k2>piSI
{%Piśī,%}¦ f. spikenard, Nardostachys Jatamansi ({%=%}
{%piśitā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29338<pc>0576-b<k1>piSuna<k2>piSuna
{%Piśuna, as, ā, am,%}¦ informing against, betraying,
treacherous; disparaging, calumniating, backbiting,
calumnious, slanderous; cruel, wicked, malignant,
mischievous, harsh, unkind; exciting hopes and dis-
appointing them; vile, low, contemptible, infamous;
stupid, a fool; making known, indicating, evincing,
displaying, reminding, commemorating, memorable
for (at the end of comps., e. g. {%tulyānurāga-p˚,%}
manifesting an equal attachment; {%kṣatra-pradha-%}
{%na-p˚,%} memorable for the conflict of Kṣatriyas);
({%as%}), m. a betrayer, traitor, informer, spy, tale-
bearer, backbiter, calumniator, slanderer; epithet of
a goblin dangerous to pregnant women; cotton
(which betrays by hanging to the clothes); an epi-
thet of Nārada (the messenger and informant of the
gods); a crow; N. of a Brāhman; N. of a minister
of Dushyanta; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant, Medicago
Esculenta; ({%am%}), n. informing against, betraying,
sycophancy; saffron (which betrays an unfaithful
lover); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πικ῏πό-ς, πευκεδανό-ς, πευκάλιμο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐχε-πευκές:</lang> Lith. <nsi>pī1k-ta-s,</nsi> ‘bad;’ <nsi>pýk-ti,</nsi> ‘to be
angry;’ <nsi>peīk-ti,</nsi> ‘to despise, to blame.’] {%—Piśuna-%}
{%tā,%} f. slander, scandal, backbiting, betrayal, syco-
phancy. {%—Piśuna-vacana%} or {%piśuna-vākya, am,%}
n. evil speech, bad report, detraction, slander.
<LEND>

<L>29339<pc>0576-b<k1>piSunaya<k2>piSunaya
{%Piśunaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%piśunayati, -yitum,%} to
betray, make known, indicate, make manifest.
<LEND>

<L>29340<pc>0576-b<k1>piSika<k2>piSika
{#piSika#}¦ {%piśika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
in the South.
<LEND>

<L>29341<pc>0576-b<k1>piSIla<k2>piSIla
{#piSIla#}¦ {%piśīla%} or {%piśīlaka, am,%} n., Ved.
[Page0576-c+ 77]
(a wooden) vessel or dish. {%—Piśīla-vīṇā,%} f. a kind
of stringed instrument or guitar, the strings of which
are stretched across a frame ({%= śūrpa-vīṇā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29342<pc>0576-c<k1>piSuna<k2>piSuna
{#piSuna#}¦ {%piśuna.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>29343<pc>0576-c<k1>piz<k2>piz
{#piz#}¦ {%piṣ,%} cl. 7. P. (ep. also A.) {%pinaṣṭi,%}
{%piṃṣṭe%} (Impv. 2nd sing. {%piṇḍhi%}), {%pi-%}
{%peṣa, pekṣyati, apiṣat, peṣṭum%} (ep. Impf.
{%apiṃṣat,%} Pot. {%piṣet%}), to grind, pound, crush; to
bruise, hurt, injure, destroy; cl. 10. P. or Caus. {%peṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%apīpiṣat,%} to grind, pound; to
injure; to give; to be strong; to dwell; cl. 1. 10.
P. {%peṣati, peṣayati,%} to go, move; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πτίσσ-ω</lang>
for <lang n="greek">πίσσ-ω, πίτυρον, πτίσ-μα, πίσ-ο-ς, πίσ-ινο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πίσσο-;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pins-o, pīs-o, pis-tor, pis-tillu-m,</nsi>
<nsi>pistrīnum, pis-tura, pis-u-m, Piso, pī-lu-m,</nsi>
<nsi>pī-la, pī-lu-s;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pes-tà,</nsi> ‘a mill.’]
<LEND>

<L>29344<pc>0576-c<k1>pizwa<k2>pizwa
{%Piṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ ground, pounded, crushed,
bruised; rubbed together, squeezed, clasped (as the
hands); kneaded; ({%am%}), n. anything ground, any
finely ground substance, flour, meal, ({%na piṣṭam%}
{%pinaṣṭi,%} he does not grind flour, i. e. he does
no useless work or vain repetition); lead; ({%as%}),
m. pastry; N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his
descendants. {%—Piṣṭa-pacana, am,%} n. a pan for
parching flower; a boiler, seether, sauce-pan.
{%—Piṣṭa-paśu, us,%} m. an effigy of a beast or
sacrificial victim made with flour or dough. {%—Piṣṭa-%}
{%pāka, as,%} m. food prepared by baking flour. {%—Piṣ-%}
{%ṭapāka-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} containing food prepared by
baking flour; ({%t%}), m. a boiler. {%—Piṣṭa-pācaka,%}
{%am,%} n. a boiler. {%—Piṣṭa-piṇḍa, as,%} m. a cake of
meal. {%—Piṣṭa-pūra, as,%} m. meal made up into a
sort of cake with clarified butter; [cf. {%ghṛta-pūra.%}]
{%—Piṣṭa-peṣa, as,%} m. or {%piṣṭa-peṣaṇa, am,%}
n. ‘grinding flour,’ useless labour, vain repetition.
{%—Piṣṭa-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of meal or flour,
mixed with flour; {%jalam piṣṭa-mayam,%} water
sprinkled with meal. {%—Piṣṭa-meha, as,%} m. flour-
like diabetes. {%—Piṣṭamehin, ī, inī, i,%} suffering
from flour-like diabetes. {%—Piṣṭa-rasa, as,%} m. water
mixed with flour. {%—Piṣṭa-varti,%} a small cake made
of the meal of barley, rice, or pulse. {%—Piṣṭa-%}
{%saurabha, am,%} n. (pulverized) sandal-wood. {%—Piṣ-%}
{%ṭāda (˚ṭa-ada), as, ā, am,%} feeding on meal.
{%—Piṣṭodaka (˚ṭa-ud˚), am,%} n. water mixed with
flour.
<LEND>

<L>29345<pc>0576-c<k1>pizwaka<k2>pizwaka
{%Piṣṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a cake made of the flour or
meal of any grain, any baked cake, bread; a disease
of the eyes, opacity of the cornea; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind
of grits, the meal of pulse steeped in water and
peeled and ground; ({%am%}), n. pounded sesamum
seeds, oil-cake.
<LEND>

<L>29346<pc>0576-c<k1>pizwAta<k2>pizwAta
{%Piṣṭāta, as,%}¦ m. perfumed powder (for scenting
rooms, garments, &c.); scented dust which the
Hindūs sprinkle over each other at the Holi or
spring festival.
<LEND>

<L>29347<pc>0576-c<k1>pizwika<k2>pizwika
{%Piṣṭika, am,%}¦ n. a cake made of rice flour.
<LEND>

<L>29348<pc>0576-c<k1>pizwoqI<k2>pizwoqI
{%Piṣṭoḍī,%}¦ f. a species of shrub ({%= śvetāmli%}).
<LEND>

<L>29349<pc>0576-c<k1>pizwapa<k2>pizwapa
{#pizwapa#}¦ {%piṣṭapa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. {%piś,%} substituted for rt. {%viś%}), a world, a division of
the universe; [cf. {%viṣṭapa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29350<pc>0576-c<k1>pis<k2>pis
{#pis#}¦ {%pis,%} cl. 4. P. {%pisyati, pesitum,%} Ved.
to go; (perhaps) to extend; cl. 1. P.
{%pesati, pesitum,%} to go, move; cl. 10. P. {%pesayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to go; to hurt, injure; to be strong; to
give; to take; to dwell; [cf. rts. {%pes, vis, ves,%}
{%biś, beś.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29351<pc>0576-c<k1>pispfkzu<k2>pispfkzu
{#pispfkzu#}¦ {%pispṛkṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. {%spṛś%}), being about to touch; (with {%jalam%}) being
about to enter the water, being about to perform
ablutions.
<LEND>

<L>29352<pc>0576-c<k1>pihita<k2>pihita
{#pihita#}¦ {%pi-hita.%} See p. 575, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>29353<pc>0576-c<k1>pI<k2>pI<h>1
{#pI#} 1¦. {%pī%} (probably originally Pass. of rt.
1. {%pā,%} q. v.), cl. 4. A. {%pīyate, pipye, peṣ-%}
{%yati, apeṣṭa, petum,%} to drink.
<LEND>

<L>29354<pc>0576-c<k1>pI<k2>pI<h>2
{#pI#} 2¦. {%pī, īs, īs, i%} (fr. rt. {%pyai,%} q. v.; at the
end of a comp.) becoming fat.
<LEND>
[Page0577-a+ 79]

<L>29355<pc>0577-a<k1>pIca<k2>pIca
{#pIca#}¦ {%pīca, am,%} n. the lower jaw, the chin.
<LEND>

<L>29356<pc>0577-a<k1>pIwikA<k2>pIwikA
{#pIwikA#}¦ {%pīṭikā,%} a various reading for
{%pīṭhikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29357<pc>0577-a<k1>pIWa<k2>pIWa
{#pIWa#}¦ {%pīṭha, am,%} n. (thought by some to be
a Prākṛt form fr. {%pi-sada = pi-ṣada = pi-ṣḍa%} or
connected with rt. {%piṭh%}), a stool, seat, chair, bench; a
religious student's seat made properly of Kuśa grass;
the seat of a deity, an altar (according to some
native authorities in this and the preceding senses
also {%as, ī,%} m. f.); a basis, basement, pedestal; an
epithet of various temples (erected on the fifty-
one spots on which, according to tradition, the
various members of Pārvatī fell after she had been
cut to pieces by the discus of Viṣṇu); a kind of orna-
ment; a particular posture in sitting; (in geometry)
the complement of a segment; N. of an Asura the
minister of Kaṃsa. {%—Pīṭha-keli, is,%} m. a particular
dramatic character, a male confidant, a parasite.
{%—Pīṭha-ga, as, ā, am,%} moving about in a wheel-
chair, lame. {%—Pīṭha-garbha%} or {%pīṭha-vivara, as,%}
m. the cavity in the pedestal of an idol. {%—Pīṭha-%}
{%cakra, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), Ved. a chariot with
a seat. {%—Pīṭha-nāyikā,%} f. a girl of fourteen (before
menstruation) who impersonates Durgā at the festival
of that goddess. {%—Pīṭha-nyāsa, as,%} m. epithet of a
particular mystical ceremony. {%—Pīṭha-bhū, ūs,%} f. a
basis, basement. {%—Pīṭha-marda, as, ā, am,%} ‘rub-
bing the seat,’ (perhaps) riding on horseback, a rider;
exceedingly impudent; ({%as%}), m. the companion of a
hero in great undertakings; a companion, parasite;
a dancing-master who teaches courtezans. {%—Pīṭha-%}
{%sarpa, as, ā, am,%} or {%pīṭha-sarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
moving about on a wheel-chair, lame, crippled, a
cripple. {%—Pīṭha-sthāna, am,%} n. a place where one
of the limbs of Pārvatī is supposed to have fallen and
therefore consecrated to her worship; [cf. {%pīṭha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29358<pc>0577-a<k1>pIWaka<k2>pIWaka
{%Pīṭhaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a seat, chair, bench; a
saddle ?; ({%ikā%}), f. a bench; a base, pedestal; a sec-
tion, chapter (sometimes wrongly spelt {%pīṭikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29359<pc>0577-a<k1>pIq<k2>pIq
{#pIq#}¦ {%pīḍ%} (perhaps connected with rt.
{%piṣ%}), cl. 1. A. {%pīḍate, pīḍitum,%} Ved. to
be squeezed or pressed out (as Soma): Caus. or
cl. 10. P. (ep. also A.) {%pīḍayati (-te), -yitum,%} to
squeeze, pinch, press, oppress, compress, suppress
(e. g. {%kālaṃ kālena pīḍayan,%} Manu. I. 51, pressing
time against time, or suppressing one period by
means of another, according to Kullūka {%= sṛṣṭi-%}
{%kālam pralaya-kālena nāśayan%}); to overpower;
to hurt, harm, injure, pain, vex, harass, annoy, tor-
ment; to break, violate (an oath); to beleaguer (a
city); to neglect, cause suffering by neglect; to
remove; to cover; (in augury) to cover with any-
thing inauspicious; (in astrology) to eclipse; to
oppose, resist; to stir, agitate.
<LEND>

<L>29360<pc>0577-a<k1>pIqa<k2>pIqa
{%Pīḍa, as, am,%}¦ m. n., in {%tila-p˚, tṛṇa-p˚,%} q. v.
{%—Pīḍa-yantra-gṛha, as,%} m. a workhouse for
criminals, house of correction.
<LEND>

<L>29361<pc>0577-a<k1>pIqaka<k2>pIqaka
{%Pīḍaka, as,%}¦ m. an oppressor; [cf. {%tālu-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29362<pc>0577-a<k1>pIqana<k2>pIqana
{%Pīḍana, as, ā, am,%}¦ molesting, paining, disagree-
able; ({%am%}), n. the act of pressing, squeezing, rub-
bing; an instrument for pressing, press; oppressing,
inflicting pain, paining, distressing; laying a country
waste, devastation; (in astrology) the oppression or
suppression of a planet &c., i. e. eclipse [cf. {%graha-%}
{%p˚%}]; suppressing sounds, a fault in the pronunciation
of vowels.
<LEND>

<L>29363<pc>0577-a<k1>pIqanIya<k2>pIqanIya
{%Pīḍanīya%}¦ or {%pīḍayitavya, as, ā, am,%} to be
oppressed or molested, to be pained or harassed;
used for pressing, serving for a press.
<LEND>

<L>29364<pc>0577-a<k1>pIqayat<k2>pIqayat
{%Pīḍayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ squeezing, pressing; op-
pressing, suppressing, harassing, paining; breaking,
violating.
<LEND>

<L>29365<pc>0577-a<k1>pIqA<k2>pIqA
{%Pīḍā,%}¦ f. pain, suffering, anguish, annoyance;
damage, injury, wrong; infraction, violation [cf.
{%dharma-p˚%}]; devastation, laying waste; restriction,
limitation; the ‘pain or calamity’ of a planet,
eclipse, occultation [cf. {%graha-p˚%}]; compassion, pity,
charity; a chaplet, garland for the head; the Saral
tree, Pinus Longifolia; a basket ({%= piṭaka, peṭā, %}
[Page0577-b+ 80]
{%peḍā%}). {%—Pīḍā-kara, as, ī, am,%} pain-causing, giving
pain, afflicting, tormenting. {%—Pīḍā-karaṇa, am,%} n.
the causing of pain, torturing, tormenting. {%—Pīḍā-%}
{%bhāj, k, k, k,%} (according to Malli-nātha) {%= vimarda-%}
{%bhāj = bhaṅga-vat%}. {%—Pīḍā-sthāna, am,%} n., Ved.
(in astrology) an unlucky position, inauspicious dis-
tance (of a planet).
<LEND>

<L>29366<pc>0577-b<k1>pIqAya<k2>pIqAya
{%Pīḍāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%pīḍāyate, -yitum,%} to feel pain,
experience a sense of uneasiness.
<LEND>

<L>29367<pc>0577-b<k1>pIqita<k2>pIqita
{%Pīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ squeezed, pressed; rubbed,
chafed; griped, wrung; oppressed, harassed, dis-
tressed, pained, afflicted, suffering pain or distress,
injured, impaired; violated, transgressed; destroyed,
laid waste, devastated; eclipsed; bound, tied; ({%am%}),
n. injuring, harming, harassing; a kind of coitus;
({%am%}), ind. closely. {%—Pīḍita-tā,%} f. or {%pīḍita-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the being squeezed or pressed; the being
afflicted or distressed.
<LEND>

<L>29368<pc>0577-b<k1>pIqyamAna<k2>pIqyamAna
{%Pīḍyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being squeezed or pressed;
being pained or afflicted, suffering.
<LEND>

<L>29369<pc>0577-b<k1>pIta<k2>pIta<h>1
{#pIta#} 1¦. {%pīta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}), drunk,
quaffed; drunk in, imbibed; soaked, steeped, satu-
rated, filled with; ({%am%}), n. drinking. {%—Pīta-taila,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has drunk oil, filled with oil,
{%= taila-pīta; (ā),%} f. a species of creeper; a kind
of heart-pea, Cardiospermum Halicacabum ({%= jyo-%}
{%tiṣ-matī, = mahā-jyotiṣmatī%}). {%—Pīta-dugdhā,%}
f. a cow whose milk has been pledged (lit. already
drunk); a cow tied up to be milked [cf. {%dhe-%}
{%nuṣyā%}]; any milch cow. {%—Pīta-nidra, as, ā, am,%}
immersed in slumber. {%—Pīta-pratibaddha-vatsa,%}
{%ā,%} f. (a cow) whose calf has drunk milk and been
tied up. {%—Pīta-madya, as, ā, am,%} one who has
drunk wine or any other intoxicating liquor. {%—Pīta-%}
{%rasa, as, ā, am,%} whose juice is drunk or quaffed.
{%—Pīta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having drunk or quaffed; con-
taining the verb 1. {%pā%} (Ved.). {%—Pīta-soma, as,%} m.
a Brāhman by whom the juice of the acid Asclepias
is drunk at a ceremony. {%—Pītābdhi (˚ta-ab˚), is,%}
m. an epithet of the Muni Agastya (‘by whom the
ocean was drunk,’ this saint having on one occasion
swallowed up the sea).
<LEND>

<L>29370<pc>0577-b<k1>pIti<k2>pIti<h>1
1. {%pīti, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. and 3. see p. 578, col. 1),
drinking, a draught; a tavern, dram-shop.
<LEND>

<L>29371<pc>0577-b<k1>pItin<k2>pItin<h>1
1. {%pītin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) drinking,
having drunk. (For 2. {%pītin%} see p. 578, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>29372<pc>0577-b<k1>pItvA<k2>pItvA
{%Pītvā,%}¦ ind. having drunk or quaffed. {%—Pītvā-%}
{%sthiraka, as, ā, am,%} somewhat refreshed by a
draught (Gaṇa to Pāṇ. II. 1, 72).
<LEND>

<L>29373<pc>0577-b<k1>pITa<k2>pITa<h>1
1. {%pītha, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. and 3. see p. 578, col. 1), a
drink, draught [cf. {%go-p˚%}]; ({%am%}), n. water; melted
butter.
<LEND>

<L>29374<pc>0577-b<k1>pITin<k2>pITin
{%Pīthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) drinking;
{%kośa-p˚,%} squandering away the treasury.
<LEND>

<L>29375<pc>0577-b<k1>pIyamAna<k2>pIyamAna
{%Pīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being drunk or quaffed,
being drunk or sucked in.
<LEND>

<L>29376<pc>0577-b<k1>pIta<k2>pIta<h>2
{#pIta#} 2¦. {%pīta, as, ā, am%} (probably connected
with rt. {%pyai,%} the colour of butter and oil being
yellowish), of a yellow colour, yellow (the colour of
the Vaiśyas, white being that of the Brāhmans, red
that of the Kṣatriyas, and black that of the Śūdras);
({%as%}), m. yellow colour; a yellow gem, topaz; a
yellow pigment prepared from the urine of kine;
N. of several plants, Alangium Hexapetalum (=
{%aṅkoṭha%}); safflower, Carthamus Tinctorius; Trophis
Aspera {%(= śākhoṭa); (ā),%} f., N. of various plants,
turmeric ({%= haridrā%}); a medical plant, Betula,
commonly called Atais; a kind of yellow pigment
({%= go-rocanā%}); a mystical designation of the letter
{%ṣa; (am),%} n. gold; yellow orpiment. {%—Pīta-%}
{%kadalī,%} f. a species of banana ({%= svarṇa-kadalī%}).
{%—Pīta-kanda, am,%} n. the carrot, Daucus Carota.
{%—Pīta-karavīraka, as,%} m. oleander with yellow
flowers. {%—Pīta-kāvera, am,%} n. saffron; bell-metal.
{%—Pīta-kāṣṭha, am,%} n. yellow sanders. {%—Pīta-%}
{%kīlā,%} f. a species of plant {%(= ā-vartakī)%}. {%—Pīta-%}
{%kauśeya-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%} dressed in yellow silk;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Pīta-gandha,%}
{%am,%} n. yellow sandal. {%—Pīta-ghoṣā,%} f. yellow Gho-
ṣā, a species of creeper with yellow flowers. {%—Pīta- %}
[Page0577-c+ 81]
{%candana, am,%} n. a yellow fragrant wood considered
as a yellow species of sandal-wood; saffron; turmeric.
{%—Pīta-campaka, as,%} m. a lamp (‘yellow as the
Campa’). {%—Pīta-taṇḍulā,%} f. millet, Panicum Itali-
cum; a species of Solanum. {%—Pīta-tā,%} f. or {%pīta-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. yellowness, yellow (the colour). {%—Pīta-%}
{%tuṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘yellow-beak,’ N. of the Sylvia Sutoria
(the whole bird being of a light yellow colour). {%—Pī-%}
{%ta-dāru, us,%} m. a species of pine, Pinus Deodora (=
{%deva-dāru%}); Pinus Longifolia; Curcuma Aromatica
or Curcuma Xanthorrhiza {%(= haridru)%}. {%—Pīta-dru,%}
{%us,%} m. a species of pine, Pinus Longifolia; Cur-
cuma Aromatica or C. Xanthorrhiza. {%—Pīta-nīla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘yellow-blue,’ green. {%—Pīta-parṇī,%} f.
‘yellow-leaved,’ a plant commonly called Bichati;
a N. of the nettle or a plant of the same
class, Tragia Involucrata. {%—Pīta-pādā,%} f. ‘yellow-
footed,’ a small bird, the Maina (Turdus Salica). {%—Pī-%}
{%ta-puṣpa, as,%} m., N. of several plants ({%= karṇi-%}
{%kāra%}), Pterospermum Acerifolium, or a species of
Karṇikāra; Michelia Champaka; a species of Taber-
næmontana Coronaria; a species of Barleria with
yellow flowers; ({%ā%}), f. a species of Coloquintida
({%= indra-vāruṇī, = jhiñjhariṣṭā%}), Cajanus Indicus
({%= āḍhakī%}); a species of yellow Barleria; ({%ī%}), f.
Andropogon Acicularis ({%= śaṅkha-puṣpī, saha-%}
{%devī, mahā-koṣātakī,%} and {%trapuṣī%}); a species
of Barleria with yellow flowers; ({%am%}), n. Tabernæ-
montana Coronaria ({%= āhulya%}). {%—Pīta-prasava,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= pīta-karavīraka,%} q. v. {%—Pīta-phala, as,%}
m. a tree, Trophis Aspera; Averrhoa Carambola.
{%—Pītaphalaka, as,%} m. Trophis Aspera. {%—Pīta-%}
{%bālukā,%} f. turmeric; yellow sand. {%—Pīta-bījā,%} f.
Trigonella Fœnum Græcum {%(= methikā)%}. {%—Pīta-%}
{%bhṛṅga-rāja, as,%} m. a species of Verbesina with
yellow flowers. {%—Pīta-maṇi, is,%} m. a yellow gem,
a topaz. {%—Pīta-mastaka, as,%} m. ‘yellow-head,’ a
small bird, Loxia Philippensis ({%= kali-kāra;%} cf.
{%pīta-muṇḍa%}). {%—Pīta-mākṣika, am,%} n. {%= mā-%}
{%kṣika,%} a species of mineral substance. {%—Pīta-māñ-%}
{%jiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} yellowish-red. {%—Pīta-muṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘yellow-head,’ a bird ({%= kali-kāra%}), Loxia
Philippensis; a kind of gallinule. {%—Pīta-mudga,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of bean, a yellow variety of the
Phaseolus Mungo. {%—Pīta-mūlaka, am,%} n. the carrot,
Daucus Carota. {%—Pīta-yūthī,%} f. yellow jasmine.
{%—Pīta-rakta, as, ā, am,%} yellowish-red, orange;
({%am%}), n. (or according to some {%as%} m.), a yellow-
coloured gem, perhaps the topaz. {%—Pīta-rāga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of a yellow colour; ({%am%}), n. (or according
to some {%as,%} m.), a yellow colour; the fibres of the
lotus; wax. {%—Pīta-rohiṇī,%} f. the plant Gmelina
Arborea. {%—Pīta-loha, as,%} m. yellow metal, queen's
metal or a mixed metal resembling gold. {%—Pīta-%}
{%vāsas, ās, ās, as,%} dressed in yellow; ({%ās%}), m. an
epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. {%—Pīta-vṛkṣa, as,%}
m. a species of Śyonāka and Pinus Longifolia.
{%—Pīta-śāla%} or {%pīta-sāla%} or {%pīta-sālaka, as,%} m.
the plant Terminalia Tomentosa. {%—Pīta-sāra, as,%}
m. a yellow gem, a topaz; the sandal tree; the
tree Alangium Hexapetalum; Citrus Medica; East-
Indian incense, {%= turuṣka; (am),%} n. a yellow sandal-
wood. {%—Pīta-sāraka, as,%} m. Alangium Hexapeta-
lum; Azadirachta Indica. {%—Pīta-sāri, i,%} n. anti-
mony. {%—Pīta-skandha, as,%} m. ‘fat-shouldered,’ a
hog. {%—Pīta-sphaṭika, as,%} m. ‘yellow crystal,’ the
topaz. {%—Pīta-harita, as, ā, am,%} yellowish-green.
{%—Pītāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a species of Śyonāka.
{%—Pītāmbara (˚ta-am˚), as, ā, am,%} dressed in
yellow clothes, clad in yellow; ({%as%}), m. a N. of
Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu; a dancer or actor; a religious
mendicant wearing yellow garments; N. of a man.
{%—Pītāruṇa (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} yellowish-red;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of the middle of day-break; [cf.
{%tāmrāruṇa, nīlāruṇa.%}] {%—Pītāśaman (˚ta-aś˚), ā,%}
m. ‘yellow-stone,’ a topaz or any yellow gem.
<LEND>

<L>29377<pc>0577-c<k1>pItaka<k2>pItaka
{%Pītaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ of a yellow colour, yellow;
({%as%}), m. a species of gentian, Gentiana Cherayta; the
Tūn tree, Cedrela Toona; ({%ikā%}), f. saffron; turmeric;
yellow jasmine; ({%am%}), n. yellow orpiment; brass;
honey; saffron; yellow sandal; aloe wood, Amyris
[Page0578-a+ 74]
Agallocha; a species of Śyonāka; {%= pīta-śāla.%}
{%—Pītaka-druma, as,%} m. Curcuma Xanthorrhiza
({%= hari-dru%}).
<LEND>

<L>29378<pc>0578-a<k1>pItana<k2>pItana
{%Pītana, as,%}¦ m. the hog-plum, Spondias Mangifera;
a tree, Pentaptera Tomentosa; the waved-leaf fig-
tree, Ficus Infectoria; ({%am%}), n. yellow orpiment;
saffron; a species of pine ({%= deva-dāru%}).
<LEND>

<L>29379<pc>0578-a<k1>pItanaka<k2>pItanaka
{%Pītanaka, as,%}¦ m. the hog-plum, Spondias Man-
gifera.
<LEND>

<L>29380<pc>0578-a<k1>pItala<k2>pItala
{%Pītala, as, ā, am,%}¦ of a yellow colour; ({%as%}), m.
yellow colour; ({%am%}), n. brass.
<LEND>

<L>29381<pc>0578-a<k1>pItalaka<k2>pItalaka
{%Pītalaka, am,%}¦ n. brass.
<LEND>

<L>29382<pc>0578-a<k1>pIti<k2>pIti<h>2
{#pIti#} 2¦. {%pīti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. 3. {%pā;%} for 1. see
p. 577, col. 2), Ved. protection; [cf. {%nṛ-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29383<pc>0578-a<k1>pITa<k2>pITa<h>2
2. {%pītha, as,%}¦ m. protection; [cf. {%go-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29384<pc>0578-a<k1>pITya<k2>pITya
{%Pīthya, am,%}¦ n. protection; [cf. {%go-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29385<pc>0578-a<k1>pIti<k2>pIti<h>3
{#pIti#} 3¦. {%pīti, is,%} m. a horse.
<LEND>

<L>29386<pc>0578-a<k1>pItin<k2>pItin<h>2
2. {%pītin, ī,%}¦ m. a horse. (For 1. {%pītin%} see p. 577,
col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>29387<pc>0578-a<k1>pITi<k2>pITi
{%Pīthi, is,%}¦ m. a horse.
<LEND>

<L>29388<pc>0578-a<k1>pItu<k2>pItu
{#pItu#}¦ {%pītu, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pā,%}
but perhaps fr. rt. {%piv%}), the sun; fire; the chief
elephant of a herd. {%—Pītu-dāru, us,%} m. {%= deva-%}
{%dāru,%} q. v.; (according to others) {%= khadira,%} a tree
related to the Uḍumbara; ({%am%}), n. the resin of this
tree; [cf. {%pūtu-dāru;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">πί-τυ-ς, πίσσα</lang> for <lang n="greek">πι-</lang>
<lang n="greek">κ-ια;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pī-nu-s, pix;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pī1ki-s,</nsi> ‘pitch.’]
<LEND>

<L>29389<pc>0578-a<k1>pITa<k2>pITa<h>3
3. {%pītha, as,%}¦ m. the sun; fire; time. (For 1.
and 2. {%pītha%} see p. 577, col. 2, and above.)
<LEND>

<L>29390<pc>0578-a<k1>pItvA<k2>pItvA
{#pItvA#}¦ {%pītvā.%} See under 1. {%pīta,%} p. 577.
<LEND>

<L>29391<pc>0578-a<k1>pITi<k2>pITi
{#pITi#}¦ {%pīthi, is,%} m. See under 3. {%pīti%} above.
<LEND>

<L>29392<pc>0578-a<k1>pITe<k2>pITe
{#pITe#}¦ {%pīthe,%} m., N. of a chief builder (in
an inscription).
<LEND>

<L>29393<pc>0578-a<k1>pITya<k2>pITya
{#pITya#}¦ {%pīthya.%} See under 2. {%pīti%} above.
<LEND>

<L>29394<pc>0578-a<k1>pIna<k2>pIna
{#pIna#}¦ {%pīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%pyai%}), fat,
fleshy, brawny, muscular; swelling, swollen, large,
corpulent, thick, plump; full, round; profuse (e. g.
{%pīnaḥ svedaḥ,%} profuse perspiration); [cf. {%pīvara;%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">πῑαρός, πῖας, πΐων, πιμελή;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pinguis;</nsi>
Iceland. <nsi>feit-r,</nsi> ‘fat;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>fœtt;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>feizt</nsi> = Mod. Germ. <nsi>feist, fett.</nsi>] {%—Pīna-tarala, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a large central gem. {%—Pīna-tā,%} f.
fatness, corpulency (opposed to {%kṛśa-tā%}). {%—Pīna-%}
{%nitambā,%} f. ‘having full hips,’ N. of a metre, four
times ¯¯¯¯ , ¯˘˘¯¯ , ¯¯¯˘˘¯¯ . {%—Pīna-vak-%}
{%ṣas, ās, ās, as,%} large-chested, full-breasted, having
a large or full breast. {%—Pīna-śroṇīpayodharā,%} f.
having swelling hips and breasts. {%—Pīnottuṅga-%}
{%stanī (˚na-ut˚),%} f. (a woman) having a large and
prominent breast. {%—Pīnodhnī (˚na-ūdh˚),%} f. a cow
with full or swelling udders (also {%pīnodhas, ās,%} f.;
cf. {%ūdhas, ghaṭodhnī%}).
<LEND>

<L>29395<pc>0578-a<k1>pIpivas<k2>pIpivas
{%Pīpivas, ān, pipyuṣī, at,%}¦ Ved. swelling, swollen,
distended, overflowing, dropping (Sāy. {%= pra-vṛd-%}
{%dha, pīna, vardhayat, ā-pyāyitṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>29396<pc>0578-a<k1>pIpyAnA<k2>pIpyAnA
{%Pīpyānā,%}¦ f., Ved. having a full or swelling breast
(Sāy. {%= putraṃ stanam pāyayantī%}).
<LEND>

<L>29397<pc>0578-a<k1>pIyUza<k2>pIyUza<h>1
1. {%pīyūṣa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (said to be fr. the
Sautra rt. 1. {%pīy%}), the first milk given by a cow
after calving, biestings; the milk of a cow during
the first seven days after calving; any thick fluid,
cream, juice (Sāy. {%= rasa-bhūtam payaḥ, abhina-%}
{%vam payaḥ%}); the drink of immortality produced at
the churning of the ocean of milk, the food of the
gods, ambrosia, nectar; milk; [cf. {%peyūṣa.%}] {%—Pī-%}
{%yūṣa-mahas, ās,%} or {%pīyūṣa-ruci, is,%} m. ‘bright
with nectar,’ the moon (whose rays are said to be
filled with nectar). {%—Pīyūṣa-varṇa, as, ā, am,%}
milk-white, white as milk. {%—Pīyūṣa-varṣa, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a shower of nectar or ambrosia. {%—Pī-%}
{%yūṣavarṣāya,%} Nom. A. {%pīyūṣavarṣāyate, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to become or turn into a shower of nectar.
<LEND>

<L>29398<pc>0578-a<k1>pIyUza<k2>pIyUza<h>2
2. {%pīyūṣa,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pīyūṣati, pīyūṣitum,%} to
become or turn into nectar.
<LEND>
[Page0578-b+ 75]

<L>29399<pc>0578-b<k1>pIva<k2>pIva
{%Pīva, as, ā, am,%}¦ (according to Sāy.) {%= ā-pyā-%}
{%yita,%} fat.
<LEND>

<L>29400<pc>0578-b<k1>pIvat<k2>pIvat
{%Pīvat, an, antī, at,%}¦ fat; (probably the original
form of {%pīvan%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>29401<pc>0578-b<k1>pIvan<k2>pIvan
{%Pīvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ swelling, full, fat, large; stout,
strong, robust; ({%ā%}), m. wind; ({%arī%}), f. Asparagus
Racemosus, Desmodium Gangeticum ({%= śāla-par-%}
{%ṇī%}); N. of a spiritual daughter of the Barhi-shad
Pitṛs; of the wife of Veda-śiras; of a princess of
Vi-darbha.
<LEND>

<L>29402<pc>0578-b<k1>pIvara<k2>pIvara
{%Pīvara, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}),
fat, stout, large, fleshy, corpulent, plump, thick,
dense; ({%as%}), m. a tortoise; N. of one of the Sap-
tarshis under Manu Tāmasa; ({%ā%}), f. Physalis Flex-
uosa, Asparagus Racemosus; N. of a daughter of the
Gandharva Huhu; ({%ī%}), f. a young woman; a cow;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πιαρό-ς, πιερό-ς, πιαλέο-ς, πίειρα.</lang>]; {%—Pī-%}
{%vara-tva, am,%} n. fatness, thickness, largeness, heavi-
ness, density. {%—Pīvara-stanī,%} f. a woman with large
breasts; a cow with a large udder. {%—Pīvarī-kṛ,%} cl.
8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to fatten, make
fat. {%—Pīvarī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} fattened.
<LEND>

<L>29403<pc>0578-b<k1>pIvas<k2>pIvas
{%Pīvas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (a kindred form to {%pīvan%}),
fat, stout; ({%as%}), n., Ved. fat; [cf. Zend <nsi>pivanh,</nsi>
‘fat;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πῖαρ.</lang>] {%—Pīva-sphāka, as, ā, am%} (for
{%pīvas-sphāka%}), Ved. swelling with fat. {%—Pīvas-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. abounding with, swollen.
{%—Pīvo-anna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having rich or
abundant food. {%—Pīvo-aśva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
fat horses. {%—Pīvopavasana (˚va-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
Ved. covered with fat; (according to Mahī-dhara)
near to fat or fleshy parts of the body.
<LEND>

<L>29404<pc>0578-b<k1>pIvasa<k2>pIvasa
{%Pīvasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. abounding with fat, fat,
abundant; swelling, swollen, inflated; (Sāy.) {%= pīna,%}
robust; {%= a-cchinna,%} untorn.
<LEND>

<L>29405<pc>0578-b<k1>pIvizWa<k2>pIvizWa
{%Pīviṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ extremely fat.
<LEND>

<L>29406<pc>0578-b<k1>pInasa<k2>pInasa
{#pInasa#}¦ {%pīnasa, as,%} m. (probably {%api + nas%}
{%= nāsā;%} by some connected with {%pīna%}), cough,
catarrh; cold affecting the nose, inflammation of the
schneiderian membrane [cf. {%apī-nasa%}]; ({%ā%}), f. the
plant Cucumis Utilissimus ({%= karkaṭī%}).
<LEND>

<L>29407<pc>0578-b<k1>pInasin<k2>pInasin
{%Pīnasin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a cold.
<LEND>

<L>29408<pc>0578-b<k1>pIpari<k2>pIpari
{#pIpari#}¦ {%pīpari, is,%} m. a species of Plaksha
of low growth.
<LEND>

<L>29409<pc>0578-b<k1>pIy<k2>pIy<h>1
{#pIy#} 1¦. {%pīy%} (a Sautra rt.), to gladden.
<LEND>

<L>29410<pc>0578-b<k1>pIy<k2>pIy<h>2
{#pIy#} 2¦. {%pīy,%} cl. 1. P. {%pīyati,%} &c., Ved.
to blame, abuse, treat disrespectfully or
with contempt; to give pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>29411<pc>0578-b<k1>pIyaka<k2>pIyaka
{%Pīyaka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘an abuser,’ (probably) N. of
a class of demons.
<LEND>

<L>29412<pc>0578-b<k1>pIyatnu<k2>pIyatnu
{%Pīyatnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. scornful.
<LEND>

<L>29413<pc>0578-b<k1>pIyu<k2>pIyu
{%Pīyu, us, us, u%}¦ (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}), Ved.
scornful, injurious (as an Asura); ({%us%}), m. an owl;
a crow; time; fire; the sun (?); gold.
<LEND>

<L>29414<pc>0578-b<k1>pIyamAna<k2>pIyamAna
{#pIyamAna#}¦ {%pīyamāna.%} See under 1. {%pīta.%}
<LEND>

<L>29415<pc>0578-b<k1>pIyUkzA<k2>pIyUkzA
{#pIyUkzA#}¦ {%pīyūkṣā,%} f. a species of plant.
<LEND>

<L>29416<pc>0578-b<k1>pIyUza<k2>pIyUza<h>1
{#pIyUza#} 1¦. 2. {%pīyūṣa.%} See under {%pīna,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>29417<pc>0578-b<k1>pIl<k2>pIl
{#pIl#}¦ {%pīl,%} cl. 1. P. {%pīlati, pīlitum,%} to
check, impede, obstruct; to stop, to
cease to be or do; to become stupid.
<LEND>

<L>29418<pc>0578-b<k1>pIlaka<k2>pIlaka
{%Pīlaka, as,%}¦ m. the large black ant; [cf. {%pipīla%}
and {%pīluka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29419<pc>0578-b<k1>pIlu<k2>pIlu
{%Pīlu, us,%}¦ m. a species of tree, Careya Arborea,
(according to others) Salvadora Persica; a flower; the
blossoms of the Saccharum Sara; the metacarpus,
the central part of the hand; a group of palm trees;
the stem of the palm; an arrow; an atom; a worm,
an insect; an elephant (Arabic <lang n="arabic">فيل</lang> Persian <lang n="arabic">پيل</lang>);
({%u%}), n. the fruit of the Pīlu tree. {%—Pīlu-kuṇa, as,%}
m. the season of the ripening of the Pīlu fruit.
{%—Pīlu-pattra, as,%} m. the plant Sanseviera Zeyla-
nica {%(= mūrvā)%}. {%—Pīlu-parṇī,%} f. the plant Sanse-
viera Zeylanica; Momordica Monadelpha; a kind
of drug. {%—Pīlu-mat, atī,%} f., with {%dyaus,%} the central
or middle region of the sky between Udan-vatī and
[Page0578-c+ 77]
Pra-dyaus. {%—Pīlu-vaha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of a district. {%—Pīlu-sāra, as,%} m., N. of a
mountain.
<LEND>

<L>29420<pc>0578-c<k1>pIluka<k2>pIluka
{%Pīluka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a tree, Careya Arborea or
Salvadora Persica or any other exotic or unknown
tree [cf. {%kāka-p˚, kāla-p˚%}]; an ant.
<LEND>

<L>29421<pc>0578-c<k1>pIlunI<k2>pIlunI
{%Pīlunī,%}¦ f. the plant Sanseviera Zeylanica (=
{%mūrvā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29422<pc>0578-c<k1>pIlA<k2>pIlA
{#pIlA#}¦ {%pīlā,%} f., Ved. epithet of a particular
scent; N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>29423<pc>0578-c<k1>pIv<k2>pIv
{#pIv#}¦ {%pīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%pīvati, pīvitum,%} to be
fat or corpulent, to be thick.
<LEND>

<L>29424<pc>0578-c<k1>pIva<k2>pIva
{#pIva#}¦ {%pīva, pīvan, pīvara, pīvas, pīvasa,%}
{%pīviṣṭha.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>29425<pc>0578-c<k1>pIvA<k2>pIvA
{#pIvA#}¦ {%pīvā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}),
water.
<LEND>

<L>29426<pc>0578-c<k1>puMs<k2>puMs<h>1
{#puMs#} 1¦. {%puṃs%} (perhaps a Nom. fr. 2. {%puṃs%}
below), cl. 10. P. {%puṃsayati, -yitum,%} to
crush, grind; to pain, punish.
<LEND>

<L>29427<pc>0578-c<k1>puMs<k2>puMs<h>2
{#puMs#} 2¦. {%puṃs, pumān,%} m. (voc. {%puman,%} the
strong cases being fr. {%pumāṃs,%} the middle fr.
{%pum,%} and the weak fr. {%puṃs,%} but loc. pl. {%punsu%}
not {%puṃsu%} by Pāṇ. VIII. 2, 65; said to be fr.
rt. 3. {%pā%}), a male, male being, man [cf. {%na-p˚%}];
a human being; a servant, attendant; the soul,
spirit ({%= puruṣa; paraḥ pumān,%} the Supreme
Spirit, soul of the universe, Viṣṇu); (in grammar)
a word in the masculine gender; [cf. {%strī-puṃ-%}
{%napuṃsaka;%} Lat. <nsi>mas, mar-is</nsi> for <nsi>mas-is, mas-</nsi>
<nsi>culus,</nsi> the syllable <nsi>pu</nsi> being rejected in these words
but appearing in <nsi>pu-sus, pu-sa, pu-bes</nsi> perhaps
for <nsi>pu-mes.</nsi>] {%—Puṃ-yug, k,%} or {%puṃ-yoga, as,%} m.
connection with a man; cohabitation with men.
{%—Puṃ-ratna, am,%} n. ‘a jewel of a man,’ an excel-
lent man. {%—Puṃ-rāśi, is,%} m. a male sign of the
zodiac, an epithet of Aries and the signs following.
{%—Puṃ-rūpa, am,%} n. the form or shape of a man;
{%puṃ-rūpaṃ kṛ,%} to assume the form of a man.
{%—Puṃ-liṅga, am,%} n. the characteristic sign of a
man, virility, manhood, the male organ; (in gram-
mar) the masculine gender; ({%as, ā, am%}), having the
characteristics of a man; masculine. {%—Puṃliṅga-tā,%}
f. masculineness, the being of the masculine gender.
{%—Puṃliṅga-saṅgraha, as,%} m., N. of a part of
the Nāma-liṅgānuśāsana by Amara-siṃha. {%—Puṃ-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like a man, as a man, as with a man;
like the masculine gender, in the masculine form or
gender. {%—Puṃ-vatsa, as,%} m. a bull-calf; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), having bull-calves, surrounded by bull-calves.
{%—Puṃvad-vidhāna, am,%} n. ceremonies as on the
birth of a male. {%—Puṃ-vṛṣa, as,%} m. the musk rat.
{%—Puṃ-veśa, as, ā, am,%} wearing male attire,
dressed like a man. {%—Puṃś-calī,%} f. ‘running after
men,’ a frequenter of men, harlot, an unchaste
woman; N. of an Apsaras. {%—Puṃścalīya, as,%} m.
the son of a harlot. {%—Puṃś-calū, ūs,%} f., Ved. a
harlot; ({%us%}), m. a whoremonger. {%—Puṃś-cihna,%}
{%am,%} n. the characteristic of a male, membrum virile.
{%—Puṃsa-vat, ān, atī, at%} ({%puṃsa%} substituted for
{%puṃs%}), Ved. having a son. {%—Puṃ-savana, as, ā, am,%}
bringing forth a male, causing the birth of a male
child; ({%am%}), n. (with or without {%vrata%}) the first of
the essential ceremonies of Hindū initiation, a reli-
gious and domestic festival held on the mother's per-
ceiving the first signs of a living conception; a fetus;
milk. {%—Puṃsānuja (˚sā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} (perhaps)
having an elder brother. {%—Puṃ-suvana, am,%} n., Ved.
bringing forth a male child. {%—Puṃs-kaṭī,%} f. a man's
hip. {%—Puṃs-kāmā,%} f. ‘desirous of man,’ a woman
wishing for a lover or husband. {%—Puṃs-kokila, as,%} m.
the male of the Indian cuckoo. {%—Puṃskokila-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the being a male cuckoo, the state or con-
dition of a male cuckoo. {%—Puṃs-tva, am,%} n. the
being a male, the state of a male, masculineness,
manhood, virility; semen virile; (in grammar) the
masculine gender. {%—Puṃs-putra, as,%} m. a male
child, boy. {%—Puṃs-prajanana, am,%} n. the male
[Page0579-a+ 76]
organ of generation. {%—Puṃs-pravāda, as,%} m. (in
Vedic grammar) a masculine base. {%—Puṃs-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} containing the word {%puṃs%} or the masculine
gender. {%—Puṅ-khe'ṭa, as,%} m. a male planet. {%—Puṅ-%}
{%gava, as,%} m. a bull; a kind of drug commonly
called Māṣāṇi; (at the end of a comp.) a hero or
eminent person, chief, best, most excellent [cf.
{%kuru-p˚, gaja-p˚, nara-p˚.%}] {%—Puṅgava-ketu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} characterized or symbolized by a bull; ({%us%}),
m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Puṅ-guṇa-jantu-jīva, as,%}
m. the living or animal soul combined with the
qualities of man. {%—Puñ-janma-kara, as%} or {%am,%} m.
or n. (?), ‘effecting the birth of males,’ a constellation
under which male children are born. {%—Puñ-janma-%}
{%da, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), ‘granting the birth of
males,’ a constellation under which male children
are born. {%—Puñ-janman, a,%} n. the birth of a male
child. {%—Puñjanma-yoga, as,%} m. ‘star of the birth
of males,’ a constellation under which male children
are born. {%—Pun-dāsa, as,%} m. a male slave. {%—Pun-%}
{%dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘having the mark of a male,’ the
male of any species of animal. {%—Pun-nakṣatra,%}
{%am,%} n. a Nakṣatra regarded as a male, male
asterism; an asterism under which males are pro-
created. {%—Pun-nāga, as,%} m. ‘an elephant among
men,’ a distinguished man; a white elephant; N. of
a tree, Rottleria Tinctoria (from the blossoms of
which a yellowish dye is prepared); a white lotus;
a nutmeg. {%—Pun-nāṭa%} or {%pun-nāḍa, as,%} m. the
plant Cassia Tora ({%= cakra-marda%}). {%—Pun-nāma-%}
{%dheya, as,%} m. ‘that which is called man,’ one of the
male sex, a male. {%—1. pun-nāman, ā, mnī, a%} (for
2. see under {%put%}), having a masculine name; ({%ā%}),
m. the tree Rottleria Tinctoria. {%—Pum-anujā,%} f.
(probably) ‘born after a male child,’ having an elder
brother; born after or like a man. {%—Pum-apatya,%}
{%am,%} n. male offspring. {%—Pum-artha, as,%} m. the
aim of man. {%—Pum-ākhyā,%} f. a name for male
beings, a designation of a male being. {%—Pum-ācāra,%}
{%as,%} m. the custom or usage of men. {%—Pum-bhū-%}
{%man, ā,%} m. a word of the masculine gender in the
plural number.
<LEND>

<L>29428<pc>0579-a<k1>puMsa<k2>puMsa
{%Puṃsa%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) = 2. {%puṃs;%} [cf.
{%na-p˚, mahā-p˚, strī-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29429<pc>0579-a<k1>puMsaka<k2>puMsaka
{%Puṃsaka%}¦ in {%na-puṃsaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29430<pc>0579-a<k1>puMska<k2>puMska
{%Puṃska%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) = 2. {%puṃs,%} see
Gaṇa to Pāṇ. V. 4, 151; [cf. {%ukta-p˚, bhāṣita-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29431<pc>0579-a<k1>puMsti<k2>puMsti
{#puMsti#}¦ {%puṃsti,%} N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>29432<pc>0579-a<k1>pukkaSa<k2>pukkaSa
{#pukkaSa#}¦ {%pukkaśa%} or {%pukkasa, as,%} m. epithet
of a degraded mixed caste (erroneously identified by
lexicographers with the Cāṇḍālas), the offspring of a
Ni-ṣāda by a Śūdrā female, a man of an impure or
degraded tribe or occupation; ({%ī%}), f. a woman of the
Pukkaśa caste; a bud, blossom; the indigo plant;
({%as, ī, am%}), low, vile.
<LEND>

<L>29433<pc>0579-a<k1>pukkaSaka<k2>pukkaSaka
{%Pukkaśaka, as,%}¦ m. a man of the Pukkaśa caste;
({%as, ā, am%}), low, vile.
<LEND>

<L>29434<pc>0579-a<k1>puNKa<k2>puNKa
{#puNKa#}¦ {%puṅkha, as,%} m. the feathered part of
an arrow, the lower part of an arrow which comes in
contact with the bow-string and contains the feathers
and shaft; a hawk, falcon ({%= maṅgalācāra,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>29435<pc>0579-a<k1>puNKita<k2>puNKita
{%Puṅkhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with a Puṅkha.
<LEND>

<L>29436<pc>0579-a<k1>puNKilatIrTa<k2>puNKilatIrTa
{#puNKilatIrTa#}¦ {%puṅkhila-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of
a place of pilgrimage ({%= Rāma-tīrtha%}).
<LEND>

<L>29437<pc>0579-a<k1>puNga<k2>puNga
{#puNga#}¦ {%puṅga, as, am,%} m. n. a heap, collec-
tion, quantity; [cf. {%puñja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29438<pc>0579-a<k1>puNgala<k2>puNgala
{#puNgala#}¦ {%puṅgala, as,%} m. the soul; [cf. {%pud-%}
{%gala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29439<pc>0579-a<k1>puNgava<k2>puNgava
{#puNgava#}¦ {%puṅ-gava.%} See under 2. {%puṃs.%}
<LEND>

<L>29440<pc>0579-a<k1>pucCa<k2>pucCa
{#pucCa#}¦ {%puccha, as, am,%} m. n. a tail; the
hinder part; the tail of a peacock; a horse's tail;
any hairy tail; the end of anything; [cf. probably
Gr. <lang n="greek">πῡγή,</lang> perhaps <lang n="greek">πύματος.</lang>] {%—Puccha-jāha, am,%}
n. the root of the tail. {%—Puccha-dā,%} f. a bulbous
plant used as a remedy for sterility, {%= lakṣma-%}
{%nā-kanda;%} (probably a corruption of {%putra-dā.%})
[Page0579-b+ 77]
{%—Puccha-dhi, is,%} m., Ved. the root of the tail.
{%—Puccha-mūla%} or {%pucchāgra (˚cha-ag˚), am,%} n.
the tip of the tail. {%—Pucchāṇḍaka (˚cha-aṇ˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Nāga of the race of Takṣaka.
{%—Puccheśvara (˚cha-īś˚), as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
N. of a place or of a temple.
<LEND>

<L>29441<pc>0579-b<k1>pucCaya<k2>pucCaya
{%Pucchaya%}¦ in {%ut-pucchaya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29442<pc>0579-b<k1>pucCikA<k2>pucCikA
{%Pucchikā%}¦ in {%kroṣṭu-p˚, kroṣṭuka-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29443<pc>0579-b<k1>pucCin<k2>pucCin
{%Pucchin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a tail, tailed; a cock;
Calotropis Gigantea ({%= arka%}).
<LEND>

<L>29444<pc>0579-b<k1>pucCawi<k2>pucCawi
{#pucCawi#}¦ {%pucchaṭi, i,%} n. snapping or cracking
the fingers; [cf. {%mucuṭī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29445<pc>0579-b<k1>puC<k2>puC
{#puC#}¦ {%puch%} [cf. {%yuch%}], cl. 1. P. {%pucchati,%}
{%pupuccha, pucchitum,%} to be careless or
inattentive.
<LEND>

<L>29446<pc>0579-b<k1>puYja<k2>puYja
{#puYja#}¦ {%puñja, as,%} m. (perhaps for {%api +%}
{%yuñja%} fr. rt. {%yuj%}), a heap, lump, mass, quantity, collec-
tion, multitude; [cf. {%nakha-puñja-phalā, puṅga,%}
{%pūga;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">πύξ</lang> perhaps an abbreviated dat. pl.,
<lang n="greek">πύκ-τη-ς, πύγ-μαχ-ο-ς, πυγ-μή, πυγ-ών, πυκ-νό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πυκ-ι-νό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pug-nu-s, pug-na, pug-nā-re,</nsi>
<nsi>pug-io, pug-il, pugillu-s, pugillaris;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>fû-st;</nsi> Old Slav. <nsi>pe-stĭ.</nsi>] {%—Puñja-rāja, as,%} m., N.
of a grammarian and author of a commentary on
the Sarasvatī-prakriyā. {%—Puñja-śas,%} ind. in heaps.
{%—Puñjī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to heap, lay in a heap.
<LEND>

<L>29447<pc>0579-b<k1>puYjaya<k2>puYjaya
{%Puñjaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%puñjayati, -yitum,%} to heap,
heap up, heap together.
<LEND>

<L>29448<pc>0579-b<k1>puYjAtuka<k2>puYjAtuka
{%Puñjātuka%}¦ (?), {%as,%} m. {%= phalelāṅku%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>29449<pc>0579-b<k1>puYji<k2>puYji
{%Puñji, is,%}¦ f. a heap, quantity, collection. {%—Puñji-%}
{%ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} heaped, accumulated; ({%as%}), m.,
Ved. a fisherman; (according to Mahī-dhara) a
birdcatcher.
<LEND>

<L>29450<pc>0579-b<k1>puYjika<k2>puYjika
{%Puñjika, as,%}¦ m. hail. {%—Puñjika-sthalā%} or {%puñ-%}
{%jikā-sthalā%} or {%puñjikā-stanā,%} f. an allegorical N.
of an Apsaras; (scil. {%bhūmi,%} ground thrown up in
digging or having such ground?).
<LEND>

<L>29451<pc>0579-b<k1>puYjita<k2>puYjita
{%Puñjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ piled up, heaped, heaped to-
gether; made up into a ball, pressed or put together.
<LEND>

<L>29452<pc>0579-b<k1>puYjanman<k2>puYjanman
{#puYjanman#}¦ {%puñ-janman.%} See under 2. {%puṃs.%}
<LEND>

<L>29453<pc>0579-b<k1>puYjIla<k2>puYjIla
{#puYjIla#}¦ {%puñjīla, am,%} n., Ved. {%= piñjūla,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29454<pc>0579-b<k1>puw<k2>puw
{#puw#}¦ {%puṭ,%} cl. 6. P. {%puṭati, puṭitum,%} to em-
brace, clasp, fold; to intertwine; cl. 1. P.
{%poṭati,%} to rub, to press, to grind or pound, (perhaps
an incorrect form for {%muṭ%}); cl. 10. P. {%puṭayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to be in contact with; to bind together, fasten,
string; {%poṭayati, -yitum,%} to reduce to powder, grind;
to be or become small or shallow; to shine; to speak;
[cf. rts. {%paṭ, paṭh, puṭṭ, puth, muṭ, muṇṭ, puṇṭ,%}
{%puṇḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29455<pc>0579-b<k1>puwa<k2>puwa
{%Puṭa, as, ī, am,%}¦ m. f. n. a fold, pocket; a tubular
or hollow space, cavity, concavity [cf. {%kakṣa-p˚,%}
{%karṇa-p˚, gaja-p˚%}]; a cup or concavity made of
a leaf folded or doubled; a basket or vessel or dish
made of leaves (Manu VI. 28; cf. {%pattra-p˚, parṇa-%}
{%p˚, palāśa-p˚%}); the pod or capsule which envelops
young shoots; a shallow cup or receptacle (as the
hollow of the hand); an eyelid; a cover, covering,
wrapper, cloth worn round the middle of the body
to cover the privities; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a horse's
hoof; ({%as%}), m. a casket ({%= sam-puṭa%}); a narrowing
or contracting of anything; a folding or doubling of
anything so as to form a cup or concavity; N. of a
man; ({%am%}), n. a nutmeg; two vessels joined to-
gether (the upper one being inverted, for the subli-
mation of medicinal substances). {%—Puṭa-kanda, as,%}
m. a species of bulbous plant ({%= kola-kanda%}). {%—Pu-%}
{%ṭa-grīva, as,%} m. ‘hollow-necked,’ a pot, jar, pitcher,
vessel for butter; a copper vessel. {%—Puṭa-pāka, as,%}
m. a particular method of preparing drugs (the various
substances being wrapped up in leaves, covered with
clay, and roasted in the fire); digesting, subliming.
{%—Puṭa-bhid, t, t, t,%} Ved. causing to break through,
opening (said of a rock under which a spring is
discovered). {%—Puṭa-bheda, as,%} m. (probably) the
fountain-head of a river; the bend of a river (?);
[Page0579-c+ 76]
the mouth of a river (?); a city, town; a kind of
musical instrument. {%—Puṭa-bhedaka, as, ikā, am,%}
Ved. {%= puṭa-bhid,%} q. v. {%—Puṭa-bhedana, am,%} n. a
town, city. {%—Puṭāhvaya (˚ṭa-āh˚), as,%} m. {%= puṭa-%}
{%pāka,%} q. v. {%—Puṭoṭaja (˚ṭa-uṭ˚), am,%} n. a white
umbrella or parasol. {%—Puṭodaka (˚ṭa-ud˚), as,%} m.
‘having water in its hollow or interior,’ a cocoa-nut.
<LEND>

<L>29456<pc>0579-c<k1>puwaka<k2>puwaka
{%Puṭaka, am,%}¦ n. a fold, pocket, &c. [cf. {%puṭa%}];
any shallow cup or concavity (also {%pattra-p˚%}), a
bag or vessel made of a leaf doubled over in a funnel-
like shape; a lotus; a nutmeg; ({%as%}), m. a particular
position of the hands; ({%ikā%}), f. cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>29457<pc>0579-c<k1>puwakinI<k2>puwakinI
{%Puṭakinī,%}¦ f. a lotus; a group of lotuses.
<LEND>

<L>29458<pc>0579-c<k1>puwita<k2>puwita
{%Puṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed, ground; split, torn
up; contracted; sewn, stitched; ({%am%}), n. closing or
shutting the hands to hold anything, the hollow
of the hands.
<LEND>

<L>29459<pc>0579-c<k1>puww<k2>puww
{#puww#}¦ {%puṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%puṭṭayati, -yitum,%} to
decrease, diminish; to be or become small,
be or become low or shallow.
<LEND>

<L>29460<pc>0579-c<k1>puq<k2>puq
{#puq#}¦ {%puḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%puḍati, puḍitum,%} to
leave, quit; to dismiss; to emit; to cover;
cl. 1. P. {%poḍati,%} &c., to grind; [cf. rts. {%puṭ,%} 1. {%puṃs,%}
{%buḍ, muḍ, muṇṭ, muṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29461<pc>0579-c<k1>puR<k2>puR
{#puR#}¦ {%puṇ%} (connected with {%puṇya,%} q. v.),
cl. 6. P. {%puṇati, puṇitum,%} to be pure or
virtuous; to do a pious or holy act; cl. 10. P.
{%poṇayati, -yitum,%} to collect, heap up, accumulate.
<LEND>

<L>29462<pc>0579-c<k1>puRatAmakara<k2>puRatAmakara
{#puRatAmakara#}¦ {%puṇatāmakara, as,%} m., N. of
the author of the Ātmatva-jāti-vicāra and Sādṛśya-
vāda, (also called Mahā-deva.)
<LEND>

<L>29463<pc>0579-c<k1>puRw<k2>puRw
{#puRw#}¦ {%puṇṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%puṇṭayati, -yitum,%}
to speak; to shine.
<LEND>

<L>29464<pc>0579-c<k1>puRq<k2>puRq
{#puRq#}¦ {%puṇḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%puṇḍati, puṇḍitum,%} to
rub, grind, pound, reduce to dust or powder.
<LEND>

<L>29465<pc>0579-c<k1>puRqa<k2>puRqa
{#puRqa#}¦ {%puṇḍa, as,%} m. {%= puṇḍra,%} a mark, sign.
{%—Puṇḍa-vardhana = puṇḍra-vardhana,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29466<pc>0579-c<k1>puRqarIka<k2>puRqarIka
{#puRqarIka#}¦ {%puṇḍarīka, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%puṇ%}), a lotus-flower, especially a white lotus, (used at
the end of an adj. comp. as expressive of beauty, see
Gaṇa Vyāghrādi to Pāṇ. II. 1, 56); a white umbrella;
a kind of drug; a mark on the forehead (in this
sense perhaps also m.); N. of a sacred bathing-place;
({%as%}), m. a kind of sacrifice; a species of rice; a
fragrant kind of mango; Artemisia Indica ({%= da-%}
{%manaka%}); a variety of the sugar-cane; a silk-
worm (?); a kind of leprosy; fever in an elephant;
white (the colour); a tiger; a kind of serpent; N.
of a Nāga; a pitcher, student's water-pot; N. of
the elephant of the south-east quarter; N. of an
ancient king; of a son of Nabha or Nabhas; (with
Jainas) N. of a Gaṇa-dhara; N. of a hermit the son
of Śveta-ketu and Lakṣmī; of a mountain; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of an Apsaras; of a daughter of Vasiṣṭha
and wife of Prāṇa or Pāṇḍu. {%—Puṇḍari-srajā,%}
f. ({%puṇḍari%} substituted for {%puṇḍarīka%}), Ved. a
wreath or garland of lotuses. {%—Puṇḍarīka-nārada-%}
{%saṃvāda, as,%} m., N. of the thirty-second chapter
of the Pārtha Itihāsa-samuccaya. {%—Puṇḍarīka-pa-%}
{%lāśākṣa (˚śa-akṣa), as, ī, am,%} having eyes like
the petals of a lotus. {%—Puṇḍarīka-pura, am,%} n.,
N. of a city. {%—Puṇḍarīka-plava, as,%} m. a kind of
bird. {%—Puṇḍarīka-mukhī,%} f. a kind of leech.
{%—Puṇḍarīkākṣa (˚ka-akṣa), as,%} m. ‘lotus-
eyed,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu; a kind of drug {%(=%}
{%puṇḍarya, pra-pauṇḍarīka)%}. {%—Puṇḍarīkāta-%}
{%patra (˚ka-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} having the lotus for
an umbrella (said of the autumn). {%—Puṇḍarīkāva-%}
{%taṃsa (˚ka-av˚), as, ā, am,%} having white lotus-
flowers for ear ornaments. {%—Puṇḍarīkodara-pra-%}
{%bha (˚ka-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} resplendent as the in-
terior of a white lotus.
<LEND>

<L>29467<pc>0579-c<k1>puRqarIyaka<k2>puRqarIyaka
{%Puṇḍarīyaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a divinity enu-
merated among the Viśve Devāḥ; ({%am%}), n. Ketmia
Mutabilis ({%= sthala-padma%}); a kind of drug (com-
monly called {%puṇḍarīya%}).
<LEND>
[Page0580-a+ 80]

<L>29468<pc>0580-a<k1>puRqarya<k2>puRqarya
{%Puṇḍarya, am,%}¦ n. a creeper; a medicinal plant used
as a remedy for diseased eyes ({%= pra-pauṇḍarīka%}).
<LEND>

<L>29469<pc>0580-a<k1>puRqra<k2>puRqra
{#puRqra#}¦ {%puṇḍra, as,%} m. a red variety of the
common sugar-cane, Saccharum Officinarum; a white
lotus, a lotus in general; a species of tree ({%= hrasva-%}
{%plakṣa%}); a kind of creeper, Gærtnera Racemosa
({%= ati-muktaka, vāsantī%}); a mark or line made
on the forehead with sandal &c., sectarial mark; a
worm; N. of a Daitya or infernal being considered
incarnate in Śiśu-pāla; N. of a son of Bali; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people and of their country (the
modern Bengal and Behar, ‘the country of the
sugar-cane’); N. of a mythical city between the
mountains Hima-vat and Hema-kūṭa. {%—Puṇḍra-%}
{%keli, is,%} m. an elephant. {%—Puṇḍra-deśa, as,%} m.,
N. of a district. {%—Puṇḍra-nagara, am,%} n. ‘city of
the Puṇḍras,’ N. of a town; [cf. {%pauṇḍranāgara.%}]
{%—Puṇḍra-vardhana, am,%} n., N. of a town in
Gauḍa; (also spelt {%puṇḍa-vardhana.%})
<LEND>

<L>29470<pc>0580-a<k1>puRqraka<k2>puRqraka
{%Puṇḍraka, as,%}¦ m. a red variety of the common
sugar-cane, Saccharum Officinarum; a kind of creeper,
Gærtnera Racemosa; a species of tree; a mark on
the forehead, sectarial mark; one who lives by
breeding silk-worms; N. of a man (?).
<LEND>

<L>29471<pc>0580-a<k1>puRQra<k2>puRQra
{%Puṇḍhra, as,%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a mark, sign,
sectarial mark; [cf. {%puṇḍra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29472<pc>0580-a<k1>puRya<k2>puRya
{#puRya#}¦ {%puṇya, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%pū;%} according to others fr. rt. 1. {%puṣ%} or rt.
{%puṇ;%} not met with in the earliest language), good,
pure, holy, right, righteous, virtuous, just, sacred;
happy, prosperous, favourable, propitious, auspicious,
lucky; bright, fine, beautiful, pleasing; sweet, fra-
grant (as an odour); solemn, festive, ferial; ({%am%}),
n. good, right, virtue, moral or religious merit; a
good or meritorious act; purity, purification; a reli-
gious ceremony, especially one performed by a wife
in order to retain her husband's affections and to
obtain a son; a brick trough for watering cattle, =
{%koṣṭhaka; (as),%} m., N. of a man; of a lake (in
this sense perhaps n.); ({%ā%}), f. holy basil, Ocymum
Sanctum; N. of a daughter of Kratu and San-natī.
{%—Puṇya-kartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘right-doer,’ an upright
or virtuous man. {%—Puṇya-karman, a,%} n. a virtuous
or meritorious act; ({%ā, ā, a%}), whose actions are
holy or meritorious, doing good works, upright,
righteous, virtuous, pious; [cf. {%puṇyaika-karman.%}]
{%—Puṇya-kāla, as,%} m. an auspicious time. {%—Pu-%}
{%ṇyakāla-tā,%} f. a propitious period. {%—Puṇya-kīrtti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} bearing a good name, famous, celebrated;
N. of a Buddhist (whose form was assumed by
Viṣṇu). {%—Puṇya-kṛt, t, t, t,%} ‘right-doing,’ up-
right, virtuous; N. of a divinity enumerated among
the Viśve Devāḥ. {%—Puṇya-kṛtyā,%} f. a good action.
{%—Puṇya-kṣaya, as,%} m. decay or loss of religious
merit. {%—Puṇya-kṣetra, am,%} n. a holy place or
district, a place by visiting which merit is acquired,
a place of pilgrimage. {%—Puṇya-gandha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} sweet-scented, fragrant; ({%as%}), m. the Campaka,
Michelia Champaka. {%—Puṇya-gandhi, is, is, i,%} or
{%puṇya-gandhin, ī, inī, i,%} sweet-scented, fragrant.
{%—Puṇya-gṛha, am,%} n. a house of charity, an
alms-house; a temple. {%—Puṇya-jana, as,%} m. a
good or pious or virtuous man; N. of a class of
supernatural beings; a Yakṣa or attendant of Kuvera
the god of wealth; a fiend, goblin, Rākṣasa. {%—Pu-%}
{%ṇyajaneśvara (˚na-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of the Yakṣas,’
Kuvera the Hindū deity of wealth. {%—Puṇya-jala,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} containing pure water. {%—Puṇya-jita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} gained or attained by good works.
{%—Puṇya-tara, as, am,%} purer, holier. {%—Puṇya-%}
{%tarī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make purer
or cleaner. {%—Puṇya-tā,%} f. or {%puṇya-tva, am,%} n.
purity, holiness. {%—Puṇya-tīrtha, am,%} n. a holy shrine
or place of pilgrimage. {%—Puṇya-tṛṇa, am,%} n. holy
grass; N. of the white variety of Kuśa grass.
{%—Puṇya-darśana, as, ā, am,%} of beautiful appear-
ance, beautiful; ({%as%}), m. the blue jay, {%= cāṣa;%}
{%(am),%} n. visiting holy shrines. {%—Puṇya-duh, -dhuk,%}
{%k, k,%} yielding or granting happiness or beatitude.
{%—Puṇya-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a grammarian.
[Page0580-b+ 81]
{%—Puṇya-nāman, ā,%} m., N. of one of the attend-
ants of Skanda. {%—Puṇya-puṇya-tā,%} f. perfect holi-
ness. {%—Puṇya-puruṣa, as,%} m. a godly or good
man, a man rich in moral merit. {%—Puṇya-pra-%}
{%tāpa, as,%} m. the might and efficacy of virtue or
of the merit acquired by a course of virtuous acts.
{%—Puṇya-prada, as, ā, am,%} conferring merit,
meritorious. {%—Puṇya-prasava, ās,%} m. pl. (with
Buddhists) N. of a class of deities. {%—Puṇya-phala,%}
{%am,%} n. the fruit or reward of good works or merito-
rious actions; ({%as%}), m. ‘having good fruit,’ the garden
of Lakṣmī; a grove. {%—Puṇya-bala, as,%} m., N. of
a king of Puṇya-vatī. {%—Puṇya-bharita, as, ā, am,%}
extremely blessed, abounding in holiness or bliss.
{%—Puṇya-bhāj, k, k, k,%} or {%puṇya-bhājin, ī, inī, i,%}
possessing happiness, partaker of bliss, happy; pos-
sessing merit, virtuous. {%—Puṇya-bhū, ūs,%} f. the holy
land of the Hindūs (bounded on the north by the
Himālayas, on the south by the Vindhya mountains,
and on the east and west by the sea, = Āryāvarta).
{%—Puṇya-bhūmi, is,%} f. the holy land of the Hindūs
[cf. {%puṇya-bhū%} above]; the mother of a male
child. {%—Puṇya-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed or con-
sisting of good. {%—Puṇya-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a
Buddhist patriarch. {%—Puṇya-yoga, as,%} m. the influ-
ence or effect of virtuous actions done in a former
life. {%—Puṇya-rātra, as,%} m. a good or auspicious
night; a night on which any religious commemora-
tion or ceremony is held; [cf. {%puṇyāha.%}] {%—Puṇya-%}
{%rāśi, is,%} m., N. of a man; N. of a mountain.
{%—Puṇya-labdha, as, ā, am,%} attained by good
works (as a reward in heaven). {%—Puṇya-loka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} belonging to a better world, sharing in a
better world (Ved.); ({%as%}), m. heaven, paradise.
{%—Puṇyaloka-tra,%} ind., Ved. in a better world.
{%—Puṇya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing merit, merito-
rious, pure, holy, righteous, pious, virtuous; pleasing,
beautiful; fortunate, lucky, auspicious; happy; ({%atī%}),
f., N. of a country. {%—Puṇya-vardhana, am,%} n.,
N. of a town; (probably a wrong reading for
{%puṇḍra-vardhana.%}) {%—Puṇya-varman, ā,%} m., N.
of a prince of Vi-darbha. {%—Puṇya-vāg-buddhi-%}
{%karmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} pure in word, thought, and deed.
{%—Puṇya-vijita, as, ā, am,%} acquired by merit,
merited. {%—Puṇya-śakuna, as,%} m. a bird of good
omen. {%—Puṇya-śālā,%} f. a house of charity, alms-
house. {%—Puṇya-śīla, as, ā, am,%} being of a virtuous
disposition, disposed to virtuous acts, virtuous, pious,
righteous. {%—Puṇya-śrī-garbha, as,%} m., N. of a
Bodhi-sattva. {%—Puṇya-śloka, as, ā, am,%} ‘well
spoken of,’ of good fame or reputation; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Nala; of Yudhi-ṣṭhira; of Kṛṣṇa; ({%ā%}),
f. an epithet of Draupadī; of Sītā. {%—Puṇyaśloka-%}
{%didṛkṣā,%} f. the desire of seeing Nala. {%—Puṇya-%}
{%śloka-parāṅmukha, as, ī, am,%} having the face
averted from Nala. {%—Puṇya-sañcaya, as,%} m. a
store of virtue or religious merit. {%—Puṇya-sama,%}
{%am,%} n. a good year. {%—Puṇya-sāra, as,%} m., N. of
a prince. {%—Puṇya-sundara, as,%} m., N. of a gram-
marian who arranged the Dhātu-pāṭha of Hema-
candra's grammar in alphabetical order. {%—Puṇya-%}
{%sena, as,%} m., N. of a man; of a prince of Ujjayinī.
{%—Puṇya-stambha-kara, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Puṇya-sthāna, am,%} n. a sacred place, conse-
crated ground. {%—Puṇyātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%}
pure-souled, righteous, virtuous, pious, holy. {%—Pu-%}
{%ṇyālaṅkṛta (˚ya-al˚), as, ā, am,%} adorned by
virtue; ({%as%}), m., N. of a demon. {%—Puṇyāha (˚ya-%}
{%aha), am,%} n. a good or happy or auspicious day,
holiday; {%puṇyāhaṃ vac%} in Caus., to wish any one
a happy or pleasant day. {%—Puṇyāhan (˚ya-ahan),%}
{%a,%} n., Ved. {%= puṇyāha%} above. {%—Puṇyāha-vācana,%}
{%am,%} n. the declaration of a holiday, repeating at
sacrifices &c. ‘this is a holiday’ three times, wishing
any one a happy day. {%—Puṇyaika-karman (˚ya-%}
{%ek˚), ā, ā, a,%} one whose actions are only virtuous.
{%—Puṇyodakā (˚ya-ud˚),%} f. ‘having sacred waters,’
N. of a river in the next world. {%—Puṇyodaya (˚ya-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. the resulting of good fortune (as the effect
of virtuous acts done in a former life). {%—Puṇyodyāna%}
{%(˚ya-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} having beautiful gardens.
<LEND>
[Page0580-c+ 77]

<L>29473<pc>0580-c<k1>puRyaka<k2>puRyaka
{%Puṇyaka, am,%}¦ n. a religious ceremony, festival;
a meritorious act or obligation of a religious nature
(as fasting, praying, &c.); a ceremony performed by
a woman in order to retain her husband's affections
and to obtain a son; the observance of this cere-
mony; the present made to a wife on that occasion.
{%—Puṇyaka-vrata, am,%} n. the worship of Kṛṣṇa
for a year, with daily presents, to be performed by a
woman desirous of a son.
<LEND>

<L>29474<pc>0580-c<k1>put<k2>put
{#put#}¦ {%put%} or {%pud,%} n. hell, a particular hell to
which the childless are condemned, a division of the
infernal regions considered to be the abode of those
who die childless; (a word invented to explain {%putra;%}
see Manu IX. 138.) — 2. {%pun-nāman, ā, mnī, a%}
(for 1. see under 2. {%puṃs%}), having the name Put,
called Put.
<LEND>

<L>29475<pc>0580-c<k1>puta<k2>puta
{#puta#}¦ {%puta, au,%} m. du. the buttocks; {%puta%}
and {%śrī-puta,%} a kind of metre consisting of four
times ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯¯,¯˘¯¯
<LEND>

<L>29476<pc>0580-c<k1>putArikA<k2>putArikA
{#putArikA#}¦ {%putārikā%} (?), f. the navel.
<LEND>

<L>29477<pc>0580-c<k1>putIsfYjaya<k2>putIsfYjaya
{#putIsfYjaya#}¦ {%putī-sṛñjaya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of
a people; (a wrong reading for {%pūti-sṛñjaya.%})
<LEND>

<L>29478<pc>0580-c<k1>puttala<k2>puttala
{#puttala#}¦ {%puttala, puttalaka, puttikā.%} See
p. 581, cols. 1, 2.
<LEND>

<L>29479<pc>0580-c<k1>putra<k2>putra
{#putra#}¦ {%putra, as,%} m. (perhaps connected with
{%pitṛ;%} said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pū,%} but according to
others fr. rt. 1. {%puṣ;%} traditionally said to be a
comp. {%put-tra,%} ‘preserving from the hell called Put,’
Manu IX. 138), a son, child, the young of an
animal; (at the end of a comp.) used as a diminutive
to express ‘any little thing of its kind’ [cf. {%śilā-p˚%}];
the fifth mansion from the point of conjunction of
the sun and a zodiacal sign (in astrol.), the fifth
house; N. of a son of Brahmiṣṭha; of a son of
Priya-vrata; of a son of a Brāhman; ({%au%}), m. du.
two sons, a son and daughter; ({%ī%}), f. a daughter; a
doll [cf. {%dāru-p˚%}]; (at the end of a comp.) used as
a diminutive to express ‘any little thing of its kind’
[cf. {%asi-p˚%}]; an epithet of Pārvatī; a species of
plant. {%Putra%} in the voc. sing. is sometimes used as
a mode of addressing young persons, ‘my son,’
‘my child;’ [cf. Pers. <nsi>pusr,</nsi> ‘a son;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πῶλο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πωλ-ίο-ν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pullu-s, (Marci-)por, pu-er, pu-</nsi>
<nsi>era, pu-su-s, pusa, pû-pu-s, pû-pa, pûpilla, pu-</nsi>
<nsi>tu-s;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>fula (n)</nsi> = Old Germ. <nsi>folo,</nsi> ‘a foal;’
Armor. <nsi>paotr,</nsi> ‘a boy.’] {%—Putra-kandā,%} f. a
bulbous plant supposed to cause fecundity ({%= lakṣ-%}
{%maṇā-kanda%}). {%—Putra-karman, a,%} n. a ceremony
or sacrifice on the birth of a son. {%—Putra-kalatra-%}
{%nāśa-bhīta, as, ā, am,%} fearful or apprehensive of
the destruction of wife and children. {%—Putra-kāma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. desirous of sons or children.
{%—Putrakāmeṣṭi (˚ma-iṣ˚), is,%} f., Ved. an obla-
tion or sacrifice made by one desirous of offspring.
{%—Putrakāmya,%} Nom. P. {%—Putrakāmyati,%} &c., to
wish for or be desirous of a son. {%—Putrakāmyā,%} f.,
Ved. wish for sons or children, affection for progeny.
{%—Putra-kārya, am,%} n. a ceremony relating to
a son. {%—Putra-kṛt, t, t,%} m. f. an adopted child.
{%—Putra-kṛtaka, as, ā, am,%} adopted as a child
or son. {%—Putra-kṛtya, am,%} n. the duty of a son.
{%—Putra-kṛtha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), Ved. the
bringing forth or procreation of children. {%—Putra-%}
{%krama-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work by Rāma-bhadra
on the law of inheritance. {%—Putra-ghna, as, ī, am,%}
child-killing; scil. {%yoni,%} in which the fetus dies.
{%—Putra-jagdhī,%} f. ‘one who has devoured her
children,’ an unnatural mother. {%—Putra-jāta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one to whom a son is born, having a son.
{%—Putra-jīva%} or {%putrañ-jīva%} or {%putrañ-jīvaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘giving life to children,’ the tree Putranjiva
Roxburghii (from the fruit of which necklaces are
made, supposed to be of prolific efficacy, and when
worn by children to keep them in good health).
{%—Putra-tā,%} f. or {%putra-tva, am,%} n. sonship,
filial relation. {%—Putra-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of the
119th and 120th chapters of the Bhūmi-khaṇḍa or
[Page0581-a+ 81]
second part of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Putra-da, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} giving sons or offspring; ({%ā%}), f., N. of various
plants ({%= bandhyā-karkoṭakī, garbha-dātrī,%} and
{%lakṣmaṇā-kanda%}). {%—Putra-dātrī,%} f. ‘child-giver,’
N. of a plant growing in Mālava, supposed to be
of prolific efficacy. {%—Putra-dāra, am,%} n. son and
wife, child and wife. {%—Putra-dharma, as,%} m. filial
duty. {%—Putradharma-tas,%} ind. according to the
ceremonies usual on the birth of a son. {%—Putra-%}
{%niveśana, am,%} n. the habitation or abode of a son.
{%—Putra-paṅkti, is,%} f. a line or assemblage of
sons. {%—Putra-putrādinī (˚ra-ād˚),%} f. (probably)
‘devouring sons and grandsons,’ an unnatural
mother. {%—Putra-pautra, am,%} n., {%ās,%} m. pl. sons
and grandsons. {%—Putrapautrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having
sons and grandsons. {%—Putrapautrīṇa, as, ā, am,%}
transmitted to sons and grandsons, transmitted from
son to son; hereditary. {%—Putrapautrīṇa-tā,%} f.
transmission to sons and grandsons, transmission from
son to son, hereditary descent. {%—Putra-pratinidhi,%}
{%is,%} m. a substitute for a son (as an adopted son &c.).
{%—Putra-pradā,%} f. ‘giving sons or children,’ epi-
thet of a species of Solanum {%(= kṣavikā)%}. {%—Putra-%}
{%priya, as,%} m. ‘fond of offspring,’ epithet of a kind
of bird. {%—Putra-phala-bhaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} enjoy-
ing the advantage of having a son. {%—Putra-bhadrā,%}
f. a species of plant {%(= bṛhaj-jīvantī)%}. {%—Putra-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. the share or portion of a son.
{%—Putra-bhāva, as,%} m. the being a son, the state
or condition of a son, sonship. {%—Putra-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} Ved. consisting of a son, formed of a son.
{%—Putra-lābha, as,%} m. the obtaining of a son.
 — 1. {%putra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} or {%putra-vala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a son or sons, possessing offspring.
 — 2. {%putra-vat,%} ind. like a son, as with a son, as
on the birth of a son. {%—Putra-vadhū, ūs,%} f. a son's
wife, daughter-in-law. {%—Putra-vidya, am,%} n., Ved.
obtaining sons. {%—Putra-śṛṅgī,%} f. {%= aja-śṛṅgī,%}
q. v. {%—Putra-śreṇī,%} f. ‘having a row of offspring,
i. e. of shoots or suckers,’ the plant Salvinia Cucullata.
{%—Putra-sakha, as,%} m. a friend of children, one
who is fond of children. {%—Putra-saṅkarin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} mixing or confusing sons or children (through
mixed marriages). {%—Putra-saṅgraha, as,%} m. (per-
haps) N. of a work by Śaunaka on adoption.
{%—Putra-sū, ūs,%} f. the mother of a son; [cf.
{%putrikā-prasū.%}] {%—Putra-hata, as, ā, am,%} ‘whose
sons have been killed,’ an epithet of Vasiṣṭha; ({%ī%}),
f. ‘one who has killed her son,’ an unnatural mother.
{%—Putra-hīna, as, ā, am,%} sonless, childless. {%—Pu-%}
{%trahīna-tva, am,%} n. sonlessness, childlessness. {%—Pu-%}
{%trācārya (˚ra-āc˚), as, ā, am,%} having a son for
one's teacher; ({%as%}), m. a father instructed in sacred
science by his son. {%—Putrādinī (˚ra-ād˚),%} f. ‘son-
devouring,’ an unnatural mother; (according to a
Scholiast when used literally spelt with two {%t's,%} e. g.
{%puttrādinī vyāghrī,%} a tigress that devours her
young; cf. {%putra-jagdhī, putra-hatī.%}) {%—Putrān-%}
{%nāda (˚ra-anna-ada), as, ā, am,%} eating the
food of a son, living at a son's expense; ({%as%}), m.
one who is maintained by his son. {%—Putrārthin%}
{%(˚ra-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} wishing for a son. {%—Putrī-%}
{%karaṇa-mīmāṃsā,%} f., N. of a treatise by Nanda-
paṇḍita on the adoption of sons. {%—Putrī-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to adopt as a son.
{%—Putrī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} adopted as a son. {%—Pu-%}
{%trepsu (˚ra-īp˚), us, us, u,%} wishing for a son.
{%—Putreṣṭi (˚ra-iṣ˚), is,%} or {%putreṣṭikā (˚ra-%}
{%iṣ˚),%} f. a sacrifice performed to obtain male children,
one performed at the time of adoption. {%—Putrai-%}
{%śvarya (˚ra-aiś˚), am,%} n. ‘son's proprietorship,’ a
resignation of property or power by a father to his
son. {%—Putraiṣaṇā (˚ra-eṣ˚),%} f., Ved. desire or
longing for a son.
<LEND>

<L>29480<pc>0581-a<k1>puttala<k2>puttala
{%Puttala, as,%}¦ m. or {%puttalī,%} f. {%= puttalaka, put-%}
{%talikā%} below. {%—Puttala-dahana, am,%} n. or {%put-%}
{%tala-vidhi, is,%} m. ‘doll-burning or doll-rite,’ burning
an effigy in place of the body of one who has died
abroad. {%—Puttalī-pūjā,%} f. image-worship, idolatry.
<LEND>

<L>29481<pc>0581-a<k1>puttalaka<k2>puttalaka
{%Puttalaka, as,%}¦ m. or {%puttalikā,%} f. a puppet,
doll, small statue, image, idol, effigy.
<LEND>
[Page0581-b+ 78]

<L>29482<pc>0581-b<k1>puttikA<k2>puttikA
{%Puttikā,%}¦ f. the white ant or termite (so called from
its doll-like form); {%= pataṅgikā,%} a small kind of bee.
<LEND>

<L>29483<pc>0581-b<k1>putraka<k2>putraka
{%Putraka, as,%}¦ m. a little son, little boy, child, a
son (often used as a term of endearment); a puppet,
doll, figure of stone or wood or lac, &c.; a rogue,
cheat; a small and venomous species of animal
(enumerated among the Mūṣikas); a fabulous
animal with eight legs ({%= śarabha%}); a grasshopper;
hair; a species of tree; N. of a man, the supposed
founder of the city of Pāṭali-putraka; a particular
mountain; ({%akā%} or {%ikā%}), f. a daughter; a daughter
appointed to raise male issue to be adopted by a
father who has no sons; a puppet, doll, figure of
wood, &c.; the cotton or down of the tamarisk;
(at the end of a comp.) used as a diminutive to
express any little thing of its kind (e. g. {%asi-p˚,%}
{%khaḍga-p˚%}). {%—Putrikā-putra, as,%} m. a daughter's
son who by agreement or adoption becomes the son
of her father (one of the twelve heirs acknowledged
by the old Hindū law); a grandson. {%—Putrikā-%}
{%prasū, ūs,%} f. the mother of a daughter. {%—Putrikā-%}
{%bhartṛ, tā,%} m. a daughter's husband. {%—Putrikā-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. a daughter's son, a grandson.
<LEND>

<L>29484<pc>0581-b<k1>putrin<k2>putrin
{%Putrin, ī, iṇi, i,%}¦ having a son or sons, possessing
children; ({%ī%}), m. the father of a son; ({%iṇī%}), f. the
mother of a son or of children generally; a para-
sitical plant; the plant Siphonanthus Indica.
<LEND>

<L>29485<pc>0581-b<k1>putriya<k2>putriya
{%Putriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
son, filial; procuring a son; {%a-putriya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. unfavourable to sons or children.
<LEND>

<L>29486<pc>0581-b<k1>putrIkf<k2>putrIkf
{%Putrī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to adopt as a son. {%—Putrī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
adopted as a son.
<LEND>

<L>29487<pc>0581-b<k1>putrIya<k2>putrIya<h>1
1. {%putrīya = putriya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>29488<pc>0581-b<k1>putrIya<k2>putrIya<h>2
2. {%putrīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%putrīyati,%} &c., to wish or
desire a son or children; to treat like a son; Desid.
{%puputrīyiṣati, putitrīyiṣati, putrīyiyiṣati,%}
{%puputitrīyiyiṣiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>29489<pc>0581-b<k1>putrIyat<k2>putrIyat
{%Putrīyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing for a son.
<LEND>

<L>29490<pc>0581-b<k1>putrIyA<k2>putrIyA
{%Putrīyā,%}¦ f. the desire of or wish for a son.
<LEND>

<L>29491<pc>0581-b<k1>putrIyitf<k2>putrIyitf
{%Putrīyitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who wishes for a son.
<LEND>

<L>29492<pc>0581-b<k1>putrya<k2>putrya
{%Putrya, as, ā, am, = putriya,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29493<pc>0581-b<k1>puT<k2>puT
{#puT#}¦ {%puth,%} cl. 4. P. {%puthyati, pupotha,%}
{%pothitum,%} to injure, hurt, kill: Caus.
{%pothayati, -yitum,%} to crush, bruise, kill, destroy,
annihilate; to overpower or drown (one sound by
another); to speak; to shine; [cf. rt. {%punth.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29494<pc>0581-b<k1>pudgala<k2>pudgala
{#pudgala#}¦ {%pudgala, as, ā, am,%} beautiful, hand-
some, of a handsome form or figure; having form
or property; ({%as%}), m. the body, matter; the soul,
personal identity; an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>29495<pc>0581-b<k1>puddala<k2>puddala
{%Puddala, as,%}¦ m. a various reading for {%pudgala.%}
<LEND>

<L>29496<pc>0581-b<k1>puna<k2>puna
{#puna#}¦ {%puna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pū%}), purifying,
cleaning; [cf. {%kim-p˚, kulam-p˚,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>29497<pc>0581-b<k1>punaca<k2>punaca
{#punaca#}¦ {%punaca%} (?), N. of a country in the
north of India.
<LEND>

<L>29498<pc>0581-b<k1>punar<k2>punar
{#punar#}¦ {%punar,%} ind. again, afresh, anew, once
more; back, in an opposite direction, (with rt. 1. {%dā,%} to
give back, requite, to give up; with rts. 5. {%i%} or 1. {%gā%} or
{%gam,%} to go back, return home, to go away again, to
escape; with {%bhū,%} to exist again, to be renewed, to be-
come a wife again, Manu IX. 175; cf. {%punar-bhū%});
{%punaḥ punaḥ,%} again and again, repeatedly; {%punar — %}
{%punar,%} at one time — at another time.
<LEND>

<L>29499<pc>0581-b<k1>punar<k2>punar
{%Punar%}¦ is often used to introduce further details or
simply as a connecting particle in a sentence, in the
sense of ‘further,’ ‘furthermore,’ ‘besides,’ ‘now.’
As an adversative particle {%punar%} is equivalent to
‘on the other hand,’ ‘on the contrary,’ ‘but,’ ‘yet,’
‘still,’ ‘and yet,’ ‘notwithstanding,’ ‘nevertheless,’
‘however.’ The construction {%vā punar%} often takes
the place of the simple {%vā,%} e. g. {%adroheṇaiva bhū-%}
{%tānām alpa-droheṇa vā, punaḥ,%} with no injury
or with the least possible injury to animated beings,
Manu IV. 2. {%Punar api,%} even again, and on the
other hand, also. {%Kim punar,%} how much more!
how much less! see {%kim%}. {%—Punaḥ-pada, am,%} n.,
Ved. ‘a repeated portion of a verse,’ the burden
[Page0581-c+ 81]
(of a hymn), refrain; ({%as, ā, am%}), containing a
refrain. {%—Punaḥ-parājaya, as,%} m. losing again
(what has been won). {%—Punaḥ-pāka, as,%} m. cook-
ing afresh, repeated boiling or cooking; a repeated
baking (of earthen vessels); {%punaḥpākaṃ kṛ,%} to
cook afresh or again. {%—Punaḥ-punā,%} f., N. of a
river in Behar, the Poonpoon (perhaps so called
from its meandering course). {%—Punaḥ-pratyupa-%}
{%kāra, as,%} m. retribution, requital, retaliation. {%—Pu-%}
{%naḥ-pravṛddha, as, ā, am,%} grown again. {%—Pu-%}
{%naḥ-prāpya, as, ā, am,%} to be obtained again,
recoverable. {%—Punaḥ-saṃskāra, as,%} m. renewed
investiture, repetition of any essential ceremony (as
the reinvestiture of a Brāhman with the sacrificial
cord when he has forfeited it by unknowingly drink-
ing spirits &c.). {%—Punaḥ-saṃskṛta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. fitted up again, repaired, mended. {%—Punaḥ-%}
{%saṅgama, as,%} m. coming together again, meeting
again, reunion. {%—Punaḥ-sandarśana, am,%} n. seeing
one another again. {%—Punaḥ-sandhāna, am,%} n.
uniting again, reuniting; restoring (the sacred fire
when it has gone out). {%—Punaḥ-sambhava, as,%} m.
coming into existence again. {%—Punaḥ-sara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. running back (as a dog returning by the
way that it came); an epithet of the Achyranthes
Aspera (the flowers of which are turned back;
cf. {%apā-mārga, parāk-puṣpī, pratyak-puṣpī%}).
{%—Punaḥ-sukha, as, ā, am,%} again agreeable or
pleasant. {%—Punaḥ-stuti, is,%} f., Ved. repeated praise,
a repeated ceremony. {%—Punaḥ-stoma, as,%} m., N. of
an Ekāha. {%—Punar-apagama, as,%} m. going away
again. {%—Punar-abhidhāna, am,%} n. mentioning
again. {%—Punar-abhiṣeka, as,%} m., Ved. anointing
again. {%—Punar-arthitā,%} f. a reiterated request or
entreaty. {%—Punar-asu, us, us, u,%} Ved. breathing
again, coming to life again. {%—Punar-āgata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} come back again, returned. {%—Punar-āgama,%}
{%as,%} m. coming back, return. {%—Punar-āgamana,%}
{%am,%} n. the act of coming back, returning to the
place set out from. {%—Punar-āgāmin, ī, inī, i,%}
coming back, returning. {%—Punar-ādāyam,%} ind.,
Ved. repeatedly. {%—Punar-ādi, is, is, i,%} Ved. begin-
ning afresh, repeated. {%—Punar-ādhāna, am,%} n.
renewing or replacing a consecrated fire (according
to Kullūka {%punar-ādhānaṃ kuryāt = smārtāgnīn%}
{%śrautāgnīn vā ādadhyāt%}). {%—Punar-ādheya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. to be renewed or replaced (on the altar,
said of fire); ({%am%}), n. renewing or replacing the
consecrated fire; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Soma festival.
{%—Punarādheyaka, am,%} n. renewing or replacing
a consecrated fire. {%—Punarādheyika, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. relating to the act of replacing the consecrated
fire. {%—Punar-āyana, am,%} n., Ved. coming back,
return. {%—Punar-ālambha, as,%} m., Ved. seizing or
taking hold of again. {%—Punar-āvarta, as,%} m. re-
turn, revolution; repeated birth. {%—Punarāvarta-%}
{%nandā,%} f., N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Punar-%}
{%āvartin, ī, inī, i,%} returning (to mundane exist-
ence); leading back (to mundane existence); sub-
ject to successive births. {%—Punar-āvṛtta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. repeated. {%—Punar-āvṛtti, is,%} f. return
(to mundane existence); repetition; revision (of a
book &c.). {%—Punar-āhāra, as,%} m., Ved. taking
again, recapture. {%—Punar-ukta, as, ā, am,%} said
again, reiterated, repeated, superfluous; ({%am%}), n.
repetition, useless repetition, tautology. {%—Punar-%}
{%ukta-janman, ā,%} m. ‘whose birth is repeated,’ a
Brāhman. {%—Punarukta-tā,%} f. repetition, tautology.
{%—Punarukta-bhukta-viṣaya, as, ā, am,%} (an
occupation) in which the objects of sense are re-
peatedly enjoyed. {%—Punaruktavad-ābhāsa, as,%} m.
appearance of repetition, seeming tautology (a figure
of speech). {%—Punar-ukti, is,%} f. saying again, useless
repetition, tautology; a mere word, empty word.
{%—Punarukti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having repetition,
tautological. {%—Punar-utthāna, am,%} n. rising again,
resurrection. {%—Punar-utpatti, is,%} f. the coming
again into being, reproduction, new birth; metem-
psychosis. {%—Punar-utsṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. re-
peatedly let loose (said of a bull). {%—Punar-utsyūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. sewed or mended again, patched
[Page0582-a+ 79]
up. {%—Punar-upagamana, am,%} n. coming back,
returning. {%—Punar-upāgama, as,%} m. return. {%—Pu-%}
{%nar-upoḍhā,%} f. married again, re-married. {%—Punar-%}
{%gamana, am,%} n. going again, returning. {%—Punar-%}
{%grahaṇa, am,%} n., Ved. repeatedly taking, repeated
taking up (of ghee &c. with a ladle); repetition.
{%—Punarjanma-jaya, as,%} m. ‘victory over future
birth,’ liberation, final emancipation, freedom from
transmigration. {%—Punar-janman, a,%} n. new or second
birth, regeneration, future birth by transmigration,
metempsychosis; ({%ā, ā, a%}), born again, regenerated.
{%—Punar-jāta, as, ā, am,%} born again, regenerated.
{%—Punar-darśana, am,%} n. seeing again, ({%punar-%}
{%darśanāya,%} ‘au revoir.’) {%—Punar-dātṛ, tā,%} m.
giving again, a rewarder, recompenser. {%—Punar-%}
{%dāra-kṛyā,%} f. taking a second wife (after the death
of the first). {%—Punar-dhenu, us,%} f. a cow that
again gives milk. {%—Punar-nava%} or {%punar-ṇava,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. becoming new or young again,
being renewed or restored to youth; ({%as%}), m. a
finger-nail; ({%ā%}), f. hog-weed, Boerhavia Procumbens.
{%—Punar-niṣkṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. repaired or
mended again. {%—Punar-bāla, as, ā, am,%} = <lang n="greek">παλίμ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">παις,</lang> become a child again, become childish, being
in second childhood. {%—Punar-bhava, as, ā, am,%}
born again; ({%as%}), m. new birth, regeneration, trans-
migration; a finger-nail; a species of Punar-navā
with red flowers. {%—Punar-bhavin, ī,%} m. the sentient
soul (existing again after the dissolution of one body
in another form). {%—Punar-bhāva, as,%} m. new birth.
{%—Punar-bhāvin, ī, inī, i,%} being born again.
{%—Punar-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} produced again or anew,
reproduced, born again, regenerated, restored to
youth, renovated; ({%ūs%}), f. a virgin widow re-married;
re-existence. {%—Punar-bhoga, as,%} m. repeated en-
joyment; a return of fruition, perception of pleasure
or pain as a reward of former actions. {%—Punar-%}
{%magha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘having repeated gifts,’
covetous, avaricious; repeatedly offering oblations or
granting gifts. {%—Punar-manya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
(perhaps) again thinking of, remembering; (Sāy.)
{%= punaḥ stotavya,%} to be praised or adored again.
{%—Punar-mṛtyu, us,%} m., Ved. repeated or second
death. {%—Punar-yajña, as,%} m., Ved. a repeated
sacrifice. {%—Punar-yātrā,%} f. a repeated procession.
{%—Punar-yuvan, ā, atī, a,%} Ved. again young, re-
stored to youth. {%—Punar-lābha, as,%} m. obtaining
again, recovery. {%—Punar-vaktavya, as, ā, am,%}
to be repeated. {%—Punarvaktavya-tā,%} f. necessity of
being repeated. {%—Punar-vacana, am,%} n. saying
again, repeating; repeated text or injunction. {%—Pu-%}
{%nar-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing the word
{%punar%}. {%—Punar-vatsa, as,%} m. a weaned calf that
begins to suck again; N. of the author of the hymn
Ṛg-veda VIII. 9. {%—Punar-varaṇa, am,%} n., Ved.
choosing again. {%—Punar-vasu, us,%} m. (perhaps) ‘re-
storing goods,’ the fifth (or seventh) of the lunar
asterisms (containing according to some authorities,
two, and according to others, four stars; in this
sense generally {%ū,%} m. du.); N. of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa;
an epithet of Śiva; ‘born under the Nakṣatra Punar-
vasu,’ an epithet of Kātyāyana or Vara-ruci; N. of
a son of Taittiri, father of Abhi-jit and grandfather
of Āhuka, or of a son of Abhi-jit (Ari-dyota) and
father of Āhuka; epithet of a particular Loka or
division of the universe; commencement of wealth.
{%—Punar-vivāha, as,%} m. second marriage. {%—Pu-%}
{%nar-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} Ved. slaying or destroying in
return. {%—Punar-havis, is,%} n., Ved. repeated sacri-
ficial oblation. {%—Punaś-candrā,%} f., N. of a river.
{%—Punaś-carvaṇa, am,%} n. chewing repeatedly,
chewing the cud, ruminating. {%—Punaś-citi, is,%} f.,
Ved. piling up again.
<LEND>

<L>29500<pc>0582-a<k1>punT<k2>punT
{#punT#}¦ {%punth,%} cl. 1. P. {%punthati, punthi-%}
{%tum,%} to hurt, give pain; to suffer pain
or uneasiness; (a various reading for {%yunth.%})
<LEND>

<L>29501<pc>0582-a<k1>pundAsa<k2>pundAsa
{#pundAsa#}¦ {%pun-dāsa.%} See under 2. {%puṃs,%} p. 578.
<LEND>

<L>29502<pc>0582-a<k1>punnAman<k2>punnAman<h>1
{#punnAman#} 1¦. and 2. {%pun-nāman.%} See under
2. {%puṃs%} and {%put,%} pp. 578, 580.
<LEND>
[Page0582-b+ 76]

<L>29503<pc>0582-b<k1>pupUzat<k2>pupUzat
{#pupUzat#}¦ {%pupūṣat, an, antī, at%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. 1. {%pū%}), wishing to cleanse or purify.
<LEND>

<L>29504<pc>0582-b<k1>pupUzA<k2>pupUzA
{%Pupūṣā,%}¦ f. the wish or desire to cleanse or
purify.
<LEND>

<L>29505<pc>0582-b<k1>puppuwa<k2>puppuwa
{#puppuwa#}¦ {%puppuṭa, as,%} m., N. of a particular
disease, swelling of the palate and gums.
<LEND>

<L>29506<pc>0582-b<k1>pupPula<k2>pupPula
{#pupPula#}¦ {%pupphula, as,%} m. flatulency, wind
in the stomach.
<LEND>

<L>29507<pc>0582-b<k1>pupPusa<k2>pupPusa
{#pupPusa#}¦ {%pupphusa, as,%} m. the lungs [cf.
{%phupphasa%}]; the pericarp or seed-pod of a lotus.
<LEND>

<L>29508<pc>0582-b<k1>pum<k2>pum
{#pum#}¦ {%pum, pum-anujā,%} &c. See under 2.
{%puṃs,%} p. 578, col. 3, and p. 579, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>29509<pc>0582-b<k1>pur<k2>pur<h>1
{#pur#} 1¦. {%pur%} (fr. rt. {%pṝ%}), only in inst. pl.
{%pūrbhis,%} Ved. in abundance, abundantly; (Sāy.) =
{%pūrvakaiḥ stavaiḥ,%} with former praises.
<LEND>

<L>29510<pc>0582-b<k1>pur<k2>pur<h>2
{#pur#} 2¦. {%pur%} (probably an artificial rt.
invented to furnish an etymology for {%puras%}
and {%purā%} below), cl. 6. P. {%purati, puritum,%} to
precede, go before, go at the head, lead.
<LEND>

<L>29511<pc>0582-b<k1>puraga<k2>puraga
{%Pura-ga, as, ā, am%}¦ (a corruption of {%puro-ga%}),
inclined or disposed towards, favourably inclined.
{%—Puragā-vaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a forest.
<LEND>

<L>29512<pc>0582-b<k1>puratas<k2>puratas
{%Puratas,%}¦ ind. before (said both of place and
time), in front, in advance, in the presence of (with
gen.); {%purataḥ kṛ,%} to place in front, cause to
precede, give the lead to.
<LEND>

<L>29513<pc>0582-b<k1>puranDi<k2>puranDi
{%Puran-dhi, is,%}¦ f. ({%puram%} connected with {%puras%}
and {%purā,%} but by some considered to be fr. rt. {%pṝ%}),
Ved. understanding, intelligence, prudence, wisdom;
praise; ({%ayas%}), f. pl. good thoughts or reflections;
({%is, is, i%}), intelligent, prudent, wise (said of Pūṣan,
Indra, a Ṛbhu, Bhaga, Savitṛ, Heaven and Earth;
perhaps also {%is,%} m., N. of a particular deity); (ac-
cording to Sāy.) {%= strī-rūpa%} or {%rūpa-vat%}. {%—Pu-%}
{%randhi-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. endowed with wisdom
or understanding.
<LEND>

<L>29514<pc>0582-b<k1>puranDri<k2>puranDri
{%Puran-dhri, is%}¦ or {%ī,%} f. an elderly married woman,
respectable matron; a woman whose husband and
children are living.
<LEND>

<L>29515<pc>0582-b<k1>puras<k2>puras
{%Puras,%}¦ ind. before, in front, in advance, in the
presence of, before the eyes of (with gen., e. g.
{%tasya puro vācam ādade,%} he commenced a speech
in his presence; or in the earlier language with the
abl. or loc., opposed to {%paścā, paścāt, pṛṣṭhe%});
in the east, from the east, towards the east, east-
ward, ({%dakṣiṇataḥ puraḥ,%} towards the south-east);
[cf. {%purā, puratas, pūrva:%} Zend <nsi>para,</nsi> ‘before:’
Gr. <lang n="greek">πάρος, προ-πάοι-θεν, πρόσθε, πρόσθιος,</lang> perhaps
<lang n="greek">πρες</lang> in <lang n="greek">πρέσβυς:</lang> perhaps Lat. <nsi>coram</nsi> for <nsi>poram,</nsi>
<nsi>palam</nsi> for <nsi>param:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>faura,</nsi> ‘before;’ <nsi>faur,</nsi>
‘for:’ Old Germ. <nsi>vora,</nsi> ‘before;’ <nsi>furi,</nsi> ‘for:’ Old
Pruss. <nsi>pirsdan,</nsi> ‘before.’] {%—Pura-uṣṇih, k,%} f.,
Ved., N. of a metre of three Pādas, the first con-
taining twelve, and the second and third eight
syllables each. {%—Pura-etṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. one who
goes before, a guide, leader. {%—Puraḥ-pāka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having fulfilment at hand, near fulfilment.
{%—Puraḥ-prasravaṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pouring
forth; (Sāy.) {%= purastād gacchat%}. {%—Puraḥ-pra-%}
{%hartṛ, tā,%} m. one who fights in the front (of the
battle). {%—Puraḥ-phala, as, ā, am,%} having fruit
night at hand, exhibiting fruit in advance, promising
fruit. {%—Puraḥ-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. sitting in front,
presiding; sitting towards the east. {%—Puraḥ-sara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} going before or in advance; ({%as%}), m.
one who goes before, a forerunner, precursor, har-
binger, attendant; (at the end of comps. {%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), having as an attendant, attended by, preceded
by, connected with, with [cf. {%priyākhyāna-p˚%}];
({%am%}), ind. with, after. {%—Puraḥ-sthātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}
Ved. standing at the head, a leader. {%—Puraḥ-%}
{%sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} standing before one's eyes. {%—Pu-%}
{%raḥ-sphurat, an, atī%} or {%antī, at,%} opening or be-
coming manifest before any one. {%—Puraś-caraṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} making preparation; ({%am%}), n. a pre-
paratory or introductory rite, preparation; repetition
[Page0582-c+ 81]
of the name of a deity accompanied with burnt
offerings. {%—Puraścaraṇa-candrikā%} and {%puraśca-%}
{%raṇa-paddhati-mālā,%} f., N. of two works. {%—Pu-%}
{%raścaraṇa-tā,%} f. the being engaged in making pre-
parations. {%—Puraś-chada, as,%} m. a species of grass,
Imperata Cylindrica (commonly called {%ulu%}); a nip-
ple. {%—Puras-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of placing in
front, &c.; making perfect (?). {%—Puras-karaṇīya%}
or {%puras-kartavya, as, ā, am,%} to be placed in
front, to be set before; to be honoured, to be treated
with deference or respect; to be prepared or fitted
out; to be made complete. {%—Puras-kāra, as,%} m.
the placing before or in front; preference; showing
respect, treating with honour, distinction, deference;
worshipping; consecrating; causing to go before, ac-
companying, attending; preparing, making ready;
arranging, putting in array, making complete; attack-
ing, assailing; accusation; anticipating, expecting; (at
the end of a comp.) preceded or accompanied by,
joined or connected with, including. {%—Puras-kārya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} to be placed in front or appointed, to be
charged or commissioned; to be prepared or fitted out,
&c. {%—Puras-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to bring to the front, place before or in front,
station in front, cause to precede, hold before one's
self; to make one's leader; to lead; to place in office,
appoint; to show respect, pay respect, honour; to
set before one's self, keep in sight, have respect to,
make one's rule of conduct, attend to, regard, choose,
prefer; to show, evince, betray, manifest; to use
as a pretext. {%—Puras-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} placed
before or in front; advanced to the foremost rank,
placed in office, appointed; accompanied or attended
by, combined with, provided or furnished with, pos-
sessing; distinguished, honoured, respected; revered,
adored, worshipped; attended to, regarded, chosen,
adopted; made perfect, finished, polished; prepared;
sprinkled with holy water, anointed, initiated; con-
secrated; anticipated; accused, calumniated; harassed
or attacked by an enemy. {%—Puraskṛta-madhyama-%}
{%krama, as, ā, am,%} taking or adopting a middle
course. {%—Puras-kṛtya,%} ind. having placed before
or caused to precede; having appointed; having paid
respect to or honoured; having rewarded; having
attended to or regarded. {%—Puras-kriyā,%} f. a pre-
paratory or introductory rite; showing honour, de-
monstration of respect. {%—Puro-agni, is,%} m., Ved.
the foremost fire or fire in front. {%—Puro-'kṣam,%}
ind., Ved. before the axle-tree. {%—Puro-ga, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} going before, preceding, leading, a leader;
first, chief, principal, pre-eminent; (at the end of a
comp.) preceded by, accompanied by (e. g. {%devā%}
{%Agni-purogamāḥ,%} the gods preceded by Agni).
{%—Puro-gata, as, ā, am,%} standing or being in
front of; preceded, gone before. {%—Puro-gati, is, is,%}
{%i,%} preceding, going before; ({%is%}), m. a dog; ({%is%}), f.
precedence, going before. {%—Puro-gantṛ, tā,%} m. a
messenger who goes before. {%—Puro-gama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} going before or in front, travelling in front,
preceding, leading, a leader; first, most excellent;
best; (at the end of a comp.) preceded by, accom-
panied by. {%—Puro-gamana, am,%} n. going before,
preceding. {%—Puro-gava, as, ī,%} m. f., Ved. one who
precedes, a leader. {%—Puro-gā, ās,%} m., Ved. going
before, a leader. {%—Puro-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going in
front or before, preceding, a leader, one who pre-
cedes; ({%ī%}), m. a dog. {%—Puro-guru, us, us,%} or {%vī, u,%}
Ved. heavy before or in front. {%—Purojanma-tā,%} f.
priority of birth. {%—Puro-janman, ā, ā, a,%} born
before. {%—Puro-java, as, ā, am,%} excelling in speed,
swifter than; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Medhātithi
and of a Varṣa named after him; of a son of Prāṇa.
{%—Puro-jiti, is,%} f., Ved. previous possession or ac-
quisition. {%—Puro-jyotis, is, is, is,%} Ved. preceded by
light. {%—Puro-ḍāś, -ḍās%} (or {%-ḷās%}), Ved. or {%puro-ḍāśa,%}
{%as,%} m. a sacrificial cake of ground rice usually divided
into pieces and offered in one or more cups ({%kapāla%});
an oblation of ghee or clarified butter with cakes of
ground meal; an oblation in general; a sort of flat
ladle or spoon used for placing the cakes in the
sacrificial fire; the orts or leavings of any substance
[Page0583-a+ 81]
used in an oblation to fire; Soma juice as drunk at
particular sacrifices; a Mantra or prayer recited in
offering oblations to fire. {%—Puroḍāśin, ī, inī, i,%}
Ved. connected with the sacrificial cake. {%—Puro-%}
{%ḍāśīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to the Puroḍāśa or
sacrificial cake, fit to be offered in oblations. {%—Pu-%}
{%roḍāśya, as, ā, am,%} intended for the sacrificial cake,
fit for offering with ghee as an oblation to fire.
{%—Puro-dhas,%} 2. {%puro-dhā, puro-dhātṛ, puro-dhā-%}
{%nīya, purodhikā,%} see under 1. {%puro-dhā,%} col. 3.
{%—Puronuvākya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having an
invitatory verse; [cf. the next.] {%—Puro-'nuvākyā%}
{%(˚ras-an˚),%} f., Ved., scil. {%ṛc,%} an introductory or
invitatory verse. {%—Puro-bhāga, as,%} m. the front
part, fore part; officiousness, meddling in other
people's affairs, obtrusiveness; malevolence; envy;
({%as, ā, am%}), obtrusive, meddlesome. {%—Purobhāgi-%}
{%tā,%} f. officiousness, obtrusiveness; malevolence.
{%—Puro-bhāgin, ī, inī, i,%} taking the first share;
obtrusive, officious; malevolent, censorious, fault-
finding; envious, jealous. {%—Puro-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%}
Ved. being in front, excelling, superior (said of
Indra; according to Sāy. {%yuddhe purataḥ śatrūn%}
{%avāpnotīti purobhūḥ%}). {%—Puro-māruta, as,%} m. a
wind blowing from before or in front, east wind
(opposed to {%paścān-māruta%}). {%—Puro-yāvan, ā,%}
{%arī, a,%} Ved. going in front, leading; (Sāy.) {%= pu-%}
{%rato miśrayitṛ,%} mingling foremost (in battles).
{%—Puro-yudh, t, t, t,%} or {%puro-yodha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. fighting before or in front. {%—Puro-ratha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. one whose chariot is foremost; surpassing,
excelling, superior. {%—Puroruṅ-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. furnished with the Puro-ruc. {%—Puro-ruc, k, k,%}
{%k,%} Ved. shining before or in front of, shining in the
east; ({%k%}), f., N. of certain Nivid formularies (or Padas)
recited at the morning sacrifice in the Ājya ceremony
before the principal hymn ({%sūkta%}) or any part of it.
{%—Puro-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being before the eyes or
in the presence of, being in front. {%—Puro-vasu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. preceded by wealth (?); (perhaps a cor-
ruption of {%purū-vasu.%}) {%—Puro-vāta, as,%} m. wind
from before, east wind. {%—Puro-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}
being before, preceding. {%—Puro-havis, is, is, is,%}
Ved. previously provided with sacrifices or oblations.
{%—Puro-hita,%} see under 1. {%puro-dhā,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>29516<pc>0583-a<k1>purastAt<k2>purastAt
{%Purastāt,%}¦ ind. before, in front of (with abl. or
gen.) in advance, towards the front, forward, at the
beginning or commencement, in the first place; ere;
previously, formerly, first; before the eyes of, in the
presence of; eastward, towards the east, in the east,
from the east [cf. {%uttara-p˚%}]; in the preceding
part (of a book), further on, in the sequel. {%—Pu-%}
{%rastāj-japa, as,%} m., Ved. a preceding Japa. {%—Pu-%}
{%rastāj-jyotis, is, is, is,%} N. of a kind of Triṣṭubh,
the first Pāda of which contains eight syllables.
{%—Purastād-uddhāra, as,%} m., Ved. a part given in
advance. {%—Purastād-dhoma, as,%} m. (fr. {%purastāt +%}
{%homa%}), Ved. an introductory sacrifice. {%—Purastād-%}
{%dhoma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having an introductory
sacrifice. {%—Purastād-bṛhatī,%} f., Ved. a kind of
Bṛhatī metre, the first Pāda or which contains twelve
syllables.
<LEND>

<L>29517<pc>0583-a<k1>purastAtna<k2>purastAtna
{%Purastātna, as, ā (?), am,%}¦ preceding, going before.
<LEND>

<L>29518<pc>0583-a<k1>purA<k2>purA
{%Purā,%}¦ ind. (perhaps and old inst. sing. fr. a form
{%pura%} for {%para%}), in former times, formerly, of old,
in the olden time, in the days of old, of yore;
before, hitherto, up to the present time (with {%na,%}
‘never’); firstly, in the first place, first, at first (opposed
to {%paścā, paścāt%}); soon, ere long, shortly, in a
short time, by and by (in this sense giving a future
sense to the pres. by Pāṇ. III. 3, 4, e. g. {%purā%}
{%dūṣayati sthalīm,%} ere long he will contaminate
the earth, Raghu-v. XII. 30; {%āloke te nipatati%}
{%purā,%} soon she will fall within [the range of] thy
sight, Megh. 84); before, ere (with abl. and in the
earlier language also with dat.); for the defence or
safety of (Ved.); securely from (Ved.); with the
exception of, except, besides (Ved.); [cf. {%puras,%}
{%pūrva;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">πάροι, πάροιθε, παροίτερος, πάλαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πάλαιος,</lang> perhaps <lang n="greek">πέλας, πλήσιος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>por</nsi> in <nsi>por-</nsi>
<nsi>tendere;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>faura, faur;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>for,</nsi>
[Page0583-b+ 81]
<nsi>fora-, fore-.</nsi>] {%—Purā-kathā,%} f. a story of the past,
an old legend. {%—Purā-kalpa, as,%} m. a former
creation, former age; a story or tale of the past.
{%—Purā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done formerly or of old,
done long ago; done or observed previously; begun,
commenced. {%—Purā-kṛti, is,%} f. the former mode
of action. {%—Purā-ja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. former,
existing from of old or from aforetime (Sāy. {%=%}
{%pūrva-jāta, cirantana%}). {%—Purā-yoni, is, is, i,%}
of ancient origin or lineage; an epithet of kings.
{%—Purā-vasu, us,%} m. an epithet of Bhīṣma.
{%—Purā-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing the events of former
times, knowing or acquainted with the past; an
epithet of kings. {%—Purā-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} that
which has occurred or taken place in former times,
long since transpired; one who has lived in former
times; relating to ancient times, referring to times
of yore; ({%am%}), n. former conduct, former mode of
action; any old or legendary event; history, any
account of former events traditionary or heroic.
{%—Purāvṛtta-kathā,%} f. or {%purāvṛttākhyāna%}
{%(˚ta-ākh˚), am,%} n. an old story or legend, a story
of the past. {%—Purāvṛttākhyāna-kathana (˚ta-%}
{%ākh˚), am,%} n. telling old stories, relating tales of
the past. {%—Purā-sāh, ṣāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. superior from
ancient times; (Sāy.) {%= purāṇām abhibhavitṛ,%}
conqueror of cities. {%—Purodbhava (˚rā-ud˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of former or prior origin; ({%ā%}), f. a species of
plant, a drug ({%= mahā-medā%}). {%—Puropanīta (˚rā-%}
{%up˚), as, ā, am,%} formerly obtained or possessed.
<LEND>

<L>29519<pc>0583-b<k1>purARa<k2>purARa
{%Purāṇa, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (opposed to {%nūtana,%}
{%nava%}), belonging to ancient or olden times, ancient,
old, aged, primeval; worn out, laid aside; ({%am%}), n.
a thing of the past, past event; a tale of the past,
ancient history legendary and traditionary, legend
(= Gr. <lang n="greek">λόγος, μῦθος</lang>); the N. given to certain well-
known sacred works, supposed to have been com-
piled by the poet Vyāsa, and comprising the whole
body of modern Hindū mythology (each of which
should treat of five topics; cf. {%pañca-lakṣaṇa.%}
There are eighteen acknowledged Purāṇas, usually
reckoned as follow: 1. Kūrma-p˚; 2. Garuḍa-p˚;
3. Vṛhan-nāradīya-p˚; 4. Padma-p˚; 5. Brahma-p˚;
6. Brahma-vaivarta-p˚, which is of very modern
origin; 7. Brahmāṇḍa-p˚; 8. Bhaviṣya-p˚; 9. Bhā-
gavata-p˚, or the life of Kṛṣṇa, by some considered
a modern work; 10. Matsya-p˚; 11. Mārkaṇḍeya-p˚;
12. Liṅga-p˚; 13. Vāmana-p˚; 14. Vāyu-p˚, which is
probably one of the oldest; 15. Vārāha-p˚; 16. Viṣṇu-
p˚; 17. Śiva-p˚; 18. Skanda-p˚. Some authorities sub-
stitute the Agni-p˚ for the Vāyu-p˚; and others add
the Narasiṃha-p˚, which is considered by some as an
Upa-p˚, q. v.; by some the Purāṇas are divided into
four or by others into six Saṃhitās or collections);
({%as%}), m. a Karṣa or measure of silver (= 16 Paṇas
of cowries); N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Purāṇa-kalpa, as,%} m.
former creation; a story or tale of former time; [cf.
{%purā-kalpa.%}] {%—Purāṇa-ga, as,%} m. [cf. 3. {%ga%}],
‘singing of the past,’ an epithet of Brahma; a reciter
of the Purāṇas. {%—Purāṇa-puruṣa, as,%} m. ‘the
primeval male,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Purāṇa-%}
{%prokta, as, ā, am,%} proclaimed by ancient sages.
{%—Purāṇa-mahimopavarṇana (˚ma-up˚), am,%} n.,
N. of the 132nd chapter of the Bhūmi-khaṇḍa or
second part of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Purāṇa-mā-%}
{%hātmya, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Liṅga-
Purāṇa. {%—Purāṇa-vat,%} ind., Ved. as of old. {%—Pu-%}
{%rāṇa-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. knowing the events of the
past; knowing the Purāṇas. {%—Purāṇa-vidyā,%} f. or
{%purāṇa-veda, as,%} m., Ved. a knowledge of the
events of the past. {%—Purāṇa-samuccaya, as,%} m.,
N. of a book mentioned in Kamalākara-bhaṭṭa's
Śūdra-dharma-tattva. {%—Purāṇa-sarvasva, am,%} n.
‘essence of the Purāṇas,’ N. of a work by Halā-
yudha taken mostly from the Purāṇas and giving a
general outline of universal knowledge. {%—Purāṇa-%}
{%sāra, am,%} n. ‘substance of the Purāṇas,’ N. of a
work mentioned in Mādhava's Parāśara-smṛti-
vyākhyā. {%—Purāṇānta (˚ṇa-an˚), as,%} m. an epi-
thet of Yama. {%—Purāṇāvatāra (˚ṇa-av˚), as,%} m.,
N. of the first chapter of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Pu- %}
[Page0583-c+ 80]
{%rāṇokta (˚ṇa-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} enjoined by or
written in the Purāṇas.
<LEND>

<L>29520<pc>0583-c<k1>purARaka<k2>purARaka
{%Purāṇaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>29521<pc>0583-c<k1>purARya<k2>purARya
{%Purāṇya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%purāṇyati,%} &c., to talk of
the past, relate past events.
<LEND>

<L>29522<pc>0583-c<k1>purAtana<k2>purAtana
{%Purātana, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the past,
former, old, ancient; worn out; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
ancients; ({%am%}), n. an ancient story, old legend;
({%e%}), ind. in past times, formerly.
<LEND>

<L>29523<pc>0583-c<k1>puroDA<k2>puroDA<h>1
1. {%puro-dhā,%}¦ cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte,%}
{%-dhātum,%} (P.) to place or set before, place foremost
or in front, regard before others, value highly, honour,
esteem, pay chief attention to, apply one's self to;
to weigh, ponder; (A.) to place at the head or in
front, to place before, lay down before; to charge,
commission, appoint, especially to appoint to priestly
functions; to enjoin upon, charge with. {%—Puro-%}
{%dhas, ās,%} m. an appointed priest or one appointed
to a particular charge, a family priest, king's domestic
chaplain ({%= puro-hita;%} in Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 10635,
the form {%puro-dha, as,%} m. occurs); N. of a man
said to be the author of the hymn Vājasaneyi-Saṃ-
hitā XI. 17. {%—2. puro-dhā,%} f. charge, commission,
standing in the place of any one, representation;
the rank or office of a Puro-hita, q. v. {%—Puro-dhātṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m., Ved. the giver of a charge or commission;
the appointer of the Puro-hita. {%—Puro-dhāna, am,%}
n. priestly ministration. {%—Puro-dhānīya, as,%} m.,
Ved. {%= puro-hita%}. {%—Purodhikā,%} f. preferred to
other women, a favourite wife. {%—Puro-hita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} placed foremost or in front; charged, com-
missioned, appointed; ({%as%}), m. one holding a charge
or commission, an agent, an appointed priest or
one appointed to any particular charge, a family
priest, a king's domestic chaplain, a priest who con-
ducts all the ceremonials and sacrifices of the family.
{%—Purohita-tva, am,%} n. the rank of a Puro-hita.
{%—Puro-hiti, is,%} f. priestly ministration (Sāy. {%=%}
{%puro-dhāna, paurohitya%}). {%—Purohitikā,%} f., N. of
a woman, or a mode of addressing a favourite (?).
<LEND>

<L>29524<pc>0583-c<k1>pur<k2>pur<h>3
{#pur#} 3¦. {%pur, ūr,%} f. (probably fr. rt. {%pṝ%}), a
rampart, wall; a stronghold, castle, fortress, fortified
city, town; the body (considered as the stronghold of
the {%puruṣa,%} q. v.); intellect ({%= mahat%}); N. of a
Daśa-rātra (Ved.). {%—Purañ-jana, as,%} m. the living
principle, life, the soul (personified as a king); ({%ī%}), f.
understanding, intelligence (personified as the wife
of a king). {%—Purañ-jaya, as,%} m. ‘city-conqueror,’
N. of a hero on the side of the Kurus; of a son of
Sṛñjaya and father of Janam-ejaya; of a son of
Bhajamāna and Sṛñjarī; ({%= kakut-stha%}) N. of a
son of Śaśāda; {%= kākutstha;%} N. of a son of
Vindhya-śakti; of Medhāvin; of an elephant, the son
of Airāvaṇa. {%—Puran-da, as,%} m. {%= puran-dara.%}
{%—Puran-dara, as,%} m. ‘town-splitter’ or ‘fortress-
destroyer,’ an epithet of Indra (as breaking cities into
fragments with his thunderbolt?); the Indra of the
seventh Manv-antara; an epithet of Agni; of Śiva;
a thief, house-breaker; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Gaṅgā;
({%am%}), n. a species of pepper, Piper Chaba. {%—Pu-%}
{%randara-cāpa, as,%} m. Indra's bow, the rainbow.
{%—Purandara-purī,%} f., N. of a town in Mālava.
{%—Puri-śaya, as, ā, am%} (a word formed to explain
{%puruṣa%}), reposing in the fortress or fastness (i. e. the
body). {%—Puro-han, ā, ghnī, a%} (fr. {%puras,%} acc. pl. of 3.
{%pur + han%}), Ved. breaking castles, destroying strong-
holds. {%—Pūr-dvār, r,%} f. or {%pūr-dvāra, am,%} n. the
gate of a city. {%—Pūr-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the lord of
a castle or city. {%—Pūr-bhid, t, t, t,%} Ved. breaking
down strongholds or castles. {%—Pūr-bhidya, am,%} n.,
Ved. the breaking of strongholds or castles; (Sāy.)
{%= saṅgrāma,%} war. {%—Pūr-yāṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
leading or conducting to the fastness (i. e. to the
celestial world).
<LEND>

<L>29525<pc>0583-c<k1>pura<k2>pura
{%Pura, am,%}¦ n. a fortress, castle, fortified town; a
town, city, a place containing large buildings surrounded
by a ditch and extending not less than one Kos in
length (if it extends for half that distance it is called
a {%kheṭa,%} if less than that, a {%karvaṭa%} or small
market town; any smaller cluster of houses is called
[Page0584-a+ 79]
a {%grāma%} or village); ‘the city’ <lang n="greek">κατ’ ἐξοχήν,</lang> i. e.
Pāṭali-putra or Patna; a house, dwelling, abode,
residence; an upper story; the female apartments,
gynæceum; a store-house, repository; a brothel;
the body; the skin; the calyx of a flower or any
receptacle or cup formed of leaves; a fragrant grass,
a species of Cyperus ({%= nāgara-mustā%}); a kind of
resin, bdellium; N. of a constellation; N. of the
subdivisions of the Vedānta work called Tri-puṭī
or Tri-purī; ({%as%}), m. a kind of resin, bdellium;
yellow Barleria; N. of a demon; N. of a man;
({%ā%}), f. a stronghold, castle (at the end of a comp.;
cf. {%jīva-p˚, deva-p˚%}); a kind of perfume; the east;
({%ī%}), f. a fort, stronghold, castle; a town, city; the
body; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πόλι-ς, πολί-χ-νη, πολί-χ-νιο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πολί-τη-ς, πτολί-ε-θρο-ν, perhaps also πύργος;</lang>]; per-
haps Lat. <nsi>urbs;</nsi> perhaps Lith. <nsi>pil-ī-s,</nsi> ‘a castle.’]
{%—Pura-koṭṭa, am,%} n. ‘city-stronghold,’ a citadel.
{%—Pura-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of fortresses or conqueror
of Pura,’ an epithet of Śiva; N. of a prince (a son
of Aja and father of Ariṣṭa-nemi). {%—Pura-jyotis,%}
{%is,%} n. an epithet of the region or world of Agni;
[cf. {%puro-jyotis.%}] {%—Pura-taṭī,%} f. a small market-
town, village; a small fair. {%—Pura-toraṇa, am,%} n.
‘city-arch,’ the outer gate of a city. {%—Pura-devatā,%}
f. ‘city-deity,’ the tutelary deity of a town. {%—Pura-%}
{%dvāra, am,%} n. a city-gate. {%—Pura-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m.
‘foe of Pura,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Pura-niveśa,%}
{%as,%} m. the founding of a city. {%—Pura-pakṣin, ī,%}
m., Ved. ‘town-bird,’ a bird living in a city, tame
bird (opposed to {%vanya-pakṣin%}). {%—Pura-pāla%} or
{%pura-pālaka, as,%} m. the defender of a fortress, city-
governor. {%—Pura-bhid, t,%} m. ‘the crusher of Pura,’ an
epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%pura-jit.%}] {%—Pura-mathana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘crusher of Pura,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Pura-%}
{%mārga, as,%} m. the street of a town. {%—Pura-mālinī,%}
f. ‘crowned with castles,’ N. of a river. {%—Pura-%}
{%rakṣa, as,%} or {%pura-rakṣin, ī,%} m. a watchman of
a town, constable. {%—Pura-rāṣṭrāṇi,%} n. pl. cities
and kingdoms. {%—Pura-rodha, as,%} m. the siege of
a fortress or city. {%—Pura-vara, am,%} n. an excellent
town. {%—Pura-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling in a city or
town; ({%ī%}), m. a city-dweller, inhabitant of a town,
citizen, townsman. {%—Pura-vāstu, u,%} n. ground suit-
able for the foundation of a city. {%—Pura-śāsana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘chastiser of Pura,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Pura-han, ā,%} m. ‘slayer of Pura,’ an epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Pura-hita, am,%} n. the welfare of a town
or city. {%—Purāṭṭa (˚ra-aṭ˚), as,%} m. a turret for
defensive purposes on a city wall. {%—Purādhipa%}
{%(˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m. the governor of a town, prefect
of police. {%—Purādhyakṣa (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m.
‘fort-overseer,’ the commandant of a fortress, the
governor of a city, prefect of police. {%—Purārāti%}
{%(˚ra-ar˚), is,%} m. ‘foe of Pura,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Purāri (˚ra-ari˚), is,%} m. ‘foe of Pura,’ an
epithet of Śiva; an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Purārdha-%}
{%vistara (˚ra-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} being of the extent
of half a town; ({%as%}), m. part of a town, a suburb,
ward, division. {%—Purā-vatī,%} f. ‘rich in castles,’ N.
of a river. {%—Purāsuhṛd (˚ra-as˚), t,%} m. ‘enemy
of Pura,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Purī-dāsa, as,%} m.,
N. of the author of the Caitanya-candrodaya; (also
called {%Kavi-karṇa-pūra.%}) {%—Purī-moha, as,%} m.
the thorn-apple, Datura. {%—Purotsava (˚ra-ut˚), as,%}
m. ‘town-festival,’ a festival solemnized in a city.
{%—Purodbhavā (˚ra-ud˚),%} f. ‘growing in towns,’ N.
of a plant. {%—Purodyāna (˚ra-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘city-
garden,’ a pleasure-garden belonging to a town, park.
{%—Puraukas (˚ra-ok˚), ās,%} m. an inhabitant of a
town, inhabitant of Tri-pura.
<LEND>

<L>29526<pc>0584-a<k1>puraka<k2>puraka
{%Puraka = pura.%}¦ See {%arghāṣṭa-puraka,%} p. 83.
<LEND>

<L>29527<pc>0584-a<k1>puraRa<k2>puraRa
{%Puraṇa, as,%}¦ m. the sea, ocean.
<LEND>

<L>29528<pc>0584-a<k1>puri<k2>puri
{%Puri, is,%}¦ f. a city [cf. {%purī%} under {%pura%}]; a river;
a king.
<LEND>

<L>29529<pc>0584-a<k1>purikA<k2>purikA
{%Purikā,%}¦ f., N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>29530<pc>0584-a<k1>puraYjara<k2>puraYjara
{#puraYjara#}¦ {%purañjara, as,%} m. the armpit.
<LEND>

<L>29531<pc>0584-a<k1>purawa<k2>purawa
{#purawa#}¦ {%puraṭa, am,%} n. gold.
<LEND>

<L>29532<pc>0584-a<k1>puratas<k2>puratas
{#puratas#}¦ {%puratas.%} See rt. 2. {%pur,%} p. 582.
<LEND>
[Page0584-b+ 71]

<L>29533<pc>0584-b<k1>puranDi<k2>puranDi
{#puranDi#}¦ {%puran-dhi, puran-dhri.%} See under
rt. 2. {%pur,%} p. 582, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>29534<pc>0584-b<k1>puraya<k2>puraya
{#puraya#}¦ {%puraya, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29535<pc>0584-b<k1>puralA<k2>puralA
{#puralA#}¦ {%puralā%} (?), f. an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>29536<pc>0584-b<k1>puras<k2>puras
{#puras#}¦ {%puras, purastāt.%} See under rt. 2.
{%pur,%} p. 582, col. 2, and p. 583, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>29537<pc>0584-b<k1>purA<k2>purA
{#purA#}¦ {%purā.%} See p. 583, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>29538<pc>0584-b<k1>purAwaNka<k2>purAwaNka
{#purAwaNka#}¦ {%purāṭaṅka, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29539<pc>0584-b<k1>purARa<k2>purARa
{#purARa#}¦ {%purāṇa.%} See p. 583, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>29540<pc>0584-b<k1>purAtana<k2>purAtana
{#purAtana#}¦ {%purātana.%} See p. 583, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>29541<pc>0584-b<k1>purAtala<k2>purAtala
{#purAtala#}¦ {%purātala, am,%} n. the region below
the seven worlds; [cf. {%talātala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29542<pc>0584-b<k1>purAsinI<k2>purAsinI
{#purAsinI#}¦ {%purāsinī,%} f. a species of creeper
({%= saha-deva%}).
<LEND>

<L>29543<pc>0584-b<k1>puri<k2>puri
{#puri#}¦ {%puri.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>29544<pc>0584-b<k1>purIkaya<k2>purIkaya
{#purIkaya#}¦ {%purīkaya, as,%} m., Ved. a species
of aquatic animal.
<LEND>

<L>29545<pc>0584-b<k1>purItat<k2>purItat
{#purItat#}¦ {%purī-tat, t, t,%} m. n. (probably fr.
{%puri%} for 3. {%pur%} + 2. {%tat%}), the pericardium or some
other intestine near the heart; the entrails in general;
(also wrongly read {%puri-tat.%})
<LEND>

<L>29546<pc>0584-b<k1>purIza<k2>purIza
{#purIza#}¦ {%purīṣa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%pṝ%}), vapour, damp exhalations rising in the air,
moisture, fluid in general (Sāy. {%= udaka%}); dust,
anything crumbled; mould, rubbish, rubble-stones,
anything used to fill up interstices in a wall; feces,
excrement, ordure; ({%ī%}), f. epithet of a particular
religious observance. {%—Purīṣa-nigrahaṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} stopping or obstructing the bowels. {%—Purīṣa-%}
{%pada, am,%} n., Ved. epithet of particular passages
inserted in the recitation of the Mahā-nāmnī verses.
{%—Purīṣa-bhedin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘loosening the feces,’
relaxing the bowels. {%—Purīṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. furnished with rubbish or loose earth (used for
filling interstices). {%—Purīṣa-vāhaṇa%} or {%purīṣa-%}
{%vāhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. removing rubbish or
refuse. {%—Purīṣādhāna (˚ṣa-ādh˚)%} or {%purīṣa-%}
{%dhāna (?), am,%} n. ‘receptacle of excrement,’ the
last of the intestines, the rectum. {%—Purīṣotsarga%}
{%(˚ṣa-ut˚), as,%} m. the voiding of excrement.
<LEND>

<L>29547<pc>0584-b<k1>purIzaRa<k2>purIzaRa
{%Purīṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. evacuation by stool, voiding
of excrement, feces.
<LEND>

<L>29548<pc>0584-b<k1>purIzama<k2>purIzama
{%Purīṣama, as,%}¦ m. the black kidney-bean, Pha-
seolus Mas or Radiatus.
<LEND>

<L>29549<pc>0584-b<k1>purIzaya<k2>purIzaya
{%Purīṣaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%purīṣayati, -yitum,%} to
void excrement, evacuate by stool.
<LEND>

<L>29550<pc>0584-b<k1>purIzita<k2>purIzita
{%Purīṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ voided, evacuated (as the
bowels), voided upon.
<LEND>

<L>29551<pc>0584-b<k1>purIzin<k2>purIzin
{%Purīṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. filled with vapours,
vaporous, damp, humid, moist (as the Maruts or
Parjanya-Vāta); ‘possessing articles that fill up’
(<lang n="greek">ἐπίπλα</lang>), i. e. furnished with utensils or movables,
wealthy; ({%iṇī%}), f. ‘bearing or carrying rubbish,’ an
epithet of the Sarayū, or N. of another river; (Sāy.)
{%= udaka-vatī,%} watery.
<LEND>

<L>29552<pc>0584-b<k1>purIzya<k2>purIzya
{%Purīṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. an epithet of fire;
(according to Sāy.) {%= sikatā-sammiśra,%} mixed with
sand, {%= citya,%} q. v.; (according to Mahī-dhara) {%=%}
{%paśavya;%} dwelling in loose earth or in rubbish;
dirty; possessing utensils or movables, wealthy.
{%—Purīṣya-vāhana, as, ā, am,%} see Pāṇ. III.
2, 65.
<LEND>

<L>29553<pc>0584-b<k1>puru<k2>puru
{#puru#}¦ {%puru, us, vī, u%} (said to be fr. rt. {%pṝ;%}
mostly Ved.; in the epic and later literature only at
the beginning of proper names, except in the Bhā-
gavata-Purāṇa which affects archaic forms, where it
occurs at the beginning of comps.), much, many,
abounding, abundant, exceeding; ({%us%}), m. the pollen
or farina of a flower; heaven or the world and
residence of immortals; N. of a prince the son of
Yayāti and Śarmiṣṭhā and sixth monarch of the
[Page0584-c+ 81]
lunar race; N. of a son of Manu Cākṣuṣa and
Naḍvalā; N. of a son of Vasu-deva and Saha-devā;
N. of a river; ({%vyas%}), f. pl. a multitude, (Sāy.) =
{%bahvyaḥ prajāḥ; (u),%} ind. much, often, exceedingly;
{%simā puru,%} everywhere, in all places; {%purūru,%} very
far, far and wide; {%puru tiraḥ,%} far off, from
afar; {%puru viśva,%} one and all, every; [cf. {%pulu,%}
{%pūrṇa:%} Old Pers. {%paru-s,%} ‘much:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πολύ-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πολλοί, πλε-ῖ-ων, πλε-ῖστο-ς, πλἠ-ν:</lang> Lat. <nsi>plûs,</nsi>
<nsi>plûrimu-s, plêri-que:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>filu,</nsi> ‘much;’ <nsi>filu-</nsi>
<nsi>sna,</nsi> ‘multitude:’ Old Norse <nsi>flei-ri, flest-r:</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>filu, filo, vilo,</nsi> ‘much:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>viel:</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>fela, feala,</nsi> ‘much:’ perhaps Hib. <nsi>mor,</nsi>
‘great, big, bulky, many, noble;’ <nsi>moradh,</nsi> ‘aug-
mentation.’] {%—Puru-kutsa, as,%} m., N. of a man
with the patronymic Aikṣvāka (Ved.); N. of a son
of Mān-dhātṛ. {%—Puru-kutsava, as,%} m., N. of an
enemy of Indra. {%—Purukutsānī,%} f., Ved., N. of a
woman (perhaps wife of Puru-kutsa). {%—Puru-kṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. achieving great deeds, efficacious (said of
Indra and of Soma); increasing. {%—Puru-kṛtvan,%}
{%ā,%} m., Ved. achieving great deeds (said of Indra).
{%—Puru-kṛpā,%} f. abundant mercy or compassion.
{%—Puru-kṣu, us, us, u,%} Ved. rich in food (said of
Agni, Soma, Indra; Sāy. {%= puroḍāśādi-bahuvi-%}
{%dhānnopeta%}). {%—Puru-gūrta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. wel-
come to many (said of Indra). {%—Puru-cetana,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. visible to many, very grateful to the
eyes (said of Agni and Indra; according to Sāy. =
{%bahūnāṃ jñātṛ, sarva-jña%}). {%—Puru-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} much, for {%puruha; (as),%} m., N. of a prince
the son of Su-śānti; [cf. {%puru-jāti, puru-jānu.%}]
{%—Puru-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. variously manifested,
appearing in various forms (said of Aryaman).
{%—Puru-jāti, is,%} m., N. of a prince the son of Su-
śānti. {%—Puru-jānu, us,%} m., N. of a prince the son
of Su-śānti. {%—Puru-jit, t,%} m. ‘conquering many,’
N. of a hero on the side of the Pāṇḍus and brother
of Kunti-bhoja; N. of a prince the son of Rucaka;
of a son of Ānaka. {%—Puru-ṇāman, ā, mnī, a,%} Ved.
‘having many names,’ an epithet of Indra. {%—Puru-%}
{%ṇītha, am,%} n., Ved. a song for many voices, choral
song; (according to Sāy.) N. of a king. {%—Puru-%}
{%tman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. existing variously (said of
Indra); (Sāy.) {%= bahuṣu pradeśeṣu satataṃ%}
{%gacchat%}. {%—Puru-trā,%} ind., Ved. variously, in various
directions, in many places; in various ways; many
times, often. {%—Puru-da, am,%} n. gold. {%—Puru-%}
{%daṃśaka, as,%} m. ‘many-teethed,’ a goose (so called
from its serrated beak). {%—Puru-daṃsas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. abounding in mighty acts or operations; ({%ās%}),
m. an epithet of Indra, (also incorrectly spelt {%puru-%}
{%daṃśas%}); ({%asau%}), m. du. an epithet of the Aśvins.
{%—Puru-datra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. rich in gifts, giving
wealth (said of Indra; Sāy. {%= bahu-dhana%}). {%—Puru-%}
{%dama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. possessing many houses,
belonging to or springing from many households.
{%—Puru-daya, as, ā, am,%} abounding in compassion.
{%—Puru-dasma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. abounding in
mighty acts or operations (said of Viṣṇu and of
Soma). {%—Puru-dasyu, us, us, u,%} very rapacious.
{%—Puru-dina, āni,%} n. pl., Ved. many days. {%—Puru-%}
{%drapsa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. abounding in drops of
water (said of the Maruts). {%—Puru-druh, -dhruk,%}
{%k, k,%} Ved. injuring greatly; (Sāy.) {%= nānāvidha-%}
{%droha-yukta%}. {%—Puru-dha%} and {%puru-dhā,%} ind.,
Ved. in many ways, variously; often, frequently.
{%—Purudha-pratīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
various or multiform aspects; (Sāy.) {%= bahudhā-%}
{%vikṣiptāṅga%}. {%—Puru-dhasman, ā, ā, a%} ({%dhas-%}
{%man%} probably for {%hasman%}), Ved. much jesting;
(probably an incorrect word.) {%—Puru-niḥṣidh, t,%}
or {%puru-niḥṣidhvan, ā,%} m., Ved. granting or giv-
ing abundantly; (Sāy.) {%= bahūnāṃ śatrūṇāṃ ni-%}
{%ṣedhaka,%} the repeller of many foes (said of Indra).
{%—Puru-niṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} or {%puru-niṣṭhā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. excelling among many; (Sāy.) {%= bahu-%}
{%sthāna,%} having many stations. {%—Puru-nṛmṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. displaying great valour (said of In-
dra). {%—Puru-panthā, ās,%} m., Ved., N. of a man.
{%—Puru-paśu, us, us, u,%} Ved. rich in herds, possessing
[Page0585-a+ 81]
much cattle. {%—Puru-putra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
many sons or children. {%—Puru-peśa, as, ā, am,%}
or {%puru-peśas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. multiform, having
various forms; (Sāy.) {%= bahu-rūpa%}. {%—Puru-pra-%}
{%jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. variously propagated; (Sāy.)
{%= bahu-prādurbhāva%}. {%—Puru-praśasta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. praised by many. {%—Puru-priya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. greatly beloved, beloved of many. {%—Puru-%}
{%praiṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. the inciter or instigator
of many, much inciting (said of Agni); accompanied
by various acclamations; (Sāy.) {%= bahuvidham pha-%}
{%lam icchat%}. {%—Puru-bhuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. possessing
much; (Sāy.) {%= bahūnām pālaka%} or {%prabhūta-%}
{%hasta;%} (occurring only in the voc. m. du. as an
epithet of the Aśvins.) {%—Puru-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved.
appearing much or of high value; (Sāy.) {%= bahu%}
{%bhavat%}. {%—Puru-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} a various reading
for {%puru-hūta,%} q. v. {%—Puru-bhojas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. containing or granting many means of enjoy-
ment, greatly nourishing. {%—Puru-manas, ās, ās, as,%}
a word formed in Nirukta IX. 15 for the explanation
of 2. {%puṃs%}. {%—Puru-mantu, ū,%} m. du., Ved. full of
wisdom, intelligent (said of the Aśvins; Sāy. =
{%bahūnāṃ jñātārau,%} cognizant of many things).
{%—Puru-mandra, ā,%} m. du., Ved. delighting
many (said of the Aśvins; Sāy. {%= bahu-madau%}
or {%bahūnām mādayitārau%}). {%—Puru-mahna, as,%}
m., N. of a man with the patronymic Āṅgirasa.
{%—Puru-māya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. possessing various
arts or virtues, wonderful (said of Indra and
of the chariot of the Aśvins; Sāy. {%= Vṛtrahana-%}
{%nādi-bahukarman, bahuvidhāścarya, bahuvi-%}
{%dha-karman%}). {%—Puru-māyya, as,%} m., Ved., N. of
a man. {%—Puru-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a man; N. of
a follower of the Kurus. {%—Puru-mīḍha%} or {%puru-%}
{%mīḷha, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a man with the patro-
nymic Āṅgirasa; of a son of Su-hotra and author of
the hymns Ṛg-veda IV. 43, 44; of a grandson of
Su-hotra and son of Hastin or Bṛhat; a man with the
patronymic Vaidadaśvi. {%—Puru-medha, as, ā, am,%}
or {%puru-medhas, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. endowed with
wisdom; ({%as%} or {%ās%}), m., N. of a man with the
patronymic Āṅgirasa, the author of the hymns Ṛg-
veda VIII. 78, 79. {%—Puru-ratha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having many chariots. {%—Puru-ravasa,%} a wrong
reading for {%purū-ravasa = purū-ravas.%} {%—Puru-%}
{%rāvan, ā,%} m., Ved. much-barking or much-howling;
epithet of a demon. {%—Puru-ruc, k, k, k,%} Ved.
much-shining, shining brightly. {%—Puru-ruj, k, k,%}
{%k,%} subject to many diseases. {%—Puru-rūpa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. multiform, variegated; (said of {%tvaṣṭṛ%})
forming various shapes. {%—Puru-lampaṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very lascivious. {%—Puru-vartman, ā, ā, a,%}
Ved. having many ways or paths. {%—Puru-varpas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. multiform, variegated. {%—Puru-%}
{%vāja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. of great strength, powerful,
strong. {%—Puru-vāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having an
ample tail (?); rich in gifts, (Sāy.) much desired.
{%—Puruvāra-puṣṭi, is, is, i,%} Ved. rich in treasured
wealth, granting treasured riches; (Sāy. {%= bahubhir%}
{%varaṇīyā abhivṛddhir yasya.%}) {%—Puru-vīra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. abounding in men, possessed of many
men or male offspring; (Sāy. {%= bahubhir vīraiḥ%}
{%putrādibhir upeta.%}) {%—Puru-vepas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. much excited or exciting (said of Agni).
{%—Puru-vrata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having many ordi-
nances (said of Soma). {%—Puru-śakti, is, is, i,%} pos-
sessing various powers. {%—Puru-śāka, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. of great might, very powerful (said of Indra;
Sāy. {%= bahubhiḥ stutya, bahu-sahāya%}). {%—Puru-%}
{%śāka-tama, ā,%} m. du., Ved. ‘achievers of great
exploits,’ epithet of the Aśvins; (Sāy. {%= atiśayena%}
{%bahu-karmāṇau%} or {%atiśayena bahu-sahāyau.%}
{%—Puru-ścandra, as, ā, am (= puru + candra),%}
Ved. much-shining, resplendent; (Sāy. {%= bahu-%}
{%dīpti,%} said of Agni, of the Aśvins and their chariots,
&c.) {%—Puru-ṣanti, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a man.
{%—Puru-ṣṭuta, as, ā, am,%} highly lauded or ex-
tolled, praised by many. {%—Puru-sambhṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. accumulated by many. {%—Puru-spārha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} or {%puru-spṛh, k, k, k,%} Ved. wished for or
[Page0585-b+ 80]
desired by many. {%—Puru-hanman, ā,%} m., Ved., N.
of a man with the patronymic Āṅgirasa or Vaikhā-
nasa, author of Ṛg-veda VIII. 59, 2. {%—Puru-huta,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Puru-hūta, as, ā, am,%}
much invoked, invoked by many; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Indra; ({%ā%}), f. a form of Dākṣāyaṇī.
{%—Puruhūta-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. ‘foe of Indra,’ an epithet
of Indra-jit. {%—Puru-hūti, is,%} f. manifold invocation.
{%—Puru-hotra, as,%} m., N. of a son of Anu. {%—Pu-%}
{%rūcī,%} f. (fr. an unused form {%purv-añc%}), Ved. abound-
ing, abundant, full, comprehensive. {%—Purūdvaha%}
{%(˚ru-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of one of the sons of the eleventh
Manu. {%—Puru-ravas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. crying much
or loudly; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a celebrated prince of
the lunar race, hero of the Vikramorvaśī (his father's
name was Budha, who was son of the Moon and
regent of Mercury, and who is supposed to have in-
stituted the three sacrificial fires; his mother's name
was Iḷā, whence his metronymic Aiḷa [cf. Ṛg-veda
X. 95, 2, 5]; he was father of Āyus and ancestor of
Puru, Dushyanta, Bharata, Kuru, Dhṛta-rāṣṭra, and
Pāṇḍu; according to Nirukta X. 46, Purū-ravas is
one of the beings belonging to the middle region of
the universe; in the Veda he seems to be connected
with the Sun as Urvaśī is with the Dawn, the word
{%purū-ravas%} being then interpreted to mean ‘pos-
sessing much light,’ cf. {%ravi, rudhira;%} according
to some Purū-ravas is a Viśva-deva, according to
others a Pārvaṇa-śrāddha-deva). {%—Purū-ravasa,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= purū-ravas,%} q. v. {%—Purū-ruc, k, k, k,%}
Ved. much-shining. {%—Purūruṇā (˚ru-ur˚),%} ind.,
Ved. far and wide. {%—Purū-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
abounding in goods or riches (said of Indra, the
Aśvins, &c.). {%—Purū-vṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. moving in
various ways. {%—Puru-aṇīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. vari-
ously manifested (said of Agni; Sāy. {%= bahvībhir%}
{%anīka-sthānīyābhir jvālābhir yukta,%} having many
flames instead of faces).
<LEND>

<L>29554<pc>0585-b<k1>puruha<k2>puruha
{%Puruha, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%puruhu, us, us, u,%}
much, many.
<LEND>

<L>29555<pc>0585-b<k1>purudvas<k2>purudvas
{#purudvas#}¦ {%purudvas, ān,%} m., N. of a prince
the son of Madhu and Vaidarbhī.
<LEND>

<L>29556<pc>0585-b<k1>puruza<k2>puruza
{#puruza#}¦ {%puruṣa, as,%} m. (poetically also {%pū-%}
{%ruṣa;%} said to be fr. rt. 2. {%pur;%} probably connected
with {%pūru%}), man collectively or individually, man-
kind, a man, human being, male; a person ({%pumān%}
{%puruṣaḥ,%} a male person); a member or repre-
sentative of a race or generation (e. g. {%sapiṇḍatā%}
{%puruṣe saptame vinivartate,%} the relationship of
men connected by the funeral cake ceases with
the seventh person); an officer, official, functionary,
agent, employé, attendant, servant, footman; the
height or measure of a man, = 5 Aratnis (1 Aratni
= 2 Padas, 1 Pada = 12 Aṅgulis; cf. {%ardha-p˚,%}
{%dvi-p˚%}); Punishment personified; (in gram.) a per-
son ({%= prathamaḥ p˚,%} the third person; {%madhya-%}
{%maḥ p˚,%} the second person; {%uttamaḥ p˚,%} the first
person); Man personified or identified with Nārā-
yaṇa the son of Nara (regarded as the author of
Vājasaneyi-Saṃhitā XXX. 31); the soul and original
source of the universe (described in the Puruṣa-
sūkta, q. v.); the personal and life-giving principle
in men and other beings, the human soul or spirit,
Soul (which according to the Sāṅkhya philosophy is
neither a production nor productive: it is so called
according to the Tattva-samāsa because it reposes in
the body, {%puri śayanāt;%} or because it is {%purāṇa,%}
ancient, having existed from eternity); the Supreme
Spirit or Soul of the universe, Supreme Being, God
(identified variously with Brahman, with Viṣṇu, with
Śiva, and with Durgā); the ‘spirit,’ i. e. the fragrant
exhalation of plants (Ved.); the pupil of the eye;
the tree Rottleria Tinctoria ({%= pun-nāga%}); {%= tilaka;%}
N. of one of the sons of Manu Cākṣuṣa; N. of
one of the eighteen attendants of the Sun; N. of a
Pāda in the Mahā-nāmnī verses; an epithet of the
first, third, fifth, seventh, ninth, and eleventh signs
of the zodiac; a friend; a follower of the Sāṅkhya
philosophy (?); ({%ās%}), m. pl. men, people; N. of the
class of inhabitants of Krañca-dvīpa corresponding
[Page0585-c+ 80]
to the Brāhmans; the seven divine or active prin-
ciples from the minute portions of which the uni-
verse was formed, viz. {%mahat = buddhi, ahaṅ-%}
{%kāra,%} and the five {%tan-mātras,%} (according to Manu
I. 19); {%pañca puruṣāḥ,%} an epithet of five royal
personages or miraculous persons born under par-
ticular constellations (Ved.); ({%ī%}), f. a woman,
female; ({%am%}), n. an epithet of mount Meru. {%—Pu-%}
{%ruṣa-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. desirous of men.
{%—Puruṣa-kāra, as,%} m. any act of man, manly
act, human effort or exertion (commonly opposed to
{%daiva,%} fate); manhood, virility; N. of a gram-
marian. {%—Puruṣa-kuṇapa, as, am,%} m. n. the
corpse of a man, a human corpse. {%—Puruṣa-ke-%}
{%śarin, ī,%} m. ‘man-lion or half-man, half-lion,’
Viṣṇu in his fourth appearance on earth (which he
undertook for the defeat of Hiraṇya-kaśipu). {%—Pu-%}
{%ruṣa-kṣetra, am,%} n., Ved. a male or uneven
zodiacal sign or astrological house. {%—Puruṣa-gati,%}
{%is,%} f., N. of a Sāman. {%—Puruṣa-gandhi, is, is, i,%}
Ved. smelling of men. {%—Puruṣa-ghna, as, ī, am,%}
‘man-slaying,’ striking or slaying men; {%strī pu-%}
{%ruṣa-ghnī,%} a woman who kills her husband. {%—Pu-%}
{%ruṣa-cchandasa, am,%} n., Ved. ‘man's metre,’ the
metre suited for men, the Dvi-padā. {%—Puruṣa-%}
{%jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge of men or of mankind.
 — 1. {%puruṣa-tā,%} f. or {%puruṣa-tva, am,%} n. man-
hood, virility; manliness, valour, prowess; the state
of man, manly nature or property. {%—2. puruṣa-tā,%}
ind., Ved. after the manner of men, among men.
{%—Puruṣa-tejas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having a man's
energy or manly vigour. {%—Puruṣa-trā,%} ind., Ved.
among men, to men; in the manner of men.
{%—Puruṣatva-tā,%} ind., Ved. after the manner of
men; (Sāy.) {%= puruṣavattayā%}. {%—Puruṣa-da-%}
{%ghna%} or {%puruṣa-dvayasa, as, ī, am,%} of the height
or measure of a man. {%—Puruṣa-dantikā,%} f. a
medicinal root; [cf. {%medā.%}] {%—Puruṣa-dravya-%}
{%sampad, t,%}  f. abundance of men and material.
{%—Puruṣa-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. an enemy of Viṣṇu. {%—Pu-%}
{%ruṣa-dveṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} ‘man-hating,’ misan-
thropic; ({%iṇī%}), f. an ill-tempered or fractious woman.
{%—Puruṣa-dharma, as,%} m., Ved. personal rule or
precept. {%—Puruṣa-nāya, as,%} m. ‘man-leader,’ a
prince. {%—Puruṣa-niyama, as,%} m. (in gram.) a
restriction as to person. {%—Puruṣa-pati, is,%} m.
‘lord of men,’ Rāma. {%—Puruṣa-parīkṣā,%} f. ‘trial
of man,’ N. of a collection of moral tales. {%—Pu-%}
{%ruṣa-paśu, us,%} m. beast of a man, a brutal man;
a man as a sacrificial victim; a human animal, man.
{%—Puruṣa-puṅgava, as,%} m. ‘man-bull,’ an emi-
nent or excellent man. {%—Puruṣa-puṇḍarīka, as,%}
m. an excellent or superior man; (with Jainas) N.
of the sixth black Vāsudeva. {%—Puruṣa-pura, am,%}
n., N. of the capital of Gāndhāra, the modern
Peshāwar (<lang n="arabic">پيشاور</lang>). {%—Puruṣa-bahumāna, as,%} m.
the respect or esteem of mankind. {%—Puruṣa-mātra,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} of the height or measure of a man.
{%—Puruṣa-mānin, ī, inī, i,%} fancying one's self a
man or hero. {%—Puruṣa-mukha, as, ī, am,%} having
a man's face. {%—Puruṣa-mṛga, as,%} m., Ved. (ac-
cording to Mahī-dhara) {%= pum-mṛga%}. {%—Puruṣa-%}
{%medha, as,%} m., Ved. the sacrifice of a man; N. of
the reputed author of the hymn Vājasaneyi-Saṃhitā
XX. 30. {%—Puruṣa-rakṣas, as,%} n. a demon in
the form of a man. {%—Puruṣa-rāja, as,%} m., Ved.
a human king. {%—Puruṣa-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
man-shaped, in the form of a man; ({%am%}), n. the
shape of a man. {%—Puruṣa-rūpaka, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. man-shaped, in the form of a man. {%—Pu-%}
{%ruṣa-reṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%} or {%puruṣa-reṣin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} Ved. hurting men. {%—Puruṣarṣabha (˚ṣa-%}
{%ṛṣ˚), as,%} m. ‘man-bull,’ an excellent man. {%—Pu-%}
{%ruṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. accompanied by men.
{%—Puruṣa-vadha, as,%} m., Ved. manslaughter,
homicide, murder. {%—Puruṣa-vara, as,%} m. ‘best
of males,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Puruṣa-varjita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} destitute of human beings, desolate.
{%—Puruṣa-vāc, k, k, k,%} Ved. having a human
voice. {%—Puruṣa-vāha, as,%} m. ‘Viṣṇu's vehicle,’
[Page0586-a+ 81]
an epithet of Garuḍa; ({%am%}), ind. in such a way as
to be borne along by men; {%puruṣa-vāhaṃ va-%}
{%hati,%} he is carried in such a manner as to be drawn
along by men (Pāṇ. III. 4, 43). {%—Puruṣa-vidha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. man-like, in the form or likeness
of men. {%—Puruṣavidha-tā,%} f. likeness to man,
humanity. {%—Puruṣa-vyāghra, as,%} m. ‘man-tiger,’
N. of a demon; ‘tiger among men,’ a distinguished
or eminent man; a vulture. {%—Puruṣa-vrata, am,%}
n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Puruṣa-śārdūla, as,%} m.
‘man-tiger,’ an eminent man, a chief of men.
{%—Puruṣa-śiras, as,%} or {%puruṣa-śīrṣa, am,%} n.,
Ved. a man's head, human head. {%—Puruṣa-śīr-%}
{%ṣaka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of an instrument
used by thieves. {%—Puruṣa-samavāya, as,%} m. a
number of men. {%—Puruṣa-siṃha, as,%} m. ‘man-
lion,’ lion of a man, a brave man, hero; an eminent
man; (with Jainas) the fifth of the black Vāsudevas,
a son of Śiva. {%—Puruṣa-sūkta, am,%} n. ‘the Pu-
rusha hymn,’ N. of the 90th hymn of the tenth
Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda, (this celebrated hymn, in
which the soul or original source of the universe is
described, is supposed by the best authorities to be
comparatively modern in its diction and allusions; it
is also found with alterations in the Vājasaneyi-Sam-
hitā of the Yajur-veda XXXI. 1 — 16, and in the
Atharva-veda XIX. 6.) {%—Puruṣāṃsaka (˚ṣa-aṃ˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a teacher. {%—Puruṣākāra (˚ṣa-āk˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of a human form or shape. {%—Puruṣāṅga%}
{%(˚ṣa-aṅ˚), as, am,%} m. n. the male organ of gene-
ration; [cf. {%narāṅga.%}] {%—Puruṣād (˚ṣa-ad˚), t,%}
{%t, t,%} Ved. eating or destroying men. {%—Puruṣāda%}
{%(˚ṣa-ada), as, ī, am,%} ‘man-eating,’ a cannibal, a
Rakṣas; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a race of cannibals in
the east of Madhya-deśa. {%—Puruṣādaka (˚ṣa-%}
{%ad˚), as, ā, am,%} men-devouring; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of certain cannibals. {%—Puruṣāda-tva, am,%} n. the
state or condition of a man-eater, cannibalism, the
state of a demon or Rakṣas. {%—Puruṣādya (˚ṣa-%}
{%ād˚), as,%} m. ‘first of men,’ (with Jainas) an epithet
of Ādi-nātha; of Ṛṣabha the first Arhat of the
present Ava-sarpiṇī; an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Puru-%}
{%ṣādhama (˚ṣa-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘lowest or vilest of
men,’ a low man, an outcast; the worst of servants.
{%—Puruṣādhikāra (˚ṣa-adh˚), as,%} m. manly
office or duty. {%—Puruṣāntara (˚ṣa-an˚), am,%} n.
another or succeeding generation; ({%as%}), m., scil.
{%sandhi,%} an alliance negotiated by warriors chosen
by each party; another who is a man (a mere
man). {%—Puruṣāntara-vedin, ī, inī, i,%} knowing
the heart of mankind. {%—Puruṣāntarātman (˚ṣa-%}
{%an˚), ā,%} m. ‘man's inner self,’ the soul. {%—Puru-%}
{%ṣāyaṇa (˚ṣa-ay˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. going to the
soul, uniting with the soul. {%—Puruṣāyuṣa (˚ṣa-%}
{%āy˚), am,%} or {%puruṣāyus (˚ṣa-āy˚), us,%} n. the
duration of a man's life, age of man, life or lifetime
of man, human existence. {%—Puruṣārtha (˚ṣa-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m. any object of human pursuit, any one of
the four objects or aims of man or of the soul (viz.
1. {%kāma,%} the gratification of desire; 2. {%artha,%} ac-
quirement of wealth; 3. {%dharma,%} discharge of duty;
4. {%mokṣa,%} final emancipation); human effort or ex-
ertion; ({%am%}), ind. for the sake of man; for the soul's
sake. {%—Puruṣārtha-prabodha, as,%} m., N. of a
book mentioned in the Śūdra-dharma-tattva. {%—Pu-%}
{%ruṣārtha-siddhy-upāya,%} N. of a Jaina poetical
work by Amṛta-canda-sūri. {%—Puruṣāśin (˚ṣa-%}
{%āś˚), ī,%} m. ‘man-eater,’ a cannibal, Rākṣasa. {%—Pu-%}
{%ruṣāsthi-mālin (˚ṣa-as˚), ī, inī, i,%} wearing a
necklace of human skulls; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Puruṣendra (˚ṣa-in˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of
men,’ a king. {%—Puruṣendra-tā,%} f. ‘lordship over
men,’ sovereignty. {%—Puruṣeṣita (˚ṣa-iṣ˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. caused or instigated by men. {%—Puru-%}
{%ṣokti (˚ṣa-uk˚), is,%} f. the name or title of a man.
{%—Puruṣoktika, as, ā, am,%} ‘having only the
name of man,’ destitute, having no friends, friendless.
{%—Puruṣottama (˚ṣa-ut˚), as,%} m. best of men,
an excellent or superior man; best of servants, a
good attendant; the highest being, Supreme Spirit,
an epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa; (with Jainas) N.
[Page0586-b+ 74]
of the fourth black Vāsudeva (son of Soma); N. of
an Arhat; a Jina, one of the generic terms for a
deified teacher of the Jaina sect; N. of a district in
Orissa sacred to Viṣṇu; N. of the author of the
Trikāṇḍa-śeṣa and Hārāvalī; of a grammarian; of
the father of Halāyudha; of various men. {%—Puruṣot-%}
{%tama-kṣetra, am,%} n. ‘district of the Supreme
Being,’ N. of a district in Orissa sacred to Viṣṇu
({%= Līlācala, Līlādri;%} cf. {%jagannātha-kṣetra%}).
{%—Puruṣottama-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Puruṣottamatīrtha-prayoga-tattva, am,%} n.
‘truth of the ceremonies connected with the Puru-
ṣottama-tīrtha,’ N. of a work by Raghu-nandana.
{%—Puruṣottama-deva, as,%} or {%puruṣottamadeva-%}
{%śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a grammarian the author of
the Paribhāṣā-vṛtti. {%—Puruṣottama-mantra, as,%}
m., N. of the seventeenth chapter of the Śāradā-
tilaka, a mystical work by Lakṣmaṇa. {%—Puruṣot-%}
{%tama-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a man the author of
the Rāma-candrodaya.
<LEND>

<L>29557<pc>0586-b<k1>puruzaka<k2>puruzaka
{%Puruṣaka, am,%}¦ n. standing on two feet like a
man, the rearing of a horse.
<LEND>

<L>29558<pc>0586-b<k1>puruzAya<k2>puruzAya
{%Puruṣāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%puruṣāyate, -yitum,%} to
behave or act like a man, play the man.
<LEND>

<L>29559<pc>0586-b<k1>puruzAyita<k2>puruzAyita
{%Puruṣāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ acting or behaving like
a man, playing a manly part; ({%am%}), n. acting like a
man, playing the part of a man. {%—Puruṣāyita-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. manly conduct, manliness.
<LEND>

<L>29560<pc>0586-b<k1>puruzya<k2>puruzya
{%Puruṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. pertaining to man,
human.
<LEND>

<L>29561<pc>0586-b<k1>puruha<k2>puruha
{#puruha#}¦ {%puruha, puruhu.%} See p. 585, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>29562<pc>0586-b<k1>purUravas<k2>purUravas
{#purUravas#}¦ {%purū-ravas.%} See p. 585, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>29563<pc>0586-b<k1>puroga<k2>puroga
{#puroga#}¦ {%puro-ga.%} See under {%puras,%} p. 582.
<LEND>

<L>29564<pc>0586-b<k1>purocana<k2>purocana
{#purocana#}¦ {%purocana, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29565<pc>0586-b<k1>purowi<k2>purowi
{#purowi#}¦ {%puroṭi, is,%} m. the current of a river.
<LEND>

<L>29566<pc>0586-b<k1>puroqASa<k2>puroqASa
{#puroqASa#}¦ {%puro-ḍāśa.%} See p. 582, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>29567<pc>0586-b<k1>puroravas<k2>puroravas
{#puroravas#}¦ {%puroravas%} for {%purū-ravas,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29568<pc>0586-b<k1>purohan<k2>purohan
{#purohan#}¦ {%puro-han.%} See 3. {%pur,%} p. 583.
<LEND>

<L>29569<pc>0586-b<k1>purya<k2>purya
{#purya#}¦ {%purya, as, ā, am%} (fr. 3. {%pur%}), Ved.
being in a stronghold or fastness.
<LEND>

<L>29570<pc>0586-b<k1>puryazwa<k2>puryazwa
{#puryazwa#}¦ {%pury-aṣṭa%} or {%pury-aṣṭaka, am,%} n.
the eight constituent parts of the body.
<LEND>

<L>29571<pc>0586-b<k1>purv<k2>purv
{#purv#}¦ {%purv%} [cf. rt. {%pṝ%}], cl. 1. P. {%pūrvati,%}
{%pūrvitum,%} to fill; cl. 10. P. {%pūrvayati%}
or {%pūrbayati, -yitum,%} to dwell or inhabit; to
invite.
<LEND>

<L>29572<pc>0586-b<k1>pul<k2>pul
{#pul#}¦ {%pul%} [cf. rt. {%pṝ%}], cl. 1. 6. 10. P.
{%polati, pulati, polayati,%} &c., to be
great or large; to be lofty or high; to be piled or
heaped up.
<LEND>

<L>29573<pc>0586-b<k1>pula<k2>pula
{%Pula, as, ā, am,%}¦ extended, wide, vast, great,
extensive; ({%as%}), m. erection of the hairs of the
body (considered as a proof of exquisite delight);
horripilation; N. of one of the attendants of Śiva;
({%ā%}), f. the soft palate or uvula.
<LEND>

<L>29574<pc>0586-b<k1>pulaka<k2>pulaka
{%Pulaka, as,%}¦ m. erection or bristling of the hairs
of the body (considered by the Hindūs to be
occasioned by delight or desire rather than by fear),
a thrill of joy or of fear, horripilation; a species of
edible plant; a kind of stone or gem; flaw or defect
in a gem; any kind of insect or vermin infesting
animals; a ball of bread and sweetmeats with which
elephants are fed; yellow orpiment; a Gandharva or
heavenly chorister; a wine-goblet or glass; a species
of mustard; ({%am%}), n. a species of earth ({%= kaṅku-%}
{%ṣṭha%}). {%—Pulakākulākṛti (˚ka-āk˚, ˚la-āk˚), is,%}
{%is, i,%} ‘having the frame excited by horripilation,’
thrilled with joy. {%—Pulakāṅga (˚ka-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
the noose or cord of Varuṇa. {%—Pulakālaya (˚ka-%}
{%āl˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Kuvera. {%—Pulakī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the hairs or down of the body
erect, thrilled with delight. {%—Pulakīkṛtāṅga (˚ta-%}
{%aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} whose body has its hairs erect,
having the body thrilled with joy. {%—Pulakodgama %}
[Page0586-c+ 77]
{%(˚ka-ud˚), as,%} m. erection of the hairs of the body
(through rapture), horripilation.
<LEND>

<L>29575<pc>0586-c<k1>pulakaya<k2>pulakaya
{%Pulakaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pulakayati, -yitum,%} to have
or feel the hairs of the body erect (with rapture or
desire).
<LEND>

<L>29576<pc>0586-c<k1>pulakita<k2>pulakita
{%Pulakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having the hairs or down
of the body erect or bristling up with joy, thrilled
with joy, delighted, rejoiced, enraptured, joyful.
<LEND>

<L>29577<pc>0586-c<k1>pulakin<k2>pulakin
{%Pulakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having the hairs or down of
the body erect, thrilled, enraptured; ({%ī%}), m. a species
of Kadamba tree ({%= dhārā-kadamba%}).
<LEND>

<L>29578<pc>0586-c<k1>pulasti<k2>pulasti
{%Pulasti, is, is, i%}¦ (perhaps fr. {%pulas%} for {%puras,%}
cf. {%palasti%} fr. {%paras,%} but said to be fr. {%pula%} and rt.
3. {%as%}), wearing the hair straight or plain; (gender
doubtful), the hair of the head; ({%is%}), m., N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>29579<pc>0586-c<k1>pulastya<k2>pulastya
{%Pulastya, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%pul;%} per-
haps fr. {%pulas%} for {%puras%}), N. of an ancient
Ṛṣi, one of the mind-born sons of Brahmā (Manu
1. 35; also enumerated among the Prajā-patis and
seven sages, and described as a lawgiver); an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Pulastya-smṛti, is,%} f., N. of a work
mentioned in the Śūdra-dharma-tattva.
<LEND>

<L>29580<pc>0586-c<k1>pulaha<k2>pulaha
{%Pulaha, as,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient Ṛṣi, one of
the mind-born sons of Brahmā enumerated among
the Prajā-patis and the seven sages (Manu I. 35);
an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>29581<pc>0586-c<k1>pulAka<k2>pulAka
{%Pulāka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. shrivelled or blighted or
empty grain, bad grain; a small lump of rice rolled
into a ball, a lump of boiled rice; (according to par-
ticular medical authorities) rice-water; brevity, abbre-
viation, abridgement, compendium; smallness, a
little; celerity, dispatch. {%—Pulāka-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
making haste, hastening.
<LEND>

<L>29582<pc>0586-c<k1>pulAkin<k2>pulAkin
{%Pulākin, ī,%}¦ m. a tree.
<LEND>

<L>29583<pc>0586-c<k1>pulAnikA<k2>pulAnikA
{%Pulānikā,%}¦ f. (perhaps) induration of the skin.
<LEND>

<L>29584<pc>0586-c<k1>pulAyita<k2>pulAyita
{%Pulāyita, am,%}¦ n. a horse's gallop; (a wrong
reading for {%palāyita.%})
<LEND>

<L>29585<pc>0586-c<k1>pulina<k2>pulina
{%Pulina, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a sandbank, land deposited
by alluvium on the bank of a river; an island of
alluvial formation or one from which the water has
recently withdrawn, a small island or bank left in
the middle of a river by the subsiding of its waters,
an islet; a sandy beach; (according to a Scholiast)
{%= tīra,%} the bank of a river; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
mythical being conquered by Garuḍa. {%—Pulina-%}
{%jaghanā,%} f. having sandbanks for hips (said of the
Gambhīrā river personified as a female). {%—Pulina-%}
{%dvīpa-śobhita, as, ā, am,%} adorned with shoals and
islands. {%—Pulina-pradeśa, as,%} m. island-site, situa-
tion on an island. {%—Pulina-maṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}
adorned with sandbanks or islets. {%—Pulina-vatī,%} f.
‘possessing sandbanks,’ (probably) N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>29586<pc>0586-c<k1>pulinda<k2>pulinda
{%Pulinda, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a barbarous tribe;
({%as%}), m. a man of this tribe, a king of the Pulindas;
a barbarian, savage, Mleccha, mountaineer, one who
uses an uncultivated and unintelligible dialect.
<LEND>

<L>29587<pc>0586-c<k1>pulindaka<k2>pulindaka
{%Pulindaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a barbarous tribe;
({%as%}), m., N. of a king of the Pulindas, Śavaras, and
Bhillas; of a son of Ārdraka.
<LEND>

<L>29588<pc>0586-c<k1>pulika<k2>pulika
{#pulika#}¦ {%pulika, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f.
yellowish alum.
<LEND>

<L>29589<pc>0586-c<k1>pulimat<k2>pulimat
{#pulimat#}¦ {%pulimat, ān,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29590<pc>0586-c<k1>pulirika<k2>pulirika
{#pulirika#}¦ {%pulirika, as,%} m. a snake.
<LEND>

<L>29591<pc>0586-c<k1>puliSa<k2>puliSa
{#puliSa#}¦ {%puliśa, as,%} m. = Paulus (Alexan-
drinus), N. of the author of a Siddhānta.
<LEND>

<L>29592<pc>0586-c<k1>pulu<k2>pulu
{#pulu#}¦ {%pulu = puru%} (in particular comps.).
{%—Pulu-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having many de-
sires, covetous (Sāy.) {%= bahukāmanā-vat%}. {%—Pulv-%}
{%agha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. doing much evil.
<LEND>

<L>29593<pc>0586-c<k1>puluza<k2>puluza
{#puluza#}¦ {%puluṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29594<pc>0586-c<k1>puloma<k2>puloma
{#puloma#}¦ {%puloma, as,%} m. {%= puloman,%} q. v.;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter of the demon Vaiśvānara,
(she was loved by the demon Puloman, but became
the wife of Bhṛgu or Kaśyapa); the plant Acorus
Calamus ({%= vacā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29595<pc>0586-c<k1>puloman<k2>puloman
{%Puloman, ā,%}¦ m., N. of a demon (the father-in-law
[Page0587-a+ 76]
of Indra by whom he was destroyed). {%—Puloma-jā,%}
f. ‘daughter of Puloman,’ an epithet of the wife of
Indra. {%—Puloma-jit, t,%} or {%puloma-bhid, t,%} m.
‘conquerer or destroyer of Puloman,’ an epithet of
Indra (who destroyed his father-in-law Puloman in
order to avert his imprecation consequent on the
violation of his daughter). {%—Puloma-dviṣ, ṭ,%} or
{%pulomāri (˚ma-ari), is,%} m. ‘foe of Puloman,’ an
epithet of Indra. {%—Pulomārcis (˚ma-ar˚), is,%} m.
‘having the lustre of Puloman,’ N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>29596<pc>0587-a<k1>pulomat<k2>pulomat
{#pulomat#}¦ {%pulomat, ān,%} m., N. of a prince;
[cf. {%pulimat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29597<pc>0587-a<k1>pulomahI<k2>pulomahI
{#pulomahI#}¦ {%pulomahī,%} f. opium.
<LEND>

<L>29598<pc>0587-a<k1>pulkasa<k2>pulkasa
{#pulkasa#}¦ {%pulkasa, as,%} m., Ved. (according
to the commentators) {%= paulkasa.%}
<LEND>

<L>29599<pc>0587-a<k1>pulla<k2>pulla
{#pulla#}¦ {%pulla%} wrongly for {%phulla,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29600<pc>0587-a<k1>pullaka<k2>pullaka
{#pullaka#}¦ {%pullaka, am%} (?), n. {%= āścarya,%} wonder.
<LEND>

<L>29601<pc>0587-a<k1>puz<k2>puz<h>1
{#puz#} 1¦. {%puṣ%} (various reading for {%vyuṣ,%}
q. v.), cl. 4. P. {%puṣyati,%} &c., to divide,
distribute.
<LEND>

<L>29602<pc>0587-a<k1>puz<k2>puz<h>2
{#puz#} 2¦. {%puṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%poṣati, pupoṣa,%}
{%poṣiṣyati, apoṣīt, poṣitum,%} cl. 4. P.
{%puṣyati,%} &c., to be nourished, thrive, prosper, in-
crease (intrans.); to share, divide; cl. 4. P. later also
9. P. {%puṣyati, puṣṇāti,%} &c., to nourish, nurture,
cherish, foster, rear, bring up; to support, maintain,
bear; to cause to thrive or prosper, cause to grow,
unfold, develop; to increase (trans.), augment; to
further, advance, promote, enhance, aggrandize; to
magnify, exalt, extol; to increase in (with acc.),
receive, get, possess, have, enjoy; to manage; to
exhibit, show, display, evince, make to appear:
Caus. {%poṣayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%apūpuṣat,%} to
nourish, cherish, foster, rear, bring up; to cause to
thrive or pros per, take care of, provide for; to cause
to be fostered or brought up; to wear, put on:
Desid. {%pupoṣiṣati, pupuṣiṣati, pupukṣati:%}
Intens. {%popuṣyate, popoṣṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>29603<pc>0587-a<k1>puz<k2>puz<h>3
3. {%puṣ%}¦ in {%viśva-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29604<pc>0587-a<k1>puza<k2>puza
{%Puṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ nourishing (in {%graha-p˚,%} q. v.);
({%as%}), m., N. of a teacher of the Veda; ({%ā%}), f. a
species of plant ({%= lāṅgalikī%}).
<LEND>

<L>29605<pc>0587-a<k1>puzarya<k2>puzarya
{%Puṣarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. well-nourished, thriving.
<LEND>

<L>29606<pc>0587-a<k1>puzita<k2>puzita
{%Puṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ nourished, nurtured (=
{%puṣṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>29607<pc>0587-a<k1>puzka<k2>puzka
{%Puṣka,%}¦ a word formed for the explanation of
{%puṣkala%} in Gaṇa to Pāṇ. V. 2, 97.
<LEND>

<L>29608<pc>0587-a<k1>puzkara<k2>puzkara
{%Puṣkara, am,%}¦ n. (probably an anomalous form-
ation fr. an unused {%puṣa + kara%}), a blue lotus-
flower; a lotus, Nelumbium Speciosum or Nymphæa
Nelumbo, (in Mahā-bh. Udyoga-p. 1790, a meta-
phorical expression for ‘the heart,’ or according to
others for ‘error’); a species of medicinal plant,
Costus Speciosus or Arabicus; the bowl of a spoon;
the tip or extremity of an elephant's trunk; the skin
of a drum or place where any musical instrument is
struck; the blade of a sword; the sheath of a sword;
an arrow; air, atmosphere, sky, heaven; water;
N. of a celebrated place of pilgrimage (now called
Pokur in the district of Ajmere, about five miles
from the city of Ajmere, consisting of a small town
on the bank of a lake, said to be one of the most
sacred in India; in this sense also {%puṣkarāṇi,%} n.
pl.); a cage; union; a part; war, battle; intoxi-
cation; the art of dancing; ({%as%}), m. a pond, tank,
lake [cf. {%tri-p˚%}]; a kind of drum, a kettle-drum; a
kind of serpent; a species of crane, Ardea Sibirica;
a kind of disease; the sun; (in astrology) an in-
auspicious Yoga, an ill-omened combination of a
lucky lunation with an unlucky day, three-fourths of
a lunar mansion; the regent of Puṣkara-dvīpa; an
epithet of Kṛṣṇa; of Śiva; N. of a son of Varuṇa;
of an Asura; of a Buddha; of a prince the brother
of Nala; of a son of Bharata; of Su-nakṣatra; of a
son of Vṛka and Dūrvākṣī; N. of a mountain in
Puṣkara-dvīpa; ({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet of a class of
[Page0587-b+ 81]
clouds said to occasion dearth or famine; of the
inhabitants of Kuśa-dvīpa corresponding to Brāh-
mans; ({%as, am%}), m. n., N. of one of the seven
great Dvīpas or divisions of the universe; (with
Jainas) N. of one of the five Bharatas; ({%ī%}), f., N.
of one of the eight wives of Śiva. {%—Puṣkara-cūḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘lotus-crested,’ N. of one of the four elephants
that support the earth. {%—Puṣkara-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Puṣkara-dvīpa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Dvīpa or great division of the
universe. {%—Puṣkara-nābha, as,%} m. ‘lotus-naveled,’
an epithet of Viṣṇu; [cf. {%padma-nābha.%}] {%—Puṣ-%}
{%kara-pattra, am,%} n. a lotus-leaf, leaf of a lotus.
{%—Puṣkarapattra-netra, as, ā, am,%} having eyes
like lotus-leaves. {%—Puṣkara-parṇa, am,%} n., Ved.
a lotus-petal; an epithet of a kind of brick; ({%ī%} or
{%ikā%}), f. the plant Hibiscus Mutabilis. {%—Puṣkara-%}
{%purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Puṣkara-priya,%}
{%as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), wax. {%—Puṣkara-bīja, am,%}
n. lotus-seed. {%—Puṣkara-mālin, ī,%} m. ‘wearing a
lotus-wreath,’ N. of a man. {%—Puṣkara-māhātmya,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Padma-Purāṇa.
{%—Puṣkara-mūla, am,%} n. the plant Costus Speci-
osus or Arabicus. {%—Puṣkaramūlaka, am,%} n. the
root of Costus Speciosus or Arabicus. {%—Puṣkara-%}
{%vyāghra, as,%} m. ‘water-tiger,’ an alligator. {%—Puṣ-%}
{%kara-śāyikā,%} f. a species of aquatic bird. {%—Puṣ-%}
{%kara-śikā%} or (according to others) {%puṣkara-śiphā,%}
f. the root of the lotus. {%—Puṣkara-sad, t,%} m., N.
of a man; ({%das%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants;
(in derivatives both members of this comp. are
Vṛddhied; cf. {%pauṣkarasādi.%}) {%—Puṣkara-sā-%}
{%gara, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the plant Costus
Speciosus or Arabicus. {%—Puṣkara-sāda, as,%} m.,
Ved. a species of bird. {%—Puṣkara-sārin, ī,%} m., N.
of a Brāhman. {%—Puṣkara-sārī,%} f. ‘having the
essence of the lotus,’ a kind of writing ({%lipi%}).
{%—Puṣkara-sthapati, is,%} m. ‘architect of the
lotus,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Puṣkara-sraj, k,%} f. a
lotus-wreath, chaplet of lotuses; ({%jau%}), m. du. an
epithet of the two sons of Aśvinī and physicians of
Svarga or paradise; ({%k, k, k%}), wearing a garland of
lotuses, crowned with lotuses. {%—Puṣkarākṣa (˚ra-%}
{%ak˚), as, ī, am,%} lotus-eyed; ({%as%}), m. an epithet
of Viṣṇu; N. of a man; of a prince. {%—Puṣka-%}
{%rākhya (˚ra-ākh˚), as,%} m. the Indian crane, Ardea
Sibirica. {%—Puṣkarāṅghrija (˚ra-aṅ˚), am,%} n. the
plant Costus Speciosus or C. Arabicus. {%—Puṣkarā-%}
{%raṇya (˚ra-ar˚), am,%} n., N. of a forest in the east
of Viśālā. {%—Puṣkarāruṇi (˚ra-ār˚), is,%} m., N. of
a king. {%—Puṣkarā-vatī,%} f. ‘abounding in lotuses,’
N. of a town (= the <lang n="greek">Πευκελαῶτις</lang> of the ancients
and the Pousekielofati of Hiouen-Thsang); a form of
Dākṣāyaṇī. {%—Puṣkarāvartaka (˚ra-āv˚), ās,%} m.
pl. epithet of a particular class of clouds (also called
{%puṣkalāvartakās%}). {%—Puṣkarāhva (˚ra-āh˚), as,%}
m. the Indian crane, Ardea Sibirica; the plant
Costus Speciosus or Arabicus (also {%puṣkarāhvaya%}).
 — 1. {%puṣkarekṣaṇa (˚ra-īkṣ˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘lotus-eyed,’ having eyes like the blue lotus. {%—2. pu-%}
{%ṣkare-kṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} being for a moment in
the sky. {%—Puṣkaroddhṛta (˚ra-ud˚), as, ā, am,%}
raised with the extremity of the trunk.
<LEND>

<L>29609<pc>0587-b<k1>puzkarAya<k2>puzkarAya
{%Puṣkarāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%puṣkarāyate, -yitum,%}
to act as or represent a drum.
<LEND>

<L>29610<pc>0587-b<k1>puzkarikA<k2>puzkarikA
{%Puṣkarikā,%}¦ f. a kind of disease, formation of
abscesses on the penis; N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>29611<pc>0587-b<k1>puzkarin<k2>puzkarin
{%Puṣkarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ abounding in lotuses; ({%ī%}),
m. an elephant; N. of a prince; ({%iṇī%}), f. a female
elephant; a lotus-pool, pool in general, piece of
water, lake, artificial pond, square or large pond;
the plant Costus Speciosus or Arabicus; the plant
Hibiscus Mutabilis; N. of a river; of the wife of
Bhumanyu; of the wife of Cākṣuṣa and mother
of Manu; of the mother of Manu Cākṣuṣa; of
the wife of Vyuṣṭa and mother of Cakṣus and
grandmother of Manu; of the wife of Ulmuka; of
a Buddhist temple in Maru or Marwar.
<LEND>

<L>29612<pc>0587-b<k1>puzkala<k2>puzkala
{%Puṣkala, as, ā, am,%}¦ much, many, abundant;
full, filled, complete; rich, sumptuous, splendid, mag-
nificent; good, salutary, eminent, excellent, best;
[Page0587-c+ 81]
resonant, resounding, loud; near, approached; ({%as%}),
m. a kind of drum; N. of a son of Varuṇa; epithet
of Śiva; of an Asura; N. of a son of Bharata; of a
Ṛṣi; of a Buddha; epithet of mount Meru; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people; N. of the military caste in
Kuśa-dvīpa corresponding to the ancient Kṣatriyas;
({%ī%}), f., see Gaṇa to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 41; ({%am%}), n. a
particular measure of capacity (= 8 Kuñcis = 64
handfuls; sometimes = four times a double handful);
a particular weight of gold; alms to the extent of
four mouthfuls of food; N. of a celebrated place of
pilgrimage ({%= Puṣkara%}). {%—Puṣkala-mocana,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the 78th chapter of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa
of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Puṣkala-vijaya, as,%} m.,
N. of the 68th and 69th chapters of the Pātāla-
khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Puṣkalā-vatī,%} f.
{%= puṣkarā-vatī,%} q. v. {%—Puṣkalāvartaka (˚la-%}
{%āv˚), ās,%} m. pl. epithet of a particular class of clouds
({%= puṣkarāvartaka,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>29613<pc>0587-c<k1>puzkalaka<k2>puzkalaka
{%Puṣkalaka, as,%}¦ m. the musk-deer; a post,
wedge, pin, bolt; a Buddhist mendicant; (sometimes
wrongly spelt {%puṣyalaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>29614<pc>0587-c<k1>puzkalAvata<k2>puzkalAvata
{%Puṣkalāvata, as,%}¦ m. (probably a wrong form
for {%pauṣkalāvata%}), an inhabitant of Puṣkalā-
vatī.
<LEND>

<L>29615<pc>0587-c<k1>puzwa<k2>puzwa
{%Puṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ nourished, cherished, fed, well-
fed; thriving, strong; tended, cared for; incubated,
brooded over; abounding, abundant; rich, well-sup-
plied, amply provided; eminent; full-sounding, loud;
complete, perfect; burnt (for {%pluṣṭa?%}); ({%am%}), n.,
Ved. increase, acquisition, gain, wealth, property.
{%—Puṣṭa-tā,%} f. or {%puṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. the being
well-fed, a prosperous or thriving condition. {%—Puṣ-%}
{%ṭa-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the lord of prosperity or
welfare. {%—Puṣṭa-vipuṣṭau,%} m. du. the well-fed
and the ill-fed. {%—Puṣṭāṅga (˚ṭa-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%}
fat-limbed, fat in body, fattened, well-fed, fat. {%—Puṣ-%}
{%ṭārtha (˚ṭa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having a complete
sense. {%—Puṣṭā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. breeding or
rearing (cattle; Sāy. {%= sambhṛta-ghāsa%}).
<LEND>

<L>29616<pc>0587-c<k1>puzwi<k2>puzwi
{%Puṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. a well-nourished condition, fatness,
plumpness; growth, increase, vegetation, advance,
prosperity, thriving; comfort, wealth, means, pro-
perty; cherishing, nourishing, nourishment, main-
tenance, support; breeding, rearing (of cattle);
Nourishment personified as a daughter of Dakṣa
and wife of Dharma (also mother of Lobha, and one
of the 16 Mātṛkās or divine mothers); a form of
Dākṣāyaṇī; N. of a Kalā of Prakṛti and wife
of Gaṇeśa; of a Kalā of the moon; of a daughter of
Paurṇamāsa; of a plant, Physalis Flexuosa {%(= aśva-%}
{%gandhā)%}. {%—Puṣṭi-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} nourish-
ing, causing to thrive or grow. {%—Puṣṭi-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. a religious ceremony performed for the attain-
ment of prosperity. {%—Puṣṭi-kānta, as,%} m. ‘be-
loved of Puṣṭi,’ an epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Puṣṭi-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} wishing for or desirous of pros-
perity or welfare. {%—Puṣṭi-gu, us,%} m., N. of a
man, said to be a Kāṇva and the reputed author of
the hymn Ṛg-veda VIII. 51, 1. {%—Puṣṭi-da, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} yielding or causing prosperity or welfare,
nourishing, cherishing; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of
Manes or deceased ancestors; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant
({%= vṛddhi%}); the plant Physalis Flexuosa. {%—Puṣṭi-%}
{%dāvan, ā, arī, a,%} yielding or causing prosperity or
welfare, nourishing. {%—Puṣṭi-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the
lord of welfare or prosperity. {%—Puṣṭi-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. thriving, abundant, prosperous, well off; con-
taining the word {%puṣṭi%} or any other derivative of
rt. 2. {%puṣ%}. {%—Puṣṭi-mati, is,%} m. a N. of Agni;
(incorrectly for {%puṣṭi-pati.%}) {%—Puṣṭim-bhara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. bringing prosperity, conveying
nutriment; an epithet of Pūṣan. {%—Puṣṭi-var-%}
{%dhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. augmenting nourishment,
causing to prosper, promoting welfare; ({%as%}), m.
a cock.
<LEND>

<L>29617<pc>0587-c<k1>puzwika<k2>puzwika
{%Puṣṭika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a poet; ({%ā%}), f. a bivalve
shell, an oyster.
<LEND>

<L>29618<pc>0587-c<k1>puzpa<k2>puzpa
{%Puṣpa, am,%}¦ n. a flower, blossom; the menstrual
flux; a disease of the eyes, specks on the eye, albugo;
a topaz; (in dramatic language) gallantry, politeness,
[Page0588-a+ 81]
declaration of love; blossoming, blooming, expanding,
expansion; the vehicle or car of Kuvera [cf. {%puṣ-%}
{%paka%}]; a kind of perfume; N. of a Sāman; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a serpent-demon; of a son of Śliṣṭi; of
a son of Śaṅkha; of a Bodhi-sattva (?); of a moun-
tain; ({%ā%}), f. a N. of the town Campā (or the capital
of Karṇa; it was in Aṅga and is identified with the
modern Bhāgalpur). {%—Puṣpa-karaṇḍaka, am,%} n.
‘flower-basket,’ N. of a grove in the vicinity of
Avantī or Oujein sacred to Mahā-deva. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%karaṇḍinī,%} f. a N. of Oujein. {%—Puṣpa-karṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a flower (i. e. a flower-
shaped mole or mark) in the ear (said of an animal).
{%—Puṣpa-kāra, as,%} m. the author of the Puṣpa-
sūtras. {%—Puṣpa-kāla, as,%} m. ‘flower-time,’ the
spring; the time of the menses. {%—Puṣpa-kāsīsa,%}
{%am,%} n. green or black sulphate of iron. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%kīṭa, as,%} m. ‘flower-insect, a large black bee; an
insect living in flowers. {%—Puṣpa-ketana, as,%} m.
‘characterized by flowers,’ the god of love. {%—Puṣ-%}
{%pa-ketu, us,%} m. ‘characterized by flowers,’ an epithet
of the god of love; N. of a Buddha; of a prince;
calx of brass; vitriol used for collyrium. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%gaṇḍikā,%} f. contrary purpose or effort of man and
woman. {%—Puṣpa-giri, is,%} m. ‘flower-mountain,’
N. of a fabulous mountain (the favourite resort of
Varuṇa). {%—Puṣpa-gṛha, am,%} n. ‘flower-house,’
a conservatory. {%—Puṣpa-granthana, am,%} n. weav-
ing a wreath or garland of flowers. {%—Puṣpa-ghā-%}
{%taka, as,%} m. ‘having flowers for its destroyer,’ the
bamboo (the stem of which is said to decay after the
plant has flowered). {%—Puṣpa-caya, as,%} m. a quan-
tity of flowers; gathering flowers. {%—Puṣpa-cāpa,%}
{%as,%} m. a bow of flowers, the bow of the god of
love; ‘having a bow of flowers,’ an epithet of Kāma-
deva the god of love. {%—Puṣpa-cāmara, as,%} m.
‘having flowers for a chowrie,’ the plant Artemisia
Indica; a fragrant plant, Pandanus Odoratissimus.
{%—Puṣpa-ja, as, ā, am,%} derived or coming from
flowers (e. g. {%puṣpajaṃ rajaḥ,%} dust derived from
flowers, pollen); ({%as%}), m. the juice of flowers; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a river rising in the Vindhya mountains.
{%—Puṣpa-jāti, is,%} f. ‘flower-born,’ N. of a river
rising in the Malaya mountains. {%—Puṣpa-da, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} giving blossoms or flowers; ({%as%}), m. a tree.
{%—Puṣpa-daṃṣṭra, as,%} m. ‘having flowers for
fangs,’ N. of a serpent-demon. {%—Puṣpa-danta,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having flowers for teeth,’ N. of one of
Śiva's attendants; of a Gandharva and author of the
Mahimnaḥ Stavaḥ; of an attendant of Viṣṇu (who
is described as fighting against the Asuras); (with
Jainas) the ninth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī;
N. of a Vidyā-dhara; of the elephant of the north-
west quarter; of a serpent-demon; of the mountain
Śatruñ-jaya; ({%au%}), m. du. the sun and moon; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a Rākṣasī; ({%am%}), n., N. of a temple; of a
palace; of a city gate (Hari-vaṃśa 6510). {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%dantaka, as,%} m., N. of a Gandharva and author of the
Mahimnaḥ Stavaḥ. {%—Puṣpadanta-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Puṣpadanta-bhid,%}
{%t,%} m. an epithet of Śiva; (perhaps wrongly for {%pūṣa-%}
{%danta-bhid,%} cf. {%pūṣa-danta-hara.%}) {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%dāman, a,%} n. a garland or chaplet of flowers; a kind of
metre, four times ¯¯¯¯¯,˘˘˘˘˘˘¯,¯˘¯¯˘¯¯.
{%—Puṣpa-drava, as,%} m. the exudation or saccharine
matter of flowers; an infusion of flowers, as rose-
water &c. {%—Puṣpa-druma, as,%} m. a flowering
tree, tree which bears flowers. {%—Puṣpadruma-%}
{%kusumita-mukuṭa, as,%} m. ‘having a flowery dia-
dem like a tree in blossom,’ N. of a Gandharva-rāja.
{%—Puṣpa-dha, as,%} m. the offspring of an outcast
Brāhman. {%—Puṣpa-dhanus, us,%} or {%puṣpa-dhan-%}
{%van, ā,%} m. ‘arming his bow with flowers,’ an epithet
of Kāma-deva the god of love. {%—Puṣpa-dhara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} bearing flowers or blossoms, flowering.
{%—Puṣpa-dhāraṇa, as,%} m. ‘flower-bearer,’ an
epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Puṣpa-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘cha-
racterized by flowers,’ the god of love. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%nāṭaka,%} a various reading for {%puṣpa-vaṭuka,%} q. v.
{%—Puṣpa-nikara, as,%} m. scattering or throwing
flowers; a multitude of flowers. {%—Puṣpa-nikṣa, %}
[Page0588-b+ 81]
{%as,%} m. ‘flower-kissing,’ a bee. {%—Puṣpa-niryāsa%}
or {%puṣpaniryāsaka, as,%} m. exudation or juice of
flowers, nectar of flowers. {%—Puṣpa-netra, am,%} n.
the tube of a flower; a kind of cane or bamboo (?).
{%—Puṣpan-dhaya, as,%} m. ‘flower-sucking,’ a bee.
{%—Puṣpa-pattra, as,%} m. ‘feathered with flowers,’
a kind of arrow. {%—Puṣpa-pattrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having
flowers for arrows (an epithet of the bow of Kāma-
deva). {%—Puṣpa-patha, as,%} m. ‘course of the
menses,’ the vulva. {%—Puṣpa-pāṇḍu, us,%} m. a
species of serpent. {%—Puṣpa-puṭa, as,%} m. the
sheath or calyx of a flower; the hands arranged in
the shape of the calyx of a flower. {%—Puṣpa-pura,%}
{%am,%} n. the city Pāṭali-putra or Palibothra. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%pracaya, as,%} m. plucking or gathering flowers;
stealing flowers. {%—Puṣpa-pracāya, as,%} m. pluck-
ing or gathering flowers. {%—Puṣpa-pracāyikā,%} f.
plucking or gathering flowers; {%tava puṣpapracā-%}
{%yikā,%} it is thy turn to gather flowers, Schol. to Pāṇ.
VI. 2, 74. {%—Puṣpa-prastāra, as,%} m. a couch of
flowers, flowery couch. {%—Puṣpaprastāra-śāyin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} reposing on a flowery couch. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%phala, am,%} n. flowers and fruits; ({%as%}), m. the
elephant or wood-apple tree, Feronia Elephantum
({%= kapittha%}); a pumpkin-gourd, Benincasa Cerifera
({%= kuṣmāṇḍa%}). {%—Puṣpaphala-druma, ās,%} m.
pl. trees bearing blossom and fruit. {%—Puṣpa-bali,%}
{%is,%} m. an offering or oblation of flowers. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%bhaṅga, as,%} m. a festoon of flowers; (according to
a Scholiast) treading on flowers. {%—Puṣpa-bha-%}
{%draka, am,%} n. ‘beautiful with flowers,’ N. of a
particular wood. {%—Puṣpa-bhadrā,%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Puṣpa-bhava, as, ā, am,%} being or con-
tained in flowers; ({%as%}), m. the nectar of flowers.
{%—Puṣpa-bhūṣita, am,%} n. ‘adorned with flowers,’
N. of a kind of Prakaraṇa, q. v. {%—Puṣpa-bherotsa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Puṣpa-mañjarikā,%} f. a
blue lotus. {%—Puṣpa-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or
consisting of flowers, abounding in flowers, flowery.
{%—Puṣpa-mālā,%} f. a garland of flowers; N. of a
work by Candra-śekhara. {%—Puṣpa-mās, ās,%} or
{%puṣpa-māsa, as,%} m. ‘flower-month,’ the spring.
{%—Puṣpa-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a king, (according
to the Brāhmanical account, a general of the last
Maurya dynasty and father of prince Agni-mitra;
or according to Buddhists, a king, the successor of
Puṣya-dharman); N. of another king. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%rakta, as, ā, am,%} red as a flower; dyed red with
vegetable colour, as safflower &c.; ({%as%}), m. the
shrub Hibiscus Phœniceus ({%= sūryamaṇi-vṛkṣa%}).
{%—Puṣpa-rajas, as,%} n. ‘flower-dust,’ pollen, espe-
cially saffron. {%—Puṣpa-ratha, as,%} m. ‘flower-
chariot,’ a car or carriage for travelling or for pleasure
or any purpose except war. {%—Puṣpa-rasa, as,%} m.
‘flower-juice,’ the nectar or honey of flowers.
{%—Puṣparasāhvaya (˚sa-āh˚), as,%} m. ‘having
the name flower-juice,’ honey, nectar. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%rāga%} or {%puṣpa-rāja, as,%} m. a topaz. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%reṇu, us,%} m. ‘flower-dust,’ the dust or farina of
flowers, pollen. {%—Puṣpa-rocana, as,%} m. the plant
Mesua Roxburghii. {%—Puṣpa-lāva, as,%} m. a flower-
gatherer, flower-seller, garland-maker; ({%ī%}), f. a
female flower-gatherer. {%—Puṣpa-lāvin, ī,%} m. a
flower-gatherer, garland-maker. {%—Puṣpa-likṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘flower-licker,’ a bee. {%—Puṣpa-lipi, is,%} f.
‘flower-writing,’ N. of a particular style of writing.
{%—Puṣpa-lih, ṭ,%} m. ‘flower-licker,’ a large black
bee. {%—Puṣpa-vaṭuka, as,%} m. a courtier, gallant;
(also read {%puṣpa-nāṭaka.%}) — 1. {%puṣpa-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having flowers, flowery, blooming, decorated
with flowers; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a Daitya; of a man;
of a prince; of a mountain in Kuśa-dvīpa; ({%antau%}),
m. du. the sun and moon [cf. {%puṣpa-danta%}];
({%atī%}), f. a menstruous woman; N. of a sacred
bathing-place. {%—2. puṣpa-vat,%} ind. like a flower.
{%—Puṣpa-vana, am,%} n. ‘flower-forest,’ N. of a
forest. {%—Puṣpa-varṣa, as,%} m., N. of a mountain;
({%am%}), n. or {%puṣpa-varṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘flower-rain,’
a shower of flowers, flowers showered from heaven
upon a hero or demigod or on any great occasion.
{%—Puṣpa-varṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} raining or showering
[Page0588-c+ 81]
flowers. {%—Puṣpa-vāṭī%} or {%puṣpa-vāṭikā,%} f. a
flower garden. {%—Puṣpa-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘having a
flowery car,’ N. of a king of Puṣkara. {%—Puṣpa-vā-%}
{%hinī,%} f. ‘carrying flowers,’ N. of a river. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a tree bearing blossoms. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%vṛṣṭi, is,%} f. ‘flower-rain,’ a shower of flowers.
{%—Puṣpa-veṇī,%} f. a chaplet or garland of flowers;
N. of a river. {%—Puṣpa-śakaṭī,%} f. a heavenly voice,
voice from heaven; raining flowers (?). {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%śakalin, ī,%} m. ‘having flower-like scales,’ a kind of
serpent. {%—Puṣpa-śayyā,%} f. a couch of flowers,
flowery couch. {%—Puṣpa-śara, as,%} m. ‘having
flowers for arrows,’ Kāma-deva the god of love.
{%—Puṣpa-śarāsana, as,%} m. ‘arming his bow with
flowers,’ the god of love. {%—Puṣpa-śūnya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} destitute of blossoms, not bearing flowers,
flowerless; ({%as%}), m. the tree Ficus Glomerata.
{%—Puṣpa-śrī, īs,%} f. abundance or beauty of flow-
ers. {%—Puṣpaśrī-garbha, as,%} m. ‘filled with the
beauty of flowers,’ N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Puṣpa-%}
{%samaya, as,%} m. ‘flower-season,’ the spring. {%—Puṣ-%}
{%pa-sādhāraṇa, as,%} m. the common time for flowers,
spring. {%—Puṣpa-sāyaka, as,%} m. ‘having flowers
for arrows,’ the god of love. {%—Puṣpa-sāra, as,%} m.
the nectar or honey of flowers; ({%ā%}), f. basil (=
{%tulasī%}). {%—Puṣpa-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a Sūtra
work ascribed to Gobhila. {%—Puṣpa-saurabhā,%} f.
the plant Methonica Superba {%(= kali-kārī)%}. {%—Puṣ-%}
{%pa-snāna, am,%} n. ‘bathing with flowers,’ a kind of
inauguration. {%—Puṣpa-sveda, as,%} m. the nectar or
honey of flowers. {%—Puṣpa-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} stealing
or taking away flowers. {%—Puṣpa-hāsa, as,%} m.
‘smiling with flowers,’ a flower garden (?); an epithet
of Viṣṇu; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f. a woman during
menstruation. {%—Puṣpa-hīna, as, ā, am,%} destitute
of flowers or blossoms, flowerless, not flowering;
({%ā%}), f. the glomerous fig-tree, Ficus Glomerata; a
woman past child-bearing, barren woman. {%—Puṣpā-%}
{%kara (˚pa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} rich or abounding in
flowers, flowery; {%puṣpākaro māsaḥ,%} the flowery
month, spring. {%—Puṣpākara-deva, as,%} m., N. of
a poet. {%—Puṣpāgama (˚pa-āg˚), as,%} m. ‘flower-
advent,’ the spring. {%—Puṣpājīva (˚pa-āj˚), as,%} or
{%puṣpājīvin (˚pa-āj˚), ī,%} m. ‘living by flowers,’ a
gardener, florist, garland-maker. {%—Puṣpāñjana%}
{%(˚pa-añ˚), am,%} n. calx of brass employed as a colly-
rium. {%—Puṣpāñjali (˚pa-añ˚), is, is, i,%} presenting
flowers or a nosegay in both hands opened and
hollowed {%(= prasūnāñjali)%}. {%—Puṣpānana (˚pa-%}
{%ān˚), as,%} m. ‘flower-faced,’ N. of a Yakṣa. {%—Puṣ-%}
{%pāpīḍa (˚pa-āp˚), as,%} m. a chaplet of flowers; N.
of a Gandharva. {%—Puṣpābhikīrṇa (˚pa-abh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} strewed with flowers; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
serpent (‘having spots like flowers’). {%—Puṣpābhi-%}
{%ṣeka (˚pa-abh˚), as,%} m. {%= puṣpa-snāna,%} q. v.
{%—Puṣpāmbuja (˚pa-am˚), as,%} m. the sap of
flowers. {%—Puṣpāmbhas (˚pa-am˚), as,%} n., N.
of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Puṣpāyudha (˚pa-%}
{%āy˚), as,%} m. ‘flower-armed,’ the god of love.
{%—Puṣpārṇa (˚pa-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of
Vatsara and Svar-vīthi. {%—Puṣpāvacaya (˚pa-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m. gathering flowers. {%—Puṣpāvacāyin (˚pa-%}
{%av˚), ī, inī, i,%} gathering flowers, a flower-gatherer.
{%—Puṣpā-vatī,%} f., N. of a town. {%—Puṣpāvali-%}
{%vanarāji-kusumitābhijña (˚pa-āv˚, ˚ta-abh˚), as,%}
m. ‘knowing the season of the flowering of the
rows of flowers and of the paths of the forest,’ N. of
a Buddha. {%—Puṣpāsava (˚pa-ās˚), as,%} m. a de-
coction of flowers; ({%am%}), n. honey. {%—Puṣpāsāra%}
{%(˚pa-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘flower-rain,’ a shower of flowers.
{%—Puṣpāstra (˚pa-as˚), as,%} m. ‘having flowers
for missiles,’ Kandarpa or Kāma-deva the god of
love. {%—Puṣpāhara (˚pa-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} taking
or plucking flowers. {%—Puṣpāhvā (˚pa-āh˚),%} f. the
plant Anethum Sowa {%(= śata-puṣpā)%}. {%—Puṣ-%}
{%peṣu (˚pa-iṣu), us,%} m. ‘flower-arrowed,’ the god
of love. {%—Puṣpotkaṭā (˚pa-ut˚),%} f., N. of a Rā-
kṣasī, the mother of Rāvaṇa and Kumbha-karṇa.
{%—Puṣpodakā (˚pa-ud˚),%} f. ‘having flowers for
water,’ N. of a river in the lower world. {%—Puṣ-%}
{%podgama (˚pa-ud˚), as,%} m. the coming forth or
[Page0589-a+ 76]
appearance of flowers. {%—Puṣpodbhava (˚pa-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘flower-sprung,’ N. of a man. {%—Puṣpodyāna%}
{%(˚pa-ud˚), am,%} n. a flower garden. {%—Puṣpopa-%}
{%jīvin (˚pa-up˚), ī,%} m. ‘living by flowers,’ a gar-
dener, garland-maker.
<LEND>

<L>29619<pc>0589-a<k1>puzpaka<k2>puzpaka
{%Puṣpaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of serpent; N. of a
mountain; ({%ikā%}), f. the tartar of the teeth; the
mucus of the glans penis or urethra; ({%am%}), n. calx
of brass, green vitriol; a sort of collyrium; a cup or
vessel of iron; a bracelet; a bracelet of diamonds or
jewels; a small earthen fire-place or furnace on
wheels; a disease of the eyes, albugo, specks on the
eye; N. of the self-moving aerial car of Kuvera
(carried off by the demon Rāvaṇa and constantly
used by him till he was slain by Rāma-candra, who
then employed the car, which was of enormous
dimensions, to transport himself and Sītā along with
Lakṣmaṇa and all his allies back to Ayodhyā, see
Rāmāyaṇa VI. 108, Raghu-vaṃśa XIII); N. of a
forest.
<LEND>

<L>29620<pc>0589-a<k1>puzpita<k2>puzpita
{%Puṣpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowered, in flower or
blossom, full of flowers, bearing flowers, blooming,
in bloom; flowery, florid (e. g. {%puṣpitā vāk,%} a
flowery speech, fine words without much sense);
having marks that look like flowers, spotted, varie-
gated; abounding, abounding in, rich in [cf. {%su-%}
{%varṇa-p˚%}]; completely manifested, fully developed;
({%ā%}), f. a menstruous woman; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Buddha. {%—Puṣpita-palāśa-pratima, as, ā, am,%}
resembling a Butea Frondosa in flower. {%—Puṣpi-%}
{%tāgra (˚ta-ag˚), as, ā, am,%} covered at the extre-
mities with flowers or blossoms; ({%ā%}), f. a form of
metre, a variety of the Aupacchandasika, consist-
ing of four lines, alternately ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯¯,
and ˘˘˘˘¯˘˘¯˘¯˘¯¯.
<LEND>

<L>29621<pc>0589-a<k1>puzpin<k2>puzpin
{%Puṣpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ flowery, bearing flowers,
flowering, blossoming; abounding in flowers; ({%iṇī%}),
f. a woman during menstruation.
<LEND>

<L>29622<pc>0589-a<k1>puzpya<k2>puzpya
{%Puṣpya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%puṣpyati, -te,%} &c., to
bear flowers, flower, blossom, bloom.
<LEND>

<L>29623<pc>0589-a<k1>puzya<k2>puzya
{%Puṣya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the blossom (i. e. that
which rises to the surface or the best part of any-
thing; cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄνθος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>flos</nsi>); the uppermost
part, the foam or froth of a fluid, scum; ({%as%}), m. the
Kali-yuga or fourth age; N. of the sixth (or in later
times the eighth) Nakṣatra or lunar mansion, also
called Tiṣya; the month Pauṣa; N. of a prince;
of a Buddha; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant; the asterism
Puṣya. {%—Puṣya-dharman, ā,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Puṣya-netra, as, ā, am,%} having Puṣya for a
leader. {%—Puṣya-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a prince; (a
various reading for {%puṣpa-mitra.%}) {%—Puṣya-%}
{%yaśas, ās,%} m., N. of a man with the patronymic
Audavraji. {%—Puṣya-yoga, as,%} m. the conjunction
of the moon with the asterism Puṣya, the time of
the moon's entering the lunar mansion Puṣya.
{%—Puṣya-ratha, as,%} m. a carriage for pleasure,
any sort of car or carriage except a war-chariot;
[cf. {%puṣpa-ratha.%}] {%—Puṣya-snāna, am,%} n. or
{%puṣyābhiṣeka (˚ya-abh˚), as,%} m. a ceremony of
purification performed while the moon stands in
the asterism Puṣya; [cf. {%puṣpa-snāna, puṣpā-%}
{%bhiṣeka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29624<pc>0589-a<k1>puzkara<k2>puzkara
{#puzkara#}¦ {%puṣkara, puṣkala.%} See under rt.
2. {%puṣ,%} p. 587, cols. 1, 2.
<LEND>

<L>29625<pc>0589-a<k1>puzkaletra<k2>puzkaletra
{#puzkaletra#}¦ {%puṣkaletra, as,%} m., N. of a
village.
<LEND>

<L>29626<pc>0589-a<k1>puzkaSa<k2>puzkaSa
{#puzkaSa#}¦ {%puṣkaśa%} and {%puṣkasa,%} various
readings for {%pukkaśa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29627<pc>0589-a<k1>puzpalaka<k2>puzpalaka
{#puzpalaka#}¦ {%puṣpalaka, as,%} m. a post, pin,
stake, peg, wedge; [cf. {%puṣkalaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29628<pc>0589-a<k1>puzpasa<k2>puzpasa
{#puzpasa#}¦ {%puṣpasa, as,%} m. the lungs; [cf.
{%pupphusa, phupphusa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29629<pc>0589-a<k1>puzpARanAqa<k2>puzpARanAqa
{#puzpARanAqa#}¦ {%puṣpāṇanāḍa, as,%} m., N. of a
Grāma.
<LEND>

<L>29630<pc>0589-a<k1>puzyalaka<k2>puzyalaka
{#puzyalaka#}¦ {%puṣyalaka, as,%} m. the musk-
[Page0589-b+ 78]
deer; a post, pin, bolt, stake, peg, wedge; a naked
mendicant; [cf. {%puṣpalaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29631<pc>0589-b<k1>pus<k2>pus
{#pus#}¦ {%pus,%} cl. 10. P. {%posayati, -yitum,%} to
discharge, emit.
<LEND>

<L>29632<pc>0589-b<k1>pust<k2>pust
{#pust#}¦ {%pust%} [cf. rt. {%bust%}], cl. 10. P. {%pusta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to honour, respect; to dis-
regard, to treat with disrespect; to bind; to smear (?).
<LEND>

<L>29633<pc>0589-b<k1>pusta<k2>pusta
{#pusta#}¦ {%pusta, as, ā, am,%} filled, covered (?);
({%am%}), n. smearing, anointing, plastering, painting;
working in clay, modelling, anything made of metal
or wood or clay; a book, manuscript (in this latter
sense, according to some, also {%pustī,%} f.). {%—Pusta-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. using a mixture of earth with lime
and cow-dung and water as a mortar or plaster,
plastering, painting. {%—Pusta-maya, as, ī, am,%}
formed of metal or wood, wrought in clay, modelled.
{%—Pusta-vārtta, as,%} m., Ved. one who lives by
books, one who makes books.
<LEND>

<L>29634<pc>0589-b<k1>pustaka<k2>pustaka
{%Pustaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. (usually m. or n.),
a manuscript, a book. {%—Pustakāgāra (˚ka-āg˚),%}
{%am,%} n. ‘book-room,’ a library.
<LEND>

<L>29635<pc>0589-b<k1>pusPusa<k2>pusPusa
{#pusPusa#}¦ {%pusphusa, as,%} m. the lungs (=
{%pupphusa, phupphusa%}).
<LEND>

<L>29636<pc>0589-b<k1>pU<k2>pU<h>1
{#pU#} 1¦. {%pū,%} cl. 9. P. A., 1. A. {%punāti, punīte,%}
{%pavate%} (in Bhagaved-gītā X. 31, P.), {%pu-%}
{%pāva, pupuve, paviṣyati, -te, apāvīt, apaviṣṭa,%}
{%pavitum,%} to make clean or pure, cleanse, purify,
clarify, refine; to purge or cleanse from chaff,
winnow; to expiate, atone for; to make clear or
bright; to purify in passing or by pervading, to
ventilate (as the wind); (metaphorically applied to
mental operations), to sift, discriminate, discern,
distinguish; to think out, contrive, invent, compose;
{%= abhi-gam%} (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII.
28, 4, where however, according to some, it may
have the sense of ‘to scheme or plot’); (A.) to
become clean or pure, to become clear, to flow or
drop clearly (as Soma); to form a clear conception
or distinct notion; cl. 4. A. (properly Pass.) {%pūyate,%}
to grow or become pure, to be pure: Caus. {%pava-%}
{%yati%} or {%pāvayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%apīpavat,%} to cleanse,
purify: Desid. {%pupūṣati, -te, pipaviṣate:%} Desid.
of Caus. {%pipāvayiṣati;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ποινή, ἄ-ποινα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πῦρ, πυρ-ε-τό-ς, πυρ-ά, πυρ-σός, πυῤῥό-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>pū-</nsi>
<nsi>ru-s, pu-tu-s, puta-re, pœna, pûnio, pœnitet,</nsi>
perhaps <nsi>pi-u-s, ex-pia-re, pia-culu-m, prū-na:</nsi>
Umbr. <nsi>pir,</nsi> ‘fire:’ Goth. <nsi>fon</nsi> = Old Germ. <nsi>fuir</nsi> =
Angl. Sax. <nsi>fyr</nsi> = Mod. Germ. <nsi>feuer</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>fire:</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>bar,</nsi> ‘pure:’ Lith. <nsi>pûs-tas,</nsi> ‘desert;’
<nsi>pus-tau,</nsi> ‘I sharpen:’ Bohem. <nsi>púr,</nsi> ‘glowing
ashes.’]
<LEND>

<L>29637<pc>0589-b<k1>pU<k2>pU<h>2
2. {%pū, ūs, ūs, u,%}¦ cleansing, purifying, clarifying
(at the end of comps.; cf. {%anna-pū, uda-pū, keta-%}
{%pū, ghṛta-pū%}).
<LEND>

<L>29638<pc>0589-b<k1>pUta<k2>pUta<h>1
1. {%pūta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see rt. {%pūy,%} p. 590),
made clean or pure, purified, pure, cleaned, cleansed,
clean, washed; threshed, winnowed; expiated,
atoned for; bright; contrived, invented, composed;
guarded, defended ?; ({%am%}), n. truth, speaking truth;
({%as%}), m. a conch-shell; white Kuśa grass; the plant
Flacourtia Sapida; ({%au%}), m. du. the buttocks, (in
this sense a wrong reading for {%puta%}); ({%ā%}), f. an
epithet of Durgā. {%—Pūta-kratā,%} f., N. of a woman;
[cf. the two following words.] {%—Pūtakratāyī,%} f.
the wife of Pūta-kratu; the wife of Indra. {%—Pūta-%}
{%kratu, us,%} m. ‘of clear intellect,’ N. of a man; an
epithet of Indra. {%—Pūta-gandha, as,%} m. a species
of plant {%(= varvara)%}. {%—Pūta-tṛṇa, am,%} n. white
Kuśa grass; [cf. {%puṇya-tṛṇa.%}] {%—Pūta-dakṣa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘pure-willed, pure-minded,’ an
epithet of the Ādityas and other gods; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a descendant of Aṅgiras, author of the hymn
Ṛg-veda VIII. 83. {%—Pūta-dakṣas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. ‘pure-minded,’ an epithet of the Ādityas.
{%—Pūta-dru, us,%} m. ‘pure tree,’ the tree Butea
Frondosa ({%= palāśa,%} but possibly fr. 2. {%pūta%}).
{%—Pūta-dhānya, am,%} n. ‘winnowed grain,’ sesa-
mum. {%—Pūta-pāpa, as, ā, am,%} or {%pūta-pāpman, %}
[Page0589-c+ 79]
{%ā, ā, a,%} purified or freed from sin. {%—Pūta-phala,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘pure-fruited,’ the Jaka or bread-fruit tree,
Artocarpus Integrifolia {%(= panasa)%}. {%—Pūta-ban-%}
{%dhana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. attached to that which is
pure (Sāy. {%= pūtaṃ sūryam anubadhnat%}). {%—Pūta-%}
{%bandhu, us, us, u,%} of pure descent, of noble race;
(Sāy. {%= pūta-stotra,%} accepting pious praise.) {%—Pūta-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m., Ved. a kind of vessel which receives
the Soma juice after it has been strained. {%—Pūta-%}
{%mati, is,%} m. ‘pure-minded,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Pūta-yavam,%} ind. at the time of winnowing
barley; [cf. {%pūyamāna-yavam.%}] {%—Pūtātma-tā,%} f.
personal purity, purity of soul. {%—Pūtātman (˚ta-%}
{%āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} pure-minded, personally pure; ({%ā%}),
m. a pure or purified person, saint, ascetic; a man
of a cleanly person, a man purified by ablution.
<LEND>

<L>29639<pc>0589-c<k1>pUti<k2>pUti<h>1
1. {%pūti, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. see rt. {%pūy,%} p. 590), purity,
purification. {%—Pūti-dhānya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. con-
taining winnowed corn; (probably a wrong reading
for {%pūta-dhānya.%})
<LEND>

<L>29640<pc>0589-c<k1>pUtrima<k2>pUtrima
{%Pūtrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. purified, pure, clean.
<LEND>

<L>29641<pc>0589-c<k1>pUtvA<k2>pUtvA
{%Pūtvā,%}¦ ind. having purified, having bathed or
washed one's self ({%= snātvā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29642<pc>0589-c<k1>pUna<k2>pUna
{%Pūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroyed ({%= vi-naṣṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>29643<pc>0589-c<k1>pUni<k2>pUni
{%Pūni, is,%}¦ f. purifying, cleansing (?); [cf. 1. {%pūti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29644<pc>0589-c<k1>pUyamAnayavam<k2>pUyamAnayavam
{%Pūyamāna-yavam,%}¦ ind. at the time of winnowing
barley; [cf. {%pūta-yavam.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29645<pc>0589-c<k1>pU<k2>pU<h>3
{#pU#} 3¦. {%pū, ūs, ūs, u%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}), drinking
(in {%agre-pū,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>29646<pc>0589-c<k1>pUga<k2>pUga
{#pUga#}¦ {%pūga, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pū;%}
but cf. {%puñja%}), an association, union, assembly, cor-
poration; a heap, quantity, multitude; disposition,
property, nature; the Areca or betel-nut tree, Areca
Catechu [cf. {%tāmbūla%}]; the Jaka tree, Artocarpus
Integrifolia; {%= chanda%} or {%chandas; (ās),%} m. pl. a
number of persons; ({%am%}), n. the Areca-nut, com-
monly called betel-nut. {%—Pūga-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
made into a heap or collection, assembled, collected,
heaped. {%—Pūga-pātra, am,%} n. a betel-box (=
{%pharuvaka%}); a spitting-pot, spittoon (commonly
called {%pikādinī%}). {%—Pūga-pīṭha, am,%} n. ‘betel-
stool,’ a spitting-pot, spittoon (chewing the Pān
producing an increased excretion of saliva). {%—Pūga-%}
{%puṣpikā,%} f. betel-nut and flowers (presented to the
principal guests at a marriage festival). {%—Pūga-phala,%}
{%am,%} n. the fruit of the Areca Catechu, the Areca-nut.
{%—Pūga-roṭa, as,%} m. or {%pūga-roṭaka, as%} or {%am,%}
m. or n. (?), ‘resembling the Areca Catechu,’ the
marshy date tree, Phœnix or Elate Paludosa (=
{%hintāla;%} also read {%pūga-voṭa%}). {%—Pūga-vaira,%}
{%am,%} n. enmity against many.
<LEND>

<L>29647<pc>0589-c<k1>pUgatiTa<k2>pUgatiTa
{%Pūgatitha, as, ī, am,%}¦ see Pāṇ. V. 2, 52; [cf.
{%gaṇatitha, bahutitha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29648<pc>0589-c<k1>pUgya<k2>pUgya
{%Pūgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) be-
longing to a multitude.
<LEND>

<L>29649<pc>0589-c<k1>pUj<k2>pUj
{#pUj#}¦ {%pūj,%} cl. 10. P. {%pūjayati%} (ep. also
cl. 10. A. {%pūjayate,%} and cl. 1. P. {%pūjati%}),
{%apūpujat, pūjayitum,%} to adore, honour, revere,
reverence, worship, respect, receive with honour, re-
ceive hospitably; to take notice of, regard; to honour
with, present with (e. g. {%ratnaiḥ pūjayed enam,%}
he should honour him with a present of gems).
<LEND>

<L>29650<pc>0589-c<k1>pUjaka<k2>pUjaka
{%Pūjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ honouring, worshipping,
respecting, a worshipper (often used in comps.; cf.
{%deva-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>29651<pc>0589-c<k1>pUjat<k2>pUjat
{%Pūjat, an, antī, at,%}¦ reverencing, honouring; wor-
shipping.
<LEND>

<L>29652<pc>0589-c<k1>pUjana<k2>pUjana
{%Pūjana, am,%}¦ n. reverencing, honouring; wor-
shipping, worship, respect; showing attention (to a
visitor), treating with respect or hospitality; an object
of reverence; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a female bird a friend of
king Brahma-datta; a hen-sparrow.
<LEND>

<L>29653<pc>0589-c<k1>pUjanIya<k2>pUjanIya
{%Pūjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be revered or honoured,
entitled to homage; venerable, honourable; to be
worshipped, adorable; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a female bird
a friend of king Brahma-datta.
<LEND>

<L>29654<pc>0589-c<k1>pUjayAna<k2>pUjayAna
{%Pūjayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ honouring, reverencing.
<LEND>

<L>29655<pc>0589-c<k1>pUjayitavya<k2>pUjayitavya
{%Pūjayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured or wor-
shipped, deserving honour or worship, venerable.
<LEND>
[Page0590-a+ 76]

<L>29656<pc>0590-a<k1>pUjayitf<k2>pUjayitf
{%Pūjayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ honouring, worshipping,
a worshipper.
<LEND>

<L>29657<pc>0590-a<k1>pUjayitvA<k2>pUjayitvA
{%Pūjayitvā,%}¦ ind. having honoured or worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>29658<pc>0590-a<k1>pUjA<k2>pUjA
{%Pūjā,%}¦ f. honour, worship, respect, culture, rever-
ence, veneration, homage to superiors or adoration
of the gods. {%—Pūjā-khaṇḍa,%} N. of a Buddhist work.
{%—Pūjā-pradīpa, as,%} m. ‘lamp of worship,’ N. of
a work. {%—Pūjārha (˚jā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy
of reverence or honour, worshipful, venerable, re-
spectable, sacred. {%—Pūjā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} enjoying
honour or distinction.
<LEND>

<L>29659<pc>0590-a<k1>pUjita<k2>pUjita
{%Pūjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured, respected, rever-
enced; worshipped, adored; frequented; recom-
mended; acknowledged; endowed. {%—Pūjita-pū-%}
{%jaka, as, ikā, am,%} honouring the honoured or what
is honoured (by others).
<LEND>

<L>29660<pc>0590-a<k1>pUjila<k2>pUjila
{%Pūjila, as, ā, am,%}¦ venerable, respectable, wor-
shipful; ({%as%}), m. a god, deity.
<LEND>

<L>29661<pc>0590-a<k1>pUjya<k2>pUjya
{%Pūjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured, honourable,
respectable, venerable; fit for or deserving adoration,
worshipful; ({%as%}), m. a father-in-law. {%—Pūjya-tā,%} f.
or {%pūjya-tva, am,%} n. venerableness, honourableness,
the being entitled to honour. {%—Pūjya-pūjā,%} f.
honouring those worthy of honour. {%—Pūjyapūjā-%}
{%vyatikrama, as,%} m. neglecting to honour those
worthy of honour,
<LEND>

<L>29662<pc>0590-a<k1>pUjyamAna<k2>pUjyamAna
{%Pūjyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being honoured or re-
spected; being adored or worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>29663<pc>0590-a<k1>pUR<k2>pUR
{#pUR#}¦ {%pūṇ%} [cf. rt. {%pūl%}], cl. 10. P. {%pūṇa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to collect or heap together,
accumulate.
<LEND>

<L>29664<pc>0590-a<k1>pUt<k2>pUt
{#pUt#}¦ {%pūt,%} ind. an onomatopoetic word ex-
pressive of blowing or hard breathing, a puff.
<LEND>

<L>29665<pc>0590-a<k1>pUtkf<k2>pUtkf
{%Pūt-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to
blow, puff, breathe hard; to recover breath. {%—Pūt-%}
{%kartu-kāma, as, ā, am,%} wishing to blow or breathe.
{%—Pūt-kārī,%} f. a N. of Sarasvatī; of the capital of
the Nāgas or serpent race.
<LEND>

<L>29666<pc>0590-a<k1>pUta<k2>pUta
{#pUta#}¦ {%pūta, pūti.%} See p. 589 and col. 2. of this p.
<LEND>

<L>29667<pc>0590-a<k1>pUtanA<k2>pUtanA
{#pUtanA#}¦ {%pūtanā,%} f., N. of a female demon
(said to cause a particular disease in children; she
was sent by Kaṃsa to destroy the infant Kṛṣṇa,
and having assumed a pleasing form [according to
Hari-vaṃśa 3423, Śakunī-veśa-dhāriṇī] appeared to
the child and offered him her poisoned breast to
suck, which he seized and held till he had sucked
away her life; she is enumerated among the Mātṛs
attending upon Skanda, and associated with Śakuni
as a daughter of Bali; cf. {%andha-p˚, ahi-p˚, kaṭa-%}
{%p˚, gandha-p˚%}); a kind of disease, atrophy and
wasting in a child (ascribed to the demon Pūtanā);
yellow myrobalan, Terminalia Chebula or Citrina
({%= harītakī%}); a species of Valeriana ({%= gandha-%}
{%māṃsī%}). {%—Pūtanā-mokṣaṇa-prastāva, as,%} m.,
N. of a chapter of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa.
{%—Pūtanāri (˚nā-ari˚), is,%} m. ‘enemy of Pūtanā,’
an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Pūtanā-sūdana, as,%} m.
‘destroyer of Pūtanā,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Pū-%}
{%tanā-han, ā,%} m. ‘slayer of Pūtanā,’ an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>29668<pc>0590-a<k1>pUtanikA<k2>pUtanikA
{%Pūtanikā,%}¦ f., N. of a female demon ({%= pūtanā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29669<pc>0590-a<k1>pUtudAru<k2>pUtudAru
{#pUtudAru#}¦ {%pūtu-dāru, us,%} m. the tree Butea
Frondosa ({%= palāśa;%} cf. {%pūta-dru,%} p. 589).
<LEND>

<L>29670<pc>0590-a<k1>pUtudru<k2>pUtudru
{#pUtudru#}¦ {%pūtu-dru, us,%} m. a species of tree, {%=%}
{%pītu-dāru = khadira%} or according to others {%deva-%}
{%dāru; (u),%} n. the fruit of this tree.
<LEND>

<L>29671<pc>0590-a<k1>pUTikA<k2>pUTikA
{#pUTikA#}¦ {%pūthikā,%} f. a species of culinary
plant.
<LEND>

<L>29672<pc>0590-a<k1>pUpa<k2>pUpa
{#pUpa#}¦ {%pūpa, as,%} m. a cake, a sort of bread;
[cf. {%apūpa.%}] {%—Pūpa-śālā,%} f. a cake room, baker's
shop (according to Kullūka {%= apūpa-vikraya-veś-%}
{%man%}). {%—Pūpāṣṭakā (˚pa-aṣ˚),%} f. the eighth day
of the wane of the moon after the day Āgrahāyaṇī.
<LEND>

<L>29673<pc>0590-a<k1>pUpalA<k2>pUpalA
{%Pūpalā%}¦ or {%pūpalikā%} or {%pūpalī,%} f. a kind of
sweet cake fried with ghee or oil, a rich cake of
wheaten flour.
<LEND>
[Page0590-b+ 80]

<L>29674<pc>0590-b<k1>pUpAlika<k2>pUpAlika
{%Pūpālika, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a cake.
<LEND>

<L>29675<pc>0590-b<k1>pUpAlI<k2>pUpAlI
{%Pūpālī,%}¦ f. a sort of cake or biscuit made of meal
or barley half baked or fried.
<LEND>

<L>29676<pc>0590-b<k1>pUpikA<k2>pUpikA
{%Pūpikā,%}¦ f. a sort of cake half baked or fried in
oil or ghee.
<LEND>

<L>29677<pc>0590-b<k1>pUpIya<k2>pUpIya
{%Pūpīya%}¦ or {%pūpya, as, ā, am,%} see Gaṇa to Pāṇ.
V. 1, 4.
<LEND>

<L>29678<pc>0590-b<k1>pUy<k2>pUy
{#pUy#}¦ {%pūy,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%pūyati, -te, pupūya,%}
{%-ye, pūyiṣyati, -te, pūyitum,%} Ved. to
become foul or putrid, to putrefy, stink; to be dis-
solved; to split or cleave (?); [cf. Zend <nsi>pū,</nsi> ‘to
stink;’ <nsi>pui-ti,</nsi> ‘putridness:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πύ-θ-ω, πΰθ-ο-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πυθ-ε-δών, Πυθ-ώ, Πύθων, πύ-ο-ν, πυέ-ω, πῦος:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>pūs, pus-cīnu-s, pur-u-lentu-s, put-eo, puter,</nsi>
<nsi>put-i-du-s, pud-ere:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ful-s,</nsi> ‘foul:’ Old Norse
<nsi>fūi,</nsi> ‘putridness;’ <nsi>fūk-i,</nsi> ‘a stench:’ Angl. Sax.
<nsi>fūl</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>foul</nsi> = Mod. Germ. <nsi>faul:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pú-ti,</nsi>
‘to putrefy;’ <nsi>pú-d-au,</nsi> ‘I cause to putrefy;’ <nsi>pú-lei,</nsi>
‘pus:’ Hib. <nsi>putar,</nsi> ‘putrid, stinking.’]
<LEND>

<L>29679<pc>0590-b<k1>pUta<k2>pUta<h>2
2. {%pūta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see rt. 1. {%pū,%} p. 589),
putrid, foul-smelling, ill-smelling, fetid, stinking.
<LEND>

<L>29680<pc>0590-b<k1>pUti<k2>pUti<h>2
2. {%pūti, is, is, i%}¦ (for 1. see rt. 1. {%pū,%} p. 589),
putrid, foul-smelling, stinking, fetid, ill-smelling;
({%is%}), f. a stench, stink, fetor; putrefaction; ({%i%}), n.
filthy water, suds; ichor, pus, matter; the substance
called civet; a species of grass, {%= rohiṣa; (i),%} ind.
an expression of censure or blame (after a verb, see
Scholiast on Pāṇ. VIII. 1, 69). {%—Pūti-karaja%} or
{%pūti-karañja, as,%} m. a species of shrub, Guilandina
Bonducella. {%—Pūti-karṇa%} or {%pūtikarṇaka, as,%} m.
or {%pūtikarṇa-tā,%} f. a disease of the ear accompanied
with a discharge of putrid matter. {%—Pūti-kāṣṭha%}
or {%pūtikāṣṭhaka, am,%} n. a species of pine, Pinus
Deodora ({%= deva-dāru%}); Pinus Longifolia. {%—Pūti-%}
{%kīṭa, as,%} m. ‘stinking insect,’ a species of insect.
{%—Pūti-gandha, as,%} m. a fetid odour, stench, fetor;
sulphur; the plant Terminalia Catappa, {%= iṅgudī;%}
{%(am),%} n. tin; sulphur; ({%as, ā, am%}), having an
offensive smell, fetid, foul-smelling, stinking. {%—Pūti-%}
{%gandhi, is, is, i,%} ill-smelling, having an offensive
smell, fetid, stinking. {%—Pūti-gandhika, as, ā, am,%}
having an offensive smell, stinking, fetid; ({%ā%}), f. the
plant Serratula Anthelminthica {%(= vākucī)%}. {%—Pūti-%}
{%ghāsa, as,%} m. ‘eating putrid food,’ a species of
animal living in trees. {%—Pūti-tailā,%} f. ‘containing
ill-scented oil,’ heart-pea, Cardiospermum Halica-
cabum. {%—Pūti-tva, am,%} n. putrid state, stinking.
{%—Pūti-nasya, am,%} n. ‘fetid exhalation from the
nostrils,’ a kind of disease of the nose attended with
offensive breath; (sometimes wrongly spelt {%pūta-%}
{%nasya.%}) {%—Pūti-nāsā-gada, as,%} m. ‘fetid disease of
the nose,’ a kind of disease in the nose attended
with offensive breath. {%—Pūti-nāsika, as, ā, am,%}
having a fetid nose. {%—Pūti-pattra, as,%} m. ‘having
ill-smelling leaves,’ a species of plant, a variety of the
Śyonāka. {%—Pūti-puṣpikā,%} f. ‘having ill-smelling
blossoms,’ a variety of the common citron (Citrus
Medica). {%—Pūti-phala, as, ā, am,%} bearing ill-
smelling fruit; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a species of medicinal
plant, Serratula Anthelminthica. {%—Pūti-mayūrikā,%}
f. a species of plant {%(= aja-gandhā)%}. {%—Pūti-māṃsa,%}
{%am,%} n. dead or decayed flesh. {%—Pūti-māṣa, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Pūti-mukta, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), evacuation by stool. {%—Pūti-mṛttika, as,%} m.
‘having fetid or stinking soil,’ N. of a hell. {%—Pūti-%}
{%meda, as,%} m. Vachellia Farnesiana ({%= ari-meda%}).
{%—Pūti-rajju, us,%} f., Ved. (probably) a species of
plant. {%—Pūti-vaktra, as, ā, am,%} ‘fetid-mouthed,’
having offensive breath. {%—Pūtivaktra-tā,%} f. the hav-
ing a fetid mouth or offensive breath. {%—Pūti-vāta,%}
{%as,%} m. foul air, a fart; the plant Ægle Marmelos.
{%—Pūti-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. ‘ill-scented tree,’ Calosan-
thes Indica. {%—Pūti-vraṇa, am,%} n. a foul ulcer.
{%—Pūti-śārijā,%} f. a polecat, civet-cat. {%—Pūti-sṛñ-%}
{%jaya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people; (incorrectly spelt
{%putī-sṛñjaya.%}) {%—Pūtī-karaja%} and {%pūtī-karañja%}
{%= pūti-karaja,%} q. v. {%—Pūty-aṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘having
stinking eggs,’ an insect with a fetid smell, the flying
bug; the musk-deer.
<LEND>

<L>29681<pc>0590-b<k1>pUtika<k2>pUtika
{%Pūtika, as, ā, am,%}¦ foul, stinking, putrid; ({%as%}),
[Page0590-c+ 80]
m. a species of plant serving as a substitute for the
Soma plant, grey bonduc, Guilandina Bonducella,
{%= pūti-karaja; (ā),%} f. a species of pot-herb,
Basella Lucida ({%= upodikā, potikā, potakī%}); a
polecat, civet-cat, {%= mārjārī; (am),%} n. ordure,
excrement.
<LEND>

<L>29682<pc>0590-c<k1>pUtIka<k2>pUtIka
{%Pūtīka, as,%}¦ m. a species of plant serving as a
substitute for the Soma plant, Guilandina Bonducella;
the polecat, civet-cat; ({%ā%}), f. a pot-herb, Basella
Rubra and Lucida. {%—Pūtikā-mukha, as,%} m. a
bivalve shell. {%—Pūtikeśvara-tīrtha (˚ka-īś˚), am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha on the banks of the Revā or
Narmadā.
<LEND>

<L>29683<pc>0590-c<k1>pUya<k2>pUya
{%Pūya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. pus, purulent matter, sup-
puration, discharge from an ulcer or wound. {%—Pūya-%}
{%bhuj, k, k, k,%} eating purulent carcasses. {%—Pūya-%}
{%rakta, as,%} m., scil. {%roga,%} ‘having purulent blood,’
a kind of disease of the nose with discharge of puru-
lent blood or sanies; ({%am%}), n. discharge of sanies
from the nostrils; ichor, sanies. {%—Pūya-vāha, as,%}
m. ‘filthy-streamed,’ N. of a hell (in which filthy
water flows). {%—Pūya-śoṇita, am,%} n. purulent blood,
ichor, sanies. {%—Pūyāri (˚ya-ari˚), is,%} m. ‘hostile
to suppuration,’ the Nimb tree, Azadirachta Indica
(the leaves of which are used to produce dis-
persion or absorption of purulent matter). {%—Pūyā-%}
{%lasa (˚ya-al˚), as,%} m. a particular disease of the
juncture of the eye; suppuration at the joints, white
swelling. {%—Pūyoda (˚ya-uda), as,%} m. ‘having
stinking water,’ N. of a hell; [cf. {%pūya-vāha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29684<pc>0590-c<k1>pUyana<k2>pUyana
{%Pūyana, am,%}¦ n. pus, discharge from a wound
or sore.
<LEND>

<L>29685<pc>0590-c<k1>pUr<k2>pUr
{#pUr#}¦ {%pūr,%} cl. 10. P. {%pūrayati, -yitum,%} more
properly regarded as a Caus. of rt. {%pṝ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29686<pc>0590-c<k1>pUra<k2>pUra
{%Pūra, as, ā, am,%}¦ filling, making full (e. g. {%pāṇi-%}
{%pūrānna,%} food that fills the hand, i. e. a handful of
food); ({%as%}), m. filling, making full; satisfying,
contenting, making content; the swelling or rising
of a river or of the sea, flood, a large quantity of
water, a piece of water, lake; (metaphorically) a
stream, flood (as of tears or blood, cf. {%vāṣpa-p˚, rak-%}
{%tāmbu-p˚%}); a cake; drawing in breath slowly through
the nose (as a religious exercise); the cleansing or
healing of ulcers or wounds; the citron tree; ({%am%}),
n. a kind of incense, {%= dāhāguru; (as, ā, am),%}
m. f. n. a sort of unleavened cake fried with ghee
or oil; [cf. {%vṛkṣāmla, karṇa-p˚.%}] {%—Pūra-kum-%}
{%bhaka-recaka, ās,%} or {%āni,%} m. or n. pl. (?), inhaling,
suspending and exhaling the breath. {%—Pūra-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} filled. {%—Pūrāmla (˚ra-am˚), am,%} n.
{%= amla-pūra%} or {%vṛkṣāmla%}. {%—Pūrotpīḍa (˚ra-%}
{%ut˚), as,%} m. excess or superabundance of water.
<LEND>

<L>29687<pc>0590-c<k1>pUraka<k2>pUraka
{%Pūraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ filling, completing, that
which fills or completes; filling up; satisfying, mak-
ing content; ({%as%}), m. (in arithmetic) the multiplier;
a cake of meal offered at the conclusion of the
funeral rites or oblations to the Manes; closing the
right nostril and drawing up air through the left as
a religious ceremonial; a citron, Citrus Medica (=
{%vīja-pūra%} or {%vīja-pūraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>29688<pc>0590-c<k1>pUraRa<k2>pUraRa
{%Pūraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ filling, filling up, completing;
satisfying; drawing (a bow); (in gram.) an epithet
of the ordinal numbers from {%dvitīya%} upwards (so
called as ‘filling out or completing’); ({%as%}), m. a
dam, dike, causeway, bridge; the ocean; a medi-
cinal oil or embrocation; N. of a man; a man with
the patronymic Vaiśvāmitra, author of the hymn
Ṛg-veda X. 160; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā; the
silk-cotton tree, Bombax Heptaphyllum; an ordinal
number in the feminine gender; ({%am%}), n. the act of
filling, filling out, filling up, completing or making
up, supplying a deficiency; puffing or swelling up;
(in medicine) injection of fluids; with {%dhanuṣaḥ,%}
filling out, i. e. drawing or bending a bow; furnishing,
decorating with; fulfilling; multiplication (in arith-
metic); rain, raining; a sort of cake; funeral
cake; a species of fragrant grass, Cyperus Rotundus
({%= kuṭannaṭa%}); the cross threads in weaving
cloth, warp; [cf. {%a-p˚, karṇa-p˚, nirvāṇa-p˚,%}
&c.]. {%—Pūraṇa-kāśyapa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
[Page0591-a+ 81]
{%—Pūraṇa-pratyaya, as,%} m. (in gram.) an affix
forming an ordinal.
<LEND>

<L>29689<pc>0591-a<k1>pUraRIya<k2>pUraRIya
{%Pūraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be filled up, to be com-
pleted.
<LEND>

<L>29690<pc>0591-a<k1>pUrayitavya<k2>pUrayitavya
{%Pūrayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be filled or filled up;
to be satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>29691<pc>0591-a<k1>pUrayitf<k2>pUrayitf
{%Pūrayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who fills or fills up;
one who fulfils or satisfies; ({%tā%}), m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu; of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>29692<pc>0591-a<k1>pUrayitvA<k2>pUrayitvA
{%Pūrayitvā,%}¦ ind. having filled or completed.
<LEND>

<L>29693<pc>0591-a<k1>pUrika<k2>pUrika
{%Pūrika, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a kind of pastry, a sort of
unleavened cake fried with ghee or oil. {%—Pūrikā-%}
{%pūpa (˚ka-ap˚), as,%} m. an unleavened cake.
<LEND>

<L>29694<pc>0591-a<k1>pUrita<k2>pUrita
{%Pūrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ filled, full, complete; multi-
plied; overspread.
<LEND>

<L>29695<pc>0591-a<k1>pUrin<k2>pUrin
{%Pūrin, ī, iṇi, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) filling,
making full, filling up.
<LEND>

<L>29696<pc>0591-a<k1>pUrRa<k2>pUrRa
{%Pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ filled, full, filled with, full of
(e. g. {%bhāṇḍa-pūrṇāni yānāni,%} waggons filled with
goods; sometimes with inst. or with gen., e. g.
{%vasunā pūrṇaḥ,%} full of wealth; {%ghaṭa apām%}
{%pūrṇaḥ,%} a pitcher full of water); fulfilled, finished,
ended, accomplished; completed, complete, all, en-
tire (e. g. {%daśa pūrṇaṃ śatāni,%} full ten hundred);
past, elapsed; satisfied, contented; drawn, bent (as
a bow); uttering the full and natural cry, full-
sounding, sonorous (a term of augury applied to the
cry of birds and sometimes to that of beasts; opposed
to {%dīpta, pra-dīpta,%} q. v.); strong, powerful, able;
selfish, self-indulgent; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga; of a
Deva-gandharva; of a Buddhist ascetic frequently
called the son of Maitrāyaṇī; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of
the fifteenth Kalā of the moon; of the fifth, tenth,
and fifteenth Tithis; N. of a woman; of a river;
({%am%}), n., Ved. fulness, plenty, abundance; water.
{%—Pūrṇa-kaṃsa, as,%} m. a full cup. {%—Pūrṇa-kakud,%}
{%t, t, t,%} ‘full-humped,’ hump-backed. {%—Pūrṇa-kāma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one whose wishes are fulfilled, satisfied,
satiated. {%—Pūrṇakāma-tā,%} f. contentment, satiety.
{%—Pūrṇa-kāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} filling, satisfying.
{%—Pūrṇa-kuṭa%} or {%pūrṇa-kūṭa, as,%} m., Ved. epithet
of a particular class of birds. {%—Pūrṇa-kumbha, as,%}
m. a full cup or jar; a water-vessel, one filled with
holy water used at the consecration of a king; a
particular mode of fighting; N. of a Dānava; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), having a full pitcher. {%—Pūrṇa-kośā,%} f.
‘having a full pod,’ a species of plant. {%—Pūrṇa-%}
{%koṣṭhā,%} f. a species of Cyperus ({%= nāgara-mustā%}).
{%—Pūrṇa-gabhasti, is,%} m., Ved. ‘having the arms
full,’ an epithet of Savitṛ; (Sāy.) {%= sampūrṇa-dha-%}
{%na-hasta,%} whose hands are full of wealth. {%—Pūr-%}
{%ṇa-garbhā,%} f. pregnant, gravid, ready to bring
forth. {%—Pūrṇa-candra, as,%} m. the full moon; N.
of a Bodhi-sattva; of an author. {%—Pūrṇacandra-%}
{%nibha, as, ā, am,%} like or resembling the full moon.
{%—Pūrṇacandranibhānana (˚bha-ān˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a face or countenance like the full moon.
{%—Pūrṇacandra-prabhā,%} f. the lustre of the full
moon. {%—Pūrṇa-tā,%} f. or {%pūrṇa-tva, am,%} n. fulness.
{%—Pūrṇa-tūṇa, as, ā, am,%} full-quivered, having
the quiver full. {%—Pūrṇa-darva, am,%} n., Ved. the
ceremony with the full ladle. {%—Pūrṇa-deva, as,%}
m., N. of an author. {%—Pūrṇa-pātra, as, am,%} m.
n. a full vessel or cup; as much as will fill a vessel,
a cupful; a particular measure of capacity (properly
256 handfuls of rice; it may also be composed of as
much as will satisfy one great eater); a vessel full of
rice presented at a sacrifice to the superintending and
officiating priests; a box or basket filled with clothes
and ornaments scrambled for by guests and relations
at a festival or distributed as presents. {%—Pūrṇapātra-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of a Pūrṇa-pātra; {%pūr-%}
{%ṇapātra-mayaṃ vacaḥ,%} talking about full vessels,
i. e. a season of plenty. {%—Pūrṇa-prajña, as,%} m.,
N. of an author. {%—Pūrṇaprajña-darśana, am,%}
n., N. of a chapter of the Sarva-darśana-saṅgraha.
{%—Pūrṇa-bhadra, as,%} m. ‘completely happy,’ N.
of a serpent-demon; of a man; of the father of the
Yakṣa Hari-keśa. {%—Pūrṇa-mā,%} f. ({%mā%} contracted
fr. {%māsa%}), the day or night of full moon; [cf. {%pūr-%}
{%ṇimā.%}] {%—Pūrṇa-mānasa, as, ā, am,%} satisfied or
[Page0591-b+ 81]
contented in mind, having the mind satisfied,
satisfied. {%—Pūrṇa-mās, ās,%} m., Ved. full moon.
{%—Pūrṇa-māsa, as,%} m. full moon; a monthly
sacrifice or ceremony performed on the day of full
moon; Full Moon personified as a son of Dhātṛ and
Anu-mati; ({%ī%}), f. the day or night of full moon.
{%—Pūrṇa-mukha, as,%} m. ‘full-faced,’ N. of a ser-
pent-demon. {%—Pūrṇa-yoga, as,%} m. a particular
mode of fighting. {%—Pūrṇa-vandhura, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having the chariot-seat filled; (Sāy.) {%= dhanaiḥ%}
{%pūritena rathena yuktaḥ%}. {%—Pūrṇa-vapus, us,%}
{%us, us,%} ‘full-bodied,’ corpulent; (with {%niśā-kara%})
the full moon. {%—Pūrṇa-varman, ā,%} m. ‘completely
mail-clad,’ N. of a man. {%—Pūrṇa-vīja, as,%} m. ‘full-
kerneled,’ a citron. {%—Pūrṇa-vaināśika, as,%} m.
an epithet of Buddhists (as maintaining the doc-
trine of absolute annihilation, {%= sarva-vaināśika%}).
{%—Pūrṇa-śruti, is, is, i,%} having the ears filled.
{%—Pūrṇa-samaya, as,%} m., N. of a Kṣapaṇaka
who identified time with the Supreme Being.
{%—Pūrṇa-saugandha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Pūrṇa-homa, as,%} m. {%= pūrṇāhuti,%} q. v. {%—Pūr-%}
{%ṇāṅka (˚ṇa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘a full figure or number,’
an integer. {%—Pūrṇāṅka-gaṇita, am,%} n. arithmetic
of integers. {%—Pūrṇāṅgada (˚ṇa-aṅ˚), as,%} m., N. of
a serpent-demon. {%—Pūrṇāñjali (˚ṇa-añ˚), is,%} m., Ved.
'full {%añjali,%}’ two handfuls. {%—Pūrṇānaka (˚ṇa-ān˚),%}
{%am,%} n. ‘full drum,’ a drum; the sound of a drum;
clothes and garlands presented to friends at a feast (in
this sense also spelt {%pūrṇālaka;%} cf. {%pūrṇa-pātra%});
a vessel; a moon-beam. {%—Pūrṇā-nadī,%} f., N. of
a sacred river. {%—Pūrṇābhilāṣa (˚ṇa-abh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} whose wishes are fulfilled, satisfied, contented.
{%—Pūrṇāmṛtā (˚ṇa-am˚),%} f. epithet of the six-
teenth Kalā of the moon. {%—Pūrṇāyata (˚ṇa-āy˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} completely bent (as a bow); a bow
that is completely bent. {%—Pūrṇāyus (˚ṇa-āy˚), us,%}
m., N. of a Gandharva. {%—Pūrṇārtha (˚ṇa-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has attained his object or whose
wishes have been realized. {%—Pūrṇāśā (˚ṇa-āśā˚),%} f.,
N. of a river. {%—Pūrṇāhuti (˚ṇa-āh˚), is,%} f., Ved.
‘complete oblation,’ an offering made with a full
ladle. {%—Pūrṇāhutika, as, ā, am,%} Ved. relating to
an offering made with a full ladle. {%—Pūrṇendu%}
{%(˚ṇa-in˚), us,%} m. the full moon. {%—Pūrṇendu-bim-%}
{%bānana (˚ba-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} having a face like
the disk of the full moon. {%—Pūrṇendu-vadana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a face like the full moon. {%—Pūr-%}
{%ṇotkaṭa (˚ṇa-ut˚), as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Pūrṇotsaṅga (˚ṇa-ut˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Pūrṇodarā (˚ṇa-ud˚),%} f. ‘full-bellied,’ N. of a
deity. {%—Pūrṇopamā (˚ṇa-up˚),%} f. a complete com-
parison (containing the four requisites, {%upamāna,%}
{%upameya, sādhāraṇa-dharma,%} and {%upamā-vā-%}
{%caka%} or {%sādṛśya-pratipādaka;%} opposed to {%lup-%}
{%topamā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29697<pc>0591-b<k1>pUrRaka<k2>pUrRaka
{%Pūrṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ filled, full; ({%as%}), m. a
species of tree; the blue jay ({%= svarṇa-cūḍa%}); a
cock; ({%ikā%}), f. a species of bird described as having
a double or cleft beak (also called {%nāsā-chinnī%}).
<LEND>

<L>29698<pc>0591-b<k1>pUrRAlaka<k2>pUrRAlaka
{%Pūrṇālaka, am,%}¦ n. clothes and ornaments dis-
tributed or scrambled for at a feast; [cf. {%pūrṇā-%}
{%naka, pūrṇa-pātra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29699<pc>0591-b<k1>pUrRiman<k2>pUrRiman
{%Pūrṇiman, ā,%}¦ m., N. of a brother of Kaśyapa
and son of Marīci and Kalā.
<LEND>

<L>29700<pc>0591-b<k1>pUrRimA<k2>pUrRimA
{%Pūrṇimā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%pūrṇi%} for {%pūrṇa%} and {%mā%} a
contraction of {%māsa%}), the day or night of full moon.
{%—Pūrṇimā-dina, am,%} n. the day of full moon.
{%—Pūrṇimānta (˚mā-an˚), as,%} m. the end of the
day of full moon. {%—Pūrṇimā-rātri, is,%} f. the night
of full moon.
<LEND>

<L>29701<pc>0591-b<k1>pUrRimAsI<k2>pUrRimAsI
{%Pūrṇimāsī,%}¦ f. (according to some) {%= paurṇa-%}
{%māsī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29702<pc>0591-b<k1>pUrRIkf<k2>pUrRIkf
{%Pūrṇī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make
complete.
<LEND>

<L>29703<pc>0591-b<k1>pUrta<k2>pUrta
{%Pūrta, as, ā, am,%}¦ filled, full, complete, completed,
perfected; covered, concealed; ({%am%}), n. fulfilling,
fulfilment; granting; the act of nourishing or
cherishing; rewarding, a reward; merit; a merito-
rious work, an act of pious liberality (as feeding a
Brāhman, digging a well, planting a grove, building
[Page0591-c+ 78]
a temple); nourishing, cherishing; N. of a work on
the digging of wells &c. by Kamalākara; [cf. {%iṣṭā-%}
{%pūrta.%}] {%—Pūrta-kamalākara, as,%} m., N. of a
work mentioned in the Śūdra-dharma-tattva.
<LEND>

<L>29704<pc>0591-c<k1>pUrti<k2>pUrti
{%Pūrti, is,%}¦ f. filling, fulfilling, accomplishing; ful-
ness, completion, accomplishment; satiety, satisfac-
tion; (Ved.) granting, rewarding, reward. {%—Pūrti-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. desirous of a grant or
reward.
<LEND>

<L>29705<pc>0591-c<k1>pUrtin<k2>pUrtin
{%Pūrtin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. possessing the merit of
pious liberality [cf. {%pūrta%}]; filling, completing;
effective.
<LEND>

<L>29706<pc>0591-c<k1>pUrya<k2>pUrya
{%Pūrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be filled or satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>29707<pc>0591-c<k1>pUru<k2>pUru
{#pUru#}¦ {%pūru, us,%} m., Ved. (connected with
{%puruṣa, pūruṣa%}), a man, people; N. of a tribe
associated with the Yadus, Turvaśas, Druhyus; epi-
thet of a class of demons; N. of an ancient prince
the son of Yayāti and Śarmiṣṭhā; of a son of
Manu and Naḍvalā; of a son of Jahnu; of a de-
scendant of Atri and author of the hymns Ṛg-veda
V. 16, 17.
<LEND>

<L>29708<pc>0591-c<k1>pUruza<k2>pUruza
{%Pūruṣa = puruṣa,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29709<pc>0591-c<k1>pUrdvAr<k2>pUrdvAr
{#pUrdvAr#}¦ {%pūr-dvār, pūr-dvāra,%} &c. See un-
der 3. {%pur,%} p. 583, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>29710<pc>0591-c<k1>pUrv<k2>pUrv
{#pUrv#}¦ {%pūrv%} or {%pūrb.%} See rt. {%purv,%} p. 586.
<LEND>

<L>29711<pc>0591-c<k1>pUrva<k2>pUrva
{#pUrva#}¦ {%pūrva%} or {%pūrba, as, ā, am,%} (connected
with {%purā, puras,%} but said to be fr. rt. {%pūrv;%}
declined like a pronominal when implying relative
position whether in place or time, see Pāṇ. I. 1, 34,
but the nom. pl. may be either {%pūrve%} or {%pūrvās,%}
the abl. sing. either {%pūrvasmāt%} or {%pūrvāt,%} the loc.
sing. either {%pūrvasmin%} or {%pūrve%}), being before or
in front of, fore, first, foremost; eastern, easterly, to
the east of; previous to, earlier than (with abl.);
former, prior, anterior, preceding, antecedent (in
these senses frequently at the end of a comp. and
then translatable by ‘formerly,’ e. g. {%āḍhya-pūrva,%}
formerly wealthy; {%darśanīya-pūrva,%} formerly
handsome; often after a past pass. part., cf. {%adṛṣ-%}
{%ṭa-p˚, kṛta-p˚, dṛṣṭa-p˚%}); first (in a series),
lowest, initial (opposed to {%uttara%}); ancient, cus-
tomary, hitherto prevalent; foregoing, aforesaid,
before-mentioned; preceded by, accompanied by,
attended with (at the end of comps., cf. {%prīti-p˚,%}
{%buddhi-p˚, mṛdu-p˚, smita-p˚;%} often used ad-
verbially with the termination of the neut., e. g.
{%mati-pūrvam,%} knowingly, intentionally); full, all,
entire (wrongly for {%pūrṇa%}); ({%as%}), m. an ancestor,
forefather; N. of a prince; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the ancients,
ancestors; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%diś,%} the east; epithet of a
country to the east of Madhya-deśa; a collective
epithet of the Nakṣatras Pūrva-phālgunī, Pūrvā-
ṣāḍha, and Pūrva-bhadra-padā; ({%am%}), n. the fore
part, a particular high number (applied to a period
of years); N. of the most ancient of the Jaina
writings (of which fourteen are enumerated); N. of
a Tantra; an ancient tradition; ({%am%}), ind. before
(with abl. or gen.), beforehand, formerly, hitherto,
previously, antecedently (in these senses frequently
at the beginning of a comp., cf. {%pūrva-kārin,%}
{%pūrvokta%}); immemorially; {%adya pūrvam,%} until
now, hitherto; {%pūrvam — tatas,%} first — then; {%pūr-%}
{%vam — paścāt,%} previously — afterwards; {%pūrvam — %}
{%upari,%} previously — subsequently; {%pūrvam — adhu-%}
{%nā%} or {%pūrvam — adya,%} formerly — now; ({%eṇa%}), ind.
(opposed to {%apareṇa;%} with acc., gen., or abl.) in
front, before; to the east, eastward of; {%tataḥ pūr-%}
{%veṇa,%} to the east of that; [cf. Zend <nsi>panurva;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>prŭvüj;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>pervyi,</nsi> ‘first;’ Hib. <nsi>foirfe,</nsi>
‘old, ancient, perfect, worthy.’] {%—Pūrva-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. a former work; preparation; actions done
in a former state of being. {%—Pūrva-kalpa, as,%}
m. the preceding or aforesaid manner; former
times. {%—Pūrva-kāma-kṛtvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. ful-
filling former wishes. {%—Pūrva-kāya, as,%} m. the fore
part of the body (of animals); the upper part of the
body (of men). {%—Pūrva-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} active at
first. {%—Pūrva-kāla, as,%} m. earlier time, former
[Page0592-a+ 81]
times; ({%as, ā, am%}), belonging to former times,
spoken of or mentioned before. {%—Pūrvakāla-tā,%} f.
priority in time. {%—Pūrvakālika, as, ā, am,%} or
{%pūrvakālīna, as, ā, am,%} belonging to former
times, ancient. {%—Pūrva-kāṣṭhā,%} f. the eastern
quarter, the east. {%—Pūrva-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. active
from ancient times (according to Mahī-dhara = {%pūr-%}
{%vasya kartṛ%}). {%—Pūrva-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done
formerly or in a prior existence, previous; ({%am%}), n.
an action done in former times or in a former birth.
{%—Pūrva-kṛtvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. acting before-
hand. {%—Pūrva-koṭi = pūrvānta,%} (perhaps) the start-
ing-point. {%—Pūrva-ga, as, ā, am,%} going before,
preceding; belonging to what precedes. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%gaṅgā,%} f. ‘eastern Gaṅgā,’ epithet of the Narmadā
or Revā river. {%—Pūrva-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone be-
fore, preceding; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Jaina work
belonging to the Dṛṣṭi-vāda. {%—Pūrva-gatvan, ā,%}
{%arī, a,%} Ved. going to meet; (Sāy.) {%= purato gantā%}
{%dūtaḥ%}. {%—Pūrvaṅ-gama, as, ā, am,%} going before,
preceding. {%—Pūrva-cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. piling up first,
preceding in piling up; (also incorrectly {%pūrva-%}
{%citta.%}) {%—Pūrva-citti, is,%} f. (in the Ṛg-veda occur-
ring only in the dat. perhaps in the sense of ‘before-
hand, in advance’), Ved. foreboding, presentiment,
(Sāy. {%= anyebhyaḥ pūrvaṃ lābhaḥ,%} a first notion
or conception ?); N. of an Apsaras. {%—Pūrva-codita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} formerly stated, before-mentioned, afore-
said. {%—Pūrva-ja, as, ā, am,%} born or produced
before or formerly, former, elder, first-born; ancient,
primeval; produced by something antecedent, caused;
born in the east, eastern; ({%as%}), m. an elder brother;
the son of the elder wife, even though last born;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the deified progenitors of mankind;
ancestors, forefathers in general. {%—Pūrva-jana, ās,%}
m. pl., Ved. men of former times. {%—Pūrvajanma-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done in a former birth or previous
state of existence. {%—Pūrva-janman, a,%} n. a former
birth, former state of existence or life; ({%ā%}), m. an elder
brother. {%—Pūrvajanmārjita (˚ma-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
acquired in some former state of existence (as merit
&c.). {%—Pūrva-jāti, is,%} f. former birth, previous life
or existence. {%—Pūrva-jāvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. born
or produced before. {%—Pūrva-jina, as,%} m. ‘the
ancient Jina,’ an epithet of Mañjū-śrī. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge of a former life. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Pūrva-tara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} earlier, previous, prior, anterior; ({%am%}), ind.
before, first, previously. {%—Pūrva-tāpanīya, as%} or
{%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of the first half of the Nṛsiṃha-
tāpanīyopaniṣad; [cf. {%uttara-tāpanīya.%}] {%—Pūrva-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. precedence, priority, a former state.
{%—Pūrva-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} south-eastern.
{%—Pūrva-dik-pati, is,%} or {%pūrva-dig-īśa, as,%} m.
‘regent of the eastern quarter,’ an epithet of Indra.
{%—Pūrva-dina, am,%} n. the earlier part of the day,
forenoon. {%—Pūrva-diś, k,%} f. the eastern region,
east quarter. {%—Pūrvadiśya, as, ā, am,%} situ-
ated towards the east, bearing east; eastern.
{%—Pūrva-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} determined by former
actions; ({%am%}), n. the award of destiny. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%duṣkṛta-bhoga, as,%} m. the pain or penalty conse-
quent on sins committed in a former birth. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} formerly seen, seen before.
{%—Pūrva-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. a former view or sight.
{%—Pūrva-deva, as,%} m. an ancient deity, primeval
divinity; an Asura or demon (offspring of Kaśyapa
the parent of both gods and demons); a Pitṛ or
progenitor. {%—Pūrva-devatā,%} f. a primeval deity, a
Pitṛ or progenitor of gods as well as men. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%devikā,%} f., N. of a Grāma in the eastern part of
India. {%—Pūrva-deśa, as,%} m. the eastern country or
eastern part of India. {%—Pūrva-deha, as,%} m. a for-
mer body, a former birth. {%—Pūrvadehika, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} done in a former existence. {%—Pūrva-naḍaka,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. a hollow bone in the upper part (of
the thigh). {%—Pūrva-nipāta, as,%} m. (in gram.) the
irregular priority of a word in a compound. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%nivāsa-jñāna, am,%} n. (with Buddhists) ‘knowledge
of former habitations,’ knowledge of the past lives
of all beings. {%—Pūrva-nivāsānusmṛti (˚sa-an˚), %}
[Page0592-b+ 81]
{%is,%} f. ‘recollection of former habitations,’ reminis-
cence of former existence (one of the ten powers
of a Buddha). {%—Pūrva-nyāsa, as,%} m., N. of a
grammatical work. {%—Pūrva-pakṣa, as,%} m. the fore
part or side; the first half of a lunar month, the
fortnight of the waxing moon; the first half of a year;
an assertion, proposition; the first side or part of an
argument, a primâ facie argument or assertion, the
primâ facie view of a question; the first objection to
an argument; the statement of the plaintiff; an
action or suit at law. {%—Pūrvapakṣa-pāda, as,%} m.
the first step of a legal process or lawsuit, the plaint.
{%—Pūrvapakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} one who makes an
assertion or proposition. {%—Pūrvapakṣīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} situated on the front side. {%—Pūrva-pañcāla,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. the eastern Pañcālas. {%—Pūrva-pada, am,%}
n. the first member of a compounded word or of a
sentence or of a verse. {%—Pūrvapadika, as, ā, am,%}
relating to the first member of a compound term;
reading or knowing the first member of a compound.
{%—Pūrvapadya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the first
member of a compound term. {%—Pūrva-parvata,%}
{%as,%} m. the eastern mountain from behind which the
sun is supposed to rise. {%—Pūrva-paścān-mukha,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} flowing to the east and west (as a
river). {%—Pūrva-pā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. drinking
first or before others. {%—Pūrvapāñcālaka, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%pūrva-pañcāla%}), belonging to the eastern
Pāñcālas. {%—Pūrva-pāṭaliputraka, as, ā, am,%} being
in the eastern Pāṭali-putra (?). {%—Pūrva-pāṇinīya,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. the disciples of Pāṇini living in the east;
{%pūrvapāṇinīyaṃ śāstram,%} (probably) the gram-
mar of the eastern disciples of Pāṇini. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%pāda, as,%} m. a forefoot. {%—Pūrva-pāna%} or {%pūrva-%}
{%pāyya, am,%} n. or {%pūrva-pīti, is,%} f., Ved. prece-
dence in drinking. {%—Pūrva-pālin, ī,%} m., N. of a
prince. {%—Pūrva-pitāmaha, as,%} m. a forefather,
ancestor. {%—Pūrva-puruṣa, as,%} m. ‘the primeval
soul,’ an epithet of Brahmā; a forefather, ancestor.
{%—Pūrva-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} each previous or pre-
ceding one; ({%ās%}), m. pl. forefathers, ancestors.
{%—Pūrva-peya, am,%} n., Ved. precedence in drink-
ing; precedence. {%—Pūrva-prajñā,%} f., Ved. know-
ledge of the past, remembrance, memory. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%prayoga, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Pūrva-pravṛtta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} formerly happened, done, fixed. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%prasthita, as, ā, am,%} gone before, set out in
advance. {%—Pūrva-phalgunī,%} f. ‘the first Phalgunī,’
the eleventh Nakṣatra (figured by a couch and con-
taining two stars, one of which is <lang n="greek">δ</lang> Leonis; cf.
{%uttara-phalgunī%}). {%—Pūrvaphalgunī-bhava, as,%}
m. an epithet of Bṛhas-pati or the planet Jupiter.
{%—Pūrva-bhadra-padā, ās,%} f. pl. or {%pūrva-bhadra-%}
{%pada, as,%} m. {%= pūrva-bhādrapadā,%} q. v. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. the fore part; the upper part
(opposed to {%adho-bhāga%}); {%dina-pūrvabhāga,%} the
earlier part of the day, forenoon, morning. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%bhāj, k, k, k,%} Ved. receiving the first share, the
first sharer; preferred, excellent. {%—Pūrva-bhādra-%}
{%padā,%} f. the twenty-fifth Nakṣatra, the former of
the two called Bhādrapadā, containing two stars.
{%—Pūrva-bhāva, as,%} m. the having existed formerly,
previous existence; (in rhetoric) disclosing an inten-
tion. {%—Pūrvabhāvi-tva, am,%} n. the being previous
to everything else, priority. {%—Pūrva-bhāvin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} being anterior, preceding (everything else). {%—Pūr-%}
{%va-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} speaking first, addressing a
person, condescending to speak first, polite, com-
plaisant. {%—Pūrva-bhukti, is,%} f. prior possession.
{%—Pūrva-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} existing previously,
preceding. {%—Pūrva-mārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} dying before
or first. {%—Pūrva-mīmāṃsā,%} f. an inquiry into the
first or ritual portion of the Veda (hence sometimes
also called {%karma-mīmāṃsā,%} as opposed to {%uttara-%}
{%mīmāṃsā%} or {%brahma-mīmāṃsā,%} q. q. v. v., which is
rather an exposition of the later portion of the Veda
or Upaniṣads; the Pūrva-mīmāṃsā forms one of
the six systems of philosophy and is attributed to
Jaimini; it is really an interpretation of the text of
the Veda, and is generally called <nsi>the</nsi> Mīmāṃsā, the
term Vedānta being applied to the Uttara-mīmāṃsā;
[Page0592-c+ 81]
though scarcely a system of philosophy, yet in the
course of its critical explanation of the Vedic text
the Pūrva-mīmāṃsā discusses various philosophical
questions, one of its speculations being the doctrine
of the eternity of sound or of an eternal sound
underlying all temporary sound and by some iden-
tified with Brahma). {%—Pūrva-mīmāṃsārtha-saṅ-%}
{%graha (˚sā-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of an introduction to
the Mīmāṃsā by Laugākṣi Bhāskara. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%yakṣa, as,%} m. ‘the first Yakṣa,’ an epithet of
Maṇi-bhadra, one of the Jinas or Jaina teachers.
{%—Pūrva-yāyāta, am,%} n. the more ancient form of
the legend of Yayāti or that current in the east.
{%—Pūrva-yāvan, ā,%} m., Ved. ‘going before,’ a
leader. {%—Pūrva-raṅga, as,%} m. the commencement
or prelude of a drama, a prologue, an overture.
{%—Pūrva-rāga, as,%} m. earliest or incipient affec-
tion, dawning love; affection arising from some pre-
vious cause (before meeting). {%—Pūrva-rātra, as,%}
m. the first part of the night, the former or earlier
part of the night, the time from dusk to midnight.
{%—Pūrvarātra-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done during the
first part of the night. {%—Pūrva-rūpa, am,%} n. indi-
cation of approaching change; symptom of occurring
disease; the first of two concurrent vowels or con-
sonants; (in rhetoric) a figure of speech which
describes anything as unexpectedly returned to its
former state; ({%as, ā, am%}), having the previous
form or shape. {%—Pūrva-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. indica-
tion of something about to occur (as sickness).
 — 1. {%pūrva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having something
preceding or antecedent, having or characterized by
a cause; (according to others) relating to something
preceding. {%—2. pūrva-vat,%} ind. as before, as hitherto,
as heretofore, as aforesaid; [applied in the Nyāya
philosophy to a kind of syllogism, e. g. inferring
from the appearance of a dark cloud that rain
will fall.] {%—Pūrva-vayas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%pūrva-%}
{%vayaska, as, ā, am,%} being in the first period or stage
of life, young. {%—Pūrva-vayasa, am,%} n., Ved. the
first period or stage of life, youth. {%—Pūrva-vayasin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} Ved. being in the first period of life, young.
{%—Pūrvavarti-tā,%} f. the having existed before,
former existence, precedence, priority. {%—Pūrva-var-%}
{%tin, ī, inī, i,%} existing before, preceding, prior, pre-
vious. {%—Pūrva-vah, -vāṭ,%} m., Ved. drawing in front,
being the first horse or leader, or harnessed for the
first time (applied to a horse). {%—Pūrva-vāda, as,%}
m. the first plea or commencement of an action at
law, a former plea or assertion. {%—Pūrva-vādin, ī,%}
m. ‘speaking first,’ ‘stating his case in the first
instance,’ a complainant, plaintiff, one who makes
the first charge or complaint; the first claimant; one
who has made a former plea or complaint. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%vārṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pūrva-varṣa%}), relating
to the first half of the rainy season. {%—Pūrva-vid,%}
{%t, t, t,%} knowing the things or events of the past.
{%—Pūrva-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} formerly happened,
relating to a previous occurrence; ({%am%}), n. a former
event, previous occurrence; former conduct. {%—Pūr-%}
{%va-vairin, ī, iṇī, i,%} one who has first commenced
hostilities, the first to declare war, the aggressor.
{%—Pūrva-śārada, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pūrva-śarad%}),
relating to the first half of the autumn. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%śīrṣa, as, ā, am,%} turned with the head or face
towards the east. {%—Pūrva-śaila, as,%} m. the eastern
mountain behind which the sun is supposed to rise;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a Buddhist school. {%—Pūrvaśaila-%}
{%saṅghārāma (˚gha-ār˚), as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
monastery. {%—Pūrva-saktha, am,%} n. (probably) the
upper part of the thigh. {%—Pūrva-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved.
sitting in front. {%—Pūrva-sandhyā,%} f. ‘earlier twi-
light,’ dawn, day-break. {%—Pūrva-samudra, as,%} m.,
Ved. the eastern sea. {%—Pūrva-sara, as, ī, am,%}
going before, preceding. {%—Pūrva-sasya, am,%} n.,
Ved. earliest-sown grain. {%—Pūrva-sāgara, as,%} m.
the eastern sea. {%—Pūrva-sāra, as, ī, am,%} going
eastwards. {%—Pūrva-sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} preceding,
taking precedence of all others. {%—Pūrva-sāhasa,%}
{%am,%} n. the first or heaviest fine or punishment.
{%—Pūrva-sū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. first bringing forth;
[Page0593-a+ 81]
first-born. {%—Pūrva-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing first, most
excellent. {%—Pūrva-sthiti, is,%} f. first or former state.
{%—Pūrva-svara, as, ā, am,%} (in grammar) having the
accent of the preceding. {%—Pūrva-hūti, is,%} f., Ved.
first or earliest invocation, morning prayer. {%—Pūrva-%}
{%homa, as,%} m., Ved. an introductory sacrifice. {%—Pūr-%}
{%vāgni (˚va-ag˚), is,%} m., Ved. ‘original or primeval
fire,’ the householder's sacred fire ({%= āvasathya%}).
{%—Pūrvāgni-vah, vāṭ,%} m. carrying the sacred fire.
{%—Pūrvāgni-vahana, am,%} n., Ved. a vehicle for
carrying the sacred fire. {%—Pūrvācarita (˚va-āc˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} formerly done or followed. {%—Pūrvācala%}
{%(˚va-āc˚), as,%} or {%pūrvādri (˚va-ad˚), is,%} m. the
eastern mountain (behind which the sun and moon
are supposed to rise). {%—Pūrvātithi (˚va-at˚), is,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Pūrvādi (˚va-ādi˚), is, is, i,%}
beginning with the word {%pūrva%}. {%—Pūrvādhikārin%}
{%(˚va-adh˚), ī,%} m. prior owner, former proprietor.
{%—Pūrvādhirāma (˚va-adh˚), am,%} n. the more
ancient form of the story of Rāma or the form
current in the east of India. {%—Pūrvānuyoga (˚va-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m., N. of a Jaina work belonging to the
Dṛṣṭi-vāda. {%—Pūrvānta (˚va-an˚), as,%} m. the
end of a preceding word; {%= pūrva-koṭi,%} q. v. {%—Pūr-%}
{%vāpara (˚va-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} being before and
behind, eastern and western; prior and subsequent,
first and last, preceding and following, following one
another, connected with one another; ({%am%}), n. that
which is before and behind, east and west; connec-
tion; the proof and thing to be proved. {%—Pūrvā-%}
{%para-tva, am,%} n. the being before and behind.
{%—Pūrvāpara-virodha, as,%} m. opposition of prior
and subsequent, inconsistency, incongruity. {%—Pūr-%}
{%vāparī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} following one another,
connected with one another. {%—Pūrvā-puṣ (?), ṭ,%}
{%ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. supporting those who precede. {%—Pūrvā-%}
{%bhibhāṣin (˚va-abh˚), ī, iṇī, i, = pūrva-bhā-%}
{%ṣin,%} q. v. {%—Pūrvābhimukha (˚va-abh˚), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} turned towards or facing the east. {%—Pūrvābhi-%}
{%rāmā (˚va-abh˚),%} f., N. of a river. {%—Pūrvābhiṣeka%}
{%(˚va-abh˚), as,%} m. previous anointing; (according
to Sāy.) a particular Mantra. {%—Pūrvābhyāsa (˚va-%}
{%abh˚), as,%} m. the repetition of what precedes, for-
mer practice, antecedent experience; ({%ena%}), ind.
afresh, anew. {%—Pūrvāmbudhi (˚va-am˚), is,%} m.
the eastern ocean. {%—Pūrvāyus (˚va-āy˚), us, us,%}
{%us,%} Ved. (perhaps) ‘of an early age,’ young. {%—Pūr-%}
{%vārāma (˚va-ār˚), as,%} m. ‘eastern garden,’ N. of a
Buddhist monastery. {%—Pūrvārcika (˚va-ār˚), am,%}
n., N. of the first half of the Sāma-veda (the second
half of which is called {%uttarārcika%}). {%—Pūrvārjita%}
{%(˚va-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} attained or gained by former
works. {%—Pūrvārdha (˚va-ar˚), as,%} m. the first
half, front or upper part, eastern part (opposed to
{%jaghanārdha, uttarārdha, uttamārdha, parār-%}
{%dha%}); the first half of a hemistich; {%dinasya pūr-%}
{%vārdhaḥ,%} forenoon. {%—Pūrvārdha-kāya, as,%} m.
the front or upper part of the body. {%—Pūrvārdha-%}
{%lambin, ī, inī, i,%} having the foremost half inclined,
leaning forward. {%—Pūrvārdhya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
relating to the first or front part, relating to the
upper part, relating to the eastern part. {%—Pūrvāve-%}
{%daka (˚va-āv˚), as,%} m. a plaintiff. {%—Pūrvāśin%}
{%(˚va-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%} eating before (another, with
abl. or loc.). {%—Pūrvāṣāḍhā (˚va-aṣ˚),%} f. the
first of two constellations called Aṣāḍhā, the eigh-
teenth or twentieth Nakṣatra or lunar asterism con-
taining two stars of which one is <lang n="greek">δ</lang> Sagittarii. {%—Pūr-%}
{%vāsin (˚va-ās˚), ī, inī, i,%} Ved. shooting before
(another). {%—Pūrvāhṇa (˚va-ah˚), as,%} m. the
earlier part of the day, forenoon (mostly occurring
in the loc. case; sometimes incorrectly spelt {%pūr-%}
{%vāhna%}). {%—Pūrvāhṇaka, as,%} m. ‘born in the fore-
noon,’ N. of a man. {%—Pūrvāhṇatana%} or {%pūrvāh-%}
{%ṇika%} or {%pūrvāhṇetana, as, ī, am,%} belonging or
relating to the forenoon. {%—Pūrvetara (˚va-it˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘other than eastern,’ western. {%—Pūrve-%}
{%dyus,%} ind. on the day before, yesterday (opposed to
{%uttare-dyus, uttaram ahar, apare-dyus%}); on a for-
mer day; at dawn, during the first part of the day;
early, betimes, in the morning; during that portion
[Page0593-b+ 78]
of a day on which religious ceremonies are to be per-
formed. {%—Pūrveṣukāmaśamī (˚va-iṣ˚),%} f., N.
of a Grāma. {%—Pūrvokta (˚va-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} said
before, formerly stated, aforesaid, before-mentioned.
{%—Pūrvottara (˚va-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} north-eastern;
({%e%}), n. du. the antecedent and subsequent, the pre-
ceding and following; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. the north-east.
{%—Pūrvotpanna (˚va-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} previously
produced, previously existent. {%—Pūrvotpanna-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. former existence, condition of prior exist-
ence. {%—Pūrvodita (˚va-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} aforesaid,
before-mentioned.
<LEND>

<L>29712<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvaka<k2>pUrvaka
{%Pūrvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ earlier, former, previous,
prior, anterior, preceding, antecedent (often like
{%pūrva,%} q. v., at the end of a comp.; cf. {%strī-p˚%});
first; preceded by, accompanied by, connected with,
attended with (at the end of comps. {%= pūrva,%} q. v.;
cf. {%vyāhṛti-p˚%}); ({%as%}), m. a forefather, ancestor;
({%am%}), ind. preceded by, with, according to, in con-
formity with (at the end of comps.; cf. {%vidhi-p˚,%}
{%prīti-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>29713<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvatana<k2>pUrvatana
{%Pūrvatana, as, ī, am,%}¦ former, earlier, older,
more ancient.
<LEND>

<L>29714<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvatas<k2>pUrvatas
{%Pūrva-tas,%}¦ ind. in front of, before (with gen.);
towards the east; first, in the first place.
<LEND>

<L>29715<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvatra<k2>pUrvatra
{%Pūrva-tra,%}¦ ind. in the former or preceding part
(opposed to {%uttara-tra,%} q. v.); {%pūrvatra janmani,%}
in a former birth.
<LEND>

<L>29716<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvaTA<k2>pUrvaTA
{%Pūrva-thā,%}¦ ind., Ved. at first, formerly, of old,
aforetime; as of old; in front, towards the east (?).
<LEND>

<L>29717<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvaya<k2>pUrvaya
{%Pūrvaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. in {%upādhāyya-p˚,%}
having an edge or border (of red braid), trimmed,
edged.
<LEND>

<L>29718<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvAtiTa<k2>pUrvAtiTa
{%Pūrvātitha, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Sāman ({%= paur-%}
{%vātitha%}).
<LEND>

<L>29719<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvika<k2>pUrvika
{%Pūrvika, as, ā, am,%}¦ formerly or previously done;
formerly invited; {%pūrvaka,%} previous; [cf. {%strī-%}
{%pūrvika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29720<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrviRezWA<k2>pUrviRezWA
{%Pūrviṇe-ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ Ved. standing in the
east (? probably a wrong reading).
<LEND>

<L>29721<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvin<k2>pUrvin
{%Pūrvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ derived from ancestors or fore-
fathers, observed by ancestors, ancestral; having for-
merly, having formerly been (at the end of a comp.;
cf. {%kṛta-p˚, bhukta-p˚, strī-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>29722<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvIRa<k2>pUrvIRa
{%Pūrvīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ derived from ancestors or
forefathers, ancestral.
<LEND>

<L>29723<pc>0593-b<k1>pUrvya<k2>pUrvya
{%Pūrvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. former, previous,
preceding, ancient, old (opposed to {%navīyas, nū-%}
{%tana%}); first, next, nearest (Sāy. {%= nediṣṭha%}); ex-
cellent; (according to a Scholiast) young; ({%am%}),
ind. before, formerly, long since, hitherto, at first.
{%—Pūrvya-stuti, is,%} f., Ved. principal praise (Sāy. {%=%}
{%mukhyā stutiḥ%}).
<LEND>

<L>29724<pc>0593-b<k1>pUl<k2>pUl
{#pUl#}¦ {%pūl,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%pūlati, pūlayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to collect, gather, heap up, accu-
mulate.
<LEND>

<L>29725<pc>0593-b<k1>pUla<k2>pUla
{%Pūla, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), or {%pūlaka, as,%} m.
a bundle, pack.
<LEND>

<L>29726<pc>0593-b<k1>pUlikA<k2>pUlikA
{#pUlikA#}¦ {%pūlikā,%} f. a kind of pastry; [cf.
{%pūrikā, polikā, pauli.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29727<pc>0593-b<k1>pUlya<k2>pUlya
{#pUlya#}¦ {%pūlya, am,%} n. an empty or shrivelled
grain of corn.
<LEND>

<L>29728<pc>0593-b<k1>pUz<k2>pUz
{#pUz#}¦ {%pūṣ%} (= rt. 2. {%puṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%pū-%}
{%ṣati, pūṣitum,%} to nourish; to increase,
grow.
<LEND>

<L>29729<pc>0593-b<k1>pUza<k2>pUza
{%Pūṣa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. 2. {%puṣ%}), a kind of mul-
berry tree, Morus Indica; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of the
third Kalā of the moon.
<LEND>

<L>29730<pc>0593-b<k1>pUzaka<k2>pUzaka
{%Pūṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of mulberry tree, Morus
Indica.
<LEND>

<L>29731<pc>0593-b<k1>pUzaRa<k2>pUzaRa
{%Pūṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m. {%= pūṣan%} below; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>29732<pc>0593-b<k1>pUzan<k2>pUzan
{%Pūṣan, ā,%}¦ m. (the {%a%} of {%an%} is not lengthened in
the nom. du. pl. and acc. sing. du., e. g. nom. du.
{%pūṣaṇau,%} nom. pl. {%pūṣaṇas,%} acc. sing. {%pūṣa-%}
{%ṇam,%} acc. pl. {%pūṣṇas,%} or according to some also
{%pūṣas,%} inst. sing. {%pūṣṇā%} or {%pūṣā,%} loc. sing.
{%pūṣṇi%} or {%pūṣaṇi%} or {%pūṣi,%} see Gram. 157), N.
[Page0593-c+ 74]
of a Vedic deity (regarded as the guardian of flocks
and herds and of property in general, cf. {%puṣṭim-%}
{%bhara;%} in the character of a herdsman he is repre-
sented as carrying an ox-goad and riding in a car
drawn by goats, cf. {%ajāśva;%} in that of a presiding
deity of the sun he is all-seeing, the companion of
travellers, guide of the soul on its way to the next
world, and the lover of his sister Sūryā; he causes
the alternation of day and night, and is associated
with Soma or the Moon as protector of the universe;
he is invoked together with various gods, but most
frequently with Indra and Bhaga; his most remark-
able epithets are {%ā-ghṛṇi, kapardin, dasra, da-%}
{%sma, dasma-varcas;%} in the Brāhmaṇas Pūṣan is
represented as having lost his teeth and feeding on a
kind of gruel, whence he is called {%karambhād;%} in
later times he is enumerated among the twelve
Ādityas, and regent of the Nakṣatra Revatī or
Pauṣṇa); N. of the sun. {%—Pūṣaṇ-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. accompanied by Pūṣan; (Sāy.) {%= puṣṭyā%}
{%yukta,%} filled with nutriment. {%—Pūṣa-danta-hara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘taking away Pūṣan's teeth,’ an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Pūṣa-bhāsā,%} f. ‘sun-splendor,’ N. of the
capital of Indra; (also spelt {%pūṣa-bhāṣā.%}) {%—Pū-%}
{%ṣa-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a man with the surname
Gobhila. {%—Pūṣa-rāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. having Pūṣan
as a giver, i. e. probably, among whom Pūṣan is
the especial benefactor. {%—Pūṣātmaja (˚ṣa-āt˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘son of Pūṣan,’ an epithet of Indra. {%—Pū-%}
{%ṣāsuhṛd (˚ṣa-as˚), t,%} m. ‘enemy of Pūṣan,’
an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>29733<pc>0593-c<k1>pUzaDra<k2>pUzaDra
{#pUzaDra#}¦ {%pūṣadhra, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Manu; (probably a wrong reading for {%pṛṣadhra.%})
<LEND>

<L>29734<pc>0593-c<k1>pUzkara<k2>pUzkara
{#pUzkara#}¦ {%pūṣkara,%} a word formed for the ex-
planation of {%puṣkara%} (Śatapatha-b. VII. 4, 1, 13).
<LEND>

<L>29735<pc>0593-c<k1>pf<k2>pf<h>1
{#pf#} 1¦. {%pṛ,%} cl. 3. P. {%piparti, papāra, pa-%}
{%riṣyati, apārṣīt%} (mostly Ved.), to bring
over, carry over or across, ferry over; to bring
out of, deliver from (with abl.); to escort; to pro-
tect, uphold, support, sustain, maintain; to bring
forward, promote, advance; cl. 9. P. {%pṛnāti,%}
to protect: Caus. P. (ep. also A.) {%pārayati%}
{%(-te), -yitum,%} Aor. {%apīparat,%} to ferry over or
across, carry over, conduct through; to bring out,
deliver, extricate, rescue, save, protect; to reach
the other side of anything, to accomplish, achieve,
perform, bring to a conclusion; to keep one's ground,
withstand, oppose; to be able or capable; to live;
[cf. Zend <nsi>par,</nsi> ‘to carry across:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">περά-ω, πόρο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πορεύς, πορ-θ-μός, πορσύν-ω, πορεύ-ω, πορίζ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἄπορος, ἀπορέ-ω, ἔμ-πορο-ς, πεῖρ-α, πειρά-ω, παρών,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πειράτης, πεπαρεῖν, πείρω, περόνη, πόρπη, πειρά,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πηρό-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>por-ta, por-tu-s, ex-per-i-o-r, peritus,</nsi>
<nsi>perî-culu-m, par-a-re (?), parere, partus, portare:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>far-an,</nsi> ‘to go;’ <nsi>far-j-an,</nsi> ‘to carry:’ Old
Germ. <nsi>ar-far-an,</nsi> ‘to perceive;’ <nsi>furt:</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>fyrd.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>29736<pc>0593-c<k1>pf<k2>pf<h>2
{#pf#} 2¦. {%pṛ%} [cf. rt. {%pṛṇ%}], cl. 5. P. {%pṛṇomi,%}
{%papāra, pariṣyati, apārṣīt, partum,%} to
please, gratify, delight; to be pleased or delighted.
<LEND>

<L>29737<pc>0593-c<k1>pf<k2>pf<h>3
{#pf#} 3¦. {%pṛ,%} cl. 6. A. {%priyate, papre, pariṣ-%}
{%yate, apṛta, partum,%} to be busy or active
(in {%vy-ā-pṛ,%} q. v.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">περά-ω, πέρ-νη-μι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πι-πρά-σκ-ω, πρί-α-μαι, πρά-σι-ς, πρα-τία-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πόρ-νη, ἔμ-πορος, ἔμ-πολά-ω, πωλέω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>prec-iu-m,</nsi>
<nsi>prec-ari;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>feil, feili</nsi> = Mod. Germ. <nsi>feil,</nsi>
‘cheap, venal.’]
<LEND>

<L>29738<pc>0593-c<k1>pf<k2>pf<h>4
{#pf#} 4¦. {%pṛ%} = rt. {%pṝ,%} to fill, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29739<pc>0593-c<k1>pfkkA<k2>pfkkA
{#pfkkA#}¦ {%pṛkkā,%} f. a species of leguminous
plant, Trigonella Corniculata; [cf. {%spṛkkā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29740<pc>0593-c<k1>pfkta<k2>pfkta
{#pfkta#}¦ {%pṛkta, pṛkti.%} See under rt. 1. {%pṛc.%}
<LEND>

<L>29741<pc>0593-c<k1>pfkTa<k2>pfkTa
{#pfkTa#}¦ {%pṛktha, am,%} n. possession, property,
wealth; [cf. {%riktha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29742<pc>0593-c<k1>pfkz<k2>pfkz
{#pfkz#}¦ {%pṛkṣ,%} f. (the nom. sing. does not
[Page0594-a+ 76]
occur; perhaps connected with rt. 1. {%pṛc%}), Ved.
refreshment, food, nourishment, satiation. {%—Pṛkṣu-%}
{%dhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. (according to Sāy.) {%= paśu-%}
{%puroḍāśādiṣu dāha-madhye dhīyamānaḥ,%} being
placed in the midst of the burnt offerings of animals,
ghee, &c., or {%= pra-kṣodhyaḥ. = prakarṣeṇa%}
{%bubhukṣitaḥ;%} (perhaps a corruption for {%pra-%}
{%kṣudha,%} ‘hungry, eager.’)
<LEND>

<L>29743<pc>0594-a<k1>pfkza<k2>pfkza
{#pfkza#}¦ {%pṛkṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. fleet, swift
(? said of a horse); having food, (Sāy.) {%= ghāsādy-%}
{%anna-vat,%} possessing grass and other food; ({%as%}),
m. a swift horse, courser (an epithet especially of
the horses of the Aśvins, Agni, and Indra); N. of a
man; a battle. {%—Pṛkṣa-prayaj, k, k, k,%} Ved.
(perhaps) hastening with swift horses; (Sāy.) in
which oblations of food begin to be offered (said of
the morning). {%—Pṛkṣa-yāma, as, ā, am,%} driving
swift horses; (Sāy.) {%= annānāṃ niyamanaṃ yas-%}
{%min,%} in which there is the offering of food; ({%as%}),
m. a proper N. (?).
<LEND>

<L>29744<pc>0594-a<k1>pfc<k2>pfc<h>1
{#pfc#} 1¦. {%pṛc,%} cl. 7. P. {%pṛṇakti, paparca,%}
{%parciṣyati, aparcīt, parcitum;%} cl. 2.
A. {%pṛkte%} or {%pṛṅkte%} (sometimes referred to a form
{%pṛñc%}), {%papṛce%} or {%papṛñce, parcitā%} or {%pṛñcitā,%}
{%parciṣyate, aparciṣṭa, parcitum;%} cl. 1. A.
{%parcati,%} &c. (?), to mix, mingle; to bring into
contact, connect, unite, join; to be in contact, touch;
to fill, satisfy, sate, satiate; to give lavishly, grant
bountifully, bestow anything (acc. or gen.) richly
upon any one (dat.), lavish upon (Ved.); to increase,
augment, multiply; (A.) to fill one's self (?); cl. 1.
10. P. {%parcati, parcayati,%} &c., to touch; to hin-
der, restrain (?); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πλέκ-ω, πλέγ-μα, πλοκή,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πλόκαμο-ς, δί-πλαξ,</lang> perhaps <lang n="greek">πόρκο-ς, πόρκη-ς:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>plec-t-o, am-plec-t-or, plic-o, du-plex, Parca,</nsi>
<nsi>plăg-a:</nsi> Umbr. <nsi>tribricu,</nsi> ‘triplicity:’ Goth. <nsi>flah-</nsi>
<nsi>t-om,</nsi> ‘with folds;’ <nsi>fal-th-a,</nsi> ‘I fold;’ <nsi>flaht, flihtu,</nsi>
<nsi>fluhtumês:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>flihtu, flahs</nsi> = Mod. Germ.
<nsi>Flachs</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>flax; flehtan:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>flech-t-</nsi>
<nsi>en:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>folg-ian:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>ple-t-a,</nsi> ‘I plait.’]
<LEND>

<L>29745<pc>0594-a<k1>pfkta<k2>pfkta
{%Pṛkta, as, ā, am,%}¦ mixed, mingled, combined;
brought into contact, touched, united, being in com-
bination with, touching [cf. {%mayūkha-p˚%}]; filled,
full (e. g. {%ghṛta-pṛkta,%} full of ghee); ({%am%}), n.
possessions, property, wealth (in these senses a wrong
reading for {%pṛktha,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>29746<pc>0594-a<k1>pfkti<k2>pfkti
{%Pṛkti, is,%}¦ f. touch, contact.
<LEND>

<L>29747<pc>0594-a<k1>pfc<k2>pfc<h>2
2. {%pṛc, k,%}¦ f., Ved. refreshment; (Sāy.) {%= prāp-%}
{%tuṃ kāmayamāna,%} desirous of attaining, or {%= bhuj,%}
enjoying; [cf. {%ghṛta-p˚, madhu-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29748<pc>0594-a<k1>pfcCaka<k2>pfcCaka
{#pfcCaka#}¦ {%pṛcchaka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%prach%}),
one who asks or inquires after (with gen.); inquiring;
inquiring into the future; ({%as%}), m. an inquirer,
querist, investigator, inquisitive person.
<LEND>

<L>29749<pc>0594-a<k1>pfcCana<k2>pfcCana
{%Pṛcchana, am,%}¦ n. asking, inquiring.
<LEND>

<L>29750<pc>0594-a<k1>pfcCA<k2>pfcCA
{%Pṛcchā,%}¦ f. asking, questioning, a question, in-
quiry; an inquiry into the future.
<LEND>

<L>29751<pc>0594-a<k1>pfcCya<k2>pfcCya
{%Pṛcchya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be asked or inquired
after.
<LEND>

<L>29752<pc>0594-a<k1>pfj<k2>pfj
{#pfj#}¦ {%pṛj, pṛñj,%} cl. 2. A. {%pṛṅkte,%} &c.,
various readings for rts. 1. {%pṛc, pṛñc,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29753<pc>0594-a<k1>pfYc<k2>pfYc
{#pfYc#}¦ {%pṛñc,%} cl. 2. A. {%pṛṅkte,%} &c. See
rt. 1. {%pṛc%} above.
<LEND>

<L>29754<pc>0594-a<k1>pfq<k2>pfq
{#pfq#}¦ {%pṛḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%pṛḍati,%} &c. [cf. rt.
{%pṛṇ%}], to gladden, delight.
<LEND>

<L>29755<pc>0594-a<k1>pfR<k2>pfR
{#pfR#}¦ {%pṛṇ%} [cf. rts. 2. and 4. {%pṛ%}], cl. 6.
P. A. {%pṛṇati, -te,%} &c., Ved. to fill; to
please, gratify.
<LEND>

<L>29756<pc>0594-a<k1>pft<k2>pft
{#pft#}¦ {%pṛt, t,%} f., Ved. (usually in loc. pl.
{%pṛtsu,%} in Ṛg-veda I. 129, 4. {%pṛtsuṣu,%} but
according to native grammarians also in other cases,
viz. {%pṛtas, pṛtā, pṛdbhyām%}), battle, contest,
strife. {%—Pṛt-suti, is,%} f., Ved. a hostile attack;
(Sāy.) a host. {%—Pṛtsu-tur, ūr, ūr, ur,%} Ved. vic-
torious; (Sāy.) {%= pṛtanāsu taraṇa-śīla = śūra.%}
<LEND>

<L>29757<pc>0594-a<k1>pftana<k2>pftana
{%Pṛtana, am,%}¦ n. a hostile encounter (Ved.); an
[Page0594-b+ 80]
army (Ved.); ({%ā%}), f. a battle, encounter, fight, con-
test, (in the earlier language only in acc. and loc.
plur.); a hostile armament, army; a small army or
division consisting of 243 elephants, as many chariots,
729 horse, and 1215 foot, = 3 Vāhinīs; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. men, mankind (?). {%—Pṛtanāj (˚nā-aj˚), k, k,%}
{%k,%} Ved. running or rushing in battle. {%—Pṛtanāji%}
{%(˚nā-aji˚), is, is, i, = pṛtanāj%} (Atharva-veda VII.
85, 1). {%—Pṛtanā-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. victorious in
battle; ({%t%}), m., N. of an Ekāha. {%—Pṛtanājya%}
{%(˚nā-aj˚), am,%} n., Ved. ‘running-match,’ a fight,
battle. {%—Pṛtanā-nī, īs,%} or {%pṛtanā-pati, is,%} m.,
Ved. a leader in battle, commander, general. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%tanā-ṣah%} or {%pṛthanā-ṣāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. winning
battles, victorious, (Sāy.) {%= a-martya,%} immortal; ({%ṭ%}),
m. an epithet of Indra. {%—Pṛtanā-ṣāhya, am,%} n.,
Ved. victory in battle (Sāy. {%= parakīya-senābhi-%}
{%bhava%}). {%—Pṛtanāhava (˚nā-āh˚), as,%} m., Ved. a
challenge to fight; a fight, battle; (Sāy.) {%= saṅgrā-%}
{%meṣu rakṣaṇārtham āhvānam.%}
<LEND>

<L>29758<pc>0594-b<k1>pftanAyat<k2>pftanAyat
{%Pṛtanāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. fighting together,
engaged in combat, (according to Mahī-dhara {%=%}
{%saṅgrāma-kāma,%} eager for battle.)
<LEND>

<L>29759<pc>0594-b<k1>pftanAyu<k2>pftanAyu
{%Pṛtanāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. hostile, inimical.
<LEND>

<L>29760<pc>0594-b<k1>pftanya<k2>pftanya
{%Pṛtanya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pṛtanyati, -yitum,%} Ved. to
attack, assail, to fight against.
<LEND>

<L>29761<pc>0594-b<k1>pftanyA<k2>pftanyA
{%Pṛtanyā,%}¦ f. {%= pṛtanā,%} an army.
<LEND>

<L>29762<pc>0594-b<k1>pftanyu<k2>pftanyu
{%Pṛtanyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. attacking, hostile;
(Sāy.) {%= yuddham icchat.%}
<LEND>

<L>29763<pc>0594-b<k1>pftsuDa<k2>pftsuDa
{%Pṛtsudha, as,%}¦ m. battle ?; (a various reading
for {%pṛtsu%} in Naigh. II. 17.)
<LEND>

<L>29764<pc>0594-b<k1>pfT<k2>pfT
{#pfT#}¦ {%pṛth,%} cl. 10. P. {%parthayati, -yitum,%}
to extend (= rt. 1. {%prath%}); to throw,
cast; to send, direct; [cf. rt. 2. {%prath.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29765<pc>0594-b<k1>pfTa<k2>pfTa
{%Pṛtha, as,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. {%pṛth%} as another form of rt.
1. {%prath%}), Ved. the flat or palm of the hand; a par-
ticular measure, the length of the hand from the tip
of the fingers to the knuckles, or = 13 Aṅgulis; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a daughter of Śūra and adopted daughter of
Kunti and one of the wives of Pāṇḍu (she was the
mother of Karṇa before her marriage and of Yudhi-
ṣṭhira, Bhīma, and Arjuna after her marriage, see
{%Kunti%}). {%—Pṛtha-hara, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Pṛthā-ja, as,%} m. ‘son of Pṛthā,’ an epithet of
Arjuna; the tree Pentaptera Arjuna. {%—Pṛthā-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘the husband of Pṛthā,’ an epithet of Pāṇḍu.
{%—Pṛthāraṇi (˚thā-ar˚), is,%} f. ‘the Araṇi Pṛthā,’
a N. of Kuntī the wife of Pāṇḍu (as the mystical
wood from which the Pāṇḍavas were struck out or
generated; cf. {%Pāṇḍava-vahni%}). {%—Pṛthā-suta,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘son of Pṛthā,’ an epithet of Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>29766<pc>0594-b<k1>pfTak<k2>pfTak
{%Pṛthak,%}¦ ind. separately, singly, severally; apart
from, besides, with exception of, except (with abl.);
without (with abl., inst., or gen.); differently from
(with abl.); {%pṛthak pṛthak,%} one by one, separately,
with regular intervals; [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">φάρ-σο-ς;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>par(t)s, prī-vus</nsi> perhaps for <nsi>prith-vus, pri-</nsi>
<nsi>vare.</nsi>] {%—Pṛthak-karaṇa, am,%} n. making separate,
separating, distinguishing, setting apart. {%—Pṛthak-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having different wishes,
having various desires. {%—Pṛthak-kārya, am,%} n.
a separate or private affair, the affair of an individual.
{%—Pṛthak-kula, as, ā, am,%} belonging to a separate
or different family. {%—Pṛthak-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-ka-%}
{%roti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to make separate, sever,
sunder; to keep off, avert. {%—Pṛthak-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} separated, severed, sundered, cut off; made
distinct. {%—Pṛthak-kriyā,%} f. separation, disunion.
{%—Pṛthak-kṣetra, ās,%} m. pl. children of one
father by different wives or by wives of different
classes. {%—Pṛthak-cara, as, ī, am,%} going separately,
walking alone. {%—Pṛthak-tva, am,%} n. separateness,
separation, diversity, severalty; singleness, individu-
ality; ({%ena%}), ind. singly, one by one. {%—Pṛthak-%}
{%tvacā,%} f. ‘diverse-barked,’ a species of aloe com-
monly called Mūrvā, Sanseviera Zeylanica. {%—Pṛthak-%}
{%parṇī,%} f. ‘diverse-leaved,’ a species of plant, Hemio-
nitis Cordifolia. {%—Pṛthak-piṇḍa, as,%} m. a distant
kinsman who offers the funeral cake by himself and
not together with the other relations; (according to
[Page0594-c+ 81]
Kullūka {%= samānodaka.%}) {%—Pṛthak-śabda, as,%} m.
a separate word, a distinct or independant word. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thak-śayyā,%} f. sleeping apart. {%—Pṛthak-śruti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} uttering a distinct sound, distinctly heard.
{%—Pṛthak-sthita, as, ā, am,%} existing separately,
separate. {%—Pṛthak-sthiti, is,%} f. separate existence,
separation. {%—Pṛthag-abhimati, is, is, i,%} regarding
the world as separate (from God). {%—Pṛthag-ātmatā,%}
f. separateness, severalty; discrimination, judgment.
{%—Pṛthag-ātman, ā, ā, a,%} ‘having a distinct
nature or essence,’ separate, distinct, individual; ({%ā%}),
m. individualized spirit, that of an individual as
detached from universal spirit or the soul of the
universe. {%—Pṛthag-ātmikā,%} f. separate or individual
existence, individuality. {%—Pṛthag-īśa-mānin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} regarding God as distinct from the universe;
[cf. {%pṛthag-abhimati.%}] {%—Pṛthag-gaṇa, as,%} m. a
separate company. {%—Pṛthag-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing distinct properties. {%—Pṛthag-jana, as,%} m. a
man of the lower classes or of low caste, a man of
low character or profession; (with Buddhists) a man
in his natural state, one not yet illuminated; an
ignorant man, fool, blockhead; a wicked or vicious
man, sinner; the lower orders, low people, the mul-
titude; ({%ās%}), m. pl. children of one father by different
mothers; the lower orders, populace. {%—Pṛthag-dṛś,%}
{%k, k, k,%} beholding other objects (than those of sense).
{%—Pṛthag-bīja, as,%} m. the plant Semecarpus Ana-
cardium {%(= bhallātaka)%}. {%—Pṛthag-bhāva, as,%} m.
separate state or existence, separateness, difference,
individuality ({%= pṛthak-tva,%} q. v.). {%—Pṛthag-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become separate, separated, dif-
ferent. {%—Pṛthag-yoga, as, ā, am,%} (probably) hav-
ing a different lot. {%—Pṛthagyoga-karaṇa, am,%} n.
disuniting things connected with one another. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thag-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} variously shaped, diverse,
manifold, various, different, of different kinds. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thag-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of different kinds, various,
diversified, multiform, different from (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>29767<pc>0594-c<k1>pfTavI<k2>pfTavI
{%Pṛthavī,%}¦ f. {%= pṛthivī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>29768<pc>0594-c<k1>pfTivI<k2>pfTivI
{%Pṛthivī,%}¦ f. (for {%pṛthvī,%} f. of {%pṛthu%} below),
‘the wide (world),’ the earth, Earth personified (as
the mother of all beings, and often invoked together
with the Sky; in the Veda there are three earths
enumerated corresponding with the three heavens,
that on which mankind lives being called {%bhūmi;%}
in the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa said to be the daughter of
Pṛthu); land, ground, soil; earth regarded as one
of the elements; (according to Naigh. I. 3) {%= anta-%}
{%rikṣa,%} sky; {%pṛthivyā vratam%} or {%pṛthivyāḥ saṃ-%}
{%sarpam,%} N. of a Sāman. [{%Pṛthivī%} is sometimes
shortened into {%pṛthivi,%} especially in comps.] {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thivi-tva, am,%} n. the state of the earth. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thivi-dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. earth-giving. {%—Pṛthivi-%}
{%bhāga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the earth as a share,
one to whom the earth is allotted, entitled to the
earth. {%—Pṛthivi-loka, as,%} m., Ved. the earth re-
garded as a world, the terrestrial world. {%—Pṛthivi-%}
{%ṣad%} or {%pṛthivi-sad, t, t, t,%} sitting on the ground.
{%—Pṛthivi-ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. standing on the
ground, stepping firmly (said of a horse; Sāy. =
{%pṛthivyāṃ su-pratiṣṭhitaḥ%}). {%—Pṛthivī-kampa,%}
{%as,%} m. an earthquake. {%—Pṛthivī-kṣit, t, t, t,%}
dwelling on earth (Ved.); reigning over the earth;
({%t%}), m. a prince, king, sovereign. {%—Pṛthivī-candra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘earth-moon,’ N. of a prince of the Tri-
gartas. {%—Pṛthivīñ-jaya, as, ā, am,%} conquering
the earth; ({%as%}), m. a prince, king, sovereign. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thivī-tala, am,%} n. the surface of the earth, ground,
bare ground, the very earth. {%—Pṛthivī-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Pṛthivī-dharaṇa, am,%} n. a
prop or support of the earth. {%—Pṛthivī-pati, is,%} m.
‘lord of the earth,’ a prince, king, sovereign; an
epithet of Yama the regent of the dead; a kind of
drug {%(= ṛṣabha)%}. {%—Pṛthivī-paripālaka, as,%} m.
‘guardian of the earth,’ a prince, king, sovereign.
{%—Pṛthivī-pārvataka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
rock-oil, petroleum (?). {%—Pṛthivī-pāla, as,%} m.
‘guardian of the earth,’ a king, sovereign, ruler.
{%—Pṛthivī-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘earth-enjoying,’ a prince,
sovereign. {%—Pṛthivī-maṇḍa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
[Page0595-a+ 81]
the scum of the earth. {%—Pṛthivī-maṇḍala, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. the circuit of the earth. {%—Pṛthivī-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} made of earth, earthen. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thivī-rasa, as,%} m. the sap of the earth. {%—Pṛthivī-%}
{%rājya, am,%} n. the sovereignty of the earth. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thivī-ruha, as,%} m. ‘earth-growing,’ a plant, tree.
{%—Pṛthivī-loka, as,%} m. the earth considered as a
world, the terrestrial world; [cf. {%pṛthivi-loka.%}]
{%—Pṛthivīśa (˚vi-īśa˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of the earth,’
a prince, king, sovereign. {%—Pṛthivī-śakra, as,%} m.
‘the Indra of the earth,’ a king. {%—Pṛthivy-āpīḍa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of two princes of Kaśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>29769<pc>0595-a<k1>pfTu<k2>pfTu
{%Pṛthu, us, us,%}¦ or {%vī, u,%} broad, wide, expansive,
extensive, spacious; ample, abundant, luxuriant;
large, great, gigantic; detailed; prolix; numerous;
smart, clever; various; important; ({%us%}), m. a N. of
Agni or fire; a particular measure of length (=
{%pṛtha%}); N. of a mythical personage ({%= pṛthī,%} see
col. 3); N. of a son of An-enas; of a Vṛṣṇi and son
of Citraka; of a son of Citra-ratha; of a descendant
of Ikṣvāku (son of An-araṇya and father of Tri-
śaṅku); of a son of Pāra; of a son of Pra-stāra; of
a son of Rucaka; of one of the Saptarṣis; of a son
of one of the Manus; of a Dānava; of a monkey;
({%us%}), f. a pungent seed, Nigella Indica; a medicinal
substance (commonly {%hiṅgu-pattrī%}); opium; ({%vī%}),
f. ‘the wide (world),’ earth; earth as an element;
the pungent seed Nigella Indica; {%= hiṅgu-pattrī;%}
the plant Boerhavia Procumbens ({%= punar-nava,%}
q. v.); great cardamoms; a kind of metre consisting
of four lines of seventeen syllables each; another
metre containing eleven syllables in each line; N. of
the mother of the seventh Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī; [cf. rt. {%prath; prath-as,%} ‘breadh:’
Zend <nsi>frath-anh,</nsi> ‘breadth:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πλατύ-ς, πλάτ-ος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πλάτ-η, πλάτ-ανο-ς, πλάθ-ανο-ς, πλαθ-άνη, πλάσσω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πλάσ-μα, πλασ-τό-ς, ἔμ-πλασ-τρο-ν:</lang> Lat. <nsi>lăt-</nsi>
<nsi>us</nsi> for <nsi>platus; Latium,</nsi> ‘flat country;’ <nsi>lat-er:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>platus:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>braid-s,</nsi> ‘broad:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>brâd:</nsi>
Eng. <nsi>broad:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>breit.</nsi>] {%—Pṛthu-kar-%}
{%man, ā,%} m., N. of a son of Śaśa-vindu and grandson
of Citra-ratha. {%—Pṛthu-kalpinī,%} f. a various reading
for {%patha-kalpanā,%} q. v. {%—Pṛthu-kīrtti, is,%} m.
‘far-famed,’ N. of a son of Śaśa-vindu; ({%is%}), f., N.
of a daughter of Śūra. {%—Pṛthu-kola, as,%} m. a species
of jujube. {%—Pṛthu-ga, ās,%} m. pl. ‘far-going,’ N. of
a class of deities under Manu Cākṣuṣa. {%—Pṛthu-%}
{%gaman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. ‘broad-pathed,’ having a broad
path; thick-set ?; (Sāy. {%= pṛthu-bhāvam prāp-%}
{%nuvat.%}) {%—Pṛthu-grīva, as,%} m. ‘broad-necked,’ N.
of a Rākṣasa. {%—Pṛthu-cārv-añcitekṣaṇa (˚ta-%}
{%īkṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} having large, beautiful, and curved
eyes. {%—Pṛthu-cchada, as,%} m. ‘broad-leaved,’ a
species of plant {%(= harid-garbha)%}. {%—Pṛthu-ja-%}
{%ghana, as, ā, am,%} ‘large-hipped,’ having broad hips.
{%—Pṛthu-jaya, as,%} m. ‘victorious far and wide,’ N.
of a son of Śaśa-vindu. {%—Pṛthu-jaman, ā, ā, a,%}
Ved. ‘broad-pathed,’ having a broad path; [cf.
{%pṛthu-gman.%}] {%—Pṛthu-jraya, as, ā, am,%} or
{%pṛthu-jrayas, ās, ās, as,%} widely extended, spread-
ing widely; of rapid or extended impetus (Sāy.
{%= pṛthu-java = śīghra-gāmin = prathita-vega%}).
{%—Pṛthu-tama, as, ā, am,%} broadest, widest, largest
{%(= prathiṣṭha)%}. {%—Pṛthu-tara, as, ā, am,%} broader,
wider, larger, more spacious, very large or important
{%(= prathīyas)%}. {%—Pṛthu-tā,%} f. or {%pṛthu-tva, am,%}
n. breadth, width, largeness, greatness. {%—Pṛthu-%}
{%darśin, ī, inī, i,%} far-seeing, far-sighted (in a meta-
phorical sense). {%—Pṛthu-dāna, as,%} m., N. of a son
of Śaśa-vindu. {%—Pṛthu-dīrgha-bāhu, us, us, u,%}
having broad and long arms, broad and long-armed.
{%—Pṛthu-dharaṇi-dhara, as,%} m. ‘supporting the
broad earth,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu (Mahā-bh. Śānti-p.
13444). {%—Pṛthu-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} ‘broad-edged,’
having a wide or broad edge. {%—Pṛthu-nitamba,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having broad hips, large-hipped. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thu-pakṣas, as,%} n. (probably) a broad space at the
side (of a chariot); (according to Sāy. an adj. {%ās, ās,%}
{%as%}) {%= pṛthu-pārśva-dvaya-yukta,%} broad-flanked,
having the two flanks broad (said of a horse). {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thu-pattra, as,%} m. ‘broad-leaved,’ a kind of garlic
[Page0595-b+ 81]
{%(= rakta-laśuna)%}. {%—Pṛthu-parśu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. armed with large sickles; (Sāy.) {%= vistīrṇāśva-%}
{%parśu-hasta,%} holding large rib-bones of horses.
{%—Pṛthu-palāśikā,%} f. Curcuma Zedoaria {%(= śaṭī,%}
{%palāśikā)%}. {%—Pṛthu-pājas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. far-
shining, resplendent (said of Agni, of the horses of
Uṣas, of the chariot of the Aśvins, and of Indra-
Vāyu; Sāy. {%= pṛthu-tejas%} or {%pṛthu-vegas%}). {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thu-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} Ved. broad-handed (said of
Savitṛ; Sāy. {%= mahat-kara%}). {%—Pṛthu-pragāṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a wide approach or access,
approached by wide avenues; (Sāy.) {%= pṛthu-gīti,%}
much-lauded. {%—Pṛthu-pragāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved.
wide-striding, taking wide strides; moving fleetly
(Sāy. {%= pṛthu-pragamana%}). {%—Pṛthu-pratha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} far-famed, having a wide reputation. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thu-protha, as, ā, am,%} having broad or wide nostrils
(said of a horse). {%—Pṛthu-bāhu, us, us, u,%} broad-
armed, having brawny arms. {%—Pṛthu-budhna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} broad-based, having a broad basis or foot,
having a broad sole or under-part (Sāy. {%= sthūla-%}
{%mūla%}). {%—Pṛthu-bhuvana, am,%} n. the wide world.
{%—Pṛthu-mṛdvīkā,%} f. ‘wide grape,’ (probably) a
raisin. {%—Pṛthu-yaśas, ās, ās, as,%} far-famed, of
wide renown; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a son of Śaśa-vindu;
of a son of Varāha-mihira. {%—Pṛthu-yāman, ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} Ved. ‘broad-pathed,’ having a broad path (said
of Uṣas); (Sāy.) {%= pṛthu-ratha,%} a spacious chariot.
{%—Pṛthu-raśmi, is,%} m., Ved. ‘broad-rayed,’ N. of
a Yati. {%—Pṛthu-rukma, as,%} or {%pṛthu-rukman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a son of Parā-jit (or Parā-vṛt). {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thu-roman, ā,%} m. ‘having broad hairs or scales,’ a
fish. {%—Pṛthuroma-yugma, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
the sign of the zodiac Pisces. {%—Pṛthu-locana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} large-eyed, having large eyes. {%—Pṛthu-%}
{%vaktrā,%} f. ‘wide-mouthed,’ N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda. {%—Pṛthu-vega, as,%} m. ‘having
excessive force or impetus,’ N. of a prince. {%—Pṛthu-%}
{%śimba, as,%} m. a species of Śyonāka. {%—Pṛthu-śiras,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. broad-headed, flat-headed. {%—Pṛthu-%}
{%śekhara, as,%} m. ‘broad-crested,’ a mountain. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thu-śrava, as,%} m., N. of a being attendant upon
Skanda; (probably a wrong reading for {%pṛthu-%}
{%śravas.%}) {%—Pṛthu-śravas, ās, ās, as,%} far-famed, of
wide renown; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a man; of a son of
Śaśa-vindu; of a son of Raghu; of a son of the
ninth Manu; of a serpent-demon. {%—Pṛthu-śrī, īs,%}
{%īs, i,%} having great fortune, highly prosperous. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%thu-śroṇi, is, is, i,%} ‘broad-hipped,’ having broad
hips, having large buttocks. {%—Pṛthu-ṣeṇa (pṛthu%}
{%+ senā), as,%} m. ‘having an extensive army,’ N. of
a son of Rucira (or Rucirāśva); of a son of Vibhu;
(also read {%pṛthu-sena.%}) {%—Pṛthu-ṣṭhu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} or {%pṛthu-ṣṭhuka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according
to Mahī-dhara) {%= pṛthu-keśa-bhāra,%} abundant-
haired, having a broad plait or tuft of hair; much-
praised, much-desired, desired of many; (according
to the Nirukta and Sāy.) {%= pṛthu-jaghana,%} q. v.
{%—Pṛthu-sattva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding in
great living creatures. {%—Pṛthu-sampad, t, t, t,%}
possessing large property, rich, wealthy. {%—Pṛthu-%}
{%skandha, as, ā, am,%} ‘broad-shouldered,’ a boar.
{%—Pṛthūdaka (˚thu-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘having exten-
sive waters,’ N. of a sacred bathing-place on the
northern bank of the Sarasvatī. {%—Pṛthūdaka-svā-%}
{%min, ī,%} m., N. of the author of a commentary on
the Brahma-gupta. {%—Pṛthūdara (˚thu-ud˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} big-bellied, stout, corpulent; ({%as%}), m. a ram.
{%—Pṛthūpākhyāna (˚thu-up˚), am,%} n. ‘episode
of Pṛthu,’ N. of the twenty-ninth and thirtieth
chapters of the second part of the Padma-Purāṇa.
{%—Pṛthvī-kuravaka, as,%} m. a species of tree (=
{%śveta-mandāraka%}). {%—Pṛthvī-khāta, am,%} n. a
hole or pit in the earth, cavern. {%—Pṛthvī-garbha,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Pṛthvī-gṛha, am,%}
n. a dwelling in the earth, a cave. {%—Pṛthvī-can-%}
{%drodaya, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Pṛthvī-ja, am,%}
n. ‘earth-born,’ a species of salt {%(= gaḍa-lavaṇa).%}
{%—Pṛthvī-daṇḍa-pāla-tā,%} f. the office of chief of
the police, prefecture of police. {%—Pṛthvī-dhara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of the Bhuvaneśvarī-stotra
[Page0595-c+ 75]
hymn; of the author of a commentary on the
Mṛc-chakatikā. {%—Pṛthvī-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the
earth,’ a prince, king, sovereign. {%—Pṛthvī-pāla,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘earth-protector,’ N. of a man. {%—Pṛthvī-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town in Magadha. {%—Pṛthvī-%}
{%bhara, as,%} m. (?), a species of the Aty-aṣṭi metre.
{%—Pṛthvī-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘earth-enjoyer,’ a prince,
king. {%—Pṛthvī-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of the earth,’
N. of a prince. {%—Pṛthvīśa (˚vī-īśa˚), as,%} m. ‘lord
of the earth,’ a prince, king, sovereign. {%—Pṛthvī-%}
{%hara, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29770<pc>0595-c<k1>pfTuka<k2>pfTuka
{%Pṛthuka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. rice or grain flattened;
rice scalded with hot water and then dried over a
fire and ground in a mortar; ({%as%}), m. a child,
boy, the young of any animal; ({%ā%}), f. a girl; a
species of plant ({%= hiṅgu-pattrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>29771<pc>0595-c<k1>pfTula<k2>pfTula
{%Pṛthula, as, ā, am,%}¦ broad, large, great; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a medicinal substance ({%= hiṅgu-pattrī%}).
{%—Pṛthulākṣa (˚la-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘large-eyed,’ N.
of a prince, a son of Catur-aṅga.
<LEND>

<L>29772<pc>0595-c<k1>pfTvIkA<k2>pfTvIkA
{%Pṛthvīkā,%}¦ f. large cardamoms; small cardamoms;
a small pungent seed, Nigella Indica.
<LEND>

<L>29773<pc>0595-c<k1>pfTavAna<k2>pfTavAna
{#pfTavAna#}¦ {%pṛthavāna, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29774<pc>0595-c<k1>pfTASva<k2>pfTASva
{#pfTASva#}¦ {%pṛthāśva, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>29775<pc>0595-c<k1>pfTi<k2>pfTi
{#pfTi#}¦ {%pṛthi, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a man
(according to Sāy. a Rājarṣi) under the especial
protection of the Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>29776<pc>0595-c<k1>pfTikA<k2>pfTikA
{#pfTikA#}¦ {%pṛthikā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%pṛth%}),
a centipede.
<LEND>

<L>29777<pc>0595-c<k1>pfTivI<k2>pfTivI
{#pfTivI#}¦ {%pṛthivī.%} See p. 594, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>29778<pc>0595-c<k1>pfTI<k2>pfTI
{#pfTI#}¦ {%pṛthī, ī,%} m., Ved., N. of a mythical
personage with the patronymic Vainya (said to have
been the first anointed sovereign of men, to have
ruled also the lower animals, and to have introduced
the arts of husbandry into the world; he is enume-
rated among the Ṛṣis and said to be the author of
the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 148).
<LEND>

<L>29779<pc>0595-c<k1>pfTu<k2>pfTu
{#pfTu#}¦ {%pṛthu.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>29780<pc>0595-c<k1>pfdAku<k2>pfdAku
{#pfdAku#}¦ {%pṛdāku, us,%} m. or {%pṛdākū, ūs,%} f. (said
to be fr. rt. {%pard%}), an adder, viper, snake, serpent; ({%us%}),
m. a scorpion; a tiger; a panther ({%= citraka%}); an
elephant; a tree. {%—Pṛdāku-sānu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
having a surface like that of a serpent; smooth or
variegated or shining like a serpent; (according to
Sāy.) having the head uplifted like a serpent.
<LEND>

<L>29781<pc>0595-c<k1>pfSana<k2>pfSana
{#pfSana#}¦ {%pṛśana, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%spṛś%}), Ved.
clinging to, attached to; tender, gentle (only used in
the fem.); ({%am%}), n. clinging to.
<LEND>

<L>29782<pc>0595-c<k1>pfSanAyu<k2>pfSanAyu
{%Pṛśanāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. clinging to, attached
to; tender; (Sāy.) {%= sparśana-kāma,%} desirous of
contact.
<LEND>

<L>29783<pc>0595-c<k1>pfSni<k2>pfSni
{#pfSni#}¦ {%pṛśni, is, is, i%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%spṛś,%} the initial {%s%} being elided, see Uṇādi-s. IV. 52),
variegated, party-coloured, dappled, piebald, speckled,
spotted (used in the Veda as a favourite epithet of
cows); manifold, diverse, various, of many kinds
(Ved.); dwarfish, stunted, short, thin, small; deli-
cate, feeble; ({%is%}), f. (like all other words for ‘cow’
used in various figurative or mythical senses, viz.)
earth, a cloud, milk, the spangled or starry sky, a
ray of light; a kind of fruit; N. of the mother of
the Maruts; of the wife of Savitṛ; of the wife of
king Su-tapas (who in a former birth under the name
of Devakī was mother of Kṛṣṇa); ({%ī%}), f. the plant
Pistia Stratiotes; ({%is%}), m. a dwarf; N. of a prince
the father of Śvaphalka; ({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a
race of Ṛṣis; {%pṛśni%} or {%Bharadvājasya pṛśni,%}
N. of a Sāman; [cf. rts. {%pṛṣ%} and {%spṛś; pṛṣ-%}
{%ata, pṛṣat, pṛṣaṭī:%} Gr. <lang n="greek">περκ-νό-ς, πέρκο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">περκαίνειν, πρακ-νό-ν, πρεκ-νό-ν, πρόξ, προκά-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πρώξ, πρόκ-νη:</lang> Lat. <nsi>spurc-u-s, sparg-o:</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>spreng-en:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>be-spreng-en</nsi> = Eng.
<nsi>sprinkle.</nsi>] {%—Pṛśni-garbha, as, ā, am,%} being in
the variegated bosom or in the bosom of the varie-
gated one (Sāy. {%= ādityasya garbha-bhūta%} or
[Page0596-a+ 80]
{%saptojjvala-varṇāḥ sūrya-raśmayas teṣāṃ gar-%}
{%bha-bhūta%}); ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Pṛśni-gu, us, us, u,%} Ved. driving piebald horses
(said of the Maruts; Sāy. {%= pṛśni-varṇā aśvā%}
{%yeṣāṃ te%}); ({%us%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Pṛśni-tva,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. the being variegated or party-coloured,
the being speckled or spotted. {%—Pṛśni-dhara, as,%}
m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Pṛśni-nipreṣita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. sent down or hastening down to Pṛśni,
i. e. to the earth (said of the Maruts); (Sāy.) =
{%Pṛśnyā mātrā nitarām prayatāḥ,%} sent down
by their mother Pṛśni. {%—Pṛśni-parṇī,%} f. ‘having
variegated leaves,’ N. of a plant, Hemionitis Cordi-
folia. {%—Pṛśni-bāhu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having speckled
arms, i. e. front legs (said of a frog); ({%us%}), m., N.
of a mythical being. {%—Pṛśni-bhadra, as,%} m. ‘pro-
pitious to Devakī,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Pṛśni-%}
{%mat%} or {%pṛśni-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing
the word {%pṛśni%}. {%—Pṛśni-mātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} Ved.
‘having Pṛśni for a mother,’ an epithet of the
Maruts; ‘having the earth for a mother,’ an epithet
of herbs. {%—Pṛśni-śṛṅga, as,%} m. ‘having a small
or a variegated crest,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu
incarnate as Kṛṣṇa; of Gaṇeśa. {%—Pṛśni-saktha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having spotted thighs. {%—Pṛśni-%}
{%han, ā,%} m., Ved. slaying the speckled (snake).
{%—Pṛśny-āhvayā,%} f. {%= pṛśni-parṇī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29784<pc>0596-a<k1>pfSnikA<k2>pfSnikA
{%Pṛśnikā,%}¦ f. an aquatic plant, Pistia Stratiotes.
<LEND>

<L>29785<pc>0596-a<k1>pfz<k2>pfz
{#pfz#}¦ {%pṛṣ%} (akin to rt. {%pruṣ;%} cf. rts.
{%spṛś%} and {%vṛṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%parṣati, pa-%}
{%parṣa, parṣiṣyati, aparṣīt, parṣitum,%} to
sprinkle; to weary; to vex; to hurt, injure; to give;
cl. 1. A. {%parṣate, parṣitum%} (a various reading
for rt. {%vṛṣ%}), to become wet: Caus. {%parṣayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%apaparṣat, apīpṛśat:%} Desid. {%pi-%}
{%parṣiṣati:%} Intens. {%parīpṛśyate, parīparṣṭi:%}
[cf. {%pṛśni;%} Zend {%pareṣ,%} ‘to sprinkle.’]
<LEND>

<L>29786<pc>0596-a<k1>pfzat<k2>pfzat
{%Pṛṣat, an, atī, at,%}¦ (Ved.) spotted, speckled,
mottled, dappled, piebald, party-coloured, variegated;
sprinkling (in this sense used as a part.); ({%an%}),
m. the spotted antelope; the hog deer, porcine
deer; {%pṛṣatām patiḥ,%} ‘lord of the spotted ante-
lopes,’ a N. of the Wind; ({%atī%}), f. a spotted cow;
epithet of the animals ridden by the Maruts (usually
said by commentators to be spotted antelopes, ac-
cording to Mahī-dhara piebald mares, and often
apparently identified in the Ṛg-veda with the horses
of the Maruts); the female spotted antelope, spotted
doe; {%= Pārṣatī,%} the daughter of Pṛṣata; ({%at%}), n. a
drop of water or of any other liquid. {%—Pṛṣat-tā,%} f. or
{%pṛṣat-tva, am,%} n. the being spotted or variegated.
{%—Pṛṣad-aśva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘having piebald
horses,’ an epithet of the Maruts; (according to Sāy.)
riding on spotted antelopes; ({%as%}), m. air, wind, the
god of air or wind divinely personified; an epithet
of Śiva; N. of a man; of a son of An-araṇya and
father of Hary-aśva; of a son of Vi-rūpa; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of the descendants of Pṛṣad-aśva. {%—Pṛṣad-%}
{%ājya, am,%} n. sprinkled or clotted butter, ghee mixed
with coagulated milk forming an oblation. {%—Pṛṣad-%}
{%ājya-praṇutta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. driven away from
the oblation of ghee and curds. {%—Pṛṣad-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. party-coloured, variegated. {%—Pṛṣad-%}
{%vatsa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a spotted calf. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%ṣad-varā,%} f. ‘the best among the variegated ante-
lopes,’ N. of a wife of Ruru and daughter of a Vidhyā-
dhara by Menakā (a sort of antelope). {%—Pṛṣad-%}
{%vala, as,%} m. ‘piebald,’ N. of a horse of Vāyu or
Wind; [cf. {%pṛṣad-aśva.%}] {%—Pṛṣad-vāṇa, as,%}
m. ‘having variegated arrows,’ N. of a man. {%—Pṛ-%}
{%ṣodara, as, ā, am%} ({%pṛṣa%} for {%pṛṣat + udara%}),
Ved. ‘speckled-bellied,’ having the belly speckled,
(see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VI. 3, 109.)
<LEND>

<L>29787<pc>0596-a<k1>pfzata<k2>pfzata
{%Pṛṣata, as, ā, am,%}¦ spotted, speckled, having
white spots, variegated; ({%as%}), m. the spotted ante-
lope, the porcine deer; a drop of water; a spot,
mark; N. of the father of Dru-pada. {%—Pṛṣatāśva%}
{%(˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m. air, wind ({%= pṛṣad-aśva%}).
<LEND>

<L>29788<pc>0596-a<k1>pfzatka<k2>pfzatka
{%Pṛṣatka, as,%}¦ m. an arrow (so called as being
variegated or as being as swift as an antelope).
<LEND>
[Page0596-b+ 77]

<L>29789<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzadDara<k2>pfzadDara
{%Pṛṣaddhara%}¦ or {%pṛṣadhra, as,%} m. (probably a
comp. fr. {%pṛṣat + dhra%}), N. of a man the son
of Manu and author of the hymn Ṛg-veda VIII.
57 (= Vālakhilya 8).
<LEND>

<L>29790<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzaDru<k2>pfzaDru
{%Pṛṣadhru, us,%}¦ m., N. of a warrior on the side
of the Pāṇḍavas.
<LEND>

<L>29791<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzanti<k2>pfzanti
{%Pṛṣanti, is,%}¦ m. a drop of water (probably an
error for {%pṛṣanti,%} n. pl. of {%pṛṣat%}).
<LEND>

<L>29792<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzAtaka<k2>pfzAtaka
{%Pṛṣātaka, am,%}¦ n. a mixture of ghee and coagu-
lated milk or some similar compound; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Rudra; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of disease or N. of
a female demon causing this disease.
<LEND>

<L>29793<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzodyAna<k2>pfzodyAna
{%Pṛṣodyāna, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pṛṣa%} for {%pṛṣat +%}
{%udyāna%}), a small garden or grove.
<LEND>

<L>29794<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzwa<k2>pfzwa<h>1
1. {%pṛṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. and 3. see below),
sprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>29795<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzaBAzA<k2>pfzaBAzA
{#pfzaBAzA#}¦ {%pṛṣa-bhāṣā,%} f. {%= pūṣa-bhāsā,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29796<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzAkarA<k2>pfzAkarA
{#pfzAkarA#}¦ {%pṛṣākarā,%} f. a small stone used
as a weight.
<LEND>

<L>29797<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzwa<k2>pfzwa<h>2
{#pfzwa#} 2¦. {%pṛṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (for {%spṛṣṭa%} fr. rt.
{%spṛś%}), Ved. cleaving or adhering to, in contact
with (Sāy. {%= saṃ-spṛṣṭa,%} or {%= ni-ṣikta = ni-%}
{%hita%}). {%—Pṛṣṭa-bandhu, us, us, u,%} Ved. (perhaps)
having devoted relatives or attendants; (Sāy.) {%= sto-%}
{%tṝṇām bandhuḥ,%} a friend to those who praise him.
<LEND>

<L>29798<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzwi<k2>pfzwi
{%Pṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. a rib ({%= parśu%}); touch; a
ray of light. {%—Pṛṣṭi-vah, vāṭ,%} m., Ved. carrying
on the back (as a horse). {%—Pṛṣṭy-āmaya, as,%}
m., Ved. a pain in the side. {%—Pṛṣṭy-āmayin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} Ved. feeling a pain in the side.
<LEND>

<L>29799<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzwa<k2>pfzwa<h>3
{#pfzwa#} 3¦. {%pṛṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%prach%}),
asked, inquired, questioned, interrogated, demanded.
{%—Pṛṣṭābhidhāyin (˚ṭa-abh˚), ī, inī, i,%} Ved. an-
swering that which is asked, answering an inquiry.
<LEND>

<L>29800<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzwvA<k2>pfzwvA
{%Pṛṣṭvā,%}¦ ind. having asked or inquired, having
questioned or interrogated.
<LEND>

<L>29801<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzwahAyana<k2>pfzwahAyana
{#pfzwahAyana#}¦ {%pṛṣṭahāyana, as,%} m. an ele-
phant; a species of grain.
<LEND>

<L>29802<pc>0596-b<k1>pfzWa<k2>pfzWa
{#pfzWa#}¦ {%pṛṣṭha, am,%} n. (probably fr. {%pra-stha%}
or perhaps fr. {%parā-stha%}), the back of any animal
(as standing out prominently), the back in general
(e. g. {%aśva-pṛṣṭhe sammataḥ,%} admired on horse-
back, i. e. a good rider; {%pṛṣṭhaṃ dā,%} to bend
the back, make a low obeisance); the hinder part
of anything, the rear [cf. {%senā-p˚%}]; the upper side,
uppermost part, surface, superficies (e. g. {%divaḥ%}
{%pṛṣṭham,%} Ved. the surface of the sky, vault of
heaven; cf. {%ghṛta-p˚, tṛ-p˚, nāka-p˚%}); the flat
roof of a house; a terrace; a page of a book; N.
of a particular arrangement of Sāmans employed at
the midday oblation, and formed from the Rathan-
tara, Bṛhat, Vairūpa, Vairāja, Śākvara, and Raivata
Sāmans, (in this sense more usually written as a
comp. {%pṛṣṭha-stotra,%} q. v.); N. of various Sā-
mans; ({%ena, e%}), ind. at the back, behind, from
behind. {%—Pṛṣṭha-gopa, as,%} m. one who guards
or protects the rear of a warrior while fighting.
{%—Pṛṣṭha-granthi, is,%} m. ‘back-knot,’ a hump
on the back. {%—Pṛṣṭha-ghna, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Pṛṣṭha-cakṣus, us,%} m. ‘having eyes in
the back,’ a crab. {%—Pṛṣṭha-ja, as,%} m. a form of
Skanda; (also considered as a son of Skanda.)
{%—Pṛṣṭha-jāha, am,%} n. {%= pṛṣṭhasya mūlam,%}
‘the root of the back,’ (probably) os coccygis; [cf.
{%jāha.%}] {%—Pṛṣṭha-talpana, am,%} n. the exterior
muscles on an elephant's back {%(= talpana)%}. {%—Pṛṣ-%}
{%ṭha-dṛṣṭi, is,%} m. ‘looking backwards,’ a bear.
{%—Pṛṣṭha-pātin, ī, inī, i,%} being behind the
back of a person, following, observing, controlling.
{%—Pṛṣṭha-phala, am,%} n. the superficial contents
of a figure. {%—Pṛṣṭha-bhaṅga, as,%} m. ‘breaking
or bending the back,’ epithet of a mode of fighting.
{%—Pṛṣṭha-bhāga, as,%} m. the hinder part, back.
{%—Pṛṣṭha-madhya, as,%} m. the middle of the
back. {%—Pṛṣṭha-māṃsa, am,%} n. the flesh on the
back; {%pṛṣṭhamāṃsaṃ khād%} or {%bhakṣ,%} ‘to eat
[Page0596-c+ 79]
the flesh of a person's back,’ i. e. to speak ill of any
one behind his back. {%—Pṛṣṭhamāṃsāda (˚sa-%}
{%ada˚)%} or {%pṛṣṭhamāṃsādana (˚sa-ad˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘eating the flesh of the back,’ backbiting, speaking
ill of a person behind his back, a backbiter, tale-
bearer, slanderer; ({%am%}), n. backbiting. {%—Pṛṣṭha-%}
{%yajvan, ā,%} m., Ved. one who sacrifices on high
places (Sāy. {%= rathantara-bṛhad-ādibhir ījāna%}).
{%—Pṛṣṭha-yāna, am,%} n. ‘going on the back (of
a horse &c.), riding; ({%as, ā, am%}), an animal for
riding, riding horse. {%—Pṛṣṭha-rakṣa, as,%} m. one
who covers the rear of a warrior while fighting;
[cf. {%pṛṣṭha-gopa.%}] {%—Pṛṣṭha-rakṣaṇa, am,%}
n. protection or defence of the back. {%—Pṛṣṭha-%}
{%vaṃśa, as,%} m. the back-bone. {%—Pṛṣṭha-vāstu, u,%}
n. an upper story, the upper room of a building.
{%—Pṛṣṭha-vāh, ṭ,%} m. (f. {%pṛṣṭhauhī,%} see Gram.
182. <nsi>c</nsi>), a draught-ox, an ox employed for draught,
(also read {%praṣṭha-vāh%} and {%paṣṭha-vāh%}); ‘borne
on the back,’ riding. {%—Pṛṣṭha-vāhya, as,%} m. a
draught-ox, an ox carrying burdens. {%—Pṛṣṭha-%}
{%śaya, as, ā, am,%} lying or sleeping on the back.
{%—Pṛṣṭha-śṛṅga, as,%} m. ‘having horns over the
back,’ a wild goat. {%—Pṛṣṭha-śṛṅgin, ī,%} m. a
ram; a buffalo; a eunuch; an epithet of Bhīma-sena.
{%—Pṛṣṭha-stotra, am,%} n., N. of a particular
arrangement of Sāmans ({%= pṛṣṭha,%} q. v.). {%—Pṛṣ-%}
{%ṭhānuga (˚ṭha-an˚), as, ā, am,%} or {%pṛṣṭhānu-%}
{%gāmin (˚ṭha-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} going behind, following
(opposed to {%agra-ga%}). {%—Pṛṣṭhāsthi (˚ṭha-as˚),%}
{%i,%} n. the back-bone. {%—Pṛṣṭhe-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
having the face in the back. {%—Pṛṣṭhodaya (˚ṭha-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘rising from behind,’ an epithet of
the signs of the zodiac, Aries, Taurus, Gemini,
Sagittarius, and Capricorn.
<LEND>

<L>29803<pc>0596-c<k1>pfzWaka<k2>pfzWaka
{%Pṛṣṭhaka, am,%}¦ n. the back; {%pṛṣṭhake kṛ,%}
to place behind, postpone; to resign, renounce.
<LEND>

<L>29804<pc>0596-c<k1>pfzWatas<k2>pfzWatas
{%Pṛṣṭha-tas,%}¦ ind. from the back, from behind,
behind the back, at the back, behind (with gen.);
to the back, backwards; on the back; behind the
back, secretly, covertly; {%pṛṣṭhataḥ kṛ,%} to place
on the back (e. g. {%parvatam pṛṣṭhataḥ kṛtvā,%}
having placed the mountain on his back); to place
behind the back, neglect, forsake, abandon; to re-
sign, renounce, desist from; {%pṛṣṭhato gam,%} to go
at the back, follow, pursue; {%pṛṣṭhato bhū,%} to be
behind, i. e. to be disregarded, to be an object of
indifference.
<LEND>

<L>29805<pc>0596-c<k1>pfzWya<k2>pfzWya
{%Pṛṣṭhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
the back; belonging to or coming from the heights
(Ved., e. g. {%pṛṣṭhyam payaḥ,%} ‘milk from the
heights,’ i. e. Soma, or according to Sāy. {%= dhāra-%}
{%kam payaḥ,%} sustaining milk); forming the Pṛṣṭha
hymns (Ved.); having the Pṛṣṭha hymns (said of
a particular period of six sacrificial days, Ved.); ({%as%}),
m. with or without {%aśva,%} a horse for riding or for
draught, a pack-horse; ({%as, am%}), m. n. {%= pṛṣṭhā-%}
{%nāṃ samūhaḥ%} [cf. Pāṇ. IV. 2, 42] {%= stotrāṇāṃ%}
{%samūhaḥ%} (Ujjvala-datta on Uṇādi-s. II. 12); ({%ā%}),
f. with or without {%aśvā,%} a mare for riding or for
draught; an edge or ridge along the back of the
Vedi (Ved.). {%—Pṛṣṭhya-stoma, as,%} m., Ved., N.
of six Ekāhas or of a period of six sacrificial days.
{%—Pṛṣṭhyāvalamba (˚ya-av˚), as,%} m., Ved.,
scil. {%pañcāha,%} a period of five sacrificial days.
<LEND>

<L>29806<pc>0596-c<k1>pfzRi<k2>pfzRi
{#pfzRi#}¦ {%pṛṣṇi, is, is, i,%} small, short, or thin
({%= pṛśni%}); ({%is%}), f. the heel ({%= pārṣṇi%}); a ray of
light ({%= pṛśni%}).
<LEND>

<L>29807<pc>0596-c<k1>pfzRiparRI<k2>pfzRiparRI
{#pfzRiparRI#}¦ {%pṛṣṇi-parṇī,%} f. a wrong read-
ing for {%pṛśni-parṇī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29808<pc>0596-c<k1>pfzvA<k2>pfzvA
{#pfzvA#}¦ {%pṛṣvā,%} incorrectly for {%pruṣvā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29809<pc>0596-c<k1>pF<k2>pF
{#pF#}¦ {%pṝ%} [cf. rts. 1. and 2. {%pṛ, pṛṇ%}], cl. 9.
and 3. P. (Ved. also A.) {%pṛṇāti (-ṇīte),%}
{%piparti%} (3rd du. {%pipṛtas%} or {%pipūrtas,%} Vopa-deva
X. 5), {%papāra%} (3rd du. {%paparatus%} or {%papratus,%}
3rd pl. {%paparus%} or {%paprus,%} Pāṇ. VII. 4, 12),
{%pariṣyati, parīṣyati, apārīt,%} Prec. {%pūryāt, pa-%}
{%ritum, parītu%} (Ved. forms, Impf. 3rd sing. A.
{%apiprata,%} Impv. 2nd sing. {%pūrdhi,%} Aor. {%parṣi, %}
[Page0597-a+ 74]
{%parṣat, pāriṣat;%} irregular Impv. 2nd sing. A.
{%pipīpṛhi?%}), to fill, fill up; to fulfil; to sate,
satisfy, refresh (e. g. {%pitṝn apārīt,%} he satisfied or
refreshed the Manes); to cherish, nourish, nurture,
foster, rear, bring up; to protect; to bestow bounti-
fully, grant abundantly, give plentifully, lavish (with
acc. of the thing and dat. of the person, Ved.); to
collect, accumulate; (A.) to fill or sate one's self;
cl. 4. A. (properly Pass. but ep. also P.), {%pūryate%}
{%(-ti),%} Aor. {%apūri, apūriṣṭa,%} to be filled, become
full, to be fulfilled; to be sated or satisfied; Caus.
{%pārayati, -yitum%} [cf. Caus. of rt. 1. {%pṛ%}], to fill,
fulfil (Ved.); {%pūrayati, -te, -yitum%} (sometimes
regarded as derived fr. a separate rt. {%pūr,%} q. v.),
to fill, fill up, replenish; to fulfil (a wish, hope,
promise, &c.); to make full, fill out, intensify,
strengthen (a sound); to fill with wind, blow, wind
(a conch-shell or other wind instrument); to draw
(a bow, or an arrow to the ear); to cover completely,
cover up, surround, envelop; to load or enrich (with
gifts); to spend the whole (of a period of time):
Desid. {%pipariṣati, piparīṣati, pupūrṣati, pu-%}
{%pūrṣate:%} Intens. {%popūryate, pāparti, popūrti;%}
[cf. rt. 1. {%prā,%} 3. {%pur, pura, puru, pulu:%} Zend
<nsi>par,</nsi> ‘fill;’ <nsi>perena,</nsi> ‘full:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πί-μ-πλη-μι, πλή-θ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πλέ-ω-ς, πλή-ρ-ης, πλη-θ-ύ-ς, πλῆ-θ-ος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πλοῦ-το-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>im-ple-o, plē-nu-s, plē-be-s, pŏ-pul-u-s,</nsi>
<nsi>multus</nsi> said to be for <nsi>pūrtas, am-plu-s:</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>full-s,</nsi> ‘full;’ <nsi>fullo,</nsi> ‘fulness;’ <nsi>full-yan,</nsi> ‘to fill:’
Old Germ. <nsi>fol, folc:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>fyll-an:</nsi> Mod.
Germ. <nsi>voll</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>full:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>plŭ-nŭ,</nsi> ‘full;’ <nsi>plŭ-</nsi>
<nsi>kŭ,</nsi> ‘people;’ <nsi>ple-me,</nsi> ‘a tribe:’ Lith. <nsi>pil-ti,</nsi> ‘to
fill;’ <nsi>pī1l-na-s,</nsi> ‘full;’ <nsi>pùl-ka-s,</nsi> ‘crowd:’ Hib. <nsi>pailt,</nsi>
‘abundant, plentiful, copious.’]
<LEND>

<L>29810<pc>0597-a<k1>pecaka<k2>pecaka
{#pecaka#}¦ {%pecaka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%pac%}), an owl; the tip or the root of an elephant's
tail; a couch, bed; a louse; a cloud; ({%ikā%}), f. a
kind of owl.
<LEND>

<L>29811<pc>0597-a<k1>pecakin<k2>pecakin
{%Pecakin, ī,%}¦ m. an elephant; (also read {%picakin.%})
<LEND>

<L>29812<pc>0597-a<k1>pecila<k2>pecila
{%Pecila, as,%}¦ m. an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>29813<pc>0597-a<k1>pecu<k2>pecu
{#pecu#}¦ {%pecu, u,%} n. or {%peculī,%} f. a species of bul-
bous plant with esculent roots, Colocasia Antiquorum.
<LEND>

<L>29814<pc>0597-a<k1>peja<k2>peja
{#peja#}¦ {%peja%} in {%tila-peja,%} q. v.; ({%ā%}), f. {%= peyā.%}
<LEND>

<L>29815<pc>0597-a<k1>peYjUza<k2>peYjUza
{#peYjUza#}¦ {%peñjūṣa, as,%} m. the wax of the ear
({%= piñjūṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>29816<pc>0597-a<k1>pewa<k2>pewa
{#pewa#}¦ {%peṭa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} m. f. n. (said to
be fr. rt. {%piṭ,%} q. v.), a basket, a large basket, bag; a
chest; a multitude; a retinue; ({%as%}), m. the open
hand with the fingers expanded ({%= pra-hasta%}).
<LEND>

<L>29817<pc>0597-a<k1>pewaka<k2>pewaka
{%peṭaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. [cf. {%piṭaka%}], a
basket for holding clothes, books, &c.; ({%am%}), n.
multitude, company, quantity; ({%ikā%}), f. a species of
plant ({%= kuliṅgākṣī, kuverākṣī, kṛṣṇa-vṛn-%}
{%tikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29818<pc>0597-a<k1>pewAka<k2>pewAka
{%Peṭāka, as,%}¦ m. a basket.
<LEND>

<L>29819<pc>0597-a<k1>peqA<k2>peqA
{%Peḍā,%}¦ f. a basket, large basket ({%= peṭā,%} for which
it is perhaps only a wrong reading).
<LEND>

<L>29820<pc>0597-a<k1>pewwiBawwa<k2>pewwiBawwa
{#pewwiBawwa#}¦ {%peṭṭi-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a man
the father of the commentator Viśveśvara.
<LEND>

<L>29821<pc>0597-a<k1>peQAla<k2>peQAla
{#peQAla#}¦ {%peḍhāla, as,%} m., N. of the eighth
Arhat of the future Ut-sarpiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>29822<pc>0597-a<k1>peR<k2>peR
{#peR#}¦ {%peṇ%} [cf. rts. {%paiṇ, praiṇ, laiṇ%}], cl.
1. P. {%peṇati,%} &c., to go; to send (?); to
grind (?); to embrace.
<LEND>

<L>29823<pc>0597-a<k1>petva<k2>petva
{#petva#}¦ {%petva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%pā?%}), a ram,
sheep (Ved.); a small part; ({%am%}), n. nectar, Amṛta;
ghee or clarified butter.
<LEND>

<L>29824<pc>0597-a<k1>pedu<k2>pedu
{#pedu#}¦ {%pedu, us,%} m., Ved., N. of a man (under
the especial protection of the Aśvins, by whom he was
presented with a white horse that killed serpents).
<LEND>

<L>29825<pc>0597-a<k1>pepIyamAna<k2>pepIyamAna
{#pepIyamAna#}¦ {%pepīyamāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. In-
tens. of rt. 1. {%pā%}), drinking repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>29826<pc>0597-a<k1>peb<k2>peb
{#peb#}¦ {%peb,%} cl. 1. A. {%pebate,%} a various
reading for rt. {%sev,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0597-b+ 75]

<L>29827<pc>0597-b<k1>peya<k2>peya
{#peya#}¦ {%peya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pā%}), to be
drunk or quaffed, fit to be drunk, drinkable, potable;
tastable, sapid; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%yajña-kratu,%} a
drink offering, libation (Ved.); ({%ā%}), f. rice gruel;
any drink with a small quantity of boiled rice; the
decoction of anything after straining; a species of
anise, {%= miśreyā; (am),%} n. a drink, beverage.
<LEND>

<L>29828<pc>0597-b<k1>peru<k2>peru<h>1
1. {%peru, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. (according to Mahī-dhara)
drinking; ({%us%}), m. the sun; fire; the ocean; the
golden mountain.
<LEND>

<L>29829<pc>0597-b<k1>peyUza<k2>peyUza
{#peyUza#}¦ {%peyūṣa, as, am,%} m. n. ({%= pīyūṣa,%}
q. v), the milk of a cow that has calved within seven
days, biestings; fresh butter; nectar, Amṛta.
<LEND>

<L>29830<pc>0597-b<k1>peraja<k2>peraja
{#peraja#}¦ {%peraja,%} or {%peroja, am,%} n. a turquoise
(= Pers. <lang n="arabic">فيروزه</lang>).
<LEND>

<L>29831<pc>0597-b<k1>perA<k2>perA
{#perA#}¦ {%perā,%} f. a kind of musical instrument.
<LEND>

<L>29832<pc>0597-b<k1>peru<k2>peru<h>2
{#peru#} 2¦. {%peru, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. 1. {%pṛ;%} for 1.
{%peru%} see above), Ved. drawing through, carrying
across; leading through, delivering, rescuing; (Sāy.
{%= pūraka,%} as if fr. rt. {%pṝ.%})
<LEND>

<L>29833<pc>0597-b<k1>peru<k2>peru<h>3
{#peru#} 3¦. {%peru, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. {%pyai%}), Ved.
swelling; causing to ferment; (Sāy. {%= sarvasya%}
{%rakṣaka,%} as if fr. rt. 3. {%pā%}); ({%us%}), m. a limb,
member (?).
<LEND>

<L>29834<pc>0597-b<k1>peruka<k2>peruka
{#peruka#}¦ {%peruka, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>29835<pc>0597-b<k1>pel<k2>pel
{#pel#}¦ {%pel,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%pelati, pelitum,%}
{%pelayati, -yitum,%} to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>29836<pc>0597-b<k1>pela<k2>pela
{%Pela, as,%}¦ m. going; a small part; ({%am%}), n. a
testicle.
<LEND>

<L>29837<pc>0597-b<k1>pelaka<k2>pelaka
{%Pelaka, as,%}¦ m. a testicle.
<LEND>

<L>29838<pc>0597-b<k1>pelava<k2>pelava
{%Pelava, as, ā, am,%}¦ delicate, fine, soft, tender;
thin, slim, slender. {%—Pelava-puṣpa, am,%} n. a
tender flower.
<LEND>

<L>29839<pc>0597-b<k1>peli<k2>peli
{%Peli,%}¦ (perhaps) {%= pelin,%} see Gaṇa to Pāṇ. VI. 2, 86.
<LEND>

<L>29840<pc>0597-b<k1>pelin<k2>pelin
{%Pelin, ī,%}¦ m. a horse. {%—Peli-śālā,%} f. a horse-stable.
<LEND>

<L>29841<pc>0597-b<k1>peloja<k2>peloja
{#peloja#}¦ {%peloja, as,%} m., N. of one of the
attendants of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>29842<pc>0597-b<k1>pev<k2>pev
{#pev#}¦ {%pev%} [cf. rt. {%peb%}], cl. 1. A. {%pevate,%}
{%pevitum,%} a various reading for rt. {%sev,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29843<pc>0597-b<k1>peSa<k2>peSa
{#peSa#}¦ {%peśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%piś%}), Ved. =
{%peśas,%} q. v.; [cf. {%puru-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29844<pc>0597-b<k1>peSana<k2>peSana
{%Peśana, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. well formed, well made;
decorated, adorned.
<LEND>

<L>29845<pc>0597-b<k1>peSala<k2>peSala
{%Peśala, as, ā, am,%}¦ artificially formed, adorned,
decorated; beautiful, charming, lovely, pleasant;
soft, smooth, tender; skilful, dexterous, expert,
clever, ingenious; fraudulent, deceitful, crafty; ({%am%}),
n. beauty, loveliness; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ποικ-ίλο-ς, ποικἰλλ-ω:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>ping-o, pic-tor, pic-tura:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>feh,</nsi>
‘variegated:’ Slav. <nsi>pĭstrŭ,</nsi> ‘variegated;’ <nsi>pis-ati,</nsi>
‘to write:’ Lith. <nsi>pisz-nu-s,</nsi> ‘splendid.’] {%—Peśala-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. dexterity, skill. {%—Peśala-madhya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} slender-waisted, having a delicate or slender
waist.
<LEND>

<L>29846<pc>0597-b<k1>peSas<k2>peSas
{%Peśas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. shape, form; an artificial figure,
ornament, decoration, embroidery; variety of colour,
brilliance; gold; [cf. {%aśva-p˚, ṛta-p˚.%}] {%—Peśas-%}
{%kārī,%} f., Ved. a woman who weaves artistically or
embroiders. {%—Peśas-kṛt, t,%} m. ‘the artist,’ an epi-
thet of the hand; a species of insect, a kind of wasp.
{%—Peśas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. decorated, adorned,
ornamented.
<LEND>

<L>29847<pc>0597-b<k1>peSi<k2>peSi
{%Peśi, is,%}¦ m. a thunderbolt (for {%peṣi%}); ({%is%}), f. an
egg; split pease.
<LEND>

<L>29848<pc>0597-b<k1>peSikA<k2>peSikA
{%Peśikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%peśī%}), rind, shell (of fruit).
<LEND>

<L>29849<pc>0597-b<k1>peSitf<k2>peSitf
{%Peśitṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who cuts in pieces or
carves, a carver.
<LEND>

<L>29850<pc>0597-b<k1>peSI<k2>peSI
{%Peśī,%}¦ f. a piece of flesh or meat [cf. {%piśita%}]; a
ball or mass of flesh; the fetus shortly after con-
ception; a muscle (of which there are said to be five
hundred in the human body); the peel or rind (of
fruit); a kind of drum; a sheath, scabbard; a shoe;
the egg of a bird; spikenard, Valeriana Jatamansi;
a blown bud; N. of a Piśācī; of a Rākṣasī; of a
river. {%—Peśī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, %}
[Page0597-c+ 74]
{%-kartum,%} to cut into pieces, to carve. {%—Peśī-kośa%} or
{%peśī-koṣa, as,%} m. a bird's egg. {%—Peśy-aṇḍa, am,%}
n. a bird's egg; a piece of flesh; the fetus shortly
after conception.
<LEND>

<L>29851<pc>0597-c<k1>peSvara<k2>peSvara
{%Peśvara, as, ā, am%}¦ (? for {%peṣvara%} fr. rt. {%piṣ%}),
who or what grinds.
<LEND>

<L>29852<pc>0597-c<k1>pez<k2>pez
{#pez#}¦ {%peṣ%} [cf. rt. {%yeṣ%}], cl. 1. A. {%peṣate,%}
{%peṣitum,%} to exert one's self or strive
diligently.
<LEND>

<L>29853<pc>0597-c<k1>peza<k2>peza
{#peza#}¦ {%peṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%piṣ%}), pounding,
grinding; [cf. {%śilā-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29854<pc>0597-c<k1>pezaka<k2>pezaka
{%Peṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who pounds or grinds,
a grinder, grinding, pounding, pulverizing, masti-
cating.
<LEND>

<L>29855<pc>0597-c<k1>pezaRa<k2>pezaRa
{%Peṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. pounding, grinding, crushing,
triturating, pulverizing by means of a mill, ({%peṣaṇaṃ%}
{%yā,%} to be ground); a threshing-floor; a hand-mill,
a stone and muller, any apparatus for grinding or
pounding; a plant, a species of Euphorbia with three
lobes, Euphorbia Antiquorum ({%= śata-guptā,%} Ben-
gālī {%tekāṭosija%}). {%—Peṣaṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} a word
formed for the explanation of {%pipiṣvat.%}
<LEND>

<L>29856<pc>0597-c<k1>pezaRi<k2>pezaRi
{%Peṣaṇi, is, ī,%}¦ f. a stone slab on which condi-
ments are ground, a muller, mill-stone, grind-stone.
<LEND>

<L>29857<pc>0597-c<k1>pezaRIya<k2>pezaRIya
{%Peṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be ground or pounded,
fit to be ground or pulverized.
<LEND>

<L>29858<pc>0597-c<k1>pezAka<k2>pezAka
{%Peṣāka, as,%}¦ m. a small slab for grinding anything
upon, a grind-stone.
<LEND>

<L>29859<pc>0597-c<k1>pezi<k2>pezi
{%Peṣi, is,%}¦ m. a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>29860<pc>0597-c<k1>pezwf<k2>pezwf
{%Peṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who pounds or crushes,
one who grinds, a grinder.
<LEND>

<L>29861<pc>0597-c<k1>pezya<k2>pezya
{%Peṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pounded or ground, to
be triturated or pulverized.
<LEND>

<L>29862<pc>0597-c<k1>pezala<k2>pezala
{#pezala#}¦ {%peṣala, as, ā, am, = peśala,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29863<pc>0597-c<k1>pezI<k2>pezI
{#pezI#}¦ {%peṣī,%} f., Ved. (according to Sāy.) {%=%}
{%hiṃsikā, piśācikā,%} a malevolent spirit, female Pi-
śāca; (perhaps) a nurse; spikenard (in this sense a
various reading for {%peśī,%} q. v.). {%—Peṣī-kṛ,%} a various
reading for {%peśī-kṛ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29864<pc>0597-c<k1>pezwra<k2>pezwra
{#pezwra#}¦ {%peṣṭra, am,%} n. (perhaps fr. rt. 1. {%piś%}),
Ved. a bone.
<LEND>

<L>29865<pc>0597-c<k1>pes<k2>pes
{#pes#}¦ {%pes%} (= rt. {%pis%}), cl. 1. P. {%pesati,%}
{%pesitum,%} to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>29866<pc>0597-c<k1>pesuka<k2>pesuka
{%Pesuka, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. rt. {%pis%}), Ved. spreading,
extending.
<LEND>

<L>29867<pc>0597-c<k1>pesvara<k2>pesvara
{%Pesvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, moving; destructive;
splendid.
<LEND>

<L>29868<pc>0597-c<k1>pesala<k2>pesala
{#pesala#}¦ {%pesala = peśala,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29869<pc>0597-c<k1>pE<k2>pE
{#pE#}¦ {%pai,%} cl. 1. P. {%pāyati, pāyitum,%} to dry,
wither.
<LEND>

<L>29870<pc>0597-c<k1>pENga<k2>pENga
{#pENga#}¦ {%paiṅga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%piṅga%}), belong-
ing or relating to a rat or mouse; derived from or
composed by Paiṅgya (as a book); acknowledged
by the Paiṅgins; ({%am%}), n., N. of a work; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a teacher (in this sense perhaps a wrong
reading for {%paiṅgya%}). {%—Paiṅga-rāja, as,%} m.,
Ved. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>29871<pc>0597-c<k1>pENgi<k2>pENgi
{%Paiṅgi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%piṅga%}), a patronymic of Yāska.
<LEND>

<L>29872<pc>0597-c<k1>pENgin<k2>pENgin
{%Paiṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ derived from Paiṅgya; ({%ī%}),
m. a follower of Paiṅgya.
<LEND>

<L>29873<pc>0597-c<k1>pENgya<k2>pENgya
{%Paiṅgya, as,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%piṅga%}), N.
of a teacher; ({%am%}), n. the doctrine or the manual of
Paiṅgya. {%—Paiṅgī-putra, as,%} m. (fr. {%paiṅgī,%} f.
of {%paiṅgya, + putra%}), Ved., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>29874<pc>0597-c<k1>pENgala<k2>pENgala
{#pENgala#}¦ {%paiṅgala, ās,%} m. pl. a patronymic
from Piṅgala.
<LEND>

<L>29875<pc>0597-c<k1>pENgalAyana<k2>pENgalAyana
{%Paiṅgalāyana, as,%}¦ or {%paiṅgalāyani, is,%} m. a
patronymic from Piṅgala.
<LEND>

<L>29876<pc>0597-c<k1>pENgalya<k2>pENgalya
{%Paiṅgalya, am,%}¦ n. the treatise of Piṅgala; brown
or tawny colour.
<LEND>

<L>29877<pc>0597-c<k1>pEcCilya<k2>pEcCilya
{#pEcCilya#}¦ {%paicchilya, am,%} n. (fr. {%picchila%}),
sliminess, mucilaginousness.
<LEND>

<L>29878<pc>0597-c<k1>pEjavana<k2>pEjavana
{#pEjavana#}¦ {%paijavana, as,%} m. (fr. {%pijavana%}), a
patronymic of Su-dās.
<LEND>
[Page0598-a+ 73]

<L>29879<pc>0598-a<k1>pEYjUza<k2>pEYjUza
{#pEYjUza#}¦ {%paiñjūṣa, as,%} m. the ear; [cf. {%piñ-%}
{%jūṣa, peñjūṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29880<pc>0598-a<k1>pEwakika<k2>pEwakika
{#pEwakika#}¦ {%paiṭakika%} or {%paiṭākika, as, ī, am,%}
{%= piṭākena harati,%} see Gaṇa to Pāṇ. IV. 4, 15.
<LEND>

<L>29881<pc>0598-a<k1>pEWara<k2>pEWara
{#pEWara#}¦ {%paiṭhara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%piṭhara%}),
cooked in a saucepan, boiled in a vessel or pot (as
meat &c.).
<LEND>

<L>29882<pc>0598-a<k1>pEWInasi<k2>pEWInasi
{#pEWInasi#}¦ {%paiṭhīnasi, is,%} or {%paiṭhīnas, ās,%}
m. patronymic of an ancient teacher, a Muni and
author of a system of laws.
<LEND>

<L>29883<pc>0598-a<k1>pER<k2>pER
{#pER#}¦ {%paiṇ%} [cf. rts. {%peṇ, laiṇ, praiṇ%}], cl. 1.
P. {%paiṇati, paiṇitum,%} to go, approach;
to command, direct (an act); to send; to touch or
embrace; to pound, grind.
<LEND>

<L>29884<pc>0598-a<k1>pERqapAtika<k2>pERqapAtika
{#pERqapAtika#}¦ {%paiṇḍapātika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%piṇḍa-pāta%}), living on alms.
<LEND>

<L>29885<pc>0598-a<k1>pERqAyana<k2>pERqAyana
{%Paiṇḍāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Piṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>29886<pc>0598-a<k1>pERqinya<k2>pERqinya
{%Paiṇḍinya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%piṇḍin%}), living on alms,
mendicity.
<LEND>

<L>29887<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtadArava<k2>pEtadArava
{#pEtadArava#}¦ {%paitadārava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pīta-%}
{%dāru%}), see Gaṇa to Pāṇ. IV. 3, 154.
<LEND>

<L>29888<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtAputrIya<k2>pEtAputrIya
{#pEtAputrIya#}¦ {%paitāputrīya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pitā-%}
{%putra%}), relating to father and son.
<LEND>

<L>29889<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtAmaha<k2>pEtAmaha
{#pEtAmaha#}¦ {%paitāmaha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pitā-%}
{%maha%}), belonging or relating to a paternal grand-
father; derived or inherited from a grandfather;
belonging or relating to Brahmā, derived from
Brahmā, governed or presided over by Brahmā;
({%as%}), m. a son of Brahmā, a patronymic of Manu;
({%ās%}), m. pl. forefathers, ancestors. {%—Paitāmaha-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place.
<LEND>

<L>29890<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtAmahika<k2>pEtAmahika
{%Paitāmahika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pitā-maha%}), be-
longing or relating to a grandfather.
<LEND>

<L>29891<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtfka<k2>pEtfka
{#pEtfka#}¦ {%paitṛka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pitṛ%}), belong-
ing or relating to a father or to ancestors generally,
coming or derived from a father, paternal, ancestral;
belonging or relating to the Manes, sacred to the
Manes; ({%am%}), n. a sacred rite or Śrāddha in honour
of the Manes or deceased ancestors. {%—Paitṛka-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n. ancestral property, patrimony. {%—Pai-%}
{%tṛka-bhūmi, is,%} f. the country of one's ancestors,
fatherland; a paternal estate.
<LEND>

<L>29892<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtfmatya<k2>pEtfmatya
{%Paitṛmatya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%pitṛ-mat%}), sprung
from one who has an illustrious father, the grandson
of an illustrious man.
<LEND>

<L>29893<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtfyajYika<k2>pEtfyajYika
{%Paitṛyajñika,%}¦ Ved. or {%paitṛyajñīya, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%pitṛ-yajña%}), belonging or relating to a
sacrifice to the Manes.
<LEND>

<L>29894<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtfzvaseya<k2>pEtfzvaseya
{%Paitṛṣvaseya%}¦ or {%paitṛṣvasrīya, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%pitṛ-ṣvasṛ%}), sprung from a father's sister
or paternal aunt; ({%as%}), m. a father's sister's son,
the son of a paternal aunt; ({%ī%}), f. a father's sister's
daughter, the daughter of a paternal aunt (see Manu
XI. 171).
<LEND>

<L>29895<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtra<k2>pEtra
{%Paitra, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pitṛ%}), belonging or re-
lating to a father or to ancestors generally, paternal,
ancestral; belonging or relating to the Manes, sacred
or consecrated to the Manes; ({%am%}), n. the part of
the hand between the thumb and fore-finger, (ac-
cording to others) the root of the fore-finger [cf.
{%pitṛ-tīrtha%}]; a year or month or day of the
Pitṛs. {%—Paitrāhorātra (˚ra-ah˚), as,%} m. a day and
night of the Pitṛs or progenitors (= one month).
<LEND>

<L>29896<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtrika<k2>pEtrika
{%Paitrika = paitṛka%}¦ (for which it is probably an
incorrect form).
<LEND>

<L>29897<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtrya<k2>pEtrya
{%Paitrya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pitṛ%}), belonging or re-
lating to the Manes.
<LEND>

<L>29898<pc>0598-a<k1>pEtta<k2>pEtta
{#pEtta#}¦ {%paitta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pitta%}), relating to
the bilious humor, proceeding from bile, bilious.
<LEND>

<L>29899<pc>0598-a<k1>pEttika<k2>pEttika
{%Paittika, as, ī, am,%}¦ bilious, of a bilious tem-
perament.
<LEND>

<L>29900<pc>0598-a<k1>pEttala<k2>pEttala
{#pEttala#}¦ {%paittala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pittala%}), made
of brass, brazen.
<LEND>
[Page0598-b+ 72]

<L>29901<pc>0598-b<k1>pEdva<k2>pEdva
{#pEdva#}¦ {%paidva, as,%} m., Ved. scil. {%aśva,%} the
horse of Pedu said to be a serpent-killer (Ṛg-
veda IX. 88, 4).
<LEND>

<L>29902<pc>0598-b<k1>pEnAka<k2>pEnAka
{#pEnAka#}¦ {%paināka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pinākin%}),
belonging to or coming from Rudra-Śiva; ({%as%}), m.
a patronymic from Pināka.
<LEND>

<L>29903<pc>0598-b<k1>pEppala<k2>pEppala
{#pEppala#}¦ {%paippala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pippala%}),
made of the wood of the holy fig-tree.
<LEND>

<L>29904<pc>0598-b<k1>pEppalAda<k2>pEppalAda
{%Paippalāda, as, ī, am,%}¦ derived from Pippalāda;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>29905<pc>0598-b<k1>pEppalAdaka<k2>pEppalAdaka
{%Paippalādaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ peculiar to or taught
by Pippalāda or Paippalāda; ({%am%}), n. the treatise or
text of Pippalāda.
<LEND>

<L>29906<pc>0598-b<k1>pEppalAdi<k2>pEppalAdi
{%Paippalādi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Pippa-
lāda; N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>29907<pc>0598-b<k1>pEyavana<k2>pEyavana
{#pEyavana#}¦ {%paiyavana,%} an incorrect form for
{%paijavana,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29908<pc>0598-b<k1>pEyUza<k2>pEyUza
{#pEyUza#}¦ {%paiyūṣa, am,%} n. {%= pīyūṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29909<pc>0598-b<k1>pEla<k2>pEla
{#pEla#}¦ {%paila, as,%} m. a metronymic from
Pīlā; N. of a teacher (a sage and promulgator of
the Ṛg-veda). {%—Paila-garga, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Paila-garbha, as,%} m. ‘offspring of Paila,’ N. of
a man.
<LEND>

<L>29910<pc>0598-b<k1>pEleya<k2>pEleya
{%Paileya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Pīlā.
<LEND>

<L>29911<pc>0598-b<k1>pElava<k2>pElava
{#pElava#}¦ {%pailava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pīlu%}), made of
the wood of the Pīlu tree (as the staff borne by a
Vaiśya, Manu II. 45).
<LEND>

<L>29912<pc>0598-b<k1>pESalya<k2>pESalya
{#pESalya#}¦ {%paiśalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%peśala%}), kind-
liness, graciousness, affability, mildness.
<LEND>

<L>29913<pc>0598-b<k1>pESAca<k2>pESAca
{#pESAca#}¦ {%paiśāca, as, ī, am,%} relating or be-
longing to a Piśāca or kind of demon, infernal,
demoniacal; {%paiśāco grahaḥ,%} demoniacal possession;
({%as%}), m. the eighth and lowest from of marriage, one
of the eight forms of marriage according to Manu
(described in Manu III. 34 as taking place when a
lover secretly embraces a damsel either sleeping or
intoxicated or disordered in her intellect); a Piśāca
or kind of demon; ({%ī%}), f. a present made at a
religious ceremony to secure friendly regard; a sort
of gibberish spoken by demons on the stage [cf. {%pi-%}
{%śāca-bhāṣā%}]; night; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>29914<pc>0598-b<k1>pESAcika<k2>pESAcika
{%Paiśācika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to a
Piśāca or kind of demon, infernal, demoniacal.
<LEND>

<L>29915<pc>0598-b<k1>pESuna<k2>pESuna
{#pESuna#}¦ {%paiśuna%} or {%paiśunya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pi-%}
{%śuna%}), the act of informing or giving information,
tale-bearing, backbiting, calumny, espionage, report-
ing evil of others, malignity, roguery, depravity,
wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>29916<pc>0598-b<k1>pEzwa<k2>pEzwa
{#pEzwa#}¦ {%paiṣṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%piṣṭa%}), made of
flour, ground or made up into a cake; ({%ī%}), f. spirituous
liquor distilled from meal or extracted from bruised
rice.
<LEND>

<L>29917<pc>0598-b<k1>pEzwika<k2>pEzwika
{%Paiṣṭika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%piṣṭa%}), made of meal
or flour; ({%am%}), n. a quantity of cakes; spirituous
liquor distilled from meal.
<LEND>

<L>29918<pc>0598-b<k1>pogaRqa<k2>pogaRqa
{#pogaRqa#}¦ {%pogaṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} not full-grown
or adult, young; deformed, deficient in a member;
having a redundant member; ({%as%}), m. a boy, one
from his fifth to his sixteenth year; [cf. {%a-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29919<pc>0598-b<k1>pOgaRqa<k2>pOgaRqa
{%Paugaṇḍa, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
boy, boyish; ({%am%}), n. boyhood (a period lasting
from the fifth to the tenth year).
<LEND>

<L>29920<pc>0598-b<k1>pOgaRqaka<k2>pOgaRqaka
{%Paugaṇḍaka, am,%}¦ n. boyhood.
<LEND>

<L>29921<pc>0598-b<k1>powa<k2>powa
{#powa#}¦ {%poṭa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%puṭ%}),
the foundation of a house [cf. {%pota%}]; putting to-
gether, uniting, mixing; ({%ā%}), f. a woman with a
beard; a hermaphrodite; a female servant or slave;
({%ī%}), f. the rectum; a large alligator. {%—Poṭa-gala,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of reed, Arundo Tibialis; a kind
of grass, Saccharum Spontaneum; a fish.
<LEND>

<L>29922<pc>0598-b<k1>powaka<k2>powaka
{%Poṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a servant.
<LEND>

<L>29923<pc>0598-b<k1>powAya<k2>powAya
{%Poṭāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%poṭāyate,%} &c., {%= poṭāṃ kṛ.%}
<LEND>
[Page0598-c+ 78]

<L>29924<pc>0598-c<k1>powalaka<k2>powalaka
{#powalaka#}¦ {%poṭalaka, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
or {%poṭalikā,%} f. a bundle or packet.
<LEND>

<L>29925<pc>0598-c<k1>powwalI<k2>powwalI
{%Poṭṭalī,%}¦ f. a bundle, parcel.
<LEND>

<L>29926<pc>0598-c<k1>powika<k2>powika
{#powika#}¦ {%poṭika, as,%} m. a boil.
<LEND>

<L>29927<pc>0598-c<k1>powwila<k2>powwila
{#powwila#}¦ {%poṭṭila, as,%} m. (with Jainas) N. of
the ninth Arhat of the future Ut-sarpiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>29928<pc>0598-c<k1>poqu<k2>poqu
{#poqu#}¦ {%poḍu, us,%} m. the parietal bone, the
bone forming the upper part of the skull.
<LEND>

<L>29929<pc>0598-c<k1>pota<k2>pota
{#pota#}¦ {%pota, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%pū,%}
but probably fr. a lost rt. {%pu,%} ‘to beget’), the young
of any animal [cf. {%mṛga-p˚%}]; a colt, foal; a young
elephant ten years old; a young plant or tree, the young
shoot of a plant; a fetus which has no enveloping mem-
brane; cloth, a garment; the foundation of a house [cf.
{%poṭa%}]; the site of a house or dwelling; ({%as, am%}), m.
n. a vessel, ship, boat; [cf. {%putra, 2. puṃs;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">πῶλο-ς</lang>
for <lang n="greek">ποϝ-λο-ς, πωλ-ίο-ν, πά-ϊ(δ)ς</lang> for <lang n="greek">παϝ-ι(δ)ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πο-ία, πό-α,</lang> perhaps <lang n="greek">ποιέ-ω</lang> fr. a form <lang n="greek">ποιο</lang> as in <lang n="greek">παιδο-</lang>
<lang n="greek">ποιό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pullu-s, Marci-por, pu-er</nsi> for <nsi>pov-er,</nsi>
<nsi>pu-era, pu-su-s, pusa, pū-pu-s, pū-pa, pūpilla,</nsi>
<nsi>pu-tu-s, pūbes, pum-ilu-s, pumil-io, prœ-pu-tiu-m,</nsi>
<nsi>pō-mu-m</nsi> for <nsi>pov-mu-m, pa-pav-er;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>fula (n),</nsi>
<nsi>fula</nsi> = Old Germ. <nsi>folo</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>foal;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pauta-s,</nsi>
‘an egg.’] {%—Pota-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced or de-
veloped from a fetus which has no enveloping mem-
brane (said of elephants and certain other quadrupeds,
as opposed to men, cattle, &c., which are called
{%jarāyu-ja%}). {%—Pota-dhārin, ī,%} m. a ship-owner,
master of a vessel. {%—Pota-plava, as,%} m., Ved.
‘floating in a ship,’ a seaman, mariner. {%—Pota-%}
{%baṇij, k,%} m. ‘ship-merchant,’ a voyaging merchant,
sea-faring trader. {%—Pota-bhaṅga, as,%} m. shipwreck.
{%—Pota-rakṣa, as,%} m. ‘ship-governing,’ a large
paddle used for a rudder, the rudder of a boat.
{%—Pota-vāha, as,%} m. ‘boat-conductor,’ a rower,
boatman, steersman, one of the crew who keeps
watch at the mast-head. {%—Potācchādana (˚ta-%}
{%āc˚), am,%} n. ‘cloth-covering,’ a tent. {%—Potā-%}
{%dhāna (˚ta-ādh˚), am,%} n. small fry, a shoal of
young fish.
<LEND>

<L>29930<pc>0598-c<k1>potaka<k2>potaka
{%Potaka, as,%}¦ m. the young of any animal; a young
plant or tree (e. g. {%cūta-potaka,%} a young mango-
tree); N. of a Nāga; the site or foundation of a
house [cf. {%gṛha-p˚%}]; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of vegetable,
Basella Lucida or Rubra; Anethum Sowa, {%= śata-%}
{%puṣpā; (akī),%} f. Basella Lucida or Rubra; a kind
of bird, Turdus Macrourus ({%= śyāmā%}).
<LEND>

<L>29931<pc>0598-c<k1>potala<k2>potala
{%Potala, as,%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a sea-
port on the Indus (the <lang n="greek">Παράλα</lang> of the ancients);
N. of the residence of the Dalai Lama in Lhassa
(also called {%potaraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>29932<pc>0598-c<k1>potalaka<k2>potalaka
{%Potalaka, as,%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a moun-
tain ({%= potala?%}). {%—Potalaka-priya, as,%} m. ‘fond
of the mountain Potalaka,’ N. of a Buddha; of a
Jina or deified teacher of the Jainas.
<LEND>

<L>29933<pc>0598-c<k1>potu<k2>potu
{%Potu, us,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. 1. {%pū%}), {%= mānabhāṇḍa-%}
{%śodhaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>29934<pc>0598-c<k1>potf<k2>potf
{%Potṛ, tā,%}¦ m. ‘the purifier,’ an epithet of one of
the sixteen officiating priests ({%ṛtv-ij%}) at a sacrifice,
the assistant of the Brahman, (Sāy. {%= potṛ-nāma-%}
{%kartvij%} or {%yajñasya śodhayitṛ%}); an epithet of
Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>29935<pc>0598-c<k1>potyA<k2>potyA
{%Potyā,%}¦ f. {%= potānāṃ samūhaḥ,%} see Gaṇa to Pāṇ.
IV. 2, 49.
<LEND>

<L>29936<pc>0598-c<k1>potra<k2>potra
{%Potra, am,%}¦ n. the Soma vessel of the Potṛ, the
office of the Potṛ, (Sāy. {%= potrā kṛtaṃ karma,%}
{%potur yajñaḥ%}); a ship, boat [cf. {%pota%}]; the
snout of a hog; a ploughshare; a dress, garment (?);
a thunderbolt (?). {%—Potra-maṇḍala, am,%} n. ‘snout-
orb,’ the round snout (of a hog &c.). {%—Potrā-%}
{%yudha (˚ra-āy˚), as,%} m. ‘armed with a snout,’ a
hog, boar.
<LEND>

<L>29937<pc>0598-c<k1>potrin<k2>potrin
{%Potrin, ī,%}¦ m. a hog, boar. {%—Potri-daṃṣṭrā-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘produced in the tusk of a boar,’ a kind of
gem supposed to be found in the tusk of a boar.
{%—Potri-rathā,%} f. ‘hog-vehicled,’ (with Buddhists)
an epithet of Māyā; (with Jainas) N. of a Śakti or
female divinity.
<LEND>
[Page0599-a+ 73]

<L>29938<pc>0599-a<k1>potrIya<k2>potrIya
{%Potrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. relating or belonging to
the Potṛ.
<LEND>

<L>29939<pc>0599-a<k1>popuva<k2>popuva
{%Popuva, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. Intens. of rt. 1. {%pū%}),
purifying or cleansing much or repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>29940<pc>0599-a<k1>pOtika<k2>pOtika
{%Pautika, as, ī, am,%}¦ connected with a boat (as
a cargo &c.).
<LEND>

<L>29941<pc>0599-a<k1>potAla<k2>potAla
{#potAla#}¦ {%potāla, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman;
a wrong reading for {%potala,%} p. 598, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>29942<pc>0599-a<k1>potAsa<k2>potAsa
{#potAsa#}¦ {%potāsa, as,%} m. a species of camphor;
[cf. Eng. <nsi>potash.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>29943<pc>0599-a<k1>potimatsaka<k2>potimatsaka
{#potimatsaka#}¦ {%potimatsaka, as,%} m., N. of a
prince.
<LEND>

<L>29944<pc>0599-a<k1>poTakI<k2>poTakI
{#poTakI#}¦ {%pothakī,%} f. a kind of ulcer on the
eyelids, red pimples on the eyelids.
<LEND>

<L>29945<pc>0599-a<k1>poTika<k2>poTika
{#poTika#}¦ {%pothika, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
in {%ava-p˚,%} a machine for hurling down stones, fire-
brands, and fiery darts upon the enemy, a kind of
ballista (?); [cf. {%solkālātāvapothika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29946<pc>0599-a<k1>poyAladaha<k2>poyAladaha
{#poyAladaha#}¦ {%poyāladaha, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), N. of a tank or pool.
<LEND>

<L>29947<pc>0599-a<k1>pora<k2>pora
{#pora#}¦ {%pora, as,%} m. in {%nīla-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>29948<pc>0599-a<k1>pola<k2>pola
{#pola#}¦ {%pola, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%pul%}), magnitude,
bulk; a heap, quantity.
<LEND>

<L>29949<pc>0599-a<k1>polikA<k2>polikA
{#polikA#}¦ {%polikā,%} f. flat cakes made of barley
or wheat, &c.; [cf. {%pūlikā, paulī, pūpālī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29950<pc>0599-a<k1>polI<k2>polI
{%Polī,%}¦ f. a kind of cake.
<LEND>

<L>29951<pc>0599-a<k1>polinda<k2>polinda
{#polinda#}¦ {%polinda, as,%} m. the mast or the
ribs of a ship or boat; [cf. {%padāra, pādāraka,%}
{%pādālinda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>29952<pc>0599-a<k1>poviya<k2>poviya
{#poviya#}¦ {%poviya, as,%} m., N. of the father of
the commentator Gaṅga-dāsa.
<LEND>

<L>29953<pc>0599-a<k1>poza<k2>poza
{#poza#}¦ {%poṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%puṣ%}), thriving,
growth, increase; welfare, prosperity, plenty, abun-
dance; nourishing, cherishing; maintaining, sup-
porting.
<LEND>

<L>29954<pc>0599-a<k1>pozaka<k2>pozaka
{%Poṣaka, as,%}¦ m. one who feeds or nourishes; a
nourisher, supporter, breeder, keeper.
<LEND>

<L>29955<pc>0599-a<k1>pozaRa<k2>pozaRa
{%Poṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ nourishing, cherishing [cf.
{%pakṣa-p˚%}]; bringing up, breeding; ({%am%}), n. the
act of nourishing, cherishing, fostering, supporting.
<LEND>

<L>29956<pc>0599-a<k1>pozaRIya<k2>pozaRIya
{%Poṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cherished or pro-
tected, to be nourished.
<LEND>

<L>29957<pc>0599-a<k1>pozayitf<k2>pozayitf
{%Poṣayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ nourishing, cherishing,
one who breeds or rears.
<LEND>

<L>29958<pc>0599-a<k1>pozayitnu<k2>pozayitnu
{%Poṣayitnu, us, us, u,%}¦ causing to grow, nourish-
ing, cherishing (Ved.); ({%us%}), m. (according to a
Scholiast) the Koïl or Kokila or Indian cuckoo;
(probably) a crow.
<LEND>

<L>29959<pc>0599-a<k1>pozayizRu<k2>pozayizRu
{%Poṣayiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. causing to thrive,
nourishing, causing prosperity or welfare, advan-
tageous.
<LEND>

<L>29960<pc>0599-a<k1>pozita<k2>pozita
{%Poṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ nourished, cherished, fostered,
supported.
<LEND>

<L>29961<pc>0599-a<k1>pozitavya<k2>pozitavya
{%Poṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cherished or pro-
tected.
<LEND>

<L>29962<pc>0599-a<k1>pozitf<k2>pozitf
{%Poṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ nourishing, feeding; one
who breeds or rears.
<LEND>

<L>29963<pc>0599-a<k1>pozin<k2>pozin
{%Poṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦  nourishing, bringing up, rearing.
<LEND>

<L>29964<pc>0599-a<k1>pozuka<k2>pozuka
{%Poṣuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. prospering, growing.
<LEND>

<L>29965<pc>0599-a<k1>pozwf<k2>pozwf
{%Poṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ a nourisher, cherisher, one
who brings up; ({%ṭā%}), m. a protector, nourisher,
cherisher; grey bonduc. {%—Poṣṭṛ-vara, as, ā, am,%}
the best of nourishers, nourishing best.
<LEND>

<L>29966<pc>0599-a<k1>pozya<k2>pozya
{%Poṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ well-fed, thriving; causing
welfare or prosperity, prosperous; to be nourished
or cherished, to be taken care of, to be fed, to be
brought up; copious. {%—Poṣya-tva, am,%} n. the being
one who is to be cherished; being taken care of.
{%—Poṣya-putra%} or {%poṣya-putraka, as,%} m. ‘a son
to be brought up,’ an adopted son. {%—Poṣyaputra-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. adoption. {%—Poṣya-varga, as,%} m. a
class of persons or objects to be cherished, as parents,
children, guests, and the sacred fire; a family, house-
[Page0599-b+ 72]
hold. {%—Poṣyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. causing pros-
perity; (Sāy. {%= bahu-poṣya-jana-yukta.%})
<LEND>

<L>29967<pc>0599-b<k1>pozaDa<k2>pozaDa
{#pozaDa#}¦ {%poṣadha, as,%} m. (with Buddhists)
renewal of religious vows.
<LEND>

<L>29968<pc>0599-b<k1>pozaDika<k2>pozaDika
{%Poṣadhika, as, ā, am,%}¦ (perhaps) one who renews
religious vows.
<LEND>

<L>29969<pc>0599-b<k1>pOMScalIya<k2>pOMScalIya
{#pOMScalIya#}¦ {%pauṃścalīya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%puṃś-%}
{%calī%}), belonging or relating to harlots, meretricious.
<LEND>

<L>29970<pc>0599-b<k1>pOMScaleya<k2>pOMScaleya
{%Pauṃścaleya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the son of a harlot.
<LEND>

<L>29971<pc>0599-b<k1>pOMScalya<k2>pOMScalya
{%Pauṃścalya, am,%}¦ n. female incontinency, harlotry.
<LEND>

<L>29972<pc>0599-b<k1>pOMsavana<k2>pOMsavana
{#pOMsavana#}¦ {%pauṃsavana, am,%} n. (fr. {%puṃ-sa-%}
{%vana%}), one of the Saṃskāras or essential ceremonies
of the Hindū religion; a religious observance held
when signs of a living conception take place (in
order to obtain male offspring).
<LEND>

<L>29973<pc>0599-b<k1>pOMsna<k2>pOMsna
{#pOMsna#}¦ {%pauṃsna, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%puṃs%}), worthy
of or fit for a man; relating to or good for man;
manly, virile; human; ({%am%}), n. manhood, manly
strength.
<LEND>

<L>29974<pc>0599-b<k1>pOMsya<k2>pOMsya
{%Pauṃsya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. manhood, virility, manly
power; the courage or virtue of a man, a manly
deed (Sāy. {%= bala%}); ({%as,%} &c.), masculine.
<LEND>

<L>29975<pc>0599-b<k1>pOgaRqa<k2>pOgaRqa
{#pOgaRqa#}¦ {%paugaṇḍa.%} See {%pogaṇḍa,%} p. 598.
<LEND>

<L>29976<pc>0599-b<k1>pOYjizWa<k2>pOYjizWa
{#pOYjizWa#}¦ {%pauñjiṣṭha%} or {%pauñjiṣṭa%} (?), {%as,%}
m., Ved. ({%= puñjiṣṭha%}), a fisherman; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>29977<pc>0599-b<k1>pORqarIka<k2>pORqarIka
{#pORqarIka#}¦ {%pauṇḍarīka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%puṇḍa-%}
{%rīka%}), consisting of lotus-flowers; ({%as%}), m. a kind
of Soma sacrifice lasting twelve days (Ved.); a pa-
tronymic of Kṣema-dhṛtvan; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%kuṣ-%}
{%ṭha,%} a kind of leprosy; a species of plant {%(= pra-%}
{%pauṇḍarīka)%}. {%—Pauṇḍarīka-paddhati, is,%} f., N.
of a ritual work containing the prayers used at the
Pauṇḍarīka sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>29978<pc>0599-b<k1>pORqarya<k2>pORqarya
{#pORqarya#}¦ {%pauṇḍarya, am,%} n. a kind of drug
used as a remedy for diseased eyes ({%= puṇḍarya,%}
q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>29979<pc>0599-b<k1>pORqra<k2>pORqra
{#pORqra#}¦ {%pauṇḍra, as,%} m. (fr. {%puṇḍra%}), a species
of sugar-cane of a pale straw colour; N. of a country
(said to include part of South Behar and Bengal);
N. of a king of this country (regarded as a son of
Vasu-deva); N. of the conch-shell of Bhīṣma; a
mark, sectarial mark; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people,
the inhabitants of the Pauṇḍra country.
<LEND>

<L>29980<pc>0599-b<k1>pORqraka<k2>pORqraka
{%Pauṇḍraka, as, ī, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
{%= pauṇḍra; (as),%} m. the pale straw-coloured
species of sugar-cane; epithet of a particular mixed
caste of hereditary sugar-boilers, (the son of a Vaiśya
by a woman of the distiller class; regarded as one of
the degraded races of Kṣatriyas, Manu X. 44);
a king of the Pauṇḍras; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people, the Pauṇḍras.
<LEND>

<L>29981<pc>0599-b<k1>pORqranAgara<k2>pORqranAgara
{%Pauṇḍranāgara,%}¦ see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VII.
3, 24.
<LEND>

<L>29982<pc>0599-b<k1>pORqramAtsyaka<k2>pORqramAtsyaka
{%Pauṇḍramātsyaka, as,%}¦ m. (probably) a king of
the Puṇḍras and Matsyas.
<LEND>

<L>29983<pc>0599-b<k1>pORqravatsa<k2>pORqravatsa
{%Pauṇḍravatsa, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%puṇḍra + vatsa%}),
N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>29984<pc>0599-b<k1>pORqravarDana<k2>pORqravarDana
{%Pauṇḍravardhana, am,%}¦ n., N. of a city, =
{%puṇḍra-vardhana; (as),%} m., N. of a country, one
of the divisions of central India, Behar.
<LEND>

<L>29985<pc>0599-b<k1>pORqrika<k2>pORqrika
{%Pauṇḍrika, as,%}¦ m. a pale straw-coloured variety
of the sugar-cane; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>29986<pc>0599-b<k1>pORya<k2>pORya
{#pORya#}¦ {%pauṇya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%puṇya%}), up-
right, righteous, virtuous, deserving good treatment.
<LEND>

<L>29987<pc>0599-b<k1>pOtana<k2>pOtana
{#pOtana#}¦ {%pautana%} (perhaps fr. {%pūtanā%}), N. of
a country or people.
<LEND>

<L>29988<pc>0599-b<k1>pOtava<k2>pOtava
{#pOtava#}¦ {%pautava, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%pū%}), a measure; (also spelt {%yautava.%})
<LEND>

<L>29989<pc>0599-b<k1>pOtika<k2>pOtika
{#pOtika#}¦ {%pautika.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>29990<pc>0599-b<k1>pOtikI<k2>pOtikI
{#pOtikI#}¦ {%pautikī,%} f. {%= pūtikā,%} a kind of
vegetable.
<LEND>
[Page0599-c+ 75]

<L>29991<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtinAsikya<k2>pOtinAsikya
{#pOtinAsikya#}¦ {%pautināsikya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pūti-%}
{%nāsikā%}), fetor of the nostrils.
<LEND>

<L>29992<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtimAzIputra<k2>pOtimAzIputra
{#pOtimAzIputra#}¦ {%pautimāṣī-putra, as,%} m.,
Ved., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>29993<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtimAzya<k2>pOtimAzya
{%Pautimāṣya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (a patronymic fr.
{%pūti-māṣa%}), N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>29994<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtimAzyAyaRa<k2>pOtimAzyAyaRa
{%Pautimāṣyāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic
from Pautimāṣya.
<LEND>

<L>29995<pc>0599-c<k1>pOttika<k2>pOttika
{#pOttika#}¦ {%pauttika, am,%} n. (fr. {%puttikā%}), scil.
{%madhu,%} the honey of the small bee called {%puttikā;%}
pale-coloured honey.
<LEND>

<L>29996<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtra<k2>pOtra<h>1
{#pOtra#} 1¦. {%pautra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%putra%}), de-
rived from a son or from children, belonging or
relating to a son or to children; ({%as%}), m. a son's
son, grandson; ({%ī%}), f. a granddaughter (either in the
male or female line, though more usually implying
a son's daughter); an epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>29997<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtrajIvika<k2>pOtrajIvika
{%Pautrajīvika, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%putra-jīva%}), an amulet
made of the nuts of the tree Putranjiva Roxburghii.
<LEND>

<L>29998<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtrAGa<k2>pOtrAGa
{%Pautrāgha (˚ra-agha˚), am,%}¦ n., Ved. any injury
or evil happening to children.
<LEND>

<L>29999<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtrAdya<k2>pOtrAdya
{%Pautrādya,%}¦ perhaps a wrong reading for the pre-
ceding.
<LEND>

<L>30000<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtrAyaRa<k2>pOtrAyaRa
{%Pautrāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Pautra.
<LEND>

<L>30001<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtrika<k2>pOtrika
{%Pautrika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%putra%} or 1. {%pautra%}),
belonging to a son or grandson; ({%as%}), m. the son
of a Putrikā (?); a patronymic from Putrika (?).
<LEND>

<L>30002<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtrikeya<k2>pOtrikeya
{%Pautrikeya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%putrikā%}), the son of a
daughter appointed to raise issue for her father.
{%—Pautrikeya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having for a grand-
son the son of a daughter appointed to raise issue.
<LEND>

<L>30003<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtrin<k2>pOtrin
{%Pautrin, ī, iṇī, i%}¦ (fr. 1. {%pautra%}), having a grandson.
<LEND>

<L>30004<pc>0599-c<k1>pOtra<k2>pOtra<h>2
{#pOtra#} 2¦. {%pautra, am,%} n. (fr. {%potṛ,%} q. v.),
Ved. the office of the Potṛ.
<LEND>

<L>30005<pc>0599-c<k1>pOdanya<k2>pOdanya
{#pOdanya#}¦ {%paudanya, am,%} n., N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>30006<pc>0599-c<k1>pOnaHpunika<k2>pOnaHpunika
{#pOnaHpunika#}¦ {%paunaḥpunika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%punaḥ-punaḥ%}), frequently reiterated, repeated again
and again.
<LEND>

<L>30007<pc>0599-c<k1>pOnaHpunya<k2>pOnaHpunya
{%Paunaḥpunya, am,%}¦ n. frequent reiteration, con-
stant repetition; ({%ena%}), ind. again and again, re-
peatedly.
<LEND>

<L>30008<pc>0599-c<k1>pOnarADeyika<k2>pOnarADeyika
{%Paunarādheyika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%punar-ādheya%}),
Ved. relating to the rite of replacing or renewing the
sacrificial fire; [cf. {%punar-ādheyika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30009<pc>0599-c<k1>pOnarukta<k2>pOnarukta
{%Paunarukta, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%punar-ukta%}), repe-
tition, tautology.
<LEND>

<L>30010<pc>0599-c<k1>pOnaruktika<k2>pOnaruktika
{%Paunaruktika, as, ī, am,%}¦ see Gaṇa Ukthādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 60.
<LEND>

<L>30011<pc>0599-c<k1>pOnaruktya<k2>pOnaruktya
{%Paunaruktya, am,%}¦ n. repetition, tautology.
<LEND>

<L>30012<pc>0599-c<k1>pOnarnava<k2>pOnarnava
{%Paunarnava, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%punar-navā%}), relat-
ing or belonging to the plant Boerhavia Procumbens.
<LEND>

<L>30013<pc>0599-c<k1>pOnarBava<k2>pOnarBava
{%Paunarbhava, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%punar-bhū%}), re-
peated, additional; relating or belonging to a widow
who has married a second husband; ({%as%}), m. the
son of a widow remarried, the offspring of a twice-
married woman by her second husband, one of the
sons or heirs admitted by the old Hindū law; {%pau-%}
{%narbhavo bhartā,%} a woman's second husband.
<LEND>

<L>30014<pc>0599-c<k1>pOnarBavika<k2>pOnarBavika
{%Paunarbhavika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%punar-bhava%}),
relating to regeneration.
<LEND>

<L>30015<pc>0599-c<k1>pOmpA<k2>pOmpA
{#pOmpA#}¦ {%paumpā,%} f., N. of a sacred lake.
<LEND>

<L>30016<pc>0599-c<k1>pOra<k2>pOra<h>1
{#pOra#} 1¦. {%paura, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%pur%} or fr. rt.
{%pṝ?%}), Ved. ‘filling, sating,’ an epithet of Soma (Sāy.
{%= udara-pūraka%}); ‘filler, increaser,’ an epithet of
the Aśvins; an epithet of Indra (Sāy. {%= pūrayitṛ%});
N. of a Ṛṣi the author of the hymns Ṛg-veda V.
73, 74; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a dynasty.
<LEND>

<L>30017<pc>0599-c<k1>pOra<k2>pOra<h>2
{#pOra#} 2¦. {%paura, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pura,%} see 3. {%pur%}),
belonging to a town or city, produced in a town
or city; ({%as%}), m. a townsman, burgher, citizen (op-
posed to {%jānapada%}); {%= nāgara,%} a term for a prince
engaged in war under certain circumstances and (in
astrology) applied to a planet in a state of opposition
to other planets; ({%ī%}), f. the language or conversation
of the servants in a palace; ({%am%}), n. a species of
[Page0600-a+ 75]
fragrant grass ({%= rauhiṣa%}). {%—Paura-jana, as,%} m.
a person belonging to the town, townsman, citizen.
{%—Paura-jānapada, as, ī, am,%} belonging to town
and country; ({%ās%}), m. pl. citizens and rustics, towns-
men and country people. {%—Paura-yoṣit, t,%} or
{%paura-strī%} or {%paurāṅganā (˚ra-aṅ˚),%} f. a woman
living in a town or city. {%—Paura-loka, ās,%} m. pl.
city people, citizens. {%—Paura-vṛddha, as,%} m. a
distinguished or eminent citizen, alderman. {%—Paura-%}
{%sakhya, am,%} n. fellow-citizenship, connection or
equality with others formed by inhabiting the same
city for ten years.
<LEND>

<L>30018<pc>0600-a<k1>pOraka<k2>pOraka
{%Pauraka, as,%}¦ m. a garden in the neighbourhood
of a city; a garden round a house.
<LEND>

<L>30019<pc>0600-a<k1>pOraYjana<k2>pOraYjana
{%Paurañjana, as, ī, am,%}¦ sprung or descended
from Purañ-jana and Purañ-janī.
<LEND>

<L>30020<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrandara<k2>pOrandara
{%Paurandara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%puran-dara%}), be-
longing or relating to Indra, derived or coming from
Indra, sacred to Indra; ({%am%}), n. the Nakṣatra
Jyeṣṭhā.
<LEND>

<L>30021<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrika<k2>pOrika
{%Paurika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%pura%}), a townsman, citizen;
a governor of a city; N. of a prince of the city of
Purikā; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>30022<pc>0600-a<k1>pOreya<k2>pOreya
{%Paureya, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
town or city, civic.
<LEND>

<L>30023<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrava<k2>pOrava
{#pOrava#}¦ {%paurava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pūru%}), be-
longing to or descended from Pūru, of the race of
Pūru; ({%as%}), m. a descendant of Pūru; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the descendants or the race of Pūru; N. of a people
in the north or north-east of India; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the
wife of Vasu-deva; of the wife of Yudhi-ṣṭhira.
<LEND>

<L>30024<pc>0600-a<k1>pOravaka<k2>pOravaka
{%Pauravaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>30025<pc>0600-a<k1>pOravatantava<k2>pOravatantava
{%Pauravatantava, as,%}¦ m. (probably fr. {%pūru +%}
{%tantu%}), in {%para-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30026<pc>0600-a<k1>pOravIya<k2>pOravIya
{%Pauravīya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pūru%}), devoted to
Paurava.
<LEND>

<L>30027<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrastya<k2>pOrastya
{#pOrastya#}¦ {%paurastya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%puras%}),
situated in front, foremost; eastern; previous, pre-
ceding, former, prior, first, initial.
<LEND>

<L>30028<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrARa<k2>pOrARa
{#pOrARa#}¦ {%paurāṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%purāṇa%}),
belonging or relating to the past, of the past, of
ancient occurrence, derived from or belonging to
past ages, primeval, ancient; belonging to former
times, former, previous; relating to the Purāṇas.
<LEND>

<L>30029<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrARika<k2>pOrARika
{%Paurāṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
the past or to past ages; familiar with the events
and legends of the past; relating or belonging to
the Purāṇas, Paurānic; worth a Purāṇa, of the
value of one Purāṇa; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman well-
read in the Purāṇas or a public expounder of them;
a mythologist.
<LEND>

<L>30030<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrika<k2>pOrika
{#pOrika#}¦ {%paurika.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>30031<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrukutsa<k2>pOrukutsa
{#pOrukutsa#}¦ {%paurukutsa, as,%} or {%paurukutsi,%}
{%is,%} or {%paurukutsya, as,%} m. (fr. {%puru-kutsa%}), a
patronymic of Trasa-dasyu.
<LEND>

<L>30032<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrumadga<k2>pOrumadga
{#pOrumadga#}¦ {%paurumadga, am,%} n., N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>30033<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrumahna<k2>pOrumahna
{#pOrumahna#}¦ {%paurumahna, am,%} n. (fr. {%puru-%}
{%mahna%}), N. of various Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>30034<pc>0600-a<k1>pOrumIQa<k2>pOrumIQa
{#pOrumIQa#}¦ {%paurumīḍha%} or {%paurumīḷha, am,%}
n. (fr. {%puru-mīḍha%}), N. of various Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>30035<pc>0600-a<k1>pOruSizwi<k2>pOruSizwi
{#pOruSizwi#}¦ {%pauruśiṣṭi, is,%} m. (fr. {%puru +%}
{%śiṣṭa%}), Ved., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>30036<pc>0600-a<k1>pOruza<k2>pOruza
{#pOruza#}¦ {%pauruṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%puruṣa%}),
belonging or relating to a man or to man in general,
manly, virile, human; relating or belonging to Pu-
rusha, sacred to Puruṣa; being of the length of a
man with both arms elevated and the fingers ex-
tended; ({%as%}), m. (according to Kullūka) {%= puruṣa-%}
{%vāhya-bhāra,%} a weight or load which can be carried
by one man; ({%ī%}), f. a woman; ({%am%}), n. manhood,
manliness, manly strength or courage, heroism,
strength, power, vigour; human action, action of
men, man's work, action; effort, exertion; the
measure of a man, the height to which he reaches
[Page0600-b+ 75]
with both arms elevated and the fingers extended;
generation; semen virile; the penis; a sun-dial.
{%—Pauruṣa-tā,%} f. or {%pauruṣa-tva, am,%} n. man-
hood, manly strength or spirit.
<LEND>

<L>30037<pc>0600-b<k1>pOruzameDika<k2>pOruzameDika
{%Pauruṣamedhika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%puruṣa-%}
{%medha%}), Ved. relating or belonging to a human
sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>30038<pc>0600-b<k1>pOruzaviDika<k2>pOruzaviDika
{%Pauruṣavidhika, as, ī, am, = puruṣa-vidha,%}¦
man-like, resembling man, human.
<LEND>

<L>30039<pc>0600-b<k1>pOruzAMsakin<k2>pOruzAMsakin
{%Pauruṣāṃsakin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the school of Pu-
ruṣāṃsaka.
<LEND>

<L>30040<pc>0600-b<k1>pOruzAda<k2>pOruzAda
{%Pauruṣāda, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%puruṣāda%}), relating
or belonging to man-eaters or cannibals.
<LEND>

<L>30041<pc>0600-b<k1>pOruzika<k2>pOruzika
{%Pauruṣika, as,%}¦ m. a worshipper of Puruṣa.
<LEND>

<L>30042<pc>0600-b<k1>pOruzeya<k2>pOruzeya
{%Pauruṣeya, as, ī, am,%}¦ derived from or relating
to man, incidental to man, made by man, human,
manly, male, virile; coming from the soul, spiritual;
({%as%}), m. a hireling, day-labourer; a crowd or num-
ber of men (?); manslaughter, murder; law as
affecting persons; ({%am%}), n. human action, the work
of man. {%—Pauruṣeya-tva, am,%} n. humanity, human
origin, the human element (in sacred writings).
<LEND>

<L>30043<pc>0600-b<k1>pOruzya<k2>pOruzya
{%Pauruṣya, as, -ṣī, am,%}¦ relating to Puruṣa;
({%am%}), n. manliness, manly strength or courage.
<LEND>

<L>30044<pc>0600-b<k1>pOruhanmana<k2>pOruhanmana
{#pOruhanmana#}¦ {%pauruhanmana, am,%} n. (fr. {%puru-%}
{%hanman%}), N. of various Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>30045<pc>0600-b<k1>pOruhUta<k2>pOruhUta
{#pOruhUta#}¦ {%pauruhūta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%puru-%}
{%hūta%}), belonging to Indra.
<LEND>

<L>30046<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrUravasa<k2>pOrUravasa
{#pOrUravasa#}¦ {%paurūravasa, as, ī, am,%} belonging
or relating to Purū-ravas; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>30047<pc>0600-b<k1>pOreya<k2>pOreya
{#pOreya#}¦ {%paureya.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>30048<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrogava<k2>pOrogava
{#pOrogava#}¦ {%paurogava, as,%} m. (fr. {%puro-gava%}),
an overseer or superintendent of a royal household,
especially the inspector of the royal kitchen.
<LEND>

<L>30049<pc>0600-b<k1>pOroqASa<k2>pOroqASa
{%Pauroḍāśa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%puro-ḍāśa%}), see Gaṇa
to Pāṇ. IV. 4, 62; ({%as%}), m. a Mantra recited upon
making an oblation of clarified butter.
<LEND>

<L>30050<pc>0600-b<k1>pOroqASika<k2>pOroqASika
{%Pauroḍāśika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%puro-ḍāśa%}), a priest
who recites the Mantra used in offering an oblation
of clarified butter.
<LEND>

<L>30051<pc>0600-b<k1>pOroDasa<k2>pOroDasa
{%Paurodhasa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Puro-dhas;
({%am%}), n. the office or function of a family priest.
<LEND>

<L>30052<pc>0600-b<k1>pOroBAgya<k2>pOroBAgya
{%Paurobhāgya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%puro-bhāgin%}), envy,
jealousy, malevolence, ill-will, censoriousness; ob-
trusiveness.
<LEND>

<L>30053<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrohita<k2>pOrohita
{%Paurohita, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%puro-hita%}), belonging
to a Puro-hita, coming or proceeding from a family
priest.
<LEND>

<L>30054<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrohitya<k2>pOrohitya
{%Paurohitya, as, -tī, am,%}¦ belonging to the family
of a Puro-hita; ({%am%}), n. the character or office of a
family priest.
<LEND>

<L>30055<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrRadarva<k2>pOrRadarva
{#pOrRadarva#}¦ {%paurṇadarva, am,%} n. {%= pūrṇa-%}
{%darva,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30056<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrRamAsa<k2>pOrRamAsa
{%Paurṇamāsa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pūrṇa-māsa%}), re-
lating or belonging to the full moon, usual or cus-
tomary at full moon, having the full moon; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. a ceremony performed at the full moon
by persons maintaining a perpetual fire; a patro-
nymic; N. of a son of Marīci and Sambhūti; of a
prince of the Āndhra dynasty; ({%am%}), n. a day of
full moon; ({%ī%}), f. a day or night of full moon.
<LEND>

<L>30057<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrRamAsAyana<k2>pOrRamAsAyana
{%Paurṇamāsāyana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the preceding),
Ved. a kind of sacrifice offered at the full moon.
<LEND>

<L>30058<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrRamAsika<k2>pOrRamAsika
{%Paurṇamāsika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%paurṇamāsa%}),
used for the sacrifice offered at the full moon.
<LEND>

<L>30059<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrRamAsya<k2>pOrRamAsya
{%Paurṇamāsya, am,%}¦ n., scil. {%karman,%} a sacrifice
offered at the full moon.
<LEND>

<L>30060<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrRamI<k2>pOrRamI
{%Paurṇamī,%}¦ f. a day of full moon ({%= pūrṇimā%}).
<LEND>

<L>30061<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrRima<k2>pOrRima
{%Paurṇima, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%pūrṇimā%}), an ascetic;
({%ā%}), f. a day of full moon.
<LEND>

<L>30062<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrta<k2>pOrta
{#pOrta#}¦ {%paurta, am,%} n. (fr. {%pūrta%}), scil. {%kar-%}
{%man,%} a meritorious work ({%= pūrta%}).
<LEND>

<L>30063<pc>0600-b<k1>pOrtika<k2>pOrtika
{%Paurtika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to a
meritorious work (as the feeding of a Brāhman
&c.).
<LEND>
[Page0600-c+ 75]

<L>30064<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrva<k2>pOrva
{#pOrva#}¦ {%paurva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pūrva%}), relating
or belonging to the past; relating to the east,
eastern.
<LEND>

<L>30065<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrvadehika<k2>pOrvadehika
{%Paurvadehika%}¦ or {%paurvadaihika, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%pūrva-deha%}), belonging or relating to a former
body, belonging or relating to a former life or
existence; derived from a former existence, done in
a former life.
<LEND>

<L>30066<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrvapaYcAlaka<k2>pOrvapaYcAlaka
{%Paurvapañcālaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pūrva-pañ-%}
{%cāla%}), {%= pūrvaḥ pañcālānām.%}
<LEND>

<L>30067<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrvapadika<k2>pOrvapadika
{%Paurvapadika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pūrva-pada%}),
relating to the first member of a compound; (pro-
bably) pronouncing the first member of a compound
(in teaching).
<LEND>

<L>30068<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrvavarzika<k2>pOrvavarzika
{%Paurvavarṣika, as, ī, am, = pūrvāsu var-%}¦
{%ṣāsu bhavaḥ,%} Scholiast on Pāṇ. VII. 3, 11.
<LEND>

<L>30069<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrvaSAla<k2>pOrvaSAla
{%Paurvaśāla, as, ī, am, = pūrvasyāṃ śālāyām%}¦
{%bhavaḥ,%} Scholiast on Pāṇ. IV. 2, 107.
<LEND>

<L>30070<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrvAtiTa<k2>pOrvAtiTa
{%Paurvātitha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic from
Pūrvātithi; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>30071<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrvAparya<k2>pOrvAparya
{%Paurvāparya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pūrvāpara%}), priority
and posteriority, the relation of prior and posterior,
succession, continuity.
<LEND>

<L>30072<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrvArDa<k2>pOrvArDa
{%Paurvārdha%}¦ or {%paurvārdhika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%pūrvārdha%}), living or situated on the eastern side
of (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>30073<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrvAhRika<k2>pOrvAhRika
{%Paurvāhṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pūrvāhṇa%}), be-
longing or relating to the morning, produced in the
forenoon, matutinal; (often wrongly spelt {%paurvāh-%}
{%nika.%})
<LEND>

<L>30074<pc>0600-c<k1>pOrvika<k2>pOrvika
{%Paurvika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pūrva%}), former, pre-
vious, prior, primary; ancient, old; ancestral; ({%ī%}),
f. an ancestress.
<LEND>

<L>30075<pc>0600-c<k1>pOlastya<k2>pOlastya
{#pOlastya#}¦ {%paulastya, as, -stī, am,%} relating to
or descended from Pulasti or Pulastya; ({%as%}), m. a
patronymic from Pulasti or Pulastya; an epithet of
Kuvera; of Rāvaṇa; of Vibhīṣaṇa; of the moon;
N. of an astronomer; ({%ās%}), m. pl. an epithet of the
brothers of Dur-yodhana; ({%paulastī%}), f. a patro-
nymic of Śūrpa-ṇakhā the sister of Rāvaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>30076<pc>0600-c<k1>pOli<k2>pOli
{#pOli#}¦ {%pauli, is, ī,%} m. f. grain half dressed
or scorched or fried with ghee and made into a
sort of cake.
<LEND>

<L>30077<pc>0600-c<k1>pOlikA<k2>pOlikA
{%Paulikā,%}¦ f. a kind of cake ({%= pauli;%} perhaps
an error for {%polikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>30078<pc>0600-c<k1>pOliSa<k2>pOliSa
{#pOliSa#}¦ {%pauliśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%puliśa%}), de-
rived from or composed by Puliśa. {%—Pauliśa-sid-%}
{%dhānta, as,%} m., N. of an astronomical work.
<LEND>

<L>30079<pc>0600-c<k1>pOluzi<k2>pOluzi
{#pOluzi#}¦ {%pauluṣi, is,%} m. (fr. {%puluṣa%}), Ved.
a patronymic of Satya-yajña.
<LEND>

<L>30080<pc>0600-c<k1>pOloma<k2>pOloma
{#pOloma#}¦ {%pauloma, as, ī, am,%} relating to or
treating of Pulomā, an epithet of Adhyāyas 4-12 of
the Ādi-parva of the Mahā-bhārata; relating to
Puloman or Pulomā or Paulomī; descended from
Puloman or Pulomā; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of
demons; ({%ī%}), f. the daughter of Puloman, an epithet
of the wife of Indra; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Indra;
a Muni. {%—Paulomī-maṅgala, as, ā, am,%} as for-
tunate or happy as Paulomī. {%—Paulomī-sambhava,%}
{%as,%} m. born from Paulomī, son of Paulomī (an
epithet of Jayanta, q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>30081<pc>0600-c<k1>pOlkasa<k2>pOlkasa
{#pOlkasa#}¦ {%paulkasa, as,%} m., Ved. ({%= pulkasa,%}
said to be) the son of a Niṣāda or of a Śūdra
father and of a Kṣatriyā mother.
<LEND>

<L>30082<pc>0600-c<k1>pOza<k2>pOza
{#pOza#}¦ {%pauṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%puṣya%}), relating
to or occurring at the time when the moon is in the
asterism Puṣya; ({%as%}), m., N. of a month, the
month Pauṣa (December-January, when the full
moon is in the asterism Puṣya); N. of the third
year in the twelve years' cycle of Jupiter; ({%ī%}), f. the
night or day of full moon in the month Pauṣa;
({%am%}), n. a festival or a particular festival; a fight,
combat; N. of various Sāmans; [cf. {%pauṣya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30083<pc>0600-c<k1>pOzkara<k2>pOzkara
{#pOzkara#}¦ {%pauṣkara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%puṣkara%}),
relating to the blue lotus-flower, made or consisting
[Page0601-a+ 71]
of blue lotuses, treating of the blue lotus; (with
{%prādur-bhāva%}) the appearance of Viṣṇu in the
form of a lotus-flower; belonging to or derived from
Costus Speciosus or C. Arabicus; ({%am%}), n. the root or
fruit of the plant Costus Speciosus or C. Arabicus.
<LEND>

<L>30084<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzkaraka<k2>pOzkaraka
{%Pauṣkaraka, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the blue
lotus-flower, consisting of blue lotuses; (with {%prā-%}
{%dur-bhāva%}) the appearance of Viṣṇu in the form
of a lotus-flower.
<LEND>

<L>30085<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzkarasAdi<k2>pOzkarasAdi
{%Pauṣkarasādi, is,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%puṣ-%}
{%kara-sad%}), N. of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>30086<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzkariRI<k2>pOzkariRI
{%Pauṣkariṇī,%}¦ f. {%= puṣkariṇī,%} a lotus-pool, a
large pond or reservoir.
<LEND>

<L>30087<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzkareyaka<k2>pOzkareyaka
{%Pauṣkareyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ see Gaṇa to Pāṇ.
IV. 2, 95.
<LEND>

<L>30088<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzkala<k2>pOzkala
{#pOzkala#}¦ {%pauṣkala, as,%} m. (fr. {%puṣkala%}),
a species of grain; ({%am%}), n., N. of various Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>30089<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzkalAvati<k2>pOzkalAvati
{%Pauṣkalāvati, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%puṣkalā-vatī%}), N.
of a physician.
<LEND>

<L>30090<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzkalya<k2>pOzkalya
{%Pauṣkalya, am,%}¦ n. full growth, maturity, com-
plete development.
<LEND>

<L>30091<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzwika<k2>pOzwika
{#pOzwika#}¦ {%pauṣṭika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%puṣṭi%}),
relating to or promoting growth or welfare; nutri-
tious, nourishing, nutritive, fattening, invigorating;
preservative, protective; ({%am%}), n. a cloth worn dur-
ing the ceremony of tonsure.
<LEND>

<L>30092<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzwI<k2>pOzwI
{%Pauṣṭī,%}¦ f. (probably fr. {%puṣṭa%}), N. of the wife
of Pūru.
<LEND>

<L>30093<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzRa<k2>pOzRa
{#pOzRa#}¦ {%pauṣṇa, as, ī, am,%} belonging or
relating to Pūṣan, sacred to Pūṣan; relating to the
sun; ({%am%}), n. the last of the twenty-eight lunar
asterisms; the Nakṣatra Revatī.
<LEND>

<L>30094<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzpa<k2>pOzpa
{#pOzpa#}¦ {%pauṣpa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%puṣpa%}), re-
lating or belonging to flowers, coming from flowers,
made of flowers, flowery, floral; ({%ī%}), f. the city of
Pāṭali-putra ({%= puṣpa-pura%}).
<LEND>

<L>30095<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzpaka<k2>pOzpaka
{%Pauṣpaka, am,%}¦ n. oxide of brass considered as
a collyrium, green vitriol.
<LEND>

<L>30096<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzpiYji<k2>pOzpiYji
{#pOzpiYji#}¦ {%pauṣpiñji, is,%} m. a patronymic;
N. of a teacher; (also read {%pauṣyiñji.%})
<LEND>

<L>30097<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzpiRqya<k2>pOzpiRqya
{#pOzpiRqya#}¦ {%pauṣpiṇḍya, as,%} m., N. of an
ancient teacher.
<LEND>

<L>30098<pc>0601-a<k1>pOzya<k2>pOzya
{#pOzya#}¦ {%pauṣya, as, -ṣī (?) , am%} (fr. {%puṣya%}),
relating to the asterism Puṣya; (fr. {%pauṣya%}), re-
lating to or treating of king Pauṣya, an epithet of
the third Adhyāya of the Ādi-parva of the Mahā-
bhārata; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince the son of Pūṣan
and king of Karavīra-pura.
<LEND>

<L>30099<pc>0601-a<k1>pnA<k2>pnA
{#pnA#}¦ {%pnā,%} f. the braided hair of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>30100<pc>0601-a<k1>pyAw<k2>pyAw
{#pyAw#}¦ {%pyāṭ,%} ind. a particle used in calling,
ho! holla!
<LEND>

<L>30101<pc>0601-a<k1>pyAy<k2>pyAy
{#pyAy#}¦ {%pyāy.%} See rt. {%pyai%} below.
<LEND>

<L>30102<pc>0601-a<k1>pyukzRa<k2>pyukzRa
{#pyukzRa#}¦ {%pyukṣṇa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
Ved. a covering for a bow (made of sinews or of
the skin of a serpent, see Kātyāyana's Śrauta-s. XV.
3, 31).
<LEND>

<L>30103<pc>0601-a<k1>pyuz<k2>pyuz
{#pyuz#}¦ {%pyuṣ,%} cl. 4. 10. P. {%pyuṣyati, pyo-%}
{%ṣayati,%} &c., a various reading for rt.
{%vyuṣ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30104<pc>0601-a<k1>pyus<k2>pyus
{#pyus#}¦ {%pyus,%} cl. 4. P. {%pyusyati,%} &c., a
various reading for rt. {%vyuṣ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30105<pc>0601-a<k1>pyE<k2>pyE
{#pyE#}¦ {%pyai%} or {%pyāy%} (developed out of a
Vedic rt. {%pī;%} cf. rt. {%pinv%}), cl. 1. A. {%pyā-%}
{%yate%} (Ved. {%payate%}), {%pipye%} (Ved. {%pīpāya%}), {%pyās-%}
{%yate, pyāyiṣyate, apyāsta, apyāyiṣṭa, apyāyi,%}
{%pyātum, pyāyitum,%} to swell, become swollen or
distended; to be exuberant; to become full; to
increase, grow; to overflow; to cause to swell,
distend; to fill to excess, overfill, surcharge, cause to
run over or overflow: Caus. {%pyāyayati, -yitum,%}
(with {%ā,%} see {%ā-pyai.%})
<LEND>
[Page0601-b+ 77]

<L>30106<pc>0601-b<k1>pyAna<k2>pyAna
{%Pyāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fat, swollen, grown fat, =
{%pīna,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30107<pc>0601-b<k1>pyAyana<k2>pyAyana
{%Pyāyana, as, ī, am,%}¦ promoting growth or in-
crease (according to a Scholiast {%= vṛddhi-hetu%}),
causing to thrive; invigorating; ({%am%}), n. growth,
increase.
<LEND>

<L>30108<pc>0601-b<k1>pyAyita<k2>pyAyita
{%Pyāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fat, grown fat; increased;
strengthened, refreshed; {%= pīna,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30109<pc>0601-b<k1>pra<k2>pra<h>1
{#pra#} 1¦. {%pra%} (as a preposition or prefix to
verbs and their derivative nouns, expressing) before,
forward, in advance, in front, onward, forth, away
(e. g. {%pra-gam,%} to go forward, proceed; {%pra-sthā,%}
to set out; {%pra-sthāna,%} going away, departure;
{%pra-kram,%} to walk onwards, to begin, commence).
<LEND>

<L>30110<pc>0601-b<k1>pra<k2>pra
{%Pra%}¦ is also used in the Veda as a separable adverb,
and the verb of motion is then sometimes to be
supplied, e. g. {%pra cakriyeva rodasī Marudbhyaḥ,%}
heaven and earth (have been caused) by the Maruts
(to roll) onward like two wheels.
<LEND>

<L>30111<pc>0601-b<k1>pra<k2>pra
{%Pra%}¦ is also compounded with nouns not imme-
diately connected with verbs in the sense of ‘forth,’
‘away;’ and before adjectives in the sense of ‘pre-
eminently,’ ‘excessively,’ ‘very,’ ‘much;’ [cf. {%pra-%}
{%pautra.%}]
<div n="P"/>According to native lexicographers the senses in
which {%pra%} may be used are expressed by the follow-
ing Sanskrit words, {%gati, ā-rambha, ut-karṣa,%}
{%sarvato-bhāva, prāthamya, khyāti, ut-patti, vy-%}
{%avahāra;%} [cf. {%pra-taram, pra-naptṛ, prathama,%}
{%parā, pūrva, prātar:%} Zend <nsi>fra-, frā,</nsi> ‘before,
away:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πρό, πρό-τερος, πρῶ-το-ς</lang> (Dor. <lang n="greek">πρᾶ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">το-ς</lang>), <lang n="greek">πρό-μο-ς, πρύ-τανι-ς</lang> (Æol. <lang n="greek">πρό-τανι-ς</lang>), <lang n="greek">πρίν</lang>
 for <lang n="greek">προ-ιν, πρω-ΐ, πρῴην</lang> (Dor. <lang n="greek">πράν</lang>), <lang n="greek">πρόσσω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πρό-σω, πόρ-σω, πόῥῥω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>prō-d, prō, prŏ-</nsi> in
<nsi>prŏ-nepos, prœ</nsi> for <nsi>prai, prīmu-s</nsi> for <nsi>pro-imus,</nsi>
<nsi>pri-or, pris- = prius</nsi> for <nsi>pro-ios, pris-tinu-s, pris-</nsi>
<nsi>cu-s, pran-diu-m, porro,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>pru-īna</nsi> for
<nsi>provīna:</nsi> Umbr. <nsi>pru = pro; pre = prœ; perne,</nsi>
‘in front;’ <nsi>pernaio,</nsi> ‘ancient;’ <nsi>per,</nsi> ‘for (?):’ Goth.
<nsi>fru-ma,</nsi> ‘first;’ <nsi>frum-ist,</nsi> ‘at first;’ <nsi>fairra,</nsi> ‘far:’
Old Germ. <nsi>fur-iro,</nsi> ‘former;’ <nsi>furisto,</nsi> ‘a prince;’
<nsi>fruo,</nsi> ‘early;’ <nsi>fer,</nsi> ‘far:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>form:</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>pra-, pro-,</nsi> ‘before;’ <nsi>prĭ-vy,</nsi> ‘first:’ Lith. <nsi>pra-,</nsi>
‘before;’ <nsi>pro,</nsi> ‘through, for;’ <nsi>pir-ma-s,</nsi> ‘first;’
<nsi>pirm,</nsi> ‘before:’ Hib. <nsi>fur,</nsi> ‘for;’ <nsi>foir,</nsi> ‘before;’
perhaps <nsi>fri,</nsi> ‘with, by, through, on.’]
<LEND>

<L>30112<pc>0601-b<k1>pra<k2>pra<h>2
{#pra#} 2¦. {%pra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%pṝ%}), filling,
fulfilling (at the end of a comp., cf. {%ākūti-pra,%}
{%kakṣya-pra, kāma-pra%}); like, resembling (in
{%ikṣu-pra, kṣura-pra,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>30113<pc>0601-b<k1>prauga<k2>prauga
{#prauga#}¦ {%pra-üga, am,%} n. (according to the
commentators fr. {%pra-yuga%}), Ved. the forepart of
the pole or shafts of a chariot (Sāy. {%= īṣayor agraṃ%}
{%yuga-bandhana-sthānam%}); {%ubhayataḥ-praüga,%}
having the foreparts of the shafts on both sides; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n., N. of the second Śastra or hymn at
the morning libation. {%—Praüga-cit, t, t, t,%} Ved.
arranged in the form of the forepart of a chariot-pole.
<LEND>

<L>30114<pc>0601-b<k1>prakaNkata<k2>prakaNkata
{#prakaNkata#}¦ {%pra-kaṅkata, as,%} m., Ved. a veno-
mous species of reptile; (Sāy.) {%= prakṛṣṭa-viṣo%}
(or {%prakṛṣṭa-gāmī%}) {%mahoragaḥ.%}
<LEND>

<L>30115<pc>0601-b<k1>prakaca<k2>prakaca
{#prakaca#}¦ {%pra-kaca, as, ā, am,%} (perhaps) having
the hair erect; [cf. {%ut-k˚, vi-k˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30116<pc>0601-b<k1>prakawa<k2>prakawa<h>1
{#prakawa#} 1¦. {%pra-kaṭa, as, ā, am,%} evident, clear,
manifest, apparent, displayed, unfolded, open; public,
commonly known, undisguised; visible; {%prakaṭaḥ%}
{%so 'stu,%} let him show himself; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
man; ({%am%}), ind. evidently, clearly, manifestly,
visibly; openly, undisguisedly, in public; {%a-pra-%}
{%kaṭam,%} unobservedly; [cf. {%ava-kaṭa, ut-k˚, ni-k˚,%}
{%vi-k˚, saṅ-k˚.%}] {%—Prakaṭa-prīti-vardhana, as,%} m.
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Prakaṭī-karaṇa, am,%} n.
making visible or apparent, displaying, manifesting.
{%—Prakaṭī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to manifest, bring to light, unfold, display.
{%—Prakaṭī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} manifested, brought
to light, unfolded, displayed. {%—Prakaṭī-bhū,%} cl. 1.
[Page0601-c+ 73]
P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to become manifest, appear.
{%—Prakaṭī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} manifested, manifest.
<LEND>

<L>30117<pc>0601-c<k1>prakawa<k2>prakawa<h>2
2. {%prakaṭa,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prakaṭati, prakaṭitum,%} to
appear, become manifest.
<LEND>

<L>30118<pc>0601-c<k1>prakawana<k2>prakawana
{%Prakaṭana, am,%}¦ n. manifesting, bringing to
light.
<LEND>

<L>30119<pc>0601-c<k1>prakawaya<k2>prakawaya
{%Prakaṭaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prakaṭayati, -yitum,%} to
manifest, make manifest, bring to light; to disclose,
evince, display.
<LEND>

<L>30120<pc>0601-c<k1>prakawAya<k2>prakawAya
{%Prakaṭāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prakaṭāyati, -yitum,%} to
manifest, reveal, promulgate, proclaim.
<LEND>

<L>30121<pc>0601-c<k1>prakawita<k2>prakawita
{%Prakaṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ manifested; evident, ap-
parent; unfolded, displayed, opened, expanded;
publicly proclaimed or exhibited. {%—Prakaṭita-ha-%}
{%tāśeṣa-tamas (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} ind. having openly
destroyed utter darkness.
<LEND>

<L>30122<pc>0601-c<k1>prakaRva<k2>prakaRva
{#prakaRva#}¦ {%pra-kaṇva, as, ā, am,%} (probably)
freed from evil (said of a place, Scholiast on Pāṇ.
VI. 1, 153).
<LEND>

<L>30123<pc>0601-c<k1>prakaT<k2>prakaT
{#prakaT#}¦ {%pra-kath,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kathayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to announce, proclaim.
<LEND>

<L>30124<pc>0601-c<k1>prakaTana<k2>prakaTana
{%Pra-kathana, am,%}¦ n. announcing, proclaiming,
relating, communicating.
<LEND>

<L>30125<pc>0601-c<k1>prakamp<k2>prakamp
{#prakamp#}¦ {%pra-kamp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kampate, -kam-%}
{%pitum,%} to tremble, shake, quake, quiver, shudder;
to become lax or loose, to be loosened; to vibrate
(said of sound): Caus. {%-kampayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to tremble; to swing, wave, brandish, shake.
<LEND>

<L>30126<pc>0601-c<k1>prakampa<k2>prakampa
{%Pra-kampa, as,%}¦ m. trembling, quivering, shaking,
quaking, staggering, violent motion.
<LEND>

<L>30127<pc>0601-c<k1>prakampana<k2>prakampana
{%Pra-kampana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to tremble;
({%as%}), m. wind, air; N. of a hell; of an Asura;
({%am%}), n. great trembling, shaking, swaying to and
fro, violent or excessive motion.
<LEND>

<L>30128<pc>0601-c<k1>prakampanIya<k2>prakampanIya
{%Pra-kampanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made to
tremble.
<LEND>

<L>30129<pc>0601-c<k1>prakampamAna<k2>prakampamAna
{%Pra-kampamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling violently,
shaking, quaking, quivering; becoming lax or loose.
<LEND>

<L>30130<pc>0601-c<k1>prakampayat<k2>prakampayat
{%Pra-kampayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to tremble,
shaking, agitating.
<LEND>

<L>30131<pc>0601-c<k1>prakampin<k2>prakampin
{%Pra-kampin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ trembling, shaking, mov-
ing to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>30132<pc>0601-c<k1>prakampya<k2>prakampya
{%Pra-kampya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to tremble,
to be made to shake; [cf. {%duṣ-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30133<pc>0601-c<k1>prakara<k2>prakara<h>1
{#prakara#} 1¦. and 2. {%pra-kara.%} See under {%pra-%}
{%kṛ,%} p. 602, and {%pra-kṝ,%} p. 603.
<LEND>

<L>30134<pc>0601-c<k1>prakaraRa<k2>prakaraRa
{#prakaraRa#}¦ {%pra-karaṇa, pra-kartavya, pra-%}
{%kartṛ.%} See {%pra-kṛ,%} p. 602, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>30135<pc>0601-c<k1>prakaritf<k2>prakaritf
{#prakaritf#}¦ {%pra-karitṛ.%} See {%pra-kṝ,%} p. 603.
<LEND>

<L>30136<pc>0601-c<k1>prakarza<k2>prakarza
{#prakarza#}¦ {%pra-karṣa, pra-karṣaṇa,%} &c. See
{%pra-kṛṣ,%} p. 603.
<LEND>

<L>30137<pc>0601-c<k1>prakal<k2>prakal
{#prakal#}¦ {%pra-kal%} (see rt. 2. {%kal%}), cl. 10. P.
{%-kālayati, -yitum,%} to drive onwards, chase, pursue;
to urge on, incite.
<LEND>

<L>30138<pc>0601-c<k1>prakAlana<k2>prakAlana
{%Pra-kālana, as, ā, am,%}¦ driving, driving on,
chasing, pursuing; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga of the
race of Vāsuki.
<LEND>

<L>30139<pc>0601-c<k1>prakalA<k2>prakalA
{#prakalA#}¦ {%pra-kalā,%} f. part of a part, a minute
portion. {%—Prakala-vid, t,%} m., Ved. (according to
the Nirukta) ‘knowing, i. e. calculating the smallest
particles or sums,’ a merchant; (according to Sāy.) =
{%a-jānat,%} ‘not knowing,’ knowing very little, desti-
tute of knowledge, ignorant.
<LEND>

<L>30140<pc>0601-c<k1>prakalpanA<k2>prakalpanA
{#prakalpanA#}¦ {%pra-kalpanā.%} See {%pra-kḷp,%} p. 604.
<LEND>

<L>30141<pc>0601-c<k1>prakalyARa<k2>prakalyARa
{#prakalyARa#}¦ {%pra-kalyāṇa, as, ā, am,%} very
excellent.
<LEND>

<L>30142<pc>0601-c<k1>prakaSa<k2>prakaSa
{#prakaSa#}¦ {%pra-kaśa, as,%} m., Ved. the thong or
lash of a whip; hurting, killing.
<LEND>

<L>30143<pc>0601-c<k1>prakas<k2>prakas
{#prakas#}¦ {%pra-kas,%} Caus. P. {%-kāsayati, -yitum,%}
to drive away, repel, repulse; to cause to bloom.
<LEND>

<L>30144<pc>0601-c<k1>prakANkz<k2>prakANkz
{#prakANkz#}¦ {%pra-kāṅkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kāṅkṣati,%}
{%kāṅkṣitum,%} to wish for, desire.
<LEND>

<L>30145<pc>0601-c<k1>prakARqa<k2>prakARqa
{#prakARqa#}¦ {%pra-kāṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. the stem
[Page0602-a+ 79]
or trunk of a tree from the root to the branches; a
branch, a shoot; ({%as%}), m. the upper part of the
arm [cf. {%pra-gaṇḍa%}]; ({%as, am%}), m. n. anything
excellent of its kind (at the end of a comp.; cf.
{%go-p˚, mantri-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>30146<pc>0602-a<k1>prakARqaka<k2>prakARqaka
{%Prakāṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= pra-kāṇḍa%} (at the end of
a comp.; cf. {%rakṣaḥ-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>30147<pc>0602-a<k1>prakARqara<k2>prakARqara
{%Prakāṇḍara, as,%}¦ m. a tree.
<LEND>

<L>30148<pc>0602-a<k1>prakAma<k2>prakAma
{#prakAma#}¦ {%pra-kāma, as, ā, am,%} amorous; ({%as%}),
m. desire, delight, pleasure, luxury; ({%am%}), ind.
according to wish or desire, with great pleasure, to
the heart's content; voluntarily, willingly; sufficiently;
very much; indeed. {%—Prakāma-tas,%} ind. willingly,
with great pleasure or delight, to the heart's content;
at will, according to the will. {%—Prakāma-bhuj, k,%}
{%k, k,%} eating till satisfied, eating enough. {%—Prakāma-%}
{%vistāra, as,%} m. great expansiveness (according to
Malli-nātha {%= atyanta-viśālatā%}). {%—Prakāmāloka-%}
{%nīya-tā (˚ma-āl˚),%} f. the being an object that may
be viewed at pleasure. {%—Prakāmodya (˚ma-ud˚),%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. talking to the heart's content, talkative-
ness, garrulity.
<LEND>

<L>30149<pc>0602-a<k1>prakAra<k2>prakAra
{#prakAra#}¦ {%pra-kāra.%} See {%pra-kṛ,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>30150<pc>0602-a<k1>prakAS<k2>prakAS
{#prakAS#}¦ {%pra-kāś,%} cl. 1. A. (ep. also P.)
{%-kāśate (-ti), -kāśitum,%} to become visible, come
to light, come in sight, appear; to shine, gleam,
glitter; to become evident or manifest: Caus. P.
{%-kāśayati, -yitum,%} to make visible, bring to light,
cause to appear; to show, display; to lighten, illu-
mine, irradiate; to discover, disclose, unfold, mani-
fest, reveal; to make known, impart, communicate,
proclaim: Pass. {%-kāśyate,%} to be illumined, &c.:
Caus. A. {%-kāśayate, -yitum,%} to cause to appear; to
explain: Intens., Ved. {%-cākaśīti,%} to irradiate, illumine;
to survey.
<LEND>

<L>30151<pc>0602-a<k1>prakASa<k2>prakASa
{%Pra-kāśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ visible, manifest, clear,
evident; open, public; generally or universally
known, noted, renowned, famous, celebrated; bright,
shining, brilliant; expanded, blown; (at the end of
a comp.) having the appearance of, looking like,
resembling, like; ({%as%}), m. clearness, brightness,
brilliance, lustre, splendor, light, elucidation (in this
sense frequently at the end of the titles of explana-
tory works; cf. {%arka-p˚, tattva-p˚, tarka-p˚%});
display, manifestation, expansion, diffusion; publicity,
fame, renown, celebrity; sunshine; the open air, an
open spot or space; (according to Mahī-dhara) =
{%uparitana-deha-kānti,%} the gloss on the upper part
of a (horse's) body; a golden mirror (wrongly for
{%prākāśa%}); a chapter, section; laughter (perhaps
wrongly for a form {%pra-kāsa%} fr. {%pra-kas%}); N. of a
Brāhman the son of Tamas or Darkness personified;
of a son of Manu Raivata; ({%ās%}), m. pl. an epithet
of the messengers of Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n. white
metal, bell-metal, brass; ({%am%}), ind. openly, pub-
licly, undisguisedly, before all eyes (opposed to
{%a-p˚, pra-cchannam, rahasyam%}); aloud, audibly
(especially in dramatic language where it is opposed
to {%ātma-gatam, sva-gatam, apa-vārya, janān-%}
{%tikam%}); ({%e%}), ind. visibly, apparently; before the
world, openly, publicly; in the presence of. {%—Pra-%}
{%kāśa-kartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘maker of light,’ an epithet of
the sun. {%—Prakāśa-karman, ā,%} m. ‘whose work is
to give light,’ an epithet of the sun. {%—Prakāśa-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. wishing for a splendid ap-
pearance or for distinction. {%—Prakāśa-kraya, as,%}
m. a purchase made publicly. {%—Prakāśa-tā,%} f. or
{%prakāśa-tva, am,%} n. brightness, brilliance, splendor,
luminousness; appearance, manifestation, visibility;
celebrity, renown, fame. {%—Prakāśa-devī,%} f., N. of a
princess (Rāja-taraṅginī IV. 79). {%—Prakāśa-nārī,%}
f. ‘public woman,’ a prostitute, harlot. {%—Prakāśa-%}
{%vañcaka, as,%} m. ‘an open rogue,’ public deceiver or
cheat. {%—Prakāśa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} bright, brilliant,
shining; ({%ān%}), m., N. of one of the feet of Brahmā.
{%—Prakāśa-varṣa, as,%} m., N. of a poet men-
tioned in the Śārṅgadhara-paddhati. {%—Prakāśā-%}
{%kāśa-kānti (˚śa-āk˚), is, is, i,%} bright as a clear
sky. {%—Prakāśātmaka (˚śa-āt˚), as, ikā, am,%}
[Page0602-b+ 76]
brilliant in character or nature, shining, brilliant.
{%—Prakāśātmaka-tva, am,%} n. the possession of a
brilliant nature or character, brilliancy. {%—Prakā-%}
{%śātman (˚śa-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} brilliant in character or
nature, brilliant, shining; ({%ā%}), m. an epithet of
Śiva; the sun; N. of a man; of a philosophical
writer (pupil of Ananyānubhava-svāmin). {%—Prakā-%}
{%śātma-pati, is,%} or {%prakāśātma-svāmin, ī,%} m., N.
of a philosophical writer {%(= prakāśātman)%}. {%—Pra-%}
{%kāśānanda (˚śa-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a philosophical
writer. {%—Prakāśī-karaṇa, am,%} n. giving light,
illuminating, irradiating. {%—Prakāśī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A.
{%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to give light, illumine;
to publish, make known. {%—Prakāśī-bhāva, as,%} m.
the becoming light, morning twilight. {%—Prakāśe-%}
{%tara (˚śa-it˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘other than visible,’
invisible.
<LEND>

<L>30152<pc>0602-b<k1>prakASaka<k2>prakASaka
{%Pra-kāśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ clear, bright, shining,
brilliant; universally known, noted, renowned; irra-
diating, illuminating, giving light, luminous; making
apparent or manifest, disclosing, discovering, pub-
lishing; evincing, betraying; expressing; explaining;
({%as%}), m. ‘the giver of light,’ the sun; an expounder,
illustrator; a publisher; a discoverer; ({%ikā%}), f., N.
of a commentary on the Mīmāṃsā-sūtra by Rāma-
kṛṣṇa. {%—Prakāśaka-jñātṛ, tā,%} m. ‘knowing the
giver of light, i. e. the sun,’ a cock. {%—Prakāśaka-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. luminousness, radiance.
<LEND>

<L>30153<pc>0602-b<k1>prakASana<k2>prakASana
{%Pra-kāśana, as, ā, am,%}¦ illuminating, giving
light; making known; ({%as%}), m. ‘the giver of light,’
an epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n. causing to appear,
displaying; illuminating, giving light; bringing to
light, making clear or manifest, making known,
publicly showing or manifesting; ({%ā%}), f. propound-
ing, explaining, teaching. {%—Prakāśana-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} irradiating, illuminating.
<LEND>

<L>30154<pc>0602-b<k1>prakASanIya<k2>prakASanIya
{%Pra-kāśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be displayed, to be
shown or manifested.
<LEND>

<L>30155<pc>0602-b<k1>prakASamAna<k2>prakASamAna
{%Pra-kāśamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming manifest,
appearing; shining, splendid, brilliant, radiant.
<LEND>

<L>30156<pc>0602-b<k1>prakASita<k2>prakASita
{%Pra-kāśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ become visible, brought
to light, visible, manifest, apparent, evident; dis-
played, unfolded, discovered; illumined, enlightened,
irradiated; published, promulgated.
<LEND>

<L>30157<pc>0602-b<k1>prakASin<k2>prakASin
{%Pra-kāśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ visible, clear, bright, shin-
ing; making visible or manifest. {%—Prakāśi-tā,%} f. or
{%prakāśi-tva, am,%} n. clearness, brightness, brilliance,
light.
<LEND>

<L>30158<pc>0602-b<k1>prakASya<k2>prakASya
{%Pra-kāśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be illuminated or en-
lightened; to be brought to light or made manifest;
({%am%}), n. light, clearness, distinctness (in this sense
a wrong form for {%prākāśya,%} q. v.). {%—Prakāśya-tā,%}
f. the being manifest; publicity; the being illu-
minated.
<LEND>

<L>30159<pc>0602-b<k1>prakiraRa<k2>prakiraRa
{#prakiraRa#}¦ {%pra-kiraṇa.%} See {%pra-kṝ,%} p. 603.
<LEND>

<L>30160<pc>0602-b<k1>prakIrtana<k2>prakIrtana
{#prakIrtana#}¦ {%pra-kīrtana, pra-kīrtita, pra-%}
{%kīrtti.%} See {%pra-kṝt,%} p. 604, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>30161<pc>0602-b<k1>prakIrya<k2>prakIrya
{#prakIrya#}¦ {%pra-kīrya.%} See {%pra-kṝ,%} p. 603.
<LEND>

<L>30162<pc>0602-b<k1>prakuYca<k2>prakuYca
{#prakuYca#}¦ {%prakuñca, as,%} m. a particular
measure of capacity (somewhat more or less than
a handful).
<LEND>

<L>30163<pc>0602-b<k1>prakuw<k2>prakuw
{#prakuw#}¦ {%pra-kuṭ%} or {%pra-kuṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kuṭa-%}
{%yati, -kuṭṭayati, -yitum,%} to divide, reduce to small
pieces.
<LEND>

<L>30164<pc>0602-b<k1>prakuT<k2>prakuT
{#prakuT#}¦ {%pra-kuth,%} cl. 4. P. {%-kuthyati, -kothi-%}
{%tum,%} to become putrid, turn putrid, begin to stink.
<LEND>

<L>30165<pc>0602-b<k1>prakuTita<k2>prakuTita
{%Pra-kuthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ putrid, putrescent.
<LEND>

<L>30166<pc>0602-b<k1>prakoTa<k2>prakoTa
{%Pra-kotha, as,%}¦ m. putrefaction, putridity, putres-
cence. {%—Prakothodaka (˚tha-ud˚), am,%} n. filthy
water.
<LEND>

<L>30167<pc>0602-b<k1>prakup<k2>prakup
{#prakup#}¦ {%pra-kup,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-kupyati, -te,%}
{%-kopitum,%} to be moved or agitated; to become
enraged, fly into a passion: Caus. {%-kopayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to provoke to anger, incense.
<LEND>

<L>30168<pc>0602-b<k1>prakupita<k2>prakupita
{%Pra-kupita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved, agitated, moving
to and fro (Sāy. {%= itas tataś calita%}); very angry,
[Page0602-c+ 79]
wroth, enraged, incensed; disordered; {%ati-praku-%}
{%pita,%} excessively irritated.
<LEND>

<L>30169<pc>0602-c<k1>prakupta<k2>prakupta
{%Pra-kupta,%}¦ anomalously for {%pra-kupita.%}
<LEND>

<L>30170<pc>0602-c<k1>prakupya<k2>prakupya
{%Pra-kupya,%}¦ ind. having become angry, being
enraged.
<LEND>

<L>30171<pc>0602-c<k1>prakopa<k2>prakopa
{%Pra-kopa, as,%}¦ m. effervescence, ebullition, excite-
ment, emotion, violent anger, rage, fury, wrath, ire,
anger; irritation, provocation, exasperation; political
disturbance, insurrection, mutiny; an attack; (in medi-
cine) excess, superabundance, vitiation [cf. {%pitta-p˚,%}
{%vāta-p˚%}].
<LEND>

<L>30172<pc>0602-c<k1>prakopaRa<k2>prakopaRa
{%Pra-kopaṇa%}¦ or {%pra-kopana, as, ī, am,%} exciting,
agitating, irritating, provoking; ({%am%}), n. irritating,
provoking, irritation, provocation, incensing.
<LEND>

<L>30173<pc>0602-c<k1>prakopaRIya<k2>prakopaRIya
{%Pra-kopaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be irritated or
incensed, to be provoked to anger, irritable.
<LEND>

<L>30174<pc>0602-c<k1>prakopita<k2>prakopita
{%Pra-kopita, as, ā, am,%}¦ irritated, provoked, in-
censed, enraged.
<LEND>

<L>30175<pc>0602-c<k1>prakopitf<k2>prakopitf
{%Pra-kopitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ exciting, agitating, dis-
quieting, an exciter, agitator.
<LEND>

<L>30176<pc>0602-c<k1>prakula<k2>prakula
{#prakula#}¦ {%pra-kula, am,%} n. a handsome or
excellent body; (also read {%prahvala.%})
<LEND>

<L>30177<pc>0602-c<k1>prakUrd<k2>prakUrd
{#prakUrd#}¦ {%pra-kūrd,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-kūrdati, -te,%}
{%kūrditum,%} to jump forward, leap about.
<LEND>

<L>30178<pc>0602-c<k1>prakUzmARqI<k2>prakUzmARqI
{#prakUzmARqI#}¦ {%pra-kūṣmāṇḍī,%} f. an epithet of
Durgā; [cf. {%kūṣmāṇḍī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30179<pc>0602-c<k1>prakf<k2>prakf
{#prakf#}¦ {%pra-kṛ,%} cl. 5. Ved. and cl. 8. P. A.
{%-kṛṇoti, -kṛṇute, -karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to
make, accomplish, perform, achieve, effect; to make,
render (with double acc., e. g. {%andhakāraṃ śavalam%}
{%prakurvan,%} rendering the darkness partly illumined);
to bring to light, express, utter; to place before or
in front, cause to precede, mention first; to place
at the head, honour, worship; to appoint (to an
office, with loc.); to gain, win, conquer (Ved.); to
do away with, destroy (Ved.); to induce, move,
incline (Ved.); to cause, enable (with inf., Ved.);
Sāy. {%= prakṛṣṭaṃ kṛ, stutim prakarṣeṇa kṛ,%}
to exalt, praise highly; to lay out, expend; (with
{%buddhim%} or {%manas%}) to set the heart upon, apply
the mind to, direct the thoughts towards anything
(dat. or loc.); to resolve upon anything; (with {%dārān%})
to marry; (with {%kanyām,%} &c.) to deflower, violate.
<LEND>

<L>30180<pc>0602-c<k1>prakara<k2>prakara<h>1
1. {%pra-kara, as, ī, am%}¦ (for 2. see under {%pra-kṝ,%}
p. 603), doing much, doing well; ({%as%}), m. aid, assist-
ance, friendship; usage, custom, continuance of a
similar practice; respect; seduction, abduction; ({%ī%}),
f. an episodical incident or interlude inserted in a
drama to explain that which follows; theatrical dress
or disguise, as wearing a woman's garb, &c.
<LEND>

<L>30181<pc>0602-c<k1>prakaraRa<k2>prakaraRa
{%Pra-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. treatment, discussion, ex-
pounding, explanation; a subject, topic, province,
department; a section, chapter, book, paragraph;
opportunity, occasion; relation; an introduction,
prologue, prelude; a poetical fiction or poem, in
which the story and principal persons are wholly
imaginary; a drama, a kind of drama with a fic-
titious plot; treating with respect; doing much or
well; ({%ī%}), f. a drama of the same character as the
Pra-karaṇa but of less extent. {%—Prakaraṇa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the being a prelude or introduction. {%—Pra-%}
{%karaṇa-pañcikā,%} f., N. of a philosophical treatise by
Śālika-nātha; (also called {%śālikā.%}) {%—Prakaraṇa-%}
{%pāda, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Prakaraṇa-%}
{%śas,%} ind. according to species or kind (opposed to
{%pṛthaktvena%}).
<LEND>

<L>30182<pc>0602-c<k1>prakaraRikA<k2>prakaraRikA
{%Prakaraṇikā,%}¦ f. a kind of minor drama ({%= pra-%}
{%karaṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>30183<pc>0602-c<k1>prakarikA<k2>prakarikA
{%Pra-karikā,%}¦ f. an episodical incident or interlude
inserted in a drama to explain that which follows
({%= pra-karī%}).
<LEND>

<L>30184<pc>0602-c<k1>prakartavya<k2>prakartavya
{%Pra-kartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be prepared; to be
manifested or shown; to be appointed.
<LEND>

<L>30185<pc>0602-c<k1>prakartf<k2>prakartf
{%Pra-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who causes or
occasions.
<LEND>

<L>30186<pc>0602-c<k1>prakAra<k2>prakAra
{%Pra-kāra, as,%}¦ m. sort, kind, species; way, mode,
fashion, manner (in these and the preceding mean-
ings frequently at the end of a comp., e. g. {%nānā-%}
{%prakāra,%} of many kinds, manifold; {%tri-prakāra,%}
[Page0603-a+ 81]
of three kinds, threefold; cf. {%bahu-prakāram%});
similitude; difference; speciality. {%—Prakāra-tā,%} f.
particularity, speciality. {%—Prakāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
belonging to a species or kind. {%—Prakārāntara%}
{%(˚ra-an˚), am,%} n. another sort or kind, another
manner; ({%e%}), ind. in another way.
<LEND>

<L>30187<pc>0603-a<k1>prakAraka<k2>prakAraka
{%Prakāraka, as, ā, am, = pra-kāra%}¦ (at the end of
comps., e. g. {%tat-prakāraka,%} of that kind, belonging
to that).
<LEND>

<L>30188<pc>0603-a<k1>prakArya<k2>prakArya
{%Pra-kārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be evinced or mani-
fested.
<LEND>

<L>30189<pc>0603-a<k1>prakurvat<k2>prakurvat
{%Pra-kurvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ doing much or well;
behaving respectfully to, waiting upon, serving,
honouring.
<LEND>

<L>30190<pc>0603-a<k1>prakurvARa<k2>prakurvARa
{%Pra-kurvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ doing much or well;
attending or behaving respectfully to.
<LEND>

<L>30191<pc>0603-a<k1>prakfta<k2>prakfta
{%Pra-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made, accomplished, com-
pleted; commenced, begun; one who has begun
anything; original; that which is spoken of or is
the original subject of discussion, that which is
now in hand or under consideration; genuine, real;
appointed, charged; wished, expected; mentioned;
important, interesting; ({%am%}), n. original subject,
present subject of discussion, present case; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a man. {%—Prakṛta-tā,%} f. or {%prakṛta-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the being begun or in process of execu-
tion, incipient state or condition; the being the
subject of discussion. {%—Prakṛtārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the original sense; real, true.
<LEND>

<L>30192<pc>0603-a<k1>prakfti<k2>prakfti
{%Pra-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. the original or natural form of
anything, natural condition, or state, original, primary
substance (opposed to {%vi-kṛti,%} change, modification,
anything derived or secondary); cause, original
source; origin, extraction, descent; nature, character,
usual or natural state; constitution, disposition, tem-
per; a rule, scheme, paradigm, pattern, model,
standard (especially in ritual); (in the Sāṅkhya
philosophy) {%= pra-dhāna,%} the evolver of all material
appearances, the ‘originant’ or original source of (or
rather passive power of creating) the material world,
(generally called Nature as opposed to Puruṣa or
Spirit); (in mythology) a goddess, the personified
will of the Supreme in the creation (identified with
Māyā or Illusion and in an especial manner the
prototype of the female sex; hence the same with
the Śakti or personified energy or bride of a deity,
as Lakṣmī, Durgā, &c.; in some systems Pra-kṛti
is considered the same with the Supreme Being);
(in grammar) the crude or elementary form of a
word, an uninflected word, the radical form of a
word before the case-terminations and other affixes
are subjoined; N. of two classes of metres, consisting
of eight and of eighty-four syllables respectively; (in
arithmetic) a coefficient, multiplier; (in anatomy)
temperament, the predominance of one of the
humors at the time of generation; a woman, woman-
kind; a mother; an animal; the male organ of
generation; the female organ of generation; N. of
a woman; {%tṛtīyā prakṛtiḥ,%} the third nature, a
eunuch; ({%ayas%}), f. pl. (in the Sāṅkhya) the ma-
terial archetypes of everything existing; the eight
producers or primary elements out of which every-
thing else is evolved (viz. {%a-vyakta, buddhi%} or {%ma-%}
{%hat, ahaṅkāra,%} and the five {%tan-mātras%}); the con-
stituent elements of the state (of which five are usually
enumerated, viz. the minister, treasure, territory,
fortresses, and army, to these are sometimes added
the king himself and the sovereign who is his ally,
and sometimes also the corporations of citizens); a
king's ministers generally; the subjects of a king,
the citizens, artizans, &c.; the various sovereigns to
be considered in case of war (according to Manu VII.
155, viz. the {%madhyama, vi-jigīṣu, ud-āsīna,%}
and {%śatru,%} to which according to Kullūka should be
added eight remoter princes, viz. the {%mitra, ari-%}
{%mitra, mitra-mitra, arimitra-mitra, pārṣṇi-%}
{%grāha, ā-kranda, pārṣṇigrāhāsāra, ākrandā-%}
{%sāra;%} each of these twelve kings has the five Prakṛtis
above-mentioned, so that the total number of Pra-
kṛtis may be seventy-two, Manu VII. 157); N. of
a class of divinities under Manu Raibhya; {%pra- %}
[Page0603-b+ 79]
{%kṛtyā,%} ind. by nature, naturally, by birth or extrac-
tion; in the original state or condition, without
change or alteration; properly. {%—Prakṛti-kṛpaṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} naturally plaintive or disposed to lament,
naturally feeble (in discriminating). {%—Prakṛti-%}
{%khaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. ‘section on nature,’ N. of the
second book of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Pra-%}
{%kṛti-guṇa, as,%} m. one of the three constituent quali-
ties of nature (see {%guṇa%}). {%—Prakṛti-ja, as, ā, am,%}
springing from nature, inborn, innate. {%—Prakṛti-%}
{%tarala, as, ā, am,%} naturally changeful, volatile, fickle,
dissolute, voluptuous. {%—Prakṛti-puruṣa, as,%} m. a
minister of state. {%—Prakṛti-pralaya, as,%} m. {%= pra-%}
{%kṛti-laya,%} q. v. {%—Prakṛti-bhāva, as,%} m. natural
state, original or unaltered condition; ({%as, ā, am%}),
natural, usual, common. {%—Prakṛti-bhūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} being in the original state or condition, original.
{%—Prakṛtibhūtekāra (˚ta-ik˚), as,%} m. the original
sound or letter {%i%}. {%—Prakṛti-maṇḍala, am,%} n.
the circle or aggregate of the Prakṛtis or of a
king's subjects, the entire kingdom, whole empire.
{%—Prakṛti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having the original or
natural form or shape, natural, usual, ordinary; in a
natural or usual frame of mind. {%—Prakṛti-laya, as,%}
m. absorption into Prakṛti, the dissolution of the
universe. {%—Prakṛti-vat,%} ind. as in the original
form. {%—Prakṛti-vikṛti-svabhāva, as,%} m. the
relation of (a word in its) radical form to (itself
under the) mutations (of inflection &c.). {%—Pra-%}
{%kṛti-viṣama, as, ā, am,%} naturally rough. {%—Pra-%}
{%kṛti-siddha, as, ā, am,%} effected by nature, natural;
({%am%}), n. true or real nature. {%—Prakṛti-subhaga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} naturally pleasing or agreeable. {%—Pra-%}
{%kṛti-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in the original or
natural state, being in the natural condition, natural,
genuine, unmixed; healthy, in good health; reco-
vered; inherent, innate; bare, stripped of everything.
{%—Prakṛtīśa (˚ti-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of subjects,’ a
magistrate.
<LEND>

<L>30193<pc>0603-b<k1>prakriyA<k2>prakriyA
{%Pra-kriyā,%}¦ f. conduct, manner, way; a ceremony,
rite, observance; elevation, exaltation; a privilege,
prerogative, advantage over others, precedence, high
position; the bearing of royal insignia; insignia (of
rank); a chapter, section; an introductory section
of a work; producing, production; (in grammar)
etymological formation, formation of a word with
the root, affix, &c.; rules for the formation and
inflection of words. {%—Prakriyā-kaumudī,%} f. ‘elu-
cidation of etymological structure,’ N. of a gram-
matical work by Rāma-candra. {%—Prakriyākau-%}
{%mudī-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a commentary by Kṛṣṇa-
paṇḍita on the preceding. {%—Prakriyā-pāda, as,%}
m. ‘introductory section,’ N. of the first part of the
Vāyu-Purāṇa. {%—Prakriyā-ratna, am,%} n. ‘gem of
etymological structure,’ N. of a grammatical work.
<LEND>

<L>30194<pc>0603-b<k1>pracikIrzu<k2>pracikIrzu
{%Pra-cikīrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ intending or purposing
to recompense, wishing to requite ({%= prati-ci-%}
{%kīrṣu%}).
<LEND>

<L>30195<pc>0603-b<k1>prakft<k2>prakft
{#prakft#}¦ {%pra-kṛt%} (see rt. 2. {%kṛt%}), cl. 1. 6. P.
{%-kartati, -kṛntati, -kartitum,%} to cut off; to cut
up, cut to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>30196<pc>0603-b<k1>prakfSita<k2>prakfSita
{#prakfSita#}¦ {%pra-kṛśita, as, ā, am,%} attenuated,
thin, emaciate.
<LEND>

<L>30197<pc>0603-b<k1>prakfz<k2>prakfz
{#prakfz#}¦ {%pra-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-karṣati (-te), -karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to draw
forth, stretch forth; to draw forwards, drag away;
to lead (an army); to draw or bend (a bow); to
draw out, stretch out, prolong; to place before or in
front; to harass, distract, disturb, trouble, disquiet.
<LEND>

<L>30198<pc>0603-b<k1>prakarza<k2>prakarza
{%Pra-karṣa, as,%}¦ m. pre-eminence, excellence,
eminence, distinction, superiority, intensity of good
qualities or merit, high degree (in these senses fre-
quently at the end of comps.; cf. {%praṇaya-p˚,%}
{%vapuḥ-p˚, varṇa-p˚%}); might, strength; speciality;
universality; absoluteness, definitiveness; protracted-
ness, length; (in grammar) the effect of the prefix
{%pra%} upon roots; ({%āt, eṇa%}), ind. in a high degree,
intensely, eminently, exceedingly, mightily, strongly.
{%—Prakarṣa-gamana, am,%} n. going absolutely or
[Page0603-c+ 80]
finally (?). {%—Prakarṣa-tantra, as, ā, am,%} depend-
ent on excellence or intensity of merit; dependent
on superior strength or power. {%—Prakarṣa-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} pre-eminent, eminent, excellent.
<LEND>

<L>30199<pc>0603-c<k1>prakarzaka<k2>prakarzaka
{%Pra-karṣaka, as,%}¦ m. ‘the harasser, disquieter,’
an epithet of the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>30200<pc>0603-c<k1>prakarzaRa<k2>prakarzaRa
{%Pra-karṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ harassing, distracting,
disquieting, troubling; ({%am%}), n. the act of drawing
away, drawing, attracting; drawing furrows, plough-
ing; pushing forwards; stretching out, extension,
long duration, length; excellence, superiority; the
act of harassing or disquieting, distraction; realizing
by the use of a pledge more than the interest of the
money lent upon it; a bridle (?).
<LEND>

<L>30201<pc>0603-c<k1>prakarzaRIya<k2>prakarzaRIya
{%Pra-karṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be dragged away,
to be moved along the ground.
<LEND>

<L>30202<pc>0603-c<k1>prakarzat<k2>prakarzat
{%Pra-karṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dragging forth, drawing
out, drawing along; drawing or bending (a bow).
<LEND>

<L>30203<pc>0603-c<k1>prakarzita<k2>prakarzita
{%Pra-karṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn forth, dragged
forwards; stretched out; exceeded in profit (as the
interest of a loan); ({%am%}), n. profit on a pledge
beyond the interest of the money lent upon it.
<LEND>

<L>30204<pc>0603-c<k1>prakarzin<k2>prakarzin
{%Pra-karṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ drawing forth; excellent,
pre-eminent, distinguished.
<LEND>

<L>30205<pc>0603-c<k1>prakfzwa<k2>prakfzwa
{%Pra-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn forth, dragged
forwards; drawn out, protracted, lengthy, long; pre-
eminent, superior, distinguished, excellent, exalted;
prominent, chief, principal; well to do; distracted,
harassed, disquieted; violent. {%—Prakṛṣṭa-tā,%} f. or
{%prakṛṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. transcendent excellence,
eminence, superiority.
<LEND>

<L>30206<pc>0603-c<k1>prakfzya<k2>prakfzya
{%Pra-kṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be dragged forwards,
to be drawn along on the ground; excessive. {%—Pra-%}
{%kṛṣya-kutsita, as, ā, am,%} strongly censured;
(also read {%prakṛṣṭa-kutsita.%})
<LEND>

<L>30207<pc>0603-c<k1>prakF<k2>prakF
{#prakF#}¦ {%pra-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -karitum,%}
{%-karītum,%} to scatter forth, scatter, strew, throw about;
to issue forth, spring up: Pass. {%-kīryate%} (ep. Pot.
{%-kīryet%}), to disappear, vanish.
<LEND>

<L>30208<pc>0603-c<k1>prakara<k2>prakara<h>2
2. {%pra-kara, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see under {%pra-kṛ,%}
p. 602), a scattered heap, heap, multitude, quantity,
plenty; a bunch of flowers, a nosegay; ({%ī%}), f. a kind
of song; an open piece of ground; a place where four
roads meet; the proper site of any magical opera-
tions; ({%am%}), n. aloe wood, Agallochum.
<LEND>

<L>30209<pc>0603-c<k1>prakaritf<k2>prakaritf
{%Pra-karitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who sprinkles;
one who spices or seasons (?).
<LEND>

<L>30210<pc>0603-c<k1>prakiraRa<k2>prakiraRa
{%Pra-kiraṇa, am,%}¦ n. scattering, strewing, throwing
about.
<LEND>

<L>30211<pc>0603-c<k1>prakirat<k2>prakirat
{%Pra-kirat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} scattering, strewing.
<LEND>

<L>30212<pc>0603-c<k1>prakIrRa<k2>prakIrRa
{%Pra-kīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ scattered forth, scattered,
strewed, dispersed; squandered; spread abroad, spread,
published, public, promulgated; mixed, containing
various subjects, miscellaneous; disordered, loose,
dishevelled; agitated, excited, wild; confused, in-
coherent; waved, waving, undulating; expanded,
open; standing alone, nowhere mentioned; ({%as%}),
m. the plant Guilandina Bonduc; ({%am%}), n. a con-
fused mass, miscellany, miscellanea; a collection of
miscellaneous rules; a chapter, section, division of
a book. {%—Prakīrṇa-keśī,%} f. ‘having dishevelled
hair,’ an epithet of Durgā. {%—Prakīrṇa-maithuna,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} living in mixed (connubial) intercourse.
{%—Prakīrṇāmbara-mūrdhaja (˚ṇa-am˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} with disordered garments and dishevelled hair.
<LEND>

<L>30213<pc>0603-c<k1>prakIrRaka<k2>prakIrRaka
{%Pra-kīrṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ scattered about; occur-
ring singly or in single instances; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
a chowrie, the tail of the Bos Grunniens used as a
fan or fly-flap and as an ornament for horses; a
tuft of hair used as an ornament for horses; ({%as%}),
m. a horse; ({%am%}), n. a miscellany, any collection of
heterogeneous objects not arranged under any dis-
tinct classes or heads; a section or division of a
book; (in law) a case not provided for by the
Śāstras and to be decided by the judge or king,
the legal decision of a case not anticipated in the
law-books; a section or chapter of a book; extent,
length (especially of a book or stanza).
<LEND>

<L>30214<pc>0603-c<k1>prakIrya<k2>prakIrya
{%Pra-kīrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be strewed or scattered,
to be spread abroad or about; to be diffused or
[Page0604-a+ 77]
promulgated; to be expanded or extended; ({%as%}), m.
the plant Guilandina Bonduc.
<LEND>

<L>30215<pc>0604-a<k1>prakFt<k2>prakFt
{#prakFt#}¦ {%pra-kṝt,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kīrtayati, -yitum,%}
to announce, proclaim; to pronounce, declare, call,
name; to approve.
<LEND>

<L>30216<pc>0604-a<k1>prakIrtana<k2>prakIrtana
{%Pra-kīrtana, am,%}¦ n. announcing, proclaiming;
pronouncing aloud; praising aloud, lauding, extolling;
({%ā%}), f. mentioning, naming.
<LEND>

<L>30217<pc>0604-a<k1>prakIrtita<k2>prakIrtita
{%Pra-kīrtita, as, ā, am,%}¦ announced, proclaimed;
pronounced, declared, said, mentioned, stated; called,
named; explained; revealed; renowned, celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>30218<pc>0604-a<k1>prakIrtti<k2>prakIrtti
{%Pra-kīrtti, is,%}¦ f. celebration, praise; fame, cele-
brity; declaration.
<LEND>

<L>30219<pc>0604-a<k1>prakxp<k2>prakxp
{#prakxp#}¦ {%pra-kḷp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kalpate, -kalpi-%}
{%tum, -kalptum,%} to proceed prosperously, succeed, be
successful; to be fit or suitable for (with inf. or dat.):
Caus. {%-kalpayati, -yitum,%} to prepare, make, de-
sign; to put a person at the head, show honour to;
to accompany (?); to establish, fix, settle; to appoint,
invest, install, elect to, choose or select for (with two
acc., or with acc. and loc. of abstract noun); to fix,
fasten; to further; (with {%aśru%}) to shed tears.
<LEND>

<L>30220<pc>0604-a<k1>prakalpanA<k2>prakalpanA
{%Pra-kalpanā,%}¦ f. fixing, settlement, allotting, allot-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>30221<pc>0604-a<k1>prakalpayitf<k2>prakalpayitf
{%Pra-kalpayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who prepares
or arranges, setting in order ({%= iṣ-kartṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>30222<pc>0604-a<k1>prakalpita<k2>prakalpita
{%Pra-kalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ done, made, appointed;
formed or shed (as a tear); ({%ā%}), f. a kind of riddle.
<LEND>

<L>30223<pc>0604-a<k1>prakalpya<k2>prakalpya
{%Pra-kalpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be appointed, to be
fixed or settled, to be determined.
<LEND>

<L>30224<pc>0604-a<k1>prakxpta<k2>prakxpta
{%Pra-kḷpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ prepared, arranged, made
ready; ({%am%}), ind., Ved. readily, easily. {%—Pra-%}
{%kḷpta-tva, am,%} n., Ved. progress, success, success-
fulness. {%—Prakḷpta-snāna-maṇḍana, as, ā, am,%}
one whose ablutions and toilet have been arranged.
<LEND>

<L>30225<pc>0604-a<k1>prakxpti<k2>prakxpti
{%Pra-kḷpti,%}¦ a various reading for {%pra-kṛti,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30226<pc>0604-a<k1>praketa<k2>praketa
{#praketa#}¦ {%pra-keta, as,%} m. ({%keta%} fr. 2. {%ki%} = rt. 2.
{%ci%}), Ved. appearance; observation, perception, intel-
ligence; one who knows; (Sāy. {%= andhakārāvṛ-%}
{%tasya sarvasya padārthasya prajñāpakaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>30227<pc>0604-a<k1>prakozWa<k2>prakozWa
{#prakozWa#}¦ {%pra-koṣṭha, as,%} m. the fore-arm;
a room near the gate of a royal palace; a court in a
house, an open space surrounded by buildings; a part
of a door-frame.
<LEND>

<L>30228<pc>0604-a<k1>prakozWaka<k2>prakozWaka
{%Prakoṣṭhaka, as,%}¦ m. a room near the gate of
a palace.
<LEND>

<L>30229<pc>0604-a<k1>prakKara<k2>prakKara
{#prakKara#}¦ {%prakkhara, as,%} m. iron armour for
the defence of a horse or elephant; (also written
{%pra-khara, pra-kṣara.%})
<LEND>

<L>30230<pc>0604-a<k1>prakrand<k2>prakrand
{#prakrand#}¦ {%pra-krand,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krandati,%}
{%-te, -kranditum,%} Ved. to invoke loudly: Caus. P.
{%-krandayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to roar; to move with
a rushing sound.
<LEND>

<L>30231<pc>0604-a<k1>prakram<k2>prakram
{#prakram#}¦ {%pra-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-kramate, -kramitum,%} to step or stride forwards,
go forwards, walk on, advance; to set out, march
forth, march off; to come forth, issue forth, to go,
depart; to step or stride across, pass; (usually A.) to
proceed to do or apply one's self to anything, under-
take, prepare; to take the first step, commence,
begin (with inf.); (A.) to act or behave towards
(with loc.): Caus. {%-krāmayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to step or stride forwards.
<LEND>

<L>30232<pc>0604-a<k1>prakrantf<k2>prakrantf
{%Pra-krantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who proceeds or
goes; one who takes the first step or begins, a
beginner; conquering, overpowering, surpassing.
<LEND>

<L>30233<pc>0604-a<k1>prakrama<k2>prakrama
{%Pra-krama, as,%}¦ m. a step, stride; a particular
measure of distance, a pace (the length of which is
variously stated by commentators on works on ritual
at two or three or three and a half Padas, and some-
times at more or less); striding forwards, stepping,
striding; proceeding, going; commencement, be-
ginning; leisure, opportunity; relation, proportion,
degree, measure; a series of oblations correspond-
ing to the movements of a sacrificial horse (Ved.);
the reading of the Krama, q. v.; speaking about or
discussing the point in question; the case in question.
[Page0604-b+ 76]
{%—Prakrama-tṛtīya, am,%} n., Ved. the third of a
square pace. {%—Prakrama-bhaṅga, as,%} m. want of
method, the breaking of arrangement in composition
({%= bhagna-krama, bhagna-prakrama%}).
<LEND>

<L>30234<pc>0604-b<k1>prakramaRa<k2>prakramaRa
{%Pra-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. stepping forwards, step-
ping, proceeding; issuing forth.
<LEND>

<L>30235<pc>0604-b<k1>prakramaRIya<k2>prakramaRIya
{%Pra-kramaṇīya,%}¦ or {%pra-kramitavya,%} or {%pra-%}
{%kramya, as, ā, am,%} to be gone or proceeded.
<LEND>

<L>30236<pc>0604-b<k1>prakramamARa<k2>prakramamARa
{%Pra-kramamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ proceeding, be-
ginning; overcoming.
<LEND>

<L>30237<pc>0604-b<k1>prakrAnta<k2>prakrAnta
{%Pra-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, proceeded; gone
beyond, surpassed; commenced, begun; preceded,
previously mentioned, previously laid down or stated;
({%am%}), n. the outset of a journey; the point in
question. {%—Prakrānta-tva, am,%} n. beginning, com-
mencing; the being begun; the being stated or
mentioned previously.
<LEND>

<L>30238<pc>0604-b<k1>prakraya<k2>prakraya
{#prakraya#}¦ {%pra-kraya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%krī%} with
{%pra%}), sale (?).
<LEND>

<L>30239<pc>0604-b<k1>prakrI<k2>prakrI
{%Pra-krī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ Ved. to be bought, purchasable.
<LEND>

<L>30240<pc>0604-b<k1>prakrIq<k2>prakrIq
{#prakrIq#}¦ {%pra-krīḍ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krīḍati, -te,%}
{%-krīḍitum,%} to play, sport, disport one's self, gambol,
frolic, amuse one's self.
<LEND>

<L>30241<pc>0604-b<k1>prakrIqa<k2>prakrIqa
{%Pra-krīḍa, as,%}¦ m. play, pastime; a place of
sports, play-ground (Ved.); {%Marutām prakrīḍaḥ,%}
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>30242<pc>0604-b<k1>prakrIqita<k2>prakrIqita
{%Pra-krīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ played, playing, sporting.
<LEND>

<L>30243<pc>0604-b<k1>prakrIqin<k2>prakrIqin
{%Pra-krīḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. playing, sporting;
playful, sportive, frolicsome.
<LEND>

<L>30244<pc>0604-b<k1>prakruS<k2>prakruS
{#prakruS#}¦ {%pra-kruś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati, -kroṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to raise a cry, cry out; to utter (cries), call;
to invoke, call upon, cry out to.
<LEND>

<L>30245<pc>0604-b<k1>prakroSa<k2>prakroSa
{%Pra-krośa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a shriek, scream.
<LEND>

<L>30246<pc>0604-b<k1>praklid<k2>praklid
{#praklid#}¦ {%pra-klid,%} cl. 4. A. {%-klidyate, -kledi-%}
{%tum, -klettum,%} to become moist or humid, to be-
come wet: Caus. {%-kledayati, -yitum,%} to moisten,
wet, make wet.
<LEND>

<L>30247<pc>0604-b<k1>praklinna<k2>praklinna
{%Pra-klinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ moist, humid, wet,
soaked, saturated; moved with compassion or sym-
pathy. {%—Praklinna-vartman, a,%} n. a kind of dis-
ease of the eyelids; [cf. {%klinna-vartman.%}] {%—Pra-%}
{%klinna-hṛdayekṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} having the
heart and eyes moist (with affection).
<LEND>

<L>30248<pc>0604-b<k1>prakleda<k2>prakleda
{%Pra-kleda, as,%}¦ m. moistness, wetness, humidity.
{%—Prakleda-vat, ān, atī, at,%} moistening, wetting.
<LEND>

<L>30249<pc>0604-b<k1>prakledana<k2>prakledana
{%Pra-kledana, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%pra-kledin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} moistening, wetting.
<LEND>

<L>30250<pc>0604-b<k1>prakvaRa<k2>prakvaRa
{#prakvaRa#}¦ {%pra-kvaṇa%} or {%pra-kvāṇa, as,%} m. (fr.
rt. {%kvaṇ%} with {%pra%}), the sound of a Vīṇā or lute.
<LEND>

<L>30251<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzaya<k2>prakzaya
{#prakzaya#}¦ {%pra-kṣaya.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>30252<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzar<k2>prakzar
{#prakzar#}¦ {%pra-kṣar,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kṣarati, -kṣa-%}
{%ritum,%} to stream, trickle forth, ooze; to drop down.
<LEND>

<L>30253<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzara<k2>prakzara
{%Pra-kṣara, as,%}¦ m. iron armour for the defence
of a horse or elephant; [cf. {%pra-khara, prak-%}
{%khara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30254<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzaraRa<k2>prakzaraRa
{%Pra-kṣaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. flowing forth, trickling
out, oozing, dripping.
<LEND>

<L>30255<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzal<k2>prakzal
{#prakzal#}¦ {%pra-kṣal,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kṣālayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to wash off, wash away, rinse; to cleanse,
clean, purify: Caus. to cause to wash.
<LEND>

<L>30256<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzAlaka<k2>prakzAlaka
{%Pra-kṣālaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ washing, one who
washes; [cf. {%sadyaḥ-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30257<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzAlana<k2>prakzAlana
{%Pra-kṣālana, as, ā, am,%}¦ performing frequent
ablutions, one who performs frequent ablutions; ({%am%}),
n. washing, washing off, cleaning, cleansing, purify-
ing; bathing; a means of cleaning, anything used
for purifying, water for washing. {%—Prakṣālanār-%}
{%thāya (˚na-ar˚),%} ind. for the sake of washing.
<LEND>

<L>30258<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzAlanIya<k2>prakzAlanIya
{%Pra-kṣālanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be washed away
or cleansed; to be purified.
<LEND>

<L>30259<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzAlita<k2>prakzAlita
{%Pra-kṣālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ washed, cleansed; ex-
piated.
<LEND>

<L>30260<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzAlya<k2>prakzAlya<h>1
1. {%pra-kṣālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be washed or
purified.
<LEND>

<L>30261<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzAlya<k2>prakzAlya<h>2
2. {%pra-kṣālya,%}¦ ind. having washed, having rinsed.
<LEND>

<L>30262<pc>0604-b<k1>prakzi<k2>prakzi
{#prakzi#}¦ {%pra-kṣi,%} cl. 9. 5. 1. P. {%-kṣiṇāti, %}
[Page0604-c+ 75]
{%kṣiṇoti, -kṣayati, -kṣetum,%} to spoil, injure,
wear out, exhaust, destroy: Pass. {%-kṣīyate,%} to be
destroyed, perish, to be worn out or exhausted; to
be diminished.
<LEND>

<L>30263<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzaya<k2>prakzaya
{%Pra-kṣaya, as,%}¦ m. destruction, ruin.
<LEND>

<L>30264<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzayaRa<k2>prakzayaRa
{%Pra-kṣayaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to perish,
destroying.
<LEND>

<L>30265<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzIRa<k2>prakzIRa
{%Pra-kṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ decayed, wasting; de-
stroyed; atoned; vanished, disappeared; ({%am%}), n.
the spot where any one has perished (e. g. {%prakṣī-%}
{%ṇam iḍaṃ Deva-dattasya,%} this is the spot where
Deva-datta perished).
<LEND>

<L>30266<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzip<k2>prakzip
{#prakzip#}¦ {%pra-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣipati,%}
{%-te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw or fling at, throw or cast
into; to project; to hurl; to put or lay before; to
insert, interpolate: Caus. {%-kṣepayati, -yitum,%} to
cause or order to cast or put into.
<LEND>

<L>30267<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzipta<k2>prakzipta
{%Pra-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or cast at,
hurled, flung; thrown forth, projected.
<LEND>

<L>30268<pc>0604-c<k1>prakziptavat<k2>prakziptavat
{%Pra-kṣiptavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has thrown
at, one who has thrown.
<LEND>

<L>30269<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzipya<k2>prakzipya
{%Pra-kṣipya,%}¦ ind. having thrown at, having hurled.
<LEND>

<L>30270<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzepa<k2>prakzepa
{%Pra-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. throwing or casting forth or
forward, projecting; a throw, cast; throwing into or
upon, scattering upon; insertion, interpolation; any-
thing added or thrown into drugs while in course of
decoction, an ingredient; the sum deposited by each
member of a commercial company; the box of a
carriage. {%—Prakṣepa-lipi, is,%} f. a particular style
of handwriting.
<LEND>

<L>30271<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzepaRa<k2>prakzepaRa
{%Pra-kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. throwing, casting; pouring
upon, throwing on, throwing into; fixing (as a
price).
<LEND>

<L>30272<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzepaRIya<k2>prakzepaRIya
{%Pra-kṣepaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thrown or cast
forth, to be thrown away.
<LEND>

<L>30273<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzepin<k2>prakzepin
{%Pra-kṣepin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ throwing upon, placing
upon.
<LEND>

<L>30274<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzeptavya<k2>prakzeptavya
{%Pra-kṣeptavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thrown into
or upon, to be scattered upon; to be scattered.
<LEND>

<L>30275<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzepya<k2>prakzepya
{%Pra-kṣepya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thrown or put on.
<LEND>

<L>30276<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzIvita<k2>prakzIvita
{#prakzIvita#}¦ {%pra-kṣīvita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%kṣīv%} with {%pra%}), drunken, intoxicated.
<LEND>

<L>30277<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzud<k2>prakzud
{#prakzud#}¦ {%pra-kṣud,%} cl. 7. P. {%-kṣuṇatti, -kṣot-%}
{%tum,%} to pound, crush; to break; to pierce, pierce
through.
<LEND>

<L>30278<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzuRRa<k2>prakzuRRa
{%Pra-kṣuṇṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushed; pierced through,
lacerated; incited.
<LEND>

<L>30279<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzuB<k2>prakzuB
{#prakzuB#}¦ {%pra-kṣubh,%} cl. 1. A., 4. P. {%-kṣo-%}
{%bhate, -kṣubhyati, -kṣobhitum,%} to be moved, to
be shaken or agitated; to totter, stagger; to be
confused: Caus. {%-kṣobhayati, -yitum,%} to agitate,
excite.
<LEND>

<L>30280<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzoBaRa<k2>prakzoBaRa
{%Pra-kṣobhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. agitating, exciting.
<LEND>

<L>30281<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzE<k2>prakzE
{#prakzE#}¦ {%pra-kṣai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kṣāyati, -kṣā-%}
{%tum,%} to be consumed, to burn (intrans.).
<LEND>

<L>30282<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzRu<k2>prakzRu
{#prakzRu#}¦ {%pra-kṣṇu,%} cl. 2. P. {%-kṣṇauti, -kṣṇa-%}
{%vitum,%} to sharpen, whet, point.
<LEND>

<L>30283<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzveqana<k2>prakzveqana
{#prakzveqana#}¦ {%pra-kṣveḍana%} or {%pra-kṣvedana,%}
{%as, ā,%} m. f. (fr. rt. {%kṣviḍ%} or {%kṣvid%} with {%pra%}),
clamour, a loud indistinct noise; an iron arrow.
<LEND>

<L>30284<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzveqA<k2>prakzveqA
{%Pra-kṣveḍā,%}¦ f. humming, grumbling, an inarti-
culate sound.
<LEND>

<L>30285<pc>0604-c<k1>prakzveqita<k2>prakzveqita
{%Pra-kṣveḍita%}¦ or {%pra-kṣvedita, as, ā, am,%}
clamorous, shouting, making a loud indistinct noise;
unctuous. {%—Prakṣveḍita-vat%} or {%prakṣvedita-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} noisy; unctuous.
<LEND>

<L>30286<pc>0604-c<k1>praKara<k2>praKara
{#praKara#}¦ {%pra-khara, as, ā, am,%} very hot or
acrid, acrid, biting, pungent; very hard or rough;
({%as%}), m. iron armour for the defence of a horse or
elephant [cf. {%prakkhara, pra-kṣara%}]; a mule;
a dog.
<LEND>

<L>30287<pc>0604-c<k1>praKala<k2>praKala
{#praKala#}¦ {%pra-khala, as,%} m. a great scoundrel,
very wicked person.
<LEND>

<L>30288<pc>0604-c<k1>praKAda<k2>praKAda
{#praKAda#}¦ {%pra-khāda, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%khād%}
with {%pra%}), Ved. devouring, consuming.
<LEND>
[Page0605-a+ 76]

<L>30289<pc>0605-a<k1>praKid<k2>praKid
{#praKid#}¦ {%pra-khid,%} cl. 6. P. {%-khidati, -khet-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to thrust away; to harass, afflict.
<LEND>

<L>30290<pc>0605-a<k1>praKidat<k2>praKidat
{%Pra-khidat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. thrusting away;
harassing, afflicting (according to Mahī-dhara {%= pra-%}
{%karṣeṇa khedayat%}).
<LEND>

<L>30291<pc>0605-a<k1>praKyA<k2>praKyA
{#praKyA#}¦ {%pra-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti, -khyā-%}
{%tum,%} to see (Ved.); to announce, report; to praise,
extol, celebrate: Pass. {%-khyāyate,%} to be recognised
or acknowledged, to be known; to shine: Caus.
{%-khyāpayati, -yitum,%} to make generally known,
to be published.
<LEND>

<L>30292<pc>0605-a<k1>praKya<k2>praKya
{%Pra-khya, as, ā, am,%}¦ visible, clear, distinct;
looking or appearing like, resembling, like (at the
end of comps., cf. {%śaśāṅka-kiraṇa-p˚%}); ({%ā%}), f.
look, appearance; perceptibility, visibility; making
manifest, disclosure.
<LEND>

<L>30293<pc>0605-a<k1>praKyas<k2>praKyas
{%Pra-khyas, ās,%}¦ m. {%= Prajā-pati,%} q. v.; the planet
Jupiter.
<LEND>

<L>30294<pc>0605-a<k1>praKyAta<k2>praKyAta
{%Pra-khyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ celebrated, renowned,
famous, noted, notorious; recognised, acknowledged;
bespoken, forestalled, claimed by right of pre-emp-
tion; pleased, happy. {%—Prakhyāta-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n.
a commodity the pre-emption of which is claimed
by a king. {%—Prakhyāta-vaptṛka, as, ā, am,%}
having a celebrated father. {%—Prakhyāta-sad-bhar-%}
{%tṛ, tā,%} m. known as a good husband.
<LEND>

<L>30295<pc>0605-a<k1>praKyAti<k2>praKyAti
{%Pra-khyāti, is,%}¦ f. perceptibility; publicity, no-
toriety, celebrity; praise, eulogium, fame; {%a-pra-%}
{%khyātim i%} or {%gam,%} to become imperceptible, vanish,
disappear.
<LEND>

<L>30296<pc>0605-a<k1>praKyAna<k2>praKyAna
{%Pra-khyāna, am,%}¦ n. perception, the being per-
ceived or being known; the making known, report-
ing, communicating; a report, information.
<LEND>

<L>30297<pc>0605-a<k1>praKyAnIya<k2>praKyAnIya
{%Pra-khyānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be celebrated or
made known.
<LEND>

<L>30298<pc>0605-a<k1>praKyApana<k2>praKyApana
{%Pra-khyāpana, am,%}¦ n. the making known, pub-
lishing; reporting, communicating; report, inform-
ation.
<LEND>

<L>30299<pc>0605-a<k1>praKyApanIya<k2>praKyApanIya
{%Pra-khyāpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made gene-
rally known, to be published.
<LEND>

<L>30300<pc>0605-a<k1>praKyAyamAna<k2>praKyAyamAna
{%Pra-khyāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being celebrated,
being praised.
<LEND>

<L>30301<pc>0605-a<k1>praKyAla<k2>praKyAla
{#praKyAla#}¦ {%pra-khyāla,%} probably a wrong
reading for {%pra-khyāta%} above.
<LEND>

<L>30302<pc>0605-a<k1>praga<k2>praga
{#praga#}¦ {%pra-ga.%} See under {%pra-gam%} below.
<LEND>

<L>30303<pc>0605-a<k1>pragaR<k2>pragaR
{#pragaR#}¦ {%pra-gaṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-gaṇayati, -yitum,%}
to reckon up, calculate.
<LEND>

<L>30304<pc>0605-a<k1>pragaRqa<k2>pragaRqa
{#pragaRqa#}¦ {%pra-gaṇḍa, as,%} m. the upper part
of the arm from the elbow to the shoulder [cf.
{%pra-kāṇḍa%}]; ({%ī%}), f. an outer wall or rampart.
<LEND>

<L>30305<pc>0605-a<k1>pragadita<k2>pragadita
{#pragadita#}¦ {%pra-gadita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%gad%}
with {%pra%}), spoken, speaking, beginning to speak.
<LEND>

<L>30306<pc>0605-a<k1>pragAdya<k2>pragAdya
{%Pra-gādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Scholiast on Pāṇ. III.
1, 100.
<LEND>

<L>30307<pc>0605-a<k1>pragam<k2>pragam
{#pragam#}¦ {%pra-gam,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%-gac-%}
{%chati (-te), -gantum,%} to go forward, advance, pro-
ceed; to set out towards, start for; to stride towards,
go to; to reach, attain (Sāy. {%= prāp%}).
<LEND>

<L>30308<pc>0605-a<k1>praga<k2>praga
{%Pra-ga, as, ā, am,%}¦ going before or in advance,
preceding; ({%e%}), ind. early in the morning, at dawn,
at day-break (‘when the sun goes forth?’). {%—Prage-%}
{%tana, as, ī, am,%} relating or belonging to the morn-
ing, to be performed in the morning, matutinal.
{%—Prage-niśa, as, ā, am,%} ‘one to whom it is night
early in the morning,’ i. e. one who is asleep early
in the morning. {%—Prage-śaya, as, ā, am,%} sleeping
early in the morning, asleep at day-break.
<LEND>

<L>30309<pc>0605-a<k1>pragata<k2>pragata
{%Pra-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forward, gone forth,
started; separate, apart; gone with difficulty. {%—Pra-%}
{%gata-jānu, us, us, u,%} or {%pragata-jānuka, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} having the knees far apart, bandy-legged, bow-
legged.
<LEND>

<L>30310<pc>0605-a<k1>pragama<k2>pragama
{%Pra-gama, as,%}¦ m. the first manifestation of affec-
tion in conversation, first advance.
<LEND>

<L>30311<pc>0605-a<k1>pragamana<k2>pragamana
{%Pra-gamana, am,%}¦ n. progress, advance; going
apart; the first manifestation of affection in the
[Page0605-b+ 76]
course of conversation; difficult progress (?); dis-
puting (?).
<LEND>

<L>30312<pc>0605-b<k1>pragamanIya<k2>pragamanIya
{%Pra-gamanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Scholiast on Pāṇ.
VIII. 4, 34.
<LEND>

<L>30313<pc>0605-b<k1>pragAman<k2>pragAman
{%Pra-gāman,%}¦ walk, gait, step; [cf. {%pṛthu-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30314<pc>0605-b<k1>pragAmin<k2>pragAmin
{%Pra-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ setting out, being about
to depart.
<LEND>

<L>30315<pc>0605-b<k1>pragayaRa<k2>pragayaRa
{#pragayaRa#}¦ {%pra-gayaṇa, am,%} n. a various read-
ing for {%pra-gamana,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30316<pc>0605-b<k1>pragarj<k2>pragarj
{#pragarj#}¦ {%pra-garj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-garjati, -garjitum,%}
to roar; to begin to thunder.
<LEND>

<L>30317<pc>0605-b<k1>pragarjana<k2>pragarjana
{%Pra-garjana, am,%}¦ n. roaring, roar; [cf. {%siṃha-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30318<pc>0605-b<k1>pragarjita<k2>pragarjita
{%Pra-garjita, am,%}¦ n. a roar, noise, din.
<LEND>

<L>30319<pc>0605-b<k1>pragarDin<k2>pragarDin
{#pragarDin#}¦ {%pra-gardhin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt. {%gṛdh%}
with {%pra%}), Ved. pressing onwards, pressing forwards;
eager (Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇābhikāṅkṣan%}).
<LEND>

<L>30320<pc>0605-b<k1>pragalB<k2>pragalB
{#pragalB#}¦ {%pra-galbh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-galbhate, -gal-%}
{%bhitum,%} to act with spirit or resolution, behave
resolutely, act in a determined manner, be deter-
mined; to be arrogant or proud; to be ready or
able to (with inf.).
<LEND>

<L>30321<pc>0605-b<k1>pragalBa<k2>pragalBa
{%Pra-galbha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bold, confident; resolute,
energetic; prompt, ready; spirited, courageous, brave,
intrepid, daring; audacious, proud, arrogant; impudent,
shameless; strong, able; eminent, illustrious; mature
(as age); ({%as%}), m. an epithet of the fire employed
at the Jāta-karman; N. of a philosophical writer;
({%ā%}), f. a bold or confident woman, a woman who courts
her husband's caresses, a wanton woman; a scolding
woman, shrew; an epithet of Durgā; ({%am%}), n. in
a spirited or determined manner, resolutely. {%—Pra-%}
{%galbha-kulāla, as,%} m. a skilful potter. {%—Pragal-%}
{%bha-tā,%} f. or {%pragalbha-tva, am,%} n. boldness, con-
fidence; energy, resolution, resoluteness; audacity,
arrogance; power, eminence, consequence; per-
verseness, wilfulness.
<LEND>

<L>30322<pc>0605-b<k1>pragalBita<k2>pragalBita
{%Pra-galbhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rendered proud, arro-
gant; eminent, conspicuous.
<LEND>

<L>30323<pc>0605-b<k1>pragA<k2>pragA
{#pragA#}¦ {%pra-gā,%} cl. 2. 3. P. {%-gāti, -jigāti,%}
{%gātum,%} to go forwards, proceed, go away, move.
<LEND>

<L>30324<pc>0605-b<k1>pragARa<k2>pragARa<h>1
1. {%pra-gāṇa, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see under {%pra-gai,%}
col. 3), access, approach; [cf. {%pṛthu-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30325<pc>0605-b<k1>pragAh<k2>pragAh
{#pragAh#}¦ {%pra-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -gāhitum,%}
{%gāḍhum,%} Ved. to dive into, enter, penetrate, pervade.
<LEND>

<L>30326<pc>0605-b<k1>pragAQa<k2>pragAQa
{%Pra-gāḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ dipped into, steeped,
soaked, impregnated [cf. {%lavaṇa-p˚%}]; much, exces-
sive; hard, difficult; hard, firm; ({%am%}), n. pain,
privation, penance; ({%am%}), ind. much, exceedingly;
earnestly, forcibly; tightly, firmly; in due propor-
tion. {%—Pragāḍha-tā,%} f. or {%pragāḍha-tva, am,%} n.
abundance, excessiveness; hardness.
<LEND>

<L>30327<pc>0605-b<k1>pragAhana<k2>pragAhana
{%Pra-gāhana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. dipping or plunging
into.
<LEND>

<L>30328<pc>0605-b<k1>praguRa<k2>praguRa
{#praguRa#}¦ {%pra-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} having excel-
lent qualities, being in a good state or condition, being
in the right state or order, straight; honest, upright.
{%—Praguṇī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make straight, put in order, arrange, place in
rank and file, array; to spread, make smooth or even.
<LEND>

<L>30329<pc>0605-b<k1>praguRana<k2>praguRana
{%Pra-guṇana, am,%}¦ n. putting straight.
<LEND>

<L>30330<pc>0605-b<k1>praguRaya<k2>praguRaya
{%Praguṇaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%praguṇayati, -yitum,%} to
make straight.
<LEND>

<L>30331<pc>0605-b<k1>praguRita<k2>praguRita
{%Pra-guṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made straight or even,
made smooth, smoothed.
<LEND>

<L>30332<pc>0605-b<k1>praguRin<k2>praguRin
{%Pra-guṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ straightened, made smooth
or even, smoothed.
<LEND>

<L>30333<pc>0605-b<k1>praguRya<k2>praguRya
{%Pra-guṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ having excellent qualities,
excellent; more, exceeding.
<LEND>

<L>30334<pc>0605-b<k1>pragup<k2>pragup
{#pragup#}¦ {%pra-gup,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gopayati, -yitum,%}
to seek to protect, to guard.
<LEND>

<L>30335<pc>0605-b<k1>pragopana<k2>pragopana
{%Pra-gopana, am,%}¦ n. protection, preservation,
salvation.
<LEND>

<L>30336<pc>0605-b<k1>pragur<k2>pragur
{#pragur#}¦ {%pra-gur,%} cl. 6. P. {%-gurati, -guritum,%}
Ved. to cry aloud, exclaim loudly; to make great
efforts, make strenuous exertions (Sāy. {%= atyartham%}
{%udyuj%}).
<LEND>
[Page0605-c+ 78]

<L>30337<pc>0605-c<k1>pragF<k2>pragF
{#pragF#}¦ {%pra-gṝ%} (see rt. 1. {%gṝ%}), cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛṇāti, -gṛṇīte, -garitum, -garītum,%} to announce,
praise, extol, celebrate.
<LEND>

<L>30338<pc>0605-c<k1>prage<k2>prage
{#prage#}¦ {%pra-ge.%} See under {%pra-gam,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>30339<pc>0605-c<k1>pragE<k2>pragE
{#pragE#}¦ {%pra-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gātum,%} to
begin to sing, sing of, sing, celebrate; to sound,
resound.
<LEND>

<L>30340<pc>0605-c<k1>pragARa<k2>pragARa<h>2
2. {%pra-gāṇa, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. see under {%pra-gā,%}
col. 2), singing, song.
<LEND>

<L>30341<pc>0605-c<k1>pragAtf<k2>pragAtf
{%Pra-gātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a singer, excellent singer.
<LEND>

<L>30342<pc>0605-c<k1>pragATa<k2>pragATa
{%Pra-gātha, as,%}¦ m. a strophe, a combination of
two verses (viz. of a Bṛhatī or Kakubh followed
by a Sato-bṛhatī which by an intermixture of the
several Pādas is changed into a triplet); ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a man with the patronymics Kāṇva and
Ghaura, the author of the hymns Ṛg-veda VIII. 1,
2, 10, 48, 51-54; ({%ās%}), m. pl. an epithet of the
hymns of the eighth Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>30343<pc>0605-c<k1>pragAyin<k2>pragAyin
{%Pra-gāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ singing, beginning to sing.
<LEND>

<L>30344<pc>0605-c<k1>pragIta<k2>pragIta
{%Pra-gīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sung; one who has begun
to sing, singing; resonant with singing, vocal;
({%am%}), n. song; a sing-song or drawling recitation
(regarded as a fault).
<LEND>

<L>30345<pc>0605-c<k1>pragIti<k2>pragIti
{%Pra-gīti, is,%}¦ f. a kind of metre, containing 30 +
29 syllabic instants.
<LEND>

<L>30346<pc>0605-c<k1>pragraTana<k2>pragraTana
{#pragraTana#}¦ {%pra-grathana, am,%} n. the act of
connecting or stringing together, intertwining.
<LEND>

<L>30347<pc>0605-c<k1>pragras<k2>pragras
{#pragras#}¦ {%pra-gras,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-grasati, -te,%}
{%-grasitum,%} to eat up, devour, swallow, swallow up;
to eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>30348<pc>0605-c<k1>pragrah<k2>pragrah
{#pragrah#}¦ {%pra-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti,%}
{%gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} to hold forth, hold out, stretch
forth; to offer; to seize, grasp, clutch, take hold of,
take; to receive, accept; to draw up, stop; to draw
towards one's self, unite with; to give a friendly
reception to, act in a friendly manner towards,
favour; to keep separate or isolated (as words &c.
not subjected to the rules of Sandhi): Caus. {%-grā-%}
{%hayati, -yitum,%} to receive, accept.
<LEND>

<L>30349<pc>0605-c<k1>pragfhIta<k2>pragfhIta
{%Pra-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ held in front, held out;
received, accepted, admitted; pronounced separately
without observing the usual rules of Sandhi [cf. 1. {%pra-%}
{%gṛhya%}]; collected, strung together (?). {%—Pragṛhīta-%}
{%pada, as,%} m., scil. {%sandhi,%} a suspension of Sandhi
in which the vowels remain unaltered.
<LEND>

<L>30350<pc>0605-c<k1>pragfhya<k2>pragfhya<h>1
1. {%pra-gṛhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or accepted,
to be admitted; (in grammar) to be taken or pro-
nounced separately, not subject to the rules of Sandhi
or euphony (as the final {%ī, ū,%} and {%e%} of the dual
terminations whether of nouns, pronouns, or verbs,
e. g. {%kavī etau,%} ‘these two poets;’ {%bandhū etau,%}
‘these two relations’).
<LEND>

<L>30351<pc>0605-c<k1>pragfhya<k2>pragfhya<h>2
2. {%pra-gṛhya,%}¦ ind. having taken or grasped, car-
rying away with; with.
<LEND>

<L>30352<pc>0605-c<k1>pragfhyamARa<k2>pragfhyamARa
{%Pra-gṛhyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being taken or
seized.
<LEND>

<L>30353<pc>0605-c<k1>pragraha<k2>pragraha
{%Pra-graha, as,%}¦ m. holding in front, holding
forth, holding out, stretching forth; taking, taking
or laying hold of, grasping, clutching, seizing (e. g.
{%aṅga-p˚,%} the seizing of the limbs [by a demon],
pain in the limbs); the seizing or grasping of the
sun or moon, beginning of an eclipse [cf. {%graha%}];
kind or friendly reception, kindness, favour; a rein,
bridle, rope or halter for horses, lash, thong, whip,
scourge; the cord or string suspending a balance; a
guide, leader, ruler; a ray of light; a prisoner,
captive, either man or beast in confinement; bind-
ing; taming, breaking (a horse); the arm; a species
of plant, Cassia Fistula; (in grammar) a vowel not
subject to the rules of Sandhi; epithet of a particular
sacrificial rite (more fully written {%pragraha-homa%});
an epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Pragraha-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} (at the end of a comp.) having seized,
holding; giving a friendly reception, receiving kindly,
obliging, kind.
<LEND>

<L>30354<pc>0605-c<k1>pragrahaRa<k2>pragrahaRa
{%Pra-grahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. taking, seizing, holding,
assuming; shutting up, confining; the seizure of
sun and moon, i. e. the commencement of an eclipse;
[Page0606-a+ 74]
offering; a rein, bridle; a check, restraint; the being
a leader or guide.
<LEND>

<L>30355<pc>0606-a<k1>pragrAha<k2>pragrAha
{%Pra-grāha, as,%}¦ m. seizing, taking, taking up,
bearing, carrying; a rein; the string of a balance.
{%—Pragrāha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having the string of
a balance.
<LEND>

<L>30356<pc>0606-a<k1>pragrIva<k2>pragrIva
{#pragrIva#}¦ {%pra-grīva, as, am,%} m. n. a window,
lattice, balcony (‘projecting like a neck,’ cf. {%grīvā%});
a summer-house, pleasure-house; a building on the
top of a palace, a painted turret; a wooden balus-
trade or fence round a building; a stable; the top
of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>30357<pc>0606-a<k1>praglE<k2>praglE
{#praglE#}¦ {%pra-glai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-glāyati, -glātum,%}
to fade or wither away: Caus. {%-glāpayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to fade or wither away.
<LEND>

<L>30358<pc>0606-a<k1>pragla<k2>pragla
{%Pra-gla, as, ā, am,%}¦ wearied, fatigued, exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>30359<pc>0606-a<k1>praGaw<k2>praGaw
{#praGaw#}¦ {%pra-ghaṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ghaṭate, -ghaṭitum,%}
to exert one's self, to apply or devote one's self to;
to begin, commence.
<LEND>

<L>30360<pc>0606-a<k1>praGawaka<k2>praGawaka
{%Pra-ghaṭaka,%}¦ a precept, rule, doctrine.
<LEND>

<L>30361<pc>0606-a<k1>praGawA<k2>praGawA
{%Pra-ghaṭā,%}¦ f. (perhaps) the rudiments or first
elements of a science. {%—Praghaṭā-vid, t,%} m. ‘know-
ing the rudiments,’ a general reader but not a pro-
found one.
<LEND>

<L>30362<pc>0606-a<k1>praGawwaka<k2>praGawwaka
{#praGawwaka#}¦ {%pra-ghaṭṭaka, as%} or {%am%} (fr. rt. {%ghaṭṭ%}
with {%pra%}), a precept, rule, doctrine.
<LEND>

<L>30363<pc>0606-a<k1>praGaRa<k2>praGaRa
{#praGaRa#}¦ {%pra-ghaṇa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%han%} with
{%pra%}), a porch before the door of a house, a terrace be-
fore a house; an iron mace or crowbar; a copper pot.
<LEND>

<L>30364<pc>0606-a<k1>praGana<k2>praGana
{%Pra-ghana, as,%}¦ m. a covered terrace before a
house; a species of bean, Phaseolus Mungo (a wrong
reading for {%prathana%}).
<LEND>

<L>30365<pc>0606-a<k1>praGARa<k2>praGARa
{%Pra-ghāṇa, as,%}¦ m. a covered terrace or small
portico before the door of a house; an iron mace or
hand-spike; a copper pot; the trunk of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>30366<pc>0606-a<k1>praGAta<k2>praGAta
{%Pra-ghāta, as,%}¦ m. a combat, battle; the edging
of a garment.
<LEND>

<L>30367<pc>0606-a<k1>praGAna<k2>praGAna
{%Pra-ghāna, as,%}¦ m. a covered terrace before the
door of a house, porch, portico.
<LEND>

<L>30368<pc>0606-a<k1>praGasa<k2>praGasa
{#praGasa#}¦ {%pra-ghasa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ghas%}
with {%pra%}), voracious; an epithet of false gods;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Rakṣas; N. of a monkey fol-
lower of Rāma; a Daitya, demon; eating much,
voracity; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>30369<pc>0606-a<k1>praGAsin<k2>praGAsin
{%Pra-ghāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ or {%pra-ghāsya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. voracious (an epithet of the Maruts, ac-
cording to Mahī-dhara {%= puroḍāśa-bhakṣaṇa-%}
{%śīla%}).
<LEND>

<L>30370<pc>0606-a<k1>praGuRa<k2>praGuRa
{#praGuRa#}¦ {%praghuṇa, as,%} m. a guest, visitor; (a
wrong form for {%prāghuṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>30371<pc>0606-a<k1>praGuz<k2>praGuz
{#praGuz#}¦ {%pra-ghuṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ghoṣati, -gho-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to sound forth, sound: Caus. {%-ghoṣayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to sound forth, cause to announce
aloud, proclaim.
<LEND>

<L>30372<pc>0606-a<k1>praGozaka<k2>praGozaka
{%Pra-ghoṣaka, as,%}¦ m. sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>30373<pc>0606-a<k1>praGozin<k2>praGozin
{%Pra-ghoṣin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘roaring,’ an epithet of
one of the nine classes of the Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>30374<pc>0606-a<k1>praGUrRa<k2>praGUrRa
{#praGUrRa#}¦ {%pra-ghūrṇa, as, ā, am,%} turning round
or rolling violently; wandering, roaming; ({%as%}), m.
a guest, a visitor (in this sense a wrong form for
{%prāghūrṇaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>30375<pc>0606-a<k1>praGfz<k2>praGfz
{#praGfz#}¦ {%pra-ghṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gharṣati, -ghar-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to rub to pieces; to rub into, anoint.
<LEND>

<L>30376<pc>0606-a<k1>praGfzwa<k2>praGfzwa
{%Pra-ghṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed in, embrocated,
anointed.
<LEND>

<L>30377<pc>0606-a<k1>pracakita<k2>pracakita
{#pracakita#}¦ {%pra-cakita, as, ā, am,%} trembling,
shuddering, terrified, startled.
<LEND>

<L>30378<pc>0606-a<k1>pracakra<k2>pracakra
{#pracakra#}¦ {%pra-cakra, am,%} n. an army in motion;
a foraging army.
<LEND>

<L>30379<pc>0606-a<k1>pracakz<k2>pracakz
{#pracakz#}¦ {%pra-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe, -caṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to tell, relate, recount, inform; to suppose,
consider as, regard as, deem; to call, name: Caus.
{%-cakṣayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to irradiate, illumine.
<LEND>
[Page0606-b+ 78]

<L>30380<pc>0606-b<k1>pracakzaRa<k2>pracakzaRa
{%Pra-cakṣaṇa,%}¦ see Gaṇa Gotrādi to Pāṇ. VIII.
1, 27, 57.
<LEND>

<L>30381<pc>0606-b<k1>pracakzas<k2>pracakzas
{%Pra-cakṣas, ās,%}¦ m. the regent of the planet
Jupiter, Bṛhas-pati.
<LEND>

<L>30382<pc>0606-b<k1>pracaRqa<k2>pracaRqa
{#pracaRqa#}¦ {%pra-caṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} excessively
violent, vehement, impetuous, passionate, furious,
enraged, wrathful; very hot or burning; intolerable,
insupportable; terrible, terrific; bold, confident, pre-
suming; ({%as%}), m. a species of oleander with white
flowers; N. of a Dānava; of a goblin; of a son of
Vatsa-prī and Su-nanda; ({%ā%}), f. a species of Dūrvā
with white flowers; a form or Śakti of Durgā.
{%—Pracaṇḍa-ghoṇa, as, ā, am,%} large-nosed, hav-
ing a large or prominent nose. {%—Pracaṇḍa-tā,%} f.
violence, vehemence; boldness. {%—Pracaṇḍa-pāṇ-%}
{%ḍava, am,%} n. ‘the wrathful sons of Pāṇḍu,’ N. of
a comedy by Rāja-śekhara {%(= Bāla-bhārata).%}
{%—Pracaṇḍa-mūrti, is,%} f. ‘oleander-formed,’ a
species of tree, Tapia Cratæva. {%—Pracaṇḍa-var-%}
{%man, ā,%} m., N. of a prince (a younger brother of
Caṇḍa-varman). {%—Pracaṇḍa-sūrya, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing a hot or burning sun {%—Pracaṇḍa-sena, as,%} m.
‘having a formidable army,’ N. of a prince of Tāmra-
liptikā. {%—Pracaṇḍātapa (˚ḍa-āt˚), as,%} m. fierce
or stifling heat.
<LEND>

<L>30383<pc>0606-b<k1>pracat<k2>pracat
{#pracat#}¦ {%pra-cat,%} Caus. A. {%-cātayate, -yitum,%}
Ved. to drive away, frighten or scare away; (ac-
cording to Sāy.) to destroy utterly, consume.
<LEND>

<L>30384<pc>0606-b<k1>pracatA<k2>pracatA
{%Pra-catā,%}¦ ind., Ved. secretly, in secret, clandestinely.
<LEND>

<L>30385<pc>0606-b<k1>pracaya<k2>pracaya
{#pracaya#}¦ {%pra-caya,%} &c. See under {%pra-ci,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>30386<pc>0606-b<k1>pracar<k2>pracar
{#pracar#}¦ {%pra-car,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%-ca-%}
{%rati (-te), -caritum,%} to come forth, issue forth,
appear; to proceed towards, arrive at, reach, attain;
to visit; to roam, wander; to circulate, become
current (as a story); to undertake, perform, discharge
(especially sacred functions, with inst. of the object
or of the means employed); to proceed, behave,
act in a particular manner (e. g. {%bhṛtya-vat pra-%}
{%car,%} to act like a servant); to treat (e. g. {%mithyā%}
{%pra-car,%} to treat wrongly or unskilfully); to be
busied about, to be occupied or engaged in (with loc.);
to do, perform, fulfil, practise; to succeed, thrive,
prosper: Caus. {%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to allow to roam,
cause to graze, turn out to graze; to make public.
<LEND>

<L>30387<pc>0606-b<k1>pracara<k2>pracara
{%Pra-cara, as,%}¦ m. a road, way, path; usage, cus-
tom, currency; going well or widely; N. of a people
(in this sense also read {%praccara, prastara%}).
<LEND>

<L>30388<pc>0606-b<k1>pracaraRa<k2>pracaraRa
{%Pra-caraṇa, am,%}¦ n. going, proceeding; circu-
lating, being current; proceeding with, beginning,
undertaking; employing, using; ({%ī%}), f., Ved., scil.
{%sruc,%} a wooden ladle employed for want of a better
at a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>30389<pc>0606-b<k1>pracaraRIya<k2>pracaraRIya
{%Pra-caraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be used, being
in actual use.
<LEND>

<L>30390<pc>0606-b<k1>pracarat<k2>pracarat
{%Pra-carat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going forth, going well
or quickly, going widely, being current, circulating.
<LEND>

<L>30391<pc>0606-b<k1>pracarita<k2>pracarita
{%Pra-carita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, going; pursued,
practised (as a profession).
<LEND>

<L>30392<pc>0606-b<k1>pracaritavya<k2>pracaritavya
{%Pra-caritavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be proceeded with
or undertaken, to be performed.
<LEND>

<L>30393<pc>0606-b<k1>pracAra<k2>pracAra
{%Pra-cāra, as,%}¦ m. coming forth, going forth, ap-
pearing, becoming manifest, showing one's self;
being in actual use, currency; appearance, manifesta-
tion; proceeding, taking place, being used or ap-
plied; going, wandering; conduct, behaviour; pre-
valence, currency, custom, usage; a play-ground, place
of exercise; pasture ground, pasture, pasturage.
<LEND>

<L>30394<pc>0606-b<k1>pracArita<k2>pracArita
{%Pra-cārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ allowed to wander or
roam about; made public or manifest.
<LEND>

<L>30395<pc>0606-b<k1>pracArin<k2>pracArin
{%Pra-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ coming forth, appearing,
manifesting one's self; going about, wandering; pro-
ceeding with, behaving.
<LEND>

<L>30396<pc>0606-b<k1>pracal<k2>pracal
{#pracal#}¦ {%pra-cal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-calati, -calitum,%}
to be set in motion, shake, quake, totter, tremble;
to move forth, move on, advance; to start up, spring
up; to start, set out, set forth, depart; to become
troubled or confused, to be perplexed or bewildered,
to be excited; to swerve, deviate from (with abl.):
[Page0606-c+ 78]
Caus. {%-calayati, -yitum,%} to set in motion, move,
jog, wag; {%-cālayati, -yitum,%} to cause to shake or
tremble; to stir up, stir round.
<LEND>

<L>30397<pc>0606-c<k1>pracala<k2>pracala
{%Pra-cala, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in motion, trembling,
shaking; going well or widely; current, circulating,
customary.
<LEND>

<L>30398<pc>0606-c<k1>pracalaka<k2>pracalaka
{%Pra-calaka, as,%}¦ m. a venomous species of reptile;
[cf. {%pra-calāka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30399<pc>0606-c<k1>pracalakin<k2>pracalakin
{%Pracalakin.%}¦ See {%pracalākin%} below.
<LEND>

<L>30400<pc>0606-c<k1>pracalat<k2>pracalat
{%Pra-calat, an, antī, at,%}¦ moving, trembling, shak-
ing; going or proceeding far; circulating, being cur-
rent or customary; prevailing, being recognised (as
authority or law).
<LEND>

<L>30401<pc>0606-c<k1>pracalana<k2>pracalana
{%Pra-calana, am,%}¦ n. trembling, shaking, rocking,
swaying, tottering; retiring, retreating, fleeing, flight;
moving to and fro; going well or widely; circu-
lating, being current or customary.
<LEND>

<L>30402<pc>0606-c<k1>pracalAka<k2>pracalAka
{%Pra-calāka, as,%}¦ m. shooting with arrows, archery;
a peacock's tail; a snake; another poisonous animal;
({%ā%}), f., Ved. a violent shower of rain, a sudden fall
of rain in torrents.
<LEND>

<L>30403<pc>0606-c<k1>pracalAkin<k2>pracalAkin
{%Pracalākin, ī,%}¦ m. a peacock; a snake; (also
spelt {%pracalakin.%})
<LEND>

<L>30404<pc>0606-c<k1>pracalAya<k2>pracalAya
{%Pracalāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pracalāyati, -yitum,%} to
move to and fro, to nod the head.
<LEND>

<L>30405<pc>0606-c<k1>pracalAyita<k2>pracalAyita
{%Pracalāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rolling about, tossing,
tumbling, rolled or tossed about (as in a ship);
nodding the head (while asleep in a sitting posture);
({%am%}), n. nodding the head.
<LEND>

<L>30406<pc>0606-c<k1>pracalita<k2>pracalita
{%Pra-calita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set in motion, moved,
shaken; swinging to and fro; rolling (as the eye);
gone far or wide, wandering, roving; having set out
or moved forwards, having proceeded; current, cus-
tomary, circulating; prevailing, recognised, received
(as authority or law).
<LEND>

<L>30407<pc>0606-c<k1>pracAlaka<k2>pracAlaka
{%Pra-cālaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
causing to tremble, trembling with.
<LEND>

<L>30408<pc>0606-c<k1>pracAlana<k2>pracAlana
{%Pra-cālana, am,%}¦ n. stirring, stir; making a
noise (?).
<LEND>

<L>30409<pc>0606-c<k1>pracazAla<k2>pracazAla
{#pracazAla#}¦ {%pra-caṣāla, am,%} n. a particular
ornament on a sacrificial post.
<LEND>

<L>30410<pc>0606-c<k1>pracAya<k2>pracAya
{#pracAya#}¦ {%pra-cāya.%} See under {%pra-ci%} below.
<LEND>

<L>30411<pc>0606-c<k1>pracAla<k2>pracAla
{#pracAla#}¦ {%pra-cāla, as,%} m. the neck of the
Vīṇā or Indian lute; (a wrong reading for {%pra-bāla.%})
<LEND>

<L>30412<pc>0606-c<k1>praci<k2>praci
{#praci#}¦ {%pra-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -cinute,%}
{%-cetum,%} to collect, gather, pluck; to cut down, cut
to pieces; to increase, augment, enhance: Pass.
{%-cīyate,%} to be gathered or collected; to grow.
<LEND>

<L>30413<pc>0606-c<k1>pracaya<k2>pracaya
{%Pra-caya, as,%}¦ m. collecting, gathering (as fruit
or flowers, but especially by means of a stick or
other implement); a heap, quantity, number; slight
union or aggregation; the neutral accentless tone
(also called {%eka-śruti%}); the common increase or
difference of the terms in a progression (in algebra).
{%—Pracaya-svara, as,%} m. (in Ved. gram.) ‘the
most usual tone,’ the accentless or neutral tone
neither raised nor depressed ({%= pra-caya, pra-cita,%}
{%pracita-svara%}).
<LEND>

<L>30414<pc>0606-c<k1>pracayana<k2>pracayana
{%Pra-cayana, am,%}¦ n. gathering, collecting.
<LEND>

<L>30415<pc>0606-c<k1>pracAya<k2>pracAya
{%Pra-cāya, as,%}¦ m. or {%pra-cāyikā,%} f. gathering
(with the hand), plucking, collecting.
<LEND>

<L>30416<pc>0606-c<k1>pracita<k2>pracita
{%Pra-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gathered, collected, plucked;
accumulated, amassed; covered, filled; accentless or
An-udātta, {%= pra-caya; (as),%} m. a kind of Daṇḍaka
metre (also called {%pracitaka%}). {%—Pracita-svara =%}
{%pracaya-svara,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30417<pc>0606-c<k1>pracinvat<k2>pracinvat
{%Pra-cinvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ gathering, collecting,
plucking; ({%an%}), m., N. of a son of Janam-ejaya.
<LEND>

<L>30418<pc>0606-c<k1>pracikIrzu<k2>pracikIrzu
{#pracikIrzu#}¦ {%pra-cikīrṣu.%} See p. 603, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>30419<pc>0606-c<k1>pracit<k2>pracit
{#pracit#}¦ {%pra-cit,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-ciketti, -ci-%}
{%kitte, -cetitum,%} Ved. to know; to make known,
announce, proclaim; to become visible or percep-
tible, appear: Caus. P. {%-cetayati, -yitum,%} to make
known, cause to appear; to observe, notice, remark,
perceive; (A.) to appear: Desid. {%-cikitsati,%} to show,
point out.
<LEND>

<L>30420<pc>0606-c<k1>pracikita<k2>pracikita
{%Pra-cikita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. familiar or conver-
sant with.
<LEND>
[Page0607-a+ 75]

<L>30421<pc>0607-a<k1>pracetas<k2>pracetas
{%Pra-cetas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ attentive, observant, con-
versant or familiar with, clever, wise, intelligent
(mostly Ved. as an epithet of the gods and especially
of Agni and the Ādityas); happy, delighted; ({%ās%}),
m. an epithet of Varuṇa regent of the waters; N. of
a Prajā-pati (an ancient sage and law-giver, Manu
1. 35); of a prince (son of Duduha); of a son of
Dur-yāman; of a son of Dur-mada; ({%asas%}), m. pl.
the ten sons of Prācīna-barhis by a daughter of
Varuṇa (they are the progenitors of Dakṣa; in this
sense also written {%pra-cetasa%}).
<LEND>

<L>30422<pc>0607-a<k1>pracetuna<k2>pracetuna
{%Pra-cetuna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. affording a wide
view or prospect; (Sāy.) {%= prakarṣeṇa phala-%}
{%bhoga-jñāpaka,%} notifying in a high degree the
experience of results (of actions).
<LEND>

<L>30423<pc>0607-a<k1>pracint<k2>pracint
{#pracint#}¦ {%pra-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cintayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to think upon, reflect, muse, meditate, con-
sider; to find out, devise, contrive.
<LEND>

<L>30424<pc>0607-a<k1>pracintya<k2>pracintya<h>1
1. {%pra-cintya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be reflected or medi-
tated upon.
<LEND>

<L>30425<pc>0607-a<k1>pracintya<k2>pracintya<h>2
2. {%pra-cintya,%}¦ ind. having reflected or considered.
<LEND>

<L>30426<pc>0607-a<k1>pracIbala<k2>pracIbala
{#pracIbala#}¦ {%pracībala, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a species of plant.
<LEND>

<L>30427<pc>0607-a<k1>pracIra<k2>pracIra
{#pracIra#}¦ {%pra-cīra, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Vatsa-prī and Su-nandā.
<LEND>

<L>30428<pc>0607-a<k1>pracud<k2>pracud
{#pracud#}¦ {%pra-cud,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-codati, -te,%}
{%-coditum,%} to drive on, drive, impel (Ved.): Caus.
{%-codayati, -yitum,%} to set in rapid motion, push on,
drive on, drive, impel, urge on; to excite, animate,
inspire, inflame; to request, ask, solicit, importune;
to decree, determine, settle; to announce, make
known, proclaim; to hasten, make haste.
<LEND>

<L>30429<pc>0607-a<k1>pracoda<k2>pracoda
{%Pra-coda, as,%}¦ m. instigating, inciting, exciting.
<LEND>

<L>30430<pc>0607-a<k1>pracodaka<k2>pracodaka
{%Pra-codaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ instigating; ({%ikā%}), f.
‘inflamer,’ epithet of the four daughters of Ni-yojikā
daughter of the demon Duḥ-saha.
<LEND>

<L>30431<pc>0607-a<k1>pracodana<k2>pracodana
{%Pra-codana, am,%}¦ n. instigating, inciting, excit-
ing; directing, enjoining, prescribing, ordering, an
order; a rule or law; saying; sending; ({%ī%}), f. the
plant Solanum Jacquini.
<LEND>

<L>30432<pc>0607-a<k1>pracodita<k2>pracodita
{%Pra-codita, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven on, impelled,
instigated, incited; decreed, determined; announced,
proclaimed; prescribed, commanded, directed (Manu
II. 191); sent.
<LEND>

<L>30433<pc>0607-a<k1>pracodin<k2>pracodin
{%Pra-codin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ driving forward, urging;
({%inī%}), f. prickly nightshade, Solanum Jacquini.
<LEND>

<L>30434<pc>0607-a<k1>pracura<k2>pracura
{#pracura#}¦ {%pracura, as, ā, am,%} much, many,
abundant (opposed to {%alpa%}); plenteous, plentiful,
frequent; abounding in, filled with, replete with (in
comp., e. g. {%vṛkṣa-p˚,%} abounding in trees). {%—Pra-%}
{%cura-tā,%} f. or {%pracura-tva, am,%} n. abundance,
plentifulness, plenty; multitude, numerousness; the
state of being full of, abounding in. {%—Pracura-%}
{%nitya-dhanāgama (˚na-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} receiving
many and constant supplies of money. {%—Pracura-%}
{%paribhava, as,%} m. frequent humiliation. {%—Pracura-%}
{%puruṣa, as, ā, am,%} abounding with men, populous,
numerous; ({%as%}), m. a thief; [cf. {%caura.%}] {%—Pra-%}
{%cura-ratna-dhanāgama (˚na-āg˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a large income of gems and money. {%—Pra-%}
{%cura-loma, as, ā, am,%} having too much hair.
{%—Pracurī-karaṇa, am,%} n. making abundant or
plentiful; adding to, augmenting, increasing. {%—Pra-%}
{%curī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made abundant or plentiful;
added to, augmented, increased. {%—Pracurī-bhavat,%}
{%an, antī, at,%} becoming abundant or plentiful, in-
creasing. {%—Pracurī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavi-%}
{%tum,%} to become abundant or plentiful, to increase.
<LEND>

<L>30435<pc>0607-a<k1>pracUrR<k2>pracUrR
{#pracUrR#}¦ {%pra-cūrṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cūrṇayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to crush, grind to dust, reduce to powder.
<LEND>

<L>30436<pc>0607-a<k1>pracft<k2>pracft
{#pracft#}¦ {%pra-cṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-cṛtati, -cartitum,%}
Ved. to loose, loosen, untie.
<LEND>

<L>30437<pc>0607-a<k1>pracetas<k2>pracetas
{#pracetas#}¦ {%pra-cetas.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>30438<pc>0607-a<k1>pracetf<k2>pracetf
{#pracetf#}¦ {%pra-cetṛ, tā,%} m. a charioteer; (a
wrong form for {%pra-vetṛ.%})
<LEND>
[Page0607-b+ 76]

<L>30439<pc>0607-b<k1>pracela<k2>pracela
{#pracela#}¦ {%pra-cela, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%cel%} with
{%pra?%}), yellow sandal-wood.
<LEND>

<L>30440<pc>0607-b<k1>pracelaka<k2>pracelaka
{%Pra-celaka, as,%}¦ m. a horse.
<LEND>

<L>30441<pc>0607-b<k1>praceluka<k2>praceluka
{#praceluka#}¦ {%praceluka, as,%} m. a cook; (a wrong
form for {%paceluka,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>30442<pc>0607-b<k1>pracoda<k2>pracoda
{#pracoda#}¦ {%pra-coda,%} &c. See {%pra-cud,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>30443<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCad<k2>pracCad<h>1
{#pracCad#} 1¦. {%pra-cchad (pra-chad),%} cl. 10. P.
(ep. also A.) {%-chādayati (-te), -yitum,%} to cover
over, cover, envelop, wrap up; to hide, conceal, dis-
guise, keep secret; to obscure, darken, cloud; to
be in the way, be an obstacle; to cover or clothe
one's self with (with inst.), put on.
<LEND>

<L>30444<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCad<k2>pracCad<h>2
2. {%pra-cchad, t,%}¦ f., Ved. a cover, covering; (ac-
cording to Mahī-dhara {%= anna.%})
<LEND>

<L>30445<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCada<k2>pracCada
{%Pra-cchada, as,%}¦ m. a cover, coverlet, wrapper,
blanket. {%—Pracchada-paṭa, as,%} m. ‘enveloping
cloth,’ a cover, wrapper (either of a person or thing,
as a cloak, veil, sheet, curtain, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>30446<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCanna<k2>pracCanna
{%Pra-cchanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, enveloped;
concealed, secreted, hidden; clothed, clad; private,
secret, unavowed, disguised; ({%am%}), n. a private door
inside a house, private door in general; a lattice, a
loop-hole; ({%am%}), ind. secretly, covertly. {%—Pra-%}
{%cchanna-cāraka, as, ikā, am,%} acting fraudulently.
{%—Pracchanna-taskara, as,%} m. a secret or unseen
thief. {%—Pracchanna-vañcaka, as,%} m. a secret or
concealed rogue or rascal.
<LEND>

<L>30447<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCannIBU<k2>pracCannIBU
{%Pracchannī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%}
to hide or conceal one's self. {%—Pracchannī-bhūya,%}
ind. being hidden, having become concealed.
<LEND>

<L>30448<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCAdaka<k2>pracCAdaka
{%Pra-cchādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ concealing, covering
(at the end of a comp., e. g. {%tamaḥ-pracchādaka,%}
‘enveloping in darkness,’ an epithet of a demon);
({%as%}), m. the song of a wife deserted by her husband
(sung with the accompaniment of a lute and con-
taining a covert description of her sorrows).
<LEND>

<L>30449<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCAdana<k2>pracCAdana
{%Pra-cchādana, as, ī, am,%}¦ concealing, hiding;
({%am%}), n. covering, concealing, concealment; an upper
or outer garment. {%—Pracchādana-paṭa, as,%} m.
‘enveloping-cloth,’ a cover, coverlet, wrapper.
<LEND>

<L>30450<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCAdita<k2>pracCAdita
{%Pra-cchādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, enveloped;
concealed, hidden; clothed.
<LEND>

<L>30451<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCAdya<k2>pracCAdya<h>1
1. {%pra-cchādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be covered; to be
hidden or concealed.
<LEND>

<L>30452<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCAdya<k2>pracCAdya<h>2
2. {%pra-cchādya,%}¦ ind. having covered; having
obscured or darkened; having hidden or concealed.
<LEND>

<L>30453<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCana<k2>pracCana
{#pracCana#}¦ {%pracchana.%} See rt. {%prach,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>30454<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCayitvA<k2>pracCayitvA
{#pracCayitvA#}¦ {%pra-cchayitvā, pra-cchāna, pra-%}
{%cchita.%} See under {%pra-ccho%} below.
<LEND>

<L>30455<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCAya<k2>pracCAya
{#pracCAya#}¦ {%pra-cchāya, am,%} n. a shadowy place,
dense shadow, shade.
<LEND>

<L>30456<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCid<k2>pracCid<h>1
{#pracCid#} 1¦. {%pra-cchid (pra-chid),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-chinatti, -chintte, -chettum,%} to cut off, rend away;
to cut to pieces, cut through, pierce, split, cleave; to
take away, withdraw: Caus. {%-cchedayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to cut off, to order to be lopped off.
<LEND>

<L>30457<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCid<k2>pracCid<h>2
2. {%pra-cchid, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. cutting off, cutting to
pieces.
<LEND>

<L>30458<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCeda<k2>pracCeda
{%Pra-ccheda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a cutting, slip, strip;
(according to a Scholiast a piece of grass, such as a
portion of the root, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>30459<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCedana<k2>pracCedana
{%Pra-cchedana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. dividing into small
pieces.
<LEND>

<L>30460<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCedya<k2>pracCedya
{%Pra-cchedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut to pieces;
[cf. {%a-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30461<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCfd<k2>pracCfd
{#pracCfd#}¦ {%pra-cchṛd (pra-chṛd),%} Caus. P.
{%-cchardayati, -yitum,%} to vomit.
<LEND>

<L>30462<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCardana<k2>pracCardana
{%Pra-cchardana, am,%}¦ n. vomiting; emitting,
exhaling; an emetic.
<LEND>

<L>30463<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCardikA<k2>pracCardikA
{%Pra-cchardikā,%}¦ f. vomiting, sickness.
<LEND>

<L>30464<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCo<k2>pracCo
{#pracCo#}¦ {%pra-ccho (pra-cho),%} cl. 4. P. {%-cchyati,%}
{%-cchātum,%} to bleed by making incisions in the skin,
cup, lance, scarify.
<LEND>

<L>30465<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCayitvA<k2>pracCayitvA
{%Pra-cchayitvā,%}¦ ind. (?), having made an incision,
having lanced.
<LEND>

<L>30466<pc>0607-b<k1>pracCAna<k2>pracCAna
{%Pra-cchāna, am,%}¦ n. scarifying; making sore.
<LEND>
[Page0607-c+ 78]

<L>30467<pc>0607-c<k1>pracCita<k2>pracCita
{%Pra-cchita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, lanced, scarified.
<LEND>

<L>30468<pc>0607-c<k1>pracyu<k2>pracyu
{#pracyu#}¦ {%pra-cyu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-cyavate, -cyotum,%}
to move, proceed, move away, go away, depart; to
forsake, transgress; to be displaced or ejected, be
deprived of, lose (with abl.); to come forth, flow
out, stream forth; to fall down, drop, stumble; to
set in motion, drive, impel: Caus. {%-cyāvayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to move, shake; to eject, displace, remove,
expel, dispel; to divert (from an opinion &c.); to
cause to fall down or fall out, cause to fall, ruin.
<LEND>

<L>30469<pc>0607-c<k1>pracyava<k2>pracyava
{%Pra-cyava, as,%}¦ m. advancement, improvement;
withdrawal; fall, ruin.
<LEND>

<L>30470<pc>0607-c<k1>pracyavana<k2>pracyavana
{%Pra-cyavana, am,%}¦ n. going away, departing,
retreating, withdrawing; being deprived of, loss
(with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>30471<pc>0607-c<k1>pracyAvana<k2>pracyAvana
{%Pra-cyāvana, am,%}¦ n. means of removing or
diminishing, a sedative; causing to desist from or
give up, diverting from (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>30472<pc>0607-c<k1>pracyAvuka<k2>pracyAvuka
{%Pra-cyāvuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. transitory, fragile.
<LEND>

<L>30473<pc>0607-c<k1>pracyuta<k2>pracyuta
{%Pra-cyuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen from, strayed, de-
viated; ejected, displaced, degraded; banished, ex-
pelled; routed, put to flight, retreated. {%—Pracyuta-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. deviation; the being routed or put to
flight, retreat.
<LEND>

<L>30474<pc>0607-c<k1>pracyuti<k2>pracyuti
{%Pra-cyuti, is,%}¦ f. going away, withdrawing, de-
parting; deprivation, loss; the becoming frail or
fragile (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>30475<pc>0607-c<k1>praC<k2>praC
{#praC#}¦ {%prach,%} cl. 6. P. (in poetry also A.)
{%pṛcchati (-te), papraccha%} (Ved. {%pa-%}
{%pṛkṣe%}), {%praṣṭā, prakṣyati, aprākṣīt%} (Ved.
{%aprāṭ%}), Cond. {%aprakṣyat%} (anomalous 2nd sing.
{%aprākṣyas%}), {%praṣṭum,%} to ask, question, interro-
gate, inquire of, ascertain, learn by inquiry; to ask
or interrogate any one (acc.) about anything (with
acc. or loc. or with {%prati%} or {%adhi-kṛtya%}); to seek,
seek for; to entreat, supplicate, solicit, importune
(Ved.): Caus. {%pracchayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%apa-%}
{%pracchat:%} Desid. {%pipṛcchiṣati:%} Intens. {%parī-%}
{%pṛcchyate;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>pĕrĕs,</nsi> ‘to inquire;’ <nsi>frāś,</nsi>
‘a question:’ Lat. <nsi>prec-ari, prex, proc-u-s, procax,</nsi>
probably <nsi>posco</nsi> for <nsi>prosco</nsi> and <nsi>rogo</nsi> for <nsi>progo, pos-</nsi>
<nsi>tulare,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>suf-frag-ari, flag-it-are:</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>frah, fraihna, frag-an, fraihn-an:</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>fregnan:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>Frage:</nsi> Russ. <nsi>pros'u,</nsi> ‘I
ask, pray:’ Lith. <nsi>pers'u,</nsi> ‘I woo;’ <nsi>pras'au,</nsi> ‘I ask,
pray:’ Hib. <nsi>fiafrach,</nsi> ‘inquisitive;’ <nsi>fiafraighe,</nsi> ‘a
question;’ <nsi>fiafruighim,</nsi> ‘I inquire, ask;’ perhaps
<nsi>friscim,</nsi> ‘I hope,’ and <nsi>friscart,</nsi> ‘an answer.’]
<LEND>

<L>30476<pc>0607-c<k1>pracCana<k2>pracCana
{%Pracchana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. asking, inquiring, a
question, inquiry.
<LEND>

<L>30477<pc>0607-c<k1>praja<k2>praja
{#praja#}¦ {%pra-ja.%} See under {%pra-jan%} below.
<LEND>

<L>30478<pc>0607-c<k1>prajaNGa<k2>prajaNGa
{#prajaNGa#}¦ {%pra-jaṅgha, as,%} m., N. of a monkey;
of a Rākṣasa; ({%ā%}), f. a particular portion of the
lower part of the thigh.
<LEND>

<L>30479<pc>0607-c<k1>prajan<k2>prajan
{#prajan#}¦ {%pra-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate, -janitum,%}
to be born, be produced, come into existence, spring
up; to become an embryo; to be born again; to
propagate offspring (with inst.), beget, generate,
cause to conceive; to bring forth, be delivered of,
bear: Caus. {%-janayati, -yitum,%} to cause any one
(acc.) to propagate offspring (inst., Ved., Sāy. =
{%prodbhūtaṃ kṛ%}); to cause to be born; to beget,
generate; to bring forth, bear; to produce, cause,
occasion: Desid. {%-jijaniṣate,%} to wish to be born:
Desid. of Caus. {%-jijanayiṣati,%} to wish to cause to
be conceived.
<LEND>

<L>30480<pc>0607-c<k1>praja<k2>praja
{%Pra-ja, as, ā, am,%}¦ bringing forth, bearing (in
{%a-p˚,%} q. v.); ({%as%}), m. a husband; ({%ā%}), f. progeny,
offspring, brood, children and children's children,
posterity, descendants, race, family; a creature,
created being; man, mankind, people, subjects;
seed, semen; birth, generation, propagation. {%—Pra-%}
{%jā-kara, as,%} m. a symbolical expression for ‘a
sword;’ (perhaps an error for {%prajñā-kara.%})
{%—Prajā-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desirous of offspring,
wishing for children. {%—Prajā-kāra, as,%} m. the
maker of created beings, author of creation. {%—Pra-%}
{%jā-ghna, as, ī, am,%} Ved. killing offspring, destroying
[Page0608-a+ 81]
progeny. {%—Prajā-candra, as,%} m. ‘a moon to his
subjects,’ epithet of a prince. {%—Prajā-tantu, us,%} m.
a line of descendants, a race. {%—Prajā-da, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} granting offspring; removing barrenness (as a
medicine &c.); ({%ā%}), f. a species of shrub ({%= gar-%}
{%bha-dātrī%}). {%—Prajā-dāna, am,%} n. ‘people's gift,’
silver. {%—Prajā-dvāra, am,%} n. ‘a gate or means of
obtaining progeny,’ epithet of the sun. {%—Prajā-%}
{%dharma, as,%} m. the duty of children or of subjects.
{%—Prajādhyakṣa (˚jā-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘the super-
intendent or leader of created beings,’ an epithet
of the sun; of Kardama; of Dakṣa; [cf. {%prajā-%}
{%pati.%}] {%—Prajā-nātha, as,%} m. ‘protector or lord of
created beings,’ an epithet of Brahmā; of Manu; of
Dakṣa; a protector of subjects, a king, prince.
{%—Prajā-niṣeka, as,%} m. ‘infusion of offspring,’
impregnation; the infused germ itself, offspring.
{%—Prajāntaka (˚jā-an˚), as,%} m. the god of death.
{%—Prajā-pa, as,%} m. ‘protector of subjects,’ a king,
prince. {%—Prajā-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of creatures,’ an
epithet in the Veda originally applied to Savitṛ,
Soma, Tvaṣṭṛ, Hiraṇya-garbha, Indra, and Agni,
afterwards the name of a separate god presiding
over procreation [cf. Manu XII. 121] and the be-
stower of progeny and cattle, sometimes invoked
as the ‘Creator’ and sometimes invoked only as
one of the thirty-three deities, (in more recent hymns
and Brāhmaṇas sometimes identified with the uni-
verse, and described like Brahma as the original
self-existent Being or source out of which the uni-
verse was evolved); an epithet of the ten lords of
created beings first created by Brahmā (according to
Manu I. 34; their names are Marīci, Atri, Aṅgiras,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Vasiṣṭha, Pra-cetas or
Dakṣa, Bhṛgu, and Nārada; some authorities make
these Prajā-patis only seven in number, counting
only the first seven in the above list, others reduce
them to the last three, viz. Dakṣa, Bhṛgu, and
Nārada); an epithet of Śiva; ‘lord of the people,’
a king, sovereign, prince; a daughter's husband, son-
in-law; a creator, procreator, father (as generator); a
kind of insect; the fifth (or thirty-ninth) year in a
sixty years' cycle of Jupiter; a particular star, ò Aurigæ;
(in astrol.) = 2. {%kāla-nara,%} q. v.; the sun; fire;
N. of a man; of a Ṛṣi; ({%ī%}), f., N. of Śākya-
muni's aunt and nurse with the patronymic Gautamī
(the first woman who assented to the doctrines of
Buddha; cf. {%mahā-prajāpatī, mahā-prajāvatī%}).
{%—Prajāpati-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. created by
Prajā-pati (according to Mahī-dhara {%= prajāpati-%}
{%sṛṣṭa%}). {%—Prajāpati-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the
lords of created beings,’ an epithet of Dakṣa. {%—Pra-%}
{%jāpati-bhakṣita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. eaten by Prajā-
pati. {%—Prajāpati-yajña, as,%} m. ‘the sacrifice per-
formed to Prajā-pati (as the deity presiding over
procreation of offspring),’ the procreation of children
enjoined by law. {%—Prajāpati-loka, as,%} m. the
world of Prajā-pati situated between the sphere of
Brahmā and that of the Gandharvas. {%—Prajāpati-%}
{%śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Prajāpati-sṛṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} created by Prajā-pati. {%—Prajāpati-%}
{%hṛdaya, am,%} n., Ved. ‘Prajāpati's heart,’ N. of a
Sāman (also called {%Prajāpater hṛdayam%}). {%—Pra-%}
{%jāpatya,%} an incorrect form for {%prājāpatya,%} q. v.
{%—Prajā-pāla%} or {%prajā-pālaka, as,%} m. ‘protector
of created beings,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa; a protector
of subjects, a king, sovereign; N. of a prince.
{%—Prajā-pālana, am,%} n. the protection of subjects.
{%—Prajā-pāli, is,%} m. an epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%go-%}
{%pāli.%}] {%—Prajāpālya, am,%} n. the office of protector
of the people, royal office. {%—Prajāmṛtatva (˚jā-%}
{%am˚), am,%} n., Ved. perpetuity of posterity. {%—Pra-%}
{%jārtham%} or {%prajārthe (˚jā-ar˚),%} ind. for the sake of
offspring. {%—Prajā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} accompanied by
progeny, having offspring or children, abounding in
progeny, prolific; pregnant; having subjects; ({%atī%}),
f. a brother's wife; the wife of an elder brother; a
mother, matron; N. of a tutelary deity of the Su-
mantus; of the wife of Priya-vrata. {%—Prajā-vid, t,%}
{%t, t,%} or {%prajā-sani, is, is, i,%} Ved. bestowing or
granting progeny. {%—Prajā-vṛddhi, is,%} f. increase
[Page0608-b+ 76]
of progeny. {%—Prajā-sṛj, ṭ,%} m. ‘the creator of
beings,’ an epithet of Brahmā; of Kaśyapa. {%—Prajā-%}
{%hita, as, ā, am,%} favourable to or good for children
or subjects, kind or useful to children or subjects;
({%am%}), n. water. {%—Prajepsu (˚jā-īp˚), us, us, u,%}
wishing to obtain offspring, desirous of progeny.
{%—Prajeśa (˚jā-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of created beings,’
an epithet of the god presiding over the procreation
of offspring; ‘lord of the people,’ a prince, king,
sovereign. {%—Prajeśvara (˚jā-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of
the people,’ a sovereign, king. {%—Prajotpatti (˚jā-%}
{%ut˚), is,%} f. or {%prajotpādana (˚jā-ut˚), am,%} n. the
raising up of progeny.
<LEND>

<L>30481<pc>0608-b<k1>prajajYi<k2>prajajYi<h>1
1. {%pra-jajñi, is, is, i,%}¦ able to beget (in {%a-p˚,%}
q. v.; for 2. {%pra-jajñi%} see under 1. {%pra-jñā,%} col. 3).
<LEND>

<L>30482<pc>0608-b<k1>prajana<k2>prajana
{%Pra-jana, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (usually m.), begetting,
generating, impregnating, generation; impregnation
or pregnancy of cattle; bearing, bringing forth;
({%as%}), m. one who begets, a generator, impregnator,
progenitor. {%—Prajanārtham (˚na-ar˚),%} ind. for the
sake of procreation.
<LEND>

<L>30483<pc>0608-b<k1>prajanana<k2>prajanana
{%Pra-janana, as, ī, am,%}¦ begetting, generating,
generative, procreative, vigorous (according to Mahī-
dhara {%= prajotpādaka%}); ({%am%}), n. the act of gene-
ration, procreation, propagation, conception in the
womb; the act of bringing forth, delivery, birth;
production; generative energy, procreative power,
semen; the generative organ, penis, vulva; off-
spring, children; {%= pra-gama; = pra-gata%}. {%—Pra-%}
{%janana-kuśala, as, ā, am,%} skilled in midwifery.
{%—Prajanana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessing
generative power.
<LEND>

<L>30484<pc>0608-b<k1>prajanayitf<k2>prajanayitf
{%Pra-janayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. a generator, begetter,
progenitor.
<LEND>

<L>30485<pc>0608-b<k1>prajanikA<k2>prajanikA
{%Pra-janikā,%}¦ f. a mother.
<LEND>

<L>30486<pc>0608-b<k1>prajanizRu<k2>prajanizRu
{%Pra-janiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ generative, procreative,
prolific, productive, generating, producing; being
born or produced; growing or standing (as corn).
<LEND>

<L>30487<pc>0608-b<k1>prajanizyamARA<k2>prajanizyamARA
{%Pra-janiṣyamāṇā,%}¦ f. about to bring forth, being
near the time of delivery.
<LEND>

<L>30488<pc>0608-b<k1>prajanuka<k2>prajanuka
{%Pra-januka, as,%}¦ m. the body; (perhaps an in-
correct form.)
<LEND>

<L>30489<pc>0608-b<k1>prajanU<k2>prajanU
{%Pra-janū, ūs,%}¦ f., Ved. the vulva, pudenda muli-
ebria.
<LEND>

<L>30490<pc>0608-b<k1>prajas<k2>prajas
{%Pra-jas, ās, ās, as, = pra-ja%}¦ (at the end of a
comp.; cf. {%duṣ-p˚, bahu-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>30491<pc>0608-b<k1>prajAta<k2>prajAta
{%Pra-jāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ born, produced; impreg-
nating; ({%ā%}), f. a woman who has borne a child.
<LEND>

<L>30492<pc>0608-b<k1>prajAti<k2>prajAti
{%Pra-jāti, is,%}¦ f. generating, generation, procreation,
propagation, production; bringing forth, delivery,
travail, labour; generative power; ({%is%}), m., N. of a
prince. {%—Prajāti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing
words relating to generation.
<LEND>

<L>30493<pc>0608-b<k1>prajAyinI<k2>prajAyinI
{%Pra-jāyinī,%}¦ f. being about to bring forth; bearing,
bringing forth, a mother (at the end of comps., e. g.
{%abhirūpa-prajāyinī,%} bearing handsome children;
cf. {%vīra-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>30494<pc>0608-b<k1>prajijanizamARa<k2>prajijanizamARa
{%Pra-jijaniṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. wishing to
be born.
<LEND>

<L>30495<pc>0608-b<k1>prajap<k2>prajap
{#prajap#}¦ {%pra-jap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-japati, -japitum,%}
to recite in a low tone, whisper, mutter.
<LEND>

<L>30496<pc>0608-b<k1>prajaya<k2>prajaya
{#prajaya#}¦ {%pra-jaya.%} See under {%pra-ji,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>30497<pc>0608-b<k1>prajalp<k2>prajalp
{#prajalp#}¦ {%pra-jalp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jalpati, -jalpi-%}
{%tum,%} to prattle, gossip, chatter; to speak, talk; to
communicate, proclaim, announce.
<LEND>

<L>30498<pc>0608-b<k1>prajalpa<k2>prajalpa
{%Pra-jalpa, as,%}¦ m. prattle, gossip, heedless or
frivolous words (especially such as used in greeting
a lover).
<LEND>

<L>30499<pc>0608-b<k1>prajalpana<k2>prajalpana
{%Pra-jalpana, am,%}¦ n. talking, speaking.
<LEND>

<L>30500<pc>0608-b<k1>prajalpita<k2>prajalpita
{%Pra-jalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ talked, chattered; one who
has begun to talk; ({%am%}), n. spoken words, talk.
<LEND>

<L>30501<pc>0608-b<k1>prajava<k2>prajava
{#prajava#}¦ {%pra-java.%} See under {%pra-jū,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>30502<pc>0608-b<k1>prajAgf<k2>prajAgf
{#prajAgf#}¦ {%pra-jāgṛ,%} cl. 2. P. {%-jāgarti, -jāgari-%}
{%tum,%} to watch, keep watch, watch over (with loc.);
to lie in wait for (with gen.): Caus. {%-jāgarayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to wake (trans.).
<LEND>
[Page0608-c+ 71]

<L>30503<pc>0608-c<k1>prajAgara<k2>prajAgara
{%Pra-jāgara, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who wakes, waking,
an epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%as%}), m. a guardian; the act
of waking or watching, lying awake at night, sleep-
lessness, being awake, being roused, awaking; taking
care; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>30504<pc>0608-c<k1>prajAgaraRa<k2>prajAgaraRa
{%Pra-jāgaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. being awake, sleeplessness.
<LEND>

<L>30505<pc>0608-c<k1>prajAni<k2>prajAni
{#prajAni#}¦ {%pra-jāni, is,%} m., N. of a prince;
(a various reading for {%pra-jāti.%})
<LEND>

<L>30506<pc>0608-c<k1>praji<k2>praji
{#praji#}¦ {%pra-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%} to
win, conquer, overpower, subdue.
<LEND>

<L>30507<pc>0608-c<k1>prajaya<k2>prajaya
{%Pra-jaya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. victory, conquest.
<LEND>

<L>30508<pc>0608-c<k1>prajit<k2>prajit
{%Pra-jit, t, t, t,%}¦ conquering, defeating.
<LEND>

<L>30509<pc>0608-c<k1>prajita<k2>prajita
{#prajita#}¦ {%prajita, as, ā, am,%} impelled, urged
on; (probably a wrong form for {%prājita%} fr. rt. {%aj%}
with {%pra.%})
<LEND>

<L>30510<pc>0608-c<k1>prajina<k2>prajina
{#prajina#}¦ {%prajina, as,%} m. wind, air; (also
read {%prajīna.%})
<LEND>

<L>30511<pc>0608-c<k1>prajinv<k2>prajinv
{#prajinv#}¦ {%pra-jinv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jinvati, -jinvi-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to refresh, animate; to promote, help,
assist.
<LEND>

<L>30512<pc>0608-c<k1>prajihIrzu<k2>prajihIrzu
{#prajihIrzu#}¦ {%pra-jihīrṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid.
of rt. {%hṛ%} with {%pra%}), being about to strike or hit,
wishing to strike.
<LEND>

<L>30513<pc>0608-c<k1>prajIvana<k2>prajIvana
{#prajIvana#}¦ {%pra-jīvana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%jīv%} with
{%pra%}), livelihood, subsistence.
<LEND>

<L>30514<pc>0608-c<k1>prajIvin<k2>prajIvin
{%Pra-jīvin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a minister of Megha-varṇa
the king of the crows.
<LEND>

<L>30515<pc>0608-c<k1>prajuzwa<k2>prajuzwa
{#prajuzwa#}¦ {%pra-juṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%juṣ%}
with {%pra%}), strongly attached to, devoted to, intent
on ({%= pra-sakta,%} Manu II. 96).
<LEND>

<L>30516<pc>0608-c<k1>prajU<k2>prajU
{#prajU#}¦ {%pra-jū,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-javati, -te,%} &c., to
hasten forwards; to set in rapid motion, push or
drive on; to urge on, incite: Caus. {%-jāvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to set in rapid motion, let fly, dart, shoot.
<LEND>

<L>30517<pc>0608-c<k1>prajava<k2>prajava
{%Pra-java, as,%}¦ m., Ved. haste, rapidity; ({%am%}),
ind. hastily, rapidly.
<LEND>

<L>30518<pc>0608-c<k1>prajavita<k2>prajavita
{%Pra-javita, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven on, impelled; in-
cited, urged on.
<LEND>

<L>30519<pc>0608-c<k1>prajavin<k2>prajavin
{%Pra-javin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hastening, rapid, swift, speedy;
({%ī%}), m. a runner, courier, express.
<LEND>

<L>30520<pc>0608-c<k1>prajfmB<k2>prajfmB
{#prajfmB#}¦ {%pra-jṛmbh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-jṛmbhate,%}
{%jṛmbhitum,%} to begin to yawn.
<LEND>

<L>30521<pc>0608-c<k1>prajF<k2>prajF
{#prajF#}¦ {%pra-jṝ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-jīryati, -jaritum,%}
{%-jarītum,%} to be digested.
<LEND>

<L>30522<pc>0608-c<k1>prajjawika<k2>prajjawika
{#prajjawika#}¦ {%prajjaṭika, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a kind of Prākṛt metre (= Prākṛt {%pajjaliā%}).
<LEND>

<L>30523<pc>0608-c<k1>prajji<k2>prajji
{#prajji#}¦ {%prajji, is,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>30524<pc>0608-c<k1>prajYa<k2>prajYa<h>1
{#prajYa#} 1¦. {%pra-jña, as, ā, am, = pra-jñu,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30525<pc>0608-c<k1>prajYA<k2>prajYA<h>1
{#prajYA#} 1¦. {%pra-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti, -jā-%}
{%nīte, -jñātum,%} to know, understand (especially said
of knowing a way or mode of action); to distinguish,
discern, discriminate; to know of, know about, be
acquainted with; to become aware of, to find out,
discover: Caus. {%-jñapayati, -jñāpayati, -yitum,%}
to show or point out (the way); to discover, betray;
to summon, invite.
<LEND>

<L>30526<pc>0608-c<k1>prajajYi<k2>prajajYi<h>2
2. {%pra-jajñi, is, is, i%}¦ (for 1. see col. 2), Ved.
conversant with.
<LEND>

<L>30527<pc>0608-c<k1>prajYa<k2>prajYa<h>2
2. {%pra-jña, as, ā, am,%}¦ wise, intelligent, learned;
(at the end of a comp.) knowing, conversant with;
({%ā%}), f. a clever or sensible woman; intelligence, un-
derstanding, intellect, wisdom, knowledge; discern-
ment, discrimination, judgment; device, design, de-
termination; Wisdom personified as the goddess of
arts and eloquence, Sarasvatī; (with Buddhists) the
energy of the Ādi-buddha. {%—Prajña-tā,%} f., Ved.
knowledge. {%—Prajñā-kara, as,%} m., N. of the author
of a commentary on the Nalodaya. {%—Prajñā-kāya,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Mañju-śrī a Buddhist saint.
{%—Prajñā-kūṭa, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Prajñā-gupta-śarīra, as, ā, am,%} having the
[Page0609-a+ 77]
body protected by understanding. {%—Prajñā-cakṣus,%}
{%us, us, us,%} ‘mind-eyed,’ ‘having the understanding
or wisdom as the only eyes,’ blind; ({%us%}), m. an
epithet of the blind king Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Prajñā-%}
{%ḍhya (˚ñā-āḍh˚), as,%} m. ‘rich in wisdom,’ N. of a
man. {%—Prajñāditya (˚ñā-ād˚), as,%} m. ‘sun of
wisdom,’ N. of a man. {%—Prajñā-pāramitā,%} f. (with
Buddhists) one of the six perfections, perfection in
wisdom, (the other five are {%dāna-p˚, śīla-p˚, kṣān-%}
{%ti-p˚, vīrya-p˚,%} and {%dhyāna-p˚%}); N. of a Buddhist
work. {%—Prajñā-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or consist-
ing of wisdom. {%—Prajñā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
wisdom, wise, knowing, intelligent. {%—Prajñā-var-%}
{%man, ā,%} m. ‘having wisdom for armour,’ N. of a
man. {%—Prajñā-vāda, as,%} m. a wise speech, wise
saying. {%—Prajñā-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%} old in wisdom
or knowledge. {%—Prajñā-sahāya, as, ā, am,%} ‘hav-
ing wisdom for a companion,’ wise, intelligent.
{%—Prajñā-hīna, as, ā, am,%} destitute of wisdom,
ignorant, silly, unwise.
<LEND>

<L>30528<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYapti<k2>prajYapti
{%Pra-jñapti, is,%}¦ f. teaching, informing, doctrine,
communication; an appointment, agreement, en-
gagement; (with Jainas) a particular magical art per-
sonified as one of the Vidyā-devīs (also {%pra-jñaptī%}).
{%—Prajñapti-kauśika, as,%} m., N. of a teacher
acquainted with the magical art called Pra-jñapti.
{%—Prajñapti-vādin, inas,%} m. pl., N. of a Buddhist
sect. {%—Prajñapti-śāstra, am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist
work.
<LEND>

<L>30529<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYAta<k2>prajYAta
{%Pra-jñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ known, understood; dis-
tinguished, discriminated, discerned, discernible, dis-
tinct, clear; renowned, famous, notorious.
<LEND>

<L>30530<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYAti<k2>prajYAti
{%Pra-jñāti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. knowing the way (to any
place), knowing the right way.
<LEND>

<L>30531<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYAtf<k2>prajYAtf
{%Pra-jñātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who knows the
right way, a skilful guide, conductor.
<LEND>

<L>30532<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYAtra<k2>prajYAtra
{%Pra-jñātra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. in {%a-p˚,%} losing or
missing the way.
<LEND>

<L>30533<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYAna<k2>prajYAna
{%Pra-jñāna, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} prudent, wise, clever,
learned; easily known (Ved.); ({%am%}), n. knowledge,
knowing one's duty, wisdom, intelligence; discrimina-
tion; a mark, sign, token, memorial. {%—Prajñāna-%}
{%santati, is,%} f. a train of thought.
<LEND>

<L>30534<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYApita<k2>prajYApita
{%Pra-jñāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ betrayed, disclosed, dis-
covered.
<LEND>

<L>30535<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYAla<k2>prajYAla
{%Prajñāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ wise, prudent.
<LEND>

<L>30536<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYin<k2>prajYin
{%Prajñin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wise, prudent; ({%ī%}), m. a wise
or learned man, sage, scholar.
<LEND>

<L>30537<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYila<k2>prajYila
{%Prajñila, as, ā, am,%}¦ wise, prudent, clever.
<LEND>

<L>30538<pc>0609-a<k1>prajYu<k2>prajYu
{#prajYu#}¦ {%pra-jñu, us, us, u,%} having the knees
far apart, bandy-legged, bow-legged; (also written
{%pra-jña.%})
<LEND>

<L>30539<pc>0609-a<k1>prajval<k2>prajval
{#prajval#}¦ {%pra-jval,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-jvalati (-te), -jvalitum,%} to catch fire, begin to burn
or blaze, be in flames, flame, blaze up; to blaze
brightly, shine, gleam; to be inflamed or incensed,
become wrathful, to be kindled (e. g. {%teṣāṃ kro-%}
{%dhaḥ prajajvāla,%} their wrath was kindled): Caus.
{%-jvalayati, -jvālayati, -yitum,%} to set on fire, light,
kindle, inflame; (with Buddhists) to explain, illus-
trate.
<LEND>

<L>30540<pc>0609-a<k1>prajvalana<k2>prajvalana
{%Pra-jvalana, am,%}¦ n. blazing up, flaming, burn-
ing, taking fire, kindling.
<LEND>

<L>30541<pc>0609-a<k1>prajvalanIya<k2>prajvalanIya
{%Pra-jvalanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be set on fire,
inflammable.
<LEND>

<L>30542<pc>0609-a<k1>prajvalita<k2>prajvalita
{%Pra-jvalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in flames, flaming,
burning, blazing, shining, bright, radiant; blazed
forth, burnt; ({%am%}), n. flaming up, blazing, burning.
<LEND>

<L>30543<pc>0609-a<k1>prajvAlita<k2>prajvAlita
{%Pra-jvālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lighted, kindled, set on
fire.
<LEND>

<L>30544<pc>0609-a<k1>prajvAra<k2>prajvAra
{#prajvAra#}¦ {%pra-jvāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%jvar%} with
{%pra%}), the heat of fever (sometimes personified).
<LEND>

<L>30545<pc>0609-a<k1>praqI<k2>praqI
{#praqI#}¦ {%pra-ḍī,%} cl. 1. 4. A. {%-ḍayate, -ḍīyate,%}
{%-ḍayitum,%} to fly forward, fly away, fly up.
<LEND>

<L>30546<pc>0609-a<k1>praqIna<k2>praqIna
{%Pra-ḍīna, am,%}¦ n. flying rapidly, flying in every
direction; taking flight, beginning to fly; the act of
flying; flying forward.
<LEND>
[Page0609-b+ 76]

<L>30547<pc>0609-b<k1>praRa<k2>praRa
{#praRa#}¦ {%praṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%pra%}), ancient,
old (see Vārttika 3. to Pāṇ. V. 4, 30).
<LEND>

<L>30548<pc>0609-b<k1>praRaKa<k2>praRaKa
{#praRaKa#}¦ {%pra-ṇakha, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
the point of the nails.
<LEND>

<L>30549<pc>0609-b<k1>praRad<k2>praRad
{#praRad#}¦ {%pra-ṇad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṇadati, -ṇaditum,%}
to resound, begin to sound, begin to roar or cry.
<LEND>

<L>30550<pc>0609-b<k1>praRadana<k2>praRadana
{%Pra-ṇadana, am,%}¦ n. sounding, sound.
<LEND>

<L>30551<pc>0609-b<k1>praRadita<k2>praRadita
{%Pra-ṇadita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, sounding;
buzzing, humming (as a bee).
<LEND>

<L>30552<pc>0609-b<k1>praRAda<k2>praRAda
{%Pra-ṇāda, as,%}¦ m. a loud sound, clangour, noise,
shout, cry; any loud noise, especially one expressing
approbation or delight, huzza; neighing, braying,
bray; roar, roaring; a cry for help; a low sound
expressive of great pleasure, a murmur or sigh of
rapture; a disease of the ear, a noise or buzzing in
the ear from thickening of the membranes &c.; N.
of a Cakra-vartin.
<LEND>

<L>30553<pc>0609-b<k1>praRAdaka<k2>praRAdaka
{%Pra-ṇādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ see Scholiast on Pāṇ.
VIII. 4, 16.
<LEND>

<L>30554<pc>0609-b<k1>praRapAt<k2>praRapAt
{#praRapAt#}¦ {%pra-ṇapāt, t,%} m., Ved. a great-
grandson; [cf. Lat. <nsi>pro-nepo-(t)-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>30555<pc>0609-b<k1>praRaB<k2>praRaB
{#praRaB#}¦ {%pra-ṇabh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ṇabhate,%} &c.,
Ved. to burst, split, cleave (intrans.).
<LEND>

<L>30556<pc>0609-b<k1>praRam<k2>praRam
{#praRam#}¦ {%pra-ṇam,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ṇamati, -te,%}
{%-ṇantum,%} to bend or bow down before, make obei-
sance to (with dat., gen., loc., or acc.): Caus. {%-ṇama-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause any one (acc.) to bow before
another (dat.); to bend, incline; to do anything
reverentially.
<LEND>

<L>30557<pc>0609-b<k1>praRata<k2>praRata
{%Pra-ṇata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent forwards, crooked;
bowed, bowing to (with gen. or acc.); bending,
stooping, stooped; inclined; humble; skilful, clever.
{%—Praṇata-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} having the head or
top bent down or bowed; inclined, stooping. {%—Pra-%}
{%ṇatāśeṣa-sāmanta (˚ta-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} one
before whom all (his) neighbours bow, receiving
homage from all the neighbouring princes.
<LEND>

<L>30558<pc>0609-b<k1>praRatavat<k2>praRatavat
{%Pra-ṇatavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ having bent, bowed,
bowing, bent.
<LEND>

<L>30559<pc>0609-b<k1>praRati<k2>praRati
{%Pra-ṇati, is,%}¦ f. bending, bowing, inclination,
salutation, reverence, obeisance, courtesy.
<LEND>

<L>30560<pc>0609-b<k1>praRamat<k2>praRamat
{%Pra-ṇamat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bowing to, saluting
with reverence or respect.
<LEND>

<L>30561<pc>0609-b<k1>praRamita<k2>praRamita
{%Pra-ṇamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bending, bowing.
<LEND>

<L>30562<pc>0609-b<k1>praRamya<k2>praRamya
{%Pra-ṇamya,%}¦ ind. having bowed, having done
homage or made obeisance.
<LEND>

<L>30563<pc>0609-b<k1>praRAma<k2>praRAma
{%Pra-ṇāma, as,%}¦ m. bending, bowing, a bow;
respectful or reverential salutation, prostration, obei-
sance (especially to a Brāhman or to a deity). {%—Pra-%}
{%ṇāmāñjali (˚ma-añ˚), is,%} m. reverential salutation
with the hands opened and hollowed. {%—Praṇāmā-%}
{%dara (˚ma-ād˚), as,%} m. reverential salutation.
<LEND>

<L>30564<pc>0609-b<k1>praRAmin<k2>praRAmin
{%Pra-ṇāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ bending, bowing before, sa-
luting, honouring, worshipping, prostrating one's self.
<LEND>

<L>30565<pc>0609-b<k1>praRaya<k2>praRaya
{#praRaya#}¦ {%pra-ṇaya.%} See 1. {%pra-ṇī,%} p. 610, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>30566<pc>0609-b<k1>praRava<k2>praRava
{#praRava#}¦ {%pra-ṇava.%} See {%pra-ṇu,%} p. 610, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>30567<pc>0609-b<k1>praRaS<k2>praRaS<h>1
{#praRaS#} 1¦. {%pra-ṇaś%} (see rt. 1. {%naś%}), cl. 1. P.
A. {%-ṇaśati, -te,%} &c., Ved. to reach, attain.
<LEND>

<L>30568<pc>0609-b<k1>praRaS<k2>praRaS<h>2
{#praRaS#} 2¦. {%pra-ṇaś%} (see rt. 2. {%naś%}), cl. 1. 4. P.
{%-ṇaśati, -ṇaśyati, -ṇaśitum, -naṃṣṭum, -naṣ-%}
{%ṭum%} (the {%n%} of the rt. is not changed to {%ṇ%} when {%ś%}
passes into {%ṣ%} or is otherwise changed, e. g. {%pra-%}
{%naṣṭa, pra-naṅkṣyati%}), to be lost, disappear,
vanish; to escape: Caus. {%-ṇāśayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to disappear or perish; to allow to be lost,
i. e. to leave unrewarded.
<LEND>

<L>30569<pc>0609-b<k1>praRaSyat<k2>praRaSyat
{%Pra-ṇaśyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ perishing, falling away;
endeavouring to escape.
<LEND>

<L>30570<pc>0609-b<k1>praRASa<k2>praRASa
{%Pra-ṇāśa, as,%}¦ m. vanishing, disappearance, cessa-
tion, loss [cf. {%labdha-p˚%}]; death, destruction, per-
dition, decay.
<LEND>

<L>30571<pc>0609-b<k1>praRASana<k2>praRASana
{%Pra-ṇāśana, as, ī, am,%}¦ (at end of comps.) causing
to disappear or cease, removing, destroying, annihilat-
ing; ({%am%}), n. destroying, destruction, annihilation.
<LEND>

<L>30572<pc>0609-b<k1>praRASin<k2>praRASin
{%Pra-ṇāśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ causing to disappear or cease,
removing, destroying.
<LEND>
[Page0609-c+ 75]

<L>30573<pc>0609-c<k1>pranazwa<k2>pranazwa
{%Pra-naṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (often incorrectly written
{%pra-ṇaṣṭa%}), lost, disappeared, vanished, not to be
seen; departed, escaped; perished, destroyed, ruined,
decayed, annihilated. {%—Pranaṣṭa-jñānika, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘whose knowledge is destroyed,’ without know-
ledge. {%—Pranaṣṭa-vinaya, as, ā, am,%} ‘whose
politeness has vanished,’ lost to propriety, uncivil,
uncomplaisant, rude.
<LEND>

<L>30574<pc>0609-c<k1>praRasa<k2>praRasa
{#praRasa#}¦ {%pra-ṇasa, as, ā, am,%} having a pro-
minent nose.
<LEND>

<L>30575<pc>0609-c<k1>praRAqI<k2>praRAqI
{#praRAqI#}¦ {%pra-ṇāḍī,%} f., Ved. a channel from
a pond, a water-course, waste-pipe, drain; interven-
tion, interposition; ({%ḍyā%}), ind. mediately, indirectly.
<LEND>

<L>30576<pc>0609-c<k1>praRAla<k2>praRAla
{%Pra-ṇāla, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. or {%pra-ṇālikā,%} f. a channel
from a pond, gutter, drain, water-course; {%praṇā-%}
{%likayā,%} through a particular channel, through the
medium of, mediately.
<LEND>

<L>30577<pc>0609-c<k1>praRiMsita<k2>praRiMsita
{#praRiMsita#}¦ {%pra-ṇiṃsita%} or {%pra-niṃsita, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (fr. rt. {%niṃs%} with {%pra%}), kissed.
<LEND>

<L>30578<pc>0609-c<k1>praRiMsitavya<k2>praRiMsitavya
{%Pra-ṇiṃsitavya%}¦ or {%pra-niṃsitavya, as, ā, am,%}
to be kissed, what may or ought to be kissed.
<LEND>

<L>30579<pc>0609-c<k1>praRigad<k2>praRigad
{#praRigad#}¦ {%pra-ṇi-gad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gadati, -ga-%}
{%ditum,%} to begin to address.
<LEND>

<L>30580<pc>0609-c<k1>praRiGnat<k2>praRiGnat
{#praRiGnat#}¦ {%pra-ṇighnat.%} See {%pra-ṇi-han,%}
p. 610, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>30581<pc>0609-c<k1>praRij<k2>praRij
{#praRij#}¦ {%pra-ṇij,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-ṇenekti, -ṇe-%}
{%nikte, -ṇektum,%} Ved. to wash away, cleanse.
<LEND>

<L>30582<pc>0609-c<k1>praRejana<k2>praRejana
{%Pra-ṇejana, as, ī, am,%}¦ washing away, wiping
away; ({%am%}), n. washing away, wiping away, bathing;
water for washing.
<LEND>

<L>30583<pc>0609-c<k1>praRijYA<k2>praRijYA
{#praRijYA#}¦ {%pra-ṇi-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to consider, recollect.
<LEND>

<L>30584<pc>0609-c<k1>praRiDA<k2>praRiDA
{#praRiDA#}¦ {%pra-ṇi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to set in front, place in advance,
cause to precede; to lay down, deposit; to lay on,
impose, apply; to place in, lay in, bring into, infix,
enchase; to include, inclose; to stretch out, stretch forth
(the hand); to touch; to turn or direct (the eyes or
thoughts) upon; (with {%manas%}) to concentrate the
thoughts upon, give the whole attention to; to re-
solve; to think; to send out or employ (a spy or
emissary), spy.
<LEND>

<L>30585<pc>0609-c<k1>praRiDAna<k2>praRiDAna
{%Pra-ṇidhāna, am,%}¦ n. laying on, imposing, ap-
plying, employing, application, employment, use;
access, entrance; respectful conduct or behaviour
towards, attention paid to (with loc.); profound re-
ligious meditation; great effort, stress, energy; (with
Buddhists) prayer, entreaty, supplication.
<LEND>

<L>30586<pc>0609-c<k1>praRiDi<k2>praRiDi
{%Pra-ṇidhi, is,%}¦ m. observing, scrutinizing, spying
out; sending out (spies or emissaries); a spy, secret
agent, emissary; an attendant, a follower; care,
attention; asking, solicitation, request; N. of a son
of Bṛhad-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>30587<pc>0609-c<k1>praRiDeya<k2>praRiDeya
{%Pra-ṇidheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be applied or injected
(as a clyster); to be sent out (as a spy); ({%am%}), n.
employing; sending out (of emissaries).
<LEND>

<L>30588<pc>0609-c<k1>praRihita<k2>praRihita
{%Pra-ṇihita, as, ā, am,%}¦ laid on, applied, imposed;
deposited; outstretched, stretched forth; delivered,
entrusted, consigned; having the attention fixed,
having the thoughts concentrated on one point,
intent ({%= sam-āhita%}); resolved, determined, de-
cided; prudent, advised, careful, wary, cautious;
discovered by spies, spied out; obtained, attained,
received, acquired; acknowledged, previously agreed
to or admitted.
<LEND>

<L>30589<pc>0609-c<k1>praRiDyE<k2>praRiDyE
{#praRiDyE#}¦ {%pra-ṇi-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati,%}
{%-dhyātum,%} to give the attention to (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>30590<pc>0609-c<k1>praRinad<k2>praRinad
{#praRinad#}¦ {%pra-ṇi-nad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nadati, -na-%}
{%ditum,%} to sound loudly, thunder.
<LEND>

<L>30591<pc>0609-c<k1>praRinadat<k2>praRinadat
{%Pra-ṇinadat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sounding deep or
like thunder.
<LEND>

<L>30592<pc>0609-c<k1>praRinAda<k2>praRinAda
{%Pra-ṇināda, as,%}¦ m. a deep sound, that of thunder
or the like.
<LEND>

<L>30593<pc>0609-c<k1>praRind<k2>praRind
{#praRind#}¦ {%pra-ṇind%} or {%pra-nind,%} cl. 1. P.
{%-ṇindati, -ṇinditum,%} to blame, censure, upbraid.
<LEND>
[Page0610-a+ 75]

<L>30594<pc>0610-a<k1>praRindana<k2>praRindana
{%Pra-ṇindana%}¦ or {%pra-nindana, am,%} n. censuring,
upbraiding.
<LEND>

<L>30595<pc>0610-a<k1>praRindya<k2>praRindya
{%Pra-ṇindya%}¦ or {%pra-nindya,%} ind. having censured
or upbraided.
<LEND>

<L>30596<pc>0610-a<k1>praRipat<k2>praRipat
{#praRipat#}¦ {%pra-ṇi-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -pati-%}
{%tum,%} to throw one's self down before, fall prostrate
before, bow down before, bow respectfully to (with
acc. and sometimes with dat. or loc.): Caus. {%-pāta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to bow down, induce or cause
to fall prostrate.
<LEND>

<L>30597<pc>0610-a<k1>praRipatana<k2>praRipatana
{%Pra-ṇipatana, am,%}¦ n. falling down before, throw-
ing one's self down at any one's feet, prostration;
bowing or doing homage to, saluting.
<LEND>

<L>30598<pc>0610-a<k1>praRipatita<k2>praRipatita
{%Pra-ṇipatita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bowed down in reverence,
saluting.
<LEND>

<L>30599<pc>0610-a<k1>praRipatya<k2>praRipatya
{%Pra-ṇipatya,%}¦ ind. having bowed down or in
reverence, having saluted respectfully, having done
homage to.
<LEND>

<L>30600<pc>0610-a<k1>praRipAta<k2>praRipAta
{%Pra-ṇipāta, as,%}¦ m. falling at any one's feet, pros-
tration, humble submission to (with gen.); saluta-
tion, reverence, obeisance. {%—Praṇipāta-puraḥ-%}
{%saram,%} ind. preceded by prostration, with an obei-
sance. {%—Praṇipāta-pratīkāra, as, ā, am,%} having
submission for a remedy, counteracted by submission.
{%—Praṇipāta-rasa, as,%} m. ‘taking pleasure in sub-
mission,’ a magical formula pronounced over weapons.
<LEND>

<L>30601<pc>0610-a<k1>praRipAtin<k2>praRipAtin
{%Pra-ṇipātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ throwing one's self down
or falling at the feet of, submitting, submissive.
<LEND>

<L>30602<pc>0610-a<k1>praRimA<k2>praRimA<h>1
{#praRimA#} 1¦. {%pra-ṇi-mā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-mimīte,%}
{%mātum%} (fr. rt. 2. {%mā%}), see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VIII.
4, 17.
<LEND>

<L>30603<pc>0610-a<k1>praRimA<k2>praRimA<h>2
{#praRimA#} 2¦. {%pra-ṇi-mā,%} cl. 2. P., 3. A. {%-māti,%}
{%-mimīte, -mātum%} (fr. rt. 4. {%mā%}), see Scholiast on
Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 17, Vopa-deva VIII. 22, IX. 16.
<LEND>

<L>30604<pc>0610-a<k1>praRimi<k2>praRimi
{#praRimi#}¦ {%pra-ṇi-mi,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-minoti,%}
{%-minute,%} &c., see Vopa-deva XXVI. 212.
<LEND>

<L>30605<pc>0610-a<k1>praRiyA<k2>praRiyA
{#praRiyA#}¦ {%pra-ṇi-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to advance, proceed.
<LEND>

<L>30606<pc>0610-a<k1>praRiSam<k2>praRiSam
{#praRiSam#}¦ {%pra-ṇi-śam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śāmyati,%}
{%-śamitum,%} to become calm, be pacified or appeased;
to hear.
<LEND>

<L>30607<pc>0610-a<k1>praRihan<k2>praRihan
{#praRihan#}¦ {%pra-ṇi-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -han-%}
{%tum,%} to slay, to kill (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>30608<pc>0610-a<k1>praRiGnat<k2>praRiGnat
{%Pra-ṇighnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ preparing or threatening
to strike.
<LEND>

<L>30609<pc>0610-a<k1>praRihita<k2>praRihita
{#praRihita#}¦ {%pra-ṇihita.%} See under {%pra-ṇi-%}
{%dhā,%} p. 609, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>30610<pc>0610-a<k1>praRI<k2>praRI<h>1
{#praRI#} 1¦. {%pra-ṇī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ṇayati, -te,%}
{%-ṇetum,%} to lead forwards, advance, conduct, promote;
to bring forwards, show, display; to bring; to offer,
present; to direct or turn (the eyes) towards; (in
liturgical language) to convey the sacrificial fire or
water or Soma to its place at the altar; to bring
into, reduce to (e. g. {%vaśam pra-ṇī,%} to reduce to
submission); to bring to pass, effect, accomplish,
perform, execute, complete, finish; to apply; to
manifest affection, show love or affection, love; to
establish, institute, promulgate, teach; to write, com-
pose; to cast, shoot, discharge; to do away with,
remove, dispel; (with {%daṇḍam%}) to carry the rod, inflict
punishment; (A.) to draw in (the breath): Desid.
{%-ṇinīṣati,%} to desire to lead, wish to conduct (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>30611<pc>0610-a<k1>praRaya<k2>praRaya
{%Pra-ṇaya, as,%}¦ m. a leader (Scholiast on Pāṇ. III.
1, 142); leading, conduct, guidance; confidence,
familiarity, trust, intimacy; friendly acquaintance,
confidential relationship, friendly or fond regard,
friendship, affection, love, fondness, favour, kindness;
wish, desire, longing; affectionate solicitation, re-
quest, asking, begging; reverence, obeisance; final
emancipation or beatitude; ({%eṇa%}), ind. confidentially,
candidly; of one's own accord; without ceremony;
({%āt%}), ind. candidly, openly, frankly. {%—Praṇaya-%}
{%kalaha, as,%} m. a lovers' quarrel, mere wanton
quarrelsomeness. {%—Praṇaya-kupita, as, ā, am,%}
according to a Scholiast {%= premātiśayena kupita,%}
[Page0610-b+ 81]
angry through excess of affection. {%—Praṇaya-kopa,%}
{%as,%} m. the (feigned) anger of a coquette towards her
lover, anger indulged for the sake of the pleasure of
being pacified. {%—Praṇaya-prakarṣa, as,%} m. excess
of affection, unwonted or extraordinary attachment.
{%—Praṇaya-bhaṅga, as,%} m. a breach of confidence
or friendship, faithlessness. {%—Praṇaya-māna, as,%}
m. ‘love-pride,’ the arrogance of love, lovers'
quarrels. {%—Praṇaya-vacana, am,%} n. a declaration
of love or affection (according to a Scholiast {%= prema-%}
{%kathana%}). {%—Praṇaya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
candour, acting frankly or openly, free from con-
straint, unceremonious, frank, open, confident; pos-
sessing affection, attached to, feeling an attraction
towards, loving. {%—Praṇaya-vimukha, as, ī, am,%}
averse from acquaintance, disinclined to friendship.
{%—Praṇaya-vihati, is,%} f. refusal of a request, denial,
refusal, non-compliance. {%—Praṇaya-spṛś, k, k, k,%}
exciting affection, affectionate. {%—Praṇayāparādha%}
{%(˚ya-ap˚), as,%} m. an offence against (mutual) affec-
tion or confidence. {%—Praṇayāpahārin (˚ya-ap˚),%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} taking with confidence, taking without shy-
ness or constraint. {%—Praṇayī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
{%-bhavitum,%} to become attached, to become affec-
tionate. {%—Praṇayonmukha (˚ya-un˚), as, ī, am,%}
intending or about to make a declaration of love.
{%—Praṇayopeta (˚ya-up˚), as, ā, am,%} possessing
candour, frank, open, candid.
<LEND>

<L>30612<pc>0610-b<k1>praRayat<k2>praRayat
{%Pra-ṇayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ leading forwards, con-
ducting; dispensing; decreeing, awarding.
<LEND>

<L>30613<pc>0610-b<k1>praRayana<k2>praRayana
{%Pra-ṇayana, am,%}¦ n. bringing forwards, conduct-
ing; conveying, bringing, fetching [cf. {%agni-ṣoma-%}
{%p˚%}]; carrying out, executing, performing, practising;
bringing forward, adducing; composing, writing;
that in which anything is brought [cf. {%praṇītā-p˚%}];
dispensing, distributing; decreeing, awarding, sen-
tencing; (with {%daṇḍasya%} or {%daṇḍa-p˚%}) carrying
the rod, inflicting punishment.
<LEND>

<L>30614<pc>0610-b<k1>praRayanIya<k2>praRayanIya
{%Praṇayanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ used in bringing or
fetching (as wood employed in carrying the sacred
fire; cf. {%agni-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>30615<pc>0610-b<k1>praRayin<k2>praRayin
{%Pra-ṇayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ feeling attracted towards,
attached to, affectionate, loving, kind; liking, wish-
ing or longing for, desirous of; beloved, dear; inti-
mate, familiar; ({%ī%}), m. a friend, favourite; a lover,
husband; a petitioner; a humble servant; ({%inī%}), f. a
female friend; a mistress, wife. {%—Praṇayi-kriyā,%} f.
the act of a lover or affectionate person. {%—Praṇayi-%}
{%jana, as,%} m. a friendly person, a friend; a number
of friends, friendly circle. {%—Praṇayi-tā,%} f. desire or
longing for.
<LEND>

<L>30616<pc>0610-b<k1>praRAyaka<k2>praRAyaka
{%Pra-ṇāyaka, as,%}¦ m. a leader or commander (of
an army), guide, chief.
<LEND>

<L>30617<pc>0610-b<k1>praRAyya<k2>praRAyya
{%Pra-ṇāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be regarded with affec-
tion, dear, beloved; blameless, upright, straight-
forward; devoid of passion or desire (?) ; disap-
proved, disagreeing.
<LEND>

<L>30618<pc>0610-b<k1>praRinIzeRya<k2>praRinIzeRya
{%Pra-ṇinīṣeṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. appointed to
lead or begin, appointed to be a commencement.
<LEND>

<L>30619<pc>0610-b<k1>praRI<k2>praRI<h>2
2. {%pra-ṇī, īs,%}¦ m., Ved. a leader, conductor; ({%īs%}),
f. (according to Sāy.) {%= praṇīyamānā stutiḥ.%}
<LEND>

<L>30620<pc>0610-b<k1>praRIta<k2>praRIta
{%Pra-ṇīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ led forwards, advanced,
promoted; brought; offered, presented, delivered,
given; directed; conveyed (to the altar, as fire or
water or Soma); brought into, reduced to; effected,
accomplished, performed, executed, completed, finish-
ed; made, done, constructed; prepared, dressed (as
food), cooked; established, instituted, taught, said,
declared; written, composed, compiled; thrown,
cast, shot, discharged, sent; set aside, removed, dis-
pelled, (exposed as a child?); beloved, dear [cf.
{%manaḥ-p˚%}]; inflicted, decreed, sentenced, awarded;
entered, approached; ({%as%}), m. fire consecrated by
prayers or mystical formulas; ({%ā%}), f. a vessel used at
sacrifices, a sort of cup; N. of a river; ({%ās%}), f. pl.,
scil. {%āpas,%} water fetched on the morning of a festi-
val for sacrificial uses, holy water. {%—Praṇītā-praṇa-%}
{%yana, am,%} n., Ved. the vessel in which holy water
is fetched.
<LEND>

<L>30621<pc>0610-b<k1>praRIti<k2>praRIti
{%Pra-ṇīti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. conduct, leading, guidance;
leading away; favour.
<LEND>
[Page0610-c+ 75]

<L>30622<pc>0610-c<k1>praRIya<k2>praRIya
{%Pra-ṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be led on, see Pāṇ.
III. 1, 123.
<LEND>

<L>30623<pc>0610-c<k1>praRetavya<k2>praRetavya
{%Pra-ṇetavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be led or guided; to be
accomplished or executed, to be used or applied.
<LEND>

<L>30624<pc>0610-c<k1>praRetf<k2>praRetf
{%Pra-ṇetṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a leader, guide; a maker,
framer, creator; an author, promulgator of a doctrine,
teacher; a performer or one who plays a musical
instrument. {%—Praṇetṛ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. con-
taining the notion of leading.
<LEND>

<L>30625<pc>0610-c<k1>praRenI<k2>praRenI
{%Pra-ṇenī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ Ved. leading or guiding con-
stantly or repeatedly; (Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇa netā.%})
<LEND>

<L>30626<pc>0610-c<k1>praReya<k2>praReya
{%Pra-ṇeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be guided or led, ductile,
docile, submissive, obedient, tamable, yielding; to be
executed or accomplished; to be fixed or settled;
agreeable (?).
<LEND>

<L>30627<pc>0610-c<k1>praRu<k2>praRu
{#praRu#}¦ {%pra-ṇu,%} cl. 2. 6. P. and Ved. 1. A.
{%-ṇauti, -ṇuvati, -ṇavate, -ṇavitum, -ṇuvitum,%} to
roar, bellow, low; to resound, reverberate; to make
a humming or droning sound, to utter the sacred
syllable {%Om;%} to praise.
<LEND>

<L>30628<pc>0610-c<k1>praRava<k2>praRava
{%Pra-ṇava, as,%}¦ m. the mystical or sacred syllable
{%Om%} (Manu II. 74); a small kind of drum or tabor
{%(= paṇava)%}. {%—Praṇavopaniṣad (˚va-up˚), t,%} f.,
N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>30629<pc>0610-c<k1>praRavaka<k2>praRavaka
{%Pra-ṇavaka, as,%}¦ m. (at the end of comps.) the
mystical or sacred syllable {%Om.%}
<LEND>

<L>30630<pc>0610-c<k1>praRuta<k2>praRuta
{%Pra-ṇuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised, celebrated, lauded.
<LEND>

<L>30631<pc>0610-c<k1>praRud<k2>praRud<h>1
{#praRud#} 1¦. {%pra-ṇud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-ṇudati, -te,%}
{%-ṇottum,%} to push or thrust forward, press forward,
push on; to drive away, send away, repel, dispel;
to scare or frighten away; to set in motion, drive;
to stir: Caus. {%-ṇodayati, -yitum,%} to push or thrust
away; to move, excite; to press any one to do any-
thing; to request any one for anything (with two
acc.).
<LEND>

<L>30632<pc>0610-c<k1>praRutta<k2>praRutta
{%Pra-ṇutta, as, ā, am,%}¦ pushed away, driven away,
repelled; frightened or scared away.
<LEND>

<L>30633<pc>0610-c<k1>praRud<k2>praRud<h>2
2. {%pra-ṇud, t, t, t,%}¦ driving away, frightening or
scaring away; forcing away, removing; directing,
enjoining, who or what commands or enjoins.
<LEND>

<L>30634<pc>0610-c<k1>praRuda<k2>praRuda
{%Pra-ṇuda, as, ā, am,%}¦ driving away, frightening
away; forcing away.
<LEND>

<L>30635<pc>0610-c<k1>praRudat<k2>praRudat
{%Pra-ṇudat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} driving away,
dispelling.
<LEND>

<L>30636<pc>0610-c<k1>praRudita<k2>praRudita
{%Pra-ṇudita, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven away.
<LEND>

<L>30637<pc>0610-c<k1>praRunna<k2>praRunna
{%Pra-ṇunna, as, ā, am,%}¦ pushed or thrust away,
driven away; frightened or scared away; set in
motion, driven; sent, dispatched; shaking, trem-
bling.
<LEND>

<L>30638<pc>0610-c<k1>praRottavya<k2>praRottavya
{%Pra-ṇottavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pushed or moved
forwards.
<LEND>

<L>30639<pc>0610-c<k1>praRoda<k2>praRoda
{%Pra-ṇoda, as,%}¦ m. driving, guiding (horses &c.);
directing, ordering.
<LEND>

<L>30640<pc>0610-c<k1>praRodita<k2>praRodita
{%Pra-ṇodita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set in motion, agitated;
driven, guided; directed, ordered.
<LEND>

<L>30641<pc>0610-c<k1>praRodya<k2>praRodya
{%Pra-ṇodya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be driven away, to be
sent or turned away; to be frightened away; to be
removed.
<LEND>

<L>30642<pc>0610-c<k1>pratakvan<k2>pratakvan
{#pratakvan#}¦ {%pra-takvan, ā, arī, a%} (fr. rt. {%tak%}
with {%pra%}), Ved. moving onwards; steep, precipitous
(? according to Mahī-dhara {%= pradakṣiṇaṃ gac-%}
{%chanty ṛtvijo yatra%}).
<LEND>

<L>30643<pc>0610-c<k1>pratakz<k2>pratakz
{#pratakz#}¦ {%pra-takṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-takṣati, -tak-%}
{%ṣitum, -taṣṭum,%} Ved. to build, make, produce.
<LEND>

<L>30644<pc>0610-c<k1>prataNkam<k2>prataNkam
{#prataNkam#}¦ {%pra-taṅkam,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%taṅk%} with
{%pra%}), Ved. having glided or crept.
<LEND>

<L>30645<pc>0610-c<k1>prataq<k2>prataq
{#prataq#}¦ {%pra-taḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tāḍayati, -yitum,%}
to strike down, knock down.
<LEND>

<L>30646<pc>0610-c<k1>pratata<k2>pratata
{#pratata#}¦ {%pra-tata.%} See under {%pra-tan,%} p. 611.
<LEND>

<L>30647<pc>0610-c<k1>pratatAmaha<k2>pratatAmaha
{#pratatAmaha#}¦ {%pra-tatāmaha, as,%} m., Ved. a
great-grandfather.
<LEND>

<L>30648<pc>0610-c<k1>pratadvasu<k2>pratadvasu
{#pratadvasu#}¦ {%pratad-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. ‘laden
with wealth,’ an epithet of the horses of Indra
(according to the Nirukta {%= prāpta-vasu;%} Sāy. =
{%vistīrṇa-dhana%}).
<LEND>
[Page0611-a+ 79]

<L>30649<pc>0611-a<k1>pratan<k2>pratan
{#pratan#}¦ {%pra-tan%} [cf. rt. 3. {%tan%}], cl. 8. P. A.
{%-tanoti, -tanute, -tanitum,%} to spread, extend; to
spread over, cover, fill; to stretch out, unfold, spread
abroad, disperse, diffuse; to carry off; to show, dis-
play, reveal, manifest; to begin to perform, begin
(a sacrifice); to execute, perform, accomplish: Pass.
{%-tanyate, -tāyate,%} to spread or extend from, proceed
from.
<LEND>

<L>30650<pc>0611-a<k1>pratata<k2>pratata
{%Pra-tata, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread; spread over, covered,
filled; stretched out, spread abroad, diffused; ({%am%}),
ind. continuously, unintermittingly.
<LEND>

<L>30651<pc>0611-a<k1>pratati<k2>pratati
{%Pra-tati, is,%}¦ f. spreading, expansion, extension;
({%is%} or {%ī%}), f. a creeping plant, creeper.
<LEND>

<L>30652<pc>0611-a<k1>pratAna<k2>pratAna
{%Pra-tāna, as,%}¦ m. a shoot, tendril; a plant with
tendrils; a low spreading creeper, creeping plant,
creeper, climber; branching out, ramification (both
literal and metaphorical); ‘a branch or tendril,’ epithet
of a section of a work entitled Kāvya-kalpa-latā-
parimala; a kind of disease, tetanus, epilepsy; N. of
a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants. {%—Pra-%}
{%tāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having shoots or tendrils;
ramified.
<LEND>

<L>30653<pc>0611-a<k1>pratAnin<k2>pratAnin
{%Pra-tānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ spreading, extending; having
shoots or tendrils; ({%inī%}), f. a spreading creeper,
climbing plant.
<LEND>

<L>30654<pc>0611-a<k1>pratana<k2>pratana
{#pratana#}¦ {%pratana, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%pra%}), an-
cient, old; [cf. {%pratna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30655<pc>0611-a<k1>pratanu<k2>pratanu
{#pratanu#}¦ {%pra-tanu, us, us%} or {%vī, u,%} very thin
or fine, delicate, minute; slender, emaciated; small,
narrow; insignificant, indifferent.
<LEND>

<L>30656<pc>0611-a<k1>pratanuka<k2>pratanuka
{%Pra-tanuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ very fine or delicate;
({%am%}), ind. very delicately.
<LEND>

<L>30657<pc>0611-a<k1>pratap<k2>pratap
{#pratap#}¦ {%pra-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -taptum,%}
to give forth heat, radiate heat, be hot, burn, glow;
to warm, to heat, to shine upon; to bake, roast; to
anneal metals; to kindle, light, illumine; to feel
pain, suffer; to mortify the flesh, perform penance;
to pain with heat, torment, torture, harass: Pass.
{%-tapyate,%} to feel pain, suffer pain: Caus. {%-tāpayati,%}
{%-yitum%} (anomalous 3rd sing. 1st Fut. {%pra-tāpitā,%}
Mahā-bh. Karṇa-p. 1971), to make warm or hot,
warm, heat; to set on fire, set in flames, irradiate,
illuminate; to destroy with heat, pain by heat, tor-
ment, harass.
<LEND>

<L>30658<pc>0611-a<k1>pratapat<k2>pratapat
{%Pra-tapat, an, antī, at,%}¦ burning; ({%an%}), m. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>30659<pc>0611-a<k1>pratapana<k2>pratapana
{%Pra-tapana, am,%}¦ n. making warm, warming;
{%pratapane kṛ,%} to put near the fire, make warm.
<LEND>

<L>30660<pc>0611-a<k1>pratapta<k2>pratapta
{%Pra-tapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ heated; hot, ardent;
annealed; pained, tormented, tortured.
<LEND>

<L>30661<pc>0611-a<k1>pratApa<k2>pratApa
{%Pra-tāpa, as,%}¦ m. glowing heat, heat, warmth;
splendor, brilliancy, glory, majesty, dignity, the pos-
session of rank and power, superiority; ardour, zeal,
spirit, vigour, power, efficacy, energy; courage,
prowess, valour; the plant Calotropis Gigantea (=
{%arka%}); N. of a man. {%—Pratāpa-candra, as,%} m.,
N. of an author. {%—Pratāpa-dhavala, as,%} m., N.
of a prince. {%—Pratāpa-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Pratāpa-pura, am,%} n., N. of a city. {%—Pratāpa-%}
{%mārtaṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Pratāpa-%}
{%mukuṭa, as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Pratāpa-rudra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a prince of the Kākatīyas (celebrated in
a work by Vidyā-nātha on rhetoric and in the drama
called Pratāparudrīya or Pratāpa-rudra; he was born
in Bhoja-purī; Pratāpa-rudra is also described as a
king of Vijaya-nagara). {%—Pratāpa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
full of splendor, endowed with majesty, majestic,
glorious, mighty, powerful; dignified; ({%ān%}), m., N.
of an attendant of Skanda; an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Pratāpa-śīla, as,%} m., N. of a prince {%(= śīlā-%}
{%ditya)%}. {%—Pratāpāditya (˚pa-ād˚), as,%} m., N. and
epithet of various princes. {%—Pratāpālaṅkāra (˚pa-%}
{%al˚), as,%} m., N. of a medical work.
<LEND>

<L>30662<pc>0611-a<k1>pratApana<k2>pratApana
{%Pra-tāpana, as, ī, am,%}¦ making hot, paining,
distressing, tormenting; ({%as%}), m. a particular hell;
({%am%}), n. warming, heating; burning, consuming;
inflicting pain or punishment, paining, distressing.
<LEND>

<L>30663<pc>0611-a<k1>pratApasa<k2>pratApasa
{%Pra-tāpasa, as,%}¦ m. a species of gigantic Asclepias
with white flowers, Calotropis Gigantea Alba.
<LEND>

<L>30664<pc>0611-a<k1>pratApin<k2>pratApin
{%Pra-tāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hot, burning, scorching,
[Page0611-b+ 75]
singeing; splendid, shining; paining, distressing,
harassing; majestic, dignified, powerful.
<LEND>

<L>30665<pc>0611-b<k1>pratam<k2>pratam
{#pratam#}¦ {%pra-tam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-tāmyati, -tamitum,%}
to lose the breath, become breathless, be stupefied
or stunned; to become exhausted, feel exhausted,
faint, perish; to be beside one's self.
<LEND>

<L>30666<pc>0611-b<k1>pratamaka<k2>pratamaka
{%Pra-tamaka, as,%}¦ m. a particular form of asthma.
<LEND>

<L>30667<pc>0611-b<k1>pratAm<k2>pratAm
{%Pra-tām, n, n, n,%}¦ desiring?; being afflicted?;
({%ān%}), ind. see Gaṇa Svar-ādi to Pāṇ. I. 1, 37.
<LEND>

<L>30668<pc>0611-b<k1>pratamAm<k2>pratamAm
{#pratamAm#}¦ {%pra-tamām,%} ind. (fr. 1. {%pra%}), Ved.
especially, in particular.
<LEND>

<L>30669<pc>0611-b<k1>prataram<k2>prataram
{%Pra-taram,%}¦ ind., Ved. further; more, more espe-
cially, more exceedingly; principally, pre-eminently;
(Sāy. {%= prakṛṣṭataram, atiśayena.%})
<LEND>

<L>30670<pc>0611-b<k1>pratara<k2>pratara
{#pratara#}¦ {%pra-tara.%} See under {%pra-tṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>30671<pc>0611-b<k1>pratark<k2>pratark
{#pratark#}¦ {%pra-tark,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tarkayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to form a clear view or notion; to gather, con-
clude; to search, investigate; to regard as, take for,
deem, suppose.
<LEND>

<L>30672<pc>0611-b<k1>pratarka<k2>pratarka
{%Pra-tarka, as,%}¦ m. conclusion, supposition, con-
jecture.
<LEND>

<L>30673<pc>0611-b<k1>pratarkaRa<k2>pratarkaRa
{%Pra-tarkaṇa, am,%}¦ n. judging, reasoning, discus-
sing, discussion; doubt; logic.
<LEND>

<L>30674<pc>0611-b<k1>pratarkya<k2>pratarkya
{%Pra-tarkya, as, ā, am,%}¦ conceivable, compre-
hensible, imaginable.
<LEND>

<L>30675<pc>0611-b<k1>pratardana<k2>pratardana
{#pratardana#}¦ {%pra-tardana, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%tṛd%}
with {%pra%}), N. of a king of Kāśī (a son of Divo-dāsa
and author of the hymn Ṛg-veda IX. 96); N. of a
Rākṣasa; of a class of divinities under Manu Auttama.
<LEND>

<L>30676<pc>0611-b<k1>pratala<k2>pratala
{#pratala#}¦ {%pra-tala, as,%} m. the open hand with
the fingers extended; ({%am%}), n. one of the divisions
of the lower regions; [cf. {%pātāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30677<pc>0611-b<k1>pratavas<k2>pratavas
{#pratavas#}¦ {%pra-tavas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. mighty,
powerful, active; (Sāy. {%= prakṛṣṭa-balopeta.%})
<LEND>

<L>30678<pc>0611-b<k1>pratAmra<k2>pratAmra
{#pratAmra#}¦ {%pra-tāmra, as, ā, am,%} excessively
red, very red.
<LEND>

<L>30679<pc>0611-b<k1>pratAra<k2>pratAra
{#pratAra#}¦ {%pra-tāra, pra-tāraka, pra-tāraṇa,%}
{%pra-tāraṇīya.%} See under {%pra-tṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>30680<pc>0611-b<k1>prati<k2>prati<h>1
{#prati#} 1¦. {%prati%} (an indeclinable particle and
prefix to verbs and their derivative nouns; some-
times {%pratī%} in composition), towards, in the direc-
tion of, to, unto, near to; against, in opposition to,
counter; back, back again, again, in return; down
upon, upon, on.
<LEND>

<L>30681<pc>0611-b<k1>prati<k2>prati
{%Prati%}¦ is also prefixed to nouns not immediately
connected with verbs, to express equality, likeness,
resemblance, or comparison; [cf. {%prati-cakra,%}
{%prati-candra.%}]
<div n="P"/>(As a separable preposition with acc. and usu-
ally but not invariably following its substantive),
towards, to, unto, in the direction of (e. g. {%śabdam%}
{%prati,%} in the direction of the sound, towards the
place whence the sound came); down upon, upon;
against, in opposition to, counter (e. g. {%yāyād ripum%}
{%prati,%} he should march against the enemy; {%pāhi%}
{%nas tvam prati rīṣataḥ,%} defend thou us against
the enemy); over against, opposite, contra; in the
presence of, before; in comparison with, in propor-
tion to, on a par with (e. g. {%tvaṃ sahasrāṇi prati,%}
thou art on a par with, i. e. equivalent to, thousands);
in the vicinity of, near, beside, by, at, on (e. g.
{%Gaṅgām prati,%} at or on the Ganges; {%āyodhanam%}
{%prati,%} on the field of battle); on the side of, in
favour of; (distributively) in each, at or in every,
according to each, severally (e. g. {%yajñam prati,%} at
every sacrifice; {%varṣam prati,%} every year, annually;
in this sense {%prati%} is frequently used at the beginning
of adv. comps., cf. {%prati-kṣaṇam, prati-gṛham%});
about, at the time of, during (e. g. {%Phālgunam%}
{%māsam prati,%} about the month Phālguna; {%ciram%}
{%prati,%} for a long time); in relation to, with refer-
ence to, with regard to (e. g. {%dharmam prati,%}
with regard to justice); concerning; on account of;
according to (e. g. {%mām prati,%} according to me,
i. e. in my opinion), in conformity with, in pursuance
[Page0611-c+ 72]
of; a little (at the end of a comp., e. g. {%sūpa-%}
{%prati,%} a little broth, see Pāṇ. II. 1, 9).
<div n="P"/>(As a separable preposition, with abl.), on a par
with, on an equality with (also with adverbs ending
with the affix {%tas,%} e. g. {%Nārāyaṇataḥ prati,%} on an
equality with Nārāyaṇa); in return for, as compen-
sation for (e. g. {%ukṣā kapotāt prati,%} an ox in
return for a dove); in the place of, in lieu of,
instead of.
<div n="P"/>Native lexicographers explain the senses of {%prati%}
by the following Sanskrit words: {%pra-dhāna, kṣepa,%}
{%niś-caya, vy-āvṛtti, pra-śasti, vi-rodha, sam-%}
{%ādhi:%} [cf. Zend <nsi>paiti:</nsi> Old Pers. <nsi>pati-sh,</nsi> ‘against:’
Gr. <lang n="greek">προ-τί, πα-τί, πρός</lang> for <lang n="greek">πρότ,  πρόσ-θε-(ν):</lang> Lat.
<nsi>red-</nsi> as in <nsi>red-dere, red-ire; re-</nsi> as in <nsi>re-ferre;</nsi>
<nsi>prœ</nsi> for <nsi>prai; por, pol, pos</nsi> for <nsi>port</nsi> in the forms
<nsi>por-rigo, pol-liceor, pol-lus, pos-sides:</nsi> Old Slav.
<nsi>proti:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>prësz,</nsi> ‘against:’ Bohem. <nsi>proti:</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>frith, frioth,</nsi> as in <nsi>frithbeart,</nsi> ‘I object, oppose;’
<nsi>frithbuille,</nsi> ‘a back-stroke;’ <nsi>frithshearc,</nsi> ‘a return
of love, mutual regard;’ <nsi>frithcuirim,</nsi> ‘I oppose,
obstruct;’ <nsi>frithbharamhuil,</nsi> ‘a {{parodox->paradox||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}.’]
<LEND>

<L>30682<pc>0611-c<k1>prati<k2>prati<h>2
{#prati#} 2¦. {%prati, is,%} m., N. of a son of Kuśa.
<LEND>

<L>30683<pc>0611-c<k1>pratika<k2>pratika
{#pratika#}¦ {%pratika, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%prati%}), worth
a Kārṣāpaṇa or sixteen Paṇas of Kowries.
<LEND>

<L>30684<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikaYcuka<k2>pratikaYcuka
{#pratikaYcuka#}¦ {%prati-kañcuka, as,%} m. an ad-
versary.
<LEND>

<L>30685<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikaRWam<k2>pratikaRWam
{#pratikaRWam#}¦ {%prati-kaṇṭham,%} ind. singly, se-
verally, one by one (lit. so that each is seized by the
throat).
<LEND>

<L>30686<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikamp<k2>pratikamp
{#pratikamp#}¦ {%prati-kamp,%} Caus. P. {%-kampa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to shake, cause to tremble.
<LEND>

<L>30687<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikara<k2>pratikara
{#pratikara#}¦ {%prati-kara,%} &c. See under {%prati-%}
{%kṛ,%} p. 612, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>30688<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikarkaSa<k2>pratikarkaSa
{#pratikarkaSa#}¦ {%prati-karkaśa, as, ā, am,%} equally
hard, of the same hardness.
<LEND>

<L>30689<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikarza<k2>pratikarza
{#pratikarza#}¦ {%prati-karṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kṛṣ%}
with {%pra%}), drawing together, aggregation; antici-
pating that which occurs later.
<LEND>

<L>30690<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikfzwa<k2>pratikfzwa
{%Prati-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ ploughed back again,
twice ploughed; thrust back, repulsed, rejected,
despised; inferior, low, vile; put out of sight,
hidden, concealed.
<LEND>

<L>30691<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikalpya<k2>pratikalpya
{#pratikalpya#}¦ {%prati-kalpya.%} See under {%prati-%}
{%kḷp,%} p. 612, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>30692<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikaSa<k2>pratikaSa
{#pratikaSa#}¦ {%prati-kaśa, as, ā, am,%} (probably)
not obeying the whip.
<LEND>

<L>30693<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikANkz<k2>pratikANkz
{#pratikANkz#}¦ {%prati-kāṅkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also
A.) {%-kāṅkṣati (-te), -kāṅkṣitum,%} to wish for,
long for.
<LEND>

<L>30694<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikANkzin<k2>pratikANkzin
{%Prati-kāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ longing for, desirous
of, desiring.
<LEND>

<L>30695<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikAmam<k2>pratikAmam
{#pratikAmam#}¦ {%prati-kāmam,%} ind., Ved. accord-
ing to wish or desire, at will.
<LEND>

<L>30696<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikAmin<k2>pratikAmin
{%Prati-kāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. contrary to desire,
contrary to taste, disagreeable, distasteful; ({%inī%}), f. a
female rival.
<LEND>

<L>30697<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikAmya<k2>pratikAmya
{%Prati-kāmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being according
to wish or liking.
<LEND>

<L>30698<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikAya<k2>pratikAya
{#pratikAya#}¦ {%prati-kāya, as,%} m. an effigy,
image, likeness, picture; the effigy of a man for
archers to practise at; a target, butt, mark.
<LEND>

<L>30699<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikAra<k2>pratikAra
{#pratikAra#}¦ {%prati-kāra,%} &c. See under {%prati-%}
{%kṛ,%} p. 612, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>30700<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikAS<k2>pratikAS
{#pratikAS#}¦ {%prati-kāś,%} Intens. {%-cākaśīti,%} Ved.
to see, behold.
<LEND>

<L>30701<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikASa<k2>pratikASa
{%Prati-kāśa, as,%}¦ m. (or {%pratī-kāśa,%} q. v.), reflec-
tion; look, appearance; (at the end of comps.) hav-
ing the appearance of, looking like, similar, resem-
bling, like (e. g. {%candra-pratikāśa, as, ā, am,%}
like the moon).
<LEND>

<L>30702<pc>0611-c<k1>pratikAsa<k2>pratikAsa
{%Prati-kāsa,%}¦ wrongly spelt for {%prati-kāśa%} above.
<LEND>
[Page0612-a+ 77]

<L>30703<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikitava<k2>pratikitava
{#pratikitava#}¦ {%prati-kitava, as,%} m. an adver-
sary at play, an opponent in a game
<LEND>

<L>30704<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikuYcita<k2>pratikuYcita
{#pratikuYcita#}¦ {%prati-kuñcita, as, ā, am,%} bent,
curved.
<LEND>

<L>30705<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikuYjara<k2>pratikuYjara
{#pratikuYjara#}¦ {%prati-kuñjara, as,%} m. a hostile
elephant; [cf. {%prati-gaja, prati-dvirada, prati-%}
{%nāga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30706<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikUj<k2>pratikUj
{#pratikUj#}¦ {%prati-kūj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kūjati, -kū-%}
{%jitum,%} to coo or warble in return, answer by an
inarticulate sound.
<LEND>

<L>30707<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikUpa<k2>pratikUpa
{#pratikUpa#}¦ {%prati-kūpa, as,%} m. a moat, ditch.
<LEND>

<L>30708<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikUla<k2>pratikUla
{#pratikUla#}¦ {%prati-kūla, as, ā, am,%} ‘against
the bank’ (opposed to {%anu-kūla,%} q. v.), against the
stream or current, contrary, adverse, opposed, oppo-
site; cross-grained, cross, inverted, reverse; contradic-
tory; disastrous, inauspicious; disagreeable, unpleasant,
ungracious, perverse, stubborn, contumacious, rebel-
lious; {%pratikūleṣu sthita,%} standing among the re-
fractory, offering opposition (according to Kullūka =
{%ājñā-vyāghāta-kārin%}); ({%am, ena%}), ind. contrary,
contrarily, contrary to nature, in inverted order, in-
versely. {%—Pratikūla-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%pratikūla-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} opposing, offering opposition to (with
gen.). {%—Pratikūla-tas,%} ind. in contradiction or con-
travention to; {%pratikūlato vṛt,%} to be in contradiction
to. {%—Pratikūla-tā,%} f. or {%pratikūla-tva, am,%} n.
adverseness, opposition, hostility; perverseness, con-
tumacy. {%—Pratikūla-darśana, as, ā, am,%} looking
cross or awry, having an ungracious aspect. {%—Prati-%}
{%kūla-daiva-tā,%} f. hostility of fate. {%—Pratikūla-pra-%}
{%vartin, ī, inī, i,%} taking an adverse course; caus-
ing unpleasantness. {%—Pratikūla-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
speaking against, contravening, contradicting. {%—Pra-%}
{%tikūla-vacana, am,%} n. refractory speech, contradic-
tion; disagreeable speech. {%—Pratikūla-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} refractory, contumacious. {%—Pratikūla-vartin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} being adverse to, disturbing, troubling.
{%—Pratikūla-vāda, as,%} m. speaking contradictorily,
contradiction. {%—Pratikūla-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} speaking
contradictorily, contradictory, contradicting, opposing.
{%—Pratikūla-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} being in a state of
opposition, opposing. {%—Pratikūla-śabda, as, ā, am,%}
having a disagreeable sound, having a discordant note
(Kumāra-s. I. 46). {%—Pratikūlācarita (˚la-āc˚), am,%}
n. offensive or hostile action, injurious conduct. {%—Pra-%}
{%tikūlokta (˚la-uk˚), am,%} n. contradiction.
<LEND>

<L>30709<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikUlaya<k2>pratikUlaya
{%Pratikūlaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pratikūlayati, -yitum,%}
to oppose, offer opposition to.
<LEND>

<L>30710<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikf<k2>pratikf
{#pratikf#}¦ {%prati-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -ku-%}
{%rute, -kartum,%} to do or make (anything as a defence)
against (Ved.); to return, repay, recompense, re-
quite, retaliate (with acc. of the thing, and gen.,
dat., or loc. of the person); to act in opposition to,
counteract (with acc. or gen.); to treat or attend
to (as a physician), cure; to repair, mend, restore:
Caus. A. {%-kārayate, -yitum,%} to cause to be repeated:
Desid. {%-cikīrṣati,%} to wish to requite, seek to retaliate
or take vengeance upon (with loc. or acc.).
<LEND>

<L>30711<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikara<k2>pratikara
{%Prati-kara, as, ī, am,%}¦ acting against, counter-
acting; ({%as%}), m. requital, compensation.
<LEND>

<L>30712<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikaraRIya<k2>pratikaraRIya
{%Prati-karaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be counteracted,
to be prevented, remediable.
<LEND>

<L>30713<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikartavya<k2>pratikartavya
{%Prati-kartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be requited or re-
turned, to be paid or discharged (as a debt); to be
counteracted or counterworked, to be frustrated; to
be treated or attended (by a physician).
<LEND>

<L>30714<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikartf<k2>pratikartf
{%Prati-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a requiter, recompenser;
an opponent, adversary.
<LEND>

<L>30715<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikarman<k2>pratikarman
{%Prati-karman, a,%}¦ n. requital, retaliation; redress,
remedy; counteraction, counterworking; opposing,
opposition; dress, decoration, toilet, personal embel-
lishment; ({%a%}), ind. at each celebration or perform-
ance; in every work; {%a-pratikarman, ā, ā, a,%}
(either) whose deeds are unmatched, (or) not offer-
ing opposition; obedient.
<LEND>

<L>30716<pc>0612-a<k1>pratikAra<k2>pratikAra
{%Prati-kāra, as,%}¦ m. (or {%pratī-kāra,%} q. v.), ren-
dering back, requital, reward, retaliation, retribution,
[Page0612-b+ 74]
revenge; counteraction, application of an antidote or
remedy, obviating, preventing, remedying, preven-
tion, remedy; opposition; help against, help, allevi-
ation; a kind of treaty or alliance concluded with
the hope that one party will requite the services
rendered by the other. {%—Pratikāra-karman, a,%} n.
the making of amends. {%—Pratikāra-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} knowing what remedy should be applied. {%—Pra-%}
{%tikāra-vidhāna, am,%} n. the application of a remedy,
medical treatment.
<LEND>

<L>30717<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikArin<k2>pratikArin
{%Prati-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ counteracting, obviating,
opposing; {%a-pratikārin,%} one who uses no remedies,
one who does not allow himself to be attended by
a physician.
<LEND>

<L>30718<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikArya<k2>pratikArya
{%Prati-kārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be retaliated or re-
venged; ({%am%}), n. retribution.
<LEND>

<L>30719<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikfta<k2>pratikfta
{%Prati-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ rendered back, returned,
repaid, recompensed, requited, retaliated; opposed,
counteracted, remedied; ({%am%}), n. recompense, re-
quital; resistance, opposition.
<LEND>

<L>30720<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikfti<k2>pratikfti
{%Prati-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. resistance, defence; retaliation,
return, revenge; a reflected image, reflection, a
shadow; an effigy, figure, image, statue, picture;
a substitute.
<LEND>

<L>30721<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikftya<k2>pratikftya
{%Prati-kṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be counteracted or
remedied, remediable.
<LEND>

<L>30722<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikriyA<k2>pratikriyA
{%Prati-kriyā,%}¦ f. requital, retaliation, revenge; a re-
turn for kindness received, recompense; opposition;
counteracting, remedying; (medical) attendance;
embellishment, decoration; defence, protection; a
fence; succour, help, care.
<LEND>

<L>30723<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikfzwa<k2>pratikfzwa
{#pratikfzwa#}¦ {%prati-kṛṣṭa.%} See {%prati-karṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>30724<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikF<k2>pratikF
{#pratikF#}¦ {%prati-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kirati, -te,%}
{%-karitum, -karītum,%} to scatter towards; [cf. {%prati-%}
{%s-kṝ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30725<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikxp<k2>pratikxp
{#pratikxp#}¦ {%prati-kḷp,%} cl. 4. A. {%-kalpate,%}
{%-kalpitum, -kalptum,%} Ved. to be at the service
of (with acc.); to receive hospitably: Caus. {%-kal-%}
{%payati, -yitum,%} to regulate, arrange.
<LEND>

<L>30726<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikalpya<k2>pratikalpya
{%Prati-kalpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be arranged or
prepared.
<LEND>

<L>30727<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikopa<k2>pratikopa
{#pratikopa#}¦ {%prati-kopa, as,%} m. anger against
(any one), wrath; vexation.
<LEND>

<L>30728<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikram<k2>pratikram
{#pratikram#}¦ {%prati-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krāmati,%}
{%-kramate, -kramitum,%} to come back, return.
<LEND>

<L>30729<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikrama<k2>pratikrama
{%Prati-krama, as,%}¦ m. reversed or inverted order.
<LEND>

<L>30730<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikramaRa<k2>pratikramaRa
{%Prati-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (Ved.) stepping towards;
(with Buddhists) confessing, making confession.
<LEND>

<L>30731<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikruD<k2>pratikruD
{#pratikruD#}¦ {%prati-krudh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-krudhyati,%}
{%-kroddhum,%} to be angry with any one (acc.) in
return (Manu VI. 48).
<LEND>

<L>30732<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikroDa<k2>pratikroDa
{%Prati-krodha, as,%}¦ m. anger in return.
<LEND>

<L>30733<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikruzwa<k2>pratikruzwa
{#pratikruzwa#}¦ {%prati-kruṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%kruś%} with {%prati%}), miserable, poor (said of a kind
of soil).
<LEND>

<L>30734<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikroSa<k2>pratikroSa
{%Prati-krośa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. crying out to, hallooing.
<LEND>

<L>30735<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikrUra<k2>pratikrUra
{#pratikrUra#}¦ {%prati-krūra, as, ā, am,%} cruel or
harsh in return, returning harshness for harshness.
<LEND>

<L>30736<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikzaRam<k2>pratikzaRam
{#pratikzaRam#}¦ {%prati-kṣaṇam,%} ind. at every
moment, every moment, momentarily, every in-
stant; constantly, continually.
<LEND>

<L>30737<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikzatra<k2>pratikzatra
{#pratikzatra#}¦ {%prati-kṣatra, as,%} m., N. of a
descendant of Atri, author of the hymn Ṛg-veda V.
46; of a son of An-enas; of a son of Kṣatra-vṛddha;
of a son of Śamin.
<LEND>

<L>30738<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikzaya<k2>pratikzaya
{#pratikzaya#}¦ {%prati-kṣaya, as,%} m. a guard, at-
tendant (‘protecting from injury or loss’).
<LEND>

<L>30739<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikzi<k2>pratikzi
{#pratikzi#}¦ {%prati-kṣi%} (see rt. 2. {%kṣi%}), cl. 2. 6.
P. {%-kṣeti, -kṣiyati, -kṣetum,%} Ved. to settle near.
<LEND>

<L>30740<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikzip<k2>pratikzip
{#pratikzip#}¦ {%prati-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṣipati,%}
{%-kṣeptum,%} to throw or cast into; to push against,
hurt; to revile, ridicule, reject.
<LEND>

<L>30741<pc>0612-b<k1>pratikzipta<k2>pratikzipta
{%Prati-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown into; turned
away, rejected, dismissed; sent, dispatched; repelled,
[Page0612-c+ 69]
opposed, resisted; abused, reviled; calumniated,
falsely accused; ({%am%}), n. medicine.
<LEND>

<L>30742<pc>0612-c<k1>pratikzipya<k2>pratikzipya
{%Prati-kṣipya,%}¦ ind. having thrown into, having
thrown.
<LEND>

<L>30743<pc>0612-c<k1>pratikzepa<k2>pratikzepa
{%Prati-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. contradicting, contradiction;
opposing, controverting, contravening; contest, con-
testing; not acknowledging, rejecting.
<LEND>

<L>30744<pc>0612-c<k1>pratikzepaRa<k2>pratikzepaRa
{%Prati-kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. contradicting, opposing,
controverting, contesting.
<LEND>

<L>30745<pc>0612-c<k1>pratikzuta<k2>pratikzuta
{#pratikzuta#}¦ {%prati-kṣuta, am,%} n. sneezing,
wheezing.
<LEND>

<L>30746<pc>0612-c<k1>pratiKura<k2>pratiKura
{#pratiKura#}¦ {%prati-khura, as,%} m. a particular
wrong position of a child at birth.
<LEND>

<L>30747<pc>0612-c<k1>pratiKyA<k2>pratiKyA
{#pratiKyA#}¦ {%prati-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti, -khyā-%}
{%tum,%} to see, behold.
<LEND>

<L>30748<pc>0612-c<k1>pratiKyAti<k2>pratiKyAti
{%Prati-khyāti, is,%}¦ f. renown; (also read {%pra-%}
{%vikhyāti.%})
<LEND>

<L>30749<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigaja<k2>pratigaja
{#pratigaja#}¦ {%prati-gaja, as,%} m. a hostile ele-
phant, elephant standing opposite; [cf. {%prati-kuñ-%}
{%jara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30750<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigad<k2>pratigad
{#pratigad#}¦ {%prati-gad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gadati, -gadi-%}
{%tum,%} to speak in return, answer.
<LEND>

<L>30751<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigam<k2>pratigam
{#pratigam#}¦ {%prati-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gan-%}
{%tum,%} to go or advance towards, go to meet; to go
back, return, go home.
<LEND>

<L>30752<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigata<k2>pratigata
{%Prati-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ flying backwards and for-
wards, wheeling in flight; lost from the memory.
<LEND>

<L>30753<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigamana<k2>pratigamana
{%Prati-gamana, am,%}¦ n. going back, returning,
return.
<LEND>

<L>30754<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigara<k2>pratigara
{#pratigara#}¦ {%prati-gara.%} See {%prati-gṝ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>30755<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigarj<k2>pratigarj
{#pratigarj#}¦ {%prati-garj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-garjati, -gar-%}
{%jitum,%} to roar at, roar against, roar at one another;
to answer with roars; to resist, oppose.
<LEND>

<L>30756<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigarjat<k2>pratigarjat
{%Prati-garjat, an, antī, at,%}¦ roaring against; mur-
muring against, rebelling; reverberating, echoing.
<LEND>

<L>30757<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigarjanA<k2>pratigarjanA
{%Prati-garjanā,%}¦ f. roaring against, answering roar.
<LEND>

<L>30758<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigarhita<k2>pratigarhita
{#pratigarhita#}¦ {%prati-garhita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%garh%} with {%prati%}), blamed (Rām. VI. 103, 15; per-
haps wrongly for {%prati garhita%}).
<LEND>

<L>30759<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigA<k2>pratigA
{#pratigA#}¦ {%prati-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%}
to go back, return.
<LEND>

<L>30760<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigAtram<k2>pratigAtram
{#pratigAtram#}¦ {%prati-gātram,%} ind. in every limb.
<LEND>

<L>30761<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigAh<k2>pratigAh
{#pratigAh#}¦ {%prati-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -gā-%}
{%hitum, -gāḍhum,%} to penetrate, enter.
<LEND>

<L>30762<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigiri<k2>pratigiri
{#pratigiri#}¦ {%prati-giri, is,%} m. an opposite
mountain; an inferior mountain or anything like a
mountain.
<LEND>

<L>30763<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigIrya<k2>pratigIrya
{#pratigIrya#}¦ {%prati-gīrya.%} See {%prati-gṝ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>30764<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigu<k2>pratigu
{#pratigu#}¦ {%prati-gu,%} Caus. P. {%-gāvayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to proclaim.
<LEND>

<L>30765<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigupta<k2>pratigupta
{#pratigupta#}¦ {%prati-gupta, as, ā, am,%} guarded,
protected.
<LEND>

<L>30766<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigupya<k2>pratigupya
{%Prati-gupya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be guarded or pro-
tected.
<LEND>

<L>30767<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigfD<k2>pratigfD
{#pratigfD#}¦ {%prati-gṛdh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-gṛdhyati,%}
{%-gardhitum,%} to be greedy or eager for (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>30768<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigfham<k2>pratigfham
{#pratigfham#}¦ {%prati-gṛham,%} ind. in every house.
<LEND>

<L>30769<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigfhIta<k2>pratigfhIta
{#pratigfhIta#}¦ {%prati-gṛhīta.%} See under {%prati-%}
{%grah,%} p. 613, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>30770<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigF<k2>pratigF
{#pratigF#}¦ {%prati-gṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛṇāti, -gṛ-%}
{%ṇīte, -garitum, -garītum,%} to invoke, salute (Ved.);
to answer or make responses in recitation or singing
(Ved.); to agree with any one (with dat.).
<LEND>

<L>30771<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigara<k2>pratigara
{%Prati-gara, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the Adhvaryu's response
to the address of the Hotṛ.
<LEND>

<L>30772<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigaritf<k2>pratigaritf
{%Prati-garitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who ejaculates
or utters a response.
<LEND>

<L>30773<pc>0612-c<k1>pratigIrya<k2>pratigIrya
{%Prati-gīrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be answered with
a response in singing.
<LEND>
[Page0613-a+ 79]

<L>30774<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigeham<k2>pratigeham
{#pratigeham#}¦ {%prati-geham,%} ind. in every house.
<LEND>

<L>30775<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrah<k2>pratigrah
{#pratigrah#}¦ {%prati-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti,%}
{%gṛhṇīte, -grahītum%} (an irreg. 2nd sing. Impv.
{%prati-gṛhṇa%} is used in Rāmāyaṇa III. 9, 27), to
take hold of, grasp, seize; to eclipse; to take up,
collect, admit; to take, eat, drink; to take posses-
sion of, occupy; to take away, deprive of; to receive,
accept ({%śirasā prati-grah,%} to accept anything and
place it on the head as a mark of respect); to
receive an enemy, attack, assault, assail; to receive
a friend, give a friendly reception to, welcome; to
take as a wife, choose for a husband, wed, marry;
to hear, hear with pleasure; to accept what is said
as a good omen; to express assent, approve, attend,
pay attention to: Caus. {%-grāhayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to accept, give, present.
<LEND>

<L>30776<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigfhIta<k2>pratigfhIta
{%Prati-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken hold of; taken,
accepted, received; assented to, admitted; taken as
a wife, married.
<LEND>

<L>30777<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigfhItavya<k2>pratigfhItavya
{%Prati-gṛhītavya,%}¦ a wrong form for {%prati-gra-%}
{%hītavya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30778<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigfhItf<k2>pratigfhItf
{%Prati-gṛhītṛ,%}¦ a wrong form for {%prati-gra-%}
{%hītṛ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30779<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigfhya<k2>pratigfhya<h>1
1. {%prati-gṛhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accepted,
acceptable; one from whom anything may be ac-
cepted.
<LEND>

<L>30780<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigfhya<k2>pratigfhya<h>2
2. {%prati-gṛhya,%}¦ ind. having taken or received;
bringing up the rear.
<LEND>

<L>30781<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigraha<k2>pratigraha
{%Prati-graha, as,%}¦ m. receiving, accepting, accept-
ance, receiving a donation; the right of accepting
gifts (as the peculiar prerogative of Brāhmans); one
who receives, a receiver; a gift, present; a proper
donation or fit present to a Brāhman at suitable
periods; receiving kindly, friendly reception; taking
a wife, marrying; favour, grace; hearing, hearken-
ing, listening; the reserve of an army, a detach-
ment posted with the general four hundred yards in
the rear of the line; a spitting-pot, spittoon; the
sun near the moon's node; {%= kriyā-kāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>30782<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrahaRa<k2>pratigrahaRa
{%Prati-grahaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ receiving, accepting;
({%am%}), n. receiving, reception, receiving presents;
receiving a bride, marrying; a vessel.
<LEND>

<L>30783<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrahaRIya<k2>pratigrahaRIya
{%Prati-grahaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or
accepted, acceptable.
<LEND>

<L>30784<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrahin<k2>pratigrahin
{%Prati-grahin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ one who receives, a
receiver (opposed to {%dātṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>30785<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrahItavya<k2>pratigrahItavya
{%Prati-grahītavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or
accepted, allowed to be taken or received; to be
received (in a friendly manner), to be welcomed.
<LEND>

<L>30786<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrahItf<k2>pratigrahItf
{%Prati-grahītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who receives or
accepts, a receiver; one who takes in marriage, one
who marries.
<LEND>

<L>30787<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrAha<k2>pratigrAha
{%Prati-grāha, as,%}¦ m. receiving, accepting gifts; a
spitting-pot, spittoon.
<LEND>

<L>30788<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrAhaka<k2>pratigrAhaka
{%Prati-grāhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ receiving gifts or
presents.
<LEND>

<L>30789<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrAhin<k2>pratigrAhin
{%Prati-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ one who accepts, re-
ceiving presents.
<LEND>

<L>30790<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrAhya<k2>pratigrAhya<h>1
1. {%prati-grāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or ac-
cepted, acceptable, admissible; one from whom
anything may be received.
<LEND>

<L>30791<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrAhya<k2>pratigrAhya<h>2
2. {%prati-grāhya,%}¦ ind. having caused to accept,
having offered.
<LEND>

<L>30792<pc>0613-a<k1>pratigrAmam<k2>pratigrAmam
{#pratigrAmam#}¦ {%prati-grāmam,%} ind. in every
village.
<LEND>

<L>30793<pc>0613-a<k1>pratiGa<k2>pratiGa
{#pratiGa#}¦ {%prati-gha, as,%} m. (fr. {%prati-han%}),
resistance, opposing, opposition; mutual beating,
striking back again, fighting, combat; anger, wrath,
rage, passion; an enemy; fainting; ({%as, ā, am%}),
inimical, adverse.
<LEND>

<L>30794<pc>0613-a<k1>pratiGAta<k2>pratiGAta
{%Prati-ghāta, as,%}¦ m. (or {%pratī-ghāta,%} q. v.), ward-
ing off a blow, keeping back, repulse; hinderance,
opposition, resistance; reaction; preventing, prohi-
biting; a blow in return; rebound.
<LEND>

<L>30795<pc>0613-a<k1>pratiGAtaka<k2>pratiGAtaka
{%Prati-ghātaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ disturbing, inter-
rupting, troubling; (at the end of an adj. comp.) =
{%prati-ghāta.%}
<LEND>

<L>30796<pc>0613-a<k1>pratiGAtana<k2>pratiGAtana
{%Prati-ghātana, am,%}¦ n. warding off, repulsing;
killing, slaughter.
<LEND>
[Page0613-b+ 72]

<L>30797<pc>0613-b<k1>pratiGAtin<k2>pratiGAtin
{%Prati-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ keeping off, repelling,
repulsing; troubling, encroaching, injuring; hostile,
opposed to; reacting.
<LEND>

<L>30798<pc>0613-b<k1>pratiGna<k2>pratiGna
{%Prati-ghna, am,%}¦ n. the body.
<LEND>

<L>30799<pc>0613-b<k1>pratiGnat<k2>pratiGnat
{%Prati-ghnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ opposing, impeding;
destructive; hostile.
<LEND>

<L>30800<pc>0613-b<k1>pratiGozin<k2>pratiGozin
{#pratiGozin#}¦ {%prati-ghoṣin, ī, iṇī, i%} (fr. rt.
{%ghuṣ%} with {%prati%}), Ved. roaring against, sounding
against.
<LEND>

<L>30801<pc>0613-b<k1>praticakra<k2>praticakra
{#praticakra#}¦ {%prati-cakra, am,%} n. a discus that
will bear comparison with others, a discus which is
a match for any other; (perhaps) a corresponding
or subordinate wheel.
<LEND>

<L>30802<pc>0613-b<k1>praticakz<k2>praticakz
{#praticakz#}¦ {%prati-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe,%} &c.,
to see, perceive, become aware of; to expect; to
cause to see, cause to appear, bring to light.
<LEND>

<L>30803<pc>0613-b<k1>praticakzaRa<k2>praticakzaRa
{%Prati-cakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking at, viewing;
making visible; appearance, look, aspect.
<LEND>

<L>30804<pc>0613-b<k1>praticakzya<k2>praticakzya
{%Prati-cakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. visible.
<LEND>

<L>30805<pc>0613-b<k1>praticandra<k2>praticandra
{#praticandra#}¦ {%prati-candra, as,%} m. a mock
moon, paraselene.
<LEND>

<L>30806<pc>0613-b<k1>praticar<k2>praticar
{#praticar#}¦ {%prati-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -cari-%}
{%tum,%} to advance towards, approach (Ved.): Caus.
{%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to make current, circulate, pro-
claim, publish.
<LEND>

<L>30807<pc>0613-b<k1>praticArita<k2>praticArita
{%Prati-cārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ circulated, proclaimed,
published.
<LEND>

<L>30808<pc>0613-b<k1>praticaraRam<k2>praticaraRam
{#praticaraRam#}¦ {%prati-caraṇam,%} ind. in every
school or branch.
<LEND>

<L>30809<pc>0613-b<k1>praticikIrzA<k2>praticikIrzA
{#praticikIrzA#}¦ {%prati-cikīrṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid.
of {%prati-kṛ%}), wish to requite, desire of retaliation
or revenge, desire to be avenged upon (with acc.
or loc.).
<LEND>

<L>30810<pc>0613-b<k1>praticikIrzu<k2>praticikIrzu
{%Prati-cikīrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to requite,
desirous of retaliating.
<LEND>

<L>30811<pc>0613-b<k1>praticiti<k2>praticiti
{#praticiti#}¦ {%prati-citi,%} ind., Ved. in every
layer or pile, in each layer or course (of faggots,
bricks, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>30812<pc>0613-b<k1>praticint<k2>praticint
{#praticint#}¦ {%prati-cint,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-cinta-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} to think or reflect on; to consider
again, remember.
<LEND>

<L>30813<pc>0613-b<k1>praticintana<k2>praticintana
{%Prati-cintana, am,%}¦ n. thinking repeatedly, con-
sidering, meditating upon.
<LEND>

<L>30814<pc>0613-b<k1>praticintanIya<k2>praticintanIya
{%Prati-cintanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be reflected upon
anew, to be thought over again.
<LEND>

<L>30815<pc>0613-b<k1>praticud<k2>praticud
{#praticud#}¦ {%prati-cud,%} cl. 10. P. {%-codayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to drive on, push on, impel, urge on, insti-
gate; to fall upon, assail, attack.
<LEND>

<L>30816<pc>0613-b<k1>praticodanam<k2>praticodanam
{%Prati-codanam,%}¦ ind. (fr. {%prati + codana%}), Ved.
according to order or injunction.
<LEND>

<L>30817<pc>0613-b<k1>praticodita<k2>praticodita
{%Prati-codita, as, ā, am,%}¦ impelled, one who has
pushed against or assailed (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>30818<pc>0613-b<k1>praticCad<k2>praticCad
{#praticCad#}¦ {%prati-cchad (prati-chad),%} cl. 10.
P. (poet. also A.) {%-cchādayati (-te), -yitum,%} to cover
over, cover, clothe, envelop; to obscure; to hide,
conceal, disguise; to endow.
<LEND>

<L>30819<pc>0613-b<k1>praticCadana<k2>praticCadana
{%Prati-cchadana, am,%}¦ n. a cover, a piece of
cloth for a covering.
<LEND>

<L>30820<pc>0613-b<k1>praticCanna<k2>praticCanna
{%Prati-cchanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered over, covered,
overlaid, clotted, enveloped; obscured; hidden, con-
cealed, disguised; beset, enclosed, hemmed in; fur-
nished with, provided with.
<LEND>

<L>30821<pc>0613-b<k1>praticCanda<k2>praticCanda
{#praticCanda#}¦ {%prati-cchanda, as,%} m. a reflected
image, likeness, any image, picture, statue; a sub-
stitute.
<LEND>

<L>30822<pc>0613-b<k1>praticCandaka<k2>praticCandaka
{%Prati-cchandaka, as,%}¦ m. an image; a substitute.
<LEND>

<L>30823<pc>0613-b<k1>praticCAyA<k2>praticCAyA
{#praticCAyA#}¦ {%prati-cchāyā (prati-chāyā),%} f. a
reflected image, a shade, shadow; an image, statue,
picture, bas-relief.
<LEND>

<L>30824<pc>0613-b<k1>praticCid<k2>praticCid
{#praticCid#}¦ {%prati-cchid (prati-chid),%} cl. 7. P.
A. {%-cchinatti, -cchintte, -cchettum,%} to tear off, cut
off; to retaliate by cutting to pieces.
<LEND>
[Page0613-c+ 73]

<L>30825<pc>0613-c<k1>praticCeda<k2>praticCeda
{%Prati-ccheda, as,%}¦ m. cutting off; resistance, oppo-
sition.
<LEND>

<L>30826<pc>0613-c<k1>praticyavIyas<k2>praticyavIyas
{#praticyavIyas#}¦ {%prati-cyavīyas, ān, asī, as%}
(fr. rt. {%cyu%}), Ved. pressing closer against or towards;
(Sāy. {%pra-cyavīyasī = pumāṃsam prati śarīra-%}
{%syātyantaṃ cyāvayitrī.%})
<LEND>

<L>30827<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijaNGA<k2>pratijaNGA
{#pratijaNGA#}¦ {%prati-jaṅghā,%} f. the shin-bone;
the fore part of the leg.
<LEND>

<L>30828<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijan<k2>pratijan
{#pratijan#}¦ {%prati-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate, -jani-%}
{%tum,%} to be born again, spring up again, be pro-
duced anew.
<LEND>

<L>30829<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijana<k2>pratijana
{#pratijana#}¦ {%prati-jana, as,%} m., Ved. an ad-
versary.
<LEND>

<L>30830<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijanya<k2>pratijanya
{%Pratijanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. adverse, opposed to,
hostile; (Sāy. {%pratijanyāni%} = hostile people.)
<LEND>

<L>30831<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijap<k2>pratijap
{#pratijap#}¦ {%prati-jap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-japati, -japi-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to mutter in response.
<LEND>

<L>30832<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijalp<k2>pratijalp
{#pratijalp#}¦ {%prati-jalp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jalpati, -jal-%}
{%pitum,%} to answer, reply.
<LEND>

<L>30833<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijalpa<k2>pratijalpa
{%Prati-jalpa, as,%}¦ m. an answer, reply.
<LEND>

<L>30834<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijalpaka<k2>pratijalpaka
{%Prati-jalpaka, as,%}¦ m. a reply expressing assent,
respectful concurrence; a polite but evasive answer (?).
<LEND>

<L>30835<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijAgf<k2>pratijAgf
{#pratijAgf#}¦ {%prati-jāgṛ,%} cl. 2. P. {%-jāgarti,%}
{%jāgaritum,%} Ved. to watch beside (another).
<LEND>

<L>30836<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijAgara<k2>pratijAgara
{%Prati-jāgara, as,%}¦ m. vigilance, watchfulness,
attention.
<LEND>

<L>30837<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijAgaraRa<k2>pratijAgaraRa
{%Prati-jāgaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. watching, guarding,
attending to.
<LEND>

<L>30838<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijAgaraRaka<k2>pratijAgaraRaka
{%Prati-jāgaraṇaka, as,%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
district.
<LEND>

<L>30839<pc>0613-c<k1>pratiji<k2>pratiji
{#pratiji#}¦ {%prati-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%}
Ved. to conquer, defeat (at play): Desid. {%-jigīṣati,%}
to wish to conquer or defeat, to attack, assault, assail.
<LEND>

<L>30840<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijihvA<k2>pratijihvA
{#pratijihvA#}¦ {%prati-jihvā%} or {%prati-jihvikā,%} f.
the uvula or soft palate.
<LEND>

<L>30841<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijIvana<k2>pratijIvana
{#pratijIvana#}¦ {%prati-jīvana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%jīv%}
with {%prati%}), returning to life, resuscitation.
<LEND>

<L>30842<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijuz<k2>pratijuz
{#pratijuz#}¦ {%prati-juṣ,%} cl. 6. A. {%-juṣate, -jo-%}
{%ṣitum,%} Ved. to be kind, act tenderly towards; to
receive with pleasure, delight in, be gratified by:
Caus. {%-joṣayati, -yitum,%} to coax, caress.
<LEND>

<L>30843<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijUtivarpas<k2>pratijUtivarpas
{#pratijUtivarpas#}¦ {%pratijūti-varpas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. victorious over enemies (Sāy. {%= pratipakṣā-%}
{%bhibhavana-śīla-tejo-yukta%}).
<LEND>

<L>30844<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijF<k2>pratijF
{#pratijF#}¦ {%prati-jṝ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-jarate, -jaritum,%}
{%-jarītum,%} Ved. to roar (as fire) in the direction of
(Sāy. {%= abhi-vṛdh,%} to increase); to call out to,
salute (Sāy. {%= stu,%} to praise).
<LEND>

<L>30845<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijYA<k2>pratijYA<h>1
{#pratijYA#} 1¦. {%prati-jñā,%} cl. 9. A. (ep. also P.)
{%-jānīte, -jānāti, -jñātum,%} to admit, own, acknow-
ledge, recognise, allow, take in good part; to ap-
prove, consent; to promise (with gen., dat., or loc.
of the person, and acc. or dat. of the thing); to
maintain, uphold, assert, affirm, allege; to bring
forward or introduce (a topic); to perceive, observe,
learn, discern, become aware of; (A.) to confirm,
assent, answer in the affirmative; to propose; (P. A.)
to remember with regret, remember sorrowfully.
<LEND>

<L>30846<pc>0613-c<k1>pratijYA<k2>pratijYA<h>2
2. {%prati-jñā,%}¦ f. admission, acknowledgment; as-
sent; a solemn declaration, agreement, engagement,
promise, vow; a statement, assertion, affirmation,
declaration, allegation; (in logic) a proposition, the
assertion to be proved, the first member or {%avayava%}
of the five-membered Nyāya syllogism (in the usual
standing example = ‘this hill is fiery’); (in law) a
plaint, complaint, indictment; ({%ayā%}), ind. by ex-
press rule; in the manner laid down. {%—Pratijñān-%}
{%tara (˚jñā-an˚), am,%} n. (in logic) a subsequent
proposition on failure of the first. {%—Pratijñā-%}
{%pattra%} or {%pratijñā-pattraka, am,%} n. a promissory
note, a written contract, bond. {%—Pratijñā-pari-%}
{%śiṣṭa, am,%} n., N. of a treatise by Kātyāyana.
{%—Pratijñā-bhaṅga, as,%} m. the breaking or breach
[Page0614-a+ 72]
of a promise. {%—Pratijñābhaṅga-bhīru, us, us, u,%}
fearful or apprehensive of breaking a promise. {%—Pra-%}
{%tijñā-virodha, as,%} m. acting contrary to promise
or agreement; denial of a logical proposition. {%—Pra-%}
{%tijñā-vivāhita, as, ā, am,%} promised in marriage,
betrothed. {%—Pratijñā-sannyāsa, as,%} m. breaking
a promise; abandonment of the original proposition
(in logic). {%—Pratijñā-hāni, is,%} f. giving up the pro-
position or argument.
<LEND>

<L>30847<pc>0614-a<k1>pratijYAta<k2>pratijYAta
{%Prati-jñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ asserted, propounded,
declared, stated, proposed, deposed, alleged; admitted,
acknowledged; promised, agreed; agreeable, desira-
ble; ({%am%}), n. anything promised, a promise. {%—Pra-%}
{%tijñātārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as,%} m. a statement, averment.
<LEND>

<L>30848<pc>0614-a<k1>pratijYAtavya<k2>pratijYAtavya
{%Prati-jñātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be assented to, to
be promised, &c.
<LEND>

<L>30849<pc>0614-a<k1>pratijYAti<k2>pratijYAti
{%Prati-jñāti, is,%}¦ f. a wrong form for {%prati-pra-%}
{%jñāti,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>30850<pc>0614-a<k1>pratijYAna<k2>pratijYAna
{%Prati-jñāna, am,%}¦ n. admission, assent, agreement,
engagement, promise; asserting, assertion; bringing
forward or introducing (a topic).
<LEND>

<L>30851<pc>0614-a<k1>pratijYApita<k2>pratijYApita
{%Prati-jñāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ betrayed; (a various
reading for {%pra-jñāpita.%})
<LEND>

<L>30852<pc>0614-a<k1>pratijYAya<k2>pratijYAya
{%Prati-jñāya,%}¦ ind. having admitted or acknow-
ledged; having promised; having maintained or
asserted.
<LEND>

<L>30853<pc>0614-a<k1>pratijYeya<k2>pratijYeya
{%Prati-jñeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be promised or assented
to; ({%as%}), m. the reciter or pronouncer of a pane-
gyric, a proclaimer of rank and titles, herald, bard,
panegyrist.
<LEND>

<L>30854<pc>0614-a<k1>pratijval<k2>pratijval
{#pratijval#}¦ {%prati-jval,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jvalati, -jva-%}
{%litum,%} to flame, blaze, shine.
<LEND>

<L>30855<pc>0614-a<k1>pratitaq<k2>pratitaq
{#pratitaq#}¦ {%prati-taḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tāḍayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to strike in return, strike again.
<LEND>

<L>30856<pc>0614-a<k1>pratitattvasidDAnta<k2>pratitattvasidDAnta
{#pratitattvasidDAnta#}¦ {%prati-tattva-siddhānta, as,%}
m. a conclusion adopted by each disputant.
<LEND>

<L>30857<pc>0614-a<k1>pratitantram<k2>pratitantram
{#pratitantram#}¦ {%prati-tantram,%} ind. according to
each Tantra, according to each opinion.
<LEND>

<L>30858<pc>0614-a<k1>pratitap<k2>pratitap
{#pratitap#}¦ {%prati-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -taptum,%}
to throw out heat towards; to heat, warm, foment.
<LEND>

<L>30859<pc>0614-a<k1>pratitara<k2>pratitara
{#pratitara#}¦ {%prati-tara, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%tṝ%} with
{%prati%}), a sailor, oarsman, ferryman.
<LEND>

<L>30860<pc>0614-a<k1>pratitarAm<k2>pratitarAm
{#pratitarAm#}¦ {%prati-tarām,%} ind. (compar. fr. 1.
{%prati%}), Ved. with rt. {%bhū,%} to become shorter or
more contracted; (according to a Scholiast {%= atyan-%}
{%tam pratikūla.%})
<LEND>

<L>30861<pc>0614-a<k1>pratitaru<k2>pratitaru
{#pratitaru#}¦ {%prati-taru,%} ind. at each tree.
<LEND>

<L>30862<pc>0614-a<k1>pratitAla<k2>pratitAla
{#pratitAla#}¦ {%prati-tāla%} or {%prati-tālaka, as,%} m.
(in music) a particular time, a kind of air or melody;
({%ī%}), f. the key of a door or padlock, an instrument
to open a door.
<LEND>

<L>30863<pc>0614-a<k1>pratitURI<k2>pratitURI
{#pratitURI#}¦ {%prati-tūṇī,%} f. a modification of
the nervous disease called Tūṇī; [cf. {%pra-tūṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30864<pc>0614-a<k1>pratitryaham<k2>pratitryaham
{#pratitryaham#}¦ {%prati-tryaham,%} ind. for three
days at a time.
<LEND>

<L>30865<pc>0614-a<k1>pratiTi<k2>pratiTi
{#pratiTi#}¦ {%pra-tithi, is,%} m., N. of a teacher
with the epithet Deva-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>30866<pc>0614-a<k1>pratidaRqa<k2>pratidaRqa
{#pratidaRqa#}¦ {%prati-daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. re-
fractory, disobedient, obstinate.
<LEND>

<L>30867<pc>0614-a<k1>pratidarSa<k2>pratidarSa
{#pratidarSa#}¦ {%prati-darśa.%} See {%prati-dṛś,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>30868<pc>0614-a<k1>pratidah<k2>pratidah
{#pratidah#}¦ {%prati-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dag-%}
{%dhum,%} Ved. to burn towards, encounter with flames,
consume (Sāy. {%= sarvathā bhasmī-kṛ%}): Pass. {%-dah-%}
{%yate,%} to be burnt or consumed by fire.
<LEND>

<L>30869<pc>0614-a<k1>pratidA<k2>pratidA
{#pratidA#}¦ {%prati-dā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadāti, -datte,%}
{%dātum,%} to give in return, give as a reward, give
back, return, restore; to retort; to give: Caus.
{%-dāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be given back,
cause to be restored.
<LEND>

<L>30870<pc>0614-a<k1>pratidatta<k2>pratidatta
{%Prati-datta, as, ā, am,%}¦ given back. See {%pratī-tta.%}
<LEND>

<L>30871<pc>0614-a<k1>pratidAtavya<k2>pratidAtavya
{%Prati-dātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given back, to
be restored.
<LEND>
[Page0614-b+ 70]

<L>30872<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidAna<k2>pratidAna
{%Prati-dāna, am,%}¦ n. giving back, restoring (a
deposit), restitution, restoration; returning, a gift
in return; exchange, barter.
<LEND>

<L>30873<pc>0614-b<k1>pratideya<k2>pratideya
{%Prati-deya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given back or
returned, to be given as an equivalent; ({%am%}), n. a
pledge, pawn; an article purchased and given back.
<LEND>

<L>30874<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidAraRa<k2>pratidAraRa
{#pratidAraRa#}¦ {%prati-dāraṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%dṝ%}
with {%prati%}), battle, fighting, fierce conflict.
<LEND>

<L>30875<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidinam<k2>pratidinam
{#pratidinam#}¦ {%prati-dinam,%} ind. day by day,
daily, every day.
<LEND>

<L>30876<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidivan<k2>pratidivan
{#pratidivan#}¦ {%prati-divan, ā,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%div%}
with {%prati%}), the sun; a day.
<LEND>

<L>30877<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidIvan<k2>pratidIvan
{%Prati-dīvan, ā,%}¦ m. an adversary at play (Ved.);
the sun.
<LEND>

<L>30878<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidivasam<k2>pratidivasam
{#pratidivasam#}¦ {%prati-divasam,%} ind. day after
day, daily, day by day.
<LEND>

<L>30879<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidiS<k2>pratidiS
{#pratidiS#}¦ {%prati-diś,%} Caus. P. {%-deśayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to point towards, point out; to enjoin, teach;
to direct; to confess.
<LEND>

<L>30880<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidiSam<k2>pratidiSam
{%Prati-diśam,%}¦ ind. (fr. {%prati + 2. diś%}), in every di-
rection, from every quarter; everywhere, all around.
<LEND>

<L>30881<pc>0614-b<k1>pratideSam<k2>pratideSam
{%Prati-deśam,%}¦ ind. (fr. {%prati + deśa%}), in every re-
gion, in each district or country, in every country.
<LEND>

<L>30882<pc>0614-b<k1>pratiduh<k2>pratiduh
{#pratiduh#}¦ {%prati-duh, dhuk%} (gender doubtful;
inst. {%-duhā%} or {%-dhuṣā,%} gen. {%-duhas%} or {%-dhuṣas%}),
Ved. fresh milk, milk still warm.
<LEND>

<L>30883<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidUta<k2>pratidUta
{#pratidUta#}¦ {%prati-dūta, as,%} m. a messenger or
ambassador sent in return.
<LEND>

<L>30884<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidUzita<k2>pratidUzita
{#pratidUzita#}¦ {%prati-dūṣita, as, ā, am,%} defiled,
rendered unclean, contaminated.
<LEND>

<L>30885<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidfS<k2>pratidfS
{#pratidfS#}¦ {%prati-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati,%}
{%-draṣṭum,%} to look at, behold; to become aware
of, experience, know; A. {%-paśyate%} or Pass. {%-dṛś-%}
{%yate,%} to come in sight, become visible or perceptible,
appear: Caus. {%-darśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to see,
to show; to teach.
<LEND>

<L>30886<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidarSa<k2>pratidarSa
{%Prati-darśa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. looking at, viewing.
<LEND>

<L>30887<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidarSana<k2>pratidarSana
{%Prati-darśana, am,%}¦ n. seeing, perceiving; (at
the end of comps.) appearance, look.
<LEND>

<L>30888<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidfSam<k2>pratidfSam
{%Prati-dṛśam,%}¦ ind. (fr. {%prati + 2. dṛś%}), in every
eye, for every eye.
<LEND>

<L>30889<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidfzwa<k2>pratidfzwa
{%Prati-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ beheld; become
visible, come in sight.
<LEND>

<L>30890<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidevatam<k2>pratidevatam
{#pratidevatam#}¦ {%prati-devatam,%} ind., Ved. for
every deity.
<LEND>

<L>30891<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidevatA<k2>pratidevatA
{%Prati-devatā,%}¦ f., Ved. a corresponding deity.
<LEND>

<L>30892<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidEvatam<k2>pratidEvatam
{%Prati-daivatam,%}¦ ind. for every deity.
<LEND>

<L>30893<pc>0614-b<k1>pratideham<k2>pratideham
{#pratideham#}¦ {%prati-deham,%} ind. in each body,
in every body.
<LEND>

<L>30894<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidozam<k2>pratidozam
{#pratidozam#}¦ {%prati-doṣam,%} ind., Ved. in the
evening, in the dark.
<LEND>

<L>30895<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidru<k2>pratidru
{#pratidru#}¦ {%prati-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -dro-%}
{%tum,%} to run towards, run to.
<LEND>

<L>30896<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidruh<k2>pratidruh<h>1
{#pratidruh#} 1¦. {%prati-druh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-druhyati,%}
{%-drohitum, -drogdhum, -droḍhum,%} to injure in
return, retaliate an injury.
<LEND>

<L>30897<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidruh<k2>pratidruh<h>2
2. {%prati-druh, dhruk, k, k,%}¦ or {%dhruṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} seeking
to injure in return, wishing to retaliate an injury.
<LEND>

<L>30898<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidvandva<k2>pratidvandva
{#pratidvandva#}¦ {%prati-dvandva, as,%} m. an oppo-
nent, antagonist, adversary, rival; an enemy, foe;
({%am%}), n. opposition, hostility.
<LEND>

<L>30899<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidvandvin<k2>pratidvandvin
{%Prati-dvandvin, ī,%}¦ m. an opponent, adversary,
rival; ({%ī, inī, i%}), hostile, opposed; (at the end of
a comp.) rivalling, vying with.
<LEND>

<L>30900<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidvAram<k2>pratidvAram
{#pratidvAram#}¦ {%prati-dvāram,%} ind. at every gate,
at each door.
<LEND>

<L>30901<pc>0614-b<k1>pratidvirada<k2>pratidvirada
{#pratidvirada#}¦ {%prati-dvirada, as,%} m. an opposite
elephant, a hostile elephant; [cf. {%prati-kuñjara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30902<pc>0614-b<k1>pratiDartf<k2>pratiDartf
{#pratiDartf#}¦ {%prati-dhartṛ.%} See under {%prati-%}
{%dhṛ,%} col. 3.
<LEND>
[Page0614-c+ 74]

<L>30903<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDA<k2>pratiDA<h>1
{#pratiDA#} 1¦. {%prati-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum%} (mostly Ved.), to place on, place
within; to put back; to replace, restore, give back
to (with loc. or dat.); to fix (an arrow on the bow-
string); to put to the lips (in drinking, Ṛg-veda
IV. 27, 5); to set (the foot) upon; to offer, pre-
sent; to use, employ; (A.) to begin, commence; to
draw near, come on (said of the night).
<LEND>

<L>30904<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDA<k2>pratiDA<h>2
2. {%prati-dhā,%}¦ f., Ved. putting to the lips (in
drinking); a draught.
<LEND>

<L>30905<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDAna<k2>pratiDAna
{%Prati-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. putting on; adopting pre-
cautions.
<LEND>

<L>30906<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDi<k2>pratiDi
{%Prati-dhi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a particular part of a
chariot, pieces of wood fastened across the pole;
(according to Mahī-dhara) {%= anna.%}
<LEND>

<L>30907<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDAv<k2>pratiDAv
{#pratiDAv#}¦ {%prati-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-te, -dhāvitum,%} to run back; to rush upon, assail,
attack.
<LEND>

<L>30908<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDAvana<k2>pratiDAvana
{%Prati-dhāvana, am,%}¦ n. running against, rushing
upon, assailing, attacking.
<LEND>

<L>30909<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDura<k2>pratiDura
{#pratiDura#}¦ {%prati-dhura, as,%} m. a horse har-
nessed by the side of another, one horse of a pair.
<LEND>

<L>30910<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDf<k2>pratiDf
{#pratiDf#}¦ {%prati-dhṛ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-dhārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} Ved. to keep back, stop, check; to keep
erect, support.
<LEND>

<L>30911<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDartf<k2>pratiDartf
{%Prati-dhartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who keeps
back or stops, one who checks; (according to Mahī-
dhara {%= nir-ākartṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>30912<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDfz<k2>pratiDfz
{#pratiDfz#}¦ {%prati-dhṛṣ,%} cl. 1. 5. P. {%-dhar-%}
{%ṣati, -dhṛṣṇoti, -dharṣitum%} (Ved. {%-dhṛṣe%}),
to be bold against, brave, defy; to withstand, resist;
to sustain, endure.
<LEND>

<L>30913<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDfzya<k2>pratiDfzya
{%Prati-dhṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be braved
or defied, to be withstood or resisted, resistible.
<LEND>

<L>30914<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDyE<k2>pratiDyE
{#pratiDyE#}¦ {%prati-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati,%}
{%-dhyātum,%} to think upon, hit upon an idea, devise.
<LEND>

<L>30915<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDyAta<k2>pratiDyAta
{%Prati-dhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thought upon, medi-
tated on, devised.
<LEND>

<L>30916<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDvani<k2>pratiDvani
{#pratiDvani#}¦ {%prati-dhvani, is,%} m. or {%prati-%}
{%dhvāna, as, am,%} m. n. echo, reverberated sound.
<LEND>

<L>30917<pc>0614-c<k1>pratiDvasta<k2>pratiDvasta
{#pratiDvasta#}¦ {%prati-dhvasta, as, ā, am,%} cast
down, downcast; forsaken (?).
<LEND>

<L>30918<pc>0614-c<k1>pratinad<k2>pratinad
{#pratinad#}¦ {%prati-nad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nadati, -nadi-%}
{%tum,%} to sound back, repeat or re-echo a sound; to
answer with a cry or with a shout: Caus. {%-nādayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to resound, make resonant, fill with
repeated roaring, fill with cries; to cry aloud.
<LEND>

<L>30919<pc>0614-c<k1>pratinAda<k2>pratinAda
{%Prati-nāda, as,%}¦ m. echo, resonance, reverberation.
<LEND>

<L>30920<pc>0614-c<k1>pratinAdita<k2>pratinAdita
{%Prati-nādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to resound,
resonant, resounding, echoing, echoed.
<LEND>

<L>30921<pc>0614-c<k1>pratininada<k2>pratininada
{%Prati-ninada, as,%}¦ m. an echo, a reverberation.
<LEND>

<L>30922<pc>0614-c<k1>pratinand<k2>pratinand
{#pratinand#}¦ {%prati-nand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nandati,%}
{%-nanditum,%} to greet cheerfully, accept or receive
gladly, take thankfully (Manu II. 54); to greet in
return, return a salute, salute, bid welcome, bid
farewell; to address kindly, express gratification,
display affection or devotion; to favour; (with {%na%}),
to decline, refuse: Caus. {%-nandayati, -yitum,%} to
gladden, delight, gratify.
<LEND>

<L>30923<pc>0614-c<k1>pratinandana<k2>pratinandana
{%Prati-nandana, am,%}¦ n. greeting, salutation (Ved.);
thankful acceptance; the act of returning thanks at
meals, thanksgiving.
<LEND>

<L>30924<pc>0614-c<k1>pratinaptf<k2>pratinaptf
{#pratinaptf#}¦ {%prati-naptṛ, tā,%} m. a great grand-
son, a son's grandson; [cf. {%pra-ṇapāt.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30925<pc>0614-c<k1>pratinam<k2>pratinam
{#pratinam#}¦ {%prati-nam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-namati, -nan-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to bow or incline towards.
<LEND>

<L>30926<pc>0614-c<k1>pratinamaskAra<k2>pratinamaskAra
{%Prati-namaskāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. returning a
salutation.
<LEND>

<L>30927<pc>0614-c<k1>pratinard<k2>pratinard
{#pratinard#}¦ {%prati-nard,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nardati, -nar-%}
{%ditum,%} to utter sounds or cries against; to greet or
hail with cries; to roar after (prey or food).
<LEND>

<L>30928<pc>0614-c<k1>pratinava<k2>pratinava
{#pratinava#}¦ {%prati-nava, as, ā, am,%} new, young,
fresh, recent; blown, budded. {%—Pratinava-javā,%} f.
a fresh or newly opened China rose.
<LEND>
[Page0615-a+ 69]

<L>30929<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinAga<k2>pratinAga
{#pratinAga#}¦ {%prati-nāga, as,%} m. an elephant
standing opposite, a hostile elephant; [cf. {%prati-%}
{%kuñjara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30930<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinAqI<k2>pratinAqI
{#pratinAqI#}¦ {%prati-nāḍī,%} f. a branch vein.
<LEND>

<L>30931<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinAda<k2>pratinAda
{#pratinAda#}¦ {%prati-nāda.%} See {%prati-nad,%} p. 614.
<LEND>

<L>30932<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinAman<k2>pratinAman
{#pratinAman#}¦ {%prati-nāman, ā, mnī, a,%} Ved.
having corresponding names, related by name.
<LEND>

<L>30933<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinAyaka<k2>pratinAyaka
{#pratinAyaka#}¦ {%prati-nāyaka.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>30934<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinAha<k2>pratinAha
{#pratinAha#}¦ {%prati-nāha.%} See {%pratī-nāha.%}
<LEND>

<L>30935<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinikzip<k2>pratinikzip
{#pratinikzip#}¦ {%prati-ni-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-kṣipati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to put down again, de-
posit again.
<LEND>

<L>30936<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinigad<k2>pratinigad
{#pratinigad#}¦ {%prati-ni-gad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gadati,%}
{%-gaditum,%} Ved. to speak to, address.
<LEND>

<L>30937<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinigrah<k2>pratinigrah
{#pratinigrah#}¦ {%prati-ni-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛh-%}
{%ṇāti, -gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} Ved. to take up (liquids
with a ladle or other vessel), ladle out.
<LEND>

<L>30938<pc>0615-a<k1>pratiniDA<k2>pratiniDA
{#pratiniDA#}¦ {%prati-ni-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put in the place of
another, substitute; to set aside, slight, disregard; to
command, order.
<LEND>

<L>30939<pc>0615-a<k1>pratiniDAya<k2>pratiniDAya
{%Prati-nidhāya,%}¦ ind. having placed in, having
implanted.
<LEND>

<L>30940<pc>0615-a<k1>pratiniDi<k2>pratiniDi
{%Prati-nidhi, is,%}¦ m. substitution; a substitute, re-
presentative, proxy, deputy, vicegerent; a surety;
a resemblance of a real form, an image, likeness,
statue, picture.
<LEND>

<L>30941<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinind<k2>pratinind
{#pratinind#}¦ {%prati-nind,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nindati, -nin-%}
{%ditum,%} to inveigh against, abuse, blame, censure.
<LEND>

<L>30942<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinipAta<k2>pratinipAta
{#pratinipAta#}¦ {%prati-nipāta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2.
{%pat%} with {%prati-ni%}), falling down, alighting.
<LEND>

<L>30943<pc>0615-a<k1>pratiniyata<k2>pratiniyata
{#pratiniyata#}¦ {%prati-niyata, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%yam%}),
settled, predestined.
<LEND>

<L>30944<pc>0615-a<k1>pratiniyama<k2>pratiniyama
{%Prati-niyama, as,%}¦ m. a general rule, general
prevalence.
<LEND>

<L>30945<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinirji<k2>pratinirji
{#pratinirji#}¦ {%prati-nir-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati,%}
{%-jetum,%} to prevail against, overcome, vanquish; to
rescind.
<LEND>

<L>30946<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinirjita<k2>pratinirjita
{%Prati-nirjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ prevailed against, van-
quished; rescinded.
<LEND>

<L>30947<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinirdiS<k2>pratinirdiS
{#pratinirdiS#}¦ {%prati-nir-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to point back, refer back.
<LEND>

<L>30948<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinirdeSa<k2>pratinirdeSa
{%Prati-nirdeśa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. pointing or referring
back to (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>30949<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinirdeSaka<k2>pratinirdeSaka
{%Prati-nirdeśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a
comp.) pointing back, referring back.
<LEND>

<L>30950<pc>0615-a<k1>pratiniryat<k2>pratiniryat
{#pratiniryat#}¦ {%prati-nir-yat,%} Caus. P. {%-yāta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to give back, return.
<LEND>

<L>30951<pc>0615-a<k1>pratiniryAtana<k2>pratiniryAtana
{%Prati-niryātana, am,%}¦ n. giving back, returning;
rewarding, retaliation.
<LEND>

<L>30952<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinivAraRa<k2>pratinivAraRa
{#pratinivAraRa#}¦ {%prati-nivāraṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%vṛ%} with {%prati-ni%}), keeping off, warding off.
<LEND>

<L>30953<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinivAsana<k2>pratinivAsana
{#pratinivAsana#}¦ {%prati-nivāsana, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
5. {%vas%} with {%prati-ni%}), a kind of garment (with
Buddhists).
<LEND>

<L>30954<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinivizwa<k2>pratinivizwa
{#pratinivizwa#}¦ {%prati-niviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} har-
dened, obstinate, obdurate. {%—Pratiniviṣṭa-mūrkha,%}
{%as,%} m. an obstinate fool, confirmed blockhead.
<LEND>

<L>30955<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinivft<k2>pratinivft
{#pratinivft#}¦ {%prati-ni-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
{%-vartitum,%} to turn back or round, turn away from;
to return; to run away, take flight.
<LEND>

<L>30956<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinivartana<k2>pratinivartana
{%Prati-nivartana, am,%}¦ n. turning back, turning
away from; returning, return.
<LEND>

<L>30957<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinivftta<k2>pratinivftta
{%Prati-nivṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned away from,
desisted from, leaving, withdrawn from; come back,
returned.
<LEND>

<L>30958<pc>0615-a<k1>pratiniSam<k2>pratiniSam
{#pratiniSam#}¦ {%prati-niśam,%} ind. every night,
nightly, by night.
<LEND>

<L>30959<pc>0615-a<k1>pratinizpU<k2>pratinizpU
{#pratinizpU#}¦ {%prati-niṣ-pū (-nis-pū),%} cl. 9. P.
[Page0615-b+ 73]
A. {%-punāti, -punīte, -pavitum,%} Ved. to cleanse or
winnow close at hand (?).
<LEND>

<L>30960<pc>0615-b<k1>pratinI<k2>pratinI
{#pratinI#}¦ {%prati-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati, -te,%}
{%-netum,%} to lead back; to lead to, bring towards; to
put into, mix.
<LEND>

<L>30961<pc>0615-b<k1>pratinAyaka<k2>pratinAyaka
{%Prati-nāyaka, as,%}¦ m. ‘counter hero,’ the adver-
sary of the hero of a play.
<LEND>

<L>30962<pc>0615-b<k1>pratinud<k2>pratinud
{#pratinud#}¦ {%prati-nud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-nudati, -te,%}
{%-nottum,%} to thrust back, repel, repulse, ward off.
<LEND>

<L>30963<pc>0615-b<k1>pratinoda<k2>pratinoda
{%Prati-noda, as,%}¦ m. thrusting back, repelling,
repulse.
<LEND>

<L>30964<pc>0615-b<k1>pratinft<k2>pratinft
{#pratinft#}¦ {%prati-nṛt,%} cl. 4. P. {%-nṛtyati, -nar-%}
{%titum,%} to dance before (in token of contempt), to
mock in turn by dancing before (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>30965<pc>0615-b<k1>pratinyas<k2>pratinyas
{#pratinyas#}¦ {%prati-ny-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati, -asi-%}
{%tum,%} to place apart or lay down separately (for
different persons), deposit.
<LEND>

<L>30966<pc>0615-b<k1>pratinyAyam<k2>pratinyAyam
{#pratinyAyam#}¦ {%prati-nyāyam,%} ind., Ved. in
inverted order.
<LEND>

<L>30967<pc>0615-b<k1>pratinyUNKa<k2>pratinyUNKa
{#pratinyUNKa#}¦ {%prati-nyūṅkha, as,%} m., Ved. a cor-
responding insertion of the vowel {%o;%} [cf. {%nyūṅkha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30968<pc>0615-b<k1>pratipa<k2>pratipa
{#pratipa#}¦ {%pratipa, as,%} m., N. of a king of the
lunar race the father of Śāntanu and grandfather of
Bhīṣma; (more correctly spelt {%pratīpa,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>30969<pc>0615-b<k1>pratipakza<k2>pratipakza
{#pratipakza#}¦ {%prati-pakṣa, as,%} m. the opposite
side or party, opposite faction, opposition, hostility;
an adversary, enemy, foe, opponent, rival; a respond-
ent, defendant; N. of a prince; (also read {%prati-%}
{%kṣatra.%}) {%—Pratipakṣa-tā,%} f. or {%pratipakṣa-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. opposition, enmity; obstacle. {%—Prati-%}
{%pakṣa-vāditva, am,%} n. contradictory or deceitful
conversation, double dealing.
<LEND>

<L>30970<pc>0615-b<k1>pratipakzita<k2>pratipakzita
{%Pratipakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ containing a contra-
diction; nullified by a contradictory premiss (one of
the five kinds of fallacious middle terms).
<LEND>

<L>30971<pc>0615-b<k1>pratipakzin<k2>pratipakzin
{%Pratipakṣin, ī,%}¦ m. an opponent, adversary.
{%—Pratipakṣi-tā,%} f. self-contradiction, the being
self-contradictory.
<LEND>

<L>30972<pc>0615-b<k1>pratipaRa<k2>pratipaRa
{#pratipaRa#}¦ {%prati-paṇa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%paṇ%}
with {%prati%}), barter, exchange (Ved.); (fr. {%prati +%}
{%paṇa%}), the stake of an adversary at play.
<LEND>

<L>30973<pc>0615-b<k1>pratipat<k2>pratipat
{#pratipat#}¦ {%prati-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -pati-%}
{%tum,%} to fly or hasten towards, hasten to meet.
<LEND>

<L>30974<pc>0615-b<k1>pratipaTam<k2>pratipaTam
{#pratipaTam#}¦ {%prati-patham,%} ind. along the
road, by the way; straightway (?). {%—Pratipatha-%}
{%gati, is, is, i,%} going on the road, wending the way.
<LEND>

<L>30975<pc>0615-b<k1>pratipaTika<k2>pratipaTika
{%Pratipathika, as, ā, am,%}¦ going along the road,
wending the way.
<LEND>

<L>30976<pc>0615-b<k1>pratipad<k2>pratipad<h>1
{#pratipad#} 1¦. {%prati-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to set foot on, step upon, step up to; to
light upon, meet with, find; to go towards, approach,
betake one's self to, resort to, take refuge with; to
go into, enter; to arrive at, reach, attain; to gain,
get, obtain, share, partake of; to receive back, re-
gain, reobtain, recover; to go back, return; to walk,
roam, wander, go; to perceive, observe, become
aware of, become conscious of; to find out, discover;
to obtain a knowledge of, become acquainted with,
learn; to comprehend, understand, know; to regard
as, consider, deem; to affirm, admit; to answer
affirmatively, express assent, comply with, consent,
agree, promise; to permit, allow; to avow, acknow-
ledge; to begin to speak, begin to answer, commence
a reply; to apply one's self to, perform, practise,
observe, fulfil, accomplish; to do anything to any one
(with loc. or gen.), undertake anything against, pro-
ceed against; to act towards; to take place, occur,
transpire; to give, give up, restore, return; {%uttaram%}
{%prati-pad,%} to give an answer: Caus. {%-pādayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to go back, bring back, lead back;
to convey or transport to (a place); to cause to
attain, cause to share in, cause to partake of; to
give to (with loc., dat., or gen.), deliver over, present,
[Page0615-c+ 81]
bestow; to communicate, impart, teach; to declare,
represent, assert; to establish, substantiate, prove;
to explain, expound, make clear; to consider, regard
as, deem; to appoint to, install in (with loc.); to
procure; to prepare; to effect, cause: Desid. of Caus.
{%-pipādayiṣati,%} to wish or intend to explain or
analyze.
<LEND>

<L>30977<pc>0615-c<k1>pratipattavya<k2>pratipattavya
{%Prati-pattavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be obtained, to be
received; to be assumed or supposed, to be stated;
to be given (as an answer); to be begun; to be
done or performed.
<LEND>

<L>30978<pc>0615-c<k1>pratipatti<k2>pratipatti
{%Prati-patti, is,%}¦ f. gaining, getting, obtaining,
acquirement, gain; becoming aware of, perception,
observation, ascertainment, determination, knowledge;
intelligence, intellect; assertion, affirmation, state-
ment, opinion; acknowledgment, admitting, admis-
sion, assent; undertaking, beginning, commence-
ment; doing, acting, action, proceeding; worldly
action; mode of acting, procedure; method, means;
use, application; giving, imparting, bestowing, pre-
sentation; causing; elevation, exaltation, promotion,
preferment; acquirement of rank or dignity, repu-
tation, fame, renown; honouring, worshipping,
honour, respectful behaviour; inspiring trust or con-
fidence; resoluteness, boldness, assurance, reliance,
confidence; comprehending, including, conclusion;
conviction, proof; misleading, deceiving (?); a rite
from which no advantage is expected (?). {%—Prati-%}
{%patti-karman, a,%} n., Ved. a concluding rite or
ceremony. {%—Pratipatti-dakṣa, as, ā, am,%} know-
ing how to act, knowing what is to be done. {%—Pra-%}
{%tipatti-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} showing what ought to be
done. {%—Pratipatti-niṣṭhura, as, ā, am,%} hard to
understand, difficult to be understood. {%—Pratipatti-%}
{%paṭaha, as,%} m. a kind of kettle-drum, the state drum
allowed only to chiefs of a certain rank; [cf. {%prati-%}
{%pat-tūrya%} below.] {%—Pratipatti-parāṅmukha, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} averse from compliance, obstinate, unyielding.
{%—Pratipatti-pradāna, am,%} n. the giving of pre-
ferment, conferring promotion. {%—Pratipatti-bheda,%}
{%as,%} m. diversity of views, difference of opinions.
{%—Pratipatti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing appro-
priate knowledge, knowing what is to be done; in-
telligent; active, prompt; celebrated, high in rank.
{%—Pratipatti-viśārada, as, ā, am,%} knowing how
to act, knowing what is to be done, expert, clever.
<LEND>

<L>30979<pc>0615-c<k1>pratipattf<k2>pratipattf
{%Prati-pattṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who maintains or
asserts.
<LEND>

<L>30980<pc>0615-c<k1>pratipad<k2>pratipad<h>2
2. {%prati-pad, t,%}¦ f. access, ingress, entrance, way;
beginning, commencement; an introductory verse
or stanza; the first day of a lunar fortnight, the first
day of the moon's increase or wane (especially of
the former, cf. {%prati-padā%}); understanding, intel-
ligence, intellect; rank, consequence; a kettle-drum.
{%—Pratipat-tūrya, am,%} n. a kind of kettle-drum;
[cf. {%pratipatti-paṭaha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>30981<pc>0615-c<k1>pratipada<k2>pratipada
{%Prati-pada, am,%}¦ n., N. of an Upāṅga; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}),
f. the first day of a lunar fortnight, the first day of
the moon's increase or wane (especially of the
former, cf. 2. {%prati-pad%}); ({%am%}), ind. (fr. {%prati%}
{%+ pada%}), see p. 616, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>30982<pc>0615-c<k1>pratipanna<k2>pratipanna
{%Prati-panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ come up to, approached,
reached, obtained, gained; overcome, conquered,
subdued; done, effected, accomplished; undertaken;
answered, replied; offered, promised, engaged; as-
sented to, agreed to, accepted, admitted; known,
understood, ascertained, determined; convicted,
proved, demonstrated; conversant or familiar with;
acting.
<LEND>

<L>30983<pc>0615-c<k1>pratipannaka<k2>pratipannaka
{%Pratipannaka, as,%}¦ m. ‘arrived at an aim,’ (with
Buddhists) a collective epithet of the four orders of
Āryas, viz. the Śrota-āpanna, Sakṛd-āgāmin, An-
āgāmin, and Arhat.
<LEND>

<L>30984<pc>0615-c<k1>pratipAdaka<k2>pratipAdaka
{%Prati-pādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to obtain,
giving, granting, bestowing, presenting to (with
loc.); stating, establishing, supporting, demonstrating,
communicating, treating of, speaking about; explain-
ing, explanatory, illustrating, teaching; productive,
effective, efficient, accomplishing; advancing, for-
warding, furthering, promoting; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m.
or n. (?), a receptacle for hair. {%—Pratipādaka-tva, %}
[Page0616-a+ 76]
{%am,%} n. the state or condition of one who explains,
explaining.
<LEND>

<L>30985<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAdana<k2>pratipAdana
{%Prati-pādana, am,%}¦ n. causing to come back,
bringing back; causing to reach or attain, causing
to obtain; imparting, giving, presenting, donation,
gift; giving back, returning, restoring; appointing;
producing, exciting, causing; accomplishing, effect-
ing; action, worldly conduct; repeated action, prac-
tice; treating of, discussing, rendering clear or intel-
ligible, expounding, explaining, teaching, declaring,
affirming, declaration; establishing, proving, substan-
tiating; beginning, commencement.
<LEND>

<L>30986<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAdanIya<k2>pratipAdanIya
{%Prati-pādanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given, to be
given in marriage; to be accomplished; to be dis-
cussed, to be treated of or expounded; to be esta-
blished or proved, to be maintained.
<LEND>

<L>30987<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAdam<k2>pratipAdam
{%Prati-pādam,%}¦ ind. (fr. {%prati + pāda%}), in every
Pāda, in each quarter or fourth part of a verse.
<LEND>

<L>30988<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAdayitf<k2>pratipAdayitf
{%Prati-pādayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who discusses
or expounds, a teacher, instructor.
<LEND>

<L>30989<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAdita<k2>pratipAdita
{%Prati-pādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to attain; given,
delivered, presented; caused, produced; declared,
represented, stated, asserted, proved, maintained;
explained, expounded.
<LEND>

<L>30990<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAduka<k2>pratipAduka
{%Prati-pāduka, as, ī, am,%}¦ determining, ascertain-
ing; making manifest or clear; causing, effecting.
<LEND>

<L>30991<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAdya<k2>pratipAdya
{%Prati-pādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be treated of or dis-
cussed, to be explained or expounded.
<LEND>

<L>30992<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipitsA<k2>pratipitsA
{%Prati-pitsā,%}¦ f. desire of obtaining, longing for.
<LEND>

<L>30993<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipitsu<k2>pratipitsu
{%Prati-pitsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to obtain, striv-
ing for.
<LEND>

<L>30994<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipipAdayizu<k2>pratipipAdayizu
{%Prati-pipādayiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to explain,
about to treat of.
<LEND>

<L>30995<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipadam<k2>pratipadam
{#pratipadam#}¦ {%prati-padam,%} ind. at every step,
on every occasion; at every place, everywhere; in
every word; verbally, expressly, especially. {%—Prati-%}
{%pada-tva, am,%} n., Ved. advancing step by step.
<LEND>

<L>30996<pc>0616-a<k1>pratiparARI<k2>pratiparARI
{#pratiparARI#}¦ {%prati-parā-ṇī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ṇa-%}
{%yati, -te, -ṇetum,%} Ved. to lead back.
<LEND>

<L>30997<pc>0616-a<k1>pratiparI<k2>pratiparI
{#pratiparI#}¦ {%prati-parī%} ({%-pari-i,%} see rt. 5. {%i%}),
cl. 2. P. {%-pary-eti, -etum,%} Ved. to go round in a
reverse direction.
<LEND>

<L>30998<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipare<k2>pratipare
{#pratipare#}¦ {%prati-pare%} ({%-parā-i,%} see rt. 5. {%i%}),
cl. 2. P. {%-paraiti, -paraitum,%} Ved. to return again.
<LEND>

<L>30999<pc>0616-a<k1>pratiparRaSiPA<k2>pratiparRaSiPA
{#pratiparRaSiPA#}¦ {%prati-parṇa-śiphā,%} f. the plant
Anthericum Tuberosum ({%= dravantī%}).
<LEND>

<L>31000<pc>0616-a<k1>pratiparva<k2>pratiparva
{#pratiparva#}¦ {%prati-parva,%} ind., Ved. at each
Parvan.
<LEND>

<L>31001<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipallava<k2>pratipallava
{#pratipallava#}¦ {%prati-pallava, as,%} m. an opposite
branch.
<LEND>

<L>31002<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipA<k2>pratipA
{#pratipA#}¦ {%prati-pā%} (see Caus. of rt. 3. {%pā%}),
Caus. P. {%-pālayati, -yitum,%} to protect, defend; to
cherish, nourish, foster, rear, patronize; to observe,
keep, maintain; to wait, wait for, expect.
<LEND>

<L>31003<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAlaka<k2>pratipAlaka
{%Prati-pālaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ protecting, defending,
preserving, cherishing; ({%as%}), m. a protector, guardian,
a king.
<LEND>

<L>31004<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAlana<k2>pratipAlana
{%Prati-pālana, am,%}¦ n. protecting, guarding, de-
fending, cherishing; keeping up, observing, follow-
ing, practising.
<LEND>

<L>31005<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAlanIya<k2>pratipAlanIya
{%Prati-pālanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be protected or
cherished; to be observed or followed; to be
awaited, to be waited for, to be watched.
<LEND>

<L>31006<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAlayitavya<k2>pratipAlayitavya
{%Prati-pālayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be protected
or guarded; to be awaited, to be waited for, to be
watched.
<LEND>

<L>31007<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAlita<k2>pratipAlita
{%Prati-pālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ protected, cherished;
practised, followed.
<LEND>

<L>31008<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAlin<k2>pratipAlin
{%Prati-pālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ protecting, guarding,
screening.
<LEND>

<L>31009<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipAlya<k2>pratipAlya
{%Prati-pālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be protected or che-
rished; to be awaited, to be waited for.
<LEND>

<L>31010<pc>0616-a<k1>pratipARa<k2>pratipARa
{#pratipARa#}¦ {%prati-pāṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2.
{%paṇ%} with {%prati%}), ready to exchange, bartering
(Ved.); ({%as%}), m. a stake, gage, the thing played for;
a counter-pledge, anything staked against another
[Page0616-b+ 71]
thing; a counter-stake, counter-game; [cf. {%prati-%}
{%paṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>31011<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipAtram<k2>pratipAtram
{#pratipAtram#}¦ {%prati-pātram,%} ind. (in dramatic
language) in each part, in each character, by every
actor.
<LEND>

<L>31012<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipAdapam<k2>pratipAdapam
{#pratipAdapam#}¦ {%prati-pādapam,%} ind. in every
tree.
<LEND>

<L>31013<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipAdam<k2>pratipAdam
{#pratipAdam#}¦ {%prati-pādam, prati-pādita.%} See
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>31014<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipAna<k2>pratipAna
{#pratipAna#}¦ {%prati-pāna, am,%} n. water for
drinking.
<LEND>

<L>31015<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipApa<k2>pratipApa
{#pratipApa#}¦ {%prati-pāpa, as, ā, am,%} wicked or
evil in return, recompensing evil for evil.
<LEND>

<L>31016<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipitsA<k2>pratipitsA
{#pratipitsA#}¦ {%prati-pitsā, prati-pitsu, prati-%}
{%pipādayiṣu.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>31017<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipiz<k2>pratipiz
{#pratipiz#}¦ {%prati-piṣ,%} cl. 7. P. {%-pinaṣṭi,%}
{%-peṣṭum,%} to rub one thing against another, rub
together; to rub one's self against; to bruise, grind,
crush, destroy in turn.
<LEND>

<L>31018<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipIq<k2>pratipIq
{#pratipIq#}¦ {%prati-pīḍ,%} Caus. P. {%-pīḍayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to press, press hard, oppress, harass, distress.
<LEND>

<L>31019<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipIqana<k2>pratipIqana
{%Prati-pīḍana, am,%}¦ n. oppressing, harassing, mo-
lesting.
<LEND>

<L>31020<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipIy<k2>pratipIy
{#pratipIy#}¦ {%prati-pīy%} (see rt. 2. {%pīy%}), cl. 1. P.
{%-pīyati, -pīyitum,%} Ved. to revile, abuse, treat with
contempt or disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>31021<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipuruza<k2>pratipuruza
{#pratipuruza#}¦ {%prati-puruṣa%} or {%prati-pūruṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘a counter-person,’ a corresponding or similar
man; a companion, assistant; a deputy, substitute;
an effigy, the effigy of a man which thieves push
into the interior of a house before entering it them-
selves; ({%am%}), ind. man by man, every man, for
each man; for each soul.
<LEND>

<L>31022<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipuzyam<k2>pratipuzyam
{#pratipuzyam#}¦ {%prati-puṣyam,%} ind., Ved. at
each time of the moon's entrance into the asterism
Puṣya.
<LEND>

<L>31023<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipustaka<k2>pratipustaka
{#pratipustaka#}¦ {%prati-pustaka, am,%} n. a copy of
an original manuscript, a copy in general.
<LEND>

<L>31024<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUj<k2>pratipUj
{#pratipUj#}¦ {%prati-pūj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pūjayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to show respect towards, honour; to salute
respectfully, salute in turn, return a salutation, honour;
to praise, commend, approve.
<LEND>

<L>31025<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUjaka<k2>pratipUjaka
{%Prati-pūjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ doing homage,
honouring; ({%as%}), m. one who does homage, a
reverer.
<LEND>

<L>31026<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUjana<k2>pratipUjana
{%Prati-pūjana, am,%}¦ n. or {%prati-pūjā,%} f. doing
homage, showing respect, honouring; exchange of
civilities, mutual obeisance or reverence.
<LEND>

<L>31027<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUjita<k2>pratipUjita
{%Prati-pūjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured, respected,
treated with reverence or respect; exchanged as
civilities.
<LEND>

<L>31028<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUjya<k2>pratipUjya<h>2
2. {%prati-pūjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be treated with
respect, to be honoured.
<LEND>

<L>31029<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUjya<k2>pratipUjya<h>2
2. {%prati-pūjya,%}¦ ind. having done homage to,
having exchanged respectful salutations.
<LEND>

<L>31030<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUruza<k2>pratipUruza
{#pratipUruza#}¦ {%prati-pūruṣa.%} See {%prati-pu-%}
{%ruṣa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>31031<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUrvAhRam<k2>pratipUrvAhRam
{#pratipUrvAhRam#}¦ {%prati-pūrvāhṇam,%} ind. every
forenoon, every morning.
<LEND>

<L>31032<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipF<k2>pratipF
{#pratipF#}¦ {%prati-pṝ,%} Caus. P. {%-pūrayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to fill up, fill, make full; to fill with, to sate,
satiate, satisfy, content.
<LEND>

<L>31033<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUraRa<k2>pratipUraRa
{%Prati-pūraṇa, am,%}¦ n. filling up, filling; injecting
a fluid or other substance, pouring a fluid over.
<LEND>

<L>31034<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUrita<k2>pratipUrita
{%Prati-pūrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ filled up, filled; satisfied,
contented.
<LEND>

<L>31035<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipUrRa<k2>pratipUrRa
{%Prati-pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ filled with, full, full of;
satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>31036<pc>0616-b<k1>pratipragrah<k2>pratipragrah
{#pratipragrah#}¦ {%prati-pra-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛh-%}
{%ṇāti, -gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} to take up or receive
again.
<LEND>
[Page0616-c+ 69]

<L>31037<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipraC<k2>pratipraC
{#pratipraC#}¦ {%prati-prach,%} cl. 6. P. {%-pṛcchati,%}
{%-praṣṭum,%} to ask, question, interrogate, inquire of.
<LEND>

<L>31038<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipraSna<k2>pratipraSna
{%Prati-praśna, as,%}¦ m. a question asked in return;
an answer; (Ved.) an umpire (?).
<LEND>

<L>31039<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprajYA<k2>pratiprajYA
{#pratiprajYA#}¦ {%prati-pra-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%-jānīte, -jñātum,%} Ved. to seek out or find again.
<LEND>

<L>31040<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprajYAti<k2>pratiprajYAti
{%Prati-prajñāti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. distinguishing; recog-
nition, acknowledgment.
<LEND>

<L>31041<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipraRavam<k2>pratipraRavam
{#pratipraRavam#}¦ {%prati-praṇavam,%} ind. at every
repetition of the sacred syllable {%Om%}. {%—Pratipraṇava-%}
{%saṃyukta, as, ā, am,%} accompanied each time with
the syllable {%Om.%}
<LEND>

<L>31042<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipraRAma<k2>pratipraRAma
{#pratipraRAma#}¦ {%prati-praṇāma, as,%} m. (fr. rt.
{%nam%} with {%prati-pra%}), a bow or obeisance in return,
saluting in turn.
<LEND>

<L>31043<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprati<k2>pratiprati
{#pratiprati#}¦ {%prati-prati, is, inī, i,%} Ved. being
a counterpart, counter-balancing; being a match for,
equal to (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31044<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipratIkam<k2>pratipratIkam
{#pratipratIkam#}¦ {%prati-pratīkam,%} ind., Ved. at
each beginning, at every commencement.
<LEND>

<L>31045<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipradA<k2>pratipradA
{#pratipradA#}¦ {%prati-pra-dā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadāti,%}
{%-datte, -dātum,%} to give back again; to give up,
deliver.
<LEND>

<L>31046<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipratta<k2>pratipratta
{%Prati-pratta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. given up, delivered.
<LEND>

<L>31047<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipradAna<k2>pratipradAna
{%Prati-pradāna, am,%}¦ n. giving back, returning,
restoring; giving in marriage.
<LEND>

<L>31048<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprabrU<k2>pratiprabrU
{#pratiprabrU#}¦ {%prati-pra-brū,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bravīti,%}
&c., Ved. to speak to in return, address in reply,
reply, answer.
<LEND>

<L>31049<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipraBa<k2>pratipraBa
{#pratipraBa#}¦ {%prati-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a de-
scendant of Atri, author of the hymn Ṛg-veda V.
49; ({%ā%}), f. reflection, reflected light.
<LEND>

<L>31050<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipraBAtam<k2>pratipraBAtam
{%Prati-prabhātam,%}¦ ind. every morning.
<LEND>

<L>31051<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprayam<k2>pratiprayam
{#pratiprayam#}¦ {%prati-pra-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati,%}
{%-yantum,%} to give back, return, restore.
<LEND>

<L>31052<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprayavaRa<k2>pratiprayavaRa
{#pratiprayavaRa#}¦ {%prati-prayavaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%yu%} with {%prati-pra%}), repeated mixture.
<LEND>

<L>31053<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprayA<k2>pratiprayA
{#pratiprayA#}¦ {%prati-pra-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yā-%}
{%tum,%} to go back, come back, return.
<LEND>

<L>31054<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprayARa<k2>pratiprayARa
{%Prati-prayāṇa, am,%}¦ n. going back, return, retreat.
<LEND>

<L>31055<pc>0616-c<k1>pratipraSna<k2>pratipraSna
{#pratipraSna#}¦ {%prati-praśna.%} See under {%prati-%}
{%prach%} above.
<LEND>

<L>31056<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprasava<k2>pratiprasava
{#pratiprasava#}¦ {%prati-prasava, as,%} m. a counter-
order, countermand, suspension of a general prohi-
bition in a particular case, license for an act which
under other circumstances is forbidden; the laying
down of excepted cases; contrary effect.
<LEND>

<L>31057<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprasUta<k2>pratiprasUta
{%Prati-prasūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ re-enjoined after having
been forbidden.
<LEND>

<L>31058<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprasTAtf<k2>pratiprasTAtf
{#pratiprasTAtf#}¦ {%prati-prasthātṛ, tā,%} m. (fr. rt.
{%sthā%} with {%prati-pra%}), Ved., N. of a priest who
assists the Adhvaryu.
<LEND>

<L>31059<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprasTAna<k2>pratiprasTAna
{%Prati-prasthāna, am,%}¦ n. the office of the Prati-
prasthātṛ; N. of a particular Soma-graha (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>31060<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprAsTAnika<k2>pratiprAsTAnika
{%Pratiprāsthānika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the work
or office of the Prati-prasthātṛ; {%Pratiprāsthānikaṃ%}
{%karma,%} the office of the Prati-prasthātṛ.
<LEND>

<L>31061<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprahAra<k2>pratiprahAra
{#pratiprahAra#}¦ {%prati-prahāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hṛ%}
with {%prati-pra%}), a counter-blow, returning a blow
or stroke.
<LEND>

<L>31062<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprahve<k2>pratiprahve
{#pratiprahve#}¦ {%prati-pra-hve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-hva-%}
{%yati, -te, -hvātum,%} Ved. to invite to (a sacrifice),
invoke.
<LEND>

<L>31063<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprAkAra<k2>pratiprAkAra
{#pratiprAkAra#}¦ {%prati-prākāra, as,%} m. an outer
wall or rampart.
<LEND>

<L>31064<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprAS<k2>pratiprAS
{#pratiprAS#}¦ {%prati-prāś, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. consuming
another's food.
<LEND>

<L>31065<pc>0616-c<k1>pratiprAs<k2>pratiprAs
{#pratiprAs#}¦ {%prati-prās%} ({%-pra-as;%} see rt. 2. {%as%}),
cl. 4. P. {%-prāsyati, -prāsitum,%} to throw or cast upon.
<LEND>
[Page0617-a+ 75]

<L>31066<pc>0617-a<k1>pratipriya<k2>pratipriya
{#pratipriya#}¦ {%prati-priya, am,%} n. kindness in
turn, service in return.
<LEND>

<L>31067<pc>0617-a<k1>pratiprEza<k2>pratiprEza
{#pratiprEza#}¦ {%prati-praiṣa, as,%} m., Ved. a cry
or call in return, direction given in return.
<LEND>

<L>31068<pc>0617-a<k1>pratiplavana<k2>pratiplavana
{#pratiplavana#}¦ {%prati-plavana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%plu%}
with {%prati%}), jumping back, leaping back.
<LEND>

<L>31069<pc>0617-a<k1>pratiPal<k2>pratiPal
{#pratiPal#}¦ {%prati-phal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-phalati, -pha-%}
{%litum,%} to bound against, rebound; to shine back,
be reflected; to requite.
<LEND>

<L>31070<pc>0617-a<k1>pratiPala<k2>pratiPala
{%Prati-phala, as,%}¦ m. or {%prati-phalana, am,%} n.
a reflection, reflected image, image, shadow; return,
reward, remuneration, requital, retaliation, retribution.
<LEND>

<L>31071<pc>0617-a<k1>pratiPalita<k2>pratiPalita
{%Prati-phalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reflected, shadowed,
represented; requited, returned.
<LEND>

<L>31072<pc>0617-a<k1>pratiPullaka<k2>pratiPullaka
{#pratiPullaka#}¦ {%prati-phullaka, as, ā, am,%} flower-
ing, in blossom.
<LEND>

<L>31073<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibanD<k2>pratibanD
{#pratibanD#}¦ {%prati-bandh,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-badh-%}
{%nāti, -badhnīte, -banddhum,%} to bind to, make
fast, moor; to set, enchase; to fix, direct; to shut
out, exclude, preclude, cut off; to keep off, keep at
a distance; to obstruct.
<LEND>

<L>31074<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibadDa<k2>pratibadDa
{%Prati-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound to, tied to,
bound, tied, moored; attached, hanging to; con-
nected with, subject, dependant; furnished with,
possessing; set, enchased, inlaid, bestudded; fixed,
directed; excluded, cut off; hindered, impeded, ob-
structed, opposed, precluded, prevented; disappointed,
thwarted, crossed, vexed; kept off, kept at a dis-
tance; tangled, entangled, involved, hard to loose;
(in philosophy) that which is always connected and
implied, as fire is implied in smoke. {%—Pratibaddha-%}
{%prasara, as, ā, am,%} hindered or blunted in its course
(as a thunderbolt). {%—Pratibaddha-rāga, as, ā, am,%}
pervaded by passion or having passion in harmonious
connection (with gesture).
<LEND>

<L>31075<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibaDaka<k2>pratibaDaka
{%Prati-badhaka, as,%}¦ m. an opposer, injurer (?).
<LEND>

<L>31076<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibaDya<k2>pratibaDya
{%Prati-badhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bound or tied
to; to be hindered or obstructed.
<LEND>

<L>31077<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibanDa<k2>pratibanDa
{%Prati-bandha, as,%}¦ m. binding or tying to; con-
nection, conjunction; investment, blockade, beleaguer-
ing, siege; blocking up, obstacle, hinderance, impedi-
ment; resistance; cessation; disappointment. {%—Pra-%}
{%tibandha-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} creating obstacles, hin-
dering, preventing. {%—Pratibandha-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
beset with obstacles, in which obstacles are met with,
difficult to attain.
<LEND>

<L>31078<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibanDaka<k2>pratibanDaka
{%Prati-bandhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ binding or tying
to; obstructing, obstructive, hindering, impeding,
being an obstacle; resisting; ({%as%}), m. a branch,
shoot; N. of a prince; (at the end of a comp.) an
obstacle, impediment, hinderance.
<LEND>

<L>31079<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibanDana<k2>pratibanDana
{%Prati-bandhana, am,%}¦ n. binding or tying to,
binding, confinement; obstructing, impeding.
<LEND>

<L>31080<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibanDi<k2>pratibanDi
{%Prati-bandhi, is,%}¦ m. a contradiction, objection.
<LEND>

<L>31081<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibanDin<k2>pratibanDin
{%Prati-bandhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ binding or tying to;
encountering obstacles, impeded, interrupted; (at the
end of a comp.) hindering, obstructing. {%—Pratiban-%}
{%dhi-tā,%} f. the being an obstacle, obstructiveness, im-
peding, checking.
<LEND>

<L>31082<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibanDu<k2>pratibanDu
{#pratibanDu#}¦ {%prati-bandhu, us,%} m. an equal in
rank or station.
<LEND>

<L>31083<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibala<k2>pratibala
{#pratibala#}¦ {%prati-bala, as, ā, am,%} having equal
strength or power, of equal strength, equally matched,
a match for (with gen. or at the end of a comp.,
e. g. {%astra-p˚,%} equal in arms); able, adequate,
powerful.
<LEND>

<L>31084<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibARi<k2>pratibARi
{#pratibARi#}¦ {%prati-bāṇi, is, i,%} f. n. an answer;
({%is, is, i%}), improper, unseemly, unsuitable.
<LEND>

<L>31085<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibAD<k2>pratibAD
{#pratibAD#}¦ {%prati-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate,%}
{%bādhitum,%} to beat back, repel, ward off, to keep
off, combat; to restrain, check; to pain, torment,
torture.
<LEND>

<L>31086<pc>0617-a<k1>pratibADaka<k2>pratibADaka
{%Prati-bādhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ thrusting back, re-
jecting, repelling; opposing, obstructing, withstanding,
precluding, preventing.
<LEND>
[Page0617-b+ 74]

<L>31087<pc>0617-b<k1>pratibADana<k2>pratibADana
{%Prati-bādhana, am,%}¦ n. beating back, repelling,
rejecting, keeping off.
<LEND>

<L>31088<pc>0617-b<k1>pratibADin<k2>pratibADin
{%Prati-bādhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ opposing; ({%ī%}), m. an
opponent.
<LEND>

<L>31089<pc>0617-b<k1>pratibAhu<k2>pratibAhu
{#pratibAhu#}¦ {%prati-bāhu, us,%} m. a particular part
of the arm; N. of one of the sons of Śvaphalka.
<LEND>

<L>31090<pc>0617-b<k1>pratibimba<k2>pratibimba
{#pratibimba#}¦ {%prati-bimba = prati-vimba,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31091<pc>0617-b<k1>pratibIja<k2>pratibIja
{#pratibIja#}¦ {%prati-bīja, am,%} n. bad or rotten
seed.
<LEND>

<L>31092<pc>0617-b<k1>pratibuD<k2>pratibuD
{#pratibuD#}¦ {%prati-budh,%} cl. 4. A. {%-budhyate,%}
{%-bodhitum,%} to awaken, awake, wake; to perceive,
observe, remark, learn: Caus. {%-bodhayati, -yitum,%}
to awaken; to instruct, inform, admonish; to com-
mission, charge, order.
<LEND>

<L>31093<pc>0617-b<k1>pratibudDa<k2>pratibudDa
{%Prati-buddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ awakened, awake
(Manu I. 74); illuminated, enlightened; recognised,
observed; known, celebrated; exalted, rendered
prosperous or great. {%—Pratibuddha-vastu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} understanding the real nature of things. {%—Prati-%}
{%buddhātman (˚dha-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having the mind
roused or awakened, awake.
<LEND>

<L>31094<pc>0617-b<k1>pratibudDaka<k2>pratibudDaka
{%Prati-buddhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%a-p˚,%} not recog-
nised.
<LEND>

<L>31095<pc>0617-b<k1>pratibudDi<k2>pratibudDi
{%Prati-buddhi, is,%}¦ f. awakening; hostile disposition
or purpose {%(= śatru-buddhi)%}. {%—Pratibuddhi-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having hostile intentions.
<LEND>

<L>31096<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiboDa<k2>pratiboDa
{%Prati-bodha, as,%}¦ m. awaking, waking; percep-
tion, knowledge; instructing, instruction; admonish-
ing; N. of a man. {%—Pratibodha-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
endowed with knowledge or reason, possessed of
understanding. {%—Pratibodhī-putra (?), as,%} m., N.
of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>31097<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiboDaka<k2>pratiboDaka
{%Prati-bodhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ awakening; admon-
ishing, instructing.
<LEND>

<L>31098<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiboDana<k2>pratiboDana
{%Prati-bodhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ awakening [cf. {%duḥ-%}
{%svapna-p˚%}]; refreshing; ({%am%}), n. awaking, awaken-
ing; instructing, instruction, explanation.
<LEND>

<L>31099<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiboDita<k2>pratiboDita
{%Prati-bodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ awakened; instructed,
taught.
<LEND>

<L>31100<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiboDin<k2>pratiboDin
{%Prati-bodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ awaking, about to awake.
<LEND>

<L>31101<pc>0617-b<k1>pratibrU<k2>pratibrU
{#pratibrU#}¦ {%prati-brū,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-bravīti,%}
{%-brūte, -vaktum,%} to answer (with acc. of the person
or two acc.); (A.) to contradict, deny, refuse; to
resist.
<LEND>

<L>31102<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiBakz<k2>pratiBakz
{#pratiBakz#}¦ {%prati-bhakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-bhakṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Ved. to eat separately, eat alone.
<LEND>

<L>31103<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiBaj<k2>pratiBaj
{#pratiBaj#}¦ {%prati-bhaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bhajati,%}
{%-te, -bhaktum,%} to receive back as a part or share; to
fall again to one's share; to return to (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31104<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiBAga<k2>pratiBAga
{%Prati-bhāga, as,%}¦ m. division; a share, portion,
small daily present of fruit, flowers, vegetables, &c.
offered to a Rājā or prince (Manu VIII. 307);
({%am%}), ind. for every portion or degree. {%—Prati-%}
{%bhāga-śas,%} ind. according to particular divisions or
classification; in divisions or classes.
<LEND>

<L>31105<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiBaYj<k2>pratiBaYj
{#pratiBaYj#}¦ {%prati-bhañj,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhanakti,%}
{%-bhaṅktum,%} Ved. to fracture, break in pieces.
<LEND>

<L>31106<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiBawa<k2>pratiBawa
{#pratiBawa#}¦ {%prati-bhaṭa, as, ā, am,%} vying with,
rivalling, emulating. {%—Pratibhaṭa-tā,%} f. emulous-
ness, emulation.
<LEND>

<L>31107<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiBaR<k2>pratiBaR
{#pratiBaR#}¦ {%prati-bhaṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhaṇati, -bha-%}
{%ṇitum,%} to speak in reply, answer.
<LEND>

<L>31108<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiBaRita<k2>pratiBaRita
{%Prati-bhaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ answered, replied.
<LEND>

<L>31109<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiBaya<k2>pratiBaya
{#pratiBaya#}¦ {%prati-bhaya, as, ā, am,%} exciting
fear, formidable, terrible, terrific, horrific, fearful,
frightful; dangerous; ({%am%}), n. anything formidable
or dangerous, fear, danger; ({%am%}), ind. formidably,
frightfully. {%—Pratibhayaṅ-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing
fear. {%—Pratibhayākāra (˚ya-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing a formidable aspect.
<LEND>

<L>31110<pc>0617-b<k1>pratiBA<k2>pratiBA<h>1
{#pratiBA#} 1¦. {%prati-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -bhā-%}
{%tum,%} to shine upon (with acc.); to appear, seem
(e. g. {%iti pratibhāti me manaḥ,%} so it seems to my
mind); to come in sight, present one's self, offer
[Page0617-c+ 76]
one's self to (with gen. or acc.); to appear clear to the
mind, flash upon the thoughts, come into the mind,
occur to (e. g. {%nottaram pratibhāti me,%} no answer
occurs to me); to fall to the lot of, come into the
possession of (with gen. or acc.); to seem fit, appear
good, please (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31111<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBA<k2>pratiBA<h>2
2. {%prati-bhā,%}¦ f. an image; look, appearance,
manifestation; light, splendor [cf. {%niṣ-pratibha%}];
reflected light; a flashing thought, bright idea, bril-
liant conception; understanding, intelligence, intel-
lect (especially as opening or expanding); genius,
wit, ingenuity; audacity, boldness, impudence, confi-
dence; pleasingness, suitableness; ({%as, ā, am%}), clear,
bright; intelligent, clever (?). {%—Pratibhānvita%}
{%(˚bhā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} endowed with or acquiring
knowledge or experience, intelligent; confident,
proud, audacious, bold. {%—Pratibhā-mukha, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} ‘bold-faced,’ arrogant, bold, confident. {%—Prati-%}
{%bhā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} bright, luminous; knowing,
shrewd; confident, bold; ({%ān%}), m. the sun; the
moon; fire. {%—Pratibhā-vilāsa, as,%} m., N. of a
philosophical work (also called Vedārtha-pradīpa and
Vedārtha-candra). {%—Pratibhā-hāni, is,%} f. privation
of light, dulness, darkness; loss or absence of know-
ledge, want of sense.
<LEND>

<L>31112<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBAna<k2>pratiBAna
{%Prati-bhāna, am,%}¦ n. light, splendor, brilliancy;
intelligence, understanding; brilliance of conception;
confidence, boldness, audacity. {%—Pratibhāna-kūṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Pratibhāna-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} bright, brilliant, luminous, splendid;
intelligent, acute, shrewd; endowed with presence
of mind, bold, prompt, audacious.
<LEND>

<L>31113<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBAnu<k2>pratiBAnu
{%Prati-bhānu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a descendant of Atri,
author of the hymn Ṛg-veda V. 48.
<LEND>

<L>31114<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBAva<k2>pratiBAva
{#pratiBAva#}¦ {%prati-bhāva.%} See under 1. {%prati-%}
{%bhū%} below.
<LEND>

<L>31115<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBAz<k2>pratiBAz
{#pratiBAz#}¦ {%prati-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate,%}
{%-bhāṣitum,%} to address in turn, answer; to address,
speak to (with acc.); to tell, relate; to call, name.
<LEND>

<L>31116<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBAzA<k2>pratiBAzA
{%Prati-bhāṣā,%}¦ f. an answer, reply, rejoinder.
<LEND>

<L>31117<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBAs<k2>pratiBAs
{#pratiBAs#}¦ {%prati-bhās,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāsate,%}
{%-bhāsitum,%} to appear, become clear or evident,
manifest or reveal one's self; to reflect.
<LEND>

<L>31118<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBAsa<k2>pratiBAsa
{%Prati-bhāsa, as,%}¦ m. appearance, look, similitude;
appearing or occurring to the mind; illusion.
<LEND>

<L>31119<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBAsana<k2>pratiBAsana
{%Prati-bhāsana, am,%}¦ n. appearing, appearance,
look, semblance.
<LEND>

<L>31120<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBid<k2>pratiBid
{#pratiBid#}¦ {%prati-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhintte, -bhettum,%} to pierce through, pierce, pene-
trate; to disclose, betray; to express displeasure,
reproach, censure; to disown, reject, part from.
<LEND>

<L>31121<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBidya<k2>pratiBidya
{%Prati-bhidya,%}¦ ind. having pierced or penetrated;
having betrayed.
<LEND>

<L>31122<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBinna<k2>pratiBinna
{%Prati-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ pierced through, pierced;
separated, divided; in immediate contact, closely con-
nected with (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>31123<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBeda<k2>pratiBeda
{%Prati-bheda, as,%}¦ m. splitting, cleaving, dividing;
discovery, betrayal.
<LEND>

<L>31124<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBedana<k2>pratiBedana
{%Prati-bhedana, am,%}¦ n. piercing, penetrating;
splitting, cleaving, cutting; separating, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>31125<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBuj<k2>pratiBuj
{#pratiBuj#}¦ {%prati-bhuj,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhunakti,%}
{%-bhoktum,%} to enjoy.
<LEND>

<L>31126<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBoga<k2>pratiBoga
{%Prati-bhoga, as,%}¦ m. enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>31127<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBU<k2>pratiBU<h>1
{#pratiBU#} 1¦. {%prati-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
{%-bhavitum,%} to be equal to or on a par with (with
acc.): Caus. {%-bhāvayati, -yitum,%} to observe, con-
sider, become acquainted with: Pass. of Caus. {%-bhā-%}
{%vyate,%} to be considered or regarded as.
<LEND>

<L>31128<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBAva<k2>pratiBAva
{%Prati-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. corresponding character or
disposition. {%—Pratibhāva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
corresponding or congenial characters, social.
<LEND>

<L>31129<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBU<k2>pratiBU<h>2
2. {%prati-bhū, ūs,%}¦ m. a surety, security, bail.
<LEND>

<L>31130<pc>0617-c<k1>pratiBUz<k2>pratiBUz
{#pratiBUz#}¦ {%prati-bhūṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhūṣati,%}
{%-bhūṣitum,%} Ved. to make ready, prepare, fit out,
equip; to adorn; to serve, wait upon; to honour,
worship; to accord, accede, acquiesce, comply.
<LEND>
[Page0618-a+ 73]

<L>31131<pc>0618-a<k1>pratiBf<k2>pratiBf
{#pratiBf#}¦ {%prati-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. 3. P. A. {%-bharati,%}
{%-te, -bibharti, -bibhṛte, -bhartum,%} Ved. to carry
towards, offer, present.
<LEND>

<L>31132<pc>0618-a<k1>pratiBfta<k2>pratiBfta
{%Prati-bhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. offered, presented
(as Soma).
<LEND>

<L>31133<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimaNgalavAra<k2>pratimaNgalavAra
{#pratimaNgalavAra#}¦ {%pratimaṅgala-vāra, ās,%} m.
pl. (probably) every festive day, all festivals.
<LEND>

<L>31134<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimaRWaka<k2>pratimaRWaka
{#pratimaRWaka#}¦ {%prati-maṇṭhaka,%} a particular
term in music ({%= maṇṭhaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>31135<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimaRq<k2>pratimaRq
{#pratimaRq#}¦ {%prati-maṇḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-maṇḍati,%}
{%-maṇḍitum,%} to decorate, adorn.
<LEND>

<L>31136<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimaRqita<k2>pratimaRqita
{%Prati-maṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ decorated, adorned.
<LEND>

<L>31137<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimaRqala<k2>pratimaRqala
{#pratimaRqala#}¦ {%prati-maṇḍala, am,%} n. a se-
condary disk (of the sun &c.); an eccentric orbit.
<LEND>

<L>31138<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimatsya<k2>pratimatsya
{#pratimatsya#}¦ {%pratimatsya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people; (also read {%pratimāsya.%})
<LEND>

<L>31139<pc>0618-a<k1>pratiman<k2>pratiman
{#pratiman#}¦ {%prati-man,%} cl. 8. A. {%-manute, -ma-%}
{%nitum,%} to reply, rejoin (Ved.); to compare with
(Ved.): Caus. {%-mānayati, -yitum,%} to honour, hold
in honour; to applaud; to consider, regard.
<LEND>

<L>31140<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimantr<k2>pratimantr
{#pratimantr#}¦ {%prati-mantr,%} cl. 10. P. {%-mantra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to call out or reply to (Ved.); to
consecrate with sacred texts.
<LEND>

<L>31141<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimantraRa<k2>pratimantraRa
{%Prati-mantraṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. an answer, reply.
<LEND>

<L>31142<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimantram<k2>pratimantram
{%Prati-mantram,%}¦ ind., Ved. with or at every for-
mula or verse.
<LEND>

<L>31143<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimantrita<k2>pratimantrita
{%Prati-mantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ consecrated with
sacred texts.
<LEND>

<L>31144<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimandiram<k2>pratimandiram
{#pratimandiram#}¦ {%prati-mandiram,%} ind. in every
house.
<LEND>

<L>31145<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimanyUya<k2>pratimanyUya
{#pratimanyUya#}¦ {%prati-manyūya%} (fr. {%prati + man-%}
{%yu%}), Nom. A. {%pratimanyūyate,%} &c., to manifest
resentment towards, pour out one's fury upon.
<LEND>

<L>31146<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimarSa<k2>pratimarSa
{#pratimarSa#}¦ {%prati-marśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%mṛś%}
with {%prati%}), a kind of powder used as a sternutatory.
<LEND>

<L>31147<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimalla<k2>pratimalla
{#pratimalla#}¦ {%prati-malla, as,%} m. an opponent
in wrestling or boxing, antagonist; a rival.
<LEND>

<L>31148<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimA<k2>pratimA<h>1
{#pratimA#} 1¦. {%prati-mā,%} cl. 2. P., 3. 4. A. {%-māti,%}
{%-mimīte, -māyate, -mātum,%} to imitate, copy (Ved.);
to compare.
<LEND>

<L>31149<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimA<k2>pratimA<h>2
2. {%prati-mā, ās,%}¦ m. a creator, maker, framer
(Ved.); ({%ā%}), f. an image, likeness, resemblance
(frequently at the end of comps. in the sense of
‘like, similar, resembling, equal to,’ e. g. {%amara-p˚,%}
like an immortal), picture, figure, idol; a symbol;
a reflection; measure, extent; the part of an ele-
phant's head between the tusks; a metre consist-
ing of twelve syllables. {%—Pratima-tā%} (?), f. or
{%pratima-tva (?), am,%} n. reflection, image, shadow.
{%—Pratimā-gata, as, ā, am,%} ‘gone to a statue,’
present in an idol (as a deity). {%—Pratimā-candra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘reflection-moon,’ the reflected moon, image
of the moon. {%—Pratimā-paricāraka, as,%} m. an
attendant upon an idol ({%= devala,%} q. v.). {%—Pratimā-%}
{%viśeṣa, as,%} m. a sort of image, a kind of figure or
character. {%—Pratimā-śaśāṅka, as,%} or {%pratimendu%}
{%(˚mā-in˚), us,%} m. ‘reflection-moon,’ the reflected
moon, image of the moon.
<LEND>

<L>31150<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimAtavya<k2>pratimAtavya
{%Prati-mātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ comparable.
<LEND>

<L>31151<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimAna<k2>pratimAna
{%Prati-māna, am,%}¦ n. a counterpart, match, well-
matched opponent, adversary (Ved.); a model, pat-
tern; an image, picture; an idol; similarity, likeness,
resemblance, similitude; a weight; the part of an
elephant's head between the tusks; ({%as, ā, am,%} at
the end of a comp.) like, resembling. {%—Pratimāna-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. the part of an elephant's head between
the tusks.
<LEND>

<L>31152<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimita<k2>pratimita
{%Prati-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ imitated, copied; com-
pared; reflected, mirrored.
<LEND>

<L>31153<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimeya<k2>pratimeya
{%Prati-meya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be likened or com-
pared, comparable.
<LEND>

<L>31154<pc>0618-a<k1>pratimAyA<k2>pratimAyA
{#pratimAyA#}¦ {%prati-māyā,%} f. illusion or magical
power applied in return, counter-spell, counter-charm.
<LEND>
[Page0618-b+ 70]

<L>31155<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimArgaka<k2>pratimArgaka
{#pratimArgaka#}¦ {%prati-mārgaka, as,%} m. the city
of Hari-ścandra (said to hover in the air).
<LEND>

<L>31156<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimArgam<k2>pratimArgam
{%Prati-mārgam,%}¦ ind. the way back, back, back-
wards.
<LEND>

<L>31157<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimAlA<k2>pratimAlA
{#pratimAlA#}¦ {%prati-mālā,%} f. an exercise ana-
logous to capping verses, reciting verse for verse as a
trial of memory or skill.
<LEND>

<L>31158<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimAsam<k2>pratimAsam
{#pratimAsam#}¦ {%prati-māsam,%} ind. every month,
month by month, monthly.
<LEND>

<L>31159<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimAsya<k2>pratimAsya
{#pratimAsya#}¦ {%pratimāsya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people; [cf. {%pratimatsya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>31160<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimit<k2>pratimit
{#pratimit#}¦ {%prati-mit, t,%} f., Ved. (fr. rt. {%mi%}
with {%prati%}), a prop, stay, support.
<LEND>

<L>31161<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimitra<k2>pratimitra
{#pratimitra#}¦ {%prati-mitra,%} (probably) {%am,%} n. ‘a
counterfeit friend,’ an adversary, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>31162<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimih<k2>pratimih
{#pratimih#}¦ {%prati-mih,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mehati, -me-%}
{%ḍhum,%} to make water in the direction of (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31163<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimIv<k2>pratimIv
{#pratimIv#}¦ {%prati-mīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mīvati, -mī-%}
{%vitum,%} Ved. to push or press back; to close by
pressing, shut.
<LEND>

<L>31164<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimukulam<k2>pratimukulam
{#pratimukulam#}¦ {%prati-mukulam,%} ind. in or upon
every bud.
<LEND>

<L>31165<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimuKa<k2>pratimuKa
{#pratimuKa#}¦ {%prati-mukha, as, ā, am,%} standing
before the face, facing; near at hand, present; ({%am%}),
n. (in dramatic language) a secondary plot or inci-
dent calculated either to hasten or retard the catas-
trophe; ({%am%}), ind. towards; in front, in the presence
of, before. {%—Pratimukhāgata (˚kha-āg˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} come against or into collision; come before or in
front of. {%—Pratimukhāṅga (˚kha-aṅ˚), am,%} n. (in
dramatic language) progressive narration of events.
<LEND>

<L>31166<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimuc<k2>pratimuc
{#pratimuc#}¦ {%prati-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati,%}
{%-te, -moktum,%} to put on, place on, fix on, append;
to put on (clothes); to put on one's self (A.), dress
one's self (A.); to assume a form; to fasten, tie up,
bind, attach; to let go, set free, release, liberate; to
give up, resign; to return, restore; to pay, liquidate
or discharge (a debt); to fling, hurl: Pass. {%-mucyate,%}
to be freed or released from (with abl.): Caus. or
cl. 10. P. {%-mocayati, -yitum,%} to set free, release,
liberate; to rescue, save, deliver.
<LEND>

<L>31167<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimukta<k2>pratimukta
{%Prati-mukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ put on, applied;
fastened, tied, bound; clothed, armed, accoutred;
released, liberated; loosed or liberated repeatedly;
returned, restored; flung, hurled; thrown at one
another.
<LEND>

<L>31168<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimocana<k2>pratimocana
{%Prati-mocana, am,%}¦ n. loosening, loosing; libera-
tion, release.
<LEND>

<L>31169<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimocita<k2>pratimocita
{%Prati-mocita, as, ā, am,%}¦ released, liberated;
rescued, saved, delivered.
<LEND>

<L>31170<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimud<k2>pratimud
{#pratimud#}¦ {%prati-mud,%} cl. 1. A. {%-modate, -mo-%}
{%ditum,%} to rejoice at, welcome with joy, welcome
with acclamation; to be glad to see: Caus. {%-moda-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Ved. to gladden, make cheerful, cheer:
Desid. of Caus. {%-mumodayiṣati,%} Ved. to wish to
make cheerful.
<LEND>

<L>31171<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimudrA<k2>pratimudrA
{#pratimudrA#}¦ {%prati-mudrā,%} f. a counter-seal;
the impression of a seal.
<LEND>

<L>31172<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimuh<k2>pratimuh
{#pratimuh#}¦ {%prati-muh,%} Caus. P. {%-mohayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} Ved. to bewilder greatly, perplex, confound.
<LEND>

<L>31173<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimuhus<k2>pratimuhus
{%Prati-muhus,%}¦ ind. again and again, repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>31174<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimohayat<k2>pratimohayat
{%Prati-mohayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. bewildering,
confounding.
<LEND>

<L>31175<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimuhUrtam<k2>pratimuhUrtam
{#pratimuhUrtam#}¦ {%prati-muhūrtam,%} ind. every mo-
ment, constantly.
<LEND>

<L>31176<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimUrti<k2>pratimUrti
{#pratimUrti#}¦ {%prati-mūrti, is,%} f. a corresponding
form, the counterpart of any real form, an image,
resemblance, likeness.
<LEND>

<L>31177<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimUzikA<k2>pratimUzikA
{#pratimUzikA#}¦ {%prati-mūṣikā,%} f. a species of rat.
<LEND>

<L>31178<pc>0618-b<k1>pratimeya<k2>pratimeya
{#pratimeya#}¦ {%prati-meya.%} See 1. {%prati-mā,%} col. 1.
<LEND>
[Page0618-c+ 74]

<L>31179<pc>0618-c<k1>pratimokza<k2>pratimokza
{#pratimokza#}¦ {%prati-mokṣa, as,%} m. liberation,
deliverance; (with Buddhists) emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>31180<pc>0618-c<k1>pratimokzaRa<k2>pratimokzaRa
{%Prati-mokṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. liberation, deliverance;
emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>31181<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyat<k2>pratiyat
{#pratiyat#}¦ {%prati-yat,%} Caus. or cl. 10. P.
{%-yātayati, -yitum,%} to retaliate, requite.
<LEND>

<L>31182<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyatna<k2>pratiyatna
{%Prati-yatna, as,%}¦ m. care bestowed upon anything,
exertion for anything, effort, endeavour; a making
or preparing, elaboration; making complete or per-
fect; acquiring a new virtue or quality; acting well
or properly; comprehension; taking prisoner, mak-
ing captive; desire, wish; making an effort against,
opposition, counteraction, resistance; retaliating, re-
crimination, revenge; ({%as, ā, am%}), exerting one's
self for, troubling about; making effort or exertion,
strenuous, diligent, active, vigorous.
<LEND>

<L>31183<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyAtana<k2>pratiyAtana
{%Prati-yātana, am,%}¦ n. requital, retaliation; ({%ā%}), f.
the counterpart or resemblance of a real form, a
picture, image, statue.
<LEND>

<L>31184<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyam<k2>pratiyam
{#pratiyam#}¦ {%prati-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati,%}
{%-yantum,%} Ved. to grant, present, bestow.
<LEND>

<L>31185<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyA<k2>pratiyA
{#pratiyA#}¦ {%prati-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to go back, return.
<LEND>

<L>31186<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyAta<k2>pratiyAta
{%Prati-yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone against, opposed,
resisted.
<LEND>

<L>31187<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyAna<k2>pratiyAna
{%Prati-yāna, am,%}¦ n. going back, return.
<LEND>

<L>31188<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyAyin<k2>pratiyAyin
{%Prati-yāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ going towards, meeting;
going against, attacking, assailing.
<LEND>

<L>31189<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyuD<k2>pratiyuD
{#pratiyuD#}¦ {%prati-yudh,%} cl. 4. A. {%-yudhyate,%}
{%-yoddhum,%} to fight with, fight against, oppose:
Caus. P. {%-yodhayati, -yitum,%} to fight against, oppose.
<LEND>

<L>31190<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyudDa<k2>pratiyudDa
{%Prati-yuddha, am,%}¦ n. fighting against, battle
in return.
<LEND>

<L>31191<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyodDavya<k2>pratiyodDavya
{%Prati-yoddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attacked in
return.
<LEND>

<L>31192<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyodDf<k2>pratiyodDf
{%Prati-yoddhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ an antagonist,
adversary, a well-matched opponent.
<LEND>

<L>31193<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyoDa<k2>pratiyoDa
{%Prati-yodha, as,%}¦ m. an antagonist, opponent,
adversary.
<LEND>

<L>31194<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyoDana<k2>pratiyoDana
{%Prati-yodhana, am,%}¦ n. fighting against, assailing
in turn.
<LEND>

<L>31195<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyoDin<k2>pratiyoDin
{%Prati-yodhin, ī,%}¦ m. an antagonist, adversary, well-
matched opponent.
<LEND>

<L>31196<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyUTapa<k2>pratiyUTapa
{#pratiyUTapa#}¦ {%prati-yūthapa, as,%} m. the leader
of a hostile herd (of elephants).
<LEND>

<L>31197<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyoga<k2>pratiyoga
{#pratiyoga#}¦ {%prati-yoga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%yuj%}
with {%prati%}), opposition, resistance, enmity; contro-
versy, contradiction; an antidote, remedy; co-opera-
tion, association; the being a counterpart of anything.
<LEND>

<L>31198<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyogika<k2>pratiyogika
{%Pratiyogika, as, ā, am,%}¦ antithetical, related to,
relative, correlative. {%—Pratiyogika-tva, am,%} n.
relativeness, relativity, correlativeness.
<LEND>

<L>31199<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyogin<k2>pratiyogin
{%Prati-yogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ opposing, counteracting,
impeding; related to, corresponding to; co-operating
with; equally matched; ({%ī%}), m. an opponent, enemy,
antagonist, rival; any object dependant upon another
and not existing without it; a partner, associate,
coadjutor; a counterpart, match. {%—Pratiyogi-jñāna-%}
{%kāraṇatā-vāda, as,%} m., N. of a Nyāya work.
{%—Pratiyogi-tā,%} f. or {%pratiyogi-tva, am,%} n. op-
position; dependant existence; the state of being a
match or counterpart, existence as a counterpart,
equality in power; mutual co-operation, partnership.
<LEND>

<L>31200<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyojayitavya<k2>pratiyojayitavya
{%Prati-yojayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be fitted with
strings, requiring to be stringed (as a musical instru-
ment).
<LEND>

<L>31201<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiyoni<k2>pratiyoni
{#pratiyoni#}¦ {%prati-yoni,%} ind., Ved. according
to source or origin.
<LEND>

<L>31202<pc>0618-c<k1>pratira<k2>pratira
{#pratira#}¦ {%pra-tira, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pra-tṝ%}), Ved.
promoting, advancing; granting victory; (according
to Sāy.) {%pratiram āyuḥ = jaṭhare cirakālāvas-%}
{%thānam.%}
<LEND>

<L>31203<pc>0618-c<k1>pratiram<k2>pratiram
{%Pra-tiram%}¦ (probably an ind. past part. fr. {%pra-%}
{%tṝ%}), Ved. having crossed (?).
<LEND>
[Page0619-a+ 74]

<L>31204<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirakz<k2>pratirakz
{#pratirakz#}¦ {%prati-rakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rakṣati,%}
{%-rakṣitum,%} Ved. to preserve, guard, protect.
<LEND>

<L>31205<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirakzaRa<k2>pratirakzaRa
{%Prati-rakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. preserving, preservation,
protection.
<LEND>

<L>31206<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirakzA<k2>pratirakzA
{%Prati-rakṣā,%}¦ f. safety, preservation. {%—Pratirak-%}
{%ṣārtham (˚ṣā-ar˚),%} ind. for the sake of saving.
<LEND>

<L>31207<pc>0619-a<k1>pratiraTa<k2>pratiraTa
{#pratiraTa#}¦ {%prati-ratha, as,%} m. an opposite
fighter in a war-chariot, an adversary in war, an-
tagonist; N. of a descendant of Atri, author of the
hymn Ṛg-veda V. 47; N. of a son of Mati-nāra
and father of Kaṇva; N. of a son of Vajra and
father of Su-cāru.
<LEND>

<L>31208<pc>0619-a<k1>pratiramBa<k2>pratiramBa
{#pratiramBa#}¦ {%prati-rambha, as,%} m. passion, rage,
violent or passionate abuse ({%= prati-lambha%}).
<LEND>

<L>31209<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirava<k2>pratirava
{#pratirava#}¦ {%prati-rava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ru%} with
{%prati%}), crying or calling out to; quarrelling; echo;
(probably) {%= upa-rava,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31210<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirurUzu<k2>pratirurUzu
{%Prati-rurūṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to speak or tell.
<LEND>

<L>31211<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirAja<k2>pratirAja
{#pratirAja#}¦ {%prati-rāja, as,%} or {%prati-rājan, ā,%}
m. a hostile king, royal adversary.
<LEND>

<L>31212<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirAtram<k2>pratirAtram
{#pratirAtram#}¦ {%prati-rātram,%} ind. each night,
every night, nightly.
<LEND>

<L>31213<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirADa<k2>pratirADa
{#pratirADa#}¦ {%prati-rādha%} or {%pratī-rādha, as,%} m.
(fr. rt. {%rādh%} with {%prati%}), Ved. ‘obstacle, hinderance,’
N. of the verses Atharva-veda XX. 135, 1-3.
<LEND>

<L>31214<pc>0619-a<k1>pratiruc<k2>pratiruc
{#pratiruc#}¦ {%prati-ruc,%} Caus. P. {%-rocayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to choose again; to resolve, decide upon.
<LEND>

<L>31215<pc>0619-a<k1>pratiruD<k2>pratiruD
{#pratiruD#}¦ {%prati-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ruṇaddhi,%}
{%-runddhe, -roddhum,%} to check, hinder, obstruct;
to besiege, blockade; to stop, interrupt; to render
imperfect, impair; to disable; to abuse, blame, ac-
cuse unjustly; to hide, conceal.
<LEND>

<L>31216<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirudDa<k2>pratirudDa
{%Prati-ruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ impeded, hindered,
obstructed; stopped, interrupted; opposed; rendered
imperfect, impaired; disabled; invested, blockaded.
<LEND>

<L>31217<pc>0619-a<k1>pratiruDya<k2>pratiruDya
{%Prati-rudhya,%}¦ ind. having accused unjustly (Manu
XI. 88).
<LEND>

<L>31218<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirodDf<k2>pratirodDf
{%Prati-roddhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ withstanding,
opposing, resisting; a hinderer, preventer, opposer.
<LEND>

<L>31219<pc>0619-a<k1>pratiroDa<k2>pratiroDa
{%Prati-rodha, as,%}¦ m. opposition, impediment, ob-
struction, hinderance, stoppage; an opponent; con-
cealing, hiding; siege, blockade; theft, robbery.
<LEND>

<L>31220<pc>0619-a<k1>pratiroDaka<k2>pratiroDaka
{%Prati-rodhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ obstructing, opposing,
hindering, stopping; besieging; ({%as%}), m. a robber,
thief; an opponent; an obstacle.
<LEND>

<L>31221<pc>0619-a<k1>pratiroDana<k2>pratiroDana
{%Prati-rodhana, am,%}¦ n. obstructing, opposing,
hindering.
<LEND>

<L>31222<pc>0619-a<k1>pratiroDin<k2>pratiroDin
{%Prati-rodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ obstructive, hindering, im-
peding, opposing, controverting; besieging; ({%ī%}), m.
a thief, robber; an opponent.
<LEND>

<L>31223<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirurUzu<k2>pratirurUzu
{#pratirurUzu#}¦ {%prati-rurūṣu.%} See under {%prati-%}
{%rava%} above.
<LEND>

<L>31224<pc>0619-a<k1>pratiruh<k2>pratiruh
{#pratiruh#}¦ {%prati-ruh,%} Caus. P. {%-ropayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to place back, restore, re-establish.
<LEND>

<L>31225<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirUpa<k2>pratirUpa
{#pratirUpa#}¦ {%prati-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} like a
model, similar, corresponding, suitable, proper, fit;
beautiful; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. the counterpart of any real
form, an image, resemblance, representation, likeness,
picture; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
daughter of Meru. {%—Pratirūpa-carya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. exemplary in conduct, worthy of imitation.
{%—Pratirūpa-dhṛk%} (see {%dhṛk,%} p. 459, col. 1),
offering a model for imitation, being a pattern or
model.
<LEND>

<L>31226<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirUpaka<k2>pratirUpaka
{%Pratirūpaka, am,%}¦ n. an image, a picture; a
forged edict; ({%as, ikā, am%}), similar, resembling,
corresponding, having the appearance of anything
(generally at the end of a comp.; cf. {%saptamī-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>31227<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirUpya<k2>pratirUpya
{%Pratirūpya, am,%}¦ n. ‘similarity of form,’ in {%a-pra-%}
{%tirūpya,%} incomparableness.
<LEND>

<L>31228<pc>0619-a<k1>pratirOdrakarman<k2>pratirOdrakarman
{#pratirOdrakarman#}¦ {%prati-raudra-karman, ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} acting cruelly against others.
<LEND>

<L>31229<pc>0619-a<k1>pratilakzaRa<k2>pratilakzaRa
{#pratilakzaRa#}¦ {%prati-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘a coun-
ter-mark,’ mark, sign, token.
<LEND>
[Page0619-b+ 74]

<L>31230<pc>0619-b<k1>pratilaB<k2>pratilaB
{#pratilaB#}¦ {%prati-labh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-labhate, -lab-%}
{%dhum,%} to receive back, recover; to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>31231<pc>0619-b<k1>pratilaBya<k2>pratilaBya
{%Prati-labhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be received or ob-
tained, obtainable.
<LEND>

<L>31232<pc>0619-b<k1>pratilamBa<k2>pratilamBa
{%Prati-lambha, as,%}¦ m. receiving, taking, obtain-
ing, getting; censure, reviling, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>31233<pc>0619-b<k1>pratilamBita<k2>pratilamBita
{%Prati-lambhita, am,%}¦ n. obtaining, getting; cen-
sure, reviling, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>31234<pc>0619-b<k1>pratilABa<k2>pratilABa
{%Prati-lābha, as,%}¦ m. receiving back, receiving,
taking, obtaining, getting.
<LEND>

<L>31235<pc>0619-b<k1>pratiliNgam<k2>pratiliNgam
{#pratiliNgam#}¦ {%prati-liṅgam,%} ind. at every
Liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>31236<pc>0619-b<k1>pratilipi<k2>pratilipi
{#pratilipi#}¦ {%prati-lipi, is,%} f. a copy, tran-
script, a written reply.
<LEND>

<L>31237<pc>0619-b<k1>pratiloma<k2>pratiloma
{#pratiloma#}¦ {%prati-loma, as, ā, am,%} against the
hair or grain (opposed to {%anu-loma%}), contrary to
the natural course or order, reverse, inverted; dis-
agreeable, unpleasant; hostile; low, vile, base, de-
praved; left, not right; contrary to caste (where the
mother is of a higher caste than the father); ({%am%}),
n. any disagreeable or injurious act; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the descendants of
Prati-loma; ({%am%}), ind. against the hair, against the
grain, in reversed or inverted order. {%—Pratiloma-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} born in the inverse order of the classes
(as of a Kṣatriya father and Brāhmaṇī mother, or of
a Vaiśya father and Kṣatriyā or Brāhmaṇī mother,
in which cases the wife is of a higher caste than the
husband; cf. Manu X. 16). {%—Pratiloma-tas,%} ind.
against the grain, invertedly, in inverted order or
series; on account of the inversion of the order of
the castes. {%—Pratilomānuloma-tas (˚ma-an˚),%} ind.
in an unfriendly and friendly manner.
<LEND>

<L>31238<pc>0619-b<k1>pratilomaka<k2>pratilomaka
{%Pratilomaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ against the hair or
grain, reverse, inverted; ({%am%}), n. inverted order,
perversion.
<LEND>

<L>31239<pc>0619-b<k1>prativac<k2>prativac
{#prativac#}¦ {%prati-vac,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vakti, -vak-%}
{%tum,%} to say anything in reply to (with two acc.);
to point out, indicate, denounce (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>31240<pc>0619-b<k1>prativaktavya<k2>prativaktavya
{%Prati-vaktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be answered or
replied to, to be given (as an answer), answerable.
<LEND>

<L>31241<pc>0619-b<k1>prativacana<k2>prativacana
{%Prati-vacana, am,%}¦ n. a dependant or final clause
in a sentence; an answer, reply, rejoinder; an echo.
{%—Prativacanī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to make reply, to answer. {%—Prativacanī-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} replied to, answered.
<LEND>

<L>31242<pc>0619-b<k1>prativacas<k2>prativacas
{%Prati-vacas, as,%}¦ n. an answer, reply; an echo.
<LEND>

<L>31243<pc>0619-b<k1>prativAkya<k2>prativAkya
{%Prati-vākya, as, ā, am,%}¦ admitting or requiring
an answer, answerable; ({%am%}), n. a reply, answer;
({%am%}), ind. in every sentence.
<LEND>

<L>31244<pc>0619-b<k1>prativAc<k2>prativAc
{%Prati-vāc, k,%}¦ f. an answer, reply; calling or crying
out to; barking in return (as a dog, Mahā-bh.
Udyoga-p. 2651).
<LEND>

<L>31245<pc>0619-b<k1>prativat<k2>prativat
{#prativat#}¦ {%prati-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. con-
taining the word {%prati.%}
<LEND>

<L>31246<pc>0619-b<k1>prativatsara<k2>prativatsara
{#prativatsara#}¦ {%prati-vatsara, as,%} m. a year;
({%am%}), ind. every year, year by year, yearly.
<LEND>

<L>31247<pc>0619-b<k1>prativad<k2>prativad
{#prativad#}¦ {%prati-vad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vadati, -vadi-%}
{%tum,%} to answer; to repeat.
<LEND>

<L>31248<pc>0619-b<k1>prativAda<k2>prativAda
{%Prati-vāda, as,%}¦ m. an answer, reply, rejoinder;
rejection, refusal.
<LEND>

<L>31249<pc>0619-b<k1>prativAdin<k2>prativAdin
{%Prati-vādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ answering, replying, re-
joining, responding; contradicting, disobedient; ({%ī%}),
m. an opponent; a defendant, respondent. {%—Pra-%}
{%tivādi-tā,%} f. the state or situation of a respondent or
defendant at law.
<LEND>

<L>31250<pc>0619-b<k1>prativanam<k2>prativanam
{#prativanam#}¦ {%prati-vanam,%} ind. in every wood
or forest.
<LEND>

<L>31251<pc>0619-b<k1>prativap<k2>prativap
{#prativap#}¦ {%prati-vap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vapati, -vap-%}
{%tum,%} to insert (jewels &c.), inlay, stud, adorn, orna-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>31252<pc>0619-b<k1>prativApa<k2>prativApa
{%Prati-vāpa, as,%}¦ m. addition of substances to
medicines either during or after decoction ({%= pratī-%}
{%vāpa%}).
<LEND>
[Page0619-c+ 67]

<L>31253<pc>0619-c<k1>prativarRika<k2>prativarRika
{#prativarRika#}¦ {%prati-varṇika, as, ā, am,%} having
a corresponding colour, similar, corresponding.
<LEND>

<L>31254<pc>0619-c<k1>prativartana<k2>prativartana
{#prativartana#}¦ {%prati-vartana.%} See under {%prati-%}
{%vṛt,%} p. 620, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>31255<pc>0619-c<k1>prativartman<k2>prativartman
{#prativartman#}¦ {%prati-vartman.%} See under
{%prati-vṛt,%} p. 620, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>31256<pc>0619-c<k1>prativarDin<k2>prativarDin
{#prativarDin#}¦ {%prati-vardhin, ī, inī, i,%} grown
strong enough for, being a match for, superior to.
<LEND>

<L>31257<pc>0619-c<k1>prativarzam<k2>prativarzam
{#prativarzam#}¦ {%prati-varṣam,%} ind. every year,
year by year, yearly.
<LEND>

<L>31258<pc>0619-c<k1>prativas<k2>prativas<h>1
{#prativas#} 1¦. {%prati-vas%} (see rt. 5. {%vas%}), Caus.
P. {%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} to dress, clothe.
<LEND>

<L>31259<pc>0619-c<k1>prativas<k2>prativas<h>2
{#prativas#} 2¦. {%prati-vas%} (see rt. 6. {%vas%}), cl. 1.
P. {%-vasati, -vastum,%} to dwell near, live at; to
live, dwell.
<LEND>

<L>31260<pc>0619-c<k1>prativasati<k2>prativasati
{%Prati-vasati,%}¦ ind. in every habitation, on every
house, house by house.
<LEND>

<L>31261<pc>0619-c<k1>prativasaTa<k2>prativasaTa
{%Prati-vasatha, as,%}¦ m. a settlement, village.
<LEND>

<L>31262<pc>0619-c<k1>prativastu<k2>prativastu
{%Prati-vastu, u,%}¦ n. (fr. {%prati + vastu%}), a counter-
part, an equivalent; anything given in return; any-
thing contrasted with another, a parallel.
<LEND>

<L>31263<pc>0619-c<k1>prativAsin<k2>prativAsin
{%Prati-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ dwelling near, neighbouring,
a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>31264<pc>0619-c<k1>prativahana<k2>prativahana
{#prativahana#}¦ {%prati-vahana, am,%} n. leading
back.
<LEND>

<L>31265<pc>0619-c<k1>prativAha<k2>prativAha
{%Prati-vāha, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Śva-
phalka.
<LEND>

<L>31266<pc>0619-c<k1>prativoQavya<k2>prativoQavya
{%Prati-voḍhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be carried home.
<LEND>

<L>31267<pc>0619-c<k1>prativahnipradakziRam<k2>prativahnipradakziRam
{#prativahnipradakziRam#}¦ {%prati-vahni-pradakṣi-%}
{%ṇam,%} ind. at each perambulation from left to right
of the sacred fire.
<LEND>

<L>31268<pc>0619-c<k1>prativARi<k2>prativARi
{#prativARi#}¦ {%prati-vāṇi, is,%} f. an answer, reply,
rejoinder (see {%prati-bāṇi%}).
<LEND>

<L>31269<pc>0619-c<k1>prativAta<k2>prativAta
{#prativAta#}¦ {%prati-vāta, as,%} m. a contrary
wind; ({%am%}), ind. against the wind, to leeward; ({%e%}),
ind. on the lee side.
<LEND>

<L>31270<pc>0619-c<k1>prativAra<k2>prativAra
{#prativAra#}¦ {%prati-vāra, prati-vāraṇa,%} &c.
See under {%prati-vṛ,%} p. 620, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>31271<pc>0619-c<k1>prativArttA<k2>prativArttA
{#prativArttA#}¦ {%prati-vārttā.%} See {%prati-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>31272<pc>0619-c<k1>prativASa<k2>prativASa
{#prativASa#}¦ {%prati-vāśa, as, ī, am,%} howling
against; {%a-p˚,%} not contradicting.
<LEND>

<L>31273<pc>0619-c<k1>prativAsaram<k2>prativAsaram
{#prativAsaram#}¦ {%prati-vāsaram,%} ind. every day,
day by day, daily.
<LEND>

<L>31274<pc>0619-c<k1>prativAsin<k2>prativAsin
{#prativAsin#}¦ {%prati-vāsin.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>31275<pc>0619-c<k1>prativAsudeva<k2>prativAsudeva
{#prativAsudeva#}¦ {%prati-vāsudeva, as,%} m. ‘oppo-
nent of a Vāsudeva,’ (with Jainas) N. of nine beings
at enmity with Vāsudeva ({%= Viṣṇu-dviṣ%}).
<LEND>

<L>31276<pc>0619-c<k1>prativiGAta<k2>prativiGAta
{#prativiGAta#}¦ {%prati-vighāta, as,%} m. (fr. rt.
{%han%} with {%vi%}), striking back, warding off, defence.
<LEND>

<L>31277<pc>0619-c<k1>prativijYA<k2>prativijYA
{#prativijYA#}¦ {%prati-vi-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to behave wisely or prudently.
<LEND>

<L>31278<pc>0619-c<k1>prativiwapam<k2>prativiwapam
{#prativiwapam#}¦ {%prati-viṭapam,%} ind. in every
bough, to every branch, branch by branch.
<LEND>

<L>31279<pc>0619-c<k1>prativid<k2>prativid
{#prativid#}¦ {%prati-vid,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vetti, -veda,%}
{%-veditum,%} to acknowledge, receive; cl. 6. P. A.
{%-vindati, -te, -veditum, -vettum,%} to obtain, get,
receive: Caus. {%-vedayati, -yitum,%} to make known,
report, announce, relate; to deliver, give.
<LEND>

<L>31280<pc>0619-c<k1>prativedam<k2>prativedam
{%Prati-vedam,%}¦ ind. at or for every Veda.
<LEND>

<L>31281<pc>0619-c<k1>prativedayat<k2>prativedayat
{%Prati-vedayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making known,
announcing.
<LEND>

<L>31282<pc>0619-c<k1>prativedaSAKam<k2>prativedaSAKam
{%Prati-veda-śākham,%}¦ ind. for every branch or
school of the Veda.
<LEND>

<L>31283<pc>0619-c<k1>prativiDA<k2>prativiDA
{#prativiDA#}¦ {%prati-vi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to place or dispose in
order, arrange, prepare, make ready, fit out, equip;
to dispatch; to counteract, counterwork, frustrate.
<LEND>
[Page0620-a+ 74]

<L>31284<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiDAtavya<k2>prativiDAtavya
{%Prati-vidhātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be arranged;
to be used or employed.
<LEND>

<L>31285<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiDAna<k2>prativiDAna
{%Prati-vidhāna, am,%}¦ n. arrangement, array; ar-
rangement against, prevention; counteracting, coun-
terworking, counteraction, taking measures against;
a subsidiary or substituted ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>31286<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiDi<k2>prativiDi
{%Prati-vidhi, is,%}¦ m. a means of counteracting,
an act or ordinance designed to counterwork or
counteract, remedy; retaliation.
<LEND>

<L>31287<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiDeya<k2>prativiDeya
{%Prati-vidheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be performed or
done in any special case; to be counteracted or
remedied.
<LEND>

<L>31288<pc>0620-a<k1>prativihita<k2>prativihita
{%Prati-vihita, as, ā, am,%}¦ arranged, arrayed.
<LEND>

<L>31289<pc>0620-a<k1>prativinDya<k2>prativinDya
{#prativinDya#}¦ {%prati-vindhya, as,%} m., N. of a
king who ruled over a particular part of the Vindhya
mountains; of a son of Yudhi-ṣṭhira.
<LEND>

<L>31290<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiparI<k2>prativiparI
{#prativiparI#}¦ {%prati-vi-parī (-pari-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-pary-eti, -etum,%} to turn back again.
<LEND>

<L>31291<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiBaj<k2>prativiBaj
{#prativiBaj#}¦ {%prati-vi-bhaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bha-%}
{%jati, -te, -bhaktum,%} Ved. to distribute severally,
apportion.
<LEND>

<L>31292<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiBAga<k2>prativiBAga
{%Prati-vibhāga, as,%}¦ m. division, distribution, ap-
portionment.
<LEND>

<L>31293<pc>0620-a<k1>prativimba<k2>prativimba
{#prativimba#}¦ {%prati-vimba, am, as,%} n. m. the
disk (of the sun or moon) reflected (in water), a
reflection, reflected image, mirrored form; a resem-
blance or counterpart of real forms, a picture, image,
shadow; epithet of the chapters of the Kāvya-pra-
kāśādarśa. {%—Prativimba-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being
reflected or mirrored. {%—Prativimbāta (˚ba-ata)?,%}
{%as,%} m. a mirror.
<LEND>

<L>31294<pc>0620-a<k1>prativimbana<k2>prativimbana
{%Prati-vimbana, am,%}¦ n. the being reflected; re-
flection; comparing together, comparison.
<LEND>

<L>31295<pc>0620-a<k1>prativimbaya<k2>prativimbaya
{%Prativimbaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prativimbayati, -yitum,%}
to reflect, mirror.
<LEND>

<L>31296<pc>0620-a<k1>prativimbita<k2>prativimbita
{%Prativimbita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reflected, mirrored.
<LEND>

<L>31297<pc>0620-a<k1>prativirati<k2>prativirati
{#prativirati#}¦ {%prati-virati, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%ram%}
with {%prati%}), desisting from anything (with abl.),
leaving off; ({%i%}), ind. at every pause, at each cessa-
tion or disappearance.
<LEND>

<L>31298<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiSizwa<k2>prativiSizwa
{#prativiSizwa#}¦ {%prati-viśiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} most
excellent; (with abl.) more excellent.
<LEND>

<L>31299<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiSeza<k2>prativiSeza
{%Prati-viśeṣa, as,%}¦ m. peculiarity, a peculiar cir-
cumstance.
<LEND>

<L>31300<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiSva<k2>prativiSva
{#prativiSva#}¦ {%prati-viśva, as, ā, am,%} every
single one, one and all.
<LEND>

<L>31301<pc>0620-a<k1>prativiza<k2>prativiza
{#prativiza#}¦ {%prati-viṣa, am,%} n. ‘counter-
poison,’ an antidote; ({%ā%}), f. a birch tree (commonly
called Ataich or Atis Betula).
<LEND>

<L>31302<pc>0620-a<k1>prativizaya<k2>prativizaya
{#prativizaya#}¦ {%prati-viṣaya, ās,%} m. pl. the
several objects of sense; ({%am%}), ind. in relation to
each single object of sense.
<LEND>

<L>31303<pc>0620-a<k1>prativizRu<k2>prativizRu
{#prativizRu#}¦ {%prati-viṣṇu,%} ind. at every (image
of) Viṣṇu; towards Viṣṇu, in place of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>31304<pc>0620-a<k1>prativizRuka<k2>prativizRuka
{%Prativiṣṇuka, as,%}¦ m. a species of tree (=
{%mucukunda%}).
<LEND>

<L>31305<pc>0620-a<k1>prativihAya<k2>prativihAya
{#prativihAya#}¦ {%prati-vihāya,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%hā%}
with {%prati%} and {%vi%}), having quitted, having aban-
doned.
<LEND>

<L>31306<pc>0620-a<k1>prativIkz<k2>prativIkz
{#prativIkz#}¦ {%prati-vīkṣ (-vi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-vīkṣate, -vīkṣitum,%} to look upon; to observe,
perceive.
<LEND>

<L>31307<pc>0620-a<k1>prativIkzaRa<k2>prativIkzaRa
{%Prati-vīkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking upon, returning
a look.
<LEND>

<L>31308<pc>0620-a<k1>prativIkzaRIya<k2>prativIkzaRIya
{%Prati-vīkṣaṇīya%}¦ or {%prati-vīkṣya, as, ā, am,%}
to be looked upon; to be observed or perceived.
<LEND>

<L>31309<pc>0620-a<k1>prativIra<k2>prativIra
{#prativIra#}¦ {%prati-vīra, as,%} m. a well-matched
opponent, antagonist. {%—Prativīra-tā,%} f. the being
a well-matched opponent, antagonism.
<LEND>

<L>31310<pc>0620-a<k1>prativIrya<k2>prativIrya
{%Prati-vīrya, am,%}¦ n. sufficient strength or power
for resistance, the being equal to or a match for;
{%a-prativīrya,%} unequalled, matchless, irresistible;
{%aprativīryārambha,%} one who has not sufficient
strength to undertake anything.
<LEND>
[Page0620-b+ 71]

<L>31311<pc>0620-b<k1>prativf<k2>prativf
{#prativf#}¦ {%prati-vṛ,%} Caus. or cl. 10. P. {%-vāra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to keep or ward off, keep back, repel;
to oppose.
<LEND>

<L>31312<pc>0620-b<k1>prativAra<k2>prativAra
{%Prati-vāra, as,%}¦ m. keeping or warding off, de-
fence; {%a-p˚,%} not to be warded off, irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>31313<pc>0620-b<k1>prativAraRa<k2>prativAraRa
{%Prati-vāraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ keeping or warding off
[cf. {%vāraṇa-p˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. a hostile elephant; scil.
{%Daitya,%} a Daitya in the form of an elephant; ({%am%}),
n. keeping back, keeping or warding off.
<LEND>

<L>31314<pc>0620-b<k1>prativArya<k2>prativArya
{%Prati-vārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%a-p˚,%} not to be kept
back, not to be impeded, not to be warded off.
<LEND>

<L>31315<pc>0620-b<k1>prativft<k2>prativft
{#prativft#}¦ {%prati-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate, -var-%}
{%titum,%} to approach; to accrue.
<LEND>

<L>31316<pc>0620-b<k1>prativartana<k2>prativartana
{%Prati-vartana, am,%}¦ n. turning back, returning.
<LEND>

<L>31317<pc>0620-b<k1>prativartman<k2>prativartman
{%Prati-vartman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. taking an opposite
road or course.
<LEND>

<L>31318<pc>0620-b<k1>prativArttA<k2>prativArttA
{%Prati-vārttā,%}¦ f. account, intelligence, information.
<LEND>

<L>31319<pc>0620-b<k1>prativftti<k2>prativftti
{%Prati-vṛtti,%}¦ ind. (in Ved. gram.) according to the
modulation (of the voice).
<LEND>

<L>31320<pc>0620-b<k1>prativfz<k2>prativfz
{#prativfz#}¦ {%prati-vṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-varṣati,%}
{%-varṣitum,%} to rain or shower upon (with arrows),
to shoot; to assail.
<LEND>

<L>31321<pc>0620-b<k1>prativfza<k2>prativfza
{%Prati-vṛṣa, as,%}¦ m. a hostile bull.
<LEND>

<L>31322<pc>0620-b<k1>prativelam<k2>prativelam
{#prativelam#}¦ {%prati-velam,%} ind. on every oc-
casion.
<LEND>

<L>31323<pc>0620-b<k1>prativeSa<k2>prativeSa
{#prativeSa#}¦ {%prati-veśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%viś%}
with {%prati%}), neighbouring; auxiliary; ({%as%}), m. a
neighbour; the residence of a neighbour, neighbour-
ing house, neighbourhood; [cf. {%pratī-veśa.%}] {%—Pra-%}
{%tiveśa-tas,%} ind., Ved. from the neighbourhood.
{%—Prativeśa-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living in the neigh-
bourhood, neighbouring; ({%ī, inī%}), m. f. a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>31324<pc>0620-b<k1>prativeSin<k2>prativeSin
{%Prativeśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ neighbouring, a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>31325<pc>0620-b<k1>prativeSman<k2>prativeSman
{%Prati-veśman, a,%}¦ n. a neighbour's house.
<LEND>

<L>31326<pc>0620-b<k1>prativeSya<k2>prativeSya
{%Prativeśya, as,%}¦ m. a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>31327<pc>0620-b<k1>prativezwita<k2>prativezwita
{#prativezwita#}¦ {%prati-veṣṭita, as, ā, am,%} rolled
back, reverted.
<LEND>

<L>31328<pc>0620-b<k1>prativEra<k2>prativEra
{#prativEra#}¦ {%prati-vaira, am,%} n. requital of hos-
tilities, revenge.
<LEND>

<L>31329<pc>0620-b<k1>prativoQavya<k2>prativoQavya
{#prativoQavya#}¦ {%prati-voḍhavya.%} See under
{%prati-vahana,%} p. 619, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>31330<pc>0620-b<k1>prativyaD<k2>prativyaD
{#prativyaD#}¦ {%prati-vyadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-vidhyati,%}
{%-vyaddhum,%} to hit, wound.
<LEND>

<L>31331<pc>0620-b<k1>prativyUh<k2>prativyUh
{#prativyUh#}¦ {%prati-vy-ūh%} ({%-vi-ūh;%} see rt. 1. {%ūh%}),
cl. 1. P. A. {%-ūhati, -te, -ūhitum,%} to draw out in
opposite battle-array.
<LEND>

<L>31332<pc>0620-b<k1>prativyUQa<k2>prativyUQa
{%Prati-vyūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn out in array
against; broad.
<LEND>

<L>31333<pc>0620-b<k1>prativyUha<k2>prativyUha
{%Prati-vyūha, as,%}¦ m. drawing out an army in
opposite battle-array, arraying an army against an
enemy; a multitude; N. of a prince (in this sense
a various reading for {%prati-vyoman,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>31334<pc>0620-b<k1>prativyoma<k2>prativyoma
{#prativyoma#}¦ {%prati-vyoma, as,%} or {%prati-vyoman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>31335<pc>0620-b<k1>prativraj<k2>prativraj
{#prativraj#}¦ {%prati-vraj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vrajati, -vra-%}
{%jitum,%} to go towards, go near, approach.
<LEND>

<L>31336<pc>0620-b<k1>pratiSaNkanIya<k2>pratiSaNkanIya
{#pratiSaNkanIya#}¦ {%prati-śaṅkanīya, as, ā, am%}
(fr. rt. {%śaṅk%} with {%prati%}), to be doubted about or
feared.
<LEND>

<L>31337<pc>0620-b<k1>pratiSaNkA<k2>pratiSaNkA
{%Prati-śaṅkā,%}¦ f. fear or anxiety on account of
(with loc.); constant fear or doubt.
<LEND>

<L>31338<pc>0620-b<k1>pratiSatru<k2>pratiSatru
{#pratiSatru#}¦ {%prati-śatru, us,%} m., Ved. an ad-
versary, opponent, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>31339<pc>0620-b<k1>pratiSabda<k2>pratiSabda
{#pratiSabda#}¦ {%prati-śabda, as,%} m. echo, reso-
nance, reverberation; a roar. {%—Pratiśabda-ga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} going after a sound, going in the direction
of a sound.
<LEND>

<L>31340<pc>0620-b<k1>pratiSama<k2>pratiSama
{#pratiSama#}¦ {%prati-śama, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śam%}
with {%prati%}), deliverance, cessation.
<LEND>

<L>31341<pc>0620-b<k1>pratiSara<k2>pratiSara
{#pratiSara#}¦ {%prati-śara, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śṝ%} with
{%prati%}), Ved. breaking to pieces.
<LEND>
[Page0620-c+ 73]

<L>31342<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSaSin<k2>pratiSaSin
{#pratiSaSin#}¦ {%prati-śaśin, ī,%} m. a mock moon,
paraselene.
<LEND>

<L>31343<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSAKam<k2>pratiSAKam
{#pratiSAKam#}¦ {%prati-śākham,%} ind. for every
branch or school (of the Veda); ({%ā%}), f. a side branch,
side shoot. {%—Pratiśākhā-nāḍī,%} f. a branch vein.
<LEND>

<L>31344<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSApa<k2>pratiSApa
{#pratiSApa#}¦ {%prati-śāpa, as,%} m. a curse in
return, retorted imprecation, curse for curse.
<LEND>

<L>31345<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSAsana<k2>pratiSAsana
{#pratiSAsana#}¦ {%prati-śāsana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%śās%}),
giving orders, ordering, commissioning; sending a
servant on a message, ordering or dispatching an
inferior after calling him to attend; a counter-order,
rival command or authority; {%a-pratiśāsana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} without rival authority, completely under sub-
jection.
<LEND>

<L>31346<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSAsti<k2>pratiSAsti
{%Prati-śāsti, is,%}¦ f. sending on a message, ordering or
dispatching an inferior after calling him to attend.
<LEND>

<L>31347<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSizwa<k2>pratiSizwa
{%Prati-śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sent, ordered, dis-
patched; celebrated, famous.
<LEND>

<L>31348<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSI<k2>pratiSI
{#pratiSI#}¦ {%prati-śī,%} cl. 2. A. {%-śete, -śayitum,%}
to lie down opposite to (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31349<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSIvan<k2>pratiSIvan
{%Prati-śīvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. serving as a couch
or resting-place.
<LEND>

<L>31350<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSIna<k2>pratiSIna
{#pratiSIna#}¦ {%prati-śīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śyai%}
with {%prati%}), melted, fluid, dropping, oozing.
<LEND>

<L>31351<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSyA<k2>pratiSyA
{%Prati-śyā,%}¦ f. or {%prati-śyāya, as,%} m. a cold,
catarrh.
<LEND>

<L>31352<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSukram<k2>pratiSukram
{#pratiSukram#}¦ {%prati-śukram,%} ind. towards the
planet Venus.
<LEND>

<L>31353<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSuz<k2>pratiSuz
{#pratiSuz#}¦ {%prati-śuṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śuṣyati,%}
{%-śoṣṭum,%} to be dried up, become dry; to perish.
<LEND>

<L>31354<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSyA<k2>pratiSyA
{#pratiSyA#}¦ {%prati-śyā.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>31355<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSraya<k2>pratiSraya
{#pratiSraya#}¦ {%prati-śraya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śri%} with
{%prati%}), refuge, help, assistance; a place of refuge,
shelter, asylum, an alms-house; a place where food
&c. is given away; a house, dwelling; a receptacle;
a place of sacrifice, the room or building where the
sacrifice is performed; an assembly.
<LEND>

<L>31356<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSru<k2>pratiSru
{#pratiSru#}¦ {%prati-śru,%} cl. 5. P. {%-śṛṇoti, -śro-%}
{%tum,%} to promise (with dat. or gen. of the person and
acc. of the thing).
<LEND>

<L>31357<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSrava<k2>pratiSrava
{%Prati-śrava, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. overhearing, dis-
covering by listening; ({%as%}), m. promise, agreement,
assent; (according to Mahī-dhara) {%= prati-śabda.%}
{%—Pratiśravānta (˚va-an˚), as,%} m. the expiration
of a promise, i. e. lapse of a promised period.
<LEND>

<L>31358<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSravaRa<k2>pratiSravaRa
{%Prati-śravaṇa, am,%}¦ n. hearkening to, listening
to (with attention and obedience); assenting to,
agreeing, promising; a promise; maintaining; a
particular part of the ear. {%—Pratiśravaṇa-pūrva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} preceded by a promise, promised.
<LEND>

<L>31359<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSravas<k2>pratiSravas
{%Prati-śravas, ās,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Bhīma-sena.
<LEND>

<L>31360<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSrut<k2>pratiSrut
{%Prati-śrut, t,%}¦ f. an echo, resonance, reverberation;
a promise.
<LEND>

<L>31361<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSruta<k2>pratiSruta
{%Prati-śruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ promised, assented,
agreed, accepted; ({%am%}), n. a promise, assent; an
engagement.
<LEND>

<L>31362<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSruti<k2>pratiSruti
{%Prati-śruti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. an echo, repeated sound,
resonance, reverberation.
<LEND>

<L>31363<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSrutkA<k2>pratiSrutkA
{%Pratiśrutkā,%}¦ f., Ved. {%= prati-śrut.%}
<LEND>

<L>31364<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSrotf<k2>pratiSrotf
{%Prati-śrotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who promises or
assents, a promiser.
<LEND>

<L>31365<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiSlokam<k2>pratiSlokam
{#pratiSlokam#}¦ {%prati-ślokam,%} ind. at every
Śloka.
<LEND>

<L>31366<pc>0620-c<k1>pratizicya<k2>pratizicya
{#pratizicya#}¦ {%prati-ṣicya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%sic%}
with {%prati%}), Ved. to be besprinkled or moistened.
<LEND>

<L>31367<pc>0620-c<k1>pratizeka<k2>pratizeka
{%Prati-ṣeka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. besprinkling, moist-
ening.
<LEND>

<L>31368<pc>0620-c<k1>pratiziD<k2>pratiziD
{#pratiziD#}¦ {%prati-ṣidh (-sidh),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṣe-%}
{%dhati, -ṣedhitum, -ṣeddhum,%} to keep off, ward
off; to restrain; to hinder; to interdict, prohibit,
forbid, disallow: Caus. {%-ṣedhayati, -yitum,%} to
keep off, keep back, ward off; to restrain; to pro-
hibit, interdict.
<LEND>
[Page0621-a+ 78]

<L>31369<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizidDa<k2>pratizidDa
{%Prati-ṣiddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ forbidden, prohibited;
refused, denied, disallowed; contradicted. {%—Prati-%}
{%ṣiddha-sevana, am,%} n. doing what is prohibited.
{%—Pratiṣiddha-sevin, ī, inī, i,%} following or doing
what is forbidden.
<LEND>

<L>31370<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizedDavya<k2>pratizedDavya
{%Prati-ṣeddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be warded off,
to be kept back; to be prohibited or forbidden.
<LEND>

<L>31371<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizedDf<k2>pratizedDf
{%Prati-ṣeddhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ one who wards
off or keeps back; hindering, a hinderer; prohibiting,
prohibitive, a prohibitor, forbidding; resisting.
<LEND>

<L>31372<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizeDa<k2>pratizeDa
{%Prati-ṣedha, as,%}¦ m. keeping or warding off,
keeping back, expulsion (of a disease &c.); forbid-
ding, prohibition; denial, refusal, disallowal; nega-
tion, contradiction; a negative particle; an exception;
enforcing a prohibition, reminding of a prohibition.
{%—Pratiṣedhākṣara (˚dha-ak˚), am,%} n. ‘words
of denial,’ a negative answer. {%—Pratiṣedhokti%}
{%(˚dha-uk˚), is,%} f. expression of denial or refusal,
expression of prohibition or contradiction. {%—Prati-%}
{%ṣedhopamā (˚dha-up˚),%} f. a negative comparison.
<LEND>

<L>31373<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizeDaka<k2>pratizeDaka
{%Prati-ṣedhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ prohibiting, prohi-
bitive, interdicting, preventive; denying, negative;
contradicting; excepting.
<LEND>

<L>31374<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizeDana<k2>pratizeDana
{%Prati-ṣedhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ keeping or warding
off; ({%am%}), n. the act of keeping or warding off,
keeping back, expulsion; preventing, prohibiting,
inhibition, refusal, refutation.
<LEND>

<L>31375<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizeDanIya<k2>pratizeDanIya
{%Prati-ṣedhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be kept back;
to be hindered or prevented; to be prohibited.
<LEND>

<L>31376<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizkaSa<k2>pratizkaSa
{#pratizkaSa#}¦ {%prati-ṣ-kaśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kaś%}
with {%prati%}), a messenger; a secret emissary, spy;
a whip, a leather thong; [cf. {%kaśā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>31377<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizka<k2>pratizka
{%Prati-ṣka, as,%}¦ m. a messenger, an emissary, spy.
<LEND>

<L>31378<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizkaza<k2>pratizkaza
{%Prati-ṣkaṣa, as,%}¦ m. a whip, a leather thong.
<LEND>

<L>31379<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizkasa<k2>pratizkasa
{%Prati-ṣkasa, as,%}¦ m. a messenger, an emissary,
spy.
<LEND>

<L>31380<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizku<k2>pratizku
{#pratizku#}¦ {%prati-ṣku (prati-sku),%} cl. 5. P.
{%-ṣkunoti, -ṣkotum,%} to cover in return (with
arrows &c.).
<LEND>

<L>31381<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizwabDa<k2>pratizwabDa
{#pratizwabDa#}¦ {%prati-ṣṭabdha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%stambh%} with {%prati%}), obstructed, impeded, stopped,
withstood.
<LEND>

<L>31382<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizwamBa<k2>pratizwamBa
{%Prati-ṣṭambha, as,%}¦ m. obstruction, impediment,
obstacle, opposition, resistance, hinderance.
<LEND>

<L>31383<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizwuti<k2>pratizwuti
{#pratizwuti#}¦ {%prati-ṣṭuti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%stu%} with
{%prati%}), Ved. a song of praise, praise.
<LEND>

<L>31384<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizwotf<k2>pratizwotf
{%Prati-ṣṭotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who rivals
in praising.
<LEND>

<L>31385<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizwuB<k2>pratizwuB
{#pratizwuB#}¦ {%prati-ṣṭubh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ṣṭobhate,%}
{%-ṣṭobhitum,%} Ved. to praise severally, glorify indi-
vidually; (Sāy. {%= pratyekaṃ stu.%})
<LEND>

<L>31386<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizWA<k2>pratizWA
{#pratizWA#}¦ {%prati-ṣṭhā (prati-sthā),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -ṣṭhātum,%} to stand firmly, stand or
rest upon, to be supported; to depend upon; to
stay: Caus. P. {%-ṣṭhāpayati, -yitum,%} to place
firmly, to set up, erect; to place; to place with,
consign to (with loc.); to offer.
<LEND>

<L>31387<pc>0621-a<k1>pratizWa<k2>pratizWa
{%Prati-ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. standing firmly;
resisting; famous; ({%as%}), m., N. of the father of
Su-pārśva who was the seventh Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī; ({%ā%}), f. standing still, resting, remaining
in, staying, standing, fixing; a resting-place, site,
ground, base, foundation; a prop, stay; fixity, con-
stitution, strength; the state of rest, quiet, tranquillity,
comfort; the foot (regarded as the basis on which
men and animals stand); a halting-place, dwelling-
place, house, home, residence; the earth; a limit,
boundary; a receptacle; a high or honourable posi-
tion, high authority, pre-eminence; celebrity, fame,
notoriety; the accession (of a king to the throne);
installation, inauguration, the consecration of a monu-
ment or image in honour of a deity or the setting
up of an idol; the performance or institution of any
rites (e. g. the endowment of a temple, portioning a
daughter, completion of a vow, or any ceremonies
for obtaining supernatural and magical powers); ac-
complishment, completion in general; a metre of
four lines of four syllables each; a variety of the
[Page0621-b+ 76]
Gāyatrī metre consisting of three lines of eight,
seven, and six syllables respectively; a mystical
designation of the letter {%ā;%} N. of one of the
Mātṛs attending upon Skanda; {%Prajāpateḥ pra-%}
{%tiṣṭhā%} or {%pratiṣṭhā-sāman,%} N. of a Sāman;
({%ā%}), ind., Ved. (perhaps) on the spot. {%—Pratiṣṭhā-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. desirous of a firm basis;
wishing for a home or residence; wishing for emi-
nence or distinction. {%—Pratiṣṭhā-tilaka,%} N. of a
work by Rāma-candra (on the erection of the images
of the twenty-four Jaina Tīrthaṅ-karas). {%—Prati-%}
{%ṣṭhā-tva, am,%} n. the being a ground or basis,
being a foundation. {%—Pratiṣṭhānvita (˚ṭhā-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessed of fame, renowned, illustrious,
celebrated. {%—Pratiṣṭhā-mayūkha, as,%} m., N. of
the ninth section of the Bhāskara. {%—Pratiṣṭhā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a foundation or support.
<LEND>

<L>31388<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWAtf<k2>pratizWAtf
{%Prati-ṣṭhātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. epithet of a particular
priest (also called {%prati-prasthātṛ,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>31389<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWAna<k2>pratizWAna
{%Prati-ṣṭhāna, am,%}¦ n. resting or standing firmly,
being firmly stationed; a standing-place, ground,
foundation; the foundation of a city; site, situation;
a leg, foot; N. of a town at the confluence of the
Gaṅgā and Yamunā on the left bank of the Gaṅgā
opposite to Allahabad, the capital of the early kings
of the lunar dynasty; N. of a town on the Go-
dāvarī, the capital of Śāli-vāhana; ({%au%}), m. du. the
constellation Proṣṭha-pada.
<LEND>

<L>31390<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWApana<k2>pratizWApana
{%Prati-ṣṭhāpana, am,%}¦ n. fixing, placing, locating;
erecting or consecrating the image of a deity, instal-
lation.
<LEND>

<L>31391<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWApam<k2>pratizWApam
{%Prati-ṣṭhāpam,%}¦ ind., Ved. having fixed or placed.
<LEND>

<L>31392<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWApayitavya<k2>pratizWApayitavya
{%Prati-ṣṭhāpayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be placed
or established.
<LEND>

<L>31393<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWApayitf<k2>pratizWApayitf
{%Prati-ṣṭhāpayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who erects
or fixes; one who founds, a founder.
<LEND>

<L>31394<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWApita<k2>pratizWApita
{%Prati-ṣṭhāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set up, erected,
placed, located; fixed, appointed.
<LEND>

<L>31395<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWApya<k2>pratizWApya
{%Prati-ṣṭhāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be placed or
located or fixed; to be consigned or made over to
(with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>31396<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWi<k2>pratizWi
{%Prati-ṣṭhi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. resistance; (Sāy.) =
{%āśraya.%}
<LEND>

<L>31397<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWita<k2>pratizWita
{%Prati-ṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set up, erected; esta-
blished, fixed, infixed; comprised, included; placed,
situated; staying; established in life, married; por-
tioned, endowed; consecrated, inaugurated, installed;
completed, finished, effected; applied, applicable;
experienced, conversant with; famous, celebrated,
renowned, illustrious; prized, valued; secured, ac-
quired. {%—Pratiṣṭhita-santāna, as, ā, am,%} one
who has progeny or offspring secured.
<LEND>

<L>31398<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWiti<k2>pratizWiti
{%Prati-ṣṭhiti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. standing firmly, re-
maining firm or fixed; a station.
<LEND>

<L>31399<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizWAsu<k2>pratizWAsu
{#pratizWAsu#}¦ {%pra-tiṣṭhāsu, us, us, u,%} wishing
to remain, &c. See {%pra-sthā.%}
<LEND>

<L>31400<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizRAta<k2>pratizRAta
{#pratizRAta#}¦ {%prati-ṣṇāta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%snā%}), pure.
<LEND>

<L>31401<pc>0621-b<k1>pratizRikA<k2>pratizRikA
{%Pratiṣṇikā,%}¦ f., see Gaṇa to Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 98.
<LEND>

<L>31402<pc>0621-b<k1>pratisnAta<k2>pratisnAta
{%Prati-snāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ bathed.
<LEND>

<L>31403<pc>0621-b<k1>pratisaMyodDf<k2>pratisaMyodDf
{#pratisaMyodDf#}¦ {%prati-saṃyoddhṛ, dhā,%} m. an
adversary in war.
<LEND>

<L>31404<pc>0621-b<k1>pratisaMlayana<k2>pratisaMlayana
{#pratisaMlayana#}¦ {%prati-saṃlayana, am,%} n. (fr.
rt. {%lī%} with {%prati-sam%}), complete absorption.
<LEND>

<L>31405<pc>0621-b<k1>pratisaMvatsaram<k2>pratisaMvatsaram
{#pratisaMvatsaram#}¦ {%prati-saṃvatsaram,%} ind. every
year, year by year, yearly.
<LEND>

<L>31406<pc>0621-b<k1>pratisaMvid<k2>pratisaMvid
{#pratisaMvid#}¦ {%prati-saṃvid, t,%} f. (fr. rt. {%vid%}
with {%prati-sam%}), an accurate understanding of the
particulars of anything. {%—Pratisaṃvit-prāpta, as,%}
m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
<LEND>

<L>31407<pc>0621-b<k1>pratisaMvedaka<k2>pratisaMvedaka
{%Prati-saṃvedaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ giving detailed
information, informing about the particulars of any-
thing.
<LEND>

<L>31408<pc>0621-b<k1>pratisaMvedin<k2>pratisaMvedin
{%Prati-saṃvedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ enjoying.
<LEND>

<L>31409<pc>0621-b<k1>pratisaMsarga<k2>pratisaMsarga
{#pratisaMsarga#}¦ {%prati-saṃsarga, as,%} m. {%= prati-%}
{%sarga,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0621-c+ 71]

<L>31410<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaMskf<k2>pratisaMskf
{#pratisaMskf#}¦ {%prati-saṃs-kṛ (-sam-kṛ),%} cl. 8.
P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to mend, repair;
to re-establish, restore; to unite one thing with
another.
<LEND>

<L>31411<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaMsTAna<k2>pratisaMsTAna
{#pratisaMsTAna#}¦ {%prati-saṃsthāna, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%sthā%} with {%prati%}), settling in, entering into.
<LEND>

<L>31412<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaMhf<k2>pratisaMhf
{#pratisaMhf#}¦ {%prati-saṃ-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati,%}
{%-te, -hartum,%} to draw back, withdraw, drag back; to
place back, replace (an arrow in the quiver); to retract;
to change: Caus. {%-hārayati, -yitum,%} to retract.
<LEND>

<L>31413<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaMhAra<k2>pratisaMhAra
{%Prati-saṃhāra, as,%}¦ m. taking back, drawing in,
withdrawing; compression, diminution; comprehen-
sion; retracting; giving up, yielding, resigning.
<LEND>

<L>31414<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaMhfta<k2>pratisaMhfta
{%Prati-saṃhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ comprehended, in-
cluded; compressed, reduced in bulk.
<LEND>

<L>31415<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaYjihIrzu<k2>pratisaYjihIrzu
{%Prati-sañjihīrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to with-
draw from, wishing to be freed from.
<LEND>

<L>31416<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaMhfz<k2>pratisaMhfz
{#pratisaMhfz#}¦ {%prati-saṃ-hṛṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-hṛṣ-%}
{%yati, -harṣitum,%} to be glad.
<LEND>

<L>31417<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaNkASa<k2>pratisaNkASa
{#pratisaNkASa#}¦ {%prati-saṅkāśa, as,%} m. a similar
appearance, resemblance.
<LEND>

<L>31418<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaNkram<k2>pratisaNkram
{#pratisaNkram#}¦ {%prati-saṅ-kram (-sam-kram),%} cl.
1. P. A. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to go
back again, return; to cease moving on, come to an
end, cease: Caus. {%-krāmayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
go back or return.
<LEND>

<L>31419<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaNkrama<k2>pratisaNkrama
{%Prati-saṅkrama, as,%}¦ m. reabsorption, disso-
lution.
<LEND>

<L>31420<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaNkruD<k2>pratisaNkruD
{#pratisaNkruD#}¦ {%prati-saṅ-krudh (-sam-krudh),%}
cl. 4. P. {%-krudhyati, -kroddhum,%} to be angry with
(with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31421<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaNkrudDa<k2>pratisaNkrudDa
{%Prati-saṅkruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ angry with, wroth
against.
<LEND>

<L>31422<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaNKyA<k2>pratisaNKyA<h>1
{#pratisaNKyA#} 1¦. {%prati-saṅ-khyā (-sam-khyā),%}
cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti, -khyātum,%} Ved. to count or reckon
up, count, number.
<LEND>

<L>31423<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaNKyA<k2>pratisaNKyA<h>2
2. {%prati-saṅkhyā,%}¦ f. consciousness. {%—Pratisaṅ-%}
{%khyā-nirodha, as,%} m. (with Buddhists) conscious
cessation of existence; wilful destruction of any
existent thing (?).
<LEND>

<L>31424<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaNgakzikA<k2>pratisaNgakzikA
{#pratisaNgakzikA#}¦ {%prati-saṅgakṣikā,%} f. a cloak
to keep off the dust (worn by Buddhist mendicants).
<LEND>

<L>31425<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaNgin<k2>pratisaNgin
{#pratisaNgin#}¦ {%prati-saṅgin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt.
{%sañj%} with {%prati%}), cleaving or clinging to, adhering;
{%a-pratisaṅgin,%} not meeting with any obstacle,
irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>31426<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaNgrah<k2>pratisaNgrah
{#pratisaNgrah#}¦ {%prati-saṅ-grah (-sam-grah),%} cl.
9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti, -gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} to re-
ceive, accept.
<LEND>

<L>31427<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaYcar<k2>pratisaYcar
{#pratisaYcar#}¦ {%prati-sañ-car (-sam-car),%} cl. 1.
P. A. {%-carati, -te, -caritum,%} to come together,
come towards, meet with, meet.
<LEND>

<L>31428<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaYcara<k2>pratisaYcara
{%Prati-sañcara, as,%}¦ m. going or moving back-
wards; reabsorption or resolution (back again into
Prakṛti); that into which anything is reabsorbed
or resolved; a place of resort, haunt.
<LEND>

<L>31429<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaYjan<k2>pratisaYjan
{#pratisaYjan#}¦ {%prati-sañ-jan (-sam-jan),%} cl. 4.
A. {%-jāyate, -janitum,%} to be born again, to be born
or produced; to spring up, arise, appear.
<LEND>

<L>31430<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaYjIv<k2>pratisaYjIv
{#pratisaYjIv#}¦ {%prati-sañ-jīv (-sam-jīv),%} cl. 1.
P. (ep. also A.) {%-jīvati (-te), -jīvitum,%} to come to
life again, return to life, revive.
<LEND>

<L>31431<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisaYjYA<k2>pratisaYjYA
{#pratisaYjYA#}¦ {%prati-sañ-jñā (-sam-jñā),%} cl. 9.
P. A. {%-jānāti, -jānīte, -jñātum,%} Ved. to be friendly
towards, to be kindly disposed towards.
<LEND>

<L>31432<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisadfkza<k2>pratisadfkza
{#pratisadfkza#}¦ {%prati-sadṛkṣa, as, ī, am,%} or
{%prati-sadṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. similar.
<LEND>

<L>31433<pc>0621-c<k1>pratisandiS<k2>pratisandiS
{#pratisandiS#}¦ {%prati-san-diś (-sam-diś),%} cl. 6.
P. {%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%} to give an errand or commis-
sion in return; to send back a message to (with
gen.); to order, command.
<LEND>
[Page0622-a+ 72]

<L>31434<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisandeSa<k2>pratisandeSa
{%Prati-sandeśa, as,%}¦ m. a message given in return,
tidings in return, an answer to a message.
<LEND>

<L>31435<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisanDA<k2>pratisanDA
{#pratisanDA#}¦ {%prati-san-dhā (-sam-dhā),%} cl. 3.
P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put together
again, readjust; to put on, fasten; to aim at, direct
against; to give back, replace, restore; to grasp men-
tally, conceive, comprehend, understand; (A.) to com-
pose one's self; to fit an arrow to the bow-string.
<LEND>

<L>31436<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisaMhita<k2>pratisaMhita
{%Prati-saṃhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ aimed at, directed against.
<LEND>

<L>31437<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisanDAna<k2>pratisanDAna
{%Prati-sandhāna, am,%}¦ n. putting together again,
joining together; a juncture, the period of transition
between two ages; a remedy; self-command, sup-
pression of feeling; praise, panegyric.
<LEND>

<L>31438<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisanDi<k2>pratisanDi
{%Prati-sandhi, is,%}¦ m. reunion; entering into the
womb [cf. {%bhava-p˚%}]; a juncture, the period of
transition between two ages.
<LEND>

<L>31439<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisanDeya<k2>pratisanDeya
{%Prati-sandheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be opposed, re-
sistible; {%a-pratisandheya,%} irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>31440<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisAnDAnika<k2>pratisAnDAnika
{%Pratisāndhānika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%prati-sandhāna%}),
a bard, a panegyrist.
<LEND>

<L>31441<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisama<k2>pratisama
{#pratisama#}¦ {%prati-sama, as, ā, am,%} equal to,
a match for.
<LEND>

<L>31442<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisamantam<k2>pratisamantam
{#pratisamantam#}¦ {%prati-samantam,%} ind., Ved. on
every side, everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>31443<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisamAdiS<k2>pratisamAdiS
{#pratisamAdiS#}¦ {%prati-sam-ā-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-di-%}
{%śati, -deṣṭum,%} to return an answer, reply, answer;
to direct in return; to order, command.
<LEND>

<L>31444<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisamAdizwa<k2>pratisamAdizwa
{%Prati-samādiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ enjoined, directed,
ordered.
<LEND>

<L>31445<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisamADA<k2>pratisamADA
{#pratisamADA#}¦ {%prati-sam-ā-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A.
{%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put back again,
replace, affix again; to rearrange, readjust; to re-
dress, remedy; to fit an arrow to the bow-string.
<LEND>

<L>31446<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisamADAna<k2>pratisamADAna
{%Prati-samādhāna, am,%}¦ n. cure, remedy.
<LEND>

<L>31447<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisamAs<k2>pratisamAs
{#pratisamAs#}¦ {%prati-sam-ās%} (see rt. 4. {%ās%}), cl.
2. A. {%-āste, -āsitum,%} to be a match for, cope with;
to withstand, resist.
<LEND>

<L>31448<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisamAsana<k2>pratisamAsana
{%Prati-samāsana, am,%}¦ n. the being a match for,
coping with (with gen.); withstanding, resisting.
<LEND>

<L>31449<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisaminD<k2>pratisaminD
{#pratisaminD#}¦ {%prati-sam-indh,%} cl. 7. A. {%-ind-%}
{%dhe, -indhitum,%} to kindle again, rekindle.
<LEND>

<L>31450<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisamIkzaRa<k2>pratisamIkzaRa
{#pratisamIkzaRa#}¦ {%prati-samīkṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr.
rt. {%īkṣ%} with {%prati-sam%}), looking at again, return-
ing a glance.
<LEND>

<L>31451<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisamuc<k2>pratisamuc
{#pratisamuc#}¦ {%prati-sam-uc (?) ,%} cl. 4. A. {%-ucyate,%}
{%ucitum,%} Ved. to deserve, be worthy of.
<LEND>

<L>31452<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisambuD<k2>pratisambuD
{#pratisambuD#}¦ {%prati-sam-budh,%} cl. 1. P. A., 4.
A. {%-bodhati, -te, -budhyate, -bodhitum,%} to become
conscious again, recover consciousness.
<LEND>

<L>31453<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisambudDa<k2>pratisambudDa
{%Prati-sambuddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ become conscious
again, restored to consciousness, recovered.
<LEND>

<L>31454<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisamBU<k2>pratisamBU
{#pratisamBU#}¦ {%prati-sam-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
{%-bhavitum,%} to apply or give one's self to (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31455<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisara<k2>pratisara
{#pratisara#}¦ {%prati-sara.%} See {%prati-sṛ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>31456<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisarga<k2>pratisarga
{#pratisarga#}¦ {%prati-sarga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sṛj%}
with {%prati%}), continued creation out of primitive
matter; secondary creation or the creation of the
world by the agency of Brahmā and other divinities
regarded as the agents of one supreme being; disso-
lution; the portion of a Purāṇa which treats of the
destruction and renovation of the world.
<LEND>

<L>31457<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisargam<k2>pratisargam
{%Prati-sargam,%}¦ ind. in every creation.
<LEND>

<L>31458<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisfzwa<k2>pratisfzwa
{%Prati-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sent, dispatched; given;
celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>31459<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisavya<k2>pratisavya
{#pratisavya#}¦ {%prati-savya, as, ā, am,%} in inverted
order, inverted, reverse.
<LEND>

<L>31460<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisah<k2>pratisah
{#pratisah#}¦ {%prati-sah,%} cl. 1. A. {%-sahate, -sahi-%}
{%tum, -soḍhum,%} to sustain, uphold, support.
<LEND>

<L>31461<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisAnDAnika<k2>pratisAnDAnika
{#pratisAnDAnika#}¦ {%pratisāndhānika.%} See under
{%prati-san-dhā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>31462<pc>0622-a<k1>pratisAma<k2>pratisAma
{#pratisAma#}¦ {%prati-sāma, as, ā, am,%} (probably)
unkind, unfriendly.
<LEND>
[Page0622-b+ 71]

<L>31463<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisAmanta<k2>pratisAmanta
{#pratisAmanta#}¦ {%prati-sāmanta, as,%} m. ‘an ad-
verse neighbour,’ an enemy, adversary.
<LEND>

<L>31464<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisAyam<k2>pratisAyam
{#pratisAyam#}¦ {%prati-sāyam,%} ind. towards even-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>31465<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisIrA<k2>pratisIrA
{#pratisIrA#}¦ {%prati-sīrā,%} f. a curtain, a screen
or wall of cloth, an outer tent.
<LEND>

<L>31466<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisUrya<k2>pratisUrya
{#pratisUrya#}¦ {%prati-sūrya, as,%} m. a mock sun,
parhelion; a kind of lizard, a chameleon (which lies
or basks in the sun); ({%am%}), ind. opposite to the
sun, in the sun. {%—Pratisūrya-śayānaka, as,%} m.
‘lying or basking in the sun,’ a kind of lizard, a
chameleon.
<LEND>

<L>31467<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisUryaka<k2>pratisUryaka
{%Prati-sūryaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= prati-sūrya.%}
<LEND>

<L>31468<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisf<k2>pratisf
{#pratisf#}¦ {%prati-sṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati, -sartum,%}
to go towards, go back, [only used in Caus.]: Caus.
P. {%-sārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to go back; to
remove, replace.
<LEND>

<L>31469<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisara<k2>pratisara
{%Prati-sara, as, ā, am,%}¦ going towards; dependent,
subject; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a cord or ribbon used
as an amulet worn round the neck or wrist at nup-
tials &c.; an ornament, adorning; a watch, guard,
ward; the junction of an elephant's frontal sinuses (?);
({%as%}), m. a follower, servant; a bracelet; a wreath,
garland; a form of magic or incantation; the rear
of an army; day-break; cicatrizing or healing (as a
sore); ({%ā%}), f. a female servant; a thread, fillet, ribbon.
<LEND>

<L>31470<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisaraRa<k2>pratisaraRa
{%Prati-saraṇa, am,%}¦ n. leaning on, resting upon.
<LEND>

<L>31471<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisarya<k2>pratisarya
{%Prati-sarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (according to Mahī-
dhara) present in the cord used as an amulet, present
at an incantation.
<LEND>

<L>31472<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisAraRa<k2>pratisAraRa
{%Prati-sāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. dressing or anointing the
edges of a wound; an instrument used for anointing
a wound.
<LEND>

<L>31473<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisAraRIya<k2>pratisAraRIya
{%Prati-sāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be dressed or
anointed (as a wound).
<LEND>

<L>31474<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisArita<k2>pratisArita
{%Prati-sārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ repelled, repulsed; re-
moved; dressed (as a wound).
<LEND>

<L>31475<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisArin<k2>pratisArin
{%Prati-sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going round, going from
one to another.
<LEND>

<L>31476<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisfzwa<k2>pratisfzwa
{#pratisfzwa#}¦ {%prati-sṛṣṭa.%} See {%prati-sarga.%}
<LEND>

<L>31477<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisenA<k2>pratisenA
{#pratisenA#}¦ {%prati-senā,%} f. an opposing or hos-
tile army.
<LEND>

<L>31478<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisomA<k2>pratisomA
{#pratisomA#}¦ {%prati-somā,%} f. a kind of plant
({%= mahiṣa-vallī%}).
<LEND>

<L>31479<pc>0622-b<k1>pratiskanDa<k2>pratiskanDa
{#pratiskanDa#}¦ {%prati-skandha, as,%} m. every
shoulder; N. of an attendant of Skanda; ({%am%}), ind.
upon the shoulders.
<LEND>

<L>31480<pc>0622-b<k1>pratiskF<k2>pratiskF
{#pratiskF#}¦ {%prati-s-kṝ%} ({%prati-kṝ%} with {%s%} in-
serted), cl. 6. P. A. {%-kirati, -te, -karitum, -karītum,%}
to hurt, injure; [cf. {%prati-kṝ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>31481<pc>0622-b<k1>pratiskIrRa<k2>pratiskIrRa
{%Prati-s-kīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ hurt, injured.
<LEND>

<L>31482<pc>0622-b<k1>pratistabDa<k2>pratistabDa
{#pratistabDa#}¦ {%prati-stabdha, as, ā, am,%} stopped,
restrained; stupefied; propped up, stayed, supported;
[cf. {%prati-ṣṭabdha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>31483<pc>0622-b<k1>pratistrI<k2>pratistrI
{#pratistrI#}¦ {%prati-strī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. lying on
a woman.
<LEND>

<L>31484<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisTAnam<k2>pratisTAnam
{#pratisTAnam#}¦ {%prati-sthānam,%} ind. in every
place, everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>31485<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisnAta<k2>pratisnAta
{#pratisnAta#}¦ {%prati-snāta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%snā%}
with {%prati%}), bathed, washed; [cf. {%prati-ṣṇāta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>31486<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisneha<k2>pratisneha
{#pratisneha#}¦ {%prati-sneha, as,%} m. love in return,
requital of love, mutual love.
<LEND>

<L>31487<pc>0622-b<k1>pratispandana<k2>pratispandana
{#pratispandana#}¦ {%prati-spandana, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%spand%} with {%prati%}), throbbing, vibration.
<LEND>

<L>31488<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisparDA<k2>pratisparDA
{#pratisparDA#}¦ {%prati-spardhā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%spardh%}
with {%prati%}), emulation, rivalry, the wish or effort to
excel or overcome.
<LEND>

<L>31489<pc>0622-b<k1>pratisparDin<k2>pratisparDin
{%Prati-spardhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ emulous, a rival, en-
vious; refractory, rebellious.
<LEND>

<L>31490<pc>0622-b<k1>pratispaSa<k2>pratispaSa
{#pratispaSa#}¦ {%prati-spaśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%paś%}
with {%prati%}), Ved. spying, watching, lying in wait.
<LEND>
[Page0622-c+ 75]

<L>31491<pc>0622-c<k1>pratispaSAna<k2>pratispaSAna
{%Prati-spaśāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= prati-spaśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>31492<pc>0622-c<k1>pratismf<k2>pratismf
{#pratismf#}¦ {%prati-smṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-smarati, -smar-%}
{%tum,%} to remember again, recall to memory, remem-
ber, recollect.
<LEND>

<L>31493<pc>0622-c<k1>pratismfti<k2>pratismfti
{%Prati-smṛti, is,%}¦ f. recollection; epithet of a par-
ticular kind of magic.
<LEND>

<L>31494<pc>0622-c<k1>pratisyAya<k2>pratisyAya
{#pratisyAya#}¦ {%prati-syāya,%} a wrong form for
{%prati-śyāya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31495<pc>0622-c<k1>pratisrotas<k2>pratisrotas
{#pratisrotas#}¦ {%prati-srotas,%} ind. against the
stream, up the stream; (sometimes wrongly spelt
{%prati-śrotas.%})
<LEND>

<L>31496<pc>0622-c<k1>pratisvara<k2>pratisvara
{#pratisvara#}¦ {%prati-svara, as,%} m. a reverberated
sound, echo, reverberation; a focus.
<LEND>

<L>31497<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihan<k2>pratihan
{#pratihan#}¦ {%prati-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -hantum,%}
to strike in return, strike back, ward off, keep off; to
drive back, repel; to remove; to oppose, resist; to
prevent; to disown.
<LEND>

<L>31498<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihata<k2>pratihata
{%Prati-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck in return, struck
back, beaten back, knocked back, hurt, killed;
repulsed, repelled; opposed, obstructed; averted;
reflected; fallen, overthrown; hated, disliked; dis-
appointed; sent, dispatched; tied, bound. {%—Prati-%}
{%hata-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} hostile-minded, having hostile
intentions. {%—Pratihata-mati, is, is, i,%} adverse-
minded, averse from, hating, disliking.
<LEND>

<L>31499<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihati<k2>pratihati
{%Prati-hati, is,%}¦ f. beating back, beating again;
repulse, recoil, rebound; disappointment.
<LEND>

<L>31500<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihanana<k2>pratihanana
{%Prati-hanana, am,%}¦ n. striking back, hitting again,
striking in return, returning a blow.
<LEND>

<L>31501<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihantavya<k2>pratihantavya
{%Prati-hantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be opposed or
resisted, opposable, resistible.
<LEND>

<L>31502<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihantf<k2>pratihantf
{%Prati-hantṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who strikes in return, a
revenger, avenger.
<LEND>

<L>31503<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihanyamAna<k2>pratihanyamAna
{%Prati-hanyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being struck back
or hit again; being foiled or disappointed.
<LEND>

<L>31504<pc>0622-c<k1>pratiharaRa<k2>pratiharaRa
{#pratiharaRa#}¦ {%prati-haraṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%hṛ%}
with {%prati%}), throwing back, striking back, repelling
(Ved.); avoiding, shunning.
<LEND>

<L>31505<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihartf<k2>pratihartf
{%Prati-hartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who draws back,
drawing in, absorbing; dissolving, destroying; one
who keeps or wards off, an averter; epithet of one
of the sixteen priests, the assistant of the Ud-gātṛ
[cf. {%ṛtv-ij, prati-hāra%}]; N. of a prince, son of
Prati-hāra or of Pratīha.
<LEND>

<L>31506<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihAra<k2>pratihAra
{%Prati-hāra, as,%}¦ m. striking against, striking back,
pushing or thrusting back; (in grammar) the hard
contact of the tongue with the edge of the teeth in
the pronunciation of the dental letters; an epithet of
particular syllables in the Sāma hymns with which
the Prati-hartṛ begins to join in the singing (gene-
rally at the beginning of the last Pada of a verse);
N. of a particular magical formula; (that which
keeps back) a door, gate; a door-keeper, porter; a
juggler; juggling, trick, disguise; N. of a prince,
son of Parameṣṭhin; N. of a particular form of
alliance; ({%ī%}), f. a female door-keeper, portress; ({%au%}),
m. du. two door-keepers, i. e. two statues at the
entrance of a temple; (in several of the above senses
this word is also spelt {%pratī-hāra.%}) {%—Pratihāra-pa,%}
{%as,%} m. a door-keeper, porter. {%—Pratihāra-bhūmi,%}
{%is,%} f. ‘door-place,’ a threshold. {%—Pratihāra-rakṣī,%}
f. a female door-keeper, portress.
<LEND>

<L>31507<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihAraka<k2>pratihAraka
{%Prati-hāraka, as,%}¦ m. a juggler.
<LEND>

<L>31508<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihAraRa<k2>pratihAraRa
{%Prati-hāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. entrance, permission to
enter a door.
<LEND>

<L>31509<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihArya<k2>pratihArya
{%Prati-hārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pushed or thrust
back, to be repelled, resistible; ({%am%}), n. juggling,
jugglery.
<LEND>

<L>31510<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihary<k2>pratihary
{#pratihary#}¦ {%prati-hary,%} cl. 1. P. {%-haryati, -har-%}
{%yitum,%} Ved. to desire, love (Sāy. {%= kam%} or {%praty-%}
{%ekaṃ kam%}).
<LEND>

<L>31511<pc>0622-c<k1>pratiharzaRa<k2>pratiharzaRa
{#pratiharzaRa#}¦ {%prati-harṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%hṛṣ%} with {%prati%}), causing joy in return.
<LEND>

<L>31512<pc>0622-c<k1>pratihasta<k2>pratihasta
{#pratihasta#}¦ {%prati-hasta%} or {%prati-hastaka, as,%}
m. a deputy, substitute, proxy.
<LEND>
[Page0623-a+ 76]

<L>31513<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihastin<k2>pratihastin
{%Prati-hastin, ī,%}¦ m. the keeper of a house of
ill fame.
<LEND>

<L>31514<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihasti<k2>pratihasti
{#pratihasti#}¦ {%prati-hasti,%} ind. towards the ele-
phants, in the direction of the elephants.
<LEND>

<L>31515<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihAsa<k2>pratihAsa
{#pratihAsa#}¦ {%prati-hāsa%} or {%pratī-hāsa, as,%} m.
(fr. rt. {%has%} with {%prati%}), returning a laugh, laughing
with or at; fragrant oleander, Nerium Odorum.
<LEND>

<L>31516<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihiMs<k2>pratihiMs
{#pratihiMs#}¦ {%prati-hiṃs,%} cl. 7. 1. P. {%-hinasti,%}
{%-hiṃsati, -hiṃsitum,%} to injure in return, retaliate.
<LEND>

<L>31517<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihiMsA<k2>pratihiMsA
{%Prati-hiṃsā,%}¦ f. retaliation, revenge.
<LEND>

<L>31518<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihiMsita<k2>pratihiMsita
{%Prati-hiṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured in return or by
way of revenge; ({%am%}), n. requital of an injury.
<LEND>

<L>31519<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihita<k2>pratihita
{#pratihita#}¦ {%prati-hita, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%prati-%}
{%dhā%}), put close to, placed in, fitted to (the bow-string
as an arrow). {%—Pratihiteṣu (˚ta-iṣu), us, us, u,%}
one who has fitted an arrow to (the bow-string).
<LEND>

<L>31520<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihitAyin<k2>pratihitAyin
{%Pratihitāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. one who has fitted
an arrow to (the bow-string; cf. {%ātatāyin%}).
<LEND>

<L>31521<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihiti<k2>pratihiti
{%Prati-hiti, is,%}¦ f. fitting an arrow to (the bow-
string).
<LEND>

<L>31522<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihfdayam<k2>pratihfdayam
{#pratihfdayam#}¦ {%prati-hṛdayam,%} ind. in every
heart.
<LEND>

<L>31523<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihrAsa<k2>pratihrAsa
{#pratihrAsa#}¦ {%prati-hrāsa, as,%} m. (rt. {%hras%}), Ved.
shortening, abbreviation, abridgment.
<LEND>

<L>31524<pc>0623-a<k1>pratihvara<k2>pratihvara
{#pratihvara#}¦ {%prati-hvara, as,%} m., Ved. the rising
slope or vault (of the sky), a sloping side; (Sāy.
{%pratihvare = samīpe.%})
<LEND>

<L>31525<pc>0623-a<k1>pratI<k2>pratI
{#pratI#}¦ {%pratī%} ({%prati-i;%} see rt. 5. {%i%}), cl. 2. P.
{%praty-eti, -etum,%} to go towards, come towards, go to;
to go back, come back, return; to approach, turn to,
betake one's self to; to fall to the lot or share of;
to reach, attain; to observe, learn exactly, convince
one's self (of the truth of anything); to be con-
vinced, become certain of, give credence to, believe:
Pass. {%pratīyate,%} to be observed or recognised; to
follow from anything (as a necessary result); to be
proved, turn out to be true: Caus. {%praty-āyayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to go towards; to convince (any
one of the truth of anything), produce confidence,
cause to believe; to cause to think of or observe,
bring to mind; to show anything in its true light,
make clear, prove; to cause to recognise or acknow-
ledge: Desid. {%pratīṣiṣati,%} to wish or try to
understand.
<LEND>

<L>31526<pc>0623-a<k1>pratIta<k2>pratIta
{%Pratīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ set forth, started, gone away;
gone by, gone, past; acknowledged, proved, esta-
blished, true; believed, trusted; experienced, known,
well-known, famous, celebrated, renowned; called,
({%Śyāma iti pratītaḥ,%} known by the name of Ś.);
convinced (of the truth of anything), having a firm
conviction; firmly resolved, fully determined; trusting,
believing; satisfied, glad, pleased, delighted; respect-
ful; clever, wise; ({%as%}), m. a divinity enumerated
among the Viśve Devāḥ. {%—Pratīta-sena, as,%} m., N.
of a prince. {%—Pratītākṣarā (˚ta-ak˚),%} f. ‘having
trustworthy expressions,’ N. of a commentary on the
Mitākṣarā. {%—Pratītārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a recognised or acknowledged meaning.
<LEND>

<L>31527<pc>0623-a<k1>pratIti<k2>pratIti
{%Pratīti, is,%}¦ f. going towards, approaching, drawing
near; clear apprehension or insight into anything,
definite perception, clear notion, distinct conception;
complete understanding or ascertainment, knowledge,
experience; conviction; faith, belief; trust, credit;
fame, notoriety; respect; delight.
<LEND>

<L>31528<pc>0623-a<k1>pratIyamAna<k2>pratIyamAna
{%Pratīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being trusted or be-
lieved, admitted.
<LEND>

<L>31529<pc>0623-a<k1>pratIyivas<k2>pratIyivas
{%Pratīyivas, vān, -yuṣī, vat,%}¦ one who has come
back, returned.
<LEND>

<L>31530<pc>0623-a<k1>pratyaya<k2>pratyaya
{%Praty-aya, as,%}¦ m. belief, firm conviction, trust,
faith, reliance, assurance, confidence ({%pratyayaṃ%}
{%gam,%} to acquire confidence, repose confidence in;
{%asty atra pratyayo mama,%} that is my conviction;
{%kaḥ pratyayo 'tra,%} what assurance is there of
that?); certainty, ascertainment; knowledge, expe-
rience; apprehension, understanding, intellect (in the
Sāṅkhya phil. {%= buddhi%}); acceptation, idea, notion,
[Page0623-b+ 78]
conception; ground, motive; (with Buddhists) a co-
operating cause, the concurrent occasion of an event as
distinguished from its proximate cause; an instrument,
means of agency; an assistant, associate; celebrity,
fame; analysis (?); definition (?); (in Ved. gram.) a
subsequent or following letter; (according to native lexi-
cographers) an oath, ordeal; a dependent, a subject;
usage, custom, practice; religious contemplation; a
householder who keeps a sacred fire; a hole. {%—Pra-%}
{%tyaya-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%} producing assurance,
awakening confidence. {%—Pratyaya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
causing confidence; ({%iṇī%}), f. ‘producing assurance,’
a seal, signet. {%—Pratyaya-tva, am,%} n. the being a
cause, causality. {%—Pratyaya-sarga, as,%} m. (in the
Sāṅkhya phil.) the intellectual creation.
<LEND>

<L>31531<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyayana<k2>pratyayana
{%Praty-ayana,%}¦ see Gaṇa Gotrādi to Pāṇ. VIII. 1,
27, 57.
<LEND>

<L>31532<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyayika<k2>pratyayika
{%Pratyayika, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
resting or depending upon.
<LEND>

<L>31533<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyayita<k2>pratyayita
{%Praty-ayita, as, ā, am,%}¦ confided in, relied upon,
trusted, trusty, confidential.
<LEND>

<L>31534<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyayin<k2>pratyayin
{%Pratyayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ deserving trust or confi-
dence, trustworthy; having faith in, trusting, be-
lieving, relying upon.
<LEND>

<L>31535<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyAya<k2>pratyAya
{%Praty-āya, as,%}¦ m. revenue, tax, toll, tribute.
<LEND>

<L>31536<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyAyaka<k2>pratyAyaka
{%Praty-āyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ producing assurance,
proving, making intelligible or clear, explaining,
elucidating.
<LEND>

<L>31537<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyAyana<k2>pratyAyana<h>2
2. {%praty-āyana, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see under {%praty-e%}),
leading home (a wife), marrying (?); ({%am, ā%}), n. f.
producing assurance, proving, demonstrating, making
clear or intelligible, analyzing, explaining, expounding.
<LEND>

<L>31538<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyAyita<k2>pratyAyita
{%Praty-āyita, as,%}¦ m. a confidential agent, com-
missioned servant, commissioner.
<LEND>

<L>31539<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyAyitavya<k2>pratyAyitavya
{%Praty-āyitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be proved, to be
made clear or intelligible.
<LEND>

<L>31540<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyetavya<k2>pratyetavya
{%Praty-etavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be acknowledged or
admitted; to be relied on or believed.
<LEND>

<L>31541<pc>0623-b<k1>pratyetf<k2>pratyetf
{%Praty-etṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ believing, trusting, having
confidence, a believer.
<LEND>

<L>31542<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIka<k2>pratIka
{#pratIka#}¦ {%pratīka.%} See under {%praty-añc,%}
p. 625, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>31543<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkAra<k2>pratIkAra
{#pratIkAra#}¦ {%pratī-kāra, as,%} m. {%= prati-kāra,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31544<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkArya<k2>pratIkArya
{%Pratī-kārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be retaliated upon,
to be made an object of revenge, fit to be revenged;
to be opposed or resisted, opposable, resistible; to
be prevented or remedied.
<LEND>

<L>31545<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkASa<k2>pratIkASa
{#pratIkASa#}¦ {%pratī-kāśa%} (also wrongly spelt
{%pratī-kāsa%}){%= prati-kāśa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31546<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkz<k2>pratIkz
{#pratIkz#}¦ {%pratīkṣ (prati-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-īkṣate, -īkṣitum,%} to look towards, look at, ob-
serve; to look forward to, look out for, expect; to
wait, await, wait for; to look at with indifference,
wink at, bear with, tolerate.
<LEND>

<L>31547<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkza<k2>pratIkza
{%Pratīkṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking forward to, ex-
pecting, expectant, waiting for; having regard to,
paying attention to; ({%ā%}), f. looking to, looking at,
regard, consideration, attention, respect; waiting for,
expectation, hope.
<LEND>

<L>31548<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkzaka<k2>pratIkzaka
{%Pratīkṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking at; looking
forward to, looking out for, expecting, waiting for.
<LEND>

<L>31549<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkzaRa<k2>pratIkzaRa
{%Pratīkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking to, looking at,
observing, considering, referring to; respecting, re-
spect or regard for; expecting, waiting for; observ-
ing, preserving, fulfilment.
<LEND>

<L>31550<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkzaRIya<k2>pratIkzaRIya
{%Pratīkṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked at, to
be had in view, to be considered or regarded; to be
looked out for, to be waited for or expected.
<LEND>

<L>31551<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkzam<k2>pratIkzam
{%Pratīkṣam,%}¦ ind. having expected (at the end
of comps.; cf. {%śarat-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>31552<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkzita<k2>pratIkzita
{%Pratīkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ looked for, looked out
for, waited for, expected, hoped; contemplated, con-
sidered, regarded; respected, honoured.
<LEND>

<L>31553<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkzin<k2>pratIkzin
{%Pratīkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ looking or waiting for, ex-
pecting, awaiting.
<LEND>

<L>31554<pc>0623-b<k1>pratIkzya<k2>pratIkzya<h>1
1. {%pratīkṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked at, to be
considered or regarded, worthy of consideration;
[Page0623-c+ 74]
respectable, venerable; to be looked forward to or
expected, to be waited for; to be upheld or main-
tained, to be fulfilled.
<LEND>

<L>31555<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIkzya<k2>pratIkzya<h>2
2. {%pratīkṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked at, having con-
sidered, having expected.
<LEND>

<L>31556<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIkzyamARa<k2>pratIkzyamARa
{%Pratīkṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being looked at,
being an object of observation.
<LEND>

<L>31557<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIGAta<k2>pratIGAta
{#pratIGAta#}¦ {%pratī-ghāta, as, ā, am,%} warding
off, parrying ({%= prati-ghāta,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>31558<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIGAtin<k2>pratIGAtin
{%Pratī-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ presenting obstacles, hin-
dering; {%a-pratīghātin,%} unhindered, unimpeded.
<LEND>

<L>31559<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIcI<k2>pratIcI
{#pratIcI#}¦ {%pratīcī, pratīcīna,%} &c. See under
{%praty-añc,%} p. 625, cols. 1, 2.
<LEND>

<L>31560<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIcCaka<k2>pratIcCaka
{#pratIcCaka#}¦ {%pratīcchaka.%} See 1. {%pratīṣ,%} p. 624.
<LEND>

<L>31561<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIq<k2>pratIq
{#pratIq#}¦ {%pratīḍ (prati-īḍ),%} cl. 2. A. {%-īṭṭe,%}
{%īḍitum,%} Ved. to praise.
<LEND>

<L>31562<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIta<k2>pratIta
{#pratIta#}¦ {%pratīta,%} &c. See under {%pratī,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>31563<pc>0623-c<k1>pratItoda<k2>pratItoda
{#pratItoda#}¦ {%pratī-toda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%tud%}
with {%prati%}), a term applied to particular initial forms
of Padas in hymns.
<LEND>

<L>31564<pc>0623-c<k1>pratItta<k2>pratItta
{#pratItta#}¦ {%pratī-tta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%prati-dā,%} q. v.),
given back, in {%a-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31565<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIdarSa<k2>pratIdarSa
{#pratIdarSa#}¦ {%pratī-darśa, as,%} m. (fr. {%prati-dṛś;%}
cf. {%prati-darśa%}), Ved., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>31566<pc>0623-c<k1>pratInAha<k2>pratInAha
{#pratInAha#}¦ {%pratī-nāha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%nah%}
with {%prati%}), Ved. obstruction [cf. {%karṇa-p˚, nāsā-%}
{%p˚%}]; a flag, banner.
<LEND>

<L>31567<pc>0623-c<k1>pratInDaka<k2>pratInDaka
{#pratInDaka#}¦ {%pratīndhaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%indh%}
with {%prati%}), N. of a prince of Videha.
<LEND>

<L>31568<pc>0623-c<k1>pratInv<k2>pratInv
{#pratInv#}¦ {%pratīnv (prati-inv),%} cl. 1. P. {%-invati,%}
{%-invitum,%} Ved. to promote, advance; to present,
offer.
<LEND>

<L>31569<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIpa<k2>pratIpa
{#pratIpa#}¦ {%pratīpa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%prati + ap;%}
cf. {%anūpa, dvīpa, samīpa%}), ‘against the stream,’
‘against the grain,’ going in an opposite direction,
adverse, contrary, opposite, opposed, contradictory,
reverse; inverted, disordered, out of order; dis-
pleasing, offensive, disagreeable; resisting, perverse,
refractory, disobedient, cross, obstinate; impeding,
hindering; meeting, encountering; backward, retro-
grade, going back; turned away, averted; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a prince the father of Śāntanu and grand-
father of Bhīṣma; ({%am%}), n. inverse comparison as
a figure of speech (e. g. ‘the lotus resembles thine
eyes,’ or ‘the moon resembles thy face,’ instead of the
usual comparison — ‘thine eyes resemble the lotus,’
‘thy face resembles the moon;’ five forms are enu-
merated); N. of a grammatical work; ({%am%}), ind.
against the stream, backwards; against; in inverted
order; [cf. Russ. <nsi>protiv,</nsi> ‘against;’ <nsi>protivnüi,</nsi> ‘con-
trary.’] {%—Pratīpa-ga, as, ā, am,%} going against, flow-
ing backwards. {%—Pratīpa-gati, is,%} f. or {%pratīpa-ga-%}
{%mana, am,%} n. a retrograde movement. {%—Pratīpa-%}
{%gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going against, acting in contravention
to. {%—Pratīpa-taraṇa, am,%} n. sailing against the
stream, crossing over (against) the stream. {%—Pratīpa-%}
{%darśinī,%} f. ‘looking in an opposite direction,’ ‘turning
away the face,’ a woman; (also spelt {%pratīpa-dar-%}
{%śanī.%}) {%—Pratīpa-vacana, am,%} n. contradicting, con-
tradiction; a perverse or evasive manner, speaking to
a third person without answering a previous speaker.
{%—Pratīpāśva (˚pa-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince;
(also read {%pratīkāśva,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>31570<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIpaka<k2>pratIpaka
{%Pratīpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ opposed to, hindering,
hostile; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>31571<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIpaya<k2>pratIpaya
{%Pratīpaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pratīpayati, -yitum,%} to
oppose one's self to, to be against or hostile to (with
loc.); to cause to turn back, cause to return, to
bring back.
<LEND>

<L>31572<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIpAya<k2>pratIpAya
{%Pratīpāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%pratīpāyate, -yitum,%} to
oppose one's self to, to be against a person (with
gen.); to be unfavourable to, dislike.
<LEND>

<L>31573<pc>0623-c<k1>pratIpin<k2>pratIpin
{%Pratīpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ unfavourable, to, unkind
towards.
<LEND>
[Page0624-a+ 69]

<L>31574<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIboDa<k2>pratIboDa
{#pratIboDa#}¦ {%pratī-bodha, as,%} m. (fr. {%prati-%}
{%budh%}), Ved. watchfulness, vigilance.
<LEND>

<L>31575<pc>0624-a<k1>pratImAna<k2>pratImAna
{#pratImAna#}¦ {%pratī-māna, am,%} n. a measure of
capacity ({%= prati-māna,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>31576<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIyamAna<k2>pratIyamAna
{#pratIyamAna#}¦ {%pratīyamāna.%} See {%pratī,%} p. 623.
<LEND>

<L>31577<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIr<k2>pratIr
{#pratIr#}¦ {%pratīr (prati-īr),%} Caus. P. {%-īrayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} Ved. to put on, fix on (Sāy. {%= prati-dhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>31578<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIra<k2>pratIra
{#pratIra#}¦ {%pra-tīra, as,%} m., N. of one of the
sons of Manu Bhautya; ({%am%}), n. a shore, bank.
<LEND>

<L>31579<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIrADa<k2>pratIrADa
{#pratIrADa#}¦ {%pratī-rādha = prati-rādha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31580<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIvarta<k2>pratIvarta
{#pratIvarta#}¦ {%pratī-varta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%prati-%}
{%vṛt%}), Ved. circular.
<LEND>

<L>31581<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIvApa<k2>pratIvApa
{#pratIvApa#}¦ {%pratī-vāpa, as,%} m. (fr. {%prati-vap%}),
inserting (as an ingredient); adding to (especially
in mixing medicines); throwing into; calcining or
fluxing metals; an epidemic disease, pestilence,
plague.
<LEND>

<L>31582<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIvAha<k2>pratIvAha
{#pratIvAha#}¦ {%pratī-vāha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vah%} with
{%prati%}), Ved. harnessed or yoked at the side (?).
<LEND>

<L>31583<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIvI<k2>pratIvI
{#pratIvI#}¦ {%pratī-vī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. receiving,
accepting with pleasure; ({%īs%}), m. f. acceptance;
(Sāy.) {%= yajña.%}
<LEND>

<L>31584<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIveSa<k2>pratIveSa
{#pratIveSa#}¦ {%pratī-veśa, as,%} m. {%= prati-veśa,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31585<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIveSin<k2>pratIveSin
{%Pratī-veśin, ī, inī, i, = prati-veśin,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31586<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIz<k2>pratIz<h>1
{#pratIz#} 1¦. {%pratīṣ%} ({%prati-iṣ;%} see rt. 3. {%iṣ%}),
cl. 6. P. {%pratīcchati, praty-eṣitum, praty-eṣṭum,%}
to strive after, seek (Ved.); to receive; to receive
(a command), follow, attend to, observe, obey.
<LEND>

<L>31587<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIcCaka<k2>pratIcCaka
{%Pratīcchaka, as,%}¦ m. one who receives, a receiver.
<LEND>

<L>31588<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIzya<k2>pratIzya
{%Pratīṣya,%}¦ ind., Ved. striving after, seeking.
<LEND>

<L>31589<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIz<k2>pratIz<h>2
{#pratIz#} 2¦. {%pratīṣ%} ({%prati-īṣ,%} see rt. {%īṣ%}),
cl. 1. A. {%pratīṣate, pratīṣitum,%} to stretch out
towards.
<LEND>

<L>31590<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIha<k2>pratIha
{#pratIha#}¦ {%pratīha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%īh%} with {%prati%}),
N. of a prince, a son of Parameṣṭhin; (also read
{%prati-hāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>31591<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIhAra<k2>pratIhAra
{#pratIhAra#}¦ {%pratī-hāra, as,%} m. {%= prati-hāra,%}
q. v. {%—Pratīhāra-tā,%} f. or {%pratīhāra-tva, am,%} n.
the office of porter, duty of gate-keeper.
<LEND>

<L>31592<pc>0624-a<k1>pratIhAsa<k2>pratIhAsa
{#pratIhAsa#}¦ {%pratī-hāsa, as,%} m. fragrant ole-
ander, Nerium Odorum ({%= prati-hāsa%}).
<LEND>

<L>31593<pc>0624-a<k1>pratud<k2>pratud
{#pratud#}¦ {%pra-tud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-tudati, -te,%}
{%-tottum,%} to strike at, strike, cut, pierce: Caus. {%-to-%}
{%dayati, -yitum,%} to pierce; to push on, instigate.
<LEND>

<L>31594<pc>0624-a<k1>pratuda<k2>pratuda
{%Pra-tuda, as,%}¦ m. ‘pecker,’ epithet of a class
of birds (including the falcon, hawk, owl, parrot,
crow, raven, peacock, &c.); an instrument for
pricking.
<LEND>

<L>31595<pc>0624-a<k1>pratoda<k2>pratoda
{%Pra-toda, as,%}¦ m. a goad; a long whip; an in-
strument of torment; {%Aṅgirasām pratodaḥ%} and
{%Kaśyapasya pratodaḥ,%} N. of two Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>31596<pc>0624-a<k1>pratodin<k2>pratodin
{%Pra-todin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ striking; piercing.
<LEND>

<L>31597<pc>0624-a<k1>pratuz<k2>pratuz
{#pratuz#}¦ {%pra-tuṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-tuṣyati, -toṣṭum,%}
to delight in, take pleasure in (with inst.): Caus. P.
{%-toṣayati, -yitum,%} to give pleasure, gratify.
<LEND>

<L>31598<pc>0624-a<k1>pratuzwi<k2>pratuzwi
{%Pra-tuṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. gratifying, satisfying, satisfaction.
{%—Pratuṣṭi-da, as, ā, am,%} giving satisfaction.
<LEND>

<L>31599<pc>0624-a<k1>pratoza<k2>pratoza
{%Pra-toṣa, as,%}¦ m. ‘gratification,’ N. of one of the
twelve sons of Manu Svāyambhuva.
<LEND>

<L>31600<pc>0624-a<k1>pratuzwuzu<k2>pratuzwuzu
{#pratuzwuzu#}¦ {%pra-tuṣṭuṣu.%} See under {%pra-stu.%}
<LEND>

<L>31601<pc>0624-a<k1>pratURI<k2>pratURI
{#pratURI#}¦ {%pra-tūṇī,%} f. a kind of nervous
disease (in which pain is felt to extend itself from
the rectum and organs of generation towards the
bowels; in the disease called {%tūṇī%} the pain takes an
opposite direction, whence perhaps {%pra-tūṇī%} is an
incorrect form for {%prati-tūṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>31602<pc>0624-a<k1>pratUrRa<k2>pratUrRa
{#pratUrRa#}¦ {%pra-tūrṇa, pra-tūrta,%} &c. See under
{%pra-tvar,%} p. 629, col. 1.
<LEND>
[Page0624-b+ 75]

<L>31603<pc>0624-b<k1>pratfd<k2>pratfd<h>1
{#pratfd#} 1¦. {%pra-tṛd,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-tṛṇatti,%}
{%tṛntte, -tarditum,%} Ved. to thrust through with a
spit, spit, pierce.
<LEND>

<L>31604<pc>0624-b<k1>pratfd<k2>pratfd<h>2
2. {%pra-tṛd, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. splitting up, piercing; ({%t%}),
m. an expression substituted for the name of Tṛtsu.
<LEND>

<L>31605<pc>0624-b<k1>pratfp<k2>pratfp
{#pratfp#}¦ {%pra-tṛp,%} Caus. P. {%-tarpayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to satisfy, sate, satiate; to refresh, invigorate,
strengthen.
<LEND>

<L>31606<pc>0624-b<k1>pratF<k2>pratF
{#pratF#}¦ {%pra-tṝ,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.), 6. P.
{%-tarati (-te), -tirati, -taritum, -tarītum,%} to cross
over, pass over, be ferried across; to come for-
wards, advance, thrive, prosper (Ved.); to lead for-
wards, lead, conduct; to promote, further, cause to
thrive or prosper; to augment, aggrandize, enhance,
raise, elevate; to lengthen, prolong, extend (fre-
quently with {%āyus,%} in the sense of ‘prolonging
life’); (A. with {%āyus%}), to live longer: Caus. {%-tāra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to lengthen, spread, extend; to mis-
lead, misguide, cheat, deceive; to lead astray, seduce;
to induce, persuade.
<LEND>

<L>31607<pc>0624-b<k1>pratAra<k2>pratAra
{%Pra-tāra, as,%}¦ m. ferrying over or across, carrying
over; crossing over; deception, deceit, fraud.
<LEND>

<L>31608<pc>0624-b<k1>pratAraka<k2>pratAraka
{%Pra-tāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ deceiving, deceitful,
cheating, imposing upon, insidious, perfidious; a
deceiver, cheat, impostor.
<LEND>

<L>31609<pc>0624-b<k1>pratAraRa<k2>pratAraRa
{%Pra-tāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. ferrying over or across, car-
rying over, crossing over; deceiving, cheating, over-
reaching, deception, deceit, fraud, trick.
<LEND>

<L>31610<pc>0624-b<k1>pratAraRIya<k2>pratAraRIya
{%Pra-tāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be deceived or mis-
led, to be cheated ({%= vañcanīya%}), deceivable.
<LEND>

<L>31611<pc>0624-b<k1>pratArita<k2>pratArita
{%Pra-tārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ deceived, misled, cheated,
imposed upon.
<LEND>

<L>31612<pc>0624-b<k1>pratoda<k2>pratoda
{#pratoda#}¦ {%pra-toda.%} See under {%pra-tud,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>31613<pc>0624-b<k1>pratolI<k2>pratolI
{#pratolI#}¦ {%pra-tolī,%} f. a broad way, high
street, principal road through a town or village; a
kind of bandage applied to the neck and to the penis.
<LEND>

<L>31614<pc>0624-b<k1>pratolikA<k2>pratolikA
{%Pra-tolikā,%}¦ f. an upper room (?).
<LEND>

<L>31615<pc>0624-b<k1>pratolIka<k2>pratolIka
{%Pratolīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
having a high street.
<LEND>

<L>31616<pc>0624-b<k1>pratta<k2>pratta
{#pratta#}¦ {%pra-tta,%} &c. See under {%pra-dā,%} p. 630.
<LEND>

<L>31617<pc>0624-b<k1>pratna<k2>pratna
{#pratna#}¦ {%pratna, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%pra%}), former,
preceding, anterior; old, primeval, ancient; hitherto
prevalent, traditional, customary; ({%am%}), n. a kind
of metre. {%—Pratna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing
the word {%pratna; (vat),%} ind. as formerly, in the
usual manner.
<LEND>

<L>31618<pc>0624-b<k1>pratnaTA<k2>pratnaTA
{%Pratna-thā,%}¦ ind., Ved. as formerly, as of old, in
the usual manner.
<LEND>

<L>31619<pc>0624-b<k1>pratyaMSu<k2>pratyaMSu
{#pratyaMSu#}¦ {%praty-aṃśu, us,%} m., see Scholiast to
Pāṇ. VI. 2, 193.
<LEND>

<L>31620<pc>0624-b<k1>pratyak<k2>pratyak
{#pratyak#}¦ {%pratyak.%} See under {%praty-añc,%} p. 625,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>31621<pc>0624-b<k1>pratyakza<k2>pratyakza
{#pratyakza#}¦ {%praty-akṣa, as, ā, am,%} perceptible
to the eye, being present before the eyes, in sight,
perceptible, sensible, cognizable by any of the organs
of sense (opposed to {%paro'kṣa,%} q. v.); clear, dis-
tinct, evident, undoubted, express, explicit, actual,
real; corporeal; immediate; having before the eyes,
keeping in view, discerning; ({%am%}), n. perceptibility,
ocular evidence, clearness, distinctness, explicitness;
superintendence; (in philosophy) apprehension by the
senses, sensation, perception, intuition; (in rhetoric)
a kind of style descriptive of impressions derived from
the senses; ({%am, āt, eṇa%}), ind. before the eyes, in
the sight of; with direct personal knowledge, dis-
tinctly, clearly; in the face of, in the presence of,
before; publicly; immediately, directly, explicitly,
really; literally; personally; at first sight, at sight;
({%e%}), ind. in the sight of, before the eyes of. {%—Praty-%}
{%akṣa-kṛtā,%} f., Ved., scil. {%ṛk,%} a hymn or verse in
which a deity is addressed directly or in the second
person (e. g. O Indra, thou &c.). {%—Pratyakṣa-%}
{%khaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n., N. of the first part of the
Tattva-cintā-maṇi a Nyāya work by Gaṅgeśa. {%—Pra-%}
{%tyakṣa-jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge obtained by per-
[Page0624-c+ 78]
ception. {%—Pratyakṣa-tamām%} or {%pratyakṣa-ta-%}
{%māt,%} ind., Ved. most perceptibly; most directly; most
evidently. {%—Pratyakṣa-tas,%} ind. before the eyes,
in presence of, visibly, perceptibly, ({%pratyakṣataḥ%}
{%śrutam,%} heard perceptibly or with the ears); evi-
dently, clearly, plainly. {%—Pratyakṣa-tā,%} f. or {%pra-%}
{%tyakṣa-tva, am,%} n. visibility, perceptibility, per-
ception by the senses, ocular demonstration; the
standing face to face; explicitness; addressing in
the second person (Ved.); {%pratyakṣatayā,%} visibly.
{%—Pratyakṣa-darśana, am,%} n. seeing with one's
own eyes, witnessing or seeing in person; the power
of discerning the godhead present (in the sacrifice);
({%as%}), m. an eye-witness, witness. {%—Pratyakṣa-%}
{%darśin, ī, inī, i,%} seeing with one's own eyes, one who
has seen with his own eyes, an eye-witness. {%—Praty-%}
{%akṣa-darśivas, ān,%} m. one who has seen anything
with his own eyes, an eye-witness; seeing anything
clearly as if before the eyes. {%—Pratyakṣa-dṛś, k,%}
{%k, k,%} seeing distinctly, one who sees anything clearly
as if before the eyes. {%—Pratyakṣa-dṛśya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} to be seen with the eyes, visible, per-
ceptible. {%—Pratyakṣa-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} seen
with the eyes. {%—Pratyakṣa-parīkṣaṇa, am,%} n.
real observation or examination. {%—Pratyakṣa-%}
{%pramā,%} f. correct or certain knowledge obtained
through the senses. {%—Pratyakṣa-pramāṇa, am,%} n.
ocular or visible proof, the evidence of the senses;
an organ or faculty of perception. {%—Pratyakṣa-%}
{%phala, am,%} n. a visible consequence. {%—Pratyakṣa-%}
{%bṛhatī,%} f., Ved. a real or original Bṛhatī, an
evident Bṛhatī. {%—Pratyakṣa-bhakṣa, as,%} m.,
Ved. real or actual eating. {%—Pratyakṣa-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} become visible, manifested. {%—Pratyakṣa-%}
{%bhoga, as,%} m. enjoyment or use of anything in the
presence of or with the knowledge of the owner.
{%—Pratyakṣa-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘asserting percep-
tion by the senses,’ one who admits of no other
evidence than perception by the senses; ({%ī%}), m. a
Buddhist. {%—Pratyakṣa-vihita, as, ā, am,%} expressly
enjoined. {%—Pratyakṣa-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} having a
form which is visible to the eye; composed clearly
or intelligibly. {%—Pratyakṣa-siddha, as, ā, am,%}
determined by the evidence of the senses. {%—Praty-%}
{%akṣī-karaṇa, am,%} n. looking at, viewing; making
manifest or apparent. {%—Pratyakṣī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A.
{%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to make visible or evident;
to inspect, look at with one's own eyes, see. {%—Praty-%}
{%akṣī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} seen with the eyes; made
present or visible; manifested, displayed.
<LEND>

<L>31622<pc>0624-c<k1>pratyakzaya<k2>pratyakzaya
{%Pratyakṣaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pratyakṣayati, -yitum,%}
to make visible or perceptible, manifest, display.
<LEND>

<L>31623<pc>0624-c<k1>pratyakzin<k2>pratyakzin
{%Pratyakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ seeing or perceiving with
one's own eyes, perceiving by the senses, witnessing
in person; ({%ī%}), m. an eye-witness.
<LEND>

<L>31624<pc>0624-c<k1>pratyakzaram<k2>pratyakzaram
{#pratyakzaram#}¦ {%praty-akṣaram,%} ind. at each syl-
lable, syllable by syllable, letter by letter, literally.
<LEND>

<L>31625<pc>0624-c<k1>pratyagni<k2>pratyagni
{#pratyagni#}¦ {%praty-agni,%} ind. towards the fire;
at or near or in every fire.
<LEND>

<L>31626<pc>0624-c<k1>pratyagra<k2>pratyagra
{#pratyagra#}¦ {%praty-agra, as, ā, am,%} fresh, recent,
new, young; repeated, reiterated; pure ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of Vasu Upari-cara and prince
of the Cedis. {%—Pratyagra-kṣarat, an, antī, at,%}
fresh-flowing, flowing freshly. {%—Pratyagra-gandhā,%}
f. a species of shrub, Rhinacanthus Communis.
{%—Pratyagra-tā,%} f. or {%pratyagra-tva, am,%} n. new-
ness, freshness. {%—Pratyagra-prasavā,%} f. recently
delivered, having lately brought forth. {%—Pratyagra-%}
{%vayas, ās, ās, as,%} young in age, youthful, young;
({%as%}), n. youth. {%—Pratyagra-śodhita, as, ā, am,%}
recently purified, pure.
<LEND>

<L>31627<pc>0624-c<k1>pratyagraha<k2>pratyagraha
{#pratyagraha#}¦ {%pratyagraha, as,%} m., N. of a son
of Vasu and king of the Cedis ({%= praty-agra;%}
probably a contracted form for {%pratyag-graha%}).
<LEND>

<L>31628<pc>0624-c<k1>pratyaNka<k2>pratyaNka
{#pratyaNka#}¦ {%praty-aṅka, as, ā, am,%} recently
marked.
<LEND>

<L>31629<pc>0624-c<k1>pratyaNga<k2>pratyaNga
{#pratyaNga#}¦ {%praty-aṅga, am,%} n. a minor or se-
condary member of the body (as the forehead, nose,
[Page0625-a+ 79]
chin, fingers, ears, &c.; the six aṅgas or chief mem-
bers being the trunk, head, arms, and legs); a
division, section, part, subdivision (of a science &c.);
a weapon; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince; ({%am%}), ind. on
every part or member of the body, on every limb,
on the limbs severally; for every part or subdivision
(of a sacrifice &c.); in each base (in grammar).
{%—Pratyaṅga-dakṣiṇā,%} f. a fee for each part (of
a sacrifice).
<LEND>

<L>31630<pc>0625-a<k1>pratyaNgiras<k2>pratyaNgiras
{#pratyaNgiras#}¦ {%praty-aṅgiras, ās,%} m., N. of a
mythical personage (who like Aṅgiras married a
number of the daughters of Dakṣa).
<LEND>

<L>31631<pc>0625-a<k1>pratyaNgirasa<k2>pratyaNgirasa
{%Praty-aṅgirasa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a mythical per-
sonage regarded as the father of certain Ṛcas.
<LEND>

<L>31632<pc>0625-a<k1>pratyaNgirA<k2>pratyaNgirA
{%Praty-aṅgirā,%}¦ f. a form of Durgā, one of the
goddesses of the Tāntrikas.
<LEND>

<L>31633<pc>0625-a<k1>pratyajira<k2>pratyajira
{#pratyajira#}¦ {%praty-ajira, am,%} n., see Gaṇa
Aṃśv-ādi to Pāṇ. VI. 2, 193.
<LEND>

<L>31634<pc>0625-a<k1>pratyaYc<k2>pratyaYc
{#pratyaYc#}¦ {%praty-añc, pratyaṅ, pratīcī%} (accord-
ing to Vopa-deva IV. 12. also {%pratyañcī%}), {%pratyak%}
(fr. rt. 1. {%añc%} with {%prati%}), turned towards, directed
towards, proceeding to (with acc.); being behind,
coming from behind; subsequent, following (in time
or place); turning the back upon, turning back,
turning away, turned away, averted, taking an oppo-
site direction; western, occidental, westerly, west,
turned or directed towards the west, to the west of
(with abl.); turned inwards, inner, interior; equal
to, a match for; uniform, unmixed (?); ({%pratīcī%}),
f. (with or without {%diś%}), the western quarter, the
west; ({%pratyak%}), ind. backwards, back, in an opposite
direction; behind; against; to the west, westwards,
to the west of (with abl.); in the interior, inwardly;
in former times. {%—Pratīcīśa, as,%} m. ‘lord of the
west,’ an epithet of Varuṇa. {%—Pratyak-cetana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one whose thoughts are turned inwards or
upon himself; rightly intelligent. {%—Pratyak-tattva-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work confuting the Nyāya philo-
sophy upon the basis of the Vedānta. {%—Pratyak-%}
{%tattva-viveka, as,%} m., N. of a philosophical work.
{%—Pratyak-tva, am,%} n. backward direction, direc-
tion towards one's self. {%—Pratyak-parṇī,%} f. a species
of plant, Achyranthes Aspera ({%= apāmārga%}); the
plant Anthericum Tuberosum ({%= dravantī%}). {%—Pra-%}
{%tyak-puṣpī,%} f. a species of plant, Achyranthes
Aspera; (according to Vārttika I. to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 64.
the correct form would be {%pratyak-puṣpā.%}) {%—Pra-%}
{%tyak-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} having the head turned
towards the west. {%—Pratyak-śreṇī,%} f., N. of various
plants, Anthericum Tuberosum; Croton Polyandrum
or Croton Tiglium; Salvinia Cucullata (commonly
called {%indurakānī dantī%}). {%—Pratyak-srotas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} flowing towards the west; (often wrongly
spelt {%pratyak-śrotas.%}) {%—Pratyag-akṣa, am,%} n.
an inner organ, internal faculty; ({%as, ā, am%}), having
inner organs. {%—Pratyagakṣa-ja, as, ā, am,%} dis-
cerned by the internal faculties, visible to the eye
of the soul. {%—Pratyag-ātma-tva, am,%} n. universal
permeation of spirit. {%—Pratyag-ātman, ā,%} m. the
individual soul. {%—Pratyag-ānanda, as, ā, am,%}
inwardly rejoicing, internally joyful. {%—Pratyag-āśā-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the western quarter,’ an epithet
of Varuṇa. {%—Pratyag-udak,%} ind. towards the north-
west. {%—Pratyag-dakṣiṇatas,%} ind. towards the
south-west. {%—Pratyag-dakṣiṇā,%} ind., Ved. towards
the south-west. {%—Pratyag-dṛś, k,%} f. an inward
glance, glance directed inwards. {%—Pratyag-dhāman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} radiant within, internally illuminated. {%—Pra-%}
{%tyag-ratha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a warrior-tribe (also
called {%ahi-cchattra;%} cf. {%prātyagrathi%}). {%—Pratyaṅ-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} having the face turned away,
having the face averted, facing the west.
<LEND>

<L>31635<pc>0625-a<k1>pratIka<k2>pratIka
{%Pratīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned towards, directed
towards; adverse, contrary; inverted, reversed, in-
verse, contrary to the natural order or condition;
({%am%}), n. an outer or upper part, exterior, surface
(Ved.); outward form or shape, look, appearance
(Ved.; cf. {%ghṛta-p˚, cāru-p˚, tveṣa-p˚%}); an
image, symbol; the face; the front; the mouth;
[Page0625-b+ 72]
the first part (of a verse), first word; ({%as%}), m. a
part, portion, particular point or item; a limb, mem-
ber; N. of a son of Vasu and father of Ogha-vat;
[cf. {%anūka, apāka, abhīka.%}] {%—Pratīka-vat, ān,%}
m., Ved. ‘having a face or mouth,’ an epithet of
Agni. {%—Pratīkāśva (˚ka-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a
prince. {%—Pratīkopāsana (˚ka-up˚), am,%} n. image
worship, the service of idols.
<LEND>

<L>31636<pc>0625-b<k1>pratIcIna<k2>pratIcIna
{%Pratīcīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. going or coming
towards, turned or directed towards; turned away
from, turning the back upon, turning back; being
behind, coming from behind; turning westward,
situated towards the west, western, westerly; follow-
ing, subsequent, future; ({%am%}), ind. back to one's
self; backwards, behind. {%—Pratīcīna-phala, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. having the fruit turned backwards.
{%—Pratīcīneḍa (˚na-iḍā), am,%} n., Ved., with {%kā-%}
{%śītam,%} N. of various Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>31637<pc>0625-b<k1>pratIcya<k2>pratIcya
{%Pratīcya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being or living in the west,
western, westerly; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of Pu-
lastya; ({%am%}), n. a designation of anything remote
or concealed (Naighaṇṭuka III. 25).
<LEND>

<L>31638<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyaYcita<k2>pratyaYcita
{%Praty-añcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured.
<LEND>

<L>31639<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyaYj<k2>pratyaYj
{#pratyaYj#}¦ {%praty-añj,%} cl. 7. P. {%-anakti, -añjitum,%}
{%aṅktum,%} Ved. to smear over, besmear; to decorate.
<LEND>

<L>31640<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyaYjana<k2>pratyaYjana
{%Praty-añjana, am,%}¦ n. smearing over, smearing,
anointing.
<LEND>

<L>31641<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyadana<k2>pratyadana
{#pratyadana#}¦ {%praty-adana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%ad%}),
eating; food.
<LEND>

<L>31642<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyaDI<k2>pratyaDI
{#pratyaDI#}¦ {%praty-adhī (prati-adhi-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-adhy-eti, -etum,%} to read through or study severally.
<LEND>

<L>31643<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyanantara<k2>pratyanantara
{#pratyanantara#}¦ {%praty-anantara, as, ā, am,%} being
in the immediate neighbourhood (of a person or
thing), closely connected with, immediately follow-
ing; standing nearest (as an heir); ({%am%}), ind.
immediately after (with abl.); next in succession.
<LEND>

<L>31644<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyanilam<k2>pratyanilam
{#pratyanilam#}¦ {%praty-anilam,%} ind. against the
wind.
<LEND>

<L>31645<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyanIka<k2>pratyanIka
{#pratyanIka#}¦ {%praty-anīka, as, ā, am,%} hostile,
opposed, opposite; withstanding, resisting; ({%as%}),
m. an enemy; ({%am%}), n. a hostile army; hostility,
enmity, a hostile relation, hostile position; injuring
the relatives of an enemy who cannot be injured
himself; injuring one who cannot retaliate (?). {%—Pra-%}
{%tyanīka-tva, am,%} n. the state of an enemy, hostility.
<LEND>

<L>31646<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyanujYA<k2>pratyanujYA
{#pratyanujYA#}¦ {%praty-anu-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to disallow, refuse, reject; to spurn.
<LEND>

<L>31647<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyanutap<k2>pratyanutap
{#pratyanutap#}¦ {%praty-anu-tap,%} Pass. {%-tapyate,%}
&c., to feel subsequent remorse, repent, regret.
<LEND>

<L>31648<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyanunI<k2>pratyanunI
{#pratyanunI#}¦ {%praty-anu-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati,%}
{%-te, -netum,%} to bring to submission, induce to yield;
to declare against, protest against; to disagree; to
deny.
<LEND>

<L>31649<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyanuBU<k2>pratyanuBU
{#pratyanuBU#}¦ {%praty-anu-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
{%-bhavitum,%} to enjoy singly or severally.
<LEND>

<L>31650<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyanumAna<k2>pratyanumAna
{#pratyanumAna#}¦ {%praty-anumāna, am,%} n. a con-
trary deduction, opposite conclusion.
<LEND>

<L>31651<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyanta<k2>pratyanta
{#pratyanta#}¦ {%praty-anta, as, ā, am,%} bordering on,
bordering, adjacent or contiguous to, skirting; ({%as%}),
m. a border, frontier; a bordering country, i. e. a
country occupied by barbarians, the country of the
Mlecchas or savages; ({%ās%}), m. pl. barbarous tribes;
({%āt%}), ind., Ved. to the end. {%—Pratyanta-deśa, as,%} m.
a neighbouring country, a country bordering upon
another. {%—Pratyanta-parvata, as,%} m. an adjacent
hill, a small hill near a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>31652<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyapakAra<k2>pratyapakAra
{#pratyapakAra#}¦ {%praty-apakāra, as,%} m. offending
or injuring in return, retaliation.
<LEND>

<L>31653<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyabdam<k2>pratyabdam
{#pratyabdam#}¦ {%praty-abdam,%} ind. every year,
year by year, yearly.
<LEND>

<L>31654<pc>0625-b<k1>pratyaBiGf<k2>pratyaBiGf
{#pratyaBiGf#}¦ {%praty-abhi-ghṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-ghāra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Ved. to sprinkle over repeatedly.
<LEND>
[Page0625-c+ 72]

<L>31655<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBiGAraRa<k2>pratyaBiGAraRa
{%Praty-abhighāraṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. sprinkling
over afresh.
<LEND>

<L>31656<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBicar<k2>pratyaBicar
{#pratyaBicar#}¦ {%praty-abhi-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati,%}
{%-caritum,%} Ved. to use spells or charms against,
employ incantations against.
<LEND>

<L>31657<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBicaraRa<k2>pratyaBicaraRa
{%Praty-abhicaraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. using spells
or charms against, employing incantations against.
<LEND>

<L>31658<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBijYA<k2>pratyaBijYA<h>1
{#pratyaBijYA#} 1¦. {%praty-abhi-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-jānāti, -jānīte, -jñātum,%} to recognise again; to
come to one's self, recover one's consciousness.
<LEND>

<L>31659<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBijYA<k2>pratyaBijYA<h>2
2. {%praty-abhijñā,%}¦ f. recognising again, recogni-
tion; N. of a philosophical work.
<LEND>

<L>31660<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBijYAta<k2>pratyaBijYAta
{%Praty-abhijñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ recognised again,
recognised, known.
<LEND>

<L>31661<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBijYAna<k2>pratyaBijYAna
{%Praty-abhijñāna, am,%}¦ n. recognising again, re-
cognising, recognition, knowing; a token of recog-
nition (which a messenger brings back to prove that
he has duly accomplished his mission). {%—Pratyabhi-%}
{%jñāna-ratna, am,%} n. jewel of recognition, a jewel
given as a token of recognition.
<LEND>

<L>31662<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBijYAya<k2>pratyaBijYAya
{%Praty-abhijñāya,%}¦ ind. having recognised again,
having recognised.
<LEND>

<L>31663<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBiDA<k2>pratyaBiDA
{#pratyaBiDA#}¦ {%praty-abhi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to place back, bring or
draw back, reabsorb; to reply, answer; to give con-
sent.
<LEND>

<L>31664<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBiDAv<k2>pratyaBiDAv
{#pratyaBiDAv#}¦ {%praty-abhi-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhā-%}
{%vati, -dhāvitum,%} to run or hasten towards.
<LEND>

<L>31665<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBinand<k2>pratyaBinand
{#pratyaBinand#}¦ {%praty-abhi-nand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nan-%}
{%dati, -nanditum,%} to greet or salute in return, return
a salutation; to bid welcome.
<LEND>

<L>31666<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBinandin<k2>pratyaBinandin
{%Praty-abhinandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ receiving or accept-
ing with thanks.
<LEND>

<L>31667<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBiprasTA<k2>pratyaBiprasTA
{#pratyaBiprasTA#}¦ {%praty-abhi-pra-sthā,%} cl. 1. A.
{%-tiṣṭhate, -sthātum,%} to set out towards, set out for,
depart; to march towards.
<LEND>

<L>31668<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBiBAzin<k2>pratyaBiBAzin
{#pratyaBiBAzin#}¦ {%praty-abhibhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
speaking to, addressing.
<LEND>

<L>31669<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBiBUta<k2>pratyaBiBUta
{#pratyaBiBUta#}¦ {%praty-abhibhūta, as, ā, am,%} over-
powered, overcome, conquered.
<LEND>

<L>31670<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBimiT<k2>pratyaBimiT
{#pratyaBimiT#}¦ {%praty-abhi-mith,%} cl. 1. 6. P.
{%-methati, -mithati,%} &c., Ved. to answer scornfully
or abusively.
<LEND>

<L>31671<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBimeTana<k2>pratyaBimeTana
{%Praty-abhimethana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a scornful reply.
<LEND>

<L>31672<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBimfS<k2>pratyaBimfS
{#pratyaBimfS#}¦ {%praty-abhi-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛ-%}
{%śati, -marṣṭum, -mraṣṭum,%} to stroke over, stroke
down, touch; to lay hold of.
<LEND>

<L>31673<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBimarSa<k2>pratyaBimarSa
{%Praty-abhimarśa, as,%}¦ m. or {%praty-abhimar-%}
{%śana, am,%} n., Ved. rubbing, touching (with the
hand).
<LEND>

<L>31674<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBiyukta<k2>pratyaBiyukta
{#pratyaBiyukta#}¦ {%praty-abhiyukta, as, ā, am%} (fr.
rt. {%yuj%} with {%praty-abhi%}), accused in return, charged
by a counter plaint.
<LEND>

<L>31675<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBiyoga<k2>pratyaBiyoga
{%Praty-abhiyoga, as,%}¦ m. a counter plaint or charge,
a counter accusation, an accusation brought against
the accuser or plaintiff, recrimination.
<LEND>

<L>31676<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBivad<k2>pratyaBivad
{#pratyaBivad#}¦ {%praty-abhi-vad,%} Caus. A. {%-vāda-%}
{%yate, -yitum,%} to return a salute, greet in return.
<LEND>

<L>31677<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBivAda<k2>pratyaBivAda
{%Praty-abhivāda, as,%}¦ m. returning a salutation or
greeting; acknowledging a benediction.
<LEND>

<L>31678<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBivAdaka<k2>pratyaBivAdaka
{%Praty-abhivādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ returning a
salutation or greeting.
<LEND>

<L>31679<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBivAdana<k2>pratyaBivAdana
{%Praty-abhivādana, am,%}¦ n. returning a salutation
or greeting (Manu II. 126).
<LEND>

<L>31680<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBivAdayitf<k2>pratyaBivAdayitf
{%Praty-abhivādayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who re-
turns a salutation or greeting.
<LEND>

<L>31681<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaBiskandana<k2>pratyaBiskandana
{#pratyaBiskandana#}¦ {%praty-abhiskandana, am,%} n. a
counter plaint or charge, an accusation brought against
the accuser or plaintiff; [cf. {%praty-abhiyoga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>31682<pc>0625-c<k1>pratyaByanujYA<k2>pratyaByanujYA<h>1
{#pratyaByanujYA#} 1¦. {%praty-abhy-anu-jñā,%} cl. 9. P.
A. {%-jānāti, -jānīte, -jñātum,%} to dismiss any one
when taking leave.
<LEND>
[Page0626-a+ 69]

<L>31683<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyaByanujYA<k2>pratyaByanujYA<h>2
2. {%praty-abhyanujñā,%}¦ f., Ved. leave, permission.
<LEND>

<L>31684<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyaByanujYAta<k2>pratyaByanujYAta
{%Praty-abhyanujñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dismissed on
taking leave, allowed to depart.
<LEND>

<L>31685<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyamitra<k2>pratyamitra
{#pratyamitra#}¦ {%praty-amitra, as, ā, am,%} opposed
as an enemy, hostile; ({%as%}), m. an enemy, oppo-
nent, adversary.
<LEND>

<L>31686<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyaya<k2>pratyaya
{#pratyaya#}¦ {%praty-aya,%} &c. See {%pratī,%} p. 623.
<LEND>

<L>31687<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyayanastva<k2>pratyayanastva
{#pratyayanastva#}¦ {%pratyayanastva, am,%} n., Ved.
obtaining again, reobtaining, recovery.
<LEND>

<L>31688<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarA<k2>pratyarA
{#pratyarA#}¦ {%praty-arā,%} f., Ved. an intermediate
spoke of a wheel.
<LEND>

<L>31689<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyari<k2>pratyari
{#pratyari#}¦ {%praty-ari, is,%} m. a well-matched
opponent, equally powerful enemy.
<LEND>

<L>31690<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarka<k2>pratyarka
{#pratyarka#}¦ {%praty-arka, as,%} m. a mock sun,
parhelion.
<LEND>

<L>31691<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarc<k2>pratyarc
{#pratyarc#}¦ {%praty-arc,%} cl. 1. P. {%-arcati, -arcitum,%}
to shine towards, shine upon (Ved.): Caus. {%-arca-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to return a salutation (with acc.); to
salute one by one.
<LEND>

<L>31692<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarcana<k2>pratyarcana
{%Praty-arcana, am,%}¦ n. returning a salutation or
obeisance.
<LEND>

<L>31693<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarT<k2>pratyarT
{#pratyarT#}¦ {%praty-arth,%} cl. 10. P. {%-arthayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to seek (any one) as an opponent, challenge
(to combat).
<LEND>

<L>31694<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarTa<k2>pratyarTa
{%Praty-artha, as, ā, am,%}¦ useful, expedient; ({%am%}),
n. a reply, answer, counter representation; opposi-
tion, hostility; ({%am%}), ind. at every object, in every
case.
<LEND>

<L>31695<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarTaka<k2>pratyarTaka
{%Pratyarthaka, as,%}¦ m. an opponent, adversary.
<LEND>

<L>31696<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarTika<k2>pratyarTika
{%Pratyarthika, as, ā, am, = praty-arthin,%}¦ an
opponent (at the end of a comp.; cf. {%bahu-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>31697<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarTin<k2>pratyarTin
{%Praty-arthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hostile, inimical; opposing,
contradicting, rejecting; emulating; ({%ī%}), m. an
enemy, opponent, adversary, rival; (in law) a de-
fendant. {%—Pratyarthi-tā,%} f. or {%pratyarthi-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the state of a defendant at law. {%—Praty-%}
{%arthy-āvedana, am,%} n. (in a lawsuit) the verbal
information or deposition of the defendant which
is written down by the officers of the court.
<LEND>

<L>31698<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyard<k2>pratyard
{#pratyard#}¦ {%praty-ard,%} Caus. P. A. {%-ardayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to oppress or press hard in return,
assault in return, return an attack.
<LEND>

<L>31699<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarDi<k2>pratyarDi
{#pratyarDi#}¦ {%praty-ardhi, is, is, i%} (connected
with {%ardha%}), Ved. possessing half of (with gen.)?;
having equal claims, equal.
<LEND>

<L>31700<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarpaRa<k2>pratyarpaRa
{#pratyarpaRa#}¦ {%praty-arpaṇa, praty-arpaṇīya.%} See
under {%praty-ṛ,%} p. 629, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>31701<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarza<k2>pratyarza
{#pratyarza#}¦ {%praty-arṣa, as,%} m. (rt. {%ṛṣ%}), Ved.
(perhaps) the slope or side (of a hill).
<LEND>

<L>31702<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyarham<k2>pratyarham
{#pratyarham#}¦ {%praty-arham%} in {%yathā-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31703<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyavakarSana<k2>pratyavakarSana
{#pratyavakarSana#}¦ {%praty-avakarśana, as, ī, am%}
(fr. rt. {%kṛś%} with {%praty-ava%}), bringing down or
reducing to insignificance, baffling, annihilating.
<LEND>

<L>31704<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyavagam<k2>pratyavagam
{#pratyavagam#}¦ {%praty-ava-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gac-%}
{%chati, -gantum,%} to know one by one, recognise
severally.
<LEND>

<L>31705<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyavagrah<k2>pratyavagrah
{#pratyavagrah#}¦ {%praty-ava-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛh-%}
{%ṇāti, -gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} to draw back, withdraw,
resume, retract, revoke, recall.
<LEND>

<L>31706<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyavaDA<k2>pratyavaDA
{#pratyavaDA#}¦ {%praty-ava-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} Ved. to apply again.
<LEND>

<L>31707<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyavanejana<k2>pratyavanejana
{#pratyavanejana#}¦ {%praty-avanejana, am,%} n., Ved.
washing off again.
<LEND>

<L>31708<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyavaBuj<k2>pratyavaBuj
{#pratyavaBuj#}¦ {%praty-ava-bhuj%} (see rt. 1. {%bhuj%}),
cl. 6. P. {%-bhujati, -bhoktum,%} to bend back.
<LEND>

<L>31709<pc>0626-a<k1>pratyavamarSa<k2>pratyavamarSa
{#pratyavamarSa#}¦ {%praty-avamarśa, as,%} m. inner
contemplation, profound meditation; counsel, advice,
injunction; a counter conclusion; recollection [cf.
{%smṛti-p˚%}]; (sometimes less correctly spelt {%praty- %}
[Page0626-b+ 74]
{%avamarṣa.%}) {%—Pratyavamarśa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
absorbed in thought or reflection, meditative.
<LEND>

<L>31710<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavamarSana<k2>pratyavamarSana
{%Praty-avamarśana, am,%}¦ n. contemplation, re-
flection, pondering (according to a Scholiast {%= yuk-%}
{%tāyukta-vicāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>31711<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavamfz<k2>pratyavamfz
{#pratyavamfz#}¦ {%praty-ava-mṛṣ,%} cl. 4. 1. P. A.
{%-mṛṣyati, -te, -marṣati, -te, -marṣitum,%} to
endure reluctantly, suffer beyond endurance.
<LEND>

<L>31712<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavayavam<k2>pratyavayavam
{#pratyavayavam#}¦ {%praty-avayavam,%} ind. in every
part or particular, in detail. {%—Pratyavayava-var-%}
{%ṇana, am, ā,%} n. f. a detailed or minute description,
description of every part.
<LEND>

<L>31713<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavara<k2>pratyavara
{#pratyavara#}¦ {%praty-avara, as, ā, am,%} lower, more
insignificant, less honoured.
<LEND>

<L>31714<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavaruh<k2>pratyavaruh
{#pratyavaruh#}¦ {%praty-ava-ruh,%} Caus. P. {%-ropa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to descend from, bring down
from; to deprive of (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>31715<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavarUQi<k2>pratyavarUQi
{%Praty-avarūḍhi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. descending towards.
<LEND>

<L>31716<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavaropita<k2>pratyavaropita
{%Praty-avaropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to descend
from; deprived, bereft of.
<LEND>

<L>31717<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavaroha<k2>pratyavaroha
{%Praty-avaroha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. descending towards;
a descending series.
<LEND>

<L>31718<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavarohaRa<k2>pratyavarohaRa
{%Praty-avarohaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. descending
towards; N. of a particular Gṛhya festival in the
month Mārgaśīrṣa.
<LEND>

<L>31719<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavarohaRIya<k2>pratyavarohaRIya
{%Praty-avarohaṇīya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a particular
Ekāha sacrifice forming part of the Vājapeya.
<LEND>

<L>31720<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavarohin<k2>pratyavarohin
{%Praty-avarohin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. descending, mov-
ing downwards; moving or rising from a seat.
<LEND>

<L>31721<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavaroDana<k2>pratyavaroDana
{#pratyavaroDana#}¦ {%praty-avarodhana, am,%} n. ob-
struction, interruption.
<LEND>

<L>31722<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavasAna<k2>pratyavasAna
{#pratyavasAna#}¦ {%praty-avasāna, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%so%}
with {%praty-ava%}), consuming, consumption, eating.
<LEND>

<L>31723<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavasita<k2>pratyavasita
{%Praty-avasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ consumed, eaten.
<LEND>

<L>31724<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavaskanda<k2>pratyavaskanda
{#pratyavaskanda#}¦ {%praty-avaskanda, as,%} m. or {%pra-%}
{%ty-avaskandana, am,%} n. a special plea at law,
admitting a fact but qualifying or explaining it so
as not to allow it to be matter of accusation.
<LEND>

<L>31725<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavasTA<k2>pratyavasTA<h>1
{#pratyavasTA#} 1¦. {%praty-ava-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -sthātum,%} to stand alone or sepa-
rately; to attain to again, reattain, recover: Caus.
{%-sthāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to stand firm; (with
{%ātmānam%}) to collect one's self, recover.
<LEND>

<L>31726<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavasTA<k2>pratyavasTA<h>2
2. {%praty-avasthā,%}¦ f. {%= pary-avasthā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31727<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavasTAtf<k2>pratyavasTAtf
{%Praty-avasthātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. an opponent, adversary,
enemy.
<LEND>

<L>31728<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavasTAna<k2>pratyavasTAna
{%Praty-avasthāna, am,%}¦ n. removal, setting aside;
former state or place, status quo; opposition, hostility.
<LEND>

<L>31729<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavasTita<k2>pratyavasTita
{%Praty-avasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing separately.
<LEND>

<L>31730<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavahf<k2>pratyavahf
{#pratyavahf#}¦ {%praty-ava-hṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-hārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to take away; to suspend, interrupt.
<LEND>

<L>31731<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavahAra<k2>pratyavahAra
{%Praty-avahāra, as,%}¦ m. drawing back, withdraw-
ing, withdrawal; dissolution, reabsorption.
<LEND>

<L>31732<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavAp<k2>pratyavAp
{#pratyavAp#}¦ {%praty-avāp (prati-ava-āp),%} cl. 5. P.
{%-āpnoti, -āptum,%} to obtain back, reobtain, recover.
<LEND>

<L>31733<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyave<k2>pratyave
{#pratyave#}¦ {%praty-ave (prati-ava-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-avaiti, -avaitum,%} Ved. to go down towards, reach
in going downwards.
<LEND>

<L>31734<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavAya<k2>pratyavAya
{%Praty-avāya, as,%}¦ m. decrease, diminution, pri-
vation, detriment, harm; reverse, opposite course,
contrary course or proceeding, contrariety, opposition
(Manu IV. 245); annoyance, disagreeableness; dis-
appointment, disarrangement; offence, sin, sinfulness;
disappearance of anything that exists; non-production
of what does not exist.
<LEND>

<L>31735<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavekz<k2>pratyavekz
{#pratyavekz#}¦ {%praty-avekṣ (prati-ava-īkṣ),%} cl.
1. A. {%-avekṣate, -avekṣitum,%} to look towards,
look at; to view, inspect, look after; to regard,
have regard for.
<LEND>

<L>31736<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavekzaRa<k2>pratyavekzaRa
{%Praty-avekṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. or {%praty-avekṣā,%} f.
looking at, looking after, taking care of, care about.
<LEND>

<L>31737<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyavekzya<k2>pratyavekzya
{%Praty-avekṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked at, to
be regarded or considered, to be taken care of.
<LEND>

<L>31738<pc>0626-b<k1>pratyaSman<k2>pratyaSman
{#pratyaSman#}¦ {%praty-aśman, ā,%} m. red chalk.
<LEND>
[Page0626-c+ 73]

<L>31739<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyazWIlA<k2>pratyazWIlA
{#pratyazWIlA#}¦ {%praty-aṣṭhīlā,%} f. a kind of
nervous disease.
<LEND>

<L>31740<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyas<k2>pratyas<h>1
{#pratyas#} 1¦. {%praty-as%} (see rt. 1. {%as%}), cl. 2. P.
{%-asti,%} Ved. to be equal to, to be a match for; to
rival, emulate, vie with; (according to Sāy. {%= prati-%}
{%nidhir as.%})
<LEND>

<L>31741<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyas<k2>pratyas<h>2
{#pratyas#} 2¦. {%praty-as%} (see rt. 2. {%as%}), cl. 4. P.
{%-asyati, -asitum,%} to throw towards, throw down; to
turn over, turn round; to throw off, put away, let go.
<LEND>

<L>31742<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyastra<k2>pratyastra
{%Praty-astra, am,%}¦ n. a missile hurled in return.
<LEND>

<L>31743<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyastagamana<k2>pratyastagamana
{#pratyastagamana#}¦ {%praty-astagamana, am,%} n., Ved.
the setting (of the sun).
<LEND>

<L>31744<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyastamaya<k2>pratyastamaya
{%Praty-astamaya, as,%}¦ m. the setting (of the sun);
cessation, end, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>31745<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyah<k2>pratyah
{#pratyah#}¦ {%praty-ah,%} a defective verb only used
in the Perf. {%-āha,%} to say anything in the presence of
(with acc.); to relate anything (acc.) to any one
(acc.); to reply, answer.
<LEND>

<L>31746<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyaham<k2>pratyaham
{#pratyaham#}¦ {%praty-aham,%} ind. day by day, every
day, daily; in the morning.
<LEND>

<L>31747<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAkal<k2>pratyAkal
{#pratyAkal#}¦ {%praty-ā-kal,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kalayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to enumerate; to reproach, accuse, con-
demn (?).
<LEND>

<L>31748<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAkalita<k2>pratyAkalita
{%Praty-ākalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ enumerated; inter-
posed; introduced (as a step in legal process).
<LEND>

<L>31749<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAkANkz<k2>pratyAkANkz
{#pratyAkANkz#}¦ {%praty-ā-kāṅkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-kāṅkṣati, -te, -kāṅkṣitum,%} to be eagerly de-
sirous of, long for, expect, wait for, watch for.
<LEND>

<L>31750<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAkAra<k2>pratyAkAra
{#pratyAkAra#}¦ {%praty-ākāra, as,%} m. a scabbard,
sword-sheath.
<LEND>

<L>31751<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAkruS<k2>pratyAkruS
{#pratyAkruS#}¦ {%praty-ā-kruś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati,%}
{%-kroṣṭum,%} to shout in return; to revile or execrate
in turn, revile again.
<LEND>

<L>31752<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAkzepaka<k2>pratyAkzepaka
{#pratyAkzepaka#}¦ {%praty-ākṣepaka, as, ikā, am,%}
reviling in turn, reviling, jeering, deriding, derisive,
treating scornfully. {%—Pratyākṣepa-tva, am,%} n. de-
risiveness, abusiveness.
<LEND>

<L>31753<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAKyA<k2>pratyAKyA
{#pratyAKyA#}¦ {%praty-ā-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti,%}
{%-khyātum,%} to proclaim one by one (Ved.); to de-
cline, refuse, reject, disallow; to deny; to interdict; to
excel, surpass, outvie; to counteract (by remedies).
<LEND>

<L>31754<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAKyAta<k2>pratyAKyAta
{%Praty-ākhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ informed, apprised;
denied, disallowed, refused; discouraged, prohibited,
forbidden; removed, set aside; celebrated, notorious.
{%—Pratyākhyāta-tva, am,%} n. the being rejected or
refused; rejection.
<LEND>

<L>31755<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAKyAtf<k2>pratyAKyAtf
{%Praty-ākhyātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who refuses or
denies, a refuser, denier.
<LEND>

<L>31756<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAKyAna<k2>pratyAKyAna
{%Praty-ākhyāna, am,%}¦ n. refusal, denial, disallow-
ance; rejection, repulse; refutation; not admitting,
not accepting as true; disregard; reproach; N. of
one of the fourteen Pūrvas or most ancient writings
of the Jainas.
<LEND>

<L>31757<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAKyAyam<k2>pratyAKyAyam
{%Praty-ākhyāyam,%}¦ ind., Ved. having refuted or
rejected, having denied.
<LEND>

<L>31758<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAKyAyin<k2>pratyAKyAyin
{%Praty-ākhyāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. rejecting, refuting
(in {%a-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>31759<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAKyeya<k2>pratyAKyeya
{%Praty-ākhyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be declined or
refused; to be rejected or repulsed; to be refuted or
denied; not to be cured, incurable. {%—Pratyākhyeya-%}
{%tā,%} f. the being rejected; incurableness.
<LEND>

<L>31760<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAgam<k2>pratyAgam
{#pratyAgam#}¦ {%praty-ā-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to come back, come again, return; to
come to one's self, recover consciousness, revive.
<LEND>

<L>31761<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAgata<k2>pratyAgata
{%Praty-āgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ come back, come again,
returned; arrived at.
<LEND>

<L>31762<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAgati<k2>pratyAgati
{%Praty-āgati, is,%}¦ f. coming back, coming again,
return, coming home again.
<LEND>

<L>31763<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAgama<k2>pratyAgama
{%Praty-āgama, as,%}¦ m. coming back, coming again,
return; arrival. {%—Pratyāgamāvadhi (˚ma-av˚),%}
ind. till (my) return.
<LEND>

<L>31764<pc>0626-c<k1>pratyAgamana<k2>pratyAgamana
{%Praty-āgamana, am,%}¦ n. coming back, coming
again, return, coming home again.
<LEND>
[Page0627-a+ 70]

<L>31765<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAgAra<k2>pratyAgAra
{#pratyAgAra#}¦ {%praty-āgāra (?), as,%} m. former
place or state.
<LEND>

<L>31766<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAgF<k2>pratyAgF
{#pratyAgF#}¦ {%praty-ā-gṝ%} (see rt. 1. {%gṝ%}), cl. 9. P.
A. {%-gṛṇāti, -gṛṇīte, -garitum, -garītum,%} Ved.
to speak to in return, answer, respond.
<LEND>

<L>31767<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAGAta<k2>pratyAGAta
{#pratyAGAta#}¦ {%praty-āghāta, as,%} m. (fr. {%praty-%}
{%ā-han,%} q. v.), counter-stroke, reaction, repulse.
<LEND>

<L>31768<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAcakz<k2>pratyAcakz
{#pratyAcakz#}¦ {%praty-ā-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe,%}
{%-caṣṭum,%} to refuse, decline, reject; to repulse; to
answer.
<LEND>

<L>31769<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAcAra<k2>pratyAcAra
{#pratyAcAra#}¦ {%praty-ācāra, as,%} m. suitable be-
haviour, conformable conduct.
<LEND>

<L>31770<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAtan<k2>pratyAtan
{#pratyAtan#}¦ {%praty-ā-tan,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-tanoti,%}
{%-tanute, -tanitum,%} Ved. to extend in the direction
of (with acc.); to bend (a bow) against (with acc.);
to shine upon, irradiate.
<LEND>

<L>31771<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAtApa<k2>pratyAtApa
{#pratyAtApa#}¦ {%praty-ātāpa, as,%} m., Ved. a sunny
place.
<LEND>

<L>31772<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAtma<k2>pratyAtma
{#pratyAtma#}¦ {%praty-ātma, as, ā, am,%} every single,
each several; ({%am%}), ind. singly, severally.
<LEND>

<L>31773<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAtmaka<k2>pratyAtmaka
{%Pratyātmaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ belonging to one's self.
<LEND>

<L>31774<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAtmya<k2>pratyAtmya
{%Pratyātmya, am,%}¦ n. similarity with or resem-
blance to one's self.
<LEND>

<L>31775<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAdarSa<k2>pratyAdarSa
{#pratyAdarSa#}¦ {%praty-ādarśa, as,%} m. an image (?) ;
(perhaps only a wrong reading for {%praty-ādeśa,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>31776<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAdA<k2>pratyAdA
{#pratyAdA#}¦ {%praty-ā-dā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-datte, -dātum,%}
to receive back, get back; to take back, recall, revoke,
rescind; to draw forth from; to repeat (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>31777<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAdAna<k2>pratyAdAna
{%Praty-ādāna, am,%}¦ n. taking back anything given,
receiving back, resumption, reobtaining; repeating,
repetition (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>31778<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAditsu<k2>pratyAditsu
{%Praty-āditsu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), desirous of
retaking, intending to reobtain, wishing to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>31779<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAdeya<k2>pratyAdeya
{%Praty-ādeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be received back;
to be received, to be accepted.
<LEND>

<L>31780<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAditya<k2>pratyAditya
{#pratyAditya#}¦ {%praty-āditya, as,%} m. a mock sun,
parhelion; (at the beginning of a comp.) towards
the sun (e. g. {%pratyāditya-guda,%} one whose hinder
parts are towards the sun).
<LEND>

<L>31781<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAdiS<k2>pratyAdiS
{#pratyAdiS#}¦ {%praty-ā-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to enjoin upon, direct, prescribe, advise,
recommend; to warn, caution; to report anything
to (with acc.), report again; to summon; to coun-
termand; to reject, repel, repulse, deny, dismiss; to
decline, refuse; to conquer, overcome.
<LEND>

<L>31782<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAdizwa<k2>pratyAdizwa
{%Praty-ādiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ prescribed, recom-
mended; informed, apprised; declared; warned,
cautioned; rejected, repulsed; conquered, overcome;
removed, set aside.
<LEND>

<L>31783<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAdeSa<k2>pratyAdeSa
{%Praty-ādeśa, as,%}¦ m. order, command; informa-
tion, apprising, informing, annunciation, declaration;
warning, caution, supernatural warning; rejection,
disallowance, refusal, denial; reproach; putting to
shame, any one who puts another to shame, the
shamer of another; obscuring, rendering obscure.
<LEND>

<L>31784<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAdezwf<k2>pratyAdezwf
{%Praty-ādeṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who warns or
cautions.
<LEND>

<L>31785<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAdf<k2>pratyAdf
{#pratyAdf#}¦ {%praty-ā-dṛ,%} cl. 6. A. {%-driyate, -dar-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to show respect to.
<LEND>

<L>31786<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAdru<k2>pratyAdru
{#pratyAdru#}¦ {%praty-ā-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -dro-%}
{%tum,%} to run against, rush upon, assail (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31787<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyADAna<k2>pratyADAna
{#pratyADAna#}¦ {%praty-ādhāna, am,%} n., Ved. a
place where anything is deposited or laid up, a
repository.
<LEND>

<L>31788<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyADmAna<k2>pratyADmAna
{#pratyADmAna#}¦ {%praty-ādhmāna, am,%} n. a parti-
cular nervous disease, a kind of tympanites or wind-
dropsy.
<LEND>

<L>31789<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAnah<k2>pratyAnah
{#pratyAnah#}¦ {%praty-ā-nah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-nahyati,%}
{%-te, -naddhum,%} to put upon, cover with.
<LEND>

<L>31790<pc>0627-a<k1>pratyAnI<k2>pratyAnI
{#pratyAnI#}¦ {%praty-ā-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati, -te, %}
[Page0627-b+ 71]
{%netum,%} to lead or bring back, regain; to pour
again (Ved.); to fill up again: Desid. A. {%-ninīṣate,%}
to wish to bring back, try to rearrange.
<LEND>

<L>31791<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAnayana<k2>pratyAnayana
{%Praty-ānayana, am,%}¦ n. leading back, bringing
back again, giving back again, recovery.
<LEND>

<L>31792<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAninIzu<k2>pratyAninIzu
{%Praty-āninīṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of bringing
back.
<LEND>

<L>31793<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAnIta<k2>pratyAnIta
{%Praty-ānīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ led back, brought back.
<LEND>

<L>31794<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAneya<k2>pratyAneya
{%Praty-āneya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought back; to
be repaired, to be made good.
<LEND>

<L>31795<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyApad<k2>pratyApad
{#pratyApad#}¦ {%praty-ā-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to go back, return back.
<LEND>

<L>31796<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyApatti<k2>pratyApatti
{%Praty-āpatti, is,%}¦ f. return, going round again.
<LEND>

<L>31797<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyApanna<k2>pratyApanna
{%Praty-āpanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ restored, regained.
<LEND>

<L>31798<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyApIqa<k2>pratyApIqa
{#pratyApIqa#}¦ {%praty-āpīḍa, as,%} m. a kind of
metre.
<LEND>

<L>31799<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAplavana<k2>pratyAplavana
{#pratyAplavana#}¦ {%praty-āplavana, am,%} n. springing
or leaping back.
<LEND>

<L>31800<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAbrU<k2>pratyAbrU
{#pratyAbrU#}¦ {%praty-ā-brū,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bravīti,%} &c.,
to reply to, answer.
<LEND>

<L>31801<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyABU<k2>pratyABU
{#pratyABU#}¦ {%praty-ā-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bha-%}
{%vitum,%} Ved. to be at hand, be at one's command.
<LEND>

<L>31802<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAmnA<k2>pratyAmnA
{#pratyAmnA#}¦ {%praty-ā-mnā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-manati,%}
{%-mnātum,%} Ved. to recite or repeat after any one.
<LEND>

<L>31803<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAmnAtavya<k2>pratyAmnAtavya
{%Praty-āmnātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be rejected, to
be considered invalid or not binding.
<LEND>

<L>31804<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAmnAna<k2>pratyAmnAna
{%Praty-āmnāna, am,%}¦ n., Ved. contrary determina-
tion, altered purpose.
<LEND>

<L>31805<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAmnAya<k2>pratyAmnAya
{%Praty-āmnāya, as,%}¦ m. contrary or altered deter-
mination; the conclusion or fifth member of a com-
plete syllogism, the repetition of the first member
({%= ni-gamana%}).
<LEND>

<L>31806<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAya<k2>pratyAya
{#pratyAya#}¦ {%praty-āya, as,%} m. (fr. {%pratī,%} q. v.),
‘what comes in as revenue,’ toll, tax, tribute.
<LEND>

<L>31807<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAyaka<k2>pratyAyaka
{%Praty-āyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ making intelligible,
explaining, making clear, &c. See under {%pratī.%}
<LEND>

<L>31808<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAyana<k2>pratyAyana<h>1
1. {%praty-āyana, am,%}¦ n. leading home (a wife),
marrying; setting (of the sun); ({%am, ā%}), n. f. making
intelligible, analysing, explaining, explanation; prov-
ing, &c. See under {%pratī.%}
<LEND>

<L>31809<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAyita<k2>pratyAyita
{%Praty-āyita, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a confidential agent,
&c. See under {%pratī.%}
<LEND>

<L>31810<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAyitavya<k2>pratyAyitavya
{%Praty-āyitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made clear, to
be proved.
<LEND>

<L>31811<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyetavya<k2>pratyetavya
{%Praty-etavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be admitted or ac-
knowledged.
<LEND>

<L>31812<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAyana<k2>pratyAyana<h>2
{#pratyAyana#} 2¦. {%praty-āyana.%} See {%praty-e,%} p. 629.
<LEND>

<L>31813<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAyA<k2>pratyAyA
{#pratyAyA#}¦ {%praty-ā-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to go towards (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31814<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAramBa<k2>pratyAramBa
{#pratyAramBa#}¦ {%praty-ārambha, as,%} m. beginning
again, recommencement, second beginning; prohi-
bition.
<LEND>

<L>31815<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyArdrA<k2>pratyArdrA
{#pratyArdrA#}¦ {%praty-ārdrā,%} f., see Gaṇa Aṃśv-
ādi to Pāṇ. VI. 2, 193.
<LEND>

<L>31816<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyArDapura<k2>pratyArDapura
{#pratyArDapura#}¦ {%praty-ārdhapura,%} see Gaṇa Aṃśv-
ādi to Pāṇ. VI. 2, 193.
<LEND>

<L>31817<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAliNg<k2>pratyAliNg
{#pratyAliNg#}¦ {%praty-ā-liṅg,%} cl. 1. P. {%-liṅgati,%}
{%-liṅgitum,%} to embrace in return, return an embrace.
<LEND>

<L>31818<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAlIQa<k2>pratyAlIQa
{#pratyAlIQa#}¦ {%praty-ālīḍha, as, ā, am,%} eaten;
extended towards the left; ({%am%}), n. an attitude in shoot-
ing, the left foot advanced and right drawn back.
<LEND>

<L>31819<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAvft<k2>pratyAvft
{#pratyAvft#}¦ {%praty-ā-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
{%-vartitum,%} to come back, return.
<LEND>

<L>31820<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAvartana<k2>pratyAvartana
{%Praty-āvartana, am,%}¦ n. coming back, returning.
<LEND>

<L>31821<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAvftta<k2>pratyAvftta
{%Praty-āvṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come back, returned.
<LEND>

<L>31822<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyAvftya<k2>pratyAvftya
{%Praty-āvṛtya,%}¦ ind. having come back, having
returned.
<LEND>

<L>31823<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyASA<k2>pratyASA
{#pratyASA#}¦ {%praty-āśā,%} f. confidence, reliance,
trust, hope, expectation, desire.
<LEND>

<L>31824<pc>0627-b<k1>pratyASin<k2>pratyASin
{%Praty-āśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hoping, expecting, trusting,
relying upon.
<LEND>
[Page0627-c+ 73]

<L>31825<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyASraya<k2>pratyASraya
{#pratyASraya#}¦ {%praty-āśraya, as,%} m. a shelter,
refuge, dwelling.
<LEND>

<L>31826<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyASrAva<k2>pratyASrAva
{#pratyASrAva#}¦ {%praty-āśrāva, as,%} m. or {%praty-%}
{%āśrāvaṇa, am,%} n., Ved. an ejaculatory response,
a particular sacrificial formula.
<LEND>

<L>31827<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyASvas<k2>pratyASvas
{#pratyASvas#}¦ {%praty-ā-śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śvasiti,%}
{%-śvasitum,%} to breathe again, respire, take courage
again, take heart again.
<LEND>

<L>31828<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyASvasta<k2>pratyASvasta
{%Praty-āśvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ refreshed, revived,
reanimated; recollected.
<LEND>

<L>31829<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyASvAsa<k2>pratyASvAsa
{%Praty-āśvāsa, as,%}¦ m. breathing again, respiration,
recovery.
<LEND>

<L>31830<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyASvAsana<k2>pratyASvAsana
{%Praty-āśvāsana, am,%}¦ n. consolation.
<LEND>

<L>31831<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAs<k2>pratyAs
{#pratyAs#}¦ {%praty-ās,%} cl. 2. A. {%-āste, -āsitum,%}
Ved. to sit down opposite to or in the direction of
(with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31832<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAsaNkalita<k2>pratyAsaNkalita
{#pratyAsaNkalita#}¦ {%praty-āsaṅkalita, as, ā, am,%}
added to; ascertained, determined.
<LEND>

<L>31833<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAsaNga<k2>pratyAsaNga
{#pratyAsaNga#}¦ {%praty-āsaṅga, as,%} m., Ved. com-
bination, connection.
<LEND>

<L>31834<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAsad<k2>pratyAsad
{#pratyAsad#}¦ {%praty-ā-sad,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%-sīdati,%}
{%-sattum,%} to be near or close at hand.
<LEND>

<L>31835<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAsatti<k2>pratyAsatti
{%Praty-āsatti, is,%}¦ f. immediate proximity (in space,
time, &c.); close contact; analogy.
<LEND>

<L>31836<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAsanna<k2>pratyAsanna
{%Praty-āsanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ near at hand, close by,
near, proximate, contiguous; imminent. {%—Praty-%}
{%āsanna-tā,%} f. proximity, contiguity. {%—Pratyāsanna-%}
{%mṛtyu, us, us, u,%} one whose death is imminent,
at the point of death.
<LEND>

<L>31837<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAsara<k2>pratyAsara
{#pratyAsara#}¦ {%praty-āsara = praty-āsāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>31838<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAsAra<k2>pratyAsAra
{#pratyAsAra#}¦ {%praty-āsāra, as,%} m. the rear of
an army; a form of array (?).
<LEND>

<L>31839<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAstAra<k2>pratyAstAra
{#pratyAstAra#}¦ {%praty-āstāra, as,%} m. the carpet
of a Buddhist Bhikṣu.
<LEND>

<L>31840<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAsvara<k2>pratyAsvara
{#pratyAsvara#}¦ {%praty-āsvara, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%svṛ%} with {%praty-ā%}), Ved. reflecting (light).
<LEND>

<L>31841<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAhan<k2>pratyAhan
{#pratyAhan#}¦ {%praty-ā-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti%} (Perf.
A. {%-jaghne%}), {%-hantum,%} to drive back, keep off,
ward off, parry.
<LEND>

<L>31842<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAhata<k2>pratyAhata
{%Praty-āhata, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven back, repelled,
repulsed, resisted.
<LEND>

<L>31843<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAhAra<k2>pratyAhAra
{#pratyAhAra#}¦ {%praty-āhāra.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>31844<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAhf<k2>pratyAhf
{#pratyAhf#}¦ {%praty-ā-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati,%}
{%-te, -hartum,%} to take back again, draw back, with-
draw, recover; to utter (a speech); to cry; to report.
<LEND>

<L>31845<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAharaRa<k2>pratyAharaRa
{%Praty-āharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. bringing back; taking
back, recovery; drawing back, keeping back, with-
holding; withdrawing the senses from external ob-
jects, restraining the organs of sense.
<LEND>

<L>31846<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAharaRIya<k2>pratyAharaRIya
{%Praty-āharaṇīya%}¦ or {%praty-āhartavya, as, ā, am,%}
to be taken back, resumable; to be withheld; to be
restrained or controlled.
<LEND>

<L>31847<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAharat<k2>pratyAharat
{%Praty-āharat, an, antī, at,%}¦ drawing back, with-
drawing; altering.
<LEND>

<L>31848<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAhAra<k2>pratyAhAra
{%Praty-āhāra, as,%}¦ m. drawing back (troops from
a battle), marching back, retreat; withholding; with-
drawing the senses from external objects, restraint of
the organs of sense, abstraction; the reabsorption or
dissolution of the world; (in grammar) the compre-
hension of a series of letters or affixes into one
syllable effected by combining the first member of
the series without its indicatory letter or letters with
the indicatory final consonant of the last member, a
group or class of letters so combined (for the concise
expression of grammatical rules; thus the Praty-
āhāra {%ac%} is the technical term for the letters {%a, i, u,%}
{%ṛ, ḷ, e, o, ai, au,%} or all the vowels, and the
Praty-āhāra {%hal%} is the term for all the consonants);
compendium, abridgment; substitution (?).
<LEND>

<L>31849<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAhArya<k2>pratyAhArya
{%Praty-āhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken back; to be
withheld or withdrawn; to be received; to be learned.
<LEND>

<L>31850<pc>0627-c<k1>pratyAhfta<k2>pratyAhfta
{%Praty-āhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ resumed; restrained;
withheld.
<LEND>
[Page0628-a+ 71]

<L>31851<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyAhftya<k2>pratyAhftya
{%Praty-āhṛtya,%}¦ ind. having drawn back, having
recovered or taken back.
<LEND>

<L>31852<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyukta<k2>pratyukta
{#pratyukta#}¦ {%praty-ukta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%prati-vac%}),
said in return, replied, answered; ({%am%}), n. an answer.
<LEND>

<L>31853<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyukti<k2>pratyukti
{%Praty-ukti, is,%}¦ f. a reply, answer, rejoinder.
<LEND>

<L>31854<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyuccar<k2>pratyuccar
{#pratyuccar#}¦ {%praty-uc-car (prati-ud-car),%} Caus.
P. {%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to rouse up, excite, urge.
<LEND>

<L>31855<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyuccAra<k2>pratyuccAra
{%Praty-uccāra, as,%}¦ m. or {%praty-uccāraṇa, am,%}
n. repeating, repetition.
<LEND>

<L>31856<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyuccArya<k2>pratyuccArya
{%Praty-uccārya,%}¦ ind. having roused, having ex-
cited or urged.
<LEND>

<L>31857<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyujjIv<k2>pratyujjIv
{#pratyujjIv#}¦ {%praty-uj-jīv (prati-ud-jīv),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-jīvati, -jīvitum,%} to return to life, revive: Caus.
{%-jīvayati, -yitum,%} to restore to life, revivify, resus-
citate, reanimate.
<LEND>

<L>31858<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyujjIvana<k2>pratyujjIvana
{%Praty-ujjīvana, am,%}¦ n. coming to life again,
reviving; restoring to life, revivifying.
<LEND>

<L>31859<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyuta<k2>pratyuta
{#pratyuta#}¦ {%praty-uta,%} ind. on the contrary,
rather, aye, even; on the other hand, otherwise.
<LEND>

<L>31860<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyutkarza<k2>pratyutkarza
{#pratyutkarza#}¦ {%praty-utkarṣa, as,%} m. enhancing,
overcharging raising prices.
<LEND>

<L>31861<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyutkrama<k2>pratyutkrama
{#pratyutkrama#}¦ {%praty-utkrama, as,%} m. or {%praty-%}
{%utkramaṇa, am,%} n. or {%praty-utkrānti, is,%} f. un-
dertaking; an act or effort made for a certain purpose
or tending to a main object; the first step or measure
in any business; setting out to assail an enemy;
declaration of war.
<LEND>

<L>31862<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyuttabDi<k2>pratyuttabDi
{#pratyuttabDi#}¦ {%praty-uttabdhi, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%stambh%}
with {%prati-ud%}), Ved. upholding, propping up, stay-
ing, supporting, fixing.
<LEND>

<L>31863<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyuttamBa<k2>pratyuttamBa
{%Praty-uttambha, as,%}¦ m. {%= praty-uttabdhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>31864<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyuttara<k2>pratyuttara
{#pratyuttara#}¦ {%praty-uttara, am,%} n. a reply to an
answer, rejoinder, answer.
<LEND>

<L>31865<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyuttF<k2>pratyuttF
{#pratyuttF#}¦ {%praty-ut-tṝ (prati-ud-tṝ),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-tarati, -taritum, -tarītum,%} to emerge (from the
water); to betake one's self to (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31866<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyutTA<k2>pratyutTA
{#pratyutTA#}¦ {%praty-ut-thā (prati-ud-sthā),%} cl. 1.
P. A. {%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -thātum,%} to rise up before,
rise to salute.
<LEND>

<L>31867<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyutTAna<k2>pratyutTAna
{%Praty-utthāna, am,%}¦ n. rising from a seat as a
mark of respect, rising to welcome a visitor, respectful
reception (Manu II. 210); making preparations for,
undertaking.
<LEND>

<L>31868<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyutTAyin<k2>pratyutTAyin
{%Praty-utthāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. rising again.
<LEND>

<L>31869<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyutTita<k2>pratyutTita
{%Praty-utthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen to meet or to
encounter.
<LEND>

<L>31870<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyutTeya<k2>pratyutTeya
{%Praty-uttheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be honoured
or saluted by rising from the seat.
<LEND>

<L>31871<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyutpanna<k2>pratyutpanna
{#pratyutpanna#}¦ {%praty-utpanna, as, ā, am,%} existing
at the present moment, present; prompt, ready; re-
produced, regenerated; (in arithmetic) produced by
multiplication, multiplied; ({%am%}), n. multiplication;
the product of a sum in multiplication. {%—Pratyut-%}
{%panna-jāti, is,%} f. (in arithmetic) assimilation of
fractional increase. {%—Pratyutpanna-mati, is, is, i,%}
ready-minded, having presence of mind or a prompt
understanding; quick, subtle, sharp; confident, bold,
arrogant. {%—Pratyutpannamati-tva, am,%} n. presence
of mind.
<LEND>

<L>31872<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyudAhf<k2>pratyudAhf
{#pratyudAhf#}¦ {%praty-ud-ā-hṛ (prati-),%} cl. 1. P.
A. {%-harati, -te, -hartum,%} to speak in return, reply,
answer.
<LEND>

<L>31873<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyudAharaRa<k2>pratyudAharaRa
{%Praty-udāharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a contrary example,
instance to the contrary, counter example or illustra-
tion; [cf. {%ud-āharaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>31874<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyudAhfta<k2>pratyudAhfta
{%Praty-udāhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ called, named.
<LEND>

<L>31875<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyudi<k2>pratyudi
{#pratyudi#}¦ {%praty-ud-i (prati-),%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti,%}
{%-etum,%} to rise and go towards, to go out towards;
to ascend.
<LEND>

<L>31876<pc>0628-a<k1>pratyudIkz<k2>pratyudIkz
{#pratyudIkz#}¦ {%praty-ud-īkṣ (prati-),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-īkṣate, -īkṣitum,%} to look up at, look at, perceive.
<LEND>
[Page0628-b+ 72]

<L>31877<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudgam<k2>pratyudgam
{#pratyudgam#}¦ {%praty-ud-gam,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also
A.) {%-gacchati (-te), -gantum,%} to go out towards,
advance towards, go forth against, go out to meet
(a friend or an enemy).
<LEND>

<L>31878<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudgata<k2>pratyudgata
{%Praty-udgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone out towards;
gone forth against; met; risen as from a seat.
<LEND>

<L>31879<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudgati<k2>pratyudgati
{%Praty-udgati, is,%}¦ f. or {%praty-udgama, as,%} m.
or {%praty-udgamana, am,%} n. going forth towards,
going out to meet (especially to meet a guest);
rising from a seat as a mark of respect.
<LEND>

<L>31880<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudgamanIya<k2>pratyudgamanIya
{%Praty-udgamanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be met re-
spectfully; to be worshipped or reverenced; fit or
suitable for the respectful salutation of a guest; ({%am%}),
n. a clean suit of clothes or pair of garments, the
upper and lower garments as worn at meals, &c.
<LEND>

<L>31881<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudgA<k2>pratyudgA
{#pratyudgA#}¦ {%praty-ud-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti,%} &c.,
Ved. to rise before or opposite to (as the sun).
<LEND>

<L>31882<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudgAra<k2>pratyudgAra
{#pratyudgAra#}¦ {%praty-udgāra, as,%} m. a kind of
nervous disease.
<LEND>

<L>31883<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudgE<k2>pratyudgE
{#pratyudgE#}¦ {%praty-ud-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gā-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to answer by singing, sing a response.
<LEND>

<L>31884<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudgrah<k2>pratyudgrah
{#pratyudgrah#}¦ {%praty-ud-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛh-%}
{%ṇāti, -gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} Ved. to set aside, dismiss.
<LEND>

<L>31885<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudGAta<k2>pratyudGAta
{#pratyudGAta#}¦ {%praty-udghāta,%} probably an error
for {%praty-udyāta,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31886<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudDf<k2>pratyudDf
{#pratyudDf#}¦ {%praty-ud-dhṛ (-ud-hṛ),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ha-%}
{%rati, -hartum,%} to raise or lift up again, extricate.
<LEND>

<L>31887<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudDaraRa<k2>pratyudDaraRa
{%Praty-uddharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. raising up again; re-
covering, reobtaining.
<LEND>

<L>31888<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudDfta<k2>pratyudDfta
{%Praty-uddhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ recovered, reobtained.
<LEND>

<L>31889<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudyama<k2>pratyudyama
{#pratyudyama#}¦ {%praty-udyama, as,%} m. counter-
balance, counterpoise, equipoise; ({%as, ā, am%}), coun-
terbalancing.
<LEND>

<L>31890<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudyamin<k2>pratyudyamin
{%Praty-udyamin%}¦ or {%praty-udyāmin, ī, inī, i,%}
Ved. maintaining an equipoise, counterbalancing;
resisting, refractory.
<LEND>

<L>31891<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudyA<k2>pratyudyA
{#pratyudyA#}¦ {%praty-ud-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to rise up and go towards or against, rise to meet;
to go out to meet, go to meet.
<LEND>

<L>31892<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudyAta<k2>pratyudyAta
{%Praty-udyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ met, saluted, welcomed,
received (as a guest); encountered.
<LEND>

<L>31893<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudyAtf<k2>pratyudyAtf
{%Praty-udyātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ going forth against,
attacking, an assailant.
<LEND>

<L>31894<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyudvraj<k2>pratyudvraj
{#pratyudvraj#}¦ {%praty-ud-vraj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vrajati,%}
{%-vrajitum,%} to go towards, go out to meet.
<LEND>

<L>31895<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyunnamana<k2>pratyunnamana
{#pratyunnamana#}¦ {%praty-unnamana, am,%} n. rising
again, springing up again.
<LEND>

<L>31896<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyunmiz<k2>pratyunmiz
{#pratyunmiz#}¦ {%praty-un-miṣ (prati-ud-miṣ),%}
cl. 6. P. {%-miṣati, -meṣitum,%} ‘to open the eyes
upon,’ to rise or shine forth upon (as the sun); to
break forth.
<LEND>

<L>31897<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyupakf<k2>pratyupakf
{#pratyupakf#}¦ {%praty-upa-kṛ,%} cl. 8. A. {%-kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to do a service in return, return a friendly
office, requite a favour; to repay.
<LEND>

<L>31898<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyupakAra<k2>pratyupakAra
{%Praty-upakāra, as,%}¦ m. requital of aid or assist-
ance, mutual assistance; returning a service or favour,
return of a kindness, gratitude.
<LEND>

<L>31899<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyupakArin<k2>pratyupakArin
{%Praty-upakārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ requiting a favour,
returning a kindness, grateful.
<LEND>

<L>31900<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyupakriyA<k2>pratyupakriyA
{%Praty-upakriyā,%}¦ f. requital of a favour, return of
a service.
<LEND>

<L>31901<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyupagam<k2>pratyupagam
{#pratyupagam#}¦ {%praty-upa-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gac-%}
{%chati, -gantum,%} to come near, approach, meet.
<LEND>

<L>31902<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyupagata<k2>pratyupagata
{%Praty-upagata, as, ā, am,%}¦ come near to, ap-
proached, met.
<LEND>

<L>31903<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyupadiS<k2>pratyupadiS
{#pratyupadiS#}¦ {%praty-upa-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to explain singly or severally; to teach
in return, advise or caution in return.
<LEND>

<L>31904<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyupadizwa<k2>pratyupadizwa
{%Praty-upadiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ advised or cautioned
in return.
<LEND>

<L>31905<pc>0628-b<k1>pratyupadeSa<k2>pratyupadeSa
{%Praty-upadeśa, as,%}¦ m. teaching or instructing in
return, advice or admonition in return.
<LEND>
[Page0628-c+ 70]

<L>31906<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupadru<k2>pratyupadru
{#pratyupadru#}¦ {%praty-upa-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati,%}
{%-drotum,%} to rush against, fall upon, assail (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31907<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupaDA<k2>pratyupaDA
{#pratyupaDA#}¦ {%praty-upa-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} Ved. to put or place upon,
cover.
<LEND>

<L>31908<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupapanna<k2>pratyupapanna
{#pratyupapanna#}¦ {%praty-upapanna, pratyupapan-%}
{%na-mati, = praty-utpanna, pratyutpanna-mati,%}
q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>31909<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupaBuj<k2>pratyupaBuj
{#pratyupaBuj#}¦ {%praty-upa-bhuj,%} cl. 7. A. {%-bhuṅkte,%}
{%-bhoktum,%} to eat up, consume, eat.
<LEND>

<L>31910<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupaBoga<k2>pratyupaBoga
{%Praty-upabhoga, as,%}¦ m. enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>31911<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupamAna<k2>pratyupamAna
{#pratyupamAna#}¦ {%praty-upamāna, am,%} n. the coun-
terpart of a likeness or resemblance, copy, model,
pattern; a counter comparison.
<LEND>

<L>31912<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupayA<k2>pratyupayA
{#pratyupayA#}¦ {%praty-upa-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yā-%}
{%tum,%} to go again towards, return.
<LEND>

<L>31913<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupalabDa<k2>pratyupalabDa
{#pratyupalabDa#}¦ {%praty-upalabdha, as, ā, am,%} gained
back, regained. {%—Pratyupalabdha-cetas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} recovering the senses.
<LEND>

<L>31914<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupaviS<k2>pratyupaviS
{#pratyupaviS#}¦ {%praty-upa-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati,%}
{%-veṣṭum,%} to sit down opposite to.
<LEND>

<L>31915<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupaveSa<k2>pratyupaveSa
{%Praty-upaveśa, as,%}¦ m. or {%praty-upaveśana, am,%}
n. surrounding or besetting any one in order to
bring him to compliance.
<LEND>

<L>31916<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupasTAna<k2>pratyupasTAna
{#pratyupasTAna#}¦ {%praty-upasthāna, am,%} n. prox-
imity, vicinity, neighbourhood.
<LEND>

<L>31917<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupasparSana<k2>pratyupasparSana
{#pratyupasparSana#}¦ {%praty-upasparśana, am,%} n.,
Ved. rinsing or washing again.
<LEND>

<L>31918<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupahava<k2>pratyupahava
{#pratyupahava#}¦ {%praty-upahava, as,%} m., Ved. a
response to an invitatory formula or the repetition
of an invitatory ejaculation.
<LEND>

<L>31919<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupahAra<k2>pratyupahAra
{#pratyupahAra#}¦ {%praty-upahāra, as,%} m. placing
again in any one's hands, giving back, restitution;
({%as, ā, am%}), handing back, restoring.
<LEND>

<L>31920<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupAkaraRa<k2>pratyupAkaraRa
{#pratyupAkaraRa#}¦ {%praty-upākaraṇa, am,%} n., Ved.
recommencing the reading (of the Veda), resumption
of study (?).
<LEND>

<L>31921<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupADA<k2>pratyupADA
{#pratyupADA#}¦ {%praty-upā-dhā (prati-upa-ā-dhā),%}
cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to attain
to again, regain, recover.
<LEND>

<L>31922<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupe<k2>pratyupe
{#pratyupe#}¦ {%praty-upe (prati-upa-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-upaiti, -upaitum,%} Ved. to approach again.
<LEND>

<L>31923<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupeya<k2>pratyupeya
{%Praty-upeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be met; to be dealt
with or treated in turn, to be requited.
<LEND>

<L>31924<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyupta<k2>pratyupta
{#pratyupta#}¦ {%praty-upta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%prati-vap%}),
inserted, set, inlaid, studded; sown.
<LEND>

<L>31925<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyurasa<k2>pratyurasa
{#pratyurasa#}¦ {%praty-urasa, am,%} n. {%= pratigatam%}
{%uraḥ; (am),%} ind. against the breast, upon the breast.
<LEND>

<L>31926<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyulUka<k2>pratyulUka
{#pratyulUka#}¦ {%praty-ulūka, as,%} m. a bird resem-
bling an owl; (according to a Scholiast) a hostile
owl, or a crow regarded as the enemy of the owl.
<LEND>

<L>31927<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyulUkaka<k2>pratyulUkaka
{%Pratyulūkaka, as,%}¦ m. a bird resembling an owl.
<LEND>

<L>31928<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyuz<k2>pratyuz
{#pratyuz#}¦ {%praty-uṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-oṣati, -oṣitum,%}
Ved. to singe, scorch.
<LEND>

<L>31929<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyuzwa<k2>pratyuzwa
{%Praty-uṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. burnt or consumed
one by one, (according to Mahī-dhara {%= pratyekaṃ%}
{%dagdha.%})
<LEND>

<L>31930<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyuzya<k2>pratyuzya
{%Praty-uṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be singed or
scorched.
<LEND>

<L>31931<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyuza<k2>pratyuza
{#pratyuza#}¦ {%praty-uṣa, as,%} m. or {%praty-uṣas,%}
{%as,%} n. morning twilight, early morning, day-break,
dawn; the morning.
<LEND>

<L>31932<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyUza<k2>pratyUza
{%Praty-ūṣa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. morning twilight,
day-break, dawn, morning; ({%as%}), m. one of the
eight demigods called Vasus; the sun; N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>31933<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyUzas<k2>pratyUzas
{%Praty-ūṣas, as,%}¦ n. morning twilight, day-break,
dawn, morning.
<LEND>

<L>31934<pc>0628-c<k1>pratyUrDvam<k2>pratyUrDvam
{#pratyUrDvam#}¦ {%praty-ūrdhvam,%} ind. on the upper
side of, above.
<LEND>
[Page0629-a+ 75]

<L>31935<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyUh<k2>pratyUh
{#pratyUh#}¦ {%praty-ūh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ūhati, -te,%}
{%-ūhitum,%} to push back; to keep off, ward off; to
reject, refuse; to strip, strip off; to outstrip, surpass,
excel; to interrupt; to disturb; to offer up, present.
<LEND>

<L>31936<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyUha<k2>pratyUha
{%Praty-ūha, as,%}¦ m. an obstacle, impediment.
<LEND>

<L>31937<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyUhana<k2>pratyUhana
{%Praty-ūhana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. interruption; leaving
off, discontinuance.
<LEND>

<L>31938<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyf<k2>pratyf
{#pratyf#}¦ {%praty-ṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-arpayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to go towards, throw towards; to fasten,
fix, put on; to cause to go back, render up, deliver
back, give back, restore, return; to give again.
<LEND>

<L>31939<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyarpaRa<k2>pratyarpaRa
{%Praty-arpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. giving back, restoring,
delivering back, returning.
<LEND>

<L>31940<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyarpaRIya<k2>pratyarpaRIya
{%Praty-arpaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given back,
to be returned or restored, to be delivered back.
<LEND>

<L>31941<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyarpita<k2>pratyarpita
{%Praty-arpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fastened, fixed, put on;
delivered back, restored, returned.
<LEND>

<L>31942<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyfta<k2>pratyfta
{%Praty-ṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. inserted.
<LEND>

<L>31943<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyfcam<k2>pratyfcam
{#pratyfcam#}¦ {%praty-ṛcam,%} ind., Ved. at each
verse, in each verse.
<LEND>

<L>31944<pc>0629-a<k1>pratye<k2>pratye
{#pratye#}¦ {%praty-e (prati-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-aiti,%}
{%-aitum,%} to come back, return to (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>31945<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyAyana<k2>pratyAyana<h>2
2. {%praty-āyana, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. see under {%pratī,%}
p. 623), setting (of the sun).
<LEND>

<L>31946<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyetya<k2>pratyetya
{%Praty-etya,%}¦ ind. having come back, having re-
turned.
<LEND>

<L>31947<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyeka<k2>pratyeka
{#pratyeka#}¦ {%praty-eka, as, ā, am,%} each one, each
single one, every one; ({%am%}), ind. one by one, one
at a time, singly, severally; for every single one.
{%—Pratyeka-buddha, as,%} m. a Buddha who lives
in seclusion and obtains emancipation for himself
only (as opposed to those Buddhas who liberate
others also). {%—Pratyekabuddha-tva, am,%} n. the
state of a Pratyeka Buddha. {%—Pratyeka-śas,%} ind.
one by one, singly, severally.
<LEND>

<L>31948<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyetavya<k2>pratyetavya
{#pratyetavya#}¦ {%praty-etavya.%} See under {%praty-%}
{%āya,%} p. 627, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>31949<pc>0629-a<k1>pratyenas<k2>pratyenas
{#pratyenas#}¦ {%praty-enas, ās,%} m., Ved. an officer
of justice, punisher of criminals; a surety, the heir
nearest of kin who is responsible for the debts of a
deceased person.
<LEND>

<L>31950<pc>0629-a<k1>pratras<k2>pratras
{#pratras#}¦ {%pra-tras,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-trasati, -tras-%}
{%yati, -trasitum,%} to flee in terror: Caus. {%-trāsayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to frighten or scare away.
<LEND>

<L>31951<pc>0629-a<k1>pratrAsa<k2>pratrAsa
{%Pra-trāsa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. trembling, fear.
<LEND>

<L>31952<pc>0629-a<k1>pratvakzas<k2>pratvakzas
{#pratvakzas#}¦ {%pra-tvakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
active, strong, vigorous; epithet of the Maruts and
Indra; (Sāy.) {%= śatru-ghātin,%} destroying the enemy.
<LEND>

<L>31953<pc>0629-a<k1>pratvar<k2>pratvar
{#pratvar#}¦ {%pra-tvar,%} cl. 1. A. {%-tvarate, -tvari-%}
{%tum,%} to hasten forwards, hasten, speed, make haste.
<LEND>

<L>31954<pc>0629-a<k1>pratUrRa<k2>pratUrRa
{%Pra-tūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ quick, fleet.
<LEND>

<L>31955<pc>0629-a<k1>pratUrta<k2>pratUrta
{%Pra-tūrta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. hastening, speeding.
<LEND>

<L>31956<pc>0629-a<k1>pratUrtaka<k2>pratUrtaka
{%Pratūrtaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ containing the word {%pra-%}
{%tūrta.%}
<LEND>

<L>31957<pc>0629-a<k1>pratUrti<k2>pratUrti
{%Pra-tūrti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. rapid or violent motion,
undulatory motion, haste, speed; (Sāy.) {%= prakṛṣṭa-%}
{%hiṃsana,%} excessive violence; ({%is, is, i%}), hastening,
rapid, violent.
<LEND>

<L>31958<pc>0629-a<k1>praT<k2>praT<h>1
{#praT#} 1¦. {%prath,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%prathati, -te,%}
{%paprātha, paprathe, prathiṣyate, a-%}
{%prathiṣṭa, prathitum,%} (P.) to spread, extend
(trans.), prolong (Ved.); (P. A.) to spread, stretch,
extend (intrans.); (A.) to become larger or wider,
increase; to be spread abroad (said of fame, of a
name, of a speech or rumour); to become well
known, become famous or celebrated; to come to
light, appear, arise; to occur (to the mind): Caus.
P. A. {%prathayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%apaprathat,%} to
spread, stretch, extend (trans.); to increase, augment,
enhance, aggrandize; to spread abroad, proclaim,
celebrate; to bring to light; to unfold, disclose, reveal,
display, show, manifest, evince, to shine upon, give
light to (with acc., Ṛg-veda III. 14, 4); (A.) to
stretch, extend, increase (intrans., Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>31959<pc>0629-a<k1>praTa<k2>praTa
{%Pratha, as,%}¦ m. (said to be the) N. of the author
[Page0629-b+ 80]
of Ṛg-veda X. 181, 1; ({%ā%}), f. spreading out; fame,
celebrity, notoriety (e. g. {%pṛthu-pratha,%} far-famed).
{%—Prathāpaha (˚thā-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} destroying
fame, destructive to celebrity.
<LEND>

<L>31960<pc>0629-b<k1>praTana<k2>praTana
{%Prathana, as,%}¦ m. the plant Phaseolus Mungo
[cf. {%pra-ghana%}]; ({%am%}), n. spreading, extension;
scattering; throwing, projecting; a place where any-
thing is spread; displaying, showing; celebrating.
<LEND>

<L>31961<pc>0629-b<k1>praTayat<k2>praTayat<h>1
1. {%prathayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ spreading out, ex-
tending; bringing to light, displaying, making mani-
fest; seeing, beholding.
<LEND>

<L>31962<pc>0629-b<k1>praTayitf<k2>praTayitf
{%Prathayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who spreads or
extends; one who proclaims, a proclaimer.
<LEND>

<L>31963<pc>0629-b<k1>praTas<k2>praTas
{%Prathas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. width, extension. {%—Pra-%}
{%thas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. wide, spacious.
<LEND>

<L>31964<pc>0629-b<k1>praTita<k2>praTita
{%Prathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stretched, spread; scattered;
extended, increased; made known, published, openly
announced, declared; famed, famous, celebrated, re-
nowned; disclosed, shown, manifested, evinced; in-
tent upon, engaged in, occupied by, devoted to;
({%as%}), m., N. of one of the sons of Manu Svārociṣa.
{%—Prathita-tva, am,%} n. the being known or famous,
celebrity. {%—Prathita-vidiśā-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}
renowned under the title of Vidiśā. {%—Prathitānurāga%}
{%(˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} manifesting or evincing affection.
<LEND>

<L>31965<pc>0629-b<k1>praTiti<k2>praTiti
{%Prathiti, is,%}¦ f. celebrity, notoriety.
<LEND>

<L>31966<pc>0629-b<k1>praTiman<k2>praTiman
{%Prathiman, ā,%}¦ m. extension, width, breadth,
greatness, magnitude.
<LEND>

<L>31967<pc>0629-b<k1>praTimin<k2>praTimin
{%Prathimin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having size or magnitude,
large, great; ({%inī%}), f., see Scholiast on Pāṇ. V.
2, 137.
<LEND>

<L>31968<pc>0629-b<k1>praTivI<k2>praTivI
{%Prathivī,%}¦ f. the earth; (probably an incorrect
form for {%pṛthivī.%})
<LEND>

<L>31969<pc>0629-b<k1>praTizWa<k2>praTizWa
{%Prathiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%pṛthu%}),
broadest, widest, largest, very large or great, most
extended.
<LEND>

<L>31970<pc>0629-b<k1>praTIyas<k2>praTIyas
{%Prathīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%pṛthu%}),
larger, broader, wider, more extended, very large.
<LEND>

<L>31971<pc>0629-b<k1>praTu<k2>praTu
{%Prathu, us, us, u, = pṛthu,%}¦ wide, wide spread;
an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>31972<pc>0629-b<k1>praTuka<k2>praTuka
{%Prathuka, as,%}¦ m. {%= pṛthuka,%} the young of any
animal.
<LEND>

<L>31973<pc>0629-b<k1>praT<k2>praT<h>2
{#praT#} 2¦. {%prath%} or {%pṛth,%} cl. 10. P. {%prātha-%}
{%yati%} or {%parthayati, -yitum,%} to throw,
cast; to extend.
<LEND>

<L>31974<pc>0629-b<k1>prATayat<k2>prATayat<h>2
2. {%prāthayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ throwing, casting.
<LEND>

<L>31975<pc>0629-b<k1>praTama<k2>praTama
{#praTama#}¦ {%prathama, as, ā, am%} (connected with
1. {%pra;%} said to be fr. rt. 1. {%prath,%} Uṇādi-s. V. 68;
declined as a pronominal in Atharva-veda VI. 18, 1;
according to Pāṇ. I. 1, 33, the declension follows
{%Śiva%} except in the nom. pl. m. which may option-
ally be {%prathame%} or {%prathamās%}), foremost, first,
the first in a series ({%= ādi, pūrva%}); earliest, most
ancient, primary, original; preceding, previous, prior,
earlier, former (sometimes translatable adverbially,
e. g. {%prathamo nivṛttaḥ,%} returned first; {%prathame%}
{%preṣitā dūtāḥ,%} messengers sent previously); first,
chief, principal, most excellent, most eminent or
distinguished, matchless, incomparable; ({%as%}), m.,
scil. {%varṇa,%} the first consonant of a Varga, a hard
letter ({%= varga-p˚%}); scil. {%puruṣa,%} the first (= in
European grammars the third) person, a termination
of the first (or according to European grammars
third) person; scil. {%svara,%} the first tone (in gram-
mar); ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%vibhakti,%} the first or nominative
case, a termination of the first or nominative case;
({%e%}), f. du., scil. {%vibhaktī,%} the first two cases, the
terminations of the first two cases; ({%am%}), ind. first,
firstly, at first, for the first time (opposed to {%cara-%}
{%mam%}); just, newly, recently; at once, immediately;
before (with gen., e. g. {%śakteḥ prathamam,%} before
strength, i. e. before the forces were ready, Raghu-v.
IV. 24); ({%āt%}), ind. firstly, for the first time; {%pra-%}
{%thamam — anantaram,%} first — afterwards; {%pratha-%}
{%mam — tatas,%} first — next; {%prathamam — paścāt,%}
first — afterwards; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πρῶ-το-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>primus;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>fru-ma;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pī1r-ma-s.</nsi>] {%—Prathama-ka-%}
{%thita, as, ā, am,%} aforesaid, before-mentioned,
afore-mentioned. {%—Prathama-kalpa, as,%} m. a
primary or principal rule. {%—Prathama-kalpita, %}
[Page0629-c+ 79]
{%as, ā, am,%} placed first, first in rank or importance,
having precedence. {%—Prathama-kusuma, as%} or
{%am,%} m. or n. (?), white marjoram. {%—Prathama-%}
{%garbha, as,%} m., Ved. first pregnancy or con-
finement; a first litter; ({%as, ā, am%}), pregnant
for the first time. {%—Prathama-grantha, as,%} m.,
N. of a poem by Jagaj-jīvana-dāsa. {%—Prathama-%}
{%cchad, t, t, t,%} Ved. covering first, (Sāy. {%= pratha-%}
{%mam ācchādayitṛ%}); typical, figurative. {%—Pra-%}
{%thama-ja, as, ā, am,%} or {%prathama-jā, ās, ās, am,%}
firstborn, a firstling; original, primary; being the
issue of the first (i. e. first-mentioned marriage).
{%—Prathama-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. firstborn.
{%—Prathama-tas,%} ind. first, at first, firstly, in the
first place; previously; forthwith, straightway, im-
mediately; before, in preference to (with gen.).
{%—Prathama-darśana, am,%} n. first sight; ({%e%}), ind.
at first sight. {%—Prathama-divasa, as,%} m. a first
day, principal day. {%—Prathama-dugdha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. just milked. {%—Prathama-parigṛhīta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} formerly married. {%—Prathama-puruṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. the first (= in European grammars the third)
person in the verb, a termination of the first (or ac-
cording to European grammars third) person. {%—Pra-%}
{%thama-bhāj, k, k, k,%} Ved. one to whom the first
share is due; (Sāy. {%= utpatti-kāla eva vibhaktṛ,%}
dividing or distinguishing beings at the time of crea-
tion.) {%—Prathama-maṅgala, as, ā, am,%} highly
auspicious. {%—Prathama-yajña, as,%} m., Ved. the first
sacrifice. {%—Prathama-yauvana, am,%} n. early youth,
early age. {%—Prathama-rātra, as,%} m., Ved. the
beginning of night. {%—Prathama-vayas, as,%} n.
earliest age, youth. {%—Prathama-vayasin, ī, inī, i,%}
Ved. being in early youth, young. {%—Prathama-%}
{%vāsya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. worn formerly (as a gar-
ment). {%—Prathama-vittā,%} f., Ved. a first wife.
{%—Prathama-viraha, as,%} m. first separation; ({%e%}),
ind. immediately after separation. {%—Prathama-%}
{%vṛttānta, as,%} m. former circumstances, earlier his-
tory, antecedents. {%—Prathama-vaiyākaraṇa, as,%}
m. a beginner in grammar; a distinguished or first-
rate grammarian. {%—Prathama-śravas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. having a distinguished reputation; (Sāy. =
{%atiśayitaṃ dhanaṃ yaśo vā yasya.%}) {%—Prathama-%}
{%saṅgama, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Prathama-sā-%}
{%hasa, as,%} m. the first or lowest degree of punishment
or fine. {%—Prathama-sukṛta, am,%} n. a former
service or kindness. {%—Prathama-sthāna, am,%} n.,
Ved. the first or lowest scale (in pronunciation, low
but audible). {%—Prathama-svara, am,%} n., N. of a
Sāman. {%—Prathamāgāmin (˚ma-āg˚), ī, inī, i,%}
occurring first, first mentioned. {%—Prathamādeśa%}
{%(˚ma-ād˚), as,%} m. placing (a word) at the beginning
of a sentence. {%—Prathamābhitapta (˚ma-abh˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} first scorched or scalded (with tears).
{%—Prathamārdha (˚ma-ar˚), as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), the first half. {%—Prathamāvara-tva (˚ma-%}
{%av˚), am,%} n. the being the first and the last. {%—Pra-%}
{%thamāstamita (˚ma-as˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. just set
(said of the sun). {%—Prathametara (˚ma-it˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘other than first,’ the second. {%—Prathamot-%}
{%panna (˚ma-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} produced first, first-
born. {%—Prathamodita (˚ma-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} first
uttered, uttered previously.
<LEND>

<L>31976<pc>0629-c<k1>praTamaka<k2>praTamaka
{%Prathamaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ first, foremost.
<LEND>

<L>31977<pc>0629-c<k1>praTayitf<k2>praTayitf
{#praTayitf#}¦ {%prathayitṛ, prathas,%} &c. See
under rt. 1. {%prath.%}
<LEND>

<L>31978<pc>0629-c<k1>prada<k2>prada
{#prada#}¦ {%pra-da,%} &c. See {%pra-dā,%} p. 630, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>31979<pc>0629-c<k1>pradakziRa<k2>pradakziRa
{#pradakziRa#}¦ {%pra-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} moving
to the right, standing or placed on the right; auspi-
cious, favourable, of good omen; respectful, reve-
rential; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. turning the right side
towards (any one), reverential salutation by circum-
ambulation from left to right so that the right side
is towards the person saluted; ({%am%}), ind. from left
to right, towards the right side, so that the right
side is turned towards a person or object (as a sign
of respect, e. g. {%pūjyaḥ pradakṣiṇam,%} to be
honoured by keeping the right side towards him);
[Page0630-a+ 75]
{%pradakṣiṇaṃ kṛ%} or {%pra-kṛ,%} to pass on the right,
turn the right side towards (in token of respect);
towards the south, in a southern direction [from the
east, Manu III. 87]; ({%eṇa%}), ind. from left to right;
towards the south; {%a-pradakṣiṇam,%} ‘not towards
the right,’ towards the left. {%—Pradakṣiṇa-kriyā,%}
f. turning the right side towards (any one), showing
respect. {%—Pradakṣiṇa-paṭṭikā,%} f. a yard, a
court-yard. {%—Pradakṣiṇa-prakramaṇa, am,%} n.
proceeding with the right side towards (anything).
{%—Pradakṣiṇārcis (˚ṇa-ar˚), is, is, is,%} having
flames turned towards the right, flaming towards the
right. {%—Pradakṣiṇāvarta (˚ṇa-āv˚), as, ā, am,%}
turned towards the right. {%—Pradakṣiṇāvṛtka%}
{%(˚ṇa-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} turned towards the right,
having (any one or anything) on the right. {%—Pra-%}
{%dakṣiṇī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%} to turn
the right side towards (with acc.); to go round from
left to right. {%—Pradakṣiṇī-kṛtya,%} ind. having
gone round from left to right.
<LEND>

<L>31980<pc>0630-a<k1>pradakziRaya<k2>pradakziRaya
{%Pradakṣiṇaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pradakṣiṇayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to go round from left to right.
<LEND>

<L>31981<pc>0630-a<k1>pradakziRit<k2>pradakziRit
{%Pradakṣiṇit,%}¦ ind., Ved. {%= pra-dakṣiṇam,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31982<pc>0630-a<k1>pradagDa<k2>pradagDa
{#pradagDa#}¦ {%pra-dagdha,%} &c. See {%pra-dah%} below.
<LEND>

<L>31983<pc>0630-a<k1>pradatta<k2>pradatta
{#pradatta#}¦ {%pra-datta,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>31984<pc>0630-a<k1>pradam<k2>pradam
{#pradam#}¦ {%pra-dam,%} Caus. P. A. {%-damayati, -te,%}
{%-yitum,%} to subdue, conquer, overpower.
<LEND>

<L>31985<pc>0630-a<k1>pradAnta<k2>pradAnta
{%Pra-dānta, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>31986<pc>0630-a<k1>pradAm<k2>pradAm
{%Pra-dām, -dān,%}¦ m. one who tames or subdues;
[cf. Pāṇ. VIII. 2, 64.]
<LEND>

<L>31987<pc>0630-a<k1>pradara<k2>pradara
{#pradara#}¦ {%pra-dara.%} See {%pra-dṝ,%} p. 631, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>31988<pc>0630-a<k1>pradarpa<k2>pradarpa
{#pradarpa#}¦ {%pra-darpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%dṛp%} with
{%pra%}), pride, arrogance.
<LEND>

<L>31989<pc>0630-a<k1>pradfpita<k2>pradfpita
{%Pra-dṛpita%}¦ in {%a-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>31990<pc>0630-a<k1>pradfpta<k2>pradfpta
{%Pra-dṛpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ proud, haughty, conceited.
<LEND>

<L>31991<pc>0630-a<k1>pradfpti<k2>pradfpti
{%Pra-dṛpti, is,%}¦ f. haughtiness, arrogance, madness;
(Sāy. {%= anartha-hetuḥ pradarpaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>31992<pc>0630-a<k1>pradarSa<k2>pradarSa
{#pradarSa#}¦ {%pra-darśa,%} &c. See {%pra-dṛś,%} p. 631.
<LEND>

<L>31993<pc>0630-a<k1>pradala<k2>pradala
{#pradala#}¦ {%pra-dala, as,%} m. an arrow ({%= pra-%}
{%dara%}).
<LEND>

<L>31994<pc>0630-a<k1>pradava<k2>pradava
{#pradava#}¦ {%pra-dava, pra-davya, pra-dāvya.%} See
{%pra-du,%} col. 3, and p. 631, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>31995<pc>0630-a<k1>pradas<k2>pradas
{#pradas#}¦ {%pra-das,%} cl. 4. P. {%-dasyati, -dasitum,%}
to dry up, become dry.
<LEND>

<L>31996<pc>0630-a<k1>pradah<k2>pradah
{#pradah#}¦ {%pra-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dagdhum,%}
to burn, consume, destroy: Pass. {%-dahyate,%} to take
fire, be consumed by fire, be burnt, burn.
<LEND>

<L>31997<pc>0630-a<k1>pradagDa<k2>pradagDa
{%Pra-dagdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ burnt, consumed, de-
stroyed.
<LEND>

<L>31998<pc>0630-a<k1>pradagDavya<k2>pradagDavya
{%Pra-dagdhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be burnt.
<LEND>

<L>31999<pc>0630-a<k1>pradAha<k2>pradAha
{%Pra-dāha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. burning, destroying by fire.
<LEND>

<L>32000<pc>0630-a<k1>pradA<k2>pradA
{#pradA#}¦ {%pra-dā%} (see rt. 1. {%dā%}), cl. 3. P. (rarely
in the earlier language A.) {%-dadāti (-datte), -dātum,%}
to give away, give to, give; to give up, deliver; to
offer, present, grant; to give a daughter in marriage;
to sell (with inst. of the price); to restore; to put in,
place in; (with {%ṛṇam%}) to pay, discharge a debt;
(with {%vidyām%}) to communicate or impart know-
ledge; (with {%prativacaḥ%}) to give an answer; (with
{%yuddham%}) to give battle; (with {%dvandva-yud-%}
{%dham%}) to engage in single combat; (with {%pra-%}
{%vṛttim%}) to give information of an event; (with
{%hutāśanam%}) to set fire to: Pass. {%-dīyate,%} to be
given away, to be given: Caus. {%-dāpayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to give, compel to give back or to repay; to
cause to put or place in: Desid. {%-ditsate,%} to wish to
give in marriage.
<LEND>

<L>32001<pc>0630-a<k1>pratta<k2>pratta
{%Pra-tta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for {%pra-datta%}), given away,
given, offered, presented; given in marriage, be-
trothed, married. {%—Pratta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who
has given or presented.
<LEND>

<L>32002<pc>0630-a<k1>pratti<k2>pratti
{%Pra-tti, is,%}¦ f. (for {%pra-datti%}), Ved. giving away,
giving.
<LEND>

<L>32003<pc>0630-a<k1>prada<k2>prada
{%Pra-da, as, ā, am,%}¦ giving away, giving, a giver,
bestower, yielding, presenting, granting, bestowing,
[Page0630-b+ 78]
conferring (generally at the end of a comp.; cf.
{%bahu-p˚, prāṇa-p˚, ruci-p˚, śāpa-p˚, sasya-p˚%});
liberal, bountiful; ({%ā%}), f. a gift.
<LEND>

<L>32004<pc>0630-b<k1>pradatta<k2>pradatta
{%Pra-datta, as, ā, am,%}¦ given away, given, offered,
presented, bestowed, granted; given in marriage;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Gandharva.
<LEND>

<L>32005<pc>0630-b<k1>pradadi<k2>pradadi
{%Pra-dadi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. liberal, bountiful.
<LEND>

<L>32006<pc>0630-b<k1>pradAtavya<k2>pradAtavya
{%Pra-dātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given away, to be
given; to be given back; to be given in marriage;
to be placed in or put into.
<LEND>

<L>32007<pc>0630-b<k1>pradAtf<k2>pradAtf
{%Pra-dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who gives or bestows,
giving, liberal; a giver, donor; one who gives a
daughter away in marriage; ‘the giver,’ an epithet
of Indra; N. of a divinity enumerated among the
Viśve Devāḥ.
<LEND>

<L>32008<pc>0630-b<k1>pradAna<k2>pradAna<h>1
1. {%pra-dāna, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. {%pra-dāna%} see below),
giving, offering, presenting, bestowing, granting [cf.
{%pāṇi-p˚, vara-p˚%}]; an oblation (especially one made
by fire); the words or sacred texts recited during
an oblation by fire (for {%pradāna-mantra%}); impart-
ing, communicating, teaching [cf. {%veda-p˚,%} and see
Manu II. 171]; giving away in marriage; applying
(a clyster); a gift, present. {%—Pradāna-kṛpaṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} mean or niggardly in making presents.
{%—Pradāna-pūrvam,%} ind. with a present. {%—Pra-%}
{%dāna-ruci, is,%} f. ‘delighting in giving,’ N. of a
man. {%—Pradāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} giving, liberal.
{%—Pradāna-śūra, as,%} m., lit. a hero in giving,
i. e. an excessively liberal man [cf. {%dāna-śūra,%}
{%dāna-vīra%}]; N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
<LEND>

<L>32009<pc>0630-b<k1>pradAnaka<k2>pradAnaka
{%Pradānaka, am,%}¦ n. an offering, oblation.
<LEND>

<L>32010<pc>0630-b<k1>pradAnika<k2>pradAnika
{%Pradānika, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
relating to giving or offering; [cf. {%dattāp˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32011<pc>0630-b<k1>pradApayitf<k2>pradApayitf
{%Pra-dāpayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who causes to
give; (Ved.) one who gives, a giver.
<LEND>

<L>32012<pc>0630-b<k1>pradApya<k2>pradApya
{%Pra-dāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to give, to
be compelled to pay.
<LEND>

<L>32013<pc>0630-b<k1>pradAya<k2>pradAya
{%Pra-dāya, am,%}¦ n. a present.
<LEND>

<L>32014<pc>0630-b<k1>pradAyaka<k2>pradAyaka
{%Pra-dāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ giving, granting, pre-
senting, bestowing. {%—Pradāyaka-tva, am,%} n. the
being a giver, giving.
<LEND>

<L>32015<pc>0630-b<k1>pradAyin<k2>pradAyin
{%Pra-dāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ giving away, giving, a giver,
granting, presenting. {%—Pradāyi-tva, am,%} n. the
being a giver, giving.
<LEND>

<L>32016<pc>0630-b<k1>pradi<k2>pradi
{%Pra-di, is,%}¦ m. a gift, present (Schol. on Pāṇ. III.
3, 92).
<LEND>

<L>32017<pc>0630-b<k1>praditsu<k2>praditsu
{%Pra-ditsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing or intending to
give (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>32018<pc>0630-b<k1>pradeya<k2>pradeya
{%Pra-deya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given or granted, to
be offered or awarded to (in these senses sometimes
compounded with a word denoting the recipient,
cf. {%rāja-p˚, śiṣya-p˚%}); to be imparted, to be taught
or instructed; to be given in marriage, marriageable;
({%as%}), m. a present.
<LEND>

<L>32019<pc>0630-b<k1>pradAna<k2>pradAna<h>2
{#pradAna#} 2¦. {%pra-dāna, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 3. {%dā%}
with {%pra%}), a goad. (For. 1. {%pra-dāna%} see above.)
<LEND>

<L>32020<pc>0630-b<k1>pradAnta<k2>pradAnta
{#pradAnta#}¦ {%pra-dānta,%} &c. See {%pra-dam,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32021<pc>0630-b<k1>pradigDa<k2>pradigDa
{#pradigDa#}¦ {%pra-digdha.%} See {%pra-dih,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32022<pc>0630-b<k1>pradiv<k2>pradiv
{#pradiv#}¦ {%pra-div, -dyaus,%} f., Ved. the third
or highest heaven (in which the Pitṛs are said to
dwell); the fifth of the seven heavens; (according to
Sāy.) {%= purāṇa,%} existing from olden times, ancient;
{%pra-divas,%} ind. from the remotest or earliest times,
from of old, long since, always, constantly, ever; {%anu%}
{%pradivaḥ,%} as of old, as formerly; ({%pra-divi%}), ind.
at all times, always, constantly, ever.
<LEND>

<L>32023<pc>0630-b<k1>pradiS<k2>pradiS<h>1
{#pradiS#} 1¦. {%pra-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati, -deṣṭum,%}
to point out, show; to signify, announce, declare,
communicate, make known; to direct; to appoint,
ordain, prescribe, instruct; to urge on, incite; to
assign; cl. 4. P. {%-diśyati,%} &c., to grant: Caus.
{%-deśayati, -yitum,%} to urge on, incite: Intens.
{%-dedeṣṭi,%} to animate (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>32024<pc>0630-b<k1>pradiS<k2>pradiS<h>2
2. {%pra-diś, k,%}¦ f. pointing to, pointing out; direc-
tion, order, command, instruction; a direction, quarter,
region of the sky (of which from four to seven are
enumerated in the Veda; {%Pitryā pradiś,%} the region
of the Pitṛs, i. e. the south; {%pradiśo gatam,%} gone
[Page0630-c+ 77]
towards all quarters of the heavens); an intermediate
point of the compass or half quarter, as north-east,
south-west, &c.
<LEND>

<L>32025<pc>0630-c<k1>pradiSyamAna<k2>pradiSyamAna
{%Pra-diśyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being pointed out,
being urged on or incited.
<LEND>

<L>32026<pc>0630-c<k1>pradizwa<k2>pradizwa
{%Pra-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pointed out, announced,
declared; directed, ordained, appointed.
<LEND>

<L>32027<pc>0630-c<k1>pradeSa<k2>pradeSa
{%Pra-deśa, as,%}¦ m. pointing out, showing; direc-
tion, decision, determination; appealing to a pre-
cedent; an example (in grammar &c.); a place,
({%pradeśeṣu,%} in various places), spot, region; a
country, district, foreign country; a wall; a short
span measured from the tip of the thumb to that of
the forefinger. {%—Pradeśa-kārin, ī,%} m. epithet of a
kind of ascetic. {%—Pradeśa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possess-
ing or occupying a place. {%—Pradeśa-śāstra, am,%} n. a
book containing examples (in grammar). {%—Pradeśa-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} being or situated in a district.
<LEND>

<L>32028<pc>0630-c<k1>pradeSana<k2>pradeSana
{%Pra-deśana, am,%}¦ n. a gift, present, bribe; an
offering, anything given to the gods, to superiors,
or friends; ({%ī%}), f. the index finger, forefinger; the
corresponding toe.
<LEND>

<L>32029<pc>0630-c<k1>pradeSita<k2>pradeSita
{%Pra-deśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ urged, directed.
<LEND>

<L>32030<pc>0630-c<k1>pradeSinI<k2>pradeSinI
{%Pra-deśinī,%}¦ f. the index finger, forefinger; the
corresponding toe.
<LEND>

<L>32031<pc>0630-c<k1>pradezwf<k2>pradezwf
{%Pra-deṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. one who pronounces judg-
ment, a judge.
<LEND>

<L>32032<pc>0630-c<k1>pradih<k2>pradih
{#pradih#}¦ {%pra-dih,%} cl. 2. P. {%-degdhi, -degdhum,%}
to smear over, besmear, smear, daub, anoint.
<LEND>

<L>32033<pc>0630-c<k1>pradigDa<k2>pradigDa
{%Pra-digdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ smeared over, besmeared,
daubed, bedaubed, anointed, overspread; ({%am%}), n.,
scil. {%māṃsa,%} a kind of dish prepared with meat;
({%as%}), m. a kind of sauce or gravy.
<LEND>

<L>32034<pc>0630-c<k1>pradeha<k2>pradeha
{%Pra-deha, as,%}¦ m. a plaster, a thick or viscid
ointment; applying a plaster, unction; solid food
(perhaps inspissated juice and the like).
<LEND>

<L>32035<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIdI<k2>pradIdI
{#pradIdI#}¦ {%pra-dīdī = pra-dīdhī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>32036<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIDI<k2>pradIDI
{#pradIDI#}¦ {%pra-dīdhī%} (see rt. 1. {%dīdhī%}), cl. 2. A.
{%-dīdhīte,%} &c., Ved. to shine forth, shine brilliantly.
<LEND>

<L>32037<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIDyAna<k2>pradIDyAna
{%Pra-dīdhyāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. shining forth,
shining brilliantly.
<LEND>

<L>32038<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIp<k2>pradIp
{#pradIp#}¦ {%pra-dīp,%} cl. 4. A. {%-dīpyate, -dīpitum,%}
to flame forth, blaze, burst into flames: Caus. {%-dīpa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to set on fire, set fire to, light, kindle,
inflame.
<LEND>

<L>32039<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIpa<k2>pradIpa
{%Pra-dīpa, as,%}¦ m. a light, a lamp, lantern; that
which illuminates or illustrates, an enlightener; (often
at the end of a comp., e. g. {%kula-p˚,%} ‘the light of
a family;’ especially in titles of explanatory works,
cf. {%mahābhāṣya-p˚.%}) {%—Pradīpa-mañjarī,%} f., N.
of a commentary by Rāmeśvara on the Amara-
koṣa. {%—Pradīpa-śaraṇa-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of
a Mahoraga-rāja. {%—Pradīpa-sāha, as,%} m. ({%sāha%}
= <lang n="arabic">شاه</lang>), N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>32040<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIpaka<k2>pradIpaka
{%Pradīpaka, as, ikā,%}¦ m. f. a small lamp, a lamp;
({%as, ikā, am%}), illuminating, illustrating, clearing up.
<LEND>

<L>32041<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIpana<k2>pradIpana
{%Pra-dīpana, as, ī, am,%}¦ inflaming, illuminating;
stimulating, exciting; ({%am%}), n. the act of kindling,
inflaming, igniting, exciting, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a sort of
mineral poison (of a red colour and caustic in its action).
<LEND>

<L>32042<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIpAya<k2>pradIpAya
{%Pradīpāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%pradīpāyate, -yitum,%} to re-
present a lamp, to act as a lamp, act the part of a lamp.
<LEND>

<L>32043<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIpIya<k2>pradIpIya
{%Pradīpīya%}¦ or {%pradīpya.%} See Gaṇa to Pāṇ. V.
1, 4.
<LEND>

<L>32044<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIpta<k2>pradIpta
{%Pra-dīpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ kindled, inflamed, lighted
up, illuminated; blazing, burning, shining; excited,
stimulated; clear, shrill (opposed to {%pūrṇa,%} as a
term of augury?).
<LEND>

<L>32045<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIpti<k2>pradIpti
{%Pra-dīpti, is,%}¦ f. light, lustre, splendor, brilliancy.
{%—Pradīpti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} bright, radiant, lu-
minous.
<LEND>

<L>32046<pc>0630-c<k1>pradIrGa<k2>pradIrGa
{#pradIrGa#}¦ {%pra-dīrgha, as, ā, am,%} exceedingly
long.
<LEND>

<L>32047<pc>0630-c<k1>pradu<k2>pradu
{#pradu#}¦ {%pra-du,%} cl. 4. A. {%-dūyate, -dotum,%} to
be consumed by fire; cl. 5. P. {%-dunoti,%} &c., to
distress, pain, torment, torture; to press hard.
<LEND>

<L>32048<pc>0630-c<k1>pradava<k2>pradava
{%Pra-dava, as, ā, am,%}¦ burning, inflaming.
<LEND>
[Page0631-a+ 78]

<L>32049<pc>0631-a<k1>pradavya<k2>pradavya
{%Pra-davya%}¦ or {%pra-dāvya, as,%} m., Ved., scil.
{%agni,%} a forest fire ({%= dāvāgni%}).
<LEND>

<L>32050<pc>0631-a<k1>praduz<k2>praduz
{#praduz#}¦ {%pra-duṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-duṣyati, -doṣṭum,%}
to become worse, deteriorate; to be defiled or pol-
luted; to do amiss, act improperly, fall (morally);
to commit an offence against (with acc.): Caus.
{%-dūṣayati, -yitum,%} to spoil, deprave, corrupt; to
defile, pollute, contaminate, vitiate, damage; to speak
ill of, abuse, blame, censure.
<LEND>

<L>32051<pc>0631-a<k1>praduzwa<k2>praduzwa
{%Pra-duṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ corrupt, wicked, bad,
wrong, sinful; licentious, wanton, infamous.
<LEND>

<L>32052<pc>0631-a<k1>pradUzaRa<k2>pradUzaRa
{%Pra-dūṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ corrupting, spoiling;
defiling, contaminating.
<LEND>

<L>32053<pc>0631-a<k1>pradUzita<k2>pradUzita
{%Pra-dūṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ corrupted, spoilt; de-
praved, vitiated; defiled, polluted.
<LEND>

<L>32054<pc>0631-a<k1>pradoza<k2>pradoza
{%Pra-doṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ corrupt, bad, wicked;
({%as%}), m. defect, fault, offence, sin, transgression,
guilt; a disordered condition (of the body or of the
state), mutiny, insurrection, rebellion; the first part
of the night, evening twilight, evening, nightfall;
Evening personified (and associated with Niśitha and
Vyuṣṭa as a son of Doṣā); ({%am%}), ind., Ved. in
the evening, in the dark. {%—Pradoṣa-kāla, as,%} m.
evening tide. {%—Pradoṣa-timira, am,%} n. evening
darkness, the dusk of early night. {%—Pradoṣa-pūjā-%}
{%vidhi, is,%} m. and {%pradoṣa-śiva-pūjā,%} f., N. of
two works. {%—Pradoṣa-ramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} plea-
sant or delightful in the evenings. {%—Pradoṣāgama%}
{%(˚ṣa-āg˚), as,%} m. the coming on of evening, nightfall.
<LEND>

<L>32055<pc>0631-a<k1>pradozaka<k2>pradozaka
{%Pradoṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ born in the evening;
(according to a Scholiast) a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>32056<pc>0631-a<k1>praduh<k2>praduh<h>1
{#praduh#} 1¦. {%pra-duh,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-dogdhi, -dug-%}
{%dhe, -dogdhum,%} to milk; to yield milk or any
desired object.
<LEND>

<L>32057<pc>0631-a<k1>praduh<k2>praduh<h>2
2. {%pra-duh, -dhuk, k, k,%}¦ milking, milking well.
<LEND>

<L>32058<pc>0631-a<k1>pradoha<k2>pradoha
{%Pra-doha, as,%}¦ m. milking.
<LEND>

<L>32059<pc>0631-a<k1>pradohana<k2>pradohana
{%Pra-dohana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>32060<pc>0631-a<k1>pradfpti<k2>pradfpti
{#pradfpti#}¦ {%pra-dṛpti.%} See {%pra-darpa,%} p. 630.
<LEND>

<L>32061<pc>0631-a<k1>pradfS<k2>pradfS
{#pradfS#}¦ {%pra-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati, -draṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to look forward, see in front, foresee; to see,
behold, view; to perceive, observe, discern, distin-
guish, learn; to look at, look upon; to regard,
judge; to have a view or opinion; to be intelligent:
Pass. {%-dṛśyate,%} to become visible, to be seen or
observed; to look, appear: Caus. {%-darśayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to foreshow, show forth, bring to light, make
visible, display, exhibit; to describe; to make clear,
explain, teach: Desid. {%-didṛkṣati,%} to wish to see.
<LEND>

<L>32062<pc>0631-a<k1>pradarSa<k2>pradarSa
{%Pra-darśa, as,%}¦ m. looking, look, appearance;
direction, injunction.
<LEND>

<L>32063<pc>0631-a<k1>pradarSaka<k2>pradarSaka
{%Pra-darśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ foreshowing, fore-
telling, presaging; a prophet; showing, exhibiting,
displaying; presenting; proclaiming, announcing;
propounding, teaching, instructing; a teacher, in-
structor, expounder; a doctrine, principle.
<LEND>

<L>32064<pc>0631-a<k1>pradarSana<k2>pradarSana
{%Pra-darśana, am,%}¦ n. foreshowing, prophesying;
look, appearance, aspect, (often at the end of comps.,
e. g. {%ghora-p˚,%} of terrible aspect); showing, pointing
out, manifesting, displaying, bringing to light, indi-
cating; explaining, specifying, teaching; an example;
({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of deities under Manu Auttami.
<LEND>

<L>32065<pc>0631-a<k1>pradarSita<k2>pradarSita
{%Pra-darśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ foreshown, prophesied;
shown forth, shown, brought to light, manifested,
exhibited, evinced; made known, signified; rendered
clear, taught; mentioned, declared, specified.
<LEND>

<L>32066<pc>0631-a<k1>pradarSin<k2>pradarSin
{%Pra-darśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ seeing, viewing; pointing
out, showing, indicating.
<LEND>

<L>32067<pc>0631-a<k1>pradarSya<k2>pradarSya
{%Pra-darśya,%}¦ ind. having exhibited or shown.
<LEND>

<L>32068<pc>0631-a<k1>prapaSyat<k2>prapaSyat
{%Pra-paśyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ foreseeing, looking.
<LEND>

<L>32069<pc>0631-a<k1>pradF<k2>pradF
{#pradF#}¦ {%pra-dṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-dṛṇāti, -daritum,%}
{%-darītum,%} to break or tear to pieces (Ved.): Pass.
{%-dīryate,%} to cleave asunder, split open (intrans.);
to be dispersed or scattered: Caus. {%-dārayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to split, cleave, tear asunder.
<LEND>

<L>32070<pc>0631-a<k1>pradara<k2>pradara
{%Pra-dara, as,%}¦ m. splitting, rending, tearing; a
fracture, breach, crack, crevice, cleft in the earth; the
dispersion of an army; a particular disease of women,
mænorrhagia; an arrow; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>
[Page0631-b+ 72]

<L>32071<pc>0631-b<k1>pradeSa<k2>pradeSa
{#pradeSa#}¦ {%pra-deśa.%} See p. 630, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32072<pc>0631-b<k1>pradoza<k2>pradoza
{#pradoza#}¦ {%pra-doṣa.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32073<pc>0631-b<k1>pradyu<k2>pradyu
{#pradyu#}¦ {%pra-dyu, u,%} n. (fr. {%pra%} + 3. {%dyu%} or 3.
{%div%}), good works leading to heaven, works securing
heaven.
<LEND>

<L>32074<pc>0631-b<k1>pradyut<k2>pradyut
{#pradyut#}¦ {%pra-dyut,%} cl. 1. A. {%-dyotate, -dyoti-%}
{%tum,%} to begin to shine or to be brilliant: Caus. {%-dyo-%}
{%tayati, -yitum,%} to irradiate, illumine.
<LEND>

<L>32075<pc>0631-b<k1>pradyutita<k2>pradyutita
{%Pra-dyutita, as, ā, am,%}¦ beginning to shine or
to be brilliant; illuminated, irradiated, lighted.
<LEND>

<L>32076<pc>0631-b<k1>pradyota<k2>pradyota
{%Pra-dyota, as,%}¦ m. illumining, irradiating; splen-
dor, lustre, light; a ray of light; N. of a Yakṣa;
of a king of Magadha and founder of a dynasty; of
a king of Ujjayinī.
<LEND>

<L>32077<pc>0631-b<k1>pradyotana<k2>pradyotana
{%Pra-dyotana, as,%}¦ m. the sun; N. of a prince of
Ujjayinī; ({%am%}), n. blazing, shining, light.
<LEND>

<L>32078<pc>0631-b<k1>pradyotita<k2>pradyotita
{%Pra-dyotita, as, ā, am, = pra-dyutita.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>32079<pc>0631-b<k1>pradyotin<k2>pradyotin
{%Pra-dyotin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ illumining, irradiating.
<LEND>

<L>32080<pc>0631-b<k1>pradyumna<k2>pradyumna
{#pradyumna#}¦ {%pra-dyumna, as,%} m. (fr. {%pra +%}
{%dyumna,%} see p. 438, col. 1), ‘the pre-eminently
mighty one,’ an epithet of Kāma-deva the god of
love, or of that deity in another birth (regarded as a
son of Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī, or as a son of Saṅkar-
ṣaṇa and then identified with Sanat-kumāra); N. of
a son of Manu and Naḍvalā; of an astronomer; of
a mountain (?); of a river. {%—Pradyumna-pura,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘Pradyumna's city,’ N. of a town on the
Candra-bhāgā or Chenab. {%—Pradyumna-vijaya, as,%}
m. ‘Pradyumna's victory (over Vajra-nābha),’ N. of a
drama by Śaṅkara-dīkṣita. {%—Pradyumnāgamana%}
{%(˚na-āg˚), am,%} n. the arrival of Pradyumna. {%—Pra-%}
{%dyumnāgamanīya, as, ā, am,%} treating of the
arrival of Pradyumna.
<LEND>

<L>32081<pc>0631-b<k1>pradrava<k2>pradrava
{#pradrava#}¦ {%pra-drava, pra-drāva.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>32082<pc>0631-b<k1>pradrARaka<k2>pradrARaka
{#pradrARaka#}¦ {%pra-drāṇaka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2.
{%drā%} with {%pra%}), sorely distressed, very needy or
indigent, very poor.
<LEND>

<L>32083<pc>0631-b<k1>pradru<k2>pradru
{#pradru#}¦ {%pra-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -drotum,%}
to run forwards, run away, flee, escape, escape to
(with acc.); to hasten, hasten away, go away; to
hasten towards, rush against; to fall upon, assail;
to attain: Caus. {%-drāvayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
run away, put to flight, rout.
<LEND>

<L>32084<pc>0631-b<k1>pradrava<k2>pradrava
{%Pra-drava, as, ā, am,%}¦ fluid, liquid.
<LEND>

<L>32085<pc>0631-b<k1>pradrAva<k2>pradrAva
{%Pra-drāva, as,%}¦ m. running away, running, flight,
retreat, escape; going, going quickly or well.
<LEND>

<L>32086<pc>0631-b<k1>pradrAvin<k2>pradrAvin
{%Pra-drāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ runaway, fugitive; one who
retreats or flies, retreating, flying, going.
<LEND>

<L>32087<pc>0631-b<k1>pradruh<k2>pradruh
{#pradruh#}¦ {%pra-druh, -dhruk, k, k,%} one who
hurts or injures, trying to hurt.
<LEND>

<L>32088<pc>0631-b<k1>pradrek<k2>pradrek
{#pradrek#}¦ {%pra-drek,%} cl. 1. A. {%-drekate, -dreki-%}
{%tum,%} to shout out; to neigh, to roar, bellow.
<LEND>

<L>32089<pc>0631-b<k1>pradvAr<k2>pradvAr
{#pradvAr#}¦ {%pra-dvār,%} f. or {%pra-dvāra, am,%} n. a
place before a door or gate.
<LEND>

<L>32090<pc>0631-b<k1>pradviz<k2>pradviz<h>1
{#pradviz#} 1¦. {%pra-dviṣ,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-dveṣṭi,%}
{%-dviṣṭe, -dveṣṭum,%} to feel dislike or repugnance
for, dislike, hate; to show one's hatred.
<LEND>

<L>32091<pc>0631-b<k1>pradviz<k2>pradviz<h>2
2. {%pra-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ feeling dislike or repugnance
for, disliking, hating.
<LEND>

<L>32092<pc>0631-b<k1>pradvizat<k2>pradvizat
{%Pra-dviṣat, an, atī, at,%}¦ feeling dislike or re-
pugnance for, hating, hostile, an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>32093<pc>0631-b<k1>pradveza<k2>pradveza
{%Pra-dveṣa, as,%}¦ m. dislike, repugnance, aversion,
disinclination, hatred, hostility; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the
wife of Dīrgha-tamas.
<LEND>

<L>32094<pc>0631-b<k1>pradvezaRa<k2>pradvezaRa
{%Pra-dveṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. hating, hatred, hostility.
<LEND>

<L>32095<pc>0631-b<k1>pradvezwf<k2>pradvezwf
{%Pra-dveṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who dislikes or
hates, a disliker, hater.
<LEND>

<L>32096<pc>0631-b<k1>praDa<k2>praDa
{#praDa#}¦ {%pra-dha.%} See under {%pra-dhā,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32097<pc>0631-b<k1>praDana<k2>praDana
{#praDana#}¦ {%pra-dhana, am,%} n. spoil taken in
battle, a prize gained by a victor; a contest, conflict,
combat, fight, war, battle [cf. {%dhana%}]; tearing,
rending, destruction, destroying; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
[Page0631-c+ 79]
man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants. {%—Pra-%}
{%dhanottama (˚na-ut˚), am,%} n. ‘best of battles,’ a
great battle or contest.
<LEND>

<L>32098<pc>0631-c<k1>praDanya<k2>praDanya
{%Pradhanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. forming or consti-
tuting the spoil or booty (as cattle).
<LEND>

<L>32099<pc>0631-c<k1>praDamana<k2>praDamana
{#praDamana#}¦ {%pra-dhamana.%} See under 1. {%pra-%}
{%dhmā,%} p. 632, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32100<pc>0631-c<k1>praDarza<k2>praDarza
{#praDarza#}¦ {%pra-dharṣa,%} &c. See under {%pra-%}
{%dhṛṣ,%} p. 632, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32101<pc>0631-c<k1>praDA<k2>praDA
{#praDA#}¦ {%pra-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte,%}
{%-dhātum,%} to place or set before, offer; to give up,
deliver.
<LEND>

<L>32102<pc>0631-c<k1>praDa<k2>praDa
{%Pra-dha, as, ā, am,%}¦ holding, having; ({%ā%}), f.,
see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VI. 4, 64; N. of a daughter
of Dakṣa.
<LEND>

<L>32103<pc>0631-c<k1>praDAna<k2>praDAna
{%Pra-dhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ chief, main, principal,
capital (city); pre-eminent, most eminent, most ex-
cellent, best; prevalent, predominant, preponderant,
principally or pre-eminently inherent; ({%am%}), n. a chief
or principal thing, chief object, the most important
thing, the head, chief, (often at the end of a comp.,
e. g. {%Indra-pradhāna,%} having Indra as the chief
object; cf. {%dharma-p˚, vinaya-p˚, yathā-pradhā-%}
{%nam%}); (in Sāṅkhya phil.) {%= Prakṛti,%} ‘the Ori-
ginant,’ primary or original matter or rather the
primary germ out of which all material appearances
are evolved, the first evolver or source of the material
world (hence in a general acceptation ‘nature’ or
rather ‘matter’ as opposed to {%puruṣa%} or ‘spirit’);
the Supreme Spirit, the Supreme Deity; intellect, un-
derstanding; (in grammar) the principal member of a
compound (opposed to the {%upa-sarjana%} or secondary
member by which the primary member is qualified);
({%as, am%}), m. n. the first companion or attendant of
a king, his minister or counsellor, his eunuch or con-
fidant; a courtier, a noble; an elephant-driver; ({%as%}),
m., N. of an ancient king. {%—Pradhāna-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. or {%pradhāna-kārya, am,%} n. chief or principal
action; the principal mode of treatment (in medi-
cine). {%—Pradhāna-tama, as, ā, am,%} the most
excellent or distinguished, most important, chiefest.
{%—Pradhāna-tara, as, ā, am,%} more excellent,
better. {%—Pradhāna-tas,%} ind. according to eminence
or superiority. {%—Pradhāna-tā,%} f. pre-eminence,
excellence, superiority, supremacy, prevalence; the
being Pra-dhāna, q. v., (in Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 173
{%= jagat-kāraṇatā;%} cf. {%śarīra-p˚.%}) {%—Pradhāna-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. pre-eminence, superiority, excellence;
(in Sāṅkhya phil.) the being Pra-dhāna, q. v.
{%—Pradhāna-dhātu, us,%} m. the chief element or
ingredient of the body, semen virile. {%—Pradhāna-%}
{%puruṣa, as,%} m. a chief person, most distinguished
personage; an epithet of Śiva. {%—Pradhāna-puru-%}
{%ṣātīta (˚ṣa-at˚), as,%} m. transcending Pradhāna
and Puruṣa (matter and spirit); an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Pradhāna-bhāj, k, k, k,%} receiving the chief share,
presiding over; the most excellent or distinguished.
{%—Pradhāna-mantrin, ī,%} m. a prime minister.
{%—Pradhāna-mitra, am,%} n. a chief friend. {%—Pra-%}
{%dhāna-vāsas, asī,%} n. du. two principal garments, best
clothes. {%—Pradhāna-vṛṣṭi, is,%} f. very copious rain,
heaviest rain. {%—Pradhāna-śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} taught
or laid down as of primary importance; [cf. {%anvā-%}
{%caya-śiṣṭa.%}] {%—Pradhāna-sevā,%} f. chief or prin-
cipal service. {%—Pradhānāṅga (˚na-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a
chief member, the chief member of the body; most
eminent person in a state; principal branch of a
science, &c. {%—Pradhānātman (˚na-āt˚), ā,%} m. the
highest personal principle, the chief soul, an epithet
of Viṣṇu; one with crude nature or Viśva-bhāvana.
{%—Pradhānādhyakṣa (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m. a chief
superintendent. {%—Pradhānādhyakṣa-tā (˚na-%}
{%adh˚),%} f. the office of chief superintendent. {%—Pra-%}
{%dhānāmātya (˚na-am˚), as,%} m. a prime minister.
{%—Pradhānottama (˚na-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} best of
the eminent, eminent, illustrious; warlike, brave.
<LEND>

<L>32104<pc>0631-c<k1>praDAnaka<k2>praDAnaka
{%Pradhānaka, am,%}¦ n. (in Sāṅkhya phil.) primary or
original matter ({%= pra-dhāna, a-vyakta,%} q. q. v. v.).
<LEND>

<L>32105<pc>0631-c<k1>praDAnya<k2>praDAnya
{%Pradhānya,%}¦ a wrong reading for {%prādhānya,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0632-a+ 76]

<L>32106<pc>0632-a<k1>praDi<k2>praDi
{%Pra-dhi, is,%}¦ m. that which is placed round the
nave of a wheel, the circumference or periphery of
a wheel; a well. {%—Pradhi-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the
circumference of a wheel.
<LEND>

<L>32107<pc>0632-a<k1>praDAv<k2>praDAv<h>1
{#praDAv#} 1¦. {%pra-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-te, -dhāvitum,%} to run forwards, run forth, run away;
to set out, start; to become diffused, spread; to
pervade, permeate: Caus. P. {%-dhāvayati, -yitum,%}
to drive away, drive.
<LEND>

<L>32108<pc>0632-a<k1>praDAvita<k2>praDAvita
{%Pra-dhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ run forwards, run away;
set out, started.
<LEND>

<L>32109<pc>0632-a<k1>praDAv<k2>praDAv<h>2
{#praDAv#} 2¦. {%pra-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-te, -dhāvitum,%} to wash; to rub off: Caus. {%-dhāva-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to wash; to wash.
<LEND>

<L>32110<pc>0632-a<k1>praDAvana<k2>praDAvana
{%Pra-dhāvana, am,%}¦ n. rubbing or washing off;
({%as%}), m. air, wind (regarded as a ‘purifier,’ cf. {%pa-%}
{%vana;%} or perhaps fr. 1. {%pra-dhāv,%} regarded as a
‘runner’).
<LEND>

<L>32111<pc>0632-a<k1>praDi<k2>praDi
{#praDi#}¦ {%pra-dhi.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>32112<pc>0632-a<k1>praDI<k2>praDI
{#praDI#}¦ {%pra-dhī, īs,%} f. great intelligence; ({%īs, īs,%}
{%i%}), of superior intelligence, pre-eminently intelligent.
<LEND>

<L>32113<pc>0632-a<k1>praDUpita<k2>praDUpita
{#praDUpita#}¦ {%pra-dhūpita, as, ā, am,%} fumigated,
perfumed; heated, burnt; lighted, inflamed; afflicted;
excited; ({%ā%}), f. a woman in trouble or affliction;
the quarter to which the sun is proceeding.
<LEND>

<L>32114<pc>0632-a<k1>praDf<k2>praDf
{#praDf#}¦ {%pra-dhṛ,%} Caus. {%-dhārayati, -yitum,%} to
direct towards, place or fix upon; (with {%manas%})
to set the mind upon anything (dat.), resolve, deter-
mine; to bear in mind, keep in remembrance; to
reflect, consider; to chastise, punish, inflict a punish-
ment or penalty on any one (with loc.; cf. {%daṇḍaṃ%}
{%dhṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>32115<pc>0632-a<k1>praDAraRa<k2>praDAraRa
{%Pra-dhāraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ keeping, preserving,
protecting [cf. {%pāda-p˚%}]; ({%ā%}), f. (probably) a parti-
cular high order of intelligence.
<LEND>

<L>32116<pc>0632-a<k1>praDfz<k2>praDfz
{#praDfz#}¦ {%pra-dhṛṣ,%} cl. 1. 5. P. {%-dharṣati,%}
{%-dhṛṣṇoti, -dharṣitum,%} to be bold against, assail
with courage or daring; to lay hands on, hurt,
injure, harass; to overpower, overcome: Caus.
{%-dharṣayati, -yitum,%} to attack, assault, assail; to
hurt, injure; to overcome; to violate (a woman);
to destroy, lay waste, devastate.
<LEND>

<L>32117<pc>0632-a<k1>praDarza<k2>praDarza
{%Pra-dharṣa, as,%}¦ m. attacking, assaulting, assail-
ing; [cf. {%duṣ-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32118<pc>0632-a<k1>praDarzaka<k2>praDarzaka
{%Pra-dharṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ attacking, assailing;
molesting, troubling, harassing.
<LEND>

<L>32119<pc>0632-a<k1>praDarzaRa<k2>praDarzaRa
{%Pra-dharṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ attacking, assailing;
molesting, troubling, harassing; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. attack-
ing, assailing, an attack, assault; ill treatment, molesta-
tion; {%keśa-pradharṣaṇa,%} dragging by the hair.
<LEND>

<L>32120<pc>0632-a<k1>praDarzaRIya<k2>praDarzaRIya
{%Pra-dharṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be assailed or
attacked, assailable, open to attack, exposed to injury
or ill treatment.
<LEND>

<L>32121<pc>0632-a<k1>praDarzita<k2>praDarzita
{%Pra-dharṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ attacked, assailed;
hurt, injured; haughty, arrogant. {%—Pradharṣita-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} arrogant, proud.
<LEND>

<L>32122<pc>0632-a<k1>praDfzwa<k2>praDfzwa
{%Pra-dhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ treated with contumely;
proud, arrogant.
<LEND>

<L>32123<pc>0632-a<k1>praDfzwi<k2>praDfzwi
{%Pra-dhṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. overpowering, subju-
gation.
<LEND>

<L>32124<pc>0632-a<k1>praDfzya<k2>praDfzya
{%Pra-dhṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be hurt or injured,
violable; [cf. {%duṣ-p˚, su-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32125<pc>0632-a<k1>praDmA<k2>praDmA<h>1
{#praDmA#} 1¦. {%pra-dhmā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhamati,%}
{%-dhmātum,%} to blow before or in front, blow forth,
blow away, destroy; to blow into (with acc.): Pass.
{%-dhmāyate,%} to be blown or tossed about, wander
about: Caus. P. A. {%-dhmāpayati, -te, -yitum,%} to
blow into, blow (a conch shell).
<LEND>

<L>32126<pc>0632-a<k1>praDamana<k2>praDamana
{%Pra-dhamana, am,%}¦ n. blowing in, blowing into
(the nose, as powder &c.); a sternutatory.
<LEND>

<L>32127<pc>0632-a<k1>praDmA<k2>praDmA<h>2
2. {%pra-dhmā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ blowing violently.
<LEND>

<L>32128<pc>0632-a<k1>praDmApana<k2>praDmApana
{%Pra-dhmāpana, am,%}¦ n. (in medicine) a remedy
for assisting respiration in any obstruction of the
air-passages.
<LEND>

<L>32129<pc>0632-a<k1>praDmApita<k2>praDmApita
{%Pra-dhmāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ blown into, blown
(as a conch shell).
<LEND>
[Page0632-b+ 70]

<L>32130<pc>0632-b<k1>praDyE<k2>praDyE
{#praDyE#}¦ {%pra-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhyāyati, -te,%}
{%-dhyātum,%} to meditate upon, reflect upon, think of
(with acc. or with {%prati%}); to reflect, consider; to
excogitate, devise, hit upon.
<LEND>

<L>32131<pc>0632-b<k1>praDyAna<k2>praDyAna
{%Pra-dhyāna, am,%}¦ n. reflecting, reflection, think-
ing, thought; deep thought, subtile speculation.
<LEND>

<L>32132<pc>0632-b<k1>praDvaMs<k2>praDvaMs
{#praDvaMs#}¦ {%pra-dhvaṃs,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhvaṃsati,%}
{%-dhvaṃsitum,%} to fall to pieces, fall in ruins, be de-
stroyed, perish: Caus. {%-dhvaṃsayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to fall, destroy, cause to perish; to scatter,
sprinkle (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>32133<pc>0632-b<k1>praDvaMsa<k2>praDvaMsa
{%Pra-dhvaṃsa, as,%}¦ m. utter destruction, annihila-
tion; loss. {%—Pradhvaṃsa-tva, am,%} n. a state of
destruction, ruin. {%—Pradhvaṃsābhāva (˚sa-abh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. non-existence in consequence of annihilation,
ceasing to exist, complete extinction.
<LEND>

<L>32134<pc>0632-b<k1>praDvaMsana<k2>praDvaMsana
{%Pra-dhvaṃsana, as, ī, am,%}¦ destroying, annihi-
lating; ({%as%}), m., Ved. one who destroys or anni-
hilates, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>32135<pc>0632-b<k1>praDvaMsin<k2>praDvaMsin
{%Pra-dhvaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ passing, transitory, perish-
able; destroying, annihilating.
<LEND>

<L>32136<pc>0632-b<k1>praDvasta<k2>praDvasta
{%Pra-dhvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen to pieces, disap-
peared, perished, destroyed, annihilated.
<LEND>

<L>32137<pc>0632-b<k1>praDvan<k2>praDvan
{#praDvan#}¦ {%pra-dhvan,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhvanati, -dhva-%}
{%nitum,%} to sound forth, resound.
<LEND>

<L>32138<pc>0632-b<k1>praDvanayat<k2>praDvanayat
{%Pra-dhvanayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to sound.
<LEND>

<L>32139<pc>0632-b<k1>pranakz<k2>pranakz
{#pranakz#}¦ {%pra-nakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nakṣati,%}
{%-te, -nakṣitum,%} Ved. to draw near, approach; (Sāy.)
{%= sarvato vyāp,%} to be everywhere present.
<LEND>

<L>32140<pc>0632-b<k1>pranard<k2>pranard
{#pranard#}¦ {%pra-nard,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nardati, -nardi-%}
{%tum,%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 14.
<LEND>

<L>32141<pc>0632-b<k1>pranazwa<k2>pranazwa
{#pranazwa#}¦ {%pra-naṣṭa.%} See under 2. {%pra-ṇaś,%}
p. 609.
<LEND>

<L>32142<pc>0632-b<k1>pranAyaka<k2>pranAyaka
{#pranAyaka#}¦ {%pra-nāyaka, as, ā, am,%} one whose
leader is away, whose rulers are abroad; destitute of
a guide.
<LEND>

<L>32143<pc>0632-b<k1>pranAla<k2>pranAla
{#pranAla#}¦ {%pra-nāla, pra-nālī = pra-ṇāla, pra-%}
{%ṇālī,%} p. 609, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32144<pc>0632-b<k1>pranASin<k2>pranASin
{#pranASin#}¦ {%pra-nāśin,%} incorrectly for {%pra-%}
{%ṇāśin,%} p. 609, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32145<pc>0632-b<k1>praniMsita<k2>praniMsita
{#praniMsita#}¦ {%pra-niṃsita, pra-niṃsitavya = pra-%}
{%ṇiṃsita, pra-ṇiṃsitavya,%} p. 609, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32146<pc>0632-b<k1>pranikzaRa<k2>pranikzaRa
{#pranikzaRa#}¦ {%pra-nikṣaṇa = pra-ṇikṣaṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>32147<pc>0632-b<k1>praniGAtana<k2>praniGAtana
{#praniGAtana#}¦ {%pra-nighātana, am,%} n. (fr. Caus.
of rt. {%han%} with {%pra-ni%}), killing, slaughter, murder.
<LEND>

<L>32148<pc>0632-b<k1>pranindana<k2>pranindana
{#pranindana#}¦ {%pra-nindana = pra-ṇindana,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>32149<pc>0632-b<k1>praniBid<k2>praniBid
{#praniBid#}¦ {%pra-ni-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhettum,%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 18.
<LEND>

<L>32150<pc>0632-b<k1>pranirakz<k2>pranirakz
{#pranirakz#}¦ {%pra-ni-rakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rakṣati,%}
{%-rakṣitum,%} to protect, defend, maintain.
<LEND>

<L>32151<pc>0632-b<k1>pranIqa<k2>pranIqa
{#pranIqa#}¦ {%pra-nīḍa, as, ā, am,%} flown from the
nest, having left a nest.
<LEND>

<L>32152<pc>0632-b<k1>pranud<k2>pranud
{#pranud#}¦ {%pra-nud,%} incorrectly for {%pra-ṇud,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>32153<pc>0632-b<k1>pranft<k2>pranft
{#pranft#}¦ {%pra-nṛt,%} cl. 4. P. {%-nṛtyati, -nartitum,%}
to dance forwards, begin to dance, dance; to gesti-
culate as in dancing (in token of derision).
<LEND>

<L>32154<pc>0632-b<k1>pranartita<k2>pranartita
{%Pra-nartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to dance forwards,
set in motion, shaken, agitated; dandled.
<LEND>

<L>32155<pc>0632-b<k1>pranftta<k2>pranftta
{%Pra-nṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has begun to
dance, dancing; ({%am%}), n. a dance; (also incorrectly
written {%pra-nṛtya.%}) {%—Pranṛtta-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having danced forward, having begun to dance.
<LEND>

<L>32156<pc>0632-b<k1>pranftyat<k2>pranftyat
{%Pra-nṛtyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dancing forward,
beginning to dance, dancing.
<LEND>

<L>32157<pc>0632-b<k1>prapakza<k2>prapakza
{#prapakza#}¦ {%pra-pakṣa, as,%} m. the extremity of
a wing (of an army drawn out in the form of a
bird); ({%as, ā, am%}), forming the extremity of a wing
(in an army so arranged).
<LEND>

<L>32158<pc>0632-b<k1>prapac<k2>prapac
{#prapac#}¦ {%pra-pac,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-pacati, -te, -pak-%}
{%tum,%} to begin to cook; to be accustomed to cook.
<LEND>
[Page0632-c+ 79]

<L>32159<pc>0632-c<k1>prapakva<k2>prapakva
{%Pra-pakva, as, ā, am,%}¦ (in medicine) inflamed.
<LEND>

<L>32160<pc>0632-c<k1>prapAka<k2>prapAka
{%Pra-pāka, as,%}¦ m. ripening (of a boil &c.); in-
flammation.
<LEND>

<L>32161<pc>0632-c<k1>prapaYca<k2>prapaYca
{#prapaYca#}¦ {%pra-pañca, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%pac%} or
{%pañc%} with {%pra%}), spreading out, development, dif-
fusion, display, amplification, expansion; expanse, ex-
tent; (in philosophy) the expansion of the universe,
the world as the scene of manifold action, the visible
world or universe; prolixity, diffuseness, copiousness
(in style or composition); heap, abundance, quantity;
manifoldness, diversity; phenomenon, appearance;
illusion, delusion, deceit, trick, fraud, error; reci-
procal false praise; reverse, opposition, reversion,
inversion; analysis; (in grammar) the repetition of
an obscure rule in a clearer form; a joke, jest (?);
(as an enclitic after a finite verb) see Gaṇa Gotrādi
to Pāṇ. VIII. 1, 27, 57; {%prapañcena%} or {%prapañca-%}
{%tas,%} ind. diffusely, in detail. {%—Prapañca-nirmāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the creation of the visible world. {%—Prapañca-%}
{%buddhi, is, is, i,%} deceitful-minded, artful, cunning;
({%is%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Prapañca-vacana, am,%}
n. a diffuse or prolix discourse. {%—Prapañca-viveka%}
and {%prapañca-sāra, as,%} m., N. of two works.
<LEND>

<L>32162<pc>0632-c<k1>prapaYcaka<k2>prapaYcaka
{%Pra-pañcaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ developing, displaying;
explaining, copiously expounding.
<LEND>

<L>32163<pc>0632-c<k1>prapaYcana<k2>prapaYcana
{%Pra-pañcana, am,%}¦ n. development, display, diffu-
sion; copious explanation or exposition, explication.
<LEND>

<L>32164<pc>0632-c<k1>prapaYcaya<k2>prapaYcaya
{%Prapañcaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prapañcayati, -yitum,%}
to develop, amplify; to display, explain in detail,
analyze; to dwell upon a note (in music); to cause
to appear in a false light.
<LEND>

<L>32165<pc>0632-c<k1>prapaYcita<k2>prapaYcita
{%Prapañcita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Nom.), amplified,
expanded, extended, diffused; declared fully, ex-
plained, expatiated upon, treated at length; caused
to appear in a false light; mistaken, erring; tricked,
deceived, beguiled.
<LEND>

<L>32166<pc>0632-c<k1>prapaW<k2>prapaW
{#prapaW#}¦ {%pra-paṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paṭhati, -paṭhitum,%}
to recite aloud: Caus. {%-pāṭhayati, -yitum,%} to teach,
lecture, expound.
<LEND>

<L>32167<pc>0632-c<k1>prapAWaka<k2>prapAWaka
{%Pra-pāṭhaka, as,%}¦ m. a lesson, lecture, a division,
chapter or subdivision of a book (sometimes read
{%pra-pāṭha%}).
<LEND>

<L>32168<pc>0632-c<k1>prapaRa<k2>prapaRa
{#prapaRa#}¦ {%pra-paṇa, as,%} m., Ved. (fr. rt. 2. {%paṇ%}
with {%pra%}), exchange, barter.
<LEND>

<L>32169<pc>0632-c<k1>prapat<k2>prapat
{#prapat#}¦ {%pra-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -patitum,%}
to fly forwards, fly along, fly forth, fly away; to
hasten forwards, hasten away; to fly down, rush or
dart down; to fall down, fall; to fall into; to come
to; to fall from, be deprived of, lose (with abl.):
Caus. {%-pātayati, -yitum,%} to cause to fly away, put
to flight; to chase, pursue: Desid. {%-pipatiṣati,%}
Ved. to wish to hurry away: Intens. {%-pāpatīti,%} Ved.
to shoot forth; (Sāy.) {%= punaḥ punaḥ pat,%} to fall
again and again, descend repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>32170<pc>0632-c<k1>prapatana<k2>prapatana
{%Pra-patana, am,%}¦ n. flying forwards, flying forth,
flying away; falling, falling down or into, precipi-
tating one's self from; alighting; dying, death,
destruction; a steep rock, precipice.
<LEND>

<L>32171<pc>0632-c<k1>prapatita<k2>prapatita
{%Pra-patita, as, ā, am,%}¦ flown forwards, flown
away, flown; fallen, come down; decayed, dead.
<LEND>

<L>32172<pc>0632-c<k1>prapAta<k2>prapAta
{%Pra-pāta, as,%}¦ m. a particular mode of flying;
starting off, hastening away, going away, departure;
springing forth, sudden attack, facing an enemy;
falling down or into, a fall; precipitating one's self
down from a rock; falling out, ({%danta-keśa-prapāta,%}
the falling out or loss of the teeth and hair); discharge,
emission, flux [cf. {%vīrya-p˚%}]; a steep rock, cliff,
precipice; a steep bank or shore; a cascade, water-
fall. {%—Prapātābhimukha (˚ta-abh˚), as, ī, am,%}
inclined to precipitate one's self from a rock.
{%—Prapātāmbu (˚ta-am˚), u,%} n. falling water,
water falling from a rock.
<LEND>

<L>32173<pc>0632-c<k1>prapAtana<k2>prapAtana
{%Pra-pātana, am,%}¦ n. the causing to fall, throwing
down, throwing on the ground; {%akṣa-prapātana,%}
throwing dice.
<LEND>

<L>32174<pc>0632-c<k1>prapAtin<k2>prapAtin
{%Pra-pātin, ī,%}¦ m. a precipitous mountain, moun-
tain, rock, cliff.
<LEND>

<L>32175<pc>0632-c<k1>prapitsu<k2>prapitsu
{%Pra-pitsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing or intending to de-
scend or alight, wishing to fall or throw one's self down.
<LEND>
[Page0633-a+ 78]

<L>32176<pc>0633-a<k1>prapaTa<k2>prapaTa
{#prapaTa#}¦ {%pra-patha, as,%} m., Ved. a long way
or journey, a journey to a distant place; a remote
place; a broad road or street; ({%as, ā, am%}), loose,
relaxed, languid, enervated.
<LEND>

<L>32177<pc>0633-a<k1>prapaTin<k2>prapaTin
{%Prapathin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. roaming on distant
paths (Sāy. {%= prakṛṣṭa-mārga%}); ({%ī%}), m., N. of a
man (?).
<LEND>

<L>32178<pc>0633-a<k1>prapaTya<k2>prapaTya
{%Prapathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in the streets
or on the road (Mahī-dhara {%= bahu-sevito mārgas%}
{%tatra bhavaḥ,%} being in a much frequented road); an
epithet of Pūṣan, the tutelary deity of travellers.
<LEND>

<L>32179<pc>0633-a<k1>prapATa<k2>prapATa
{%Prapātha, as,%}¦ m. a road, way.
<LEND>

<L>32180<pc>0633-a<k1>prapad<k2>prapad<h>1
{#prapad#} 1¦. {%pra-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, -pat-%}
{%tum,%} to go forwards, set out for, betake one's self
to, resort to; to attain to, arrive at, reach; to take
refuge with, flee to for safety, fly to for succour; to
enter upon, enter into, set foot on; to come to a par-
ticular state, arrive at a condition; to become (with
adv. ending in {%sāt,%} e. g. {%sarpa-sāt prapad,%} to become
a serpent); to attain, obtain, gain, partake of, share
in; to perceive; to come on, draw near, approach,
appear (said of periods of time); to be going on, to
proceed; to take effect, prosper; to deal with, act
towards, behave towards; to allow, admit, assent, agree
to; to throw one's self down, fall down (at another's
feet); to fall upon, attack, assault, assail (Ved.);
{%adhvānam prapad,%} to set forth on the way, begin
a journey; {%Jina-śāśanam prapad,%} to embrace the
doctrines of Jina: Caus. P. A. {%-pādayati, -te, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to enter, introduce: Desid. P. A.
{%-pitsati, -te,%} to wish to enter; to desire to obtain;
to be going to undertake.
<LEND>

<L>32181<pc>0633-a<k1>prapad<k2>prapad<h>2
2. {%pra-pad, t,%}¦ f., Ved. a way; N. of particular sacred
texts; (fr. {%pra%} + 3. {%pad%}), the fore part of the foot.
<LEND>

<L>32182<pc>0633-a<k1>prapada<k2>prapada
{%Pra-pada, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pra + pada%}), the fore part
of the foot; the point of the foot, tip of the toes;
({%ais%}), ind. on tiptoe.
<LEND>

<L>32183<pc>0633-a<k1>prapadana<k2>prapadana
{%Pra-padana, am,%}¦ n. entering, entrance.
<LEND>

<L>32184<pc>0633-a<k1>prapadam<k2>prapadam
{%Prapadam,%}¦ ind. a term applied to a particular mode
of recitation (in which the Vedic verses are divided,
without reference to the sense and construction, into
parts of an equal number of syllables, and between
these parts particular formulas inserted containing the
word {%pra-padye%}).
<LEND>

<L>32185<pc>0633-a<k1>prapadIna<k2>prapadIna
{%Prapadīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the fore part
of the foot; extending to it, (wrongly for {%āprapa-%}
{%dīna,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>32186<pc>0633-a<k1>prapanna<k2>prapanna
{%Pra-panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ arriving at, reaching;
seeking, adhering to; one who seeks for protection
or takes refuge, a suppliant; attained, obtained; pos-
sessed of, furnished with, provided with; promised,
assented to; effecting, producing; poor, distressed.
{%—Prapanna-pāla, as,%} m. ‘the protector of sup-
pliants or of those who seek protection,’ an epithet
of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Prapannāmṛta (˚na-am˚), am,%} n.
‘nectar for suppliants,’ N. of a work. {%—Prapan-%}
{%nārti-hara (˚na-ār˚), as, ī, am,%} relieving or re-
liever of the distress of suppliants.
<LEND>

<L>32187<pc>0633-a<k1>prapAda<k2>prapAda
{%Pra-pāda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. premature delivery, mis-
carriage.
<LEND>

<L>32188<pc>0633-a<k1>prapAduka<k2>prapAduka
{%Pra-pāduka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. going off, coming
forth.
<LEND>

<L>32189<pc>0633-a<k1>prapitsu<k2>prapitsu
{%Pra-pitsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of attaining, de-
sirous of entering upon.
<LEND>

<L>32190<pc>0633-a<k1>prapanna<k2>prapanna
{#prapanna#}¦ {%pra-panna.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>32191<pc>0633-a<k1>prapannAqa<k2>prapannAqa
{#prapannAqa#}¦ {%prapannāḍa, as,%} m. {%= prapunnāḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>32192<pc>0633-a<k1>praparRa<k2>praparRa
{#praparRa#}¦ {%pra-parṇa, as,%} m. a fallen leaf.
<LEND>

<L>32193<pc>0633-a<k1>prapalAya<k2>prapalAya
{#prapalAya#}¦ {%pra-palāya,%} cl. 1. A. {%-palāyate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to run away, flee away, escape.
<LEND>

<L>32194<pc>0633-a<k1>prapalAyana<k2>prapalAyana
{%Pra-palāyana, am,%}¦ n. running away, flight, rout.
<LEND>

<L>32195<pc>0633-a<k1>prapalAyita<k2>prapalAyita
{%Pra-palāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ run away; routed,
defeated.
<LEND>

<L>32196<pc>0633-a<k1>prapalAyin<k2>prapalAyin
{%Pra-palāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ running away, flying,
escaping; a fugitive, one who deserts his cause.
<LEND>

<L>32197<pc>0633-a<k1>prapavaRa<k2>prapavaRa
{#prapavaRa#}¦ {%pra-pavaṇa%} or {%pra-pavana, am,%} n.
(rt. 1. {%pū%}), purifying, straining (Soma juice).
<LEND>

<L>32198<pc>0633-a<k1>prapavaRIya<k2>prapavaRIya
{%Pra-pavaṇīya%}¦ or {%pra-pavanīya, as, ā, am,%}
to be cleansed or purified.
<LEND>
[Page0633-b+ 71]

<L>32199<pc>0633-b<k1>prapaSyat<k2>prapaSyat
{#prapaSyat#}¦ {%pra-paśyat.%} See {%pra-dṛś,%} p. 631.
<LEND>

<L>32200<pc>0633-b<k1>prapA<k2>prapA<h>1
{#prapA#} 1¦. {%pra-pā%} (see rt. 1. {%pā%}), cl. 1. P.
{%-pibati%} (Ved. {%-pāti%}), {%-pātum,%} to begin to drink,
drink, quaff, sip; (with {%cakṣuṣā%}) to drink in
with the eyes, feast the eyes upon.
<LEND>

<L>32201<pc>0633-b<k1>prapA<k2>prapA<h>2
2. {%pra-pā,%}¦ f. (according to the usual rule the nom.
sing. would be {%pra-pās%}), a place for watering cattle,
a shed on the road-side for accommodating travellers
with water, place where water is distributed, cistern,
(according to Kullūka {%= pānīya-dāna-gṛha%}); a
draught; a supply of water. {%—Prapā-pūraṇa, am,%}
n. filling a place for watering cattle, furnishing a
cistern with water. {%—Prapāpūraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}
serving to fill a cistern. {%—Prapā-vana, am,%} n.
‘cistern-grove,’ a pleasure-garden, a cool grove.
<LEND>

<L>32202<pc>0633-b<k1>prapARIya<k2>prapARIya
{%Pra-pāṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be drunk, drinkable,
potable.
<LEND>

<L>32203<pc>0633-b<k1>prapAna<k2>prapAna
{%Pra-pāna, am,%}¦ n. drinking, sipping; the under part
of a horse's upper lip (which he uses in drinking).
<LEND>

<L>32204<pc>0633-b<k1>prapAnaka<k2>prapAnaka
{%Prapānaka, am,%}¦ n. (probably) a draught, beverage.
<LEND>

<L>32205<pc>0633-b<k1>prapAyin<k2>prapAyin<h>1
1. {%pra-pāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ drinking, one who drinks.
<LEND>

<L>32206<pc>0633-b<k1>prapA<k2>prapA<h>3
{#prapA#} 3¦. {%pra-pā%} (see rt. 3. {%pā%}), cl. 2. P.
{%-pāti, -pātum,%} to protect, defend from (with abl.):
Caus. {%-pālayati, -yitum,%} to guard, screen, defend,
protect.
<LEND>

<L>32207<pc>0633-b<k1>prapAyin<k2>prapAyin<h>2
2. {%pra-pāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ protecting (?).
<LEND>

<L>32208<pc>0633-b<k1>prapAlana<k2>prapAlana
{%Pra-pālana, am,%}¦ n. guarding, protecting, pro-
tection.
<LEND>

<L>32209<pc>0633-b<k1>prapAlin<k2>prapAlin
{%Pra-pālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ guarding, protecting; ({%ī%}),
m. an epithet of Bala-rāma.
<LEND>

<L>32210<pc>0633-b<k1>prapAka<k2>prapAka
{#prapAka#}¦ {%pra-pāka.%} See {%pra-pac,%} p. 632.
<LEND>

<L>32211<pc>0633-b<k1>prapAWaka<k2>prapAWaka
{#prapAWaka#}¦ {%pra-pāṭhaka.%} See {%pra-paṭh,%} p. 632.
<LEND>

<L>32212<pc>0633-b<k1>prapARi<k2>prapARi
{#prapARi#}¦ {%pra-pāṇi, is,%} m. the flat or palm of
the hand.
<LEND>

<L>32213<pc>0633-b<k1>prapARqu<k2>prapARqu
{#prapARqu#}¦ {%pra-pāṇḍu, us, us, u,%} very white,
of a dazzling white colour.
<LEND>

<L>32214<pc>0633-b<k1>prapARqura<k2>prapARqura
{%Pra-pāṇḍura, as, ā, am, = pra-pāṇḍu.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>32215<pc>0633-b<k1>prapAdika<k2>prapAdika
{#prapAdika#}¦ {%prapādika, as,%} m. a peacock;
(also read {%prapādīka.%})
<LEND>

<L>32216<pc>0633-b<k1>prapAduka<k2>prapAduka
{#prapAduka#}¦ {%pra-pāduka.%} See under 1. {%pra-pad.%}
<LEND>

<L>32217<pc>0633-b<k1>prapitAmaha<k2>prapitAmaha
{#prapitAmaha#}¦ {%pra-pitāmaha, as,%} m. a paternal
great-grandfather; an epithet of Kṛṣṇa (regarded
as great-grandfather of the three worlds); an epithet
of Brahmā; ({%ī%}), f. a paternal great-grandmother;
({%ās%}), m. pl. great-grandfathers, ancestors in general.
<LEND>

<L>32218<pc>0633-b<k1>prapitfvya<k2>prapitfvya
{%Pra-pitṛvya, as,%}¦ m. a paternal grand-uncle.
<LEND>

<L>32219<pc>0633-b<k1>prapitva<k2>prapitva
{#prapitva#}¦ {%pra-pitva, am,%} n., Ved. going
towards, going to meet, meeting with, encountering
(Sāy. {%= saṅgrāma,%} combat); the coming on or ap-
proach of day, day-break (Sāy. {%= pra-krama%}); [cf.
{%apa-pitva, abhi-pitva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32220<pc>0633-b<k1>prapitsu<k2>prapitsu
{#prapitsu#}¦ {%pra-pitsu.%} See under 1. {%pra-pad.%}
<LEND>

<L>32221<pc>0633-b<k1>prapinv<k2>prapinv
{#prapinv#}¦ {%pra-pinv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-pinvati,%}
{%-te, -pinvitum,%} Ved. to swell, be full of, be rich,
flow over.
<LEND>

<L>32222<pc>0633-b<k1>prapiz<k2>prapiz
{#prapiz#}¦ {%pra-piṣ,%} cl. 7. P. {%-pinaṣṭi, -peṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to crush, pound: Caus. {%-peṣayati, -yitum,%}
to pound, grind or crush to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>32223<pc>0633-b<k1>prapizwa<k2>prapizwa
{%Pra-piṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pounded, ground or crushed
to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>32224<pc>0633-b<k1>prapIq<k2>prapIq
{#prapIq#}¦ {%pra-pīḍ,%} Caus. {%-pīḍayati, -yitum,%} to
press hard, press, squeeze; to check, suppress; to
oppress, molest, injure, pain, torment, torture.
<LEND>

<L>32225<pc>0633-b<k1>prapIqana<k2>prapIqana
{%Pra-pīḍana, am,%}¦ n. pressing, squeezing; (in
medicine) an astringent.
<LEND>

<L>32226<pc>0633-b<k1>prapIqita<k2>prapIqita
{%Pra-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressed, oppressed; pained,
tortured.
<LEND>

<L>32227<pc>0633-b<k1>prapIta<k2>prapIta
{#prapIta#}¦ {%pra-pīta, pra-pīna.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32228<pc>0633-b<k1>praputra<k2>praputra
{#praputra#}¦ {%pra-putra, as,%} m. a grandson, de-
scendant.
<LEND>

<L>32229<pc>0633-b<k1>prapunAwa<k2>prapunAwa
{#prapunAwa#}¦ {%prapunāṭa,%} or {%prapunāḍa,%} or {%pra- %}
[Page0633-c+ 72]
{%punnaḍa,%} or {%prapunnāṭa,%} or {%prapunnāḍa,%} or
{%prapunnāla, as,%} m. a species of tree, Cassia Tora;
the ringworm shrub, Cassia Alata.
<LEND>

<L>32230<pc>0633-c<k1>prapuz<k2>prapuz
{#prapuz#}¦ {%pra-puṣ,%} cl. 4. 9. P. {%-puṣyati,%}
{%-puṣṇāti, -poṣitum,%} to nourish, feed, support,
maintain.
<LEND>

<L>32231<pc>0633-c<k1>prapuzpita<k2>prapuzpita
{#prapuzpita#}¦ {%pra-puṣpita, as, ā, am,%} flowering,
in blossom, blooming.
<LEND>

<L>32232<pc>0633-c<k1>prapUj<k2>prapUj
{#prapUj#}¦ {%pra-pūj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pūjayati, -yitum,%}
to show respect or honour to, praise, esteem, honour.
<LEND>

<L>32233<pc>0633-c<k1>prapf<k2>prapf
{#prapf#}¦ {%pra-pṛ%} (see rt. 1. {%pṛ%}), Caus. P. {%-pā-%}
{%rayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to carry across, bring over,
transport, ferry over; to bring out of, to deliver
from (with abl.), rescue, protect (Sāy. {%= pālayati%}).
<LEND>

<L>32234<pc>0633-c<k1>prapfc<k2>prapfc
{#prapfc#}¦ {%pra-pṛc,%} cl. 7. P. {%-pṛṇakti, -parci-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to come in contact with (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>32235<pc>0633-c<k1>prapfTak<k2>prapfTak
{#prapfTak#}¦ {%pra-pṛthak,%} ind., Ved. singly, one
by one.
<LEND>

<L>32236<pc>0633-c<k1>prapfzWa<k2>prapfzWa
{#prapfzWa#}¦ {%pra-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} having a
prominent or protuberant back.
<LEND>

<L>32237<pc>0633-c<k1>prapF<k2>prapF
{#prapF#}¦ {%pra-pṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-pṛṇāti, -paritum,%}
{%-parītum,%} to fill up, complete: Pass. {%-pūryate,%} to
be filled, become full, become satiated; to be com-
pleted, be fulfilled: Caus. {%-pūrayati, -yitum,%} to
fill up, complete; to make rich, enrich.
<LEND>

<L>32238<pc>0633-c<k1>prapUraka<k2>prapUraka
{%Pra-pūraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ filling up, fulfilling,
satisfying, satiating; ({%ikā%}), f. the plant Solanum
Jacquini.
<LEND>

<L>32239<pc>0633-c<k1>prapUraRa<k2>prapUraRa
{%Pra-pūraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ filling, fulfilling, satisfying;
({%am%}), n. the act of filling up, filling; injecting, injec-
tion, inserting; affixing, attaching to; satiating, satis-
fying; (with {%dhanuṣaḥ%}) bending a bow, i. e. the
drawing or filling out of a bow-string for the purpose
of shooting.
<LEND>

<L>32240<pc>0633-c<k1>prapUrita<k2>prapUrita
{%Pra-pūrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ filled up, completed.
<LEND>

<L>32241<pc>0633-c<k1>prapORqarIka<k2>prapORqarIka
{#prapORqarIka#}¦ {%prapauṇḍarīka, am,%} n. a small
herbaceous plant ({%= pauṇḍarīka,%} commonly {%puṇ-%}
{%ḍariyā,%} used as a remedy for ulcers and bad eyes
and as a perfume); {%= sthala-padma,%} Hibiscus Mu-
tabilis.
<LEND>

<L>32242<pc>0633-c<k1>prapOtra<k2>prapOtra
{#prapOtra#}¦ {%pra-pautra%} or {%pra-pautraka, as,%} m.
the son of a son's son, a great-grandson; ({%ī%}), f. the
daughter of a son's son, a great-granddaughter.
<LEND>

<L>32243<pc>0633-c<k1>prapyE<k2>prapyE
{#prapyE#}¦ {%pra-pyai,%} cl. 1. A. {%-pyāyate, -pyāyi-%}
{%tum, -pyātum,%} to swell out, swell up, be distended:
Caus. {%-pyāyayati, -yitum,%} to cause to swell out,
swell, distend.
<LEND>

<L>32244<pc>0633-c<k1>prapIta<k2>prapIta
{%Pra-pīta%}¦ or {%pra-pīna, as, ā, am,%} swollen out,
swollen up, distended.
<LEND>

<L>32245<pc>0633-c<k1>prapyAta<k2>prapyAta
{%Pra-pyāta%}¦ or {%pra-pyāna, as, ā, am,%} swollen
out, distended, fat, bulky.
<LEND>

<L>32246<pc>0633-c<k1>prapyAyana<k2>prapyAyana
{%Pra-pyāyana, am,%}¦ n. causing to swell out,
swelling.
<LEND>

<L>32247<pc>0633-c<k1>prapyAyanIya<k2>prapyAyanIya
{%Pra-pyāyanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to swell
out, to be swollen.
<LEND>

<L>32248<pc>0633-c<k1>prapyAyayitf<k2>prapyAyayitf
{%Pra-pyāyayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. causing to
swell out, distending.
<LEND>

<L>32249<pc>0633-c<k1>praproTa<k2>praproTa
{#praproTa#}¦ {%pra-protha, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
Ved. a particular plant (sometimes used as a substi-
tute for the Soma plant).
<LEND>

<L>32250<pc>0633-c<k1>praplu<k2>praplu
{#praplu#}¦ {%pra-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, -plotum,%}
Ved. to swim towards, to float or sail away: Caus.
{%-plāvayati, -yitum,%} to cause to float or sail away;
to pour water upon, wash or flood with water.
<LEND>

<L>32251<pc>0633-c<k1>praplAvana<k2>praplAvana
{%Pra-plāvana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. flooding with water,
extinguishing (a fire) with water.
<LEND>

<L>32252<pc>0633-c<k1>prapluta<k2>prapluta
{%Pra-pluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. dipped in water.
<LEND>

<L>32253<pc>0633-c<k1>praParvI<k2>praParvI
{#praParvI#}¦ {%prapharvī,%} f., Ved. a wanton or
lascivious girl.
<LEND>

<L>32254<pc>0633-c<k1>praPulta<k2>praPulta
{#praPulta#}¦ {%pra-phulta, as, ā, am,%} blown, blos-
somed, blooming ({%= pra-phulla,%} Scholiast on Pāṇ.
VII. 4, 89).
<LEND>
[Page0634-a+ 77]

<L>32255<pc>0634-a<k1>praPulti<k2>praPulti
{%Pra-phulti, is,%}¦ f. blooming, blossoming.
<LEND>

<L>32256<pc>0634-a<k1>praPulla<k2>praPulla
{%Pra-phulla, as, ā, am,%}¦ blooming forth, blooming,
blossoming, flowering, blossomed, blown (as a flower),
covered with blossoms; expanded like a blown
flower; shining; smiling; glad, gay, cheerful, pleased.
{%—Praphulla-nayana%} or {%praphulla-netra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having full or sparkling eyes, having eyes ex-
panded with joy. {%—Praphulla-vadana, as, ā, am,%}
having the face expanded with joy, having a cheerful
or smiling countenance, looking gay or happy.
<LEND>

<L>32257<pc>0634-a<k1>prabanD<k2>prabanD
{#prabanD#}¦ {%pra-bandh,%} cl. 9. P. {%-badhnāti,%}
{%-banddhum,%} to bind on, bind, fasten, connect; to
suppress, check, stop.
<LEND>

<L>32258<pc>0634-a<k1>prabadDa<k2>prabadDa
{%Pra-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound on, bound, fas-
tened, fettered; connected; suppressed, checked,
stopped. {%—Prabaddha-mūtra, as, ā, am,%} suffering
from retention of urine or ischury.
<LEND>

<L>32259<pc>0634-a<k1>prabandDf<k2>prabandDf
{%Pra-banddhṛ, dhā,%}¦ m. one who connects toge-
ther, an author.
<LEND>

<L>32260<pc>0634-a<k1>prabanDa<k2>prabanDa
{%Pra-bandha, as,%}¦ m. a connection, a bond, tie,
({%garbha-nāḍī-prabandha,%} the umbilical cord); an
uninterrupted connection, continuous series; uninter-
ruptedness, continuance, continuous application or
action; a continued discourse or narration, connected
discussion or narrative; a composition, any literary
composition, especially a poetical production. {%—Pra-%}
{%bandha-kalpanā,%} f. a feigned story, a work of
imagination (whether founded on fact or not). {%—Pra-%}
{%bandha-varṣa, as,%} m. incessant rain, rain without
intermission. {%—Prabandhādhyāya (˚dha-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the fourth chapter of the Saṅgīta-
darpaṇa; of the fourth book of the Saṅgīta-ratnākara.
<LEND>

<L>32261<pc>0634-a<k1>prabanDana<k2>prabanDana
{%Pra-bandhana, am,%}¦ n. connection, bond, tie;
[cf. {%sandhi-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32262<pc>0634-a<k1>prabaBra<k2>prabaBra
{#prabaBra#}¦ {%pra-babhra, as,%} m. an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>32263<pc>0634-a<k1>prabarha<k2>prabarha
{#prabarha#}¦ {%pra-barha%} or {%pra-varha, as, ā, am%}
(fr. rt. {%bṛh%} or {%vṛh%} with {%pra%}), the best, most
excellent.
<LEND>

<L>32264<pc>0634-a<k1>prabala<k2>prabala<h>1
{#prabala#} 1¦. {%pra-bala, as, ā, am%} (see {%bala%}),
prevailing, predominant; strong, powerful, mighty,
great; violent (as pain); important, significant;
abounding with; dangerous, pernicious; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of an attendant of Viṣṇu; of a Daitya; a sprout,
shoot {%(= pra-bāla); (ā),%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%pra-sāriṇī); (am),%} ind. strongly, exceedingly,
much. {%—Prabala-tā,%} f. or {%prabala-tva, am,%} n.
strength, power, might, mightiness, validity. {%—Pra-%}
{%bala-toya, as, ā, am,%} abounding in water. {%—Pra-%}
{%bala-rudita, am,%} n. strong crying, excessive weeping.
{%—Prabala-vat, ān, atī, at,%} strong, mighty.
<LEND>

<L>32265<pc>0634-a<k1>prabala<k2>prabala<h>2
2. {%prabala,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prabalati,%} &c., to become
strong or powerful.
<LEND>

<L>32266<pc>0634-a<k1>prabAla<k2>prabAla
{%Pra-bāla, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (sometimes spelt {%pra-%}
{%vāla%}), a young shoot, sprout, new leaf or branch;
coral (in this sense also written {%pra-vāḍa%}); the
neck of the Indian lute; ({%as%}), m. an animal; a
pupil; a kind of vegetable; [cf. {%prabālika.%}] {%—Pra-%}
{%bāla-padma, am,%} n. a red lotus-flower. {%—Prabāla-%}
{%phala, am,%} n. red sandal-wood. {%—Prabāla-bhasman,%}
{%a,%} n. calx or ashes of coral (used medicinally). {%—Pra-%}
{%bāla-maṇi-śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} having horns of
coral and gems. {%—Prabāla-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
new leaves or shoots. {%—Prabālāśmantaka (˚la-%}
{%aś˚),%} (probably) coral.
<LEND>

<L>32267<pc>0634-a<k1>prabAlaka<k2>prabAlaka
{%Prabālaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Yakṣa; ({%ikā%}), f.,
N. of a female.
<LEND>

<L>32268<pc>0634-a<k1>prabAlika<k2>prabAlika
{%Prabālika, as,%}¦ m. a kind of vegetable.
<LEND>

<L>32269<pc>0634-a<k1>prabalI<k2>prabalI
{#prabalI#}¦ {%prabalī,%} f. a class, division of a
community, (supposed to be used in this sense in a
particular inscription.)
<LEND>

<L>32270<pc>0634-a<k1>prabahlikA<k2>prabahlikA
{#prabahlikA#}¦ {%prabahlikā = pravahlikā%} or {%pra-%}
{%valhikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>32271<pc>0634-a<k1>prabAD<k2>prabAD
{#prabAD#}¦ {%pra-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate, -bā-%}
{%dhitum,%} to press forwards, drive; to press hard upon,
pain, torment, oppress, disquiet, vex, annoy; to
throw down, destroy, demolish, abolish, unmake;
to press back, drive back, repel, repulse.
<LEND>
[Page0634-b+ 78]

<L>32272<pc>0634-b<k1>prabADaka<k2>prabADaka
{%Pra-bādhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ pressing back, keeping
off, keeping back, keeping at a distance; refusing.
<LEND>

<L>32273<pc>0634-b<k1>prabADana<k2>prabADana
{%Pra-bādhana, am,%}¦ n. pressing hard upon, op-
pressing, tormenting, paining; keeping off, keeping
back, keeping at a distance; refusing, denying.
<LEND>

<L>32274<pc>0634-b<k1>prabADamAna<k2>prabADamAna
{%Pra-bādhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressing hard upon,
tormenting, afflicting, paining; keeping off, keeping
back.
<LEND>

<L>32275<pc>0634-b<k1>prabADita<k2>prabADita
{%Pra-bādhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressed forwards, driven;
oppressed.
<LEND>

<L>32276<pc>0634-b<k1>prabAbaDAna<k2>prabAbaDAna
{%Pra-bābadhāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Intens.), Ved.
hastening on before, overtaking.
<LEND>

<L>32277<pc>0634-b<k1>prabAla<k2>prabAla
{#prabAla#}¦ {%pra-bāla.%} See under 1. {%pra-bala,%}
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32278<pc>0634-b<k1>prabAhu<k2>prabAhu
{#prabAhu#}¦ {%pra-bāhu, us,%} m. the fore-arm;
‘long-armed,’ N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>32279<pc>0634-b<k1>prabAhuka<k2>prabAhuka
{%Prabāhuka, as,%}¦ m. ‘long-armed,’ N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>32280<pc>0634-b<k1>prabAhuk<k2>prabAhuk
{#prabAhuk#}¦ {%pra-bāhuk,%} ind., Ved. in an even
line, in an equal series, on an equal height, on a
level; at the same time.
<LEND>

<L>32281<pc>0634-b<k1>prabAhukam<k2>prabAhukam
{%Pra-bāhukam,%}¦ ind. at the same time; on high.
<LEND>

<L>32282<pc>0634-b<k1>prabuD<k2>prabuD<h>1
{#prabuD#} 1¦. {%pra-budh,%} cl. 4. A. {%-budhyate,%}
{%-bodhitum,%} to wake up, wake, awaken (intrans.);
to bloom, blossom; cl. 1. P. {%-bodhati,%} to wake up,
wake, awake (trans.); to become sensible or aware of,
perceive, observe, regard: Caus. {%-bodhayati, -yitum,%}
to wake up, wake, awaken (trans.); to make sen-
sible, cause to know, inform, admonish; to try to
convince, persuade; to instruct, teach (with two acc.);
to explain; to cause to expand or bloom; to stimu-
late (by gentle friction).
<LEND>

<L>32283<pc>0634-b<k1>prabudDa<k2>prabudDa
{%Pra-buddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ awakened, wakened,
awake, roused; enlivened, lively; clear-sighted, clever,
wise, learned; expanded, blown, in bloom; unfolded,
developed; beginning to take effect (as a spell); ({%as%}),
m., N. of a teacher. {%—Prabuddha-tā,%} f. intelli-
gence, wisdom (opposed to {%jaḍa-tā%}).
<LEND>

<L>32284<pc>0634-b<k1>prabuD<k2>prabuD<h>2
2. {%pra-budh, bhut, t, t,%}¦ Ved. attentive, watching
for; ({%t%}), f. awaking.
<LEND>

<L>32285<pc>0634-b<k1>prabuDa<k2>prabuDa
{%Pra-budha, as,%}¦ m. a great sage.
<LEND>

<L>32286<pc>0634-b<k1>praboDa<k2>praboDa
{%Pra-bodha, as,%}¦ m. awaking (either from sleep or
from ignorance); awakening, becoming conscious,
consciousness; blowing (as of a flower); vigilance,
watchfulness, wakefulness, activity; intellect, under-
standing, knowledge, wisdom, intelligence; explain-
ing; consoling, consolation; reviving the fragrance
of a perfume which has lost its scent. {%—Prabodha-%}
{%candra, as,%} m. the moon of knowledge, i. e. Know-
ledge personified and compared to the moon. {%—Pra-%}
{%bodha-candrikā,%} f. ‘moonlight of knowledge,’ N.
of a grammar by Vaijana. {%—Prabodha-candrodaya%}
{%(˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘rise of the moon of knowledge,’
Intelligence personified and compared to the risen
moon; N. of a celebrated philosophical drama. {%—Pra-%}
{%bodha-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a grammar. {%—Pra-%}
{%bodha-siddhi, is,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Prabodha-%}
{%sudhākara, as,%} m., N. of a Vedānta work. {%—Pra-%}
{%bodhotsava (˚dha-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘waking-festival,’
a festival observed from the tenth to the day of full
moon of the month Kārttika; see {%pra-bodhinī.%}
{%—Prabodhodaya (˚dha-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘the rise of
knowledge,’ N. of a work; [cf. {%prabodha-candro-%}
{%daya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32287<pc>0634-b<k1>praboDaka<k2>praboDaka
{%Pra-bodhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who awakens;
intelligible (at the end of comps., cf. {%sukha-p˚%});
({%as%}), m. a minstrel whose duty is to wake the king.
<LEND>

<L>32288<pc>0634-b<k1>praboDana<k2>praboDana
{%Pra-bodhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ awakening, exciting,
arousing; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Buddha; ({%ī%}), f. the
eleventh day in the light half of the month Kārttika
celebrated as a festival in commemoration of the wak-
ing of Viṣṇu; the plant Alhagi Maurorum {%(= dur-%}
{%ālabhā); (am),%} n. waking, awaking (e. g. {%kalya-%}
{%prabodhana,%} waking at day-break); awakening,
arousing, exciting, reviving; knowledge, understand-
ing; instructing, informing, explaining; reviving the
fragrance of a perfume which has lost its scent.
<LEND>

<L>32289<pc>0634-b<k1>praboDita<k2>praboDita
{%Pra-bodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ awakened, wakened,
awake, aroused, roused; taught, instructed, informed,
[Page0634-c+ 77]
admonished; convinced, persuaded; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
metre, four times ˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯. {%—Pra-%}
{%bodhita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has awaked.
<LEND>

<L>32290<pc>0634-c<k1>praboDin<k2>praboDin
{%Pra-bodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ waking, awaking; ({%inī%}), f.
the eleventh day in the light half of the month Kārt-
tika celebrated as a festival in commemoration of the
waking of Viṣṇu; [cf. {%pra-bodhanī.%}] {%—Prabodhi-%}
{%tā,%} f. the being (early) awake, waking betimes.
<LEND>

<L>32291<pc>0634-c<k1>praboDya<k2>praboDya<h>1
1. {%pra-bodhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be awakened.
<LEND>

<L>32292<pc>0634-c<k1>praboDya<k2>praboDya<h>2
2. {%pra-bodhya,%}¦ ind. having awakened; having
instructed, having explained; having apologized.
<LEND>

<L>32293<pc>0634-c<k1>prabrU<k2>prabrU
{#prabrU#}¦ {%pra-brū,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-bravīti, -brūte,%}
&c., to speak before (with acc.); to proclaim, an-
nounce, publish, declare, inform; to celebrate, praise,
laud, glorify (Ved.); to read before (with gen. or
dat.); to recite, teach; to tell (with two acc.); to
exclaim, shout; to describe; {%satyam pra-brū,%} to
speak the truth, speak sincerely.
<LEND>

<L>32294<pc>0634-c<k1>praBaj<k2>praBaj
{#praBaj#}¦ {%pra-bhaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bhajati, -te,%}
{%-bhaktum,%} to execute, accomplish; to honour; to
divide.
<LEND>

<L>32295<pc>0634-c<k1>praBAga<k2>praBAga
{%Pra-bhāga, as,%}¦ m. division; (in arithmetic) the
fraction of a fraction, a sub-fraction. {%—Prabhāga-%}
{%jāti, is,%} f. reducing the fraction of a fraction to a
simple fraction, reduction of sub-fractions to a com-
mon denominator.
<LEND>

<L>32296<pc>0634-c<k1>praBAj<k2>praBAj
{%Pra-bhāj, k, k, k,%}¦ dividing, sharing, one who
divides or shares.
<LEND>

<L>32297<pc>0634-c<k1>praBaYj<k2>praBaYj
{#praBaYj#}¦ {%pra-bhañj%} [cf. {%pra-bhaj%}], cl. 7. P.
{%-bhanakti, -bhaṅktum,%} to break to pieces, break
down, break up, break, destroy; to defeat, conquer.
<LEND>

<L>32298<pc>0634-c<k1>praBagna<k2>praBagna
{%Pra-bhagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken to pieces, broken
down, broken up, broken, destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>32299<pc>0634-c<k1>praBaNga<k2>praBaNga
{%Pra-bhaṅga, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. breaking, crushing;
({%as%}), m. breaking, crushing, destroying, destruction,
complete defeat.
<LEND>

<L>32300<pc>0634-c<k1>praBaNgin<k2>praBaNgin
{%Pra-bhaṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. breaking, crushing,
destroying.
<LEND>

<L>32301<pc>0634-c<k1>praBaNgura<k2>praBaNgura
{%Pra-bhaṅgura, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroying; perishable,
transitory (?).
<LEND>

<L>32302<pc>0634-c<k1>praBajyamAna<k2>praBajyamAna
{%Pra-bhajyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being broken to
pieces, being broken up.
<LEND>

<L>32303<pc>0634-c<k1>praBaYjana<k2>praBaYjana
{%Pra-bhañjana, as, ī, am,%}¦ breaking down, break-
ing, destroying; ({%as%}), m. air, wind, storm, tempest,
hurricane; the god of the winds; a nervous disease;
N. of a prince; ({%am%}), n. breaking to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>32304<pc>0634-c<k1>praBadra<k2>praBadra
{#praBadra#}¦ {%pra-bhadra, as,%} m. the plant Azadi-
rachta Indica; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant ({%= prasāriṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>32305<pc>0634-c<k1>praBadraka<k2>praBadraka
{%Prabhadraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ exceedingly handsome
or beautiful; ({%am%}), n. a kind of metre, four times
˘˘˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>32306<pc>0634-c<k1>praBartavya<k2>praBartavya
{#praBartavya#}¦ {%pra-bhartavya,%} &c. See under
{%pra-bhṛ,%} p. 636, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32307<pc>0634-c<k1>praBava<k2>praBava
{#praBava#}¦ {%pra-bhava,%} &c. See under {%pra-bhū.%}
<LEND>

<L>32308<pc>0634-c<k1>praBA<k2>praBA<h>1
{#praBA#} 1¦. {%pra-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -bhātum,%}
to shine forth, shine, gleam; to begin to become
light, begin to dawn; to appear, seem; to illuminate,
enlighten.
<LEND>

<L>32309<pc>0634-c<k1>praBA<k2>praBA<h>2
2. {%pra-bhā,%}¦ f. light, splendor, radiance, effulgence
[cf. {%acira-p˚, dhūma-p˚%}]; a ray of light; the shadow
of the gnomon on a sun-dial; Light variously per-
sonified (as wife of the Sun; or as wife of Kalpa
and mother of Prātar, Madhyan-dina, and Sāya,
i. e. of Morning, Midday, and Evening; or as a
daughter of Svar-bhānu and mother of Nahuṣa);
a N. of Durgā; of an Apsaras; of a herdsman's
wife; of the city of Kuvera; a kind of metre, four
times ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯,˘¯¯˘¯; N. of a commentary
by Vaidya-nātha on the Kāvya-pradīpa; of a com-
mentary on the Śabda-kaustubha. {%—Prabhā-kara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} causing light or splendor, radiant, luminous;
({%as%}), m. ‘light-maker,’ the sun; the moon; fire;
the ocean; a N. of a Śiva; N. of a deity under the
eighth Manu; of a sage of the race of Atri; of a
teacher of the Mīmāṃsā philosophy associated with
Kumārila-bhaṭṭa; of the author of the Rasa-pradīpa
and of the Laghu-sapta-śatikā-stava; N. of a Samādhi;
[Page0635-a+ 78]
({%ī%}), f. (with Buddhists) N. of one of the ten Bhūmis;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Varṣa. {%—Prabhākara-deva, as,%}
m., N. of a minister in Kaśmīra; of a poet. {%—Pra-%}
{%bhākara-vardhana, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Pra-%}
{%bhākara-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a minister in Kaś-
mīra. {%—Prabhākaravarma-svāmin, ī,%} m. ‘lord of
Prabhākara-varman,’ the statue of the tutelary deity
of Prabhākara-varman. {%—Prabhākara-siddhi, is,%}
m., N. of a learned man. {%—Prabhākara-svāmin, ī,%}
m., N. of a temple of Viṣṇu built by Prabhākara-
varman. {%—Prabhā-kīṭa, as,%} m. ‘light-insect,’ a fire-
fly. {%—Prabhāñjana (˚bhā-añ˚), as,%} m. the tree
Hyperanthera Moringa; [cf. {%śobhāñjana.%}] {%—Pra-%}
{%bhā-tarala, as, ā, am,%} tremulously radiant; {%pra-%}
{%bhātaralaṃ jyotiḥ,%} a tremulously radiant flash,
i. e. a flash of lightning. {%—Prabhā-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Prabhā-pallavita, as, ā, am,%}
having natural radiance in place of red dye. {%—Pra-%}
{%bhā-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Prabhā-%}
{%praroha, as,%} m. ‘a shoot of light,’ a flash or ray
of light. {%—Prabhā-maṇḍala, am,%} n. a circle or
crown of rays. {%—Prabhāmaṇḍala-śobhin, ī, inī, i,%}
shining with a circle of rays. {%—Prabhā-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} consisting of light, shining. {%—Prabhā-lepin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} covered with splendor. {%—Prabhā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having light, luminous, radiant, splendid,
resplendent; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a goddess; of the wife
of the Sun; of one of the Mātṛs attending on
Skanda; of an Apsaras; of a sister of the Asura
Indra-damana; of a daughter of king Vajra-nābha
and wife of Pra-dyumna; of the wife of Citra-ratha
king of Aṅga; of a daughter of Su-vīra and wife of
Marutta; of a Tāpasī; of the mother of Malli the
nineteenth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī; N. of
the daughter of the Śreṣṭhin Soma-datta and wife of
Madana the son of Vikrama-sena; of the lute of one
of the Gaṇas or demigods attendant on Śiva; N. of a
drama; of a metre, four times ¯¯˘¯˘˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯;
of another metre, four times ¯¯˘¯˘˘¯˘¯˘¯˘¯.
{%—Prabhāvatī-pariṇaya, as,%} m. ‘the marriage of
Prabhāvatī,’ N. of a drama by Viśva-nātha {%(= pra-%}
{%bhā-vatī)%}. {%—Prabhā-vyūha, as,%} m., N. of a god;
(also read {%prabha-vyūha.%}) {%—Prabheśvara-tīrtha%}
{%(˚bhā-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a place of pilgrimage.
<LEND>

<L>32310<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAta<k2>praBAta
{%Pra-bhāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shone forth; begun to
become clear or light; ({%am%}), n. morning, dawn,
day-break; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Vasu (in this sense
incorrectly for {%pra-bhāsa%}).
<LEND>

<L>32311<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAna<k2>praBAna
{%Pra-bhāna, am,%}¦ n. light, radiance, shining.
<LEND>

<L>32312<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAnIya<k2>praBAnIya
{%Pra-bhānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be irradiated or
lighted.
<LEND>

<L>32313<pc>0635-a<k1>praBApana<k2>praBApana
{%Pra-bhāpana, am,%}¦ n. causing to shine.
<LEND>

<L>32314<pc>0635-a<k1>praBApanIya<k2>praBApanIya
{%Pra-bhāpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to shine,
<LEND>

<L>32315<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAga<k2>praBAga
{#praBAga#}¦ {%pra-bhāga.%} See {%pra-bhaj,%} p. 634.
<LEND>

<L>32316<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAraka<k2>praBAraka
{#praBAraka#}¦ {%prabhāraka, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>32317<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAva<k2>praBAva
{#praBAva#}¦ {%pra-bhāva,%} &c. See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32318<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAz<k2>praBAz
{#praBAz#}¦ {%pra-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate, -bhā-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to speak to, address, converse with; to de-
clare, proclaim, publish, announce; to divulge, dis-
close, reveal, manifest; to expound, explain; to
prate, prattle: Pass. {%-bhāṣyate,%} to be called or
named.
<LEND>

<L>32319<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAza<k2>praBAza
{%Pra-bhāṣa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Vasu; (a wrong
reading for {%pra-bhāsa.%})
<LEND>

<L>32320<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAzaRa<k2>praBAzaRa
{%Pra-bhāṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. explanation, interpretation.
<LEND>

<L>32321<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAzaRIya<k2>praBAzaRIya
{%Prabhāṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to explanation
or interpretation.
<LEND>

<L>32322<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAzita<k2>praBAzita
{%Pra-bhāṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken, uttered.
<LEND>

<L>32323<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAzin<k2>praBAzin
{%Pra-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ saying, speaking.
<LEND>

<L>32324<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAs<k2>praBAs
{#praBAs#}¦ {%pra-bhās,%} cl. 1. A. (ep. also P.)
{%-bhāsate (-ti), -bhāsitum,%} to shine, be brilliant;
to appear: Caus. {%-bhāsayati, -yitum,%} to irradiate,
illuminate, enlighten.
<LEND>

<L>32325<pc>0635-a<k1>praBAsa<k2>praBAsa
{%Pra-bhāsa, as,%}¦ m. splendor, beauty; N. of a
Vasu; of a being attendant on Skanda; of a deity
under the eighth Manu; (with Jainas) N. of one of
the eleven Gaṇādhipas; of a minister of Candra-
pāla king of Madra; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a race of
[Page0635-b+ 78]
Ṛṣis; ({%as, am%}), m. n., N. of a celebrated place
of pilgrimage on the west coast of the Dekhan near
Dvārakā.
<LEND>

<L>32326<pc>0635-b<k1>praBAsat<k2>praBAsat
{%Pra-bhāsat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shining forth, shining,
effulgent.
<LEND>

<L>32327<pc>0635-b<k1>praBAsana<k2>praBAsana
{%Pra-bhāsana, am,%}¦ n. irradiating, illumining.
<LEND>

<L>32328<pc>0635-b<k1>praBAsvat<k2>praBAsvat
{%Pra-bhāsvat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ shining forth, shining
brightly, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>32329<pc>0635-b<k1>praBAsvara<k2>praBAsvara
{%Pra-bhāsvara, as, ā, am, = pra-bhāsvat.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>32330<pc>0635-b<k1>praBid<k2>praBid<h>1
{#praBid#} 1¦. {%pra-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhettum,%} to split asunder, split, cleave; to pierce,
bore, break open, open: Pass. {%-bhidyate,%} to be
broken to pieces, crumble (intrans.); to bud forth,
open, expand (as a flower); to split, divide (intrans.).
<LEND>

<L>32331<pc>0635-b<k1>praBid<k2>praBid<h>2
2. {%pra-bhid, t, t, t,%}¦ splitting or tearing asunder,
splitting, cleaving.
<LEND>

<L>32332<pc>0635-b<k1>praBinna<k2>praBinna
{%Pra-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ split asunder, split, cleft,
divided, severed; broken to pieces, broken through;
well cut, cut off, detached; pierced, bored, opened;
budding, expanded; loosened, relaxed; disfigured,
deformed, altered, changed; different, distinct;
({%as%}), m. a furious elephant, an elephant in rut or
from whose temples a fragrant fluid exudes; [cf. 2.
{%dāna,%} p. 408, col. 1.] {%—Prabhinna-karaṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘cloven-cheeked,’ having the cheeks cleft (during
the exuding of a fragrant fluid, as an elephant in
the rutting season). {%—Prabhinna-viṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}
having the feces divided or relaxed. {%—Prabhinnāñ-%}
{%jana (˚na-añ˚), am,%} n. ‘mixed collyrium,’ an
eye-salve mixed with oil ({%= bhinnāñjana%}).
<LEND>

<L>32333<pc>0635-b<k1>praBeda<k2>praBeda
{%Pra-bheda, as,%}¦ m. splitting, cutting through;
division, separation, distinction, difference, disparity;
kind, sort; the flowing of a juice or peculiar fluid
from the temples of an elephant; [cf. 2. {%dāna,%}
p. 408, col. 1.]
<LEND>

<L>32334<pc>0635-b<k1>praBedaka<k2>praBedaka
{%Pra-bhedaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ tearing asunder, cleav-
ing, separating, severing; piercing; distinguishing.
<LEND>

<L>32335<pc>0635-b<k1>praBedana<k2>praBedana
{%Pra-bhedana, as, ī, am, = pra-bhedaka.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>32336<pc>0635-b<k1>praBI<k2>praBI
{#praBI#}¦ {%pra-bhī,%} cl. 3. P. {%-bibheti, -bhetum,%}
to be greatly afraid of, to be terrified at (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>32337<pc>0635-b<k1>praBIta<k2>praBIta
{%Pra-bhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ terrified, afraid.
<LEND>

<L>32338<pc>0635-b<k1>praBu<k2>praBu
{#praBu#}¦ {%pra-bhu,%} &c. See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32339<pc>0635-b<k1>praBuj<k2>praBuj<h>1
{#praBuj#} 1¦. {%pra-bhuj%} (see rt. 1. {%bhuj%}), cl. 6. P.
{%-bhujati, -bhoktum,%} to bend forwards, incline, bend.
<LEND>

<L>32340<pc>0635-b<k1>praBugna<k2>praBugna
{%Pra-bhugna,%}¦ see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 29.
<LEND>

<L>32341<pc>0635-b<k1>praBuj<k2>praBuj<h>2
{#praBuj#} 2¦. {%pra-bhuj%} (see rt. 2. {%bhuj%}), cl. 7. P.
A. {%-bhunakti, -bhuṅkte, -bhoktum,%} to begin to eat;
to protect, govern (?).
<LEND>

<L>32342<pc>0635-b<k1>praBU<k2>praBU
{#praBU#}¦ {%pra-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. (rarely also A.)
{%-bhavati (-te), -bhavitum,%} to come into being,
come forth, spring forth, spring up; to proceed, rise,
arise, originate; to be brought forth; to become;
to become manifest, appear; to extend beyond, sur-
pass (Ved.); to become more numerous, become
numerous, multiply, increase, become prevalent; to
be strong or powerful, prevail; to prevail over, have
power or control over (with gen., loc., or dat.); to
be a match for (with dat.); to be able or equal
to (with inf.); to have power for, be competent to
(with dat. or loc.); to be useful, be of use; to profit,
avail; to beseech, intreat, implore: Caus. {%-bhāva-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to come forth; to increase,
augment, multiply (e. g. to multiply the Soma by
placing it in a greater number of vessels); to provide
more amply, endow more richly; to make powerful,
cause to thrive or prosper, nurture; to gain power
or strength; to recognise, discern: Desid. of Caus.
{%-bibhāvayiṣati,%} to wish to increase, wish to
lengthen or prolong (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>32343<pc>0635-b<k1>praBava<k2>praBava
{%Pra-bhava, as,%}¦ m. production, birth; origin,
source, cause of existence; generative cause, the basis
or root of being or existence; the operative cause or
immediate origin of being, as the father or mother,
&c.; the place of receiving existence or that where
an object is first perceived, birthplace; the source
of a river [cf. {%Yamunā-p˚%}]; the Creator; strength,
might, superiority, power, majesty ({%= pra-bhāva%});
N. of a Sādhya; N. of the first or thirty-fifth year
[Page0635-c+ 81]
in a sixty years’ cycle of Jupiter; ({%as, ā, am%}), be-
coming prominent, prominent, excelling, excellent,
eminent, distinguished; superior, powerful; (at the
end of a comp.) springing or originating from,
rising from, derived from, belonging to; born, pro-
duced. {%—Prabhava-prabhu, us,%} m. (with Jainas)
N. of one of the six Śruta-kevalins.
<LEND>

<L>32344<pc>0635-c<k1>praBavat<k2>praBavat
{%Pra-bhavat, an, antī, at,%}¦ coming forth, arising;
exceeding; being powerful, prevailing.
<LEND>

<L>32345<pc>0635-c<k1>praBavatitarAm<k2>praBavatitarAm
{%Prabhavati-tarām,%}¦ ind. has greater efficacy, has
more power, has great power.
<LEND>

<L>32346<pc>0635-c<k1>praBavana<k2>praBavana
{%Pra-bhavana, am,%}¦ n. production, source, origin;
the being born or produced; ruling, presiding (?);
({%as, ā, am%}), produced from, springing from (at the
end of a comp.; cf. {%meru-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>32347<pc>0635-c<k1>praBavanIya<k2>praBavanIya
{%Pra-bhavanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Scholiast on Pāṇ.
VIII. 4, 34.
<LEND>

<L>32348<pc>0635-c<k1>praBavitf<k2>praBavitf
{%Pra-bhavitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ powerful, potent; ({%tā%}),
m. a lord, ruler.
<LEND>

<L>32349<pc>0635-c<k1>praBavizRu<k2>praBavizRu
{%Pra-bhaviṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ pre-eminent; mighty,
strong, powerful, potent; ({%us%}), m. a mighty man,
lord, master, lord over (with loc. or gen.). {%—Pra-%}
{%bhaviṣṇu-tā,%} f. lordship, supremacy, dominion,
power, might, authority, consequence.
<LEND>

<L>32350<pc>0635-c<k1>praBavya<k2>praBavya
{%Pra-bhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be born or produced;
being at the source or origin, original; fit for
rule (?).
<LEND>

<L>32351<pc>0635-c<k1>praBAva<k2>praBAva
{%Pra-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. might, power, puissance,
strength, efficacy, virtue; majesty, dignity, glory,
grandeur; superhuman strength or power; effect;
extension, circumference; splendor, brilliance; high
spirit, spirit, magnanimity; tranquillizing, concilia-
tion (?); N. of a chapter of the Rasika-priyā; N.
of a son of Manu Sva-rocis; {%prabhāveṇa, prabhā-%}
{%vāt, prabhāva-tas,%} by or through the power of, by
means of, in consequence of, through, by. {%—Prabhā-%}
{%va-ja, as, ā, am,%} proceeding from conscious majesty
or power. {%—Prabhāva-tā,%} f. power, dignity, su-
periority. {%—Prabhāva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
power or strength, powerful, strong, mighty.
<LEND>

<L>32352<pc>0635-c<k1>praBAvaka<k2>praBAvaka
{%Pra-bhāvaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ prominent, having
power or influence, influential.
<LEND>

<L>32353<pc>0635-c<k1>praBAvana<k2>praBAvana
{%Prabhāvana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the Nom. below),
mighty, having power over, ruling, governing.
<LEND>

<L>32354<pc>0635-c<k1>praBAvanA<k2>praBAvanA
{%Pra-bhāvanā,%}¦ f. causing to come forth, disclosing,
revealing, uttering.
<LEND>

<L>32355<pc>0635-c<k1>praBAvaya<k2>praBAvaya
{%Prabhāvaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prabhāvayati, -yitum,%}
to have power, exercise power, to have great influ-
ence or power over (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>32356<pc>0635-c<k1>praBAvayitf<k2>praBAvayitf
{%Pra-bhāvayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ making powerful or
mighty (with acc.); enduing with power, empowering.
<LEND>

<L>32357<pc>0635-c<k1>praBu<k2>praBu
{%Pra-bhu, us, us,%}¦ or {%vī, u,%} or Ved. {%pra-bhū, ūs, vī,%}
{%u,%} excelling, surpassing; powerful (e. g. {%Rudrād api%}
{%prabhuḥ,%} more powerful even than Rudra), mighty,
strong; able, capable, competent, having power to
(e. g. {%prahartum prabhuḥ,%} having power to wound);
more than sufficient, abundant; a match for (e. g.
{%prabhur mallāya,%} a match for a wrestler); con-
stant, eternal, everlasting; ({%us%}), m. a superior, ruler,
governor, master, lord, ({%kim-prabhu,%} a bad master); an
owner, proprietor; an epithet of Brahma; of Viṣṇu;
of Śiva; of Indra; N. of a deity under the eighth
Manu; N. of a son of Kardama; of a son of Śuka
and Pīvarī; of a son of Bhaga and Siddhi; a sound;
quicksilver. {%—Prabhu-tā,%} f. or {%prabhu-tva, am,%} n.
lordship, supremacy, sovereignty, ascendancy, great-
ness, power; ownership, proprietorship, possession.
{%—Prabhutvākṣepa (˚tva-āk˚), as,%} m. (in rhe-
toric) an allusion to the superiority or supremacy (of
another). {%—Prabhu-deva, as,%} m., N. of a teacher
of the Yoga system of philosophy. {%—Prabhu-bhakta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} attached or devoted to a lord, faithful to
a master, loyal; ({%as%}), m. a good horse. {%—Prabhu-%}
{%bhakti, is,%} f. attachment to a lord or master, loyalty,
faithfulness. {%—Prabhū-tva, am,%} n., Ved. the being
sufficient, sufficiency; [cf. {%prabhu-tva.%}] {%—Prabhū-%}
{%vasu, us, us, u%} (in the Pada-pāṭha written {%prabhu-%}
{%vasu%}), Ved. ‘abundantly wealthy,’ an epithet of Indra;
({%us%}), m., N. of a descendant of Aṅgiras and author
of the hymns Ṛg-veda V. 35, 36, IX. 35, 36.
<LEND>

<L>32358<pc>0635-c<k1>praBUta<k2>praBUta
{%Pra-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced, sprung from;
[Page0636-a+ 78]
become, been; increased, much, abundant; abound-
ing in; existing in great numbers, numerous, many;
gone up or upwards; high, lofty; long; governed,
presided over; mature, perfect. {%—Prabhūta-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very great or numerous, greatest, highest.
{%—Prabhūta-tara, as, ā, am,%} greater, more nu-
merous, very large. {%—Prabhūta-tā,%} f. or {%prabhūta-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. abundance, plenty; multitude, great
number. {%—Prabhūta-nāgāśva-ratha, as, ā, am,%}
having many elephants and horses and chariots.
{%—Prabhūta-yavasendhana (˚sa-in˚), as, ā, am,%}
abounding in fresh grass and fuel. {%—Prabhūta-%}
{%ratna, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Prabhūta-rūpa,%}
{%am,%} n. great beauty. {%—Prabhūta-vayas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} advanced in age, old. {%—Prabhūta-varṣa, āṇi,%}
n. pl. many years.
<LEND>

<L>32359<pc>0636-a<k1>praBUtaka<k2>praBUtaka
{%Prabhūtaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ containing the word
{%prabhūta%} (as an Adhyāya or an Anuvāka); epithet
of a class of Manes.
<LEND>

<L>32360<pc>0636-a<k1>praBUti<k2>praBUti
{%Pra-bhūti, is,%}¦ f. source, origin; power; imperious
demeanour; sufficiency.
<LEND>

<L>32361<pc>0636-a<k1>praBUvan<k2>praBUvan
{%Pra-bhūvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. reaching or ex-
tending beyond (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>32362<pc>0636-a<k1>praBUzRu<k2>praBUzRu
{%Pra-bhūṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ powerful, mighty, strong,
able; [cf. {%pra-bhaviṣṇu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32363<pc>0636-a<k1>praBUz<k2>praBUz
{#praBUz#}¦ {%pra-bhūṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhūṣati, -bhū-%}
{%ṣitum,%} Ved. to set forth in order; to offer, present;
(Sāy.) {%= prakarṣeṇa svī-kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>32364<pc>0636-a<k1>praBf<k2>praBf
{#praBf#}¦ {%pra-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. 3. P. A. {%-bharati, -te,%}
{%-bibharti, -bibhṛte, -bhartum,%} Ved. to bring or
carry towards, bring before, to lead or bring for-
wards, place before; to offer, present; to stretch forth,
extend; to hurl, cast; to bring in, introduce.
<LEND>

<L>32365<pc>0636-a<k1>praBarat<k2>praBarat
{%Pra-bharat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bringing or leading
towards, bringing nigh.
<LEND>

<L>32366<pc>0636-a<k1>praBartavya<k2>praBartavya
{%Pra-bhartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be supported or
nourished.
<LEND>

<L>32367<pc>0636-a<k1>praBartf<k2>praBartf
{%Pra-bhartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who brings
or leads near to, bringing near, (Sāy. {%= samyak%}
{%prabharan.%})
<LEND>

<L>32368<pc>0636-a<k1>praBarman<k2>praBarman
{%Pra-bharman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. bringing towards, placing
before; reciting, recitation.
<LEND>

<L>32369<pc>0636-a<k1>praBfti<k2>praBfti
{%Pra-bhṛti, is,%}¦ f. offering, oblation (Ved.); throw-
ing, casting, hurling (Ved.); beginning, commence-
ment, (in this latter sense often used in three genders
at the end of comps. to express ‘having as a begin-
ning or commencement,’ ‘commencing with,’ or =
‘et cætera,’ e. g. {%Munayaḥ Somaśravaḥ-prabhṛ-%}
{%tayaḥ,%} the Munis beginning with Soma-śravas, i. e. the
Munis, Soma-śravas, &c.; {%varṇā Brāhmaṇa-pra-%}
{%bhṛtayaḥ,%} the Brāhmans and other castes); {%pra-%}
{%bhṛti,%} ind. beginning with, commencing with, be-
ginning with and continuing from, from — forward,
from — upward, from, since (at the end of comps.,
e. g. {%tat-prabhṛti,%} from that time forward; {%janma-%}
{%prabhṛti,%} from birth; or after a word in the abl.,
e. g. {%bālyāt prabhṛti,%} from boyhood upwards;
{%skandhāt prabhṛti,%} from the shoulder; or after
adverbs, e. g. {%adya prabhṛti,%} beginning from to-day,
from this time forwards, henceforward, henceforth;
{%adhaḥ prabhṛti,%} from below, downwards; {%tataḥ%}
{%prabhṛti%} or {%tadā prabhṛti,%} from that time for-
wards, thenceforth).
<LEND>

<L>32370<pc>0636-a<k1>praBfTa<k2>praBfTa
{%Pra-bhṛtha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an offering, oblation.
<LEND>

<L>32371<pc>0636-a<k1>praBeda<k2>praBeda
{#praBeda#}¦ {%pra-bheda.%} See 1. {%pra-bhid,%} p. 635.
<LEND>

<L>32372<pc>0636-a<k1>praBraMS<k2>praBraMS
{#praBraMS#}¦ {%pra-bhraṃś,%} cl. 4. P., 1. A. {%-bhraś-%}
{%yati, -bhraṃśate, -bhraṃśitum,%} to fall off, drop
off, slip off, fall down, fall away; to escape from,
free one's self from (with abl.); to be deprived of
(with inst.): Caus. {%-bhraṃśayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to fall down, cast down; to cause to fall from, cause
to lose (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>32373<pc>0636-a<k1>praBraMSa<k2>praBraMSa
{%Pra-bhraṃśa, as,%}¦ m. falling off, becoming separated.
<LEND>

<L>32374<pc>0636-a<k1>praBraMSaTu<k2>praBraMSaTu
{%Pra-bhraṃśathu, us,%}¦ m. a disease of the nose
accompanied with discharge of mucus.
<LEND>

<L>32375<pc>0636-a<k1>praBraMSita<k2>praBraMSita
{%Pra-bhraṃśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to fall down,
cast down; caused to fall from, deprived of (with
abl.); expelled.
<LEND>
[Page0636-b+ 74]

<L>32376<pc>0636-b<k1>praBraMSin<k2>praBraMSin
{%Pra-bhraṃśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling off, falling down.
<LEND>

<L>32377<pc>0636-b<k1>praBraMSuka<k2>praBraMSuka
{%Pra-bhraṃśuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. falling off;
vanishing, disappearing.
<LEND>

<L>32378<pc>0636-b<k1>praBraSyamAna<k2>praBraSyamAna
{%Pra-bhraśyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ falling down,
being broken off, being broken down.
<LEND>

<L>32379<pc>0636-b<k1>praBrazwa<k2>praBrazwa
{%Pra-bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen off, fallen, drop-
ping; broken.
<LEND>

<L>32380<pc>0636-b<k1>praBrazwaka<k2>praBrazwaka
{%Pra-bhraṣṭaka, am,%}¦ n. a chaplet or wreath of
flowers suspended from the lock on the crown of
the head.
<LEND>

<L>32381<pc>0636-b<k1>praBram<k2>praBram
{#praBram#}¦ {%pra-bhram,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-bhramati,%}
{%-bhrāmyati, -bhramitum,%} to roam or wander about;
to roam or wander through.
<LEND>

<L>32382<pc>0636-b<k1>praBrAj<k2>praBrAj
{#praBrAj#}¦ {%pra-bhrāj,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhrājate, -bhrā-%}
{%jitum,%} Ved. to shine forth, gleam.
<LEND>

<L>32383<pc>0636-b<k1>praBrAjamAna<k2>praBrAjamAna
{%Pra-bhrājamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. shining forth,
gleaming.
<LEND>

<L>32384<pc>0636-b<k1>pram<k2>pram
{#pram#}¦ {%pram,%} ind. (fr. rt. 1. {%prā%}), in {%goṣpada-%}
{%pram,%} sufficiently to fill the print of a cow's foot; (also
{%goṣpada-pūram,%} Scholiast on Pāṇ. III. 4, 32.)
<LEND>

<L>32385<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaMhizWIya<k2>pramaMhizWIya
{#pramaMhizWIya#}¦ {%pramaṃhiṣṭhīya, am,%} n., Ved.,
N. of a Sāman (so called from its beginning with
the words {%pra maṃhiṣṭhāya%}).
<LEND>

<L>32386<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaganda<k2>pramaganda
{#pramaganda#}¦ {%pra-maganda, as,%} m., Ved. the son
of a usurer, (according to Sāy. {%maganda = kusīdin,%}
{%tad-apatyam pra-magandaḥ%}); N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>32387<pc>0636-b<k1>pramagna<k2>pramagna
{#pramagna#}¦ {%pra-magna.%} See {%pra-majj%} below.
<LEND>

<L>32388<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaNgana<k2>pramaNgana
{#pramaNgana#}¦ {%pra-maṅgana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%maṅg%}
with {%pra%}), going, proceeding.
<LEND>

<L>32389<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaNganIya<k2>pramaNganIya
{%Pra-maṅganīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone or pro-
ceeded.
<LEND>

<L>32390<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaNgita<k2>pramaNgita
{%Pra-maṅgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, proceeded.
<LEND>

<L>32391<pc>0636-b<k1>pramajj<k2>pramajj
{#pramajj#}¦ {%pra-majj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-majjati, -maṅk-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to immerse one's self in, dip into.
<LEND>

<L>32392<pc>0636-b<k1>pramagna<k2>pramagna
{%Pra-magna, as, ā, am,%}¦ immersed, dipped,
drowned. See Scholiast on Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 29.
<LEND>

<L>32393<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaRas<k2>pramaRas
{#pramaRas#}¦ {%pra-maṇas, ās, ās, as,%} careful, soli-
citous, attentive (Ved.); kind, amiable (Ved.); good-
natured, joyful, cheerful; [cf. {%pra-manas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32394<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaRqala<k2>pramaRqala
{#pramaRqala#}¦ {%pra-maṇḍala, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
the felly of a wheel (?).
<LEND>

<L>32395<pc>0636-b<k1>pramata<k2>pramata
{#pramata#}¦ {%pra-mata,%} &c. See {%pra-man,%} p. 637.
<LEND>

<L>32396<pc>0636-b<k1>pramatta<k2>pramatta
{#pramatta#}¦ {%pra-matta,%} &c. See 1. {%pra-mad,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32397<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaT<k2>pramaT
{#pramaT#}¦ {%pra-math%} or {%pra-manth,%} cl. 1. 9. P.
{%-mathati, -manthati, -mathnāti, -manthitum,%} to
stir about violently, agitate, churn; to trample down,
strike down, bruise; to rob (Ved.); to assault
violently, handle roughly, harass, annoy; to destroy,
lay waste, devastate; to tear away, tear off, tear out,
cut out: Caus. {%-māthayati, -yitum,%} to assault vio-
lently, handle roughly, harass, annoy.
<LEND>

<L>32398<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaTa<k2>pramaTa
{%Pra-matha, as,%}¦ m. ‘destroyer, tormentor,’ N. of
a class of fiends attending on Śiva; N. of one of
the hundred sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; a horse; ({%ā%}), f.
the plant Terminalia Chebula or Citrina ({%= harī-%}
{%takī%}); N. of the wife of Kṣupa and mother of
Vīra; pain, affliction (?). {%—Pramatha-nātha, as,%}
or {%pramatha-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the Pramathas,’
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Pramathādhipa (˚tha-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘ruler of the Pramathas,’ an epithet of Śiva;
of Gaṇeśa. {%—Pramathālaya (˚tha-āl˚), as,%} m.
‘abode of torment (?) ,’ hell.
<LEND>

<L>32399<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaTana<k2>pramaTana
{%Pra-mathana, as, ī, am,%}¦ harassing, tormenting,
torturing, paining, hurting, injuring; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a magical formula pronounced over weapons; N.
of a Dānava; ({%am%}), n. hurting, paining, distressing,
injuring; killing, slaughter; agitating, churning.
<LEND>

<L>32400<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaTita<k2>pramaTita
{%Pra-mathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ well churned; trampled
on, cut down, killed; pained, distressed; ({%am%}), n. but-
termilk without water. {%—Pramathita-puraḥsara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the leader killed, whose leader is slain.
<LEND>

<L>32401<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaTya<k2>pramaTya
{%Pra-mathya,%}¦ ind. having conquered or oppressed;
having used violence, violently, forcibly.
<LEND>

<L>32402<pc>0636-b<k1>pramaTyamAna<k2>pramaTyamAna
{%Pra-mathyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being churned.
<LEND>
[Page0636-c+ 80]

<L>32403<pc>0636-c<k1>pramanTa<k2>pramanTa
{%Pra-mantha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a stick used for rubbing
wood to produce fire by friction.
<LEND>

<L>32404<pc>0636-c<k1>pramanTu<k2>pramanTu
{%Pra-manthu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Vīra-vrata
and younger brother of Manthu.
<LEND>

<L>32405<pc>0636-c<k1>pramATa<k2>pramATa
{%Pra-mātha, as,%}¦ m. stirring about, agitation; tor-
menting, torturing, afflicting, paining; killing;
tearing; forcible abduction, rape [cf. {%Draupadī-p˚%}];
violence; N. of one of the sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra;
of one of the attendants of Skanda; of a Dānava;
({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet of the fiends attendant upon
Śiva ({%= pra-matha%}).
<LEND>

<L>32406<pc>0636-c<k1>pramATita<k2>pramATita
{%Pra-māthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ assaulted violently,
roughly handled; violated, ravished, forcibly carried
off.
<LEND>

<L>32407<pc>0636-c<k1>pramATin<k2>pramATin
{%Pra-māthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ stirring about, setting in
motion, agitating; striking off, striking down, used
for striking or knocking down; tearing, rending;
breaking, cutting; disquieting, troubling, harassing,
annoying, afflicting, torturing [cf. {%citta-p˚%}]; killing,
destroying, a destroyer; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a Rākṣasa; of a monkey; N.
of the thirteenth (of forty-seventh) year of a sixty
years' cycle of Jupiter; ({%inī%}), f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>32408<pc>0636-c<k1>pramad<k2>pramad<h>1
{#pramad#} 1¦. {%pra-mad,%} cl. 4. P. {%-mādyati, -madi-%}
{%tum,%} to enjoy one's self, be joyous, sport, play,
gambol (Ved.); to be regardless of, be indifferent
to (with abl.); to pay no attention to, give no heed
to, neglect, be heedless about (with loc.); to neglect
duty for, idle away time in (with loc.); Caus. P. A.
{%-mādayati, -te, -yitum,%} to make light of, ridicule;
(A.) to enjoy, indulge in (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>32409<pc>0636-c<k1>pramatta<k2>pramatta
{%Pra-matta, as, ā, am,%}¦ excited, wanton, lascivious,
rutting; drunken, intoxicated; mad, insane; careless,
regardless, heedless, inattentive, negligent; unmindful
of duty; blundering, a blunderer. {%—Pramatta-gīta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} inattentively or carelessly sung. {%—Pra-%}
{%matta-citta, as, ā, am,%} careless-minded, heedless,
negligent. {%—Pramatta-tā,%} f. inattentiveness, inat-
tention, sleepiness, mental inactivity. {%—1. pramatta-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} inattentive, careless. {%—2. pramatta-%}
{%vat,%} ind. as if drunk, like one intoxicated.
<LEND>

<L>32410<pc>0636-c<k1>pramad<k2>pramad<h>2
2. {%pra-mad, t,%}¦ f., Ved. lust, desire.
<LEND>

<L>32411<pc>0636-c<k1>pramada<k2>pramada
{%Pra-mada, as,%}¦ m. joy, joyousness, joyfulness,
pleasure, delight, elation, rapture; the Datura tree or
thorn-apple, D. Metel [cf. {%un-matta%}]; N. of a
Dānava; of a son of Vasiṣṭha and one of the seven
sages under Manu Uttama, {%= gulpha?; (ā),%} f. a
young and wanton woman, a handsome or beautiful
woman, a woman in general; the sign of the zodiac
Virgo; N. of a metre of 29 + 27 syllables; of another
metre, four times ˘˘˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘˘¯; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), wanton, dissolute; mad, intoxicated (literally
or metaphorically); impassioned; violent; careless.
{%—Pramada-kaṇṭha, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Pra-%}
{%mada-kānana%} or {%pramadā-kānana, am,%} n. a
royal garden or pleasure-ground attached to the
gynæceum. {%—Pramada-ropya, am,%} n., N. of a
city in the Dekhan; [cf. {%mahilā-ropya, mihilā-%}
{%ropya.%}] {%—Pramada-vana = pramada-kānana.%}
{%—Pramadā-jana, as,%} m. womankind, the female
sex. {%—Pramadānana (˚dā-ān˚), am,%} n. a kind of
metre, four times ˘˘¯˘¯˘˘¯˘¯˘˘¯˘¯˘˘¯˘¯.
{%—Pramadā-vana, am,%} n. a royal garden or
pleasure-ground for the wives of a prince (attached
especially to the private apartments of the palace).
<LEND>

<L>32412<pc>0636-c<k1>pramadaka<k2>pramadaka
{%Pra-madaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ dissolute, licentious,
sensual.
<LEND>

<L>32413<pc>0636-c<k1>pramadana<k2>pramadana
{%Pra-madana, am,%}¦ n. amorous desire.
<LEND>

<L>32414<pc>0636-c<k1>pramadAya<k2>pramadAya
{%Pramadāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pramadāyati, -yitum,%}
to behave like a wanton woman.
<LEND>

<L>32415<pc>0636-c<k1>pramaditavya<k2>pramaditavya
{%Pra-maditavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be neglected or dis-
regarded, to be treated with inattention (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>32416<pc>0636-c<k1>pramadvara<k2>pramadvara
{%Pra-madvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ inattentive, careless; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of the wife of Ruru and mother of Śunaka.
<LEND>

<L>32417<pc>0636-c<k1>pramAda<k2>pramAda
{%Pra-māda, as,%}¦ m. drunkenness, intoxication; mad-
ness, insanity, distraction, confusion; negligence, inat-
tention, carelessness; inadvertence, error, inaccuracy,
a blunder, mistake; a particular high number. {%—Pra-%}
{%māda-vat, ān, atī, at,%} drunken, intoxicated; mad,
insane; incautious, careless, heedless, inconsiderate.
<LEND>
[Page0637-a+ 75]

<L>32418<pc>0637-a<k1>pramAdikA<k2>pramAdikA
{%Pramādikā,%}¦ f. an imprudent or careless woman;
a deflowered girl.
<LEND>

<L>32419<pc>0637-a<k1>pramAdita<k2>pramAdita
{%Pra-mādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made light of, ridiculed,
mocked.
<LEND>

<L>32420<pc>0637-a<k1>pramAdin<k2>pramAdin
{%Pramādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ drunken, intoxicated; in-
sane; negligent, inattentive, inadvertent, careless,
heedless, incautious, indifferent; ({%ī%}), m., N. of the
forty-seventh (or twenty-first) year of a sixty years’
cycle of Jupiter.
<LEND>

<L>32421<pc>0637-a<k1>pramAdya<k2>pramAdya
{%Pramādya%}¦ (?), {%am,%} n. insanity, carelessness.
{%—Pramādya-tas%} (?), ind. from carelessness.
<LEND>

<L>32422<pc>0637-a<k1>praman<k2>praman
{#praman#}¦ {%pra-man,%} cl. 8. A. {%-manute,%} &c.,
Ved. to think upon, excogitate.
<LEND>

<L>32423<pc>0637-a<k1>pramata<k2>pramata
{%Pra-mata, as, ā, am,%}¦ thought out, excogitated;
wise.
<LEND>

<L>32424<pc>0637-a<k1>pramataka<k2>pramataka
{%Pramataka, as,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient sage.
<LEND>

<L>32425<pc>0637-a<k1>pramati<k2>pramati
{%Pra-mati, is,%}¦ f. care, providence, protection (Ved.,
cf. {%adabdha-vrata-p˚, indra-p˚%}); one who pro-
vides for, a protector (Ved.); ({%is%}), m., N. of an
ancient sage; of a son of Cyavana and father of
Ruru; of a prince (son of Janam-ejaya); of a son
of Prāṃśu.
<LEND>

<L>32426<pc>0637-a<k1>pramanas<k2>pramanas
{%Pra-manas, ās, ās, as%}¦ (fr. {%pra + manas%}), cheer-
ful-minded, good-tempered, in good spirits, happy,
delighted; [cf. {%pra-maṇas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32427<pc>0637-a<k1>pramantra<k2>pramantra
{%Pra-mantra, as,%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n.? (fr. {%pra +%}
{%mantra%}), a particular high number; [cf. {%pra-mātra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32428<pc>0637-a<k1>pramanT<k2>pramanT
{#pramanT#}¦ {%pra-manth.%} See {%pra-math,%} p. 636.
<LEND>

<L>32429<pc>0637-a<k1>pramanda<k2>pramanda
{#pramanda#}¦ {%pra-manda, as,%} m. or {%pra-mandanī,%}
f., Ved. a species of fragrant plant.
<LEND>

<L>32430<pc>0637-a<k1>pramanyu<k2>pramanyu
{#pramanyu#}¦ {%pra-manyu, us, us, u,%} incensed or
enraged against (with loc.); distressed, sorrowful.
<LEND>

<L>32431<pc>0637-a<k1>pramaya<k2>pramaya
{#pramaya#}¦ {%pra-maya,%} &c. See p. 638, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32432<pc>0637-a<k1>pramara<k2>pramara
{#pramara#}¦ {%pra-mara,%} &c. See under {%pra-mṛ,%}
p. 638, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32433<pc>0637-a<k1>pramardaka<k2>pramardaka
{#pramardaka#}¦ {%pra-mardaka, pra-mardana,%} &c.
See {%pra-mṛd,%} p. 638, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32434<pc>0637-a<k1>pramahas<k2>pramahas
{#pramahas#}¦ {%pra-mahas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. of great
splendor (said of Mitra-Varuṇa, Sāy. {%= prakṛṣṭa-%}
{%tejaska%}).
<LEND>

<L>32435<pc>0637-a<k1>pramA<k2>pramA<h>1
{#pramA#} 1¦. {%pra-mā,%} cl. 2. P., 3. 4. A. {%-māti,%}
{%-mimīte, -māyate, -mātum,%} to measure; to form,
frame, make; to arrange, set in order; to form a
correct notion of (anything), understand; to con-
jecture: Caus. {%-māpayati, -yitum,%} to cause correct
knowledge, afford proof or authority, give proof.
<LEND>

<L>32436<pc>0637-a<k1>pramA<k2>pramA<h>2
2. {%pra-mā,%}¦ f. basis, foundation (Ved.); a measure
(Ved.); true perception, correct notion, accurate
conception, true and certain knowledge, knowledge
exempt from all error; consciousness, perception; a
kind of metre. {%—Pramā-tva, am,%} n. accuracy of
perception, trueness or correctness of knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>32437<pc>0637-a<k1>pramARa<k2>pramARa
{%Pra-māṇa, am,%}¦ n. measure, scale, standard;
measure in general (whether of weight, length, or
capacity); magnitude, extent, circumference, length,
duration (of time); weight, quantity; rule, sanction,
ground of assurance, standard, authority, judgment,
warrant; a decider, one whose advice or decision is
an authority (e. g. {%pramāṇam bhavatī,%} your lady-
ship is the warrant or you must judge; {%pramāṇam%}
{%bhavantaḥ,%} your honours are the authority, i. e.
it is yours to decide or I abide by your advice, cf.
also {%strī-p˚;%} in this sense {%pramāṇa%} sometimes
follows the number and gender of the word with
which it is placed in apposition, e. g. {%yadi Vedāḥ%}
{%pramāṇās te,%} if the Vedas be thy authorities; {%strī%}
{%pramāṇī yeṣām,%} they whose authority is a woman);
a means of acquiring {%pramā%} or certain knowledge,
source of knowledge, means of proof, proof, (the
Vedānta admits six Pramāṇas, viz. 1. {%Pratyakṣa,%}
perception by the senses; 2. {%Anumāna,%} inference;
3. {%Upamāna,%} analogy or comparison; 4. {%Śabda%} or
{%Āpta-vacana,%} verbal authority, trustworthy testi-
mony, especially of an inspired person, revelation;
5. {%An-upalabdhi%} or {%Abhāva-pratyakṣa,%} non-
[Page0637-b+ 81]
perception or negative proof; 6. {%Arthāpatti,%} in-
ference from circumstances. The Nyāya admits
only four, excluding the last two. The Sāṅkhya
only three, viz. Pratyakṣa, Anumāna, and Śabda,
excluding the third or Upamāna as well as the fifth
and sixth: besides the Pramāṇas of the three orthodox
schools, with their branches, other schools increase
the number to nine by adding 1. {%Sambhava,%} equi-
valence; 2. {%Aitihya,%} tradition or fallible testimony;
3. {%Ceṣṭā,%} gesture); testimony, evidence; a scrip-
ture, a work of sacred authority; a speaker of the
truth; a correct notion, right conception; cause,
motive; a sense of security, freedom from appre-
hension; the prosodial length of a vowel; physical
power or strength; the first term in a rule of three
sum; principal, capital; oneness, unity; constant,
eternal; a title of Viṣṇu; ({%as%}), m. rule, standard,
authority; N. of a large fig-tree on the bank of
the Ganges (Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 41); ({%ī%}), f. rule,
standard, authority; a kind of metre. {%—Pramāṇa-%}
{%koṭī,%} f., N. of a particular spot or of a Tīrtha near
the above fig-tree on the bank of the Ganges; [cf.
{%pra-māṇa.%}] {%—Pramāṇa-jña, as,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Pramāṇa-tas,%} ind. agreeably to measure or
weight, with respect to measure, &c.; according to
proof or authority. {%—Pramāṇa-tā,%} f. or {%pramāṇa-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. authority, warranty. {%—Pramāṇa-%}
{%dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} recognised by authority, en-
joined by good authorities. {%—Pramāṇa-pattra,%}
{%am,%} n. a written warrant. {%—Pramāṇa-puruṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘a man who is an authority,’ an umpire,
arbitrator, judge. {%—Pramāṇa-pramoda, as,%} m., N.
of a Nyāya work by Hari. {%—Pramāṇa-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} constituting proof or authority; true, autho-
ritative; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Pramāṇa-%}
{%mālā%} or {%pramāṇa-ratnamālā,%} f., N. of a Vedānta
work by Ānanda-bodha Yati. {%—Pramāṇa-lakṣaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Vedānta work. {%—Pramāṇa-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} furnished with proofs, established by proofs,
well-founded. {%—Pramāṇa-vākya, am,%} n. authorita-
tive statement, authority. {%—Pramāṇa-vārttika, am,%}
n. and {%pramāṇa-viniścaya, as,%} m., N. of two
works by Dharma-kīrtti. {%—Pramāṇa-śāstra, am,%} n.
any work of sacred authority, scripture. {%—Pramāṇa-%}
{%samuccaya, as,%} m., N. of a work by Diṅ-nāga.
{%—Pramāṇa-sūtra, am,%} n. a measuring cord.
{%—Pramāṇādhika (˚ṇa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} being
beyond measure, excessive, unnaturally strong.
{%—Pramāṇāntara (˚ṇa-an˚), am,%} n. another means
of proof. {%—Pramāṇāntara-tā,%} f. the being another
means of proof. {%—Pramāṇābhāva (˚ṇa-abh˚), as,%}
m. absence of proof, want of authority. {%—Pramāṇī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being an authority or proof,
proving, establishing.
<LEND>

<L>32438<pc>0637-b<k1>pramARaka<k2>pramARaka
{%Pramāṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a
comp.) {%= pra-māṇa,%} measure, quantity, extent, cir-
cumference; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of metre, four times
˘¯˘¯˘¯˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>32439<pc>0637-b<k1>pramARaya<k2>pramARaya
{%Pramāṇaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pramāṇayati, -yitum,%}
to make or regard as an authority upon any point
(with acc. of the person and loc. of the object); to
receive as an authority, admit or obey as an authority;
to hold up as a model; to prove, demonstrate, show
clearly, manifest.
<LEND>

<L>32440<pc>0637-b<k1>pramARayat<k2>pramARayat
{%Pramāṇayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ receiving or admit-
ting as an authority, obeying as authority.
<LEND>

<L>32441<pc>0637-b<k1>pramARika<k2>pramARika
{%Pramāṇika, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%pramāṇaka%} above],
forming a measure or standard, being a measure,
forming an authority (perhaps a wrong reading for
{%prāmāṇika,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>32442<pc>0637-b<k1>pramARita<k2>pramARita
{%Pra-māṇita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%pramāṇaya%} above),
proved, demonstrated, shown clearly.
<LEND>

<L>32443<pc>0637-b<k1>pramARIkf<k2>pramARIkf
{%Pramāṇī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to mete out or apportion to (with gen.);
to take as a rule or authority, regard as an autho-
rity; to conform to, obey (with acc.); to regard as
proof; to prove. {%—Pramāṇī-karaṇa, am,%} n. esta-
blishing or admitting as authority, regarding as proof.
{%—Pramāṇī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} admitted or esta-
blished as proof, regarded as authority; conformed to.
<LEND>

<L>32444<pc>0637-b<k1>pramAtf<k2>pramAtf
{%Pra-mātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ knowing truly or well,
[Page0637-c+ 74]
having a right notion or idea, competent to judge;
any person who gives evidence or proof, an authority,
a proof; proving, demonstrating.
<LEND>

<L>32445<pc>0637-c<k1>pramApaka<k2>pramApaka
{%Pra-māpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ affording proof or
certain knowledge, furnishing authority; ({%as%}), m.
an authority, an author cited or quoted.
<LEND>

<L>32446<pc>0637-c<k1>pramita<k2>pramita<h>1
1. {%pra-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ meted out, measured;
known, understood; established by argument, demon-
strated, proved; measured off, limited, few, little;
(at the end of a comp.) measuring, of such and such
measure or extent, of such and such size. {%—Prami-%}
{%tākṣarā (˚ta-ak˚),%} f. ‘having measured syllables,’
a kind of metre, four times ˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>32447<pc>0637-c<k1>pramiti<k2>pramiti
{%Pra-miti, is,%}¦ f. measure, measuring, measurement;
a correct notion, right conception, true knowledge,
knowledge or information established by proof; true
inference or analogy.
<LEND>

<L>32448<pc>0637-c<k1>prameya<k2>prameya
{%Pra-meya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be measured, measurable,
finite; to be fathomed or penetrated; admitting of
evidence or proof, to be proved, provable, demon-
strable; discernible; ({%am%}), n. an object of certain
knowledge; the thing to be proved, subject under
discussion, topic to be discussed or established. {%—Pra-%}
{%meya-kamala-mārtaṇḍa,%} N. of a work. {%—Pra-%}
{%meya-tva, am,%} n. provableness, capability of being
proved.
<LEND>

<L>32449<pc>0637-c<k1>pramAtavya<k2>pramAtavya
{#pramAtavya#}¦ {%pra-mātavya.%} See p. 638, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32450<pc>0637-c<k1>pramAtAmaha<k2>pramAtAmaha
{#pramAtAmaha#}¦ {%pra-mātāmaha, as,%} m. a maternal
great-grandfather; ({%ī%}), f. a maternal great-grand-
mother.
<LEND>

<L>32451<pc>0637-c<k1>pramAtra<k2>pramAtra
{#pramAtra#}¦ {%pra-mātra, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>32452<pc>0637-c<k1>pramATa<k2>pramATa
{#pramATa#}¦ {%pra-mātha,%} &c. See p. 636, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32453<pc>0637-c<k1>pramAda<k2>pramAda
{#pramAda#}¦ {%pra-māda,%} &c. See under 1. {%pra-%}
{%mad,%} p. 636, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32454<pc>0637-c<k1>pramApaRa<k2>pramApaRa
{#pramApaRa#}¦ {%pra-māpaṇa,%} &c. See p. 638,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32455<pc>0637-c<k1>pramAya<k2>pramAya
{#pramAya#}¦ {%pra-māya.%} See under {%pra-mi%} below.
<LEND>

<L>32456<pc>0637-c<k1>pramAra<k2>pramAra
{#pramAra#}¦ {%pra-māra.%} See {%pra-mṛ,%} p. 638.
<LEND>

<L>32457<pc>0637-c<k1>pramArjaka<k2>pramArjaka
{#pramArjaka#}¦ {%pra-mārjaka,%} &c. See under {%pra-%}
{%mṛj,%} p. 638, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32458<pc>0637-c<k1>prami<k2>prami
{#prami#}¦ {%pra-mi%} (see rt. 1. {%mi%}), cl. 5. P. A.
{%-minoti, -minute, -mātum,%} to erect, build (Ved.);
to judge, observe, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>32459<pc>0637-c<k1>pramAya<k2>pramAya
{%Pra-māya,%}¦ ind. having perceived or observed.
<LEND>

<L>32460<pc>0637-c<k1>pramita<k2>pramita<h>2
2. {%pra-mita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see above), Ved.
erected, built.
<LEND>

<L>32461<pc>0637-c<k1>pramid<k2>pramid
{#pramid#}¦ {%pra-mid,%} cl. 1. A., 4. P. {%-medate,%}
{%-medyati, -meditum,%} to begin to become fat; to
begin to show affection.
<LEND>

<L>32462<pc>0637-c<k1>pramedita<k2>pramedita
{%Pra-medita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having begun to show
affection (according to a Scholiast {%= snigdhī-bhavi-%}
{%tum ārabdhaḥ%}); being or made unctuous, unctuous,
greasy. {%—Pramedita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having be-
come unctuous, having been made unctuous.
<LEND>

<L>32463<pc>0637-c<k1>pramih<k2>pramih
{#pramih#}¦ {%pra-mih,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mehati, -meḍhum,%}
to make water, pass urine.
<LEND>

<L>32464<pc>0637-c<k1>pramIQa<k2>pramIQa
{%Pra-mīḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ passed as urine; thick,
compact.
<LEND>

<L>32465<pc>0637-c<k1>prameha<k2>prameha
{%Pra-meha, as,%}¦ m. urinary disease (a general term
applied to all diseases characterized by a morbid con-
dition of the urine; twenty-one varieties are enume-
rated, including diabetes, gleet, gonorrhœa, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>32466<pc>0637-c<k1>pramehin<k2>pramehin
{%Pra-mehin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ suffering from urinary
disease or affections.
<LEND>

<L>32467<pc>0637-c<k1>pramI<k2>pramI
{#pramI#}¦ {%pra-mī,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-mīṇāti, -mīṇīte%}
(Ved. {%-mināti, -minīte%}), {%-mātum,%} to frustrate,
annul, destroy, annihilate; to diminish; to change,
alter; to neglect, transgress, infringe (Ved.); to
miss, lose (one's way), forget (Ved.); to cause to
disappear, put out of sight, leave behind, outstrip,
surmount, surpass; to come to naught, perish, die:
Caus. {%-māpayati, -yitum,%} to destroy, annihilate,
kill, slay.
<LEND>
[Page0638-a+ 77]

<L>32468<pc>0638-a<k1>pramaya<k2>pramaya
{%Pra-maya, as,%}¦ m. ruin, downfall, fall, death;
killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>32469<pc>0638-a<k1>pramayu<k2>pramayu
{%Pra-mayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. liable to be lost or
destroyed, destructible, perishable.
<LEND>

<L>32470<pc>0638-a<k1>pramAtavya<k2>pramAtavya
{%Pra-mātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be slain or killed.
<LEND>

<L>32471<pc>0638-a<k1>pramApaRa<k2>pramApaRa
{%Pra-māpaṇa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), murder-
ing, murderous, a murderer; ({%am%}), n. killing, slay-
ing, slaughter; (sometimes also spelt {%pra-māpana.%})
<LEND>

<L>32472<pc>0638-a<k1>pramApayitf<k2>pramApayitf
{%Pra-māpayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ causing to perish,
destructive, leading to ruin; a murderer. {%—Pramā-%}
{%payitṛ-tva, am,%} n. destructiveness, murderousness.
<LEND>

<L>32473<pc>0638-a<k1>pramApita<k2>pramApita
{%Pra-māpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroyed, killed, slain.
<LEND>

<L>32474<pc>0638-a<k1>pramApin<k2>pramApin
{%Pra-māpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ destroying, killing, slaying.
<LEND>

<L>32475<pc>0638-a<k1>pramAyu<k2>pramAyu
{%Pra-māyu, us, us, u,%}¦ or {%pra-māyuka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. liable to ruin or destruction, perishable,
destructible, dying away.
<LEND>

<L>32476<pc>0638-a<k1>pramIRat<k2>pramIRat
{%Pra-mīṇat, an, atī, at,%}¦ injuring, killing; over-
coming, subduing.
<LEND>

<L>32477<pc>0638-a<k1>pramIta<k2>pramIta
{%Pra-mīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dead, deceased; immo-
lated, sacrificed. {%—Pramīta-patika, ā,%} f. one whose
husband is dead, a widow.
<LEND>

<L>32478<pc>0638-a<k1>pramIti<k2>pramIti
{%Pra-mīti, is,%}¦ f. ruin, destruction, death.
<LEND>

<L>32479<pc>0638-a<k1>pramIya<k2>pramIya
{%Pra-mīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be destroyed or killed,
destructible.
<LEND>

<L>32480<pc>0638-a<k1>pramIQa<k2>pramIQa
{#pramIQa#}¦ {%pra-mīḍha.%} See {%pra-mih,%} p. 637.
<LEND>

<L>32481<pc>0638-a<k1>pramIl<k2>pramIl
{#pramIl#}¦ {%pra-mīl,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mīlati, -mīlitum,%}
to close or shut the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>32482<pc>0638-a<k1>pramIlA<k2>pramIlA
{%Pra-mīlā,%}¦ f. shutting the eyes, sleepiness, lassi-
tude, weariness, enervation, exhaustion from indo-
lence or fatigue.
<LEND>

<L>32483<pc>0638-a<k1>pramIlita<k2>pramIlita
{%Pra-mīlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ closing the eyes, with
closed eyes.
<LEND>

<L>32484<pc>0638-a<k1>pramIlin<k2>pramIlin
{%Pra-mīlin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a demon (who causes
the eyes to close, or brings on faintness).
<LEND>

<L>32485<pc>0638-a<k1>pramIv<k2>pramIv
{#pramIv#}¦ {%pra-mīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mīvati, -mīvitum,%}
to push towards, press; to instigate, incite.
<LEND>

<L>32486<pc>0638-a<k1>pramukti<k2>pramukti
{#pramukti#}¦ {%pra-mukti.%} See {%pra-muc%} below.
<LEND>

<L>32487<pc>0638-a<k1>pramuKa<k2>pramuKa
{#pramuKa#}¦ {%pra-mukha, as, ā, am,%} turning the
face towards (with acc.), facing; first, foremost,
chief, principal, most excellent; (at the end of a
comp.) having as chief, headed by, led by, preceded
by, accompanied with [cf. {%prīti-p˚, Vaśiṣṭha-p˚%}];
honourable, respectable; ({%as%}), m. a chief, respect-
able man, sage; a heap, multitude; a tree used in
dyeing, Rottleria Tinctoria; ({%am%}), n. the mouth;
commencement, beginning (of a chapter); time
being, the present, the same time; ({%e%}), ind. before
the face of, in the presence of, in front of, before,
opposite to (with gen.); {%pramukhe kṛ,%} to cause to
go before or precede. {%—Pramukha-tas,%} ind. at the
head of, in front of, before the face of, before, oppo-
site to (with gen.); before all others, first, in the
first place. {%—Pramukha-tā,%} f. or {%pramukha-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. superiority, predominance.
<LEND>

<L>32488<pc>0638-a<k1>pramugDa<k2>pramugDa
{#pramugDa#}¦ {%pra-mugdha.%} See {%pra-muh,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32489<pc>0638-a<k1>pramuc<k2>pramuc
{#pramuc#}¦ {%pra-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati, -te,%}
{%-moktum,%} to let loose, loosen, loose, untie, unbind,
undo; to set free, let go, liberate, release; to forsake,
desert, abandon; to give up, resign, renounce; to
shake off; to discharge, emit, throw out, vomit, shed;
to hurl, fling, cast, throw, shoot, send; to utter;
to throw or put on (as a garland &c.); to remove,
expel, drive away, banish: Pass. {%-mucyate,%} to be
loosened, become loose or detached; to leave off,
cease (with abl.); to free one's self from, rid one's
self of (with abl.): Caus. {%-mocayati, -yitum,%} to
loosen, untie; to set free, liberate: Desid. {%-mumu-%}
{%kṣati,%} to wish to give up, be about to resign.
<LEND>

<L>32490<pc>0638-a<k1>pramukta<k2>pramukta
{%Pra-mukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ loosened, untied; set
free, released, liberated; given up, resigned, re-
nounced; hurled, cast, shot.
<LEND>

<L>32491<pc>0638-a<k1>pramukti<k2>pramukti
{%Pra-mukti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. setting free, liberation;
N. of particular sacred texts.
<LEND>

<L>32492<pc>0638-a<k1>pramuca<k2>pramuca
{%Pra-muca, as,%}¦ or {%pra-mucu, us,%} m., N. of a
Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>32493<pc>0638-a<k1>pramoktavya<k2>pramoktavya
{%Pra-moktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be liberated, to be
set free.
<LEND>
[Page0638-b+ 77]

<L>32494<pc>0638-b<k1>pramocana<k2>pramocana
{%Pra-mocana, as, ī, am,%}¦ liberating, setting free;
({%ī%}), f. a species of cucumber; ({%am%}), n. the act of
liberating, setting free; discharging, emitting, shed-
ding.
<LEND>

<L>32495<pc>0638-b<k1>pramud<k2>pramud<h>1
{#pramud#} 1¦. {%pra-mud,%} cl. 1. A. {%-modate, -mo-%}
{%ditum,%} to become joyful, rejoice greatly, exult, be
delighted: Caus. {%-modayati, -yitum,%} to make glad,
delight, exhilarate.
<LEND>

<L>32496<pc>0638-b<k1>pramud<k2>pramud<h>2
2. {%pra-mud, t, t, t,%}¦ pleased, happy; ({%t%}), f., Ved.
gladness, delight, pleasure; sensual pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>32497<pc>0638-b<k1>pramudita<k2>pramudita
{%Pra-mudita, as, ā, am,%}¦ delighted, pleased, happy,
glad, content; ({%ā%}), f. (with Buddhists) N. of one of
the ten Bhūmis; ({%am%}), n. epithet of one of the
eight perfections in the Sāṅkhya philosophy. {%—Pra-%}
{%mudita-pralamba-sunayana, as,%} m., N. of a
Gandharva-rāja. {%—Pramudita-vadanā,%} f., N. of a
metre, four times ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯, ˘¯¯˘¯. {%—Pra-%}
{%mudita-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} having the heart de-
lighted, delighted in heart.
<LEND>

<L>32498<pc>0638-b<k1>pramoda<k2>pramoda
{%Pra-moda, as,%}¦ m. excessive joy, delight, pleasure,
gladness, happiness; one of the eight perfections in
the Sāṅkhya philosophy; Pleasure personified as a
child of Brahmā; a strong perfume; N. of a being
attendant upon Skanda; of a Nāga; of a man; of
the fourth year in a sixty years’ cycle of Jupiter.
{%—Pramoda-nṛtya, am,%} n. joyous dancing, a
joyful dance.
<LEND>

<L>32499<pc>0638-b<k1>pramodaka<k2>pramodaka
{%Pra-modaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of grain ({%= ṣaṣ-%}
{%ṭikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>32500<pc>0638-b<k1>pramodana<k2>pramodana
{%Pra-modana, as, ī, am,%}¦ making glad, gladdening,
exhilarating; an epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n. making
glad, gladdening; gladness, joyousness.
<LEND>

<L>32501<pc>0638-b<k1>pramodamAna<k2>pramodamAna
{%Pra-modamāna, am,%}¦ n. ‘rejoicing,’ epithet of
one of the eight perfections in the Sāṅkhya phi-
losophy.
<LEND>

<L>32502<pc>0638-b<k1>pramodita<k2>pramodita
{%Pra-modita, as, ā, am,%}¦ delighted, rejoiced,
pleased, happy; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Kuvera;
({%am%}), n. epithet of one of the eight perfections in
the Sāṅkhya philosophy; [cf. {%pra-modamāna%}
above.]
<LEND>

<L>32503<pc>0638-b<k1>pramodin<k2>pramodin
{%Pramodin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ causing excessive joy, de-
lighting, making happy, gladdening; delighted,
happy; ({%inī%}), f., N. of a plant ({%= jiṅginī%}).
<LEND>

<L>32504<pc>0638-b<k1>pramurC<k2>pramurC
{#pramurC#}¦ {%pra-murch,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mūrchati, -mūr-%}
{%chitum,%} Ved. to become thick or solid, congeal.
<LEND>

<L>32505<pc>0638-b<k1>pramuz<k2>pramuz
{#pramuz#}¦ {%pra-muṣ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-muṣṇāti, -mo-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to steal away, carry off, rob, pilfer.
<LEND>

<L>32506<pc>0638-b<k1>pramuzita<k2>pramuzita
{%Pra-muṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stolen away, carried
off; distracted, beside one's self; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
riddle.
<LEND>

<L>32507<pc>0638-b<k1>pramuh<k2>pramuh
{#pramuh#}¦ {%pra-muh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-muhyati, -mog-%}
{%dhum, -moḍhum,%} to become bewildered or infatu-
ated; to faint, swoon: Caus. {%-mohayati, -yitum,%}
to bewilder, infatuate.
<LEND>

<L>32508<pc>0638-b<k1>pramugDa<k2>pramugDa
{%Pra-mugdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ fainting, unconscious;
very charming.
<LEND>

<L>32509<pc>0638-b<k1>pramUQa<k2>pramUQa
{%Pra-mūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bewildered, infatuated,
deceived; foolish, stupid, a fool. {%—Pramūḍha-%}
{%sañjña, as, ā, am,%} having the mind perplexed,
bewildered, infatuated.
<LEND>

<L>32510<pc>0638-b<k1>pramoha<k2>pramoha
{%Pra-moha, as,%}¦ m. bewilderment, infatuation, fas-
cination; insensibility, stupefaction, stupor, fainting
away. {%—Pramoha-citta, as, ā, am,%} bewildered in
mind.
<LEND>

<L>32511<pc>0638-b<k1>pramohana<k2>pramohana
{%Pra-mohana, as, ī, am,%}¦ infatuating the mind.
<LEND>

<L>32512<pc>0638-b<k1>pramohita<k2>pramohita
{%Pra-mohita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bewildered, infatuated.
<LEND>

<L>32513<pc>0638-b<k1>pramohin<k2>pramohin
{%Pramohin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ bewildering, infatuating.
<LEND>

<L>32514<pc>0638-b<k1>pramUra<k2>pramUra
{#pramUra#}¦ {%pra-mūra%} in {%a-pramūra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>32515<pc>0638-b<k1>pramf<k2>pramf
{#pramf#}¦ {%pra-mṛ,%} Caus. P. {%-mārayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to put to death.
<LEND>

<L>32516<pc>0638-b<k1>pramara<k2>pramara
{%Pra-mara, as,%}¦ m., Ved. death, dying.
<LEND>

<L>32517<pc>0638-b<k1>pramaraRa<k2>pramaraRa
{%Pra-maraṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. dying, death.
<LEND>

<L>32518<pc>0638-b<k1>pramAra<k2>pramAra
{%Pra-māra, as,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= pra-maraṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>32519<pc>0638-b<k1>pramfta<k2>pramfta
{%Pra-mṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dead, deceased; with-
drawn or gone out of sight; covered, concealed;
({%am%}), n. death; tillage, cultivation.
<LEND>

<L>32520<pc>0638-b<k1>pramftaka<k2>pramftaka
{%Pramṛtaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ dead.
<LEND>
[Page0638-c+ 70]

<L>32521<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfgam<k2>pramfgam
{#pramfgam#}¦ {%pra-mṛgam,%} ind., see Gaṇa Tish-
ṭhadgv-ādi to Pāṇ. II. 1, 17.
<LEND>

<L>32522<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfgya<k2>pramfgya
{%Pra-mṛgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sought or searched
after; peculiarly adapted to or fitted for (with dat.).
<LEND>

<L>32523<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfj<k2>pramfj
{#pramfj#}¦ {%pra-mṛj,%} cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi, -mārji-%}
{%tum, -mārṣṭum,%} to wash out, wash, clean, cleanse;
to wash off, wipe off, wipe away; to wipe out, re-
move, expel, rid one's self of; to rub gently, stroke,
pass the hand over, rub; to make ready, prepare;
to render unavailing, frustrate.
<LEND>

<L>32524<pc>0638-c<k1>pramArjaka<k2>pramArjaka
{%Pra-mārjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ wiping off, removing.
<LEND>

<L>32525<pc>0638-c<k1>pramArjana<k2>pramArjana
{%Pra-mārjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of rubbing off,
wiping off; {%aśru-pramārjana,%} the wiping away or
drying of tears, consoling.
<LEND>

<L>32526<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfzwa<k2>pramfzwa
{%Pra-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ washed or rubbed off;
rubbed; polished, bright, clear.
<LEND>

<L>32527<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfR<k2>pramfR
{#pramfR#}¦ {%pra-mṛṇ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛṇati,%} &c.,
Ved. to crush, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>32528<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfRa<k2>pramfRa
{%Pra-mṛṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. destroying, crushing.
<LEND>

<L>32529<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfta<k2>pramfta
{#pramfta#}¦ {%pra-mṛta,%} &c. See {%pra-mṛ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32530<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfd<k2>pramfd
{#pramfd#}¦ {%pra-mṛd,%} cl. 9. P. {%-mṛdnāti, -mar-%}
{%ditum,%} to crush down, destroy, lay waste, ravage,
devastate.
<LEND>

<L>32531<pc>0638-c<k1>pramardaka<k2>pramardaka
{%Pra-mardaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushing down, crush-
ing, destroying; N. of a demon.
<LEND>

<L>32532<pc>0638-c<k1>pramardana<k2>pramardana
{%Pra-mardana, as, ī, am,%}¦ crushing down, crush-
ing, destroying; rubbing out or away; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of an attendant of Śiva; of a
Vidyā-dhara; of a general of Śambara; ({%am%}), n.
crushing, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>32533<pc>0638-c<k1>pramarditf<k2>pramarditf
{%Pra-marditṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who crushes or
destroys, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>32534<pc>0638-c<k1>pramardin<k2>pramardin
{%Pra-mardin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ destroying, crushing.
<LEND>

<L>32535<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfS<k2>pramfS
{#pramfS#}¦ {%pra-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati, -marṣ-%}
{%ṭum, -mraṣṭum,%} Ved. to lay hold of, handle;
(according to Mahī-dhara) to reflect, consider, de-
liberate.
<LEND>

<L>32536<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfSa<k2>pramfSa
{%Pra-mṛśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. laying hold of, hand-
ling; (according to Mahī-dhara) {%= paṇḍita.%}
<LEND>

<L>32537<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfz<k2>pramfz
{#pramfz#}¦ {%pra-mṛṣ,%} cl. 4. and 1. P. A. {%-mṛṣ-%}
{%yati, -te, -marṣati, -te, -marṣitum,%} Ved. to
forget, neglect; (Sāy.) to destroy.
<LEND>

<L>32538<pc>0638-c<k1>pramfzya<k2>pramfzya
{%Pra-mṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%a-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>32539<pc>0638-c<k1>pramF<k2>pramF
{#pramF#}¦ {%pra-mṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-mṛṇāti,%} &c., Ved.
to crush, destroy; [cf. {%pra-mṛṇ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32540<pc>0638-c<k1>pramedita<k2>pramedita
{#pramedita#}¦ {%pra-medita.%} See {%pra-mid,%} p. 637.
<LEND>

<L>32541<pc>0638-c<k1>prameya<k2>prameya
{#prameya#}¦ {%pra-meya.%} See p. 637, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32542<pc>0638-c<k1>prameha<k2>prameha
{#prameha#}¦ {%pra-meha, pra-mehin.%} See under
{%pra-mih,%} p. 637, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32543<pc>0638-c<k1>pramoktavya<k2>pramoktavya
{#pramoktavya#}¦ {%pra-moktavya.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32544<pc>0638-c<k1>pramokza<k2>pramokza
{#pramokza#}¦ {%pra-mokṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%mokṣ%}
with {%pra%}), letting fall, dropping, losing; discharging,
dismissing, liberation.
<LEND>

<L>32545<pc>0638-c<k1>pramokzaRa<k2>pramokzaRa
{%Pra-mokṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. ‘releasing,’ a term applied
to the end of an eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>32546<pc>0638-c<k1>pramocana<k2>pramocana
{#pramocana#}¦ {%pra-mocana.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32547<pc>0638-c<k1>pramota<k2>pramota
{#pramota#}¦ {%pra-mota%} (perhaps fr. rt. {%mīv%}), Ved.
a particular kind of disease.
<LEND>

<L>32548<pc>0638-c<k1>pramoda<k2>pramoda
{#pramoda#}¦ {%pra-moda,%} &c. See under 1. {%pra-%}
{%mud,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32549<pc>0638-c<k1>pramoha<k2>pramoha
{#pramoha#}¦ {%pra-moha,%} &c. See {%pra-muh,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32550<pc>0638-c<k1>pramrad<k2>pramrad
{#pramrad#}¦ {%pra-mrad%} [cf. {%pra-mṛd%}], cl. 1. A.
{%-mradate, -mraditum,%} Ved. to destroy, kill.
<LEND>

<L>32551<pc>0638-c<k1>pramluc<k2>pramluc
{#pramluc#}¦ {%pra-mluc,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mlocati, -mlo-%}
{%citum,%} Ved. to go down, sink down.
<LEND>

<L>32552<pc>0638-c<k1>pramlocantI<k2>pramlocantI
{%Pra-mlocantī%}¦ or {%pra-mlocā,%} f., N. of an Apsaras
or nymph of heaven.
<LEND>

<L>32553<pc>0638-c<k1>pramlE<k2>pramlE
{#pramlE#}¦ {%pra-mlai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mlāyati, -mlātum,%}
to fade away, become faded, wither away, wither.
<LEND>

<L>32554<pc>0638-c<k1>pramlAna<k2>pramlAna
{%Pra-mlāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ faded away, withered
[Page0639-a+ 77]
away, faded, withered; soiled, dirty. {%—Pramlāna-%}
{%vadana, as, ā, am,%} having the face dried up or
soiled (with weeping &c.). {%—Pramlāna-śarīra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} withered in body, having an exhausted frame.
<LEND>

<L>32555<pc>0639-a<k1>prayakza<k2>prayakza
{#prayakza#}¦ {%pra-yakṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%yakṣ%}
with {%pra%}), Ved. praiseworthy, laudable; (Sāy. {%=%}
{%pūjya.%})
<LEND>

<L>32556<pc>0639-a<k1>prayacCat<k2>prayacCat
{#prayacCat#}¦ {%pra-yacchat.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32557<pc>0639-a<k1>prayaj<k2>prayaj<h>1
{#prayaj#} 1¦. {%pra-yaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-yajati, -te,%}
{%-yaṣṭum,%} Ved. to sacrifice to, offer sacrifices,
worship.
<LEND>

<L>32558<pc>0639-a<k1>prayaj<k2>prayaj<h>2
2. {%pra-yaj, k,%}¦ f., Ved. an offering, oblation; [cf.
{%pṛkṣa-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32559<pc>0639-a<k1>prayajyu<k2>prayajyu
{%Pra-yajyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. to be worshipped or
honoured (Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇa pūjyaḥ%}); striving
forwards, pressing onwards, rushing on (? cf. {%iyakṣ;%}
especially used as an epithet of the Maruts and of
Vāyu, but also said of Indra and Agni).
<LEND>

<L>32560<pc>0639-a<k1>prayAga<k2>prayAga
{%Pra-yāga, as,%}¦ m. a sacrifice, an oblation; the
place of sacrifice <lang n="greek">ἐξοχήν,</lang> a celebrated place of
pilgrimage (now called Allahabad) at the confluence
of the Gaṅgā and Yamunā with the supposed sub-
terranean Sarasvatī (cf. {%tri-veṇī; prayāga%} in com-
position is applied to four other sacred places situated
at the confluence of two rivers, viz. Deva-p˚, Rudra-
p˚, Karṇa-p˚, and Nanda-p˚, in the Himālaya moun-
tains); a horse [cf. {%pra-yoga%}]; a N. of Indra [cf.
{%prayāga-bhaya%}]; N. of a man (in this sense also
{%prayāgaka%}); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of Pra-
yāga. {%—Prayāga-bhaya, as,%} m. ‘fearing sacrifice,’
an epithet of Indra (who is liable to be dethroned
by the performance of a hundred Aśva-medhas or
horse sacrifices). {%—Prayāga-setu, us,%} m., N. of a
work.
<LEND>

<L>32561<pc>0639-a<k1>prayAja<k2>prayAja
{%Pra-yāja, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of particular sacri-
ficial texts or invocations and of the Ājya oblations
or libations at which they are employed (they form
part of the Prāyaṇīya or introductory ceremony in a
Soma sacrifice and are generally five in number, viz.
Samidh, Tanū-napāt, Iḍā, Barhis, Svāhā-kāra; at
animal sacrifices their number is eleven, correspond-
ing to the eleven Āpris, cf. {%ā-prī%}); a principal
ceremony or sacrifice. {%—Prayāja-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. accompanied with Prayājas.
<LEND>

<L>32562<pc>0639-a<k1>prayat<k2>prayat
{#prayat#}¦ {%pra-yat,%} cl. 1. A. {%-yatate, -yatitum,%}
to strive, endeavour, make effort; to apply one's
self to (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>32563<pc>0639-a<k1>prayatitavya<k2>prayatitavya
{%Pra-yatitavya%}¦ or {%pra-yattavya, as, ā, am,%} to
be striven or endeavoured.
<LEND>

<L>32564<pc>0639-a<k1>prayatna<k2>prayatna
{%Pra-yatna, as,%}¦ m. persevering effort, continued
exertion or endeavour, exertion bestowed on anything
(with the object in the loc., or as the first member
of a comp.; cf. {%kṛta-p˚%}); activity of will; activity,
action, act; great care, caution, care; difficulty; (in
philosophy) active effort of three kinds, viz. engaging
in any act, prosecuting it, and completing it; (in
grammar) effort in uttering, effort or movement of
the mouth or breath in the production of articulate
utterance, mode of articulation, (also {%āsya-pra-%}
{%yatna;%} distinguished into {%ābhyantara-p˚,%} inter-
nal effort, and {%vāhya-p˚,%} external effort); {%prayat-%}
{%nena, prayatnāt, prayatnais, prayatna-tas,%} ind.
with especial effort, with particular care or pains,
diligently, carefully, earnestly, zealously, with all one's
might; particularly, especially; with difficulty, hardly,
scarcely. {%—Prayatna-prekṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} to
be seen with an effort, hardly visible. {%—Prayatna-%}
{%muktāsana, as, ā, am,%} quitting a seat with difficulty,
rising with difficulty from a seat. {%—Prayatna-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} one who endeavours or makes effort, one
who directs his whole attention and care towards
anything, assiduous, enterprising, persevering.
<LEND>

<L>32565<pc>0639-a<k1>prayam<k2>prayam
{#prayam#}¦ {%pra-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati, -yantum,%}
to hold out towards, offer; to present, bestow, grant,
give (with dat., loc., or gen. of the person and acc.
of the thing; in Ṛg-veda VII. 75, 2, with acc. of
the person and dat. of the thing); to give in mar-
[Page0639-b+ 79]
riage; to give up, deliver, restore, return; to pay,
discharge (a debt); to restrain, check, control.
<LEND>

<L>32566<pc>0639-b<k1>prayacCat<k2>prayacCat
{%Pra-yacchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ presenting, giving,
bestowing.
<LEND>

<L>32567<pc>0639-b<k1>prayata<k2>prayata
{%Pra-yata, as, ā, am,%}¦ restrained, well governed,
self-subdued, keeping the organs of sense under con-
trol; submissive; careful, prudent; zealous, intent
(on devotion); pure; ({%as%}), m. a holy or pious
person, one purified by austerity and mortification.
{%—Prayata-tva, am,%} n. self-control, purity, holiness.
{%—Prayata-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one who
has made presents (to the priests officiating at a sa-
crifice; Sāy. {%= yena ṛtvigbhyo dakṣiṇā dattāḥ%}).
{%—Prayata-parigraha-dvitīya, as,%} m. accompa-
nied by a pious or chaste wife. {%—Prayatātman%}
{%(˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} restrained in mind, pious-minded,
devout in spirit, pious, ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>32568<pc>0639-b<k1>prayati<k2>prayati
{%Pra-yati, is,%}¦ f., Ved. offering, presenting; a gift,
oblation; effort, exertion, endeavour; will, intention.
<LEND>

<L>32569<pc>0639-b<k1>prayantf<k2>prayantf
{%Pra-yantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who offers or
presents, a giver, bringer.
<LEND>

<L>32570<pc>0639-b<k1>prayAma<k2>prayAma
{%Pra-yāma, as,%}¦ m. checking, restraining; dearth,
scarcity, dearness; competition of buyers in conse-
quence of scarcity; length (either of space or time).
<LEND>

<L>32571<pc>0639-b<k1>prayAmya<k2>prayAmya
{%Pra-yāmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be checked or con-
trolled.
<LEND>

<L>32572<pc>0639-b<k1>prayas<k2>prayas<h>1
{#prayas#} 1¦. {%pra-yas,%} cl. 4. 1. P. {%-yasyati, -ya-%}
{%sati, -yasitum,%} to endeavour, labour, strive after
(with dat.).
<LEND>

<L>32573<pc>0639-b<k1>prayAsa<k2>prayAsa
{%Pra-yāsa, as,%}¦ m. effort, exertion, labour, pains,
endeavour; {%prayāsena,%} with effort, diligently; {%a-%}
{%prayāsena,%} without any exertion, without effort or
difficulty. {%—Prayāsa-bhāj, k, k, k,%} capable of exer-
tion or fatigue, active, energetic.
<LEND>

<L>32574<pc>0639-b<k1>prayas<k2>prayas<h>2
{#prayas#} 2¦. {%prayas, as,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%prī%}), Ved.
pleasure, enjoyment, delight; an object of enjoy-
ment, delicate or dainty food, refreshing draught or
beverage; a sacrifice; {%prayāṃsi nadīnām,%} the re-
freshing waters of rivers (Sāy. {%= nadīnām prīṇayi-%}
{%trīṇi jalāni%}); ({%ās, ās, as%}), valuable, precious (?).
{%—Prayas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having or bestow-
ing pleasant food, offering refreshing food (Sāy. {%=%}
{%havir-lakṣaṇānna-vat%}); ({%at%}), n., N. of a Sā-
man; {%Prayasvanto 'trayaḥ,%} N. of the authors of
the hymn Ṛg-veda V. 20. {%—1. prayo-ga, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (for 2. {%pra-yoga%} see p. 640, col. 1), Ved.
coming to a meal; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi with
the patronymic Bhārgava, author of the hymn Ṛg-
veda VIII. 91.
<LEND>

<L>32575<pc>0639-b<k1>prayasta<k2>prayasta
{%Prayasta, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably connected with 2.
{%prayas%}), seasoned, dressed with sauces and condiments.
<LEND>

<L>32576<pc>0639-b<k1>prayA<k2>prayA<h>1
{#prayA#} 1¦. {%pra-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%} to
go forwards, proceed onwards, advance, progress; to
go forth, go away, depart: Caus. {%-yāpayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to proceed: Desid. {%-yiyāsati,%} to wish
to advance.
<LEND>

<L>32577<pc>0639-b<k1>prayA<k2>prayA<h>2
2. {%pra-yā, ās,%}¦ f. (or m. ?), Ved. rushing upon,
assailing, an attack, assault; (Sāy.) an attacking or
assailing force.
<LEND>

<L>32578<pc>0639-b<k1>prayARa<k2>prayARa
{%Pra-yāṇa, am,%}¦ n. setting out, departing, setting
forth, starting (on a journey); going forth, going to
a distance, journey, march; the march of an army,
attack, invasion; going, motion, progress; departure,
death [cf. {%prāṇa-p˚%}]; beginning, commencement;
the hind part or haunch of a horse or other animal,
the crupper (?) ; the back of a horse, the rider's seat.
{%—Prayāṇa-kāla, as,%} m. time of departure, death.
{%—Prayāṇa-purī,%} f., N. of a town. {%—Prayāṇa-%}
{%bhaṅga, as,%} m. the breaking or suspending of a
journey, a halt. {%—Prayāṇārha (˚ṇa-ar˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} worthy of death, deserving death.
<LEND>

<L>32579<pc>0639-b<k1>prayARaka<k2>prayARaka
{%Prayāṇaka, am,%}¦ n. a journey, march; going,
motion; {%a-prayāṇaka,%} the suspension of a journey,
halting, a halt.
<LEND>

<L>32580<pc>0639-b<k1>prayARIya<k2>prayARIya
{%Pra-yāṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone forward or
advanced.
<LEND>

<L>32581<pc>0639-b<k1>prayAta<k2>prayAta
{%Pra-yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone towards, advanced;
gone away, gone to a distance, gone, removed,
departed; deceased, dead; ({%as%}), m. an invasion,
[Page0639-c+ 77]
attack; a steep rock, precipice; (wrongly for {%pra-%}
{%pāta.%})
<LEND>

<L>32582<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAtavya<k2>prayAtavya
{%Pra-yātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone forward or
advanced, to be marched or proceeded; to be attacked.
<LEND>

<L>32583<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAtf<k2>prayAtf
{%Pra-yātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who goes forward,
going, able to go or fly.
<LEND>

<L>32584<pc>0639-c<k1>prayApaRa<k2>prayApaRa
{%Pra-yāpaṇa%}¦ or {%pra-yāpana, am,%} n. causing to
go forwards, sending; expelling, driving away.
<LEND>

<L>32585<pc>0639-c<k1>prayApaRIya<k2>prayApaRIya
{%Pra-yāpaṇīya%}¦ or {%pra-yāpanīya, as, ā, am,%} to be
caused to go forwards, to be sent away, to be sent.
<LEND>

<L>32586<pc>0639-c<k1>prayApita<k2>prayApita
{%Pra-yāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to go forwards,
driven or sent away, made to go or pass away.
<LEND>

<L>32587<pc>0639-c<k1>prayApin<k2>prayApin
{%Pra-yāpin, ī, iṇī%}¦ or {%inī, i,%} causing to go for-
wards, sending forwards, causing to go, sending,
sending away.
<LEND>

<L>32588<pc>0639-c<k1>prayApya<k2>prayApya
{%Pra-yāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to go for-
wards, to be sent away.
<LEND>

<L>32589<pc>0639-c<k1>prayApyamARa<k2>prayApyamARa
{%Pra-yāpyamāṇa%}¦ or {%pra-yāpyamāna, as, ā, am,%}
being caused to go forwards, being sent or made
to go, being caused to pass away.
<LEND>

<L>32590<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAman<k2>prayAman
{%Pra-yāman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. going forwards, setting
out (Sāy. {%= pra-gamana%}).
<LEND>

<L>32591<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAyin<k2>prayAyin
{%Pra-yāyin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going forwards, advancing,
marching, going, driving, riding.
<LEND>

<L>32592<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAsyat<k2>prayAsyat
{%Pra-yāsyat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to go
forwards, about to go or depart, going.
<LEND>

<L>32593<pc>0639-c<k1>prayiyAsat<k2>prayiyAsat
{%Pra-yiyāsat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing to go forth,
desirous of setting out.
<LEND>

<L>32594<pc>0639-c<k1>prayiyu<k2>prayiyu
{%Pra-yiyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. used for driving (as a horse).
<LEND>

<L>32595<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAga<k2>prayAga
{#prayAga#}¦ {%pra-yāga.%} See 1. {%pra-yaj,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32596<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAc<k2>prayAc
{#prayAc#}¦ {%pra-yāc,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-yācati, -te,%}
{%yācitum,%} to ask for, beg, solicit, request.
<LEND>

<L>32597<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAcaka<k2>prayAcaka
{%Pra-yācaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ asking, requesting,
begging, imploring.
<LEND>

<L>32598<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAcana<k2>prayAcana
{%Pra-yācana, am,%}¦ n. asking, requesting, begging,
imploring.
<LEND>

<L>32599<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAja<k2>prayAja
{#prayAja#}¦ {%pra-yāja.%} See 1. {%pra-yaj,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32600<pc>0639-c<k1>prayARa<k2>prayARa
{#prayARa#}¦ {%pra-yāṇa,%} &c. See 1. {%pra-yā,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32601<pc>0639-c<k1>prayAsa<k2>prayAsa
{#prayAsa#}¦ {%pra-yāsa.%} See 1. {%pra-yas,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32602<pc>0639-c<k1>prayu<k2>prayu
{#prayu#}¦ {%pra-yu,%} cl. 2. P., 9. P. A. {%-yauti, -yu-%}
{%nāti, -yunīte, -yavitum,%} to disjoin, sever, separate.
<LEND>

<L>32603<pc>0639-c<k1>prayuta<k2>prayuta
{%Pra-yuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined, combined, united;
disjoined, separated; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Deva-gan-
dharva; ({%am%}), n. a million. {%—Prayuteśvara-tīrtha%}
{%(˚ta-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a place of pilgrimage.
<LEND>

<L>32604<pc>0639-c<k1>prayuti<k2>prayuti
{%Pra-yuti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. separation from, absence;
thoughtlessness.
<LEND>

<L>32605<pc>0639-c<k1>prayotf<k2>prayotf
{%Pra-yotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who disjoins or
separates, severing, separating.
<LEND>

<L>32606<pc>0639-c<k1>prayuj<k2>prayuj<h>1
{#prayuj#} 1¦. {%pra-yuj,%} cl. 7. A. {%-yuṅkte, -yok-%}
{%tum,%} to join to, harness, yoke; to make use of, use,
employ; to apply; to bestow, grant, give, lend; to
impose, inflict on (with loc. or gen. of the person);
to put in front; to appoint, invest (in an office),
install; to instigate, impel, direct towards; to cast,
hurl, throw (a missile); to conduct; to perform,
practise; to befit, become, be fitting or appropriate:
Caus. {%-yojayati, -yitum,%} to use, employ; exact
(interest, Manu III. 112); to perform, practise.
<LEND>

<L>32607<pc>0639-c<k1>prayukta<k2>prayukta
{%Pra-yukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined to, harnessed, yoked;
used, employed; applied; inflicted upon; appointed,
nominated; associated or connected with; endowed
with, possessing (as an attribute &c.); resulting from,
consequent on, produced by, arising from, occasioned
by; compact, closely united; abstracted, lost in
meditation; lent (as money); asleep?; ({%am%}), n. a
cause. {%—Prayukta-saṃskāra, as, ā, am,%} to which
polish has been applied, polished (as a gem).
<LEND>

<L>32608<pc>0639-c<k1>prayukti<k2>prayukti
{%Pra-yukti, is,%}¦ f. use, employment, application;
activity, inclination; impulse, instigation, incitement;
cause, motive, main object or end, occasion, conse-
quence, result.
<LEND>

<L>32609<pc>0639-c<k1>prayuga<k2>prayuga
{%Pra-yuga, am,%}¦ n. regarded as the original form
of {%praüga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>32610<pc>0639-c<k1>prayuj<k2>prayuj<h>2
2. {%pra-yuj, k, k, k,%}¦ joining, connected with (literally
or figuratively, as a cause, motive, &c.); ({%k%}), f.,
Ved. a team of horses; impulse, motive, cause;
[Page0640-a+ 81]
acquiring, acquisition; {%prayujāṃ havīṃṣi%} or {%pra-%}
{%yug-ghavīṃṣi,%} Ved., N. of twelve oblations, one of
which is to be offered in each month.
<LEND>

<L>32611<pc>0640-a<k1>prayujya<k2>prayujya
{%Pra-yujya,%}¦ ind. having used or employed; having
applied; having connected; having acted or behaved
to or towards.
<LEND>

<L>32612<pc>0640-a<k1>prayujyamAna<k2>prayujyamAna
{%Pra-yujyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being used or em-
ployed, being applied, &c.; being united or con-
nected with.
<LEND>

<L>32613<pc>0640-a<k1>prayuYjAna<k2>prayuYjAna
{%Pra-yuñjāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ joining, adding; em-
ploying, using; appointing, deputing; performing,
doing.
<LEND>

<L>32614<pc>0640-a<k1>prayoktavya<k2>prayoktavya
{%Pra-yoktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be used or employed;
to be applied, applicable, suitable; to be exhibited
or represented (as a drama); to be hurled or thrown
(as a missile); to be uttered or pronounced.
<LEND>

<L>32615<pc>0640-a<k1>prayoktf<k2>prayoktf
{%Pra-yoktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who employs or
applies, one who makes use of, one who uses, using,
employing; one who performs or directs, an exe-
cuter; one who stirs up or excites; an instigator;
the agent of an action; lending, a money-lender;
one who exhibits or represents (a drama); one who
shoots or sends (an arrow); one who recites, a reciter.
<LEND>

<L>32616<pc>0640-a<k1>prayoga<k2>prayoga<h>2
2. {%pra-yoga, as,%}¦ m. (for. 1. {%prayo-ga%} see under
2. {%prayas%}), joining together, combination, connec-
tion; adding, addition; application, employment;
reducing to practice, use, usage, practice [cf. {%bhūri-%}
{%p˚, samyak-p˚%}]; ceremonial form, course of pro-
ceeding; act, action, effort; (in gram.) a form com-
monly employed, form usually occurring, usual form;
a general precept; employment of drugs; application
of charms or magic, magic, magical rites; offering,
presenting; employment of money, investment,
lending money on usury; principal, loan bearing
interest, profits of usury or trade; appointing, ap-
pointment; hurling, throwing, casting, sending (a
missile); undertaking, beginning, commencement;
a design, device, plan, contrivance; means, instru-
ment; exhibition (of a dance), performance, repre-
sentation (of a drama); recitation, delivery; a for-
mula to be recited, sacred text, authority; fascinating,
subduing (?); cause, motive, occasion, object; con-
sequence, result; an example, comparison; a horse
[cf. {%pra-yāga%}]; {%prayogais,%} ind. by use of means.
{%—Prayoga-tas,%} ind. by the use of, through the em-
ployment of; in consequence of; according to; in
action, actually. {%—Prayoga-dīpa, as,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Prayoga-nipuṇa, as, ā, am,%} skilful in
practice, practically experienced. {%—Prayoga-pad-%}
{%dhati, is,%} f., N. of a work by Śiva-rāma on ritual.
{%—Prayoga-pārijāta, as,%} m. and {%prayoga-muktā-%}
{%valī,%} f., N. of two works. {%—Prayoga-vṛtti, is,%} f.,
N. of a commentary by Varadādhīśa-yajvan. {%—Pra-%}
{%yoga-vaijayantī,%} f., N. of a commentary by Mahā-
deva on the Hiraṇya-keśi-kalpa-sūtra. {%—Prayoga-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m., N. of a section of the Saṃskāra-tattva.
{%—Prayogātiśaya (˚ga-at˚), as,%} m. (in dramatic
language) ‘excess in representation,’ bringing a cha-
racter on the stage the moment that his name is
pronounced. {%—Prayogārtha (˚ga-ar˚), as,%} m. an
act tending to a main object?; ({%as, ā, am%}), having
the sense of {%pra-yoga.%}
<LEND>

<L>32617<pc>0640-a<k1>prayogin<k2>prayogin
{%Pra-yogin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ being employed or used,
usual; having some object in view, striving for an
object, calculated for a particular purpose; using,
applying; causing, stimulating. {%—Prayogi-tva, am,%}
n. the being used or employed, usefulness.
<LEND>

<L>32618<pc>0640-a<k1>prayogIya<k2>prayogIya
{%Prayogīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ treating of the application
(of medicines &c.).
<LEND>

<L>32619<pc>0640-a<k1>prayogya<k2>prayogya
{%Pra-yogya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an animal harnessed to
a carriage, an animal used for draught.
<LEND>

<L>32620<pc>0640-a<k1>prayojaka<k2>prayojaka
{%Pra-yojaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ occasioning, effecting,
conducing to, causing or inducing any act, leading
to anything; instigating, occasioning, prompting,
arousing, stimulating, exciting; an original instigator;
deputing, appointing; ({%as%}), m. a founder or insti-
tutor (of any ceremony); a law-giver, legislator; an
author, composer; a money-lender, creditor. {%—Pra-%}
{%yojaka-kartṛtva, am,%} n. acting as an instigator or
promoter.
<LEND>

<L>32621<pc>0640-a<k1>prayojana<k2>prayojana
{%Pra-yojana, am,%}¦ n. application, employment,
[Page0640-b+ 74]
use, use of (with inst., e. g. {%taruṇā kim prayoja-%}
{%nam,%} what is the use of the tree? {%mama na kiñcid%}
{%arthena prayojanam,%} to me there is no use in
money, money is of no use to me); need of, neces-
sity for (with inst.); cause, occasion, motive, origin;
purpose, object, aim, intention, design; profit, in-
terest; means of attaining (Manu VII. 100); {%pra-%}
{%yojanena,%} ind. with a particular motive or inten-
tion; {%kena prayojanena,%} from what cause?
from what motive? {%—Prayojana-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having a particular use or aim or purpose, done with
a particular aim or design, selfish; serving for a par-
ticular purpose, serviceable; having a cause, caused,
produced.
<LEND>

<L>32622<pc>0640-b<k1>prayojayat<k2>prayojayat
{%Pra-yojayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ combining; behaving
to, acting towards; showing, displaying.
<LEND>

<L>32623<pc>0640-b<k1>prayojya<k2>prayojya
{%Pra-yojya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be used or employed,
to be practised; to be occasioned or produced; to
be set to work; to be appointed or directed; to be
thrown, to be cast (as a missile); ({%as%}), m. a servant,
slave; ({%am%}), n. capital, principal, (properly, that
which is put out to interest.) {%—Prayojya-tva, am,%}
n. the state of being used or employed.
<LEND>

<L>32624<pc>0640-b<k1>prayuta<k2>prayuta
{#prayuta#}¦ {%pra-yuta.%} See under {%pra-yu,%} p. 639.
<LEND>

<L>32625<pc>0640-b<k1>prayuD<k2>prayuD<h>1
{#prayuD#} 1¦. {%pra-yudh,%} Desid. A. {%-yuyutsate,%}
to wish to fight.
<LEND>

<L>32626<pc>0640-b<k1>prayutsu<k2>prayutsu
{%Pra-yutsu, us,%}¦ m. a warrior; a ram; an ascetic;
air, wind; a N. of Indra; (for {%pra-yuyutsu.%})
<LEND>

<L>32627<pc>0640-b<k1>prayudDa<k2>prayudDa
{%Pra-yuddha, am,%}¦ n. war, battle. {%—Prayuddhār-%}
{%tha (˚dha-ar˚), as,%} m. war, battle, going to war or
battle {%(= praty-utkrama); (as, ā, am),%} having the
sense of {%pra-yuddha.%}
<LEND>

<L>32628<pc>0640-b<k1>prayuD<k2>prayuD<h>2
2. {%pra-yudh, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. attacking, assailing
(Sāy. {%= pra-yoddhṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>32629<pc>0640-b<k1>prayodDf<k2>prayodDf
{%Pra-yoddhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ one who fights,
a combatant.
<LEND>

<L>32630<pc>0640-b<k1>prayoktf<k2>prayoktf
{#prayoktf#}¦ {%pra-yoktṛ,%} 2. {%pra-yoga.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32631<pc>0640-b<k1>prayotf<k2>prayotf
{#prayotf#}¦ {%pra-yotṛ.%} See under {%pra-yu,%} p. 639.
<LEND>

<L>32632<pc>0640-b<k1>prayyameDa<k2>prayyameDa
{#prayyameDa#}¦ {%prayyamedha,%} a patronymic from
Priya-medha, {%= praiyyamedha.%}
<LEND>

<L>32633<pc>0640-b<k1>prarakz<k2>prarakz
{#prarakz#}¦ {%pra-rakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rakṣati, -rak-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to protect against, protect, defend.
<LEND>

<L>32634<pc>0640-b<k1>prarakza<k2>prarakza
{%Pra-rakṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ one from whom any one
is protected.
<LEND>

<L>32635<pc>0640-b<k1>prarakzaRa<k2>prarakzaRa
{%Pra-rakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. protecting, protection.
<LEND>

<L>32636<pc>0640-b<k1>prarakzita<k2>prarakzita
{%Pra-rakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ protected against, pro-
tected, defended.
<LEND>

<L>32637<pc>0640-b<k1>praraTam<k2>praraTam
{#praraTam#}¦ {%pra-ratham,%} ind., see Gaṇa Tish-
ṭhadgv-ādi to Pāṇ. II. 1, 17.
<LEND>

<L>32638<pc>0640-b<k1>praram<k2>praram
{#praram#}¦ {%pra-ram,%} Caus. P. {%-ramayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to delight or gladden greatly, exhilarate; to
excite, arouse (?) .
<LEND>

<L>32639<pc>0640-b<k1>prarADas<k2>prarADas
{#prarADas#}¦ {%pra-rādhas, ās,%} m. (fr. rt. {%rādh%}
with {%pra%}), N. of a descendant of Aṅgiras.
<LEND>

<L>32640<pc>0640-b<k1>prarADya<k2>prarADya
{%Pra-rādhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be satisfied or made
content.
<LEND>

<L>32641<pc>0640-b<k1>praric<k2>praric
{#praric#}¦ {%pra-ric,%} Pass. {%-ricyate,%} to excel,
surpass, be superior to (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>32642<pc>0640-b<k1>prarikvan<k2>prarikvan
{%Pra-rikvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. reaching beyond,
surpassing, excelling.
<LEND>

<L>32643<pc>0640-b<k1>prareka<k2>prareka
{%Pra-reka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. abundance, plenty, afflu-
ence; (Sāy.) {%= dāna,%} bounty, liberality.
<LEND>

<L>32644<pc>0640-b<k1>prarecana<k2>prarecana
{%Pra-recana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. superabundance, super-
fluity (Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇādhikaṃ dhanam%}).
<LEND>

<L>32645<pc>0640-b<k1>praruc<k2>praruc
{#praruc#}¦ {%pra-ruc,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rocate, -rocitum,%}
to shine forth, shine, be brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>32646<pc>0640-b<k1>prarocana<k2>prarocana
{%Pra-rocana, as, ī, am,%}¦ exciting or inciting to
love (as a spell), seducing; ({%am%}), n. stimulating,
exciting; seduction; illustration, explanation; ({%am,%}
{%ā%}), n. f. praising an author in the prologue of a
drama, favourable description of that which is to
follow in a play.
<LEND>

<L>32647<pc>0640-b<k1>praruj<k2>praruj
{#praruj#}¦ {%pra-ruj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-rujati, -roktum,%}
Ved. to break down, break (Sāy. {%= pra-bhañj%}).
<LEND>
[Page0640-c+ 76]

<L>32648<pc>0640-c<k1>praruja<k2>praruja
{%Pra-ruja, as,%}¦ m., N. of a mythical being con-
quered by Garuḍa; N. of a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>32649<pc>0640-c<k1>prarud<k2>prarud
{#prarud#}¦ {%pra-rud,%} cl. 2. P. {%-roditi, -roditum,%}
to burst into tears, begin to weep, weep, cry.
<LEND>

<L>32650<pc>0640-c<k1>prarudita<k2>prarudita
{%Pra-rudita, as, ā, am,%}¦ beginning to weep,
wept, weeping.
<LEND>

<L>32651<pc>0640-c<k1>praruD<k2>praruD
{#praruD#}¦ {%pra-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ruṇaddhi,%}
{%-runddhe, -roddhum,%} to keep back, hold back.
<LEND>

<L>32652<pc>0640-c<k1>praruh<k2>praruh<h>1
{#praruh#} 1¦. {%pra-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati, -roḍhum,%}
to grow up, shoot forth, shoot up, grow; to heal up
(as a wound).
<LEND>

<L>32653<pc>0640-c<k1>praruh<k2>praruh<h>2
2. {%pra-ruh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ shooting forth, growing up
like a plant; ({%ṭ%}), f., Ved. a shoot, a new branch.
<LEND>

<L>32654<pc>0640-c<k1>prarUQa<k2>prarUQa
{%Pra-rūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown up, full-grown;
grown, increased; growing or proceeding from a
root, rooted, fastened; born, produced. {%—Prarūḍha-%}
{%keśa, as, ā, am,%} ‘long-haired,’ one whose hair has
grown long, having long hair. {%—Prarūḍha-śāli, is,%}
m. full-grown rice.
<LEND>

<L>32655<pc>0640-c<k1>prarUQi<k2>prarUQi
{%Pra-rūḍhi, is,%}¦ f. growing up, growth, increase.
<LEND>

<L>32656<pc>0640-c<k1>praroDana<k2>praroDana
{%Pra-rodhana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. rising, ascending.
<LEND>

<L>32657<pc>0640-c<k1>praroha<k2>praroha
{%Pra-roha, as,%}¦ m. growing or shooting forth [cf.
{%dṛḍha-p˚%}]; germinating, germination, sprouting,
budding; a bud, shoot, sprout, twig, spray, sprig; a
shoot of light [cf. {%prabhā-p˚%}]; a new leaf or branch;
an excrescence. {%—Praroha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pos-
sessing vegetation, covered with vegetation.
<LEND>

<L>32658<pc>0640-c<k1>prarohaRa<k2>prarohaRa
{%Pra-rohaṇa, am,%}¦ n. growing or shooting forth,
growing, growth; germinating, germination, bud-
ding, sprouting; a bud, twig, spray, shoot, sprig.
<LEND>

<L>32659<pc>0640-c<k1>prarohin<k2>prarohin
{%Pra-rohin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ growing or shooting up,
growing, propagated (Manu I. 46). {%—Prarohi-%}
{%śākhin, ī,%} m. a tree whose branches grow again,
(perhaps rather) a tree still growing or still alive.
<LEND>

<L>32660<pc>0640-c<k1>prarej<k2>prarej
{#prarej#}¦ {%pra-rej,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rejate,%} &c., Ved. to
tremble at (with acc.; Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇa kamp%}).
<LEND>

<L>32661<pc>0640-c<k1>prarkzIya<k2>prarkzIya
{#prarkzIya#}¦ {%prarkṣīya%} (fr. 1. {%pra + ṛkṣa%}),
Nom. P. {%prarkṣīyati,%} &c., see Vopa-deva II. 4;
(also {%prārkṣīya.%})
<LEND>

<L>32662<pc>0640-c<k1>prarzaBIya<k2>prarzaBIya
{#prarzaBIya#}¦ {%prarṣabhīya%} (fr. 1. {%pra + ṛṣa-%}
{%bha%}), Nom. P. {%prarṣabhīyati,%} &c., see Scholiast
on Pāṇ. VI. 1, 92; (also {%prārṣabhīya.%})
<LEND>

<L>32663<pc>0640-c<k1>pralap<k2>pralap
{#pralap#}¦ {%pra-lap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-lapati, -lapitum,%}
to speak forth, speak; to prattle, prate, talk idly or
incoherently, jabber, chatter; to cry, lament, bewail;
to call upon, invoke: Caus. {%-lāpayati, -yitum,%} to
cause or incite to speak.
<LEND>

<L>32664<pc>0640-c<k1>pralapat<k2>pralapat
{%Pra-lapat, an, antī, at,%}¦ speaking, talking; call-
ing upon, invoking.
<LEND>

<L>32665<pc>0640-c<k1>pralapana<k2>pralapana
{%Pra-lapana, am,%}¦ n. prattling, prating; speaking,
talking.
<LEND>

<L>32666<pc>0640-c<k1>pralapita<k2>pralapita
{%Pra-lapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken forth, declared,
spoken, uttered, said.
<LEND>

<L>32667<pc>0640-c<k1>pralApa<k2>pralApa
{%Pra-lāpa, as,%}¦ m. talk, talking, conversation, dis-
course; talking in an unmeaning or childish manner,
incoherent or delirious speech, prattling, prattle,
prate, chattering; {%ārta-pralāpa,%} ‘the utterance or
cry of one in pain,’ lamentation, wailing. {%—Pralāpa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} speaking confusedly. {%—Pralāpa-%}
{%han, ā,%} m. a kind of collyrium. {%—Pralāpaika-%}
{%maya (˚pa-ek˚), as, ī, am,%} ‘consisting of lamen-
tation only,’ doing nothing but lament.
<LEND>

<L>32668<pc>0640-c<k1>pralApana<k2>pralApana
{%Pra-lāpana, am,%}¦ n. causing or teaching to speak.
<LEND>

<L>32669<pc>0640-c<k1>pralApin<k2>pralApin
{%Pra-lāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ talking much or unmean-
ingly, chattering, a prater; speaking to, conversing
with; lamenting, wailing. {%—Pralāpi-tā,%} f. amorous
conversation, loving prattle.
<LEND>

<L>32670<pc>0640-c<k1>pralaB<k2>pralaB
{#pralaB#}¦ {%pra-labh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-labhate%} (ep. also
{%-lambhate%}), {%-labdhum,%} to overreach, cheat, deceive.
<LEND>

<L>32671<pc>0640-c<k1>pralabDa<k2>pralabDa
{%Pra-labdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ overreached, cheated,
deceived.
<LEND>

<L>32672<pc>0640-c<k1>pralabDavya<k2>pralabDavya
{%Pra-labdhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cheated or
deceived.
<LEND>

<L>32673<pc>0640-c<k1>pralamBa<k2>pralamBa
{%Pra-lambha, as,%}¦ m. receiving, obtaining, attain-
ing, gaining; overreaching, cheating, deceiving, fool-
ing, fraud.
<LEND>
[Page0641-a+ 76]

<L>32674<pc>0641-a<k1>pralamBana<k2>pralamBana
{%Pra-lambhana, am,%}¦ n. deceiving, cheating, fool-
ing, fraud.
<LEND>

<L>32675<pc>0641-a<k1>pralamba<k2>pralamba
{#pralamba#}¦ {%pra-lamba, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%lamb%}
with {%pra%}), hanging down, depending, pendulous
(generally in comps., cf. {%pralamba-keśa%} below);
prominent; slow, dilatory; ({%as%}), m. hanging on or
from, depending; a branch; a shoot of the vine-palm;
a garland of flowers worn round the neck; a kind of
necklace of pearls; a cucumber; the female breast; N.
of a Daitya slain by Bala-rāma; N. of a mountainous
district; tin?; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a Rākṣasī. {%—Pra-%}
{%lamba-keśa, as, ā, am,%} one whose hair hangs down.
{%—Pralamba-ghna, as,%} or {%pralamba-han, ā,%} m.
‘the slayer of the Daitya Pralamba,’ epithet of Bala-
rāma (also of Kṛṣṇa?). {%—Pralamba-bhid, t,%} or
{%pralamba-mathana, as,%} m. ‘the cleaver or crusher
of Pralamba,’ epithet of Bala-rāma (also of Kṛṣṇa?).
{%—Pralambāṇḍa (˚ba-aṇ˚), as,%} m. a man with
hanging testicles. {%—Pralambojjvala-cāru-ghoṇa%}
{%(˚ba-uj˚), as, ā, am,%} having a prominent, bright,
and handsome nose.
<LEND>

<L>32676<pc>0641-a<k1>pralambaka<k2>pralambaka
{%Pra-lambaka, as,%}¦ m. fragrant Rohisha grass.
<LEND>

<L>32677<pc>0641-a<k1>pralambana<k2>pralambana
{%Pra-lambana, am,%}¦ n. hanging down, depending.
<LEND>

<L>32678<pc>0641-a<k1>pralambita<k2>pralambita
{%Pra-lambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ suspended, hanging
down, pendulous.
<LEND>

<L>32679<pc>0641-a<k1>pralambin<k2>pralambin
{%Pra-lambin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hanging down, depending;
{%tri-pralambin,%} having three pendent limbs or mem-
bers of the body.
<LEND>

<L>32680<pc>0641-a<k1>pralambIkf<k2>pralambIkf
{%Pralambī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to make to hang down, suspend.
<LEND>

<L>32681<pc>0641-a<k1>pralamBa<k2>pralamBa
{#pralamBa#}¦ {%pra-lambha.%} See {%pra-labh,%} p. 640.
<LEND>

<L>32682<pc>0641-a<k1>pralaya<k2>pralaya
{#pralaya#}¦ {%pra-laya,%} &c. See {%pra-lī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>32683<pc>0641-a<k1>pralalAwa<k2>pralalAwa
{#pralalAwa#}¦ {%pra-lalāṭa, as, ā, am,%} having a
prominent forehead.
<LEND>

<L>32684<pc>0641-a<k1>pralava<k2>pralava
{#pralava#}¦ {%pra-lava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%lū%} with {%pra%}),
a part cut off, a chip, fragment (as of a reed &c.);
the sheath of a leaf.
<LEND>

<L>32685<pc>0641-a<k1>pralavana<k2>pralavana
{%Pra-lavana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. cutting off.
<LEND>

<L>32686<pc>0641-a<k1>pralavitf<k2>pralavitf
{%Pra-lavitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who cuts off, cut-
ting off.
<LEND>

<L>32687<pc>0641-a<k1>pralavitra<k2>pralavitra
{%Pra-lavitra, am,%}¦ n. an instrument for cutting off.
<LEND>

<L>32688<pc>0641-a<k1>pralUna<k2>pralUna
{%Pra-lūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off; ({%as%}), m. a kind
of insect.
<LEND>

<L>32689<pc>0641-a<k1>praliK<k2>praliK
{#praliK#}¦ {%pra-likh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-likhati, -lekhi-%}
{%tum,%} to draw lines along (the ground); to scratch.
<LEND>

<L>32690<pc>0641-a<k1>pralipa<k2>pralipa
{#pralipa#}¦ {%pra-lipa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%lip%} with
{%pra%}), one who smears or plasters, smearing, plas-
tering.
<LEND>

<L>32691<pc>0641-a<k1>pralepa<k2>pralepa
{%Pra-lepa, as,%}¦ m. an unguent, ointment, plaster,
salve.
<LEND>

<L>32692<pc>0641-a<k1>pralepaka<k2>pralepaka
{%Pra-lepaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ anointing, smearing,
plastering; ({%as%}), m. a plasterer, an anointer; a par-
ticular marine substance, lime made of calcined
shells (?); a hectic or slow fever.
<LEND>

<L>32693<pc>0641-a<k1>pralepana<k2>pralepana
{%Pra-lepana, am,%}¦ n. the act of anointing or
smearing.
<LEND>

<L>32694<pc>0641-a<k1>pralepya<k2>pralepya
{%Pra-lepya, as,%}¦ m. clean or well-trimmed hair;
(perhaps incorrectly for a form {%pra-lebhya.%})
<LEND>

<L>32695<pc>0641-a<k1>pralI<k2>pralI
{#pralI#}¦ {%pra-lī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate, -letum, -lā-%}
{%tum,%} to become dissolved or reabsorbed, dissolve,
melt away; to disappear, vanish; to die, perish.
<LEND>

<L>32696<pc>0641-a<k1>pralaya<k2>pralaya
{%Pra-laya, as,%}¦ m. dissolution, destruction, annihi-
lation, reabsorption; the destruction of the whole
world at the end of a Kalpa or period of 432, 000, 000
years [cf. {%kalpa%}]; any extensive destruction or de-
vastation; death, dying; fainting, syncope, loss of
sense or consciousness; an epithet of the mystic
syllable {%om%}. {%—Pralaya-kāla, as,%} m. the period of
the destruction of the world at the end of a Kalpa,
the time of universal destruction. {%—Pralaya-jala-%}
{%dhara-dhvāna, as,%} m. the rumbling or muttering
of clouds at the dissolution of the world. {%—Pralaya-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%pralaya-tva, am,%} n. dissolution. {%—Pra-%}
{%laya-dahana, am,%} n. the fire at the destruction of
the world. {%—Pralaya-sthiti-sarga, ās,%} m. pl. de-
struction, preservation, and creation (of the world).
[Page0641-b+ 75]
{%—Pralayodaya (˚ya-ud˚), au,%} m. du. dissolution
and creation.
<LEND>

<L>32697<pc>0641-b<k1>pralayana<k2>pralayana
{%Pra-layana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a place of rest or
repose, a bed.
<LEND>

<L>32698<pc>0641-b<k1>pralIna<k2>pralIna
{%Pra-līna, as, ā, am,%}¦ dissolved, melted away; de-
stroyed, annihilated; unconscious, insensible. {%—Pra-%}
{%līna-tā,%} f. or {%pralīna-tva, am,%} n. dissolution, de-
struction, annihilation, the end of the universe;
unconsciousness, loss of sense, fainting. {%—Pralīna-%}
{%bhūpāla, as, ā, am,%} whose monarchs have been
destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>32699<pc>0641-b<k1>praluW<k2>praluW
{#praluW#}¦ {%pra-luṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-loṭhati, -loṭhitum,%}
to roll forwards, roll along the ground, roll round,
turn round; to be agitated, heave, toss.
<LEND>

<L>32700<pc>0641-b<k1>praloWana<k2>praloWana
{%Pra-loṭhana, am,%}¦ n. rolling forwards, rolling on
the ground; heaving, tossing (as of the ocean).
<LEND>

<L>32701<pc>0641-b<k1>praloWita<k2>praloWita
{%Pra-loṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rolling forwards, rolling;
heaving, tossing.
<LEND>

<L>32702<pc>0641-b<k1>pralup<k2>pralup
{#pralup#}¦ {%pra-lup,%} Pass. {%-lupyate,%} to be in-
terrupted; to be destroyed; to be violated; to be
disturbed.
<LEND>

<L>32703<pc>0641-b<k1>praluB<k2>praluB
{#praluB#}¦ {%pra-lubh,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-lubhyati, -te,%}
{%-lobdhum,%} to be lustful, follow one's lusts, lust after;
to pollute (through lust); to allure, entice, seduce:
Caus. {%-lobhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to lust, allure,
entice, seduce.
<LEND>

<L>32704<pc>0641-b<k1>praloBa<k2>praloBa
{%Pra-lobha, as,%}¦ m. allurement, seduction; desire,
covetousness, cupidity, greediness.
<LEND>

<L>32705<pc>0641-b<k1>praloBaka<k2>praloBaka
{%Pra-lobhaka, as,%}¦ m. ‘allurer,’ N. of a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>32706<pc>0641-b<k1>praloBana<k2>praloBana
{%Pra-lobhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to lust after,
alluring, seducing; ({%am%}), n. seducing, attracting,
attraction; allurement, inducement; that which
allures, a lure, bait; ({%ī%}), f. gravel, sand.
<LEND>

<L>32707<pc>0641-b<k1>praloBita<k2>praloBita
{%Pra-lobhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ allured, enticed, seduced.
<LEND>

<L>32708<pc>0641-b<k1>praloBin<k2>praloBin
{%Pra-lobhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ lusting after, desiring;
alluring, seducing.
<LEND>

<L>32709<pc>0641-b<k1>praloBya<k2>praloBya
{%Pra-lobhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be lusted after or
desired, desirable, attractive, alluring.
<LEND>

<L>32710<pc>0641-b<k1>pralUna<k2>pralUna
{#pralUna#}¦ {%pra-lūna.%} See under {%pra-lava,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32711<pc>0641-b<k1>praleha<k2>praleha
{#praleha#}¦ {%pra-leha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%lih%} with {%pra%}),
a kind of broth.
<LEND>

<L>32712<pc>0641-b<k1>pralehana<k2>pralehana
{%Pra-lehana, am,%}¦ n. the act of licking.
<LEND>

<L>32713<pc>0641-b<k1>pralola<k2>pralola
{#pralola#}¦ {%pra-lola, as, ā, am,%} being in violent
motion, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>32714<pc>0641-b<k1>pralolupa<k2>pralolupa
{#pralolupa#}¦ {%pra-lolupa, as,%} m., N. of Kunti
(a descendant of Garuḍa).
<LEND>

<L>32715<pc>0641-b<k1>pralkArIya<k2>pralkArIya
{#pralkArIya#}¦ {%pralkārīya,%} Nom. (fr. {%pra + ḷ-%}
{%kāra%}), {%pralkārīyati, -yitum,%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ.
VI. 1, 92; (also {%prālkārīya.%})
<LEND>

<L>32716<pc>0641-b<k1>prava<k2>prava
{#prava#}¦ {%prava, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%pru%}), Ved.
fluttering, hovering; (Sāy.) {%= gacchat%}. {%—Prava-ga,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= plava-ga,%} a monkey. {%—Pravaṅ-ga, as,%}
m. {%= plavaṅ-ga,%} a monkey; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people. {%—Pravaṅ-gama, as,%} m. {%= plavaṅ-gama,%}
a monkey.
<LEND>

<L>32717<pc>0641-b<k1>pravaka<k2>pravaka
{%Pravaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, one who goes.
<LEND>

<L>32718<pc>0641-b<k1>pravac<k2>pravac
{#pravac#}¦ {%pra-vac,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vakti, -vaktum,%} to
speak forth, begin to speak, declare, announce, relate,
tell (with acc. of the thing and gen. or dat. of the
person); to speak to, address; to speak, say; to
explain; to recite; to celebrate.
<LEND>

<L>32719<pc>0641-b<k1>pravaktavya<k2>pravaktavya
{%Pra-vaktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be declared or
announced; to be imparted or taught; to be ex-
pounded or explained.
<LEND>

<L>32720<pc>0641-b<k1>pravaktf<k2>pravaktf
{%Pra-vaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who speaks or de-
clares, one who announces or informs, a speaker,
declarer, announcer, informer; a propounder, teacher,
expounder (Manu VII. 20); a fine speaker, good
orator, eloquent man. {%—Pravaktṛ-tva, am,%} n. the
being an expounder or teacher.
<LEND>

<L>32721<pc>0641-b<k1>pravacana<k2>pravacana
{%Pra-vacana, am,%}¦ n. speaking, talking; declara-
tion, announcement, proclamation; recitation, oral
instruction, teaching, expounding, exposition, inter-
pretation [cf. {%sāṅkhya-pravacana-bhāṣya%}]; ex-
cellent speech or language, eloquence; an expression,
[Page0641-c+ 79]
term; a system of doctrines propounded in a treatise
or dissertation; sacred writings, especially the Brāh-
maṇas; the fundamental doctrine of Buddhists; the
sacred writings of the Jainas; {%pra-vacana%} is also
said to be used as an enclitic after a simple verb, see
Gaṇa Gotrādi to Pāṇ. VIII. 1, 27. {%—Pravacana-%}
{%paṭu, us, us, u,%} skilled in speaking, eloquent.
<LEND>

<L>32722<pc>0641-c<k1>pravacanIya<k2>pravacanIya
{%Pra-vacanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be declared; to be
taught or propounded; to be well or elegantly
spoken; a good speaker; a propounder, teacher.
<LEND>

<L>32723<pc>0641-c<k1>pravAka<k2>pravAka
{%Pra-vāka, as,%}¦ m. proclaiming, announcing, a pro-
claimer, announcer.
<LEND>

<L>32724<pc>0641-c<k1>pravAc<k2>pravAc
{%Pra-vāc, k, k, k,%}¦ eloquent, oratorical, speaking,
a speaker.
<LEND>

<L>32725<pc>0641-c<k1>pravAcaka<k2>pravAcaka
{%Pra-vācaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ declaratory, explana-
tory; speaking well, eloquent.
<LEND>

<L>32726<pc>0641-c<k1>pravAcana<k2>pravAcana
{%Pra-vācana, am,%}¦ n. a proclamation, promulgation;
a designation; {%dvi-pravācana,%} having a twofold
designation.
<LEND>

<L>32727<pc>0641-c<k1>pravAcya<k2>pravAcya
{%Pra-vācya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be proclaimed aloud;
praiseworthy, glorious (Ved., Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇa%}
{%vaktavya%}); to be spoken to or addressed; ({%am%}),
n. a literary production.
<LEND>

<L>32728<pc>0641-c<k1>pravawa<k2>pravawa
{#pravawa#}¦ {%pra-vaṭa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vaṭ%} with {%pra%}),
wheat.
<LEND>

<L>32729<pc>0641-c<k1>pravaRa<k2>pravaRa
{#pravaRa#}¦ {%pravaṇa, am,%} n. (probably fr. 1. {%pra;%}
but according to Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 5, said to be fr. 1.
{%pra + vana,%} a forest), the side of a hill, a declivity,
steep descent, precipice, an abyss, depth, (in the
earlier language used only in loc. sing.; Sāy. {%=%}
{%nimna-pradeśa%}); ({%as%}), m. a place where four
roads meet; ({%e%}), ind. in a precipitous course, pre-
cipitously, precipitately, suddenly, hurriedly, hastily;
({%as, ā, am%}), declining, bent, bowed, sloping down,
shelving, flowing down (often in comps., e. g. {%nimna-%}
{%p˚,%} flowing downwards; cf. {%udak-p˚, dakṣiṇā-p˚%});
precipitous, inclining downwards, steep, abrupt;
curved, crooked; inclining, inclined to, directed
towards, disposed to, tending to [cf. {%vañcana-p˚%}];
ready, willing; applying one's self to, devoted to,
attached or adhering to, addicted, prone [cf. {%vi-%}
{%ṣaya-p˚%}]; filled with, possessed of, endowed with;
generous; humble, modest; waning or fading away,
wasted, decayed, disappeared. {%—Pravaṇa-tā,%} f. pre-
cipitousness, inclination, proclivity, propensity, pro-
pension, attachment, devotion. {%—Pravaṇa-prahar-%}
{%ṣa, as, ā, am,%} one whose joy has faded away, whose
happiness has disappeared. {%—Pravaṇa-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having a steep descent or declivity, having a
downward course, downward, precipitous.
<LEND>

<L>32730<pc>0641-c<k1>pravaRAya<k2>pravaRAya
{%Pravaṇāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%pravaṇāyati, -yitum,%} to
feel inclined or disposed towards.
<LEND>

<L>32731<pc>0641-c<k1>pravaRAyita<k2>pravaRAyita
{%Pravaṇāyita, am,%}¦ n. inclination, propensity, bias.
<LEND>

<L>32732<pc>0641-c<k1>pravat<k2>pravat
{%Pravat, t,%}¦ f. (fr. 1. {%pra%}), Ved. the side of a moun-
tain, a declivity, precipice; an elevation, height, the
heavenly height; a sloping path, easy course, rapid pro-
gress; {%pravato napāt,%} ‘son of the heavenly height,’
an epithet of lightning; {%pravatas,%} pl. the heavenly
heights (sometimes said to be three, sometimes
seven in number; Sāy. {%= āpas%}); flowing down
declivities (said of rivers; Sāy. {%= pravaṇa-deśe gac-%}
{%chat%}); ({%ān, atī, at%}), directed forwards or towards;
containing the syllable {%pra%} or {%pṛ;%} (in the preceding
adj. senses fr. 1. {%pra + vat%}); {%pravatā%} or {%pravadbhiḥ,%}
ind. down hill, downwards (Sāy. {%= pravaṇavatā%}
{%mārgeṇa%}); precipitately, rapidly, swiftly. {%—Pravat-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a downward course, de-
scending; precipitous, headlong, rapid; affording a
downward path, suited for rapid motion; hilly. {%—Pra-%}
{%vad-bhārgava,%} N. of a Sāman. {%—Pravad-yāman,%}
{%ā,%} m., Ved. having a downward path, rapid in its
course (as a chariot; Sāy. {%= śīghra-gāmin%}).
<LEND>

<L>32733<pc>0641-c<k1>pravatsyat<k2>pravatsyat
{#pravatsyat#}¦ {%pra-vatsyat.%} See 2. {%pra-vas,%} p. 642.
<LEND>

<L>32734<pc>0641-c<k1>pravad<k2>pravad
{#pravad#}¦ {%pra-vad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vadati, -te,%}
{%-vaditum,%} to speak forth, speak out, pronounce,
utter; to proclaim, declare; to speak to, address; to
say, speak, tell; to converse with; to explain: Caus.
{%-vādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to speak or sound forth,
to play (a musical instrument).
<LEND>
[Page0642-a+ 73]

<L>32735<pc>0642-a<k1>pravada<k2>pravada
{%Pra-vada, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sounding forth, sound-
ing (as a drum).
<LEND>

<L>32736<pc>0642-a<k1>pravadat<k2>pravadat
{%Pra-vadat, an, antī, at,%}¦ speaking forth, speaking
to or with, conversing, addressing; speaking much
or well; arguing, a disputant.
<LEND>

<L>32737<pc>0642-a<k1>pravadana<k2>pravadana
{%Pra-vadana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a proclamation, an-
nouncement.
<LEND>

<L>32738<pc>0642-a<k1>pravaditf<k2>pravaditf
{%Pra-vaditṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who speaks
forth or speaks out, speaking out.
<LEND>

<L>32739<pc>0642-a<k1>pravAda<k2>pravAda
{%Pra-vāda, as,%}¦ m. speaking forth, uttering a word
or sound; expressing, naming, mentioning; declar-
ing, declaration [cf. {%veda-p˚%}]; discourse, conversa-
tion; a saying, popular talk, rumour, report; spread-
ing a report, ({%dyūta-p˚,%} report of gambling); a
fable, myth; mutual defiance, the conversation of
antagonists prior to combat; litigious language; (in
Ved. gram.) a base or crude form (opposed to a
word with a case termination &c.); ({%ā%}), f., Ved. in
{%gandha-pravādās,%} f. pl. all that is called perfume (?) .
<LEND>

<L>32740<pc>0642-a<k1>pravAdaka<k2>pravAdaka
{%Pra-vādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to sound forth,
playing on (a musical instrument).
<LEND>

<L>32741<pc>0642-a<k1>pravAdin<k2>pravAdin
{%Pra-vādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ giving forth a sound, uttering
a cry; speaking, speaking of, reporting; (in Ved.
gram.) being in the crude form.
<LEND>

<L>32742<pc>0642-a<k1>pravAdya<k2>pravAdya
{%Pra-vādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be said or spoken; to
be proclaimed.
<LEND>

<L>32743<pc>0642-a<k1>pravaDya<k2>pravaDya
{#pravaDya#}¦ {%pra-vadhya,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%vadh%} with
{%pra%}), having killed or slain.
<LEND>

<L>32744<pc>0642-a<k1>pravand<k2>pravand
{#pravand#}¦ {%pra-vand,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vandate, -van-%}
{%ditum,%} Ved. to praise highly, extol.
<LEND>

<L>32745<pc>0642-a<k1>pravap<k2>pravap
{#pravap#}¦ {%pra-vap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vapati, -te,%}
{%-vaptum,%} to scatter forth, scatter, strew; to throw,
cast, shoot.
<LEND>

<L>32746<pc>0642-a<k1>pravapa<k2>pravapa
{%Pra-vapa, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%pra + vapā%}), having
much fat, very fat.
<LEND>

<L>32747<pc>0642-a<k1>pravapaRa<k2>pravapaRa
{%Pra-vapaṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. scattering forth, sow-
ing; shaving off (of the beard &c.).
<LEND>

<L>32748<pc>0642-a<k1>pravApayitf<k2>pravApayitf
{%Pra-vāpayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who scatters
forth or pours out, scattering forth, pouring out.
<LEND>

<L>32749<pc>0642-a<k1>pravApin<k2>pravApin
{%Pra-vāpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ one who sows seed, sowing,
a sower.
<LEND>

<L>32750<pc>0642-a<k1>pravayaRa<k2>pravayaRa<h>1
{#pravayaRa#} 1¦. {%pra-vayaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%vī = %}
rt. {%aj;%} for 2. see under {%pra-ve,%} p. 645, col. 1),
a goad; [cf. {%prājana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32751<pc>0642-a<k1>pravayaRIya<k2>pravayaRIya
{%Pra-vayaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be driven forwards (?) .
<LEND>

<L>32752<pc>0642-a<k1>pravayyA<k2>pravayyA
{%Pravayyā,%}¦ f., Ved. (a cow) to be driven on with
a goad (?) .
<LEND>

<L>32753<pc>0642-a<k1>pravayas<k2>pravayas
{#pravayas#}¦ {%pra-vayas, ās, ās, as,%} (Ved.) strong,
vigorous, in the prime of life; advanced in age, aged,
ancient; (Sāy.) {%= pravṛddhānna%} or {%purātana.%}
<LEND>

<L>32754<pc>0642-a<k1>pravara<k2>pravara
{#pravara#}¦ {%pra-vara.%} See {%pra-vṛ,%} p. 644, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32755<pc>0642-a<k1>pravarga<k2>pravarga
{#pravarga#}¦ {%pra-varga, pra-vargya, pra-varjana.%}
See under {%pra-vṛj,%} p. 644, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32756<pc>0642-a<k1>pravarta<k2>pravarta
{#pravarta#}¦ {%pra-varta,%} &c. See 1. {%pra-vṛt,%} p. 644.
<LEND>

<L>32757<pc>0642-a<k1>pravarDaka<k2>pravarDaka
{#pravarDaka#}¦ {%pra-vardhaka, pra-vardhana.%} See
under {%pra-vṛdh,%} p. 644, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32758<pc>0642-a<k1>pravarza<k2>pravarza
{#pravarza#}¦ {%pra-varṣa, pra-varṣaṇa, pra-var-%}
{%ṣin.%} See under {%pra-vṛṣ,%} p. 645, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32759<pc>0642-a<k1>pravarha<k2>pravarha
{#pravarha#}¦ {%pra-varha.%} See {%pra-vṛh,%} p. 645, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32760<pc>0642-a<k1>pravalAkin<k2>pravalAkin
{#pravalAkin#}¦ {%pravalākin, ī,%} m. a peacock;
a snake; (incorrectly for {%pracalākin.%})
<LEND>

<L>32761<pc>0642-a<k1>pravalha<k2>pravalha
{#pravalha#}¦ {%pra-valha, as,%} m., Ved. a riddle,
enigma.
<LEND>

<L>32762<pc>0642-a<k1>pravalhikA<k2>pravalhikA
{%Pravalhikā,%}¦ f., Ved. a riddle, enigma; N. of the
formulas Atharva-veda XX. 133; [cf. {%pravahlikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32763<pc>0642-a<k1>pravas<k2>pravas<h>1
{#pravas#} 1¦. {%pra-vas%} (see rt. 5. {%vas%}), cl. 2. A.
{%-vaste, -vasitum,%} to put on (clothes), to dress.
<LEND>

<L>32764<pc>0642-a<k1>pravas<k2>pravas<h>2
{#pravas#} 2¦. {%pra-vas%} (see rt. 6. {%vas%}), cl. 1. P.
{%-vasati, -vastum,%} to live afar off, dwell abroad; to
order to live abroad, banish to (with loc.): Caus.
{%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to live afar off, order to
dwell abroad, banish, exile.
<LEND>

<L>32765<pc>0642-a<k1>pravatsyat<k2>pravatsyat
{%Pra-vatsyat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to dwell
[Page0642-b+ 80]
abroad. {%—Pravatsyat-patikā,%} f. the wife of a man
who intends to make a journey.
<LEND>

<L>32766<pc>0642-b<k1>pravasat<k2>pravasat
{%Pra-vasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dwelling or residing
abroad.
<LEND>

<L>32767<pc>0642-b<k1>pravasaTa<k2>pravasaTa
{%Pra-vasatha, am,%}¦ n., Ved. going abroad, de-
parting.
<LEND>

<L>32768<pc>0642-b<k1>pravasana<k2>pravasana
{%Pra-vasana, am,%}¦ n. going abroad, setting out on a
journey, departing; sojourning in a foreign country.
<LEND>

<L>32769<pc>0642-b<k1>pravastavya<k2>pravastavya
{%Pra-vastavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be gone abroad,
to be departed.
<LEND>

<L>32770<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAsa<k2>pravAsa
{%Pra-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. sojourning abroad, foreign resi-
dence, being away from home, being abroad; a tem-
porary sojourn; (in astronomy) heliacal setting of
the planets; {%pravāsaṃ gam,%} to go abroad. {%—Pra-%}
{%vāsa-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone abroad, gone away from
home. {%—Pravāsa-para, as, ā, am,%} addicted to
living abroad or away from home. {%—Pravāsa-stha%}
or {%pravāsa-sthita, as, ā, am,%} dwelling abroad, being
absent from home.
<LEND>

<L>32771<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAsat<k2>pravAsat
{%Pra-vāsat (?) , an, antī, at%}¦ (see {%pra-vasat%} above),
dwelling abroad, being absent from home.
<LEND>

<L>32772<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAsana<k2>pravAsana
{%Pra-vāsana, am,%}¦ n. causing to live abroad, send-
ing away from home, exile, banishment; dwelling
abroad, sojourning, lodging; killing, slaying.
<LEND>

<L>32773<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAsita<k2>pravAsita
{%Pra-vāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to dwell abroad,
banished, exiled, expatriated, expelled.
<LEND>

<L>32774<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAsin<k2>pravAsin
{%Pra-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ dwelling or residing abroad,
being or living away from home; being on a journey,
a traveller, sojourner; {%paraloka-nava-pravāsin,%}
one who has lately set out for the next world.
<LEND>

<L>32775<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAsya<k2>pravAsya
{%Pra-vāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to live abroad,
to be sent into exile, to be banished.
<LEND>

<L>32776<pc>0642-b<k1>pravasu<k2>pravasu
{#pravasu#}¦ {%pra-vasu, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Īlina.
<LEND>

<L>32777<pc>0642-b<k1>pravah<k2>pravah
{#pravah#}¦ {%pra-vah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vahati, -voḍhum,%}
to carry forwards, drag onwards, draw; to carry forth,
carry off; to breathe.
<LEND>

<L>32778<pc>0642-b<k1>pravaha<k2>pravaha
{%Pra-vaha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bearing forwards, carrying
off, bearing away; ({%as%}), m. ‘bearing forwards,’ N. of
one of the seven winds said to cause the motion of
the planets; wind, air; N. of one of the seven
tongues of Fire; a reservoir into which water is
carried off [cf. {%varṣāmbu-p˚%}]; flowing or stream-
ing forth; going forth, going from a town; [cf.
{%pra-vāha%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>32779<pc>0642-b<k1>pravahaRa<k2>pravahaRa
{%Pra-vahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a covered carriage, a litter
or carriage for women; a ship; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>32780<pc>0642-b<k1>pravahat<k2>pravahat
{%Pra-vahat, an, antī, at,%}¦ carrying forwards, bear-
ing; breathing; receiving, enjoying (?).
<LEND>

<L>32781<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAha<k2>pravAha
{%Pra-vāha, as,%}¦ m. a stream, current, flow, flux,
course; running water; continuous flow or passage;
unbroken succession, continuity; flowing or streaming
forth [cf. {%pra-vaha%} above]; course or direction
towards; anything moving onwards like a current,
current of human affairs &c., course of action, active
life, occupation; a pond; N. of one of the attendants
of Skanda; a beautiful or swift horse; ({%ī%}), f. sand.
{%—Pravāhe-mūtrita, am,%} n. ‘making water in a
river,’ a metaphorical expression for a useless action.
<LEND>

<L>32782<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAhaka<k2>pravAhaka
{%Pra-vāhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ carrying forwards, car-
rying off, bearing or carrying well; ({%as%}), m. a
Rākṣasa, an imp, goblin; ({%ikā%}), f. a sudden desire
to evacuate, diarrhœa; ({%ā%}), ind. {%= pra-bāhuk,%} q. v.,
see Gaṇa Svar-ādi to Pāṇ. I. 1, 37.
<LEND>

<L>32783<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAhaRa<k2>pravAhaRa
{%Pra-vāhaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ carrying off, carrying
away (Ved.); ({%as%}), m., N. of a man (Ved.); ({%ī%}), f.
the sphincter muscle which ejects the feces from the
rectum; ({%am%}), n. driving forth; evacuation by stool
(especially if from sudden desire).
<LEND>

<L>32784<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAhaReya<k2>pravAhaReya
{%Pravāhaṇeya, as,%}¦ or {%pravāhaṇeyi, is,%} m. a
patronymic from Pravāhaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>32785<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAhaReyaka<k2>pravAhaReyaka
{%Pravāhaṇeyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ see Scholiast on
Pāṇ. VII. 3, 29.
<LEND>

<L>32786<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAhin<k2>pravAhin
{%Pra-vāhin, ī, iṇī,%}¦ or {%inī, i,%} carrying forwards,
drawing; carrying off, carrying away (said of a river);
flowing, streaming [cf. {%loka-p˚%}]; ({%iṇī%} or {%inī%}), f. a
region abounding in streams (?) .
<LEND>

<L>32787<pc>0642-b<k1>pravAhya<k2>pravAhya
{%Pravāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. fluviatic, fluvial;
(Mahī-dhara {%= srotasi bhavaḥ.%})
<LEND>
[Page0642-c+ 69]

<L>32788<pc>0642-c<k1>pravoQf<k2>pravoQf
{%Pra-voḍhṛ, -ḍhā, -ḍhrī, -ḍhṛ,%}¦ or Ved. {%pra-%}
{%voḷhṛ,%} carrying off, bearing away, one who carries
off or bears away.
<LEND>

<L>32789<pc>0642-c<k1>pravahli<k2>pravahli
{#pravahli#}¦ {%pra-vahli, is,%} or {%pra-vahlī,%} or {%pra-%}
{%vahlikā,%} f. a riddle, enigma, conundrum, charade;
[cf. {%pra-valha, pravalhikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32790<pc>0642-c<k1>pravA<k2>pravA<h>1
{#pravA#} 1¦. {%pra-vā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vāti, -vātum,%} to
blow forth, blow violently, blow; to smell, yield a
scent: Caus. {%-vāpayati, -yitum,%} to dry up, dry.
<LEND>

<L>32791<pc>0642-c<k1>pravA<k2>pravA<h>2
2. {%pra-vā (ās?),%}¦ f., Ved. blowing, blowing away,
({%pra-vā upa-vā,%} blowing to and fro); N. of a
daughter of Dakṣa.
<LEND>

<L>32792<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAta<k2>pravAta
{%Pra-vāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ blown forwards, agitated by
the wind; ({%am%}), n. a current or draught of air; an
airy place; windy or stormy weather. {%—Pravāta-%}
{%śayana, am,%} n. a bed placed in the middle of a
current of air. {%—Pravāta-sāra, as,%} m., N. of a
Buddha; (also read {%pravāṭa-sāgara,%} i. e. {%pravāḍa-%}
{%sāgara.%}) {%—Pravāte-ja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. growing in
an airy place.
<LEND>

<L>32793<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAyya<k2>pravAyya
{%Pra-vāyya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. (perhaps) fleetness,
rapidity.
<LEND>

<L>32794<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAka<k2>pravAka
{#pravAka#}¦ {%pra-vāka, pra-vāc,%} &c. See p. 641,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32795<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAqa<k2>pravAqa
{#pravAqa#}¦ {%pravāḍa,%} a various reading for {%pra-%}
{%bāla,%} q. v. {%—Pravāḍa-sāgara%} or {%pravāṭa-sāgara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Buddha; [cf. {%pravāta-sāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32796<pc>0642-c<k1>pravARa<k2>pravARa
{#pravARa#}¦ {%pra-vāṇa, pra-vāṇi.%} See under
{%pra-ve,%} p. 645, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32797<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAta<k2>pravAta
{#pravAta#}¦ {%pra-vāta.%} See 1. {%pra-vā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>32798<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAda<k2>pravAda
{#pravAda#}¦ {%pra-vāda, pra-vādaka, pra-vādin.%}
See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32799<pc>0642-c<k1>pravApayitf<k2>pravApayitf
{#pravApayitf#}¦ {%pra-vāpayitṛ, pra-vāpin.%} See
under {%pra-vap,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>32800<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAyaka<k2>pravAyaka
{#pravAyaka#}¦ {%pra-vāyaka.%} See Scholiast on
Pāṇ. II. 4, 56.
<LEND>

<L>32801<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAyya<k2>pravAyya
{#pravAyya#}¦ {%pra-vāyya.%} See 1. {%pra-vā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>32802<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAra<k2>pravAra
{#pravAra#}¦ {%pra-vāra,%} &c. See {%pra-vṛ,%} p. 644.
<LEND>

<L>32803<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAsa<k2>pravAsa
{#pravAsa#}¦ {%pra-vāsa,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32804<pc>0642-c<k1>pravAha<k2>pravAha
{#pravAha#}¦ {%pra-vāha,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32805<pc>0642-c<k1>pravikas<k2>pravikas
{#pravikas#}¦ {%pra-vi-kas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kasati, -ka-%}
{%situm,%} to open out, expand (intrans.).
<LEND>

<L>32806<pc>0642-c<k1>pravikasat<k2>pravikasat
{%Pra-vikasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ expanding, opening,
blossoming; (also spelt {%pra-vikaśat.%})
<LEND>

<L>32807<pc>0642-c<k1>pravikF<k2>pravikF
{#pravikF#}¦ {%pra-vi-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -kari-%}
{%tum, -karītum,%} to scatter apart, scatter abroad, strew
about, cast asunder; to disperse, diffuse.
<LEND>

<L>32808<pc>0642-c<k1>pravikIrRa<k2>pravikIrRa
{%Pra-vikīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ scattered apart, strewed
about; dispersed, diffused.
<LEND>

<L>32809<pc>0642-c<k1>praviKyAta<k2>praviKyAta
{#praviKyAta#}¦ {%pra-vikhyāta, as, ā, am%} (rt. {%khyā%}),
universally known, renowned; known as, named,
called.
<LEND>

<L>32810<pc>0642-c<k1>praviKyAti<k2>praviKyAti
{%Pra-vikhyāti, is,%}¦ f. fame, renown, reputation,
celebrity.
<LEND>

<L>32811<pc>0642-c<k1>pravigam<k2>pravigam
{#pravigam#}¦ {%pra-vi-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} Ved. to pass away, perish, disappear.
<LEND>

<L>32812<pc>0642-c<k1>pravigata<k2>pravigata
{%Pra-vigata, as, ā, am,%}¦ passed away, perished,
disappeared.
<LEND>

<L>32813<pc>0642-c<k1>pravigAh<k2>pravigAh
{#pravigAh#}¦ {%pra-vi-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -gā-%}
{%hitum, -gāḍhum,%} to dive into, enter.
<LEND>

<L>32814<pc>0642-c<k1>pravigAhya<k2>pravigAhya
{%Pra-vigāhya,%}¦ ind. having dived into, having
entered.
<LEND>

<L>32815<pc>0642-c<k1>pravigraha<k2>pravigraha
{#pravigraha#}¦ {%pra-vigraha, as,%} m. (in Ved. gram.)
exhibiting distinctly the separation of words, dividing
or breaking up the Sandhi.
<LEND>

<L>32816<pc>0642-c<k1>praviGaw<k2>praviGaw
{#praviGaw#}¦ {%pra-vi-ghaṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-ghāṭayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to divide, disunite (Kirātārj. II. 46).
<LEND>

<L>32817<pc>0642-c<k1>pravicakz<k2>pravicakz
{#pravicakz#}¦ {%pra-vi-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe%} (see
rt. {%cakṣ%}), to declare, mention, name.
<LEND>
[Page0643-a+ 73]

<L>32818<pc>0643-a<k1>pravicar<k2>pravicar
{#pravicar#}¦ {%pra-vi-car,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-carati,%}
{%-te, -caritum,%} to go forwards, move onwards, ad-
vance; to rove about, roam about; to go through,
walk through, roam or wander through: Caus.
{%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to examine or investigate accu-
rately.
<LEND>

<L>32819<pc>0643-a<k1>pravicaran<k2>pravicaran
{%Pra-vicaran, an, antī, at,%}¦ going forwards, mov-
ing onwards; going through, roaming through.
<LEND>

<L>32820<pc>0643-a<k1>pravicAra<k2>pravicAra
{%Pra-vicāra, as,%}¦ m. discernment, discrimination.
<LEND>

<L>32821<pc>0643-a<k1>pravicArita<k2>pravicArita
{%Pra-vicārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ examined or investi-
gated accurately.
<LEND>

<L>32822<pc>0643-a<k1>pravical<k2>pravical
{#pravical#}¦ {%pra-vi-cal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-calati, -cali-%}
{%tum,%} to move about, shake, quake, tremble; to go
astray, deviate; to become confused, be thrown into
confusion: Caus. {%-cālayati, -yitum,%} to set in motion,
cause to tremble, shake.
<LEND>

<L>32823<pc>0643-a<k1>pravicalita<k2>pravicalita
{%Pra-vicalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set in motion, moved,
shaking, quaking.
<LEND>

<L>32824<pc>0643-a<k1>pravici<k2>pravici
{#pravici#}¦ {%pra-vi-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -ci-%}
{%nute, -cetum,%} to search through, investigate, examine,
test, prove.
<LEND>

<L>32825<pc>0643-a<k1>pravicaya<k2>pravicaya
{%Pra-vicaya, as,%}¦ m. investigation, examination.
<LEND>

<L>32826<pc>0643-a<k1>pravicint<k2>pravicint
{#pravicint#}¦ {%pra-vi-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cintayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to think about, reflect upon.
<LEND>

<L>32827<pc>0643-a<k1>pravicintaka<k2>pravicintaka
{%Pra-vicintaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ reflecting before-
hand, foreseeing.
<LEND>

<L>32828<pc>0643-a<k1>pravicintya<k2>pravicintya
{%Pra-vicintya,%}¦ ind. having thought about or re-
flected upon.
<LEND>

<L>32829<pc>0643-a<k1>pravicetana<k2>pravicetana
{#pravicetana#}¦ {%pra-vicetana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 4.
{%cit%} with {%pra%}), comprehending, understanding.
<LEND>

<L>32830<pc>0643-a<k1>pravijaya<k2>pravijaya
{#pravijaya#}¦ {%pra-vijaya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people.
<LEND>

<L>32831<pc>0643-a<k1>pravijYA<k2>pravijYA
{#pravijYA#}¦ {%pra-vi-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to know severally or in detail,
know accurately.
<LEND>

<L>32832<pc>0643-a<k1>pravitan<k2>pravitan
{#pravitan#}¦ {%pra-vi-tan,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-tanoti,%}
{%-tanute, -tanitum,%} to stretch forwards, spread out,
extend; to begin a sacred rite; to commence.
<LEND>

<L>32833<pc>0643-a<k1>pravitata<k2>pravitata
{%Pra-vitata, as, ā, am,%}¦ stretched forwards, spread
out, expanded; dishevelled.
<LEND>

<L>32834<pc>0643-a<k1>pravitap<k2>pravitap
{#pravitap#}¦ {%pra-vi-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati, -tap-%}
{%tum,%} to scorch up, pain with heat.
<LEND>

<L>32835<pc>0643-a<k1>pravitapta<k2>pravitapta
{%Pra-vitapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ scorched up, pained
with heat.
<LEND>

<L>32836<pc>0643-a<k1>pravid<k2>pravid<h>1
{#pravid#} 1¦. {%pra-vid,%} Caus. {%-vedayati, -yitum,%}
to make known; to possess knowledge or wisdom,
know, understand (Ved.): Intens., Ved. {%-vevidīti,%}
to find often, obtain frequently.
<LEND>

<L>32837<pc>0643-a<k1>pravid<k2>pravid<h>2
2. {%pra-vid, t,%}¦ f. making known, proclaiming, pro-
clamation (Sāy. {%= pra-vedana%}).
<LEND>

<L>32838<pc>0643-a<k1>pravidvas<k2>pravidvas
{%Pra-vidvas, vān, uṣī, vat,%}¦ very knowing,
wise (?) .
<LEND>

<L>32839<pc>0643-a<k1>praveda<k2>praveda
{%Pra-veda, as,%}¦ m. in {%a-p˚,%} q. v. {%—Praveda-kṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. (perhaps) making known.
<LEND>

<L>32840<pc>0643-a<k1>pravedana<k2>pravedana
{%Pra-vedana, am,%}¦ n. the act of making known,
proclaiming, announcing.
<LEND>

<L>32841<pc>0643-a<k1>pravedin<k2>pravedin
{%Pra-vedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ knowing accurately, well
acquainted with.
<LEND>

<L>32842<pc>0643-a<k1>pravedya<k2>pravedya
{%Pra-vedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made known.
<LEND>

<L>32843<pc>0643-a<k1>pravidAra<k2>pravidAra
{#pravidAra#}¦ {%pra-vidāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%dṝ%} with
{%pra-vi%}), bursting asunder.
<LEND>

<L>32844<pc>0643-a<k1>pravidAraRa<k2>pravidAraRa
{%Pra-vidāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), causing to
burst asunder, bursting, tearing, rending, breaking;
budding; conflict, war, battle, combat; tumult,
crowd, confusion.
<LEND>

<L>32845<pc>0643-a<k1>pravidArita<k2>pravidArita
{%Pra-vidārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn, rent, severed;
opened, expanded.
<LEND>

<L>32846<pc>0643-a<k1>pravidDa<k2>pravidDa
{#pravidDa#}¦ {%pra-viddha.%} See {%pra-vyadh,%} p. 645.
<LEND>

<L>32847<pc>0643-a<k1>pravidru<k2>pravidru
{#pravidru#}¦ {%pra-vi-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -dro-%}
{%tum,%} to run or rush apart, disperse, retreat.
<LEND>

<L>32848<pc>0643-a<k1>pravidruta<k2>pravidruta
{%Pra-vidruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ running apart, dispersed,
scattered.
<LEND>

<L>32849<pc>0643-a<k1>praviDA<k2>praviDA
{#praviDA#}¦ {%pra-vi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti, %}
[Page0643-b+ 69]
{%dhatte, -dhātum,%} to place apart, divide; to medi-
tate or think upon; to place in front, put at the
head, pay attention to.
<LEND>

<L>32850<pc>0643-b<k1>praviDAya<k2>praviDAya
{%Pra-vidhāya,%}¦ ind. having placed in front, having
paid attention to.
<LEND>

<L>32851<pc>0643-b<k1>praviDvasta<k2>praviDvasta
{#praviDvasta#}¦ {%pra-vidhvasta, as, ā, am,%} thrown
away; tossed about, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>32852<pc>0643-b<k1>pravinaS<k2>pravinaS
{#pravinaS#}¦ {%pra-vi-naś,%} cl. 4. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-naśyati (-te), -naśitum, -naṃṣṭum,%} to perish
utterly, be destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>32853<pc>0643-b<k1>pravipala<k2>pravipala
{#pravipala#}¦ {%pra-vipala, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?) ,
a particular minute division of time, a small part of a
Vipala.
<LEND>

<L>32854<pc>0643-b<k1>praviBaj<k2>praviBaj
{#praviBaj#}¦ {%pra-vi-bhaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bhajati,%}
{%-te, -bhaktum,%} to part asunder, sever, sunder, sepa-
rate; to divide, distribute, apportion.
<LEND>

<L>32855<pc>0643-b<k1>praviBakta<k2>praviBakta
{%Pra-vibhakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ parted asunder, severed,
sundered, separated; divided, distributed, partitioned,
apportioned, shared; variously situated. {%—Pravi-%}
{%bhakta-raśmi, is, is, i,%} having the rays distributed,
distributing rays.
<LEND>

<L>32856<pc>0643-b<k1>praviBajya<k2>praviBajya
{%Pra-vibhajya,%}¦ ind. having parted asunder, having
separated; having divided or apportioned.
<LEND>

<L>32857<pc>0643-b<k1>praviBAga<k2>praviBAga
{%Pra-vibhāga, as,%}¦ m. parting asunder, division,
separation, distribution, classification; a part, portion.
{%—Pravibhāga-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having subdivisions,
subdivided. {%—Pravibhāga-śas,%} ind. according to
the several portions or divisions.
<LEND>

<L>32858<pc>0643-b<k1>praviBinna<k2>praviBinna
{#praviBinna#}¦ {%pra-vibhinna, as, ā, am,%} broken
or torn off, wounded.
<LEND>

<L>32859<pc>0643-b<k1>praviBuj<k2>praviBuj
{#praviBuj#}¦ {%pra-vi-bhuj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-bhujati,%}
{%-bhoktum,%} to bow.
<LEND>

<L>32860<pc>0643-b<k1>pravimuc<k2>pravimuc
{#pravimuc#}¦ {%pra-vi-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati,%}
{%-te, -moktum,%} to set free, release, liberate; to lay
aside, relinquish, resign, abandon: Pass. {%-mucyate,%}
to be freed from, be rid of (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>32861<pc>0643-b<k1>pravimfS<k2>pravimfS
{#pravimfS#}¦ {%pra-vi-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati,%}
{%-marṣṭum, -mraṣṭum,%} to think upon, meditate,
ponder, reflect, deliberate.
<LEND>

<L>32862<pc>0643-b<k1>pravimfSya<k2>pravimfSya
{%Pra-vimṛśya,%}¦ ind. having thought upon, having
pondered or considered.
<LEND>

<L>32863<pc>0643-b<k1>pravira<k2>pravira
{#pravira#}¦ {%pravira, as,%} m. a species of fragrant
wood, yellow sandal.
<LEND>

<L>32864<pc>0643-b<k1>pravirala<k2>pravirala
{#pravirala#}¦ {%pra-virala, as, ā, am,%} separated by
a considerable interval, separate, isolated, few, very
rare, very scanty.
<LEND>

<L>32865<pc>0643-b<k1>pravilambin<k2>pravilambin
{#pravilambin#}¦ {%pra-vilambin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt.
{%lamb%} with {%pra-vi%}), hanging forwards, projecting,
prominent.
<LEND>

<L>32866<pc>0643-b<k1>pravilaya<k2>pravilaya
{#pravilaya#}¦ {%pra-vilaya.%} See {%pra-vi-lī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>32867<pc>0643-b<k1>pravilasena<k2>pravilasena
{#pravilasena#}¦ {%pravila-sena, as,%} m. ({%pravila%}
probably fr. {%pra + vila%} with {%senā%}), N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>32868<pc>0643-b<k1>pravilApin<k2>pravilApin
{#pravilApin#}¦ {%pra-vilāpin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt. {%lap%}
with {%pra-vi%}), grieving, sorrowing, lamenting.
<LEND>

<L>32869<pc>0643-b<k1>pravilI<k2>pravilI
{#pravilI#}¦ {%pra-vi-lī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate, -letum,%}
{%lātum,%} to become dissolved, melt away; to vanish
away, disappear, fade away.
<LEND>

<L>32870<pc>0643-b<k1>pravilaya<k2>pravilaya
{%Pra-vilaya, as,%}¦ m. becoming dissolved, melting
away; complete dissolution or absorption.
<LEND>

<L>32871<pc>0643-b<k1>pravilupta<k2>pravilupta
{#pravilupta#}¦ {%pra-vilupta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%lup%}
with {%pra-vi%}), cut away, removed, lost, fallen or
rubbed off.
<LEND>

<L>32872<pc>0643-b<k1>pravilok<k2>pravilok
{#pravilok#}¦ {%pra-vi-lok,%} cl. 10. P. {%-lokayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to look forwards, look about.
<LEND>

<L>32873<pc>0643-b<k1>pravilokayat<k2>pravilokayat
{%Pra-vilokayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ looking forwards,
looking about.
<LEND>

<L>32874<pc>0643-b<k1>pravivA<k2>pravivA
{#pravivA#}¦ {%pra-vi-vā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vāti, -vātum,%}
Ved. to blow asunder, disperse, scatter; (Sāy.) {%=%}
{%nitarāṃ gamaya.%}
<LEND>
[Page0643-c+ 77]

<L>32875<pc>0643-c<k1>pravivAda<k2>pravivAda
{#pravivAda#}¦ {%pra-vivāda (?) , as,%} m. altercation,
dispute ({%= vi-vāda%}).
<LEND>

<L>32876<pc>0643-c<k1>pravivikta<k2>pravivikta
{#pravivikta#}¦ {%pra-vivikta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vic%}
with {%pra-vi%}), separated, detached; solitary.
<LEND>

<L>32877<pc>0643-c<k1>praviveka<k2>praviveka
{%Pra-viveka, as,%}¦ m. probably {%= vi-veka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>32878<pc>0643-c<k1>pravivrAjayizu<k2>pravivrAjayizu
{#pravivrAjayizu#}¦ {%pra-vivrājayiṣu.%} See under
{%pra-vraj,%} p. 645, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32879<pc>0643-c<k1>praviS<k2>praviS
{#praviS#}¦ {%pra-viś,%} cl. 6. P. (ep. also A.) {%-vi-%}
{%śati (-te), -veṣṭum,%} to enter into, enter, come
into, go into; to enter upon, begin, commence; to
appear: Caus. {%-veśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to enter
into, allow to enter, bring into, introduce to (with
double acc.); to lead into (one's home), lead (home,
as a wife); to lay up, store up: Desid. {%-vivikṣati,%}
to wish to enter into.
<LEND>

<L>32880<pc>0643-c<k1>pravivikzu<k2>pravivikzu
{%Pra-vivikṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to enter into,
being about to go into.
<LEND>

<L>32881<pc>0643-c<k1>praviSat<k2>praviSat
{%Pra-viśat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} entering.
<LEND>

<L>32882<pc>0643-c<k1>praviSya<k2>praviSya
{%Pra-viśya,%}¦ ind. having entered.
<LEND>

<L>32883<pc>0643-c<k1>pravizwa<k2>pravizwa
{%Pra-viṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ entered into, entered,
gone into, come into; entered upon, engaged in,
occupied with, begun, commenced; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
the mother of Paippalādi and Kauśika.
<LEND>

<L>32884<pc>0643-c<k1>pravizwaka<k2>pravizwaka
{%Praviṣṭaka, am,%}¦ n. entering a room; entrance
on the stage.
<LEND>

<L>32885<pc>0643-c<k1>praveSa<k2>praveSa
{%Pra-veśa, as,%}¦ m. entering into, entering, entrance,
ingress, penetrating, penetration; the entrance or door
of a house, &c.; the entrance of the sun into a sign of
the zodiac; entrance on the stage; coming on, setting
in (of night); going into, being contained in; income,
revenue; intentness on an object, engaging closely in
a pursuit or purpose; the syringe of a clyster-pipe;
{%praveśaṃ kṛ,%} to make one's entrance, enter.
<LEND>

<L>32886<pc>0643-c<k1>praveSaka<k2>praveSaka
{%Pra-veśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ going into, entering,
penetrating, one who enters; (at the end of comps.)
{%= pra-veśa; (as),%} m. an interlude or introductory
scene acted by inferior characters for the purpose of
acquainting the audience with any events supposed
to have occurred between the two acts, a knowledge
of which is requisite for the understanding of what
follows; (according to Kāṭavema in the opening
scene in Śakuntalā, Act 2, the object of the Praveśaka,
as of the Vi-ṣkambha, q. v., is to connect or bind
together the story of the drama and the subdivisions
of the plot by concisely alluding to what has hap-
pened in the intervals of the acts, or what is likely
to happen at the end.)
<LEND>

<L>32887<pc>0643-c<k1>praveSana<k2>praveSana
{%Pra-veśana, am,%}¦ n. entering into, entering, en-
trance, going into; sexual intercourse; an entrance
to a house, principal door or gate; conducting into,
leading into, introducing.
<LEND>

<L>32888<pc>0643-c<k1>praveSanIya<k2>praveSanIya
{%Pra-veśanīya,%}¦ to be entered, to be introduced,
&c. (See also Gaṇa Anupravacanādi to Pāṇ. V.
1, 111.)
<LEND>

<L>32889<pc>0643-c<k1>praveSayitavya<k2>praveSayitavya
{%Pra-veśayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made to enter,
to be led or conducted into.
<LEND>

<L>32890<pc>0643-c<k1>praveSita<k2>praveSita
{%Pra-veśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to go in, caused to
enter, introduced, brought in, sent in.
<LEND>

<L>32891<pc>0643-c<k1>praveSin<k2>praveSin
{%Pra-veśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ entering; (at the end of an
adj. comp.) having an entrance.
<LEND>

<L>32892<pc>0643-c<k1>praveSya<k2>praveSya<h>1
1. {%pra-veśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be entered; to be
pervaded; to be played (as a musical instrument);
to be led or conducted into, to be brought into; to
be placed in or upon.
<LEND>

<L>32893<pc>0643-c<k1>praveSya<k2>praveSya<h>2
2. {%pra-veśya,%}¦ ind. having caused to enter into, hav-
ing sent or thrown in, having sent or thrown into.
<LEND>

<L>32894<pc>0643-c<k1>pravezwavya<k2>pravezwavya
{%Pra-veṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be entered; to be
penetrated or pervaded; to be caused or allowed to
enter, to be admitted.
<LEND>

<L>32895<pc>0643-c<k1>pravezwf<k2>pravezwf
{%Pra-veṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who enters or goes
into, entering, going in.
<LEND>

<L>32896<pc>0643-c<k1>praviSleza<k2>praviSleza
{#praviSleza#}¦ {%pra-viśleṣa, as,%} m. separation,
parting.
<LEND>

<L>32897<pc>0643-c<k1>pravizaRRa<k2>pravizaRRa
{#pravizaRRa#}¦ {%pra-viṣaṇṇa, as, ā, am,%} dejected,
sad, spiritless.
<LEND>

<L>32898<pc>0643-c<k1>pravizA<k2>pravizA
{#pravizA#}¦ {%pra-viṣā,%} f. a birch tree; [cf.
{%upa-viṣā, prati-viṣā.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0644-a+ 78]

<L>32899<pc>0644-a<k1>pravizwa<k2>pravizwa
{#pravizwa#}¦ {%pra-viṣṭa, praviṣṭaka.%} See under
{%pra-viś,%} p. 643, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32900<pc>0644-a<k1>pravistara<k2>pravistara
{#pravistara#}¦ {%pra-vistara%} or {%pra-vistāra, as,%} m.
circumference, compass.
<LEND>

<L>32901<pc>0644-a<k1>pravI<k2>pravI
{#pravI#}¦ {%pra-vī,%} cl. 2. P. {%-veti, -vetum,%} Ved. to
desire, love.
<LEND>

<L>32902<pc>0644-a<k1>pravIRa<k2>pravIRa
{#pravIRa#}¦ {%pra-vīṇa, as, ā, am%} [cf. {%vīṇā%}],
skilful, clever, proficient, conversant with, skilled
in, versed in, an adept; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of
the fourteenth Manu. {%—Pravīṇa-tā,%} f. or {%pravīṇa-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. skill, proficiency.
<LEND>

<L>32903<pc>0644-a<k1>pravIra<k2>pravIra
{#pravIra#}¦ {%pra-vīra, as, ā, am,%} heroic, strong,
powerful; best, most excellent; ({%as%}), m. a hero,
warrior, chief, prince, a person of rank or distinction;
N. of a son of Pūru; of a son of Pra-cinvat and
grandson of Pūru; of a son of Dharma-netra; of a
son of Hary-aśva; of a son of the fourteenth Manu;
of a Caṇḍāla; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the descendants
of Pravīra (son of Pūru). {%—Pravīra-bāhu, us,%} m.
‘strong-armed,’ N. of a Rākṣasa. {%—Pravīra-vara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘best of heroes,’ N. of an Asura.
<LEND>

<L>32904<pc>0644-a<k1>pravf<k2>pravf
{#pravf#}¦ {%pra-vṛ,%} cl. 5. 9. P. A. {%-vṛṇoti, -vṛ-%}
{%ṇute, -vṛṇāti, -vṛṇīte, -varitum, -varītum,%} to
choose out, choose, select; to cover; to put on (a
garment); to keep off, ward off (Ved.): Caus. {%-va-%}
{%rayati, -yitum,%} to ask for, prefer; {%-vārayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cover; to defend; to present (?) .
<LEND>

<L>32905<pc>0644-a<k1>pravara<k2>pravara
{%Pra-vara, as,%}¦ m. a call, summons (especially of
a Brāhman to priestly functions); an invocation ad-
dressed by a Brāhman at the consecration of his own
fire to Agni Havya-vāhana (in such invocations Agni
is invited to bear the oblations to the gods as he
did for the sacrificer's ancestors, and the names of
the first four or five of these ancestors, who are
most nearly connected with the ancient Ṛṣis, must
then be added to each invocation of Agni, thus
Gotama invokes Agni Āṅgirasa, Agni Āyāsya, Agni
Gautama, &c.); a line of ancestors (so named in
the preceding invocation to Agni); one of the forty-
nine Gotras, as opposed to the eight original Gotras;
a member of a line of ancestors, an ancestor; a
Muni who contributes to the credit of a particular
Gotra or family; family, race, lineage, kindred;
offspring, descendants; a covering, cover, screen; an
upper garment; a black variety of Phaseolus Mungo,
Oppuntia Dillenii; N. of a messenger of the gods
and friend of Indra; of a Dānava; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a river which falls into the Go-dāvarī near Tokā,
and is celebrated for the sweetness of its water;
({%am%}), n. aloe wood; a particular high number; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), most excellent, chief, principal, best [cf.
{%śaṅkha-p˚%}]; prominent, distinguished, exalted, emi-
nent; better, greater (e. g. {%tataḥ pravaraḥ,%} better
or greater than that); eldest (e. g. {%putra-pravara,%}
the eldest son; in some of the preceding adj. senses
perhaps fr. {%pra + vara%}). {%—Pravara-dīpikā,%} f., N.
of a work. {%—Pravara-dhātu, us,%} m., Ved. a
precious metal. {%—Pravara-bhūpati, is,%} m. {%= pra-%}
{%vara-sena%}. {%—Pravara-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a work by
Puruṣottama. {%—Pravara-mūrdhaja, as,%} m. excellent
hair (of the head). {%—Pravara-lalita, am,%} n. a kind
of metre, four times ˘¯¯¯¯¯˘˘˘˘˘¯¯˘¯¯.
{%—Pravara-vāhana, au,%} m. du. ‘having the best
of horses,’ an epithet of the Aśvins. {%—Pravara-%}
{%sena, as,%} m., N. of two princes of Kaśmīra, one of
whom is also called Śreṣṭha-sena. {%—Pravarā-%}
{%dhyāya (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘book of ancestral
lines,’ N. of the eleventh of the eighteen Pari-śiṣṭas
belonging to the White Yajur-veda. {%—Pravareśa%}
{%(˚ra-īśa), as,%} m. a distinguished nobleman (?); {%=%}
{%pravara-sena%}. {%—Pravareśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a temple built by Pravara-sena.
<LEND>

<L>32906<pc>0644-a<k1>pravaraRa<k2>pravaraRa
{%Pra-varaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a call, summons, invocation,
({%ati-pravaraṇa,%} excessive invocation, invoking in
too great a number); (with Buddhists) the festivities
at the end of the rainy season.
<LEND>

<L>32907<pc>0644-a<k1>pravAra<k2>pravAra
{%Pra-vāra, as,%}¦ m. a covering, cover, clothing,
woollen cloth.
<LEND>
[Page0644-b+ 80]

<L>32908<pc>0644-b<k1>pravAraka<k2>pravAraka
{%Pra-vāraka, as,%}¦ m. (with Buddhists) the festi-
vities at the end of the rainy season; ({%am%}), n. a
covering, cover, clothing.
<LEND>

<L>32909<pc>0644-b<k1>pravAraRa<k2>pravAraRa
{%Pra-vāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. priority of choice; satis-
fying, granting what is desired; prohibition, objec-
tion, opposition; (with Buddhists) the festivities at
the end of the rainy season.
<LEND>

<L>32910<pc>0644-b<k1>pravArya<k2>pravArya
{%Pra-vārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be satisfied, to be
gratified.
<LEND>

<L>32911<pc>0644-b<k1>pravfta<k2>pravfta
{%Pra-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ chosen out, chosen, selected.
{%—Pravṛta-homa, as,%} m. or {%pravṛtāhuti (˚ta-%}
{%āh˚), is,%} f., Ved. ‘election-sacrifice,’ a sacrifice offered
at the election of a priest. {%—Pravṛtahomīya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. relating to a sacrifice offered at the
election of a priest.
<LEND>

<L>32912<pc>0644-b<k1>pravfj<k2>pravfj
{#pravfj#}¦ {%pra-vṛj,%} cl. 2. A. {%-vṛkte, -varjitum,%}
Ved. to purify; (Sāy.) {%= prakarṣeṇa chid,%} to cut
or strew in abundance; {%= pra-bhṛ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>32913<pc>0644-b<k1>pravarga<k2>pravarga
{%Pra-varga, as,%}¦ m. sacrificial fire ({%= mahā-vīra%});
an excellent assemblage [cf. {%dāsa-p˚%}]; (perhaps a
wrong reading for {%pra-vargya.%}) {%—Pravargāvarta-%}
{%bhūṣaṇa (˚ga-āv˚), as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>32914<pc>0644-b<k1>pravargya<k2>pravargya
{%Pra-vargya, as,%}¦ m. a ceremony introductory to
the Soma sacrifice, pouring fresh milk into a heated
vessel (called {%mahā-vīra%} or {%gharma%}), or according
to others into boiling ghee (Sāy. {%= tapte ghṛte%}
{%payaḥ-prakṣepaḥ%}). {%—Pravargya-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. connected with the Pravargya ceremony.
{%—Pravargyābharaṇa-bhūṣaṇa (˚ya-ābh˚), as,%}
m. an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>32915<pc>0644-b<k1>pravarjana<k2>pravarjana
{%Pra-varjana, am,%}¦ n. the performance of the
Pravargya ceremony, pouring fresh milk into a heated
vessel or into boiling ghee.
<LEND>

<L>32916<pc>0644-b<k1>pravfjya<k2>pravfjya
{%Pra-vṛjya = pra-vargya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>32917<pc>0644-b<k1>pravfYjana<k2>pravfYjana
{%Pra-vṛñjana, am,%}¦ n. {%= pra-varjana.%}
<LEND>

<L>32918<pc>0644-b<k1>pravfYjanIya<k2>pravfYjanIya
{%Pravṛñjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. used at the Pra-
vargya ceremony (said of the {%mahā-vīra,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>32919<pc>0644-b<k1>pravft<k2>pravft<h>1
{#pravft#} 1¦. {%pra-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. (also P. in Fut.,
Cond., and Aor.) {%-vartate, -vartitum,%} to go or roll
forwards, roll on, flow onwards, proceed, make
progress, go on well; to come forth, come into
being, arise, be produced; to become, exist; to
happen, take place, come to pass; to begin, com-
mence (with acc. or inf.); to engage in, enter upon,
be occupied in (with loc.); to behave, conduct one's
self; to hold good: Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to proceed; to cause to flow onwards; to set
in motion or action, instigate, urge, excite; to throw,
cast; to produce, create; to devise, invent.
<LEND>

<L>32920<pc>0644-b<k1>pravarta<k2>pravarta
{%Pra-varta, as,%}¦ m. engaging in, undertaking; ex-
citement, stimulus; (Ved.) a round ornament.
<LEND>

<L>32921<pc>0644-b<k1>pravartaka<k2>pravartaka
{%Pra-vartaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ setting in motion or
action, setting on foot; advancing, promoting, forward-
ing; producing, causing, effecting, inducing, inciting,
prompting, instigating, stimulating, urging; ({%as%}), m.
the original instigator of any act, originator, author,
principal, founder; an arbiter, judge; ({%am%}), n. (in
dramatic language) the entrance of a character on
the stage.
<LEND>

<L>32922<pc>0644-b<k1>pravartana<k2>pravartana
{%Pra-vartana, am,%}¦ n. rolling forwards, revolving,
rolling on, flowing forwards, going or moving for-
wards, coming forth, walking, roaming, wandering;
activity, action, acting; applying one's self to, en-
gaging in, occupying one's self in, having dealings
with (with loc. or inst.); beginning, commencing;
behaviour, conduct, procedure, mode of living; hap-
pening, coming to pass, coming to light, appearing;
bringing forward, presenting (Ved.); pushing for-
ward, setting on foot, setting up, establishing, insti-
tuting, erecting [cf. {%mahāyantra-p˚%}]; instigating
to action; inciting, prompting, stimulating; directing,
superintending; employing, employment; exhorta-
tion; informing; ({%ā%}), f. inciting or stimulating to
action; ordering, the sense of the imperative or of
the precative tense (?).
<LEND>

<L>32923<pc>0644-b<k1>pravartanIya<k2>pravartanIya
{%Pra-vartanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be set in motion,
to be instigated; to be used or employed.
<LEND>

<L>32924<pc>0644-b<k1>pravartamAna<k2>pravartamAna
{%Pra-vartamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving on, rolling
on, proceeding, going forth; engaging in, practising,
being occupied with, doing; being used or employed.
<LEND>
[Page0644-c+ 80]

<L>32925<pc>0644-c<k1>pravartamAnaka<k2>pravartamAnaka
{%Pravartamānaka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a diminutive of
the preceding; (Sāy.) {%= ati-śīghram abhi-gacchat,%}
going forth hastily, hastening forth.
<LEND>

<L>32926<pc>0644-c<k1>pravartayitf<k2>pravartayitf
{%Pra-vartayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who sets in
motion or action, exciting activity, instigating to
action; establishing, erecting, a builder, founder;
applying or inflicting, one who applies or inflicts.
<LEND>

<L>32927<pc>0644-c<k1>pravartita<k2>pravartita
{%Pra-vartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to roll on or for-
wards, caused to turn, going round, revolving; set
in motion, set on foot; set up, established; stimu-
lated, excited, incited, instigated; lighted, kindled;
caused, made, rendered; informed, apprized; made
pure ({%= pavitrī-kṛta,%} Manu XI. 196).
<LEND>

<L>32928<pc>0644-c<k1>pravartitavya<k2>pravartitavya
{%Pra-vartitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be proceeded, to
be acted, to be practised.
<LEND>

<L>32929<pc>0644-c<k1>pravartitf<k2>pravartitf
{%Pra-vartitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who causes or
effects; one who establishes or determines.
<LEND>

<L>32930<pc>0644-c<k1>pravartin<k2>pravartin
{%Pra-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ moving forwards, proceeding,
advancing, moving, flowing; coming forth, flowing
forth, streaming; being active; causing to flow;
setting in motion or action, causing, effecting, pro-
ducing; spreading, introducing; using, employing;
{%a-pravartin, ī, inī, i,%} immovable, unchangeable,
unalterable, invariable.
<LEND>

<L>32931<pc>0644-c<k1>pravartya<k2>pravartya
{%Pra-vartya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be excited to activity,
to be instigated or stimulated.
<LEND>

<L>32932<pc>0644-c<k1>pravft<k2>pravft<h>2
2. {%pra-vṛt, t,%}¦ f., Ved. {%= pra-vṛtti.%}
<LEND>

<L>32933<pc>0644-c<k1>pravftta<k2>pravftta
{%Pra-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ proceeded, going to, bound
for, ({%kutra pravṛtto 'si,%} where are you going?);
settled, fixed, determined; done; begun, commenced;
beginning; engaged in, occupied with, entered or
embarked upon; undertaking, doing, acting; unim-
peded, undisputed (as dominion); round; ({%as%}), m.
a round ornament; [cf. {%pra-varta.%}] {%—Pravṛtta-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. any act leading to a future birth.
{%—Pravṛtta-cakra, as, ā, am,%} ‘whose wheels roll
on unimpeded,’ having universal dominion. {%—Pra-%}
{%vṛttacakra-tā,%} f. unimpeded or universal dominion.
<LEND>

<L>32934<pc>0644-c<k1>pravfttaka<k2>pravfttaka
{%Pravṛttaka, am,%}¦ n. the entrance of a character
on the stage ({%= pra-vartaka%}); a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>32935<pc>0644-c<k1>pravftti<k2>pravftti
{%Pra-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. continuous flow onwards, pro-
gress, advance, advancement; success; coming forth,
appearing, appearance, manifestation; rise, source,
origin, beginning; activity, effort, employment, oc-
cupation; active life (as opposed to {%ni-vṛtti,%} q. v.,
and to contemplative devotion, and defined as con-
sisting of the wish to act, knowledge of the means,
and accomplishment of the object); giving or apply-
ing one's self to, devoting one's self to (with loc.);
course or tendency towards, addiction to, inclination
or predilection for; application, use, employment;
continued application, perseverance; practice, conduct,
behaviour; currency, continuance, continuity, pre-
valence, permanence, endurance; the applicableness
or validity of a rule; fate, lot, destiny; news, tidings,
intelligence [cf. {%duṣ-p˚%}]; cognition, ({%viṣayavatī%}
{%pravṛttiḥ,%} a sensuous immediate cognition); the
juice that exudes from the temples of an elephant in
rut; N. of Avantī or Oujein or any holy place; (in
arithmetic) the multiplier. {%—Pravṛtti-jña, as,%} m.
‘knowing the news,’ an emissary, agent, spy. {%—Pra-%}
{%vṛtti-nimitta, am,%} n. the reason for the use of
any term in the particular significations which it
bears. {%—Pravṛtti-parāṅmukha, as, ī, am,%} dis-
inclined to give tidings. {%—Pravṛtti-mārga, as,%} m.
active or worldly life, occupancy about the business
and pleasures of the world or with the rites and
works of religion.
<LEND>

<L>32936<pc>0644-c<k1>pravfD<k2>pravfD
{#pravfD#}¦ {%pra-vṛdh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vardhate, -var-%}
{%dhitum,%} to grow up, grow, increase.
<LEND>

<L>32937<pc>0644-c<k1>pravarDaka<k2>pravarDaka
{%Pra-vardhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to grow,
increasing, enhancing.
<LEND>

<L>32938<pc>0644-c<k1>pravarDana<k2>pravarDana
{%Pra-vardhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ who or what causes to
grow or increase; ({%am%}), n. augmenting, increase.
<LEND>

<L>32939<pc>0644-c<k1>pravfdDa<k2>pravfdDa
{%Pra-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown up, full grown;
increased, expanded, enlarged, diffused, spread abroad,
dispersed; large; swollen (as a river); full, deep (as
a sigh); haughty, arrogant; violent.
<LEND>

<L>32940<pc>0644-c<k1>pravfdDi<k2>pravfdDi
{%Pra-vṛddhi, is,%}¦ f. growth, increase [cf. {%sasya-p˚,%}
{%śmaśru-p˚%}]; rising, rise, ({%arghasya p˚,%} rising of
[Page0645-a+ 72]
the price of anything); prosperity, increasing welfare,
rising in rank or reputation.
<LEND>

<L>32941<pc>0645-a<k1>pravfScya<k2>pravfScya
{#pravfScya#}¦ {%pra-vṛścya.%} See {%pra-vraśc,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>32942<pc>0645-a<k1>pravfz<k2>pravfz
{#pravfz#}¦ {%pra-vṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-varṣati, -var-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to begin to rain, rain.
<LEND>

<L>32943<pc>0645-a<k1>pravarza<k2>pravarza
{%Pra-varṣa, as,%}¦ m. raining fast, rain.
<LEND>

<L>32944<pc>0645-a<k1>pravarzaRa<k2>pravarzaRa
{%Pra-varṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. raining, causing to rain;
the first rain; N. of the twenty-third Adhyāya of
the Bṛhat-saṃhitā of Varāha-mihira.
<LEND>

<L>32945<pc>0645-a<k1>pravarzin<k2>pravarzin
{%Pra-varṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ raining, causing to rain,
showering, discharging; {%ūrdhva-pravarṣin,%} ‘rain-
ing upwards,’ offering sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>32946<pc>0645-a<k1>pravfh<k2>pravfh
{#pravfh#}¦ {%pra-vṛh,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-vṛhati, -te,%}
{%-varhitum, -varḍhum,%} Ved. to tear forth, tear away,
tear off, tear out; to draw out, extract; to rescue;
to tear to pieces, destroy; (Sāy.) {%= pra-kṣip,%} to
hurl, fling; (A.) to draw towards one's self, attract.
<LEND>

<L>32947<pc>0645-a<k1>pravarha<k2>pravarha
{%Pra-varha, as, ā, am,%}¦ chief, principal, first.
<LEND>

<L>32948<pc>0645-a<k1>prave<k2>prave
{#prave#}¦ {%pra-ve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vayati, -te, -vātum,%}
to sew lengthwise [cf. {%prota%}]; to pierce, transfix;
to infix, impale.
<LEND>

<L>32949<pc>0645-a<k1>pravayaRa<k2>pravayaRa<h>2
2. {%pra-vayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. see p. 642, col. 1),
the upper part of a piece of woven cloth.
<LEND>

<L>32950<pc>0645-a<k1>pravARa<k2>pravARa
{%Pra-vāṇa, am,%}¦ n. the edging or trimming of a
piece of woven cloth.
<LEND>

<L>32951<pc>0645-a<k1>pravARi<k2>pravARi
{%Pra-vāṇi, is%}¦ or {%ī,%} f. a weaver's shuttle.
<LEND>

<L>32952<pc>0645-a<k1>praveka<k2>praveka
{#praveka#}¦ {%pra-veka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vic%} with
{%pra%}), choicest, most excellent, best, principal, chief;
(at the end of a comp., cf. {%maṇi-p˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>32953<pc>0645-a<k1>pravega<k2>pravega
{#pravega#}¦ {%pra-vega, as,%} m. great speed, rapi-
dity; [cf. {%śara-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32954<pc>0645-a<k1>pravegita<k2>pravegita
{%Pravegita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving swiftly, rapid.
<LEND>

<L>32955<pc>0645-a<k1>pravewa<k2>pravewa
{#pravewa#}¦ {%pra-veṭa, as,%} m. barley; [cf. {%pra-vaṭa,%}
{%prāvaṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32956<pc>0645-a<k1>praveRi<k2>praveRi
{#praveRi#}¦ {%pra-veṇi, is%} or {%ī,%} f. a braid of hair,
the hair twisted and unadorned (as worn by widows
and by wives in the absence of their husbands); a
piece of coloured woollen cloth (used instead of a
saddle); the housings of an elephant; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
a river.
<LEND>

<L>32957<pc>0645-a<k1>pravetf<k2>pravetf
{#pravetf#}¦ {%pra-vetṛ, tā,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vī%} with {%pra%}),
a charioteer.
<LEND>

<L>32958<pc>0645-a<k1>praveya<k2>praveya
{%Pra-veya, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VI.
1, 83.
<LEND>

<L>32959<pc>0645-a<k1>praveda<k2>praveda
{#praveda#}¦ {%pra-veda,%} &c. See 1. {%pra-vid,%} p. 643.
<LEND>

<L>32960<pc>0645-a<k1>pravep<k2>pravep
{#pravep#}¦ {%pra-vep,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vepate, -vepitum,%}
to tremble: Caus. {%-vepayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
tremble, shake.
<LEND>

<L>32961<pc>0645-a<k1>pravepa<k2>pravepa
{%Pra-vepa, as,%}¦ m. trembling, quivering.
<LEND>

<L>32962<pc>0645-a<k1>pravepaka<k2>pravepaka
{%Pravepaka, as,%}¦ m. trembling, shivering, shud-
dering.
<LEND>

<L>32963<pc>0645-a<k1>pravepaTu<k2>pravepaTu
{%Pra-vepathu, us,%}¦ m. {%= pravepaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>32964<pc>0645-a<k1>pravepana<k2>pravepana
{%Pra-vepana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a serpent-demon;
({%am%}), n. trembling, tremulous motion, shaking,
agitation; (also wrongly spelt {%pra-vepaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>32965<pc>0645-a<k1>pravepanin<k2>pravepanin
{%Pravepanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. ‘causing (his enemies)
to tremble,’ an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>32966<pc>0645-a<k1>pravepanIya<k2>pravepanIya
{%Pra-vepanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Scholiast on Pāṇ.
VIII. 4, 34.
<LEND>

<L>32967<pc>0645-a<k1>pravepin<k2>pravepin
{%Pra-vepin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ trembling, shaking, tottering.
<LEND>

<L>32968<pc>0645-a<k1>praverita<k2>praverita
{#praverita#}¦ {%praverita, as, ā, am%} (probably for
{%prāverita%} fr. rt. {%īr%} with {%pra-ava,%} but said by some
to be fr. {%pra-ā-īrita%}), thrown about, cast or hurled
hither and thither ({%= itastataḥ pātita,%} Mahā-bh.
Svargārohaṇa-p. 47).
<LEND>

<L>32969<pc>0645-a<k1>pravela<k2>pravela
{#pravela#}¦ {%pravela, as,%} m. a yellow variety of
kidney-bean, Phaseolus Mungo.
<LEND>

<L>32970<pc>0645-a<k1>praveSa<k2>praveSa
{#praveSa#}¦ {%pra-veśa,%} &c. See {%pra-viś,%} p. 643.
<LEND>

<L>32971<pc>0645-a<k1>pravezw<k2>pravezw
{#pravezw#}¦ {%pra-veṣṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-veṣṭate, -veṣṭi-%}
{%tum,%} to cover over, cover, surround.
<LEND>

<L>32972<pc>0645-a<k1>pravezwa<k2>pravezwa
{%Pra-veṣṭa, as,%}¦ m. an arm; the fore-arm or
wrist [cf. {%pra-koṣṭha%}]; the fleshy part of the
[Page0645-b+ 74]
back of an elephant on which the rider sits; an
elephant's housings; an elephant's gums.
<LEND>

<L>32973<pc>0645-b<k1>pravezwita<k2>pravezwita
{%Pra-veṣṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered over, covered,
surrounded.
<LEND>

<L>32974<pc>0645-b<k1>pravezwaka<k2>pravezwaka
{#pravezwaka#}¦ {%praveṣṭaka,%} a various reading for
{%praviṣṭaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>32975<pc>0645-b<k1>pravezwavya<k2>pravezwavya
{#pravezwavya#}¦ {%pra-veṣṭavya, pra-veṣṭṛ.%} See
under {%pra-viś,%} p. 643, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32976<pc>0645-b<k1>pravoQf<k2>pravoQf
{#pravoQf#}¦ {%pra-voḍhṛ.%} See p. 642, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>32977<pc>0645-b<k1>pravyakta<k2>pravyakta
{#pravyakta#}¦ {%pra-vyakta, as, ā, am,%} evident, ap-
parent, manifest.
<LEND>

<L>32978<pc>0645-b<k1>pravyakti<k2>pravyakti
{%Pra-vyakti, is,%}¦ f. appearance, manifestation.
<LEND>

<L>32979<pc>0645-b<k1>pravyaT<k2>pravyaT
{#pravyaT#}¦ {%pra-vyath,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vyathate, -vya-%}
{%thitum,%} to be afflicted or distressed; to be frightened,
fear, tremble at (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>32980<pc>0645-b<k1>pravyaTita<k2>pravyaTita
{%Pra-vyathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ distressed, pained;
agitated, trembling.
<LEND>

<L>32981<pc>0645-b<k1>pravyaD<k2>pravyaD
{#pravyaD#}¦ {%pra-vyadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-vidhyati, -vyad-%}
{%dhum,%} to throw away, cast down.
<LEND>

<L>32982<pc>0645-b<k1>pravidDa<k2>pravidDa
{%Pra-viddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown away, cast away.
<LEND>

<L>32983<pc>0645-b<k1>pravyADa<k2>pravyADa
{%Pra-vyādha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a bow-shot, the dis-
tance of the flight of an arrow.
<LEND>

<L>32984<pc>0645-b<k1>pravyAhf<k2>pravyAhf
{#pravyAhf#}¦ {%pra-vy-ā-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati,%}
{%-te, -hartum,%} to declare beforehand, foretell, predict;
to howl, yell, roar.
<LEND>

<L>32985<pc>0645-b<k1>pravyAhAra<k2>pravyAhAra
{%Pra-vyāhāra, as,%}¦ m. ({%= prakṛṣṭokti%}), pro-
longation or continuation of discourse.
<LEND>

<L>32986<pc>0645-b<k1>pravraj<k2>pravraj
{#pravraj#}¦ {%pra-vraj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vrajati, -vrajitum,%}
to go forth, set out, travel forth, go abroad, go into
exile: Caus. {%-vrājayati, -yitum,%} to send into exile,
banish.
<LEND>

<L>32987<pc>0645-b<k1>pravivrAjayizu<k2>pravivrAjayizu
{%Pra-vivrājayiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to send
into exile, desirous of banishing.
<LEND>

<L>32988<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrajat<k2>pravrajat
{%Pra-vrajat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going forth, travelling
abroad.
<LEND>

<L>32989<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrajana<k2>pravrajana
{%Pra-vrajana, am,%}¦ n. going abroad, migrating.
<LEND>

<L>32990<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrajikA<k2>pravrajikA
{%Pra-vrajikā,%}¦ a wrong reading for {%pra-vrajitā%} or
{%pra-vrājikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>32991<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrajita<k2>pravrajita
{%Pra-vrajita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forth, gone away,
gone abroad, gone into exile; ({%as%}), m. a religious
mendicant, a mendicant or ascetic; the pupil or
attendant of a Jaina or Buddhist mendicant; ({%ā%}), f.
a female ascetic or devotee; spikenard, Nardostachys
Jatamansi; N. of another plant, {%= muṇḍīrī; (am),%}
n. the life of a religious mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>32992<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrajyA<k2>pravrajyA
{%Pra-vrajyā,%}¦ f. going abroad, migration, emigra-
tion; roaming, travelling, wandering about, espe-
cially as a religious mendicant (in a dress not
authorized by the Veda, Manu V. 89); the order
of a religious mendicant; retirement into solitude.
{%—Pravrajyāvasita (˚yā-av˚), as,%} m. a religious
mendicant who renounces his order.
<LEND>

<L>32993<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrAj<k2>pravrAj
{%Pra-vrāj, ṭ,%}¦ m. a religious mendicant; [cf. {%pari-%}
{%vrāj.%}]
<LEND>

<L>32994<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrAja<k2>pravrAja
{%Pra-vrāja, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the bed of a river (Sāy.
{%= atyanta-nimno deśo nadyāḥ%}).
<LEND>

<L>32995<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrAjaka<k2>pravrAjaka
{%Pra-vrājaka, as,%}¦ m. a religious mendicant; ({%ikā%}),
f. a female ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>32996<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrAjana<k2>pravrAjana
{%Pra-vrājana, am,%}¦ n. banishing, banishment, exile.
<LEND>

<L>32997<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrAjin<k2>pravrAjin
{%Pra-vrājin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved. a religious mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>32998<pc>0645-b<k1>pravrAjya<k2>pravrAjya
{%Pra-vrājya,%}¦ ind. having sent into exile, having
banished.
<LEND>

<L>32999<pc>0645-b<k1>pravraSc<k2>pravraSc
{#pravraSc#}¦ {%pra-vraśc,%} cl. 6. P. {%-vṛścati, -vraści-%}
{%tum, -vraṣṭum,%} to tear to pieces, lacerate, wound.
<LEND>

<L>33000<pc>0645-b<k1>pravfScya<k2>pravfScya
{%Pra-vṛścya,%}¦ ind. having lacerated, having wounded.
<LEND>

<L>33001<pc>0645-b<k1>pravraScana<k2>pravraScana
{%Pra-vraścana%}¦ in {%idhma-pravraścana, as,%} m. an
instrument for cutting fuel, a knife for cutting wood.
<LEND>

<L>33002<pc>0645-b<k1>pravraska<k2>pravraska
{%Pra-vraska, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a cut.
<LEND>

<L>33003<pc>0645-b<k1>pravlaya<k2>pravlaya
{#pravlaya#}¦ {%pra-vlaya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vlī%} with
{%pra%}), Ved. sinking down.
<LEND>

<L>33004<pc>0645-b<k1>praSa~yyuvAka<k2>praSa~yyuvAka
{#praSa~yyuvAka#}¦ {%praśaṃyyu-vāka, as,%} m., see
Vārttika 1. to Pāṇ. II. 4, 29.
<LEND>

<L>33005<pc>0645-b<k1>praSaMs<k2>praSaMs
{#praSaMs#}¦ {%pra-śaṃs,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śaṃsati, -śaṃsi-%}
{%tum%} (anomalous 3rd sing. Pot. {%pra-śaṃsīyāt%}), to
[Page0645-c+ 79]
praise forth, praise, eulogize, laud, extol, commend,
recommend; to approve; to esteem, value; to de-
clare; (with {%na%}) to disapprove, blame, censure.
<LEND>

<L>33006<pc>0645-c<k1>praSaMsaka<k2>praSaMsaka
{%Pra-śaṃsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ praising, commending,
eulogizing, laudatory, flattering; a praiser.
<LEND>

<L>33007<pc>0645-c<k1>praSaMsana<k2>praSaMsana
{%Pra-śaṃsana, am,%}¦ n. praising, eulogizing; (some-
times incorrectly spelt {%pra-śaṃśana.%})
<LEND>

<L>33008<pc>0645-c<k1>praSaMsanIya<k2>praSaMsanIya
{%Pra-śaṃsanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, praise-
worthy, laudable, commendable.
<LEND>

<L>33009<pc>0645-c<k1>praSaMsA<k2>praSaMsA
{%Pra-śaṃsā,%}¦ f. praise, commendation, panegyric,
eulogy, applause, flattery; fame, reputation, glory
[cf. {%strī-p˚%}]; {%aprastuta-praśaṃsā,%} indirect de-
scription, a description of anything implied by the
description of a similar or contrary object; (some-
times incorrectly spelt {%pra-śaṃśā.%}) {%—Praśaṃsā-%}
{%mukhara, as, ā, am,%} loud with praise, praising
loudly. {%—Praśaṃsāmukharānana (˚ra-ān˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘one whose mouth is loud with praise,’
speaking loudly in praise (of anything). {%—Praśaṃso-%}
{%pamā (˚sā-up˚),%} f. laudatory comparison, comparing
to anything superior.
<LEND>

<L>33010<pc>0645-c<k1>praSaMsita<k2>praSaMsita
{%Pra-śaṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised, commended,
eulogized, extolled, applauded.
<LEND>

<L>33011<pc>0645-c<k1>praSaMsitavya<k2>praSaMsitavya
{%Pra-śaṃsitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised or
commended, praiseworthy, laudable, commendable.
<LEND>

<L>33012<pc>0645-c<k1>praSaMsin<k2>praSaMsin
{%Pra-śaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ praising, commending,
eulogizing.
<LEND>

<L>33013<pc>0645-c<k1>praSaMstavya<k2>praSaMstavya
{%Pra-śaṃstavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, praise-
worthy, laudable; [cf. {%pra-śastavya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33014<pc>0645-c<k1>praSaMsya<k2>praSaMsya
{%Pra-śaṃsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, com-
mendable, praiseworthy, laudable; preferable, better;
[cf. 1. {%pra-śasya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33015<pc>0645-c<k1>praSasta<k2>praSasta
{%Pra-śasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised, commended;
eulogized, extolled; laudable, commendable, admir-
able, excellent, good, best; happy; well; right;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
{%—Praśasta-kara, as,%} m., N. of an author (per-
haps the writer of a work entitled Pra-śasta). {%—Pra-%}
{%śasta-kalaśa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Praśasta-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%praśasta-tva, am,%} n. excellence, goodness.
{%—Praśasta-pāda, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Pra-%}
{%śastādri (˚ta-ad˚), is,%} m., N. of a mountain to
the west of Madhya-deśa.
<LEND>

<L>33016<pc>0645-c<k1>praSastavya<k2>praSastavya
{%Pra-śastavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, praise-
worthy; [cf. {%pra-śaṃstavya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33017<pc>0645-c<k1>praSasti<k2>praSasti
{%Pra-śasti, is,%}¦ f. praise, eulogy, fame; glorification,
benediction; excellence, eminence; instruction, con-
duct, guidance; an edict (?) ; {%praśastiṃ dhā,%} to bestow
praise upon, speak highly of, value highly (with loc.).
{%—Praśasti-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. bestowing praise, prais-
ing. {%—Praśasti-prakāśikā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Pra-%}
{%śasti-ratnāvalī,%} f., N. of a poem by Viśva-nātha.
<LEND>

<L>33018<pc>0645-c<k1>praSasya<k2>praSasya<h>1
1. {%pra-śasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised or com-
mended, praiseworthy, laudable, commendable; ex-
cellent, eminent, distinguished; to be called happy,
to be congratulated; [cf. {%pra-śaṃsya.%}] {%—Praśasya-%}
{%tā,%} f. excellence, eminence.
<LEND>

<L>33019<pc>0645-c<k1>praSasya<k2>praSasya<h>2
2. {%pra-śasya,%}¦ ind. having praised or recommended.
<LEND>

<L>33020<pc>0645-c<k1>praSaka<k2>praSaka
{#praSaka#}¦ {%pra-śaka.%} See under {%pra-śākha.%}
<LEND>

<L>33021<pc>0645-c<k1>praSad<k2>praSad
{#praSad#}¦ {%pra-śad,%} Caus. P. {%-śātayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to fall down, break off, pluck, gather.
<LEND>

<L>33022<pc>0645-c<k1>praSattvan<k2>praSattvan
{%Pra-śattvan, ā,%}¦ m. the ocean; ({%arī%}), f. a river.
<LEND>

<L>33023<pc>0645-c<k1>praSam<k2>praSam
{#praSam#}¦ {%pra-śam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śāmyati, -śami-%}
{%tum,%} to become calm or tranquil, to be still or
unmoved; to be appeased or pacified, be soothed;
to be laid or made to settle down (as dust); to be
restrained; to become extinguished; to cease; to
fade away: Caus. {%-śamayati, -yitum,%} to tranquillize,
make calm or tranquil, pacify, soothe, appease; to
extinguish, quench, allay; to kill, destroy; {%-śāma-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to make subject, make obedient,
subdue, conquer, tranquillize.
<LEND>

<L>33024<pc>0645-c<k1>praSama<k2>praSama
{%Pra-śama, as,%}¦ m. becoming calm or tranquil,
rest, quiet, quiescence, calmness, tranquillity, peace,
composure (e. g. {%praśamam upaihi,%} go to com-
posure, i. e. compose yourself); assuagement, ap-
peasement, tranquillizing, removing; becoming ex-
tinguished, extinction (of flames &c.), abatement;
N. of a son of Ānaka-dundubhi and Śānti-devā;
[Page0646-a+ 77]
({%ī%}), f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Praśamaṅ-kara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} causing the cessation of. {%—Praśama-sthita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} being in a state of quiescence. {%—Praśamāyana%}
{%(˚ma-ay˚), as, ā, am,%} walking in tranquillity.
<LEND>

<L>33025<pc>0646-a<k1>praSamana<k2>praSamana
{%Pra-śamana, as, ī, am,%}¦ tranquillizing, pacifying,
calming; suppressing, curing, healing; ({%am%}), n.
reposing, repose, quiescence; tranquillizing, pacifying,
calming; mitigating, assuaging, allaying, composing;
soothing (fever &c.); curing, healing; extinguish-
ing, quenching, suppressing; abatement, cessation;
killing, destroying, slaughter; (scil. {%astram%}), N. of
a magic weapon; bestowing aptly or fitly (Manu
VII. 56, {%= sat-pātre pratipādanam%}); securing,
keeping safe; {%labdhasya praśamanam,%} the se-
curing of what has been acquired or bestowing it
on fit objects; [cf. {%labdha-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33026<pc>0646-a<k1>praSamayya<k2>praSamayya
{%Pra-śamayya,%}¦ ind. having appeased or tranquil-
lized.
<LEND>

<L>33027<pc>0646-a<k1>praSamita<k2>praSamita
{%Pra-śamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ tranquillized, appeased,
relieved; quelled, quenched, allayed. {%—Praśamito-%}
{%padrava (˚ta-up˚), as, ā, am,%} having all calamities
or hinderances quelled ({%= praśānta-bādha%}).
<LEND>

<L>33028<pc>0646-a<k1>praSamyamAna<k2>praSamyamAna
{%Pra-śamyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being tranquillized
or pacified, being appeased; being flattered.
<LEND>

<L>33029<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAn<k2>praSAn
{%Pra-śān,%}¦ ind., see Gaṇa Svar-ādi to Pāṇ. I. 1,
37; [cf. {%pra-śām.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33030<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAnta<k2>praSAnta
{%Pra-śānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ tranquillized, composed,
quieted, calmed, calm; tamed; subdued; abated,
ended, ceased, discontinued (as active effort); dead,
deceased; relieved; ({%as%}), m., N. of a divinity.
{%—Praśānta-kāma, as, ā, am,%} one whose desires
are calmed, content. {%—Praśānta-cāritra-mati, is,%}
m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Praśānta-cārin, iṇas,%}
m. pl. walking tranquilly, (perhaps) an epithet of a
class of deities. {%—Praśānta-ceṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} one
whose efforts have ceased, resting. {%—Praśānta-tā,%} f.
tranquillity (of mind). {%—Praśānta-bādha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having all calamities or hinderances quelled {%(=%}
{%praśamitopadrava)%}. {%—Praśāntātman (˚ta-āt˚),%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} ‘tranquil-souled,’ composed in mind, peace-
ful, calm. {%—Praśāntorja (˚ta-ūr˚), as, ā, am,%} one
whose strength has ceased, weakened, prostrated.
{%—Praśāntaujas (˚ta-oj˚), ās, ās, as, = praśān-%}
{%torja%} above.
<LEND>

<L>33031<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAntaka<k2>praSAntaka
{%Praśāntaka, as, ā, am, = pra-śānta%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>33032<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAnti<k2>praSAnti
{%Pra-śānti, is,%}¦ f. becoming calm or tranquil, tran-
quillization, tranquillity of mind, calm, quiet, pacifi-
cation, composure; ceasing, cessation, rest; allaying,
quenching, extinguishing, extinction. {%—Praśānti-%}
{%dūtī,%} f. the harbinger of rest, forerunner of repose,
an epithet of old age.
<LEND>

<L>33033<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAm<k2>praSAm
{%Pra-śām, n, n, n,%}¦ tranquil, quiet.
<LEND>

<L>33034<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAma<k2>praSAma
{%Pra-śāma, as,%}¦ m. tranquillity, quiescence; paci-
fying; laying, suppressing.
<LEND>

<L>33035<pc>0646-a<k1>praSarDa<k2>praSarDa
{#praSarDa#}¦ {%pra-śardha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śṛdh%}
with {%pra%}), Ved. valiant (said of Indra; Sāy. {%= pra-%}
{%karṣeṇābhibhavitā%}).
<LEND>

<L>33036<pc>0646-a<k1>praSala<k2>praSala
{#praSala#}¦ {%praśala,%} a various reading for {%pra-%}
{%sala,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33037<pc>0646-a<k1>praSas<k2>praSas
{#praSas#}¦ {%pra-śas, as,%} f. (fr. rt. {%śas%} with {%pra%}),
Ved. a hatchet, axe, knife; (according to others) {%=%}
{%pra-śasta, praśasta-cchedana.%}
<LEND>

<L>33038<pc>0646-a<k1>praSasta<k2>praSasta
{#praSasta#}¦ {%pra-śasta,%} &c. See p. 645, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33039<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAKa<k2>praSAKa
{#praSAKa#}¦ {%pra-śākha, as, ā, am,%} having great
branches (as a tree); an epithet of the fifth stage in
the formation of an embryo (in which the hands
and feet are formed, in this sense also written {%pra-%}
{%śaka%}); ({%ā%}), f. a branch, small branch or twig;
(probably) the extremities of the body. {%—Praśākha-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having many branches.
<LEND>

<L>33040<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAKikA<k2>praSAKikA
{%Praśākhikā,%}¦ f. a branch; a small branch or twig.
<LEND>

<L>33041<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAnta<k2>praSAnta
{#praSAnta#}¦ {%pra-śānta,%} &c. See above.
<LEND>

<L>33042<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAs<k2>praSAs
{#praSAs#}¦ {%pra-śās,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śāsti, -śāsitum,%}
to rule over, reign over, rule, reign, govern, com-
mand, enjoin; to teach, instruct; to chastise, punish.
<LEND>

<L>33043<pc>0646-a<k1>praSAsana<k2>praSAsana
{%Pra-śāsana, am,%}¦ n. governing, ruling; dominion,
government; enjoining, enacting.
<LEND>
[Page0646-b+ 74]

<L>33044<pc>0646-b<k1>praSAsita<k2>praSAsita
{%Pra-śāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ruled over, reigned over,
governed, ruled; enjoined, enacted.
<LEND>

<L>33045<pc>0646-b<k1>praSAsitf<k2>praSAsitf
{%Pra-śāsitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ governing, ruling, a
governor, ruler.
<LEND>

<L>33046<pc>0646-b<k1>praSAstf<k2>praSAstf
{%Pra-śāstṛ, tā,%}¦ m. ‘director,’ title of a priest also
called Maitrāvaruṇa, the first assistant of the Hotṛ
(Ved.); a king.
<LEND>

<L>33047<pc>0646-b<k1>praSAstra<k2>praSAstra
{%Pra-śāstra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the office of Praśāstṛ;
the Soma vessel of the Praśāstṛ; (Sāy.) {%= praśāstur%}
{%yāgaḥ.%}
<LEND>

<L>33048<pc>0646-b<k1>praSizwa<k2>praSizwa
{%Pra-śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ ruled over, reigned,
governed, commanded.
<LEND>

<L>33049<pc>0646-b<k1>praSizwi<k2>praSizwi
{%Pra-śiṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. injunction, command, order.
<LEND>

<L>33050<pc>0646-b<k1>praSis<k2>praSis
{%Pra-śis, īs,%}¦ f., Ved. injunction, command, order;
[cf. 1. {%ā-śis.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33051<pc>0646-b<k1>praSiTila<k2>praSiTila
{#praSiTila#}¦ {%pra-śithila, as, ā, am,%} very loose,
relaxed, lax. {%—Praśithilī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} rendered
very loose, greatly loosened. {%—Praśithilī-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} become loose or lax.
<LEND>

<L>33052<pc>0646-b<k1>praSiza<k2>praSiza
{#praSiza#}¦ {%praśiṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>33053<pc>0646-b<k1>praSizya<k2>praSizya
{#praSizya#}¦ {%pra-śiṣya, as,%} m. the disciple of
a disciple, scholar of a scholar, pupil of a pupil.
{%—Praśiṣya-tva, am,%} n. the being the disciple of
a disciple, the condition of a pupil's pupil.
<LEND>

<L>33054<pc>0646-b<k1>praSukrIya<k2>praSukrIya
{#praSukrIya#}¦ {%praśukrīya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. be-
ginning with the words {%pra śukrā%} (said of the
hymn Ṛg-veda VII. 34, 1).
<LEND>

<L>33055<pc>0646-b<k1>praSudDi<k2>praSudDi
{#praSudDi#}¦ {%pra-śuddhi, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%śudh%} with
{%pra%}), purity, clearness.
<LEND>

<L>33056<pc>0646-b<k1>praSumB<k2>praSumB
{#praSumB#}¦ {%pra-śumbh,%} cl. 6. A. {%-śumbhate,%}
{%-śumbhitum,%} Ved. to decorate or adorn one's self
highly; (Sāy.) {%= prakarṣeṇa svakīyam aṅgam%}
{%alaṅ-kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>33057<pc>0646-b<k1>praSuSruka<k2>praSuSruka
{#praSuSruka#}¦ {%pra-śuśruka, as,%} m., N. of a prince
(a son of Maru; cf. {%pra-suśruta%}).
<LEND>

<L>33058<pc>0646-b<k1>praSocana<k2>praSocana
{#praSocana#}¦ {%pra-śocana, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śuc%}
with {%pra%}), Ved. burning on, continuing to burn.
<LEND>

<L>33059<pc>0646-b<k1>praSoza<k2>praSoza
{#praSoza#}¦ {%pra-śoṣa, as,%} m. (rt. {%śuṣ%}), drying
up, becoming dry, exsiccating, aridity.
<LEND>

<L>33060<pc>0646-b<k1>praSozaRa<k2>praSozaRa
{%Pra-śoṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m. ‘drying up,’ epithet of a
kind of phantom.
<LEND>

<L>33061<pc>0646-b<k1>praScut<k2>praScut
{#praScut#}¦ {%pra-ścut%} or {%pra-ścyut,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śco-%}
{%tati, -ścyotati, -ścotitum, -ścyotitum,%} to pour forth,
shed, distil, sprinkle; to drip, fall in drops.
<LEND>

<L>33062<pc>0646-b<k1>praScotat<k2>praScotat
{%Pra-ścotat%}¦ or {%pra-ścyotat, an, antī, at,%} pouring
forth, sprinkling; dripping, falling in drops.
<LEND>

<L>33063<pc>0646-b<k1>praSna<k2>praSna<h>1
{#praSna#} 1¦. {%praśna, as,%} m. basket-work, a
plaited basket.
<LEND>

<L>33064<pc>0646-b<k1>praSna<k2>praSna<h>2
{#praSna#} 2¦. {%praśna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%prach%}), a
question, demand, inquiry, interrogation, query [cf.
{%kuśula-p˚%}]; judicial inquiry or examination [cf.
{%sākṣi-p˚%}]; a controverted question, point at issue,
subject of inquiry, controversy, ({%praśnam pra-brū,%}
to decide a controverted point; {%praśnam i,%} to lay
a question before any one (acc.) for decision; {%praś-%}
{%nas tava pitari,%} the point at issue is before thy
father, i. e. it is submitted to him to decide); a
problem for calculation; inquiry into the future (in
astrology; cf. {%divya-p˚, deva-p˚, daiva-p˚%}); a par-
ticular number of verses of the Veda repeated from
memory by a pupil to his Guru, a task, lesson, repeti-
tion; a term applied to short sections in various works.
{%—Praśna-koṣṭhī,%} f., N. of a work on divination.
{%—Praśna-dūtī,%} f. a riddle, enigma, perplexing or
enigmatical question. {%—Praśna-vivāka, as,%} m., Ved.
one who decides controversies, an arbitrator. {%—Praś-%}
{%na-vivāda, as,%} m. a controverted question, contro-
versy. {%—Praśna-vaiṣṇava, am,%} n., N. of an
astrological work. {%—Praśna-vyākaraṇa, am,%} n.,
N. of the tenth of the twelve sacred books of the
Jainas. {%—Praśnārṇava (˚na-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘ocean of
questions,’ N. of a work on astrology {%(= Vaiṣṇava-%}
{%śāstra)%}. {%—Praśnottara (˚na-ut˚), as%} or {%am,%} m. or
[Page0646-c+ 75]
n. (?), a particular Śabdālaṅkāra or figure of speech.
{%—Praśnottara-maṇi-mālā%} or {%praśnottara-mālā,%}
f., N. of a work. {%—Praśnottara-ratna-mālā,%} f.,
N. of a work. {%—Praśnopaniṣad (˚na-up˚), t,%} f.,
N. of an Upaniṣad (consisting of six questions and
six answers).
<LEND>

<L>33065<pc>0646-c<k1>praSnaya<k2>praSnaya
{%Praśnaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%praśnayati, -yitum,%} to
inquire after, ask about (with two acc.).
<LEND>

<L>33066<pc>0646-c<k1>praSnin<k2>praSnin
{%Praśnin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved. an inquirer, one who inquires
into the future (Mahī-dhara {%= śakunādi-praṣṭṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>33067<pc>0646-c<k1>prazwavya<k2>prazwavya
{%Praṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be asked or questioned
about (with acc.); deserving to be consulted; proper
to be inquired into.
<LEND>

<L>33068<pc>0646-c<k1>prazwf<k2>prazwf
{%Praṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ asking, demanding, an asker,
inquirer, questioner, interrogator, querist.
<LEND>

<L>33069<pc>0646-c<k1>praSni<k2>praSni
{#praSni#}¦ {%praśni, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a race of
Ṛṣis; (incorrectly for {%pṛśni,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>33070<pc>0646-c<k1>praSnI<k2>praSnI
{%Praśnī,%}¦ f. incorrectly for {%pṛśnī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33071<pc>0646-c<k1>praSraTa<k2>praSraTa
{#praSraTa#}¦ {%pra-śratha, as,%} m. or {%pra-śranthana,%}
{%am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%śranth%} with {%pra%}), laxity, relaxation,
flaccidity.
<LEND>

<L>33072<pc>0646-c<k1>praSrabDi<k2>praSrabDi
{#praSrabDi#}¦ {%pra-śrabdhi, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%śrambh%}
with {%pra%}), trust, confidence.
<LEND>

<L>33073<pc>0646-c<k1>praSraya<k2>praSraya
{#praSraya#}¦ {%pra-śraya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śri%} with
{%pra%}), respectful demeanour, affection, regard, solicit-
ation, affection, respect, courtesy, civility, modesty;
Modesty personified as a son of Dharma and Hrī.
{%—Praśraya-vat, ān, atī, at, = praśrayin%} below.
<LEND>

<L>33074<pc>0646-c<k1>praSrayaRa<k2>praSrayaRa
{%Pra-śrayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. respectful demeanour, civi-
lity, modesty.
<LEND>

<L>33075<pc>0646-c<k1>praSrayin<k2>praSrayin
{%Praśrayin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ behaving respectfully, cour-
teous, civil; modest. {%—Praśrayi-tā,%} f. respectful
demeanour, courtesy, civility, modesty.
<LEND>

<L>33076<pc>0646-c<k1>praSrita<k2>praSrita
{%Pra-śrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ modest, humble, well-
behaved; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Ānaka-dundubhi
and Śānti-devā.
<LEND>

<L>33077<pc>0646-c<k1>praSravaRa<k2>praSravaRa
{#praSravaRa#}¦ {%pra-śravaṇa,%} an incorrect form
for {%pra-sravaṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33078<pc>0646-c<k1>praSravas<k2>praSravas
{#praSravas#}¦ {%pra-śravas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. ‘loud-
sounding,’ an epithet of the Maruts; (Sāy.) {%= pra-%}
{%kṛṣṭānna,%} having or bestowing excellent food.
<LEND>

<L>33079<pc>0646-c<k1>praSlaTa<k2>praSlaTa
{#praSlaTa#}¦ {%pra-ślatha, as, ā, am,%} very loose,
greatly relaxed, languid, flaccid; unnerved.
<LEND>

<L>33080<pc>0646-c<k1>praSlita<k2>praSlita
{#praSlita#}¦ {%pra-ślita, as,%} m. (for {%pra-śrita%}), a
term applied to the rule of Sandhi according to
which {%as%} before a soft letter is changed into {%o.%}
<LEND>

<L>33081<pc>0646-c<k1>praSlizwa<k2>praSlizwa
{#praSlizwa#}¦ {%pra-śliṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śliṣ%}
with {%pra%}), twisted, entwined; ({%as%}), m. a term
applied to the Sandhi of the vowel {%a%} with a following
vowel and of other vowels with homogeneous vowels;
also to the vowel resulting from this Sandhi and of
the accent with which such a vowel is pronounced;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man (?) .
<LEND>

<L>33082<pc>0646-c<k1>praSleza<k2>praSleza
{%Pra-śleṣa, as,%}¦ m. close contact, pressing against;
euphonic coalition of vowels.
<LEND>

<L>33083<pc>0646-c<k1>praSvasitavya<k2>praSvasitavya
{#praSvasitavya#}¦ {%pra-śvasitavya, as, ā, am%} (fr.
rt. {%śvas%} with {%pra%}), Ved. to be caused to recover
the breath.
<LEND>

<L>33084<pc>0646-c<k1>praSvAsa<k2>praSvAsa
{%Pra-śvāsa, as,%}¦ m. breathing in, inhaling, breath,
respiration.
<LEND>

<L>33085<pc>0646-c<k1>prazwavya<k2>prazwavya
{#prazwavya#}¦ {%praṣṭavya, praṣṭṛ.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>33086<pc>0646-c<k1>prazwi<k2>prazwi
{#prazwi#}¦ {%praṣṭi, is,%} m. (connected with
{%pṛṣṭi,%} q. v.), Ved. a horse harnessed at the side,
a side-horse or one harnessed outside the shafts by
the side of the other yoke-horses [cf. {%dakṣiṇā-p˚%}];
(perhaps) a horse in front of those harnessed to the
yoke or to the chariot-pole [cf. {%adhi-praṣṭi-yuga%}];
(according to Sāy.) {%= vāhana-traya-madhya-vartī%}
{%yuga-viśeṣaḥ,%} a sort of yoke in the middle of
three horses; a bystander, companion (Sāy. {%= pārśva-%}
{%stha%}). {%—Praṣṭi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having
side-horses (as a chariot). {%—Praṣṭi-vāhana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%praṣṭi-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. (a chariot)
drawn by side-horses (and thus having at least three
horses).
<LEND>
[Page0647-a+ 75]

<L>33087<pc>0647-a<k1>prazWa<k2>prazWa
{#prazWa#}¦ {%pra-ṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%sthā%} with
{%pra%}), standing in front, preceding, prior; chief, prin-
cipal, best [cf. {%ratha-p˚%}]; a leader, conductor; ({%as%}),
m. a species of plant; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of a leader or
chief. {%—Praṣṭha-vāh, ṭ,%} m. a young bull or steer
training for the plough; {%praṣṭhauhī,%} f. a cow for
the first time with calf; [cf. {%paṣṭha-vāh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33088<pc>0647-a<k1>prazWivAhin<k2>prazWivAhin
{#prazWivAhin#}¦ {%praṣṭhi-vāhin,%} a wrong read-
ing for {%praṣṭi-vāhin,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33089<pc>0647-a<k1>prazRavEzRava<k2>prazRavEzRava
{#prazRavEzRava#}¦ {%praṣṇa-vaiṣṇava,%} an incorrect
form for {%praśna-vaiṣṇava,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33090<pc>0647-a<k1>pras<k2>pras
{#pras#}¦ {%pras,%} cl. 1. A. {%prasate, prasitum,%} to
extend, expand, spread, diffuse; to bring
forth young.
<LEND>

<L>33091<pc>0647-a<k1>prasakta<k2>prasakta
{#prasakta#}¦ {%pra-sakta, pra-sakti.%} See under
{%pra-sañj%} below.
<LEND>

<L>33092<pc>0647-a<k1>prasakzin<k2>prasakzin
{#prasakzin#}¦ {%pra-sakṣin.%} See p. 648, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33093<pc>0647-a<k1>prasaNKyA<k2>prasaNKyA<h>1
{#prasaNKyA#} 1¦. {%pra-saṅ-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti,%}
{%-khyātum,%} to count or reckon up, number, enume-
rate, calculate.
<LEND>

<L>33094<pc>0647-a<k1>prasaNKyA<k2>prasaNKyA<h>2
2. {%pra-saṅkhyā,%}¦ f. total number, sum; reflection.
<LEND>

<L>33095<pc>0647-a<k1>prasaNKyAna<k2>prasaNKyAna
{%Pra-saṅkhyāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ meditating (? as an
epithet of an order of ascetics); ({%as%}), m. payment,
liquidation; a sum of money; ({%am%}), n. enumerat-
ing, enumeration; reflection, meditation; reputation,
renown. {%—Prasaṅkhyāna-para, as, ā, am,%} en-
grossed or absorbed in meditation.
<LEND>

<L>33096<pc>0647-a<k1>prasaNga<k2>prasaNga
{#prasaNga#}¦ {%pra-saṅga.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>33097<pc>0647-a<k1>prasaNGa<k2>prasaNGa
{#prasaNGa#}¦ {%pra-saṅgha, as,%} m. a great multitude.
<LEND>

<L>33098<pc>0647-a<k1>prasaYcakz<k2>prasaYcakz
{#prasaYcakz#}¦ {%pra-sañ-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe,%} &c.
(see rt. {%cakṣ%}), to reckon up, recount, enumerate.
<LEND>

<L>33099<pc>0647-a<k1>prasaYj<k2>prasaYj
{#prasaYj#}¦ {%pra-sañj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sajati, -saṅktum,%}
to become attached to, feel affection for: Pass. {%-saj-%}
{%yate,%} to cleave to, adhere or cling to, become fixed
upon or attached to, become strongly addicted to
(with loc.); to be relevant or applicable, to apply.
<LEND>

<L>33100<pc>0647-a<k1>prasakta<k2>prasakta
{%Pra-sakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached to, in contact
with, united to, connected with; cleaving to, adher-
ing to, fixed upon (with loc.); devoted to; accom-
panying; engaged in, applied to, used, employed;
attained, obtained, gained; continual, constant, eter-
nal; opened, expanded; ({%am%}), ind. continually, in-
cessantly, eternally, ever.
<LEND>

<L>33101<pc>0647-a<k1>prasaktavya<k2>prasaktavya
{%Pra-saktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attached to.
<LEND>

<L>33102<pc>0647-a<k1>prasakti<k2>prasakti
{%Pra-sakti, is,%}¦ f. adherence or attachment to, ad-
hesion, devotion to, addiction to, engagedness, the
being occupied with; bearing upon, applicability,
application (especially of a rule in grammar; {%ati-%}
{%prasakti,%} too wide applicability; {%prasaktim pra-yā,%}
to become attached); connection, union, association;
inference, conclusion, deduction; a topic or subject
of conversation; occurrence of a possibility; perse-
verance, energy; acquiring, acquisition.
<LEND>

<L>33103<pc>0647-a<k1>prasaNga<k2>prasaNga
{%Pra-saṅga, as,%}¦ m. adherence or attachment to,
devotion to, devotedness; addiction to [cf. {%surata-%}
{%p˚%}]; occupation [cf. {%virata-p˚, viruddha-p˚%}]; con-
nection, union, association, intercourse [cf. {%strī-p˚%}];
illicit intercourse; connected reasoning or argument;
connected language or style; subject, topic, the case
as stated; occurrence of a possibility, contingency,
case, event (e. g. {%ecaḥ pluta-prasaṅge,%} in the event
of a diphthong being prolated); conjuncture, occa-
sion, circumstances, time; introduction, insertion;
mention of parents; conjoint result (?); revealing a
secret (?); second or subsidiary incident (?); N. of a Bud-
dhist school; of a man; {%prasaṅgena%} or {%prasaṅgāt,%}
ind. through connection with or relation to; with all
the heart, heartily, earnestly; on the occasion of,
in consequence of, on account of, because of (lit.
from its happening); when the occasion presents
itself, occasionally, incidentally; in the course of
(e. g. {%kathā-prasaṅgena,%} in course of conversation).
{%—Prasaṅga-tas,%} ind. out of attachment to or
respect for; {%= prasaṅgena, prasaṅgāt%}. {%—Pra-%}
{%saṅga-nivāraṇa, am,%} n. the prevention of (similar)
[Page0647-b+ 80]
cases, obviation of (like future) contingencies. {%—Pra-%}
{%saṅga-ratnāvalī,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Prasaṅga-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} occasional, incidental, casual. {%—Pra-%}
{%saṅga-vaśāt,%} ind. according to the time, as occasion
may demand, by the force of circumstances. {%—Pra-%}
{%saṅga-vinivṛtti, is,%} f. the non-recurrence of a case.
{%—Prasaṅga-sama, as,%} m. a particular Jāti [q. v.]
in logic. {%—Prasaṅgābharaṇa (˚ga-ābh˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a modern poetical anthology.
<LEND>

<L>33104<pc>0647-b<k1>prasaNgin<k2>prasaNgin
{%Prasaṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ attached to, devoted to;
dependent on, contingent, additional; occasional,
incidental; secondary, subordinate, non-essential.
{%—Prasaṅgi-tā,%} f. attachment, addiction to, con-
nection, intercourse with.
<LEND>

<L>33105<pc>0647-b<k1>prasajya<k2>prasajya
{%Pra-sajya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attached to, to be
connected with; applicable. {%—Prasajya-pratiṣe-%}
{%dha, as,%} m. a particular kind of negation, negation
of a possible case (distinguished from {%pary-udāsa,%}
q. v.), a simple prohibition of the particular matter
specified without enjoining what is different.
<LEND>

<L>33106<pc>0647-b<k1>prasaYjana<k2>prasaYjana
{%Pra-sañjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of attaching or con-
necting, combining, uniting; applying, employing,
bringing into use, bringing to bear.
<LEND>

<L>33107<pc>0647-b<k1>prasad<k2>prasad
{#prasad#}¦ {%pra-sad,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%-sīdati, -sattum,%}
to settle down, become clear, become placid or
tranquil, become calm, be calm, be soothed; to be
content or satisfied; to be glad; to be gracious
or propitious, to be favourable, favour (with gen.);
to vouchsafe, be pleased to (with inf.): Caus. {%-sā-%}
{%dayati, -yitum,%} to render calm, soothe, appease,
propitiate; to beg pardon of (with acc.); (A.) to
cause to be gracious, pray for grace or favour: Pass.
of Caus. {%-sādyate,%} to be rendered calm, to be
soothed or appeased.
<LEND>

<L>33108<pc>0647-b<k1>prasatti<k2>prasatti
{%Pra-satti, is,%}¦ f. transparency, brightness, clearness,
cleanness, purity; complacency, graciousness, favour.
<LEND>

<L>33109<pc>0647-b<k1>prasanna<k2>prasanna
{%Pra-sanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ settled down, tranquil;
clear, bright, pellucid, limpid, pure, clean; soothed,
propitiated, pleased, delighted; gracious, propitious,
kind, kindly disposed towards, favourable, compla-
cent; true; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince; ({%ā%}), f. pro-
pitiating, pleasing; spirituous or vinous liquor. {%—Pra-%}
{%sanna-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} almost quiet, tolerably
calm. {%—Prasanna-tā,%} f. or {%prasanna-tva, am,%} n.
brightness, pellucidness, clearness, purity; favour,
kindness, propitiousness, good humour. {%—Prasanna-%}
{%pāda, as,%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?) , N. of a work by
Dharma-kīrtti. {%—Prasanna-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
‘placid-countenanced,’ having a pleased or approv-
ing countenance, agreeable-looking, looking pleased,
smiling. {%—Prasanna-rāghava, am,%} n., N. of a
drama by Jaya-deva. {%—Prasanna-veṅkaṭeśvara-%}
{%māhātmya (˚ṭa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a legend in the
Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa. {%—Prasanna-salila, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having clear or limpid water. {%—Prasannātman%}
{%(˚na-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} gracious-minded, propitious.
{%—Prasannerā (˚na-īrā),%} f. spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>33110<pc>0647-b<k1>prasAda<k2>prasAda<h>1
1. {%pra-sāda, as,%}¦ m. clearness, brightness, pellucid-
ness, transparentness, limpidness, purity, cleanness
[cf. {%ambu-p˚%}]; clearness of style, perspicuity; calm-
ness, tranquillity, absence of excitement, repose,
composure; serenity of disposition, good humour,
good temper; graciousness, propitiousness, favour,
kindness, kind behaviour [cf. {%duṣ-p˚, dṛk-p˚%}];
approbation; Kindness personified as a son of Dharma
and Maitrī; a propitiatory offering or gift, food
offered to a god ({%= prasāda-dravya, prasādānna%});
the remnants of food presented to an idol or left by
a spiritual teacher (both of which any one may
freely appropriate to his own use); free gift, gratuity;
well-being, welfare; N. of a commentary on the
Prakriyā-kaumudī; {%prasādāt,%} abl. c. through the
kindness of, by the favour of. {%—Prasāda-dāna,%}
{%am,%} n. a propitiatory gift, a gift in token of favour,
gift of food by a superior. {%—Prasāda-paṭṭa, as,%}
m. a turban of honour (worn as a token of royal
favour). {%—Prasāda-parāṅmukha, as, ī, am,%} not
caring for any one's favour; withdrawing favour
from any one (with gen.). {%—Prasāda-pātra, am,%}
n. an object of favour. {%—Prasāda-puraga, as, ā, %}
[Page0647-c+ 77]
{%am,%} inclined to favour, favourably inclined. {%—Pra-%}
{%sāda-pratilabdha, as,%} m., N. of a demon. {%—Pra-%}
{%sāda-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pleased, delighted; gracious,
favourable. {%—Prasāda-vittaka, as, ā, am%} (perhaps
an incorrect form for {%prasāda-vittama%}), best ac-
quainted with the favour (of another), preferred to
all others. {%—Prasāda-stha, as, ā, am,%} abiding in
serenity, kind, propitious; happy. {%—Prasādāntara%}
{%(˚da-an˚), am,%} n. another (mark of) favour. {%—Pra-%}
{%sādī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to
bestow as a mark of favour, bestow graciously, present.
<LEND>

<L>33111<pc>0647-c<k1>prasAda<k2>prasAda<h>2
2. {%prasāda,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prasādati, prasāditum,%} to
be clear or bright.
<LEND>

<L>33112<pc>0647-c<k1>prasAdaka<k2>prasAdaka
{%Pra-sādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ clearing, purifying,
rendering clear or pellucid; gladdening, cheering,
exhilarating; propitiating, courting favour, wishing
to win any one's favour.
<LEND>

<L>33113<pc>0647-c<k1>prasAdana<k2>prasAdana
{%Pra-sādana, as, ī, am,%}¦ rendering clear, purifying
[cf. {%ambu-p˚, toya-p˚%}]; calming, tranquillizing;
soothing, cheering, gratifying; ({%as%}), m. a royal
tent; ({%ā%}), f. service, worship; ({%am%}), n. cleaning,
freeing from soil or impurities; the act of calming,
tranquillizing, composing, soothing (e. g. {%netra-p˚,%}
administering soothing remedies to the eyes); cheer-
ing, gratifying [cf. {%śruti-p˚%}]; rendering gracious,
propitiating, pleasing, ({%tvat-prasādanāt,%} for the sake
of propitiating thee); boiled rice.
<LEND>

<L>33114<pc>0647-c<k1>prasAdanIya<k2>prasAdanIya
{%Pra-sādanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be rendered gracious,
to be propitiated.
<LEND>

<L>33115<pc>0647-c<k1>prasAdayat<k2>prasAdayat
{%Pra-sādayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to be gracious,
propitiating, gratifying, pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>33116<pc>0647-c<k1>prasAdayitavya<k2>prasAdayitavya
{%Pra-sādayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be rendered
gracious, to be propitiated.
<LEND>

<L>33117<pc>0647-c<k1>prasAdita<k2>prasAdita
{%Pra-sādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ purified, cleansed; pleased,
conciliated, propitiated, appeased, reconciled; wor-
shipped.
<LEND>

<L>33118<pc>0647-c<k1>prasAdin<k2>prasAdin
{%Pra-sādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ calming, tranquillizing,
soothing, cheering, gladdening; showing favour,
treating with kindness; clear, serene, bright.
<LEND>

<L>33119<pc>0647-c<k1>prasAdya<k2>prasAdya
{%Pra-sādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be rendered gracious,
to be propitiated, to be conciliated, placable.
<LEND>

<L>33120<pc>0647-c<k1>prasedivas<k2>prasedivas
{%Pra-sedivas, vān, duṣī, vat,%}¦ one who has be-
come pleased or propitiated, favourable.
<LEND>

<L>33121<pc>0647-c<k1>prasanDA<k2>prasanDA
{#prasanDA#}¦ {%pra-san-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to fix or fit (an arrow) to (the
bow-string).
<LEND>

<L>33122<pc>0647-c<k1>prasanDAna<k2>prasanDAna
{%Pra-sandhāna, am,%}¦ n. combination (e. g. of
words in the Krama, q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>33123<pc>0647-c<k1>prasanDi<k2>prasanDi
{%Pra-sandhi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Manu.
<LEND>

<L>33124<pc>0647-c<k1>prasaBam<k2>prasaBam
{#prasaBam#}¦ {%pra-sabham.%} See p. 648, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33125<pc>0647-c<k1>prasamIkz<k2>prasamIkz
{#prasamIkz#}¦ {%pra-sam-īkṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-īkṣate,%}
{%-īkṣitum,%} to look at, look upon, observe, perceive,
see; to reflect upon, consider, deliberate; to ac-
knowledge, recognise as, regard as.
<LEND>

<L>33126<pc>0647-c<k1>prasamIkzaRa<k2>prasamIkzaRa
{%Pra-samīkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. considering, deliberat-
ing, discussing.
<LEND>

<L>33127<pc>0647-c<k1>prasamIkzA<k2>prasamIkzA
{%Pra-samīkṣā,%}¦ f. deliberation, judgment.
<LEND>

<L>33128<pc>0647-c<k1>prasamIkzita<k2>prasamIkzita
{%Pra-samīkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ looked at, looked
upon, observed; reflected upon, considered; regarded
as, declared.
<LEND>

<L>33129<pc>0647-c<k1>prasamIkzya<k2>prasamIkzya<h>1
1. {%pra-samīkṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be considered
or weighed or discussed.
<LEND>

<L>33130<pc>0647-c<k1>prasamIkzya<k2>prasamIkzya<h>2
2. {%pra-samīkṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked at; having
reflected upon, having considered.
<LEND>

<L>33131<pc>0647-c<k1>prasamIqita<k2>prasamIqita
{#prasamIqita#}¦ {%pra-samīḍita, as, ā, am,%} praised,
celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>33132<pc>0647-c<k1>prasayana<k2>prasayana
{#prasayana#}¦ {%pra-sayana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%si%} with
{%pra%}), binding, fastening.
<LEND>

<L>33133<pc>0647-c<k1>prasita<k2>prasita
{%Pra-sita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound to, bound, fastened;
adhering to or engaged in, diligent, attentive,
zealous; attached or devoted to, engrossed by;
({%am%}), n. pus, matter.
<LEND>

<L>33134<pc>0647-c<k1>prasiti<k2>prasiti<h>1
1. {%pra-siti, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. see p. 648, col. 2), a
ligament, binding, tie, fetter.
<LEND>

<L>33135<pc>0647-c<k1>prasara<k2>prasara
{#prasara#}¦ {%pra-sara,%} &c. See {%pra-sṛ,%} p. 649.
<LEND>

<L>33136<pc>0647-c<k1>prasarga<k2>prasarga
{#prasarga#}¦ {%pra-sarga, pra-sarjana.%} See under
{%pra-sṛj,%} p. 649, col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page0648-a+ 76]

<L>33137<pc>0648-a<k1>prasarpa<k2>prasarpa
{#prasarpa#}¦ {%pra-sarpa,%} &c. See {%pra-sṛp,%} p. 649.
<LEND>

<L>33138<pc>0648-a<k1>prasala<k2>prasala
{#prasala#}¦ {%prasala, as,%} m. the cold season,
winter ({%= hemanta;%} also read {%praśala%}).
<LEND>

<L>33139<pc>0648-a<k1>prasalavi<k2>prasalavi
{#prasalavi#}¦ {%pra-salavi,%} ind., Ved. towards
the right side, (opposed to {%apa-salavi;%} also incor-
rectly written {%prasavi.%})
<LEND>

<L>33140<pc>0648-a<k1>prasava<k2>prasava<h>1
{#prasava#} 1¦. 2. and 3. {%pra-sava.%} See under
1. and 2. {%pra-su,%} col. 2, and 2. {%pra-sū,%} p. 649.
<LEND>

<L>33141<pc>0648-a<k1>prasavya<k2>prasavya
{#prasavya#}¦ {%pra-savya, as, ā, am,%} turned towards
the left, (opposed to {%pra-dakṣiṇa%}); contrary,
reverse, reverted, inverted; favourable; ({%am%}), ind.
towards the left, to the left side.
<LEND>

<L>33142<pc>0648-a<k1>prasah<k2>prasah<h>1
{#prasah#} 1¦. {%pra-sah,%} cl. 1. A. {%-sahate, -sahi-%}
{%tum, -soḍhum,%} to bear up against, be able to with-
stand, sustain, endure; to overpower, conquer, de-
feat; to make an effort; to be able (with inf.).
<LEND>

<L>33143<pc>0648-a<k1>prasakzin<k2>prasakzin
{%Pra-sakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. overpowering, de-
feating, victorious (Sāy. {%= śatrūṇām prasahana-%}
{%śīlaḥ%}).
<LEND>

<L>33144<pc>0648-a<k1>prasaBam<k2>prasaBam
{%Pra-sabham,%}¦ ind. (an ind. past part. of a form
{%sabh = sah,%} cf. 2. {%pra-sahya%}), by force, forcibly,
violently; importunately; exceedingly, much; N. of
a variety of the Triṣṭubh metre. {%—Prasabha-da-%}
{%mana, am,%} n. forcible taming (of wild animals;
according to a Scholiast {%= balātkāreṇa mardanam%}).
{%—Prasabha-haraṇa, am,%} n. carrying off by force,
violent seizure. {%—Prasabhoddhṛta (˚bha-ud˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} torn up by force, forcibly uprooted. {%—Pra-%}
{%sabhoddhṛtāri (˚ta-ari), is, is, i,%} one who has
forcibly uprooted his enemies.
<LEND>

<L>33145<pc>0648-a<k1>prasah<k2>prasah<h>2
2. {%pra-sah%}¦ or {%pra-sāh, -sāṭ,%} m. (acc. {%pra-sāham%}),
overpowering; an epithet of Indra, (Sāy. {%= śatrūṇām%}
{%abhibhavitā,%} the overcomer of foes); force, violence.
<LEND>

<L>33146<pc>0648-a<k1>prasaha<k2>prasaha
{%Pra-saha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bearing up against, with-
standing; ({%as%}), m. a beast or bird of prey; endur-
ance, resistance (in {%duṣ-p˚,%} q. v.); ({%ā%}), f. a kind
of Solanum ({%= vṛhatikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>33147<pc>0648-a<k1>prasahana<k2>prasahana
{%Pra-sahana, as,%}¦ m. a beast or bird of prey;
({%am%}), n. withstanding, resisting; overcoming, de-
feating; defeat; bearing, enduring; embracing, an
embrace.
<LEND>

<L>33148<pc>0648-a<k1>prasahya<k2>prasahya<h>1
1. {%pra-sahya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be resisted, to be
conquered or defeated; {%a-prasahya,%} not to be
resisted, irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>33149<pc>0648-a<k1>prasahya<k2>prasahya<h>2
2. {%pra-sahya,%}¦ ind. having withstood, having sus-
tained; having overpowered or conquered; forcibly,
violently, by violence, by force; exceedingly. {%—Pra-%}
{%sahya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} acting violently, violent in
action. {%—Prasahya-caura, as,%} m. ‘a violent thief,’
a robber, plunderer. {%—Prasahya-haraṇa, am,%} n.
taking away by force, robbing, plundering; [cf. {%pra-%}
{%sabha-haraṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33150<pc>0648-a<k1>prasahvan<k2>prasahvan
{%Pra-sahvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. overpowering, defeat-
ing; an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>33151<pc>0648-a<k1>prasAh<k2>prasAh
{%Pra-sāh.%}¦ See 2. {%pra-sah%} above.
<LEND>

<L>33152<pc>0648-a<k1>prasAha<k2>prasAha
{%Pra-sāha, as,%}¦ m. overpowering, defeating; con-
trolling one's self; {%a-prasāha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. com-
pletely master of one's self, not subject to passion.
<LEND>

<L>33153<pc>0648-a<k1>prasAtikA<k2>prasAtikA
{#prasAtikA#}¦ {%prasātikā,%} f. a kind of rice with
small grains ({%= aṇu-vrīhi;%} cf. {%pra-sādhikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>33154<pc>0648-a<k1>prasAda<k2>prasAda
{#prasAda#}¦ {%pra-sāda,%} &c. See {%pra-sad,%} p. 647.
<LEND>

<L>33155<pc>0648-a<k1>prasAD<k2>prasAD
{#prasAD#}¦ {%pra-sādh,%} Caus. P. {%-sādhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to accomplish, effect; to promote, advance,
further; to make one's own, acquire, (according to
Kullūka on Manu VII. 103 {%= ātmasāt-kṛ%}); to
subdue; to dress.
<LEND>

<L>33156<pc>0648-a<k1>prasADaka<k2>prasADaka
{%Pra-sādhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ accomplishing, per-
fecting, one who accomplishes or perfects; cleansing,
purifying; decorating, adorning, ornamenting; ({%as%}),
m. an attendant who dresses his master, a valet de
chambre; ({%ikā%}), f. a female attendant who dresses
her mistress, lady's maid; wild rice; [cf. {%prasā-%}
{%tikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33157<pc>0648-a<k1>prasADana<k2>prasADana
{%Pra-sādhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ accomplishing, effecting;
one who accomplishes or effects (Ved.); ({%as%}), m. a
comb; ({%ī%}), f. a drug, commonly called {%siddhi;%} a
[Page0648-b+ 76]
comb, ({%keśa-p˚,%} a comb for the hair); ({%am%}), n.
bringing about, accomplishing, effecting; arranging;
setting in order; decorating, decoration, embellish-
ment, ornament, dress, toilet; a comb. {%—Prasā-%}
{%dhana-vidhi, is,%} m. a mode of decoration or em-
bellishment. {%—Prasādhana-viśeṣa, as,%} m. the
highest decoration, most excellent ornament.
<LEND>

<L>33158<pc>0648-b<k1>prasADita<k2>prasADita
{%Pra-sādhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ accomplished, finished,
completed, done; proved; ornamented, decorated.
{%—Prasādhitāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having
the limbs ornamented or decorated.
<LEND>

<L>33159<pc>0648-b<k1>prasADya<k2>prasADya
{%Pra-sādhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accomplished or
effected, practicable; to be destroyed; to be defeated.
<LEND>

<L>33160<pc>0648-b<k1>prasAra<k2>prasAra
{#prasAra#}¦ {%pra-sāra,%} &c. See {%pra-sṛ,%} p. 649.
<LEND>

<L>33161<pc>0648-b<k1>prasAha<k2>prasAha
{#prasAha#}¦ {%pra-sāha.%} See 1. {%pra-sah,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33162<pc>0648-b<k1>prasic<k2>prasic
{#prasic#}¦ {%pra-sic,%} Pass. {%-sicyate,%} to be poured
out or flow forth, to be scattered; to be lost.
<LEND>

<L>33163<pc>0648-b<k1>praseka<k2>praseka
{%Pra-seka, as,%}¦ m. flowing forth, flowing, dropping,
oozing; sprinkling, wetting; emission, discharge;
running or watering of the mouth or nose, flow of
saliva in vomiting, vomiting, sickness, nausea; the
bowl of a spoon or ladle. {%—Praseka-tā,%} f. flow of
saliva in nausea or vomiting.
<LEND>

<L>33164<pc>0648-b<k1>prasekin<k2>prasekin
{%Prasekin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ discharging a fluid; suffering
from morbid flow of saliva.
<LEND>

<L>33165<pc>0648-b<k1>prasita<k2>prasita
{#prasita#}¦ {%pra-sita.%} See {%pra-sayana,%} p. 647.
<LEND>

<L>33166<pc>0648-b<k1>prasiti<k2>prasiti<h>2
{#prasiti#} 2¦. {%pra-siti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%so%} with
{%pra;%} for 1. see {%pra-sayana,%} p. 647), Ved. a track,
path, course (as of fire &c.); an attack, assault; a
throw, cast, shot; stretch, reach, extent, compass;
duration, series, succession (e. g. {%dīrghām anu pra-%}
{%sitim,%} in long succession); dominion, power, autho-
rity, influence; (Sāy.) {%= jvālā,%} a flame; {%= bandhana,%}
confinement.
<LEND>

<L>33167<pc>0648-b<k1>prasiD<k2>prasiD
{#prasiD#}¦ {%pra-sidh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-sidhyati, -sed-%}
{%dhum,%} to be accomplished or effected, to succeed; to
be gained or obtained; to be established; to be made
known or certified.
<LEND>

<L>33168<pc>0648-b<k1>prasidDa<k2>prasidDa
{%Pra-siddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ well known, notorious,
renowned, famous, celebrated; adorned, ornamented.
{%—Prasiddha-kṣatriya-prāya, as, ā, am,%} con-
sisting for the most part of renowned Kṣatriyas.
{%—Prasiddha-tā,%} f. or {%prasiddha-tva, am,%} n.
celebrity, the being well known, notoriety.
<LEND>

<L>33169<pc>0648-b<k1>prasidDaka<k2>prasidDaka
{%Prasiddhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a prince descended
from Janaka (a son of Maru and father of Kṛtti-
ratha).
<LEND>

<L>33170<pc>0648-b<k1>prasidDi<k2>prasidDi
{%Pra-siddhi, is,%}¦ f. accomplishment, success, attain-
ment; the being generally known or admitted,
celebrity, fame, notoriety; ornament, decoration.
{%—Prasiddhi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} generally known,
notorious, famous.
<LEND>

<L>33171<pc>0648-b<k1>prasIdikA<k2>prasIdikA
{#prasIdikA#}¦ {%prasīdikā,%} f. a small garden;
(also read {%prasedikā,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>33172<pc>0648-b<k1>prasu<k2>prasu<h>1
{#prasu#} 1¦. {%pra-su,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-sunoti, -sunute,%}
{%-sotum,%} Ved. to press or squeeze out Soma juice,
extract the juice of the Soma plant (Sāy. {%= somā-%}
{%bhiṣavaṃ kṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>33173<pc>0648-b<k1>prasava<k2>prasava<h>1
1. {%pra-sava, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see under 2. {%pra-su%}
below), Ved. pressing out Soma juice.
<LEND>

<L>33174<pc>0648-b<k1>prasut<k2>prasut
{%Pra-sut, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. flowing forth (as Soma from
the Soma press).
<LEND>

<L>33175<pc>0648-b<k1>prasunvat<k2>prasunvat
{%Pra-sunvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. squeezing out or
extracting Soma juice.
<LEND>

<L>33176<pc>0648-b<k1>prasuva<k2>prasuva
{%Pra-suva, as,%}¦ m., Ved. pressing out Soma juice,
extraction of the juice of the Soma plant.
<LEND>

<L>33177<pc>0648-b<k1>prasu<k2>prasu<h>2
{#prasu#} 2¦. {%pra-su%} (sometimes written {%pra-sū%}),
cl. 1. P., 2. 4. A. {%-savati, -sūte, -sūyate%} (properly a
kind of reflexive passive form), {%-sotum, -savitum,%} to
procreate, beget, generate, engender; to bring forth,
be delivered of, bear: Pass. {%-sūyate%} (ep. also P. {%-ti%}),
to be begotten by (with abl.); to be brought forth
by, be born of (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>33178<pc>0648-b<k1>prasava<k2>prasava<h>2
2. {%pra-sava, as,%}¦ m. (for 3. see under 2. {%pra-sū,%}
p. 649), procreating, generating, procreation, genera-
tion; the production of young, bringing forth or bearing
[Page0648-c+ 79]
young, childbirth, parturition, delivery, travail, labour;
conception; birthplace, source, origin; offspring,
young, progeny, posterity, ({%antaḥ-p˚,%} containing
offspring, pregnant; {%kisalaya-p˚,%} the offspring of a
twig, a young shoot); a flower, blossom [cf. {%kanaka-%}
{%p˚, pīta-p˚%}]; fruit. {%—Prasava-gṛha, am,%} n. a lying-
in chamber. {%—Prasava-dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} charac-
terized by production, productive, prolific. {%—Pra-%}
{%sava-bandhana, am,%} n. the foot-stalk of a leaf or
flower, the leaf-stalk or peduncle. {%—Prasava-vi-%}
{%kāra, as,%} m., Ved. a prodigy happening at the
birth of a child. {%—Prasava-vedanā,%} f. the pangs of
childbirth, throes. {%—Prasava-sthalī,%} f. ‘birthplace,’
a mother. {%—Prasava-sthāna, am,%} n. a receptacle for
young, a nest. {%—Prasavotthāna (˚va-ut˚), am,%} n.,
N. of the seventeenth Pari-śiṣṭa of the Yajur-veda.
{%—Prasavonmukha (˚va-un˚), ī,%} f. expecting child-
birth, about to be delivered (according to Malli-
nātha {%= āsanna-prasavā%}).
<LEND>

<L>33179<pc>0648-c<k1>prasavaka<k2>prasavaka
{%Prasavaka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Buchanania Latifolia
({%= piyāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>33180<pc>0648-c<k1>prasavat<k2>prasavat
{%Pra-savat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bringing forth, bearing;
({%antī%}), f. a woman in labour.
<LEND>

<L>33181<pc>0648-c<k1>prasavana<k2>prasavana
{%Pra-savana, am,%}¦ n. bringing forth, bearing
children, fecundity.
<LEND>

<L>33182<pc>0648-c<k1>prasavitf<k2>prasavitf<h>1
1. {%pra-savitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. (for 2. see under 2. {%pra-sū,%}
p. 649), a procreator, generator, father; ({%trī%}), f.
bringing forth, a mother.
<LEND>

<L>33183<pc>0648-c<k1>prasavin<k2>prasavin<h>1
1. {%pra-savin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (for 2. see under 2. {%pra-%}
{%sū,%} p. 649), bringing forth, having or bearing young,
producing.
<LEND>

<L>33184<pc>0648-c<k1>prasuta<k2>prasuta
{%Pra-suta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought forth, born; ({%as%}
or {%am%}), m. or n. (?) , a particular high number; [cf.
{%mahā-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33185<pc>0648-c<k1>prasU<k2>prasU<h>1
1. {%pra-sū, ūs, ūs, u%}¦ (for 2. see p. 649), bringing
forth, bearing [cf. {%pitṛ-p˚, putrikā-p˚, strī-p˚%}];
fruitful, productive; ({%ūs%}), f. a mother; a mare; a
young shoot, tender grass or herbs, sacrificial grass,
(Sāy. {%= prasavitry oṣadhī%}); a spreading creeper,
the plantain. {%—Prasū-mat, ān, atī, at,%} or {%prasū-%}
{%van, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. furnished with flowers.
<LEND>

<L>33186<pc>0648-c<k1>prasUkA<k2>prasUkA
{%Pra-sūkā,%}¦ f. a mare.
<LEND>

<L>33187<pc>0648-c<k1>prasUta<k2>prasUta
{%Pra-sūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ procreated, begotten, en-
gendered; brought forth, born, produced, grown;
begetting, engendering; one who has brought forth,
delivered; ({%as%}), m., N. of a class of deities under
Manu Cākṣuṣa; ({%am%}), n. a flower; any productive
source; ({%ā%}), f. a woman who has brought forth a
child, a woman recently delivered.
<LEND>

<L>33188<pc>0648-c<k1>prasUti<k2>prasUti<h>1
1. {%pra-sūti, is,%}¦ f. procreating, procreation, beget-
ting, generating; bringing forth, bearing; calving;
laying eggs; birth, production, generation; coming
forth, growth (of fruits, flowers, leaves; cf. {%phala-%}
{%p˚%}); a production, product; a procreator, begetter;
one who brings forth, a mother; offspring, children,
progeny; N. of a daughter of Maru and wife of
Dakṣa. {%—Prasūti-ja, am,%} n. ‘birth-produced,’ pain
or affliction (mental or corporeal) resulting as a ne-
cessary consequence of birth. {%—Prasūti-vāyu, us,%}
m. air generated in the womb during the pangs of
travail.
<LEND>

<L>33189<pc>0648-c<k1>prasUtikA<k2>prasUtikA
{%Prasūtikā,%}¦ f. a woman who has had a child, a
woman recently delivered; = 1. {%pra-sūti%} (at the end
of a comp., cf. {%naśyat-p˚, sakṛt-p˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>33190<pc>0648-c<k1>prasUna<k2>prasUna
{%Pra-sūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ born, produced; ({%am%}), n.
a flower; a bud, blossom; fruit. {%—Prasūna-bāṇa%}
or {%prasūna-vāṇa, as,%} m. ‘having flowers for
arrows,’ the god of love. {%—Prasūna-varṣa, as,%}
m. a shower of flowers (rained from heaven).
{%—Prasūnāñjali (˚na-añ˚), is, is, i,%} presenting
a nosegay of flowers held in both hands opened and
hollowed {%(= puṣpāñjali)%}. {%—Prasūneṣu (˚na-%}
{%iṣu), us,%} m. ‘flower-arrowed,’ an epithet of the
god of love.
<LEND>

<L>33191<pc>0648-c<k1>prasUnaka<k2>prasUnaka
{%Prasūnaka, am,%}¦ n. a flower; a bud, blossom.
<LEND>

<L>33192<pc>0648-c<k1>prasUyat<k2>prasUyat
{%Pra-sūyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being born (Mahā-bh.
Śānti-p. 5687).
<LEND>

<L>33193<pc>0648-c<k1>prasut<k2>prasut
{#prasut#}¦ {%pra-sut.%} See under 1. {%pra-su,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>33194<pc>0648-c<k1>prasuta<k2>prasuta
{#prasuta#}¦ {%pra-suta.%} See above.
<LEND>
[Page0649-a+ 76]

<L>33195<pc>0649-a<k1>prasup<k2>prasup
{#prasup#}¦ {%pra-sup, pra-supta, pra-supti.%} See
under {%pra-svap,%} p. 651, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33196<pc>0649-a<k1>prasuva<k2>prasuva
{#prasuva#}¦ {%pra-suva.%} See 1. {%pra-su,%} p. 648, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>33197<pc>0649-a<k1>prasuSruta<k2>prasuSruta
{#prasuSruta#}¦ {%pra-suśruta, as,%} m., N. of a prince
(a son of Maru; cf. {%pra-śuśruka%}).
<LEND>

<L>33198<pc>0649-a<k1>prasuhma<k2>prasuhma
{#prasuhma#}¦ {%pra-suhma, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>33199<pc>0649-a<k1>prasU<k2>prasU<h>2
{#prasU#} 2¦. {%pra-sū,%} cl. 6. P. {%-suvati, -savitum,%}
Ved. to urge forwards, incite, excite, animate.
<LEND>

<L>33200<pc>0649-a<k1>prasava<k2>prasava<h>3
3. {%pra-sava, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. and 2. see under 1.
and 2. {%pra-su,%} p. 648), Ved. urging forwards, setting
in motion, being set in motion; a current, course,
stream; rousing up, excitement, animation; order-
ing, enjoining; furtherance, assistance, help; pursuit,
acquisition; one who urges on or excites.
<LEND>

<L>33201<pc>0649-a<k1>prasavitf<k2>prasavitf<h>2
2. {%pra-savitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (for 1. see p. 648,
col. 3), Ved. urging forwards, setting in motion, ex-
citing, animating; (Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇābhijñātṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>33202<pc>0649-a<k1>prasavin<k2>prasavin<h>2
2. {%pra-savin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (for 1. see under 2. {%pra-%}
{%su,%} p. 648), urging forwards, exciting (?) .
<LEND>

<L>33203<pc>0649-a<k1>prasavItf<k2>prasavItf
{%Pra-savītṛ,%}¦ in the Ṛg-veda = 2. {%pra-savitṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>33204<pc>0649-a<k1>prasUti<k2>prasUti<h>2
2. {%pra-sūti, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. see under 2. {%pra-su%}),
urging forwards, impelling, commanding; permission.
<LEND>

<L>33205<pc>0649-a<k1>prasUkA<k2>prasUkA
{#prasUkA#}¦ {%pra-sūkā.%} See p. 648, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33206<pc>0649-a<k1>prasf<k2>prasf
{#prasf#}¦ {%pra-sṛ,%} cl. 1. and Ved. cl. 3. P. {%-sa-%}
{%rati, -sisarti, -sartum,%} to move forwards, go for-
ward, proceed, advance; to pass, pass by (as time);
to flow onwards, flow forth; to spring up; to break
forth, break out (as fire); to spread abroad; be
diffused; to be stretched forth, be extended, extend:
Caus. {%-sārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to go forwards,
move forwards, stretch forth, hold out; to spread
out, spread, extend; to expand, open wide; to put
forward, exhibit, expose (for sale).
<LEND>

<L>33207<pc>0649-a<k1>prasara<k2>prasara
{%Pra-sara, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving forwards, proceeding,
projecting; ({%am%}), n. going forwards, unimpeded
motion, free course [cf. {%vicchinna-dhūma-p˚%}];
spreading, extending, extension, extent, dimension,
diffusion, dispersion; expansion; a stream, flow,
flood, torrent; (in medicine) morbid displacement
of the humors of the body; multitude, assemblage;
a fight, combat, battle, war; an iron arrow; speed,
velocity; affectionate solicitation; ({%ā%}), f. the plant
Pæderia Fœtida. {%—Prasara-yuta, as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessing extension, extensive.
<LEND>

<L>33208<pc>0649-a<k1>prasaraRa<k2>prasaraRa
{%Pra-saraṇa, am,%}¦ n. going forth, running forth,
running away, escaping; going round; spreading
abroad, spreading over the country to forage; sur-
rounding an enemy; morbid displacement of the
humors of the body; complaisance, amiability.
<LEND>

<L>33209<pc>0649-a<k1>prasaraRi<k2>prasaraRi
{%Pra-saraṇi, is,%}¦ or {%pra-saraṇī,%} f. surrounding an
enemy.
<LEND>

<L>33210<pc>0649-a<k1>prasarat<k2>prasarat
{%Pra-sarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going forwards, proceed-
ing, projecting; spreading out, spreading, expanding;
bursting.
<LEND>

<L>33211<pc>0649-a<k1>prasAra<k2>prasAra
{%Pra-sāra, as,%}¦ m. going forth, going about, spread-
ing, extending, extension, expansion; stretching out
[cf. {%bāhu-p˚%}]; opening (the mouth); going out to
forage, spreading over the country for grass and fuel.
<LEND>

<L>33212<pc>0649-a<k1>prasAraRa<k2>prasAraRa
{%Pra-sāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. causing to go forwards,
stretching out, extending, spreading, spreading abroad,
diffusing, diffusion, expanding, expansion, increase;
displaying, unfolding; going about; surrounding
an enemy; dispersion of an army by detachments
for collecting forage, &c.; changing a semivowel
into a vowel [cf. {%sam-prasāraṇa%}]; ({%ī%}), f. surround-
ing an enemy; a species of creeper, Pæderia Fœtida.
<LEND>

<L>33213<pc>0649-a<k1>prasAraRin<k2>prasAraRin
{%Prasāraṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ containing a semivowel
liable to be changed into a vowel.
<LEND>

<L>33214<pc>0649-a<k1>prasArita<k2>prasArita
{%Pra-sārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved forwards, held
out; stretched out, expanded, extended, spread, dif-
fused; laid out, exhibited, exposed (for sale).
<LEND>

<L>33215<pc>0649-a<k1>prasArin<k2>prasArin
{%Pra-sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ coming forth, flowing forth,
moving on; going along gently, gliding, flowing,
creeping; stretching, extending; spreading forth,
spreading, expanding, expanded, unfolded; spread-
ing round; ({%iṇī%}), f. the plant Pæderia Fœtida.
<LEND>
[Page0649-b+ 75]

<L>33216<pc>0649-b<k1>prasArya<k2>prasArya<h>1
1. {%pra-sārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be changed into a
vowel.
<LEND>

<L>33217<pc>0649-b<k1>prasArya<k2>prasArya<h>2
2. {%pra-sārya,%}¦ ind. having stretched forth, having
put forth, having held out.
<LEND>

<L>33218<pc>0649-b<k1>prasfta<k2>prasfta
{%Pra-sṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forwards, gone;
stretched out, stretched, extended; diffused, spread
abroad, dispersed; lengthened, long; swift, quick;
modest, humble; attached to, engaged in, appointed;
({%as%}), m. the palm of the hand stretched out and hol-
lowed as if to hold liquids; a handful (as a measure,
= two Palas); ({%ā%}), f. the leg; ({%am%}), n. a measure
equal to two Palas; ({%pra-sṛta%} is sometimes incor-
rectly written for {%pra-śrita%} and even for {%pra-sita,%}
q. q. v. v.) {%—Prasṛta-ja, ās,%} m. pl. an epithet of
a particular class of sons (Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p.
2615).
<LEND>

<L>33219<pc>0649-b<k1>prasfti<k2>prasfti
{%Pra-sṛti, is,%}¦ f. progress, advance; streaming,
flowing; the palm of the hand hollowed, a handful;
a measure equal to two Palas.
<LEND>

<L>33220<pc>0649-b<k1>prasfmara<k2>prasfmara
{%Pra-sṛmara, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowing forth, dropping,
distilling.
<LEND>

<L>33221<pc>0649-b<k1>prasfj<k2>prasfj
{#prasfj#}¦ {%pra-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati, -sraṣṭum,%}
to pour away; to lay aside, dismiss; to quit, leave,
abandon; to hurt, injure.
<LEND>

<L>33222<pc>0649-b<k1>prasarga<k2>prasarga
{%Pra-sarga, as,%}¦ m., Ved. pouring forth, flowing
forth, efflux (Sāy. {%= varṣaṇa%}); emission, discharge.
<LEND>

<L>33223<pc>0649-b<k1>prasarjana<k2>prasarjana
{%Pra-sarjana, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. (perhaps) throwing
or casting forth.
<LEND>

<L>33224<pc>0649-b<k1>prasfzwa<k2>prasfzwa
{%Pra-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ poured away, laid aside,
dismissed; hurt, injured; ({%ā%}), f. (probably) a par-
ticular movement in fighting.
<LEND>

<L>33225<pc>0649-b<k1>prasfp<k2>prasfp
{#prasfp#}¦ {%pra-sṛp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarpati, -sarptum,%}
{%-sraptum,%} to creep or crawl forth, creep on; to go
on, proceed.
<LEND>

<L>33226<pc>0649-b<k1>prasarpa<k2>prasarpa
{%Pra-sarpa, as,%}¦ m. going to the part of the
sacrificial enclosure called the Sadas; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>33227<pc>0649-b<k1>prasarpaka<k2>prasarpaka
{%Pra-sarpaka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an assistant who is
under the superintendance of the Ṛtvij at a sacrifice
or a mere spectator at a sacrifice (so designated
from entering the part of the sacrificial enclosure
called Sadas; cf. {%pra-sṛpta%}); an uninvited guest,
an intruder (?) .
<LEND>

<L>33228<pc>0649-b<k1>prasarpaRa<k2>prasarpaRa
{%Pra-sarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. going forwards, progressing,
entering (with loc.); entering the part of the sacri-
ficial ground called Sadas; refuge, shelter (Ved.;
Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇa sarpaṇa-sādhanam%}).
<LEND>

<L>33229<pc>0649-b<k1>prasarpat<k2>prasarpat
{%Pra-sarpat, an, antī, at,%}¦ advancing, proceeding.
<LEND>

<L>33230<pc>0649-b<k1>prasarpin<k2>prasarpin
{%Pra-sarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ creeping or crawling forth,
gliding away; coming forth, issuing; going to the
part of the sacrificial enclosure called Sadas.
<LEND>

<L>33231<pc>0649-b<k1>prasfpta<k2>prasfpta
{%Pra-sṛpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ crept or crawled forth,
crept away, come forth; entered into the part of the
sacrificial ground called Sadas; ({%as%}), m. {%= pra-sar-%}
{%paka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33232<pc>0649-b<k1>prasfmara<k2>prasfmara
{#prasfmara#}¦ {%pra-sṛmara.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>33233<pc>0649-b<k1>prasfzwa<k2>prasfzwa
{#prasfzwa#}¦ {%pra-sṛṣṭa.%} See {%pra-sṛj%} above.
<LEND>

<L>33234<pc>0649-b<k1>praseka<k2>praseka
{#praseka#}¦ {%pra-seka, prasekin.%} See under
{%pra-sic,%} p. 648, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>33235<pc>0649-b<k1>prasedikA<k2>prasedikA
{#prasedikA#}¦ {%prasedikā,%} f. a various reading
for {%prasīdikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33236<pc>0649-b<k1>prasedivas<k2>prasedivas
{#prasedivas#}¦ {%pra-sedivas.%} See p. 647, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33237<pc>0649-b<k1>prasena<k2>prasena
{#prasena#}¦ {%pra-sena, as,%} m., N. of a prince (a
son of Nighna or Nimna); N. of a king of Ujjayinī
succeeded by Vikramārka or Vikramāditya. {%—Pra-%}
{%sena-jit, t,%} m., N. of several princes, especially of a
sovereign of Śrāvastī contemporary with Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>33238<pc>0649-b<k1>praseva<k2>praseva
{#praseva#}¦ {%pra-seva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%siv%} with {%pra%}),
a sack, a leathern bottle; a small instrument of wood
covered with leather and placed under the neck of
an Indian lute to render the sound deeper.
<LEND>

<L>33239<pc>0649-b<k1>prasevaka<k2>prasevaka
{%Prasevaka, as,%}¦ m. a sack [cf. {%carma-p˚%}]; a
particular part of a lute ({%= pra-seva%}); a crooked
piece of wood at the end of a lute.
<LEND>

<L>33240<pc>0649-b<k1>praskaRva<k2>praskaRva
{#praskaRva#}¦ {%pra-s-kaṇva, as,%} m., N. of a Vedic
[Page0649-c+ 77]
Ṛṣi with the patronymic Kāṇva (according to the
Bhāgavata-Purāṇa, a grandson of Kaṇva), author of
the hymns Ṛg-veda I. 44-50, IX. 95, Vālakhilya
3, 2, and 6, 8; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the descendants
of Praskaṇva.
<LEND>

<L>33241<pc>0649-c<k1>praskand<k2>praskand
{#praskand#}¦ {%pra-skand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-skandati, -skan-%}
{%tum,%} to spring forward, spring forth; to spring down,
leap down, alight: Caus. {%-skandayati, -yitum,%} to
overleap, spring over, leap across, cross (a river).
<LEND>

<L>33242<pc>0649-c<k1>praskandat<k2>praskandat
{%Pra-skandat, an, antī, at,%}¦ springing forward,
springing forth.
<LEND>

<L>33243<pc>0649-c<k1>praskandana<k2>praskandana
{%Pra-skandana, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of Śiva (‘emit-
ting semen?’); ({%am%}), n. the act of leaping over, spring-
ing across; evacuation by stool, diarrhœa, dysentery.
<LEND>

<L>33244<pc>0649-c<k1>praskandikA<k2>praskandikA
{%Pra-skandikā,%}¦ f. diarrhœa, dysentery.
<LEND>

<L>33245<pc>0649-c<k1>praskandin<k2>praskandin
{%Pra-skandin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a man possessed of
extraordinary strength.
<LEND>

<L>33246<pc>0649-c<k1>praskandya<k2>praskandya
{%Pra-skandya,%}¦ ind. having sprung forwards, having
leaped down, having quickly alighted.
<LEND>

<L>33247<pc>0649-c<k1>praskanna<k2>praskanna
{%Pra-skanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprung forward, sprung
forth; dropped, fallen; defeated in battle; ({%as%}), m.
a transgressor, sinner; one who has violated the
usages of his caste or order, an outcast.
<LEND>

<L>33248<pc>0649-c<k1>praskunda<k2>praskunda
{#praskunda#}¦ {%pra-skunda, as,%} m. an altar or ele-
vated floor of a circular shape ({%= cakrākārā vedikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>33249<pc>0649-c<k1>prasKal<k2>prasKal
{#prasKal#}¦ {%pra-skhal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-skhalati, -skha-%}
{%litum,%} to stagger forwards, stagger, reel, totter, tumble.
<LEND>

<L>33250<pc>0649-c<k1>prasKalat<k2>prasKalat
{%Pra-skhalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ staggering forwards,
reeling, tumbling.
<LEND>

<L>33251<pc>0649-c<k1>prasKalana<k2>prasKalana
{%Pra-skhalana, am,%}¦ n. the act of staggering,
stumbling, tumbling, falling.
<LEND>

<L>33252<pc>0649-c<k1>prastara<k2>prastara
{#prastara#}¦ {%pra-stara, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%stṛ%} with
{%pra%}), anything strewed about, a couch of leaves and
flowers; a bed or couch in general; a flat surface,
flat top, level, a plain [cf. {%prāsāda-p˚%}]; a stone,
rock; a precious stone, gem, jewel; a paragraph,
section of a work; (in prosody) a tabular represen-
tation of the long and short vowels of a metre (?) ;
musical notation (?) . {%—Prastara-ghaṭanopakaraṇa%}
{%(˚na-up˚), am,%} n. an instrument for breaking or
splitting stones. {%—Prastare-ṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (rt.
{%sthā%}), Ved. being on a couch or bed.
<LEND>

<L>33253<pc>0649-c<k1>prastaraRa<k2>prastaraRa
{%Pra-staraṇa, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a couch, bed; a seat.
<LEND>

<L>33254<pc>0649-c<k1>prastariRI<k2>prastariRI
{%Pra-stariṇī,%}¦ f. a species of small shrub ({%= go-%}
{%lomikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>33255<pc>0649-c<k1>prastAra<k2>prastAra
{%Pra-stāra, as,%}¦ m. strewing about, spreading out,
scattering, spreading, covering with; a process in pre-
paring minerals; a bed made with blossoms and leaves;
a bed or couch in general; a flower-bed; a jungle, a
thicket or wood overgrown with grass; a flat surface,
level, plain; a representation or enumeration of all
the possible combinations of certain given numbers
(see Colebrooke's Algebra, p. 125); N. of a prince
(a son of Ud-gītha; in this sense incorrectly for {%pra-%}
{%stāva%}). {%—Prastāra-paṅkti, is,%} f. a kind of metre
consisting of 12 + 12 + 8 + 8 syllables.
<LEND>

<L>33256<pc>0649-c<k1>prastArin<k2>prastArin
{%Pra-stārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ extending, spreading; (scil.
{%arman%}) a particular disease of the white of the eye.
<LEND>

<L>33257<pc>0649-c<k1>prastira<k2>prastira
{%Pra-stira, as,%}¦ m. a bed or couch made of flowers
and leaves ({%= pra-stara%}).
<LEND>

<L>33258<pc>0649-c<k1>prastIrRa<k2>prastIrRa
{%Pra-stīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrust forward, protruded (as
the tip of the tongue in pronouncing the dentals).
<LEND>

<L>33259<pc>0649-c<k1>prastfta<k2>prastfta
{%Pra-stṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread out, spread, ex-
tended; disappeared.
<LEND>

<L>33260<pc>0649-c<k1>prastIta<k2>prastIta
{#prastIta#}¦ {%pra-stīta%} or {%pra-stīma, as, ā, am%}
(fr. rt. {%styai%} with {%pra%}), crowded together, clustering,
swarming; sounded, making a noise.
<LEND>

<L>33261<pc>0649-c<k1>prastu<k2>prastu
{#prastu#}¦ {%pra-stu,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-stauti, -stavīti,%}
{%-stute, -stuvīte, -stotum,%} to praise before (anything
else), praise first, praise; to begin, commence; to
speak, say, report, relate, propound: Caus. {%-stāva-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to begin, commence.
<LEND>

<L>33262<pc>0649-c<k1>pratuzwuzu<k2>pratuzwuzu
{%Pra-tuṣṭuṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to begin,
desirous of commencing.
<LEND>

<L>33263<pc>0649-c<k1>prastava<k2>prastava
{%Pra-stava, as,%}¦ m. a hymn of praise; {%= pra-stāva,%}
a favourable moment, &c.
<LEND>

<L>33264<pc>0649-c<k1>prastAva<k2>prastAva
{%Pra-stāva, as,%}¦ m. an introductory eulogy, intro-
[Page0650-a+ 78]
duction; the prelude or introductory words of a
Sāman (sung by the Pra-stotṛ, Ved.); the prologue
of a drama ({%= pra-stāvanā%}); beginning, commenc-
ing, commencement; introducing a topic, mention-
ing, mention; the occasion of a conversation, a
subject, topic; occasion, opportunity, time, season;
convenience, ({%tava prastāvena,%} at your conveni-
ence); N. of a prince (a son of Ud-gītha); {%=%}
{%helā,%} q. v.; ({%e%}), ind. on a suitable occasion, oppor-
tunely; ({%ena%}), ind. on the occasion of, occasionally,
opportunely; suitably. {%—Prastāva-cintāmaṇi, is,%}
m., N. of a work. {%—Prastāva-tas,%} ind. on the
occasion of; {%kathā-p˚,%} in course of conversation.
{%—Prastāva-yajña, as,%} m. ‘the sacrifice to a topic
of discussion,’ a conversation to which each inter-
locutor contributes his share (and therefore compared
with a sacrifice at which each person present offers a
contribution). {%—Prastāva-ratnākara, as,%} m., N. of
a work. {%—Prastāva-sadṛśa, as, ī, am,%} suited to
the occasion, appropriate, seasonable.
<LEND>

<L>33265<pc>0650-a<k1>prastAvanA<k2>prastAvanA
{%Pra-stāvanā,%}¦ f. causing to be praised; causing to
mention or to speak of; sounding forth; introduc-
tion, commencement, preface, exordium; a dramatic
prologue, an introductory dialogue usually spoken by
the manager and one of the actors, the scene be-
tween the prayer and the beginning of the first act
(of which several varieties are enumerated, viz. the
Udghāṭyaka, Kathodghāṭa, Prayogātiśaya, Pra-var-
taka, and Ava-lagita).
<LEND>

<L>33266<pc>0650-a<k1>prastAvayat<k2>prastAvayat
{%Pra-stāvayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ beginning, com-
mencing.
<LEND>

<L>33267<pc>0650-a<k1>prastAvita<k2>prastAvita
{%Pra-stāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be told or
related; mentioned.
<LEND>

<L>33268<pc>0650-a<k1>prastAvya<k2>prastAvya
{%Pra-stāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be preluded or
introduced with a Pra-stāva (as a Sāman).
<LEND>

<L>33269<pc>0650-a<k1>prastuta<k2>prastuta
{%Pra-stuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised, eulogized, pane-
gyrised; proposed, propounded, declared, under dis-
cussion, revealed; said; expected, desired; ready,
prepared; accomplished, done; happened, come to
pass; made or consisting of; approached, proximate;
done with effort or energy; ({%am%}), n. that which is
propounded, any object under discussion, a proposi-
tion. {%—Prastuta-yajña, as, ā, am,%} prepared for a
sacrifice. {%—Prastutāṅkura (˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a
kind of metaphorical expression, allusion by the
mention of any passing circumstance to something
latent in the hearer's mind (as, for instance, if a girl
walking in a garden with an inconstant lover were
to ask a bee, Why go to the thorny plantain when
you can have the jasmine flower?).
<LEND>

<L>33270<pc>0650-a<k1>prastuti<k2>prastuti
{%Pra-stuti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. praise, eulogium.
<LEND>

<L>33271<pc>0650-a<k1>prastutya<k2>prastutya
{%Pra-stutya,%}¦ ind. having told or related, having
rehearsed.
<LEND>

<L>33272<pc>0650-a<k1>prastotf<k2>prastotf
{%Pra-stotṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. the Ud-gātṛ's assistant
who sings the Pra-stāva (q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>33273<pc>0650-a<k1>prastotrIya<k2>prastotrIya
{%Prastotrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the Pra-stotṛ.
<LEND>

<L>33274<pc>0650-a<k1>prastUta<k2>prastUta
{#prastUta#}¦ {%pra-stūta, as,%} m., N. of a class of
deities under Manu Cākṣuṣa; (an incorrect form
for {%pra-bhūta%} or {%pra-sūta.%})
<LEND>

<L>33275<pc>0650-a<k1>prastoka<k2>prastoka
{#prastoka#}¦ {%pra-stoka, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
son of Sṛñjaya; {%Kutsasya prastokaḥ,%} N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>33276<pc>0650-a<k1>prastoBa<k2>prastoBa
{#prastoBa#}¦ {%pra-stobha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%stubh%}
with {%pra%}), allusion to, reference to (with gen.);
{%rayer āṅgirasasya prastobhaḥ,%} N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>33277<pc>0650-a<k1>prasTala<k2>prasTala
{#prasTala#}¦ {%pra-sthala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>33278<pc>0650-a<k1>prasTA<k2>prasTA
{#prasTA#}¦ {%pra-sthā,%} cl. 1. A. (ep. also P.)
{%-tiṣṭhate (-ti), -sthātum,%} to set out, depart; to
proceed, advance, march towards (with acc. or dat.
or with {%prati%}); (P., Ved.) to place before, set before,
deposit: Caus. {%-sthāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to set
forth, cause to depart, induce to retire; to send
forth, send out, dispatch, send away, dismiss; to
send into exile, banish; to urge forwards, push on:
Desid. {%-tiṣṭhāsati, -te,%} to wish to advance.
<LEND>

<L>33279<pc>0650-a<k1>prasTa<k2>prasTa
{%Pra-stha, as, ā, am,%}¦ going on a march or
journey, going to, visiting, abiding in [cf. {%vana-p˚%}];
stable, firm, solid; expanding, spread; ({%as, am%}),
[Page0650-b+ 79]
m. n. table-land on the top of a mountain; a level
expanse, (at the end of names of towns and villages,
cf. {%indra-p˚, oṣadhi-p˚, karīra-p˚;%} see Pāṇ. IV.
2, 110); a particular weight and measure of capacity
(= 32 Palas = (1/4) of an Āḍhaka; or = 16 Palas = 4
Kuḍavas = (1/4) of an Āḍhaka; or = 2 Śarāvas; or =
6 Palas; or = (1/16) of a Droṇa); a Prastha of anything
or anything measuring a Prastha, (according to the
Su-śruta a man should never lose more than a
Prastha of blood in being bled); ({%as%}), m., N. of a
man. {%—Prastha-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘flowering on the
mountain-top,’ a species of plant, a variety of Tulasī
or basil with small leaves. {%—Prastham-paca, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} cooking a Prastha (said of a cooking utensil
capable of containing one Prastha). {%—Prasthā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} hastening away, rapid, (according to
Mahī-dhara {%= utkṛṣṭa-javopeta%}); ({%atī%}), f., N. of
a river.
<LEND>

<L>33280<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTAna<k2>prasTAna
{%Pra-sthāna, am,%}¦ n. going forth, setting forth,
procession, proceeding, departing; marching forth,
a march, the march of an army or of an assailant;
sending away, dispatching; departing this life, dying
[cf. {%mahā-p˚%}]; a way to attain (any object), course,
method, system; a sect; an inferior kind of drama the
characters of which are slaves and outcasts. {%—Pra-%}
{%sthāna-bheda, as,%} m., N. of a work by Madhu-
sūdana-sarasvatī. {%—Prasthāna-vat,%} ind. as in setting
forth, as on a departure. {%—Prasthāna-vikala-gati%}
or {%prasthāna-viklava-gati, is, is, i,%} one whose
step falters in walking. {%—Prasthāna-vighna, am,%}
n. an obstacle to proceeding or to sending (anything);
non-attendance at a festival, impeding its taking place.
{%—Prasthānavighna-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing an impe-
diment to proceeding or to dispatching (anything).
<LEND>

<L>33281<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTAnika<k2>prasTAnika
{%Prasthānika,%}¦ belonging or relating to a de-
parture, to a course, sect, &c.
<LEND>

<L>33282<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTAnIya<k2>prasTAnIya
{%Prasthānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging or re-
lating to a departure.
<LEND>

<L>33283<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTApana<k2>prasTApana
{%Pra-sthāpana, am,%}¦ n. causing to depart, sending
away, dismissing, dispatching, ({%diśaḥ prasthāpa-%}
{%nam,%} sending into all quarters of the world); using,
employing, ({%dhvani-p˚,%} employing a metaphor);
appointment to an embassy; carrying off cattle; ({%ā%}),
f. sending away, dispatching.
<LEND>

<L>33284<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTApanIya<k2>prasTApanIya
{%Pra-sthāpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sent away,
proper to be sent or dispatched; to be carried or
driven off.
<LEND>

<L>33285<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTApita<k2>prasTApita
{%Pra-sthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to depart, sent
away, dismissed, sent, dispatched.
<LEND>

<L>33286<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTApya<k2>prasTApya<h>1
1. {%pra-sthāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sent away, to
be dispatched.
<LEND>

<L>33287<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTApya<k2>prasTApya<h>2
2. {%pra-sthāpya,%}¦ ind. having sent forth, having
dispatched.
<LEND>

<L>33288<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTAyin<k2>prasTAyin
{%Pra-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ setting forth, starting,
departing; preparing to go or depart; travelling,
marching, going.
<LEND>

<L>33289<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTAvan<k2>prasTAvan
{%Pra-sthāvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. hastening away,
rapid (an epithet of the Maruts, Sāy. {%= gamana-%}
{%śīla%}).
<LEND>

<L>33290<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTika<k2>prasTika
{%Prasthika,%}¦ at the end of adjectives derived from
comps. ending in {%prastha,%} cf. {%ārdhaprasthika.%}
<LEND>

<L>33291<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTikA<k2>prasTikA
{%Prasthikā,%}¦ f. a species of plant ({%= amba-ṣṭhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>33292<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTita<k2>prasTita
{%Pra-sthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set forth, set out, departed,
gone; an epithet of particular Soma vessels (Ved.).
{%—Prasthita-yājyā,%} f., Ved. a particular Yājyā re-
cited during the oblation offered with the Soma
vessels called {%pra-sthita.%}
<LEND>

<L>33293<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTiti<k2>prasTiti
{%Pra-sthiti, is,%}¦ f. setting forth, going forth, going
away; a march, journey.
<LEND>

<L>33294<pc>0650-b<k1>prasTeya<k2>prasTeya
{%Pra-stheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be set forth or departed.
<LEND>

<L>33295<pc>0650-b<k1>prasna<k2>prasna
{#prasna#}¦ {%pra-sna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%snā%} with {%pra%}),
a bath, vessel for bathing.
<LEND>

<L>33296<pc>0650-b<k1>prasnAtf<k2>prasnAtf
{%Pra-snātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who bathes, a bather.
<LEND>

<L>33297<pc>0650-b<k1>prasneya<k2>prasneya
{%Pra-sneya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be bathed in,
suitable for bathing.
<LEND>

<L>33298<pc>0650-b<k1>prasnava<k2>prasnava
{#prasnava#}¦ {%pra-snava, pra-snāvin.%} See under
{%pra-snu,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33299<pc>0650-b<k1>prasnigDa<k2>prasnigDa
{#prasnigDa#}¦ {%pra-snigdha, as, ā, am,%} very fatty
or greasy, very oily.
<LEND>
[Page0650-c+ 76]

<L>33300<pc>0650-c<k1>prasnu<k2>prasnu
{#prasnu#}¦ {%pra-snu,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-snauti, -snute,%}
{%-snavitum,%} to pour forth, flow, distil.
<LEND>

<L>33301<pc>0650-c<k1>prasnava<k2>prasnava
{%Pra-snava, as,%}¦ m. dropping, a stream; pouring
forth, flowing.
<LEND>

<L>33302<pc>0650-c<k1>prasnAvin<k2>prasnAvin
{%Pra-snāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. pouring forth, dropping.
<LEND>

<L>33303<pc>0650-c<k1>prasnuta<k2>prasnuta
{%Pra-snuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ poured forth; dropping.
{%—Prasnuta-stanī,%} f. having breasts that distil milk
(through excess of maternal love).
<LEND>

<L>33304<pc>0650-c<k1>prasnuzA<k2>prasnuzA
{#prasnuzA#}¦ {%pra-snuṣā,%} f. the wife of a grandson.
<LEND>

<L>33305<pc>0650-c<k1>praspandana<k2>praspandana
{#praspandana#}¦ {%pra-spandana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%spand%}
with {%pra%}), palpitating, quivering, trembling, vibrating.
<LEND>

<L>33306<pc>0650-c<k1>prasPuw<k2>prasPuw
{#prasPuw#}¦ {%pra-sphuṭ,%} Caus. or cl. 10. P.
{%-sphoṭayati, -yitum,%} to cleave through, transfix,
cleave, split, pierce; to expand.
<LEND>

<L>33307<pc>0650-c<k1>prasPuwa<k2>prasPuwa
{%Pra-sphuṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleft open, expanded,
blown; manifest, clear, plain, apparent, evident;
divulged, published, spread abroad.
<LEND>

<L>33308<pc>0650-c<k1>prasPowaka<k2>prasPowaka
{%Pra-sphoṭaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>33309<pc>0650-c<k1>prasPowana<k2>prasPowana
{%Pra-sphoṭana, am,%}¦ n. splitting, falling asunder;
expanding, budding, opening, blooming; ripening;
causing to blow or bloom; making evident or mani-
fest, revealing; striking, beating; threshing or win-
nowing corn; a winnowing basket; wiping away,
rubbing out.
<LEND>

<L>33310<pc>0650-c<k1>prasPur<k2>prasPur
{#prasPur#}¦ {%pra-sphur,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sphurati, -sphu-%}
{%ritum,%} to become tremulous, quiver, palpitate,
vibrate, throb, pulsate.
<LEND>

<L>33311<pc>0650-c<k1>prasPuramARa<k2>prasPuramARa
{%Pra-sphuramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, quiver-
ing, palpitating.
<LEND>

<L>33312<pc>0650-c<k1>prasPurita<k2>prasPurita
{%Pra-sphurita, as, ā, am,%}¦ become tremulous,
quivering, vibrating. {%—Prasphuritādhara (˚ta-%}
{%adh˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose lower lip quivers,
with quivering nether lip.
<LEND>

<L>33313<pc>0650-c<k1>prasmfti<k2>prasmfti
{#prasmfti#}¦ {%pra-smṛti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%smṛ%} with
{%pra%}), forgetting, forgetfulness.
<LEND>

<L>33314<pc>0650-c<k1>prasyand<k2>prasyand
{#prasyand#}¦ {%pra-syand,%} cl. 1. A. {%-syandate,%}
{%-syanditum,%} to flow forth, flow away; to move
rapidly, dart, fly.
<LEND>

<L>33315<pc>0650-c<k1>prasyanda<k2>prasyanda
{%Pra-syanda, as,%}¦ m. flowing forth, trickling out.
<LEND>

<L>33316<pc>0650-c<k1>prasyandana<k2>prasyandana
{%Pra-syandana, am,%}¦ n. trickling forth, exudation.
<LEND>

<L>33317<pc>0650-c<k1>prasyandamAna<k2>prasyandamAna
{%Pra-syandamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving rapidly,
darting, flying.
<LEND>

<L>33318<pc>0650-c<k1>prasyandin<k2>prasyandin
{%Pra-syandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ flowing forth, trickling
down.
<LEND>

<L>33319<pc>0650-c<k1>prasraMsa<k2>prasraMsa
{#prasraMsa#}¦ {%pra-sraṃsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sraṃs%} with
{%pra%}), Ved. falling down, falling asunder.
<LEND>

<L>33320<pc>0650-c<k1>prasraMsin<k2>prasraMsin
{%Pra-sraṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ letting fall, dropping; (scil.
{%yoni%}) giving birth to the fetus before the time,
miscarrying.
<LEND>

<L>33321<pc>0650-c<k1>prasru<k2>prasru
{#prasru#}¦ {%pra-sru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sravati, -srotum,%}
to flow forth; to let flow, pour out.
<LEND>

<L>33322<pc>0650-c<k1>prasrava<k2>prasrava
{%Pra-srava, as,%}¦ m. flowing forth, gushing forth,
oozing out, dropping; that which flows forth, a flow,
stream; milk flowing from the breast or udder;
urine; the overflowing scum of boiling rice; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. falling tears, tears gushing forth. {%—Prasrava-%}
{%yukta%} or {%prasrava-saṃyukta, as, ā, am,%} connected
with a stream, flowing in a stream, falling in drops,
trickling; flowing with milk.
<LEND>

<L>33323<pc>0650-c<k1>prasravaRa<k2>prasravaRa
{%Pra-sravaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (often incorrectly written
{%pra-śravaṇa%}), flowing forth, gushing out, oozing
out, trickling, dripping, leaking; dripping or fall of
water, a cascade, cataract; a fountain, spring, well;
a spout, the projecting mouth of a vessel (out of
which any fluid is poured); streaming forth of the
milk from the breast or udder; a pool of water
formed by mountain streams; washing away of
rocks &c. by the dripping of water; sweat, perspi-
ration; voiding urine; N. of a place where the
Sarasvatī takes its rise, (also {%plākṣam prasrava-%}
{%ṇam%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; of a range of moun-
tains on the confines of Malaya.
<LEND>

<L>33324<pc>0650-c<k1>prasravin<k2>prasravin
{%Pra-sravin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ pouring forth; yielding
milk; rich in milk.
<LEND>

<L>33325<pc>0650-c<k1>prasrAva<k2>prasrAva
{%Pra-srāva, as,%}¦ m. flowing, dropping; urine;
the overflowing scum of boiling rice.
<LEND>
[Page0651-a+ 76]

<L>33326<pc>0651-a<k1>prasruta<k2>prasruta
{%Pra-sruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowed forth, oozed out,
dropped, issued.
<LEND>

<L>33327<pc>0651-a<k1>prasruti<k2>prasruti
{%Pra-sruti, is,%}¦ f. flowing forth, oozing out.
<LEND>

<L>33328<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvan<k2>prasvan
{#prasvan#}¦ {%pra-svan,%} cl. 1. P. {%-svanati, -svani-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to sound loudly, resound.
<LEND>

<L>33329<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvana<k2>prasvana
{%Pra-svana, as,%}¦ m. sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>33330<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvanita<k2>prasvanita
{%Pra-svanita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. loud-sounding,
resounding, resonant.
<LEND>

<L>33331<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvAna<k2>prasvAna
{%Pra-svāna, as,%}¦ m. a loud noise.
<LEND>

<L>33332<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvap<k2>prasvap
{#prasvap#}¦ {%pra-svap,%} cl. 2. P. {%-svapiti, -svap-%}
{%tum,%} to fall asleep, go to sleep.
<LEND>

<L>33333<pc>0651-a<k1>prasup<k2>prasup
{%Pra-sup, p, p, p,%}¦ Ved. sleeping, asleep, slumber-
ing; (Sāy. {%= śatrūṇāṃ hantṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>33334<pc>0651-a<k1>prasupta<k2>prasupta
{%Pra-supta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen into deep or sound
sleep, fast asleep, asleep, sleeping, slumbering. {%—Pra-%}
{%supta-tā,%} f. sleepiness.
<LEND>

<L>33335<pc>0651-a<k1>prasupti<k2>prasupti
{%Pra-supti, is,%}¦ f. sleepiness, somnolence; paralysis.
<LEND>

<L>33336<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvApa<k2>prasvApa
{%Pra-svāpa, as,%}¦ m. falling asleep, sleep; a dream;
({%as, ā, am%}), causing sleep, sending to sleep.
<LEND>

<L>33337<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvApaka<k2>prasvApaka
{%Pra-svāpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to fall asleep;
causing to die, slaying.
<LEND>

<L>33338<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvApana<k2>prasvApana
{%Pra-svāpana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing sleep, sending
to sleep; ({%am%}), n. the act of sending to sleep.
<LEND>

<L>33339<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvApinI<k2>prasvApinI
{%Pra-svāpinī,%}¦ f. ‘sending to sleep,’ N. of a
daughter of Sattrājit and wife of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>33340<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvAdas<k2>prasvAdas
{#prasvAdas#}¦ {%pra-svādas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. agree-
able, pleasant.
<LEND>

<L>33341<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvAra<k2>prasvAra
{#prasvAra#}¦ {%pra-svāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%svṛ%} with
{%pra%}), Ved. an epithet of the sacred syllable {%Om%}
repeated by the religious teacher at the beginning of
a lesson.
<LEND>

<L>33342<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvinna<k2>prasvinna
{#prasvinna#}¦ {%pra-svinna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%svid%}
with {%pra%}), covered with perspiration, sweated,
heated, perspired.
<LEND>

<L>33343<pc>0651-a<k1>prasveda<k2>prasveda
{%Pra-sveda, as,%}¦ m. great or excessive perspiration,
sweat.
<LEND>

<L>33344<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvedita<k2>prasvedita
{%Pra-svedita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sweated, heated, perspired,
perspiring, sweating; causing perspiration, hot.
{%—Prasvedita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} suffering or pro-
ducing perspiration.
<LEND>

<L>33345<pc>0651-a<k1>prasvedin<k2>prasvedin
{%Pra-svedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ covered with perspiration,
sweating.
<LEND>

<L>33346<pc>0651-a<k1>prahaRemi<k2>prahaRemi
{#prahaRemi#}¦ {%praha-ṇemi%} or {%praha-nemi, is,%} m.
the moon (incorrect forms for {%graha-nemi,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>33347<pc>0651-a<k1>prahan<k2>prahan<h>1
{#prahan#} 1¦. {%pra-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -hantum,%}
to kill, slay.
<LEND>

<L>33348<pc>0651-a<k1>prahaRana<k2>prahaRana
{%Pra-haṇana, am,%}¦ n. killing, slaying (Scholiast
on Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 22).
<LEND>

<L>33349<pc>0651-a<k1>prahata<k2>prahata
{%Pra-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck, beaten (as a drum),
smitten, wounded, killed; repelled, repulsed, over-
come, defeated; spread, expanded; contiguous,
bounding, limitating; conversant with the principles
of science; learned, accomplished. {%—Prahata-mu-%}
{%raja, as, ā, am,%} having drums beaten, sounding
with the beating of drums.
<LEND>

<L>33350<pc>0651-a<k1>prahan<k2>prahan<h>2
2. {%pra-han%}¦ in {%a-prahan,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33351<pc>0651-a<k1>prahantavya<k2>prahantavya
{%Pra-hantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be killed or slain.
<LEND>

<L>33352<pc>0651-a<k1>prahantf<k2>prahantf
{%Pra-hantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ striking down, slaying,
a slayer.
<LEND>

<L>33353<pc>0651-a<k1>prahara<k2>prahara
{#prahara#}¦ {%pra-hara,%} &c. See {%pra-hṛ,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33354<pc>0651-a<k1>praharza<k2>praharza
{#praharza#}¦ {%pra-harṣa,%} &c. See {%pra-hṛṣ,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33355<pc>0651-a<k1>prahas<k2>prahas
{#prahas#}¦ {%pra-has,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hasati, -hasitum,%}
to break out into laughter, laugh heartily, laugh at,
laugh; to mock, deride, ridicule.
<LEND>

<L>33356<pc>0651-a<k1>prahasa<k2>prahasa
{%Pra-hasa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>33357<pc>0651-a<k1>prahasat<k2>prahasat
{%Pra-hasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ laughing heartily, laugh-
ing, smiling; ({%antī%}), f. Arabian jasmine ({%= yūthī,%}
{%vāsantī%}); a large chafing-dish or fire-pan.
<LEND>

<L>33358<pc>0651-a<k1>prahasana<k2>prahasana
{%Pra-hasana, am,%}¦ n. laughing loudly, violent or
hearty laughter, laughing, mirth, merriment; laugh-
ing at, mocking, deriding, ridicule, irony, mockery;
sarcasm, satire (as a branch of rhetorical composi-
tion); a kind of comedy, a farce.
<LEND>

<L>33359<pc>0651-a<k1>prahasita<k2>prahasita
{%Pra-hasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ laughing, cheerful; ({%am%}),
n. laughter, mirth. {%—Prahasita-netra, as,%} m.
‘laughing-eyed,’ N. of a Buddha.
<LEND>
[Page0651-b+ 76]

<L>33360<pc>0651-b<k1>prahasitvA<k2>prahasitvA
{%Pra-hasitvā,%}¦ ind. an anomalous form for {%pra-%}
{%hasya%} below.
<LEND>

<L>33361<pc>0651-b<k1>prahasya<k2>prahasya
{%Pra-hasya,%}¦ ind. having smiled or laughed.
<LEND>

<L>33362<pc>0651-b<k1>prahAsa<k2>prahAsa
{%Pra-hāsa, as,%}¦ m. loud laughter, violent or hearty
laughter, laughing, laughter; ridicule, mocking, de-
rision; satire, irony; an actor, a dancer; N. of Śiva;
of an attendant of Śiva; of a son of Varuṇa; of a
Nāga; of a place of pilgrimage {%(= Soma-tīrtha);%}
{%Bharad-vājasya prahāsam,%} N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>33363<pc>0651-b<k1>prahAsaka<k2>prahAsaka
{%Pra-hāsaka, as,%}¦ m. one who causes laughter or
merriment, a jester.
<LEND>

<L>33364<pc>0651-b<k1>prahAsita<k2>prahAsita
{%Pra-hāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to laugh.
<LEND>

<L>33365<pc>0651-b<k1>prahAsin<k2>prahAsin
{%Pra-hāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ laughing aloud, causing
laughter, diverting, joking, jesting; satirical; ({%ī%}),
m. the buffoon of a drama ({%= vi-dūṣaka,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>33366<pc>0651-b<k1>prahasta<k2>prahasta
{#prahasta#}¦ {%pra-hasta, as, ā, am,%} having long
hands; ({%as%}), m. the open hand with the fingers
extended; N. of a Rākṣasa; of a companion of
Sūrya-prabha (see Kathā-sarit-s. XLIV. 25).
<LEND>

<L>33367<pc>0651-b<k1>prahastaka<k2>prahastaka
{%Prahastaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ scil. {%tṛca,%} an epithet of
the verses Ṛg-veda VIII. 86, 13 — 15.
<LEND>

<L>33368<pc>0651-b<k1>prahA<k2>prahA<h>1
{#prahA#} 1¦. {%pra-hā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jahāti, -hātum,%}
to forsake, desert, leave, quit, abandon; to depart
from; to throw, cast, fling: Pass. {%-hīyate,%} to be for-
saken or relinquished, to be neglected; to fail, be
lost, perish, disappear, vanish; to cease.
<LEND>

<L>33369<pc>0651-b<k1>prahA<k2>prahA<h>2
2. {%pra-hā,%}¦ f., Ved. a good throw at dice, gain,
winnings; an advantage; (Sāy. {%= pra-hantṛ,%} a
smiter, as if fr. 1. {%pra-han.%} {%—Prahā-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. acquiring gain, gaining; (Sāy. {%= praha-%}
{%raṇa-vat,%} dealing blows, smiting.)
<LEND>

<L>33370<pc>0651-b<k1>prahARa<k2>prahARa
{%Pra-hāṇa, am,%}¦ n. relinquishing, abandoning,
omitting, avoiding.
<LEND>

<L>33371<pc>0651-b<k1>prahARi<k2>prahARi
{%Pra-hāṇi, is,%}¦ f. relinquishing, abandoning; want,
deficiency.
<LEND>

<L>33372<pc>0651-b<k1>prahApaRa<k2>prahApaRa
{%Pra-hāpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. driving away, forced aban-
donment or departure.
<LEND>

<L>33373<pc>0651-b<k1>prahIRa<k2>prahIRa
{%Pra-hīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, abandoned; ({%as%}), m.
removal, loss, waste, destruction. {%—Prahīṇa-jīvita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has abandoned life, dead, slain.
<LEND>

<L>33374<pc>0651-b<k1>prahAra<k2>prahAra
{#prahAra#}¦ {%pra-hāra.%} See {%pra-hṛ,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33375<pc>0651-b<k1>prahi<k2>prahi<h>1
{#prahi#} 1¦. {%pra-hi,%} cl. 5. P. {%-hiṇoti, -hetum,%} to
send forth, dispatch, send to (with dat. or gen. or
acc. of the person and acc. of the thing); to shoot
(an arrow from a bow), send, cast, throw, discharge;
(Ved.) to rouse up, urge on (?); to propitiate (?).
<LEND>

<L>33376<pc>0651-b<k1>prahAyya<k2>prahAyya
{%Pra-hāyya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘one who is to be sent,’
a messenger; [cf. {%pra-heya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33377<pc>0651-b<k1>prahita<k2>prahita<h>1
1. {%pra-hita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see below), sent
forth, sent, dispatched; shot, discharged (as an arrow
from a bow); appointed, commissioned [cf. {%a-p˚%}];
{%Gaurīviteḥ prahitaḥ,%} N. of a Sāman; ({%am%}), n.
sauce, gravy, condiment. {%—Prahitan-gama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. going on an errand or mission.
<LEND>

<L>33378<pc>0651-b<k1>praheti<k2>praheti
{%Pra-heti, is,%}¦ m. a missile weapon (Ved., according
to Mahī-dhara {%= prakṛṣṭam āyudham%}); N. of a
king of the Rākṣasas; N. of an Asura.
<LEND>

<L>33379<pc>0651-b<k1>prahetf<k2>prahetf
{%Pra-hetṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who sends forth; one who
excites or impels.
<LEND>

<L>33380<pc>0651-b<k1>praheya<k2>praheya
{%Pra-heya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sent away or dis-
patched, serving as a messenger.
<LEND>

<L>33381<pc>0651-b<k1>prahi<k2>prahi<h>2
{#prahi#} 2¦. {%prahi, is,%} m. (said to be fr. {%pra-%}
{%hṛ%}), a well.
<LEND>

<L>33382<pc>0651-b<k1>prahita<k2>prahita<h>2
{#prahita#} 2¦. {%pra-hita, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pra-dhā,%}
p. 631, col. 3; for 1. see above), put forth, placed;
stretched out, extended; suitable, appropriate;
learned (?).
<LEND>

<L>33383<pc>0651-b<k1>prahima<k2>prahima
{#prahima#}¦ {%pra-hima,%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ.
VIII. 4, 16.
<LEND>

<L>33384<pc>0651-b<k1>prahIRa<k2>prahIRa
{#prahIRa#}¦ {%pra-hīṇa.%} See 1. {%pra-hā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>33385<pc>0651-b<k1>prahuta<k2>prahuta
{#prahuta#}¦ {%pra-huta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hu%} with {%pra%}),
sacrificial food offered to all created beings; ({%am%}),
n. an offering of food to all created beings ({%= bhūta-%}
{%yajña,%} Manu III. 74).
<LEND>

<L>33386<pc>0651-b<k1>prahuti<k2>prahuti
{%Pra-huti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. an oblation, sacrifice; (Sāy.
{%= prakṛṣṭāhutiḥ,%} an excellent oblation.)
<LEND>
[Page0651-c+ 80]

<L>33387<pc>0651-c<k1>prahoza<k2>prahoza
{%Pra-hoṣa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an oblation, sacrifice (?).
<LEND>

<L>33388<pc>0651-c<k1>prahozin<k2>prahozin
{%Prahoṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. offering oblations or
sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>33389<pc>0651-c<k1>prahf<k2>prahf
{#prahf#}¦ {%pra-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te, -har-%}
{%tum,%} to strike at, strike, beat; to wound, hurt,
injure; to attack, assail, assault; to cast, throw,
fling, hurl (with dat. or acc.); to seize upon; (with
{%pādena%}) to kick; (Ved.) to offer, present.
<LEND>

<L>33390<pc>0651-c<k1>prahara<k2>prahara
{%Pra-hara, as,%}¦ m. a particular division of time
(comprising about three hours, = 6 or 7 Nāḍikas; so
called from its lapse being announced by beating a
gong); the eighth part of a day, a watch [cf. {%ardha-%}
{%p˚%}]; a subdivision of Śrī-vasanta-rāja's work entitled
Śākuna. {%—Prahara-kuṭuvī,%} f. a species of plant
{%(= kuṭumbinī)%}. {%—Prahara-virati, is,%} f. the end of
a watch; ({%au%}), ind. at the end of the (morning)
watch, at nine o'clock in the forenoon.
<LEND>

<L>33391<pc>0651-c<k1>praharaka<k2>praharaka
{%Praharaka, as,%}¦ m. striking the hours; a watch.
<LEND>

<L>33392<pc>0651-c<k1>praharaRa<k2>praharaRa
{%Pra-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. striking, beating; casting,
throwing; attacking, assailing, assaulting; fighting,
war, battle; repelling, removing, expelling; a
weapon, ({%kṛta-praharaṇa,%} practised in the use of
arms, cf. {%kṛtāstra%}); the box of a carriage; a
covered car, litter, small covered pleasure-car, (in
this sense incorrectly for {%pra-vahaṇa,%} q. v.); ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Praharaṇa-kalikā%} or
{%praharaṇa-kalitā,%} f. a kind of metre, four times
˘˘˘˘˘˘¯˘˘˘˘˘˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>33393<pc>0651-c<k1>praharaRiya<k2>praharaRiya
{%Pra-haraṇiya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attacked or
assailed, assailable; to be fought with; to be expelled
or removed; ({%am%}), n. a weapon.
<LEND>

<L>33394<pc>0651-c<k1>praharin<k2>praharin
{%Praharin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘one who announces the hours
by striking a bell, beating a gong, &c.,’ a watchman,
sentry; a bellman.
<LEND>

<L>33395<pc>0651-c<k1>praharizyat<k2>praharizyat
{%Pra-hariṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} intending to
strike; wishing to take.
<LEND>

<L>33396<pc>0651-c<k1>prahartavya<k2>prahartavya
{%Pra-hartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be struck; to be
attacked or assailed, assailable.
<LEND>

<L>33397<pc>0651-c<k1>prahartf<k2>prahartf
{%Pra-hartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ striking, a striker; one
who beats; fighting, a fighter, assailant, combatant,
champion; one who shoots, a shooter, archer.
<LEND>

<L>33398<pc>0651-c<k1>prahAra<k2>prahAra
{%Pra-hāra, as,%}¦ m. striking, hitting; a stroke,
blow, slap, knock, thump [cf. {%tala-p˚, muṣṭi-p˚%}];
a kick [cf. {%pāda-p˚%}]; a cut, thrust [cf. {%khaḍga-p˚%}];
killing, wounding; pecking; shooting, hitting (with
a missile), a shot, hit. {%—Prahāra-karaṇa, am,%} n.
dealing blows, beating. {%-Prahāra-varman, ā,%} m.,
N. of a prince of Mithilā. {%—Prahāra-vallī,%} f. {%=%}
{%carma-kaśā, māṃsa-rohiṇī%}. {%—Prahārārta (˚ra-%}
{%ār˚), as, ā, am,%} bruised or wounded by a blow,
hurt by a blow; ({%am%}), n. chronic and acute pain
from a wound or hurt.
<LEND>

<L>33399<pc>0651-c<k1>prahAraRa<k2>prahAraRa
{%Pra-hāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. a desirable gift; (a various
reading for {%pra-vāraṇa,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>33400<pc>0651-c<k1>prahArin<k2>prahArin
{%Pra-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ striking, smiting, beating;
attacking, assailing [cf. {%randhra-p˚%}]; killing; fight-
ing, a warrior, champion, hero.
<LEND>

<L>33401<pc>0651-c<k1>prahAruka<k2>prahAruka
{%Pra-hāruka, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. carrying off, tearing
away.
<LEND>

<L>33402<pc>0651-c<k1>prahArya<k2>prahArya
{%Pra-hārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be beaten, deserving
to be beaten; to be taken away, to be removed.
<LEND>

<L>33403<pc>0651-c<k1>prahfta<k2>prahfta
{%Pra-hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck, beaten, smitten;
seized; ({%am%}), n. a stroke, blow, striking, killing;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>33404<pc>0651-c<k1>prahfz<k2>prahfz
{#prahfz#}¦ {%pra-hṛṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-hṛṣyati, -har-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to rejoice beforehand, be glad in anticipation,
anticipate pleasure; to be very glad, rejoice exceed-
ingly, exult: Caus. {%-harṣayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
be glad, gladden, cheer, inspirit, encourage, delight.
<LEND>

<L>33405<pc>0651-c<k1>praharza<k2>praharza
{%Pra-harṣa, as,%}¦ m. extreme joy, hilarity, mirth,
gladness, delight, rapture, exultation, thrill; erection
of the male organ, priapism; {%praharṣaṃ kṛ,%} to
take pleasure or delight in (with loc.) {%—Praharṣa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} delighted, glad.
<LEND>

<L>33406<pc>0651-c<k1>praharzaRa<k2>praharzaRa
{%Pra-harṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing erection of the
hair of the body, causing a thrill of joy; making
glad, gladdening; delighting; delighted, happy;
({%as%}), m. the planet Mercury or its ruler [cf. {%pra-%}
{%harṣula%}]; ({%ī%}), f. turmeric, (a various reading
for {%pra-harṣiṇī%}); a kind of metre, four times
[Page0652-a+ 76]
¯¯¯, ˘˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯¯; ({%am%}), n. joy, delight;
the act of making glad or rejoicing; the attainment
of a desired object.
<LEND>

<L>33407<pc>0652-a<k1>praharzita<k2>praharzita
{%Pra-harṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly delighted, de-
lighted, very happy.
<LEND>

<L>33408<pc>0652-a<k1>praharzin<k2>praharzin
{%Pra-harṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ causing gladness, gladden-
ing; ({%iṇī%}), f. turmeric [cf. {%pra-harṣaṇī%}]; a kind
of metre, {%= pra-harṣaṇī.%}
<LEND>

<L>33409<pc>0652-a<k1>praharzula<k2>praharzula
{%Pra-harṣula, as,%}¦ m. the planet Mercury; [cf.
{%pra-harṣaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33410<pc>0652-a<k1>prahfzwa<k2>prahfzwa
{%Pra-hṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ exceedingly pleased,
overjoyed, rejoiced, delighted, happy, joyful, glad.
{%—Prahṛṣṭa-manas, ās, ās, as,%} delighted at
heart, rejoiced in mind, exceedingly glad. {%—Pra-%}
{%hṛṣṭa-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} of pleasing form; erect
in form. {%—Prahṛṣṭa-roman, ā,%} m. ‘having brist-
ling hair,’ N. of an Asura. {%—Prahṛṣṭātman (˚ṭa-%}
{%āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} delighted in soul, rejoiced in mind.
<LEND>

<L>33411<pc>0652-a<k1>prahfzwaka<k2>prahfzwaka
{%Prahṛṣṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a crow.
<LEND>

<L>33412<pc>0652-a<k1>praheRaka<k2>praheRaka
{#praheRaka#}¦ {%pra-heṇaka, am,%} n. a kind of
pastry; victuals or sweetmeats distributed at festivals;
[cf. {%pra-helaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33413<pc>0652-a<k1>praheti<k2>praheti
{#praheti#}¦ {%pra-heti,%} &c. See 1. {%pra-hi,%} p. 651.
<LEND>

<L>33414<pc>0652-a<k1>prahelaka<k2>prahelaka
{#prahelaka#}¦ {%pra-helaka, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%hil%} with
{%pra%}), a riddle, enigma; a kind of pastry; sweet-
meats &c. distributed at festivals ({%= pra-heṇaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>33415<pc>0652-a<k1>prahelA<k2>prahelA
{%Pra-helā,%}¦ f. playful dalliance, loose or free be-
haviour; {%prahelayā,%} sportively, freely, without con-
striant.
<LEND>

<L>33416<pc>0652-a<k1>praheli<k2>praheli
{%Pra-heli, is,%}¦ or {%prahelikā,%} f. an enigma, riddle,
puzzling or enigmatical question.
<LEND>

<L>33417<pc>0652-a<k1>prahoza<k2>prahoza
{#prahoza#}¦ {%pra-hoṣa, prahoṣin.%} See p. 651,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33418<pc>0652-a<k1>prahrAda<k2>prahrAda
{#prahrAda#}¦ {%pra-hrāda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hrād%} with
{%pra%}), N. of the chief of the Asuras with the patro-
nymic Kāyādhava (the father of Vi-rocana); N. of
a son of Hiraṇya-kaśipu (he was an enemy of Indra
and friend of Viṣṇu; cf. {%pra-hlāda%}).
<LEND>

<L>33419<pc>0652-a<k1>prahrAdi<k2>prahrAdi
{%Prahrādi, ayas,%}¦ m. pl. the attendants of the
Asura Pra-hrāda.
<LEND>

<L>33420<pc>0652-a<k1>prahrAsa<k2>prahrAsa
{#prahrAsa#}¦ {%pra-hrāsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hras%} with
{%pra%}), shortening, decrease; languishing, fading away.
<LEND>

<L>33421<pc>0652-a<k1>prahlAd<k2>prahlAd
{#prahlAd#}¦ {%pra-hlād,%} cl. 1. A. {%-hlādate, -hlādi-%}
{%tum,%} to be delighted: Caus. {%-hlādayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to rejoice, gladden, delight, exhilarate; to
extinguish (?).
<LEND>

<L>33422<pc>0652-a<k1>prahlatti<k2>prahlatti
{%Pra-hlatti, is,%}¦ f. pleasure, happiness, joy; (less
correctly for {%pra-hlanni.%})
<LEND>

<L>33423<pc>0652-a<k1>prahlanna<k2>prahlanna
{%Pra-hlanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, glad, happy.
<LEND>

<L>33424<pc>0652-a<k1>prahlanni<k2>prahlanni
{%Pra-hlanni, is,%}¦ f. pleasure, delight, happiness.
<LEND>

<L>33425<pc>0652-a<k1>prahlAda<k2>prahlAda
{%Pra-hlāda, as,%}¦ m. joyful excitement, pleasure,
joy, happiness; sound, noise; N. of a pious Daitya
(son of Hiraṇya-kaśipu; he was remarkable for his
devotion to Viṣṇu, and was on this account perse-
cuted by his father; he was made king of the
Daityas by Viṣṇu, and was regent of one of the
divisions of Pātāla, cf. {%pra-hrāda%} and see Viṣṇu-
Purāṇa I. 17); N. of a Nāga; of a Prajā-pati;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>33426<pc>0652-a<k1>prahlAdaka<k2>prahlAdaka
{%Pra-hlādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing joy or pleasure,
refreshing.
<LEND>

<L>33427<pc>0652-a<k1>prahlAdana<k2>prahlAdana
{%Pra-hlādana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing joy or pleasure;
({%as%}), m., N. of a poet; ({%am%}), n. the act of causing
joy or pleasure, refreshing.
<LEND>

<L>33428<pc>0652-a<k1>prahlAdayat<k2>prahlAdayat
{%Pra-hlādayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to rejoice,
gladdening, delighting.
<LEND>

<L>33429<pc>0652-a<k1>prahlAdita<k2>prahlAdita
{%Pra-hlādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rejoiced, delighted.
<LEND>

<L>33430<pc>0652-a<k1>prahlAdin<k2>prahlAdin
{%Pra-hlādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ causing joy, delighting;
refreshing.
<LEND>

<L>33431<pc>0652-a<k1>prahva<k2>prahva
{#prahva#}¦ {%pra-hva, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%hvṛ%} with
{%pra%}), bent forwards, inclined, sloping, slanting;
bent, bowed, stooping; bowing humbly, humble,
modest; inclined towards, intent upon, devoted to,
attached to, engrossed by, engaged in; ({%ī%}), f., N.
of a Śakti. {%—Prahvāñjali (˚va-añ˚), is, is, i,%}
stooping or bowing with the palms of the hands
[Page0652-b+ 72]
joined and put to the forehead in token of respect.
{%—Prahvī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} bent forwards, bowed,
bent; subjected, conquered, won.
<LEND>

<L>33432<pc>0652-b<k1>prahvaRa<k2>prahvaRa
{%Pra-hvaṇa, am,%}¦ n. bowing down in reverence.
<LEND>

<L>33433<pc>0652-b<k1>prahvARa<k2>prahvARa
{%Pra-hvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. bent forwards, bent,
bowed, stooping.
<LEND>

<L>33434<pc>0652-b<k1>prahval<k2>prahval
{#prahval#}¦ {%pra-hval,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hvalati, -litum,%}
to stagger forwards, quake, tremble.
<LEND>

<L>33435<pc>0652-b<k1>prahvalIkA<k2>prahvalIkA
{#prahvalIkA#}¦ {%pra-hvalīkā,%} f. an incorrect form
for {%pra-valhikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33436<pc>0652-b<k1>prahve<k2>prahve
{#prahve#}¦ {%pra-hve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-hvayati, -te,%}
{%-hvātum,%} to call to, call upon, call, summon, invoke.
<LEND>

<L>33437<pc>0652-b<k1>prahvAya<k2>prahvAya
{%Pra-hvāya, as,%}¦ m. calling, summoning, invoking,
invocation.
<LEND>

<L>33438<pc>0652-b<k1>prA<k2>prA<h>1
{#prA#} 1¦. {%prā%} [cf. rt. {%pṝ%}], cl. 2. P. {%prāti,%}
{%paprau, prāsyati, aprāsīt%} (Ved. {%aprās%}),
{%prāyāt%} or {%preyāt, prātum,%} Ved. to fill: Pass. {%prā-%}
{%yate,%} to be filled or full.
<LEND>

<L>33439<pc>0652-b<k1>prA<k2>prA<h>2
2. {%prā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ Ved. filling (at the end of
comps.; cf. {%antarikṣa-prā, kratu-prā%}).
<LEND>

<L>33440<pc>0652-b<k1>prARa<k2>prARa<h>1
1. {%prāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see under 1. {%prāṇ,%}
p. 654, col. 3), filled, full, replete.
<LEND>

<L>33441<pc>0652-b<k1>prAta<k2>prAta
{%Prāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. filled, full (Sāy. {%= pūrṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>33442<pc>0652-b<k1>prAti<k2>prAti
{%Prāti, is,%}¦ f. filling; the span of the thumb and
forefinger.
<LEND>

<L>33443<pc>0652-b<k1>prAMSu<k2>prAMSu
{#prAMSu#}¦ {%prāṃśu (pra-aṃ˚), us, us, u,%} high,
tall, lofty, of great stature; long; ({%us%}), m., N. of
a son of Manu Vaivasvata; of a son of Vatsa-prī
(or Vatsa-prīti). {%—Prāṃśu-tā,%} f. height, loftiness.
{%—Prāṃśu-labhya, as, ā, am,%} to be obtained or
reached (only) by a tall person.
<LEND>

<L>33444<pc>0652-b<k1>prAk<k2>prAk
{#prAk#}¦ {%prāk.%} See p. 653, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>33445<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkawya<k2>prAkawya
{#prAkawya#}¦ {%prākaṭya, am,%} n. publicity, mani-
festation, notoriety.
<LEND>

<L>33446<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkara<k2>prAkara
{#prAkara#}¦ {%prākara, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Dyuti-mat; ({%am%}), n., N. of the Varṣa called after
Prākara.
<LEND>

<L>33447<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkaraRika<k2>prAkaraRika
{#prAkaraRika#}¦ {%prākaraṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%karaṇa%}), appertaining to the subject of discussion,
belonging to a chapter, belonging to a class or genus.
<LEND>

<L>33448<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkarza<k2>prAkarza
{#prAkarza#}¦ {%prākarṣa, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-karṣa%}),
N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>33449<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkarzika<k2>prAkarzika
{%Prākarṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ deserving preference.
<LEND>

<L>33450<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkazika<k2>prAkazika
{#prAkazika#}¦ {%prākaṣika, as,%} m. (said to be
fr. rt. {%kaṣ%} with {%pra-ā%}), a dancer employed by a
woman, one supported by another's wife; a catamite.
<LEND>

<L>33451<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkAmya<k2>prAkAmya
{#prAkAmya#}¦ {%prākāmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-kāma%}),
freedom of will; wilfulness, following or obeying
one's own will or inclination; irresistible will or fiat
(one of the eight attributes of Śiva).
<LEND>

<L>33452<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkAra<k2>prAkAra
{#prAkAra#}¦ {%prā-kāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ%} and
{%prā%} for {%pra%}), an encircling wall, enclosure, fence,
rampart (especially a surrounding wall elevated on
a mound of earth). {%—Prākāra-karṇa, as,%} m. ‘wall-
ear,’ N. of a minister of the owl-king Ari-mardana.
{%—Prākāra-bhañjana, as, ī, am,%} breaking down
ramparts. {%—Prākāramardi, is,%} m. a patronymic
from Prākāra-mardin. {%—Prākāra-mardin, ī,%} m.
‘rampart-crusher,’ N. of a man. {%—Prākāra-stha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} standing on a wall, stationed on a rampart.
<LEND>

<L>33453<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkArIya<k2>prAkArIya
{%Prākārīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for a wall, of or be-
longing to a wall; enclosed by a wall, walled.
<LEND>

<L>33454<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkAruka<k2>prAkAruka
{%Prākāruka, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. rt. 1. {%kṝ%} with {%pra-ā?%}),
Ved. scattering about (?).
<LEND>

<L>33455<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkASa<k2>prAkASa
{#prAkASa#}¦ {%prākāśa, as,%} m. (fr. {%pra-kāśa%}), Ved.
a metallic mirror; (according to some commentators)
a kind of ornament.
<LEND>

<L>33456<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkASya<k2>prAkASya
{%Prākāśya, am,%}¦ n. the being evident or manifest,
publicity; celebrity, fame, renown.
<LEND>

<L>33457<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkf<k2>prAkf
{#prAkf#}¦ {%prā-kṛ (pra-ā-kṛ),%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-ka-%}
{%roti, -kurute, -kartum,%} Ved. to drive away.
<LEND>

<L>33458<pc>0652-b<k1>prAkfta<k2>prAkfta
{#prAkfta#}¦ {%prākṛta, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-kṛti%}),
[Page0652-c+ 76]
original, natural, not artificial, essential, unchanged,
unaltered, unmodified; normal, ordinary, usual, com-
mon, uncultivated, unrefined, provincial, plebeian,
vulgar; vernacular; (in the Sāṅkhya phil.) belong-
ing to or derived from Prakṛti or the original ele-
ment; (in astronomy) an epithet of one of the
seven divisions of the planetary courses, (according
to Parāśara comprising the Nakṣatras Svāti, Bha-
raṇī, Rohiṇī, and Kṛttikā); {%prākṛto layaḥ%} or
{%pralayaḥ%} or {%prati-sañcaraḥ,%} resolution or reabsorp-
tion into Prakṛti or the original element, the disso-
lution of the universe; ({%as%}), m. a low man, a man
following a degraded profession; ({%am%}), n. any pro-
vincial or vernacular dialect akin to Sanskrit, espe-
cially spoken by the female characters and the
inferior personages of plays. {%—Prākṛta-kāma-%}
{%dhenu, us,%} f., N. of a Prākṛt grammar. {%—Prākṛta-%}
{%candrikā,%} f., N. of a Prākṛt grammar by Vara-ruci
({%= prākṛta-prakāśa%}); also of one by Vāmanā-
cārya. {%—Prākṛta-jvara, as,%} m. common or usual
fever (occurring from affections of the wind in the rainy
season, of the bile in the autumn, and of the phlegm
in the spring). {%—Prākṛta-tva, am,%} n. original or
natural state or condition. {%—Prākṛta-dīpikā,%} f., N.
of a commentary on the Saṅkṣipta-sāra. {%—Prā-%}
{%kṛta-pāda, as,%} m., N. of a Prākṛt grammar by
Nārāyaṇa. {%—Prākṛta-piṅgala, as%} or {%am,%} m. or
n. (?), Piṅgala's work on Prākṛt metres. {%—Prā-%}
{%kṛta-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a Prākṛt grammar
by Vara-ruci {%(= prākṛta-candrikā)%}. {%—Prākṛta-%}
{%pralaya, as,%} m. the total dissolution of the world.
{%—Prākṛta-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} talking or speaking
Prākṛt. {%—Prākṛta-manoramā,%} f., N. of Bhā-
maha's commentary on the Prākṛta-prakāśa; (also
called Mano-ramā.) {%—Prākṛta-mānuṣa, as,%} m.
a common or ordinary man. {%—Prākṛta-mitra, am,%}
n. a natural friend or ally, a sovereign whose king-
dom is separated by that of another from the country
with which he is allied; [cf. {%prākṛtāri, prākṛto-%}
{%dāsīna.%}] {%—Prākṛta-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a
work ascribed to Pāṇini. {%—Prākṛta-laṅkeśvara%}
{%(˚kā-īś˚), as,%} m. (?), N. of a Prākṛt grammar. {%—Prā-%}
{%kṛta-śāsana, am,%} n. a manual of the Prākṛt dia-
lects. {%—Prākṛta-sarvasva, am,%} n., N. of a Prākṛt
grammar by Mārkaṇḍeya-kavīndra. {%—Prākṛtāri%}
{%(˚ta-ari), is,%} m. a natural enemy, a sovereign of an
adjacent country (whose dominions intercept those of
the Prākṛta-mitra, q. v.). {%—Prākṛtodāsīna (˚ta-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. a natural neutral, a sovereign whose
dominions are situated beyond those of the natural
ally.
<LEND>

<L>33459<pc>0652-c<k1>prAkftAyana<k2>prAkftAyana
{%Prākṛtāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Pra-
kṛta.
<LEND>

<L>33460<pc>0652-c<k1>prAkftika<k2>prAkftika
{%Prākṛtika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
Pra-kṛti or the original element, material, natural,
illusory.
<LEND>

<L>33461<pc>0652-c<k1>prAkkarman<k2>prAkkarman
{#prAkkarman#}¦ {%prāk-karman,%} &c. See p. 653.
<LEND>

<L>33462<pc>0652-c<k1>prAkriyAkOmuda<k2>prAkriyAkOmuda
{#prAkriyAkOmuda#}¦ {%prākriyākaumuda, as, ī, am,%}
belonging or relating to the Prakriyā-kaumudī, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33463<pc>0652-c<k1>prAkzAlana<k2>prAkzAlana
{#prAkzAlana#}¦ {%prākṣālana,%} an incorrect form
for {%pra-kṣālana,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33464<pc>0652-c<k1>prAKarya<k2>prAKarya
{#prAKarya#}¦ {%prākharya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-khara%}),
sharpness; pungency; ardour; wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>33465<pc>0652-c<k1>prAgadya<k2>prAgadya
{#prAgadya#}¦ {%prāgadya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pra-gadin%}),
see Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>33466<pc>0652-c<k1>prAgapam<k2>prAgapam
{#prAgapam#}¦ {%prāg-apam,%} &c. See under {%prāñc.%}
<LEND>

<L>33467<pc>0652-c<k1>prAgalBya<k2>prAgalBya
{#prAgalBya#}¦ {%prāgalbhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-gal-%}
{%bha%}), boldness, confidence; resoluteness, determina-
tion; pride, arrogance, effrontery; pomp, parade,
rank; proficiency. {%—Prāgalbhya-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessed of confidence, bold; vain, proud.
<LEND>

<L>33468<pc>0652-c<k1>prAgahi<k2>prAgahi
{#prAgahi#}¦ {%prāgahi, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a
teacher.
<LEND>

<L>33469<pc>0652-c<k1>prAgahIya<k2>prAgahIya
{%Prāgahīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or referring to
Prāgahi.
<LEND>

<L>33470<pc>0652-c<k1>prAgATa<k2>prAgATa
{#prAgATa#}¦ {%prāgātha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-gātha%}),
[Page0653-a+ 68]
belonging to the Pragāthas, i. e. to the eighth
Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic
of Kali; of Bharga; of Haryata.
<LEND>

<L>33471<pc>0653-a<k1>prAgATika<k2>prAgATika
{%Prāgāthika, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the eighth
Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>33472<pc>0653-a<k1>prAgAra<k2>prAgAra
{#prAgAra#}¦ {%prāgāra, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), a
building, a house; a principal building (?).
<LEND>

<L>33473<pc>0653-a<k1>prAgAhnika<k2>prAgAhnika
{#prAgAhnika#}¦ {%prāgāhnika.%} See under {%prāñc.%}
<LEND>

<L>33474<pc>0653-a<k1>prAgra<k2>prAgra
{#prAgra#}¦ {%prāgra (pra-ag˚), am,%} n. the highest
point, summit. {%—Prāgra-sara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} going
at the head, foremost, first, best. {%—Prāgra-hara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} taking the best share, chief, principal.
<LEND>

<L>33475<pc>0653-a<k1>prAgrya<k2>prAgrya
{%Prāgrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ chief, principal, most excellent.
<LEND>

<L>33476<pc>0653-a<k1>prAgrAwa<k2>prAgrAwa
{#prAgrAwa#}¦ {%prāgrāṭa, am,%} n. thin coagulated
milk.
<LEND>

<L>33477<pc>0653-a<k1>prAGarmasad<k2>prAGarmasad
{#prAGarmasad#}¦ {%prāgharma-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. abid-
ing in a region of light; (Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇa%}
{%dīpta-sthāne vartamānaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>33478<pc>0653-a<k1>prAGAta<k2>prAGAta
{#prAGAta#}¦ {%prāghāta, as,%} m. war, battle; (in-
correctly for {%pra-ghāta.%})
<LEND>

<L>33479<pc>0653-a<k1>prAGAra<k2>prAGAra
{#prAGAra#}¦ {%prāghāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ghṛ%} with
{%pra%}), dropping, oozing, trickling out, aspersion or
pouring out of any oily substance.
<LEND>

<L>33480<pc>0653-a<k1>prAGuRa<k2>prAGuRa
{#prAGuRa#}¦ {%prāghuṇa, as,%} m. a guest, a visitor,
one demanding hospitality; [cf. {%prāhuṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33481<pc>0653-a<k1>prAGuRaka<k2>prAGuRaka
{%Prāghuṇaka%}¦ or {%prāghuṇika, as,%} m. {%= prāghuṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>33482<pc>0653-a<k1>prAGUrRaka<k2>prAGUrRaka
{%Prāghūrṇaka%}¦ or {%prāghūrṇika, as,%} m. various
forms for {%prāghuṇaka, prāghuṇika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>33483<pc>0653-a<k1>prANga<k2>prANga
{#prANga#}¦ {%prāṅga, as,%} m. a small kind of drum
or tabor ({%= paṇava%}).
<LEND>

<L>33484<pc>0653-a<k1>prANgaRa<k2>prANgaRa
{%Prāṅgaṇa%}¦ or {%prāṅgana, am,%} n. a court, a yard, a
court-yard [cf. {%aṅgana, aṅgaṇa%}]; a kind of drum.
<LEND>

<L>33485<pc>0653-a<k1>prANnyAya<k2>prANnyAya
{#prANnyAya#}¦ {%prāṅ-nyāya,%} &c. See p. 654, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33486<pc>0653-a<k1>prAcaRqya<k2>prAcaRqya
{#prAcaRqya#}¦ {%prācaṇḍya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-caṇḍa%}),
violence, vehemence, passion.
<LEND>

<L>33487<pc>0653-a<k1>prAcAra<k2>prAcAra
{#prAcAra#}¦ {%prācāra (pra-āc˚), as, ā, am,%} con-
trary to or deviating from ordinary institutions and
observances (?); ({%as%}), m. a particular insect.
<LEND>

<L>33488<pc>0653-a<k1>prAcArya<k2>prAcArya
{%Prācārya (pra-āc˚), as,%}¦ m. a pupil, scholar (?).
<LEND>

<L>33489<pc>0653-a<k1>prAcinvat<k2>prAcinvat
{#prAcinvat#}¦ {%prācinvat, an,%} m., N. of a son
of Janam-ejaya ({%= pra-cinvat%}).
<LEND>

<L>33490<pc>0653-a<k1>prAcIna<k2>prAcIna
{#prAcIna#}¦ {%prācīna.%} See p. 654, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>33491<pc>0653-a<k1>prAcIra<k2>prAcIra
{#prAcIra#}¦ {%prācīra, am,%} n. an enclosure, hedge,
fence, wall; [cf. {%kṣauṇī-p˚, mahī-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33492<pc>0653-a<k1>prAcurya<k2>prAcurya
{#prAcurya#}¦ {%prācurya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pracura%}), mul-
titude, quantity; abundance, copiousness, plentiful-
ness, plenty; ({%eṇa%}), ind. in a mass; fully, in detail.
<LEND>

<L>33493<pc>0653-a<k1>prAcetas<k2>prAcetas
{#prAcetas#}¦ {%prācetas, asas,%} m. pl. an epithet
of the ten sons of Prācīna-barhis ({%= pra-cetas%}).
<LEND>

<L>33494<pc>0653-a<k1>prAcetasa<k2>prAcetasa
{%Prācetasa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Pra-cetas;
a patronymic of Manu; of Dakṣa; of Vālmīki.
<LEND>

<L>33495<pc>0653-a<k1>prAcya<k2>prAcya
{#prAcya#}¦ {%prācya.%} See p. 654, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>33496<pc>0653-a<k1>prAC<k2>prAC
{#prAC#}¦ {%prāch, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ%} (fr. rt. {%prach%}), asking,
inquiring, an inquirer, questioner. {%—Prāḍ-vivāka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘one who interrogates and discriminates,’ a
judge, magistrate, the presiding officer in a court of
judicature (Manu VIII. 79, 181).
<LEND>

<L>33497<pc>0653-a<k1>prAjaka<k2>prAjaka
{#prAjaka#}¦ {%prājaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%aj%} with {%pra%}),
a driver, charioteer, coachman.
<LEND>

<L>33498<pc>0653-a<k1>prAjana<k2>prAjana
{%Prājana, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a whip, goad.
<LEND>

<L>33499<pc>0653-a<k1>prAjika<k2>prAjika
{%Prājika, as,%}¦ m. a hawk.
<LEND>

<L>33500<pc>0653-a<k1>prAjitf<k2>prAjitf
{%Prājitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a driver, charioteer, coachman.
<LEND>

<L>33501<pc>0653-a<k1>prAjin<k2>prAjin
{%Prājin, ī,%}¦ m. {%= prājika.%}
<LEND>

<L>33502<pc>0653-a<k1>prAjayA<k2>prAjayA
{#prAjayA#}¦ {%prājayā,%} see Gaṇa Sākṣādādi to
Pāṇ. I. 4, 74.
<LEND>

<L>33503<pc>0653-a<k1>prAjahita<k2>prAjahita
{#prAjahita#}¦ {%prājahita, as,%} m., Ved. a Gārha-
patya fire maintained during a longer period of time,
an older Gārhapatya fire.
<LEND>
[Page0653-b+ 77]

<L>33504<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjApata<k2>prAjApata
{#prAjApata#}¦ {%prājāpata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%prajā-%}
{%pati%}), see Gaṇa Mahiṣyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 4, 48.
<LEND>

<L>33505<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjApatya<k2>prAjApatya
{%Prājāpatya, as, ā%}¦ (or {%tī%}), {%am,%} belonging to
or derived from Prajā-pati, relating to Prajā-pati,
sacred to Prajā-pati; ({%as%}), m., with or without
{%vivāha%} or {%vidhi,%} the third or according to Manu
the fourth form of marriage (that in which the
father gives his daughter to the bridegroom without
receiving a present from him, but with the convic-
tion that the two will live faithfully together, Manu
III. 30); scil. {%upavāsa,%} a kind of penance (lasting
twelve days, food being eaten during the first three
once in the morning, during the next three once in
the evening, in the next three only if given as
alms, and a plenary fast being observed during the
three remaining days); scil. {%tithi,%} the eighth day in
the dark half of the month Pauṣa; a patronymic
of Pataṅ-ga; of Prajā-vat; of Yakṣma-nāśana; of
Yajña; of Vimada; of Viṣṇu; of Saṃvaraṇa; of
Hiraṇya-garbha; (with Jainas) N. of the first black
Vāsudeva; a N. of the confluence of the Gaṅgā and
Yamunā, {%= pra-yāga; (am),%} n. a particular sacrifice
performed before appointing a daughter to raise issue
in default of male heirs; scil. {%bha%} or {%nakṣatra,%}
the asterism Rohiṇī; generative energy, procreative
power; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. or n. (?), the heaven or
sphere of the Manes, {%= pitṛ-loka; (ā),%} f. giving
away the whole of one's property before entering
upon the life of an ascetic or mendicant; a patro-
nymic of Dakṣiṇā; scil. {%śakaṭī,%} N. of an asterism,
the chariot of Rohiṇī (probably = <lang n="greek">α β γ δ ε</lang> Tauri).
{%—Prājāpatya-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition
of belonging or referring to Prajā-pati.
<LEND>

<L>33506<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjApatyaka<k2>prAjApatyaka
{%Prājāpatyaka, as,%}¦ &c., belonging or referring
or sacred to Prajā-pati.
<LEND>

<L>33507<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjAvata<k2>prAjAvata
{%Prājāvata, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%prajā-vat%}), see Gaṇa
Mahiṣyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 4, 48.
<LEND>

<L>33508<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjeSa<k2>prAjeSa
{%Prājeśa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%prajeśa%}), Ved. sacred to
Prajā-pati; ({%am%}), n. the Nakṣatra Rohiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>33509<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjeSvara<k2>prAjeSvara
{%Prājeśvara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%prajeśvara%}), sacred to
Prajā-pati.
<LEND>

<L>33510<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjiDara<k2>prAjiDara
{#prAjiDara#}¦ {%prājidhara, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>33511<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjimaWikA<k2>prAjimaWikA
{#prAjimaWikA#}¦ {%prājimaṭhikā,%} f., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>33512<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjeSa<k2>prAjeSa
{#prAjeSa#}¦ {%prājeśa, prājeśvara.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>33513<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjYa<k2>prAjYa
{#prAjYa#}¦ {%prājña, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-jñā%}),
intellectual, (opposed to {%śārīra, taijasa%}); intelligent,
wise, clever; patient in investigation; (Ved.) having
no deep insight; ({%as%}), m. a wise or learned man, a
Paṇḍit, a skilful or clever man; a kind of parrot
with red stripes on the neck and wings; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f.
a clever or intelligent woman; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of an
intellectual man, wife of a Paṇḍit; ({%ā%}), f. intelligence,
understanding. {%—Prājña-kathā,%} f. a story of a wise
man, tale about a wise man. {%—Prājña-tva, am,%} n.
or {%prājña-tā,%} f. wisdom, learning. {%—Prājña-māna,%}
{%am,%} n. respect for learned men. {%—Prājña-mānin%} or
{%prājñam-mānin, ī, inī, i,%} thinking one's self wise,
fancying one's self a learned man.
<LEND>

<L>33514<pc>0653-b<k1>prAjya<k2>prAjya
{#prAjya#}¦ {%prājya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pra%} with rt. {%aj%}
or fr. {%pra + ājya,%} clarified butter used for obla-
tions?), abundant, plentiful, much, many, great, im-
portant; lofty. {%—Prājya-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the Rājāvali-patākā. {%—Prājya-vikrama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessing great power. {%—Prājya-vṛṣṭi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} sending rain in abundance (said of Indra).
<LEND>

<L>33515<pc>0653-b<k1>prAYc<k2>prAYc
{#prAYc#}¦ {%prāñc (pra-añc), prāṅ, prācī, prāk,%}
turned towards the front, directed forwards, being
before, in front, foremost; turned towards, inclined
towards, disposed, ready, willing (Ved.); turning
eastward, eastern, easterly; previous, prior, former;
{%prāñcaṃ kṛ,%} to place in front, bring, offer, provide
(Ved.); to promote, further, advance (Ved., Sāy.
{%= prakarṣeṇa gacchantaṃ kṛ%}); to spread out,
stretch out (Ved.); {%prāñcas,%} m. pl. the people of
the east, eastern people; eastern grammarians;
{%prāci,%} f. the east; {%prāk,%} ind. (with abl. or rarely
with gen. or acc.), before (in place or time or order),
[Page0653-c+ 81]
in front; up to, as far as (especially in the technical
language of grammatical Sūtras, e. g. {%prāk kaḍārāt,%}
up to the word Kaḍāra); in the east; first, at first,
formerly, previously, in the former part (of a book);
at dawn, at day-break, early in the morning; {%prāg%}
{%eva,%} recently, just; (in Buddhist writings) {%= kim%}
{%uta,%} how much more? much more, still more;
{%prācā,%} ind., Ved. forwards, onwards; (Sāy.) {%= ṛjunā%}
{%mārgeṇa,%} by a straight path; {%prācas,%} ind., Ved.
from the front. {%—Prāk-karman, a,%} n. preparatory
or preliminary medical treatment; an action done
in a former life. {%—Prāk-kalpa, as,%} m. a former
age or era. {%—Prāk-kāla, as,%} m. a former age or
time, a previous time. {%—Prākkālīna, as, ā, am,%}
belonging to former or ancient times, pertaining to
a previous time, anterior, ancient, previous, former.
{%—Prāk-kūla, as, ā, am,%} having the points turned
towards the east (said of blades of Kuśa grass; ac-
cording to Kullūka on Manu II. 75 {%= prāg-agra%});
({%am%}), n. the point of a blade of Kuśa grass turned
towards the east; (also written {%prāk-tūla;%} cf.
{%prācīna-kūla.%}) {%—Prāk-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done be-
fore; ({%am%}), n. an action done in a former life.
{%—Prāk-kevala, as, ā, am,%} manifested from the
first in a distinct form (without preliminary symp-
toms, as a disease). {%—Prāk-caraṇā,%} f. an epithet
of the female organ of generation. {%—Prāk-ciram,%}
ind. before it is too late, in good time. {%—Prāk-%}
{%chāya, am,%} n. a shadow's falling eastward. {%—Prāk-%}
{%tanaya, as,%} m. a former pupil (perhaps a wrong
reading for {%prāpta-naya%}). {%—Prāk-tūla = prāk-%}
{%kūla,%} q. v. {%—Prāk-pada, am,%} n. a preceding word,
the first member of a compound. {%—Prāk-puṇya-%}
{%prabhava, as, ā, am,%} caused by merits accrued in
a former existence, resulting from good works done
in a former state of being. {%—Prāk-puṣpā,%} f., see
Vārtt. 1. to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 64. {%—Prāk-phala, as,%} m.
the bread-fruit tree {%(= panasa)%}. {%—Prāk-phalgunī,%}
f. the eleventh of the lunar mansions ({%= pūrva-%}
{%phalgunī,%} q. v.). {%—Prākphalgunī-bhava, as,%} m.
Bṛhaspati or the planet Jupiter (born when the
moon was in the mansion Prākphalgunī). {%—Prāk-%}
{%phālguna%} or {%prākphālguneya, as,%} m. the planet
Jupiter. {%—Prāk-phālgunī = pūrva-phālgunī,%} q. v.
{%—Prāk-śas,%} ind. from the front, from the east.
{%—Prāk-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} or {%prāk-śirasa%} or
{%prākśiraska, as, ā, am,%} having the head turned
forwards or to the east. {%—Prāk-śṛṅga-vat, ān,%} m.,
N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Prāk-śliṣṭa,%} a various reading for
{%prāśliṣṭa,%} q. v. {%—Prāk-saṃstha, as, ā, am,%} turned
or directed eastwards. {%—Prāk-sandhyā,%} f. morning
twilight. {%—Prāk-savana, am,%} n. a morning libation.
{%—Prāk-soma, as, ā, am,%} or {%prāk-saumika, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} preceding the Soma sacrifice. {%—Prāk-srotas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} flowing eastward (sometimes wrongly
spelt {%prāk-śrotas%}). {%—Prāg-agra, as, ā, am,%} having
the tip or point turned forwards or towards the
east (as a blade of grass). {%—Prāg-apam,%} ind. (fr.
{%prāk%} and {%apam%} fr. {%apāk%}), Ved. from the front
towards the back, in a backward direction. {%—Prāg-%}
{%aparāyata (˚ra-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} extending eastward
and westward; [cf. {%prāg-āyata.%}] {%—Prāg-abhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. previous non-existence of anything, antecedent
non-existence or privation, the non-existence of any-
thing which may yet be; non-existence (of an
effect) previous (to production); (in law) the non-
possession of property that may be possessed. {%—Prā-%}
{%gabhāva-vicāra, as,%} m., N. of a Nyāya work.
{%—Prāg-abhihita, as, ā, am,%} before-mentioned, pre-
viously mentioned. {%—Prāg-avasthā,%} f. a former state,
previous existence. {%—Prāg-āyata, as, ā, am,%} extend-
ing towards the east; [cf. {%prāg-aparāyata.%}] {%—Prāg-%}
{%āhnika, as, ī, am,%} relating to the forenoon ({%=%}
{%paurvāhṇika%}). {%—Prāg-ukti, is,%} f. previous utter-
ance. {%—Prāg-uttara, as, ā, am,%} north-eastern;
({%eṇa%}), ind. to the north-east of (with abl.), north-
eastwards. {%—Prāg-udak-plavana, as, ā, am,%} in-
clining towards the north-east, situated in a north-
easterly direction. {%—Prāg-udaṅmukha, as, ī, am,%}
having the face turned to the east or north. {%—Prāg-%}
{%udañc, aṅ, īcī, ak,%} north-eastern; ({%īcī%}), f., scil.
[Page0654-a+ 81]
{%diś,%} the north-east quarter, the north-east; ({%ak%}),
ind. to the north-east. {%—Prāg-gamana-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having a forward motion, going forwards. {%—Prāg-%}
{%gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going before, preceding, intending to
go before; a precursor. {%—Prāg-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessing the previously mentioned quality. {%—Prāg-grīva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the neck turned towards the east.
{%—Prāg-janman, a,%} n. a former birth, former life.
{%—Prāg-jāti, is,%} f. a former birth {%(= pūrva-jan-%}
{%man)%}. {%—Prāg-jyotiṣa, am,%} n., N. of a city, the
dwelling-place of the demon Naraka; ({%as%}), m., with or
without {%rājā,%} the king of Prāg-jyotiṣa, an epithet
of Bhaga-datta; N. of a country, {%= kāma-rūpa;%}
{%(ās),%} m. pl., N. of a people living in the city of Prāg-
jyotiṣa or its environs; ({%am%}), ind. before day-break (?),
{%—Prāgjyotiṣa-jyeṣṭha, as,%} m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Prāg-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} south-eastern;
({%am%}), ind. to the south-east, south-eastwards. {%—Prāg-%}
{%dakṣiṇāñc (˚ṇa-añc), āṅ, ācī, āk,%} turned to the
south-east, south-eastward. {%—Prāg-daṇḍa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having the stem or stalk turned towards
the east. {%—Prāg-diś, k,%} f. ‘the eastern quarter,’ the
east. {%—Prāg-deśa, as,%} m. the eastern country,
country of the eastern people; a former or previous
place. {%—Prāg-dvār, r,%} f. a door on the east side.
{%—Prāg-dvāra, as, ā, am,%} having doors towards
the east; an epithet of the seven lunar mansions
beginning with Kṛttikā; ({%e%}), ind. in front of or before
the door. {%—Prāgdvārika, as, ī, am,%} having the
door on the eastern side. {%—Prāg-bodhi,%} N. of a
mountain. {%—Prāg-bhakta, am,%} n. taking medicine
before a meal. {%—Prāg-bhāga, as,%} m. the fore part.
{%—Prāg-bhāra, as,%} m. the top or peak of a moun-
tain; a multitude, heap; bending, inclining, leaning
[cf. {%prācīna-p˚%}]; ({%as, ā, am%}), inclined, bent.
{%—Prāg-bhāva, as,%} m. prior or previous existence;
superiority, excellence; the top of a mountain (in
this sense a various reading for {%prāg-bhāra%}). {%—Prāg-%}
{%bhāva-tas,%} ind. from a prior state of existence. {%—Prāg-%}
{%rūpa, am,%} n. symptom of disease {%(= pūrva-rūpa).%}
{%—Prāg-vaṃśa, as, ā, am,%} having the supporting
beam turned eastwards (Ved.); ({%as%}), m. the space
before the Vedi, (perhaps) a kind of sacrificial chamber
having columns or beams towards the east and situ-
ated opposite to the Vedi, (according to Malli-nātha
on Raghu-v. XV. 61 {%= prācīna-sthūṇo yajña-%}
{%śālā-viśeṣaḥ;%} according to others, a room in which
the family and friends of the person performing the
sacrifice assemble); a former dynasty or generation; an
epithet of Viṣṇu (?). {%—Prāg-vacana, am,%} n. a for-
mer decision; anything formerly decided or decreed.
{%—Prāg-vaṭa, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of a city.
{%—Prāg-vat,%} ind. as before, as previously, as for-
merly, as in former times, as in the preceding part
(of a book). {%—Prāg-vṛtta, am,%} n. former behaviour;
(in law) {%= prāṅ-nyāya,%} q. v. {%—Prāg-vṛttānta, am,%}
n. a former event, previous adventure, a story of the past.
{%—Prāg-veṣa%} or {%prāg-veśa, as,%} m. a former dress.
{%—Prāg-hāra,%} a various reading for {%prāg-bhāra,%}
q. v. {%—Prāṅ-āyata,%} an incorrect form for {%prāg-%}
{%āyata,%} q. v. {%—Prāṅ-nāsikā%} or {%prāṅ-nāsikī,%} f., see
Scholiast on Pāṇ. IV. 1, 60. {%—Prāṅ-nyāya, as,%} m.
(in law) a former trial of a cause, the plea of a
former trial, special plea; ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. turned
forwards or eastwards according to rule. {%—Prāṅnyā-%}
{%yottara (˚ya-ut˚), am,%} n. the rejoinder of the
defendant that the charge against him has already
been tried. {%—Prāṅ-mukha, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having
the face turned forward or towards the east, facing
the east (Manu II. 51); inclined towards, desirous
of, wishing. {%—Prācā-jihva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. moving
the tongue forwards (said of Agni; Sāy. {%= prāg-%}
{%deśa-sthita-jihvā-sthānīya-jvāla%}). {%—Prācā-man-%}
{%yu, us, us, u,%} Ved. striving to move forwards (said
of Indra; Sāy. {%= apratihata-krodha%}). {%—Prācī-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the east,’ an epithet of Indra.
{%—Prācī-mūla, am,%} n. the eastern horizon.
<LEND>

<L>33516<pc>0654-a<k1>prAktana<k2>prAktana
{%Prāktana, as, ī, am,%}¦ former, prior, previous,
anterior, antecedent, preceding; early, old, ancient,
(opposed to {%idānīntana%}); relating to a former state
of existence, resulting from acts done in a former
[Page0654-b+ 81]
life. {%—Prāktana-karman, a,%} n. any act formerly
done or done in a former state of existence; fate,
destiny. {%—Prāktana-janman, a,%} n. a former birth.
<LEND>

<L>33517<pc>0654-b<k1>prAktas<k2>prAktas
{%Prāktas%}¦ or {%prāktāt,%} ind., Ved. from the front,
from the east.
<LEND>

<L>33518<pc>0654-b<k1>prAgivIya<k2>prAgivIya
{%Prāgivīya%}¦ (fr. {%prāg iva%}), see Pāṇ. V. 3, 70.
<LEND>

<L>33519<pc>0654-b<k1>prAgGitIya<k2>prAgGitIya
{%Prāgghitīya%}¦ (fr. {%prāgghitāt%}), see Pāṇ. IV. 4, 75.
<LEND>

<L>33520<pc>0654-b<k1>prAgdiSIya<k2>prAgdiSIya
{%Prāgdiśīya%}¦ (fr. {%prāg diśaḥ%}), see Scholiast on
Pāṇ. V. 3, 2.
<LEND>

<L>33521<pc>0654-b<k1>prAgdIvyatIya<k2>prAgdIvyatIya
{%Prāgdīvyatīya%}¦ (fr. {%prāg dīvyataḥ%}), see Pāṇ.
IV. 1, 83.
<LEND>

<L>33522<pc>0654-b<k1>prAgDitIya<k2>prAgDitIya
{%Prāgdhitīya,%}¦ a wrong reading for {%prāgghitīya.%}
<LEND>

<L>33523<pc>0654-b<k1>prAcA<k2>prAcA
{%Prācā,%}¦ ind. See p. 653, col. 3, and p. 654, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33524<pc>0654-b<k1>prAcikA<k2>prAcikA
{%Prācikā,%}¦ f. a musquito; a female falcon.
<LEND>

<L>33525<pc>0654-b<k1>prAcIna<k2>prAcIna
{%Prācīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned towards the front or
towards the east, belonging to the front or east,
eastern, easterly; former, prior, preceding, ancient,
old; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a hedge, fence, wall; ({%ā%}), f.
a species of plant, Clypea Hernandifolia; ({%am%}), ind.
in front, forwards; eastwards, to the east of (with
abl.); before (with abl.); {%ataḥ prācīnam,%} further
on from that point. {%—Prācīna-āvītin = prācīnā-%}
{%vītin,%} q. v. {%—Prācīna-kalpa, as,%} m. a former Kalpa
or period of the world's duration. {%—Prācīna-kūla, as,%}
{%ā, am, = prāk-kūla,%} q. v. {%—Prācīna-garbha, as,%}
m., N. of an ancient Ṛṣi also called Apāntara-tamas.
{%—Prācīna-gāthā,%} f. an ancient story or tradition.
{%—Prācīna-gauḍa, as,%} m., N. of the author of
the Saṃvatsara-pradīpa. {%—Prācīna-grīva, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having the neck turned forwards or towards the
east. {%—Prācīna-tā,%} f. or {%prācīna-tva, am,%} n. anti-
quity, oldness. {%—Prācīna-tilaka, as,%} m. ‘having a
mark towards the east (?),’ the moon. {%—Prācīna-%}
{%pakṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the feathers turned
forwards (as an arrow). {%—Prācīna-panasa, as,%} m.
‘the eastern Jaka tree,’ the plant Ægle Marmelos.
{%—Prācīna-prakriyā,%} f., N. of a grammatical work
{%(= prakriyā-kaumudī)%}. {%—Prācīna-prāgbhāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} bending or inclining towards the east.
{%—Prācīna-barhis, is,%} m. ‘eastern light (?),’ N. of
a Prajā-pati of the race of Atri; of a son of Havir-
dhāman (or Havir-dhāna) and father of the ten
Pracetasas; of a son of Manu; an epithet of Indra.
{%—Prācīna-mata, am,%} n. an ancient opinion, a
belief sanctioned by antiquity. {%—Prācīna-yoga, as,%}
m., N. of a man; of an ancient teacher, the father of
Patañjali. {%—Prācīnayogī-putra, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
teacher. {%—Prācīnayogya, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Prācīna-yoga; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a school. {%—Prā-%}
{%cīna-raśmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having the reins directed
forwards (Sāy. {%= devābhimukha%}). {%—Prācīna-vaṃśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the supporting beam turned
forwards or towards the east; [cf. {%prāg-vaṃśa.%}]
{%—Prācīna-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a commentary on
the Uṇādi-sūtras. {%—Prācīna-śāla, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Prācīna-śiva-stuti, is,%} f. an ancient hymn
in praise of Śiva. {%—Prācīnāgra (˚na-ag˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the points turned towards the east (said
of sacred grass). {%—Prācīnāmalaka (˚na-ām˚), as,%}
m. the plant Flacourtia Cataphracta; ({%am%}), n. the
fruit of the Flacourtia Cataphracta. {%—Prācīnāvīta%}
{%(˚na-āv˚), am,%} n. the sacrificial cord worn over the
right shoulder and passed under the left arm (as at a
Śrāddha). {%—Prācīnāvītin (˚na-āv˚), ī, inī, i,%} or
{%prācīnopavīta (˚na-up˚), as, ā, am,%} wearing the
sacrificial cord over the right shoulder and under the
left arm (Manu II. 63).
<LEND>

<L>33526<pc>0654-b<k1>prAcEs<k2>prAcEs
{%Prācais,%}¦ ind., Ved. forwards; [cf. {%uccais, nīcais,%}
{%parācais.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33527<pc>0654-b<k1>prAcya<k2>prAcya
{%Prācya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in front, situated in
front; being in the east, living in the east, belonging
to the east, eastern, easterly; preceding, prior, ante-
rior, previous; ancient, old, (opposed to {%ādhunika%});
an epithet of particular songs belonging to the Sāma-
veda; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of the east, the
eastern country, the country south or east of the
river Sarasvatī (which flows from the north-east
towards the south-west); ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%bhāṣā,%} the
dialect spoken in the east of India. {%—Prācya-pada-%}
{%vṛtti, is,%} f. (in Ved. gram.) a term applied to the
rule according to which {%e%} remains in particular cases
[Page0654-c+ 77]
unchanged before {%a%}. {%—Prācya-bhāṣā,%} f. the dialect
of the east of India. {%—Prācya-vṛtti, is,%} f. a kind
of metre. {%—Prācya-saptasama,%} see Scholiast on
Pāṇ. VI. 2, 12. {%—Prācyādhvaryu,%} see Scholiast
on Pāṇ. VI. 2, 10.
<LEND>

<L>33528<pc>0654-c<k1>prAcyaka<k2>prAcyaka
{%Prācyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ situated in the east, eastern,
easterly.
<LEND>

<L>33529<pc>0654-c<k1>prAcyAyana<k2>prAcyAyana
{%Prācyāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Prācya.
<LEND>

<L>33530<pc>0654-c<k1>prAYj<k2>prAYj
{#prAYj#}¦ {%prāñj (pra-añj),%} cl. 7. P. {%prāṇakti,%}
{%prāñjitum, prāṅktum,%} Ved. (?), to adorn, deco-
rate, embellish, beautify.
<LEND>

<L>33531<pc>0654-c<k1>prAYjana<k2>prAYjana
{%Prāñjana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. paint or cement (on an
arrow).
<LEND>

<L>33532<pc>0654-c<k1>prAYjala<k2>prAYjala
{#prAYjala#}¦ {%prāñjala, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pra + añ-%}
{%jali?%}), straight; honest, upright, sincere. {%—Prāñjala-%}
{%tā,%} f. straightness; honesty.
<LEND>

<L>33533<pc>0654-c<k1>prAYjali<k2>prAYjali
{#prAYjali#}¦ {%prāñjali (pra-añ˚), is, is, i,%} hold-
ing out the open hands slightly hollowed and placed
side by side (as if to hold an offering; a common
mark of respect and salutation, cf. {%añjali, kṛtāñ-%}
{%jali%}); joining the palms of the hands in a suppli-
cating manner (Manu II. 192). {%—Prāñjali-dvaita-%}
{%bhṛt, tas,%} m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>33534<pc>0654-c<k1>prAYjalika<k2>prAYjalika
{%Prāñjalika, as, ā, am, = prāñjali.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>33535<pc>0654-c<k1>prAYjalin<k2>prAYjalin
{%Prāñjalin, ī, inī, i, = prāñjali.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>33536<pc>0654-c<k1>prAqAhati<k2>prAqAhati
{#prAqAhati#}¦ {%prāḍāhati, is,%} m. a patronymic;
see Gaṇa Taulvalyādi to Pāṇ. II. 4, 61.
<LEND>

<L>33537<pc>0654-c<k1>prAqvivAka<k2>prAqvivAka
{#prAqvivAka#}¦ {%prāḍ-vivāka.%} See {%prāch,%} p. 653.
<LEND>

<L>33538<pc>0654-c<k1>prAR<k2>prAR<h>1
{#prAR#} 1¦. {%prāṇ%} or {%prān%} ({%pra-aṇ%} or {%pra-an%}),
cl. 2. P. {%prāṇiti%} (according to Vopa-deva IX. 27,
also {%prāniti%}), &c., to breathe in; inhale, inspire; to
blow (as the wind, Ved.); to live; to smell (intrans.):
Caus. P. A. {%prāṇayati, -te,%} Aor. {%prāṇiṇat,%} to cause to
breathe, give life to, animate: Desid. {%prāṇiṇiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>33539<pc>0654-c<k1>prAR<k2>prAR<h>2
2. {%prāṇ (pra-aṇ), ṇ, ṇ, ṇ,%}¦ breathing (?); see
Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 20.
<LEND>

<L>33540<pc>0654-c<k1>prARa<k2>prARa<h>2
2. {%prāṇa, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see under rt. 1. {%prā,%} p. 652),
breathing, breath, respiration, inspiration and expira-
tion, breath of life, spirit, vital action or life generally,
vitality; a vital organ, organ of sense, vital air, (the
vital airs are variously enumerated as three, viz.
{%prāṇa, apāna,%} and {%vy-āna;%} or five, viz. {%prāṇa,%}
{%apāna, sam-āna, vy-āna, ud-āna;%} or with the
other vital organs six or seven, or nine or ten, or
thirteen; the fivefold enumeration being however
the most usual; and the first of the five or {%prāṇa%}
being used from its seat in the lungs to express
pre-eminently life and vitality); air inhaled, wind;
circulation of nutriment, digestion; the place of
breathing, the mouth and nose (?); any one as dear
as the breath of life, any beloved object (e. g. {%tvam%}
{%me prāṇaḥ,%} thou art as dear to me as the breath of
life; cf. {%pati-prāṇa%}); the spirit (as opposed to the
body); the spirit or life of a poem, poetical talent,
inspiration; the soul ({%= puruṣa%}); vigorous action,
energy, strength, power, might [cf. {%yathā-prāṇām%}];
breathing, aspiration (in the pronunciation of letters);
a breath as a measure of time, viz. the time required for
the pronunciation of ten long syllables = (1/6) Vināḍikā;
N. of a Kalpa, the sixth day in the light half of a
month of Brahmā; myrrh; a mystical expression for
the letter {%y;%} an epithet of Brahma the Supreme
Spirit; N. of a son of the Vasu, Dhara; of one of
the eight Vasus; of a Marut; of one of the seven
sages in the second Manv-antara; of a son of Dhātṛ;
of a son of Vi-dhātṛ the brother of Dhātṛ; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the five vital airs or modes of inspiration and
expiration collectively (see above); life, vitality, the vital
organs or organs of sense, (according to Kullūka, Manu
IV. 143, {%prāṇāḥ = cakṣur-ādīnīndriyāṇi%}); ({%prā-%}
{%ṇān muc,%} to resign or lay down one's life; {%prāṇān%}
{%hā%} or {%pari-tyaj,%} to quit life; {%prāṇān rakṣ,%} to
save life; {%prāṇān ni-han,%} to destroy life); {%prā-%}
{%ṇais,%} ind. with all the soul, with all the strength,
with might and main; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">φρήν, ὀσ-φραίνομαι;</lang>
Cambro-Brit. <nsi>fion,</nsi> ‘the breath or respiration, a
puff of breath, a sigh.’] {%—Prāṇa-kara, as, ī, %}
[Page0655-a+ 81]
{%am,%} ‘life-making,’ refreshing the spirits; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of the father of the author of the Medinī. {%—Prā-%}
{%ṇa-karman, a,%} n. a vital function. {%—Prāṇa-kṛc-%}
{%chra, am,%} n. danger to life, peril of life. {%—Prāṇa-%}
{%kṛṣṇa, as,%} m., N. of an author of various works.
{%—Prāṇa-graha, as,%} m., N. of a particular Soma vessel.
{%—Prāṇa-ghātaka, as, ī, am,%} life-destroying, de-
structive to life, killing. {%—Prāṇa-ghna, as, ī, am,%}
life-destroying, deadly, mortal. {%—Prāṇa-cchid, t, t,%}
{%t,%} cutting off life, shortening life, murderous. {%—Prā-%}
{%ṇa-ccheda, as,%} m. the cutting off of life, murder.
{%—Prāṇa-toṣaṇī,%} f., N. of a compendium of Tantra
works. {%—Prāṇa-tyāga, as,%} m. abandonment of
life, expiring, death, suicide. {%—Prāṇa-da, as, ā, am,%}
life-giving, saving life; ({%as%}), m. a species of plant,
{%= jīvaka; (ā),%} f. the plant Terminalia Chebula ({%=%}
{%harītakī%}); a species of medicinal plant, {%= ṛddhi;%}
{%(am),%} n. water; blood. {%—Prāṇa-dakṣiṇā,%} f. the
gift of life; {%prāṇadakṣiṇāṃ dā,%} to grant any one
his life. {%—Prāṇa-daṇḍa, as,%} m. the punishment of
death. {%—Prāṇa-dayita, as, ā, am,%} dear as life;
({%as%}), m. a husband. {%—Prāṇa-dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} a
life-giver, one who saves another's life. {%—Prāṇa-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. the gift of life, saving any one's life;
resigning or laying down life; anointing the Havis
with Ghṛta during the recitation of sacred texts
supposed to restore life (Ved.). {%—Prāṇa-dāvat,%}
{%ān,%} m., Ved. life-giving, conferring life. {%—Prāṇa-%}
{%durodara, am,%} n. playing or gambling for life,
staking life. {%—Prāṇa-dyūta, am,%} n. staking life or
existence, a battle for life, fighting for life. {%—Prāṇa-%}
{%dyūtābhidevana (˚ta-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} played or
fought with life as a stake (said of a battle in which
life is as it were gambled with or staked, see Mahā-
bh. Śalya-p. 760). {%—Prāṇa-droha, as,%} m. an attack
or attempt upon (any one's) life. {%—Prāṇa-dhara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Prāṇa-dhāra, as, ā, am,%}
possessing life, living, animate; ({%as%}), m. a living
being. {%—Prāṇa-dhāraṇa, am,%} n. the support or
maintenance of life, prolongation of life, suste-
nance; a means of supporting life; retaining life,
vitality. {%—Prāṇa-dhṛk, k, k,%} Ved. sustaining the
breath, prolonging the act of inhaling the breath;
[cf. {%dhṛk,%} p. 459, col. 1.] {%—Prāṇa-nātha, as,%} m.
‘lord of life,’ a husband, lover; an epithet of Yama;
N. of a heresiarch who held a controversy with
Śaṅkara at Pra-yāga. {%—Prāṇa-nāśa, as,%} m. de-
struction or cessation of breath. {%—Prāṇa-nigraha,%}
{%as,%} m. checking or obstructing the breath. {%—Prāṇa-%}
{%pata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%prāṇa-pati%}), see Gaṇa to Pāṇ.
IV. 1, 84. {%—Prāṇa-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of life,’ the
soul; a husband; the heart (?). {%—Prāṇa-patnī,%} f.
‘wife of the vital breath,’ the voice. {%—Prāṇa-pari-%}
{%kraya, as,%} m. the price of life, staking one's life or
existence. {%—Prāṇa-parikṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%} one
whose life is drawing to a close. {%—Prāṇa-pari-%}
{%graha, as,%} m. possession of breath or life, life,
existence. {%—Prāṇa-parityāga, as,%} m. abandoning
or resigning life. {%—Prāṇa-parīpsā,%} f. desire of sav-
ing life, wish to escape. {%—Prāṇa-pā, ās, ās, am,%}
Ved. life-protecting, preserving life. {%—Prāṇa-prada,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} life-bestowing, restoring life, saving life;
({%ā%}), f. a species of medicinal plant {%(= ṛddhi).%}
{%—Prāṇa-pradāyaka, as, ikā, am,%} or {%prāṇa-%}
{%pradāyin, ī, inī, i,%} life-bestowing, restoring life,
saving life. {%—Prāṇa-prayāṇa, am,%} n. departure of
the breath of life, end of life. {%—Prāṇa-priya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} dear as life; ({%as%}), m. a lover. {%—Prāṇa-bādha, as,%}
m. danger to life, fear for life, extreme peril. {%—Prā-%}
{%ṇa-buddhi, is,%} f. sing. (?), life and intelligence.
{%—Prāṇa-bhakṣa, as, ā, am,%} ‘breath-eating,’
‘air-eating,’ inhaling merely the odour of food or
drink. {%—Prāṇa-bhaya, am,%} n. fear for one's life,
danger to life. {%—Prāṇa-bhāsvat, vān,%} m. the
ocean (‘the light of life?’). {%—Prāṇa-bhūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} being the breath of life. {%—Prāṇa-bhṛt, t, t,%}
{%t,%} supporting life (Ved.); containing life, possessed
of life, living, sentient; ({%t%}), m. a living being, a
man; an epithet of particular bricks used in the
erection of an altar. {%—Prāṇa-maya, as, ī, am,%} Ved.
consisting of breath, endowed with breath or life,
[Page0655-b+ 81]
living, breathing. {%—Prāṇamaya-koṣa, as,%} m. one
of the cases or investitures of the soul, the vital case.
{%—Prāṇa-mokṣaṇa, am,%} n. giving up the ghost,
resigning life, suicide. {%—Prāṇa-yama, as,%} m. sus-
pending the breath {%(= prāṇāyāma)%}. {%—Prāṇa-yātrā,%}
f. support of life, subsistence. {%—Prāṇayātrika, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} necessary for the support of life. {%—Prāṇayātrika-%}
{%mātra, as, ī, am,%} possessing only the necessaries
of life. {%—Prāṇa-yoni, is,%} f. the source or spring of
life. {%—Prāṇa-rakṣaṇārtham (˚ṇa-ar˚),%} ind. for
the preservation of life. {%—Prāṇa-rakṣā,%} f. protec-
tion or preservation of life. {%—Prāṇa-randhra, am,%}
n. ‘breath-aperture,’ the mouth; nostril. {%—Prāṇa-%}
{%rodha, as,%} m. checking or suppressing the breath;
danger to life; N. of a particular hell. {%—Prāṇa-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having breath or life, breathing, living,
animated; possessing power, strong, powerful. {%—Prā-%}
{%ṇa-vidyā,%} f. the science of the breath or vital airs.
{%—Prāṇa-vināśa, as,%} m. destruction or loss of life.
{%—Prāṇa-viplava, as, ā, am,%} depriving of life.
{%—Prāṇa-viyoga, as,%} m. ‘the separation of breath
or life,’ the departure of the spirit at the hour of
dissolution, death. {%—Prāṇa-vṛtti, is,%} f. living, acti-
vity, vital function. {%—Prāṇa-vyaya, as,%} m. ‘expen-
diture of life,’ giving up the ghost, death. {%—Prāṇa-%}
{%śakti, is,%} f. a particular Śakti of Viṣṇu. {%—Prāṇa-%}
{%śarīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. whose (only) body is the
breath of life or spirit. {%—Prāṇa-saṃyama, as,%} m.
checking or suspending the breath (as a religious
exercise). {%—Prāṇa-saṃrodha, as,%} m. checking or
obstructing the breath. {%—Prāṇa-saṃvāda, as,%} m.
a controversy between the vital airs, dispute between
the organs of sense (an imaginary contest or con-
troversy between the senses supposed to be disputing
for precedence). {%—Prāṇa-saṃśaya, as,%} m. danger
to life. {%—Prāṇa-saṃhitā,%} f. a manner of reciting
the Vedic texts, pronouncing as many letters as
possible during one breath. {%—Prāṇa-saṅkaṭa, am,%}
n. danger to life, great peril. {%—Prāṇa-sadman, a,%}
n. the abode of the vital airs, the body. {%—Prāṇa-%}
{%santyāga, as,%} m. abandoning or resigning life.
{%—Prāṇa-sandeha, as,%} m. danger to life, risk of
life, great peril. {%—Prāṇa-sannyāsa, as,%} m. giving
up the ghost, dying. {%—Prāṇa-sama, as, ā, am,%}
equal to or as dear as life; ({%as%}), m. a lover, a
husband; ({%ā%}), f. a wife. {%—Prāṇa-sambhṛta, as,%} m.
wind, air; (perhaps a wrong form for {%prāṇa-sam-%}
{%bhūta.%}) {%—Prāṇa-sammita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. reaching
to the nose; dear as life. {%—Prāṇa-sāra, as, ā, am,%}
whose whole essence consists of life, spirited, full of
strength, vigorous. {%—Prāṇa-sūtra, am,%} n. the thread
of life. {%—Prāṇa-hara, as, ī, am,%} taking away life,
threatening life, causing death, destructive. {%—Prāṇa-%}
{%hāraka, as, ikā, am,%} taking away life, causing
death; ({%am%}), n. a kind of poison {%(= vatsa-nābha).%}
{%—Prāṇa-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} taking away life, causing
death, mortal, deadly. {%—Prāṇākarṣin (˚ṇa-āk˚),%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} attracting the vital spirit. {%—Prāṇāgnihotra%}
{%(˚ṇa-ag˚), as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), N. of an Upaniṣad.
{%—Prāṇāghāta (˚ṇa-āgh˚), as,%} m. destruction of
life, killing a living being. {%—Prāṇācārya (˚ṇa-āc˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a physician to a king. {%—Prāṇātipāta (˚ṇa-%}
{%at˚), as,%} m. an attack upon life, taking away life, kill-
ing a living being. {%—Prāṇātman (˚ṇa-āt˚), ā,%} m. the
vital or animal soul, the lowest of the three souls of
a human being (the other two are called {%jīvātman%}
and {%paramātman,%} q. q. v. v.). {%—Prāṇātyaya (˚ṇa-%}
{%at˚), as,%} m. the passing away of life; ({%e%}), ind. at a
time when life is in danger of ceasing. {%—Prāṇāda%}
{%(˚ṇa-āda), as, ā, am,%} ‘eating away life,’ causing
death, fatal. {%—Prāṇādhika (˚ṇa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘more than life,’ dearer than life; superior in vigour.
{%—Prāṇādhinātha (˚ṇa-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of life,’
a husband. {%—Prāṇādhipa (˚ṇa-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘ruler
of the breath of life,’ the soul. {%—Prāṇānta (˚ṇa-%}
{%an˚), as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), the end of life, death;
{%prāṇāntaṃ daṇḍam arhati,%} he deserves death as
a punishment, i. e. he deserves the punishment of
death. {%—Prāṇāntika, as, ī, am,%} destructive to life,
fatal, mortal, capital (as punishment); dangerous; last-
ing to the end of life, ending with life; ({%am%}), n. murder,
[Page0655-c+ 78]
assassination; ({%am%}), ind. until death. {%—Prāṇāpa-%}
{%hārin (˚ṇa-ap˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} taking away life, fatal,
deadly. {%—Prāṇāpāna (˚ṇa-ap˚), au,%} m. du. two of
the vital airs, air inhaled and exhaled; Inspiration
and Expiration personified and identified with the
Aśvins. {%—Prāṇābādha (˚ṇa-āb˚), as,%} m. injury or
danger to life, any act injurious to life. {%—1. prāṇāyana%}
{%(˚ṇa-ay˚), am,%} n. an organ of sense. {%—Prāṇāyāma%}
{%(˚ṇa-āy˚), as,%} m. restraining or suspending the
breath or breathing in a peculiar way through the
nostrils during the mental recitation of the names
or attributes of some deity, (it is differently performed,
cf. {%pūraka, kumbhaka, recaka.%}) {%—Prāṇāyāmin%}
{%(˚ṇa-āy˚), ī, inī, i,%} checking or suppressing the
breath. {%—Prāṇārtha-vat (˚ṇa-ar˚), ān, atī, at,%}
possessed of life and riches. {%—Prāṇeśa (˚ṇa-īśa),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘lord of life,’ a lover, husband; ‘lord of
breath,’ N. of a Marut; ({%ā%}), f. a wife. {%—Prāṇeś-%}
{%vara (˚ṇa-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of (my) life,’ a hus-
band, lover; a particular formula; ({%ī%}), f. a wife.
{%—Prāṇotkramaṇa (˚ṇa-ut˚), am,%} n. the departure
of the spirit, flight of the soul, death. {%—Prāṇot-%}
{%sarga (˚ṇa-ut˚), as,%} m. giving up the ghost, dying.
{%—Prāṇopahāra (˚ṇa-up˚), as,%} m. food (regarded
as an oblation to life).
<LEND>

<L>33541<pc>0655-c<k1>prARaka<k2>prARaka
{%Prāṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a living being, an animal or
sentient being; a species of plant ({%= jīvaka%}); myrrh;
cloth, clothes (?).
<LEND>

<L>33542<pc>0655-c<k1>prARat<k2>prARat
{%Prāṇat, an, atī, at,%}¦ breathing, living.
<LEND>

<L>33543<pc>0655-c<k1>prARaTa<k2>prARaTa
{%Prāṇatha, as,%}¦ m. breathing; air, wind; the lord
of all created beings ({%= prajā-pati%}); a sacred
bathing-place; ({%as, ā, am%}), strong, powerful.
<LEND>

<L>33544<pc>0655-c<k1>prARana<k2>prARana
{%Prāṇana, as,%}¦ m. the throat; ({%am%}), n. the act of
breathing, respiration; living, life; producing life,
calling into life; ({%as, ā, am%}), giving life to, pro-
ducing life. {%—Prāṇanānta (˚na-an˚), as,%} m. the
end of life.
<LEND>

<L>33545<pc>0655-c<k1>prARanta<k2>prARanta
{%Prāṇanta, as,%}¦ m. air, wind; a kind of collyrium,
{%= rasāñjana; (ī),%} f. sneezing; sobbing.
<LEND>

<L>33546<pc>0655-c<k1>prARayat<k2>prARayat
{%Prāṇayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ restoring to life, resusci-
tating, reanimating.
<LEND>

<L>33547<pc>0655-c<k1>prARAyana<k2>prARAyana<h>2
2. {%prāṇāyana, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the offspring of the
vital airs (in Vājasaneyi-Saṃhitā XIII. 54; according
to Mahī-dhara {%prāṇāyana = prāṇasyāpatya%}).
<LEND>

<L>33548<pc>0655-c<k1>prARiRizu<k2>prARiRizu
{%Prāṇiṇiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (see Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 21),
wishing to breathe or live, wishing for life.
<LEND>

<L>33549<pc>0655-c<k1>prARita<k2>prARita
{%Prāṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to breathe, kept alive,
animated, longing to do (anything).
<LEND>

<L>33550<pc>0655-c<k1>prARin<k2>prARin
{%Prāṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ breathing, living, alive; ({%ī%}), m.
a living or sentient being, living creature, animal;
a man. {%—Prāṇi-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%} killing living
beings. {%—Prāṇi-jāta, am,%} n. a class or species of
animals. {%—Prāṇi-tva, am,%} n. the state of a living
being, sentient existence, life. {%—Prāṇi-dyūta, am,%}
n. gambling with fighting animals, setting animals
to fight for wagers, a fight of animals exhibited for
sport, cock-fighting, ram-fighting, &c. {%—Prāṇi-pīḍā,%}
f. giving pain to sentient beings, cruelty to animals.
{%—Prāṇi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of or peopled
with living beings. {%—Prāṇi-mātṛ, tā,%} f. the mother
of a living being; a kind of shrub {%(= garbha-dātrī).%}
{%—Prāṇi-yodhana, am,%} n. setting animals to fight
({%= prāṇi-dyūta%} above). {%—Prāṇi-hiṃsā,%} f. doing
harm to any living creature, injuring or killing an
animal. {%—Prāṇi-hita, as, ā, am,%} favourable or good
for living beings; ({%ā%}), f. a shoe, a boot, (in this
sense probably for {%prāṇahitā,%} q. v.) {%—Prāṇy-aṅga,%}
{%am,%} n. a part or limb of an animal or man, any
animal product (as flesh, bone, milk, ghee, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>33551<pc>0655-c<k1>prARataja<k2>prARataja
{#prARataja#}¦ {%prāṇataja, ās,%} m. pl. (with Jainas)
N. of a subdivision of the Kalpa-bhavas.
<LEND>

<L>33552<pc>0655-c<k1>prARahitA<k2>prARahitA
{#prARahitA#}¦ {%prāṇahitā,%} f. a shoe, a boot;
[cf. {%prāṇi-hitā;%} both are probably corruptions.]
<LEND>

<L>33553<pc>0655-c<k1>prARAyya<k2>prARAyya
{#prARAyya#}¦ {%prāṇāyya, as, ā, am,%} proper, fit,
suited.
<LEND>

<L>33554<pc>0655-c<k1>prARAvAya<k2>prARAvAya
{#prARAvAya#}¦ {%prāṇāvāya, am,%} n., N. of the
twelfth of the fourteen Pūrvas or ancient writings
of the Jainas.
<LEND>
[Page0656-a+ 79]

<L>33555<pc>0656-a<k1>prARAha<k2>prARAha
{#prARAha#}¦ {%prāṇāha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%nah%} with
{%prā%}), Ved. cement (used in building).
<LEND>

<L>33556<pc>0656-a<k1>prARItya<k2>prARItya
{#prARItya#}¦ {%prāṇītya, am,%} n. (probably incor-
rect for {%prāmītya%}), debt.
<LEND>

<L>33557<pc>0656-a<k1>prAta<k2>prAta
{#prAta#}¦ {%prāta.%} See under rt. 1. {%prā,%} p. 652.
<LEND>

<L>33558<pc>0656-a<k1>prAtar<k2>prAtar
{#prAtar#}¦ {%prātar,%} ind. (fr. 1. {%pra%}), early in the
morning, at day-break, at dawn [cf. {%abhi-p˚%}]; on
the next morning, to-morrow morning, early on the
morrow, to-morrow; Morning personified as a son
of Puṣpārṇa and Prabhā; {%prātaḥ prātaḥ,%} every
morning; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πρωΐ;</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>fro, fruo;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>frühe.</nsi>] {%—Prātaḥ-karman, a,%} or
{%prātaḥ-kārya, am,%} n. morning business, a morning
ceremony; [cf. {%prātaḥ-kṛtya%} below.] {%—Prātaḥ-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. morning-time, the early time of day,
early morning, first break of day. {%—Prātaḥ-kṛtya,%}
{%am,%} n. matutinal duty, morning ceremonies, a reli-
gious duty performed in the morning (as worship,
ablution, purification, &c.). {%—Prātaḥ-prahara, as,%}
m. the morning watch, the first part of the day
(from six to nine o'clock); {%prātaḥ-prahare gate,%}
the morning watch being past, at nine o'clock in
the morning. {%—Prātaḥ-sandhyā,%} f. morning twi-
light, dawn, the morning devotions of a Brāhman;
morning sacrifice. {%—Prātaḥ-samaya, as,%} m. the
morning-time, early morning, day-break. {%—Prātaḥ-%}
{%sava, as,%} m. or {%prātaḥ-savana, am,%} n. the morning
libation of Soma (accompanied with ten ceremonial
observances, viz. the {%prātar-anuvāka, abhi-ṣava,%}
{%bahiṣ-pavamāna-stotra, savanīyāḥ paśavaḥ,%}
{%dhiṣṇy-upasthāna, savanīyāḥ puroḍāśāḥ, dvi-%}
{%devatya-grahāḥ, dvi-devatya-bhakṣa, ṛtu-yā-%}
{%jāḥ, ājya%} or {%praüga śastra%}). {%—Prātaḥsavanika%}
or {%prātaḥsavanīya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. belonging or
relating to the morning libation of Soma. {%—Prā-%}
{%taḥ-sāva, as,%} m., Ved. the morning preparation of
Soma, morning libation. {%—Prātaḥ-snāna, am,%} n.
bathing at sun-rise, morning ablution. {%—Prātaḥ-%}
{%snāyin, ī, inī, i,%} bathing early in the morning.
{%—Prātar-anuvāka, as,%} m., Ved. ‘morning recita-
tion,’ the hymn recited at the commencement of
the Prātaḥ-savana. {%—Prātar-abhivāda, as,%} m., Ved.
morning salutation. {%—Prātar-ahna, as,%} m. the
early part of the day, forenoon; N. of a man.
{%—Prātar-āśa, as,%} m. the morning meal, breakfast,
({%a-prātarāśa,%} not breakfasting.) {%—Prātarāśita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has had the morning meal, one
who has breakfasted. {%—Prātar-āhuti, is,%} f., Ved.
the morning oblation, the second half of the daily
Agni-hotra sacrifice. {%—Prātar-itvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved.
going out early in the morning; coming at day-break,
an early guest (Sāy. {%= prātar āgataḥ%}). {%—Prātar-%}
{%geya, as, ā, am,%} to be sung or chanted in the
morning; ({%as%}), m. a minstrel employed to wake
the king in the morning. {%—Prātar-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved.
victorious at day-break; conquering the morning.
{%—Prātar-dina, am,%} n. the early part of the day,
forenoon. {%—Prātar-dugdha, am,%} n., Ved. morning
milk. {%—Prātar-doha, as,%} m. milking in the morn-
ing, morning milk. {%—Prātar-bhoktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}
one who makes an early meal; ({%tā%}), m. a crow.
{%—Prātar-bhojana, am,%} n. the morning meal,
breakfast. {%—Prātar-yāvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. going
out early in the morning, an early guest [cf. {%prātar-%}
{%itvan%}]; ({%āṇā%}), m. du. an epithet of the Aśvins
(Sāy. {%= prātar eva yajña-gantārau%}). {%—Prātar-%}
{%yukta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. yoked or harnessed early in
the morning. {%—Prātar-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. yoking or
harnessing early in the morning; yoked or harnessed
early in the morning (said of a chariot, Sāy. {%=%}
{%prātaḥ-kāle 'śvair yujyamānaḥ%}); ({%jā%}), m. du. an
epithet of the Aśvins (Sāy. {%= prātaḥ-savana-gra-%}
{%heṇa saṃyuktau%}). {%—Prātar-vastṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}
Ved. shining in the morning; [cf. {%doṣā-vastṛ.%}]
{%—Prātar-homa, as,%} m. the morning sacrifice.
{%—Prātas-tarām,%} ind. very early in the morn-
ing. {%—Prātas-trivargā,%} f. an epithet of the river
Gaṅgā (Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 1846).
<LEND>

<L>33559<pc>0656-a<k1>prAtastana<k2>prAtastana
{%Prātastana, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to the
[Page0656-b+ 70]
morning, matutinal; ({%am%}), n., Ved. early morning (the
first of five parts of the day, the other four being {%saṅ-%}
{%gava%} or morning, midday, afternoon, and evening).
<LEND>

<L>33560<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtastya<k2>prAtastya
{%Prātastya, as,%}¦ &c., belonging or relating to the
morning, matutinal.
<LEND>

<L>33561<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtara<k2>prAtara
{#prAtara#}¦ {%prātara, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga; (in
Gaṇa Kṛśāsvādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80, a various reading
for {%pratara.%})
<LEND>

<L>33562<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtardana<k2>prAtardana
{#prAtardana#}¦ {%prātardana, as, ī, am,%} belonging
to or derived from Pra-tardana.
<LEND>

<L>33563<pc>0656-b<k1>prAti<k2>prAti
{#prAti#}¦ {%prāti.%} See under rt. 1. {%prā,%} p. 652.
<LEND>

<L>33564<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtikaRWika<k2>prAtikaRWika
{#prAtikaRWika#}¦ {%prātikaṇṭhika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%prati-kaṇṭham%}), seizing by the throat (?).
<LEND>

<L>33565<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtikA<k2>prAtikA
{#prAtikA#}¦ {%prātikā,%} f. the China rose, Hibis-
cus Rosa Sinensis ({%= javā%}).
<LEND>

<L>33566<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtikAmin<k2>prAtikAmin
{#prAtikAmin#}¦ {%prātikāmin, ī,%} m. (fr. {%prati-%}
{%kāmam%}), a servant, a messenger.
<LEND>

<L>33567<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtikUlika<k2>prAtikUlika
{#prAtikUlika#}¦ {%prātikūlika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%prati-%}
{%kūla%}), opposed to, opposing.
<LEND>

<L>33568<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtikUlya<k2>prAtikUlya
{%Prātikūlya, am,%}¦ n. contrariety, adverseness, con-
tradiction, hinderance, opposition, resistance, hostility,
unfriendliness, unpleasantness.
<LEND>

<L>33569<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtijanIna<k2>prAtijanIna
{#prAtijanIna#}¦ {%prātijanīna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%prati-%}
{%jana%}), suitable against an adversary.
<LEND>

<L>33570<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtijYa<k2>prAtijYa
{#prAtijYa#}¦ {%prātijña, am,%} n. (fr. {%prati-jñā%}), the
subject under discussion.
<LEND>

<L>33571<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtiTeyI<k2>prAtiTeyI
{#prAtiTeyI#}¦ {%prātitheyī,%} f. (fr. {%pra-tithi%}), N. of
a female sage; (also read {%prātītheyī.%})
<LEND>

<L>33572<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtidEvasika<k2>prAtidEvasika
{#prAtidEvasika#}¦ {%prātidaivasika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%prati-divasam%}), happening or occurring daily.
<LEND>

<L>33573<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtiniDika<k2>prAtiniDika
{#prAtiniDika#}¦ {%prātinidhika, as,%} m. (fr. {%prati-%}
{%nidhi%}), Ved. a substitute, proxy.
<LEND>

<L>33574<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtipakza<k2>prAtipakza
{#prAtipakza#}¦ {%prātipakṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%prati-%}
{%pakṣa%}), belonging to an enemy, hostile; adverse,
contrary.
<LEND>

<L>33575<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtipakzya<k2>prAtipakzya
{%Prātipakṣya, am,%}¦ n. hostility, enmity; {%asmā-%}
{%kam prātipakṣyam,%} enmity against us.
<LEND>

<L>33576<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtipaTika<k2>prAtipaTika
{#prAtipaTika#}¦ {%prātipathika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%tipathika%}), going along a road or path.
<LEND>

<L>33577<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtipada<k2>prAtipada
{#prAtipada#}¦ {%prātipada, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%prati-%}
{%pad%}), forming the beginning or commencement;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>33578<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtipadika<k2>prAtipadika
{%Prātipadika, am,%}¦ n. the crude form or base of a
noun, a crude word or noun as formed by either Kṛt or
Taddhita affix before receiving a case-termination, a
noun in its uninflected state, (when the case-termina-
tion is added, the {%prātipadika%} becomes a {%pada%} or
real word); ({%as%}), m. an epithet of fire; ({%as, ī, am%}),
in express terms, express, explicit; [cf. {%prati-pa-%}
{%dam.%}] {%—Prātipadikānurodha (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m.
conformity with the words or express terms of any
statement; ({%āt%}), ind. in conformity with express
terms, expressly.
<LEND>

<L>33579<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtipIya<k2>prAtipIya
{#prAtipIya#}¦ {%prātipīya%} or {%prātipeya, as,%} m. a
patronymic of Balhika.
<LEND>

<L>33580<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtipOruzika<k2>prAtipOruzika
{#prAtipOruzika#}¦ {%prātipauruṣika, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%prati + pauruṣa%}), relating or belonging to
manliness or valour.
<LEND>

<L>33581<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtiboDa<k2>prAtiboDa
{#prAtiboDa#}¦ {%prātibodha, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Prati-bodha; see Gaṇa to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 104.
<LEND>

<L>33582<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtiboDAyana<k2>prAtiboDAyana
{%Prātibodhāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Prati-
bodha; see Gaṇa to Pāṇ. IV. 1. 100.
<LEND>

<L>33583<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtiBa<k2>prAtiBa
{#prAtiBa#}¦ {%prātibha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%prati-bhā%}),
belonging or relating to divination; ({%am%}), n., scil.
{%jñāna,%} divination; quick apprehension or conception.
<LEND>

<L>33584<pc>0656-b<k1>prAtiBAvya<k2>prAtiBAvya
{#prAtiBAvya#}¦ {%prātibhāvya, am,%} n. (fr. {%prati-%}
{%bhū%}), the act of becoming bail or surety, suretiship,
being answerable for the appearance of the debtor
or for his being trustworthy or for the payment of
his debt in case of his failing to do it.
<LEND>
[Page0656-c+ 74]

<L>33585<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtiBAsika<k2>prAtiBAsika
{#prAtiBAsika#}¦ {%prātibhāsika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%prati-bhāsa%}), having only the appearance of, exist-
ing only in appearance; bearing a resemblance, re-
sembling, looking like.
<LEND>

<L>33586<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtirUpya<k2>prAtirUpya
{#prAtirUpya#}¦ {%prātirūpya, am,%} n. (fr. {%prati-%}
{%rūpa%}), similarity of form, &c.
<LEND>

<L>33587<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtilomika<k2>prAtilomika
{#prAtilomika#}¦ {%prātilomika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%prati-loma%}), against the hair or the grain, contrary
to natural course or order, hostile, disagreeable.
<LEND>

<L>33588<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtilomya<k2>prAtilomya
{%Prātilomya, am,%}¦ n. contrary direction, contrariety,
inverted order, inversion, the being at variance with
the natural or established order of things, reverse-
ness; opposition, hostility, hostile feeling; ({%āt%}), ind.
out of opposition to.
<LEND>

<L>33589<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtiveSika<k2>prAtiveSika
{#prAtiveSika#}¦ {%prātiveśika, as,%} m. (fr. {%prati-%}
{%veśa%}), a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>33590<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtiveSmaka<k2>prAtiveSmaka
{%Prātiveśmaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%prati-veśman%}), be-
longing to a neighbour's house, neighbouring; ({%as%}),
m. a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>33591<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtiveSya<k2>prAtiveSya
{%Prātiveśya, as,%}¦ m. a neighbour who lives opposite,
a next-door neighbour, (according to Kullūka {%= ni-%}
{%rantara-gṛha-vāsin%}); a neighbour in general.
<LEND>

<L>33592<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtiveSyaka<k2>prAtiveSyaka
{%Prātiveśyaka, as,%}¦ m. a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>33593<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtiSAKya<k2>prAtiSAKya
{#prAtiSAKya#}¦ {%prātiśākhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%prati-%}
{%śākham%}), a grammatical treatise on the rules regu-
lating the euphonic combination of letters and their
pronunciation peculiar to one of the different Śākhās
or branches of the Vedas, i. e. to one of those
versions of the Vedic texts handed down in different
families in different parts of India, (the Prātiśākhyas
do not undo words in the same way as the Vyākaraṇa,
but take actually formed words as they occur in the
hymns and teach the phonetic changes they undergo,
the mode of pronouncing the accents, &c.; there
exist four Prātiśākhyas, 1. a Prātiśākhya to the
Śākala-śākhā of the Ṛg-veda, called Śākala-prāti-
śākhya and ascribed to Śaunaka; 2. to a Śākhā of
the Taittirīya or Black Yajur-veda; 3. to a Śākhā
of the Mādhyandinas who belong to the family of
the Vājasaneyins or authors of the White Yajur-veda,
whence this is called the Vājasaneyi-prātiśākhya, it
is attributed to Kātyāyana; 4. an Atharva-veda-prā-
tiśākhya, called Śaunakīyā Caturādhyāyikā; but no
Prātiśākhya has yet been found to the Sāma-veda.)
{%—Prātiśākhya-kṛt, t,%} m. the author of a Prātiśā-
khya. {%—Prātiśākhya-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a com-
mentary by Ūaṭa on the Ṛg-veda-prātiśākhya.
<LEND>

<L>33594<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtiSrutka<k2>prAtiSrutka
{#prAtiSrutka#}¦ {%prātiśrutka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%prati-%}
{%śrut%}), Ved. existing in the echo.
<LEND>

<L>33595<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtisvika<k2>prAtisvika
{#prAtisvika#}¦ {%prātisvika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%prati-%}
{%sva%}), own, peculiar, proper, not common to others;
granting to every one his own due.
<LEND>

<L>33596<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtihata<k2>prAtihata
{#prAtihata#}¦ {%prātihata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%prati-%}
{%hata%}), epithet of a particular Svarita ({%= tairovi-%}
{%rāma,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>33597<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtihantra<k2>prAtihantra
{%Prātihantra, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%prati-hantṛ%}), the state
or condition of a revenger; vengeance.
<LEND>

<L>33598<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtihartra<k2>prAtihartra
{#prAtihartra#}¦ {%prātihartra, am,%} n. (fr. {%prati-%}
{%hartṛ,%} rt. {%hṛ%} with {%prati%}), the office or duty of
the Prati-hartṛ, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33599<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtihAra<k2>prAtihAra
{%Prātihāra, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%prati-hāra%}), a juggler.
<LEND>

<L>33600<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtihAraka<k2>prAtihAraka
{%Prātihāraka, as,%}¦ m. {%= prātihāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>33601<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtihArika<k2>prAtihArika
{%Prātihārika, as, ī, am,%}¦ containing Prati-hāras (as
a Vedic hymn); ({%as%}), m. a juggler, conjurer.
<LEND>

<L>33602<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtihArya<k2>prAtihArya
{%Prātihārya, am,%}¦ n. juggling, conjuring, legerde-
main; working miracles; a miracle, miraculous phe-
nomenon.
<LEND>

<L>33603<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtItika<k2>prAtItika
{#prAtItika#}¦ {%prātītika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pratīti%}),
existing in the mind or imagination, mental.
<LEND>

<L>33604<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtITeyI<k2>prAtITeyI
{#prAtITeyI#}¦ {%prātītheyī,%} a various reading for
{%prātitheyī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33605<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtIpa<k2>prAtIpa
{#prAtIpa#}¦ {%prātīpa, as,%} m. (fr. {%pratīpa%}), a
patronymic of Śāntanu.
<LEND>

<L>33606<pc>0656-c<k1>prAtIpika<k2>prAtIpika
{%Prātīpika, as, ī, am,%}¦ contrary, reverse, retrograde.
<LEND>
[Page0657-a+ 74]

<L>33607<pc>0657-a<k1>prAtfda<k2>prAtfda
{#prAtfda#}¦ {%prātṛda, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Pra-tṛd.
<LEND>

<L>33608<pc>0657-a<k1>prAtyakza<k2>prAtyakza
{#prAtyakza#}¦ {%prātyakṣa%} or {%prātyakṣika, as, ī, am,%}
perceptible to the eyes, &c. ({%= pratyakṣa,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>33609<pc>0657-a<k1>prAtyagraTi<k2>prAtyagraTi
{#prAtyagraTi#}¦ {%prātyagrathi, is,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Pratyag-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>33610<pc>0657-a<k1>prAtyantika<k2>prAtyantika
{#prAtyantika#}¦ {%prātyantika, as,%} m. (fr. {%praty-%}
{%anta%}), a prince of the Pratyantas; a lord of the
marches, keeper of the borders (?).
<LEND>

<L>33611<pc>0657-a<k1>prAtyayika<k2>prAtyayika
{#prAtyayika#}¦ {%prātyayika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%praty-%}
{%aya%}), relating to or attended with confidence or trust,
confidential, trusty, having faith in; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%prati-%}
{%bhū,%} a surety for the trustworthiness of a debtor.
<LEND>

<L>33612<pc>0657-a<k1>prAtyavekzA<k2>prAtyavekzA
{#prAtyavekzA#}¦ {%prātyavekṣā,%} wrongly for {%praty-%}
{%avekṣā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33613<pc>0657-a<k1>prAtyahika<k2>prAtyahika
{#prAtyahika#}¦ {%prātyahika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%praty-%}
{%aham%}), occurring or happening every day, daily.
<LEND>

<L>33614<pc>0657-a<k1>prATamika<k2>prATamika
{#prATamika#}¦ {%prāthamika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%thama%}), belonging or relating to the first, primary,
first, initial, initiative, prior, previous; happening or
occurring for the first time.
<LEND>

<L>33615<pc>0657-a<k1>prATamakalpika<k2>prATamakalpika
{%Prāthamakalpika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%prathama +%}
{%kalpa%}), one who has just commenced the perusal
of the Vedas, a student; a term applied to a Yogi
just commencing his course.
<LEND>

<L>33616<pc>0657-a<k1>prATamya<k2>prATamya
{%Prāthamya, am,%}¦ n. the being first, priority, pre-
cedence.
<LEND>

<L>33617<pc>0657-a<k1>prAd<k2>prAd
{#prAd#}¦ {%prād (pra-ad),%} cl. 2. P. {%prātti, prāt-%}
{%tum,%} to eat up, consume, devour.
<LEND>

<L>33618<pc>0657-a<k1>prAdakziRya<k2>prAdakziRya
{#prAdakziRya#}¦ {%prādakṣiṇya, as,%} m. (fr. {%pra-%}
{%dakṣiṇa%}), keeping the right side towards anything
while moving round it, circumambulation by starting
from the left and coming round to the right (by
way of reverence).
<LEND>

<L>33619<pc>0657-a<k1>prAdA<k2>prAdA
{#prAdA#}¦ {%prā-dā (pra-ā-),%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadāti,%}
{%-datte, -dātum,%} to give, bestow.
<LEND>

<L>33620<pc>0657-a<k1>prAdAya<k2>prAdAya
{%Prādāya,%}¦ ind. having given or bestowed.
<LEND>

<L>33621<pc>0657-a<k1>prAditya<k2>prAditya
{#prAditya#}¦ {%prāditya (pra-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of
two princes.
<LEND>

<L>33622<pc>0657-a<k1>prAdurAkzi<k2>prAdurAkzi
{#prAdurAkzi#}¦ {%prādurākṣi, is,%} m. a patronymic;
(perhaps an incorrect form for {%prādur-akṣi.%})
<LEND>

<L>33623<pc>0657-a<k1>prAdus<k2>prAdus
{#prAdus#}¦ {%prādus,%} ind. (perhaps fr. {%prā%} for
1. {%pra%} + 1. {%dur,%} i. e. before or outside the door, in
open daylight; said to be fr. rt. {%ad%} with {%pra;%} accord-
ing to Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 41, the final {%s%} is changed into {%ṣ%}
before {%k%} and {%p;%} and according to Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 87, the
radical {%s%} of rt. 1. {%as,%} ‘to be,’ is changed to {%ṣ%} after
{%prādus%} whenever in the conjugation of this rt. the
initial {%a%} is dropped, e. g. {%prāduḥ ṣanti,%} not {%prā-%}
{%duḥ santi; prādus%} appears to occur only in con-
nection with the rts. 1. {%as,%} 1. {%bhū,%} and 1. {%kṛ,%} except
in the comp. {%prāduṣ-pītam%} given as an example
by the Scholiast on Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 41); apparently,
evidently, manifestly, visibly, in sight. According
to native lexicographers the senses in which {%prādus%}
is used may be expressed by the following Sanskrit
words, {%prākāśya, nāman, sam-bhāvya, sam-bhava,%}
{%pra-vṛtti, vṛtti.%}
<LEND>

<L>33624<pc>0657-a<k1>prAduras<k2>prAduras
{%Prādur-as%}¦ (see rt. 1. {%as%}), cl. 2. P. {%asti,%} &c., to
be apparent or evident, to be manifest; to appear,
arise, exist.
<LEND>

<L>33625<pc>0657-a<k1>prAdurBU<k2>prAdurBU
{%Prādur-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to
become manifest, become visible; to appear, arise,
come to light, exist; to become audible, be heard.
{%—Prādur-bhāva, as,%} m. the becoming manifest or
visible, arising, coming into existence, appearance,
manifestation; the appearance of a deity on earth;
the being evident; the becoming audible. {%—Prādur-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become manifest or evident, come
to light, manifested, appeared, revealed.
<LEND>

<L>33626<pc>0657-a<k1>prAduzkf<k2>prAduzkf
{%Prāduṣ-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make visible or manifest, bring to light, reveal,
disclose, exhibit, manifest. {%—Prāduṣ-karaṇa, am,%}
n. the making visible, bringing to light, manifesta-
[Page0657-b+ 74]
tion, production. {%—Prāduṣ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made
visible, brought to light, manifested, displayed to
view. {%—Prāduṣkṛta-vapus, us, us, us,%} one whose
form is manifested, appearing in a visible form (as a
deity). {%—Prāduṣ-kṛtya,%} ind. having brought to
light, having produced.
<LEND>

<L>33627<pc>0657-b<k1>prAduzya<k2>prAduzya
{%Prāduṣya, am,%}¦ n. appearance, manifestation.
<LEND>

<L>33628<pc>0657-b<k1>prAdeSa<k2>prAdeSa
{#prAdeSa#}¦ {%prādeśa, as,%} m. (fr. {%pra-deśa%}), the
span of the thumb and forefinger, the space measured
by the span of the thumb and forefinger; place,
country (?). {%—Prādeśa-mātra, as, ī, am,%} only a
span long; {%prādeśamātram bhūmeḥ,%} a mere span
of land.
<LEND>

<L>33629<pc>0657-b<k1>prAdeSana<k2>prAdeSana
{%Prādeśana, am,%}¦ n. {%= pra-deśana,%} a gift, &c.
<LEND>

<L>33630<pc>0657-b<k1>prAdeSika<k2>prAdeSika
{%Prādeśika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pra-deśa%}), authorized
by precedents or examples, precedented; significant,
indicatory of the original meaning; local, limited,
relating to a part; {%prādeśiko guṇaḥ,%} the property
of a word indicatory of its original or etymological
meaning; ({%as%}), m. a small landed proprietor, the
owner or chief of a district. {%—Prādeśikeśvara (˚ka-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. the owner or chief of a district, a small
landed proprietor, (opposed to {%sārvabhauma.%})
<LEND>

<L>33631<pc>0657-b<k1>prAdeSin<k2>prAdeSin
{%Prādeśin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. {%prādeśa%}), a span long;
({%inī%}), f. the forefinger, (in this sense probably an
error for {%pra-deśinī.%})
<LEND>

<L>33632<pc>0657-b<k1>prAdoza<k2>prAdoza
{#prAdoza#}¦ {%prādoṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-doṣa%}),
belonging or relating to the evening, vespertine.
<LEND>

<L>33633<pc>0657-b<k1>prAdozika<k2>prAdozika
{%Prādoṣika, as, ī, am, = prādoṣa.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>33634<pc>0657-b<k1>prAdohani<k2>prAdohani
{#prAdohani#}¦ {%prādohani, is,%} m. a patronymic
from Pra-dohana.
<LEND>

<L>33635<pc>0657-b<k1>prAdyumni<k2>prAdyumni
{#prAdyumni#}¦ {%prādyumni, is,%} m. a patronymic
from Pra-dyumna.
<LEND>

<L>33636<pc>0657-b<k1>prAdyoti<k2>prAdyoti
{#prAdyoti#}¦ {%prādyoti, is,%} m. a patronymic
from Pra-dyota.
<LEND>

<L>33637<pc>0657-b<k1>prAdru<k2>prAdru
{#prAdru#}¦ {%prā-dru (pra-ā-dru),%} cl. 1. P. {%-dra-%}
{%vati, -drotum,%} to run away from, flee from; to
escape to, escape.
<LEND>

<L>33638<pc>0657-b<k1>prADanika<k2>prADanika
{#prADanika#}¦ {%prādhanika, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-%}
{%dhana%}), an implement of war, a destructive weapon.
<LEND>

<L>33639<pc>0657-b<k1>prADA<k2>prADA
{#prADA#}¦ {%prādhā,%} f., N. of a daughter of
Dakṣa and mother of several Apsarasas and Gan-
dharvas; [cf. {%pra-dhā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33640<pc>0657-b<k1>prADeya<k2>prADeya
{%Prādheya, as, ī, am,%}¦ descended from Prādhā.
<LEND>

<L>33641<pc>0657-b<k1>prADAnika<k2>prADAnika
{#prADAnika#}¦ {%prādhānika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%dhāna%}), pre-eminent, most eminent or distinguished,
best, most excellent, superior; predominant; derived
from or relating to Pradhāna or primary matter (in
the Sāṅkhya phil.).
<LEND>

<L>33642<pc>0657-b<k1>prADAnya<k2>prADAnya
{%Prādhānya, am,%}¦ n. predominance, preponder-
ance, prevalence, ascendancy, pre-eminence, superi-
ority, supremacy; the being the highest object; a
principal cause; {%prādhānyena%} or {%prādhānyāt%} or
{%prādhānya-tas,%} ind. in regard to the highest object,
with reference to the chief purpose; in the highest
degree, chiefly, principally, especially. {%—Prādhānya-%}
{%stuti, is, is, i,%} receiving especial praise, chiefly praised,
especially celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>33643<pc>0657-b<k1>prADIta<k2>prADIta
{#prADIta#}¦ {%prādhīta, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. 5. {%i%} with
{%pra-adhi%}), well-read, highly educated, learned (said
of Brāhmans).
<LEND>

<L>33644<pc>0657-b<k1>prADyayana<k2>prADyayana
{%Prādhyayana, am,%}¦ n. reciting, reading, studying.
<LEND>

<L>33645<pc>0657-b<k1>prADyezaRa<k2>prADyezaRa
{#prADyezaRa#}¦ {%prādhy-eṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 3.
{%iṣ%} with {%pra-adhi%}), Ved. incitement, exhortation
(to study).
<LEND>

<L>33646<pc>0657-b<k1>prADva<k2>prADva
{#prADva#}¦ {%prādhva (pra-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} being
on a road or journey, distant, remote, long, a long
way off; bent, bowed, inclined; favourable, conform-
able; ({%as%}), m. a car, carriage; ({%am%}), ind. favourably,
conformably, agreeably; crookedly, in a contrary
way (?). {%—Prādhvaṃ-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -ku-%}
{%rute, -kartum,%} to make conformable, to bend conform-
ably, to join together (as the hands) in token of good-
will. {%—Prādhvaṃ-kṛtya,%} ind. making conformable.
<LEND>
[Page0657-c+ 77]

<L>33647<pc>0657-c<k1>prADvana<k2>prADvana
{%Prādhvana (pra-adh˚), as,%}¦ m., Ved. the bed of
a river or stream.
<LEND>

<L>33648<pc>0657-c<k1>prADvaMsana<k2>prADvaMsana
{#prADvaMsana#}¦ {%prādhvaṃsana, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Pra-dhvaṃsana.
<LEND>

<L>33649<pc>0657-c<k1>prADvara<k2>prADvara
{#prADvara#}¦ {%prādhvara, as, ī, am,%} an epithet of
a branch of a tree; (probably an incorrect form.)
<LEND>

<L>33650<pc>0657-c<k1>prAn<k2>prAn
{#prAn#}¦ {%prān.%} See 1. {%prāṇ,%} p. 654, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33651<pc>0657-c<k1>prAnAqI<k2>prAnAqI
{#prAnAqI#}¦ {%prānāḍī,%} perhaps incorrectly for
{%pra-ṇāḍī = pra-ṇālī.%}
<LEND>

<L>33652<pc>0657-c<k1>prAnta<k2>prAnta
{#prAnta#}¦ {%prānta (pra-an˚), as, am,%} m. n. edge,
margin, verge, border, ({%oṣṭha-prāntau,%} the corners
of the mouth); boundary, bound, extremity, extreme
verge, end [cf. {%yauvana-p˚%}]; back part; a point,
tip (of a blade of grass); ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
{%—Prānta-ga, as, ā, am,%} dwelling near the boun-
daries, living close by. {%—Prānta-tas,%} ind. along the
edge or border (of anything), marginally, along or
upon the extremity. {%—Prānta-durga, am,%} n. ‘bor-
der-stronghold,’ a suburb or collection of houses
outside the walls of the town, a Petta or town con-
tiguous to a fort and separately fortified. {%—Prānta-%}
{%puṣpā,%} f. a kind of plant (having flowers along the
edge of the stem ?). {%—Prānta-virasa, as, ā, am,%}
finally or ultimately insipid, tasteless in the end.
{%—Prānta-stha, as, ā, am,%} inhabiting the borders.
<LEND>

<L>33653<pc>0657-c<k1>prAntAyana<k2>prAntAyana
{%Prāntāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Prānta.
<LEND>

<L>33654<pc>0657-c<k1>prAntara<k2>prAntara
{#prAntara#}¦ {%prāntara (pra-an˚), am,%} n. a long
desolate road, a lonesome way or lane, a solitary path;
an intervening long tract of country between two vil-
lages; a forest; the hollow of a tree. {%—Prāntara-śūn-%}
{%ya, am,%} n. a long tiresome road (also {%prānta-śūnya%}).
<LEND>

<L>33655<pc>0657-c<k1>prAp<k2>prAp<h>1
{#prAp#} 1¦. {%prāp (pra-āp),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%prāp-%}
{%noti, prāpnute, prāptum,%} to attain to, reach,
arrive at; to extend, stretch; to come upon, light
upon, meet with, find; to obtain, get, gain, win;
to obtain as a husband or wife; to bring upon
one's self, contract, incur (e. g. {%daṇḍam prāp,%} to
incur a fine); to suffer, endure (e. g. {%vadham prāp,%}
to suffer capital punishment); to flee to (e. g. {%diśaḥ%}
{%prāpan,%} they fled to the various quarters, i. e. they
fled in all directions); to pass or be changed into
(in gram.), to follow (a grammatical rule); to be
present, be at hand (Ved.): Caus. {%prāpayati, -te,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to attain to, cause to reach or
arrive at, cause to occupy; to lead to, bring to;
to promote or advance to, appoint to (an office); to
drive to; to cause to obtain or gain, cause to possess,
give anything to any one (with two acc.); to tell,
announce (Rāmāyaṇa VII. 103, 10): Desid. {%prep-%}
{%sati,%} to try to attain or get at, strive to reach.
<LEND>

<L>33656<pc>0657-c<k1>prAp<k2>prAp<h>2
2. {%prāp, p, p, p,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>33657<pc>0657-c<k1>prApa<k2>prApa<h>1
1. {%prāpa, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see p. 658), arriving at,
reaching, attaining, obtaining; [cf. {%duṣ-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33658<pc>0657-c<k1>prApaka<k2>prApaka
{%Prāpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to arrive at, leading
to (with gen.), conveying, bringing; causing to obtain,
providing with, procuring; a procurer; establishing,
making valid; obtaining, one who obtains.
<LEND>

<L>33659<pc>0657-c<k1>prApaRa<k2>prApaRa
{%Prāpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. attaining to, attainment, reach-
ing, extending, ({%bāhvoḥ prāpaṇānte,%} as far as the
arms reach); obtaining, receiving, acquisition; bring-
ing to, leading to, conveying; procuring [cf. {%duṣ-%}
{%prāpaṇa%}]; reference to.
<LEND>

<L>33660<pc>0657-c<k1>prApaRIya<k2>prApaRIya
{%Prāpaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attained to, to be
reached, attainable; to be caused to attain, to be
made to arrive at; to be provided with; to be pro-
cured, procurable, obtainable.
<LEND>

<L>33661<pc>0657-c<k1>prApayya<k2>prApayya
{%Prāpayya,%}¦ ind. = 2. {%prāpya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33662<pc>0657-c<k1>prApita<k2>prApita
{%Prāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to attain to, made
to arrive at; caused to occupy, placed upon; led or
conducted to, brought to, conveyed; promoted or
advanced to, appointed to; caused to obtain or gain,
caused to possess; procured.
<LEND>

<L>33663<pc>0657-c<k1>prApin<k2>prApin
{%Prāpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ attaining to, reaching, coming
to; obtaining, getting, gaining, receiving.
<LEND>

<L>33664<pc>0657-c<k1>prApta<k2>prApta
{%Prāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ attained to, reached, arrived
at [cf. {%kara-p˚, hasta-p˚%}]; come upon, lighted
upon, met with, found; obtained, got, gained,
[Page0658-a+ 81]
acquired, procured, won; incurred, contracted; suf-
fered, endured; one who has attained to or arrived
at; arrived, come, present; come to a close, com-
pleted, arrived at maturity; (in gram.) obtained
from a rule, following from a rule, valid in conse-
quence of a rule (e. g. {%iti prāpte,%} because it so
follows from a preceding rule); (in medicine) de-
scribed (as a symptom); fixed, placed; proper, right;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Prāpta-kārin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} doing what is fit or proper. {%—Prāpta-kāla,%}
{%as,%} m. a time or moment arrived, a favourable
moment, a fit time, proper season; ({%as, ā, am%}),
one whose time has come (e. g. {%prāpta-kālo dehī,%}
a mortal whose time, i. e. whose last hour, is come);
opportune, seasonable, suitable; arrived at maturity,
marriageable; fated, destined; ({%am%}), ind. at the
right time, opportunely. {%—Prāptakāla-tva, am,%} n.
the being a favourable moment, timeliness, season-
ableness; ({%tvāt%}), ind. because it is the proper season.
{%—Prāpta-jīvana, as, ā, am,%} restored to life.
{%—Prāpta-doṣa, as, ā, am,%} one who has incurred
guilt, one who has committed an offence. {%—Prāpta-%}
{%pañcatva, as, ā, am,%} arrived at dissolution into
the five elements, deceased, dead. {%—Prāpta-buddhi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} possessed of understanding, enlightened,
instructed, intelligent; regaining consciousness, be-
coming conscious (after fainting), recovering. {%—Prāp-%}
{%ta-bhāra, as,%} m. a draught-ox or beast of burden.
{%—Prāpta-bhāva, as, ā, am,%} one who has attained
to any state or condition, of a good disposition; ({%as%}),
m. a young bullock, an ox, (? for {%prāpta-bhāra.%})
{%—Prāpta-manoratha, as, ā, am,%} one who has
obtained his wish. {%—Prāpta-yauvana, as, ā, am,%}
one who has attained the age of puberty, being in
the bloom of youth. {%—Prāpta-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} of
a proper form, fit, proper, suitable; handsome, pleas-
ing, beautiful; learned, wise, educated. {%—Prāpta-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has attained to or arrived
at; one who has obtained or gained. {%—Prāpta-%}
{%vara, as, ā, am,%} fraught with blessings. {%—Prāpta-%}
{%vyavahāra, as,%} m. a young man come of age, an
adult, one able to conduct his own affairs and respon-
sible for his conduct. {%—Prāpta-sūrya, as, ā, am,%}
having the sun (vertical). {%—Prāptānujña (˚ta-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has received permission to with-
draw, allowed to depart. {%—Prāptāparādha (˚ta-%}
{%ap˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has committed an offence,
guilty of an offence. {%—Prāptārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one whose object is attained, successful; ({%as%}),
m. an object attained, an advantage gained. {%—Prāp-%}
{%tārthāgrahaṇa (˚tha-ag˚), am,%} n. the not securing
of advantages gained. {%—Prāptāvasara (˚ta-av˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} taking or finding occasion, opportune,
seasonable; ({%as%}), m. a proper time, suitable occasion.
{%—Prāptodaya (˚ta-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has
attained exaltation, fortunate.
<LEND>

<L>33665<pc>0658-a<k1>prAptavya<k2>prAptavya
{%Prāptavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attained to, to be
reached, attainable; to be met with or found; to be
gained or obtained, obtainable, procurable; a fanciful
name given to a man in the Pañca-tantra (who,
whenever asked his name, replied {%prāptavyam ar-%}
{%thaṃ labhate manuṣyaḥ,%} a man takes anything
that is to be got, see Pañca-tantra, p. 128. 17).
<LEND>

<L>33666<pc>0658-a<k1>prApti<k2>prApti
{%Prāpti, is,%}¦ f. attaining to, attainment, reaching,
arriving at, arrival, coming; coming or lighting
upon, meeting with, finding; obtaining, getting,
gaining, acquisition, profit, gain, advantage; reach,
range; the power of obtaining everything, one of
the eight superhuman faculties; obtaining by actions
done in a former existence; discovering by percep-
tion, guessing, conjecture; the being valid, holding
good (of a rule); lot, share, portion, fortune, luck,
good luck; (in dramatic language) happy denoue-
ment, successful termination of a plot; (in astrology)
N. of the eleventh lunar mansion ({%= āya, lābha%});
Prāpti personified as wife of Śama (associated with
Asti as a daughter of Jarā-sandha); a collection,
assemblage, quantity. {%—Prāpti-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
one who has attained to or reached. {%—Prāpti-sama,%}
{%as,%} m. a particular {%jāti%} (q. v.) in logic. {%—Prāpty-%}
{%āśā,%} f. the hope of obtaining (an object).
<LEND>
[Page0658-b+ 72]

<L>33667<pc>0658-b<k1>prApya<k2>prApya<h>1
1. {%prāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attained, to be
arrived at, attainable, obtainable, acquirable, pro-
curable [cf. {%sukha-p˚%}]; proper, fitting, suitable.
<LEND>

<L>33668<pc>0658-b<k1>prApya<k2>prApya<h>2
2. {%prāpya,%}¦ ind. having attained to or arrived at;
having come upon or met with; having obtained or
gained; having incurred; having suffered or endured.
<LEND>

<L>33669<pc>0658-b<k1>prApyamARa<k2>prApyamARa
{%Prāpyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being attained to or ar-
rived at; taking place (according to a rule in gram.).
<LEND>

<L>33670<pc>0658-b<k1>prApa<k2>prApa<h>2
{#prApa#} 2¦. {%prāpa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pra + ap%}),
abounding with water, watery (?).
<LEND>

<L>33671<pc>0658-b<k1>prApaRika<k2>prApaRika
{#prApaRika#}¦ {%prāpaṇika, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%paṇ%}
with {%pra;%} according to Malli-nātha fr. {%pra-paṇa%}),
a trader, dealer, retail dealer; [cf. {%āpaṇika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33672<pc>0658-b<k1>prApeya<k2>prApeya
{#prApeya#}¦ {%prāpeya%} for {%prādheya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33673<pc>0658-b<k1>prAbanDa<k2>prAbanDa
{#prAbanDa#}¦ {%prābandha%} in {%kesara-prābandhā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33674<pc>0658-b<k1>prAbalya<k2>prAbalya
{#prAbalya#}¦ {%prābalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-bala%}),
superiority of force, superior force, predominance, as-
cendancy; powerfulness, power, vigour, might, force.
<LEND>

<L>33675<pc>0658-b<k1>prAbAlika<k2>prAbAlika
{#prAbAlika#}¦ {%prābālika, as,%} m. (fr. {%pra-bāla%}),
a vender of coral, coral merchant.
<LEND>

<L>33676<pc>0658-b<k1>prAboDaka<k2>prAboDaka
{#prAboDaka#}¦ {%prābodhaka, as,%} m. ({%= pra-bo-%}
{%dhaka%}), a minstrel employed to wake the king in
the morning; (a various reading for {%prābodhika.%})
<LEND>

<L>33677<pc>0658-b<k1>prAboDika<k2>prAboDika
{%Prābodhika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%pra-bodha%}), dawn, day-
break.
<LEND>

<L>33678<pc>0658-b<k1>prABaYjana<k2>prABaYjana
{#prABaYjana#}¦ {%prābhañjana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%bhañjana%}), presided over by the god of wind; ({%am%}),
n., scil. {%nakṣatra%} or {%bha,%} the Nakṣatra Svāti.
<LEND>

<L>33679<pc>0658-b<k1>prABava<k2>prABava
{#prABava#}¦ {%prābhava, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-bhu%}), pre-
eminence, superiority, supremacy.
<LEND>

<L>33680<pc>0658-b<k1>prABavatya<k2>prABavatya
{%Prābhavatya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pra-bhavat%}), superi-
ority, power, authority, ascendancy.
<LEND>

<L>33681<pc>0658-b<k1>prABUtika<k2>prABUtika
{%Prābhūtika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pra-bhūta%}), see
Vārttika II. to Pāṇ. IV. 4, 1.
<LEND>

<L>33682<pc>0658-b<k1>prABAkara<k2>prABAkara
{#prABAkara#}¦ {%prābhākara, as,%} m. (fr. {%prabhā-%}
{%kara%}), a follower of Prabhā-kara, the designation
of a particular philosophical sect (a branch of the
Mīmāṃsā school).
<LEND>

<L>33683<pc>0658-b<k1>prABAtika<k2>prABAtika
{#prABAtika#}¦ {%prābhātika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%bhāta%}), belonging or relating to the morning, matu-
tinal.
<LEND>

<L>33684<pc>0658-b<k1>prABAsika<k2>prABAsika
{#prABAsika#}¦ {%prābhāsika, as, ī, am,%} belonging
to the place Pra-bhāsa, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33685<pc>0658-b<k1>prABfta<k2>prABfta
{#prABfta#}¦ {%prābhṛta, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-bhṛti%}),
a present, gift, offering of ceremony; an offering to a
deity or sovereign; a bribe; a term applied to the
chapters of the Sūrya-prajñapti. {%—Prābhṛtī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} given as a present, offered.
<LEND>

<L>33686<pc>0658-b<k1>prABftaka<k2>prABftaka
{%Prābhṛtaka, am,%}¦ n. a present, an offering.
<LEND>

<L>33687<pc>0658-b<k1>prAmati<k2>prAmati
{#prAmati#}¦ {%prāmati, is,%} m., N. of one of the
seven sages in the tenth Manv-antara; (also read
{%prāptati;%} cf. {%pra-mati.%})
<LEND>

<L>33688<pc>0658-b<k1>prAmARika<k2>prAmARika
{#prAmARika#}¦ {%prāmāṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%māṇa%}), forming or being a measure; established
by proof, resting or founded on an authority, pro-
ceeding from evidence or authority, being of authority,
authoritative; authentic, credible; true; ({%as%}), m.
one who accepts proof or rests his arguments on
authority; a president, the chief or head of a trade.
{%—Prāmāṇika-tva, am,%} n. {%= prāmāṇya%} below.
<LEND>

<L>33689<pc>0658-b<k1>prAmARya<k2>prAmARya
{%Prāmāṇya, am,%}¦ n. the being established by proof,
the resting upon authority; the being an authority;
the being a rule, the being a proof; proof, evidence,
authority; authenticity, credibility, genuineness {%(=%}
{%pramāṇa-tā)%}. {%—Prāmāṇya-vāda, as,%} m., N. of a
Nyāya work by Raghu-nātha. {%—Prāmāṇya-vādin,%}
{%ī,%} m. one who affirms or believes in proof.
<LEND>

<L>33690<pc>0658-b<k1>prAmAdika<k2>prAmAdika
{#prAmAdika#}¦ {%prāmādika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%māda%}), arising from carelessness or negligence,
blundering, faulty, erroneous, incorrect, wrong; {%prā-%}
{%mādikaḥ pāṭhaḥ,%} a wrong reading. {%—Prāmādika-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. erroneousness, incorrectness.
<LEND>
[Page0658-c+ 79]

<L>33691<pc>0658-c<k1>prAmAdya<k2>prAmAdya
{%Prāmādya, as,%}¦ m. a species of plant, Gendarussa
({%= aṭarūṣa%}) Adhadota or Vulgaris; ({%am%}), n.
madness, frenzy, fury; intoxication.
<LEND>

<L>33692<pc>0658-c<k1>prAmItya<k2>prAmItya
{#prAmItya#}¦ {%prāmītya, am,%} n. debt.
<LEND>

<L>33693<pc>0658-c<k1>prAmodaka<k2>prAmodaka
{#prAmodaka#}¦ {%prāmodaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%moda%}), charming, transporting, enchanting.
<LEND>

<L>33694<pc>0658-c<k1>prAya<k2>prAya
{#prAya#}¦ {%prāya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 5. {%i%} with {%pra%}),
setting out or starting (for a battle, Ved.; Sāy. {%=%}
{%pra-veśa,%} entering, or {%= yuddha,%} battle); going
away, departure, departure from life, seeking death
by fasting, sitting down and fasting to death (as a
religious or penitentiary act, or, like the practice of
sitting in Dharnā, to enforce compliance with a de-
mand; often used in connection with rt. 4. {%ās%} or
with {%upa-viś,%} e. g. {%prāyam āsmahe,%} we sit down
seeking death by fasting; but in such examples
{%prāyam%} may perhaps be regarded as the indeclinable
participle of rt. 5. {%i%} with {%pra;%} cf. {%prayopaveśa%});
principal part, largest portion, plurality, majority,
majority of cases, general rule, abundance, plenty,
excess, (when used at the end of adj. comps. often
translatable by ‘in most cases,’ ‘for the most part,’
‘as a general rule,’ ‘generally,’ ‘well nigh,’ ‘almost,’
‘nearly,’ e. g. {%daṇḍa-p˚,%} one who generally inflicts
punishment; {%jita-p˚,%} almost conquered; cf. {%ārya-%}
{%p˚, gata-p˚, duḥkha-p˚, saṃstuta-p˚, siddha-p˚:%}
or translatable by ‘abounding in,’ ‘much,’ ‘exceed-
ing,’ ‘abundant,’ e. g. {%śāli-p˚,%} abounding in rice;
cf. {%hiṃsā-p˚:%} or by ‘like,’ ‘resembling,’ e. g. {%amṛta-%}
{%prāya, as, ā, am,%} like nectar); a stage or condition
of life (as youth, age, &c.); ({%am%}), n. sin (?); {%prā-%}
{%yeṇa,%} ind. for the most part, in most cases, mostly,
commonly, as a rule; in all probability, probably,
likely; much more, much rather. {%—Prāya-gata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} near departure from life, nigh unto death.
{%—Prāya-citta, prāya-citti,%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ.
VI. 1, 157, and cf. {%prāyaś-citta,%} &c. {%—Prāya-%}
{%darśana, am,%} n. a common or ordinary pheno-
menon. {%—Prāya-bhava, as, ā, am,%} being com-
monly the case, usually met with. {%—Prāya-vidhā-%}
{%yin, ī, inī, i,%} resolved to die of starvation. {%—Prā-%}
{%yaś-citta, am,%} n. ({%prāya + citta%} with {%ś%} euphonically
inserted), an expiation, expiatory act, atonement,
penance, satisfaction, compensation, indemnification,
amends; ({%as, ā, am%}), belonging to or included in
an expiation or atonement, expiatory. {%—Prāyaścitta-%}
{%tattva, am,%} n., N. of a work by Raghu-nandana.
{%—Prāyaścitta-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work on ritual
by Vara-da. {%—Prāyaścitta-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of
a work by Kāma-deva. {%—Prāyaścitta-ratna, am,%}
n., N. of a work by Kamalākara-bhaṭṭa. {%—Prāyaś-%}
{%citta-vidhi, is,%} m. a prescribed rule of penance or
expiation. {%—Prāyaścitta-viveka, as,%} m., N. of a
work by Śūla-pāṇi on expiatory ceremonies. {%—Prā-%}
{%yaś-citti, is, is, i%} ({%prāya + citti%} with {%ś%} euphoni-
cally inserted), expiating, atoning; ({%is%}), f. expiation,
atonement, penance. {%—Prāyaścittika, as, ī, am,%}
expiating, expiatory, performing penance (?); expi-
able. {%—Prāyaścittin, ī, inī, i,%} one who does
penance or has to make expiation. {%—Prāyaścitti-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} making atonement, expiating,
performing penance. {%—1. prāyaścittīya,%} Nom. A.
{%prāyaścittīyate, -yitum,%} to have to expiate, to be
obliged to perform penance. {%—2. prāyaścittīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating to expiation or penance, expia-
tory. {%—Prāyaścittīya-tā,%} f. obligation to make an
atonement. {%—Prāyaścittendu-śekhara (˚ta-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a work by Kāśī-nātha on expiatory
ceremonies. {%—Prāyopagamana (˚ya-up˚), am,%} n.
going to meet death, seeking death (by abstaining
from food). {%—Prāyopaviṣṭa (˚ya-up˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%prāyopaveśin, ī, inī, i,%} one who sits
down in expectation of death, one who calmly
awaits the approach of death (by abstaining from
food), one who sits in Dharnā to compel compliance
with a demand; [cf. {%prāyopaveśa.%}] {%—Prāyopa-%}
{%veśa (˚ya-up˚), as,%} m. or {%prāyopaveśana, am,%} n.
or {%prāyopaveśanikā,%} f. abstaining from food and
awaiting in a sitting posture the approach of death,
[Page0659-a+ 74]
(this corresponds with the practice prevalent in some
parts of India of sitting in Dharnā at the door of a
house to extort a boon or gain a point which cannot
be accomplished by other means; the person so
sitting observes a strict fast till his object is obtained,
and if he dies in the process the sin falls on the
householder who refuses compliance with his de-
mand.) {%—Prāyopeta (˚ya-up˚), as, ā, am,%} prepared
to die, resolved to die (by abstaining from food).
<LEND>

<L>33695<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyaRa<k2>prAyaRa
{%Prāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ going away, going, going
well (Ved.); ({%am%}), n. entrance, beginning, com-
mencement; the course or path of life; going for
protection, taking refuge; departure from life, death,
voluntary death, ({%prāyaṇaṃ kṛ,%} to court death);
a kind of food prepared with milk. {%—Prāyaṇānta%}
{%(˚ṇa-an˚), as,%} m. the end of life; ({%am%}), ind. till
death, unto death.
<LEND>

<L>33696<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyaRIya<k2>prAyaRIya
{%Prāyaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
the entrance or commencement, introductory, ini-
tiatory; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%yāga%} or {%karma-viśeṣa,%} an
introductory libation at a Soma sacrifice; scil. {%ati-%}
{%rātra,%} the first day of a Soma sacrifice lasting for
several days; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%ahan,%} the first day of a
Soma sacrifice lasting for several days.
<LEND>

<L>33697<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyaSas<k2>prAyaSas
{%Prāya-śas,%}¦ ind. for the most part, mostly, almost, in
all probability, always, commonly, generally, usually;
(sometimes wrongly spelt {%prāya-sas.%})
<LEND>

<L>33698<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyas<k2>prAyas
{%Prāyas,%}¦ ind. for the most part, mostly; commonly,
usually, frequently, oftentimes, generally, nearly; in all
probability, most likely, abundantly, largely. {%—Prāyo-%}
{%devatā,%} f. the most usually worshipped deity.
<LEND>

<L>33699<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyika<k2>prAyika
{%Prāyika, as, ā, am,%}¦ common, usual, general.
{%—Prāyika-tva, am,%} n. likelihood, probability;
usage, custom.
<LEND>

<L>33700<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyatya<k2>prAyatya
{#prAyatya#}¦ {%prāyatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-yata%}),
purity, cleanliness.
<LEND>

<L>33701<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyaScitta<k2>prAyaScitta
{#prAyaScitta#}¦ {%prāyaś-citta.%} See {%prāya,%} p. 658.
<LEND>

<L>33702<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyARika<k2>prAyARika
{#prAyARika#}¦ {%prāyāṇika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%yāṇa%}), necessary for a march, suitable for a journey.
<LEND>

<L>33703<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyAtrika<k2>prAyAtrika
{%Prāyātrika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pra-yātrā%}), {%= prā-%}
{%yāṇika.%}
<LEND>

<L>33704<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyAsa<k2>prAyAsa
{#prAyAsa#}¦ {%prā-yāsa, as,%} m., Ved. another
form for {%pra-yāsa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33705<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyika<k2>prAyika
{#prAyika#}¦ {%prāyika.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>33706<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyudDezin<k2>prAyudDezin
{#prAyudDezin#}¦ {%prāyuddheṣin, ī,%} m. a horse,
(probably an incorrect form; also spelt {%prāyudhe-%}
{%ṣin;%} cf. rt. {%heṣ,%} to neigh.)
<LEND>

<L>33707<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyuD<k2>prAyuD
{#prAyuD#}¦ {%prā-yudh (pra-ā-),%} cl. 4. A. {%-yudh-%}
{%yate, -yoddhum,%} to fight.
<LEND>

<L>33708<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyeRa<k2>prAyeRa
{#prAyeRa#}¦ {%prāyeṇa.%} See under {%prāya,%} p. 658.
<LEND>

<L>33709<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyoga<k2>prAyoga
{#prAyoga#}¦ {%prāyoga, as,%} m., Ved. perhaps a
wrong reading for {%pra-yoga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33710<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyogika<k2>prAyogika
{%Prāyogika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pra-yoga%}), applied,
used, applicable; a kind of sternutatory.
<LEND>

<L>33711<pc>0659-a<k1>prAyojya<k2>prAyojya
{%Prāyojya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%pra-yojya%}), belonging
or relating to things requisite or necessary.
<LEND>

<L>33712<pc>0659-a<k1>prAr<k2>prAr
{#prAr#}¦ {%prār (pra-ṛ),%} cl. 3. P. {%preyarti,%} &c.,
Ved. to go forth, go, move; to set in motion, pro-
duce: Caus. {%prārpayati, -yitum,%} to set in motion,
stir up, animate.
<LEND>

<L>33713<pc>0659-a<k1>prArpaRa<k2>prArpaRa
{%Prārpaṇa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who stirs up or
animates.
<LEND>

<L>33714<pc>0659-a<k1>prAraB<k2>prAraB
{#prAraB#}¦ {%prā-rabh (pra-ā-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-rabhate,%}
{%-rabdhum,%} to begin, commence, undertake.
<LEND>

<L>33715<pc>0659-a<k1>prArabDa<k2>prArabDa
{%Prā-rabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ begun, commenced,
beginning; ({%am%}), n. an undertaking.
<LEND>

<L>33716<pc>0659-a<k1>prArabDi<k2>prArabDi
{%Prā-rabdhi, is,%}¦ f. beginning, commencement;
the post to which an elephant is fastened.
<LEND>

<L>33717<pc>0659-a<k1>prAramBa<k2>prAramBa
{%Prā-rambha, as,%}¦ m. beginning, commencement;
an undertaking, enterprise.
<LEND>

<L>33718<pc>0659-a<k1>prAramBaRa<k2>prAramBaRa
{%Prā-rambhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. beginning, commencing.
<LEND>

<L>33719<pc>0659-a<k1>prAruh<k2>prAruh
{#prAruh#}¦ {%prā-ruh (pra-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati,%}
{%-roḍhum,%} to ascend, rise.
<LEND>

<L>33720<pc>0659-a<k1>prAroha<k2>prAroha
{%Prāroha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pra-roha%}), one who is
[Page0659-b+ 75]
used to rise or ascend; ({%as%}), m. a shoot, sprout, a
new branch or leaf ({%= pra-roha%}).
<LEND>

<L>33721<pc>0659-b<k1>prArkzIya<k2>prArkzIya
{#prArkzIya#}¦ {%prārkṣīya%} (fr. {%pra + ṛkṣa%}), Nom.
P. {%prārkṣīyati = prarkṣīyati,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33722<pc>0659-b<k1>prArc<k2>prArc
{#prArc#}¦ {%prārc (pra-arc),%} cl. 1. P. {%prārcati,%}
{%prārcitum,%} to praise, celebrate in hymns (Sāy. =
{%stuti-rūpābhir vāgbhiḥ pūj%}); to honour, worship:
Caus. {%prārcayati, -yitum,%} to praise, honour.
<LEND>

<L>33723<pc>0659-b<k1>prArj<k2>prArj
{#prArj#}¦ {%prārj (pra-arj),%} Caus. P. {%prārjayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cause to acquire; to grant, bestow.
<LEND>

<L>33724<pc>0659-b<k1>prArjayitf<k2>prArjayitf
{%Prārjayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who grants or
bestows; (used to explain {%parjanya,%} Nirukta X.
10.)
<LEND>

<L>33725<pc>0659-b<k1>prArjuna<k2>prArjuna
{#prArjuna#}¦ {%prārjuna (pra-ar˚), ās,%} m. pl., N.
of a people.
<LEND>

<L>33726<pc>0659-b<k1>prArRa<k2>prArRa
{#prArRa#}¦ {%prārṇa (pra-ṛṇa), am,%} n. a chief or
principal debt.
<LEND>

<L>33727<pc>0659-b<k1>prArT<k2>prArT
{#prArT#}¦ {%prārth (pra-arth),%} cl. 10. A. (rarely
also P. and according to some grammarians regarded
as a Nom. fr. {%artha%} with {%pra%}), {%prārthayate (-ti),%}
{%-yitum,%} to wish for, desire, require, want; to ask
for, beg for, pray for, request, solicit, ask any one
for anything (with two acc.); to wish or want to do
anything (with inf.); to pray, prefer a suit or peti-
tion, make a request.
<LEND>

<L>33728<pc>0659-b<k1>prArTa<k2>prArTa
{%Prārtha (pra-ar˚), as,%}¦ m., Ved. (perhaps) fur-
niture, gear, harness, apparatus, equipment.
<LEND>

<L>33729<pc>0659-b<k1>prArTaka<k2>prArTaka
{%Prārthaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ wishing for, asking,
desiring, soliciting, begging, an asker, solicitor; a
suitor, petitioner, candidate; {%a-prārthaka-vara,%} a
bridegroom who has not been a suitor [cf. Kullūka
on Manu III. 27].
<LEND>

<L>33730<pc>0659-b<k1>prArTana<k2>prArTana
{%Prārthana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. desire, wish; longing
desire for; requesting, asking, begging; supplication,
suit; prayer, entreaty, request, application, petition
(the object may be expressed by the loc., e. g. {%Ruk-%}
{%miṇyām asya prārthanā,%} his petition or suit for
Rukmiṇī; or precedes {%prārthana%} in a comp., cf.
{%anujñā-p˚%}); {%prārthanayā,%} ind. at the request or
petition of (any one). {%—Prārthanā-bhaṅga, as,%} m.
refusal of a request, asking in vain. {%—Prārthanā-%}
{%bhāva (˚na-abh˚), as,%} m. absence of solicitation.
{%—Prārthanā-siddhi, is,%} f. accomplishment of a
desire, fulfilment of wishes.
<LEND>

<L>33731<pc>0659-b<k1>prArTanIya<k2>prArTanIya
{%Prārthanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be desired or wished
for; to be asked or begged; to be prayed for;
worthy of desire, desirable, proper to be solicited;
({%am%}), n. the third or Dvāpara age of the world.
<LEND>

<L>33732<pc>0659-b<k1>prArTayitavya<k2>prArTayitavya
{%Prārthayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be desired or
wished for, worthy of desire, desirable; {%asulabha-%}
{%prārthayitavya,%} one the object of whose desire is
difficult of attainment.
<LEND>

<L>33733<pc>0659-b<k1>prArTayitf<k2>prArTayitf
{%Prārthayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who wishes for or
asks or solicits, an asker, inquirer, solicitor, impor-
tuner, beggar; a lover, wooer, suitor.
<LEND>

<L>33734<pc>0659-b<k1>prArTita<k2>prArTita
{%Prārthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished for, desired, wished,
required, wanted; requested, solicited, asked for,
prayed for; killed, hurt; obstructed or opposed by
an enemy; attacked. {%—Prārthita-durlabha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} desired but hard to obtain. {%—Prārthita-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} one who has asked or begged; asking,
begging.
<LEND>

<L>33735<pc>0659-b<k1>prArTin<k2>prArTin
{%Prārthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wishing, desiring, desirous of,
ambitious for; attacking, assailing, assaulting.
<LEND>

<L>33736<pc>0659-b<k1>prArTya<k2>prArTya
{%Prārthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be desired or wished for
by any one (inst. or gen.); desirable; to be suppli-
cated, implored, petitioned, &c.
<LEND>

<L>33737<pc>0659-b<k1>prArd<k2>prArd
{#prArd#}¦ {%prārd (pra-ard),%} Caus. P. {%prārdayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} Ved. to exert beyond measure, overwork;
to cause to flow away.
<LEND>

<L>33738<pc>0659-b<k1>prArdaka<k2>prArdaka
{%Prārdaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ making efforts.
<LEND>

<L>33739<pc>0659-b<k1>prArDa<k2>prArDa
{#prArDa#}¦ {%prārdha (pra-ar˚)%} in {%pari-prārdha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33740<pc>0659-b<k1>prArpaRa<k2>prArpaRa
{#prArpaRa#}¦ {%prārpaṇa.%} See under {%prār,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33741<pc>0659-b<k1>prArz<k2>prArz
{#prArz#}¦ {%prārṣ (pra-ṛṣ),%} cl. 1. P. {%prārṣati,%}
{%prārṣitum,%} to flow forth.
<LEND>
[Page0659-c+ 70]

<L>33742<pc>0659-c<k1>prArzaBIya<k2>prArzaBIya
{#prArzaBIya#}¦ {%prārṣabhīya%} (fr. {%pra + ṛṣabha%}),
Nom. P. {%prārṣabhīyati, -yitum, = prarṣabhīya,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33743<pc>0659-c<k1>prArh<k2>prArh
{#prArh#}¦ {%prārh (pra-arh),%} cl. 1. A. {%prārhate,%}
{%prārhitum,%} Ved. to distinguish or signalize one's
self.
<LEND>

<L>33744<pc>0659-c<k1>prAlamba<k2>prAlamba
{#prAlamba#}¦ {%prālamba, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-lamba%}),
hanging down, suspended, pendent; ({%as%}), m. a kind
of pearl ornament; the female breast; a species of
gourd; ({%am%}), n. a garland hanging round the neck
and reaching to the breast; [cf. {%muktā-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33745<pc>0659-c<k1>prAlambaka<k2>prAlambaka
{%Prālambaka, am,%}¦ n. a garland hanging round
the neck and reaching to the breast; ({%ikā%}), f. a
kind of golden necklace.
<LEND>

<L>33746<pc>0659-c<k1>prAlepika<k2>prAlepika
{#prAlepika#}¦ {%prālepika, as, ī, am,%} an adj. de-
rived from {%pra-lepikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>33747<pc>0659-c<k1>prAleya<k2>prAleya<h>1
{#prAleya#} 1¦. {%prāleya, as, ī%} (?), {%am%} (anoma-
lously fr. {%pra-laya%}), produced by melting; ({%am%}),
n. (according to some also {%as,%} m.), hail, snow, frost,
hoar-frost (so called as being easily dissolved), dew.
{%—Prāleya-raśmi, is,%} or {%prāleyāṃśu (˚ya-aṃ˚), us,%}
m. the moon (said to have cold or frosty rays). {%—Prā-%}
{%leya-leśa, as,%} m. a hailstone. {%—Prāleya-śaila, as,%}
or {%prāleyādri (˚ya-ad˚), is,%} m. the snowy moun-
tain, Hima-vat. {%—Prāleyāśra (˚ya-aś˚), am,%} n. a
cold or chilly tear.
<LEND>

<L>33748<pc>0659-c<k1>prAleya<k2>prAleya<h>2
2. {%prāleya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prāleyati, -yitum,%} to re-
semble hail.
<LEND>

<L>33749<pc>0659-c<k1>prAlkArIya<k2>prAlkArIya
{#prAlkArIya#}¦ {%prālkārīya%} (fr. {%pra + ḷkāra%}),
Nom. P. {%prālkārīyati, -yitum, = pralkārīya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33750<pc>0659-c<k1>prAv<k2>prAv
{#prAv#}¦ {%prāv (pra-av),%} cl. 1. P. {%prāvati, prā-%}
{%vitum,%} Ved. to attend to, observe; to take interest
in, assist, encourage, animate; to protect, defend,
(Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇa rakṣ,%} to defend strenuously,
to protect exceedingly); to sate, satisfy, content.
<LEND>

<L>33751<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvitf<k2>prAvitf
{%Prāvitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. a protector, bene-
factor, guardian, (Sāy. {%= rakṣaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>33752<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvitra<k2>prAvitra
{%Prāvitra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. protection, guardianship.
<LEND>

<L>33753<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvI<k2>prAvI
{%Prāvī, īs, īs, i,%}¦  Ved. attentive, taking care of.
<LEND>

<L>33754<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvawa<k2>prAvawa
{#prAvawa#}¦ {%prāvaṭa, as,%} m. barley; [cf. {%pra-vaṭa,%}
{%pra-veṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33755<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvaRa<k2>prAvaRa
{#prAvaRa#}¦ {%prāvaṇa, as, am,%} m. n. (according
to Sāy.) a spade, shovel; (either a lengthened form
for {%pra-vaṇa%} or a derivative from it.)
<LEND>

<L>33756<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvaRi<k2>prAvaRi
{#prAvaRi#}¦ {%prāvaṇi,%} see Ujjvala-datta on
Uṇādi-sūtras II. 103.
<LEND>

<L>33757<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvan<k2>prAvan
{#prAvan#}¦ {%prāvan%} (fr. rt. 1. {%prā%}) in {%kratu-p˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33758<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvanij<k2>prAvanij
{#prAvanij#}¦ {%prāva-nij (pra-ava-),%} cl. 3. P. A.
{%-nenekti, -nenikte, -nektum,%} Ved. to wash away.
<LEND>

<L>33759<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvara<k2>prAvara
{#prAvara#}¦ {%prā-vara.%} See under {%prā-vṛ,%} p. 660.
<LEND>

<L>33760<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvareya<k2>prAvareya
{#prAvareya#}¦ {%prāvareya, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Pra-vara.
<LEND>

<L>33761<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvarga<k2>prAvarga
{#prAvarga#}¦ {%prāvarga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-varga%}),
Ved. distinguished, eminent; (Sāy.) pre-eminently a
scatterer of enemies ({%= prakarṣeṇa śatrūṇāṃ%}
{%varjayitā%}).
<LEND>

<L>33762<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvartaka<k2>prAvartaka
{#prAvartaka#}¦ {%prā-vartaka, as, ikā, am%} (for {%pra-%}
{%vartaka%}), bringing to light, manifesting; stirring
up, inciting; founding, a founder.
<LEND>

<L>33763<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvarzin<k2>prAvarzin
{#prAvarzin#}¦ {%prā-varṣin, ī, iṇī, i%} (fr. rt. {%vṛṣ%}
with {%pra%}), Ved. raining.
<LEND>

<L>33764<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvahaRi<k2>prAvahaRi
{#prAvahaRi#}¦ {%prāvahaṇi%} for {%prāvāhaṇi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33765<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvAra<k2>prAvAra
{#prAvAra#}¦ {%prā-vāra,%} &c. See under {%prā-vṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>33766<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvAsa<k2>prAvAsa
{#prAvAsa#}¦ {%prāvāsa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-vāsa%}),
see Gaṇa Vyuṣṭādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 97.
<LEND>

<L>33767<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvAsika<k2>prAvAsika
{%Prāvāsika, as, ī, am,%}¦ see Gaṇa Guḍādi to Pāṇ.
IV. 3, 103, and Gaṇa Santāpādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 101.
<LEND>

<L>33768<pc>0659-c<k1>prAvAhaRi<k2>prAvAhaRi
{#prAvAhaRi#}¦ {%prāvāhaṇi, is,%} m. a patronymic
from Pra-vāhaṇa; (also wrongly written {%prāhaṇi,%}
{%prāvahaṇi.%})
<LEND>
[Page0660-a+ 78]

<L>33769<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvAhaReya<k2>prAvAhaReya
{%Prāvāhaṇeya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Pra-
vāhaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>33770<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvAhaReyaka<k2>prAvAhaReyaka
{%Prāvāhaṇeyaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. {%prāvāhaṇeya%}),
{%= pravāhaṇeyaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>33771<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvAhaReyi<k2>prAvAhaReyi
{%Prāvāhaṇeyi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Prāvā-
haṇeya.
<LEND>

<L>33772<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvitf<k2>prAvitf
{#prAvitf#}¦ {%prāvitṛ.%} See under {%prāv,%} p. 659.
<LEND>

<L>33773<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvIRya<k2>prAvIRya
{#prAvIRya#}¦ {%prāvīṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-vīṇa%}),
cleverness, dexterity, skilfulness, proficiency, accurate
knowledge, conversancy, skill.
<LEND>

<L>33774<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvf<k2>prAvf
{#prAvf#}¦ {%prā-vṛ (pra-ā-),%} cl. 5. 9. 1. P. A.
{%-vṛṇoti, -vṛṇute, -vṛṇāti, -vṛṇīte, -varati, -te,%}
{%-varitum, -varītum,%} to put on, dress one's self in
(with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>33775<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvara<k2>prAvara
{%Prā-vara, as,%}¦ m. an inclosure, a fence, hedge;
[cf. {%mahī-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33776<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvaraka<k2>prAvaraka
{%Prā-varaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a district ({%= prā-vāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>33777<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvaraRa<k2>prAvaraRa
{%Prā-varaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a covering, cover, an upper
or outer garment, cloak, mantle [cf. {%karṇa-p˚, ku-%}
{%p˚%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; {%cīra-prāvaraṇa,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>33778<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvaraRIya<k2>prAvaraRIya
{%Prāvaraṇīya, am,%}¦ n. a covering, upper garment.
<LEND>

<L>33779<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvAra<k2>prAvAra
{%Prā-vāra, as,%}¦ m. an upper or outer garment,
cloak, mantle; ({%as%}), m. {%= prā-varaka,%} N. of a
district; ({%as, ā, am%}), belonging to, found in outer
garments or cloaks. {%—Prāvāra-karṇa, as,%} m.
‘cloak-eared,’ N. of an owl. {%—Prāvāra-kīṭa, as,%}
m. ‘clothes-insect,’ a large kind of white ant.
<LEND>

<L>33780<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvAraka<k2>prAvAraka
{%Prā-vāraka, as,%}¦ m. an upper or outer garment,
cloak.
<LEND>

<L>33781<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvArika<k2>prAvArika
{%Prāvārika, as,%}¦ m. a maker of upper garments
or cloaks.
<LEND>

<L>33782<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvArIya<k2>prAvArIya
{%Prāvārīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prāvārīyati, -yitum,%} to
use as an upper garment or cloak.
<LEND>

<L>33783<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvuvUrzu<k2>prAvuvUrzu
{%Prā-vuvūrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing or intending
to wear.
<LEND>

<L>33784<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfta<k2>prAvfta
{%Prā-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, enclosed, encom-
passed, screened, sheltered; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n.
a veil, mantle, cloak, wrapper.
<LEND>

<L>33785<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfti<k2>prAvfti
{%Prā-vṛti, is,%}¦ f. an inclosure, fence, hedge; spiritual
darkness, one of the four consequences of Māyā.
<LEND>

<L>33786<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvftya<k2>prAvftya
{%Prā-vṛtya,%}¦ ind. having put on, having dressed
one's self in.
<LEND>

<L>33787<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfttika<k2>prAvfttika
{#prAvfttika#}¦ {%prāvṛttika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%vṛtti%}), secondary, derived, derivative, (opposed to
{%mukhya%}); informed of what is passing, well-informed.
<LEND>

<L>33788<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfz<k2>prAvfz
{#prAvfz#}¦ {%prā-vṛṣ, ṭ,%} f. (fr. {%pra-vṛṣ%}), the
rainy season, wet season, rains; the months Āṣāḍha
and Śrāvaṇa (comprising the first half of the rainy
season which lasts in some parts from the middle of
June till the middle of October). {%—Prāvṛṭ-kāla,%}
{%as,%} m. the period of the rains, rainy season. {%—Prā-%}
{%vṛṭkāla-vaha, as, ā, am,%} flowing only in the
rainy season; (opposed to {%sadākāla-vaha.%}) {%—Prā-%}
{%vṛḍ-atyaya, as,%} m. the time following the rainy
season, autumn. {%—Prāvṛṣi-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced
in the rainy season, occurring during the rains.
<LEND>

<L>33789<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfza<k2>prAvfza
{%Prā-vṛṣa, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. the rainy season, the rains.
<LEND>

<L>33790<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfzAyaRI<k2>prAvfzAyaRI
{%Prāvṛṣāyaṇī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%prā-vṛṣ%}), a kind of
weed which grows most luxuriantly during the rains,
Bœrhavia Procumbens; Mucuna Pruritus.
<LEND>

<L>33791<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfzika<k2>prAvfzika
{%Prāvṛṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the rainy
season, born or produced in the rainy season; ({%as%}),
m. a peacock (as delighting in the rains).
<LEND>

<L>33792<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfzIRa<k2>prAvfzIRa
{%Prāvṛṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating
to the rainy season, rainy.
<LEND>

<L>33793<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfzeRya<k2>prAvfzeRya
{%Prāvṛṣeṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating
to the rainy season; coming in showers, abundant,
numerous, much; ({%as%}), m. the Cadamba tree,
Nauclea Cadamba [cf. {%kadamba%}]; Wrightia Anti-
dysenterica; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Mucuna Pruritus; a
species of Punar-navā with red flowers.
<LEND>

<L>33794<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfzeya<k2>prAvfzeya
{%Prāvṛṣeya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>33795<pc>0660-a<k1>prAvfzya<k2>prAvfzya
{%Prāvṛṣya, as,%}¦ m. a species of Cadamba, Wrightia
Antidysenterica; Hedysarum Alhagi; ({%am%}), n. lapis
lazuli.
<LEND>

<L>33796<pc>0660-a<k1>prAveRya<k2>prAveRya
{#prAveRya#}¦ {%prāveṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-veṇi%} or
{%pra-veṇī%}), a fine woollen covering.
<LEND>
[Page0660-b+ 78]

<L>33797<pc>0660-b<k1>prAvepa<k2>prAvepa
{#prAvepa#}¦ {%prāvepa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-vepa%}),
Ved. revolving easily, rolling easily, (Sāy. {%= kam-%}
{%pana-śīla.%})
<LEND>

<L>33798<pc>0660-b<k1>prAveSana<k2>prAveSana
{#prAveSana#}¦ {%prāveśana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-ve-%}
{%śana%}), given on entering, to be done on entering,
(see Gaṇa Vyuṣṭādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 97); ({%am%}), n.
a manufactory, workshop.
<LEND>

<L>33799<pc>0660-b<k1>prAveSika<k2>prAveSika
{%Prāveśika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%pra-veśa%}), relating to
entrance (into a house or upon the stage); connected
with entry; in the habit of entering; {%prāveśiky%}
{%ākṣiptikā,%} a particular air or song called Ā-kṣiptikā
sung by a person on entering the stage.
<LEND>

<L>33800<pc>0660-b<k1>prAvrajya<k2>prAvrajya
{#prAvrajya#}¦ {%prāvrajya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-vrajyā%}),
wandering as a religious mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>33801<pc>0660-b<k1>prAvrAjya<k2>prAvrAjya
{%Prāvrājya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pra-vrāj%}), the life of a
wandering religious mendicant; vagrancy.
<LEND>

<L>33802<pc>0660-b<k1>prAS<k2>prAS<h>1
{#prAS#} 1¦. {%prāś%} ({%pra-aś,%} see rt. 1. {%aś%}), cl. 5.
P. A. {%prāśnoti, prāśnute, prāśitum,%} Ved. to
arrive at, reach, (Sāy. {%= prakarṣeṇa vy-āp%}); to
fall to the lot or share of any one (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>33803<pc>0660-b<k1>prAzwa<k2>prAzwa
{%Prāṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ arrived at, attained, gained.
{%—Prāṣṭa-varṇa, as, ā, am, = priśni%} (Nirukta
X. 39).
<LEND>

<L>33804<pc>0660-b<k1>prAS<k2>prAS<h>2
{#prAS#} 2¦. {%prāś%} ({%pra-aś,%} see rt. 2. {%aś%}), cl. 9.
P. A. {%prāśnāti, prāśnīte, prāśitum,%} to begin to
eat, begin eating; to take into the mouth; taste
(Manu II. 62); to eat, consume, devour; (A.) to
drink; to enjoy, sport with, dally with (with inst.):
Pass. {%prāśyate,%} to be fed: Caus. {%prāśayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to eat or devour, give to eat, feed.
<LEND>

<L>33805<pc>0660-b<k1>prAS<k2>prAS<h>3
3. {%prāś, ṭ,%}¦ f., Ved. food, provisions.
<LEND>

<L>33806<pc>0660-b<k1>prASa<k2>prASa
{%Prāśa, as,%}¦ m. eating, consuming, feeding upon,
tasting [cf. {%ghṛta-p˚, dhūma-p˚%}]; food, victuals
[cf. {%cātuṣprāśya%}]; (occasionally incorrect) for {%prā-%}
{%sa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33807<pc>0660-b<k1>prASaka<k2>prASaka
{%Prāśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who eats, an eater.
<LEND>

<L>33808<pc>0660-b<k1>prASana<k2>prASana
{%Prāśana, am,%}¦ n. the act of eating, feeding upon,
tasting; causing to eat or taste [cf. {%anna-p˚%}];
feeding (especially applied in Manu II. 29 to the cere-
mony of making an infant taste, for the first time, a
little honey and clarified butter); food, victuals;
{%amṛta-prāśana, as,%} m. having nectar for food,
feeding on ambrosia, an immortal.
<LEND>

<L>33809<pc>0660-b<k1>prASanIya<k2>prASanIya
{%Prāśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ eatable, edible, esculent,
serving for food; ({%am%}), n. food, victuals.
<LEND>

<L>33810<pc>0660-b<k1>prASavya<k2>prASavya
{%Prāśavya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. 3. {%prāś%} or {%prāśa%}), Ved.
food, provisions; (Sāy.) {%= sādhv-annādi, hitam%}
{%annādi,%} good or wholesome food, &c.
<LEND>

<L>33811<pc>0660-b<k1>prASita<k2>prASita
{%Prāśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken into the mouth, tasted;
eaten, devoured, swallowed, well eaten; ({%am%}), n. an
offering of rice or water to the Manes of progenitors,
obsequies to deceased ancestors (Manu III. 74, {%=%}
{%pitṛ-yajñākhyaṃ nitya-śrāddham%}).
<LEND>

<L>33812<pc>0660-b<k1>prASitavya<k2>prASitavya
{%Prāśitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten, eatable,
edible, esculent, allowed to be eaten.
<LEND>

<L>33813<pc>0660-b<k1>prASitf<k2>prASitf
{%Prāśitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who eats, an eater,
eating.
<LEND>

<L>33814<pc>0660-b<k1>prASitra<k2>prASitra
{%Prāśitra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the portion of Havis eaten
by the Brahman at a sacrifice; the vessel in which
the Brahman's portion of Havis is placed; anything
edible. {%—Prāśitra-haraṇa, am,%} n., Ved. a vessel in
which the Brahman's portion of Havis is placed.
<LEND>

<L>33815<pc>0660-b<k1>prASitriya<k2>prASitriya
{%Prāśitriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. in {%a-prāśitriya,%} not
fit for the Prāśitra.
<LEND>

<L>33816<pc>0660-b<k1>prASin<k2>prASin
{%Prāśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) eating,
feeding upon; {%amṛta-prāśin, ī,%} m. eating nectar,
a god.
<LEND>

<L>33817<pc>0660-b<k1>prASnat<k2>prASnat
{%Prāśnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ eating, consuming, de-
vouring.
<LEND>

<L>33818<pc>0660-b<k1>prASya<k2>prASya<h>1
1. {%prāśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten, eatable, edible.
<LEND>

<L>33819<pc>0660-b<k1>prASya<k2>prASya<h>2
2. {%prāśya,%}¦ ind. having eaten, having tasted or
sipped.
<LEND>

<L>33820<pc>0660-b<k1>prASastya<k2>prASastya
{#prASastya#}¦ {%prāśastya, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-śasta%}),
the being praised, praiseworthiness, celebrity, excel-
lence, pre-eminence.
<LEND>

<L>33821<pc>0660-b<k1>prASAstra<k2>prASAstra
{#prASAstra#}¦ {%prāśāstra, am,%} n. (fr. {%pra-śāstṛ%}),
the office of the Pra-śāstṛ, q. v.; government, rule,
dominion.
<LEND>
[Page0660-c+ 72]

<L>33822<pc>0660-c<k1>prASu<k2>prASu
{#prASu#}¦ {%prāśu (pra-āśu), us, us, u,%} Ved. (accord-
ing to the Nirukta {%= kṣipra%}), exceedingly quick or
speedy, swift; (Sāy.) {%= Somasya prāśakaḥ,%} an eater
or partaker of Soma; or {%= Vṛtrasya hiṃsakaḥ,%}
the enemy (or injurer) of Vṛtra. {%—Prāśu-ṣah%} or
{%prāśu-ṣāh, ṣāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. leading or curbing swift
horses, having fleet horses; (Sāy.) {%= śīghram abhi-%}
{%bhavitṛ,%} rapidly victorious.
<LEND>

<L>33823<pc>0660-c<k1>prASU<k2>prASU
{#prASU#}¦ {%prāśū, ūs,%} m. {%= parā-krama.%}
<LEND>

<L>33824<pc>0660-c<k1>prASfNga<k2>prASfNga
{#prASfNga#}¦ {%prā-śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
projecting horns, having the horns bent forward;
(according to Mahī-dhara {%= prakṛṣṭa-śriṅga-%}
{%yukta.%})
<LEND>

<L>33825<pc>0660-c<k1>prASnika<k2>prASnika
{#prASnika#}¦ {%prāśnika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%praśna%}),
containing questions or inquiries [cf. {%bahu-p˚%}]; ({%as%}),
m. an inquirer, asker, examiner; one who decides a
dispute or quarrel, an umpire, arbiter, arbitrator; an
assistant at a spectacle or assembly (?).
<LEND>

<L>33826<pc>0660-c<k1>prASnIputra<k2>prASnIputra
{%Prāśnī-putra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>33827<pc>0660-c<k1>prASya<k2>prASya<h>1
{#prASya#} 1¦. and 2. {%prāśya.%} See under 2.
{%prāś,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>33828<pc>0660-c<k1>prASravaRa<k2>prASravaRa
{#prASravaRa#}¦ {%prāśravaṇa.%} See {%prāsravaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>33829<pc>0660-c<k1>prASlizwa<k2>prASlizwa
{#prASlizwa#}¦ {%prāśliṣṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%śliṣṭa;%} in Ved. gram.) N. of a kind of Svarita
produced by the combination of two short {%is;%} (also
wrongly read {%prāk-śliṣṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>33830<pc>0660-c<k1>prASvameDa<k2>prASvameDa
{#prASvameDa#}¦ {%prāśvamedha (pra-aś˚), as,%} m. a
preceding horse sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>33831<pc>0660-c<k1>prAzwa<k2>prAzwa
{#prAzwa#}¦ {%prāṣṭa.%} See under 1. {%prāś,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>33832<pc>0660-c<k1>prAs<k2>prAs<h>1
{#prAs#} 1¦. {%prās%} ({%pra-as,%} see rt. 1. {%as%}), cl. 2.
P. {%prāsti,%} &c., Ved. to be in front of, be in an
especial manner or extraordinary degree; to be pre-
eminent, excel, preponderate, (Sāy. {%= pra-bhū.%})
<LEND>

<L>33833<pc>0660-c<k1>prAs<k2>prAs<h>2
{#prAs#} 2¦. {%prās%} ({%pra-as,%} see rt. 2. {%as%}), cl. 4.
P. {%prāsyati, prāsitum,%} to throw forth, cast away,
hurl forth, fling forth; to throw, cast, discharge (a
missile); {%aṃśam prās,%} to cast lots.
<LEND>

<L>33834<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsa<k2>prAsa
{%Prāsa, as,%}¦ m. casting, throwing; interspersing,
insertion; a barbed missile or dart; a particular
constellation or a particular position of a planet; N.
of a man.
<LEND>

<L>33835<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsaka<k2>prAsaka
{%Prāsaka, as,%}¦ m. a die, dice.
<LEND>

<L>33836<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsana<k2>prAsana
{%Prāsana, am,%}¦ n. throwing forth, casting away;
throwing, casting; throwing down.
<LEND>

<L>33837<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsika<k2>prAsika
{%Prāsika, as, ī, am,%}¦ armed with a dart or javelin;
({%as%}), m. a spearman, lancer, javelin-man.
<LEND>

<L>33838<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsta<k2>prAsta
{%Prāsta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown away, thrown off;
thrown into, thrown, cast, hurled, discharged; ex-
pelled, turned out, banished.
<LEND>

<L>33839<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsaNga<k2>prAsaNga
{#prAsaNga#}¦ {%prāsaṅga, as,%} m. (fr. {%pra-saṅga%}), a
kind of yoke for cattle.
<LEND>

<L>33840<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsaNgika<k2>prAsaNgika
{%Prāsaṅgika, as, ī, am,%}¦ resulting from attach-
ment, proceeding from near relation, derived from
close connection; connected with, inseparably con-
nected, inherent, innate; pertaining to, belonging to
any topic, relevant; opportune, seasonable; occasion-
ally connected, occasional, incidental, casual, acci-
dental, (opposed to {%ādhikārika%}); episodical.
<LEND>

<L>33841<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsaNgya<k2>prAsaNgya
{%Prāsaṅgya, as, gī%}¦ (?), {%am,%} harnessed with a
yoke, yoked; ({%as%}), m. any animal used for draught,
a draught-ox or one yoked.
<LEND>

<L>33842<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsaca<k2>prAsaca
{#prAsaca#}¦ {%prāsaca, as,%} m., Ved. a sudden and
violent shower of rain?; ({%ī%}), f. a flood of water
produced by sudden and violent showers of rain.
<LEND>

<L>33843<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsarpaka<k2>prAsarpaka
{#prAsarpaka#}¦ {%prāsarpaka, as,%} m. {%= pra-sarpaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>33844<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsah<k2>prAsah
{#prAsah#}¦ {%prā-sah, ṭ,%} f., Ved. power, force; {%prā-%}
{%sahā,%} by force, violently, mightily, (Sāy. {%= balena.%})
<LEND>

<L>33845<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsaha<k2>prAsaha
{%Prā-saha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. power, force, (Sāy.) {%= śa-%}
{%trūṇām prakarṣeṇābhibhavitā; (ā),%} f., N. of
the wife of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>33846<pc>0660-c<k1>prAsAha<k2>prAsAha
{%Prā-sāha, as, ā, am,%}¦ overpowering, subduing; {%ja-%}
{%gat-prāsāha,%} (in which) the Jagatīmetre predominates.
<LEND>
[Page0661-a+ 73]

<L>33847<pc>0661-a<k1>prAsAda<k2>prAsAda
{#prAsAda#}¦ {%prāsāda, as,%} m. (fr. {%pra-sad%}), a
lofty seat or platform for spectators; a building
erected on high foundations and approached by
means of steps, a building consecrated to a deity or
inhabited by a prince, a temple, palace; the assembly
room and confessional hall of the Buddhist priest-
hood. {%—Prāsāda-kukkuṭa, as,%} m. a domestic
pigeon. {%—Prāsāda-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone to (the
roof of) a palace. {%—Prāsāda-tala, am,%} n. the flat
roof of a house or palace. {%—Prāsāda-parāmantra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a particular magical formula (a com-
bination of the letters {%ha%} and {%sa, = parā-prāsāda-%}
{%mantra%}). {%—Prāsāda-pṛṣṭha, as,%} m. a terrace or
balcony on the top of a large house. {%—Prāsāda-pra-%}
{%tiṣṭhā,%} f. the consecration of a temple. {%—Prāsāda-%}
{%prastara, as,%} m. the flat roof of a house. {%—Prāsāda-%}
{%maṇḍanā,%} f. a kind of orpiment. {%—Prāsāda-vāsin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} dwelling in a palace. {%—Prāsāda-śāyin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} accustomed to sleep in a palace. {%—Prāsāda-%}
{%śṛṅga, am,%} n. the spire or pinnacle of a palace or
temple, a turret. {%—Prāsāda-stha, as, ā, am,%} stand-
ing on (the roof of) a palace. {%—Prāsādāgrya (˚da-%}
{%ag˚), āṇi,%} n. pl. the most excellent or beautiful
palaces. {%—Prāsādāṅganā (˚da-aṅ˚),%} f. the court-
yard of a temple, {{precints->precincts||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} of a shrine. {%—Prāsādā-%}
{%rohaṇa (˚da-ār˚), am,%} n. the going up into a
palace, entering a palace. {%—Prāsādārohaṇīya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} relating to the act of going up into a palace.
<LEND>

<L>33848<pc>0661-a<k1>prAsAdika<k2>prAsAdika
{%Prāsādika, as, ā%}¦ (?), {%am%} (fr. {%pra-sāda%}), kind,
amiable, friendly, favourable; given by way of
blessing, given as a favour; beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>33849<pc>0661-a<k1>prAsAdIya<k2>prAsAdIya<h>1
1. {%prāsādīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%prāsādīyati,%} &c., to
imagine one's self to be in a palace.
<LEND>

<L>33850<pc>0661-a<k1>prAsAdIya<k2>prAsAdIya<h>2
2. {%prāsādīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a palace,
palatial.
<LEND>

<L>33851<pc>0661-a<k1>prAsika<k2>prAsika
{#prAsika#}¦ {%prāsika.%} See under 2. {%prās,%} p. 660.
<LEND>

<L>33852<pc>0661-a<k1>prAsUtika<k2>prAsUtika
{#prAsUtika#}¦ {%prāsūtika, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%pra-%}
{%sūti%}), belonging or relating to childbirth.
<LEND>

<L>33853<pc>0661-a<k1>prAsenajitI<k2>prAsenajitI
{#prAsenajitI#}¦ {%prāsenajitī,%} f. a patronymic
from Prasena-jit.
<LEND>

<L>33854<pc>0661-a<k1>prAseva<k2>prAseva
{#prAseva#}¦ {%prā-seva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%siv%} with {%pra%}),
Ved. a rope (forming part of a horse's harness).
<LEND>

<L>33855<pc>0661-a<k1>prAskaRva<k2>prAskaRva
{#prAskaRva#}¦ {%prāskaṇva, as, ī, am,%} belonging or
relating to Pra-skaṇva; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>33856<pc>0661-a<k1>prAstArika<k2>prAstArika
{#prAstArika#}¦ {%prāstārika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%stāra%}), see Scholiast on Pāṇ. IV. 4, 72.
<LEND>

<L>33857<pc>0661-a<k1>prAstAvika<k2>prAstAvika
{#prAstAvika#}¦ {%prāstāvika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%stāva%}), forming a commencement or introduction;
having a prelude (as a hymn, Ved.); useful on
occasion, suiting the subject under treatment; op-
portune.
<LEND>

<L>33858<pc>0661-a<k1>prAstutya<k2>prAstutya
{%Prāstutya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%pra-stuta%}), the being pro-
pounded or discussed, the being under discussion.
<LEND>

<L>33859<pc>0661-a<k1>prAsTAnika<k2>prAsTAnika
{#prAsTAnika#}¦ {%prāsthānika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%sthāna%}), relating to departure; favourable or auspi-
cious to a departure; [cf. {%mahā-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33860<pc>0661-a<k1>prAsTika<k2>prAsTika
{#prAsTika#}¦ {%prāsthika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-stha%}),
containing a Prastha, weighing a Prastha, bought for
a Prastha; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%kṣetram,%} a field sown
with a Prastha of grain.
<LEND>

<L>33861<pc>0661-a<k1>prAsravaRa<k2>prAsravaRa
{#prAsravaRa#}¦ {%prāsravaṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%pra-%}
{%sravaṇa%}), coming or derived from a spring or
fountain (as water); ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from
Pra-sravaṇa; {%plakṣaḥ prāsravaṇaḥ,%} N. of a
place, the source of the Sarasvatī or the spot where
the Sarasvatī reappears [cf. {%saras-vatī%}]; (also spelt
{%prāśravaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>33862<pc>0661-a<k1>prAh<k2>prAh
{#prAh#}¦ {%prāh%} ({%pra-ah,%} see 3. {%ah%}), only in
Perf. {%prāha,%} to utter, express; to announce, pro-
claim, declare, state, tell, speak, say (with acc. of
the thing and dat. or acc. of the person); to record,
hand down by tradition; to call, name; to consider
or regard as.
<LEND>
[Page0661-b+ 76]

<L>33863<pc>0661-b<k1>prAha<k2>prAha
{#prAha#}¦ {%prāha, as,%} m. instruction in the art
of acting or dancing.
<LEND>

<L>33864<pc>0661-b<k1>prAhaRi<k2>prAhaRi
{#prAhaRi#}¦ {%prāhaṇi, is,%} m. a wrong reading
for {%prāvāhaṇi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33865<pc>0661-b<k1>prAhArika<k2>prAhArika
{#prAhArika#}¦ {%prāhārika, as,%} m. (fr. {%pra-hāra%}),
a police officer, constable (?).
<LEND>

<L>33866<pc>0661-b<k1>prAhftAyana<k2>prAhftAyana
{%Prāhṛtāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Pra-
hṛta.
<LEND>

<L>33867<pc>0661-b<k1>prAhuRa<k2>prAhuRa
{#prAhuRa#}¦ {%prāhuṇa, as, ī,%} m. f. a guest ({%=%}
{%prāghuṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>33868<pc>0661-b<k1>prAhuRaka<k2>prAhuRaka
{%Prāhuṇaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= prāhuṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>33869<pc>0661-b<k1>prAhuRikA<k2>prAhuRikA
{%Prāhuṇikā,%}¦ f. a female guest.
<LEND>

<L>33870<pc>0661-b<k1>prAhRa<k2>prAhRa
{#prAhRa#}¦ {%prāhṇa%} (fr. {%pra + ahna%}), {%as,%} m. the
early part of the day, forenoon, morning; ({%am, e%}),
ind. in the forenoon, in the morning. {%—Prāhṇe-%}
{%tamām,%} ind. very early in the forenoon. {%—Prāhṇe-%}
{%tarām,%} ind. earlier in the forenoon, very early in
the morning.
<LEND>

<L>33871<pc>0661-b<k1>prAhRetana<k2>prAhRetana
{%Prāhṇetana, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
the forenoon, happening in the morning, matutinal.
<LEND>

<L>33872<pc>0661-b<k1>prAhrAda<k2>prAhrAda
{#prAhrAda#}¦ {%prāhrāda, as,%} m. (fr. {%pra-hrāda%}),
a patronymic of Vi-rocana.
<LEND>

<L>33873<pc>0661-b<k1>prAhrAdi<k2>prAhrAdi
{%Prāhrādi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Vi-rocana and
of Bali.
<LEND>

<L>33874<pc>0661-b<k1>priya<k2>priya
{#priya#}¦ {%priya.%} See under rt. 1. {%prī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>33875<pc>0661-b<k1>priyAla<k2>priyAla
{#priyAla#}¦ {%priyāla.%} See p. 662, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33876<pc>0661-b<k1>prI<k2>prI<h>1
{#prI#} 1¦. {%prī,%} cl. 9. (and 1 ?). P. A. {%prīṇāti,%}
{%prīṇīte, prayati (?), -te (?), piprāya, pi-%}
{%priye, preṣyati, -te, apraiṣīt, apreṣṭa, pretum%}
(Vedic forms are {%prīṇāhi = prīṇīhi, piprīhi, api-%}
{%pres, apiprayat, piprayasva%}), (P.) to please, de-
light, gladden, cheer, regale; to act kindly to, show
kindness to, show grace or favour to any one (with
acc.); to take pleasure in, delight in (with gen. or
loc.); to love; (A.) to be pleased or gratified, be
glad or cheerful: Pass. {%prīyate%} (by some regarded
as cl. 4. A.; ep. also P. {%prīyati%}), to be pleased or
gratified, be glad or cheerful; to feel affection for,
regard with affection, love; to be satisfied, assent:
Caus. {%prīṇayati%} (according to Siddhānta-kaum.
p. 150 also {%prāpayati,%} and according to Vopa-deva
XVIII. 12 also {%prāyayati%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%api-%}
{%prīṇat,%} to give pleasure to, please, delight, gratify;
to act kindly or graciously to, treat kindly: Desid.
{%piprīṣati, -te,%} Ved. to wish to please or propitiate:
Intens. {%peprīyate, peprayīti, pepreti;%} [cf. Zend
<nsi>frī,</nsi> ‘to love, praise;’ <nsi>fry-a,</nsi> ‘beloved, a friend:’
Gr. <lang n="greek">φίλο-ς, φιλέω</lang> fr. a rt. <lang n="greek">φιλ</lang> for <lang n="greek">φλι, πρᾷο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πραΰ-ς</lang> (Ion. <lang n="greek">πρη-ΰ-ς</lang>), <lang n="greek">πρᾳ-ό-τη(τ)-ς, πραΰ-ν-ω:</lang>
perhaps Lat. <nsi>pla-ceo, pla-co, pius</nsi> for <nsi>prius</nsi> (?),
<nsi>lœ-tus</nsi> for <nsi>plœ-tus</nsi> (?), <nsi>filius</nsi> = {%priya%} (?): Goth.
<nsi>fri-j-on,</nsi> ‘to love;’ <nsi>frijond-s,</nsi> ‘a friend;’ <nsi>fria-thva,</nsi>
‘love,’ = {%priya-tva%}; <nsi>faihu-freiks,</nsi> ‘money-lov-
ing, avaricious:’ Old Germ. <nsi>fra-o, frô,</nsi> ‘joyful;’
<nsi>friunt,</nsi> ‘a friend;’ <nsi>fri-du, fri-da,</nsi> ‘peace;’ <nsi>friu-</nsi>
<nsi>dil, fri-del, fre-del,</nsi> ‘a minion, favourite:’ Old
Slav. <nsi>pri-ja-ti,</nsi> ‘to provide;’ <nsi>pri-ja-telu</nsi> = Russ.
<nsi>prijāteli</nsi> = Lith. <nsi>prëteliu-s,</nsi> ‘a friend:’ Cambro-
Brit. <nsi>prïawd.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>33877<pc>0661-b<k1>priya<k2>priya
{%Priya, as, ā, am,%}¦ beloved, dear to (with gen.,
loc., or dat.), dear, valued, amiable, agreeable, liked,
desired, desirable, pleasing; customary, familiar,
wonted, own (Ved., cf. <lang n="greek">φίλος</lang>); dear, expensive, high
in price [cf. {%priya-dhānyaka, priyānna-tva%}];
(mostly in comps.), loving, liking, kind, favourable,
affectionate, fond of (also with loc.), attached to,
addicted to [cf. {%akṣa-p˚, nartana-p˚, puru-p˚%}];
({%as%}), m. a lover, husband; (according to Kullūka on
Manu III. 19) a son-in-law; a kind of deer [cf.
{%priyaka%}]; a species of medicinal plant, {%= vṛddhi;%}
{%(ā),%} f. a mistress, wife; a woman; news, tidings,
information; small cardamoms; Arabian jasmine;
vinous or spirituous liquor; N. of various metres,
four times ˘˘¯˘¯; a metre of four lines of which
the first, third, and fourth are ¯¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯,
and the second ˘¯ &c.; another variety of metre;
[Page0661-c+ 80]
({%am%}), n. love; a service, kindness, favour; a pleasure;
({%am%}), ind. in an agreeable manner, in a pleasant
way; ({%eṇa%}), ind. willingly, with pleasure, readily,
gladly, pleasantly, agreeably {%(= priya-priyeṇa).%}
{%—Priyaṃ-vada, as, ā, am,%} speaking kindly or
pleasantly, pleasant speaking, sweet speaking, agree-
able; ({%as%}), m. a kind of bird; N. of the son of the
chief of the Gandharvas; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of metre,
four times ˘˘˘¯˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯; N. of a woman.
{%—Priya-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing pleasure or en-
joyment, giving pleasure. {%—Priya-karman, ā, ā, a,%}
one whose actions are kind, one who acts kindly,
kind; ({%a%}), n. the action of a lover. {%—Priya-ka-%}
{%latra, as,%} m. a man who is fond of his wife.
{%—Priya-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desirous of showing
kindness to (with gen.), well-wishing, friendly dis-
posed, benevolent. {%—Priya-kāmya, as,%} m. the
plant Terminalia Tomentosa. {%—Priya-kāra, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} doing a kindness to (with gen.), doing a
favour or acting kindly towards, treating kindly,
pleasing, gratifying; kind, favourable, affectionate;
congenial, suiting. {%—Priya-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%}
causing love, causing pleasure or gladness, agreeable.
{%—Priya-kāraṇa, am,%} n. the act of doing a favour;
({%āt%}), ind. for the sake of doing a favour. {%—Priya-%}
{%kāri-tva, am,%} n. the act of showing kindness, kind
treatment. {%—Priya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} showing kind-
ness to, acting kindly towards, doing what is pleasing,
acting kindly. {%—Priya-kṛt, t, t, t,%} doing a kind-
ness; ({%t%}), m. a friend, benefactor. {%—Priyakṛt-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} giving the greatest pleasure, doing that
which pleases most. {%—Priya-kṣatra, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. ruling benevolently, governing propitiously
(said of the gods; Sāy. {%= prīṇayitṛ-bala%}). {%—Pri-%}
{%ya-guḍa, as, ā, am,%} one to whom sugar is agree-
able, fond of sugar. {%—Priyaṅ-kara, as, ī, am,%}
acting kindly or affectionately to, showing kindness
to (with gen.); agreeable; exciting or attracting
regard, amiable; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava; N. of
a man; ({%ī%}), f., N. of various plants {%(= bṛhaj-%}
{%jīvantī, śveta-kaṇṭakārī, aśva-gandhā)%}. {%—Pri-%}
{%yaṅ-karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} acting kindly or affection-
ately to; exciting or attracting regard, amiable.
{%—Priyaṅ-kāra, as, ī, am, = priya-kāra,%} q. v.
{%—Priya-catura, as, ā, am,%} see Vopa-deva III.
110. {%—Priya-cikīrṣu, us, us, u,%} wishing to do
what is pleasing (to any one), desirous of pleasing.
{%—Priya-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. dear when born,
born beloved or desired; an epithet of Agni. {%—Priya-%}
{%jāni, is,%} m. a man who is fond of his wife. {%—Priya-%}
{%jīva, as, ā, am,%} one to whom life is dear, loving
life, living long, long-lived; ({%as%}), m. the plant
Calosanthes Indica. {%—Priya-jīvita, as, ā, am,%} lov-
ing life. {%—Priyajīvita-tā,%} f. love of life. {%—Priya-%}
{%tanu, us, us, u,%} Ved. loving the body (?). {%—Priya-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} most beloved, dearest; ({%as%}), m. a
lover, husband; N. of a plant, Celosia Cristata, {%=%}
{%mayūra-śikhā; (ā),%} f. a mistress, wife. {%—Priya-%}
{%tara, as, ā, am,%} dearer, more beloved, kinder; more
expensive. {%—Priyatara-tva, am,%} n. the being dearer
to any one (with loc.). {%—Priya-tā,%} f. or {%priya-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. dearness, the being dear; the being fond of,
affection, love. {%—Priya-toṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%} satisfy-
ing a lover; ({%as%}), m. a kind of coitus. {%—Priya-da,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} giving agreeable or desired objects; ({%ā%}),
f. the plant Rhinacanthus Communis. {%—Priya-dattā,%}
f. a mystical name of the earth; N. of a woman.
{%—Priya-darśa, as, ā, am,%} pleasant or agree-
able to look at, (opposed to {%dur-darśa.%}) {%—Priya-%}
{%darśana, as, ā, am,%} pleasant or grateful to the
sight, good looking, lovely, handsome; ({%am%}), n.
the look of a friend; ({%as%}), m. a parrot; a kind of
date tree; Terminalia Tomentosa; Mimusops Kauki;
a plant growing in wet weather on trees and stones,
(in Marāṭhī called <nsi>dagaḍaphūla</nsi>, in Hindūstani
<lang n="arabic">پتهركى پهول</lang>); N. of a prince of the Gandharvas;
of a son of Vāsuki; N. of a Kalpa; ({%ī%}), f. a kind
of bird, Gracula Religiosa; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter
of Mahā-vīra. {%—Priya-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} looking
with kindness (upon everything); an epithet of
[Page0662-a+ 81]
king Aśoka. {%—Priya-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of the
author of a commentary on the Bhakta-mālā.
{%—Priya-devana, as, ā, am,%} fond of play or
gambling. {%—Priya-dhanva, as,%} m. ‘fond of the
bow,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Priya-dhā,%} ind., Ved.
lovingly, kindly, affectionately. {%—Priya-dhānyaka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. causing dearness of provisions,
producing scarcity of corn, (opposed to {%subhikṣa-%}
{%kārin.%}) {%—Priya-dhāma, as,%} m., Ved. fond of
home, loving the sacrificial enclosure; an epithet of
Agni; (Sāy. {%= priya-sthāna,%} fond of his station.)
{%—Priya-dhāman, ā,%} m., Ved. {%= priya-dhāma,%} an
epithet of Indra; ({%ānas%}), m. pl. an epithet of the
Ādityas. {%—Priya-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of the
beloved or desired; (Mahī-dhara) {%= priyāṇām pā-%}
{%lakaḥ%}. {%—Priya-putra, as,%} m. a kind of bird.
{%—Priya-prada, as,%} m., N. of an author of a
Śāktamantra. {%—Priya-prasādana, am,%} n. the
conciliation of a husband, reconciliation with any
object of affection. {%—Priyaprasādana-vrata, am,%}
n. a vow for the reconciliation of a husband.
{%—Priya-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%} fond of life {%(=%}
{%priyāsu)%}. {%—Priya-prāya, as, ā, am,%} exceed-
ingly kind or amiable; of pleasing speech, well-
spoken, eloquent; ({%am%}), n. eloquence in language.
{%—Priya-priyeṇa,%} ind. with pleasure, willingly,
readily, gladly, pleasantly, agreeably. {%—Priya-prep-%}
{%su, us, us, u,%} desirous of obtaining a beloved object,
lamenting the loss or absence of any beloved object,
grieving for an object of affection. {%—Priya-bhāṣaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. speaking kindly, kind or friendly speech.
{%—Priya-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} speaking kindly; ({%iṇī%}),
f. a kind of bird, Gracula Religiosa. {%—Priya-maṇ-%}
{%ḍana, as, ā, am,%} fond of trinkets or ornaments.
{%—Priya-madhu, us,%} m. ‘fond of wine,’ an epithet
of Bala-rāma the half-brother of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Priya-%}
{%mānasa, as, ā, am,%} fond of the lake Mānasa (the
Rāja-haṃsa or Royal-goose). {%—Priya-mālyānule-%}
{%pana (˚ya-an˚), as,%} m., N. of an attendant of
Skanda. {%—Priya-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a mythical
Cakra-vartin. {%—Priya-medha, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi
(a descendant of Aṅgiras and author of the hymns
Ṛg-veda VIII. 1-40, 57, 58, 76, IX. 28);
of a descendant of Aja-mīḍha; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
descendants of the Ṛṣi Priya-medha. {%—Priya-%}
{%medha-stuta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. praised by those who
are fond of sacrifices, celebrated by pious priests;
(Sāy. {%= priya-yajñair ṛṣibhiḥ stutaḥ.%}) {%—Pri-%}
{%yam-bhaviṣṇu, us, us, u,%} becoming dear, be-
coming an object of affection. {%—Priyambhaviṣṇu-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%priyambhaviṣṇu-tva, am,%} n. the becom-
ing an object of affection, amiability. {%—Priyam-%}
{%bhāvuka, as, ī, am,%} one who has become dear,
become an object of affection. {%—Priyambhāvuka-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%priyambhāvuka-tva, am,%} n. the having
become dear or beloved, becoming beloved, amia-
bility. {%—Priya-yajña, as, ā, am,%} fond of sacrifices,
loving sacrifices. {%—Priya-raṇa, as, ā, am,%} delighting
in war, warlike, martial. {%—Priya-ratha, as, ā, am,%}
possessing a favourite chariot, (Sāy. {%= prīyamāṇa-%}
{%ratha-yukta%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of a man (?). {%—Priya-%}
{%rūpa, as, ā, am,%} having an agreeable form. {%—Priya-%}
{%vaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} one who speaks kindly or
agreeably, flattering, a flatterer. {%—Priya-vacana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one whose words are kind or friendly,
kindly spoken; ({%as%}), m. {%= bhaktimān rogī; (am),%}
n. kind or flattering speech, term of endearment,
endearing expression. {%—Priya-vacas, as,%} n. a kind
or friendly speech. {%—Priya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} con-
taining the word {%priya%}. {%—Priya-vayasya, as,%}
m. a dear friend. {%—Priya-varṇī,%} f. {%= priyaṅgu,%} a
creeping plant, Echites Frutescens. {%—Priya-vallī,%} f.
a species of plant {%(= priyaṅgu, phalinī)%}. {%—Priya-%}
{%vastu,%} n. a favourite object or topic. {%—Priya-vāk-%}
{%sahita, as, ā, am,%} accompanied by kind words.
{%—Priya-vāc, k,%} f. kind or agreeable speech; ({%k, k,%}
{%k%}), one whose words are kind, kind in speech,
affable in address. {%—Priya-vāda, as,%} m. kind or
agreeable speech. {%—Priya-vādikā,%} f. a kind of
musical instrument. {%—Priyavādi-tā,%} f. speaking
kindly, kindliness of speech. {%—Priya-vādin, ī, inī, %}
[Page0662-b+ 81]
{%i,%} speaking kindly or agreeably, speaking affection-
ately, flattering, a flatterer; ({%inī%}), f. a kind of bird,
Gracula Religiosa. {%—Priya-vinākṛta, as, ā, am,%}
abandoned by a lover, deserted by a husband. {%—Pri-%}
{%ya-viśva, as, ā, am,%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ. I. 1, 29.
{%—Priya-vrata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. liking pious ob-
servances, fond of obedience (said of the gods; Sāy.
{%= priyāṇi karmāṇi yeṣām%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of a
king (a son of Manu and Śata-rūpā); N. of a priest.
{%—Priya-śālaka, as,%} m. the plant Terminalia To-
mentosa; (also spelt {%priya-sālaka.%}) {%—Priya-śra-%}
{%vas, ās, ās, as,%} loving glory; an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Priya-sa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. granting desired ob-
jects; (according to Sāy. {%priyasāsaḥ = priyatamā%}
{%dhārāḥ.%}) {%—Priya-saṃvāsa, as,%} m. the society of
a beloved object, the society of loved persons. {%—Pri-%}
{%ya-sakha, as, ā, am,%} one to whom friends are
dear, loving friends; ({%as%}), m. a dear friend; the tree
Acacia Catechu, {%= khadira; (ī),%} f. a dear female
friend, a female friend or companion, a confidante.
{%—Priya-saṅgamana, am,%} n. ‘the meeting of
friends,’ N. of a place in which Indra and Viṣṇu
are said to have met with their parents Aditi and
Kaśyapa. {%—Priya-satya, as, ā, am,%} pleasant and
true; ({%am%}), n. speech at once pleasing and true,
eloquent and truthful discourse. {%—Priya-santati, is,%}
{%is, i,%} having a beloved son. {%—Priya-sandeśa, as,%}
m. a tree with fragrant flowers, Michelia Champaca.
{%—Priya-samāgama, as,%} m. reunion with a beloved
object. {%—Priya-samucita, as, ā, am,%} befitting
or becoming a lover. {%—Priya-sahacarī,%} f. a dear
female companion, beloved wife. {%—Priya-sālaka, as,%}
m. {%= priya-śālaka,%} q. v. {%—Priya-suhṛd, t,%} m. a
dear friend, kind or good friend. {%—Priya-stotra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. fond of praise; (Sāy. {%= priyāṇi%}
{%stotrāṇi yasya.%}) {%—Priya-svapna, as, ā, am,%} fond
of sleep, sluggish. {%—Priyākhya (˚ya-ākh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} called ‘dear,’ a lover, mistress; announcing
good tidings {%—Priyākhyāna (˚ya-ākh˚), am,%} n.
agreeable news, pleasant tidings. {%—Priyākhyāna-%}
{%puraḥsara, as, ā, am,%} preceded by agreeable
news, preceded by pleasant tidings. {%—Priyā-jana,%}
{%as,%} m. any dear or beloved female. {%—Priyātithi%}
{%(˚ya-at˚), is, is, i,%} fond of guests, a lover of
guests, hospitable. {%—Priyātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} of a pleasant nature, agreeable, pleasant. {%—Priyā-%}
{%dhāna (˚ya-ādh˚), am,%} n. a friendly office, good
service. {%—Priyānna (˚ya-an˚), am,%} n. expensive
food, dear provisions. {%—Priyānna-tva, am,%} n. dear-
ness of provisions, dearth, scarcity. {%—Priyāpaya%}
{%(˚ya-ap˚), as,%} m. the absence of a beloved object.
{%—Priyāpriya (˚ya-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} agreeable and
disagreeable, pleasant and unpleasant. {%—Priyāmbu%}
{%(˚ya-am˚), us, us, u,%} fond of water; ({%us%}), m. the
mango tree. {%—Priyārtham (˚ya-ar˚),%} ind. for the
sake of a beloved object. {%—Priyārha (˚ya-ar˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} deserving love, amiable. {%—Priyā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. having a mistress, enamoured, being
in love with. {%—Priyāsu (˚ya-asu), us, us, u,%} fond
of life {%(= priya-prāṇa)%}. {%—Priyāsūya-matī (˚ya-%}
{%as˚),%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Priyaiṣin (˚ya-eṣ˚),%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} wishing to please, friendly, affectionate.
{%—Priyokti (˚ya-uk˚), is,%} f. friendly speech.
{%—Priyodita (˚ya-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} well or kindly
spoken, pleasingly uttered; ({%am%}), n. kind or gentle
speech. {%—Priyopapatti (˚ya-up˚), is,%} f. a happy
event or circumstance, pleasant occurrence. {%—Priyo-%}
{%pabhoga (˚ya-up˚), as,%} m. the enjoyment of a
lover or of a mistress. {%—Priyopabhoga-bandhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} barren or destitute of the enjoyment of a
lover. {%—Priyosriya (˚ya-us˚), as,%} m., Ved. loving
cows, amorous (said of a bull).
<LEND>

<L>33878<pc>0662-b<k1>priyaka<k2>priyaka
{%Priyaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of variegated or spotted
deer; a kind of bird; a bee; N. of several plants,
Nauclea Cadamba; Terminalia Tomentosa; saffron;
{%= priyaṅgu,%} a kind of tree; N. of an attendant on
Skanda; N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>33879<pc>0662-b<k1>priyaNgu<k2>priyaNgu
{%Priyaṅgu, us, us,%}¦ m. f. panic seed, Panicum
Italicum; a medicinal plant and perfume, commonly
called Priyaṅgu and described in some places as a fra-
grant seed ({%= phalinī%}); Italian millet; long pepper;
[Page0662-c+ 81]
Sinapis Ramosa, {%= kaṭukī; (am),%} n. saffron. {%—Pri-%}
{%yaṅgu-dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of a country. {%—Priyaṅgu-%}
{%śyāmā,%} f., N. of the wife of Naravāhana-datta.
<LEND>

<L>33880<pc>0662-c<k1>priyAkf<k2>priyAkf
{%Priyā-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to act kindly towards, treat kindly (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>33881<pc>0662-c<k1>priyAla<k2>priyAla
{%Priyāla, as,%}¦ m. the tree Buchanania Latifolia (com-
monly called Piyāl, {%= piyāla, tāpasa-priya%}); ({%ā%}), f.
a vine, a bunch of grapes {%(= drākṣā)%}. {%—Priyāla-%}
{%tāla-kharjūra-harītakī-vibhītaka, ās,%} m. pl. piyāl,
palm, date and yellow and beleric myrobalan trees.
<LEND>

<L>33882<pc>0662-c<k1>prI<k2>prI<h>2
2. {%prī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ in {%adha-prī, kadha-prī, ghṛta-%}
{%prī,%} &c., q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>33883<pc>0662-c<k1>prIRa<k2>prIRa<h>1
1. {%prīṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see s. v.), pleased, satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>33884<pc>0662-c<k1>prIRana<k2>prIRana
{%Prīṇana, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleasing, gratifying, appeas-
ing, allaying, soothing; ({%am%}), n. the act of pleasing
or delighting, gladdening, satisfying, satisfaction,
satiety; a means of gladdening or satisfying.
<LEND>

<L>33885<pc>0662-c<k1>prIRayitvA<k2>prIRayitvA
{%Prīṇayitvā,%}¦ ind. having pleased or propitiated.
<LEND>

<L>33886<pc>0662-c<k1>prIRita<k2>prIRita
{%Prīṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, gratified, delighted.
<LEND>

<L>33887<pc>0662-c<k1>prIta<k2>prIta
{%Prīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, delighted, gladdened,
satisfied; joyful, content; happy, glad; dear, be-
loved, loved; gracious, kind, affectionate; ({%am%}), n.
pleasure, delight; jest, mirth. {%—Prita-tara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} more highly pleased, much gratified. {%—Prīta-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} pleased in mind, gratified in
mind. {%—Prītātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} pleased in
mind, rejoiced in spirit, pleased, satisfied, content.
<LEND>

<L>33888<pc>0662-c<k1>prIti<k2>prIti
{%Prīti, is,%}¦ f. any pleasurable sensation, pleasure,
joy, gladness, happiness; enjoyment, gratification, sa-
tisfaction [cf. {%ātma-p˚%}]; graciousness, grace, favour,
favourableness, kindness, propitiousness; friendly
disposition, liking, fondness for, delighting in, friend-
liness, amity, regard, harmony, affection, love; con-
ciliation; Joy or Gratification personified as a
daughter of Dakṣa; Love personified as wife of
Kāma-deva; the second of the twenty-seven astro-
nomical Yogas; N. of the thirteenth Kalā of the
moon; a symbolical expression for the letter {%dh;%}
{%prītyā,%} ind. in a friendly way, amicably, peaceably.
{%—Prīti-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing pleasure; inspiring
love or affection; pleasing, agreeable. {%—Prīti-ka-%}
{%raṇa, am,%} n. the act of causing pleasure, gratifying.
{%—Prīti-karman, a,%} n. an act of friendship or
love; kind action. {%—Prīti-kūṭa,%} N. of a village.
{%—Prīti-candra, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Prīti-%}
{%juṣā,%} f., N. of the wife of A-niruddha. {%—Prīti-%}
{%tṛṣ, ṭ,%} m. a N. of the god of love. {%—Prīti-da,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} giving pleasure; inspiring love or regard,
affectionate; ({%as%}), m. a jester or buffoon in a play,
the Vidūṣaka. {%—Prīti-datta, as, ā, am,%} given
through love or affection; ({%am%}), n. (?), property or
valuables presented to a female by her relations and
friends at the time of her marriage, and constituting
part of her peculiar property. {%—Prīti-dāna, am,%} n.
or {%prīti-dāya, as,%} m. ‘gift of love,’ a present
made from love or affection, a kind or friendly
present, token of affection. {%—Prīti-dhana, am,%} n.
money given from love or friendship. {%—Prīti-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. an object of affection, a beloved person or
thing. {%—Prīti-puroga, as, ā, am,%} preceded by
affection, affectionate, loving. {%—Prīti-pūrvam%} or
{%prīti-pūrvakam,%} ind. with the accompaniment of
kindness, kindly, graciously, affectionately, in an af-
fectionate manner. {%—Prīti-pramukha, as, ā, am,%}
preceded by kindness ({%= prīti-pūrvaka%}), kind,
friendly. {%—Prītipramukha-vacana, am,%} n. a speech
preceded by affection, affectionate words, kind speech
({%= prīti-pūrvakāṇi vacanāni%} or according to others
{%= sneha-pradhāna-vacanam,%} speech principally
characterized by affection). {%—Prīti-bhāj, k, k, k,%}
enjoying friendship, receiving friendly offices. {%—Prī-%}
{%ti-bhojya, as, ā, am,%} to be eaten joyfully or cheer-
fully. {%—Prīti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having pleasurable
sensations, pleased, gratified; having love or affection
for (with loc. or gen.), full of affection, loving, fond,
affectionate, kind; favourable; ({%atī%}), f. a kind of
metre consisting of four lines, alternately ˘¯˘¯¯
˘˘¯˘¯¯ and ¯¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯. {%—Prīti-ma-%}
{%nas, ās, ās, as,%} joyous-minded, joyful-hearted,
pleased in mind, content, happy; kind, affectionate.
{%—Prīti-maya, as, ī, am,%} made up of affection,
[Page0663-a+ 79]
arising from affection or joy. {%—Prīti-vacas, as,%} n.
kind or friendly words, gracious or kindly speech.
{%—Prīti-vāda, as,%} m. a friendly discussion. {%—Prīti-%}
{%vivāha, as,%} m. a love-marriage, love-match. {%—Prī-%}
{%ti-viśrambha-bhājana, am,%} n. a repository of
affection and confidence. {%—Prīti-śrāddha, am,%} n.
a funeral offering to the Manes of both parents
performed for the eldest surviving son, and to be
re-performed at some other period by this son in
person. {%—Prīti-saṅgati, is,%} f. a covenant of friend-
ship, friendly alliance. {%—Prīti-snigdha, as, ā, am,%}
moist through love or charming through affection
(said of the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>33889<pc>0663-a<k1>prIyamARa<k2>prIyamARa
{%Prīyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being pleased or pro-
pitiated; being glad or joyful; being dear or beloved;
kind, affectionate.
<LEND>

<L>33890<pc>0663-a<k1>preRA<k2>preRA
{%Preṇā,%}¦ a shortened form for {%premṇā,%} inst. of
{%preman,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33891<pc>0663-a<k1>preRi<k2>preRi
{%Preṇi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. gladdening, delighting, one
who delights (by praises); (Sāy.) {%= prerayitṛ,%} in-
citing, instigating.
<LEND>

<L>33892<pc>0663-a<k1>pretf<k2>pretf
{%Pretṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who loves or cherishes,
a benefactor; (Sāy.) {%= tarpayitṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>33893<pc>0663-a<k1>prema<k2>prema
{%Prema, as, ā, am, = preman,%}¦ love, affection,
(at the end of adj. comps.; cf. {%sa-p˚%}); ({%ā%}), f. {%=%}
{%preman%} (in {%premā-bandha%}); a kind of metre
consisting of four lines (the first, second, and fourth
being ¯¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯ and the third ˘¯˘¯¯
&c.). {%—Premā-bandha = prema-bandha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33894<pc>0663-a<k1>preman<k2>preman
{%Preman, ā, a,%}¦ m. n. love, affection, kindness,
tender regard, favour; sport, pastime; joy, glad-
ness, pleasure; ({%ā%}), m. a jest, joke; wind, air;
an epithet of Indra; N. of various men; {%premṇā%}
(Ved. also {%preṇā%}), ind. through love or affection.
{%—Prema-tattva-nirūpaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Bengālī
poem by Kṛṣṇa-dāsa. {%—Prema-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m.,
N. of a king {%(= prema-sāhi)%}. {%—Prema-para, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} intent on love, filled with affection, affec-
tionate, loving, constant. {%—Prema-pātana, am,%} n.
defluxion of rheum or of tears. {%—Prema-pātra, am,%}
n. an object of affection, a beloved person or thing.
{%—Prema-bandha, as,%} m. or {%prema-bandhana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘love-bond,’ the ties of love, love. {%—Prema-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. state of affection, love. {%—Prema-rāśī-%}
{%bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to become (as
it were) one mass of affection. {%—Premarddhi (˚ma-%}
{%ṛ˚), is,%} f. increase of affection, ardent love. {%—Prema-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} full of love, affectionate; ({%atī%}), f.
a mistress. {%—Prema-viśvāsa-bhūmi, is,%} f. an object
of love and confidence. {%—Prema-sāgara, as,%} m. an
ocean of love. {%—Prema-sāhi, is,%} m. (fr. {%preman%}
{%+ sāhi%} = <lang n="arabic">شاه</lang>) {%= prema-nārāyaṇa%}. {%—Premāmṛta%}
{%(˚ma-am˚), am,%} n. ‘love-ambrosia,’ N. of a metrical
list of 112 names of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Premāśru (˚ma-%}
{%aś˚), u,%} n. a tear of affection.
<LEND>

<L>33895<pc>0663-a<k1>premin<k2>premin
{%Premin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ loving, affectionate, friendly.
<LEND>

<L>33896<pc>0663-a<k1>preyas<k2>preyas
{%Preyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. fr. {%priya%}), dearer,
very dear, more agreeable, more desired; dearest,
most beloved; kinder, more affectionate; ({%ān%}), m.
a lover, husband; ({%asī%}), f. a mistress, wife; ({%ān, as%}),
m. n. (in rhetoric) flattery. {%—Preyas-kara, as,%} m. the
hand of a lover. {%—Preyas-tā,%} f. or {%preyas-tva, am,%} n.
the being dearer, being very dear. {%—Preyo-'patya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘very fond of offspring,’ a heron.
<LEND>

<L>33897<pc>0663-a<k1>prezWa<k2>prezWa
{%Preṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. fr. {%priya%}), dearest,
very dear, most beloved, greatly beloved, most
agreeable, most desired; ({%as%}), m. a lover, husband;
({%ā%}), f. a mistress, wife; a leg. {%—Preṣṭha-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} dearest, most beloved.
<LEND>

<L>33898<pc>0663-a<k1>prIRa<k2>prIRa<h>2
{#prIRa#} 2¦. {%prīṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%pra%}), old,
ancient, former ({%= praṇa, purāṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>33899<pc>0663-a<k1>prItu<k2>prItu
{#prItu#}¦ {%prītu, us,%} m. a bird (?).
<LEND>

<L>33900<pc>0663-a<k1>pru<k2>pru
{#pru#}¦ {%pru%} [cf. rt. {%plu%}], cl. 1. A. {%pravate,%}
{%pupruve,%} &c., to spring up, jump up; to go,
move: Caus. {%prāvayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%apupravat,%}
{%apipravat,%} to reach to, extend as far as (with acc.):
Desid. of Caus. {%puprāvayiṣati, piprāvayiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>33901<pc>0663-a<k1>prut<k2>prut
{%Prut, t, t, t,%}¦ moving, going, (at the end of comps.;
cf. {%antarikṣa-p˚, uda-p˚, upari-p˚, kṛṣṇa-p˚.%})
<LEND>
[Page0663-b+ 79]

<L>33902<pc>0663-b<k1>pruT<k2>pruT
{#pruT#}¦ {%pruth,%} by some regarded as the
proper form of rt. {%proth,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33903<pc>0663-b<k1>pruz<k2>pruz<h>1
{#pruz#} 1¦. {%pruṣ%} [cf. rt. {%pluṣ%}], cl. 5. 9. 10.
P. A. {%pruṣṇoti, pruṣṇute, pruṣṇāti,%}
{%pruṣṇīte, pruṣāyati, -te, proṣitum,%} Ved. to
scatter or sprinkle down in drops, rain, shower,
wet, moisten (in these senses probably fr. {%pra +%}
{%ukṣ;%} Sāy. {%= sic%}); cl. 9. P. {%pruṣṇāti,%} to become
moist or wet, become unctuous; to pour out, sprinkle,
shed, discharge; to fill; cl. 1. P. {%proṣati,%} to burn (in
this sense probably fr. {%pra%} + 1. {%uṣ%}); [cf. Old Germ.
<nsi>frus,</nsi> ‘to be cold;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>frieren, Frost.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>33904<pc>0663-b<k1>pruz<k2>pruz<h>2
2. {%pruṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ sprinkling, (at the end of comps.;
cf. {%abhra-p˚, ghṛta-p˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>33905<pc>0663-b<k1>pruzita<k2>pruzita
{%Pruṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled, wetted, moist-
ened; burning, consuming; (Sāy.) {%= dagdhum pra-%}
{%vṛttaḥ%}. {%—Pruṣita-psu, us, us, u,%} Ved. of a
speckled or dappled aspect, piebald, of a varied hue
(said of the horses of the Aśvins and of Indra; Sāy.
{%= vicitra-rūpa%}).
<LEND>

<L>33906<pc>0663-b<k1>pruzwa<k2>pruzwa
{%Pruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ burnt, consumed.
<LEND>

<L>33907<pc>0663-b<k1>pruzwAya<k2>pruzwAya
{%Pruṣṭāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%pruṣṭāyate, -yitum,%} to
sprinkle; (probably incorrectly for {%pruṣvāya%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>33908<pc>0663-b<k1>pruzva<k2>pruzva
{%Pruṣva, as,%}¦ m. the rainy season, the rains; the
sun; ({%ā%}), f., Ved. a drop of water, a frozen drop
of water, hoar-frost.
<LEND>

<L>33909<pc>0663-b<k1>pruzvAya<k2>pruzvAya
{%Pruṣvāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%pruṣvāyate, -yitum,%} to
fall in drops, trickle.
<LEND>

<L>33910<pc>0663-b<k1>proza<k2>proza
{%Proṣa, as,%}¦ m. burning, combustion; [cf. {%ploṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33911<pc>0663-b<k1>prozaka<k2>prozaka
{%Proṣaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>33912<pc>0663-b<k1>prU<k2>prU
{#prU#}¦ {%prū%} in {%kaṭa-prū,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33913<pc>0663-b<k1>pre<k2>pre
{#pre#}¦ {%pre%} ({%pra-i,%} see rt. 5. {%i%}), cl. 2. P. {%praiti,%}
{%praitum%} (Ved. {%preṣe%}), to go forth, come forth,
appear (Ved.); to go on, proceed (especially as a
sacrifice, Ved.); to go forwards, go farther; to go
to, come to, arrive at, attain, reach; to go out; to
depart (this life), die: Intens. {%preyate,%} Ved. to drive
or go forth (in a chariot, said of Uṣas).
<LEND>

<L>33914<pc>0663-b<k1>preta<k2>preta
{%Preta, as, ā, am,%}¦ departed, deceased, dead, de-
funct, a dead person; ({%as%}), m. the spirit of a de-
parted person, departed spirit, spirit abiding in the
lower world, the spirit before obsequial rites are
performed; a ghost, an evil being (especially one ani-
mating the carcases of the dead). {%—Preta-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. an obsequial act or rite, funeral rites. {%—Preta-%}
{%kalpa, as,%} m. ‘obsequial ordinance,’ N. of the
second part of the Garuḍa-Purāṇa. {%—Preta-kārya,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%preta-kṛtya, am, ā,%} n. f. an obsequial
or funeral rite, obsequial ceremonies in honour of
the dead or of deceased ancestors. {%—Preta-gata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} gone to the departed, dead. {%—Preta-gṛha,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘house of the dead,’ a burying ground. {%—Pre-%}
{%ta-gopa, as,%} m. the Keeper of the dead. {%—Preta-%}
{%cārin, ī,%} m. ‘roaming among the dead,’ Śiva. {%—Pre-%}
{%ta-tva, am,%} n. the state of a departed spirit, the being
dead. {%—Preta-dāha, as,%} m. the burning of the
dead. {%—Preta-dhūma, as,%} m. ‘smoke of the dead,’
the smoke of a funeral pile; (according to Kullūka
{%= dahyamāna-śava-dhūma.%}) {%—Preta-nadī,%} f.
the river of the dead ({%= vaitaraṇī,%} q. v.). {%—Preta-%}
{%nara, as,%} m. a dead man, a corpse, a ghost.
{%—Preta-niryātaka%} or {%preta-nirhāraka, as,%} m. a
man employed to carry forth dead bodies; a kinsman
who does so. {%—Preta-pakṣa%} or {%preta-pakṣaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘half-month of the departed, i. e. of the
Manes,’ N. of the dark half in the Gauṇa Āśvina
(so called as peculiarly appointed for the celebration
of obsequial rites to the Pitṛs or Manes; {%= pitṛ-%}
{%pakṣa%}). {%—Preta-paṭaha, as,%} m. ‘drum of the
dead,’ a drum beaten at a funeral. {%—Preta-pati, is,%}
m. ‘lord or ruler of the dead,’ an epithet of Yama.
{%—Preta-pātra, am,%} n. ‘vessel of the dead,’ a vessel
used in obsequial presentations. {%—Preta-pura, am,%}
n. the city of the dead, the abode of Yama. {%—Preta-%}
{%prasādhana, am,%} n. the laying out of a corpse.
{%—Preta-bhakṣiṇī,%} f., N. of a goddess. {%—Preta-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. the state of the departed, the being
dead; {%saṃsiddhaḥ preta-bhāvāya,%} ready to die.
{%—Pretabhāva-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in the state
[Page0663-c+ 80]
of the departed, dead. {%—Preta-bhūmi, is,%} f. a place
in which the dead are burned or buried, a cemetery.
{%—Preta-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a section of the Garuḍa-
Purāṇa. {%—Preta-medha, as,%} m. a sacrifice to the
dead, funeral sacrifice. {%—Preta-mokṣa, as,%} m., N.
of the twenty-eighth chapter of the Māgha-mā-
hātmya. {%—Preta-rākṣasī,%} f. a various reading for
{%apeta-rākṣasī, = tulasī%}. {%—Preta-rāja, as,%} m.
‘king of the dead,’ an epithet of Yama. {%—Preta-loka,%}
{%as,%} m. the world of the dead, the region of disem-
bodied spirits (in which they remain for one year
or until the obsequial rites are completed). {%—Preta-%}
{%vat,%} ind. as if dead, as in the case of the dead.
{%—Preta-vana, am,%} n. ‘grove of the dead,’ a place
where bodies are burnt or buried, a cemetery. {%—Pre-%}
{%ta-vāhita, as, ā, am,%} impelled or possessed by an
evil spirit. {%—Preta-śarīra, am,%} n. the body which
accompanies a departed spirit. {%—Preta-śilā,%} f. ‘stone
of the dead,’ N. of a stone near Gayā, on which
funeral cakes were offered. {%—Preta-śuddhi, is,%} f.
or {%preta-śauca, am,%} n. purification after the death
of a kinsman. {%—Preta-śrāddha, am,%} n. obsequial
ceremonies offered to a departed relative during the
year of his demise (fifteen are said to be required).
{%—Preta-hāra, as,%} m. one who carries out the dead,
a near kinsman. {%—Pretādhipa (˚ta-adh˚), as,%} m.
‘lord or ruler of the dead,’ an epithet of Yama.
{%—Pretādhipati (˚ta-adh˚), is,%} m., Ved. the lord of
the dead, ruler of departed spirits. {%—Pretānna (˚ta-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. food offered to the Manes or distributed
on a person's death. {%—Pretāvāsa (˚ta-āv˚), as,%} m.
‘habitation of the dead,’ a burial ground, cemetery.
{%—Pretāsthi (˚ta-as˚), i,%} n. the bone of a dead
man. {%—Pretāsthi-dhārin, ī,%} m. ‘wearing dead men's
bones,’ an epithet of Rudra (Śiva). {%—Preteśa (˚ta-īśa)%}
or {%preteśvara (˚ta-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of the dead,’
an epithet of Yama. {%—Pretoddeśa (˚ta-ud˚), as,%}
m. an offering to the Manes.
<LEND>

<L>33915<pc>0663-c<k1>preti<k2>preti
{%Preti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. departure, flight. {%—Preti-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing the word {%preti%} or a
form of {%pre%}. {%—Pretīṣaṇi (˚ti-iṣ˚), is, is, i,%} Ved.
striving to move forwards (an epithet of Agni; Sāy.
{%= prāpta-gamana%}).
<LEND>

<L>33916<pc>0663-c<k1>pretika<k2>pretika
{%Pretika, as,%}¦ m. the soul of a deceased person, a
spirit, ghost.
<LEND>

<L>33917<pc>0663-c<k1>pretya<k2>pretya
{%Pretya,%}¦ ind. having departed, having died, after
death, in the next world, in the life to come.
{%—Pretya-jāti, is,%} f. rank or position in the world
to come. {%—Pretya-bhāj, k, k, k,%} obtaining after
death, enjoying the fruits of anything in the next
world. {%—Pretya-bhāva, as,%} m. the state after death,
condition of the soul after death, future state. {%—Pre-%}
{%tyabhāvika, as, ī, am,%} relating to the state after
death, (opposed to {%aihalaukika;%} probably an incor-
rect form for {%praityabhāvika.%})
<LEND>

<L>33918<pc>0663-c<k1>pretvan<k2>pretvan
{%Pretvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ straying about (as cattle); ({%ā%}),
m. wind, air; an epithet of Indra; [cf. {%prertvan.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33919<pc>0663-c<k1>prehikawA<k2>prehikawA
{%Prehi-kaṭā,%}¦ f. ({%prehi,%} 2nd sing. impv. of {%pre +%}
{%kaṭa%}), a rite in which no mats are allowed (see
Gaṇa Mayūra-vyaṃsakādi to Pāṇ. II. 1, 72).
<LEND>

<L>33920<pc>0663-c<k1>prehikardamA<k2>prehikardamA
{%Prehi-kardamā,%}¦ f. a rite in which no impurity
of any kind is allowed.
<LEND>

<L>33921<pc>0663-c<k1>prehidvitIyA<k2>prehidvitIyA
{%Prehi-dvitīyā,%}¦ f. a rite at which no second person
is allowed to be present.
<LEND>

<L>33922<pc>0663-c<k1>prehivARijA<k2>prehivARijA
{%Prehi-vāṇijā,%}¦ f. a rite at which no merchants are
allowed to be present.
<LEND>

<L>33923<pc>0663-c<k1>prekIya<k2>prekIya
{#prekIya#}¦ {%prekīya%} (fr. {%pra + eka%}), Nom. P. {%pre-%}
{%kīyati, -yitum, = praikīya;%} see Vopa-deva II. 4.
<LEND>

<L>33924<pc>0663-c<k1>prekz<k2>prekz
{#prekz#}¦ {%prekṣ (pra-īkṣ%}), cl. 1. A. {%prekṣate,%}
{%prekṣitum,%} to look towards, look at, view, see,
behold, regard, observe; to look on (without inter-
fering), allow, suffer.
<LEND>

<L>33925<pc>0663-c<k1>prekzaka<k2>prekzaka
{%Prekṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ looking at, viewing,
beholding, seeing, surveying, intending to view;
({%as%}), m. a looker, spectator, beholder, surveyor,
member of an audience. {%—Prekṣakerita (˚ka-īr˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} uttered by a spectator.
<LEND>

<L>33926<pc>0663-c<k1>prekzaRa<k2>prekzaRa
{%Prekṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking at, viewing, seeing,
regarding, being a spectator; visiting; looking wan-
tonly; the eye; any public show or spectacle; a
[Page0664-a+ 80]
sight; a place where public exhibitions are held.
{%—Prekṣaṇa-kūṭa, as, am,%} m. n. the eye-ball, the
pupil of the eye.
<LEND>

<L>33927<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzaRaka<k2>prekzaRaka
{%Prekṣaṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ looking at, viewing,
a spectator; ({%am%}), n. a spectacle, show, a play.
<LEND>

<L>33928<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzaRika<k2>prekzaRika
{%Prekṣaṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ looking at, one who looks
at or views; ({%ā%}), f. a woman fond of seeing shows.
<LEND>

<L>33929<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzaRIya<k2>prekzaRIya
{%Prekṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be seen or viewed,
to be beheld or gazed at, visible, apparent, conspi-
cuous [cf. {%duṣ-p˚%}]; worth seeing, worthy of being
looked at, beautiful to the view, sightly; to be re-
garded as, resembling, looking or appearing like.
{%—Prekṣaṇīya-tama, as, ā, am,%} most worthy of
being seen, most sightly. {%—Prekṣaṇīya-tara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} more worthy of being seen, more sightly,
more conspicuous. {%—Prekṣaṇīya-tā,%} f. sightliness,
conspicuousness, beautifulness.
<LEND>

<L>33930<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzaRIyaka<k2>prekzaRIyaka
{%Prekṣaṇīyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ visible, apparent,
conspicuous; ({%am%}), n. a play, spectacle.
<LEND>

<L>33931<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzat<k2>prekzat
{%Prekṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ looking at, beholding,
regarding, observing.
<LEND>

<L>33932<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzamARa<k2>prekzamARa
{%Prekṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking at, looking on,
viewing, beholding, regarding.
<LEND>

<L>33933<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzA<k2>prekzA
{%Prekṣā,%}¦ f. looking at, viewing, beholding, ob-
serving, seeing, regarding, (sometimes at the end of
a comp., e. g. {%dharma-prekṣa,%} regarding or con-
sidering the law; cf. {%mukha-p˚%}); sight, view, look,
aspect, appearance; being a spectator, seeing a play
or dance; any public show or spectacle, a sight; a
play, dancing; conceiving, conception, understand-
ing, intellect; circumspection, consideration; reflec-
tion, deliberation; the branch of a tree. {%—Prekṣā-%}
{%gāra%} ({%˚ṣā-ag˚%} or {%˚ṣā-āg˚%}), {%as, am,%} m. n. or
{%prekṣā-gṛha, am,%} n. ‘spectacle-house,’ any build-
ing erected for a show, temporary structure consisting
of stalls for spectators, a play-house. {%—Prekṣā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessed of circumspection, considerate,
wise, prudent. {%—Prekṣā-samāja, as,%} m. an assembly
at a spectacle, crowd at a theatre; (according to
Kullūka {%= nṛtyādi-sthāna-jana-samṛddhi.%})
<LEND>

<L>33934<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzita<k2>prekzita
{%Prekṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ looked at, viewed, beheld,
seen; ({%am%}), n. a look, glance.
<LEND>

<L>33935<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzitf<k2>prekzitf
{%Prekṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who looks on, a
spectator.
<LEND>

<L>33936<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzin<k2>prekzin
{%Prekṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ looking at, viewing, regarding;
watching narrowly, scrutinizing [cf. {%mukha-p˚%}];
having the eyes or glance of [cf. {%mṛga-p˚, vṛka-p˚%}];
{%jihma-prekṣin,%} looking aside, looking askance.
{%—Prekṣi-tva, am,%} n. the act of watching nar-
rowly, scrutinizing.
<LEND>

<L>33937<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzya<k2>prekzya<h>1
1. {%prekṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked at, to be
regarded or observed [cf. {%duṣ-p˚%}]; to be seen,
visible, apparent, brilliantly conspicuous; to be looked
at patiently, to be suffered or endured; worthy of being
seen, sightly, conspicuous; N. of a Śabdālaṅkāra.
<LEND>

<L>33938<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzya<k2>prekzya<h>2
2. {%prekṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked at, having beheld
or observed.
<LEND>

<L>33939<pc>0664-a<k1>prekzyamARa<k2>prekzyamARa
{%Prekṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being looked at or
beheld, being seen.
<LEND>

<L>33940<pc>0664-a<k1>preNK<k2>preNK
{#preNK#}¦ {%preṅkh (pra-īṅkh),%} cl. 1. P. {%preṅkhati,%}
{%preṅkhitum,%} to tremble, shake, quiver, oscillate,
vibrate: Caus. {%preṅkhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
oscillate or vibrate, swing (trans.), shake.
<LEND>

<L>33941<pc>0664-a<k1>preNKa<k2>preNKa
{%Preṅkha, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, shaking, vibrating,
oscillating, swinging (Ved.); ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n.
a swing, a sort of hammock or swinging cot (either
for travelling or diversion); {%nakulasya vāmade-%}
{%vasya preṅkhaḥ%} and {%marutām preṅkhaḥ,%} N. of
two Sāmans; ({%ā%}), f. dancing; wandering, travelling
about, roaming (?); a particular pace of a horse.
{%—Preṅkheṅkhana (˚kha-īṅ˚), am,%} n. swinging.
<LEND>

<L>33942<pc>0664-a<k1>preNKaRa<k2>preNKaRa
{%Preṅkhaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wandering, moving or
going towards, entering; ({%am%}), n. swinging; a swing;
a minor drama in one act; going, wandering (?).
{%—Preṅkhaṇa-kārikā,%} f. a female swinger or dancer.
<LEND>

<L>33943<pc>0664-a<k1>preNKaRIya<k2>preNKaRIya
{%Preṅkhaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be swung or made
to oscillate.
<LEND>

<L>33944<pc>0664-a<k1>preNKat<k2>preNKat
{%Preṅkhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shaking, moving, oscil-
lating, vibrating; wandering (?); diffusing (?);
touching (?).
<LEND>
[Page0664-b+ 73]

<L>33945<pc>0664-b<k1>preNKayat<k2>preNKayat
{%Preṅkhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ swinging (trans.).
<LEND>

<L>33946<pc>0664-b<k1>preNKita<k2>preNKita
{%Preṅkhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ swung, shaken, set in
motion, made to oscillate; being in contact with (?).
<LEND>

<L>33947<pc>0664-b<k1>preNKolana<k2>preNKolana
{%Preṅkholana, am,%}¦ n. swinging, shaking, oscil-
lating; a swing, swing-cot or hammock.
<LEND>

<L>33948<pc>0664-b<k1>preNKolaya<k2>preNKolaya
{%Preṅkholaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%preṅkholayati, -yitum,%}
to swing, shake; [cf. {%andolaya, āndolaya, hindo-%}
{%laya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>33949<pc>0664-b<k1>preNgaRa<k2>preNgaRa
{#preNgaRa#}¦ {%preṅgaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%iṅg%} with
{%pra%}), see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 32.
<LEND>

<L>33950<pc>0664-b<k1>preq<k2>preq
{#preq#}¦ {%preḍ (pra-īḍ),%} cl. 2. A. {%preṭṭe, preḍitum,%}
Ved. to implore, supplicate; praise, celebrate; (Sāy.
{%= prakarṣeṇa stu,%} to praise greatly, celebrate ex-
ceedingly.)
<LEND>

<L>33951<pc>0664-b<k1>preqaka<k2>preqaka
{#preqaka#}¦ {%preḍaka,%} an incorrect form for {%pre-%}
{%raka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>33952<pc>0664-b<k1>preRi<k2>preRi
{#preRi#}¦ {%preṇi.%} See p. 663, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33953<pc>0664-b<k1>preta<k2>preta
{#preta#}¦ {%preta,%} &c. See under {%pre,%} p. 663, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>33954<pc>0664-b<k1>predDa<k2>predDa
{#predDa#}¦ {%preddha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%indh%} with
{%pra%}), Ved. kindled, lighted.
<LEND>

<L>33955<pc>0664-b<k1>pren<k2>pren
{#pren#}¦ {%pren (pra-in),%} cl. 8. P. {%prenoti,%} &c.,
Ved. to send forth, impel forwards or upwards.
<LEND>

<L>33956<pc>0664-b<k1>prenvana<k2>prenvana
{#prenvana#}¦ {%prenvana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%inv%} with
{%pra%}), see Vārttika II. to Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 2.
<LEND>

<L>33957<pc>0664-b<k1>prenvanIya<k2>prenvanIya
{%Prenvanīya,%}¦ see Vārttika II. to Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 2.
<LEND>

<L>33958<pc>0664-b<k1>prepsA<k2>prepsA
{#prepsA#}¦ {%prepsā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. {%āp%} with
{%pra%}), the wish to attain, desire of obtaining, desire,
longing for; supposition, assumption.
<LEND>

<L>33959<pc>0664-b<k1>prepsu<k2>prepsu
{%Prepsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to attain, desirous of
obtaining, wishing, seeking, longing for (with acc.);
aiming at, having in view; supposing, assuming;
anxious to rescue or save; {%tat-prepsu, us,%} m. (in
Ved. gram.) epithet of a particular form of the
Desiderative.
<LEND>

<L>33960<pc>0664-b<k1>preman<k2>preman
{#preman#}¦ {%preman,%} &c. See p. 663, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33961<pc>0664-b<k1>preyas<k2>preyas
{#preyas#}¦ {%preyas.%} See p. 663, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33962<pc>0664-b<k1>prer<k2>prer
{#prer#}¦ {%prer (pra-īr),%} cl. 2. A. {%prerte, preri-%}
{%tum,%} to move, come forward, come forth, go forth,
rise, appear (Ved.): Caus. P. {%prerayati, -yitum,%}
to set in motion, cause to move forwards, move; to
drive forwards, push on, drive onwards, urge or
press forwards; to urge on, force on, hasten, stimu-
late, incite, excite; to send forth, dismiss, dispatch;
to send; to direct towards; to utter; to ask.
<LEND>

<L>33963<pc>0664-b<k1>preraka<k2>preraka
{%Preraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ setting in motion, urging
on, impelling, inciting, stimulating, exciting; sending.
{%—Preraka-tva, am,%} n. the act of setting in motion,
urging on.
<LEND>

<L>33964<pc>0664-b<k1>preraRa<k2>preraRa
{%Preraṇa, am,%}¦ n. driving on [cf. {%paśu-p˚%}]; ({%am,%}
{%ā%}), n. f. the act of urging on, inciting, driving,
instigating; impulse, passion; sending, dispatching,
directing, ordering, order, direction, commanding;
activity, action; the sense of the causal verb, [cf.
Vopa-deva XVIII. 1.] {%—Preraṇārtha (˚ṇa-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the sense of inciting or of the
causal verb.
<LEND>

<L>33965<pc>0664-b<k1>preraRIya<k2>preraRIya
{%Preraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be urged on or incited.
<LEND>

<L>33966<pc>0664-b<k1>prerayat<k2>prerayat
{%Prerayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ setting in motion, mov-
ing, directing (the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>33967<pc>0664-b<k1>prerayitf<k2>prerayitf
{%Prerayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who urges, an insti-
gator, inciting, instigating; one who sends.
<LEND>

<L>33968<pc>0664-b<k1>prerita<k2>prerita
{%Prerita, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven forwards, impelled,
influenced, instigated; excited, urged, stimulated;
incited to speak; sent, directed, dispatched; ordered;
touched; ({%as%}), m. an envoy, a messenger.
<LEND>

<L>33969<pc>0664-b<k1>preritf<k2>preritf
{%Preritṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who urges on or incites,
an inciter; one who sends.
<LEND>

<L>33970<pc>0664-b<k1>prertvan<k2>prertvan
{%Prertvan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. the ocean, the sea; ({%arī%}),
f. a river.
<LEND>

<L>33971<pc>0664-b<k1>preryamARa<k2>preryamARa
{%Preryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being urged on, being
incited.
<LEND>

<L>33972<pc>0664-b<k1>prez<k2>prez<h>1
{#prez#} 1¦. {%preṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%preṣate,%} &c., to
go, move; (also read {%hreṣ.%})
<LEND>
[Page0664-c+ 80]

<L>33973<pc>0664-c<k1>prez<k2>prez<h>2
{#prez#} 2¦. {%preṣ%} ({%pra-iṣ,%} see rt. 1. {%iṣ%}),
cl. 4. P. A. {%preṣyati, -te, preṣitum,%} to drive
forth, drive away, drive forwards, drive on; to
send forth, send out, utter; to hurl, fling, cast; (P.)
to call upon, invite, summon (in Vedic ritual said
technically of the presiding priest at a sacrifice calling
upon the assistant priests to commence a recitation
or a ceremony; with acc. of the object, e. g. {%sāma%}
{%preṣyati gāya brūhīti vā,%} he calls upon an
assistant priest with the words ‘Sing’ or ‘Say’ to
commence the recitation of a Sāman; also with gen.
of the object; also with dat. of the deity to whom
the recitation is addressed or the sacrifice offered,
e. g. {%Agnaye preṣya,%} call upon an assistant priest
to commence the offering or to commence the
hymn to Agni); Caus. {%preṣayati, -yitum,%} to send
forth, send away, dismiss; to send into exile, banish;
to send, dispatch; to send word to, send a message
to; to hurl, fling, cast, throw; to turn or direct
(the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>33974<pc>0664-c<k1>prez<k2>prez<h>3
3. {%preṣ, ṭ,%}¦ f., Ved. pressing, pressure; ({%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ%}),
pressing, urging on, (Sāy. {%= preraka.%})
<LEND>

<L>33975<pc>0664-c<k1>preza<k2>preza
{%Preṣa, as,%}¦ m. urging on, impelling (Ved. {%=%}
{%praiṣa%}); pain, affliction.
<LEND>

<L>33976<pc>0664-c<k1>prezaka<k2>prezaka
{%Preṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ sending, dispatching; one
who orders or commands, ordering, directing.
<LEND>

<L>33977<pc>0664-c<k1>prezaRa<k2>prezaRa
{%Preṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of sending, dispatching
(a messenger); sending on a mission, commissioning,
charging, ordering, directing, commanding; execut-
ing a commission. {%—Preṣaṇa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} executing
a commission. {%—Preṣaṇādhyakṣa (˚ṇa-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a superintendent of the commands (of a
king), chief of the administration.
<LEND>

<L>33978<pc>0664-c<k1>prezaRIya<k2>prezaRIya
{%Preṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sent or dispatched.
<LEND>

<L>33979<pc>0664-c<k1>prezayat<k2>prezayat
{%Preṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sending forth, sending
away; turning, directing (the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>33980<pc>0664-c<k1>prezayitf<k2>prezayitf
{%Preṣayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ sending on a commis-
sion, giving orders.
<LEND>

<L>33981<pc>0664-c<k1>prezita<k2>prezita
{%Preṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sent forth, sent away; sent
into exile, banished; sent, dispatched (on an errand);
ordered, directed; turned, directed (as the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>33982<pc>0664-c<k1>prezitavat<k2>prezitavat
{%Preṣitavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has sent or
dispatched.
<LEND>

<L>33983<pc>0664-c<k1>prezitavya<k2>prezitavya
{%Preṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be called upon
or invited (to commence a ceremony).
<LEND>

<L>33984<pc>0664-c<k1>prezya<k2>prezya
{%Preṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sent or dispatched,
proper to be sent [cf. {%kārya-p˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. a mes-
senger, servant, menial, slave [cf. {%grāma-p˚%}]; ({%ā%}),
f. a female messenger, female servant; ({%am%}), n. the
being a servant, servitude; [cf. {%śūdra-p˚.%}] {%—Preṣya-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} executing orders. {%—Preṣya-jana,%}
{%as,%} m. servants collectively, domestics, an establishment
of servants. {%—Preṣya-tā,%} f. or {%preṣya-tva, am,%}
n. the being a servant, servitude. {%—Preṣya-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. the state or condition of a servant, servitude.
{%—Preṣya-vadhū, ūs,%} f. a female servant, hand-
maid; the wife of a slave. {%—Preṣya-varga, as,%} m.
a train of servants. {%—Preṣyā-tva, am,%} n. the state
of a female servant, being a handmaid.
<LEND>

<L>33985<pc>0664-c<k1>prezyamARa<k2>prezyamARa
{%Preṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being sent forth, being
sent or dispatched (on an errand).
<LEND>

<L>33986<pc>0664-c<k1>prEza<k2>prEza
{%Praiṣa, as,%}¦ m. an invitation, order, command
(especially in liturgical language, {%= preṣa%}); sending,
directing; sorrow, distress, affliction; phrenzy, in-
toxication, insanity (?). {%—Praiṣa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
executing orders or commands, a servant.
<LEND>

<L>33987<pc>0664-c<k1>prEzaRika<k2>prEzaRika
{%Praiṣaṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%preṣaṇa%}), executing
orders or commissions (as a means of livelihood),
fitted for the execution of commands.
<LEND>

<L>33988<pc>0664-c<k1>prEzam<k2>prEzam
{%Praiṣam,%}¦ ind., Ved. in the formula {%praiṣaiḥ%}
or {%iṣṭibhiḥ praiṣam icchati,%} he strives to start
(the sacrifice compared to an animal in the chase)
with invocations or exclamations.
<LEND>

<L>33989<pc>0664-c<k1>prEzika<k2>prEzika
{%Praiṣika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%praiṣa%}), belonging
to or connected with the invitatory formulas (in
liturgical language).
<LEND>

<L>33990<pc>0664-c<k1>prEzya<k2>prEzya
{%Praiṣya, as,%}¦ m. a servant, slave; ({%ā%}), f. a female
servant; ({%am%}), n. the being a servant, servitude.
{%—Praiṣya-bhāva, as,%} m. the state or condition
of a servant, servitude.
<LEND>
[Page0665-a+ 73]

<L>33991<pc>0665-a<k1>prezWa<k2>prezWa
{#prezWa#}¦ {%preṣṭha.%} See p. 663, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>33992<pc>0665-a<k1>prehaRa<k2>prehaRa
{#prehaRa#}¦ {%prehaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%īh%} with {%pra%}),
see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 31.
<LEND>

<L>33993<pc>0665-a<k1>prehikawA<k2>prehikawA
{#prehikawA#}¦ {%prehi-kaṭā,%} &c. See p. 663, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>33994<pc>0665-a<k1>prEkIya<k2>prEkIya
{#prEkIya#}¦ {%praikīya%} (fr. {%pra + eka%}), Nom. P.
{%praikīyati, -yitum, = prekīya,%} see Vopa-deva II. 4.
<LEND>

<L>33995<pc>0665-a<k1>prEya<k2>prEya
{#prEya#}¦ {%praiya, am,%} n. an abstract noun from
{%priya,%} see Gaṇa Pṛthv-ādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 122.
<LEND>

<L>33996<pc>0665-a<k1>prEyaka<k2>prEyaka
{%Praiyaka, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Priyaka.
<LEND>

<L>33997<pc>0665-a<k1>prEyaNgava<k2>prEyaNgava
{%Praiyaṅgava, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%priyaṅgu%}), Ved.
relating to panic-grass.
<LEND>

<L>33998<pc>0665-a<k1>prEyameDa<k2>prEyameDa
{%Praiyamedha, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. an adj. from
{%priya-medha; (as),%} m., N. of a Sāman; a patro-
nymic of Sindhu-kṣit.
<LEND>

<L>33999<pc>0665-a<k1>prEyarUpaka<k2>prEyarUpaka
{%Praiyarūpaka, am,%}¦ n. an abstract noun from
{%priya-rūpa.%}
<LEND>

<L>34000<pc>0665-a<k1>prEyavrata<k2>prEyavrata
{%Praiyavrata, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
Priya-vrata; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from Priya-vrata.
<LEND>

<L>34001<pc>0665-a<k1>prEyyaNgava<k2>prEyyaNgava
{%Praiyyaṅgava,%}¦ a wrong form for {%praiyaṅgava,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34002<pc>0665-a<k1>prEyyameDa<k2>prEyyameDa
{%Praiyyamedha, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic; ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), a wrong form for {%praiyamedha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34003<pc>0665-a<k1>prokta<k2>prokta
{#prokta#}¦ {%prokta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%pra-vac%}), spoken
to, addressed; announced, declared, laid down as a
rule or axiom, said, told, uttered. {%—Prokta-kārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} doing what one has been told.
<LEND>

<L>34004<pc>0665-a<k1>proktavat<k2>proktavat
{%Proktavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has said or
declared.
<LEND>

<L>34005<pc>0665-a<k1>procyamAna<k2>procyamAna
{%Procyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being declared or an-
nounced, being uttered or said.
<LEND>

<L>34006<pc>0665-a<k1>prokz<k2>prokz
{#prokz#}¦ {%prokṣ (pra-ukṣ),%} cl. 6. P. A. {%prok-%}
{%ṣati, -te, prokṣitum,%} to sprinkle upon, besprinkle,
sprinkle; to consecrate (by sprinkling), consecrate as
a sacrificial victim; to sacrifice, kill, slay, slaughter
(a sacrificial victim): Caus. {%prokṣayati, -yitum,%}
to sprinkle, sprinkle with.
<LEND>

<L>34007<pc>0665-a<k1>prokzaRa<k2>prokzaRa
{%Prokṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of sprinkling with
water (for purification), sprinkling, consecration by
sprinkling (of a sacrifical animal or of a dead body
before burial); immolation of victims, killing animals
in sacrifice; a text to be repeated at an animal sacri-
fice; ({%ī%}), f. (generally used in pl.) water for sprinkling,
holy water, water for consecrating (mixed with rice
and barley grains). {%—Prokṣaṇī-pātra, am,%} n. a
vessel for sprinkling water, &c.
<LEND>

<L>34008<pc>0665-a<k1>prokzaRi<k2>prokzaRi
{%Prokṣaṇi, is,%}¦ f. {%= prokṣaṇī%} above.
<LEND>

<L>34009<pc>0665-a<k1>prokzaRIya<k2>prokzaRIya
{%Prokṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sprinkled, fit to be
sprinkled; ({%am%}), n. water used for consecrating.
<LEND>

<L>34010<pc>0665-a<k1>prokzat<k2>prokzat
{%Prokṣat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} Ved. sprinkling,
consecrating.
<LEND>

<L>34011<pc>0665-a<k1>prokzita<k2>prokzita
{%Prokṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled, purified by
sprinkling; offered in sacrifice; immolated, killed,
slaughtered.
<LEND>

<L>34012<pc>0665-a<k1>prokzitavya<k2>prokzitavya
{%Prokṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦  to be sprinkled, to be
consecrated.
<LEND>

<L>34013<pc>0665-a<k1>proGIya<k2>proGIya
{#proGIya#}¦ {%proghīya (pra-ogha),%} Nom. P. {%pro-%}
{%ghīyati, -yitum, = praughīya,%} see Vopa-deva II. 4.
<LEND>

<L>34014<pc>0665-a<k1>proccaRqa<k2>proccaRqa
{#proccaRqa#}¦ {%proccaṇḍa (pra-uc˚), as, ā, am,%}
exceedingly terrible or horrible, very violent.
<LEND>

<L>34015<pc>0665-a<k1>proccar<k2>proccar
{#proccar#}¦ {%proc-car (pra-ud-car),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ca-%}
{%rati, -caritum,%} to utter a sound, utter, pronounce:
Caus. {%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to sound, utter a
sound.
<LEND>

<L>34016<pc>0665-a<k1>proccarat<k2>proccarat
{%Proc-carat, an, antī, at,%}¦ uttering a sound,
uttering.
<LEND>

<L>34017<pc>0665-a<k1>proccArita<k2>proccArita
{%Proc-cārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to sound, sounding.
<LEND>

<L>34018<pc>0665-a<k1>proccEs<k2>proccEs
{#proccEs#}¦ {%proccais (pra-uc˚),%} ind. exceedingly
high, in a very high degree; very loudly.
<LEND>

<L>34019<pc>0665-a<k1>procCal<k2>procCal
{#procCal#}¦ {%proc-chal (pra-ud-śal),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-chalate, -chalitum,%} to spirt out, gush forth, flow
forth.
<LEND>

<L>34020<pc>0665-a<k1>procCalat<k2>procCalat
{%Proc-chalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ spirting out, gushing
forth, flowing or issuing forth, flowing out or up.
<LEND>
[Page0665-b+ 70]

<L>34021<pc>0665-b<k1>procCUna<k2>procCUna
{#procCUna#}¦ {%proc-chūna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śvi%}
with {%pra-ud%}), swelled, swollen.
<LEND>

<L>34022<pc>0665-b<k1>procCri<k2>procCri
{#procCri#}¦ {%proc-chri (pra-ud-śri),%} cl. 1. P.
{%procchrayati, -yitum,%} to set up, erect.
<LEND>

<L>34023<pc>0665-b<k1>procCrita<k2>procCrita
{%Proc-chrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ high, lofty.
<LEND>

<L>34024<pc>0665-b<k1>projjAsana<k2>projjAsana
{#projjAsana#}¦ {%proj-jāsana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%jas%}
with {%pra-ud%}), killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>34025<pc>0665-b<k1>projjval<k2>projjval
{#projjval#}¦ {%proj-jval (pra-ud-jval),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-jvalati, -jvalitum,%} to shine brightly, flash, glitter.
<LEND>

<L>34026<pc>0665-b<k1>projJ<k2>projJ
{#projJ#}¦ {%projjh (pra-ujjh),%} cl. 6. P. {%projjhati,%}
{%projjhitum,%} to abandon, forsake, avoid, shun, leave,
quit, escape.
<LEND>

<L>34027<pc>0665-b<k1>projJana<k2>projJana
{%Projjhana, am,%}¦ n. abandoning, forsaking, leaving,
quitting, letting go.
<LEND>

<L>34028<pc>0665-b<k1>projJita<k2>projJita
{%Projjhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ abandoned, forsaken,
quitted, shunned, avoided.
<LEND>

<L>34029<pc>0665-b<k1>proYC<k2>proYC
{#proYC#}¦ {%proñch (pra-uñch),%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%proñ-%}
{%chati, proñchitum,%} to wipe out, efface.
<LEND>

<L>34030<pc>0665-b<k1>proYCana<k2>proYCana
{%Proñchana, am,%}¦ n. wiping out, wiping away,
effacing; picking up the remnants; [cf. {%uñchana,%}
and cf. also Kullūka on Manu II. 241.]
<LEND>

<L>34031<pc>0665-b<k1>proqqI<k2>proqqI
{#proqqI#}¦ {%proḍ-ḍī (pra-ud-ḍī),%} cl. 1. 4. A. {%-ḍa-%}
{%yate, -ḍīyate, -ḍayitum,%} to fly up, fly away, fly off.
<LEND>

<L>34032<pc>0665-b<k1>proqqIna<k2>proqqIna
{%Proḍ-ḍīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ flown up, flown away.
<LEND>

<L>34033<pc>0665-b<k1>proqqIya<k2>proqqIya
{%Proḍ-ḍīya,%}¦ ind. having flown up, having flown away.
<LEND>

<L>34034<pc>0665-b<k1>proQam<k2>proQam
{#proQam#}¦ {%proḍham,%} ind., see Gaṇa Tish-
ṭhadgv-ādi to Pāṇ. II. 1, 17.
<LEND>

<L>34035<pc>0665-b<k1>proRWa<k2>proRWa
{#proRWa#}¦ {%proṇṭha, as,%} m. a spitting-pot, spit-
toon.
<LEND>

<L>34036<pc>0665-b<k1>prota<k2>prota
{#prota#}¦ {%prota, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ve%} with {%pra%}),
sewed, stitched; extended lengthwise or perpendicu-
larly, sewed with the threads lengthwise (as the warp
of ‘a piece of cloth, opposed to {%ota,%} q. v., which
means extended horizontally or sewn with the threads
crosswise as the woof of cloth;’ {%ota-prota%} in Mahā-
bh. Udyoga-p. 1789 probably means ‘who is the
woof and warp of the universe,’ i. e. extended every-
where; according to the Scholiast {%otaḥ protaśca =%}
{%tiryag ūrdhvaṃ ca paṭe tantava ivānusyūtaḥ%});
tied, strung; joined, connected; set, inlaid; trans-
fixed, pierced, impaled, put on (a spit); ({%am%}), n.
cloth, clothes. {%—Prototsādana (˚ta-ut˚), am,%} n. a
parasol, umbrella.
<LEND>

<L>34037<pc>0665-b<k1>protaya<k2>protaya
{%Protaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%protayati, -yitum,%} to infix,
insert.
<LEND>

<L>34038<pc>0665-b<k1>protayitvA<k2>protayitvA
{%Protayitvā,%}¦ ind. having infixed or inserted.
<LEND>

<L>34039<pc>0665-b<k1>proti<k2>proti
{%Proti, is,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34040<pc>0665-b<k1>protkawa<k2>protkawa
{#protkawa#}¦ {%protkaṭa (pra-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} scil.
{%bhṛtya,%} a head servant, favourite servant.
<LEND>

<L>34041<pc>0665-b<k1>protkaRWa<k2>protkaRWa<h>1
{#protkaRWa#} 1¦. {%protkaṇṭha (pra-ut˚), as, ā, am,%}
stretching out or lifting up the neck.
<LEND>

<L>34042<pc>0665-b<k1>protkaRWa<k2>protkaRWa<h>2
2. {%protkaṇṭha,%}¦ Nom. Caus. P. {%-kaṇṭhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to awaken longings, excite desires in (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>34043<pc>0665-b<k1>protkarza<k2>protkarza
{#protkarza#}¦ {%protkarṣa (pra-ut˚), as,%} m. pre-
eminence.
<LEND>

<L>34044<pc>0665-b<k1>protkruzwa<k2>protkruzwa
{#protkruzwa#}¦ {%protkruṣṭa (pra-ut˚), am,%} n. a loud
cry or uproar, loud sound (Hari-vaṃśa 13816).
<LEND>

<L>34045<pc>0665-b<k1>protKan<k2>protKan
{#protKan#}¦ {%prot-khan (pra-ud-khan),%} cl. 1. P.
A. {%-khanati, -te, -khanitum,%} to dig up, dig through,
dig out, dig open.
<LEND>

<L>34046<pc>0665-b<k1>protKAta<k2>protKAta
{%Prot-khāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dug up, dug out.
<LEND>

<L>34047<pc>0665-b<k1>protKE<k2>protKE
{#protKE#}¦ {%prot-khai (pra-ud-khai),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-khāyati, -khātum,%} to dig up, dig out.
<LEND>

<L>34048<pc>0665-b<k1>prottAna<k2>prottAna
{#prottAna#}¦ {%prottāna (pra-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
stretched out widely.
<LEND>

<L>34049<pc>0665-b<k1>prottuNga<k2>prottuNga
{#prottuNga#}¦ {%prottuṅga (pra-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} very
high or lofty, elevated, prominent.
<LEND>

<L>34050<pc>0665-b<k1>prottF<k2>prottF
{#prottF#}¦ {%prot-tṝ (pra-ud-tṝ),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati,%}
{%-taritum, -tarītum,%} to cross over, pass over; to rise
or come out from, emerge.
<LEND>
[Page0665-c+ 73]

<L>34051<pc>0665-c<k1>protpat<k2>protpat
{#protpat#}¦ {%prot-pat (pra-ud-pat),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-patati, -patitum,%} to fly up, soar aloft.
<LEND>

<L>34052<pc>0665-c<k1>protpanna<k2>protpanna
{#protpanna#}¦ {%prot-panna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%pad%}
with {%pra-ud%}), produced, originated, developed.
<LEND>

<L>34053<pc>0665-c<k1>protPulla<k2>protPulla
{#protPulla#}¦ {%protphulla, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%phal%}
with {%pra-ud%}), widely expanded, full-blown. {%—Prot-%}
{%phulla-nayana, as, ā, am,%} having the eyes wide
open.
<LEND>

<L>34054<pc>0665-c<k1>protPala<k2>protPala
{%Protphala (pra-ut˚), as,%}¦ m. a species of tree
resembling the fan-palm.
<LEND>

<L>34055<pc>0665-c<k1>protsad<k2>protsad
{#protsad#}¦ {%prot-sad (pra-ud-sad),%} Caus. P.
{%-sādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to perish, destroy, re-
move; to pacify, appease (anger); to draw forth.
<LEND>

<L>34056<pc>0665-c<k1>protsAdana<k2>protsAdana
{%Prot-sādana, am,%}¦ n. causing to perish, destroying;
contriving, device (?).
<LEND>

<L>34057<pc>0665-c<k1>protsAdya<k2>protsAdya
{%Prot-sādya,%}¦ ind. having destroyed; having drawn
forth.
<LEND>

<L>34058<pc>0665-c<k1>protsah<k2>protsah
{#protsah#}¦ {%prot-sah (pra-ud-sah),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-sahati, -te, -sahitum, -soḍhum,%} to make effort,
exert one's self; to take courage, take heart: Caus.
{%-sāhayati, -yitum,%} to incite, instigate, inspirit; to
exhort.
<LEND>

<L>34059<pc>0665-c<k1>protsAha<k2>protsAha
{%Prot-sāha, as,%}¦ m. any great exertion or effort,
great zeal, ardour; stimulus, incitement.
<LEND>

<L>34060<pc>0665-c<k1>protsAhaka<k2>protsAhaka
{%Prot-sāhaka, as,%}¦ m. an instigator, inciter, ex-
horter; (in law) the instigator of any crime.
<LEND>

<L>34061<pc>0665-c<k1>protsAhana<k2>protsAhana
{%Prot-sāhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of inspiriting or
inciting, instigation, stimulating to bold and vigorous
effort.
<LEND>

<L>34062<pc>0665-c<k1>protsAhita<k2>protsAhita
{%Prot-sāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ incited, instigated, stimu-
lated, encouraged.
<LEND>

<L>34063<pc>0665-c<k1>protsf<k2>protsf
{#protsf#}¦ {%prot-sṛ (pra-ud-sṛ),%} Caus. P. {%-sā-%}
{%rayati, -yitum,%} to cause to go forwards, urge on,
incite; to exhort; to offer, grant, give.
<LEND>

<L>34064<pc>0665-c<k1>protsAraRa<k2>protsAraRa
{%Prot-sāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. sending away, removing,
getting rid of, clearing away, expelling.
<LEND>

<L>34065<pc>0665-c<k1>protsArita<k2>protsArita
{%Prot-sārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ urged forwards, incited;
removed, got rid of, ejected, expelled; offered,
granted, given; relinquished.
<LEND>

<L>34066<pc>0665-c<k1>protsAryamARa<k2>protsAryamARa
{%Prot-sāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being urged on or
incited.
<LEND>

<L>34067<pc>0665-c<k1>proT<k2>proT
{#proT#}¦ {%proth,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%prothati, -te,%}
{%prothitum,%} to pant, neigh, whinny, snort
(as a horse, Ved.); to be equal to, be a match for, be
able to withstand (with dat. or gen.); to be able, to
be adequate or competent; to be full, be complete
or ample; to subdue, overpower; to destroy: Intens.
(in pres. part. {%popruthat%}), Ved. to neigh, snort; to
champ; (Sāy. {%= ghāsa-bhakṣaṇānantara-bhāvi-%}
{%nam oṣṭha-śabdaṃ kṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>34068<pc>0665-c<k1>proTa<k2>proTa
{%Protha, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (according to Uṇādi-s. II.
12, fr. rt. {%pru%}), the nostrils of a horse, the nose of
a horse or the tip of it; the snout of a hog; ({%as%}),
m. the loins or hip; the womb (?); an embryo; an
excavation or cave; a petticoat, old clothes; terror,
fright; ({%as, ā, am%}), travelling, wayfaring, a traveller;
notorious, famous; placed, fixed.
<LEND>

<L>34069<pc>0665-c<k1>proTaTa<k2>proTaTa
{%Prothatha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. panting, snorting.
<LEND>

<L>34070<pc>0665-c<k1>proTin<k2>proTin
{%Prothin, ī,%}¦ m. a horse.
<LEND>

<L>34071<pc>0665-c<k1>prodi<k2>prodi
{#prodi#}¦ {%prod-i (pra-ud-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -etum,%}
to go up, rise.
<LEND>

<L>34072<pc>0665-c<k1>prodgam<k2>prodgam
{#prodgam#}¦ {%prod-gam (pra-ud-gam),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to extend forward, jut out,
project, overhang.
<LEND>

<L>34073<pc>0665-c<k1>prodgata<k2>prodgata
{%Prod-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ projecting, prominent.
<LEND>

<L>34074<pc>0665-c<k1>prodgE<k2>prodgE
{#prodgE#}¦ {%prod-gai (pra-ud-gai),%} cl. 1. P. {%-gā-%}
{%yati, -gātum,%} to begin to sing.
<LEND>

<L>34075<pc>0665-c<k1>prodgIta<k2>prodgIta
{%Prod-gīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ begun to be sung.
<LEND>

<L>34076<pc>0665-c<k1>prodGuz<k2>prodGuz
{#prodGuz#}¦ {%prod-ghuṣ (pra-ud-ghuṣ),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-ghoṣati, -ghoṣitum,%} to sound forth, resound; to
fill with cries: Caus. {%-ghoṣayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to resound, cause to sound forth; to proclaim loudly,
proclaim.
<LEND>
[Page0666-a+ 71]

<L>34077<pc>0666-a<k1>prodGuzwa<k2>prodGuzwa
{%Prod-ghuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ resounding, resonant,
sounding forth; making a loud noise.
<LEND>

<L>34078<pc>0666-a<k1>prodGozaRa<k2>prodGozaRa
{%Prod-ghoṣaṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. sounding or crying
aloud; causing to sound forth, proclaiming, procla-
mation.
<LEND>

<L>34079<pc>0666-a<k1>prodGozayat<k2>prodGozayat
{%Prod-ghoṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to sound
forth, proclaiming loudly, proclaiming.
<LEND>

<L>34080<pc>0666-a<k1>proddAma<k2>proddAma
{#proddAma#}¦ {%proddāma (pra-ud˚), as, ā, am,%}
unbounded, immense, vast, huge.
<LEND>

<L>34081<pc>0666-a<k1>prodDf<k2>prodDf
{#prodDf#}¦ {%prod-dhṛ (pra-ud-hṛ),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-dharati, -te, -dhartum,%} to lift up, draw up (water
from a well); to save, extricate.
<LEND>

<L>34082<pc>0666-a<k1>prodbudDa<k2>prodbudDa
{#prodbudDa#}¦ {%prod-buddha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%budh%}
with {%pra-ud%}), awakened (in a metaphorical sense).
<LEND>

<L>34083<pc>0666-a<k1>prodboDa<k2>prodboDa
{%Prod-bodha, as,%}¦ m. awaking, appearing, appear-
ance.
<LEND>

<L>34084<pc>0666-a<k1>prodBid<k2>prodBid
{#prodBid#}¦ {%prod-bhid (pra-ud˚),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-bhinatti, -bhintte, -bhettum,%} to break forth, burst
forth.
<LEND>

<L>34085<pc>0666-a<k1>prodBinna<k2>prodBinna
{%Prod-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken forth, burst forth;
germinated, standing erect.
<LEND>

<L>34086<pc>0666-a<k1>prodBUta<k2>prodBUta
{#prodBUta#}¦ {%prod-bhūta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%bhū%}
with {%pra-ud%}), sprung up, arisen.
<LEND>

<L>34087<pc>0666-a<k1>prodyam<k2>prodyam
{#prodyam#}¦ {%prod-yam (pra-ud-yam),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-yacchati, -yantum,%} to lift up, raise; to throw for-
wards, throw, cast.
<LEND>

<L>34088<pc>0666-a<k1>prodyata<k2>prodyata
{%Prod-yata, as, ā, am,%}¦ lifted up, raised.
<LEND>

<L>34089<pc>0666-a<k1>prodvAha<k2>prodvAha
{#prodvAha#}¦ {%prod-vāha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vah%} with
{%pra-ud%}), marriage.
<LEND>

<L>34090<pc>0666-a<k1>pronnad<k2>pronnad
{#pronnad#}¦ {%pron-nad (pra-ud-nad),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-nadati, -naditum,%} to roar out, roar.
<LEND>

<L>34091<pc>0666-a<k1>pronnam<k2>pronnam
{#pronnam#}¦ {%pron-nam (pra-ud-nam),%} Caus. P.
{%-namayati, -yitum,%} to raise up, erect.
<LEND>

<L>34092<pc>0666-a<k1>pronnata<k2>pronnata
{%Pron-nata, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised up, elevated, very
high, towering, very lofty; projecting; superior to.
<LEND>

<L>34093<pc>0666-a<k1>pronnamita<k2>pronnamita
{%Pron-namita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised up, erected.
<LEND>

<L>34094<pc>0666-a<k1>pronnamya<k2>pronnamya
{%Pron-namya,%}¦ ind. having raised up or erected.
<LEND>

<L>34095<pc>0666-a<k1>pronnI<k2>pronnI
{#pronnI#}¦ {%pron-nī (pra-ud-nī),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-na-%}
{%yati, -te, -netum,%} to bring up, lead up, raise, elevate.
<LEND>

<L>34096<pc>0666-a<k1>pronmad<k2>pronmad
{#pronmad#}¦ {%pron-mad (pra-ud-mad),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-mādyati, -maditum,%} to begin to grow furious,
begin to rut (as an elephant).
<LEND>

<L>34097<pc>0666-a<k1>pronmATin<k2>pronmATin
{#pronmATin#}¦ {%pron-māthin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt.
{%math%} with {%pra-ud%}), destroying, annihilating.
<LEND>

<L>34098<pc>0666-a<k1>pronmIl<k2>pronmIl
{#pronmIl#}¦ {%pron-mīl (pra-ud-mīl),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-mīlati, -mīlitum,%} Ved. to open the eyes, open (as
a flower), blossom; come to light, appear: Caus.
{%-mīlayati, -yitum,%} to open the eyes; to unfold,
reveal, bring to light, discover.
<LEND>

<L>34099<pc>0666-a<k1>proB<k2>proB
{#proB#}¦ {%probh%} or {%prombh%} ({%pra-ubh%} or {%pra-%}
{%umbh%}), cl. 6. P. {%probhati, prombhati, probhitum,%}
{%prombhitum,%} Ved. to bind.
<LEND>

<L>34100<pc>0666-a<k1>promBaRa<k2>promBaRa
{%Prombhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. binding; filling (?).
<LEND>

<L>34101<pc>0666-a<k1>promBita<k2>promBita
{%Prombhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound; filled (?).
<LEND>

<L>34102<pc>0666-a<k1>prorRu<k2>prorRu
{#prorRu#}¦ {%prorṇu (pra-ūrṇu),%} cl. 2. P. A. {%pror-%}
{%ṇoti, prorṇauti, prorṇute, prorṇavitum, prorṇu-%}
{%vitum,%} (P.) to cover over, cover up, cover, envelop;
(A.) to be covered: Intens. {%prorṇonūyate,%} to cover
or envelop completely.
<LEND>

<L>34103<pc>0666-a<k1>prorRunavizu<k2>prorRunavizu
{%Prorṇunaviṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to cover or
conceal.
<LEND>

<L>34104<pc>0666-a<k1>prorRunUzu<k2>prorRunUzu
{%Prorṇunūṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to cover.
<LEND>

<L>34105<pc>0666-a<k1>prorRuvat<k2>prorRuvat
{%Prorṇuvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ covering over, covering,
enveloping.
<LEND>

<L>34106<pc>0666-a<k1>prorRuvitf<k2>prorRuvitf
{%Prorṇuvitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who covers or
envelops.
<LEND>

<L>34107<pc>0666-a<k1>prollas<k2>prollas
{#prollas#}¦ {%prol-las (pra-ud-las),%} cl. 1. P. {%-la-%}
{%sati, -lasitum,%} to shine brightly, glitter.
<LEND>

<L>34108<pc>0666-a<k1>prollasat<k2>prollasat
{%Prol-lasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shining brightly, glit-
tering.
<LEND>

<L>34109<pc>0666-a<k1>prollAGita<k2>prollAGita
{#prollAGita#}¦ {%prol-lāghita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
[Page0666-b+ 74]
{%lāgh%} with {%pra-ud%}), recovered from sickness, con-
valescent, strong, robust.
<LEND>

<L>34110<pc>0666-b<k1>prolliKat<k2>prolliKat
{#prolliKat#}¦ {%prol-likhat, an, atī%} or {%antī, at%}
(fr. rt. {%likh%} with {%pra-ud%}), making lines or scratches,
marking.
<LEND>

<L>34111<pc>0666-b<k1>prolleKana<k2>prolleKana
{%Prol-lekhana, am,%}¦ n. drawing marks or lines,
scratching, marking.
<LEND>

<L>34112<pc>0666-b<k1>proza<k2>proza
{#proza#}¦ {%proṣa.%} See rt. 1. {%pruṣ,%} p. 663.
<LEND>

<L>34113<pc>0666-b<k1>prozaka<k2>prozaka
{#prozaka#}¦ {%proṣaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
(Mahā-bh. Bhīṣma-p. 376).
<LEND>

<L>34114<pc>0666-b<k1>prozita<k2>prozita
{#prozita#}¦ {%proṣita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 6. {%vas%}
with {%pra%}), sojourning abroad or in a foreign country,
away from home, absent, abroad. {%—Proṣita-trāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. fear of one who is absent. {%—Proṣita-%}
{%bhartṛka, as, ā, am,%} whose husband is abroad.
{%—Proṣita-maraṇa, am,%} n. dying abroad or in a
foreign country. {%—Proṣita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} sojourn-
ing away from home, strange, a stranger.
<LEND>

<L>34115<pc>0666-b<k1>prozya<k2>prozya
{%Proṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. moving to distant
places, flowing onwards (as water; perhaps connected
with rt. 1. {%pruṣ%}). {%—Proṣya-pāpīyas, ān, asī, as,%}
become worse by sojourning in a foreign country,
deteriorated by living abroad.
<LEND>

<L>34116<pc>0666-b<k1>prozWa<k2>prozWa
{#prozWa#}¦ {%proṣṭha, as,%} m. (perhaps a contrac-
tion for a form {%prāva-stha%} fr. rt. {%sthā%} with {%pra-%}
{%ava%}), a bench, stool; a bull, an ox; N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. a sort of
carp, Cyprinus Pausius {%(= śapharī)%}. {%—Proṣṭha-%}
{%pada, as, ā,%} m. f. (also {%e,%} f. du., {%ās,%} pl.), ‘the foot of
a stool,’ N. of a double Nakṣatra or of the third
and fourth lunar mansions, the month Bhādra or
August-September; (also called {%pūrva-bhādrapadā%}
and {%uttara-bhādrapadā;%} cf. {%nakṣatra, bhādra-%}
{%padā.%}) {%—Proṣṭha-pāda, as, ī, am,%} one whose
feet rest on a bench; born under the Nakṣatra
Proṣṭha-padā. {%—Proṣṭhe-śaya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
sleeping on a couch; (Sāy.) {%= prāṅgaṇe śayānaḥ,%}
sleeping or lying in a court-yard.
<LEND>

<L>34117<pc>0666-b<k1>prozWika<k2>prozWika
{%Proṣṭhika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34118<pc>0666-b<k1>prozRa<k2>prozRa
{#prozRa#}¦ {%proṣṇa (pra-uṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} ex-
ceedingly hot, burning hot, scorching.
<LEND>

<L>34119<pc>0666-b<k1>prozya<k2>prozya
{#prozya#}¦ {%proṣya.%} See under {%proṣita%} above.
<LEND>

<L>34120<pc>0666-b<k1>proh<k2>proh
{#proh#}¦ {%proh%} ({%pra-ūh,%} see rt. 1. {%ūh%}), cl. 1. P.
{%prohati, prohitum,%} Ved. to push forward, push
away, (according to Mahī-dhara {%= nir-ākṛ%}); to
throw down; ({%prohati = pātayati.%})
<LEND>

<L>34121<pc>0666-b<k1>proha<k2>proha<h>1
1. {%proha%}¦ in {%proha-karaṭā,%} f. ({%proha,%} 2nd sing.
Impv. of {%proh%}), a various reading for {%prehi-kaṭā,%}
q. v. {%—Proha-kardamā,%} f. a ceremony at which
impurity is cleared away (see Gaṇa Mayūra-vyaṃsa-
kādi to Pāṇ. II. 1, 72).
<LEND>

<L>34122<pc>0666-b<k1>prohaRa<k2>prohaRa
{%Prohaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of pushing away (?).
<LEND>

<L>34123<pc>0666-b<k1>prohyapadi<k2>prohyapadi
{%Prohya-padi,%}¦ ind. (perhaps) by or in pushing
away the foot (Gaṇa Dvidaṇḍy-ādi to Pāṇ. V. 4,
128).
<LEND>

<L>34124<pc>0666-b<k1>proha<k2>proha<h>2
{#proha#} 2¦. {%proha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%ūh%} with {%pra%}),
logical reasoning; an elephant's foot; the ankle of
an elephant; a joint, a knot; ({%as, ā, am%}), skilful,
clever; reasoning logically, a reasoner, disputant.
<LEND>

<L>34125<pc>0666-b<k1>prohaRIya<k2>prohaRIya
{%Prohaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be reasoned or argued.
<LEND>

<L>34126<pc>0666-b<k1>prOha<k2>prOha
{%Prauha, as, ī, am,%}¦ clever, skilful; ({%as%}), m. con-
sideration, reflection; a good argument; the foot of
an elephant; a joint.
<LEND>

<L>34127<pc>0666-b<k1>prOkta<k2>prOkta
{#prOkta#}¦ {%praukta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%prokta%}), having
the sense of ‘proclaimed by’ (said of a suffix).
<LEND>

<L>34128<pc>0666-b<k1>prOGIya<k2>prOGIya
{#prOGIya#}¦ {%praughīya%} (fr. {%pra + ogha%}), Nom.
P. {%praughīyati, -yitum, = proghīya,%} see Vopa-
deva II. 4.
<LEND>

<L>34129<pc>0666-b<k1>prOQa<k2>prOQa
{#prOQa#}¦ {%prauḍha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vah%} with
{%pra%}), grown up, full-grown, fully developed, matured,
perfected; mature, adult, old; married; luxuriant
(as a plant); great, grand, mighty, strong; impulsive,
impetuous, violent; thick, dense (as darkness); full
(as the moon); filled with, full of, (at the end of
[Page0666-c+ 77]
comps.; cf. {%mṛdu-p˚%}); confident, bold, arrogant,
audacious, impudent; forward; raised up, lifted up;
controverted; an epithet of one of the seven Ullāsas
in the Kulārṇava-tantra; (in music) an epithet of
one of the seven Rūpakas; {%prauḍham Brāhma-%}
{%ṇam,%} the great Brāhmaṇa; ({%ā%}), f. a married woman
from thirty to fifty-five years of age; a violent or
impetuous woman (described as a Nāyikā who
stands in no awe of her lover or husband). {%—Prau-%}
{%ḍha-carita-nāman, āni,%} n. pl., N. of a work by
Vallabha Ācārya on the titles of Kṛṣṇa derived
from one hundred and twenty-eight of his exploits
during adolescence. {%—Prauḍha-tva, am,%} n. confi-
dence, arrogance. {%—Prauḍha-pāda, as, ī, am,%} one
whose feet are raised on a bench; [cf. {%proṣṭha-pāda.%}]
{%—Prauḍha-puṣpa, as, ā, am,%} having blossoms
full-grown (as a tree). {%—Prauḍha-pratāpa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of mighty prowess, renowned in arms. {%—Prau-%}
{%ḍhapratāpa-mārtaṇḍa,%} N. of a work attributed to
Pratāpa-rudra Gaja-pati on the appropriate seasons
for the worship of Viṣṇu. {%—Prauḍha-priyā,%} f. a
bold or confident mistress; (according to Malli-nātha
{%= pragalbha-kāntā.%}) {%—Prauḍha-manoramā,%} f.,
N. of a commentary by Bhaṭṭoji-dīkṣita on his own
work the Siddhānta-Kaumudī. {%—Prauḍha-yauvana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} in the prime or bloom of youth. {%—Prau-%}
{%ḍha-vāda, as,%} m. an arrogant expression. {%—Prau-%}
{%ḍhāṅganā (˚ḍha-aṅ˚),%} f. a bold or impulsive
woman. {%—Prauḍhānta (˚ḍha-an˚),%} N. of one of
the seven Ullāsas in the Kulārṇava-tantra. {%—Prau-%}
{%ḍhokti (˚ḍha-uk˚), is,%} f. a bold expression or
speech.
<LEND>

<L>34130<pc>0666-c<k1>prOQi<k2>prOQi
{%Prauḍhi, is,%}¦ f. growth, increase; maturity, per-
fect state (of body or mind); full development,
elevation, greatness, grandeur; sense of power, self-
confidence, feeling of security, arrogance; audacity,
boldness; zeal, enterprise, exertion; investigation,
controversy, discussion. {%—Prauḍhi-vāda, as,%} m. a
bold assertion, confident affirmation; a pompous
speech.
<LEND>

<L>34131<pc>0666-c<k1>prOQIBU<k2>prOQIBU
{%Prauḍhī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to
grow up, increase, come to maturity. {%—Prauḍhī-%}
{%bhavat, an, antī, at,%} growing up, coming to matu-
rity. {%—Prauḍhī-bhaviṣyat, an, atī%} or {%antī, at,%}
about to arrive at maturity.
<LEND>

<L>34132<pc>0666-c<k1>prORa<k2>prORa
{#prORa#}¦ {%prauṇa, as, ā, am,%} clever, learned,
skilful; [cf. {%prauha, proha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34133<pc>0666-c<k1>prOzWa<k2>prOzWa
{#prOzWa#}¦ {%prauṣṭha, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Proṣṭha.
<LEND>

<L>34134<pc>0666-c<k1>prOzWapada<k2>prOzWapada
{%Prauṣṭhapada, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%proṣṭha-pada%}),
scil. {%māsa,%} the month Bhādra (August-September);
N. of one of Kuvera's treasure-keepers; N. of a
Pari-śiṣṭa of the Sāma-veda; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%paurṇa-%}
{%māsī,%} full moon in the month Bhādra.
<LEND>

<L>34135<pc>0666-c<k1>prOzWapadika<k2>prOzWapadika
{%Prauṣṭhapadika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%proṣṭha-%}
{%padā%}), see Pāṇ. IV. 2, 35.
<LEND>

<L>34136<pc>0666-c<k1>prOzWika<k2>prOzWika
{%Prauṣṭhika, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Prosh-
ṭhika.
<LEND>

<L>34137<pc>0666-c<k1>prOha<k2>prOha
{#prOha#}¦ {%prauha.%} See under 2. {%proha,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34138<pc>0666-c<k1>plaka<k2>plaka
{#plaka#}¦ {%plaka, as,%} m., Ved. in {%kaśa-plakau,%}
pudenda muliebria.
<LEND>

<L>34139<pc>0666-c<k1>plakz<k2>plakz
{#plakz#}¦ {%plakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%plakṣati, -te,%}
&c., to eat, consume; (a various reading
for {%bhakṣ.%})
<LEND>

<L>34140<pc>0666-c<k1>plakza<k2>plakza
{#plakza#}¦ {%plakṣa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%pluṣ,%} to burn), the waved-leaf fig-tree or Ficus Infec-
toria (a large and beautiful tree with small white
fruit); the holy fig-tree, Ficus Religiosa; the tree
Hibiscus Populneoides, Thespesia Populneoides; a
side door, private or back door; the space at the
side of a door; one of the seven Dvīpas or continents
into which the world is divided; N. of a man; ({%ā%}),
f. a N. of the river Sarasvatī. {%—Plakṣa-jātā,%} f.
‘rising near the fig-tree,’ an epithet of the Sarasvatī.
{%—Plakṣa-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place of pil-
grimage. {%—Plakṣa-prasravaṇa, am,%} n. ‘the
fig-tree source,’ N. of the place where the Sarasvatī
[Page0667-a+ 73]
takes its rise. {%—Plakṣa-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of the
fig-trees,’ N. of the place where the Sarasvatī becomes
visible. {%—Plakṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} surrounded by
fig-trees (Ficus Infectoria); ({%atī%}), f., N. of a river
(perhaps the Sarasvatī). {%—Plakṣa-samudra-vā-%}
{%cakā,%} f. an epithet of the river Sarasvatī. {%—Plakṣa-%}
{%sravaṇa, am,%} n., N. of the place where the Saras-
vatī becomes visible; [cf. {%plakṣa-prasravaṇa.%}]
{%—Plakṣāvataraṇa (˚ṣa-av˚), am,%} n., N. of a
place of pilgrimage.
<LEND>

<L>34141<pc>0667-a<k1>plakzakIya<k2>plakzakIya
{%Plakṣakīya,%}¦ see Gaṇa Naḍādi to Pāṇ. IV.
2, 91.
<LEND>

<L>34142<pc>0667-a<k1>plAkza<k2>plAkza
{%Plākṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to the
waved-leaf fig-tree (Ficus Infectoria); ({%am%}), n. the
fruit of the waved-leaf fig-tree and of the various
trees called Plaksha; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic from
Plākṣi.
<LEND>

<L>34143<pc>0667-a<k1>plAkzaki<k2>plAkzaki
{%Plākṣaki, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Plaksha.
<LEND>

<L>34144<pc>0667-a<k1>plAkzAyaRa<k2>plAkzAyaRa
{%Plākṣāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Plākṣi.
<LEND>

<L>34145<pc>0667-a<k1>plAkzi<k2>plAkzi
{%Plākṣi, is, ī,%}¦ m. f. a patronymic from Plaksha.
<LEND>

<L>34146<pc>0667-a<k1>plati<k2>plati
{#plati#}¦ {%plati, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34147<pc>0667-a<k1>plAta<k2>plAta
{%Plāta, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Plati.
<LEND>

<L>34148<pc>0667-a<k1>plab<k2>plab
{#plab#}¦ {%plab%} or {%plav,%} cl. 1. A. {%plabate, pla-%}
{%vate,%} &c., to float, = rt. {%plu,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34149<pc>0667-a<k1>playoga<k2>playoga
{#playoga#}¦ {%playoga (= pra-yoga?), as,%} m., N.
of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34150<pc>0667-a<k1>plAyogi<k2>plAyogi
{%Plāyogi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Āsaṅga.
<LEND>

<L>34151<pc>0667-a<k1>plava<k2>plava
{#plava#}¦ {%plava, plavaka,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34152<pc>0667-a<k1>plAkza<k2>plAkza
{#plAkza#}¦ {%plākṣa,%} &c. See above.
<LEND>

<L>34153<pc>0667-a<k1>plAya<k2>plAya
{#plAya#}¦ {%plāya.%} See under {%ple,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>34154<pc>0667-a<k1>plAva<k2>plAva
{#plAva#}¦ {%plāva,%} &c. See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>34155<pc>0667-a<k1>plASi<k2>plASi
{#plASi#}¦ {%plāśi, is,%} m., Ved. a particular part
of the intestines; (according to Mahī-dhara {%= śiśna%}
or {%śiśna-mūla-nāḍyaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>34156<pc>0667-a<k1>plASuka<k2>plASuka
{#plASuka#}¦ {%plāśuka, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%plāśu =%}
{%prāśu%}), Ved. growing rapidly; (according to the
Scholiasts) growing again, springing up again.
<LEND>

<L>34157<pc>0667-a<k1>plASucit<k2>plASucit
{%Plāśucit, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. quick, speedy; [cf. {%prāśu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34158<pc>0667-a<k1>plih<k2>plih
{#plih#}¦ {%plih,%} cl. 1. A. {%plehate, piplihe, ple-%}
{%hitum,%} to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>34159<pc>0667-a<k1>plihan<k2>plihan
{%Plihan, ā,%}¦ m. the spleen.
<LEND>

<L>34160<pc>0667-a<k1>plIhan<k2>plIhan
{%Plīhan, ā,%}¦ m. the spleen (which with the liver
is regarded by the Hindūs as the part of the body
from which the blood flows); disease of the spleen
(said to be equally applied to enlargement of the
mesenteric glands, &c.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σπλήν, σπλάγχ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">νο-ν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>lien;</nsi> Bohem. <nsi>slez-ina;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>bluz-ni-s;</nsi>
Eng. <nsi>spleen.</nsi>] {%—Plīha-ghna, as,%} or {%plīha-śatru,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘destroying spleen’ or ‘enemy to spleen,’ N.
of a medicinal plant, Amoora Rohitaka (commonly
Rohera or Rohinī). {%—Plīhā-karṇa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. (according to Mahī-dhara) suffering from a
particular disease of the ear called {%plīhan%}. {%—Plīhāri%}
{%(˚ha-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy to spleen,’ the holy fig-
tree, Ficus Religiosa. {%—Plīhodara (˚ha-ud˚), am,%}
n. enlargement of the spleen, disease of the spleen.
{%—Plīhodarin, ī, iṇī, i,%} affected with enlargement
or disease of the spleen, splenetic.
<LEND>

<L>34161<pc>0667-a<k1>plIhA<k2>plIhA
{%Plīhā,%}¦ f. {%= plīhan.%}
<LEND>

<L>34162<pc>0667-a<k1>plI<k2>plI
{#plI#}¦ {%plī,%} cl. 9. P. {%plināti,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>34163<pc>0667-a<k1>plu<k2>plu
{#plu#}¦ {%plu,%} cl. 1. A. (in poetry sometimes
also P.) {%plavate (-ti), pupluve, ploṣyate,%}
{%aploṣṭa%} (2nd pl. {%aploḍhvam%}), {%ploṣīṣṭa, plo-%}
{%tum,%} to float, swim; to go in a boat, cross in a
boat, navigate; to bathe; to sway to and fro,
vibrate, hover, soar, fly; to fly away, haste away;
to blow (as the wind); to fade away, disappear; to
leap, jump, spring, (in these senses originally {%pru%});
to hop, skip, dance; to spring over, jump over,
leap across, spring upon, spring down; to be length-
ened or prolated (as a vowel): Caus. P. {%plāvayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%apuplavat, apiplavat,%} to cause to
float or swim, flood, deluge, inundate, submerge; to
[Page0667-b+ 81]
pour water upon, sprinkle, bathe, wash; to wash
away, remove; to cause to leap; to cause to stagger;
to lengthen, prolate (a vowel): Pass. of Caus. {%plāv-%}
{%yate,%} to be deluged, to be overflowed, to be inun-
dated: Desid. of Caus. {%piplāvayiṣati, puplāvayi-%}
{%ṣati:%} Desid. {%puplūṣate:%} Intens. {%poplūyate,%}
{%poploti,%} to float about, swim about; to swim rapidly;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πλέ-ω, πλεύ-σομαι, πλό-ο-ς, πλω-τό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πλώ-τη-ς, πλύν-ω, πλῦ-μα, πλυ-τό-ς, πλυν-τήρ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πύελος;</lang> perhaps <lang n="greek">λού-ω</lang> for <lang n="greek">πλού-ω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>plu-i-t,</nsi>
<nsi>pluv-ia, flu-o, fle-o, plôra-re, linter;</nsi> perhaps
<nsi>fund-o</nsi> for <nsi>plund-o;</nsi> perhaps <nsi>pluma;</nsi> probably
<nsi>lav-o</nsi> for <nsi>plav-o:</nsi> Old Lat. <nsi>per-plov-ere:</nsi> Umbr.
<nsi>pre-plo-tutu,</nsi> ‘overflowed:’ Goth. <nsi>flô-du-s,</nsi> ‘a
river:’ Old Germ. <nsi>flew-iu,</nsi> ‘float;’ <nsi>fliu-z-u,</nsi> ‘flow;’
<nsi>fluz,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>flug:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>fleot, fleowan, flod,</nsi>
<nsi>fleogan, fliogan, fleón, flión, aet-flowan, fleotan;</nsi>
Iceland. <nsi>flut:</nsi> Old Slav. <nsi>plov-a, plou-ti,</nsi> ‘to sail;’
<nsi>plu-ti,</nsi> ‘to swim:’ Russ. <nsi>plavaju,</nsi> ‘I swim:’ Lith.
<nsi>pláu-j-u, plau-ti,</nsi> ‘to wash off;’ <nsi>plaú-t-is; plú-sti,</nsi>
‘to swim:’ Hib. <nsi>plod,</nsi> ‘a fleet;’ <nsi>plodaim,</nsi> ‘I float;’
perhaps <nsi>lua</nsi> = Gaelic <nsi>lu,</nsi> ‘water;’ <nsi>luathaim,</nsi> ‘I
hasten, I move;’ <nsi>falcaim,</nsi> ‘I bathe;’ <nsi>luan,</nsi> ‘a
woman's breast:’ Gaelic <nsi>plucas,</nsi> ‘a flux, ventris
fluxio.’]
<LEND>

<L>34164<pc>0667-b<k1>plava<k2>plava
{%Plava, as, ā, am,%}¦ swimming, floating; leaping,
jumping, one who goes by leaps or jumps, a tumbler;
superior, excellent (Ved.); ({%as%}), m. the act of
swimming, floating, diving, bathing [cf. {%jala-p˚,%}
{%dharaṇī-p˚%}]; flooding, a flood, the swelling of a
river; suffusion, ({%nayana-p˚,%} suffusion or swimming
of the eyes); jumping, leaping, plunging, going by
leaps or plunges; a float, raft, boat, canoe, small
ship; a snare or basket of wicker-work for catching
fish ({%= palava%}); a kind of aquatic bird, Pelicanus
Fusicollis ({%= gātra-samplava%}); a kind of duck {%(=%}
{%kāraṇḍava); = jala-vāyasa; = jala-kāka; = jala-%}
{%kukkuṭa;%} a frog; a monkey; a sheep; a man of
low or degraded tribe, a Cāṇḍāla; an enemy; the
waved-leaf fig-tree, Ficus Infectoria ({%= plakṣa%}); a
kind of weapon; the thirty-fifth (or ninth) year in a
cycle of Jupiter; N. of various Sāmans; the prolated
utterance of a vowel; protracting a sentence through
three or more Ślokas ({%= kulaka%}); a kind of metre;
a declivity, slope, shelving ground; proclivity, incli-
nation; returning, return; urging on, inciting;
({%am%}), n. a species of grass, Cyperus Rotundus; a
kind of fragrant grass ({%= gandha-tṛṇa%}); [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">πλόος, πλοῖον;</lang> Hib. <nsi>falc,</nsi> ‘a flood.’] {%—Plava-ga,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘going by leaps,’ a frog; an ape, monkey;
a sort of aquatic bird, the diver; the plant Acacia
Sirissa ({%= śirīṣa%}); N. of the charioteer of the Sun;
of a son of the Sun; ({%ā%}), f. the sign of the zodiac
Virgo. {%—Plava-gati, is,%} f. going by leaps and
jumps; ({%is%}), m. a frog. {%—Plavaṅ-ga, as, ā, am,%}
‘going by leaps,’ an epithet of fire as flickering; ({%as%}),
m. an ape, baboon, monkey; a deer; the waved-leaf
fig-tree, Ficus Infectoria; N. of the forty-first (or
fifteenth) year in a sixty years' cycle of Jupiter.
{%—Plavaṅ-gama, as,%} m. ‘going by leaps,’ a frog;
an ape, monkey; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of metre. {%—Plavaṅ-%}
{%gamendu (˚ma-in˚), us,%} m. ‘moon among the apes,’
an epithet of Hanumat. {%—Plava-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessing a ship, owner of a boat.
<LEND>

<L>34165<pc>0667-b<k1>plavaka<k2>plavaka
{%Plavaka, as,%}¦ m. a frog; a tumbler, a dancer, a
man who walks on the edge of a sword, a rope-
dancer, &c.; an outcast, a Cāṇḍāla; the waved-leaf
fig-tree, Ficus Infectoria.
<LEND>

<L>34166<pc>0667-b<k1>plavana<k2>plavana
{%Plavana, am,%}¦ n. swimming, plunging into,
bathing; a deluge, inundation; jumping, leaping,
plunging; capering, one of a horse's paces; flying;
declivity, inclination; ({%as, ā, am%}), inclined, stooping
down, (at the end of comps.; cf. {%prāg-udak-p˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>34167<pc>0667-b<k1>plavamAna<k2>plavamAna
{%Plavamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ floating, swimming;
going in a boat, crossing in a boat; bathing; hover-
ing, soaring; blowing (as the wind); fading away,
disappearing; leaping, springing, bounding.
<LEND>

<L>34168<pc>0667-b<k1>plavAkA<k2>plavAkA
{%Plavākā,%}¦ f. a boat, a raft.
<LEND>

<L>34169<pc>0667-b<k1>plavika<k2>plavika
{%Plavika, as, ā, am,%}¦ ferrying over in a boat, a
ferryman.
<LEND>

<L>34170<pc>0667-b<k1>plavitf<k2>plavitf
{%Plavitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ leaping, springing, a leaper.
<LEND>
[Page0667-c+ 76]

<L>34171<pc>0667-c<k1>plAva<k2>plAva
{%Plāva, as,%}¦ m. flowing over; filling a vessel till it
overflows; submersion; jumping.
<LEND>

<L>34172<pc>0667-c<k1>plAvana<k2>plAvana
{%Plāvana, am,%}¦ n. bathing, immersion, ablution;
filling a vessel till it overflows, flooding, deluging;
inundation, flood, deluge; [cf. {%jala-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34173<pc>0667-c<k1>plAvayat<k2>plAvayat
{%Plāvayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to float, flooding,
inundating.
<LEND>

<L>34174<pc>0667-c<k1>plAvayitf<k2>plAvayitf
{%Plāvayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who causes to swim,
causing to cross or go in a boat.
<LEND>

<L>34175<pc>0667-c<k1>plAvita<k2>plAvita
{%Plāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to float, made to
swim; made to overflow; overflowed, deluged,
inundated, flooded; moistened, soaked; covered
with; [cf. {%rudhira-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34176<pc>0667-c<k1>plAvin<k2>plAvin
{%Plāvin, ī,%}¦ m. spreading, promulgating; ({%ī%}), m. a
bird.
<LEND>

<L>34177<pc>0667-c<k1>plAvya<k2>plAvya<h>1
1. {%plāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be submerged or inun-
dated; to be steeped or soaked in anything (with
inst.); to be jumped or leaped.
<LEND>

<L>34178<pc>0667-c<k1>plAvya<k2>plAvya<h>2
2. {%plāvya,%}¦ ind. having caused to float or swim;
having immersed or flooded; having washed away.
<LEND>

<L>34179<pc>0667-c<k1>pluta<k2>pluta
{%Pluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ floated, floating or swimming
in [cf. {%uda-p˚%}]; bathed in; inundated, submerged,
overflowed, wet; covered with, filled with [cf. {%ma-%}
{%dhu-p˚, rajaḥ-p˚%}]; flown; jumped, leaped, one
who has leaped, gone by leaps or jumps; protracted,
prolated, continuous or lengthened to three Mātrās
or prosodial instants (as a vowel in pronunciation,
cf. {%mātrā%}); ({%am%}), n. leaping, jumping, tumbling;
bounding, vaulting; capering, one of a horse's paces.
{%—Pluta-gati, is,%} f. going by jumps or leaps; a
bounding motion, galloping, a gallop; ({%is%}), m. a hare.
<LEND>

<L>34180<pc>0667-c<k1>plutavat<k2>plutavat
{%Plutavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has leaped or
jumped.
<LEND>

<L>34181<pc>0667-c<k1>pluti<k2>pluti
{%Pluti, is,%}¦ f. overflowing, a flood; a leap, jump,
skip, hop; bounding, capering, curvet, one of a
horse's paces; prolation (of a vowel).
<LEND>

<L>34182<pc>0667-c<k1>pluz<k2>pluz
{#pluz#}¦ {%pluṣ%} [cf. rt. 1. {%pruṣ%}], cl. 1. 4. 9. P.
{%ploṣati, pluṣyati, pluṣṇāti, puplo-%}
{%ṣa, ploṣitum,%} to burn, scorch, singe; cl. 9. P.
to sprinkle; to anoint, embrocate; to fill.
<LEND>

<L>34183<pc>0667-c<k1>plukzi<k2>plukzi
{%Plukṣi, is,%}¦ m. fire; the god of fire (?); the
burning of a house; oil.
<LEND>

<L>34184<pc>0667-c<k1>pluza<k2>pluza
{%Pluṣa, as,%}¦ m. burning, combustion.
<LEND>

<L>34185<pc>0667-c<k1>pluzi<k2>pluzi
{%Pluṣi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a species of noxious insect;
(according to Mahī-dhara {%= puttikā;%} according to
another Scholiast {%= vakra-tuṇḍa.%})
<LEND>

<L>34186<pc>0667-c<k1>pluzwa<k2>pluzwa
{%Pluṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ burned, scorched, singed.
<LEND>

<L>34187<pc>0667-c<k1>pluzwAya<k2>pluzwAya
{%Pluṣṭāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%pluṣṭāyate, -yitum, =%}
{%pluṣṭāṃ kṛ;%} (perhaps an incorrect form for
{%pluṣvāya = pruṣvāya.%})
<LEND>

<L>34188<pc>0667-c<k1>ploza<k2>ploza
{%Ploṣa, as,%}¦ m. burning combustion.
<LEND>

<L>34189<pc>0667-c<k1>plozaRa<k2>plozaRa
{%Ploṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ burning, scorching, singeing.
<LEND>

<L>34190<pc>0667-c<k1>plus<k2>plus
{#plus#}¦ {%plus,%} cl. 4. P. {%plusyati,%} &c., to burn,
(a various reading for {%pluṣ%}); to share.
<LEND>

<L>34191<pc>0667-c<k1>ple<k2>ple
{#ple#}¦ {%ple%} (rt. 5. {%i%} with {%pla%} for {%pra%}) {%= pre,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34192<pc>0667-c<k1>plAya<k2>plAya
{%Plāya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= prāya,%} abundance, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34193<pc>0667-c<k1>pleNKa<k2>pleNKa
{#pleNKa#}¦ {%pleṅkha,%} Ved. {%= preṅkha,%} a swing.
<LEND>

<L>34194<pc>0667-c<k1>plev<k2>plev
{#plev#}¦ {%plev%} [cf. rts. {%peb, pev, sev%}], cl. 1.
A. {%plevate,%} &c., to serve, wait upon.
<LEND>

<L>34195<pc>0667-c<k1>plota<k2>plota
{#plota#}¦ {%plota, am,%} n. (probably {%= prota%}),
cloth, stuff; a bandage.
<LEND>

<L>34196<pc>0667-c<k1>ploza<k2>ploza
{#ploza#}¦ {%ploṣa.%} See under rt. {%pluṣ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>34197<pc>0667-c<k1>psaras<k2>psaras
{#psaras#}¦ {%psaras.%} See under rt. 1. {%psā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>34198<pc>0667-c<k1>psA<k2>psA<h>1
{#psA#} 1¦. {%psā,%} cl. 2. P. {%psāti%} (3rd pl. Impf.
{%apsus%} or {%apsān%}), {%papsau, psāsyati, ap-%}
{%sāsīt, psāyāt%} or {%pseyāt, psātum,%} Ved. to chew,
masticate, eat, consume; to go; [cf. Old Germ.
<nsi>spīsa,</nsi> ‘food;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>speise.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>34199<pc>0667-c<k1>psaras<k2>psaras
{%Psaras, as,%}¦ n., Ved. a favourite dish or kind of
food, feast, enjoyment, (occurring in connection with
{%mahi;%} cf. {%madhu-p˚%}); food, sacrificial food; {%deva-%}
{%psaras, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. being a pleasure for the
gods, delightful to the gods.
<LEND>

<L>34200<pc>0667-c<k1>psA<k2>psA<h>2
2. {%psā,%}¦ f. eating, food; hunger.
<LEND>

<L>34201<pc>0667-c<k1>psAta<k2>psAta
{%Psāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ chewed, eaten; hungry.
<LEND>

<L>34202<pc>0667-c<k1>psAna<k2>psAna
{%Psāna, am,%}¦ n. eating, food.
<LEND>
[Page0668-a+ 73]

<L>34203<pc>0668-a<k1>psur<k2>psur
{%Psur, r,%}¦ f. or {%psuras, as,%} n., Ved. (perhaps) fruit,
(according to Sāy. an epithet of Indra, {%= rūpa-vat%} which
would come under {%psu%} below); [cf. Zend <nsi>fshu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>34204<pc>0668-a<k1>psnya<k2>psnya
{%Psnya%}¦ in {%viśva-psnya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34205<pc>0668-a<k1>psu<k2>psu
{#psu#}¦ {%psu,%} Ved. form, aspect, (at the end of
comps.; cf. {%aruṇa-psu, ṛta-psu.%})
<LEND>
<H>{#Pa#}

<L>34206<pc>0668-a<k1>Pa<k2>Pa<h>1
{#Pa#} 1¦. {%pha,%} the twenty-second consonant
of the Nāgarī alphabet and the second letter of the
fifth or labial class, being the aspirate of {%p,%} and
said to be pronounced like {%ph%} in <nsi>uphill, loophole.</nsi>
{%—Pha-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ph.%}
<LEND>

<L>34207<pc>0668-a<k1>Pa<k2>Pa<h>2
{#Pa#} 2¦. {%pha, as, ā, am,%} evident, manifest;
({%as%}), m. the performance of a mystical rite by which
Kuvera's attendants are propitiated; increasing, swell-
ing, enlarging, expanding; an augmenter, increaser;
fruitfulness, fertility, gain; a high wind, a gale;
yawning with the mouth wide open; ({%am%}), n.
blowing, panting; bursting with a popping noise (as
air bubbles &c.); bubbling, boiling; angry speech;
unprofitable or idle speech; [cf. {%phā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34208<pc>0668-a<k1>Pakk<k2>Pakk
{#Pakk#}¦ {%phakk,%} cl. 1. P. {%phakkati, paphakka,%}
{%phakkiṣyati, aphakkīt, phakkitum,%} to
move slowly, go softly, creep, steal along; to have
a preconceived opinion; to behave ill, act wrongly,
act in a low or unjust manner; to swell: Caus.
{%phakkayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%apaphakkat:%} Desid.
{%piphakkiṣati:%} Intens. {%pāphakkyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>34209<pc>0668-a<k1>Pakka<k2>Pakka
{%Phakka, as,%}¦ m. a cripple.
<LEND>

<L>34210<pc>0668-a<k1>PakkikA<k2>PakkikA
{%Phakkikā,%}¦ f. a preconceived opinion, previous
statement; a position, assertion or argument to be
proved, thesis to be maintained; logical exposition
or elucidation; a sophism, a trick, illusion, fraud; N.
of a commentary on the Tarka-saṅgraha.
<LEND>

<L>34211<pc>0668-a<k1>Pagula<k2>Pagula
{#Pagula#}¦ {%phagula, as,%} m., N. of a man;
(perhaps incorrectly for {%phalguna.%})
<LEND>

<L>34212<pc>0668-a<k1>PaYjI<k2>PaYjI
{#PaYjI#}¦ {%phañjī,%} f. the plant Clerodendrum
Siphonanthus; [cf. {%jīrṇa-ph˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34213<pc>0668-a<k1>PaYjikA<k2>PaYjikA
{%Phañjikā,%}¦ f. Clerodendrum Siphonanthus; Li-
peocercis Serrata ({%= deva-tāḍa%}); Alhagi Maurorum
({%= dur-ālabhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>34214<pc>0668-a<k1>PaYjipattrikA<k2>PaYjipattrikA
{%Phañji-pattrikā,%}¦ f. a species of plant ({%= ākhu-%}
{%parṇī;%} also read {%phañji-putrikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>34215<pc>0668-a<k1>Paw<k2>Paw
{#Paw#}¦ {%phaṭ,%} an onomatopoetic word used
mystically in incantations.
<LEND>

<L>34216<pc>0668-a<k1>Pawa<k2>Pawa
{#Pawa#}¦ {%phaṭa, as, ā,%} m. f. (probably fr. rt.
{%sphaṭ; = sphaṭa%}), the expanded hood or neck of a
serpent [cf. {%phaṇa%}]; a tooth; a cheat.
<LEND>

<L>34217<pc>0668-a<k1>PaqiNgA<k2>PaqiNgA
{#PaqiNgA#}¦ {%phaḍiṅgā,%} f. a cricket, grasshopper,
locust.
<LEND>

<L>34218<pc>0668-a<k1>PaR<k2>PaR
{#PaR#}¦ {%phaṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%phaṇati, paphāṇa%}
(2nd sing. {%pheṇitha%} or {%paphaṇitha,%}
3rd pl. {%pheṇus%} or {%paphaṇus%}), {%phaṇiṣyati,%}
{%aphaṇīt, aphāṇīt, phaṇitum,%} to go, go about,
move: Caus. {%phaṇayati, phāṇayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to spring or run (Ved.); {%phāṇayati,%} to scum,
skim, take off (the surface of a fluid); to produce
easily or without exertion: Desid. {%piphaṇiṣati:%}
Intens. {%pamphaṇyate, pamphaṇīti, pamphaṇṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>34219<pc>0668-a<k1>PaRa<k2>PaRa
{%Phaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps) scum, froth (Ved.);
({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n. the expanded side of a nostril;
({%as, ā%}), m. f. the expanded hood or neck of the
cobra di capello {%(= phaṭa); aṅgulī-phaṇa-hastaka,%}
one in whose hands the fingers take the shape of a
hood; [cf. {%go-phaṇā.%}] {%—Phaṇa-kara, as,%} m. the
cobra di capello, Coluber Naga; a snake in general.
{%—Phaṇa-giri,%} see {%phena-giri%}. {%—Phaṇa-traya,%}
{%am,%} n. three hoods (of a snake). {%—Phaṇa-dhara,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= phaṇa-kara;%} an epithet of Śiva. {%—Phaṇa-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m. {%= phaṇa-kara;%} a symbolical expression
for the number nine (or eight). {%—Phaṇa-maṇi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘hood-gem,’ a jewel supposed to be found in
the hood of a snake. {%—Phaṇa-maṇḍala, am,%} n.
[Page0668-b+ 77]
‘hood-orb,’ the rounded hood (of a serpent). {%—Pha-%}
{%ṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a hood, hooded; ({%ān%}),
m. the cobra di capello, a snake in general. {%—Pha-%}
{%ṇa-śreṇī,%} f. a line or row of serpents’ hoods.
{%—Phaṇa-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in a serpent's hood
(as a gem). {%—Phaṇā-kara, as,%} m. {%= phaṇa-kara.%}
{%—Phaṇāṭopa%} ({%˚ṇa-āṭ˚%} or {%˚ṇā-āṭ˚%}), {%as,%} m. the
swelling of a serpent's hood. {%—Phaṇāṭopin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} having the hood swollen (said of a serpent).
{%—Phaṇātapatra%} ({%˚ṇa-āt˚%} or {%˚ṇā-āt˚%}), {%as, ā, am,%}
having a hood for a parasol (said of a serpent).
{%—Phaṇā-dhara, as,%} m. {%= phaṇa-dhara%}. {%—Pha-%}
{%ṇā-phalaka, am,%} n. the flat surface of a serpent's
hood. {%—Phaṇā-bhara, as,%} m. the cobra di capello.
{%—Phaṇā-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘hood-bearing,’ a snake,
serpent. {%—Phaṇā-maṇi-sahasra-ruc,%} f. the splendor
of the thousand jewels on the hood (of the serpent-
king, Māgha IX. 25). {%—Phaṇā-vat, ān,%} m. ‘pos-
sessing a hood,’ the cobra di capello, a snake.
<LEND>

<L>34220<pc>0668-b<k1>PaRikA<k2>PaRikA
{%Phaṇikā,%}¦ f. the tree Ficus Oppositifolia. {%—Pha-%}
{%ṇikeśvara (˚kā-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of one of the eight
Vīta-rāgas of the Buddhists; [cf. {%phaṇīndreśvara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34221<pc>0668-b<k1>PaRikAra<k2>PaRikAra
{%Phaṇikāra, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of Piṅgala, (perhaps
incorrectly for {%phaṇa-kara%} or {%phaṇā-kara,%} which
would be analogous to his epithets {%nāga-rāja%} and
{%bhujaṅgeśa%}); N. of a people, (also read {%karṇikāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>34222<pc>0668-b<k1>PaRita<k2>PaRita
{%Phaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone; diluted (?).
<LEND>

<L>34223<pc>0668-b<k1>PaRin<k2>PaRin
{%Phaṇin, ī,%}¦ m. the hooded serpent, cobra di
capello, a serpent in general; an epithet of Rāhu;
of Patañjali; a species of herb {%(= sarpiṇī)%}. {%—Pha-%}
{%ṇi-kanyā,%} f. the daughter of a serpent-demon.
{%—Phaṇi-keśara%} or {%phaṇi-kesara, as, am,%} m. n.
Mesua Roxburghii {%(= nāga-kesara)%}. {%—Phaṇi-jā,%}
f. a species of plant (= Marāṭhī {%jharasī%}). {%—Phaṇi-%}
{%jihvā,%} f. ‘serpent's tongue,’ N. of a plant ({%= mahā-%}
{%śatāvarī%}); the plant Sida Cordifolia {%(= mahā-sa-%}
{%maṅgā)%}. {%—Phaṇi-jihvikā,%} f. the plant Emblica
Officinalis; {%= phaṇi-jihvā%}. {%—Phaṇi-talpa-ga, as,%}
m. ‘resorting to a serpent as a couch,’ an epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Phaṇi-pati, is,%} m. ‘serpent-king,’ N.
of the serpent Śeṣa; of Patañjali. {%—Phaṇi-priya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘serpent's friend,’ wind. {%—Phaṇi-pheṇa, as,%}
m. ‘snake's saliva,’ opium {%(= ahi-pheṇa)%}. {%—Phaṇi-%}
{%bhārikā,%} f. the tree Ficus Oppositifolia {%(= pha-%}
{%ṇikā)%}. {%—Phaṇi-bhāṣya, am,%} n. the commentary
of Patañjali {%(= mahā-bhāṣya)%}. {%—Phaṇi-bhuj, k,%}
m. ‘serpent-eater,’ a peacock. {%—Phaṇi-mukha,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘serpent's mouth,’ a kind of spade used by
housebreakers. {%—Phaṇi-latā%} or {%phaṇi-vallī,%} f. betel-
pepper {%(= nāga-vallī)%}. {%—Phaṇi-hantrī,%} f. the plant
with which the ichneumon is said to cure itself after
the bite of a snake {%(= gandha-nākulī)%}. {%—Phaṇi-%}
{%hṛt, t,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= kṣudrā dur-ālabhā).%}
{%—Phaṇīndra (˚ṇi-in˚), as,%} m. ‘serpent-chief,’ an
epithet of the serpent-demon Śeṣa; an epithet of
Patañjali {%(= phaṇin)%}. {%—Phaṇīndreśvara(˚ra-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of one of the eight Vīta-rāgas of the
Buddhists; [cf. {%phaṇikeśvara.%}] {%—Phaṇīśa (˚ṇi-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. ‘serpent-chief,’ an epithet of Patañjali
{%(= phaṇin)%}. {%—Phaṇīśvara (˚ṇi-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘ser-
pent-chief,’ an epithet of the serpent-demon Śeṣa;
an epithet of Patañjali ({%= phaṇin%}).
<LEND>

<L>34224<pc>0668-b<k1>PaRIya<k2>PaRIya
{%Phaṇīya, as%}¦ or {%am,%} m. or n. (?), Cerasus Puddum
({%= padma-kāṣṭha%}).
<LEND>

<L>34225<pc>0668-b<k1>PaRqa<k2>PaRqa
{%Phaṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. the belly ({%= phāṇḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>34226<pc>0668-b<k1>PaRiKela<k2>PaRiKela
{#PaRiKela#}¦ {%phaṇikhela, as,%} m. a quail; (pro-
bably incorrectly for {%phāla-khelā.%})
<LEND>

<L>34227<pc>0668-b<k1>PaRijJaka<k2>PaRijJaka
{#PaRijJaka#}¦ {%phaṇijjhaka, as,%} m. marjoram
and another similar plant; ({%ā%}), f. a plant, apparently
a species of basil with small leaves (commonly called
{%rāma-dūti%}).
<LEND>

<L>34228<pc>0668-b<k1>PaRI<k2>PaRI
{#PaRI#}¦ {%phaṇī,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>34229<pc>0668-b<k1>Pat<k2>Pat
{#Pat#}¦ {%phat,%} ind. an interjection, in {%phat-kṛ%}
probably an error for {%phut-kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>34230<pc>0668-b<k1>PatkArin<k2>PatkArin
{%Phat-kārin, ī,%}¦ m. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>34231<pc>0668-b<k1>PatihaSAha<k2>PatihaSAha
{#PatihaSAha#}¦ {%phatiha-śāha,%} N. of a king of
Kaśmīra (= <lang n="arabic">شاه فتح</lang>).
<LEND>
[Page0668-c+ 75]

<L>34232<pc>0668-c<k1>Patepura<k2>Patepura
{#Patepura#}¦ {%phatepura, am,%} n., N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>34233<pc>0668-c<k1>Par<k2>Par
{#Par#}¦ {%phar%} for {%phṝ = pṝ,%} Ved. to fill.
<LEND>

<L>34234<pc>0668-c<k1>Parvara<k2>Parvara
{%Pharvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. filling, (Sāy. {%= pū-%}
{%rayitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>34235<pc>0668-c<k1>Para<k2>Para
{#Para#}¦ {%phara, am,%} n. a shield ({%= phalaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>34236<pc>0668-c<k1>ParaYja<k2>ParaYja
{#ParaYja#}¦ {%pharañja,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34237<pc>0668-c<k1>Paruvaka<k2>Paruvaka
{#Paruvaka#}¦ {%pharuvaka, am,%} n. a betel-box ({%=%}
{%pūga-pātra%}).
<LEND>

<L>34238<pc>0668-c<k1>Parendra<k2>Parendra
{#Parendra#}¦ {%pharendra, as,%} m. Pandanus Odora-
tissimus.
<LEND>

<L>34239<pc>0668-c<k1>ParParAya<k2>ParParAya
{#ParParAya#}¦ {%pharpharāya,%} Nom. A. {%pharpha-%}
{%rāyate, -yitum,%} to glance about, dart to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>34240<pc>0668-c<k1>ParParIka<k2>ParParIka
{#ParParIka#}¦ {%pharpharīka, as,%} m. (said to be
fr. rt. {%sphur%}), the palm of the hand with the fingers
extended; ({%ā%}), f. a shoe, {%= madana,%} q. v.; ({%am%}), n.
softness, sweetness; a young shoot or branch.
<LEND>

<L>34241<pc>0668-c<k1>Parv<k2>Parv
{#Parv#}¦ {%pharv,%} cl. 1. P. {%pharvati,%} &c., Ved.
to go.
<LEND>

<L>34242<pc>0668-c<k1>Pal<k2>Pal
{#Pal#}¦ {%phal,%} cl. 1. P. {%phalati, paphāla%}
(3rd pl. {%phelus%}), {%phaliṣyati, aphālīt,%}
{%phalitum,%} to split (intrans.) cleave asunder, burst,
cleave open (intrans.), burst open, burst asunder
(Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 7472); to bear fruit, yield
or produce fruit, ({%sampadaḥ phal,%} to bring forth
successes as fruit, have a reward); to be fruitful; to have
results or consequences; to result; to succeed; to be
fruitful in, be fulfilled by (with abl.); to fall to the
share of any one (with loc.), befall; to be useful;
to become ripe, ripen; to produce; to shine back,
be reflected; to go (for {%pal%}): Caus. {%phālayati, apī-%}
{%phalat:%} Desid. {%piphaliṣati:%} Intens. {%pamphulyate,%}
{%pamphulti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐκ-φλαίν-ω, ἔ-φλαδ-ον, φλα-σ-μό-ς</lang>
<lang n="greek">πα-φλάζ-ω;</lang> perhaps <lang n="greek">ὄφελος, ὀφέλλω:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>fla-re, fla-tu-s, flâ-men, flâ-bru-m, flô-s, flôr-eo,</nsi>
<nsi>Flora:</nsi> Osc. <nsi>Flusa:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>uf-blês-an, bloth, blô-</nsi>
<nsi>ma:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>blâ-an,</nsi> ‘to blow;’ <nsi>blus-jan,</nsi> ‘to
bloom;’ <nsi>bluot,</nsi> ‘a blossom;’ <nsi>blâs,</nsi> ‘blowing;’ <nsi>blâsa,</nsi>
<nsi>bla-tara,</nsi> ‘bladder;’ <nsi>bluot,</nsi> ‘blood;’ <nsi>bloz,</nsi> ‘proud:’
Angl. Sax. <nsi>blowan, bloma, blostma:</nsi> Cambro-Brit.
<nsi>pâl,</nsi> ‘a spread;’ <nsi>palad,</nsi> ‘a shooting or spreading
out;’ <nsi>paladu,</nsi> ‘to spread or shoot out.’]
<LEND>

<L>34243<pc>0668-c<k1>Pala<k2>Pala
{%Phala, am,%}¦ n. a fruit, fruit (especially that of a
tree); produce, crop; a kernel, ({%dāḍima-ph˚,%} the
kernel of a pomegranate); fruit metaphorically,
offspring, progeny, a child (Raghu-v. XIV. 39); a
result, consequence, effect [cf. {%niṣ-ph˚, puṇya-ph˚,%}
{%puraḥ-ph˚%}]; profit, gain, interest on capital, ad-
vantage, benefit, utility; recompense, reward, prize,
meed, retribution (good or bad); detriment, loss,
disadvantage; (in mathematics) the result of a cal-
culation, product or quotient, result (in trigonome-
try); second term in a rule of three sum; corrective
equation; area or superficial contents of a figure;
a nutmeg; the three myrobalans ({%= tri-phalā%}); a
testicle; a blade (of a sword or knife, cf. {%khaḍga-%}
{%ph˚%}); a tablet, board [cf. {%śāri-ph˚%}]; a shield; the
point of an arrow, head of a dart or spear; a point
or spot on a die; a ploughshare ({%= phāla%}); the
menstrual discharge [cf. {%nava-phalikā, puṣpa%}];
a gift, giving; ({%as%}), m. the plant Wrightia Antidy-
senterica, {%= kuṭaja; (ā),%} f. a species of shrub, {%=%}
{%jhiñjhiriṣṭā; (ī),%} f. a species of fragrant plant
({%= phalinī, priyaṅgu%}); a kind of fish {%(= phali).%}
{%—Phala-kakṣa, as,%} m., N. of a Yakṣa. {%—Phala-%}
{%kaṇṭakā,%} f. the plant Asclepias Echinata. {%—Phala-%}
{%kāmanā,%} f. desire of a result or consequence.
{%—Phala-kāla, as,%} m. the time of fruits, fruit
season. {%—Phala-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m. Carissa Carandas
or Flacourtia Cataphracta {%(= kṛṣṇa-pāka-phala).%}
{%—Phala-keśara, as,%} m. ‘having fruit for hair,’
the cocoa-nut tree (the fruit of which is covered
with a fibrous coat resembling hair). {%—Phala-kośa%}
or {%phala-koṣaka, as,%} m. the covering of the
testicles, the scrotum. {%—Phala-khaṇḍana, am,%} n.
the destruction of fruits, frustration of results, dis-
[Page0669-a+ 81]
appointing. {%—Phala-graha, as, ā, am,%} ‘receiving
fruits,’ deriving profit or advantage, benefited; ({%as%}),
m. the deriving profit or advantage, being benefited.
{%—Phala-grahi, is, is, i,%} fruitful, bearing fruit in due
season. {%—Phala-grahiṣṇu, us, us, u,%} fruit-bearing,
fruitful. {%—Phala-grāhin, ī,%} m. ‘fruit-bearer,’ a tree
(properly a fruit tree). {%—Phala-ghṛta, am,%} n., Ved.
‘fruit-ghee,’ N. of an aphrodisiac for men (which
is composed of various ingredients, and said to be
the invention of Bharad-vāja); N. of a powerful me-
dicament used in diseases of the uterus. {%—Phala-%}
{%camasa, as,%} m. ‘fruit-goblet,’ a cup containing
fruit instead of Soma (Ved. the fruit consisting of
pounded figs, young leaves, and sour milk); the bark
of the Indian fig-tree (ground and eaten with curds
by way of penance). {%—Phala-cāraka, as,%} m. ‘fruit-
distributor,’ a particular official in Buddhist monasteries.
{%—Phala-coraka, as,%} m. a kind of perfume. {%—Pha-%}
{%la-cchadana, am,%} n. a house built of wooden boards.
{%—Phala-tas,%} ind. consequently, accordingly, virtu-
ally. {%—Phala-tā,%} f. or {%phala-tva, am,%} n. the being
fruit, the state of fruit. {%—Phala-traya, am,%} n. ‘fruit-
triad,’ three sorts of fruit collectively (the fruit of the
vine with those of Grewia Asiatica or Xylocarpus Gra-
natum and Gmelina Arborea); the three myrobalans.
{%—Phala-trika, am,%} n. ‘fruit-triad,’ the three myro-
balans. {%—Phala-da, as, ā, am,%} ‘fruit-giving,’ yield-
ing or bearing fruit; bringing profit or gain; giving
a reward, rewarding; ({%as%}), m. a tree (properly a
fruit tree). {%—Phala-dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or {%phala-%}
{%dāyin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘fruit-giving,’ yielding fruit; giving
a result. {%—Phala-nirvṛtti, is,%} f. final consequence
or result. {%—Phala-nivṛtti, is,%} f. cessation of con-
sequences. {%—Phala-niṣpatti, is,%} f. production of
fruit, bearing fruit, yielding profit, having the desired
results. {%—Phala-pañcāmla, am,%} n. a collection of
five kinds of acid vegetables and fruits; (see {%pha-%}
{%lāmla-pañcaka.%}) {%—Phala-pariṇati, is,%} f. the ripe-
ness of fruit. {%—Phala-pāka, as,%} m. the ripening of
fruit; the fulness of consequences; Carissa Carandas
or Flacourtia Cataphracta; [cf. {%pāka-phala%} and
{%kṛṣṇa-pākaphala.%}] {%—Phalapākānta (˚ka-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ending with the ripening of fruit; ({%ā%}),
f. an annual plant. {%—Phalapākāvasānā (˚ka-av˚),%}
f. ‘terminating with ripeness of fruit,’ an annual plant.
{%—Phalapākin, ī,%} m. the plant Thespesia Popul-
neoides. {%—Phala-pātana, am,%} n. knocking down
or gathering fruit. {%—Phala-pādapa, as,%} m. a fruit
tree. {%—Phala-puccha, as,%} m. a particular species
of esculent root or bulb. {%—Phala-pura, am,%}
n., N. of a city {%(= phalaka-pura)%}. {%—Phala-%}
{%puṣpa-vṛddhi, is,%} f. increase or growth of fruits
and flowers. {%—Phala-puṣpā%} or {%phala-puṣpī,%} f.
Ipomœa Turpethum {%(= piṇḍa-kharjūrī)%}. {%—Phala-%}
{%puṣpopaśobhita (˚pa-up˚), as, ā, am,%} adorned
with fruits and flowers. {%—Phala-pūra%} or {%phala-%}
{%pūraka, as,%} m. ‘full of kernels,’ common citron.
{%—Phala-pracayana, am,%} n. fruit-gathering, gather-
ing fruits. {%—Phala-prajanana, am,%} n. the produc-
tion of fruit. {%—Phala-prada, as, ā, am,%} yielding
fruit, productive; bringing a reward. {%—Phala-pra-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. the giving of fruits; a ceremony at
weddings. {%—Phala-prayukta, as, ā, am,%} connected
with or producing consequences, yielding fruit.
{%—Phala-prasūti, is,%} f. a growth of fruit, crop of
fruit. {%—Phala-prāpti, is,%} f. obtaining (the desired)
fruit or result; enjoying the consequences of actions.
{%—Phala-priyā,%} f. a species of fragrant plant {%(=%}
{%priyaṅgu)%}. {%—Phala-prepsu, us, us, u,%} wishing to
obtain fruit, desirous of attaining results. {%—Phala-%}
{%bandhin, ī, inī, i,%} forming or developing fruit,
setting (said of blossom). {%—Phala-bandhya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} barren or destitute of fruit, not bearing fruit;
[cf. {%phalābandhya.%}] {%—Phala-bhāga, as,%} m. a
share in any product, share of advantage or profit;
N. of an astrological work. {%—Phala-bhāgin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} sharing in the profit or advantage, partaking of a
reward. {%—Phala-bhāj, k, k, k,%} receiving or having
fruit, having consequences; sharing in a reward.
{%—Phala-bhuj, k, k, k,%} enjoying fruit. {%—Phala-%}
{%bhūti, is,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Phala-bhūmi, %}
[Page0669-b+ 81]
{%is,%} f. ‘the land of retribution,’ a place of reward or
recompense (as heaven, hell, &c.). {%—Phala-bhṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} fruit-bearing, fruitful, productive. {%—Phala-%}
{%bhoga, as,%} m. enjoyment of consequences; possession
of rent or profit, usufruct. {%—Phala-bhogin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} enjoying fruits or consequences, receiving profits.
{%—Phala-matsyā,%} f. the aloe plant. {%—Phala-mu-%}
{%khyā,%} f. a species of plant {%(= aja-modā)%}. {%—Phala-%}
{%mudgarikā,%} f. a kind of date tree {%(= piṇḍa-khar-%}
{%jūrī)%}. {%—Phala-mūla, am,%} n. or {%e,%} n. du. or {%āni,%}
n. pl. fruits and roots. {%—Phalamūlin, ī, inī, i,%}
having (edible) fruits and roots. {%—Phala-yoga, as,%}
m. the attainment of an object; remuneration, wages.
{%—Phala-rājan, ā,%} m. ‘king of the fruits,’ a water-
melon. {%—Phala-vat, ān, atī, at,%} fruit-bearing, fruc-
tiferous, covered or laden with fruits, fruitful; yielding
results or consequences, successful, profitable, advan-
tageous; containing the result or end of a plot; ({%atī%}),
f. a species of plant ({%= priyaṅgu;%} cf. {%phalinī%}).
{%—Phalavat-tva, am,%} n. or {%phalavat-tā,%} f. fruit-
fulness, beneficial results or consequences. {%—Phala-%}
{%varti, is,%} f. (in medicine) a suppository. {%—Phala-%}
{%vartula, am,%} n. a water-melon; (probably {%as,%} m.),
the plant Gardenia Latifolia. {%—Phala-vallī,%} f. a
series of quotients in the solution of certain arith-
metical problems. {%—Phala-vikrayin, ī, iṇī,%} m. f. a
fruit-seller, fruiterer, dealer in fruits. {%—Phala-vṛk-%}
{%ṣa, as,%} m. a fruit tree. {%—Phala-vṛkṣaka, as,%} m.
the bread-fruit tree. {%—Phala-śāḍava, as,%} m. the
pomegranate tree. {%—Phalaśāli-tva, am,%} n. the bear-
ing of fruit; experience of consequences or results.
{%—Phala-śālin, ī, inī, i,%} bearing or yielding fruit;
experiencing consequences, sharing in results. {%—Pha-%}
{%la-śaiśira, as,%} m. Zizyphus Jujuba {%(= badara).%}
{%—Phala-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. ‘best of fruits,’ the
mango tree. {%—Phala-saṃstha, as, ā, am,%} bearing
fruit. {%—Phala-sampad, t,%} f. abundance of fruit,
good result, success, prosperity. {%—Phala-sambad-%}
{%dha, as,%} m. ‘fruit-endowed,’ the tree Ficus Glome-
rata. {%—Phala-sambhava, as, ā, am,%} or {%phala-%}
{%sambhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} produced in or by fruit. {%—Pha-%}
{%la-sambhārā,%} f. ‘having an abundance of fruit,’ the
tree Ficus Oppositifolia. {%—Phala-sahasra, am,%} n.
a thousand fruits; ({%e%}), n. du. two thousand fruits.
{%—Phala-sādhana, am,%} n. a means of effecting any
result. {%—Phala-siddhi, is,%} f. acquiring fruit, reaping
fruit, realising an object; a prosperous issue. {%—Phala-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. the stage in which fruits or results
are enjoyed. {%—Phala-sneha, as,%} m. ‘having oil in
the fruit,’ a walnut tree. {%—Phala-hāni, is,%} f. loss
of fruit or profit. {%—Phala-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} fruit-
seizing, stealing fruits. {%—Phala-hārī,%} f. an epithet
of Kālī (a form of Durgā). {%—Phala-hīna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} void of fruit, yielding no profit. {%—Phala-%}
{%hetu, us, us, u,%} one who has results for a motive,
acting with a view to results. {%—Phalākāṅkṣā%}
{%(˚la-āk˚),%} f. hope or expectation of favourable con-
sequences. {%—Phalākāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} desirous of
results, wishing for favourable consequences. {%—Pha-%}
{%lāgama (˚la-āg˚), as,%} m. ‘arrival of fruits,’ the fruit
season, autumn. {%—Phalāḍhyā (˚la-āḍh˚),%} f. ‘rich
in fruit,’ a variety of the plantain {%(= kāṣṭha-kadalī).%}
{%—Phalādana (˚la-ad˚), as,%} m. ‘fruit-eater,’ a
parrot; [cf. {%phalāśana.%}] {%—Phalādhyakṣa (˚la-%}
{%adh˚), am,%} n. ‘superintendant of fruits,’ the tree
Mimusops Kauki. {%—Phalānubandha (˚la-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. sequence or succession of results, consequences,
results. {%—Phalānumeya (˚la-an˚), as, ā, am,%} in-
ferable from consequences or results. {%—Phalānusa-%}
{%raṇa (˚la-an˚), am,%} n. rate or aggregate of profits.
{%—Phalānta (˚la-an˚), as,%} m. ‘ending with fruit,’
a bamboo (which dies away after bearing fruit).
{%—Phalānveṣin (˚la-an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} seeking fruits
or results, looking for a reward. {%—Phalāpekṣā%}
{%(˚la-ap˚),%} f. regard to results, expectation of conse-
quences. {%—Phalāpeta (˚la-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} de-
prived of fruit, unproductive, unfertile. {%—Phalāpha-%}
{%likā (˚la-aph˚),%} f., see Gaṇa Śāka-pārthivādi to
Vārttika to Pāṇ. II. 1, 69. {%—Phalābandhya (˚la-%}
{%ab˚), as, ā, am,%} not barren of fruit, bearing fruit;
[cf. {%phala-bandhya.%}] {%—Phalābhoga (˚la-abh˚), %}
[Page0669-c+ 81]
{%as,%} m. non-enjoyment of profits, &c. {%—Phalāmla%}
{%(˚la-am˚), as,%} m. a species of sorrel, Rumex Vesi-
carius; ({%am%}), n. a tamarind. {%—Phalāmla-pañcaka%}
{%(˚la-am˚), am,%} n. the five acid or sour fruits, viz.
bergamot, orange, sorrel, tamarind, and citron; [cf.
{%amla-pañca%} and {%phala-pañcāmla.%}] {%—Phalām-%}
{%lika, as, ā, am,%} (probably) accompanied with sauce
prepared from sour tamarind juice. {%—Phalārāma%}
{%(˚la-ār˚), as,%} m. a fruit-garden, orchard. {%—Phalā-%}
{%śana (˚la-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘fruit-eater,’ a parrot; [cf.
{%phalādana.%}] {%—Phalāśin (˚la-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%} feed-
ing or living on fruits. {%—Phalāsakta (˚la-ās˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} attached to fruit or results, acting for the
sake of reward; fond of fruit, seeking to pluck fruit.
{%—Phalāsava (˚la-ās˚), as,%} m. a decoction of
fruits. {%—Phalāsthi (˚la-as˚), i,%} n. ‘having a hard
kernel for fruit,’ a cocoa-nut. {%—Phalāhāra (˚la-āh˚),%}
{%as, ī, am,%} feeding or living on fruits, gathering
fruits. {%—Phale-grahi%} or {%phale-grāhi, is, is, i,%} or
{%phale-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} bearing fruit in season, fruitful
{%(= phala-grahi)%}. {%—Phalendra (˚la-in˚), as,%} m.
‘fruit-king,’ a species of Eugenia {%(= rāja-jambū).%}
{%—Phale-pāka, phale-pākā, phale-pāku,%} see Gaṇa
to Pāṇ. VII. 3, 53. {%—Phale-puṣpā,%} f. a kind of small
shrub {%(= droṇa-puṣpī)%}. {%—Phale-ruhā,%} f. the
trumpet-flower, Bignonia Suaveolens. {%—Phaloccaya%}
{%(˚la-uc˚), as,%} m. the collecting of fruits, a collection
of fruits. {%—Phalottamā (˚la-ut˚),%} f. ‘best of fruits,’
a kind of grape without stones ({%= kākalī-drākṣā%});
a black grape; the three myrobalans ({%= tri-phalā%});
the benefit arising from sacred study (?); a small
sort of rope (?). {%—Phalotpati (˚la-ut˚), is,%} m.
the mango tree; (perhaps incorrectly for {%phalot-%}
{%patti.%}) {%—Phalotpatti (˚la-ut˚), is,%} f. production
of fruit, profit, gain, advantage. {%—Phalodaka (˚la-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m., N. of a Yakṣa. {%—Phalodaya (˚la-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. coming forth or appearance of fruit;
profit, advantage, gain; appearance of consequences
or results, consequence, result, recompense, reward,
retribution, punishment; happiness, joy; heaven,
paradise. {%—Phalodgama (˚la-ud˚), as,%} m. the pro-
duction of fruit, appearance of fruit. {%—Phaloddeśa%}
{%(˚la-ud˚), as,%} m. regard to results. {%—Phalodbhava%}
{%(˚la-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} obtained or derived from fruits.
{%—Phalopajīvin (˚la-up˚), ī, inī, i,%} living by the
cultivation or sale of fruits. {%—Phalopeta (˚la-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessing fruits, yielding fruit.
<LEND>

<L>34244<pc>0669-c<k1>Palaka<k2>Palaka
{%Phalaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (at the end of an adj.
comp., f. {%ikā%}), {%= phala,%} fruit, result, consequence,
profit, gain; menstruation [cf. {%nava-phalikī%}]; a
shield; ({%as%}), m. the plant Mesua Roxburghii;
({%am%}), n. a board, lath, plank, a bench; a slab at the
base (of a pedestal; cf. {%sphaṭika-ph˚%}); any flat sur-
face [cf. {%phaṇā-ph˚%}]; a slab or tablet for writing on
[cf. {%citra-ph˚, lipi-ph˚%}]; a leaf or page for writing
on; the stand on which a Buddhist priest keeps
his turban; a broad and flat bone, the os frontis or
bone of the forehead; the palm of the hand; the
buttocks; a particular vessel; a kind of cloth; the
top or head of an arrow; the pericarp of a lotus;
({%ā%}), f. a various reading for {%halakā%} in Gaṇa Prek-
ṣādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80. {%—Phalaka-pāṇi, is,%} m. a
soldier armed with a shield. {%—Phalaka-pura, am,%}
n., N. of a town in the east of India; [cf. {%phala-%}
{%pura.%}] {%—Phalaka-yantra, am,%} n. an astronomical
instrument invented by Bhāskara. {%—Phalaka-sak-%}
{%tha, am,%} n. a thigh like a board, (Scholiast on Pāṇ.
V. 4, 98.) {%—Phalakā-vana%} or {%phalakī-vana, am,%}
n., N. of a forest sacred to Sarasvatī. {%—Phalakāsā-%}
{%dana (˚ka-ās˚), am,%} n. the obtaining or reaching a
plank (said of a drowning person).
<LEND>

<L>34245<pc>0669-c<k1>Palakin<k2>Palakin
{%Phalakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having boards, boarded; armed
with a shield; ({%ī%}), m. a wooden bench; a kind of fish,
{%= phali; (ī, i),%} m. n. sandal-wood.
<LEND>

<L>34246<pc>0669-c<k1>Palat<k2>Palat
{%Phalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bearing or yielding fruit;
producing consequences; bringing gain or profit.
{%—Phalaj-jala-vāsudeva, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>34247<pc>0669-c<k1>Palana<k2>Palana
{%Phalana, am,%}¦ n. bearing fruit, fructifying; pro-
ducing consequences.
<LEND>

<L>34248<pc>0669-c<k1>Palasa<k2>Palasa
{%Phalasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessed of fruit ?; ({%as%}),
m. the bread-fruit or Jaka tree ({%= panasa%}).
<LEND>
[Page0670-a+ 81]

<L>34249<pc>0670-a<k1>PalahI<k2>PalahI
{%Phalahī,%}¦ f. the cotton tree, cotton plant.
<LEND>

<L>34250<pc>0670-a<k1>Pali<k2>Pali
{%Phali, is,%}¦ m. a kind of fish commonly Phalai.
<LEND>

<L>34251<pc>0670-a<k1>PalikA<k2>PalikA
{%Phalikā,%}¦ f. a kind of bean ({%= niṣ-pāvī%}); Thes-
pesia Populneoides.
<LEND>

<L>34252<pc>0670-a<k1>Palita<k2>Palita
{%Phalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ that has produced fruit,
bearing fruit, yielding fruit, fruitful; yielding a result,
followed by a consequence, successful; fulfilled, ac-
complished (as a desire); produced as a consequence;
{%phalitaṃ vṛkṣaiḥ,%} fruit was borne by the trees,
the trees bore fruit; ({%as%}), m. a tree (properly a
fruit tree); ({%ā%}), f. a menstruous woman; ({%am%}), n.
a kind of perfume ({%= śaileya%}).
<LEND>

<L>34253<pc>0670-a<k1>Palitavya<k2>Palitavya
{%Phalitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accompanied by
fruits or good consequences.
<LEND>

<L>34254<pc>0670-a<k1>Palin<k2>Palin
{%Phalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fruitful, bearing fruit, (at the
end of comps.; cf. {%sat-ph˚%}); productive of results
or consequences, advantageous, profitable; having
an iron point (as an arrow); ({%ī%}), m. a tree, espe-
cially one in fruit; ({%inī%}), f. a medicinal plant ({%=%}
{%priyaṅgu%}); a species of herb, Echites Dichotoma;
a species of flower, Celosia Cristata; {%phalinī yoniḥ,%}
(in medicine) the vagina injured by too violent
sexual intercourse. {%—Phali-ga, as,%} m., Ved. a cloud,
(perhaps ‘a receptacle for water;’ Sāy. {%phali =%}
{%vṛṣṭi-jala,%} rain-water.)
<LEND>

<L>34255<pc>0670-a<k1>Palina<k2>Palina
{%Phalina, as, ā, am,%}¦ fruitful, bearing or yielding
fruit; ({%as%}), m. the bread-fruit tree ({%= panasa%}).
<LEND>

<L>34256<pc>0670-a<k1>PalIkf<k2>PalIkf
{%Phalī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%phalī-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} Ved. to separate the fruit or grain from
the husks, to winnow, thresh, (according to a Scholiast
{%phalī-karoti = avahatya sūkṣma-tuṣebhyo vi-%}
{%yojayati.%}) {%—Phalī-karaṇa, am,%} n. or {%phalī-kāra,%}
{%as,%} m. separating the grain from the husks, the
grain (of rice &c.) separated from the husks. {%—Pha-%}
{%lī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} threshed, winnowed.
<LEND>

<L>34257<pc>0670-a<k1>PalIya<k2>PalIya
{%Phalīya,%}¦ see Gaṇa Utkarādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 90.
<LEND>

<L>34258<pc>0670-a<k1>Palya<k2>Palya
{%Phalya, am,%}¦ n. a flower, a bud.
<LEND>

<L>34259<pc>0670-a<k1>PAla<k2>PAla
{%Phāla, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a ploughshare, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%bhūmi-vidāraka-kāṣṭha%}); a kind of hoe or
shovel; a bundle; the forehead; ({%as%}), m. a citron
tree; an epithet of Mahā-deva; of Bala-rāma; {%=%}
{%ut-pluti; (as, ī, am),%} made of cotton (as a gar-
ment; in this sense perhaps fr. {%phala%}). {%—Phāla-%}
{%kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} tilled with the plough, ploughed,
furrowed; growing on arable land, produced by
cultivation; ({%am%}), n. ploughed or cultivated soil, a
ploughed field; {%a-phālakṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} grow-
ing on uncultivated soil, growing wild. {%—Phāla-%}
{%gupta, as, ā, am,%} ‘ploughshare-defended,’ an epi-
thet of Bala-rāma; [cf. {%halāyudha.%}] {%—Phāla-datī,%}
f. ‘having teeth like ploughshares,’ N. of a female
demon. {%—Phālāhata (˚la-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘struck
with the ploughshare,’ ploughed.
<LEND>

<L>34260<pc>0670-a<k1>PAlIkaraRa<k2>PAlIkaraRa
{%Phālīkaraṇa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%phalī-karaṇa%}),
Ved. made of husks.
<LEND>

<L>34261<pc>0670-a<k1>Pulti<k2>Pulti
{%Phulti, is,%}¦ f. full expansion or perfection (?); see
Vopa-deva XXVI. 183.
<LEND>

<L>34262<pc>0670-a<k1>Pulla<k2>Pulla
{%Phulla, as, ā, am%}¦ (past pass. part. of rt. {%phal%}
by Pāṇ. VIII. 2, 55), ‘split or cleft open,’ open,
expanded, blown (as a flower); in full bloom,
flowering, flowery, in blossom, covered with flowers;
opened wide, dilated (as the eyes); smiling, gay;
({%as%}), m., N. of a saint; ({%am%}), n. a full-blown
flower; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">φύλλο-ν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>foliu-m.</nsi>] {%—Phulla-%}
{%tuvarī,%} f. alum. {%—Phulla-dāman, a,%} n. ‘flowery
garland,’ a kind of metre, four times ¯¯¯¯¯,
˘˘˘˘˘˘¯, ¯˘¯¯˘¯¯, (also called {%puṣpa-%}
{%dāman,%} q. v.) {%—Phulla-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} or {%phulla-%}
{%nayana,%} or {%phulla-netra, as, ā, am,%} having full
or large eyes, having the eyes dilated (with pleasure),
smiling, happy. {%—Phulla-pura, am,%} n., N. of a
city. {%—Phulla-phāla, as,%} m. the wind raised in
winnowing corn {%(= phalla-phala)%}. {%—Phulla-lo-%}
{%cana, as, ā, am,%} having the eyes dilated, looking
pleased or happy; full-eyed; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
antelope; ({%am%}), n. a large full eye. {%—Phulla-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} expanded, blossoming, blowing. {%—Phul-%}
{%la-vadana, as, ā, am,%} ‘smiling-faced,’ looking
pleased or happy. {%—Phullāmbikā (˚la-am˚),%} f., N.
of a woman, wife of Go-vinda and mother of Nīla-
kaṇṭha Catur-dhara. {%—Phullāraṇya-māhātmya %}
[Page0670-b+ 76]
{%(˚la-ar˚), am,%} n., N. of a section of the Agni-
Purāṇa. {%—Phullotpala (˚la-ut˚), am,%} n. ‘whose
lotuses are in full bloom,’ N. of a lake.
<LEND>

<L>34263<pc>0670-b<k1>Pulli<k2>Pulli
{%Phulli, is,%}¦ f. blossoming, blowing.
<LEND>

<L>34264<pc>0670-b<k1>Palaya<k2>Palaya
{#Palaya#}¦ {%phalaya (?), as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>34265<pc>0670-b<k1>PalasatIRa<k2>PalasatIRa
{#PalasatIRa#}¦ {%phalasatīṇa,%} N. of a country
(Palestine ?).
<LEND>

<L>34266<pc>0670-b<k1>Palahaka<k2>Palahaka
{#Palahaka#}¦ {%phalahaka, as,%} m. a plank, board
({%= phalaka%}); N. of a place (?).
<LEND>

<L>34267<pc>0670-b<k1>PalAyozit<k2>PalAyozit
{#PalAyozit#}¦ {%phalāyoṣit, t,%} f. a cricket;
[cf. {%phaḍiṅgā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34268<pc>0670-b<k1>PalUza<k2>PalUza
{#PalUza#}¦ {%phalūṣa, as,%} m. a species of creeper.
<LEND>

<L>34269<pc>0670-b<k1>Paloni<k2>Paloni
{#Paloni#}¦ {%phaloni%} (?), pudenda muliebria.
<LEND>

<L>34270<pc>0670-b<k1>Palka<k2>Palka
{#Palka#}¦ {%phalka, as, ā, am,%} having an expanded
or extended body, {%= visāritāṅga; = viśodhitāṅka;%}
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">φολκός.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>34271<pc>0670-b<k1>Palgu<k2>Palgu
{#Palgu#}¦ {%phalgu, us, us%} ({%ūs,%} Vājasaneyi-saṃ-
hitā XXIV. 4), {%u%} (said to be fr. rt. {%phal;%} perhaps
fr. rt. {%sphurj%}), reddish (this meaning is Vedic and
is doubtful; cf. {%phalguna%}); small, minute; pithless,
sapless, unsubstantial, (opposed to {%sāra%}); worthless,
vain, unprofitable, unmeaning, useless; flimsy, weak,
feeble, insignificant; untrue; ({%us%}), f. the opposite-
leaved fig-tree, Ficus Oppositifolia; a red powder
usually of the root of wild ginger (coloured with
sappan wood and thrown over one another by the
Hindūs at the Holī festival; cf. {%phalgūtsava, ho-%}
{%lākā%}); the spring season; N. of a river flowing past
Gayā; ({%ū%}), f. du., N. of a Nakṣatra. {%—Phalgu-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%phalgu-tva, am,%} n. worthlessness, vain-
ness, vanity, uselessness, insignificance. {%—Phalgu-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place near
Gayā. {%—Phalgu-da, as, ā, am,%} giving little, nig-
gardly; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river {%(= phalgu).%}
{%—Phalgu-prāsaha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having little
strength. {%—Phalgu-vat, ān, atī, at%} (?), insignificant,
worthless, weak. {%—Phalgu-vāṭikā,%} f. the opposite-
leaved fig-tree, Ficus Oppositifolia. {%—Phalgu-vṛnta,%}
{%as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?) , a species of Symplocos.
{%—Phalgu-vṛntāka, as,%} m. a species of Colosan-
thes. {%—Phalgu-hastinī,%} f., N. of a poetess. {%—Phal-%}
{%gūtsava (˚gu-ut˚), as,%} m. the vernal festival, com-
monly called Holī, in honour of Kṛṣṇa, at which
the people throw a red powder over one another.
<LEND>

<L>34272<pc>0670-b<k1>PalguRa<k2>PalguRa
{%Phalguṇa, phalguṇaka,%}¦ incorrect forms for
{%phalguna, phalgunaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>34273<pc>0670-b<k1>Palguna<k2>Palguna
{%Phalguna, as, ī, am,%}¦ red; born under the Nak-
ṣatra Phalgunī; ({%as%}), m. the month Phalguna ({%=%}
{%phālguna%}); an epithet of Arjuna ({%= phālguna%});
N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a double Nakṣatra (q. v.)
also called {%arjunī;%} the opposite-leaved fig-tree, Ficus
Oppositifolia; N. of a woman. {%—Phalguna-svāmin,%}
{%ī,%} m., N. of a temple built by Phalguna. {%—Phal-%}
{%gunī-bhava, as,%} m. an epithet of the planet Jupiter
({%= phālgunī-bhava%}).
<LEND>

<L>34274<pc>0670-b<k1>Palgunaka<k2>Palgunaka
{%Phalgunaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>34275<pc>0670-b<k1>PalgunAla<k2>PalgunAla
{%Phalgunāla, as,%}¦ m. the month Phalguna ({%=%}
{%phālgunāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>34276<pc>0670-b<k1>Palguluka<k2>Palguluka
{%Phalguluka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>34277<pc>0670-b<k1>Palgva<k2>Palgva
{%Phalgva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. insignificant, frivolous.
<LEND>

<L>34278<pc>0670-b<k1>PAlguRa<k2>PAlguRa
{%Phālguṇa,%}¦ an incorrect form for {%phālguna%} below.
<LEND>

<L>34279<pc>0670-b<k1>PAlguna<k2>PAlguna
{%Phālguna, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the Nakṣatra
Phalgunī; born under the Nakṣatra Phalgunī;
({%as%}), m., scil. {%māsa,%} the month during which the
full moon stands in the Nakṣatra Phalgunī (February
-March); an epithet of Arjuna [cf. {%phalguna%}];
the plant Terminalia Arjuna, {%= nadī-ja; (ī),%} f., N. of
the sixteenth and seventeenth lunar asterisms (dis-
tinguished as {%pūrvā%} and {%uttarā,%} ‘the former’ and
‘the latter,’ {%= phalgunī%}); scil. {%paurṇamāsī,%} the
day of full moon in the month Phālguna on which
the Holī or great vernal festival of the Hindūs is
celebrated; ({%am%}), n. a species of grass used as a
substitute for the Soma plant (and also called {%arju-%}
{%nānī%}); N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Phālgunā- %}
[Page0670-c+ 69]
{%nuja (˚na-an˚), as,%} m. ‘younger brother of the
month Phālguna,’ the vernal month Caitra. {%—Phāl-%}
{%gunī-paurṇamāsī,%} f. the day of full moon in the
month Phālguna. {%—Phālgunī-bhava, as,%} m. an
epithet of the planet Jupiter ({%= phalgunī-bhava%}).
<LEND>

<L>34280<pc>0670-c<k1>PAlgunAla<k2>PAlgunAla
{%Phālgunāla, as,%}¦ m. the month Phālguna ({%=%}
{%phalgunāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>34281<pc>0670-c<k1>PAlguni<k2>PAlguni
{%Phālguni, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Phālguna ({%=%}
{%arjuna%}).
<LEND>

<L>34282<pc>0670-c<k1>PAlgunika<k2>PAlgunika
{%Phālgunika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the Nakṣa-
tra Phalgunī or to the day of full moon in the month
Phālguna; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%māsa,%} the month Phālguna.
<LEND>

<L>34283<pc>0670-c<k1>PAlgunya<k2>PAlgunya
{%Phālgunya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Phalgunī.
<LEND>

<L>34284<pc>0670-c<k1>Pallakin<k2>Pallakin
{#Pallakin#}¦ {%phallakin, ī,%} m. a kind of fish
({%= phalakin%}).
<LEND>

<L>34285<pc>0670-c<k1>PallaPala<k2>PallaPala
{#PallaPala#}¦ {%phalla-phala, as,%} m. {%= phulla-%}
{%phāla%} (probably onomatopoetic), the wind raised in
winnowing grain.
<LEND>

<L>34286<pc>0670-c<k1>PazAjiga<k2>PazAjiga
{#PazAjiga#}¦ {%phaṣājiga%} and {%phaṣājima,%} N.
of two places.
<LEND>

<L>34287<pc>0670-c<k1>PA<k2>PA
{#PA#}¦ {%phā, phās,%} m. heat; useless or idle
talk; growth, increase; one who increases, an in-
creaser; [cf. 2. {%pha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34288<pc>0670-c<k1>PAw<k2>PAw
{#PAw#}¦ {%phāṭ,%} ind. an interjection of calling.
<LEND>

<L>34289<pc>0670-c<k1>PAwakI<k2>PAwakI
{#PAwakI#}¦ {%phāṭakī,%} f. alum ({%= sphāṭī%}).
<LEND>

<L>34290<pc>0670-c<k1>PARi<k2>PARi
{#PARi#}¦ {%phāṇi, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%phaṇ%}), unrefined
sugar, molasses; flour or meal mixed with curds ({%=%}
{%karambha%}).
<LEND>

<L>34291<pc>0670-c<k1>PARita<k2>PARita
{%Phāṇita, am,%}¦ n. (fr. Caus. of rt. {%phaṇ%}), the in-
spissated juice of the sugar-cane, raw sugar; the
inspissated juice of other plants; [cf. Arab. <lang n="arabic">فانيذ</lang>
Pers. <lang n="arabic">پانيد</lang> medieval Lat. <nsi>penidium.</nsi>] {%—Phā-%}
{%ṇitī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} inspissated.
<LEND>

<L>34292<pc>0670-c<k1>PARwa<k2>PARwa
{%Phāṇṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (a contraction of {%phāṇita%}),
obtained by straining or filtering, readily or easily
prepared, anything made by an easy process (as a
decoction &c.); ({%as%}), m. an infusion, decoction,
pounded medicinal substances mixed with four parts
of hot water and filtered; ({%am%}), n. the first particles
of butter that are produced by churning. {%—Phāṇṭā-%}
{%hṛta (˚ṭa-āh˚), as,%} m., N. of a man; a patronymic
from Phāṇṭāhṛti; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the pupils of Phāṇ-
ṭāhṛti. {%—Phāṇṭāhṛtāyana, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Phāṇṭāhṛti. {%—Phāṇṭāhṛti, is,%} m., N. of a
man; see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 150.
<LEND>

<L>34293<pc>0670-c<k1>PARwaka<k2>PARwaka
{%Phāṇṭaka, as,%}¦ m. an infusion, decoction ({%=%}
{%phāṇṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>34294<pc>0670-c<k1>PARqa<k2>PARqa
{%Phāṇḍa, am,%}¦ n. the belly ({%= phaṇḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>34295<pc>0670-c<k1>PARqin<k2>PARqin
{%Phāṇḍin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a serpent-demon.
<LEND>

<L>34296<pc>0670-c<k1>PAri<k2>PAri
{#PAri#}¦ {%phāri,%} Ved. (Sāy.) {%= āyudha.%}
<LEND>

<L>34297<pc>0670-c<k1>PAriva<k2>PAriva
{%Phāriva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (Sāy.) {%= āyudha-vat.%}
<LEND>

<L>34298<pc>0670-c<k1>PAla<k2>PAla
{#PAla#}¦ {%phāla.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34299<pc>0670-c<k1>PAlaKelA<k2>PAlaKelA
{#PAlaKelA#}¦ {%phālakhelā,%} f. a quail; (also
read {%phaṇikhela, phalakhela%} or {%phalakhelā.%})
<LEND>

<L>34300<pc>0670-c<k1>PAlita<k2>PAlita
{#PAlita#}¦ {%phālita,%} perhaps for {%phāṇita.%}
<LEND>

<L>34301<pc>0670-c<k1>PAlIkaraRa<k2>PAlIkaraRa
{#PAlIkaraRa#}¦ {%phālīkaraṇa.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34302<pc>0670-c<k1>PAlguna<k2>PAlguna
{#PAlguna#}¦ {%phālguna,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34303<pc>0670-c<k1>Pi<k2>Pi
{#Pi#}¦ {%phi, is,%} m. a wicked man; useless or
idle talk; anger, passion.
<LEND>

<L>34304<pc>0670-c<k1>PiNgaka<k2>PiNgaka
{#PiNgaka#}¦ {%phiṅgaka, as,%} m. a kind of bird,
the fork-tailed shrike ({%= kaliṅga, kuliṅga%}).
<LEND>

<L>34305<pc>0670-c<k1>PiraNga<k2>PiraNga
{#PiraNga#}¦ {%phiraṅga, as,%} m. the country of the
Franks (i. e. of Europeans); the disease of the Franks,
syphilis. {%—Phiraṅga-roṭī,%} f. European bread.
<LEND>

<L>34306<pc>0670-c<k1>PiraNgin<k2>PiraNgin
{%Phiraṅgin, ī,%}¦ m. a Frank, a European.
<LEND>

<L>34307<pc>0670-c<k1>PirAla<k2>PirAla
{#PirAla#}¦ {%phirāla,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34308<pc>0670-c<k1>PiriRqa<k2>PiriRqa
{#PiriRqa#}¦ {%phiriṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>34309<pc>0670-c<k1>Pu<k2>Pu
{#Pu#}¦ {%phu, us,%} m. a magical formula; useless
or idle talk.
<LEND>
[Page0671-a+ 71]

<L>34310<pc>0671-a<k1>Puka<k2>Puka
{#Puka#}¦ {%phuka, as,%} m. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>34311<pc>0671-a<k1>Puwa<k2>Puwa
{#Puwa#}¦ {%phuṭa, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. the hood or
expanded neck of a snake ({%= phaṭa, phaṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>34312<pc>0671-a<k1>PuwwikA<k2>PuwwikA
{#PuwwikA#}¦ {%phuṭṭikā,%} f. a sort of woven texture.
<LEND>

<L>34313<pc>0671-a<k1>Put<k2>Put
{#Put#}¦ {%phut%} or {%phūt,%} an onomatopoetic word
imitative of the sound made by blowing or puffing
into liquids, or by the boiling or bubbling of water,
&c.; sometimes expressive of disregard or contempt;
(used only in connection with rt. {%kṛ.%}) {%—Phut-kara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘making a blowing or crackling noise,’ fire.
{%—Phut-kartu-manas, ās, ās, as,%} wishing to make
a derisory noise, intending to cry aloud. {%—Phut-%}
{%kāra%} or {%phūt-kāra, as,%} m. blowing, hissing, whiz-
zing; the hiss of a serpent; shouting loudly, shriek-
ing, screaming. {%—Phutkāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} hissing;
shrieking. {%—Phut-kārya%} in {%a-phutkārya, as, ā, am,%}
requiring no blowing. {%—Phut-kṛ%} or {%phūt-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to blow, blow into; to
scream, shriek, screech. {%—Phut-kṛta%} or {%phūt-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} blown, blown on, blown into, breathed
in, cooled by blowing into; blown up (as a bubble);
screamed aloud; ({%am%}), n. the sound of a wind
instrument; a loud scream, shriek. {%—Phut-kṛti%} or
{%phūt-kṛti, is,%} f. blowing, hissing; screaming.
<LEND>

<L>34314<pc>0671-a<k1>PupPu<k2>PupPu
{#PupPu#}¦ {%phupphu,%} ind. an onomatopoetic word.
{%—Phupphu-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%} panting, gasping.
<LEND>

<L>34315<pc>0671-a<k1>PupPusa<k2>PupPusa
{%Phupphusa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the lungs; [cf. {%pup-%}
{%phusa;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">φῦ-σα, φυσά-ω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>34316<pc>0671-a<k1>PumPuA<k2>PumPuA
{#PumPuA#}¦ {%phumphuā,%} ind. imitation of the
sound made by the crackling of fire.
<LEND>

<L>34317<pc>0671-a<k1>PuliNga<k2>PuliNga
{#PuliNga#}¦ {%phuliṅga, as%} or {%am,%} m. or n. (?),
syphilis; [cf. {%phiraṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34318<pc>0671-a<k1>Pull<k2>Pull
{#Pull#}¦ {%phull%} (more properly regarded as
a Nom. fr. {%phulla%}), cl. 1. P. {%phullati,%}
{%puphulla,%} &c., to open, expand (as a flower),
bloom, blossom, blow, flower.
<LEND>

<L>34319<pc>0671-a<k1>Pullana<k2>Pullana
{%Phullana, as, ī, am,%}¦ filling with air, inflating.
<LEND>

<L>34320<pc>0671-a<k1>Pulla<k2>Pulla
{#Pulla#}¦ {%phulla, phulti,%} &c. See p. 670, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34321<pc>0671-a<k1>PullarIka<k2>PullarIka
{#PullarIka#}¦ {%phullarīka, as,%} m. a district, place;
a snake, serpent.
<LEND>

<L>34322<pc>0671-a<k1>PUt<k2>PUt
{#PUt#}¦ {%phūt, phūt-kāra,%} &c. See {%phut%} above.
<LEND>

<L>34323<pc>0671-a<k1>PeYcaka<k2>PeYcaka
{#PeYcaka#}¦ {%pheñcaka, as,%} m. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>34324<pc>0671-a<k1>Pew<k2>Pew
{#Pew#}¦ {%pheṭ,%} ind. an onomatopoetic word {%(=%}
{%phet)%}. {%—Pheṭ-kāra, as,%} m. howling, a howl. {%—Pheṭ-%}
{%kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} howling. {%—Pheṭkāriṇī-tantra, am,%}
n., N. of a work on magic.
<LEND>

<L>34325<pc>0671-a<k1>PeRa<k2>PeRa
{#PeRa#}¦ {%pheṇa = phena%} below.
<LEND>

<L>34326<pc>0671-a<k1>PeRwa<k2>PeRwa
{#PeRwa#}¦ {%pheṇṭa, as,%} m. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>34327<pc>0671-a<k1>Pet<k2>Pet
{#Pet#}¦ {%phet,%} ind. an onomatopoetic word.
{%—Phet-kāra, as,%} m. howling (of the wind or of
animals). {%—Phet-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} howling; ({%iṇī%}), f.,
N. of a Tantra. {%—Phetkārīya, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra. {%—Phet-kṛta, am,%} n. howling, a howl.
<LEND>

<L>34328<pc>0671-a<k1>Pena<k2>Pena
{#Pena#}¦ {%phena%} or {%pheṇa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to
be fr. {%phe,%} substituted for rt. {%sphāy,%} Uṇādi-s. III. 3;
by some derived fr. rt. {%phaṇ%}), foam, froth, spume;
scum [cf. {%dugdha-ph˚, payaḥ-phenī%}]; foam of
the mouth, moisture of the lips, saliva [cf. {%vṛṣalī-%}
{%phena-pīta, phaṇi-ph˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. white cuttle-fish
bone, os sepiæ, supposed to be indurated foam of
the sea [cf. {%abdhi-kapha, abdhi-ph˚, samudra-%}
{%ph˚%}]; N. of a son of Ushad-ratha and father of
Su-tapas; ({%ā%}), f. a species of shrub, {%= sātalā;%}
{%(ī),%} f. a kind of food; [cf. Lat. <nsi>spūma;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>fam, fœman;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>pêna,</nsi> ‘foam.’]
{%—Phena-giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain near the
mouth of the Indus; (also written {%pheṇa-giri.%})
{%—Phena-tā,%} f. frothiness, vapour. {%—Phena-dugdhā,%}
f. a kind of small shrub {%(= dugdha-phenī)%}. {%—Phe-%}
{%na-pa, as, ā, am,%} ‘froth-drinking, foam-quaffing,’
feeding on foam; (according to a Scholiast {%= svayam %}
[Page0671-b+ 73]
{%patitaiḥ phalādibhir jīvan;%} also spelt {%pheṇa-%}
{%pa.%}) {%—Phena-piṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘a mass of foam,’ a
mere bubble, any mere fancy, empty idea, nonentity,
nonsense. {%—Phena-prakhya, as, ā, am,%} foam-like,
resembling foam. {%—Phena-mehin, ī, inī, i,%} dis-
charging frothy urine. {%—Phena-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
frothy, foaming, bubbling. {%—Phena-vāhin, ī,%} m.
‘carrying off the scum,’ a filtering cloth; ‘foam-
bearing,’ (perhaps) the thunderbolt of Indra (Indra
having used the foam of the sea for his thunderbolt
to kill the demon Vṛtra); (perhaps rather) an epi-
thet of Indra; [cf. {%phenāśani.%}] {%—Phenāgra (˚na-%}
{%ag˚), am,%} n. ‘surface of foam,’ a bubble on the
water. {%—Phenāśani (˚na-aś˚), is,%} m. ‘having foam
for a thunderbolt,’ an epithet of Indra. {%—Phenāhāra%}
{%(˚na-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} living on foam, feeding on
froth. {%—Phenopama (˚na-up˚), as, ā, am,%} foam-
like, resembling foam (said of life).
<LEND>

<L>34329<pc>0671-b<k1>Penaka<k2>Penaka
{%Phenaka, as,%}¦ m. white cuttle-fish bone, os sepiæ;
({%as, ā%}), m. f. a kind of pastry; ground rice boiled
in water; the soap-berry?; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of pre-
pared food; froth.
<LEND>

<L>34330<pc>0671-b<k1>Penala<k2>Penala
{%Phenala, as, ā, am,%}¦ frothy, foamy; [cf. {%phenila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34331<pc>0671-b<k1>PenAya<k2>PenAya
{%Phenāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%phenāyate, -yitum,%} to foam,
froth.
<LEND>

<L>34332<pc>0671-b<k1>PenAyamAna<k2>PenAyamAna
{%Phenāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ foaming, frothing.
<LEND>

<L>34333<pc>0671-b<k1>Penila<k2>Penila
{%Phenila, as, ā, am,%}¦ foamy, frothy, spumous;
({%as%}), m. the soap plant, Sapindus Detergens; the
plant Zizyphus Jujuba, {%= badara; (ā),%} f. a species of
plant ({%= bāmba, bāmbī, jala-brahmī, sarpākṣī%});
the plant Sapindus Detergens; ({%am%}), n. (probably)
the fruit of Sapindus Detergens; the fruit of Zizyphus
Jujuba; the fruit of Madana.
<LEND>

<L>34334<pc>0671-b<k1>Penya<k2>Penya
{%Phenya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. existing in foam;
(Mahī-dhara) {%= ḍiṇḍire bhavaḥ.%}
<LEND>

<L>34335<pc>0671-b<k1>Pera<k2>Pera
{#Pera#}¦ {%phera, as,%} m. (an onomatopoetic word;
cf. {%pheṭ, phet%}), a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>34336<pc>0671-b<k1>PeraRqa<k2>PeraRqa
{%Pheraṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>34337<pc>0671-b<k1>Perala<k2>Perala
{#Perala#}¦ {%pherala,%} N. of a place; (perhaps
wrongly for {%kerala.%})
<LEND>

<L>34338<pc>0671-b<k1>Perava<k2>Perava
{#Perava#}¦ {%phe-rava, as,%} m. (fr. {%phe%} onomato-
poetic {%+ rava%}), a jackal; a Rākṣasa, a goblin, a
demon; ({%as, ā, am%}), fraudulent, crafty, a rogue, a
cheat; malicious, noxious, injurious.
<LEND>

<L>34339<pc>0671-b<k1>Peru<k2>Peru
{%Pheru, us,%}¦ m. a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>34340<pc>0671-b<k1>Pel<k2>Pel
{#Pel#}¦ {%phel,%} cl. 1. P. {%phelati,%} &c., to go,
move.
<LEND>

<L>34341<pc>0671-b<k1>Pela<k2>Pela
{#Pela#}¦ {%phela, am, ā,%} n. f. remnants of food,
leavings of a meal, droppings from the mouth, refuse,
orts; a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>34342<pc>0671-b<k1>Peli<k2>Peli
{%Pheli, is,%}¦ or {%phelī,%} f. remnants of food.
<LEND>

<L>34343<pc>0671-b<k1>PelikA<k2>PelikA
{%Phelikā,%}¦ f. {%= pheli.%}
<LEND>

<L>34344<pc>0671-b<k1>Pesala<k2>Pesala
{#Pesala#}¦ {%phesala%} (?), N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34345<pc>0671-b<k1>POlli<k2>POlli
{#POlli#}¦ {%phaulli%} (fr. {%phulla%}), see Scholiast on
Vārttika III. to Pāṇ. VIII. 2, 42.
<LEND>
<H>{#ba#}

<L>34346<pc>0671-b<k1>ba<k2>ba<h>1
{#ba#} 1¦. {%ba,%} the twenty-third consonant of the
Nāgarī alphabet and the third of the labial class, often
confounded with the semivowel {%v,%} with which some
grammarians consider it optionally interchangeable.
{%—Ba-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ba.%}
<LEND>

<L>34347<pc>0671-b<k1>ba<k2>ba<h>2
{#ba#} 2¦. {%ba, as,%} m. a N. of Varuṇa; water;
a water-jar. According to lexicographers {%ba%} also {%=%}
{%bhaga, gandhana, vapana,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>34348<pc>0671-b<k1>baMh<k2>baMh
{#baMh#}¦ {%baṃh,%} also written {%vaṃh%} (related to
2. {%bṛh%}), cl. 1. A. {%baṃhate, babaṃhe, baṃ-%}
{%hitā,%} &c., to grow, increase: Caus. P. {%baṃhayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cause to grow, increase, strengthen, fix,
make firm; [cf. {%bahala, bahu, bahula.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34349<pc>0671-b<k1>baMhiman<k2>baMhiman
{%Baṃhiman, ā,%}¦ m. muchness, abundance, multitude.
<LEND>

<L>34350<pc>0671-b<k1>baMhizWa<k2>baMhizWa
{%Baṃhiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%bahula%}), very
much, very many, most abundant, very abundant,
very great, excessive.
<LEND>
[Page0671-c+ 70]

<L>34351<pc>0671-c<k1>baMhIyas<k2>baMhIyas
{%Baṃhīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%bahula%}), much
more, more abundant, very many, exceeding.
<LEND>

<L>34352<pc>0671-c<k1>baka<k2>baka
{#baka#}¦ {%baka,%} &c. See {%vaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>34353<pc>0671-c<k1>bakura<k2>bakura
{#bakura#}¦ {%bakura, as,%} m., Ved. (according to
native authorities), a thunderbolt, lightning, anything
shining; perhaps ‘a horn, trumpet, or other wind
instrument used in battle;’ [cf. {%bākura, bekurā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34354<pc>0671-c<k1>bagadAda<k2>bagadAda
{#bagadAda#}¦ {%bagadāda,%} N. of a city, Bagdad.
<LEND>

<L>34355<pc>0671-c<k1>bagadAru<k2>bagadAru
{%Bagadāru,%}¦ N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34356<pc>0671-c<k1>bagadAha<k2>bagadAha
{%Bagadāha,%}¦ N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34357<pc>0671-c<k1>baNga<k2>baNga
{#baNga#}¦ {%baṅga, as,%} m. the country of Bengal;
(usually written {%vaṅga,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>34358<pc>0671-c<k1>baNgAla<k2>baNgAla
{%Baṅgāla, as,%}¦ m. (?), N. of the country Bengal.
<LEND>

<L>34359<pc>0671-c<k1>baja<k2>baja
{#baja#}¦ {%baja, as,%} m., Ved. (probably) N. of a
herb used as a charm against evil spirits.
<LEND>

<L>34360<pc>0671-c<k1>baw<k2>baw
{#baw#}¦ {%baṭ,%} ind. (perhaps connected with
{%vāḍham,%} q. v.), Ved. (a particle of affirmation), in
truth, certainly (Sāy. {%= satyam%}); [cf. Zend <nsi>bāṭ, bā.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>34361<pc>0671-c<k1>baW<k2>baW
{#baW#}¦ {%baṭh%} = rt. {%vaṭh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34362<pc>0671-c<k1>baqapilA<k2>baqapilA
{#baqapilA#}¦ {%baḍapilā,%} f., N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>34363<pc>0671-c<k1>baqavA<k2>baqavA
{#baqavA#}¦ {%baḍavā,%} f. a mare; the nymph
Aśvinī or the personification of the asterism repre-
sented by a horse's head; a female slave. {%—Baḍa-%}
{%vāgni (˚vā-ag˚), is,%} or {%baḍavānala (˚vā-an˚), as,%}
m. submarine fire; (in mythology) a being consisting
of flame but with the head of a mare, fabled to have
sprung from the thighs of Urvā and to have been
received by the ocean. {%—Baḍavā-mukha, as,%} m.
submarine fire; ({%am%}), n. the infernal regions. {%—Ba-%}
{%ḍavā-suta, au,%} m. du. the two sons of Aśvinī, (see
{%aśvin, aśvinī-kumāra.%}) {%—Baḍavā-hṛta%} (?), {%as,%}
m. the paramour of a female slave, a slave.
<LEND>

<L>34364<pc>0671-c<k1>baqA<k2>baqA
{#baqA#}¦ {%baḍā%} or {%baḷā,%} ind., Ved. {%= baṭ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34365<pc>0671-c<k1>baqAha<k2>baqAha
{#baqAha#}¦ {%baḍāha, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>34366<pc>0671-c<k1>baR<k2>baR
{#baR#}¦ {%baṇ%} = rt. {%vaṇ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34367<pc>0671-c<k1>baRij<k2>baRij
{#baRij#}¦ {%baṇij, k,%} m. (connected with the
Vedic {%paṇi%} fr. rt. 2. {%paṇ,%} q. v.; but in Ved. and later
Sanskrit often written {%vaṇij%}), a merchant, ({%ku-baṇij,%}
a wicked merchant); a trader; the sixth of the astrono-
mical periods called Karaṇa, corresponding to the half
of a lunar day; ({%k%}), f. trade, traffic. {%—Baṇik-patha,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. ‘a trader's path or line,’ traffic, com-
merce; ({%as%}), m. a merchant. {%—Baṇik-putra, as,%}
m. a merchant's son, son of a trader, a young mer-
chant or trader; ({%ī%}), f. a merchant's daughter, a
young woman of the merchant class. {%—Baṇig-ban-%}
{%dhu, us,%} m. ‘trader's friend,’ the indigo plant, Indi-
gofera Tinctoria. {%—Baṇig-bhāva, as, am,%} m. n. the
state of being a merchant, traffic, trade, commerce.
{%—Baṇig-vaha, as,%} m. ‘carrying merchants,’ a camel.
<LEND>

<L>34368<pc>0671-c<k1>baRijya<k2>baRijya
{%Baṇijya, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. (for {%bāṇijya%}), trade, traffic.
<LEND>

<L>34369<pc>0671-c<k1>baRqa<k2>baRqa
{#baRqa#}¦ {%baṇḍa, as, ā, am.%} See {%vaṇḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>34370<pc>0671-c<k1>bata<k2>bata<h>1
{#bata#} 1¦. {%bata,%} ind. (in the later language
{%vata%}), Ved. an interjection of astonishment, sorrow,
or regret, generally translatable by ah! oh! O! alas!
alack! wo! woe! (the word {%bata%} seems originally
to have stood immediately after the idea beginning
the sentence and giving rise to the interjection, e. g.
{%bato batāsi yama,%} alas! thou art a weak person, O
Yama.) According to native lexicographers the
senses in which {%bata%} may be used are expressed by
the following Sanskrit words, {%kheda, anu-kampa,%}
{%anu-krośa, vi-smaya, āścarya, san-toṣa, dhṛti,%}
{%ā-mantraṇa, nindā, sam-bodhana.%}
<LEND>

<L>34371<pc>0671-c<k1>bata<k2>bata<h>2
{#bata#} 2¦. {%bata, as,%} m. (probably for {%vata,%}
past pass. part. of rt. {%van,%} q. v.), Ved. (according to
the Nirukta) a weak or feeble person.
<LEND>

<L>34372<pc>0671-c<k1>bad<k2>bad
{#bad#}¦ {%bad%} or {%band,%} cl. 1. P. {%badati, ban-%}
{%dati, babāda, baditum,%} &c., to be steady,
to be firm; [cf. rt. 1. {%pad.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0672-a+ 73]

<L>34373<pc>0672-a<k1>badara<k2>badara
{#badara#}¦ {%badara, as,%} m. (later also {%vadara%}),
the jujube tree, Zizyphus Jujuba or Z. Scandens;
a kind of mustard ({%= deva-sarṣapa%}); the kernel
of the fruit of the cotton plant; N. of a man [cf.
{%bādarāyaṇa%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of various plants; the
cotton shrub; a particular species of bulbous plant
({%= gṛṣṭi, vārāhī%}); Mimosa Octandra ({%= elā-%}
{%parṇī%}); Clitoria Ternatea {%(= viṣṇu-krāntā); (ī),%} f.
the jujube tree; the cotton shrub; Mucuna Pruritus
({%= kapi-kacchu%}); N. of one of the sources of the
Gaṅgā and of the hermitage of Nara and Nārāyaṇa
situated near it [cf. {%badarikā%}]; ({%am%}), n. the edible
fruit of the jujube; the berry or pod of the cotton
shrub; the same berry used as a weight. {%—Badara-%}
{%kuṇa, as,%} m. the time when the fruit of the jujube
becomes ripe. {%—Badara-pācana, am,%} n., N. of a
sacred bathing-place (‘where the jujube ripens’). {%—Ba-%}
{%dara-phalī,%} f. a species of jujube tree {%(= bhū-ba-%}
{%darī)%}. {%—Badara-yūṣa,%} a decoction of the fruit of
the jujube. {%—Badarāmalaka (˚ra-ām˚), am,%} n.
Flacourtia Cataphracta (probably the fruit rather than
the plant itself). {%—Badarī-cchada, as, ā,%} m. f. a
kind of perfume (apparently a dried shell-fish, {%=%}
{%śaṅkha-nakhī%}); ({%ā%}), f. a species of jujube tree
{%(= hasti-koli)%}. {%—Badarī-tapovana, am,%} n. the
penance grove or hermitage at Badarī. {%—Badarī-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m., N. of a temple at Badarī. {%—Badarī-%}
{%nārāyaṇa,%} N. of a place. {%—Badarī-pattra, as,%} m.
a kind of perfume {%(= nakhī)%}. {%—Badarīpattraka,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of perfume, a leaf. {%—Badarī-pācana%}
{%= badara-pācana,%} q. v. {%—Badarī-prastha, as,%} m.,
N. of a city. {%—Badarī-phala, am,%} n. the fruit of
the jujube tree; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, a variety of
Śephālikā or Nyctanthes with blue flowers. {%—Ba-%}
{%darī-mūla, am,%} n. the root of the jujube tree.
{%—Badarī-vaṇa%} or {%badarī-vana, am,%} n. a wood
of jujube trees; N. of a place. {%—Badarī-vāsā,%} f.
‘dwelling at Badarī,’ an epithet of Durgā. {%—Badarī-%}
{%śaila, as,%} m. ‘rock of Badarī,’ N. of a rocky emi-
nence at the source of the Gaṅgā in the Himālaya
range (a celebrated place of pilgrimage, the Bhadri-
nāth of modern travellers; or a town and temple on
the west bank of the Alaka-nandā river, in the
province of Śrī-nagar).
<LEND>

<L>34374<pc>0672-a<k1>badari<k2>badari
{%Badari, is,%}¦ f. {%= badarī,%} the jujube tree.
<LEND>

<L>34375<pc>0672-a<k1>badarikA<k2>badarikA
{%Badarikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%badarā%}), the fruit of the
jujube (?); N. of one of the sources of the Gaṅgā
and of the neighbouring hermitage of Nara and
Nārāyaṇa {%(= badarī)%}. {%—Badarikāśrama (˚kā-%}
{%āś˚),%} N. of a hermitage.
<LEND>

<L>34376<pc>0672-a<k1>badDa<k2>badDa
{#badDa#}¦ {%baddha.%} See under rt. {%bandh,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34377<pc>0672-a<k1>badDappi<k2>badDappi
{#badDappi#}¦ {%baddha-ppi,%} n. (perhaps a Prākṛt
form for {%baddha-pāṇi%}), the clasped hand, the fist;
(also read {%baddhāpi.%})
<LEND>

<L>34378<pc>0672-a<k1>baD<k2>baD<h>1
{#baD#} 1¦. {%badh,%} to bind, for {%bandh,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34379<pc>0672-a<k1>baD<k2>baD<h>2
{#baD#} 2¦. {%badh,%} used only in Desid. A. {%bī-%}
{%bhatsate,%} to abhor, detest, &c. See {%bībhatsa%}
(which is by some considered to belong to rt. {%bādh%}).
<LEND>

<L>34380<pc>0672-a<k1>baD<k2>baD<h>3
{#baD#} 3¦. {%badh%} for {%vadh,%} to kill, &c., sub-
stituted in some tenses of rt. {%han.%} See
{%vadh%} and {%han.%}
<LEND>

<L>34381<pc>0672-a<k1>baDa<k2>baDa
{%Badha, as,%}¦ m. killing, murder, &c.; see {%vadha.%}
{%—Badha-kāṅkṣin,%} for this and all other com-
pounds of {%badha%} see under {%vadha.%}
<LEND>

<L>34382<pc>0672-a<k1>baDaka<k2>baDaka
{%Badhaka, badhya,%}¦ &c. See {%vadhaka, vadhya,%}
&c.
<LEND>

<L>34383<pc>0672-a<k1>baDira<k2>baDira
{#baDira#}¦ {%badhira.%} See p. 673, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34384<pc>0672-a<k1>baDU<k2>baDU
{#baDU#}¦ {%badhū.%} See {%vadhū.%}
<LEND>

<L>34385<pc>0672-a<k1>baDyoga<k2>baDyoga
{#baDyoga#}¦ {%badhyoga, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34386<pc>0672-a<k1>band<k2>band
{#band#}¦ {%band.%} See rt. {%bad,%} p. 671, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>34387<pc>0672-a<k1>bandi<k2>bandi
{#bandi#}¦ {%bandi, bandin,%} &c. See {%vandi,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>34388<pc>0672-a<k1>bandiArayu<k2>bandiArayu
{#bandiArayu#}¦ {%bandiārayu,%} N. of a place men-
tioned in the Romaka-siddhānta.
<LEND>
[Page0672-b+ 80]

<L>34389<pc>0672-b<k1>banD<k2>banD
{#banD#}¦ {%bandh%} [cf. rt. {%bundh%}], cl. 9. P. (ep.
also A.) {%badhnāti (badhnīte),%} Impv. 2nd
sing. {%badhāna, babandha%} (Ved. 3rd pl. {%bedhus,%}
2nd sing. A. {%bedhiṣe%}), {%bhantsyati%} (ep. also {%ban-%}
{%dhiṣyati, -te%}), {%abhāntsīt, banddhum%} (ep. also {%ban-%}
{%dhitum%}), to bind, tie, fix, fasten; to chain, enchain,
fetter; to fasten or tie round, bind round, put on (e. g.
{%cīram badhnanti munayaḥ,%} the ascetics put on
clothing made of strips of bark); (A.) to bind on
one's self, put on; to ensnare; to catch (e. g. {%mat-%}
{%syān bandh,%} to catch fish), take captive, take
prisoner; to shut up, confine, imprison; to inflict
punishment, punish, chastise; to bind a sacrificial
victim, offer, sacrifice (with dat. of the deity to whom
the victim is presented, Ved.); to fix, direct, fasten
(the eyes or mind) upon (with loc.); to shut, close,
stop, stop up, preclude; to arrest, hold back, check,
suppress; to overpower, oppress, violate; to bind
together, put together, fasten together, join, com-
bine, connect, conglomerate, unite; to construct,
build; to construct verses, compose; to bring to pass,
effect, produce, evoke, result in, be followed by
(with acc.); to form fruit (as a plant), to set; to
strike (root); to take up (an abode); to manifest,
exhibit, evince, display, show (e. g. {%dhṛtim ba-%}
{%dhāna,%} show thy resolution); to entertain, cherish,
foster, possess, have, contract, form; {%añjalim bandh,%}
to place the two hands hollowed side by side;
{%muṣṭim bandh,%} to clench the fist; {%setum bandh,%}
to construct a dam, build a bridge, ({%bandhiṣye%}
{%setunā Gaṅgām,%} I will span the Gaṅgā with a
bridge); {%golam bandh,%} to form or construct a
globe; {%bhru-kuṭim bandh,%} to knit the brows,
frown; {%sauhṛdyam%} or {%sakhyam%} or {%ajaryam bandh%}
to contract friendship; {%vairam bandh,%} to contract
enmity: Pass. {%badhyate,%} Aor. {%abadhi%} (?), to be
bound; to bind on one's self, put on: Caus. {%ban-%}
{%dhayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ababandhat,%} to cause to
bind, cause to be bound; to order to be imprisoned;
to cause to be joined together or constructed, cause
to be built, cause to be embanked; (according to
the Dhātu-pāṭha) to bind, (in this last sense also
{%bādhayati%}): Desid. {%bibhatsati,%} to wish to bind:
Intens. {%bābadhyate, bābanddhi,%} to bind fast, tie
firmly; [cf. Zend <nsi>band, banda, baś-ta,</nsi> ‘bound;’ Gr.
<lang n="greek">πείθω, πεῖσ-μα</lang> for <lang n="greek">πενθ-μα, πενθερός;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pat-</nsi>
<nsi>ibulum, pendo, pendeo, fī-lum</nsi> for <nsi>fid-lum, fū-</nsi>
<nsi>nis</nsi> for <nsi>fud-nis, fīd-es, fīd-o</nsi> for <nsi>feido</nsi> = <lang n="greek">πείθω,</lang>
<nsi>fœd-us;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>vjazati,</nsi> ‘to bind;’ Goth. <nsi>bind-an,</nsi>
<nsi>fastan;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>fasti;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>bindan,</nsi>
<nsi>bonda, bœnd, bœst, fœst;</nsi> Iceland. <nsi>fas-t.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>34390<pc>0672-b<k1>badDa<k2>badDa
{%Baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound, tied, fixed, fastened;
chained, enchained, fettered; fastened or tied round,
bound on, put on, girt on, dressed; caught, captured,
confined, imprisoned; shut, stopped, closed, pre-
cluded; arrested, held back, checked, restrained,
suppressed, withheld; joined, connected, combined,
united; formed, constructed, built, embanked; inlaid,
studded [cf. {%rīti-b˚, loha-b˚%}]; composed (as verses);
effected, produced; directed towards; formed, set (as
fruit); struck (as a root); firmly rooted, firm; placed
side by side (as the hollowed hands); clenched (as
the fist); knit (as the brows); contracted (as friend-
ship or enmity); taken up (as an abode); mani-
fested, evinced, displayed; entertained, cherished,
fostered, possessed, got; entangled, involved, en-
meshed; congealed, clotted (as blood; opposed to
{%drava,%} q. v.); (at the beginning of adj. comps.
{%baddha%} has often a vague sense analogous to that of
{%jāta,%} q. v.; see examples below); ({%as%} or {%am%}), m.
or n.?, (with Jainas) that which binds or fetters
the embodied spirit (viz. connection of the soul with
deeds; it consists in a succession of births and deaths
as the result of works). {%—Baddha-kakṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who has the loins girt, girt about the
loins, having a tightened girdle. {%—Baddha-kakṣya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the girdle bound or girt up,
prepared, ready. {%—Baddha-kaṭa, as, ā, am,%} made
of plaited grass. {%—Baddha-kāma, as, ā, am,%} one
whose desires are restrained. {%—Baddha-kesara, as, %}
[Page0672-c+ 81]
{%ā, am,%} having hair formed, forming hair. {%—Baddha-%}
{%kopa, as, ā, am,%} having anger suppressed, smother-
ing resentment, governing wrath. {%—Baddha-guda,%}
{%am,%} n. a dangerous kind of obstruction of the
bowels. {%—Baddhagudin, ī, inī, i,%} suffering from
the above obstruction. {%—Baddha-godhāṅgulitra-%}
{%vat (˚dhā-aṅ˚), ān, atī, at,%} (in archery) having
fastened a leathern guard on the left arm and
fingers; [cf. {%go-dhā.%}] {%—Baddhagodhāṅguli-trāṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having fastened on a leathern guard
for the left arm and fingers. {%—Baddha-ghaṇṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having bells bound on. {%—Baddha-citta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the thoughts fixed, rivetting the
mind. {%—Baddha-jihva, as, ā, am,%} tongue-tied,
moving the tongue with difficulty. {%—Baddha-jña-%}
{%tā,%} f. the state of having acquired knowledge, great
knowledge. {%—Baddha-tala, as, ā, am,%} one who
has put on a leathern guard (for the left arm).
{%—Baddha-tūṇa, as, ā, am,%} having a quiver fas-
tened on, girt with a quiver. {%—Baddha-dṛṣṭi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} having the eyes fixed, fixing the gaze (upon
anything). {%—Baddha-dvirada-setu, us, us, us,%} hav-
ing elephants bound together for bridges. {%—Bad-%}
{%dha-dveṣa, as, ā, am,%} contracting hatred. {%—Bad-%}
{%dha-dhārā-pravāha, as, ā, am,%} checking the flow
of (tear) drops. {%—Baddha-niścaya, as, ā, am,%}
having a firm conviction, forming a firm resolve,
firmly resolved. {%—Baddha-nistṛṃśa, as, ā, am,%}
girt with a falchion. {%—Baddha-netra, as, ā, am,%}
having the eyes fixed, fixing the eyes (upon any-
thing). {%—Baddha-nepathya, as, ā, am,%} attired in
a theatrical costume. {%—Baddha-paṅka-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having the mud dried or hardened. {%—Bad-%}
{%dha-purīṣa, as, ā, am,%} having the bowels ob-
structed or constipated. {%—Baddhapurīṣa-tva, am,%}
n. the state of being constipated, obstruction of the
bowels. {%—Baddha-pratijña, as, ā, am,%} one who
has contracted an engagement, one who has made a
vow or promise. {%—Baddha-pratiśrut, t, t, t,%} in
which echoes are formed, resonant with echoing
sounds. {%—Baddha-phala, as,%} m. the plant Pon-
gamia Glabra {%(= karañja)%}. {%—Baddha-bhāva, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the mind or heart fixed. {%—Baddha-%}
{%bhīmāndhakāra (˚ma-an˚), as, ā, am,%} enveloped
in terrible darkness. {%—Baddha-bhū, ūs,%} f. the
lowest floor (‘fixed on the ground’); ground pre-
pared for the site of a house. {%—Baddha-bhūmika,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having an inlaid floor. {%—Baddha-mukha,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} having the mouth or orifice closed.
{%—Baddha-muṣṭi, is, is, i,%} having a closed fist;
close-fisted, griping, penurious, covetous; [cf. {%dṛḍha-%}
{%muṣṭi.%}] {%—Baddhamuṣṭi-kara, as,%} m. the hand
with closed fist. {%—Baddhamuṣṭi-tva, am,%} n. the state
of having the fist closed (for holding a bow). {%—Bad-%}
{%dha-mūtra, as, ā, am,%} stopping or obstructing the
urine. {%—Baddha-mūla, as, ā, am,%} striking root
firmly, deeply rooted. {%—Baddhamūla-tā,%} f. the state
of being firmly rooted. {%—Baddha-mauna, as, ā, am,%}
one by whom silence is observed, keeping silence.
{%—Baddha-rabhasa, as, ā, am,%} one who has formed
an ardent attachment, passionately attached (to any
one). {%—Baddha-rasāla, as,%} m. a species of mango
(the most highly prized kind). {%—Baddha-rāga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} filled with passion, impassioned. {%—Baddha-%}
{%rājya, as, ā, am,%} having attained to royalty. {%—Bad-%}
{%dha-vatsā,%} f., scil. {%gaus,%} a cow whose calf is tied
up (in the stall). {%—Baddha-vandana-mālaka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} having fastened garlands in token of wel-
come. {%—Baddha-varcas, ās, ās, as,%} constipating
the bowels. {%—Baddha-vasati, is, is, i,%} fixing an
abode. {%—Baddha-vāc, k, k, k,%} suppressing the
voice, maintaining silence, taciturn. {%—Baddhaviṭka,%}
{%as, ā, am%} (fr. {%baddha + viṣ%}), one whose bowels
are constipated, costive. {%—Baddhaviṭka-tā,%} f. con-
stipation of the bowels, costiveness. {%—Baddha-viṇ-%}
{%mūtra, as, ā, am,%} obstructing the evacuations by
stool and by the bladder. {%—Baddha-vīra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} whose heroes or soldiers are bound. {%—Baddha-%}
{%vepathu, us, us, u,%} seized with tremor, trembling.
{%—Baddha-vaira, as, ā, am,%} one who has con-
tracted great enmity or confirmed hostility, feeling
[Page0673-a+ 81]
bitter hatred. {%—Baddha-śas,%} an incorrect form for
{%badva-śas,%} q. v. {%—Baddha-śikha, as, ā, am,%} one
whose hair is tied up into a single lock upon the
crown of the head; one who is still in childhood,
young, a child, a pupil (not yet tonsured); ({%ā%}), f. a
sort of pungent root, (according to some) a kind of
garlic. {%—Baddha-śrotra-manaś-cakṣus, us, us,%}
{%us,%} having the ears, mind, and eyes fixed; fixing the
ears, mind, and eyes. {%—Baddha-sūta, as,%} m. a par-
ticular preparation of quicksilver. {%—Baddha-sneha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} forming an attachment, conceiving affection
for (with loc.). {%—Baddhāṅguli-tra%} or {%baddhāṅ-%}
{%guli-trāṇa (˚dha-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} having a finger-
guard fastened on, equipped with gauntlets. {%—Bad-%}
{%dhāñjali (˚dha-añ˚), is, is, i,%} having the hands
hollowed and placed side by side, with hands or
palms joined in humble entreaty, putting the joined
hands to the forehead, saluting respectfully; with
closed hands. {%—Baddhāñjali-puṭa, as, ā, am,%}
forming a cup with the hollowed hands. {%—Bad-%}
{%dhātman (˚dha-āt˚), ā,%} m. (with Jainas) a soul
which is bound or fettered by deeds and works
previous to its deliverance. {%—Baddhānanda (˚dha-%}
{%ān˚), as, ā, am,%} feeling pleasure, joyful. {%—Baddhā-%}
{%nurāga (˚dha-an˚), as, ā, am,%} manifesting love,
feeling affection. {%—Baddhānuśaya (˚dha-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one whose purpose is fixed, of fixed
intent; taking aim. {%—Baddhāmbaracara-mārga%}
{%(˚dha-am˚), as, ā, am,%} obstructing the path of birds
(said of a conflagration). {%—Baddhāyudha (˚dha-%}
{%āy˚), as, ā, am,%} accoutred with arms. {%—Baddhā-%}
{%śaṅka (˚dha-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose suspicions
are raised, apprehensive. {%—Baddhotsava (˚dha-%}
{%ut˚), as, ā, am,%} observing a festival, enjoying a
holiday. {%—Baddhodyama (˚dha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%}
uniting efforts, making united efforts, having the
energies intently fixed.
<LEND>

<L>34391<pc>0673-a<k1>badDaka<k2>badDaka
{%Baddhaka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who is bound, a
captive, prisoner.
<LEND>

<L>34392<pc>0673-a<k1>badDvA<k2>badDvA
{%Baddhvā,%}¦ ind. having bound or tied; having put
on; having joined.
<LEND>

<L>34393<pc>0673-a<k1>badva<k2>badva
{%Badva, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a large number, multitude;
a particular high number, (according to Sāy.) 100
Koṭis, (according to others) 10,000 millions; the
number 13084. {%—Badva-śas,%} ind. in large numbers,
in multitudes; (also incorrectly written {%baddha-śas.%})
<LEND>

<L>34394<pc>0673-a<k1>badvan<k2>badvan
{%Badvan, ā,%}¦ m. a causeway, highway.
<LEND>

<L>34395<pc>0673-a<k1>baDira<k2>baDira
{%Badhira, as, ā, am,%}¦ deaf, (sometimes written
{%vadhira%}); [cf. Hib. <nsi>bodhar;</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>byzar;</nsi>
Armor. <nsi>byzar.</nsi>] {%—Badhira-tā,%} f. or {%badhira-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. deafness. {%—Badhirāndha (˚ra-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deaf and blind; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga, son
of Kaśyapa. {%—Badhirī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -ku-%}
{%rute, -kartum,%} to make deaf, deafen. {%—Badhirī-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made deaf, deafened.
<LEND>

<L>34396<pc>0673-a<k1>baDiraka<k2>baDiraka
{%Badhiraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of his descendants; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>34397<pc>0673-a<k1>baDiraya<k2>baDiraya
{%Badhiraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%badhirayati, -yitum,%} to
make deaf, deafen.
<LEND>

<L>34398<pc>0673-a<k1>baDirita<k2>baDirita
{%Badhirita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made deaf, deafened.
<LEND>

<L>34399<pc>0673-a<k1>baDiriman<k2>baDiriman
{%Badhiriman, ā,%}¦ m. deafness.
<LEND>

<L>34400<pc>0673-a<k1>baDnat<k2>baDnat
{%Badhnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ binding, tying; effecting,
producing.
<LEND>

<L>34401<pc>0673-a<k1>baDra<k2>baDra
{%Badhra, am,%}¦ n. lead; ({%ī%}), f. a thong.
<LEND>

<L>34402<pc>0673-a<k1>baDrya<k2>baDrya
{%Badhrya, am,%}¦ n. a shoe, slipper.
<LEND>

<L>34403<pc>0673-a<k1>banDa<k2>banDa
{%Bandha, as,%}¦ m. binding, tying, a bond, tie, chain,
fetter, knot, halter, tether [cf. {%pāda-b˚%}]; a ligature,
bandage; laying snares; catching, capturing, capture;
binding in fetters, fettering, confining, imprisoning,
confinement, imprisonment, custody [cf. {%rāja-b˚%}];
fixing, directing (the mind towards anything); bind-
ing together, joining, uniting [cf. {%pāṇi-b˚%}]; joining
the hollowed hands; forming, constructing, construc-
tion, building, erecting (e. g. {%setor bandhaḥ,%} the
construction of an embankment or bridge; cf. {%setu-%}
{%b˚%}); embanking, an embankment, throwing a bridge
across (a river); contracting or knitting the brows
[cf. {%bhrukuṭi-b˚%}]; joining the hands or feet in
particular positions, any posture or position of the
limbs or body generally, a position, posture (e. g.
{%āsana-b˚,%} a sitting posture); a particular position of
[Page0673-b+ 81]
the hands and feet [cf. {%mahā-b˚, mūla-b˚%}]; a par-
ticular position in coitus; connection, intercourse,
society; agreement, union; manifestation, exhibition,
display [cf. {%rāga-b˚%}]; consequence, result (e. g.
{%ariṣṭa-b˚,%} having welfare as a consequence, causing
welfare); a sinew, tendon; a pledge, deposit, (per-
haps rather) pledging [cf. {%bandhaka%}]; that with
which anything is bound together or bordered,
border, framework, inclosure; (in philosophy) bon-
dage, (opposed to {%mukti, mokṣa,%} and regarded in
the Sāṅkhya system as threefold, viz. {%prakṛti-b˚,%}
{%vaikārika-b˚, dakṣiṇā-b˚;%} cf. {%karma-b˚, dak-%}
{%ṣiṇā-b˚%}); (in rhetoric) combination of sounds, con-
struction of words; a disease in which the eyelids
cannot be wholly closed; (in comp. with numerals)
a part [cf. {%daśa-b˚, pañca-b˚;%} cf. also Lat. <nsi>pondus;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>bandà,</nsi> ‘a herd of cattle;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>bonda,</nsi>
<nsi>bœnd, bœst;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>bad</nsi> = Armor. <nsi>bód,</nsi> ‘a bunch,
bush, cluster, tuft, thicket.’] {%—Bandha-karaṇa, am,%}
n. binding, fettering, restraining, holding back,
preventing, impeding. {%—Bandha-kartṛ, tā, trī,%}
{%tṛ,%} a binder, one who fetters or restrains. {%—Ban-%}
{%dha-tantra, am,%} n. a complete army, or one pos-
sessing the four divisions of chariots, elephants, horse,
and foot. {%—Bandha-deśa,%} N. of a country men-
tioned in the Ratna-koṣa. {%—Bandha-pāruṣya,%}
{%am,%} n. forced construction of words. {%—Bandha-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of bonds or ties, serving
for a bond, being of the nature of a bond. {%—Ban-%}
{%dha-mudrā,%} f. the impression or mark of fetters.
{%—Bandha-mocanikā%} or {%bandha-mocinī,%} f. ‘re-
leasing from bonds,’ N. of a Yoginī. {%—Bandha-%}
{%stambha, as,%} m. ‘binding-post,’ the post to which
an elephant is tied.
<LEND>

<L>34404<pc>0673-b<k1>banDaka<k2>banDaka
{%Bandhaka, as,%}¦ m. a binder, one who is employed
in binding; one who catches, a catcher [cf. {%nāga-b˚%}];
a violator, ravisher; a band, tie [cf. {%paśu-b˚%}]; a bank,
dam, dike [cf. {%jala-b˚%}]; any posture of the body
[cf. {%malla-b˚%}]; a pledge, deposit, pawn, (perhaps
rather) pledging; a promise, vow ({%= satyaṅ-kāra%});
exchanging, barter; (in comp. with numerals, espe-
cially at the end of an adj. comp.) a part, portion
(e. g. {%ṛṇaṃ sa-daśa-bandhakam,%} a debt plus one
tenth); a city; ({%am%}), n. binding, confinement; ({%ī%}),
f. an unchaste woman (‘connected with many men;’
{%kumāra-bandhakī,%} a woman unchaste even as a
girl); a harlot, courtezan, wanton [cf. {%bandhukī%}];
a barren woman [cf. {%bandhyā%}]; a female elephant.
{%—Bandhaka-tva, am,%} n. the being fettered.
<LEND>

<L>34405<pc>0673-b<k1>banDana<k2>banDana
{%Bandhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ binding, tying, fettering
[cf. {%bhāva-b˚%}]; holding fast, arresting, checking,
stopping; (at the end of a comp.) dependant on,
depending upon; ({%am%}), n. the act of binding, tying,
fastening, fettering; a bond, chain, fetter; a tether,
halter; a sinew, muscle [cf. {%ślatha-b˚%}]; binding on,
binding round; binding up; a ligature, bandage;
joining, connection; catching, capturing; confining,
confinement, captivity, bondage, detention, im-
prisonment; a gaol, prison; inflicting pain, hurting;
putting to death; joining, connecting, uniting;
forming, building, constructing, construction; {%setor%}
{%bandhanam,%} the construction of an embankment
or bridge [cf. {%setu-bandha, setu-bandhana%}]; a
bar, barrier; embanking, an embankment, bridging
over; mixing, alloying, alloyage (of metals); con-
junction, connection, coherence; a stalk, stem, pe-
duncle [cf. {%prasava-b˚%}]; {%gīta-bandhana,%} a com-
position which is sung, an epic poem rehearsed in
singing; ({%am, ī%}), n. f. any instrument of binding or
holding together, a bond (e. g. {%annam prāṇasya%}
{%bandhanam,%} food is the bond, i. e. the staff of
life), band, rope, tie, cord, string, garter, thread;
a tether, halter [cf. {%pāda-b˚%}]; a chain, fetter; a
snare; a ligature, bandage. {%—Bandhana-granthi,%}
{%is,%} m. the knot of a ligature; a noose; a rope for
tying cattle. {%—Bandhana-pālaka, as,%} m. a gaol-
keeper, gaoler, turnkey. {%—Bandhana-rajju, us,%}
f. a rope for tying cattle; any rope or string used
for tying. {%—Bandhana-veśman, a,%} n. ‘house of
bondage,’ a prison. {%—Bandhana-stha, as, ā, am,%}
being in prison, living in confinement, imprisoned,
[Page0673-c+ 81]
captive; ({%as%}), m. a prisoner, captive. {%—Bandhana-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. (a place where cattle are fastened),
a stall, stable. {%—Bandhanāgāra%} ({%˚na-ag˚%} or {%-āg˚%}),
{%as, am,%} m. n. ‘house of bondage,’ a prison. {%—Ban-%}
{%dhanādhikāra (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of the third
chapter of the first part of the Rasendra-kalpa-druma,
a medical work by Rāma-kṛṣṇa. {%—Bandhanālaya%}
{%(˚na-āl˚), am,%} n. ‘house of bondage,’ a prison.
<LEND>

<L>34406<pc>0673-c<k1>banDanIya<k2>banDanIya
{%Bandhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bound or tied, to
be bound on, to be bound round; anything bound
on or tied round; to be confined, to be captured or
taken prisoner; to be embanked; ({%as%}), m. (accord-
ing to a Scholiast) {%= setu,%} an embankment.
<LEND>

<L>34407<pc>0673-c<k1>banDayitf<k2>banDayitf
{%Bandhayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who binds or ties up,
a binder.
<LEND>

<L>34408<pc>0673-c<k1>banDita<k2>banDita
{%Bandhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be bound (e. g.
{%śatam bandhitaḥ,%} caused to be bound for a hundred
pieces of money, i. e. imprisoned for a debt of a
hundred pieces of money); bound.
<LEND>

<L>34409<pc>0673-c<k1>banDitra<k2>banDitra
{%Bandhitra, am,%}¦ n. (?), the god of love, love,
desire [cf. {%vadhitra%}]; a spot, mole.
<LEND>

<L>34410<pc>0673-c<k1>banDin<k2>banDin
{%Bandhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) binding
[cf. {%dṛḍha-bandhinī%}]; catching [cf. {%matsya-b˚%}];
causing, effecting, producing, exciting, evoking [cf.
{%phala-b˚, rāga-b˚%}]; showing, exhibiting, manifest-
ing, evincing [cf. {%vātsalya-b˚%}].
<LEND>

<L>34411<pc>0673-c<k1>banDu<k2>banDu
{%Bandhu, us,%}¦ m. connection, conjunction, relation-
ship, association; relation, reference, respect (e. g.
{%kena bandhunā,%} in what respect ?); one who is
connected with or belongs to (any profession or tribe,
especially if only nominally so connected; cf. {%kṣa-%}
{%tra-b˚, dvija-b˚, brahma-b˚%}); a kinsman, relation,
relative, connection, kindred in general [cf. {%mātṛ-b˚%}];
(in law) a cognate kinsman in a remote degree, one
subsequent in right of inheritance to the Sa-gotra,
(three kinds of these are enumerated, personal, pater-
nal, and maternal: the first are sons of the deceased
father's sister, of his mother's sister, and of his ma-
ternal uncle: the second are the sons of his father's
paternal aunt, of his father's maternal aunt, and of
his father's maternal uncle: the third are the sons
of his mother's paternal aunt, of his mother's ma-
ternal aunt, and of his mother's maternal uncle); a
friend [cf. {%a-b˚, amṛta-b˚, ṛṣi-b˚%}]; a husband;
a brother; N. of a flower ({%= bandhūka%}); N. of a
metre; (in astron.) N. of the fourth mansion; N.
of a Ṛṣi with the patronymic Gaupāyana or Lau-
pāyana, author of two hymns in the Ṛg-veda; (ac-
cording to Yāska also) wealth; according to Pāṇini
a feminine word ending in {%yā%} must change {%yā%} to {%ī%}
before {%bandhu%} in a comp., e. g. {%kārīṣa-gandhyā-%}
{%bandhu%} becomes {%kārīṣa-gandhī-bandhu;%} [cf.
Hib. <nsi>badh,</nsi> ‘love, friendship.’] {%—Bandhu-kāma, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} loving relations, affectionate towards relations
and friends. {%—Bandhu-kṛtya, am,%} n. the duty of a
kinsman or of a friend, a friendly office, friendly service.
{%—Bandhu-kṣit, t, t, t,%} Ved. dwelling among rela-
tions; (Sāy.) having the quality or condition of kin-
dred; (according to some this word may be the N.
of a person or family.) {%—Bandhu-jana, as,%} m. a
kinsman, relation, friend; kinsfolk, relations. {%—Ban-%}
{%dhu-jīva%} or {%bandhu-jīvaka, as,%} m. ‘living in associ-
ation or groups,’ Pentapetes Phœnicea, (a plant with a
red flower which opens at midday and withers away
the next morning at sunrise); ({%am%}), n. its flower;
({%kas%}), m., N. of a Cakra-vartin. {%—Bandhujīva-%}
{%puṣpa, am,%} n. the flower of Pentapetes Phœnicea.
{%—Bandhujīvābhi-tāmra (˚va-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
deep red like the blossom of Pentapetes Phœnicea.
{%—Bandhu-tā,%} f. relations collectively, kindred, kin
({%= bandhūnāṃ samūhaḥ%}); relationship, affinity,
connection, relation. {%—Bandhu-tva, am,%} n. relation-
ship, brotherhood, affinity. {%—Bandhu-dagdha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘destroyed or consumed by relations,’ i. e. an
abandoned wretch {%(= hataka)%}. {%—Bandhu-datta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} given by relations or by a kinsman; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman; ({%am%}), n. a
particular kind of female property (given to a girl
by her relations at her marriage). {%—Bandhu-dāyāda,%}
{%as,%} m. a kinsman and heir. {%—Bandhu-pati, is,%} m.
lord of kindred or relations; [cf. {%bāndhupata.%}]
[Page0674-a+ 81]
{%—Bandhu-pāla, as,%} m. ‘kindred-protector,’ N. of
a man. {%—Bandhu-pālita, as,%} m. ‘kindred-pro-
tected,’ N. of a prince. {%—Bandhu-puṣpa-māla, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} wearing a chaplet of Bandhu flowers. {%—Ban-%}
{%dhu-pṛch, ṭ,%} m., Ved. asking relations, inquiring after
kindred, (Sāy. {%= bandhūnām praṣṭā%}); [cf. {%pṛṣ-%}
{%ṭa-bandhu.%}] {%—Bandhu-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a
Vidyā-dhara. {%—Bandhu-prīti, is,%} f. affection for a
friend, love of relatives or friends. {%—Bandhu-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. friendship. {%—Bandhu-bhāṣita, am,%} n. the
talk or speech of kindred. {%—Bandhu-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having relations, surrounded by relations; ({%ān%}),
m., N. of a man; of a king; ({%atī%}), f., N. of two
women; N. of a town. {%—Bandhu-vañcaka, as,%} m.
‘deceiver of relatives,’ N. of a Vidūṣaka. {%—Bandhu-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having relations or kindred. {%—Ban-%}
{%dhu-varga, as,%} m. the whole body of relations, circle
of kinsmen, kindred. {%—Bandhu-hīna, as, ā, am,%}
destitute of kindred, relationless, friendless. {%—Ban-%}
{%dhū-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make a friend
of. {%—Bandhū-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made a friend.
{%—Bandhv-eṣa, as,%} m., Ved. inquiring after kin-
dred, (Sāy. {%= bandhūnām anveṣaṇam.%})
<LEND>

<L>34412<pc>0674-a<k1>banDuka<k2>banDuka
{%Bandhuka, as,%}¦ m. a species of plant ({%= ban-%}
{%dhūka, bandhu-jīva%}); a bastard [cf. {%bandhula%}];
({%ā, ī%}), f. an unchaste woman ({%= bandhakī%}).
<LEND>

<L>34413<pc>0674-a<k1>banDukin<k2>banDukin
{%Bandhukin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ coming from or belonging
to an unchaste woman.
<LEND>

<L>34414<pc>0674-a<k1>banDudA<k2>banDudA
{%Bandhudā,%}¦ f. an unchaste woman; (perhaps
wrongly for {%bandhurā.%})
<LEND>

<L>34415<pc>0674-a<k1>banDura<k2>banDura
{%Bandhura, as, ā, am,%}¦ uneven, undulating, fluc-
tuating, wavy; bowed, bent, inclined, depressed,
crooked; pleasing, delightful, handsome, beautiful;
deaf; injurious, mischievous; ({%as%}), m. a goose; a
crane; a drug ({%= viḍaṅga ṛṣabha%}); a plant ({%=%}
{%bandhūka%}); oil-cake; the vulva; ({%ā%}), f. a prostitute;
({%ās%}), f. pl. the meal of parched corn; ({%am%}), n. a
diadem, crest; [cf. Angl. Sax. <nsi>bendan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>34416<pc>0674-a<k1>banDurita<k2>banDurita
{%Bandhurita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, inclined, depressed.
<LEND>

<L>34417<pc>0674-a<k1>banDula<k2>banDula
{%Bandhula, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, inclined, depressed;
pleasing, charming; ({%as%}), m. an attendant in the
chamber of a harlot; the son of a harlot, a bastard;
Pentapetes Phœnicea; N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Bandhulān-%}
{%vaya (˚la-an˚), as,%} m. the posterity of Bandhula.
<LEND>

<L>34418<pc>0674-a<k1>banDUka<k2>banDUka
{%Bandhūka, as,%}¦ m. a shrub bearing a red flower,
Pentapetes Phœnicea [cf. {%bandhu-jīva%}]; Terminalia
Tomentosa; ({%am%}), n. the flower of Pentapetes Phœ-
nicea. {%—Bandhūka-puṣpa, as,%} m. the tree Termi-
nalia Tomentosa. {%—Bandhūkapuṣpa-rajas, as,%} n.
the pollen of the above flower.
<LEND>

<L>34419<pc>0674-a<k1>banDUra<k2>banDUra
{%Bandhūra, as, ā, am,%}¦ wavy, undulating, uneven;
bowing, bent; beautiful; ({%as%}), m. a hole, a chasm.
<LEND>

<L>34420<pc>0674-a<k1>banDUli<k2>banDUli
{%Bandhūli, is,%}¦ m. a plant ({%= bandhūka%}).
<LEND>

<L>34421<pc>0674-a<k1>banDya<k2>banDya
{%Bandhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bound or fettered,
to be confined or imprisoned; to be bound together,
to be joined; to be constructed; detained, confined,
under arrest; stopped; not bearing fruit in due
season, barren, unfruitful, unproductive, fruitless, idle,
useless, unprofitable, vain; not having the menstrual
courses; destitute, deprived of (with inst. or at the
end of a comp., e. g. {%prajā-b˚,%} destitute of offspring);
({%ā%}), f. a barren or childless woman; a barren cow;
a kind of perfume commonly called Bāla. {%—Ban-%}
{%dhya-tā,%} f. or {%bandhya-tva, am,%} n. barrenness,
sterility, uselessness; want, deficiency, scarcity, desti-
tution. {%—Bandhya-parvata,%} N. of a district. {%—Ban-%}
{%dhya-phala, as, ā, am,%} fruitless, useless, idle, vain.
{%—Bandhyaphala-tā,%} f. fruitlessness, uselessness.
{%—Bandhyā-karkoṭakī,%} f. a species of medicinal
plant given to barren women; [cf. {%putra-dā.%}]
{%—Bandhyā-tanaya, as,%} m. {%= bandhyā-putra,%}
q. v. {%—Bandhyā-tva, am,%} n. sterility, barrenness.
{%—Bandhyā-duhitṛ, tā,%} f. the daughter of a barren
woman, a mere chimæra or anything merely ima-
ginary which does not really exist. {%—Bandhyā-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. the son of a barren woman, i. e. any-
thing merely imaginary, an impossibility; [cf. {%ga-%}
{%gaṇa-puṣpa.%}] {%—Bandhyā-roga, as,%} m., N. of a
chapter of the Prayogāmṛta, a medical work by
Vaidya-cintāmaṇi. {%—Bandhyā-suta, as,%} or {%ban-%}
{%dhyā-sūnu, us,%} m. {%= bandhyā-putra,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0674-b+ 73]

<L>34422<pc>0674-b<k1>banDyAyamAna<k2>banDyAyamAna
{%Bandhyāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming barren
or useless.
<LEND>

<L>34423<pc>0674-b<k1>banDra<k2>banDra
{%Bandhra%}¦ or {%banddhra, am,%} n. a band, tie,
(in {%a-b˚,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>34424<pc>0674-b<k1>bapsa<k2>bapsa
{#bapsa#}¦ {%bapsa,%} Ved. {%= rūpa.%}
<LEND>

<L>34425<pc>0674-b<k1>baPAra<k2>baPAra
{#baPAra#}¦ {%baphāra,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34426<pc>0674-b<k1>babakARa<k2>babakARa
{#babakARa#}¦ {%babakāṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34427<pc>0674-b<k1>bababA<k2>bababA
{#bababA#}¦ {%bababā,%} ind., Ved. an onomato-
poetic word expressive of the crackling of fire.
<LEND>

<L>34428<pc>0674-b<k1>babara<k2>babara
{#babara#}¦ {%babara, as,%} m., N. of a man; N. of
a place; (also read {%vavara.%})
<LEND>

<L>34429<pc>0674-b<k1>babAqa<k2>babAqa
{#babAqa#}¦ {%babāḍa, as,%} m., N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>34430<pc>0674-b<k1>babUARa<k2>babUARa
{#babUARa#}¦ {%babūāṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34431<pc>0674-b<k1>baBra<k2>baBra
{#baBra#}¦ {%babhra%} (fr. rt. {%bhṛ%} with reduplication)
in {%pra-babhra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34432<pc>0674-b<k1>baBri<k2>baBri
{%Babhri, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. bearing, carrying, wielding,
taking, (Sāy. {%= bhartṛ, dhāraka%}); (in Atharva-
veda XI. 1, 31 sqq., either ‘nourishing’ or a various
reading for {%babhru,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>34433<pc>0674-b<k1>baBru<k2>baBru
{#baBru#}¦ {%babhru, us, us,%} or {%ūs, u%} (said to be a
reduplicated form of rt. {%bhṛ%}), deep brown, brown,
tawny, tan-coloured, a mixed brownish colour (vari-
ously applied to oxen, to the horses of Indra, of
Rudra, and Soma, to plants, to dice formed of nuts,
&c.); bald-headed through disease; ({%us%}), m. a man
with deep brown hair, red-haired person; a large kind
of ichneumon, an ichneumon generally; the bird Cu-
culus Melanoleucus ({%= cātaka%}); a species of vege-
table; an epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu; an epithet
of Śiva; fire; N. of various men; of a descendant
of Atri with the epithets Daivāvṛdha and Kaumbhya
and author of the hymns Ṛg-veda V. 30, 14, VIII.
22, 10; of the author of a Dharma-śāstra; of a
disciple of Śaunaka; of a son of Viśvā-mitra; of a
son of Viśva-garbha; of a Vṛṣṇi; of a son of
Druhyu; of a son of Roma-pāda or Loma-pāda;
of a Gandharva; N. of a country [cf. {%babhru-deśa%}];
({%u%}), n. a tawny or brown colour; any object of a
tawny or brown colour; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">φρΰ-νη, φρῦ-νο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">Φρύνη, Φρῦνος, Φρύνιχο-ς, Φρυνίων, Φρυνώνδας;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>fur-vu-s,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>fu-scu-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>brun</nsi>
= Mod. Germ. <nsi>braun</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>brown.</nsi>] {%—Babhru-%}
{%karṇa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. brown-eared, having brown
ears. {%—Babhru-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a country; [cf.
{%babhru.%}] {%—Babhru-dhātu, us,%} m. ‘dark brown
mineral,’ a kind of ochre {%(= su-varṇa-gairika).%}
{%—Babhru-dhūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pressed out or
extracted by Babhru (as Soma juice; Sāy. {%= babhru-%}
{%ṇābhiṣutaḥ%}). {%—Babhru-nīkāśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
appearing brownish, of a brownish look, (according
to Mahī-dhara {%= kapila-varṇa-sadṛśa.%}) {%—Ba-%}
{%bhru-piṅgala, as, ā, am,%} brown and tawny (as an
owl). {%—Babhru-mālin, ī,%} m. ‘brown-garlanded,’
N. of a Muni. {%—Babhru-vaktra, as, ā, am,%} ‘ich-
neumon-faced,’ having the face of an ichneumon.
{%—Babhru-vāha%} or {%babhru-vāhana, as,%} m., N. of
a son of Arjuna, king of Mahodaya.
<LEND>

<L>34434<pc>0674-b<k1>baBravI<k2>baBravI
{%Babhravī,%}¦ f. an epithet of Durgā; (an incorrect
form for {%bābhravī.%})
<LEND>

<L>34435<pc>0674-b<k1>baBruka<k2>baBruka
{%Babhruka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. brownish; ({%as%}), m.
(probably) a kind of ichneumon.
<LEND>

<L>34436<pc>0674-b<k1>baBruSa<k2>baBruSa
{%Babhruśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Gaṇa Lomādi to
Pāṇ. V. 2, 100.
<LEND>

<L>34437<pc>0674-b<k1>baBluSa<k2>baBluSa
{%Babhluśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. brownish, (Mahī-
dhara {%= kapila-varṇa;%} cf. {%kapiśa, kṛṣṇaśa.%})
<LEND>

<L>34438<pc>0674-b<k1>bamb<k2>bamb
{#bamb#}¦ {%bamb,%} cl. 1. P. {%bambati, bambitum,%}
to go.
<LEND>

<L>34439<pc>0674-b<k1>bambagEra<k2>bambagEra
{#bambagEra#}¦ {%bambagaira,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34440<pc>0674-b<k1>bambA<k2>bambA
{#bambA#}¦ {%bambā,%} a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>34441<pc>0674-b<k1>bamburevaRa<k2>bamburevaRa
{#bamburevaRa#}¦ {%bamburevaṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34442<pc>0674-b<k1>bamBara<k2>bamBara
{#bamBara#}¦ {%bambhara, as,%} m. a bee; [cf. {%bhra-%}
{%mara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34443<pc>0674-b<k1>bamBarAlI<k2>bamBarAlI
{%Bambharālī,%}¦ f. a fly; [cf. {%bhambharālī.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0674-c+ 69]

<L>34444<pc>0674-c<k1>bamBAri<k2>bamBAri
{#bamBAri#}¦ {%bambhāri, is,%} m., Ved., N. of one
of the seven tutelary deities of the Soma plant.
<LEND>

<L>34445<pc>0674-c<k1>bara<k2>bara
{#bara#}¦ {%bara, as,%} m. a N. of Bala-rāma ({%=%}
{%bala%}).
<LEND>

<L>34446<pc>0674-c<k1>barawa<k2>barawa
{#barawa#}¦ {%baraṭa, as,%} m. a species of grain;
[cf. {%barbaṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34447<pc>0674-c<k1>barAsI<k2>barAsI
{#barAsI#}¦ {%barāsī,%} f. a particular article of
clothing or kind of woven cloth; (also read {%varāsī,%}
{%varāsi, varāśi.%})
<LEND>

<L>34448<pc>0674-c<k1>baru<k2>baru
{#baru#}¦ {%baru, us,%} m., Ved., N. of a descendant
of Aṅgiras and author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 96;
N. of an Āṅgirasa.
<LEND>

<L>34449<pc>0674-c<k1>barodA<k2>barodA
{#barodA#}¦ {%barodā,%} N. of a place in Guzerat.
<LEND>

<L>34450<pc>0674-c<k1>barku<k2>barku
{#barku#}¦ {%barku, us,%} m., Ved., N. of a man
with the patronymic Vārṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>34451<pc>0674-c<k1>barjara<k2>barjara
{#barjara#}¦ {%barjara,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34452<pc>0674-c<k1>barjaha<k2>barjaha
{#barjaha#}¦ {%barjaha, as, am,%} m. n., Ved. an
udder, (Sāy. {%= payasa utpatti-sthānam.%})
<LEND>

<L>34453<pc>0674-c<k1>barjahya<k2>barjahya
{%Barjahya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a nipple.
<LEND>

<L>34454<pc>0674-c<k1>barb<k2>barb
{#barb#}¦ {%barb,%} cl. 1. P. {%barbati, barbitum,%} to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>34455<pc>0674-c<k1>barbawa<k2>barbawa
{#barbawa#}¦ {%barbaṭa, as, ī,%} m. f. a kind of bean,
Dolichos Catjang [cf. {%baraṭa%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a harlot, pros-
titute; [cf. {%bārbaṭīra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34456<pc>0674-c<k1>barbaRA<k2>barbaRA
{#barbaRA#}¦ {%barbaṇā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%barb%}),
a blue fly.
<LEND>

<L>34457<pc>0674-c<k1>barbara<k2>barbara
{#barbara#}¦ {%barbara, as,%} m. (also written {%var-%}
{%vara,%} q. v., cf. <lang n="greek">βάρβαρος</lang>), a blockhead, fool, low fel-
low, barbarian, any one not a Sanskrit speaker, not an
Āryan, (used mostly in the voc.); ({%as%} or {%am%}), m.
or n. (?), N. of a district. {%—Barbara-tā,%} f. (in Ved.
gram.) a stammering pronunciation of the letter {%r.%}
{%—Barbara-sthāna,%} N. of a district.
<LEND>

<L>34458<pc>0674-c<k1>barbaraka<k2>barbaraka
{%Barbaraka, barbarīka.%}¦ See {%varvaraka,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>34459<pc>0674-c<k1>barbura<k2>barbura
{#barbura#}¦ {%barbura, am,%} n., Ved. water; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">βόρβορο-ν;</lang> Fr. <nsi>bourbe.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>34460<pc>0674-c<k1>barsa<k2>barsa
{#barsa#}¦ {%barsa, as,%} m., Ved. a tip, point, thin
end, extremity. {%—Barsa-naddhi, is,%} f., Ved. the
tying of sacrificial knots.
<LEND>

<L>34461<pc>0674-c<k1>barsva<k2>barsva
{#barsva#}¦ {%barsva, as,%} m., Ved. the fleshy forma-
tion of the gums round the socket of a tooth, a
socket of a tooth.
<LEND>

<L>34462<pc>0674-c<k1>barh<k2>barh
{#barh#}¦ {%barh%} (also written {%varh,%} q. v., cf.
rts. {%bṛh, vṛh, bṛṃh, vṛṃh%}), cl. 1. A.
{%barhate, babarhe, barhitum,%} to speak; to hurt,
injure, kill; to give, (according to another reading)
to cover; to spread, (this sense being perhaps only
deduced from {%barhis,%} q. v.); to be pre-eminent or
excellent; cl. 10. P. {%barhayati,%} to hurt, injure, kill.
<LEND>

<L>34463<pc>0674-c<k1>barha<k2>barha
{#barha#}¦ {%barha, barhin.%} See {%varha, varhin.%}
<LEND>

<L>34464<pc>0674-c<k1>barhaRa<k2>barhaRa
{#barhaRa#}¦ {%barhaṇa%} (fr. rt. {%bṛṃh%} for {%vṛṃh%}), Ved.
strong; occurring only in the Vedic inst. {%barhaṇā,%}
closely, firmly, strongly; very, really, certainly.
{%—Barhaṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} energetic, vigorous,
earnest; (according to Sāy.) injuring enemies. {%—Bar-%}
{%haṇāśva (˚ṇa-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince, a son
of Nikumbha.
<LEND>

<L>34465<pc>0674-c<k1>barhas<k2>barhas
{%Barhas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. strong, firm; occurring
only in {%adri-barhas, ās, ās, as,%} firm as a rock,
fastened by rocks; (or according to Sāy.) spread out
or swollen with clouds, and in {%dvi-b˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34466<pc>0674-c<k1>barhizWa<k2>barhizWa<h>1
1. {%barhiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ strongest, &c. See {%var-%}
{%hiṣṭha.%} (For 2. {%barhi-ṣṭha%} see p. 675, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>34467<pc>0674-c<k1>barhis<k2>barhis
{#barhis#}¦ {%barhis, is,%} m. n. (in the later litera-
ture generally written {%varhis;%} probably fr. rt. 1. or 2.
{%vṛh;%} said to be fr. rt. {%vṛṃh%}), (that which is plucked
up), a bed or layer of Kuśa grass (usually strewed
over the sacrificial ground and especially over the
Vedi, to serve as a sacred surface on which to present
[Page0675-a+ 80]
the oblations, and as a seat for the gods and for the
sacrificers); Kuśa grass, sacrificial grass; ({%is%}), n. the
strewed sacrificial grass personified and enumerated
among the Pra-yāja and Anu-yāja deities; sacrifice
({%= tantra%}); ether; water; a kind of perfume, {%=%}
{%barhi-puṣpa; (is),%} m. fire, light, lustre, splendor;
Plumbago Zeylanica (to which plant all the names
of fire are applied); N. of a son of Bṛhad-rāja;
({%iṣas%}), m. pl. the descendants of Barhis. {%—Barhiḥ-%}
{%puṣpa, am,%} n. {%= barhi-puṣpa%}. {%—Barhiḥ-śuṣ-%}
{%man, ā,%} m. fire, the god of fire. {%—Barhiḥ-ṣad,%}
see under {%barhi-ṣad%}. {%—Barhiḥ-ṣṭha, as,%} m.
‘standing upon the sacrificial grass,’ (perhaps) a
victim; ({%am%}), n. a kind of perfume commonly
called Bāla; or (according to some) a kind of fragrant
grass, Andropogon Muricatus. {%—Barhiḥ-ṣṭhā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. standing or placed upon the sacrificial
grass. {%—Barhi-kusuma, am,%} n. {%= barhi-puṣpa.%}
{%—Barhi-puṣpa, am,%} n. a kind of perfume. {%—Bar-%}
{%hir-jyotis, is,%} m. fire, the deity of fire. {%—Barhir-%}
{%mukha, as,%} m. ‘fire-mouthed,’ a deity (so called
because sacrifices are mostly offered to the gods by
fire). {%—Barhi-ṣad, t, t, t%} ({%barhi%} for {%barhis + sad%}),
seated on sacrificial grass; (according to the Nirukta)
{%= mahat,%} great; ({%das%}), m. pl. the Manes; (in the
later literature) a particular class of Pitṛs or Manes,
see Manu III. 196, 199; ({%t%}), m. a Pitṛ or deified
progenitor; N. of a son of Havir-dhāna and Havir-
dhānī {%(= prācīna-barhis)%}. {%—Barhi-ṣada, as,%} m.,
N. of a holy sage {%(= barhin)%}. {%—Barhiṣ-keśa, as,%}
m. ‘having light for hair,’ fire, Agni, the god of fire.
 — 2. {%barhi-ṣṭha, am,%} n. a kind of fragrant grass
or perfume; the resin of the Pinus Longifolia, see
{%barhiḥ-ṣṭha;%} (for 1. {%barhiṣṭha%} see p. 674,
col. 3.) {%—Barhiṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
sacrificial grass, (Sāy. {%= āstīrṇena barhiṣā yuk-%}
{%taḥ%}); ({%ān%}), m. one who has or spreads sacrificial
grass, a worshipper, sacrificer, (Sāy. {%= yajñena yuk-%}
{%taḥ%}); having fire or light, blazing, shining; ({%ān%}),
m. an epithet of Prācīna-barhis; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a
wife of Priya-vrata and daughter of Viśva-karman;
N. of a city in Brahmāvarta.
<LEND>

<L>34468<pc>0675-a<k1>barhizka<k2>barhizka
{%Barhiṣka, as, ā, am,%}¦ formed of sacrificial grass;
covered with sacrificial grass; a perfume commonly
called Bāla, (perhaps a species of Andropogon); resin
of Pinus Longifolia; (also written {%barhiska.%})
<LEND>

<L>34469<pc>0675-a<k1>barhizya<k2>barhizya
{%Barhiṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to or fitted
for sacrificial grass; {%Kaśyapasya barhiṣyam,%} N. of
a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>34470<pc>0675-a<k1>barhiska<k2>barhiska
{%Barhiska = barhiṣka%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>34471<pc>0675-a<k1>bal<k2>bal<h>1
{#bal#} 1¦. {%bal%} [cf. rt. {%val%}], only occurring
in Intens. {%balbalīti,%} &c., Ved. to whirl
round in a circle.
<LEND>

<L>34472<pc>0675-a<k1>bal<k2>bal<h>2
{#bal#} 2¦. {%bal%} [cf. rt. {%bhal%}], cl. 1. P. {%ba-%}
{%lati, babāla,%} &c., to breathe, live; to
hoard grain; to prevent or obstruct wealth; A.
{%balate,%} to speak; to hurt, to kill; to give, (in this
sense a various reading for rt. {%bhal%}); to describe
[cf. rt. {%bhal%}]; cl. 10. P. {%balayati, -yitum,%} to
breathe, live; {%bālayati, -yitum,%} to support, nourish,
foster, cherish, bring up, rear; A. {%bālayate%} (a various
reading for {%bhālayate%}), to explain, describe.
<LEND>

<L>34473<pc>0675-a<k1>bala<k2>bala
{%Bala, am,%}¦ n. (said to be also {%as,%} m.), power,
strength, might, vigour, ({%aurasam balam,%} native
strength, innate power); force, violence, rigour,
severity; force or power of articulation; force con-
sidered as a sixth organ of action, (Mahā-bh. Śānti-p.
9895; cf. {%karmendriya%}); (with Buddhists) one of
ten forces; Power personified as one of the Viśve
Devāḥ; massiveness, stoutness, bulkiness, weight;
body, form, figure, shape; semen virile; military
force, forces, troops, a host, army, (in these senses
also pl.); gum, myrrh; blood; a sprout, young
shoot; ({%as%}), m., N. of Bala-rāma the elder brother
of Kṛṣṇa, also called Bala-deva, Bala-bhadra, &c.;
(with Jainas) a white Bala or elder brother of Vāsu-
deva, (nine of these are enumerated by Hemacandra,
viz. Acala, Vijaya, Bhadra, Su-prabha, Su-darśana,
Ānanda, Nandana, Padma, and Rāma); N. of a
son of Varuṇa and brother of Surā; of an attendant
[Page0675-b+ 81]
on Skanda; of a son of Kṛṣṇa; of a son of Aṅgiras;
of a son of Pari-kṣit; of a demon; of a lexicographer
(also Vala); a species of carrion crow; a kind of tree, =
1. {%balāya; (ā),%} f. an aquatic plant, a species of mallow,
Sida Cordifolia; ({%bale,%} f. du. the two Balā plants, viz.
Balā and Ati-balā, cf. {%ati-b˚, jyeṣṭha-b˚%}); N. of a
particular charm or incantation of great efficacy [cf.
{%ati-balā%}]; N. of a woman; of a daughter of Dakṣa
and wife of Kaśyapa; of a female divinity who
executes the orders of the seventeenth Arhat of the
present Ava-śarpiṇī; ({%as, ā, am%}), strong, stout,
robust, powerful; sick {%(= amin?); balena,%} ind. by
force, by the power of, on the strength of; in virtue
of, by means of, through, by; {%balāt,%} ind. by force,
forcibly, violently; against the will of, without the
consent of; [cf. Lat. <nsi>valor, validus, valeo, de-bilis.</nsi>]
{%—Bala-kara, as, ī, am,%} or {%bala-kṛt, t, t, t,%}
inspiring or infusing strength, strengthening. {%—Bala-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done by force, done against free
consent. {%—Bala-kṛti, is,%} f., Ved. a mighty deed.
{%—Bala-kṣobha, as,%} m. a commotion in the
forces, mutiny in an army. {%—Bala-guptā,%} f., N. of
a woman. {%—Bala-cakra, am,%} n. ‘circle of power,’
dominion, sovereignty, supremacy; an army, host.
{%—Bala-cakravartin, ī,%} m. a powerful sovereign
or emperor. {%—Bala-candra, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Bala-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by strength or power;
({%am%}), n. a city-gate, gate in general; a field; fruit,
grain; war; a pretty figure; pith, marrow; ({%ā%}), f.
a pretty or handsome woman; the earth; Arabian
jasmine; N. of a river; (at the end of certain
comps. {%bala-ja%} may optionally take Vṛddhi accord-
ing to Pāṇ. VII. 3, 25, e. g. {%sauvarṇa-balaja%} or
{%sauvarṇa-bālaja.%}) {%—Bala-da, as,%} m. ‘strength-
giving,’ a form of Agni; an ox, bullock; a
medicinal plant, {%= jīvaka; (ā),%} f. the plant Phy-
salis Flexuosa ({%= aśva-gandhā%}); N. of a daughter
of Raudrāśva. {%—Bala-darpa, as,%} m. pride of
strength; reckless ardour of troops. {%—Bala-dā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. ‘strength-giving,’ conferring or impart-
ing power. {%—Baladī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bha-%}
{%vitum,%} to become an ox. {%—Baladī-bhūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} become an ox. {%—Bala-deya, am,%} n., Ved. the
granting of power, bestowal of strength, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%bala-dāna.%}) {%—Bala-deva, as,%} m. air, wind; the
elder brother of Kṛṣṇa, see {%bala-rāma,%} (he is said
in Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 7308 to have been produced
from a white hair of Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa having been
produced from a black hair, and is regarded as a Nāga
in Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 6163); N. of a Nāga-
rāja; N. of a Brāhman; ({%ā%}), f. a species of medi-
cinal plant {%(= trāyamāṇā)%}. {%—Baladeva-pattana,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a city. {%—Baladeva-svasṛ, sā,%} f.
‘sister of Bala-deva,’ an epithet of the wife of Śiva.
{%—Bala-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. ‘foe of the demon Bala,’ an
epithet of Indra. {%—Bala-dhara, as,%} m., N. of a
Brāhman; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of Bhīma-sena.
{%—Bala-nigraha, as,%} m. reducing strength, weak-
ening. {%—Bala-nisūdana, as,%} m. ‘destroyer of the
demon Bala,’ Indra. {%—Bala-pati, is,%} m. lord of
strength; a general, commander; an epithet of Indra.
{%—Bala-prada, as, ā, am,%} giving strength. {%—Bala-%}
{%prasū, ūs,%} f. the mother of Bala-deva. Rohiṇī. {%—Bala-%}
{%prāṇa, am,%} n. strength and spirit. {%—Bala-bandhu,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of one of the sons of Manu Raivata; of a
son of Bhṛgu in the tenth Dvāpara. {%—Bala-bhadra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} strong, powerful; ({%as%}), m. a strong or
robust man; a kind of ox, the gayal, Bos Gavæus
({%= gavaya%}); the tree Symplocos Racemosa, com-
monly called Lodh ({%= lodhra%}); N. of Bala-rāma,
q. v., or of An-anta, the great serpent identified with
Bala-rāma; N. of a descendant of Bharata; N. of
various men; N. of a mountain-range; ({%ā%}), f. a
young girl, maiden; a species of medicinal plant {%(=%}
{%trāyamāṇā)%}. {%—Bala-bhadrikā,%} f. a species of
medicinal plant {%(= bala-bhadrā)%}. {%—Bala-bhit-%}
{%sakhi, ā,%} m. a friend of the slayer of Bala, friend
of Indra. {%—Bala-bhid, t, t, t,%} breaking up or routing
an army; ({%t%}), m. the slayer of Bala; an epithet of
Indra. {%—Bala-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} ‘might-bearing,’ power-
ful, strong. {%—Bala-rāma, as,%} m., N. of the elder
[Page0675-c+ 81]
brother of Kṛṣṇa and third of the Rāmas, (seventh
son of Vasu-deva and Devakī, but transferred to the
womb of Rohiṇī; regarded as the eighth Avatār of
Viṣṇu, sometimes as an incarnation of the great ser-
pent Śeṣa or An-anta; he is also called Bala, Bala-
deva, Bala-bhadra, and Halāyudha.) {%—Balarāma-%}
{%pañcānana, as,%} m., N. of a grammarian. {%—Bala-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing power, powerful, mighty,
strong, stout, lusty; dense, thick; preponderating,
prevailing; accompanied by an army; ({%ān%}), m., N.
of the eighth Muhūrta; ({%at%}), ind. powerfully, strongly,
vehemently, stoutly, lustily, in a high degree, much,
well. {%—Balavat-tara, as, ā, am,%} more powerful,
stronger. {%—Balavat-tā,%} f. powerfulness, mightiness;
superiority, preponderance. {%—Bala-vardhana, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} increasing power, strengthening, ennobling;
({%as%}), m., N. of one of the sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
{%—Bala-vardhin, ī, inī, i,%} increasing strength,
strengthening; ({%inī%}), f. a species of medicinal plant
{%(= jīvaka)%}. {%—Bala-varma-deva, as,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Bala-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a prince; of a
merchant. {%—Bala-vijñāya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. recog-
nizable by strength. {%—Bala-vinyāsa, as,%} m. ar-
rangement or disposition of forces, array of troops.
{%—Bala-vīrya, as,%} m., N. of a descendant of
Bharata. {%—Balavīrya-parākrama, as, ā, am,%}
strong, heroic, and valorous. {%—Bala-vṛtra-nisū-%}
{%dana, as,%} or {%bala-vṛtra-han, hā,%} m. the destroyer
of Bala and Vṛtra; an epithet of Indra. {%—Bala-%}
{%vyasana, am,%} n. the defeat or rout of an army.
{%—Balavyasana-saṅkula, as, ā, am,%} (a king)
embarassed by disorder in (his) army. {%—Bala-śāli-%}
{%tā,%} f. the possession of strength, prowess. {%—Bala-%}
{%śālin, ī, inī, i,%} having or possessing strength, strong,
vigorous. {%—Bala-sūdana, as, ī, am,%} destroying
armies; ({%as%}), m. ‘destroyer of the demon Bala,’
Indra. {%—Bala-sena, as,%} m., N. of a warrior; ({%ā%}), f.
a strong army, an army, host. {%—Bala-stha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} strong, vigorous, powerful [cf. {%balāvastha%}];
({%as%}), m. being in or belonging to an army, a warrior,
soldier. {%—Bala-sthiti, is,%} f. ‘army-station,’ a camp,
encampment; a royal residence, a royal camp or
quarters. {%—Bala-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} one who slays or
destroys armies; ({%ā%}), m. ‘destroyer of strength,’
phlegm, the phlegmatic humor. {%—Bala-hara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} taking away strength, depriving of power;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Bala-hīna, as, ā, am,%}
destitute of strength, weak, infirm. {%—Balahīna-tā,%}
f. the being destitute of strength, weakness, exhaustion,
prostration of strength, infirmity from fatigue or age.
{%—Balākṣa (˚la-ak˚), as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Balāgra (˚la-ag˚), am,%} n. the utmost strength,
extreme force, excessive might; the head of an
army. {%—Balāṭa (˚la-aṭa), as,%} m. a kind of bean,
Phaseolus Mungo. {%—Balā-taila, am,%} n. the oil of
the plant Sida Cordifolia. {%—Balāt-kāra, as,%} m.
doing anything by force, acting with violence, using
or employing force, application of force or violence,
power exerted wrongfully, oppression; violence, ex-
action; injustice; (in law) the detention of the
person of a debtor by his creditor, and the violent
measures taken by the latter to recover his debt;
({%eṇa%}), ind. by force, forcibly, violently. {%—Balātkā-%}
{%rābhilāṣin (˚ra-abh˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} wishing to use
violence, wishing to violate. {%—Balātkārita%} or {%ba-%}
{%lāt-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} treated violently, forced,
overpowered, overcome. {%—Balātmikā (˚la-āt˚),%} f.
the plant Tiaridium Indicum; a species of sun-
flower, Heliotropium Indicum. {%—Balādhika (˚la-%}
{%adh˚), as, ā, am,%} superior in strength, surpassing in
power. {%—Balādhikaraṇa (˚la-adh˚), āni,%} n. pl.
‘army affairs,’ the business or affairs of an army.
{%—Balādhyakṣa (˚la-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘inspector of
forces,’ the superintendent or commander of an army, a
general, minister of war. {%—Balānīka (˚la-an˚), as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Balānuja (˚la-an˚), as,%} m. the
younger brother of Bala-deva; an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Balānvita (˚la-an˚), as, ā, am,%} possessed of power,
powerful, strong; leading an army. {%—Balāpakar-%}
{%ṣam (˚la-ap˚),%} ind. by force. {%—Balābala (˚la-%}
{%ab˚), am,%} n. strength and weakness, comparative
[Page0676-a+ 81]
strength and want of strength, relative importance
and insignificance; ({%as, ā, am%}), strong and weak,
strong at one time and weak at another. {%—Balābala-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a work elucidating the various
apparent discrepancies in Kātantra's grammatical
aphorisms. {%—Balābalākṣepa-parihāra (˚la-ākṣ˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a work by Ananta-deva on the com-
parative dignity of the various gods invoked in sacri-
fice. {%—Balābhra (˚la-abh˚), am,%} n. ‘army-cloud,’
an army in the form of a cloud. {%—Balā-mūla,%}
{%am,%} n. the root of Sida Cordifolia. {%—Balārāti%}
{%(˚la-ar˚), is,%} m. ‘enemy of the demon Bala,’ an
epithet of Indra. {%—Balārthin (˚la-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%}
seeking power, desirous of power. {%—Balāvalepa%}
{%(˚la-av˚), as,%} m. pride of strength or prowess.
{%—Balāśva (˚la-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a king (called.
also Karan-dhama). {%—Balāsa%} or {%balāśa%} ({%˚la-as˚%} or
{%-aś˚%}), {%as,%} m. ‘taking away strength (?),’ a particular
disease, perhaps a kind of consumptive expectoration,
(Mahī-dhara) {%= kṣaya-vyādhi,%} consumption, phthi-
sis; the phlegmatic humor ({%= kapha, śleṣman%});
a swelling in the throat obstructing the passage of
food; [cf. {%a-balāsa.%}] {%—Balāsaka, as,%} m. a yel-
lowish spot in the white of the eye, caused by disease.
{%—Balāsa-grathita, am,%} n. a kind of ophthalmia.
{%—Balāsa-basta, as,%} m. a disease of the eye. {%—Ba-%}
{%lāsama (˚la-as˚), as,%} m. ‘unequalled in strength,’ N.
of one of the Jaina saints. {%—Balāsin, ī, inī, i,%} con-
sumptive, phthisical. {%—Balāha%} ({%bala + āha%} fr. rt.
{%hā%} with {%ā?%}), {%am,%} n. water. {%—Balāhva-kanda (˚la-%}
{%āh˚), am,%} n. a kind of esculent root {%(= gulañca-%}
{%kanda)%}. {%—Balotkaṭā (˚la-ut˚),%} f., N. of one of
the Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Balotsāha (˚la-%}
{%ut˚), as,%} m. ardour of troops or forces. {%—Balopa-%}
{%panna%} or {%balopaviṣṭa%} or {%balopeta (˚la-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessed of power, endowed with strength,
mighty, powerful. {%—Balaugha (˚la-ogha), as,%} m. a
multitude of troops or forces, numerous force.
<LEND>

<L>34474<pc>0676-a<k1>balana<k2>balana
{%Balana, am,%}¦ n. the act of strengthening, making
strong.
<LEND>

<L>34475<pc>0676-a<k1>balaya<k2>balaya
{%Balaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%balayati, -yitum,%} to make
strong, strengthen; (appearing only in the preceding
derivative {%balana%} and in {%upod-balaya,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>34476<pc>0676-a<k1>balala<k2>balala
{%Balala, as,%}¦ m. {%= bala-rāma,%} p. 675, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34477<pc>0676-a<k1>balAya<k2>balAya<h>1
1. {%balāya, as,%}¦ m. a species of tree, Capparis Trifo-
liata ({%= bala%}).
<LEND>

<L>34478<pc>0676-a<k1>balAya<k2>balAya<h>2
2. {%balāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%balāyati, -yitum,%} to put
forth strength.
<LEND>

<L>34479<pc>0676-a<k1>balikA<k2>balikA
{%Balikā,%}¦ f. a species of plant.
<LEND>

<L>34480<pc>0676-a<k1>balita<k2>balita<h>1
1. {%balita, as, ā, am,%}¦ strong ?; ({%am%}), ind. strongly;
[cf. 2. {%balita%} at p. 677, col. 1.]
<LEND>

<L>34481<pc>0676-a<k1>balin<k2>balin
{%Balin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ powerful, strong, mighty, vigorous,
stout, robust [cf. {%bāhu-b˚%}]; ({%ī%}), m. a hog; a bull;
a buffalo; a camel; a soldier [cf. {%bala-stha%}]; a N.
of Bala-rāma; N. of a son of Vatsa-prī; a kind of
pulse, Phaseolus Radiatus; a sort of jasmine, Jasmi-
num Pubescens; the phlegmatic humor [cf. {%balāsa%}];
({%inī%}), f. the plant Sida Cordifolia; [cf. {%balā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34482<pc>0676-a<k1>baliman<k2>baliman
{%Baliman, ā,%}¦ m. power, strength; {%a-baliman, ā,%}
m., Ved. enfeeblement, weakness.
<LEND>

<L>34483<pc>0676-a<k1>balizWa<k2>balizWa
{%Baliṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. fr. {%balin%}), most
powerful, strongest, mightiest, stoutest, very strong;
(with abl.) more powerful, stronger; ({%as%}), m. a
camel. {%—Baliṣṭha-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most
powerful, strongest, mightiest, stoutest.
<LEND>

<L>34484<pc>0676-a<k1>balizRu<k2>balizRu
{%Baliṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ disregarded, despised; arro-
gant, disrespectful (?).
<LEND>

<L>34485<pc>0676-a<k1>balIyas<k2>balIyas
{%Balīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. fr. {%balin%}), more
powerful, stronger, mightier, exceedingly powerful,
very strong; more important; efficacious, having a
powerful effect; [cf. {%a-b˚.%}] {%—Balīyas-tara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} more powerful, stronger. {%—Balīyas-tva, am,%}
n. pre-eminence in strength, superior power, greater
strength, predominance; excessive strength, extreme
efficacy, all powerfulness.
<LEND>

<L>34486<pc>0676-a<k1>balIyasa<k2>balIyasa
{%Balīyasa, as, ā, am, = balīyas.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>34487<pc>0676-a<k1>balUla<k2>balUla
{%Balūla, as, ā, am,%}¦ powerful, strong, mighty.
<LEND>

<L>34488<pc>0676-a<k1>balya<k2>balya
{%Balya, as, ā, am,%}¦ powerful, strong, vigorous;
strengthening, giving strength; ({%as%}), m. a Buddhist
mendicant; ({%ā%}), f., N. of various plants, {%ati-balā,%}
{%aśva-gandhā, pra-sāriṇī; (am),%} n. semen virile.
<LEND>
[Page0676-b+ 74]

<L>34489<pc>0676-b<k1>balakza<k2>balakza
{#balakza#}¦ {%balakṣa.%} See {%valakṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>34490<pc>0676-b<k1>balaKin<k2>balaKin
{#balaKin#}¦ {%balakhin, ī, inī, i,%} coming from
Balkh; [cf. {%turakin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34491<pc>0676-b<k1>balaNga<k2>balaNga
{#balaNga#}¦ {%balaṅga%} and {%balaṣa%} and {%balahaṣa,%}
N. of places.
<LEND>

<L>34492<pc>0676-b<k1>balaBa<k2>balaBa
{#balaBa#}¦ {%balabha, as,%} m. a poisonous insect.
<LEND>

<L>34493<pc>0676-b<k1>balAka<k2>balAka
{#balAka#}¦ {%balāka, as, ā,%} m. f. (more usually
f.; said to be fr. rt. {%val,%} cf. {%valāka%}), a crane, a kind
of edible crane; ({%as%}), m., N. of a pupil of Śāka-
pūrṇi; of a pupil of Jātūkarṇya; of a hunter; of a
son of Pūru and grandson of Jahnu [cf. {%balākāśva%}];
of a son of Vatsa-prī; of a Rākṣasa; ({%ā%}), f. a mistress
or loved woman; N. of a woman. {%—Balākā-kauśika,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Balākā-paṅkti-hāsin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} smiling with rows of cranes. {%—Balākāśva%}
{%(˚ka-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a descendant of Jahnu.
<LEND>

<L>34494<pc>0676-b<k1>balAkikA<k2>balAkikA
{%Balākikā,%}¦ f. a species of small crane.
<LEND>

<L>34495<pc>0676-b<k1>balAkin<k2>balAkin
{%Balākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ abounding in cranes; ({%ī%}), m.,
N. of one of the hundred sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>34496<pc>0676-b<k1>balANgaka<k2>balANgaka
{#balANgaka#}¦ {%balāṅgaka, as,%} m. the spring
season.
<LEND>

<L>34497<pc>0676-b<k1>balAYcitA<k2>balAYcitA
{#balAYcitA#}¦ {%balāñcitā,%} f. the lute of Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>34498<pc>0676-b<k1>balAtkAra<k2>balAtkAra
{#balAtkAra#}¦ {%balāt-kāra.%} See p. 675, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>34499<pc>0676-b<k1>balAdyA<k2>balAdyA
{#balAdyA#}¦ {%balādyā,%} f. Sida Cordifolia ({%=%}
{%balā%}).
<LEND>

<L>34500<pc>0676-b<k1>balAmowA<k2>balAmowA
{#balAmowA#}¦ {%balāmoṭā,%} f. a kind of shrub ({%=%}
{%nāga-damanī%}).
<LEND>

<L>34501<pc>0676-b<k1>balAlaka<k2>balAlaka
{#balAlaka#}¦ {%balālaka, as,%} m. Flacourtia Cata-
phracta ({%= pānīyāmalaka%}); Carissa Carondas (?).
<LEND>

<L>34502<pc>0676-b<k1>balAsura<k2>balAsura
{#balAsura#}¦ {%balāsura, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34503<pc>0676-b<k1>balAhaka<k2>balAhaka
{#balAhaka#}¦ {%balāhaka.%} See {%valāhaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>34504<pc>0676-b<k1>bali<k2>bali
{#bali#}¦ {%bali, is,%} m. (probably fr. rt. 2. {%bal%}),
tax, impost, tribute, royal revenue; an oblation, a
gift or religious offering in general; the offering of
a portion of the daily meal of ghee, grain, rice &c.
to all creatures of every description, i. e. to gods,
semi-divine beings, men, animals, and even trees
&c., inanimate objects, but especially to those beings
called {%gṛha-devatāḥ%} or ‘household spirits,’ which
were supposed to hover round and protect households,
(this {%bali,%} also called {%bhūta-yajña,%} q. v., was one
of the five great sacrifices or religious rites, some-
times called ‘sacraments,’ which Manu enjoins on
every householder; cf. {%brahma-yajña, deva-yajña,%}
{%pitṛ-yajña, manuṣya-yajña:%} it was performed
by throwing up into the air, generally at the door of
the house, the remains of the morning and evening
meal, uttering at the same time a Mantra or prayer
to some of the inferior deities, either to Indra and
the Maruts or to Kuvera and his followers, the
Guhyakas &c., or to the spirits of trees, waters &c.;
the real consumers of the offering being the birds,
dogs, insects &c. in the neighbourhood of the house;
see Manu III. 67, 91, IV. 21); any oblation or act of
worship not being a real sacrifice; fragments of food
left at an oblation or a meal; a victim, any victim
offered to Durgā; the handle of a chowrie or fly-
flapper; three folds of skin at the end of the rectum;
N. of a celebrated Daitya, a son of Virocana, and
also called Mahā-bali, (he was the sovereign of
Mahābali-pura, and so extended his empire as to
acquire dominion over the three worlds; having
omitted however in his arrogance to make the usual
offerings to the deities, Viṣṇu resolved to mortify
his pride, and assumed the form of a Vāmana or
dwarf, as the son of Kaśyapa and Aditi and younger
brother of Indra, in which shape he appeared before
Bali and asked as much land as he could pace in
three steps; this Bali granted, and Viṣṇu expanding
himself deprived him in two steps of heaven and
earth, but in consideration of his virtues left Pātāla
or the lower regions still in his dominion; cf. {%tri-%}
{%vikrama%}); N. of Indra in the eighth Manv-antara;
N. of a Muni; of a king; of a son of Su-tapas;
[Page0676-c+ 81]
({%is, ī%}), f. a wrinkle, skin shrivelled by old age; the
fold of skin in stout persons (especially females) upon
the upper part of the belly or between the ensiform
cartilage and the navel; the ridge of a thatched
roof. {%—Bali-kara, as, ī, am,%} paying tribute; offer-
ing sacrifices; producing wrinkles. {%—Bali-karam-%}
{%bha, as,%} m. sacrificial cake. {%—Bali-karman, a,%} n.
presentation or payment of tribute; offering of
oblations to all creatures, offering victims in sacrifice.
{%—Bali-kṛt, t, t, t,%} paying taxes, tributary. {%—Bali-%}
{%ceṣṭita-varṇana, am,%} n., N. of the thirty-first
chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa or second part of the
Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Bali-dāna, am,%} n. the presenta-
tion of an offering to a deity, (when presented by
the worshippers of Viṣṇu to any of his forms, the
offering usually consists of rice, milk, curds, fruits,
and flowers; when offered to the terrific forms of
Śiva or more especially to those of Durgā, it consists
of living victims, as sheep, goats, buffaloes, and the
like, the heads of which after decapitation in presence
of the idol are given to the priests, and the carcases
carried away and eaten by the low castes); presen-
tation of grain and the like to all creatures. {%—Bali-%}
{%dhvaṃsin, ī,%} m. ‘destroying the Daitya Bali,’ an
epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Bali-nandana, as,%} m. the
son of the Daitya Bali, the Asura Bāṇa. {%—Bali-%}
{%niyamanodyata (˚na-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} prepared to
subdue the Daitya Bali (said of Viṣṇu). {%—Bali-%}
{%niṣūdana, as,%} m., in Rāmāyaṇa I. 47, 7, a wrong
reading for {%bala-nisūdana,%} q. v. {%—Balin-dama,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘tamer of the Daitya Bali,’ an epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Balindama-prakhya, as, ā, am,%} resem-
bling the tamer of the Daitya Bali, equal to Viṣṇu.
{%—Bali-putra, as,%} m. the son of the Daitya Bali,
the Asura Bāṇa. {%—Baliputra-mokṣaṇa, am,%} n.,
N. of the twenty-fifth chapter of the Kṛṣṇa-khaṇḍa
or fourth part of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Bali-%}
{%puṣṭa, as,%} m. ‘nourished by offerings or oblations,’
a crow; [cf. {%bali, bali-bhuj, bali-bhojana.%}] {%—Bali-%}
{%podakī,%} f. the plant Basella Cordifolia {%(= upodakī).%}
{%—Bali-priya, as,%} m. ‘fond of oblations,’ the Lodh
tree, Symplocos Racemosa (fabled to grow faster if
perfumed). {%—Bali-bandhana, as,%} m. ‘binding or
subduing the Daitya Bali,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Ba-%}
{%li-bhadra, as,%} m., N. of a man (various reading for
{%bala-bhadra%}). {%—Bali-bhuj, k, k, k,%} devouring obla-
tions; enjoying offerings (said of the gods); ({%k%}), m.
a crow [cf. {%bali, bali-puṣṭa%}]; a sparrow; a crane.
{%—Bali-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} paying tribute, tributary; [cf.
{%bali-hṛt.%}] {%—Bali-bhojana, as,%} m. ‘eating obla-
tions,’ a crow; [cf. {%bali, bali-bhuj.%}] {%—Bali-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessing the oblation offered to all
creatures, provided with the sacrifice to all beings
(said of a house; according to Malli-nātha {%= pūjā-%}
{%yukta%}); receiving taxes or tribute (said of Agni);
having wrinkles, wrinkled, shrivelled, flaccid. {%—Bali-%}
{%mandira, am,%} n. the abode of the Daitya Bali,
the infernal regions. {%—Bali-mātra, am,%} n. a mere
offering (to all beings), as much in quantity as an
oblation to all creatures. {%—Bali-mukha, as,%} m.
‘wrinkled-faced,’ a monkey. {%—Bali-vindhya, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Manu Raivata. {%—Bali-veśman,%}
{%a,%} n. the abode of the Daitya Bali, the infernal
regions. {%—Bali-vyākula, as, ā, am,%} distracted or
busily occupied with offering the oblation to all
creatures. {%—Bali-saṅga, as,%} m. the lash of a whip (?).
{%—Bali-sadman, a,%} n. the abode of Bali, the in-
fernal regions. {%—Bali-sūdana,%} in Rāmāyaṇa I. 47,
2, a wrong reading for {%bala-sūdana,%} q. v. {%—Bali-%}
{%han, ā,%} m. ‘smiter of the Daitya Bali,’ an epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Bali-haraṇa, as, ī, am,%} adapted for the
presentation of oblations (Ved.); ({%am%}), n. the pre-
sentation of a gift or oblation. {%—Bali-hāra, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} or {%bali-hṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. paying taxes or
tribute, (Sāy. {%= kara-prada;%} cf. {%bali-bhṛt.%})
{%—Balī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make
an offering, present as an offering; to destine or
intend for an oblation. {%—Balī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
presented as an offering, intended for an oblation.
{%—Balī-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} or {%balī-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
having curls, curled (as the hair). {%—Balī-mukha %}
[Page0677-a+ 71]
{%= bali-mukha%}. {%—Baly-upākhyāna, am,%} n., N. of
the twentieth chapter of the Vāsiṣṭha-rāmāyaṇa or
Yoga-vāsiṣṭha.
<LEND>

<L>34505<pc>0677-a<k1>balika<k2>balika
{%Balika, as,%}¦ m. the edge of a thatched roof, (more
properly {%valika,%} q. v.); N. of a Nāga-rāja.
<LEND>

<L>34506<pc>0677-a<k1>balita<k2>balita<h>2
2. {%balita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 676, col. 1),
wrinkled, having wrinkles, wizened.
<LEND>

<L>34507<pc>0677-a<k1>balina<k2>balina
{%Balina, as, ā, am,%}¦ wrinkled, shrivelled, flabby,
flaccid.
<LEND>

<L>34508<pc>0677-a<k1>baliBa<k2>baliBa
{%Balibha, as, ā, am,%}¦ shrivelled, wrinkled, flaccid,
withered.
<LEND>

<L>34509<pc>0677-a<k1>balI<k2>balI
{%Balī.%}¦ See p. 676, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>34510<pc>0677-a<k1>balIna<k2>balIna
{%Balīna, as,%}¦ m. a scorpion; N. of an Asura.
<LEND>

<L>34511<pc>0677-a<k1>balin<k2>balin
{#balin#}¦ {%balin.%} See p. 676, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34512<pc>0677-a<k1>balivarda<k2>balivarda
{#balivarda#}¦ {%balivarda, as,%} m. (according to
native authorities connected with {%bala,%} strength, and
with rt. {%vṛdh, varda%} being for {%vardha%}), a bull or
ox; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>34513<pc>0677-a<k1>balIvarda<k2>balIvarda
{%Balīvarda.%}¦ See {%balivarda%} above.
<LEND>

<L>34514<pc>0677-a<k1>balIvardin<k2>balIvardin
{%Balīvardin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34515<pc>0677-a<k1>balIvardineya<k2>balIvardineya
{%Balīvardineya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Balī-
vardī.
<LEND>

<L>34516<pc>0677-a<k1>balIvarDa<k2>balIvarDa
{%Balīvardha = balīvarda,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34517<pc>0677-a<k1>balizWa<k2>balizWa
{#balizWa#}¦ {%baliṣṭha, baliṣṇu.%} See p. 676, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34518<pc>0677-a<k1>balIyas<k2>balIyas
{#balIyas#}¦ {%balīyas.%} See p. 676, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34519<pc>0677-a<k1>balIha<k2>balIha
{#balIha#}¦ {%balīha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
[cf. {%balhika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34520<pc>0677-a<k1>balkasa<k2>balkasa
{#balkasa#}¦ {%balkasa, am,%} n., Ved. dregs or sedi-
ment left in the distillation of ardent spirits.
<LEND>

<L>34521<pc>0677-a<k1>balbaja<k2>balbaja
{#balbaja#}¦ {%balbaja, as,%} m. (in the later litera-
ture written {%valvaja%}), Eleusine Indica, a species of
coarse grass (found in meadows and on roads in
solitary patches and not liked by cattle). {%—Balbaja-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} made of the grass Eleusine Indica.
{%—Balbaja-stuka,%} Ved. a bunch or tuft of the grass
Eleusine Indica.
<LEND>

<L>34522<pc>0677-a<k1>balbajika<k2>balbajika
{%Balbajika, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Gaṇa Kumudādi I. to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>34523<pc>0677-a<k1>balbalA<k2>balbalA
{#balbalA#}¦ {%balbalā,%} ind., Ved. an onomato-
poetic word. {%—Balbalā-kurvat, an, atī, at,%} Ved.
stammering, stuttering. {%—Balbalā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-ka-%}
{%roti, -kartum,%} Ved. to stammer in speaking, stam-
mer, stutter; [cf. Lat. <nsi>balbutire.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>34524<pc>0677-a<k1>balbUTa<k2>balbUTa
{#balbUTa#}¦ {%balbūtha, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34525<pc>0677-a<k1>balya<k2>balya
{#balya#}¦ {%balya.%} See p. 676, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34526<pc>0677-a<k1>balla<k2>balla
{#balla#}¦ {%balla,%} in Mahā-bh. Droṇa-p. 1217,
incorrectly for {%valga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34527<pc>0677-a<k1>ballava<k2>ballava
{#ballava#}¦ {%ballava, as,%} m. (also written {%vallava,%}
q. v.), a cowherd [cf. {%go-vallava%}]; N. assumed by
Bhīma-sena when cook to king Virāṭa; a cook; ({%ī%}),
f. a cowherdess. {%—Ballava-tva, am,%} n. the charge
or duty of a cowherd. {%—Ballava-yuvati, is,%} or {%bal-%}
{%lava-yuvatī,%} f. a young cowherdess.
<LEND>

<L>34528<pc>0677-a<k1>ballAla<k2>ballAla
{#ballAla#}¦ {%ballāla, as,%} m., N. of various men;
of the author of the Bhoja-prabandha or history of
king Bhoja. {%—Ballāla-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Ballāla-sena, as,%} m., N. of a poet; N. of a
king of Bengal who reigned in the eleventh century
of our era.
<LEND>

<L>34529<pc>0677-a<k1>balva<k2>balva
{#balva#}¦ {%balva, am,%} n. (also written {%valva%}), N.
of the second Karaṇa or astrological division of the
day; (also called {%bālava%} or {%vālava;%} see under {%ka-%}
{%raṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>34530<pc>0677-a<k1>balvala<k2>balvala
{#balvala#}¦ {%balvala, as,%} m., N. of a Daitya,
the son of Ilvala; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; (a
various reading for {%kalkala,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>34531<pc>0677-a<k1>balvI<k2>balvI
{#balvI#}¦ {%balvī,%} incorrectly for {%vallī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34532<pc>0677-a<k1>balhi<k2>balhi
{#balhi#}¦ {%balhi, is,%} m., N. of a country, Balkh;
[cf. {%balhika, bālhi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34533<pc>0677-a<k1>balhika<k2>balhika
{%Balhika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people; (sometimes also written {%valhika.%})
<LEND>
[Page0677-b+ 78]

<L>34534<pc>0677-b<k1>balhIka<k2>balhIka
{%Balhīka, am,%}¦ n. (also written {%vahlīka%}), {%= bāl-%}
{%hīka,%} Asa Fœtida.
<LEND>

<L>34535<pc>0677-b<k1>bava<k2>bava
{#bava#}¦ {%bava, am,%} n., N. of the first Karaṇa
or astrological division of the day; (also written
{%vava;%} see under {%karaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>34536<pc>0677-b<k1>bazkaya<k2>bazkaya
{#bazkaya#}¦ {%baṣkaya, as, ā, am%} (also written
{%vaṣkaya,%} q. v.), Ved. one year old, a yearling,
(Sāy. = either {%āditya,%} the sun, or {%eka-hāyano vat-%}
{%saḥ,%} a yearling calf); born later or after (?).
<LEND>

<L>34537<pc>0677-b<k1>bazkayaRI<k2>bazkayaRI
{%Baṣkayaṇī%}¦ (or {%vaṣkayaṇī%}), f. a cow bearing
many calves; a cow whose calf is full-grown.
<LEND>

<L>34538<pc>0677-b<k1>bazkayiRI<k2>bazkayiRI
{%Baṣkayiṇī = baṣkayaṇī.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>34539<pc>0677-b<k1>bazkiha<k2>bazkiha
{%Baṣkiha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (according to Mahī-
dhara) {%= cira-prasūta.%}
<LEND>

<L>34540<pc>0677-b<k1>basta<k2>basta
{#basta#}¦ {%basta, as,%} m. (also written {%vasta,%} q. v.),
a goat. {%—Basta-karṇa, as,%} m. the Śāl tree, Shorea
Robusta {%(= aja-karṇaka)%}. {%—Basta-gandhā,%} f.
shrubby basil, Ocymum Gratissimum {%(= aja-gan-%}
{%dhā)%}. {%—Bastagandhākṛti (˚dhā-āk˚),%} a species of
plant {%(= putra-dātrī)%}. {%—Basta-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
‘goat-faced,’ having a face like that of a goat. {%—Basta-%}
{%mūtra, am,%} n. the urine of a goat. {%—Basta-modā,%}
f. ‘goat's delight,’ a species of plant {%(= aja-modā).%}
{%—Basta-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} making a noise like a
goat; (probably an incorrect form for {%basta-vāśin.%})
{%—Basta-śṛṅgī,%} f. a species of plant {%(= meṣa-%}
{%śṛṅgī)%}. {%—Bastāntrī (˚ta-an˚),%} f. Argyreia Spe-
ciosa or Argentea {%(= chagalāntrī)%}. {%—Bastābhivā-%}
{%śin%} or {%bastābhivāsin (˚ta-abh˚), ī, inī, i,%} Ved. {%=%}
{%basta-vāsin.%}
<LEND>

<L>34541<pc>0677-b<k1>basri<k2>basri
{#basri#}¦ {%basri,%} ind., Ved. (according to Sāy.)
{%= kṣipram,%} quickly, swiftly.
<LEND>

<L>34542<pc>0677-b<k1>bah<k2>bah
{#bah#}¦ {%bah%} (another form of rt. {%baṃh%}), to
grow, increase, &c. See rt. {%baṃh.%}
<LEND>

<L>34543<pc>0677-b<k1>bahala<k2>bahala
{%Bahala, as, ā, am,%}¦ hard, firm, compact; dense,
thick (as any substance or as a liquid); harsh (as a
sound); manifold, multifarious; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
sugar-cane; ({%ā%}), f. Anethum Sowa ({%= śata-puṣpā%});
large cardamoms. {%—Bahala-gandha, am,%} n. a
species of sandal {%(= śambara-candana)%}. {%—Bahala-%}
{%cakṣus, us,%} m. a species of plant ({%= meṣa-śṛṅgī;%}
also read {%cakṣur-bahala%} and {%cakṣur-vahana%}).
{%—Bahala-tā,%} f. thickness, density, compactness.
{%—Bahala-tvaca, as,%} m. the white flowering Lodhra.
{%—Bahala-vartman, a,%} n. a particular disease of
the eyes, a swollen eyelid. {%—Bahalāṅga = bahala-%}
{%cakṣus,%} q. v. {%—Bahalānurāga (˚la-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deep red.
<LEND>

<L>34544<pc>0677-b<k1>bahu<k2>bahu
{%Bahu, us, us%}¦ or {%vī, u%} (of rare occurrence in the
first nine Maṇḍalas of the Ṛg-veda; frequently used
in the Atharva-veda), much, abundant; many, nu-
merous; frequent, repeated; abounding in, rich in
(with inst., Ved.); large, great, mighty; fine, hand-
some, splendid (Ved.); {%kim bahunā,%} what occasion
is there for much (speaking)? why say more? in
short, in fine; {%bahu,%} ind. much, abundantly; in a high
degree, greatly, exceedingly, very [cf. {%bahu-kalyāṇa,%}
{%bahu-citra, bahu-sadṛśa%}]; rather, somewhat,
very nearly, almost, (at the beginning of a comp.;
cf. {%bahu-tṛṇa, bahu-trivarṣa%}); {%bahu man,%} to
think much of, esteem highly, rate high, prize, value.
{%—Bahu-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. ‘many-thorned,’ N. of
various prickly plants; a species of Asteracantha Lon-
gifolia; Hedysarum Alhagi ({%= yavāsa%}); Phœnix
Paludosa, {%= hintāla; (ā),%} f. Solanum Jacquini {%(=%}
{%agni-damanī)%}. {%—Bahu-kaṇṭā,%} f. ‘many-thorned,’
the plant Solanum Jacquini. {%—Bahu-kanda, as,%} m.
‘having many bulbous roots,’ the plant Arum Cam-
panulatum; ({%ī%}), f. a species of plant {%(= karkaṭī).%}
{%—Bahu-kara, as, ī, am,%} ‘much-doing,’ doing many
things, busy, diligent; industrious, laborious; effect-
ing much, serviceable in various ways; one who
sweeps, a sweeper; ({%as%}), m. a camel; ({%ī%}), f. a
broom. {%—Bahu-karaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} one who has
much to do or complains he is full of business, one
who never has time for anything; [cf. {%bahu-kṛtya.%}]
{%—Bahu-karṇikā,%} f. {%= ākhu-karṇī,%} Salvinia Cucul-
lata; [cf. {%bahu-parṇikā.%}] {%—Bahu-kalyāṇa, as, ā%}
[Page0677-c+ 81]
or {%ī, am,%} very illustrious, most noble. {%—Bahu-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} having many wishes, cherish-
ing many desires. {%—Bahu-kāra, as, ā, am,%} ‘much-
doing,’ doing or effecting much. {%—Bahu-kālam,%} ind.
for a long time, for a long while. {%—Bahukālīna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of long standing, old, ancient. {%—Bahu-%}
{%kīṭa, as,%} m., N. of a Grāma in the north. {%—Bahu-%}
{%kulīna%} or {%bahu-kulya, as, ā, am,%} see Scholiast on
Pāṇ. IV. 1, 140; [cf. {%bāhu-kuleyaka.%}] {%—Bahu-%}
{%kusumita, as, ā, am,%} ‘many-blossomed,’ full of
blossoms. {%—Bahu-kūrca, as,%} m. a species of cocoa-
nut {%(= madhu-nālikerika)%}. {%—Bahu-kṛtya, as,%}
{%ā, am, = bahu-karaṇīya,%} q. v. {%—Bahu-ketu, us,%}
m., N. of a mountain. {%—Bahu-krama, as,%} m.,
Ved. a Krama of more than three words; [cf.
{%krama.%}] {%—Bahu-kṣama, as, ā, am,%} enduring
much, patient; ({%as%}), m. a Jaina deified saint; a
Buddha. {%—Bahu-kṣāra, as,%} m. a kind of alkali {%(=%}
{%sarva-kṣāra)%}. {%—Bahu-gandha, as, ā, am,%} ‘much-
smelling,’ strong scented; ({%as%}), m. the resin of Bos-
wellia Thurifera, olibanum; ({%ā%}), f. a bud of Michelia
Champaka; Jasminum Auriculatum; Nigella Indica
{%= kṛṣṇa-jīraka; (am),%} n. cinnamon. {%—Bahu-%}
{%gandha-tā,%} f. musk. {%—Bahu-garhya-vāc, k, k, k,%}
saying much that is to be censured, talking much and
blamably, too talkative, garrulous, loquacious. {%—Ba-%}
{%hu-gava, as,%} m. ‘having many kine,’ N. of a prince.
{%—Bahu-giri, is,%} N. of a district. {%—Bahu-guḍā,%}
f. the plant Solanum Jacquini. {%—Bahu-guṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} many-threaded, composed of many threads;
manifold, multifarious, much; having many good
qualities, possessed of many virtues; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a Deva-gandharva, (Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 4814, where
however {%bahu-guṇa%} is more probably an adj. in the
last of the preceding senses.) {%—Bahu-guru, us,%} m.
one who has read much but superficially {%(= cum-%}
{%baka)%}. {%—Bahu-guhā,%} f. {%= bahu-guḍā%}. {%—Bahu-go,%}
{%gaus, gaus, gu,%} having much cattle. {%—Bahu-%}
{%granthi, is,%} m. ‘many-knotted,’ the plant Tamarix
Indica. {%—Bahu-graha, as, ā, am,%} ‘much-receiving,’
receiving or taking much, holding much. {%—Bahu-%}
{%cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. ‘much-wandering,’ roaming
widely. {%—Bahu-citra, as, ā, am,%} very various or
manifold. {%—Bahu-cchada, as,%} m. the plant Alstonia
Scholaris {%(= sapta-parṇa)%}. {%—Bahu-cchinnā,%} f. a
species of plant {%(= kanda-guḍūcī)%}. {%—Bahu-janya,%}
{%am,%} n. (?), a multitude of people. {%—Bahu-jalpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘much-talking,’ very talkative, loqua-
cious. {%—Bahu-java, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very swift, (a
word used in Nirukta XII. 43 to explain {%uru-jri,%}
q. v.) {%—Bahu-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. grown mighty,
(a word used in Nirukta XII. 36 to explain {%tuvi-%}
{%jāta,%} q. v.) {%—Bahu-jña, as, ā, am,%} ‘much-know-
ing,’ possessed of great knowledge. {%—Bahujña-tā,%}
f. great knowledge. {%—Bahu-tantri, is, īs, i,%} many-
fibred (said only of the body, Pāṇ. V. 4, 159). {%—Ba-%}
{%hutantrīka, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%bahu + tantrī%}), many-
stringed, having many strings (as a musical instru-
ment). {%—Bahu-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very many,
most, most numerous; farthest, remotest (e. g. {%ā%}
{%bahutamāt puruṣāt,%} as far as the remotest de-
scendant). {%—Bahu-tara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} more,
more abundant, more numerous, very abundant,
very numerous; many, most; greater, mightier, of
greater extent, very great; ({%am%}), ind. more, very
much, for the greater part, chiefly. {%—Bahutara-%}
{%kaṇiśa, as,%} m. a kind of corn or grain; [cf. {%guccha-%}
{%kaṇiśa.%}] {%—Bahu-tarām,%} ind. in a high degree,
highly, exceedingly, much. {%—Bahu-tas,%} ind. from
or by much, from or by many; from many sides.
{%—Bahu-tā,%} f. the being many, numerousness, much-
ness, abundance, plenty, multiplicity, plurality; [cf.
{%bahu-tva.%}] {%—Bahu-tiktā,%} f. the plant Solanum In-
dicum {%(= kāka-mācikā)%}. {%—Bahutitha,%} see p. 679,
col. 3. {%—Bahu-tṛṇa, am,%} n. rich or abounding in
grass; much like a blade of grass, (according to Malli-
nātha {%= tṛṇa-kalpa.%}) {%—Bahu-tra,%} ind. in many
ways or places, amongst many. {%—Bahu-trā,%} ind., Ved.
amongst many, to many. {%—Bahu-trivarṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. well-nigh three years old. {%—Bahu-tva, am,%}
n. the state of being much or many, muchness, abun-
[Page0678-a+ 81]
dance, multitude; plurality, majority; (in grammar)
the plural number; [cf. {%bahu-tā.%}] {%—Bahutvakka, as,%}
m. (fr. {%bahu + tvac%}), ‘having much bark,’ a species
of birch tree. {%—Bahu-tvac, k,%} m. ‘having much
bark’ ({%= bahutvakka%}); Astonia Scholaris {%(= bahu-%}
{%cchada)%}. {%—Bahu-thā,%} ind. in numerous ways, in
various manners. {%—Bahu-da, as, ā, am,%} ‘much-
giving,’ liberal, munificent. {%—Bahu-dakṣiṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} accompanied with many fees or donations
(as a religious ceremony), liberal, bountiful. {%—Bahu-%}
{%daṇḍika, as, ā, am,%} or {%bahu-daṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}
having many staff-bearers. {%—Bahu-dantī,%} f., N. of
a woman. {%—Bahudantī-suta, as,%} m. the son of
Bahu-dantī; N. of an author. {%—Bahu-darśaka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} or {%bahu-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} seeing much,
paying attention to many things, circumspect. {%—Ba-%}
{%hudarśi-tā,%} f. circumspection. {%—Bahu-dāman, ā,%}
or {%bahu-dāmā,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
on Skanda. {%—Bahu-dāyin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘much-giving,’
liberal, munificent. {%—Bahu-dugdha, as, ā, am,%}
having much milk; ({%ā%}), f. a cow giving much milk;
({%as%}), m. wheat. {%—Bahudugdhikā,%} f. ‘having much
milk,’ the plant Tithymalus Antiquorum (which yields
a caustic milky juice). {%—Bahu-dṛśvan, ā, arī, a,%}
one who has seen much, a great observer or tourist.
{%—Bahu-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} ‘one by whom much
has been seen,’ very experienced. {%—Bahu-devata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. addressed to many deities (as a hymn).
{%—Bahudevatya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%bahu + devatā%}),
Ved. belonging to many deities. {%—Bahu-deśa-dar-%}
{%śin, ī, inī, i,%} one who has seen many countries; ({%ī%}),
m. a great traveller. {%—Bahudaivata, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%bahu + devatā%}), Ved. relating to many deities.
{%—Bahudaivatya, as, tī, am%} (fr. {%bahu + devatā%}),
relating to many deities; ({%am%}), n., N. of a work
belonging to the Śaiva-darśana and mentioned in
Mādhavācārya's Sarva-darśana-saṅgraha. {%—Bahu-do-%}
{%ṣa, as, ā, am,%} having many faults, full of faults or
defects, very wicked, very bad. {%—Bahu-dhana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} possessing much wealth, wealthy, rich. {%—Ba-%}
{%hudhana-tva, am,%} n. the possession of great wealth,
wealthiness, richness. {%—Bahudhaneśvara (˚na-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a very rich man. {%—Bahu-dhā,%} see p. 679,
col. 3. {%—Bahu-dhānya, as,%} m. ‘abounding in corn,’
N. of the twelfth or forty-sixth year in a sixty years’
cycle of Jupiter (this year being supposed to be par-
ticularly fertile). {%—Bahudhānyaka,%} N. of a place.
{%—Bahu-dhāra, am,%} n. ‘many-edged,’ the thun-
derbolt of Indra. {%—Bahu-dhīvan, ā, arī,%} m. f.,
see Vopa-deva IV. 14. {%—Bahu-dhenūka, am,%} n. a
great multitude of milch cows. {%—Bahu-dheya, ās,%}
m. pl., N. of a school; (probably an incorrect form.)
{%—Bahu-dhmāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. often annealed
or cast (as iron). {%—Bahu-nāda, as,%} m. ‘loud-
sounding,’ a conch shell. {%—Bahu-nāman, ā, mnī,%}
{%a,%} having many names. {%—Bahu-paṭu, us, vī, u,%}
very clever. {%—Bahu-pattra, as, ī, am,%} many-leaved;
many-scaled; ({%as%}), m. ar onion; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
various plants; Aloe Perfoliata ({%= gṛha-kanyā%});
basil; a species of Solanum ({%= bṛhatī%}); Asparagus
Racemosus {%(= gorakṣa-dugdhā); = jatukā;%} a
kind of drug, Trigonella Fœnum Græcum; ({%am%}), n.
talc. {%—Bahupattrikā,%} f., N. of various plants; Fla-
courtia Cataphracta ({%= mahā-śatāvarī%}); Trigonella
Fœnum Græcum. {%—Bahupatnīka, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%bahu + patnī%}), having many wives; performed by
many wives. {%—Bahupatnīka-tā,%} f. the having many
wives, polygamy. {%—Bahupatnī-kṛt, t,%} m. one who
marries many wives. {%—Bahupatnī-tā,%} f. the posses-
sion of many wives, polygamy. {%—Bahu-pad, pāt,%} m.
‘many-footed,’ the Indian fig-tree (so called from its
numerous branches growing downwards and striking
root again). {%—Bahu-pada, as, ā, am,%} many-footed.
{%—Bahu-pannaga, as,%} m., N. of a Marut; (also
read {%brahma-pannaga.%}) {%—Bahu-parṇa, as, ī, am,%}
many-leaved, having many leaves; ({%as%}), m. a species
of plant, {%= sapta-cchada; (ī),%} f. a species of medi-
cinal plant, Trigonella Fœnum Græcum. {%—Bahu-%}
{%parṇikā,%} f. Salvinia Cucullata {%(= bahu-karṇikā).%}
{%—Bahu-paśu, us, us, u,%} one who has many cattle,
rich in cattle. {%—Bahu-pākya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one
[Page0678-b+ 81]
at whose house much is cooked (for the poor).
{%—Bahu-pād, t,%} m. {%= bahu-pad,%} q. v. {%—Bahu-%}
{%pāda, as, ā, am,%} many-footed, having many feet;
composed of several Pādas (q. v., as a stanza, Ved.);
({%as%}), m. the Indian fig-tree. {%—Bahu-pāyya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. protecting mightily; (Sāy. = either {%bahu-%}
{%bhir gantavyaḥ,%} to be resorted to by many, or
{%bahubhī rakṣitavyaḥ,%} to be defended by many.)
{%—Bahu-putra, as, ā, am,%} one who has many
children; having many sons; ({%as%}), m. Alstonia
Scholaris ({%= sapta-parṇa%}); N. of a Prajā-pati; ({%ī%}),
f. the plant Asparagus Racemosus; Flacourtia Cata-
phracta; an epithet of Durgā. {%—Bahuputra-tā,%} f. or
{%bahuputra-tva, am,%} n. the possessing many sons.
{%—Bahu-putrikā,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda; N. of a particular plant ({%=%}
{%mahā-śatāvarī;%} cf. {%bahupattrikā%}). {%—Bahu-puṣ-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. ‘many-blossomed,’ the coral tree {%(= pā-%}
{%ribhadra)%}. {%—Bahu-puṣpa-prabāla-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having many flowers and young shoots. {%—Bahu-%}
{%puṣpa-phalopeta (˚la-up˚), as, ā, am,%} having
many flowers and fruits. {%—Bahupuṣpikā,%} f. ‘many-
blossomed,’ the plant Grislea Tomentosa. {%—Bahu-%}
{%prakāra, as, ā, am,%} of many kinds, manifold;
({%am%}), ind. in many ways, manifoldly. {%—Bahu-pra-%}
{%kṛti, is, is, i,%} (in Ved. gram.) consisting of many
primary parts or verbal elements (as a compound).
{%—Bahu-praja, as, ā, am,%} having many children,
having a numerous progeny, prolific; ({%as%}), m. a
hog; a species of grass, Saccharum Munjia. {%—Bahu-%}
{%prajas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having many children,
having a numerous progeny; (Sāy.) {%= bahu-prāṇy-%}
{%upakārin%} or {%prāṇinām pra-janayitā%}. {%—Bahu-%}
{%pratijña, as, ā, am,%} containing more than one
proposition, complicated; (in law) comprising many
counts (as a plaint). {%—Bahu-pratyarthika, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having many adversaries or opponents. {%—Bahu-%}
{%prada, as, ā, am,%} ‘much-bestowing,’ liberal, muni-
ficent, bountiful. {%—Bahu-pravāha, as, ā, am,%}
‘many-streamed,’ flowing in many streams. {%—Bahu-%}
{%prasū, ūs,%} f. a mother of many children. {%—Bahu-%}
{%prāśnika, as, ā, am,%} containing many questions.
{%—Bahu-priya, as, ā, am,%} dear to many. {%—Bahu-%}
{%preyasi%} (even m. by Vopa-deva VI. 14 ?), having
many loved ones. {%—Bahu-phala, as, ā, am,%} ‘many-
fruited,’ rich in fruits, fertile; ({%as%}), m. the tree
Nauclea Cadamba; ({%ā%}), f., N. of various plants;
Solanum Indicum; another variety of Solanum ({%=%}
{%kṣavikā%}); Glycine Debilis; (probably) Convol-
vulus Turpethum; a kind of cucurbitaceous plant
({%= kṣudra-kāravellī%}); Flacourtia Cataphracta;
({%ī%}), f. the opposite-leafed fig-tree; N. of various
plants; Emblica Officinalis; {%= mṛgervāru%}. {%—Ba-%}
{%huphalikā,%} f. a species of plant {%(= bhū-badarī).%}
{%—Bahu-phenā,%} f. a species of plant {%(= sātalā).%}
{%—Bahu-bala, as, ā, am,%} possessing great strength;
({%as%}), m. a lion. {%—Bahu-bāhu, us, us, u,%} many-
armed; ({%us%}), m., N. of a prince. {%—Bahu-bīja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having much seed; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of
Anona Reticulata or Squamosa. {%—Bahu-bhakṣa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} eating much, a great eater. {%—Bahu-%}
{%bhadra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Bahu-bhāgya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of great good fortune, fortunate. {%—Bahu-%}
{%bhāṣi-tā,%} f. the being a great talker, talkativeness,
garrulity, loquaciousness. {%—Bahu-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} talking much, a great talker, talkative, garru-
lous, loquacious. {%—Bahubhāṣya, am,%} n. talking
much, talkativeness, garrulity, loquaciousness; (pro-
bably a wrong form for {%bāhubhāṣya,%} q. v.) {%—Ba-%}
{%hu-bhuj, k, k, k,%} ‘much-eating,’ a great eater, vo-
racious. {%—Bahu-bhuja, as, ā, am,%} ‘many-armed,’
having many arms; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Durgā.
{%—Bahu-bhṛjj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} ‘much-frying,’ roasting or
frying much. {%—Bahu-bhojana, as, ā, am,%} eating
much. {%—Bahu-bhauma, as, ī, am,%} ‘many-storied,’
having many floors or stories. {%—Bahu-mañjarī,%} f.
basil. {%—Bahu-mata, as, ā, am,%} much thought of,
highly esteemed, rated high, prized, valued, respected,
considered; having many different opinions. {%—Ba-%}
{%hu-mati, is,%} f. high esteem, value, estimation; priz-
ing highly, preferring. {%—Bahu-matsya, am,%} n.,
[Page0678-c+ 81]
Ved. a place abounding in fish. {%—Bahu-madhya-ga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘going amongst many,’ belonging to
many; (according to Kullūka {%= bahu-sādhāraṇa,%}
q. v.) {%—Bahu-mantavya, as, ā, am,%} to be thought
much of, to be esteemed highly, estimable. {%—Bahu-%}
{%mala, as,%} m. ‘having much dross,’ lead. {%—Bahu-%}
{%māna, as,%} m. high esteem or estimation, great
respect or regard for (with loc. of the person or
thing, and more rarely with gen. of the person);
respect, reverence; ({%am%}), n. a gift made by a supe-
rior to an inferior. {%—Bahumānin, ī, inī, i,%} thought
much of, highly esteemed, being in high estimation.
{%—Bahu-mānya, as, ā, am,%} to be thought much
of, to be highly esteemed, estimable. {%—Bahu-māya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} practising many wiles, artful, deceit-
ful, treacherous. {%—Bahu-mārgī,%} f. a place where
many roads meet; (also read {%bahu-mārga, am,%} n.)
{%—Bahu-māla%} or {%bahumālaka, as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessing many necklaces. {%—Bahu-mitra, as, ā, am,%}
having many friends; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Ba-%}
{%hu-mukha, as, ī, am,%} ‘many-mouthed,’ speaking
variously. {%—Bahu-mūtra, as, ā, am,%} making water
in excess; afflicted with diabetes. {%—Bahumūtra-tā,%}
f. excessive discharge of urine; diabetes. {%—Bahu-%}
{%mūrti, is, is, i,%} many-formed, variously shaped,
multiform; ({%is%}), f. the wild cotton shrub. {%—Bahu-%}
{%mūrdhan, ā, ā, a,%} many-headed; ({%ā%}), m. an epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Bahu-mūla, as, ā, am,%} many-rooted,
having many roots; ({%as%}), m. a sort of reed or grass,
Hyperanthera Moringa; ({%ā%}), f. Asparagus Racemo-
sus; ({%ī%}), f. Emblica Officinalis. {%—Bahumūlaka, as,%}
m. a species of reed; N. of a Nāga; ({%am%}), n. the
sweet-scented root of Andropogon Muricatus. {%—Ba-%}
{%humūla-phalānvita (˚la-an˚), as, ā, am,%} provided
or furnished with many roots and fruits. {%—Bahu-%}
{%mūlya, as, ā, ā, am,%} high-priced, of a high price,
costly, precious; ({%am%}), n. a large sum of money.
{%—Bahu-mṛga, as, ā, am,%} abounding in deer.
{%—Bahu-yajvan, ā,%} or {%bahu-yajvā,%} f., see Vopa-
deva IV. 5. {%—Bahu-yājin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. ‘much-
sacrificing,’ conducting many sacrifices, desiring the
management of sacrifices (for the sake of gain).
{%—Bahu-yojanā,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attend-
ing on Skanda. {%—Bahu-ratna, as, ā, am,%} rich in
gems or jewels. {%—Bahu-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Bahu-randhrikā,%} f. ‘much perforated,’
N. of a particular medicinal root. {%—Bahu-ramya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very delightful, affording much pleasure.
{%—Bahu-rasa, as, ā, am,%} having much juice, juicy,
succulent (Ved.); ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant {%(= mahā-%}
{%jyotiṣmatī)%}. {%—Bahu-rāśi, is, is, i,%} (in arithmetic)
composed of numerous terms; {%bahu-rāśiḥ pakṣaḥ,%}
a set of many terms. {%—Bahu-ripu, us, us, u,%} one
who has many foes. {%—Bahu-ruhā,%} f. a species of
plant {%(= kanda-guḍūcī)%}. {%—Bahu-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
many-formed, multiform, variously shaped; many-
hued, variegated, checkered; of varied aspect, varied,
manifold; ({%as%}), m. a chameleon; hair; the resin of
Shorea Robusta; the sun; an epithet of Brahman;
of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of the god of love; N. of a
Rudra; of a Buddha; of a son of Medhātithi and
of a Varṣa called after him; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of
the seven tongues of fire. {%—Bahurūpaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} multiform, having many forms, manifold; ({%as%}),
m. a kind of animal {%(= jāhaka)%}. {%—Bahurūpaka-%}
{%śobhita, as, ā, am,%} adorned in many ways, variously
decorated. {%—Bahurūpāṣṭaka (˚pa-aṣ˚), am,%} n.
a collective name for eight Tantras (viz. the {%Brāhmī-%}
{%tantra, Māheśvarī-t˚, Kaumārika-t˚, Vaiṣṇavī-%}
{%t˚, Vārāhī-t˚, Indrāṇī-t˚, Cāmuṇḍā-t˚, Śiva-dūtī-%}
{%t˚)%}. {%—Bahu-rekha, ās,%} m. pl. many lines, wrinkles,
furrows, marks of care or pain. {%—Bahu-retas, ās,%} m.
‘having much seed,’ an epithet of Brahmā. {%—Bahu-%}
{%rai, rās, rās, ri,%} having great riches, very rich.
{%—Bahu-roman, ā, ā, a,%} having much hair, exceed-
ingly hairy or woolly; ({%ā%}), m. a sheep. {%—Bahu-%}
{%lavaṇa, as, ā, am,%} containing much salt; ({%am%}), n.
a soil impregnated with salt. {%—Bahu-vacana, am,%}
n. the plural number, the case-endings and personal
terminations in the plural number. {%—Bahu-vat,%} ind.
(in Ved. gram.) plurally, in the plural number (e. g.
[Page0679-a+ 81]
{%api dvi-vad api bahu-vat,%} both in the dual and
plural). {%—Bahu-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} many-hued,
many-coloured. {%—Bahuvarṇa-tā,%} f. the being many-
hued, multiplicity of colours. {%—Bahu-varta,%} N. of a
place. {%—Bahu-valka, as,%} m. ‘having much bark,’
the tree Buchanania Latifolia {%(= priyāla)%}. {%—Bahu-%}
{%vallī,%} f. a species of shrub. {%—Bahu-vādin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} Ved. talking much, garrulous, babbling. {%—Bahu-%}
{%vāra, as,%} m. the plant Cordia Myxa; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
many times; ({%am%}), ind. often. {%—Bahuvāraka, as,%} m.
the plant Cordia Myxa. {%—Bahuvāraka-phala, am,%}
n. the fruit of Cordia Myxa. {%—Bahu-vārṣika, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} lasting many years, many years old. {%—Bahu-%}
{%vi, is, is, i,%} containing many birds. {%—Bahu-vikrama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very powerful; of great prowess. {%—Bahu-%}
{%vighna, as, ā, am,%} presenting many obstacles,
attended with many difficulties. {%—Bahuvighna-tā,%}
f. the being attended with many obstacles or diffi-
culties, multiplicity of lets or hinderances. {%—Bahu-%}
{%vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. much-knowing, very learned.
{%—Bahu-vidya, as, ā, am,%} one who has much
learning, very learned. {%—Bahuvidya-tā,%} f. great
learnedness, profound learning, erudition. {%—Bahu-%}
{%vidha, as, ā, am,%} of many sorts or kinds, mani-
fold, diverse, various, multiform; ({%am%}), ind. di-
versely, in several directions, up and down. {%—Bahu-%}
{%vistīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} wide-spread, widely diffused;
({%ā%}), f. Abrus Precatorius (a shrub bearing a small
red and black berry and commonly called Kucaï).
{%—Bahuvistīrṇa-tā,%} f. the being wide-spread, wide
diffusion. {%—Bahu-vīja, as, ā, am,%} having many
seeds, containing much seed; ({%am%}), n. the custard
apple, Annona Squamosa. {%—Bahu-vīrya, as,%} m.
‘having much seed,’ the plant Terminalia Bellerica;
Amaranthus Polygonoides; Bombax Heptaphyllum;
Vangueria Spinosa; ({%ā%}), f. Flacourtia Cataphracta.
{%—Bahu-vyayin, ī, inī, i,%} spending much, lavish,
prodigal. {%—Bahu-vyāla-niṣevita, as, ā, am,%} in-
fested or inhabited by many snakes or wild beasts.
{%—Bahu-vrīhi, is, is, i,%} possessing much rice; ({%is%}),
m. a relative or adjective compound, a class of com-
pounds in which the last member being a substantive
loses its independance as well as its original gram-
matical character and together with the first member
serves only to qualify or define another word. The
word {%bahu-vrīhi,%} ‘possessing much rice,’ is itself an
example of this class of compounds; [cf. {%tat-pu-%}
{%ruṣa.%}] {%—Bahuvrīhi-vat,%} ind. like a Bahu-vrīhi
or relative compound. {%—Bahu-śakti, is, is, i,%} pos-
sessing great power; ({%is%}), m., N. of a prince. {%—Ba-%}
{%hu-śatru, us, us, u,%} having many enemies; ({%us%}),
m. a sparrow. {%—Bahu-śabda, as,%} m., Ved. the
plural number. {%—Bahu-śalya, as,%} m. a variety of
Khadira with red blossoms. {%—Bahu-śas,%} see p. 680,
col. 1. {%—Bahu-śasta, as, ā, am,%} very excellent; very
right or happy. {%—Bahu-śākha, as, ā, am,%} ‘many-
branched,’ having many branches or ramifica-
tions. {%—Bahuśākha-tva, am,%} n. the having many
branches, ramification. {%—Bahu-śāla, as,%} m. the plant
Tithymalus Antiquorum. {%—Bahu-śāstra-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} acquainted with many books or sciences. {%—Ba-%}
{%hu-śikha, as, ā, am,%} ‘many-pointed,’ having many
points; ({%ā%}), f. a species of aquatic plant {%(= jala-%}
{%pippalī)%}. {%—Bahu-śūnya, as, ā, am,%} very empty
or void. {%—Bahu-śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} ‘many-horned,’
having many horns; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Bahu-śruta, as, ā, am,%} one who has studied
much, very learned, well taught; well versed in the
Vedas. {%—Bahu-śruti, is,%} f., Ved. the occurrence of
the plural in the text, ({%bahu-śrutes,%} from the occur-
rence of the plural in the text, because the plural is
found in the text.) {%—Bahuśrutīya, ās,%} m. pl. ‘having
deep erudition,’ N. of a Buddhist school. {%—Bahu-śre-%}
{%yasī%} (even m. by Pāṇ. 1. 2, 48, Schol.), having many
excellencies, very excellent. {%—Bahu-satya, as,%} m., N.
of the tenth Muhūrta. {%—Bahu-sadṛśa, as, ī, am,%}
very similar, very fit or right. {%—Bahu-santati, is, is,%}
{%i,%} having a numerous posterity; having a large after-
growth; ({%is%}), m. a species of bamboo, Bambusa Spinosa.
{%—Bahu-sampuṭa, as,%} m. a species of bulbous root
{%(= viṣṇu-kanda)%}. {%—Bahu-sasya, as, ā, am,%} rich in
[Page0679-b+ 81]
grain; ({%as%}), m., N. of a village. {%—Bahu-sādhana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} possessing many resources. {%—Bahusādhana-%}
{%tā,%} f. the possession of many resources. {%—Bahu-%}
{%sādhāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} common to many. {%—Bahu-%}
{%sāra, as, ā, am,%} containing much pith, pithy;
solid, substantial; ({%as%}), m. the tree Acacia Catechu.
{%—Bahusāhasra, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%bahu + sahasra%}),
amounting to many thousands. {%—Bahu-su = bahu-%}
{%sū,%} q. v. {%—Bahu-suta, as, ā, am,%} having many
children, having a large progeny; having a large
after-growth; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Asparagus Racemosus.
{%—Bahu-suvarṇaka, as, ā, am,%} costing or possess-
ing much gold; ({%as%}), m., N. of an Agra-hāra on
the Ganges; of a prince. {%—Bahu-sū, ūs, ūs, u,%}
‘much-bearing,’ fertile; ({%ūs%}), f. the mother of many
children; a sow. {%—Bahu-sūkta, as, ā, am,%} consist-
ing of many Sūktas or hymns. {%—Bahu-sūti, is,%} f. a
female who has borne many children; a cow that
calves often. {%—Bahusūti-go, gaus,%} f. a cow that
calves often. {%—Bahu-sūvarī,%} f., Ved. bearing many
children (Sāy. {%= bahvīnām prajānām savitrī%}).
{%—Bahu-stavāvali (˚va-āv˚), is,%} f., N. of a collection
of hymns. {%—Bahu-spṛś, k, k, k,%} reaching to many,
generally spread or diffused. {%—Bahu-svana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘much-sounding,’ making many sounds; ({%as%}),
m. an owl. {%—Bahu-svarṇa-lakṣa-mūlya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} worth many hundred thousand pieces of gold.
{%—Bahu-svāmika, as, ā, am,%} having many owners
or proprietors. {%—Bahu-hiraṇya, as,%} m., Ved. an
epithet of an Ekāha commonly called Dū-ṇāśa. {%—Ba-%}
{%hūdaka (˚hu-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} having much water;
({%as%}), m. a kind of religious mendicant, a mendicant
who lives in a strange town and begs his food from
house to house. {%—Bahūdana (˚hu-od˚?), am,%} n.
the union of different kinds of food (?). {%—Bahv-%}
{%akṣara, as, ā, am,%} many-syllabled, of many syl-
lables, polysyllabic. {%—Bahvakṣarāntya (˚ra-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being at the end of a polysyllabic word.
{%—Bahv-agni, is, is, i,%} Ved. a term applied to
particular verses in which various Agnis are men-
tioned. {%—Bahv-ac, k, k, k,%} or {%bahv-acka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} (in grammar) having several vowels, polysyllabic.
{%—Bahv-ajāvika, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having many goats
and sheep. {%—Bahv-adhyāya, as, ā, am,%} ‘many-
chaptered,’ consisting of many chapters. {%—Bahv-%}
{%anartha, as, ā, am,%} fraught with many ills, attended
with many evils. {%—Bahv-anna, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
rich in food, (according to Sāy. {%= phala-mūlādibhir%}
{%upetaḥ.%}) {%—Bahv-ap, p, p, p,%} or {%bahv-apa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} containing much water, watery. {%—Bahv-apatya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a numerous progeny, one who
has many children, having many young; (in astro-
logy) promising or foretelling a numerous progeny;
({%as%}), m. a hog; a rat, mouse; ({%ā%}), f. a cow that has
often calved. {%—Bahv-abaddha-pralāpin, ī, inī, i,%}
talking much that is unmeaning, speaking much folly.
{%—Bahv-abhidhāna, am,%} n. (in Ved. gram.) the
plural number. {%—Bahv-artha, as, ā, am,%} having
much meaning or import, important; having many
objects. {%—Bahv-aśva, as,%} m. ‘having many horses,’
N. of a son of Mudgala. {%—Bahv-ādin, ī, inī, i,%}
eating much, a great eater. {%—Bahv-āśi-tva, am,%}
n. the being a great eater, voraciousness. {%—Bahv-%}
{%āśin, ī, inī, i,%} eating much, a great eater, voracious,
gluttonous; ({%ī%}), m., N. of one of the sons of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra. {%—Bahv-āścarya, as, ā, am,%} containing
many wonderful objects (said of Indra's heaven).
{%—Bahvāścarya-maya, as, ī, am,%} composed of or
containing many wonderful objects. {%—Bahv-īśvara,%}
N. of a sacred place on the bank of the Revā or
Narmadā river. {%—Bahv-ṛc, k, k, k,%} ‘many-versed,’
containing many verses; ({%k%}), f. a term applied to
the Ṛg-veda or to a Śākhā of the Ṛg-veda.
{%—Bahv-ṛca, as,%} m. ‘having many verses,’ one con-
versant with the Ṛg-veda, a priest of it or the Hotṛ
priest who represents it in the sacrificial ceremonies;
({%ī%}), f. the wife of one conversant with the Ṛg-veda;
({%as, ā, am%}), containing many verses. {%—Bahvṛca-%}
{%pariśiṣṭa, am,%} n., N. of a Pariśiṣṭa belonging to
the Ṛg-veda. {%—Bahvṛca-brāhmaṇa, as,%} m., N.
of a Brāhmaṇa treating of the sacrificial duties of the
[Page0679-c+ 81]
Hotṛ priests. {%—Bahvṛcabrāhmaṇopaniṣad (˚ṇa-%}
{%up˚), t,%} f., Ved. the Upaniṣad of the Bahvṛca-
Brāhmaṇa. {%—Bahvṛcākhyā (˚ca-ākh˚),%} f. ‘entitled
Bahv-ṛca,’ the Ṛg-veda. {%—Bahvṛcopaniṣad (˚ca-%}
{%up˚), t,%} f. the Bahvṛca Upaniṣad. {%—Bahv-enas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} one who has committed many sins, very sinful.
<LEND>

<L>34545<pc>0679-c<k1>bahuka<k2>bahuka
{%Bahuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ bought at a high price, dear-
bought; ({%as%}), m. the plant Calotropis Gigantea ({%=%}
{%arka%}); a crab; a kind of gallinule; the digger of
a tank.
<LEND>

<L>34546<pc>0679-c<k1>bahutaya<k2>bahutaya
{%Bahutaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. manifold, various.
<LEND>

<L>34547<pc>0679-c<k1>bahutiTa<k2>bahutiTa
{%Bahutitha, as, ī, am,%}¦ manifold, various, many,
({%bahutithe 'hani,%} on the ‘manieth’ day, during
many days, Nala IX. 12); much; ({%am%}), ind. much,
greatly, sorely, in a high degree.
<LEND>

<L>34548<pc>0679-c<k1>bahuDA<k2>bahuDA
{%Bahu-dhā,%}¦ ind. in many ways, variously, mani-
foldly, multifariously; in various parts, in different
forms; in many places, in various directions; much,
repeatedly; {%bahudhā kṛ,%} to make manifold, mul-
tiply; to make public, divulge. {%—Bahudhā-gata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} gone in various directions, dispersed,
scattered. {%—Bahudhātmaka (˚dhā-āt˚), as, ikā,%}
{%am,%} existing in various forms, manifold in essence.
<LEND>

<L>34549<pc>0679-c<k1>bahura<k2>bahura
{%Bahura = bahula%}¦ in the comp. {%bahura-madhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. thick in the middle (said of the
Soma juice during the process of fermentation);
(Sāy.) {%= bahulam aṅgādikam anuṣṭhānam ma-%}
{%dhye prārambha-samāpty-antarāle yasya.%}
<LEND>

<L>34550<pc>0679-c<k1>bahula<k2>bahula
{%Bahula, as, ā, am,%}¦ thick, dense, compact, solid;
broad, wide, wide-spread, spacious; capacious, ample,
large; abundant, exceeding, numerous, manifold,
many, much; abounding in, rich in, full of (with
inst. or in comp.; cf. {%vyādhi-b˚%}); accompanied by,
attended with; variously applicable, comprehensive
(as a rule); born under the Pleiades; black; ({%as%}),
m. the dark half of a month; Agni or fire; N. of a
Prajā-pati; of a king of the Tāla-jaṅghas; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a cow; cardamoms; the
indigo plant; N. of the twelfth Kalā of the moon;
of a goddess; of one of the Mātṛs attending on
Skanda; of the wife of Uttama who was son of
Uttāna-pāda; of a mythical cow; of a river; ({%ās%}),
f. pl. {%= kṛttikās,%} the Pleiades; ({%am%}), n. the sky,
air; white pepper; a particular high number;
({%am%}), ind. often, frequently. {%—Bahula-gandhā,%}
f. ‘richly-scented,’ cardamoms. {%—Bahula-cchada,%}
{%as,%} m. a red-flowering Hyperanthera Moringa {%(=%}
{%rakta-śigru)%}. {%—Bahula-tara, as, ā, am,%} thicker,
denser; {%dvi-guṇo bahulataraḥ,%} twice as thick.
{%—Bahula-tā,%} f. or {%bahula-tva, am,%} n. muchness,
multiplicity, abundance, numerousness; the being rich
in, abounding in, (at the end of a comp.); compre-
hensiveness. {%—Bahula-varman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. en-
veloped in a thick covering. {%—Bahulānta (˚la-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘thick at the end,’ having a thick
sediment (as Soma juice; cf. {%bahura-madhya%}).
{%—Bahulābhimāna (˚la-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. much
threatening, menacing (said of Indra; according to
Sāy. {%= mahānubhāva%}). {%—Bahulālāpa (˚la-āl˚),%}
‘much-talking,’ talkative, garrulous, loquacious. {%—Ba-%}
{%hulāviṣṭa (˚la-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. thickly
peopled, densely populated. {%—Bahulāśva (˚la-aś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having many horses,’ N. of a king. {%—Ba-%}
{%hulī-karaṇa, am,%} n. multiplying, magnifying; win-
nowing (for {%phalī-karaṇa?%}). {%—Bahulī-kariṣṇu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} striving or endeavouring to increase. {%—Ba-%}
{%hulī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make wide,
extend; to increase, aggrandize; to make public, pro-
mulgate, divulge. {%—Bahulī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made
much or manifold; made wide, extended; increased,
augmented, aggrandized; made public, promulgated;
distracted; threshed, winnowed (for {%phalī-kṛta?%}).
{%—Bahulī-bhāva, as,%} m. the becoming wide-spread,
becoming public, being generally known, general no-
toriety. {%—Bahulī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%}
to become wide-spread, spread, increase (intrans.); to
become public, to become generally known. {%—Ba-%}
{%hulī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become wide-spread, spread,
increased; become public, generally known.
<LEND>

<L>34551<pc>0679-c<k1>bahulaka<k2>bahulaka
{%Bahulaka,%}¦ an incorrect form for {%bāhulaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34552<pc>0679-c<k1>bahulikA<k2>bahulikA
{%Bahulikā, ās,%}¦ f. pl. the Pleiades ({%= bahulās%}).
<LEND>
[Page0680-a+ 72]

<L>34553<pc>0680-a<k1>bahuSas<k2>bahuSas
{%Bahu-śas,%}¦ ind. much, abundantly, plentifully, nu-
merously, in great numbers; manifoldly; frequently,
repeatedly; generally, commonly, for the most part.
<LEND>

<L>34554<pc>0680-a<k1>bahi<k2>bahi
{#bahi#}¦ {%bahi, is,%} m., N. of a Piśāca.
<LEND>

<L>34555<pc>0680-a<k1>bahis<k2>bahis
{#bahis#}¦ {%bahis,%} ind. (in the later language
more usually {%vahis,%} q. v.; the final {%s%} is changed before
{%k%} and {%p%} into {%ṣ%} according to Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 41), out,
without, outside (a house, village, city, kingdom, &c.,
with abl.); on the outside, outwards, out-of-doors;
{%vahir gam, vahir yā,%} &c., to go out; {%rāṣṭrād%}
or {%viṣayād vahiṣ kṛ,%} to place outside the king-
dom, banish from the realm. {%—Bahiḥ-sad, t, t, t,%}
Ved. sitting outside (said of a person held in low
esteem). {%—Bahir-dhā,%} ind., Ved. outside, on the
outside, to the outside of (with abl.). {%—Bahirdhā-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m., Ved. the being outside, being ex-
ternal. {%—Bahir-vedi,%} ind., Ved. outside the Vedi,
without the Vedi or altar; [cf. {%vahir-vedi, vahir-%}
{%vedika,%} and {%vāhirvedika.%}] {%—Bahiṣ-paridhi,%}
ind., Ved. outside the wooden frame called Pari-
dhi, q. v. {%—Bahiṣ-pavamāna, am,%} n. (scil. {%sto-%}
{%tram%}), Ved., N. of a morning Stotra commonly
consisting of three Tricas and sung outside the Vedi
(e. g. the verses in Ṛg-veda IX. 11, 1-9); ({%as%}),
m. the morning Stoma; ({%ī%}), f. (scil. {%stotriyā,%} i. e.
{%ṛc%}), the morning prayer. {%—Bahiṣ-pavitra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. destitute of or wanting the Pavitra. {%—Ba-%}
{%hiṣ-piṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the knots out-
wards. {%—Bahiṣ-prajña, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one whose
knowledge is directed towards external objects. {%—Ba-%}
{%hiṣ-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one whose breath or
life is without; [cf. {%vahiṣ-prāṇa.%}] {%—Bahī-rajju,%}
ind., Ved. outside the rope.
<LEND>

<L>34556<pc>0680-a<k1>bahInara<k2>bahInara
{#bahInara#}¦ {%bahīnara, as,%} m. (also written {%va-%}
{%hīnara%}), N. of a man; of a prince; of a grandson
of Śatānīka.
<LEND>

<L>34557<pc>0680-a<k1>bahu<k2>bahu
{#bahu#}¦ {%bahu, bahuka, bahula,%} &c. See under
rt. {%bah,%} pp. 677, 678, 679.
<LEND>

<L>34558<pc>0680-a<k1>bahutalavaSA<k2>bahutalavaSA
{#bahutalavaSA#}¦ {%bahutalavaśā,%} f. Iris Pseuda-
corus.
<LEND>

<L>34559<pc>0680-a<k1>bahurada<k2>bahurada
{#bahurada#}¦ {%bahurada, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(also read {%bāhubādha.%})
<LEND>

<L>34560<pc>0680-a<k1>bahrAmaKAna<k2>bahrAmaKAna
{#bahrAmaKAna#}¦ {%bahrāmakhāna, as,%} m. = <lang n="arabic">بهرام</lang>
<lang n="arabic">خان</lang>
<LEND>

<L>34561<pc>0680-a<k1>bahli<k2>bahli
{#bahli#}¦ {%bahli, bahlika, bahlīka,%} various read-
ings for {%balhi, balhika, balhīka,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>34562<pc>0680-a<k1>bAkura<k2>bAkura
{#bAkura#}¦ {%bākura, as,%} m., Ved., scil. {%dṛti,%}
(perhaps) a kind of bag-pipe.
<LEND>

<L>34563<pc>0680-a<k1>bAkula<k2>bAkula
{#bAkula#}¦ {%bākula.%} See {%vākula.%}
<LEND>

<L>34564<pc>0680-a<k1>bAjabAhAduracandra<k2>bAjabAhAduracandra
{#bAjabAhAduracandra#}¦ {%bāja-bāhādura-candra, as,%}
m., N. of a prince who was the patron of Ananta-
deva the author of the Vyavahāra-dīdhiti, a work
on civil law.
<LEND>

<L>34565<pc>0680-a<k1>bAq<k2>bAq
{#bAq#}¦ {%bāḍ%} (according to Vopa-deva {%vāḍ%}),
cl. 1. A. {%bāḍate, bāḍitum,%} to bathe, dive;
to emerge; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">Βαλανεῖον:</lang> Lat. <nsi>balneum:</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>bad,</nsi> ‘a bath;’ <nsi>badôn,</nsi> ‘to bathe.’]
<LEND>

<L>34566<pc>0680-a<k1>bAqava<k2>bAqava
{#bAqava#}¦ {%bāḍava.%} See {%vāḍava.%}
<LEND>

<L>34567<pc>0680-a<k1>bAqIra<k2>bAqIra
{#bAqIra#}¦ {%bāḍīra, as,%} m. a servant, a hired
labourer.
<LEND>

<L>34568<pc>0680-a<k1>bAQa<k2>bAQa
{#bAQa#}¦ {%bāḍha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%bah%} or {%baṃh;%}
frequently also written {%vāḍha,%} q. v.; according to
Pāṇ. V. 3, 63, the compar. is {%sādhīyas%} and superl.
{%sādhiṣṭha%}), loud, strong; ({%e%}), ind. loudly, strongly,
(according to Sāy. {%= dṛḍha, sthira%}); ({%am%}), ind.
(almost always written {%vāḍham%}), much, exceed-
ingly; assuredly, certainly; (as a particle expres-
sive of consent, affirmation, and confirmation),
be it so, good, very well, such is the case, yes.
{%—Bāḍha-sṛtvan, ā,%} m., Ved. going mightily,
rushing fearlessly (Sāy. {%= bhṛśaṃ sartā = aśaṅ-%}
{%kita-gamana%}).
<LEND>
[Page0680-b+ 78]

<L>34569<pc>0680-b<k1>bARa<k2>bARa
{#bARa#}¦ {%bāṇa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%baṇ%} or
{%vaṇ,%} to sound; in the later language more usually
written {%vāṇa,%} q. v.), a reed-shaft, shaft made of a
reed, an arrow. {%—Bāṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. made
or consisting of reeds, reeden, reedy; ({%ān%}), m. ‘con-
taining reed-shafts,’ a quiver; an arrow.
<LEND>

<L>34570<pc>0680-b<k1>bARi<k2>bARi
{#bARi#}¦ {%bāṇi.%} See {%vāṇi.%}
<LEND>

<L>34571<pc>0680-b<k1>bARija<k2>bARija
{#bARija#}¦ {%bāṇija, as,%} m. (fr. {%baṇij%}), a mer-
chant, trader; (also written {%vāṇija.%})
<LEND>

<L>34572<pc>0680-b<k1>bARijika<k2>bARijika
{%Bāṇijika, as,%}¦ m. a trader, merchant; a rogue,
cheat; submarine fire.
<LEND>

<L>34573<pc>0680-b<k1>bARijya<k2>bARijya
{%Bāṇijya, am,%}¦ n. merchandize, trade, traffic, com-
merce.
<LEND>

<L>34574<pc>0680-b<k1>bAdara<k2>bAdara
{#bAdara#}¦ {%bādara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%badara%}), be-
longing to or derived from the jujube tree; made of
cotton; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. the cotton shrub; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a people; ({%am%}), n. the jujube ({%= ba-%}
{%dara%}); the berry of Abrus Precatorius; the plant
itself; {%= vīra,%} (probably) a species of plant; silk;
water; a conch shell which winds in a direction
from left to right.
<LEND>

<L>34575<pc>0680-b<k1>bAdarAyaRa<k2>bAdarAyaRa
{%Bādarāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%badara%}),
N. of a sage (said to be the author of the Śārīraka-
sūtras belonging to the Uttara-mīmāṃsā or Vedānta
philosophy and identified with Vyāsa, the reputed
compiler of the Vedas, Mahā-bhārata, Purāṇas, &c.;
also written {%vādarāyaṇa%}); N. of an astronomer;
of the author of a Dharma-śāstra; ({%as, ī, am%}),
composed by Bādarāyaṇa. {%—Bādarāyaṇa-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the Vedānta aphorisms ascribed to
Bādarāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>34576<pc>0680-b<k1>bAdarAyaRi<k2>bAdarAyaRi
{%Bādarāyaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Śuka, son
of Bādarāyaṇa or Vyāsa; a N. of Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>34577<pc>0680-b<k1>bAdari<k2>bAdari
{%Bādari, is,%}¦ m., Ved. (a patronymic fr. {%badara%}),
N. of a philosophical teacher mentioned in the Bā-
darāyaṇa-sūtras.
<LEND>

<L>34578<pc>0680-b<k1>bAdarika<k2>bAdarika
{%Bādarika, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who gathers the fruit
of the jujube tree.
<LEND>

<L>34579<pc>0680-b<k1>bAD<k2>bAD
{#bAD#}¦ {%bādh,%} cl. 1. A. (in poetry some-
times also P.) {%bādhate (-ti), babādhe%}
{%(babādha), bādhiṣyate, abādhiṣṭa, bādhitum,%}
to press, press hard, oppress, harass, pain, torment;
to give trouble, trouble, grieve, vex, disturb, disquiet
(with acc. or gen.); to resist, oppose, thwart, check,
obstruct, stop, arrest, prevent; to attack, assault,
assail; to injure, wrong, violate; to hurt, damage;
to drive away, chase away, repel, remove; to sus-
pend, set aside (as a rule in grammar), invalidate,
abolish, annul; to clash, mutually oppose each other;
to suffer annoyance or oppression (Ved.); to thrust
apart (Ved.): Pass. {%bādhyate,%} to be oppressed, pained,
&c., to suffer pain: Caus. {%bādhayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%ababādhat,%} to oppress, annoy, harass, distress, afflict,
pain; to overcome, subdue, conquer: Desid. {%bi-%}
{%bādhiṣate, bībhatsate,%} Ved. to feel an aversion
from, feel disgust or loathing for, have a horror
of (with abl.): Intens. {%bābādhyate, bābāddhi,%}
(probably the Ved. form {%badbadhe,%} which according
to Sāy. is fr. rt. {%bandh,%} belongs to this Intens. with
the following senses), to reduce to great straits, hem
in, confine, cramp; to strike or knock against (for want
of room, Ṛg-veda VII. 69, 1); [cf. Zend <nsi>vad,</nsi> ‘to
strike;’ <nsi>vaday,</nsi> ‘to strike back:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔπαθον, ὠθ-έ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐν-οσί-χθων, ἐνν-οσί-γαιο-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>ôd-i, ŏ-d-i-um:</nsi>
Russ. <nsi>bjeda</nsi> = Lith. <nsi>bêda,</nsi> ‘misery:’ Lith. <nsi>bêdnas,</nsi>
‘miserable:’ perhaps Goth. <nsi>balvja,</nsi> ‘I trouble,’ fr.
<nsi>badvja:</nsi> perhaps Hib. <nsi>buairim,</nsi> ‘I vex, aggrieve,
trouble,’ fr. <nsi>buaidim.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>34580<pc>0680-b<k1>bADa<k2>bADa
{%Bādha, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. pain, suffering, trouble, sorrow,
affliction; annoyance, molestation [cf. {%bhramara-%}
{%b˚%}]; resistance, opposition, obstruction; injury, de-
triment, hurt, damage; violation, infraction; sus-
pension, annulment (of a rule); danger, peril, jeopardy
[cf. {%prāṇa-b˚%}]; a contradiction, absurdity, reductio
ad absurdum; ({%as%}), m. a harasser, tormentor (Ved.,
cf. {%tuvi-b˚%}); opposing, opposition, hinderance, ob-
struction, obstacle, oppression; objection; one of
the five forms of fallacious middle term, the being
[Page0680-c+ 79]
precluded by superior proof; (according to Naigh.
II. 9) {%= bala; (ā),%} f. refutation. {%—Bādha-rahasya,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%bādha-buddhi-pratibandhakatā-vicāra,%}
or {%bādha-buddhi-vādārtha, as,%} m., N. of a Nyāya
work by Hari-rāma Tarka-vāg-īśa Bhaṭṭācārya. {%—Bā-%}
{%dhāpavāda (˚dha-ap˚), as,%} m. denial of an excep-
tion, re-establishing a previous rule.
<LEND>

<L>34581<pc>0680-c<k1>bADaka<k2>bADaka
{%Bādhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ oppressing, harassing,
paining [cf. {%śatru-b˚%}]; one who hinders or opposes,
a hinderer; suspending, setting aside (as a rule in
grammar); invalidating, annulling, neutralizing;
({%as%}), m. a particular disease of women; a species of
tree {%(= giri-māla, rāja-vṛkṣa); (as, ī, am),%} be-
longing to or derived from the preceding tree.
{%—Bādhaka-tā,%} f. or {%bādhaka-tva, am,%} n. the
being a hinderer, hinderance.
<LEND>

<L>34582<pc>0680-c<k1>bADana<k2>bADana
{%Bādhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ pressing hard, harassing,
opposing; refuting; ({%ā%}), f. uneasiness, uncomfort-
ableness, trouble, pain; ({%am%}), n. oppression, the act
of harassing, annoying, paining, pain; opposing,
hindering; precluding; suspending, removing, setting
aside (a rule), annulling, abolishing; refutation.
<LEND>

<L>34583<pc>0680-c<k1>bADamAna<k2>bADamAna
{%Bādhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ oppressing, harassing,
paining, annoying.
<LEND>

<L>34584<pc>0680-c<k1>bADita<k2>bADita
{%Bādhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressed hard, oppressed,
harassed, pained, tormented; resisted, opposed, ob-
structed, hindered, impeded, thwarted, checked;
self-refuted, refuted; set aside, suspended (as a rule),
abolished; (in logic) contradictory, absurd, false, in-
compatible. {%—Bādhita-tva, am,%} n. the being sus-
pended or set aside (as a rule), suspension, abolition;
the state of being refuted or contradicted.
<LEND>

<L>34585<pc>0680-c<k1>bADitavya<k2>bADitavya
{%Bādhitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pressed hard, to be
harassed or annoyed, to be pained; to be suspended
or set aside, to be annulled; to be removed.
<LEND>

<L>34586<pc>0680-c<k1>bADitf<k2>bADitf
{%Bādhitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who presses hard, an
oppressor, harasser, annoyer.
<LEND>

<L>34587<pc>0680-c<k1>bADitvA<k2>bADitvA
{%Bādhitvā,%}¦ ind. having pressed hard or harassed;
(in grammar) destroying or neutralizing the effect of
a previous rule.
<LEND>

<L>34588<pc>0680-c<k1>bADya<k2>bADya
{%Bādhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pressed hard or harassed
or distressed, to be pained [cf. {%strī-b˚%}]; one who is
harassed or pained; to be hindered or resisted, to be
objected to or opposed, objectionable, exceptionable;
to be suspended or annulled; preventable; suppressed,
obstructed. {%—Bādhya-bādhaka-tā,%} f. the condition
of oppressed and oppressor. {%—Bādhya-retas, ās,%} m.
one whose generative power is obstructed, impotent.
<LEND>

<L>34589<pc>0680-c<k1>bADyamAna<k2>bADyamAna
{%Bādhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being pressed hard or
oppressed, being harassed or beset, being tormented.
{%—Bādhyamāna-tva, am,%} n. the being suspended
or set aside, suspension, annulment.
<LEND>

<L>34590<pc>0680-c<k1>bADiraka<k2>bADiraka
{#bADiraka#}¦ {%bādhiraka%} (fr. {%badhira%}), see Gaṇa
Arīhaṇādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>34591<pc>0680-c<k1>bADirika<k2>bADirika
{%Bādhirika, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Badhirikā.
<LEND>

<L>34592<pc>0680-c<k1>bADirya<k2>bADirya
{%Bādhirya, am,%}¦ n. deafness.
<LEND>

<L>34593<pc>0680-c<k1>bADyoga<k2>bADyoga
{#bADyoga#}¦ {%bādhyoga, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Badhyoga.
<LEND>

<L>34594<pc>0680-c<k1>bADyogAyaRa<k2>bADyogAyaRa
{%Bādhyogāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bā-
dhyoga.
<LEND>

<L>34595<pc>0680-c<k1>bAnDakineya<k2>bAnDakineya
{#bAnDakineya#}¦ {%bāndhakineya, as,%} m. (fr. {%ban-%}
{%dhakī%}), the son of an unmarried woman, a bastard.
<LEND>

<L>34596<pc>0680-c<k1>bAnDava<k2>bAnDava
{#bAnDava#}¦ {%bāndhava, as,%} m. (fr. {%bandhu%}), a
relation (near or remote and including wives and chil-
dren), relative, kinsman [cf. {%pitṛ-b˚%}]; a maternal
relation; a friend [cf. {%pika-b˚%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a female rela-
tion. {%—Bāndhava-kara, as,%} m. an epithet of Lallā-
dīkṣita, a commentator on the Mṛc-chakaṭī. {%—Bān-%}
{%dhava-tyāga, as,%} m. abandoning a kinsman, for-
saking a relation. {%—Bāndhavākrośin (˚va-āk˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} calling out to or bewailing a kinsman.
<LEND>

<L>34597<pc>0680-c<k1>bAnDavaka<k2>bAnDavaka
{%Bāndhavaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
kinsmen, kindred.
<LEND>

<L>34598<pc>0680-c<k1>bAnDavya<k2>bAnDavya
{%Bāndhavya, am,%}¦ n. connection by blood, relation-
ship, consanguinity.
<LEND>

<L>34599<pc>0680-c<k1>bAnDuka<k2>bAnDuka
{%Bāndhuka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bandhuka%}), belonging
to or derived from the Bandhuka tree.
<LEND>

<L>34600<pc>0680-c<k1>bAnDupata<k2>bAnDupata
{%Bāndhupata, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bandhu-pati%}), re-
lating to the lord of kindred or relations.
<LEND>
[Page0681-a+ 72]

<L>34601<pc>0681-a<k1>bApaya<k2>bApaya
{#bApaya#}¦ {%bāpaya, as,%} m. surname of the scribe
Kāśī-nātha-bhaṭṭa.
<LEND>

<L>34602<pc>0681-a<k1>bApyadeva<k2>bApyadeva
{#bApyadeva#}¦ {%bāpya-deva, as,%} m., N. of the
writer of a particular inscription.
<LEND>

<L>34603<pc>0681-a<k1>bAbajIvyAsa<k2>bAbajIvyAsa
{#bAbajIvyAsa#}¦ {%bābajī-vyāsa, as,%} m., N. of
an author.
<LEND>

<L>34604<pc>0681-a<k1>bAbara<k2>bAbara
{#bAbara#}¦ {%bābara, am,%} n. (fr. {%babara%}), epithet
of a Pañca-rātra; N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34605<pc>0681-a<k1>bAberI<k2>bAberI
{#bAberI#}¦ {%bāberī,%} f., N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>34606<pc>0681-a<k1>bABrava<k2>bABrava
{#bABrava#}¦ {%bābhrava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%babhru%}),
belonging or relating to Babhru; ({%as%}), m. a patro-
nymic from Babhru; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā
(the wife of Babhru, i. e. Śiva).
<LEND>

<L>34607<pc>0681-a<k1>bABravAyaRi<k2>bABravAyaRi
{%Bābhravāyaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bā-
bhrava; N. of a son of Viśvā-mitra.
<LEND>

<L>34608<pc>0681-a<k1>bABravIya<k2>bABravIya
{%Bābhravīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%bābhravya%}), the
disciples or followers of Bābhravya.
<LEND>

<L>34609<pc>0681-a<k1>bABravya<k2>bABravya
{%Bābhravya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Babhru;
N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>34610<pc>0681-a<k1>bABravyaka<k2>bABravyaka
{%Bābhravyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ inhabited by Bābhravyas.
<LEND>

<L>34611<pc>0681-a<k1>bABruka<k2>bABruka
{%Bābhruka, as, ī, am,%}¦ like an ichneumon, (i. e.
probably) brown, brownish.
<LEND>

<L>34612<pc>0681-a<k1>bAra<k2>bAra
{#bAra#}¦ {%bāra,%} Ved. an opening, aperture; [cf.
{%jihma-b˚, nīcīna-b˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34613<pc>0681-a<k1>bArahawa<k2>bArahawa
{#bArahawa#}¦ {%bārahaṭa, as,%} m. epithet of Nara-
hara-dāsa the author of the Hindī work Avatāra-
caritra or Caturviṃsaty-avatāra-caritra.
<LEND>

<L>34614<pc>0681-a<k1>bArejya<k2>bArejya
{#bArejya#}¦ {%bārejya,%} N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>34615<pc>0681-a<k1>bArbawIra<k2>bArbawIra
{#bArbawIra#}¦ {%bārbaṭīra%} or {%bārvaṭīra, as,%} m. the
kernel of the mango fruit; a young shoot; tin; the
son of a harlot; [cf. {%barbaṭī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34616<pc>0681-a<k1>bArha<k2>bArha
{#bArha#}¦ {%bārha, bārhiṇa.%} See {%vārha.%}
<LEND>

<L>34617<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhata<k2>bArhata
{#bArhata#}¦ {%bārhata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bṛhat%}), Ved.
relating to the Sāman called Bṛhat, celebrated in the
Bṛhat-sāman, (according to Mahī-dhara {%= bṛhat-%}
{%sāma-stuta%}); relating or belonging to the Bṛhatī
metre, representing it, consisting of it; {%Bārhataṃ%}
{%vājajidaukṣṇorandhram,%} N. of a Sāman; ({%am%}),
n. the fruit of the Bṛhatī, a variety of the So-
lanum.
<LEND>

<L>34618<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhatAnuzwuBa<k2>bArhatAnuzwuBa
{%Bārhatānuṣṭubha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bṛhat + anu-%}
{%ṣṭubh%}), Ved. consisting of a Bṛhatī and an Anu-
ṣṭubh.
<LEND>

<L>34619<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhatsAmA<k2>bArhatsAmA
{%Bārhatsāmā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%bṛhat-sāman%}), Ved., N. or
epithet of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>34620<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhadagna<k2>bArhadagna
{%Bārhadagna, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%bṛhad-agni%}), the
descendants of Bṛhad-agni.
<LEND>

<L>34621<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhadIzava<k2>bArhadIzava
{%Bārhadīṣava, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bṛhad-
ishu (with {%i%} lengthened).
<LEND>

<L>34622<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhadukTa<k2>bArhadukTa
{%Bārhaduktha, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. relating or be-
longing to Bṛhad-uktha; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic
from Bṛhad-uktha.
<LEND>

<L>34623<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhadgira<k2>bArhadgira
{%Bārhadgira, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. relating or belong-
ing to Bṛhad-giri.
<LEND>

<L>34624<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhaddEvata<k2>bArhaddEvata
{%Bārhaddaivata, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%bṛhad-devatā%}),
N. of a work also called Bṛhad-devatā and attributed
to Śaunaka.
<LEND>

<L>34625<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhadbala<k2>bArhadbala
{%Bārhadbala, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
Bṛhad-bala.
<LEND>

<L>34626<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhadraTa<k2>bArhadraTa
{%Bārhadratha, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
Bṛhad-ratha; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic of Jarā-sandha;
(sometimes spelt {%bārahadratha.%})
<LEND>

<L>34627<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhadraTi<k2>bArhadraTi
{%Bārhadrathi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bṛhad-ratha%}), a patro-
nymic of Jarā-sandha.
<LEND>

<L>34628<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhavata<k2>bArhavata
{%Bārhavata, as, ī, am,%}¦ containing the word {%barha-%}
{%vat.%}
<LEND>

<L>34629<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhaspata<k2>bArhaspata
{%Bārhaspata, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
Bṛhas-pati, descended from Bṛhas-pati, sacred to
Bṛhas-pati.
<LEND>

<L>34630<pc>0681-a<k1>bArhaspatya<k2>bArhaspatya
{%Bārhaspatya, as, tī, am,%}¦ relating to or coming
from Bṛhas-pati; ({%as%}), m. a pupil of Bṛhas-pati;
an infidel, a materialist; an epithet of Śamyu; of
[Page0681-b+ 79]
Agni; of Tapur-mūrdhan; of Bharad-vāja; ({%am%}),
n., scil. {%bha%} or {%nakṣatra,%} the constellation Puṣya;
the Artha-śāstra of Bṛhas-pati, ethics, morality;
{%Bārhaspatyam mānam,%} ‘Jupiter's measure of
time,’ a method of reckoning time. {%—Bārhaspatya-%}
{%jyotir-grantha, as,%} m., N. of a work mentioned
in Raghu-nandana's Saṃskāra-tattva. {%—Bārhaspa-%}
{%tya-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra mentioned in
the Ānanda-laharī.
<LEND>

<L>34631<pc>0681-b<k1>bArhizada<k2>bArhizada
{#bArhizada#}¦ {%bārhiṣada, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Barhiṣad.
<LEND>

<L>34632<pc>0681-b<k1>bAl<k2>bAl
{#bAl#}¦ {%bāl,%} ind., Ved. an interjection imi-
tative of the sound of a falling body.
<LEND>

<L>34633<pc>0681-b<k1>bAla<k2>bAla
{#bAla#}¦ {%bāla, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt. 2.
{%bal%}), young, childish, infantine, immature, not full-
grown; newly risen (as the sun, cf. {%bālātapa, bālā-%}
{%ditya, bālārka%}), new or waxing (as the moon,
cf. {%bāla-candra, bālendu%}); puerile, ignorant, un-
wise, uninstructed; pure (said especially of a female
animal, as a heifer &c., fit for sacrifice); ({%as, ā%}),
m. f. a child (especially one under five years of age,
but also one under sixteen years of age generally),
an infant; (in law) a minor (who is distinguished
as a {%kumāra%} or boy under five years of age; {%śiśu,%}
a boy under eight; {%pogaṇḍa,%} a boy from the fifth
to the end of the ninth year, or where the next
distinction is omitted, till the sixteenth year; and
{%kiśora,%} a boy from the tenth to the sixteenth year);
the young of an animal, a five years old elephant
[cf. {%bāla-gaja%}]; a colt, foal; one whose under-
standing is not matured, a simpleton, fool; a tail, an
elephant or horse's tail; hair; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a
kind of perfume or fragrant grass, Andropogon
Schœnanthus; ({%as%}), m. a boy; a kind of fish,
Cyprinus Denticulatus or Cyprinus Rohita; N. of a
prince; ({%ā%}), f. a female child, girl, young woman
not more than sixteen years of age; a woman,
female; small cardamoms [cf. {%candra-b˚%}]; Aloe
Indica [cf. {%ghṛta-kumārī%}]; a species of plant, com-
monly called Aknadhi; a variety of jasmine; a
species of flower, Hibiscus Tortuosus; the cocoa-nut;
turmeric; a kind of metre, the quantities of the first
three lines being ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯ and that of the
fourth ¯¯˘¯¯ &c.; N. of the mother of Bālin and
Sugrīva, (she is said to have been formed by Prajā-
pati out of some dust which had fallen into his eyes);
N. of a mystical prayer; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of ear-ring;
[cf. Lith. <nsi>wála-s,</nsi> ‘horsehair.’] {%—Bāla-kadalī,%} f. a
young plantain tree, Musa Sapientum. {%—Bāla-%}
{%kāṇḍa, am,%} n. ‘section treating of the boy (Rāma),’
N. of the first book of the Rāmāyaṇa according to
the northern recension (called Ādi-kāṇḍa in the
Bengālī recension); N. of the first book of the
Adhyātma-rāmāyaṇa. {%—Bāla-kunda, as, am,%} m.
n. a young jasmine of the variety Jasminum Multi-
florum or J. Pubescens. {%—Bālakundānuviddha%}
{%(˚da-an˚), as, ā, am,%} adorned with young jasmine
blossoms. {%—Bāla-kṛmi, is,%} m. ‘hair-insect,’ a louse.
{%—Bāla-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m. the boy Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa
as a boy; N. of various men; N. of the father of
the author Śaṅkara-dīkṣita; of a friend of Maṇi-
rāma (a commentator on the Bhāminī-vilāsa); of the
father of Mahā-deva (the author of the Nyāya-sid-
dhānta-muktāvalī-dīpikā, a commentary on the Bhā-
ṣā-pariccheda); of a son of Mahādeva-bhaṭṭa and
husband of Lakṣmī-devī; of a son of Raṅga-nātha
and father of Nārāyaṇa (a commentator on the Uttara-
rāma-carita); of the father of Raṅga-nātha and Veṇī-
mādhava-bandhu; of a man called also Gaṅgā-dhara.
{%—Bāla-kriyā,%} f. children's act, the actions or con-
duct of children. {%—Bāla-krīḍana, am,%} n. child's
play, childish amusement. {%—Bāla-krīḍanaka, as,%}
m. a child's toy or plaything, a ball; the plant
Cypræa Moneta; an epithet of Śiva; ({%am%}), n.
child's play, childish sports; ({%āni%}), n. pl., N. of the
sixty-first chapter of the third part of Vātsyāyana's
Kāma-sūtra. {%—Bāla-krīḍā,%} f. child's play, children's
amusements, childish sport, juvenile pastime. {%—Bā-%}
{%lakrīḍā-varṇana, am,%} n., N. of the eleventh book
[Page0681-c+ 81]
of the Kumāra-sambhava. {%—Bāla-khilya, as,%} m.
[cf. {%vāla-khilya%}], a divine personage of the size of
a thumb, (sixty thousand were produced from Brah-
ma's body, and surround the chariot of the Sun;
see Raghu-vaṃśa XV. 10; Wilson's Viṣṇu-Purāṇa,
p. 34.) {%—Bāla-gaja, as,%} m. a young elephant.
{%—Bāla-garbhiṇī,%} f. a cow with calf for the first
time. {%—Bāla-gādā-dharī,%} f., N. of a work by
Annam Bhaṭṭa {%(= tarka-dīpikā)%}. {%—Bāla-gopāla,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the boy cowherd,’ Kṛṣṇa as a youthful
herdsman. {%—Bālagopāla-tīrtha, as,%} m., N. of the
teacher of the commentator Dhana-pati. {%—Bāla-%}
{%gopāla-yatīndra (˚ti-in˚), as,%} m., N. of the scho-
liast on Śaṅkara's commentary to the Kaṭhopaniṣad.
{%—Bāla-gaurī-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bath-
ing-place in Śrī-māla. {%—Bāla-graha, as,%} m. ‘seizer
of children,’ a kind of demon (to whom nine kinds
of demoniacal possessions are ascribed); any demon
who delights in teasing and injuring children. {%—Bā-%}
{%lagraha-pratiṣedha, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of
Vāgbhaṭa's Aṣṭāṅga-hṛdaya-saṃhitā. {%—Bālagra-%}
{%hopaśamana (˚ha-up˚), am,%} n., N. of a chapter of
the Śārṅga-dhara-paddhati. {%—Bāla-ghna, as,%} m.
a child-slayer, one who has killed a child, the
murderer of a child; ({%ī%}), f. a murderess of children
(said of a Rākṣasī). {%—Bāla-candra, as,%} or {%bāla-%}
{%candramas, ās,%} m. the young or waxing moon ({%=%}
{%bālendu%}); a term for the moon till five or six days
old. {%—Bālacandrikā,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Bāla-%}
{%carita%} or {%bāla-caritra, am,%} n. ‘childish exploits,’
juvenile sports or pastime; a common N. of works or
sections of works treating of the youthful adventures
of a deity; N. of a chapter of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa.
{%—Bālacarita-nāman,%} N. of a work by Vallabha-
dīkṣita containing the titles of Kṛṣṇa derived from
128 of his youthful adventures. {%—Bāla-carya, as,%}
m. ‘behaving like a child,’ an epithet of Kārttikeya;
({%ā%}), f. the conduct or behaviour of a child. {%—Bāla-%}
{%cūta, as,%} m. a young mango tree. {%—Bāla-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} springing or produced from hair; (in Mahā-
bh. Anuśāsana-p. 1611, 4587, a wrong reading for
{%bālbaja,%} q. v.) {%—Bāla-tanaya, as,%} m. a young
son; the tree Acacia Catechu. {%—Bāla-tantra, am,%}
n. midwifery, the care of a lying-in woman and of
her child. {%—Bāla-taru, us,%} m. a young tree. {%—Bāla-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%bāla-tva, am,%} n. childhood, boyhood.
{%—Bāla-tṛṇa, am,%} n. young grass. {%—Bāladalaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘small-leafed,’ the tree Acacia Catechu; [cf.
{%bāla-pattra.%}] {%—Bāla-deva, as,%} m., N. of the
father of Bāvā-deva, q. v. {%—Bāla-dhana, am,%} n. the
property of a minor or infant. {%—Bāla-dhi, is,%} m.
a hairy tail (as that of a horse). {%—Bāla-paṇḍita,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bāla-pattra%} or {%bāla-pat-%}
{%traka, as,%} m. ‘small-leafed,’ Acacia Catechu ({%=%}
{%bāladalaka%}); Hedysarum Alhagi. {%—Bāla-pāda-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. a young tree. {%—Bāla-pāśyā,%} f. an orna-
ment (of gold, silver, &c.) worn between the hair
when parted on the forehead; a string of pearls
binding the hair. {%—Bāla-putra, as, ā, am,%} having
little children, possessing very young children; pos-
sessed of young offspring. {%—Bāla-putraka, as,%} m.
a little son. {%—Bāla-puṣpikā,%} f. a variety of jas-
mine {%(= yūthikā)%}. {%—Bāla-puṣpī,%} f. a variety of
jasmine, Jasminum Auriculatum. {%—Bāla-bandhana,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. ‘child-fetterer,’ N. of a demon. {%—Bāla-%}
{%bodha, as,%} m. ‘instruction for the youthful,’ N. of
various works adapted to the capacity of the young
or inexperienced; of a commentary by the mathe-
matician Go-vinda the son of Lāḍama on a Nyāya
work by Śāṇḍilya; of a work by Vallabha Ācārya
on devotion to Kṛṣṇa. {%—Bāla-bodhaka, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} instructing the youthful and inexperienced, en-
lightening the simple. {%—Bāla-bodhanī,%} f. ‘instruct-
ing the youthful,’ N. of a Vedānta work. {%—Bāla-%}
{%bodhinī,%} f. ‘instructing the youthful,’ N. of a com-
mentary by an anonymous Vedānta writer on the
Vākya-sudhā; N. of a work by Śaṅkarācarya said
to epitomize the logical portions of the Śārīraka-
mīmāṃsā-bhāṣya. {%—Bālabodhinī-bhāva-prakā-%}
{%śikā,%} f., N. of a commentary on Śaṅkara Ācārya's
Bāla-bodhinī. {%—Bāla-bhañjaka, as,%} m., N. of a
[Page0682-a+ 81]
man. {%—Bāla-bhadraka, as,%} m. a kind of mineral
poison {%(= śāmbhava)%}. {%—Bāla-bhāra, as,%} m. ‘a
weight of tail,’ a large bushy tail. {%—Bāla-bhārata,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the little Bhārata,’ (opposed to the Mahā-
bhārata or great Bhārata), N. of a work ascribed to
Amara-candra (being a compendium of the Mahā-
bhārata); N. of a drama by Rāja-śekhara {%(= pra-%}
{%caṇḍa-pāṇḍava)%}. {%—Bāla-bhāva, as,%} m. state of a
child, childhood, minority, infancy; the state of a planet
which has not risen far above the horizon; (according
to Kullūka on Manu VIII. 118) {%= an-avadhāna,%}
inattention; ({%kātaro bāla-bhāvas,%} feeble childhood
= children collectively.) {%—Bāla-bhṛtya, as,%} m. a
servant from childhood. {%—Bāla-bhaiṣajya, am,%} n.
a kind of collyrium ({%= rasāñjana,%} q. v.). {%—Bāla-%}
{%bhojya, as,%} m. ‘children's food,’ pease. {%—Bāla-%}
{%mati, is, is, i,%} ‘childish-minded,’ one who has a
puerile intellect. {%—Bāla-mandāra-vṛkṣa, as,%} m.
a young coral tree (Erythrina Fulgens). {%—Bāla-%}
{%mūla, am,%} n. a young radish. {%—Bālamūlaka, as,%}
m. ‘hairy-rooted (?),’ a species of plant. {%—Bāla-%}
{%mūṣikā,%} f. a small rat, mouse. {%—Bāla-mṛga, as,%}
m. a young deer, fawn. {%—Bāla-mṛṇāla, as, am,%} m.
n. a tender filament or fibre of the lotus. {%—Bālam-%}
{%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a man; of a commentator on
the law-book called Mitākṣarā; ({%as, ī, am%}), com-
posed by Bālam-bhaṭṭa. {%—Bāla-yajñopavītaka%}
{%(˚ña-up˚), am,%} n. the sacrificial thread worn across
the breast; a sort of substitute for the sacrificial
thread, a string or scarf as worn by children upon
the breast (?); [cf. {%bālopavīta.%}] {%—Bāla-rāja, am,%}
n. lapis lazuli; [cf. {%bāla-sūrya, bāla-vāyaja.%}]
{%—Bāla-rāmāyaṇa, am,%} n. the little or abridged
Rāmāyaṇa; [cf. {%bāla-bhārata, mahā-rāmāyaṇa.%}]
{%—Bāla-rūpa,%} N. of a work mentioned in Vācas-
pati-miśra's Vivāda-cintāmaṇi. {%—Bālarūpa-dhara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘bearing the form of a boy,’ an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Bālarūpa-dhṛk%} (see {%dhṛk,%} p. 459), hav-
ing the form of a boy, assuming the form of a
dwarf. {%—Bāla-roga, as,%} m. a child's disease, disease
of children. {%—Bāla-latā,%} f. a young creeper. {%—Bā-%}
{%la-līlā,%} f. child's play, childish sport; juvenile pas-
time. {%—Bāla-vatsa, as,%} m. a young calf; ‘favourite
of children,’ a dove, pigeon. {%—Bāla-vanitā,%} f. a
young woman. {%—Bāla-vāyaja, am,%} n. lapis lazuli.
{%—Bāla-vāsas, as,%} n. ‘hair-raiment,’ woollen gar-
ments. {%—Bāla-vāhya, as,%} m. ‘ridden by children,’
a wild goat. {%—Bāla-vidhavā,%} f. ‘child-widow,’ a
widow whose husband died before she attained to
puberty. {%—Bāla-vinaṣṭa%} or {%bālavinaṣṭaka, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Bāla-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a young
tree. {%—Bāla-vaidhavya, am,%} n. ‘child-widowhood,’
the becoming a widow in childhood. {%—Bāla-vya-%}
{%jana, am,%} n. ‘tail-fan,’ a chowrie, a whisk, fly-
flapper (generally made of the tail of the Yak or
Bos Grunniens and used as an emblem of princely
rank). {%—Bāla-vrata, as,%} m. an epithet of the Bud-
dhist saint Mañju-ghoṣa or Mañju-śrī. {%—Bāla-%}
{%śarman, ā,%} m., N. of the father of Śāṇḍa and
grandfather of Lakṣmī-dhara. {%—Bāla-śṛṅga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘young-horned,’ having horns not yet full-
grown. {%—Bāla-sakhi, ā,%} m. ‘child-friend,’ a friend
from childhood. {%—Bāla-sañjīvana, am,%} n., N. of
the thirty-third chapter of the second part of the
Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Bāla-sandhyā,%} f. early twilight,
dawn. {%—Bālasandhyābha (˚yā-ābha), as, ā, am,%}
resembling early twilight, of the hue of dawn, of a
purple colour. {%—Bāla-sātmya, am,%} n. ‘that which
is suitable for children,’ milk. {%—Bāla-siṃha, as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Bāla-suhṛd, t,%} m. a friend from
childhood, a friend of one's youth. {%—Bāla-sūrya%} or
{%bālasūryaka, am,%} n. lapis lazuli; [cf. {%bāla-rāja.%}]
{%—Bāla-sthāna, am,%} n. the position or condition of
a child, childhood, youth, youthfulness, inexperience.
{%—Bāla-hatyā,%} f. child-murder, infanticide. {%—Bāla-%}
{%hasta, as,%} m. ‘hairy-hand,’ a hairy tail, the tail of a
horse or any hairy animal. {%—Bālākṣī (˚la-ak˚),%} f. a
species of tree, (commonly called {%keśa-puṣṭa.%}) {%—Bā-%}
{%lāgra (˚la-ag˚), am,%} n. a pinnacle?, (Mṛc-chakaṭī,
Act 1. p. 21); the point of a hair. {%—Bālātapa%}
{%(˚la-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘early heat of the sun,’ the newly
[Page0682-b+ 81]
risen sun, the morning sun-beams, heat of the morn-
ing sun. {%—Bālātapa-rakta, as, ā, am,%} red or roseate
with the morning sun-beams. {%—Bālāditya (˚la-%}
{%ād˚), as,%} m. ‘youthful sun,’ the newly risen sun,
morning sun; N. of a king of Kaśmīra; of a king
of Magadha. {%—Bālādhyāpaka (˚la-adh˚), as,%} m.
‘child-instructor,’ a teacher of youth, tutor. {%—Bālā-%}
{%dhyāpaka-tā,%} f. the office of a teacher of youth, a
tutorship. {%—Bālāpatya (˚la-āp˚), am,%} n. young off-
spring, youthful progeny. {%—Bālābhyāsa (˚la-abh),%}
{%as,%} m. early application, study during childhood.
{%—Bālāmaya (˚la-ām˚), as,%} m. a child's disease,
disease of children. {%—Bālāmaya-pratiṣedha, am,%}
n., N. of the second chapter of the Uttara-tantra or
sixth part of Vāgbhaṭa's Aṣṭāṅga-hṛdaya-saṃhitā.
{%—Bālāruṇa (˚la-ar˚), as,%} m. early dawn; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), like early dawn, ruddy as early dawn. {%—Bālārka%}
{%(˚la-ar˚), as,%} m. the newly risen sun, the morning
sun-beams, heat of the morning sun. {%—Bālārka-ko-%}
{%mala, as, ā, am,%} soft as the orient sun (said of red
dye). {%—Bālāvabodha (˚la-av˚), as,%} m. ‘instructing
the young or inexperienced,’ N. of a short treatise
on omens drawn from the movements of dogs. {%—Bā-%}
{%lāvabodha-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a commentary
on Śaṅkhāyana's Gṛhya-sūtras. {%—Bālā-varṇana,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the ninety-sixth chapter of the Śārṅ-
gadhara-paddhati. {%—Bālāvastha (˚la-av˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} being in a state of childhood, still young, juve-
nile. {%—Bālāvasthā,%} f. the state of a child, youth,
childhood. {%—Bālāśoka (˚la-aś˚), as,%} m. a young
Aśoka tree. {%—Bālāsura (˚la-as˚), as,%} m., N. of an
Asura. {%—Bālāsura-vadha, as,%} m., N. of the eighty-
fifth chapter of the second part of the Gaṇeśa-Pu-
rāṇa. {%—Bālā-hatyā,%} f. the murdering of female
children, female infanticide. {%—Bālendu (˚la-in˚),%}
{%us,%} m. ‘young moon,’ the new moon, waxing moon.
{%—Bāleśvara (˚la-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of Jaṭā-
dhara and father of Nārāyaṇa the author of the
Prākṛta-pāda, a grammatical work. {%—Bāleṣṭa (˚la-%}
{%iṣ˚), as,%} m. ‘desired by children,’ a jujube tree.
{%—Bālopacaraṇa (˚la-up˚), am,%} n. or {%bālopacāra%}
{%(˚la-up˚), as,%} m. the medical treatment of children,
any medicine or remedy suited for children. {%—Bālo-%}
{%pacaraṇīya, am,%} n., N. of the first chapter of the
Uttara-tantra or sixth book of Vāgbhaṭa's Aṣṭāṅga-
hṛdaya-saṃhitā. {%—Bālopavīta (˚la-up˚), am,%} n.
a cloth used for covering the privities; the sacrificial
thread ({%= bāla-yajñopavītaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>34634<pc>0682-b<k1>bAlaka<k2>bAlaka
{%Bālaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ young, childlike, childish,
not yet full-grown; ({%as%}), m. a child, infant, a boy;
(in law) a minor; a fool, blockhead; the tail of a
horse or elephant; a finger-ring; a bracelet; a kind
of perfume; N. of a prince, (also called Pālaka);
({%ikā%}), f. a female child or infant, a girl; sand; the
knot or flower of an ear-ring; the rustling of leaves;
small cardamoms [cf. {%ikṣu-b˚%}]; ({%am%}), n. a variety
of Hibiscus, Hibiscus Mutabilis; [cf. Hib. <nsi>ballach,</nsi>
‘a boy.’] {%—Bālaka-tva, am,%} n. childhood, child-
ishness. {%—Bālaka-pralapita, am,%} n. childish talk,
foolish prattle. {%—Bālaka-priya, as, ā, am,%} fond of
children; ({%ā%}), f. coloquintida, colocynth; Musa Sapi-
entum. {%—Bālaka-hatyā,%} f. infanticide.
<LEND>

<L>34635<pc>0682-b<k1>bAlakIya<k2>bAlakIya
{%Bālakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ childish, infantine, relating
to children.
<LEND>

<L>34636<pc>0682-b<k1>bAlAyani<k2>bAlAyani
{%Bālāyani, is,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Bālā.
<LEND>

<L>34637<pc>0682-b<k1>bAli<k2>bAli
{%Bāli, is,%}¦ m., N. of a monkey, brother of the
monkey-king Su-grīva, (he was son of Indra and was
said to derive his name from {%bāla,%} ‘hair,’ as being
born from the hair of his mother; he was slain by
Rāma-candra, see Rāmāyaṇa IV. 21). {%—Bāli-%}
{%sambhava, as,%} m. ‘sprung from Bāli,’ N. of a cele-
brated monkey, the son of Bāli. {%—Bāli-hantṛ, tā,%}
m. ‘killer of Bāli,’ an epithet of Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>34638<pc>0682-b<k1>bAlin<k2>bAlin
{%Bālin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a monkey, son of Indra, =
{%bāli; (inī),%} f. the constellation Aśvinī.
<LEND>

<L>34639<pc>0682-b<k1>bAliman<k2>bAliman
{%Bāliman, ā,%}¦ m. childhood, youth, youthfulness,
boyhood, immaturity.
<LEND>

<L>34640<pc>0682-b<k1>bAliSa<k2>bAliSa
{%Bāliśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ young, childish, puerile, of
tender years; ignorant, inexperienced, simple, foolish
({%= bāla%}); careless, heedless; ({%as%}), m. a child; a
fool, blockhead; ({%am%}), n. a pillow, cushion (=
[Page0682-c+ 70]
Pers. <lang n="arabic">بالش</lang>). {%—Bāliśa-tā,%} f. or {%bāliśa-tva, am,%} n.
childishness, youthfulness, simplicity, foolishness, folly.
{%—Bāliśa-mati, is, is, i,%} ‘childish-minded,’ foolish.
<LEND>

<L>34641<pc>0682-c<k1>bAliSya<k2>bAliSya
{%Bāliśya, am,%}¦ n. childishness, youth, youthfulness,
boyhood, folly, thoughtlessness, heedlessness.
<LEND>

<L>34642<pc>0682-c<k1>bAleya<k2>bAleya
{%Bāleya, as, ī, am,%}¦ fit for an offering or oblation
(fr. {%bali%}); descended from Bali (fr. {%bali%}); tender,
soft, fit or proper for children (fr. {%bāla%}); ({%as%}), m.
an ass; a kind of vegetable ({%= aṅgāra-vallī%}); a kind
of radish ({%= cāṇakya-mūlaka%}); N. of a Daitya.
{%—Bāleya-śāka, as,%} m. a kind of vegetable, Sipho-
nanthus Indica.
<LEND>

<L>34643<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlya<k2>bAlya
{%Bālya, am,%}¦ n. boyhood, childhood, infancy; child-
ishness, puerility, immaturity of the understanding,
folly, thoughtlessness, puerile temerity. {%—Bālya-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. the period or age of childhood. {%—Bā-%}
{%lya-tā,%} f. {%= bālya.%}
<LEND>

<L>34644<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlaKilya<k2>bAlaKilya
{#bAlaKilya#}¦ {%bāla-khilya.%} See p. 681, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>34645<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlandana<k2>bAlandana
{#bAlandana#}¦ {%bālandana, as,%} m. a patronymic
of Vatsa-prī.
<LEND>

<L>34646<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlAki<k2>bAlAki
{#bAlAki#}¦ {%bālāki, is,%} m. a metronymic from
Balākā.
<LEND>

<L>34647<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlAkyA<k2>bAlAkyA
{%Bālākyā,%}¦ f. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>34648<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlAyani<k2>bAlAyani
{#bAlAyani#}¦ {%bālāyani, is,%} m., N. of a pre-
ceptor.
<LEND>

<L>34649<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlAhaka<k2>bAlAhaka
{#bAlAhaka#}¦ {%bālāhaka, as,%} m., N. of a ser-
pent-demon.
<LEND>

<L>34650<pc>0682-c<k1>bAliSa<k2>bAliSa
{#bAliSa#}¦ {%bāliśa.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34651<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlIvardineya<k2>bAlIvardineya
{#bAlIvardineya#}¦ {%bālīvardineya, as,%} m. a pa-
tronymic from Balīvardin; a metronymic from Balī-
vardī; [cf. {%balīvardineya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34652<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlISa<k2>bAlISa
{#bAlISa#}¦ {%bālīśa, as,%} m. retention of urine.
<LEND>

<L>34653<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlu<k2>bAlu
{#bAlu#}¦ {%bālu, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%bal%}),
a kind of drug; (also written {%vālu;%} cf. {%elavālu.%})
<LEND>

<L>34654<pc>0682-c<k1>bAluka<k2>bAluka
{%Bāluka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of drug and perfume,
(also written {%vāluka;%} cf. {%elavāluka%}); ({%ā%}), f. sand,
gravel; powder; camphor; a sand-bath; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f.
a species of cucumber, Cucumis Usitatissimus. {%—Bā-%}
{%lukā-gaḍa, as,%} m. a species of fish, Cheilodipterus
Calius and Butis. {%—Bālukātmikā (˚kā-āt˚),%} f. ‘hav-
ing the nature of sand,’ sugar. {%—Bālukā-prabhā,%} f.
one of the seven hells of the Jainas, the hell of sand.
<LEND>

<L>34655<pc>0682-c<k1>bAluNkI<k2>bAluNkI
{%Bāluṅkī,%}¦ f. a species of cucumber, Cucumis Usi-
tatissimus.
<LEND>

<L>34656<pc>0682-c<k1>bAluNgI<k2>bAluNgI
{%Bāluṅgī%}¦ or {%bāluṅgikā,%} f. {%= bāluṅkī.%}
<LEND>

<L>34657<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlUka<k2>bAlUka
{%Bālūka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of poison.
<LEND>

<L>34658<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlendu<k2>bAlendu
{#bAlendu#}¦ {%bālendu.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34659<pc>0682-c<k1>bAleya<k2>bAleya
{#bAleya#}¦ {%bāleya.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>34660<pc>0682-c<k1>bAloka<k2>bAloka
{#bAloka#}¦ {%bāloka, as,%} m., N. of an author (?).
<LEND>

<L>34661<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlbaja<k2>bAlbaja
{#bAlbaja#}¦ {%bālbaja, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%balbaja%}),
made of the grass Eleusine Indica.
<LEND>

<L>34662<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlbajaBArika<k2>bAlbajaBArika
{%Bālbajabhārika%}¦ (fr. {%balbaja + bhāra%}), {%as, ī, am,%}
laden or burdened with Balbaja grass.
<LEND>

<L>34663<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlbajika<k2>bAlbajika
{%Bālbajika, as, ī, am,%}¦ bearing Balbaja grass; [cf.
{%balbajika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34664<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlya<k2>bAlya
{#bAlya#}¦ {%bālya.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>34665<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlhaka<k2>bAlhaka
{#bAlhaka#}¦ {%bālhaka.%} See {%bālhika%} below.
<LEND>

<L>34666<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlhi<k2>bAlhi
{#bAlhi#}¦ {%bālhi,%} N. of a country, Balkh;
(often written {%bāhli;%} cf. {%balhi.%}) {%—Bālhi-ja%} or
{%bālhi-jāta, as, ā, am,%} born or bred in Balkh, of
the Balkh breed (said of a horse).
<LEND>

<L>34667<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlhAyana<k2>bAlhAyana
{%Bālhāyana, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or derived
from Bālhi.
<LEND>

<L>34668<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlhika<k2>bAlhika
{%Bālhika, as,%}¦ m. (also written {%bāhlika, vāhlika,%}
{%bāhlīka,%} and incorrectly {%bālhaka%}), a king of the
Bālhikas; N. of a son of Pratīpa; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people; ({%as, ī, am%}), coming from Balkh; ({%am%}),
n. saffron; Asa Fœtida.
<LEND>

<L>34669<pc>0682-c<k1>bAlhIka<k2>bAlhIka
{%Bālhīka, as,%}¦ m. (often written {%bāhlīka%} or {%vā-%}
{%hlīka,%} and sometimes for {%bāhīka%}), a prince of the
[Page0683-a+ 71]
Bālhīkas; N. of a son of Janam-ejaya; of a son of
Pratīpa; of the father of Rohiṇī, wife of Vasu-deva;
of a Gandharva; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people, {%=%}
{%bālhika; (ī),%} f. a princess of the Bālhīkas (an epithet
of Mādrī, Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 4886); ({%as, ī, am%}),
belonging to or derived from the Bālhīkas; ({%am%}),
n. saffron; Asa Fœtida. {%—Bālhīka-bhāṣā,%} f. the
language of the Bālhīkas (enumerated among the
various Prākṛt dialects). {%—Bālhīkeśa (˚ka + īś˚), as,%}
m. lord of the Bālhīkas.
<LEND>

<L>34670<pc>0683-a<k1>bAvAdeva<k2>bAvAdeva
{#bAvAdeva#}¦ {%bāvā-deva, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the Arpaṇa-mīmāṃsā, a treatise on sacri-
ficial rites.
<LEND>

<L>34671<pc>0683-a<k1>bAvASAstrin<k2>bAvASAstrin
{%Bāvā-śāstrin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of the author of the
Svarodaya-vivaraṇa, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34672<pc>0683-a<k1>bAzkala<k2>bAzkala
{#bAzkala#}¦ {%bāṣkala, as,%} m., N. of a teacher
(a pupil of Paila); of a Daitya; of a son of Anu-
hrāda; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a family regarded as be-
longing to the Kauśikas, (also written {%vāskalās%}); N.
of a school; ({%as, ā, am%}), large, great?; ({%as%}), m. a
warrior (see {%vāṣkala%}). {%—Bāṣkala-śākhā,%} f., N.
of a work. {%—Bāṣkalopaniṣad (˚la-up˚), t,%} f.,
N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>34673<pc>0683-a<k1>bAzkalaka<k2>bAzkalaka
{%Bāṣkalaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to or derived
from the Bāṣkalas.
<LEND>

<L>34674<pc>0683-a<k1>bAzkali<k2>bAzkali
{%Bāṣkali, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bāṣkala; N.
of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>34675<pc>0683-a<k1>bAzkiha<k2>bAzkiha
{#bAzkiha#}¦ {%bāṣkiha, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Bashkiha.
<LEND>

<L>34676<pc>0683-a<k1>bAzpa<k2>bAzpa
{#bAzpa#}¦ {%bāṣpa, bāṣpaka, bāṣpin,%} &c. See
{%vāṣpa,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>34677<pc>0683-a<k1>bAskala<k2>bAskala
{#bAskala#}¦ {%bāskala,%} a various reading for
{%bāṣkala%} above.
<LEND>

<L>34678<pc>0683-a<k1>bAsta<k2>bAsta
{#bAsta#}¦ {%bāsta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%basta,%} a goat,
cf. {%vasta%}), belonging to or coming from a goat,
goatish; {%bāstaṃ carma,%} a goat-skin; (also written
{%vāsta,%} cf. Manu II. 41.)
<LEND>

<L>34679<pc>0683-a<k1>bAstAyana<k2>bAstAyana
{%Bāstāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Basta.
<LEND>

<L>34680<pc>0683-a<k1>bAh<k2>bAh
{#bAh#}¦ {%bāh.%} See rt. {%vāh.%}
<LEND>

<L>34681<pc>0683-a<k1>bAha<k2>bAha
{#bAha#}¦ {%bāha, as, ā,%} m. f. the arm, = 1. {%bāhu%} be-
low; ({%as%}), m. a horse; (probably for {%vāha%} fr. rt. {%vah%})
<LEND>

<L>34682<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhava<k2>bAhava<h>1
1. {%bāhava, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%bahu%}), see Gaṇa Pṛthv-
ādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 122.
<LEND>

<L>34683<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhava<k2>bAhava<h>2
2. {%bāhava, as, am,%}¦ m. n., Ved. the arm ({%= bāhu%}).
<LEND>

<L>34684<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhavi<k2>bAhavi
{%Bāhavi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bāhu; N. of
a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>34685<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhAbAhavi<k2>bAhAbAhavi
{%Bāhābāhavi,%}¦ ind. arm against arm, hand to hand
(in close combat, {%= bāhūbāhavi%}).
<LEND>

<L>34686<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhawa<k2>bAhawa
{#bAhawa#}¦ {%bāhaṭa, as,%} m., N. of an author
mentioned by Malli-nātha in his commentary on the
Raghu-vaṃśa.
<LEND>

<L>34687<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhaqa<k2>bAhaqa
{#bAhaqa#}¦ {%bāhaḍa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34688<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhAdura<k2>bAhAdura
{#bAhAdura#}¦ {%bāhādura, as,%} m. a modern title
of honour conferred by Muhammadan kings bearing
some resemblance to the European title of military
knighthood (= Pers. <lang n="arabic">بهادر</lang>).
<LEND>

<L>34689<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhAbAhavi<k2>bAhAbAhavi
{#bAhAbAhavi#}¦ {%bāhābāhavi.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>34690<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhirvedika<k2>bAhirvedika
{#bAhirvedika#}¦ {%bāhirvedika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ba-%}
{%hir-vedi%}), Ved. situated or taking place outside the
Vedi; [cf. {%bahirvedika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34691<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhIka<k2>bAhIka
{#bAhIka#}¦ {%bāhīka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bahis%}), being
outside, external, exterior; (probably) being abroad;
belonging or relating to the people of the Pañjāb;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the people of the Pañjāb, (opposed to
{%prācya%}); ({%as%}), m. an inhabitant of the Pañjāb. a
Pañjābī; N. of a priest; an ox; ({%am%}), n., N. of a lake
or piece of water in the country of the Bāhīkas.
<LEND>

<L>34692<pc>0683-a<k1>bAhu<k2>bAhu<h>1
{#bAhu#} 1¦. {%bāhu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. {%bah%} for {%baṃh,%}
said to be fr. rt. {%bādh;%} by some grammarians 1.
{%bāhu%} is said to be both m. and f.; for 2. {%bāhu%}
see col. 3), the arm, ({%bāhū udyamya,%} raising
[Page0683-b+ 81]
the two arms; {%Lakṣmaṇo Rāmasya dakṣiṇo%}
{%bāhuḥ,%} Lakṣmaṇa is Rāma's right arm; {%ājānu-%}
{%bāhu,%} one whose arms reach as far as his kness; cf.
{%ud-b˚, ūrdhva-b˚%}); the fore-arm, the arm between
the elbow and the wrist, (opposed to {%pra-gaṇḍa,%}
q. v.); the fore-foot of an animal, (according to the
commentators especially the upper part of the fore-
foot, but perhaps also the lower part; cf. {%pṛśni-%}
{%b˚%}); the whole upper extremity of the body (in
medicine, as opposed to {%sakthi,%} the lower extre-
mity); the limb of a bow (Ved.); the bar of a
chariot-pole (Ved.); a door-post [cf. {%dvāra-b˚%}];
(in geometry) the base of a right-angled triangle,
leg of a triangle, side of an angular figure [cf.
{%bāhu-pratibāhu%}]; the shadow of the gnomon on a
sun-dial; the constellation Ārdrā, (in this sense also
{%ū,%} m. du.); N. of a Daitya; of a prince (enumerated
among eighteen who brought ruin upon their families
by their illegal actions, Mahā-bh. Udyoga-p. 2731);
of a son of Vṛka; of a son of Vajra; (adjective com-
pounds having {%bāhu%} in the sense of ‘arm’ at the
end and applied to the names of persons make
their fem. in {%ū%}); [cf. Zend <nsi>bâzu,</nsi> ‘the arm;’ Gr.
<lang n="greek">πῆχυ-ς, βραχίων;</lang> Lat. <nsi>brachium;</nsi> Old Norse
<nsi>bôg-r</nsi> = Old Germ. <nsi>buoc,</nsi> ‘a bow, bend.’] {%—Bāhu-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} working with the hands. {%—Bāhu-%}
{%kuṇṭha%} or {%bāhu-kubja, as, ā, am,%} crippled in the
arms. {%—Bāhu-kuntha, as,%} m. a wing. {%—Bāhu-%}
{%kṣad, t, t, t,%} Ved. offering the fore-legs (i. e. the
inferior parts) of an animal (said of a parsimonious
sacrificer; according to Sāy. {%= bāhubhir yajamā-%}
{%naḥ%}). {%—Bāhu-cāpa, as,%} m. ‘arm-bow,’ the dis-
tance measured by the extended arms, a fathom.
{%—Bāhu-cyut, t, t, t,%} in Atharva-veda XVIII. 3,
25, perhaps for {%bāhu-tā%}. {%—Bāhu-cyuta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. fallen from the arm, dropped out of
the hand; (Sāy. {%= bāhubhyām pracyutaḥ.%}) {%—Bā-%}
{%hu-ja, as,%} m. ‘arm-born,’ a Kṣatriya or man of
the military class (as sprung from the arm of Brahmā,
Manu I. 31); a parrot; sesamum growing wild or
spontaneously. {%—Bāhu-jūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. swift
with the arms; (Sāy. {%= bāhuḥ prerakaḥ śatrūṇāṃ%}
{%yasya tādṛśaḥ,%} repelling the enemy with the arms.)
{%—Bāhu-jyā,%} f. the cord of an arc, sine. {%—Bāhu-tā,%}
ind., Ved. in the arms; [cf. {%deva-tā,%} 2. {%puruṣa-%}
{%tā.%}] {%—Bāhu-trāṇa, am,%} n. ‘arm-fence,’ armour for
the arms, vantbrass. {%—Bāhu-daṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n.
‘arm-staff,’ an arm like a staff, the arm compared to
a staff; a blow or punishment inflicted with the arm
or fist; [cf. {%bhuja-daṇḍa.%}] {%—Bāhu-dā,%} f. ‘arm-
giver,’ an epithet of Suyaśā (a wife of Parīkṣit,
Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 3795); N. of a river said to rise
in the Himālaya and probably identical with the
Vitastā or classical Hydaspes and modern Jhelum,
(into this river Gaurī the wife of Prasena-jit is said
to have been transformed; and its name is accounted
for by a legend that a saint recovered his lost arms
by bathing in the stream.) {%—Bāhu-pāśa, as,%} m.
‘crossing or intertwining the arms,’ a particular atti-
tude in fighting. {%—Bāhu-pratibāhu, ū,%} m. du. (in
geometry) the opposite sides of a figure. {%—Bāhu-%}
{%prasāra, as,%} m. the act of stretching out the arms,
embracing. {%—Bāhu-praharaṇa, as,%} m. ‘striking
with the arms,’ a striker, boxer; ({%am%}), n. boxing,
wrestling. {%—Bāhu-phala, am,%} n. (in geometry) the
result from the base sine; the sine of an arc of a
circle of position contained between the sun and the
prime vertical. {%—Bāhu-bala, am,%} n. power or
strength of arm; ({%as%}), m., N. of a prince; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), strong in the arm. {%—Bāhu-balin, ī, inī, i,%}
strong in the arm. {%—Bāhu-bādha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of
a people; (also read {%bāhu-bādhya, bahu-rada.%})
{%—Bāhu-bhaṅgi, is,%} f. bending or twisting the arms.
{%—Bāhu-bhūṣaṇa, am,%} n. or {%bāhu-bhūṣā,%} f.
‘arm-ornament,’ an armlet, an ornament worn on
the upper part of the arm. {%—Bāhu-bhedin, ī,%} m.
‘arm-breaker,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Bāhu-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} one who has (strong) arms; ({%ān%}), m.
an epithet of Indra; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Bāhu-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} made or done with the arms.
{%—Bāhu-mātra, as, ī, am,%} Ved. as long as the
[Page0683-c+ 80]
arm. {%—Bāhu-mūla, am,%} n. the root or juncture of
the arm, armpit, extremity of the upper part of the
arm, shoulder-balde, the region of the shoulder.
{%—Bāhumūla-vibhūṣaṇa, am,%} n. an ornament
worn on the extremity of the upper part of the arm.
{%—Bāhu-yuddha, am,%} n. ‘arm-fight,’ a close fight,
personal struggle, pugilistic encounter, boxing, wrest-
ling, pugilism. {%—Bāhu-yodha, as,%} or {%bāhu-yodhin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘fighting with the arms,’ a wrestler, a boxer. {%—Bā-%}
{%hu-latā,%} f. ‘arm-creeper,’ an arm (lithe) as a creeper
or climbing plant. {%—Bāhulatāntara (˚tā-an˚), am,%}
n. the space between creeper-like arms, the breast,
bosom. {%—Bāhu-latikā,%} f. an arm like a young
creeper or climbing plant. {%—Bāhu-vikṣepa, as,%}
m. the act of throwing the arms apart, moving the
arms; swimming. {%—Bāhu-vīrya, am,%} n. strength of
arm, personal prowess. {%—Bāhu-vṛkta, as,%} m., Ved.
N. of a descendant of Atri and author of the hymns
Ṛg-veda V. 71, 72. {%—Bāhu-vyāyāma, as,%} m.
‘arm-exercise,’ gymnastic or athletic exercise. {%—Bā-%}
{%hu-śakti, is,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Bāhu-śardhin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} Ved. ‘relying on (his) arms,’ mighty in
arm or prowess; an epithet of Indra. {%—Bāhu-śālin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} possessing (strong) arms; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet
of Śiva; N. of a Dānava; of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra;
of Bhīma; of a prince. {%—Bāhu-śikhara,%} ‘the upper
part of the arm,’ the shoulder. {%—Bāhu-sambhava,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘arm-born,’ ‘sprung from the arms (of Brahmā),’
a Kṣatriya or man of the military class. {%—Bāhu-%}
{%sahasra-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘having a thousand arms,’ an
epithet of king Arjuna Kārtavīrya killed by Paraśu-
rāma. {%—Bāhūtkṣepam (˚hu-ut˚),%} ind. having lifted
up the arms, having raised the hands. {%—Bāhū-bā-%}
{%havi,%} ind. arm against arm, arm to arm, hand to
hand or mutually grappling (in close combat, {%= bāhā-%}
{%bāhavi%}). {%—Bāhv-aṅka, as,%} m., Ved. bending the
arm. {%—Bāhv-ojas, as,%} n., Ved. strength of arm;
({%ās, ās, as%}), strong in the arm; strong in the
fore-legs (said of a horse; Sāy. {%= bāhuṣu pra-%}
{%kṛṣṭa-balavān%}).
<LEND>

<L>34693<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhuka<k2>bAhuka
{%Bāhuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ servile, a servant, dependant;
swimming with the arms; like a dwarf, dwarfish;
({%as%}), m. = 1. {%bāhu,%} ‘the arm,’ at the end of a comp.
[cf. {%hrasva-b˚%}]; a monkey; N. of a Nāga; of a
prince; of a son of Vṛka (= 1. {%bāhu%}); N. assumed
by Nala after his transformation into a dwarf by the
serpent-demon Karkoṭaka and upon his becoming
charioteer to king Ṛtu-parṇa, (with this meaning
also written {%vāhuka%}); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>34694<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhula<k2>bAhula<h>1
1. {%bāhula, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see p. 684, col. 1), mail
or armour for the arms; N. of a place in Dakṣiṇā-
patha.
<LEND>

<L>34695<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhu<k2>bAhu<h>2
{#bAhu#} 2¦. {%bāhu%} (fr. {%bahu,%} p. 677, col. 2), oc-
curring at the beginning of compounds as follow.
(For 1. {%bāhu%} see col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>34696<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhukIwa<k2>bAhukIwa
{%Bāhukīṭa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bahu-kīṭa%}), see Gaṇa
Paladyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 110.
<LEND>

<L>34697<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhukuleyaka<k2>bAhukuleyaka
{%Bāhukuleyaka%}¦ (fr. {%bahu + kula%}), {%as,%} m. a pa-
tronymic; [cf. {%bahukulīna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34698<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhugarta<k2>bAhugarta
{%Bāhugarta, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bahu + garta%}), see
Scholiast on Pāṇ. IV. 2, 137.
<LEND>

<L>34699<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhuguRya<k2>bAhuguRya
{%Bāhuguṇya, am,%}¦ n. possession of numerous ex-
cellences, great advantageousness; excess; ({%ena%}), ind.
exceedingly.
<LEND>

<L>34700<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhudantaka<k2>bAhudantaka
{%Bāhudantaka%}¦ [cf. {%bāhudantin%}], belonging to
Indra, (said of a treatise on moral duties abridged
by Indra, Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 2204.)
<LEND>

<L>34701<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhudantin<k2>bAhudantin
{%Bāhudantin, ī,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bahu + danta%}), an epithet
of Indra. {%—Bāhudanti-putra, as,%} m. a son of Indra,
epithet of Jaya-datta (son of Indra and reputed author
of a Tantra).
<LEND>

<L>34702<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhudanteya<k2>bAhudanteya
{%Bāhudanteya, as,%}¦ m. {%= bāhudantin.%}
<LEND>

<L>34703<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhubali<k2>bAhubali
{%Bāhubali, is,%}¦ m. (probably fr. {%bahu-bala%}), N. of
a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>34704<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhuBAzya<k2>bAhuBAzya
{%Bāhubhāṣya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%bahu-bhāṣin,%} q. v.),
talkativeness, garrulity, loquaciousness.
<LEND>

<L>34705<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhumitrAyaRa<k2>bAhumitrAyaRa
{%Bāhumitrāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bahu-
mitra, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34706<pc>0683-c<k1>bAhurUpya<k2>bAhurUpya
{%Bāhurūpya, as,%}¦ &c. (fr. {%bahu + rūpya%}), see
Siddhānta-kaumudī on Pāṇ. IV. 2, 106; ({%am%}), n.
[Page0684-a+ 73]
(fr. {%bahu-rūpa%}), the possession of many forms or
aspects, manifoldness.
<LEND>

<L>34707<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhuvartaka<k2>bAhuvartaka
{%Bāhuvartaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bahu-varta%}), see
Scholiast on Pāṇ. IV. 2, 126.
<LEND>

<L>34708<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhuvidDa<k2>bAhuvidDa
{%Bāhuviddha, as,%}¦ m. (fr. a form {%bahu-viddha?%}),
a patronymic (?).
<LEND>

<L>34709<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhuSAla<k2>bAhuSAla
{%Bāhuśāla, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bahu-śāla%}), prepared
from Tithymalus Antiquorum. {%—Bāhuśāla-guḍa, as,%}
m. (in medicine) pills prepared from Tithymalus An-
tiquorum and used as a remedy for hemorrhoids &c.
<LEND>

<L>34710<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhuSrutya<k2>bAhuSrutya
{%Bāhuśrutya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%bahu-śruta%}), great
learning, learnedness, erudition.
<LEND>

<L>34711<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhvfcya<k2>bAhvfcya
{%Bāhvṛcya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%bahv-ṛc%}), the sacred
tradition of the Bahv-ṛcas, traditional teaching of
the Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>34712<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhuk<k2>bAhuk
{#bAhuk#}¦ {%bāhuk%} in {%pra-b˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34713<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhubARa<k2>bAhubARa
{#bAhubARa#}¦ {%bāhubāṇa, as,%} m. a patronymic of
king Hammīra; (also read {%vāhuvāna, cāhubāṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>34714<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhula<k2>bAhula<h>2
{#bAhula#} 2¦. {%bāhula, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bahula;%} for
1. see p. 683, col. 3), manifold, see Gaṇa Saṅka-
lādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 75; ({%as%}), m. the month Kārt-
tika (when the moon is near the Pleiades; fr. {%ba-%}
{%hulā,%} the Pleiades); ({%as%}), m. fire; N. of a prince;
of a son of Śākya-muni; ({%am%}), n. manifoldness, a
term in grammar implying the optional applicabi-
lity of different rules. {%—Bāhula-grīva, as,%} m.
‘variegated-necked,’ a peacock.
<LEND>

<L>34715<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhulaka<k2>bAhulaka
{%Bāhulaka, am,%}¦ n. manifoldness, diversity; ({%āt%}),
ind. in consequence of the diverse or indeterminate
applicability (of a rule), from the various application
of meanings or of forms.
<LEND>

<L>34716<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhuli<k2>bAhuli
{%Bāhuli, is,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Viśvā-mitra.
<LEND>

<L>34717<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhuleya<k2>bAhuleya
{%Bāhuleya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bahulā,%} the Pleiades), a
metronymic of Kārttikeya.
<LEND>

<L>34718<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhulya<k2>bAhulya
{%Bāhulya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%bahula%}), abundance, plen-
tifulness, plenty, quantity, multitude, multiplicity,
manifoldness, variety; the usual course of things,
common order of things; ({%āt, ena%}), ind. in the
usual course of things, for the most part, usually,
ordinarily, commonly; ({%āt%}), ind. in all probability.
<LEND>

<L>34719<pc>0684-a<k1>bAheyaka<k2>bAheyaka
{#bAheyaka#}¦ {%bāheyaka, as, ikā, am,%} (perhaps)
relating to or current among the Bāhīkas.
<LEND>

<L>34720<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhya<k2>bAhya
{#bAhya#}¦ {%bāhya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%bahis,%} q. v. In
classical Sanskrit this word is more usually written
{%vāhya,%} but in the Veda {%bahis%} and {%bāhya%} are the
usual forms, the nom. pl. {%bāhye%} following the pro-
nominal declension), being outside, situated without
(a city or village or house), outer, external, out-
ward, exterior; foreign; ({%as%}), m. a foreigner; an
outcast, one of a low tribe; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%tvac,%} the
outer bark (of a tree); ({%am, ena, e%}), ind. outside,
on the outside, without; ({%āt%}), ind. from without.
{%—Bāhya-tas,%} ind. outside, externally, on the outside
of (with gen. or abl.; cf. {%vāhya-tas%}).
<LEND>

<L>34721<pc>0684-a<k1>bAhlaka<k2>bAhlaka
{#bAhlaka#}¦ {%bāhlaka, bāhli, bāhlika, bāhlīka,%} &c.
See {%bālhaka,%} &c., p. 682, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>34722<pc>0684-a<k1>biw<k2>biw
{#biw#}¦ {%biṭ%} (also written {%viṭ;%} cf. rts. {%viḍ%}
and {%hiṭ%}), cl. 1. P. {%beṭati, beṭitum,%} to
address harshly; to swear, curse; to shout, exclaim.
<LEND>

<L>34723<pc>0684-a<k1>biwaka<k2>biwaka
{#biwaka#}¦ {%biṭaka, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. a boil
({%= piṭaka,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>34724<pc>0684-a<k1>biWa<k2>biWa
{#biWa#}¦ {%biṭha, am,%} n., Ved. (according to
Yāska) the sky.
<LEND>

<L>34725<pc>0684-a<k1>biq<k2>biq
{#biq#}¦ {%biḍ%} (or {%viḍ%}) {%= biṭ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34726<pc>0684-a<k1>biqAla<k2>biqAla
{#biqAla#}¦ {%biḍāla, biḍālaka,%} &c. See {%viḍāla,%}
&c.
<LEND>

<L>34727<pc>0684-a<k1>bid<k2>bid
{#bid#}¦ {%bid%} or {%bind%} (connected with rts.
{%bhid, bil, bhil%}), cl. 1. P. {%bindati, bi-%}
{%binda, binditā, binditum,%} to split, cleave; to
divide; to make or constitute a part.
<LEND>

<L>34728<pc>0684-a<k1>bidala<k2>bidala
{%Bidala, am,%}¦ n. (usually written {%vidala,%} q. v., and
according to some fr. {%vi + dala%}), anything split off,
a slip, cutting, chip; a split bamboo; a split pea [cf.
[Page0684-b+ 74]
{%masūra-b˚%}]; a twig; a basket made of split bam-
boos; gold-leaf, &c.; paste of pomegranates; ({%as%}),
m. pastry, a cake; the tree Bauhinia Variegata
{%(= kuddāla, ko-vidāra); (ā),%} f. the plant Ipomœa
Turpethum. {%—Bidala-kārī,%} f., Ved. a woman em-
ployed in splitting bamboos; (Mahī-dhara {%= vaṃśa-%}
{%vidāriṇī, vaṃśa-pātra-kāriṇī.%}) {%—Bidala-saṃ-%}
{%hita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. composed or made up of
halves. {%—Bidalī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} split, cleft, pierced;
{%dvi-b˚,%} cleft in twain; (generally spelt {%vidalī-kṛta.%})
<LEND>

<L>34729<pc>0684-b<k1>bindavi<k2>bindavi
{%Bindavi%}¦ (fr. {%bindu%}), N. of a place; [cf. {%baindavi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34730<pc>0684-b<k1>bindavIya<k2>bindavIya
{%Bindavīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Gaṇa Gahādi to Pāṇ.
IV. 2, 138; ({%as%}), m. a prince of the Bindus; [cf.
{%baindavīya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34731<pc>0684-b<k1>bindu<k2>bindu
{%Bindu, us,%}¦ m. (in classical Sanskrit more usually
written {%vindu,%} q. v., in the Veda {%bindu%}), a detached
particle, a drop; a sphericle, globule, point, dot, spot;
N. of a descendant of Aṅgiras and author of the
hymns Ṛg-veda VIII. 83, IX. 30.
<LEND>

<L>34732<pc>0684-b<k1>bind<k2>bind
{#bind#}¦ {%bind%} = rt. {%bid,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34733<pc>0684-b<k1>binduraka<k2>binduraka
{#binduraka#}¦ {%binduraka, as,%} m. Himenia Ægyp-
tiaca.
<LEND>

<L>34734<pc>0684-b<k1>biboDayizu<k2>biboDayizu
{#biboDayizu#}¦ {%bibodhayiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr.
Desid. of Caus. of rt. 1. {%budh%}), wishing to rouse, in-
tending to wake; [cf. {%bubodhayiṣu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34735<pc>0684-b<k1>bibboka<k2>bibboka
{#bibboka#}¦ {%bibboka, as,%} m. (also written {%viv-%}
{%voka, vibboka,%} q. q. v. v.), haughty indifference; (in
erotic poetry) affectation of indifference towards a
beloved object through pride and conceit.
<LEND>

<L>34736<pc>0684-b<k1>biBakzayizu<k2>biBakzayizu
{#biBakzayizu#}¦ {%bibhakṣayiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr.
Desid. of rt. {%bhakṣ%}), wishing to eat, desirous of
eating. {%—Bibhakṣayiṣu-daṃṣṭrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
‘having teeth desirous of eating,’ hungry-mouthed.
<LEND>

<L>34737<pc>0684-b<k1>biBitsA<k2>biBitsA
{#biBitsA#}¦ {%bibhitsā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt.
{%bhid%}), a desire to break through or destroy, wish to
pierce or penetrate (with acc., e. g. {%Droṇānīkam%}
{%bibhitsā,%} the desire of breaking through the army of
Droṇa).
<LEND>

<L>34738<pc>0684-b<k1>biBitsu<k2>biBitsu
{%Bibhitsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of breaking through,
wishing to pierce or penetrate (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>34739<pc>0684-b<k1>biBedayizu<k2>biBedayizu
{%Bibhedayiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. Desid. of Caus.),
desirous of severing, intending to divide or dis-
unite.
<LEND>

<L>34740<pc>0684-b<k1>biBrakzu<k2>biBrakzu
{#biBrakzu#}¦ {%bibhrakṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. {%bhrajj%}), wishing to roast or fry; desirous of scorch-
ing up, intending to scorch or parch; wishing to
destroy; ({%us%}), m. fire.
<LEND>

<L>34741<pc>0684-b<k1>biBrajjizu<k2>biBrajjizu
{%Bibhrajjiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to fry or parch;
({%us%}), m. fire. {%—Bibhrajjiṣu-prakhya, as, ā, am,%}
resembling fire, (according to a Scholiast {%= agni-%}
{%tulya.%})
<LEND>

<L>34742<pc>0684-b<k1>biBrat<k2>biBrat
{#biBrat#}¦ {%bibhrat, at, atī, at%} (pres. part. of rt.
{%bhṛ,%} q. v.), bearing, carrying.
<LEND>

<L>34743<pc>0684-b<k1>bimba<k2>bimba
{#bimba#}¦ {%bimba.%} See {%vimba.%}
<LEND>

<L>34744<pc>0684-b<k1>birAla<k2>birAla
{#birAla#}¦ {%birāla%} and {%bilāla = viḍāla,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34745<pc>0684-b<k1>bil<k2>bil
{#bil#}¦ {%bil%} (sometimes less correctly
written {%vil;%} connected with rts. {%bhil,%}
{%bid, bhid%}), cl. 6. 10. P. {%bilati, belayati,%} to split,
cleave, break, divide.
<LEND>

<L>34746<pc>0684-b<k1>bila<k2>bila
{%Bila, am,%}¦ n. (also written {%vila,%} q. v.), a hole
(especially of a mouse, snake, wild beast, &c.),
hollow, cavity; a gap, pit, chasm; an opening, aper-
ture, outlet, ({%catur-b˚,%} Ved. ‘having four apertures
or outlets,’ said of the udder of a cow), embouchure;
the hollow of a dish, bowl of a spoon or ladle; ({%as%}),
m. a species of reed or cane, Calamus Rotang ({%=%}
{%vetasa%}); N. of Uccaiḥ-śravas (one of the horses of
Indra). {%—Bileśvara-tīrtha (˚la-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of
a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>34747<pc>0684-b<k1>bilma<k2>bilma
{%Bilma, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a slip, chip, (Sāy. {%= bhāsa-%}
{%naṃ kāṣṭham%}); a broken helmet; an ash-pit.
<LEND>

<L>34748<pc>0684-b<k1>bilmin<k2>bilmin
{%Bilmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (according to Mahī-dhara) having
a helmet.
<LEND>

<L>34749<pc>0684-b<k1>billa<k2>billa
{%Billa, am,%}¦ n. (also written {%villa%}), a pit, hole,
[Page0684-c+ 76]
reservoir; Asa Fœtida. {%—Billa-mūlā,%} f. a species of
esculent bulbous plant. {%—Billa-sū, ūs,%} f. a mother
of ten children.
<LEND>

<L>34750<pc>0684-c<k1>bilva<k2>bilva
{%Bilva, as,%}¦ m. (in the later language more usually
written {%vilva,%} q. v.), a species of tree, Ægle Mar-
melos, the wood-apple (commonly called Bel; it bears
a delicious fruit, which when unripe is used for medi-
cinal purposes; its leaves are employed in the cere-
monial of the worship of Śiva); ({%am%}), n. the fruit
of Ægle Marmelos; a particular weight, = 1 Pala, =
4 Akṣas, = (1/4) Kuḍava; a kind of vegetable; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of drug ({%= hiṅgu-pattrī,%} q. v.). {%—Bilva-ja,%}
see {%bailvaja%}. {%—Bilva-tejas, ās,%} m., N. of a serpent-
demon. {%—Bilva-daṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘having a staff of
Bilva wood,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bilva-nātha, as,%}
m., N. of a teacher of the Haṭha-vidyā. {%—Bilva-%}
{%pattra, as,%} m., N. of a serpent-demon. {%—Bilva-%}
{%pattra-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or consisting of
Bilva leaves. {%—Bilvapattrikā,%} f. a N. of Dākṣā-
yaṇī under which she was worshipped at Bilvaka.
{%—Bilva-pāṇḍara, as,%} m., N. of a serpent-demon.
{%—Bilva-peśikā%} or {%bilva-peśī,%} f. the dried shell of
the Bilva fruit. {%—Bilva-maṅgala, as,%} m., N. of a
poet (also called Līlā-śuka, the author of the Kṛṣṇa-
karṇāmṛta, a poem on the sports of Kṛṣṇa at
Vṛndā-vana). {%—Bilva-vana, am,%} n. a wood of Bilva
trees. {%—Bilvāmraka (˚va-ām˚),%} N. of a place on
the Revā or Narmadā river. {%—Bilveśvara (˚va-īś˚),%}
N. of a Liṅga. {%—Bilvodakeśvara (˚va-ud˚, ˚ka-%}
{%īś˚),%} N. of a temple of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>34751<pc>0684-c<k1>bilvaka<k2>bilvaka
{%Bilvaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a serpent-demon; of a
place of pilgrimage.
<LEND>

<L>34752<pc>0684-c<k1>bilvakIyA<k2>bilvakIyA
{%Bilvakīyā,%}¦ f. a place planted with Bilva trees.
<LEND>

<L>34753<pc>0684-c<k1>bilhaRa<k2>bilhaRa
{#bilhaRa#}¦ {%bilhaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man; of
a poet, (in this sense also written {%vihlaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>34754<pc>0684-c<k1>biS<k2>biS
{#biS#}¦ {%biś%} (= rt. {%pis%}), cl. 1. P. {%beśati,%} &c.,
to go.
<LEND>

<L>34755<pc>0684-c<k1>biSa<k2>biSa
{#biSa#}¦ {%biśa, biṣa,%} various forms for {%bisa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34756<pc>0684-c<k1>bizkalA<k2>bizkalA
{#bizkalA#}¦ {%biṣkalā,%} f., Ved. parturient, a
woman in travail; [cf. {%billa-sū, baṣkaya, baṣ-%}
{%kiha;%} according to some a masc. form {%viṣkala%} or
{%biṣkala%} exists, {%= grāmya-śūkara,%} a tame hog,
which by reason of its fecundity has the name {%bahv-%}
{%apatya,%} having much offspring.]
<LEND>

<L>34757<pc>0684-c<k1>bis<k2>bis
{#bis#}¦ {%bis%} (sometimes written {%vis,%} q. v.),
cl. 4. P. {%bisyati,%} &c., to go, move; to
split; to grow; to urge on, incite; to cast, throw.
<LEND>

<L>34758<pc>0684-c<k1>bisa<k2>bisa
{%Bisa, am,%}¦ n. (in classical Sanskrit more usually
written {%visa,%} q. v.), a shoot, sucker; the film or
fibres of the stalk of the water-lily, that part of the
stalk of the lotus which is underground, (the young
shoots of the Nelumbium and of various species of
the Nymphæa, particularly of the Nymphæa Edulis,
as well as the parts of the stalk underground, appear
to have been eaten as a delicacy; at the end of an
adj. comp. {%bisa%} forms the fem. in {%ā%}); the whole
lotus plant (Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 7974). {%—Bisa-khā,%}
{%ās,%} m., Ved. one who digs for the stalks of roots, a
digger for the fibres of the stem of the lotus, (also
written {%viṣa-khā.%}) {%—Bisa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
abounding in lotus fibres; ({%atī%}), f. a place abounding
in lotus fibres.
<LEND>

<L>34759<pc>0684-c<k1>bihlaRa<k2>bihlaRa
{#bihlaRa#}¦ {%bihlaṇa.%} See {%bilhaṇa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>34760<pc>0684-c<k1>bIja<k2>bIja
{#bIja#}¦ {%bīja, am,%} n. (in classical Sanskrit
more usually written {%vīja,%} q. v., perhaps fr. rt. {%jan%}
with {%vi%}), the seed or germ of plants and animals;
seed-corn, corn, (see {%vīja.%}) {%—Bīja-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. possessing seed.
<LEND>

<L>34761<pc>0684-c<k1>bIjaka<k2>bIjaka
{%Bījaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a poet; [cf. {%bhaṭṭa-bījaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34762<pc>0684-c<k1>bIB<k2>bIB
{#bIB#}¦ {%bībh%} (also read {%cībh,%} q. v.), cl. 1.
A. {%bībhate,%} &c., to commend, flatter;
to boast.
<LEND>

<L>34763<pc>0684-c<k1>bIBatsa<k2>bIBatsa
{#bIBatsa#}¦ {%bībhatsa, as, ā, am%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. {%bādh%}), loathsome, disgusting, nauseous, revolting,
detestable, hideous; loathing, detesting; envious;
cruel, mischievous; wicked; changed or estranged in
[Page0685-a+ 72]
mind; ({%as%}), m. disgust, abhorrence, detestation;
‘the disgusting,’ one of the eight Rasas; an epithet
of Arjuna, {%= bībhatsu; (ā),%} f. (Ved.) loathing, ab-
horrence; disgust. {%—Bībhatsa-tā,%} f. loathsomeness,
detestableness. {%—Bībhatsā-rasa-nirdeśa, as,%} m.,
N. of the 145th chapter of the Śārṅgadhara-pad-
dhati.
<LEND>

<L>34764<pc>0685-a<k1>bIBatsu<k2>bIBatsu
{%Bībhatsu, us, us, u,%}¦ loathing, detesting, feeling
repugnance or abhorrence, disgusted, revolted; en-
vious, emulous; (Sāy.) {%= kampamāna, kampamā-%}
{%nāvayava; (us),%} m. an epithet of Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>34765<pc>0685-a<k1>bIriwa<k2>bIriwa
{#bIriwa#}¦ {%bīriṭa, as,%} m., Ved. (according to
Yāska) the air; a crowd, multitude.
<LEND>

<L>34766<pc>0685-a<k1>bIriRa<k2>bIriRa
{#bIriRa#}¦ {%bīriṇa%} in {%dur-bīriṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34767<pc>0685-a<k1>buk<k2>buk
{#buk#}¦ {%buk,%} ind. an onomatopoetic word.
{%—Buk-kāra, as,%} m. the roaring of a lion; the cry
of any animal.
<LEND>

<L>34768<pc>0685-a<k1>buka<k2>buka
{#buka#}¦ {%buka,%} see Gaṇa Prekṣādi to Pāṇ.
IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>34769<pc>0685-a<k1>bukin<k2>bukin
{%Bukin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fr. {%buka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>34770<pc>0685-a<k1>bukk<k2>bukk
{#bukk#}¦ {%bukk,%} cl. 1. P. {%bukkati, bubukka, buk-%}
{%kitum,%} to bark; to sound; cl. 10. P.
{%bukkayati, -yitum,%} to bark, yelp; to speak, talk;
to give pain (?).
<LEND>

<L>34771<pc>0685-a<k1>bukka<k2>bukka
{%Bukka, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} m. f. n. the heart [cf.
{%vṛkka%}]; {%= samaya%} (perhaps an error for {%hṛdaya%});
({%as%}), m. a goat. {%—Bukka-mahīpati, is,%} or {%bukka-%}
{%bhūpāta,%} or {%bukka-rāya, as,%} m., N. of two kings
of Vijaya-nagara or Vidyā-nagara; [cf. {%bukkaṇa%}
below.] {%—Bukkāgramāṃsa (˚ka-ag˚), am,%} n. the
heart; (probably a compound incorrectly formed
from blending the two equivalents {%bukkā = agra-%}
{%māṃsam.%})
<LEND>

<L>34772<pc>0685-a<k1>bukkaRa<k2>bukkaRa
{%Bukkaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king (the patron of
Mādhavācārya and Sāyaṇācārya, see above).
<LEND>

<L>34773<pc>0685-a<k1>bukkan<k2>bukkan
{%Bukkan, ā,%}¦ m. the heart.
<LEND>

<L>34774<pc>0685-a<k1>bukkana<k2>bukkana
{%Bukkana, am,%}¦ n. the barking of a dog; the noise
made by other animals.
<LEND>

<L>34775<pc>0685-a<k1>bukkasa<k2>bukkasa
{#bukkasa#}¦ {%bukkasa, as,%} m. a Caṇḍāla, man of
the lowest class [cf. {%pukkaśa, pukkasa%}]; ({%ī%}), f. =
{%kālī,%} (perhaps) black colour; the indigo plant ({%=%}
{%pukkaśa, pukkasa%}).
<LEND>

<L>34776<pc>0685-a<k1>buNg<k2>buNg
{#buNg#}¦ {%buṅg%} (also written {%vuṅg%}), cl. 1. P.
{%buṅgati,%} &c., to forsake, desert, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>34777<pc>0685-a<k1>buw<k2>buw
{#buw#}¦ {%buṭ,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%boṭati, boṭayati,%}
&c., to hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>34778<pc>0685-a<k1>buq<k2>buq
{#buq#}¦ {%buḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%buḍati,%} &c., to cover,
hide, conceal, (in these senses a various
reading for rt. {%cuḍ,%} q. v.); to emit, discharge, (in
these senses a various reading for rt. {%puḍ,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>34779<pc>0685-a<k1>buqila<k2>buqila
{#buqila#}¦ {%buḍila%} or {%bulila, as,%} m., Ved., N.
of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34780<pc>0685-a<k1>bud<k2>bud
{#bud#}¦ {%bud%} = rt. {%bund,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34781<pc>0685-a<k1>budDa<k2>budDa
{#budDa#}¦ {%buddha, buddhi.%} See cols. 2 and 3.
<LEND>

<L>34782<pc>0685-a<k1>budbuda<k2>budbuda
{#budbuda#}¦ {%budbuda, as,%} m. (an onomatopoetic
word imitative of the sound of a bubble rising to
the surface of any fluid), a bubble in water (frequently
the symbol of anything transitory); a bubble in
general; an embryo five days old (Ved.); {%nayana-%}
{%b˚,%} the pupil of the eye; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras;
({%am%}), n. a particular disease of the eye. {%—Budbuda-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the being a (mere) bubble, existence as
a bubble (attributed to an embryo five days old).
{%—Budbuda-yāśu, us, us, u,%} Ved. frothy as a
bubble, frothy, foamy; (or perhaps) one whose
generative power is a mere bubble, impotent; (Sāy.)
{%= budbuda-vad yātṛ%} or {%vyāpana-śīla.%}
<LEND>

<L>34783<pc>0685-a<k1>buD<k2>buD<h>1
{#buD#} 1¦. {%budh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%bodhati, -te%}
(Ved. Impv. 2nd sing. {%bodhi,%} but this is
often referred to rt. 1. {%bhū%}), {%bubodha, bubudhe, bo-%}
{%dhiṣyati, -te, abudhat, abodhīt, abhutsat, abud-%}
{%dha, bodhitum,%} and more commonly cl. 4. A. (ep.
[Page0685-b+ 81]
also P.) {%budhyate (-ti), bubudhe%} (part. {%bubudhāna%}),
{%bhotsyate, abodhi%} or {%abuddha%} (1st sing. {%abhutsi,%}
1st pl. {%abhutsmahi,%} 2nd pl. {%abhuddhvam%}), {%bhut-%}
{%sīṣṭa, boddhum%} (Ved. {%budhi,%} Sāy. {%= bodhe sati;%}
{%budhanta, abudhram, bodhiṣat, bubodhas;%} the
original sense may have been ‘to fathom a depth,
penetrate to the bottom;’ cf. {%budhna%}); to observe,
mark, heed, regard, attend to (with acc. or gen.);
to perceive, notice, become acquainted with, recog-
nise; to know, understand, comprehend; to think,
reflect; to deem, consider, regard as, esteem as (with
two acc.); to recover consciousness (after a swoon or
after sleep &c.), come to one's senses; to wake up,
awake; to admonish: Caus. {%bodhayati%} (Ved. also
{%-te?%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%abūbudhat%} (Ved. part. {%bubu-%}
{%dhāna,%} q. v.; Pres. part. Pass. {%bodhyamāna,%} q. v.),
to cause to observe or attend, excite the attention of
(with acc.); to cause to know or understand, render
intelligible, make known, inform, teach; to revive,
re-animate, restore to life, to bring any one to his
senses, cause to listen to reason, admonish, advise;
to remind any one of anything (with two acc.); to
raise, cause (a perfume); to wake, wake up, rouse;
to wake (metaphorically), cause (a flower) to expand:
Desid. {%bubodhiṣati, -te, bubudhiṣati, -te, bu-%}
{%bhutsate,%} to wish to observe, desire to become ac-
quainted with: Intens. {%bobudhyate, boboddhi:%} [cf.
Zend <nsi>bud,</nsi> ‘to observe, to awake:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">πυνθ-άνο-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐ-πυθ-όμην, πεύθ-ο-μαι, πύσ-τι-ς, πεῦ-σι-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πύσ-μα, πευθ-ήν, βυθ;ος:</lang> Lat. <nsi>fundus:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>bud,</nsi>
‘to bid;’ <nsi>biuda, bauth, budum:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>bytne,</nsi>
<nsi>botm, beodan, boda, bodian:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>biutan:</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>biete, ge-biete:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>bud-i-ti,</nsi> ‘he
awakens;’ <nsi>bŭd-ĕ-ti,</nsi> ‘to wake:’ Russ. <nsi>bdju,</nsi> ‘I
wake;’ <nsi>bodrüĭ,</nsi> ‘wakeful:’ Lith. <nsi>bund-ù,</nsi> Inf. <nsi>bu-</nsi>
<nsi>déti,</nsi> ‘to wake;’ <nsi>bud-rù-s,</nsi> ‘wakeful.’]
<LEND>

<L>34784<pc>0685-b<k1>budDa<k2>budDa
{%Buddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ recognised, observed; known,
understood; completely conscious, enlightened, clever,
wise, knowing; wakened, awake; ({%as%}), m. a wise
or learned man, sage; (with Buddhists) one who is
perfectly enlightened, the Wise, the Enlightened (i. e.
one who by perfect knowledge of the truth is libe-
rated from all existence, and who before his own
attainment of Nirvāṇa or annihilation reveals to the
world the method of obtaining it); the Buddha or
‘Enlightened’ <lang n="greek">κατ’ ἐξοχήν</lang> whose original appellation
was Śākya-muni or Śākya-siṃha, (he was born at
Kapila-vastu, a city and kingdom at the foot of the
mountains of Nepal, his father, Śuddhodana, of the
family of the Śākyas, being the king of that country,
and his mother, Māyādevī, being the daughter of
king Su-prabuddha; hence he belonged to the
Kṣatriya caste, and his name Śākya was really his
family name, while that of Gautama was taken from
the class or race to which his family belonged; his
other names of Buddha, ‘enlightened,’ and Siddhārtha,
‘one whose objects have been effected,’ being pro-
bably given at a later period; he is said to have
entered on his mission in the district of Magadha or
Behār about the year 588 B. C. and to have died at
Kuśi-nagara in Oude in the year 543 B. C.; there
have been twenty-four Buddhas of the past, Śākya-
muni or Gautama being only the last Buddha, i. e.
the Buddha of the present cycle; according to the
northern Buddhists he had been preceded by six other
Buddhas; others enumerate four; he is sometimes re-
garded as the ninth incarnation of Viṣṇu); ({%am%}), n.
knowledge. {%—Buddha-kalpa, as,%} m. Buddha's Kalpa,
the present era (which has, according to some, had four
Buddhas and is to expect another). {%—Buddha-kṣe-%}
{%tra, am,%} n. the district of a Buddha, a term applied
to the neighbourhood in which a Buddha appears.
{%—Buddha-gayā,%} f. ‘Buddha's Gayā,’ (with Bud-
dhists) an epithet of the city Gayā (in Behār), where
Śākya-muni and all the other Buddhas are said to
have attained to true wisdom. {%—Buddha-gupta,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a prince; (also written {%budha-gupta.%})
{%—Buddha-guru, us,%} m. a Buddhist spiritual teacher.
{%—Buddha-ghoṣa, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist cele-
brated for his learning, who lived at the beginning
of the fifth century A. D. {%—Buddha-carita, am,%} n.
[Page0685-c+ 81]
‘the acts of Buddha,’ N. of a work. {%—Buddha-%}
{%carita-kāvya, am,%} n., N. of a work ascribed to
Aśva-ghoṣa. {%—Buddha-caritra, am,%} n. ‘the his-
tory of Buddha,’ N. of a work. {%—Buddha-carya,%}
{%am,%} n. the acts or life of Buddha. {%—Buddha-jñā-%}
{%na, am,%} n. Buddha's knowledge, the knowledge
possessed by Buddha. {%—Buddhajñāna-śrī, īs,%} m.,
N. of a learned Buddhist. {%—Buddha-tva, am,%} n.
the state or condition of a Buddha, the dignity of
Buddha. {%—Buddha-datta, as,%} m. ‘given by Bud-
dha,’ N. of a minister of king Caṇḍa-mahāsena.
{%—Buddha-dāsa, as,%} m. ‘slave of Buddha,’ N. of
a man. {%—Buddha-diś, k,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Buddha-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Buddha-%}
{%dravya, am,%} n. ‘the property of a Buddha,’ (pro-
bably) a term applied to the relics found in a Stūpa
(q. v.), {%= staupika,%} q. v.; avarice, covetous accu-
mulation (?). {%—Buddha-dvādaśī-vrata, am,%} n., N.
of the forty-seventh chapter of the Vārāha-Purāṇa.
{%—Buddha-dharma, as,%} m. the law of Buddha.
{%—Buddha-dharma-saṅgha, ās,%} m. pl. Buddha,
the law, and the congregation. {%—Buddha-nandi,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of the eighth Buddhist patriarch; (perhaps
a wrong reading for {%buddhānanda.%}) {%—Buddha-%}
{%pakṣa%} (?), {%as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Buddha-pāla,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Buddha-pālita, as,%} m., N.
of a disciple of Nāgārjuna. {%—Buddha-purāṇa, am,%}
n. ‘Buddha's Purāṇa,’ a term applied to the Laghu-
lalita-vistara ascribed to Parāśara. {%—Buddha-bha-%}
{%dra, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Buddha-bhūmi,%} N. of
a Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Buddha-mantra, am,%} n. a
Buddhist prayer or charm {%(= dhāraṇī)%}. {%—Buddha-%}
{%mārga, as,%} m. ‘the path of Buddha,’ the doctrines
of Buddha, Buddhism. {%—Buddha-mitra, as,%} m., N.
of the ninth Buddhist patriarch (who was a disci-
ple of Vasu-bandhu). {%—Buddha-rakṣita, as,%} m.
‘guarded by Buddha,’ N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a woman. {%—Buddha-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Buddha-vacana, am,%} n. ‘the word of Buddha,’
a term applied to the Buddhist Sūtras. {%—Buddha-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing a form of the rt.
1. {%budh%}. {%—Buddha-vana,%} N. of a mountain. {%—Bud-%}
{%dha-viṣaya, as,%} m. {%= buddha-kṣetra,%} q. v.
{%—Buddhaviṣayāvatāra (˚ya-av˚),%} N. of a work.
{%—Buddha-saṅgīti, is,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Bud-%}
{%dha-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Buddha-sena,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Buddhāgama (˚dha-%}
{%āg˚), as,%} m. Buddha's Doctrine (personified). {%—Bud-%}
{%dhāṇḍaka,%} a various reading for {%buddhaiḍūka,%}
q. v. {%—Buddhānusmṛti (˚dha-an˚), is,%} f., N. of a
Buddhist Sūtra. {%—Buddhānta (˚dha-an˚), as,%} m.,
Ved. waking state or condition, the being awake.
{%—Buddhāvataṃsaka (˚dha-av˚),%} N. of a work.
{%—Buddhāvatāra (˚dha-av˚), as,%} m. ‘Buddha's
descent,’ N. of a chapter of the Khaṇḍa-praśasti, a
poem ascribed to Hanu-mat and treating of the ten
incarnations of Viṣṇu. {%—Buddhaiḍūka (˚dha-eḍ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a temple in which relics of Buddha are pre-
served {%(= caitya)%}. {%—Buddhokta-saṃsārāmaya%}
{%(˚dha-uk˚, ˚ra-ām˚), as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
work. {%—Buddhopāsaka (˚dha-up˚), as,%} m. a wor-
shipper of Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>34785<pc>0685-c<k1>budDi<k2>budDi
{%Buddhi, is,%}¦ f. perception, (of which five kinds are
enumerated, or with {%manas%} six; cf. {%indriya, bud-%}
{%dhīndriya%}); observation, intelligence, understand-
ing, intellect, mind, wisdom, judgment, discernment;
the power of forming and retaining conceptions and
general notions; (in the Sāṅkhya phil.) Intellect
({%= adhy-avasāya,%} ascertainment) as the second
Tattva coming next to and proceeding from Mūla-
prakṛti or A-vyakta [cf. {%buddhi-tattva%}]; compre-
hension, knowledge; presence of mind; an opinion,
view, notion, idea, impression (e. g. {%etayā buddhyā,%}
under this idea or impression); regarding, deeming;
intention, purpose, plan, design (e. g. {%buddhyā,%}
with a purpose, deliberately, purposely; {%a-buddhyā,%}
unintentionally, undesignedly; {%anartha-buddhi,%} hav-
ing evil designs, ill-intentioned; cf. {%hita-b˚%}); Intelli-
gence personified as a daughter of Dakṣa and wife
of Dharma and mother of Bodha; a kind of metre,
the first line of which is ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯, and
[Page0686-a+ 81]
the second, third, and fourth ¯¯˘ &c.; {%buddhiṃ%}
{%kṛ,%} to turn the attention to, fix the mind upon (with
loc.); to form a purpose or design, resolve to do any-
thing (with inf. or with dat. or loc. or with {%prati%}
and acc.; cf. rt. 1. {%kṛ,%} p. 246, col. 1, {%kṛta-b˚%}).
{%—Buddhi-kāmā,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda. {%—Buddhi-kārī,%} f., N. of a
princess. {%—Buddhi-gamya%} or {%buddhi-grāhya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} to be apprehended by the intellect, attainable
by the reason or understanding, intelligible. {%—Bud-%}
{%dhi-cintaka, as, ā, am,%} thinking intelligently;
[cf. {%cintayantī buddhyā,%} Nala V. 12.] {%—Buddhi-%}
{%cchāyā,%} f. reflex action of the understanding on
the soul. {%—Buddhi-cyuta, as, ā, am,%} one who
has lost his intellect. {%—Buddhi-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%}
subsisting by intelligence, employing the reason,
possessed of life and intelligence, rational, intelli-
gent (Manu I. 96). {%—Buddhi-tattva, am,%} n. the
Tattva of intellect, the second Tattva or prin-
ciple of the Sāṅkhya phil., (it is the second of the
eight Prakṛtayaḥ or ‘producers,’ coming next to
and proceeding from Mūla-prakṛti or A-vyakta; it
is described in the Siddhānta-śiromaṇi as proceeding
from both Puruṣa and Prakṛti, q. q. v. v.) {%—Bud-%}
{%dhi-tas,%} ind. from the mind or understanding, by
the mind. {%—Buddhi-pura, am,%} n. the city of the
intellect. {%—Buddhi-puraḥsara = buddhi-pūrva%}
below. {%—Buddhipura-māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of a
section of the Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa. {%—Buddhi-pūrva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} preceded by design, intentional, designed,
purposed; ({%am%}), ind. intentionally, designedly, pur-
posely. {%—Buddhi-pūrvaka, as, ā, am,%} preceded by
design; ({%am%}), ind. intentionally, designedly, pur-
posely. {%—Buddhipūrvaka-tva, am,%} n. the being
preceded by design, being intentional or designed.
{%—Buddhi-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Bud-%}
{%dhi-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} possessing intelligence or under-
standing, wise, intelligent. {%—Buddhi-bhrama, as,%}
m. aberration of the mind or intellect. {%—Buddhi-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} endowed with understanding, in-
telligent, rational; wise, learned; sharp, acute,
shrewd, sensible; humble, docile; famed, known ?;
({%ān%}), m. a rational being, man (?). {%—Buddhima-%}
{%tikā,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Buddhimat-tara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} more intelligent, wiser; very intelligent,
very wise. {%—Buddhimat-tā,%} f. or {%buddhimat-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the possession of intelligence or understand-
ing, wisdom, sagacity. {%—Buddhi-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting in intellect. {%—Buddhi-yukta, as, ā, am,%}
endowed with intelligence or understanding, intelli-
gent. {%—Buddhi-yoga, as,%} m. devotion of the intel-
lect, intellectual union with the Supreme Spirit.
{%—Buddhi-vara, as,%} m., N. of a minister of Vikra-
māditya. {%—Buddhi-vināśa, as,%} m. loss of under-
standing, deficiency of intellect. {%—Buddhi-vilāsa, as,%}
m. play of the mind, sporting of the fancy. {%—Bud-%}
{%dhi-vilāsinī,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Līlā-
vatī. {%—Buddhi-vivardhana, as, ī, am,%} increasing
the understanding. {%—Buddhi-viṣaya, as,%} m. a
matter apprehensible by the understanding. {%—Bud-%}
{%dhi-vṛddhi, is,%} f. growth of the understanding,
increase of intellect; ({%is%}), m., N. of a pupil of
Śaṅkara. {%—Buddhivṛddhi-kara, as, ī, am,%} caus-
ing increase of intellect, giving increase of wisdom.
{%—Buddhi-vaibhava, am,%} n. strength or force of
understanding. {%—Buddhi-śakti, is,%} f. an intellectual
faculty. {%—Buddhi-śarīra, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Buddhi-śastra, as, ā, am,%} having intelligence
for a weapon, armed with understanding. {%—Buddhi-%}
{%śālin, ī, inī, i,%} possessed of intelligence, intelligent.
{%—Buddhi-śuddha, as, ā, am,%} pure in intention,
honest in purpose or design. {%—Buddhi-śrī-garbha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Buddhi-sampanna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} endowed with understanding, intelligent,
rational. {%—Buddhi-sahāya, as,%} m. a counsellor, a
minister; [cf. {%dhī-sakha, dhī-saciva, prajñā-sa-%}
{%hāya.%}] {%—Buddhi-sāgara, as,%} m. ‘ocean of wis-
dom,’ an epithet given to any very wise man; N. of
a lexicographer. {%—Buddhi-stha, as, ā, am,%} fixed in
the mind, present to the mind. {%—Buddhi-hīna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} destitute of intelligence, void of understand-
[Page0686-b+ 80]
ing, ignorant, silly, foolish. {%—Buddhihīna-tva, am,%}
n. want of understanding, ignorance, folly. {%—Bud-%}
{%dhīndriya (˚dhi-in˚), am,%} n. an organ of percep-
tion, a perceptive organ of sense, (of which five are
enumerated, viz. eye, ear, nose, tongue, and skin, or
the organs of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and
feeling; opposed to the {%karmendriyāṇi%} or organs
of action, q. v.; {%manas,%} ‘the mind,’ being both an
organ of perception and of action, cf. {%indriya.%})
{%—Buddhy-atīta, as, ā, am,%} beyond the reach of
the understanding. {%—Buddhy-avajñāna, am,%} n. dis-
regard for or contempt of any one's understanding.
<LEND>

<L>34786<pc>0686-b<k1>budDvA<k2>budDvA
{%Buddhvā,%}¦ ind. having perceived, having observed
or marked; having deemed or supposed; having
become awake, having waked.
<LEND>

<L>34787<pc>0686-b<k1>buD<k2>buD<h>2
2. {%budh, bhut, t, t,%}¦ wise, prudent [cf. {%a-b˚%}];
waking, awaking [cf. {%uṣar-b˚%}].
<LEND>

<L>34788<pc>0686-b<k1>buDa<k2>buDa
{%Budha, as, ā, am,%}¦ wise, intelligent, sensible,
prudent, clever; waking, awaking [cf. {%uṣar-b˚%}];
({%as%}), m. any wise or learned man; N. of a descendant
of Soma (and hence called {%Saumya, Saumāyana,%}
author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 1, and father of
Purū-ravas; he is identified with the planet Mercury,
regarded as a son of Soma or the moon; he is also
the reputed author of a law-book); N. of a de-
scendant of Atri and author of the hymn Ṛg-veda
V. 1; of a son of Vega-vat and father of Tṛṇa-
bindu; of the author of the Kalpa-yukti, (in this
sense also written {%buddha%}); ({%ā%}), f. Indian spikenard,
Nardostachys Jatamansi; ({%e%}), ind. on a Wednesday
{%(= budha-vāre)%}. {%—Budha-gupta, as,%} m., N. of a
prince; (also written {%buddha-gupta.%}) {%—Budha-%}
{%cāra, as,%} m., N. of the seventh chapter of Bhaṭṭot-
pala's commentary on Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-saṃ-
hitā; of the twentieth chapter of the Mīna-rāja-
jātaka ascribed to Yavaneśvara. {%—Budha-jana, as,%}
m. a wise man. {%—Budha-tāta, as,%} m. ‘father of
Budha or the planet Mercury,’ the moon. {%—Budha-%}
{%darśana-cāra, as,%} m., N. of the twelfth chapter
of the Mīna-rāja-jātaka ascribed to Yavaneśvara.
{%—Budha-dina, am,%} n. ‘the day of Budha or the
planet Mercury,’ Wednesday. {%—Budha-deśa, as,%}
m., N. of a place. {%—Budha-manohara,%} N. of a
work. {%—Budha-ratna, am,%} n. ‘Budha's gem,’ an
emerald. {%—Budha-vāra, as,%} m. ‘Budha's day,’
Wednesday; ({%e%}), ind. on a Wednesday. {%—Budha-%}
{%śānti, is,%} f., N. of a chapter of Halāyudha's Purāṇa-
sarvasva. {%—Budha-sānu, us,%} m. {%= parṇa,%} q. v.; {%=%}
{%yajña-puruṣa%}. {%—Buddha-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of
Budha,’ an epithet of Purū-ravas the first king of
the lunar dynasty. {%—Budhāṣṭamī (˚dha-aṣ˚),%} f.
‘the eighth (day) of Budha,’ N. of a festival. {%—Bu-%}
{%dhāṣṭamī-vrata, am,%} n., N. of the forty-seventh
chapter of the Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa or second part
of the Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>34789<pc>0686-b<k1>buDAna<k2>buDAna
{%Budhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being awakened, waking
(Ved.); knowing, wise, prudent; ({%as%}), m. a wise
man, sage; a spiritual guide, holy teacher, a theo-
logian; one who speaks kindly; [cf. {%bodhāna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34790<pc>0686-b<k1>buDita<k2>buDita
{%Budhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ known, understood.
<LEND>

<L>34791<pc>0686-b<k1>buDila<k2>buDila
{%Budhila, as, ā, am,%}¦ wise, learned.
<LEND>

<L>34792<pc>0686-b<k1>buDya<k2>buDya
{%Budhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be understood, to be
observed or marked, observable, noticeable, note-
worthy [cf. {%aśva-b˚%}]; wakened; to be awaked, to
be wakened.
<LEND>

<L>34793<pc>0686-b<k1>buDyamAna<k2>buDyamAna
{%Budhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ awakening, waking.
<LEND>

<L>34794<pc>0686-b<k1>bubuDAna<k2>bubuDAna
{%Bubudhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ having known &c.; (Ved.)
wakening, waking, rousing (Sāy. {%= bodhayat%}).
<LEND>

<L>34795<pc>0686-b<k1>buboDayizu<k2>buboDayizu
{%Bubodhayiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. Desid. of Caus.),
wishing or intending to restore to consciousness,
wishing to rouse to attention, desirous of admon-
ishing (with acc.; cf. {%bibodhayiṣu%}).
<LEND>

<L>34796<pc>0686-b<k1>buButsA<k2>buButsA
{%Bubhutsā,%}¦ f. (fr. the Desid.), wish to become
acquainted with, desire to know, curiosity.
<LEND>

<L>34797<pc>0686-b<k1>buButsu<k2>buButsu
{%Bubhutsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to know, eager to
learn, desirous of knowing all things (said of the
gods); curious.
<LEND>

<L>34798<pc>0686-b<k1>buDna<k2>buDna
{#buDna#}¦ {%budhna, as,%} m. (said in Uṇādi-s. III.
5. to be fr. a form {%budh%} substituted for rt. {%bandh,%}
but cf. rt. 1. {%budh%}), Ved. ground, base, basis [cf.
[Page0686-c+ 70]
{%adri-b˚, aśva-b˚%}]; depth, lowest part; the bottom
of a vessel [cf. {%uccā-b˚, ūrdhva-b˚%}]; the foot or
root of a tree; (according to Yāska) the sky; the
body; an epithet of Śiva; a Rudra (for {%budhnya,%}
q. v.); a wrong reading for {%bradhna = vradhna;%}
[cf. Zend <nsi>bu-na,</nsi> ‘bottom;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">βυθός, πυθ-μήν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">πύνδ-οξ, βθσσός, βόθρος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>fundus;</nsi> Old Ice-
land. <nsi>bot-n;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>bytne,</nsi> ‘the bottom of a
ship,’ <nsi>bot-m;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>bodam.</nsi>] {%—Budhna-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a foot or basis.
<LEND>

<L>34799<pc>0686-c<k1>buDniya<k2>buDniya
{%Budhniya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= budhnya%} below.
<LEND>

<L>34800<pc>0686-c<k1>buDnya<k2>buDnya
{%Budhnya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being on the ground
or at the base; being in the depth; at the foot; a
Rudra often named in connection with {%ahi,%} ({%Ahir%}
{%Budhnyaḥ,%} ‘the serpent of the deep,’ is a being
enumerated in the Nirukta among the divinities of
the middle region, the depth in which he lives being
that of the region of mist; Ahi Budhnya is also
in the Veda allegorically identified with Agni Gār-
hapatya; cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">πύθων ὅφις;</lang> in later times Ahi
Budhnya, often incorrectly written {%Budhna, Bra-%}
{%dhna, Vradhna, Vṛdhnya, Vradhnya,%} is regarded
as a Rudra, or the name is used as an epithet of
Śiva; cf. {%ahir-bradhna, ahir-budhna.%})
<LEND>

<L>34801<pc>0686-c<k1>bund<k2>bund
{#bund#}¦ {%bund%} or {%bud%} or {%bundh%} or {%cund%} (cf.
rt. 1. {%budh%}), cl. 1. P. A. {%bundati, -te, bo-%}
{%dati, -te, bundhati, -te, cundati, -te,%} &c., to per-
ceive, apprehend, discern, descry, see; to hear; to
reflect, understand.
<LEND>

<L>34802<pc>0686-c<k1>bunda<k2>bunda
{#bunda#}¦ {%bunda, as,%} m., Ved. an arrow (ac-
cording to Yāska and Sāy. {%= iṣu%}).
<LEND>

<L>34803<pc>0686-c<k1>bunD<k2>bunD<h>1
{#bunD#} 1¦. {%bundh,%} cl. 1. P. {%bundhati,%} = rt.
{%bund%} above; cl. 10. P. {%bundhayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to bind.
<LEND>

<L>34804<pc>0686-c<k1>bubuDAna<k2>bubuDAna
{#bubuDAna#}¦ {%bubudhāna.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34805<pc>0686-c<k1>bubura<k2>bubura
{#bubura#}¦ {%bubura, as,%} m., Ved. (according to
Yāska) water.
<LEND>

<L>34806<pc>0686-c<k1>buboDayizu<k2>buboDayizu
{#buboDayizu#}¦ {%bubodhayiṣu.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34807<pc>0686-c<k1>buBukzA<k2>buBukzA
{#buBukzA#}¦ {%bubhukṣā,%} f. (fr. the Desid. of rt.
{%bhuj%}), desire of eating, appetite, hunger; the desire
of enjoying anything. {%—Bubhukṣāpanaya (˚ṣā-%}
{%ap˚), as,%} m. ‘that which takes away hunger,’ food.
{%—Bubhukṣā-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%} pained by hunger.
<LEND>

<L>34808<pc>0686-c<k1>buBukzita<k2>buBukzita
{%Bubhukṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ hungered, hungry, starv-
ing, pinched with hunger, famishing, ravenous.
<LEND>

<L>34809<pc>0686-c<k1>buBukzu<k2>buBukzu
{%Bubhukṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing or longing to eat,
hungry; longing to enjoy (with acc.), desirous of
enjoyment; (opposed to {%mumukṣu,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>34810<pc>0686-c<k1>buButsA<k2>buButsA
{#buButsA#}¦ {%bubhutsā, bubhutsu.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34811<pc>0686-c<k1>buBUrzu<k2>buBUrzu
{#buBUrzu#}¦ {%bubhūrṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of rt.
{%bhṛ%}), wishing to nourish, desirous of supporting.
<LEND>

<L>34812<pc>0686-c<k1>buBUzaka<k2>buBUzaka
{#buBUzaka#}¦ {%bubhūṣaka, as, ā, am%} (fr. Desid.
of rt. 1. {%bhū%}), wishing to become, desiring to be of
service (to another).
<LEND>

<L>34813<pc>0686-c<k1>buBUzA<k2>buBUzA
{%Bubhūṣā,%}¦ f. wish to become, desire of being or
living.
<LEND>

<L>34814<pc>0686-c<k1>buBUzu<k2>buBUzu
{%Bubhūṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to become, de-
sirous of being; wishing to become powerful or to
prevail; desiring to be of service (to another).
<LEND>

<L>34815<pc>0686-c<k1>buruqa<k2>buruqa
{#buruqa#}¦ {%buruḍa, as,%} m. a basket-maker, a
mat-maker.
<LEND>

<L>34816<pc>0686-c<k1>bul<k2>bul
{#bul#}¦ {%bul,%} cl. 10. P. {%bolayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to sink; to dip (intrans.), dive,
sink, plunge into and emerge again.
<LEND>

<L>34817<pc>0686-c<k1>bulila<k2>bulila
{#bulila#}¦ {%bulila, as,%} m., Ved. {%= buḍila.%}
<LEND>

<L>34818<pc>0686-c<k1>bulla<k2>bulla
{#bulla#}¦ {%bulla, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34819<pc>0686-c<k1>bulva<k2>bulva
{#bulva#}¦ {%bulva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (perhaps) ob-
lique, transverse.
<LEND>

<L>34820<pc>0686-c<k1>buSa<k2>buSa
{#buSa#}¦ {%buśa, buṣa,%} various forms for {%busa.%}
See rt. {%bus,%} p. 687, col. 1.
<LEND>
[Page0687-a+ 72]

<L>34821<pc>0687-a<k1>bus<k2>bus
{#bus#}¦ {%bus,%} cl. 4. P. {%busyati,%} &c., to dis-
charge, pour forth, emit, let loose; to
divide, distribute (= rt. {%vyuṣ%}).
<LEND>

<L>34822<pc>0687-a<k1>busa<k2>busa
{%Busa, am,%}¦ n. (according to Yāska) water; chaff
and other refuse of grain [cf. {%khale-busam, nirbusī-%}
{%kṛta%}]; refuse, rubbish; ({%am%}), n. wealth; dry cow-
dung; the thick part of sour curds or coagulated
milk; ({%ā%}), f. (in dramatic language) a younger
sister (?).
<LEND>

<L>34823<pc>0687-a<k1>busasa<k2>busasa
{%Busasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Gaṇa Tṛṇādi to Pāṇ. IV.
2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>34824<pc>0687-a<k1>bust<k2>bust
{#bust#}¦ {%bust%} [cf. rt. {%pust%}], cl. 10. P. {%bus-%}
{%tayati, -yitum,%} to honour, respect; to
disregard, treat with disrespect; to bind.
<LEND>

<L>34825<pc>0687-a<k1>busta<k2>busta
{#busta#}¦ {%busta, as, am,%} m. n. the burnt ex-
terior of roast meat; the husk or shell of fruit; [cf.
{%custa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34826<pc>0687-a<k1>bUkka<k2>bUkka
{#bUkka#}¦ {%būkka, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. the heart
({%= bukka%}).
<LEND>

<L>34827<pc>0687-a<k1>bUkkan<k2>bUkkan
{%Būkkan = bukkan,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34828<pc>0687-a<k1>bUbaSarman<k2>bUbaSarman
{#bUbaSarman#}¦ {%būba-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a
man; (also written {%vūva-śarman.%})
<LEND>

<L>34829<pc>0687-a<k1>bUza<k2>bUza
{#bUza#}¦ {%būṣa,%} a various form for {%busa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>34830<pc>0687-a<k1>bfMh<k2>bfMh
{#bfMh#}¦ {%bṛṃh,%} more commonly spelt {%vṛṃh,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34831<pc>0687-a<k1>bfMhana<k2>bfMhana
{%Bṛṃhana, am,%}¦ n. (see {%vṛṃhana%}), Ved. a means
of maintaining or preserving, (according to a Scholiast
{%= sandhāraṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>34832<pc>0687-a<k1>bfbadukTa<k2>bfbadukTa
{#bfbadukTa#}¦ {%bṛbad-uktha, as,%} m., Ved. an
epithet of Indra, (according to Yāska = either {%ma-%}
{%had-uktha,%} ‘highly lauded,’ or {%vaktavyam asmā%}
{%uktham,%} ‘one to whom praise is to be ascribed.’)
<LEND>

<L>34833<pc>0687-a<k1>bfbu<k2>bfbu
{#bfbu#}¦ {%bṛbu, us,%} m., Ved., N. of a man,
(according to Sāy. he was the carpenter of the Paṇis.)
<LEND>

<L>34834<pc>0687-a<k1>bfbUka<k2>bfbUka
{#bfbUka#}¦ {%bṛbūka, am,%} n., Ved. (according to
Yāska) water; (perhaps an adj.)
<LEND>

<L>34835<pc>0687-a<k1>bfzI<k2>bfzI
{#bfzI#}¦ {%bṛṣī = vṛṣī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34836<pc>0687-a<k1>bfsaya<k2>bfsaya
{#bfsaya#}¦ {%bṛsaya, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a demon;
(Sāy.) N. of Tvaṣṭṛ.
<LEND>

<L>34837<pc>0687-a<k1>bfh<k2>bfh<h>1
{#bfh#} 1¦. {%bṛh,%} cl. 6. P. {%bṛhati,%} &c., to make
effort, to raise, &c. See rt. 1. {%vṛh.%}
<LEND>

<L>34838<pc>0687-a<k1>bfh<k2>bfh<h>2
{#bfh#} 2¦. {%bṛh%} (in the later literature written
{%vṛh,%} see rt. 2. {%vṛh%}), cl. 6. P. {%bṛhati, bṛṃ-%}
{%hati, barhitum,%} Ved. to grow, increase.
<LEND>

<L>34839<pc>0687-a<k1>bfh<k2>bfh<h>3
3. {%bṛh%}¦ in {%bṛhas-pati,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34840<pc>0687-a<k1>bfha<k2>bfha
{%Bṛha%}¦ in {%a-b˚.%} See {%a-vṛha.%}
<LEND>

<L>34841<pc>0687-a<k1>bfhat<k2>bfhat
{%Bṛhat, an, atī, at%}¦ (in the later language usually
written {%vṛhat,%} q. v.; many compounds beginning
with {%bṛhat%} will be found under {%vṛhat%}), Ved.
thick, compact, massy, massive; wide, wide-spread,
far extended; great, large, vast; ample, abundant;
mighty, powerful (said of Indra, Varuṇa, Agni,
Rudra, Uṣas, and Soma); high, lofty; full-grown,
mature, old; extended (as a luminous body), bright;
clear, loud (said of sounds); ({%atī%}), f., N. of a par-
ticular metre of 36 (viz. 8 + 8 + 12 + 8) syllables;
a term applied to particular bricks forming part of
the sacrificial fire-place; the egg-plant, Solanum
Indicum or S. Melongena and S. Jacquini; speech?;
({%at%}), n. (with or without {%sāman%}) a term applied to
a Sāman composed in the Bṛhatī metre; ({%at, atā%}),
ind. much, greatly, highly, mightily; clearly, brightly;
[cf. probably Goth. <nsi>bairgahei;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>beorh,</nsi>
<nsi>beorg.</nsi>] {%—Bṛhac-chandas (bṛhat + chandas =%}
{%chadis, chadman), ās, ās, as,%} Ved. high-roofed,
having a lofty ceiling. {%—Bṛhac-charīra (bṛhat +%}
{%śarīra), as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a vast body (said
of Viṣṇu). {%—Bṛhac-chravas (bṛhat + śravas),%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. loud-sounding, rattling (as a chariot);
loudly extolled, highly lauded, far-famed; (Sāy. {%=%}
{%prabhūtānna.) — Bṛhaj-jāla (bṛhat + jāla), am,%}
n., Ved. a large net or snare. {%—Bṛhaj-jyotis (bṛ- %}
[Page0687-b+ 81]
{%hat + jyotis), is, is, i,%} Ved. bright-shining, brilliant.
{%—Bṛhat-kīrtti, is, is, i,%} Ved. far-famed (said of
Bṛhas-pati). {%—Bṛhat-ketu, us, us, u,%} Ved. highly
brilliant (said of Agni); (Sāy. {%= prabhūta-pra-%}
{%jñāna.%}) {%—Bṛhat-tṛna, am,%} n., Ved. rank or coarse
grass. {%—Bṛhat-palāśa as, ā, am,%} Ved. large-leafed,
having great leaves. {%—Bṛhat-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having the Bṛhat-sāman as the basis of the
Pṛṣṭha-stotra. {%—Bṛhat-sāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved.
having the Bṛhat-sāman for a Sāman; ({%ā%}), m., N.
of an Āṅgirasa. {%—Bṛhat-sumna, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
of great benevolence or kindness, very benevolent or
gracious; (Sāy.) {%= prabhūta-dhana%} or {%prabhūta-%}
{%sukha%}. {%—Bṛhat-sphic,%} see under {%vṛhat%}. {%—Bṛhad-%}
{%anīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. powerful-looking; having a
great army; very radiant (said of Agni). {%—Bṛhad-%}
{%āraṇyaka, am,%} n. or {%bṛhad-āraṇyakopaniṣad%}
{%(˚ka-up˚), t,%} f., Ved., N. of a celebrated Upaniṣad
forming the last five Prapāṭhakas or last six Adhyāyas
of the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Bṛhad-uktha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. loudly praised, (Sāy. {%= vṛhat-stotra,%}
Mahī-dhara {%= mahānti śastrāṇi yasya%}); ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a man with the patronymic Vāmadevya, and
author of the hymns Ṛg-veda X. 54-56. {%—Bṛhad-%}
{%ukṣ,%} Ved. sprinkling abundantly, shedding copiously
(said of the clouds; Sāy. {%= prabhūta-sektṛ%}). {%—Bṛ-%}
{%had-ukṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= bṛhad-ukṣ;%} (ac-
cording to Mahī-dhara on Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā VIII.
8), an epithet of Prajā-pati {%(= mahāṃś-ca sektā%}
{%ca)%}. {%—Bṛhad-ukṣan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. one who has
great oxen; an epithet of Agni; (Sāy.) {%= prabhūta-%}
{%raśmi-yukta%}. {%—Bṛhad-giri, is, is, i,%} Ved. (ac-
cording to Sāy.) {%= prabhūta-stuti,%} greatly praised,
highly extolled; an epithet of the Maruts; (perhaps)
calling or shouting loudly; ({%is%}), m., N. of a Yati.
{%—Bṛhad-grāvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. like a huge stone.
{%—Bṛhad-diva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. belonging to the
lofty sky, heavenly, celestial; (Sāy.) {%= prabhūta-dyuti,%}
{%prabhūta-dīpti,%} exceedingly splendid; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a son of Atharvan and author of the hymn Ṛg-veda
X. 120; an epithet of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 120;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a goddess associated with Iḷā, Sarasvatī,
and others. {%—Bṛhad-devatā,%} f., Ved., N. of a
work which enumerates and explains the deities to
which each hymn of the Ṛg-veda is addressed.
{%—Bṛhad-dharma-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a work
mentioned in the Śakti-ratnākara. {%—Bṛhad-bhānu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. shining brightly (said of Agni and
Indra; Sāy. {%= prauḍha-raśmi,%} ‘brilliant-rayed,’ or
{%= mahā-dīpta,%} ‘having great brilliance’). {%—Bṛ-%}
{%had-ratha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a spacious
chariot (said of Uṣas; Sāy. {%= prabhūta-ratha%});
({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Bṛhad-rayi, is, is, i,%}
Ved. having abundant possessions, a possessor of vast
riches (said of Vāyu; Sāy. {%= mahā-dhana%}). {%—Bṛ-%}
{%had-ravas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. loud-sounding, (Mahī-
dhara {%= mahān dhvanir yasya.%}) {%—Bṛhad-ri, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. {%= bṛhad-rayi,%} q. v. {%—Bṛhad-reṇu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. stirring up thick dust (in battle, said of
Indra; Sāy. {%= mahataḥ pāṃsor utthāpakaḥ%}). {%—Bṛ-%}
{%had-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. one to whom the Bṛhat-
sāman is addressed, (Mahī-dhara {%= bṛhat-sāma-%}
{%priya.%}) {%—Bṛhad-vayas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. grown
strong, very powerful, very vigorous (said of Agni
and of the Maruts). {%—Bṛhad-vasu, us,%} m., Ved.,
N. of a man. {%—Bṛhan-nārāyaṇopaniṣad,%} f., N.
of an Upaniṣad. {%—Bṛhan-mati, is, is, i,%} Ved. full
of devotion, very pious (said of Soma); ({%is%}), m., N.
of a descendant of Aṅgiras and reputed author of the
hymns Ṛg-veda IX. 39, 40.
<LEND>

<L>34842<pc>0687-b<k1>bfhatikA<k2>bfhatikA
{%Bṛhatikā.%}¦ See {%vṛhatikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>34843<pc>0687-b<k1>bfhaspati<k2>bfhaspati
{%Bṛhas-pati, is,%}¦ m. (in the later language more
usually written {%vṛhas-pati,%} q. v.; fr. {%bṛhas,%} gen.
of 3. {%bṛh + pati%}), ‘lord of prayer (?),’ N. of a
deity (who may be regarded as Piety and Re-
ligion personified; he is the chief offerer of
prayers, the sacrificer, and priest who is said to
intercede with the gods for men, and to protect the
pious against the impious; hence he is the type of
the priestly order, and is represented as the Puro-
hita of the gods. He is invoked together with Indra
[Page0687-c+ 73]
in Ṛg-veda IV. 49, and in the Taittirīya-Upaniṣad
associated with Indra and Prajā-pati. He is also
called {%brahmaṇas-pati,%} q. v.); the regent of the
planet Jupiter and preceptor of the gods; the name
of a saint and law-giver, (in these senses more
usually written {%vṛhas-pati,%} q. v.) {%—Bṛhaspati-%}
{%gupta, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a man. {%—Bṛhaspati-%}
{%purohita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having Bṛhas-pati for a
Puro-hita. {%—Bṛhaspati-praṇutta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
expelled or banished by Bṛhas-pati. {%—Bṛhaspati-%}
{%prasūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ordered or enjoined by
Bṛhas-pati; (Sāy.) {%= bṛhaspati-mitrābhimānin.%}
{%—Bṛhaspati-mat%} or {%bṛhaspati-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. accompanied by Bṛhas-pati. {%—Bṛhaspati-%}
{%śiras, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. ‘Bṛhas-pati-headed,’ (pro-
bably) having the head shaved like Bṛhas-pati.
{%—Bṛhaspati-sava, as,%} m., N. of a festival lasting
one day (said to confer the rank of a Puro-hita on
those observing it). {%—Bṛhaspati-stoma, as,%} m.,
Ved., N. of an Ekāha.
<LEND>

<L>34844<pc>0687-c<k1>bF<k2>bF
{#bF#}¦ {%bṝ.%} See rt. {%vṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>34845<pc>0687-c<k1>bekanAwa<k2>bekanAwa
{#bekanAwa#}¦ {%bekanāṭa, as,%} m., Ved. (according
to Yāska) a usurer.
<LEND>

<L>34846<pc>0687-c<k1>bekurA<k2>bekurA
{#bekurA#}¦ {%bekurā,%} f., Ved. (probably connected
with {%bakura%}), a kind of musical instrument (?), one
who plays a particular musical instrument?; (accord-
ing to the Nirukta) a voice, sound.
<LEND>

<L>34847<pc>0687-c<k1>bekuri<k2>bekuri
{%Bekuri, is,%}¦ f., Ved. {%= bekurā;%} (also written
{%vekuri, bhekuri, bhākuri.%})
<LEND>

<L>34848<pc>0687-c<k1>beqA<k2>beqA
{#beqA#}¦ {%beḍā,%} f. a boat; (written also {%veḍā.%})
<LEND>

<L>34849<pc>0687-c<k1>beBiditavya<k2>beBiditavya
{#beBiditavya#}¦ {%bebhiditavya,%} Fut. Pass. part.
of Intens. of rt. {%bhid,%} to be repeatedly broken &c.
<LEND>

<L>34850<pc>0687-c<k1>beS<k2>beS
{#beS#}¦ {%beś%} (= rts. {%biś, pis, vis, pes, ves%}),
cl. 1. P. {%beśati,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>34851<pc>0687-c<k1>bEjavApa<k2>bEjavApa
{#bEjavApa#}¦ {%baijavāpa, as,%} m., Ved. a patro-
nymic from Bīja-vāpa; [cf. {%vīja-vāpa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34852<pc>0687-c<k1>bEjavApAyana<k2>bEjavApAyana
{%Baijavāpāyana, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic from
Baijavāpa.
<LEND>

<L>34853<pc>0687-c<k1>bEjavApi<k2>bEjavApi
{%Baijavāpi,%}¦ &c. See {%vaijavāpi,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>34854<pc>0687-c<k1>bEjika<k2>bEjika
{%Baijika.%}¦ See {%vaijika.%}
<LEND>

<L>34855<pc>0687-c<k1>bEqAla<k2>bEqAla
{#bEqAla#}¦ {%baiḍāla,%} &c. See {%vaiḍāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>34856<pc>0687-c<k1>bEdala<k2>bEdala
{#bEdala#}¦ {%baidala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bidala,%} q. v.),
made of split bamboos, made of cane; ({%as%}), m. a
kind of pastry, a flat unleavened cake ({%= bidala,%}
q. v.); a leguminous plant, pulse; ({%am%}), n. a vessel
made of wicker-work, basket made of reeds; a
basket; (more usually written {%vaidala.%})
<LEND>

<L>34857<pc>0687-c<k1>bEdalika<k2>bEdalika
{%Baidalika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to pulse &c.
<LEND>

<L>34858<pc>0687-c<k1>bEnda<k2>bEnda
{#bEnda#}¦ {%bainda, as,%} m., Ved. (according to
Mahī-dhara), N. of a degraded tribe, a Niṣāda.
<LEND>

<L>34859<pc>0687-c<k1>bEndava<k2>bEndava
{#bEndava#}¦ {%baindava,%} &c. See {%vaindava,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>34860<pc>0687-c<k1>bElAyana<k2>bElAyana
{#bElAyana#}¦ {%bailāyana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bila%}),
Gaṇa Pakṣādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>34861<pc>0687-c<k1>bElya<k2>bElya
{%Bailya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; (a various reading
for {%bailva.%})
<LEND>

<L>34862<pc>0687-c<k1>bElyAyana<k2>bElyAyana
{%Bailyāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bailya.
<LEND>

<L>34863<pc>0687-c<k1>bElva<k2>bElva
{#bElva#}¦ {%bailva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bilva%}), relating or
belonging to the tree Ægle Marmelos, coming from
the Bilva tree, made of Bilva wood; covered with
Bilva trees; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%am%}), n. the
fruit of the Bilva tree.
<LEND>

<L>34864<pc>0687-c<k1>bElvaka<k2>bElvaka
{%Bailvaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bilva%}), Gaṇa Arīhaṇādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>34865<pc>0687-c<k1>bElvaki<k2>bElvaki
{%Bailvaki, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bilvaka.
<LEND>

<L>34866<pc>0687-c<k1>bElvaja<k2>bElvaja
{%Bailvaja, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bilva-ja%}), Gaṇa Rāja-
nyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 53.
<LEND>

<L>34867<pc>0687-c<k1>bElvajaka<k2>bElvajaka
{%Bailvajaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ inhabited by Bailvajas.
<LEND>

<L>34868<pc>0687-c<k1>bElvamaya<k2>bElvamaya
{%Bailvamaya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bailva%}), Scholiast
on Pāṇ. IV. 3, 155.
<LEND>

<L>34869<pc>0687-c<k1>bElvavana<k2>bElvavana
{%Bailvavana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bilva-vana%}), see Gaṇa
Rājanyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 53.
<LEND>

<L>34870<pc>0687-c<k1>bElvavanaka<k2>bElvavanaka
{%Bailvavanaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bailvavana%}), in-
habited by Bailvavanas.
<LEND>
[Page0688-a+ 77]

<L>34871<pc>0688-a<k1>bElvAyana<k2>bElvAyana
{%Bailvāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bailva.
<LEND>

<L>34872<pc>0688-a<k1>bElvayata<k2>bElvayata
{#bElvayata#}¦ {%bailvayata, bailvayatyā,%} see Gaṇa
Krauḍy-ādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 80.
<LEND>

<L>34873<pc>0688-a<k1>bEhInari<k2>bEhInari
{#bEhInari#}¦ {%baihīnari, is,%} m. a patronymic
from Bahīnara; (also written {%vaihīnari.%})
<LEND>

<L>34874<pc>0688-a<k1>bokaqI<k2>bokaqI
{#bokaqI#}¦ {%bokaḍī,%} f. the plant Argyreia Spe-
ciosa or Argentea ({%= bastāntrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>34875<pc>0688-a<k1>bokaRa<k2>bokaRa
{#bokaRa#}¦ {%bokaṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34876<pc>0688-a<k1>bodDavya<k2>bodDavya
{#bodDavya#}¦ {%boddhavya, boddhṛ.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>34877<pc>0688-a<k1>boDa<k2>boDa
{#boDa#}¦ {%bodha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%budh%}), know-
ing, understanding; ({%as%}), m. perception, apprehen-
sion, observation, conception, thought; knowledge,
understanding, wisdom, intellect, sense, intelligence
[cf. {%dur-b˚, viparīta-b˚%}]; waking, becoming awake,
waking state, ({%bodham pra-yā,%} to become awake,
wake up; said of a spell, i. e. to begin to take effect);
the opening of blossom, bloom; making known,
informing, instructing; awakening, arousing; a de-
signation, epithet; Knowledge personified as the son
of Buddhi; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; of a district.
{%—Bodha-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing knowledge; one
who informs or teaches, a teacher; one who wakens
or rouses; ({%as%}), m. ‘an awakener,’ a minstrel who
wakes a prince or chief in the morning with music.
{%—Bodha-gamya, as, ā, am,%} attainable by the intel-
lect, intelligible, within the compass of the understand-
ing. {%—Bodha-ghanācārya (˚na-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of
a teacher. {%—Bodha-citta-vivaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a
Buddhist work; (perhaps wrongly for {%bodhi-citta-%}
{%vivaraṇa.%}) {%—Bodha-tas,%} ind. through wisdom or
understanding. {%—Bodha-dhiṣaṇa, as,%} m. one
whose intellect is knowledge (an epithet of the Su-
preme Being ?). {%—Bodha-pūrvam,%} ind. knowingly,
consciously; {%a-b˚,%} unconsciously. {%—Bodha-pṛthvī-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Bodha-vāsara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the day of waking,’ the eleventh day in the
light half of the month Kārttika (in which Viṣṇu
awakes from his sleep; {%= bodhanī%}). {%—Bodha-sudhā-%}
{%kara (˚dhā-āk˚), as,%} m., N. of a Vedānta work. {%—Bo-%}
{%dhātīta (˚dha-at˚), as, ā, am,%} beyond the reach of
the understanding. {%—Bodhātman (˚dha-āt˚), ā,%} m.
(with Jainas) the intelligent and sentient soul. {%—Bo-%}
{%dhānanda-ghana (˚dha-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a
preceptor; [cf. {%bodha-ghanācārya.%}] {%—Bodhāra-%}
{%ṇya-yati (˚dha-ar˚), is,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>34878<pc>0688-a<k1>bodDavya<k2>bodDavya
{%Boddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be observed or re-
garded, observable, to be attended to; to be per-
ceived, perceptible, to be recognised; to be known
or understood, intelligible; to be wakened or roused;
to be enlightened, to be admonished; to be informed,
one whose attention is to be called to anything.
<LEND>

<L>34879<pc>0688-a<k1>bodDf<k2>bodDf
{%Boddhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ one who knows or
understands; an observer. {%—Boddhṛ-tva, am,%} n.
the being one who knows or understands, knowing,
capacity for understanding.
<LEND>

<L>34880<pc>0688-a<k1>boDaka<k2>boDaka
{%Bodhaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing to
know, apprising, informing, instructing, explaining,
teaching, an instructor, teacher [cf. {%bāla-b˚%}]; de-
noting, indicating, signifying; arousing, awaking;
({%as%}), m. a spy, informer; N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of his descendants. {%—Bodhaka-tva, am,%} n.
the state of causing to know, giving information or
instruction; capability of instructing.
<LEND>

<L>34881<pc>0688-a<k1>boDana<k2>boDana
{%Bodhana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the simple rt. and fr. the
Caus.), making known, informing, explaining, teach-
ing, instructing, enlightening [cf. {%bāla-bodhanī%}];
wakening, rousing, exciting; kindling, inflaming; ({%as%}),
m. the planet Mercury; N. of a mountain; ({%ī%}), f. intel-
lect, understanding, knowledge; ‘the day of awaking,’
an epithet of the eleventh day in the light half of the
month Kārttika on which Viṣṇu awakes from his
sleep [cf. {%utthānaikādaśī%}]; long pepper; ({%am%}),
n. observing, marking, perceiving; causing to per-
ceive or know, instructing, teaching; signifying,
denoting, indicating; making attentive; waking,
being awake; causing to wake, awakening, rousing,
arousing; burning incense (regarded as the ‘awaken-
[Page0688-b+ 80]
ing’ of a perfume); ‘the awaking of Durgā,’ N. of
a festival on the ninth day of the dark half of the
month Bhādra. {%—Bodhana-mantra, as,%} m., N. of
a chapter of the Purāṇa-sarvasva.
<LEND>

<L>34882<pc>0688-b<k1>boDanIya<k2>boDanIya
{%Bodhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be known or under-
stood, intelligible, to be apprehended; to be made
known or explained.
<LEND>

<L>34883<pc>0688-b<k1>boDanmanas<k2>boDanmanas
{%Bodhan-manas,%}¦ Ved. a various reading for {%bo-%}
{%dhin-manas,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34884<pc>0688-b<k1>boDayat<k2>boDayat
{%Bodhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to know, in-
forming, apprising, teaching; causing to wake, wak-
ening, rousing.
<LEND>

<L>34885<pc>0688-b<k1>boDayitavya<k2>boDayitavya
{%Bodhayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to under-
stand, to be made acquainted with, to be informed
of (with acc.; cf. {%bodhitavya%} below).
<LEND>

<L>34886<pc>0688-b<k1>boDayitf<k2>boDayitf
{%Bodhayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who causes to know, a
teacher, preceptor; a waker, awakener.
<LEND>

<L>34887<pc>0688-b<k1>boDayizRu<k2>boDayizRu
{%Bodhayiṣṇu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), wishing
to awaken, intending to arouse.
<LEND>

<L>34888<pc>0688-b<k1>boDAna<k2>boDAna
{%Bodhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ prudent, clever; ({%as%}), m. a
prudent man; an epithet of Bṛhas-pati; [cf. {%bu-%}
{%dhāna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34889<pc>0688-b<k1>boDAyana<k2>boDAyana
{%Bodhāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher and author
of the Brahma-sūtra-vṛtti, a philosophical work.
<LEND>

<L>34890<pc>0688-b<k1>boDi<k2>boDi
{%Bodhi, is,%}¦ m. (with Buddhists and Jainas) perfect
wisdom (by which a man becomes a Buddha or
Jina); the illuminated or enlightened intellect of a
Buddha [cf. {%deva-b˚%}]; the tree under which perfect
wisdom is attained or under which a man becomes
a Buddha, the sacred fig-tree, Ficus Religiosa [cf.
{%bodhi-taru%}]; an epithet of Buddha; N. of one of
the thirty-four Jātakas of Buddha; ‘the wakener,’ a
cock; ({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a people [cf. {%bodha,%}
{%baudhi%}]; ({%is, is, i%}), wise, learned (?). {%—Bodhi-%}
{%citta-vivaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a work mentioned in
the Sarva-darśana-saṅgraha. {%—Bodhi-taru, us,%} or
{%bodhi-druma, as,%} m. ‘tree of wisdom,’ the sacred
fig-tree under which perfect knowledge is obtained.
{%—Bodhi-da, as,%} m. (with Jainas) an Arhat. {%—Bo-%}
{%dhi-dhana, as,%} m., see the next. {%—Bodhi-dharma,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist patriarch whose original
name was Bodhi-dhana. {%—Bodhi-bhadra, as,%} m., N.
of a Buddhist teacher. {%—Bodhi-maṇḍa,%} N. of a seat
which was said to have risen out of the earth under the
sacred fig-tree when Śākya-muni attained to Bodhi or
perfect wisdom; {%= bodhi-maṇḍala%}. {%—Bodhi-maṇ-%}
{%ḍala, am,%} n., N. of the place where Śākya-muni at-
tained to Bodhi or perfect wisdom. {%—Bodhi-vṛkṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= bodhi-taru%}. {%—Bodhi-saṅghārāma (˚gha-%}
{%ār˚), as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist monastery. {%—Bodhi-%}
{%sattva, as, ā, am,%} one whose essence is wisdom;
({%as%}), m. (with Buddhists) ‘one who has Bodhi or
perfect wisdom as his essence,’ one who is on the way
to the attainment of perfect knowledge when he has
only one birth or certain births to undergo before ob-
taining the state of a supreme Buddha and then Nir-
vāṇa [cf. {%deva-b˚%}]; a title of the Buddha <lang n="greek">κατ’ ἐξοχήν.</lang>
{%—Bodhisattva-caryāvatāra (˚ya-av˚)%} and {%bodhi-%}
{%sattva-pakṣanirdeśa, as,%} m. and {%bodhisattva-pi-%}
{%ṭaka,%} N. of Buddhist works. {%—Bodhisattva-tā,%} f. the
state of one who is on the way to attain perfect wisdom.
{%—Bodhisattva-buddhānusmṛti-samādhi (˚dha-%}
{%an˚), is,%} m., N. of a Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Bodhi-%}
{%sattva-bhūmi, is,%} f., N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Bo-%}
{%dhisattva-samuccayā,%} f., N. of a Buddhist goddess.
{%—Bodhisattvāvadāna-kalpa-latā (˚va-av˚),%} f.,
N. of a collection of Buddhist legends. {%—Bodhy-%}
{%aṅga, am,%} n. an element or condition of the state
of Bodhi or perfect knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>34891<pc>0688-b<k1>boDita<k2>boDita
{%Bodhita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), made known,
apprised, explained, informed, instructed.
<LEND>

<L>34892<pc>0688-b<k1>boDitavya<k2>boDitavya
{%Bodhitavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), to be
made known, to be imparted or communicated.
<LEND>

<L>34893<pc>0688-b<k1>boDin<k2>boDin
{%Bodhin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. the simple rt. and fr. the
Caus.), knowing, familiar with; causing to perceive
or know; making known, teaching, revealing [cf.
{%tattva-bodhinī%}]; arousing, awakening [cf. {%jñāna-%}
{%bodhinī%}].
<LEND>

<L>34894<pc>0688-b<k1>boDinmanas<k2>boDinmanas
{%Bodhin-manas, ās, ās, as%}¦ (according to the Pada-
pāṭha fr. a form {%bodhit + manas%}), Ved. one whose
[Page0688-c+ 74]
mind is awake, watchful, attentive (Sāy. {%= budhya-%}
{%māna-manaska%}).
<LEND>

<L>34895<pc>0688-c<k1>boDila<k2>boDila
{%Bodhila, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bodhi%}), N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34896<pc>0688-c<k1>boDeya<k2>boDeya
{%Bodheya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school; [cf. {%addhā-%}
{%b˚, baudheya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34897<pc>0688-c<k1>boDya<k2>boDya
{%Bodhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be known or understood,
knowable; perceivable, intelligible, to be appre-
hended; to be informed or instructed, to be admon-
ished; to be declared or explained; to be waked; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Bodhya-gītā,%} f., N. of the 178th
chapter of the Śānti-parvan of the Mahā-bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>34898<pc>0688-c<k1>bOdDa<k2>bOdDa
{%Bauddha, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to intellect or un-
derstanding; relating or belonging to Buddha; ({%as%}),
m. a Buddhist, a follower of the religion of Buddha.
{%—Bauddha-darśana, am,%} n., N. of a section of
Mādhavācārya's Sarva-darśana-saṅgraha. {%—Baud-%}
{%dha-dhikkāra, as,%} m., N. of a work by Udayana
Ācārya, refuting Buddhist doctrines from a Vaiśeṣika
point of view. {%—Bauddhadhikkāra-gādādharī,%} f.
and {%bauddhadhikkāra-guṇānandī,%} f., N. of two
commentaries on the following commentary. {%—Baud-%}
{%dhadhikkāra-dīdhiti, is,%} N. of a commentary on
the Bauddha-dhikkāra. {%—Bauddha-mata-nibar-%}
{%haṇa, am,%} n., N. of the twenty-eighth chapter of
Anantānanda-giri's Śaṅkara-vijaya.
<LEND>

<L>34899<pc>0688-c<k1>bODa<k2>bODa
{%Baudha, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to the
planet Mercury; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic of Purū-ravas
son of Budha and grandson of Soma.
<LEND>

<L>34900<pc>0688-c<k1>bODAyana<k2>bODAyana
{%Baudhāyana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%budha%} or fr. {%bodha%}),
a patronymic and N. of a teacher; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a school; ({%as, ī, am%}), relating or belonging to
Baudhāyana; {%Baudhāyanaṃ sūtram,%} N. of a Sūtra
work. {%—Baudhāyana-darśa-pūrṇa-māsa-prayo-%}
{%ga, as,%} m., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>34901<pc>0688-c<k1>bODAyanIya<k2>bODAyanIya
{%Baudhāyanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging
to Baudhāyana; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a school.
{%—Baudhāyanīya-prayoga-sāra,%} N. of a work on
domestic observances.
<LEND>

<L>34902<pc>0688-c<k1>bODi<k2>bODi
{%Baudhi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bodha;%} but according to a
Scholiast fr. {%budha%}), a patronymic from Bodha.
<LEND>

<L>34903<pc>0688-c<k1>bODIputra<k2>bODIputra
{%Baudhī-putra, as,%}¦ m. ({%baudhī%} probably f. of
{%baudhya,%} q. v. {%+ putra%}), Ved., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>34904<pc>0688-c<k1>bODeya<k2>bODeya
{%Baudheya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school; [cf. {%bo-%}
{%dheya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34905<pc>0688-c<k1>bODya<k2>bODya
{%Baudhya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bodha;
({%as, dhī?, am%}), born in Bodha; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>34906<pc>0688-c<k1>borasidDi<k2>borasidDi
{#borasidDi#}¦ {%borasiddhi,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34907<pc>0688-c<k1>bODnya<k2>bODnya
{#bODnya#}¦ {%baudhnya, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%budhna%}),
N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>34908<pc>0688-c<k1>bOBukza<k2>bOBukza
{#bOBukza#}¦ {%baubhukṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bubhu-%}
{%kṣā%}), one who is always hungry, a starveling.
<LEND>

<L>34909<pc>0688-c<k1>byus<k2>byus
{#byus#}¦ {%byus%} = rt. {%vyuṣ,%} to divide.
<LEND>

<L>34910<pc>0688-c<k1>braR<k2>braR
{#braR#}¦ {%braṇ.%} See rt. 1. {%vraṇ.%}
<LEND>

<L>34911<pc>0688-c<k1>braDna<k2>braDna
{#braDna#}¦ {%bradhna, as, ā, am%} (perhaps fr. rt.
{%vṛdh;%} said to be fr. {%bradh%} substituted for rt.
{%bandh%}), reddish yellow (said of Soma, also called
{%babhru,%} q. v., of the Puroḍāśa and of the sun; Sāy.
{%= ādityarūpeṇāvasthitaḥ%}); bay (as a horse), fal-
low; (according to Naighaṇṭuka III. 3) great, mighty,
large {%(= mahat, vṛhat); (as),%} m. a horse (ac-
cording to Naighaṇṭuka I. 14); the sun; the root of
a tree; a son (?), the body (?); a particular disease;
N. of a man; of a son of Manu Bhautya; an epi-
thet of Śiva; of Brahmā; (gender uncertain), lead;
(in {%śata-b˚,%} q. v., gender uncertain), the point or
some other part of an arrow. {%—Bradhna-tva, am,%}
n. (according to Sāy.) greatness, mightiness ({%= ma-%}
{%hat-tva%}).
<LEND>

<L>34912<pc>0688-c<k1>braDnaSva<k2>braDnaSva
{%Bradhnaśva, as,%}¦ m., N. of a prince; (probably
wrongly for {%vadhryaśva.%})
<LEND>

<L>34913<pc>0688-c<k1>brahm<k2>brahm
{#brahm#}¦ {%brahm,%} cl. 1. P. {%brahmati,%} &c.,
Ved. to go or move.
<LEND>

<L>34914<pc>0688-c<k1>brahma<k2>brahma
{#brahma#}¦ {%brahma.%} See p. 692, col. 3.
<LEND>
[Page0689-a+ 81]

<L>34915<pc>0689-a<k1>brahman<k2>brahman
{#brahman#}¦ {%brahman, a,%} n. (fr. rt. 2. {%bṛh%} =
2. {%vṛh;%} cf. rts. {%vṛṃh, vṛdh%}), religious devotion
(regarded as an impulse or feeling gradually growing
up and expanding so as to fill the soul), prayer or
any pious expression in the worship of the gods, a
hymn of praise (Ved., Sāy. {%= stotra%}); a sacred text
(especially a Mantra used as a spell for averting evil
influences, forming a distinct class from the {%ṛcas,%}
{%sāmāni,%} and {%yajūṃṣi;%} and hence the term {%Brah-%}
{%ma-veda,%} q. v., is sometimes applied to the collec-
tion of texts commonly called {%Atharva-veda%}); the
mystic syllable {%Om%} [cf. Manu II. 83]; the sacred
word or word of God (opposed to {%vāc,%} the word of
man), the sacred text, the Veda; (in Atharva-veda X.
7, 32, X. 8, 1, there is an allusion to a {%jyeṣṭham%}
{%brahma%} or original pre-æval Veda or Deity? from
which the existing Vedas have been drawn); sacred
learning, divine science, religious knowledge, theo-
logy (speculative or theoretical, as opposed to prac-
tical religion, i. e. {%tapas,%} &c.); the Brāhmaṇa por-
tion of the Veda [cf. {%brāhmaṇa%} and Manu IV.
100]; religious life, celibacy, chastity [cf. {%brahma-%}
{%carya,%} col. 3]; the practice of austerity or penance ({%=%}
{%tapas%}); the Supreme Being regarded as impersonal
or in the abstract and divested of all quality and
action; the highest object of religious knowledge,
the Supreme all-pervading Spirit and Soul of the
Universe, the divine essence and source of all being
from which all created things emanate and to which
they return, the Self-existent, the Absolute, the
Eternal ({%= paramātman, ātman, adhyātma, pra-%}
{%dhāna, kṣetra-jña, tattva;%} Brahman as the Su-
preme Spirit is not an object of worship in the usual
sense of the term, but is meditated upon by the
devout with profound veneration; he appears in the
Atharva-veda as the Supreme Deity, and in X. 7, 24,
a highest divine essence or {%brahma jyeṣṭham%} is
spoken of); {%= mokṣa,%} emancipation or liberation
from mundane existence; the class occupied with
religious knowledge, the Brāhmanical caste as a
body, the priestly or sacerdotal class (cf. Manu IX.
322; in one or two passages the neut. {%brahman%}
appears to = ) a member of the Brāhmanical caste,
a Brāhman; (according to the Nirukta) {%= anna,%}
food; {%= dhana,%} wealth; ({%ā%}), m. one who prays, a
devout man [cf. {%tuvi-b˚%}]; one whose calling and
business consist in praying, a priest, Brāhman [cf.
{%oha-b˚%}]; one versed in sacred texts or in spells, one
conversant with sacred knowledge; an epithet of
Bṛhas-pati; one of the four principal priests or
{%ṛtvijas%} (the other three being the Hotṛ, Adhvaryu,
and Udgātṛ, q. q. v. v.; he had the supervision of
the sacrifice and was required to know the three
Vedas; as the most learned of the priests he had
to set right any mistake or remedy any defect in
the ritual; at a later period functions based espe-
cially on the Atharva-veda were assigned to him;
his three Puruṣas or assistants were the Brāhma-
ṇācchaṃsin, Āgnīdhra, and Potṛ); Brahmā or the
Supreme Being regarded as a person, (in the later
mythology he is held to be the first deity of the
Hindū triad and the Creator of the world; he never
appears to have become an object of general worship,
though a qualified reverence is paid to him in con-
junction with other deities; the {%sapta Brahmāṇaḥ,%}
or seven Brahmās, are the seven Prajā-patis, viz.
Marīci, Atri, Aṅgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and
Vasiṣṭha); a lifetime of Brahmā ({%= Brahmaṇa%}
{%āyuḥ%}); the sun; an epithet of Śiva; the Veda (?);
intellect ({%= buddhi%}); N. of a star, <lang n="greek">δ</lang> Aurigæ; epi-
thet of a particular astronomical Yoga; N. of the
servant of the tenth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī;
N. of a magician; of the ninth Muhūrta; [cf.
Zend <nsi>bareśma.</nsi> In giving the meaning of the
following words compounded with {%brahman,%} the
N. Brahman in the crude form will be used in all
cases where the distinction between the neut. Brahma
and the masc. Brahmā is not clearly determinable.]
{%—Brahma-ṛṣi,%} see {%brahmarṣi%}. {%—Brahma-%}
{%kanya%} or {%brahma-kanyaka,%} Clerodendrum Sipho-
nanthus; ({%kā%}), f. ‘daughter of Brahmā,’ the goddess
[Page0689-b+ 81]
Sarasvatī. {%—Brahma-kara, as,%} m. an impost paid to
the priestly class. {%—Brahma-karman, a,%} n. the office
of Brahman or presiding priest; the work or office
of the Brāhmans, the religious duties of the priestly
caste. {%—Brahmakarma-prakāśaka, as,%} m. an epi-
thet of Go-pāla (i. e. Kṛṣṇa). {%—Brahma-karma-%}
{%samādhi, is, is, i,%} occupied with and meditating
upon the Supreme Spirit. {%—Brahma-kalā,%} f. an
epithet of Dākṣāyaṇī who dwells in the heart of
men. {%—Brahma-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} like Brahman
or the Supreme Being; ({%as%}), m. the age of Brahman,
epithet of a particular period of time. {%—Brahma-%}
{%kāṇḍa, am,%} n. {%= jñāna-kāṇḍa,%} that inner portion
of the Veda which relates to spiritual knowledge
or the knowledge of Brahma, (opposed to {%karma-%}
{%kāṇḍa%} or the knowledge of rites and ceremonies);
N. of a work or section of a work by Bhartṛ-hari.
{%—Brahma-kāya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a particular
class of deities. {%—Brahmakāyika, as, ī, am,%} be-
longing to the class of deities called Brahma-kāyas.
{%—Brahma-kāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. making prayers,
offering prayers; (Sāy.) {%= annasya havir-lakṣa-%}
{%ṇasya kartā,%} preparing sacrificial food. {%—Brahma-%}
{%kāṣṭha,%} the plant Thespesia Populnea; a mulberry
tree. {%—Brahma-kileya (?), as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Brahma-kilbiṣa, am,%} n., Ved. an offence
against Brāhmans. {%—Brahma-kuṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of
a sacred pool. {%—Brahma-kuśā,%} f. a species of plant
({%= aja-modā;%} cf. {%brahma-kośī%}). {%—Brahma-kūṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a sacred mountain. {%—Brahma-kūrca,%}
a particular kind of penance. {%—Brahma-kṛt, t, t, t,%}
making or offering prayers, singing hymns of praise
(Sāy. {%= stota-kṛt%}); one who prays, a devout wor-
shipper (Ved.); ({%t%}), m. an epithet of Indra (‘making
pious or devout ?,’ Ved.); an epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Brahma-kṛta, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Brahma-%}
{%kṛti, is,%} f., Ved. the making of prayers, praying,
devotion (Sāy. {%= kriyamāṇaṃ stotram%}). {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Brahma-kośa,%}
{%as,%} m. receptacle or treasury of the Brahman, i. e.
of the sacred word or text, &c.; ({%ī%}), f. a species of
plant ({%= aja-modā;%} cf. {%brahma-kuśā%}). {%—Brahma-%}
{%kṣetra, am,%} n., N. of a sacred district. {%—Brahma-%}
{%khaṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of the first book of the Brahma-
vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Brahma-gandha, as,%} m., Ved.
the odour or perfume of Brahman. {%—Brahma-gar-%}
{%bha, as,%} m. the embryo of a Brāhman (?); N. of a
law-giver; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant, Polanisia Ico-
sandra. {%—Brahma-gavī,%} f., Ved. a cow belonging
to a Brāhman. {%—Brahma-gāyatrī,%} f., N. of a par-
ticular magical formula. {%—Brahma-gārgya, as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Brahma-giri, is,%} m., N. of a
mountain. {%—Brahma-gītā, ās,%} f. pl., N. of parti-
cular verses ascribed to Brahmā (and given in
Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 2146-2152); N. of a work
forming chapters 6-9 of the Jñāna-khaṇḍa of the
Śiva-Purāṇa and treating of the Vedānta and Yoga
systems. {%—Brahmagītā-vyākhyā,%} f., N. of a com-
mentary by Mādhava on the Brahma-gītā. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-gītikā,%} f. ‘the song of Brahmā,’ a N. of certain
verses. {%—Brahma-gupta, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Brahmā by the wife of the Vidyā-dhara Bhīma;
of an astronomer born A. D. 598; of a chief of the
Bhakta sect; of a Trigarta-ṣaṣṭha, (in this sense
also read {%brāhmagupta%}); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
race. {%—Brahmaguptīya, as,%} m. a prince of the
Brahma-guptas. {%—Brahma-gola, as,%} m. ‘the globe
of Brahman,’ the universe. {%—Brahma-gaurava,%}
{%am,%} n. the potency of the weapon given by the
god Brahmā (Bhaṭṭi-kāvya IX. 76). {%—Brahma-%}
{%granthi, is,%} m. a term applied to a particular joint
of the body. {%—Brahma-graha, as,%} m. {%= brahma-%}
{%rākṣasa,%} q. v. {%—Brahma-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved.
worthy to receive that which is holy; (also read
{%brahmārgha.%}) {%—Brahma-ghātaka, as,%} m. the
slayer or murderer of a Brāhman. {%—Brahma-ghā-%}
{%tin, ī, inī, i,%} slaying a Brāhman; ({%ī%}), m. (according
to a Scholiast) an epithet of Bhṛgu; ({%inī%}), f. a
woman on the second day of the menses. {%—Brahma-%}
{%ghoṣa, as,%} m. ‘prayer-sound,’ the murmur arising
from the recital of prayers; the sacred word, the text
[Page0689-c+ 81]
of the Veda; the reading or repeating of the Veda.
{%—Brahma-ghna, as, ī, am,%} slaying a Brāhman;
({%as%}), m. the slayer or murderer of a Brāhman;
({%ī%}), f. the plant Aloe Perfoliata. {%—Brahma-cakra,%}
{%am,%} n. the wheel of Brahman, circle of the universe
(Ved.); epithet of a particular magical circle.
{%—Brahma-carya, am,%} n. sacred study, religious
studentship, the condition of a young Brāhman or
student in the first period of his life [cf. {%āśrama,%}
{%brahma-cārin%}]; religious self-restraint, pious auste-
rity, the controlling of the senses, abstinence, chastity,
sanctity; ({%as%}), m. a religious student; ({%ā%}), f. chas-
tity. {%—Brahmacarya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} leading the
life of a religious student, practicing chastity. {%—Brah-%}
{%macarya-vrata, am,%} n. a vow of chastity. {%—Brah-%}
{%macarya-skhalana, am,%} n. falling or deviating
from chastity, incontinence. {%—Brahma-cāraṇī,%} f.
{%= bhārgī,%} Clerodendrum Siphonanthus; (a wrong
form for {%brahma-cāriṇī.%}) {%—Brahma-cārika, am,%}
n. religious studentship. {%—Brahma-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
studying sacred learning; practicing continence or
chastity; ({%ī%}), m. a Brāhman who practices chastity,
especially a religious student (or young Brāhman in
the first {%āśrama%} or period of his life [cf. {%āśrama%}]
from the time of his investiture with the sacrificial
thread till he marries and becomes a householder, or
one who remains with his spiritual teacher studying
the Veda and observing the duties of a student, cf.
Manu II. 219; the title of Brahma-cārin is also
given to a particular class of ascetics, and to Pandits
learned in the Veda, and by the Tantras to persons
whose chief virtue is the observance of continence;
in Atharva-veda XI. 5. great powers are ascribed to
the Brahma-cārin; he appears in some particulars to
be identified with the Supreme Being, and is even
said to be the source of the {%brahma jyeṣṭham%} or
primitive Veda); N. of a Gandharva; an epithet
of Skanda; of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. a woman observing a
vow of chastity; an epithet of Durgā; N. of various
plants, Clerodendrum Siphonanthus; {%= karuṇī;%}
Thespesia Populnea. {%—Brahma-codana, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. inciting or encouraging prayer; urging or in-
citing Brāhmans; (according to Mahī-dhara {%= brāh-%}
{%maṇānāṃ yajñam prati prerakaḥ.%}) {%—Brahma-%}
{%ja, as,%} m. ‘sprung from that which is holy,’ an
epithet of Kārttikeya; ({%ās%}), m. pl. (with Jainas) N.
of a class of divinities enumerated among the Kalpa-
bhavas. {%—Brahma-ja-jña, as, ā, am,%} Ved. begotten
by and knowing Brahman; knowing what is pro-
duced by Brahman, i. e. knowing all things (?).
{%—Brahma-jaṭā%} or {%brahma-jaṭī,%} f. the plant Arte-
misia Indica. {%—Brahma-janman, a,%} n. divine or
spiritual birth, the second birth effected by sacred
study or knowledge, investiture with the sacred
thread; ({%ā, ā, a%}), begotten by or sprung from
Brahman (said of Prajā-pati). {%—Brahma-japa, as,%}
m., Ved., N. of a particular form of prayer. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-jāmala = brahma-yāmala,%} q. v. {%—Brahma-%}
{%jāyā,%} f., Ved. the wife of a Brāhman; (Juhū
Brahma-jāyā is the reputed authoress of the hymn
Ṛg-veda X. 109.) {%—Brahma-jāra, as,%} m. the
paramour of a Brāhman's wife. {%—Brahma-jīvin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} living by sacred knowledge, gaining a liveli-
hood by religious learning; ({%ī%}), m. a mercenary
Brāhman (who converts his religious duties into
a trade, performing sacrifice, teaching the Veda &c.
for hire). {%—Brahma-juṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. grati-
fied by prayer or devotion. {%—Brahma-jūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. urged on by prayer, incited by devotion;
(Sāy.) {%= stotreṇākṛṣṭaḥ,%} attracted by a hymn of
praise. {%—Brahma-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing sacred
things, one who has spiritual wisdom or who knows
Brahma as the one all-pervading Spirit, a sage;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; of Kārttikeya.
{%—Brahma-jñāna, am,%} n. divine knowledge, true
knowledge of the Deity or of the Veda, knowledge
of the universal permeation of one Spirit as taught
by the Vedānta, spiritual wisdom. {%—Brahmajñānin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} possessing true knowledge of the Deity,
having true spiritual knowledge; [cf. {%brahma-%}
{%jñāna.%}] {%—Brahma-jya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. annoying
[Page0690-a+ 81]
or using violence against a Brāhman, oppressing a
Brāhman. {%—Brahma-jyeya, am,%} n., Ved. the act
of annoying or using violence against a Brāhman.
{%—Brahma-jyeṣṭha, as,%} m. the elder brother of
Brahmā; ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. having Brahman for
the first or chief. {%—Brahma-jyotis,%} n. the splendor
of Brahman, brightness of the Deity, (also written
{%brahma jyotis%}); an epithet of Śiva; ({%is, is, is%}),
Ved. having the splendor of Brahman, having the
splendor of the sacred office; (according to a Scho-
liast) having the splendor of a presiding priest.
 — 1. {%brahmaṇ-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. accompanied
by prayer, devout; having sacred acts; containing
the word Brahman; including or representing the
priesthood; ({%ān%}), m. an epithet of Agni; ({%atī%}), f.
an epithet of Iṣṭakā. {%—2. brahmaṇ-vat,%} ind., Ved.
like a Brāhman. {%—Brahma-tattva, am,%} n. the
true knowledge of Brahma or the Supreme Spirit.
{%—Brahma-tarka-stava, as,%} m., N. of a Vedānta
work by Appayya-dīkṣita. {%—Brahmatarkastava-%}
{%vivaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a commentary on the
Brahma-tarka-stava. {%—Brahma-tas,%} ind. from the
Brāhmanical caste, from the Brāhmans. {%—Brahma-%}
{%tā,%} f. the state or condition of a Brāhman, ‘Brāh-
manhood;’ the state or nature of Brahma or of the
Supreme Spirit, divine nature. {%—Brahma-tāla, as,%}
m. (in music) N. of a particular measure of time.
{%—Brahma-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place of pil-
grimage on the Revā or Narmadā river; Costus
Speciosus or C. Arabicus. {%—Brahma-tuṅga, as,%}
m., N. of a mountain. {%—Brahma-tejas, as,%} n. the
glory or power of Brahman; the glory or lustre
supposed to surround a Brāhman, Brāhmanical splen-
dor; ({%ās, ās, as%}), having the glory or power of
Brahman or of a Brāhman; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a
Buddha. {%—Brahmatejo-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or
composed of the glory of Brahman or the Supreme
Spirit, having divine splendor. {%—Brahma-tva, am,%}
n. the office of the Brahman or chief priest; the
state or condition of a Brāhman, ‘Brāhmanhood;’ the
state or condition of Brahma or the Supreme Spirit,
identification with Brahma; godhead. {%—Brahma-%}
{%tvac, k,%} the plant Alstonia Scholaris. {%—Brahmatva-%}
{%paddhati, is,%} f. ‘guide-book for the office of a chief
priest,’ N. of a work by Rāma-kṛṣṇa. {%—Brahma-%}
{%da, as, ā, am,%} imparting religious knowledge, a giver
of sacred knowledge; ({%as%}), m. a spiritual teacher.
{%—Brahma-daṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘staff of Brahman,’ epi-
thet of a mythical weapon; the curse of a Brāhman;
an epithet of Śiva; a species of plant ({%= brahma-%}
{%yaṣṭi%}); epithet of a particular Ketu; ({%ī%}), f. a
species of plant {%(= aja-daṇḍī, kaṇṭa-pattra-phalā).%}
{%—Brahma-daṇḍin, ī,%} m., N. of a sage. {%—Brahma-%}
{%datta, as, ā, am,%} given by Brahmā; given by
Brahma; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; of a man with the
patronymic Caikitāneya; of a king of the Pañcālas
in Kāmpilya; of a king of the Śālvas; of a prince
in Vārāṇasī; of a prince in Śrāvastī; of a prince in
Campā; of a prince in Kusuma-pura; of the
twelfth Cakra-vartin in Bhārata; of a Brāhman; of
a merchant; of a king; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his descendants.
{%—Brahma-darbhā,%} f. Ligusticum Ajowan. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ, = brahma-da%}. {%—Brahma-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. the gift of sacred knowledge. {%—1. brah-%}
{%ma-dāya, as,%} m. [cf. 1. {%dāya%}], the gift of sacred
knowledge, instruction in the Vedas; ({%as, ā, am%}),
imparting or teaching sacred knowledge. {%—2. brah-%}
{%ma-dāya, as,%} m. [cf. 2. {%dāya%}], sacred knowledge
as an inheritance or portion; the earthly possession
or portion of a Brāhman. {%—Brahmadāya-hāra, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} one who receives the gift of sacred know-
ledge. {%—Brahmadāyāda (˚ya-āda), as,%} m. one
who receives sacred knowledge as his inheritance, i. e.
the son of a Brāhman. {%—Brahma-dāru, u, us,%} n. m.
the Indian mulberry tree, Morus Indica. {%—Brahma-%}
{%dāsa, as,%} m., N. of the father of Nārāyaṇa-dāsa
(author of the Praśnārṇava); of a king who reigned
in the beginning of the fifteenth century. {%—Brahma-%}
{%dina, am,%} n. a day of Brahmā. {%—Brahma-deya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} given (in marriage) after the manner of
Brāhmans, married according to the Brāhmo vivāha
[Page0690-b+ 81]
(see Manu III. 27). {%—Brahma-daitya, am,%} n. a
Brāhman changed into a Daitya. {%—Brahma-dvāra,%}
{%am,%} n. ingress into Brahma or the Supreme Spirit.
{%—Brahma-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} or {%brahma-dveṣin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} ‘prayer-hating,’ hostile to devotion and holy
acts, hating religion, godless, impious (said of men
and demons; Sāy. {%= brāhmaṇānām mantrāṇāṃ%}
{%vā dveṣṭā,%} a hater of Brāhmans or hating prayers;
cf. {%brahma-vidviṣ%}); (according to Kullūka) hating
Brāhmans. {%—Brahma-dveṣa, as,%} m. hatred of
Brāhmans. {%—Brahma-dhara, as, ā, am,%} possessing
holy knowledge. {%—Brahma-dharma-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}
one who hates the Veda and the duties prescribed by
it. {%—Brahma-dhātu, us,%} m. an essential portion of
Brahman. {%—Brahma-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a Bud-
dha. {%—Brahma-nadī,%} f. ‘the river of Brahmā,’ an
epithet of the Sarasvatī. {%—Brahma-nābha, as,%} m.
‘having Brahmā on the navel,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu,
(Brahmā having arisen from a lotus which sprang
from the navel of Viṣṇu.) {%—Brahma-nāla, am,%}
n., N. of a sacred bathing-place in Benares. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-nirukta, am,%} n., N. of a work mentioned in
Mādhava's Parāśara-smṛti. {%—Brahma-nirvāṇa, am,%}
n. extinction in Brahma, absorption into the Supreme
Spirit. {%—Brahma-niṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} abiding in
Brahma, absorbed in the contemplation of the
Supreme Spirit; ({%as%}), m. the mulberry tree. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-nīḍa, am,%} n. the resting-place of Brahman or of
‘the holy.’ {%—Brahma-nutta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. cast
out through the efficacy of a sacred text. {%—Brahma-%}
{%pati, is,%} m., Ved. {%= brahmaṇas-pati,%} q. v. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-pattra, am,%} n. ‘Brahman's leaf,’ i. e. the leaf
of Butea Frondosa; [cf. {%brahma-pādapa.%}] {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-patha, as,%} m. the way to Brahman or the
Supreme Spirit; the way to Brahmā. {%—Brahma-%}
{%pada, am,%} n. the place of Brahman or the Supreme
Spirit, the place or nature of spiritual being; the
station or rank of Brahmā; the station or rank of
a Brāhman. {%—Brahma-pannaga, as,%} m., N. of a
Marut; (also read {%bahu-pannaga.%}) {%—Brahma-%}
{%pariṣadya = brahma-pārṣadya,%} q. v. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-parṇī,%} f. a species of plant, Hemionitis Cordi-
folia {%(= pṛśni-parṇī)%}. {%—Brahma-parvata, am,%}
n. ‘mountain of Brahmā,’ N. of a place. {%—Brahma-%}
{%palāśa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school of the Atharva-
veda; (also written {%brāhmapalāśa.%}) {%—Brahma-%}
{%pavitra, as,%} m. Kuśa grass, Poa Cynosuroides.
{%—Brahma-pādapa, as,%} m. ‘tree of Brahman,’ the
tree Butea Frondosa. {%—Brahma-pārṣadya, ās,%} m.
pl. (with Buddhists) ‘retinue of Brahmā,’ N. of a
class of divinities. {%—Brahma-pāśa, as,%} m. ‘noose
of Brahmā,’ N. of a mythical weapon, a weapon
given by Brahmā (Bhaṭṭi-kāvya IX. 75). {%—Brahma-%}
{%pitṛ, tā,%} m. ‘father of Brahmā,’ Viṣṇu; [cf.
{%brahma-nābha.%}] {%—Brahma-piśāca, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%brahma-rākṣasa,%} q. v. {%—Brahma-putra, as,%} m.
the son of a priest or Brāhman (Ved.); (Sāy.) {%=%}
{%brāhmaṇācchaṃsin,%} q. v.; a son of Brahmā (as
Sanat-kumāra, Manu, &c.); N. of a river (rising at
the eastern extremity of the Himālaya in Thibet,
flowing through Assam, where it is joined by the
Sanpoo, and falling with the Ganges into the Bay of
Bengal); of a place of pilgrimage (probably the
source of the Brahma-putra river); of a lake; N. of
a sacred district; a kind of vegetable poison; ({%ī%}), f.
‘daughter of Brahmā,’ an epithet of the river Saras-
vatī [cf. {%brahma-nadī%}]; a kind of esculent root {%(=%}
{%vārāhī)%}. {%—Brahmaputra-tā,%} f. the being a son of
Brahman, divine sonship. {%—Brahma-pura, am,%} n.
‘city of Brahmā,’ N. of a city in heaven; of a city
on earth; of a kingdom; a term applied to the
heart (Ved.); a term applied to the body (Ved.);
({%ī%}), f. the city of Brahmā (in heaven), the capital of
Brahmā on the mountain Kailāsa; N. of any city
the inhabitants of which are mostly Brāhmans; an
epithet of Benares; N. of a peak in the Himālaya
range. {%—Brahma-puraka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people. {%—Brahma-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of one of
the eighteen Purāṇas so called as revealed by Brahmā
to Dakṣa, (this Purāṇa is sometimes placed first and
therefore called Ādi-Purāṇa; its main object appears
[Page0690-c+ 81]
to be the promotion of the worship of Kṛṣṇa.)
{%—Brahma-puruṣa, as,%} m., Ved. an assistant of the
Brahman or chief priest, see {%brahman;%} a minister
of Brahman (said of the five vital airs); {%= brahma-%}
{%rākṣasa,%} q. v. {%—Brahma-purogava, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. preceded by Brahman or ‘the holy.’ {%—Brahma-%}
{%purohita, as,%} m., Ved. having the sacerdotal class
for a Puro-hita; ({%ās%}), m. pl. ‘the high priests of
Brahman,’ (with Buddhists) epithet of a class of
divinities. {%—Brahma-puṣpi, is,%} m., N. of a man;
(probably wrongly for {%brāhmapuṣpa,%} a patronymic
fr. {%brahma-puṣpa.%}) {%—Brahma-pūta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. purified by devotion; purified by Brahman
(Brahma or Brahmā). {%—Brahma-pralaya, as,%} m.
the universal destruction that takes place at the end
of every hundred years of Brahmā, in which even
Brahmā himself is swallowed up. {%—Brahma-prasūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. urged or requested by a Brāhman.
{%—Brahma-prāpti, is,%} f. obtainment of Brahma,
absorption of the soul into the divine essence.
{%—Brahma-priya, as, ā, am,%} loving or delighting
in devotion. {%—Brahma-prī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. loving or
delighting in devotion; (Sāy.) {%= somalakṣaṇenān-%}
{%nena prītaḥ%}. {%—Brahma-badha,%} see {%brahma-va-%}
{%dha%}. {%—Brahma-bandhava, am,%} n., Ved. (probably)
the office or occupation of a priest's assistant; (per-
haps a wrong form for {%brāhmabandhava.%}) {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-bandhu, us,%} m. ‘the kinsman of a Brāhman,’
an unworthy member of the Brāhmanical class, a
contemptuous term for a Brāhman; a Brāhman only
in name; (according to Sāy.) a Brāhman who does
not perform his Sandhyā or devotions at sunrise and
sunset. {%—Brahmabandhu-tā,%} f. the being a Brāh-
man only in name. {%—Brahma-bala, as,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Brahma-bali, is,%} m., N. of a teacher of
the Atharva-veda. {%—Brahma-bileya (?), as,%} m., N.
of a man; (also written {%brahma-vileya.%}) {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-bīja, am,%} n. ‘germ of religious knowledge,’ an
epithet of the mystical syllable {%Om;%} a mulberry tree.
{%—Brahma-bodhyā,%} f., N. of a river; (also read
{%brahma-vedhyā.%}) {%—Brahma-bruvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}
calling one's self a Brāhman, professing or pretending
to be a Brāhman; [cf. {%bruva.%}] {%—Brahma-bhadrā,%}
f. a species of plant {%(= trāyamāṇā)%}. {%—Brahma-%}
{%bhavana, am,%} n. the abode of Brahman. {%—Brahma-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m., Ved. the share of a priest, the portion
of a Brahman or chief priest; a mulberry tree.
{%—Brahma-bhāva, as,%} m. the becoming Brahma,
entrance or re-absorption into the Supreme Spirit.
{%—Brahma-bhāvana, as, ā, am,%} revealing or im-
parting religious knowledge. {%—Brahma-bhid, t, t,%}
{%t,%} ‘dividing Brahma,’ making many Brahmas out
of the one Brahma. {%—Brahma-bhuvana, am,%} n.
the world of Brahmā. {%—Brahma-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
become (one with) Brahma or the universal spirit,
entered into Brahma; ({%am%}), n. that which is iden-
tified with the universal spirit, condition of Brahma (?) .
{%—Brahma-bhūti, is,%} f. twilight. {%—Brahma-bhū-%}
{%mi-jā,%} f. ‘growing in the land of Brahmā,’ N. of a
species of plant. {%—Brahma-bhūya, am,%} n. the be-
coming (one with) Brahma, identification or identity
with Brahma, absorption into Brahma; final felicity,
ultimate happiness; the state or rank of a Brāhman,
‘Brāhmanhood.’ {%—Brahmabhūya-tva, am,%} n. the
becoming one with Brahma; the condition of a
Brāhman. {%—Brahma-bhūyas, ān, asī, as,%} becom-
ing one with Brahma, being absorbed into Brahma;
({%as%}), n. absorption into Brahma. {%—Brahma-maṅ-%}
{%gala-devatā,%} f. an epithet of Lakṣmī. {%—Brahma-%}
{%maṭha, as,%} m. ‘the college of Brahman,’ N.
of a college of theology in Kaśmīra. {%—Brahma-%}
{%maṇḍūkī,%} f. Clerodendrum Siphonanthus; (also
written {%brahma-māṇḍūkī;%} cf. {%brāhmī.%}) {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-mati, is,%} m. (with Buddhists) N. of a demon.
{%—Brahma-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting or made of
Brahma, identified with Brahma, belonging or re-
lating to the Veda, (according to Malli-nātha on
Kumāra-s. V. 30 {%= vaidika%}); belonging to or fit
for a Brāhman. {%—Brahma-maha, as,%} m. a feast
in honour of the Brāhmans. {%—Brahma-māṇḍūkī%}
{%= brahma-maṇḍūkī,%} q. v. {%—Brahma-mitra, as, %}
[Page0691-a+ 81]
{%ā, am,%} having Brahman for a friend, befriended
by Brahman; having the Brāhmans for friends;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Muni. {%—Brahma-mīmāṃsā,%} f.
‘investigation into Brahma or the spiritual doctrine
of the Veda,’ N. of the Vedānta philosophy treating of
the Supreme Spirit ({%= uttara-mīmāṃsā, śārīraka-%}
{%mīmāṃsā, vedānta,%} q. q. v. v.). {%—Brahmamīmāṃ-%}
{%sā-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a commentary by Śaṅ-
karācārya. {%—Brahmamīmāṃsā-bhāṣyakāra, as,%}
m. ‘commentator on the Brahma-mīmāṃsā,’ an
epithet of Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Brahmamīmāṃsābhā-%}
{%ṣya-vivaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a commentary by
Ānanda-tīrtha on Śaṅkarācārya's Brahmamīmāṃsā-
bhāṣya. {%—Brahma-mūrti, is, is, i,%} having the
figure of Brahmā, in the form of Brahmā. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-mūrdha-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘carrying the head of
Brahmā,’ an epithet of Śiva (as having in a dispute
cut off one of Brahmā's heads). {%—Brahma-mekhala,%}
{%as,%} m. the plant Saccharum Munjia ({%muñja%}), of
which the sacred thread of a Brāhman is made.
{%—Brahma-medhyā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Brahma-%}
{%yajña, as,%} m. ‘the offering of prayer or of repeating
the Veda,’ repeating by heart or recitation of a sacred
text, teaching and repeating the Vedas (regarded as
one of the five Mahā-yajñas or great sacrifices, see
Manu III. 70, where Kullūka explains {%brahma-%}
{%yajña%} by {%adhyāpana%} and {%adhyayana%}); N. of
the thirty-first chapter of the Sṛṣṭi-khaṇḍa of the
Padma-Purāṇa; [cf. {%brahma-sattra.%}] {%—Brahma-%}
{%yajña-māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the
Purāṇa-sarvasva. {%—Brahmayajña-vidhi, is,%} m., N.
of a chapter of Mādhava's Parāśara-smṛti. {%—Brah-%}
{%mayajñādi-vidhi (˚ña-ād˚), is,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Brahma-yaśas, as,%} or {%brahma-yaśasa, am,%} n.,
Ved. the glory or majesty of Brahman. {%—Brahma-%}
{%yaśasin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. renowned for sanctity.
{%—Brahma-yaṣṭi, is,%} or {%brahma-yaṣṭikā,%} or
{%brahma-yaṣṭī,%} f. the plant Clerodendrum Sipho-
nanthus; Ligusticum Ajowan. {%—Brahma-yāya, as,%}
m. (probably) {%= brahma-yajña,%} q. v. {%—Brahma-%}
{%yātu, us,%} m. epithet of a particular Yātu; [cf.
{%deva-yātu.%}] {%—Brahma-yāmala,%} N. of a Tantra;
(also written {%brahma-jāmala.%}) {%—Brahma-yuga,%}
{%am,%} n. the age of the Brāhmans, (opposed to {%kṣa-%}
{%trasya yugam,%} the age of the Kṣatriyas, Hari-vaṃśa
11808.) {%—Brahma-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. harnessed
by prayer or devotion (i. e. bringing Indra in
answer to the prayers of men, said of the horses of
that deity; Sāy. {%= parivṛḍhena mantreṇa yujya-%}
{%mānaḥ%}). {%—Brahma-yoga, as,%} m. use or employ-
ment of prayer, the binding power or efficacy of
devotion (Ved.); cultivation of spiritual knowledge.
{%—Brahma-yoni, is,%} f. original source in Brahma,
home in Brahma; ({%is, is, i%}), having the original
source or home in Brahma; descended or sprung from
Brahmā; ({%is, ī%}), f., N. of a place of pilgrimage; ({%is%}),
m., N. of a mountain {%(= brahma-giri)%}. {%—Brahma-%}
{%yoni-stha, as, ā, am,%} intent on the means of
attaining sacred knowledge or the supreme godhead,
(according to Kullūka on Manu X. 74 {%= brahma-%}
{%prāpti-kāraṇa-brahma-dhyāna-niṣṭha.%}) {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-rakṣas, as,%} n., N. of a kind of evil demon ({%=%}
{%brahma-rākṣasa,%} q. v.). {%—Brahma-ratna, am,%}
n. a valuable present made to Brāhmans. {%—Brahma-%}
{%ratha, as,%} m. the chariot or carriage of a Brāhman.
{%—Brahma-randhra, am,%} n. a suture or aperture
in the crown of the head and through which the
soul is said to escape on death. {%—Brahma-rasa, as,%}
m., Ved. the savour of Brahman, the savour of
divine knowledge. {%—Brahma-rākṣasa, as,%} m. a
kind of evil demon, a fiend of the Brāhmanical class,
the ghost of a Brāhman who in his lifetime indulged
a haughty and disdainful spirit; a species of plant
commonly called Thorarohiḍā; ({%ī%}), f. epithet of one
of the nine Samidhs. {%—Brahma-rāja, as,%} m., N. of
a king; of a man. {%—Brahma-rāta, as,%} m. ‘given
by Brahmā,’ an epithet of Śuka; N. of the father of
Yājñavalkya. {%—Brahma-rātra, as,%} m. ‘the night
of Brahmā,’ epithet of a particular hour of night.
{%—Brahma-rātri, is,%} m. an epithet of Yājñavalkya;
(an incorrect form for {%brāhmarāti.%}) {%—Brahma- %}
[Page0691-b+ 81]
{%rāśi, is,%} m. the whole circle of sacred knowledge,
whole mass of the sacred text; ‘a mass of holiness,’
an epithet of Paraśu-rāma; a particular constel-
lation, (according to a Scholiast {%= śravaṇa,%} q. v.)
{%—Brahma-rīti, is,%} f. a kind of brass. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-rūpiṇī,%} f. a species of plant (commonly called
Bādāṅgula). {%—Brahma-rekhā,%} f. ‘line of Brahmā,’
the lines or destiny written by Brahmā on the
forehead of every creature, the predestined lot
of a man. {%—Brahmarṣi (˚ma-ṛ˚), is,%} m. ‘Brāh-
manical sage,’ epithet of a particular class of sages
[cf. {%ṛṣi%}] supposed to belong to the Brāhmanical
caste (as Vasiṣṭha, &c.; higher than Maharṣi,
q. v.; also written {%brahma-ṛṣi,%} see Gram-
mar 38. {%h%}). {%—Brahmarṣi-tā,%} f. or {%brahmarṣi-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the being a Brahmarṣi, the rank of a
sage of the Brāhmanical class. {%—Brahmarṣi-deśa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the country of the Brahmarṣis,’ including
Kuru-kṣetra and the country of the Matsyas, Pañ-
cālas, and Śūrasenakas (see Manu II. 19). {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-lakṣaṇa-vākyārtha (˚ya-ar˚),%} N. of an
abridgement of the Vedānta-sudhā-rahasya. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-likhita, am,%} n. or {%brahma-lekha, as,%} m.
‘Brahmā's writing,’ a man's destiny written on his
forehead {%(= brahma-rekhā)%}. {%—Brahma-loka, as,%}
m. the world of Brahmā, i. e. the heaven or place of
residence of Brahmā, (a division of the universe and
one of the supposed residences of pious spirits.)
{%—Brahma-vaktṛ, tā,%} m. a proclaimer of religious
truths, a teacher of the Veda. {%—1. brahma-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} possessed of Brahma; possessing religious
learning. {%—2. brahma-vat,%} ind. according to the
sacred text, according to the Veda. {%—Brahma-vada%}
or {%brahma-vala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school; (pro-
bably an incorrect form.) {%—Brahma-vadya, am,%} n.
knowledge or declaration of Brahma, {%= brahmodya,%}
q. v.; ({%as, ā, am%}), in {%brahma-vadyā kathā,%} see
Vopa-deva XXVI. 21. {%—Brahma-vadha, as,%} m. or
{%brahma-vadhyā,%} f. the murder of a Brāhman.
{%—Brahmavadhyā-kṛta, am,%} n. an act of Brāh-
manicide, the crime of killing a Brāhman. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-vani, is, is, i,%} Ved. (according to Mahī-dhara)
devoted to the Brāhmans. {%—Brahma-varcas,%} see
{%brahma-varcasa%}. {%—Brahma-varcasa, am,%} n. divine
glory or splendor; eminence in holiness or in sacred
knowledge, spiritual pre-eminence, holiness resulting
from the study and observance of the Vedas; the
sanctity or superhuman power of a Brāhman. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-varcasin%} or {%brahma-varcasvin, ī, inī, i,%} emi-
nent in religious learning, holy; illumined by the
Vedas; ({%ī%}), m. an illustrious priest, holy Brāhman,
(Mahī-dhara {%= yajñādhyayana-śīlo brāhmaṇaḥ.%})
{%—Brahma-varcasya, as, ā, am,%} see Vārttika to
Pāṇ. V. 1, 39. {%—Brahma-varta, as,%} m. {%= brahmā-%}
{%varta,%} q. v. {%—Brahma-vardhana, am,%} n. copper
(which is considered peculiarly suitable for sacrificial
utensils). {%—Brahma-vala = brahma-vada,%} q. v.
{%—Brahma-vallī,%} f. Brahmā's tendril or creeper.
{%—Brahmavallī-lipi,%} N. of a work. {%—Brahma-%}
{%vāṭīya, as, ā, am,%} epithet of a kind of Muni.
{%—Brahma-vāda, as,%} m., Ved. speaking of sacred
matters, declaring or teaching spiritual knowledge,
citing the Vedas; {%(as, ā, am), = brahma-vādin.%}
{%—Brahmavādi-tva, am,%} n. the being an ex-
pounder of the Veda. {%—Brahma-vādin, ī, inī, i,%}
one who recites the Veda, a defender or expounder
of the Veda, a theologian, speaking of or discussing
sacred matters; one who asserts that all things are
Brahma, a follower of the Vedānta system of philo-
sophy. {%—Brahma-vādya, am,%} n., Ved. rivalry in
sacred knowledge or in magical power, (according to
the commentator, also {%as, ā, am;%} cf. {%brahma-%}
{%vadya, brahmodya.%}) {%—Brahma-vāluka, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Brahma-vāsa, as,%} m. the abode
of Brahmā, the heaven of Brahmā. {%—Brahma-vā-%}
{%has, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. one to whom prayers are
offered (said of Indra); (Sāy.) {%= stotreṇa prāpya-%}
{%māṇaḥ,%} obtained by prayer; {%= stotrasya vāhakaḥ,%}
the accepter of prayer. {%—Brahmavit-tva, am,%} n.
(fr. {%brahma-vid%}), knowledge of Brahma or the
Supreme Spirit. {%—Brahma-vid, t, t, t,%} or {%brahma- %}
[Page0691-c+ 81]
{%vida, as, ā, am,%} knowing Brahma or the Supreme
Spirit, a theologian, philosopher, sage; skilled in
sacred spells or magical charms. {%—Brahma-vidyā,%}
f. knowledge of ‘the holy’ or of Brahma; know-
ledge of the Supreme Spirit or Soul of the Universe;
N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Brahmavidyā-tīrtha, as,%} m.,
N. of an author. {%—Brahmavidyābharaṇa (˚yā-%}
{%ābh˚), am,%} n., N. of a commentary by Advaitānanda
on the Śārīraka-mīmāṃsā-bhāṣya. {%—Brahma-vid-%}
{%vas, vān, uṣī, vas,%} Ved. one who knows Brahma,
knowing the Supreme Spirit. {%—Brahma-vidviṣ, ṭ,%}
{%ṭ, ṭ, = brahma-dviṣ,%} q. v. {%—Brahma-vindu, us,%}
m. a drop of saliva sputtered while reciting the Veda;
N. of an Upaniṣad connected with the Atharva-
veda. {%—Brahma-vivardhana, as,%} m. ‘increasing
religious knowledge,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-viśeṣa-citta-paripṛcchā,%} f., N. of a Buddhist
Sūtra work. {%—Brahma-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. ‘the divine
tree’ or ‘Brahma regarded as a tree;’ the Palāśa
tree, Butea Frondosa; the glomerous fig-tree, Ficus
Glomerata. {%—Brahma-vṛtti, is,%} f. the livelihood
or means of subsistence of a Brāhman. {%—Brahma-%}
{%vṛddha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. become great by devotion,
increased by prayer. {%—Brahma-vṛddhi, is,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Brahma-vṛnda, am,%} n. a company or
assemblage of Brāhmans; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the city of
Brahmā. {%—Brahma-veda, as,%} m. ‘the Veda of
sacred spells or charms,’ a N. of the Atharva-veda;
the Veda of the Brāhmans, (opposed to {%kṣatra-%}
{%veda,%} q. v.); knowledge of Brahma, monotheism;
knowledge of the Vedas. {%—Brahmaveda-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} consisting of the Brahma-veda. {%—Brahma-%}
{%vedi, is,%} f. ‘the altar of Brahmā,’ N. of the country
between the five lakes of Rāma in Kuru-kṣetra.
{%—Brahma-vedin, ī, inī, i, = brahma-vid,%} know-
ing or acquainted with the Vedas or spiritual know-
ledge. {%—Brahma-vedhyā,%} another form for {%brah-%}
{%ma-bodhyā,%} q. v. {%—Brahma-vaivarta%} or {%brahma-%}
{%vaivartaka, am,%} n. ‘changes of Brahman’ (who is
identified with Kṛṣṇa), N. of a Purāṇa, (this
Purāṇa, which is one of the most modern of the
eighteen, contains prayers and invocations addressed
to Kṛṣṇa, descriptions of Vṛndāvana and Go-loka,
with tedious narratives about Kṛṣṇa and his love
for the Gopīs and Rādhā.) {%—Brahma-vrata, am,%}
n., N. of a religious observance; a vow of chastity.
{%—Brahma-śalya, as,%} m. a species of plant ({%=%}
{%soma-valka%}); the tree Mimosa Arabica. {%—Brahma-%}
{%śāyin, ī, inī, i,%} resting or reposing in Brahma.
{%—Brahma-śālā,%} f. the hall of Brahmā; N. of a
sacred place. {%—Brahma-śāsana, am,%} n. an edict ad-
dressed to the Brāhmans; a command of Brahmā;
the command of a Brāhman, {%= dharma-kīlaka;%}
{%(as),%} m., N. of a Grāma. {%—Brahma-śiras, as,%} or
{%brahma-śīrṣan, a,%} n. ‘the head of Brahmā,’ N. of
a mythical weapon. {%—Brahma-śumbhita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. cleansed by prayer, adorned by devotion.
{%—Brahma-śrī, īs,%} f., N. of a Sāman. {%—Brahma-%}
{%śrī-mantra, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of Kṛṣṇā-
nanda's Tantra-sāra. {%—Brahma-saṃśita, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. sharpened by prayer or by a sacred text (Sāy.
{%= mantreṇa tīkṣṇī-kṛtaḥ%}). {%—Brahma-saṃsad,%}
{%t,%} f. Brahman's hall of assembly or court. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-saṃstha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. wholly devoted to
Brahma or to religious knowledge, attaining to union
with Brahma. {%—Brahma-saṃhitā,%} f. a collection of
prayers; N. of a short treatise on the Vedānta system.
{%—Brahmasaṃhitā-vyākhyā,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary on the Brahma-saṃhitā. {%—Brahma-satī,%} f. a
N. of the river Sarasvatī. {%—Brahma-sattra, am,%} n.
the sacrifice or offering of devotion or abstract medi-
tation, absorption in the holy one; study and teaching
of the Vedas, the constant repetition of the Vedas or
a particular portion of the Vedas which is constantly
studied and repeated (Manu II. 106; cf. {%brahma-%}
{%yajña%}) . {%—Brahma-sattrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} offering the
sacrifice of prayer, absorbed in the holy one. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-sadana, am,%} n. the seat of the Brahman or
chief priest (Ved.); the abode or heaven of Brahmā;
N. of a Tīrtha, (in this sense a various reading for
{%veda-vadana.%}) {%—Brahma-sadas, as,%} n. the resi-
[Page0692-a+ 81]
dence or court of Brahmā. {%—Brahma-sabhā,%} f. the
hall or court of Brahmā. {%—Brahma-sambandha,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= brahma-rākṣasa,%} q. v. {%—Brahma-sam-%}
{%bhava, as, ā, am,%} sprung from Brahman; coming
from Brahmā; sprung or descended from Brāhmans;
({%as%}), m. (with Jainas) N. of the second black Vāsu-
deva; of the author of a law-book. {%—Brahma-saras,%}
{%as,%} n. ‘the lake of Brahmā,’ N. of a very sacred
bathing-place. {%—Brahma-sarpa, as,%} m. ‘the serpent
of Brahmā,’ a kind of snake. {%—Brahma-sava, as,%}
m. ‘divine clarifying process,’ distillation of Soma,
(Sāy. {%brahma = Soma,%}) or the (Soma) distillation
(performed) by Brāhmans; N. of a particular libation.
{%—Brahma-sāgara, as,%} m., N. of a place. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-sāt,%} ind. into the state of Brahma, with refer-
ence to Brahma. {%—Brahmasāt-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
absorbed into the state of Brahma, performed with
reference to Brahma. {%—Brahma-sāma, am,%} or
{%brahma-sāman, a,%} n., Ved., N. of a Sāman (sung
to a text recited by the Brahman or chief priest
or by the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin). {%—Brahma-sāyujya,%}
{%am,%} n. intimate union or identification with Brahma,
entrance into Brahma. {%—Brahma-sārṣṭitā,%} f.
equality or identification with Brahma, union with
the Supreme Spirit, (according to Kullūka {%= brah-%}
{%maṇaḥ samāna-gati-tā.%}) {%—Brahma-sāvarṇa, as,%}
m., N. of a particular Manu; ({%am%}), n., N. of his
Manv-antara. {%—Brahma-sāvarṇi, is,%} m., N. of the
tenth Manu; (also written {%brahmā-sāvarṇi.%})
{%—Brahma-siddhānta, as,%} m., N. of various astro-
nomical works. {%—Brahma-siddhi, is,%} m., N. of a
Muni; ({%is%}), f., N. of a work by Maṇḍana-miśra.
{%—Brahma-suta, as,%} m. ‘the son of Brahmā,’ i. e.
the Ketu Brahma-daṇḍa. {%—Brahma-suvarcalā,%} f.
a species of plant (an infusion of which is drunk as
a penance for eating anything left by a cat, crow,
rat, &c., Manu XI. 159); Helianthus; Cleroden-
drum Siphonanthus {%(= brāhmī)%}. {%—Brahma-sū, ūs,%}
m. ‘the son of Brahmā,’ an epithet of A-niruddha,
son of the god of love; N. of Kāma-deva, the god
of love. {%—Brahma-sūtra, am,%} n. the sacrificial or
Brāhmanical thread worn over the shoulder; a Sūtra
work treating of true divine knowledge or of the
Vedānta philosophy; N. of a work containing the
aphorisms of the Vedānta philosophy ascribed to
Bādārāyaṇa or Vyāsa, also denominated Vedānta-
sūtra and Śārīraka-sūtra, q. q. v. v. {%—Brahmasūtra-%}
{%ṛju-vyākhyā,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Brah-
ma-sūtras by Vijñāna-bhikṣu or Vijñāna-yati. {%—Brah-%}
{%masūtra-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a commentary by
Śaṅkarācārya; of a commentary by Ānanda-tīrtha.
{%—Brahmasūtra-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a commentary
by Bodhāyana; of a commentary by Bhairava-
dīkṣita-tilaka. {%—Brahmasūtrānubhāṣya (˚ra-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n., N. of a commentary by Vallabhācārya.
{%—Brahma-sūtrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} invested with the
Brāhmanical cord. {%—Brahma-sūnu, us,%} m. (with
Jainas) a sovereign of the race of Ikṣvāku; N. of
the twelfth king of Bhārata. {%—Brahma-sṛj, ṭ,%} m.
‘the creator of Brahmā,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-soma, as,%} m., N. of a sage. {%—Brahma-stamba,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘Brahman's post or prop,’ the world. {%—Brah-%}
{%ma-stambi, is,%} m., N. of a man; (probably a wrong
form for {%brāhmastambi,%} a patronymic fr. {%brahma-%}
{%stamba.%}) {%—Brahma-steya, am,%} n. stealing that
which is holy, stealing the Veda, obtaining a know-
ledge of the Veda by illicit means. {%—Brahma-%}
{%sthala, am,%} n., N. of a city, (also read {%brahma-%}
{%pura%}); N. of a village. {%—Brahma-sthāna, am,%} n.
‘place or abode of Brahmā,’ N. of a Tīrtha; (pro-
bably {%as,%} m.), a mulberry tree. {%—Brahma-sphuṭa-%}
{%siddhānta, as,%} m., N. of an astronomical work by
Brahma-gupta (whose name is frequently written
Brāhma-gupta). {%—Brahma-sva, am,%} n. Brāhma-
nical property, money or lands belonging to Brāh-
mans. {%—Brahma-svarūpa, as, ā, am,%} of the nature
of spirit, of the same essence as the godhead. {%—Brah-%}
{%masva-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} carrying off or stealing
the property of Brāhmans. {%—Brahma-svāmin, ī,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Brahma-hatyā,%} f. killing a
Brāhman, Brāhmanicide, or any crime equally
[Page0692-b+ 81]
heinous. {%—Brahma-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} ‘Brāhman-
slaying,’ murdering a Brāhman, the murderer or
slayer of a Brāhman. {%—Brahma-huta, am,%} n. the
oblation or offering to Brāhmans, performance of
the rites of hospitality (especially to twice-born
guests, {%= nṛ-yajña, atithi-pūjana,%} one of the
Mahā-yajñas, see Manu III. 74, and cf. {%brāhmya-%}
{%huta%}). {%—Brahma-hṛdaya, as, am,%} m. n. the star
Capella. {%—Brahma-hrada, as,%} m., N. of a lake.
{%—Brahmākṣara (˚ma-ak˚), am,%} n. the sacred
and mysterious syllable, the syllable {%Om%} (regarded
as a mystical name of the Deity). {%—Brahmākṣara-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of sacred syllables.
{%—Brahmāgra-bhū (˚ma-ag˚), ūs,%} m. a horse;
[cf. {%brahmātma-bhū.%}] {%—Brahmāñjali (˚ma-añ˚),%}
{%is,%} m. ‘homage to the divine,’ joining the hollowed
hands together while repeating the Veda (either as
an act of homage or to mark by the motion of the
hands so placed the accentuation of the Sāma-veda;
cf. Manu II. 71); obeisance to a spiritual preceptor
at the beginning or end of a repetition of the Veda;
[cf. {%añjali.%}] {%—Brahmāñjali-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} one
who has joined the hollowed hands in token of
homage to the Veda. {%—Brahmāṇḍa (˚ma-aṇ˚),%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the egg of Brahmā,’ the mundane egg, the
universe, globe, world; N. of a Purāṇa and of an
Upa-Purāṇa. {%—Brahmāṇḍa-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of
one of the eighteen Purāṇas so called as revealed by
Brahmā, and containing an account of the egg of
Brahmā and the future Kalpas, (this Purāṇa is sup-
posed to be only extant in a number of unauthentic
fragments or Khaṇḍas.) {%—Brahmāṇḍa-bhāṇḍodara%}
{%(˚ḍa-ud˚), am,%} n. the interior of the vessel-like egg
of Brahmā. {%—Brahmātithi (˚ma-at˚), is,%} m., N.
of a Kāṇva (author of the hymn Ṛg-veda VIII. 5).
{%—Brahmātma-bhū (˚ma-āt˚), ūs,%} m. a horse;
[cf. {%brahmāgra-bhū.%}] {%—Brahmādanī (˚ma-ad˚),%}
f. a species of plant {%(= haṃsa-padī)%}. {%—Brahmā-%}
{%darśa (˚ma-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a work by Vijñā-
nācārya. {%—Brahmādi-jātā (˚ma-ad˚),%} f. the river
Godāvarī; (probably an incorrect form for {%brahmā-%}
{%dri-jātā;%} also written {%brāhmādri-jātā.%}) {%—Brah-%}
{%mādi-śīrṣa (˚ma-ād˚),%} N. of a place; (probably
for {%brahmādri-śīrṣa.%}) — 1. {%brahmādya (˚ma-%}
{%ād˚), as, ā, am%} (fr. {%brahma%} + 1. {%ādya,%} q. v.), be-
ginning with Brahmā (Manu I. 50). {%—2. brahmādya%}
{%(˚ma-ād˚), as, ā, am%} (fr. {%brahma%} + 2. {%ādya,%} q. v.),
Ved. to be eaten by priests or Brāhmans. {%—Brah-%}
{%mādri-jātā,%} see {%brahmādi-jātā%}. {%—Brahmādhi-%}
{%gama (˚ma-adh˚), as,%} m. or {%brahmādhigamana,%}
{%am,%} n. application or devotion to sacred study, repe-
tition of the Veda. {%—Brahmādhigamika, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} proceeding or derived from the study or repe-
tition of the Veda. {%—Brahmānanda (˚ma-ān˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘joy in Brahma,’ the rapture of absorption
into the Supreme Spirit, beatitude, bliss; N. of a
man. {%—Brahmānanda-pañcaka, am,%} n., N. of
the third part of Bhāratī-tīrtha's Pañca-daśī. {%—Brah-%}
{%mānanda-bhāratī%} or {%brahmānanda-sarasvatī,%}
{%īs,%} m., N. of the author of several commentaries.
{%—Brahmānanda-vallī,%} f., N. of the second Vallī
of the Taittirīya Upaniṣad. {%—Brahmāpeta (˚ma-%}
{%ap˚), as,%} m., N. of one of the seven Rākṣasas
said to dwell in the sun during the month Māgha.
{%—Brahmābhyāsa (˚ma-abh˚), as,%} m. the study
of the Veda. {%—Brahmāmṛta-varṣiṇī (˚ma-am˚),%}
f., N. of a commentary by Śrī-rāmānanda on the
Brahma-sūtras. {%—Brahmāmbhas (˚ma-am˚), as,%} n.
‘holy water,’ the urine of a cow. {%—Brahmāyaṇa%} or
{%brahmāyana (˚ma-ay˚), as,%} m. ‘refuge of Brahmā,’
resorted to by Brahmā, epithet of Nārāyaṇa; [cf.
{%tridaśāyana.%}] {%—Brahmāyatana (˚ma-āy˚), am,%}
n., Ved. a temple of Brahmā. {%—Brahmāyus (˚ma-%}
{%āy˚), us,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Brahmāraṇya%}
{%(˚ma-ar˚), am,%} n. ‘forest of religious knowledge,’
a grove in which the Vedas are read and explained;
N. of a forest. {%—Brahmārambha (˚ma-ār˚), as,%}
m. beginning to repeat the Veda (Manu II. 71).
{%—Brahmārgha (˚ma-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. worthy
of sacred knowledge; worthy of Brahma; (in the
Kauṣītaki Upaniṣad I. 1, a various reading for
[Page0692-c+ 81]
{%brahma-grāhin,%} q. v.) {%—Brahmārpaṇa (˚ma-%}
{%ar˚), am,%} n. the offering or oblation of sacred
knowledge; N. of a magical spell (see {%manu%}).
{%—Brahmālaṅkāra (˚ma-al˚), as,%} m., Ved. the
ornament of Brahmā, (according to a Scholiast {%=%}
{%hiraṇyagarbha-yogyam maṇḍanam.%}) {%—Brah-%}
{%māvarta (˚ma-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘the holy land,’ an
epithet of the country situated between the rivers
Sarasvatī and Dṛṣadvatī to the N. W. of Hastinā-
pura (Manu II. 17); N. of a Tīrtha; N. of one of
the sons of Ṛṣabha. {%—Brahmāvarta-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha on the Revā or Narmadā river.
{%—Brahmāvāsa (˚ma-āv˚), as,%} m., N. of a Vedānta
philosophical work; (also called Avimukta-nirukti.)
{%—Brahmāsana (˚ma-ās˚), am,%} n. the seat of the
Brahman priest (Ved.); a particular posture suited to de-
vout religious meditation. {%—Brahmāsana-niviṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} seated in the posture called Brahmāsana.
{%—Brahmāstra (˚ma-as˚), am,%} n. ‘Brahmā's mis-
sile,’ N. of a fabled weapon (supposed to be the gift
of Brahmā) which deals infallible destruction; ‘the
imprecation of a Brāhman,’ a term applied to a par-
ticular kind of incantation. {%—Brahmāsya (˚ma-%}
{%ās˚), am,%} n. the mouth of a Brāhman. {%—Brahmā-%}
{%huta (˚ma-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. one to whom
oblations of prayer or devotion have been made.
{%—Brahmāhuti (˚ma-āh˚), is,%} f. the offering of prayer
or devotion; [cf. {%brahma-yajña, brahma-sattra.%}]
{%—Brahmeddha (˚ma-id˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. lighted
or kindled during prayer. {%—Brahme-śaya%} ({%brahme%}
for {%brahmaṇi%}), {%as,%} m. ‘reposing or resting in
Brahman,’ an epithet of Kārttikeya; of Viṣṇu.
{%—Brahmeśvara-tīrtha (˚ma-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of
a Tīrtha on the Revā or Narmadā river. {%—Brah-%}
{%mojjhatā (˚ma-uj˚),%} f. neglecting or forgetting
the Vedas, (according to Kullūka on Manu XI.
56 {%= adhīta-vedasyānabhyāsena vismaraṇam.%})
{%—Brahmoḍumbara,%} another form for {%brahmo-%}
{%dumbara,%} q. v. {%—Brahmottara (˚ma-ut˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} treating particularly of Brahman [cf. {%bṛhad-%}
{%brahmottara-khaṇḍa%}]; consisting chiefly of Brāh-
mans; ({%as%}), m., N. of a superhuman being; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. ‘mostly Brāhmans,’ N. of a people; ({%am%}),
n., N. of a section of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Brah-%}
{%mottara-khaṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of a section of the
Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Brahmottara-purāṇa, am,%} n.,
N. of a supplementary section of the Brahma-Purāṇa.
{%—Brahmoda-tīrtha (˚ma-ud˚), am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha mentioned in the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Brahmo-%}
{%dumbara (˚ma-ud˚),%} N. of a place of pilgrimage.
{%—Brahmodya (˚ma-ud˚), am,%} n. rivalry in sacred
knowledge, playful discussion of theological problems
or enigmas, reciting or explaining the Veda, speaking
or treating of religious knowledge. {%—Brahmopa-%}
{%deśa (˚ma-up˚), as,%} m. instruction in divine know-
ledge. {%—Brahmopaniṣad (˚ma-up˚), t,%} f. mystical
teaching concerning Brahma (Ved.); a mystical
Brāhmanical treatise; N. of an Upaniṣad men-
tioned in the Tantra-sāra; of an Upaniṣad belonging
to the Atharva-veda. {%—Brahmaudana (˚ma-od˚),%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. boiled rice distributed to Brāhmans
and especially to priests at a sacrifice. {%—Brahmau-%}
{%pagava (˚ma-aup˚),%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VI.
1, 88.
<LEND>

<L>34916<pc>0692-c<k1>brahma<k2>brahma
{%Brahma, am,%}¦ n. {%= brahman,%} the Supreme Spirit,
the Absolute; ({%brahma%} is also used for {%brahman%} at
the end of certain compounds, cf. {%ku-brahma, mahā-%}
{%brahma.%})
<LEND>

<L>34917<pc>0692-c<k1>brahmaRaspati<k2>brahmaRaspati
{%Brahmaṇas-pati, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%brahmaṇas,%} gen. c.
of {%brahman + pati%}), {%= bṛhas-pati,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34918<pc>0692-c<k1>brahmaRya<k2>brahmaRya<h>1
1. {%brahmaṇya%}¦ (fr. {%brahman%}), Nom. P. {%brahma-%}
{%ṇyati,%} &c., Ved. to pray, be prayerful or devout, to
be religious.
<LEND>

<L>34919<pc>0692-c<k1>brahmaRya<k2>brahmaRya<h>2
2. {%brahmaṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging
to Brahma or Brahmā; devoted to sacred know-
ledge; fit for a Brāhman; friendly to Brāhmans;
religious, pious; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Kārttikeya;
the planet Saturn; the mulberry tree, Morus Indica;
the plant Saccharum Munjia; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of
Durgā; (Ved.) devotion, (in this sense fr. the Nom.;
according to Sāy. n. pl. {%= brahmāṇi stotrāṇi havir- %}
[Page0693-a+ 81]
{%lakṣaṇāny annāni vā.%}) {%—Brahmaṇya-tā,%} f.
friendliness towards Brāhmans, piety. {%—Brahmaṇya-%}
{%tīrtha, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Brahmaṇya-%}
{%deva, as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Brahmaṇya-%}
{%bhāskara, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34920<pc>0693-a<k1>brahmaRyat<k2>brahmaRyat
{%Brahmaṇyat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. the Nom.), Ved.
praying, prayerful, devout; (Sāy.) {%= stotram icchat.%}
<LEND>

<L>34921<pc>0693-a<k1>brahmARI<k2>brahmARI
{%Brahmāṇī,%}¦ f. the Śakti or personified female
energy of Brahmā, the wife of Brahmā; an epithet
of Durgā, (wrongly written {%brāhmāṇī, brāhmaṇī%});
a kind of perfume ({%= reṇukā%}); a kind of brass ({%=%}
{%rāja-rīti%}); N. of a river, (in this sense also read
{%brāhmaṇī.%})
<LEND>

<L>34922<pc>0693-a<k1>brahmin<k2>brahmin
{%Brahmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ belonging or relating to
Brahma; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu (as possessing
sacred knowledge).
<LEND>

<L>34923<pc>0693-a<k1>brahmizWa<k2>brahmizWa
{%Brahmiṣṭha, as,%}¦ m. (superl. fr. {%brahman%}), a
Brāhman in the highest degree (as an epithet of
learned and pious Brāhmans or princes); an epithet
of Bṛhas-pati (Ved.); N. of a prince; ({%ā%}), f. an
epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>34924<pc>0693-a<k1>brahmI<k2>brahmI
{%Brahmī,%}¦ f. sacred, holy? (used as adj. in Ṛg-
veda IX. 33, 5; Sāy. {%= brāhmaṇa-prerita%}); a kind
of fish, Macrognathus Pancalus (commonly called
Pancal); a kind of vegetable [cf. {%jala-b˚%}]; the
plant Clerodendrum Siphonanthus.
<LEND>

<L>34925<pc>0693-a<k1>brahmIyas<k2>brahmIyas
{%Brahmīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. fr. {%brahman%}),
Ved. more devout, more skilled in sacred texts.
<LEND>

<L>34926<pc>0693-a<k1>brAhma<k2>brAhma
{%Brāhma, as, ī, am,%}¦ holy, sacred, divine; be-
longing or relating to Brahman (Brahma or Brahmā);
belonging or relating to the Brāhmans, Brāhmanical;
deposited with the sacerdotal class (Manu VII. 82);
favourable to the sacerdotal class (as a view or
opinion); relating to sacred knowledge; relating to
the Veda or to sacred study; prescribed by the Veda;
fit for a divine state or condition; {%brāhmaṃ tīrtham,%}
the part of the hand sacred to the Veda, (situated at
the root of the thumb, Manu II. 59); ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a marriage ceremony, (a form of marriage
in which the bride, clothed in a single robe and
otherwise decorated, is bestowed on the bridegroom
without anything being required from him by her
father or friends; described in Manu III. 21, 27);
N. of a man; a patronymic of Nārada; of Kavi; of
Ūrdhva-nābhan; of Raksho-han; ({%ī%}), f. the Śakti
or personified energy of Brahmā, (she is regarded as
one of the eight Mātṛs or divine mothers of created
beings; in Mahā-bh. Śalya-p. 2655 they are said
to attend Skanda); speech, the goddess of speech,
Sarasvatī the wife of Brahmā; a speech, tale, narra-
tive; the wife of a Brāhman; an epithet of Durgā;
the constellation Rohiṇī; a religious practice, pious
usage or custom, ({%brāhmyā,%} according to pious
usage); a woman married according to the {%Brāhmo%}
{%vivāhaḥ%} (Manu III. 37); a female fish or frog (?);
a species of ant; N. of various plants, the moon-
plant, Asclepias Acida ({%= soma-vallarī%} or {%soma-%}
{%vallī%}); a kind of vegetable, Clerodendrum Sipho-
nanthus [cf. {%brahmī%}]; {%= vārāhī-kanda; = hila-%}
{%mocikā;%} a kind of brass; N. of a river; ({%am%}), n.
the part of the hand under the root of the thumb;
sacred study, study of the Veda. {%—Brāhma-deyā,%} f.
a girl to be given in marriage according to the
Brāhma forms; see under {%brāhma%}. {%—Brāhma-%}
{%piṅgā,%} f. (?), silver. {%—Brāhma-purāṇa,%} see {%brah-%}
{%ma-purāṇa%}. {%—Brāhma-muhūrta, as, am,%} m. n.
a particular period of the day (that included between
the fourth Ghaṭikā and the second before sunrise),
dawn; [cf. {%brāhmya-m˚.%}] {%—Brāhma-vivāha, as,%}
m. a particular form of marriage; see under {%brāhma.%}
{%—Brāhmāho-rātra (˚ma-ahas-rā˚), as,%} m. a day
and night of Brahmā, a period of two thousand ages
of the gods or two Kalpas of mortals. {%—Brāhmī-%}
{%kanda, as,%} m. a species of bulbous plant {%(= vārāhī-%}
{%kanda)%}. {%—Brāhmī-kuṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of a sacred
tank or reservoir. {%—Brāhmī-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra. {%—Brāhmī-putra, as,%} m. the son of a woman
married according to the Brāhma ceremony (Manu
III. 27, 37; see under {%brāhma%} above). {%—Brāhmī-%}
{%rasa, as,%} m. the juice of Clerodendrum Siphonan-
thus, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0693-b+ 81]

<L>34927<pc>0693-b<k1>brAhmakfteya<k2>brAhmakfteya
{%Brāhmakṛteya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from
Brahma-kṛta.
<LEND>

<L>34928<pc>0693-b<k1>brAhmagupta<k2>brAhmagupta
{%Brāhmagupta, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%brahma-gupta%}),
N. of a race; (also read {%brahma-gupta.%})
<LEND>

<L>34929<pc>0693-b<k1>brAhmaguptIya<k2>brAhmaguptIya
{%Brāhmaguptīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the Brāhma-
guptas; (also read {%brahmaguptīya.%})
<LEND>

<L>34930<pc>0693-b<k1>brAhmaRa<k2>brAhmaRa
{%Brāhmaṇa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%brahman%}), belonging
or relating to a Brāhman, Brāhmanical, befitting or
becoming a Brāhman; given by a Brāhman; relating
to prayer or religious worship; ({%as%}), m. one who has
divine knowledge, a theologian, priest, a Brāhman
or man belonging to the first of the four original
divisions of the Hindū body; an epithet of Agni;
N. of the twenty-eighth Nakṣatra; ({%ī%}), f. a Brāh-
maness, the wife of a Brāhman; a woman of the
Brāhmanical caste; the shrub Clerodendrum Sipho-
nanthus; a species of grass, Trigonella Corniculata
({%= pṛkkā%}); a kind of vegetable, Ruta Graveolens;
a kind of wasp ({%= varaṭī%}); a kind of large-headed
ant; a kind of lizard with a red tail [cf. {%brāhma-%}
{%ṇikā%}]; N. of a river, {%= brahmāṇī;%} (according
to Nīla-kaṇṭha on Mahā-bh. Āśvamedhika-parva
924) {%= buddhi; (am),%} n. {%= brahma,%} that which is
divine, the divine (Ved.); sacred or divine power
(Ved.); that portion of the Veda, as distinct from
the Mantra portion, which was composed by and for
Brāhmans and contains rules for the employment of
the Mantras or hymns at various sacrifices, detailed
explanations of these sacrifices, their origin and
meaning, with tedious illustrations in the way of
legends and old stories; (this Brāhmaṇa portion of
the Veda is a kind of Hindū Talmud, but like the
Mantra portion it was {%śruta,%} i. e. heard by the sages to
whom it was revealed and is therefore regarded as an
integral part of {%śruti%} or revelation; it is said by
Sāyaṇa to contain two parts, 1. {%vidhi,%} rules or direc-
tions for rites; 2. {%artha-vāda,%} explanatory remarks);
N. of a well-known class of Vedic works in prose
which contain the Brāhmaṇa portion of the Veda as
explained above, (each of the four Vedas has its own
Brāhmaṇa appended to it; the Brāhmaṇa of the
Bahvṛcas or priests of the Ṛg-veda is still preserved
in two works, viz. the Aitareya, sometimes called
Āśvalāyana, consisting of eight Pañcikās or {{pentades->pentads||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}
of Adhyāyas, subdivided into 285 sections or Khaṇḍas,
and the Kauṣītaki-Brāhmaṇa, sometimes called Śāṅ-
khāyana, which two Brāhmaṇas do not follow the order
of the hymns of the Ṛg-veda, but quote them as
they are required for the Hotṛ priest, part of the
Aitareya being also a kind of commentary on the
commencement of the Ṛg-veda, and the latter
portion giving an elaborate description of the Abhi-
sheka ceremony or inauguration of kings; the white
Yajur-veda has the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa, which is per-
haps the most modern and interesting of all these
compositions; and the black Yajur-veda has the Brāh-
maṇa of the Taittirīyas, which though distinct from
its Saṃhitā differs little from it; the Sāma-veda has
eight Brāhmaṇas, the best known of which are the
Prauḍha or Pañca-viṃśa and the Ṣaḍ-viṃśa; the
Atharva-veda has one Brāhmaṇa called Go-patha);
the Soma vessel of the Brahman priest; a society or
assemblage of Brāhmans, a conclave. {%—Brāhmaṇa-%}
{%kalpa, ās,%} m. pl. the Brāhmaṇas and Kalpas (two
kinds of Vedic works closely connected, see {%brāh-%}
{%maṇa, kalpa%}); ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. like a Brāhman.
{%—Brāhmaṇa-ghna, as,%} m. the killer or slayer of
a Brāhman. {%—Brāhmaṇa-cāṇḍāla, as,%} m. ‘a Cāṇ-
ḍāla among Brāhmans,’ a degraded or outcast Brāh-
man (who being married to more than one wife,
allows a wife of a lower caste to wait upon him, see
Manu IX. 87); the son of a Śūdra father by a
Brāhmaṇī mother. {%—Brāhmaṇa-ja, am,%} n. or
{%brāhmaṇa-jāta, am,%} n., Ved. or {%brāhmaṇa-jāti,%}
{%is,%} f. the Brāhmanical caste, sacerdotal class. {%—Brāh-%}
{%maṇa-jātīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the Brāh-
manical caste. {%—Brāhmaṇa-jīvikā,%} f. the occupation
of a Brāhman, means of subsistence for a man of
the sacerdotal class. {%—Brāhmaṇa-tā,%} f. or {%brāhma-%}
{%ṇa-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition of a Brāhman;
the rank or dignity of a Brāhman. {%—Brāhmaṇa- %}
[Page0693-c+ 81]
{%trā,%} ind. among the Brāhmans. {%—Brāhmaṇa-dā-%}
{%rikā,%} f. a Brāhmaṇī girl. {%—Brāhmaṇa-dravya,%}
{%am,%} n. the property of a Brāhman. {%—Brāhmaṇa-%}
{%dveṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} hating Brāhmans; [cf. {%brahma-%}
{%dviṣ.%}] {%—Brāhmaṇa-nindaka, as,%} m. a reviler of
Brāhmans. {%—Brāhmaṇa-patha,%} Ved. (probably) N.
of particular Brāhmaṇas (of which eight are enume-
rated). {%—Brāhmaṇa-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a prince.
{%—Brāhmaṇa-badha,%} see {%brāhmaṇa-vadha.%}
{%—Brāhmaṇa-bruva, as,%} m. calling one's self a
Brāhman, professing or pretending to be a Brāhman,
a Brāhman only in name, a Brāhman who disgraces
his caste, a Brāhman by birth but not by attention to
his duties, one engaged in business or who subsists by
avocations properly limited to the other castes; [cf.
{%dvija-bruva, brahma-bruvāṇa, bruva.%}] {%—Brāh-%}
{%maṇa-bhūyiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} principally consisting
of or containing Brāhmans. {%—Brāhmaṇa-bhojana,%}
{%am,%} n. the feeding of Brāhmans (as a religious act).
{%—Brāhmaṇa-yajña, as,%} m., Ved. a sacrifice in-
tended for Brāhmans. {%—Brāhmaṇa-yaṣṭikā%} or
{%brāhmaṇa-yaṣṭī,%} f. the shrub Clerodendrum Sipho-
nanthus. {%—Brāhmaṇa-rūpa-bhṛt,%} m. bearing the
form of a Brāhman. {%—Brāhmaṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. connected with a Brāhman; possessed of or fur-
nished with a Brāhmaṇa, q. v.; according to a Brāh-
maṇa. {%—Brāhmaṇa-vadha, as,%} m. killing a Brāhman,
the murder of a Brāhman. {%—Brāhmaṇa-vara, as,%}
m., N. of a prince. {%—Brāhmaṇa-varcasa, am,%} n.,
Ved. the splendor or dignity of a Brāhman. {%—Brāh-%}
{%maṇa-vilāpa, as,%} m. ‘the Brāhman's Lament,’ N.
of an episode of the Mahā-bhārata (Ādi-parva 6104),
more usually called Baka-vadha-parva or Vaka-badha-
p˚. {%—Brāhmaṇa-śramaṇa-nyāyāt,%} ind. according
to the phrase ‘a Brāhman Śramaṇa’ (which in-
volves a contradiction). {%—Brāhmaṇa-saṃstha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} belonging to or abiding with a Brāhman.
{%—Brāhmaṇa-sattama, as,%} m. the best of Brāhmans.
{%—Brāhmaṇa-santarpaṇa, am,%} n. {%= brāhmaṇa-%}
{%bhojana,%} q. v. {%—Brāhmaṇa-sarvasva, am,%} n., N.
of a work mentioned in Raghu-nandana's Saṃskāra-
tattva. {%—Brāhmaṇa-sāt,%} ind. in the possession
of the Brāhmans; {%brāhmaṇasāt kṛ,%} to put into
the possession of the Brāhmans, present to the
Brāhmans; {%brāhmaṇasād as,%} to be in the posses-
sion of the Brāhmans, belong to the Brāhmans.
{%—Brāhmaṇa-stuti, is,%} f., N. of a portion of the
Purāṇa-sarvasva. {%—Brāhmaṇa-sva, am,%} n. the pro-
perty of a Brāhman. {%—Brāhmaṇa-hita, as, ā, am,%}
suitable to or fit for a Brāhman. {%—Brāhmaṇāc-%}
{%chaṃsin, ī,%} m. (fr. {%brāhmaṇāt + śaṃsin%}), a par-
ticular priest, the assistant of the Brahman at the
Soma sacrifice. {%—Brāhmaṇācchaṃsi-prayoga, as,%}
m., N. of a work. {%—Brāhmaṇācchaṃsīya, am, ā,%}
n. f., Ved. the office of a Brāhmaṇāc-chaṃsin.
{%—Brāhmaṇācchaṃsya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. relating
to the Brāhmaṇāc-chaṃsin; ({%ā%}), f. the office of a
Brāhmaṇāc-chaṃsin. {%—Brāhmaṇātikrama (˚ṇa-%}
{%at˚), as,%} m. disrespect towards Brāhmans. {%—Brāh-%}
{%maṇātmaka (˚ṇa-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} belonging or
referring to Brāhmans; containing an account of the
Brāhmans. {%—Brāhmaṇādarśana (˚ṇa-ad˚), am,%}
n. absence of Brāhmanical instruction or guidance.
{%—Brāhmaṇāpāśraya (˚ṇa-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} seek-
ing refuge in Brāhmans. {%—Brāhmaṇābhāṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ṇa-ābh˚), am,%} n., N. of a kind of artificial com-
position (contained in the Kavi-kalpa-latā, a compen-
dium of versification by Devendra or Deveśvara).
{%—Brāhmaṇābhyupapatti (˚ṇa-abh˚), is,%} f. pro-
tection or preservation of a Brāhman. {%—Brāhmaṇī-%}
{%gāmin, ī,%} m. the paramour of a Brāhmaṇī woman
or of a Brāhman's wife. {%—Brāhmaṇī-tva, am,%} n.
the being a Brāhmaṇī woman. {%—Brāhmaṇī-sat-%}
{%tamā,%} f. the best of Brāhmaṇī women.
<LEND>

<L>34931<pc>0693-c<k1>brAhmaRaka<k2>brAhmaRaka
{%Brāhmaṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a bad Brāhman, a Brāhman
merely by name; N. of a country inhabited by
warlike Brāhmans [cf. {%brāhmaṇakīya%}]; ({%ikā%}), f.
(probably) a species of lizard; [cf. {%brāhmaṇī%} and
{%brāhmaṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34932<pc>0693-c<k1>brAhmaRakIya<k2>brAhmaRakIya
{%Brāhmaṇakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming from or
relating to the country Brāhmaṇaka.
<LEND>
[Page0694-a+ 79]

<L>34933<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmaRakfteya<k2>brAhmaRakfteya
{%Brāhmaṇakṛteya, as,%}¦ m. (probably) a patrony-
mic from Brāhmaṇa-kṛta; ({%ī%}), f. a metronymic.
<LEND>

<L>34934<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmaRAyana<k2>brAhmaRAyana
{%Brāhmaṇāyana, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a descendant of
a Brāhman; a Brāhman sprung from learned and
holy progenitors.
<LEND>

<L>34935<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmaRika<k2>brAhmaRika
{%Brāhmaṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ derived from or relating
to the Brāhmaṇas.
<LEND>

<L>34936<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmaRI<k2>brAhmaRI
{%Brāhmaṇī.%}¦ See under {%brāhmaṇa,%} p. 693, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34937<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmaRya<k2>brAhmaRya
{%Brāhmaṇya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%brāhmaṇa%}), fit for
Brāhmans; ({%as%}), m. the planet Saturn [cf. 2. {%brah-%}
{%maṇya%}]; ({%am%}), n. the state or rank or business of
a Brāhman, the dignity of a Brāhman, Brāhman-
hood, priesthood, priestly rank or character [cf. {%a-b˚%}];
a multitude or assembly of Brāhmans.
<LEND>

<L>34938<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmadattAyana<k2>brAhmadattAyana
{%Brāhmadattāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from
Brahma-datta.
<LEND>

<L>34939<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmaprajApatya<k2>brAhmaprajApatya
{%Brāhmaprajāpatya,%}¦ coming from or relating to
Brahma-prajāpatī; see Vārttika II. to Pāṇ. VI. 3, 6.
<LEND>

<L>34940<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmarAti<k2>brAhmarAti
{%Brāhmarāti, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Yājñavalkya
from Brahma-rāta; [cf. {%brahma-rātri.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34941<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmARI<k2>brAhmARI
{%Brāhmāṇī,%}¦ f. a wrong form for {%brahmāṇī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>34942<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmi<k2>brAhmi
{%Brāhmi, is, is, i%}¦ (fr. {%brahma%}), Ved. holy, divine.
<LEND>

<L>34943<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmikA<k2>brAhmikA
{%Brāhmikā,%}¦ f. {%= brāhmī%} and {%brāhmaṇa-yaṣṭikā,%}
Clerodendrum Siphonanthus.
<LEND>

<L>34944<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmI<k2>brAhmI
{%Brāhmī.%}¦ See under {%brāhma,%} p. 693, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34945<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmOdanika<k2>brAhmOdanika
{%Brāhmaudanika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%brahmaudana%}), scil.
{%agni,%} a fire on which the rice of Brāhmans is boiled
(Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>34946<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhmya<k2>brAhmya
{%Brāhmya, as, mī, am, = brāhma,%}¦ relating to
Brahman (Brahma or Brahmā) or to the Brāhmans;
({%am%}), n., scil. {%huta,%} worship or veneration paid to
Brāhmans considered as one of the five great sacra-
ments, (in Manu III. 74 {%= dvijāgryārcā%} or {%ma-%}
{%nuṣya-yajña%}); (according to some also) astonish-
ment; {%= dṛśyam%}. {%—Brāhmya-muhūrta, as, am,%}
m. n. dawn, the hour preceding sunrise; see {%brāhma-%}
{%m˚%}. {%—Brāhmya-huta, am,%} n. respect shown to
twice-born guests, especially to Brāhmans; hospitality,
(in Manu III. 74 {%= nṛ-yajña, manuṣya-yajña,%} see
above; and cf. {%brahma-huta.%})
<LEND>

<L>34947<pc>0694-a<k1>brADnAyana<k2>brADnAyana
{#brADnAyana#}¦ {%brādhnāyana.%} See {%brādhnā-%}
{%yanya%} below.
<LEND>

<L>34948<pc>0694-a<k1>brADnAyanya<k2>brADnAyanya
{%Brādhnāyanya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from
Bradhna, q. v.; ({%nās%}), m. pl. the descendants of
Bradhna; ({%nī%}), f. a metronymic. See Pāṇ. V. 3,
113.
<LEND>

<L>34949<pc>0694-a<k1>brAhma<k2>brAhma
{#brAhma#}¦ {%brāhma, brāhmaṇa,%} &c. See p. 693.
<LEND>

<L>34950<pc>0694-a<k1>bruva<k2>bruva
{#bruva#}¦ {%bruva.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34951<pc>0694-a<k1>brU<k2>brU
{#brU#}¦ {%brū%} (a defective verb, borrowing all
but the Pres., Impf., Pot., and Impv. fr. rt.
{%vac%}), cl. 2. P. A. {%bravīti, brūte%} (1st sing. {%bravīmi,%}
ep. {%brūmi,%} 1st du. {%brūvas,%} 1st pl. {%brūmas,%} 3rd pl. {%bru-%}
{%vanti%} or {%āhus%} fr. 3. {%ah,%} the Perf. of which is sometimes
substituted for 2nd and 3rd sing., 2nd and 3rd du., and
3rd pl. of this tense, Pāṇ. III. 4, 84); Impf. {%abra-%}
{%vīt, abrūta%} (ep. {%abravat, bravīt,%} 1st sing. {%abravam%}
or rarely {%abruvam%}); Pot. {%brūyat%} (sometimes
wrongly {%bruyāt%}), {%bruvīta;%} Impv. {%bravītu, brūtām%}
(2nd sing. {%brūhi, brūṣva,%} ep. forms {%bravīhi, bru-%}
{%vadhvam%}); Perf. {%uvāca%} (see rt. {%vac%}); Pres. part.
{%bruvat, bruvāṇa,%} (Ved. forms {%bravasi, bravat, bra-%}
{%vātha, brūtāt,%} part. {%bravat;%} in Nala XVII. 36, a
form {%brūyāsta%} 2nd pl. Prec. occurs, but this is
probably a wrong reading for {%brūyās tat%}); to
say, speak, inform, tell; to speak to (with acc. of
the thing and gen. or dat. or loc. of the person);
to speak about any person or thing (with acc. or
with {%prati%} or {%adhi-kṛtya%} after acc., e. g. {%Śakun-%}
{%talām adhikṛtya bravīmi,%} I speak about Śakun-
talā); to declare, announce, publish, proclaim, pro-
mulgate; to answer; to call or profess one's self
(usually A.); to be called or named (A.); (with
{%anyathā,%} q. v.) to decide wrongly, to pronounce
a wrong sentence in a lawsuit; [cf. rt. {%ru:%} Zend
<nsi>mrū,</nsi> ‘to speak:’ Slav. <nsi>mlu-v-i-ti,</nsi> ‘to make a noise:’
Old Pruss. <nsi>billa,</nsi> ‘I say:’ Lith. <nsi>biloyu:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>bri,</nsi> ‘a
word;’ <nsi>bruidheann,</nsi> ‘talk, speech;’ <nsi>bruideanaim,</nsi>
‘I contend, dispute:’ Scot. <nsi>bruidhean,</nsi> ‘speaking,
speech, talk, tumult;’ <nsi>bruidhneach,</nsi> ‘talkative, lo-
[Page0694-b+ 70]
quacious:’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>brud,</nsi> ‘a chronicle, pro-
phecy;’ <nsi>brudiwr,</nsi> ‘a chronicler, prophet:’ perhaps
also Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥέ-ω,</lang> ‘to speak;’ <lang n="greek">ῥῆ-μα, ῥή-τωρ,</lang> Æol. <lang n="greek">βρή-τωρ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ῥή-τρα;</lang> El. <lang n="greek">ϝράγμα,</lang> ‘a sentence.’]
<LEND>

<L>34952<pc>0694-b<k1>bruva<k2>bruva
{%Bruva, as, ā, am,%}¦ calling one's self by a name
without any real title to it, (at the end of comps.,
e. g. {%Kṣatriya-b˚,%} calling one's self a Kṣatriya;
cf. {%brāhmaṇa-b˚, dvija-b˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>34953<pc>0694-b<k1>bruvat<k2>bruvat
{%Bruvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ speaking, saying.
<LEND>

<L>34954<pc>0694-b<k1>bruvARa<k2>bruvARa
{%Bruvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking, telling, saying;
calling one's self, (at the end of comps., cf. {%brah-%}
{%ma-b˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>34955<pc>0694-b<k1>blI<k2>blI
{#blI#}¦ {%blī,%} Ved. See rt. {%vlī.%}
<LEND>

<L>34956<pc>0694-b<k1>blezka<k2>blezka
{#blezka#}¦ {%bleṣka, am,%} n. a snare, noose.
<LEND>
<H>{#Ba#}

<L>34957<pc>0694-b<k1>Ba<k2>Ba<h>1
{#Ba#} 1¦. {%bha,%} the twenty-fourth consonant of
the Nāgarī alphabet and the fourth letter of the fifth
or labial class, being the aspirate of {%b,%} and said to be
pronounced like <nsi>bh</nsi> in <nsi>cabhorse</nsi>. {%—Bha-kāra, as,%}
m. the letter or sound {%bh.%}
<LEND>

<L>34958<pc>0694-b<k1>Ba<k2>Ba<h>2
{#Ba#} 2¦. {%bha,%} (in Pāṇini's system) a N. given
to the weakest base or base of nouns before the vowel-
terminations beginning with the acc. plur. (i. e. in the
‘weak cases’ or ‘weakest cases’ as they are sometimes
called to distinguish them both from the {%aṅga%} or
‘strong cases,’ {%sarva-nāma-sthāna,%} and the {%pada%} or
‘middle cases’), before feminine affixes, and before
Taddhitas beginning with vowels and {%y.%}
<LEND>

<L>34959<pc>0694-b<k1>Ba<k2>Ba<h>3
{#Ba#} 3¦. {%bha,%} (in prosody) a dactyl. {%—Bha-%}
{%vipulā,%} f. ‘abounding with dactyls,’ a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>34960<pc>0694-b<k1>Ba<k2>Ba<h>4
{#Ba#} 4¦. {%bha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%bhā%}), N. of the
planet Venus or of its regent, {%= śukra;%} semblance,
mere semblance, delusion, error; ({%ā%}), f. light, lustre,
splendor, a ray of light [cf. {%aṇu-bhā%} and 2. {%bhā%}];
likeness, resemblance, (at the end of a comp., cf.
{%agni-bha, guḍa-bhā, tantu-bha%}); the shadow of
a gnomon [cf. {%pala-bhā%}]; ({%am%}), n. a star, a planet,
an asterism, a lunar mansion, Nakṣatra; the num-
ber 27; a sign of the zodiac. {%—Bha-kakṣā,%} f. the
path of the asterisms. {%—Bha-gaṇa, as,%} m. the whole
multitude of stars or constellations, group of Nakṣa-
tras or asterisms ({%= bhā-gaṇa%}); revolution (of the
planets) in the zodiac; the zodiac. {%—Bha-gola, as,%}
m. the starry sphere, vault of heaven. {%—Bha-cakra,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘circle of constellations,’ the zodiac. {%—Bha-%}
{%cakra-nābhi, is,%} f. the centre of the zodiac. {%—Bha-%}
{%datta, as,%} m., N. of an astrologer (also called
Satya). {%—Bha-pañjara, am,%} n. ‘cage of asterisms,’
the zodiac. {%—Bha-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the asterisms,’
the moon. {%—Bha-maṇḍala, am,%} n. {%= bha-cakra,%}
q. v. {%—Bha-latā,%} f., N. of a shrub, Pæderia Fœtida.
{%—Bha-varga, as,%} m. the whole multitude of aste-
risms, the starry host. {%—Bha-vicārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
passing through or present in an asterism. {%—Bha-%}
{%sandhi, is,%} m. ‘point of junction of the asterisms,’
N. of the last quarters of the asterisms Āśleṣā,
Jyeṣṭhā, and Revatī. {%—Bha-samūha, as,%} m. ‘ag-
gregate of the lunar mansions,’ an expression for the
number 27. {%—Bha-sūcaka, as,%} m. ‘indicator of aste-
risms,’ an astrologer. {%—Bhāṃśa (bha-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a
portion of an asterism. {%—Bhena (bha-īna), as,%} m.
‘lord of stars,’ the sun; the moon. {%—Bheśa (bha-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. the regent of an asterism &c.
<LEND>

<L>34961<pc>0694-b<k1>Ba<k2>Ba<h>5
{#Ba#} 5¦. {%bha, as,%} m. (probably onomato-
poetic), a bee.
<LEND>

<L>34962<pc>0694-b<k1>BaMsas<k2>BaMsas
{#BaMsas#}¦ {%bhaṃsas, as,%} n., Ved. a particular
part of the intestine or abdomen.
<LEND>

<L>34963<pc>0694-b<k1>BakkikA<k2>BakkikA
{#BakkikA#}¦ {%bhakkikā,%} f. a cricket; [cf. {%pha-%}
{%ḍiṅgā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34964<pc>0694-b<k1>Bakta<k2>Bakta
{#Bakta#}¦ {%bhakta, bhakti.%} See p. 695, col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page0694-c+ 80]

<L>34965<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakz<k2>Bakz
{#Bakz#}¦ {%bhakṣ%} (probably connected with
rts. {%bhaj%} and {%bhañj%}), cl. 10. P. {%bhakṣa-%}
{%yati,%} and in the later language rarely also cl. 1. P. A.
{%bhakṣati, -te, bhakṣayāmāsa, bhakṣayiṣyati,%}
{%ababhakṣat, bhakṣayitum, bhakṣitum,%} to eat,
eat up, devour, (in these senses rarely used in
the Veda); to drink, quaff (mostly Ved.); to con-
sume, bring to nought, destroy; to use up, waste,
impoverish; to bite: Caus. {%bhakṣayati, -yitum%}
(see Vārttika VIII. to Pāṇ. I. 4, 52), to cause to
eat, feed any one (acc.) with anything (inst.):
Desid. {%bibhakṣayiṣati,%} to desire to eat, wish to
devour; [cf. Zend <nsi>baz,</nsi> ‘to distribute;’ <nsi>bagh-a-s,</nsi>
‘a piece;’ <nsi>bakhsh,</nsi> ‘to attain:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">φαγ-εῖν, φαγ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">ᾶ-ς, φαγ-όν-ες,</lang> perhaps also <lang n="greek">φακός, φάσηλος:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>fām-es</nsi> for <nsi>fag-mes, fa-ba</nsi> for <nsi>fag-ba, bacca</nsi> for
<nsi>bacsa:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>basi,</nsi> ‘a berry,’ fr. <nsi>basya</nsi> = {%bhakṣya,%}
q. v.]
<LEND>

<L>34966<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakza<k2>Bakza
{%Bhakṣa, as,%}¦ m. eating; drinking, quaffing
(mostly Ved.); drink, beverage; (in the later
language) food; ({%as, ā, am%}), having (anything)
for food or for a beverage, eating, drinking, living
upon, (at the end of comps., cf. {%ab-bh˚, dhana-%}
{%bh˚, māṃsa-bh˚, vāyu-bh˚.%}) {%—Bhakṣa-kāra, as,%}
m. ‘food-maker,’ a cook, baker, pastry-cook, con-
fectioner. {%—Bhakṣaṅ-kāra, as,%} m. (fr. {%bhakṣam,%}
acc. of {%bhakṣa,%} or ind. past part. of rt. {%bhakṣ +%}
{%kāra%}), Ved. one who prepares or one who partakes
of food. {%—Bhakṣaṅ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. drunk;
eaten. {%—Bhakṣa-pattrā,%} f. betel-pepper (‘the leaf
of which serves for food’).
<LEND>

<L>34967<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakzaka<k2>Bakzaka
{%Bhakṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who eats, an eater,
eating, one who feeds or lives upon, (often at the end
of comps., e. g. {%māṃsa-bh˚, śasya-bh,%} q. v.); vo-
racious, gluttonous, a gourmand; ({%as%}), m. food (in
{%gaja-bh˚,%} q. v.); ({%ikā%}), f. a meal; eating, (at the
end of a comp., cf. {%ikṣu-bh˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>34968<pc>0694-c<k1>BakzaRa<k2>BakzaRa
{%Bhakṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ eating, one who eats [cf.
{%dāḍima-bh˚, pāpa-bh˚%}]; ({%am%}), n. the act of eating,
eating, drinking, feeding; the being eaten; (Ved.)
a drinking vessel.
<LEND>

<L>34969<pc>0694-c<k1>BakzaRIya<k2>BakzaRIya
{%Bhakṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten, eatable,
edible, proper for food. {%—Bhakṣaṇīya-tā,%} f. the
being edible, eatableness.
<LEND>

<L>34970<pc>0694-c<k1>BakzamARa<k2>BakzamARa
{%Bhakṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ eating, devouring.
<LEND>

<L>34971<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakzayat<k2>Bakzayat
{%Bhakṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ eating, devouring;
consuming, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>34972<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakzayitavya<k2>Bakzayitavya
{%Bhakṣayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten, edible,
to be devoured.
<LEND>

<L>34973<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakzayitf<k2>Bakzayitf
{%Bhakṣayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an eater, one who
eats; [cf. {%bhakṣitṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34974<pc>0694-c<k1>BakzayitvA<k2>BakzayitvA
{%Bhakṣayitvā,%}¦ ind. having eaten, having devoured.
<LEND>

<L>34975<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakzita<k2>Bakzita
{%Bhakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ eaten, eaten up, devoured;
mispronounced in a particular way; ({%am%}), n. food.
{%—Bhakṣita-śeṣa, as,%} m. remnants of food, leav-
ings. {%—Bhakṣitaśeṣāhāra (˚ṣa-āh˚), as,%} m. a
meal of leavings.
<LEND>

<L>34976<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakzitavya<k2>Bakzitavya
{%Bhakṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten, eatable,
edible.
<LEND>

<L>34977<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakzitf<k2>Bakzitf
{%Bhakṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an eater, one who eats;
[cf. {%bhakṣayitṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34978<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakzin<k2>Bakzin
{%Bhakṣin, ī, iṇī, i%}¦ (mostly at the end of comps.),
eating, devouring.
<LEND>

<L>34979<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakzivas<k2>Bakzivas
{%Bhakṣivas, vān, uṣī, vat,%}¦ Ved. one who has
eaten, eating; [cf. {%jakṣivas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>34980<pc>0694-c<k1>Bakzya<k2>Bakzya
{%Bhakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten, eatable, edible,
esculent, fit for food; ({%am%}), n. anything eaten, an
article of food; food in general, especially such as
requires mastication; water; ({%as%}), m. food, (in this
sense probably only erroneously for {%bhakṣa,%} q. v.)
{%—Bhakṣya-kāra%} or {%bhakṣyaṅ-kāra, as,%} m.
‘food-preparer,’ a baker. {%—Bhakṣya-bhakṣaka,%}
{%au,%} m. du. food and the eater. {%—Bhakṣya-vastu,%} n.
edible matter, eatables, victuals, viands. {%—Bhakṣyā-%}
{%bhakṣya (˚ya-abh˚), am,%} n. what may and what
may not be eaten, food allowed and prohibited.
{%—Bhakṣyālābu (˚ya-al˚), us,%} f. a variety of
cucumber ({%= rājālābu%}).
<LEND>

<L>34981<pc>0694-c<k1>BakzyamARa<k2>BakzyamARa
{%Bhakṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being eaten or
devoured; being bitten.
<LEND>
[Page0695-a+ 71]

<L>34982<pc>0695-a<k1>BAkza<k2>BAkza
{%Bhākṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ (probably) habitually eating,
gluttonous ({%= bhakṣā śīlam asya,%} Gaṇa Chattrādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 4, 62).
<LEND>

<L>34983<pc>0695-a<k1>Bakzawaka<k2>Bakzawaka
{#Bakzawaka#}¦ {%bhakṣaṭaka, as,%} m. a variety of
the plant Asteracantha Longifolia.
<LEND>

<L>34984<pc>0695-a<k1>BakzAlI<k2>BakzAlI
{#BakzAlI#}¦ {%bhakṣālī,%} f., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>34985<pc>0695-a<k1>Baga<k2>Baga
{#Baga#}¦ {%bhaga.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>34986<pc>0695-a<k1>Bagana<k2>Bagana
{#Bagana#}¦ {%bha-gana%} for {%bha-gaṇa.%} See under
4. {%bha,%} p. 694, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34987<pc>0695-a<k1>BaganarAya<k2>BaganarAya
{#BaganarAya#}¦ {%bhaganarāya (bhagana + rāya?),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>34988<pc>0695-a<k1>Bagala<k2>Bagala
{#Bagala#}¦ {%bhagala, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>34989<pc>0695-a<k1>Bagavat<k2>Bagavat
{#Bagavat#}¦ {%bhaga-vat.%} See p. 696, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34990<pc>0695-a<k1>BagAla<k2>BagAla
{#BagAla#}¦ {%bhagāla, am,%} n. {%= kapāla,%} a skull.
<LEND>

<L>34991<pc>0695-a<k1>BagAlin<k2>BagAlin
{%Bhagālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ bedecked with skulls; ({%ī%}), m.
an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>34992<pc>0695-a<k1>Bagin<k2>Bagin
{#Bagin#}¦ {%bhagin, bhaginī, bhagīratha.%} See
p. 696, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>34993<pc>0695-a<k1>BageSa<k2>BageSa
{#BageSa#}¦ {%bhageśa.%} See p. 696, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34994<pc>0695-a<k1>Bagna<k2>Bagna
{#Bagna#}¦ {%bhagna.%} See under rt. 2. {%bhañj,%} p. 696.
<LEND>

<L>34995<pc>0695-a<k1>BagnI<k2>BagnI
{#BagnI#}¦ {%bhagnī.%} See p. 696, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>34996<pc>0695-a<k1>BaNkArI<k2>BaNkArI
{#BaNkArI#}¦ {%bhaṅkārī,%} f. a gad-fly.
<LEND>

<L>34997<pc>0695-a<k1>BaNkti<k2>BaNkti
{#BaNkti#}¦ {%bhaṅkti, bhaṅga.%} See p. 697, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>34998<pc>0695-a<k1>BaNgAna<k2>BaNgAna
{#BaNgAna#}¦ {%bhaṅgāna, as,%} m. a kind of carp,
Cyprinus Banganna.
<LEND>

<L>34999<pc>0695-a<k1>BaNgArI<k2>BaNgArI
{#BaNgArI#}¦ {%bhaṅgārī,%} f. a gad-fly; (perhaps
an incorrect form for {%bhaṅkārī%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>35000<pc>0695-a<k1>Baj<k2>Baj
{#Baj#}¦ {%bhaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%bhajati, -te, ba-%}
{%bhāja%} (2nd sing. {%babhaktha%} or {%bhejitha,%}
3rd pl. {%bhejus%}), {%bheje%} (part. {%bhejāna%}), {%bhakṣyati,%}
{%-te%} (in later Sanskrit also {%bhajiṣyati, -te%}), {%abhā-%}
{%kṣīt, abhakta, bhakṣīṣṭa,%} (Vedic forms are,
2nd sing. impv. {%bhakṣi, abhāk, abhākta, bha-%}
{%kṣata%}), {%bhaktum%} (ep. also {%bhajitum%}), to assign,
allot, apportion, dispense, distribute; to share, divide
(e. g. {%bhajeran paitṛkaṃ riktham,%} they may divide
the property of their father); to grant, bestow; to
supply, furnish, provide (Ved.); to receive as a por-
tion, obtain as one's share (A.), share in, partake of
(with acc. and in the earlier language also with gen.);
to obtain, get, take for one's self (A.); take posses-
sion of, recover; to enjoy, possess, have; to enjoy
carnally; to embrace (A.); to be devoted to, betake
one's self to, resort to, have recourse to, go to, fre-
quent (with acc.); to come to, turn towards any
one (with acc.); to favour (A.); prefer, choose,
elect; decide in favour of, declare for; to serve,
honour, revere, worship, adore, esteem, wait upon,
attend upon; to be attached to, love, court (affection);
to fall to the lot of any one (acc.); to apply one's
self to, pursue, practise, cultivate, be engaged in;
to cook, dress (food); to employ, engage. The
above meanings of {%bhaj%} may be variously extended
by connecting it with nouns, e. g. {%patnīm bhaj,%} to
take as a wife; {%āsanam bhaj,%} to take a seat; {%rūpam%}
{%bhaj,%} to assume a form; {%sukham%} (or {%duḥkham%})
{%bhaj,%} to experience pleasure (or pain); {%bhayam%}
{%bhaj,%} to feel terror or alarm; {%maunam bhaj,%} to
become silent; {%mūrchām bhaj,%} to fall into a swoon,
faint away; {%śayanam bhaj,%} to go to bed, lie
down to rest; {%diśo bhaj,%} to flee in all directions,
run away: Caus. {%bhājayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%abhī-%}
{%bhajat, ababhājat,%} to cause to share, give any one
(acc.) a share of anything (gen. or acc., Ved.);
to divide; to cause to go towards, cause to flee,
put to flight, pursue; (according to Vopa-deva) to
cook: Desid. {%bibhakṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%bābhajyate,%}
{%bābhakti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">φώγω, φώγνυμι:</lang> perhaps Lat.
<nsi>fa-mulus, familia:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>anda-bahti, bahtjan:</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>bacan:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>bachan:</nsi> Hib.
[Page0695-b+ 81]
<nsi>fuighim,</nsi> ‘I get, obtain;’ <nsi>fuigheall,</nsi> ‘profit, gain,
remainder;’ <nsi>faghail,</nsi> ‘getting, finding, obtaining.’]
<LEND>

<L>35001<pc>0695-b<k1>Bakta<k2>Bakta
{%Bhakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ assigned, allotted, appor-
tioned, distributed [cf. {%deva-bh˚, bhaga-bh˚%}]; di-
vided; forming a part of, belonging to; served,
worshipped; loved, beloved, liked, (when compounded
in this sense with nouns denoting places especially
preferred by particular plants or particular families,
{%bhakta%} is regarded as an affix, according to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 54); occupied with, engaged in, en-
grossed by, attentive to; attached to, devoted to,
faithfully adhering to, loyal, faithful, respecting,
honouring (with loc. or acc. of the object); dressed,
cooked; ({%as%}), m. a worshipper, adorer; a faithful
attendant, follower, votary; ({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet of
a Śaiva sect (‘the devoted’); epithet of a Vaiṣṇava
sect; ({%am%}), n. a share, portion; a share of food,
food, nourishment; a meal, regular meal [cf. {%adho-%}
{%bh˚, caturtha-bh˚%}]; boiled rice; any eatable grain
boiled with water. {%—Bhakta-kaṃsa, as,%} m. a dish
of food. {%—Bhakta-kara, as,%} m. artificially prepared
incense, incense prepared from various fragrant resins
and perfumes. {%—Bhakta-kāra, as,%} m. ‘food-pre-
parer,’ a cook. {%—Bhakta-cchanda, am,%} n. ({%cchanda%}
for {%chanda%}), desire of food, appetite. {%—Bhakta-jā,%}
f. nectar. {%—Bhakta-tā,%} f. or {%bhakta-tva, am,%} n. the
being a part of anything, belonging to (e. g. {%dhātu-%}
{%bhaktatva,%} the belonging to the root); devotedness,
faith in, attachment to. {%—Bhakta-tūrya, am,%} n.
music played during a meal. {%—Bhakta-da, as,%} or
{%bhakta-dātṛ, tā,%} or {%bhakta-dāyaka, as,%} or
{%bhakta-dāyin, ī,%} m. a giver of meals, supporter,
maintainer. {%—Bhakta-dāsa, as,%} m. ‘food-slave,’ a
servant or slave who receives his meals as a com-
pensation for his services, (according to Rāghavā-
nanda on Manu VIII. 415 {%= bhaktādi-lobhena%}
{%dāsatvaṃ gataḥ.%}) {%—Bhakta-dveṣa, as,%} m. aver-
sion from food, loss of appetite. {%—Bhakta-dveṣin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} feeling an aversion from food, one who
has lost his appetite. {%—Bhakta-pulāka,%} a mouthful
of rice kneaded into a ball. {%—Bhakta-maṇḍa,%} the
scum of boiled rice. {%—Bhaktamaya-stotra, am,%} n.,
N. of a work. {%—Bhakta-mālā,%} f., N. of a work by
Nārāyaṇa-dāsa. {%—Bhakta-ruci, is,%} f. desire of food,
appetite. {%—Bhakta-rocana, as, ī, am,%} exciting
appetite, appetizing. {%—Bhakta-vatsala, as, ā, am,%}
kind to worshippers or faithful attendants. {%—Bhakta-%}
{%śaraṇa, am,%} n., Ved. a receptacle for food, store-
room. {%—Bhakta-śālā,%} f. (probably) a room for the
reception of petitioners, audience-chamber; a din-
ing-hall (?); a store-room (?); an alms-house (?).
{%—Bhakta-siktha%} or {%bhaktasikthaka = bhakta-%}
{%pulāka,%} q. v. {%—Bhaktābhilāṣa (˚ta-abh˚), as,%}
m. desire of food, appetite. {%—Bhaktāmara-stotra%}
{%(˚ta-am˚), am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Bhaktoddeśaka%}
{%(˚ta-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘food-prescriber,’ a particular
official in a Buddhist monastery. {%—Bhaktopasā-%}
{%dhaka (˚ta-up˚), as,%} m. ‘food-dresser,’ a cook.
<LEND>

<L>35002<pc>0695-b<k1>Bakti<k2>Bakti
{%Bhakti, is,%}¦ f. allotment, partition, division, sepa-
ration [cf. {%kṣetra-bh˚%}]; dividing, separating into
(various forms &c., cf. {%bhaṅgī-bh˚%}); division, por-
tion, share; variegation, decoration, embellishment,
ornament; a division of a Sāman (also called Vidhi,
of which sometimes seven, sometimes only five are
enumerated); the being a part of, belonging to; that
which belongs to or is contained in anything else, an
attribute; devotion, devotedness, attachment, loyalty,
loving faith, belief, faith; love, affection, fondness
for; reverence, homage. {%—Bhakti-kara, as, ī, am,%}
see Pāṇ. III. 2, 21. {%—Bhakti-candrodaya (˚ra-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. ‘rise of the moon of devotion,’ N. of
a work. {%—Bhakti-ccheda, as,%} m. ‘distinctive mark
of faith,’ a coloured streak, the separating or distin-
guishing marks of devotion to Viṣṇu, particular
streaks on the forehead, nose, cheeks, breast, and
arms, which denote a follower of the Vaiṣṇava sect.
{%—Bhakti-taraṅgiṇī,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Bhakti-%}
{%tas,%} ind., Ved. accurately. {%—Bhakti-namra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} bent down in devotion, making obeisance.
{%—Bhakti-pūrvam%} or {%bhakti-pūrvakam,%} ind. pre-
ceded by devotion, devoutly, reverentially. {%—Bhakti- %}
[Page0695-c+ 81]
{%prakaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a portion of Halāyudha's
Purāṇa-sarvasva. {%—Bhakti-praśaṃsā-varṇana, am,%}
n., N. of a section of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Bhakti-%}
{%prārthanā,%} f., N. of a portion of the Purāṇa-sarvasva.
{%—Bhakti-bhāj, k, k, k,%} possessing pious faith or
true devotion; firmly attached or devoted to (with
loc.). {%—Bhakti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing faith,
devoted, attached, faithful, loyal; religious, devout;
accompanied by devotion. {%—Bhakti-mārga-nirū-%}
{%paṇa, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Bhakti-muktāvalī,%}
f., N. of a work. {%—Bhakti-yoga, as,%} m. faithful
devotion, loving faith; N. of the first chapter of the
Śiva-gītā. {%—Bhakti-ratnāvalī,%} f., N. of a work on
devotion by Viṣṇu-purī. {%—Bhakti-rasa, as,%} m. a
sense of devotion, feeling of loving faith. {%—Bhakti-%}
{%rasāmṛta-sindhu (˚sa-am˚)%} and {%bhakti-rasā-%}
{%yana, am,%} n., N. of two works. {%—Bhakti-rāga, as,%}
m. affection or predilection for (with loc.). {%—Bhakti-%}
{%vardhinī,%} f., N. of a metrical work on the means
of increasing religious faith. {%—Bhakti-vāda, as,%} m.
declaration of devotion, assurance of attachment.
{%—Bhakti-viśiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} distinguished by
faith or devotion. {%—Bhakti-śata, am,%} n. ‘a hundred
verses on faith,’ N. of a work on devotion by Sūrya.
{%—Bhakti-siddhānta, as,%} m. or {%bhaktisiddhānta-%}
{%vivṛti, is,%} f., N. of two works (‘explanation of the
fundamental doctrines of faith’). {%—Bhakti-sudho-%}
{%daya (˚dhā-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘production of the nectar
of devotion,’ N. of the first part of the Nāradīya-
Purāṇa. {%—Bhakti-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a work con-
taining the aphorisms of Śāṇḍilya. {%—Bhakti-haṃsa,%}
N. of a treatise by Viṭṭhala-dīkṣita on faith in
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Bhakti-hetu-nirṇaya, as,%} m., N. of a
disquisition by Viṭṭhaleśvara on the sources of faith
and devotion. {%—Bhakty-upakrama, as,%} m., N. of
a work mentioned in the Śakti-ratnākara. {%—Bhakty-%}
{%upahṛta, as, ā, am,%} offered with faith.
<LEND>

<L>35003<pc>0695-c<k1>Baktika<k2>Baktika
{%Bhaktika, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to worship or
devotion.
<LEND>

<L>35004<pc>0695-c<k1>Baktila<k2>Baktila
{%Bhaktila, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached, faithful, trusty
(said of a horse).
<LEND>

<L>35005<pc>0695-c<k1>Baktf<k2>Baktf
{%Bhaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an adorer, worshipper;
devotedly attached. {%—Bhaktṛ-tva, am,%} n. the being
an adorer or worshipper, adoration, worship.
<LEND>

<L>35006<pc>0695-c<k1>BaktvA<k2>BaktvA<h>1
1. {%bhaktvā,%}¦ ind. having apportioned or divided.
(For 2. see under rt. 2. {%bhañj,%} p. 696, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>35007<pc>0695-c<k1>Baga<k2>Baga
{%Bhaga, as,%}¦ m. a liberal or wealthy master (‘ap-
portioner of food’), gracious lord, patron (a frequent
epithet of Savitṛ, Ved.); N. of an Āditya (regarded
in the Veda as bestowing wealth, and instituting or
presiding over love and marriage; he is brother of
the Dawn, and the afternoon is peculiarly sacred to
him; his Nakṣatra is the Uttara-Phalgunī, considered
particularly favourable for forming alliances by mar-
riage; according to a legend his eyes were destroyed by
Rudra; Yāska enumerates him among the divinities
of the highest sphere); N. of the sun; of the moon;
of a Rudra; good fortune, happiness, happy lot,
prosperity, affluence [cf. {%dur-bh˚, su-bh˚%}]; dignity,
majesty, distinction; beauty, loveliness; excellence;
amorous pleasure, dalliance; love, affection; the
pudenda (pudendum muliebre); ({%am%}), n. the Nak-
ṣatra called Uttara-Phalgunī; the perinæum of
males; a term applied to a Muhūrta; (according to
native lexicographers) {%= yatna, prayatna, kīrtti,%}
{%yaśas, vairāgya, icchā, jñāna, mukti, mokṣa,%}
{%dharma, strī;%} ({%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}), at the end of
comps., see Gaṇa Bahv-ādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 45; [cf.
Zend <nsi>bagha</nsi> = Old Pers. <nsi>baga,</nsi> ‘a lord:’ Slav. <nsi>bog,</nsi>
‘a lord:’ Lith. <nsi>na-bagas,</nsi> ‘a poor man;’ <nsi>bagotas,</nsi>
‘rich:’ Goth. <nsi>ga-bigs.</nsi>] {%—Bhaga-ghna, as,%} m.
‘slayer of Bhaga,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhaga-tti,%}
{%is,%} f. (fr. {%bhaga + datti,%} cf. {%ā-tta, nī-tta, parā-%}
{%tta, parī-tta, pra-tta, pratī-tta%}), Ved. a gift of
fortune. {%—Bhaga-datta, as,%} m., N. of a prince of
Prāg-jyotiṣa; of a king of Kāmrūp. {%—Bhaga-dā,%}
f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
{%—Bhaga-deva, as,%} m. ‘whose god is the female
organ,’ a libertine, a lustful man. {%—Bhaga-devata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having Bhaga for a deity; ({%ā%}), f. a
hymeneal divinity. {%—Bhaga-daivata, as, ī, am,%}
[Page0696-a+ 81]
having Bhaga for a deity; conferring conjugal feli-
city; ({%am%}), n. the asterism Uttara-Phalgunī.
{%—Bhagadaivata-māsa, as,%} m. the month that has
Bhaga for its deity, i. e. the month Phālguna.
{%—Bhaga-nandā,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs at-
tending on Skanda. {%—Bhaga-netra-ghna, as,%} or
{%bhaganetra-han, ā,%} or {%bhaganetra-nipātana, as,%}
or {%bhaganetra-hara, as,%} or {%bhaganetra-hṛt, t,%} or
{%bhaganetrāpahārin (˚ra-ap˚), ī,%} or {%bhaganetrān-%}
{%taka (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m. ‘the destroyer of the eyes
of Bhaga,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhagan-dara, as,%}
m. (fr. the acc. {%bhagam%}), ‘rending the vulva,’ a
fistula in the pudendum muliebre or in the anus &c.
(from five to eight varieties of this disease are enu-
merated); N. of an ancient sage. {%—Bhaga-pura,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the city of Multan. {%—Bhaga-bhakta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. fortune-favoured, endowed with
prosperity (Sāy. {%= dhana-saṃyukta%}). {%—Bhaga-%}
{%bhakṣaka, as,%} m. ‘living by the vulva,’ a pro-
curer, pander, one who lives by harlotry. {%—Bhaga-%}
{%vat,%} see below. {%—Bhaga-vitta, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Bhaga-vedana, as, ī, am,%} proclaiming
prosperity, announcing connubial felicity. {%—Bhaga-%}
{%han, ā,%} m. the slayer of Bhaga. {%—Bhaga-hārin, ī,%}
m. the destroyer of Bhaga. {%—Bhagākṣi-han (˚ga-%}
{%ak˚), ā,%} m. ‘destroyer of the eyes of Bhaga,’ an
epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhagāṅkura (˚ga-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
the clitoris. {%—Bhagādhāna (˚ga-ādh˚), as, ā, am,%}
bestowing matrimonial felicity, granting wedded bliss,
(according to a Scholiast {%= aiśvaryādhāyaka.%}) {%—Bha-%}
{%gevita%} (according to the Pada-pāṭha {%bhage + avita%}),
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. (perhaps) satisfied with good fortune,
sated with prosperity. {%—Bhageśa (˚ga-īśa), as,%} m.,
Ved. the lord of fortune or prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>35008<pc>0696-a<k1>Bagavat<k2>Bagavat
{%Bhaga-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ possessing fortune, fortu-
nate, prosperous, happy (Ved.); glorious, illustrious,
excellent; venerable, revered, sacred, divine, holy
(as an epithet of gods, demigods, and other holy
personages; frequently found in the voc. {%bhagavan%}
[Ved. {%bhagavas%} and {%bhagos,%} see Vārttika II. to
Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 1, Vopa-deva III. 149, and see Pāṇ.
VIII. 3, 17, where {%bhagos,%} like {%aghos%} and {%bhos,%} is
said to drop the final {%s%} before all vowels and all soft
consonants] as a respectful mode of address, and also
similarly used in the Veda in the nom. with the 3rd
sing. of the verb; with Buddhists {%bhaga-vat%} is
respectfully prefixed to the titles of their sacred
writings); ({%ān%}), m. ‘the holy one,’ ‘the revered
one,’ a deity, a god; an epithet of Viṣṇu; of Śiva;
of a Buddha; of a Bodhi-sattva; of a Jina; ({%atī%}),
f. an epithet of Durgā; of Lakṣmī. {%—Bhagavac-%}
{%chāstra (bhagavat + śāstra), am,%} n., N. of a
section of the Vārāha-Purāṇa. {%—Bhagavatī-gītā,%} f.,
N. of a poem. {%—Bhagavatī-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Bhagavat-tva, am,%} n. the condition of
Bhagavat, rank of Viṣṇu. {%—Bhagavat-padī,%} f. an
epithet of the source of the Gaṅgā (said to have
sprung from an aperture made in the mundane egg
by the toe-nail of Viṣṇu while striding his celebrated
three paces). {%—Bhagavat-pādābhāṣaṇa (˚da-%}
{%ābh˚), am,%} n., N. of an artificial style of writing.
{%—Bhagavaty-aṅga, am,%} n., N. of the fifth of the
twelve sacred writings of the Jainas. {%—Bhagavat-sva-%}
{%tantra-tā,%} f., N. of a work maintaining that Kṛṣṇa
is supreme and uncontrolled in volition and authority.
{%—Bhagavad-arcana-prastāva, as,%} m., N. of the
seventy-third chapter of the Uttara-khaṇḍa or fifth
part of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Bhagavadarcana-%}
{%māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of the seventy-eighth chapter
of the Uttara-khaṇḍa or fifth part of the Padma-
Purāṇa. {%—Bhagavad-upanayana, am,%} n., N. of
the 100 and 101st chapters of the fourth part of the
Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Bhagavad-gītā,%} f. ({%upa-%}
{%niṣad%} being sometimes supplied, or in the fem. pl.
{%bhagavad-gītā upaniṣadas%}), ‘the mystical doctrine
sung or declared by Bhagavat, i. e. Kṛṣṇa,’ N. of
a celebrated episode of the great epic poem called
Mahā-bhārata, (it is really a comparatively modern
philosophical poem interpolated in the Bhīṣma-parva
and generally divided into eighteen chapters com-
mencing at 1. 830, or the twenty-fifth chapter of the
[Page0696-b+ 81]
Bhīṣma-p., and ending at 1. 1532; it is in the form
of a dialogue between Kṛṣṇa, acting as Arjuna's
charioteer, and Arjuna himself, in which the Pan-
theism of the Vedānta with a tinge of the Sāṅkhya
is combined with the later principle of {%bhakti%} or
devotion to Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Being, Arjuna
being therein admonished that the renunciation of
the world ought not to involve the avoidance of
action or the neglect of professional duties); ({%am%}),
n. that which is sung or proclaimed by Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Bhagavadgītā-gūḍhārtha-dīpikā (˚ḍha-ar˚),%} f.,
N. of a metrical commentary on the Bhagavad-gītā
by Madhu-sūdana Sarasvatī. {%—Bhagavadgītā-bhā-%}
{%va-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a metrical commentary
on the Bhagavad-gītā by Sadānanda Vyāsa. {%—Bha-%}
{%gavadgītā-sārārtha-saṅgraha (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a metrical commentary on the Bhagavad-gītā
by Jaya-rāma Tarka-vāgīśa. {%—Bhagavad-guṇa-%}
{%varṇana, am,%} n., N. of the fifty-seventh chapter
of the fourth part of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa.
{%—Bhagavad-dṛśa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. like the Su-
preme, resembling the Supreme. {%—Bhagavad-dru-%}
{%ma, as,%} m. ‘Bhagavat's (i. e. probably Buddha's)
tree,’ (perhaps) a term applied to the sacred fig-tree.
{%—Bhagavad-bhakti-nirṇaya, as,%} m., N. of an
essay by Ananta-deva on faith and devotion. {%—Bha-%}
{%gavad-bhakti-ratnāvalī,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Bha-%}
{%gavad-bhakti-rasāyana (˚sa-ay˚), am,%} n., N. of
a work by Madhu-sūdana Sarasvatī, consisting of me-
morial verses treating of faith and devotion, on the
basis of the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa, accompanied by a
prose exposition. {%—Bhagavad-bhakti-vilāsa, as,%}
m., N. of a work. {%—Bhagavad-bhāskara,%} N. of a
work on law by Nīla-kaṇṭha; [cf. {%bhagavanta-%}
{%bhāskara.%}] {%—Bhagavad-yauvanodgama (˚na-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m., N. of the seventh chapter of the
Kṛṣṇa-krīḍita. {%—Bhagavad-rāta, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Bhagavad-viśeṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Bhagavan-nanda-saṃvāda, as,%} m., N. of the
seventy-fourth to the seventy-ninth chapters of the
Kṛṣṇa-khaṇḍa or fourth part of the Brahma-vaivarta-
Purāṇa. {%—Bhagavan-nāma-kaumudī,%} f., N. of a
poetical treatise by Lakṣmīdharācārya on the merit
of repeating the name of the Deity. {%—Bhagavannā-%}
{%makaumudī-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a metrical
commentary by Ananta-deva on the preceding work.
{%—Bhagavannāma-māhātmya-grantha-saṅgraha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a metrical composition by Raghunā-
thendra Yati on the merit of repeating the name
of the Deity. {%—Bhagavan-maya, as, ī, am,%} wholly
devoted to Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>35009<pc>0696-b<k1>BagavadIya<k2>BagavadIya
{%Bhagavadīya, as,%}¦ m. a worshipper of Bhagavat,
i. e. of Viṣṇu; [cf. {%bhavadīya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35010<pc>0696-b<k1>Bagavanta<k2>Bagavanta
{%Bhagavanta%}¦ or {%bhagavanta-deva, as,%} m., N.
of a prince, the son of Sāhi-deva and a patron of
Nīla-kaṇṭha. {%—Bhagavanta-bhāskara,%} N. of a
work; [cf. {%bhagavad-bhāskara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35011<pc>0696-b<k1>Bagas<k2>Bagas
{%Bhagas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. {%= bhaga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35012<pc>0696-b<k1>Bagin<k2>Bagin
{%Bhagin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ prosperous, happy, fortunate;
grand, splendid; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a commentator on
the Amara-kośa, (in this sense an abbreviated form of
{%bhagīratha%} below); ({%inī%}), f. a sister (‘the happy
or fortunate one’); a woman in general. {%—Bhagi-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} most prosperous; most splendid,
finest, most perfect. {%—Bhaginī-pati, is,%} m. or {%bha-%}
{%ginī-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. a sister's husband. {%—Bhaginī-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. a sister's son.
<LEND>

<L>35013<pc>0696-b<k1>BaginikA<k2>BaginikA
{%Bhaginikā,%}¦ f. a little sister.
<LEND>

<L>35014<pc>0696-b<k1>BaginI<k2>BaginI
{%Bhaginī,%}¦ f. See under {%bhagin%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35015<pc>0696-b<k1>BaginIya<k2>BaginIya
{%Bhaginīya, as,%}¦ m. (probably) a sister's son.
<LEND>

<L>35016<pc>0696-b<k1>BagIraTa<k2>BagIraTa
{%Bhagīratha, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps fr. {%bhagin + ratha%}),
N. of an ancient king (son of Dilīpa and great-grand-
son of Sagara, king of Ayodhyā; he brought down
the sacred Gaṅgā from heaven to earth by the aid
of Śiva, who is fabled to have received the stream
on his head; he then conducted this river to the
ocean, in order to purify the ashes of his ancestors,
the 60,000 sons of Sagara, who were reduced to
ashes by Viṣṇu in the form of Kapila when they
dug through the earth, then under his protection,
in seeking to recover the sacrificial horse which had
[Page0696-c+ 79]
been stolen from their father, see Rāmāyaṇa I. 36-
44); N. of a commentator on the Amara-kośa and
author of the metrical commentary Nyāya-līlāvatī-
bhāva-prakāśa; N. of an architect of recent date; of
a mountain. {%—Bhagīratha-prayatna, as,%} m. ‘Bha-
gīratha's labour,’ a term for any Herculean effort or
exertion. {%—Bhagīratha-sutā,%} f. ‘daughter of Bhagī-
ratha,’ an epithet of Gaṅgā or the Ganges. {%—Bha-%}
{%gīrathopākhyāna (˚tha-up˚), am,%} n., N. of the
thirty-fifth chapter of the Vāsiṣṭha-rāmāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>35017<pc>0696-c<k1>Bagos<k2>Bagos
{%Bhagos.%}¦ See {%bhaga-vat,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35018<pc>0696-c<k1>BagnI<k2>BagnI
{%Bhagnī,%}¦ f. {%= bhaginī,%} a sister.
<LEND>

<L>35019<pc>0696-c<k1>Bajaka<k2>Bajaka
{%Bhajaka, as,%}¦ m. an apportioner, distributer [cf.
{%cīvara-bh˚%}]; one who serves or worships, a wor-
shipper.
<LEND>

<L>35020<pc>0696-c<k1>Bajat<k2>Bajat
{%Bhajat, an, antī, at,%}¦ apportioning, distributing,
dividing; serving, honouring.
<LEND>

<L>35021<pc>0696-c<k1>Bajana<k2>Bajana
{%Bhajana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sharing; possession;
serving, service, adoring, adoration, worship, rever-
ing, reverence; the act of waiting or attending upon.
{%—Bhajana-tā,%} f. devotion, adoration. {%—Bhajana-%}
{%vārika, as,%} m. a particular official in a Buddhist
monastery. {%—Bhajanāmṛta (˚na-am˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>35022<pc>0696-c<k1>BajanIya<k2>BajanIya
{%Bhajanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be loved; worthy of
worship, to be adored, adorable, venerable; to be
waited upon.
<LEND>

<L>35023<pc>0696-c<k1>BajamAna<k2>BajamAna
{%Bhajamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ apportioning, dividing,
sharing; enjoying, possessing; loving, honouring,
courting; waiting on, serving; fitting, meet, appro-
priate; N. of various princes.
<LEND>

<L>35024<pc>0696-c<k1>Baji<k2>Baji
{%Bhaji, is,%}¦ m., N. of a prince; (also read {%bhajin,%}
{%bhajina.%})
<LEND>

<L>35025<pc>0696-c<k1>Bajitavya<k2>Bajitavya
{%Bhajitavya, as, ā, am, = bhajanīya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>35026<pc>0696-c<k1>Bajin<k2>Bajin
{%Bhajin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>35027<pc>0696-c<k1>Bajenya<k2>Bajenya
{%Bhajenya, as, ā, am,%}¦ worthy of adoration,
adorable.
<LEND>

<L>35028<pc>0696-c<k1>Bajya<k2>Bajya
{%Bhajya, as, ā, am,%}¦ divisible, to be divided or
shared; to be worshipped or adored, adorable.
<LEND>

<L>35029<pc>0696-c<k1>BajyamAna<k2>BajyamAna
{%Bhajyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being divided or shared;
being worshipped or adored.
<LEND>

<L>35030<pc>0696-c<k1>BajeraTa<k2>BajeraTa
{#BajeraTa#}¦ {%bhajeratha, as,%} m., Ved. (according
to the Pada-pāṭha {%bhaje + aratha%}), occurring in
Ṛg-veda X. 66, 2, (a doubtful word.)
<LEND>

<L>35031<pc>0696-c<k1>BaYj<k2>BaYj<h>1
{#BaYj#} 1¦. {%bhañj,%} cl. 10. P. {%bhañjayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to speak; to shine; [cf. Hib.
<nsi>faighim,</nsi> ‘I speak, talk;’ <nsi>faighle, faighleadh,</nsi>
‘words, talk, conversation;’ <nsi>faigh,</nsi> ‘a prophet.’]
<LEND>

<L>35032<pc>0696-c<k1>BaYj<k2>BaYj<h>2
{#BaYj#} 2¦. {%bhañj,%} cl. 7. P. {%bhanakti, ba-%}
{%bhañja, bhaṅkṣyati, abhāṅkṣīt,%}
{%bhaṅktum,%} to break, fracture, break down, break
to pieces, shatter, split; to break into, make a
breach in (a fortress, with acc.); to interrupt, check,
arrest, suspend, foil, frustrate; to disappoint: Pass.
{%bhajyate,%} Aor. {%abhañji, abhāji,%} see Pāṇ. VI. 4,
33: Caus. {%bhañjayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ababhañjat:%}
Desid. {%bibhaṅkṣati:%} Intens. {%bambhajyate, bam-%}
{%bhaṅkti;%} [perhaps the original form was {%bhrañj;%}
cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥήγνυμι, ῥηγμίν, ῥαγή,</lang> perhaps also <lang n="greek">ἄγνυμι</lang>
Lat. <nsi>frang-o:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>brak, ga-brika, ga-brak,</nsi>
<nsi>ga-brekum, brik-an:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>brak-an, brec-an:</nsi>
Lettish <nsi>braks,</nsi> ‘fragile:’ Hib. <nsi>brisim,</nsi> ‘I break,
dismember, disunite;’ <nsi>brit,</nsi> ‘fraction;’ <nsi>breadach,</nsi>
‘broken.’]
<LEND>

<L>35033<pc>0696-c<k1>BaktvA<k2>BaktvA<h>2
2. {%bhaktvā,%}¦ ind. having broken; (a less common
form than {%bhaṅktvā,%} q. v. For 1. {%bhaktvā%} see
p. 695, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>35034<pc>0696-c<k1>Bagna<k2>Bagna
{%Bhagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken, broken down, broken
to pieces, knocked to pieces, shattered, shivered,
torn; broken into; routed, defeated, conquered,
vanquished; marred, impaired, demolished, destroyed;
interrupted, checked, arrested, suspended, foiled,
frustrated; disappointed; ({%am%}), n. fracture of the
leg. {%—Bhagna-krama, am,%} n. the breaking of
grammatical order, violation of grammatical con-
struction. {%—Bhagna-ceṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} broken in
effort, disappointed, defeated. {%—Bhagna-jānu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} broken-kneed, having a fractured leg. {%—Bhag-%}
{%na-tāla,%} N. of a particular air (in music). {%—Bhagna- %}
[Page0697-a+ 81]
{%daṃṣṭra, as, ā, am,%} ‘broken-tusked,’ having the
tusks or fangs broken. {%—Bhagna-danta, as, ā, am,%}
‘broken-teethed,’ one whose teeth are broken. {%—Bhag-%}
{%na-darpa, as, ā, am,%} one whose pride is broken,
crest-fallen, humbled, humiliated. {%—Bhagna-nidra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one whose sleep is broken, roused from
sleep. {%—Bhagna-pādarkṣa (˚da-ṛk˚), am,%} n. a
collective epithet of six Nakṣatras (viz. Punar-vasū,
Uttarāṣāḍhā, Kṛttikā, Uttara-Phalgunī, Pūrva-Bhā-
drapadā, and Viśākhā, which six Nakṣatras are
sometimes called Puṣkarāḥ). {%—Bhagna-pārśva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} suffering from pain in the sides, having a
pain in the side. {%—Bhagna-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}
‘broken-backed, ’ having a broken or bent back;
coming before or in front of (?). {%—Bhagna-pra-%}
{%krama, as,%} m. broken or interrupted order, dis-
order, confusion; want of method or arrangement
in composition; [cf. {%bhagna-krama.%}] {%—Bhagna-%}
{%prakrama-tā,%} f. ‘broken arrangement,’ (in rhetoric)
N. of a particular fault in diction, the use of a word
which does not correspond to one used before.
{%—Bhagna-pratijña, as, ā, am,%} one who has
broken a promise. {%—Bhagna-bāhu, us, us, u,%}
broken-armed. {%—Bhagna-bhāṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} one
who has broken an earthenware pot or a number of
pots and pans. {%—Bhagna-manas, ās, ās, as,%} ‘broken-
hearted,’ having a broken heart, discouraged, disap-
pointed. {%—Bhagna-manoratha, as, ā, am,%} one
whose wishes are disappointed, frustrated or disap-
pointed in expectation. {%—Bhagna-māna, as, ā, am,%}
one whose honour is tarnished, disgraced, dishonoured.
{%—Bhagna-viṣāṇaka, as, ā, am,%} ‘broken-horned,’
having broken horns or tusks. {%—Bhagna-vrata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has broken a vow, faithless to vows.
{%—Bhagna-śakti, is, is, i,%} one whose strength is
broken, shattered in strength. {%—Bhagna-śṛṅga,%}
{%as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} ‘broken-horned,’ having broken
horns. {%—Bhagna-saṅkalpa, as, ā, am,%} one whose
designs are foiled or whose plans are frustrated.
{%—Bhagna-sandhika, am,%} n. buttermilk {%(= ghola).%}
{%—Bhagnātman (˚na-āt˚), ā,%} m. ‘broken-bodied,’
an epithet of the Moon (as having been cut in two
pieces by the trident of Śiva for violating the wife
of Bṛhas-pati). {%—Bhagnāpad (˚na-āp˚), t, t, t,%}
one who has overcome misfortune, one who has
conquered calamity. {%—Bhagnāśa (˚na-āś˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one whose hopes or expectations are broken,
disappointed in expectation, discouraged. {%—Bhagnot-%}
{%sāha (˚na-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose energy is
impaired, broken in energy. {%—Bhagnodyama (˚na-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose efforts are frustrated,
baffled in one's endeavours, frustrated. {%—Bhagnoru-%}
{%daṇḍa (˚na-ūru-), as, ā, am,%} ‘broken-thighed,’
having the bone of the thigh fractured.
<LEND>

<L>35035<pc>0697-a<k1>BaNkti<k2>BaNkti
{%Bhaṅkti, is,%}¦ f. breaking, fracture.
<LEND>

<L>35036<pc>0697-a<k1>BaNktf<k2>BaNktf
{%Bhaṅktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who breaks, breaking,
a breaker.
<LEND>

<L>35037<pc>0697-a<k1>BaNktvA<k2>BaNktvA
{%Bhaṅktvā,%}¦ ind. having broken, having broken
into.
<LEND>

<L>35038<pc>0697-a<k1>BaNga<k2>BaNga
{%Bhaṅga, as,%}¦ m. breaking, splitting, shattering,
breaking down, breaking up; a break, breach; frac-
ture [cf. {%asthi-bh˚%}]; chasm, fissure, division; break-
ing up, the being broken up; breaking to pieces,
separation, analysis, taking to pieces; a piece broken
off, detached portion, fragment [cf. {%mṛṇāla-bh˚%}];
falling to pieces, fall, downfall, ruin, destruction;
decay (e. g. {%kṣaṇa-bh˚,%} momentary decay; with
Buddhists, the constant decay taking place in the
universe, constant flux or change); defeat, overthrow
(opposed to {%jaya%}), discomfiture; interruption, stop-
page, impediment, suspension, non-performance [cf.
{%daṇḍa-bh˚%}]; frustration, disappointment; rejection,
refusal [cf. {%praṇaya-bh˚%}]; humiliation; derogation,
abatement; taking to flight, flight; going, motion;
panic, fear; bowing, bending, stretching (e. g. {%gātra-%}
{%bh˚,%} the bending or stretching of the limbs); knit-
ting (the brow); a bend, fold (of a garment); a
wave; paralysis, palsy, disease; fraud, deceit, false-
hood; a water-course, canal; hemp; N. of a Nāga;
{%= bhaṅgi,%} a tortuous course, roundabout mode of
acting or speaking; (Ved.) an epithet of Soma,
[Page0697-b+ 80]
(according to Sāy. {%bhajyate grāvabhiḥ,%} or {%śatrū-%}
{%ṇām bhañjakaḥ%}); ({%ā%}), f. hemp (Cannabis Sativa);
the plant Convolvulus Turpethum; an intoxicating
beverage prepared from the hemp plant; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἀγή;</lang> Lith. <nsi>bangà,</nsi> ‘a wave, flood.’] {%—Bhaṅga-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} causing a breach, making a fissure;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of A-vikṣit; of a son of
Sattra-jit. {%—Bhaṅga-kāra, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Bhaṅga-naya, as,%} m. removal of obstacles,
removing a difficulty in argument or reasoning.
{%—Bhaṅga-bhāj, k, k, k,%} experiencing a fracture,
being broken. {%—Bhaṅga-vāsā,%} f. turmeric. {%—Bhaṅ-%}
{%ga-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of a man; [cf. {%bhaṅgya-%}
{%śravas.%}] {%—Bhaṅga-sārtha, as, ā, am,%} deceitful,
fraudulent, dishonest. {%—Bhaṅgā-kaṭa, am,%} n. the
pollen of hemp. {%—Bhaṅgāsura (˚ga-as˚), as,%} m.,
see {%bhāṅgāsuri%}. {%—Bhaṅgā-svana, as,%} m., N. of
a Rājarṣi.
<LEND>

<L>35039<pc>0697-b<k1>BaNgi<k2>BaNgi
{%Bhaṅgi, is,%}¦ or {%bhaṅgī,%} f. breaking, fracture,
breach, division; bending; incurvation; undulation;
a wave; a crooked path, tortuous course; current;
a roundabout mode of acting or speaking, circum-
locution; irony, wit, repartee; mere appearance or
semblance, pretext, disguise, trick, fraud, deception;
modesty; a step; an interval. {%—Bhaṅgi-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} possessing waves or undulations, wavy,
crisp, curled. {%—Bhaṅgī-bhakti, is,%} f. division or
separation into (a series of) waves or wave-like
steps.
<LEND>

<L>35040<pc>0697-b<k1>BaNgin<k2>BaNgin
{%Bhaṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fragile, transient, transitory,
perishable; (in law) defeated or cast in a suit.
{%—Bhaṅgi-bhāva, as,%} m. the state of being bent,
frowning aspect.
<LEND>

<L>35041<pc>0697-b<k1>BaNgiman<k2>BaNgiman
{%Bhaṅgiman, ā,%}¦ m. fracture, separation, breach;
incurvation, curliness; perversity, foolishness; disguise,
deceit; irony, wit, repartee.
<LEND>

<L>35042<pc>0697-b<k1>BaNgIla<k2>BaNgIla
{%Bhaṅgīla, am,%}¦ n. defect in the organs of sense.
<LEND>

<L>35043<pc>0697-b<k1>BaNgura<k2>BaNgura
{%Bhaṅgura, as, ā, am,%}¦ apt to break, fragile, brittle;
frail, transient, transitory, evanescent, of short dura-
tion, perishable; changeable, changeful, variable;
crooked, bent, wrinkled; curved, curled, crisped;
fraudulent, crafty, dishonest; ({%as%}), m. a bend or
reach of a river, the elbow of a river; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
two plants {%(= ati-viṣā, priyaṅgu)%}. {%—Bhaṅgura-%}
{%tā,%} f. fragility, transitoriness. {%—Bhaṅgura-niścaya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} forming changeable resolutions, vacillating.
{%—Bhaṅgurā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. (perhaps) in-
triguing, crafty, treacherous.
<LEND>

<L>35044<pc>0697-b<k1>BaNguraya<k2>BaNguraya
{%Bhaṅguraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%bhaṅgurayati, -yitum,%}
to break to pieces, destroy; to crisp, curl (trans.).
<LEND>

<L>35045<pc>0697-b<k1>BaNgya<k2>BaNgya
{%Bhaṅgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be broken, fit to be
broken, breakable: ({%am%}), n., scil. {%kṣetra,%} a field
of hemp. {%—Bhaṅgya-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of a man;
[cf. {%bhaṅga-śravas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35046<pc>0697-b<k1>BaYjaka<k2>BaYjaka
{%Bhañjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who breaks, break-
ing, a breaker; what breaks or severs, what divides
or destroys; ({%ikā%}), f. breaking, (in comps. affixed to
the names of plants to denote particular games, cf.
{%uddālaka-puṣpa-bh˚, śāla-bh˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>35047<pc>0697-b<k1>BaYjat<k2>BaYjat
{%Bhañjat, an, atī, at,%}¦ breaking, breaking up, de-
stroying.
<LEND>

<L>35048<pc>0697-b<k1>BaYjana<k2>BaYjana
{%Bhañjana, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who breaks, breaking,
a breaker, destroyer; one who checks or arrests, one
who frustrates or brings to nought; causing violent
pain; ({%as%}), m. falling to pieces or decay of the
teeth; ({%am%}), n. the act of breaking, destroying, de-
molishing, shattering; routing; paining, afflicting;
interrupting, checking, arresting, frustrating; remov-
ing, dispelling (a doubt, difficulty, &c.). {%—Bhañ-%}
{%janā-giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>35049<pc>0697-b<k1>BaYjanaka<k2>BaYjanaka
{%Bhañjanaka, as,%}¦ m. a particular disease of the
mouth, contortion of the lips and decay of the
teeth.
<LEND>

<L>35050<pc>0697-b<k1>BaYjaru<k2>BaYjaru
{%Bhañjaru, us,%}¦ m. a tree growing near a temple.
<LEND>

<L>35051<pc>0697-b<k1>BaYjA<k2>BaYjA
{%Bhañjā,%}¦ f. a N. of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>35052<pc>0697-b<k1>BaYjin<k2>BaYjin
{%Bhañjin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ breaking, removing, dispelling;
[cf. {%mada-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35053<pc>0697-b<k1>BaYjI<k2>BaYjI
{%Bhañjī%}¦ in {%śāla-bh˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35054<pc>0697-b<k1>BaYjipattrikA<k2>BaYjipattrikA
{#BaYjipattrikA#}¦ {%bhañjipattrikā,%} f. the plant
Salvinia Cucullata; [cf. {%phañjipattrikā.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0697-c+ 78]

<L>35055<pc>0697-c<k1>Baw<k2>Baw
{#Baw#}¦ {%bhaṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%bhaṭati, bhaṭitum,%} to
hire; to nourish, foster, cherish, maintain;
cl. 10. P. {%bhaṭayati, -yitum,%} to speak, converse:
Caus. {%bhāṭayati, -yitum,%} to hire.
<LEND>

<L>35056<pc>0697-c<k1>Bawa<k2>Bawa
{%Bhaṭa, as,%}¦ m. (probably connected with {%bhṛta,%}
q. v.), a mercenary, hired soldier, soldier in general,
warrior, combatant; N. of a particular degraded
tribe [cf. {%bhaṭṭa, bhaḍa, bhaṇḍa%}]; an outcast,
barbarian; a demon; N. of a person (perhaps of
a Nāga-rāja); ({%ā%}), f. coloquintida. {%—Bhaṭa-bhaṭa-%}
{%mātṛ-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Bha-%}
{%ṭārka (˚ṭa-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of the founder of the
Valabhī dynasty.
<LEND>

<L>35057<pc>0697-c<k1>BawaBawAya<k2>BawaBawAya
{#BawaBawAya#}¦ {%bhaṭabhaṭāya%} (an onomatopoetic
word), Nom. A. {%bhaṭabhaṭāyate,%} &c., to make a
gurgling sound, gurgle.
<LEND>

<L>35058<pc>0697-c<k1>Bawitra<k2>Bawitra
{#Bawitra#}¦ {%bhaṭitra, as, ā, am,%} roasted on a spit.
<LEND>

<L>35059<pc>0697-c<k1>BawkalA<k2>BawkalA
{#BawkalA#}¦ {%bhaṭkalā,%} f., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>35060<pc>0697-c<k1>Bawwa<k2>Bawwa
{#Bawwa#}¦ {%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m. (probably connected
with {%bhartṛ,%} q. v.), lord, my lord (as a title of
respect by which a prince is addressed); a title affixed
to the names of learned Brāhmans (the proper name
being sometimes omitted, e. g. {%Bhaṭṭa = Kumārila-%}
{%bhaṭṭa,%} a respectful designation of Kumārila; cf.
{%ārya-bh˚, kedāra-bh˚, govinda-bh˚%}); any learned
man, doctor or philosopher; a title applied to the
son of a Brāhman; best, excellent; an authority (?);
an enemy (?); N. of a particular mixed caste of
hereditary panegyrists, a bard, encomiast; in Rāmā-
yaṇa I. 12, 11, incorrectly for {%bhaṭa,%} q. v.; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of an enchantress. {%—Bhaṭṭa-kārikā, ās,%} f. pl.,
N. of particular Kārikās. {%—Bhaṭṭa-kedāra, as,%} m.
{%= kedāra-bhaṭṭa,%} q. v. {%—Bhaṭṭa-divākara,%} N. of
a man; [cf. {%divā-kara.%}] {%—Bhaṭṭa-dīpikā,%} f., N.
of a work ({%= bhāṭṭa-dīpikā,%} q. v.). {%—Bhaṭṭa-nā-%}
{%yaka, as,%} m., N. of a poet; of a rhetorician.
{%—Bhaṭṭa-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of various men.
{%—Bhaṭṭa-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Bhaṭṭa-%}
{%pāda, ās,%} m. pl. ‘the feet of Bhaṭṭa,’ the venerable
Kumārila; [cf. {%pāda.%}] {%—Bhaṭṭa-prayāga, as,%} m.
‘the chief place of sacrifice,’ the spot where the Ya-
munā falls into the Gaṅgā. {%—Bhaṭṭa-phalguṇa,%} see
{%phalguṇa%}. {%—Bhaṭṭa-balabhadra, as,%} m., N. of
the author of a commentary on the Brahma-sid-
dhānta; of the author of a logical treatise; [cf.
{%bala-bhadra.%}] {%—Bhaṭṭa-bījaka, as,%} m., N. of a
poet. {%—Bhaṭṭa-bhāskara-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a
commentator. {%—Bhaṭṭa-madana, as,%} m., N. of an
author; [cf. {%madana.%}] {%—Bhaṭṭa-malla, as,%} m.,
N. of a grammarian. {%—Bhaṭṭa-yaśas, ās,%} m., N. of
a poet. {%—Bhaṭṭa-vārttika,%} N. of a work. {%—Bhaṭṭa-%}
{%viśveśvara (˚va-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhaṭṭa-%}
{%śaṅkara = bhaṭṭa-śrī-śaṅkara,%} q. v. {%—Bhaṭṭa-%}
{%śiva, as,%} m., N. of a philosopher mentioned in the
Śaṅkara-vijaya. {%—Bhaṭṭa-śrī-śaṅkara, as,%} m., N.
of an astronomer. {%—Bhaṭṭa-someśvara (˚ma-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author mentioned in Kamalākara-
bhaṭṭa's Śūdra-dharma-tattva. {%—Bhaṭṭa-svāmin, ī,%}
m., N. of a poet mentioned in the Śārṅgadhara-
paddhati. {%—Bhaṭṭācārya (˚ṭa-āc˚), as,%} m. a title
given to a learned Brāhman or any great teacher or
celebrated instructor, (especially, according to the
Śabda-kalpa-druma) one versed in the doctrine of
Tutāta and Udayanācārya; a great doctor or philo-
sopher; a frequent designation of Kumārila-bhaṭṭa
[cf. {%bhaṭṭa%}]; N. of a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya.
{%—Bhaṭṭācārya-cūḍāmaṇi, is,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Bhaṭṭācārya-śatāvadhāna, as,%} m. an epithet
of Rāghavendra. {%—Bhaṭṭālaṅkāra (˚ṭa-al˚), as,%}
m., N. of a metrical commentary by Ananta-bhaṭṭa
on the Mīmāṃsā-nyāya-prakāśa or Āpadevī. {%—Bhaṭ-%}
{%ṭotpala (˚ṭa-ut˚), as,%} m., N. of a Scholiast of the
tenth century who wrote a commentary on the
works of Varāha-mihira. {%—Bhaṭṭopama (˚ṭa-up˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a learned Buddhist.
<LEND>

<L>35061<pc>0697-c<k1>BawwAra<k2>BawwAra
{%Bhaṭṭāra, as,%}¦ m. noble lord (affixed as an honour-
able title or distinction to proper names); ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), worshipful, reverend, entitled to homage or
[Page0698-a+ 76]
respect; [cf. {%dilha.%}] {%—Bhaṭṭāra-haricandra, as,%}
m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>35062<pc>0698-a<k1>BawwAraka<k2>BawwAraka
{%Bhaṭṭāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ venerable, respectable,
entitled to reverence or to homage; ({%as%}), m. a
sage, a Muni or saint; noble lord, an epithet of
gods and of great and learned men (especially applied
to Buddhist teachers); (in dramatic language) a king;
the sun; Ardea Nivea?; ({%ikā%}), f. a noble lady,
a goddess, tutelary deity; [cf. {%jayā-bhaṭṭārikā.%}]
{%—Bhaṭṭāraka-vāra, as,%} m. ‘day of the great lord,
i. e. of the sun,’ Sunday.
<LEND>

<L>35063<pc>0698-a<k1>Bawwi<k2>Bawwi
{%Bhaṭṭi, is,%}¦ m., N. of the author of the epic poem
described below. {%—Bhaṭṭi-kāvya, am,%} n. ‘the poem
of Bhaṭṭi,’ N. of an artificial epic poem by Bhaṭṭi
(celebrating the exploits of Rāma and illustrating
Sanskrit grammar by the systematic application of all
possible forms and constructions; cf. {%bhartṛ-hari%}).
<LEND>

<L>35064<pc>0698-a<k1>Bawwika<k2>Bawwika
{%Bhaṭṭika, as,%}¦ m., N. of the mythical progenitor
of copyists (son of Citra-gupta and grandson of
Brahmā).
<LEND>

<L>35065<pc>0698-a<k1>BawwinI<k2>BawwinI
{%Bhaṭṭinī,%}¦ f. (a Prākṛt feminine fr. {%bhartṛ,%} per-
haps adopted into Sanskrit from its resemblance to
{%patnī%}), a woman of high rank, a queen (but one
not crowned or consecrated like the Devī); the wife
of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>35066<pc>0698-a<k1>BawwIya<k2>BawwIya
{%Bhaṭṭīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to Bhaṭṭa, i. e. to
Ārya-bhaṭṭa. {%—Bhaṭṭīya-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a com-
mentary on Ārya-bhaṭṭa's explanation of the Sūrya-
siddhānta.
<LEND>

<L>35067<pc>0698-a<k1>Bawwoji<k2>Bawwoji
{%Bhaṭṭoji, is,%}¦ m., N. of a grammarian, author of
the Siddhānta-kaumudī. {%—Bhaṭṭoji-dīkṣita%} or
{%bhaṭṭoji-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m. {%= bhaṭṭoji.%}
<LEND>

<L>35068<pc>0698-a<k1>Baqa<k2>Baqa
{#Baqa#}¦ {%bhaḍa, as,%} m., N. of a particular
mixed caste; (also read {%bhaṇḍa.%}) {%—Bhaḍa-harī-%}
{%mātṛ-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>35069<pc>0698-a<k1>Baqita<k2>Baqita
{#Baqita#}¦ {%bhaḍita, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>35070<pc>0698-a<k1>Baqila<k2>Baqila
{#Baqila#}¦ {%bhaḍila, as,%} m. an attendant, ser-
vant; a hero; N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his
descendants.
<LEND>

<L>35071<pc>0698-a<k1>BaR<k2>BaR
{#BaR#}¦ {%bhaṇ%} (perhaps a Prākṛt form con-
nected with rt. {%bhāṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%bhaṇati,%}
{%babhāṇa%} (2nd sing. {%babhaṇitha%}), {%abhāṇīt, bha-%}
{%ṇitum,%} to sound; to utter an articulate sound, speak,
say; to call, name: Caus. {%bhāṇayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%abībhaṇat, ababhāṇat.%}
<LEND>

<L>35072<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRa<k2>BaRa
{%Bhaṇa%}¦ in {%dur-bhaṇa, as, ā, am,%} difficult to be
told or mentioned.
<LEND>

<L>35073<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRana<k2>BaRana
{%Bhaṇana, as, ī, am,%}¦ speaking, announcing, pro-
claiming.
<LEND>

<L>35074<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRanIya<k2>BaRanIya
{%Bhaṇanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be told or said.
<LEND>

<L>35075<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRita<k2>BaRita
{%Bhaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, uttered, spoken,
said; ({%am%}), n. talking, talk, conversation.
<LEND>

<L>35076<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRiti<k2>BaRiti
{%Bhaṇiti, is,%}¦ f. speech, talking, talk, discourse;
(incorrectly {%bhaṇati.%})
<LEND>

<L>35077<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRitf<k2>BaRitf
{%Bhaṇitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a speaker, speaking, talking.
<LEND>

<L>35078<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRitvA<k2>BaRitvA
{%Bhaṇitvā,%}¦ ind. having spoken, having said.
<LEND>

<L>35079<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRw<k2>BaRw
{#BaRw#}¦ {%bhaṇṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%bhaṇṭayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to deceive.
<LEND>

<L>35080<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRwAkI<k2>BaRwAkI
{#BaRwAkI#}¦ {%bhaṇṭākī,%} f. the plant Solanum
Melongena; (also read {%bhaṇḍākī.%})
<LEND>

<L>35081<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRwuka<k2>BaRwuka
{#BaRwuka#}¦ {%bhaṇṭuka, as,%} m. the plant Calo-
santhes Indica; (also read {%bhaṇḍuka.%})
<LEND>

<L>35082<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRq<k2>BaRq
{#BaRq#}¦ {%bhaṇḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%bhaṇḍate, bhaṇḍi-%}
{%tum,%} to chide, upbraid, reprove; to deride,
mimic; to jest; to speak; cl. 10. and 1. P. {%bhaṇḍa-%}
{%yati, bhaṇḍati,%} to be fortunate; to render fortunate,
prosper (trans.); to do an auspicious act.
<LEND>

<L>35083<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRqa<k2>BaRqa
{%Bhaṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. a jester, buffoon, actor, mime,
mimic; N. of a particular mixed caste [cf. {%bhaḍa%}];
({%ā%}), f. in {%śveta-bh˚,%} q. v. {%—Bhaṇḍa-tapasvin, ī,%}
m. a hypocritical ascetic. {%—Bhaṇḍa-hāsinī,%} f. a
harlot, prostitute.
<LEND>

<L>35084<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRqaka<k2>BaRqaka
{%Bhaṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a water wag-tail.
<LEND>

<L>35085<pc>0698-a<k1>BaRqana<k2>BaRqana
{%Bhaṇḍana, am,%}¦ n. armour, mail; war, battle;
evil, wickedness, mischief.
<LEND>
[Page0698-b+ 78]

<L>35086<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqara<k2>BaRqara
{%Bhaṇḍara, as,%}¦ m. a particular kind of combat
({%= kalaha-viśeṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>35087<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqAkI<k2>BaRqAkI
{%Bhaṇḍākī.%}¦ See {%bhaṇṭākī.%}
<LEND>

<L>35088<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqikA<k2>BaRqikA
{%Bhaṇḍikā,%}¦ f. {%= bhaṇḍī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35089<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqijaNGa<k2>BaRqijaNGa
{%Bhaṇḍi-jaṅgha, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35090<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqita<k2>BaRqita
{%Bhaṇḍita, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>35091<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqin<k2>BaRqin
{%Bhaṇḍin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35092<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqira<k2>BaRqira
{%Bhaṇḍira, as,%}¦ m. {%= bhaṇḍila,%} Mimosa Seeressa;
({%ī%}), f. {%= bhaṇḍī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35093<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqila<k2>BaRqila
{%Bhaṇḍila, as, ā, am,%}¦ fortunate, happy, prosperous,
auspicious; ({%as%}), m. fortune, welfare; a messenger;
an artizan, workman; the plant Mimosa Seeressa
({%= śirīṣa%}); N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his
descendants.
<LEND>

<L>35094<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqI<k2>BaRqI
{%Bhaṇḍī,%}¦ f. the plant Rubia Munjista {%(= mañ-%}
{%jiṣṭhā)%}. {%—Bhaṇḍī-puṣpa-nikāśa, as, ā, am,%}
resembling the flowers of Rubia Munjista.
<LEND>

<L>35095<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqItakI<k2>BaRqItakI
{%Bhaṇḍītakī = bhaṇḍī%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>35096<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqIra<k2>BaRqIra
{%Bhaṇḍīra, as,%}¦ m. Amaranthus Polygonoides;
Mimosa Seeressa; N. of a lofty Nyagrodha tree
upon the Go-vardhana mountain; ({%ī%}), f. {%= bhaṇḍī,%}
q. v. {%—Bhaṇḍīra-latikā,%} f. {%= bhaṇḍī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35097<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqIla<k2>BaRqIla
{%Bhaṇḍīla, as,%}¦ m. {%= bhaṇḍī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35098<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRquka<k2>BaRquka
{%Bhaṇḍuka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Calosanthes Indica;
(also written {%bhaṇḍūka;%} cf. {%bhaṇṭuka.%})
<LEND>

<L>35099<pc>0698-b<k1>BaRqUka<k2>BaRqUka
{%Bhaṇḍūka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Calosanthes Indica;
a kind of fish.
<LEND>

<L>35100<pc>0698-b<k1>Badanta<k2>Badanta
{#Badanta#}¦ {%bhadanta, bhadāka.%} See under rt.
{%bhand%} below.
<LEND>

<L>35101<pc>0698-b<k1>Badra<k2>Badra
{#Badra#}¦ {%bhadra.%} See under rt. {%bhand%} below.
<LEND>

<L>35102<pc>0698-b<k1>Ban<k2>Ban
{#Ban#}¦ {%bhan%} (a various reading for rt.
{%bhaṇ%}), cl. 1. P. {%bhanati, bhanitum,%} Ved.
to sound, resound; to cry aloud, shout.
<LEND>

<L>35103<pc>0698-b<k1>Banandana<k2>Banandana
{#Banandana#}¦ {%bhanandana, as,%} m., N. of a man;
(wrongly for {%bhalandana.%})
<LEND>

<L>35104<pc>0698-b<k1>Band<k2>Band
{#Band#}¦ {%bhand%} or {%bhad,%} cl. 1. A. {%bhandate,%}
{%bhanditum,%} Ved. to be greeted with
praise, be hailed with acclamations, receive applause;
to be fortunate or prosperous; to be excellent; to be
glad; to exhilarate; to shine; to make fortunate, to
honour, worship: Caus. {%bhandayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to prosper.
<LEND>

<L>35105<pc>0698-b<k1>Badanta<k2>Badanta
{%Bhadanta, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%bhaṇḍ,%}
col. 1), a term of respect applied to a Buddhist; a
Buddhist mendicant. {%—Bhadanta-gopa-deva%} and
{%bhadanta-goṣaka%} or {%bhadanta-ghoṣaka, as,%} m.,
N. of two Buddhist teachers. {%—Bhadanta-jñāna-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Bhadanta-dharma-%}
{%trāta%} and {%bhadanta-rāma, as,%} m., N. of two Bud-
dhist teachers. {%—Bhadanta-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a
poet. {%—Bhadanta-śrī-lābha, as,%} m., N. of a Bud-
dhist teacher (also called Śrī-lābha).
<LEND>

<L>35106<pc>0698-b<k1>BadAka<k2>BadAka
{%Bhadāka, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%bhand%}), for-
tune, prosperity; ({%as, ā, am%}), auspicious.
<LEND>

<L>35107<pc>0698-b<k1>Badra<k2>Badra
{%Bhadra, as, ā, am,%}¦ good, well, prosperous,
happy, auspicious (e. g. {%bhadrā diś,%} the auspicious
quarter, the south); favourable, propitious, gracious,
kind, friendly, benevolent, pious, excellent, ({%bhadro%}
{%nṛpatiḥ,%} a good or gracious king; often used
in voc. sing. m. {%bhadra%} as a familiar mode of
address, in the sense of ‘my good sir,’ ‘my dear
fellow;’ and in voc. sing. f. {%bhadre,%} ‘my good
lady,’ ‘my dear madam’); pleasant, enjoyable,
desirable, laudable, commendable; lovely, beauti-
ful; beloved, dear; specious, plausible, hypocritical,
any hypocrite or impostor, (according to Kullūka on
Manu IX. 258 {%= kalyāṇācāra-pracchanna-pāpa%});
({%am%}), n. prosperity, happiness, welfare, good fortune,
fortune, ({%bhadrāṇi,%} n. pl. {%= bhadram,%} good for-
tune; {%bhadram a-vyāhatam,%} uninterrupted happi-
ness or prosperity; {%bhadraṃ te,%} prosperity to thee!
{%bhadraṃ vaḥ,%} happiness to you! may it be well
with you! frequently mere forms politely used in
conversation, and sometimes equivalent to our expres-
sions ‘if you please,’ ‘with all deference or respect
for you,’ &c.); gold; iron, steel; a fragrant grass,
Cyperus Rotundus [cf. {%bhadra-musta%}]; a particular
[Page0698-c+ 81]
posture in sitting ({%= bhadrāsana%}); N. of the
seventh of the eleven astronomical periods called
Karaṇas; of various Sāmans; ({%as%}), m. a bullock; a
term applied to a particular kind of elephant; N. of
one of the elephants which support the world; a
water wag-tail [cf. {%bhadra-nāman%}]; a heap, multi-
tude (?); Nauclea Cadamba; Tithymalus Antiquorum;
an epithet of Śiva; N. of one of the twelve sons of
Viṣṇu and one of the Tuṣita deities in the Svā-
yambhava Manv-antara; (with Jainas) N. of the
third of the nine white Balas; N. of a son of Vasu-
deva and Pauravī; of a son of Vasu-deva and Devakī;
of a son of Upacāru-mat; of an actor; of a friend
of Bāṇa; of a son of Kṛṣṇa; an epithet of mount
Meru; (with Buddhists) N. of a particular world;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of divinities under the
third Manu; N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a cow; N.
of various plants ({%= kṛṣṇā, anantā, rāsnā,%}
{%pra-sāriṇī, jīvantī, aparājitā, nīlī, balā,%}
{%śamī, vacā, dantī, haridrā, śveta-dūrvā, kāś-%}
{%marī, sārivā-viśeṣa, kākoḍumbarikā%}); Gmelina
Arborea; a kind of metre, the first and third lines
of which are ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯, and the second
and fourth ¯¯˘¯¯ &c.; N. of the second, seventh,
and twelfth days of the lunar fortnight; of a goddess;
of a Buddhist woman; of Dākṣāyaṇī in Bhadre-
śvara; of a Vidyā-dharī; of a daughter of Surabhi;
of a wife of Vasu-deva; of the wife of Vaiśravaṇa;
of a daughter of Soma and wife of Utathya; of a
daughter of Raudrāśva and the Apsaras Ghṛtācī; of
a Kākṣīvatī and wife of Vyuṣitāśva; of a daughter
of Meru and wife of Bhadrāśva; of a daughter of
Sruta-kīrtti and wife of Kṛṣṇa; of various rivers;
of a river described as rising on the northern summit
of Meru and flowing through Uttara-kuru into the
northern ocean; the celestial Ganges; {%bhadram,%}
{%bhadrayā, bhadrebhis,%} ind., Ved. auspiciously,
favourably, propitiously, happily, well, rightly; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>fastus</nsi> for <nsi>fad-tus, fastigium, fastidium,</nsi>
<nsi>festivus:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>bats, bat-iza,</nsi> ‘better;’ <nsi>bat-ista,</nsi>
‘best:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>bet:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>baz,</nsi> ‘better;’
<nsi>beziro, bezisto,</nsi> ‘best:’ Goth. <nsi>ga-bat-non, bot-a,</nsi>
<nsi>bot-jan:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>bót:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>feodhas,</nsi> ‘better;’
<nsi>badhach,</nsi> ‘famous;’ perhaps <nsi>maith:</nsi> Cambro-Brit.
<nsi>mad,</nsi> ‘good.’] {%—Bhadra-kaṇṭa, as,%} m. the plant
Asteracantha Longifolia. {%—Bhadra-kanyā,%} f., N.
of the mother of Maudgalyāyana. {%—Bhadra-kapila,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%bhadra%} and {%kapila.%}]
{%—Bhadra-karṇikā,%} f., N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in Go-
karṇa. {%—Bhadra-karṇeśvara (˚ṇa-īś˚),%} N. of a
sacred bathing-place. {%—Bhadra-kalpa, as,%} m. (with
Buddhists) ‘the good or beautiful Kalpa,’ N. of the
present age; of a Sūtra work. {%—Bhadrakalpika,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Bhadra-kāra, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people. {%—Bhadra-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%} causing
prosperity or welfare, propitious, prosperous. {%—Bha-%}
{%dra-kālī,%} f., N. of a goddess; (in the later mytho-
logy) a form of Durgā [cf. Manu III. 89]; N. of
one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda; a species
of plant ({%= gandholī%}); N. of a village on the
right bank of the Ganges. {%—Bhadrakālī-ka-%}
{%vaca, am,%} n., N. of the thirty-seventh chapter of
the Gaṇeśa-khaṇḍa or third part of the Brahma-
vaivarta-Purāṇa. {%—Bhadrakālī-pūjā-yantra, am,%}
n., N. of a mystical diagram mentioned in Kṛṣṇā-
nanda's Tantra-sāra. {%—Bhadrakālī-manu, us,%} m.,
N. of the ninth chapter of the Pheṭ-kāriṇī-tantra.
{%—Bhadrakālī-mantra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a chapter
of the Tantra-sāra. {%—Bhadra-kāśī,%} f. {%= bhadra-%}
{%mustā,%} q. v. {%—Bhadra-kāṣṭha, am,%} n. the wood
of Pinus Deodora or of Pinus Longifolia. {%—Bhadra-%}
{%kumbha, as,%} m. ‘auspicious jar,’ a golden jar filled
with water from a holy place or from the Ganges
(used especially at the consecration of a king).
{%—Bhadra-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. causing prosperity or
welfare; (with Jainas) N. of the twenty-fourth Arhat
of the future Ut-sarpiṇī. {%—Bhadra-gaṇita, am,%} n.
the construction of magical squares or diagrams.
{%—Bhadra-gandhikā,%} f. the plant Cyperus Rotun-
dus ({%= mustaka%}); the creeping plant Asclepias Pseu-
[Page0699-a+ 81]
dosarsa. {%—Bhadra-gaura, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Bhadra-ghaṭa%} or {%bhadra-ghaṭaka, as,%} m. a
vessel from which a lottery is drawn. {%—Bhadraṅ-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} auspicious, propitious, causing pros-
perity or happiness; ({%as%}), m., N. of a person;
({%am%}), n., N. of a town in Vidarbha. {%—Bhadraṅ-%}
{%karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} causing prosperity or happiness,
prosperous. {%—Bhadra-cāru, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Bhadra-cūḍa, as,%} m. the plant Euphor-
bia Tirucalli. {%—Bhadra-ja, as,%} m. the plant Wrightia
Antidysenterica. {%—Bhadra-jaya, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Bhadra-jāni, is, is, i,%} Ved. having a beau-
tiful wife. {%—Bhadra-tara, as, ā, am,%} more pros-
perous, happier; better. {%—Bhadra-taruṇī,%} f. the
plant Trapa Bispinosa {%(= kubjaka)%}. {%—Bhadra-tā,%}
f. or {%bhadra-tva, am,%} n. honesty, probity; pros-
perity, good fortune. {%—Bhadra-tuṅga,%} N. of a
sacred bathing-place. {%—Bhadra-turaga, am,%} n., N.
of a Varṣa. {%—Bhadra-danta, as,%} m., N. of an
elephant. {%—Bhadra-dantikā,%} f. a species of Croton.
{%—Bhadra-dāru, us, u,%} m. n. a sort of pine, Pinus
Deodora; Pinus Longifolia. {%—Bhadradārv-ādika,%}
{%as,%} m. a class of thirty-nine medicinal plants and
substances. {%—Bhadra-deha, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Bhadra-dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of an island.
{%—Bhadra-nāman, ā,%} m. the wood-pecker; the
water wag-tail; [cf. {%bhadra.%}] {%—Bhadra-nāmikā,%}
f. a species of plant {%(= trāyamāṇā)%}. {%—Bhadra-%}
{%nidhi, is,%} m. ‘treasure of fortune,’ a term applied
to a costly vessel offered to Viṣṇu. {%—Bhadra-%}
{%pada, am,%} n. a kind of metre; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the
third and fourth lunar asterisms ({%= proṣṭha-pada;%}
cf. {%nakṣatra%}). {%—Bhadrapadā-yoga, as,%} m.,
N. of the twenty-eighth chapter of Bhaṭṭotpala's
commentary on Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-saṃhitā.
{%—Bhadra-parṇā,%} f. the shrub Pæderia Fœtida.
{%—Bhadra-parṇī,%} f. the tree Gmelina Arborea; the
shrub Pæderia Fœtida. {%—Bhadrapāda, as, ī, am,%}
born under the Nakṣatra Bhadra-padā. {%—Bhadra-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Bhadra-pī-%}
{%ṭha, am,%} n. a beautiful chair, splendid seat, throne;
a kind of winged insect, (perhaps incorrectly for a
form {%bhadra-kīṭa.%}) {%—Bhadra-pura, am,%} n., N. of
a city; [cf. {%bhadrā-nagara.%}] {%—Bhadra-balana,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= bala-bhadra,%} N. of the elder brother of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Bhadra-balā,%} f. the shrub Pæderia Fœ-
tida; Sida Cordifolia {%(= balā)%}. {%—Bhadra-bāhu,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of a son of Vasu-deva by Rohiṇī (Pau-
ravī); of a king of Magadha; (with Jainas) N. of
one of the six Śruta-kevalins; of the author of certain
Kalpa-sūtras; of the author of the Jātakāmbho-nidhi;
({%ūs%}), f., N. of a woman. {%—Bhadrabāhu-śāstra, am,%}
n., N. of a work mentioned in Nārāyaṇa's Praśnār-
ṇava. {%—Bhadrabāhu-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of an author
mentioned in Cāritra-siṃha-gaṇi's Shaḍdarśana-vṛtti.
{%—Bhadra-bhuja, as, ā, am,%} ‘auspicious-armed,’
whose arms confer prosperity. {%—Bhadra-bhūṣaṇī,%}
f., N. of a deity. {%—Bhadra-manas, ās,%} f., N. of
the mother of the elephant Airāvata; [cf. {%bhadra-%}
{%reṇu.%}] {%—Bhadra-manda, as,%} m. epithet of a parti-
cular kind of elephant; (also read {%bhadra-mandra;%}
cf. {%bhadra, manda, mandra.%}) {%—Bhadramandra-%}
{%mṛga, as,%} m. epithet of a particular kind of ele-
phant. {%—Bhadra-mallikā,%} f. a species of plant, Cu-
cumis Madraspatanus {%(= gavākṣī)%}. {%—Bhadra-mā-%}
{%tṛ, tā,%} f. a good or beautiful mother. {%—Bhadra-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} one whose face (i. e. whose
look) confers prosperity; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga.
{%—Bhadra-muñja, as,%} m. a plant akin to Saccha-
rum Sara. {%—Bhadra-musta%} or {%bhadra-mustā,%} f. a
variety of Cyperus. {%—Bhadramustaka, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%bhadra-musta%}. {%—Bhadra-mṛga, as,%} m. epithet
of a particular kind of elephant. {%—Bhadra-yava,%}
{%am,%} n. the seed of Wrightia Antidysenterica {%(=%}
{%indra-yava)%}. {%—Bhadra-yāna, as,%} m., N. of a
man; (commonly written {%bhadrāyana.%}) {%—Bha-%}
{%drayānīya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of the school founded by
Bhadra-yāna; (commonly written {%bhadrāyanīya.%})
{%—Bhadra-yoga, as,%} m., N. of a subdivision of the
Purāṇa-sarvasva; of an astrological Yoga. {%—Bhadra-%}
{%ratha, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Bhadra-ruci, is,%}
[Page0699-b+ 81]
m., N. of a man. {%—Bhadra-rūpā,%} f., N. of a
woman. {%—Bhadra-reṇu, us,%} m., N. of Indra's ele-
phant; (also read {%bhadra-veṇu;%} cf. {%bhadra-ma-%}
{%nas.%}) {%—Bhadra-rohiṇī,%} f. a species of plant. {%—Bha-%}
{%dra-vaṭa, as,%} m. ‘the auspicious or beautiful fig-
tree,’ N. of a place. {%—Bhadra-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
fraught with good, auspicious; ({%atī%}), f. a wanton,
courtezan (?Ved.); the tree Gmelia Arborea; N. of
a daughter of Kṛṣṇa; of a wife of Madhu (with
the patronymic Pauravī); N. of a female elephant;
({%at%}), n. the tree Pinus Deodora; N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Bhadra-varman, ā,%} m. ‘Double Arabian Jasmine,’
N. of a man. {%—Bhadra-vallikā,%} f. the plant Hemi-
desmus Indicus. {%—Bhadra-vallī,%} f. Jasminum Sam-
bac; Gærtnera Racemosa, a large Bengal creeper;
the plant Vallaris Dichotomus. {%—Bhadra-vasana,%}
{%am,%} n. splendid apparel, magnificent array. {%—Bha-%}
{%dra-vāc, k, k, k,%} Ved. speaking auspiciously. {%—Bha-%}
{%dra-vācya, am,%} n., Ved. wishing well, congratu-
lation. {%—Bhadra-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. uttering
auspicious cries (said of a bird). {%—Bhadra-vinda,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Bhadra-virāj,%}
{%ṭ,%} f. a kind of metre. {%—Bhadra-vihāra, as,%} m., N.
of a Buddhist monastery. {%—Bhadra-veṇu,%} another
form for {%bhadra-reṇu,%} q. v. {%—Bhadra-vrāta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. having or forming a happy assem-
blage. {%—Bhadra-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a man with
the patronymic Kauśika; [cf. {%bhādraśarmi.%}] {%—Bha-%}
{%dra-śākha, as,%} m., N. of a form of Skanda.
{%—Bhadra-śāla-vana = bhadra-sāla-vana,%} q. v.
{%—Bhadra-śīla, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhadra-%}
{%śoci, is, is, i,%} Ved. beautifully shining, flashing,
coruscating, glittering. {%—Bhadra-śaunaka, as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Bhadra-śraya%} or {%bhadra-śriya,%}
{%am,%} n. sandal-wood. {%—Bhadra-śravas, ās,%} m., N.
of a son of Dharma. {%—Bhadra-śrī, īs,%} f. the
sandal tree. {%—Bhadra-śrut, t, t, t,%} Ved. hearing
good, hearing pleasant things. {%—Bhadra-śreṇya, as,%}
m., N. of a king. {%—Bhadra-ṣaṣṭhī,%} f., N. of a
form of Durgā. {%—Bhadra-sāman, ā,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Bhadra-sāra, as,%} m., N. of a king; (also
read {%vindu-sāra.%}) {%—Bhadra-sāla-vana,%} (probably)
{%am,%} n., N. of a forest (of fine Shorea Robusta trees).
{%—Bhadra-sena, as,%} m., N. of a man with the
patronymic Ajātaśatrava; of a son of Vasu-deva and
Devakī; of a son of Ṛṣabha; of a son of Mahiṣ-
mat, (in this sense also {%bhadrasenaka%}); N. of a
king of Kaśmīra; (with Buddhists) N. of the leader
of the host of the evil spirit Māra-pāpīyas. {%—Bha-%}
{%dra-somā,%} f., N. of a river in Uttara-kuru; a N. of
the Ganges. {%—Bhadra-hasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
beautiful-handed, auspicious-handed (said of the
Aśvins). {%—Bhadrā-karaṇa, am,%} n. ‘making beau-
tiful,’ the act of shaving. {%—Bhadrā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
{%-karoti, -kartum,%} ‘to make beautiful,’ to shave;
[cf. {%madrā-kṛ.%}] {%—Bhadrākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as,%}
m. ‘fair-eyed,’ N. of a king [cf. {%bhallākṣa%}]; a
particular seed of which beads are made (?). {%—Bha-%}
{%drāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘beauteous-framed,’ having
a handsome person,’ an epithet of Bala-bhadra. {%—Bha-%}
{%drātmaja (˚ra-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘son of iron,’ a sword.
{%—Bhadrā-nagara, am,%} n., N. of a city; [cf. {%bha-%}
{%dra-pura.%}] {%—Bhadrābhadra (˚ra-abh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} good and bad; ({%am%}), n. good and evil. {%—Bha-%}
{%drāyudha (˚ra-āy˚), as,%} m. ‘handsome-weaponed,’
N. of a giant; of a warrior. {%—Bhadrāyus (˚ra-āy˚),%}
{%us,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhadrāvakāśā (˚ra-av˚),%}
f., N. of a sacred river. {%—Bhadrā-vrata, am,%} n. a
particular religious ceremony; (also called {%viṣṭi-%}
{%vrata.%}) {%—Bhadrāśrama%} ({%˚ra%} or {%˚rā-āś˚%}), {%as,%} m.,
N. of a hermitage mentioned in the Śambhala-
māhātmya portion of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Bhadrā-%}
{%śraya, am,%} n. sandal-wood ({%= bhadra-śraya,%} q. v.).
{%—Bhadrāśva (˚ra-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a Dvīpa said
in the Purāṇas to be named after Bhadrāśva, son of
Āgnīdhra, (some systems describe Bhadrāśva as one
of the four Mahā-dvīpas into which the known world
is divided, while another states it to be one of nine
Khaṇḍas or smaller divisions into which the conti-
nent is distributed; in either case it is the eastern
division); N. of a son of Vasu-deva and Rohiṇī; of
[Page0699-c+ 77]
a son of Dhundhumāra; of a king called Bhadrāśva
Śveta-vāhana; of a son of Āgnīdhra or Agnīdhra;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Varṣa named after the son of
Āgnīdhra. {%—Bhadrāsana (˚ra-ās˚), am,%} n. a
splendid seat, chair of state, throne; a particular
posture of a devotee while meditating, (the legs being
crossed and bent underneath the body and turned so
as to bring the ankles into contact with the perinæum
while the soles of the feet are held close to the
sides.) {%—Bhadrāha (˚ra-aha), am,%} n., Ved. an
auspicious day, favourable season. {%—Bhadrendra%}
{%(˚ra-in˚), as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhadreśa (˚ra-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhadreśvara (˚ra-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. an epithet of various statues and Liṅgas
of Śiva; N. of a place; of a Kāyastha. {%—Bha-%}
{%drailā (˚ra-elā),%} f. large cardamoms. {%—Bhadro-%}
{%danī (˚ra-od˚),%} f. Sida Cordifolia; Uraria Lagopodi-
oides. {%—Bhadrodaya (˚ra-ud˚), am,%} n., N. of a par-
ticular medicinal compound. {%—Bhadropavāsa-vrata%}
{%(˚ra-up˚), am,%} n. a particular religious observance.
<LEND>

<L>35108<pc>0699-c<k1>Badraka<k2>Badraka
{%Bhadraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ good; fine, handsome,
beautiful; ({%as%}), m. (according to a Scholiast) a kind
of bean; (probably) Cyperus Pertenuis; the Deodar
tree, Pinus Deodora; N. of a man, (also called
{%bhadrika,%} q. v.); of a king; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people [cf. {%bhadra%}]; ({%ikā%}), f. an amulet; N. of a
metre, four times ¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘¯; of a metre, four
times ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯; ({%akā%}), f., N. of a woman;
({%am%}), n. Cyperus Rotundus; a particular posture in
sitting ({%= bhadrāsana,%} q. v.); a kind of metre, four
times ¯˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯, ˘¯˘˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>35109<pc>0699-c<k1>BadrAraka<k2>BadrAraka
{%Bhadrāraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of the eighteen
lesser Dvīpas.
<LEND>

<L>35110<pc>0699-c<k1>BadrAlapattrikA<k2>BadrAlapattrikA
{%Bhadrālapattrikā,%}¦ f. Pæderia Fœtida ({%= gan-%}
{%dhālī%}).
<LEND>

<L>35111<pc>0699-c<k1>BadrAlI<k2>BadrAlI
{%Bhadrālī,%}¦ f. {%= bhadrālapattrikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>35112<pc>0699-c<k1>BadrAvatI<k2>BadrAvatI
{%Bhadrāvatī,%}¦ f. a species of tree.
<LEND>

<L>35113<pc>0699-c<k1>Badrika<k2>Badrika
{%Bhadrika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; [cf. {%bhadraka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35114<pc>0699-c<k1>BadriRa<k2>BadriRa
{%Bhadriṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35115<pc>0699-c<k1>Bandadizwi<k2>Bandadizwi
{%Bhandad-iṣṭi, is, is, i%}¦ (fr. {%bhandat,%} pres. part. P.
of rt. {%bhand + iṣṭi%}), Ved. (perhaps) hastening amidst
shouts of applause; (Sāy.) {%= stuti-rūpeṣṭir yasya.%}
<LEND>

<L>35116<pc>0699-c<k1>Bandana<k2>Bandana
{%Bhandana, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. shouting lustily, ap-
plauding, cheering; (Mahī-dhara), causing to prosper,
(or) beautifying, embellishing; ({%ā%}), f. acclamation,
applause, praise.
<LEND>

<L>35117<pc>0699-c<k1>BandanAya<k2>BandanAya
{%Bhandanāya%}¦ (fr. {%bhandana%}), Nom. P. {%bhan-%}
{%danāyati, -yitum,%} Ved. to shout loudly, howl, yell,
(used only in the pres. part. below.)
<LEND>

<L>35118<pc>0699-c<k1>BandanAyat<k2>BandanAyat
{%Bhandanāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. shouting loudly,
howling, yelling.
<LEND>

<L>35119<pc>0699-c<k1>BandanIya<k2>BandanIya
{%Bhandanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. a word formed in
Nirukta XI. 19. to explain {%bhadra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35120<pc>0699-c<k1>BandamAna<k2>BandamAna
{%Bhandamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. hailed with ac-
clamations, greeted with applause.
<LEND>

<L>35121<pc>0699-c<k1>Bandila<k2>Bandila
{%Bhandila, am,%}¦ n. fortune, prosperity [cf. {%bhaṇ-%}
{%ḍila%}]; tremulous motion; a messenger (?).
<LEND>

<L>35122<pc>0699-c<k1>BandizWa<k2>BandizWa
{%Bhandiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. rt. {%bhand%} with the
termination of the superl.), Ved. shouting or yelling
most loudly, applauding or praising most highly.
<LEND>

<L>35123<pc>0699-c<k1>BanDruka<k2>BanDruka
{#BanDruka#}¦ {%bhandhruka, as,%} m., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>35124<pc>0699-c<k1>BapaYjara<k2>BapaYjara
{#BapaYjara#}¦ {%bha-pañjara,%} &c. See under 4. {%bha.%}
<LEND>

<L>35125<pc>0699-c<k1>Bappawa<k2>Bappawa
{#Bappawa#}¦ {%bhappaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a man who
built a temple named after him Bhappaṭeśvara.
<LEND>

<L>35126<pc>0699-c<k1>BamBa<k2>BamBa
{#BamBa#}¦ {%bhambha, as,%} m. smoke; a fly.
<LEND>

<L>35127<pc>0699-c<k1>BamBarAlikA<k2>BamBarAlikA
{%Bhambharālikā,%}¦ f. a gnat, musquito, gad-fly.
<LEND>

<L>35128<pc>0699-c<k1>BamBarAlI<k2>BamBarAlI
{%Bhambharālī,%}¦ f. a fly.
<LEND>

<L>35129<pc>0699-c<k1>BamBArava<k2>BamBArava
{#BamBArava#}¦ {%bhambhā-rava, as,%} m. (onomato-
poetic), the lowing of a cow; (also {%bambhā-rava.%})
<LEND>

<L>35130<pc>0699-c<k1>BamBAsAra<k2>BamBAsAra
{#BamBAsAra#}¦ {%bhambhāsāra, as,%} m., N. of a
king of Magadha.
<LEND>

<L>35131<pc>0699-c<k1>Baya<k2>Baya
{#Baya#}¦ {%bhaya, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%bhī%}), fear,
alarm, dread, apprehension (e. g. {%ātma-bh˚,%} fear for
one's life; {%mā bhayaṃ kuru,%} be not afraid; cf.
{%daṇḍa-bh˚%}); dismay, fright, terror (e. g. {%jagad-bh˚,%}
a terror to the universe); cause for fear, danger,
peril, risk, jeopardy, hazard; the blossom of Trapa
[Page0700-a+ 81]
Bispinosa; ({%as%}), m. Fear personified as a son of
Nir-ṛti, as a prince of the Yavanas and husband of
the daughter of Time; sickness, disease; ({%āt%}), ind.
from fear, for fear; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter of
Kāla and wife of the Rākṣasa Heti. {%—Bhaya-%}
{%kampa, as,%} m. tremor from fear, the tremor of
fear, trembling caused by fright. {%—Bhaya-kara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} or {%bhaya-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or {%bhaya-kāra-%}
{%ka, as, ikā, am,%} or {%bhaya-kṛt, t, t, t,%} fear-causing,
fear-exciting, terrifying, dangerous, perilous; fearful,
formidable, terrible. {%—Bhayaṅ-kara, as, ī, am, =%}
{%bhaya-kara; (as),%} m. a small kind of owl ({%=%}
{%ḍuṇḍula%}); N. of one of the Viśve Devāḥ; N. of
various persons; ({%ī%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending upon Skanda. {%—Bhayaṅ-kartṛ, tā, trī,%}
{%tṛ, = bhaya-kartṛ%}. {%—Bhaya-jāta, as,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Bhaya-ḍiṇḍima, as,%} m. ‘terror-drum,’ a
drum used in battle. {%—Bhaya-trātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} a
deliverer from danger, rescuer from peril. {%—Bhaya-%}
{%da, as, ā, am,%} causing danger, inspiring fear;
{%vahni-bh˚,%} causing danger from fire; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a king. {%—Bhaya-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} apprehensive
of danger, fearful. {%—Bhaya-dāya, as, ā, am,%} or
{%bhaya-dāyin, ī, inī, i,%} causing danger, inspiring
fear; {%salila-bhayadāyin,%} causing danger from water.
{%—Bhaya-druta, as, ā, am,%} fleeing for fear, run-
ning away in terror, routed, put to flight. {%—Bhaya-%}
{%nāśin, ī, inī, i,%} destructive of fear or danger; ({%inī%}),
f. a species of plant. {%—Bhaya-nimīlitākṣa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} having the eyes closed from fear. {%—Bhaya-%}
{%pratīkāra, as,%} m. counteraction or removal of fear.
{%—Bhaya-prada, as, ā, am,%} or {%bhaya-pradāyin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} causing danger, inspiring fear, terrible.
{%—Bhaya-prastāva, as,%} m. an occasion of alarm,
season of fear. {%—Bhaya-brāhmaṇa, as,%} m. a timid
Brāhman. {%—Bhaya-bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} scattered
in terror, put to flight. {%—Bhaya-vidhāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
causing alarm, alarming, fearful. {%—Bhaya-vipluta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} overwhelmed with fear, panic-struck.
{%—Bhaya-vihvala, as, ā, am,%} disturbed or agitated
with fear. {%—Bhaya-vyūha, as,%} m. ‘array against
danger,’ a term applied to a particular mode of
marshalling an army when threatened with danger
from all sides. {%—Bhaya-śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a timo-
rous disposition, timid. {%—Bhaya-śoka-samāviṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} affected with fear and grief, filled with
sorrow and dismay. {%—Bhaya-saṃhṛṣṭa-roman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} having the hair erect with terror, horrified.
{%—Bhaya-santrasta, as, ā, am,%} terrified by danger,
scared with terror. {%—Bhayasantrasta-mānasa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the mind scared with terror. {%—Bhaya-%}
{%stha,%} Ved. a perilous position, dangerous situation.
{%—Bhaya-sthāna, am,%} n. an occasion of alarm, cause
of apprehension or fear. {%—Bhayasthāna-śata, āni,%}
n. pl. hundreds of occasions of fear. {%—Bhaya-hartṛ,%}
{%tā, trī, tṛ,%} or {%bhaya-hāraka, as, ikā, am,%} re-
moving or dispelling fear, a remover of fear. {%—Bha-%}
{%ya-hetu, us,%} m. a cause for fear or alarm, danger.
{%—Bhayātura (˚ya-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} distressed with
fear, agitated with alarm. {%—Bhayānvita (˚ya-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} filled with fear, frightened, alarmed.
{%—Bhayāpaha (˚ya-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} warding off
fear or danger; a prince, king. {%—Bhayābādha%}
{%(˚ya-ab˚), as, ā, am,%} undisturbed by fear, unex-
posed to danger. {%—Bhayārta (˚ya-ār˚), as, ā, am,%}
distressed with fear, alarmed, terrified, frightened,
afraid. {%—Bhayāvaha (˚ya-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} bring-
ing fear or danger, causing alarm, formidable, fearful.
{%—Bhayaika-pravaṇa (˚ya-ek˚), as, ā, am,%} wholly
inclined to the one (feeling) fear, wholly filled with
alarm, wholly absorbed or engrossed by fear. {%—Bha-%}
{%yottara (˚ya-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} attended with or
succeeded by fear; [cf. {%uttara.%}] {%—Bhayopaśama%}
{%(˚ya-up˚), as,%} m. soothing or allaying fear, en-
couraging.
<LEND>

<L>35132<pc>0700-a<k1>BayamAna<k2>BayamAna
{%Bhayamāna, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of the author of
the hymn Ṛg-veda I. 100.
<LEND>

<L>35133<pc>0700-a<k1>BayAnaka<k2>BayAnaka
{%Bhayānaka, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably fr. {%bhayāna,%}
an old anomalous present part. A. of rt. 1. {%bhī%}),
fearful, frightful, formidable, terrible, terrific, horrible;
({%am%}), n. terror; ({%as%}), m. a tiger; Rāhu or the
[Page0700-b+ 80]
Ascending Node personified; the Rasa or sentiment
of terror as excited by poetical or dramatic compo-
sition. {%—Bhayānaka-tā,%} f. or {%bhayānaka-tva, am,%}
n. fearfulness, formidableness. {%—Bhayānaka-rasa-%}
{%nirdeśa, as,%} m., N. of the 144th chapter of the
Śārṅgadhara-paddhati.
<LEND>

<L>35134<pc>0700-b<k1>Bayya<k2>Bayya
{%Bhayya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be feared.
<LEND>

<L>35135<pc>0700-b<k1>Bara<k2>Bara
{#Bara#}¦ {%bhara, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%bhṛ%}), bearing,
carrying; bringing, getting; granting; cherishing,
upholding, supporting, (often at the end of comps.,
cf. {%ṛtam-bh˚, kaṭam-bh˚, kulam-bh˚, deham-%}
{%bh˚, puṣṭim-bh˚, viśvam-bh˚%}); ({%as%}), m. the act of
taking or carrying, getting, gaining, taking away,
theft; a burden, load, weight, mass, ({%bharaṃ kṛ,%}
to place one's weight, support one's self, cf. {%dur-bh˚,%}
{%su-bh˚, bhāra%}); a particular weight or measure {%=%}
{%bhāra%} = 20 Tulās = 2000 Palas; a large quantity,
great number, mass, multitude, bulk; attacking,
battle, contest (Ved.); raising the voice (Ved.); a
joyful song, a hymn (Ved.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">βάρος.</lang>] {%—Bha-%}
{%ra-hūti, is,%} f., Ved. a war-cry, war-hoop; ({%is, is, i%}),
sounding a battle-cry, raising a war-shout. {%—Bhare-%}
{%ṣu-jā, ās,%} m., Ved. ‘born or produced amidst cries
of joy,’ an epithet of Soma.
<LEND>

<L>35136<pc>0700-b<k1>Barawa<k2>Barawa
{%Bharaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a potter; a servant.
<LEND>

<L>35137<pc>0700-b<k1>Barawika<k2>Barawika
{%Bharaṭika, as, ī, am, = bharaṭena harati,%}¦ see
Gaṇa Bhastrādi to Pāṇ. IV. 4, 16.
<LEND>

<L>35138<pc>0700-b<k1>BaraRa<k2>BaraRa
{%Bharaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ bearing, cherishing, main-
taining, nourishing, supporting; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. the con-
stellation Bharaṇī; ({%ī%}), f. the creeper Luffa Fœtida
or a similar plant, {%= ghoṣaka; (ṇyas),%} f. pl., N. of
the seventh lunar asterism or Nakṣatra containing
three stars and figured by the pudendum muliebre;
({%am%}), n. the act of bearing, supporting, cherishing,
maintaining, nourishing; nutriment; wages, hire;
the act of carrying; wearing; what is worn, clothes
(Ved.); bringing, procuring. {%—Bharaṇī-bhū, ūs,%}
m. ‘born from the asterism or nymph Bharaṇī,’ an
epithet of Rāhu or the Ascending Node personified.
{%—Bharaṇy-āhvā,%} f. the plant Tiaridium Indicum
({%= parva-puṣpī%}).
<LEND>

<L>35139<pc>0700-b<k1>BaraRi<k2>BaraRi
{%Bharaṇi, is,%}¦ m. f. (probably) {%= bharaṇī,%} q. v.
{%—Bharaṇi-ṣeṇa%} or {%bharaṇi-sena, as,%} m., N. of
a man; [cf. {%rohiṇi-ṣeṇa%} or {%rohiṇi-sena.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35140<pc>0700-b<k1>BaraRIya<k2>BaraRIya
{%Bharaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be borne, to be cherished,
to be supported or maintained; a dependant.
<LEND>

<L>35141<pc>0700-b<k1>BaraRqa<k2>BaraRqa
{%Bharaṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. a master, owner, lord; a hus-
band; a king; an ox, bull; a worm; the earth (?).
<LEND>

<L>35142<pc>0700-b<k1>BaraRya<k2>BaraRya<h>1
1. {%bharaṇya%}¦ (fr. {%bharaṇa%}), Nom. P. {%bharaṇyati,%}
&c., {%= sam-bhṛ,%} q. v.; [cf. {%bhuraṇya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35143<pc>0700-b<k1>BaraRya<k2>BaraRya<h>2
2. {%bharaṇya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for {%bharaṇīya%}), to be
maintained, to be cherished or protected; ({%ā%}), f.
wages, hire; a woman; ({%am%}), n. {%= bharaṇa,%} cherish-
ing, maintaining; wages, hire; the asterism Bharaṇī.
{%—Bharaṇya-bhuj, k, k, k,%} receiving wages, working
for hire; ({%k%}), m. a hireling, servant; a labourer.
<LEND>

<L>35144<pc>0700-b<k1>BaraRyu<k2>BaraRyu
{%Bharaṇyu, us,%}¦ m. a master; a protector ({%= śara-%}
{%ṇyu%}); a friend; fire; the moon; the sun.
<LEND>

<L>35145<pc>0700-b<k1>Barat<k2>Barat
{%Bharat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bearing, holding; wearing;
possessing, having; nourishing, maintaining, sup-
porting. {%—Bharad-vāja, as,%} m. ‘bringing or bearing
food,’ a skylark; N. of a Ṛṣi the author of various
Ṛg-veda hymns, said to be a son of Bṛhas-pati,
(Bharad-vāja Bārhaspatya is the author of Ṛg-veda
VI. 1-30, 37-43, 53-74; IX. 67, 1-3; X. 137,
1: he is fabled as the Puro-hita of Divo-dāsa; but
Divo-dāsa and Bharad-vāja may be the same person,
cf. Ṛg-veda I. 116, 18; VI. 16, 5); N. of one of
the seven sages; of an author of a law-book; of a
Buddhist Arhat; N. of a district, (also read {%bhārad-%}
{%vāja%}); N. of an Agni; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the race or
family of Bharad-vāja; [cf. {%bhāradvāja.%}] {%—Bha-%}
{%rad-vājaka, as,%} m. a skylark. {%—Bharadvāja-prā-%}
{%dur-bhāva, as,%} m., N. of a division of the Bhāva-
prakāśa treating of medicine. {%—Bharadvāja-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Sūtra work. {%—Bharadvājin%} in {%bha-%}
{%radvājināṃ vratam,%} N. of a Sāman; [cf. {%bhā-%}
{%radvājin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35146<pc>0700-b<k1>Barata<k2>Barata
{%Bharata, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be supported, being sup-
ported; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Agni who is supposed
[Page0700-c+ 81]
to be maintained or kept alive by the care of men
(Ved.); N. of a particular Agni, (he has a son Bha-
rata and a daughter Bharatī, cf. {%bharatha%}); a hired
soldier, warrior, (perhaps in particular) the charioteer
of a prince, (hence perhaps the Maruts are called
sons of Bharata, i. e. of ‘the warrior’ Rudra); a
(‘hired’) bard, poet, actor, dancer, mime [cf. {%bha-%}
{%rata-putraka%}]; a weaver; (according to Naighaṇ-
ṭuka III. 18) {%= ṛtv-ij;%} N. of an Āditya; N. of a
celebrated hero and monarch of all India, (he was
the first of a series of twelve Cakra-vartins or Sārva-
bhaumas, i. e. universal emperors; as son of Duḥ-
ṣanta or Dushyanta and Śakuntalā, he has the
patronymic Dauḥṣanti or Dauṣyanti, also read
{%dauṣmanti, dauṣvanti,%} &c.; in Ṛg-veda III.
53, 24, the sons of Bharata are regarded as descend-
ants of Viśvā-mitra); N. of a son of Dhruva-sandhi,
father of Asita; of a son of Daśa-ratha and younger
brother of Rāma; of a son of Ṛṣabha; of a son of
Vīti-hotra; an epithet of a Manu who gave the
name to the country Bhārata (Viṣṇu-Purāṇa II. 1);
N. of a son of Manu Bhautya; of a king of Aśmaka;
of an ancient Muni (the celebrated author of the
Gandharva-veda or Alaṅkāra-śāstra, treating of dra-
matic composition; the term is also applied to his
work, which appears to have been a body of Sūtras
or rules relating to every branch of dramatic writing
and theatrical exhibition; although said to be lost,
it is constantly quoted by the commentators on the
Nāṭakas or Indian dramas); a barbarian, moun-
taineer, savage, {%= kṣetra; (ās),%} m. pl., N. of a
tribe, ‘the descendants of Bharata;’ ({%āni%}), n. pl., N.
of a particular Varṣa; [cf. {%bhārata.%}] {%—Bharata-%}
{%khaṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of a part of Bharata-varṣa
{%(= kumārikā)%}. {%—Bharata-jña, as,%} m. ‘knowing
the science of Bharata,’ conversant with dramatic
writings and rules. {%—Bharata-tva, am,%} n. the name
‘Bharata.’ {%—Bharata-dvādaśāha (˚śa-aha), am,%}
n., N. of a particular festival. {%—Bharata-putraka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘son of Bharata,’ an actor, a mime. {%—Bha-%}
{%rata-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town (mentioned in
the Bharaṭaka-dvātriṃśikā). {%—Bharata-prasū, ūs,%}
f. ‘the mother of Bharata,’ an epithet of Kaikeyī
(wife of Daśa-ratha). {%—Bharata-malla, as,%} m., N.
of a grammarian. {%—Bharata-mallika, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%bharata-sena,%} q. v. {%—Bharata-roha, as,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Bharatarṣabha (˚ta-ṛ˚), as,%} m. ‘bull-
like descendant of Bharata,’ the best or most dis-
tinguished of the Bharatas; a prince of the Bharatas.
{%—Bharata-varṣa, am,%} n. ‘the country of Bha-
rata’ (supposed to have been the first monarch of all
India, cf. {%bharata,%} col. 2), a N. of India {%(= bhā-%}
{%rata)%}. {%—Bharata-vākya, am,%} n. ‘the speech of
Bharata,’ N. of the seventy-seventh chapter of the
Uttara-kāṇḍa or seventh book of the Rāmāyaṇa;
N. of the eighty-third chapter of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa
or fourth part of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Bharata-%}
{%śārdūla, as,%} m. ‘tiger-like descendant of Bharata,’
the most distinguished or excellent of the Bharatas.
{%—Bharata-śreṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} or {%bharata-sat-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} ‘best of the Bharatas,’ the most
distinguished of the descendants of Bharata. {%—Bha-%}
{%rata-sena, as,%} m., N. of an author of commentaries
on the Megha-dūta, Raghu-vaṃśa, Śiśupāla-vadha,
and Bhaṭṭi-kāvya. {%—Bharata-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of
a commentator on the Vedas; of an astronomer.
{%—Bharatāgraja (˚ta-ag˚), as,%} m. ‘the elder bro-
ther of Bharata,’ an epithet of Rāma. {%—Bharatā-%}
{%vāsa (˚ta-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘abode of Bharata,’ N. of the
twenty-ninth chapter of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa or fourth
part of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Bharatāśrama (˚ta-%}
{%āś˚), as,%} m. ‘the hermitage of Bharata,’ N. of a
hermitage. {%—Bharateśvara-tīrtha (˚ta-īś˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>35147<pc>0700-c<k1>BaraTa<k2>BaraTa
{%Bharatha, as,%}¦ m. {%= loka-pāla,%} a world-protector,
a deity presiding over one of the regions of the
world; a sovereign, king; fire [cf. {%bharata%}].
<LEND>

<L>35148<pc>0700-c<k1>BaradvAja<k2>BaradvAja
{%Bharad-vāja.%}¦ See under {%bharat,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35149<pc>0700-c<k1>Barama<k2>Barama
{%Bharama, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; [cf. {%bhārameya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35150<pc>0700-c<k1>Baras<k2>Baras
{%Bharas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. bearing, holding, cherishing;
[cf. {%visva-bh˚, sa-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0701-a+ 81]

<L>35151<pc>0701-a<k1>Bari<k2>Bari
{%Bhari, is, is, i,%}¦ bearing, possessing, maintaining,
supporting, nourishing, (often at the end of comps.,
cf. {%ātmam-bh˚, udaram-bh˚, kukṣim-bh˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>35152<pc>0701-a<k1>BariRI<k2>BariRI
{%Bhariṇī,%}¦ f. of 2. {%bharita%} below; [cf. {%hariṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35153<pc>0701-a<k1>Barita<k2>Barita<h>1
1. {%bharita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhara%}), nourished,
filled, full of; [cf. {%vasu-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35154<pc>0701-a<k1>Barita<k2>Barita<h>2
2. {%bharita, as, ā,%}¦ or {%bhariṇī, am, = harita,%}
green, of a green colour.
<LEND>

<L>35155<pc>0701-a<k1>Baritra<k2>Baritra
{%Bharitra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the arm.
<LEND>

<L>35156<pc>0701-a<k1>Bariman<k2>Bariman
{%Bhariman, ā,%}¦ m. supporting, nourishing, cherish-
ing; [cf. {%bharīman.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35157<pc>0701-a<k1>Bariza<k2>Bariza
{%Bhariṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. rapacious, avaricious,
greedy.
<LEND>

<L>35158<pc>0701-a<k1>BarIman<k2>BarIman
{%Bharīman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. a household, family;
bearing, supporting, nourishing, cherishing (in this
sense the gender is doubtful).
<LEND>

<L>35159<pc>0701-a<k1>Baru<k2>Baru
{%Bharu, us,%}¦ m. a husband, lord; N. of Śiva; of
Viṣṇu; gold; the sea.
<LEND>

<L>35160<pc>0701-a<k1>BarRas<k2>BarRas
{%Bharṇas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. in the comp. {%sahasra-%}
{%bh˚,%} q. v.; (according to Sāy. {%bharṇas = bharaṇa,%}
q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>35161<pc>0701-a<k1>Bartavya<k2>Bartavya
{%Bhartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be borne or carried;
to be maintained, to be nourished or supported; to
be engaged or hired, to be retained in service or
kept in pay.
<LEND>

<L>35162<pc>0701-a<k1>Bartf<k2>Bartf
{%Bhartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a bearer, carrier (Ved.); a
cherisher, nourisher, holder, supporter, protector; ({%tā%}),
m. a husband, lord; master, landlord; chief, com-
mander; ({%trī%}), f. a female supporter or nourisher;
a mother; [cf. {%jagatī-bh˚, divasa-bh˚, nṛ-bh˚,%}
{%paśu-bh˚, proṣita-bhartṛka.%}] {%—Bhartṛ-guṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. the excellence or virtue of a husband
(Manu IX. 24). {%—Bhartṛ-ghna, as, ī, am,%} mur-
dering a master or supporter; ({%ī%}), f. a woman who
murders her husband. {%—Bhartṛghna-tva, am,%} n.
the killing or injuring a master. {%—Bhartṛ-tā,%} f. or
{%bhartṛ-tva, am,%} n. the state or relation of a hus-
band, husbandship; manhood. {%—Bhartṛtāṅ-gata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘gone to husbandship,’ married. {%—Bhar-%}
{%tṛ-darśana-kāṅkṣā,%} f. the desire of seeing a
husband. {%—Bhartṛdarśana-lālasā,%} f. longing or
eager desire to see a husband. {%—Bahartṛ-dāraka,%}
{%as,%} m. a king's son, a crown prince, prince royal
(especially in the drama), a young prince designated
as heir-apparent; ({%ikā%}), f. a king's daughter, princess.
{%—Bhartṛ-dṛḍha-vratā,%} f. strictly faithful to a
husband. {%—Bhartṛ-bhakta, as, ā, am,%} devoted to
a lord or husband. {%—Bhartṛ-matī,%} f. possessing a
husband, a married woman. {%—Bhartṛ-meṇṭha, as,%}
m., N. of a poet; [cf. {%meṇṭha.%}] {%—Bhartṛ-yajña,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Bhartṛ-rājyāpaharaṇa%}
{%(˚ya-ap˚), am,%} n. seizure of a husband's kingdom.
{%—Bhartṛ-loka, as,%} m. the sphere or abode of a
husband (in a future life). {%—Bhartṛ-vyasana-pī-%}
{%ḍita, as, ā, am,%} afflicted by a husband's or master's
calamity. {%—Bhartṛ-vrata, am,%} n. fidelity or devo-
tion to a husband [cf. {%pati-vrata%}]; ({%ā%}), f. faithful
to a husband, a virtuous and devoted wife; [cf. {%pati-%}
{%vratā.%}] {%—Bhartṛvratā-tva, am,%} n. the state or
condition of fidelity to a husband. {%—Bhartṛ-śoka-%}
{%para, as, ā, am,%} absorbed in grief for a husband or
lord. {%—Bhartṛśoka-parītāṅgin (˚ta-aṅ˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} whose limbs are affected by grief for a husband or
lord. {%—Bhartṛśokābhipīḍita (˚ka-abh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} afflicted by a husband's sorrow or by grief for a
husband or lord. {%—Bhartṛ-sāt,%} ind. to a husband,
to the power of a husband; (with {%kṛtā%}) a married
woman. {%—Bhartṛ-sthāna, am,%} n., N. of a sacred
place of pilgrimage. {%—Bhartṛ-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of
a poet mentioned in the Śārṅgadhara-paddhati.
{%—Bhartṛ-hari, is,%} m., N. of a well-known author
(of 300 moral, political, and religious maxims or
apothegms comprised in three Śatakas called Śṛṅ-
gāra-ś˚, Nīti-ś˚, Vairāgya-ś˚, also of some gramma-
tical Kārikās, and of the Vākya-padīya; and also,
according to some, of the Bhaṭṭi-kāvya: he is often
designated by the one name Hari, and though little
is really ascertained about his history, is said to have
been the brother of king Vikramāditya, who lived
in the first century B. C.; according to a legend, he
wrote his apothegms when leading the life of an
[Page0701-b+ 69]
ascetic, after a licentious youth). {%—Bhartṛ-hīna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} abandoned or deserted by a husband or
lord. {%—Bhartṛ-hema, as,%} m. {%= bhartṛ-hari,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35163<pc>0701-b<k1>Bartrima<k2>Bartrima
{%Bhartrima (?), as, ā, am,%}¦ maintained, nourished,
supported.
<LEND>

<L>35164<pc>0701-b<k1>Barma<k2>Barma
{%Bharma, am,%}¦ n. {%= bharman,%} wages, hire; gold;
a coin of a particular value; the navel.
<LEND>

<L>35165<pc>0701-b<k1>BarmaRyA<k2>BarmaRyA
{%Bharmaṇyā,%}¦ f. wages, hire.
<LEND>

<L>35166<pc>0701-b<k1>Barman<k2>Barman
{%Bharman, a,%}¦ n. support, maintenance, nourish-
ment, care [cf. {%ariṣṭa-bh˚, garbha-bh˚, jātū-bh˚%}];
a burden, load; hire, wages; gold; a coin, piece of
gold, gold coin, piece of money; the navel; [cf.
{%bharma.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35167<pc>0701-b<k1>Barvara<k2>Barvara
{%Bharvara, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (according to Sāy.) {%=%}
{%jagad-bhartṛ%} or {%prajā-pati.%}
<LEND>

<L>35168<pc>0701-b<k1>Baraga<k2>Baraga
{#Baraga#}¦ {%bha-ra-ga,%} a word invented to ex-
plain {%bharga%} ({%bha%} standing for {%bhāsayati, ra%} for
{%rañjayati,%} and {%ga%} for {%gacchanty asmād imāḥ%}
{%prajāḥ%}).
<LEND>

<L>35169<pc>0701-b<k1>Barawa<k2>Barawa
{#Barawa#}¦ {%bharaṭa.%} See p. 700, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35170<pc>0701-b<k1>Barawaka<k2>Barawaka
{#Barawaka#}¦ {%bharaṭaka%} or {%bharaḍaka, as,%} m.,
N. of a particular class of mendicants. {%—Bharaṭaka-%}
{%dvātriṃśikā,%} f., N. of thirty-two popular stories (writ-
ten to ridicule the ignorance and folly of ascetics).
<LEND>

<L>35171<pc>0701-b<k1>BaraRqa<k2>BaraRqa
{#BaraRqa#}¦ {%bharaṇḍa.%} See p. 700, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35172<pc>0701-b<k1>Baru<k2>Baru
{#Baru#}¦ {%bharu.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35173<pc>0701-b<k1>Baruka<k2>Baruka
{#Baruka#}¦ {%bharuka, as,%} m., N. of a prince;
(also written {%kuruka%} or {%ruruka.%})
<LEND>

<L>35174<pc>0701-b<k1>BarukacCa<k2>BarukacCa
{#BarukacCa#}¦ {%bharukaccha, as,%} m., N. of a
country, (also read {%marukaccha%}); N. of a people;
of a Nāga. {%—Bharukaccha-nivāsin, ī, inī, i,%} an
inhabitant of Bharukaccha.
<LEND>

<L>35175<pc>0701-b<k1>Baruja<k2>Baruja
{#Baruja#}¦ {%bharuja, as,%} m. (perhaps fr. rt. 1.
{%bhrajj%}), a sort of jackal; [cf. {%bharūjā, bhārujika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35176<pc>0701-b<k1>Baruwaka<k2>Baruwaka
{#Baruwaka#}¦ {%bharuṭaka%} or {%bharūṭaka, am,%} n.
(probably fr. rt. {%bhṝ%}), fried meat.
<LEND>

<L>35177<pc>0701-b<k1>BarUjA<k2>BarUjA
{#BarUjA#}¦ {%bharūjā,%} f. (according to Yāska fr.
rt. 1. {%bhrajj%}), Ved. a particular colour, being of a
particular colour (used adjectively); {%bharūjī%} in the
Atharva-veda may be a N. of some wild animal; [cf.
{%bharuja,%} which is variously read {%bharūjā;%} cf. {%bhā-%}
{%rūjika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35178<pc>0701-b<k1>BarezujA<k2>BarezujA
{#BarezujA#}¦ {%bhareṣu-jā.%} See {%bhara,%} p. 700.
<LEND>

<L>35179<pc>0701-b<k1>BarehanagarI<k2>BarehanagarI
{#BarehanagarI#}¦ {%bhareha-nagarī,%} f., N. of a town
mentioned in Nīla-kaṇṭha's Śrāddha-mayūkha.
<LEND>

<L>35180<pc>0701-b<k1>Barga<k2>Barga
{#Barga#}¦ {%bharga, as,%} m. (said to be fr. a rt.
{%bhṛj,%} which is probably here for rt. {%bhrāj,%} = Gr.
<lang n="greek">φλέγω)</lang> Ved. radiance, splendor, lustre, effulgence
(Ved. {%= bhargas%} below, cf. <lang n="greek">φλόξ);</lang> N. of Śiva; of
Brahman; of a man with the patronymic Prāgātha,
author of the hymns Ṛg-veda VIII. 49-50; of a
king, the son of Veṇu-hotra; of Vīti-hotra; of Vahni;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a race of warriors; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a Sāman. {%—Bharga-śikhā,%} f., N. of a work men-
tioned in the Śiva-sūtra-vivṛti.
<LEND>

<L>35181<pc>0701-b<k1>Bargas<k2>Bargas
{%Bhargas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. radiance, lustre, effulgence;
N. of Brahman; of a Sāman. {%—Bhargas-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. clear, shrill (said of the voice).
<LEND>

<L>35182<pc>0701-b<k1>Bargya<k2>Bargya
{%Bhargya, as,%}¦ m., N. of Śiva ({%= bharga%}).
<LEND>

<L>35183<pc>0701-b<k1>BargaBUmi<k2>BargaBUmi
{#BargaBUmi#}¦ {%bharga-bhūmi, is,%} m., N. of a
king; [cf. {%bhārga-bhūmi, bhṛgu-bhūmi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35184<pc>0701-b<k1>BargAyaRa<k2>BargAyaRa
{#BargAyaRa#}¦ {%bhargāyaṇa, ās,%} m. pl. (probably)
an incorrect form for {%bhārgāyaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>35185<pc>0701-b<k1>BarCu<k2>BarCu
{#BarCu#}¦ {%bharchu, us,%} m., N. of a poet men-
tioned in the Śārṅgadhara-paddhati.
<LEND>

<L>35186<pc>0701-b<k1>Barjana<k2>Barjana
{#Barjana#}¦ {%bharjana.%} See under rt. {%bhṛj,%} p. 720.
<LEND>

<L>35187<pc>0701-b<k1>BarRas<k2>BarRas
{#BarRas#}¦ {%bharṇas.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35188<pc>0701-b<k1>Bartavya<k2>Bartavya
{#Bartavya#}¦ {%bhartavya.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35189<pc>0701-b<k1>Bartf<k2>Bartf
{#Bartf#}¦ {%bhartṛ.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>
[Page0701-c+ 72]

<L>35190<pc>0701-c<k1>Barts<k2>Barts
{#Barts#}¦ {%bharts,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%bhartsayati,%}
{%-te%} (according to the Dhātu-pāṭha only A.),
{%-yitum,%} rarely cl. 1. {%bhartsati,%} (in Atharva-veda III.
9, 5, a form {%bhartsyāmi%} occurs), to menace, threaten;
to reproach, abuse, blame, reprove, chide, rebuke; to
deride: Pass. {%bhartsyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>35191<pc>0701-c<k1>Bartsaka<k2>Bartsaka
{%Bhartsaka, as,%}¦ m. a threatener, abuser, reviler.
<LEND>

<L>35192<pc>0701-c<k1>Bartsana<k2>Bartsana
{%Bhartsana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. threatening, reviling;
cursing; threat, menace, reproach, abuse; a curse.
<LEND>

<L>35193<pc>0701-c<k1>BartsapattrikA<k2>BartsapattrikA
{%Bhartsa-pattrikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%bhartsa ? + pattra%}), N.
of a particular plant ({%= mahā-nīlī%}).
<LEND>

<L>35194<pc>0701-c<k1>Bartsita<k2>Bartsita
{%Bhartsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ threatened, menaced, reviled,
abused, blamed, upbraided, rebuked; ({%am%}), n. a
menace, threat, curse.
<LEND>

<L>35195<pc>0701-c<k1>BartsyamAna<k2>BartsyamAna
{%Bhartsyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being threatened &c.,
being reviled.
<LEND>

<L>35196<pc>0701-c<k1>Barb<k2>Barb
{#Barb#}¦ {%bharb%} or {%bharbh.%} See rt. {%bharv.%}
<LEND>

<L>35197<pc>0701-c<k1>Barma<k2>Barma
{#Barma#}¦ {%bharma,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35198<pc>0701-c<k1>BarmyASva<k2>BarmyASva
{#BarmyASva#}¦ {%bharmyāśva, as,%} m., N. of a king,
father of Mudgala; (also read {%haryaśva;%} cf. {%bhār-%}
{%mya, bhārmyaśva, bhṛmyaśva.%})
<LEND>

<L>35199<pc>0701-c<k1>Barv<k2>Barv
{#Barv#}¦ {%bharv%} or {%bharb%} or {%bharbh%} (connected
with rt. 1. {%bhas%}), cl. 1. P. {%barvati%} or
{%bharbati%} or {%bharbhati,%} &c., Ved. to chew, devour,
eat; to hurt, injure, fight; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">φέρβ-ω, φορβ-ή;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>herb-a;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>balvjan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>35200<pc>0701-c<k1>Barvara<k2>Barvara
{#Barvara#}¦ {%bharvara.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35201<pc>0701-c<k1>BarS<k2>BarS
{#BarS#}¦ {%bharś.%} See under rt. {%bhraṃś%} or
{%bhraś,%} p. 724, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35202<pc>0701-c<k1>Barzwavya<k2>Barzwavya
{#Barzwavya#}¦ {%bharṣṭavya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1.
{%bhrajj%}), to be fried or roasted.
<LEND>

<L>35203<pc>0701-c<k1>Bal<k2>Bal
{#Bal#}¦ {%bhal%} or {%bal%} (connected with rt.
{%bhall,%} q. v.), cl. 1. A. {%bhalate, balate,%}
&c., to describe, recount, mention; to expound, ex-
plain; to strike, kill; to hurt, injure; to give; cl.
10. A. {%bhālayate, bālayate,%} &c., Ved. to describe;
to see, behold; to throw up (?); [cf. {%ni-bh˚, sam-%}
{%bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35204<pc>0701-c<k1>Bala<k2>Bala<h>1
{#Bala#} 1¦. {%bhala,%} ind., Ved. certainly; [cf.
{%bal, baṭ,%} and Marāṭhī {%bhalla,%} ‘well!’]
<LEND>

<L>35205<pc>0701-c<k1>Bala<k2>Bala<h>2
{#Bala#} 2¦. {%bhala, as,%} m. a term used in ad-
dressing the Sun.
<LEND>

<L>35206<pc>0701-c<k1>BalatA<k2>BalatA
{#BalatA#}¦ {%bha-latā,%} f. See under 4. {%bha.%}
<LEND>

<L>35207<pc>0701-c<k1>Balandana<k2>Balandana
{#Balandana#}¦ {%bhalandana, as,%} m., N. of a man;
of the father of Vatsa-prī or Vatsa-prīti; (ās), m.
pl. the descendants of Bhalandana; [cf. {%bhālandana,%}
{%bhālandanaka, bhanandana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35208<pc>0701-c<k1>BalAnas<k2>BalAnas
{#BalAnas#}¦ {%bhalānas,%} m. pl., Ved., N. of a
particular family or race (Ṛg-veda VII. 18, 7).
<LEND>

<L>35209<pc>0701-c<k1>Ball<k2>Ball
{#Ball#}¦ {%bhall%} (connected with rt. {%bhal%}), cl.
1. A. {%bhallate, babhalle,%} &c., to tell,
describe; to wound, kill, to hurt, injure; to give.
<LEND>

<L>35210<pc>0701-c<k1>Balla<k2>Balla
{%Bhalla, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a kind of arrow or missile with
a point of a particular shape (perhaps crescent-shaped);
({%am%}), n. an arrow-head of a particular shape; ({%as%}),
m. a bear [cf. {%accha-bh˚, bhalluka, bhallūka%}]; an
epithet of Śiva, {%= bhadra; (ās),%} m. pl., N. of a
tribe, (also read {%malla%}); ({%ī%}), f. {%= bhallātaka,%} the
marking-nut plant, Semecarpus Anacardium [cf. {%bhālla,%}
{%bhālleya%}]; ({%as, ā, am%}), propitious, favourable ({%=%}
{%bhadra, śiva%}); a term used in addressing the Sun
(= 2. {%bhala,%} q. v.). {%—Bhalla-pucchī,%} f. ‘bear's tail,’
N. of the plant Hedysarum Lagopodioides. {%—Bhal-%}
{%lākṣa (˚la-ak˚), as,%} m., Ved. an expression used
in addressing a flamingo ({%= bhadrākṣa,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>35211<pc>0701-c<k1>Ballaka<k2>Ballaka
{%Bhallaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= bhalla,%} a bear.
<LEND>

<L>35212<pc>0701-c<k1>BallAtaka<k2>BallAtaka
{%Bhallātaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (?), {%= bhallātaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>35213<pc>0701-c<k1>BallAtaka<k2>BallAtaka
{%Bhallātaka, as,%}¦ m. (in Amara-koṣa II. 4, 2, 23,
also {%bhallātakī,%} f.), the marking-nut plant, Seme-
carpus Anacardium; ({%am%}), n. the Acajou or cashew-
nut, the marking-nut (from which is extracted an
acid juice, used for medicinal purposes, as well as a
[Page0702-a+ 76]
black liquid used for marking linen). {%—Bhallātaka-%}
{%taila, am,%} n. the oil of the cashew-nut.
<LEND>

<L>35214<pc>0702-a<k1>Balluka<k2>Balluka
{%Bhalluka, as,%}¦ m. a bear; [cf. {%bhāluka, bhālūka,%}
{%bhīluka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35215<pc>0702-a<k1>BallUka<k2>BallUka
{%Bhallūka, as,%}¦ m. a bear; a dog; a particular
kind of shell ({%= mahā-kaparda%}); a particular
plant, a species of Śyonāka.
<LEND>

<L>35216<pc>0702-a<k1>Ballawa<k2>Ballawa
{#Ballawa#}¦ {%bhallaṭa, as,%} m., N. of a poet men-
tioned in the Śārṅgadhara-paddhati.
<LEND>

<L>35217<pc>0702-a<k1>Ballavi<k2>Ballavi
{#Ballavi#}¦ {%bhallavi, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a man;
[cf. {%bhālavin, bhāllaveya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35218<pc>0702-a<k1>BallAka<k2>BallAka
{#BallAka#}¦ {%bhallāka, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>35219<pc>0702-a<k1>BallAwa<k2>BallAwa
{#BallAwa#}¦ {%bhallāṭa as,%}); m., N. of a king,
(also read {%bhallāka%}); of a mythical being; of a
mountain; of a gate. {%—Bhallāṭa-nagara, am,%} n.,
N. of the capital of king Śaśi-dhavaja.
<LEND>

<L>35220<pc>0702-a<k1>BallAda<k2>BallAda
{%Bhallāda, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king, {%= bhallāṭa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35221<pc>0702-a<k1>BallAta<k2>BallAta
{#BallAta#}¦ {%bhallāta, bhallātaka.%} See under
rt. {%bhall,%} p. 701, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35222<pc>0702-a<k1>Ballika<k2>Ballika
{#Ballika#}¦ {%bhallika, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ā%}),
f. the marking-nut plant ({%= bhallātaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>35223<pc>0702-a<k1>Balluka<k2>Balluka
{#Balluka#}¦ {%bhalluka, bhallūka.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>35224<pc>0702-a<k1>BalvAci<k2>BalvAci
{#BalvAci#}¦ {%bhalvāci (?), is,%} m., N. of a man
mentioned in the Vāyu-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>35225<pc>0702-a<k1>Bava<k2>Bava
{#Bava#}¦ {%bhava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%bhū%}), {%= bhāva,%}
being, state of being ({%= sat-tā%}), existing, existence;
birth, production, origin; worldly existence, life; place
of being, the world ({%= saṃ-sāra%}); means of exist-
ence; a sound state of being, welfare, prosperity, health
({%= śreyas%}); excellence, superiority; (according to
some) {%= āpti, prāpti,%} obtaining, acquisition; a god,
deity; N. of a deity attending on Rudra and frequently
mentioned in connection with Śarva; (in the later
mythology) a N. of Śiva or a form of Śiva; N. of a
Rudra; (according to some {%= jala,%} water); of a son of
Mahā-deva; of Agni (Ved.); N. of the first and fourth
Kalpa; of a king; of a son of Prati-hartṛ; of Vi-
loman; of an author; {%(au),%} m. du. the god Bhava
or Śiva with his wife Bhavānī; ({%am%}), n. the fruit
of Dillenia Speciosa, {%= bhavya, bhaviṣya,%} 2. {%bhā-%}
{%vana; (as, ā, am),%} arising, coming, produced or
born from, originating in, relating to, (in these
senses at the end of an adj. comp., e. g. {%deha-bh˚,%}
produced from the body; {%ākāśa-bhavā,%} ‘coming
from heaven,’ said of Sarasvatī; cf. {%araṇya-bh˚.%})
{%—Bhava-kalpa, as,%} m., N. of a particular Kalpa
mentioned in the Vāyu-Purāṇa. {%—Bhava-kāntāra,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. (?), the wilderness of worldly exist-
ence. {%—Bhava-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a particular phe-
nomenon in the heavens. {%—Bhava-kṣiti, is,%} f. the
place of birth. {%—Bhava-ghasmara, as,%} m. the burn-
ing of a wood, a forest conflagration. {%—Bhava-can-%}
{%dra, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhava-cchid, t, t, t,%}
preventing births or transmigration. {%—Bhava-ccheda,%}
{%as,%} m. the destruction of the world; N. of a Grāma.
{%—Bhava-trāta, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor; of a son
of Bhava. {%—Bhava-dā,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda. {%—Bhava-dāru, u,%} n. {%= deva-%}
{%dāru,%} the tree Pinus Deodora. {%—Bhava-deva, as,%}
m., N. of the author of the Vyavahāra-tilaka, of the
Smṛti-candra, and of the Prāyaścitta-prakaraṇa.
{%—Bhavadeva-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of the author of
the Chandoga-paddhati. {%—Bhavadeva-miśra, as,%}
m., N. of the author of the Bhāva-prakāśa; [cf.
{%bhāva-miśra.%}] {%—Bhava-nanda, as,%} m., N. of an
actor. {%—Bhava-nandin, ī,%} m. ‘son of Bhava,’ N.
of a man. {%—Bhava-nāga, as,%} m., N. of an author
mentioned in the Payo-graha-samarthana-prakāra by
Vasudeua. {%—Bhava-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Bhava-nāśinī,%} f. ‘destroying worldly existence,’
N. of the river Sarayū. {%—Bhava-nigaḍa-nibandha-%}
{%vināśin, ī, inī, i,%} destroying the chains and fetters
of worldly existence. {%—Bhava-nibhandha-vināśin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} destroying the fetters of mundane exist-
ence. {%—Bhava-pratisandhi, is,%} m. entering into
existence, coming into being. {%—Bhava-bandheśa %}
[Page0702-b+ 81]
{%(˚dha-īśa), as,%} m. ‘the lord of the fetters of the
world or worldly existence,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Bhava-bhāj, k, k, k,%} sharing the world; expe-
riencing existence, living. {%—Bhava-bhāvana, as,%}
m. ‘the author of existence,’ a N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Bha-%}
{%va-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being the origin; that Being
through whom all beings exist, the source of all
being. {%—Bhava-bhūti, is,%} m., N. of a poet who
lived in the eighth century A. D., author of the three
well known dramas, Mālatī-mādhava, Mahā-vīra-
carita (sometimes called Vīra-carita), and Uttara-
rāma-carita. {%—Bhava-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting
or made up of Śiva, produced from Śiva. {%—Bhava-%}
{%mocana, as,%} m. ‘the liberator of the world or of
existence,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Bhava-rud,%} a
drum played at funeral ceremonies. {%—Bhava-vīti,%}
{%is,%} f. liberation from the world; cessation from
worldly acts; end of the world. {%—Bhava-samudra,%}
{%as,%} or {%bhava-sindhu, us,%} m. the ocean of existence
or life, ocean of the world. {%—Bhava-svāmin, ī,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Bhavācala (˚va-ac˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a mountain. {%—Bhavātiga (˚va-at˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} overcoming worldly existence. {%—Bhavātmajā%}
{%(˚va-āt˚),%} f., N. of the goddess Manasā. {%—Bhavā-%}
{%nanda (˚va-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a commentator on
the Anumāna-dīdhiti; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a commentary
by Bhavānanda-siddhānta-vāg-īśa. {%—Bhavānanda-%}
{%siddhānta-vāg-īśa, as,%} m., N. of an author; [cf.
{%siddhānta-vāg-īśa.%}] {%—Bhavānandī-prakāśa, as,%}
m., N. of a commentary on the Bhavānandī by
Mahā-deva Pandit. {%—Bhavānta-kṛt (˚va-an˚), t,%}
m., N. of Brahman; of Buddha. {%—Bhavāntara%}
{%(˚va-an˚), am,%} n. another existence; a former ex-
istence; a future existence. {%—Bhavābdhi (˚va-ab˚),%}
{%is,%} m. the ocean of worldly existence. {%—Bhavābha-%}
{%vau (˚va-abh˚),%} m. du. existence and non-existence;
prosperity and adversity. {%—Bhavābhāva (˚va-abh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. non-existence of the world. {%—Bhavābhibhāvin%}
{%(˚va-abh˚), ī, inī, i,%} overcoming the world. {%—Bhavā-%}
{%bhīṣṭa (˚va-abh˚), as,%} m. ‘dear to Śiva,’ bdellium.
{%—Bhavāmburaśi (˚va-am˚), is,%} m. the ocean of
life or of worldly existence. {%—Bhavāyanā (˚va-ay˚),%}
f. ‘coming from Śiva,’ N. of the Ganges. {%—Bhavā-%}
{%raṇya (˚va-ar˚), am,%} n. the forest of worldly ex-
istence. {%—Bhavāri (˚va-ari), is,%} m. the enemy of
life or existence. {%—Bhavārṇava (˚va-ar˚), as,%} m.
the ocean of existence or of life. {%—Bhavārta (˚va-%}
{%ār˚), as, ā, am,%} wearied with the world, sick of
worldly troubles or the vanities of life. {%—Bhaveśa%}
{%(˚va-īśa), as,%} m. ‘the lord of existence or of the
world or of life,’ an epithet of Śiva; N. of a king,
the father of Hara-siṃha. {%—Bhavoccheda (˚va-uc˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the destruction of the world or of existence.
<LEND>

<L>35226<pc>0702-b<k1>Bavaka<k2>Bavaka
{%Bhavaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of an adj.
comp.) {%= bhava,%} being, existing, existence (e. g.
{%parārtha-bh˚,%} existing for others).
<LEND>

<L>35227<pc>0702-b<k1>Bavat<k2>Bavat<h>1
1. {%bhavat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being, becoming; present;
({%antī%}), f. time being, present time; (with some
grammarians) the technical term for the present tense;
[cf. {%bhavanti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35228<pc>0702-b<k1>Bavat<k2>Bavat<h>2
2. {%bhavat, ān,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%bhā,%} to shine,
Uṇādi-s. 1. 64), the honorific or respectful pronoun,
generally translatable by your honour, your highness,
your worship, your lordship, you (used respectfully
for the second personal pronoun, but properly with
the third person of the verb, e. g. {%bhavān dadātu,%}
let your highness give); {%bhavan,%} voc. sing. m. ‘O
sir,’ ‘O my lord,’ or contracted into {%bhos,%} q. v.;
{%bhavadbhis,%} by your honour; ({%atī%}), f. lady, your
ladyship; {%bhavatyas,%} your ladyships; {%bhavati,%} voc.
sing. f. ‘O lady:’ Manu II. 49 assigns a different
position in the sentence to this honorific pronoun
according to the person using it; a Brāhman should
say, {%bhavati bhikṣāṃ dehi,%} ‘good lady give alms;’
a Kṣatriya, {%bhikṣām bhavati dehi;%} a Vaiśya,
{%dehi bhikṣām bhavati:%} this honorific pronoun
{%bhavat%} is sometimes used when {%tvam%} occurs in
another clause of the same sentence; sometimes the
plural is employed to express greater courtesy (e. g.
{%bhavantaḥ pramāṇam,%} your honour is an authority);
{%bhavat%} is exceptionally found in construction with
[Page0702-c+ 81]
the 2nd person sing.; [cf. {%atra-bh˚, tato-bh˚, tatra-%}
{%bh˚.%}] {%—Bhavat-putra, as,%} m. your honour's son,
your highness' son, your son. {%—Bhavad-deva, as,%}
m., N. of a man mentioned in the Smṛti-kaustubha.
{%—Bhavad-vacana, am,%} n. your honour's speech,
your speech. {%—Bhavad-vidha, as, ā, am,%} any one
like your honour or like you. {%—Bhavad-vidhi, is,%}
m. your honour's manner (i. e. the way in which you
are treated). {%—Bhavan-manyu, us,%} m., N. of a
king; [cf. {%bhu-manyu, bhū-manyu.%}] {%—Bhavā-%}
{%dṛkṣa, as, ī, am%} ({%bhavā%} for {%bhavat%}), or {%bhavā-%}
{%dṛś, k, k, k,%} or {%bhavā-dṛśa, as, ī, am,%} any one
like your honour or like you.
<LEND>

<L>35229<pc>0702-c<k1>BavatI<k2>BavatI<h>1
1. {%bhavatī,%}¦ f. your ladyship, lady (respectfully,
see under 2. {%bhavat,%} col. 2.).
<LEND>

<L>35230<pc>0702-c<k1>BavatI<k2>BavatI<h>2
2. {%bhavatī,%}¦ f. a particular kind of poisoned arrow.
<LEND>

<L>35231<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavatu<k2>Bavatu
{%Bhavatu,%}¦ ind. (3rd sing. Impv.), be it so, let it
be, let it pass, very well; enough! no matter!
<LEND>

<L>35232<pc>0702-c<k1>BavadIya<k2>BavadIya
{%Bhavadīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ your honour's, your, thy,
thine.
<LEND>

<L>35233<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavana<k2>Bavana
{%Bhavana, am,%}¦ n. being, existing, becoming, pro-
duction, birth; nature; a place of abode, house,
home, dwelling; a mansion, ({%kamala-bhavana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having a lotus for a dwelling,’ a N. of
Brahmā); a palace, residence; an edifice, building,
temple, structure, (often at the end of a comp., cf.
{%amṛta-bh˚, garbha-bh˚, cara-bh˚, deva-bh˚%}); a
site, spot; the place where anything grows, a field;
{%= bhuvana,%} water. {%—Bhavana-pati, ayas,%} m. pl.
or {%bhavanādhīśa (˚na-adh˚), ās,%} m. pl. (with
Jainas) a particular class of gods having ten inferior
classes. {%—Bhavanodara (˚na-ud˚), am,%} n. the in-
terior apartments of a house.
<LEND>

<L>35234<pc>0702-c<k1>BavanIya<k2>BavanIya
{%Bhavanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be become, to be about
to take place or happen; impending; ({%am%}), n. it
is to be become; [cf. {%bhavitavya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35235<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavanta<k2>Bavanta
{%Bhavanta, as,%}¦ m. time, present time; ({%ī%}), f. a
virtuous wife.
<LEND>

<L>35236<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavanti<k2>Bavanti
{%Bhavanti, is,%}¦ m. time being, present time; [cf.
{%bhavantī%} under 1. {%bhavat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35237<pc>0702-c<k1>BavAdfkza<k2>BavAdfkza
{%Bhavā-dṛkṣa, bhavā-dṛś,%}¦ &c. See above.
<LEND>

<L>35238<pc>0702-c<k1>BavAnI<k2>BavAnI
{%Bhavānī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%bhava%}), N. of a goddess identified
in later times with Pārvatī, (she is the wife of Śiva
in her pacific and amiable form; according to the
Matsya-Purāṇa, especially adored in Sthāneśvara);
N. of the mother of the commentator Gaṇeśa (wife
of Bhava-nātha); N. of a river. {%—Bhavānī-guru, us,%}
m. ‘the father of Bhavānī,’ the Himālaya mountain
personified. {%—Bhavānī-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Bhavānī-pati, is,%} or {%bhavānī-vallabha, as,%} m.
‘the husband of Bhavānī,’ Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>35239<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavika<k2>Bavika
{%Bhavika, as, ā, am,%}¦ beneficial, suitable, useful;
prosperous, happy, being or faring well; ({%am%}), n.
a salutary state, prosperous condition; prosperity,
welfare.
<LEND>

<L>35240<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavita<k2>Bavita
{%Bhavita, as, ā, am, = bhūta,%}¦ been, become,
happened, taken place, passed.
<LEND>

<L>35241<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavitavya<k2>Bavitavya
{%Bhavitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be become, to be
about to become, to be about to take place or happen;
({%am%}), n. it is to be become, (used impersonally with
an inst., e. g. {%bhavitavyaṃ tvayā,%} it is to be become
by thee, i. e. thou must become; {%mayā tava anu-%}
{%careṇa bhavitavyam,%} I must become thy com-
panion; cf. {%bhavanīya.%}) {%—Bhavitavya-tā,%} f. the
being about to be, the state of being necessary to
be, necessary consequence, inevitable necessity, fate,
destiny.
<LEND>

<L>35242<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavitf<k2>Bavitf
{%Bhavitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ, = bhaviṣṇu,%}¦ being, be-
coming [cf. {%tiro-bh˚%}]; what is or ought to be or to
become, about to be, future [Lat. <nsi>futurus</nsi>]; immi-
nent, impending, disposed or inclined to be; being
or faring well.
<LEND>

<L>35243<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavitra<k2>Bavitra
{%Bhavitra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the world, heaven, the
atmosphere; (according to Sāy., Ṛg-veda VII. 35, 9)
{%= bhuvanam antarikṣam udakaṃ vā;%} [cf. {%bhā-%}
{%vitra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35244<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavin<k2>Bavin
{%Bhavin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ living, being, having life and
sensation; ({%ī%}), m. a living being.
<LEND>

<L>35245<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavinin<k2>Bavinin
{%Bhavinin, ī,%}¦ m. a poet; (the reading {%bhavina%} is
probably incorrect.)
<LEND>

<L>35246<pc>0702-c<k1>Bavila<k2>Bavila
{%Bhavila, as, ā, am, = bhavya,%}¦ being, existing,
[Page0703-a+ 79]
what is or exists; what is to be, future; ({%as%}), m. {%=%}
{%viṭa,%} a catamite, voluptuary, sensualist; N. of a man
(son of a certain Bhava).
<LEND>

<L>35247<pc>0703-a<k1>BavizRu<k2>BavizRu
{%Bhaviṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. {%= bhūṣṇu, bhavitṛ,%}
being, becoming, disposed or inclined to be, what is
or ought to be or to become; to be about to come
to pass, future; being or faring well, existing hap-
pily or virtuously; (often used at the end of a comp.
after an adv. in {%am,%} cf. {%andham-bh˚, dūram-bh˚,%}
{%nagnam-bh˚, palitam-bh˚, priyam-bh˚, subha-%}
{%gam-bh˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>35248<pc>0703-a<k1>Bavizya<k2>Bavizya
{%Bhaviṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be about to become;
to be about to come to pass, future, imminent, im-
pending; ({%am%}), n. the future; (scil. {%purāṇa%}), N.
of a Purāṇa; the fruit of Dillenia Speciosa ({%= bhava,%}
2. {%bhāvana%}). {%—Bhaviṣya-kāla, as,%} m. the future
tense. {%—Bhaviṣya-gaṅgā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Bha-%}
{%viṣya-jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge of futurity. {%—Bha-%}
{%viṣya-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of one of the eighteen
Purāṇas; [this Purāṇa is supposed to have been
communicated by Sumantu to Śatānīka, a king of
the Pāṇḍu family; the original is said to have been
a revelation of future events by Brahmā; the ex-
tant Purāṇa is not so much a book of prophecies,
as a manual of religious rites and observances; the
commencement however treats of creation and is
little else than a transcript of Manu.] {%—Bhaviṣyot-%}
{%tara (˚ya-ut˚),%} or {%bhaviṣyottara-purāṇa, am,%}
n., N. of the second part of the Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa,
(like that Purāṇa it is a sort of manual of religious
observances.)
<LEND>

<L>35249<pc>0703-a<k1>Bavizyat<k2>Bavizyat
{%Bhaviṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to be or
become, about to come to pass, future; ({%at%}), n. futu-
rity, the future, future time. {%—Bhaviṣyat-kāla, as,%}
m. future time, futurity. {%—Bhaviṣyat-tā,%} f. or {%bha-%}
{%viṣyat-tva, am,%} n. the being about to come to
pass, futurity. {%—Bhaviṣyad-ākṣepa, as,%} m. de-
nying that a possible future event will come to pass.
{%—Bhaviṣyad-vaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or {%bhaviṣyad-%}
{%vādin, ī, inī, i,%} predicting future events, prophe-
cying.
<LEND>

<L>35250<pc>0703-a<k1>BavItva<k2>BavItva
{%Bhavītva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. future.
<LEND>

<L>35251<pc>0703-a<k1>BavIyas<k2>BavIyas
{%Bhavīyas.%}¦ See below.
<LEND>

<L>35252<pc>0703-a<k1>Bavya<k2>Bavya
{%Bhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being, existing, being present;
to be become, (sometimes used impersonally, e. g.
{%bhavyam anena,%} it is to be become by him); to
be about to be or become; to be about to come to
pass, future ({%= bhāvin%}); likely to be or occur, on
the point of becoming [cf. {%dhenum-bhavyā%}]; what
ought to be, suitable, proper, fit, right ({%= yogya%});
good, excellent; showy in appearance, handsome,
beautiful, nice, pleasant; happy, auspicious, pros-
perous, fortunate; calm, placid, tranquil in mind;
true; ({%as%}), m., N. of a small fruit tree commonly
called Kāmaraṅga, Averrhoa Carambola; of a son of
Dhruva or the pole-star; of a son of Priya-vrata; of
a Buddhist teacher; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a particular class
of gods under Manu Cākṣuṣa; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet
of Umā (Pārvatī); {%= kari-pippalī;%} a sort of pepper,
Piper Chaba, (a wrong form for {%cavyā%}); ({%am%}), n.
that which is or exists ({%= yad bhavati%}); being,
existence, the being present; future time (e. g. {%bha-%}
{%vad-bhūta-bhavye,%} in the present, past, and future);
result, fruit; the fruit of the Averrhoa Carambola;
the fruit of the Dillenia Indica; a bone; {%(as, am),%}
m. n. a division of the poetical Rasas or sentiments.
{%—Bhavya-jīvana, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Niryukti-bhāṣya, a Gujarāṭhī commentary on certain
Jaina doctrines. {%—Bhavya-tā,%} f. suitableness, good-
ness, excellence, beauty; futurity. {%—Bhavya-rūpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘of a good figure or form,’ good.
<LEND>

<L>35253<pc>0703-a<k1>BavipulA<k2>BavipulA
{#BavipulA#}¦ {%bha-vipulā.%} See under 3. {%bha.%}
<LEND>

<L>35254<pc>0703-a<k1>BavIyas<k2>BavIyas
{#BavIyas#}¦ {%bhavīyas, ān, asī, as,%} Ved. (pro-
bably a compar. form fr. {%bhūri%}), more abundant,
more plentiful.
<LEND>

<L>35255<pc>0703-a<k1>BaSirA<k2>BaSirA
{#BaSirA#}¦ {%bhaśirā,%} f. a sort of beet, Beta
Bengalensis.
<LEND>

<L>35256<pc>0703-a<k1>Baz<k2>Baz
{#Baz#}¦ {%bhaṣ,%} cl. 1. P. (in epic poetry also
A.) {%bhaṣati (-te), babhāṣa, bhaṣi- %}
[Page0703-b+ 80]
{%tum,%} to bark, growl; to bark at, rail against, re-
proach, revile (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>35257<pc>0703-b<k1>Baza<k2>Baza
{%Bhaṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ barking, yelping; chiding,
Ved.; ({%as%}), m. a dog; ({%ī%}), f. a bitch; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a particular species of plant ({%= svarṇa-kṣīrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>35258<pc>0703-b<k1>Bazaka<k2>Bazaka
{%Bhaṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a barker, a dog.
<LEND>

<L>35259<pc>0703-b<k1>BazaRa<k2>BazaRa
{%Bhaṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a barker, a dog; ({%am%}), n. the
act of barking, the barking of a dog.
<LEND>

<L>35260<pc>0703-b<k1>Bazat<k2>Bazat<h>1
1. {%bhaṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ barking, howling.
<LEND>

<L>35261<pc>0703-b<k1>Bazat<k2>Bazat<h>2
{#Bazat#} 2¦. {%bhaṣat%} (?), m. the heart; the
thigh; wood.
<LEND>

<L>35262<pc>0703-b<k1>Bas<k2>Bas<h>1
{#Bas#} 1¦. {%bhas,%} cl. 3. P. {%babhasti%} (pl. {%bap-%}
{%sati,%} Impv. 3rd du. {%babdhām,%} Pāṇ. VI.
4, 100), {%bhasitum,%} Ved. to chew, chew asunder; to
eat, eat up, devour, consume [cf. rt. 1. {%psā%}]; to crush;
(according to the Dhātu-pāṭha) to blame or abuse
[cf. rt. {%bharts%}]; to shine [cf. rts. 1. {%bhā, bhās%}].
<LEND>

<L>35263<pc>0703-b<k1>Bas<k2>Bas<h>2
2. {%bhas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. ashes.
<LEND>

<L>35264<pc>0703-b<k1>Basad<k2>Basad
{%Bhasad, d,%}¦ m. the hinder parts [cf. {%bhāsada%}];
pudendum muliebre; mons Veneris; the sun; a
month; time [cf. {%bhasanta, bhāsanta%}]; a sort of
duck; a float, raft.
<LEND>

<L>35265<pc>0703-b<k1>Basadya<k2>Basadya
{%Bhasadya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being or situated on the
hinder parts.
<LEND>

<L>35266<pc>0703-b<k1>Basana<k2>Basana
{%Bhasana, as,%}¦ m. a bee; (also {%bhasala ?.%})
<LEND>

<L>35267<pc>0703-b<k1>Basanta<k2>Basanta
{%Bhasanta, as,%}¦ m. time; [cf. {%bhasad%} and {%bha-%}
{%vanta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35268<pc>0703-b<k1>Basita<k2>Basita
{%Bhasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reduced to ashes; ({%am%}), n.
ashes.
<LEND>

<L>35269<pc>0703-b<k1>BastrakA<k2>BastrakA
{%Bhastrakā,%}¦ f. a diminutive fr. {%bhastrā%} below;
[cf. {%bhastrākā, bhastrikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35270<pc>0703-b<k1>BastrA<k2>BastrA
{%Bhastrā,%}¦ f. a bellows or a large hide with valves
and a clay nozzle so used; a leathern bottle or vessel
(used for carrying or holding water); a skin, pouch,
leathern bag [cf. {%mātrā-bh˚%}]; a particular manner
of recitation; [cf. {%bhāstrāyaṇa.%}] {%—Bhastrā-phala,%}
f. a species of plant; (also written {%bhastra-phalā.%})
{%—Bhastrā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with a bellows
or sack.
<LEND>

<L>35271<pc>0703-b<k1>BastrAkA<k2>BastrAkA
{%Bhastrākā,%}¦ f. a diminutive fr. {%bhastrā%} above;
[cf. {%bhastrakā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35272<pc>0703-b<k1>Bastrika<k2>Bastrika
{%Bhastrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ (according to Pāṇ. IV. 4,
16) {%= bhastrayā harati; (ā),%} f. (diminutive fr.
{%bhastrā%}), a little bag.
<LEND>

<L>35273<pc>0703-b<k1>BastrI<k2>BastrI
{%Bhastrī,%}¦ f. {%= bhastrā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35274<pc>0703-b<k1>BastrIya<k2>BastrIya
{%Bhastrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to a bellows or
leathern bag.
<LEND>

<L>35275<pc>0703-b<k1>Basmaka<k2>Basmaka
{%Bhasmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%bhasmakāgni = bhas-%}
{%māgni,%} q. v.; ({%am%}), n. a disease of the eyes (thick-
ening of the membrane with indistinctness of vision);
morbid appetite from over-digestion of food [cf.
{%bhasmāgni%}]; gold or silver; a species of plant ({%=%}
{%viḍaṅga%}).
<LEND>

<L>35276<pc>0703-b<k1>Basman<k2>Basman
{%Bhasman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ chewing, consuming, Ved.; ({%a%}),
n. ‘what is crushed or consumed by fire,’ what is
reduced to ashes, ashes; [cf. {%bhāsmana.%}] {%—Bhasma-%}
{%kāra, as,%} m. ‘making ashes,’ i. e. using the ashes
of wood in place of soap or lye, a washerman.
{%—Bhasma-kūṭa, as,%} m. a heap of ashes; N. of a
mountain in Kāma-rūpa; [cf. {%bhasmācala.%}] {%—Bhas-%}
{%ma-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} see {%bhasmī-kṛta%}. {%—Bhasma-%}
{%kaumudī,%} f., N. of a work by Prāṇa-kṛṣṇa on
quicksilver and other metals. {%—Bhasma-gandhā%} or
{%bhasma-gandhikā%} or {%bhasma-gandhinī,%} f. ‘having
the smell of ashes,’ a kind of perfume {%(= reṇukā).%}
{%—Bhasma-garbha, am,%} n. the tree Dalbergia
Ougeinensis, {%= tiniśa; (ā),%} f. a species of plant ({%=%}
{%kapilā%}); a kind of perfume {%(= reṇukā)%}. {%—Bhasma-%}
{%guṇṭhana, am,%} n. the act of covering with ashes.
{%—Bhasma-caya, as,%} m. a heap of ashes, an ash-heap.
{%—Bhasma-cchanna, as, ā, am,%} covered with ashes.
{%—Bhasma-jābāla,%} N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Bhasma-%}
{%tā,%} f. the state or condition of ashes; ({%bhasmatāṃ%}
{%yā,%} to go to ashes, become ashes.) {%—Bhasma-tūla,%}
{%am,%} n. frost, snow; a shower of dust ({%= pāṃsu-%}
{%varṣa%}); a number of villages. {%—Bhasmani-huta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘one who has sacrificed in ashes,’ i. e.
done a useless work. {%—Bhasma-puñja, as,%} m. a
heap of ashes, quantity or collection of ashes. {%—Bhas-%}
{%ma-priya, as,%} m. ‘friend of ashes,’ an epithet of
[Page0703-c+ 79]
Śiva. {%—Bhasma-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become ashes,
changed into ashes, dead. {%—Bhasma-meha, as,%} m.
a particular disease of the bladder, a sort of gravel.
{%—Bhasma-rājī,%} f., Ved. a row of ashes, line or
stripe of ashes. {%—Bhasma-rāśī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A.
{%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to turn into a heap of
ashes. {%—Bhasmarāśī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} turned or
changed into a heap of ashes. {%—Bhasma-reṇu, us,%}
m. the dust of ashes. {%—Bhasma-roga, as,%} m. a
particular disease, a kind of bulimy; [cf. {%bhas-%}
{%māgni.%}] {%—Bhasma-rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} afflicted with
the disease called bulimy. {%—Bhasma-rohā,%} f. ‘grow-
ing on ashes,’ a species of plant {%(= dagdhā, dag-%}
{%dha-ruhā)%}. {%—Bhasma-lepana, am,%} n. the act of
smearing with ashes. {%—Bhasma-vidhi, is,%} m. any
rite or ceremony performed with ashes. {%—Bhasma-%}
{%vedhaka, as,%} m. camphor. {%—Bhasma-śayyā-śa-%}
{%yāna, as,%} m. ‘lying on a couch of ashes,’ an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Bhasma-śāyin, ī,%} m. ‘lying on ashes,’
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhasma-śuddhi-kara, as,%} m.
‘performing purification with ashes,’ an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Bhasma-sāt,%} ind. to the state of ashes, com-
pletely into ashes; (with rt. {%kṛ%} or {%nī,%} to reduce to
ashes; with rt. {%gam%} or {%yā%} or {%as%} or {%bhū,%} to go to
the state of ashes, become ashes, be reduced to ashes.)
{%—Bhasma-snāna, am,%} n. purification by ashes.
{%—Bhasmā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to reduce to ashes. {%—Bhasmākhya (˚ma-%}
{%ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} called ashes, nothing but ashes.
{%—Bhasmāgni (˚ma-ag˚), is,%} m., N. of a disease
in which the food is over-digested or as it were
reduced to ashes, a kind of bulimy (?). {%—Bhasmā-%}
{%cala (˚ma-ac˚), as,%} m., N. of a mountain in
Kāma-rūpa; [cf. {%bhasma-kūṭa.%}] {%—Bhasmānta%}
{%(˚ma-an˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. ending in ashes, finish-
ing with ashes (said of the body when burnt on the
funeral pyre); {%bhasmānte,%} Ved. in the neighbour-
hood of ashes. {%—Bhasmānti,%} ind. ({%= bhasma-sa-%}
{%mīpe%}), near ashes, in the neighbourhood of ashes.
{%—Bhasmāpas (˚ma-āp˚),%} f. pl. water with ashes.
{%—Bhasmāvṛtāṅga (˚ma-āv˚, ˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the body covered with ashes. {%—Bhas-%}
{%māhvaya (˚ma-āh˚), as,%} m. camphor. {%—Bhasmī-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of reducing to ashes; com-
pletely consuming or burning; calcining. {%—Bhasmī-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to make
into ashes, reduce to ashes. {%—Bhasmī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} reduced to ashes; calcined (as a metal). {%—Bhas-%}
{%mī-kṛtya,%} ind. having reduced to ashes. {%—Bhasmī-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. the state or condition of becoming
ashes. {%—Bhasmī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%}
to become ashes. {%—Bhasmī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} be-
come ashes, reduced to ashes, being mere ashes,
being wholly worthless. {%—Bhasmoddhūlita-vigraha%}
{%(˚ma-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘whose body is strewed over
with ashes,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhasmodvapana%}
{%(˚ma-ud˚), am,%} n., Ved. the act of pouring or
shaking out ashes.
<LEND>

<L>35277<pc>0703-c<k1>Basad<k2>Basad
{#Basad#}¦ {%bhasad, bhasana,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35278<pc>0703-c<k1>BastrA<k2>BastrA
{#BastrA#}¦ {%bhastrā, bhastrika,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35279<pc>0703-c<k1>Basman<k2>Basman
{#Basman#}¦ {%bhasman,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35280<pc>0703-c<k1>BA<k2>BA<h>1
{#BA#} 1¦. {%bhā%} [cf. rts. 1. {%bhas, bhāṣ, bhās%}],
cl. 2. P. {%bhāti, babhau, bhāsyati, abhāsīt,%}
{%bhāyāt, bhātum,%} to shine, be bright or luminous,
to be splendid or beautiful; to be conspicuous or
eminent; to appear, seem; to show one's self, mani-
fest any feeling; to be, exist: Pass. {%bhāyate:%} Caus.
{%bhāpayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%abībhapat,%} to cause to
shine or appear: Desid. {%bibhāsati:%} Intens. {%bābhā-%}
{%yate, bābheti, bābhāti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>bā-nu,</nsi> ‘a ray;’
<nsi>bā-ma,</nsi> ‘brightness:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">φη-μί, φά-σκ-ω, φά-τι-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φήμη, φανή, φαίνω, φαν-ε-ρό-ς, φαν-ή, φά-σι-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φά-σ-μα; φά-ε</lang> (Homeric), ‘he appeared;’ <lang n="greek">ὑπό-φαυ-σι-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φά-ος, φαῦ-ος, φῶς, φέγγ-ος, φα-έ-θ-ω, φαε-ίν-ω</lang>
<lang n="greek">φαει-νό-ς, φᾱνό-ς, φαίδιμος, πι-φαύ-σκ-ω:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>fā-rī, fā-ma, fā-tu-m, fā-s, fā-bu-la, fă-t-</nsi>
<nsi>eo-r, fa-c-s, fă-c-ie-s, făc-ē-tu-s, fav-illa, focus,</nsi>
<nsi>februus</nsi> (fr. the Caus.): Slav. <nsi>o-ba-v-a-ti,</nsi> ‘incan-
tare;’ <nsi>ba-s-nĭ,</nsi> ‘a tale.’]
<LEND>
[Page0704-a+ 81]

<L>35281<pc>0704-a<k1>BA<k2>BA<h>2
2. {%bhā, bhās,%}¦ f. [cf. 4. {%bha%}], light, brightness, splen-
dor (Ved., cf. 2. {%bhās%}); lustre, beauty; the reflection of
any object, shadow; ({%ās%}), m. the sun. {%—Bhā-ṛjīka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. light-shedding, radiating, radiant
(Sāy. {%= prakāśasya prārjayitṛ,%} said of Agni).
{%—Bhā-kūṭa, as,%} m. ‘having a point or peak of
light,’ a species of fish, (also {%bhā-kuṭa%}); N. of a
mountain (apparently the part of the Himālaya
called Bhākūr). {%—Bhā-kośa, as,%} m. ‘repository of
light,’ the sun. {%—Bhā-gaṇa, as,%} m. the whole col-
lection of stars or constellations, (for {%bha-gaṇa.%})
{%—Bhā-tvakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. producing light.
{%—Bhā-nikara, as,%} m. a multitude of rays, a mass
of light. {%—Bhā-nemi, is,%} m. ‘a circle of light or
rays,’ the sun. {%—Bhān-da, am,%} n. ‘giving light,’
N. of an Upa-Purāṇa. {%—Bhā-maṇḍala, am,%} n. a
circle of light, crown or diadem of light, garland of
rays. {%—Bhāmatī,%} f. (fr. {%bhā-mat%}), or {%bhāmatī-ni-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m., N. of a commentary by Vācaspati-
miśra on Śaṅkarācārya's commentary on the Brahma-
sūtras. {%—Bhāmatī-kāra, as,%} m., N. of Vācaspati-
miśra, the author of the Bhāmatī as well as of several
other treatises on the different systems of philosophy.
{%—Bhāmatī-nibandha = bhāmatī,%} q. v. {%—Bhā-%}
{%ruci, is,%} m., N. of an author mentioned in the
Mitākṣarā to whom a commentary on Yājña-
valkya's Dharma-śāstra is ascribed. {%—Bhā-rūpa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} (perhaps fr. {%bhās + rūpa%}), Ved. light, shining,
bright, splendid. {%—1. bhā-vana, am,%} n. (for 2. {%bhā-%}
{%vana%} see p. 708, col. 1), a forest of light, sea of
glory, a mass of rays. {%—Bhā-sarva-jña, as,%} m., N.
of an author.
<LEND>

<L>35282<pc>0704-a<k1>BAt<k2>BAt
{%Bhāt, bhān, bhāntī%}¦ or {%bhātī, bhāt,%} shining,
splendid.
<LEND>

<L>35283<pc>0704-a<k1>BAta<k2>BAta
{%Bhāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, bright, splendid, re-
splendent; ({%as%}), m. dawn, morning.
<LEND>

<L>35284<pc>0704-a<k1>BAti<k2>BAti
{%Bhāti, is,%}¦ f. light, brightness, splendor; the being
clear or evident, perception, knowledge ({%= pra-tīti%}).
<LEND>

<L>35285<pc>0704-a<k1>BAtu<k2>BAtu
{%Bhātu, us,%}¦ m. the sun; [cf. {%bhānu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35286<pc>0704-a<k1>BAna<k2>BAna
{%Bhāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of appearing or growing
visible, appearance; being clear or evident, per-
ception. {%—Bhāna-tas,%} ind. in consequence of the
appearance. {%—Bhāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having the
appearance.
<LEND>

<L>35287<pc>0704-a<k1>BAnavIya<k2>BAnavIya
{%Bhānavīya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhānu%}), Ved. coming
from the sun (as rays); {%(am),%} n. the right eye.
<LEND>

<L>35288<pc>0704-a<k1>BAnu<k2>BAnu
{%Bhānu, us,%}¦ m. appearance, brightness, light [cf.
{%ahi-bh˚%}]; a ray of light; the sun; beauty; N. of
an Āditya; day; a sovereign, king, prince, master;
N. of Śiva ({%= hara%}); of a Deva-gandharva; of a
son of Kṛṣṇa; of a Yādava; of the father of the
fifteenth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī; of a
prince (son of Prati-vyoma); of a son of Viśva-
dhara and brother of Hari-nātha; of a pupil of
Śaṅkarācārya; of an author; {%(avas),%} m. pl. the
Ādityas (children of Bhānu); the gods of the
third Manv-antara; ({%us%}), f. {%= bhānu-matī,%} a hand-
some woman; N. of a daughter of Dakṣa (wife of
Dharma or Manu and mother of Bhānu or Āditya);
of the mother of Devarṣabha; of a daughter of
Kṛṣṇa; of the mother of the Dānava Śakuni.
{%—Bhānu-kesara%} or {%bhānu-keśara, as,%} m. the sun.
{%—Bhānu-ja, as,%} m. ‘son of the Sun,’ the planet
Saturn. {%—Bhānujī-dīkṣita, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Bhaṭṭoji-dīkṣita. {%—Bhānu-datta, as,%} m., N. of a
man; of the author of the Rasa-taraṅgiṇī; of the
author of the Rasa-mañjarī. {%—Bhānu-dina, am,%} n.
Sunday; [cf. {%bhānu-vāra.%}] {%—Bhānu-dīkṣita, as,%}
m., N. of a commentator on the Amara-kośa.
{%—Bhānu-deva, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Bhānu-%}
{%paṇḍita, as,%} m., N. of a poet with the epithet Śrī-
vaidya. {%—Bhānu-phalā,%} f. the plant Musa Sapien-
tum; [cf. {%aṃśumat-phalā.%}] {%—Bhānu-bhaṭṭa, as,%}
m., N. of the preceptor of Nārāyaṇa-dāsa. {%—Bhānu-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} luminous, splendid, resplendent;
beautiful, handsome; containing the word {%bhānu;%}
{%(ān),%} m. the sun; N. of a man with the patronymic
Aupamanyava; of a warrior on the side of the
Kurus, (according to the commentator) a son of
Kaliṅga; of a son of Kuśa-dhuaja (or Keśi-dhvaja);
of Bṛhad-aśva [cf. {%bhānu-ratha%}]; of Bharga; of a
[Page0704-b+ 76]
son of Kṛṣṇa; {%(matī),%} f., N. of a daughter of
Aṅgiras; of a daughter of Kṛta-vīrya (wife of Ahaṃ-
yāti); of a daughter of the Yādava Bhānu; of a
daughter of Vikramāditya; of the mother of Śaṅkara
(who wrote a commentary on the Śakuntalā). {%—Bhā-%}
{%numatin, ī,%} m. (fr. {%bhānu-mat%} or {%bhānu + mati%}),
Ved., N. of a man. {%—Bhānu-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of rays. {%—Bhānu-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a
king, a son of Candra-giri [cf. {%bhānu-ratha%}]; of a
son of Udaya-siṃha. {%—Bhānu-ratha, as,%} m., N. of
a king, a son of Candra-giri, (also written {%bhānū-%}
{%ratha%}); N. of a son of Bṛhad-aśva; [cf. {%bhānu-%}
{%mat.%}] {%—Bhānu-vana, am,%} n. ‘wood of the sun,’
N. of a wood; (also read {%bhārga-vana.%}) {%—Bhānu-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhānu-vāra, as,%}
m. ‘day of the sun,’ Sunday; [cf. {%bhānu-dina.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35289<pc>0704-b<k1>BAnusena<k2>BAnusena
{%—Bhānu-sena, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35290<pc>0704-b<k1>BAnula<k2>BAnula
{%Bhānula, as,%}¦ m. a diminutive from Bhānu-datta
(used by way of endearment).
<LEND>

<L>35291<pc>0704-b<k1>BAma<k2>BAma<h>1
1. {%bhāma, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see rt. {%bhām,%} p. 706),
light, brightness, splendor; the sun. {%—Bhāma-nī, īs,%}
{%īs, i,%} Ved. ‘bearing light,’ an epithet of Puruṣa.
<LEND>

<L>35292<pc>0704-b<k1>BAmin<k2>BAmin<h>1
1. {%bhāmin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. 1. {%bhāma;%} for 2. see
under rt. {%bhām%}), shining, glittering, beautiful, hand-
some; proud; ({%inī%}), f. a handsome woman; N. of
the daughter of a Gandharva. {%—Bhāminī-vilāsa, as,%}
m., N. of a poem by Jagan-nātha in four chapters,
(the first book contains allegorical precepts, the
second includes amatory subjects, the third an elegy
[karuṇa] on the death of a wife, the fourth teaches
that consolation is only to be obtained by adoration
of Kṛṣṇa.)
<LEND>

<L>35293<pc>0704-b<k1>BAMSa<k2>BAMSa
{#BAMSa#}¦ {%bhāṃśa.%} See under 4. {%bha,%} p. 694.
<LEND>

<L>35294<pc>0704-b<k1>BAHkara<k2>BAHkara
{#BAHkara#}¦ {%bhāḥ-kara, bhāḥ-karaṇa.%} See {%bhās-%}
{%kara,%} &c., p. 709, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35295<pc>0704-b<k1>BAHKara<k2>BAHKara
{#BAHKara#}¦ {%bhāḥ-khara, bhāḥ-pati, bhāḥ-pheru,%}
{%= bhās-khara,%} &c., see Vopa-deva II. 45.
<LEND>

<L>35296<pc>0704-b<k1>BAkuwa<k2>BAkuwa
{#BAkuwa#}¦ {%bhā-kuṭa, bhā-kūṭa, bhā-kośa.%} See
under 2. {%bhā,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35297<pc>0704-b<k1>BAkuri<k2>BAkuri
{#BAkuri#}¦ {%bhākuri,%} a patronymic. See {%bhe-%}
{%kuri,%} p. 721, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35298<pc>0704-b<k1>BAkta<k2>BAkta<h>1
{#BAkta#} 1¦. {%bhākta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bhakta%}),
regularly fed by another; a dependent, retainer; fit
for food.
<LEND>

<L>35299<pc>0704-b<k1>BAkta<k2>BAkta<h>2
2. {%bhākta, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhakti%}), inferior, secon-
dary, (opposed to {%mukhya%}); ({%ās%}), m. pl. ‘the
faithful ones, the pious ones,’ N. of a Vaiṣṇava sect;
of a Śaiva sect.
<LEND>

<L>35300<pc>0704-b<k1>BAktika<k2>BAktika
{%Bhāktika, as, ī, am,%}¦ = 1. {%bhākta,%} regularly fed
by another; ({%as%}), m. one who is fed by another, a
dependent, retainer.
<LEND>

<L>35301<pc>0704-b<k1>BAkza<k2>BAkza
{#BAkza#}¦ {%bhākṣa.%} See p. 695, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35302<pc>0704-b<k1>BAkzAlaka<k2>BAkzAlaka
{#BAkzAlaka#}¦ {%bhākṣālaka,%} relating to or com-
ing from the place Bhakṣālī.
<LEND>

<L>35303<pc>0704-b<k1>BAga<k2>BAga<h>1
{#BAga#} 1¦. {%bhāga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%bhaj%}), a part,
portion, share, lot, division, allotment, partition,
distribution [cf. {%dāya-bh˚%}]; portioning out; good
portion, fortunate lot, good fortune, luck, destiny
(Ved.); a fraction, part of any whole, a part of a
whole (e. g. {%śata-bh˚,%} the hundredth part); a quarter
(in {%eka-bh˚,%} one fourth; {%tri-bh˚,%} three fourth); part
of anything given as interest; the numerator of a
fraction; a division of time, the thirtieth part of a
Rāśi or zodiacal sign; a degree or 360th part of the
circumference of a great circle; a quotient; a half
rupee; place, spot, region, side, border; N. of a
king, (also {%bhāgavata%}); N. of one of the branches
of the river Candra-bhāgā, q. v.; {%(as, ā, am),%} taking
the place of any one, representing, (at the end of
adj. comps., cf. {%bhājana%}); ({%am%}), n., N. of a parti-
cular Sāman. {%—Bhāga-kalpanā,%} f. the allotment of
shares. {%—Bhāga-jāti, is,%} f. assimilation of fractions,
reduction of fractions to a common denominator;
[cf. {%aṃśa-savarṇana.%}] {%—Bhāgajāti-catuṣṭaya,%}
{%am,%} n. four modes of assimilation of fractions or of
reducing them to a common denominator. {%—Bhā- %}
[Page0704-c+ 81]
{%gañ-jaya, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhāga-dā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. granting or giving a share. {%—Bhāga-%}
{%dugha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. yielding or dealing out
portions, distributing. {%—Bhāga-dha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. paying a share, discharging or paying what is
due. {%—Bhāga-dheya, am,%} n. share, portion, part,
lot, portion allotted by destiny, luck, fortune, fate,
destiny; property; happiness; ({%as%}), m. revenue,
tax, dues, impost; one to whom a share is due, an
heir, co-heir; {%(as, ī, am),%} Ved. due as a share or
part. {%—Bhāga-bhāj, k, k, k,%} having a share in (any-
thing), interested, a partner. {%—Bhāga-bhuj, k,%} m.
‘enjoying taxes,’ a king, sovereign. {%—Bhāga-mātṛ,%}
{%tā,%} f. a particular rule of division. {%—Bhāga-mukha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhāga-lakṣaṇā,%} f. (in
rhetoric) insinuation or intimation of a part. {%—Bhā-%}
{%ga-vijñeya, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhāga-vṛtti,%}
{%is,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Bhāgavṛtti-kāra, as,%} m., N.
of an author mentioned in the Prauḍha-mano-ramā.
{%—Bhāga-śas,%} ind. in parts or portions, according to
a share or portion; one part after another, by turns,
alternately; by and by. {%—Bhāga-hara, as, ā, am,%}
taking a part, sharing; ({%as%}), m. a co-heir; (in
arithmetic) division. {%—Bhāga-hāra, as,%} m. (in
arithmetic) division; [cf. {%bhājana, chedana.%}]
{%—Bhāga-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} inheriting; ({%ī%}), m. an
heir. {%—Bhāgānubandha-jāti (˚ga-an˚), is,%} f. assi-
milation of quantities by fractional increase; reduc-
tion of quantities to uniformity by the addition of a
fraction. {%—Bhāgāpahāra-jāti (˚ga-ap˚), is,%} f. assi-
milation of quantities by fractional decrease, reduction
of quantities to uniformity by the subtraction of a
fraction. {%—Bhāgārthin (˚ga-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} desirous
of a share (as of a sacrifice). {%—Bhāgārha (˚ga-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} entitled to a portion or inheritance; to
be divided according to shares. {%—Bhāgāsura (˚ga-%}
{%as˚), as,%} m., N. of an Asura. {%—Bhāgī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to divide, share.
<LEND>

<L>35304<pc>0704-c<k1>BAga<k2>BAga<h>2
2. {%bhāga, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. relating to Bhaga (as
a hymn).
<LEND>

<L>35305<pc>0704-c<k1>BAgaka<k2>BAgaka
{%Bhāgaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.)
= 1. {%bhāga,%} q. v., sharing, dividing; ({%as%}), m. (?),
a divisor (in arithmetic).
<LEND>

<L>35306<pc>0704-c<k1>BAgana<k2>BAgana
{%Bhāgana, am,%}¦ n. (? for {%bhā-gaṇa,%} col. 1), the
period of the sun's passing through the signs of the
zodiac; the zodiac; the circumference of a great circle.
<LEND>

<L>35307<pc>0704-c<k1>BAgavata<k2>BAgavata
{%Bhāgavata, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhaga-vat%}), relating
to or coming from Bhaga-vat, i. e. Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa;
worshipping Bhaga-vat; holy, sacred, divine; ({%as%}),
m. a follower of Bhaga-vat, worshipper of Viṣṇu
or Kṛṣṇa; N. of a king. {%—Bhāgavata-tātparya,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work by Ānanda-tīrtha or Madhu.
{%—Bhāgavata-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of the most
celebrated and popular of the eighteen Purāṇas,
especially dedicated to the glorification of Viṣṇu,
(it was narrated by Śuka, son of Vyāsa, to king
Parīkṣit, grandson of Arjuna, who in consequence
of a hermit's curse had been bitten by as snake, and
desired to die with his thoughts fixed on Viṣṇu;
the tenth book, which is the most characteristic and
best known part of the Purāṇa, is devoted to the
history of Kṛṣṇa.) {%—Bhāgavata-bhāvārtha-dī-%}
{%pikā (˚va-ar˚),%} f., N. of a commentary by Śrī-
dhara on the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa. {%—Bhāgavata-līlā-%}
{%rahasya, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Bhāgavata-san-%}
{%darbha, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Bhāgavata-sāra-%}
{%samuccaya, as,%} m. (perhaps) N. of a collection of
the works of Vallabha. {%—Bhāgavatāmṛta (˚ta-%}
{%am˚), am,%} n., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>35308<pc>0704-c<k1>BAgavati<k2>BAgavati
{%Bhāgavati, is,%}¦ m. (probably) a patronymic from
Bhaga-vat.
<LEND>

<L>35309<pc>0704-c<k1>BAgavitta<k2>BAgavitta
{%Bhāgavitta, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils or followers of
Bhāgavittika.
<LEND>

<L>35310<pc>0704-c<k1>BAgavittAyana<k2>BAgavittAyana
{%Bhāgavittāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhā-
gavitti.
<LEND>

<L>35311<pc>0704-c<k1>BAgavitti<k2>BAgavitti
{%Bhāgavitti, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic from Bha-
gavitta; N. of a son of Kuthumi.
<LEND>

<L>35312<pc>0704-c<k1>BAgavittika<k2>BAgavittika
{%Bhāgavittika, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhā-
gavitti.
<LEND>

<L>35313<pc>0704-c<k1>BAgavittikIya<k2>BAgavittikIya
{%Bhāgavittikīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or coming
from Bhāgavittika.
<LEND>
[Page0705-a+ 81]

<L>35314<pc>0705-a<k1>BAgika<k2>BAgika
{%Bhāgika, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to a part; forming
one part; having a part; fractional; bearing interest,
subject to a fractional deduction for interest, ({%bhāgi-%}
{%kaṃ śatam,%} one part in a hundred, i. e. one per
cent; {%bhāgikā viṃśatiḥ,%} one part in twenty, i. e.
five per cent); ({%as%}), m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35315<pc>0705-a<k1>BAgin<k2>BAgin
{%Bhāgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a portion or share, shar-
ing, one who shares, a partner; sharing in, partaking
of, participating in [cf. {%duḥkha-bh˚%}]; concerned
in, ({%apacaya-bhāgin,%} concerned in a loss); one to
whom a share is due, entitled to; possessing, a pos-
sessor, owner; consisting of parts or shares; having
a good portion, having luck, lucky, fortunate; ({%ī%}),
m. a co-heir; ({%inī%}), f. a co-heiress.
<LEND>

<L>35316<pc>0705-a<k1>BAgineya<k2>BAgineya
{%Bhāgineya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhaginī%}), a sister's son;
({%ī%}), f. a sister's daughter.
<LEND>

<L>35317<pc>0705-a<k1>BAgIyas<k2>BAgIyas
{%Bhāgīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%bhāgin%}), hav-
ing a larger share, entitled to a larger share.
<LEND>

<L>35318<pc>0705-a<k1>BAgIraTa<k2>BAgIraTa
{%Bhāgīratha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhagīratha%}), relating
to Bhagīratha; ({%ī%}), f. a N. of the Ganges; also of
one of the three main streams or branches of the
Ganges, viz. the great western branch; [cf. {%nava-%}
{%dvīpa.%}] {%—Bhāgīratha-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
place of pilgrimage.
<LEND>

<L>35319<pc>0705-a<k1>BAgya<k2>BAgya<h>1
1. {%bhāgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. {%bhaga%}), relating to
Bhaga; (with {%yuga%}) the twelfth or last lustrum in
Jupiter's cycle of sixty years; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%bha%} or
{%nakṣatra,%} the asterism of Bhaga or = the seven-
teenth asterism or latter Phalgunī (see {%nakṣatra%}).
<LEND>

<L>35320<pc>0705-a<k1>BAgya<k2>BAgya<h>2
2. {%bhāgya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhāga%} or fr. rt. {%bhaj%}),
to be shared, to be divided, divisible ({%= bhajya%});
entitled to a share; {%= bhāgika,%} forming a part, sub-
ject to a fractional deduction (e. g. {%bhāgyaṃ śatam,%}
one for a hundred, one in a hundred, one per cent);
lucky, fortunate [cf. {%nir-bh˚%}]; ({%am%} or {%āni%}), n. sing.
or plur. good or bad fortune (resulting from merit or
demerit in former existences); lot, luck, fate, destiny,
fortune; happiness, welfare; sensual pleasure (?);
{%(ena),%} ind. by good fortune, fortunately, happily.
{%—Bhāgya-krameṇa,%} ind. in course of fortune.
{%—Bhāgya-bhāva, as,%} m. state of fortune. {%—Bhā-%}
{%gya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having good qualities, possess-
ing good fortune, fortunate; happy, prosperous.
{%—Bhāgyavat-tā,%} f. fortunateness, good fortune.
{%—Bhāgya-vaśāt,%} ind. from the force or influence
of destiny, through the will of fate, through fortune.
{%—Bhāgya-vṛtti, is,%} f. course or state of fortune,
destiny. {%—Bhāgyodaya (˚ya-ud˚), as,%} m. rise or
dawn of fortune, commencement of good fortune,
rising prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>35321<pc>0705-a<k1>BAj<k2>BAj
{%Bhāj, k, k, k,%}¦ (usually at the end of comps.)
sharing, a sharer; sharing in, participating in, par-
taking of; entitled to; possessing, a possessor, ob-
taining, having, enjoying [cf. {%riktha-bh˚, mokṣa-%}
{%bh˚, svapna-bh˚%}]; perceiving, feeling, being sensible
of, devoting one's self to; forming a part of, be-
longing to (Ved.); joined or connected with; occu-
pying (as a seat, place), inhabiting, living in, dwelling
in or on [cf. {%viṣṭara-bh˚, harmya-bh˚, yamunā-%}
{%bh˚%}]; seeking, resorting to, going to, ({%aṅka-bhāj,%}
going to the side or to close proximity, close at hand,
soon to be accomplished); flowing to; revering,
worshipping (e. g. {%ananya-bhāj,%} worshipping no
other); honouring [cf. {%labdha-varṇa-bh˚%}]; falling
to the share or lot of; what is due, duty, concern,
business, (Bhaṭṭi-k. III. 21 {%= kartavya.%})
<LEND>

<L>35322<pc>0705-a<k1>BAjaka<k2>BAjaka
{%Bhājaka, as,%}¦ m. (fr. Caus. of rt. {%bhaj%}), dividing;
(in arithmetic) a divisor.
<LEND>

<L>35323<pc>0705-a<k1>BAjana<k2>BAjana
{%Bhājana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), the act of sharing,
dividing; (in arithmetic) division; a vessel, cup, pot,
dish, plate, (often found at the end of a comp., e. g.
{%jala-bh˚, pāna-bh˚%}); a particular measure = an
Āḍhaka = 64 Palas; a vessel (metaphorically), a re-
ceptacle for anything, repository, recipient, a place or
person in which anything is collected or in whom
any quality is conspicuous [cf. {%prīti-viśrambha-bh˚%}];
a fit person in general, a deserving person, clever or
capable person [cf. {%pātra%}]; the act of representing
or taking the place of, representation; (at the end
of comps.) a representative, deputy, anything which
serves for or is equivalent to (Ved.); {%bhājanena,%} in
[Page0705-b+ 75]
place of, in lieu of, instead of; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man;
the patronymic formed from this N., see Gaṇa Gopa-
vanādi to Pāṇ. II. 4, 67; {%(as, ā, am),%} sharing, par-
ticipating in, entitled to (at the end of comps.); relat-
ing to, belonging to (at the end of comps., Ved.).
{%—Bhājana-tā,%} f. or {%bhājana-tva, am,%} n. the state
of being a vessel or receptacle for anything, the pos-
sessing (of any quality &c.), the being a (fit) vessel,
fitness, worthiness, the being worthy of or entitled
to; a fit object. {%—Bhājana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
a word used in Nirukta IV. 10, XI. 19, XII. 17,
to explain the word {%bhadra%}. {%—Bhājanī-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having become a vessel or receptacle for
anything, i. e. having become a participator in or
possessor of.
<LEND>

<L>35324<pc>0705-b<k1>BAjayu<k2>BAjayu
{%Bhājayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. communicating, sharing
with others, generous, liberal.
<LEND>

<L>35325<pc>0705-b<k1>BAjita<k2>BAjita
{%Bhājita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shared, divided, distributed,
apportioned, allotted, portioned; ({%am%}), n. a share,
portion.
<LEND>

<L>35326<pc>0705-b<k1>BAjin<k2>BAjin
{%Bhājin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) sharing,
participating in; connected with.
<LEND>

<L>35327<pc>0705-b<k1>BAjI<k2>BAjI
{%Bhājī,%}¦ f. rice gruel ({%= śrāṇā%}).
<LEND>

<L>35328<pc>0705-b<k1>BAjya<k2>BAjya
{%Bhājya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be divided, divisible, to be
portioned or distributed; ({%am%}), n. a portion, share;
an inheritance; (in arithmetic) the dividend.
<LEND>

<L>35329<pc>0705-b<k1>BAgala<k2>BAgala
{#BAgala#}¦ {%bhāgala, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Bhagala.
<LEND>

<L>35330<pc>0705-b<k1>BAgalaka<k2>BAgalaka
{%Bhāgalaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or coming
from Bhagala.
<LEND>

<L>35331<pc>0705-b<k1>BAgali<k2>BAgali
{%Bhāgali, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhagala; N.
of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>35332<pc>0705-b<k1>BAgaleya<k2>BAgaleya
{%Bhāgaleya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhāgali.
<LEND>

<L>35333<pc>0705-b<k1>BAgIraTa<k2>BAgIraTa
{#BAgIraTa#}¦ {%bhāgīratha.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35334<pc>0705-b<k1>BANkAra<k2>BANkAra
{#BANkAra#}¦ {%bhāṅ-kāra,%} perhaps {%= jhaṅ-kāra,%}
q. v.; [cf. {%bherī-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35335<pc>0705-b<k1>BANga<k2>BANga
{#BANga#}¦ {%bhāṅga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bhaṅgā,%} hemp),
hempen, of hemp, made or consisting of hemp.
<LEND>

<L>35336<pc>0705-b<k1>BANgaka<k2>BANgaka
{%Bhāṅgaka%}¦ (fr. {%bhaṅga,%} a fracture), a tattered or
ragged cloth.
<LEND>

<L>35337<pc>0705-b<k1>BANgAsuri<k2>BANgAsuri
{%Bhāṅgāsuri, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhaṅgāsura%}), a patro-
nymic of Ṛtu-parṇa. {%—Bhāṅgāsuri-nṛpājñā (˚pa-%}
{%āj˚),%} f. the command of king Bhāṅgāsuri.
<LEND>

<L>35338<pc>0705-b<k1>BANgIna<k2>BANgIna
{%Bhāṅgīna, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhaṅgā%}), bearing or
growing hemp; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%kṣetra,%} a field of
hemp.
<LEND>

<L>35339<pc>0705-b<k1>BANgila<k2>BANgila
{#BANgila#}¦ {%bhāṅgila,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>35340<pc>0705-b<k1>BANgileya<k2>BANgileya
{%Bhāṅgileya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; {%(as, ī, am),%}
coming from Bhāṅgila (?).
<LEND>

<L>35341<pc>0705-b<k1>BAj<k2>BAj
{#BAj#}¦ {%bhāj, bhājana,%} &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35342<pc>0705-b<k1>BAjak<k2>BAjak
{#BAjak#}¦ {%bhājak,%} ind. quickly, swiftly; (pro-
bably incorrectly for {%tājak.%})
<LEND>

<L>35343<pc>0705-b<k1>BAwa<k2>BAwa
{#BAwa#}¦ {%bhāṭa%} (fr. rt. {%bhaṭ%}), wages, hire, rent.
<LEND>

<L>35344<pc>0705-b<k1>BAwaka<k2>BAwaka
{%Bhāṭaka, as,%}¦ m. price paid for anything, wages,
hire, rent.
<LEND>

<L>35345<pc>0705-b<k1>BAwi<k2>BAwi
{%Bhāṭi, is,%}¦ f. wages, hire, fee; earnings of prosti-
tutes.
<LEND>

<L>35346<pc>0705-b<k1>BAwwa<k2>BAwwa
{#BAwwa#}¦ {%bhāṭṭa, as,%} m. a follower of Bhaṭṭa
(i. e. Kumārila-bhaṭṭa); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Bhāṭṭa-cintā-maṇi, is,%} m., N. of a commentary
by Viśveśvara-bhaṭṭa (better known as Gāgā-bhaṭṭa)
on the Mīmāṃsā-sūtra. {%—Bhāṭṭa-tantra, am,%} n.,
N. of a work. {%—Bhāṭṭa-dinakara,%} N. of a com-
mentary by Bhaṭṭa Dinakara on the Mīmāṃsā work
Śāstra-dīpikā. {%—Bhāṭṭa-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary by Khaṇḍa-deva on Jaimini's Mīmāṃsā-sūtra.
{%—Bhāṭṭadīpikā-prabhāvalī,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary on the preceding work by Śambhu-bhaṭṭa.
{%—Bhāṭṭa-bhāṣā-prakāśikā,%} f. ‘explanation of the
language of the Bhāṭṭas,’ an index to the terminology
of the Bhāṭṭas by Nārāyaṇa-tīrtha or Nārāyaṇa-
muni. {%—Bhāṭṭa-bhāskara,%} N. of a work by Jīva-
deva, being a concise account of the various Mīmāṃsā
schools and their doctrines; [cf. {%bhāṭṭa-dinakara.%}]
{%—Bhāṭṭa-rahasya, am,%} n. ‘the secret or mystic
[Page0705-c+ 77]
doctrine of the Bhāṭṭas,’ N. of an elementary Mī-
māṃsā disquisition by Khaṇḍa-deva.
<LEND>

<L>35347<pc>0705-c<k1>BAqitAyana<k2>BAqitAyana
{#BAqitAyana#}¦ {%bhāḍitāyana, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Bhaḍita.
<LEND>

<L>35348<pc>0705-c<k1>BAqilAyana<k2>BAqilAyana
{#BAqilAyana#}¦ {%bhāḍilāyana, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Bhaḍila, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35349<pc>0705-c<k1>BAR<k2>BAR
{#BAR#}¦ {%bhāṇ,%} Ved. (onomatopoetic) imitation
of the noise of breathing or hissing.
<LEND>

<L>35350<pc>0705-c<k1>BARa<k2>BARa
{#BARa#}¦ {%bhāṇa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%bhaṇ,%} q. v.), N.
of a sort of dramatic entertainment (in which one
only of the interlocutors appears on the scene, or
described as a narrative of some intrigue told either
by the hero or a third person). {%—Bhāṇa-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>35351<pc>0705-c<k1>BARaka<k2>BARaka
{%Bhāṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a proclaimer, announcer, de-
clarer.
<LEND>

<L>35352<pc>0705-c<k1>BARikA<k2>BARikA
{%Bhāṇikā,%}¦ f. a kind of dramatic performance; [cf.
{%bhāṇa%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>35353<pc>0705-c<k1>BARqa<k2>BARqa
{#BARqa#}¦ {%bhāṇḍa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%bhaṇ%} or {%bhaṇḍ?%}),
the plant Thespesia Populneoides; ({%ī%}), f. (perhaps) {%=%}
{%bhaṇḍī,%} Rubia Munjista [cf. {%kāka-bh˚, kāla-bhāṇ-%}
{%ḍikā%}]; ({%am%}), n. any vessel, pot, pan, cup, plate,
dish, pail, vat, utensil [cf. {%pāka-bh˚, pāna-bh˚%}];
any chest, box, trunk, case [cf. {%kṣura-bh˚%}]; any
implement, tool, instrument; any musical instrument
({%= vādya-bh˚%}); a pack or bale (of goods or mer-
chandise); horse-trappings, harness; an ornament in
general; the stock (of a shopkeeper), goods, wares,
merchandise, the capital or principal (of a merchant);
the bed of a river, the space between its banks;
mimicry, buffoonery, the practice of the Bhaṇḍa or
professional jester; ({%ās%}), m. pl. wares, merchandise.
{%—Bhāṇḍa-gopaka, as,%} m. the keeper of vessels or
utensils (in a Buddhist temple). {%—Bhāṇḍa-pati, is,%}
m. a possessor of wares, a merchant. {%—Bhāṇḍa-%}
{%puṭa, as,%} m. ‘sharpener of instruments, i. e. razors,’
a barber. {%—Bhāṇḍa-puṣpa, as,%} m. a sort of snake.
{%—Bhāṇḍa-prati-bhāṇḍaka, am,%} n. ‘commodity
for commodity,’ computation of the exchange of
goods, barter (in arithmetic). {%—Bhāṇḍa-bhajaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the distributer of vessels or utensils (in a
Buddhist temple). {%—Bhāṇḍa-bharaka, as,%} m. the
contents of any vessel. {%—Bhāṇḍa-mūlya, am,%} n.
capital consisting of wares. {%—Bhāṇḍa-vādana, am,%}
n. playing on a musical instrument. {%—Bhāṇḍa-śālā,%}
f. a store-house, store-room, magazine. {%—Bhāṇḍā-%}
{%gāra (˚ḍa-āg˚), am,%} n. a store-room, store-house, place
where household goods and utensils are kept; a
magazine, treasury; a treasure, store. {%—Bhāṇḍāgā-%}
{%rika, as,%} m. the overseer of a store-house, store-
keeper, keeper of magazine; a steward, treasurer.
{%—Bhāṇḍānusārin (˚ḍa-an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} hanging to
a pot or vessel. {%—Bhāṇḍā-pura, am,%} n., N. of a
city. {%—Bhāṇḍodara (˚ḍa-ud˚), am,%} n. the cavity or
interior of a vessel. {%—Bhāṇḍopapurāṇa (˚ḍa-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>35354<pc>0705-c<k1>BARqaka<k2>BARqaka
{%Bhāṇḍaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a small vessel, cup,
plate, utensil, box, chest; ({%ikā%}), f. an implement,
tool, utensil; {%= bhāṇḍī,%} see {%kāla-bh˚; (am),%} n.
goods, merchandise.
<LEND>

<L>35355<pc>0705-c<k1>BARqAyana<k2>BARqAyana
{%Bhāṇḍāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>35356<pc>0705-c<k1>BARqAyani<k2>BARqAyani
{%Bhāṇḍāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic (probably)
from Bhāṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>35357<pc>0705-c<k1>BARqAra<k2>BARqAra
{%Bhāṇḍāra = bhāṇḍāgāra%}¦ (of which it is a corrupt
or contracted form). {%—Bhāṇḍāra-gṛha, am,%} n. a
store-house.
<LEND>

<L>35358<pc>0705-c<k1>BARqArika<k2>BARqArika
{%Bhāṇḍārika, as,%}¦ m. {%= bhāṇḍāgārika,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35359<pc>0705-c<k1>BARqArin<k2>BARqArin
{%Bhāṇḍārin, ī,%}¦ m. the keeper of a store-house,
steward, treasurer ({%= bhāṇḍāgārika%}).
<LEND>

<L>35360<pc>0705-c<k1>BARqI<k2>BARqI
{%Bhāṇḍī,%}¦ a razor-case; [cf. {%bhāṇḍi-vāha, bhāṇ-%}
{%ḍila,%} and {%kṣura-bhāṇḍa.%}] {%—Bhāṇḍi-vāha, as,%} m.
a barber. {%—Bhāṇḍi-śālā,%} f. (probably) a barber's
shop.
<LEND>

<L>35361<pc>0705-c<k1>BARqika<k2>BARqika
{%Bhāṇḍika, as,%}¦ m. a barber; [cf. {%bhāṇḍila,%}
{%bhāṇḍi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35362<pc>0705-c<k1>BARqijaNGi<k2>BARqijaNGi
{%Bhāṇḍijaṅghi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhaṇḍi-
jaṅgha.
<LEND>
[Page0706-a+ 75]

<L>35363<pc>0706-a<k1>BARqita<k2>BARqita
{%Bhāṇḍita, ās,%}¦ m. pl. of {%bhāṇḍitya%} below, see
Gaṇa Kaṇvādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 111.
<LEND>

<L>35364<pc>0706-a<k1>BARqitAyana<k2>BARqitAyana
{%Bhāṇḍitāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhaṇ-
ḍita; [cf. {%bhāḍitāyana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35365<pc>0706-a<k1>BARqitya<k2>BARqitya
{%Bhāṇḍitya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhaṇḍita;
[cf. {%bhāṇḍita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35366<pc>0706-a<k1>BARqinI<k2>BARqinI
{%Bhāṇḍinī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%bhāṇḍa%}), a chest, a basket ({%=%}
{%mañjūṣā%}).
<LEND>

<L>35367<pc>0706-a<k1>BARqila<k2>BARqila
{%Bhāṇḍila, as,%}¦ m. a barber.
<LEND>

<L>35368<pc>0706-a<k1>BARqilAyana<k2>BARqilAyana
{%Bhāṇḍilāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhaṇ-
ḍila.
<LEND>

<L>35369<pc>0706-a<k1>BARqIra<k2>BARqIra
{%Bhāṇḍīra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a lofty Nyag-rodha tree
on the Govardhana in Vṛndā-vana; {%= vaṭa,%} the
Indian fig-tree [cf. {%bhaṇḍīra%}]; N. of a Dānava.
{%—Bhāṇḍīra-vana, am,%} n., N. of a forest. {%—Bhāṇ-%}
{%ḍīravana-vāsin, ī,%} m. ‘dwelling in the Bhāṇḍīra
forest,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>35370<pc>0706-a<k1>BAti<k2>BAti
{#BAti#}¦ {%bhāti, bhātu.%} See p. 704, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35371<pc>0706-a<k1>BAdiga<k2>BAdiga
{#BAdiga#}¦ {%bhādiga, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35372<pc>0706-a<k1>BAdra<k2>BAdra
{#BAdra#}¦ {%bhādra, as,%} m. (fr. {%bhadra%}), the month
Bhādra, {%= bhādrapada%} below; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%tithi,%}
the day of full moon in the month Bhādra.
<LEND>

<L>35373<pc>0706-a<k1>BAdradArava<k2>BAdradArava
{%Bhādradārava, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or coming
from Bhadra-dāru, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35374<pc>0706-a<k1>BAdrapada<k2>BAdrapada
{%Bhādrapada, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhadra-padā%}), the
month Bhādra (a rainy month corresponding to a
period in our calendar from about the middle of
August to the middle of September); ({%ā%}), f. (also {%e,%}
du., {%ās,%} pl.), {%= bhadra-padā,%} a name common to
the third and fourth lunar asterisms or Nakṣatras
[cf. {%nakṣatra%}]; ({%ī%}), f. the day of full moon in the
month Bhādrapada.
<LEND>

<L>35375<pc>0706-a<k1>BAdramAtura<k2>BAdramAtura
{%Bhādramātura, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhadra-mātṛ%}), the
son of a virtuous or handsome mother.
<LEND>

<L>35376<pc>0706-a<k1>BAdramOYja<k2>BAdramOYja
{%Bhādramauñja, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. made from
Bhadra (a kind of Cyperus grass) and Muñja.
<LEND>

<L>35377<pc>0706-a<k1>BAdravarmaRa<k2>BAdravarmaRa
{%Bhādravarmaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from
Bhadra-varman.
<LEND>

<L>35378<pc>0706-a<k1>BAdraSarmi<k2>BAdraSarmi
{%Bhādraśarmi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhadra-
śarman.
<LEND>

<L>35379<pc>0706-a<k1>BAdrasAma<k2>BAdrasAma
{%Bhādrasāma, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhadra-
sāman.
<LEND>

<L>35380<pc>0706-a<k1>BAna<k2>BAna
{#BAna#}¦ {%bhāna, bhānu,%} &c. See p. 704, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35381<pc>0706-a<k1>BAnta<k2>BAnta
{#BAnta#}¦ {%bhānta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. perhaps a
participle of rt. {%bhām%} below; (according to Mahī-
dhara) {%= vajra-rūpa,%} having the shape of a thunder-
bolt, or {%= candra,%} the moon.
<LEND>

<L>35382<pc>0706-a<k1>BAnda<k2>BAnda
{#BAnda#}¦ {%bhān-da, am,%} n., N. of an Upa-
Purāṇa (see under 2. {%bhā,%} p. 704, col. 1).
<LEND>

<L>35383<pc>0706-a<k1>BAm<k2>BAm
{#BAm#}¦ {%bhām,%} cl. 1. A. {%bhāmate, babhāme,%}
&c., or (by Dhātu-pāṭha XXXV. 20) cl.
10. P. {%bhāmayati,%} &c., Ved. to be angry or wrath-
ful; to be impatient: Intens. {%bābhāmyate,%} to be
very angry.
<LEND>

<L>35384<pc>0706-a<k1>BAma<k2>BAma<h>2
2. {%bhāma, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see p. 704, col. 2; for
3. see below), passion, wrath, fury, anger; ({%ā%}), f. a
passionate woman; {%= satya-bhāmā,%} one of the
wives of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>35385<pc>0706-a<k1>BAmita<k2>BAmita
{%Bhāmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. enraged, angry.
<LEND>

<L>35386<pc>0706-a<k1>BAmin<k2>BAmin<h>2
2. {%bhāmin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (for 1. see p. 704, col. 2),
passionate, angry; ({%inī%}), f. an angry or passionate
woman, vixen, (often used as a term of endearment,
in the same sense as {%māninī.%})
<LEND>

<L>35387<pc>0706-a<k1>BAma<k2>BAma<h>3
{#BAma#} 3¦. {%bhāma%} or {%bhāmaka, as,%} m. a sister's
husband.
<LEND>

<L>35388<pc>0706-a<k1>BAmaha<k2>BAmaha
{#BAmaha#}¦ {%bhāmaha, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Mano-ramā commentary and of a treatise on
the art of rhetoric.
<LEND>

<L>35389<pc>0706-a<k1>BAyajAtya<k2>BAyajAtya
{#BAyajAtya#}¦ {%bhāyajātya, as,%} m. (fr. {%bhaya-%}
{%jāta),%} a patronymic of Kapi-vana; of Nikothaka.
<LEND>

<L>35390<pc>0706-a<k1>BAra<k2>BAra
{#BAra#}¦ {%bhāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%bhṛ%}), a burden,
load, weight, gravity [cf. {%ati-bh˚, aṃsa-bh˚%}]; heavy
work, labour, toil, trouble; a large quantity, mass,
bulk, (often connected with words meaning ‘hair,’
e. g. {%jaṭā-bhāra-dhara,%} wearing a great quantity of
[Page0706-b+ 79]
matted hair); a particular weight = 20 Tulās = 2000
Palas of gold; a pole or yoke for carrying burdens
[cf. {%udaka-bh˚%}]; an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Bhāra-%}
{%jīvin, ī,%} m. one who earns his livelihood by carrying
loads. {%—Bhāra-bhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. bearing or
carrying a load or weight. {%—Bhāra-bhūti-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Bhāra-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
{%= bhāra-bhārin%}. {%—Bhāra-yaṣṭi, is,%} f. a pole or
yoke (generally laid over the shoulder) for carry-
ing burdens. {%—Bhāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a
weight or load, loaded, burdened, bearing a burden.
{%—Bhāravat-tva, am,%} n. the state of carrying a
load, weightiness, ponderousness. {%—Bhāra-vāh, vāṭ,%}
{%bhārauhī, vāṭ,%} bearing a burden, carrying a load.
{%—Bhāra-vāha, as,%} m. a bearer of burdens, porter,
carrier; ({%ī%}), f. indigo. {%—Bhāra-vāhana, as,%} m. a
burden-bearer, beast of burden, pack-bearer; ({%am%}),
n. a vehicle for loads, a cart, waggon. {%—Bhāra-%}
{%vāhika, as, ī, am,%} load-bearing, carrying burdens;
({%as%}), m. a load-bearer, porter. {%—Bhāra-vāhin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} load-bearing, carrying a burden; ({%ī%}), m. a
burden-bearer, porter. {%—Bhāra-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a
fragrant substance commonly called Kākṣī (con-
sidered variously as a vegetable or a mineral product).
{%—Bhāra-saha, as, ā, am,%} burden-bearing, able to
carry a great weight, very strong or powerful. {%—Bhā-%}
{%ra-sādhana, as, ī, am,%} or {%bhāra-sāhin, ī, inī, i,%}
accomplishing difficult feats (said of certain weapons),
effecting great objects. {%—Bhāra-hara, as, ā, am,%} or
{%bhāra-hāra, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} load-bearing, carrying
a weight, bearing burdens; ({%as%}), m. a burden-bearer,
porter. {%—Bhāra-hārika, as, ī, am,%} burden-bearing,
carrying a load; relating or referring to the carrying
of loads. {%—Bhāra-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} load-bearing,
carrying weights; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Bhārākrānta (˚ra-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} oppressed
by a burden, overburdened, heavily laden, bearing a
heavy burden; ({%ā%}), f. a species of the Atyaṣṭi
metre, four times <lang n="greek">— — — —, ∪ ∪ ∪ ∪ ∪ —, ∪ — ∪ ∪ — ∪ —;</lang>
[cf. {%mandākrāntā.%}] {%—Bhārāvataraṇa%} or {%bhārā-%}
{%vatāraṇa (˚ra-av˚), am,%} n. the taking down or
removal of a burden, taking away a burden. {%—Bhā-%}
{%roḍhi (˚ra-ūḍhi), is,%} f. the bearing of a burden.
{%—Bhāroddharaṇa (˚ra-ud˚), am,%} n. the act of
raising up or lifting a burden. {%—Bhārodvaha (˚ra-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. a burden-carrier, porter. {%—Bhāropajī-%}
{%vana (˚ra-up˚), am,%} n. living by burdens, earning
a livelihood by carrying weights. {%—Bhārauhī,%} f.,
see {%bhāra-vāh%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35391<pc>0706-b<k1>BAraka<k2>BAraka
{%Bhāraka, am,%}¦ n. a load, burden, weight, a par-
ticular weight; {%(as, ikā, am),%} loaded with, (at the
end of comps.; cf. {%phaṇi-bhārikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>35392<pc>0706-b<k1>BArAya<k2>BArAya
{%Bhārāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%bhārāyate,%} &c., to become a
burden, form a load; to be like a load.
<LEND>

<L>35393<pc>0706-b<k1>BArika<k2>BArika
{%Bhārika, as, ā, am,%}¦ forming a load, heavy;
swollen (said of a particular kind of elephantiasis);
({%as%}), m. a burden-bearer, porter.
<LEND>

<L>35394<pc>0706-b<k1>BArin<k2>BArin
{%Bhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ bearing a load, carrying a
burden, a bearer, porter [cf. {%bhāra-bh˚%}]; having
weight, heavy, ponderous. {%—Bhāri-tva, am,%} n.
heaviness.
<LEND>

<L>35395<pc>0706-b<k1>BAraNgI<k2>BAraNgI
{#BAraNgI#}¦ {%bhāraṅgī,%} f., see Gaṇa Kāśyādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 116.
<LEND>

<L>35396<pc>0706-b<k1>BAraNgika<k2>BAraNgika
{%Bhāraṅgika, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} an adj. from the
preceding.
<LEND>

<L>35397<pc>0706-b<k1>BAraRqa<k2>BAraRqa
{#BAraRqa#}¦ {%bhāraṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a fabulous
bird, (also written {%bhāruṇḍa, bheraṇḍa, bheruṇḍa%});
({%ī%}), f. the female of the above bird.
<LEND>

<L>35398<pc>0706-b<k1>BArata<k2>BArata
{#BArata#}¦ {%bhārata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bharata%}), de-
scended from Bharata; belonging or relating to the
Bharatas; (with {%saṅgrāma, samiti, yuddha, sa-%}
{%mara%}) the war or battle of the Bharatas; (with
{%kathā, ākhyāna, itihāsa%}) the story of the Bharatas,
the history or narrative of their war, (in this sense
also {%bhāratam,%} n.); (with {%varṣa%}) India (so called
from its king Bharata, son of Dushyanta; in this
sense also {%bhāratam,%} n.); an inhabitant of India or
Bhārata-varṣa; {%Bhārataṃ saras,%} N. of a lake;
({%as%}), m. a descendant of Bharata; N. of Agni or
[Page0706-c+ 76]
Fire (so called, according to Sāy., either ‘as sprung
from the priests called Bharatas,’ or ‘as bearer of the
oblation’); an actor, a mime [cf. {%bharata%}]; N. of
Deva-śravas; of Deva-rāta; an epithet of the sun
shining on the south of Meru; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a Vedic
goddess (invoked among the Ā-prī deities together
with Ilā and Sarasvatī [cf. {%ā-prī%}] or sometimes with
Hotrā and Varūtrī; according to Yāska, Nirukta
VIII. 13, she is a daughter of Āditya); the goddess
of speech, Sarasvatī; speech, voice, word, eloquence,
literary composition, the dramatic art, dramatic reci-
tation or declamation; (with {%vṛtti%}) a particular kind
of style; a quail; N. of a river; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a
teacher (‘personified speech’); {%Aśva-medha Bhā-%}
{%rata,%} N. of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda V. 27.
{%—Bhārata-tātparya-nirṇaya, as,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Bhārata-bhāva-dīpa, as,%} m. ‘light of the
meaning of the Bhārata,’ N. of Nīla-kaṇṭha's com-
mentary on the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Bhārata-saṅgra-%}
{%ha-dīpikā,%} f. {%= bhāratārtha-dīpikā,%} q. v. {%—Bhā-%}
{%rata-sattama, as,%} m. the best of the descendants
of Bharata. {%—Bhāratācārya (˚ta-āc˚), as,%} m., N.
of a preceptor; of Arjuna-miśra (a commentator on
the Mahā-bhārata). {%—Bhāratārtha-dīpikā (˚ta-%}
{%ar˚),%} f. ‘light of the meaning of the Bhārata,’ N. of
a commentary by Arjuna-miśra on the Mahā-bhārata.
{%—Bhāratārtha-prakāśa, as,%} m. ‘light of the
meaning of the Bhārata,’ N. of Nārāyaṇa's commen-
tary on the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Bhāratī-kavi, is,%} m.,
N. of a poet mentioned in the Śārṅgadhara-paddhati.
{%—Bhāratī-kṛṣṇācārya (˚ṇa-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of
a preceptor. {%—Bhāratī-candra, as,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Bhāratī-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred
bathing-place; ({%as%}), m., N. of the author of the
philosophical treatise Pañca-daśī, (he was preceptor
of Mādhavācārya.) {%—Bhāratī-yati, is,%} m., N. of
the author of the Tattva-kaumudī-vyākhyā. {%—Bhā-%}
{%ratī-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. accompanied by Bhāratī;
({%ān%}), m. an epithet of Indra. {%—Bhāratī-śrī-nṛ-%}
{%siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>35399<pc>0706-c<k1>BArateya<k2>BArateya
{%Bhārateya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhārata
(or from Bharata).
<LEND>

<L>35400<pc>0706-c<k1>BAradvAja<k2>BAradvAja
{#BAradvAja#}¦ {%bhāradvāja, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bharad-%}
{%vāja%}), coming from or relating to Bharad-vāja; ({%as%}),
m., N. of Śūṣa Vāhneya; of Śaunahotra; of Satya-
vāha; of Sukeśan; of Śauṅga; of Droṇa (who was
son of Bharad-vāja and preceptor of the Kurus and
Pāṇḍus); of one of the seven Ṛṣis; of a son of
Bṛhas-pati; of the Muni Agastya; of a grammarian;
the planet Mars (according to the Graha-yajña-tattva);
a skylark [cf. {%bharad-vāja%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people [cf. {%bharad-vāja%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a particular species
of bird; the wild cotton shrub; N. of a river; ({%am%}),
n. a bone; N. of a country; (a various reading for
{%bharad-vāja.%}) {%—Bhāradvājī-putra, as,%} m., Ved.,
N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>35401<pc>0706-c<k1>BAradvAjaka<k2>BAradvAjaka
{%Bhāradvājaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating
to Bharad-vāja.
<LEND>

<L>35402<pc>0706-c<k1>BAradvAjAyana<k2>BAradvAjAyana
{%Bhāradvājāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from
Bharad-vāja.
<LEND>

<L>35403<pc>0706-c<k1>BAradvAjin<k2>BAradvAjin
{%Bhāradvājin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%bharad-vāja%} or
{%bhāradvāja%}), N. of a school; [cf. {%bharad-vājin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35404<pc>0706-c<k1>BAradvAjIya<k2>BAradvAjIya
{%Bhāradvājīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming from or relat-
ing to Bhāradvāja; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the school of
the grammarian Bhāradvāja.
<LEND>

<L>35405<pc>0706-c<k1>BArameya<k2>BArameya
{#BArameya#}¦ {%bhārameya, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Bharama, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35406<pc>0706-c<k1>BAraya<k2>BAraya
{#BAraya#}¦ {%bhāraya, as,%} m. {%= bhāradvāja,%} a sky-
lark.
<LEND>

<L>35407<pc>0706-c<k1>BArava<k2>BArava
{#BArava#}¦ {%bhārava, am,%} n. a bow-string; ({%ī%}),
f. sacred basil.
<LEND>

<L>35408<pc>0706-c<k1>BAravi<k2>BAravi
{#BAravi#}¦ {%bhāravi, is,%} m., N. of the author of
the poem called Kirātārjunīya.
<LEND>

<L>35409<pc>0706-c<k1>BArAya<k2>BArAya
{#BArAya#}¦ {%bhārāya.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35410<pc>0706-c<k1>BAri<k2>BAri
{#BAri#}¦ {%bhāri, is,%} m. a lion.
<LEND>

<L>35411<pc>0706-c<k1>BArika<k2>BArika
{#BArika#}¦ {%bhārika,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page0707-a+ 76]

<L>35412<pc>0707-a<k1>BArujika<k2>BArujika
{#BArujika#}¦ {%bhārujika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bharuja%}),
relating to or coming from a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>35413<pc>0707-a<k1>BAruRqa<k2>BAruRqa
{#BAruRqa#}¦ {%bhāruṇḍa, as,%} m. {%= bhāraṇḍa,%} q. v.;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman; of a wood mentioned
in Rāmāyaṇa II. 71, 5.
<LEND>

<L>35414<pc>0707-a<k1>BArga<k2>BArga
{#BArga#}¦ {%bhārga, as,%} m. a king of the Bhargas;
N. of a son of Pratardana; of a king also called
Bharga; ({%ī%}), f. a queen of the Bhargas; the plant
Clerodendrum Siphonanthus. {%—Bhārga-bhumi, is,%}
m., N. of a king; [cf. {%bharga-bhūmi%} and {%bhṛgu-%}
{%bhūmi.%}] {%—Bhārga-vana, am,%} n., N. of a forest;
(a various reading has {%bhānu-vana.%}) {%—Bhārga-%}
{%śrī-kānta-miśra, as,%} m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>35415<pc>0707-a<k1>BArgAyaRa<k2>BArgAyaRa
{%Bhārgāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bharga%}), Ved. a patro-
nymic of Sutvan.
<LEND>

<L>35416<pc>0707-a<k1>BArgi<k2>BArgi
{%Bhārgi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bharga.
<LEND>

<L>35417<pc>0707-a<k1>BArgaleSvaratIrTa<k2>BArgaleSvaratIrTa
{#BArgaleSvaratIrTa#}¦ {%bhārgaleśvara-tīrtha (˚la-%}
{%īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>35418<pc>0707-a<k1>BArgava<k2>BArgava
{#BArgava#}¦ {%bhārgava, as, ī, am,%} relating to or
coming from Bhṛgu, belonging to Bhṛgu; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of Cyavana [cf. {%caṇḍa-bh˚%}]; of Gṛtsa-mada;
of Dvi-gat; of Dṛśāna; of Iṭala; of Mārkaṇḍeya;
of Śaunaka; of Ṛcīka; of Jamad-agni; of Paraśu-
rāma; of Pramati; of Śiva; the planet Venus (pro-
perly a patronymic of Śukra, regent of the planet
Venus and preceptor of the Daityas); an archer, a
good archer ({%= dhanvin, su-dhanvan%}); an ele-
phant; ({%ās%}), m. pl. ‘the descendants of Bhṛgu,’
commonly called Bhṛgavas, N. of a particular tribe;
({%ī%}), f. a female descendant of Bhṛgu; N. of Deva-
yāni; an epithet of Lakṣmī; an epithet of Pārvatī;
{%= dūrvā,%} bent grass, Panicum Dactylon; {%= nīla-%}
{%dūrvā; = śveta-dūrvā%}. {%—Bhārgava-dīpikā,%} f., N.
of a work. {%—Bhārgava-priya, as,%} m. ‘dear to
Śukra or to the planet Venus,’ a diamond. {%—Bhārga-%}
{%vārcana-dīpikā (˚va-ar˚),%} f., N. of a work; [cf.
{%bhārgava-dīpikā.%}] {%—Bhārgavālāpa (˚va-āl˚), as,%}
m., N. of the third Act of the Abhirāma-maṇi-nāṭaka.
{%—Bhārgavopapurāṇa (˚va-up˚), am,%} n., N. of
an Upa-Purāṇa. {%—Bhārgavopākhyāna (˚va-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the thirteenth chapter of the Vāsiṣṭha-
rāmāyaṇa, commonly called Yoga-vāsiṣṭha.
<LEND>

<L>35419<pc>0707-a<k1>BArgavIya<k2>BArgavIya
{%Bhārgavīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or coming
from Bhārgava.
<LEND>

<L>35420<pc>0707-a<k1>BArdvAjI<k2>BArdvAjI
{#BArdvAjI#}¦ {%bhārdvājī,%} f. {%= bhāradvājī,%} the
wild cotton shrub.
<LEND>

<L>35421<pc>0707-a<k1>BArman<k2>BArman
{#BArman#}¦ {%bhārman%} (fr. rt. {%bhṛ%}), Ved. bring-
ing, waiting upon, serving.
<LEND>

<L>35422<pc>0707-a<k1>BArmya<k2>BArmya
{#BArmya#}¦ {%bhārmya, as,%} m. a patronymic of
Mudgala.
<LEND>

<L>35423<pc>0707-a<k1>BArmyaSva<k2>BArmyaSva
{%Bhārmyaśva, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhṛmyaśva%}), a patro-
nymic of Mugdala; [cf. {%bharmyāśva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35424<pc>0707-a<k1>BArya<k2>BArya
{#BArya#}¦ {%bhārya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%bhṛ%}), to be
borne, to be supported, to be cherished or nourished;
to be maintained, dependent for a livelihood on
another; ({%as%}), m. a servant, dependent, mercenary;
({%ā%}), f. a wife (espoused according to the ritual of the
Vedas), any wife; the female of an animal. {%—Bhār-%}
{%yāṭa (˚yā-āṭa), as, ā, am,%} living by the prostitution
of a wife; [cf. {%patny-āṭa.%}] {%—Bhāryāṭika, as,%} m.
a husband under the rule of his wife, a hen-pecked
husband; a species of antelope ({%= hariṇāntara%});
N. of a Muni. {%—Bhāryā-tva, am,%} n. wifehood,
the state of being a wife, the condition of a wife.
{%—Bhāryādhikārika (˚yā-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} relat-
ing to the chapter on wives. {%—Bhāryā-pati-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the being man and wife, conjugal union.
{%—Bhāryā-patī,%} m. du. husband and wife. {%—Bhār-%}
{%yārthin (˚yā-ar˚), ī,%} m. seeking or desiring a wife.
{%—Bhāryā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a wife. {%—Bhār-%}
{%yā-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the tree Cæsalpina Sappan {%(=%}
{%pattaṅga)%}. {%—Bhāryoḍha (˚yā-ūḍha), as,%} m. {%=%}
{%ūḍha-bhārya,%} married (said of a man).
<LEND>

<L>35425<pc>0707-a<k1>BAryaka<k2>BAryaka
{%Bhāryaka = bhāryā,%}¦ a wife, (at the end of a
comp., e. g. {%sa-bh˚,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>35426<pc>0707-a<k1>BAryAru<k2>BAryAru
{%Bhāryāru, us,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhāryā%}), the father of a
[Page0707-b+ 74]
child by another man's wife; a kind of deer or
antelope; N. of a mountain.
<div n="P"/>{#BArvara#}¦ {%bhārvara, as,%} m., Ved. (according to
Sāy., Ṛg-veda IV. 21, 7), a N. of Indra as son of
Bharvara, = Jagad-bhartṛ, Prajā-pati, (perhaps to be
referred to the horses of Indra as ‘bearing,’ ‘carry-
ing,’ fr. rt. {%bhṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>35427<pc>0707-b<k1>BArSya<k2>BArSya
{#BArSya#}¦ {%bhārśya, am,%} n. (fr. {%bhṛśa%}), vehe-
mence, violence; excessiveness.
<LEND>

<L>35428<pc>0707-b<k1>BAla<k2>BAla
{#BAla#}¦ {%bhāla, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%bhā;%} according to some also {%bhālas,%} m.), the fore-
head, brow; light, lustre. {%—Bhāla-kṛt, t,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Bhāla-candra, as,%} m. ‘having the
moon on his forehead,’ an epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Bhā-%}
{%lacandrācārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
{%—Bhāla-darśana, am,%} n. red lead (‘appearing on
the forehead,’ being used to stain the forehead with
lines &c.). {%—Bhāla-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} watching
the brow or countenance (said of a servant who is
attentive to a master's wishes). {%—Bhāla-dṛś, k,%} or
{%bhāla-locana, as,%} m. ‘having an eye in the fore-
head,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhālāṅka (˚la-aṅ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having (auspicious) marks on the fore-
head; ({%as%}), m. a man born with lucky lines on his
forehead; a sort of fish (known as the Rohi, Cypri-
nus Rohita); a tortoise; an epithet of Śiva; a saw;
a species of leguminous plant or pot-herb.
<LEND>

<L>35429<pc>0707-b<k1>BAlu<k2>BAlu
{%Bhālu, us,%}¦ m. the sun; [cf. {%bhānu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35430<pc>0707-b<k1>BAlandana<k2>BAlandana
{#BAlandana#}¦ {%bhālandana, as,%} m., Ved. a patro-
nymic from Bhalandana, N. of Vatsa-prī; (also read
{%bālandana.%})
<LEND>

<L>35431<pc>0707-b<k1>BAlandanaka<k2>BAlandanaka
{%Bhālandanaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or coming
from Bhalandana.
<LEND>

<L>35432<pc>0707-b<k1>BAlu<k2>BAlu
{#BAlu#}¦ {%bhālu.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>35433<pc>0707-b<k1>BAluka<k2>BAluka
{#BAluka#}¦ {%bhāluka, as,%} m. a bear; [cf. {%bhalla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35434<pc>0707-b<k1>BAlUka<k2>BAlUka
{%Bhālūka, as,%}¦ m. {%= bhāluka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35435<pc>0707-b<k1>BAluki<k2>BAluki
{#BAluki#}¦ {%bhāluki, is,%} m. (probably a patro-
nymic), N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>35436<pc>0707-b<k1>BAlukin<k2>BAlukin
{%Bhālukin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor ({%= vālukin%}).
<LEND>

<L>35437<pc>0707-b<k1>BAlukIputra<k2>BAlukIputra
{%Bhālukī-putra, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhālukī,%} f.), Ved.
‘the son of Bhālukī,’ N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>35438<pc>0707-b<k1>BAlla<k2>BAlla
{#BAlla#}¦ {%bhālla, as, ī, am,%} relating to or com-
ing from Bhalla, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35439<pc>0707-b<k1>BAllavi<k2>BAllavi
{#BAllavi#}¦ {%bhāllavi, is,%} m. a patronymic from
Bhallavi.
<LEND>

<L>35440<pc>0707-b<k1>BAllavin<k2>BAllavin
{%Bhāllavin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils of Bhallavin (?).
{%—Bhāllavi-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n. and {%bhāllavi-%}
{%śākhā,%} f. and {%bhāllavi-śruti, is,%} f. and {%bhāllavy-%}
{%upaniṣad, t,%} f., N. of certain Vedic works.
<LEND>

<L>35441<pc>0707-b<k1>BAllaveya<k2>BAllaveya
{%Bhāllaveya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic from
Bhāllavi, of Indra-dyumna; N. of a preceptor.
{%—Bhāllaveya-śruti, is,%} f., N. of a Vedic work.
{%—Bhāllaveyopaniṣad (˚ya-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an
Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>35442<pc>0707-b<k1>BAlluka<k2>BAlluka
{#BAlluka#}¦ {%bhālluka%} or {%bhāllūka, as,%} m. a bear;
[cf. {%bhalla, bhalluka, bhallūka, bhāluka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35443<pc>0707-b<k1>BAlleya<k2>BAlleya
{#BAlleya#}¦ {%bhālleya, as, ī, am,%} relating to or
coming from Bhalla, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35444<pc>0707-b<k1>BAva<k2>BAva
{#BAva#}¦ {%bhāva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%bhū%}), becom-
ing, being, existing, existence, taking place, occurring,
appearing, appearance; state of being, condition of
existence, state, condition, relationship; manner,
mode; true condition or state, truth, ({%bhāvena,%} in
truth, really, truly); manner of being, nature, natural
state, innate property, temperament, disposition,
temper, ({%eko bhāvaḥ,%} a simple or artless nature);
any state of mind or body, affection, sentiment, feel-
ing, emotion, passion, (in the dramatic system of the
Hindūs, two kinds of Bhāvas are usually enumerated,
see {%sthāyin, vyabhi-cārin;%} but other divisions are
also given, see {%anu-bhāva, vi-bhāva, sāttvika-%}
{%bhāva%}); feeling of love, inclination, attachment,
({%bhāvaṃ teṣu cakre,%} he felt an affection for them;
{%sā tasmin bhāvam babandha,%} she fixed her affec-
[Page0707-c+ 81]
tions on him); inclination or disposition of mind,
({%yādṛśena bhāvena,%} with whatever disposition or
condition of mind); sentiment, idea, thought, opinion,
supposition, conjecture; resolution, intention, pur-
pose, ({%dṛḍho bhāvaḥ,%} a firm resolution); purport,
tenor, scope, drift; meaning, sense, ({%iti bhāvaḥ,%}
‘such is the sense,’ constantly used by Indian com-
mentators at the end of their interpretations); con-
templation, reflection, abstract meditation; the seat
of the feelings and affections, the heart, soul, mind,
({%parituṣṭena bhāvena,%} with a pleased mind, Manu
IV. 227; {%yadā manyeta bhāvena,%} when he believes
in his mind, Manu VII. 171; but according to
Kullūka, {%bhāvena%} here {%= tattva-tas,%} truly); that
which is or exists, a being, living creature, thing,
matter, object, substance, ({%sarva-bhāveṣu niḥspṛ-%}
{%haḥ,%} one who is free from attachment to all [earthly]
objects); behaviour, conduct, act, action, movement,
gesture; amorous gesture, corporeal expression of
amorous sentiments, wanton sport, dalliance ({%= līlā%});
passing from one state to another, change or substi-
tution of one nature for another, {%(dantyānām mūr-%}
{%dhanya-bhāvaḥ,%} the change of dentals to cerebrals;
{%bho-bhāvaḥ,%} the existence or substitution [for the
name of a person] of the expression {%bhos,%} Manu II.
124); birth; the place of birth, the womb ({%=%}
{%yoni%}); the place of being, the world, universe; an
organ of sense; superhuman power; the Supreme
Being; advice, instruction: (in theatrical language)
a learned or worthy man, a man of dignity or conse-
quence, gentleman, master, honourable sir [cf. {%bhāva-%}
{%miśra,%} 2. {%bhavat%}]: (in astronomy) the state or
condition of a planet; an astrological house, mansion,
lunar mansion; N. of the twenty-seventh Kalpa; of
the eighth (forty-second) year in Jupiter's cycle of
sixty years; (in Pāṇini's grammatical system) a term
for an impersonal passive or neuter verb having
neither agent nor object expressed (e. g. {%pacyate,%}
there is cooking, i. e. cooking is going on); the
abstract idea conveyed by a word, the sense of the
abstract noun (as describing the state or condition of
anything; sometimes used at the end of a comp.
instead of the affixes {%tā, tva, ya,%} e. g. {%bāla-bhāva%}
{%= bāla-tā,%} &c., the state of a child, childhood; and
even added pleonastically to the abstract noun itself,
e. g. {%tanutā-bhāva,%} the state of thinness); the sense
of a noun of action (as expressing the idea of the
root, e. g. going, doing, &c.): {%= miśra-bhāva,%} N. of
the author of the Bhāva-prakāśa. {%—Bhāva-kalpa-%}
{%latā,%} f., N. of a commentary by Bhaṭṭa-mudgala on
the Bhāvanā-viveka, q. v. {%—Bhāva-gambhīram,%} ind.
from the bottom of the heart, ({%bhāva-gambhīraṃ%}
{%jahasuḥ,%} they laughed heartily); deeply; gravely.
{%—Bhāva-gamya, as, ā, am,%} to be ascertained by
reflection or by meditating in the heart. {%—Bhāva-%}
{%grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} apprehending the sense, appre-
ciating the sentiment. {%—Bhāva-cūḍā-maṇi, is,%} m.,
N. of a work. {%—Bhāva-ja, as,%} m. ‘produced in
the heart,’ love; the god of love; [cf. {%mano-ja.%}]
{%—Bhāva-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing the heart.
{%—Bhāva-tas,%} ind. through being, in consequence
of being, ({%jñāti-bhāvatas,%} through being a relation.)
{%—Bhāva-tva, am,%} n. the state of Bhāva, q. v.
{%—Bhāva-dīpa, as,%} m., N. of a commentary on
the Tattva-prakāśa; {%= bhārata-bhāvadīpa%}. {%—Bhā-%}
{%va-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a commentary. {%—Bhāva-nārā-%}
{%yaṇa-māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Bhāva-%}
{%padārtha, as,%} m. a thing which has a real or posi-
tive existence. {%—Bhāva-pāda, as,%} m., N. of a lexi-
cographer. {%—Bhāva-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a medical
work by Bhava-deva-miśra. {%—Bhāva-prakāśikā,%} f.,
N. of a grammatical commentary. {%—Bhāva-pra-%}
{%tyaya-vādārtha (˚da-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a work
by Mathurā-nātha Tarka-vāg-īśa Bhaṭṭācārya. {%—Bhā-%}
{%va-pradīpikā,%} f., N. of a commentary on the
Mālatī-mādhava. {%—Bhāva-bandhana, as, ā, am,%}
‘heart-enchaining,’ fettering the heart, joining hearts
(as love). {%—Bhāva-bodhaka, as, ikā, am,%} revealing
or displaying any sentiment, indicating a feeling or
passion. {%—Bhāva-miśra, as,%} m. (in dramatic lan-
guage) a gentleman, a man of dignity or consequence,
[Page0708-a+ 81]
master, sir; N. of the author of the Bhāva-prakāśa,
(also called Miśra-bhāva and Bhāva-deva-miśra.)
{%—Bhāva-rāma-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man men-
tioned in the second part of the Prabodha-candrodaya.
{%—Bhāva-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} ‘consisting of reality,’
actually being, really existing, real, actual; ({%am%}),
n. (?), N. of a work. {%—Bhāva-vacana, as, ā, am,%}
(in gram.) signifying a state or action, denoting the
abstract notion of a verb. {%—Bhāva-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
being in a state or condition. {%—Bhāva-vācaka%} (?),
an abstract noun. {%—Bhāva-viveka, as,%} m., N. of a
Buddhist teacher. {%—Bhāva-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} relat-
ing to creation, concerned with cosmogony; ({%as%}),
m., N. of Brahmā. {%—Bhāvavṛttīya, as, ā, am,%} an
adj. formed from {%bhāva-vṛtta%}. {%—Bhāva-śataka,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Bhāva-śabala-tā,%} f. or
{%bhāva-śabalā,%} f. mixture or union of various emo-
tions. {%—Bhāva-śānti, is,%} f. the allaying of any
(transitory) emotion. {%—Bhāva-śuddhi, is,%} f. purity
of mind. {%—Bhāva-śūnya, as, ā, am,%} void of affec-
tion or attachment. {%—Bhāva-saṃśuddhi, is,%} f.
purification of the natural condition, purity of nature.
{%—Bhāva-sandhi, is,%} m. union of emotions or feel-
ings, co-existence of two emotions, a vacillating frame
of mind between conflicting emotions and feelings.
{%—Bhāva-samāhita, as, ā, am,%} fixed or collected
in mind, abstracted, devout. {%—Bhāva-sarga, as,%} m.
the intellectual creation (comprising the faculties of
the human mind and their affections, as distinguished
from the material creation, see {%bhautika%}). {%—Bhāva-%}
{%sāra-viveka, as,%} m., N. of a work by Gaṅgā-dhara
Mahāḍakara. {%—Bhāva-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in a
state of love or affection, attached, enamoured.
{%—Bhāva-snigdha, as, ā, am,%} attached in heart or
mind, affectionately disposed. {%—Bhāvākūta (˚va-%}
{%āk˚), am,%} n. the thoughts of the heart or mind.
{%—Bhāvā-gaṇeśa-dīkṣita, as,%} m., N. of the author
of several commentaries. {%—Bhāvātmaka (˚va-āt˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘consisting of reality,’ real, actual; [cf.
{%bhāva-rūpa.%}] {%—Bhāvātmaka-tā,%} f. reality. {%—Bhā-%}
{%vādvaita (˚va-ad˚), am,%} n. natural cause; material
cause (as thread of cloth). {%—Bhāvānandī (˚va-ān˚),%}
f., N. of a commentary by Bhāvānanda Siddhānta-
vāg-īśa on the Dīdhiti or Śiro-maṇi. {%—Bhāvānanadī-%}
{%prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a commentary on the pre-
ceding by Mahā-deva Pandit. {%—Bhāvānuga (˚va-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘following the object,’ natural,
simple, not forced or assumed; ({%ā%}), f. a shadow;
[cf. {%bhāvālīnā.%}] {%—Bhāvāntara (˚va-an˚), am,%} n.
another state, a different state or condition. {%—Bhā-%}
{%vābhāsa (˚va-ābh˚), as,%} m. simulation of feeling or
emotion. {%—Bhāvārtha (˚va-ar˚), as,%} m. the simple
or inherent meaning (of words), the obvious purport
(of a phrase &c.), subject-matter. {%—Bhāvārtha-dī-%}
{%pikā,%} f. ‘light of the inherent meaning,’ N. of a
metrical commentary by Gaurī-kānta Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya on the Tarka-bhāṣā; on the Vṛtta-
ratnā-kara by Janārdana-vibudha; {%= bhāgavata-bh˚,%}
q. v. {%—Bhāvālīnā (˚va-āl˚),%} f. ‘cleaving to an
object,’ a shadow; [cf. {%bhāvānugā.%}] {%—Bhāvodaya%}
{%(˚va-ud˚), as,%} m. the rising of emotion or passion.
<LEND>

<L>35445<pc>0708-a<k1>BAvaka<k2>BAvaka
{%Bhāvaka, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing to
be, effecting; promoting any one's welfare; imagin-
ing, fancying; having a taste for the beautiful; having
a poetical taste; ({%as%}), m. sentiment, feeling, affec-
tion, emotion; the external expression of amatory
sentiments; [cf. {%bhāvāṭa,%} col. 2.]
<LEND>

<L>35446<pc>0708-a<k1>BAvana<k2>BAvana<h>2
2. {%bhāvana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.; for 1. {%bhā-%}
{%vana%} see p. 704, col. 1), causing to be, causing,
forming, creating, framing, manifesting; promoting
or effecting any one's welfare; imagining, fancying;
teaching; ({%as%}), m. a creator, producer, efficient
cause; N. of Śiva ({%= dhyātṛ%}); N. of the twenty-
second Kalpa; {%(ā, am),%} f. n. the act of causing to
be or creating, manifesting, manifestation; promotion
of any one's interests ({%= vardhana%}); the act of form-
ing in the mind, conceiving, imagination, conception,
fancy, thought, ({%bhāvanayā,%} in thought, in imagina-
tion); reflection, meditation, abstract meditation, con-
templation; supposition, hypothesis, mental perception,
recollection; observing, investigating; settling, fixing,
[Page0708-b+ 81]
determining; (in law) proof, demonstration, argu-
ment, ascertainment; (in medicine) saturating any
dry powder with fluid, steeping, infusion, drying an
article by day and keeping it moist at night; (in
arithmetic) finding by combination or composition [cf.
{%samāsa-bh˚%}]; decorating with flowers and perfumes,
scenting, anointing; (at the end of an adj. comp.) =
nature, essence; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Upaniṣad; a crow
({%= kā-rava%}); water, {%= ambu; (am),%} n. apprehen-
sion, perception; the fruit of the Dillenia Speciosa
({%= bhavya, bhaviṣya%}); N. of a wood, (perhaps
for 1. {%bhā-vana,%} q. v.) {%—Bhāvanā-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} produced by imagination or fancy, imaginary.
{%—Bhāvanā-yukta, as, ā, am,%} thoughtful, full of
anxiety, anxious. {%—Bhāvanā-viveka, as,%} m., N. of
a commentary on a metrical treatise on the nature
of injunction according to the theory of Madhu.
{%—Bhāvanāśraya (˚na-āś˚), as,%} m. ‘the refuge of
thought,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhāvanā-sāra-saṅ-%}
{%graha, as,%} m., N. of a Vedānta work by Mudgala
Bhaṭṭa.
<LEND>

<L>35447<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvanikA<k2>BAvanikA
{%Bhāvanikā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>35448<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvanIya<k2>BAvanIya
{%Bhāvanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. the Caus.) to be
manifested, to be effected or accomplished; to be
conceived or imagined, to be fancied; to be medi-
tated on; to be proved, requiring demonstration; to
be taught.
<LEND>

<L>35449<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvayat<k2>BAvayat
{%Bhāvayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ fancying, imagining,
calling to mind; reflecting on, meditating on.
<LEND>

<L>35450<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvayavya<k2>BAvayavya
{%Bhāvayavya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhāvayu%}), Ved., N.
of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda I. 126, 6; a
patronymic of Svana-ja.
<LEND>

<L>35451<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvayitavya<k2>BAvayitavya
{%Bhāvayitavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), Ved.
to be cherished, to be protected or taken care of.
<LEND>

<L>35452<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvayitf<k2>BAvayitf
{%Bhāvayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. causing to be; pro-
moting the welfare (of any one), cherishing, taking
care of, protecting; a cherisher, protector.
<LEND>

<L>35453<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvayu<k2>BAvayu
{%Bhāvayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. cherishing, taking care
of, protecting.
<LEND>

<L>35454<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvAwa<k2>BAvAwa
{%Bhāvāṭa, as,%}¦ m. {%= bhāvaka,%} affection, emotion,
passion; the external expression or indication of
amatory feeling; a pious or holy man; an amorous
man; an actor; dress, decoration.
<LEND>

<L>35455<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvika<k2>BAvika
{%Bhāvika, as, ī, am,%}¦ actually being or existing,
real, natural, innate; full of feeling or sentiment,
expressive, sentimental; future; ({%am%}), n. a descrip-
tion of an imaginary object so vivid that it actually
appears to be present, describing the past or future
as present; {%= bhāvuka,%} language full of feeling or
passion; ({%as%}), m. an equation involving products of
unknown quantities.
<LEND>

<L>35456<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvita<k2>BAvita
{%Bhāvita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), caused to be,
brought into being, produced, obtained, got; made
to thrive, protected, cherished, fostered; made to
become, transformed into; made to exist or appear,
manifested, exhibited; made to exist in the mind,
presented to the imagination, conceived, imagined,
supposed, thought of; thought about, meditated on;
fixed on (as the mind or thoughts); purified by
meditation; known, recognised, acknowledged;
proved, established; convicted; occupied with, per-
vaded by, filled with; inspired by, animated; mixed
with (as an ingredient); soaked in, saturated with,
steeped, infused; perfumed with, scented; (in arith-
metic and algebra) involving a product of unknown
quantities; ({%am%}), n. a product obtained by multipli-
cation, a factum. {%—Bhāvita-buddhī, is, is, i,%} one
who has purified his mind by meditation &c.; see {%bhā-%}
{%vitātman%}. {%—Bhāvita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has
imagined or conceived or infused &c. {%—Bhāvitātman%}
{%(˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} one whose soul is purified or who
has purified it by meditating on the universal soul,
one who has perceived or whose thoughts are fixed
on the Supreme Spirit; thoughtful, meditative;
intent upon, engaged in; a sage; ({%ā%}), m., N. of
the thirteenth Muhūrta.
<LEND>

<L>35457<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvitaka<k2>BAvitaka
{%Bhāvitaka,%}¦ the product of a multiplication; [cf.
{%bhāvita%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>35458<pc>0708-b<k1>BAvitra<k2>BAvitra
{%Bhāvitra, am,%}¦ n. the three worlds (viz. earth,
heaven, and the lower regions or the atmosphere),
the universe; [cf. {%bhavitra.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0708-c+ 77]

<L>35459<pc>0708-c<k1>BAvin<k2>BAvin
{%Bhāvin, i, ini, i,%}¦ becoming, being, existing [cf.
{%bhṛtya-bh˚, pūrva-bh˚%}]; about to be, about to
come to pass, future; predestined; what ought to
be; what will fall to the share of (any one); attached
to, ({%Hari-bhāvin,%} attached to Hari); being pos-
sessed of, (at the end of a comp., e. g. {%jñāna-vijñā-%}
{%na-bh˚,%} possessing sacred and profane knowledge);
beautiful, illustrious; ({%ī%}), m. (according to the Vāja-
saneyi-prātiśākhya) every vowel except {%a%} and {%ā%}
(perhaps so called as liable to become changed into
the corresponding semivowels); N. of the caste of
Śūdras in Plaksha-dvīpa; ({%inī%}), f. a distinguished
or handsome woman; a lady, noble lady [cf. {%bha-%}
{%vya%}]; a wanton woman; N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda; of a daughter of a Gandharva;
[cf. {%a-niruddha-bh˚.%}] {%—Bhāvi-tā,%} f. the state of
being or becoming, ({%tad-bhāva-bhāvi-tā,%} conform-
ing one's self to the mode of thought of that person);
futurity, predestination. {%—Bhāvi-tva, am,%} n. the
state of being or becoming, the being obliged to
take place, inevitableness, unavoidableness, necessity.
{%—Bhāvy-upadha, as,%} m., scil. {%visarjanīya,%} a
Visarjanīya following in the Pada-pāṭha after any
vowel except the vowel {%a%} or {%ā.%}
<LEND>

<L>35460<pc>0708-c<k1>BAvuka<k2>BAvuka
{%Bhāvuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ being, disposed to be, about
to be, becoming, (sometimes used like {%bhaviṣṇu%}
at the end of a comp. after an adv. in {%am,%} cf. {%āḍh-%}
{%yam-bh˚, andham-bh˚, dūram-bh˚, nagnam-bh˚,%}
{%palitam-bh˚, priyam-bh˚%}); happy, well, auspicious,
prosperous; having a taste for the beautiful, having
a poetical taste; ({%as%}), m. (in theatrical language) a
sister's husband; ({%am%}), n. language full of feeling or
passion; happiness, auspiciousness, welfare.
<LEND>

<L>35461<pc>0708-c<k1>BAvya<k2>BAvya
{%Bhāvya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. rt. 1. {%bhū%} or its Caus.),
being, existing at the present time (Ved., cf. {%bhavya%});
about to be or happen, future, to be become, what
must or ought to be or become, (sometimes used for
the future tense of the verb, e. g. {%Pulaho bhāvyo%}
{%maharṣiḥ,%} Pulaha is to be reckoned a great Ṛṣi;
and often impersonally, e. g. {%bhāvyaṃ tayā,%} it is
to be become by her, i. e. she must become); to be
effected or accomplished, to be performed; to be appre-
hended or perceived; to be imagined or conceived
[cf. {%dur-bh˚%}]; to be convinced; to be argued or
proved or demonstrated; to be investigated or de-
termined; (according to Vedic commentators) {%=%}
{%bhāvayavya,%} to be honoured or worshipped?; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a king ({%= bhāvya-ratha%} or {%bhānu-%}
{%ratha%}). {%—Bhāvya-tā,%} f. or {%bhāvya-tva, am,%} n.
the state of being about to happen, futurity. {%—Bhā-%}
{%vya-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a king; [cf. {%bhāvya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35462<pc>0708-c<k1>BAvaqa<k2>BAvaqa
{#BAvaqa#}¦ {%bhāvaḍa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35463<pc>0708-c<k1>BAvata<k2>BAvata
{#BAvata#}¦ {%bhāvata, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%bhavat%}),
your honour's, your, thy (respectfully).
<LEND>

<L>35464<pc>0708-c<k1>BAvatka<k2>BAvatka
{%Bhāvatka, as, ī, am,%}¦ your honour's, your, thy,
thine.
<LEND>

<L>35465<pc>0708-c<k1>BAvalA<k2>BAvalA
{#BAvalA#}¦ {%bhāvalā,%} f., N. of the wife of Bhā-
vaḍa.
<LEND>

<L>35466<pc>0708-c<k1>BAvAwa<k2>BAvAwa
{#BAvAwa#}¦ {%bhāvāṭa.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35467<pc>0708-c<k1>BAvAva<k2>BAvAva
{#BAvAva#}¦ {%bhāvāva, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr.
{%bhāva + ava%} fr. rt. {%av%}), delicate, tender, compas-
sionate.
<LEND>

<L>35468<pc>0708-c<k1>BAz<k2>BAz<h>1
{#BAz#} 1¦. {%bhāṣ%} (connected with rt. 1.
{%bhā%} as Gr. <lang n="greek">φη-μί</lang> with <lang n="greek">φαίνω),</lang> cl. 1. A.
{%bhāṣate%} (ep. also P. {%-ti%}), {%babhāṣe, bhāṣitum,%}
to speak, talk, say; to speak to, address (with acc.
of the person or sometimes with acc. of the person
and thing); to tell or announce (anything) to (any
one); to speak of or about; to reply, to call or
name; to use or employ in speaking; to describe:
Pass. {%bhāṣyate,%} to be spoken, to be addressed or
spoken to (sometimes with acc., e. g. {%sa vaco mu-%}
{%ninā babhāṣe,%} he was addressed by the Muni in a
speech): Caus. {%bhāṣayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ababhā-%}
{%ṣat%} or {%abībhaṣat,%} to cause to speak or talk; to
say or speak; to cause disquietude, disturb (?): Desid.
{%bibhāṣiṣate:%} Intens. {%bābhāṣyate, bābhāṣṭi.%}
<LEND>
[Page0709-a+ 78]

<L>35469<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzaka<k2>BAzaka
{%Bhāṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking, talking about,
(at the end of a comp.)
<LEND>

<L>35470<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzaRa<k2>BAzaRa
{%Bhāṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. speaking, talking, saying;
speech, talk; kind words, kindness, {%= sāma-dānādi;%}
(in theatrical language) expression of satisfaction at
the end of a drama, applause (?).
<LEND>

<L>35471<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzat<k2>BAzat
{%Bhāṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ speaking, saying, talking.
<LEND>

<L>35472<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzamARa<k2>BAzamARa
{%Bhāṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking, saying, talking.
<LEND>

<L>35473<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzA<k2>BAzA
{%Bhāṣā,%}¦ f. speech, language [cf. {%deśa-bh˚, para-%}
{%bh˚, bhūta-bh˚%}]; common or vernacular speech (in
ancient times as opposed to Vedic, in later as opposed
to Sanskrit), any Prākṛt dialect, (the five Prākṛts
or vernaculars, viz. Mahā-rāṣṭrī, Śaurasenī, Māgadhī,
Prācyā, and Avantī, are called Pañca-vidhā Bhāṣā);
description, definition; (in law) an accusation, charge,
complaint, plaint; N. of Sarasvatī (goddess of speech);
of a Rāgiṇī. {%—Bhāṣā-jña, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Bhāṣāntara (˚ṣā-an˚), am,%} n. another dialect
or version, a translation. {%—Bhāṣā-pariccheda, as,%}
m. ‘definition of (the categories of) speech,’ N. of
a compendium of the Vaiśeṣika branch of the Nyāya
system of philosophy by Viśva-nātha. {%—Bhāṣā-%}
{%pāda, am,%} n. the plaint or charge, the first of the
four stages of a lawsuit. {%—Bhāṣā-mañjarī,%} f., N.
of an elementary work on Sanskrit grammar. {%—Bhā-%}
{%ṣārṇava (˚ṣā-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a work by
Candra-śekhara. {%—Bhāṣā-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a
commentary on Pāṇini's grammar. {%—Bhāṣāvṛtty-%}
{%artha-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a commentary on the
preceding work. {%—Bhāṣā-sama, as,%} m. a particular
figure in rhetoric, a sentence so arranged that it may
be either Sanskrit or Prākṛt. {%—Bhāṣā-samiti, is,%}
f. (with Jainas) one of the Samitis, moderation in
speech.
<LEND>

<L>35474<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzika<k2>BAzika
{%Bhāṣika, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to common or
vernacular speech.
<LEND>

<L>35475<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzikA<k2>BAzikA
{%Bhāṣikā,%}¦ f. speech, language.
<LEND>

<L>35476<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzita<k2>BAzita
{%Bhāṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken, uttered, said; ({%am%}),
n. that which is spoken, speech, language, talk,
speaking. {%—Bhāṣita-puṃska, as, am,%} m. n. {%=%}
{%ukta-puṃska,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35477<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzitavya<k2>BAzitavya
{%Bhāṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken to or
addressed.
<LEND>

<L>35478<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzitf<k2>BAzitf
{%Bhāṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a speaker, talker; speak-
ing, talking, telling.
<LEND>

<L>35479<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzin<k2>BAzin
{%Bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ speaking, talking, saying, tell-
ing, a speaker, (commonly at the end of a comp., cf.
{%alpa-bh˚, prākṛta-bh˚%}); loquacious, a chatterer.
<LEND>

<L>35480<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzya<k2>BAzya
{%Bhāṣya, am,%}¦ n. speaking, talking; any work in
the common or vernacular speech; an explanatory
work, exposition, explanation, commentary in general
(but especially the explanation of technical Sūtras or
aphorisms); Patañjali's commentary on the Sūtras
of Pāṇini [cf. {%mahā-bhāṣya%}]; a sort of house or
building. {%—Bhāṣya-kara%} or {%bhāṣya-kāra, as,%}
or {%bhāṣya-kṛt, t,%} m. ‘commentary-maker,’ the
writer of any explanatory work or commentary, a
commentator, scholiast, an expounder of technical
Sūtras or aphorisms; (especially) an epithet of Patañ-
jali, the author of the Mahā-bhāṣya or great com-
mentary on Pāṇini; epithet of the commentators
Nātha and Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Bhāṣya-ṭīkā,%} f., N.
of a commentary on the Mahā-bhāṣya; of another
commentary better known as Śrīmad-bhāṣya-ṭīkā.
{%—Bhāṣya-pradīpa, as,%} m., N. of Kaiyaṭa's com-
mentary on the Mahā-bhāṣya. {%—Bhāṣyapradīpa-%}
{%vivaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of Iśvarānanda's explanation
of the Bhāṣya-pradīpa. {%—Bhāṣyapradīpoddyota%}
{%(˚pa-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of Nāgojī-bhaṭṭa's expla-
nation of Kaiyaṭa's Bhāṣya-pradīpa. {%—Bhāṣya-%}
{%ratna-prabhā,%} f., N. of a commentary on the
Śārīraka-mīmāṃsā-bhāṣya.
<LEND>

<L>35481<pc>0709-a<k1>BAzyamARa<k2>BAzyamARa
{%Bhāṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being spoken to or
addressed.
<LEND>

<L>35482<pc>0709-a<k1>BAz<k2>BAz<h>2
{#BAz#} 2¦. {%bhāṣ%} (fr. rt. {%bhaṣ%}), Ved. occur-
ring only in the comp. {%rakṣo-bhāṣ,%} barking like
a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>35483<pc>0709-a<k1>BAza<k2>BAza
{#BAza#}¦ {%bhāṣa.%} See {%bhāsa,%} col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page0709-b+ 80]

<L>35484<pc>0709-b<k1>BAzaRIkzOlema<k2>BAzaRIkzOlema
{#BAzaRIkzOlema#}¦ {%bhāṣaṇīkṣaulema, ās,%} m.
pl., N. of a race (?).
<LEND>

<L>35485<pc>0709-b<k1>BAs<k2>BAs<h>1
{#BAs#} 1¦. {%bhās%} (connected with rt. 1.
{%bhā%}), cl. 1. A. (in epic poetry also P.)
{%bhāsate (-ti), babhāse, bhāsiṣyate, abhāsiṣṭa,%}
{%bhāsitum,%} to shine, to be bright; to appear; to
appear or come into the mind, to be conceived or
imagined, to become clear or evident: Caus. {%bhāsa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ababhāsat%} and {%abībhasat,%} to
make shine, illuminate; to cause to appear, show,
make evident: Desid. {%bibhāsiṣate:%} Intens. {%bābhā-%}
{%syate, bābhāsti;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>beosach,</nsi> ‘bright, glitter-
ing,’ perhaps <nsi>mais,</nsi> ‘sparkling;’ probably Lat. <nsi>fes-</nsi>
<nsi>tra, fas-tus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>35486<pc>0709-b<k1>BAs<k2>BAs<h>2
2. {%bhās,%}¦ f. n. (according to some fr. rt. 1. {%bhā,%}
q. v.; but according to Pāṇini III. 2, 177, fr. rt. 1.
{%bhās%}), light, glare, lustre, brightness; a ray or gleam
of light, ({%bhāsāṃ nidhiḥ,%} receptacle of rays of
light, the sun); an image, reflection, shadow; glory,
splendor, power, majesty; wish, desire. {%—Bhāsā-%}
{%ketu, us, us, u%} (fr. {%bhāsā%} inst. c. {%+ ketu%}), Ved.
perceivable by light, appearing through light; (Sāy.
{%= jvālā-lakṣaṇa-jñāpaka.%}) {%—Bhās-kara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} ‘light-causing,’ shining, glittering, bright, re-
splendent; ({%as%}), m. the sun, (if used at the end of
an adj. comp. the fem. will end in {%ā%}); N. of Śiva;
fire; a hero; the plant Calotropis Gigantea ({%=%}
{%arka%}); N. of various men; of a famous Hindū
astronomer, (also called Bhāskarācārya, q. v.; {%bhās-%}
{%kara%} is often found at the end of names, cf. {%jñāna-%}
{%bh˚, brahmaṇya-bh˚, bhagavad-bh˚, bhagavanta-%}
{%bh˚, bhāṭṭa-bh˚%}); ({%am%}), n. gold; N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Bhāskara-nṛsiṃha, as,%} m., N. of a Scholiast
of the last century. {%—Bhāskara-priya, as,%} m.
‘fond of the sun,’ a ruby. {%—Bhāskara-bhaṭṭa, as,%}
m., N. of an author. {%—Bhāskara-miśra, as,%} m.,
N. of an author; (also called {%bhaṭṭa-bh˚.%}) {%—Bhās-%}
{%kara-lavaṇa, am,%} n. a particular mixture (contain-
ing salt &c.). {%—Bhāskara-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a
king of Kāma-rūpa; of a person mentioned in the
Daśa-kumāra-carita, p. 194, 1. 14. {%—Bhāskara-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n., N. of a particular religious observ-
ance. {%—Bhāskara-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a com-
mentator of the seventeenth century; [cf. {%hari-%}
{%bhāskara.%}] {%—Bhāskara-saptamī,%} f., N. of the
seventh day in the light half of the month Māgha.
{%—Bhāskarācārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of an
author; N. of a celebrated astronomer and mathe-
matician who lived in the twelfth century and wrote
the Siddhānta-śiro-maṇi (which contains treatises on
algebra, arithmetic, and geometry, called Vīja-gaṇita
and Līlāvatī). {%—Bhāskari, is,%} m. (a patronymic fr.
{%bhās-kara%}), the planet Saturn; N. of a Muni.
{%—Bhāskarīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to or coming
from Bhāskara; ({%as%}), m. a pupil of Bhāskara.
{%—Bhāskareṣṭā (˚ra-iṣ˚),%} f. the plant Polanisia
Icosandra. {%—Bhās-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing light,
luminous, splendid, shining; ({%ān%}), m. the sun; light,
lustre, brightness; a hero; ({%atī%}), f. the city of the
sun; N. of a work; (according to Naighaṇṭuka 1. 8)
{%= uṣas,%} dawn; ({%yas%}), f. pl. (according to Naighaṇ-
ṭuka 1. 13) {%= nadī,%} a river. {%—Bhāsvatī-karaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>35487<pc>0709-b<k1>BAsa<k2>BAsa
{%Bhāsa, as,%}¦ m. (sometimes written {%bhāṣa%}), light,
lustre, brightness; shining, (at the end of a comp.,
e. g. {%candra-bhāsa,%} shining as the moon); im-
pression made on the mind, fancy; a vulture; a
cock; a sort of bird described as a water-fowl; {%=%}
{%śakunta; = kukkuṭa; = nīla-pakṣaḥ pakṣī;%} a
cow-shed, cattle-fold ({%= goṣṭha%}); N. of a Sāman
(also {%am,%} n.); of a man; of a dramatic poet; of a
son of a minister of king Candra-prabha; of a Dā-
nava; of a mountain; ({%ī%}), f. the mother of the Bhāsas
or vultures; N. of a daughter of Prādhā. {%—Bhāsa-%}
{%karṇa, as,%} m., N. of a Rākṣasa. {%—Bhāsa-tā,%} f.
the being a vulture or bird of prey; vulturous nature,
rapacity. {%—Bhāsa-vilāsa-saṃvāda, as,%} m., N. of
the twenty-fifth chapter of the Vāsisṭha-rāmāyaṇa,
commonly called Yoga-vāsiṣṭha. {%—Bhāsā-pura,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>
[Page0709-c+ 76]

<L>35488<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsaka<k2>BAsaka
{%Bhāsaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing to
appear, making evident, showing, manifesting; en-
lightening; making intelligible, (usually at the end of
comps.); ({%as%}), m., N. of a dramatic poet. {%—Bhā-%}
{%saka-tva, am,%} n. enlightenment, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35489<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsana<k2>BAsana
{%Bhāsana, am,%}¦ n. shining, glittering, illuminating.
<LEND>

<L>35490<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsanta<k2>BAsanta
{%Bhāsanta, as, ī, am,%}¦ shining, splendid; beautiful,
handsome; ({%as%}), m. the sun; the moon; a star, an
asterism; the bird Bhāsa, q. v.; ({%ī%}), f. an asterism,
a Nakṣatra.
<LEND>

<L>35491<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsamAna<k2>BAsamAna
{%Bhāsamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, radiant; ap-
pearing.
<LEND>

<L>35492<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsayat<k2>BAsayat
{%Bhāsayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making to shine, illu-
minating; shining, radiant (?).
<LEND>

<L>35493<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsas<k2>BAsas
{%Bhāsas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. brightness, light, lustre.
<LEND>

<L>35494<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsAya<k2>BAsAya
{%Bhāsāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%bhāsāyate,%} &c., to act the
part of the bird Bhāsa, to appear like this bird.
<LEND>

<L>35495<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsin<k2>BAsin
{%Bhāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) shining,
brilliant (e. g. {%ūrdhva-bh˚,%} shining upwards; cf.
{%jyotir-bh˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>35496<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsu<k2>BAsu
{%Bhāsu, us,%}¦ m. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>35497<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsura<k2>BAsura
{%Bhāsura, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, splendid; terrible,
(in this sense probably an incorrect form); ({%as%}), m.
a crystal; a hero; ({%am%}), n. Costus Speciosus or
Arabicus; [cf. {%bhāsvara.%}] {%—Bhāsura-tva, am,%} n.
splendor. {%—Bhāsura-puṣapā,%} f. the plant Tragia
Involucrata ({%= vṛści-kālī%}).
<LEND>

<L>35498<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsuraka<k2>BAsuraka
{%Bhāsuraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a lion (in Pañca-tantra,
p. 53, 1. 17).
<LEND>

<L>35499<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsya<k2>BAsya
{%Bhāsya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), to be made
visible, to be brought to light. {%—Bhāsya-tva, am,%}
n. the state or condition of appearing, visibleness.
{%—Bhāsya-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a section in the
Kāktantra treating of the meaning of grammatical
forms.
<LEND>

<L>35500<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsvara<k2>BAsvara
{%Bhāsvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, radiant, brilliant,
bright, resplendent; ({%as%}), m. the sun; a day; N. of
a satellite of the god of the sun; of a Buddhist
deity; ({%am%}), n. Costus Arabicus or Speciosus ({%=%}
{%kuṣṭha;%} cf. {%pra-bh˚, bhāsura%}).
<LEND>

<L>35501<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsada<k2>BAsada
{#BAsada#}¦ {%bhāsada, as,%} m., {%au,%} m. du. (fr.
{%bhasad%}), Ved. (perhaps) the buttocks.
<LEND>

<L>35502<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsin<k2>BAsin
{#BAsin#}¦ {%bhāsin, bhāsura,%} &c. See above.
<LEND>

<L>35503<pc>0709-c<k1>BAskara<k2>BAskara
{#BAskara#}¦ {%bhās-kara.%} See under 2. {%bhās,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35504<pc>0709-c<k1>BAstrAyaRa<k2>BAstrAyaRa
{#BAstrAyaRa#}¦ {%bhāstrāyaṇa, bhāstrāyaṇaka%} (fr.
{%bhastrā%}), see Gaṇa Arīhaṇādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>35505<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsmana<k2>BAsmana
{#BAsmana#}¦ {%bhāsmana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bhasman%}),
made or consisting of ashes, ashy.
<LEND>

<L>35506<pc>0709-c<k1>BAsmAyanya<k2>BAsmAyanya
{%Bhāsmāyanya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhas-
man; {%bhāsmāyanās,%} m. pl., see Gaṇa Kuñjādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 1, 98.
<LEND>

<L>35507<pc>0709-c<k1>BiHKarAja<k2>BiHKarAja
{#BiHKarAja#}¦ {%bhiḥkha-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a
king.
<LEND>

<L>35508<pc>0709-c<k1>Bikz<k2>Bikz
{#Bikz#}¦ {%bhikṣ%} (probably for {%bihakṣ,%}
Desid. of rt. {%bhaj%}), cl. 1. A. (ep. also P.)
{%bhikṣate, bibhikṣe, bhikṣiṣyate, abhikṣiṣṭa,%}
{%bhikṣitum,%} lit. to wish to share or partake; to beg
for, ask for; to desire, implore (Ved. with acc. and
gen., e. g. {%bhikṣe sumatiṃ turāṇām,%} I implore
your favour against eager foes, Ṛg-veda 1. 171, 1);
to solicit, to beg alms (with abl. of person or with a
double acc.); to obtain; to ask for without obtain-
ing; to be weary or distressed (?); to speak (?):
Caus. {%bhikṣayati, -yitum,%} to cause to beg, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35509<pc>0709-c<k1>BikzaRa<k2>BikzaRa
{%Bhikṣaṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of begging,
asking alms.
<LEND>

<L>35510<pc>0709-c<k1>BikzamARa<k2>BikzamARa
{%Bhikṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ asking, begging.
<LEND>

<L>35511<pc>0709-c<k1>BikzA<k2>BikzA
{%Bhikṣā,%}¦ f. the act of begging, asking [cf. {%māṃsa-%}
{%bh˚%}]; anything given as alms or obtained by begging,
(sometimes in comp. with the object asked for, e. g.
{%putra-bhikṣāṃ dehi,%} grant the boon of a son,
lit. a son as alms); alms, food given as alms [cf.
{%dur-bhikṣa, su-bh˚%}]; hire, wages ({%= bhṛti%});
service. {%—Bhikṣā-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of ask-
ing alms, begging. {%—Bhikṣā-cara, as, ī, am,%} going
about begging; a beggar, mendicant; ({%as%}), m., N.
[Page0710-a+ 79]
of a son of Bhoja, (also called {%bhikṣu.%}) {%—Bhikṣā-%}
{%caraṇa, am,%} n. or {%bhikṣā-carya, am, ā,%} n. f.
the act of going about begging, begging, mendi-
cancy. {%—Bhikṣā-cāra, as, ī, am, = bhikṣā-cara.%}
{%—Bhikṣāṭana (˚ṣā-aṭ˚), as, ā, am,%} wandering
about begging or asking for alms, begging, men-
dicity, mendicancy; ({%as%}), m. a mendicant; N. of a
poet; ({%am%}), n. the act of begging, mendicancy,
going about asking for alms; N. of a work; {%bhik-%}
{%ṣāṭanaṃ kṛ,%} to wander about as a mendicant.
{%—Bhikṣānna (˚ṣā-an˚), am,%} n. food obtained
as alms; [cf. {%bhikṣāhāra.%}] {%—Bhikṣā-pātra, am,%}
n. a mendicant's bowl, vessel for collecting alms,
alms-dish. {%—Bhikṣā-pracāra, as,%} m. {%= bhikṣā-%}
{%caraṇa,%} q. v. {%—Bhikṣā-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a mendi-
cant's bowl or vessel. {%—Bhikṣā-bhuj, k, k, k,%} living
on alms. {%—Bhikṣā-māṇava, as,%} m. a beggar boy,
young beggar (as a term of contempt). {%—Bhikṣā-%}
{%yaṇa (˚ṣā-ay˚), am,%} n. the act of plying for alms.
{%—Bhikṣārthin (˚ṣā-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} asking for
alms, a petitioner for charity; begging; a beggar or
mendicant. {%—Bhikṣārha (˚ṣā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
worthy of alms. {%—Bhikṣā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
or receiving alms, begging. {%—Bhikṣā-vāsas, as,%} n.
the garment of a mendicant, a beggar's dress. {%—Bhik-%}
{%ṣā-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} living or subsisting on alms,
begging. {%—Bhikṣāśi-tva (˚ṣā-āś˚), am,%} n. the
eating begged food, subsisting on alms; mendi-
cancy; profligacy, roguery. {%—Bhikṣāśin (˚ṣā-%}
{%āś˚), i, inī, i,%} eating begged food, living or sub-
sisting on alms; dishonest; [cf. {%bhaikṣāśya.%}]
{%—Bhikṣāhāra (˚ṣā-āh˚), as,%} m. begged food;
[cf. {%bhikṣānna.%}] {%—Bhikṣotkara (˚ṣā-ut˚), as,%}
m. scattering alms. {%—Bhikṣopajīvin (˚ṣā-up˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} subsisting by alms, one who lives by begging.
<LEND>

<L>35512<pc>0710-a<k1>BikzAka<k2>BikzAka
{%Bhikṣāka, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. begging, a beggar, men-
dicant.
<LEND>

<L>35513<pc>0710-a<k1>Bikzita<k2>Bikzita
{%Bhikṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ begged, solicited or ob-
tained as alms; [cf. {%śūdra-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35514<pc>0710-a<k1>Bikzitavya<k2>Bikzitavya
{%Bhikṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be begged or
asked for.
<LEND>

<L>35515<pc>0710-a<k1>Bikzin<k2>Bikzin
{%Bhikṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ begging, asking for alms.
<LEND>

<L>35516<pc>0710-a<k1>Bikzu<k2>Bikzu
{%Bhikṣu, us,%}¦ m. a beggar, mendicant, religious
mendicant (especially a Brāhman of the fourth or
mendicant order, i. e. one in the fourth āśrama or
last stage of his life when he abandons his house and
family and subsists entirely on alms; cf. {%āśrama,%}
{%mahā-bh˚%}); a Buddhist mendicant; a particular
Buddha; N. of an Āṅgīrasa (author of the hymn
Ṛg-veda X. 117); of a son of Bhoja ({%= bhikṣā-%}
{%cara%}); N. of a particular species of plant, {%= śrā-%}
{%vaṇī, = kokilākṣa; (u),%} n., N. of an Upaniṣad.
{%—Bhikṣu-caryā,%} f. ‘a beggar's course of life,’
begging. {%—Bhikṣu-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Bhikṣu-saṅgha, as,%} m. a society of Buddhist
mendicants. {%—Bhikṣu-saṅghātī,%} f. beggar's clothes,
old or ragged raiment. {%—Bhikṣu-sūtra, am,%} n. a
collection of rules or precepts for mendicants. {%—Bhik-%}
{%ṣusūtra-bhāṣya-vārttika, am,%} n., N. of a com-
mentary on the preceding.
<LEND>

<L>35517<pc>0710-a<k1>Bikzuka<k2>Bikzuka
{%Bhikṣuka, as,%}¦ m. a beggar, mendicant, a Brāh-
man of the mendicant order [cf. {%bhikṣu%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a
female mendicant. {%—Bhikṣukī-pāraka%} (?), N. of
a building mentioned in Rāja-taraṅgiṇī VI. 191.
<LEND>

<L>35518<pc>0710-a<k1>BikzuRI<k2>BikzuRI
{%Bhikṣuṇī,%}¦ f. a Buddhist female mendicant or
nun, (probably a Pāli form.)
<LEND>

<L>35519<pc>0710-a<k1>Bikzya<k2>Bikzya
{%Bhikṣya%}¦ (fr. {%bhikṣā%}), Nom. P. {%bhikṣyati,%}
&c., to beg or ask for alms, (a doubtful form.)
<LEND>

<L>35520<pc>0710-a<k1>BiRqa<k2>BiRqa
{#BiRqa#}¦ {%bhiṇḍa%} or {%bhiṇḍaka%} or {%bhiṇḍītaka,%}
{%as,%} m. or {%bhiṇḍā,%} f. the plant Abelmoschus Escu-
lentus.
<LEND>

<L>35521<pc>0710-a<k1>Bitta<k2>Bitta
{#Bitta#}¦ {%bhitta, bhitti,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35522<pc>0710-a<k1>Bid<k2>Bid<h>1
{#Bid#} 1¦. {%bhid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%bhinatti,%}
{%bhintte%} (Ved. also cl. 1. {%bhedati%}), Impf.
{%abhinat%} (2nd sing. {%abhinas%} or {%abhinat,%} 1st sing.
Ved. {%abhedam,%} 2nd sing. {%abhet, bhet%}), Impv. {%bhi-%}
{%nattu%} (2nd sing. {%bhinddhi%} or {%bhindhi%}), {%bibheda%}
(2nd sing. {%bibheditha%}), {%bibhide%} (Part. {%bibhidvas%}),
{%bhetsyati, -te,%} Aor. {%abhidat%} and {%abhaitsīt, abhitta%}
[Page0710-b+ 81]
(2nd sing. {%abhitthās%}), Inf. {%bhettum%} (Ved. {%bhet-%}
{%tavai%}), to break, split, cleave, slit, cut asunder, sever,
rend, tear, pierce, penetrate; to break through or
down, burst through (e. g. {%setum bhid,%} to break
through an embankment; {%timiram bhid,%} to break
through or disperse darkness); to violate (e. g. {%san-%}
{%dhim bhid,%} to violate a compact or alliance); to
interrupt, disturb; to tear up; to destroy; to divide,
separate; to open; to make to open or blossom,
expand; to divide into parts or portions, disjoin,
disunite; to loose, loosen, dissolve; to unravel, extri-
cate; to betray, disclose; to set at variance; to
unsettle, perplex; to alter, change, make to differ;
to distinguish, discriminate: Pass. {%bhidyate,%} to be
split; to burst (e. g. {%śītena,%} with frost); to be torn
asunder; to be destroyed; to be harassed or afflicted;
to be divided or separated; to open, be opened,
become relaxed; to expand, blossom, bloom; to
become loose, be loosened; to separate one's self
from, keep aloof from (with inst.); to differ or be
different from (with abl.); to alter, change; to be
divulged: Caus. {%bhedayati, -yitum, abībhidat,%} to
cause to break or split &c., to break, split, cleave,
divide, tear or dash to pieces; to destroy, overcome;
to separate, dissolve, disunite, unsettle (in opinion),
perplex, set at variance, cause dispersion; to seduce:
Desid. of Caus. {%bibhedayiṣati:%} Desid. {%bibhit-%}
{%sati, -te:%} Intens. {%bebhidyate, bebhidīti, bebhetti,%}
to break or split repeatedly, to divide or cut into
again and again; [cf. Lat. <nsi>findo, fi-nis</nsi> fr. <nsi>fid-</nsi>
<nsi>nis</nsi> (?): Goth. <nsi>bit,</nsi> ‘to bite;’ <nsi>beita, bait, bitum:</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>biz.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>35523<pc>0710-b<k1>Bitta<k2>Bitta
{%Bhitta, am,%}¦ n. a fragment, broken piece, bit; a
part, portion; {%= bhitti,%} a partition, wall.
<LEND>

<L>35524<pc>0710-b<k1>Bitti<k2>Bitti
{%Bhitti, is,%}¦ f. breaking, splitting, tearing, dividing;
a wall of earth or masonry, a partition; a mat (made
of split reeds); anything broken or divided; a rent,
fissure; a fragment, bit, piece, portion, part; a place,
spot; a flaw, defect, deficiency; an opportunity,
occasion; an asylum (?). {%—Bhitti-khātana, as,%} m.
‘wall-digger,’ one who digs into or undermines
walls, a rat; [cf. {%bhitti-pātana.%}] {%—Bhitti-caura,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘wall-burglar,’ a house-breaker (the mud wall
of the Hindū cottages being easily cut through by
burglars). {%—Bhitti-pātana, as,%} m. ‘wall-overthrower,
wall-destroyer,’ a kind of rat; [cf. {%bhitti-khātana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35525<pc>0710-b<k1>BittikA<k2>BittikA
{%Bhittikā,%}¦ f. a partition, wall; a small house-
lizard; {%(as, ā, am) = bhitti%} (at the end of an adj.
comp.).
<LEND>

<L>35526<pc>0710-b<k1>BittvA<k2>BittvA
{%Bhittvā,%}¦ ind. having broken, having split, having
burst through, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35527<pc>0710-b<k1>Bid<k2>Bid<h>2
2. {%bhid, t, t, t,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) breaking,
splitting, dividing, piercing; a breaker, &c.; break-
ing to pieces, destroying [cf. {%aśma-bh˚, giri-bh˚,%}
{%gotra-bh˚, tamo-bh˚, pura-bh˚%}]; ({%t%}), f., Ved. a
breaker, destroyer, &c.; breaking, splitting, dividing;
difference; different sort, kind.
<LEND>

<L>35528<pc>0710-b<k1>Bidaka<k2>Bidaka
{%Bhidaka, as,%}¦ m. ‘cutter or wounder,’ a sword;
({%am%}), n. Indra's thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>35529<pc>0710-b<k1>BidA<k2>BidA
{%Bhidā,%}¦ f. breaking, splitting, piercing, bursting in
pieces, tearing, rending [cf. {%dur-bhida%}]; dividing,
separation; difference; sort, kind, species; coriander.
<LEND>

<L>35530<pc>0710-b<k1>BidApana<k2>BidApana
{%Bhidāpana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. an irregular Caus. {%bhi-%}
{%dāpaya%}), the act of causing to break, causing to
pound or trample on.
<LEND>

<L>35531<pc>0710-b<k1>Bidi<k2>Bidi
{%Bhidi, is,%}¦ or {%bhidu, us,%} m. Indra's thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>35532<pc>0710-b<k1>Bidira<k2>Bidira
{%Bhidira, am,%}¦ n. a thunderbolt ({%= bhidi%} above).
<LEND>

<L>35533<pc>0710-b<k1>Bidura<k2>Bidura
{%Bhidura, as, ā, am,%}¦ breaking, splitting, piercing,
destroying; easily broken or split, fragile, brittle;
divided, variegated, mingled; ({%am%}), n. a thunderbolt
[cf. {%bhidira%}]. {%—Bhidura-svana, as,%} m. ‘making a
piercing sound, N. of an Asura; (in Hari-vaṃśa’ 2289
also read {%mṛdura-svana, sṛmaraḥ khanaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>35534<pc>0710-b<k1>Bidelima<k2>Bidelima
{%Bhidelima, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be broken or split,
easily broken, brittle, fragile.
<LEND>

<L>35535<pc>0710-b<k1>Bidya<k2>Bidya
{%Bhidya, as,%}¦ m. a rushing river (‘one bursting its
banks’); N. of a river; [cf. {%pūr-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35536<pc>0710-b<k1>BidyamAna<k2>BidyamAna
{%Bhidyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being broken or split
or pierced; being divided or separated; being dis-
tinguished.
<LEND>

<L>35537<pc>0710-b<k1>Bidra<k2>Bidra
{%Bhidra, am,%}¦ n. a thunderbolt.
<LEND>
[Page0710-c+ 81]

<L>35538<pc>0710-c<k1>Bidvat<k2>Bidvat
{%Bhid-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. containing the root {%bhid.%}
<LEND>

<L>35539<pc>0710-c<k1>Bindat<k2>Bindat
{%Bhindat, an, atī, at,%}¦ breaking, splitting, cleaving,
piercing, destroying, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>35540<pc>0710-c<k1>Bindu<k2>Bindu
{%Bhindu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. breaking, splitting; de-
stroying; a destroyer; ({%us%}), m. a drop [cf. {%bindū%}];
({%us%}), f. a woman bringing forth a still-born child, a
woman who bears a dead child; [cf. {%nindu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35541<pc>0710-c<k1>BindDilavaRA<k2>BindDilavaRA
{%Bhinddhi-lavaṇā,%}¦ f. (fr. 2nd sing. Impv.), con-
stant sprinkling of salt; [cf. {%paca-l˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35542<pc>0710-c<k1>Binna<k2>Binna
{%Bhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken, fractured, split,
({%bhinnā nauḥ,%} a leaky ship, a wrecked vessel);
torn, rent, cloven, pounded, lacerated; opened, ex-
panded, budded, blossoming; divided, separated
into parts, anything less than a whole; detached,
disunited, disjoined; loosened; separated or different
from; distinct, other, different (e. g. {%āṅ-bhinno-%}
{%nipātaḥ,%} any particle other than {%āṅ%}); deviated,
deviating or varying from; deprived of, without;
furious (as an elephant, see {%bhinna-karaṭa%}); mingled,
mixed, cleaving to; ({%as%}), m. a flaw or defect in a
jewel; ({%am%}), n. a fragment, bit, part, portion; (in
arithmetic) a fraction; a blossom; a wound from a
pointed weapon, a stab; a particular mode of fight-
ing mentioned in Hari-vaṃśa 15978 (also read
{%mitra.%}) {%—Bhinna-karaṭa, as,%} m. an elephant in
rut or from whose divided temples the juice exudes.
{%—Bhinna-karṇa, as, ā, am,%} having divided ears
(said of particular animals). {%—Bhinna-kūṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deprived of a chief or leader (said of an army).
{%—Bhinna-krama, as, ā, am,%} having the order
broken, out of order or place, displaced. {%—Bhinna-%}
{%gati, is, is, i,%} going with great strides, going quickly.
{%—Bhinna-garbha, as, ā, am,%} disunited in its
centre (said of an army), broken up, disorganized.
{%—Bhinna-gātrikā,%} f. a kind of cucumber, Cucumis
Usitatissimus {%(= karkaṭī)%}. {%—Bhinna-guṇana, am,%}
n. multiplication of fractions. {%—Bhinna-ghana, as,%}
m. the cube of a fraction. {%—Bhinna-jātīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of a different tribe or caste. {%—Bhinna-tva, am,%}
n. the state of being different, difference, variation.
{%—Bhinna-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%bhinna-dṛś, k,%}
{%k, k,%} seeing different things, seeing a difference,
making a difference, partial, (opposed to {%sama-%}
{%darśin.%}) {%—Bhinna-deśa, as, ā, am,%} belonging to
different or various places; occurring or happening
in various places. {%—Bhinnadeśa-tva, am,%} n. the
condition of being widely distant. {%—Bhinna-deha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘whose body is pierced,’ wounded.
{%—Bhinna-nau, aus, aus, u,%} or {%bhinna-nauka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘whose ship is broken,’ shipwrecked.
{%—Bhinna-parikarman, a,%} n. an arithmetical ope-
ration with fractions. {%—Bhinna-prakāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of a different kind or sort. {%—Bhinna-bhāga-%}
{%hara, as,%} m. division of fractions. {%—Bhinna-bhāṇḍa%}
or {%bhinna-bhājana, am,%} n. a broken pot or vessel,
potsherd. {%—Bhinna-bhinnātman (˚na-āt˚), ā,%} m.
chick-pea, Cicer Arietinum. {%—Bhinna-marman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} pierced in the vital organs, mortally wounded.
{%—Bhinna-maryāda, as, ā, am,%} ‘whose course is
broken or separated from the right way,’ uncontrolled,
unrestrained; unbounded. {%—Bhinna-mastaka-piṇ-%}
{%ḍaka%} or {%-piṇḍika, as, ā, am,%} whose skull and
forehead is cloven, (an elephant) whose frontal globes
are open. {%—Bhinna-yojanī,%} f. the plant Plectran-
thus Scutellarioides {%(= pāṣāṇa-bheda)%}. {%—Bhinna-%}
{%liṅga, am,%} n. incongruity of gender in a comparison.
{%—Bhinna-vacana, am,%} n. incongruity of number
in a comparison. {%—Bhinna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who
has divided. {%—Bhinna-varga, as,%} m. the square of a
fraction. {%—Bhinna-varcas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%bhinna-%}
{%varcaska, as, ā, am,%} voiding excrement, &c. {%—Bhin-%}
{%varcaska, as, ā, am,%} changed in colour, discoloured,
pale; of a different caste or tribe. {%—Bhinna-vart-%}
{%man, ā, ā, a,%} separated from the right way; [cf.
{%bhinna-maryāda.%}] {%—Bhinna-viṭka, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%bhinna + viṣ%}), {%= bhinna-varcas%}. {%—Bhinnaviṭka-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of one who voids excrement,
&c., (according to some commentators) change of
colour in the feces. {%—Bhinna-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}
having abandoned the path of duty, leading a bad
life; containing a metrical fault. {%—Bhinna-vṛtti, %}
[Page0711-a+ 74]
{%is, is, i,%} having different occupations, occupied dif-
ferently; leading a bad life; neglecting prescribed
observances, following bad courses. {%—Bhinnavṛtti-%}
{%tā,%} f. the following of evil courses, neglect of pre-
scribed observances. {%—Bhinna-vyavakalita, am,%} n.
subtraction of fractions. {%—Bhinna-saṃhati, is, is, i,%}
whose union is broken, disunited. {%—Bhinna-saṅ-%}
{%kalana%} or {%bhinna-saṅkalita, am,%} n. addition of
fractions. {%—Bhinna-svara, as, ā, am,%} having a
broken or changed voice, hesitating in speech, fal-
tering; discordant. {%—Bhinnasvara-mukha-varṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a broken or changed voice and
complexion. {%—Bhinna-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} pierced
through the heart. {%—Bhinnāñjana (˚na-añ˚), am,%}
n. divided antimony, pounded collyrium, or colly-
rium mixed (with oil and used as an eye-salve), eye-
ointment consisting of various materials pounded and
mixed. {%—Bhinnāñjadna-cayopama (˚ya-up˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} like a quantity of pounded antimony or
mixed collyrium. {%—Bhinnāñjana-sannibha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} similar to pounded antimony or mixed pigment.
{%—Bhinnāñjanākara (˚na-āk˚),%} or {%bhinnāñjanā-%}
{%bha (˚na-ābha˚), as, ā, am,%} appearing like pounded
antimony or mixed collyrium. {%—Bhinnābhinna%}
{%(˚na-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} distinct and not distinct,
separate and not separate. {%—Bhinnārtha (˚na-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a clear or distinct meaning, clear,
evident, intelligible, perspicuous. {%—Bhinnārtha-tā,%}
f. clearness of meaning, intelligibleness, clearness.
{%—Bhinnodara (˚na-ud˚), as,%} m. a brother by a
different mother, a half brother.
<LEND>

<L>35543<pc>0711-a<k1>Binnaka<k2>Binnaka
{%Bhinnaka, as,%}¦ m. ‘a seceder,’ a Buddhist; N. of
a musical mode or Rāga.
<LEND>

<L>35544<pc>0711-a<k1>Bettavya<k2>Bettavya
{%Bhettavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be broken; to be be-
trayed; to be divulged.
<LEND>

<L>35545<pc>0711-a<k1>Bettf<k2>Bettf
{%Bhettṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ breaking, splitting, piercing,
bursting through, dividing, &c.; a breaker, splitter,
piercer, interrupter, disturber, troubler, frustrator; a
divulger (of a secret), betrayer, traitor; a factious or
seditious man; {%(tā),%} m., N. of a particular magical
spell recited over weapons.
<LEND>

<L>35546<pc>0711-a<k1>Bind<k2>Bind
{#Bind#}¦ {%bhind,%} a various reading for rt.
{%bind,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35547<pc>0711-a<k1>BindapAla<k2>BindapAla
{#BindapAla#}¦ {%bhindapāla%} or {%bhindipāla, as,%} m.
a short javelin or arrow thrown from the hand or shot
through a tube; a stone fastened to a string; (also
read {%bhindamāla, bhindumāla, bhiṇḍimāla, bhiṇ-%}
{%ḍimālā.%})
<LEND>

<L>35548<pc>0711-a<k1>Bindu<k2>Bindu
{#Bindu#}¦ {%bhindu, bhinna,%} &c. See p. 710, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35549<pc>0711-a<k1>Biyas<k2>Biyas
{#Biyas#}¦ {%bhiyas.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35550<pc>0711-a<k1>BiriRwikA<k2>BiriRwikA
{#BiriRwikA#}¦ {%bhiriṇṭikā,%} f. a species of plant,
{%= śveta-guñjā;%} (also read {%bhṛṇṭikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>35551<pc>0711-a<k1>Bil<k2>Bil
{#Bil#}¦ {%bhil%} = rt. {%bil,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35552<pc>0711-a<k1>Bilma<k2>Bilma
{#Bilma#}¦ {%bhilma, am,%} n. a word used by
Yāska (Nirukta 1. 20) to explain {%bilma,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35553<pc>0711-a<k1>Billa<k2>Billa
{#Billa#}¦ {%bhilla, as,%} m., N. of a wild mountain
race, probably the modern Bheels, (they live in the
Vindhya mountains, in the forests of Malwa, Mewar,
and Kandesh, and in the Dakhin to the north of
Poona; they were formerly notorious for their depre-
dations); a kind of the Bhillas; ({%ī%}), f. the plant
Symplocos Racemosa. {%—Bhilla-gavī,%} f. {%= gavayī,%}
the female of the Bos Gavæus. {%—Bhilla-taru, us,%}
m. Symplocos Racemosa; [cf. {%bhillī.%}] {%—Bhilla-%}
{%bhūṣaṇā,%} f. the seed of the plant Abrus Preca-
torius.
<LEND>

<L>35554<pc>0711-a<k1>Billowa<k2>Billowa
{%Bhilloṭa%}¦ or {%bhilloṭaka, as,%} m., N. of a species
of plant, (perhaps) {%= bhilla-taru.%}
<LEND>

<L>35555<pc>0711-a<k1>BiScA<k2>BiScA
{#BiScA#}¦ {%bhiścā,%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>35556<pc>0711-a<k1>Bizaj<k2>Bizaj<h>1
{#Bizaj#} 1¦. {%bhiṣaj%} (a Vedic verb of which
the 3rd sing. present {%bhiṣakti%} occurs in Ṛg-veda
VIII. 79, 2, where according to Sāy. {%bhiṣakti =%}
{%bhiṣajyati%}), to heal or cure; [cf. {%bheṣaja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35557<pc>0711-a<k1>Bizaj<k2>Bizaj<h>2
2. {%bhiṣaj, k, k, k%}¦ (in Uṇādi-s. I. 137 derived
[Page0711-b+ 78]
fr. rt. 1. {%bhī%} with vowel shortened and affix {%aj, ṣ%}
being inserted), healing, sanative, curative; ({%k%}), m.
a physician; medicine, a remedy ({%= bheṣaja%}); N.
of a man with the patronymic Ātharvaṇa; of a son
of Śata-dhanvan; {%(au),%} m. du. the Aśvins; [cf.
{%śata-bh˚.%}] {%—Bhiṣak-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
most healing; {%(au),%} m. du. ‘the best physicians,’ the
Aśvins. {%—Bhiṣak-tara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. more
healing. {%—Bhiṣak-pāśa, as,%} m. an inferior phy-
sician, a quack doctor. {%—Bhiṣak-priyā,%} f. ‘dear
to a physician,’ the plant Cocoulus Cordifolius ({%=%}
{%guḍūcī%}). {%—Bhiṣag-jita, am,%} n. ‘subdued by phy-
sicians,’ any drug or medicine. {%—Bhiṣag-bhadrā,%} f.
a species of the plant Croton; [cf. {%bhadra-dantikā.%}]
{%—Bhiṣag-vara, as,%} m. the best of physicians;
{%(au),%} m. du. the two Aśvins. {%—Bhiṣaṅ-mātṛ, tā,%}
f. the plant Justicia Adhadota; [cf. {%vaidya-mātṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35558<pc>0711-b<k1>BizajAvarta<k2>BizajAvarta
{%Bhiṣajāvarta, as,%}¦ m., N. of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>35559<pc>0711-b<k1>Bizajya<k2>Bizajya<h>1
1. {%bhiṣajya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%bhiṣajyati,%} &c., Ved. to
heal, cure.
<LEND>

<L>35560<pc>0711-b<k1>Bizajya<k2>Bizajya<h>2
2. {%bhiṣajya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sanative, healing,
healthful; ({%ā%}), f. the act of healing or curing; a
remedy, cure; [cf. {%dur-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35561<pc>0711-b<k1>Bizajyita<k2>Bizajyita
{%Bhiṣajyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. healed, cured, (also
incorrectly read {%bhiṣajjyita, bhiṣajjiyita, bhi-%}
{%ṣajjayita.%})
<LEND>

<L>35562<pc>0711-b<k1>BizRaja<k2>BizRaja
{%Bhiṣṇaja, as,%}¦ m., see Gaṇa Gargādi to Pāṇ.
IV. 1, 105.
<LEND>

<L>35563<pc>0711-b<k1>BizRajya<k2>BizRajya
{%Bhiṣṇajya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%bhiṣṇajyati,%} &c., Ved. =
1. {%bhiṣajya,%} to heal, cure.
<LEND>

<L>35564<pc>0711-b<k1>BizmA<k2>BizmA
{#BizmA#}¦ {%bhiṣmā,%} f. a various reading for
{%bhissā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>35565<pc>0711-b<k1>BizmikA<k2>BizmikA
{%Bhiṣmikā, bhiṣmiṭā, bhiṣmiṣṭā,%}¦ various
readings for {%bhissaṭā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>35566<pc>0711-b<k1>BissawA<k2>BissawA
{#BissawA#}¦ {%bhissaṭā%} or {%bhissiṭā,%} f. parched or
fried rice.
<LEND>

<L>35567<pc>0711-b<k1>BissA<k2>BissA
{%Bhissā,%}¦ f. boiled rice.
<LEND>

<L>35568<pc>0711-b<k1>Bihu<k2>Bihu
{#Bihu#}¦ {%bhihu (?), us,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>35569<pc>0711-b<k1>BI<k2>BI<h>1
{#BI#} 1¦. {%bhī,%} cl. 1. A. {%bhayate%} (Ved.); cl. 3.
P. (Ved. and ep. also A.) {%bibheti%} (3rd du.
{%bibhītas%} or {%bibhitas,%} 3rd pl. {%bibhyati,%} Part. {%bibh-%}
{%yat,%} ep. 1st sing. A. {%bibhye%}), Impf. {%abibhet%} (3rd pl.
{%abibhayus%}), Pot. {%bibhīyāt%} or {%bibhiyāt%} (3rd pl. {%bi-%}
{%bhīyus%} or {%bibhiyus, bibhyeyus%} Mahā-bh. Śānti-p.
459), {%bibhāya%} or {%bibhayāñ-cakāra%} or {%bibhayām-%}
{%āsa%} (3rd pl. {%bibhyus,%} Part. {%bibhīvas, bibhyuṣī,%} f.),
{%bheṣyati,%} Aor. {%abhaiṣīt%} (2nd sing. {%abhaiṣīs,%}
ep. {%mā bhais%} for {%mā bhaiṣīs,%} Ved. forms {%bhes,%}
{%bhema%}), {%bhetum%} (Ved. forms {%bhayante, abhayanta,%}
Part. {%bhayamāna, bhiyāna,%} Inf. {%bhiyase,%} cf. {%bhiyas%}
below; according to the Dhātu-pāṭha even cl. 10. P.
{%bhāyayati%}), to fear, dread, be afraid of (with abl. or
gen., e. g. {%mṛtyor bibheti,%} he fears death; {%bibhemi%}
{%-te,%} I fear thee; very rarely with inst. or acc.); to fear
for, be anxious or solicitous about (A.): Pass. {%bhī-%}
{%yate,%} Aor. {%abhāyi:%} Caus. A. {%bhīṣayate%} (ep. also
P. {%bhīṣayati%}), {%bhāpayate,%} Aor. {%abibhīṣata,%} &c.,
to terrify, put in a fright, intimidate; {%bhāyayati,%}
Aor. {%abībhayat,%} &c., to frighten or terrify any one
(acc.) with anything (inst.): Desid. {%bibhīṣati:%}
Intens. {%bebhīyate, bebhayīti, bebheti;%} [cf. Zend
rt. {%bī,%} ‘to be frightened:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">φέβ-ο-μαι, φόβο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φοβέ-ω, φοβέ-ο-μαι, φοβ-ερό-ς:</lang> Lith. <nsi>bij-au,</nsi> ‘I
am afraid;’ <nsi>baime,</nsi> ‘fear;’ <nsi>bai-dau,</nsi> ‘I terrify;’
<nsi>baisis,</nsi> ‘terrible;’ perhaps belonging to the Caus.
{%bhīṣaya%}; <nsi>byaurùs,</nsi> ‘deformed,’ see {%bhīru%}; <nsi>baj-</nsi>
<nsi>us,</nsi> ‘fear,’ {%= bhaya:%} Slav. <nsi>boj-a-ti,</nsi> ‘to be afraid:’
probably Goth. <nsi>fia</nsi> for <nsi>bia, fiangds:</nsi> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>feind:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>fiend:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>bi-bê-n:</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>bif-ian, beof-ian:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>beb-en</nsi> = Intens.
{%bebheti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35570<pc>0711-b<k1>Biyas<k2>Biyas
{%Bhiyas,%}¦ m., Ved. fear, apprehension, dread, (oc-
curring only in the acc. and inst. sing., the dat.
sing. {%bhiyase%} being used as Ved. inf. of rt. 1. {%bhī,%}
above; cf. Zend <nsi>bienghe.</nsi>)
<LEND>

<L>35571<pc>0711-b<k1>BiyasAna<k2>BiyasAna
{%Bhiyasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. fearful, timid.
<LEND>

<L>35572<pc>0711-b<k1>BiyA<k2>BiyA
{%Bhiyā,%}¦ f. fear, apprehension, dread.
<LEND>

<L>35573<pc>0711-b<k1>BI<k2>BI<h>2
2. {%bhī, īs,%}¦ f. fear, apprehension, alarm, dread,
[Page0711-c+ 81]
(sometimes at the end of a comp., cf. {%avadya-bhī.%})
{%—Bhī-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} causing or exciting
fear. {%—Bhī-mat, ān, atī, at,%} fearful.
<LEND>

<L>35574<pc>0711-c<k1>BIta<k2>BIta
{%Bhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ frightened, alarmed, terrified,
afraid, fearful, timid; placed in jeopardy or danger,
imperiled, (often at the end of a comp., e. g. {%agni-%}
{%bh˚,%} afraid of fire; {%mṛtyu-bh˚%}); ({%am%}), n. fear,
alarm, apprehension; ({%am%}), ind. timidly. {%—Bhītaṅ-%}
{%kāra, as, ā, am,%} making afraid; ({%am%}), ind. making
a coward, calling a coward, ({%tam bhītaṅ-kāram%}
{%ākruśya,%} calling him a coward.) {%—Bhīta-paritrāṇa-%}
{%vastūpālambha-paṇḍita (˚tu-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
clever in finding fault with the means of rescuing
the terrified. {%—Bhīta-bhīta, as, ā, am,%} very much
frightened, exceedingly afraid. {%—1. bhīta-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} one who is afraid. {%—2. bhīta-vat,%} ind. like
a frightened person, timidly.
<LEND>

<L>35575<pc>0711-c<k1>BIti<k2>BIti
{%Bhīti, is,%}¦ f. fear, alarm, apprehension, dread,
terror, (often at the end of a comp., cf. {%doṣa-bh˚,%}
{%deva-bh˚%}); tremor, trembling, shaking; danger.
{%—Bhīti-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing fear, exciting alarm.
{%—Bhīti-nāṭitaka, am,%} n. mimic representation of
fear.
<LEND>

<L>35576<pc>0711-c<k1>BIma<k2>BIma
{%Bhīma, as, ā, am,%}¦ fearful, dreadful, terrible, for-
midable, horrible, horrid, terrific, terrifying; ({%am%}),
n. horror, terror; ({%as%}), m. a kind of sorrel ({%=%}
{%amla-vetasa%}), Rumex Vesicarius; N. of Rudra; of
Śiva; of one of the eight forms of Śiva; of one
of the eleven Rudras; of a Deva-gandharva; of one
of the Devas called Yajña-mush; of a Dānava; of a
Vidyā-dhara; of a son of the Rākṣasa Kumbha-
karṇa; of the second son of Pāṇḍu (also called
Bhīma-sena and Vṛkodara; he was only the reputed
son of Pāṇḍu, being really the son of his wife Pṛthā
or Kuntī by Vāyu, god of the wind; he was remark-
able for his vast size and strength and voracious
appetite; cf. {%vāyu-putra%}); N. of a Vaidarbha; of
a son of Īlina; of a son of Amāvasu or Āmāvasu
and father of Kāñcana; of a son of Sattvata; of a
king of Dvārakā; of several kings; of an author;
of a poet; of the father of Ananta; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the race of Bhīma; ({%ā%}), f. a whip; a sort of perfume
({%= rocanā%}); N. of a form of Durgā; of an Apsaras;
of several rivers; of a district (probably sacred to
Durgā); of a town. {%—Bhīma-karman, ā, ā, a,%}
terrible in act, of terrific prowess; dreadful, destruc-
tive. {%—Bhīma-kārmuka, as, ā, am,%} having for-
midable bows. {%—Bhīma-khaṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of a
work treating of the Liṅga Bhīmeśvara (mentioned
in the Skanda-Purāṇa). {%—Bhīma-gava, as,%} or {%bhī-%}
{%ma-gu, us,%} m. ({%gava%} or {%gu = go%}), N. of a man;
[cf. {%bhaimagava.%}] {%—Bhīma-gupta, as,%} m., N. of
a king. {%—Bhīma-grāha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
terrible sea monsters. {%—Bhīma-candra, as,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Bhīma-jānu, us,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Bhīma-tā,%} f. terribleness, fearfulness, formidable-
ness. {%—Bhīma-tithi, is,%} f. the day of Bhīma {%(=%}
{%bhīmaikādaśī)%}. {%—Bhīma-darśana, as, ā, am,%}
frightful in appearance or aspect, frightful, hideous.
{%—Bhīma-dvādaśī,%} f., N. of the twelfth day of the
light half of the month Māgha (called after Bhīma
the reputed son of Pāṇḍu; cf. {%bhīmaikādaśī%}).
{%—Bhīmadvādaśī-vrata, am,%} n., N. of the sixty-
fifth chapter of the Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa. {%—Bhīma-%}
{%dhanvan, ā,%} m. ‘having a terrific bow,’ N. of a
king. {%—Bhīma-dhanvāyana,%} ‘bearing dreadful
bows,’ in {%bhīma-dhanvāyanī senā,%} Mahā-bh. Ud-
yoga-p. 7633. {%—Bhīma-nagara, am,%} n. ‘Bhīma's
city,’ N. of a town; [cf. {%bhīma-pura.%}] {%—Bhīma-%}
{%nāda, as, ā, am,%} sending forth a fearful sound,
sounding dreadfully; ({%as%}), m. a loud or fearful sound;
a lion; N. of one of the seven clouds which will
cover the sky at the destruction of the world. {%—Bhī-%}
{%ma-nāyaka, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhīma-parā-%}
{%krama, as, ā, am,%} possessing fearful power or
prowess; of terrible strength; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Śiva; N. of a man; of a work mentioned in Raghu-
nandana's Saṃskāra-tattva. {%—Bhīma-pāla, as,%} m.,
N. of a king. {%—Bhīma-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town
situated on the Ganges; [cf. {%bhīma-nagara.%}] {%—Bhī-%}
{%ma-bala, as, ā, am,%} possessing fearful or tremendous
[Page0712-a+ 81]
strength; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the sons of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra; of one of Devas called Yajña-mush,
see Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 14166. {%—Bhīma-bhaṭa, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Bhīma-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of
an author. {%—Bhīma-bhuja, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Bhīma-mukha, as, ī, am,%} of fearful aspect or
appearance; ({%as%}), m., N. of a monkey. {%—Bhīma-%}
{%ratha, as,%} m., N. of a king; of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra; of Ketu-mat (the father of Divo-dāsa); of
a son of Vikṛti and father of Nava-ratha; of a son
of Kṛṣṇa by Satya-bhāmā; of a Rākṣasa [cf.
{%bhaimaratha%}]; {%(ā, ī),%} f., N. of a river in the
Himālaya mountains; ({%ī%}), f. ‘the fearful night,’ N.
of the seventh night in the seventh month of the
seventy-seventh year of life (supposed to be the
ordinary period of human life; a person after this
period is thought to be arrived at dotage and
exempt from all religious observances; {%bhīma-rathī%}
is probably for {%bhīma-rātrī%} or for Prākṛt {%bhīma-%}
{%rattī;%} cf. {%kāla-rātrī%}). {%—Bhīma-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
of terrible form, of fearful aspect. {%—Bhīma-vikrama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of terrible prowess, tremendous in power
or strength; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Bhīma-vikrānta, as, ā, am,%} fear-
fully powerful or courageous; ({%as%}), m. a lion.
{%—Bhīma-vigraha, as, ā, am,%} of fearful form, ter-
rific in appearance, gigantic. {%—Bhīma-vega, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of fearful or tremendous speed, terribly swift
or impetuous; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a Dānava. {%—Bhīma-vega-rava,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of dreadful speed and sound, fearful in
velocity and noise; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the sons
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Bhīma-śaṅkara, am,%} n., scil.
{%liṅga,%} N. of one of the twelve most sacred Liṅgas.
{%—Bhīma-śara, as,%} m. ‘having fearful arrows,’ N.
of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Bhīma-śāsana, as,%} m.
‘terrible in rule,’ N. of Yama. {%—Bhīma-śāha, as,%}
m. ({%śāha%} = <lang n="arabic">شاه</lang> ‘the terrible king,’ N. of a king.
{%—Bhīma-śukla, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Bhīma-%}
{%siṃha-paṇḍita, as,%} m., N. of a learned man and
poet. {%—Bhīma-sena, as,%} m. ‘having a terrible
army,’ N. of a brother of Janam-ejaya; of a son of
Janam-ejaya; of a son of Ṛkṣa; of the second son
of Pāṇḍu [cf. {%bhīma%}]; of a Deva-gandharva; of a
Yakṣa; of a king; of a grammarian; of a phy-
sician; a kind of camphor; [cf. {%bhaimaseni, bhai-%}
{%masenya.%}] {%—Bhīmasena-maya, as, ī, am,%} con-
sisting of Bhīmasena. {%—Bhīma-svāmin, ī,%} m., N.
of a Brāhman. {%—Bhīmākara (˚ma-āk˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Bhīmā-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Bhīmādy-upākhyāna, am,%} n., N. of the fifteenth
chapter of the Vāsiṣṭha-rāmāyaṇa, commonly called
Yoga-vāsiṣṭha. {%—Bhīmeśa (˚ma-īśa˚)%} or {%bhīme-%}
{%śvara (˚ma-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a place sacred to
Śiva. {%—Bhīmeśvara-tīrtha%} and {%bhīmeśvara-mā-%}
{%kātmya, am,%} n., N. of two chapters of the Revā-
māhātmya of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Bhīmaikādaśī%}
{%(˚ma-ek˚),%} f., N. of the eleventh day in the light
half of the month Māgha; [cf. {%bhīma-dvādaśī.%}]
{%—Bhīmottara (˚ma-ut˚), as,%} m., N. of a Kum-
bhāṇḍa. {%—Bhīmodarī (˚ma-ud˚),%} f. an epithet of
Umā.
<LEND>

<L>35577<pc>0712-a<k1>BImaka<k2>BImaka
{%Bhīmaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a demon; (also read
{%bhīṣaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>35578<pc>0712-a<k1>BImayu<k2>BImayu
{%Bhīmayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. fearful, dreadful.
<LEND>

<L>35579<pc>0712-a<k1>BImara<k2>BImara
{%Bhīmara, am,%}¦ n. war, battle.
<LEND>

<L>35580<pc>0712-a<k1>BImala<k2>BImala
{%Bhīmala, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= bhīma,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35581<pc>0712-a<k1>BIraka<k2>BIraka
{%Bhīraka, as,%}¦ m. a various reading for {%bhīruka,%} a
kind of sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>35582<pc>0712-a<k1>BIru<k2>BIru
{%Bhīru, us, us,%}¦ or {%ūs, u,%} fearful, timid, cowardly,
(opposed to {%śūra%}); fearing, afraid of (with abl.,
e. g. {%maraṇād bhīruḥ,%} afraid of death; or at the
end of a comp., e. g. {%pratijñā-bhaṅga-bhīru,%} afraid
of breaking a promise); ({%us%}), m. a jackal [cf. {%pheru%}];
a tiger; a kind of sugar-cane; {%(us, ūs),%} f. a timid
woman; a shadow; a goat; a centipede; Solanum
Jacquini or a sort of prickly nightshade; the plant
Asparagus Racemosus, (in some of these last senses
said to be also m.); ({%u%}), n. silver. {%—Bhīru-cetas,%}
{%ās,%} m. ‘timid-hearted,’ a deer; [cf. {%bhīru-hṛdaya.%}]
{%—Bhīru-jana, as,%} m. one whose servants are
[Page0712-b+ 81]
cowards. {%—Bhīru-tā,%} f. or {%bhīru-tva, am,%} n. fear-
fulness, timidity, cautiousness, cowardice; natural
cowardice (as of a tiger, cf. {%bhīru,%} col. 1). {%—Bhīru-%}
{%pattrī,%} f. Asparagus Racemosus. {%—Bhīru-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} fearful, terrible, frightful. {%—Bhīru-yodha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having cowardly soldiers, possessing a
cowardly garrison. {%—Bhīru-randhra, as,%} m. ‘having
a fearful chasm,’ an oven, a furnace. {%—Bhīru-sattva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a timid nature, fearful, timid.
{%—Bhīru-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} timid-hearted, fearful,
timid; ({%as%}), m. a deer; [cf. {%bhīru-cetas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35583<pc>0712-b<k1>BIruka<k2>BIruka
{%Bhīruka, as, ā, am,%}¦ fearful, timid, timorous,
cowardly; afraid; shy; formidable; ({%as%}), m. an
owl; a bear [cf. {%bhīluka%}]; a kind of sugar-cane,
(also written {%bhīraka%}); N. of a man; ({%am%}), n. a
wood, forest. {%—Bhīruka-jana, as,%} m. one whose
servants are cowards.
<LEND>

<L>35584<pc>0712-b<k1>BIruRa<k2>BIruRa
{%Bhīruṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ terrific, &c. See {%a-bh˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>35585<pc>0712-b<k1>BIlu<k2>BIlu
{%Bhīlu = bhīru,%}¦ col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35586<pc>0712-b<k1>BIluka<k2>BIluka
{%Bhīluka, as, ā, am, = bhīruka%}¦ above; ({%as%}), m.
a bear; [cf. {%bhallūka, bhīruka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35587<pc>0712-b<k1>BIzaka<k2>BIzaka
{%Bhīṣaka, as,%}¦ m. (fr. the Caus.), N. of one of
Śiva's attendants [cf. {%bhīmaka%}]; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of a
goddess.
<LEND>

<L>35588<pc>0712-b<k1>BIzaRa<k2>BIzaRa
{%Bhīṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), terrifying,
frightening, causing alarm, terrific, awful, formidable,
horrible, (often at the end of a comp., e. g. {%śatru-%}
{%bh˚,%} terrifying an enemy); ({%as%}), m. the sentiment
of horror (in poetical composition); N. of a form of
Bhairava (= Yama); an epithet of Śiva; the olibanum
tree, Boswellia Thurifera; the plant Phœnix Paludosa
({%= hintāla%}); a pigeon, dove; N. of a Rākṣasa;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a goddess, (probably a form of Durgā);
({%am%}), n. the act of terrifying or frightening, causing
alarm or horror; anything which excites terror.
{%—Bhīṣaṇa-tva, am,%} n. terribleness, horribleness.
<LEND>

<L>35589<pc>0712-b<k1>BIzaRaka<k2>BIzaRaka
{%Bhīṣaṇaka, as, ikā, am, = bhīṣaṇa,%}¦ terrify-
ing, frightening, intimidating.
<LEND>

<L>35590<pc>0712-b<k1>BIzayamARa<k2>BIzayamARa
{%Bhīṣayamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ terrifying, fright-
ening.
<LEND>

<L>35591<pc>0712-b<k1>BIzA<k2>BIzA<h>1
1. {%bhīṣā,%}¦ f. the act of terrifying, frightening,
intimidation, terror, fright.
<LEND>

<L>35592<pc>0712-b<k1>BIzA<k2>BIzA<h>2
2. {%bhīṣā,%}¦ ind. (perhaps contracted fr. {%bhiyasā,%}
or inst. c. of {%bhīs%} = 2. {%bhī%}), Ved. from fear.
<LEND>

<L>35593<pc>0712-b<k1>BIzita<k2>BIzita
{%Bhīṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ terrified, frightened, alarmed.
<LEND>

<L>35594<pc>0712-b<k1>BIzidAsa<k2>BIzidAsa
{%Bhīṣi-dāsa, as,%}¦ m., N. of the man under whose
patronage Nārāyaṇa's commentary on the Gīta-
govinda was composed.
<LEND>

<L>35595<pc>0712-b<k1>BIzma<k2>BIzma
{%Bhīṣma, as, ā, am, = bhīma,%}¦ terrible, horrible,
terrific, fearful; ({%as%}), m. the sentiment of horror as
the object of poetical composition; an epithet of
Śiva (Rudra); a Rākṣasa, imp, goblin; N. of a
son of Śāntanu and Gaṅgā, (he is an important
personage in the Mahā-bhārata, being the half
brother of both Vicitra-vīrya and Vyāsa, — Śāntanu,
who was a descendant of Bharata, having had his
son Vicitra-vīrya by his legitimate wife Satyavatī,
but Bhīṣma by Gaṅgā before his marriage; when
Vicitra-vīrya died childless, Bhīṣma undertook the
government of Hastinā-pur, and brought up his three
nephews, the sons of his half brother Vyāsa, viz.
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra, Pāṇḍu, and Vidura; whence he is
sometimes called their father; he took the side of
his grand-nephews, the sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra, against
the sons of Pāṇḍu; he was a warrior renowned for
his continence, wisdom, bravery, and fidelity to his
word); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the race or followers of Bhīṣma;
({%am%}), n. horror, horribleness, the property of excit-
ing fear or terror. {%—Bhīṣma-garijita-ghoṣa-%}
{%svara-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha; [cf. {%bhīṣma-%}
{%svara-rāja.%}] {%—Bhīṣma-jananī,%} f. ‘mother of
Bhīṣma,’ an epithet of the Ganges. {%—Bhīṣma-%}
{%pañcaka, am,%} n. ‘five days sacred to Bhīṣma,’ the
five days from the eleventh to the fifteenth in the light
half of the month Kārttika. {%—Bhīṣmapañcaka-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n., N. of the sixty-third chapter of the
Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa. {%—Bhīṣma-parvan, a,%} n.,
N. of the sixth book of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Bhīṣ-%}
{%ma-mukti-pradāyaka, as,%} m. ‘giving release to
Bhīṣma,’ N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Bhīṣma-ratna-parī-%}
{%kṣā,%} f. trial of the jewel of Bhīṣma. {%—Bhīṣma- %}
[Page0712-c+ 71]
{%sū, ūs,%} f. ‘mother of Bhīṣma,’ an epithet of the
Ganges. {%—Bhīṣma-stava-rāja, as,%} m. ‘Bhīṣma's
hymn to Kṛṣṇa,’ N. of the forty-seventh chapter of
the twelfth book of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Bhīṣma-%}
{%svara-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of terrible sounds,’ N. of
a Buddha; [cf. {%bhīṣma-garjita-ghoṣa-svara-%}
{%rāja.%}] {%—Bhīṣmāṣṭamī (˚ma-aṣ˚),%} f. the eighth
day in the light half of the month Māgha (when
there is a festival sacred to Bhīṣma).
<LEND>

<L>35596<pc>0712-c<k1>BIzmaka<k2>BIzmaka
{%Bhīṣmaka, as,%}¦ m. Bhīṣma, the son of Śāntanu
(used contemptuously); N. of a king (the father of
Rukmiṇī who was carried off by Kṛṣṇa).
<LEND>

<L>35597<pc>0712-c<k1>Betavya<k2>Betavya
{%Bhetavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be feared or dreaded, to
be apprehended, (the neuter is used impersonally,
e. g. {%na bhetavyam,%} it is not to be feared, i. e. one
need not fear; often with abl. or gen., e. g. {%na%}
{%tasmāt%} or {%tasya bhetavyam,%} one need not be afraid
of him.)
<LEND>

<L>35598<pc>0712-c<k1>Beya<k2>Beya
{%Bheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be feared, (the neut. may
be used impersonally, e. g. {%arer bheyam,%} one must
fear an enemy.)
<LEND>

<L>35599<pc>0712-c<k1>BIRI<k2>BIRI
{#BIRI#}¦ {%bhīṇī,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda, (in Mahā-bh. Śalya-p. 2645
also read {%bhītī.%})
<LEND>

<L>35600<pc>0712-c<k1>BImarikA<k2>BImarikA
{#BImarikA#}¦ {%bhīmarikā,%} f., N. of a daughter
of Kṛṣṇa by Satya-bhāmā; (also read {%bhīmanikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>35601<pc>0712-c<k1>BIra<k2>BIra
{#BIra#}¦ {%bhīra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(incorrectly for {%ābhīra.%})
<LEND>

<L>35602<pc>0712-c<k1>BIraka<k2>BIraka
{#BIraka#}¦ {%bhīraka.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35603<pc>0712-c<k1>BIrukacCa<k2>BIrukacCa
{#BIrukacCa#}¦ {%bhīrukaccha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people; (probably for {%bharukaccha.%})
<LEND>

<L>35604<pc>0712-c<k1>BIlaBUzaRA<k2>BIlaBUzaRA
{#BIlaBUzaRA#}¦ {%bhīla-bhūṣaṇā.%} See {%bhilla-%}
{%bhūṣaṇā,%} p. 711, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35605<pc>0712-c<k1>BIlu<k2>BIlu
{#BIlu#}¦ {%bhīlu.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35606<pc>0712-c<k1>BIzaka<k2>BIzaka
{#BIzaka#}¦ {%bhīṣaka, bhīṣaṇa, bhīṣā, bhīṣma.%}
See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35607<pc>0712-c<k1>BIzawAcArya<k2>BIzawAcArya
{#BIzawAcArya#}¦ {%bhīṣaṭācārya (?), as,%} m., N. of
an author mentioned in Raghu-nandana's Saṃskāra-
tattva.
<LEND>

<L>35608<pc>0712-c<k1>Bu<k2>Bu
{#Bu#}¦ {%bhu, us, us, u, = bhū,%} existing, being,
becoming, produced, (at the end of some comps.,
cf. {%agni-bhu, pra-bhu, svayam-bhu.%})
<LEND>

<L>35609<pc>0712-c<k1>BuHKAra<k2>BuHKAra
{#BuHKAra#}¦ {%bhuḥkhāra,%} N. of a country in
Independent Tartary, Bokhāra; [cf. {%bhūḥkhāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35610<pc>0712-c<k1>Buk<k2>Buk
{#Buk#}¦ {%bhuk,%} ind., Ved. an exclamation of
surprise.
<LEND>

<L>35611<pc>0712-c<k1>BukkaBUpAla<k2>BukkaBUpAla
{#BukkaBUpAla#}¦ {%bhukka-bhūpāla, as,%} m., N. of
a king.
<LEND>

<L>35612<pc>0712-c<k1>Bukta<k2>Bukta
{#Bukta#}¦ {%bhukta, bhukti.%} See p. 713, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35613<pc>0712-c<k1>Bugna<k2>Bugna
{#Bugna#}¦ {%bhugna.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>35614<pc>0712-c<k1>BuN<k2>BuN
{#BuN#}¦ {%bhuṅ,%} a syllable inserted in certain
Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>35615<pc>0712-c<k1>Buj<k2>Buj<h>1
{#Buj#} 1¦. {%bhuj,%} cl. 6. P. {%bhujati, bubhoja,%}
{%bhoktum,%} to bend, curve, turn round,
make crooked: Pass. {%bhujyate,%} to be bent, to
incline one's self; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">φεύγ-ω, φυγ-ή, φύζα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φυγἀ-ς, φύξ-ις, φύξι-μο-ς,</lang> probably <lang n="greek">φυγών</lang> from
<lang n="greek">φυγών:</lang> Lat. <nsi>fug-i-o, fug-a, fug-ax, fugitivu-s,</nsi>
<nsi>fugare:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>biug-an:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>big-an,</nsi>
<nsi>bug-an, beág, beagrian, boga, eln-boga, el-</nsi>
<nsi>boga:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>baug, bogo, elin-bogo, buoc,</nsi>
<nsi>būh:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>bieg-en:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>bow, elbow:</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>be†g-a,</nsi> ‘I flee;’ <nsi>be†g-l-ĭ-c-ĭ,</nsi> ‘a deserter:’ Lith.
<nsi>be†g-u,</nsi> ‘I flee, run;’ <nsi>bug-ti,</nsi> ‘to be afraid;’ <nsi>baug-</nsi>
<nsi>ù-s,</nsi> ‘fearful, timid:’ Hib. <nsi>bog-aim,</nsi> ‘I put in
motion;’ <nsi>bogha,</nsi> ‘bow;’ <nsi>boghaighim,</nsi> ‘I bend;’
<nsi>boghadoir,</nsi> ‘an archer.’]
<LEND>

<L>35616<pc>0712-c<k1>Bugna<k2>Bugna
{%Bhugna, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, crooked, distorted;
curved; bending, stooping, bowed.
<LEND>

<L>35617<pc>0712-c<k1>Buj<k2>Buj<h>2
2. {%bhuj, k, k, k,%}¦ in {%tri-bh˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35618<pc>0712-c<k1>Buja<k2>Buja
{%Bhuja, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. the arm, = 1. {%bāhu;%} (often at
[Page0713-a+ 81]
the end of an adj. comp., cf. {%catur-bh˚, daśa-bh˚,%}
{%bhadra-bh˚%}); {%= pāṇi, kara,%} the hand; ({%as%}), m. a
bending, bend, curve; an arm or branch; the trunk
(of an elephant); a side (of a triangle or of any
mathematical figure; {%prati-bhuja,%} the opposite
side); the base of a triangle; (in astronomy) the
base of a shadow; the supplement of two or four
right angles or the complement of three right angles;
({%ā%}), f. a winding; = 1. {%bhoga,%} the coil of a snake;
[cf. perhaps Lat. <nsi>pug-nus</nsi> for <nsi>fug-nus,</nsi> ‘a fist.’]
{%—Bhuja-koṭara, as,%} m. the armpit. {%—Bhuja-ga,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘going crookedly or in a curve,’ {%= bhujaṅga,%}
a snake; ({%ī%}), f. a female snake; a species of shrub,
{%= sarpiṇī;%} [cf. {%bhujaṅgī.%}] {%—Bhujaga-dāraṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘snake-destroyer,’ an epithet of Garuḍa;
(this and similar compounds may be applied to any
of the natural enemies of the serpent race, as the
Ardea, peacock, ichneumon, &c.) {%—Bhujaga-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. the king of snakes. {%—Bhujaga-puṣapa, as,%}
m. {%= bhujaṅga-puṣpa,%} q. v. {%—Bhujaga-bhojin, ī,%}
m. ‘snake-eater,’ a peacock; Garuḍa. {%—Bhujaga-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. ‘snake-king,’ an epithet of Śeṣa.
{%—Bhujagarājaya,%} Nom. A. {%bhujagarājayate,%}
&c., to become or act like the king of snakes.
{%—Bhujaga-valaya, as, am,%} m. n. a bracelet con-
sisting of a serpent. {%—Bhujaga-śiśu-sṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} going or moving like a young snake; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a metre, four times ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯, ˘˘. {%—Bhu-%}
{%jagāntaka (˚ga-an˚), as,%} m. ‘snake-destroyer,’ an
epithet of Garuḍa; [cf. {%bhujaga-dāraṇa.%}] {%—Bhu-%}
{%jagābhojin (˚ga-ābh˚), ī,%} m. ‘feeding on snakes,’
an epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Bhujagāśana (˚ga-aś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘snake-eater,’ Garuḍa. {%—Bhujagendra (˚ga-%}
{%in˚), as,%} m. ‘snake-king,’ any large snake. {%—Bhuja-%}
{%geśvara (˚ga-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘snake-lord,’ an epithet
of Śeṣa. {%—Bhujaṅ-ga, as,%} m. {%= bhuja-ga,%} a snake,
serpent, ({%bhujaṅ-ga%} is said by some to be formed
fr. {%bhujam%} as an indec. part. of rt. 1. {%bhuj%}); a term
for the number eight; the paramour of a prostitute;
the dissolute friend of a king; a catamite, lecher; a
species of Daṇḍaka metre; N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f. a
female snake, a young female snake; a species of
shrub, {%= sarpiṇī%} [cf. {%bhujagī%}]; ({%am%}), n., N. of a
particular metal, (perhaps lead; cf. {%bhujaṅ-gama.%})
{%—Bhujaṅga-kanyā,%} f. a young female snake.
{%—Bhujaṅga-ghātnī,%} f. ‘killing snakes,’ a species
of plant, (commonly called Kankālika, considered as
an antidote and said to be a sort of mustard; {%=%}
{%sūkri, sarpākṣī, kṣut-karī, spṛhā.%}) {%—Bhujaṅga-%}
{%jihvā,%} f. ‘snake's tongue,’ a species of plant {%(=%}
{%mahā-samaṅgā)%}. {%—Bhujaṅga-damanī,%} f. a species
of plant {%(= nakuleṣṭā)%}. {%—Bhujaṅga-parṇinī,%} f.
a species of plant {%(= nāga-damanī)%}. {%—Bhujaṅga-%}
{%pihita, as, ā, am,%} covered with serpents. {%—Bhu-%}
{%jaṅga-puṣpa,%} a species of plant, {%= nāga-puṣpa;%}
[cf. {%bhujaga-puṣpa.%}] {%—Bhujaṅga-prayāta, am,%}
n. ‘snake-like course,’ N. of a metre, four times
˘¯¯˘¯¯˘¯¯˘¯¯. {%—Bhujaṅgaprayāta-stotra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a hymn addressed to Śiva, composed
in the Bhujaṅga-prayāta metre, and said to be by
Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Bhujaṅgaprayātāṣṭaka (˚ta-%}
{%aṣ˚), am,%} n., N. of a piece of poetry in praise of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Bhujaṅga-bha, am,%} n. ‘snake-asterism,’
N. of the Nakṣatra Āśleṣā. {%—Bhujaṅga-bhuj, k,%}
m. ‘snake-eater,’ a peacock; an epithet of Garuḍa.
{%—Bhujaṅga-bhojin, ī,%} m. ‘feeding on snakes,’ a
particular species of snake, the large Indian serpent
(Boa Constrictor), {%= rāja-sarpa;%} an epithet of Ga-
ruḍa. {%—Bhujāṅ-gama, as,%} m. {%= bhujaṅ-ga,%} a
snake, serpent; a term for the number eight; an
epithet of Rāhu; N. of a Nāga; ({%ā%}), f. a female
snake, a female snake-demon; ({%am%}), n. lead. {%—Bhu-%}
{%jaṅga-latā,%} f. betel-pepper {%(= nāga-vallī)%}. {%—Bhu-%}
{%jaṅga-vijṛmbhita, am,%} n. a species of the Utkṛti
metre. {%—Bhujaṅga-śiśu, us,%} m. a species of Vṛhatī
metre. {%—Bhujaṅga-saṅgatā,%} f. a species of metre,
four times ˘˘¯˘¯˘¯˘¯. {%—Bhujaṅga-han, ā,%}
m. ‘snake-killer,’ Garuḍa. {%—Bhujaṅgākṣī (˚ga-%}
{%akṣi),%} f. the ichneumon plant, {%= nakuleṣṭā; =%}
{%rāsnā%}. {%—Bhujaṅgākhya (˚ga-ākh˚), as,%} m. the
plant Mesua Roxburghii {%(= nāga-keśara)%}. {%—Bhu- %}
[Page0713-b+ 80]
{%jaṅgikā,%} f., N. of a village. {%—Bhujaṅgedra (˚ga-%}
{%in˚), as,%} m. the king of snakes. {%—Bhujaṅgerita%}
{%(˚ga-īr˚), am,%} n. a kind of metre. {%—Bhujaṅgeśa%}
{%(˚ga-īśa), as,%} m. ‘snake-lord,’ an epithet of Piṅga-
laka. {%—Bhuja-jyā,%} f. (in astronomy) the base sine.
{%—Bhujajyā-phala, am,%} n. the result from the
base sine. {%—Bhuja-daṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. ‘arm-
staff,’ an arm like a staff, the arm; [cf. {%bāhu-%}
{%daṇḍa.%}] {%—Bhuja-dala, as,%} m. ‘arm-leaf,’ the
hand; [cf. {%bhujā-dala.%}] {%—Bhuja-nagara, am,%} n.,
N. of a town. {%—Bhuja-pratibhuja, am,%} n. opposite
sides in a plane figure. {%—Bhuja-phala, am,%} n. {%=%}
{%bāhu-phala,%} the result from the base sine. {%—Bhuja-%}
{%bala, am,%} n. strength of arm; ({%as%}), m., N. of an
author, (also called {%bhuja-bala-bhīma.%}) {%—Bhuja-%}
{%madhya, am,%} n. ‘the part between the arms,’ the
breast. {%—Bhuja-mūla, am,%} n. ‘the root of the arm,’
the shoulder. {%—Bhuja-yaṣṭi, is,%} m. f. {%= bhuja-%}
{%daṇḍa%}. {%—Bhuja-vīrya, am,%} n. vigour of arm.
{%—Bhuja-śālin, ī, inī, i,%} possessing strong arms;
[cf. {%bāhu-śālin.%}] {%—Bhuja-śikhara, am,%} n. ‘the
head of the arm,’ the shoulder. {%—Bhuja-śiras, as,%}
n. ‘the head of the arm,’ the shoulder, the shoulder-
blade. {%—Bhuja-saṃśraya, as,%} m. going for pro-
tection to the arms, taking refuge in the arms (of
another). {%—Bhuja-sūtra, am,%} n. the base sine.
{%—Bhujā-kaṇṭa, as,%} m. ({%kaṇṭa = kaṇṭaka%}), ‘hand-
thorn,’ a finger-nail. {%—Bhujāgra (˚ja-ag˚), as,%} m.
‘end of the arm,’ the hand; the shoulder. {%—Bhujā-%}
{%dala, as,%} m. ‘arm-leaf,’ the hand {%(= bhuja-dala).%}
{%—Bhujāntara (˚ja-an˚), am,%} n. ‘the interval or
part between the arms or between the shoulders,’ the
breast, chest; ({%am%}), ind. between the arms, in the
embrace. {%—Bhujāntarāla (˚ja-an˚), am,%} n. {%= bhu-%}
{%jāntara%}. {%—Bhujāpīḍa (˚ja-āp˚), as,%} m. clasping or
embracing in the arms. {%—Bhujā-madhya, am,%} n.
‘the middle of the arm,’ the elbow. {%—Bhujā-mūla,%}
{%am,%} n. {%= bhuja-mūla,%} q. v. the shoulder.
<LEND>

<L>35619<pc>0713-b<k1>Buji<k2>Buji<h>1
1. {%bhuji, is,%}¦ f., Ved. clasping round, enfolding, fold,
(at the end of a comp., e. g. {%daśa-bh˚,%} tenfold; cf.
{%śata-bh˚, tri-bhuj.%})
<LEND>

<L>35620<pc>0713-b<k1>Bujyu<k2>Bujyu<h>1
1. {%bhujyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. capable of being
bent, pliant, flexible; easily turned or guided (said of
a chariot; according to Sāy. {%= rakṣaka,%} see rt. 3.
{%bhuj%}); ({%us%}), m., N. of a son of Tugra saved from
shipwreck by the Aśvins; of Bhujyu Lāhyāyani;
(perhaps) a snake or viper; (according to some
{%bhujyu%} also) {%= bhāṇḍa, bhājana,%} a pot, vessel; {%=%}
{%bhojana,%} food; {%= agni,%} fire.
<LEND>

<L>35621<pc>0713-b<k1>Buj<k2>Buj<h>3
{#Buj#} 3¦. {%bhuj%} [cf. rt. {%bhakṣ%}], cl. 7. P. A.
{%bhunakti, bhuṅkte%} (3rd pl. {%bhuñjate,%}
ep. also 3rd sing. {%bhuñjate,%} Ved. {%bhojate%}), Impf.
{%abhunak, abhuṅkta,%} Pot. {%bhuñjyāt%} (ep. {%bhuñjīyāt%}
and {%bhuñjet%}), {%bhuñjīta,%} Impv. {%bhunaktu, bhuṅk-%}
{%tām,%} Perf. {%bubhoja, bubhuje%} (1st pl. irreg. {%bubhuj-%}
{%mahe,%} 3rd pl. irreg. {%bubhujrire%}), 2nd Fut. {%bhokṣ-%}
{%yati, -te,%} Aor. {%abhaukṣīt, abhukta%} (Ved. forms
are {%bhojam, bhujema, bhukṣiṣīya%}), {%bhoktum%}
(Ved. Inf. {%bhuje, bhojase%}), to enjoy, enjoy a meal,
eat and drink, eat, consume, (generally A., especially
if without an object; in Ved. with inst. of the thing
eaten, but in later Sanskrit with acc.); to possess,
have, make use of; to enjoy carnally (with acc.); to
rule, govern; to suffer, experience, endure; to pass
(as time), live through; (in astronomy) to pass
through, fulfil; to be useful to any person (P. with
acc. Ved.): Pass. {%bhujyate,%} to be enjoyed, to be
eaten; to be possessed; to be brought under the
power of: Caus. {%bhojayati%} (also {%bhuñjāpayati%}),
{%-te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%abūbhujat,%} to cause to enjoy or
eat, to feed (with double acc. or with acc. of the
person and inst. of the thing, e. g. {%tām annam%} or
{%annena bhojayām-āsa,%} he caused her to eat food):
Desid. {%bubhukṣati, -te,%} to desire to enjoy or eat, to
be hungry [cf. {%bubhukṣu%}]: Intens. {%bobhujyate,%} to
be eaten frequently; {%bobhokti,%} to eat frequently; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>fung-or, fru-or,</nsi> fr. <nsi>frug-or, fruges, fructus,</nsi>
<nsi>frustum, frustra, frutex;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>bugjan, biuhts,</nsi>
<nsi>biuhti, bruks, brūkjan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>bycgan, brucan,</nsi>
<nsi>bryce;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>brūchan;</nsi> Old Island. <nsi>brūka.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page0713-c+ 81]

<L>35622<pc>0713-c<k1>Bukta<k2>Bukta
{%Bhukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ enjoyed, eaten; used, pos-
sessed; experienced, suffered; passed (as time);
({%am%}), n. the thing eaten or enjoyed, food [cf. {%ku-%}
{%bh˚%}]; the act of eating; the place where any person
has eaten. {%—Bhukta-pūrvin, ī, iṇī, i,%} one who
has eaten before. {%—Bhukta-bhoga, as, ā, am,%}
one who has enjoyed an enjoyment or suffered a
suffering; made use of, used, employed, enjoyed.
{%—Bhukta-mātre,%} ind. immediately on having eaten.
{%—Bhukta-vṛddhi, is,%} f. the swelling of food (in
the stomach). {%—Bhukta-śeṣa%} or {%bhukta-śeṣaka%}
or {%bhukta-samujjhita, am,%} n. what is left after
eating, the remnants of a meal, leavings, orts.
{%—Bhukta-supta, as, ā, am,%} sleeping after a meal.
{%—Bhuktāsava (˚ta-as˚), as,%} m. (in astronomy) the
equivalent in respirations of the part of the sign
traversed. {%—Bhuktocchiṣṭa (˚ta-uc˚), am,%} n. the
rejected leavings or remnants of food ({%= phelikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>35623<pc>0713-c<k1>Buktavat<k2>Buktavat
{%Bhuktavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has eaten or
possessed.
<LEND>

<L>35624<pc>0713-c<k1>Bukti<k2>Bukti
{%Bhukti, is,%}¦ f. the act of enjoying or eating, enjoy-
ment, eating; fruition, possession, usufruct; food; (in
astronomy) the daily motion of a planet [cf. {%pakṣa-%}
{%bh˚, māsa-bh˚%}]; a limit [cf. {%tīra-bh˚%}]. {%—Bhukti-%}
{%pātra, am,%} n. a dish for food. {%—Bhukti-prada, as,%}
m. the plant Phaseolus Mungo {%(= mudga)%}. {%—Bhuk-%}
{%ti-matī,%} f., N. of a river; (also read {%mukti-matī.%})
{%—Bhukti-varjita, as, ā, am,%} excluded from enjoy-
ment, not allowed to be enjoyed.
<LEND>

<L>35625<pc>0713-c<k1>BuktvA<k2>BuktvA
{%Bhuktvā,%}¦ ind. having enjoyed or eaten; having
possessed. {%—Bhuktvā-suhita, as, ā, am,%} satisfied
after eating.
<LEND>

<L>35626<pc>0713-c<k1>Buj<k2>Buj<h>4
4. {%bhuj, k,%}¦ f. enjoyment; profit, advantage, wel-
fare, usefulness; ({%k, k, k%}), enjoying, eating, consum-
ing, an eater, &c., (at the end of comps., cf. {%anna-%}
{%bh˚, amṛta-bh˚, kravya-bh˚%}); possessing, ruling,
(in comp. with words meaning ‘earth,’ e. g. {%kāśyapī-%}
{%bh˚,%} a ruler of the earth, i. e. king; cf. {%kṣiti-bh˚%});
experiencing, enduring, suffering, suffering punish-
ment for (e. g. {%kilviṣa-bh˚,%} suffering for a crime);
passing (as time), fulfilling; useful to, serviceable to.
<LEND>

<L>35627<pc>0713-c<k1>Buji<k2>Buji<h>2
2. {%bhuji, is,%}¦ f., Ved. enjoyment, favour, (Sāy.
{%= bhoga, pari-bhoga%}); {%(is, is, i),%} one who causes
enjoyment or grants favours, one who protects; ({%ī%}),
m. du. an epithet of the two Aśvins, (Sāy. {%= havi-%}
{%ṣām bhoktārau,%} eaters of the oblations); ({%is%}), m.
fire, (see Uṇādi-s. IV. 141.)
<LEND>

<L>35628<pc>0713-c<k1>Bujizya<k2>Bujizya
{%Bhujiṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ granting food, useful
(Ved.); free, independent; ({%as%}), m. a slave, servant
[cf. Uṇādi-s. IV. 178]; a companion; a string worn
round the wrist ({%= hasta-sūtraka,%} which some in-
terpret as a Dvandva comp., ‘the hand’ and ‘a string’);
({%ā%}), f. a female slave or servant, maid-servant, slave-
girl, hand-maid, (perhaps in general) any woman
dependent on or working for others; a harlot.
<LEND>

<L>35629<pc>0713-c<k1>Bujman<k2>Bujman
{%Bhujman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. producing or giving food;
(Sāy. {%= sarveṣām bhojayitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>35630<pc>0713-c<k1>BujyamAna<k2>BujyamAna
{%Bhujyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being enjoyed or eaten;
being possessed.
<LEND>

<L>35631<pc>0713-c<k1>Bujyu<k2>Bujyu<h>2
2. {%bhujyu, us,%}¦ m. (for 1. see col. 2), eating;
{%= bhojana,%} food.
<LEND>

<L>35632<pc>0713-c<k1>BuYjat<k2>BuYjat
{%Bhuñjat, an, atī, at,%}¦ enjoying, eating, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35633<pc>0713-c<k1>BuYjAna<k2>BuYjAna
{%Bhuñjāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ enjoying, eating, feeding
on, possessing.
<LEND>

<L>35634<pc>0713-c<k1>Boktavya<k2>Boktavya
{%Bhoktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be enjoyed, to be
eaten; to be used or employed, to be made use of;
to be possessed; to be governed or ruled.
<LEND>

<L>35635<pc>0713-c<k1>BoktukAma<k2>BoktukAma
{%Bhoktu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. the Inf.), wishing
to enjoy or eat, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35636<pc>0713-c<k1>Boktf<k2>Boktf
{%Bhoktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an enjoyer, eater, feeder
[cf. {%prātar-bh˚%}]; enjoying, eating; possessing; one
who employs or makes use of; one who feels or
experiences (joy, sorrow, &c.), feeling, experienc-
ing; {%(tā),%} m. a possessor; a king, ruler; a husband;
a lover. {%—Bhoktṛ-tva, am,%} n. the state of being and
enjoyer or eater, the being a possessor or feeler;
enjoyment, possession; perception. {%—Bhoktṛ-śakti,%}
{%is,%} f. the faculty of the soul as the enjoyer and pos-
sessor of nature.
<LEND>

<L>35637<pc>0713-c<k1>BokzyamARa<k2>BokzyamARa
{%Bhokṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being about to enjoy
or eat.
<LEND>
[Page0714-a+ 73]

<L>35638<pc>0714-a<k1>Bogya<k2>Bogya
{%Bhogya, bhojanīya, bhojya,%}¦ &c. See p. 723.
<LEND>

<L>35639<pc>0714-a<k1>BujiNga<k2>BujiNga
{#BujiNga#}¦ {%bhujiṅga, ās,%} m. pl,. N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>35640<pc>0714-a<k1>Buwwa<k2>Buwwa
{#Buwwa#}¦ {%bhuṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhuṭṭa-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town built by Bhuṭṭa. {%—Bhuṭ-%}
{%ṭeśvara (˚ṭa-īś˚),%} N. of a temple (?) built by Bhuṭṭa.
<LEND>

<L>35641<pc>0714-a<k1>Buwva<k2>Buwva
{%Bhuṭva,%}¦ a various reading for {%bhuṭṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>35642<pc>0714-a<k1>BuRq<k2>BuRq
{#BuRq#}¦ {%bhuṇḍ%} [cf. rt. {%huṇḍ%}], cl. 1. A. {%bhuṇ-%}
{%ḍate,%} &c., to support, maintain; to support, maintain; to select;
to take.
<LEND>

<L>35643<pc>0714-a<k1>Bumanyu<k2>Bumanyu
{#Bumanyu#}¦ {%bhumanyu, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Bharata; of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>35644<pc>0714-a<k1>Buyya<k2>Buyya
{#Buyya#}¦ {%bhuyya, as,%} m., N. of a person men-
tioned in Rāja-taraṅgiṇī VI. 264.
<LEND>

<L>35645<pc>0714-a<k1>Bur<k2>Bur
{#Bur#}¦ {%bhur%} (a Vedic rt. not occurring in
the Dhātu-pāṭha and regarded by Sāy. as a
Vedic form of rt. {%bhṛ,%} to bear), P. A. {%bhurati, -te,%}
&c., to move rapidly, make a short quick move-
ment, be active; to wish for, (Sāy. {%bhuranta =%}
{%icchanti%}). Intens. {%jarbhurīti%} (Pres. part. {%jarbhu-%}
{%rāṇa%}), to shoot out in flames (as fire); [cf. {%bhūrṇi;%}
Gr. <lang n="greek">πορφύρω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>fur-ere.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>35646<pc>0714-a<k1>BuraRa<k2>BuraRa
{%Bhuraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. active, (Sāy. {%= bhartṛ%}
or {%poṣaka,%} as if fr. rt. {%bhṛ%}); ({%ā%}), m. du. epithet
of the Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>35647<pc>0714-a<k1>BuraRya<k2>BuraRya
{%Bhuraṇya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%bhuraṇyati,%} &c., Ved. to
be active, move restlessly; to stir, (Sāy. {%= gacchati%}
or {%poṣayati.%})
<LEND>

<L>35648<pc>0714-a<k1>BuraRyat<k2>BuraRyat
{%Bhuraṇyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. being active, stirring,
restless; (Sāy. {%= dhārayat,%} supporting; {%poṣayat,%}
nourishing; or {%gantum icchat,%} wishing to go.)
<LEND>

<L>35649<pc>0714-a<k1>BuraRyu<k2>BuraRyu
{%Bhuraṇyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. active, stirring, rest-
less, uneasy; eager; (Sāy. {%= haviṣām bhartṛ,%}
bearer of the oblations, as an epithet of Agni; ac-
cording to Naigh. II. 15 {%= kṣipra,%} quick); ({%ū%}),
m. du. epithet of the Aśvins; (Sāy. {%= sarvatra gan-%}
{%tārau%} or {%yajñasya bhartārau.%})
<LEND>

<L>35650<pc>0714-a<k1>BuramARa<k2>BuramARa
{%Bhuramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. moving actively,
struggling; (Sāy. {%= bhriyamāṇa,%} being borne.)
<LEND>

<L>35651<pc>0714-a<k1>BurvaRi<k2>BurvaRi
{%Bhurvaṇi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. active, stirring, restless,
uneasy, impatient; (according to Sāy. {%= attṛ,%} eating,
devouring, as if fr. {%bhurv%} for rt. {%bharv,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>35652<pc>0714-a<k1>Burvan<k2>Burvan
{%Bhurvan,%}¦ Ved. restless motion (of water &c.; but
according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 134, 5, {%bhurvaṇi,%}
loc. sing. {%= bharaṇavati,%} and may here stand either
for ‘the sacrifice’ which bears oblations &c. or for
‘a cloud’ which bears water).
<LEND>

<L>35653<pc>0714-a<k1>Buraj<k2>Buraj
{#Buraj#}¦ {%bhuraj%} (a Vedic verb probably con-
nected with rt. {%bhur%}), A. {%bhurajate,%} &c., (perhaps)
to bubble, spout up, (but according to Sāy. {%bhura-%}
{%janta%} in Ṛg-veda IV. 43, 5, {%= prāpnuvanti.%})
<LEND>

<L>35654<pc>0714-a<k1>Burij<k2>Burij
{#Burij#}¦ {%bhurij, au,%} f. du. (said in Uṇādi-s.
II. 72. to be fr. rt. {%bhṛ%}), Ved. the two arms;
heaven and earth; (in Ṛg-veda VIII. 4, 16) a pair
of scissors or shears, (but according to Sāy. {%bhu-%}
{%rijoḥ%} here {%= bāhvoḥ,%} of the two arms); a carpen-
ter's vice or implement consisting of two arms, (but
in Ṛg-veda IV. 2, 14, Sāy. makes {%bhurijau = bā-%}
{%hū%}); ({%k%}), f. the earth; N. of a particular metre in
which a Pāda has one or two superfluous syllables;
N. of certain insertions in liturgical formularies.
<LEND>

<L>35655<pc>0714-a<k1>BuruRqa<k2>BuruRqa
{#BuruRqa#}¦ {%bhuruṇḍa, as,%} m. a species of animal
[cf. {%bhāraṇḍa, bhāruṇḍa, bheruṇḍa%}]; N. of a
man.
<LEND>

<L>35656<pc>0714-a<k1>BurBurikA<k2>BurBurikA
{#BurBurikA#}¦ {%bhurbhurikā%} and {%bhurbhurī,%} f. a
sort of sweetmeat.
<LEND>

<L>35657<pc>0714-a<k1>Buva<k2>Buva
{#Buva#}¦ {%bhuva, bhuvat, bhuvana, bhuvanyu,%}
{%bhuvas,%} &c. See col. 3, and p. 715, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35658<pc>0714-a<k1>BuSuRqa<k2>BuSuRqa
{#BuSuRqa#}¦ {%bhuśuṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35659<pc>0714-a<k1>BuSuRqi<k2>BuSuRqi
{#BuSuRqi#}¦ {%bhuśuṇḍi, is,%} or {%bhuśuṇḍī,%} f. a kind
of weapon, (perhaps a kind of fire-arms; sometimes
incorrectly written {%bhuṣuṇḍi%} and {%bhūśuṇḍi.%})
<LEND>

<L>35660<pc>0714-a<k1>BU<k2>BU<h>1
{#BU#} 1¦. {%bhū,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%bhavati, -te,%} Impf.
{%abhavat, abhavata,%} Pot. {%bhavet, bhaveta,%}
[Page0714-b+ 81]
Impv. {%bhavatu, bhavatām%} (Ved. 2nd sing. {%bodhi%}
[but referred by Sāy. to rt. 1. {%budh%}], 3rd sing. {%bhūtu;%}
in Ṛg-veda 1. 94, 12, {%bhavatāt%}), Perf. {%babhūva,%}
{%babhūve%} (according to Vopa-deva VIII. 33, Pass. and
Impers. {%babhūve%} or {%bubhūve,%} 2nd sing. {%babhūvitha,%}
Ved. {%babhūtha,%} 2nd pl. {%babhūva,%} part. {%babhūvas,%}
{%babhūvuṣī,%} f.; in Ṛg-veda 1. 27, 2, {%babhūyāt =%}
{%bhavatu%}), 1st Fut. {%bhavitā,%} 2nd Fut. {%bhaviṣyati,%}
{%-te%} (ep. 2nd pl. {%bhaviṣyadhvam%}), Aor. {%abhūt,%}
{%abhaviṣṭa%} (3rd pl. {%abhūvan,%} Ved. forms {%bhuvas,%}
{%bhuvat%}), Prec. {%bhūyāt, bhaviṣīṣṭa,%} Cond. {%abha-%}
{%viṣyat, abhaviṣyata, bhavitum%} (Ved. {%bhavitos.%}
{%bhuve%}), to become, be, ({%nābhijānāmi bhaved evaṃ%}
{%na veti,%} I do not know whether it may be so or not);
to be in any state or condition, ({%kathaṃ sa bha-%}
{%viṣyati,%} in what state will he be?); to be born
or produced; to exist, live, ({%abhūn nṛpaḥ,%} there
lived a king); to remain, stay, abide (e. g. {%pathi%}
{%bhava,%} remain thou or stay thou awhile on the
road, Megha-dūta 30); to arise, spring up, happen,
occur, befall, take place, ({%yadi saṃśayo bhavet,%}
if a doubt should arise, cf. Manu XII. 108); to be
possible, (according to Pāṇ. III. 3, 146, a future
tense may follow {%bhavati%} in this sense, e. g. {%bhavati%}
{%bhavān yājayiṣyati,%} it is possible or it may happen
that you will cause a sacrifice to be performed); to
turn out, lead to (with dat., e. g. {%tan nāśāya bha-%}
{%vati,%} that leads to destruction; {%tat saṅgamāya%}
{%bhavati,%} that leads to union); to serve for, tend or
conduce to (with dat., e. g. {%tad dātur anarthāya%}
{%bhavati,%} that conduces to the disadvantage of the
giver); to conduct one's self, behave; to become the
property of any one, belong to (with gen., = ‘to
have, to possess,’ e. g. {%tasya bhrātā bhavati,%} of
him there is a brother, i. e. he has a brother); to be
on the side of, assist (with gen., e. g. {%ye mitrāṇāṃ%}
{%na bhavanti,%} those who do not assist their friends;
or with the affix {%tas,%} e. g. {%devā Arjuna-to 'bhavan,%}
the gods were on the side of Arjuna); to be occupied
with or engaged in (with loc., e. g. {%tapasi bhava,%}
be thou engaged in, i. e. devote thyself to penance);
to be of importance or consequence, become pros-
perous (Ved.); to turn out well, succeed (Ved.); to
obtain, attain to (Ved., cf. Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 5366).
The senses of the verb may be almost infinitely
extended when {%bhū%} is compounded with a preceding
adjective or substantive, the final of which if {%a, ā, i,%}
{%an,%} or {%as%} becomes {%ī;%} if {%us%} or {%u,%} becomes {%ū%} (e. g.
fr. {%agni, agnī-bhū,%} to become fire; fr. {%arus, arū-%}
{%bhū,%} to become wounded; fr. {%eka-mati, ekamatī-%}
{%bhū,%} to become unanimous; fr. {%kaṭhora, kaṭhorī-%}
{%bhū,%} to become sharp; fr. {%kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇī-bhū,%}
to become black; fr. 1. {%kṣapaṇa, kṣapaṇī-bhū,%}
to become a Buddhist mendicant; fr. {%go-cara, go-%}
{%carī-bhū,%} to become visible; fr. {%jarjara, jarjarī-%}
{%bhū,%} to decay; fr. {%taruṇī, taruṇī-bhū,%} to become
a marriageable girl; fr. {%tīvra, tīvrī-bhū,%} to become
violent or intense; fr. {%parikhā, parikhī-bhū,%} to
become a ditch or moat; fr. {%pary-utsuka, paryut-%}
{%sukī-bhū,%} to become sorrowful; fr. {%pra-ṇidhi, pra-%}
{%ṇidhī-bhū,%} to become a spy; fr. {%praty-anantara,%}
{%pratyanantarī-bhū%} [also read {%pratyantarī-bhū%}],
to be near; fr. {%bandhakī, bandhakī-bhū,%} to become
a harlot; fr. {%bhasman, bhasmī-bhū,%} to become
ashes; fr. {%rahas, rahī-bhū,%} to become solitary, &c.).
The senses of {%bhū%} may also be variously modified
when it is connected with adverbs or with the nega-
tive {%na%} (e. g. {%pṛthivī na bhaviṣyati,%} the earth
will not exist, i. e. will perish or be destroyed; {%punar%}
{%bhū,%} to marry again, see Manu IX. 175; cf. {%āvir-%}
{%bhū, prādur-bhū, tiro-bhū, mithyā-bhū, vṛthā-%}
{%bhū; anyathā bhū,%} to become otherwise, i. e. to
be changed or be falsified; {%agre bhū,%} to be in front,
to precede, &c.). The perfect of {%bhū%} ({%babhūva,%}
&c.) is used after the syllable {%ām%} like the perfect of
the rts. 1. {%as%} and 1. {%kṛ%} as an auxiliary to form the
perfect of verbs of the 10th class, derivative verbs,
and others mentioned in Gram. r. 385 [cf. Pāṇini
III. 1, 40]: Pass. {%bhūyate,%} Aor. {%abhāvi%} (sometimes
used impersonally, e. g. {%tair bhaviṣyate,%} by them
it will be existed, i. e. they will exist): Caus. {%bhāva- %}
[Page0714-c+ 81]
{%yati%} (rarely A. {%-te%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%abībhavat,%} to
cause to be or become or exist; to bring into exist-
ence or being, call into life; to originate, produce,
effect, cause, create; to cherish, support, protect,
preserve, foster, animate, enliven, encourage; to
devote one's self to, addict one's self to; to manifest,
make manifest, exhibit; to change, transform; to
purify; to obtain, attain to, get (P. A.); to cause to
exist in the mind, present to the mind, think about,
reflect upon, consider, know; to convince, convict;
to prove, substantiate, establish; to mingle, mix; to
soak, saturate, steep; to perfume: Pass. of Caus.
{%bhāvyate,%} to be caused to be, to be preserved: Desid.
of Caus. {%bibhāvayiṣati,%} to wish to cause to be, &c.:
Desid. {%bubhūṣati,%} &c., to wish to become or be:
Intens. {%bobhūyate, bobhavīti, bobhoti,%} &c. (Impv.
3rd sing. Ved. {%bobhūtu%}), to be or become very fre-
quently, to be generally, to take various forms (with
acc., Ved.); [cf. Zend <nsi>bū,</nsi> ‘to be, become:’ Gr.
<lang n="greek">φύ-ω, ἔ-φῡ-ν, ἔ-φῡ-ς, ἔ-φῡ</lang> {%= abhūvam, abhūs,%}
{%abhūt,%} <lang n="greek">φύ-ο-μαι, φυ-ή, φύ-σι-ς, φῦ-μα, φυ-τό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φυτεύ-ω, φῦ-λο-ν, φυ-λή, φῖ-τυ, φί-τυ-μα, φι-τύ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φοι-τά-ω(?), φώς, gen. φωτός,</lang> ‘the generating one,’
probably {%= bhavat:%} Lat. <nsi>fu-a-m, fu-i, fu-turu-s,</nsi>
<nsi>fo-re, fu-tu-o, -bam</nsi> (in <nsi>amabam</nsi>) = {%abhavam,%} <nsi>-bo,</nsi>
<nsi>bimus</nsi> = {%bhaviṣyāmi, bhaviṣyāmas%}, <nsi>fe-tu-s, fe-</nsi>
<nsi>cundu-s, fe-nus, fe-nu-m:</nsi> Osc. <nsi>Fu-tri-s:</nsi> Old.
Sax. <nsi>biu-m:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>beo-m:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>bi-m,</nsi>
‘I am:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>bin:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>bau-an,</nsi> ‘to
dwell;’ <nsi>bau-ains</nsi> = {%bhavana,%} ‘a dwelling:’ Slav.
<nsi>by-ti:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>bu-ti,</nsi> ‘to be;’ <nsi>bù-ta-s,</nsi> ‘a house:’
Hib. <nsi>fuilim,</nsi> ‘I am.’]
<LEND>

<L>35661<pc>0714-c<k1>Bava<k2>Bava
{%Bhava, bhavat, bhavatu, bhavita,%}¦ &c. See
p. 702, cols. 1, 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>35662<pc>0714-c<k1>BAva<k2>BAva
{%Bhāva, bhāvanīya, bhāvayat, bhāvita, bhāvya,%}¦
&c. See pp. 707, 708.
<LEND>

<L>35663<pc>0714-c<k1>Buva<k2>Buva
{%Bhuva, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (according to Mahī-dhara)
an epithet of Agni; {%= bhuvas,%} atmosphere [cf. {%bhu-%}
{%va-bhartṛ, bhūr-bhuva-kara%}]; a fungus, mush-
room (?). {%—Bhuva-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the lord of
the atmosphere (as contrasted with {%bhuvana-pati,%}
q. v.). {%—Bhuva-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. (according to a
commentator) the lord of the atmosphere (as con-
trasted with {%bhū-pati,%} the lord of the earth).
<LEND>

<L>35664<pc>0714-c<k1>Buvat<k2>Buvat
{%Bhuvat,%}¦ probably an old Pres. part., but occurring
only in the following compounds. {%—Bhuvad-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. ‘giving prosperity;’ {%(antas),%} m.
pl. an epithet of the Ādityas. {%—Bhuvad-vasu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. (according to the Nirukta) producing
wealth, (but the Pada-pāṭha separates {%bhuvat%} from
{%uasu.%})
<LEND>

<L>35665<pc>0714-c<k1>Buvana<k2>Buvana
{%Bhuvana, am,%}¦ n. a being, animated being, living
creature; man, mankind; the world; heaven; earth;
place of being, abode, residence (Ved.); (as a va-
rious reading for {%bhavana%}), a house; = 2. {%bhāvana,%}
the act of bringing into existence; becoming pros-
perous, prospering (Ved.); water; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a particular month; of a Rudra [cf. {%bhuvanādhīśa,%}
{%bhuvaneśa%}]; of a man; of an Āptya (author of
the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 157). {%—Bhuvana-kośa, as,%}
m. the globe or sphere of the earth, receptacle of
beings. {%—Bhuvana-candra, as,%} m. ‘moon of the
world,’ N. of a man. {%—Bhuvana-cyava, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. shaking the world. {%—Bhuvana-jñāna, am,%} n.
knowledge of the world. {%—Bhuvana-traya, am,%}
n. triad of worlds, the three worlds, viz. heaven,
atmosphere, and earth; [cf. {%tri-bhuvana.%}] {%—Bhu-%}
{%vana-dvaya, am,%} n. the two worlds, heaven and
earth. {%—Bhuvana-pati, is,%} m. the lord of beings or
of the world; [cf. {%bhuva-pati.%}] {%—Bhuvana-pāvana,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} world-purifying; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of the
Ganges. {%—Bhuvana-pratiṣṭhā-dāna-vidhi, is,%}
m., N. of the 152nd chapter of the Bhaviṣyottara-
Purāṇa. {%—Bhuvana-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. lord of the
world, supporter of the earth. {%—Bhuvana-matī,%} f.,
N. of a princess. {%—Bhuvana-malla-vīra, as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Bhauvana-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of the
world,’ N. of a king. {%—Bhuvana-vinyāsa, as,%} m.,
N. of the fortieth chapter of the Kūrma-Purāṇa.
{%—Bhuvana-śāsin, ī, inī, i,%} ruling the world; ({%ī%}),
m. a king, prince. {%—Bhuvana-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved.
[Page0715-a+ 81]
reposing or situated in the world. {%—Bhuvana-hita,%}
{%am,%} n. the welfare of the world. {%—Bhuvanādbhuta%}
{%(˚na-ad˚), as, ā, am,%} astonishing the world. {%—Bhu-%}
{%vanādhīśa%} or {%bhuvanādhīśvara (˚na-adh˚), as,%}
m. ‘lord of the world,’ N. of a Rudra; [cf. {%bhuva-%}
{%neśa.%}] {%—Bhuvanānanda (˚na-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘joy
of the world,’ N. of a man. {%—Bhuvanābhyudaya%}
{%(˚na-abh˚), as,%} m. ‘prosperity of the world,’ N. of
a poem by Śaṅkuka; of the nineteenth chapter of
the Kṛṣṇa-krīḍita. {%—Bhuvanālokana (˚na-āl˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the act of looking at the earth, the sight of
the world. {%—Bhuvaneśa (˚na-īśa˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of
the world,’ N. of a Rudra; of a place; {%(ī),%} f., N.
of a goddess. {%—Bhuvaneśānī (˚na-īś˚),%} f. the mis-
tress of the world. {%—Bhuvaneśī-pārijāta,%} N. of a
work mentioned in Raghu-nandana's Saṃskāra-tattva.
{%—Bhuvaneśī-yantra, am,%} n., N. of a mystical
diagram described in Kṛṣṇānanda's Tantra-sāra.
{%—Bhuvaneśvara (˚na-īś˚), as,%} m. a lord of the
earth, king, prince; an epithet of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. ‘mis-
tress of the world,’ N. of several goddesses; ({%am%}),
n., N. of a temple and city sacred to Śiva. {%—Bhu-%}
{%vaneśvarī-kavaca, am,%} n. ‘the armour of the
mistress of the world,’ N. of a chapter in Kṛṣṇā-
nanda's Tantra-sāra. {%—Bhuvaneśvarī-tantra, am,%}
n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Bhuvaneśvarī-pūjā-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n., N. of a mystical diagram described
in the Tantra-sāra. {%—Bhuvaneśvarī-rahasya, am,%}
n., N. of a section of the Rudra-yāmala-tantra.
{%—Bhuvane-ṣṭha%} ({%bhuvane,%} loc. sing. + {%stha%}), {%as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. being in the world or in all existing
things. {%—Bhuvanaukas (˚na-ok˚), ā,%} m. an inha-
bitant of heaven, a god.
<LEND>

<L>35666<pc>0715-a<k1>Buvanti<k2>Buvanti
{%Bhuvanti, is,%}¦ m. a word occurring in Vājasaneyi-
saṃhitā XVI. 19, (according to Mahī-dhara fr. {%bhu-%}
{%vaṃ tanoti%}) {%= bhū-maṇḍala-vistārakaḥ.%}
<LEND>

<L>35667<pc>0715-a<k1>Buvanyu<k2>Buvanyu
{%Bhuvanyu, us,%}¦ m. a master, lord; the sun; the
moon; fire.
<LEND>

<L>35668<pc>0715-a<k1>Buvas<k2>Buvas
{%Bhuvas,%}¦ ind. the atmosphere, ether, sky; a mys-
tical word (being the second of the three Vyāhṛtis
{%bhūr bhuvaḥ svar,%} uttered by every Brāhman in
commencing his daily prayers, see {%vyāhṛti,%} and cf.
Manu II. 76; from its being pronounced between
{%bhū,%} the earth, and {%svar,%} heaven, {%bhuvas%} is supposed
to mean ‘the atmosphere’ situated between the two;
it was probably originally the pl. of 2. {%bhū,%} q. v.; in
Hari-vaṃśa 11506, Bhuvas is described as one of the
mind-born sons of Brahmā); the second of the seven
worlds, (according to the system which supposes
seven worlds rising one above the other); N. of the
second and eleventh Kalpa mentioned in the Vāyu-
Purāṇa. {%—Bhuvar-loka, as,%} m. one of the divisions
of the universe, the space between the earth and
heaven (frequented by Siddhas and other superhuman
beings).
<LEND>

<L>35669<pc>0715-a<k1>Buvaspati<k2>Buvaspati
{%Bhuvas-pati, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhuvas,%} gen. sing. of 2.
{%bhū%}), {%= prajā-pati,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35670<pc>0715-a<k1>BuvizWa<k2>BuvizWa
{%Bhuvi-ṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhuvi,%} loc. sing. of
2. {%bhū + stha%}), standing on the ground (i. e. not
in a chariot), staying or dwelling on the earth, (op-
posed to {%divi-ṣṭha,%} q. v.) {%—Bhuvi-spṛś, k, k, k,%}
touching the ground.
<LEND>

<L>35671<pc>0715-a<k1>Buvis<k2>Buvis
{%Bhuvis,%}¦ m. (?), the sea, ocean; heaven.
<LEND>

<L>35672<pc>0715-a<k1>BU<k2>BU<h>2
2. {%bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.)
being, becoming, springing, taking rise [cf. {%agni-%}
{%bhū, akṣi-bhū, aśleṣā-bhū, gādhi-bhū, giri-%}
{%bhū, citta-bhū%}]; ({%ūs%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; N.
of an Ekāha; ({%ūs%}), f. the act of becoming, arising;
the place of being or abiding, the universe; the
earth (as opposed to the other two divisions of the
universe, viz. atmosphere and heaven); ground, floor;
land, landed property; earth (as a substance); space,
site, place [cf. {%kūla-bhū, keśa-bhū%}]; a district,
piece or plot of ground, ({%bhuvas,%} pl. districts); a
mystical word (being the first of the three Vyāhṛtis
{%bhūr bhuvaḥ svar,%} uttered by every Brāhman in
commencing his daily prayers; in this sense only in
the nom. sing. {%bhūs,%} which is considered indeclinable,
see {%bhūr, bhuvas, vyāhṛti,%} and cf. Manu 11. 76);
the base of a triangle or of any geometrical figure;
object, matter, subject-matter, subject (see {%vivāda- %}
[Page0715-b+ 81]
{%saṃvāda-bhū,%} cf. {%sthāna%}); a sacrificial fire; a sym-
bolical expression for the number one (derived from
the earth considered as one); a term for the letter {%b.%}
{%—Bhū-kadamba, as,%} m. a species of plant com-
monly called Kokasima {%(= alambuṣa); = bhū-%}
{%kadambaka; (ā),%} f. a plant commonly called Go-
rakṣamuṇḍī, perhaps Sphæranthus Mollis. {%—Bhū-%}
{%kadambaka, as,%} m. the plant Ligusticum Ajowan,
{%= yavānī; (ikā),%} f. {%= bhū-kadambā%}. {%—Bhū-kan-%}
{%da, as,%} m. a medicinal plant {%(= mahā-śrāvaṇikā).%}
{%—Bhū-kapittha, as,%} m. the plant Feronia Ele-
phantum; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of this plant. {%—Bhū-%}
{%kampa, as,%} m. an earthquake; N. of a man.
{%—Bhūkampa-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n., N. of the thirty-
third chapter of Bhaṭṭotpala's commentary on Varāha-
mihira's Bṛhat-saṃhitā. {%—Bhū-karṇa, as,%} m. (in
astronomy) the diameter of the earth, the radius of
the equator. {%—Bhū-karṇi, is,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Bhū-karbudāraka, as,%} m. the plant Cordia
Myxa. {%—Bhū-kaśyapa, as,%} m. an epithet of Vasu-
deva (the father of Kṛṣṇa). {%—Bhū-kāka, as,%} m.
‘earth-crow,’ N. of several birds, a species of
heron ({%= svalpa-kaṅka%}); the curlew ({%= kranuñca%});
a species of pigeon {%(= nīla-kapota)%}. {%—Bhū-kāṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘chapter of the earth,’ N. of a chapter of the
Bhūri-prayoga. {%—Bhū-kumbhī,%} f. a plant {%(= bhū-%}
{%pāṭalī)%}. {%—Bhū-kuṣmāṇḍī,%} f. the plant Batatas
Paniculata. {%—Bhū-keśa, as,%} m. ‘earth-hair,’ the
Indian fig-tree; the plant Blyxa Saivala; ({%ā%}), f. a
Rākṣasī or female demon; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Ver-
nonia Anthelminthica. {%—Bhū-kṣit, t,%} m. ‘earth-
destroyer,’ a hog. {%—Bhū-kṣīra-vāṭikā,%} f., N. of a
place. {%—Bhū-khaṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘earth-section,’ N. of
a section of the Skanda-Purāṇa; of a section of the
Padma-Purāṇa {%(= bhūmi-khaṇḍa)%}. {%—Bhū-khar-%}
{%jūrī,%} f. a species of date. {%—Bhūgata, as, ā, am,%}
being or existing on the earth. {%—Bhū-gara, am,%} n.
‘earth-poison,’ a particular mineral poison. {%—Bhū-%}
{%garbha, as,%} m. an epithet of the poet Bhava-bhūti.
{%—Bhū-gṛha, am,%} n. an underground room or
chamber; a particular part of a diagram. {%—Bhū-%}
{%geha, am,%} n. an underground room. {%—Bhū-gola,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘earth-ball,’ the terrestrial globe, the earth.
{%—Bhūgola-vidyā,%} f. knowledge of the terrestrial
globe, geography. {%—Bhūgola-vṛttānta%} and {%bhū-%}
{%gola-saṅgraha%} and {%bhūgola-sāra,%} N. of certain
works treating of the earth. {%—Bhū-ghana, as,%} m.
the body. {%—Bhū-cakra, am,%} n. ‘earth-circle,’ the
equator or equinoctial line. {%—Bhū-cara, as, ā, am,%}
going on the earth (opposed to {%ākāśa-gati%}), mov-
ing on the ground, moving on land, living on land
(opposed to {%jala-cara%}), inhabiting the earth, ter-
restrial, any land animal; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Bhū-chāyā%} or {%bhū-cchāyā,%} f. or (according
to some) {%am,%} n. ‘earth-shadow,’ darkness. {%—Bhū-%}
{%jantu, us,%} m. ‘earth-animal,’ a kind of snail, an
earth-worm {%(= bhū-nāga)%}. {%—Bhū-jambu, us,%} or
{%bhū-jambū, ūs,%} f. wheat {%(= nādeyī);%} the plant
Flacourtia Sapida or the fruit of this plant. {%—Bhū-%}
{%tala, am,%} n. the face of the earth, the surface of
the ground, the earth. {%—Bhūtala-stha, as, ā, am,%}
standing or being on the face of the earth. {%—Bhū-%}
{%talikā,%} f. (probably fr. {%bhū-tala%}), the plant Trigo-
nella Corniculata {%(= pṛkkā)%}. {%—Bhūtalonmathana%}
{%(˚la-un˚), as,%} m. ‘earth-shaker,’ N. of a Dānava.
{%—Bhū-tṛṇa, as,%} m. [cf. {%bhū-s-tṛṇa%}], ‘earth-
grass,’ the plant Andropogon Schœnanthus; a kind
of fragrant grass {%(= gandha-kheḍa, rohiṣa).%}
{%—Bhūttama (bhū-ut˚), am,%} n. ‘the best of earths,’
gold. {%—Bhū-darī-bhavā,%} f. the plant Salvinia Cu-
cullata. {%—Bhū-dāra, as,%} m. ‘earth-tearer,’ i. e. root-
ing up the earth, a hog. {%—Bhū-deva, as,%} m. ‘earth-
god,’ a divinity upon earth, a Brāhman [cf. {%bhū-%}
{%sura%}]; an epithet of Śiva; N. of several persons;
of the author of a commentary on the Kāśikā-tilaka.
{%—Bhū-dhana, as,%} m. ‘whose property is the
earth,’ a king, prince. {%—Bhū-dhara, as, ā, am,%}
‘earth-bearing,’ supporting the earth; dwelling in
the earth; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; of Kṛṣṇa;
of Vaṭuka-bhairava; a mountain; a term for the
number seven [cf. {%kula-parvata%}]; a kind of che-
[Page0715-c+ 80]
mical or medical apparatus, a sort of sand-bath (?);
N. of a commentator on the Sūrya-siddhānta. {%—Bhū-%}
{%dhara-guhāntara-tas (˚hā-an˚),%} ind. from within
the caves of the mountains. {%—Bhūdhara-ja, as,%} m.
‘mountain-born,’ a tree. {%—Bhūdhara-tā,%} f. the state
or act of supporting the earth. {%—Bhūdhareśvara%}
{%(˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘mountain-lord,’ an epithet of
Hima-vat. {%—Bhū-dhātrī,%} f. ‘earth-mother,’ an epi-
thet of Vaṭuka-bhairava; the plant Flacourtia Cata-
phracta. {%—Bhū-dhra, as,%} m. {%= bhū-dhara,%} a moun-
tain. {%—Bhū-nandana, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Bhū-%}
{%nāga, as,%} m. ‘earth-snake,’ a kind of snail or earth-
worm. {%—Bhū-nimba, as,%} m. the plant Gentiana
Cherayta, commonly called Cherayta. {%—Bhū-nīpa,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= bhū-kadamba%}. {%—Bhū-netṛ, tā,%} m. ‘earth-
leader,’ a sovereign, king, prince. {%—Bhū-pa, as,%} m.
‘earth-protector,’ a sovereign, king, prince. {%—Bhūpa-%}
{%tā,%} f. the state or rank of a king, sovereignty, king-
ship. {%—Bhū-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the earth,’ an epi-
thet of Rudra; of Indra; of Vaṭuka-bhairava; of
one of the Viśve-Devāḥ; a king, monarch, prince;
N. of a sacrificer; of a poet (probably Bhoja, cf.
{%bhū-pāla%}); a kind of medicinal plant {%(= ṛṣabha).%}
{%—Bhū-pada, as,%} m. ‘earth-fixed, earth-rooted,’ a
tree; ({%ī%}), f. Arabian jasmine, Jasminum Zambac.
{%—Bhūpa-putra, as,%} m. a king's son, prince. {%—Bhū-%}
{%paridhi, is,%} m. the circumference of the earth; the
equinoctial line. {%—Bhū-palāśa, as,%} m. a kind of
plant commonly called Viśālī. {%—Bhū-pavitra, am,%}
n. ‘earth-purifying,’ cow-dung. {%—Bhūpa-suta, as,%}
m. a king's son, prince. {%—Bhū-pāṭalī,%} f. a kind of
plant {%(= bhū-kumbhī)%}. {%—Bhū-pāla, as,%} m. ‘earth-
guardian,’ a sovereign, king, prince; an epithet of
Bhoja-rāja; N. of a son of Soma-pāla; of a country;
({%ī%}), f., N. of a particular scale in the Hindū musical
system. {%—Bhū-pālana, am,%} n. protection or govern-
ment of the earth, sovereignty, dominion. {%—Bhū-%}
{%pāla-vallabha, as,%} m. ‘king's favourite,’ N. of an
author; of an astronomer. {%—Bhūpāla-śrī, īs,%} f.
‘king's fortune,’ N. of a temple of Śiva mentioned
in the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Bhūpāla-sāhi, is,%} m.
({%sāhi%} = Persian <lang n="arabic">شاه</lang>), N. of a king. {%—Bhū-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘son of the earth,’ the planet Mars. {%—Bhū-%}
{%putrī,%} f. ‘daughter of the earth,’ an epithet of Sītā
(wife of Rāma-candra). {%—Bhū-pura, am,%} n. a par-
ticular part of a diagram; [cf. {%bhū-gṛha.%}] {%—Bhū-%}
{%peṣṭa (˚pa-iṣ˚), as,%} m. ‘liked by kings,’ a kind of
fruit tree {%(= rājādanī)%}. {%—Bhū-prakampa, as,%} m.
an earthquake. {%—Bhū-pradāna, am,%} n. a gift of
land. {%—Bhū-phala, as,%} m. a kind of rat. {%—Bhū-%}
{%badarī,%} f. a species of jujube. {%—Bhū-bimba, as, am,%}
m. n. ‘earth-ball,’ the globe. {%—Bhū-bhaṭa, as,%} m.,
N. of a man. {%—Bhū-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘earth-supporter,
earth-lord,’ a sovereign, king, prince. {%—Bhū-bhāga,%}
{%as,%} m. a portion of ground, a place, spot, station;
[cf. {%bhūmi-bhāga.%}] {%—Bhū-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘earth-pos-
sessor,’ a sovereign, king, prince. {%—Bhū-bhṛt, t,%} m.
‘earth-supporter,’ a mountain [cf. {%kula-bh˚%}]; an
epithet of Viṣṇu; a king, prince. {%—Bhū-maṇḍala,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘earth-circle, earth-ball,’ the terrestrial globe;
the circumference or circuit of the earth. {%—Bhū-mat,%}
{%ān,%} m. ‘possessing the earth,’ a king, prince. {%—1. bhū-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am%} (for 2. {%bhūmaya%} see p. 717,
col. 3), made or formed or consisting of earth, pro-
duced from the earth, earthen, earthy, terrene; ({%ī%}),
f. an epithet of Chāyā or Shadow (personified as
wife of the Sun). {%—Bhū-mitra, as,%} m. ‘earth-friend,’
N. of a king. {%—Bhū-yuktā,%} f. a kind of palm {%(=%}
{%bhūmi-kharjūrī)%}. {%—Bhū-rati, is,%} m. ‘earth-joy,’
N. of a magical spell recited over weapons (personi-
fied as a son of Kṛśāśva). {%—Bhū-ruṇḍī,%} f. a sort of
sun-flower, Heliotropium Indicum. {%—Bhū-ruh, ṭ,%} m.
‘earth-grower,’ a plant, tree. {%—Bhū-ruha, as,%} m.
‘earth-growing,’ any plant, tree; the plant Termi-
nalia Arjuna and Glabra. {%—Bhūr-bhuva, as,%} m.
{%(bhuva = bhuvas),%} one of the mind-born sons of
Brahmā (mentioned with Bhūr and Bhuvas in Hari-
vaṃśa 11509). {%—Bhūrbhuva-kara, as,%} m. a dog.
{%—Bhūrbhuva-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place of
pilgrimage. {%—Bhūr-loka, as,%} m. the terrestrial world,
[Page0716-a+ 81]
habitation of mortals, the earth; the country on the
southern part of the equator; [cf. {%bhū-loka.%}] {%—Bhū-%}
{%lagnā,%} f. ‘clinging to the ground,’ the plant Andro-
pogon Aciculatus. {%—Bhū-latā,%} f. an earth-worm, a
worm. {%—Bhū-liṅga,%} N. of a district of Sālua [cf.
{%bhauliṅgi%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town. {%—Bhūliṅga-%}
{%śakuna, as,%} or {%bhūliṅga-śakunī, is,%} m. a species
of bird described in Mahā-bhārata Sabhā-parva,
1. 1546, &c., (it is said to make a sound like {%mā%}
{%sāhasam,%} no rashness!) {%—Bhū-loka, as,%} m. the
terrestrial world, earth; [cf. {%bhūr-loka.%}] {%—Bhū-%}
{%loka-suranāyaka, as,%} m. ‘earth-Indra,’ an Indra
of the earth. {%—Bhū-valaya, as, am,%} m. n. the cir-
cumference of the earth; the terrestrial globe. {%—Bhū-%}
{%vallabha, as,%} m. ‘earth's favourite,’ a king, prince.
{%—Bhū-vāh%} (gen. c. {%bhūhas,%} inst. c. {%bhūhā%}), see
Vopa-deva III. 103. {%—Bhū-vṛtta, am,%} n. ‘earth-
circle,’ the equator. {%—Bhū-śakra, as,%} m. ‘earth-
Indra,’ a king, prince. {%—Bhū-śamī,%} f. a kind of
Acacia {%(= laghu-śamī)%}. {%—Bhū-śaya, as,%} m. ‘lying
or dwelling on the earth,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu; any
animal living in the earth; [cf. {%bhūmi-śaya.%}] {%—Bhū-%}
{%śayyā,%} f. a couch on the bare ground, lying on the
ground. {%—Bhū-śarkarā%} f. a species of bulbous plant
commonly called Kaḍamākaḍa-kanda. {%—Bhū-śud-%}
{%dhi, is,%} f. purification of the ground (by sweeping,
burning, &c.). {%—Bhū-śelu, us,%} m. the plant Cordia
Myxa. {%—Bhū-śravas, ās,%} m. an ant or mole hill.
{%—Bhū-saṃskāra, as,%} m., Ved. ‘preparation of the
ground,’ a term applied to five methods of preparing
and consecrating the Khara, q. v., at a sacrifice, (these
five methods are called {%pari-samūh, upa-lip, lekhāḥ%}
{%kṛ, pāṃsu-nuddhṛ, adbhir abhyukṣ;%} some
enumerate seven.) {%—Bhū-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of the
earth,’ the planet Mars; ({%ā%}), f. ‘daughter of the
earth,’ an epithet of Sītā (wife of Rāma). {%—Bhū-%}
{%sura, as,%} m. ‘earth-god,’ a Brāhman; [cf. {%bhū-%}
{%deva.%}] {%—Bhū-s-tṛṇa, as,%} m. {%= bhū-tṛṇa,%} q. v.
{%—Bhū-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing on the earth,
living on the earth. {%—Bhū-spṛś, k, k, k,%} touching
the ground; ({%k%}), m. a man; man, mankind; a
Vaiśya; [cf. {%bhūmi-spṛś.%}] {%—Bhū-svarga, as,%} m.
‘heaven on earth,’ an epithet of the mountain Su-
meru. {%—Bhūsvargāya%} (fr. the preceding), Nom. A.
{%bhūsvargāyate,%} &c., to become a heaven on earth.
{%—Bhū-svāmin, ī,%} m. a landlord, landholder.
<LEND>

<L>35673<pc>0716-a<k1>BUta<k2>BUta
{%Bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ been, become, produced,
formed, being, existing, being or becoming like,
consisting of, (in all these senses often at the end of
comps., cf. {%ātma-bh˚, jīva-bh˚, citra-bh˚, bhava-%}
{%bh˚, ittham-bh˚, bhasma-bh˚, śaktu-bh˚%}); being
mixed or joined with [cf. {%māṃsa-bhūtodana, bhā-%}
{%vita%}]; actually being, really happened, true; right,
proper, fit; past, gone, former; obtained, got; ({%as%}),
m. a son, child, youth; a great devotee or ascetic
[cf. {%bhūtendriya-jayin%}]; an epithet of Śiva; N. of
a priest of the gods; of a son of Vasu-deva and
Pauravī; of a son-in-law of Dakṣa and father of
numerous Rudras; of a Yakṣa; the fourteenth day
of the dark half of the lunar month, (in this sense
also {%ā,%} f.; cf. {%bhuteṣṭā%}); ({%am%}), n. that which is
or exists, any being (whether human or divine, and
applied also to inanimate objects or plants), a living
being, animal, creature, (in these senses exception-
ally {%as,%} m.); a spirit (good or evil), the spirit of a
deceased person, a ghost, a particular class of super-
human beings, a demon, imp, goblin, (in these
senses also occasionally {%as,%} m.); an element, (pro-
perly a gross element, of which, according to the
Hindūs, there are five, viz. earth, water, fire, air,
ether, cf. {%mahā-bh˚, pāñca-bhautika;%} but also
exceptionally a subtile element, cf. {%tan-mātra;%} the
Buddhists reckon only four elements); a symbolical
expression for the number five; the place of being,
the world; that which has actually been or really
happened, an actual occurrence, fact, matter of fact,
the real state of the case; that which is past and
gone, past time, the past; well-being, welfare, pros-
perity; {%(ās),%} m. pl., N. of an heretical sect, the
followers of which rub their bodies with ashes; (with
Jainas) a class of the Vyantaras. {%—Bhūta-karaṇa, %}
[Page0716-b+ 81]
{%am,%} n. ‘maker of past meaning,’ a term for the
augment in Vedic grammar (cf. Atharva-veda Prā-
tiśākhya III. 49). {%—Bhūta-kartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘maker
of beings,’ Brahmā, the creator. {%—Bhūta-karman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a man (in Mahā-bh. Droṇa-p. 1085).
{%—Bhūta-kāla, as,%} m. past time, the preterite tense.
{%—Bhūtakālika, as, ī, am,%} relating to time past.
{%—Bhūta-kṛt, t, t, t,%} forming beings, creative; ({%t%}),
m. the creator. {%—Bhūta-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a son of
Manu Dakṣasāvarṇi; of a Vetāla (Kathā-sarit-s.
123, 34). {%—Bhūta-keśa, as,%} m. a particular plant,
root of sweet flag ({%= go-lomī%}); the plant mussænda
Frondosa; ({%ī%}), f. Nardostachys Jatmansi {%(= jaṭā-%}
{%māṃsī);%} Vitex Negundo {%(= nirguṇḍī);%} white basil;
Nyctanthes Arbor Tristis {%(= śephālikā)%}. {%—Bhūta-%}
{%kesarā,%} f. the plant Trigonella Fœnum Græcum.
{%—Bhūta-koṭi,%} (with Buddhists) ‘the highest culmi-
nating point for all beings,’ absolute nonentity {%(=%}
{%śūnya-tā)%}. {%—Bhūta-krānti, is,%} f. possession by
spirits; (perhaps for {%bhūtākrānti.%}) {%—Bhūta-gaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. the aggregate or whole collection of beings;
the troop or whole class of demons or spirits, any
class of spirits or superhuman beings. {%—Bhūtagaṇā-%}
{%dhipa (˚ṇa-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of the Bhūta-gaṇas,’
an epithet of Nandin, q. v. {%—Bhūta-gandhā,%} f. a
particular perfume (used perhaps in the ceremonies
with which the Bhūtas are worshipped, {%= murā%}).
{%—Bhūta-grasta, as, ā, am,%} possessed by an evil
spirit. {%—Bhūta-grāma, as,%} m. or {%ās,%} m. pl. the
aggregate or whole collection of living beings; a
multitude of spirits or ghosts; the world; ({%as%}), m.
any aggregate of elementary matter, the body.
{%—Bhūta-ghna, as, ī, am,%} destroying or removing
spirits or demons; a camel; garlic; a species of
birch; ({%ī%}), f. the sacred basil {%(= muṇḍitikā).%}
{%—Bhūta-caturdaśī,%} f. the fourteenth day in the
dark half of the month Kārttika (consecrated to
Yama). {%—Bhūta-cārin, ī,%} m. ‘going among beings
or among spirits,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhūta-cintā,%}
f. investigation or inquiry into the elements. {%—Bhū-%}
{%ta-jaṭā,%} f. the plant Nardostachys Jatamansi [cf.
{%bhūta-keśī%}]; a species of Valeriana, Indian spike-
nard {%(= gandha-māṃsī)%}. {%—Bhūta-jaya, as,%} m.
victory over the elements. {%—Bhūta-jyotis, is,%} m.
‘light of living beings,’ N. of a king. {%—Bhūta-ḍā-%}
{%mara,%} N. of a Tantra. {%—Bhūta-tantra, am,%} n.
‘the doctrine of spirits,’ as contained in the Uttara-
tantra or sixth division of the Aṣṭāṅga-hṛdaya.
{%—Bhūta-tṛṇa, am,%} n. a kind of plant {%(= ati-%}
{%gandha)%}. {%—Bhūta-tva, am,%} n. the state of being
an element. {%—Bhūta-dayā,%} f. compassion or ten-
derness towards all beings or creatures, universal be-
nevolence or compassion. {%—Bhūta-druh, dhruk, k,%}
{%k,%} injuring beings, injurious. {%—Bhūta-dharā,%} f. ‘sup-
porting beings,’ the earth. {%—Bhūta-dhātrī,%} f. ‘nurse
or mother of beings,’ the earth. {%—Bhūta-dhāman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a son of Indra. {%—Bhūta-dhāriṇī,%} f. {%=%}
{%bhūta-dharā,%} the earth. {%—Bhūta-nanda, as,%} m.,
N. of a king. {%—Bhūta-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of beings
or spirits,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhūta-nāyikā,%} f.
‘leader of the Bhūtas,’ an epithet of Durgā. {%—Bhū-%}
{%ta-nāśana, as, ā, am,%} destroying evil beings; ({%as%}),
m. the marking-nut plant, Semicarpus Anacardium
[cf. {%bhallātaka%}]; mustard; pepper; ({%am%}), n. Asa
Fœtida; the berry or seed of the Eleocarpus (used
for rosaries). {%—Bhūta-nicaya, as,%} m. ‘lord
of elements,’ the body. {%—Bhūta-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord
of beings’ (especially of evil beings), an epithet of
Rudra; of Bhava and Śarva; of Śiva; of Agni; the
plant Ocymum Sanctum or sacred basil. {%—Bhūta-%}
{%pattrī,%} f. sacred basil. {%—Bhūta-pāla, as,%} m., Ved.
the guardian of living beings. {%—Bhūta-pura, ās,%} m.
pl., N. of a people; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a town. {%—Bhūta-%}
{%puṣpa, as,%} m. the plant Calosanthes Indica. {%—Bhū-%}
{%ta-pūrṇimā,%} f. the day of full moon in the month
Āśvina (when the Bhūtas are worshipped). {%—Bhūta-%}
{%pūrva, as, ā, am,%} been before, existed before,
existing formerly or previously, prior; ({%am%}), ind.
formerly. {%—Bhūtapūrva-tā,%} f. the totality of past
events, all that has happened before, all former cir-
cumstances. {%—Bhūta-prakṛti, is,%} f. the orgin of
[Page0716-c+ 81]
all beings. {%—Bhūta-pratiṣedha, as,%} m. the ward-
ing off of evil spirits or demons. {%—Bhūta-bali, is,%}
f. the offering for all beings, see {%bali%}. {%—Bhūta-%}
{%brahman, ā,%} m. {%= devala,%} q. v. {%—Bhūta-bhartṛ,%}
{%tā, trī, tṛ,%} supporting the elements or living beings;
{%(tā),%} m. ‘lord of evil beings,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Bhūta-bhāva, as, ā, am,%} elementary, consisting
of the elements. {%—Bhūta-bhāvana, as, ā, am,%}
causing the existence of beings, creating or caus-
ing the welfare of living beings; ({%as%}), m. the
creator of living beings, Brahmā; Viṣṇu. {%—Bhūta-%}
{%bhāṣā,%} f. or {%bhūta-bhāṣita, am,%} n. the lan-
guage of demons or Piśācas. {%—Bhūtabhāṣā-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} composed in the language of Piśācas.
{%—Bhūta-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} sustaining the elements,
supporting living beings. {%—Bhūta-bhairava, as,%}
m., N. of a particular medical compound {%(rasa);%}
N. of a Tantra. {%—Bhūtabhautika, as, ī, am,%} con-
sisting of the elements or of anything formed from
them. {%—Bhūta-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed out of
the elements or out of created beings; containing or
including all beings. {%—Bhūta-maheśvara, as,%} m.
‘lord of the Bhūtas,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhūta-%}
{%mātṛ, tā,%} f. ‘mother of all beings,’ an epithet of
Gaurī, Brāhmī, &c. {%—Bhūta-mātra, am, ā,%} n. f.
the rudiment of an element; ({%ās%}), f. pl. the subtile
rudiments of the elements, (see {%tan-mātra%}); the
coarse and subtile elements, (in this sense a Dvandva
comp.); ten primary perceptions (viz. {%vāc, gandha,%}
{%rūpa, śabda, anna-rasa, karaman, sukha-duḥkhe,%}
{%ānanda%} or {%rati%} or {%prajāti, ityā, manas%}). {%—Bhūta-%}
{%mārī,%} f. a particular perfume {%(= cīḍā)%}. {%—Bhūta-%}
{%yajña, as,%} m. the oblation of food &c. to all created
beings, (one of the five {%mahā-yajña,%} see {%bali.%})
{%—Bhūta-yoni, is,%} f. the origin or source of all
beings, (an epithet applied to the Supreme Being.)
{%—Bhūta-raya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a class of gods
under the fifth Manu. {%—Bhūta-rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘king of
the Bhūtas, lord of imps,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Bhūta-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} having the form of a
Bhūta or evil being, imp-like. {%—Bhūta-lipi, is,%} f.
‘demon-writing,’ N. of a particular magical formula.
 — 1. {%bhūta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} connected with or con-
taining the word {%bhūta%}. {%—2. bhūta-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having been, what has been. {%—Bhūta-varga, as,%}
m. the whole class or company of Bhūtas or evil
beings. {%—Bhūta-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} telling the real
fact, speaking the truth. {%—Bhūta-vāsa, as,%} m. ‘the
abode of evil beings,’ the tree Belleric Myrobalan,
Terminalia Bellerica, (so called because the nuts of
this plant are used as dice; cf. {%bhūtāvāsa.%}) {%—Bhūta-%}
{%vāhana, as,%} m. ‘having the Bhūtas for his vehicle,’
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhūtavāhana-sārathi, is,%} m.
‘charioteer of the Bhūta vehicle,’ an epithet of Śiva.-
{%—Bhūta-vikriyā,%} f. possession by evil spirits, epi-
lepsy. {%—Bhūta-vijñāna, am,%} n. the knowledge of
evil spirits or demons. {%—Bhūta-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved.
knowing all beings. {%—Bhūta-vidyā,%} f. the know-
ledge of evil beings or demons, demonology. {%—Bhū-%}
{%ta-vināyaka, as,%} m. a leader of evil beings. {%—Bhū-%}
{%ta-viṣṇu, us,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhūta-vīra, ās,%}
m. pl., Ved., N. of a race. {%—Bhūta-vṛkṣa, as,%}
m. ‘demon-tree,’ the tree Trophis Aspera; Calo-
santhes Indica; Terminalia Bellecrica. {%—Bhūta-veṣī%}
or {%bhūta-veśī,%} f. a white-flowering Vitex Negundo.
{%—Bhūta-śuddhi, is,%} f. purification of the elements
(of the body); N. of a work. {%—Bhūta-saṃsāra, as,%}
m. the world of sentient beings or mortals. {%—Bhūta-%}
{%saṅkrāmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. going through all
beings (?). {%—Bhūta-saṅgha, as,%} m. the whole col-
lection or totality of beings, the aggregate of the
elements. {%—Bhūta-sañcāra, as,%} m. possession by
evil spirits, demoniac possession, madness; ({%ī%}), f.
fire in a forest, a forest conflagration (?). {%—Bhūta-%}
{%santāpa, as,%} m., N. of an Asura. {%—Bhūta-santā-%}
{%pana, as,%} m. ‘harasser of living beings,’ N. of a
Daitya (son of Hiraṇyākṣa). {%—Bhūta-sampṛkta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} combined with elementary matter. {%—Bhū-%}
{%ta-samplava, as,%} m. the flooding or drowning of
all creatures, universal deluge, drowning of the world.
{%—Bhūta-sarga, as,%} m. a class or order of created
[Page0717-a+ 81]
beings (usually classified into eight species of Deva-
yonis or divine beings, men, and five species of
Tiryag-yonis, viz. cattle, birds, wild animals, creep-
ing things, and plants); elementary creation, crea-
tion of the elements. {%—Bhūta-sākṣin, ī,%} m. an
eye-witness of created beings, all-seeing. {%—Bhūta-%}
{%sādhana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. (according to Mahī-dhara)
producing creatures or created beings (as the earth);
effecting (objects) for living beings. {%—Bhūta-sāra,%}
{%as,%} m. a variety of Colosanthes Indica. {%—Bhūta-%}
{%sūkṣma, am,%} n. a subtile element {%(= tan-mātra,%}
q. v.). {%—Bhūta-sṛṣṭi, is,%} f. the creation of Bhūtas;
the illusions effected by the power of Bhūtas; the
whole class of Bhūtas collectively. {%—Bhūta-stha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} being in living creatures, existing in all
beings, residing in the elements. {%—Bhūta-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the dwelling-place of beings, abode of living
creatures. {%—Bhūta-hatyā,%} f. the killing of a being,
destruction of a living creature. {%—Bhūta-hantṛ, trī,%}
f. ‘destroying beings, counteracting evil spirits,’ two
plants {%(= bandhyā-karkoṭakī%} and {%nīla-dūrvā%}).
{%—Bhūta-hara, as,%} m. bdellium. {%—Bhūta-hārin, i,%}
n. the tree Pinus Deodora. {%—Bhūtāṃśa (˚ta-aṃ˚), as,%}
m., N. of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 106,
(he was a descendant of Kaśyapa.) {%—Bhūtāṅkuśa%}
{%(˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a kind of plant {%(= kṣava, kṣa-%}
{%vaka, kṣuraka, tīkṣṇa, krūra)%}. {%—Bhūtātmaka%}
{%(˚ta-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} possessing the essence of the
elements, consisting of the elements, composed of
the elements. {%—Bhūtātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā,%} m. ‘soul
of all beings,’ epithet of Brahman; of Mahā-puruṣa
(Viṣṇu); of Śiva [cf. {%sarva-bhūtātman%}]; the
individual soul; the elementary or vital principle; a
soul or mind which clings to the elements, a carnal
mind (see Yājñavalkya III. 34); war, conflict; {%(ā,%}
{%ā, a),%} whose soul is subdued or purified [cf. {%bhāvi-%}
{%tātman%}]; whose soul is the elements, consisting or
composed of the [five] elements, epithet of the body
(in this sense masc., and in Manu XII. 12. opposed
to {%kṣetra-jña%}). {%—Bhūtādi (˚ta-ādi), is,%} m. ‘the
original or originator of all beings,’ an epithet of Ma-
hā-puruṣa or the Supreme Spirit; (in the Sāṅkhya
phil.) an epithet of Ahaṅ-kāra as the principle from
which the five Tan-mātras and elements are evolved.
{%—Bhūtādika, as, ā, am,%} beginning with the ele-
ments, the elements, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a term applied
to Ahaṅ-kāra as the source of the elements; [cf.
{%bhūtādi%} above.] {%—Bhūtādhipati (˚ta-adh˚), is,%}
m., Ved. the lord of all beings. {%—Bhūtānukampā%}
{%(˚ta-an˚),%} f. compassion towards all beings. {%—Bhū-%}
{%tāntaka (˚ta-an˚), as,%} m. ‘destroyer of beings,’ the
god of death. {%—Bhūtāri (˚ta-ari), i,%} n. ‘enemy of
evil beings,’ Asa Fœtida. {%—Bhūtārta (˚ta-ār˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} afflicted by evil beings, possessed by demons.
{%—Bhūtārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as,%} m. anything which has
really happened, anything really existing, real fact, a
matter of fact, fact; an element of life. {%—Bhūtār-%}
{%tha-kathana%} or {%bhūtārtha-varṇana, am,%} n. nar-
ration of a real fact or of a past event, description of
past occurrences. {%—Bhūtārthānubhava (˚tha-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the apprehension of a matter of fact. {%—Bhū-%}
{%tārma (˚ta-ar˚), am,%} n., see Pāṇini VI. 2, 91.
{%—Bhūtāvāsa (˚ta-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘abode of beings,’
an epithet of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; the plant Terminalia
Bellerica [cf. {%bhūta-vāsa%}]; the body (as the abode
of the elements). {%—Bhūtāviṣṭa (˚ta-āv˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} occupied by evil spirits, possessed by a devil.
{%—Bhūtāveśa (˚ta-āv˚), as,%} m. possession by a
devil or evil spirit, demoniac possession. {%—Bhūtā-%}
{%sana (˚ta-ās˚), am,%} n. ‘seat of Bhūtas,’ N. of a
magic chariot. {%—Bhūtejya (˚ta-ij˚), as, ā, am,%} wor-
shipping evil beings or spirits; making oblations to
the Bhūtas (see {%bhūta-yajña%}). {%—Bhūtendriya-%}
{%jayin (˚ta-in˚), ī, inī, i,%} ‘one who has subdued
both the elements (of the body) and the senses,’ a
kind of ascetic or devotee. {%—Bhūteśa (˚ta-iśa), as,%}
m. ‘lord of beings,’ Brahmā; Viṣṇu; Kṛṣṇa;
‘lord of evil beings,’ an epithet of Śiva (or of
an idol representing him). {%—Bhūteśvara (˚ta-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. lord of beings (said of man); ‘lord of evil
beings,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhūteṣṭakā (˚ta-iṣ˚),%}
[Page0717-b+ 81]
f., Ved. a particular kind of brick. {%—Bhūteṣṭā%}
{%(˚ta-iṣ˚),%} f. ‘liked by the Bhūtas,’ the fourteenth
day of a half month; [cf. {%bhūtā.%}] {%—Bhūtodana%}
{%(˚ta-od˚), as,%} m. a dish of rice (eaten to counteract
the influence of demons). {%—Bhūtonmāda (˚ta-un˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘demon-madness,’ a form of insanity pro-
duced by the influence of evil spirits, (twenty kinds
are enumerated.) {%—Bhūtopadeśa (˚ta-up˚), as,%} m.
referring to anything already occurring or existing.
{%—Bhūtopamā (˚ta-up˚),%} f., Ved. comparison with
a living being or animal. {%—Bhūtopasṛṣṭa (˚ta-%}
{%up˚)%} or {%bhūtopahata (˚ta-up˚), as, ā, am,%} possessed
by an evil spirit. {%—Bhūtopahata-citta, as, ā, am,%}
having the mind possessed by evil beings.
<LEND>

<L>35674<pc>0717-b<k1>BUtAyana<k2>BUtAyana
{%Bhūtāyana, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>35675<pc>0717-b<k1>BUti<k2>BUti
{%Bhūti, is,%}¦ f. being, existence, any state of being;
birth, production; well-being, welfare, prosperity,
success, good fortune, wealth, riches, fortune, ({%a-bhū-%}
{%ti,%} misfortune, calamity); Welfare personified (=
Lakṣī) or = the wife of Ruci and mother of Manu
Bhautya, or = the wife of Kavi and mother of Manu
Bhautya; in this latter meaning also {%bhūtī,%} f.);
power, grandeur, majesty, dignity; superhuman
power as attainable by the practice of austerity and
magical rites [cf. {%vi-bhūti%}]; ornament, decorating
elephants with many-coloured stripes {%(= gaja-maṇ-%}
{%ḍana);%} ashes; fried meat; N. of various plants
({%= vṛddhi, = rohiṣa-tṛṇa, = bhū-tṛṇa%}); the
rutting of elephants; ({%is%}), m., N. of a class of
Manes; of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of a pupil (or son) of
Aṅgiras and father of Manu Bhautya; of a Brāhman;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">φύ-σι-ς;</lang> Slav. infinitive <nsi>by-ti</nsi> = Lith. <nsi>bú-ti,</nsi>
‘to be.’] {%—Bhūti-karman, a,%} n. any auspicious or
festive rite (e. g. any domestic ceremony performed
at a birth, marriage, or the introduction of a pupil to
his preceptor). {%—Bhūti-kalaśa, as,%} m., N. of a
person (mentioned in Rāja-taraṅgiṇī VII. 26, &c.).
{%—Bhūti-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desiring prosperity,
desirous of wealth or aggrandisement, &c.; ({%as%}),
m. a king's councillor, a minister of state; an epithet
of Bṛhas-pati. {%—Bhūti-kāla, as,%} m. a time of pros-
perity or good fortune, an auspicious hour, a happy
moment. {%—Bhūti-kīrtana, am,%} n. ‘praise of pros-
perity,’ N. of the twenty-ninth chapter of the Jñāna-
khaṇḍa or second part of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Bhūti-%}
{%kīla, as,%} m. a hole, pit, moat, ditch; a cellar, a
place under ground for concealing wealth, &c.
{%—Bhūti-kṛt, t,%} m. ‘causing welfare,’ an epithet of
Śiva; N. of a class of Manes. {%—Bhūti-kṛtya, am,%}
n. {%= bhūti-karman,%} q. v. {%—Bhūti-garbha, as,%} m.
a N. of the dramatic poet Bhava-bhūti. {%—Bhūti-%}
{%tīrthā,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on
Skanda. {%—Bhūti-da, as,%} m. ‘granting welfare,’ an
epithet of Śiva; N. of a class of Manes. {%—Bhūti-%}
{%datta, as,%} m. ‘fortune-given,’ N. of a man. {%—Bhū-%}
{%ti-nidhāna, am,%} n. ‘receptacle of prosperity,’ the
lunar mansion or Nakṣatra Dhaniṣṭhā. {%—Bhūti-%}
{%bhūṣaṇa, as,%} m. ‘adorned with ashes,’ an epithet
of Śiva. {%—Bhūti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing welfare,
prosperous, fortunate, doing well, affluent, happy.
{%—Bhūti-malina, as, ā, am,%} soiled with ashes.
{%—Bhūti-yuvaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a tribe. {%—Bhūti-%}
{%laya,%} N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Bhūti-varman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a king of Prāg-jyotiṣa; of a Rākṣasa.
{%—Bhūti-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘welfare-bringing,’ an
epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%bhūta-vāhana.%}] {%—Bhūti-śiva,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhūti-sita, as, ā, am,%}
white with ashes. {%—Bhūti-sṛj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} ‘welfare-
creating,’ causing prosperity. {%—Bhūtīśvara-tīrtha%}
{%(˚ti-iś˚), am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place men-
tioned in the Śiva-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>35676<pc>0717-b<k1>BUtika<k2>BUtika
{%Bhūtika, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the plant Ligusticum
Ajowan; ({%am%}), n. Gentiana Cherayta; Andropogon
Schœnanthus; a medicinal plant commonly called
Kayaphal {%(= kat-tṛṇa);%} camphor {%(= ghana-sāra);%}
[cf. {%drāviḍa-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35677<pc>0717-b<k1>BUtIka<k2>BUtIka
{%Bhūtīka, am,%}¦ n., n. of several plants, Gentiana
Cherayta; Curcuma Zerumbet; {%= dīpya;%} a kind
of grass.
<LEND>

<L>35678<pc>0717-b<k1>BUtvA<k2>BUtvA
{%Bhūtvā,%}¦ ind. having been or become.
<LEND>

<L>35679<pc>0717-b<k1>BUma<k2>BUma
{%Bhūma = bhūmi%}¦ (at the end of some comps, cf.
[Page0717-c+ 81]
{%utkṛṣṭa-bh˚, udaka-bh˚, udag-bh˚, kavi-bh˚,%}
{%kṛṣṇa-bh˚, pāṇḍu-bh˚;%} and occurring separately
in the Vedic formula {%dhruvāya bhūmāya svāhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>35680<pc>0717-c<k1>BUmaka<k2>BUmaka
{%Bhūmaka,%}¦ a proper N. (?). {%—Bhūmaka-tṛtīyā,%}
f. epithet of the third day in a particular month.
<LEND>

<L>35681<pc>0717-c<k1>BUman<k2>BUman
{%Bhūman, a,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. {%bhū%} for {%bahu +%}
{%iman%}), the earth, world; a territory, district, country,
piece of ground [cf. {%bhūmi,%} Lat. <nsi>humus</nsi>]; a being,
the aggregate of all existing things; ({%ā%}), m. a great
quantity, large number abundance, plenty, multitude,
majority; wealth; N. of a son of Prati-hartṛ and
father of Udgītha; ({%ā%}), f., Ved. a collection, assembly;
{%(mnā),%} inst. c. (Ved. {%bhūnā%}), for the most part,
generally, usually, abundantly. {%—Bhūmānanda-sa-%}
{%rasvatī (˚ma-ān˚),%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35682<pc>0717-c<k1>BUmanyu<k2>BUmanyu
{%Bhūmanyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a king, (also read
{%sumanyu;%} cf. {%bhumanyu.%})
<LEND>

<L>35683<pc>0717-c<k1>BUmaya<k2>BUmaya<h>2
2. {%bhūmaya%}¦ (fr. {%bhūman;%} for 1. {%bhū-maya%} see
P. 715, col. 3), Nom. P. {%bhūmanyati,%} &c., to aug-
ment, increase, make abundant.
<LEND>

<L>35684<pc>0717-c<k1>BUmi<k2>BUmi
{%Bhūmi, is,%}¦ f. (also {%bhūmī,%} f., but this form is
more commonly Ved., where occur nom. sing. {%bhūmī,%}
gen. {%bhūmyās,%} loc. {%bhūmyām%}), the earth, soil,
ground; a territory, country, district; land, estate,
domain; a place, site in general, situation, (often at
the end of comps., cf. {%keśa-bh˚%}); position, posture,
attitude; the floor of a house, story; a step, degree
(metaphorically); the base of a triangle or of any
geometrical figure; the part or character (of an actor
in a play); a matter, object, subject [cf. {%viśvāsa-%}
{%bh˚%}]; the tongue; ({%is%}), m., N. of a son of Yuyu-
dhāna and father of Yugan-dhara; [cf. Lat. <nsi>humus;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>aim.</nsi>] {%—Bhūmi-kadamba, as,%} m. a kind of
Kadamba; (also read {%bhūmī-kadamba.%}) {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%kandalī,%} f. a species of plant {%(= kandalī)%}. {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%kapāla, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the ground for a
vessel or receptacle. {%—Bhūmi-kampa, as,%} m. or
{%bhūmi-kampana, am,%} n. an earthquake. {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%kuṣmāṇḍa, as,%} m. a species of plant {%(= vidārī).%}
{%—Bhūmi-khaṇḍa,%} ‘earth-section,’ N. of the second
book of the Padma-Purāṇa; [cf. {%bhū-khaṇḍa.%}]
{%—Bhūmi-kharjūrikā%} or {%bhūmi-kharjūrī,%} f. a
species of plam. {%—Bhūmi-garta, as,%} m. a pit or
hole in the earth. {%—Bhūmi-guhā,%} f. a hole in the
earth. {%—Bhūmi-gṛha, am,%} n. an under-ground
chamber [cf. {%bhū-gṛha%}]; {%(as, ā, am),%} Ved. whose
house is the earth (said of a dead person). {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%campaka, as,%} m. the plant Kæmpferia Rotunda.
{%—Bhūmi-cala, as,%} m. or {%bhūmi-calana, am,%} n.
an earthquake. {%—Bhūmi-ja, as, ā, am,%} ‘earth-born,’
produced from the earth, sprung from the ground;
({%as%}), m. the planet Mars; a man; a plant {%(= bhūmi-%}
{%kadamba);%} an epithet of the demon Naraka; hell;
({%ā%}), f. an epithet of Sītā; ({%am%}), n. a species of
vegetable {%(= gaura-suvarṇa)%}. {%—Bhūmija-guggu-%}
{%lu, us,%} m. a species of bdellium. {%—Bhūmi-jambu,%}
{%us,%} or {%bhūmi-jambukā,%} or {%bhūmi-jambū, ūs,%} f. a
tree, {%= nādeyī;%} [cf. {%bhū-jambū.%}] {%—Bhūmi-jīvin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘living by the soil, living on (the produce of)
land,’ an agriculturalist, a Vaiśya or Hindū of the
third or agricultural class. {%—Bhūmiñ-jaya, as,%} m.
({%bhumim,%} acc. of {%bhūmi%}), ‘earth-conquering,’ N. of
a son of Virāṭa. {%—Bhūmi-tala, am,%} n. the surface
of the earth, the ground. {%—Bhūmi-tuṇḍika, as,%} m.,
N. of a district. {%—Bhūmi-tva, am,%} n. the state of
earth, earthiness, earth (e. g. {%bhūmitvam eti,%} he
goes to or becomes earth). {%—Bhūmi-dāna, am,%} n.
donation of landed property. {%—Bhūmi-dundubhi,%}
{%is,%} m., Ved. ‘earth-drum,’ a pit or hole in the earth
covered over with skins. {%—Bhūmi-dṛṃha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. firmly fixed on the ground. {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%deva, as,%} m. ‘earth-god,’ a Brāhman; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
two women. {%—Bhūmi-dhara, as,%} m. ‘earth-sup-
porter,’ a mountain; a symbolical expression for the
number seven [cf. {%kula-parvata%}]; a king, prince.
{%—Bhūmi-nātha, as,%} m. ‘earth-lord,’ a king, prince.
{%—Bhūmi-pa, as,%} m. ‘earth-protector,’ a sovereign,
king, prince; a Kṣatriya. {%—Bhūmi-pakaṣa, as,%} m.
a swift horse, a horse with good paces or of good
breed. {%—Bhūmi-pati, is,%} m. ‘earth-lord,’ a king,
prince. {%—Bhūmipati-tva, am,%} n. ‘earth-sovereignty,’
[Page0718-a+ 81]
sovereignty, kingship, princedom. {%—Bhūmi-pāla,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘earth-guardian,’ a king, prince. {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%pāśa, as,%} m., Ved. ‘earth-fetter,’ a plant. {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%piśāca, as,%} m. ‘earth-piśāca,’ the wine-palam or
Palmyra tree, Borassus Flabelliformis. {%—Bhūmi-pu-%}
{%tra, as,%} m. ‘earth-son,’ the planet Mars; N. of a
king. {%—Bhūmi-purandara, as,%} m. ‘earth-Indra,’
an epithet of Dilīpa. {%—Bhūmi-bhāga, as,%} m. a
portion or plot of land, place, spot; [cf. {%bhū-bhāga.%}]
{%—Bhūmi-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘earth-possessor,’ a king,
prince. {%—Bhūmi-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become earth;
being on the ground. {%—Bhūmi-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘earth-
supporter,’ a king, prince; a mountain [cf. {%bhū-%}
{%bhṛt%}]. {%—Bhūmi-bhedin, ī, inī, i,%} differing from
(what exists on) earth. {%—Bhūmi-maṇḍa, as,%} m.
‘earth-ornament,’ the plant Vallaris Dichotomus;
({%ā%}), f. Arabian jasmine. {%—Bhūmi-maṇḍapa-bhū-%}
{%ṣaṇā,%} f. the plant Gærtnera Racemosa. {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing land, having land.
{%—Bhūmi-mitra, as,%} m. ‘friend of the country,’ N.
of two kings. {%—Bhūmi-rakṣaka, as,%} m. the
guardian or protector of a country; a swift horse,
horse of good breed. {%—Bhūmi-lābha, as,%} m. ‘gain-
ing or returning to earth,’ dying, death. {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%lepana, am,%} n. ‘earth-ointment,’ cow-dung. {%—Bhū-%}
{%mi-loka, as,%} m., Ved. the terrestrial world. {%—Bhū-%}
{%mi-vardhana, as, am,%} m. n. ‘earth-increasing,’ a
dead body, corpse. {%—Bhūmi-śaya, as, ā, am,%} sleep-
ing on the ground, lying or living on the ground,
living in the earth; ({%as%}), m. any animal living in
the ground or earth [cf. {%bhū-śaya%}]; ({%as%}), m. a
wild pigeon {%(= araṇya-caṭaka);%} N. of a king.
{%—Bhūmi-śayana, am,%} n. or {%bhūmi-śayyā,%} f. the
act of sleeping on the (bare) ground. {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} standing or remaining on the
earth or on the ground; lying on the earth, ({%ambu%}
{%bhūmi-ṣṭham,%} stagnant water); living or remain-
ing in one's own country [cf. {%para-bh˚%}]. {%—Bhū-%}
{%mi-sattra, am,%} n. an offering consisting of a dona-
tion of land. {%—Bhūmi-sanniveśa, as,%} m. the general
appearance or configuration of a country. {%—Bhūmi-%}
{%sambhava, as, ā, am,%} ‘earth-born, earth-produced,’
produced on or from the earth; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet of
Sītā. {%—Bhūmi-sava, as,%} m., Ved. one of the nine
Vrātya-stomas. {%—Bhūmi-suta, as,%} m. ‘earth-son,’
the planet Mars. {%—Bhūmi-sena, as,%} m., N. of one
of the sons of the tenth Manu; of a Buddhist sage.
{%—Bhūmi-stoma, as,%} m. ‘earth-stoma,’ N. of a
Stoma. {%—Bhūmi-snu, us,%} m. an earth-worm. {%—Bhū-%}
{%mi-spṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. touching the ground; blind;
cripple, lame; ({%k%}), m. a terrestrial being, man;
mankind; an agriculturalist, a Vaiśya or Hindū of
the third caste who cultivates the soil; a theif, one
who creeps along the ground to carry off his plunder;
[cf. {%bhū-spṛś.%}] {%—Bhūmi-svāmin, ī,%} m. ‘land-lord,’
a king, prince. {%—Bhūmī-kadamba,%} see {%bhūmi-ka-%}
{%damba%}. {%—Bhūmī-kuravaka,%} a species of plant.
{%—Bhūmīcchā (˚mi-ic˚),%} f. desire for the earth or
for lying on the ground. {%—Bhūmīndra (˚mi-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘earth-chief,’ a sovereign, king, prince. {%—Bhū-%}
{%mī-pati, is,%} m. {%= bhūmi-pati%}. {%—Bhūmī-bhuj, k,%}
m. {%= bhūmi-bhuj%}. {%—Bhūmī-ruh, ṭ,%} or {%bhūmī-ru-%}
{%ha, as,%} m. ‘earth-growing,’ a plant, tree. {%—Bhūmī-%}
{%śvara (˚mi-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘earth-lord,’ a king, prince.
{%—Bhūmī-saha, as,%} m. a species of tree. {%—Bhūmy-%}
{%antara, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the next country;
({%as%}), m. the king of an adjacent country. {%—Bhūmy-%}
{%āmalakī%} or {%bhūmy-ālī,%} f. the plant Flacourtia Cata-
pharacta. {%—Bhūmy-āhulya, am,%} n. a species of shrub.
{%—Bhūmy-ekadeśa, as,%} m. one portion of terri-
tory.
<LEND>

<L>35685<pc>0718-a<k1>BUmikA<k2>BUmikA
{%Bhūmikā,%}¦ f. earth, ground, soil; a place, sport;
the floor of a building [cf. {%maṇi-bh˚%}]; a story, flat
roof of a house; a step, degree (as in the Yoga phil.);
an actor's part, character in a play; theatrical dress,
the costume of any character represented on the
stage, change of costume (to represent different cha-
racters); decorating images or temples, adorning
gateways, decoration; a preface to a book.
<LEND>

<L>35686<pc>0718-a<k1>BUmya<k2>BUmya
{%Bhūmya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhūmi%}), Ved. belonging
to the earth, terrestrial; (Sāy. {%= bhūmer arhas,%} suited
[Page0718-b+ 81]
to the earth, or {%antarikṣārhas,%} suited to the
atmosphere.)
<LEND>

<L>35687<pc>0718-b<k1>BUya<k2>BUya
{%Bhūya, am,%}¦ n. becoming, being, existence, con-
dition, state, abstract state, (at the end of comps., cf.
{%amutra-bh˚, ātma-bh˚, deva-bh˚, brahma-bh˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>35688<pc>0718-b<k1>BUyas<k2>BUyas<h>1
1. {%bhūyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (for 2. {%bhūyas%} see col. 3),
becoming; ({%as%}), n. the act of becoming; [cf.
{%brahma-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35689<pc>0718-b<k1>BUr<k2>BUr
{%Bhūr,%}¦ ind. (originally {%= bhūs,%} nom. sing. of 2.
{%bhū%}), a mystical word (the first of the three Vyāhṛtis
uttered by every Brāhman in commencing his daily
prayers, see 2. {%bhū, bhuvas, vyāhṛti,%} and cf. Manu
II. 76); the lowest of the seven lower worlds ({%=%}
{%rasātala,%} q. v.); a spiritual son of Brahmā. (For
comps. see under 2. {%bhū,%} p. 715, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>35690<pc>0718-b<k1>BUri<k2>BUri
{%Bhūri, is, is, i%}¦ (according to some contracted fr.
{%bahu-rai%} or {%bahu-ri%}), much, many, numerous,
abundant, copious, frequent; great, large, strong,
mighty; {%(is),%} m. an epithet of Brahmā; of Viṣṇu;
of Śiva; of Indra; N. of a man; of a son of Soma-
datta (king of the Bālhīkas, cf. {%bhaura%}); ({%i%}), n.
gold [cf. {%bhaurika%}]; ({%i%}), ind. much, abundantly,
exceedingly, often, frequently, repeatedly. {%—Bhūri-%}
{%karman, ā, ā, a,%} doing much, performing many
exploits, very busy (Ved.); making many oblations.
{%—Bhūri-kālam,%} ind. for a long time. {%—Bhūri-%}
{%gandhā,%} f. a particular perfume {%(= purā)%}. {%—Bhūri-%}
{%gama, as,%} m. ‘much-going,’ an ass. {%—Bhūri-gu,%}
{%us, us, u (gu = go),%} Ved. having many oxen, rich
in herds. {%—Bhūri-cakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. ‘much-
seeing,’ affording manifold appearances or aspects
(said of the sun). {%—Bhūri-ja, ās,%} m. pl., Ved. many
(sons) born at the same time. {%—Bhūri-janman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} Ved. having many births. {%—Bhūri-jyeṣṭha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of king Vi-cakṣus. {%—Bhūri-%}
{%tara, as, ā, am,%} more, more abundant, more nu-
merous. {%—Bhūri-tā,%} f. muchness, numerousness, mul-
titude. {%—Bhūri-tejas, ās, ās, as,%} of great splendor
or brightness, very glorious; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a
prince. {%—Bhūri-tejasa, as, ā, am,%} possessing great
splendor; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of fire. {%—Bhūri-toka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having many children. {%—Bhūri-da, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘much-giving,’ liberal, munificent. {%—Bhūrī-%}
{%dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} attended with rich presents or
liberal rewards; bestowing large presents to Brāh-
mans at a sacrifice, &c.; giving liberal rewards,
liberal; ({%am%}), ind. with rich offerings or liberal
presents. {%—Bhūri-dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. ‘much-giv-
ing,’ very liberal, munificent. {%—Bhūri-dātra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. rich in gifts or weapons (rt. 1. {%dā%} or 3. {%dā%}).
{%—Bhūri-dāna, am,%} n. great liberality, much-giving.
{%—Bhūri-dāvan, ā, varī, a,%} ‘much-giving,’ a muni-
ficent giver, very liberal, (compar. {%bhūridāvat-tara,%} a
more munificent giver, cf. Pāṇini VIII. 2, 17, Vārt. 2.)
{%—Bhūri-dugdhā,%} f. ‘having much milk,’ the plant
Tragia Involucrata. {%—Bhūri-dyumna, as,%} m. ‘pos-
sessing great glory,’ N. of a pious prince (son of Vīra-
dyumna); N. of the sons of two Manus, (also read
{%bhūri-dhāman.%}) {%—Bhūri-dhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having much wealth, rich in property. {%—Bhūri-dhā-%}
{%man, ā, mnī, a,%} possessing great splendor, splendid,
bright; full of energy, having great might; ({%ā%}), m.,
N. of a son of the ninth Manu. {%—Bhūri-dhāyas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. ‘much-nourishing,’ abundantly satis-
fying, much-supporting (said of Parjanya and Soma).
{%—Bhūri-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘much-showering,’
yielding abundant rays. {%—Bhūri-nidhana, as, ā, am,%}
having various terminations. {%—Bhūri-pattra, as,%} m.
‘many-leaved,’ a species of Andropogon {%(= ukhar-%}
{%vala)%}. {%—Bhūri-palita-dā,%} f. [cf. {%palita%}], a species
of shrub {%(= pāṇḍura-phalī)%}. {%—Bhūri-pāṇi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} Ved. many-handed. {%—Bhūri-pādāta, as, ā, am,%}
possessing many foot-soldiers, having much infantry.
{%—Bhūri-pāśa, au,%} m. du., Ved. ‘holders of many
fetters,’ an epithet of Mitra and Varuṇa; (Sāy. {%=%}
{%prabhūta-bandhana-sādhana-pāśopetau.%}) {%—Bhū-%}
{%ri-puṣpā,%} f. ‘many-blossomed,’ fennel, Anethum
Sowa {%(= śata-puṣpā)%}. {%—Bhūri-poṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
Ved. ‘much-nourishing,’ cherishing multitudes. {%—Bhū-%}
{%ri-prayoga, as, ā, am,%} having many uses, variously
used or applied, in common use; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
[Page0718-c+ 76]
dictionary of synonyms by Padmanābha-datta. {%—Bhū-%}
{%riprayoga-tva, am,%} n. the state of being much
used, general applicability. {%—Bhūri-preman, ā,%} m.
‘full of affection,’ the ruddy goose, Anas Casarca;
[cf. {%cakra-vāka.%}] {%—Bhūri-phenā,%} f. ‘having much
exudation,’ a species of plant commonly called Cher-
maghās. {%—Bhūri-bala, as,%} m. ‘having much
strength,’ N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; ({%ā%}), f. a
species of plant {%(= ati-balā)%}. {%—Bhūri-bhāga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having great good fortune, prosperous.
{%—Bhūri-bhāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘much-weighted,’
heavily laden. {%—Bhūri-bhoja, as, ā, am,%} having
much enjoyment. {%—Bhūri-mallī,%} f. a species of
plant ({%= amba-ṣṭhā;%} cf. {%bhūri-mūlikā%}). {%—Bhū-%}
{%ri-māya, as,%} m. ‘possessed of much deceit,’ a jackal.
{%—Bhūri-mūla, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘many-rooted,’
rich in roots. {%—Bhūri-mūlikā,%} f. ‘many-rooted,’ a
species of plant {%(= amba-ṣṭhā)%}. {%—Bhūri-rasa, as,%}
m. ‘having much juice,’ the sugar-cane. {%—Bhūri-%}
{%retas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. ‘many-germed,’ rich in germ
or seed, prolific, much-fructifying. {%—Bhūri-lagnā,%}
f. the plant Clitoria Ternatea (having white flowers).
{%—Bhūri-lābha, as, ā, am,%} having much profit,
very profitable; ({%as%}), m. great gain. {%—Bhūri-var-%}
{%pas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. ‘many-shaped,’ presenting many
appearances. {%—Bhūri-vasu, us,%} m., N. of a minister
or councillor; of a Brāhman. {%—Bhūri-vāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. rich in gift; (Sāy. {%= yajamānair bahu-%}
{%vāraṃ varaṇīya,%} cf. {%puru-vāra.%}) {%—Bhūri-vikra-%}
{%ma, as, ā, am,%} having great valour, very brave.
{%—Bhūri-viyoga, as, ā, am,%} having many separa-
tions, causing numerous separations. {%—Bhūri-vṛṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} f. excessive rain. {%—Bhūri-vetasa, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing many canes or reeds, very reedy. {%—Bhūri-śas,%}
ind. manifoldly, variously, in many ways. {%—Bhūri-%}
{%śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. many-horned. {%—Bhūri-%}
{%śrama, as,%} m. great fatigue. {%—Bhūri-śravas, ās,%}
m. ‘very renowned,’ N. of a son of Soma-datta (king
of the Bālhīkas). {%—Bhūri-śreṣṭhika,%} N. of a
building in Benares; (also read {%bhūri-śreṣṭhaka.%})
{%—Bhūri-ṣah%} or {%bhūri-ṣāh, ṭ,%} m., Ved. (a
chariot) bearing or carrying much (Sāy. {%= bhūri-%}
{%bhārasya soḍhā%}). {%—Bhūri-ṣeṇa, as,%} m. ‘having
many armies,’ N. of a man; of a son of the tenth
Manu; of the king Śaryāti. {%—Bhūri-sthātra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. having many stations, being at many
places or spots. {%—Bhūri-han, ā,%} m. ‘many-killer,’
N. of an Asura. {%—Bhūry-akṣa, as, ī, am,%} Ved.
many-eyed. {%—Bhūry-āsuti, is, is, i,%} Ved. much-
excited, much-exciting; (Sāy.) having much Soma
poured forth ({%= bahuṣu deśeṣu soma āsūyate%} or
{%bahūni somādi-havīṃṣy āsūyante iti tādṛśaḥ%}).
{%—Bhūry-ojas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having great power,
very vigorous.
<LEND>

<L>35691<pc>0718-c<k1>BUrika<k2>BUrika
{%Bhūrika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35692<pc>0718-c<k1>BUzRu<k2>BUzRu
{%Bhūṣṇu, us, us, u, = bhaviṣṇu, bhavitṛ,%}¦
being, becoming, being or faring well; desiring
happiness, wishing for wealth and prosperity (see
Manu IV. 135).
<LEND>

<L>35693<pc>0718-c<k1>BUHKAra<k2>BUHKAra
{#BUHKAra#}¦ {%bhūḥkhāra, as, ā, am,%} coming from
Bokhara (as horses &c., cf. {%bhuḥkhāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>35694<pc>0718-c<k1>BUka<k2>BUka
{#BUka#}¦ {%bhūka, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. 1. {%bhū%}), a cavity, hole, chasm; the cavity from
which a stream issues, the source of a stream, a
spring; time; ({%as%}), m. darkness.
<LEND>

<L>35695<pc>0718-c<k1>BUkala<k2>BUkala
{#BUkala#}¦ {%bhūkala, as,%} m. a restive or un-
manageable horse.
<LEND>

<L>35696<pc>0718-c<k1>BUtAlI<k2>BUtAlI
{#BUtAlI#}¦ {%bhūtālī,%} f., N. of two plants ({%=%}
{%bhū-pāṭalī, musalī%}).
<LEND>

<L>35697<pc>0718-c<k1>BUnA<k2>BUnA
{#BUnA#}¦ {%bhūnā,%} f., N. of a district; (for. {%bhūnā,%}
inst. c. of {%bhūman,%} see {%bhūman,%} p. 717, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>35698<pc>0718-c<k1>BUmi<k2>BUmi
{#BUmi#}¦ {%bhūmi, bhūmī,%} &c. See p. 717, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35699<pc>0718-c<k1>BUmiARa<k2>BUmiARa
{#BUmiARa#}¦ {%bhūmiāṇa%} and {%bhūmīyāṇa,%} N. of
two places.
<LEND>

<L>35700<pc>0718-c<k1>BUyas<k2>BUyas<h>2
{#BUyas#} 2¦. {%bhūyas, ān, asī, as%} (according to
Pāṇini VI. 4, 158, compar. of {%bahu,%} q. v.; for 1.
[Page0719-a+ 78]
{%bhūyas%} see p. 718, col. 2), more, more numerous,
more abundant; greater, larger, mightier; more im-
portant; much, many, numerous; very great, impor-
tant; vehement, severe; abounding in, abundantly
furnished with (with inst., e. g. {%guṇair bhūyān,%}
abounding in qualities); ({%as%}), ind. more, most, very
much, much, exceedingly, largely, over and above,
still more, more and more, further on, further, be-
sides, moreover, even; again, anew, afresh, fre-
quently, repeatedly; {%bhūyo bhūyaḥ,%} again and again;
{%pūrvam — bhūyaḥ,%} first — next; in the first place — 
in the next place; {%(asā),%} ind. very much, exceed-
ingly, beyond measure, excessively, in a high degree;
mostly, generally, as a general rule; [cf. Hib. <nsi>bhus,</nsi>
a sign of the comparative degree, always having <nsi>ni</nsi>
before it, as <nsi>ni bhus airde,</nsi> ‘higher.’] {%—Bhūya-śas,%}
ind. mostly, generally, as a general rule, commonly;
again, anew, afresh. {%—Bhūyas-kara, as, ī, am,%} or
{%bhūyas-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. making or doing more;
augmenting, increasing. {%—Bhūyas-taram%} or {%bhū-%}
{%yas-tarām,%} ind. more, anew, afresh, again. {%—Bhū-%}
{%yas-tva, am,%} n. ‘moreness,’ the being more or
greater, muchness, a large quantity, abundance, mul-
titude, manifoldness, multiplicity; majority, prepon-
derance, surplus, surplusage, overplus. {%—Bhūyo-vidya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} knowing more, more learned.
<LEND>

<L>35701<pc>0719-a<k1>BUyasvin<k2>BUyasvin
{%Bhūyasvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. more numerous or
abundant; superior.
<LEND>

<L>35702<pc>0719-a<k1>BUyizWa<k2>BUyizWa
{%Bhūyiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%bahu%}), most,
most numerous, most abundant; very abundant
or numerous, many, much, very great, very, ({%bhū-%}
{%yiṣṭhe nikaṭe,%} very near, in the closest proximity);
chief, principal, most important; consisting principally
of, chiefly filled with or characterized by ({%= prāya,%}
often at the end of comps., e. g. {%śūdra-bh˚,%} q. v.;
{%ahaṅkāra-darpa-bhūyiṣṭha,%} chiefly characterized
by or filled with egotism and pride); nearly all,
almost, (especially after a past passive part., e. g.
{%gata-bhūyiṣṭha,%} almost gone; cf. {%nirvāṇa-bh˚%});
({%am%}), ind. for the most part, mostly, almost, chiefly;
abundantly or numerously, in the highest degree,
very much; {%(ena),%} ind. for the most part, mostly.
{%—Bhūyiṣṭha-bhāj, k, k, k,%} Ved. sharing princi-
pally, enjoying the largest share, receiving most.
{%—Bhūyiṣṭha-śas,%} ind. in very large numbers, very
numerously.
<div n="P"/>{#BUri#}¦ {%bhūri.%} See p. 718, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35703<pc>0719-a<k1>BUrij<k2>BUrij
{#BUrij#}¦ {%bhūrij, k,%} f. the earth; (incorrectly
for {%bhurij,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>35704<pc>0719-a<k1>BUrja<k2>BUrja
{#BUrja#}¦ {%bhūrja, as,%} m. a species of birch (the
Bhoj or Bhojpatra tree, the bark of which is used
for writing on); [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>birca, bircha;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>birke;</nsi> Engl. <nsi>birch;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>berza-s.</nsi>]
{%—Bhūrja-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. a man of one of the
mixed classes, the son of an outcast Brāhman by
a woman of the same tribe (see Manu X. 21).
{%—Bhūrja-pattra, as,%} m. {%= bhūrja%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35705<pc>0719-a<k1>BUrRi<k2>BUrRi
{#BUrRi#}¦ {%bhūrṇi, is, is, i%} (probably fr. rt. {%bhur,%}
but said in Uṇādi-s. IV. 52. to be fr. rt. {%bhṛ%}), Ved.
active, agile, moving restlessly, restless, wild, excited,
irritated, (according to Sāy. {%= bhartṛ, bharaṇa-%}
{%śīla,%} supporting, accustomed to bear); ({%is%}), f. the
earth; a desert, a country ill-supplied with water.
<LEND>

<L>35706<pc>0719-a<k1>BUz<k2>BUz
{#BUz#}¦ {%bhūṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%bhūṣati, bubhūṣa,%}
{%bhūṣitum,%} to strive after, use efforts for,
care for (with dat., Ved.); to adorn, decorate; (in
the Veda a rt. {%bhūṣ%} is found, which is regarded by
Sāy. as a form of 1. {%bhū%} in the sense of ‘to obtain,
attain;’ thus in Ṛg-veda IV. 16, 11. {%bhūṣāt =%}
{%pra-bhavate,%} and in VIII. 92, 26. {%bhūṣasi = bha-%}
{%vasi%}); cl. 10. or Caus. {%bhūṣayati%} (rarely A. {%-te%}),
{%bhūṣayām-āsa, bhūṣayitum,%} to adorn, decorate,
embellish, attire; to spread or strew over with (any-
thing); to adorn one's self (A.); [cf. Hib. <nsi>beosai-</nsi>
<nsi>ghim,</nsi> ‘I adorn.’]
<LEND>

<L>35707<pc>0719-a<k1>BUzaRa<k2>BUzaRa
{%Bhūṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ decorating, adorning; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of a Daitya; {%(as, am),%} m.
n. ornament, decoration, embellishment (generally
[Page0719-b+ 79]
{%am,%} n., often at the end of comps., cf. {%karṇa-bh˚;%}
sometimes at the end of an adj. comp., e. g. {%kanaka-%}
{%bhūṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} decorated with gold); ({%am%}),
n. ‘the act of decorating or adorning,’ N. of a work.
{%—Bhūṣaṇa-tā,%} f. the being an ornament, ornature.
{%—Bhūṣaṇa-sāra-darpaṇa, as,%} m. ‘mirror of
the essence of decoration,’ N. of a commentary on
the Vaiyākaraṇa-bhūṣaṇa. {%—Bhūṣaṇendra-prabha%}
{%(˚ṇa-in˚), as,%} m., N. of a king of the Kinnaras.
<LEND>

<L>35708<pc>0719-b<k1>BUzaRIya<k2>BUzaRIya
{%Bhūṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be adorned, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35709<pc>0719-b<k1>BUzat<k2>BUzat
{%Bhūṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. striving after; (Sāy.)
adorning, ornamenting {%(= bhūṣayat, alaṅkurvat%}).
<LEND>

<L>35710<pc>0719-b<k1>BUzayat<k2>BUzayat
{%Bhūṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ adorning, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35711<pc>0719-b<k1>BUzayitavya<k2>BUzayitavya
{%Bhūṣayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be decorated or
ornamented, to be adorned.
<LEND>

<L>35712<pc>0719-b<k1>BUzayitvA<k2>BUzayitvA
{%Bhūṣayitvā,%}¦ ind. having adorned, having deco-
rated.
<LEND>

<L>35713<pc>0719-b<k1>BUzA<k2>BUzA
{%Bhūṣā,%}¦ f. adorning, decorating, ornament, deco-
ration; a jewel; [cf. {%karṇa-bh˚, bāhu-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35714<pc>0719-b<k1>BUzita<k2>BUzita
{%Bhūṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ adorned, decorated, orna-
mented, embellished, garnished.
<LEND>

<L>35715<pc>0719-b<k1>BUzin<k2>BUzin
{%Bhūṣin, ī, iṇī, i%}¦ (fr. {%bhūṣā%}), adorned or deco-
rated with (usually at the end of comps.).
<LEND>

<L>35716<pc>0719-b<k1>BUzya<k2>BUzya
{%Bhūṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be adorned or decorated.
<LEND>

<L>35717<pc>0719-b<k1>BUzRu<k2>BUzRu
{#BUzRu#}¦ {%bhūṣṇu.%} See p. 718, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35718<pc>0719-b<k1>BUstfRa<k2>BUstfRa
{#BUstfRa#}¦ {%bhū-s-tṛṇa.%} See p. 716, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35719<pc>0719-b<k1>Bf<k2>Bf
{#Bf#}¦ {%bhṛ%} (allied to rt. {%dhṛ%} and to rt. {%hṛ,%}
which was probably evolved fr. rt. {%bhṛ%}), cl. 1.
P. A. {%bharati, -te,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%bibharti, bibhṛte%}
(1st du. P. {%bibhṛvas,%} 3rd pl. {%bibhrati%}), Impf.
{%abibhar, abibhṛta%} (3rd pl. {%abibharus%}), Pot. {%bi-%}
{%bhṛyāt, bibhrīta,%} Impv. {%bibhartu, bibhṛtām%} (2nd
sing. P. {%bibhṛhi%}), Perf. {%babhāra, babhre%} (2nd sing.
P. {%babhartha,%} 2nd du. P. {%babhṛva%} by Pāṇ. VII. 2, 13,
cf. Gram. 369), or {%bibharāṃ-cakāra, bibharāṃ-%}
{%cakre%} (also {%bibharām-āsa, bibharām-babhūva%}),
1st Fut. {%bhartā,%} 2nd Fut. {%bhariṣyati, -te,%} Aor.
{%abhārṣīt, abhṛta%} (1st sing. {%abhārṣam,%} 2nd
du. {%abhārṣṭam%}), Prec. {%bhriyāt, bhṛṣīṣṭa,%}
Cond. {%abhariṣyat, abhariṣyata%} (Vedic and ir-
regular forms are Pres. {%bharti,%} 1st pl. {%bibhṛmasi,%}
Impf. {%abibhrat, bibharat,%} Perf. {%jabhāra, jabhar-%}
{%tha, jabhrus,%} A. {%jabhre, jabhrire, jabharat, ja-%}
{%bhartana,%} Aor. {%abhāriṣam, bharṣat, abhār%}),
Inf. {%bhartum%} (Ved. {%bhartave, apa-bhartavai, bhar-%}
{%tos, bharase, bharadhyai%}), to bear, carry; to sup-
port, maintain, keep, sustain, nourish, foster, cherish,
protect, take care of; to hire, keep in one's pay,
give wages or pay to (generally A.); to wear; to
possess, have; to hold, contain, retain (as in the
memory); to keep up, maintain; to endure, suffer;
to carry to (any person or place), bring; to confer,
bestow, give, produce; to fill, fill up, load; to carry
away, take away, transport; to raise the voice, raise
a sound (Ved.); to be borne along rapidly (A. Ved.,
Lat. <nsi>ferri</nsi>); to take or carry away for one's self,
acquire, gain (A. Ved.); to be borne upwards (as
sound, A. Ved.). The above meanings of rt. {%bhṛ%}
may be variously extended by connecting it with
various nouns, e. g. {%garbham bhṛ,%} to conceive,
become pregnant [cf. {%garbhaṃ dhṛ%} under rt. {%dhṛ%}];
{%śmaśru-loma-nakhāni bhṛ,%} to wear the hair, beard,
and nails long, i. e. allow them to grow without cutting
(Manu VI. 6); {%vibhramam bhṛ,%} to make playful
movements or to have the appearance of moving
about; {%ūrjām bhṛ,%} to exert the strength; {%kṣitim%}
{%bhṛ,%} to take care of, i. e. govern the earth: Pass.
{%bhriyate,%} Aor. {%abhāri%} (Ved. forms {%bharate,%} part.
{%bhuramāṇa, babhrāṇa, bibhramāṇa%}): Caus. {%bhā-%}
{%rayati, -yitum, abībharat,%} to cause to bear or
support; to put out to hire, engage for hire: Desid.
{%bubhūrṣati, -te, bibhariṣati, -te%} (Pāṇ. VII. 2,
49), to wish to bear, to wish or intend to support or
maintain [cf. {%bubhūrṣu%}]: Intens. {%bebhrīyate, bar-%}
{%bharti, barībharti%} (Ved. 3rd pl. {%bharibhrati,%} part.
{%bharibhrat%}), to bear repeatedly, to bear or carry
hither and thither; to maintain continually; [cf.
Zend <nsi>bar,</nsi> ‘to bear, bring:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">φέρ-ω, φέρ-μα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φέρ-ε-τρο-ω, φαρ-έ-τρα, φόρ-ο-ς, φορό-ς, φορ-ά,</lang>
[Page0719-c+ 81]
<lang n="greek">φορ-μό-ς, φόρ-το-ς, φερ-νή; φάρ-μα-κο-ν; φέρ-τερος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φέρ-ιστο-ς, φέρ-τα-το-ς; φέρ-β-ω, φορ-β-ή;</lang>
<lang n="greek">φᾶρος; φωρ-ιαμός; δί-φρο-ς, δι-φθέρα:</lang> Lat. <nsi>fero,</nsi>
<nsi>fer</nsi> in <nsi>belli-fer, fer-cu-lu-m, fer-āx, for-du-s,</nsi>
<nsi>far, far-īna, fer-ti-li-s, for(t)-s, for-tū-na, for-</nsi>
<nsi>tu-itu-s; pro-bru-m, op-pro-br-iu-m</nsi> <lang n="greek">(προ-φέρ-ειν),</lang>
<nsi>candela-bru-m; her-b-a, fi-b-ra, forb-ea:</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>bair-an,</nsi> ‘to bear;’ <nsi>ga-baur,</nsi> ‘tax;’ <nsi>baur-ei</nsi> or
<nsi>baur-thei,</nsi> ‘a burden;’ <nsi>ga-baur-th-s,</nsi> ‘birth;’ <nsi>bar-n,</nsi>
‘a child;’ <nsi>ber-usyōs,</nsi> ‘parents;’ <nsi>barm-s,</nsi> ‘womb;’
<nsi>baris,</nsi> ‘barley;’ <nsi>brigg-an,</nsi> ‘to bring:’ Old Germ.
<nsi>bur-di,</nsi> ‘a burden;’ <nsi>bāra,</nsi> ‘a barrow, bier:’ Angl.
Sax. <nsi>ber-an,</nsi> ‘to bear;’ <nsi>bearm,</nsi> ‘womb;’ <nsi>bearn,</nsi>
‘a child;’ <nsi>byrdhen,</nsi> ‘a burden;’ <nsi>bring-an,</nsi> ‘to
bring:’ Slav. <nsi>bra-ti,</nsi> ‘to bear;’ <nsi>bre†-me,</nsi> ‘a load;’
<nsi>bra-kŭ,</nsi> ‘wedlock:’ Boh. <nsi>bra-ti,</nsi> ‘to take;’ <nsi>ber-nĕ,</nsi>
‘tax:’ Lith. <nsi>bér-na-s,</nsi> ‘a child, servant:’ Hib. <nsi>beir-</nsi>
<nsi>im,</nsi> ‘I bear, carry.’]
<LEND>

<L>35720<pc>0719-c<k1>baBrARa<k2>baBrARa
{%Babhrāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (Perf. part. A.), one who
has borne, &c.; being borne (fr. the Pass.; according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 1, 8, {%= sarvair dhārya-%}
{%māṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>35721<pc>0719-c<k1>biBrat<k2>biBrat
{%Bibhrat, at, atī, at%}¦ (Pres. part. P.), bearing,
carrying.
<LEND>

<L>35722<pc>0719-c<k1>biBrARa<k2>biBrARa
{%Bibhrāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (Pres. part. A.), bearing,
carrying.
<LEND>

<L>35723<pc>0719-c<k1>Bft<k2>Bft
{%Bhṛt, t, t, t,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) bearing,
carrying [cf. {%śastrāstra-bh˚%}], supporting, maintain-
ing [cf. {%dharma-bh˚%}], nourishing, protecting [cf.
{%kṣiti-bh˚%}]; possessing, having, furnished or pro-
vided with [cf. {%janma-bh˚%}]; bringing, procuring,
conferring; a bearer, maintainer, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35724<pc>0719-c<k1>Bfta<k2>Bfta
{%Bhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ borne, carried, supported,
maintained, cherished; hired, kept in pay, paid,
({%kṣīra-bhṛtaḥ,%} a servant whose wages are paid
with milk, Manu VIII. 231); possessed of, endowed
with, having earned, acquired, gained; filled, full of;
({%as%}), m. a hireling, hired servant or labourer, mer-
cenary. {%—Bhṛta-bhūti, is, is, i,%} possessing power
or prosperity, powerful, prosperous; smeared with
ashes. {%—Bhṛta-randhra, as, ā, am,%} filled up (as
a hole or depression).
<LEND>

<L>35725<pc>0719-c<k1>Bftaka<k2>Bftaka
{%Bhṛtaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ hired, kept in pay, receiving
wages; ({%as%}), m. a hired labourer, a servant. {%—Bhṛ-%}
{%takādhyāpaka (˚ka-adh˚), as,%} m. a hired teacher,
one who gives instruction for pay. {%—Bhṛtakādhyā-%}
{%pita, as, ā, am,%} taught by a hired teacher; ({%as%}), m.
a student who pays his teacher.
<LEND>

<L>35726<pc>0719-c<k1>Bfti<k2>Bfti
{%Bhṛti, is,%}¦ f. the act of bearing, carrying, sup-
porting, maintaining, nourishing; bringing [cf.
{%idhma-bh˚%}]; service for wages; nourishment, sup-
port, maintenance, sustenance, food [cf. {%dur-bh˚%}];
wages, hire; capital, principal. {%—Bhṛti-bhuj, k, k,%}
{%k,%} enjoying or living on wages; ({%k%}), m. a hired
servant, labourer. {%—Bhṛti-rūpa,%} a reward given to
a person in lieu of wages for the performance of a
duty for which stipulated payment or hire is im-
proper (as for the performance of a Śrāddha in
behalf of another person). {%—Bhṛty-adhyāpana,%}
{%am,%} n. instructing for wages, teaching (especially the
Vedas) for hire. {%—Bhṛty-anna, am,%} n. wages and
board.
<LEND>

<L>35727<pc>0719-c<k1>Bftin<k2>Bftin
{%Bhṛtin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ supporting, maintaining, fos-
tering.
<LEND>

<L>35728<pc>0719-c<k1>Bftya<k2>Bftya
{%Bhṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be nourished or main-
tained; ({%as%}), m. one who is to be supported, a
dependent, servant, ({%kim-bhṛtya,%} a bad servant),
slave; subject; the servant of a king, a minister [cf.
{%rāja-bh˚%}]; ({%ā%}), f. fostering, rearing; service, de-
pendence; maintenance, support, sustenance, food;
hire, wages. {%—Bhṛtya-kāma-kṛt, t, t, t,%} acting
kindly to servants. {%—Bhṛtya-jana, as,%} m. a person
to be supported, a dependent. {%—Bhṛtya-tā,%} f. or
{%bhṛtya-tva, am,%} n. the condition of a servant, servi-
tude, service, dependence. {%—Bhṛtya-bharaṇa, am,%}
n. maintaining or cherishing dependents or servants,
&c. {%—Bhṛtya-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. one who maintains or
supports dependents, the master of a family. {%—Bhṛ-%}
{%tya-bhāvin, ī, inī, i,%} being or becoming a servant,
about to become a dependent. {%—Bhṛtya-varga,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘servant-class,’ the whole number of any one's
[Page0720-a+ 76]
servants, assemblage of dependents, household.
{%—Bhṛtya-vātsalya, am,%} n. kindness to depend-
ents or servants. {%—Bhṛtya-vṛtti, is,%} f. maintenance
of servants or dependents (Manu XI. 7). {%—Bhṛ-%}
{%tya-śālin, ī, inī, i,%} having many servants. {%—Bhṛ-%}
{%tyādhyāpana (˚ya-adh˚), am,%} n. teaching the
Veda for hire [cf. {%bhṛty-adhyāpana%}]. {%—1. bhṛ-%}
{%tyā-bhāva, as,%} m. a state of servitude or dependence.
 — 2. {%bhṛtyābhāva (˚ya-abh˚), as,%} m. the absence
of servants. {%—Bhṛtyī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bha-%}
{%vitum,%} to become a servant, enter upon service.
<LEND>

<L>35729<pc>0720-a<k1>BftyAya<k2>BftyAya
{%Bhṛtyāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%bhṛtyāyate,%} &c., to behave
like a servant.
<LEND>

<L>35730<pc>0720-a<k1>BfTa<k2>BfTa
{%Bhṛtha,%}¦ Ved. the offering (of the Soma); the
vessel in which the Soma is offered, (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda II. 14, 4, {%bhṛthe = somam bi-%}
{%bhrati pātre%} or {%somasya bharaṇe.%})
<LEND>

<L>35731<pc>0720-a<k1>BfMS<k2>BfMS
{#BfMS#}¦ {%bhṛṃś%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%bhṛṃśati, bhṛṃśa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to speak; to shine.
<LEND>

<L>35732<pc>0720-a<k1>BfkuMSa<k2>BfkuMSa
{#BfkuMSa#}¦ {%bhṛkuṃśa%} or {%bhṛkuṃsa%} or {%bhṛkuṃ-%}
{%saka, as,%} m. a male actor or dancer in female attire
[cf. {%bhrūkuṃśa, bhrukuṃśa, bhrakuṃśa%}].
<LEND>

<L>35733<pc>0720-a<k1>Bfkuwi<k2>Bfkuwi
{#Bfkuwi#}¦ {%bhṛ-kuṭi, is,%} or {%bhṛ-kuṭī,%} f. (cor-
rupted fr. {%bhrū-kuṭi,%} see {%bhrū%}), contraction or knit-
ting of the eyebrow, a frown; ({%ī%}), f. a species of
frog; (with Jainas) N. of a goddess executing the
commands of the eighth Arhat of the present Ava-
sarpiṇī; {%(is),%} m. (with Jainas) N. of the servant of
the twentieth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī.
{%—Bhṛkuṭi-mukha = bhrukuṭi-mukha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35734<pc>0720-a<k1>Bfkz<k2>Bfkz
{#Bfkz#}¦ {%bhṛkṣ%} or {%bhrakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%bhṛkṣati, -te, bhrakṣati, -te,%} &c.,
various reading for rt. {%bhakṣ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35735<pc>0720-a<k1>Bfg<k2>Bfg
{#Bfg#}¦ {%bhṛg,%} an onomatopoetic word used
to express the crackling sound of fire.
<LEND>

<L>35736<pc>0720-a<k1>BfgamAtrika<k2>BfgamAtrika
{#BfgamAtrika#}¦ {%bhṛgamātrika, as,%} m. probably
wrongly for {%mṛga-mātrika%} or {%mṛga-matṛka.%}
See {%mṛga-mātṛkā.%}
<LEND>

<L>35737<pc>0720-a<k1>Bfgala<k2>Bfgala
{#Bfgala#}¦ {%bhṛgala,%} see Kātyāyana's Śrauta-s.
IX. 11, 25.
<LEND>

<L>35738<pc>0720-a<k1>BfgavARa<k2>BfgavARa
{#BfgavARa#}¦ {%bhṛgavāṇa.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35739<pc>0720-a<k1>Bfgu<k2>Bfgu
{#Bfgu#}¦ {%bhṛgu, us,%} m., {%avas,%} m. pl. (fr. rt. 1. {%bhrāj,%}
said to be fr. rt. 1. {%bhrajj,%} to scorch; according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 127, 7, {%bhṛgavaḥ = haviṣām%}
{%pāpānāṃ vā bhraṣṭāraḥ,%} roasters or consumers of
oblations or of sins), Ved., N. of a mythical race of
beings (frequently mentioned in connection with Agni
and classed in Naighaṇṭuka V. 5. with the Aṅgirasas,
Atharvans, Ṛbhus, &c.; they are described in the
Ṛg-veda as cherishing Fire brought to them by the
Wind [Mātari-śvan], or as kindling Fire from the
wood of attrition; in Ṛg-veda IV. 16, 20, and one
or two other passages, they are said to fabricate
chariots); the descendants of Bhṛgu; ({%us%}), m., N.
of a Ṛṣi regarded as the ancestor of the whole race
of Bhṛgus, (he is sometimes described as the off-
spring of Prajā-pati, but in Manu 1. 35. is enumerated
among the ten Maharṣis or primeval patriarchs
created by the first Manu; according to Sāy., Varuṇa
adopted him as his son, whence he is called Vāruṇi
and is regarded as the author of Ṛg-veda IX. 65,
X. 19); N. of one of the chief Brāhmanical families
(the Aitaśayanas are said to belong to it); N. of
Kṛṣṇa; of a son of Kavi; of one of the Prajā-patis
(produced from Brahmā's skin); of one of the seven
sages (an Adhvaryu at the Rāja-sūya of Soma, Hari-
vaṃśa 1334); of the father of Cyavana and six
others; of the father of Dhātṛ and Vidhātṛ; of the
father of Śrī (by Khyāti); of the author of a Dharma-
śāstra (who also communicated the Ganeśa-Purāṇa to
Soma-kānta); N. of the son of Jamad-agni; of the
Ṛṣi Jamad-agni himself; of Śukra or the planet
Venus (called either Bhṛgu or the son of Bhṛgu;
the day of Bhṛgu is the sixth day of the week, i. e.
Friday); N. of Rudra (according to some); of a
son of Artha-pati and uncle of the poet Bāṇa;
[Page0720-b+ 80]
table land, the level summit of a mountain; a
declivity, slope, cliff, precipice [cf. {%bhṛgu-patana%}].
{%—Bhṛgu-kaccha,%} N. of a sacred place on the
northern bank of the river Narma-dā; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the inhabitants of this place. {%—Bhṛgu-ja%} or {%bhṛgu-%}
{%tanaya, as,%} m. ‘son of Bhṛgu,’ the planet Venus.
{%—Bhṛgu-tuṅga, as,%} m. ‘Bhṛgu's peak,’ N. of a
sacred mountain in the Himālaya, (sometimes called
{%bhṛgos tuṅga.%}) {%—Bhṛgu-nandana, as,%} m. ‘son
of Bhṛgu,’ the planet Venus [cf. {%bhṛgu-ja, bhṛgu-%}
{%putra, bhṛgu-suta%}]; an epithet of Paraśu-rāma.
{%—Bhṛgu-patana, am,%} n. a fall from a precipice,
&c. {%—Bhṛgu-pati, is,%} m. ‘chief of the Bhṛgus,’
an epithet of Paraśu-rāma. {%—Bhṛgu-pāta, as,%} m.
precipitating one's self from a precipice. {%—Bhṛgu-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. ‘son of Bhṛgu,’ the planet Venus.
{%—Bhṛgu-prasravaṇa,%} ‘Bhṛgu's spring,’ N. of a
mountain, probably = Bhṛgu-tuṅga. {%—Bhṛgu-bhū-%}
{%mi, is,%} m., N. of a son of Aṅgiras (belonging to the
family of the Bhṛgus; cf. {%bharga-bhūmi, bhārga-%}
{%bhūmi%}). {%—Bhṛgu-maṇḍala, am,%} n. (in astronomy)
‘Bhṛgu's circle,’ N. of a Karaṇa, q. v. {%—Bhṛgu-%}
{%rākṣasa, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi (said to have sacri-
ficed men and cows). {%—Bhṛgu-vaṃśa, as,%} m. ‘race
of Bhṛgu,’ N. of a family deriving their origin from
Parśu-rāma. {%—Bhṛgu-vallī,%} f., N. of the third
Vallī in the Taittirīyopaniṣad. {%—Bhṛgu-vāra, as,%}
m. the day of Venus, Friday. {%—Bhṛgu-śārdūla,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘most excellent of the Bhṛgus,’ an epithet
of Paraśu-rāma. {%—Bhṛgu-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. ‘best
of the Bhṛgus,’ epithet of Paraśu-rāma. {%—Bhṛgu-%}
{%sattama, as,%} m. ‘best of the Bhṛgus,’ epithet of
Paraśu-rāma. {%—Bhṛgu-suta, as,%} m. ‘Bhrigu's son,’
the planet Venus or Śukra (who was preceptor of
the Daityas); an epithet of Paraśu-rāma. {%—Bhṛgu-%}
{%sūnu, us,%} m. ‘Bhṛgu's son,’ the planet Venus.
{%—Bhṛgūdvaha (˚gu-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘offspring of
Bhṛgu,’ an epithet of Paraśu-rāma. {%—Bhṛgu-aṅgi-%}
{%ras, ās,%} m., Ved., N. of the author of certain
Atharva-veda hymns (supposed to avert diseases).
{%—Bhṛgu-aṅgiro-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing (the verses
or hymns of) Bhṛgu and Aṅgiras (i. e. of the
Atharvans and Aṅgirasas or Atharva-veda). {%—Bhṛgv-%}
{%īśvara-tīrtha, am,%} n. ‘Tīrtha of Bhṛgu's lord,’ N.
of a sacred bathing-place on the Narma-dā.
<LEND>

<L>35740<pc>0720-b<k1>BfgavARa<k2>BfgavARa
{%Bhṛgavāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. imitating Bhṛgu,
acting like Bhṛgu, i. e. shining, glittering (Sāy. {%=%}
{%bhṛgu-vad ācarat = dīpyamāna%}).
<LEND>

<L>35741<pc>0720-b<k1>BfgvandIya<k2>BfgvandIya
{%Bhṛgvandīya, as,%}¦ m. a N. (probably wrong).
<LEND>

<L>35742<pc>0720-b<k1>BfNga<k2>BfNga
{#BfNga#}¦ {%bhṛṅga, as, ā, ī,%} m. f. (probably fr.
rt. {%bhram,%} cf. {%bhramara;%} said in Uṇādi-s. I. 124.
to be fr. rt. {%bhṛ%}), a species of large black bee, the
humble bee; {%(as),%} m. {%= bhṛṅgarola,%} a species of
wasp, either the common kind or the Vespa Solitaria;
the fork-tailed shrike, Lanius Cærulescens; a bird,
apparently a sort of shrike different from the pre-
ceding; a libertine, catamite, lecher; the plant
Eclipta Prostrata {%(= bhṛṅga-rāja, mārkava, keśa-%}
{%rāja); = bhṛṅgāra,%} a golden vase or pitcher; ({%ī%}),
f. a species of poisonous plant, {%= ati-viṣā; (am),%}
n. woody Cassia {%(= tvak-pattra);%} the plant Eclipta
Prostrata or Verbesina Prostrata; talc; [cf. {%pañca-%}
{%bh˚.%}] {%—Bhṛṅga-ja, am,%} n. aloe wood or Agallo-
chum; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Clerodendrum Siphonanthus
{%(= bhārgī)%}. {%—Bhṛṅga-parṇikā,%} f. small carda-
moms. {%—Bhṛṅga-priyā,%} f. ‘liked by bees,’ the plant
Gærtnera Racemosa. {%—Bhṛṅga-mārī,%} f. {%= bhṛṅ-%}
{%gāri%}. {%—Bhṛṅga-mūlikā,%} f. a species of plant {%(=%}
{%bhramara-cchallī)%}. {%—Bhṛṅga-raja, as,%} or {%bhṛṅ-%}
{%ga-rajas, ās,%} m. the plant Eclipta Prostrata.
{%—Bhṛṅga-rasa, as,%} m. the juice of the plant
Eclipta Prostrata. {%—Bhṛṅga-rāja, as,%} m. ‘bee-
king,’ a species of large bee, the humble bee; a
species of bird (apparently the variety of shrike
termed Malabar, Lanius Malabaricus); a spreading
shrub, Eclipta Prostrata [cf. {%nīla-bh˚, pīta-bh˚%}]; a
kind of oblation or sacrifice. {%—Bhṛṅga-rājaka, as,%}
m. a species of bird. {%—Bhṛṅgarāja-rasa, as,%} m.
the juice of the plant Eclipta Prostrata. {%—Bhṛṅga-%}
{%vallabha, as,%} m. ‘favourite of bees,’ a species of
[Page0720-c+ 76]
Kadamba plant, Ligusticum Ajowan, {%= dhārā-ka-%}
{%damba%} and {%bhūmi-kadamaba; (ā),%} f. {%= bhūmi-%}
{%jambū%}. {%—Bhṛṅga-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. ‘bee-tree,’ per-
haps {%= bhṛṅga-rajas%}. {%—Bhṛṅga-sodara, as,%} m.
the plant Eclipta Prostrata. {%—Bhṛṅgādhipa (˚ga-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. ‘bee-chief,’ the queen of the bees.
{%—Bhṛṅgānandā (˚ga-ān˚),%} f. ‘bee-joy,’ the plant
Jasminum Auriculatum {%(= yūthikā)%}. {%—Bhṛṅgā-%}
{%bhīṣṭa (˚ga-abh˚), as,%} m. ‘liked by bees,’ the
Mango tree. {%—Bhṛṅgāri (˚ga-ari), is,%} m. ‘bee-
enemy,’ a species of flower growing in Mālwa {%(=%}
{%kevikā)%}. {%—Bhṛṅgāvalī (˚ga-āv˚),%} f. a line or flight
of bees. {%—Bhṛṅgāhva (˚ga-āh˚), as,%} m. the plant
Eclipta Prostrata; another plant, {%= jīvaka; (ā),%} f.
another plant {%(= bhramara-cchallī)%}. {%—Bhṛṅgī-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. the hog-plum, Spondias Mangifera.
{%—Bhṛṅgeṣṭā (˚ga-iṣ˚),%} f. ‘liked by bees,’ N.
of several plants {%(= ghṛta-kumārī, bhārgī, ta-%}
{%ruṇī, kāka-jambū).%}
<LEND>

<L>35743<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgaka<k2>BfNgaka
{%Bhṛṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. the fork-tailed shrike; (at the
end of an adj. comp.) {%= bhṛṅga,%} a bee.
<LEND>

<L>35744<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgariwi<k2>BfNgariwi
{%Bhṛṅgariṭi%}¦ or {%bhṛṅgarīṭi, is,%} m. or {%bhṛṅga-%}
{%rīṭa, as,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's attendants; [cf.
{%bhṛṅgin, bhṛṅgīriṭi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35745<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgarola<k2>BfNgarola
{%Bhṛṅgarola, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. {%bhṛṅga%} and
rt. {%ru,%} to cry), a kind of wasp; [cf. {%varola.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35746<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgAya<k2>BfNgAya
{%Bhṛṅgāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%bhṛṅgāyate, -yitum,%} to
become a bee, behave like a bee.
<LEND>

<L>35747<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgAra<k2>BfNgAra
{%Bhṛṅgāra, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%bhṛ%}), a golden pitcher or vase; a vase used at the
inauguration of a king, (it might be made of any
one of eight different substances, viz. gold, silver,
brass, iron, earthenware, sandal-wood, crystal, or
horn, and might be of eight differents forms); ({%as%}),
m. {%= bhṛṅga-rāja,%} the shrub Eclipta Prostrata; ({%ī%}),
f. a cricket; ({%am%}), n. cloves; gold.
<LEND>

<L>35748<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgAraka<k2>BfNgAraka
{%Bhṛṅgāraka, as,%}¦ m. {%= bhṛṅgāra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35749<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgArikA<k2>BfNgArikA
{%Bhṛṅgārikā,%}¦ f. {%= bhṛṅgārī,%} a cricket.
<LEND>

<L>35750<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgArIwa<k2>BfNgArIwa
{%Bhṛṅgārīṭa, as,%}¦ m. {%= bhṛṅgarīṭa%} under {%bhṛṅ-%}
{%gariṭi%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35751<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgi<k2>BfNgi
{%Bhṛṅgi, is,%}¦ m., N. of one of Śiva's attendants;
[cf. {%bhṛṅgin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35752<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgin<k2>BfNgin
{%Bhṛṅgin, ī,%}¦ m. the Indian fig-tree; N. of one
of Śiva's attendants [cf. {%bhṛṅgariṭi, bhṛṅgiriṭi%}];
N. of a people; ({%iṇī%}), f. a species of tree {%(= vaṭī).%}
{%—Bhṛṅgīśa (˚gi-īśa),%} ‘lord of the Bhṛṅgins,’
an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>35753<pc>0720-c<k1>BfNgiriwi<k2>BfNgiriwi
{%Bhṛṅgiriṭi%}¦ or {%bhṛṅgīriṭi%} or {%bhṛṅgirīṭi%} or
{%bhṛṅgeriṭi, is,%} m. {%= bhṛṅgariṭi,%} q. v.; an epithet
of Śiva?; [cf. {%bhṛṅgīśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35754<pc>0720-c<k1>Bfj<k2>Bfj
{#Bfj#}¦ {%bhṛj%} (connected with rt. 1. {%bhrajj%}),
cl. 1. A. {%bharjate, babhṛje, bharjitum,%}
to fry, parch, roast: Caus. {%bharjayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%ababharjat, abībhṛjat:%} Desid. {%bibharjiṣate:%}
Intens. {%barībhṛjyate, barbharkti.%}
<LEND>

<L>35755<pc>0720-c<k1>Barjana<k2>Barjana
{%Bharjana, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%bhrajjana%}], roasting,
frying, baking; annihilating; ({%am%}), n. the act of
roasting, frying, scorching, parching; a frying-pan.
<LEND>

<L>35756<pc>0720-c<k1>Bfkta<k2>Bfkta
{%Bhṛkta, as, ā, am,%}¦ roasted, fried; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>frictus, frixus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>35757<pc>0720-c<k1>BfjAyana<k2>BfjAyana
{#BfjAyana#}¦ {%bhṛjāyana, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>35758<pc>0720-c<k1>Bfjj<k2>Bfjj
{#Bfjj#}¦ {%bhṛjj, bhṛṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} (fr. rt. 1. {%bhrajj%}),
frying, roasting, baking; [cf. {%bahu-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35759<pc>0720-c<k1>Bfjja<k2>Bfjja
{%Bhṛjja%}¦ in {%uda-bh˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>35760<pc>0720-c<k1>Bfjjana<k2>Bfjjana
{%Bhṛjjana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a frying-pan.
<LEND>

<L>35761<pc>0720-c<k1>Bfq<k2>Bfq
{#Bfq#}¦ {%bhṛḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%bhṛḍati,%} &c., to
dive, plunge; [cf. rt. {%kruḍ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35762<pc>0720-c<k1>BfRIya<k2>BfRIya
{#BfRIya#}¦ {%bhṛṇīya, bhṛṇīyate,%} &c., Ved. a
verb given in Naighaṇṭuka II. 12. and said to mean
‘to be angry;’ [cf. rt. {%bhrī%} and {%hṛṇīya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35763<pc>0720-c<k1>BfRwikA<k2>BfRwikA
{#BfRwikA#}¦ {%bhṛṇṭikā.%} See {%bhiriṇṭikā,%} p. 711.
<LEND>

<L>35764<pc>0720-c<k1>BfRqi<k2>BfRqi
{#BfRqi#}¦ {%bhṛṇḍi,%} a wave; (also read {%bhaṇḍi.%})
<LEND>

<L>35765<pc>0720-c<k1>Bfta<k2>Bfta
{#Bfta#}¦ {%bhṛta, bhṛtya,%} &c. See p. 719, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35766<pc>0720-c<k1>Bfma<k2>Bfma
{#Bfma#}¦ {%bhṛma, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%bhram%}), Ved.
erring, aberration, error, mistake.
<LEND>

<L>35767<pc>0720-c<k1>Bfmala<k2>Bfmala
{%Bhṛmala, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. perplexed, bewildered.
<LEND>
[Page0721-a+ 77]

<L>35768<pc>0721-a<k1>Bfmi<k2>Bfmi
{%Bhṛmi, is, is, i,%}¦ [cf. {%bhrami%}], Ved. whirling
round, wandering about (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 32,
2, III. 62, 1, {%= bhramaṇa-śīla%}), active, quick, ener-
getic (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 31, 16, {%= bhrāmaka =%}
{%karma-nirvāhaka%}), sprightly, gay; ({%is%}), m. a
whirlwind, hurricane, high wind, (according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda II. 34, 1, either a moving cloud or a
kind of lute); a whirlpool, eddy; ({%is%}), f., Ved.
quickness, activity, agility. {%—Bhṛmy-aśva, as,%} m.,
Ved., N. of a man [cf. {%bhārmyaśva%}].
<LEND>

<L>35769<pc>0721-a<k1>BfS<k2>BfS
{#BfS#}¦ {%bhṛś%} (connected with rt. {%bhraṃś%}),
cl. 4. P. {%bhṛśyati,%} to fall, fall down; cl. 6.
P. {%bhṛśati,%} &c., to be strong or vehement (?).
<LEND>

<L>35770<pc>0721-a<k1>BfSa<k2>BfSa
{%Bhṛśa, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably fr. rt. {%bhṛś%} with a
sense ‘to be strong,’ or perhaps contracted fr. {%bhūri-%}
{%śas%}), powerful, mighty, strong, vehement, intense,
much, exceeding, frequent; ({%am%}), ind. vehemently,
strongly, intensely, in a high degree, much, very,
exceedingly, excessively, violently, powerfully, greatly,
extremely, eminently, in a superior manner, beauti-
fully, better, often, repeatedly, quickly. {%—Bhṛśa-%}
{%kopana, as, ā, am,%} extremely passionate, very
wrathful. {%—Bhṛśa-tā,%} f. violence, vehemence, inten-
sity; [cf. {%bhārśya.%}] {%—Bhṛśa-dāruṇa, as, ā, am,%}
very terrible or cruel. {%—Bhṛśa-duḥkhita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very much afflicted, very unfortunate or unhappy.
{%—Bhṛśa-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%} very much afflicted.
{%—Bhṛśa-vismita, as, ā, am,%} excessively astonished
or perplexed. {%—Bhṛśa-śoka-vardhana, as, ī, am,%}
greatly increasing grief or augmenting sorrow.
{%—Bhṛśa-saṃhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} very delighted,
very glad. {%—Bhṛśa-svid, t, t, t,%} perspiring violently.
{%—Bhṛśī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become
vehement, to become very powerful or strong.
<LEND>

<L>35771<pc>0721-a<k1>BfSAya<k2>BfSAya
{%Bhṛśāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%bhṛśāyate,%} &c., to become
powerful, to be strong or vehement.
<LEND>

<L>35772<pc>0721-a<k1>Bfzwa<k2>Bfzwa<h>1
1. {%bhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35773<pc>0721-a<k1>BraSizWa<k2>BraSizWa
{%Bhraśiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (superl.) most powerful,
very strong or violent, very vehement.
<LEND>

<L>35774<pc>0721-a<k1>BraSIyas<k2>BraSIyas
{%Bhraśīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ (compar.) more powerful,
stronger, more violent or vehement, very vehement.
<LEND>

<L>35775<pc>0721-a<k1>Bfzwa<k2>Bfzwa<h>2
{#Bfzwa#} 2¦. {%bhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%bhrajj%}),
fried, broiled, grilled, roasted, parched, scorched, baked;
({%am%}), n. roasted meat. {%—Bhṛṣṭa-kāra, as,%} m. a
preparer of roasted or fried meat. {%—Bhṛṣṭānna%}
{%(˚ṭa-an˚), am,%} n. rice boiled and then fried.
<LEND>

<L>35776<pc>0721-a<k1>Bfzwi<k2>Bfzwi<h>1
1. {%bhṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. the act of frying, broiling,
roasting.
<LEND>

<L>35777<pc>0721-a<k1>Bfzwi<k2>Bfzwi<h>2
{#Bfzwi#} 2¦. {%bhṛṣṭi, is,%} f. (perhaps fr. rt. {%hṛṣ%}),
Ved. a spike, point, top, corner, edge [cf. {%sahasra-%}
{%bh˚, kṣura-bh˚, tigma-bh˚, piśaṅga-bh˚%}]; an
empty or deserted cottage, a deserted garden {%(=%}
{%śūnya-vāṭī%} or {%śūnya-vāṭikā%}). {%—Bhṛṣṭi-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} pronged, toothed.
<LEND>

<L>35778<pc>0721-a<k1>BF<k2>BF
{#BF#}¦ {%bhṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%bhṛṇāti, babhāra,%} &c.,
to blame; to bear, nourish, maintain, support,
hold [cf. rt. {%bhṛ%}]; to fry; to bend, be crooked.
<LEND>

<L>35779<pc>0721-a<k1>Beka<k2>Beka
{#Beka#}¦ {%bheka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%bhī%}),
a frog, (according to the Kathā-sarit-sāgara XX. 77,
the inarticulate sounds uttered by frogs were the
result of the curse of Agni, who was betrayed by
them to the gods when he took refuge in the water);
a cloud; a timid man ({%= bhīru;%} cf. {%bhela%}); ({%ī%}), f.
a female frog; a small frog; a kind of creeper,
Hydrocotyle Asiatica. {%—Bheka-parṇī,%} f. ‘frog-
leaved,’ a plant {%(= maṇḍūka-parṇī)%}. {%—Bheka-%}
{%bhuj, k,%} m. ‘frog-eater,’ a serpent, snake. {%—Bheka-%}
{%śabda, as,%} m. the croaking of frogs.
<LEND>

<L>35780<pc>0721-a<k1>Bekuri<k2>Bekuri
{#Bekuri#}¦ {%bhekuri, is,%} f., Ved., N. of particular
asterisms (according to Colebrooke ‘nymphs of the
moon,’ cf. Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā XVIII. 40, Śatapatha-
Brāhmaṇa IX. 4, 1, 9, where {%bhekuri%} is explained
by {%bhākuri%}).
<LEND>

<L>35781<pc>0721-a<k1>Beqa<k2>Beqa
{#Beqa#}¦ {%bheḍa,%} or {%bheḍaka, as,%} m. (said by some
to be fr. rt. {%bhil%} with change of {%l%} into {%ḍ%}), a ram,
sheep, (in this sense also written {%bheḍra;%} cf. {%eḍa%});
a raft, float [cf. {%bhela%}]; N. of a physician; of a
[Page0721-b+ 79]
lexicographer; of a Ṛṣi; ({%ī%}), f. a ewe; N. of one
of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda (associated with
Eḍī and Sameḍī in Mahā-bh. Śalya-parva 2631).
{%—Bheḍa-giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>35782<pc>0721-b<k1>Beqara<k2>Beqara
{%Bheḍara, as,%}¦ m., N. of an Agra-hāra.
<LEND>

<L>35783<pc>0721-b<k1>Beqra<k2>Beqra
{%Bheḍra.%}¦ See {%bheḍa,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35784<pc>0721-b<k1>Betavya<k2>Betavya
{#Betavya#}¦ {%bhetavya.%} See p. 712, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35785<pc>0721-b<k1>Bettavya<k2>Bettavya
{#Bettavya#}¦ {%bhettavya, bhettṛ.%} See p. 711, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35786<pc>0721-b<k1>Beda<k2>Beda
{#Beda#}¦ {%bheda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%bhid%}), breaking,
splitting, cleaving, dividing, separating, dissolving;
bursting, tearing, rending, piercing, perforation;
breaking in or through, breaking open; violation,
dissolution; interruption, disturbance; breach, rup-
ture, fracture [cf. {%parva-bh˚%}]; a hurt, injury, wound;
a slit, chasm, fissure, cleft, chap; division, separation,
partition, part, portion; gaping, parting asunder [cf.
{%hanu-bh˚%}]; discrimination, discernment; distinction,
difference, kind, sort, species, variety; change, alter-
ation, modification [cf. {%mati-bh˚%}]; divulging, dis-
closure (of a secret), betrayal, treachery, treason
[cf. {%rahasya-bh˚, mantra-bh˚%}]; dissension, em-
broilment, disunion, disagreement, schism, making
mischief, creating divisions (among confederates);
seducing or enticing an ally to one's own party by
sowing dissensions &c. (one of the four Upāyas or
means of success against an opponent, see {%upāya%});
defeat; (in philosophy) dualism, duality; (in medi-
cine) evacuation of the bowels; (in astronomy) a
particular separation of the stars; ({%kukṣi-bheda, as,%}
m., Ved. epithet of one of the modes in which an
eclipse terminates); (in the drama according to the
Sāhitya-darpaṇa) {%= saṃhati-bhedana, protsāhana;%}
N. of a people (Ved.); N. of a man (see Atharva-
veda XII. 4, 49); {%(au),%} m. du. pudendum muliebre.
{%—Bheda-kara, as, ī, am,%} or {%bheda-kārin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} or {%bheda-kṛt, t, t, t,%} making a breach, breaking
through, bursting asunder; causing separation, pro-
ducing dissension or disunion, separating, disuniting.
{%—Bheda-tas,%} ind. according to difference; discrimi-
nately, according to peculiarities or diversities; sepa-
rately, singly, individually, (opposed to {%yuga-pad.%})
{%—Bheda-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. viewing or holding the
Universe and the Deity to be different and distinct.
{%—Bheda-dhikkāra, as,%} m. ‘refutation of duality,’
N. of a treatise by Nṛ-siṃha Āśrama controverting
the Nyāya philosophy from a Vedānta point of
view. {%—Bhedadhikkāra-satkriyā,%} f., N. of a com-
mentary by Nārāyaṇa Āśrama on the Bheda-dhik-
kāra. {%—Bheda-prakāśa, as,%} m. ‘manifestation of
duality,’ N. of a refutation by Śaṅkara Miśra of the
non-dualistic Vedānta theory from a Nyāya point of
view. {%—Bheda-pratyaya, as,%} m. belief in dualism
(in opposition to the doctrine that every thing is
God). {%—Bheda-buddhi, is,%} f. perception or idea of
a difference or distinction. {%—Bheda-vādin, ī,%} m. one
who maintains the doctrine that God and the Uni-
verse are distinct. {%—Bheda-vidhi, is,%} m. the faculty
of discriminating or discerning (between two different
objects). {%—Bheda-vibhīṣikā,%} f., N. of a philoso-
phical work. {%—Bheda-saha, as, ā, am,%} capable of
being divided or disunited, seducible, corruptible.
{%—Bhedābheda, au,%} m. du. disagreement and agree-
ment, disunion and union. {%—Bhedonmukha (˚da-%}
{%un˚), as, ī, am,%} just about to burst into blossom.
<LEND>

<L>35787<pc>0721-b<k1>Bedaka<k2>Bedaka
{%Bhedaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ who or what breaks or
breaks open or divides; breaking, breaking through,
causing division or separation; piercing; a mischief-
maker; a destroyer; one who breaks through or diverts
(the course of a stream, cf. Manu III. 163); distin-
guishing, discriminating, defining; a distinguisher;
{%(as, am?),%} m. n. an adjective; ({%ikā%}), f. the act of
breaking asunder, destruction, annihilation.
<LEND>

<L>35788<pc>0721-b<k1>Bedana<k2>Bedana
{%Bhedana, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī (?), am,%} breaking, bursting,
tearing, splitting, piercing, perforating, dividing, se-
parating; loosening (as the feces, in medicine), dis-
solving, cathartic, purgative; ({%as%}), m. a hog; a
species of sorrel [cf. {%amla-bh˚%}]; ({%am%}), n. the act of
breaking or breaking asunder, bursting, splitting,
piercing, cutting up, ripping open, dissolving, loosen-
[Page0721-c+ 75]
ing, fracture, rupture; the act of dividing or sepa-
rating, division, separation, discrimination, making a
difference; disclosing, betraying [cf. {%rahasya-bh˚%}];
dissension, disunion, discord, disagreement; Asa
Fœtida; (in astronomy) passing through a constel-
lation or asterism.
<LEND>

<L>35789<pc>0721-c<k1>Bedanaka<k2>Bedanaka
{%Bhedanaka%}¦ in {%ghaṭa-bh˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35790<pc>0721-c<k1>BedanIya<k2>BedanIya
{%Bhedanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be broken, frangible;
capable of being split or cut open; fit to be separated
or distinguished.
<LEND>

<L>35791<pc>0721-c<k1>Bedita<k2>Bedita
{%Bhedita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), broken,
divided, separated.
<LEND>

<L>35792<pc>0721-c<k1>Bedin<k2>Bedin
{%Bhedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ who or what breaks or divides
or splits &c., breaking, splitting, dividing, opening,
dissolving; interrupting, disturbing; piercing, per-
forating; hurting, wounding; loosening (the bowels),
cathartic; separating, distinguishing; separating from
(with abl.); causing to flow (as juice); having a dis-
tinction or division; (in philosophy) one who sepa-
rates spirit and matter or holds the doctrine of
dualism; causing dissension; ({%ī%}), m. a species of
sorrel; the ratan; ({%inī%}), f. (with Tāntrikas) N. of a
particular Śakti. {%—Bhedi-tva, am,%} n. separation,
division, parting asunder.
<LEND>

<L>35793<pc>0721-c<k1>Bedira<k2>Bedira
{%Bhedira, am,%}¦ n. {%= bhidira,%} a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>35794<pc>0721-c<k1>Bedura<k2>Bedura
{%Bhedura, am,%}¦ n. {%= bhidura,%} a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>35795<pc>0721-c<k1>Bedya<k2>Bedya
{%Bhedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be broken or split, to be
divided or pierced or cut; capable of being broken
or divided &c., frangible, divisible, fragile; to be
cut or opened (in medicine); to be disclosed or
betrayed; to be separated or distinguished; to be
defined; to be set at variance or disunited; to be
seduced or led away; ({%am%}), n. a substantive. {%—Bhe-%}
{%dya-roga, as,%} m. any disease treated by incision or
cutting. {%—Bhedya-liṅga, as, ā, am,%} distinguished
by the gender.
<LEND>

<L>35796<pc>0721-c<k1>Bedyaka<k2>Bedyaka
{%Bhedyaka%}¦ in {%utpala-bh˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35797<pc>0721-c<k1>Bena<k2>Bena
{#Bena#}¦ {%bhena, bheśa.%} See under 4. {%bha,%}
p. 694, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35798<pc>0721-c<k1>BeMpura<k2>BeMpura
{#BeMpura#}¦ {%bhempura, am,%} n., N. of a Grāma.
<LEND>

<L>35799<pc>0721-c<k1>Beya<k2>Beya
{#Beya#}¦ {%bheya.%} See p. 712, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35800<pc>0721-c<k1>BeyapAla<k2>BeyapAla
{#BeyapAla#}¦ {%bheyapāla (?), as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>35801<pc>0721-c<k1>Bera<k2>Bera
{#Bera#}¦ {%bhera, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%bhī%}),
{%= bherī,%} a kettle-drum.
<LEND>

<L>35802<pc>0721-c<k1>Beri<k2>Beri
{%Bheri, is,%}¦ or {%bherī,%} f. (the latter is the more usual
form), a kettle-drum; [cf. {%ābherī.%}] {%—Bherī-ghnat,%}
{%an,%} m. ‘striking a kettle-drum,’ a kettle-drummer.
{%—Bherī-bhāṅ-kāra. as,%} m., N. of a poet, (perhaps
for {%bherī-jhāṅ-kāra.%}) {%—Bherī-svana-mahā-svanā,%}
f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>35803<pc>0721-c<k1>BeruRqa<k2>BeruRqa
{#BeruRqa#}¦ {%bheruṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} (connected with
rt. 1. {%bhī%}), terrible, formidable, fearful, awful, (also
read {%bheraṇḍa%}); ({%as%}), m. a bird, (perhaps a parti-
cular species of bird, also read {%bheraṇḍa,%} cf. {%bhā-%}
{%raṇḍa%}); a species of beast of prey (wolf, jackal, or
hyena); N. of a form of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
goddess {%(= kālī);%} N. of a Yakṣiṇī or female attend-
ant on Durgā; ({%am%}), n. conception, impregnation,
pregnancy, (in this sense perhaps fr. rt. {%bhṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>35804<pc>0721-c<k1>BeruRqaka<k2>BeruRqaka
{%Bheruṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a jackal [cf. {%pheru%}].
<LEND>

<L>35805<pc>0721-c<k1>Bela<k2>Bela
{#Bela#}¦ {%bhela, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%bhī%}), timid,
timorous, fearful; foolish, ignorant, unwise, simple-
minded; tall; active, agile; unsteady (literally or
figuratively), inconstant; ({%as%}), m. a boat, skiff, float,
raft; N. of a Ṛṣi (supposed to be the author of
some medical works, cf. {%bheḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>35806<pc>0721-c<k1>Belaka<k2>Belaka
{%Bhelaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. {%= bhela,%} a boat, raft.
<LEND>

<L>35807<pc>0721-c<k1>Belu<k2>Belu
{#Belu#}¦ {%bhelu,%} a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>35808<pc>0721-c<k1>BelUpurA<k2>BelUpurA
{#BelUpurA#}¦ {%bhelūpurā,%} f., N. of a suburb of
Benares.
<LEND>

<L>35809<pc>0721-c<k1>Bez<k2>Bez
{#Bez#}¦ {%bheṣ%} [cf. rts. 1. {%bhī, bhyas%}], cl. 1.
P. A. {%bheṣati, bheṣate,%} &c., to fear,
dread, be afraid; (according to others) to move, go.
<LEND>

<L>35810<pc>0721-c<k1>Bezaja<k2>Bezaja
{#Bezaja#}¦ {%bheṣaja, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%bhiṣaj%}),
making well or healthy, sanative, curative, curing
[Page0722-a+ 78]
(Ved.); ({%am%}), n. a remedy or cure, remedy against
(with gen.); any drug or medicament, medicine,
physic [cf. {%āsrāva-bh˚%}]; any spell or charm against
diseases (as particular verses of the Atharva-veda); a
kind of fennel, Nigella Indica; (according to Nai-
ghaṇṭuka 1. 12) water. {%—Bheṣaja-kalpa, as,%} m.,
N. of a chapter of the Aṣṭāṅga-hṛdaya-saṃhitā by
Vāg-bhaṭa. {%—Bheṣaja-candra, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Bheṣaja-tā,%} f., Ved. curativeness, healing
power. {%—Bheṣaja-bhakṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘drug-eat-
ing,’ the act of taking medicine. {%—Bheṣajāgāra%}
{%(˚ja-āg˚), am,%} n. ‘medicine-room, drug-room,’ a
druggist's or apothecary's shop. {%—Bheṣajāṅga (˚ja-%}
{%aṅ˚), am,%} n. anything taken after medicine, any
vehicle or medium in which medicine is administered
(as water gruel).
<LEND>

<L>35811<pc>0722-a<k1>Bezajya<k2>Bezajya
{%Bheṣajya, as, ā, am,%}¦ curative, sanitary, sanative.
<LEND>

<L>35812<pc>0722-a<k1>BEkza<k2>BEkza
{#BEkza#}¦ {%bhaikṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bhikṣā%}), living
by alms, subsisting by charity; ({%am%}), n. asking alms,
begging, mendicancy, ({%bhaikṣaṃ car%} or {%bhai-%}
{%kṣāya gam,%} to go about begging, beg); anything
obtained by begging, begged food, charity, alms.
{%—Bhaikṣa-kāla, as,%} m. ‘alms-time,’ the time for
alms or for bringing home anything obtained as
alms. {%—Bhaikṣa-caraṇa%} or {%bhaikṣa-carya, am,%}
n. or {%bhaikṣa-caryā,%} f. the going about begging,
plying for alms, collecting alms, begging. {%—Bhai-%}
{%kṣa-jīvikā,%} f. living on alms, subsisting by begging,
mendicancy. {%—Bhaikṣa-bhuj, k, k, k,%} eating alms-
food, living on alms; ({%k%}), m. a mendicant. {%—Bhai-%}
{%kṣa-vṛtti, is,%} f. the living on alms, mendicancy;
{%(is, is, i),%} living by charity. {%—Bhaikṣānna (˚ṣa-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. ‘alms-food,’ food obtained as alms,
begged food. {%—Bhaikṣāśin (˚ṣa-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%}
eating alms-food or food obtained by begging; ({%ī%}),
m. a mendicant. {%—Bhaikṣāśya, am,%} n. (fr. the
preceding), the living on alms, subsisting by charity.
{%—Bhaikṣāhāra (˚ṣa-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} eating
begged food or food given in charity; ({%as%}), m. one
living on charity (Manu XI. 257), a mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>35813<pc>0722-a<k1>BEkzaka<k2>BEkzaka
{%Bhaikṣaka%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) {%=%}
{%bhaikṣa,%} alms.
<LEND>

<L>35814<pc>0722-a<k1>BEkzuka<k2>BEkzuka
{%Bhaikṣuka, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%bhikṣuka%}), a number of
mendicants, assemblage or collection of beggars.
<LEND>

<L>35815<pc>0722-a<k1>BEkzya<k2>BEkzya
{%Bhaikṣya,%}¦ an incorrect form for {%bhaikṣa%} above.
{%—Bhaikṣya-kāla, bhaikṣya-carya, bhaikṣya-%}
{%vṛtti,%} see {%bhaikṣa-kāla,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>35816<pc>0722-a<k1>BEdika<k2>BEdika
{#BEdika#}¦ {%bhaidika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bheda%}),
frangible, liable to fracture (? Pāṇ. V. 1, 64).
<LEND>

<L>35817<pc>0722-a<k1>BEma<k2>BEma
{#BEma#}¦ {%bhaima, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bhīma%}), relating
to Bhīma; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of Bhīma;
({%ī%}), f. ‘the daughter of Bhīma,’ a patronymic of
Damayantī; a festival on the eleventh day of Māgha,
when ceremonies with {%tila%} or sesamum are performed
in honour of Bhīma; [cf. Lith. <nsi>baime†,</nsi> ‘terror.’]
{%—Bhaima-pravīra, as,%} m. the bravest of the
Bhaimas, the chief of the Bhaimas.
<LEND>

<L>35818<pc>0722-a<k1>BEmagava<k2>BEmagava
{%Bhaimagava, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhīma-gava%}), a patro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>35819<pc>0722-a<k1>BEmaraTa<k2>BEmaraTa
{%Bhaimaratha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhīma-ratha%}),
relating to Bhīma-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>35820<pc>0722-a<k1>BEmaseni<k2>BEmaseni
{%Bhaimaseni, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhīma-sena%}), a patro-
nymic of Divo-dāsa, (also written {%bhaimasīni%});
of Ghaṭotkaca, (also written {%bhaimiseni.%})
<LEND>

<L>35821<pc>0722-a<k1>BEmasenya<k2>BEmasenya
{%Bhaimasenya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhīma-sena%}), a patro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>35822<pc>0722-a<k1>BEmAyana<k2>BEmAyana
{%Bhaimāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic (see Scholiast
on Pāṇ. VI. 2, 34).
<LEND>

<L>35823<pc>0722-a<k1>BEmi<k2>BEmi
{%Bhaimi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhīma%}), a patronymic of
Ghaṭotkaca.
<LEND>

<L>35824<pc>0722-a<k1>BErava<k2>BErava
{#BErava#}¦ {%bhairava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bhīru%}), for-
midable, awful, horrible, terrific, terrible, horrid;
miserable; relating to Bhairava; ({%as%}), m. a form of
Śiva, (eight forms of Bhairavas are enumerated, viz.
{%mahā-bh˚, saṃhāra-bh˚, asitāṅga-bh˚, ruru-bh˚,%}
{%kāla-bh˚, krodha-bh˚, tāmra-cūḍa-bh˚%} or {%ka-%}
{%pāla-bh˚, candra-cūḍa-bh˚%} or {%rudra-bh˚;%} other
names of these forms are sometimes given, e. g.
[Page0722-b+ 78]
{%vidyā-rāja, kāma-r˚, nāga-r˚, sacchanda-r˚,%}
{%lambita-r˚, deva-r˚, ugra-r˚, vighna-r˚%}); a man
representing Bhairava; a Śivagaṇādhipa; a son of
Śiva by Tārā-vatī (who was wife of Candra-śekhara,
king of Karavīra-pura); N. of a Nāga; of a Yakṣa;
of the author of the Pheṭkāriṇī-tantra; of a teacher
of the Haṭha-vidyā; of two kings; of a hunter; of
a river; of a Rāga or musical mode calculated to
excite emotions of terror; ({%ī%}), f. a particular form
of Durgā; a girl of twelve years (representing that
goddess at the Durgā festival); N. of a Rāgiṇī or of
a particular scale in the Hindū musical system; ({%am%}),
n. terror, horror, the property of exciting terror,
terribleness; {%= bhairava-tantra%} below. {%—Bhairava-%}
{%kāraka, as, ikā, am,%} causing terror, formidable.
{%—Bhairava-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra men-
tioned in Kṛṣṇānanda's Tantra-sāra. {%—Bhairava-%}
{%tarjaka, as,%} m. ‘awful threatener,’ an epithet of
Viṣṇu (properly of Śiva). {%—Bhairava-tva, am,%} n.
the state of being Bhairava or a form of Śiva.
{%—Bhairava-dīkṣita-tilaka, as,%} m., N. of an
author. {%—Bhairava-nātha-tantra, am,%} n. ‘Tantra
of the lord of terror,’ N. of a Tantra. {%—Bhairava-%}
{%yātanā,%} f. a purificatory torment inflicted by Śiva
as presiding deity of Benares on those who die
there, to render their spirits fit for absorption into
the essence of the Supreme (whereas those who are
punished by Yama have to return to mundane exist-
ence). {%—Bhairavāgratas (˚va-ag˚),%} ind. in the
presence of Bhairava. {%—Bhairavācārya (˚va-āc˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Bhairavānanda (˚va-%}
{%ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a Yogin. {%—Bhairavendra%}
{%(˚va-in˚), as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Bhairaveśa (˚va-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of terror,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu
(properly of Śiva).
<LEND>

<L>35825<pc>0722-b<k1>BEravIya<k2>BEravIya
{%Bhairavīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to Bhairava (as
a Tantra).
<LEND>

<L>35826<pc>0722-b<k1>BErika<k2>BErika
{%Bhairika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa by
Satya-bhāmā.
<LEND>

<L>35827<pc>0722-b<k1>BEzaja<k2>BEzaja
{#BEzaja#}¦ {%bhaiṣaja, as,%} m. (fr. {%bheṣaja%}), a
sort of quail, Perdix Chinensis; ({%ās%}), m. pl. of the
patronymic Bhaiṣajya below; ({%am%}), n. a drug,
medicine, medicament.
<LEND>

<L>35828<pc>0722-b<k1>BEzajya<k2>BEzajya
{%Bhaiṣajya, as,%}¦ m. the descendant of a physician;
a patronymic from Bhiṣaj; ({%am%}), n. the adminis-
tering of medicines and healing applications to the
sick; curativeness, healing efficacy; a particular
ceremony (performed as a remedy for sickness); any
remedy, drug, medicine, medicament. {%—Bhaiṣajya-%}
{%guru-vaidūrya-prabhā,%} f., N. of a Buddhist work.
{%—Bhaiṣajya-ratnāvalī,%} f., N. of a medical work.
{%—Bhaiṣajya-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Bhaiṣajya-samudgata, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-
sattva.
<LEND>

<L>35829<pc>0722-b<k1>BEzRaja<k2>BEzRaja
{%Bhaiṣṇaja, ās,%}¦ m. pl. of the following.
<LEND>

<L>35830<pc>0722-b<k1>BEzRajya<k2>BEzRajya
{%Bhaiṣṇajya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Bhiṣṇaja.
<LEND>

<L>35831<pc>0722-b<k1>BEzmaka<k2>BEzmaka
{#BEzmaka#}¦ {%bhaiṣmaka, as,%} m. (fr. {%bhīṣmaka%}),
a patronymic; ({%ī%}), f. a patronymic of Rukmiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>35832<pc>0722-b<k1>Bo<k2>Bo
{#Bo#}¦ {%bho.%} See {%bhos,%} p. 723, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35833<pc>0722-b<k1>Boktavya<k2>Boktavya
{#Boktavya#}¦ {%bhoktavya, bhoktṛ,%} &c. See p. 713,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35834<pc>0722-b<k1>Boga<k2>Boga<h>1
{#Boga#} 1¦. {%bhoga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%bhuj%}), any
winding or curve, a ring, coil; winding; the ex-
panded hood of a snake; a snake; the body; a par-
ticular array, an army in column. {%—Bhoga-tva, am,%}
n. the state of being curved or winding, curvature,
curvedness. {%—1. bhoga-vat, ān, atī, at%} (for 2. see
col. 3), furnished with windings or curves, having
rings, ringed [cf. {%mahā-bh˚%}]; ({%ān%}), m. a snake; a
mountain; ({%atī%}), f. a female snake-demon; one of
the Mātṛs attending on Skanda; the city of the
snake-demons in the subterranean regions [cf. {%bho-%}
{%gāvatī%}]; the sacred river of the snake-demons, or
a Tīrtha in that river sacred to the serpent-king
Vāsuki; N. of Ujjayinī in the Dvāpara age.
<LEND>

<L>35835<pc>0722-b<k1>Bogin<k2>Bogin<h>1
1. {%bhogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ furnished with windings or
curves, having windings or rings, curved, ringed [cf.
{%mahā-bh˚%}]; ({%ī%}), m. a snake [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-bh˚%}].
[Page0722-c+ 80]
{%—Bhogi-kānta, as,%} m. ‘dear to snakes,’ air, wind.
{%—Bhogi-gandhikā,%} f. a species of ichneumon
plant. {%—Bhogi-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘eating snakes,’ an ich-
neumon. {%—Bhogi-vallabha, am,%} n. ‘beloved by
snakes,’ sandal. {%—Bhogīndra (˚gi-in˚), as,%} m.
‘king of snakes,’ an epithet of Ananta or Śeṣa.
<LEND>

<L>35836<pc>0722-c<k1>Boga<k2>Boga<h>2
{#Boga#} 2¦. {%bhoga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%bhuj%}), en-
joyment, fruition; eating; use, application; usufruct,
the use of a deposit (Manu VIII. 149); utility,
advantage, profitable aim or object; enjoyment (of
women), sexual enjoyment; possessing, possession;
ruling, governing, protecting, rule, government;
cherishing, nourishing; suffering, experiencing; en-
during, feeling, perception (of joy or sorrow), pleasure;
suffering, passion; any object of enjoyment, that
which is eaten, food; food offered to an idol;
festivity, feasting, a repast, feast, banquet; income,
revenue; gain, profit, produce; money, wealth;
hire, the hire of dancing girls or courtezans, wages
of prostitution; (in astronomy) the passing (of an
asterism); the part of the ecliptic occupied by each
of the 27 lunar mansions or Nakṣatras, i. e. 13°
20° or 800°; (in arithmetic) the numerator of a
fraction (?); N. of a preceptor. {%—Bhoga-kara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} producing or affording enjoyment, procuring
food or pleasure. {%—Bhoga-guccha, am,%} n. hire of
prostitution, price paid to harlots. {%—Bhoga-gṛha,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘pleasure-chamber,’ the inner or private
apartments, women's apartments, zenana, harem;
[cf. {%bhoga-sthāna.%}] {%—Bhoga-grāma, as,%} m., N.
of a village. {%—Bhoga-jāta, as, ā, am,%} produced by
enjoyment or by suffering. {%—Bhoga-dattā,%} f., N. of
a woman. {%—Bhoga-dā,%} f. ‘granting enjoyment,’ N.
of the goddess of the Piṅgalas. {%—Bhoga-deva, as,%}
m. ‘having pleasure for a god (?),’ N. of a man
(Rāja-taraṅgiṇī VIII. 531). {%—Bhoga-deha, as,%} m.
‘the body of suffering,’ the subtle body which a
dead person takes with him and with which, accord-
ing to his works, he experiences either happiness or
misery. {%—Bhoga-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Bhoga-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of possession,’ a person
in actual possession (of anything), the governor or
viceroy of a town or province. {%—Bhoga-pāla,%} a
groom; [cf. {%bhogika.%}] {%—Bhoga-piśācikā,%} f. hunger.
{%—Bhoga-prastha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Bhoga-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Bhoga-%}
{%bhuj, k, k, k,%} enjoying pleasures. {%—Bhoga-bhūmi,%}
{%is,%} f. ‘land of enjoyment,’ the place where people
enjoy the reward of their works, Svarga or paradise,
(opposed to {%karma-bhūmi,%} ‘land of works.’) {%—Bho-%}
{%ga-bhṛtaka, as,%} m. a servant who works only for
maintenance. {%—Bhoga-maṇḍapa, as,%} m. the part of
the temple of Jagan-nāth where the food to be pre-
sented to the idol is cooked. {%—Bhoga-lābha, as,%} m.
acquisition of enjoyment or profit; the gain or profit
made by the use of anything deposited or pledged;
welfare. {%—2. bhoga-vat, ān, atī, at%} (for 1. see
col. 2), furnished with enjoyments, having enjoy-
ment, delightful, pleasurable, enjoyable, affording or
yielding enjoyment; happy, prosperous; ({%ān%}), m.
dancing, acting and singing; N. of Satya-bhāmā's
residence (Hari-vaṃśa 8978); ({%atī%}), f., N. of a town;
epithet of the night of the second lunar day.
{%—Bhoga-vardhana,%} N. of a country; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
its inhabitants. {%—Bhoga-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a
king; of a merchant. {%—Bhoga-vastu, u,%} n. an object
of enjoyment. {%—Bhoga-sadman, a,%} n. the abode of
pleasure; the inner or women's apartments. {%—Bho-%}
{%ga-sena, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhoga-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the body as the seat of sensual enjoyment;
the women's apartments. {%—Bhogādhi (˚ga-ādhi),%}
{%is,%} m. a pledge or deposit which may be used until
redeemed. {%—Bhogānta (˚ga-an˚), as,%} m. the end of
enjoyment or of suffering. {%—Bhogāyatana (˚ga-āy˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a place of enjoyment or suffering. {%—Bho-%}
{%gārha (˚ga-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} fit for enjoyment, to
be enjoyed or possessed; ({%am%}), n. property, wealth,
money; [cf. {%bhogya.%}] {%—Bhogārhya (˚ga-ar˚),%}
{%am,%} n. corn, grain. {%—Bhogāvalī (˚ga-āv˚),%} f. an
encomiastic poem, the panegyric of professional
[Page0723-a+ 81]
encomiasts or bards, eulogium. {%—Bhogāvāsa (˚ga-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m. ‘abode of pleasure,’ the women's apart-
ments; [cf. {%bhoga-gṛha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35837<pc>0723-a<k1>Bogika<k2>Bogika
{%Bhogika, as,%}¦ m. a horse-keeper, groom {%(= bho-%}
{%ga-pāla).%}
<LEND>

<L>35838<pc>0723-a<k1>Bogin<k2>Bogin<h>2
2. {%bhogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ enjoying, eating; using, pos-
sessing; suffering, experiencing, undergoing; an
enjoyer, possessor, &c.; full of enjoyments, devoted
to enjoyments, indulging in sensual pleasures;
wealthy, opulent; ({%ī%}), m. a voluptuary, a king,
prince; the head man of a village; a barber; a
person who accumulates money for a particular ex-
penditure; ({%inī%}), f. the concubine of a king or a
wife not regularly consecrated with him; epithet of
a kind of heroine.
<LEND>

<L>35839<pc>0723-a<k1>BogIna<k2>BogIna
{%Bhogīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ at the end of a comp. [cf.
{%mātṛ-bhogīṇa%}].
<LEND>

<L>35840<pc>0723-a<k1>Bogya<k2>Bogya
{%Bhogya, as, ā, am,%}¦ enjoyable, to be enjoyed, to
be used, (in the sense ‘to be eaten,’ {%bhojya%} is rather
employed); to be endured or experienced; useful,
profitable; (in astronomy) to be passed; ({%ā%}), f. a
harlot, courtezan, prostitute; ({%am%}), n. what may be
enjoyed, anything that may be possessed or used, an
object of fruition, a possession, wealth, money; corn,
grain. {%—Bhogya-tā,%} f. or {%bhogya-tva, am,%} n. the
state of being used or possessed, usefulness, profit-
ableness, enjoyableness. {%—Bhogyādhi (˚ya-ādhi),%}
{%is,%} m. {%= bhogādhi,%} p. 722, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35841<pc>0723-a<k1>Boja<k2>Boja
{%Bhoja, as, ā, am,%}¦ bestowing enjoyment or
pleasure, bountiful, liberal, (as an epithet of Indra
or as the title of a king; Ved., Sāy. {%= phalasya%}
{%dātṛ%} or {%rakṣitṛ%} or {%pālayitṛ%}); enjoying, leading
a life of enjoyment or sensuality; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
country (= Patna and Bhāgalpur, cf. {%bhoja-kaṭa%});
N. of a celebrated sovereign of Malwa (supposed to
have flourished about the end of the tenth century or
beginning of the eleventh century, and to have been
a great patron of learning, see {%bhoja-deva, bhoja-%}
{%rāja%} below); a king of the Bhojas (see below); N.
of a king of Vidarbha (Raghu-v. VII. 1); N. of a
son of Vasu-deva and Śānti-devā; of Kṛta-varman;
of a son of Ujjendra and founder of Bhoja-purī; of
a lexicographer; of an author of certain medical
works; of a son of Kalaśa-deva; ({%ā%}), f. a princess of
the Bhojas; N. of the wife of Vīra-vrata, (also read
{%bhojyā%}); a cowherd; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people;
the descendants of Mahā-bhoja [cf. {%mahā-bh˚%}].
{%—Bhoja-kaṭa, am,%} n., N. of a town founded by
Rukmin (Mahā-bh. Sabhā-p. 1166); the country
of Bhoja, the present Bhojpur, or the vicinity of
Patna and Bhāgalpur. {%—Bhojakaṭīya, as, ā, am,%}
relating to or coming from Bhoja-kaṭa; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the inhabitants of Bhoja-kaṭa. {%—Bhoja-kanyā,%} f. a
girl of the race of the Bhojas. {%—Bhoja-kula-pra-%}
{%dīpa, as,%} m. ‘the lamp of the race of Bhoja,’ epithet
of a king of Vidarbha (Raghu-v. VII. 26). {%—Bhoja-%}
{%duhitṛ, tā,%} f. a daughter of Bhoja, a princess or
queen of the Bhojas [cf. {%bhoja-putrī%}]. {%—Bhoja-%}
{%deva, as,%} m. king Bhoja (said to have been king of
Dhārā in Malwa at the beginning of the eleventh
century of our era; his capital being placed by some
at Ujjayinī or Oujein; he was a great patron of
literature, and is the reputed author of several works,
e. g. the Yukti-kalpa-taru, Vyavahāra-samuccaya,
Sarasvatī-kaṇṭhābharaṇa, and a commentary called
Rāja-mārtaṇḍa on the Yoga-sūtras; cf. {%bhoja-rāja%}).
{%—Bhojadeva-śabdānuśāsana (˚da-an˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a grammatical work (mentioned by Ujjvala-
datta, Uṇādi-s. 1. 92). {%—Bhoja-nagara, am,%} n., N.
of a town [cf. {%bhoja-pura%}]. {%—Bhoja-narendra%}
{%(˚ra-in˚), as,%} m. or {%bhoja-nṛpati, is,%} m. king
Bhoja, {%= bhoja-deva%}. {%—Bhoja-pati, is,%} m. the king
of the Bhojas; king Bhoja (see {%bhoja-deva%}); an
epithet of Kaṃsa. {%—Bhoja-putrī,%} f. a daughter of
Bhoja, a princess or queen of the Bhojas [cf. {%bhoja-%}
{%duhitṛ%}]. {%—Bhoja-pura, am,%} n. or {%bhoja-purī,%} f.,
N. of a town [cf. {%bhoja-nagara%}]. {%—Bhoja-pra-%}
{%bandha%} or {%bhoja-rāja-prabandha, as,%} m., N. of
Ballāla's biography of Bhoja king of Dhārā. {%—Bho-%}
{%ja-rāja, as,%} m. the king of the Bhojas; king Bhoja
(said to be the author of several works, and described
[Page0723-b+ 80]
as a poet, astronomer, lexicographer, and philosopher,
cf. {%bhoja-deva%}). {%—Bhoja-rājaka-vivarga, as,%} m.,
N. of a work mentioned in the Śārṅga-dhara-pad-
dhati. {%—Bhojarāja-vārttika, am,%} n., N. of a work
mentioned in the Sāṅkhya-tattva-karumudī by Vācas-
pati-miśra. {%—Bhojarāja-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a com-
mentary on the Yoga-sūtra by Patañjali (supposed
to have been written under the patronage of king
Bhoja). {%—Bhojarājīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to or
coming from Bhoja-rāja. {%—Bhojādhipa (˚ja-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘king of the Bhojas,’ an epithet of Kaṃsa;
of Karṇa, the half brother of the Pāṇḍus. {%—Bho-%}
{%jādhirāja (˚ja-adh˚), as,%} m. the king of the Bhojas.
{%—Bhojāntā (˚ja-an˚),%} f., N. of a river. {%—Bhojen-%}
{%dra (˚ja-in˚), as,%} m. the king of the Bhojas.
<LEND>

<L>35842<pc>0723-b<k1>Bojaka<k2>Bojaka
{%Bhojaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ eating; (fr. the Caus.),
giving to eat, causing to eat, nourishing; ({%as%}), m.
one who gives to eat, (perhaps) a waiter at table;
N. of a class of priests (or Sun-worshippers, supposed
to be descended from the Magas by intermarriage
with women of the Bhoja race).
<LEND>

<L>35843<pc>0723-b<k1>Bojana<k2>Bojana
{%Bhojana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing or giving to eat,
feeding, nourishing; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; N.
of a river; ({%am%}), n. the act of giving to eat, feed-
ing, nourishing, serving up or dressing food, (in these
senses fr. the Caus.); the act of enjoying, using,
eating, (in these and other senses fr. the simple rt.,
cf. {%parṇa-bh˚%}); a meal, food, ({%ku-bhojana,%} bad
food, indifferent, viands); anything given as sustenance
or for enjoyment, anything enjoyed or used, property,
possession; any object of enjoyment. {%—Bhojana-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. meal-time, dinner-time, supper-time.
{%—Bhojana-tyāga, as,%} m. ‘food-abandonment,’
abstinence from food, fasting. {%—Bhojana-bhāṇḍa,%}
{%am,%} n. a dish of meat. {%—Bhojana-bhūmi, is,%} f.
‘eating-place,’ a place for eating. {%—Bhojana-viśe-%}
{%ṣa, as,%} m. choice food, a dainty, delicacy. {%—Bho-%}
{%jana-vṛtti, is,%} f. course or act of eating, a meal,
food. {%—Bhojana-velā,%} f. meal-time, dinner-time,
supper-time. {%—Bhojana-vyagra, as, ā, am,%} occu-
pied or engaged in eating; bewildered or strait-
ened for want of food. {%—Bhojana-vyaya, as,%} m.
expense for food. {%—Bhojanādhikāra (˚na-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. superintendence over food or provisions, the
office of a master or overseer of the kitchen, commis-
sariat, stewardship, charge of provender.
<LEND>

<L>35844<pc>0723-b<k1>BojanIya<k2>BojanIya
{%Bhojanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten or enjoyed,
eatable, edible; (fr. the Caus.), to be fed, to be
made to eat or enjoy; ({%am%}), n. food.
<LEND>

<L>35845<pc>0723-b<k1>Bojayitavya<k2>Bojayitavya
{%Bhojayitavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), to be
made to eat, to be fed or nourished.
<LEND>

<L>35846<pc>0723-b<k1>Bojayitf<k2>Bojayitf
{%Bhojayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (fr. the Caus), causing to
enjoy or eat, feeding; one who makes another enjoy
or eat; a promoter of enjoyment or amusement.
<LEND>

<L>35847<pc>0723-b<k1>BojayitvA<k2>BojayitvA
{%Bhojayitvā,%}¦ ind. having caused to eat, having fed.
<LEND>

<L>35848<pc>0723-b<k1>Bojas<k2>Bojas
{%Bhojas,%}¦ Ved., in {%puru-bh˚, viśva-bh˚;%} [cf. {%bho-%}
{%jase%} under rt. 3. {%bhuj,%} p. 713, col. 2.]
<LEND>

<L>35849<pc>0723-b<k1>Bojika<k2>Bojika
{%Bhojika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>35850<pc>0723-b<k1>Bojin<k2>Bojin
{%Bhojin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ enjoying, eating; using, pos-
sessing, &c. (at the end of comps., cf. {%a-śrāddha-%}
{%bh˚, gṛha-bh˚, bhujaṅga-bh˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>35851<pc>0723-b<k1>Bojya<k2>Bojya
{%Bhojya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be enjoyed or eaten,
eatable, palatable [cf. {%prīti-bh˚%}]; to be enjoyed
carnally; to be used; to be suffered or experienced;
(fr. the Caus.), to be made to eat, to be fed or
nourished; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a
princess of the Bhojas [cf. {%bhojā%}]; ({%am%}), n. anything
to be enjoyed or eaten, food, ({%ku-bhojya,%} bad food,
indifferent viands); a dainty; a feast, a store of
provisions, eatables; enjoyment, advantage, profit.
{%—Bhojya-kāla, as,%} m. eating-time, dinner-time,
meal-time. {%—Bhojya-tā,%} f. or {%bhojya-tva, am,%} n.
the condition of being eaten, the state of being food;
{%bhojyatāṃ yā,%} to become food. {%—Bhojya-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} consisting of food. {%—Bhojya-sambhava,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having its origin in food,’ chyle, chyme, the
primary juice of the body [cf. {%rasa%}]. {%—Bhojyoṣṇa%}
{%(˚ya-uṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} too hot to be eaten.
<LEND>

<L>35852<pc>0723-b<k1>Bowa<k2>Bowa
{#Bowa#}¦ {%bhoṭa%} or {%bhota, as,%} m., N. of a country,
Bhoṭa (said to be the same as Tibet; cf. {%mahā-bh˚%}).
[Page0723-c+ 73]
{%—Bhoṭa-deśa, as,%} m. the country of Bhoṭa. {%—Bho-%}
{%ṭāṅga (˚ṭa-aṅ˚), as,%} m., N. of a country, Bhootan.
{%—Bhoṭānta (˚ṭa-an˚), as,%} m., N. of a country
[cf. {%bhoṭāṅga%}].
<LEND>

<L>35853<pc>0723-c<k1>BowIya<k2>BowIya
{%Bhoṭīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to Tibet, Tibetan.
{%—Bhoṭīya-kośī,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>35854<pc>0723-c<k1>BOwwa<k2>BOwwa
{%Bhauṭṭa, as,%}¦ m. a Tibetan.
<LEND>

<L>35855<pc>0723-c<k1>BomIrA<k2>BomIrA
{#BomIrA#}¦ {%bhomīrā,%} f. coral.
<LEND>

<L>35856<pc>0723-c<k1>BolAnATa<k2>BolAnATa
{#BolAnATa#}¦ {%bholānātha (?), as,%} m. an epithet
of Śiva; N. of a commentator on the Mugdha-
bodha.
<LEND>

<L>35857<pc>0723-c<k1>Boli<k2>Boli
{#Boli#}¦ {%bholi, is,%} m. a camel.
<LEND>

<L>35858<pc>0723-c<k1>Bos<k2>Bos
{#Bos#}¦ {%bhos%} (contracted fr. {%bhavas%} for {%bha-%}
{%van,%} Sir! voc. sing. of 2. {%bhavat,%} q. v.; cf. {%bhagos%}
under {%bhaga-vat,%} p. 696, col. 1), an interjection or
vocative particle commonly used in addressing another
person and generally translateable by ‘O!’ ‘Ho!’
‘there!’ ‘Hallo!’ ‘Ah!’ ‘Alas!’ (before vowels and
soft consonants {%bhos,%} like {%bhagos%} and {%aghos,%} is said
to drop the final {%s,%} but before vowels {%bhoy%} is also
allowed, see Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 17, 18, 20, 22, Vopa-
deva II. 49, 50; before hard consonants, {%bhos%} or
{%bhoḥ%} is the form required, and {%bhoḥ%} before a
pause, but in the later literature {%bho%} is sometimes
used where {%bhos%} or {%bhoḥ%} would be more correct;
in Kathā-sarit-sāgara XVIII. 211, {%bhor iti%} is against
the rule; in Hari-vaṃśa 8301 {%bhos%} occurs in the middle
of a sentence, and in Bhāgavata-Purāṇa III. 23, 2,
redundantly at the end; it is sometimes repeated,
e. g. {%bho bho rājan%} in Śakuntalā, p. 12; according
to lexicographers it may be used as an interjection
of sorrow and of interrogation.)
<LEND>

<L>35859<pc>0723-c<k1>Bohara<k2>Bohara
{#Bohara#}¦ {%bhohara, as,%} m., N. of a poet men-
tioned in the Śārṅga-dhara-paddhati.
<LEND>

<L>35860<pc>0723-c<k1>BOgaka<k2>BOgaka
{#BOgaka#}¦ {%bhaugaka, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Bhogaka.
<LEND>

<L>35861<pc>0723-c<k1>BOjakawa<k2>BOjakawa
{#BOjakawa#}¦ {%bhaujakaṭa, as, ī, am,%} relating to
or coming from Bhoja-kaṭa.
<LEND>

<L>35862<pc>0723-c<k1>BOjaNga<k2>BOjaNga
{#BOjaNga#}¦ {%bhaujaṅga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bhujaṅ-ga%}),
relating to a snake, snake-like, snaky, serpent-like,
serpentine; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%bha,%} the serpent asterism,
the Nakṣatra Āśleṣā.
<LEND>

<L>35863<pc>0723-c<k1>BOji<k2>BOji
{#BOji#}¦ {%bhauji, is,%} m. a patronymic from
Bhoja.
<LEND>

<L>35864<pc>0723-c<k1>BOjIya<k2>BOjIya
{%Bhaujīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or coming from
Bhauji.
<LEND>

<L>35865<pc>0723-c<k1>BOjya<k2>BOjya
{%Bhaujya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the rank of a king with
the title of Bhoja.
<LEND>

<L>35866<pc>0723-c<k1>BOwwa<k2>BOwwa
{#BOwwa#}¦ {%bhauṭṭa.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>35867<pc>0723-c<k1>BOta<k2>BOta
{#BOta#}¦ {%bhauta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bhūta%}), relating
to existing beings; relating to or possessed by evil
spirits, demoniacal, crazy, mad, silly; formed of the
elements, elemental, material; ({%as%}), m. an attendant
upon idols, a worshipper of demons and spirits, {%=%}
{%devala%} or {%devalaka,%} q. v.; ({%ī%}), f. ‘time of ghosts
or spirits,’ night; ({%am%}), n. {%= bhūtānāṃ samūha,%}
a collection or assemblage of Bhūtas.
<LEND>

<L>35868<pc>0723-c<k1>BOtaka<k2>BOtaka
{%Bhautaka, as, ī, am, = bhauta,%}¦ possessed by evil
spirits.
<LEND>

<L>35869<pc>0723-c<k1>BOtika<k2>BOtika
{%Bhautika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhūta%}), coming from
or relating to existing beings, belonging to created
beings, ({%bhautika sarga,%} the creation of beings,
the corporeal creation); relating or pertaining to
evil spirits; possessed by evil spirits; formed of the
elements, produced by the coarse or visible elements,
relating to the elements, elemental, existent, material;
({%as%}), m. Śiva (fr. {%bhūti,%} ashes ?); a sort of monk;
({%am%}), n. anything elemental or material; a pearl
(probably for {%mauktika%}). {%—Bhautika-maṭha, as,%}
m. a college of monks, monastery, convent. {%—Bhau-%}
{%tika-vidyā,%} f. ‘spirit-science,’ sorcery, witchcraft.
<LEND>

<L>35870<pc>0723-c<k1>BOtya<k2>BOtya
{%Bhautya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhūti%}), N. of a Manu; ({%as,%}
{%tī, am),%} relating to the preceding Manu.
<LEND>
[Page0724-a+ 75]

<L>35871<pc>0724-a<k1>BOpAla<k2>BOpAla
{#BOpAla#}¦ {%bhaupāla, as,%} m. (fr. {%bhū-pāla%}),
the son of a king, a prince.
<LEND>

<L>35872<pc>0724-a<k1>BOma<k2>BOma
{#BOma#}¦ {%bhauma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bhūmi%}), be-
longing or relating to the earth, dedicated to the
earth; existing on or in the earth, produced or com-
ing from the earth or ground, earthly, terrestrial,
terrene; consisting or made of earth, earthy; com-
ing from the land (as revenue &c.); relating to the
planet Mars or to his day, falling on Tuesday, (in
this sense fr. {%bhauma,%} the planet Mars); ({%as%}), m.
water; light; ambergris {%(= ambara);%} a red flower-
ing Punar-navā; a metronymic of several persons;
N. of a kind of supernatural being or spirit haunting
the earth; of Atṛ; of the Daitya Naraka; of the
planet Mars, ({%vāro bhaumasya,%} Tuesday); an epi-
thet of the twenty-seventh Muhūrta; ({%ī%}), f. ‘produced
from the earth,’ an epithet of Sītā; ({%am%}), n. any-
thing coming from the earth, dust, &c.; a particular
mode of sitting practised by Yogins; {%= bhūmi,%} ground,
floor, ceiling, (at the end of an adj. comp.) {%—Bhau-%}
{%ma-cāra, as,%} m. ‘the course of the planet Mars,’
N. of the sixth chapter of Bhaṭṭotpala's commentary
on Varāha-mihira's Bṛhat-saṃhitā. {%—Bhauma-dar-%}
{%śana-cāra, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the Mīna-
rāja-jātaka ascribed to Yavaneśvara. {%—Bhauma-%}
{%deva-lipi, is,%} f., N. of a kind of writing. {%—Bhau-%}
{%ma-ratna, am,%} n. coral. {%—Bhauma-vāra, as,%} m.
‘Mars-day,’ Tuesday.
<LEND>

<L>35873<pc>0724-a<k1>BOmaka<k2>BOmaka
{%Bhaumaka, as,%}¦ m. any animal living in the earth.
<LEND>

<L>35874<pc>0724-a<k1>BOmana<k2>BOmana
{%Bhaumana, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of Viśva-karman,
(for {%bhauvana,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>35875<pc>0724-a<k1>BOmika<k2>BOmika
{%Bhaumika, as, ī, am,%}¦ being or existing on the
earth, earthly, earthy, terrestrial, terrene, belonging
to any particular piece of ground.
<LEND>

<L>35876<pc>0724-a<k1>BOmya<k2>BOmya
{%Bhaumya = bhaumika%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>35877<pc>0724-a<k1>BOra<k2>BOra
{#BOra#}¦ {%bhaura, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Bhūri.
<LEND>

<L>35878<pc>0724-a<k1>BOrika<k2>BOrika
{%Bhaurika, as,%}¦ m. the superintendent of gold in a
royal treasury, a treasurer, (fr. {%bhūri,%} gold.)
<LEND>

<L>35879<pc>0724-a<k1>BOrikAyaRi<k2>BOrikAyaRi
{#BOrikAyaRi#}¦ {%bhaurikāyaṇi, is,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Bhuriki below.
<LEND>

<L>35880<pc>0724-a<k1>BOriki<k2>BOriki
{%Bhauriki, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic. {%—Bhauriki-vi-%}
{%dha, as, ā, am,%} see Pāṇ. IV. 2, 54.
<LEND>

<L>35881<pc>0724-a<k1>BOlikAyani<k2>BOlikAyani
{#BOlikAyani#}¦ {%bhaulikāyani, is,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Bhauliki below.
<LEND>

<L>35882<pc>0724-a<k1>BOliki<k2>BOliki
{%Bhauliki, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>35883<pc>0724-a<k1>BOliNgi<k2>BOliNgi
{#BOliNgi#}¦ {%bhauliṅgi, is,%} m. (fr. {%bhū-liṅga%}),
a king of Bhū-liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>35884<pc>0724-a<k1>BOvana<k2>BOvana
{#BOvana#}¦ {%bhauvana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%bhuvana%}),
belonging to the world; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viśva-
karman [cf. {%bhaumana%}]; a son of Manthu.
<LEND>

<L>35885<pc>0724-a<k1>BOvanAyana<k2>BOvanAyana
{%Bhauvanāyana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%bhuvana%} or {%bhau-%}
{%vana%}), Ved. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>35886<pc>0724-a<k1>BOvAdika<k2>BOvAdika
{#BOvAdika#}¦ {%bhauvādika, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. 1.
{%bhū + ādi%}), belonging to that class of roots which
begins with {%bhū,%} i. e. belonging to the first class.
<LEND>

<L>35887<pc>0724-a<k1>BOvAyana<k2>BOvAyana
{#BOvAyana#}¦ {%bhauvāyana, as,%} m. (fr. {%bhuva%}),
Ved. a patronymic; N. of Kapi-vana.
<LEND>

<L>35888<pc>0724-a<k1>Byas<k2>Byas
{#Byas#}¦ {%bhyas,%} cl. 1. A. {%bhyasate, babhyase,%}
{%bhyasitum,%} Ved. to fear, be afraid, trem-
ble [cf. rt. 1. {%bhī%}]: Caus. {%bhyāsayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%abibhyasat,%} to cause to fear, frighten: Desid.
{%bibhyasiṣate:%} Intens. {%bābhyasyate, bābhyasti.%}
<LEND>

<L>35889<pc>0724-a<k1>BraMS<k2>BraMS
{#BraMS#}¦ {%bhraṃś%} or {%bhraś%} (sometimes written
{%bhraṃs;%} cf. rt. {%bhṛś%}), cl. 4. P. {%bhraś-%}
{%yati%} (ep. also {%bhraśyate,%} &c.), cl. 1. A. {%bhraṃśate,%}
{%babhraṃśa, babhraṃśe, bhraṃśiṣyati, -te, abhra-%}
{%śat, abhraṃśiṣṭa, bhraṃśitum,%} Indec. part. {%bhraṃ-%}
{%śituā%} or {%bhraṣṭvā,%} to fall, tumble, drop or fall
down, fall out; to decline, decrease, decay, fade,
disappear, vanish, to be ruined or lost; to fall from,
stray from, be separated from, be deprived of, lose
(with abl.); to run away, flee from (with abl.):
Caus. {%bhraṃśayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ababhraṃśat,%} to
cause to fall, throw or cast down, precipitate; to
[Page0724-b+ 75]
ruin, overturn, expel; to cause to be lost, cause to
disappear or vanish; to cause to be separated from,
deprive of (with acc. of person and abl. of thing):
Desid. {%bibhraṃśiṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%bābhraśyate,%}
{%bābhraṣṭi, banībhraśyate, banībhraṃśiti, banī-%}
{%bhraṃṣṭi;%} [cf. Angl. Sax. <nsi>hreosan, resosan,</nsi> ‘to
fall;’ <nsi>arisan,</nsi> ‘to rise:’ Goth. <nsi>ur-risan, us-hris-</nsi>
<nsi>jan, af-hrisjan,</nsi> ‘to cast off.’]
<LEND>

<L>35890<pc>0724-b<k1>BraMSa<k2>BraMSa
{%Bhraṃśa, as,%}¦ m. falling, falling off, a fall; de-
clining, decline, decrease; decay, overthrow, destruc-
tion, ruin (e. g. {%deśa-bh˚,%} ruin of a country); dis-
appearance; running away; separating from, aban-
doning, deserting; losing, loss [cf. {%jāti-bh˚%}]; de-
viating or straying from (propriety &c.).
<LEND>

<L>35891<pc>0724-b<k1>BraMSaTu<k2>BraMSaTu
{%Bhraṃśathu, us,%}¦ m. {%= pra-bhraṃśathu,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35892<pc>0724-b<k1>BraMSana<k2>BraMSana
{%Bhraṃśana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the simple rt. and
Caus.), causing to fall, precipitating, throwing down;
({%am%}), n. the act of causing to fall, precipitating;
falling from, being deprived of, losing (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>35893<pc>0724-b<k1>BraMSita<k2>BraMSita
{%Bhraṃśita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), made to
fall, thrown down.
<LEND>

<L>35894<pc>0724-b<k1>BraMSin<k2>BraMSin
{%Bhraṃśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling, tumbling, falling
down, falling out, falling from or off, coming to
ruin, decaying; causing to fall, ruining, annihilating;
[cf. {%svārtha-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35895<pc>0724-b<k1>Brazwa<k2>Brazwa
{%Bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen, dropped, fallen
down, fallen out or off; declined, decayed, ruined,
disappeared, lost; fallen from, strayed from (with abl.,
e. g. {%sārthād bhraṣṭa uṣṭraḥ,%} a camel strayed
from a caravan); separated from, deprived of (with
abl.); depraved, vicious, a backslider; ({%ā%}), f. a fallen
or unchaste woman. {%—Bhraṣṭa-kriya, as, ā, am,%}
one who has discontinued or omitted prescribed acts.
{%—Bhraṣṭa-guda, as, ā, am,%} suffering from pro-
lapsus ani. {%—Bhraṣṭa-nidra, as, ā, am,%} deprived
of sleep. {%—Bhraṣṭa-yoga, as, ā, am,%} one who
has fallen from devotion, a backslider. {%—Bhraṣṭa-%}
{%rājya, as, ā, am,%} fallen from or deprived of a king-
dom. {%—Bhraṣṭādhikāra (˚ṭa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
fallen from office, deprived of office. {%—Bhraṣṭā-%}
{%dhikāra-tva, am,%} n. loss of office.
<LEND>

<L>35896<pc>0724-b<k1>Brazwaka<k2>Brazwaka
{%Bhraṣṭaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>35897<pc>0724-b<k1>BrASya<k2>BrASya
{%Bhrāśya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. Caus. of rt. {%bhraś%} or fr. rt.
{%bhrāś ?%}), Ved. to be made to fall, to be struck down;
(according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda X. 116, 5, {%bhrā-%}
{%śyāni = āyudhāni,%} ‘weapons,’ and connected with
rt. {%bhrāś,%} to shine.)
<LEND>

<L>35898<pc>0724-b<k1>BraMs<k2>BraMs
{#BraMs#}¦ {%bhraṃs.%} See rt. {%bhraṃś,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35899<pc>0724-b<k1>BrakuMSa<k2>BrakuMSa
{#BrakuMSa#}¦ {%bhrakuṃśa%} or {%bhrakuṃsa, as,%} m. an
actor in female apparel; [cf. {%bhṛkuṃśa, bhrukuṃśa,%}
{%bhrūkuṃśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35900<pc>0724-b<k1>Brakuwi<k2>Brakuwi
{#Brakuwi#}¦ {%bhra-kuṭi%} or {%bhra-kuṭī = bhrū-kuṭi,%}
{%is,%} f. a contraction of the eyebrows, frown. {%—Bhra-%}
{%kuṭi-mukha, am,%} n. a face with contracted eyebrows,
frowning face, (also written {%bhṛkuṭī-mukha.%})
<LEND>

<L>35901<pc>0724-b<k1>Brakz<k2>Brakz
{#Brakz#}¦ {%bhrakṣ.%} See rt. {%bhṛkṣ,%} p. 720.
<LEND>

<L>35902<pc>0724-b<k1>Braj<k2>Braj<h>1
{#Braj#} 1¦. {%bhraj%} in {%giri-bhraj,%} q. v.; (the word
{%bhraj%} is thought to be fr. a lost rt. {%bhraj%} = Lat.
<nsi>frango.</nsi>)
<LEND>

<L>35903<pc>0724-b<k1>Braj<k2>Braj<h>2
{#Braj#} 2¦. {%bhraj,%} f., Ved. (perhaps) stiffness;
[cf. {%mṛta-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35904<pc>0724-b<k1>Brajj<k2>Brajj<h>1
{#Brajj#} 1¦. {%bhrajj%} (in the Dhātu-pāṭha writ-
ten {%bhrasj;%} cf. rt. {%bhṛj%}), cl. 6. P. A.
{%bhṛjjati, -te%} (for {%bharjate,%} see rt. {%bhṛj%}), {%babhrajja,%}
{%babharjja, babhrajje, babharjje, bhraṣṭā, bhar-%}
{%ṣṭā, bhrakṣyati, -te, bharkṣyati, -te, abhrā-%}
{%kṣīt, abhārkṣīt, abhraṣṭa, abharṣṭa, bhraṣ-%}
{%ṭum, bharṣṭum,%} to fry, broil, grill, parch, scorch,
roast (especially grain): Pass. {%bhṛjjyate:%} Caus.
{%bhrajjayati, bharjjayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aba-%}
{%bhrajjat,%} to fry, roast: Desid. {%bibhrakṣati,%}
{%-te, bibharkṣati, -te, bibhrajjiṣati, -te%} [cf. {%bi-%}
{%bhrakṣu, bibhrajjiṣu%}]; Intens. {%barībhṛjjyate,%}
{%bābhraṣṭi%} or {%bābharṣṭi (?);%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">φρῡ́γ-ω,</lang>
[Page0724-c+ 79]
<lang n="greek">φρύγ-ανο-ν, φρύγ-ε-τρο-ν, φρυκ-τό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>frīg-0,</nsi>
<nsi>frictus, frixus;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>briuwan</nsi> = Angl. Sax.
<nsi>briwan</nsi> = Old Iceland. <nsi>brugga</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>brew;</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>bruighim,</nsi> ‘I boil, seeth.’]
<LEND>

<L>35905<pc>0724-c<k1>Bfzwa<k2>Bfzwa
{%Bhṛṣṭa, bhṛṣṭi,%}¦ &c. See p. 721, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35906<pc>0724-c<k1>Brajj<k2>Brajj<h>2
2. {%bhrajj, bhraṭ, ṭ, ṭ%}¦ (or {%bhṛṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} if fr.
{%bhṛjj,%} q. v.), frying, roasting, (at the end of a
comp., e. g. {%dhānā-bh˚,%} roasting or parching grain,
see Pāṇ. VIII. 2, 36.)
<LEND>

<L>35907<pc>0724-c<k1>Brajjana<k2>Brajjana
{%Bhrajjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of frying, parching,
roasting; [cf. {%bhṛjjana, bharjana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35908<pc>0724-c<k1>Brazwavya<k2>Brazwavya
{%Bhraṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be fried, to be
parched or roasted.
<LEND>

<L>35909<pc>0724-c<k1>Brazwra<k2>Brazwra
{%Bhraṣṭra, am,%}¦ n. a frying-pan, gridiron.
<LEND>

<L>35910<pc>0724-c<k1>BrAzwra<k2>BrAzwra
{%Bhrāṣṭra, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a frying-pan; ({%as%}),
m. light, ether (in this sense probably to be con-
nected with rt. {%bhrāś%}); ({%as, ī, am%}), fried or cooked
in a frying-pan. {%—Bhrāṣṭra-ja, as, ā, am,%} pro-
duced or cooked in a frying-pan; ({%ā%}), f. a pan-cake
made of rice-flour. {%—Bhrāṣṭram-indha, as, ā, am,%}
heating the frying-pan, one who fries or cooks.
{%—Bhrāṣṭra-vratin, ī,%} m. N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>35911<pc>0724-c<k1>BrAzwraka<k2>BrAzwraka
{%Bhrāṣṭraka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a frying-pan.
<LEND>

<L>35912<pc>0724-c<k1>BrAzwraki<k2>BrAzwraki
{%Bhrāṣṭraki, is,%}¦ m., N. of a man, (also read
{%bhrāṣṭra-kṛt.%})
<LEND>

<L>35913<pc>0724-c<k1>BraR<k2>BraR
{#BraR#}¦ {%bhraṇ%} [cf. rts. {%bhram, raṇ%}], cl. 1.
P. {%bhraṇati, babhrāṇa, bhraṇitum,%} to
sound, utter a sound.
<LEND>

<L>35914<pc>0724-c<k1>BraBaNga<k2>BraBaNga
{#BraBaNga#}¦ {%bhra-bhaṅga, as,%} m. {%= bhrū-bhaṅga%}
under {%bhrū,%} p. 726, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35915<pc>0724-c<k1>Bram<k2>Bram
{#Bram#}¦ {%bhram,%} cl. 1. 4. P. (ep. also A.)
{%bhramati (-te), bhrāmyati%} ({%-te;%} accord-
ing to Pāṇ. III. 1, 70, a form {%bhrāmati%} is admis-
sible; the form {%bhramyati%} is doubtful), {%babhrāma%}
(2nd sing. {%babhramitha%} or {%bhremitha,%} 3rd pl.
{%babhramus%} or {%bhremus%}), {%bhramiṣyati, abhra-%}
{%mīt, bhramitum%} or {%bhrāntum,%} (perhaps orginally)
to fly about humming (as insects); to roam or
wander about, rove or ramble about, go or move
about, ({%bhikṣām bhram,%} to go about begging);
to stroll, perambulate; to circulate, revolve, turn or
whirl round, move in a circle or orbit, move round
(as the stars &c.); to totter, stagger about, waver;
to go astray, stray, deviate (from rectitude), err, be
in error or mistake, be perplexed, be foolish or
ignorant; to move to and fro, move unsteadily,
flicker, flutter, vibrate, quiver (as the tongue, eyes,
flames, &c.); to surround; to roam or wander
through, go over (with acc., e. g. {%deśam bhram,%} to
wander through a country): Caus. {%bhramayati,%}
{%bhrāmayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%abibhramat,%} to cause
or make to wander, make to rove or roam; to
cause to turn round or revolve; to whirl round,
swing; to cause to roll or roll along or through;
to cause to err, delude, perplex, embarrass, con-
fuse, seduce; to cause to move to and fro, wave,
brandish, agitate, vibrate: Pass. of Caus. {%bhrām-%}
{%yate,%} to be made to wander or whirl, caused to err,
made to go astray: Desid. {%bibhramiṣati:%} Intens.
{%bambhramyate, bambhramīti, bambhrānti,%} to
roam about repeatedly, move frequently to and fro,
wander through; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">βρέμ-ω, ὑψι-βρεμ-έ-της,</lang>
<lang n="greek">βρόμ-ο-ς, βρον-τή, βαβράζω, πεμφρηδών, φριμάσσομαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φόρμιγξ, ῥέμβω;</lang>Lat. <nsi>frem-o, frem-or,</nsi>
<nsi>frem-itu-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>brem-an, bremo, briosa;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>bremman;</nsi> Old Iceland. <nsi>brim,</nsi> ‘surf.’]
<LEND>

<L>35916<pc>0724-c<k1>bamBramyamARa<k2>bamBramyamARa
{%Bambhramyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ roaming or wan-
dering about repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>35917<pc>0724-c<k1>Brama<k2>Brama
{%Bhrama, as,%}¦ m. roving or roaming about, wan-
dering about; moving or going round, turning
round, whirling, revolving, moving or going to and
fro; straying, erring; a flickering flame (Ved.);
a circular motion, whirl; a whirlpool, eddy; a
potter's wheel; a lathe; a grindstone; giddiness,
dizziness; wandering of mind; confusion, perplexity,
error, mistake, aberration, misconception, misappre-
hension, delusion [cf. {%sthāṇu-bh˚%}]; a spring, foun-
tain, watercourse; ({%āt%}), ind. by an error or mistake.
{%—Bhrama-tva, am,%} n. whirling found, the being
[Page0725-a+ 81]
in error or mistake, erroneousness. {%—Bhramāsakta%}
{%(˚ma-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘occupied in grinding,’ a knife-
grinder, sword-cleaner, armourer.
<LEND>

<L>35918<pc>0725-a<k1>BramaRa<k2>BramaRa
{%Bhramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the simple rt. or Caus.),
the act of roaming, wandering about, travelling, tour-
ing, a tour; turning round, whirling; revolution,
the orbit (of a planet &c.); wavering, staggering,
tottering, shaking about, unsteadiness, deviation
(from rectitude); causing to go round or move
about; erring, falling into error; giddiness, dizzi-
ness; {%(ī),%} f. a sort of game (played by lovers, pro-
bably consisting in circular movements or waltzes);
a leech; N. of one of five Dhāraṇās or mental con-
ceptions of the elements (viz. that of the wind; the
others being {%stambhinī,%} earth; {%dhāriṇī,%} water; {%da-%}
{%hanī,%} fire; and {%śoṣiṇī,%} ether). {%—Bhramaṇa-vila-%}
{%sita,%} N. of a metre. {%—Bhramaṇārthe (˚ṇa-ar˚),%}
ind. for the sake of travelling.
<LEND>

<L>35919<pc>0725-a<k1>BramaRIya<k2>BramaRIya
{%Bhramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be roamed about, to
be wandered through.
<LEND>

<L>35920<pc>0725-a<k1>Bramat<k2>Bramat
{%Bhramat, an, antī, at,%}¦ roaming, roving, prowl-
ing, wandering, sauntering about, turning round,
whirling, shaking, &c. {%—Bhramat-kuṭī,%} f. a sort of
umbrella, a concave mat carried on the head; [cf.
{%jaṅgama-kuṭī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35921<pc>0725-a<k1>BramamARa<k2>BramamARa
{%Bhramamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wandering about,
whirling round; being in error.
<LEND>

<L>35922<pc>0725-a<k1>Bramara<k2>Bramara
{%Bhramara, as,%}¦ m. a large black bee, a kind of
humble bee, any bee; a lover, gallant, libertine; a
young man; a potter's wheel; a particular position
of the hand; N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f. {%= bhramara-%}
{%cchallī%} below; ({%ī%}), f. a bee; the plant Jatukā,
q. v.; the plant Putra-dātrī, q. v.; ({%am%}), n. giddi-
ness, vertigo, epilepsy. {%—Bhramara-karaṇḍaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a small box containing bees (used by thieves
to extinguish a candle-light by letting the bees
escape), a dark lantern (?). {%—Bhramara-kīṭa, as,%}
m. a species of wasp that builds its nest in the
corners of walls, doors, &c., Vespa Solitaria. {%—Bhra-%}
{%mara-kuṇḍa,%} N. of a sacred bathing-place on the
mountain Nīla (mentioned in Raghu-nātha's Rasika-
ramaṇa). {%—Bhramara-cchallī,%} f. a species of creeper
{%(= bhṛṅga-mūlikā, bhṛṅgāhvā, bhramarā).%}
{%—Bhramara-pada, am,%} n. ‘bee-foot,’ a kind of
metre, four times ¯˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘¯¯¯.
{%—Bhramara-priya, as,%} m. ‘dear to bees,’ a par-
ticular sort of Kadamba plant {%(= dhārā-kadamba).%}
{%—Bhramara-bādhā,%} f. annoyance caused by a bee,
molestation by a bee. {%—Bhramara-maṇḍala, am,%}
n. a circle or swarm of bees. {%—Bhramara-mārī,%} f.
‘bee-killing,’ a particular plant or flower (growing
in Malwa, {%= bhṛṅga-mārī, bhramarāri%}). {%—Bhra-%}
{%mara-vilasita, as, ā, am,%} (a creeper, lotus, &c.)
about which bees hover or sport; ({%am%}), n. the
hovering or sporting of bees; {%(ā, am),%} f. n. a species
of metre, four times ¯¯¯¯, ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯. {%—Bhra-%}
{%marātithi (˚ra-at˚), is,%} m. ‘bee-guest,’ the plant
Michelia Champaka. {%—Bhramarānanda (˚ra-ān˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘bee-joy,’ N. of several plants, Mimusops
Elengi, Gærtnera Racemosa ({%= atimuktaka%}), the
red-flowering globe amaranth {%(= raktāmlāna).%}
{%—Bhramarāmbā-kṣetra (˚ra-am˚), am,%} n., N.
of a district sacred to Durgā; [cf. {%bhrāmarī, ambā.%}]
{%—Bhramarāri (˚ra-ari), is,%} m. ‘bee-enemy’ ({%=%}
{%bhramara-mārī,%} q. v.). {%—Bhramarālaka (˚ra-%}
{%al˚), as,%} m. ‘bee-curl,’ a curl on the forehead.
{%—Bhramarāvalī (˚ra-āv˚),%} f. ‘bee-line,’ N. of a
species of the Ati-śakkarī metre. {%—Bhramarāṣ-%}
{%ṭaka (˚ra-aṣ˚), am,%} n. ‘eight verses on the bee,’
N. of a collection of eight verses. {%—Bhramareṣṭa%}
{%(˚ra-iṣ˚), as,%} m. ‘loved by bees,’ a sort of Big-
nonia; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Clerodendrum Siphonanthus
({%= bhūmi-jambū,%} q. v.). {%—Bhramarotsavā (˚ra-%}
{%ut˚),%} f. ‘bee-delight,’ the plant Gærtnera Racemosa
({%= mādhavī%}).
<LEND>

<L>35923<pc>0725-a<k1>Bramaraka<k2>Bramaraka
{%Bhramaraka, as,%}¦ m. a bee; a whirlpool; {%(as,%}
{%am),%} m. n. a lock of hair or curl hanging down on
the forehead; a humming-top; a ball for playing
with; ({%ikā%}), f. the act of wandering or straying in
all directions. {%—Bhramarikā-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. a wan-
dering glance (?).
<LEND>
[Page0725-b+ 81]

<L>35924<pc>0725-b<k1>BramAya<k2>BramAya
{%Bhramāya%}¦ (fr. {%bhramat,%} see Gaṇa Bhṛśādi to
Pāṇ. III. 1, 12), Nom. A. {%bhramāyate,%} &c., (pro-
bably) to begin turning round or revolving; to roam
about, become a vagabond.
<LEND>

<L>35925<pc>0725-b<k1>Brami<k2>Brami
{%Bhrami, is%}¦ (according to some also {%bhramī%}), f.
whirling or turning round, turning about, going
round, circulating, revolving [cf. {%saṃvatsara-bh˚%}];
a potter's wheel, a turner's lathe; a whirlpool; a
whirlwind; any circular arrangement of troops, a cir-
cle formed by troops; an error, a mistake; N. of a
daughter of Śiśu-māra and wife of Dhruva.
<LEND>

<L>35926<pc>0725-b<k1>Bramita<k2>Bramita
{%Bhramita, as, ā, am,%}¦ whirled round, made to
go round, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35927<pc>0725-b<k1>Bramin<k2>Bramin
{%Bhramin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ roaming about, going round
or about, whirling round, revolving, making a circuit,
turning round (as the wind), erratic.
<LEND>

<L>35928<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAnta<k2>BrAnta
{%Bhrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ roamed, wandered (some-
times impersonally, e. g. {%tair bhrāntam,%} it has
been wandered by them; and even with acc., e. g.
{%deśam bhrāntam,%} it has been wandered through a
country); whirled round, turned round, revolved,
rolled; confused, perplexed, bewildered, gone astray,
mistaken, in error, blundering; roaming or wander-
ing about, turning round, whirling, rolling, stagger-
ing, flying or careering round and round (as a bird),
moving to and fro; ({%as%}), m. an elephant in rut; a
species of thorn-apple, {%= rāja-dhustūraka; (am),%}
n. roaming, wandering about, moving to and fro; a
particular mode of fighting; error, mistake, delusion,
blunder. {%—Bhrānta-citta, as, ā, am,%} confused or
perplexed in mind. {%—Bhrānta-buddhi, is, is, i,%}
confused in intellect, perplexed in mind, puzzled.
<LEND>

<L>35929<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAnti<k2>BrAnti
{%Bhrānti, is,%}¦ f. the act or state of wandering about,
roaming, going round, flying about, turning round,
revolution, whirling, rolling, a whirl or rapid rotary
motion; confusion, perplexity, delirium [cf. {%mati-%}
{%bh˚%}]; error, going astray, mistake, delusion, false
idea or supposition, wrong notion (e. g. {%padma-%}
{%bhrāntyā,%} under the false idea of [its being] a lotus;
{%bhrāhmaṇa-bhrānti,%} the error of supposing [those
works to be] Brāhmaṇas); unsteadiness; doubt, un-
certainty. {%—Bhrānti-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing error
or confusion. {%—Bhrānti-nāśana, as,%} m. ‘destroying
error,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Bhrānti-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} wandering or roaming about, whirling; erring,
mistaken, being under a delusion, labouring under
an error; entertaining a false notion; a particular
figure of rhetoric (describing an error). {%—Bhrānti-%}
{%hara, as, ā, am,%} taking away delusion, removing
error; ({%as%}), m. a counsellor, minister.
<LEND>

<L>35930<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAntvA<k2>BrAntvA
{%Bhrāntvā,%}¦ ind. having wandered about, having
roamed through; having whirled.
<LEND>

<L>35931<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAma<k2>BrAma
{%Bhrāma, as,%}¦ m. roaming about, wandering, un-
steadiness, delusion, error, mistake.
<LEND>

<L>35932<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAmaka<k2>BrAmaka
{%Bhrāmaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus. or fr.
{%bhrama%}), causing to whirl; causing error or mis-
take, bewildering, perplexing, puzzling, deceitful,
deceptive, false; ({%as%}), m. a sort of loadstone or
magnet (so called from its causing iron to turn
round); sun-flower, heliotrope; a deceiver, cheat,
rogue; a jackal; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a particular plant
(commonly called Laghu-dhāyaṭī).
<LEND>

<L>35933<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAmaRa<k2>BrAmaRa
{%Bhrāmaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to turn
round, swinging or turning round; ({%ī%}), f. ‘the be-
wilderer,’ N. of a female demon.
<LEND>

<L>35934<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAmayat<k2>BrAmayat
{%Bhrāmayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to turn round,
whirling round, bewildering.
<LEND>

<L>35935<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAmara<k2>BrAmara
{%Bhrāmara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhramara%}), relating
or belonging to a bee; {%(as, am),%} m. n. a kind of
magnet or loadstone [cf. {%bhrāmaka%}]; ({%am%}), n.
whirling round; dancing round; vertigo, giddiness,
epilepsy; honey; a village; a kind of coitus; {%(ī),%}
f. an epithet of Durgā or Pārvatī (from her having
assumed the form of a bee to contend with Mahi-
ṣāsura ?); a Yoginī or female attendant on Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>35936<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAmarin<k2>BrAmarin
{%Bhrāmarin, ī, iṇī, i%}¦ (fr. {%bhrāmara%}), whirling
round, revolving; affected with vertigo, giddy; hav-
ing epilepsy, epileptic; made of honey.
<LEND>

<L>35937<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAmin<k2>BrAmin
{%Bhrāmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ confused, perplexed.
<LEND>

<L>35938<pc>0725-b<k1>BrAmyat<k2>BrAmyat
{%Bhrāmyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ roaming or rambling
about, strolling about, perambulating; erring.
<LEND>
[Page0725-c+ 73]

<L>35939<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAmyamARa<k2>BrAmyamARa
{%Bhrāmyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being caused to
wander about, being made to whirl round, being
caused to err or go astray.
<LEND>

<L>35940<pc>0725-c<k1>BramAtra<k2>BramAtra
{#BramAtra#}¦ {%bhramātra,%} a particular high num-
ber.
<LEND>

<L>35941<pc>0725-c<k1>BraS<k2>BraS
{#BraS#}¦ {%bhraś.%} See rt. {%bhraṃś,%} p. 724, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35942<pc>0725-c<k1>BraSiman<k2>BraSiman
{#BraSiman#}¦ {%bhraśiman, ā,%} m. (fr. {%bhṛśa%}), po-
tency, mightiness, vehemence, violence, excessive-
ness, strength.
<LEND>

<L>35943<pc>0725-c<k1>BraSizWa<k2>BraSizWa
{#BraSizWa#}¦ {%bhraśiṣṭha, bhraśīyas.%} See under
rt. {%bhṛś,%} p. 721, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35944<pc>0725-c<k1>Brazwa<k2>Brazwa
{#Brazwa#}¦ {%bhraṣṭa, bhraṣṭaka.%} See p. 724,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35945<pc>0725-c<k1>Brazwavya<k2>Brazwavya
{#Brazwavya#}¦ {%bhraṣṭavya, bhraṣṭra.%} See p. 724,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35946<pc>0725-c<k1>Brasj<k2>Brasj
{#Brasj#}¦ {%bhrasj.%} See rt. 1. {%bhrajj,%} p. 724,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35947<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAj<k2>BrAj<h>1
{#BrAj#} 1¦. {%bhrāj%} (connected with rts. {%rāj,%}
{%bhrāś, bhlāś, bhrej, bhṛj%}), cl. 1. A.
{%bhrājate%} (Ved. and ep. also P. {%bhrājati%}), {%babhrāje%}
{%(babhrāja)%} or {%bhreje%} (3rd pl. {%babhrājire%} or {%bhre-%}
{%jire,%} Pāṇ. VI. 4, 125), {%bhrājiṣyate, abhrājiṣṭa%}
(Ved. {%abhrāṭ, abhrāji%}), {%bhrājitum,%} to shine, glitter,
gleam, glow, flash, beam, sparkle: Caus. {%bhrāja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ababhrājat, abibhrajat,%} to
make to shine, illuminate, irradiate: Desid. {%bibhrā-%}
{%jiṣate:%} Intens. {%bābhrājyate, bābhrāṣṭi;%} [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">φλέγ-ω, φλεγ-έ-θ-ω, φλέγ-μα, φλεγ-μονή, φλεγ-υρό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φλύξ:</lang> Lat. <nsi>fulg-e-o, fulg-ur, ful-vu-s, flag-</nsi>
<nsi>ra-re, flam-ma</nsi> for <nsi>flag-ma, flā-men</nsi> for <nsi>flag-men,</nsi>
‘the kindler, i. e. priest:’ Goth. <nsi>bairh-t-s,</nsi> ‘mani-
fest;’ <nsi>bairhtei,</nsi> ‘light:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>bearht, beorht,</nsi>
probably <nsi>blāc, blœc-an, blīc-an:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>beraht, blanch, blich-an, blich, blic, blig:</nsi> Engl.
<nsi>bright:</nsi> Russ. <nsi>blescu:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>blizg-ù,</nsi> ‘I shine:’
Scot. <nsi>breagh,</nsi> ‘shining, beautiful;’ <nsi>breachad, boillsg,</nsi>
‘splendor;’ <nsi>boillsgeach,</nsi> ‘splendid.’]
<LEND>

<L>35948<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAj<k2>BrAj<h>2
2. {%bhrāj, bhrāṭ,%}¦ f. (Pāṇ. VIII. 2, 36), Ved. light,
lustre, splendor, glitter; [cf. {%deva-bh˚, na-bh˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>35949<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAja<k2>BrAja
{%Bhrāja, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, gleaming, glittering
(Ved.); ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the seven suns; of
a particular kind of fire (mentioned in Hari-vaṃśa,
1. 10467); of a Gandharva protecting the Soma
(Ved.); of a work composed in Ślokas and ascribed
to Kātyāyana; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>35950<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAjaka<k2>BrAjaka
{%Bhrājaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing
to shine, illuminating, making bright (said of the
digestive fire and bile as brightening the skin);
({%am%}), n. the bile, bilious humor, gall.
<LEND>

<L>35951<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAjat<k2>BrAjat
{%Bhrājat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shining, gleaming, glitter-
ing. {%—Bhrājaj-janman, ānas,%} m. pl., Ved. ‘having
a brilliant native place or origin, brilliant form birth,’
an epithet of the Maruts; (Sāy.) having brilliant
forms {%(= dīpta-śarīra)%}. {%—Bhrājad-ṛṣṭi, ayas,%}
m. pl., Ved. ‘bright-weaponed’ (having bright
gleams of lightning), an epithet of the Maruts;
(Sāy. {%= dīpyamānāyudha.%})
<LEND>

<L>35952<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAjaTu<k2>BrAjaTu
{%Bhrājathu, us,%}¦ m. brilliance, splendor, glitter,
beauty. {%—Bhrājathu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} shining,
beautiful (said of a woman).
<LEND>

<L>35953<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAjana<k2>BrAjana
{%Bhrājana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), the act of
causing to shine, illuminating.
<LEND>

<L>35954<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAjamAna<k2>BrAjamAna
{%Bhrājamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>35955<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAjayat<k2>BrAjayat
{%Bhrājayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to shine, illu-
minating.
<LEND>

<L>35956<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAjas<k2>BrAjas
{%Bhrājas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. sparkling, glittering; [cf.
{%agni-bh˚.%}] {%—Bhrājas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. spark-
ling, glittering; containing the word {%bhrājas%}. {%—Bhrā-%}
{%jas-vin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. {%= bhrājas-vat%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35957<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAjin<k2>BrAjin
{%Bhrājin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ shining, gleaming, glittering.
<LEND>

<L>35958<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAjira<k2>BrAjira
{%Bhrājira, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a class of gods under
the Manu Bhautya.
<LEND>

<L>35959<pc>0725-c<k1>BrAjizWa<k2>BrAjizWa
{%Bhrājiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. fr. rt. 1. {%bhrāj%}),
[Page0726-a+ 78]
shining very brightly, highly glittering or radiant;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Ghṛta-pṛṣṭha.
<LEND>

<L>35960<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAjizRu<k2>BrAjizRu
{%Bhrājiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ shining, gleaming, splen-
did, radiant, elegant; ({%us%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu;
of Śiva. {%—Bhrājiṣṇu-tā,%} f. radiance, brightness,
splendor, splendid appearance.
<LEND>

<L>35961<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAjis<k2>BrAjis
{%Bhrājis, is,%}¦ f. {%= bhrājas,%} p. 725. {%—Bhrājiṣ-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} splendid, shining.
<LEND>

<L>35962<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAjoBrAdantya<k2>BrAjoBrAdantya
{%Bhrājobhrādantya%}¦ (?), {%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race.
<LEND>

<L>35963<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAtf<k2>BrAtf
{#BrAtf#}¦ {%bhrātṛ, tā,%} m. (perhaps fr. rt. {%bhṛ,%}
and originally meaning ‘a supporter’), a brother,
uterine brother, own brother, ({%ku-bhrātṛ,%} a bad
brother); an intimate friend or relation, a cousin or
near relative in general, an intimate friend, (some-
times used as a term of friendly address); {%(tarau),%}
m. du. brother and sister; [cf. Zend <nsi>brātar:</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">φράτηρ, φράτωρ, φρᾱτρ-ία, φρᾱ́τρ-α or φρή-τρη,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φρατρίζ-ω, φρατριάζ-ω, φράτριοι θεοί:</lang> Lat. <nsi>frāter,</nsi>
<nsi>fraternu-s, frātr-ia,</nsi> ‘a brother's wife:’ Umbr. <nsi>frā-</nsi>
<nsi>ter:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>brōthar,</nsi> pl. <nsi>bro-thra-hans,</nsi> ‘brethren:’
Angl. Sax. <nsi>bródhor:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>bruodar:</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>brātrŭ:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>broter-eli-s,</nsi> a diminutive; <nsi>bró-li-s,</nsi>
‘brother;’ <nsi>brotù-szi-s,</nsi> ‘a cousin:’ Old Pruss. <nsi>bra-</nsi>
<nsi>ti-s:</nsi> Russ. <nsi>brat:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>brathair.</nsi>] {%—Bhrātur-%}
{%jāyā,%} f. ({%bhrātur,%} gen. sing.), a brother's wife, sister-
in-law. {%—Bhrātuṣ-putra, as,%} m. ({%bhrātuṣ%} for
{%bhrātus,%} gen. sing.), a brother's son, nephew; ({%ī%}),
f. a brother's daughter, niece. {%—Bhrātṛ-gandhi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} or {%bhrātṛ-gandhika, as, ā, am,%} a brother
only in appearance, having merely the name of
brother. {%—Bhrātṛ-ja, as,%} m. a brother's son; ({%ā%}),
f. a brother's daughter. {%—Bhrātṛ-jāyā,%} f. a brother's
wife, sister-in-law. {%—Bhrātṛ-tva, am,%} n. fraternity,
brotherhood. {%—Bhrātṛ-datta, as, ā, am,%} given by
a brother; ({%am%}), n. anything given by a brother to
a sister on her marriage. {%—Bhrātṛ-dvitīyā,%} f. a
festival on the second day in the light half of the
month Kārttika (on which sisters give entertain-
ments to brothers in commemoration of Yamunā's
entertaining her brother Yama). {%—Bhrātṛ-patnī,%} f.
a brother's wife. {%—Bhrātṛ-padma-vana, am,%} n. a
group of lotus-like brethren. {%—Bhrātṛ-putra, as,%}
m. a brother's son, nephew. {%—Bhrātṛ-bhaginyau,%}
du. a brother and sister. {%—Bhrātṛ-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having a brother or brothers. {%—Bhrātṛ-vadhū,%}
{%ūs,%} f. a brother's wife. {%—Bhrātṛ-vala, as, ā, am,%}
possessing a brother or brothers. {%—Bhrātṛ-śva-%}
{%śura, as,%} m. a husband's eldest brother. {%—Bhrātṛ-%}
{%siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Bhrātṛ-hatyā,%} f.
fratricide.
<LEND>

<L>35964<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAtfka<k2>BrAtfka
{%Bhrātṛka, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a brother, (at the
end of a comp., cf. {%a-bh˚%}); coming from a brother,
of or belonging to a brother, fraternal, brotherly (in
this sense the fem. is {%ī%}).
<LEND>

<L>35965<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAtfvya<k2>BrAtfvya
{%Bhrātṛvya, as,%}¦ m. a brother's son, nephew,
cousin; a rival, enemy, adversary; [cf. Lat. <nsi>fra-</nsi>
<nsi>trūelis.</nsi>] {%—Bhrātṛvya-kṣayaṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
destroying rivals. {%—Bhrātṛvya-cātana, as, ā, am,%}
scaring or frightening away rivals. {%—Bhrātṛvya-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having rivals. {%—Bhrātṛvya-%}
{%han, hā, ghnī,%} m. f. killing or striking down rivals
(Atharva-veda X. 9, 1).
<LEND>

<L>35966<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAtra<k2>BrAtra
{%Bhrātra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. brotherhood, fraternity.
<LEND>

<L>35967<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAtrIya<k2>BrAtrIya
{%Bhrātrīya%}¦ or {%bhrātreya, as,%} m. a (father's)
brother's son, nephew; {%(as, ā, am),%} fraternal, be-
longing or relating to a brother.
<LEND>

<L>35968<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAtrya<k2>BrAtrya
{%Bhrātrya, am,%}¦ n. {%= bhrātra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35969<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAnta<k2>BrAnta
{#BrAnta#}¦ {%bhrānta, bhrāma, bhrāmara, bhrām-%}
{%yat,%} &c. See p. 725, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35970<pc>0726-a<k1>BrAS<k2>BrAS
{#BrAS#}¦ {%bhrāś%} (connected with rts. 1.
{%bhrāj, bhlāś%}), cl. 1. 4. A. {%bhrāśate,%}
{%bhrāśyate%} (Ved. also P. {%bhrāśyati%}), {%babhrāśe%} or
{%bhreśe%} (3rd pl. {%babhrāśire%} or {%bhreśire,%} Pāṇ. VI.
4, 125), {%bhrāśiṣyate, abhrāśiṣṭa, bhrāśitum,%}
to shine, glitter, gleam, blaze: Caus. {%bhrāśayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%ababhrāśat, abibhraśat%} (Vopa-deva
XVII. 3): Desid. {%bibhrāśiṣate:%} Intens. {%bābhrāś-%}
{%yate, bābhrāṣṭi.%}
<LEND>
[Page0726-b+ 73]

<L>35971<pc>0726-b<k1>BrASya<k2>BrASya
{#BrASya#}¦ {%bhrāśya.%} See p. 724, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>35972<pc>0726-b<k1>BrAzwra<k2>BrAzwra
{#BrAzwra#}¦ {%bhrāṣṭra, bhrāṣṭraka.%} See p. 724,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>35973<pc>0726-b<k1>BrAzwreya<k2>BrAzwreya
{#BrAzwreya#}¦ {%bhrāṣṭreya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
family or race; (also {%bhrāstreya.%})
<LEND>

<L>35974<pc>0726-b<k1>BrAs<k2>BrAs
{#BrAs#}¦ {%bhrās,%} a various reading for rt.
{%bhrāś,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>35975<pc>0726-b<k1>BrI<k2>BrI
{#BrI#}¦ {%bhrī,%} cl. 9. P. {%bhrīṇāti%} or {%bhriṇāti,%}
{%bibhrāya, bhreṣyati, abhrasihit, bhre-%}
{%tum%} (?), Ved. to be angry [cf. {%{{bhṛnīya->bhṛṇīya||20161210|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 311-315|}}%}]; to fear
[cf. rt. 1. {%bhī%}]; to bear, support, nourish [cf. rt.
{%bhṛ%}]; to injure, hurt, (Sāy. = rt. {%hiṃs, Ṛg-veda%}
II. 28, 7.)
<LEND>

<L>35976<pc>0726-b<k1>BrukuMSa<k2>BrukuMSa
{#BrukuMSa#}¦ {%bhrukuṃśa%} or {%bhrukuṃsa, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%bhrūkuṃśa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>35977<pc>0726-b<k1>Brukuwi<k2>Brukuwi
{#Brukuwi#}¦ {%bhru-kuṭi, is,%} or {%bhru-kuṭī,%} f. {%=%}
{%bhrū-kuṭi%} under {%bhrū%}. {%—Bhrukuṭi-bandha, as,%} m.
knitting the brows, frowning, a frown. {%—Bhrukuṭī-%}
{%mukha, am,%} n. a face with contracted eyebrows, a
frowning face; {%(as, ī, am),%} having a frowning face;
({%as%}), m. a kind of snake.
<LEND>

<L>35978<pc>0726-b<k1>Bruq<k2>Bruq
{#Bruq#}¦ {%bhruḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%bhruḍati,%} &c., to
cover; to collect.
<LEND>

<L>35979<pc>0726-b<k1>BruBaNga<k2>BruBaNga
{#BruBaNga#}¦ {%bhru-bhaṅga, as,%} m. {%= bhrū-bhaṅga%}
under {%bhrū.%}
<LEND>

<L>35980<pc>0726-b<k1>Bruva<k2>Bruva
{#Bruva#}¦ {%bhruva.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>35981<pc>0726-b<k1>BrU<k2>BrU
{#BrU#}¦ {%bhrū, ūs,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%bhram%}),
an eyebrow, the brow; [cf. {%agre-bh˚, su-bh˚, bhrau-%}
{%veya;%} cf. also Zend <nsi>brvat</nsi>; Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀ-φρύ-ς;</lang> perhaps
Lat. <nsi>front(t)s</nsi> = <lang n="greek">ὀφρυόεις;</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>brāwa;</nsi> Mod.
Germ. <nsi>braue;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>brœw;</nsi> Engl. <nsi>brow;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>brŭvĭ.</nsi>] {%—Bhrū-kuṭi, is,%} or {%bhrū-kuṭī,%} f. con-
traction or knitting of the eyebrow, a frown, a look
of displeasure; [cf. {%bhṛ-k˚, bhra-k˚, bhru-k˚.%}]
{%—Bhrūkuṭī-kuṭilānana (˚la-ān˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a face wrinkled with frowns. {%—Bhrū-kṣe-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. contraction of the eyebrows, a frown.
{%—Bhrūkṣepālāpa (˚pa-āl˚), as,%} m. the language
of frowns. {%—Bhrū-cāpākṛṣṭa-mukta (˚pa-āk˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} drawn and discharged from the bow
of the eyebrows (as a glance). {%—Bhrū-jāha, am,%}
n. the root of the eyebrows (perhaps the inner side).
{%—Bhrū-bhaṅga%} or {%bhrū-bheda, as,%} m. contraction
of the eyebrows, a frown. {%—Bhrūbhedin, ī, inī, i,%}
frowning, contracting or wrinkling the brow, attended
with frowns. {%—Bhrū-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the arch of
the eyebrow. {%—Bhrū-madhya, am,%} n. the interval
between the eyebrows. {%—Bhrū-latā,%} f. ‘brow-
creeper,’ a creeper-like eyebrow, an arched eyebrow
(curving like a creeper). {%—Bhrū-vikāra, as,%} m.
‘change of the eyebrows,’ contracting the brow,
frowning. {%—Bhrū-vikṣepa, as,%} m. contraction of
the eyebrows, a frown. {%—Bhrū-viceṣṭita, am,%} n.
playful movement of the eyebrows. {%—Bhrū-vilāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. a playful or graceful motion of the eyebrows,
play or contraction of the eyebrows, amorous play of
the brows.
<LEND>

<L>35982<pc>0726-b<k1>Bruva<k2>Bruva
{%Bhruva, as, ā, am, = bhrū%}¦ at the end of an adj.
comp.
<LEND>

<L>35983<pc>0726-b<k1>BrUkuMSa<k2>BrUkuMSa
{#BrUkuMSa#}¦ {%bhrūkuṃśa%} or {%bhrūkuṃsa, as,%} m. a
male actor in female attire.
<LEND>

<L>35984<pc>0726-b<k1>BrUR<k2>BrUR
{#BrUR#}¦ {%bhrūṇ,%} cl. 10. A. {%bhrūṇayate,%} &c.,
to hope; to trust; to confide; to wish,
desire; to fear.
<LEND>

<L>35985<pc>0726-b<k1>BrURa<k2>BrURa
{#BrURa#}¦ {%bhrūṇa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%bhṛ;%} perhaps
for original {%bhūrṇa%}), an embryo, fetus, unborn
child; a child, boy; a pregnant woman ({%= gar-%}
{%bhiṇī%}); a Brāhman conversant with the Vedas (?);
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔμβρυον.</lang>] {%—Bhrūṇa-ghna, as, ī, am,%} the
killer of an embryo, one who occasions or procures
abortion. {%—Bhrūṇa-hati, is,%} f. the killing of an
embryo. {%—Bhrūṇa-hatyā,%} f. the killing of an em-
bryo, procuring abortion; any sin equally heinous.
[Page0726-c+ 70]
{%—Bhrūṇa-han, ā, ghnī,%} m. f. the killer of an
embryo, one who procures abortion.
<LEND>

<L>35986<pc>0726-c<k1>BrORaGna<k2>BrORaGna
{%Bhrauṇaghna, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%bhrūṇa-han%}), re-
lating to the killer of an embryo.
<LEND>

<L>35987<pc>0726-c<k1>BrORahatya<k2>BrORahatya
{%Bhrauṇahatya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%bhrūṇa-han%}), {%=%}
{%bhrūṇa-hatyā,%} the killing of an embryo.
<LEND>

<L>35988<pc>0726-c<k1>Brej<k2>Brej
{#Brej#}¦ {%bhrej%} (allied to rt. 1. {%bhrāj%}), cl. 1.
A. {%bhrejate, bibhreje,%} to shine, glitter,
gleam, &c.: Caus. {%bhrejayati, -yitum, abibhrejat.%}
<LEND>

<L>35989<pc>0726-c<k1>Brez<k2>Brez
{#Brez#}¦ {%bhreṣ%} [cf. rts. {%bhraṃś, hreṣ%}], cl.
1. P. A. {%bhreṣati, -te, bibhreṣa, bi-%}
{%bhreṣe, bhreṣitum,%} to go, move; to totter, waver,
slip, fall, make a false step; to fear; to be angry.
<LEND>

<L>35990<pc>0726-c<k1>Breza<k2>Breza
{%Bhreṣa, as,%}¦ m. motion, going, proceeding; tot-
tering, wavering, slipping, falling, declining or falling
(from virtue), deviation (from rectitude), trespass,
sin; loss, deprivation.
<LEND>

<L>35991<pc>0726-c<k1>BrezaRa<k2>BrezaRa
{%Bhreṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of going, moving,
tottering, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35992<pc>0726-c<k1>BrORaGna<k2>BrORaGna
{#BrORaGna#}¦ {%bhrauṇaghna.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>35993<pc>0726-c<k1>BrOveya<k2>BrOveya
{#BrOveya#}¦ {%bhrauveya, as,%} m. (fr. {%bhrū%}), a me-
tronymic.
<LEND>

<L>35994<pc>0726-c<k1>Blakz<k2>Blakz
{#Blakz#}¦ {%bhlakṣ%} (various reading for rt.
{%bhakṣ;%} cf. rt. {%bhrakṣ%}), cl. 1. P. A.
{%bhlakṣati, -te,%} &c., to eat.
<LEND>

<L>35995<pc>0726-c<k1>BlAS<k2>BlAS
{#BlAS#}¦ {%bhlāś%} (connected with rt. {%bhrāś%}),
cl. 1. 4. A. {%bhlāśate, bhalāśyate, ba-%}
{%bhlāśe%} or {%bhaleśe%} (3rd pl. {%babhlāśire%} or {%bhleśire%}),
{%bhlāśitum,%} to shine, gleam, beam, glitter, &c.
<LEND>

<L>35996<pc>0726-c<k1>BlAs<k2>BlAs
{#BlAs#}¦ {%bhlās,%} a various reading for rt.
{%bhlāś%} above.
<LEND>

<L>35997<pc>0726-c<k1>Blez<k2>Blez
{#Blez#}¦ {%bhleṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%bhleṣati, -te,%}
&c., = rt. {%bhreṣ,%} to go; to fear, &c.
<LEND>
<H>{#ma#}

<L>35998<pc>0726-c<k1>ma<k2>ma<h>1
{#ma#} 1¦. {%ma,%} the twenty-fifth consonant of
the Nāgarī alphabet and the nasal letter of the fifth
or labial class, having the sound of the English {%m.%}
 — 1. {%ma-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ma.%}
<LEND>

<L>35999<pc>0726-c<k1>ma<k2>ma<h>2
{#ma#} 2¦. {%ma, as,%} m. (in prosody) a molossus
or foot consisting of three long syllables. {%—2. ma-%}
{%kāra, as,%} m. the foot called molossus. {%—Makāra-%}
{%vipulā,%} f., N. of a metre.
<LEND>

<L>36000<pc>0726-c<k1>ma<k2>ma<h>3
{#ma#} 3¦. {%ma,%} the singular base in all the cases
except the nom. of the first personal pronoun and
related to the verbal termination in the first person
singular, (nom. {%aham,%} 1; acc. {%mām%} or {%mā,%} me;
inst. {%mayā;%} dat. {%mahyam%} or {%me;%} abl. {%mat%} or
{%mad;%} gen. {%mama%} or {%me;%} loc. {%mayi%}); at the
beginning of a comp. the form {%mad%} is used for the
base, see 1. {%mad;%} [cf. {%aham:%} Zend {%ma:%} Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐμέ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐμ-ό-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>me, me-u-s, mihi</nsi> = Umbr. <nsi>me-he:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>mi-s,</nsi> ‘to me;’ <nsi>mi-k,</nsi> acc. ‘me:’ Slav. <nsi>me,</nsi>
acc. ‘me:’ Lith. <nsi>ma-n,</nsi> ‘to me.’]
<LEND>

<L>36001<pc>0726-c<k1>makat<k2>makat
{%Makat,%}¦ a familiar diminutive of 3. {%ma%} (according to
the Bhāṣya on Pāṇ. I. 1. 29, e. g. {%makat pitṛka%}).
<LEND>

<L>36002<pc>0726-c<k1>ma<k2>ma<h>4
{#ma#} 4¦. {%ma, as,%} m. time, season; poison,
venom; a magical or mystical formula; N. of the
fourth note of the scale (abbreviated for {%madhyama%});
the moon; N. of Brahmā; of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of
Yama; ({%ā%}), f. a mother; measure; light, lustre;
knowledge, science; binding, fettering; death; a
woman's waist; N. of Lakṣmī; ({%am%}), n. happiness,
good fortune, welfare; water.
<LEND>

<L>36003<pc>0726-c<k1>maMh<k2>maMh
{#maMh#}¦ {%maṃh%} [cf. rt. 1. {%mah, mahat,%} &c.],
cl. 1. A. {%maṃhate, mamaṃhe, maṃhitum;%}
cl. 10. P. {%maṃhayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to increase; to
give, grant, bestow, offer, (sometimes with {%dānāya,%}
to give as a present), honour; to speak; to shine,
(in the last two senses cl. 1. is used in P. {%maṃ-%}
{%hati,%} &c.): Intensive form in Ṛg-veda V. 27, 1,
[Page0727-a+ 78]
{%māmahe%} (or according to the Pada-pāṭha {%mamahe%}),
part. {%māmahāna.%}
<LEND>

<L>36004<pc>0727-a<k1>maMhanA<k2>maMhanA
{%Maṃhanā,%}¦ ind. (perhaps inst. c. fr. a form {%maṃ-%}
{%han%} or {%maṃhana%}), Ved. quickly, soon, promptly,
willingly; (according to Sāy.) with greatness, great,
praiseworthy; giving, granting, bestowing ({%= ma-%}
{%hattvena, mahattvena%} or {%mahimnā yukta, pūja-%}
{%nīya, dāna,%} either as an adj. or subst.).
<LEND>

<L>36005<pc>0727-a<k1>maMhanIya<k2>maMhanIya
{%Maṃhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. great, valuable,
praiseworthy, worthy of honour; [cf. rt. 1. {%mah,%}
and see Nirukta III. 13, IV. 4.]
<LEND>

<L>36006<pc>0727-a<k1>maMhanezWa<k2>maMhanezWa
{%Maṃhane-ṣṭha%}¦ or {%-ṣṭhā%} (?), according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda X. 61, 1 {%= pradāne pravartamāna.%}
<LEND>

<L>36007<pc>0727-a<k1>maMhayat<k2>maMhayat
{%Maṃhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ granting, giving, offer-
ing. {%—Maṃhayad-rayi, is, is, i,%} Ved. granting
riches, distributing wealth or treasures.
<LEND>

<L>36008<pc>0727-a<k1>maMhayu<k2>maMhayu
{%Maṃhayu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), Ved. wishing
to grant or distribute, liberal.
<LEND>

<L>36009<pc>0727-a<k1>maMhizWa<k2>maMhizWa
{%Maṃhiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. very liberal; very
mighty, very honourable, (Sāy. {%= atiśayena pra-%}
{%vṛddha, atiśayena pūjya, dātṛ-tama%}); exceed-
ingly abundant; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μέγ-ιστο-ς;</lang> Goth. <nsi>maists,</nsi>
‘most, greatest.’] {%—Maṃhiṣṭha-rāti, is, is, i,%} Ved.
giving most abundantly, very bountiful, very rich,
(Sāy. {%= pravṛddha-dhana%} or {%pravṛddha-dāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>36010<pc>0727-a<k1>maMhIyas<k2>maMhIyas
{%Maṃhīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ giving more abundantly.
<LEND>

<L>36011<pc>0727-a<k1>mak<k2>mak
{#mak#}¦ {%mak,%} ind., see Gaṇa Svar-ādi to Pāṇ.
1. 1, 37.
<LEND>

<L>36012<pc>0727-a<k1>maka<k2>maka
{#maka#}¦ {%maka, as, am,%} m. n., see Gaṇa Ardhar-
cādi to Pāṇ. II. 4, 31.
<LEND>

<L>36013<pc>0727-a<k1>makadatta<k2>makadatta
{%Maka-datta, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36014<pc>0727-a<k1>makaka<k2>makaka
{#makaka#}¦ {%makaka, as,%} m. in Atharva-veda
VIII. 6, 12 (perhaps a particular kind of animal, or
bleating, lowing, fr. rt. 2. {%mā%}).
<LEND>

<L>36015<pc>0727-a<k1>makat<k2>makat
{#makat#}¦ {%makat.%} See 3. {%ma,%} p. 726, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36016<pc>0727-a<k1>makamakAya<k2>makamakAya
{#makamakAya#}¦ {%makamakāya%} (an onomatopo-
etic verb), {%makamakāyate,%} &c., to croak (as a
frog), to make a croaking noise.
<LEND>

<L>36017<pc>0727-a<k1>makara<k2>makara
{#makara#}¦ {%makara, as,%} m. a kind of sea monster
sometimes confounded with the crocodile, shark,
dolphin, &c., (properly a fabulous animal regarded as
the emblem of Kāma-deva, the god of love, cf.
{%makara-ketana%} below; also a symbol of the ninth
Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī); N. of the tenth
sign of the zodiac (Capricornus); the tenth arc of
thirty degrees in any circle; a particular species of
insect or other small animal; an array of troops in
the form of a Makara (Manu VII. 187); an ear-ring
in the shape of a Makara [cf. {%makara-kuṇḍala%}
below]; the hands folded in the form of a Makara;
one of the nine treasures of Kuvera; one of the
eight treasures of the magic art called Padminī; a
particular magical spell recited over weapons; N. of
a mountain; ({%ī%}), f. the female of the sea monster
Makara; N. of a river. {%—Makara-kaṭī,%} f., N. of a
woman. {%—Makara-kuṇḍala, am,%} n. an ear-ring
shaped like a Makara. {%—Makara-ketana, as,%} or {%ma-%}
{%kara-ketu, us,%} or {%makara-ketu-mat, ān,%} m. ‘hav-
ing the Makara for an emblem,’ or ‘having a fish
on his banner,’ epithet of Kāma-deva, the god of
love. {%—Makara-daṃṣṭrā,%} f. ‘Makara-toothed,’ N.
of a woman. {%—Makara-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘Makara-
bannered,’ epithet of Kāma-deva, the god of love;
a particular array of troops; a particular medical
preparation {%(= rasasindūra-viśeṣa)%}. {%—Makara-%}
{%pāṭaka, as,%} m., N. of a village. {%—Makara-rāśi, is,%}
m. the sign of the Hindū zodiac corresponding with
Capricornus. {%—Makara-vibhūṣaṇa-ketana, as,%}
m. ‘having the Makara for a characteristic ornament,’
epithet of the god of love. {%—Makara-saṅkramaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the passage of the sun from Sagittarius into
Capricoruns. {%—Makara-saptamī,%} f., N. of the
seventh day in the light half of the month Māgha
(see {%mākarī saptamī%} under {%mākara%}). {%—Makarā-%}
{%kara (˚ra-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘receptacle of Makaras,’ the
ocean. {%—Makarākāra (˚ra-āk˚), as,%} m. a variety of
Cæsalpina Banducella {%(= ṣaḍ-grantha)%}. {%—Maka-%}
{%rākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘Makara-eyed,’ N. of a
[Page0727-b+ 74]
Rākṣasa (son of Khara). {%—Makarāṅka (˚ra-aṅ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having the Makara for a symbol or mark,’
epithet of the ocean; of the god of love. {%—Maka-%}
{%rānana (˚ra-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's
attendants. {%—Makarālaya (˚ra-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘Ma-
kara-abode,’ epithet of the ocean; a symbolical ex-
pression for the number four. {%—Makarāvāsa (˚ra-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m. ‘Makara-abode,’ the ocean. {%—Maka-%}
{%rāśva (˚ra-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘whose horse is the Makara,’
epithet of Varuṇa. {%—Makarī-pattra, am,%} n. or
{%makarī-lekhā,%} f. the mark of a Makarī (on the
face of Lakṣmī; cf. {%pattra-bhaṅga, pattra-lekhā%}).
{%—Makarī-prastha, as,%} m., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>36018<pc>0727-b<k1>makarAyaRa<k2>makarAyaRa
{%Makarāyaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or coming
from Makara.
<LEND>

<L>36019<pc>0727-b<k1>makarin<k2>makarin
{%Makarin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘full of Makaras,’ epithet of the
ocean.
<LEND>

<L>36020<pc>0727-b<k1>makaranda<k2>makaranda
{#makaranda#}¦ {%makaranda, as,%} m. the juice or
nectar of flowers [cf. {%maranda%}], the honey of
flowers; a species of jasmine; N. of various persons;
of an astronomer; of a work ({%= kusumāñjali-ma-%}
{%karanda%} or {%supadma-makaranda%}); the Indian
cuckoo {%(= kokila);%} a bee; a species of fragrant
Mango; ({%am%}), n. a filament (especially of the
lotus-flower); N. of a pleasure-garden in Ujjayinī.
{%—Makaranda-kaṇa, as,%} m. a drop or particle of
flower-juice. {%—Makarandakaṇāya,%} Nom. A. {%-yate,%}
to be like drops or particles of flower-juice. {%—Maka-%}
{%randa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} rich in the juice of flowers;
({%atī%}), f. the flower of Bignonia Suaveolens. {%—Maka-%}
{%randa-vivṛti, is,%} f., N. of a commentary by
Citsukha Muni on the Nyāya-makaranda. {%—Maka-%}
{%randa-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>36021<pc>0727-b<k1>makarandikA<k2>makarandikA
{%Makarandikā,%}¦ f. a kind of metre, four times
<lang n="meter">˘ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯, ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ¯, ˘ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯</lang>; N. of a
daughter of a Vidyā-dhara.
<LEND>

<L>36022<pc>0727-b<k1>makazwu<k2>makazwu
{#makazwu#}¦ {%makaṣṭu, us,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36023<pc>0727-b<k1>makuARa<k2>makuARa
{#makuARa#}¦ {%makuāṇa, as,%} m., N. of a race of
kings.
<LEND>

<L>36024<pc>0727-b<k1>makuwa<k2>makuwa
{#makuwa#}¦ {%makuṭa, am,%} n. {%= mukuṭa,%} a head-
dress, crown, tiara, crest.
<LEND>

<L>36025<pc>0727-b<k1>makuti<k2>makuti
{#makuti#}¦ {%makuti, is,%} m. f. an edict or govern-
ment order addressed to the Śūdras ({%= śūdra-śā-%}
{%sana%}).
<LEND>

<L>36026<pc>0727-b<k1>makura<k2>makura
{#makura#}¦ {%makura, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%maṅk,%} to adorn), a looking-glass, mirror; the stick
or rod or handle of a potter's wheel; the tree Mimu-
sops Elengi ({%= vakula%}); a bud; Arabian jasmine;
[cf. {%mukura.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36027<pc>0727-b<k1>makurARa<k2>makurARa
{%Makurāṇa,%}¦ N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>36028<pc>0727-b<k1>makula<k2>makula
{%Makula, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the tree Mimusops Elengi;
a bud; [cf. {%mukula.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36029<pc>0727-b<k1>makuzwa<k2>makuzwa
{#makuzwa#}¦ {%makuṣṭa%} or {%makuṣṭaka, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%makuṣṭha%} below.
<LEND>

<L>36030<pc>0727-b<k1>makuzWa<k2>makuzWa
{%Makuṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ slow, going slowly, {%=%}
{%manthara; (as),%} m. or {%makuṣṭhaka, as,%} m. a
species of kidney-bean or of rice; [cf. {%mukuṣṭha,%}
{%mapaṣṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36031<pc>0727-b<k1>makUlaka<k2>makUlaka
{#makUlaka#}¦ {%makūlaka, as,%} m. a species of
medicinal plant (commonly called Danti, {%= mukū-%}
{%laka%}).
<LEND>

<L>36032<pc>0727-b<k1>makeruka<k2>makeruka
{#makeruka#}¦ {%makeruka, as,%} m. a kind of para-
sitical worm.
<LEND>

<L>36033<pc>0727-b<k1>makk<k2>makk
{#makk#}¦ {%makk%} [cf. rt. {%mask%}], cl. 1. A. {%mak-%}
{%kate,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>36034<pc>0727-b<k1>makkalla<k2>makkalla
{#makkalla#}¦ {%makkalla, as,%} m. a dangerous abscess
in the abdomen (peculiar to lying-in women).
<LEND>

<L>36035<pc>0727-b<k1>makkula<k2>makkula
{#makkula#}¦ {%makkula, as,%} m. red chalk {%(= śilā-%}
{%jatu),%} a mineral substance considered variously to be
chalk or benzoin.
<LEND>

<L>36036<pc>0727-b<k1>makkola<k2>makkola
{%Makkola, as,%}¦ m. chalk, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36037<pc>0727-b<k1>makz<k2>makz
{#makz#}¦ {%makṣ%} [cf. rt. {%mrakṣ%}], cl. 1. P.
{%makṣati,%} &c., to collect, heap, accumu-
late; to be angry.
<LEND>
[Page0727-c+ 80]

<L>36038<pc>0727-c<k1>makza<k2>makza
{%Makṣa, as,%}¦ m. or {%ā,%} f. a fly (Ved.; cf. {%maśa,%}
{%nīla-m˚, madhu-m˚%}); ({%as%}), m. hypocrisy, the
concealing of one's own defects; wrath; multitude
(see {%mrakṣa%}); [cf. Zend <nsi>makhshi,</nsi> ‘a fly:’ Gr.
<lang n="greek">μυ-ῖ-α,</lang> ‘a fly;’ <lang n="greek">μοθ-ΐ-α:</lang> Lat. <nsi>mus-ca:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>muc-ca,</nsi> ‘a gnat:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>micge</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>midge:</nsi>
Old Norse <nsi>my:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>mucha</nsi> = Lith. <nsi>musé,</nsi> ‘a fly.’]
{%—Makṣa-vīrya, as,%} m. the plant Buchanania
Latifolia.
<LEND>

<L>36039<pc>0727-c<k1>makzika<k2>makzika
{%Makṣika, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. (said to be fr. rt. {%maś,%}
Uṇādi-s. IV. 153; cf. {%maśaka%}), a fly, bee; [cf.
{%nir-m˚, dhenu-m˚, madhu-m˚.%}] {%—Makṣikā-mala,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘excretion of bees,’ wax.
<LEND>

<L>36040<pc>0727-c<k1>makzIkA<k2>makzIkA
{%Makṣīkā,%}¦ f. {%= makṣikā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>36041<pc>0727-c<k1>makzu<k2>makzu
{#makzu#}¦ {%makṣu%} or {%makṣū,%} ind. (properly a
form in loc. pl. fr. rt. {%maṃh;%} cf. {%maṅkṣu, maṃ-%}
{%hanā%}), Ved. quickly, rapidly, soon, promptly, imme-
diately, directly, (in Ṛg-veda VIII. 26, 6, a form
{%makṣubhiḥ = śīghra-gamanaiḥ%} occurs); ({%us%}), m.,
N. of a man; [cf. Zend <nsi>mashu, moshu;</nsi> Lat.
<nsi>mox.</nsi>] {%—Makṣuṅ-gama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (accord-
ing to Sāy.) {%= śīghraṃ gacchan,%} going quickly.
{%—Makṣū-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very prompt,
most prompt or quick, (Sāy. {%= śīghratama.%})
<LEND>

<L>36042<pc>0727-c<k1>makzUyu<k2>makzUyu
{%Makṣūyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. quick, rapid, fleet,
(Sāy. {%= śīghra-gantṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>36043<pc>0727-c<k1>maK<k2>maK
{#maK#}¦ {%makh%} or {%maṅkh,%} cl. 1. P. {%makhati,%}
{%maṅkhati,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>36044<pc>0727-c<k1>maKa<k2>maKa
{%Makha, as, ā, am%}¦ (in some of its senses probably
fr. a rt. {%makh%} = 1. {%mah%} or {%maṃḥ,%} to worship),
Ved. active, lively, sprightly, cheerful, free (said of
the Maruts &c.; cf. {%a-dur-m˚%}); adorable, having
sacrifices, honoured with oblations (Sāy. {%= maṃha-%}
{%nīya, mahanīya, yajña-vat%}); ({%as%}), m. a sacrifice,
sacrifical oblation, feast, festival [cf. 1. {%maha%}], any
occasion of joy or festivity; (Ved.) a gift, wealth
[? cf. {%magha%}]; N. of a mythical being (supposed to
be alluded to in Ṛg-veda IX. 101, 13, and in Vāja-
saneyi-saṃhitā XXXVII. 7, 57, and in Śatapatha-
Brāhmaṇa XIV. 1, 2, 17, where mention is made
of {%Makhasya śiraḥ,%} the head of Makha, but in some
of these passages {%makha%} is explained by {%yajña%} and
may mean ‘the victim’); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μάχομαι, μάχαιρα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μαῖμαξ</lang> (fr. an Intens.), <lang n="greek">μαιμάκτης, μαιμακτήρια;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>macellum, mactare, mucro, maceria;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>méce;</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>mœkir.</nsi>] {%—Makha-kriyā,%}
f. a sacrificial rite. {%—Makha-trātṛ, tā,%} m. ‘pro-
tector of [Viśvāmitra's] sacrifice,’ an epithet of Rāma-
candra (son of Daśa-ratha). {%—Makha-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m.
‘enemy of sacrifices,’ an evil being, demon, Rakṣas,
(according to Malli-nātha {%= kratu-vighātaka.%})
{%—Makha-dveṣin, ī,%} m. ‘enemy of [Dakṣa's]
sacrifice,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Makha-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} containing or representing a sacrifice. {%—Ma-%}
{%kha-vat, ān,%} m. having or performing sacrifices, a
sacrificer; ‘companion of Makha,’ a word used in
Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa XIV. 1, 1, 13, to explain
{%magha-vat,%} q. v. {%—Makha-vahni, is,%} m. sacrificial
fire. {%—Makha-vedī,%} f. a sacrificial altar. {%—Makha-%}
{%svāmin, ī,%} m. ‘lord of sacrifice,’ N. of a commen-
tator on the Drāhyāyaṇa-sūtras; (also read {%magha-%}
{%svāmin.%}) {%—Makha-han, ā,%} m., Ved. ‘killer of
Makha,’ an epithet of Agni; of Indra; of Rudra.
{%—Makhāṃśa-bhāj (˚kha-aṃ˚), k, k, k,%} receiving a
share of the sacrifice; ({%k%}), m. a god. {%—Makhāgni%}
{%(˚kha-ag˚), is,%} or {%makhānala (˚kha-an˚), as,%} m.
sacrificial fire. {%—Makhānna (˚kha-an˚), am,%} n.
‘sacrificial food,’ the seed of Euryola Ferox. {%—Ma-%}
{%khāpeta (˚kha-ap˚), as,%} m., N. of a Rākṣasa.
{%—Makhālaya (˚kha-āl˚), as,%} m. a house or place
for sacrifice. {%—Makhāsuhṛd (˚kha-as˚), t,%} m.
‘enemy of [Dakṣa's] sacrifice,’ an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>36045<pc>0727-c<k1>maKasya<k2>maKasya
{%Makhasya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%makhasyati, -te,%} &c.,
Ved. to be cheerful or sprightly; to wish to sacrifice;
to wish to grant riches; (Sāy.) to wish for wealth,
wish for honour.
<LEND>

<L>36046<pc>0727-c<k1>maKasyu<k2>maKasyu
{%Makhasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ cheerful, sprightly, merry,
active, free; wishing to sacrifice; wishing for wealth,
(Sāy. {%= yajñam icchu, dhana-kāma.%})
<LEND>

<L>36047<pc>0727-c<k1>maKya<k2>maKya
{%Makhya,%}¦ a wrong form for {%makha.%}
<LEND>
[Page0728-a+ 76]

<L>36048<pc>0728-a<k1>maga<k2>maga
{#maga#}¦ {%maga, as,%} m. a magian, a priest of
the sun; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a country in Śāka-
dvīpa inhabited chiefly by Brāhmans.
<LEND>

<L>36049<pc>0728-a<k1>magaDa<k2>magaDa
{#magaDa#}¦ {%magadha, as,%} m. the country of the
Magadhas, South Behār; a family bard or minstrel
who sings the praises of a chief's ancestry in his
presence; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the people or the country of
South Behār [cf. {%māgadha%}]; ({%ā%}), f. the town of
the Magadhas; long pepper. {%—Magadha-deśa, as,%}
m. the country of Magadha. {%—Magadha-purī,%} f.
the city of Magadha. {%—Magadha-pratiṣṭha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} dwelling in Magadha. {%—Magadha-lipi, is,%}
f. the writing of Magadha. {%—Magadha-vaṃśa-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} sprung from the race of Magadha. {%—Ma-%}
{%gadheśvara (˚dha-iś˚), as,%} m. a king of the Ma-
gadhas; N. of Paran-tapa (Raghu-v. VI. 20); of
Jarāsandha (one of the nine adversaries of Kṛṣṇa).
{%—Magadhodbhava (˚dha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} born in
Magadha, growing in Magadha; ({%ā%}), f. long pepper.
<LEND>

<L>36050<pc>0728-a<k1>magaDIya<k2>magaDIya
{%Magadhīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or coming
from Magadha.
<LEND>

<L>36051<pc>0728-a<k1>magaDya<k2>magaDya
{%Magadhya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%magadhyati,%} &c., to sur-
round; to serve, be a slave.
<LEND>

<L>36052<pc>0728-a<k1>maganda<k2>maganda
{#maganda#}¦ {%maganda, as,%} m. {%= kusīdin,%} a usurer.
<LEND>

<L>36053<pc>0728-a<k1>magala<k2>magala
{#magala#}¦ {%magala, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36054<pc>0728-a<k1>magava<k2>magava
{#magava#}¦ {%magava,%} (with Buddhists) a parti-
cular high number.
<LEND>

<L>36055<pc>0728-a<k1>magasa<k2>magasa
{#magasa#}¦ {%magasa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of the war-
rior caste in Śāka-dvīpa.
<LEND>

<L>36056<pc>0728-a<k1>magu<k2>magu
{#magu#}¦ {%magu = maga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36057<pc>0728-a<k1>magundI<k2>magundI
{#magundI#}¦ {%magundī,%} f., Ved., N. of a mythical
being whose daughters are mentioned in Atharva-
veda II. 14, 2.
<LEND>

<L>36058<pc>0728-a<k1>magna<k2>magna
{#magna#}¦ {%magna.%} See under rt. {%majj,%} p. 729,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36059<pc>0728-a<k1>maGa<k2>maGa
{#maGa#}¦ {%magha, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%maṃh%}), a gift,
donation, present, reward [cf. {%kratvā-m˚, go-m˚%}];
riches [cf. {%aśvā-m˚, tuvī-m˚%}]; wealth, power, (in
all the preceding senses Ved.); a kind of flower;
({%as%}), m. a particular drug or medicine, (in this sense
also {%ā,%} f.); N. of one of the Dvīpas or divisions of
the universe; of a country (Arrakan); pleasure; N.
of the tenth or fifteenth Nakṣatra (containing five
stars figured by a house, apparently <lang n="greek">α, γ, ζ, η, ν</lang>
Leonis; in this sense often {%maghāḥ,%} pl.; cf. {%nak-%}
{%ṣatra; Maghā,%} like the other Nakṣatras, is some-
times regarded as a wife of the moon); N. of the
wife of Śiva; {%(ā, ī),%} f. a species of grain. {%—Magha-%}
{%tti, is,%} f. (fr. {%magha + datti;%} cf. {%bhaga-tti),%} Ved.
the giving of wealth, distribution of treasures, the
giving and receiving of presents; (Sāy. {%= dhana-%}
{%dāna, dhana-lābha.%}) {%—Magha-deya, am,%} n., Ved.
the giving of presents. {%—Magha-rava, as,%} m., N.
of a Niṣāda. {%—Magha-va, as,%} m. {%= magha-van,%}
a N. of Indra. {%—Magha-vat, ān, atī, at, = magha-%}
{%van%} below. {%—Maghavat-tva, am,%} n., Ved. libe-
rality, munificence. {%—Magha-van, vā, ghonī, at%} (acc.
sing. du. pl. m. {%maghavānam maghavānau magho-%}
{%nas,%} inst. {%maghonā maghavabhyām maghavabhis,%}
dat. {%maghone, maghavabhyām,%} &c., see Gram.
155. <nsi>c;</nsi> the form {%magha-vat%} above may be option-
ally used throughout), possessing gifts, rich, wealthy,
distributing gifts (often as an epithet of the person
who institutes a sacrifice and pays the priests), liberal,
munificent; ({%ān%}), m. an epithet of Indra (especially
in the post-Vedic literature; cf. {%mahī-m˚, māgha-%}
{%vata, māghavana%}); epithet of the chariot of the
Aśvins (‘filled with treasures,’ Sāy. {%= dhana-vat%});
epithet of several gods; N. of a Vyāsa or arranger
of the Purāṇas; of a Dānava; of the third Cakra-
vartin in Bhārata; {%(vānā),%} m. du., Ved. epithet of the
Aśvins, (Sāy. {%= havir-lakṣaṇānnavantau%} or {%dha-%}
{%navantau%}); {%(onī),%} f. epithet of Uṣas, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%dhanavatī.%}) {%—Maghavan-nagara, am,%} n. ‘Indra's
city,’ N. of a town. {%—Maghavan-mukta-kuliśa,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. the thunderbolt hurled by Indra.
[Page0728-b+ 71]
{%—Magha-svāmin,%} see {%makha-svāmin%}. {%—Maghā-%}
{%trayodaśī,%} f. the thirteenth day in the dark half of
the month Bhādra. {%—Maghā-trayodaśī-śrāddha,%}
{%am,%} n. a ceremony on the above-mentioned day.
{%—Maghā-bhava, as,%} m. or {%maghā-bhū, ūs,%} m.
‘offspring of Maghā,’ the planet Venus.
<LEND>

<L>36060<pc>0728-b<k1>maGnIprasTa<k2>maGnIprasTa
{#maGnIprasTa#}¦ {%maghnī-prastha, as,%} m., N. of a
town.
<LEND>

<L>36061<pc>0728-b<k1>maNk<k2>maNk
{#maNk#}¦ {%maṅk%} [cf. rt. {%vaṅk%}], cl. 1. A. {%maṅ-%}
{%kate, mamaṅke, maṅkiṣyate, amaṅ-%}
{%kiṣṭa, maṅkitum,%} to go, move; to adorn.
<LEND>

<L>36062<pc>0728-b<k1>maNku<k2>maNku
{%Maṅku, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. shaking, vacillating, oscil-
lating; ({%dur-maṅku,%} feeling no regret.)
<LEND>

<L>36063<pc>0728-b<k1>maNkaRaka<k2>maNkaRaka
{#maNkaRaka#}¦ {%maṅkaṇaka, as,%} m., N. of a
Ṛṣi; of a Yakṣa (also read {%macakruka%}).
<LEND>

<L>36064<pc>0728-b<k1>maNki<k2>maNki
{#maNki#}¦ {%maṅki, is,%} m., N. of a man (men-
tioned in the Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 6589). {%—Maṅki-%}
{%gīta, am,%} n. ‘song of Maṅki,’ N. of the fifteenth
chapter of the Pārtha Itihāsa-samuccaya, containing
episodes from the Mahā-bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>36065<pc>0728-b<k1>maNkila<k2>maNkila
{#maNkila#}¦ {%maṅkila, as,%} m. a forest confla-
gration.
<LEND>

<L>36066<pc>0728-b<k1>maNkura<k2>maNkura
{#maNkura#}¦ {%maṅkura, as,%} m. {%= mukura,%} a mirror.
<LEND>

<L>36067<pc>0728-b<k1>maNktavya<k2>maNktavya
{#maNktavya#}¦ {%maṅktavya, maṅktṛ, maṅktvā.%} See
p. 729, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36068<pc>0728-b<k1>maNkzaRa<k2>maNkzaRa
{#maNkzaRa#}¦ {%maṅkṣaṇa, am,%} n. armour for the
legs or thighs, greaves; [cf. {%maṅkhuṇa, matkuṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36069<pc>0728-b<k1>maNkzu<k2>maNkzu
{#maNkzu#}¦ {%maṅkṣu,%} ind. ({%= makṣu,%} q. v.), im-
mediately, directly, instantly, quickly; much, exceed-
ingly; truly, really; ({%us%}), m., N. of a man [cf.
{%makṣu, māṅkṣavya%}].
<LEND>

<L>36070<pc>0728-b<k1>maNK<k2>maNK
{#maNK#}¦ {%maṅkh.%} See rt. {%makh,%} p. 727, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36071<pc>0728-b<k1>maNKa<k2>maNKa
{#maNKa#}¦ {%maṅkha, as,%} m. {%= magadha,%} a royal
bard or panegyrist; a mendicant of a particular order;
N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36072<pc>0728-b<k1>maNKaka<k2>maNKaka
{%Maṅkhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man (in Rāja-taraṅ-
giṇī VIII. 3455).
<LEND>

<L>36073<pc>0728-b<k1>maNKanA<k2>maNKanA
{#maNKanA#}¦ {%maṅkhanā,%} f., N. of a woman (in
Rāja-taraṅgiṇī VII. 105).
<LEND>

<L>36074<pc>0728-b<k1>maNKuRa<k2>maNKuRa
{#maNKuRa#}¦ {%maṅkhuṇa, am,%} n. {%= maṅkṣaṇa%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>36075<pc>0728-b<k1>maNg<k2>maNg
{#maNg#}¦ {%maṅg%} [cf. rt. {%maṅk%}], cl. 1. P. A.
{%maṅgati,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>36076<pc>0728-b<k1>maNga<k2>maNga
{#maNga#}¦ {%maṅga, as, am,%} m. n. the head of a
boat; ({%as%}), m. a mast or side of a ship [cf. {%maṇḍa%}];
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a country in Śāka-dvīpa inha-
bited chiefly by Brāhmans; [cf. {%maga%} and {%mṛga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36077<pc>0728-b<k1>maNginI<k2>maNginI
{%Maṅginī,%}¦ f. a boat, ship.
<LEND>

<L>36078<pc>0728-b<k1>maNgala<k2>maNgala
{#maNgala#}¦ {%maṅgala, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%maṅg,%} Uṇādi-s. V. 70), happiness, felicity, good
fortune, good luck, success, auspiciousness, prospe-
rity, welfare, well-being, bliss, (in these and some
other similar senses said to be also {%as,%} m.); any-
thing regarded as auspicious or tending to a lucky
issue, a good omen, an auspicious prayer, blessing,
benediction, salutation; any auspicious or lucky
object (as a dress, ornament, amulet, preservative);
any happy or auspicious event (as a marriage &c.);
a festival, festivity, rejoicing, solemnity, any solemn
ceremony or religious service (as a thread-investi-
ture &c.; cf. {%kautuka-m˚%}); any ancient custom; a
good work; turmeric; N. of the capital of Udyāna;
({%as%}), m., N. of Agni; of the planet Mars; N. of a
king belonging to the race of Manu; of a Buddha;
of a poet; of a chief of the Cālukyas; {%(ā),%} f. a
faithful wife; the white-flowering Dūrvā grass; the
blue-flowering Dūrvā; a sort of Karañja; an epithet
of Umā; of Dākṣyāyaṇī (as worshipped in Gayā);
of the mother of the fifth Arhat of the present Ava-
sarpiṇī, (according to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 41, {%maṅgala%} may
also have a fem. form in {%ī%}); {%(as, ā, am),%} lucky,
[Page0728-c+ 81]
fortunate, prosperous, auspicious, propitious, faring
well or happily; brave. {%—Maṅgala-karaṇa, am,%}
n. ‘luck-causing, success-effecting,’ the act of reciting
a prayer for success before the beginning of any
enterprise. {%—Maṅgala-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%} or
{%maṅgala-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} causing welfare or pros-
perity. {%—Maṅgala-kārya, am,%} n. a festive occasion,
solemnity (as a marriage &c.). {%—Maṅgala-kuṭhāra-%}
{%miśra, as,%} m., N. of a door-keeper in the Dhūrta-
nartaka by Sāma-rāja. {%—Maṅgala-kṣauma, am,%}
n. a linen cloth worn at festivals. {%—Maṅgala-giri,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘mountain of fortune,’ N. of a mountain.
{%—Maṅgalagiri-māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Maṅgala-graha, as,%} m. an auspicious planet;
a lucky star. {%—Maṅgala-ghaṭa, as,%} m. ‘auspicious
jar,’ a pot full of water offered to the gods on fes-
tivals; N. of an elephant (Kathā-sarit-s. LI. 160).
{%—Maṅgala-caṇḍikā%} or {%maṅgala-caṇḍī,%} f., N. of
a goddess, = Durgā (?). {%—Maṅgala-cchāya, as,%} m.
the tree Ficus Infectoria {%(= plakṣa)%}. {%—Maṅgala-%}
{%tūrya, am,%} n. a musical instrument used at festivals;
[cf. {%maṅgalātodya.%}] {%—Maṅgala-devatā,%} f. a tute-
lary deity; [cf. {%brahma-m˚.%}] {%—Maṅgala-dhvani,%}
{%is,%} m. an auspicious sound. {%—Maṅgala-pattra, am,%}
n. a leaf serving as an amulet. {%—Maṅgala-pāṭhaka,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘blessing-reciter,’ a professional well-wisher
or panegyrist, a bard, encomiast. {%—Maṅgala-pāṇi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} having auspicious hands. {%—Maṅgala-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. an auspicious vessel, a vessel containing
auspicious objects. {%—Maṅgala-pura, am,%} n. ‘city
of properity,’ N. of a town; [cf. {%maṅgala.%}]
{%—Maṅgala-puṣpa, am,%} n. an auspicious flower.
{%—Maṅgalapuṣpa-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed of
auspicious flowers (as a garland). {%—Maṅgala-pū-%}
{%jita, as, ā, am,%} honoured with a sacrificial fee or
offering. {%—Maṅgala-pratisara, as,%} m. any auspi-
cious string or cord [cf. {%maṅgala-sūtra%}], the cord
of an amulet. {%—Maṅgala-prada, as, ā, am,%} be-
stowing welfare or prosperity, auspicious; ({%ā%}), f.
turmeric. {%—Maṅgala-prastha, as,%} m. ‘auspicious-
peak,’ N. of a mountain. {%—Maṅgala-mātra-bhū-%}
{%ṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} only adorned with turmeric or
with the Maṅgala-sūtra, q. v. {%—Maṅgala-vacas,%}
{%as,%} n. a benedictory or congratulatory word, auspi-
cious expression, wishing joy, benediction, congratu-
lation. {%—Maṅgala-vat, ān, atī, at,%} auspicious,
happy, blessed; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Tum-
buru. {%—Maṅgala-vāda, as,%} m. benediction, wishing
joy, benedictory expression; N. of a Nyāya work by
Hari-rāma Tarka-vāg-īśa on the effect of benedic-
tions. {%—Maṅgala-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} pronouncing a
benediction, wishing joy, expressing congratulations,
felicitating. {%—Maṅgala-vādya, am,%} n. a musical
instrument played at festivals; [cf. {%maṅgalātodya.%}]
{%—Maṅgala-vāra, as,%} m. ‘Mars-day,’ Tuesday.
{%—Maṅgala-vidhi, is,%} m. any auspicious ceremony
or festive rite; preparations for a festival. {%—Maṅ-%}
{%gala-vṛṣabha, as,%} m. an auspicious ox or one
promising good luck. {%—Maṅgala-śaṃsana, am,%} n.
the act of wishing joy, uttering a benediction or
congratulation. {%—Maṅgala-śabda, as,%} m. an auspi-
cious word, expression of congratulation, word of
good omen, felicitation. {%—Maṅgala-sāman, a,%} n.
an auspicious Sāman. {%—Maṅgala-sūtra, am,%} n. the
lucky thread, the marriage-string, (a string tied by
the bridegroom round the neck of the bride and
worn as long as the husband lives; in Upper India
it is a string or piece of silk tied round the wrist and
worn only during the marriage celebration). {%—Maṅ-%}
{%gala-snāna, am,%} n. an auspicious ablution, any
solemn ablution. {%—Maṅgalākṣata (˚la-ak˚), ās,%}
m. pl. rice cast upon people by Brāhmans in bestow-
ing a blessing at marriages &c. {%—Maṅgalāguru%}
{%(˚la-ag˚), u,%} n. a species of Agallochum. {%—Maṅga-%}
{%lācaraṇa (˚la-āc˚), am,%} n. benediction, prayer for
the success of anything, an auspicious introduction
or form of words in praise of some deity &c. at the
commencement of a written work or of any under-
taking; pronouncing a blessing, wishing joy. {%—Maṅ-%}
{%galācāra (˚la-āc˚), as,%} m. the repeating a prayer
for success, wishing joy, pronouncing a blessing,
[Page0729-a+ 79]
benediction, any auspicious ceremony or observance,
pious usage. {%—Maṅgalācāra-yukta, as, ā, am,%}
accompanied with a prayer for success or with good
wishes, attended with benedictions or auspicious cere-
monies. {%—Maṅgalātodya (˚la-āt˚), am,%} n. a drum
beaten on festive occasions [cf. {%maṅgala-tūrya%}].
{%—Maṅgalādeśa-vṛtta (˚la-ād˚), as,%} m. a fortune-
teller, professional panegyrist or well-wisher. {%—Maṅ-%}
{%galāyana (˚la-ay˚), am,%} n. an auspicious way, the
way to happiness or prosperity; ({%as, ā, am%}), walking
on the path of prosperity. {%—Maṅgalārambha (˚la-%}
{%ār˚), as, ā, am,%} having auspicious commencements;
({%as%}), m. an epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Maṅgalārtham%}
{%(˚la-ar˚),%} ind. for the sake of good fortune, for the
sake of prosperity or happiness. {%—Maṅgalārha%}
{%(˚la-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy of prosperity or happi-
ness. {%—Maṅgalālambhana (˚la-āl˚), am,%} n. touch-
ing anything auspicious. {%—Maṅgalālaya (˚la-āl˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} dwelling in prosperity. {%—Maṅgalā-%}
{%vaṭa%} ({%˚la-av˚%} or {%˚lā-va˚%}), {%am,%} n., N. of a place
of pilgrimage mentioned in the Kapila-saṃhitā.
{%—Maṅgalāvāsa (˚la-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘auspicious
dwelling,’ a temple. {%—Maṅgalā-vrata, am,%} n. ‘the
vow of Umā,’ N. of a chapter of the Kāśī-khaṇḍa
of the Skanda-Purāṇa; ({%as%}), m. ‘devoted to Umā,’
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Maṅgalā-śāstra, am,%} n. ‘the
book of Umā,’ N. of a work mentioned in the
Paramārtha-sāra by Abhinava-gupta. {%—Maṅgalāṣ-%}
{%ṭaka (˚la-aṣ˚),%} eight lines of benediction pro-
nounced for good luck by a Brāhman on a
newly-wedded pair while a piece of silk is held
between them. {%—Maṅgalāhnika (˚la-ah˚), am,%} n.
an auspicious ceremony performed daily, any daily
religious rite for success. {%—Maṅgalecchu (˚la-ic˚),%}
{%us, us, u,%} wishing well, wishing joy, wishing pros-
perity or happiness. {%—Maṅgaleśvara-tīrtha (˚la-%}
{%īś˚), am,%} n. ‘Tīrtha of the lord of prosperity,’ N.
of a sacred bathing-place mentioned in the Revā-
māhātmya division of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Maṅga-%}
{%lopepsā (˚la-up˚),%} f. the wish or desire for pros-
perity or happiness.
<LEND>

<L>36079<pc>0729-a<k1>maNgalika<k2>maNgalika
{%Maṅgalika,%}¦ N. of the hymns of the eighteenth
Kāṇḍa of the Atharva-veda (?).
<LEND>

<L>36080<pc>0729-a<k1>maNgalIya<k2>maNgalIya
{%Maṅgalīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ auspicious, fortunate,
prosperous.
<LEND>

<L>36081<pc>0729-a<k1>maNgalya<k2>maNgalya
{%Maṅgalya, as, ā, am,%}¦ auspicious, propitious, for-
tunate, lucky, happy, conferring happiness, pros-
perous; beautiful, pleasing, agreeable; pious, pure,
holy; ({%as%}), m., N. of several plants, a sort of pulse
or lentil; the sacred fig-tree, Ficus Religiosa; Ægle
Marmelos; {%= trāyamāṇā;%} the cocoa-nut tree, Fe-
ronia Elephantum; a species of Karañja {%(= rīṭhā-%}
{%karañja); = jīvaka;%} N. of a Nāga-rāja; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of several plants, a species of very fragrant sandal;
a sort of Agallochum or aloe wood; Anethum Sowa,
a sort of fennel; Mimosa Suma {%(= śamī); = adhaḥ-%}
{%puṣpī; = priyaṅgu; = śaṅkha-puṣpī; = mā-%}
{%ṣa-parṇī; = jīvantī, ṛddhi, haridrā; = dūrvā;%}
sweet flag, Acorus Calamus; a particular yellow pig-
ment {%(= rocanā);%} a particular perfume ({%= cīḍā%});
an epithet of Durgā; ({%am%}), n. water brought from
various sacred places for the consecration of a king,
&c.; sour curds; sandal-wood; a kind of Agallo-
chum; gold; red lead. {%—Maṅgalya-kusumā,%} f.
‘having auspicious blossoms,’ a species of plant {%(=%}
{%śaṅkha-puṣpī)%}. {%—Maṅgalya-daṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing an auspicious staff,’ N. of a man. {%—Maṅgalya-%}
{%nāmadheyā,%} f. ‘having an auspicious name,’ a
species of plant {%(= jīvantī)%}. {%—Maṅgalya-vastu,%}
{%u,%} n. any auspicious object or fortunate matter.
<LEND>

<L>36082<pc>0729-a<k1>maNgalyaka<k2>maNgalyaka
{%Maṅgalyaka, as,%}¦ m. a sort of pulse or lentil,
Cicer Lens.
<LEND>

<L>36083<pc>0729-a<k1>maNguza<k2>maNguza
{#maNguza#}¦ {%maṅguṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36084<pc>0729-a<k1>maNG<k2>maNG
{#maNG#}¦ {%maṅgh,%} cl. 1. P. {%maṅghati,%} &c., to
adorn, decorate; A. {%maṅghate,%} &c., to
go, move, move quickly; to begin moving, start;
to begin; to blame; to cheat.
<LEND>

<L>36085<pc>0729-a<k1>mac<k2>mac
{#mac#}¦ {%mac%} [cf. rts. {%mañc,%} 1. {%muc, muñc%}],
cl. 1. A. {%macate, mece, macitum,%} to
[Page0729-b+ 75]
cheat; to be wicked; to boast; to be vain or proud;
to pound, grind.
<LEND>

<L>36086<pc>0729-b<k1>macakacAtanI<k2>macakacAtanI
{#macakacAtanI#}¦ {%macakacātanī,%} f. a species of
plant (said to be {%= paṭoli;%} also read {%mecakacā-%}
{%tanī%}).
<LEND>

<L>36087<pc>0729-b<k1>macakruka<k2>macakruka
{#macakruka#}¦ {%macakruka, as,%} m., N. of a Yakṣa
and of a sacred spot, guarded by him, near the
entrance to Kurukṣetra, (in Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 5079
one edition has {%maṅkaṇaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>36088<pc>0729-b<k1>macarcikA<k2>macarcikA
{#macarcikA#}¦ {%macarcikā,%} f. (at the end of a
comp.), excellence, anything excellent or good of its
kind (e. g. {%go-macarcikā,%} an excellent cow; cf. {%ma-%}
{%tallikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>36089<pc>0729-b<k1>maccitta<k2>maccitta
{#maccitta#}¦ {%mac-citta.%} See p. 734, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36090<pc>0729-b<k1>macCa<k2>macCa
{#macCa#}¦ {%maccha, as,%} m. (corrupted fr. {%matsya%}),
a fish.
<LEND>

<L>36091<pc>0729-b<k1>maj<k2>maj
{#maj#}¦ {%maj.%} See {%nir-maj,%} p. 498, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36092<pc>0729-b<k1>majamudAra<k2>majamudAra
{#majamudAra#}¦ {%majamudāra =%} <lang n="arabic">مجموع دار</lang>; {%maj-%}
{%mū'-dār,%} a record-keeper, document-holder.
<LEND>

<L>36093<pc>0729-b<k1>majiraka<k2>majiraka
{#majiraka#}¦ {%majiraka, as,%} m., N. of a man
(Gaṇa Śivādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 112; cf. {%mājiraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>36094<pc>0729-b<k1>majj<k2>majj
{#majj#}¦ {%majj%} (in the Dhātu-pāṭha written
{%masj%}), cl. 6. P. (ep. also A.) {%majjati,%}
{%(-te), mamajja%} (2nd sing. {%mamajjitha%} or {%ma-%}
{%maṅktha%}), {%maṅkṣyati%} (ep. also {%majjiṣyati%}),
{%amāṅkṣīt%} (ep. 2nd sing. {%amajjīs;%} with particle
{%mā, majjīs%}), {%maṅktum%} or {%majjitum,%} to sink (in
water), dive, bathe, be submerged or immersed; to
dip one's self, plunge, bathe, throw one's self into
water; to sink down, sink under, sink into (with
loc. or acc., e. g. {%tamo majjati,%} he sinks into dark-
ness, Manu IV. 81); to be drowned, perish in
water, perish; to sink into misfortune, become
ruined; to despond, be disheartened: Caus. {%majja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%amamajjat,%} to cause to sink (in
water), immerse, submerge, dip, bathe, cause to
plunge or dive, drown, deluge, cause to perish, over-
whelm: Desid. {%mimaṅkṣati, mimajjiṣati:%} In-
tens. {%māmajjyate, māmaṅkti;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>mergo:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>merkiu,</nsi> ‘macero;’ <nsi>mazgoju</nsi> = Caus. {%majja-%}
{%yāmi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36095<pc>0729-b<k1>magna<k2>magna
{%Magna, as, ā, am,%}¦ plunged, dived, immersed;
sunk, drowned; absorbed; ({%as%}), m., N. of a moun-
tain.
<LEND>

<L>36096<pc>0729-b<k1>maNktavya<k2>maNktavya
{%Maṅktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be dived or immersed.
<LEND>

<L>36097<pc>0729-b<k1>maNktf<k2>maNktf
{%Maṅktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who dives or plunges,
diving, plunging, bathing, performing ablutions;
drowning.
<LEND>

<L>36098<pc>0729-b<k1>maNktvA<k2>maNktvA
{%Maṅktvā%}¦ or {%maktvā,%} ind. (Pāṇ. VI. 4, 32), hav-
ing sunk or dived; having plunged; having im-
mersed one's self; being plunged.
<LEND>

<L>36099<pc>0729-b<k1>majja<k2>majja
{%Majja, as, ā, am,%}¦ sinking, diving; [cf. {%uda-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36100<pc>0729-b<k1>majjat<k2>majjat
{%Majjat, an, antī%}¦ or {%atī, at,%} sinking, drowning,
dipping, bathing.
<LEND>

<L>36101<pc>0729-b<k1>majjan<k2>majjan
{%Majjan, ā,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%majj%} above,
according to some for an original {%marjan?%}), the
marrow of the bones and flesh; the pith or sap of
plants; (in the later medical system) the element or
essential ingredient [cf. {%dhātu%}] of the body which
is produced from the bones and itself produces semen;
[cf. Old Germ. <nsi>marag;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>mearg, merg.</nsi>]
{%—Majja-kṛt, t,%} n. ‘producing marrow,’ a bone.
{%—Majjan-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. marrowy, (op-
posed to {%a-majjaka.%}) {%—Majja-samudbhava, am,%}
n. ‘produced from the marrow,’ semen virile.
<LEND>

<L>36102<pc>0729-b<k1>majjana<k2>majjana
{%Majjana, as,%}¦ m. ‘the diver,’ N. of a kind of
supernatural being; N. of one of Śiva's attend-
ants; ({%am%}), n. the act of sinking or sinking under
water, diving, immersion; dipping, bathing, ablution;
perishing in water, drowning; deluging; {%= majjan%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>36103<pc>0729-b<k1>majjayitf<k2>majjayitf
{%Majjayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who causes to
sink or plunge.
<LEND>

<L>36104<pc>0729-b<k1>majjala<k2>majjala
{%Majjala, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of Skanda's attend-
ants, (also read {%majjāna;%} cf. {%majjana.%})
<LEND>
[Page0729-c+ 78]

<L>36105<pc>0729-c<k1>majjas<k2>majjas
{%Majjas, as,%}¦ n. {%= majjan,%} marrow.
<LEND>

<L>36106<pc>0729-c<k1>majjA<k2>majjA
{%Majjā,%}¦ f. the marrow of the bones or flesh [cf.
{%nir-majja%}]; pith, sap, the sap of plants. {%—Majjā-%}
{%gata, as, ā, am,%} seated in the marrow (as a
disease). {%—Majjā-ja, as,%} m. a species of bdellium
{%(= bhūmija-guggulu)%}. {%—Majjā-meha, as,%} m., N.
of a particular disease of the urinary organs. {%—Majjā-%}
{%rajas, as,%} n. a particular hell; bdellium. {%—Majjā-%}
{%rasa, as,%} m. ‘marrow-secretion,’ semen virile.
{%—Majjā-sāra, am,%} n. nutmeg.
<LEND>

<L>36107<pc>0729-c<k1>majjAna<k2>majjAna
{%Majjāna, as,%}¦ m. {%= majjala,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36108<pc>0729-c<k1>majjikA<k2>majjikA
{%Majjikā,%}¦ f. the female of the Indian crane.
<LEND>

<L>36109<pc>0729-c<k1>majjUka<k2>majjUka
{%Majjūka, as, ā, am,%}¦ repeatedly or habitually
diving (used in Nirukta IX. 5. to explain the word
{%maṇḍūka%}).
<LEND>

<L>36110<pc>0729-c<k1>majjUzA<k2>majjUzA
{#majjUzA#}¦ {%majjūṣā,%} f. {%= mañjūṣā.%}
<LEND>

<L>36111<pc>0729-c<k1>majmanA<k2>majmanA
{#majmanA#}¦ {%majmanā,%} ind. (inst. case of a form
{%majman;%} cf. {%maṃhanā%}), Ved. in one mass, to-
gether, collectively, in one body, generally; with or
by strength, by might, by intensity (Sāy. {%= balena,%}
according to Naighaṇṭuka 11. 9. {%majmanā = bala%});
[cf. Lat. <nsi>magmentum.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>36112<pc>0729-c<k1>maYc<k2>maYc
{#maYc#}¦ {%mañc,%} cl. 1. A. {%mañcate,%} &c., to
cheat; to be wicked, &c. (= rts. {%mac,%}
1. {%muc, muñc%}); to hold; to grow high or tall; to
adore; to shine; to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>36113<pc>0729-c<k1>maYca<k2>maYca
{%Mañca, as,%}¦ m. a stage or platform supported by
columns, a scaffold or temporary structure erected for
spectators on festive occasions; an elevated shed
raised on bamboos in a field (where a watchman is
stationed to protect the crop from cattle, birds, &c.);
a bedstead, couch, bed, sofa; a chair; a seat of
state, throne; a pulpit. {%—Mañca-maṇḍapa, as,%} m.
a sort of temporary open shed standing upon bamboo
posts; a platform erected for marriage ceremonies or
other festive occasions.
<LEND>

<L>36114<pc>0729-c<k1>maYcaka<k2>maYcaka
{%Mañcaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a stage, platform, tem-
porary scaffold erected on a house; a couch, bed;
any frame or stand; a kind of brazier or stand for
holding fire; ({%ikā%}), f. {%= āsandī,%} a chair; a trough,
tray. {%—Mañcakāśraya (˚ka-āś˚), as,%} m. ‘bed-
infesting,’ a bed-bug, house-bug. {%—Mañcakāsura%}
{%(˚ka-as˚), as,%} m., N. of an Asura. {%—Mañcakāsura-%}
{%dundubhi-vadha, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the
Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>36115<pc>0729-c<k1>maYcayAyya<k2>maYcayAyya
{%Mañcayāyya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a brother of Cauṇḍa-
pācārya.
<LEND>

<L>36116<pc>0729-c<k1>maYcukA<k2>maYcukA
{%Mañcukā%}¦ in {%madana-mañcukā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36117<pc>0729-c<k1>maYj<k2>maYj
{#maYj#}¦ {%mañj%} (connected with rts. {%mārj,%}
{%mṛj%}), cl. 10. P. {%mañjayati, -yitum,%} to
wipe, clean, cleanse, purify, wipe off; to sound.
<LEND>

<L>36118<pc>0729-c<k1>maYjara<k2>maYjara
{%Mañjara, am,%}¦ n. a cluster of blossoms; a species
of plant {%(= tilaka);%} a pearl; [cf. {%deva-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36119<pc>0729-c<k1>maYjari<k2>maYjari
{%Mañjari, is,%}¦ or {%mañjarī,%} f. a cluster of blossoms;
a compound pedicle or flower-stalk, a branching
flower-stalk; a flower-bud; a shoot, sprout, sprig,
stalk, (often at the end of titles of works, cf. {%pra-%}
{%dīpa-m˚%}); N. of a work by Bhaṭṭācārya-cūḍāmaṇi
(abbreviated fr. the full title Nyāya-siddhānta-mañ-
jarī); a parallel line or row; a species of plant ({%=%}
{%tilaka%}); N. of a metre, four times ˘˘¯˘¯,
˘˘˘¯˘¯¯˘¯; of another consisting of four lines
of 12, 8, 16, and 20 syllables; a pearl; a creeper;
{%= tulasī,%} holy basil; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μάργαρον, μαργαρίτης;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>margarita.</nsi>] {%—Mañjarī-cāmara, am,%} n. a
fan-like sprout. {%—Mañjarī-namra, as,%} m. ‘bent
down with clusters of flowers,’ the plant Calamus
Rotang. {%—Mañjarī-piñjarita, as, ā, am,%} having
pearls and gold. {%—Mañjarī-prakāśa%} or {%nyāya-%}
{%siddhānta-mañjarī-prakāśa, as,%} m. a commen-
tary by Bhāskara or Laugākṣi Bhāskara on the
Nyāya-siddhānta-mañjarī (an elementary treatise on
the Nyāya system). {%—Mañjarī-sāra%} or {%nyāya-sid-%}
{%dhānta-mañjarī-sāra, am,%} n. a commentary by
Yādava Vyāsa on the Nyāya-siddhānta-mañjarī.
<LEND>

<L>36120<pc>0729-c<k1>maYjarikA<k2>maYjarikA
{%Mañjarikā,%}¦ f. {%= mañjarī%} in {%kaṭu-m˚, puṣpa-%}
{%m˚;%} N. of a princess.
<LEND>

<L>36121<pc>0729-c<k1>maYjarita<k2>maYjarita
{%Mañjarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having clusters of flowers
[Page0730-a+ 81]
or branching flower-stalks; mounted on a stalk (as
a bud &c.).
<LEND>

<L>36122<pc>0730-a<k1>maYjA<k2>maYjA
{%Mañjā,%}¦ f. a cluster of blossoms, a branching flower-
stalk; a creeper; {%= ajā,%} a she-goat.
<LEND>

<L>36123<pc>0730-a<k1>maYji<k2>maYji
{%Mañji, is,%}¦ or {%mañjī,%} f. a cluster of blossoms, &c.
[cf. {%aṅgāra-mañjī%}]; a creeper. {%—Mañji-phalā,%} f.
the plantain tree, Musa Sapientum.
<LEND>

<L>36124<pc>0730-a<k1>maYjikA<k2>maYjikA
{%Mañjikā,%}¦ f. a harlot, courtezan.
<LEND>

<L>36125<pc>0730-a<k1>maYjiman<k2>maYjiman
{%Mañjiman, ā,%}¦ m. (fr. {%mañju%}), beauty, loveliness,
elegance.
<LEND>

<L>36126<pc>0730-a<k1>maYjizWa<k2>maYjizWa
{%Mañjiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably superl. of
{%mañju,%} according to Pāṇ. fr. {%mañji%}), bright red
(as the Indian madder); ({%ā%}), f. Bengal or Indian
madder, Rubia Mujista; [cf. {%māñjiṣṭha.%}] {%—Mañ-%}
{%jiṣṭhābha (˚ṭha-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} having the
colour of Indian madder. {%—Mañjiṣṭā-meha, as,%}
m., N. of a disease in which the urine is of a light
red colour. {%—Mañjiṣṭhā-mehin, ī, inī, i,%} suffering
from the above disease. {%—Mañjiṣṭhā-rāga, as,%} m.
the colour or dye of the Indian madder; an attach-
ment charming and durable as the colour of the
Indian madder, permanent attachment.
<LEND>

<L>36127<pc>0730-a<k1>maYjIra<k2>maYjIra
{%Mañjīra, as, am,%}¦ m. n. an ornament for the
feet or toes, a ring, bangle, foot-oprnament, anklet;
({%am%}), n. a post round which the string of the churn-
ing-stick passes; a metre, four times ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘˘
¯˘¯˘¯; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>36128<pc>0730-a<k1>maYjIraka<k2>maYjIraka
{%Mañjīraka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.; [cf. {%māñjīraka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36129<pc>0730-a<k1>maYjIla<k2>maYjIla
{%Mañjīla, as,%}¦ m. a village inhabited especially by
washermen.
<LEND>

<L>36130<pc>0730-a<k1>maYju<k2>maYju
{%Mañju, us, us, u%}¦ (perhaps corrupted fr. {%mano-%}
{%jña,%} but said to be fr. rt. {%mañj%}), beautiful, lovely,
charming, pleasing, agreeable, sweet. {%—Mañju-kula,%}
{%as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mañju-keśin, ī,%} m. ‘beautiful-
haired,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. {%—Mañju-%}
{%gamana, as, ā, am,%} going beautifully or with
graceful movements; ({%ā%}), f. a goose; a flamingo.
{%—Mañju-garta,%} a N. of Nepal. {%—Mañju-gir, īr,%}
{%īr, īr,%} having a charming voice, singing sweetly.
{%—Mañju-gīti, is,%} f. a metre consisting of 29 + 30
syllables. {%—Mañju-guñja, as,%} m. a charming murmur
or humming. {%—Mañju-ghoṣa, as, ā, am,%} having a
sweet voice or cry, uttering a sweet sound; ({%as%}), m.
{%= mañju-śrī;%} N. of a deity worshipped by the
Tāntrikas; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Mañju-%}
{%deva%} and {%mañju-nātha, as,%} m. {%= mañju-śrī.%}
{%—Mañju-nāśī,%} f. a beautiful woman (‘destroying
or eclipsing other beautiful women?’); epithet of
the wife of Indra; of Durgā; (perhaps for {%mañju-%}
{%nārī.%}) {%—Mañju-netra, am,%} n. a beautiful eye; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), lovely-eyed. {%—Mañju-pattana, am,%} n., N.
of a town built by Mañju-śrī. {%—Mañju-pāṭhaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘repeating beautifully,’ a parrot. {%—Mañju-%}
{%prāṇa, as,%} m. an epithet of Brahmā. {%—Mañju-%}
{%bhadra, as,%} m. {%= mañju-śrī%}. {%—Mañju-bhāṣin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} sweetly speaking; {%(iṇī),%} f. a particular metre.
{%—Mañju-mañjīra, as, am,%} m. n. a beautiful foot-
ornament. {%—Mañju-matī,%} f., N. of a princess.
{%—Mañju-vaktra, as, ā, am,%} beautiful faced, lovely,
handsome. {%—Mañju-vāc, k, k, k,%} speaking beauti-
fully (as a parrot). {%—Mañju-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} speak-
ing delightfully; ({%inī%}), f. a kind of metre, four
times ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯; N. of a woman.
{%—Mañju-śrī, īs,%} m., N. of one of the most cele-
brated Bodhi-sattvas among the northern Buddhists.
{%—Mañjuśrī-paripṛcchā,%} f., N. of a Buddhist work.
{%—Mañjuśrī-parvata, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Mañjuśrī-mūla-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist
work. {%—Mañjuśrī-vikrīḍita, am,%} n., N. of a Bud-
dhist work. {%—Mañju-saurabha, am,%} n. a kind of
metre, two lines of ˘˘˘˘¯˘˘¯˘¯˘¯, ˘˘¯˘¯
˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯. {%—Mañju-svana, as, ā, am,%} sweet-
sounding. {%—Mañju-svara, as,%} m. {%= mañju-śrī;%}
{%(as, ā, am),%} sounding or buzzing sweetly (as
bees).
<LEND>

<L>36131<pc>0730-a<k1>maYjula<k2>maYjula
{%Mañjula, as, ā, am,%}¦ beautiful, pleasing, agreeable,
charming, lovely, sweet, soft, melodious; ({%as%}), m.
a species of water-hen or gallinule {%(= dātyūha,%}
{%jala-raṅka, jala-raṅku); (ā),%} f., N. of a river;
({%am%}), n. a bower, arbour {%(= kuñja);%} a spring, well,
natural water-course or channel {%(= jalāñcala);%} the
[Page0730-b+ 71]
fruit of Ficus Oppositifolia, Vallisneria Octandra;
variegated or the state of being variegated ({%= śa-%}
{%vala%} or {%śaivala?%}).
<LEND>

<L>36132<pc>0730-b<k1>maYjulikA<k2>maYjulikA
{%Mañjulikā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>36133<pc>0730-b<k1>maYjUzA<k2>maYjUzA
{#maYjUzA#}¦ {%mañjūṣā,%} f. (sometimes written
{%mañjuṣā;%} according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 77, fr. rt.
{%majj%}), a box, chest, case (for a bow &c.); recep-
tacle, (sometimes at the end of titles of works,
cf. {%dhātu-nyāya-m˚%}); a basket, large basket, ham-
per; N. of a work by Nāgeśa (abridged from the full
title Vaiyākaraṇa-siddhānta-mañjūṣā); N. of a com-
mentary on a work called Jagadīśa-toṣiṇī; {%= mañ-%}
{%jiṣṭhā,%} Bengal madder; a stone. {%—Mañjūṣā-%}
{%kuñcikā,%} f. ‘key to the Mañjūṣā,’ N. of a com-
mentary by Kṛṣṇa-mitra on Nāgeśa's Mañjūṣā.
<LEND>

<L>36134<pc>0730-b<k1>maYjUzaka<k2>maYjUzaka
{%Mañjūṣaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a species of celestial
flower; [cf. {%mahā-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36135<pc>0730-b<k1>mawaka<k2>mawaka
{#mawaka#}¦ {%maṭaka%} (formed fr. {%mṛtaka%}), a dead
body, corpse.
<LEND>

<L>36136<pc>0730-b<k1>mawacI<k2>mawacI
{#mawacI#}¦ {%maṭacī,%} f. (probably) {%= maṭatī,%} hail.
<LEND>

<L>36137<pc>0730-b<k1>mawatI<k2>mawatI
{#mawatI#}¦ {%maṭatī,%} f. hail.
<LEND>

<L>36138<pc>0730-b<k1>mawasPawi<k2>mawasPawi
{#mawasPawi#}¦ {%maṭasphaṭi, is,%} m. incipient arro-
gance or pride {%(= darpārambha).%}
<LEND>

<L>36139<pc>0730-b<k1>mawAmawAya<k2>mawAmawAya
{#mawAmawAya#}¦ {%maṭāmaṭāya%} (an onomatopoetic
verb), {%maṭāmaṭāyati,%} &c., to make the sound
Maṭā-maṭā; [cf. {%paṭa-paṭā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36140<pc>0730-b<k1>mawutacaRqI<k2>mawutacaRqI
{#mawutacaRqI#}¦ {%maṭuta-caṇḍī,%} f., N. of a Rāk-
ṣasī.
<LEND>

<L>36141<pc>0730-b<k1>mawwaka<k2>mawwaka
{#mawwaka#}¦ {%maṭṭaka, as,%} m. {%= maḍaka,%} Eleusine
Coracana; ({%am%}), n. the ridge or top of a roof.
<LEND>

<L>36142<pc>0730-b<k1>mawmawa<k2>mawmawa
{#mawmawa#}¦ {%maṭmaṭa, as,%} m., Ved. a species of
demon or evil spirit.
<LEND>

<L>36143<pc>0730-b<k1>maW<k2>maW
{#maW#}¦ {%maṭh%} [cf. rt. {%maṇṭh%}], cl. 1. P. {%ma-%}
{%ṭhati,%} &c., to dwell, inhabit; to grind;
to go.
<LEND>

<L>36144<pc>0730-b<k1>maWa<k2>maWa
{%Maṭha, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (probably connected with
the preceding rt.), a hut, cottage, especially the re-
tired hut of an ascetic, a building inhabited by a
devotee and his disciples, a small retired room occu-
pied by a pupil, a pupil's cell; a cloister, convent,
monastery, a school, college (especially for young
Brāhmans prosecuting sacred studies); a temple; a
carriage or cart drawn by oxen; ({%ī%}), f. a cell; a
cloister. {%—Maṭha-keśava-dhāriṇī,%} f. epithet of
Nandā the founder of the college of Keśava (Rāja-
tar. V. 244). {%—Maṭha-sthiti, is, is, i,%} staying or
residing in a college of priests. {%—Maṭhādhidpati%}
{%(˚ṭha-adh˚), is,%} or {%maṭhādhyakṣa (˚ṭha-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the superintendent of a monastery, principal
of a college, &c. {%—Maṭhāyatana (˚ṭha-ay˚), am,%}
n. a monastery, convent, college.
<LEND>

<L>36145<pc>0730-b<k1>maWikA<k2>maWikA
{%Maṭhikā,%}¦ f. a hut, cottage; a cell.
<LEND>

<L>36146<pc>0730-b<k1>maWara<k2>maWara
{#maWara#}¦ {%maṭhara, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%man,%} and included in the Gaṇa Kaḍārādi, see Pāṇ.
II. 2, 38), intoxicated; (perhaps) persisting in any-
thing (with loc.); ({%as%}), m., N. of a man, (according
to some) of a Muni; [cf. {%māṭhara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36147<pc>0730-b<k1>maWoSIloWikA<k2>maWoSIloWikA
{#maWoSIloWikA#}¦ {%maṭhośīloṭhikā,%} f. (pro-
bably) N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>36148<pc>0730-b<k1>maqaka<k2>maqaka
{#maqaka#}¦ {%maḍaka, as,%} m. Eleusine Coracana
[cf. {%maṭṭaka%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>36149<pc>0730-b<k1>maqava<k2>maqava
{#maqava#}¦ {%maḍava%} or {%maḍava-rājya, am,%} n., N.
of a district in Kāśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>36150<pc>0730-b<k1>maqqacandra<k2>maqqacandra
{#maqqacandra#}¦ {%maḍḍa-candra, as,%} m., N. of a man
(mentioned in Rāja-taraṅgiṇī VIII. 3416).
<LEND>

<L>36151<pc>0730-b<k1>maqqu<k2>maqqu
{#maqqu#}¦ {%maḍḍu, us,%} or {%maḍḍuka, as,%} m. a sort
of drum; [cf. {%māḍḍuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36152<pc>0730-b<k1>maR<k2>maR
{#maR#}¦ {%maṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%maṇati, mamāṇa,%} &c.,
to sound, murmur.
<LEND>

<L>36153<pc>0730-b<k1>maRi<k2>maRi
{%Maṇi, is,%}¦ m. f. (usually m., said to be fr. rt. {%maṇ,%}
Uṇādi-s. IV. 117; a form {%maṇī,%} f., is also given),
[Page0730-c+ 81]
a jewel, gem, precious stone (especially a pearl, bead,
or other globular ornament); an ornament or amulet
in general; anything excellent of its kind (e. g.
{%khaga-maṇi,%} a jewel of a bird); a crystal [cf. {%kāca-%}
{%m˚%}]; a magnet, loadstone; glans penis; clitoris;
the fleshy excrescences or processes on the neck of a
goat; {%= maṇi-bhandha,%} the wrist; a water-pot {%(=%}
{%aliñjara);%} N. of a Nāga; N. of a companion of
Skanda (associated with Su-maṇi in Mahā-bh. Śalya-
p. 2534); N. of a sage (in Mahā-bh. Sabhā-p. 442);
of a son of Yuyudhāna (in Hari-vaṃśa 9207; also
read {%tūṇi%}); of a work (abridged from the full title
of Tattva-cintāmaṇi, q. v.); of a collection of magical
formulas; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μάννος, μόννος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>monile.</nsi>]
{%—Maṇi-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. the blue jay or roller bird;
N. of a Nāga. {%—Maṇikaṇṭhaka, as,%} m. a cock.
{%—Maṇi-karṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} ‘jewel-eared,’
having an ornament of any kind (as a mark) on the
ear; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Śiva-liṅga in Kāma-rūpa;
{%(ī),%} f. {%= maṇi-karaṇikā%} below. {%—Maṇi-karaṇikā,%} f.,
N. of a sacred pool or tank in Benares much fre-
quented by pilgrims, (also written {%maṇi-karṇikī%});
of a daughter of Caṇḍa-ghoṣa. {%—Maṇikarṇikā-%}
{%mahiman, ā,%} m. and {%maṇikarṇikā-stotra, am,%} n.,
N. of two works by Gaṅgā-dhara. {%—Maṇikarṇikā-%}
{%māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of the twenty-second chapter
of the Uttara-khaṇḍa of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%karṇīśvara (˚ṇī-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a Śiva-liṅga at
Benares. {%—Maṇikarṇeśvara (˚ṇa-īś˚), as,%} m., N.
of a Śiva-liṅga in Kāma-rūpa. {%—Maṇi-kāca, as,%} m.
the feathered part of an arrow. {%—Maṇi-kāñcana,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a mountain (mentioned in Mahā-bhā-
rata Bhīṣma-p. 426). {%—Maṇi-kānana, am,%} n. a
wood or grove containing jewels; the neck, throat
(as covered with jewels). {%—Maṇi-kāra, as,%} m. a
worker in precious stones, lapidary, jeweller; N. of
the author of the work called Maṇi; of the author
of the Nyāya-cintāmaṇi. {%—Maṇi-kuṭṭikā,%} f. [cf.
{%kuṭṭaka%}], N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on
Skanda. {%—Maṇi-kusuma, as,%} m., N. of a Jina.
{%—Maṇi-kūṭa, as,%} m., N. of a mountain in Kāma-
rūpa. {%—Maṇi-kṛt, t,%} m. {%= maṇi-kāra%}. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%ketu, us,%} m., N. of a particular comet or meteor.
{%—Maṇi-gaṇa, as,%} m. a multitude of pearls. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%guṇa-nikara, as,%}  m. ‘a multitude of strings of pearls,’
a species of the Ati-śakkarī metre, four times
<lang n="meter">˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘, ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ¯.</lang> {%—Maṇi-grīva, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘jewel-necked,’ wearing a necklace; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a son of Kuvera. {%—Maṇi-cūḍa, as,%} m., N. of
a Vidyā-dhara; of a king of Sāketa-nagara ({%= ratna-%}
{%cūḍa%}); of a Nāga. {%—Maṇi-cchidrā,%} f. ‘jewel-
holed,’ N. of two medicinal herbs; {%= medā%}. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%jalā,%} ‘having jewel-like water,’ N. of a river.
{%—Maṇi-tāraka, as,%} m. ‘jewel-eyed’ [cf. {%tāraka%}];
the Indian crane. {%—Maṇi-daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} ‘jewel-
handled,’ having a handle adorned with jewels. {%—Ma-%}
{%ṇi-datta, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Maṇi-dara, as,%}
m., N. of a chief of the Yakṣas. {%—Maṇi-darpaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. a mirror adorned with jewels or consisting of
jewels; N. of a work on music. {%—Maṇi-dīdhiti,%}
{%is,%} f., N. of a work (abridged from the full title
of Anumāna-maṇidīdhiti). {%—Maṇidīdhiti-gūḍhār-%}
{%tha-prakāśikā,%} f., N. of a commentary by Bhavā-
nanda Siddhānta-vāg-īśa on the Maṇi-dīdhiti (said
to be an epitome of the Dīdhiti). {%—Maṇi-dīpa%} or
{%maṇi-dīpika, as,%} m. ‘jewel-lamp,’ a lamp having
jewels. {%—Maṇi-doṣa, as,%} m. a flaw or defect in a
jewel. {%—Maṇi-dvīpa, as,%} m. ‘jewel-island,’ N. of a
mythical island in the ocean of nectar; the hood of
the serpent Ananta. {%—Maṇi-dhanu, us,%} m. ‘jewel-
bow,’ a rain-bow; N. of a king, (also read {%maṇi-%}
{%dhāna%} or {%maṇi-dhāṇya.%}) {%—Maṇi-dhanus, us,%}
n. ‘jewel-bow,’ a rain-bow. {%—Maṇi-dhara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having or wearing jewels or beads. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%dhāna,%} see {%maṇi-dhanu%} above. {%—Maṇi-nāga, as,%}
m., N. of a snake-demon; N. of a sacred bathing-
place. {%—Maṇi-niryātana, am,%} n. the restitution of
a jewel. {%—Maṇi-padma, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-
sattva. {%—Maṇi-parvata, as,%} m. ‘jewel-mountain,’
N. of a mythical mountain. {%—Maṇi-pālī,%} f. ‘jewel-
keeper,’ a woman who has charge of pearls &c., a
[Page0731-a+ 81]
female keeper of jewels. {%—Maṇi-pucchī,%} f. ‘jewel-
tailed,’ having jewels &c. on the tail; [cf. {%maṇi-%}
{%bāla.%}] {%—Maṇi-pura, am,%} n. {%= maṇi-pūra%}. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%puṣpaka, as,%} m., N. of the conch-shell of Saha-
deva (Bhagavad-gītā 1. 16). {%—Maṇi-puṣpeśvara%}
{%(˚pa-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's attendants.
{%—Maṇi-pūra, am,%} n., N. of a town in Kaliṅga
(situated on the sea-shore and the residence of
Babhru-vāhana); the pit of the stomach or a mysti-
cal circle on the navel; ({%as%}), m. the navel; a sort
of bodice (worn by women and richly adorned with
jewels). {%—Maṇipūraka, am,%} n., N. of a mystical
circle on the navel. {%—Maṇipūra-pati, is,%} m., N.
of king Babhru-vāhana. {%—Maṇipūra-vibhedana,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a jewel. {%—Maṇipūreśvara (˚ra-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. {%= maṇipūra-pati;%} (also written {%maṇipu-%}
{%reśvara.%}) {%—Maṇi-pradāna, am,%} n., N. of the
thirty-fourth chapter of the Sundara-kāṇḍa of the
Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Maṇi-pradīpa, as,%} m. {%= maṇi-dīpa.%}
{%—Maṇi-prabhā,%} f. ‘jewel-splendor,’ N. of a par-
ticular metre, the first line of which is ¯¯˘¯¯˘˘
¯˘¯¯ and the second, third, and fourth ˘¯˘¯¯
˘˘¯˘¯¯; of a lake. {%—Maṇi-praveka,%} a most
excellent jewel; [cf. {%praveka.%}] {%—Maṇi-bandha,%}
{%as,%} m. the fastening or putting on of jewels; the
wrist (as the place on which jewels are fastened); a
kind of metre, four times ¯˘˘¯˘¯˘˘ [cf.
{%maṇi-madhya%}]; N. of a mixed race. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%bandhana, am,%} n. the fastening on of jewels, a
string of pearls, an ornament of pearls; the part of
a ring or bracelet where the jewels are set; the wrist
or fore-arm from the wrist to the elbow. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%bāla, as, ā, am,%} ‘jewel-tailed’ or having jewel-like
lumps on the tail, (according to Mahī-dhara on Vāja-
saneyi-saṃhitā XXIV. 3 {%= maṇi-śuddha-bāla%} or
{%maṇi-varṇa-keśa.%}) {%—Maṇi-bīja, as,%} m. ‘having
jewel-like or pearl-like seeds,’ the pomegranate tree.
{%—Maṇi-bhadra, as,%} m., N. of a king of the
Yakṣas (the tutelary deity of travellers and mer-
chants, probably another name for Kuvera); of a
Jina or Jaina teacher ({%= pūrva-yakṣa%}); of a
brother of Kuvera; of a Śreṣṭhin; [cf. {%māṇi-%}
{%bhadra.%}] {%—Maṇibhadraka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
race (in Mahā-bh. Bhīṣma-p. 2099; also read {%pāri-%}
{%bhadraka%}); of a serpent-demon. {%—Maṇi-bhava,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of one of the five Dhyāni-Buddhas.
{%—Maṇi-bhitti, is,%} f. ‘jewel-walled,’ N. of the palace
of the serpent-demon Śeṣa. {%—Maṇi-bhū, ūs,%} f. a
floor inlaid with jewels. {%—Maṇi-bhūmi, is,%} f. a floor
inlaid with precious stones; a mine of jewels; [cf.
{%kuṭṭima.%}] {%—Maṇi-bhūmikā,%} f. a floor inlaid with
jewels; (according to a Scholiast {%maṇibhūmikā-%}
{%karman = kṛtrima-putrikā-nirmāṇa.%}) {%—Maṇi-%}
{%mañjarī,%} f. rows of jewels or pearls; a species of
the Ati-dhṛti metre, four times ˘¯¯¯˘˘˘˘˘˘
¯¯˘¯˘˘¯˘¯. {%—Maṇi-maṇḍapa, as,%} m. ‘jewel-
palace, crystal-palace,’ N. of the residence of Śeṣa
and of Nairṛta, the ruler of the south-west quarter.
{%—Maṇi-maṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} set or studded with
jewels or pearls. {%—Maṇi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
or adorned with jewels, jewelled; ({%ān%}), m. the sun;
N. of a Yakṣa; of a servant of Śiva; of a Rakṣas;
of a Nāga; of a king (who was Vṛtra in a former
birth); of a mountain; of a place of pilgrimage;
({%atī%}), f., N. of a town of the Daityas; of a river.
{%—Maṇi-madhya, am,%} n., N. of a metre, four
times ¯˘˘¯¯, ¯˘˘¯. {%—Maṇi-mantha, as,%} m.,
N. of a mountain; ({%am%}), n. {%= māṇimantha,%} rock-
salt. {%—Maṇi-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed or consisting
of jewels, set or studded with gems, jewelled. {%—Ma-%}
{%ṇimaya-bhū, ūs,%} f. a floor made of gems, a jewelled
floor; ({%uvas%}), f. pl. jewelled floors. {%—Maṇi-maheśa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a place of pilgrimage mentioned in
Raghu-nātha's Rasika-ramaṇa. {%—Maṇi-mālā,%} f. a
string of jewels or pearls, necklace of precious stones;
a circular impression left by a bite (especially in
amorous dalliance); lustre, splendor, beauty; epithet
of Lakṣmī; a kind of metre, four times ¯¯˘˘¯¯
¯¯˘˘¯¯. {%—Maṇi-miśra, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Nyāya-ratna. {%—Maṇi-muktā,%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Maṇi-mekhala, as, ā, am,%} girdled with
[Page0731-b+ 78]
gems, surrounded by jewels. {%—Maṇi-megha, as,%} m.,
N. of a mountain. {%—Maṇi-yaṣṭi, is,%} m. f. a jewelled
staff or stick. {%—Maṇi-rata, as,%} m., N. of a Bud-
dhist teacher; (perhaps for {%maṇi-ratha%} or {%mano-%}
{%ratha.%}) {%—Maṇi-ratna, am,%} n. a jewel, gem,
precious stone. {%—Maṇiratna-maya, as, ī, am,%}
formed or consisting of jewels, jewelled. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%ratna-mālā,%} f. ‘garland of jewels,’ N. of a philo-
sophical treatise ascribed to Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%ratna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing jewels, jewelled.
{%—Maṇi-ratha,%} see {%maṇi-rata%}. {%—Maṇi-rāga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘jewel-coloured,’ having the colour of a
jewel; ({%as%}), m. ‘jewel-colour,’ the colour of jewels;
a kind of metre, four times ¯˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯¯;
({%am%}), n. vermilion {%(= hiṅgula)%}. {%—Maṇi-rāja, as,%}
m. ‘jewel-king, jewel-chief,’ (probably) a diamond
[cf. {%maṇīndra%}]. {%—Maṇi-rāma, as,%} m., N. of an
author; of a commentator who lived in the begin-
ning of this century. {%—Maṇi-liṅgeśvara (˚ga-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of one of the eight Vīta-rāgas. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m., N. of a merchant. {%—Maṇi-vāla,%}
see {%maṇi-bāla%}. {%—Maṇi-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘jewel-
bearer,’ an epithet of Kuśāmba (in Mahā-bh. Ādi-p.
2363). {%—Maṇi-viśeṣa, as,%} m. a kind of jewel; an
excellent jewel. {%—Maṇi-vīja, am,%} n. a pomegranate.
{%—Maṇi-śaṅkha-śarkara, as, ā, am,%} having jewel-
like shells and gravel. {%—Maṇi-śara = maṇi-sara.%}
{%—Maṇi-śilā,%} f. a jewelled slab. {%—Maṇi-śṛṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. (probably) N. of the sun. {%—Maṇi-śaila, as,%}
m. ‘jewel-mountain,’ N. of a mountain. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%śyāma, as, ā, am,%} dark-blue like a jewel, i. e. like
a sapphire; (according to a Scholiast {%maṇi = indra-%}
{%nīla.%}) {%—Maṇi-sara, as,%} m. a string of pearls, an
ornament of pearls, a necklace, (wrongly written
{%maṇi-śara.%}) {%—Maṇi-sāra,%} N. of a work. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} n. a string of pearls. {%—Maṇi-sopāna,%}
{%am,%} n. steps or stairs set with jewels, a jewelled
staircase; a staff or stick set with jewels (?). {%—Maṇi-%}
{%skandha, as,%} m., N. of a snake-demon. {%—Maṇi-%}
{%stambha, as,%} m. a post or column set with jewels,
a jewelled post or pillar. {%—Maṇi-sraj, k,%} f. a garland
of jewels. {%—Maṇi-harmya, am,%} n. a jewelled palace,
crystal-palace; N. of a particular palace. {%—Maṇīndra%}
{%(˚ṇi-in˚), as,%} m. ‘jewel-chief,’ (probably) a diamond
[cf. {%maṇi-rāja%}]. {%—Maṇīśvara-tīrtha (˚ṇi-īś˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Maṇy-āloka,%}
N. of a commentary by Jaya-deva Tarkālaṅkāra on
part of the Tattva-cintāmaṇī, (also called {%āloka.%})
{%—Maṇyāloka-kaṇṭakoddhāra (˚ka-ud˚), as,%} m.
‘removing thorns from the Maṇy-āloka,’ N. of a
commentary on the Maṇy-āloka.
<LEND>

<L>36154<pc>0731-b<k1>maRika<k2>maRika
{%Maṇika, as,%}¦ m. a jewel, gem, precious stone;
{%(as, am),%} m. n. a water-jar or pitcher; (according
to Sāy.) globular formations of flesh on an animal's
shoulder; [cf. {%māṇikya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36155<pc>0731-b<k1>maRita<k2>maRita
{%Maṇita, am,%}¦ n. a murmuring sound, an inarticu-
late sound said to be uttered at cohabitation, murmur
libidinosum.
<LEND>

<L>36156<pc>0731-b<k1>maRila<k2>maRila
{%Maṇila, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. having fleshy excres-
cences (as on the dew-lap &c.).
<LEND>

<L>36157<pc>0731-b<k1>maRiva<k2>maRiva
{%Maṇiva, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%a-maṇiva,%} (perhaps)
‘having no jewels’ (opposed to {%su-maṇi,%} q. v.);
({%as%}), m., N. of a serpent-demon.
<LEND>

<L>36158<pc>0731-b<k1>maRIcaka<k2>maRIcaka
{%Maṇīcaka, as,%}¦ m. a king-fisher, halcyon; ({%am%}),
n. a particular jewel, the moon-stone (probably a
sort of crystal; cf. {%candra-kānta%}).
<LEND>

<L>36159<pc>0731-b<k1>maRIya<k2>maRIya
{%Maṇīya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%maṇīyate,%} &c., to become a
jewel.
<LEND>

<L>36160<pc>0731-b<k1>maRIvaka<k2>maRIvaka
{%Maṇīvaka, am,%}¦ n. a flower.
<LEND>

<L>36161<pc>0731-b<k1>maRa<k2>maRa
{#maRa#}¦ {%maṇa%} (fr. Arabic <lang n="arabic">من</lang> a particular
measure of grain by weight = 40 ser, mentioned by
Hindū writers as used by the Turuṣkas or Muham-
madans, a ‘maund.’
<LEND>

<L>36162<pc>0731-b<k1>maRaU<k2>maRaU
{#maRaU#}¦ {%maṇaū%} (fr. Arabic <lang n="arabic">منع</lang>), N. of the
seventh Yoga (in astronomy).
<LEND>

<L>36163<pc>0731-b<k1>maRi<k2>maRi
{#maRi#}¦ {%maṇi.%} See p. 730, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36164<pc>0731-b<k1>maRitTa<k2>maRitTa
{#maRitTa#}¦ {%maṇittha, as,%} m., N. of an astro-
nomer.
<LEND>
[Page0731-c+ 78]

<L>36165<pc>0731-c<k1>maRwapI<k2>maRwapI
{#maRwapI#}¦ {%maṇṭapī,%} f. a species of pot-herb
({%= kṣudropodakī%}).
<LEND>

<L>36166<pc>0731-c<k1>maRwi<k2>maRwi
{#maRwi#}¦ {%maṇṭi, is,%} m., N. of a man; (pro-
bably wrongly for {%māṇṭi.%})
<LEND>

<L>36167<pc>0731-c<k1>maRW<k2>maRW
{#maRW#}¦ {%maṇṭh,%} cl. 1. A. {%maṇṭhate,%} &c., to
desire eagerly, long for; to remember
with regret, to meditate sorrowfully, grieve for.
<LEND>

<L>36168<pc>0731-c<k1>maRWa<k2>maRWa
{#maRWa#}¦ {%maṇṭha, as,%} m. a sort of baked
sweetmeat.
<LEND>

<L>36169<pc>0731-c<k1>maRWaka<k2>maRWaka
{#maRWaka#}¦ {%maṇṭhaka,%} a particular musical air;
[cf. {%prati-m˚, maṇḍaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36170<pc>0731-c<k1>maRq<k2>maRq
{#maRq#}¦ {%maṇḍ%} (connected with rts. 2. {%mad,%}
{%mand%}), cl. 1. P. {%maṇḍati, mamaṇḍa,%}
{%maṇḍitum,%} to adorn one's self; cl. 1. A. {%maṇḍate,%}
&c., to clothe, dress; to surround, encompass; to
divide, distribute; cl. 10. P. (ep. also A.) {%maṇḍa-%}
{%yati (-te), -yitum,%} to adorn; to rejoice, exhilarate;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>mund-u-s, mund-are.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>36171<pc>0731-c<k1>maRqa<k2>maRqa
{%Maṇḍa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (in Uṇādi-s. 1. 113. said
to be fr. rt. {%man%}), that part of any fluid which
rises and collects on the surface in the process of
fermentation or while boiling; the scum or thick
oily matter which forms on the surface of any liquor
or liquid; the thick part of milk, cream, ({%dadhi-ja%}
{%maṇḍa,%}) sour cream; cf. {%dadhi-m˚%}); the spirituous
part of wine, &c.; the scum of boiled rice (or any
grain); skimmings, scum, foam or forth in general;
barm, ferment; gruel; the best part of anything,
essence, pith {%(= sāra);%} the head; ({%as%}), m. orna-
ment, decoration; the castor-oil tree, Ricinus Com-
munis [cf. {%amaṇḍa%}]; a particular species of pot-
herb; a frog [cf. {%maṇḍūka%}]; ({%ā%}), f. the emblic
myrobalan tree {%(= āmalakī);%} spirituous or vinous
liquor, brandy; ({%am%}), n. (Ved.) an oar (? connected
with {%maṅga%}). {%—Maṇḍa-karaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
man; [cf. {%māṇḍakarṇi.%}] {%—Maṇḍa-citra, as,%} m.,
N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the family of Maṇḍa-
citra. {%—Maṇḍa-pa, as, ā, am,%} drinking the scum
of boiled rice or of any liquor, sipping cream, &c.;
{%(as, am),%} m. n. an open hall or temporary shed erected
on festive occasions, (in this sense probably fr. {%maṇḍa,%}
an ornament, + 3. {%pā%}); a temple or building conse-
crated to a deity; a pavilion, shed, tent; an arbour,
bower; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of pulse or
leguminous plant {%(= niṣpāvī)%}. {%—Maṇḍapa-kṣe-%}
{%tra, am,%} n., N. of a particular sacred district. {%—Maṇ-%}
{%ḍapa-pratiṣṭhā,%} f. the consecration of a temple.
{%—Maṇḍa-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of cream or
from the scum of any liquid. {%—Maṇḍa-hāraka,%}
{%as,%} m. a distiller of spirits, &c. {%—Maṇḍodaka (˚ḍa-%}
{%ud˚), am,%} n. barm, yeast; the decorating of walls,
floors, &c. on festive occasions; {%= citta-rāga,%} mental
excitement; (according to some) {%= citra-rāga,%} varie-
gated colour.
<LEND>

<L>36172<pc>0731-c<k1>maRqaka<k2>maRqaka
{%Maṇḍaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ a sort of thick gruel
made of rice &c., (at the end of a comp., e. g.
{%priya-maṇḍaka,%} fond of this dish); ({%as%}), m. a
sort of pastry or baked flour; a particular musical
air [cf. {%maṇṭhaka%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people,
(also read {%mandaka;%} cf. {%maṇḍika.%})
<LEND>

<L>36173<pc>0731-c<k1>maRqana<k2>maRqana
{%Maṇḍana, as, ā, am,%}¦ adorning, dressing out,
decorating; fond of ornament; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
man, {%= maṇḍana-miśra%} below; ({%am%}), n. the act
of adorning or decorating, bedecking one's self, de-
coration, jewels, trinkets, ({%maṇḍanaṃ kurute,%} she
adorns herself); ornament, embellishment; N. of a
work. {%—Maṇḍana-kavi, is,%} m., N. of a Pandit.
{%—Maṇḍana-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a philosopher
(also called Sureśvarācārya and Viśva-rūpācārya).
{%—Maṇḍanārha (˚na-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy of
ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>36174<pc>0731-c<k1>maRqanaka<k2>maRqanaka
{%Maṇḍanaka%}¦ in {%mukha-m˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36175<pc>0731-c<k1>maRqapika<k2>maRqapika
{%Maṇḍapika, as,%}¦ m. or {%maṇḍapikā,%} f. (fr. {%maṇḍa-%}
{%pa%} above), a little pavilion; a small shed, shop.
<LEND>

<L>36176<pc>0731-c<k1>maRqayanta<k2>maRqayanta
{%Maṇḍayanta, as,%}¦ m. an ornament; an actor; an
assembly of women; food; ({%ī%}), f. a woman.
<LEND>

<L>36177<pc>0731-c<k1>maRqika<k2>maRqika
{%Maṇḍika, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people; (also read
{%śuṇḍika.%})
<LEND>
[Page0732-a+ 79]

<L>36178<pc>0732-a<k1>maRqita<k2>maRqita
{%Maṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ adorned, ornamented, deco-
rated; {%(as),%} m. (with Jainas) N. of one of the
eleven Gaṇādhipas; a Vāsiṣṭha. {%—Maṇḍita-pu-%}
{%tra, as,%} m. {%= maṇḍita,%} N. of one of the eleven
Gaṇādhipas.
<LEND>

<L>36179<pc>0732-a<k1>maRqapa<k2>maRqapa
{#maRqapa#}¦ {%maṇḍa-pa.%} See under {%maṇḍa,%} p. 731,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36180<pc>0732-a<k1>maRqapUla<k2>maRqapUla
{#maRqapUla#}¦ {%maṇḍapūla,%} boots with legs, high
boots, jack-boots.
<LEND>

<L>36181<pc>0732-a<k1>maRqarI<k2>maRqarI
{#maRqarI#}¦ {%maṇḍarī,%} f. a sort of cricket; [cf.
{%māṇḍarika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36182<pc>0732-a<k1>maRqala<k2>maRqala
{#maRqala#}¦ {%maṇḍala, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr.
rt. {%maṇḍ%}), round; ({%as%}), m. a circular array of troops,
an army drawn up in a circle; a species of snake; a
dog; ({%am%}), n. a disk (especially the disk of the sun
or moon); anything round (e. g. {%ādarśa-maṇḍa-%}
{%lam,%} a mirror; {%cāpa-maṇḍalam,%} the circular bend
of a strung bow); a circle, globe, ball, orb, wheel,
circumference, ring, (said to be also {%as,%} m.); the
path or orbit of a heavenly body; a great circle (in
astronomy); the visible horizon; a halo round the
sun or moon; any circular figure or diagram; a sort
of mystical diagram formed in summoning a divinity,
&c.; a circular bandage (in surgery); a round mark
(as a mark caused by a finger-nail, &c.); a parti-
cular attitude or position of the feet in shooting; a
district, arrondissement, territory, province (sometimes
at the end of modern names as in Coro-mandal, the
whole circle of territory over which one of the twelve
emperors termed Cakra-vartins was supposed to have
reigned in ancient times); a surrounding district or
territory, the circle of a king's near and distant
neighbours (with whom he must maintain political
and diplomatic relations; four or six or ten or even
twelve such neighbouring princes are enumerated);
a multitude, assemblage, group, troop, collection,
band, whole body, association, society, company,
heap; a division of the Ṛg-veda, (the whole Saṃ-
hitā of the Śākala school, which is the only extant
Śākhā or recension of the Ṛg-veda, is divided into
ten Maṇḍalas, and these into 85 Anuvākas or
sections, and these again into 1017, or with the
eleven additional hymns, into 1028 Sūktas or hymns,
which again are divided into 10, 417 Ṛcs or verses,
and these into 153, 826 Padas or words; the other
method of division is into Aṣṭakas, Adhyāyas,
Vargas, Ṛcs, and Padas; cf. {%varga%}); a sort of
cutaneous eruption or leprosy with circular spots, (in
this sense also n. pl.); a sugar-ball, sweetmeat; a
sort of perfume {%(= vyāghra-nakha);%} a particular
oblation or sacrifice; ({%ī%}), f. a circle, &c.; an assem-
blage, company, corporate body, church, multitude,
crowd; walking round, whirling, circular motion; a
nest; bent grass, Panicum Dactylon (see {%dūrvā%}).
{%—Maṇḍala-kārmuka, as, ā, am,%} having a circular
bow or whose bow is bent; [cf. {%maṇḍalī-kṛta.%}]
{%—Maṇḍala-cihna, am,%} n. the sign or mark of a
circle. {%—Maṇḍala-nṛtya, am,%} n. a circular dance
(especially a dance like that said to have been
danced by the Gopīs round Kṛṣṇa and his mistress
Rādhā; also read {%maṇḍalī-nṛtya%}). {%—Maṇḍala-%}
{%nyāsa, am,%} n. the putting down or drawing a
circle; {%maṇḍala-nyāsaṃ kṛ,%} to describe a circle.
{%—Maṇḍala-pattrikā,%} f. a red-flowering Punar-
navā. {%—Maṇḍala-pucchaka, as,%} m. a species of
insect. {%—Maṇḍala-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n., N. of an
Upaniṣad. {%—Maṇḍala-bhāga, as,%} m. part of a
circle. {%—Maṇḍala-vaṭa, as,%} m. an Indian fig-tree
forming a circle; [cf. {%maṇḍalin.%}] {%—Maṇḍala-var-%}
{%tin, ī,%} m. the governor of a province, ruler of a
small kingdom; [cf. {%cakra-vartin.%}] {%—Maṇḍala-%}
{%varṣa, am,%} n. (probably) general rain extending
over a whole country, lasting rain. {%—Maṇḍala-śas,%}
ind. by circles, in circles, in rings. {%—Maṇḍalāgra%}
{%(˚la-ag˚), as, ā, am,%} round-pointed, having a round
point or end; ({%as%}), m. a bent or rounded sword, a
scimitar, sabre; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%śastra,%} a surgeon's
circular knife. {%—Maṇḍalādhipa%} or {%maṇḍalādhīśa%}
{%(˚la-adh˚), as,%} m. the lord of a district, ruler or
[Page0732-b+ 79]
governor of a province, king of a country, a monarch,
emperor. {%—Maṇḍalī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of
making round, rounding, gathering in a ball or
circle, coiling, &c. {%—Maṇḍalī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kartum,%} to make round, form into a circle or ball,
form into a ring, coil. {%—Maṇḍalī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
formed into a circle, made circular, rounded, curved,
tense, bent (as a bow). {%—Maṇḍalī-nṛtya = maṇ-%}
{%ḍala-nṛtya,%} q. v. {%—Maṇḍalī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bha-%}
{%vati, -bhavitum,%} to become round, to form a circle.
{%—Maṇḍalī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become round, be-
come circular or rounded, curved, bent (as a bow).
{%—Maṇḍaleśa (˚la-īśa)%} or {%maṇḍaleśvara (˚la-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. the lord of a district, ruler or governor
of a province. {%—Maṇḍaleśa-tva, am,%} n. rulership
of a province, governorship. {%—Maṇḍalottama (˚la-%}
{%ut˚), am,%} n. the best or most excellent empire,
principal kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>36183<pc>0732-b<k1>maRqalaka<k2>maRqalaka
{%Maṇḍalaka, am,%}¦ n. a disk; a circle; a district,
province; a cutaneous disease, white leprosy with
round spots; a circular array of troops; a group; a
mirror; ({%as%}), m. a dog. {%—Maṇḍalaka-rājan, ā,%}
m. the king of a small district or province.
<LEND>

<L>36184<pc>0732-b<k1>maRqalaya<k2>maRqalaya
{%Maṇḍalaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%maṇḍalayati,%} &c., to
make round or circular.
<LEND>

<L>36185<pc>0732-b<k1>maRqalAya<k2>maRqalAya
{%Maṇḍalāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%maṇḍalāyate, -yitum,%} to
become a circle, form one's self into a circle or ring,
coil one's self.
<LEND>

<L>36186<pc>0732-b<k1>maRqalAyamAna<k2>maRqalAyamAna
{%Maṇḍalāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming circular,
forming one's self into a circle or ring, coiling one's
self.
<LEND>

<L>36187<pc>0732-b<k1>maRqalAyita<k2>maRqalAyita
{%Maṇḍalāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ formed into a circle or
ring; round, circular, {%= vartula?; (am),%} n. a ball,
globe.
<LEND>

<L>36188<pc>0732-b<k1>maRqalita<k2>maRqalita
{%Maṇḍalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made round or circular,
({%pari-maṇḍalita,%} rounded, whirled round.) {%—Maṇ-%}
{%ḍalita-hasta-kāṇḍa, as,%} m. having a trunk formed
in rings or circles (said of an elephant).
<LEND>

<L>36189<pc>0732-b<k1>miRqalin<k2>miRqalin
{%Miṇḍalin, i, inī, i,%}¦ forming a circle or ring,
made up into a coil or ball; possessing or ruling a
country; {%(ī),%} m. ‘marked with round spots,’ a par-
ticular kind of snake {%(= go-nāsa);%} ‘ringed,’ any
snake; the ruler of a district or province; a pole-cat;
a cat; a dog; the Indian fig-tree [cf. {%maṇḍala-%}
{%vaṭa%}]; the sun.
<LEND>

<L>36190<pc>0732-b<k1>maRqita<k2>maRqita
{#maRqita#}¦ {%maṇḍita.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36191<pc>0732-b<k1>maRqu<k2>maRqu
{#maRqu#}¦ {%maṇḍu, us,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi; [cf.
{%māṇḍavya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36192<pc>0732-b<k1>maRquka<k2>maRquka
{%Maṇḍuka%}¦ in {%paṅka-m˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36193<pc>0732-b<k1>maRqUka<k2>maRqUka
{#maRqUka#}¦ {%maṇḍūka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%maṇḍ%}), a frog; N. of a particular breed of horses;
the plant Calosanthes Indica; N. of a Ṛṣi; of a
Nāga; (according to some) {%= gāḍha-tejas?; (ā),%}
f. the plant Rubia Munjista, {%= mañjiṣṭhā; (ī),%} f.
a female frog; N. of several plants ({%= maṇḍūka-%}
{%parṇī%}); Hydrocotyle Asiatica; Polanisia Icosandra;
Clerodendrum Siphonanthus; a particular shrub (com-
monly called Khulakuḍī); a wanton woman; ({%am%}),
n. a kind of coitus; (if {%maṇḍūka%} occurs at the end of
an adj. comp. the fem. ends in {%ā.%}) {%—Maṇḍūka-kula,%}
{%am,%} n. a collection or assemblage of frogs. {%—Maṇ-%}
{%ḍūka-gati-lālasa, as, ā, am,%} ardently desiring the
gait of a frog. {%—Maṇḍūka-parṇa, as,%} m., N. of
several plants, Calosanthes Indica, {%= kapītana; (ī),%}
f. Rubia Munjista; Clerodendrum Siphonanthus;
Polanisia Icosandra; Hydrocotyle Asiatica; a par-
ticular shrub (commonly called Khulakuḍī). {%—Maṇ-%}
{%ḍūkaparṇikā,%} f. {%= maṇḍūka-parṇī%}. {%—Maṇḍūka-%}
{%pluti, is,%} f. ‘frog-leap,’ the passing over or skipping
of several Sūtras and supplying from a previous Sūtra
(in grammar). {%—Maṇḍūka-mātṛ, tā,%} f. ‘the mother
of frogs,’ the plant Clerodendrum Siphonanthus.
{%—Maṇḍūka-yoga, as,%} m. a particular kind of ab-
stract meditation in which an ascetic sits motionless
like a frog. {%—Maṇḍūkayoga-niyata, as, ā, am,%}
intent upon the frog-meditation. {%—Maṇḍūkayoga-%}
{%śayana, am,%} n. lying like a frog in deep medita-
tion. {%—Maṇḍūka-śāyin, ī, inī, i,%} lying like a frog.
{%—Maṇḍūka-sarasa, am,%} n. a frog-pond, pond
[Page0732-c+ 72]
full of frogs [cf. Pāṇ. V. 4, 94]. {%—Maṇḍūkānu-%}
{%vṛtti (˚ka-an˚), is,%} f. ‘frog-course,’ skipping over
or omitting at intervals; [cf. {%maṇḍūka-pluti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36194<pc>0732-c<k1>maRqUra<k2>maRqUra
{#maRqUra#}¦ {%maṇḍūra, am,%} n. rust of iron, scoriæ,
dross. {%—Maṇḍūra-dhāṇikī,%} f., Ved. a particular
abusive and indelicate expression.
<LEND>

<L>36195<pc>0732-c<k1>mat<k2>mat
{#mat#}¦ {%mat%} or {%mad,%} abl. of 3. {%ma,%} q. v. (serv-
ing for the base of the singular number of the first
personal pronoun at the beginning of compounds, the
proper form in these cases being {%mad,%} see 1. {%mad%}).
<LEND>

<L>36196<pc>0732-c<k1>matkfta<k2>matkfta
{%Mat-kṛta, mat-para,%}¦ &c. See under 1. {%mad,%}
p. 734, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36197<pc>0732-c<k1>mata<k2>mata
{#mata#}¦ {%mata.%} See p. 740, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36198<pc>0732-c<k1>mataNga<k2>mataNga
{#mataNga#}¦ {%mataṅga, as,%} m. (according to some
fr. {%matam + ga,%} going wilfully), an elephant; a
cloud; N. of a Muni (mentioned in Mahā-bh. Ādi-p.
2925, &c.); of a Dānava; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the family
of this Muni. {%—Mataṅga-ja, as,%} m. an elephant.
{%—Mataṅgaja-tva, am,%} n. the being an elephant.
{%—Mataṅga-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-
place (mentioned in the Śiva-Purāṇa). {%—Mataṅga-%}
{%deva, as,%} m., N. of a fabulous being. {%—Mataṅga-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Mataṅga-vāpī,%} f.,
N. of a sacred tank. {%—Mataṅga-hataka, as,%} m.,
N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36199<pc>0732-c<k1>mataNginI<k2>mataNginI
{%Mataṅginī,%}¦ f., N. of a daughter of Mandara.
<LEND>

<L>36200<pc>0732-c<k1>matallikA<k2>matallikA
{#matallikA#}¦ {%matallikā,%} f. (at the end of a
comp.), anything excellent of its kind [cf. {%macar-%}
{%cika, go-m˚%}]; a particular metre, four times ˘¯˘¯
˘¯˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>36201<pc>0732-c<k1>matallI<k2>matallI
{%Matallī,%}¦ f. {%= matallikā,%} anything excellent of
its kind.
<LEND>

<L>36202<pc>0732-c<k1>matasna<k2>matasna
{#matasna#}¦ {%matasna, e,%} n. du., Ved., N. of
certain internal organs of the body, (perhaps) the
kidneys; (according to Mahī-dhara on Vājasaneyi-
saṃhitā XIX. 85) {%= hṛdayobhaya-pārśva-sthe%}
{%asthinī,%} two bones situated on either side of the
heart.
<LEND>

<L>36203<pc>0732-c<k1>mati<k2>mati
{#mati#}¦ {%mati.%} See p. 740, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36204<pc>0732-c<k1>matinAra<k2>matinAra
{#matinAra#}¦ {%matināra, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>36205<pc>0732-c<k1>matila<k2>matila
{#matila#}¦ {%matila, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>36206<pc>0732-c<k1>matIkf<k2>matIkf
{#matIkf#}¦ {%matī-kṛ.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>36207<pc>0732-c<k1>matuTa<k2>matuTa
{#matuTa#}¦ {%matutha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%man%}), an in-
telligent person ({%= medhāvin%}).
<LEND>

<L>36208<pc>0732-c<k1>matula<k2>matula
{#matula#}¦ {%matula,%} (with Buddhists) a parti-
cular high number.
<LEND>

<L>36209<pc>0732-c<k1>matka<k2>matka<h>1
{#matka#} 1¦. {%matka, as,%} m. (for 2. see p. 734,
col. 1), a bug, {%= matkuṇa%} below.
<LEND>

<L>36210<pc>0732-c<k1>matkuRa<k2>matkuRa
{%Matkuṇa, as,%}¦ m. a bug; a flea; a beardless man;
an elephant without tusks; a small elephant; a
buffalo; a cocoa-nut; ({%ā%}), f. pudendum (of a young
girl, {%= ajāta-loma-bhaga%}); N. of a river; ({%am%}),
n. armour for the thighs or legs, greaves ({%= jaṅghā-%}
{%trāṇa;%} cf. {%maṅkṣaṇa%}). {%—Matkuṇāri (˚ṇa-ari),%}
{%is,%} m. ‘bug-enemy,’ hemp.
<LEND>

<L>36211<pc>0732-c<k1>matkuRikA<k2>matkuRikA
{%Matkuṇikā%}¦ or {%matkulikā,%} f., N. of one of the
Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>36212<pc>0732-c<k1>matta<k2>matta
{#matta#}¦ {%matta, matta-kāla, matta-gāminī, mat-%}
{%ta-dantin,%} &c. See p. 734, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36213<pc>0732-c<k1>matya<k2>matya<h>1
{#matya#} 1¦. {%matya, am,%} n. (for 2. see p. 741), a
harrow, roller; a club (perhaps with teeth, Ved.); har-
rowing, rolling, making even or level; [cf. {%madi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36214<pc>0732-c<k1>matIkf<k2>matIkf
{%Matī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to harrow,
roll, make even by rolling.
<LEND>

<L>36215<pc>0732-c<k1>matsa<k2>matsa
{#matsa#}¦ {%matsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%mad,%} to re-
joice), {%= matsya,%} a fish (‘the gay one’); the king of
the Matsyas, (also read {%matsa,%} q. v.); ({%ī%}), f. {%=%}
{%matsyā,%} p. 733, col. 1. {%—Matsa-gaṇṭa, as,%} m. a
kind of fish-sauce ({%= vyañjana-viśeṣa;%} perhaps
for {%matsa-ghaṇṭa,%} cf. {%matsya-ghaṇṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>36216<pc>0732-c<k1>matsara<k2>matsara
{%Matsara, as, ā, am%}¦ (according to Uṇādi-s. III.
73. fr. rt. 2. {%mad;%} according to others fr. {%mat + %}
[Page0733-a+ 81]
{%sṛ%}), exhilarating, intoxicating (Ved.; according to
Sāy. {%= tṛpti-kara, tṛpti-hetu,%} satisfying); envious,
grudging, jealous, hostile; selfish, self-interested; in-
satiate, greedy, covetous; niggardly; wicked; ({%as%}),
m. the exhilarater, i. e. Soma; envy, jealousy, en-
mity, hostility; greediness after, selfish eagerness for
or addiction to (with loc.); anger, passion; {%(as, ā),%}
m. f. a gnat, musquito (usually fem.). {%—Matsara-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. {%= matsara,%} exhilarating, in-
toxicating, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IX. 97,
32 {%= madakara-rasa-yukta,%} having intoxicating
juice.)
<LEND>

<L>36217<pc>0733-a<k1>matsarin<k2>matsarin
{%Matsarin, ī, iṇī, i, = matsara,%}¦ exhilarating, in-
toxicating (Ved., Sāy. {%= madayitṛ%}); envious, jealous,
grudging; greedy after, selfishly eager for or addicted
to (with loc.); wicked, depraved, bad. {%—Matsarin-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very exhilarating, very in-
toxicating (Sāy. {%= atiśayena madayitṛ%} or {%mada-%}
{%kārin%}).
<LEND>

<L>36218<pc>0733-a<k1>matsya<k2>matsya
{%Matsya, as,%}¦ m. a fish (‘the gay one’); a parti-
cular species of fish (probably the Sapharī); (in
astronomy) the figure of a fish ({%= timi,%} q. v.); a
king of the Matsyas (also called Matsa; cf. Mahā-bh.
Virāṭa-p. 16, 18, 145, Ādi-p. 2393, 2396, where
the name is applied to Virāṭa as having been found
by fishermen, along with his sister Matsyā or Satya-
vatī, in the body of the Apsaras Adrikā, metamorphosed
into a fish); N. of a pupil of Deva-mitra Śākalya,
(also read {%vātsya%}); a particular luminous appear-
ance; {%(au),%} m. du. the twelfth sign of the zodiac
or Pisces (figured by two fish); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people and country (mentioned in Manu II. 19. as
forming part of the district called Brahmarṣi), the
country of Virāṭa; ({%syā%} or {%sī%}), f., N. of the sister
of king Virāṭa; [cf. Hib. <nsi>meas,</nsi> ‘a fish;’ <nsi>measach,</nsi>
‘fishy.’] {%—Matsya-karaṇḍikā,%} f. a fish-basket, any
hamper or receptacle for fish. {%—Matsya-kūrmādy-%}
{%avatārin (˚ma-ād˚), ī,%} m. ‘descending (and be-
coming incarnate) as a fish, tortoise, &c.,’ an epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Matsya-gandha, as, ā, am,%} having
the smell of fish; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a race; ({%ā%}), f.
epithet of Satya-vatī (mother of Vyāsa, also called
Mīna-gandhā; see {%matsya%} above); a species of
aquatic plant {%(= lāṅgalī, jala-pippalī)%}. {%—Matsya-%}
{%ghaṇṭa, as,%} m. a kind of fish-sauce or dish of fish;
[cf. {%matsa-gaṇṭa.%}] {%—Matsya-ghāta, as,%} m. the
killing of fish, i. e. the occupation of a fisherman.
{%—Matsya-ghātin, ī,%} m. ‘fish-killer,’ a fisherman.
{%—Matsya-jāla, am,%} n. a fishing net. {%—Matsya-%}
{%jīvat, an,%} or {%matsya-jīvin, ī,%} m. ‘living by fish,
i. e. living by catching fish,’ a fisherman; [cf. {%matsyo-%}
{%pajīvin.%}] {%—Matsya-deśa, as,%} m. ‘the country
Matsya,’ N. of a country mentioned in the Ratna-
koṣa; [cf. {%matsya.%}] {%—Matsya-dvādaśī%} or {%matsya-%}
{%dvādaśikā,%} f., N. of the twelfth day in one of the
halves of the month Mārgaśīrṣa. {%—Matsya-dvīpa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘fish-island,’ N. of a Dvīpa. {%—Matsya-dhānī,%}
f. ‘fish-holder,’ a fish-basket, a small basket used by
fishermen, (also sometimes, but less accurately, applied
to a kind of snare of reeds or grass which is left in
the water and entangles the fish that swim with the
current.) {%—Matsya-dhvaja, as,%} m. a fish-shaped
standard; N. of a mountain in Kāma-rūpa. {%—Matsya-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m. ‘fish-lord,’ N. of a man ({%= matsyen-%}
{%dra,%} q. v.). {%—Matsya-nārī,%} f. ‘fish-woman, half
fish, half woman,’ epithet of Satya-vatī. {%—Matsya-%}
{%nāśaka%} or {%matsya-nāśana, as,%} m. ‘fish-destroyer,’
a sea-eagle, ospray. {%—Matsya-pittā,%} f. ‘fish-bile,’ a
species of medicinal plant ({%= kaṭu-rohiṇī;%} cf.
{%matsya-vinnā%}). {%—Matsya-purāṇa, am,%} n. ‘fish-
Purāṇa,’ N. of one of the eighteen Purāṇas, so
called as communicated by Viṣṇu in the form of a
fish to the seventh Manu, sometimes called Vaivas-
vata; [cf. {%matsyāvatāra.%}] {%—Matsya-prādurbhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘fish-manifestation,’ N. of the thirty-sixth
chapter of the Narasiṃha-Purāṇa; [cf. {%matsyāva-%}
{%tāra.%}] {%—Matsya-bandha, as,%} m. a fisherman.
{%—Matsya-bandhana, am,%} n. a fish-hook, angle;
({%ī%}), f. a fish-basket. {%—Matsya-bandhin, ī,%} m. ‘fish-
catching,’ an angler, fisherman; ({%inī%}), f. a fish-
basket (various reading for {%matsya-bandhanī%}).
[Page0733-b+ 79]
{%—Matsya-mādhava, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Matsya-raṅka%} or {%matsya-raṅga%} or {%matsya-%}
{%raṅgaka, as,%} m. a halcyon, king-fisher. {%—Matsya-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. ‘fish-king,’ the fish Cyprinus Rohita;
the king of the Matsyas. {%—Matsya-vid, t, t, t,%} know-
ing fish, an ichthyologist. {%—Matsya-vinnā,%} f. a plant
{%(= kaṭukā)%}. {%—Matsya-vedhana, am, ī,%} n. f. ‘fish-
piercing,’ a fish-hook, angle; ({%ī%}), f. a cormorant.
{%—Matsya-sagandhin, ī, inī, i,%} having a fish
smell. {%—Matsya-saṅghāta, as,%} m. a multitude of
fish, a shoal of young fry or small fish. {%—Matsya-san-%}
{%tānika, as,%} m. a particular dish of fish (eaten with
condiments and oil). {%—Matsya-sūkta, am,%} n., N. of
a work mentioned in Kṛṣṇānanda's Tantra-sāra.
{%—Matsya-han, ā,%} m., Ved. ‘fish-killer,’ a fisher-
man. {%—Matsyākṣaka (˚ya-ak˚), as,%} m. or {%mats-%}
{%yākṣakā%} or {%matsyākṣī,%} f. ‘fish-eyed (?),’ N. of a
species of Soma plant; (according to some {%mats-%}
{%yākṣī%} and {%matsyākṣikā = gaṇḍa-dūrvā,%} accord-
ing to others {%matsyākṣī = hilamocikā,%} Hingcha
Repens; {%matsyākṣī%} is sometimes read {%matsyāṅgī.%})
{%—Matsyād (˚ya-ad), t, t, t,%} or {%matsyāda (˚ya-%}
{%āda), as, ā, am,%} ‘fish-eating,’ feeding on fish.
{%—Matsyādanī,%} f. {%= jala-pippalī,%} a particular plant.
{%—Matsyāvatāra (˚ya-av˚), as,%} m. ‘fish-descent,’
N. of the first of the ten incarnations or manifesta-
tions of Viṣṇu (during the reign of the seventh
Manu, the whole earth, which had become corrupt,
was destroyed by a flood, and all living beings
perished, except the pious Manu himself, and the
seven Ṛṣis, who were preserved by the help of
Viṣṇu in the form of a fish, after having been di-
rected by him to enter a large ship with the seeds
of all existing things; while the ship floated, fastened
to the fish, Manu entered into conversation with
him, and his questions, with the replies of Viṣṇu,
form the substance of the Matsya-Purāṇa, q. v.; in
the Vana-parvan of the Mahā-bhārata, 1. 12746-
12804, the fish is represented as an incarnation of
Brahmā); N. of a division of the Khaṇḍa-praśasti,
ascribed to Hanumat, treating of the ten manifesta-
tions of Viṣṇu. {%—Matsyāvatāra-kathana, am,%} n.
‘the tale or narration of the fish-descent,’ N. of the
thirty-seventh chapter of the Uttara-khaṇḍa of the
Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Matsyāśana (˚ya-aś˚), as,%} m.
‘feeding on fishes,’ a halcyon, king-fisher. {%—Matsyā-%}
{%sura (˚ya-as˚), as,%} m. ‘fish-Asura,’ N. of an Asura.
{%—Matsyāsura-śaila-vadha, as,%} m., N. of the
ninety-second chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa or second
part of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Matsyendra (˚ya-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a teacher of the Haṭha-vidyā. {%—Mats-%}
{%yeśvara-tīrtha (˚ya-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Matsyodarin (˚ya-ud˚), ī,%} m., N. of Matsya or
Virāṭa as the brother of Matsyodarī. {%—Matsyodarī%}
{%(˚ya-ud˚),%} f. a N. of Matsyā or Satya-vatī, who with
her brother Matsya was found in the body of the
Apsaras Adrikā metamorphosed into a fish, (also read
{%matsodarī%}); N. of a sacred bathing-place in Benares.
{%—Matsyodarīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to the belly
of a fish; ({%as%}), m. ‘son of Satya-vatī or Matsyodarī,’
an epithet of Vyāsa. {%—Matsyopajīvin (˚ya-up˚), ī,%}
m. ‘living by fish,’ a fisherman; [cf. {%matsya-jīvat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36219<pc>0733-b<k1>matsyaka<k2>matsyaka
{%Matsyaka, as,%}¦ m. a little fish.
<LEND>

<L>36220<pc>0733-b<k1>matsara<k2>matsara
{#matsara#}¦ {%matsara.%} See p. 732, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36221<pc>0733-b<k1>matsya<k2>matsya
{#matsya#}¦ {%matsya.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36222<pc>0733-b<k1>matsyaRqikA<k2>matsyaRqikA
{#matsyaRqikA#}¦ {%matsyaṇḍikā%} or {%matsyaṇḍī,%} f.
(corrupted fr. {%madhu-syandī?%}), granulated sugar,
coarse or unrefined sugar.
<LEND>

<L>36223<pc>0733-b<k1>maT<k2>maT<h>1
{#maT#} 1¦. {%math%} (or {%manth,%} q. v.), cl. 1. 9. P.
(ep. also A.) {%mathati%} (Ved. {%mathāyati%}),
{%manthati, mathnāti (-te), mamantha%} or less usually
{%mamātha%} (2nd sing. {%mamanthitha,%} 3rd du. {%ma-%}
{%manthatus%} or less usually {%mamathatus,%} 3rd pl.
{%mamanthus%} or {%mamathus,%} Ved. {%methus, methire%}),
{%manthiṣyati%} or {%mathiṣyati, amanthīt%} (Ved.
{%mathīt%}), Inf. {%manthitum%} or {%mathitum,%} to rub
together (Ved.); to stir, stir up, excite (in Ved.
with {%agnim,%} to excite fire by rubbing two pieces of
wood together); to stir or whirl round, shake to-
[Page0733-c+ 79]
gether, shake, agitate; to churn, produce by churn-
ing (sometimes with two acc., e. g. {%sudhāṃ kṣīra-%}
{%nidhim mathnāti,%} he churns nectar out of the
ocean of milk); to agitate, confuse; to crush, grind,
pinch; to grind down, oppress, afflict, distress, trouble;
to destroy, kill, annihilate, hurt; to tear off, dislocate,
disjoint: Pass. {%mathyate%} (ep. also {%-ti%}), to be stirred
up or churned, &c.: Caus. {%manthayati%} or less
usually {%māthayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be stirred up
or churned, &c.: Deside. {%mimanthiṣati, mimathi-%}
{%ṣati:%} Intens. {%māmathyate, māmantti, māman-%}
{%thīti,%} Impf. 3rd sing. {%amāman;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μάτος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ματεύω, μανθάνω, μόθα-ς, μόθων, Προ-μηθ-εύ-ς =</lang>
{%pra-mantha-s,%} q. v.; Lat. <nsi>ment-ula;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>met-</nsi>
<nsi>eźÇ,</nsi> ‘tumult;’ Lith. <nsi>met-uri-s, ment-ure,</nsi> ‘a churn-
ing-stick;’ Hib. <nsi>muidhe, meadar,</nsi> ‘a churn, milk-
pail.’]
<LEND>

<L>36224<pc>0733-c<k1>maT<k2>maT<h>2
2. {%math.%}¦ See {%mathin%} below.
<LEND>

<L>36225<pc>0733-c<k1>maTa<k2>maTa
{%Matha, as,%}¦ m. {%= mātha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36226<pc>0733-c<k1>maTaka<k2>maTaka
{%Mathaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his
descendants.
<LEND>

<L>36227<pc>0733-c<k1>maTan<k2>maTan
{%Mathan (mathnā,)%}¦ inst. c. sing.), a piece of wood
for producing fire by attrition; friction, rubbing
(Ved., Sāy. {%mathnā = pramāthanena, loḍanena%}).
<LEND>

<L>36228<pc>0733-c<k1>maTana<k2>maTana
{%Mathana, as, ī, am,%}¦ rubbing; stirring round;
churning; hurting, injuring, destroying; a destroyer
[cf. {%pura-m˚, madhu-m˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. the tree
Premna Spinosa (the wood of which is used to
produce fire by attrition); ({%am%}), n. the act of rub-
bing, friction; the act of stirring round, churning
[cf. {%amṛta-m˚, manthana%}]; the act of hurting,
injury, harsh treatment, destruction; N. of a weapon.
{%—Mathanācala (˚na-ac˚), as,%} m. the mountain
(Mandara, q. v.) used as a churning-stick by the gods
and Dānavas in churning the ocean of milk; [cf.
{%mantha-śaila.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36229<pc>0733-c<k1>maTi<k2>maTi
{%Mathi, is, is, i%}¦ (at the end of a comp.), Ved.
rubbing, churning, destroying, killing [cf. {%urā-m˚%}];
({%is%}), m. a churning-stick, any staff for stirring or
churning; [cf. {%mathin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36230<pc>0733-c<k1>maTita<k2>maTita
{%Mathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stirred round, shaken about,
churned, agitated; crushed, ground, pinched, nipped;
oppressed, afflicted, distressed, anxious; destroyed,
killed; dislocated, disjointed; ({%as%}), m., N. of a de-
scendant of Yama (the reputed author of the hymn
Ṛg-veda X. 19); ({%am%}), n. buttermilk without
water, pure buttermilk.
<LEND>

<L>36231<pc>0733-c<k1>maTitf<k2>maTitf
{%Mathitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who stirs or churns,
one who destroys or annihilates, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>36232<pc>0733-c<k1>maTitvA<k2>maTitvA
{%Mathitvā%}¦ or {%manthitvā,%} ind. having stirred, hav-
ing churned, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36233<pc>0733-c<k1>maTin<k2>maTin
{%Mathin, manthās%}¦ (nom. voc. sing. {%manthās%} fr. a
base {%manthas,%} the other strong cases fr. a base
{%manthan,%} acc. pl. and other weak cases fr. a base
{%math,%} middle cases fr. {%mathin,%} see Gram. 162;
hence nom. pl. {%manthānas,%} acc. pl. {%mathas,%} inst.
sing. du. pl. {%mathā, mathibhyām, mathibhis%}), a
churning-stick, churn-staff, any stick for stirring or
churning; the penis; a thunderbolt; wind.
<LEND>

<L>36234<pc>0733-c<k1>maTIna<k2>maTIna
{%Mathīna%}¦ (said to be fr. {%mathin%} above), Nom. P.
{%mathīnati,%} &c. (meaning doubtful).
<LEND>

<L>36235<pc>0733-c<k1>maTna<k2>maTna
{%Mathna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. shaken about, agitated,
whirled, (but {%mathnā%} in Ṛg-veda I. 181, 5, is
regarded by Sāy. as inst. sing. of {%mathan%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>36236<pc>0733-c<k1>maTnat<k2>maTnat
{%Mathnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ stirring round, shaking
about, churning, agitating; oppressing.
<LEND>

<L>36237<pc>0733-c<k1>maTya<k2>maTya
{%Mathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be rubbed, to be churned,
to be extracted or produced by churning.
<LEND>

<L>36238<pc>0733-c<k1>maTyamAna<k2>maTyamAna
{%Mathyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being stirred or churned,
being rubbed.
<LEND>

<L>36239<pc>0733-c<k1>maTra<k2>maTra
{%Mathra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. tearing or whirling
along (Sāy. {%= mathana-śila%}).
<LEND>

<L>36240<pc>0733-c<k1>manTa<k2>manTa
{%Mantha, manthya,%}¦ &c. See under rt. {%manth.%}
<LEND>

<L>36241<pc>0733-c<k1>maTavya<k2>maTavya
{#maTavya#}¦ {%mathavya, as, ā, am,%} Ved., in Atharva-
veda II. 35, 2, for {%madhavya.%}
<LEND>

<L>36242<pc>0733-c<k1>maTA<k2>maTA
{#maTA#}¦ {%mathā,%} ind., Ved. a Nidhana formula.
<LEND>

<L>36243<pc>0733-c<k1>maTAta<k2>maTAta
{#maTAta#}¦ {%mathāta, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman;
[cf. {%mamātha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36244<pc>0733-c<k1>maTura<k2>maTura
{#maTura#}¦ {%mathura, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
[Page0734-a+ 80]
1. {%math%}), N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an ancient town
held in great honour as sacred to Kṛṣṇa (situated
in the province of Agra on the right bank of the
river Yamunā or Jumnā, not far from the hill Go-
vardhana in Vṛndā-vana, the scene of the amours
and exploits of Kṛṣṇa; it is described in Viṣṇu-
Purāṇa XII. 1. as having been founded by Śatru-
ghna; it was the birthplace of the god Kṛṣṇa, and
under the modern name of Muttra is to this day
the resort of crowds of devotees; according to Kul-
lūka on Manu II. 19, the town forms part of a
district, called Brahmarṣi, belonging to Śūrasena);
N. of two other towns; [cf. {%māthura, madhurā.%}]
{%—Mathurā-kāṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of a section of the
Mantra-rahasya-prakāśikā. {%—Mathurā-nātha, as,%}
m. ‘lord of Mathurā,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa; N. of
several men; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a commentary on the
Tattva-cintāmaṇi by Mathurā-nātha. {%—Mathurā-%}
{%niveśa, as,%} m., N. of the sixty-third chapter of the
Uttara-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Mathurā-mā-%}
{%hātmya, am,%} n., N. of a part of the Vārāha-Purāṇa
(containing an account of the city and temples of
Mathurā). {%—Mathurā-setu, us,%} m. ‘the bridge of
Mathurā,’ N. of a work. {%—Mathureśa (˚rā-īśa),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘lord of Mathurā,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa;
N. of the author of the Śabda-ratnāvalī, a dictionary
of synonyms.
<LEND>

<L>36245<pc>0734-a<k1>maTUrA<k2>maTUrA
{%Mathūrā,%}¦ f. {%= mathurā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>36246<pc>0734-a<k1>mad<k2>mad<h>1
{#mad#} 1¦. {%mad%} [cf. {%mat,%} p. 732, col. 3], a form
derived fr. {%mat,%} abl. of 3. {%ma,%} and serving for the
base of the first personal pronoun in the singular
number (especially at the beginning of compounds
as follow). {%—Mac-citta, as, ā, am,%} having the mind
(fixed) on me, thinking of me. {%—Mac-charīra,%}
{%am,%} n. ({%mad + ś˚%}), my body. {%—Mat-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} made by me; uttered by me; ({%e%}), ind. for the
sake of me, on my account. {%—Mat-tara, as, ā, am,%}
better or more than mine. {%—Mat-tas,%} ind. from me.
{%—Mat-para, as, ā, am,%} devoted to me. {%—Mat-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. the son of me, my son. {%—Mat-pra-%}
{%sūta, as, ā, am,%} produced from me. {%—Mat-sakāśe,%}
ind. in my presence. {%—Mat-sakhi, ā,%} m. my com-
panion, my friend. {%—Mat-sandeśa, as,%} m. news of
me, tidings of me. {%—Mat-samakṣam,%} ind. in the
presence of me, in my sight. {%—Mat-sādṛśya, am,%}
n. the likeness or resemblance of me. {%—Mad-artha,%}
{%as,%} m. my purpose; ({%am%}), ind. for the sake of me.
{%—Mad-deha, am,%} n. my body. {%—Mad-bandhana-%}
{%samudbhava, as, ā, am,%} caused by the binding of
me, i. e. by my bondage. {%—Mad-bhakta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} devoted to me. {%—Mad-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%mad-%}
{%bhavati,%} &c., to become 1. {%—Madrik,%} ind. (fr.
{%madryañc%}), Ved. to me, towards me (Sāy. {%= mad-%}
{%abhimukham%}). {%—Madryañc, aṅ, drīcī, ak%} (fr. 1.
{%mad%} with {%adri%} substituted for {%ad%} and rt. {%añc%}),
Ved. directed towards me, extending to me; {%(ak),%}
ind. towards me. {%—Madryadrik,%} ind., Ved. {%= ma-%}
{%drik%} (with reduplication of affix {%adri;%} cf. {%tadryañc%}).
{%—Mad-vacana, am,%} n. my word, my order;
{%mad-vacanāt,%} in my name, from me. {%—1. mad-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like me; (for 2. {%madvat%} see p. 736,
col. 1.) {%—Mad-vargīṇa%} or {%mad-vargīya%} or {%mad-%}
{%vargya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to my class or to my
party, connected with or related to me. {%—Mad-%}
{%vidha, as, ā, am,%} like me, equal to me, of my
sort or kind. {%—Mad-viyoga, as,%} m. separation from
me. {%—Mad-vihīna, as, ā, am,%} separated from me.
{%—Man-maya, as, ī, am,%} ‘consisting of me,’ full
of me, like me, attached to me; come forth from
me, proceeding from me.
<LEND>

<L>36247<pc>0734-a<k1>matka<k2>matka<h>2
2. {%matka, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 732, col. 3),
mine, my.
<LEND>

<L>36248<pc>0734-a<k1>madIya<k2>madIya
{%Madīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ mine, my own, belonging
to me.
<LEND>

<L>36249<pc>0734-a<k1>madya<k2>madya<h>1
1. {%madya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%madyati,%} &c., see Pāṇ. VII.
2, 98. (For 2. {%madya%} see p. 735, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>36250<pc>0734-a<k1>mad<k2>mad<h>2
{#mad#} 2¦. {%mad%} [cf. rts. {%mand, mud%}], cl. 4.
P. (rarely A. in Ved.) {%mādyati (-te), ma-%}
{%māda, amādīt, maditum%} (Vedic forms are {%madati,%}
{%mandati, -te%} [see rt. {%mand%}], {%mademahi, matsi, %}
[Page0734-b+ 81]
{%mamatsi, matsva, mamaddhi, mamattu%} by Pāṇ.
VI. 1, 192, {%mamattana, mamadas, mamadan,%}
{%matsat, matsati, amatta, amatsus, amatsata,%}
{%amandata, amandīt,%} see rt. {%mand%}), to become
drunk or inebriated, (perhaps originally <nsi>madidum</nsi>
<nsi>esse,</nsi> to be moist); to be mad; to be drunk with joy,
&c.; to revel, revel in, delight in (with inst., gen.,
loc., and rarely acc.); to be glad, rejoice, be happy; to
enjoy heavenly bliss; to be cheerful or gay; (Ved.)
to gladden, delight, amuse, exhilarate, intoxicate,
inspire, animate: Caus. {%mādayati, madayati, -yi-%}
{%tum%} (Ved. Inf. {%mādayadhyai%}), Aor. {%amīmadat,%}
{%amamadat,%} to intoxicate, inebriate, delight, exhi-
larate, gladden, satisfy; A. {%(-te),%} to be glad, rejoice,
be pleased, be happy, delight in; to enjoy heavenly
bliss: Desid. {%mimadiṣati:%} Intens. {%māmadyate,%}
{%māmatti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μαδ-αρό-ς, μαδ-ά-ω, μαδός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μαδίζω, μᾱνός;</lang> Lat. <nsi>măd-e-o, măd-i-du-s, măd-</nsi>
<nsi>e-sc-o, măde-facio, mā-na-re</nsi> from <nsi>mad-na-re;</nsi>
probably Goth. <nsi>mat-s, mat-jan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>mœte,</nsi>
<nsi>mœt-an;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>mad;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>misge,</nsi> ‘drunkenness;’
Pers. <lang n="arabic">مست</lang> <nsi>mas-t</nsi> from <nsi>med-t.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>36251<pc>0734-b<k1>matta<k2>matta
{%Matta, as, ā, am,%}¦ intoxicated, inebriated, drunk,
(often used metaphorically, as ‘drunk with love, with
joy, with pride, passion, &c.’); mad, insane, furious;
in rut, ruttish (said of animals of all kinds, but espe-
cially of an elephant); amorous, lustful, wanton;
delighted, overjoyed, excited; proud, arrogant; ({%as%}),
m. a drunkard; a madman; a furious elephant, an
elephant in rut; a buffalo; the Indian cuckoo; a thorn-
apple; N. of a Rākṣasa; ({%ā%}), f. any intoxicating
drink, spirituous or vinous liquor; a particular metre,
four times ¯¯¯¯, ˘˘˘˘¯¯. {%—Matta-kāla, as,%}
m., N. of a king of Lāṭa. {%—Matta-kāśinī,%} f. ‘ap-
pearing intoxicated,’ a bewitching or wanton woman;
(sometimes written {%matta-kāsinī%} and {%matta-kā-%}
{%ṣiṇī.%}) {%—Matta-krīḍā,%} f. a kind of metre. {%—Matta-%}
{%gāminī,%} f. ‘having the gait of an elephant in rut,’
a woman with a rolling walk, a bewitching or wanton
woman. {%—Matta-dantin, ī,%} m. a furious elephant
or one in rut. {%—Matta-nāga, as,%} m. an elephant in
rut; N. of an author. {%—Matta-mayūra, as,%} m. an
amorous peacock or one drunk with passion, a wild
or excited peacock; ({%am%}), n. a kind of metre, four
times ¯¯¯¯, ˘˘˘˘¯¯. {%—Mattamayūraka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} behaving like an amorous peacock; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. epithet of a particular warrior-tribe. {%—Matta-%}
{%mātaṅga-līlākara,%} a kind of metre. {%—Matta-vā-%}
{%raṇa, as,%} m. an elephant in rut, a furious elephant;
{%(as, am),%} m. n. a fence against drunkards, &c., a
fence or hedge round the house of a rich man; a
turret, a little room on the top of a large building or
palace; a veranda; a pavilion; {%= nir-yūha,%} q. v.;
({%am%}), n. pounded betel-nuts. {%—Mattavāraṇa-vi-%}
{%krama, as,%} m. the strength or might of a furious
elephant. {%—Matta-vilāsinī,%} f. a particular metre,
four times ¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘¯.
{%—Mattākrīḍā (˚ta-āk˚),%} f. a particular metre, four
times ¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯, ˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘¯.
{%—Mattālamba (˚ta-āl˚), as,%} m. a fence or hedge
round the house of a rich man; [cf. {%matta-vāraṇa.%}]
{%—Mattebha-kumbha-pariṇāhin (˚ta-ibh˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} round as the frontal globes of an elephant in rut.
{%—Mattebha-gamanā (˚ta-ibh˚),%} f. a woman hav-
ing the gait of an elephant in rut, a woman with a
lounging or rolling walk; [cf. {%matta-gāminī%}]
{%—Mattebha-vikrīḍita, am,%} n., N. of a particular
metre, four times ˘˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯¯¯˘
¯¯˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>36252<pc>0734-b<k1>mattaka<k2>mattaka
{%Mattaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ somewhat drunk or inebri-
ated, somewhat arrogant or proud; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a Brāhman in Rāja-taraṅgiṇī VI. 339.
<LEND>

<L>36253<pc>0734-b<k1>mattakISa<k2>mattakISa
{%Mattakīśa, as,%}¦ m. (? fr. {%mattakī + īśa%}), an ele-
phant.
<LEND>

<L>36254<pc>0734-b<k1>mada<k2>mada
{%Mada, as,%}¦ m. intoxication, drunkenness, inebriety;
madness, insanity, frenzy; ardent passion, lust, rut-
tishness, rut (especially of an elephant), lascivious-
ness, wantonness, sensual enjoyment; love, desire,
passion, ardour, inspiration; delight, rapture, joy;
pride, arrogance, presumption, conceit, petulance;
any exhilarating or intoxicating drink, spirituous
[Page0734-c+ 81]
liquor, wine; Soma; honey; the juice or ichor that
exudes from an elephant's temples when in rut;
semen virile; musk [cf. {%mṛga-mada%}]; any beautiful
object; a river; Intoxication or Insanity personified
(a monster created by Cayavana, see Mahā-bh. Vana-
p. 10389, Anuśāsana-p. 7317, 7322); N. of a son
of Brahmā; of a Dānava; of a servant of Śiva;
{%gṛtsamadasya madaḥ,%} N. of a Sāman; ({%ī%}), f.
any drinking vessel, cup, &c. ({%= caṣaka-vastu%});
any agricultural implement, a plough, &c. {%(= kṛ-%}
{%ṣaka-vastu)%}. {%—Mada-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing
intoxication, making drunk, intoxicating. {%—Mada-%}
{%karin, ī,%} m. an elephant in rut. {%—Mada-kala, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} uttering low sounds of love; sounding softly,
speaking indistinctly or like a drunkard, indistinct,
inarticulate; ruttish, under the influence of rut (as
an elephant); furious, mad; ({%as%}), m. an elephant.
{%—Mada-kāraṇa, am,%} n. a cause of pride or arro-
gance. {%—Mada-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%mada-kṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} making drunk, intoxicating {%—Mada-kohala,%}
{%as,%} m. a bull set at liberty (at a festival and allowed
to range about at will). {%—Mada-gandha, as,%} m. a
species of plant, {%= sapta-cchadā; (ā),%} f. an intoxi-
cating beverage; hemp, Linum Usitatissimum {%(=%}
{%atasī)%}. {%—Mada-gamana, as,%} m. ‘having an excited
or reeling gait,’ a buffalo. {%—Mada-guru-pakṣa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having wings heavy with honey (as
bees). {%—Mada-ghnī,%} f. ‘destroying intoxication,’ a
species of leguminous plant {%(= pūtikā)%}. {%—Mada-%}
{%cyut, t, t, t,%} distilling juice or ichor (as an elephant
in rut), lustful, wanton, drunk; joy-bestowing, in-
spiriting, gladdening, exhilarated by the Soma juice;
destroying or overcoming pride, (according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda 1. 126, 4, 1. 51, 2 {%= śatrūṇāṃ gar-%}
{%vasya cyāvayitṛ%} or {%mada-srāvin%}); ({%t%}), m. an
epithet of Indra; {%(tā),%} m. du., Ved. an epithet of the
Aśvins. {%—Mada-cyuta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. staggering
or reeling with intoxication (Sāy. {%= madārtham%}
{%prerita%}). {%—Mada-jala, am,%} n. the juice of rut,
the ichor of a ruttish elephant. {%—Mada-jvara, as,%}
m. the fever of passion; fever of pride or arrogance.
{%—Mada-dvipa, as,%} m. an elephant in rut. {%—Mada-%}
{%dhāra, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mada-pati, is,%} m.,
Ved. lord of the Soma juice (epithet of Indra and
Viṣṇu, Ṛg-veda VI. 69, 3). {%—Mada-prayoga,%}
{%as,%} m. the issue of the fluid from the temples of an
elephant in rut. {%—Mada-praseka, as,%} m. or {%mada-%}
{%prasravaṇa, am,%} n. the oozing out or exudation of
the juice from an elephant's temples (when in rut).
{%—Mada-bhañjin, ī, inī, i,%} removing or dispelling
(the effects of) intoxication; ({%inī%}), f. the plant Aspa-
ragus Racemosus. {%—Mada-mattā,%} f. a particular
metre. {%—Mada-muc, k, k, k,%} emitting or distilling
juice, being in rut (as an elephant). {%—Mada-mohita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} infatuated by drunkenness or intoxication
(Manu XI. 98), infatuated by pride. {%—Mada-rakta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} affected with love, agitated by passion,
amorous. {%—Mada-rāga, as,%} m. ‘affected by passion
or by intoxication,’ the god of love; a drunken man;
a cock. {%—Mada-rudra-datta, as,%} m., N. of an
author. {%—Mada-lekhā,%} f. a line formed by the juice
(exuding from an elephant's temples); a kind of
metre, four times ¯¯¯˘˘¯¯; N. of a woman.
{%—Mada-vāri,%} n. the juice of rut, the ichor of a
ruttish elephant. {%—Mada-vikṣipta, as, ā, am,%} dis-
tracted by passion, agitated by lust, in rut (as an
elephant). {%—Mada-vihvala, as, ā, am,%} stupefied
with liquor, mad with lust or pride. {%—Mada-vīrya,%}
{%am,%} n. the strength of passion; the heroism of love.
{%—Mada-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. invigorated by
Soma, exhilarated by the Soma juice. {%—Mada-vṛd-%}
{%dhi, is,%} f. invigoration (caused) by Soma. {%—Mada-%}
{%vṛnda, as,%} m. ‘having a quantity of juice or ichor,’
an elephant. {%—Mada-śāka, as,%} m. Basella Cordi-
folia. {%—Mada-śauṇḍaka, am,%} n. nutmeg; (also
written {%mada-sauṇḍaka.%}) {%—Mada-sāra, as,%} m.
the cotton shrub. {%—Mada-sthala%} or {%mada-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘place of intoxication,’ a drinking-house,
ale-house, dram-shop, tavern. {%—Mada-srāvin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} distilling juice as an elephant in rut. {%—Mada-%}
{%hastinī,%} f. a species of Karañja {%(= mahā-karañja). %}
[Page0735-a+ 81]
{%—Mada-hetu, us,%} m. ‘cause of intoxication,’ the
plant Grislea Tomentosa. {%—Madākula (˚da-āk˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} agitated by passion, full of lust, furious
with rut. {%—Madāgha (˚da-agha), as,%} m., N. of a
man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his descendants. {%—Madāḍhya%}
{%(˚da-āḍh˚), as, ā, am,%} rich in wine or liquor, filled
with wine, intoxicated, drunk; ({%as%}), m. the palmyra
tree or palm which yields an intoxicating liquor; ({%ā%}),
f. a red-flowering Barleria. {%—Madātaṅka (˚da-āt˚),%}
{%as,%} m. {%= madātyaya%} below. {%—Madātmānanda%}
{%(˚da-ātma-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Ma-%}
{%dātyaya (˚da-at˚), as,%} m. ‘passing off of wine,’
disorder resulting from intoxication (as head-ache,
crop-sickness, &c.); [cf. {%pānātyaya.%}] {%—Madāndha%}
{%(˚da-an˚), as, ā, am,%} blind through drunkenness,
blinded by intoxication, dead drunk, intoxicated;
blinded by passion or pride, infatuated; dissolute,
arrogant; ({%ā%}), f. a particular metre, four times
<lang n="meter">¯ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯.</lang> {%—Madāpanayana (˚da-ap˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the removal of intoxication. {%—Madāmnāta%}
{%(˚da-ām˚), as,%} m. a kettle-drum carried on an ele-
phant. {%—Madāmbara (˚da-am˚), as,%} m. the ele-
phant of Indra; an elephant in rut. {%—Madālasa%}
{%(˚da-al˚), as, ā, am,%} lazy from drunkenness, languid
with passion, indolent from pride, slothful; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of the daughter of the Gandharva Viśvā-vasu
(carried off by the Daitya Pātāla-ketu and subse-
quently the wife of Kuvalayāśva); N. of a work.
{%—Madālāpin (˚da-āl˚), ī,%} m. ‘uttering sounds of
love or of joy, singing delightfully,’ the Indian cuckoo
or koil. {%—Madā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. intoxicated,
drunk. {%—Madāvasthā (˚da-av˚),%} f. a state of passion,
wantonness, lustfulness, ruttishness, rut. {%—Madāhva%}
{%(˚da-āh˚), as,%} m. musk. {%—Made-raghu, us, us, u%}
(fr. the loc. {%made%}), Ved. eager with enthusiasm,
enthusiastic, (according to Sāy. {%madakare dhane%}
{%gantā.%}) {%—Madotkaṭa (˚da-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} ex-
cited by drink, intoxicated; excited by passion or
lust, furious with passion; furious, mad, excited by
pride, arrogant, haughty; under the influence of rut,
ruttish (especially an elephant); ({%as%}), m. an elephant
in rut; a dove; N. of a lion; ({%ā%}), f. an intoxicating
beverage; N. of the goddess Dākṣāyaṇī as wor-
shipped in Caitraratha. {%—Madodagra (˚da-ud˚),%}
or {%madoddhata (˚da-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} excited with
drink, intoxicated, excited with passion, furious;
puffed up with pride, arrogant, haughty. {%—Madon-%}
{%matta (˚da-un˚), as, ā, am,%} intoxicated with passion
or pride, furious. {%—Madorjita (˚da-ūr˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} swollen with pride, haughty with arrogance.
{%—Madollāpin (˚da-ul˚), ī,%} m. the Indian cuckoo;
[cf. {%madālāpin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36255<pc>0735-a<k1>madana<k2>madana
{%Madana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), intoxicating,
maddening, delighting, &c.; ({%as%}), m. passion, love,
sexual love, lust; N. of Kāma-deva, the god of love;
a kind of embrace; the season of spring; a bee;
bees-wax; N. of several plants, Vanguiera Spinosa
[cf. {%madana-kaṇṭaka%}]; the thorn-apple, Datura
Metel; Phaseolus Radiatus; Acacia Catechu; Alan-
gium Hexapetalum; Mimusops Elengi; N. of several
men [cf. {%bhaṭṭa-m˚, madana-nṛpa, madana-%}
{%pāla, madana-rāja%}]; ({%ā, ī%}), f. any intoxicating
drink, spirituous liquor; ({%ī%}), f. musk; a species of
plant, {%= ati-muktaka; (am),%} n. the act of intoxi-
cating or exhilarating; gladdening; (scil. {%astra%}), N.
of a mythical weapon (‘the intoxicater, maddener’).
{%—Madana-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. {%= madana,%} the plant
Vanguiera Spinosa. {%—Madana-kāku-rava, as,%} m.
‘uttering low sounds of love,’ a pigeon, dove. {%—Ma-%}
{%dana-kliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} pained by love. {%—Ma-%}
{%dana-gṛha, am,%} n. ‘abode of love,’ N. of a parti-
cular Prākṛt metre. {%—Madana-gopāla, as,%} m.
‘herdsman of love,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa; N. of the
preceptor of Vaikuṇṭha-purī, (also written simply
{%go-pāla.%}) {%—Madana-caturdaśī,%} f., N. of a festival
in honour of Kāma-deva on the fourteenth day in
the light half of the month Caitra. {%—Madana-tra-%}
{%yodaśī,%} f., N. of a festival in honour of Kāma-deva
on the thirteenth day of the light half of the month
Caitra. {%—Madana-daṃṣṭrā,%} f., N. of a princess.
{%—Madana-damana, as,%} m. ‘Kāma-deva's subduer,’
[Page0735-b+ 81]
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Madana-dahana, as,%} m.
‘Kāma-deva's burner or consumer,’ an epithet of
Śiva or Rudra; a symbolical expression for the
number eleven. {%—Madana-dvādaśī,%} f. the twelfth
day of the light half of the month Caitra (sacred to
Kāma-deva). {%—Madana-nālikā,%} f. a faithless wife.
{%—Madana-nṛpa, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Madana-vinoda glossary. {%—Madana-pakṣin, ī,%} m.
‘spring-bird (?),’ a sort of raven. {%—Madana-pāṭha-%}
{%ka, as,%} m. ‘announcer of spring,’ the Indian cuckoo.
{%—Madana-pārijāta%} or {%madana-parijāta, as,%} m.,
N. of a compendium of rules on morality and ritual
compiled from older codes by Viśveśvara under the
patronage of king Madana-pāla. {%—Madana-pāla,%}
{%as,%} m. (sometimes simply {%madana%}), N. of a king
to whom several works are ascribed or under whose
patronage they were composed; [cf. {%madana-pāri-%}
{%jāta, madana-vinoda, madana-rāja.%}] {%—Mada-%}
{%na-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Madana-prabha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Vidyā-dhara. {%—Madana-phala, am,%}
n. the fruit of the plant Vanguiera Spinosa. {%—Ma-%}
{%dana-bādhā,%} f. the pain or disquietude of love.
{%—Madana-bhavana, am,%} n. ‘abode of love or
matrimony,’ a particular station or state of the
heavenly bodies (in astrology); {%= madanālaya,%} q. v.
{%—Madana-mañcukā,%} f., N. of a daughter of Ma-
dana-vega and Kaliṅga-senā (the sixth Lambaka in
the Kathā-sarit-sāgara is called after her). {%—Madana-%}
{%mañjarī,%} f., N. of a woman; of a daughter of
Dundubhi, king of the Yakṣas; of a kind of raven.
{%—Madana-mahotsava (˚hā-ut˚), as,%} m. a great
festival held in honour of Kāma-deva. {%—Madana-%}
{%mālinī,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Madana-miśra, as,%}
m., N. of a man. {%—Madana-modaka,%} a particular
medicinal powder. {%—Madana-mohana, as,%} m. ‘the
infatuater of the god of love,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Madana-ratna, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Ma-%}
{%danaratna-pradīpa, as,%} m., N. of a work ascribed
to king Madana-siṃha. {%—Madana-rāja, as,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Madana-ripu, us,%} m. ‘Kāma-deva's
enemy,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Madana-rekhā,%} f., N. of
the supposed mother of Vikramāditya. {%—Madana-%}
{%lalita, am,%} n. play of love, amorous sport or dalli-
ance; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of metre, four times ¯¯¯¯
˘˘˘˘˘¯¯¯˘˘˘¯. {%—Madana-lekha, as, ā,%}
m. f. a love-letter; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman; of a
daughter of Pratāpa-mukha, king of Vārāṇasī. {%—Ma-%}
{%dana-vaśa, as, ā, am,%} subdued by or subject to
love, in love. {%—Madana-vahni-śikhāvalī,%} f. the
flame of the fire of love. {%—Madana-vinoda, as,%}
m., N. of a glossary by Madana-nṛpa (composed
under the patronage of Madana-pāla). {%—Madana-%}
{%vega, as,%} m., N. of a king of the Vidyā-dharas.
{%—Madana-śalākā,%} f. a species of thrush, Turdus
Salica {%(= sārikā);%} the female of the Indian cuckoo;
an aphrodisiac. {%—Madana-śikhi-pīḍā,%} f. the pain
of the fire of love. {%—Madana-sārikā,%} f. {%= sārikā,%}
Turdus Salica. {%—Madana-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a
king (said to be the author of the Madana-ratna-
pradīpa). {%—Madana-sundarī,%} f., N. of various
women. {%—Madana-senā,%} f., N. of a daughter of
Vīra-bhaṭa, king of Tāmra-lipti; of a merchant's
daughter. {%—Madana-harā,%} f. {%(= madana-gṛha),%}
N. of a particular Prākṛt metre. {%—Madanāgraka%}
{%(˚na-ag˚), as,%} m. a species of grain, Paspalum
Scrobiculatum {%(= kodrava)%}. {%—Madanāṅkuśa (˚na-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. the penis; a finger-nail; [cf. {%kāmāṅ-%}
{%kuśa.%}] {%—Madanācārya (˚na-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of
a certain preceptor. {%—Madanātura (˚na-āt˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} love-sick, sick with love. {%—Madanāditya%}
{%(˚na-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Madanāntaka%}
{%(˚na-an˚), as,%} m. ‘Kāma-deva's destroyer,’ an epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Madanāyudha (˚na-āy˚), am,%} n.
pudendum muliebre. {%—Madanāyuṣa (˚na-āy˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a species of shrub {%(= kāma-vṛddhi)%}. {%—Ma-%}
{%danālaya (˚na-āl˚), am,%} n. ‘love-dwelling,’ pu-
dendum muliebre; a lotus; a sovereign, prince; {%=%}
{%madana-bhavana%}. {%—Madanāvastha (˚na-av˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being in a state of love, enamoured, in
love; ({%ā%}), f. the state of being in love, enamoured
state, separation of lovers (?). {%—Madanecchā-phala %}
[Page0735-c+ 81]
{%(˚na-ic˚), as,%} m. a species of mango {%(= baddha-%}
{%rasāla)%}. {%—Madanotsava (˚na-ut˚), as,%} m. Kāma-
deva's festival, the Holi or vernal festival (held in
the spring, in honour of the god of love); a parti-
cular game; ({%ā%}), f. a courtezan of Svarga. {%—Madanot-%}
{%suka (˚na-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} pining or languid with
love. {%—Madanodyāna (˚na-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘love's
garden,’ N. of a garden.
<LEND>

<L>36256<pc>0735-c<k1>madanaka<k2>madanaka
{%Madanaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Artemisia Indica
(said to be a transposition for {%damanaka,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>36257<pc>0735-c<k1>madanAya<k2>madanAya
{%Madanāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%madanāyate,%} &c., to be
like Kāma-deva, to resemble the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>36258<pc>0735-c<k1>madanikA<k2>madanikA
{%Madanikā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>36259<pc>0735-c<k1>madanIya<k2>madanIya
{%Madanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ intoxicating (used in Ni-
rukta V. 1. to explain {%madya%}); causing love, exciting
passion.
<LEND>

<L>36260<pc>0735-c<k1>madayat<k2>madayat
{%Madayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ intoxicating; exhilarating,
delighting, gladdening; {%(antī),%} f. Arabian jasmine;
wild jasmine {%(= vana-mallikā);%} N. of the wife of
Kalmāṣa-pāda or Mitra-saha.
<LEND>

<L>36261<pc>0735-c<k1>madayantikA<k2>madayantikA
{%Madayantikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%madayantī%}), Arabian jas-
mine; N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>36262<pc>0735-c<k1>madayitf<k2>madayitf
{%Madayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an intoxicater, maddener,
delighter; intoxicating, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36263<pc>0735-c<k1>madayitunu<k2>madayitunu
{%Madayitunu, us, us, u,%}¦ intoxicating, exhilarating;
maddening; gladdening; ({%us%}), m. the god of love;
a distiller of spirituous liquor; a drunken man; a
cloud; ({%us, u%}), m. n. spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>36264<pc>0735-c<k1>madAmada<k2>madAmada
{%Madāmada, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in perpetual ex-
citement.
<LEND>

<L>36265<pc>0735-c<k1>madAra<k2>madAra
{%Madāra, as,%}¦ m. a hog; an elephant, an elephant
in rut; {%= dhūrta,%} a thorn-apple, (according to some,
‘a cheat, rogue’); a lover, libertine {%(= kāmuka);%} a
kind of perfume, (probably) musk; N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>36266<pc>0735-c<k1>madin<k2>madin
{%Madin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. intoxicating; rejoicing,
gladdening; delightful, lovely; [cf. {%mandin.%}] {%—Ma-%}
{%din-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very intoxicating or
exhilarating (as Soma); very gladdening; (Sāy. =
{%mādayitṛtama.%}) {%—Madin-tara, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
more intoxicating, more gladdening; very gladden-
ing, &c.; (Sāy. {%= atyartham mādayitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>36267<pc>0735-c<k1>madira<k2>madira
{%Madira, as, ā, am,%}¦ intoxicating; gladdening,
delightful, lovely; ({%as%}), m. a species of red-flowering
Khadira; ({%ā%}), f. spirituous liquor, any inebriating
drink, wine, nectar; {%= matta-khañjana,%} a species of
wagtail at the pairing season, a wagtail in general;
a kind of metre; N. of one of the wives of Vasu-
deva; an epithet of Durgā; N. of the mother of
Kādambarī. {%—Madirākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as, ī, am,%}
‘having intoxicating or fascinating eyes,’ lovely-eyed;
({%as%}), m., N. of a younger brother of Śatānīka; ({%ī%}),
f. a fascinating woman. {%—Madirā-gṛha, am,%} n.
a drinking-house, tavern, dram-shop, public-house.
{%—Madirāyata-nayanā (˚rā-āy˚),%} f. a mistress
with fascinating and long eyes. {%—Madirā-vatī,%} f.,
N. of the thirteenth Lambaka in the Kathā-sarit-
sāgara. {%—Madirā-śālā,%} f. a drinking-house, dram-
shop. {%—Madirāśva (˚ra-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a
Rājarṣi and of a king (son of Daśāśva and grand-
son of Ikṣvāku, see Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 91).
{%—Madirā-sakha, as,%} m. ‘friend of wine,’ the
mango tree. {%—Madirāsava (˚ra-ās˚), as,%} m. any
intoxicating beverage or spirituous liquor. {%—Madi-%}
{%rekṣaṇa (˚ra-īk˚), as, ā, am,%} having intoxicating or
fascinating eyes; ({%ā%}), f. a fascinating woman. {%—Ma-%}
{%direkṣaṇa-vallabhā,%} f. a mistress with fascinating
eyes, a fascinating woman. {%—Madirotkaṭa (˚rā-ut˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} excited or intoxicated with spirituous
liquor. {%—Madironmatta (˚rā-un˚), as, ā, am,%}
drunk with wine or spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>36268<pc>0735-c<k1>madizWa<k2>madizWa
{%Madiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. very intoxicating or
exhilarating (as Soma); very gladdening or delightful;
({%ā%}), f. any intoxicating drink, spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>36269<pc>0735-c<k1>madizRu<k2>madizRu
{%Madiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ a word used in Nirukta IV.
12. to explain {%mandu,%} cheerful, joyful.
<LEND>

<L>36270<pc>0735-c<k1>maduGa<k2>maduGa
{%Madugha, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a plant yielding
honey or of a species of liquorice.
<LEND>

<L>36271<pc>0735-c<k1>maderu<k2>maderu
{%Maderu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. (according to Sāy.) either
very much intoxicated or worthy of praise.
<LEND>

<L>36272<pc>0735-c<k1>madya<k2>madya<h>2
2. {%madya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 734, col. 1),
intoxicating, exhilarating, gladdening, lovely; ({%am%}),
[Page0736-a+ 77]
n. any intoxicating drink, vinous or spirituous liquor,
wine. {%—Madya-kīṭa, as,%} m. a kind of insect or
animalcule bred in vinegar, &c. {%—Madya-druma,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of tree {%(= māḍa)%}. {%—Madya-pa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} a drunkard, a wine-drinker, one who
drinks intoxicating liquor; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava.
{%—Madya-paṅka, as,%} m. vinous liquor for distilling,
mash. {%—Madya-pāna, am,%} n. the drinking of in-
toxicating liquors; any intoxicating drink. {%—Madya-%}
{%pāśana (˚pa-āś˚), am,%} n. a drunkard's meal.
{%—Madya-pīta, as, ā, am, = pīta-madya,%} one who
has drunk wine or spirits; drunk, intoxicated, a
drunkard. {%—Madya-puṣpā, ī,%} f. Grislea Tomen-
tosa (the blossoms of which are used in distilling).
{%—Madya-bīja,%} see {%madya-vīja%} below. {%—Madya-%}
{%bhājana, am,%} n. ‘a wine-glass,’ a vessel for drinking
intoxicating liquors. {%—Madya-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a
vessel for intoxicating liquors. {%—Madya-maṇḍa, as,%}
m. yeast, barm, froth. {%—Madya-vāsinī,%} f. Grislea
Tomentosa (the blossoms of which are used in dis-
tilling). {%—Madya-vīja, am,%} n. a drug used to
procure fermentation, leaven; less of wine. {%—Ma-%}
{%dya-sandhāna, am,%} n. distillation of spirit. {%—Ma-%}
{%dyāmoda (˚ya-ām˚), as,%} m. Mimusops Elengi.
{%—Madyāsattaka, as,%} m., N. of a man, (Rāja-
taraṅgiṇī VIII. 276, perhaps for {%madyāsaktaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>36273<pc>0736-a<k1>madra<k2>madra
{%Madra, am,%}¦ n. joy, happiness; ({%as%}), m. a country
to the north-west of Hindūstan proper, the land of
Madra; a king of Madra; N. of a son of Śivi
the progenitor of the Madras; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter of Raudrāśva; of
a river; a personification of the first note or Mūr-
chanā in the Gāndhāra-grāma; ({%ī%}), f. a princess of
Madra. {%—Madra-kāra%} or {%madraṅ-kara, as, ā%} or
{%ī, am,%} causing joy, giving delight, delighting. {%—Ma-%}
{%dra-kūla,%} cf. {%mādrakūlaka%}. {%—Madra-gāra, as,%}
m., N. of a man, (also written {%madra-gāri.%}) {%—Ma-%}
{%dra-nagara, am,%} n. the city of the Madras. {%—Ma-%}
{%dra-nābha, as,%} m. a particular mixed caste (Mahā-
bh. Anuśāsana-p. 2585). {%—Madra-pa, as,%} m. the
ruler of the Madras. {%—Madra-bāṇija, as,%} m. a
merchant who goes to Madra. {%—Madra-sutā,%} f.
‘daughter of the king of Madra,’ an epithet of Mādrī,
the second wife of Pāṇḍu; [cf. {%mādrī.%}] {%—Madrā-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to shear, shave.
<LEND>

<L>36274<pc>0736-a<k1>madraka<k2>madraka
{%Madraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ belonging to or produced
in Madra; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a degraded people in
the Dakṣiṇāpatha; ({%as%}), m. a king of the Madras,
an inhabitant of Madra; N. of a son of Śivi the
progenitor of the Madra people; ({%ikā%}), f. a Madra
woman, (also {%mādrikā,%} q. v.); ({%am%}), n., N. of a kind
of song; a particular metre, four times ¯˘˘¯˘
¯˘˘˘¯, ˘¯˘˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>36275<pc>0736-a<k1>madrAya<k2>madrAya
{%Madrāya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%madrāyati, -te,%} &c., to
be glad.
<LEND>

<L>36276<pc>0736-a<k1>madvat<k2>madvat<h>2
2. {%madvat, ān, atī, at%}¦ (for 1. {%mad-vat%} see
p. 734, col. 1), Ved. containing a form or derivative
of rt. 2. {%mad;%} intoxicating, gladdening.
<LEND>

<L>36277<pc>0736-a<k1>madvan<k2>madvan
{%Madvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. addicted to intoxication,
fond of enjoyment, giving enjoyment, intoxicating;
({%ā%}), m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>36278<pc>0736-a<k1>madadin<k2>madadin
{#madadin#}¦ {%madadin,%} see Gaṇa Pragadyādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>36279<pc>0736-a<k1>madarpitapura<k2>madarpitapura
{#madarpitapura#}¦ {%madarpitapura, am,%} n. (said to
be fr. 1. {%mad + arpita-pura%}), N. of a town, (also
read {%padadika-pura.%})
<LEND>

<L>36280<pc>0736-a<k1>madArmada<k2>madArmada
{#madArmada#}¦ {%madārmada, as,%} m. a species of
fish; [cf. {%mahonmada%} under {%mahat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36281<pc>0736-a<k1>madi<k2>madi
{#madi#}¦ {%madi%} or {%madikā,%} f. a kind of harrow
or roller; [cf. {%matya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36282<pc>0736-a<k1>madIRu<k2>madIRu
{#madIRu#}¦ {%madīṇu,%} N. of a place (? Medina)
mentioned in the Romaka-siddhānta by Śrīṣavāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>36283<pc>0736-a<k1>madIya<k2>madIya
{#madIya#}¦ {%madīya.%} See p. 734, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36284<pc>0736-a<k1>madgu<k2>madgu
{#madgu#}¦ {%madgu, us,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
1. 7. fr. rt. {%majj%}), a particular aquatic bird, a kind of
cormorant, shag, diver [cf. {%kāka-m˚, jala-m˚%}]; a
species of wild animal frequenting the boughs of
[Page0736-b+ 75]
trees {%(= parṇa-mṛga);%} a kind of snake {%(= mālu-%}
{%dhāna);%} a particular fish; a kind of galley or vessel
of war, a ship; a man of a particular degraded tribe
or mixed caste who live by killing forest animals
(described as the offspring of a Brāhman by a woman
of the Vandin or bard class, cf. Manu X. 48), an
outcast; N. of a son of Śvaphalka [cf. {%upa-m˚%}].
<LEND>

<L>36285<pc>0736-b<k1>madgura<k2>madgura
{%Madgura, as,%}¦ m. (probably fr. rt. {%majj,%} but ac-
cording to Uṇādi-s. 1. 42. fr. rt. 2. {%mad%}), a species
of fish (Macropteronatus Magur); a kind of sheat-
fish [cf. {%karṇa-m˚%}]; a diver, pearl-fisher. {%—Mad-%}
{%gura-priyā,%} f. the female of the above fish.
<LEND>

<L>36286<pc>0736-b<k1>madguraka<k2>madguraka
{%Madguraka, as,%}¦ m. {%= madgura,%} the fish Ma-
cropteronatus Magur.
<LEND>

<L>36287<pc>0736-b<k1>madgurasI<k2>madgurasI
{%Madgurasī,%}¦ f. a species of fish ({%= grāma-mad-%}
{%gurikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>36288<pc>0736-b<k1>madBU<k2>madBU
{#madBU#}¦ {%mad-bhū.%} See p. 734, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36289<pc>0736-b<k1>madya<k2>madya<h>1
{#madya#} 1¦. 2. {%madya.%} See pp. 734, 735.
<LEND>

<L>36290<pc>0736-b<k1>madra<k2>madra
{#madra#}¦ {%madra.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36291<pc>0736-b<k1>madrAbala<k2>madrAbala
{#madrAbala#}¦ {%madrābala = mudrābala,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36292<pc>0736-b<k1>madrArma<k2>madrArma
{#madrArma#}¦ {%madrārma, am,%} n., cf. Pāṇ. VI. 2, 91.
<LEND>

<L>36293<pc>0736-b<k1>madrukasTalI<k2>madrukasTalI
{#madrukasTalI#}¦ {%madruka-sthalī,%} f., cf. Pāṇ. IV.
2, 127.
<LEND>

<L>36294<pc>0736-b<k1>madrumarakanTa<k2>madrumarakanTa
{#madrumarakanTa#}¦ {%madrumarakantha, am,%} n., cf.
Pāṇ. VI. 2, 125.
<LEND>

<L>36295<pc>0736-b<k1>madryaYc<k2>madryaYc
{#madryaYc#}¦ {%madryañc, madrik.%} See p. 734, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36296<pc>0736-b<k1>madvacana<k2>madvacana
{#madvacana#}¦ {%mad-vacana, mad-vidha,%} &c. See
p. 734, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36297<pc>0736-b<k1>maDavya<k2>maDavya
{#maDavya#}¦ {%madhavya.%} See p. 734, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36298<pc>0736-b<k1>maDu<k2>maDu
{#maDu#}¦ {%madhu, us, us%} or {%ūs%} or {%vī, u%} (connected
with rt. 2. {%mad,%} but in Uṇādi-s. 1. 19. said to be fr.
rt. {%man;%} for declension of neut. see Gram. 115; in
Ved. the gen. of the neut. may be {%madhos,%} inst.
{%madhvā,%} loc. {%madhau,%} fem. nom. pl. {%madhvīs%}),
sweet, of a pleasant taste or flavour, pleasant, agree-
able; ({%u%}), n. anything sweet (especially if liquid),
mead; Soma ({%Somyam madhu,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 19, 9);
honey (said to possess intoxicating qualities and to be
of eight kinds); milk or anything produced from
milk (as butter, melted butter, ghee, Ved.); the juice
or nectar of flowers, any sweet intoxicating drink,
wine, spirituous liquor; sugar; sweetness; water;
N. of one of the Brāhmaṇas; a particular metre,
four times ˘˘; ({%us%}), m., N. of the first month of
the year, = Caitra (March-April); the spring; Bassia
Latifolia; Jonesia Asoka; liquorice ({%= madhūka,%}
{%madhu-druma%}); N. of an Asura or Daitya (gene-
rally associated with Kaiṭabha and along with him
slain by Viṣṇu); N. of another Asura (father of the
Rākṣasa Lavaṇa and killed in Madhu-vana by
Śatru-ghna, who founded there the city of Mathurā
or Madhurā; this Asura is sometimes identified with
the previous one); N. of a son of the third Manu;
of one of the seven sages under Manu Cākṣuṣa;
of various princes, of a son of Vṛṣa, of Deva-
kṣatra, of Bindumat, of Arjuna Kārtavīrya; N. of
a teacher [cf. {%madhva%}]; N. of a mountain; {%(avas),%}
m. pl. the race of Madhu, = the Yādavas or Mā-
thuras; ({%us%}), f. a particular plant, = Jīvā or Jīvantī;
[cf. Zend <nsi>madhu,</nsi> ‘honey;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">μέθ-υ, μεθ-ύ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μεθ-ύ-σκ-ω, μέλι</lang> in which <lang n="greek">θ</lang> or <lang n="greek">δ</lang> is changed into <lang n="greek">λ;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>mel, mellis</nsi> for <nsi>melvis = meduis</nsi> (?); Angl. Sax.
<nsi>med-u, med-o;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>met-o, medu;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>med-ŭ;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>mid-u-s,</nsi> ‘honey;’ Hib. <nsi>mil,</nsi> gen.
<nsi>meala,</nsi> ‘honey.’] {%—Madhu-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. the
Indian cuckoo, koïl {%(= kokila)%}. {%—Madhu-kara, as,%}
m. ‘honey-maker,’ a bee; a lover, libertine; Eclipta
Prostrata {%(= bhṛṅga-rāja-vṛkṣa);%} Asparagus
Racemosus; Achyranthes Aspera; sweet lime; ({%ī%}),
f. a female bee. {%—Madhukara-gaṇa, as,%} m. a
swarm of bees. {%—Madhukara-rājan, ā,%} m. the
king of bees, i. e. the queen bee. {%—Madhukara-%}
{%śreṇi, is,%} f. a line of bees. {%—Madhukara-sāha, as,%}
or {%madhukara-sāhi, is,%} m., N. of a king, son of
Pratāpa-rudra. {%—Madhukarāya,%} Nom. A. {%madhu- %}
[Page0736-c+ 81]
{%karāyate,%} &c., to act the part of a bee, represent a
bee. {%—Madhukarikā,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhu-karkaṭikā,%} f. a species of Madhura-jambīra {%(=%}
{%madhurā%} or {%madhu-kharjūrikā%}). {%—Madhu-kar-%}
{%kaṭī,%} f. a kind of citron, sweet lime; a kind of date
{%(= madhu-bīja-pūra)%}. {%—Madhu-karṇa,%} see Gaṇa
Kumud-ādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80. {%—Madhu-kaśā,%} f.
({%= madhumatī kaśā,%}) Ṛg-veda I. 22, 3), Ved. the
whip belonging to the Aśivins with which they are said
to mix up the Soma juice (described in Atharva-veda
IX. 1, 1, &c. as produced from the heaven, earth, air,
ocean, fire, or as a daughter of the Wind); an imple-
ment furnished with thongs for whipping up milk &c.
{%—Madhu-kāṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of the first Kāṇḍa of the
Bṛhad-āraṇyakopaniṣad. {%—Madhu-kānana, am,%}
n. {%= madhu-vana,%} the forest of the Daitya Madhu.
{%—Madhu-kāra, as,%} m. ‘honey-maker,’ a bee; ({%ī%}),
f. a female bee. {%—Madhu-kārin, ī,%} m. a bee. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhu-kukkuṭikā%} or {%madhu-kukkuṭī,%} f. a kind of
citron tree with ill-smelling blossoms [cf. {%pūti-%}
{%puṣpikā%}]; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of plant {%(= madhurā).%}
{%—Madhu-kumbhā,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda. {%—Madhu-kulyā,%} f. a stream
of honey, honey in streams (sometimes used to
express an overflowing abundance of good things);
N. of a river in Kuśa-dvīpa. {%—Madhu-kūla, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} whose banks consist of Madhu. {%—Madhu-kṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} making honey or sweetness; ({%t%}), m. ‘honey-
maker,’ a bee. {%—Madhu-keśaṭa, as,%} m. ‘honey-
insect,’ a bee. {%—Madhu-kośa%} or {%madhu-koṣa, as,%}
m. ‘honey-receptacle,’ a bee-hive; a honey-comb.
{%—Madhu-krama, as,%} m. a bee-hive; a honey-
comb; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a drinking bout, drunkenness.
{%—Madhu-kṣīra, as,%} m. Phœnix Silvestris. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhu-kharjūrikā%} or {%madhu-kharjūrī,%} f. a kind of
date. {%—Madhu-gandhika, as, ā, am,%} sweet-smell-
ing. {%—Madhu-gāyana, as,%} m. the Indian cuckoo.
{%—Madhu-guñjana, as,%} m. Hyperanthera Moringa.
{%—Madhu-graha, as,%} m. a libation of honey (in
the Vāja-peya). {%—Madhu-ghoṣa, as,%} m. ‘sweetly-
sounding,’ the Indian cuckoo. {%—Madhu-cchadā,%} f.
a particular shrub {%(= mayūra-śikhā)%}. {%—Madhu-%}
{%cchanda, as,%} m. (a later form of {%madhu-cchandas%}),
N. of one of the seven sages (in Hari-vaṃśa 1462).
{%—Madhu-cchandas, ās,%} m., N. of the middlemost
(51st) of Viśvāmitra's 101 sons; {%(asas),%} m. pl., N.
of all the sons of Viśvāmitra. {%—Madhu-cyut, t, t, t,%}
or {%madhu-cyuta, as, ā, am,%} dropping honey, dis-
tilling honey, overflowing with sweets. {%—Madhu-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} obtained from honey; ({%ā%}), f. sugar made
from honey, sugar-candy; the earth; ({%am%}), n. bees-
wax. {%—Madhu-jambīra, madhu-jambha,%} or {%ma-%}
{%dhu-jambhala, as,%} m. a kind of citron. {%—Madhu-%}
{%jāta, as, ā, am,%} ‘honey-born,’ sprung or produced from
honey. {%—Madhu-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of the Daitya
Madhu,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Madhu-jihva, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. ‘honey-tongued, sweet-tongued’ (said of
fire, because of the butter melted upon it); sweetly-
speaking, (Sāy. {%= madhura-bhāṣi-jihvopeta.%})
{%—Madhu-tṛna, am,%} n. sugar-cane. {%—Madhu-%}
{%traya, am,%} n. the three sweet things ({%sitā, māk-%}
{%ṣikā,%}) and {%sarpis,%} q. q. v. v.). {%—Madhu-tva, am,%} n.
sweetness. {%—Madhu-dīpa, as,%} m. ‘lamp of spring,’
the god of love. {%—Madhu-dugha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
milking (i. e. yielding) sweetness; (Sāy.) water-
yielding. {%—Madhu-dūta, as,%} m. ‘the messenger of
spring,’ the mango tree; ({%ī%}), f. Bignonia Suaveolens.
{%—Madhu-dogha, as,%} m., Ved. the milking of
sweetness; (Sāy.) water-yielding (as adj. {%= udakasya%}
{%dohaka%} or {%vṛṣṭy-udakasya kartri%}). {%—Madhu-%}
{%doha, as,%} m. the milking out or extracting of honey,
the extracting of sweetness. {%—Madhu-dra, as,%} m.
‘hastening after honey or sweets’ [cf. rt. 2. {%drā%}], a
bee; a libertine. {%—Madhu-drava, as,%} m. a red-blos-
somed Hyperanthera Moringa. {%—Madhu-druma, as,%}
m. Bassia Latifolia (see {%madhūka%}), the mango tree.
{%—Madhu-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. ‘the foe of the Daitya Madhu,’
an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Madhu-dhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
dispensing or holding sweetness; (Sāy. {%madhu =%}
{%madhurāṇi stuti-lakṣaṇāni vākyāni%} or {%āditya%}
or {%stoma.%}) {%—Madhu-dhātu, us,%} m. a kind of yellow
[Page0737-a+ 81]
pyrites (see {%mākṣika%}). {%—Madhu-dhāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. pouring out sweetness; pouring down
water, (Sāy. {%= udaka-dhārā yasya.%}) {%—Madhu-%}
{%dhārā,%} f. a stream of honey; N. of a mythical
river. {%—Madhu-dhūli, is,%} f. molasses, unrefined
brown sugar. {%—Madhu-dhenu, us,%} f. honey offered
to Brāhmans in the form of a milch cow. {%—Madhu-%}
{%nāḍī,%} f. a cell in a honey-comb; an epithet of the
hymns Ṛg-veda III. 54, 55. {%—Madhu-nālikeraka,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of cocoa-nut. {%—Madhu-nirgama, as,%}
m. the departure of spring. {%—Madhu-nisūdana, as,%}
and {%madhu-nihantṛ, tā,%} m. ‘destroyer of Madhu,’
an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Madhu-netṛ, tā,%} m. a bee.
{%—Madhuno-leha (?), as,%} m. ‘licker of honey,’ a bee.
{%—Madhun-tama, as, ā, am%} (a superlative of {%madhu%}
formed analogously to {%madin-tima%}), very intoxi-
cating, sweetest. {%—Madhu-pa, as, ā, am,%} honey-
drinking, drinking sweetness, ({%madhupaḥ khagaḥ,%}
a bee); ({%as%}), m. a bee. {%—Madhu-paṭala, as,%} m. a
bee-hive. {%—Madhu-pati, is,%} m. ‘chief of the race
of Madhu,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Madhu-parka,%}
{%as,%} m. a mixture of honey, an offering of honey
and milk, a respectful offering to a guest or to the
bridegroom on his arrival at the door of the father
of the bride (sometimes consisting of equal parts of
curds, honey, and clarified butter, see Manu III. 119,
V. 41); the ceremony of receiving a guest; N. of a
son of Garuḍa. {%—Madhuparka-dāna, am,%} n. the
offering of the Madhu-parka. {%—Madhuparka-pāṇī,%}
{%is, is, i,%} having the Madhu-parka oblation in the
hand, offering the Madhu-parka. {%—Madhu-parkā-%}
{%camana (˚ka-āc˚), am,%} n. the tasting of the Madhu-
parka. {%—Madhu-parkika, as, ā, am,%} presenting
the offering of honey, &c. {%—Madhu-parkya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} worthy of the honey offering (Pāṇ. V. 1, 66).
{%—Madhu-parṇikā,%} f. Gmelina Arborea; the indigo
plant, Indigofera Tinctoria; a species of creeper,
Lycopodium Imbricatum; Cocculus Cordifolius; {%=%}
{%sudarśanā%}. {%—Madhu-parṇī,%} f. Cocculus Cordi-
folius; Gmelina Arborea; Indigofera Tinctoria; the
pomegranate tree; Lycopodium; Menispermum;
sweet lime. {%—Madhu-pā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. honey-
drinking, drinking sweetness. {%—Madhu-pāṇi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} Ved. having honey or sweetness in the hand.
{%—Madhupā-tama, as, ā, am,%} excessively drink-
ing sweetness or Soma, (Sāy. {%= atiśayena madhoḥ%}
{%somasya pātṛ.%}) {%—Madhu-pāna, am,%} n. sipping
the nectar of flowers. {%—Madhupāna-kala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} indistinct through the sipping of the nectar of
flowers (as the humming of bees). {%—Madhu-pāyin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘honey-drinker,’ a bee. {%—Madhu-pāla, as,%} m.
a honey-keeper (Rāmāyaṇa V. 60, 10). {%—Madhu-%}
{%pālikā,%} f. Gmelina Arborea. {%—Madhu-piṅgākṣa%}
{%(˚ga-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} having eyes as yellow as honey;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Muni. {%—Madhu-pīlu, us,%} m. a
species of tree, a kind of Pīlu tree. {%—Madhu-pura,%}
{%am,%} n. the city of the Daitya Madhu; N. of a city in
Northern India; ({%ī%}), f. the city of the Madhus, i. e.
Mathurā. {%—Madhu-puṣpa, as,%} m. Bassia Latifolia;
Acacia Sirissa {%(= śirīṣa);%} Jonesia Asoka; Mimu-
sops Elengi; ({%ā%}), f. Croton Polyandrum, or Croton
Tilglium; Tiaridium Indicum. {%—Madhu-pū, ūs, ūs,%}
{%u,%} Ved. becoming clear in sweetness. {%—Madhu-%}
{%pṛc, k, k, k,%} Ved. dispensing sweetness; (Sāy.)
granting the sweet fruit of the sacrifice. {%—Madhu-%}
{%pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. whose back or surface
consists of sweetness (said of Soma). {%—Madhu-peya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. sweet to drink; ({%am%}), n., Ved. the
drinking of sweetness (of Soma &c.). {%—Madhu-%}
{%praṇaya, as,%} m. fondness for wine, addiction to
wine. {%—Madhupraṇaya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} fond of
or addicted to wine. {%—Madhu-pratīka, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having a sweet mouth or face, having sweetness
in the mouth; (Sāy.) having sweetness in every part
{%(= ghṛta-prayuktāvayavaḥ);%} epithet of certain
supernatural powers and properties belonging to a
Yogin. {%—Madhu-prameha, as,%} m. honey-like or
saccharine urine, diabetes. {%—Madhu-prāsana, am,%}
n. putting a little honey into the mouth of a new-
born male infant, one of the Saṃskāras or purificatory
ceremonies of the Hindūs. {%—Madhu-priya, as, ā, %}
[Page0737-b+ 81]
{%am,%} fond of honey or the juice of flowers; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of shrub, {%= bhūmi-jambu,%} Ardisia Solanacea;
an epithet of Bala-bhadra. {%—Madhu-pluta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} swimming with honey, mixed with honey.
{%—Madhu-psaras, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. longing for
sweetness; (Sāy.) feeding on the sweet Soma juice,
or of sweet form ({%= madhurasya soma-rasasya%}
{%bhakṣayitṛ%} or {%manohara-rūpa%}). {%—Madhu-pha-%}
{%la, as,%} m. a kind of cocoa-nut; Flacourtia Sapida
or Cataphracta. {%—Madhu-phalikā,%} f. a kind of
date {%(= madhu-kharjūrikā)%}. {%—Madhu-bahulā,%} f.
Gærtnera Racemosa. {%—Madhu-bīja, as,%} m. a pome-
granate tree. {%—Madhu-bījapūra, as,%} m. a kind of
citron. {%—Madhu-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Brāh-
maṇa. {%—Madhu-bhakṣaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a chapter
of the Bāla-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Madhu-%}
{%bhadra, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Madhu-bhāga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. whose lot or portion is sweetness.
{%—Madhu-bhāva, as,%} m. a particular Prākṛt metre.
{%—Madhu-bhid, t,%} m. ‘the slayer of the Daitya
Madhu,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Madhu-bhuj, k,%}
{%k, k,%} enjoying sweetness or gladness. {%—Madhu-bhū-%}
{%mika, as,%} m. an epithet of a Yogin or ascetic in the
second order or degree. {%—Madhu-makṣa, as, ā,%} m.
f. or {%madhu-makṣikā,%} f. ‘honey-fly,’ a bee. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhu-majjan,%} a kind of tree {%(= ākhoṭa)%}. {%—Madhu-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing or containing sweetness,
sweet; pleasant, agreeable; mixed with honey, honied;
rich in honey, richly provided with the juice of flowers;
containing the word {%madhu; (ān),%} m., N. of a
country; of a city?; ({%antas%}), m. pl., N. of a people;
({%atī%}), f. Gmelina Arborea; N. of a particular step or
degree in the Yoga [cf. {%bhūmikā%}]; of a particular
supernatural faculty belonging to a Yogin; of a kind
of metre, four times ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯; of a river; of a
city in Saurāṣṭra; of a daughter of the Daitya Madhu
(wife of Hary-aśva). {%—Madhu-matta, as, ā, am,%}
drunk with wine or mead; intoxicated or excited by
the spring; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a people. {%—Madhu-math, t,%} or {%madhu-ma-%}
{%thana, as,%} m., Ved. ‘the destroyer of the Daitya
Madhu,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Madhu-mada, as,%}
m. the intoxication of wine. {%—Madhu-manta, am,%}
n., N. of a town. {%—Madhu-mantha, as,%} m. a kind
of drink mixed with honey. {%—Madhu-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} made of honey, honied, sweet as honey,
sweet, luscious. {%—Madhu-mallī,%} f. Jasminum Gran-
diflorum. {%—Madhu-mastaka, am,%} n. a kind of
sweetmeat (made of honey, flour, oil, and ghee).
{%—Madhu-mādhava, au,%} m. du. or {%am,%} n. the two
spring months, ({%madhu-mādhave,%} in the spring.)
{%—Madhu-mādhavī,%} f. any spring flower abounding
in honey or a particular species of flower; a kind of
intoxicating drink; a kind of metre, four times
¯¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘˘¯˘¯¯; a particular Rāgiṇī or
musical mode (?); N. of a commentary on the
Amara-kośa. {%—Madhu-mādhvīka, am,%} n. any in-
toxicating drink; a particular spirit or intoxicating
drink distilled from the flowers of the Bassia Lati-
folia; [cf. {%madhu-mādhavī.%}] {%—Madhu-māraka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘destroyer of honey,’ a bee; [cf. {%madhu-%}
{%sūdana.%}] {%—Madhu-mālapattrikā,%} f. a species of
small shrub {%(= civillikā)%}. {%—Madhu-miśra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} mixed with honey or sweet milk; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a man (the son of Bhava-candra). {%—Madhu-%}
{%mura-naraka-vināśana, as,%} m. ‘the destroyer of
(the Daityas) Madhu, Mura, and Naraka,’ an epithet
of Viṣṇu (Kṛṣṇa). {%—Madhu-mūla, am,%} n. the
edible root of Amorphophallus Campanulatus, a sort
of yam, the Indian potato. {%—Madhu-meha, as,%} m.
honey-like or saccharine urine, diabetes. {%—Madhu-%}
{%meha-tva, am,%} n. the state of passing saccharine
urine. {%—Madhu-mehin, ī, inī, i,%} suffering from
saccharine urine or diabetes. {%—Madhu-yaṣṭi, is,%}
or {%madhu-yaṣṭī,%} f. sugar-cane {%(= tikta-parvan).%}
{%—Madhu-yaṣṭikā,%} f. liquorice, liquorice-stick ({%=%}
{%yaṣṭi-madhukā;%} the root of Abrus Precatorius is
said to be similarly used). {%—Madhu-rasa, as,%} m.
juice of honey, sweetness; sugar-cane; the wine
palm; ({%ā%}), f. Sanseviera Roxburginana; a vine, a
bunch of grapes; a kind of Asclepias, Gmelina
[Page0737-c+ 81]
Arborea; {%(as, ā, am),%} sweet-flavoured, sweet. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhu-ripu, us,%} m. ‘the enemy of the Daitya Madhu,’
an epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Madhu-ruha, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Ghṛta-pṛṣṭha. {%—Madhu-reṇu,%}
{%us,%} m. a species of tree {%(= kaṭa-bhī)%}. {%—Madhu-%}
{%lagna, as,%} m. a red-blossomed Moringa. {%—Madhu-%}
{%latā,%} f. a kind of grass {%(= śūlī)%}. {%—Madhu-lih, ṭ,%}
or {%madhu-leha, as,%} or {%madhu-lehin, ī,%} m. ‘honey-
sucking,’ a bee. {%—Madhu-lolupa, as,%} m. ‘longing
after honey,’ a bee. {%—Madhu-vacas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. sweet-voiced, sweetly speaking. {%—Madhu-vaṭī,%}
f., N. of a district. {%—Madhu-vana, as,%} m. the Indian
cuckoo; N. of the forest of the ape Sugrīva (which
abounded in honey); of the forest of the Daitya Madhu
on the Yamunā (where Śatru-ghna, after slaying
Lavaṇa, son of Madhu, founded the city of Mathurā
or Madhurā; it was sacred to Sarasvatī). {%—Madhu-%}
{%varṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. honey-coloured, having an
agreeable aspect; sweet; N. of a being attending on
Skanda. {%—Madhu-vallī,%} f. liquorice {%(= yaṣṭī-ma-%}
{%dhu, klītanaka)%}. {%—Madhu-vātīya, as, ā, am,%} be-
ginning with the words {%madhu vātāḥ%}. {%—Madhu-%}
{%vāra, ās,%} m. pl. drinking repeatedly, tippling, ca-
rousing. {%—Madhu-vāhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bearing
or carrying sweet things (as honey, milk, &c.; said
of the chariots of ther Aśvins). {%—Madhu-vāhin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} bearing or carrying sweet things; ({%inī%}), f.,
N. of a river. {%—Madhu-vidyā,%} f. ‘the science of
sweetness,’ epithet of a particular mystical doctrine.
{%—Madhu-vidviṣ, ṭ,%} m. ‘the enemy of (the Daitya)
Madhu,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Madhu-vīja, as,%} m.
the pomegranate. {%—Madhu-vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. in-
creasing sweetness, abounding in sweetness. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhu-vṛṣa, as, ā, am,%} dropping or raining sweet-
ness. {%—Madhu-vrata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. occupied
with sweetness; (Sāy.) discharging the functions of
water, {%= udakārtha-karman; (as),%}  m. a bee.
{%—Madhuvrata-pati, is,%} m. ‘king of bees,’ i. e.
the queen bee. {%—Madhuvrata-varūtha (?),%} a swarm
of bees. {%—Madhu-śarkarā,%} f. honey-sugar. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhu-śākha, as, ā, am,%} having sweet branches;
({%as%}), m. Bassia Latifolia. {%—Madhu-śigru, us,%} m.
Moringa Pterygosperma. {%—Madhu-śiṣṭa%} or {%ma-%}
{%dhu-śeṣa, am,%} n. bees-wax, wax. {%—Madhu-ścut%} or
{%madhu-ścyut, t, t, t,%} or {%madhu-ścyuta, as, ā, am,%}
distilling sweetness, overflowing with sweets, (Sāy.
{%= madhu-srāvin.%}) {%—Madhu-śrava,%} see {%madhu-%}
{%srava%}. {%—Madhu-śrī, īs,%} f. Beauty of Spring (per-
sonified). {%—Madhu-śreṇī,%} f. the plant Sanseviera
Roxburghiana (of Ceylon). {%—Madhu-śvāsā,%} f. a
species of plant {%(= jīvantī)%}. {%—Madhu-ṣut, t, t, t%}
({%ṣut%} for {%sut%}), Ved. generating sweetness, producing
a sweet taste; (Sāy.) distilling the sweet Soma juice
{%(= somam abhiṣuṇvat)%}. {%—Madhuṣut-tama, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. excessively distilling or producing sweet
juice. {%—Madhu-ṣṭhāna, am,%} n., Ved. {%= madhu-%}
{%sthāna,%} q. v. {%—Madhu-ṣyanda,%} see {%madhu-syan-%}
{%da%}. {%—Madhu-sakha, as,%} m. ‘friend of spring,’ the
god of love. {%—Madhu-saṅkāśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
looking sweet, appearing pleasant. {%—Madhu-san-%}
{%dṛśa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. sweet-looking, appearing
lovely (Atharva-veda 1. 34, 3). {%—Madhu-sambhava,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} producing honey or sweetness. {%—Madhu-%}
{%sahāya, as,%} m. ‘companion of spring,’ epithet of
the god of love. {%—Madhu-sāt,%} ind. to honey, into
the state of honey. {%—Madhusād-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
become honey, become sweet. {%—Madhu-sārathi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘having spring for a charioteer,’ epithet of
the god of love. {%—Madhu-sikthaka, as,%} m. a kind
of poison. {%—Madhu-suhṛd, t,%} m. ‘the friend of
spring,’ the god of love. {%—Madhu-sūdana, as,%} m.
‘destroyer of honey,’ a bee [cf. {%madhu-māraka%}];
‘destroyer of the demon Madhu,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu
or Kṛṣṇa; N. of a scholar to whom a recension of
the Mahā-nāṭaka is attributed [cf. {%madhu-saras-%}
{%vatī, madhu-guru%}]; ({%ī%}), f. Bengal beet. {%—Madhu-%}
{%sūdana-sarasvatī,%} m., N. of an author of various
works. {%—Madhu-sena, as,%} m., N. of a prince of
Madhu-pura. {%—Madhu-skanda, as,%} m., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Madhu-sthāna, am,%} n. ‘bee-place,’ a bee-
hive {%(= caṣāla)%}. {%—Madhu-syanda, as,%} m., N. of
[Page0738-a+ 81]
one of the sons of Viśvāmitra. {%—Madhu-srava, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} dropping sweetness, distilling sweets; ({%as%}),
m. Bassia Latifolia; Sanseviera Zeylanica; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of various plants, {%= jīvantī%} (Sanseviera Roxbur-
ghiana); {%= haṃsa-padī,%} liquorice; N. of the third
day in the light half of the month Śrāvaṇa; N. of
a river sacred to Sarasvatī; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Madhu-sravas, ās,%} m. Bassia Latifolia. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhu-svara, as,%} m. ‘sweet-voiced,’ the Indian cuckoo.
{%—Madhu-han, ā,%} m. a destroyer of honey; a col-
lector of honey; a particular bird of prey; ‘the slayer
of the Daitya Madhu,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu or
Kṛṣṇa; a soothsayer. {%—Madhu-hantṛ, tā,%} m. ‘the
slayer of the Daitya Madhu,’ epithet of Rāma as an
incarnation of Viṣṇu. {%—Madhu-hastya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. ‘sweet-handed,’ having sweetness in the hand.
{%—Madhūcchiṣṭa (˚dhu-uc˚), am,%} n. bees-wax;
[cf. {%madhu-śiṣṭha, madhu-śeṣa.%}] {%—Madhūc-%}
{%chiṣṭa-sthita, as, ā, am%} covered on the outside
with wax (said of baskets, Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 17132).
{%—Madhūttha (˚dhu-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} made or pro-
duced from honey; ({%am%}), n. bees-wax. {%—Madhūt-%}
{%thita (˚dhu-ut˚), am,%} n. ‘produced from honey,’
wax. {%—Madhūtsava (˚dhu-ut˚), as,%} m. the spring
festival (on the day of the full moon in the month
Caitra). {%—Madhūdaka (˚dhu-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘honey-
water,’ honey diluted in water, hydromel. {%—Madhū-%}
{%daka-prasravaṇa, as, ā, am,%} flowing with honey
and water. {%—Madhūdyāna (˚dhu-ud˚), am,%} n. a
spring garden. {%—Madhūpaghna (˚dhu-up˚), am,%}
n., N. of a city, = Mathurā or Madhurā. {%—Madhv-%}
{%akṣa, as, ī, am,%} having eyes of the colour of
honey (said of Agni). {%—Madhv-ad, t, t, t,%} Ved. eating
sweetness. {%—Madhu-arnas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having
sweet springs or waters (said of a river; Sāy. {%= ma-%}
{%dhurodaka%}). {%—Madhv-aṣṭhīlā,%} f. a lump of honey,
honey in lumps, clotted honey. {%—Madhu-ācārya,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Vaiṣṇava teacher of the thirteenth
century. {%—Madhv-āhāra, as,%} m. bees-wax. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhv-āpāta, as, ā, am,%} having honey at the begin-
ning, having sweetness at the first taste, ({%madhvā-%}
{%pāto viṣāsvādaḥ,%} in Manu XI. 9, is probably a
proverb, ‘beginning with the taste of honey but
ending with swallowing poison.’) {%—Madhv-āmra,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of mango tree {%(= baddha-rasāla).%}
{%—Madhv-ālu, u,%} or {%madhv-āluka, am,%} n. a kind
of plant with sweet tubercles, sweet potato. {%—Madhv-%}
{%āvāsa, as,%} m. the mango tree. {%—Madhv-āśin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} eating honey or sweets, enjoying sweetness.
{%—Madhv-āsava, as,%} m. a decoction of honey, an
intoxicating drink made from honey or from the
blossoms of the Bassia Latifolia, sweet spirituous
liquor. {%—Madhvāsava-kṣīva, as, ā, am,%} drunk
with liquor distilled from honey. {%—Madhvāsava-%}
{%nika, as,%} m. a preparer of sweet intoxicating drinks,
a distiller. {%—Madhv-āsvāda, as, ā, am,%} honey-
flavoured, having the taste of honey. {%—Madhv-%}
{%āhuti, is,%} f. a sacrificial offering consisting of sweet
things, an oblation of honey, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36299<pc>0738-a<k1>maDavya<k2>maDavya
{%Madhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fitted or authorized to
drink Soma; consisting of Soma; sweet; ({%as%}), m.
= Mādhava, the second month of spring.
<LEND>

<L>36300<pc>0738-a<k1>maDuka<k2>maDuka
{%Madhuka%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) {%= madhu;%}
{%(as, ā, am),%} sweet; sweet-speaking, mellifluous,
melodious; of the colour of honey; ({%as%}), m. a par-
ticular tree, {%= madhūka%} (Bassia Latifolia); {%= aśoka;%}
{%= valli;%} a bard, panegyrist (? {%vandi-bheda%} for
{%valli-bheda%}); the liquorice-root; a species of bird;
N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f. a particular plant {%(= valli-%}
{%bheda);%} Menispermum Glabrum, Glycyrrhiza Gla-
bra; a black kind of panic-grass; ({%am%}), n. liquorice;
tin.
<LEND>

<L>36301<pc>0738-a<k1>maDunI<k2>maDunI
{%Madhunī,%}¦ f. a species of shrub (commonly called
Mākaḍahātā or Mākaḍacāulī).
<LEND>

<L>36302<pc>0738-a<k1>maDura<k2>maDura
{%Madhura, as, ā, am,%}¦ sweet, honied, pleasant,
pleasing, attractive, mellifluous, sounding sweetly or
agreeably (said of tabours, Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 15700),
uttering sweet cries (said of the Haṃsa, Anuśāsana-p.
2839), melodious; ({%as%}), m. a particular drug {%(jī-%}
{%vaka);%} a kind of sugar {%(guḍa);%} the red sugar-cane
{%(raktekṣu);%} a kind of mango {%(rājāmra);%} a Mo-
[Page0738-b+ 81]
ringa with red blossoms {%(rakta-śigru);%} rice; N. of
one of the attendants of Skanda; of a Gandharva;
({%ā%}), f., N. of various plants, Anethum Sowa; Ane-
thum Panmorium; {%= medā;%} a kind of medicinal
plant {%(= madhūlī, madhu-karkaṭikā);%} Asparagus
Racemosus; Bengal beet; liquorice; sour rice-water;
N. of a city (= Mathurā, Madhūpaghna, now called
Muttra); N. of the tutelary deity of the race of
Vandhula; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of musical instrument;
({%am%}), n. sweetness, syrup, treacle; poison; tin;
{%(am),%} ind. sweetly, pleasantly, agreeably; {%(eṇa),%}
ind. sweetly, kindly, in a friendly or agreeable man-
ner. {%—Madhura-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. ‘having sweet
bones,’ a kind of fish. {%—Madhura-kharjūrikā%} or
{%madhura-kharjūrī,%} f. a species of plant {%(= mā-%}
{%dhvī-madhurā)%}. {%—Madhura-jambīra, as,%} m. a
species of citron or lime {%(= madhu-jambīra)%}. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhura-tā,%} f. or {%madhura-tva, am,%} n. sweetness,
suavity, pleasantness, pleasingness, agreeableness,
amiability, softness. {%—Madhura-traya, am,%} n. the
three sweet things, sugar, honey, and butter. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhura-tvaca, as,%} m. Grislea Tomentosa. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhura-nirghoṣa, as,%} m., N. of an evil spirit or
demon. {%—Madhura-nisvana, as, ā, am,%} sweet-
voiced, sweet-sounding. {%—Madhura-pragīta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having an agreeable note (as a bird), singing
sweetly. {%—Madhura-phala, as,%} m. {%(= rāja-va-%}
{%dara),%} a species of plant. {%—Madhura-bhāṣitṛ, tā,%}
m. a sweet or kind speaker. {%—Madhura-bhāṣin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} sweet-speaking, speaking kindly. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhura-rāvin, ī, iṇi, i,%} sounding sweetly, uttering
sweet cries. {%—Madhura-vacana, as, ā, am,%} sweetly-
speaking. {%—Madhura-vallī,%} f. a kind of citron {%(=%}
{%madhu-bījapūra)%}. {%—Madhura-vāc, k, k, k,%}
sweetly-speaking, uttering kind or friendly words.
{%—Madhura-vījapūra, as,%} m. the sweet lime.
{%—Madhura-sambhāṣa, as, ā, am,%} discoursing
agreeably. {%—Madhura-sravā,%} f. a kind of date tree.
{%—Madhura-svara, as, ā, am,%} sweet-voiced, utter-
ing a sweet or agreeable sound, sounding sweetly or
agreeably. {%—Madhurākṣara (˚ra-ak˚), as, ā, am,%}
uttering sweet words, speaking kindly, sounding
sweetly, sweet, mellifluous, mellow, melodious; {%(āṇi),%}
n. pl. sweet or kind words. {%—Madhurāniruddha%}
{%(˚ra-an˚), am,%} n., N. of a drama by Cayanī-
Candra-śekhara-Rāya-guru. {%—Madhurāmla (˚ra-%}
{%am˚), as, ā, am,%} sweet and sour, subacid. {%—Madhu-%}
{%rāmlaka (˚ra-am˚), as,%} m. the hog-plum, Spondias
Mangifera. {%—Madhurāmla-phala, as,%} m. a par-
ticular tree {%(= āra)%}. {%—Madhurālāpā (˚ra-āl˚), ās,%}
m. ‘sweetly-talking,’ a kind of thrush or Maina,
Turdus Salica. {%—Madhurālābunī (˚ra-āl˚),%} f. a
kind of cucumber {%(= rājālābu)%}. {%—Madhurāvaṭṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a man (in Rāja-taraṅgiṇī VII. 767).
{%—Madhurāṣṭaka (˚ra-aṣ˚), am,%} n. a collection
of eight verses by Vallabhācārya (in which various
attributes of Kṛṣṇa are described, each containing
the word {%madhura%}). {%—Madhurodaka (˚ra-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m., scil. {%samudra,%} ‘the sea of sweet or fresh
water,’ N. of the outermost of the seven great seas
which encompass Meru.
<LEND>

<L>36303<pc>0738-b<k1>maDuraka<k2>maDuraka
{%Madhuraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ sweet, pleasant, agree-
able; ({%as%}), m. a species of medicinal herb, {%= jīvaka;%}
{%(ikā),%} f. an aromatic plant, Anethum Panmorium, a
kind of fennel; ({%am%}), n. the seed of Anethum Pan-
morium.
<LEND>

<L>36304<pc>0738-b<k1>maDuraya<k2>maDuraya
{%Madhuraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%madhurayati, -yitum,%}
to sweeten, display sweetness.
<LEND>

<L>36305<pc>0738-b<k1>maDurita<k2>maDurita
{%Madhurita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sweetened, rendered sweet.
<LEND>

<L>36306<pc>0738-b<k1>maDuriman<k2>maDuriman
{%Madhuriman, ā,%}¦ m. sweetness, suavity, pleasant-
ness, agreeableness.
<LEND>

<L>36307<pc>0738-b<k1>maDula<k2>maDula
{%Madhula, as, ā, am, = madhura,%}¦ sweet, &c.;
({%am%}), n. an intoxicating drink, spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>36308<pc>0738-b<k1>maDulikA<k2>maDulikA
{%Madhulikā,%}¦ f. black mustard; N. of one of the
Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>36309<pc>0738-b<k1>maDuvilA<k2>maDuvilA
{%Madhuvilā,%}¦ f. epithet of the river Samaṅgā,
Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 10692.
<LEND>

<L>36310<pc>0738-b<k1>maDuzWIka<k2>maDuzWIka
{%Madhuṣṭhīka%}¦ (perhaps for {%madhu + aṣṭhīlā%}),
Bassia Latifolia; [cf. {%madhv-aṣṭhilā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36311<pc>0738-b<k1>maDus<k2>maDus
{%Madhus, us,%}¦ n. {%= madhu,%} Ved. sweetness; (ac-
cording to Ujjvaladatta) {%= pavitra-dravya.%}
<LEND>
[Page0738-c+ 80]

<L>36312<pc>0738-c<k1>maDusya<k2>maDusya
{%Madhusya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%madhusyati,%} &c., to wish
for honey, long for sweets, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36313<pc>0738-c<k1>maDUka<k2>maDUka
{%Madhūka%}¦ (fr. {%madhu%}), {%as,%} m. a bee; Bassia
Latifolia (all the parts of which tree are useful,
arrack being distilled from the blossoms and oil
extracted from the seeds); ({%am%}), n. liquorice; the
flower of the Bassia Latifolia.
<LEND>

<L>36314<pc>0738-c<k1>maDUyu<k2>maDUyu
{%Madhūyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. eager for sweetness or
for the sweet Soma juice; (Sāy.) mixing the Soma
juice {%(= madhurasya somāder miśrayitṛ).%}
<LEND>

<L>36315<pc>0738-c<k1>maDUla<k2>maDUla
{%Madhūla, as,%}¦ m. a kind of Bassia {%(= jalaja-%}
{%girija-madhūka-vṛkṣau); (ī),%} f. liquorice; a
kind of citron; the mango tree; a particular plant
{%(= madhurā, madhūli);%} a kind of grain.
<LEND>

<L>36316<pc>0738-c<k1>maDUlaka<k2>maDUlaka
{%Madhūlaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ sweet, agreeable; ({%as%}),
m. a kind of Bassia which grows in watery places;
({%ikā%}), f. a kind of bee; N. of various plants; San-
seviera Zeylanica; water Bassia; a kind of grain
(commonly called {%pātharīgopadhūmī,%} enumerated
among the inferior kinds of grain, cf. {%go-lomikā%});
liquorice; a kind of citron, {%= madhūlī; (am),%} n.,
Ved. sweetness, honey.
<LEND>

<L>36317<pc>0738-c<k1>maDvaka<k2>maDvaka
{%Madhvaka, as,%}¦ m. a bee.
<LEND>

<L>36318<pc>0738-c<k1>maDvala<k2>maDvala
{%Madhvala, as,%}¦ m. repeated tippling, carousing.
<LEND>

<L>36319<pc>0738-c<k1>maDvasya<k2>maDvasya
{%Madhvasya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%madhvasyati,%} &c., to long
for honey, &c., to crave after anything sweet.
<LEND>

<L>36320<pc>0738-c<k1>maDvijA<k2>maDvijA
{%Madhvijā,%}¦ f. (perhaps fr. {%madhvi,%} irreg. loc. +
{%ja%}), any intoxicating drink or beverage, spirituous
liquor.
<LEND>

<L>36321<pc>0738-c<k1>maDya<k2>maDya
{#maDya#}¦ {%madhya, as, ā, am%} (perhaps connected
with the pronominal base 3. {%ma%}), middle, middle-
most, midmost, central, in the middle, in the midst
of (used especially in Ved. like the Latin <nsi>medius</nsi>,
e. g. {%madhye duroṇe,%} in the midst of the sacrificial
chamber, Ṛg-veda 1. 69, 4; {%madhye samudre,%} in
the midst of the ocean); placed in the middle, being
in the middle, intermediate, intervening, ({%madhyo%}
{%deśaḥ,%} a middle country); of a middle kind, mid-
dling, of a middling size or quality, middle-sized,
moderate; (in astronomy) mean; standing between
two, impartial, neutral; lowest, worst ({%= adhama%});
right, just, reasonable; {%(as, am),%} m. n. the middle,
midst, ({%madhye 'hnaḥ,%} in the middle of the day,
at midday; {%madhye niśāyāḥ,%} at midnight), the
centre, (in these senses usually {%am,%} n.); a middle
state or condition (e. g. {%madhyaṃ dainya-har-%}
{%ṣayoḥ,%} a condition between sorrow and joy); mean
or common time in music; the inside or interior of
anything (e. g. {%bilva-madhya,%} the inside of the
Bilva fruit); the middle of the body, the waist
(especially of a woman); the trunk of the body,
the belly, abdomen; the flank of a horse; the middle
term or mean of the progression; cessation, pause,
interval; ({%am%}), n. a particular high number, ten
thousand billions; N. of a country between Sindh
and Hindūstan proper; ({%ā%}), f. the middle finger;
a particular metre of four times three syllables, (in
this sense also {%am,%} n.); a young woman, a girl
when grown up or arrived at puberty; ({%am%}), ind.
(i. e. acc. sing. used adverbially), into the midst, into
the inside, into, in (e. g. {%nagara-madhyaṃ gac-%}
{%chati,%} he goes into the city; {%jana-madhyaṃ vi-%}
{%veśa,%} he entered into the midst of the people);
{%(ena),%} ind. between, on the inside, through the
midst, through (e. g. {%nadīm madhyena jagmuḥ,%}
they went through the river); {%(āt),%} ind. from the
midst, out of the middle, from among, out of (e. g.
{%ekā strī tāsām madhyāt,%} one woman from among
them); ({%e%}), ind. in the middle, in the midst, mid-
way; in the presence of, between, among, amongst,
midst, within, in (e. g. {%samudra-madhye,%} in the
midst of the sea; {%nagarasya madhye,%} in the city;
{%bhruvor madhye,%} between the eyebrows; {%devānām%}
{%madhye,%} in the presence of the gods; {%madhye%}
{%kartum,%} to place between, i. e. to employ as a
mediator; to place in the middle, place before, pro-
pose); {%madhye%} is used by commentators in explain-
ing the loc. case; [cf. Zend <nsi>maidhya,</nsi> ‘medius;’
<nsi>madh-ema,</nsi> ‘middlemost:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">μέσσο-ς for μεθyος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μέσο-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>med-iu-s, di-midi-us:</nsi> Oscan. <nsi>mef-</nsi>
[Page0739-a+ 81]
<nsi>ia-i</nsi> = ‘mediæ,’ loc. sing.: Goth. <nsi>midji-s,</nsi> ‘me-
dius;’ <nsi>mid-uma,</nsi> ‘the middle.’ Old Germ. <nsi>missa,</nsi>
<nsi>missi, mis-:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>midd, ge-midlian, mis-:</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>mezdu,</nsi> ‘among:’ Lith. <nsi>vidù-s,</nsi> ‘interior;’
<nsi>vidùi,</nsi> ‘within;’ <nsi>vidu-rys,</nsi> ‘the middle.’] {%—Ma-%}
{%dhya-karṇa,%} a half diameter, radius. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhya-kuru%} (probably used in m. pl.), N. of a
country. {%—Madhya-kaumudī,%} f. {%= madhya-sid-%}
{%dhānta-kaumudī,%} q. v. {%—Madhya-kṣāmā,%} f. a
slender-waisted woman; ‘slender in the centre,’ N.
of a kind of metre, four times ¯¯¯¯, ˘˘˘˘˘˘
¯¯¯¯. {%—Madhya-ga, as, ā, am,%} going in the
middle, being in the middle or among, being in or
on, (usually at the end of a comp., cf. {%vipaṇi-%}
{%m˚, mārga-m˚, bahu-m˚.%}) {%—Madhya-gata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} going in the middle, being in the midst, be-
tween, under. {%—Madhya-gandha, as,%} m. ‘having
a middling scent (?),’ the mango tree. {%—Madhya-%}
{%grahaṇa, am,%} n. the middle of an eclipse. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhya-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} going in the midst or among.
{%—Madhya-cchāyā,%} f. (in astronomy) mean or
middle shadow. {%—Madhya-jihva, am,%} n., Ved. the
middle of the tongue (said to be the organ of the
palatals). {%—Madhya-jyā,%} f. the sine of the meridian.
{%—Madhya-tamas, as,%} n., Ved. darkness in the
form of a circle, circular or annular darkness, central
darkness. {%—Madhya-tas,%} ind. from or in the middle,
centrally, centrically. {%—Madhya-tā,%} f. the state of
being in the middle, mediocrity. {%—Madhya-tāpinī,%}
f., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Madhya-dina%} for {%ma-%}
{%dhyan-dina,%} q. v. {%—Madhya-dīpaka, am,%} n. (in
rhetoric) ‘illuminating in the middle,’ N. of a figure
in which light is thrown on a description by the
use of an emphatic verb in the middle of a stanza
(Bhaṭṭi-kāvya X. 24). {%—Madhya-deśa, as,%} m.
middle region, middle space, the central or middle
part of anything; {%(= madhyaṃ nabhasaḥ),%} the
meridian; the middle of the body, waist; the trunk
of the body, belly, abdomen; the midland country,
central region, the country lying between the Himā-
layas on the north, the Vindhya mountains on the
south, Vinaśana on the west, Prayāga on the east,
and comprising the modern provinces of Allahabad,
Agra, Delhi, Oude, &c.; {%(as, ā, am),%} belonging to
the midland country, of midland origin, living in the
midland country. {%—Madhya-deśīya%} or {%madhya-%}
{%deśya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the midland country,
of midland origin, living in the midland country,
{%—Madhya-deha, as,%} m. the middle of the body,
the trunk of the body, belly, &c. {%—Madhya-nihita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} placed in the middle, fixed in the centre,
inserted, fixed into (anything). {%—Madhyan-dina,%}
{%as,%} m. (according to some {%am,%} n.), midday, noon;
the midday offering; Midday (personified as a son
of Puṣpa-pārṇa by Prabhā); Bassia Latifolia; N.
of a disciple of Yājñavalkya; {%(as, ā ?, am),%} meri-
dional, meridian, belonging to midday; middle,
central ({%= mādhyandina,%} q. v.). {%—Madhyan-%}
{%dina-samaya, as,%} m. midday-time, noon. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyan-dinīya, as, ā, am,%} meridional, meridian,
belonging to noon or midday. {%—Madhya-patita,%}
fallen in the middle, lying between or in the midst.
{%—Madhya-parimāṇa, am,%} n. the middle measure
or magnitude (or that between an atom and infini-
tude). {%—Madhya-pāta, as,%} m. falling or going in
the midst, intercourse, commerce; (in astronomy)
the mean occurrence of the aspect. {%—Madhya-bha,%}
(in astronomy) the meridian ecliptic point. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhya-bhakta, as, ā, am,%} eaten in the middle (a
term applied to any medicine taken in the middle
of a meal). {%—Madhya-bhāga, as,%} m. the middle
part or portion; the middle of the body, waist.
{%—Madhya-bhāva, as,%} m. middle state or condition;
mediocrity; a middling or moderate distance (neither
far off nor close at hand). {%—Madhya-manoramā,%}
f., N. of a grammatical work (an abridgement of
the Manoramā). {%—Madhya-mandira, as,%} m., N.
of the author of the Mahābhārata-tātparya-nirṇaya;
the title of a book. {%—Madhya-yava, as,%} m. a weight
of six white mustard seeds. {%—Madhya-yogin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} Ved. (in astronomy) being in the middle of a
[Page0739-b+ 81]
conjunction, completely covered or obscured. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhya-rātra, as,%} m. or {%madhya-rātri, is,%} f. mid-
night; {%madhya-rātrau,%} at midnight. {%—Madhya-%}
{%rekhā,%} f. the middle line, the central or first meridian,
the line conceived by the Hindūs to be drawn through
Laṅkā, Ujjayinī, Kuru-kṣetra, and other places to
mount Meru, (the first meridian being drawn by
the Hindūs through Ujjayinī or Oojein proves that,
during the time of king Vikramāditya, this city was
the cradle of the Hindū science of astronomy; it is
in lat. 23° 10′ , long. 75° 47′ E.) {%—Madhya-lagna,%}
{%am,%} n. the point of the ecliptic situated on the
meridian, the meridian ecliptic point. {%—Madhya-%}
{%līlā,%} f. title of a work. {%—Madhya-loka, as,%} m. the
middle world, earth, abode of mortals. {%—Madhya-%}
{%lokeśa (˚ka-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of the middle world
or earth,’ a king. {%—Madhya-vayas, ās, ās, as,%}
middle-aged. {%—Madhya-vartin, ī, inī, i%} (generally
at the end of a comp.), being in the middle, being
or situated between, being among; abiding in the
midst or in the centre, central, middle; ({%ī%}), m. a
mediator. {%—Madhya-vallī,%} f., N. of a Vallī of the
Taittirīyopaniṣad (probably from being in the
middle of the book). {%—Madhya-vidaraṇa, am,%}
n., Ved., N. of one of the ten modes in which an
eclipse ends. {%—Madhya-vṛtta, am,%} n. the navel.
{%—Madhya-śarīra, as, ā, am,%} having a middle-
sized body or one of moderately full habit. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhya-śāyin, ī, inī, i,%} lying in the midst, lying
within. {%—Madhya-siddhānta-kaumudī,%} f. ‘the
middle-sized Siddhānta-kaumudī,’ N. of an abridge-
ment of the Siddhānta-kaumudī by Varada-rāja.
{%—Madhya-sūtra, am,%} n. the central meridian;
[cf. {%madhya-rekhā.%}] {%—Madhya-stha, as, ā, am,%}
standing or being in the middle, being in the middle
space (i. e. the air), central, intermediate, being
within, in, among, between (e. g. {%sāgara-śoka-%}
{%madhyastha,%} being in a sea of sorrow); being of
a middle condition or middle kind, middling; stand-
ing between two persons or parties, acting as me-
diator, mediating, free from party spirit, neutral;
belonging to neither party or to both parties; re-
garding indifferently, impartial, indifferent; ({%as%}),
m. an umpire, judge, arbitrator, mediator; an epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Madhyastha-tā,%} f. middle state or
character; mediocrity; intermediate situation; me-
diatorship; indifference, impartiality. {%—Madhya-%}
{%sthala, am,%} n. a middle place or region; the centre;
the middle of the body, waist; {%(= kaṭi-deśa),%} the
hip. {%—Madhya-sthāna, am,%} n. a middle place or
station; the middle space (i. e. the air); a neutral
soil. {%—Madhya-sthita, as, ā, am,%} being in the mid-
dle, situated in the midst or between; central, inter-
mediate, being between (with gen.). {%—Madhya-%}
{%sthita-tā,%} f. indifference. {%—Madhya-sthity-ardha,%}
(in astronomy) the mean half duration. {%—Madhya-%}
{%svarita, as, ā, am,%} having the Svarita accent on
the middle syllable. {%—Madhyākṣara-vistara-lipi%}
{%(˚ya-ak˚), is,%} f., N. of a particular kind of written
character. {%—Madhyāṅguli, is,%} or {%madhyāṅgulī%}
{%(˚ya-aṅ˚),%} f. the middle finger. {%—Madhyāditya%}
{%(˚ya-ād˚), as,%} m. the midday sun. {%—Madhyānta-%}
{%vibhāga-śāstra (˚ya-an˚), am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist
work. {%—Madhyāntika, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
Arhat. {%—Madhyāmlakesara (˚ya-am˚),%} the citron.
{%—Madhyārjuna (˚ya-ar˚),%} N. of a district. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyārjuna-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha on the
southern bank of the Kāverī. {%—Madhyā-varṣa,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. the middle of the rainy season.
{%—Madhyāsthi (˚ya-as˚),%} the plant Grewia Asiatica.
{%—Madhyāhāriṇī-lipi, is,%} f. a particular kind of
written character. {%—Madhyāhna (˚ya-ah˚), as,%} m.
midday, noon; N. of a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya.
{%—Madhyāhna-kāla, as,%} m. midday-time. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyāhna-kṛtya, am,%} n. midday duty; midday
business or observance. {%—Madhyāhna-kriyā,%} f. a
religious ceremony to be performed at midday. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyāhna-velā,%} f. noontide. {%—Madhyāhna-sama-%}
{%ya, as,%} m. time or period of midday. {%—Madhyāhna-%}
{%savana, am,%} n. a midday sacrifice. {%—Madhyāhna-%}
{%snāna-vidhi, is,%} m. midday ablution, any noon-
[Page0739-c+ 81]
day purificatory rite. {%—Madhyāhnendu-prabhā-%}
{%karṇa (˚na-in˚),%} the hypothenuse of the moon's
midday shadow. {%—Madhye-kṣāmā,%} f. slender
or attenuated in the middle, thin at the waist;
[cf. {%madhya-kṣāmā.%}] {%—Madhye-gaṅgam,%} ind.
in the middle of the Ganges, in or into the
Ganges. {%—Madhye-guru, us, us%} or {%vī, u,%} (pro-
bably) containing a long syllable in the middle.
{%—Madhye-jyotis, is,%} f., Ved. epithet of the Trish-
ṭubh in which a pāda of eight syllables stands be-
tween two of twelve. {%—Madhye-nagaram,%} ind. in
the middle of a city, within the city, inside the city.
{%—Madhye-nadi,%} ind. in the middle of the river,
in the river, into the river. {%—Madhyendranīla%}
{%(˚ya-in˚), as, ā, am,%} having a sapphire in the
middle. {%—Madhye-pṛṣṭham,%} ind. in or on the
middle of the back, on the back. {%—Madhye-bhakta,%}
{%am,%} n. a medicine to be taken whilst eating.
{%—Madhyebha-bandhana (˚ya-ibh˚), am,%} n. a band
or rope round an elephant's body. {%—Madhye-%}
{%madhyamāṅguli-kūrparam (˚ma-aṅ˚),%} ind. be-
tween the middle finger and elbow. {%—Madhye-%}
{%vāri,%} ind. in the middle of the water, in or under
the water. {%—Madhye-vindhyāṭavi (˚ya-aṭ˚),%} ind.
in the forests of the Vindhya range. {%—Madhye-%}
{%śyāma, as, ā, am,%} black in the centre. {%—Madhye-%}
{%sabham,%} ind. in the midst of the assembly, in the
assembly, before all the assembled company. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyodātta (˚ya-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} having the Udātta
(acute accent) on the middle syllable.
<LEND>

<L>36322<pc>0739-c<k1>maDyatas<k2>maDyatas
{%Madhya-tas,%}¦ ind. from the middle, from or out
of the midst, in the midst, in the centre, from the
centre, among, between, out of (e. g. {%vāri-madhya-%}
{%taḥ,%} out of the water; {%Sarasvatyā Dṛṣadvatyāś-%}
{%ca madhyataḥ,%} between the Sarasvatī and the Dṛ-
ṣadvatī; {%prācyām madhyataḥ,%} to the east of the
central meridian). {%—Madhyataḥ-kārin, ī,%} m. epi-
thet of the four principal priests (viz. the Hotṛ, Adh-
varyu, Brahman, and Udgātṛ).
<LEND>

<L>36323<pc>0739-c<k1>maDyanya<k2>maDyanya
{%Madhyanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ occupying a middle place,
having a middle rank or position (in any caste &c.).
<LEND>

<L>36324<pc>0739-c<k1>maDyama<k2>maDyama
{%Madhyama, as, ā, am,%}¦ middle, middlemost, mid-
most, central, in the middle, in the midst, (used like
the Latin <nsi>medius</nsi>, e. g. {%madhyame gulme,%} in the
midst of the troop), being in the middle, placed in
the middle; intermediate, intervening; of a middle
condition or quality, middling, of a middle size,
middle-sized, moderate; (in astronomy) mean; be-
longing to the meridian; standing between two
persons or parties, impartial, neutral; middle-born,
neither the oldest nor the youngest; {%(as, am),%} m.
n. the middle of the body, waist; ({%as%}), m. {%(=%}
{%madhya-deśa),%} the midland country; (in music)
epithet of the fourth or fifth note; the middlemost of
the three musical scales, a particular musical mode or
Rāga; (in grammar) the second person ({%= madhya-%}
{%ma-puruṣa,%} q. v.); the governor of a province;
epithet of a particular sect of Buddhists; a kind of
antelope; N. of the eighteenth Kalpa; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a Buddhist sect; ({%ā%}), f. the middle finger; a
girl arrived at puberty, a marriageable woman; {%(=%}
{%karṇikā),%} the pericarp of a lotus; a central blossom;
a metre of four times three syllables; ({%am%}), n. the
middle; N. of the twelfth Kāṇḍa of the Śatapatha-
Brāhmaṇa, the fourteenth according to the Kāṇva
school; (in astronomy) the meridian ecliptic point;
[cf. Goth. <nsi>miduma, midums.</nsi>] {%—Madhyama-%}
{%kakṣā,%} f. the middle enclosure or court-yard. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyama-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. (in algebra) the middle
term of an equation; N. of the second part of the
Śārṅgadhara-saṃhitā. {%—Madhyama-gati, is,%} f.
(in astronomy) mean motion of a planet. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyama-grāma, as,%} m. the middle scale in music.
{%—Madhyama-jāta, as, ā, am,%} middle-born, born
between (two other children), middlemost. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyama-ṭīkā,%} f. title of a work by Kumārila. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyama-pada, am,%} n. the middle member (which
is sometimes omitted and requires to be supplied in a
compound consisting of two words). {%—Madhyama-%}
{%pada-lopa, as,%} m. the omission of the middle
member of a compound (as in {%Śāka-pārthiva,%} the
[Page0740-a+ 81]
king of the era, for {%Śāka-priya-pārthiva,%} the
king dear to the era). {%—Madhyama-pada-lopin, ī,%}
m., scil. {%samāsa,%} a compound which omits the
middle member. {%—Madhyama-pāṇḍava, as,%} m.
‘the middlemost of the five Pāṇḍavas,’ Arjuna.
{%—Madhyama-puruṣa, as,%} m. the second person
in verbal conjugation or a termination of the second
person; [cf. {%prathama-puruṣa, uttama-puru-%}
{%ṣa.%}] {%—Madhyama-bhṛtaka, as,%} m. a husband-
man, a farm-labourer who works both for his master
and himself. {%—Madhyama-yāna, am,%} n. (with
Buddhists) ‘the middle passage,’ the middle way to
salvation. {%—Madhyama-rātra, as,%} m. midnight.
{%—Madhyama-rekhā,%} f. the central meridian of the
earth, a line conceived to be drawn through Laṅkā,
Ujjayinī, Kuru-kṣetra, and Meru; [cf. {%madhya-%}
{%rekhā.%}] {%—Madhyama-loka, as,%} m. the middle
world (between heaven and the nether world), the
earth. {%—Madhyamaloka-pāla, as,%} m. ‘protector of
the middle world,’ a king. {%—Madhyama-lokendu%}
{%(˚ka-in˚), us,%} m. ‘moon of the middle world,’ a
king. {%—Madhyama-vayas, as,%} n. middle age.
{%—Madhyama-vayaska, as, ā, am,%} middle-aged.
{%—Madhyama-vāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. (according to Sāy.)
driving at middling or slow speed {%(= manda-ga-%}
{%manena vāhaka);%} driving with a horse in the
middle or with only one horse between the shafts (?).
{%—Madhyama-śī, īs,%} m., Ved. lying or being in
the middle, (perhaps) an intercessor; (Sāy.) {%= ma-%}
{%dhyama-sthāne vartamāna.%} (In Vājasaneyi-s. XII.
86, the nom. {%-śīr%} in {%madhyama-śīr%} is derived by
Mahī-dhara fr. rt. {%śṝ,%} to injure, and the comp. is
said to {%= marma-ghātaka.%}) {%—Madhyama-saṅgra-%}
{%ha, as,%} m. intrigue of a middling character (present-
ing flowers &c. to another's wife). {%—Madhyama-%}
{%sāhasa, as,%} m. the middlemost penalty or amerce-
ment (Manu VIII. 138, 263), punishment for
crimes of a middle degree; {%(as, am),%} m. n. vio-
lence or outrage of the middle class (injuring build-
ings, throwing down walls, &c.). {%—Madhyama-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} standing or being in the middle
(see Gaṇa Brāhmaṇādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 124). {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyama-sthā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. standing in the
middle, forming the centre (of a community).
{%—Madhyama-stheya, am,%} n., Ved. the state of
standing in the middle or forming the centre. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyamāgama (˚ma-āg˚), as,%} m. ‘the middle Āgama,’
N. of one of the four Āgamas of the Buddhists.
{%—Madhyamāṅgiras (˚ma-aṅ˚), ās,%} m. the middle
Aṅgiras (law-giver), the middle-sized Aṅgiras. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhyamāṅguli (˚ma-aṅ˚), is,%} f. the middle finger;
[cf. {%madhyāṅguli.%}] {%—Madhyamātreya (˚ma-āt˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the middle Ātreya (law-giver), the middle-
sized Ātreya work. {%—Madhyamādi (˚ma-ādi), is,%} f. a
particular musical scale. {%—Madhyamādhikāra (˚ma-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m., N. of the first chapter of the Sūrya-
siddhānta. {%—Madhyamāharaṇa (˚ma-āh˚), am,%}
n. (in algebra) the elimination of the middle term
in an equation. {%—Madhyameśvara (˚ma-īś˚), as,%}
m., N. of a Liṅga of Śiva held in great esteem at
Benares. {%—Madhyame-ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. {%=%}
{%madhyama-sthā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>36325<pc>0740-a<k1>maDyamaka<k2>maDyamaka
{%Madhyamaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ middlemost, mid-
most; common (said of property &c.); ({%ikā%}), f. a
girl arrived at puberty, a marriageable woman; N.
of the second or middle Grantha of the Kāṭhaka.
{%—Madhyamaka-vṛtti%} or {%madhyamika-vṛtti,%}
{%is,%} f., N. of a book. {%—Madhyamakālaṅkāra (˚ka-%}
{%al˚), as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Madhya-%}
{%makāloka (˚ka-āl˚), as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
work.
<LEND>

<L>36326<pc>0740-a<k1>maDyamakeya<k2>maDyamakeya
{%Madhyamakeya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>36327<pc>0740-a<k1>maDyamika<k2>maDyamika
{%Madhyamika, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school of
Buddhists, the followers of Nāgārjuna.
<LEND>

<L>36328<pc>0740-a<k1>maDyamIya<k2>maDyamIya
{%Madhyamīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ middlemost, middle,
central.
<LEND>

<L>36329<pc>0740-a<k1>maDyA<k2>maDyA
{%Madhyā,%}¦ ind. (probably an old inst.), Ved. in the
middle, in the midst, between (with gen., e. g.
{%madhyā kartor vitata,%} spread in the middle of the
work, Ṛg-veda 1. 115, 4).
<LEND>

<L>36330<pc>0740-a<k1>maDyAyu<k2>maDyAyu
{%Madhyāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. being a mediator,
[Page0740-b+ 79]
seeking mediation, intermediate, (Sāy. {%madhyā-%}
{%yuvaḥ = asmākaṃ śriyāṃ yaśasāṃ ca madhye%}
{%vasthitiṃ kāmayamānāḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>36331<pc>0740-b<k1>maDva<k2>maDva
{#maDva#}¦ {%madhva, as,%} m., N. of the founder of
a sect of Vaiṣṇavas in the south of India in the
thirteenth century, hence called the Mādhava sect,
(his N. was properly Ānanda-tīrtha Bhagavat-pāda,
he is also called Madhu.) {%—Madhva-guru, us,%} or
{%madhvācārya (˚va-āc˚), as,%} m. {%= madhva%} above.
{%—Madhva-mukha-bhaṅga, as,%} m. or {%madhva-%}
{%mukha-mardana, am,%} n. ‘the bruising of the face
of Madhva,’ N. of a work by Appi Dīkṣita refuting
Madhva's notions respecting the Vedānta. {%—Ma-%}
{%dhvācārya-vijaya, as,%} m., N. of a book.
<LEND>

<L>36332<pc>0740-b<k1>maDvaka<k2>maDvaka
{#maDvaka#}¦ {%madhvaka,%} &c. See p. 738, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36333<pc>0740-b<k1>maDvakza<k2>maDvakza
{#maDvakza#}¦ {%madhv-akṣa,%} &c. See p. 738,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36334<pc>0740-b<k1>man<k2>man
{#man#}¦ {%man%} [cf. rt. {%mnā%}], cl. 8. A. {%manute,%}
cl. 4. A. (also less commonly P.) {%manyate%}
{%(-ti),%} cl. 1. P. {%manati, mene, mantā, manitā, maṃ-%}
{%śyate (-ti), maniṣyate, amaṃsta, amata, amaṃ-%}
{%siṣṭa,%} (the following are Vedic forms generally
referable to cl. 8, cl. 1, or even cl. 2, {%manvate,%}
{%manvahe, manmahe, manāmahe, manavate,%}
{%amanmahi, amanvata, mananta, manai, maṃsi,%}
{%maṃsase, maṃsate, maṃsai, maṃsīṣṭa, maṃsī-%}
{%mahi;%} in Ṛg-veda VII. 88, 2, according to Sāy.,
{%maṃsi = stavāni,%} and in 1. 84, 17. {%maṃsate =%}
{%jānāti%}), {%mantum%} (Ved. inf. {%mantave, mantavai%}),
to think, believe (e. g. {%eko' ham asmīty ātmānaṃ%}
{%tvam manyase,%} thou believest thyself to be alone,
cf. Manu VIII. 91; {%prāpta-kālam amanyata,%} he
believed that the time was arrived, Mahā-bh. Vana-
parva 2206); to suppose, conceive, imagine, con-
jecture; to mind, consider, reflect upon, regard,
deem (e. g. {%sukhavan manyate,%} he deems it fortu-
nate); to hold or take for (with acc., e. g. {%na mām%}
{%anyathā mantum arhasi,%} deign not to take me
for any one else, i. e. to doubt me); to esteem,
estimate, prize, value, honour, ({%bahu man,%} to think
much of, esteem or value highly, with acc., e. g.
{%bahu mene tam,%} he esteemed him highly; {%laghu%}
{%man,%} to think lightly of, value lightly, disesteem,
e. g. {%tṛṇam iva laghu manyate patim,%} she values
her husband as lightly as a straw; {%na man,%} to think
nothing of, disregard, disesteem; {%sādhu man,%} to
think well of, approve, commend, with acc., e. g.
{%kaḥ sādhu manyeta niṣphalam ārambham,%} who
would approve a fruitless undertaking; or with {%iti,%}
e. g. {%kṛṣiṃ sādhv iti manyante,%} they commend
agriculture; {%asādhu man,%} to think ill of, disapprove;
{%tṛṇāya man,%} to value at a straw, esteem lightly,
e. g. {%rājyaṃ tṛṇāya manye,%} I make light of em-
pire); to think fit or right (e. g. {%yadi manyase,%}
if thou thinkest fit); to agree with any one, be of
the same opinion; to think upon, have the heart
and soul fixed upon, set the heart or mind on (e. g.
{%santānam menire,%} they set their minds on offspring);
to hope for, wish for (sometimes with gen.); to have
in the mind, intend, intend for; to remember, think
of, meditate on (as in prayer; according to Naigh.
III. 19. {%manmahe%} and {%manāmahe%} are included
among the seventeen {%yācñā-karmāṇaḥ%}); to men-
tion, declare; to think out, excogitate, invent; to
perceive, observe, know, understand, comprehend;
to be considered or regarded as, to be taken for,
appear as, seem (e. g. {%manyante jīvanto 'pi mṛtāḥ,%}
though living they are regarded as dead); {%manye,%}
I think, methinks, is sometimes inserted parentheti-
cally in a sentence without influencing the construc-
tion: Caus. P. {%mānayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%amīma-%}
{%nat,%} to honour, esteem, value highly, show honour
to, pay respect to; A. {%mānayate,%} &c., to esteem
one's self highly: Desid. {%mīmāṃsate,%} to think over,
reflect upon, consider, examine; to call in question,
to doubt (with loc. of the thing called in question):
Desid. of Desid. {%mīmāṃsiṣate:%} Intens. {%manman-%}
{%yate;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>man,</nsi> ‘to think;’ <nsi>upa-man =</nsi>
<lang n="greek">ὑπομένειν;</lang> <nsi>fra-man,</nsi> ‘to persevere;’ <nsi>mananh,</nsi>
[Page0740-c+ 81]
‘mind, spirit;’ <nsi>mad, madh,</nsi> ‘to treat medically;’
<nsi>madha,</nsi> ‘wisdom, medical science;’ <nsi>vohu-mad =</nsi>
<lang n="greek">πολυ-μαθής:</lang> Gr. <lang n="greek">μέν-ω, μέ-μον-α, μέν-ος, Μέντωρ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">Μέν-τη-ς, Ἀγα-μέ-μνων, μαίν-ο-μαι, μαν-ία, μάν-τι-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μῆν-ι-ς, μέ-μνη-μαι, μνά-ο-μαι, μι-μνή-σκ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μνή-μων, μνή-μη, μνημο-σύνη, ἔ-μαθ-ον, μανθ-άν-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μηνύ-ω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>man-e-o, me-min-i, Miner-va,</nsi>
<nsi>men-tio, men-(ti)-s, menti-o-r, mend-ax, mon-e-o,</nsi>
<nsi>Mone-ta, re-min-i-sc-o-r, com-min-i-sc-or, com-</nsi>
<nsi>men-tu-m, commen-ta-riu-s, med-eo-r, re-med-</nsi>
<nsi>iu-m, med-icu-s, med-i-tari:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>man,</nsi> ‘to
think;’ <nsi>ga-mun-an,</nsi> ‘to call to mind;’ <nsi>mun-s =</nsi> <lang n="greek">νόημα</lang>;
<nsi>ga-min-thi =</nsi> <lang n="greek">μνεία;</lang> <nsi>mun-d-ô-n,</nsi> ‘to consider;’
<nsi>mundrei,</nsi> ‘a mark:’ Old Germ. <nsi>minnia, minna,</nsi>
‘love;’ <nsi>man-ê-n, man-o-n,</nsi> ‘to warn;’ <nsi>meina,</nsi>
‘opinion;’ <nsi>munt-ar,</nsi> ‘active, wakeful:’ Lith. <nsi>menu,</nsi>
‘I remember;’ <nsi>pri-manus,</nsi> ‘prudent;’ <nsi>min-iu,</nsi>
‘to consider;’ <nsi>at-men-u, at-min-ti-s,</nsi> ‘memory;’
<nsi>mand-rù-s,</nsi> ‘active, wakeful:’ Slav. <nsi>min-e-ti,</nsi> ‘to
think;’ <nsi>po-man-a-ti =</nsi> <lang n="greek">μνημονεύειν</lang> <nsi>pa-me-ti =</nsi>
<lang n="greek">μνήμη;</lang> <nsi>ma-d-rŭ =</nsi> <lang n="greek">φρόνιμος:</lang> Russ. <nsi>mnju,</nsi> ‘I sup-
pose:’ Hib. <nsi>muinim,</nsi> ‘I teach, instruct;’ and perhaps
<nsi>smuainim,</nsi> ‘I think, imagine, devise, consider.’]
<LEND>

<L>36335<pc>0740-c<k1>mata<k2>mata
{%Mata, as, ā, am,%}¦ thought, believed, understood,
supposed; conceived, imagined, conjectured; con-
sidered, regarded, deemed, held, regarded as, taken
for; esteemed, thought well or ill of, commended,
valued [cf. {%bahu-m˚%}]; honoured, respected, ap-
proved (sometimes with gen., e. g. {%rājñām mata,%}
honoured or approved by kings); thought fit or
right, sanctioned; thought upon, hoped for, wished
for (sometimes with gen.); intended, designed,
aimed at; kept in mind, meditated on, remembered
(as in prayer), mentioned; thought out, excogitated,
invented; perceived, observed, known, recognised,
comprehended, understood; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son
of Śambara, (also read {%mana%}); ({%am%}), n. a thought,
idea, opinion, sentiment, view, doctrine, belief,
creed, tenet, sect; advice, counsel; commendation,
approbation, sanction; disposition of mind, design,
aim, intention, purpose, wish; knowledge. {%—Ma-%}
{%tākṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} one well skilled in
dice. {%—Matāntara (˚ta-an˚), am,%} n. another
opinion; a different creed or sect. {%—Matāvalam-%}
{%bana (˚ta-av˚), am,%} n. the holding or embracing a
particular creed. {%—Matāvalambin (˚ta-av˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} holding or embracing the acts of a particular sect.
<LEND>

<L>36336<pc>0740-c<k1>mati<k2>mati
{%Mati, is,%}¦ f. devotion, prayer, worship, devotional
hymn, sacred utterance (Ved.); that which is sensi-
ble, intelligent, mindful, a monitor, adviser (Ved.;
according to Sāy. in Ṛg-veda VIII. 18, 7. {%matiḥ =%}
{%mantrī,%} a monitress, X. 91, 8. {%matim = mantā-%}
{%ram%}); the mind, understanding, intelligence, intel-
lect, wit, sense, discernment, judgment (e. g. {%utpan-%}
{%neṣu kāryeṣu matir na hīyate,%} he does not lose
his senses in emergencies); a mind set on any object,
design, intention, resolution, determination (with
dat. or loc., e. g. {%narakāya matis,%} a mind set on
hell; {%śravaṇe matiḥ,%} a mind fixed on hearing;
{%kāme matis,%} a mind set on love; {%matiṃ kṛ%} or
{%dhā%} or {%dhṛ,%} or {%ā-dhā,%} or {%sam-ā-dhā,%} to fix or
direct the mind, resolve, determine; {%matiṃ dṛ-%}
{%ḍhām āsthāya,%} having made a firm resolution,
with dat. or loc., e. g. {%matiṃ gamanāya%} or {%ga-%}
{%mane karoti,%} he resolves on going); thought, idea,
conception, opinion, notion, belief, conviction, impres-
sion, mode of thought, view, creed; counsel, advice;
esteem, respect, reverence, regard (with loc., e. g.
{%dharme matiḥ,%} regard for justice); disposition of
mind, wish, desire, inclination; memory, remem-
brance, recollection; Opinion personified (and iden-
tified with Subalātmajā as one of the mothers of the
five sons of Pāṇḍu, or regarded as a daughter of
Dakṣa and wife of Soma, or as the wife of Viveka);
a kind of vegetable or pot-herb; ({%is%}), m., N. of a
king; {%matyā,%} ind. wittingly, knowingly, purposely,
intentionally, designedly, on purpose, according to
one's opinion, with the idea that, under the impres-
sion that (e. g. {%vyāghra-matyā,%} under the impres-
sion of its being a tiger); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μῆτις;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>mens, mentis;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ga-mun-ds,</nsi> ‘memory;’ Slav.
[Page0741-a+ 81]
<nsi>pramanti.</nsi>] {%—Mati-karman, a,%} n. an act of the
understanding, mental act. {%—Mati-gati, is,%} f. ‘men-
tal course,’ mode of thought. {%—Mati-garbha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘containing intelligence,’ clever, intelligent.
{%—Mati-citra, as,%} m. epithet of Aśva-ghoṣa. {%—Ma-%}
{%ti-darśana, am,%} n. the act or faculty of seeing
into the thoughts or intentions (of others). {%—Mati-%}
{%dā,%} f. ‘insight-giving,’ N. of two plants (Car-
diospermum Halicacabum and {%= śimrīḍīkṣupa,%}
{%= balyā%}). {%—Mati-dvaidha, am,%} n. difference of
opinion. {%—Mati-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a nephew
of Saskya-paṇḍita. {%—Mati-nāra, as,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Mati-nirṇaya, as,%} m. title of an artificial
poem. {%—Mati-niścaya, as,%} m. a steadfast opinion,
firm conviction. {%—Mati-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} ‘pre-
ceded by mental purpose or design,’ purposed, in-
tended; ({%am%}), ind. purposely, intentionally, wit-
tingly, knowingly. {%—Mati-pūrvaka, am,%} ind. know-
ingly, purposely, wittingly. {%—Mati-prakarṣa, as,%}
m. superiority of mind, cleverness, talent. {%—Mati-%}
{%bhadra-gaṇi, is,%} m., N. of a Paṇḍit. {%—Mati-bheda,%}
{%as,%} m. change of opinion or of views. {%—Mati-%}
{%bhrama, as,%} m. or {%mati-bhrānti, is,%} f. confusion
of mind, perplexity; error, mistake, misapprehen-
sion. {%—Mati-mat, ān, atī, at,%} clever, intelligent,
sensible, wise, prudent, judicious; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a
son of Janamejaya. {%—Mati-mukura, as,%} m. title of
a medical work. {%—Mati-vardhana, as,%} m., N. of
a commentator (thought to have lived towards the
end of the seventeenth century). {%—Mati-vid, t, t,%}
{%t,%} Ved. knowing (one's) devotion or (one's) aim.
{%—Mati-vibhraṃśa, as,%} m. failure or infatuation
of mind, madness. {%—Mati-vibhrama, as,%} m. con-
fusion or error of mind, mistake. {%—Mati-śālin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} ‘possessing intelligence,’ clever, intelligent.
{%—Mati-hīna, as, ā, am,%} deprived of mind, without
sense, stupid. {%—Matīśvara (˚ti-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord
of mind,’ epithet of Viśva-karman.
<LEND>

<L>36337<pc>0741-a<k1>matya<k2>matya<h>2
2. {%matya, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. see p. 732, col. 3), the
means of acquiring knowledge; the exercise or
application of knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>36338<pc>0741-a<k1>matvA<k2>matvA
{%Matvā,%}¦ ind. having thought; having believed;
having considered; having known or understood;
having remembered.
<LEND>

<L>36339<pc>0741-a<k1>mana<k2>mana
{%Mana, as,%}¦ m. Indian spikenard, Nardostachys
Jatamansi; N. of a son of Śambara.
<LEND>

<L>36340<pc>0741-a<k1>manana<k2>manana
{%Manana, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoughtful, careful; ({%am%}),
n. the act of thinking or considering, reflection,
thought, intelligence, understanding, intrinsic know-
ledge or science (as one of the faculties connected
with the senses), meditation, ({%īśvara-manana,%}
meditation on the Supreme Spirit); prayer, (used in
Nirukta VIII. 6, X. 42, to explain {%manman%}); ({%ā%}),
ind., Ved. thoughtfully, prayerfully, (Sāy. {%= mana-%}
{%nena.%})
<LEND>

<L>36341<pc>0741-a<k1>mananIya<k2>mananIya
{%Mananīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thought or con-
sidered, to be reflected or meditated on, proper to
be thought of, deserving thought or reflection, to be
minded.
<LEND>

<L>36342<pc>0741-a<k1>mananya<k2>mananya
{%Mananya%}¦ (?), see Ṛg-veda X. 106, 8.
<LEND>

<L>36343<pc>0741-a<k1>manas<k2>manas
{%Manas, as,%}¦ n. mind (in its widest sense as applied
to all the mental powers), intellect, intelligence, un-
derstanding, perception, sense, conscience, will; (in
phil.) the internal organ of perception and cognition,
the faculty or instrument through which thoughts
enter or by which objects of sense affect the soul (in
this sense {%manas%} is always regarded in Hindū phi-
losophy as distinct from the soul [{%ātman, puruṣa%}];
in the Sāṅkhya system it is an internal organ standing
between the organs of perception and the organs of
action, as an eleventh organ which partakes of the
nature of both [cf. {%indriya%}]; the Vedānta doctrine
is very similar, and in both the appropriate functions
or operations of {%manas%} are defined to be {%saṅkalpa,%}
judging, and {%vikalpa,%} doubting; according to the
Nyāya-sūtras, the property of the internal organ
{%manas%} is its not giving rise simultaneously to more
notions than one, hence in this philosophy it is held
to be an atomic organ or inlet to the all-pervading
soul, not allowing this latter, as the thinker or knower,
to receive more than one thought or conception at
[Page0741-b+ 81]
once; according to this system {%manas%} is a {%dravya%}
or substance; it is {%paramāṇu-rūpa,%} in the form of
an atom, and though distinct from the all-pervading
soul is like it, {%nitya,%} eternal; in the Sāṅkhya {%manas,%}
as the internal organ whose {%vṛtti%} or function is
{%saṅkalpa,%} judging or determining, has a special
connection with both {%buddhi,%} whose function is
{%adhyavasāya%} or ascertainment, and {%ahaṅkāra,%} whose
function is {%abhimāna%} or self-consciousness; and in
the Yoga and Vedānta {%manas%} is connected with both
these and a fourth, viz. {%citta,%} the organ of thinking,
whose operation is said to be {%anu-sandhāna,%} in-
vestigation; in the Sāṅkhya {%manas%} is, as it were,
a portion or modification of {%buddhi,%} which is there
called {%mahat%} as the ‘great’ source of the other in-
ternal instruments {%ahaṅkāra%} and {%manas;%} in the
Vedānta {%manas,%} whose operation is judging and
doubting, is specially associated with {%buddhi,%} whose
function is said to be {%niścaya%} or ascertainment, these
two being held to include under them {%ahaṅkāra%} and
{%citta,%} and all four together constituting the whole
{%antaḥ-karaṇa%} or internal instrument; in the Atharva-
veda XIX. 9, 5, {%manas%} is enumerated after the five
senses as a sixth; in the Ṛg-veda it is sometimes
joined with {%hṛd%} or {%hṛdaya,%} the heart, cf. IV. 37,
2, X. 10, 13; in Manu VII. 6. with {%cakṣus,%} the
eye); the spirit or spiritual principle, the breath or
living soul which escapes from the body at death
(called {%asu%} in animals), mind, thought, imagin-
ation, conception, idea, fancy, ({%manasā cintitaṃ%}
{%karma,%} an act thought of in the mind; {%manaso%}
{%javīyān,%} swifter than thought, Ṛg-veda I. 183, 1;
{%manasi nihitaḥ,%} impressed on the mind, Megha-
dūta 98; {%manaḥ kṛ,%} to direct the mind or thoughts
towards any object, with loc. or dat., e. g. {%pāpe%} or
{%pāpāya kurute manaḥ,%} he directs his mind to sin;
{%manaḥ sam-ā-dhā,%} to recover the senses, collect one's
self); excogitation, reflection, reflecting, opining;
the thing excogitated (Sāy. {%= stotra,%} a hymn), in-
vention; intention, design, purpose, inclination, will,
wish, ({%yadi manasā manyase,%} if thou hast the in-
clination, if thou art minded; sometimes with dat.,
e. g. {%manas tasmai cakre,%} he felt an inclination
for him; in this sense {%manas%} is occasionally used
at the end of compounds, and even with the infin.,
like {%kāma,%} q. v., e. g. {%sva-kanyā-pradāna-m˚,%}
intending or wishing to give his own daughter in
marriage; {%draṣṭu-m˚,%} having a mind to see,
wishing to see); heart, affection, desire, longing
after; disposition, mood, temper, good-will, favour;
spirit, energy, mettle; N. of the twenty-sixth Kalpa;
of lake Mānasa; {%manaso dohaḥ,%} N. of a Sāman.
{%—Mana-āpa, as, ā, am,%} gaining or winning the
heart, taking the fancy, attractive, pleasing, beautiful.
{%—Mana-ṛṅga, as, ā, am,%} a word of doubtful
meaning in Ṛg-veda X. 106, 8. {%—Manaḥ-kānta%}
{%= manas-kānta,%} q. v. {%—Manaḥ-kṣepa, as,%} m.
‘tossing of the mind,’ mental perplexity or confusion.
{%—Manaḥ-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the heart,’ epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Manaḥ-paryāya, as,%} m. (with Jainas)
‘the state of mental perception which precedes the
attainment of perfect knowledge,’ epithet of the last
stage but one in the perception of truth. {%—Manaḥ-%}
{%pīḍā,%} f. pain of mind, mental agony. {%—Manaḥ-%}
{%pūta, as, ā, am,%} purified by the heart, pure in heart
or intention, pure of mind, conscientious. {%—Manaḥ-%}
{%praṇīta, as, ā, am,%} dear to the heart, agreeable to
the mind. {%—Manaḥ-prasāda, as,%} m. serenity or
peace of mind. {%—Manaḥ-prīti, is,%} f. ‘heart-joy,’
gladness of heart. {%—Manaḥ-śikṣā,%} f., N. of a book.
{%—Manaḥ-śilā,%} f. realgar, red arsenic, (also written
{%manaḥ-śila, as,%} m.) {%—Manaḥśilā-guhā,%} f. a cave
of red arsenic. {%—Manaḥśilā-candana-dhāvana,%}
{%am,%} n. a fluid prepared from red arsenic and sandal.
{%—Manaḥśilā-vicchurita, as, ā, am,%} inlaid with red
arsenic, covered or smeared with red arsenic. {%—Ma-%}
{%naḥśiloccaya (˚la-uc˚), as,%} m. a quantity or col-
lection of red arsenic. {%—Manaḥ-śīghra, as, ā, am,%}
swift as thought. {%—Manaḥ-ṣaṣṭha, āni,%} n. pl.,
scil. {%indriyāṇi,%} having the mind for a sixth (said of
the five organs of sense). {%—Manaḥ-saṅkalpa, as,%}
[Page0741-c+ 81]
m. desire of the heart. {%—Manaḥ-saṅga, as,%} m.
attachment of the mind, fixing the thoughts (on any
object), constant reflection. {%—Manaḥ-sad, t, t, t,%}
Ved. staying in the mind. {%—Manaḥ-santāpa, as,%}
m. mental anguish or grief, sorrow of heart. {%—Ma-%}
{%naḥ-sāra-maya, as, ī, am,%} forming the substance
of the heart or mind. {%—Manaḥ-silā = manaḥ-śilā,%}
q. v. {%—Manaḥ-sukha, as, ā, am,%} agreeable to the
mind, of a pleasant taste. {%—Manaḥ-stha, as, ā, am,%}
‘mind-staying,’ abiding or dwelling in the heart.
{%—Manaḥ-sthirīkaraṇa, am,%} n. the act of strength-
ening or confirming the mind. {%—Manaḥ-sthairya,%}
{%am,%} n. firmness of mind. {%—Manaḥ-svāmin, ī,%} m.,
N. of a Brāhman. {%—Manaḥ-haṃsa,%} a kind of metre,
four times ˘˘¯˘¯˘˘¯˘¯˘˘¯˘¯. {%—Manaś-%}
{%cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. reflecting in the mind (in Śatapatha-Br.
X. 5, 33 {%= manasā cita%}). {%—Manasas-pati, is,%} m.,
Ved. the lord or presiding genius of the mental powers
and life of men. {%—Manasā-guptā,%} f., see Pāṇ. VI.
3, 4. {%—Manasājñāyin (˚sā-āj˚), i, inī, i,%} perceiv-
ing with the soul, perceiving intellectually, Pāṇ. VI.
3, 5. {%—Manasā-dattā,%} f., see Pāṇ. VI. 3, 4. {%—Ma-%}
{%nasi-kāra, as,%} m. reflecting in the mind, reflection.
{%—Manasi-ja, as, ā, am,%} mind-born, heart-born,
mental; ({%as%}), m. love, the god of love or Kāma-
deva; the moon. {%—Manasija-manda, as, ā, am,%}
slow or inert in love. {%—Manasi-śaya, as, ā, am,%}
reposing in the heart; ({%as%}), m. love, the god of love;
the moon. {%—Manas-kānta, as, ā, am,%} dear to
the heart, pleasant, agreeable. {%—Manas-kāra, as,%}
m. perfect consciousness, full perception, attention
of the mind to its own sensations, consciousness of
pleasure or pain. {%—Manas-keta, as,%} m., Ved. mental
perception or conception, idea, notion. {%—Manas-tas,%}
ind. from the heart, from the mind. {%—Manas-tāpa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘burning of the mind,’ mental pain, anguish,
distress of mind, agony; remorse, repentance, com-
punction, regret. {%—Manas-tāla, as,%} m., N. of the
lion on which Durgā is carried. {%—Manas-tuṣṭi, is,%}
f. satisfaction of mind, heart's content. {%—Manas-%}
{%tejas, ās, ās, as,%} having the glory or vigour of
Manas (Atharva-veda X. 5, 28). {%—Manas-tokā,%} f.
epithet of Durgā. {%—Manas-tva, am,%} n. intellectual
state, the state or condition of mind. {%—Manas-pāpa,%}
see Atharva-veda VI. 45, 1, and Prātiśākhya 11. 79.
{%—Manas-maya, as, ī, am,%} Ved. spiritual (as opposed
to material). {%—Manas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. full of
sense or spirit; containing the word {%manas%}. {%—Ma-%}
{%nasvi-garhita, as, ā, am,%} censured by the wise,
despised by intelligent persons. {%—Manasvi-tā,%} f. in-
telligence, high-mindedness, magnanimity; hope,
expectation, dependence. {%—Manas-vin, ī, inī, i,%}
full of mind or sense, intelligent, clever, intellectual,
prudent, wise; fixing the mind, attentive; ({%ī%}), m.
the fabulous animal called Śarabha; N. of a Nāga;
({%inī%}), f., N. of the mother of the moon [cf. {%ma-%}
{%nasi-ja%}]; epithet of Durgā; N. of the wife of
Mṛkaṇḍu; a virtuous woman or wife. {%—Mano-%}
{%gata, as, ā, am,%} ‘mind-gone,’ existing in the mind,
resting or concealed in the mind or heart, passing in
the mind; affecting the mind, desired; ({%am%}), n. that
which rests in the mind or heart, what is passing in
the mind, idea, thought, notion, opinion; wish,
longing. {%—Mano-gati, is,%} f. ‘heart's-course,’ the
heart's desire; {%(is, is, i),%} going whithersoever one
will. {%—Mano-gamya, as, ā, am,%} conceivable by
the mind. {%—Mano-gavī,%} f. wish, desire. {%—Mano-%}
{%gupta, as, ā, am,%} cherished or concealed in the
mind, thought or meditated on secretly; ({%ā%}), f.
red arsenic {%(= manaḥ-śilā)%}. {%—Mano-grahaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the act of seizing or captivating the mind;
seizure of the mind. {%—Mano-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
mind-captivating. {%—Mano-grāhya, as, ā, am,%} to
be grasped or comprehended by the mind; seizing
or captivating the mind. {%—Mano-ja, as, ā, am,%} or
{%mano-janman, ā, ā, a,%} mind-born, heart-born;
({%as%} or {%ā%}), m. love, the god of love; [cf. {%manasi-%}
{%ja.%}] {%—Mano-java, as,%} m., Ved. the speed or swift-
ness of thought; {%(as, ā, am),%} swift as thought;
quick in thought or apprehension; resembling
a father ({%= pitṛ-sannibha%}), fatherly, paternal,
[Page0742-a+ 81]
parental; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Anila or the Wind;
of a son of Rudra Īśāna; of Indra in the sixth
Manv-antara; of a son of Medhātithi and of a Varṣa
named after him; of a fabulous horse; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of one of the seven tongues of flame; of a parti-
cular plant {%(= agni-jihvā);%} of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda; {%(as, am),%} m. n. (probably n.),
N. of a sacred bathing-place or Tīrtha; ({%am%}), ind.
swiftly as thought, with the speed of thought. {%—Ma-%}
{%no-javas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. swift as thought; (ac-
cording to Mahīdhara) an epithet of Yama. {%—Mano-%}
{%javasa, as, ā, am,%} resembling a father, fatherly.
{%—Mano-javi-tva, am,%} n. the being swift as thought,
swiftness like that of thought. {%—Mano-javin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} swift as thought. {%—Mano-ja-vṛddhi, is,%} m. a
species of shrub {%(= kāma-vṛddhi)%}. {%—Mano-jāta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} mind-born, sprung up in the mind or
soul. {%—Mano-jighra, as, ā, am,%} scenting out or
guessing the thoughts. {%—Mano-jū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved.
swift as thought (said of the Maruts, of chariots,
horses, &c.). {%—Mano-jña, as, ā, am,%} agreeable to
the mind, pleasing, lovely, beautiful, charming; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a Gandharva; ({%ā%}), f. {%= manaḥ-śilā,%} red
arsenic; N. of various plants ({%= bandhyā-karko-%}
{%ṭakī, āvartakī, sthūla-jīraka, jātī%}); an intoxi-
cating drink; a king's daughter, princess; ({%am%}), n.
the wood of the Pinus Longifolia; [cf. {%mānojñaka.%}]
{%—Manojña-ghoṣa, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Ma-%}
{%nojña-tā,%} f. agreeableness, charmingness, attractive-
ness, beauty. {%—Manojña-śabdābhigarjita (˚da-%}
{%abh˚), as,%} m., N. of a Kalpa. {%—Manojña,-svara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Gandharva. {%—Mano-daṇḍa, as,%} m.
complete control over the thoughts (Manu XII. 10).
{%—Mano-datta, as, ā, am,%} ‘given by the mind,’
given up in thought, mentally devoted. {%—Mano-%}
{%dāha, as,%} m. heart-burning, vexation or distress of
mind. {%—Mano-dāhin, ī,%} m. ‘heart-inflamer,’ the
god of love. {%—Mano-duḥkha, am,%} n. heart-ache,
pain or anguish of mind; mental affliction. {%—Mano-%}
{%duṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} defiled with evil thoughts, depraved
in mind. {%—Mano-'-dhinātha, as,%} m. ‘heart-lord,’ a
lover, husband. {%—Mano-dhṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. having
the mind restrained or controlled (Sāy. {%= saṃyata-%}
{%manaska%}); prudent, intelligent. {%—Mano-'navas-%}
{%thāna, am,%} n. absence of mind, inattention. {%—Ma-%}
{%no-nāśa, as,%} m. loss of mind; [cf. {%mano-laya.%}]
{%—Mano-nīta, as, ā, am,%} ‘taken by the mind,’
chosen, approved, preferred; [cf. {%manaḥ-praṇīta.%}]
{%—Mano-'nuga, as, ā, am,%} ‘going after or follow-
ing the mind,’ suiting the mind, agreeable to the
heart, gratifying, pleasing; ({%as%}), m., N. of a district;
[cf. {%hṛdayānuga.%}] {%—Mano-'pahārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
ravishing or enrapturing the mind, captivating the
heart, gratifying, pleasing; ({%as%}), m., N. of a district;
or arising in the mind, mind-born, created by the
fancy or imagination; ({%as%}), m. love, the god of
love; [cf. {%mano-ja.%}] {%—Mano-'bhiniveśa, as,%} m.
close application of the mind, tenacity of purpose.
{%—Mano-'bhiprāya, as,%} m. aim or wish of the
heart, heart's desire. {%—Mano-'bhiprāya-ga, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} agreeable to the mind or heart, desired. {%—Mano-%}
{%'bhirāma, as, ā, am,%} mind-gratifying, delighting
the heart, pleasing the mind; N. of the spot where
Buddha Tamāla-pattra-candana-gandha (Mahā-maud-
galyāyana) appeared. {%—Mano-'bhilāṣa, as,%} m.
the heart's desire or wish. {%—Mano-bhū, ūs,%} m.
‘mind-born,’ the god of love, the passion of love.
{%—Mano-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} supporting the mind or
spirit. {%—Mano-mathana, as,%} m. ‘heart-agitating,’
the god of love. {%—Mano-maya, as, ī, am,%} consist-
ing of spirit or mind, spiritual, mental. {%—Manomaya-%}
{%kośa, as,%} m. the mental sheath (the second of the
subtile sheaths in which the soul is encased, according
to the Vedānta philosophy). {%—Mano-muṣi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} Ved. stealing the mind, seizing the understanding
(said of disease or evil spirits). {%—Mano-muh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}
Ved. mind-bewildering, infatuating the mind. {%—Ma-%}
{%noyāyi-tva, am,%} n. the going at will. {%—Mano-%}
{%yāyin, ī, inī, i,%} going at pleasure, going at will
(said of a chariot &c.); swift, quick as thought.
{%—Mano-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. yoking or harnessing
[Page0742-b+ 81]
themselves at will or by mere wish, i. e. without
effort (Sāy. {%= manaḥ-saṅkalpa-mātreṇa rathe%}
{%yujyamānāḥ,%} said of the horses of Agni); swift as
thought (Sāy. {%= manaḥ-samāna-gatayaḥ,%} said of
the ninety-nine steeds of Vāyu); suiting itself to the
mind, adapted to the understanding; (Sāy.) to be
gained by praise {%(= mananīyena stotreṇa prāpya,%}
Ṛg-veda VIII. 13, 26; {%= manasā yujyamāna,%} IX.
100, 3). {%—Mano-yoga, as,%} m. application of the
mind, attention. {%—Mano-yoni, is,%} m. ‘mind-born,’
N. of the god of love. {%—Mano-rañjana, am,%} n.
the act of pleasing the mind, pleasantness; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a son of Jiḍadhana; of a commentary on the
Līlāvatī. {%—Mano-rata, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
patriarch, (perhaps for {%mano-ratha.%}) {%—Mano-ratha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘vehicle of the mind,’ a wish, desire, ({%mano-%}
{%rathāya nāśaṃse,%} I do not hope for the wish, i. e.
to see my wish fulfilled; {%sva-manoratham āsan-%}
{%nam matvā,%} having deemed that his wish was near
fulfilment); a desired object; (in the drama) a wish
expressed in an indirect manner, a hint; N. of
various persons; of a Buddhist teacher; ({%ā%}), f. {%=%}
{%manoratha-prabhā,%} q. v. {%—Manoratha-kusuma,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘wish-flower,’ i. e. a wish or desire compared
to a flower. {%—Manoratha-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Manoratha-tṛtīyā,%} f., N. of the third
day in the light half of the month Caitra. {%—Mano-%}
{%ratha-tṛtīyā-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a kind of vow.
{%—Manoratha-dāyaka, as, ā, am,%} fulfilling or
answering expectations; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Kalpa-
vṛkṣa. {%—Manoratha-druma, as,%} m. ‘tree of de-
sire’ (a term or metaphorical expression for the god
of love). {%—Manoratha-dvādaśī,%} f. epithet of the
twelfth day in a particular half month. {%—Manoratha-%}
{%dvādaśī-vrata, am,%} n. a religious observance on
the preceding day. {%—Manoratha-prabhā,%} f., N. of
a woman. {%—Manoratha-maya, as, ī, am,%} consist-
ing of wishes. {%—Manoratha-siddha, as,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Manoratha-siddhi, is,%} f. the fulfilment
of a wish; ({%is%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Manoratha-%}
{%sṛṣṭi, is,%} f. creation of the fancy, phantasm of
the imagination. {%—Mano-rama, as, ā, am,%} ‘mind-
delighting,’ gratifying the mind, attractive, pleasing,
agreeable, charming, beautiful; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Nāga, (the form of the word is doubtful); ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of pigment {%(= go-rocanā);%} a particular metre,
four times <lang n="meter">˘ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯;</lang> N. of a Buddhist
goddess; of an Apsaras; of the wife of Kārtavīrya;
of the wife of Dhruva-sandhi, king of Ayodhyā,
and mother of Sudarśana; of a daughter of Vidyā-
dhara Indīvara, wife of Svarocis, and mother of
Vijaya; N. of a river; of a mountain; of a medical
work; of a commentary by Bhāmaha on the apho-
risms of Vara-ruci. {%—Mano-rājya, am,%} n. the king-
dom of the imagination, dominion of the feelings.
{%—Mano-'rhita, as,%} m. ({%= mano-ratha%}), N. of a
Buddhist teacher. {%—Mano-laya, as,%} m. loss of con-
sciousness, dissolution or destruction of the mind.
{%—Mano-laulya, am,%} n. eagerness of mind, fancy,
caprice, frolic, freak, whim. {%—Mano-vatī,%} f., N. of
a woman; of an Apsaras; of a daughter of the Vidyā-
dhara Citrāṅgada; of a daughter of Asura-pati Su-
māya; of a mythical town on mount Meru. {%—Mano-%}
{%'valambikā,%} f. title of a work of the Caitanya school.
{%—Mano-vāñchā,%} f. or {%mano-vāñchita, am,%} n.
heart's wish, the mind's desire. {%—Mano-vāta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. desired by the mind, agreeable; wished
for; (Sāy.) {%= mano-vega,%} having the velocity of
thought. {%—Mano-vikāra, as,%} m. change of mind
or feeling, emotion of the mind. {%—Mano-vid, t,%}
m. ‘spirit-knower’ (five hundred are reckoned as
followers of the Jina Mahā-vīra). {%—Mano-vina-%}
{%yana, am,%} n. mental discipline, the disciplining
of the mind. {%—Mano-viruddha, as, ā, am,%}
‘opposed to thought,’ incomprehensible; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. epithet of a group of divine beings; [cf. {%vācā-%}
{%viruddha.%}] {%—Mano-vṛtti, is,%} f. state or frame of
mind, disposition, temper; operation of the mind,
activity of spirit, volition, fancy. {%—Mano-vega, as,%}
m. speed or velocity of thought. {%—Mano-veda-śiras,%}
{%as,%} n., N. of a sacred text; (generally in pl. {%˚-śi- %}
[Page0742-c+ 81]
{%rāṃsi.%}) {%—Mano-vyathā,%} f. mental pain, anxiety of
mind, anguish. {%—Mano-hata, as, ā, am,%} wounded
at heart, frustrated in expectation, disappointed.
{%—Mano-han, ā,%} m., Ved. ‘soul-destroying,’ N. of a
demon; of a destructive Agni. {%—Mano-hara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} heart-stealing, heart-ravishing, heart-enrapturing,
taking the fancy, captivating, bewitching, fascinating,
attractive, delightful, charming, pleasing, beautiful;
({%as%}), m. a kind of jasmine {%(kunda);%} title of a
book (properly {%daivajña-m˚,%} cf. {%budha-m˚%}); N.
of the third day of the civil month {%(karma-māsa);%}
{%(ā),%} f. epithet of two kinds of jasmine ({%jātī%} and
{%svarṇa-yūthī%}); N. of an Apsaras; N. of the wife
of Varcasvin and mother of Śiśira, &c.; N. of the
wife of Dhara and mother of Śiśira, &c.; ({%am%}), n.
gold. {%—Manohara-tara, as, ā, am,%} more charming,
attractive or beautiful. {%—Manoharatara-tva, am,%}
n. greater beauty. {%—Manohara-vīreśvara, as,%} m.,
N. of a teacher. {%—Manohara-śarman, ā,%} m., N.
of the author of a commentary on the Śruta-bodha,
entitled Su-bodhanī. {%—Manohara-siṃha, as,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Mano-hartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or {%mano-%}
{%hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} heart-stealer, heart-stealing {%(= ma-%}
{%no-hara,%} q. v.). {%—Mano-hārikā,%} f., N. of a woman.
{%—Mano-hārī,%} f. an unfaithful or inconstant woman.
{%—Mano-hlāda, as,%} m. heart-joy, gladness of heart.
{%—Mano-hlādin, ī, inī, i,%} heart-gladdening, pleas-
ing, beautiful. {%—Mano-hvā%} ({%= manas + āhvā%} or
{%+ hve + a%}), f. red arsenic; [cf. {%manaḥ-śilā, mano-%}
{%guptā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36344<pc>0742-c<k1>manasa<k2>manasa
{%Manasa, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a Ṛṣi; ({%am%}), n.
{%= manas%} at the end of a comp., e. g. {%vāṅmanase,%}
n. du. word and thought; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a goddess
(described as consisting of a particle of Prakṛti and
as daughter of Kaśyapa, sister of the serpent-king
Ananta, wife of the Muni Jarat-kāru, mother of the
Muni Āstīka, and protectress of men from the venom
of serpents, cf. {%viṣa-harī%}). {%—Manasā-devī = ma-%}
{%nasā.%} {%—Manasā-pañcamī,%} f. the fifth day in the
dark half of the month Āṣāḍha (when there is a
festival in honour of the goddess Manasā). {%—Ma-%}
{%nasā-rāma, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>36345<pc>0742-c<k1>manasin<k2>manasin
{%Manasin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. having a mind or soul,
having intellect.
<LEND>

<L>36346<pc>0742-c<k1>manaska<k2>manaska
{%Manaska, as, ā, am, = manas%}¦ at the end of an
adj. comp., e. g. {%gata-manaska,%} having the mind
fixed on, thinking of (with loc.); {%tan-manaska,%}
thinking of that.
<LEND>

<L>36347<pc>0742-c<k1>manasya<k2>manasya
{%Manasya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%manasyati, -te,%} &c.,
Ved. to have in mind, intend; to think, reflect.
<LEND>

<L>36348<pc>0742-c<k1>manasyu<k2>manasyu
{%Manasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. (perhaps) wishing,
desiring; ({%us%}), m., N. of a prince, the son of Pra-
vīra; of a son of Mahānta.
<LEND>

<L>36349<pc>0742-c<k1>manA<k2>manA
{%Manā,%}¦ Ved. devotion, attachment, zeal; praise,
(Sāy. {%= mananam, stotram%}); a devout sacrificer,
(in Ṛg-veda IV. 33, 2. {%manāyai = ṛtena yaja-%}
{%mānāya%}); a malevolent disposition, (Sāy. {%= hanmīti%}
{%manyamānā buddhiḥ,%} a mind meditating murder);
thought, reflection; a vessel or weight of gold? (in
this sense thought to be fr. rt. 3. {%mā,%} but according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 78, 2. {%manā = mana-%}
{%nīyāni%}). {%—Manā-vasu, us, us, u%} (according to
Sāy.) {%= stuti-dhana,%} affluent in praise; rich in
devotion (said of the Aśvins).
<LEND>

<L>36350<pc>0742-c<k1>manAna<k2>manAna
{%Manāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. praising, glorifying.
<LEND>

<L>36351<pc>0742-c<k1>manAya<k2>manAya
{%Manāya%}¦ (fr. {%manā%}), Nom. P. {%manāyati,%} &c.,
Ved. to meditate, reflect upon; to be zealous or
devoted.
<LEND>

<L>36352<pc>0742-c<k1>manAyI<k2>manAyI
{%Manāyī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%manu%}), Manu's wife.
<LEND>

<L>36353<pc>0742-c<k1>manAyu<k2>manAyu
{%Manāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. zealous, devoted, desiring
praise, (Sāy. {%= stuti-kāma%}); intelligent, thoughtful,
(Sāy. {%= manasā yukta,%} endowed with thought.)
<LEND>

<L>36354<pc>0742-c<k1>manAvI<k2>manAvI
{%Manāvī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%manu%}), Manu's wife; [cf. {%ma-%}
{%nāyī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36355<pc>0742-c<k1>manIkf<k2>manIkf
{%Manī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%} &c., see
Vopa-deva VII. 84.
<LEND>

<L>36356<pc>0742-c<k1>manIzA<k2>manIzA
{%Manīṣā,%}¦ f. thought, reflection, understanding,
intellect, wisdom, sagacity, intelligence, conception,
idea, ({%ku-manīṣa, as, ā, am,%} having a weak
understanding, stupid; {%paro manīṣayā,%} beyond
all conception, Ṛg-veda V. 17, 2; but according to
[Page0743-a+ 81]
Sāy., supreme in understanding); prayer, request,
desire, wish; hymn, praise (Ved., Sāy. {%= stuti%}).
<LEND>

<L>36357<pc>0743-a<k1>manIzikA<k2>manIzikA
{%Manīṣikā,%}¦ f. intelligence, sagacity, understand-
ing, ({%sva-manīṣikayā,%} according to one's own
judgment.)
<LEND>

<L>36358<pc>0743-a<k1>manIzita<k2>manIzita
{%Manīṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cherished in the mind,
wished, desired, aimed at; loved, liked, agreeable;
({%am%}), n. wish, desire, longing.
<LEND>

<L>36359<pc>0743-a<k1>manIzin<k2>manIzin
{%Manīṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ thoughtful, intelligent, wise,
sage, sagacious, prudent, ({%ku-manīṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
having little wisdom, stupid); (Ved.) offering prayers
or hymns, praying, praising; ({%ī%}), m. a singer, a
priest (Ved.); a Paṇḍit, learned Brāhman, teacher,
instructor.
<LEND>

<L>36360<pc>0743-a<k1>manu<k2>manu
{%Manu, us,%}¦ m. (Ved.) thought, mental faculty ({%=%}
{%manana-śakti%}); (Ved.) a sacred text, prayer, incan-
tation, spell ({%= mantra,%} perhaps erroneously thus
explained in Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 52); (Ved.) a man,
mankind, as opposed to evil spirits, (in Ṛg-veda III.
60, 3, the Ṛbhus are called the sons of man, {%ma-%}
{%nor napātaḥ%}); the Man par excellence, or the repre-
sentative man and father of the human race (regarded
in the earlier mythological system as the first to
have instituted sacrifices and religious ceremonies;
and in Ṛg-veda 1. 139, 9, associated with the Ṛṣis
Kaṇva and Atri; in the Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa de-
scribed as dividing his possessions among some of
his sons to the exclusion of one called Nābhā-
nediṣṭha, q. v.; called Sāmvaraṇa as author of Ṛg-
veda IX. 101, 10-12; Āpsava as author of Rig-veda
IX. 106, 7-9; in the fifth chapter of the Nighaṇ-
ṭavas numbered among the thirty-one divine beings
of the upper sphere, and as father of men even iden-
tified with Prajā-pati; but the name Manu is especially
applied to fourteen successive mythical progenitors
and sovereigns of the earth, described in the code of
Manu 1. 63 and in the later mythology as creating
and supporting this world of moving and stationary
beings through successive Antaras or long periods of
time, see {%manv-antara,%} col. 2: the first in order of
these Manus is called Svāyambhuva, as sprung from
{%Svayam-bhū,%} the Self-existent, who being identified
with Brahmā, according to one account, divided
himself into two persons, male and female, whence
was produced Virāj, and from him the first Manu;
or who, according to another account, converted
himself at once into the first man called Manu
Svāyambhuva, and the first woman called Śata-rūpā;
this Manu Svāyambhuva is described in Manu 1. 34
as a sort of secondary creator, who commenced the
work of creation by producing ten Prajāpatis or
Maharṣis, of whom the first was {%Marici,%} Light,
see {%prajā-pati;%} and to this first Manu is ascribed
both the celebrated law-book known as the ‘code of
Manu,’ see {%manu-saṃhitā,%} as well as an ancient
Sūtra work on Kalpa or Vedic ritual; he is himself
sometimes called Prajā-pati, and rarely Hairaṇya-
garbha as son of Hiraṇya-garbha, and Prācetasa as
son of Pracetas: the next five Manus in regular
succession are called Svārociṣa, Auttami, Tāmasa.
Raivata, Cākṣuṣa: the seventh Manu, called {%Vai-%}
{%vasvata,%} Sun-born, is the Manu of the present period;
he is held to be the son of Vivasvat or the Sun, who
according to Rāmāyaṇa 11. 110, 6, was the son of
Kaśyapa, son of Marīci, this latter being described
as proceeding directly from Brahmā, and thus adding
to the confusion in the different Hindū accounts of
the gradation of personages interposed between the
Supreme Being and the created world; this seventh
Manu, called Vaivasvata, and sometimes, from his
piety, Satya-vrata, is regarded as the progenitor of
the present race of living beings, and has been com-
pared to the Noah of the Old Testament from various
legends current in Sanskrit literature of his preser-
vation from a great flood by Viṣṇu or, according
to some, by Brahmā in the form of a fish: he is
also variously described as the son of Āditya or as
one of the twelve Ādityas, as the author of the
hymns Ṛg-veda VIII. 27-31, as the brother of Yama,
who as son of the Sun is also called Vaivasvata, as the
founder and first king of Ayodhyā, afterwards reigned
[Page0743-b+ 81]
over by his son Ikṣvāku, and as father of Ilā who
married Budha, son of the Moon, the two great solar
and lunar races being thus nearly related to each
other; the eighth Manu or first of the future Manus,
according to the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa 111. 2, will be Sā-
varṇi; the ninth, Dakṣa-sāvarṇi; the tenth, Brahma-
sāvarṇi; the eleventh, Dharma-sāvarṇi; the twelfth,
Rudra-sāvarṇi; the thirteenth, Raucya or, accord-
ing to some, Deva-sāvarṇi; and the fourteenth,
Bhautya or Indra-sāvarṇi); {%(avas),%} m. pl. the mental
faculties; a symbolical expression for the number
fourteen; ({%us%}), f. Manu's wife {%(= manāvī);%} Tri-
gonella Corniculata. {%—Manu-kulāditya (˚la-ād˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘sun of the race of Manu,’ N. of a prince.
{%—Manu-ga, as,%} m., N. of one of the seven sons
of Dyuti-mat. {%—Manu-ja, as,%} m. ‘Manu-born,’ a
man; ({%ā%}), f. a woman. {%—Manuja-pati, is,%} m.
‘lord of men,’ a prince, king. {%—Manuja-loka, as,%}
m. ‘the world of men,’ the earth. {%—Manuja-vyā-%}
{%ghra, as,%} m. ‘man-tiger,’ chief of men, any eminent
or illustrious man. {%—Manu-jāta, as, ā, am,%} de-
scended from man or from Manu, Ved.; ({%as%}), m. a
man. {%—Manujātmaja (˚ja-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘son of
man,’ a man; ({%ā%}), f. a woman. {%—Manujādhipa%}
{%(˚ja-adh˚), as,%} or {%manujādhipati (˚ja-adh˚), is,%}
m. ‘sovereign of men,’ a prince, a king. {%—Manujī-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to change into a
man. {%—Manujendra (˚ja-in˚),%} or {%manujeśvara%}
{%(˚ja-īś˚), as,%} m. a prince, a king. {%—Manujendra-%}
{%putrī,%} f. a king's daughter. {%—Manu-jyeṣṭha, as,%} m.
a sword; ‘the oldest man,’ one of the names of Daṇḍa
or punishment in Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 4430. {%—Manu-%}
{%tantu, us,%} m., Ved., N. of a man; [cf. {%mānu-%}
{%tantavya.%}] {%—Manu-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Manu-tva, am,%} n. the rank or office of a Manu.
{%—Manu-praṇīta, as, ā, am,%} taught or promulgated
by Manu. {%—Manupraṇīta-tva, am,%} n. the being
taught or promulgated by Manu. {%—Manu-prīta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. beloved of men; favourable to men.
{%—Manu-bhū, ūs,%} m. {%(= manu-ja),%} man, mankind,
a man. {%—Manu-yuga, am,%} n. the age or period of
a Manu; [cf. {%manu-antara.%}] {%—Manu-rāj, ṭ,%} m.
‘king of men,’ epithet of Kuvera. {%—Manu-vat,%} ind.,
Ved. like men, as becomes men. {%—Manu-vṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. chosen by men. {%—Manu-śreṣṭha, as,%}
m. ‘best among men,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Manu-%}
{%saṃhitā,%} f. the collection of laws commonly known
as ‘the laws or institutes of Manu’ (ascribed to Manu
Svāyambhuva probably to secure for it the sanctity
on which its authority rests), Manu. {%—Manu-sava,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. libation or sacrifice of men, or performed
by men; Manu's libation or sacrifice. {%—Manu-an-%}
{%tara, am,%} n. the period or age of a Manu, (this
period, according to Manu 1. 79, comprises about 71
great Yugas or ages of the gods [cf. {%mahā-yuga%}],
which are held equal to 12, 000 years of the gods or
4, 320, 000 human years or (1/14) th of a day of Brahmā;
each of these periods is presided over by its own
special Manu with his own gods and Ṛṣis and
other divine personages, see {%manu,%} col. 1; six
such Manv-antaras have already elapsed, and the
seventh, presided over by Manu Vaivasvata, is now
supposed to be going on; seven more are to come,
making fourteen Manv-antaras, which together make
up one day of Brahmā); ({%ā%}), f. epithet of various
festivals, of the tenth day of the light half of the
month Āṣāḍha, of the eighth in the dark half of
the same month, and of the third in the light half
of Bhādra. {%—Manu-artha-muktāvalī,%} f. ‘pearl-
necklace of the meaning of Manu,’ N. of Kullūka-
bhaṭṭa's commentary on the laws of Manu. {%—Manv-%}
{%iddha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. kindled by men. {%—Manv-%}
{%īśa, as,%} m., Ved., according to a commentator {%=%}
{%jñāneśa,%} but probably a wrong reading for {%manīṣā%}
{%= manīṣayā.%}
<LEND>

<L>36361<pc>0743-b<k1>manuza<k2>manuza
{%Manuṣa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%manus%}), Ved. a man; ({%ī%}),
f., see under {%manuṣya%} below. {%—Manuṣendra%}
{%(˚ṣa-in˚) = manujendra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36362<pc>0743-b<k1>manuzya<k2>manuzya
{%Manuṣya, as, ṣī, am,%}¦ human, useful to
man, friendly to man (Ved., said of the chariot of
the Aśvins); ({%as%}), m. a man, ordinary mortal,
[Page0743-c+ 81]
common person; (Ved.) a class of Manes (‘fathers
of men’) who receive the Piṇḍa offering; {%(ṣī),%} f.
a woman, wife; [cf. Goth. <nsi>mannisks;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>mennesc, mennisc;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>mannisco.</nsi>] {%—Ma-%}
{%nuṣya-kāra, as,%} m. the deed of a man, human
exertion; [cf. {%puruṣa-kāra.%}] {%—Manuṣya-%}
{%kilbiṣa, am,%} n., Ved. transgression against men.
{%—Manuṣya-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done by men;
committed against men (Ved.). {%—Manuṣya-gan-%}
{%dharva, ās,%} m. pl. the human Gandharvas (inferior
to the Deva-gandharvas). {%—Manuṣya-cara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having dealings or intercourse with men.
{%—Manuṣya-cchandasa, am,%} n., Ved. the metre
of men. {%—Manuṣya-jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. born of
men. {%—Manuṣya-jāti,%} f. the human race, man-
kind. {%—Manuṣya-tā,%} f. or {%manuṣya-tva, am,%}
n. manhood, humanity, the state or condition of
man, ({%manuṣyatām etya,%} having assumed the
state of a man, becoming man, Rāmāyaṇa 1. 14,
47.) {%—Manuṣya-trā,%} ind., Ved. among men, to
men. {%—Manuṣya-deva, as,%} m. ‘man-god,’ a god
among men, a Brāhman; a prince, king. {%—Ma-%}
{%nuṣya-dharma, as,%} m. the law or duty of man,
the state or character of man. {%—Manuṣya-dhar-%}
{%man, ā,%} m. epithet of Kuvera, the god of wealth.
{%—Manuṣya-māraṇa, am,%} n. manslaughter, homi-
cide, (unintentionally) killing a man (Manu VIII.
296). {%—Manuṣya-yajña, as,%} m. ‘man-offering,’
the sacrifice or act of devotion due to men (i. e.
{%atithi-pūjana,%} the honouring of guests or hospi-
tality; this is one of the five Mahā-yajñas or great
acts of devotion, cf. {%mahā-yajña, nṛ-yajña, brah-%}
{%ma-yajña, deva-yajña, pitṛ-yajña, bhūta-yajña%}).
{%—Manuṣya-ratha, as,%} m., Ved. chariot of men.
{%—Manuṣya-rāja, as,%} or {%manuṣya-rājan, ā,%}
m., Ved. a human king. {%—Manuṣya-rūpa, am,%} n.
human form. {%—Manuṣya-loka, as,%} m. the world
of men. {%—Manuṣya-viś, ṭ,%} or {%manuṣya-viśā,%}
f., or {%manuṣya-viśa, am,%} n. mankind, human-
kind, the race of men. {%—Manuṣya-śoṇita, am,%} n.
human blood. {%—Manuṣya-sabhā,%} f. an assembly of
men; a multitude, crowd, meeting; a place of meet-
ing or assembly. {%—Manuṣya-sava, as,%} m. libation
or sacrifice of men, sacrifice performed by men. {%—Ma-%}
{%nuṣyendra (˚ya-in˚), as,%} m. the chief or best of
men, any illustrious or good man. {%—Manuṣyeśvara%}
{%(˚ya-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of men,’ a prince, king.
<LEND>

<L>36363<pc>0743-c<k1>manus<k2>manus
{%Manus, us,%}¦ m., Ved. {%(= manu),%} man, the father of
men, Manu; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">Μίνως;</lang> Lat. <nsi>mas, maris;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>man, manna;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>man, mann.</nsi>]
{%—Manur-hita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. friendly to men,
good for men. {%—Manuṣ-vat%} or {%manuṣyat,%} ind.,
Ved. like man or men {%(= manuṣya-vat);%} among
men, for men; like Manu, as Manu, as with
Manu.
<LEND>

<L>36364<pc>0743-c<k1>manotA<k2>manotA
{%Manotā,%}¦ f., Ved. the hymn Ṛg-veda VI. 1 (con-
taining the word {%manotṛ%} and used in sacrificing);
the deity to whom the offering during the recitation
of that hymn is dedicated, (according to the Brāh-
maṇa = Agni.)
<LEND>

<L>36365<pc>0743-c<k1>manotf<k2>manotf
{%Manotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. an inventor, discoverer,
disposer, manager; an honourer, bestower, honouring,
appreciating, &c., (Sāy. {%= mantṛ, dātṛ, pra-jñātṛ,%}
{%mānayitṛ;%} in Ṛg-veda VI. 1, 1, {%manotā%} is said
to mean {%devānām mano yatrotam%} or {%sambad-%}
{%dham,%} the divinity on whom the mind of the gods
is fastened or concentrated.)
<LEND>

<L>36366<pc>0743-c<k1>mantavya<k2>mantavya
{%Mantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thought, to be be-
lieved, to be considered or reflected on, to be re-
garded, to be conceived, conceivable, imaginable,
supposable; to be admitted; to be maintained; to
be observed; to be approved or sanctioned.
<LEND>

<L>36367<pc>0743-c<k1>manti<k2>manti
{%Manti, is,%}¦ f., see Pāṇ. VI. 4, 39.
<LEND>

<L>36368<pc>0743-c<k1>mantu<k2>mantu
{%Mantu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. an adviser; a manager, dis-
poser, director, arbiter [cf. {%manotṛ%}]; advice, counsel,
(in Ṛg-veda I. 152, 1, {%mantavaḥ%} according to Sāy.
{%= mananīyāḥ,%} to be regarded); a fault, offence,
transgression {%(= aparādha);%} a man, mankind; lord
of men, {%= prajā-pati; (us),%} f. thought, understand-
ing, intellect; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μαντεύομαι</lang>.] {%—Mantu-mas,%}
voc. c., Ved. (only used in this form; according to
[Page0744-a+ 81]
Sāy. {%= jñāna-vat%}), a good counsellor, wise, sagacious,
intelligent (said of Pūṣan and Indra).
<LEND>

<L>36369<pc>0744-a<k1>mantUya<k2>mantUya
{%Mantūya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%mantūyati, -yitum,%} to
transgress against; (according to others) to be
angry; to be offended or jealous.
<LEND>

<L>36370<pc>0744-a<k1>mantf<k2>mantf
{%Mantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a thinker, thinking, reflect-
ing; {%(tā),%} m. a wise man, sage, adviser, counsellor,
mentor; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">Μέντωρ</lang>.]
<LEND>

<L>36371<pc>0744-a<k1>mantra<k2>mantra
{%Mantra, as,%}¦ m. (according to some also {%am,%} n.),
‘instrument of thought,’ speech, sacred speech or
text, a prayer or hymn or words of adoration ad-
dressed to a deity (it may consist of a single text or
verse, and when recited is regarded as possessing
mystical and supernatural powers; if metrical, and
intended for loud recitation, such a Mantra is called
{%ṛc,%} praise; if in prose, and intended to be muttered
in a low tone, it is called {%yajus%} or one fit for sacri-
fices; if metrical, and intended for chanting or in-
toning, it is called {%sāman%} or one fit for using at
Soma ceremonies: the Mantra portion of the Ṛg-
veda [see {%ṛc%}] contains 1017 Sūktas or hymns, which
are subdivided as explained under {%maṇḍala,%} q. v.);
that portion of the Veda (as distinguished from the
Brāhmaṇa, q. v.) which includes the Saṃhitā or
collection of hymns and prayers described above;
a formula sacred to any individual deity (e. g. {%Om%}
{%Viṣṇave namaḥ, Om Śivāya namaḥ%}); a mystical
verse, magical formula, incantation, charm, spell;
consulting or concerting together, counsel, advice,
opinion, resolution, plan, design, intention, device,
secret plan, secret, (in these senses connected with
rt. {%mantr,%} p. 745.) {%—Mantra-karaṇa, am,%} n. the
act of making or composing sacred texts, the recital
of a sacred text; the Vedic texts. {%—Mantra-kalpa-%}
{%druma, as,%} m., N. of a work by Śrī-ghanānanda-
dāsa. {%—Mantra-kāra, as,%} m. a maker or composer
of hymns, a composer of sacred texts. {%—Mantra-%}
{%kārya, am,%} n. subject of consultation. {%—Mantra-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. council-time, time of deliberation or
consultation. {%—Mantra-kuśula, as, ā, am,%} experi-
enced in counsel, skilled in giving advice. {%—Man-%}
{%tra-kṛt, t,%} m. a composer of hymns (Ved.); one
who recites a sacred text; a counsellor, adviser;
an emissary, envoy, ambassador. {%—Mantra-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} consecrated by Mantras. {%—Mantra-%}
{%kovida, as, ā, am,%} knowing the sacred texts.
{%—Mantra-koṣa, as,%} m. ‘treasury of texts,’ N. of
a book. {%—Mantra-gaṇḍaka, as,%} m. knowledge,
science {%(= vidyā)%}. {%—Mantra-gupta, as,%} m., N. of
a man. {%—Mantra-gupti, is,%} f. secret counsel.
{%—Mantra-gūḍha, as,%} m. a secret emissary or
agent, spy. {%—Mantra-gṛha, am,%} n. a council-
chamber. {%—Mantra-cūḍāmaṇi, is,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Mantra-jala, am,%} n. water consecrated by
charms or sacred texts. {%—Mantra-jihva, as,%} m.
‘having sacred texts for tongues,’ N. of fire. {%—Man-%}
{%tra-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing sacred texts; experi-
enced in counsel; ({%as%}), m. a counsellor, adviser; a
learned Brāhman, a priest; a spy. {%—Mantra-jyotis,%}
{%is,%} f., N. of a book. {%—Mantra-tantra-netra, am,%}
n., N. of a book. {%—Mantra-tantra-prakāśa, as,%}
m., N. of a book. {%—Mantra-tas,%} ind. with respect
to the sacred texts, from or by the Mantras, from or
by mystical charms or incantations; from advice,
advisedly, deliberately, designedly. {%—Mantra-toya,%}
{%am,%} n. water consecrated by Mantras or spells; [cf.
{%mantra-jala, mantrodaka.%}] {%—Mantra-da, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%mantra-dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} teaching sacred
texts; giving advice; a spiritual guide, teacher,
preceptor. {%—Mantra-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} knowing
the Vedic texts; ({%ī%}), m. a Brāhman learned in the
Vedas; a seer or composer of a hymn. {%—Mantra-%}
{%dīdhiti, is,%} m. ‘having sacred texts for rays,’ N.
of fire. {%—Mantra-dīpaka, as,%} m. ‘lamp of the
Mantras,’ N. of a book. {%—Mantra-dṛś, k, k, k,%}
beholding or discovering sacred texts; knowing
sacred texts; skilled in counsel; ({%k%}), m. a composer
of hymns; counsellor, adviser. {%—Mantra-devatā,%} f.
the deity invoked in a sacred text. {%—Mantra-deva-%}
{%prakāśikā,%} f., N. of a book. {%—Mantra-druma,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of Indra in the sixth Manv-antara.
[Page0744-b+ 81]
{%—Mantra-dhara, as,%} or {%mantra-dhārin, ī,%} m.
possessing good counsel, an adviser, counsellor.
{%—Mantra-nirṇaya, as,%} m. decision or settlement
of counsel, final determination after deliberation.
{%—Mantra-pati, is,%} m. lord or owner of a sacred
text or texts. {%—Mantra-pattra, am,%} n. a leaf in-
scribed with a sacred text or prayer. {%—Mantra-%}
{%pada, am,%} n. the words of a sacred text. {%—Mantra-%}
{%pārāyaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Mantra-pūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} purified by sacred texts. {%—Mantra-pū-%}
{%tātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā,%} m. epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Man-%}
{%tra-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a book. {%—Mantra-%}
{%prayoga, as,%} m. application of spells or charms,
magical means. {%—Mantra-praśna-kāṇḍa, am,%} n.,
N. of a Vedic work. {%—Mantra-phala, am,%} n. fruit
of counsel, effect or consequence of advice. {%—Man-%}
{%tra-bīja, am,%} n. the seed (i. e. first syllable) of a spell;
seed-like counsel, counsel regarded as a seed or germ.
{%—Mantra-bhāṣya, am,%} n. title of Ūaṭa's com-
mentary on the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā. {%—Mantra-%}
{%bheda, as,%} m. breach of counsel, betrayal of counsel
or of a concerted plan; a particular magical incan-
tation; ({%ās%}), m. pl. various kinds of Mantras or
spells. {%—Mantra-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting or
made up of spells. {%—Mantra-mahodadhi, is,%} m.
‘ocean of Mantras,’ title of a work by Mahīdhara.
{%—Mantra-muktāvalī (˚tā-āv˚),%} f., N. of a book.
{%—Mantra-mūrti, is,%} m. ‘whose body consists of
sacred texts,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Mantra-mūla, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} rooted in counsel; rooted in Mantras or
spells; ({%am%}), n. magic. {%—Mantra-yantra, am,%} n.
‘Mantra-implement,’ an amulet, a mystical diagram
with a magical formula. {%—Mantra-yantra-prakāśa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a book. {%—Mantra-yukti, is,%} f. em-
ployment of Mantras or spells; magical means.
{%—Mantra-yoga, as,%} m. the employment of Man-
tras or sacred texts; magic. {%—Mantra-rahasya-%}
{%prakāśikā,%} f. title of a book by Nīla-kaṇṭha.
{%—Mantra-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of spells,’ N. of a
particular magical formula. {%—1. mantra-vat,%} ind. in
conformity with sacred texts, accompanied by the
recitation of sacred texts; according to all rules of
consultation. {%—2. mantra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} accom-
panied with sacred texts or hymns; having spells,
enchanted (said of a weapon); entitled to use the
Mantras, initiated; having or hearing counsel.
{%—Mantra-varjam,%} ind. without any sacred text
(Manu X. 127). {%—Mantra-varṇa, as,%} m. the con-
tents of a sacred text or hymn; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
single letters of a sacred text. {%—Mantra-varṇana,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the ninety-seventh chapter of the
Sundara-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Mantra-vādin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a reciter of sacred texts, one conversant with
Mantras or spells, an enchanter. {%—Mantra-vid, t,%}
{%t, t,%} knowing or skilled in sacred texts, knowing
magical formulas; skilled in counsel; ({%t%}), m. a
counsellor; a priest; a Brāhman learned in the
Vedas; a spy. {%—Mantra-vidyā,%} f. the science of
Mantras or spells, magic art. {%—Mantra-vīja,%} see
{%mantra-bīja%}. {%—Mantra-vyākhyā,%} f. explanation of
the sacred texts of the Veda. {%—Mantra-śāstra, am,%}
n. ‘magic science,’ N. of a book. {%—Mantra-śruti,%}
{%is,%} f. the hearing of counsel or deliberation, a con-
sultation overheard. {%—Mantra-śrutya, am,%} n., Ved.
obedience to advice, following counsel, (Sāy. {%= man-%}
{%treṇa pratipādyam%}); tradition respecting the correct
use of the sacred texts. {%—Mantra-saṃskāra, as,%} m.
a (nuptial) rite performed with sacred texts, (accord-
ing to Kullūka {%= vivāha.%}) {%—Mantrasaṃsaṃskāra-%}
{%kṛt, t,%} m. a husband who has performed the above
rite. {%—Mantra-saṃskriyā,%} f. a rite accompanied
with spells, a magic rite. {%—Mantra-saṃhitā,%} f. the
collection of the Vedic hymns. {%—Mantra-sādhaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘effecting by Mantras or spells,’ an enchanter,
magician. {%—Mantra-sādhana, am,%} n. the act of
effecting or subduing by magic; a magical formula,
incantation, spell. {%—Mantra-sādhya, as, ā, am,%} to
be subdued by spells, to be effected or attained by
incantations; to be attained by consultation; to be
overcome or brought into subjection by advice.
{%—Mantrasādhya-tva, am,%} n. the being attainable
[Page0744-c+ 81]
or subduable by spells, the being attainable by con-
sultation. {%—Mantra-siddha, as, ā, am,%} accom-
plished by or expressed in sacred texts; effected by
Mantras or spells, aided by an incantation. {%—Mantra-%}
{%siddhi, is,%}  f. the accomplishment or operation of
a spell; the effecting or carrying out of a deliberation
or advice. {%—Mantra-sūtra, am,%} n. a charm fastened
on a string. {%—Mantra-spṛś, k, k, k, (= mantreṇa%}
{%spṛśat),%} obtaining anything by means of spells or
incantations (see Pāṇ. III. 2, 58). {%—Mantra-hīna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} destitute of hymns; contrary to sacred
texts. {%—Mantrādhāraṇa (˚ra-ādh˚), am,%} n. striv-
ing to obtain by spells and incantations, conjuring.
{%—Mantrārtha-dīpa (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a
book by Rāghavendra. {%—Mantrārṣādhyāya (˚ra-%}
{%ār˚, ˚ṣa-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘chapter on the Vedic Ṛṣis,’
a Ṛṣy-anukramaṇī of the Kāṭhaka Yajur-veda.
{%—Mantrāvalī (˚ra-āv˚),%} f. a series of sacred texts.
{%—Mantreśa (˚ra-īśa)%} or {%mantreśvara (˚ra-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘lord of spells or incantations,’ (with a certain
class of Śaivas) N. of a particular superior being.
{%—Mantrodaka (˚ra-ud˚), am,%} n. water consecrated
by sacred texts. {%—Mantropaṣṭambha (˚ra-up˚),%}
{%as,%} m. encouragement by counsel, advice, direction.
<LEND>

<L>36372<pc>0744-c<k1>mantraRa<k2>mantraRa
{%Mantraṇa, mantrayat.%}¦ See p. 745, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36373<pc>0744-c<k1>mantri<k2>mantri
{%Mantri, is,%}¦ m. {%= mantrin,%} a king's councillor,
minister.
<LEND>

<L>36374<pc>0744-c<k1>mantrika<k2>mantrika
{%Mantrika%}¦ at the end of comps. {%= mantrin.%} See
{%sa-mantrika.%}
<LEND>

<L>36375<pc>0744-c<k1>mantrikA<k2>mantrikA
{%Mantrikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%mantra%}), N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>36376<pc>0744-c<k1>mantrita<k2>mantrita
{%Mantrita.%}¦ See p. 745, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36377<pc>0744-c<k1>mantrin<k2>mantrin
{%Mantrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ wise, clever in counsel; elo-
quent (Ved.); knowing sacred texts or spells, know-
ing incantations, a conjurer, enchanter; ({%ī%}), m. a
king's councillor, minister, adviser, counsellor, ({%kim-%}
{%mantrin,%} a bad counsellor.) {%—Mantri-tā,%} f. or
{%mantri-tva, am,%} n. ministership, ministry, the office
or vocation of a minister or councillor, councillorship.
{%—Mantri-dhura, as, ā, am,%} able to bear the
burden of the office of a counsellor. {%—Mantri-pati,%}
{%is,%} or {%mantri-pradhāna, as,%} or {%mantri-mukhya,%}
{%as,%} or {%mantri-vara, as,%} or {%mantri-śreṣṭha, as,%}
m. a prime minister. {%—Mantri-prakāṇḍa, as,%} m.
an excellent councillor; [cf. {%go-prakāṇḍa.%}] {%—Man-%}
{%tri-vat,%} ind. like a councillor, like a minister.
{%—Mantri-śrotriya, as,%} m. a minister (who is) a
Śrotriya or conversant with the Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>36378<pc>0744-c<k1>manya<k2>manya
{%Manya,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) thinking one's
self [cf. {%paṇḍitam-m˚, jñam-m˚%}]; appearing as,
being accounted as.
<LEND>

<L>36379<pc>0744-c<k1>manyantI<k2>manyantI
{%Manyantī,%}¦ f., N. of a daughter of Agni Manyu.
<LEND>

<L>36380<pc>0744-c<k1>manyamAna<k2>manyamAna
{%Manyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ thinking, believing,
supposing, fancying, considering; attending to, re-
specting, esteeming, honouring; approving, com-
mending, praising; perceiving, remembering.
<LEND>

<L>36381<pc>0744-c<k1>manyA<k2>manyA<h>1
1. {%manyā,%}¦ f. (for 2. see p. 747, col. 1), know-
ledge; respect (?).
<LEND>

<L>36382<pc>0744-c<k1>manyu<k2>manyu
{%Manyu, us,%}¦ m. f. (Ved.) spirit, spiritedness, courage,
mettle (as of horses), mind; (Sāy.) sacrificial act,
sacrifice, offering, hymn ({%= karman, yāga, stotra%});
high spirit or temper, ardour, zeal; pride; passion,
anger, wrath, indignation, resentment, rage, fury,
({%manyus tan manyum ṛcchati,%} fury then en-
counters fury, or rage then recoils on rage, Manu
VIII. 351); sorrow, grief, affliction, trouble, distress,
vexation; Anger, Rage, Indignation personified;
N. of the author of Ṛg-veda X. 83, 84 (as Tāpasa
or son of Tapas), of Ṛg-veda IX. 97, 10-12 (as
Vāsiṣṭha or son of Vasiṣṭha); epithet of Śiva; of
a Rudra; of Agni; N. of a prince (son of Vitatha);
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μῆνις</lang>.] {%—Manyu-tas,%} ind. from anger, in a
rage. {%—Manyu-dūṣita, as, ā, am,%} troubled by
pride or jealously. {%—Manyu-deva, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Manyu-parīta, as, ā, am,%} filled with or affected
by anger. {%—Manyu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} spirited, high-
spirited, zealous; angry, wrathful, enraged; sorrowful,
distressed; vehement, passionate; ({%ān%}), m. epithet
of Agni. {%—Manyu-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed of
anger, consisting of wrath, filled with resentment.
{%—Manyu-mī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. destroying (hostile)
spirit or fury; destroying in fury, furious with anger;
[Page0745-a+ 71]
(Sāy. {%= kopasya nirmātṛ%} or {%pareṣāṃ krodhasya%}
{%hiṃsaka%} or {%manyu-kartṛ%} or {%manyunā minat =%}
{%hiṃsat.%}) {%—Manyu-śamana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. ap-
peasing or pacifying anger. {%—Manyu-ṣāvin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} Ved. preparing or offering Soma in anger,
(Sāy. {%= krodhena somaṃ sunvat%}); offering Soma
with zeal or devotion. {%—Manyu-sūkta, am,%} n. the
Manyu hymn, (probably an epithet of Ṛg-veda X.
83, 84.)
<LEND>

<L>36383<pc>0745-a<k1>manyUya<k2>manyUya
{%Manyūya%}¦ in {%a-prati-manyūyamāna,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36384<pc>0745-a<k1>manvAna<k2>manvAna
{%Manvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ thinking, conceiving;
minding, regarding.
<LEND>

<L>36385<pc>0745-a<k1>manAk<k2>manAk
{#manAk#}¦ {%manāk,%} ind. (perhaps {%mana + añc,%}
but in Ṛg-veda X. 61, 6, {%manānak%}), a little,
slightly, somewhat, in a small degree, ({%dānam ma-%}
{%nāg api,%} a gift however small; {%kālam manāk,%} a
little time, in a little while; {%na manāk,%} not at all,
not in the slightest degree); slowly, tardily; only,
merely; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μανός, μινυν in μίνυνθα, μινυ</lang> in
<lang n="greek">μινύθω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>min-or, min-imus, minu</nsi> in <nsi>minuo:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>mins, minz, minnists:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>min,</nsi> ‘small,
fine;’ <nsi>mion,</nsi> ‘small, little.’] {%—Manāk-kara, as, ā%}
or {%ī, am,%} doing little, lazy, sluggish; ({%am%}), n. {%=%}
{%maṅgalyā,%} a kind of fragrant Agallochum or aloe
wood (having a perfume like that of jasmine). {%—Ma-%}
{%nāk-priya, as, ā, am,%} a little dear, somewhat dearer
or more valuable.
<LEND>

<L>36386<pc>0745-a<k1>manAkA<k2>manAkA
{#manAkA#}¦ {%manākā,%} f. a female elephant.
<LEND>

<L>36387<pc>0745-a<k1>manAjya<k2>manAjya
{#manAjya#}¦ {%manājya, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>36388<pc>0745-a<k1>manAyI<k2>manAyI
{#manAyI#}¦ {%manāyī, manāvī.%} See p. 742, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36389<pc>0745-a<k1>maniNgA<k2>maniNgA
{#maniNgA#}¦ {%maniṅgā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>36390<pc>0745-a<k1>manIka<k2>manIka
{#manIka#}¦ {%manīka, am,%} n. eye-salve, collyrium,
powdered antimony or other substances used as an
application and ornament to the eye.
<LEND>

<L>36391<pc>0745-a<k1>manIkf<k2>manIkf
{#manIkf#}¦ {%manī-kṛ.%} See p. 742, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36392<pc>0745-a<k1>manImuzagrAma<k2>manImuzagrAma
{#manImuzagrAma#}¦ {%manīmuṣa-grāma, as,%} m., N.
of a village.
<LEND>

<L>36393<pc>0745-a<k1>manIvaka<k2>manIvaka
{#manIvaka#}¦ {%manīvaka, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Bhavya, the son of Priya-vrata, and of a Varṣa
named after him.
<LEND>

<L>36394<pc>0745-a<k1>manu<k2>manu
{#manu#}¦ {%manu.%} See p. 743, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36395<pc>0745-a<k1>manuzya<k2>manuzya
{#manuzya#}¦ {%manuṣya.%} See p. 743, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36396<pc>0745-a<k1>manogata<k2>manogata
{#manogata#}¦ {%mano-gata,%} &c. See p. 741, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36397<pc>0745-a<k1>manotA<k2>manotA
{#manotA#}¦ {%manotā.%} See p. 743, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36398<pc>0745-a<k1>manoraTa<k2>manoraTa
{#manoraTa#}¦ {%mano-ratha.%} See p. 742, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36399<pc>0745-a<k1>mantavya<k2>mantavya
{#mantavya#}¦ {%mantavya, mantu.%} See p. 743,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36400<pc>0745-a<k1>mantr<k2>mantr
{#mantr#}¦ {%mantr%} (properly to be regarded as
a Nom. fr. {%mantra%}), cl. 10. A. (ep. also
P.) {%mantrayate (-ti), mantrayām-āsa, mantra-%}
{%yitum,%} to speak, talk (Ved.); to take counsel, con-
sult, deliberate, ponder over, determine (sometimes
with inf., e. g. {%ava-tartum sarve mantrayām-āsuḥ,%}
they all determined to descend); to counsel, advise,
propose any measure, give any one advice (with acc.
of the person or with gen. of the person and acc. of
the thing advised or consulted about, e. g. {%mantra-%}
{%yadhvaṃ hitam mama,%} give me friendly advice;
{%mantrayām-āsū rahasyāni,%} they consulted about
secret matters); to consecrate with sacred or magical
texts, enchant with spells or charms: Pass. {%mantr-%}
{%yate,%} to be consulted or deliberated; to be advised.
<LEND>

<L>36401<pc>0745-a<k1>mantra<k2>mantra
{%Mantra.%}¦ See p. 744, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36402<pc>0745-a<k1>mantraRa<k2>mantraRa
{%Mantraṇa, am,%}¦ n. or {%mantraṇā,%} f. the act of
consulting, consultation, deliberation; advising, coun-
selling, consulting, in private. {%—Mantraṇārha,%} see
Gaṇa Utkarādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 90.
<LEND>

<L>36403<pc>0745-a<k1>mantrayat<k2>mantrayat
{%Mantrayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ counselling, advising,
consulting.
<LEND>

<L>36404<pc>0745-a<k1>mantrayitavya<k2>mantrayitavya
{%Mantrayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be consulted or
advised; ({%am%}), n. that which is to be advised.
<LEND>
[Page0745-b+ 80]

<L>36405<pc>0745-b<k1>mantrita<k2>mantrita
{%Mantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken, consulted, delibe-
rated, determined; advised, counselled; consecrated
with sacred texts or magical formulas, enchanted,
charmed; ({%am%}), n. advice, counsel.
<LEND>

<L>36406<pc>0745-b<k1>manT<k2>manT
{#manT#}¦ {%manth,%} another form of rt. 1.
{%math,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36407<pc>0745-b<k1>manTa<k2>manTa
{%Mantha, as,%}¦ m. stirring round, churning; shaking
about, agitating; killing, slaying; a drink in which
other ingredients are mixed by stirring, a mixed
beverage, (usually {%= sāktava%}) parched barley-meal
stirred round in milk; a spoon for stirring; a churning-
stick; a kind of antelope; the sun, a ray of the sun
{%(= aṃśu);%} a disease of the eye, cataract, opacity,
excretion of rheum; an instrument for kindling fire
by friction. {%—Mantha-guṇa, as,%} m. a churning-cord,
the cord or string used for turning the churning-stick.
{%—Manthaguṇī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made into a
churning-cord (said of the serpent Vāsuki). {%—Man-%}
{%tha-ja, am,%} n. ‘produced by churning,’ butter.
{%—Mantha-daṇḍa%} or {%mantha-daṇḍaka, as,%} m. a
churning-stick. {%—Mantha-daṇḍī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
made into a churning-stick. {%—Mantha-parvata%} or
{%mantha-śaila%} or {%manthācala (˚tha-ac˚), as,%} or
{%manthādri (˚tha-ad˚), is,%} m. the mountain Man-
dara (which served for a churning-stick at the churn-
ing of the ocean of milk). {%—Manthāvala (˚tha-%}
{%āv˚?), as,%} m., Ved. a kind of snake; (according to
Sāy.) an animal which hangs from the boughs of
trees with its head downwards. {%—Manthodaka (˚tha-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. the ocean of milk, (perhaps wrongly
for {%maṇḍodaka.%}) {%—Manthodadhi (˚tha-ud˚), is,%}
m. ‘churning-sea,’ sea of milk.
<LEND>

<L>36408<pc>0745-b<k1>manTaka<k2>manTaka
{%Manthaka, as,%}¦ m. a churner, agitator; N. of a
man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>36409<pc>0745-b<k1>manTana<k2>manTana
{%Manthana, as, ī, am,%}¦ kindling fire by friction;
({%as%}), m. a churning-stick; (m. or n.?), an instru-
ment for kindling fire by friction; ({%ī%}), f. a churn, a
vessel for butter; ({%am%}), n. the act of kindling fire
by rubbing pieces of wood together; the act of shak-
ing, shaking about, agitating, churning (milk into
butter); churning out (of A-mṛta). {%—Manthana-%}
{%ghaṭī,%} f. a churning-vessel (for butter), churn, a com-
mon earthen pot used for churning.
<LEND>

<L>36410<pc>0745-b<k1>manTanIya<k2>manTanIya
{%Manthanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be churned, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36411<pc>0745-b<k1>manTaru<k2>manTaru
{%Mantharu, us,%}¦ m. the wind raised by flapping
away flies, the wind from a chowrie.
<LEND>

<L>36412<pc>0745-b<k1>manTA<k2>manTA
{%Manthā,%}¦ f. a churning-stick; ({%= methikā%}), Tri-
gonella Fœnum Græcum.
<LEND>

<L>36413<pc>0745-b<k1>manTAna<k2>manTAna
{%Manthāna, as,%}¦ m. ‘the shaker (of the universe),’
an epithet of Śiva; a churning-stick; a kind of
metre, four times ¯¯˘¯˘˘; [cf. Hib. <nsi>maide,</nsi> ‘a
stick, wood, timber.’] {%—Manthāna-bhairava, as,%}
m., N. of a teacher of the Kaṭha-vidyā.
<LEND>

<L>36414<pc>0745-b<k1>manTAnaka<k2>manTAnaka
{%Manthānaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of grass ({%= dṛḍha-%}
{%mūla, tṛṇāṃhripa, harita%}).
<LEND>

<L>36415<pc>0745-b<k1>manTitf<k2>manTitf
{%Manthitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who stirs or
shakes about, stirring, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36416<pc>0745-b<k1>manTitvA<k2>manTitvA
{%Manthitvā,%}¦ ind. having churned. See {%mathitvā.%}
<LEND>

<L>36417<pc>0745-b<k1>manTin<k2>manTin
{%Manthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ shaking up, stirring, agitating,
exciting; paining, afflicting; ({%ī%}), m. Soma juice
with meal mixed in it by stirring (Ved.); semen
virile [cf. {%ūrdhva-manthin%}]; ({%inī%}), f. a churn,
churning-vessel (for butter); ‘the shaker,’ N. of one
of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Manthi-pa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. drinking Soma which is stirred and
mixed (with meal &c.). {%—Manthi-vat%} or {%manthī-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. connected with mixed Soma.
{%—Manthi-śocis, is, is, is,%} Ved. sparkling like
mixed Soma.
<LEND>

<L>36418<pc>0745-b<k1>manTya<k2>manTya
{%Manthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be rubbed, to be
kindled by friction (said of fire); to be churned, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36419<pc>0745-b<k1>manTara<k2>manTara
{#manTara#}¦ {%manthara, as, ā, am%} (allied to {%manda,%}
col. 3), slow, lazy, tardy, hesitating, moving slowly,
trailing, inert, inactive, dull, stupid, silly; low, hollow,
deep (as sound), having a low tone; curved, bowed,
crooked, bent, distorted, humpbacked; broad, wide;
large, bulky; ({%as%}), m. a treasure, treasury, store;
the hair of the head; wrath, anger; fruit; an
obstacle, hindrance; a churning-stick; fresh butter;
a spy, informer; the month Vaiśākha; an antelope,
[Page0745-c+ 80]
deer; a fortress, stronghold; the mountain Mandara
[cf. {%mantha-parvata%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a humpbacked
female slave of Bharata's mother Kaikeyī, (according
to one account, an incarnation of the Gandharvī
Dundubhī; according to another, a daughter of Viro-
cana: she instigated Kaikeyī, the favourite wife of
Daśa-ratha, to plot the banishment of Rāma-candra,
by suggesting that his elevation to the throne would
involve the degradation of Bharata, see Rāmāyaṇa
II. 8); ({%am%}), n. safflower {%(= kusumbhī)%}. {%—Man-%}
{%thara-tā,%} f. slowness, tardiness. {%—Manthareṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ra-īṣ˚), as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
his descendants (see Pāṇ. II. 4, 66).
<LEND>

<L>36420<pc>0745-c<k1>manTarita<k2>manTarita
{%Mantharita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made slow or lazy, re-
laxed.
<LEND>

<L>36421<pc>0745-c<k1>manTaru<k2>manTaru
{#manTaru#}¦ {%mantharu, manthya,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36422<pc>0745-c<k1>mand<k2>mand
{#mand#}¦ {%mand%} (connected with rt. 2. {%mad,%}
q. v.; cf. rt. {%maṇḍ%}), cl. 1. A. {%mandate%}
(Ved. {%madati, mandati,%} see rt. 2. {%mad%}), to become
drunk or inebriated (Ved.); to be glad; to rejoice
(Ved.); to exhilarate (Ved.); to be praised, to be
celebrated (Ved.); to praise (Ved.); to sleep (Ved.);
to languish, be languid; to move slowly, tarry,
loiter, hesitate, stand still, pause; to be beautiful, to
shine.
<LEND>

<L>36423<pc>0745-c<k1>manda<k2>manda
{%Manda, as, ā, am,%}¦ slow, tardy, moving slowly or
softly, loitering, inert, inactive, idle, lazy, laggardly;
cold, unimpassioned, apathetic, phlegmatic; dull,
heavy, stupid, silly, foolish, weak-minded, self-willed;
low, deep, hollow, low-sounding, soft (said of the
voice &c.); weak, weakly, slight, slack (as a bow);
dull, faint (as light); little, miserable, ill, feeble (as
the digestive faculty &c.), sick, bad, evil, wicked,
vile; unhappy, unlucky; weakly, indulgent, good-
natured; drunken, addicted to intoxication; ({%as%}),
m. the planet Saturn; the (upper) apsis of a planet's
course or (according to some) its anomalistic motion;
epithet of Yama; one of the three kinds of ele-
phants [cf. {%mandra, bhadra-manda, mṛga-%}
{%manda%}]; the end of the world, the dissolution ({%pra-%}
{%laya%}) of all things; ({%ā%}), f. a pot, vessel; scil.
{%saṅkrānti,%} a particular astronomical conjunction;
N. of Dākṣāyaṇī; ({%am%}), ind. slowly, tardily, by
degrees, gradually; softly, gently, ({%mandam man-%}
{%dam,%} very slowly or gently, step by step, e. g.
{%mandam mandaṃ nudati pavanas tvām,%} the
breeze wafts thee very gently onwards); idly, indo-
lently, weakly, feebly, slightly, faintly, ({%mandam%}
{%ucchvasan,%} sighing faintly); deeply, in a low or
soft tone, in a low voice, ({%mandam mandam%}
{%uvāca,%} he spoke very softly); [cf. Hib. <nsi>mall,</nsi>
‘slow.’] {%—Manda-karṇi, is,%} m., N. of a Muni.
{%—Manda-karman, a,%} n. the process for the apsis
of a planet's course; {%(ā, ā, a),%} having little to do,
inactive. {%—Manda-kānta, as, ā, am,%} slightly or
faintly bright, of a dull lustre. {%—Manda-kānti, is,%}
m. ‘having a soft lustre,’ epithet of the moon.
{%—Manda-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} acting or working
slowly, acting foolishly, going to work in a foolish
manner. {%—Manda-ga, as, ā, am,%} moving or flow-
ing slowly; ({%as%}), m. the planet Saturn; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
epithet of the Śūdras in Śāka-dvīpa; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
a river. {%—Manda-gati, is, is, i,%} having a slow
motion, moving slowly. {%—Mandagati-tva, am,%} n.
slowness of motion, tardiness. {%—Manda-gamana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} who or what goes slowly; ({%am%}), n. the
act of moving or going slowly, slow motion. {%—Man-%}
{%da-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going slowly, marching slowly.
{%—Manda-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} having little conscious-
ness, hardly conscious, fainting away; absent in
mind. {%—Manda-cchāya, as, ā, am,%} of little bril-
liance, dull, dim, faint, lustreless. {%—Manda-jananī,%}
f. the mother of Manda or Saturn (and wife of
Sūrya). {%—Manda-jaras, ās, ās, as,%} slowly growing
old. {%—Manda-jāta, as, ā, am,%} produced slowly,
arising slowly. {%—Manda-tara, as, ā, am,%} more
slow, very slow, &c.; ({%am%}), ind. very slowly or
gently. {%—Manda-tā,%} f. or {%manda-tva, am,%} n.
slowness, tardiness, inertness, inactivity, indolence;
dulness, heaviness, stupidity, simplicity, folly, weak-
[Page0746-a+ 81]
ness, feebleness; faintness (of light &c.); littleness,
insignificance. {%—Manda-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} flowing
in a slow stream. {%—Manda-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} slow-
witted, possessing little intelligence, simple, silly.
{%—Manda-nāga, as,%} m., N. of a man, (perhaps
more correctly {%malla-nāga.%}) {%—Manda-paridhi,%}
{%is,%} m. (in astronomy) the epicycle of the apsis.
{%—Manda-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Manda-%}
{%prajña, as, ā, am,%} slow-witted, possessed of little
understanding, foolish. {%—Manda-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%}
having slow or weak breath. {%—Manda-phala, am,%}
n. (in astronomy) equation of the apsis or (accord-
ing to some) the anomalistic equation of a planet;
{%(as, ā, am),%} having unimportant results or effects;
bearing little fruit. {%—Manda-buddhi, is, is, i,%} slow-
witted, dull-witted, possessed of little understanding,
stupid, foolish. {%—Manda-bhāgin, ī, inī, i,%} unfortu-
nate, ill-fated, unhappy. {%—Manda-bhāgya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%manda-bhāj, k, k, k,%} ill-fated, unfortunate,
unhappy, wretched, miserable; ({%am%}), n. adverse for-
tune, misfortune. {%—Mandabhāgya-tā,%} f. ill-fortune,
ill-fatedness, misfortune. {%—Manda-bhāṣiṇī,%} f.
a kind of metre {%(= mañju-bhāṣiṇī)%}. {%—Manda-%}
{%mati, is, is, i,%} slow-minded, dull-witted, possessed
of little understanding, slow in apprehension, dull,
stupid, foolish; ({%is%}), m., N. of a wheelwright (in the
Hitopadeśa, p. 63). {%—Manda-mandam,%} ind. slowly,
softly, in a low tone. {%—Manda-mandātapa (˚da-%}
{%āt˚), as, ā, am,%} having decreasing sunshine. {%—Man-%}
{%da-medhas, ās, ās, as,%} dull-witted, possessed of
little understanding. {%—Manda-raśmi, is, is, i,%} hav-
ing weak or faint rays, dim. {%—Manda-vāhinī,%} f.
‘gently flowing,’ N. of a river. {%—Manda-viṣa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} containing little poison, having little venom;
({%as%}), m., N. of a snake. {%—Manda-visarpa, as,%} m.
‘slowly crawling,’ N. of a snake. {%—Manda-visarpin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} crawling or creeping slowly; {%(iṇī),%} f., N.
of a louse. {%—Manda-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} having little
vigour, weak. {%—Manda-vṛṣṭi, is,%} f. slight rain.
{%—Manda-samīraṇa, as,%} m. a gentle breeze.
{%—Manda-smita, am,%} n. or {%manda-hāsa, as,%} m.
or {%manda-hāsya, am,%} n. a gentle laugh, smile.
{%—Mandākrāntā (˚da-āk˚),%} f. ‘slowly advancing,’
N. of a kind of metre, four times. <lang n="meter">¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ , ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ¯ ,</lang>
<lang n="meter">¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯</lang> (the Megha-dūta of Kālidāsa is written
in this metre, cf. {%bhārākrāntā%}). {%—Mandākṣa%}
{%(˚da-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} weak-eyed; ({%am%}), n. bashful-
ness, sense of shame, embarrassment, modesty.
{%—Mandāgni (˚da-ag˚), is, is, i,%} having weak
digestion, dyspeptic; ({%is%}), m. slowness or weakness
of digestion. {%—Mandātman (˚da-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%}
slow-minded, simple, foolish. {%—Mandādara (˚da-%}
{%ād˚), as, ā, am,%} having little respect (for another
person), caring little for, remiss, slack, neglectful,
inattentive, disregarding, neglecting. {%—Mandānala%}
{%(˚da-an˚), as, ā, am,%} having weak digestion.
{%—Mandānala-tva, am,%} n. weakness of digestion.
{%—Mandānila (˚da-an˚), as,%} m. a gentle breeze,
zephyr. {%—Mandāyus (˚da-āy˚), ūs, ūs, us,%} short-
lived. {%—1. mandārit-tā (˚da-ar˚),%} f. hatred of the
bad, the having foolish enemies; (for 2. see under
{%mandārin,%} col. 3.) {%—Mandāsu (˚da-asu), us, us,%}
{%u,%} having slow or weak breath, one from whom the
breath of life is departing. {%—Mandī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
{%-karoti, -kartum,%} to weaken, to diminish. {%—Mandī-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. slowness, tardiness, stupidity. {%—Man-%}
{%dī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to become
weak or faint, diminish. {%—Mandī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
‘become slow,’ dull, stupid. {%—Mandocca (˚da-uc˚),%}
{%as,%} m. (in astronomy) the upper apsis of the course
of a planet. {%—Mandotsāha (˚da-ut˚), as, ā, am,%}
weak in effort, unenergetic. {%—Mandodarī (˚da-%}
{%ud˚),%} f., N. of Rāvaṇa's favourite wife (mother of
Indra-jit); of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda;
of the mother of the lexicographer Jaṭā-dhara.
{%—Mandodarīśa (˚rī-īśa), as,%} m. ‘Mandodarī's
lord,’ N. of Rāvaṇa. {%—Mandodarī-suta, as,%} m.
‘son of Mandodarī,’ Indra-jit. {%—Mandoṣṇa (˚da-%}
{%uṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} tepid, moderately warm, luke-
warm, temperate; ({%am%}), n. gentle heat, warmth.
{%—Mandoṣṇa-tā,%} f. moderate temperature, gentle
[Page0746-b+ 81]
heat, lukewarmness. {%—Mandautsukya (˚da-aut˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having no great desire.
<LEND>

<L>36424<pc>0746-b<k1>mandaka<k2>mandaka
{%Mandaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ simple, silly, foolish; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people; [cf. {%maṇḍaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36425<pc>0746-b<k1>mandat<k2>mandat
{%Mandat, an, antī, at,%}¦ rejoicing, delighting.
{%—Mandad-vīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. rejoicing men,
delighting heroes, (Sāy. {%= vīrān harṣayati yaḥ;%}
cf. {%mandayat-sakha.%})
<LEND>

<L>36426<pc>0746-b<k1>mandana<k2>mandana
{%Mandana, as, ā, am,%}¦ gay, cheerful (Ved.); ({%as%}),
m., N. of a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya; ({%am%}), n. praise,
eulogium; (with a sect of Pāśupatas) a term for a
particular limping gait.
<LEND>

<L>36427<pc>0746-b<k1>mandamAna<k2>mandamAna
{%Mandamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. rejoicing in,
praising, (Sāy. {%= stuvat.%})
<LEND>

<L>36428<pc>0746-b<k1>mandaya<k2>mandaya
{%Mandaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%mandayati, -yitum,%} to
retard; to weaken, diminish, slacken.
<LEND>

<L>36429<pc>0746-b<k1>mandayat<k2>mandayat
{%Mandayat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), delight-
ing, rejoicing; ({%antī%}), f. epithet of Durgā. {%—Man-%}
{%dayat-sakha, as, ā, am,%} rejoicing friends; (Sāy.)
the friend of the delighter (Indra).
<LEND>

<L>36430<pc>0746-b<k1>mandayu<k2>mandayu
{%Mandayu, us, us, u,%}¦ gay, cheerful, happy.
<LEND>

<L>36431<pc>0746-b<k1>mandara<k2>mandara
{%Mandara, as,%}¦ m., N. of a sacred mountain (the
residence of various deities; it served the gods
and Asuras for a churning-stick at the churning of
the ocean for the recovery of the Amṛta and thir-
teen other precious things lost during the deluge;
Viṣṇu is fabled to have become incarnate in the
form of a Kūrma or tortoise for the purpose of
sustaining this mountain on his back, the serpent
Vāsuki serving as a rope with which to whirl it
round, cf. Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 1112, &c.); heaven
({%= svarga,%} cf. {%meru%}); an ornament of pearls of
eight or sixteen strings; N. of a tree of paradise or
one of the five trees in Indra's heaven ({%= man-%}
{%dāra%}); a mirror; a kind of metre, four times ¯˘˘;
N. of a son of Hiraṇya-kaśipu (also called Mandāra);
N. of a Brāhman; of a Vidyā-dhara; ({%as, ā, am%}),
slow, tardy, sluggish, &c. ({%= manda,%} q. v.); large,
bulky; thick, dense, firm; ({%am%}), ind. slowly, slug-
gishly. {%—Mandara-deva, as,%} m., N. of a king of the
Vidyā-dharas; ({%ī%}), f. N. of this king's sister. {%—Man-%}
{%daradevīya, as, ā, am,%} coming from or belonging
to Mandara-deva. {%—Mandara-droṇī,%} f. a valley of
the mountain Mandara. {%—Mandara-bhramaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the whirling round of the mountain Mandara.
{%—Mandara-vāsinī%} or {%mandarāvāsā (˚ra-āv˚),%} f.
‘dwelling on Mandara,’ epithet of Durgā. {%—Man-%}
{%dara-hariṇa, as,%} m. (sometimes written {%manda-%}
{%hāra%}), N. of one of the eight Upa-dvīpas in Jambu-
dvīpa.
<LEND>

<L>36432<pc>0746-b<k1>mandarAya<k2>mandarAya
{%Mandarāya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%mandarāyati, -te,%}
{%-yitum,%} to be like the mountain Mandara.
<LEND>

<L>36433<pc>0746-b<k1>mandasAna<k2>mandasAna
{%Mandasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being delighted,
pleased, gladsome, (Sāy. {%= hṛṣyat, modamāna%});
exhilarated, inspirited, inebriated; ({%as%}), m., N. of
Agni or fire; life; sleep.
<LEND>

<L>36434<pc>0746-b<k1>mandasAnu<k2>mandasAnu
{%Mandasānu, us,%}¦ m. sleep; life.
<LEND>

<L>36435<pc>0746-b<k1>mandAya<k2>mandAya
{%Mandāya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%mandāyati, -te,%} to go
slowly, tarry, delay, linger, loiter; to be tardy; to
be weak or faint.
<LEND>

<L>36436<pc>0746-b<k1>mandAyamAna<k2>mandAyamAna
{%Mandāyamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), going
slowly or tardily, delaying, slow, tardy.
<LEND>

<L>36437<pc>0746-b<k1>mandAsya<k2>mandAsya
{%Mandāsya,%}¦ incorrect for {%mandākṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36438<pc>0746-b<k1>mandin<k2>mandin
{%Mandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. delightful, cheering, ex-
hilarating, invigorating, inspiriting (said of Soma);
rejoicing, cheerful, inspirited. {%—Mandi-nispṛś, k,%}
{%k, k,%} Ved. longing for Soma; sipping Soma, (Sāy.
{%= somaṃ spṛśat.%})
<LEND>

<L>36439<pc>0746-b<k1>mandiman<k2>mandiman
{%Mandiman, ā,%}¦ m. slowness, &c. (see Gaṇa Pṛth-
vādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 122).
<LEND>

<L>36440<pc>0746-b<k1>mandizWa<k2>mandizWa
{%Mandiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. most exhilarating,
giving the greatest enjoyment, (Sāy. {%= mādayitṛ-%}
{%tama.%})
<LEND>

<L>36441<pc>0746-b<k1>mandu<k2>mandu
{%Mandu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. rejoicing, cheerful, pleased.
<LEND>

<L>36442<pc>0746-b<k1>mandra<k2>mandra
{%Mandra, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounding agreeably, speaking
pleasantly, pleasing, delighting, causing joy, pleasant,
agreeable (Ved.); pleased, delighted (Ved.); com-
mendable, praiseworthy (Ved.); low, base, hollow,
dead, deep (as sound), rumbling; ({%as%}), m. a low
tone, deep sound; the low or base tone {%(sthāna)%}
of the voice (as opposed to the middle or {%madhyama%}
[Page0746-c+ 75]
and the high or {%uttama%}); a kind of drum; a species
of elephant; ({%am%}), ind. with a low or hollow sound.
{%—Mandra-jihva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘pleasing-
tongued,’ whose tongue exhilarates, pleasant-voiced
(said of Agni, Bṛhas-pati, &c.). {%—Mandra-tara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving great joy. {%—Mandrājanī%}
{%(˚ra-aj˚),%} f., Ved. ‘uttering pleasant sounds,’ the
tongue; the voice ({%= vāc,%} Naigh. 1. 11).
<LEND>

<L>36443<pc>0746-c<k1>mandraya<k2>mandraya
{%Mandraya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%mandrayate, -yitum,%} to
praise, honour? ({%= arcati,%} Naigh. 111. 14).
<LEND>

<L>36444<pc>0746-c<k1>mandawa<k2>mandawa
{#mandawa#}¦ {%mandaṭa, as,%} m. the coral tree,
Erythrina Fulgens.
<LEND>

<L>36445<pc>0746-c<k1>mandat<k2>mandat
{#mandat#}¦ {%mandat.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36446<pc>0746-c<k1>mandana<k2>mandana
{#mandana#}¦ {%mandana, mandayu,%} &c. See
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36447<pc>0746-c<k1>mandara<k2>mandara
{#mandara#}¦ {%mandara.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36448<pc>0746-c<k1>mandasAna<k2>mandasAna
{#mandasAna#}¦ {%mandasāna.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36449<pc>0746-c<k1>mandAka<k2>mandAka
{#mandAka#}¦ {%mandāka, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
{%mand%}), praising, praise; a stream, current, (perhaps
fr. {%manda + aka,%} going slowly.)
<LEND>

<L>36450<pc>0746-c<k1>mandAkinI<k2>mandAkinI
{%Mandākinī,%}¦ f., N. of an arm of the Ganges
(flowing down through the valley of Kedāra-nātha
in the Himālayas); the river Ganges; the heavenly
Ganges, the river of heaven; a kind of metre, four
times <lang n="meter">˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ ˘ ¯</lang> with a cesura after
the seventh syllable; (in astronomy) N. of a parti-
cular conjunction.
<LEND>

<L>36451<pc>0746-c<k1>mandAkrAntA<k2>mandAkrAntA
{#mandAkrAntA#}¦ {%mandākrāntā.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36452<pc>0746-c<k1>mandAra<k2>mandAra
{#mandAra#}¦ {%mandāra, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. rt. {%mand%}), the coral tree, Erythrina Indica or
this tree regarded as one of the five trees of paradise
{%(svarga);%} a white variety of Calotropis Gigantea;
thorn-apple ({%= dhūrta%}); heaven [cf. {%mandara%}];
an elephant [cf. {%manda, mandra%}]; N. of a son
of Hiraṇya-kaśipu (also called Mandara); N. of a
Vidyā-dhara; N. of a hermitage and desert spot on
the right bank of the Ganges where there are said
to be eleven sacred pools; N. of a mountain, (per-
haps for {%mandara%}); ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant. {%—Man-%}
{%dāra-deva, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mandāra-puṣpa,%}
{%am,%} n. a flower of the Mandāra tree. {%—Mandāra-%}
{%mālā,%} f. a garland of Mandāra flowers; N. of a celes-
tial being, the daughter of Vasu. {%—Mandāra-vatī,%}
f., N. of a woman. {%—Mandāra-ṣaṣṭhī,%} f., N. of
the sixth day in the light half of the month Māgha.
{%—Mandāra-ṣaṣṭhī-vrata, am,%} n. a particular
religious observance on the above day. {%—Mandāra-%}
{%saptamī,%} f., N. of the seventh day in the above
month. {%—Mandāra-saptamī-vrata, am,%} n. a parti-
cular religious observance on the above day.
<LEND>

<L>36453<pc>0746-c<k1>mandAraka<k2>mandAraka
{%Mandāraka, as,%}¦ m. Erythirna Indica or this tree
regarded as one of the five celestial trees; ({%ikā%}), f.,
N. of a woman. {%—Mandāraka-dina, am,%} n. epi-
thet of a particular day.
<LEND>

<L>36454<pc>0746-c<k1>mandArava<k2>mandArava
{%Mandārava, as,%}¦ and {%mandāru, us,%} m. {%= man-%}
{%dāra,%} the coral tree.
<LEND>
<L>36454.1<pc>0746-c<k1>mandAru<k2>mandAru
{{Lbody=36454}}
<LEND>

<L>36455<pc>0746-c<k1>mandArin<k2>mandArin
{%Mandārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having Mandāra trees,
abounding in them. {%—2. mandāri-tā,%} f. (for 1. see
col. 1), the state of possessing or abounding in Man-
dāra trees.
<LEND>

<L>36456<pc>0746-c<k1>mandikukura<k2>mandikukura
{#mandikukura#}¦ {%mandikukura, as,%} m. a kind of
fish, (also read {%mallikukuḍa.%})
<LEND>

<L>36457<pc>0746-c<k1>mandin<k2>mandin
{#mandin#}¦ {%mandin.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36458<pc>0746-c<k1>mandira<k2>mandira
{#mandira#}¦ {%mandira, am,%} n. (according to some
also {%ā,%} f. and {%as,%} m.; said to be fr. rt. {%mand%}), a
habitation, dwelling, house, palace; a temple, pagoda;
an apartment; a town; a camp; any abode or
dwelling, (sometimes at the end of an adj. comp.,
e. g. {%kṣīrābdhi-mandira, as, ā, am,%} dwelling in
the ocean of milk); ({%ā%}), f. a stable, {%= mandurā,%}
p. 747; ({%as%}), m. the sea; the hollow or back of
the knee, the ham; N. of a Gandharva. {%—Man-%}
{%dira-paśu, us,%} m. ‘household animal,’ a cat. {%—Man-%}
{%dira-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘house-gem, temple-jewel,’ epi-
thet of Śiva.
<LEND>
[Page0747-a+ 72]

<L>36459<pc>0747-a<k1>mandurA<k2>mandurA
{%Mandurā,%}¦ f. a stable for horses; a mattress,
sleeping-mat, bed.
<LEND>

<L>36460<pc>0747-a<k1>mandIkf<k2>mandIkf
{#mandIkf#}¦ {%mandī-kṛ, mandī-bhū.%} See p. 746,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36461<pc>0747-a<k1>mandIra<k2>mandIra
{#mandIra#}¦ {%mandīra, as,%} m. (probably) a proper
name.
<LEND>

<L>36462<pc>0747-a<k1>mandu<k2>mandu
{#mandu#}¦ {%mandu.%} See p. 746, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36463<pc>0747-a<k1>mandeha<k2>mandeha
{#mandeha#}¦ {%mandeha, ās,%} m. pl. a kind of Rāk-
ṣasa; epithet of the Śūdras in Kuśa-dvīpa.
<LEND>

<L>36464<pc>0747-a<k1>mandra<k2>mandra
{#mandra#}¦ {%mandra.%} See p. 746, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36465<pc>0747-a<k1>manDa<k2>manDa
{#manDa#}¦ {%mandha, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
antelope.
<LEND>

<L>36466<pc>0747-a<k1>manDAtf<k2>manDAtf
{#manDAtf#}¦ {%mandhātṛ, tā,%} m. (fr. {%man = manas%}
{%+ dhātṛ,%} q. v.), Ved. ‘a thinker,’ an intelligent
man ({%= medhāvin,%} Naigh. III. 15); a devout or
pious man; N. of a king (son of Yuvanāśva), [cf.
{%māndhātṛ%}]; N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36467<pc>0747-a<k1>manmaTa<k2>manmaTa
{#manmaTa#}¦ {%manmatha, as,%} m. (probably an in-
tensive form fr. rt. 1. {%math%} or {%manth,%} according to
others fr. {%man = manas + matha,%} ‘agitating’), love,
the god of love, amorous passion or desire, ({%pa-%}
{%rokṣa-manmatho janaḥ,%} people who know nothing
of love); the elephant or wood-apple, Feronia Ele-
phantum; epithet of the twenty-ninth (third) year
in a sixty years’ cycle of Jupiter; N. of a physician
(written at full {%Śrī-nara-vaidya-manmatha%}); ({%ā%}),
f., N. of Dākṣāyaṇī. {%—Manmatha-kara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} causing or exciting love; ({%as%}), m. epithet of a
being attending on Skanda. {%—Manmatha-yuddha,%}
{%am,%} n. strife of love, amorous strife or contest.
{%—Manmatha-lekha, as,%} m. a love-letter. {%—Man-%}
{%mathānanda (˚tha-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘love's joy,’ N.
of a kind of mango {%(= mahārāja-cūta)%}. {%—Man-%}
{%mathālaya (˚tha-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘love's abode,’ the
mango tree. {%—Manmatheśvara-tīrtha (˚tha-īś˚),%}
{%am,%} n. ‘Tīrtha of the lord of love,’ N. of a sacred
bathing-place. {%—Manmathoddīpana (˚tha-ud˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the act of kindling or inflaming love.
<LEND>

<L>36468<pc>0747-a<k1>manmaTin<k2>manmaTin
{%Manmathin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ enamoured, impassioned,
amorous, in love.
<LEND>

<L>36469<pc>0747-a<k1>manman<k2>manman
{#manman#}¦ {%manman, a,%} n. (fr. rt. {%man,%} to think),
Ved. thought, understanding, disposition of mind
[cf. {%dur-m˚%}]; expression of any desire of the mind,
wish, desire; hymn, hymn of praise, prayer, petition,
(Sāy. {%= mananīyam, mananīyam phalam, ma-%}
{%nanīyaṃ stotram, manana-vatī stutiḥ.%}) {%—Man-%}
{%ma-śas,%} ind., Ved. according to the mind's desire,
with hymns, with praise, (according to Sāy. {%= man-%}
{%manā = stotreṇa.%}) {%—Manma-sādhana, as, ī, am,%}
fulfilling the desires of the mind, accomplishing
wishes; appearing right to the mind.
<LEND>

<L>36470<pc>0747-a<k1>manmana<k2>manmana
{#manmana#}¦ {%manmana, as,%} m. confidential whis-
pering ({%= gadgada-dhvani, karṇa-mūle guptā-%}
{%lāpa%}); love, the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>36471<pc>0747-a<k1>manmaya<k2>manmaya
{#manmaya#}¦ {%man-maya.%} See under 1. {%mad,%}
p. 734, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36472<pc>0747-a<k1>manyamAna<k2>manyamAna
{#manyamAna#}¦ {%manyamāna.%} See p. 744, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36473<pc>0747-a<k1>manyA<k2>manyA<h>2
{#manyA#} 2¦. {%manyā%} or {%manyākā,%} f. (for 1. {%manyā%}
see p. 744, col. 3), the back of the neck, the tendon
of the cervical or trapezium muscle forming the nape
of the neck (musculus cucullaris or trapezius). {%—Ma-%}
{%nyā-gata, as, ā, am,%} being on the nape of the
neck, situated in the back of the neck. {%—Manyā-%}
{%graha, as,%} m. spasm or contraction of the above
cervical muscle. {%—Manyā-stambha, as,%} m. stiffness
or rigidity of the neck; a peculiar disease of the neck.
<LEND>

<L>36474<pc>0747-a<k1>manyu<k2>manyu
{#manyu#}¦ {%manyu.%} See p. 744, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36475<pc>0747-a<k1>manvantara<k2>manvantara
{#manvantara#}¦ {%manv-antara, manv-iddha,%} &c.
See p. 743, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36476<pc>0747-a<k1>mapazwa<k2>mapazwa
{#mapazwa#}¦ {%mapaṣṭa%} or {%mapaṣṭaka%} or {%mapu-%}
{%ṣṭaka, as,%} m. ({%= makuṣṭaka, mayuṣṭaka%}), a
kind of bean, (written also {%mapuṣṭhaka.%})
<LEND>
[Page0747-b+ 74]

<L>36477<pc>0747-b<k1>maPira<k2>maPira
{#maPira#}¦ {%maphira,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>36478<pc>0747-b<k1>maBr<k2>maBr
{#maBr#}¦ {%mabhr,%} cl. 1. P. {%mabhrati,%} to go,
move.
<LEND>

<L>36479<pc>0747-b<k1>mama<k2>mama
{#mama#}¦ {%mama,%} gen. case of the first personal
pronoun [cf. 3. {%ma, asmad%}] used in certain com-
pounds and to form a few derivatives; [cf. {%a-m˚, nir-%}
{%m˚, māmaka, māmakīna.%}] {%—Mama-kāra, as,%} m.
or {%mama-kṛtya, am,%} n. interesting one's self
about anything. {%—Manma-tā,%} f. ‘mineness,’ the sense
of ‘meum,’ the considering anything as belonging
to one's self, sense of ownership or self-interest,
appropriation, selfishness; individuality; pride, arro-
gance, self-sufficiency, attachment to, interest in [cf.
{%mama-tva%} below]; N. of the wife of Utathya and
mother of Dīrgha-tamas, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda VI. 10, 2, {%Mamatā nāma brahma-vādinī%}
{%Dīrgha-tamaso mātā.%}) {%—Mamatā-yukta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} filled with selfishness, selfish, miserly; ({%as%}), m.
a selfish man, miser, egotist. {%—Mama-tva, am,%} n.
‘mineness,’ regarding as one's own, sense of owner-
ship, attachment to, interest in (generally with loc.
c., e. g. {%mamatvam me tasmin,%} I take an interest
in that; {%dhane mamatvaṃ na kartavyam,%} one
must not become attached to wealth); pride, arro-
gance; [cf. {%mama-tā%} above.] {%—Mama-satya, am,%}
n., Ved. contest or struggle for ownership, (the con-
tending parties are supposed to say {%mama satyaṃ%}
{%jaya iti.%})
<LEND>

<L>36480<pc>0747-b<k1>mamaka<k2>mamaka
{%Mamaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. my, mine (see Pāṇ.
IV. 3, 3; cf. {%māmaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>36481<pc>0747-b<k1>mamAya<k2>mamAya
{%Mamāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%mamāyate, -yitum,%} to envy
any one (acc. c.).
<LEND>

<L>36482<pc>0747-b<k1>mamat<k2>mamat
{#mamat#}¦ {%mamat,%} ind., Ved. {%mamat — mamat,%}
at one time — at another time; (but according to
Sāy. {%= mādyat, pra-mādyat, pra-matta%}), exult-
ing, impassioned, intoxicated with joy.
<LEND>

<L>36483<pc>0747-b<k1>mamATa<k2>mamATa
{#mamATa#}¦ {%mamātha, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman;
(also {%mathāta.%})
<LEND>

<L>36484<pc>0747-b<k1>mamApatAla<k2>mamApatAla
{#mamApatAla#}¦ {%mamāpatāla, as,%} m. (according
to Uṇādi-s. V. 50. fr. rt. {%mavy,%} to bind, with affix
{%āla, y%} being rejected, {%m%} substituted for {%v,%} and the
augment {%āpat%} added) {%= viṣaya,%} an object of sense.
<LEND>

<L>36485<pc>0747-b<k1>mamb<k2>mamb
{#mamb#}¦ {%mamb,%} cl. 1. P. {%mambati,%} &c., to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>36486<pc>0747-b<k1>mamma<k2>mamma
{#mamma#}¦ {%mamma, as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Mam-%}
{%ma-svāmin,%} N. of a temple built by Mamma.
<LEND>

<L>36487<pc>0747-b<k1>mammaka<k2>mammaka
{#mammaka#}¦ {%mammaka, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>36488<pc>0747-b<k1>mammawa<k2>mammawa
{#mammawa#}¦ {%mammaṭa, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Kāvya-prakāśa and the Saṅgīta-ratna-mālā,
(said to be a contraction for {%mahima-bhaṭṭa,%} also
written {%mammaṭa-bhaṭṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>36489<pc>0747-b<k1>mamri<k2>mamri
{#mamri#}¦ {%mamri, is, is, i,%} mortal. See {%a-m˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>36490<pc>0747-b<k1>may<k2>may
{#may#}¦ {%may,%} cl. 1. A. {%mayate, -yitum,%} to
go, move; [cf. perhaps Lat. <nsi>meare.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>36491<pc>0747-b<k1>maya<k2>maya<h>1
{#maya#} 1¦. {%maya, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%mā,%} to
form), used as an affix at the end of a comp. to
express ‘made of, consisting of, full of,’ &c. (e. g.
{%suvarṇa-maya,%} made of gold, golden; cf. {%kāṣṭha-%}
{%m˚, jala-m˚, krodha-m˚, tejo-m˚;%} in later Sanskrit
the fem. is sometimes, but rarely, in {%ā%}); ({%as%}), m.,
N. of an Asura (described sometimes as the artificer
or architect of the Daityas, sometimes as versed in
magic, astronomy, and military science); N. of an
astronomer, (according to some <lang n="greek">Πτολεμαῖος);</lang>
N. of an author; ({%ā%}), f. medical treatment, the
practice of physic, administering remedies. {%—Maya-%}
{%kṣetra, am,%} n., N. of a district. {%—Mayakṣetra-%}
{%māhātmya, am,%} n. title of a book. {%—Maya-grāma,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a village. {%—Maya-nirmita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} made by Maya. {%—Maya-saras, as,%} n., N. of
a pool. {%—Mayārāma (˚ya-ār˚), as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Mayeśvara (˚ya-īś˚), as,%} m. Maya.
<LEND>

<L>36492<pc>0747-b<k1>maya<k2>maya<h>2
{#maya#} 2¦. {%maya, as,%} m. (perhaps fr. rt. 2. {%mā%}),
a horse; a camel; a mule; ({%ī%}), f. a mare.
<LEND>
[Page0747-c+ 74]

<L>36493<pc>0747-c<k1>maya<k2>maya<h>3
{#maya#} 3¦. {%maya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%mī%}), hurting,
injuring.
<LEND>

<L>36494<pc>0747-c<k1>mayawa<k2>mayawa
{#mayawa#}¦ {%mayaṭa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%may%}), a hut of grass or leaves; (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 81) {%= pra-sāda (? prāsāda).%}
<LEND>

<L>36495<pc>0747-c<k1>mayanda<k2>mayanda
{#mayanda#}¦ {%mayanda,%} Ved. (according to Mahī-
dhara) {%= mayoda%} (against the accentuation).
<LEND>

<L>36496<pc>0747-c<k1>mayazwaka<k2>mayazwaka
{#mayazwaka#}¦ {%mayaṣṭaka, as,%} m. a kind of bean.
<LEND>

<L>36497<pc>0747-c<k1>mayas<k2>mayas
{#mayas#}¦ {%mayas, as,%} n., Ved. pleasure, delight,
enjoyment, refreshment. {%—Mayas-kara, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. causing enjoyment, giving pleasure. {%—Mayo-%}
{%bhava, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= mayo-bhū%} below; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the descend-
ants of Mayo-bhava. {%—Mayo-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved.
causing pleasure, delighting, giving enjoyment, bene-
fitting (said of Soma, of the Aśvins, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>36498<pc>0747-c<k1>mayivasu<k2>mayivasu
{#mayivasu#}¦ {%mayi-vasu%} (fr. {%mayi,%} loc. sing. of
3. {%ma + vasu%}), Ved. used in a particular formula.
<LEND>

<L>36499<pc>0747-c<k1>mayu<k2>mayu
{#mayu#}¦ {%mayu, us,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s. 1.
7. fr. rt. 1. {%mi;%} by some referred to rt. 2. {%mā%}), N.
of a class of attendants on Kuvera, a Kim-puruṣa,
Kin-nara, chorister of Svarga, celestial musician; an
antelope, deer. {%—Mayu-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of the
Kim-puruṣas,’ epithet of Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>36500<pc>0747-c<k1>mayuzwaka<k2>mayuzwaka
{#mayuzwaka#}¦ {%mayuṣṭaka, as,%} m. ({%= makuṣ-%}
{%ṭaka%}), a kind of bean.
<LEND>

<L>36501<pc>0747-c<k1>mayUka<k2>mayUka
{#mayUka#}¦ {%mayūka, as,%} m. {%= mayūra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36502<pc>0747-c<k1>mayUKa<k2>mayUKa
{#mayUKa#}¦ {%mayūkha, as,%} m. (probably fr. rt. 1.
{%mi,%} but according to Uṇādi-s. V. 25. fr. rt. 4. {%mā%}),
a kind of peg for hanging woven cloth or skins
upon (Ved.); the pin or gnomon of a sun-dial ({%=%}
{%kīla);%} a ray of light, brilliance, light, lustre, bright-
ness, flame; beauty; epithet of an Agni; abbrevi-
ated title of a book; (wrongly written {%mayūṣa.%})
{%—Mayūkha-pṛkta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. touching
(one another) with rays (as two planets). {%—Mayū-%}
{%kha-mālā%} or {%mayūkha-mālikā,%} f., N. of a com-
mentary on the Śāstra-dīpikā by Somanātha Bhaṭṭa.
{%—Mayūkha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having rays, radiant,
brilliant. {%—Mayūkhāditya (˚kha-ād˚), as,%} m. a
form of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>36503<pc>0747-c<k1>mayUKin<k2>mayUKin
{%Mayūkhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ radiant, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>36504<pc>0747-c<k1>mayUra<k2>mayUra
{#mayUra#}¦ {%mayūra, as,%} m. (probably fr. rt. 2.
{%mā,%} but according to Uṇādi-s. 1. 68. fr. rt. 1. {%mī%}),
a peacock; a species of flower, cock's comb, Celosia
Cristata; Achyranthes Aspera; a kind of instrument
for measuring time; N. of an Asura; of a poet; of
a mountain; ({%ī%}), f. a peahen; a pot-herb, Basella
Rubra; ({%am%}), n. a particular posture in sitting; N.
of a city; [cf. {%māyūra.%}] {%—Mayūra-karṇa, as,%} m.
‘peacock's ear,’ N. of a man, see Gaṇa śivādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 1, 112; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his descendants.
{%—Mayūra-ketu, us,%} m. ‘having a peacock on (his)
banner,’ epithet of Skanda. {%—Mayūra-gati, is,%} f.
‘peacock's gait,’ epithet of a kind of metre, four
times ¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯¯.
{%—Mayūra-grīvaka, am,%} n. blue vitriol. {%—Mayūra-%}
{%ghṛta, am,%} n. ‘peacock's fat,’ epithet of a kind of
medicine. {%—Mayūra-caṭaka, as,%} m. the domestic
cock. {%—Mayūra-citraka, am,%} n., N. of the forty-
seventh Adhyāya in the Varāha-Brāhmaṇa; [cf.
{%varhi-citraka.%}] {%—Mayūra-cūḍa, am,%} n. ({%=%}
{%sthauṇeyaka%}), a kind of perfume; ({%ā%}), f. a peacock's
crest; cock's comb, Celosia Cristata. {%—Mayūra-%}
{%jaṅga, as,%} m. Bignonia Indica. {%—Mayūra-tuttha,%}
{%am,%} n. blue vitriol. {%—Mayūra-tva, am,%} n. the state
or condition of a peacock. {%—Mayūra-pattrin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} having the feather of a peacock, feathered with
peacock's feathers (said of an arrow). {%—Mayūra-%}
{%padaka, am,%} n. a scratch or impression in the form
of a peacock's foot made with the finger nails. {%—Ma-%}
{%yūra-pura, am,%} n. ‘peacock's town,’ N. of a hill.
{%—Mayūra-bidalā,%} f. a kind of shrub {%(= amba-%}
{%ṣṭhā)%}. {%—Mayūra-ratha, as,%} m. ‘having a peacock
[Page0748-a+ 79]
for a vehicle,’ epithet of Skanda. {%—Mayūra-roman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} Ved. ‘peacock-haired,’ having hair or manes
like peacocks' feathers (said of Indra's horses). {%—Ma-%}
{%yūravarma-caritra, am,%} n., N. of a book. {%—Ma-%}
{%yūra-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mayūra-%}
{%vyaṃsaka, as,%} m. ({%= dhūrta-mayūra%}), see Pāṇ.
II. 1, 72. {%—Mayūra-śataka, as,%} m., N. of Ma-
yūra's poem in a hundred Ślokas on the sun, hence
also called Sūrya-śataka. {%—Mayūra-śarman, ā,%} m.,
N. of a poet. {%—Mayūra-śikhā,%} f. a peacock's crest;
a kind of shrub, cock's comb, Celosia Cristata.
{%—Mayūra-śepa, as, ā, am,%} peacock-tailed, ({%ma-%}
{%yūra-śepyā,%} m. du., Ved. epithet of two horses
of Indra.) {%—Mayūra-sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} strutting
like a peacock; {%(iṇī),%} f., N. of a kind of metre,
four times ¯˘¯˘¯˘¯˘¯¯. {%—Mayūrāri (˚ra-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of the peacock,’ a chameleon,
lizard. {%—Mayūrāṣṭaka (˚ra-aṣ˚), am,%} n., N. of
a poem in eight Ślokas by Mayūra, descriptive of
his daughter's charms. {%—Mayūreśa (˚ra-īśa), as,%}
m. ‘peacock-lord,’ N. of a man. {%—Mayūreśa-%}
{%vivāha-varṇana, am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the
Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Mayūreśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a Liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>36505<pc>0748-a<k1>mayUraka<k2>mayUraka
{%Mayūraka, as,%}¦ m. a peacock; cock's comb,
Celosia Cristata; Achyranthes Aspera; N. of a poet;
({%as, am%}), m. n. blue vitriol; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of
venomous insect; {%(= amba-ṣṭhā),%} a kind of shrub;
[cf. {%pūti-mayūrikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36506<pc>0748-a<k1>mara<k2>mara
{#mara#}¦ {%mara, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%mṛ%}), Ved. death,
dying; the world of death, i. e. the earth; {%(as, ā,%}
{%am),%} killing; [cf. {%a-m˚, dur-m˚, nṛ-m˚.%}] {%—Marā-%}
{%rāma (˚ra-ār˚), as,%} m., N. of a Daitya.
<LEND>

<L>36507<pc>0748-a<k1>maraka<k2>maraka
{%Maraka, as,%}¦ m. an epidemic, pestilential disease,
contagious disorder, plague, murrain, mortality [cf.
{%māraka, māri%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>36508<pc>0748-a<k1>maraRa<k2>maraRa
{%Maraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of dying, death; a kind
of poison ({%= vatsa-nābha;%} perhaps wrongly for
{%māraṇa%}); a refuge, asylum, (probably for {%śaraṇa%});
{%maraṇāya kalpita,%} Ved. ‘formed for death,’ mortal,
deadly. {%—Maraṇa-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by death.
{%—Maraṇa-dharman, ā, ā, a,%} having the property
of mortality, mortal. {%—Maraṇa-niścaya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} determined to die. {%—Maraṇa-śīla, as, ā, am,%}
liable to death, mortal. {%—Maraṇāgresara (˚na-%}
{%ag˚), as, ā, am,%} preceding in dying, dying before
(any one). {%—Maraṇātmaka (˚ṇa-āt˚), as, ikā,%}
{%am,%} consisting of death, causing death. {%—Mara-%}
{%ṇānta%} or {%maraṇāntika (˚ṇa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
ending in death, having death for the end or termi-
nation. {%—Maraṇābhimukha (˚ṇa-abh˚)%} or {%mara-%}
{%ṇonmukha (˚ṇa-un˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} on the point
of death, near death, moribund, in articulo mortis.
<LEND>

<L>36509<pc>0748-a<k1>maraRIya<k2>maraRIya
{%Maraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ ‘to be died,’ doomed to
die, liable to die.
<LEND>

<L>36510<pc>0748-a<k1>marata<k2>marata
{%Marata, as,%}¦ m. death.
<LEND>

<L>36511<pc>0748-a<k1>marAyin<k2>marAyin
{%Marāyin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. destroying enemies;
(Sāy. {%= śatrūṇām māraka.%})
<LEND>

<L>36512<pc>0748-a<k1>marAyu<k2>marAyu
{%Marāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. (according to Sāy.) {%=%}
{%maraṇa-śila,%} mortal, [cf. {%dur-marāyu,%} according
to the commentator {%= durmaraṇa-hetu%} or {%durma-%}
{%raṇecchu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36513<pc>0748-a<k1>mariman<k2>mariman
{%Mariman, ā,%}¦ m. death, dying.
<LEND>

<L>36514<pc>0748-a<k1>marizRu<k2>marizRu
{%Mariṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ liable to death, mortal.
<LEND>

<L>36515<pc>0748-a<k1>marizyamARa<k2>marizyamARa
{%Mariṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ about to die, mori-
bund.
<LEND>

<L>36516<pc>0748-a<k1>marakata<k2>marakata
{#marakata#}¦ {%marakata%} or {%marakta, am,%} n. an
emerald; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σμάραγδο-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>smaragdus.</nsi>]
{%—Marakata-pattrī,%} f. a kind of climbing plant.
{%—Marakata-maṇi, is,%} m. f. the emerald gem.
{%—Marakata-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of emerald.
{%—Marakata-śilā,%} f. an emerald slab. {%—Marakata-%}
{%śyāma, as, ā, am,%} dark (green) as an emerald.
<LEND>

<L>36517<pc>0748-a<k1>maranda<k2>maranda
{#maranda#}¦ {%maranda%} or {%marandaka, as,%} m. ({%=%}
{%makaranda%}), the juice or nectar of flowers. {%—Ma-%}
{%randaukas (˚da-ok˚), as,%} n. ‘nectar-abode,’ a
flower; (also read {%marandaukasa.%})
<LEND>

<L>36518<pc>0748-a<k1>marAkAlI<k2>marAkAlI
{#marAkAlI#}¦ {%marākālī,%} f. a kind of plant ({%=%}
{%vṛści-kālī%}).
<LEND>
[Page0748-b+ 75]

<L>36519<pc>0748-b<k1>marAya<k2>marAya
{#marAya#}¦ {%marāya, as,%} m., Ved., N. of an
Ekāha; ({%am%}), n., N. of various Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>36520<pc>0748-b<k1>marAyin<k2>marAyin
{#marAyin#}¦ {%marāyin, marāyu.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36521<pc>0748-b<k1>marAra<k2>marAra
{#marAra#}¦ {%marāra, as,%} m. a corn-loft, granary,
place where grain is kept.
<LEND>

<L>36522<pc>0748-b<k1>marArAma<k2>marArAma
{#marArAma#}¦ {%marārāma.%} See {%mara,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36523<pc>0748-b<k1>marAla<k2>marAla
{#marAla#}¦ {%marāla, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%mṛ%}), soft, mild, bland, tender; ({%as%}), m. a flamingo;
a goose; a kind of duck ({%kāraṇḍava%}); a horse; a
grove of pomegranate trees; a villain, rogue; a
cloud; lamp-black (used as collyrium); a particular
mode of joining the hands.
<LEND>

<L>36524<pc>0748-b<k1>marAlaka<k2>marAlaka
{%Marālaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of duck or goose ({%= kala-%}
{%haṃsa%}); a particular mode of joining the hands.
<LEND>

<L>36525<pc>0748-b<k1>marica<k2>marica
{#marica#}¦ {%marica, as,%} m. pepper, the pepper
shrub ({%= kakkolaka;%} cf. {%mārīca%}); a kind of tree
{%(= maruva);%} N. of a man; ({%am%}), n. black pepper.
{%—Marica-pattraka, as,%} m. Pinus Longifolia ({%sa-%}
{%rala%}).
<LEND>

<L>36526<pc>0748-b<k1>marIca<k2>marIca
{%Marīca, as,%}¦ m. pepper, &c., {%= marica%} above;
N. of a son of Kaśyapa and of a son of Sunda, (in-
correctly for {%mārīca,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>36527<pc>0748-b<k1>marIci<k2>marIci
{#marIci#}¦ {%marīci, is,%} m. f. (said to be fr. rt.
{%mṛ,%} probably connected with {%marut,%} col. 3), a par-
ticle of light (distinct from the rays of the sun); a
ray of light (of the sun or moon); light, ({%somasya%}
{%marīciḥ,%} moonlight); mirage, {%= marīcikā; (is),%}
m., N. of a Prājā-pati or ‘lord of created beings’
(variously regarded as son of Svayambhū, as son of
Brahmā, as son of Manu Hairaṇyagarbha, as one
of the seven sages and father of Kaśyapa, or, accord-
ing to Manu 1. 35, as the first of the ten lords of
creatures engendered by the first Manu or Manu
Svāyambhuva for the peopling of the universe, the
other nine being Atri, Aṅgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu, Pracetas or Dakṣa, Vasiṣṭha, Bhṛgu, and
Nārada); N. of Kṛṣṇa (as a Marut, Bhagavad-gītā
X. 21); of a Daitya; of a Maharṣi; of a father of
Paurṇamāsa; of a law-giver and astronomer; of a
king; of a son of Samrāj and father of Vindumat;
of a son of Tīrthañ-cara Ṛṣabha; of a pupil of
Śaṅkarācārya; ({%= kṛpaṇa%}), a miser, niggard;
({%is%}), f., N. of an Apsaras; title of a commentary on
the Siddhānta-śiromaṇi; [cf. {%mārīca, mārīci.%}]
{%—Marīci-garbha, as, ā, am,%} containing or con-
cealing particles of light within; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a world; a class of gods under Manu Dākṣasāvarṇi.
{%—Marīci-toya, am,%} n. a mirage; [cf. {%marīcikā.%}]
{%—Marīci-pa, as, ā, am,%} sipping particles of light,
receiving nourishment from particles of light (Ved.);
a kind of spirit or tutelary deity; ({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet
of a mythical race of Ṛṣis. {%—Marīci-pattana,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a city; [cf. {%maruci-paṭṭana.%}] {%—Ma-%}
{%rīci-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having rays, possessed of
rays, radiant, brilliant; ({%ān%}), m. the sun. {%—Marīci-%}
{%mālin, ī, inī, i,%} garlanded with rays, encircled by rays,
splendid, radiant (said of the sun, moon, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>36528<pc>0748-b<k1>marIcika<k2>marIcika
{%Marīcika, as,%}¦ m. (with Buddhists) N. of a world;
({%ā%}), f. mirage, illusory appearance of water in a
desert, vapour which in hot and sandy countries
appears in the distance like a sheet of water.
<LEND>

<L>36529<pc>0748-b<k1>marIcin<k2>marIcin
{%Marīcin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing rays, radiant; ({%ī%}),
m. the sun.
<LEND>

<L>36530<pc>0748-b<k1>marImfja<k2>marImfja
{#marImfja#}¦ {%marīmṛja, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens.
of rt. {%mṛj%}), rubbing or cleaning repeatedly, cleaning
very much.
<LEND>

<L>36531<pc>0748-b<k1>marImfSa<k2>marImfSa
{#marImfSa#}¦ {%marīmṛśa, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens.
of rt. {%mṛś%}), Ved. feeling about, groping.
<LEND>

<L>36532<pc>0748-b<k1>marIyami<k2>marIyami
{#marIyami#}¦ {%marīyami, is,%} f. Mary. {%—Marī-%}
{%yami-putra, as,%} m. ‘son of Mary,’ epithet of Christ
(in the Romaka-siddhānta).
<LEND>

<L>36533<pc>0748-b<k1>maru<k2>maru
{#maru#}¦ {%maru, us,%} m. (probably fr. rt. {%mṛ%}),
a wilderness, desert, sandy desert, any arid region or
soil destitute of water; practising asceticism in a
wilderness, abstinence from drinking, &c.; a moun-
[Page0748-c+ 78]
tain, rock; a kind of plant; N. of a Daitya usually
associated with Naraka; of a Vasu; of a prince, the
son of Śīghra; of a king belonging to the Ikṣvāku
family; of a son of Hary-aśva; {%(avas),%} m. pl., N.
of a country (Marwar) and its inhabitants; [cf. pro-
bably Angl. Sax. <nsi>mor.</nsi>] {%—Maru-kaccha%} or {%maru-%}
{%kucca,%} N. of a country. {%—Marukaccha-nivāsin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} inhabitant of Maru-kaccha. {%—Maru-ja, as,%}
m. a kind of perfume {%(= nakhī);%} a tree akin to
the Mimosa Catechu; {%(ā),%} f. a particular species
of plant {%(= mṛgervāru)%}. {%—Maru-jātā,%} f. Carpo-
pogon Pruriens or some kindred plant {%(= laghu-%}
{%kuhirī)%}. {%—Maru-deśa, as,%} m. ‘desert-land,’ N. of
a country. {%—Maru-druma, as,%} m. an ill-scented
kind of Mimosa. {%—Maru-dvipa, as,%} m. ‘desert-
elephant,’ a camel. {%—Maru-dhanvan, ā,%} or {%maru-%}
{%dhanva, as,%} m. a wilderness, sandy desert [cf.
{%dhanvan%}]; N. of the father-in-law of the Vidyā-
dhara Indīvara. {%—Maru-dhara, as,%} m., N. of a
country. {%—Maru-patha, as,%} m. a desert district, wil-
derness, sandy desert. {%—Maru-priya, as,%} m. ‘fond
of the desert,’ a camel. {%—Maru-bhava, as,%} m., N.
of a place. {%—Maru-bhū, ūs,%} f. the province of Mar-
war; {%(uvas),%} f. pl., N. of this country and of its
inhabitants; (according to some {%= dāśerakāḥ.%})
{%—Maru-bhūti, is,%} or {%maru-bhūtika, as,%} m., N.
of a son of Yaugandharāyaṇa. {%—Maru-bhūmi, is,%}
f. a desert land, wilderness, waste, sandy desert; N.
of a country, Marwar; [cf. {%maru.%}] {%—Marubhūmi-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. desert state or condition. {%—Marubhū-%}
{%ruha, as,%} m. Capparis Aphylla {%(= karīra)%}. {%—Maru-%}
{%mahī,%} f. wilderness, sandy desert. {%—Maru-mārga,%}
{%as,%} m. a way through a desert. {%—Maru-sambhava,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘produced in a desert,’ a kind of horse-radish
{%(cāṇakya-mūlaka); (ā),%} f., N. of two plants ({%=%}
{%mahendra-vāruṇī%} and {%kṣudra-durālabhā%}). {%—Ma-%}
{%ru-sthala, am,%} n. or {%maru-sthalī,%} f. a desert spot,
wilderness, sandy desert, waste. {%—Maru-sthā,%} f. a
kind of plant {%(= kṣudra-durālabhā)%}. {%—Marūd-%}
{%bhavā (˚ru-ud˚),%} f., N. of various plants; the
cotton shrub; Alhagi Maurorum; a kind of Mimosa
{%(= kṣudra-khadira);%} a cucumber, [cf. {%marud-%}
{%bhavā.%}] {%—Marū-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavi-%}
{%tum,%} to become a wilderness or sandy desert.
<LEND>

<L>36534<pc>0748-c<k1>maruka<k2>maruka
{#maruka#}¦ {%maruka, as,%} m. a peacock; [cf. {%ma-%}
{%rūka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36535<pc>0748-c<k1>marucIpawwana<k2>marucIpawwana
{#marucIpawwana#}¦ {%marucī-paṭṭana,%} N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>36536<pc>0748-c<k1>maruwA<k2>maruwA
{#maruwA#}¦ {%maruṭā,%} f. {%= maruṇḍā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>36537<pc>0748-c<k1>maruRqa<k2>maruRqa
{#maruRqa#}¦ {%maruṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a prince of
Kanya-kubja; of a dynasty; ({%ā%}), f. a woman with
a high forehead [cf. {%maruṭā%}].
<LEND>

<L>36538<pc>0748-c<k1>marut<k2>marut
{#marut#}¦ {%marut, t,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%mṛ,%}
thought by some to be fr. an obsolete rt. {%mar = %} <lang n="greek">μαρ-</lang>
<lang n="greek">μαίρω</lang> and meaning ‘to shine;’ fanciful etymologies
are given by native authors, as {%mā rudaḥ,%} ‘do not
cry,’ according to the legend told in Rāmāyaṇa 1.
46, 20, Hari-vaṃśa 249; according to the Nirukta
XI. 13, the Maruts are so called because they are
{%mita-rāviṇo mahad ravantīti vā%}), wind, ({%pañca%}
{%marutaḥ,%} the five winds in the body), air, breath;
the god of the wind (father of Hanu-mat and regent
or guardian-deity of the north-west quarter of the
sky); any god, deity, immortal; N. of a Sādhya;
epithet of the prince Bṛhad-ratha; {%= ṛtv-ij,%} q. v.;
a kind of plant, {%= maruvaka; (tas),%} m. pl., N. of
the gods of the winds and storms (the companions
and friends of Indra, and even sometimes described as
his superiors, and like him very prominent as favourite
deities in the early mythology, so that the word
{%marut%} is sometimes applied to any god, cf. Raghu-v.
XII. 101; they are said in the Veda to be the sons
of Rudra and Pṛśni, the latter being explained by
Sāy. as ‘the many-coloured Earth,’ but thought by
some to be a personification of the speckled clouds;
they are also described in the Veda as sons and
brothers of Indra, as children of the ocean, as sons
of heaven, as armed with golden weapons, lightnings,
and thunderbolts, as splitting Vṛtra into fragments,
[Page0749-a+ 81]
as clothed with rain, as shaking the mountains and
overturning trees, as having iron teeth and roaring
like lions, as residing in the north, as riding with
whips in their hands in golden cars drawn by ruddy
horses, with which the chariots are said to be winged,
and which are sometimes called Pṛṣatīḥ, q. v.; they
are reckoned in the Nighaṇṭus among the gods of
the middle sphere, and in Ṛg-veda VIII. 96, 8,
are held to be sixty-three in number, forming nine
Gaṇas or troops of seven each; in the Post-vedic
literature they are described as the children of Diti,
either seven or seven times seven in number, and are
sometimes said to be led by Mātari-śvan; the legend
in the Rāmāyaṇa and Hari-vaṃśa, referred to above,
relates that the Asuras or sons of Diti having been
subdued by Indra and the Suras, their mother im-
plored her husband Kaśyapa, son of Marīci, to
bestow on her an ‘Indra-destroying’ son; her request
was granted, but Indra, with his weapon Vajra,
divided the child with which she was pregnant into
forty-nine pieces, which commenced uttering grievous
cries till Indra in compassion afterwards transformed
them into the Maruts or Winds); ({%t%}), f. Trigonella
Corniculata, {%= pṛkkā; (t),%} n. an ill-scented kind
of plant {%(= granthi-parṇa);%} in Naigh. 1. 2. {%marut%}
is said to be a synonym of {%hiraṇya,%} ‘gold,’ and in
III. 7. of {%rūpa,%} ‘form, beauty;’ [cf. {%māruta.%}]
{%—Marut-kara, as,%} m. a kind of bean, Dolichos
Catjang. {%—Marut-karman, a,%} n. or {%marut-kriyā,%}
f. breaking wind, flatulency. {%—Marut-koṇa, as,%} m.
the north-west quarter of the sky. {%—Marut-tanaya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘son of the wind,’ an epithet of Hanumat.
{%—Marut-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. quite equal to the
Maruts, swifter than the winds; (Sāy.) going with
the speed of the Maruts ({%= marudvad vega-gā-%}
{%minau,%} said of the Aśvins). {%—Marut-paṭa, as,%} m.
a sail. {%—Marut-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the Maruts,’
title of Indra. {%—Marut-patha, as,%} m. the path or
region of the air, atmosphere, sky, heaven. {%—Ma-%}
{%rut-pāla, as,%} m. ‘protector of the Maruts,’ epithet
of Indra. {%—Marut-putra, as,%} m. ‘son of the wind-
god,’ epithet of Bhīma (the second of the Pāṇḍu
princes); of Hanumat. {%—Marut-plava, as,%} m.
‘springing with the rapidity of wind,’ a lion. {%—Ma-%}
{%rut-phala, am,%} n. ‘fruit of the wind,’ hail. {%—Ma-%}
{%rut-mat = marut-vat%} (see Gaṇa Yavādi to Pāṇ.
VIII. 2, 9). {%—Marut-vat, ān, atī, at,%} (Ved.)
attended by the Maruts (said of Indra, Vāyu, Viṣṇu,
Sarasvatī, Agni, Soma); (Ved.) containing the word
{%marut; (ān),%} m. a N. of Indra; of Hanumat; of
a son of Dharma by Marutvatī; a cloud; ({%antas%}),
m. pl. a class of gods (perhaps = the Maruts) repre-
sented as children of Dharma or Manu by Marutvatī;
({%atī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Dakṣa, wife of
Dharma (Manu), and mother of the Marutvats.
{%—Marutvatīya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. related or belong-
ing to Indra Marutvat (said especially of the {%graha%}
at the midday libation, and the {%śastra%} recited after-
wards). {%—Marutvatya, as, ā, am, = marutvatīya%}
(see Pāṇ. IV. 2, 32). {%—Marut-sakha, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing the wind for a friend,’ epithet of fire [cf. {%vāyu-%}
{%sakha%}]; of Indra. {%—Marut-sakhi, khā,%} m. f., Ved.
having the Maruts for friends (said of Indra and
Sarasvatī). {%—Marut-sahāya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
the wind for a companion (said of fire). {%—Marut-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. ‘son of the wind,’ epithet of Hanumat.
{%—Marut-stotra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according to
Sāy. {%= marudbhiḥ saha stotraṃ yasya%}), united
in praise with the Maruts; praised by the Maruts.
{%—Marut-stoma, as,%} m., Ved. a Stoma of the
Maruts; N. of an Ekāha. {%—Marud-āndola, as,%} m.
a kind of fan made of the skin of a deer or buffalo.
{%—Marud-iṣṭa, as,%} m. bdellium {%(= guggulu).%}
{%—Marud-eva, as,%} m., N. of a king, father of the
Arhat Ṛṣabha; N. of a mountain; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
the wife of Marud-eva and mother of Ṛṣabha.
{%—Marud-gaṇa, as,%} m. the host or troop of the
Maruts; the host of the gods; {%(as, ā, am),%} being
with or attended by the troops of the Maruts (Ved.,
said of Indra and Soma); N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Marud-%}
{%dhvaja, am,%} n. ‘wind-sign, wind-banner,’ the down
[Page0749-b+ 77]
of cotton floating in the air, flocculent seeds wafted
by the wind. {%—Marud-baddha, as,%} m. a kind of
sacrificial vessel; a section of the Sāma-veda; epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Marud-bhavā,%} f. {%(= tāmra-mūlā),%} a
kind of shrub, (perhaps for {%marūdbhavā.%}) {%—Ma-%}
{%rud-ratha, as,%} m. a horse; a car in which idols
are dragged about. {%—Marud-vartman, a,%} n. the
path or region of the air, atmosphere, heaven, sky.
{%—Marud-vāha, as,%} m. smoke, fire. {%—Marud-%}
{%vṛtā,%} f., N. of a river, {%= kāverī;%} (probably for {%ma-%}
{%rud-vṛdhā.%}) {%—Marud-vṛddhā,%} f., N. of a river
{%(= marud-vṛdhā)%}. {%—Marud-vṛdha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. rejoicing in the winds or in the Maruts, (ac-
cording to Sāy.) increasing with the winds; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a river in the Pañjāb; (according to the Ni-
rukta) a river in general. {%—Marud-vega, as,%} m.
‘having the velocity of wind,’ N. of a Daitya.
{%—Marun-nāma,%} containing the names of the
Maruts. {%—Marun-mālā,%} f. a sort of grass, Trigo-
nella Corniculata, a plant commonly called Belsunth.
{%—Marul-loka, as,%} m. the world of the Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>36539<pc>0749-b<k1>maruta<k2>maruta
{%Maruta, as,%}¦ m. wind; a god, deity; Bignonia
Suaveolens ({%= ghaṇṭā-pāṭali%}); N. of a man ({%=%}
{%marutta%}); of a son of Śīghra.
<LEND>

<L>36540<pc>0749-b<k1>marutta<k2>marutta
{%Marutta, as,%}¦ m., N. of various kings with the
patronymic Āvikṣita; of a king of the lunar race;
of a son of Karandhama; of a son of Śineyu; wind,
a gale (?).
<LEND>

<L>36541<pc>0749-b<k1>maruttaka<k2>maruttaka
{#maruttaka#}¦ {%maruttaka, as,%} m. a species of
plant ({%= maruvaka,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>36542<pc>0749-b<k1>marunDa<k2>marunDa
{#marunDa#}¦ {%marundha,%} N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>36543<pc>0749-b<k1>marula<k2>marula
{#marula#}¦ {%marula, as,%} m. a kind of duck; [cf.
{%marāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36544<pc>0749-b<k1>maruva<k2>maruva
{#maruva#}¦ {%maruva, as,%} m. a kind of Ocimum.
<LEND>

<L>36545<pc>0749-b<k1>maruvaka<k2>maruvaka
{%Maruvaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of various plants; Vangueria
Spinosa; marjoram or a similar plant; a species of
flower ({%= tilaka%}); a kind of Ocimum ({%= khara-%}
{%pattra%}); a variety of the citron or lime (said to be
a thorny plant and to bear a small fruit); a tiger
{%(= bhayānaka);%} Rāhu or the ascending node per-
sonified ({%= bhayānaka%}); a crane; ({%as, ā, am%}),
terrible ({%= bhayānaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>36546<pc>0749-b<k1>marUka<k2>marUka
{#marUka#}¦ {%marūka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%mṛ%}), a kind of stag ({%= mṛga%}); a peacock [cf.
{%maruka%}]; Curcuma Zerumbet.
<LEND>

<L>36547<pc>0749-b<k1>maroli<k2>maroli
{#maroli#}¦ {%maroli, is,%} or {%marolika, as,%} m. the
sea-monster Makara.
<LEND>

<L>36548<pc>0749-b<k1>marka<k2>marka
{#marka#}¦ {%marka, as,%} m., Ved. (fr. rt. {%marc =%}
{%mārj%}), purifying, cleansing, (according to Sāy. {%=%}
{%mārjayitṛ, śodhayitṛ;%} but according to others,
‘dying away, becoming extinguished,’ as if fr. rt.
{%mṛ%}); N. of the Purohita of the Asuras who is held
to be a son of Śukra (Ved.); a demon or spirit
presiding over various sicknesses of childhood (Ved.);
N. of a Yakṣa; {%(= śarīra-vāyu),%} the wind in the
body, the vital breath which pervades the body,
(according to some, ‘wind and body’); an ape,
monkey ({%= markaṭa%} below).
<LEND>

<L>36549<pc>0749-b<k1>markaka<k2>markaka
{%Markaka, as,%}¦ m. ({%= markaṭa%} below), Ardea
Argala; a spider.
<LEND>

<L>36550<pc>0749-b<k1>markawa<k2>markawa
{%Markaṭa, as,%}¦ m. an ape, monkey; a kind of
large crane, Ardea Argala, the adjutant bird or Indian
crane; a spider; a sort of poison or venom; a mode
of coitus {%(strī-karaṇāntara);%} N. of a man; ({%ī%}), f.
a female ape, female monkey; N. of various plants;
Guilandina Bonduc; cowatch, Carpopogon Pruriens;
Achyranthes Aspera ({%= apāmārga; = aja-modā;%} cf.
{%mārkaṭa, mārkaṭī%}). {%—Markaṭa-karṇa, as, ā%} or
{%ī, am,%} ‘monkey-eared,’ having ears like those of an
ape. {%—Markaṭa-joḍa, as, ā, am,%} having the chin
of a monkey. {%—Markaṭa-tinduka, as,%} m. a kind
of ebony {%(ku-pīlu)%}. {%—Markaṭa-danta, as, ā%} and {%ī,%}
{%am,%} ‘monkey-toothed,’ having teeth like those of
an ape. {%—Markaṭa-nāsa, as, ā, am,%} ‘monkey-
nosed,’ having a nose like that of an ape. {%—Mar-%}
{%kaṭa-pippalī,%} f. Achyranthes Aspera {%(= apāmārga).%}
{%—Markaṭa-pota, as,%} m. a young ape or monkey.
[Page0749-c+ 75]
{%—Markaṭa-priya, as,%} m. ({%= kṣīra-vṛkṣa%}),
Mimosa Kauki. {%—Markaṭa-locana, as, ā, am,%}
‘monkey-eyed,’ having eyes like those of an ape.
{%—Markaṭa-vāsa, as,%} m. a spider's web, cobweb.
{%—Markaṭa-hrada, as,%} m. ‘apes’ pool,’ N. of a
pool in the neighbourhood of Vaiśāli. {%—Marka-%}
{%ṭāsya (˚ṭa-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} monkey-faced; ({%am%}),
n. copper. {%—Markaṭī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} one who
has become an ape. {%—Markaṭī-vrata, am,%} n., N.
of a particular religious observance. {%—Markaṭendu,%}
{%us,%} m. (perhaps fr. {%markaṭa-tindu%}), ebony {%(= kāka-%}
{%tinduka)%}. {%—Markaṭotplavana (˚ṭa-ut˚), am,%} n.
the leaping of a monkey, the act of springing like
an ape.
<LEND>

<L>36551<pc>0749-c<k1>markawaka<k2>markawaka
{%Markaṭaka, as,%}¦ m. an ape, monkey; a spider;
a kind of fish; a kind of wild panic; a species of
grain; a Daitya; ({%ikā%}), f. a female ape.
<LEND>

<L>36552<pc>0749-c<k1>markawa<k2>markawa
{#markawa#}¦ {%markaṭa.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36553<pc>0749-c<k1>markara<k2>markara
{#markara#}¦ {%markara, as,%} m. Eclipta Prostrata
[cf. {%mārkara%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a hollow, hole, cavity, chasm,
hole made under ground; a vessel, pot ({%= bhāṇḍa%});
a barren woman.
<LEND>

<L>36554<pc>0749-c<k1>marc<k2>marc
{#marc#}¦ {%marc,%} cl. 10. P. {%marcayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to endanger, imperil; (= rt. {%bharts%}),
to revile, menace, threaten; (= rt. {%hiṃs%}), to injure,
hurt; (= rt. {%mārj%}), to sound; to go, move; to
take, (in these last senses regarded by some as a
Sautra rt.); to cleanse.
<LEND>

<L>36555<pc>0749-c<k1>marj<k2>marj
{#marj#}¦ {%marj,%} cl. 1. P. {%marjati,%} &c., to sound,
(allied to rts. {%marc, mārj, muj.%})
<LEND>

<L>36556<pc>0749-c<k1>marjU<k2>marjU
{#marjU#}¦ {%marjū, ūs,%} m. (fr. rt. {%mṛj%}), a washer-
man; {%= pīṭha-marda,%} a catamite; ({%ūs%}), f. cleansing,
washing, cleanliness, purification.
<LEND>

<L>36557<pc>0749-c<k1>marjya<k2>marjya
{%Marjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be cleansed or pre-
pared (said of Soma).
<LEND>

<L>36558<pc>0749-c<k1>marqitf<k2>marqitf
{#marqitf#}¦ {%marḍitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%} (fr. rt. {%mṛḍ%}),
Ved. one who shows favour or pity, a giver of joy
or felicity, (Sāy. {%= sukhayitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>36559<pc>0749-c<k1>marta<k2>marta
{#marta#}¦ {%marta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%mṛ;%} frequent in
the Ṛg-veda, less so in the Vājasaneyi-Saṃhitā), a
mortal, a being, man; the world of mortals, the
earth; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μορτός, βροτός;</lang> Lat. <nsi>mortuus,</nsi>
<nsi>mortālis.</nsi>] {%—Marta-bhojana, am,%} n., Ved. food of
mortals, nourishment of men.
<LEND>

<L>36560<pc>0749-c<k1>martavya<k2>martavya
{%Martavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be died, what must or
should die, liable to die, mortal; ({%am%}), n. it must
be died (used impersonally); the necessity of dying,
death, ({%martavye sati,%} death being inevitable; cf.
Lat. <nsi>moriendum.</nsi>)
<LEND>

<L>36561<pc>0749-c<k1>martya<k2>martya
{%Martya, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what must die,
doomed to die, mortal; ({%as%}), m. a mortal, a man,
a being, person; the world of mortals, the earth;
({%am%}), n. that which is mortal, the body. {%—Martya-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. done by mortals. {%—Martya-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%martya-tva, am,%} n. mortality, humanity,
the condition of a man, man's estate, ({%martyatām%}
{%prāptaḥ,%} one who has become man.) {%—Martya-%}
{%tvana, am,%} n., Ved. the ways of man. {%—Martya-%}
{%dharma, as,%} m. the law of mortals, mortality; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the laws or conditions prevalent among men.
{%—Martya-dharman, ā, ā, a,%} having the character
or properties of a mortal, mortal. {%—Martya-nivāsin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a mortal inhabitant (of the world), man, man-
kind. {%—Martya-bhāva, as,%} m. the state of men,
human nature. {%—Martya-bhuvana, am,%} n. the
world of mortals, the earth. {%—Martya-mahita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} honoured by mortals; ({%as%}), m. a god.
{%—Martya-mukha, as,%} m. ‘mortal-faced,’ a being
in which the figure of a man and animal is com-
bined, a Kin-nara, Yakṣa, attendant on Kuvera.
{%—Martya-loka, as,%} m. the world of mortals, the
earth. {%—Martyeṣita (˚ya-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
sent by men, instigated by mortals.
<LEND>

<L>36562<pc>0749-c<k1>martyatrA<k2>martyatrA
{%Martya-trā,%}¦ ind., Ved. among men.
<LEND>

<L>36563<pc>0749-c<k1>marda<k2>marda
{#marda#}¦ {%marda, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%mṛd;%} at the end
[Page0750-a+ 79]
of a comp.) crushing, grinding, rubbing, shampooing,
bruising, destroying, ruining (see {%aṅga-m˚, ari-m˚,%}
{%kāka-m˚, kāsa-m˚, cakra-m˚, pāṇi-m˚, picu-m˚,%}
{%pīṭha-m˚%}); ({%as%}), m. grinding, pounding; a violent
blow, a hard stroke (e. g. {%graha-m˚ = graha-yud-%}
{%dha,%} the battle of the planets; {%aṅga-m˚,%} violent
pains in the limbs).
<LEND>

<L>36564<pc>0750-a<k1>mardaka<k2>mardaka
{%Mardaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
crushing, grinding, pounding, rubbing; destroying,
annihilating, subduing; a crusher, &c. (see {%aṅga-m˚,%}
{%kāka-m˚, kāsa-m˚, cakra-m˚, tāla-m˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>36565<pc>0750-a<k1>mardana<k2>mardana
{%Mardana, as, ī, am,%}¦ crushing, grinding, pound-
ing, bruising, rubbing, pressing, destroying, ruining;
attacking, subduing, plaguing, tormenting; a crusher,
destroyer, annihilator, &c., ({%candrārka-mardana,%}
‘the tormenter of the sun and moon,’ an epithet of
Rāhu); ({%as%}), m., N. of a king of the Vidyā-dharas;
({%am%}), n. the act of crushing, grinding, destroying;
the act of pressing, kneading, rubbing; paining,
afflicting; laying waste, devastating; breaking up
(as of ice, snow, &c.); opposition (of planets; cf.
{%graha-m˚%}); the act of rubbing the body, rubbing
in unguents, anointing; [cf. {%ari-m˚, kāma-m˚,%}
{%kāsa-m˚, pāṃsu-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36566<pc>0750-a<k1>mardanIya<k2>mardanIya
{%Mardanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be crushed, to be
bruised, to be trodden down, fit to be bruised or
pounded; to be rubbed (as the body).
<LEND>

<L>36567<pc>0750-a<k1>mardayitvA<k2>mardayitvA
{%Mardayitvā,%}¦ ind. having crushed or bruised,
having rubbed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36568<pc>0750-a<k1>mardala<k2>mardala
{%Mardala, as,%}¦ m. a kind of drum; [cf. {%guru-m˚,%}
{%tāla-m˚, tāla-mardaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36569<pc>0750-a<k1>mardita<k2>mardita
{%Mardita, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushed, pounded, ground,
thrashed; rubbed, kneaded, squeezed; strung, tied (?);
obtained (?).
<LEND>

<L>36570<pc>0750-a<k1>marditavya<k2>marditavya
{%Marditavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be crushed or ground,
to be laid waste or trodden down.
<LEND>

<L>36571<pc>0750-a<k1>mardin<k2>mardin
{%Mardin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crushing, grinding, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>36572<pc>0750-a<k1>mardala<k2>mardala
{#mardala#}¦ {%mardala.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>36573<pc>0750-a<k1>marb<k2>marb
{#marb#}¦ {%marb%} (allied to rt. {%barb%}), cl. 1. P.
{%marbati, marbitum,%} to go, move (= rt.
{%marv,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>36574<pc>0750-a<k1>marman<k2>marman
{#marman#}¦ {%marman, a,%} n. (fr. rt. {%mṛ%}), any open
or exposed part of the body particularly liable to be
mortally wounded, a vital part, mortal spot, vulne-
rable point, tender place, weak or sensitive part of
the human body (of which there are said to be a
hundred and seven); any vital member or organ,
({%antar-marman,%} the heart, inmost soul); the core
of anything, the quick; the joint of a limb, any
joint or articulation; anything which requires to be
kept concealed; a secret quality, secret foible; secret
design or purpose, hidden meaning; anything hidden
or recondite, secret recess; a secret, mystery; truth;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>membrum.</nsi>] {%—Marma-kīla, as,%} m. a hus-
band. {%—Marma-ga, as, ā, am,%} going to the vitals,
piercing to the joints or marrow, excessively painful
or poignant. {%—Marma-ghna, as, ī, am,%} wounding
mortally, striking the vitals, piercing to the core,
excessively painful. {%—Marma-cara, am,%} n. the heart.
{%—Marma-cchid, t, t, t,%} cutting through the joints
or vitals, cutting to the quick or core, wounding
mortally, excessively painful or injurious. {%—Marma-%}
{%ccheda, as,%} m. the act of cutting through the vitals,
cutting to the quick, causing intense suffering or pain.
{%—Marma-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing weak or vulne-
rable points, knowing secrets or the hidden circum-
stances of any affair, knowing mysteries, familiar
with the most secret or recondite portions of a sub-
ject; having a deep insight into anything, deeply
versed in, exceedingly acute or clever; ({%as%}), m. any
very acute or learned man. {%—Marma-jñāna, am,%}
n. knowledge of a secret. {%—Marma-tāḍana, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} paining or piercing to the quick. {%—Marma-%}
{%tra, am,%} n. ‘vitals-protector,’ a corselet, coat of
mail. {%—Marma-pāraga, as, ā, am,%} one who has
penetrated into the interior or secret recesses of any
matter, thoroughly conversant. {%—Marma-pīḍā,%} f.
pain in the inmost soul. {%—Marma-bheda, as,%} m.
piercing the vitals, penetrating the most vulnerable
[Page0750-b+ 77]
parts. {%—Marma-bhedana, as,%} m. ‘piercer of the
vitals,’ an arrow. {%—Marma-bhedin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘heart-
piercing,’ penetrating the vitals, piercing or cutting
to the quick, wounding mortally, fatal; ({%ī%}), m. an
arrow. {%—Marma-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of or
relating to the vitals, containing secrets. {%—Marma-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Marma-vid, t, t, t,%}
knowing weak points, knowing the deepest or re-
condite parts of any subject, knowing secrets; any
acute or intelligent person. {%—Marma-vidāraṇa, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} tearing the vitals, mortally wounding. {%—Mar-%}
{%ma-vibhedin, ī, inī, i, = maruma-bhedin%} above.
{%—Marmavedi-tā,%} f. the knowing weak points or
secrets. {%—Marma-vedin, ī, inī, i, = marma-vid%}
above. {%—Marma-sthala%} or {%marma-sthāna, am,%}
n. a vital part, vulnerable place. {%—Marma-spṛś, k,%}
{%k, k,%} touching or grazing the vitals, piercing to the
core, penetrating the most sensitive parts, stinging
to the quick, intensely painful, very sharp or corro-
sive, poignant, cutting, stinging. {%—Marmātiga%}
{%(˚ma-at˚), as, ā, am,%} piercing deeply into the joints
or vitals, causing acute pain. {%—Marmānuveṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ma-an˚), am,%} n. the act of seeking out vulnerable
points, probing the vitals or most sensitive parts. {%—Mar-%}
{%mānveṣin (˚ma-an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} seeking out vul-
nerable places, probing sensitive parts. {%—Marmāva-%}
{%raṇa (˚ma-āv˚), am,%} n. ‘vitals-protector,’ a corselet,
coat of mail. {%—Marmāvaraṇa-bhedin, ī, inī, i,%}
piercing armour, penetrating a coat of mail. {%—Marmā-%}
{%vidh, t, t, t,%} piercing through vulnerable places;
piercing the vitals, penetrating the joints. {%—Marmā-%}
{%vin,%} Ved., see Pāṇ. V. 2, 122, Vārttika 2.
<LEND>

<L>36575<pc>0750-b<k1>marmika<k2>marmika
{%Marmika, as, ā, am,%}¦ knowing weak points,
knowing what is recondite or secret, very acute or
penetrating, intelligent ({%= marma-vid,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>36576<pc>0750-b<k1>marmara<k2>marmara
{#marmara#}¦ {%marmara, as, ā, am%} (an onomato-
poetic word), rustling (as trees, garments, &c.), mur-
muring; ({%as%}), m. a rustling sound, murmuring,
murmur; a kind of garment; ({%ī%}), f. a species of
pine tree, Pinus Deodora; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μορ-μύρ-ω:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>mur-mur, mur-mur-a-re:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>mur-mul-</nsi>
<nsi>ôn:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>mur-m-ù,</nsi> ‘murmur;’ <nsi>murm-len-ti,</nsi> ‘to
murmur.’] {%—Marmara-pattra-mokṣa, as, ā, am,%}
having leaves falling with a rustling sound. {%—Mar-%}
{%marī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} to begin to rustle or
murmur. {%—Marmarī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} rustling,
murmuring.
<LEND>

<L>36577<pc>0750-b<k1>marmaraka<k2>marmaraka
{%Marmaraka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (used in f. in connection
with {%sirā%}), epithet of a vein in the tip of the ear.
<LEND>

<L>36578<pc>0750-b<k1>marmarAya<k2>marmarAya
{%Marmarāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%marmarāyate,%} &c., to
rustle, murmur, make a rustling or murmuring sound.
<LEND>

<L>36579<pc>0750-b<k1>marmarIka<k2>marmarIka
{#marmarIka#}¦ {%marmarīka, as,%} m. (said to be fr.
rt. {%mṛ%}), a low or wicked man; a poor man, pauper.
<LEND>

<L>36580<pc>0750-b<k1>marmfjenyu<k2>marmfjenyu
{#marmfjenyu#}¦ {%marmṛjenyu, us, us, u%} (fr. Intens.
of rt. {%mṛj%}), Ved. excessively cleansing; (Sāy.) to
be worshipped by all {%(= sarvaiḥ paricaraṇīya).%}
<LEND>

<L>36581<pc>0750-b<k1>marmftyu<k2>marmftyu
{#marmftyu#}¦ {%marmṛtyu,%} see Gaṇa Vanaspaty-ādi
to Pāṇ. VI. 2, 140.
<LEND>

<L>36582<pc>0750-b<k1>marya<k2>marya
{#marya#}¦ {%marya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%mṛ%}), Ved. a mortal;
a man, (especially) a young man; a male; a lover,
wooer, suitor [cf. perhaps Lat. <nsi>mas, maritus</nsi>]; a
stallion, horse; a camel; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the Maruts
(Rudra's people); people (in general). {%—Marya-%}
{%tas,%} ind. from or among men or suitors. {%—Marya-%}
{%śrī, īs, īs, i,%} adorned as a lover or suitor; (Sāy.) to
be had recourse to by men {%(= martyaiḥ śraya-%}
{%ṇīyaḥ).%}
<LEND>

<L>36583<pc>0750-b<k1>maryaka<k2>maryaka
{%Maryaka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a little man; a male
animal, male in general; (Sāy.) people.
<LEND>

<L>36584<pc>0750-b<k1>maryA<k2>maryA
{#maryA#}¦ {%maryā,%} f. (perhaps to be connected
with {%marya%} above), a boundary, limit.
<LEND>

<L>36585<pc>0750-b<k1>maryAdA<k2>maryAdA
{%Maryādā,%}¦ f. a limit, boundary, border, verge,
frontier, bounds, coast, bank, shore, mark, landmark,
end, termination, terminus, ({%dharma-maryādāṃ%}
{%rakṣan,%} keeping within the bounds of the law;
{%iti śāstra-maryādā,%} such is the definition of the
law-books); the bounds of morality or propriety,
[Page0750-c+ 78]
moral law, established rule or custom, fixed usage,
rule of decorum or decency, any clearly defined rule,
distinct law or definition; a covenant, agreement,
bond, contract, ({%sthirā maryādā badhyatām,%} let
a firm covenant be ratified; {%agni-sākṣika-mar-%}
{%yādo bhartā,%} a husband who has entered into the
marriage-contract with the sacrificial fire for a witness);
continuance in the right way, keeping within limits,
decorum of behaviour, propriety of conduct, steadi-
ness, rectitude; N. of the wife of Avācīna (daughter
of a king of Vidarbha); N. of the wife of Devātithi
(daughter of a king of Videha). {%—Maryādā-giri,%}
{%is,%} or {%maryādācala (˚dā-ac˚), as,%} or {%maryādā-%}
{%parvata, as,%} m. a mountain which forms a boundary
line, a frontier mountain. {%—Maryādā-dhāvana,%}
{%am,%} n. running towards a mark. {%—Maryādā-bhe-%}
{%daka, as,%} m. a destroyer of landmarks. {%—Maryādā-%}
{%sindhu,%} N. of a work. {%—Maryādī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
{%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make anything a limit, form a
boundary, to reach, attain.
<LEND>

<L>36586<pc>0750-c<k1>maryAdin<k2>maryAdin
{%Maryādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having limits or boundaries;
keeping within bounds; ({%ī%}), m. a neighbour, bor-
derer.
<LEND>

<L>36587<pc>0750-c<k1>marv<k2>marv
{#marv#}¦ {%marv,%} cl. 1. P. {%marvati, marvitum,%}
to fill; to go, move (= rt. {%marb,%} q. v.):
Caus. {%mārvayati,%} to sound, utter a particular sound
(= rt. {%mārj%}).
<LEND>

<L>36588<pc>0750-c<k1>marSa<k2>marSa
{#marSa#}¦ {%marśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%mṛś%}), any
substance used to excite sneezing, a sternutatory [cf.
{%prati-marśa%}]; consideration, deliberation; counsel,
advice.
<LEND>

<L>36589<pc>0750-c<k1>marSana<k2>marSana
{%Marśana, am,%}¦ n. touching, rubbing; inquiring
into, examining ({%= mīmāṃsā%}); deliberating, advis-
ing, counselling; explaining, explication; rubbing
off, removing.
<LEND>

<L>36590<pc>0750-c<k1>marza<k2>marza
{#marza#}¦ {%marṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%mṛṣ%}), patience,
endurance; [cf. {%a-m˚, dur-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36591<pc>0750-c<k1>marzaRa<k2>marzaRa
{%Marṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ bearing, enduring, forgiv-
ing, pardoning; ({%am%}), n. the act of enduring or
bearing, forbearance, patient endurance, patience,
resignation; [cf. {%a-m˚, agha-m˚, dur-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36592<pc>0750-c<k1>marzaRIya<k2>marzaRIya
{%Marṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be borne patiently,
to be forgiven or excused.
<LEND>

<L>36593<pc>0750-c<k1>marzita<k2>marzita
{%Marṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ borne, endured, borne
patiently, endured with resignation, patient, ({%a-mar-%}
{%ṣita, as, ā, ā, am,%} impatient, angry); forgiven,
excused; ({%am%}), n. patience.
<LEND>

<L>36594<pc>0750-c<k1>marzitavat<k2>marzitavat
{%Marṣita-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has borne or
endured or forgiven.
<LEND>

<L>36595<pc>0750-c<k1>marzin<k2>marzin
{%Marṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ patient, forbearing, long-suf-
fering, forgiving.
<LEND>

<L>36596<pc>0750-c<k1>marzIkA<k2>marzIkA
{#marzIkA#}¦ {%marṣīkā,%} f., Ved. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>36597<pc>0750-c<k1>mal<k2>mal
{#mal#}¦ {%mal,%} cl. 1. A., 10. P. {%malate, mala-%}
{%yati%} or {%malāpayati,%} to hold, possess.
<LEND>

<L>36598<pc>0750-c<k1>mali<k2>mali
{%Mali, is,%}¦ f. holding, having, possession.
<LEND>

<L>36599<pc>0750-c<k1>mala<k2>mala
{#mala#}¦ {%mala, am,%} n. (also in some senses {%as,%}
m.; perhaps connected with rt. {%mlai;%} in Uṇādi-s.
1. 109, said to be fr. rt. {%mṛj,%} the penultimate and
final being rejected and {%ala%} added), dirt, filth, dust,
impurity, any impure matter, excrement, refuse, sedi-
ment, dregs, scum, alloy or dross of metal, rust;
moral impurity, taint, sin; (with Śaivas) original
sin, natural impurity, (usually {%as,%} m.); the secretions
of the Dhātus (described in medical works as phlegm
from chyle, bile from the blood, nose-mucus and
ear-wax from the flesh, perspiration from the fat,
nails and hair from the bones, gum or rheum of the
eye from the brain, &c.; according to Manu V. 135,
the twelve {%malāḥ%} or impure excretions of the body
are as follow, {%vasā, śukra, asṛj, majjā, mūtra,%}
{%viṣ, ghrāṇa-viṣ, karṇa-viṣ, śleṣman, aśru,%}
{%dūṣikā, sveda,%} adeps, semen, blood, dandruff,
urine, feces, mucus of the nose, ear-wax, phlegm,
tears, rheum, and sweat); brass or a kind of metal
inferior to lead, (in this sense only {%am,%} n.); cam-
phor; cuttle-fish bone, Ossa Sepiæ; tanned leather,
a leather garment, (this is thought to be the meaning
of {%mala%} in Ṛg-veda X. 136, 2); ({%ā%}), f. Flacourtia
[Page0751-a+ 81]
Cataphracta; ({%as, ā, am%}), dirty, mean, niggardly,
covetous; unbelieving, godless; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μέλα-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μελαίν-ω, μολύν-ω, μόρον, μάρμαρος, μαρμαίρω:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>malu-s, mal-itia, mali-gn-us, male-ficu-s:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>mail,</nsi> ‘a wrinkle:’ Old Germ. <nsi>meil,</nsi> ‘a
spot:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>smere, smerian, smerwian, smy-</nsi>
<nsi>rian:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>móli-s,</nsi> ‘loam;’ <nsi>mélyna-s,</nsi> ‘blue.’]
{%—Mala-karṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%} removing dirt,
cleansing filth, detergent. {%—Mala-kūṭa,%} N. of a
country. {%—Mala-koṣṭhaka, as,%} m., N. of a man;
[cf. {%malla-koṣṭaka.%}] {%—Mala-ga, as,%} m., Ved.
(perhaps) a fuller, washerman. {%—Mala-grahi,%} see
Vopa-deva XXVI. 48. {%—Mala-ghna, as, ī, am,%} re-
moving dirt, freeing from spots or dirt, cleansing,
detergent; ({%as%}), m. the bulbous root of Salmalia
Malabarica ({%śālmalī;%} cf. {%mala-hantṛ%}); ({%ī%}), f. a
species of shrub {%(= nāga-damanī)%}. {%—Mala-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} arising from filth or dirt, produced from dirt
or dregs; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people [cf. {%malaka,%}
{%malada, malaya%}]; ({%am%}), n. purulent matter, pus.
{%—Mala-tva, am,%} n. dirtiness, filthiness, impurity.
{%—Mala-digdhāṅga (˚dha-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having
the limbs defiled with dirt, having the body soiled
with dust. {%—Mala-dūṣita, as, ā, am,%} soiled with
dirt, dirty, filthy, foul. {%—Mala-drava, as,%} m.
‘liquefaction of the feces,’ diarrhœa, purging. {%—Ma-%}
{%la-drāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%} dissolving impurity, purging;
({%ī%}), m. Croton Jamalgota {%(= jaya-pāla)%}. {%—Mala-%}
{%dhātrī,%} f. ‘dirt-nurse,’ a nurse who attends to a
child's necessities. {%—Mala-dhārin, ī,%} m. a religious
mendicant, especially one of the Jaina sect. {%—Mala-%}
{%paṅkin, ī, inī, i,%} covered with dust and mire.
{%—Mala-pū, ūs,%} f. Ficus Oppositifolia [cf. {%mala-%}
{%yū%}]; ({%u?%}), n. (said to) {%= śṛṅgī%} and {%nala%}. {%—Mala-%}
{%pṛṣṭha, am,%} n. ‘dust-page,’ the outer or first
page of a book (left unwritten because liable to be
dirtied). {%—Mala-bhuj, k, k, k,%} feeding on impurity,
eating filth; ({%k%}), m. a crow. {%—Mala-bhedinī,%} f. a
species of plant {%(= kaṭukā)%}. {%—Mala-mallaka, am,%}
n. a piece of cloth passing between the legs and
covering the privities {%(= kaupīna)%}. {%—Malamal-%}
{%laka-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%} having nothing left but a
small piece of cloth to cover the privities. {%—Mala-%}
{%māsa, as,%} m. an intercalary month, an intercalated
thirteenth month (in which no religious ceremonies
should be performed). {%—Malamāsa-tattva, am,%}
n., N. of a part of the Smṛti-tattva. {%—Mala-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} covered with dirt, containing impurity,
dirty, filthy. {%—Malavad-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%} wearing
dirty or impure clothes; ({%ās%}), f. a menstruous
woman; [cf. {%malodvāsas.%}] {%—Mala-vāhin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} carrying filth or soil, flowing with impurity, bear-
ing or containing dirt. {%—Mala-vināśinī,%} f. ‘dirt-
destroyer’ ({%= śaṅkha-puṣpī%}), a species of plant.
{%—Mala-viśodhana, as, ī, am,%} cleansing away
filth, washing away impurities. {%—Mala-visarga, as,%}
m. or {%mala-visarjana, am,%} n. the act of removing
dirt, cleansing away filth, evacuation of the feces,
discharging the bowels, purging. {%—Mala-śuddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. clearing away of feculent matter, evacuation of
the bowels. {%—Mala-hantṛ, tā,%} m. the bulbous root
of the Salmalia Malabarica; [cf. {%mala-ghna.%}]
{%—Mala-hā,%} f., N. of a daughter of Raudrāśva.
{%—Mala-hāraka, as, ikā, am,%} taking away impu-
rity, removing sin. {%—Malākarṣin (˚la-āk˚), ī,%} m.
‘dirt-remover,’ a sweeper, scavenger. {%—Malāpakar-%}
{%ṣaṇa (˚la-ap˚), am,%} n. the act of removing dirt
or impurity, purification, cleaning, cleansing; re-
moval of sin. {%—Malāpahā (˚la-ap˚),%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Malābha (˚la-ābha), as, ā, am,%} dirty-
looking. {%—Malāri (˚la-ari), is,%} m. ‘dirt-enemy,’ a
kind of natron (see {%sarva-kṣāra%}). {%—Malāvarodha%}
{%(˚la-av˚), as,%} m. obstruction of the feces, constipa-
tion of the bowels. {%—Malāvaha (˚la-āv˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} bringing or causing defilement, soiling, dirty-
ing; defiling, disgracing. {%—Malāśaya (˚la-āś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘receptacle of feculent matter,’ the belly.
{%—Malotsarga (˚la-ut˚), as,%} m. evacuation of the
feces, purging of the bowels. {%—Malodvāsas (˚la-%}
{%ud˚), ās,%} f. a woman who has put off her soiled
clothes (after her period of impurity).
<LEND>
[Page0751-b+ 78]

<L>36600<pc>0751-b<k1>malina<k2>malina
{%Malina, as, ā, am,%}¦ dirty, foul, filthy, impure,
soiled, unclean; stained, tarnished, rusty, sullied,
tainted; morally impure, sinful, depraved, vile, bad;
dark, obscure, obscured, clouded, beclouded (as the
intellect); of a dark colour, dark, dark gray, brown,
black; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Taṃsu (according to
some Anila); ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a woman during menstrua-
tion; ({%am%}), n. sin, fault, defect; buttermilk; borax.
{%—Malina-tā,%} f. or {%malina-tva, am,%} n. dirtiness,
foulness, filthiness, impurity, moral impurity, sinful-
ness, wickedness, blackness, moral blackness. {%—Ma-%}
{%lina-prabha, as, ā, am,%} ‘whose light is obscured,’
obscured, clouded. {%—Malina-mukha, as, ā%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} ‘dirty-faced, black-faced, dark-faced,’ vulgar,
low, vile, wicked; cruel, fierce, savage; ({%as%}), m.
fire; a kind of ape ({%= go-lāṅgūla%}); a departed
spirit, ghost, apparition, evil spirit {%(= preta)%}. {%—Ma-%}
{%lināmbu (˚na-am˚), u,%} n. ‘black-fluid,’ ink. {%—Ma-%}
{%lināsya (˚na-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘dirty-faced, dark-
faced,’ vulgar, low; savage, cruel, ferocious. {%—Ma-%}
{%linī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of making dirty, soiling,
staining, making impure; an action which defiles.
{%—Malinī-karaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} fitted to cause
pollution, occasioning defilement (Manu XI. 125).
{%—Malinī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make dirty, soil, stain; to darken, make
obscure. {%—Malinī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavi-%}
{%tum,%} to be or become dirty.
<LEND>

<L>36601<pc>0751-b<k1>malinaya<k2>malinaya
{%Malinaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%malinayati, -yitum,%} to
soil, make dirty, defile, stain, tarnish.
<LEND>

<L>36602<pc>0751-b<k1>malinita<k2>malinita
{%Malinita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dirtied, soiled, tarnished,
defiled; tainted, corrupted, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>36603<pc>0751-b<k1>maliniman<k2>maliniman
{%Maliniman, ā,%}¦ m. dirtiness, filthiness, impurity,
blackness, darkness.
<LEND>

<L>36604<pc>0751-b<k1>malizWa<k2>malizWa
{%Maliṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ excessively dirty, filthy;
({%ā%}), f. a woman during menstruation, menstruous.
<LEND>

<L>36605<pc>0751-b<k1>malImasa<k2>malImasa
{%Malīmasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ dirty, unclean, foul, im-
pure, soiled, stained, sinful, wicked; dark, of a dark
or dirty gray colour; ({%as%}), m. iron; vitriol of iron,
green vitriol.
<LEND>

<L>36606<pc>0751-b<k1>malIyas<k2>malIyas
{%Malīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ excessively dirty, filthy;
very sinful, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>36607<pc>0751-b<k1>malada<k2>malada
{#malada#}¦ {%malada, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
[cf. {%malaka, malaja, malaya%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
daughter of Raudrāśva, (also {%malandā.%})
<LEND>

<L>36608<pc>0751-b<k1>malana<k2>malana
{#malana#}¦ {%malana, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%mal%}), a tent; ({%am%}), n. crushing, grinding ({%= mar-%}
{%dana%}).
<LEND>

<L>36609<pc>0751-b<k1>malaprAladeSa<k2>malaprAladeSa
{#malaprAladeSa#}¦ {%malaprāla-deśa, as,%} m., N. of
a country. {%—Malaprāla-deśīya, as, ā, am,%} belong-
ing to or a native of Malaprāla-deśa.
<LEND>

<L>36610<pc>0751-b<k1>malabAra<k2>malabAra
{#malabAra#}¦ {%malabāra,%} the country Malabar.
{%—Malabāra-deśa, as,%} m. the Malabar country.
<LEND>

<L>36611<pc>0751-b<k1>malaya<k2>malaya
{#malaya#}¦ {%malaya, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%mal,%} Uṇādi-s. IV. 99), N. of a mountainous range
in Malabar, the western Ghāts in the Dekkan (these
mountains abound in sandal trees); the country that
lies to the east of the Malaya range, Malabar; N. of
a son of Garuḍa, (also read {%mālaya%}); N. of a son
of Ṛṣabha; a garden; a celestial grove, {%= nandana-%}
{%vana; (ās),%} m. pl., N. of a people; of a country
({%= śailāṃśa-deśa%}); one of the minor Dvīpas or
divisions of the world; ({%ā%}), f. Ipomœa Turpethum;
N. of a woman. {%—Malaya-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a
prince. {%—Malaya-gandhinī,%} f., N. of a Vidyā-dharī;
of a companion of Umā. {%—Malaya-giri, is,%} m. the
Malaya mountains in Malabar answering to the
western Ghāts; a district in the south of India; N.
of a commentator on the Jīvābhigama-sūtra. {%—Ma-%}
{%laya-ja, as, ā, am,%} growing on the Malaya moun-
tain; ({%as%}), m. a sandal tree; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
sandal-wood, sandal; ({%am%}), n. epithet of Rāhu.
{%—Malayaja-rajas, as,%} n. the dust of sandal. {%—Ma-%}
{%layajālepa (˚ja-āl˚), as,%} m. sandal unguent. {%—Ma-%}
{%laya-deśa, as,%} m. the country of Malaya. {%—Malaya-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. ‘Malaya tree,’ sandal tree. {%—Ma-%}
{%laya-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a king of the Pāṇḍyas;
of a son of Meru-dhvaja. {%—Malaya-narapati, is,%}
[Page0751-c+ 73]
m. king of Malaya. {%—Malaya-parvata, as,%} m. the
Malaya mountain. {%—Malaya-pura, am,%} n., N. of a
town. {%—Malaya-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Malaya-bhūbhṛt, t,%} m. the Malaya mountain.
{%—Malaya-bhūmi, is,%} f., N. of a district in the
Himālaya. {%—Malaya-mālin, ī,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Malaya-vatī,%} f. a proper N., (also {%malayā-vatī.%})
{%—Malaya-vāta, as,%} m. {%= malayānila%} below.
{%—Malaya-vāsinī,%} f. ‘dwelling on the Malaya
mountain,’ epithet of Durgā. {%—Malaya-siṃha, as,%}
m., N. of two kings. {%—Malayācala (˚ya-ac˚), as,%}
or {%malayādri (˚ya-ad˚), is,%} m. the Malaya moun-
tains answering to the western Ghāts. {%—Malayānila%}
{%(˚ya-an˚), as,%} m. wind (blowing) from Malaya or
the western Ghāts (an odoriferous wind prevalent in
Southern and Central India during the hot season).
{%—Malayodbhava (˚ya-ud˚), am,%} n. sandal-wood.
<LEND>

<L>36612<pc>0751-c<k1>malayU<k2>malayU
{#malayU#}¦ {%malayū, ūs,%} f. ({%= mala-pū%}), Ficus
Oppositifolia.
<LEND>

<L>36613<pc>0751-c<k1>malara<k2>malara
{#malara#}¦ {%malara,%} (with Buddhists) a parti-
cular high number.
<LEND>

<L>36614<pc>0751-c<k1>malavadeSa<k2>malavadeSa
{#malavadeSa#}¦ {%malava-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a
country.
<LEND>

<L>36615<pc>0751-c<k1>malAkA<k2>malAkA
{#malAkA#}¦ {%malākā,%} f. a female messenger,
confidante; a loved woman, amorous woman ({%=%}
{%kāminī%}); a female elephant.
<LEND>

<L>36616<pc>0751-c<k1>mali<k2>mali
{#mali#}¦ {%mali.%} See p. 750, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36617<pc>0751-c<k1>malika<k2>malika
{#malika#}¦ {%malika, as,%} m. (= <lang n="arabic">ملك</lang>), a king.
<LEND>

<L>36618<pc>0751-c<k1>malina<k2>malina
{#malina#}¦ {%malina.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36619<pc>0751-c<k1>malimluc<k2>malimluc
{#malimluc#}¦ {%malimluc%} (fr. Intens. of rt. {%mluc%}),
in {%deva-m˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>36620<pc>0751-c<k1>malimlu<k2>malimlu
{%Malimlu, us,%}¦ m. (probably a mutilated form),
Ved. a robber, thief, (according to Mahīdhara) a
housebreaker, burglar {%(= vandī-kāra)%}. {%—Malimlu-%}
{%senā,%} f., Ved. a band of robbers, gang of thieves.
<LEND>

<L>36621<pc>0751-c<k1>malimluca<k2>malimluca
{%Malimluca, as,%}¦ m. ‘one who goes about in the
dark,’ a thief, robber; a demon, imp; a gnat, mos-
quito, any fly that bites or stings; wind, air; frost,
snow; fire, burning, blazing; a Brāhman who omits
the five great sacrifices; an intercalary lunar month,
intercalated thirteenth month (introduced every third
year to approximate the lunar and solar modes of
computation; cf. {%mala-māsa%}). {%—Malimluca-tat-%}
{%tva, am,%} n., N. of a part of the Smṛti-tattva ({%= mala-%}
{%māsa-tattva%}).
<LEND>

<L>36622<pc>0751-c<k1>maluka<k2>maluka
{#maluka#}¦ {%maluka, as,%} m. the belly (?).
<LEND>

<L>36623<pc>0751-c<k1>maluda<k2>maluda
{#maluda#}¦ {%maluda, maluma,%} (with Buddhists)
particular high numbers.
<LEND>

<L>36624<pc>0751-c<k1>malUka<k2>malUka
{#malUka#}¦ {%malūka, as,%} m. a kind of worm.
<LEND>

<L>36625<pc>0751-c<k1>malmalABavat<k2>malmalABavat
{#malmalABavat#}¦ {%malmalā-bhavat, an, antī, at,%}
Ved. flashing ({%= jvalat,%} Naigh. 1. 17), glittering,
glistening, crackling.
<LEND>

<L>36626<pc>0751-c<k1>mall<k2>mall
{#mall#}¦ {%mall%} (allied to rt. {%mal%}), cl. 1. A.
{%mallate,%} &c., to hold, have.
<LEND>

<L>36627<pc>0751-c<k1>malla<k2>malla
{#malla#}¦ {%malla, as,%} m. a wrestler or boxer by
profession, (the offspring of an outcast Kṣatriya by a
Kṣatriya female, cf. Manu X. 22, XII. 45); an athlete,
a very strong man; N. of various men; epithet of a
king named Nārāyaṇa; N. of the twenty-first Arhat
of the future Utsarpiṇī; a vessel for drinking, vessel,
cup; the cheek and temple, the hemicranium; the
remnant of an oblation; a kind of fish, {%= kapālin;%}
{%(ās),%} m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a woman;
Arabian jasmine [cf. {%mallika%}]; ornamenting the
person with coloured unguents ({%= pattra-vallī%}); N.
of two women; ({%as, ā, am%}), strong, stout, athletic,
robust; good, excellent. {%—Malla-koṣṭa%} or {%malla-%}
{%koṣṭaka, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Malla-krīḍā,%} f. a
wrestling or boxing match, athletic sports. {%—Malla-%}
{%ghaṭī,%} f. a kind of dancing or pantomimic gesture
{%(= nāṭya-viśeṣa)%}. {%—Malla-ja, am,%} n. black pepper.
{%—Malla-tūrya, am,%} n. a kind of drum beaten
during a wrestling match. {%—Malla-deva, as,%} m., N.
[Page0752-a+ 78]
of the author of the Kāla-jñāna, a medical work.
{%—Malla-dvādaśi,%} f., N. of the twelfth day in
a particular half month. {%—Malladvādaśī-vrata,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a particular religious observance.
{%—Malla-nāga, as,%} m. a N. of Vātsyāyana, author
of the Kāma-sūtras (a work on amorous topics);
Indra's elephant; a letter-carrier. {%—Malla-pura%} or
{%mallā-pura, am,%} n., N. of a city. {%—Malla-ban-%}
{%dhāntara (˚dha-an˚),%} a particular posture with
wrestlers. {%—Malla-bhū, ūs,%} f. a wrestling ground,
place for athletic contests, a palæstra or arena; the
site of any conflict, a field of battle. {%—Malla-bhūmi,%}
{%is,%} f. a wrestling ground, arena for athletic contests;
N. of a country. {%—Malla-yātrā,%} f. a train or pro-
cession of wrestlers, a wrestling match. {%—Malla-%}
{%yuddha, am,%} n. ‘a prize-fight,’ pugilistic encounter,
wrestling or boxing match, athletic contest. {%—Malla-%}
{%rāṣṭra, am,%} n., N. of a kingdom. {%—Malla-vāstu,%}
{%u,%} n., N. of a place, see Pāṇ. IV. 2, 120; [cf. {%māl-%}
{%lavāstava.%}] {%—Malla-vidyā,%} f. the art of boxing or
wrestling. {%—Malla-veśa, as,%} m. a wrestler's dress.
{%—Malla-śālā,%} f. a room for wrestling or boxing,
wrestling place, gymnasium. {%—Mallāri (˚la-ari),%}
{%is,%} m. ‘the enemy of the Asura Malla,’ an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa; of Śiva; N. of a commentator on the
Graha-lāghava (his commentary appears to be called
Mallārī). {%—Mallāri-māhātmya, am,%} n., N. of a
portion of the Adhyātma-rāmāyaṇa. {%—Mallārjuna%}
{%(˚la-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mallāsura, as,%}
m. the Asura Malla, N. of an Asura.
<LEND>

<L>36628<pc>0752-a<k1>mallaka<k2>mallaka
{%Mallaka, as,%}¦ m. a tooth; a lamp-stand, lamp,
any vessel made out of a cocoa-nut shell for
holding oil (whether for culinary purposes or
for burning as a lamp), an oil vessel; a cup
or leaf in which anything is wrapped; N. of a
Brāhman; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ikā%}), f.
Jasminum Zambac (both the plant and the flower);
an earthenware vessel of a peculiar form; a lamp-
stand, oil-lamp; a species of fish; N. of a metre,
four times ¯˘¯˘¯˘¯˘; of another metre, four
times ˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯.
{%—Mallikā-gandha, am,%} n. a kind of Agallochum;
[cf. {%malli-gandhi.%}] {%—Mallikā-chad, t,%} or {%mal-%}
{%likā-chadana,%} a shade for a lamp. {%—Mallikā-%}
{%puṣpa, as,%} m. Citrus Decumana; Wrightia Anti-
dysenterica.
<LEND>

<L>36629<pc>0752-a<k1>mallava<k2>mallava
{#mallava#}¦ {%mallava, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(also read {%ballava.%})
<LEND>

<L>36630<pc>0752-a<k1>mallAnakagrAma<k2>mallAnakagrAma
{#mallAnakagrAma#}¦ {%mallānaka-grāma, as,%} m., N.
of a village.
<LEND>

<L>36631<pc>0752-a<k1>mallAra<k2>mallAra
{#mallAra#}¦ {%mallāra, as,%} m. epithet of one of
the six musical Rāgas or scales; ({%ī%}), f. epithet of a
Rāgiṇī, wife of the Rāga Vasanta, also of the Rāga
Megha; [cf. {%mallāri%} under {%malla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36632<pc>0752-a<k1>malli<k2>malli
{#malli#}¦ {%malli, is,%} m. (fr. rt. {%mall%}), having,
holding; N. of the nineteenth Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī; (also {%ī%}), f. ({%= mallikā%}), Jasminum
Zambac; [cf. {%bhūri-m˚, madhu-mallī.%}] {%—Malli-%}
{%gandhi, is, is, i,%} smelling like Jasminum Zambac;
({%i%}), n. a kind of Agallochum. {%—Malli-nātha, as,%} m.,
N. of a poet and celebrated commentator on the
Raghu-vaṃśa, Kumāra-sambhava, Megha-dūta, Śiśu-
pāla-badha, and Kirātārjunīya, (he probably lived in
about the fourteenth or fifteenth century.) {%—Malli-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. a mushroom or fungus. {%—Malli-%}
{%bhūṣaṇa-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36633<pc>0752-a<k1>mallika<k2>mallika
{#mallika#}¦ {%mallika, as,%} m. a kind of goose
with dark-coloured ({%malina%}) or brown legs and
bill; a shuttle; the month Māgha. {%—Mallika-%}
{%pūrva, as, ā, am,%} preceded by the word {%mallika%}
(e. g. {%mallika-pūrva arjuna = mallikārjuna%}).
{%—Mallikākṣa (˚ka-ak˚), as,%} m. epithet of a par-
ticular breed of horses (with white spots on the eyes);
a kind of goose; ({%ī%}), f. a female dog with white
spots on the eyes. {%—Mallikākhya (˚ka-ākh˚), as,%}
m. (probably for {%mallikākṣa%} above), a kind of
goose; ({%ā%}), f. a species of jasmine; [cf. {%mallikā.%}]
{%—Mallikārjuna (˚ka-ar˚), as,%} m. a form of Śiva;
[Page0752-b+ 67]
({%am%}), n. epithet of a Liṅga consecrated to Śiva on
the Śrī-śaila. {%—Mallikārjuna-śṛṅga,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>36634<pc>0752-b<k1>mallikA<k2>mallikA
{#mallikA#}¦ {%mallikā.%} See under {%mallaka,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36635<pc>0752-b<k1>mallinI<k2>mallinI
{#mallinI#}¦ {%mallinī,%} f. Gærtnera Racemosa.
<LEND>

<L>36636<pc>0752-b<k1>mallivAra<k2>mallivAra
{#mallivAra#}¦ {%mallivāra,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>36637<pc>0752-b<k1>mallI<k2>mallI
{#mallI#}¦ {%mallī.%} See under {%malli,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36638<pc>0752-b<k1>mallIkara<k2>mallIkara
{#mallIkara#}¦ {%mallīkara, as,%} m. a thief.
<LEND>

<L>36639<pc>0752-b<k1>mallu<k2>mallu
{#mallu#}¦ {%mallu, us,%} m. a bear; [cf. {%bhalla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36640<pc>0752-b<k1>mallUra<k2>mallUra
{#mallUra#}¦ {%mallūra%} (probably a corruption of
{%maṇḍūra%}), rust of iron; see Uṇādi-s. IV. 90.
<LEND>

<L>36641<pc>0752-b<k1>malva<k2>malva
{#malva#}¦ {%malva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. unwise, foolish,
silly; [cf. {%mālvya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36642<pc>0752-b<k1>malha<k2>malha
{#malha#}¦ {%malha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having soft
excrescences in the dew-lap (as a cow?).
<LEND>

<L>36643<pc>0752-b<k1>malhaRa<k2>malhaRa
{#malhaRa#}¦ {%malhaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man (son
of Dāmodara); of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>36644<pc>0752-b<k1>mav<k2>mav
{#mav#}¦ {%mav%} (connected with rts. {%mavy,%}
1. {%mū%}), cl. 1. P. {%mavati, mavitum,%} to
bind: Intens. {%mammavyate, māmavyate, māmoti,%}
{%māmavīti.%}
<LEND>

<L>36645<pc>0752-b<k1>mavita<k2>mavita
{%Mavita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound, strung, tied.
<LEND>

<L>36646<pc>0752-b<k1>mavara<k2>mavara
{#mavara#}¦ {%mavara,%} (with Buddhists) a parti-
cular high number.
<LEND>

<L>36647<pc>0752-b<k1>mavy<k2>mavy
{#mavy#}¦ {%mavy%} (connected with rt. {%mav%}
above), cl. 1. P. {%mavyati, mavyitum,%} to
bind.
<LEND>

<L>36648<pc>0752-b<k1>maS<k2>maS
{#maS#}¦ {%maś,%} cl. 1. P. {%maśati, maśitum,%} to
hum, buzz, sound, make a noise; to be
angry; [cf. rt. {%miś.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36649<pc>0752-b<k1>maSa<k2>maSa
{%Maśa, as,%}¦ m. a hum, humming, buzzing; anger;
a gnat, musquito; [cf. {%makṣa.%}] {%—Maśa-cchada,%}
{%as,%} m. Andropogon Serratus. {%—Maśa-harī,%} f. a
musquito-curtain ({%= maśaka-harī,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>36650<pc>0752-b<k1>maSaka<k2>maSaka
{%Maśaka, as,%}¦ m. (incorrectly spelt {%masaka%}), a
gnat, musquito, any fly that bites or stings [cf. {%mak-%}
{%ṣika%}]; a particular skin disease (causing dark bean-
like pustules or eruptions); a leather water-bag; N.
of a preceptor with the patronymic Gārgya (the
composer of a Kalpa-sūtra); N. of the district in
Śāka-dvīpa inhabited by Kṣatriyas. {%—Maśaka-kuṭi,%}
{%is,%} or {%maśaka-kuṭī,%} f. a whisk for scaring mus-
quitoes; [cf. {%jaṅgama-kuṭī.%}] {%—Maśaka-jambhana,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} Ved. driving away musquitoes. {%—Maśa-%}
{%ka-varaṇa,%} a whisk for scaring musquitoes. {%—Ma-%}
{%śaka-harī,%} f. a bed-curtain for protection against
musquitoes, musquito-curtains; [cf. {%maśa-harī.%}]
{%—Maśakārtha (˚ka-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} used for
musquitoes, employed on account of musquitoes;
{%maśakārtho dhūmaḥ,%} smoke employed for driving
off musquitoes.
<LEND>

<L>36651<pc>0752-b<k1>maSakAvatI<k2>maSakAvatI
{%Maśakāvatī,%}¦ f., N. of a district or of a river.
<LEND>

<L>36652<pc>0752-b<k1>maSakin<k2>maSakin
{%Maśakin, ī,%}¦ m. Ficus Glomerata.
<LEND>

<L>36653<pc>0752-b<k1>maSarSAra<k2>maSarSAra
{#maSarSAra#}¦ {%maśarśāra, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
man in Ṛg-veda I. 122, 15.
<LEND>

<L>36654<pc>0752-b<k1>maSuna<k2>maSuna
{#maSuna#}¦ {%maśuna, as,%} m. a dog.
<LEND>

<L>36655<pc>0752-b<k1>maSulabara<k2>maSulabara
{#maSulabara#}¦ {%maśu-labara,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>36656<pc>0752-b<k1>maz<k2>maz
{#maz#}¦ {%maṣ%} (connected with rt. 1. {%muṣ%}),
cl. 1. P. {%maṣati, maṣitum,%} to kill,
hurt, injure.
<LEND>

<L>36657<pc>0752-b<k1>mazarARa<k2>mazarARa
{#mazarARa#}¦ {%maṣarāṇa%} or {%maṣurāṇa,%} N. of a
place.
<LEND>

<L>36658<pc>0752-b<k1>mazi<k2>mazi
{#mazi#}¦ {%maṣi, maṣī.%} See {%masi, masī,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36659<pc>0752-b<k1>mazk<k2>mazk
{#mazk#}¦ {%maṣk.%} See rt. {%mask,%} p. 753.
<LEND>

<L>36660<pc>0752-b<k1>mazRAra<k2>mazRAra
{#mazRAra#}¦ {%maṣṇāra,%} N. of a tract of country.
<LEND>

<L>36661<pc>0752-b<k1>mazmazA<k2>mazmazA
{#mazmazA#}¦ {%maṣmaṣā,%} ind. (an onomatopo-
etic word, also read {%masmasā%}). {%—Maṣmaṣā-kṛ,%}
Ved. to reduce to dust, grind to powder.
<LEND>
[Page0752-c+ 74]

<L>36662<pc>0752-c<k1>mas<k2>mas<h>1
{#mas#} 1¦. {%mas,%} cl. 4. P. {%masyati,%} &c., to
measure, weigh; mete; to change form,
become decomposed (?) .
<LEND>

<L>36663<pc>0752-c<k1>masa<k2>masa
{%Masa, as,%}¦ m. measure, weight.
<LEND>

<L>36664<pc>0752-c<k1>masana<k2>masana
{%Masana, am,%}¦ n. meting, measuring; hurting [cf.
rt. {%maṣ%}]; a species of medicinal plant ({%= soma-%}
{%rājī%}).
<LEND>

<L>36665<pc>0752-c<k1>masta<k2>masta<h>1
1. {%masta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 753, col. 1),
measured; [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">μεστός.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>36666<pc>0752-c<k1>masti<k2>masti
{%Masti, is,%}¦ f. meting, measuring, weighing.
<LEND>

<L>36667<pc>0752-c<k1>mas<k2>mas<h>2
{#mas#} 2¦. {%mas = mās,%} in {%candra-m˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>36668<pc>0752-c<k1>masaka<k2>masaka
{#masaka#}¦ {%masaka.%} See {%maśaka,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36669<pc>0752-c<k1>masamasA<k2>masamasA
{#masamasA#}¦ {%masamasā,%} an onomatopoetic
word allied to {%masmasā.%}
<LEND>

<L>36670<pc>0752-c<k1>masarA<k2>masarA
{#masarA#}¦ {%masarā,%} f. a sort of lentil or pulse
({%= masūra%}).
<LEND>

<L>36671<pc>0752-c<k1>masAra<k2>masAra
{#masAra#}¦ {%masāra%} or {%masāraka, as,%} m. a sap-
phire, an emerald; N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>36672<pc>0752-c<k1>masi<k2>masi
{#masi#}¦ {%masi, is,%} m. f. or {%masī,%} f. (often
written {%maṣi, maṣī;%} said to be fr. rt. 1. {%mas,%} to
measure, but thought by some to be connected with
{%matsya,%} a fish, ink being originally made from
cuttle-fish), ink, a black liquid made from burnt
bones &c. and used for ink; a black powder (used
to beautify the eyes), soot, lampblack; the stalk of
the Nyctanthes Arbor Tristis; [cf. {%masikā.%}] {%—Masi-%}
{%kūpī,%} f. an ink-bottle. {%—Masi-jala, am,%} n. ink.
{%—Masi-dhāna, am, ī,%} n. f. an ink-bottle, ink-stand.
{%—Masi-paṇya, as,%} m. a writer, clerk, accountant.
{%—Masi-patha, as,%} m. ‘ink-path,’ a pen. {%—Masi-%}
{%prasū, ūs,%} f. an ink-bottle; a pen. {%—Masi-maṇi,%}
{%is,%} f. an ink-bottle. {%—Masi-vardhana, am,%} n.
myrrh. {%—Masī-jala, am,%} n. ink. {%—Masī-dhānī,%} f.
an ink-bottle, ink-stand. {%—Masī-varṇa, as, ā, am,%}
ink-coloured, black as ink. {%—Masy-ādhāra, as,%} m.
an ink-receptacle, ink-bottle, ink-stand.
<LEND>

<L>36673<pc>0752-c<k1>masika<k2>masika
{%Masika, as,%}¦ m. a serpent's hole; ({%ā%}), f. Nyctan-
thes Arbor Tristis; [cf. {%masī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36674<pc>0752-c<k1>masina<k2>masina
{%Masina, as, ā, am%}¦ (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%mas,%}
Uṇādi-s. II. 49), pounded, well ground ({%= su-%}
{%piṣṭa%}), finely pounded; ({%am%}), n. alliance by the
right of presenting the Piṇḍa to a common proge-
nitor ({%= sa-piṇḍaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>36675<pc>0752-c<k1>masInA<k2>masInA
{#masInA#}¦ {%masīnā,%} f. linseed, Linum Usita-
tissimum.
<LEND>

<L>36676<pc>0752-c<k1>masura<k2>masura
{#masura#}¦ {%masura, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%mas,%} Uṇādi-s. 1. 44), a sort of lentil or pulse, Ervum
Hirsutum; ({%ā%}), f. a lentil; a harlot. {%—Masura-%}
{%karṇa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>36677<pc>0752-c<k1>masUra<k2>masUra
{%Masūra, as,%}¦ m. a sort of pulse or lentil, Ervum
Hirsutum, Cicer Lens ({%= maṅgalyaka%}); a pillow;
({%ā%}), f. the preceding lentil; a harlot; ({%ī%}), f. erup-
tion of pimples or pustules, a kind of small-pox;
Ipomœa Turpethum {%(= tri-vṛt); = rakta-trivṛt.%}
{%—Masūra-karṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of his posterity. {%—Masūra-bidalā%} or {%ma-%}
{%sūra-vidalā,%} f. Impomœa Turpethum; Ichnocarpus
Frutescens (the seeds of which resemble a split lentil);
(perhaps) a split lentil. {%—Masūra-saṅghārāma, as,%}
m., N. of a Buddhist monastery.
<LEND>

<L>36678<pc>0752-c<k1>masUraka<k2>masUraka
{%Masūraka, as,%}¦ m. a pillow; ({%ikā%}), f. eruption of
lentil-shaped pustules, small-pox; a procuress; a
musquito-curtain; ({%am%}), n. a kind of ornament on
Indra's banner.
<LEND>

<L>36679<pc>0752-c<k1>masurakzita<k2>masurakzita
{#masurakzita#}¦ {%masu-rakṣita, as,%} m., N. of a
king.
<LEND>

<L>36680<pc>0752-c<k1>masUsya<k2>masUsya
{#masUsya#}¦ {%masūsya, am,%} n., Ved. a kind of
grain growing in some northern country.
<LEND>

<L>36681<pc>0752-c<k1>masfRa<k2>masfRa
{#masfRa#}¦ {%masṛṇa, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%mas%}), soft, tender, smooth; bland, mild, unctuous,
shining; ({%= karkaśa%}), hard?; ({%ā%}), f. linseed, Linum
Usitatissimum.
<LEND>

<L>36682<pc>0752-c<k1>masfRita<k2>masfRita
{%Masṛṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ softened, smoothened,
polished.
<LEND>
[Page0753-a+ 75]

<L>36683<pc>0753-a<k1>mask<k2>mask
{#mask#}¦ {%mask%} (according to Vopa-deva
{%maṣk,%} cf. rt. {%makk%}), cl. 1. A. {%maskate,%}
&c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>36684<pc>0753-a<k1>maskara<k2>maskara
{#maskara#}¦ {%maskara, as,%} m. a bamboo; a hollow
bamboo cane.
<LEND>

<L>36685<pc>0753-a<k1>maskarin<k2>maskarin
{%Maskarin, ī,%}¦ m. a religious mendicant, a Brāhman
in the fourth order (who carries a bamboo cane);
the moon; N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36686<pc>0753-a<k1>masj<k2>masj
{#masj#}¦ {%masj.%} See rt. {%majj,%} p. 729.
<LEND>

<L>36687<pc>0753-a<k1>masta<k2>masta<h>2
{#masta#} 2¦. {%masta, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%mas;%} probably connected with {%mastu%} below; for
1. {%masta%} see rt. 1. {%mas%}), the head. {%—Masta-dāru,%}
{%us,%} m. Pinus Deodora. {%—Masta-mūlaka, am,%} n.
‘root of the head,’ the neck or the upper part of it
supporting the head.
<LEND>

<L>36688<pc>0753-a<k1>mastaka<k2>mastaka
{%Mastaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the head, the skull;
the summit or highest peak of a mountain, top of
a tree, the head or top or upper part of anything
(e. g. {%cullī-mastakam āropya,%} having placed on
the top of the hearth); the tuft of leaves which
grows at the top of various species of palm trees; a
particular formula used by Śaivas. {%—Mastaka-jvara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘head-fever,’ head-ache. {%—Mastaka-piṇḍaka,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a round protuberance on the temples
of an elephant in rut. {%—Mastaka-mūlaka, am,%} n.
{%= masta-mūlaka,%} q. v. {%—Mastaka-luṅga,%} the
membrane of the brain. {%—Mastaka-śūla, am,%} n.
sharp or shooting pain in the head, head-ache.
{%—Mastaka-sneha, as,%} m. ‘head-marrow,’ the brain.
{%—Mastakākhya (˚ka-ākh˚), as,%} m. the top of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>36689<pc>0753-a<k1>mastika<k2>mastika
{%Mastika, am,%}¦ n. {%= mastaka,%} the head.
<LEND>

<L>36690<pc>0753-a<k1>mastizka<k2>mastizka
{%Mastiṣka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (incorrectly spelt {%mas-%}
{%tiska%}), the brain; any medicine or substance acting
upon the brain; [cf. Slav. <nsi>moζjd.</nsi>] {%—Mastiṣka-%}
{%tvac, k,%} f. the membrane surrounding the brain
({%dura mater?%}).
<LEND>

<L>36691<pc>0753-a<k1>mastu<k2>mastu
{%Mastu, u,%}¦ n. the upper part of thickened sour milk,
sour cream; the watery part of curds, whey. {%—Mastu-%}
{%luṅga%} or {%mastu-luṅgaka, as, am,%} m. n. the
brain; [cf. {%mastaka-luṅga.%}] {%—Mastv-āmikṣe,%} f.
du. whey and curds.
<LEND>

<L>36692<pc>0753-a<k1>masti<k2>masti
{#masti#}¦ {%masti.%} See under rt. 1. {%mas,%} p. 752.
<LEND>

<L>36693<pc>0753-a<k1>mastizka<k2>mastizka
{#mastizka#}¦ {%mastiṣka.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>36694<pc>0753-a<k1>mastu<k2>mastu
{#mastu#}¦ {%mastu.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>36695<pc>0753-a<k1>masmasA<k2>masmasA
{#masmasA#}¦ {%masmasā.%} See {%maṣmaṣā,%} p. 752.
<LEND>

<L>36696<pc>0753-a<k1>masmA<k2>masmA
{#masmA#}¦ {%masmā,%} f. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>36697<pc>0753-a<k1>mah<k2>mah<h>1
{#mah#} 1¦. {%mah%} (orginally perhaps {%magh,%}
meaning ‘to be great,’ cf. rts. {%maṃh,%}
{%makh%}), cl. 1. P. (Ved. and ep. also A.) {%mahati%}
{%(-te), mamāha, mahitā, mahiṣyati, mahitum%}
(Ved. inf. {%mahe%}); cl. 10. P. A. {%mahayati, -te,%}
&c. (Vedic forms {%māmahe, māmahasva, māma-%}
{%has%}), to gladden, make cheerful, enliven, inspirit,
excite; (Sāy.) to make great, increase, aggrandize
(e. g. {%mā naḥ kāmam mahayantam ā dhak,%} dis-
appoint not the desire that would make us great,
Ṛg-veda 1. 178, 1); to value highly, esteem highly,
hold in great esteem, honour, revere, do honour to,
worship, adore; (A., Ved.) to rejoice in, delight in;
to be honoured or glorified, (in Ṛg-veda VI. 15, 2,
{%praśastibhir mahayase%} is rendered by Sāy. ‘thou
art honoured by excellent hymns’): Caus. {%māhayati,%}
{%yitum:%} Desid. {%mimahiṣati:%} Intens. {%māmah-%}
{%yate,%} to honour, protect, preserve (Ved.); [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">μέγ-α-ς, μέγ-εθ-ος, μῆχ-ος, μῆχ-αρ, μηχ-ανή,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μηχανᾶ-σθαι, μόγ-ος, μόχθ-ος, μέγαρον:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>magnus, mactus:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>mag,</nsi> ‘I can;’ <nsi>mah-t-s,</nsi>
‘might;’ <nsi>magaths, magus,</nsi> ‘a boy;’ <nsi>magan,</nsi>
<nsi>magu, mavi:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>magan,</nsi> ‘great, heavy;’
<nsi>machôn,</nsi> ‘to make:’ Mod.; Germ. <nsi>gemach:</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>mag, magan, mæht, meaht, miht, mægn,</nsi>
<nsi>meagn, macian:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>mog-a,</nsi> ‘I can;’ <nsi>po-mos-ti,</nsi>
‘to help:’ Lith. <nsi>mag-oju,</nsi> ‘help:’ Hib. <nsi>mogh,</nsi>
<nsi>modh,</nsi> ‘respect, honour:’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>myged,</nsi>
‘respect;’ <nsi>mygaw,</nsi> ‘to revere.’]
<LEND>
[Page0753-b+ 81]

<L>36698<pc>0753-b<k1>mah<k2>mah<h>2
2. {%mah%}¦ (a Vedic adj. used in dat. {%mahe,%} gen. and
abl. sing., and acc. pl. {%mahas,%} inst. {%mahā%}), great,
powerful, mighty; abundant; (according to some)
old, aged (in connection with {%pitṛ, mātṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>36699<pc>0753-b<k1>maha<k2>maha
{%Maha, as,%}¦ m. [cf. {%makha, magha%}], a feast,
festival [cf. {%kāma-m˚, dhanur-m˚, brahma-m˚%}];
a sacrifice, offering, oblation; ({%as%}), m. a buffalo [cf.
{%mahiṣa%}]; light lustre, brilliance; ({%ā%}), f. a cow
[cf. {%māhā%}]; the plant Ichnocarpus Frutescens; Hedy-
sarum Lagopodioides; ({%as, ī, am%}), great, mighty,
abundant (Ved.); ({%ī%}), f. the earth, &c.; see {%mahī,%}
s. v. {%—Maha-tā,%} f. greatness, mightiness.
<LEND>

<L>36700<pc>0753-b<k1>mahaka<k2>mahaka
{%Mahaka, as,%}¦ m. an eminent or distinguished
man; a tortoise; an epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>36701<pc>0753-b<k1>mahakka<k2>mahakka
{%Mahakka, as,%}¦ m. a wide-spread fragrance, widely
diffused perfume.
<LEND>

<L>36702<pc>0753-b<k1>mahat<k2>mahat
{%Mahat, ān, atī, at%}¦ (originally pres. part. of rt. 1.
{%mah,%} but making in nom. sing. du. pl. {%mahān, ma-%}
{%hāntau, mahāntas,%} acc. sing. du. pl. {%mahāntam,%}
{%mahāntau, mahatas,%} inst. {%mahatā,%} &c., see Gram.
142; in Ved. the acc. sing. {%mahām%} occurs, see
{%mahā;%} in ep. the crude or neut. form {%mahat%} is
sometimes used for the correct form {%mahāntam;%} at
the beginning of Karma-dhāraya and Bahu-vrīhi com-
pounds {%mahā,%} q. v., is generally substituted for {%ma-%}
{%hat,%} but in Tat-puruṣas and a few exceptional cases
{%mahat%} is retained), great, mighty, strong, big, large,
huge, full-grown, ample, extensive, long, ({%mahān%}
{%adhvā,%} a long road; {%mahad āyus,%} long life; {%ma-%}
{%hatī kathā,%} a long story); far advanced, late, ({%ma-%}
{%haty aparāhṇe,%} late in the afternoon); numerous,
abundant, much, many, ({%janasya mahato madhye,%}
in the presence of many people); abounding in
(sometimes with inst. c.); rich in; high (in price);
gross, thick, dense, ({%bhūtāni mahānti,%} the gross
elements; {%mahat tamas,%} thick darkness); loud,
({%mahān ghoṣaḥ,%} a loud noise); important, signifi-
cant, ({%mahatī vārtā,%} important news; {%mahat kār-%}
{%yam,%} an important affair); high, lofty, eminent,
noble, ({%mahat sthānam,%} a lofty position; {%mahat%}
{%kulam,%} a distinguished family); excellent, distin-
guished; ({%ān%}), m. (in the Sāṅkhya phil.) ‘the great
principle,’ the intellect ({%= buddhi,%} i. e. the second
of the twenty-five Tattvas produced from Pradhāna
or Mūla-prakṛti and itself producing the third prin-
ciple or Ahaṅkāra, being thus both a Vikṛti and a
Prakṛti; {%buddhi,%} intellect, is called {%mahat%} to dis-
tinguish it from the Tattva {%manas,%} mind, with
which and with Ahaṅkāra it is connected and to
both of which it is superior); the superior of a
monastery; a camel; epithet of Rudra or of a
Rudra; (scil. {%gaṇa%}), epithet of a class of Manes;
N. of a Dānava; N. of a king; ({%atī%}), f. the egg-
plant ({%= bṛhatī%}); the seven-stringed or (according
to some) hundred-stringed Vīṇā or lute of Nārada;
({%at%}), n. greatness, power, dominion; infinity; the
greater part, ({%mahati rātryāḥ,%} Ved. when the
greater part of the night is past); (scil. {%tattva%}),
the great intellectual principle or intellect (the second
Tattva of the Sāṅkhya phil. described above); sacred
knowledge; ({%at%}), ind. greatly, exceedingly, much,
very; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μέγ-α-ς, μείζων, μέγ-ιστο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μεγα-λύν-ω, μέγ-εθ-ος, μάλα, μᾶλλον, μῆκος, μακρός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μάκαρες:</lang> Lat. <nsi>mag-nu-s, major, maximu-s, ma-</nsi>
<nsi>gis, magis-ter, magistra-tus:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>mik-il-s,</nsi>
‘great;’ <nsi>mikil-jan =</nsi> <lang n="greek">μεγαλύνειν;</lang> <nsi>mais,</nsi> ‘greater;’
<nsi>maist,</nsi> ‘greatest:’ Old Germ. <nsi>mihhil, mêr.</nsi>] {%—Ma-%}
{%ha-ṛṣi, is,%} m., Ved. {%= maharṣi;%} see Gram.
38. {%h%}. {%—Mahac-chabda, as,%} m. (for {%mahat +%}
{%śabda%}), the word {%mahat;%} [cf. {%mahā-śabda.%}]
{%—Mahat-katha, as, ā, am,%} being the talk of the
great, mentioned by the great, living in great men's
mouths. {%—Mahat-kāṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n., N. of a sec-
tion of the Atharva-veda Saṃhitā. {%—Mahat-kṣetra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} occupying a wide district or territory. {%—Ma-%}
{%hat-tattva, am,%} n. the Mahat or great principle, i. e.
Intellect, (see above under {%mahat.%}) {%—Mahat-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} greatest, mightiest, most powerful; ex-
ceedingly great or mighty or powerful. {%—Mahat-%}
{%tara, as, ā, am,%} greater, mightier, stronger; exceed-
ingly great or mighty or strong; ({%as%}), m. the oldest,
[Page0753-c+ 81]
most respectable, principal; the head or oldest man
of the village ({%= grāma-kūṭa, dalāḍhaka%}); a man
of the fourth or servile caste, a Śūdra (?); a courtier,
chamberlain; N. of a son of Kaśyapa (or of Kāś-
yapa); ({%ī%}), f. a particular form of the Buddhist
goddess Tārā. {%—Mahattaraka, as,%} m. a courtier,
chamberlain. {%—Mahat-tā,%} f. or {%mahat-tva, am,%} n.
greatness, magnitude, majesty, mightiness, largeness,
amplitude, great extent, intensity, violence, height,
high position, elevated station, high consideration or
estimation, importance. {%—Mahattva-rahita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deprived of majesty or greatness. {%—Mahat-sena,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Mahat-sevā,%} f. service of
the great, homage (rendered) to great men. {%—Ma-%}
{%hat-sthāna, am,%} n. a high place, lofty position; (also
read {%mahā-sthāna.%}) {%—Mahad-āvāsa, as,%} m. a
great or roomy dwelling. {%—Mahad-āśā,%} f. great
expectation, high hope. {%—Mahad-āścaryam,%} ind.
very surprising. {%—Mahad-āśraya, as, ā, am,%} de-
pendent upon or attached to the great; ({%as%}), m. the
protection of the great, having recourse to the great,
taking refuge with great people. {%—Mahad-guṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessing the virtues of the great. {%—Ma-%}
{%hadguṇa-tva, am,%} n. the possession of the virtues
of the great. {%—Mahad-bila%} or {%mahad-vila, am,%}
n. the atmosphere, ether, (the more correct form is
{%mahā-bila,%} q. v.) {%—Mahad-bhaya, am,%} n. a great
danger or emergency; fear of great people. {%—Ma-%}
{%had-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to be great or
full. {%—Mahad-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} one who has be-
come great. {%—Mahad-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. con-
nected with the word {%mahat%}. {%—Mahad-vāruṇī,%} f.
a species of plant {%(= mahendra-vāruṇī)%}. {%—Mahad-%}
{%vyatikrama, as,%} m. a great transgression.
<LEND>

<L>36703<pc>0753-c<k1>mahan<k2>mahan
{%Mahan,%}¦ n., Ved. (used only in the inst. sing.
{%mahnā%}), greatness, mightiness, power, abundance
(e. g. in Ṛg-veda V. 33, 10. {%mahnā = mahat-%}
{%tvena,%} with greatness; {%mahnā%} may sometimes be
translated ‘greatly, mightily, amply, powerfully,’
and in VII. 37, 1. there is one example of the
inst. pl., e. g. {%abhi somair mahabhiḥ pṛṇa-%}
{%dhvam,%} ‘sate yourselves amply with the libations,’
or according to Sāy. ‘be satiated with the copious
libations’).
<LEND>

<L>36704<pc>0753-c<k1>mahana<k2>mahana
{%Mahana, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be worshipped, adorable.
<LEND>

<L>36705<pc>0753-c<k1>mahanIya<k2>mahanIya
{%Mahanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured, worthy
of honour, praiseworthy, illustrious, glorious. {%—Ma-%}
{%hanīya-kīrtti, is, is, i,%} of illustrious fame. {%—Ma-%}
{%hanīya-śāsana, as, ā, am,%} ruling a magnificent
empire (Raghu-v. III. 69).
<LEND>

<L>36706<pc>0753-c<k1>mahanta<k2>mahanta
{%Mahanta, as,%}¦ m. the superior of a monastery.
<LEND>

<L>36707<pc>0753-c<k1>mahayat<k2>mahayat
{%Mahayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making glad, &c.; (Sāy.)
making great.
<LEND>

<L>36708<pc>0753-c<k1>mahayAyya<k2>mahayAyya
{%Mahayāyya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. enjoyment; venera-
tion, honour; (Sāy. {%= pūjā.%})
<LEND>

<L>36709<pc>0753-c<k1>mahaye<k2>mahaye
{%Mahaye,%}¦ dat. sing. in Ṛg-veda X. 65, 3, (ac-
cording to some) {%= mahe,%} Ved. inf. of rt. 1. {%mah,%} for
joy, for enjoyment; (according to Sāy. {%= pūjār-%}
{%tham%}), for honour.
<LEND>

<L>36710<pc>0753-c<k1>mahayya<k2>mahayya
{%Mahayya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be enjoyed; to be
honoured ({%= pūjanīya%}).
<LEND>

<L>36711<pc>0753-c<k1>mahar<k2>mahar
{%Mahar,%}¦ ind. (originally {%mahas,%} q. v., final {%s%} being
irregularly changed to {%r%} before soft letters), the
fourth of the seven worlds which rise one above the
other, (coming between Svar and Janas and said
to be one krore of Yojanas above the polar star; it
is supposed to be the abode of those saints who
survive a destruction of the world, cf. {%loka;%} the
word {%mahar%} is sometimes regarded as a fourth
Vyāhṛti, q. v.) {%—Mahar-loka, as,%} m. the fourth
of the seven worlds as described above.
<LEND>

<L>36712<pc>0753-c<k1>mahartvij<k2>mahartvij
{%Mahartvij, maharddhi, maharṣabha, ma-%}¦
{%harṣi.%} See under {%mahā,%} p. 754, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36713<pc>0753-c<k1>mahas<k2>mahas
{%Mahas, as,%}¦ n. pleasure, enjoyment (Ved.); a
feast, festival; a sacrifice, oblation [cf. {%maha, ma-%}
{%kha, magha%}]; a festive hymn, hymn of praise;
greatness, might, power, strength, dominion (Ved.);
abundance, fulness, superfluity, multitude (Ved.);
light, ray of light, lustre, splendor; the fourth of the
seven worlds, the fourth Vyāhṛti (see {%mahar%} above);
{%= udaka,%} water (according to Naigh. 1. 12); ({%as%}),
[Page0754-a+ 81]
ind., Ved. joyfully, cheerfully, willingly, swiftly,
quickly, (but Sāy. in most cases where {%mahas%} may
be taken adverbially treats it as an adj. {%= mahat%});
[cf. Zend <nsi>masaś;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">μῆκος</lang>.] {%—Mahas-tva, am,%}
n. greatness, mightiness. {%—Mahas-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
giving pleasure, causing enjoyment; great, mighty;
full of light or lustre, glorious, splendid; ({%ān%}), m., N.
of a king. {%—Mahas-vin, ī, inī, i,%} full of light, bril-
liant, bright, lustrous, glorious, splendid, luminous.
<LEND>

<L>36714<pc>0754-a<k1>mahasa<k2>mahasa
{%Mahasa, am,%}¦ n. knowledge; kind, sort, manner,
mode (?) .
<LEND>

<L>36715<pc>0754-a<k1>mahA<k2>mahA
{%Mahā = mahat,%}¦ great, &c. (in Ved. used in acc. sing.
{%mahām = mahāntam,%} e. g. Ṛg-veda III. 49, 1. {%śaṃsū%}
{%mahām Indram,%} praise the great Indra, see also
Ṛg-veda II. 22, I, III. 2, 3; in both the earlier and
later language {%mahā%} is a substitute for {%mahat,%} q. v.,
at the beginning of Karma-dhāraya and Bahu-vrīhi
and a few irregular compounds as follow.) {%—Ma-%}
{%hartvij (˚hā-ṛt˚), k,%} m., Ved. ‘great priest,’ epithet
of the four chief priests or Ṛtv-ij, viz. the Hotṛ,
Udgātṛ, Adhvaryu, and Brahman; (also read {%ma-%}
{%hatvij.%}) {%—Maharddhi (˚hā-ṛddhi), is,%} f. great
prosperity or affluence, great perfection, supernatural
power; ({%is, is, i%}), very perfect; very prosperous,
very rich, very opulent or wealthy. {%—Maharddhika%}
{%(˚hā-ṛd˚), as, ā, am,%} possessed of great pros-
perity, having great supernatural powers. {%—Mahard-%}
{%dhi-prāpta, as,%} m., N. of a king of the Garuḍas.
{%—Maharddhi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing great
prosperity, rich in blessings. {%—Maharṣabha (˚hā-%}
{%ṛṣ˚), as,%} m. a great bull. {%—Maharṣi (˚hā-ṛṣi),%}
{%is,%} m. a great Ṛṣi, any great sage or saint, (accord-
ing to Manu I. 34. there were ten Maharṣis created
by Manu Svāyambhuva, whose names were Marīci,
Atṛ, Aṅgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Pracetas,
Vasiṣṭha, Bhṛgu, Nārada, who are also called the
ten Prajā-patis; some restrict the number of Ma-
harṣis to seven, and some add the names of Dakṣa,
Dharma, Gautama, Kaṇva, Vālmīki, Vyāsa, Manu,
Vibhāṇḍaka, &c.); an epithet of Śiva; of Buddha;
a proper N. {%—Mahā-kaṅkara,%} (with Buddhists)
a particular high number. {%—Mahā-kaccha, as,%} m.
‘having vast shores,’ the sea; Varuṇa, god of the
sea; a mountain. {%—Mahā-kaṭitaṭa-śroṇī,%} f. (a
woman) having large hips and buttocks. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kaṇṭakinī,%} f. ‘having large thorns,’ the prickly pear,
Cactus Indicus. {%—Mahākathaka-cakra (˚hā-ak˚),%}
{%am,%} n. epithet of a particular magical diagram.
{%—Mahā-kanda, as,%} m., N. of a various tuberous
plants, a sort of yam, garlic ({%= rājāluka, mūlaka,%}
{%cāṇakya-mūlaka, rakta-laśuna, rāja-palāṇḍu%});
Hingtsha Repens. {%—Mahā-kanya, as,%} m., N. of a
man; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kaparda, as,%} m. a species of shell. {%—Mahā-kapāla,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘large-headed,’ N. of a Rākṣasa; epithet of
one of the attendants of Śiva. {%—Mahā-kapi, is,%} m.
‘great ape,’ N. of a king; of one of the attendants
of Śiva; one of the thirty-four incarnations of Buddha.
{%—Mahā-kapittha, as,%} m. the tree Ægle Marmelos
(see {%bilva%}). {%—Mahā-kapila-pañcarātra, am,%} n.,
N. of a work. {%—Mahā-kapota, as,%} m. a species of
serpent. {%—Mahā-kapola, as,%} m. ‘great-cheeked,’
N. of one of the attendants of Śiva. {%—Mahā-kambu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} quite naked, stark naked; ({%us%}), m. epithet
of Śiva. {%—Mahā-kara, as,%} m. a large hand, a large
revenue or rent; N. of a Buddha; ({%as, ā, am%}),
large-handed; having a large revenue; having great
rays. {%—Mahā-karañja, as,%} m. a kind of Karañja
{%(= kāka-ghnī)%}. {%—Mahā-karabha,%} (with Buddhists)
a particular high number. {%—Mahā-karambha, as,%}
m. a particular poisonous plant. {%—Mahā-karuṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very compassionate, exceedingly pitiful.
{%—Mahākaruṇa-tā,%} f. great compassionateness.
{%—Mahākaruṇa-puṇḍarīka, am,%} n., N. of a Bud-
dhist Sūtra. {%—Mahākaruṇā-candri, is,%} m., N. of a
Bodhi-sattva. {%—Mahā-karkāru, us,%} m. a species of
plant. {%—Mahā-karṇa, as,%} m. ‘large-eared,’ having
large ears,’ epithet of Śiva; N. of a Nāga; ({%ī%}), f.,
N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
{%—Mahā-karṇi, is,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Mahā-%}
{%karṇikāra, as,%} m. Cathartocarpus (Cassia) Fistula.
[Page0754-b+ 81]
{%—Mahā-karman, a,%} n. a great work; ({%ā, ā, a%}),
accomplishing great works, doing mighty deeds; ({%ā%}),
m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-kalā,%} f. the night of
the new moon or the day of conjunction of sun and
moon ({%= I. amā%}) when obsequies are performed to
the Manes of the Pitṛs. {%—Mahā-kalopa, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a Śākhā or school; (also written {%mahā-kā-%}
{%lopa,%} probably for {%Mahā-kālāpa.%}) {%—Mahā-kalpa,%}
{%as,%} m. a great Kalpa, a great cycle of time [cf.
{%kalpa%}]; an epithet of Śiva, (according to a com-
mentator {%= divya-bhūṣaṇa.%}) {%—Mahā-kalyāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a particular medicinal compound or mixture;
[cf. {%kalyāṇaka.%}] {%—Mahā-kavi, is,%} m. a great poet,
classical poet (as Kālidāsa, Māgha, Bhāravi, Śrī-
harṣa; cf. {%mahā-kāvya%}); an epithet of Śukra.
{%—Mahā-kātyāyana, as,%} m., N. of a disciple of
Buddha. {%—Mahā-kānta, as,%} m. ‘very pleasing,
greatly loved,’ an epithet of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. the earth.
{%—Mahā-kāya, as, ā, am,%} ‘large-bodied,’ of great
stature, tall, gigantic, bulky, stout; ({%as%}), m. an ele-
phant; epithet of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of a being
attending on Śiva, (according to some {%= nandi,%}
q. v.); N. of a king of the Garuḍas; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kāya-śirodhara, as, ā, am,%} having a large body
and neck. {%—Mahākāra (˚hā-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘large-
formed,’ great, extensive. {%—Mahā-kārttikī,%} f. the
night of full moon in the month Kārttika, when the
moon is in the constellation Rohiṇī. {%—Mahā-kāla,%}
{%as,%} m. a form of Śiva, an epithet of Śiva in his
character of the destroying deity (being then repre-
sented of a black colour and of more or less terrific
aspect); a sacred spot consecrated to this form of the
god; N. of one of Śiva's attendants, (according to
some {%= nandi%}); an epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of a
teacher; N. of a species of gourd or plant of the
cucurbitaceous order with an exterior resembling an
orange but with a pulp like cow-dung (Trichosanthes
Palmata, Cucumis Colocynthus); the mango tree (?);
(with Jainas) one of the nine treasures; ({%ī%}), f. a
form or epithet of Durgā in her terrific form; N. of
one of Durgā's attendants; (with Jainas) N. of one
of the sixteen Vidyādevīs; of a goddess who exe-
cutes the commands of the fifth Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Liṅga or place
sacred to Śiva in Ujjayinī. {%—Mahākāla-tantra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Mahākāla-pura, am,%} n.
‘Mahākāla's’ city, Ujjayinī. {%—Mahākālavyeya%} or
{%mahākāleta, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a Śākhā or school.
{%—Mahākāla-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kālī-mata, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kālī-yantra, am,%} n., N. of a particular magical
diagram. {%—Mahā-kāleya, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Mahākāleśvara (˚la-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga
at Ujjayinī; [cf. {%mahā-kāla.%}] {%—Mahā-kālopa, ās,%}
m. pl., N. of a school; [cf. {%mahā-kalopa.%}] {%—Mahā-%}
{%kāvya, am,%} n. a great or classical poem (applied as
a distinguishing title to six chief artificial poems, viz.
the Raghu-vaṃśa, Kumāra-sambhava, and Megha-
dūta by Kālidāsa, the Śiśupāla-badha by Māgha,
the Kirātārjunīya by Bhāravi, and the Naiṣadhīya
or Naiṣadha-carita by Śrī-harṣa; according to some
the Bhaṭṭi-kāvya is also a Mahā-kāvya). {%—Mahā-%}
{%kāśa, as,%} m. (probably) N. of a mountain. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kāśī,%} f., N. of the tutelary goddess of the Mataṅga-
jas. {%—Mahā-kāśyapa, as,%} m., N. of a disciple of
Buddha. {%—Mahā-kīṭa-parvata, as,%} m., N. of a
mountain in Gandha-mādana. {%—Mahā-kuṇḍa, as,%}
m., N. of one of the attendants of Śiva. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kumāra, as,%} m. the eldest son of a reigning king,
an hereditary prince. {%—Mahā-kumudā,%} f. {%= ku-%}
{%mudā,%} Gmelina Arborea. {%—Mahā-kumbhī,%} f. {%=%}
{%kumbhī-kaṭphala,%} a species of plant. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kula, am,%} n. a great family, noble family; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), being of a great family, sprung from a noble
family, of noble birth or descent, high-born, noble.
{%—Mahā-kulīna, as, ā, am,%} sprung from a great
or noble family, nobly born, aristocratic. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kulīna-tā,%} f. noble birth. {%—Mahākulotpanna (˚la-%}
{%ut˚),%} or {%mahākulodbhava (˚la-ud˚), as, ā, am,%}
sprung from a great or noble family. {%—Mahā-kuśa, %}
[Page0754-c+ 81]
{%as,%} m., N. of a Cakra-vartin. {%—Mahā-kuṣṭha, am,%}
n. ‘great cutaneous eruption,’ N. of seven forms of
cutaneous eruption. {%—Mahā-kūpa, as,%} m. a deep
well. {%—Mahā-kūrma, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-kūla, as, ā, am,%} having high banks or lofty
shores; (according to some {%= mahā-kula%}), of high
birth. {%—Mahā-kṛcchra, am,%} n. great pain, great
penance, (used as an epithet of Viṣṇu in Mahā-bh.
Śānti-p. 12864.) {%—Mahā-kṛtyā-parimala, as,%}
m., N. of a kind of magical spell or incantation ({%=%}
{%manu%}). {%—Mahā-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m. ‘very black,’ a
species of serpent. {%—Mahā-ketu, us,%} m. ‘having a
great banner,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-keśa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} having thick or strong hair; ({%as%}), m. epithet
of Śiva. {%—Mahā-kośa, as,%} m. a large sheath or case;
({%as, ā, am%}), having a large sheath or case; ({%as%}),
m. epithet of Śiva (as having a large scrotum); ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a river; of the tutelary goddess of the
Mataṅga-jas; (also read {%mahā-kāśī.%}) {%—Mahā-kośa-%}
{%phalā,%} f. a species of gourd {%(= deva-dālī)%}. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kośātakī,%} f. a species of plant {%(= hasti-ghoṣā).%}
{%—Mahā-kauṣītaka, am,%} n., N. of a Vedic work;
(incorrectly {%mahā-kauṣītaki.%}) {%—Mahā-kauṣ-%}
{%ṭhila, as,%} m., N. of a disciple of Buddha. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kratu, us,%} m. a great sacrifice (such as the Rāja-
sūya and the Aśva-medha; cf. {%mahā-yajña%}). {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-krama, as,%} m. ‘wide-striding,’ an epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Mahā-krodha, as, ā, am,%} excessively
angry, very wrathful; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva.
{%—Mahākṣa (˚hā-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} ‘large-eyed,’
having great eyes; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-kṣatrapa, as,%} m. a great satrap. {%—Mahā-%}
{%kṣāra, as,%} m. a kind of natron. {%—Mahā-kṣīra,%}
{%as,%} m. sugar-cane. {%—Mahā-kṣobhya,%} (with Bud-
dhists) a particular high number. {%—Mahā-kharva,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a high number, ten billions (?).
{%—Mahā-khalvala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a Śākhā or
school; (also read {%mahā-khallava.%}) {%—Mahā-khāta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a large ditch or moat. {%—Mahā-%}
{%khyāta, as, ā, am,%} greatly renowned, very famous.
{%—Mahā-ga, as, ā, am (?),%} great, prosperous.
{%—Mahā-gaṅgā,%} f. the great Gaṅgā, N. of a river.
{%—Mahā-gaja, as,%} m. a great elephant; one of the
elephants that support the earth; [cf. {%dik-karin.%}]
{%—Mahā-gaṇa, as,%} m. a great multitude, a great
crowd; ({%ās%}), m. pl. great hosts; a great corporate
body. {%—Mahā-gaṇapati, is,%} or {%mahā-gaṇeśa (˚ṇa-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. ‘great leader of the troops (of Śiva's
attendants),’ N. of Gaṇeśa or a form of Gaṇeśa.
{%—Mahā-gati,%} (with Buddhists) a particular high
number. {%—1. mahāgada (˚hā-ag˚), as,%} m. ‘great
antidote,’ a kind of medicinal compound. {%—2. mahā-%}
{%gada, as,%} m. great sickness, severe illness, fever.
 — 3. {%mahā-gada, as, ā, am,%} armed with a great
club. {%—Mahā-gandha, as, ā, am,%} having a strong
odour, smelling strongly, exceedingly fragrant; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of cane growing near water ({%= jala-vetasa%});
Wrightia Antidysenterica; ({%ā%}), f. Uraria Lagopo-
dioides; {%= kevikā-puṣpa;%} epithet of Cāmuṇḍā;
({%am%}), n. a kind of sandal-wood ({%= hari-candana%});
myrrh. {%—Mahā-gaya, as,%} m., Ved. ‘having a great
house,’ epithet of Agni; (Sāy. {%= mahadbhir devā-%}
{%dibhir abhigantavyaḥ%} or {%mahānti yajña-gṛhāṇi%}
{%yasya.%}) {%—Mahā-garta, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva.
{%—Mahā-garbha, as,%} m. a great womb, large in-
terior, great source of generation; epithet of Śiva;
({%as, ā, am%}), having a large womb, whose womb is
great; having a large interior; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Dānava. {%—Mahā-gala, as, ā, am,%} long-necked,
thick-necked. {%—Mahā-gava, as,%} m. Bos Gavæus.
{%—Mahā-giri, is,%} m. a great mountain; N. of a
Dānava; (with Jainas) N. of one of the Daśa-
pūrvins. {%—Mahā-gīta, as,%} m. ‘a great singer,’ epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-guṇa, as,%} m. a chief quality
or property, cardinal virtue, great excellency; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), possessing great excellencies, distinguished;
efficient, efficacious; ({%as%}), m., N. of a teacher.
{%—Mahāguṇa-tva, am,%} n. the possession of great
properties or virtues, great excellence. {%—Mahā-guru,%}
{%us,%} m. a very venerable person. {%—Mahā-gulmā,%} f.
a species of plant {%(= soma-vallī)%}. {%—Mahā-guha, %}
[Page0755-a+ 81]
{%as,%} m. a species of parasitical worm; ({%ā%}), f. the
plant Hemionitis Cordifolia. {%—Mahā-gṛṣṭi, is,%} f.
a cow with a large hump. {%—Mahā-godhūma, as,%} m.
large wheat, a particular kind of wheat. {%—Mahā-%}
{%gaurī,%} f. one of the nine forms of Durgā; N. of a
river. {%—Mahā-granthika, as, ā, am,%} (in medicine)
forming great knots. {%—Mahā-graha, as,%} m. ‘the
great planet,’ an epithet of Rāhu. {%—Mahā-grāma,%}
{%as,%} m. a great multitude (Ved.); a great village;
N. of the ancient capital of Ceylon (said to be the
<lang n="greek">Μαάγραμμον</lang> of Ptolemy and the modern Māgama).
{%—Mahā-grīva, as, ā, am,%} ‘long-necked,’ having a
long neck; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; a camel; N.
of one of Śiva's attendants; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people. {%—Mahā-grīvin, ī,%} m. ‘long-necked,’ a
camel. {%—Mahā-ghaṭa, as,%} m. a great pitcher; a
proper N. {%—Mahā-ghasa, as,%} m. ‘great eater,’ N.
of one of Śiva's attendants. {%—Mahā-ghāsa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} abounding with grass or fodder; ({%as%}), m. {%=%}
{%mahato mahatyā vā ghāsaḥ,%} Pāṇ. VI. 3, 46,
Vārttika I. {%—Mahā-ghūrṇā,%} f. ardent spirits, spiri-
tuous liquor. {%—Mahā-ghṛta, am,%} n. ghee kept a
long time (used for medicinal purposes). {%—Mahā-%}
{%ghora, as, ā, am,%} very terrible or formidable, very
horrible; ({%as%}), m., N. of a hell. {%—Mahā-ghoṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. a loud noise; ({%as, ā, am%}), making a loud
noise, loud-sounding, noisy; ({%ā%}), f. a species of
plant ({%= karkaṭa-śṛṅgī = śṛṅgī%}); gum olibanum
tree, Boswellia Thurifera; ({%am%}), n. a market, fair.
{%—Mahāghoṣa-svara-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-
sattva. {%—Mahāghoṣānugā (˚ṣa-an˚),%} f., N. of a
particular Tantra deity. {%—Mahāghoṣeśvara (˚ṣa-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a king of the Yakṣas. {%—Ma-%}
{%hāṅga (˚hā-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} ‘large-bodied, large-
limbed,’ having a great body or limbs, bulky, big;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; a camel; a kind of rat
({%= mahā-muṣika%}); Asteracantha Longifolia,
Plumbago Zeylanica. {%—Mahā-cakra, am,%} n. a great
wheel; ({%as%}), m. ‘having a great wheel or circle,’
N. of a Dānava. {%—Mahā-cakra-praveśa-jñāna-%}
{%mudrā,%} f. epithet of a particular Mudrā, q. v.
{%—Mahā-cakravarti-tā,%} f. the rank of a great
Cakra-vartin or universal monarch. {%—Mahā-cakra-%}
{%vartin, ī,%} m. a great emperor or universal monarch.
{%—Mahā-cakravāḍa%} or {%mahā-cakravāla, as,%} m.,
N. of a mythical mountain. {%—Mahā-cañcū, ūs,%} f. a
species of culinary plant. {%—Mahā-caṇḍa, as,%} m. a
very violent or passionate man; N. of one of Yama's
two servants; N. of one of Śiva's attendants; ({%ā%}), f.
epithet of Cāmuṇḍā. {%—Mahā-caturaka, as,%} m., N.
of a jackal (in the Pañca-tantra). {%—Mahā-capalā,%}
f. a kind of Āryā metre. {%—Mahā-camū, ūs,%} f. a
large army, a great battalion. {%—Mahā-campā,%} f., N.
of a country or kingdom. {%—Mahā-caryā,%} f. the
great course of life (applied to the life of a Bodhi-
sattva). {%—Mahācala (˚hā-ac˚), as,%} m. a great
mountain. {%—Mahācārya (˚hā-āc˚), as,%} m. ‘the
great teacher,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-citta,%} see
Gaṇa Sutaṅgamādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of an Apsaras. {%—Mahācit-tva, am,%} n. (fr. {%mahā%} +
5. {%cit%}), the state of great thoughtfulness or intelli-
gence (?). {%—Mahā-citrapāṭala,%} a species of plant.
{%—Mahā-cīna, ās,%} m. pl. the inhabitants of Great
China. {%—Mahā-cunda, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
mendicant. {%—Mahā-cūḍā,%} f., N. of one of the
Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Mahā-chada, as,%}
m. Lipeocercis Serrata. {%—Mahā-chāya, as,%} m. the
Indian fig-tree. {%—Mahā-chidrā,%} f. a species of plant
({%= mahā-medā%}). {%—1. mahāja (˚hā-aja), as,%} m. a
large he-goat. {%—2. mahā-ja, as, ā, am,%} high-born,
nobly born, aristocratic, noble. {%—Mahā-jaṭā,%} f. a
great braid or coil of hair, the matted or twisted hair
of Rudra or Śiva; ({%as%}), m. ‘wearing a great braid
or coil of matted hair,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-%}
{%jatru, us, us, u,%} having a great collar-bone; ({%us%}),
m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-jana, as,%} m. a great
multitude of men, the populace, ({%mahājane,%} in the
presence of a great number of men, in public);
a great or eminent man, great persons; the chief or
head of a trade or caste; a merchant, banker, trades-
man; [cf. {%māhājānika.%}] {%—Mahājanīya, as, ā, am,%}
[Page0755-b+ 81]
mercantile, commercial, {%= mahāñ jano yasya,%} see
Pāṇ. V. I, 9, Vārttika 10. {%—Mahā-jambu, us,%} or
{%mahā-jambū, ūs,%} f. a species of plant {%(= vṛhat-%}
{%phalā)%}. {%—Mahā-jambha, as,%} m., N. of one of
Śiva's attendants. {%—Mahā-jaya, as, ā, am,%} very
victorious (Ved.); ({%as%}), m., N. of a Nāga; ({%ā%}), f.
epithet of Durgā. {%—Mahā-java, as, ā, am,%} very
impetuous, very swift, very fleet, exceedingly rapid;
({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda,
(also read {%mano-javā.%}) {%—Mahā-jāti, is,%} f. Gærtnera
Racemosa. {%—Mahā-jātīya, as, ā, am,%} rather large,
tolerably big, moderately large; of an excellent sort
or species. {%—Mahā-jānu, us,%} m. ‘large-kneed,’ N.
of a Brāhman; of one of Śiva's attendants. {%—Mahā-%}
{%jābāla, as,%} m., see Pāṇ. VI. 2, 38. {%—Mahā-jālī,%} f.
a species of Ghoṣā with yellowish flowers {%(= rakta-%}
{%kośātakī). Mahā-jihva, as,%} m. ‘long-tongued,’
epithet of Śiva; N. of a Daitya. {%—Mahā-jñāna-%}
{%gītā,%} f., N. of a particular Tantra deity. {%—Mahā-%}
{%jñāna-yutā,%} f. epithet of the goddess Manasā.
{%—Mahā-jñānin, ī,%} m. a great sage or soothsayer;
epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-jyaiṣṭhī,%} f. epithet of a
night of full moon coinciding with certain phenomena
in the heavens in the month Jyaiṣṭha. {%—Mahā-%}
{%jyotiṣmatī,%} f. a species of plant, (in Hindī {%vaḍī-%}
{%mālakaṅgunī.%}) {%—Mahā-jyotis, is, is, is,%} having
great splendor, very splendid or brilliant; ({%is%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-jvāla, as, ā, am,%} blazing
or shining greatly, very brilliant; ({%as%}), m. an epithet
of Śiva; a sacrificial fire; N. of a hell; ({%ā%}), f. one
of the Vidyā-devīs or goddesses of learning peculiar
to the Jainas (for {%sarvāstra-m˚?)%}. {%—Mahāñjana%}
{%(˚hā-añ˚), as,%} m. ({%= añjana%}), N. of a mountain.
{%—Mahāñji (˚hā-añ˚), is, is, i,%} Ved. having broad
spots. {%—Mahāṭavi (˚hā-aṭ˚), ayas,%} m. pl., N. of
a people. {%—Mahāṭavī (˚hā-aṭ˚),%} f. a great forest.
{%—Mahā-ḍakara, as,%} m., N. of a commentator.
{%—Mahāḍhya (˚hā-āḍh˚), as, ā, am,%} very rich,
very wealthy; ({%as%}), m. Nauclea Cadamba. {%—Mahā-%}
{%ṇagnī,%} see {%mahā-nagnī%}. {%—Mahā-tattva, am,%} n.
‘the great principle,’ the intellect (or second of the
Sāṅkhya Tattvas, see {%mahat%}); ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of
Durgā's attendants. {%—Mahā-tantra, am,%} n., N. of
a Śaiva work. {%—Mahā-tapaḥ-saptamī,%} f. ‘the
seventh (day in a particular half month) of severe
penance,’ a particular festival. {%—Mahā-tapana, as,%}
m. ‘greatly burning,’ N. of a hell. {%—Mahā-tapas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} doing severe penance, performing great re-
ligious austerities, very austere, rigidly ascetic; ({%ās%}), m.
a great ascetic; an epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of a Muni.
{%—Mahā-tamaḥ-prabhā,%} f. ‘having thick darkness
for its light,’ N. of the lowermost of the twenty-one
Narakas or hells (where great darkness is the only light).
{%—Mahā-tamas, as,%} n. ‘gross (spiritual) darkness,’
N. of one of the five degrees of A-vidyā. {%—Mahā-%}
{%taru, us,%} m. ‘large tree,’ Tithymalus Antiquorum;
Euphorbia of various kinds. {%—Mahā-tala, am,%} n.
‘very deep,’ N. of the sixth of the seven lower worlds
or regions under the earth inhabited by the Nāgas or
serpent-demons, &c.; see {%pātāla%}. {%—Mahā-tāpaścita,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved., N. of a Sattra. {%—Mahā-tārā,%} f., N.
of a Buddhist goddess. {%—Mahā-tālī,%} f. a species of
plant {%(= āvartakī)%}. {%—Mahā-tikta, as, ā, am,%} very
bitter; ({%as%}), m. the large Nimb tree, Melia Sem-
pervirens; ({%ā%}), f., N. of two plants {%(= yava-tiktā,%}
{%= pāṭhā)%}. {%—Mahā-tiktaka, as, ā, am,%} extremely
bitter; (with {%sarpis%}) a particular medicinal com-
pound. {%—Mahā-tiṭibha,%} (with Buddhists) a parti-
cular high number. {%—Mahā-tithi, is,%} f. the great
lunar day, the sixth day of a lunation. {%—Mahā-%}
{%tīkṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} exceedingly sharp (said of
weapons, perception, &c.); very pungent (said of
flavours); ({%ā%}), f. the marking-nut plant (see {%bhal-%}
{%lātaka%}). {%—Mahā-tuṣṭi-jñāna-mudrā,%} f. epithet
of a particular Mudrā, q. v. {%—Mahā-teja, as, ā, am,%}
or {%mahā-tejas, ās, ās, as,%} having great energy or
vigour, very vigorous, of great splendor, full of fire,
very bright; ({%ās%}), m. a hero, demigod; N. of Agni
or fire; of Skanda; of a warrior; of a king of the
Garuḍas; ({%as%}), n. quicksilver, mercury. {%—Mahātejo-%}
{%garbha, as,%} m. a kind of meditation. {%—Mahā-taila, %}
[Page0755-c+ 81]
{%am,%} n. any valuable or precious oil, (or perhaps) N.
of a particular kind of oil. {%—Mahātodya (˚hā-āt˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a great drum. {%—Mahātman (˚hā-āt˚), ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} ‘high-souled,’ magnanimous, having a great or
noble nature, noble-minded, high-minded, lofty-
minded, generous, noble, highly gifted; eminent,
distinguished, mighty, powerful; ({%ā%}), m. the Su-
preme Spirit, great soul of the universe ({%= para-%}
{%mātman%}); the great principle, i. e. Intellect ({%= mahā-%}
{%tattva,%} q. v.); scil. {%gaṇa,%} N. of a class of Manes.
{%—Mahātma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} ‘high-souled,’ mag-
nanimous, highly gifted. {%—Mahātmya, as, ā, am,%}
(fr. {%mahātman%} above), magnanimous. {%—Mahā-%}
{%tyaya (˚hā-at˚), as,%} m. great pain, great destruction,
any great evil or calamity; ({%as, ā, am%}), causing
great pain or destruction, very pernicious. {%—Mahā-%}
{%tyāga, as,%} m. great liberality or generosity; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), extremely liberal, very generous. {%—Mahātyāga-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of great liberality.
{%—Mahā-tyāgin, ī, inī, i,%} making great sacrifices,
extremely liberal or generous; ({%ī%}), m. epithet of
Śiva. {%—Mahā-trikakud, t,%} or {%mahā-trikakubh, p,%}
m., Ved., N. of a Stoma. {%—Mahā-tripura-sundarī-%}
{%kavaca, am,%} n., N. of a kind of magical spell or
incantation. {%—Mahā-triśūla, am,%} n. a great trident.
{%—Mahā-daṃṣṭra, as, ā, am,%} having great tusks
or fangs; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Vidyā-dhara; of a man.
{%—Mahā-daṇḍa, as,%} m. a great staff; a long arm;
severe punishment; ({%as, ā, am%}), carrying a long
staff; ({%as%}), m., N. of a servant or officer of Yama.
{%—Mahā-danta, as,%} m. a great tooth, especially
the tusk of an elephant; ({%as, ā, am%}), having large
teeth or tusks; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; an elephant
with large tusks. {%—Mahā-damatra, am,%} n., N. of
a work. {%—Mahā-dambha, as, ā, am,%} practising
great deceit, very deceitful; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Mahā-daridra, as, ā, am,%} extremely poor.
{%—Mahā-daśā,%} f. the influence of a predominant
planet. {%—Mahā-dāna, am,%} n. a great gift, epithet of
certain valuable gifts or the giving of different kinds
of valuable presents to the priests (sixteen such gifts
are particularly enumerated); ({%as, ā, am%}), accom-
panied by valuable presents (said of a sacrifice &c.).
{%—Mahā-dāru, u,%} n. ({%= deva-dāru%}), Pinus Deo-
dora, the Deodar tree. {%—Mahādi-kaṭabhī,%} f. a
species of plant ({%= śveta-kiṇihī;%} also read {%mahāli-%}
{%kaṭabhī%}). {%—Mahā-divākīrtya, am,%} n., N. of a
Sāman. {%—Mahā-dundu, us,%} m. a great military
drum; (also read {%mahā-dvandva.%}) {%—Mahā-durga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very difficult to be crossed; ({%am%}), n. a
great calamity or danger. {%—Mahā-dūta (?),%} N. of
a Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Mahā-dūṣaka, as,%} m. a
species of grain. {%—Mahā-dṛti, is,%} m. a great leather
bag or pouch. {%—Mahā-deva, as,%} m. ‘the great
deity,’ especially as an epithet of Rudra or Śiva (the
third deity of the Hindū triad); epithet of Viṣṇu;
N. of various persons; of the father of the poet
Jaya-deva; of a commentator on the Nyāya-siddhānta-
muktāvalī; of the son of Mukunda (author of the
Ātmatva-jāti-vicara and Sādṛśya-vāda); of a son of
Somanātha, a commentator on the Hiraṇya-keśi-
kalpa-sūtra; of a poet; of a mountain; ({%ī%}), f. ‘the
great goddess,’ especially as an epithet of Durgā or
Pārvatī, the wife of Śiva; N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in
Śāla-grāma; epithet of Lakṣmī the wife of Viṣṇu;
the first wife of a king; N. of various women; ({%am%}),
n., N. of a Tantra; [cf. {%śiva-tantra.%}] {%—Mahā-%}
{%deva-tantra, am,%} n. the Mahā-deva Tantra. {%—Ma-%}
{%hādeva-tva, am,%} n. the state or dignity of ‘the great
deity.’ {%—Mahādeva-paṇḍita%} and {%mahādeva-bhaṭṭa%}
and {%mahādeva-bhaṭṭa-dinakara%} and {%mahādeva-%}
{%vādīndra%} and {%mahādeva-sarasvatī,%} N. of certain
learned men and authors. {%—Mahādeva-pura, am,%}
n., N. of a city. {%—Mahādeva-maṇi, is,%} m. a species
of plant. {%—Mahādevī-tva, am,%} n. the rank of first
wife of a king. {%—Mahādevīya, as, ā, am,%} belong-
ing to or composed by Mahā-deva. {%—Mahā-daitya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the great Daitya,’ N. of a Daitya in the
Manv-antara of Bhautya; of the grandfather of the
second Candra-gupta. {%—Mahā-dairgha-tamasa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Mahādbhuta (˚hā-ad˚), %}
[Page0756-a+ 81]
{%as, ā, am,%} very wonderful or marvellous; ({%am%}), n.,
Ved. a great marvel. {%—Mahā-dyuti, is, is, i,%} of
great splendor, supremely glorious, very bright or
radiant. {%—Mahā-dyotā,%} f., N. of a particular Tantra
goddess. {%—Mahā-drāvaka, as,%} m. a kind of medi-
cinal compound; [cf. {%drāvaka.%}] {%—Mahā-druma,%}
{%as,%} m. a great tree, Ficus Religiosa; N. of a son of
Bhavya. {%—Mahā-droṇā%} or {%mahā-droṇī,%} f. a species
of plant. {%—Mahā-dvandva,%} see {%mahā-dundu.%}
{%—Mahā-dvāra, am,%} n. a great door or gate, the
outer gate of a temple, &c. {%—Mahā-dhana, am,%} n.
great spoil or booty (taken in battle, Ved.); a great
contest, great battle (Ved.); great wealth or riches;
agriculture, husbandry; ({%as, ā, am%}), costing much
money, very costly or precious, sumptuous, expensive,
valuable; having much money, rich, wealthy; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a man; ({%am%}), n. anything costly or
precious; gold; incense; costly raiment, rich apparel.
{%—Mahā-dhana-pati, is,%} m. a very rich man; [cf.
{%dhana-pati.%}] {%—Mahā-dhanur-dhara, as,%} or {%ma-%}
{%hā-dhanuṣmat, ān,%} m. a great archer or bowman.
{%—Mahā-dhanus, us, us, us,%} having a great bow,
a great archer; ({%us%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-%}
{%dharma, as,%} m., N. of a prince of the Kinnaras.
{%—Mahā-dhātu, us,%} m. ‘the great metal, the great
element,’ gold; lymph; epithet of Śiva; {%= meru-%}
{%parvata,%} q. v. {%—Mahādhipati (˚hā-adh˚), is,%} f.,
N. of a particular Tantra deity. {%—Mahā-dhī, īs, īs,%}
{%i,%} having a great understanding. {%—Mahā-dhura,%}
see Pāṇ. V. 4, 74. {%—Mahā-dhṛti, is,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Mahā-dhvani, is,%} m. ‘loud-voiced, making
a loud noise,’ N. of a Dānava. {%—Mahādhvanika%}
{%(˚hā-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘who has gone a long
journey,’ dead. {%—Mahādhvara (˚hā-adh˚), as,%} m.
a great sacrifice. {%—Mahā-dhvāna, as,%} m. a loud
sound. {%—Mahānaka (˚hā-ān˚), as,%} m. a kind of
large drum. {%—Mahā-nakha, as, ā, am,%} having great
nails or claws; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-%}
{%nagara, am,%} n. a great city or N. of a city, see
Pāṇ. VI. 2, 89. {%—Mahā-nagna, as,%} m. (Ved.)
‘quite naked,’ a lover, paramour; a great officer
of state, high official; ({%ī%}), f. (Ved.) a mistress,
(also read {%mahā-ṇagnī.%}) {%—Mahā-naṭa, as,%} m.
‘the great actor,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-nada,%}
{%as,%} m. a great river or stream; N. of a river; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a well-known river which rises on the
south-west of Bengal, and after an eastward course
of 520 miles divides into several branches at the
town of Cuttack, and falls by several mouths into
the Bay of Bengal; any great river which has a long
course; N. of various streams; epithet of the Ganges.
{%—Mahānadī-sāgara-saṅgama, as,%} m. ‘confluence
of the Mahā-nadī and the ocean,’ N. of a place.
{%—Mahānana (˚hā-ān˚), as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} having a
great mouth or face. {%—Mahānanda (˚hā-ān˚),%} or
{%mahā-nanda, as,%} m. great bliss, the great joy of
deliverance from further transmigration, final eman-
cipation; N. of a disciple of Buddha; N. of a king;
of a river; ({%ā%}), f. ardent spirits; a festival on the
ninth day in the light half of the month Māgha;
N. of a river. {%—Mahānanda-tva, am,%} n. the state
of final emancipation, supreme blessedness. {%—Mahā-%}
{%nandi, is,%} m., N. of a son of Nandivardhana.
{%—Mahā-naraka, as,%} m., N. of one of the twenty-
one hells or places of torment (see Manu IV. 88-90).
{%—Mahā-nala, as,%} m. a kind of reed, Arundo Ben-
galensis. {%—Mahā-navamī,%} f. a festival on the ninth
day in the light half of the month Āśvina [cf. Pāṇ.
I. 2, 42]; the last of the nine days or nights dedi-
cated to the worship of Durgā, the last day of the
Durgā-pūjā. {%—Mahānasa (˚hā-an˚), am,%} n. a large
carriage, heavy waggon or cart; a kitchen (in this
sense also rarely {%as,%} m.), cooking utensils; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a mountain; ({%ī%}), f. a cook, kitchen-maid,
(perhaps more correctly {%māhānasī;%} cf. {%māhānasa.%})
{%—Mahā-nāga, as,%} m. a great serpent; a great ele-
phant, epithet of one of the elephants that support
the world. {%—Mahānāgahana, as,%} m. (?), epithet
of Śiva (Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 1239); of a Śrā-
vaka. {%—Mahā-nāṭaka, am,%} n. a great drama, epi-
thet especially of the Hanuman-nāṭaka (but also
[Page0756-b+ 81]
applied to the Bāla-rāmāyaṇa). {%—Mahā-nāḍī,%} f. a
great tubular vessel; sinew, tendon. {%—Mahā-nāda,%}
{%as,%} m. a loud sound, loud cry, roaring, bellowing; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), loud-sounding, roaring or bellowing loudly,
making a loud noise; ({%as%}), m. a great drum; a
muscle, shell; thunder-cloud, rain-cloud; an elephant;
a lion; a camel; the ear; epithet of Śiva; N. of a
Rākṣasa; ({%am%}), n. a musical instrument. {%—Mahā-%}
{%nānā-tva, am,%} n. epithet of certain ceremonial rules
or rubrics. {%—Mahā-nābha, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Hiraṇyākṣa; N. of another Dānava; epithet of a
magical spell or incantation pronounced over weapons.
{%—Mahā-nāman, ā,%} m., N. of a relation of Śākya-
muni; ({%mnī%}), f. a Pariśiṣṭa of the Sāma-veda;
({%mnyas%}), f. pl., scil. {%ṛcas,%} epithet of nine verses of
the Sāma-veda in the Śakvarī metre beginning with
the words {%Vidā Maghavan%}. {%—Mahānāmnika, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} relating to the Mahā-nāmnī or Mahā-nāmnī
verses above. {%—Mahānāmnī-vrata, am,%} n. a reli-
gious observance in which the Mahā-nāmnī verses
are recited. {%—Mahā-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m. ‘the great
Nārāyaṇa,’ Viṣṇu. {%—Mahānārāyaṇopaniṣad%}
{%(˚ṇa-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad of the Yajur-
veda. {%—Mahā-nāsa, as, ā, am,%} ‘great-nosed,’ hav-
ing a great nose; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-%}
{%nidra, as, ā, am,%} sleeping soundly, fast asleep,
sleeping long; ({%ā%}), f. ‘the great sleep,’ death.
{%—Mahā-nināda, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga. {%—Mahā-%}
{%nimba, as,%} m. a sort of large Nimb tree, Melia
Sempervirens (Bukayun). {%—Mahā-niyama, as,%}
m. ‘great vow,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu (in Mahā-bh.
Śānti-p. 12864). {%—Mahā-niyuta, am,%} n. (with
Buddhists) a particular high number. {%—Mahā-%}
{%niraya, as,%} m., N. of a hell; [cf. {%nir-aya.%}] {%—Mahā-%}
{%niraṣṭa, as,%} m., Ved. a gelded bull; [cf. {%nir-aṣṭa.%}]
{%—Mahā-nirvāṇa, am,%} n. ‘the great Nirvāṇa,’ the
total extinction of individuality. {%—Mahā-niś,%} f. [cf.
3. {%niś%}], the dead of night, midnight (Manu IV.
129). {%—Mahā-niśā,%} f. midnight, the dead of night,
the time after midnight [cf. {%mahā-rātra%}]; epithet
of Durgā. {%—Mahā-niśītha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
Jaina sect. {%—Mahā-nīca, as,%} m. ‘very low (in caste),’
a washerman, fuller. {%—Mahā-nīla, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%}
dark blue, deep black; ({%as%}), m. a kind of sapphire
or emerald ({%= indranīla-viśeṣa%}); a kind of bdel-
lium ({%= guggulu%}); Verbesina Scandens, Eclipta
Prostrata ({%= bhṛṅga-rāja%}); N. of a Nāga; of a
mountain; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant, {%= mahā-jambu;%}
{%(ī),%} f., N. of two plants {%(= nīlāparājitā, vṛhan-%}
{%nīlī%}). {%—Mahānīla-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra.
{%—Mahānīla-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting or made
of sapphire, filled with sapphires. {%—Mahānīlābhra-%}
{%jālīya (˚la-abh˚),%} Nom. P. {%-jālīyati,%} &c., to re-
semble a dense mass of black clouds. {%—Mahānīlo-%}
{%pala (˚la-up˚), as,%} m. ‘dark-blue stone,’ a sapphire.
{%—Mahānubhāva (˚hā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} being in
high esteem, worthy, mighty, exalted, dignified,
pre-eminent, just, virtuous; ({%as%}), m. a gentleman.
{%—Mahānubhāva-tva, am,%} n. high esteem, great dig-
nity, worthiness, mightiness. {%—Mahānurāga (˚hā-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. great love, excessive affection. {%—Mahā-%}
{%nṛtya, as,%} m. ‘a great dancer,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-netra, as, ā, am,%} large-eyed, having large eyes;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-nemi, is,%} m. a
crow. {%—Mahāntaka (˚hā-an˚), as,%} m. ‘the great
finisher,’ death; epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahāndhakāra%}
{%(˚hā-an˚), as,%} m. thick darkness, gross spiritual
darkness. {%—Mahāndhra (˚hā-an˚), as,%} m., N. of a
people and of their country. {%—Mahāndhraka (˚hā-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m., N. of a king of Videhā; (also read
{%mahīdhraka.%}) {%—Mahā-nyāya, as,%} m. a principal
rule. {%—Mahā-nyāsa,%} N. of a grammatical commen-
tary. {%—Mahānvaya (˚hā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} being of
noble family or distinguished lineage. {%—Mahā-pa-%}
{%kṣa, as, ā, am,%} having a great party or numerous
adherents; having a great family; ({%as%}), m. ‘great-
winged,’ a kind of duck; epithet of Garuḍa; ({%ī%}), f.
an owl. {%—Mahāpagā (˚hā-āp˚),%} f. a great river or
stream; N. of a river. {%—Mahā-paṅka, as, am,%} m.
n. deep mire, a great slough or quagmire. {%—Mahā-%}
{%paṅkti, is,%} f., Ved. a kind of metre of forty-eight
[Page0756-c+ 81]
syllables. {%—Mahā-pañcamūla, am,%} n. the five
great roots; [cf. {%pañca-mūla.%}] {%—Mahā-pañca-%}
{%viṣa, am,%} n. the five great poisons (viz. {%śṛṅgī,%}
{%kāla-kūṭa, mustaka, vatsa-nābha, śaṅkha-karṇī%}).
{%—Mahā-paṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} greatly learned, one
who is a great scholar; ({%as%}), m. a great Paṇḍit or
philosopher. {%—Mahā-pattra, as,%} m. ‘having large
leaves,’ a kind of pot-herb; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant
{%(= mahā-jambu)%}. {%—Mahā-patha, as,%} m. the prin-
cipal path or road (to a town or house), chief road,
high street (in a city), high road, main road, high-
way; epithet of Śiva; the long journey, the passage
into the next world, the way of all flesh, ({%mahā-%}
{%pathaṃ yā,%} to go the long journey, to die); the
long pilgrimage to the shrine of Śiva on mount
Kedāra or the same pilgrimage performed in spirit
(i. e. deep absorption into Śiva); the knowledge of
the essence of Śiva acquired in this pilgrimage; the
mountain-tops from which the faithful throw them-
selves to obtain a speedier entrance into heaven; N.
of the book which treats of the above subjects; N.
of a hell; ({%am%}), n. {%= brahma-randhra,%} q. v. {%—Ma-%}
{%hāpatha-gama, as,%} m. or {%mahā-gamana, am,%} n.
‘going the great or universal way,’ going the way of
all flesh, dying. {%—Mahāpathika, as,%} m. one who
goes the great pilgrimage, (such a man is reckoned
in Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 2874 among the Brāhmaṇa-
cāṇḍālas.) {%—Mahā-pada,%} a word of doubtful mean-
ing in Ṛg-veda X. 73, 2. {%—Mahā-pada-paṅkti,%}
{%is,%} f., Ved. a kind of metre of thirty-one syllables.
{%—Mahā-padma, am,%} n. a white lotus, the figure
or form of a large or white lotus; N. of a city on
the right bank of the Ganges; ({%as%}), m., N. of one
of the nine treasures of Kuvera; (with Jainas) N. of
a particular treasure inhabited by a Nāga; N. of one
of the eight treasures connected with the Padminī
magical art; a particular high number (= 100,000
Padmas, variously reckoned at one hundred thousand
millions, one million of millions, or one hundred
billions; in this sense also {%am,%} n.); N. of a hell;
a kind of serpent; N. of a Nāga or serpent-demon
dwelling in the Mahā-padma treasure above; N. of
the southernmost of the elephants that support the
world; epithet of Nanda [cf. {%mahāpadma-pati%}];
N. of a son of Nanda; a Kinnara or attendant on
Kuvera. {%—Mahāpadma-pati, is,%} m. epithet of
Nanda. {%—Mahāpadma-saras, as,%} or {%mahā-%}
{%padma-salila, am,%} n., N. of a lake. {%—Mahā-%}
{%padya, am,%} n. a great or classical verse; [cf. {%mahā-%}
{%kāvya.%}] {%—Mahāpadya-ṣaṭka, am,%} n. six classical
verses in praise of king Bhoja (ascribed to Kālidāsa).
{%—Mahā-panthaka, as,%} m., N. of a disciple of
Buddha. {%—Mahā-parākrama, as, ā, am,%} very
brave, of great prowess; [cf. {%mahā-vīrya-parā-%}
{%krama.%}] {%—Mahā-parāhṇa, as,%} m. ‘mid-afternoon,’
a late hour in the afternoon; [cf. {%mahā-niśā, mahā-%}
{%rātra.%}] {%—Mahā-parinirvāṇa,%} title of a Buddhist
Sūtra. {%—Mahā-pavitra, as, ā, am,%} greatly purifying,
greatly protecting against unfavourable influences;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Mahā-paśu, us,%} m.
large cattle. {%—Mahā-pāṭala,%} a species of plant.
{%—Mahā-pāta, as,%} m. a long flight; ({%as, ā, am%}),
far-flying (said of an arrow). {%—Mahā-pātaka, am,%}
n. a great crime or sin, a crime of the highest
degree (five such are enumerated in Manu XI. 54,
viz. killing a Brāhman, drinking intoxicating liquors,
theft, committing adultery with the wife of a spiritual
teacher, and associating with any one guilty of these
crimes); any great crime or heinous sin, a great
teacher, and associating with any one guilty of
one of the five great crimes, a great criminal or one
guilty of heinous sin. {%—Mahā-pātra, as,%} m. a prime
minister; [cf. {%pātra.%}] {%—Mahā-pāda, as, ā, am,%}
‘large-footed,’ having large feet; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Śiva. {%—Mahā-pāna, am,%} n. a costly beverage, ex-
pensive drink. {%—Mahā-pāpa, am,%} n. a great crime
(see {%mahā-pātaka%}). {%—Mahā-pāpman, ā, ā, a,%}
doing much evil, very wicked, very hurtful. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-pāraṇika, as,%} m., N. of a disciple of Bud-
dha. {%—Mahā-pāruṣaka,%} a species of plant.
{%—Mahā-pārevata, am,%} n. a species of fruit tree
[Page0757-a+ 81]
({%= vṛhat-pārevata, svarṇa-pārevata,%} Hindī {%vaḍa-%}
{%pārevata%}). {%—Mahā-pārśva, as,%} m., N. of a Dānava;
of a Rākṣas. {%—Mahā-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Mahā-pāśa, as,%} m., N. of an officer of Yama;
of a Nāga. {%—Mahā-pāśupata, as,%} m. a great or
zealous worshipper of Śiva Paśu-pati, ({%mahā-pāśu-%}
{%pataṃ vratam,%} the great vow connected with the
worship of Śiva.) {%—Mahāpāsaka, as,%} m. a Buddhist
lay-brother, (incorrect for {%mahopāsaka.%}) {%—Mahā-%}
{%piṇḍītaru, us,%} m. a species of tree ({%= piṇḍī-taru,%}
Hindī {%peḍirā%}). {%—Mahā-pīlu, us,%} m. a species of tree
({%= vṛhat-pīlu)%}. {%—Mahāpīlu-pati, is,%} m. epithet of
Indra (?), see Ujjvala-datta on Uṇādi-s. 1. 38. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-puṃs, mān,%} m. (perhaps) N. of a mountain, see
Mahā-bh. Bhīṣma-p. 427. {%—Mahā-puṃsa, as,%} m.
a great man. {%—Mahā-puṇya, as, ā, am,%} very good
or pure or holy; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a sacred river.
{%—Mahā-putra, as,%} m. a grandson (?), see Gaṇa
Sutaṅgamādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80; [cf. {%māhāputri.%}]
{%—Mahā-pura, am,%} n. a great stronghold or fortress;
N. of a sacred bathing-place; ({%ī%}), f. a great fortress
or city. {%—Mahā-purāṇa, am,%} n. a great Purāṇa.
{%—Mahā-puruṣa, as,%} m. a great man, eminent
personage, great saint or sage, great ascetic; epithet
of five great personages or rulers born under certain
constellations; the great soul, the Supreme Spirit;
epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Mahāpuruṣa-tā,%} f. the state
or condition of a Mahā-puruṣa. {%—Mahā-puruṣa-%}
{%dantā,%} f. Asparagus Racemosus. {%—Mahā-puruṣa-%}
{%dantikā,%} f. a species of plant ({%= mahā-śatāvarī;%}
cf. {%puruṣa-dantikā%}). {%—Mahāpuruṣa-vidyā,%} f.,
N. of a particular formula or magical sentence.
{%—Mahā-puṣpa, as,%} m. a kind of worm; ({%ā%}), f.
Clitoria Ternatea {%(= a-parājitā)%}. {%—Mahā-pūjā,%} f.
great honour, great and solemn worship on extra-
ordinary occasions; a particular religious ceremony.
{%—Mahā-pūta, as, ā, am,%} exceedingly pure. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-pūruṣa = mahā-puruṣa,%} q. v. {%—Mahā-pūr-%}
{%ṇa, as,%} m., N. of a king of the Garuḍas. {%—Mahā-%}
{%pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} having a great or broad back;
({%as%}), m. a camel; ({%am%}), n. epithet of six Anuvākas
in the fourth Aṣṭaka of the Ṛg-veda used at the
Aśva-medha sacrifice. {%—Mahā-pṛṣṭha-gala-skan-%}
{%dha, as, ā, am,%} having a large back and neck and
shoulders. {%—Mahā-paiṅgya, am,%} n., N. of a Vedic
text. {%—Mahā-paiṭhīnasi, is,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
{%—Mahā-poṭagala, as,%} m. a species of large rush
or reed. {%—Mahā-prakāśa, as,%} m. title of a medical
work; [cf. {%bhāva-prakāśa.%}] {%—Mahā-prajāpati,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘great lord of creatures,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu;
({%ī%}), f., N. of Śākya-muni's aunt and foster-mother
(the first woman who embraced the doctrines of
Buddha). {%—Mahā-prajāvatī,%} f. {%= mahā-prajāpartī.%}
{%—Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a
Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Mahā-praṇāda, as,%} m., N.
of a Cakravartin. {%—Mahā-pratāpa, as, ā, am,%} very
dignified or majestic, very puissant. {%—Mahā-prati-%}
{%bhāna, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Mahā-pra-%}
{%tīhāra, as,%} m. a chief door-keeper, superior porter.
{%—Mahā-pradāna, am,%} n. a great gift. {%—Mahā-%}
{%pradīpa, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mahā-prapañca,%}
{%as,%} m. the great universe or visible world. {%—Mahā-%}
{%prabha, as, ā, am,%} shining brightly, exceedingly
brilliant; ({%as%}), m. lamp-light, the light of a lamp;
({%ā%}), f. great brightness. {%—Mahāprabhā-maṇḍala-%}
{%vyūha-jñāna-mudrā,%} f. epithet of a particular
Mudrā, q. v. {%—Mahā-prabhāva, as, ā, am,%} exceed-
ingly mighty or powerful. {%—Mahā-prabhu, us,%} m.
a great master, mighty lord; a king, prince; a very
holy man or great saint; a chief; epithet of Indra;
of Śiva; of Viṣṇu. {%—Mahāprabhu-tva, am,%} n.
the dignity of a mighty lord. {%—Mahā-pralaya, as,%}
m. the total annihilation of the universe at the end
of a Kalpa, an entire dissolution and destruction of
all things after a period commensurate with the life
of Brahmā, when the seven Lokas and their inha-
bitants together with all the saints, gods, and Brahmā
himself are annihilated; N. of a Hindī poem by
Jagaj-jīvana-dāsa. {%—Mahā-pravṛddha, as, ā, am,%}
of lofty growth, see Pāṇ. VI. 2, 38. {%—Mahā-pra-%}
{%sāda, as,%} m. a great favour or kindness; a great
[Page0757-b+ 81]
present (of food &c. distributed among the persons
present at the worship of an idol); ({%as, ā, am%}),
exceedingly gracious, of great kindness, very kind.
{%—Mahā-prasuta,%} a particular high number. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-prasthāna, am,%} n. setting out on the great
journey, departing this life, dying. {%—Mahā-pras-%}
{%thāna-parvan%} or {%mahā-prasthānika-parvan, a,%}
n., N. of the seventeenth book of the Mahā-bhārata.
{%—Mahā-prājña, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} very wise, ex-
ceedingly clever or intelligent. {%—Mahā-prāṇa, as,%}
m. the hard breathing or aspirate (heard in the
utterance of the aspirated letters {%kh, gh, ch, jh, ṭh,%}
{%ḍh, th, dh, ph, bh, ś, ṣ, s, h,%} and, according to
some, of Anusvāra proper, Visarga, Jihvāmūlīya,
and Upadhmānīya); great spirit or power; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), pronounced with the hard breathing or aspirate
(as the above letters); the letter {%h; (as),%} m. ‘making
a harsh breathing or cry,’ a raven; [cf. {%alpa-prāṇa,%}
{%māhāprāṇa.%}] {%—Mahāprāsthānika, as, ī, am,%}
relating to the great journey or departure from life,
relating to death. {%—Mahā-prīti-vega-sambhava-%}
{%mudrā,%} f. epithet of a particular Mudrā, q. v.
{%—Mahā-prīti-harṣā,%} f., N. of a particular Tantra
deity. {%—Mahā-plava, as,%} m. a great flood. {%—Mahā-%}
{%phaṇaka, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga. {%—Mahā-phala,%}
{%am,%} n. great fruit; great reward; ({%as, ā, am%}), very
fruitful, bearing much fruit; bringing a rich reward;
({%as%}), m. Ægle Marmelos; ({%ā%}), f. a bitter gourd; a
kind of spear. {%—Mahā-pheṭkārīya,%} N. of a book.
{%—Mahā-phenā,%} f. cuttle-fish bone, Ossa Sepiæ.
{%—Mahā-baṇij, k,%} m. a great merchant. {%—Mahā-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. a peculiar posture of the hands or
feet (in Yoga). {%—Mahā-bandhyā,%} f. a female en-
tirely barren. {%—Mahā-babhru, us,%} m. a kind of
animal living in holes. {%—Mahā-bala, as, ā, am,%}
exceedingly strong, very powerful or mighty; ({%as%}),
m. wind, storm; a Buddha; scil. {%gaṇa,%} epithet of a
class of Manes; N. of one of Śiva's attendants (?);
of an Indra in the Manv-antara of Tāmasa and
Raucya; of a Nāga; of a king and various other
persons; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
on Skanda; a species of plant, {%= balā, ati-balā;%}
{%(am),%} n. lead; a particular high number; N. of a
Liṅga ({%= gokarṇeśa-liṅga;%} cf. {%mahābaleśvara%}).
{%—Mahābala-śākya, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Ma-%}
{%hābala-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist Sūtra work.
{%—Mahābalākṣa,%} a particular high number. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-bali, is,%} m., N. of the giant Bali. {%—Mahāba-%}
{%leśvara (˚la-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of Śiva; ({%am%}), n. ({%=%}
{%mahā-bala%}), a particular high number. {%—Mahā-%}
{%bādha, as, ā, am,%} causing great pain, very painful.
{%—Mahā-bārhata, as, ī, am,%} Ved., fr. {%mahā-%}
{%bṛhatī%}. {%—Mahā-bāhu, us, us, u,%} long-armed,
strong-armed, powerful [cf. {%dīrgha-bāhu%}]; ({%us%}),
m. epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of one of the sons of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a Dānava; of a Rākṣasa. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-bimbara = mahā-vimbara,%} q. v. {%—Mahā-bila,%}
{%am,%} n. the atmosphere, ether; a water-jar; the
heart, the mind; a cave, a hole; [cf. {%mahad-bila.%}]
{%—Mahā-bīja = mahā-vīja,%} q. v. {%—Mahā-bījya =%}
{%mahā-vījya,%} q. v. {%—Mahā-buddha, as,%} m. the
great Buddha. {%—Mahā-buddhi, is, is, i,%} having
great understanding, extremely clever, very sensible;
({%is%}), m., N. of an Asura; of a man mentioned in
Kathā-sarit-sāgara CXVIII. 44. {%—Mahā-budhna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘large-based,’ having a wide bottom
or base (said of a mountain). {%—Mahā-bṛhatī,%} f.
the egg-plant, Solanum Melongena; (Ved.) a kind
of metre, or four padas of eight and one of twelve
syllables. {%—Mahā-bodhi, is,%} m. the great intelli-
gence of a Buddha; a Buddha; a particular incar-
nation of Buddha. {%—Mahābodhi-saṅghārāma, as,%}
m., N. of a Buddhist monastery. {%—Mahābodhy-%}
{%aṅgavatī,%} f., N. of a particular Tantra deity.
{%—Mahā-brahma, as,%} or {%mahā-brahman, ā,%} m. a
great Brāhman; the great Brahman, the Supreme
Spirit, God; ({%ās%} or {%āṇas%}), m. pl. (with Buddhists)
a class of gods. {%—Mahā-brāhmaṇa, as,%} m. a great
Brāhman; a priest who officiates at a Śrāddha or
funeral ceremony in honour of deceased ancestors
({%= nindita-brahman,%} ‘a contemptible Brāhman,’
[Page0757-c+ 81]
because this title is applied contemptuously in Bengal
to a low caste Brāhman who officiates at funeral rites
and is the first feasted after the period of mourning;
it is also applied to a Brāhman who performs reli-
gious ceremonies for Śūdras and mixed castes);
({%am%}), n. ‘the great Brāhmaṇa,’ epithet of the Pañca-
viṃśa-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Mahā-bhaṭa, as,%} m. a great
warrior; N. of a Kṣatriya; of a Dānava. {%—Mahā-%}
{%bhadra, as,%} m., N. of a mountain; ({%ā%}), f. Gmelina
Arborea; epithet of the Gaṅgā; N. of a lake.
{%—Mahā-bhaya, am,%} n. great danger or peril; ({%as%}),
m. Great Danger personified as a son of Adharma
by Nirṛti [cf. {%bhaya%}]; ({%as, ā, am%}), accompanied
with great danger or peril; very dangerous or for-
midable. {%—Mahā-bhāga, as, ā, am,%} one to whom
a great portion or lot has fallen, highly fortunate or
blessed, very prosperous; eminent in the highest
degree, illustrious, highly distinguished; virtuous in
a high degree, pure, holy; ({%as%}), m. great luck,
happiness, prosperity; ({%ā%}), f., N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in
Mahālaya. {%—Mahābhāga-tā,%} f. or {%mahābhāga-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. high excellence, great good fortune or
happiness, great prosperity, exalted station or merit;
the possessing of the eight cardinal virtues. {%—Mahā-%}
{%bhāgavata, as,%} m. a great worshipper of Bhagavat;
({%am%}), n. the great Bhāgavata Purāṇa; N. of an
Upa-Purāṇa. {%—Mahā-bhāgin, ī, inī, i,%} exceedingly
fortunate. {%—Mahā-bhāgya, am,%} n. great luck or
happiness, extreme good fortune, high excellence,
exalted position. {%—Mahā-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a great
vessel. {%—Mahā-bhāra, as,%} m. a great weight or
burden, heavy load. {%—Mahā-bhārata, am,%} n. (with
{%yuddha%} or {%ākhyāna%} or some similar neuter substan-
tive expressed or understood), ‘the great war of
the Bharatas’ or ‘the great narrative of the war of the
Bharatas,’ N. of the great epic poem in about
215, 000 lines describing the acts, rivalries, and
contests of the sons of the two brothers Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu, descendants of Kuru and Bharata,
who were of the lunar line of kings reigning in
the neighbourhood of Hastinā-pura, (the poem con-
sists of eighteen books and the supplement called
Hari-vaṃśa, the whole being attributed to the sage
Vyāsa, who was son of Satyavatī and father of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu by the widows of his brother
Vicitra-vīrya; in the Saṅgraha-parvan 266, the word
{%mahā-bhārata%} is said to be derived from {%mahā-%}
{%bhāra,%} ‘great weight,’ and a form {%mahā-bhārata,%}
{%as,%} m. is also given; cf. Pāṇ. VI. 2, 38.) {%—Mahā-%}
{%bhārata-tātparya-nirṇaya,%} title of a work. {%—Ma-%}
{%hābhārata-darpaṇa, as,%} m. title of a work. {%—Ma-%}
{%hābhārata-yuddha, am,%} n. the great war of the
Bharatas. {%—Mahābhārata-vyākhyāna, am,%} n.
title of a work. {%—Mahā-bhāratika, as,%} m. (per-
haps) one who knows the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Mahā-%}
{%bhāṣya, am,%} n. (contracted for {%vyākaraṇa-m˚%}),
‘the great (grammatical) commentary,’ N. of Patañ-
jali's great commentary on the grammatical Sūtras of
Pāṇini. {%—Mahābhāṣya-dīpikā,%} f., N. of Bhar-
tṛ-hari's exposition of the Mahā-bhāṣya. {%—Mahā-%}
{%bhāṣya-pradīpa, as,%} m., N. of Kaiyaṭa's exposi-
tion of the above Mahā-bhāṣya. {%—Mahā-bhāsura,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} extremely brilliant; ({%as%}), m. epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Mahā-bhikṣu, us,%} m. ‘the great men-
dicant,’ an epithet of Śākya-muni. {%—Mahābhijana%}
{%(˚hā-abh˚), as,%} m. high or noble lineage or race,
noble descent. {%—Mahābhijana-jāta, as, ā, am,%}
sprung from a noble race or family, of noble birth
or descent. {%—Mahābhijñā-jñānābhibhū (˚hā-abh˚,%}
{%˚na-abh˚), ūs,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Mahābhi-%}
{%māna (˚hā-abh˚), as,%} m. great self-conceit, great
pride, arrogance. {%—Mahābhiṣava (˚hā-abh˚), as,%}
m. the great extraction or distillation of Soma. {%—Ma-%}
{%hābhiṣeka (˚hā-abh˚), as,%} m. solemn unction; N.
of the fourteenth Lambaka in the Kathā-sarit-sāgara.
{%—Mahābhisyandin (˚hā-abh˚), ī, inī, i,%} generating
great moisture. {%—Mahā-bhīta, as, ā, am,%} greatly
terrified, very timid, pusillanimous, cowardly; ({%ā%}),
f. a sort of sensitive plant, Mimosa Pudica. {%—Mahā-%}
{%bhīti, is,%} f. great terror, great danger or distress.
{%—Mahā-bhīma, as,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's
[Page0758-a+ 80]
attendants; epithet of Śāntanu; [cf. {%mahā-bhīṣ-%}
{%ma.%}] {%—Mahā-bhīru, us,%} m. ‘very timid,’ a sort of
beetle or fly found in cow-dung. {%—Mahā-bhīṣa-%}
{%ṇaka, as, ā%} or {%ikā, am,%} causing great distress,
exceedingly fearful. {%—Mahā-bhīṣma, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%mahā-bhīma,%} q. v. {%—Mahā-bhuja, as, ā, am,%}
long-armed, having long arms, strong-armed,
powerful. {%—Mahā-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being great,
great; ({%as%}), m. a great creature or being, ({%sthāvarā%}
{%jaṅgamāśca mahābhūtās,%} great objects both sta-
tionary and movable); ({%am%}), n. a great element,
primary element (of which five are reckoned, viz.
ether, air, fire, water, earth; cf. Manu I. 6); a gross
element (in phil. as distinguished from a subtile
element or Tan-mātra, q. v.). {%—Mahābhūta-ghaṭa-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. a kind of religious gift. {%—Mahā-%}
{%bhūmi, is,%} f. a great country. {%—Mahā-bhūṣaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a costly ornament. {%—Mahā-bhṛṅga, as,%} m.
a species of Verbesina with blue flowers ({%= nīla-%}
{%bhṛṅga-rāja%}). {%—Mahā-bherī-hāraka,%} N. of a Bud-
dhist Sūtra work. {%—Mahā-bhairava, as,%} m. a form
of Śiva or Bhairava; N. of a Liṅga; ({%as, ī, am%}),
related to or connected with Mahā-bhairava. {%—Ma-%}
{%hābhairava-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—1. ma-%}
{%hā-bhoga, as,%} m. [cf. 1. {%bhoga%}], a great curve or
coil, great hood (of a snake), great winding; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), having great windings or coils, having a great
hood; ({%as%}), m. a serpent. {%—2. mahābhoga (˚hā-%}
{%ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} having a wide girth (as a tree);
having a large compass or circumference. {%—3. mahā-%}
{%bhoga, as,%} m. great enjoyment; ({%as, ā, am%}), caus-
ing or possessing great enjoyment; ({%ā%}), f. an epithet
of Durgā. {%—1. mahābhoga-vat, ān, atī, at,%} or
{%mahā-bhogin, ī, inī, i,%} having a large hood.
 — 2. {%mahābhoga-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having great
enjoyments. {%—Mahā-bhoja, as,%} m. a great monarch;
N. of a king. {%—Mahā-bhoṭa%} or {%mahābhoṭa-deśa,%}
{%as,%} m. Great Tibet. {%—Mahā-bhauma, as,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Mahābhra (˚hā-abh˚), am,%} n. a great
or dense cloud. {%—Mahā-makha, as,%} m. a great
sacrifice, principal sacrifice (see {%mahā-yajña%}). {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-mañjūṣaka, as,%} m. epithet of a particular
celestial flower. {%—Mahā-maṇi, is,%} m. a costly gem,
precious jewel (as the diamond, ruby, &c.); epithet
of Śiva. {%—Mahā-maṇicūḍa, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga
or serpent-demon. {%—Mahā-maṇḍala, as,%} m., N. of
a king. {%—Mahā-maṇḍalika, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga.
{%—Mahā-maṇḍūka, as,%} m. ‘large frog,’ a species of
frog (described as {%pīta-maṇḍūka%}). {%—Mahā-mata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} highly esteemed or honoured. {%—Mahā-mati,%}
{%is, is, i,%} great-minded, magnanimous, high-minded,
clever; ({%is%}), m. the planet Jupiter; N. of a king of
the Yakṣas; of a Bodhi-sattva; ({%is%}), f., N. of a
woman (wife of Karuṇākara and mother of Padma-
nābha); ({%ī%}), f. epithet of a particular lunar day per-
sonfied as a daughter of Aṅgiras. {%—Mahā-matta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being in strong or violent rut (as an
elephant). {%—Mahā-matsya, as,%} m. a large fish, sea-
monster. {%—Mahā-mada, as,%} m. great pride or in-
toxication; the strong or violent rut (of an elephant),
strong passion; ({%as, ā, am%}), greatly intoxicated,
being in strong or violent rut; ({%as%}), m. an elephant
in rut, an elephant. {%—Mahā-manas, ās, ās, as,%} or
{%mahāmanaska, as, ā, am,%} great-minded, high-
minded, magnanimous, liberal, munificent; proud-
minded, proud, haughty; ({%ās%}), m. a fabulous animal,
{%= śarabha,%} q. v. [cf. {%manas-vin%}]; N. of a king.
{%—Mahā-mani, is,%} m., N. of a king; (probably
incorrect for {%mahā-mati%} or {%mahā-maṇi.%}) {%—Mahā-%}
{%manuṣya, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Mahā-mantra,%}
{%as,%} m. any very sacred or efficacious text (of the
Veda &c.); a great spell, efficacious charm. {%—Mahā-%}
{%mantrānusāriṇī (˚ra-an˚),%} f., N. of a Buddhist
goddess. {%—Mahā-mantrin, ī,%} m. a chief counsellor,
prime minister; a great statesman or politician.
{%—Mahā-mandārava, as,%} m. a species of plant.
{%—Mahā-mayūrī,%} f., N. of a Buddhist goddess;
[cf. {%mahā-māyūrī.%}] {%—Mahā-marakata, as,%} m.
a great emerald; ({%as, ā, am%}), adorned with great
emeralds; (also read {%mahā-mārakata.%}) {%—Mahā-%}
{%malaya-pura, am,%} n., N. of the seven pagodas
[Page0758-b+ 81]
hewn out of the rocks near Madras. {%—1. mahā-%}
{%maha, as,%} m. a great festival. {%—2. mahāmaha, as,%}
{%ā, am%} (probably an old intensive form), very mighty,
of great might, Ved.; greatest of the great, very
wealthy; greatly to be worshipped, Sāy. {%= atiśa-%}
{%yena sarvaiḥ pūjanīya%} or {%mahā-dhana%} or {%ma-%}
{%hatām api mahat; (ā),%} f. epithet of a con-
stellation; [cf. the similar forms {%ghanāghana, pa-%}
{%tāpata, vadāvada.%}] {%—Mahā-mahas, āṃsi,%} n. pl.
great lights or glories. {%—Mahāmahima-tva, am,%}
n. excessive greatness. {%—Mahā-mahiman, ā,%} m.
excessive greatness, true greatness; ({%ā, ā, a%}), very
great, extremely great, truly great, high and mighty.
{%—Mahā-mahivrata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. exercising
great power, very powerful and effective, accom-
plishing great and mighty acts; (Sāy. {%= mahanīya-%}
{%bahu-karman.%}) {%—Mahā-maheśvarāyatana (˚ra-%}
{%āy˚), am,%} n. a particular region of the gods. {%—Mahā-%}
{%mahopādhyāya (˚hā-up˚), as,%} m. a very great
preceptor, very venerable teacher. {%—Mahā-māṃsa,%}
{%am,%} n. costly meat, epithet of various kinds of meat
and especially of human flesh. {%—Mahāmāṃsa-vi-%}
{%kraya, as,%} m. selling human flesh. {%—Mahāmātya%}
{%(˚hā-am˚), as,%} m. the prime minister of a king.
{%—Mahā-mātra, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} great in measure,
great, the greatest, best, most excellent; ({%as%}), m. a
man of high rank or great substance, prime minister,
great officer of state, high official, counsellor, general,
&c.; an elephant-driver or keeper (= Hindūstānī
<nsi>mahāwat</nsi>); a superintendent of elephants; ({%ī%}), f. a
spiritual teacher's wife, wife of a prime minister or
high official, great lady. {%—Mahā-mānasikā,%} f. (with
Jainas) N. of one of the sixteen Vidyā-devīs. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-mānasī,%} f. a goddess peculiar to the Jainas.
{%—Mahā-mānin, ī, inī, i,%} exceedingly proud.
{%—Mahā-māya, as, ā, am,%} having great deceit or
illusion, practising great illusion or deceit, very illusory;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; N. of an
Asura; of a Vidyā-dhara; ({%ā%}), f. great deceit or
illusion, worldly illusion, the divine power of illusion
(which makes the material universe appear as if
really existing and renders it cognizable by the
senses), the Great Illusion (the illusory nature of
worldly objects personified and identified with Durgā);
N. of a wife of Śuddhodana. {%—Mahāmāyā-dhara,%}
{%as,%} m. an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Mahāmāyā-śam-%}
{%bara%} or {%mahāmāyā-śambara-tantra, am,%} n., N.
of a Tantra. {%—Mahā-māyūrī,%} f. (with Buddhists)
one of the five tutelary goddesses; [cf. {%mahā-ma-%}
{%yūrī.%}] {%—Mahāmāyūrī-stotra, am,%} n., N. of a col-
lection of Stotras. {%—Mahā-mārakata, as, ā, am,%}
richly adorned with emeralds; [cf. {%mahā-marakata.%}]
{%—Mahā-mārī,%} f. ‘the great destroying goddess,’
an epithet of Durgā; a great pestilence or mortality,
the cholera; [cf. {%mārī.%}] {%—Mahā-mārga, as,%} m. a
great road, main street, high street, high road; [cf.
{%mahā-patha.%}] {%—Mahā-māla, as, ā, am,%} wearing
a great garland; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-%}
{%mālikā,%} f. a kind of metre, four times <lang n="meter">˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯,</lang>
<lang n="meter">˘ ¯ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ ˘ ¯.</lang> {%—Mahā-māṣa, as,%} m. a
species of large bean {%(= rāja-māṣa)%}. {%—Mahā-%}
{%māheśvara, as,%} m. a great worshipper of Maheśvara
(Śiva). {%—Mahā-mīna, as,%} m. a kind of fish. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-mukha, am,%} n. a great mouth, the great embou-
chure of a river; ({%as, ī, am%}), large-mouthed, having
a large mouth (said of Śiva); having a great em-
bouchure; ({%as%}), m. a crocodile; N. of a man (per-
haps a brother of Kṣemaṅkara). {%—Mahā-muci-%}
{%linda,%} a species of plant. {%—Mahā-mucilinda-par-%}
{%vata, as,%} m., N. of a particular fabulous mountain.
{%—Mahā-muṇḍanikā%} or {%mahā-muṇḍī,%} f. a species
of plant {%(= mahā-śrāvaṇikā)%}. {%—Mahā-mudrā,%} f.
a particular posture or position of the hands or feet
(in the practice of Yoga, q. v.); a particular high
number. {%—Mahā-muni, is,%} m. a great Muni or
sage; N. of Vyāsa; epithet of Buddha; of Agastya;
of a Jina; the coriander plant; ({%i%}), n. any medicinal
herb or drug; coriander seed. {%—Mahā-mūḍha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} very foolish or infatuated, a great simpleton.
{%—Mahā-mūrkha, as,%} m. a great fool. {%—Mahā-%}
{%mūrti, is, is, i,%} large-formed, great-bodied, having
[Page0758-c+ 81]
a vast body; ({%is%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Mahā-%}
{%mūrddhan, ā, ā, a,%} great-headed, large-headed,
having a huge head; ({%ā%}), m. epithet of Śiva.
{%—Mahā-mūla, am,%} n. a large root, large or full-
grown radish (opposed to {%bāla-mūla,%} q. v.); ({%as%}),
m. a species of large onion {%(= rāja-palāṇḍu).%}
{%—Mahā-mūlya, as, ā, am,%} high-priced, very
costly or precious, highly valuable; ({%as%}), m. a ruby.
{%—Mahā-mūṣaka, as,%} m. a kind of large mouse
or rat. {%—Mahā-mṛga, as,%} m. a large animal (espe-
cially any large forest animal usually chased by
hunters, as a boar, buffalo, &c.); an elephant.
{%—Mahā-mṛtyu, us,%} m. great death, chief death;
epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahāmṛtyuñ-jaya, as,%} m. ‘con-
quering great death,’ epithet of a particular sacred text
addressed to Śiva, (also {%mahāmṛtyuñjaya-mantra.%})
{%—Mahā-mṛdha, am,%} n. a great battle. {%—Mahā-%}
{%megha, as,%} m. a great cloud, dense cloud; an epithet
of Śiva; N. of a man; (also read {%megha-vega.%})
{%—Mahāmegha-nivāsin, ī,%} m. ‘dwelling in thick
clouds,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahāmegha-svana%} or
{%mahāmegha-nibha-svana, as, ā, am,%} sounding
like immense thunder-clouds. {%—Mahāmeghaugha-%}
{%nirghoṣa (˚gha-ogh˚), as, ā, am,%} sounding like a
multitude of large thunder-clouds. {%—Mahā-meda,%}
{%as,%} m. the coral tree, Erythrina Indica; a species of
medicinal plant ({%= purodbhava;%} there is also a
form {%mahā-medā%}). {%—Mahā-medha, as,%} m. a great
sacrifice {%(= aśva-medha)%}. {%—Mahā-medhā,%} f. ‘great
intellect, the great intelligence,’ epithet of Durgā.
{%—Mahā-meru, us,%} m. the great Meru. {%—Mahā-%}
{%maitra, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha; ({%ī%}), f. great
friendship, excessive attachment. {%—Mahāmaitrī-%}
{%samādhi, is,%} m. (with Buddhists) epithet of a par-
ticular kind of devotion. {%—Mahā-moha, as,%} m.
great confusion or infatuation of mind; ({%ā%}), f. an
epithet of Durgā. {%—Mahā-mohana, as, ī, am,%} very
confusing, extremely bewildering, causing great in-
fatuation. {%—Mahā-maudgalyāyana, as,%} m., N. of
a disciple of Buddha. {%—Mahāmbuka (˚hā-am˚),%}
{%as,%} m. (perhaps for {%mahāmbuda%}), an epithet of
Śiva; [cf. {%mahā-megha.%}] {%—Mahāmbuja (˚hā-%}
{%am˚), am,%} n. a particular high number, a billion.
{%—Mahāmla (˚hā-am˚), as, ā, am,%} very acid, ex-
ceedingly sour; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of the Indian
tamarind; acid seasoning. {%—Mahā-yakṣa, as,%} m.
a great Yakṣa, a chief of the Yakṣas [cf. {%yakṣa-%}
{%pati%}]; N. of a servant of the second Arhat of the
present Ava-sarpiṇī; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a class of Buddhist
deities; ({%ī%}), f. a great female Yakṣa. {%—Mahā-%}
{%yakṣa-senāpati, is,%} m., N. of a particular Tantra
deity. {%—Mahā-yajña, as,%} m. a great sacrifice or
offering, a principal act of devotion, (of these great
religious offerings or devotional acts there were five,
according to Manu III. 69 — 71, viz. {%brahma-yajña,%}
{%deva-yajña, pitṛ-yajña, manuṣya-yajña, bhūta-%}
{%yajña,%} q. q. v. v., or devotional acts having reference
severally to the Veda, the gods, the Manes of ances-
tors, men, and all created beings); an epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Mahāyajña-bhāga-hara, as,%} m. ‘receiv-
ing a share of the great sacrifice,’ epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Mahā-yantra, am,%} n. a great machine, great
mechanical work (as a lock, dike, &c.). {%—Mahā-%}
{%yantra-pravartana, am,%} n. the engaging in or
erecting great mechanical works (such as dikes,
bridges, &c.). {%—Mahā-yama, as,%} m. the mighty
Yama. {%—Mahā-yamaka, am,%} n. a verse in which
all four Pādas contain words with exactly the same
sounds, but different senses (e. g. Kirātārjunīya XV.
52, where {%Vikāśamīyurjagatīśamārgaṇāḥ%} is re-
peated four times with different significations). {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-yaśas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%mahāyaśaska, as, ā, am,%}
very glorious, very famous or illustrious, renowned,
celebrated; ({%ās%}), m., N. of the fourth Arhat of the
past Utsarpiṇī; N. of a learned man; ({%ās%}), f., N.
of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Mahā-%}
{%yasa (˚hā-ay˚), as, ā, am,%} having much iron (as
an arrow), having a large iron point {%(= mahā-pha-%}
{%laka)%}. {%—Mahā-yātrā,%} f. a great pilgrimage, the
pilgrimage to Kāśī or Benares; N. of a work upon
omens. {%—Mahā-yāna, am,%} n. ‘the great vehicle’
[Page0759-a+ 81]
(opposed to {%hīna-yāna%}), epithet of a later system
of Buddhist teaching promulgated by Nāgārjuna, and
treated of in the Mahā-yāna-sūtras; ({%as%}), m. ‘having
a great chariot,’ N. of a king of the Vidyā-dharas.
{%—Mahāyāna-deva, as,%} m. an honorary title of
Hiouen-thsang. {%—Mahāyāna-parigrahaka, as,%} m.
a follower of the Mahā-yāna doctrines. {%—Mahāyāna-%}
{%prabhāsa,%} N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Mahāyāna-yoga-%}
{%śāstra, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Mahāyāna-saṅ-%}
{%graha, as,%} m., N. of a work; (also called {%mahā-%}
{%yāna-samparigraha-śāstra.%}) {%—Mahāyāna-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘a Sūtra serving as a great vehicle,’ epithet
of several Buddhist Sūtras. {%—Mahā-yāma, am,%} n.,
N. of a Sāman. {%—Mahā-yāmya, as,%} m. an epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Mahā-yuga, am,%} n. a great Yuga or
Yuga of the gods (= four Yugas of mortals or the
aggregate of the Kṛta, Tretā, Dvāpara, and Kali Yugas
= 4, 320, 000 years of mortals; a day and a night of
Brahmā comprise 2000 Mahā-yugas). {%—Mahāyuta,%}
a particular high number. {%—Mahāyudha (˚hā-āy˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having great or strong weapons; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-yogin, ī,%} m. a great Yogin;
N. of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; a cock. {%—Mahā-yogeśvara%}
{%(˚ga-īś˚), as,%} m. a great master of the Yoga system.
{%—Mahā-yoni, is,%} f. excessive dilation of the female
organ. {%—Mahā-yaudhājaya, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Mahā-rakṣas, as,%} n. a great Rākṣasa. {%—Mahā-%}
{%rakṣā,%} f. (with Buddhists) a great tutelary goddess,
(five in number, viz. Mahā-pratisarā or Pratisarā,
Mahā-māyūrī or Mahā-mayūrī, Mahā-sahasra-pra-
mardanī or -pramardinī, Mahā-śītavatī or — śetavatī,
and Mahā-mantrānusāriṇī.) {%—Mahā-rakṣita, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Mahā-rajata, am,%} n. gold;
thorn-apple; [cf. {%mahā-rajana.%}] {%—Mahā-rajana,%}
{%am,%} n. the safflower ({%= kusumbha%}); gold; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), coloured with saffron, (perhaps for {%māhāra-%}
{%jana.%}) {%—Mahā-raṇa, as, am,%} m. n. a great battle,
great war. {%—Mahāraṇya (˚hā-ar˚), am,%} n. a large
wood, great forest. {%—Mahā-ratna, am,%} n. a costly
jewel, precious gem, most precious of all gems.
{%—Mahāratna-pratimaṇḍita, as,%} m., N. of a
Kalpa or cycle. {%—Mahāratna-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of costly gems, full of precious stones.
{%—Mahāratna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} adorned with costly
gems, covered with precious stones. {%—Mahāratna-%}
{%varṣā,%} f., N. of a particular Tantra goddess. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-ratha, as,%} m. a large car, great chariot; a great
warrior or hero, (in this sense not necessarily a Bahu-
vrīhi comp., as shown by the accent, cf. also {%ratha,%}
a warrior, hero); N. of a Rākṣasa; of a son of
Viśvāmitra; of a king (= Śuddhodana in another
birth); N. of a minister of king Śaṅkara-varman;
desire, longing [cf. {%mano-ratha%}]; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having a great chariot, possessing large chariots.
{%—Mahāratha-tva, am,%} n. heroism, the being a
great warrior. {%—Mahā-rathyā,%} f. a great street, high
street; {%mahārathyā purī,%} a city having large streets.
{%—Mahārambha (˚hā-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} performing
great undertakings, enterprising, busy, industrious.
{%—Mahā-rava, as, ā, am,%} loud-sounding, uttering
loud cries, loud; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; of a Daitya,
(also read {%mahā-bala.%}) {%—Mahā-raśmi-jālāvabhāsa-%}
{%garbha, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Mahā-rasa,%}
{%as,%} m. a precious mineral; quicksilver; ({%as, ā, am%}),
very savory, having much flavour; ({%as%}), m. a sugar-
cane ({%= kośa-kāra%}); phœnix Sylvestris; Scirpus
Kysoor; ({%am%}), n. sour rice-water. {%—Mahārasa-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having much flavour, very pleasant to
the taste; ({%atī%}), f. a kind of food. {%—Mahā-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. a great king, reigning prince, supreme
sovereign; (with Buddhists) a great lord, great ruler,
(these are four in number, constituting together with
their attendants a class of divine beings); a deified
Jaina teacher; an epithet of Mañju-śrī; a follower
of the sect of Vallabhācārya; a finger-nail. {%—Mahā-%}
{%rājaka, as,%} m. {%= mahā-rājika,%} col. 2. {%—Mahārāja-%}
{%kulīna, as, ā, am,%} belonging to a race of great
kings. {%—Mahārāja-cūta, as,%} m. a kind of mango.
{%—Mahārāja-druma, as,%} m. Cathartocarpus (Cassia)
Fistula. {%—Mahārāja-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a man
(son of Māṇikya-miśra). {%—Mahārājādhirāja (˚ja- %}
[Page0759-b+ 81]
{%adh˚), as,%} m. a paramount sovereign, universal
emperor. {%—Mahā-rājika, ās,%} m. pl. epithet of a
class of gods or demigods (variously reckoned at 236
and 220 in number); ({%as%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Mahā-rājñī,%} f. a great queen, the principal wife
of a Rājā, a queen in her own right, reigning queen;
epithet of Durgā. {%—Mahā-rājya, am,%} n. the rank
or title of a reigning sovereign, sovereignty. {%—Mahā-%}
{%rātra, am,%} n. midnight, the dead of night, late at
night, the time after midnight, close of night.
{%—Mahā-rātri, is,%} or {%mahā-rātrī,%} f. midnight, the
dead of night, time after midnight; the great night
of the complete destruction of the world; the eighth
day (or night) in the light half of the month Āśvina.
{%—Mahā-rāmāyaṇa, am,%} n. the great Rāmāyaṇa.
{%—Mahā-rāṣṭra, am,%} n. a great kingdom or realm,
‘the great country,’ i. e. the Mahrāṭṭa or Marāṭha (or
more commonly Mahratta) country, the land of the
Mahrattas in the west of India; a kind of metre;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the Marāṭha people, commonly called
Mahrattas; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%bhāṣā,%} the Mahraṭṭī (or
more properly Marāṭhī) language, the language of
the Mahrattas; epithet of various plants, a species of
culinary plant {%(= jala-pippalī)%}. {%—Mahārāṣṭraka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} belonging to the great or Marāṭha
country or to the land of the Mahrattas; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. the Marāṭha people (commonly called Mahrattas).
{%—Mahārāṣṭrīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the
Marāṭha country or people, belonging to the Mah-
rattas. {%—Mahā-riṣṭa, as,%} m. a species of tree
allied to the Melia Bukayun {%(= mahā-nimba).%}
{%—Mahā-ruj, k, k, k,%} or {%mahā-ruja, as, ā, am,%}
causing great pain, very painful. {%—Mahā-rudra, as,%}
m. ‘the great Rudra,’ a form of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. a form
of Durgā. {%—Mahā-ruru, us,%} m. a species of ante-
lope {%(= mahā-mṛga)%}. {%—Mahā-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
large-formed, mighty in form, great in mien; ({%as%}),
m. epithet of Śiva; N. of a Kalpa or cycle; resin;
({%ā%}), f., N. of one of Durgā's attendants. {%—Mahā-%}
{%rūpaka, am,%} n. a kind of drama. {%—Mahā-rūpin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} large-formed, great in shape or mien.
{%—Mahā-retas, ās, ās, as,%} abounding in seed, hav-
ing great virile energy; ({%ās%}), m. epithet of Śiva;
[cf. {%mahā-vīja.%}] {%—Mahā-roga, as,%} m. a severe or
dangerous illness, grievous malady (applied to the
following disorders, {%unmāda, tvag-doṣa, rāja-%}
{%yakṣman, śvāsa, madhu-meha, bhagan-dara,%}
{%udara, aśmarī%}). {%—Mahā-rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} suffering
from a severe illness, very ill. {%—Mahā-roca,%} a species
of plant. {%—Mahā-roman, ā, ā, a,%} having large or
thick hair on the body; ({%ā%}), m. epithet of Śiva; of
a king; of the superior of a Buddhist monastery;
[cf. {%mahā-loman.%}] {%—Mahā-raudra, as, ā, am,%}
very terrible, very awful; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Durgā;
[cf. {%mahā-rudrī.%}] {%—Mahā-raurava, as,%} m., N.
of one of the twenty-one hells or places of torment
(enumerated in Manu IV. 88-90); ({%am%}), n., N. of a
Sāman. {%—Mahā-rauhiṇa, as,%} m., N. of a demon.
{%—Mahārgha (˚hā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} high-priced, very
costly or precious, extremely valuable; ({%as%}), m. a
sort of quail, Perdix Chinensis {%(= lāvaka)%}. {%—Ma-%}
{%hārgha-tā,%} f. great costliness, preciousness, high
value. {%—Mahārgha-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} magnificently
formed, of splendid form. {%—Mahārghya, as, ā, am,%}
very costly, precious, valuable. {%—Mahārghya-tā,%} f.
{%= mahārgha-tā%}. {%—Mahārcis (˚hā-ar˚), is, is, is,%}
having great flames, flaming high. {%—Mahārṇava%}
{%(˚hā-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘the mighty sea,’ great sea or
ocean; an epithet of Śiva; title of a book by Viśve-
śvara [cf. {%kṛtya-mahārṇava, smṛti-mahārṇava%}];
({%ās%}), m. pl. ‘dwelling by the ocean,’ N. of a people.
{%—Mahārtha (˚hā-ar˚), as,%} m. a great thing, a
great matter; weighty or important meaning; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), having large substance, rich; great, dignified;
having great meaning, very important; significant,
weighty; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Dānava; ({%am%}), n. (ac-
cording to a commentator) {%= mahā-bhāṣya%}. {%—Ma-%}
{%hārthaka, as, ā, am,%} having great substance, rich,
valuable; having great meaning, very important, &c.
{%—Mahārtha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having great mean-
ing, very significant, very important, of great conse-
[Page0759-c+ 81]
quence, very dignified. {%—Mahārdraka (˚hā-ār˚),%}
{%am,%} n. wild ginger {%(= vanārdraka)%}. {%—Mahārdha%}
{%(˚ha-ar˚), as,%} m. a species of plant, (commonly
Mahājā.) {%—Mahārbuda (˚hā-ar˚), am,%} n. ten
Arbudas = one thousand millions. {%—Mahārma (˚hā-%}
{%ar˚),%} see Pāṇ. VI. 2, 90. {%—Mahārha (˚hā-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very worthy or deserving, very valuable
or precious, costly, splendid; excellent, eminent;
({%am%}), n. white sandal-wood. {%—Mahā-lakṣmī, īs,%}
f. the great Lakṣmī (properly the Śakti of Nārā-
yaṇa or Viṣṇu, but sometimes identified with
Durgā, the wife of Śiva, or with Sarasvatī, the wife
of Brahmā); epithet of a girl thirteen years old, or of
one not arrived at puberty, who represents the goddess
Durgā at the Durgā festival; N. of a woman (mother
of Gaṅgā-dāsa); a kind of metre, four times
<lang n="meter">¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯ ˘ ¯.</lang> {%—Mahālakṣmī-stotra, am,%} n.
meditation and prayer in the worship of Lakṣmī.
{%—Mahālaya (˚hā-āl˚), as,%} m. a great dwelling; a
great temple, great monastery; a temple in general;
a place of refuge, sanctuary, asylum; the Loka or
world of Brahmā; a tree &c. sacred to a deity; a
place of pilgrimage; the Supreme Being or great
Universal Spirit ({%= paramātman%}); a particular half
month ({%= kanyāgatāpara-pakṣa%} and {%saurāśvi-%}
{%nīya-kṛṣṇa-pakṣa%}); N. of a place; of a man;
(perhaps {%am,%} n.), N. of a Liṅga; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
particular festival, the day of the moon's change in
the month Bhādra and the last day of the Hindū
lunar year. {%—Mahālasa (˚hā-al˚), as, ā, am,%} very
lazy, extremely idle; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman (mother
of the commentator Nārāyaṇa). {%—Mahāli-kaṭabhī,%}
f., see {%mahādi-kaṭabhī%}. {%—Mahā-liṅga, am,%} n. a
great Liṅga or phallus; N. of a place; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having a great phallus or virile organ; ({%as%}), m. epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-līlā-sarasvatī,%} f. a form of
Tārā, q. v. {%—Mahālugi-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a
book. {%—Mahā-lodhra%} or {%mahā-lodha, as,%} m. a
species of Symplocos (the Bengālī {%pāṭiyālodha,%}
the bark of which is used as an astringent). {%—Mahā-%}
{%loman, ā,%} m., N. of the superior of a Buddhist
monastery; [cf. {%mahā-roman.%}] {%—Mahā-lola, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} excessively eager; ({%as%}), m. a crow. {%—Mahā-%}
{%loha, am,%} n. ‘great iron,’ a magnet, loadstone;
[cf. {%kṛṣṇa-loha.%}] {%—Mahā-vaṃśa, as,%} m. great
lineage or race; ({%as, ā, am%}), sprung from a great
race or family. {%—Mahāvaṃśa-samudbhava, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} sprung or descended from a great race or family.
{%—Mahā-vaṃśya, as, ā, am,%} springing from a high
or noble race, belonging to a very noble family.
{%—Mahāvakāśa (˚hā-av˚), as, ā, am,%} having great
space, very spacious, very roomy or wide. {%—Mahā-%}
{%vaktra, as, ā, am,%} large-mouthed, wide-mouthed,
having a big mouth; ({%as%}), m. epithet of a Rākṣasa
or Dānava. {%—Mahā-vakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} broad-
chested, having a great or wide breast; ({%ās%}), m.
epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-vajraka, am,%} n. (i. e.
{%taila%}), a kind of oil mixed with several other ingre-
dients for medicinal purposes. {%—Mahā-vaṇij,%} see
{%mahā-baṇij%}. {%—Mahā-vada, as,%} m., Ved. ‘speaker
of great words,’ proclaimer or teacher of Vedic
knowledge. {%—Mahā-vadha, as,%} m., Ved. a mighty
or destructive weapon, destructive thunderbolt; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), carrying a mighty weapon or destructive
shaft; (Sāy. {%= mahā-vajra.%}) {%—Mahā-vana, am,%}
n. a great wood, large forest; N. of a Buddhist
monastery in a forest in Udyāna; N. of a large
forest in Vṛndā-vana; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a great
forest. {%—Mahā-vapa, as,%} m. a species of medicinal
plant, Erythrina Indica {%(= mahā-meda)%}. {%—Mahā-%}
{%varā,%} f. Dūrvā grass. {%—Mahā-varāha, as,%} m. ‘a great
boar,’ epithet of Viṣṇu in his boar incarnation; N.
of a king; of a work mentioned in the Sarva-darśana-
saṅgraha. {%—Mahāvaroha (˚hā-av˚), as,%} m. Ficus
Infectoria. {%—Mahā-vartana, am,%} n. high wages,
large pay or allowance. {%—Mahā-vallī,%} f. a large
climbing-plant; Gærtnera Racemosa. {%—Mahā-vasa,%}
{%as,%} m. the Gangetic porpoise, Delphinus Gangeticus.
{%—Mahā-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. possessing much
substance, very wealthy. {%—Mahā-vastu,%} N. of a
work. {%—Mahā-vākya, am,%} n. any long continuous
[Page0760-a+ 81]
composition or literary work (such as the Mahā-
bhārata, Rāmāyaṇa, Raghu-vaṃśa, &c.); a principal
sentence, great proposition, epithet of twelve mystical
utterances of the Upaniṣads (e. g. {%tattvam asi,%}
{%aham brahmāsmi, brahmaivedaṃ sarvam,%} &c.,
especially of the mystic words {%Tattvam%} and {%Om%});
N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Mahā-vāta, as,%} m. a great or
stormy wind, strong blast. {%—Mahāvāta-vyādhi, is,%}
m. a great or severe nervous disorder. {%—Mahā-vātsa-%}
{%pra, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Mahā-vādin, ī,%} m. a
great controversialist. {%—Mahā-vāmadevya, am,%} n.,
N. of a Sāman. {%—Mahā-vāyu, us,%} m. a great gale or
storm, tempestuous wind, strong blast; air (as an
element). {%—Mahā-vārāha,%} N. of a work. {%—Mahā-%}
{%vāruṇī,%} f. the festival on the thirteenth day of the
moon's decrease in the month Caitra. {%—Mahā-vārt-%}
{%tika, am,%} n. ‘the great Vārttika or critical com-
mentary,’ epithet of Kātyāyana's Vārttikas on the
Sūtras of Pāṇini; [cf. {%māhāvārttika.%}] {%—Mahā-%}
{%vārṣikā,%} f. a species of plant. {%—Mahā-vālabhida,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a particular Śastra or hymn. {%—Mahā-%}
{%vāhana,%} a particular high number. {%—Mahā-vi-%}
{%krama, as, ā, am,%} very valorous or courageous,
very heroic; ({%as%}), m., N. of a lion; of a Nāga.
{%—Mahā-vikramin, ī,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Mahā-vighna, as,%} m. a great obstacle. {%—Mahā-%}
{%vijña, as, ā, am,%} very wise or intelligent. {%—Mahā-%}
{%videha,%} N. of a sacred district; ({%ā%}), f. (in the Yoga
system) epithet of a certain {%vṛtti%} or condition
of the {%manas%} or mind. {%—Mahā-vidyā,%} f. a great
or exalted science; a form of Durgā. {%—Mahā-%}
{%vidyut-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a Nāga. {%—Mahā-%}
{%vidyeśvarī (˚yā-īś˚),%} f., N. of a goddess (perhaps a
form of Durgā). {%—Mahā-vipulā,%} f. a kind of Āryā
metre. {%—Mahā-vibhāṣā,%} f. a general alternative, a
rule containing a general alternative. {%—Mahā-vibhā-%}
{%ṣā-śāstra, am,%} n. title of a book. {%—Mahā-vibhūta,%}
a particular high number. {%—Mahā-vibhūti, is, is, i,%}
possessing superhuman power; ({%is%}), m. epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Mahā-vimbara,%} a particular high number.
{%—Mahā-virāva, as, ā, am,%} loud-sounding, far-
resounding, (according to Malli-nātha {%= dīrgha-%}
{%śabda.%}) {%—Mahā-vila = mahā-bila%}. {%—Mahā-vi-%}
{%vāha,%} a particular high number. {%—Mahā-viśiṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} (said to be for {%mahad-viśiṣṭa%}), greatly
or highly distinguished, see Pāṇ. VI. 3, 46. {%—Mahā-%}
{%viṣa, am,%} n. ‘great poison,’ a kind of poison enu-
merated among the Kanda-viṣāṇi; ({%as, ā, am%}),
very poisonous or venomous; ({%as%}), m. Coluber Naga
({%= kāla-sarpa%}), a kind of small serpent said to have
two heads. {%—Mahā-viṣuva, am,%} n. or {%mahāvi-%}
{%ṣuva-saṅkrānti, is,%} f. the vernal equinox, the
moment of the sun's passing into Aries (differing by
several days from European computation). {%—Mahā-%}
{%viṣṇu, us,%} m. the great Viṣṇu. {%—Mahā-vihāra,%}
{%as,%} m. a great Buddhist monastery; N. of a parti-
cular monastery in Ceylon. {%—Mahāvihāra-vāsin,%}
{%inas,%} m. pl., N. of a Buddhist school. {%—Mahā-vīci,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of one of the twenty-one hells or places
of torment (enumerated in Manu IV. 88-90).
{%—Mahā-vīja, as, ā, am,%} having much seed; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%mahā-retas.%}] {%—Mahā-%}
{%vījya, am,%} n. the septum of the scrotum and part
of the perinæum, the perinæum. {%—Mahā-vīta, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Savana. {%—Mahā-vīra, as,%} m. a
great hero; epithet of Viṣṇu; an archer, bowman;
a lion; epithet of Garuḍa, the bird and vehicle of
Viṣṇu; fire, sacrificial fire; a sacrificial vessel; the
thunderbolt of Indra; a white horse; the Indian
cuckoo or koïl ({%= kokila%}); a kind of hawk ({%= sañ-%}
{%cāna%}); a species of plant ({%= eka-vīra%}); N. of a
king; of a son of Bṛhad-ratha; of a son of Priya-
vrata; of a son of Savana, (also read {%mahā-vīta%});
N. of the last or twenty-fourth Arhat of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī, (he is the last and most celebrated Jaina
teacher of the present age, and is supposed to have
flourished in the province of Behar in the sixth
century before the Christian era); ({%ā%}), f. a species
of plant {%(= kṣīra-kākolī)%}. {%—Mahāvīra-carita%} or
{%mahāvīra-caritra, am,%} n. ‘the exploits of the great
hero (Rāma),’ N. of a celebrated drama by Bhava-
[Page0760-b+ 81]
bhūti; ‘the exploits of Mahā-vīra (the Arhat),’ N. of
a book, (in this last sense usually written {%mahāvīra-%}
{%caritra.%}) {%—Mahā-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} of great
strength or energy, very energetic, very powerful
or mighty, very potent; ({%as%}), m., N. of Brahmā;
of an Indra in the Manv-antara of Tāmasa or of
Raucya; of a Buddha; of a Jina or Jaina saint; of
a king (son of Bṛhad-ratha or of Bṛhad-uktha; also
read {%mahā-vīra%}); of a king (son of Bhavan-manyu
or of Manyu); of a Buddhist Bhikṣu; of a species
of edible bulbous root, {%= vārāhī-kanda; (ā),%} f. the
wild cotton-shrub ({%= mahā-śatāvarī%}); epithet of
Sañjñā the wife of Sūrya. {%—Mahā-vṛkṣa, as,%} m.
a great tree; a species of Euphorbia. {%—Mahāvṛkṣa-%}
{%kṣīra, as, am,%} m. n. the milky juice of the above
tree. {%—Mahā-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%} very old or aged.
{%—Mahā-vṛnda, am,%} n. a particular high number
(= 100, 000 Vṛndas). {%—Mahā-vṛṣa, as,%} m. a
great bull; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Mahā-%}
{%vṛhatī,%} see {%mahā-bṛhatī%}. {%—Mahā-vega, as,%} m.
great impetuosity, extreme velocity, excessive speed,
great swiftness or fleetness; ({%as, ā, am%}), very im-
petuous, very fleet or swift, excessively rapid; surg-
ing, raging (as the sea); ({%as%}), m. an ape; the bird
Garuḍa; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
on Skanda. {%—Mahāvega-labdha-sthāma, as,%} m.,
N. of a king of the Garuḍas. {%—Mahā-vegavatī,%} f.
a species of plant. {%—Mahā-vedi, is,%} f. the great Vedi.
{%—Mahā-vedha, as,%} m. epithet of a particular posi-
tion of the hands or feet (in the practice of Yoga).
{%—Mahā-vela, as, ā, am,%} having high tides or strong
currents, billowy, surgy. {%—Mahā-vaipulya, am,%} n.
great magnitude, wide extent. {%—Mahāvaipulya-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Mahā-%}
{%vaira, am,%} n. great enmity. {%—Mahā-vairāja, am,%}
n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Mahā-vaiśvadeva,%} Ved. epithet
of a Graha, q. v. {%—Mahā-vaiśvānara-vrata%} and
{%mahā-vaiśvāmitra%} and {%mahā-vaiṣṭambha, am,%}
n., N. of three Sāmans. {%—Mahā-vyādhi, is,%} m. a
great or severe disease; the black leprosy. {%—Mahā-%}
{%vyāhṛti, is,%} f. a great Vyāhṛti or mystical word,
(the three words {%Bhūr, Bhuvaḥ, Svar,%} pronounced
after the Praṇava {%Om,%} are the three great Vyāhṛtis,
see {%vyāhṛti.%}) {%—Mahā-vyutpatti, is,%} f., N. of a
Sanskrit-Tibetan lexicon. {%—Mahā-vyūha, as,%} m.
epithet of a Samādhi; N. of a Deva-putra. {%—Mahā-%}
{%vraṇa, am,%} n. a serious wound. {%—Mahā-vrata,%}
{%am,%} n. a great duty, fundamental duty (five in num-
ber, according to the Jaina system, viz. refraining
from injury to life, truth, honesty, chastity, and free-
dom from worldly desire); a great vow; a great
religious observance; (Ved.) epithet of a Sāman or
Stotra appointed to be sung on the last day but one
of the Gavām-ayana (applied also to the day itself
or its ceremonies or to the Śastra following the
Stotra); the rule or vow of the Pāśupatas, {%= pāśu-%}
{%pata-vrata; (as, ā, am),%} one who has undertaken
solemn religious duties or vows, performing a great
vow, great in the performance of religious vows,
very devotional; observing the rule or vow of the
Pāśupatas, a Pāśupata; (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda 1. 45, 3, and Nirukta III. 17) {%= mahi-vrata,%}
q. v. {%—Mahāvrata-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. connected
with the Mahā-vrata Sāman, &c. {%—Mahāvrata-%}
{%veṣa-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} wearing the dress of a Pāśupata.
{%—Mahāvratika, as, ā, am,%} related to the Mahā-
vrata Sāman, &c.; observing the rule of the Pāśu-
patas, a Pāśupata. {%—Mahāvratika-veṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} dressed as a Pāśupata. {%—Mahā-vratin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} observing the rule or vow of the Pāśupatas; ({%ī%}),
m. a Pāśupata; an epithet of Śiva; a devotee, ascetic
{%(= joṭiṅga); = uras-kaṭa (?)%}. {%—Mahāvratīya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. relating to the Mahā-vrata Sāman or to
the Mahā-vrata day. {%—Mahā-vrāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
accompanied by a great host (of Maruts, said of
Indra; Sāy. {%marudbhir mahān vrātaḥ samūho%}
{%yasya%}). {%—Mahā-vrīhi, is,%} m. a kind of large rice.
{%—Mahāśa (˚hā-āś˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Mahā-śakuni, is,%} m., N. of a Cakra-
vartin. {%—Mahā-śakti, is, is, i,%} very powerful,
very mighty; ({%is%}), m. epithet of Śiva; of Kārtti-
[Page0760-c+ 81]
keya; of a son of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Mahā-śaṅku, us,%} m.
the sine of the sun's elevation. {%—Mahā-śaṅkha, as,%}
m. a great conch-shell; the temporal or frontal bone,
the forehead; a human bone; a particular high
number (= ten Nikharvas or 1,000,000,000); one
of Kuvera's treasures; N. of a Nāga or serpent-
demon. {%—Mahāśaṅkha-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed
of the temporal or frontal bone. {%—Mahā-śaṭha, as,%}
m. a species of thorn-apple {%(= rāja-dhattūra).%}
{%—Mahā-śaṇapuṣpikā,%} f. a species of plant.
{%—Mahā-śatā%} or {%mahā-śatāvarī,%} f. a species of
plant {%(= bahu-pattrikā)%}. {%—Mahāśana (˚hā-aś˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} eating much, very voracious, a great
eater; ({%as%}), m., N. of an Asura. {%—Mahāśani-%}
{%dhvaja (˚hā-aś˚), as,%} m. a great banner consisting
of the thunderbolt and its lightning, (according to
Malli-nātha on Raghu-v. 3, 56 {%= mahān aśani-%}
{%rūpo dhvajaḥ.%}) {%—Mahā-śabda, as,%} m. a great
noise, loud sound, loud cry; the word {%mahā;%} any
official title beginning with the word {%mahā; (as,%}
{%ā, am),%} making a loud sound, very noisy, very loud.
{%—Mahā-śamī,%} f. a large Acacia Suma. {%—Mahā-%}
{%śambhu, us,%} m. the great Śiva. {%—Mahāśaya (˚hā-%}
{%āś˚), as,%} m. ‘the great receptacle (of water),’ the
sea, ocean; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a noble disposition,
high-minded, magnanimous, liberal, munificent, open,
unsuspicious; ({%as%}), m. a respectable person, gentle-
man; (sometimes a term of respectful address = Sir,
Master.) {%—Mahā-śayana, am,%} n. a great bed or
couch. {%—Mahā-śayyā,%} f. a great or lofty couch,
royal couch or seat, throne. {%—Mahā-śara, as,%} m. a
species of reed {%(= sthūla-śara)%}. {%—Mahā-śalka, as,%}
m. ‘large-scaled,’ a kind of prawn or sea crab (Manu
III. 272). {%—Mahā-śastra, am,%} n. a great weapon,
powerful weapon. {%—Mahā-śāka, am,%} n. a kind of
vegetable. {%—Mahā-śākya, as,%} m. a great Śākya.
{%—Mahā-śākha, as, ā, am,%} having great branches;
({%ā%}), f. a great recension of the Vedic text; the plant
Uraria Lagopodioides. {%—Mahā-śānti, is,%} f., Ved.,
N. of a great expiatory formula (for averting evil).
{%—Mahā-śāla, as, ā, am,%} having a large house;
({%as%}), m. a great householder ({%= mahā-gṛhastha%});
N. of a son of Janam-ejaya; [cf. {%mahā-śīla.%}]
{%—Mahā-śāli, is,%} m. a kind of large and sweet-
smelling rice; [cf. {%mahā-vrīhi.%}] {%—Mahā-śālīna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very modest, exceedingly bashful. {%—Mahā-%}
{%śālvaṇa, am,%} n. ‘great fomentation,’ epithet of a
particular remedy. {%—Mahā-śāsana, am,%} n. great
rule or dominion, great edict or order of government;
({%as, ā, am%}), excercising great dominion, having great
power; ({%as%}), m. (perhaps) a minister who enforces
the royal edicts. {%—Mahāśiraḥ-samudbhava, as,%} m.
(with Jainas) N. of the sixth black Vāsudeva.
{%—Mahā-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} ‘great-headed,’ having
a large head; ({%ās%}), m. a kind of serpent; a species
of lizard; N. of a man; of a Dānava. {%—Mahā-%}
{%śirodhara, as, ā, am,%} having a long or thick neck.
{%—Mahā-śilā,%} f. a kind of weapon. {%—Mahā-śiva,%}
{%as,%} m. the great Śiva. {%—Mahā-śītavatī,%} f. (with
Buddhists) N. of one of the five great tutelary
goddesses (see {%mahā-rakṣā;%} also read {%mahā-śeta-%}
{%vatī%}). {%—Mahā-śītā,%} f. a species of plant, Asparagus
Racemosa {%(= śata-mūlī)%}. {%—Mahā-śīrṣa, as,%} m.,
N. of one of Śiva's attendants. {%—Mahā-śīla, as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Janam-ejaya; [cf. {%mahā-śāla.%}]
{%—Mahā-śukti, is,%} f. a pearl muscle, mother of
pearl. {%—Mahā-śuklā,%} f. an epithet of Sarasvatī.
{%—Mahā-śubhra, am,%} n. silver. {%—Mahā-śūdra,%}
{%as,%} m. a Śūdra in a high position; an upper servant;
a cowherd, herdsman; ({%ī%}), f. a female cow-keeper, a
herdsman's wife; ({%ā%}), f. a Śūdra woman in a high
position. {%—Mahā-śūnya, am,%} n. ‘the great vacuity
or vacancy,’ epithet of a particular spiritual state of
a Yogin. {%—Mahā-śūnyatā,%} f. (with Buddhists) ‘the
great void,’ an epithet of one of the eighteen vacuities
or vacancies. {%—Mahā-śetavatī,%} f., see {%mahā-śītavatī.%}
{%—Mahā-śairīṣa, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Mahā-%}
{%śaila, as,%} m. a great rock or mountain; N. of a
mountain. {%—Mahā-śoṇa, as,%} m. ‘the great Śoṇa,’
N. of a river; [cf. {%śoṇa.%}] {%—Mahā-śauṇḍī,%} f. a
species of plant {%(= śveta-kiṇihī)%}. {%—Mahā-śauṣira, %}
[Page0761-a+ 81]
{%as,%} m. a kind of scurvy in the mouth. {%—Mahāśman%}
{%(˚hā-aś˚), ā,%} m. a precious stone, ruby. {%—Mahā-%}
{%śmaśāna, am,%} n. ‘the great cemetery or place of
burial,’ epithet of the city of Benares (whither Hindūs
are in the habit of going to die). {%—Mahā-śyāmā,%}
f. Ichnocarpus Frutescens; Dalbergia Sissoo. {%—Ma-%}
{%hāśrama (˚hā-āś˚), as,%} m. ‘the great hermitage,’
N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Mahā-śramaṇa, as,%}
m. ‘the great religious mendicant,’ an epithet of
Śākya-muni. {%—Mahā-śrāvaka, as,%} m. a great Śrā-
vaka or disciple (of Śākya-muni). {%—Mahā-śrāva-%}
{%ṇikā,%} f. a species of plant ({%= muṇḍī, mahā-muṇḍī,%}
&c.). {%—Mahā-śrāvaṇī,%} f. a species of plant, (per-
haps) Sphæranthus Indicus. {%—Mahā-śrī, īs,%} f., N. of
a Buddhist goddess; an epithet of Lakṣmī. {%—Mahā-%}
{%śruti, is,%} m., N. of a Gandharva. {%—Mahāśva (˚hā-%}
{%aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a man. {%—Mahāśva-śālā (˚hā-%}
{%aś˚),%} f. a great stable, principal stable, royal stables.
{%—Mahā-śvāsa, as,%} m. ‘great breathing or difficulty of
breathing,’ a kind of asthma. {%—Mahā-śveta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very white, of a dazzling whiteness; ({%ā%}), f. a white
variety of the Convolvulus Paniculatus or Batatas
Paniculata, Clitoria Ternatea ({%= śveta-kiṇihī, mahā-%}
{%śaṇapuṣpikā%}); white or candied sugar; an epithet
of Sarasvatī; of Durgā; N. of a woman. {%—Mahā-śveta-%}
{%ghaṇṭī,%} f. a species of plant {%(= mahā-śaṇapuṣ-%}
{%pikā)%}. {%—Mahā-ṣaṣṭhī,%} f. a form of Durgā.
{%—Mahā-ṣoḍhā-nyāsa, as,%} m. epithet of a parti-
cular position of the hands and feet. {%—Mahāṣṭamī%}
{%(˚hā-aṣ˚),%} f. ‘the great eighth,’ epithet of the
eighth day in the light half of the month Āśvina (or
festival in honour of Durgā, called the Durgā-pūjā).
{%—Mahāṣṭamī-sandhi-pūjā,%} f. the festival de-
scribed above. {%—Mahā-saṅkaṭa, as, ā, am,%} very
intricate or difficult, full of great difficulties, very
troublesome. {%—Mahā-saṅkrānti, is,%} f. ‘the great
passing,’ the sun's entrance into Capricorn, the
winter solstice. {%—Mahā-sañjñā,%} f. a particular high
number. {%—Mahā-satī,%} f. a highly virtuous woman,
a very constant or faithful wife, any woman who is
a pattern of conjugal fidelity. {%—Mahā-satobṛhatī,%}
Ved. a kind of metre. {%—Mahā-satomukhā,%} f. a
kind of metre. {%—Mahā-sattā,%} f. absolute being,
absolute existence. {%—Mahā-sattra, am,%} n., Ved. a
great Soma sacrifice, a great festival on which Soma
is offered. {%—Mahā-sattva, as,%} m. a great creature,
large animal; ({%am%}), n. great essence or being; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), having a great or noble essence, noble,
good, virtuous, just; ({%as%}), m. epithet of a Bodhi-
sattva; of Kuvera [cf. {%mahā-sanna%}]; of Śākya-
muni as heir to the throne. {%—Mahāsattva-badha,%}
{%as,%} m. the killing of a great creature or large animal.
{%—Mahā-satya, as,%} m. epithet of Yama. {%—Mahā-%}
{%sana (˚hā-ās˚), am,%} n. a great seat, splendid throne.
{%—Mahāsana-paricchada, as, ā, am,%} amply sup-
plied with seats and furniture. {%—Mahā-sandhi-%}
{%vigraha, as,%} m. the office of prime minister of
peace and war; [cf. {%mahā-sāndhivigrahika.%}]
{%—Mahā-sanna, as,%} m. epithet of Kuvera; [cf.
{%mahā-sattva.%}] {%—Mahā-saptamī,%} f. ‘the great
seventh,’ epithet of a particular seventh day. {%—Mahā-%}
{%saphara, as,%} m. a species of fish. {%—Mahā-samaṅgā,%}
f. a species of plant (called in Hindī {%kagahiyā%}).
{%—Mahā-samaya,%} N. of a Buddhist Sūtra. {%—Mahā-%}
{%samāpta,%} a particular high number. {%—Mahā-sa-%}
{%mudra, as,%} m. ‘the great sea,’ the ocean. {%—Mahā-%}
{%sambhava, as,%} m. epithet of a particular world.
{%—Mahā-sammata, as, ā, am,%} highly honoured or
esteemed; ({%as%}), m. (with Buddhists) N. of the first
king of the present age of the world; N. of a
Turuṣka chief. {%—Mahāsammatīya, ās,%} m. pl., N.
of a Buddhist school. {%—Mahā-sammohana, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} greatly bewildering, greatly confusing the mind;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Mahā-sarasvatī,%} f.
the great Sarasvatī. {%—Mahā-saroja, am,%} n. a parti-
cular high number {%(= mahāmbuja)%}. {%—Mahā-sarga,%}
{%as,%} m. a great or completely new creation (after a
complete destruction of the world), a renovation of
the universe. {%—Mahā-sarja, as,%} m. Terminalia
Tomentosa; the jack tree, Artocarpus Integrifolia.
{%—Mahā-sarpa, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Mahā- %}
[Page0761-b+ 81]
{%saha, as, ā, am,%} much-enduring, bearing much;
({%as%}), m. Trapa Bispinosa; ({%ā%}), f. the globe Ama-
ranth or Gomphræna Globosa; Glycine Debilis; a
medicinal plant, Wrightia Antidysenterica. {%—Mahā-%}
{%sahasra-pramardanī%} or {%-pramardinī,%} f. (with
Buddhists) N. of one of the five great tutelary god-
desses; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Buddhist Sūtra. {%—Mahā-%}
{%sāgara-prabhā-gambhīra-dhara, as,%} m., N. of a
king of the Garuḍas. {%—Mahā-sāṅghika, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a Buddhist school, (sometimes spelt {%mahā-%}
{%saṅghika.%}) {%—Mahā-sādhanabhāga, as,%} m. a great
executive minister or officer of state. {%—Mahā-sādhu,%}
{%us, vī, u,%} very good, exceedingly virtuous, excel-
lent; ({%vī%}), f. {%= mahā-satī,%} q. v. {%—Mahā-sānta-%}
{%pana, as, am,%} m. n. ‘greatly tormenting,’ a kind
of severe penance (viz. subsisting for six successive
days respectively on cow's urine, cow-dung, milk,
curds, ghee, and water in which Kuśa grass has been
boiled, and fasting on the seventh; or instead of one
day some authorities assign a period of three days to
each penance, considering the first kind as the common
Sāntapana, see Manu XI. 212; others omit the sixth
and seventh penance, making the whole last fifteen
days). {%—Mahā-sāndhivigrahika, as,%} m. the prime
minister of peace and war; [cf. {%mahā-sandhivigraha.%}]
{%—Mahā-sāman, a,%} n. a great Sāman. {%—Mahā-sā-%}
{%manta, as,%} m. a great lord of the borders; a large
border district (?) or great realm. {%—Mahā-sāmarāja,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Mahā-sāmānya, am,%} n. the
widest universality, generality in the broadest sense.
{%—Mahā-sāra, as, ā, am,%} having great sap or vigour,
strong; ({%as%}), m. a tree akin to the Acacia Catechu;
({%am%}), n., N. of a city (?) . {%—Mahā-sārathi, is,%} m.
‘the great charioteer (of the sun),’ epithet of Aruṇa
or the Dawn. {%—Mahā-sārtha, as,%} m. a great caravan.
{%—Mahā-sāvetasa, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Mahā-%}
{%sāhasa, am,%} n. excessive violence, great cruelty or
outrage, brutal assault; extreme audacity. {%—Mahā-%}
{%sāhasika, as,%} m. a daring robber or one who uses
great violence, one who carries off property openly
and by force; an assaulter, violator. {%—Mahā-sāha-%}
{%sika-tā,%} f. great violence, excessive energy; great
boldness or daring; {%mahā-sāhasikatayā,%} with the
greatest energy, in a very decided manner. {%—Mahāsi%}
{%(˚hā-asi), is,%} m. a large scimitar or sword. {%—Mahā-%}
{%siṃha, as,%} m. a great lion; a fabulous animal with
eight legs ({%= śarabha%}); N. of two princes. {%—Mahā-%}
{%siṃha-gati, is, is, i,%} having the gait or bearing of
a noble lion. {%—Mahāsiṃha-tejas, ās,%} m., N. of a
Buddha. {%—Mahā-siddha, as,%} m. ‘very perfect,’ a
great saint, perfect Yogin. {%—Mahā-siddhānta, as,%}
m., N. of Ārya-bhaṭṭa's work on astronomy. {%—Mahā-%}
{%siddhi, is,%} f. ‘great perfection,’ a particular form of
magical power (of which eight kinds are enumerated).
{%—Mahā-sukha, am,%} n. great pleasure, excessive
enjoyment; copulation; ({%as%}), m. ‘having great joy,
very happy,’ a Buddha. {%—Mahā-sugandha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very fragrant; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant, {%=%}
{%gandha-nākulī, sarpākṣī; (am),%} n. a fragrant
unguent. {%—Mahā-sugandhi, is,%} m. a kind of anti-
dote. {%—Mahā-sudarśana, as,%} m., N. of a Cakra-
vartin. {%—Mahā-suparṇa, as,%} m., Ved. a great bird.
{%—Mahāsura (˚hā-as˚), as,%} m. ‘a great Asura or
demon,’ N. of a Dānava; ({%ī%}), f. ‘great female
demon,’ epithet of Durgā. {%—Mahā-suhaya, as,%} m.
a high-spirited horse. {%—Mahā-sūkta, am,%} n., Ved.
a great hymn; ({%āni%}), n. pl. the great hymns of the
tenth Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda (i. e. 1-128); ({%as%}), m.
the composer of the great hymns (of the tenth Maṇ-
ḍala). {%—Mahā-sūkṣma, as, ā, am,%} very fine or
minute, very subtile; ({%ā%}), f. sand. {%—Mahā-sūci, is,%}
m. (with {%vyūha%}) a particular military array or mode
of arraying troops in battle. {%—Mahā-sūta, as,%} m. a
military drum. {%—Mahā-setu, us,%} m. ‘the great
bridge,’ an epithet of certain sacred syllables pro-
nounced before a particular mystical formula. {%—Ma-%}
{%hāsena-nareśvara, as,%} m., N. of the father of the
eighth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī; [cf. {%ma-%}
{%hasena-nareśvara.%}] {%—Mahā-senā,%} f. a great army;
({%as, ā, am,%}), having a great army; ({%as%}), m. the
commander of a large force, a general; an epithet of
[Page0761-c+ 81]
Kārttikeya or Skanda; of Śiva; the father of the
eighth Jina or Jaina saint of the present era; N. of
various sovereigns. {%—Mahāsenā-vyūha-parākrama,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mahā-soma, as,%} m. a species
of Soma plant. {%—Mahā-skandha, as, ā, am,%} large-
shouldered, broad-shouldered, high-shouldered, hav-
ing large or high shoulders; ({%as%}), m. a camel; ({%ā%}),
f. ‘having a strong stem,’ Eugenia Jambolana. {%—Ma-%}
{%hā-skandhin, ī,%} m. a kind of fabulous animal with
eight legs. {%—Mahā-stūpa, as,%} m. ‘the great Stūpa
or pile,’ N. of a great Buddhist temple or structure
for containing relics. {%—Mahā-stoma, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having a great Stoma. {%—Mahāstra (˚hā-as˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a great weapon, powerful missile. {%—Mahā-%}
{%sthalī,%} f. ‘the great ground,’ the earth. {%—Mahā-%}
{%sthavira, as,%} m. (with Buddhists) a very aged
Bhikṣu. {%—Mahā-sthāna, am,%} n. a great position,
high position or station, lofty rank. {%—Mahāsthāna-%}
{%prāpta, as,%} m. ‘one who has attained a high station,’
N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Mahā-sthāla,%} a species of
plant. {%—Mahā-snāyu, us,%} m. a great artery. {%—Ma-%}
{%hāspada (˚hā-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} having a great
position, mighty, powerful. {%—Mahā-smṛti, is,%} f.
great tradition; epithet of Durgā. {%—Mahāsmṛti-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} containing the great tradition.
{%—Mahāsya (˚hā-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. large-
mouthed, having a big mouth. {%—Mahā-sragvin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} wearing a great garland; ({%ī%}), m. epithet of
Śiva; [cf. {%mahā-māla.%}] {%—Mahā-svana, as,%} m. a
loud sound or noise; ({%as, ā, am%}), making a loud noise,
loud-sounding, very noisy; ({%as%}), m. a kind of drum or
trumpet ({%= malla-tūrya%}); N. of an Asura; ({%am%}),
ind. noisily, loudly. {%—Mahā-svara, as, ā, am,%} loud-
sounding, loud-voiced, crying aloud. {%—Mahāsvāda%}
{%(˚hā-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} tasteful, savoury. {%—Mahā-%}
{%svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a commentator. {%—Mahā-%}
{%haṃsa, as,%} m. ‘the great Haṃsa’ (q. v.), an epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Mahā-hanu, us, us, u,%} large-jawed,
having large jaws; ({%us%}), m., N. of a Nāga; of a
Dānava; of a being attending on Śiva. {%—Mahā-%}
{%hayā, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mahā-harmya, am,%}
n. a great building or palace, stately edifice, splendid
mansion. {%—Mahāhava (˚hā-āh˚), as,%} m. a great
war or battle, pitched battle. {%—Mahā-havis, is,%} n.
the principal oblation at the Sāka-medha sacrifice
(Ved.); clarified butter (used as an epithet of Śiva,
who is also called Havis in Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p.
1196); ({%is, is, is%}), Ved. relating to or connected
with the offering called Mahā-havis. {%—Mahā-hasta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} large-handed, having large hands; ({%as%}),
m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Mahā-hastin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved.
possessing large hands. {%—Mahā-hāsa, as,%} m. great
laughter, loud laughter. {%—Mahāhi (˚hā-ahi˚), is,%} m.
a great serpent. {%—Mahāhi-gandhā,%} f. a species of
plant {%(= gandha-nākulī)%}. {%—Mahā-himavat, ān,%}
m., N. of a mountain. {%—Mahāhi-valaya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} encircled with great serpents. {%—Mahāhi-śa-%}
{%yana, am,%} n. the sleeping (of Viṣṇu) on the great
serpent. {%—Mahā-hetu,%} a particular high number.
{%—Mahā-hailihila,%} see Pāṇ. VI. 2, 38. {%—Mahāhna%}
{%(˚hā-ah˚), as,%} m. midday, far advanced time of
day, the afternoon; [cf. {%mahā-niśā, mahā-rātra.%}]
{%—Mahā-hrada, as,%} m. a great tank or pool; N.
of a sacred bathing-place and of a mythical pool;
epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%tīrtha-m˚.%}] {%—Mahā-hrasva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very short, exceedingly low; ({%ā%}), f.
cowitch, Carpopogon Pruriens, Mucuna Pruritus.
{%—Mahā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make great,
magnify, exalt. {%—Maheccha (˚hā-ic˚), as, ā, am,%}
desirous of great ends, striving after great things,
having lofty aims or aspirations, ambitious; mag-
nanimous, high-minded, liberal. {%—Maheccha-tā,%} f.
the having great aims, ambition. {%—Mahendra%}
{%(˚hā-in˚), as,%} m. great Indra; any great chief or
leader, ({%sarva-devānām m˚,%} the great chief of all
the gods); N. of a younger brother (according to
others a son) of Aśoka; of king; of a mountain
or range of mountains (said to be one of the seven
principal chains in Bhārata-varṣa or India, and some-
times identified with the northern parts of the Ghats
of the Peninsula); N. of a place; a particular high
[Page0762-a+ 80]
number; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; ({%ī%}), f. a species of
plant, {%= mahendra-vāruṇī;%} [cf. {%mahī-m˚, mā-%}
{%hendra.%}] {%—Mahendra-kadalī,%} f. a species of
banana. {%—Mahendra-karman, ā, ā, a,%} performing
deeds equalling great Indra's. {%—Mahendra-ketu, us,%}
m. great Indra's banner. {%—Mahendra-gupta, as,%} m.
‘protected by great Indra,’ N. of a king. {%—Mahen-%}
{%dra-cāpa, as,%} m. ‘great Indra's bow,’ a rainbow;
[cf. {%indra-cāpa.%}] {%—Mahendra-tva, am,%} n. the
name or rank of great Indra. {%—Mahendra-dhvaja,%}
{%as,%} m. great Indra's banner. {%—Mahendra-nagarī,%}
f. ‘great Indra's city,’ i. e. Amarā-vatī. {%—Mahendra-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mahendra-mantrin,%}
{%ī,%} m., Ved. ‘great Indra's counsellor,’ an epithet of
the planet Jupiter or Bṛhaspati. {%—Mahendra-var-%}
{%man, ā,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mahendra-vāruṇī,%}
f. a species of plant. {%—Mahendra-śakti, is,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Mahendra-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Mahendrāṇī%} (fr. {%mahendra%}), f. the great
Indra's wife, i. e. Śaci. {%—Mahendrāditya (˚ra-ād˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mahendriya%} or {%mahen-%}
{%drīya, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%mahendra%} above), sacred to
or belonging to great Indra. {%—Mahendrotsava%}
{%(˚ra-ut˚), as,%} m. the festival of the great Indra.
{%—Maheśa (˚hā-īśa), as,%} m. the great lord, the
great god; epithet of Śiva; of a Buddhist deity; of
various men; of a lexicographer; of a son of Kāśi-
nātha; of the father of Kṣema-karṇa; [cf. {%mā-%}
{%heśa.%}] {%—Maheśa-bandhu, us,%} m. a fruit tree, Ægle
Marmelos. {%—Maheśākhya (˚śa-ākh˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the name of ‘great lord,’ highly distinguished
or eminent. {%—Maheśāna (˚hā-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘great
lord,’ epithet of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. ‘great lady,’ epithet of
Pārvatī. {%—Maheśitṛ (˚hā-īś˚), tā,%} m. ‘great lord,’
epithet of Śiva. {%—Maheśvara (˚hā-īś˚), as,%} m. a
great lord, sovereign, chief, ({%tridaśānām-m˚,%} chief
of the gods, i. e. Indra; {%loka-m˚,%} lord of the world,
i. e. Kṛṣṇa; {%devāsura-m˚,%} lord of gods and
Asuras, i. e. Śiva); a N. of Śiva; God (as opposed
to {%pra-kṛti%}); epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of a Deva-
putra; of a Yakṣa; of various men; of the son of
Brāhma (the author of the Viśva-prakāśa and Sāha-
sāṅka-caritra); of the father of Bhāskara; of the
author of the Vāmana-vṛtti-ṭīkā; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
Loka-pālas or guardians of the world (Indra, Yama,
Agni, and Varuṇa); ({%ī%}), f. ‘great lady or mistress,’
an epithet of Durgā; of Dākṣāyaṇī in Mahā-kāla;
a kind of brass or bell-metal ({%= brahma-rīti, rāja-%}
{%rīti%}); Clitoria Ternatea. {%—Maheśvara-kara-cyutā,%}
f. ‘dropped from the hand of Śiva,’ an epithet of
the river Kara-toyā, q. v. {%—Maheśvara-tva, am,%}
n. supreme lordship or sovereignty, supreme dominion
or empire. {%—Maheśvara-siddhānta, as,%} m. {%= pa-%}
{%śupati-śāstra,%} q. v. {%—Maheṣu (˚hā-iṣu), us,%} m.
a great arrow; ({%us, us, u%}), having a great arrow.
{%—Maheṣudhi (˚hā-iṣ˚), is,%} m. f. a great quiver.
{%—Maheṣvāsa (˚hā-iṣ˚), as,%} m. a great archer
or bowman, a warrior, champion. {%—Maheṣvāsa-%}
{%tama, as,%} m. a very great archer or warrior.
{%—Mahaikoddiṣṭa (˚hā-eka-ud˚), am,%} n., N. of a
kind of funeral ceremony or festival. {%—Mahaitareya%}
{%(˚hā-ait˚), am,%} n., Ved., N. of a Vedic text. {%—Ma-%}
{%hairaṇḍa (˚hā-er˚), as,%} m. a species of Ricinus
({%= sthūlairaṇḍa)%}. {%—Mahailā (˚hā-elā),%} f. great
cardamoms. {%—Mahaiśvarya (˚hā-aiś˚), am,%} n.
supreme lordship or sovereignty, great power or
dominion. {%—Mahokṣa (˚hā-uk˚), as,%} m. a large
bull or ox, great ox, full-grown bull. {%—Mahokṣa-%}
{%tā,%} f. the state or age of a great bull. {%—Mahocchraya%}
{%(˚hā-uc˚), as, ā, am,%} of great height or elevation,
very elevated or lofty. {%—Mahotkā (˚hā-ut˚),%} f.
(probably for {%maholkā,%} q. v.), lightning. {%—Mahot-%}
{%tama (˚hā-ut˚),%} N. of a particular fragrant per-
fume (?). {%—Mahotpala (˚hā-ut˚), am,%} n. a large
water-lily, the lotus, Nelumbium Speciosum; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in Kamalākṣa. {%—Mahotpāta%}
{%(˚hā-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} very portentous, having great
prodigies. {%—Mahotsaṅga (˚hā-ut˚),%} a particular
high number. {%—Mahotsava (˚hā-ut˚), as,%} m. a
great festival; any great rejoicing, great joy or
gladness; the god of love [cf. {%madana-m˚%}]; ({%as, %}
[Page0762-b+ 81]
{%ā, am%}), very festive, holding a great festival. {%—Ma-%}
{%hotsava-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of great festi-
vals, observing great festivals. {%—Mahotsāha (˚hā-%}
{%ut˚), as,%} m. great effort or exertion, great diligence;
({%as, ā, am%}), possessing great energy, making great
efforts or exertions, very energetic or persevering.
{%—Mahodadhi (˚hā-ud˚), is,%} m. ‘great water-
receptacle,’ the great ocean, a great sea (of which
Mahodadhis, according to some, there are four);
epithet of Indra. {%—Mahodadhi-ja, as,%} m. ‘ocean-
born,’ a muscle, shell. {%—Mahodaya (˚hā-ud˚), as,%}
m. great happiness or prosperity; great elevation
or eminence, pre-eminence, sovereignty, greatness,
pride; final beatitude, the final emancipation of the
soul; ({%as, ā, am,%}), giving or possessing great happi-
ness, great in prosperous results, very fortunate or
lucky, very prosperous, of great prosperity, having
great light or splendor, very glorious; feeling or
thinking one's self excessively lucky; ({%as%}), m. one
who has great elevation or eminence, a lord, master;
N. of a mountain; of the city and district of Kānya-
kubja or Canouj, (in this sense also {%ā, am,%} f. n.);
N. of a Vāsiṣṭha; of a royal chamberlain (who
built a temple called after himself, Mahodaya-svā-
min); N. of another person; sour milk with honey;
({%ā%}), f. Uraria Lagopodioides; N. of a mythical town
on mount Meru; of a hall or dwelling in the world
of the moon. {%—Mahodara (˚hā-ud˚), am,%} n. a
large belly or abdomen, enlargement of the abdomen;
dropsy; ({%as, ī, am%}), big-bellied, having a large
stomach or protuberant belly; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Nāga; of a Dānava; of a Rākṣasa; of a son of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of Viśvāmitra; of a Brāh-
man; ({%ī%}), f. Asparagus Racemosus. {%—Mahodara-%}
{%mukha, as,%} m., N. of one of Śiva's attendants.
{%—Mahodareśvara (˚ra-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a
Liṅga. {%—Mahodarya, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Maho-%}
{%dāra (˚hā-ud˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} mighty, powerful.
{%—Mahodyama (˚hā-ud˚), as,%} m. great effort or
exertion, extreme energy; ({%as, ā, am%}), making
great exertions, using great efforts, very laborious
or industrious, very diligent or persevering; studi-
ously occupied or busily engaged in. {%—Mahodyoga%}
{%(˚hā-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} making great exertions, very
laborious or industrious. {%—Mahonnata (˚hā-un˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very high, exceedingly lofty, much ele-
vated; ({%as%}), m. the palm or palmyra tree. {%—Mahon-%}
{%nati (˚hā-un˚), is,%} f. great elevation, high position,
high rank. {%—Mahonmada (˚hā-un˚), as,%} m. exces-
sive intoxication, great ecstasy; a species of fish
(commonly called Phalaï; cf. {%madārmada%}). {%—Ma-%}
{%honmāna (˚hā-un˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. extensive;
weighty (?). {%—Mahopakāra (˚hā-up˚), as,%} m. great
aid or assistance. {%—Mahopaniṣad (˚hā-up˚), t,%} f.
a great Upaniṣad. {%—Mahopaniṣada (˚hā-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a great secret science or mystical doctrine.
{%—Mahopamā,%} f., N. of a river; (also read {%mahā-%}
{%pagā.%}) {%—Mahopādhyāya (˚hā-up˚), as,%} m. ‘great
teacher, great preceptor,’ epithet of Vidyā-nātha; of
Bhāravi. {%—Mahopāsaka (˚hā-up˚), as,%} m. a Bud-
dhist lay-brother (see {%mahāpāsaka%}). {%—Mahoraga%}
{%(˚hā-ur˚), as,%} m. a great serpent, a great Nāga or
serpent-demon forming one of the classes inhabiting
Pātāla, (with Jainas the Mahoragas are a class of
Vyantaras); ({%am%}), n. the root of the Tabernæmon-
tana Coronaria. {%—Mahoraska (˚hā-ur˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘broad-chested,’ having a wide breast; ({%as%}), m. epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Maholkā (˚hā-ul˚),%} f. a great
meteor; a great torch or firebrand; lightning (? see
{%mahotkā%}). {%—Mahoṣṭha (˚hā-oṣ˚), as, ā%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} great-lipped, having large lips; ({%as%}), m. epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Mahaugha (˚hā-ogha), as,%} m., N.
of a son of Tvaṣṭṛ (Kathā-sarit-s. VIII. 48, 95).
{%—Mahaujas (˚hā-oj˚), as,%} n. great vigour or
energy, great might or power; ({%ās, ās, as%}), having
great vigour or energy, very vigorous, full of vital
power, very mighty or powerful, having great splendor
or glory; ({%ās%}), m. a hero, champion; N. of a king;
({%asas%}), m. pl., N. of a particular race or people.
{%—Mahaujasa (˚hā-oj˚), am,%} n. the discus of
Viṣṇu. {%—Mahaujaska (˚hā-oj˚), as, ā, am, = %}
[Page0762-c+ 81]
{%mahaujas%}. {%—Mahaudavāhi (˚hā-aud˚), is,%} m.,
N. of a Vedic teacher. {%—Mahauṣadha (˚hā-%}
{%auṣ˚), am,%} n. a very efficacious drug, a sovereign
remedy, panacea; epithet of certain very strong or
pungent plants, such as dried ginger, garlic, Allium
Ascalonicum, birch, long pepper {%(= bhūmy-āhulya,%}
{%vārāhī-kanda, vatsa-nābha)%}. {%—Mahauṣadhi,%}
{%is,%} or {%mahauṣadhī (˚hā-oṣ˚),%} f. a great or
very efficacious medicinal plant; epithet of various
medicinal plants; ({%is%}), f. Dūrvā grass; a sort of
sensitive plant, Mimosa Pudica; ({%ī%}), f. Hingstha
Repens ({%= śveta-kaṇṭakārī, brāhmī, kaṭukā%});
dried ginger.
<LEND>

<L>36716<pc>0762-c<k1>mahAnta<k2>mahAnta
{%Mahānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ great, large; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a king.
<LEND>

<L>36717<pc>0762-c<k1>mahAyya<k2>mahAyya
{%Mahāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be enjoyed; to be
honoured, (Sāy. {%= pūjya.%})
<LEND>

<L>36718<pc>0762-c<k1>mahi<k2>mahi
{%Mahi%}¦ (used in Ved. as an adj. in nom. and acc.
sing. n.) {%= mahat, prauḍha,%} great, excessive, large;
({%i%}), ind. greatly, very, exceedingly, much; in Ṛg-
veda 1. 130, 7, {%mahi = mahate,%} dat. c.; ({%is, i%}),
m. n. greatness; ({%is%}), m. {%= mahat,%} intellect; ({%is%}),
f. {%= mahī,%} the earth. {%—Mahi-keru, us, us, u,%} Ved.
(according to Sāy. {%= prauḍha-karman%}), performing
great rites or ceremonies; (perhaps) praising highly,
greatly extolling. {%—Mahi-kṣatra, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
possessing great power, very mighty; (Sāy. {%= pra-%}
{%bhūta-bala.%}) {%—Mahi-datta, as,%} m. ({%mahi%} for
{%mahī%}), ‘earth-given,’ N. of a man. {%—Mahi-dāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. ({%mahi%} for {%mahī%}), Ved., N. of a son of
Itarā (Aitareya). {%—Mahidāsa-budha%} or {%mahidāsa-%}
{%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a commentator {%(= mahī-%}
{%dhara)%}. {%—Mahi-nasa, as,%} m. a form of Śiva or
Rudra. {%—Mahi-magha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
much wealth, opulent; having much food; (Sāy.
{%= mahad dhanam annam vā yasya.%}) {%—Mahi-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} much, abundant. {%—Mahi-vṛdh,%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. giving great wealth, increasing great
wealth ({%= mahatāṃ dhanānāṃ vardhayitṛ%});
greatly rejoicing. {%—Mahi-vrata, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having great power, ruling mightily, accomplisher of
great acts, performing mighty deeds; (Sāy. {%= pra-%}
{%bhūta-karman, mahā-karman, mahā-vrata,%}
q. v.) {%—Mahi-ṣvaṇi, is, is, i%} (i. e. {%mahi + svani%}),
Ved. very noisy, making a great noise; (Sāy. {%=%}
{%prabhūta-dhvani.%})
<LEND>

<L>36719<pc>0762-c<k1>mahita<k2>mahita
{%Mahita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured, celebrated at a
festival, revered, highly esteemed, proper, right;
({%as%}), m., scil. {%gaṇa,%} epithet of a class of Manes;
N. of a man; of a Deva-putra; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
river, (also read {%a-hitā%}); ({%am%}), n. the trident of
Śiva. {%—Mahitāmbhas (˚ta-am˚), ās, ās, as,%} whose
waters are honoured or esteemed (Kirāt. V. 7).
<LEND>

<L>36720<pc>0762-c<k1>mahitvA<k2>mahitvA
{%Mahitvā,%}¦ ind. having honoured or esteemed.
<LEND>

<L>36721<pc>0762-c<k1>mahin<k2>mahin<h>1
1. {%mahin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. great, powerful, extensive.
 — 1. {%mahi-tā,%} f. or {%mahi-tva, am,%} n. greatness,
might, power, magnitude. {%—Mahi-tvana, am,%} n.,
Ved. greatness, might, power; {%mahitvanā,%} inst. c.
{%= mahattvena,%} by greatness. {%—Mahin-tama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. greatest, most powerful, very extensive.
<LEND>

<L>36722<pc>0762-c<k1>mahin<k2>mahin<h>2
2. {%mahin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ keeping a feast, observing a
festival, festive. {%—2. mahi-tā,%} f. the observance of
a festival, festivity.
<LEND>

<L>36723<pc>0762-c<k1>mahina<k2>mahina
{%Mahina, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. great, powerful, exten-
sive; ({%am%}), n. sovereignty, dominion ({%= rājya%}).
<LEND>

<L>36724<pc>0762-c<k1>mahiman<k2>mahiman
{%Mahiman, ā,%}¦ m. greatness, magnitude, grandeur,
majesty, glory; might, power, energy; exaltation,
high rank; a great person, anything great; N. of a
man; the magical power of increasing size at will;
illimitability, magnitude (as one of Śiva's attributes);
epithet of two Grahas at the Aśva-medha sacrifice
(Ved.); {%mahimnaḥ stavaḥ,%} ‘praise of (Śiva's)
majesty,’ title of a poem in thirty-four stanzas; {%ma-%}
{%himnā,%} ind. (Ved. {%mahinā%}), mightily, powerfully,
forcibly. {%—Mahima-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Mahima-sundara, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36725<pc>0762-c<k1>mahimA<k2>mahimA
{%Mahimā,%}¦ f. greatness, &c. {%= mahiman%} above.
{%—Mahimā-vat, ān,%} m., scil. {%gaṇa,%} epithet of a
class of Manes.
<LEND>

<L>36726<pc>0762-c<k1>mahiza<k2>mahiza
{%Mahiṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. great, powerful; ({%as%}),
m. ‘the great or powerful animal,’ a buffalo [cf.
[Page0763-a+ 81]
{%pañca-m˚%}]; N. of an Asura or demon slain by
Durgā; of a Sādhya; of a sage (associated with
Ātreya and Vara-ruci as author of a commentary on
the Prātiśākhya of the Yajur-veda); the emblem and
vehicle of Yama; the emblem of one of the Jaina
saints; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people [cf. {%māhiṣa%}];
({%ī%}), f. a buffalo-cow, ({%grāmya-mahiṣī,%} a tame
buffalo-cow); ‘powerfull woman,’ any woman of
high rank, especially the first or properly conse-
crated wife of a king, a queen consort, any queen,
({%sarvā mahiṣyaḥ,%} all the king's wives); the
female of a bird; (according to some) an im-
moral woman or money gained by a wife's prosti-
tution [cf. {%māhiṣika%}]; a species of medicinal
plant; [cf. {%dhūma-mahiṣī.%}] {%—Mahiṣa-kanda,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of plant with a tuberous root.
{%—Mahiṣa-ga, as, ā, am,%} riding upon a buffalo.
{%—Mahiṣa-ghnī,%} f. ‘slayer of Mahiṣa,’ an epithet
of Durgā. {%—Mahiṣa-tva, am,%} n. the being a
buffalo, the state or condition of a buffalo. {%—Ma-%}
{%hiṣa-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘having a buffalo for an
emblem,’ epithet of the god Yama. {%—Mahiṣa-%}
{%pāla%} or {%mahiṣa-pālaka, as,%} m. a buffalo-keeper,
herdsman of buffaloes. {%—Mahiṣa-mardinī,%} f.
‘crusher of Mahiṣa,’ the goddess Durgā. {%—Mahi-%}
{%ṣa-vallī,%} f. a kind of creeper. {%—Mahiṣa-vāhana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having a buffalo for a vehicle,’ epithet of
the god Yama. {%—Mahiṣākṣa%} or {%mahiṣākṣaka%}
{%(˚ṣā-ak˚), as,%} m. a kind of bdellium; [cf. {%gug-%}
{%gulu.%}] {%—Mahiṣānanā (˚ṣa-ān˚),%} f. ‘buffalo-
faced,’ N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
{%—Mahiṣārdana (˚ṣa-ar˚), as,%} m. epithet of
Skanda. {%—Mahiṣāsura (˚ṣa-as˚), as,%} m. the
Asura or demon Mahiṣa who was slain by Durgā,
(the country of Mysore is said to take its name from
this word.) {%—Mahiṣāsura-ghātinī,%} f. ‘slayer of
the Asura Mahiṣa,’ an epithet of Durgā. {%—Mahi-%}
{%ṣāsura-mathanī%} or {%mahiṣāsura-mardanī%} or
{%mahiṣāsura-sūdanī,%} f. ‘destroyer of the Asura
Mahiṣa,’ an epithet of Durgā. {%—Mahiṣāsura-%}
{%sambhava, as,%} m. (‘produced in Mysore?’), a kind
of bdellium. {%—Mahiṣāsurārdinī (˚ra-ar˚),%} f.
‘slayer of the Asura Mahiṣa,’ an epithet of Durgā.
{%—Mahiṣī-kanda, as,%} m. {%= mahiṣa-kanda,%}
q. v. {%—Mahiṣī-pāla, as,%} m. a keeper of buffalo-
cows. {%—Mahiṣī-priyā,%} f. a species of grass {%(= śūlī).%}
{%—Mahiṣī-bhāva, as,%} m. the state or condition of
a buffalo-cow. {%—Mahiṣī-stambha, as,%} m. a pillar
or column adorned with a buffalo's head.
<LEND>

<L>36727<pc>0763-a<k1>mahizaka<k2>mahizaka
{%Mahiṣaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people; [cf.
{%māhiṣa, māhiṣaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36728<pc>0763-a<k1>mahizWa<k2>mahizWa
{%Mahiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatest, largest; [cf.
{%mahīyas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36729<pc>0763-a<k1>mahizmat<k2>mahizmat
{%Mahiṣmat, ān, atī, at%}¦ (fr. {%mahiṣa%}), possessing
buffaloes, rich in buffaloes; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a king;
({%atī%}), f. epithet of a particular lunar day (personified
as a daughter of Aṅgiras).
<LEND>

<L>36730<pc>0763-a<k1>mahizvat<k2>mahizvat
{%Mahiṣvat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. rejoicing, refresh-
ing; (according to Sāy. {%= ṛbīsa?,%} a cave.)
<LEND>

<L>36731<pc>0763-a<k1>mahI<k2>mahI
{%Mahī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%maha,%} q. v.), ‘the great world;’
the earth, world [cf. {%urvī, pṛthvī%}]; soil, ground,
land, landed property; a country, kingdom; earth
(as a material, see Manu VII. 70); any space,
sphere, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 56, 2,
{%mahī = loka,%} the world); the ground or base of a
triangle or other plane figure; a large army (Ved.);
a cow, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 41, 5,
{%mahī gaus = mahatī gaus,%} a large cow); the plant
Hingtsha Repens; a kind of metre, four times <lang n="greek">˘ ¯;</lang>
N. of a divine being associated with Iḍā and Saras-
vatī; N. of a river (rising in the province of Malwa
and falling into the gulf of Cambay after a westerly
course of 280 miles); a stream, water, (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda II. 11, 2, {%mahīḥ = mahatīr apaḥ,%}
the great waters); ({%ī%}), du., Ved. heaven and earth,
(according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 80, 11, {%mahī =%}
{%mahatyau dyāvā-pṛthivyau.%}) {%—Mahī-kampa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘earth-tremor,’ an earthquake. {%—Mahī-kṣit,%}
{%t,%} m. ‘earth-ruler,’ a king, prince, sovereign. {%—Mahī-%}
{%candra, as,%} m. ‘earth-moon,’ N. of a king. {%—Mahī-%}
{%cara, as, ā, am,%} or {%mahī-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} ‘earth-
[Page0763-b+ 81]
going,’ moving or going on the earth, (opposed to
{%antarīkṣa-ga.%}) {%—Mahī-ja, as, ā, am,%} ‘earth-
born,’ produced on the land or ground; ({%as%}), m. a
plant, tree; ‘son of the Earth,’ the planet Mars;
({%am%}), n. green ginger. {%—Mahī-taṭa,%} N. of a place.
{%—Mahī-tala, am,%} n. the surface of the earth,
ground, soil. {%—Mahī-dāsa,%} see {%mahi-dāsa%}. {%—Mahī-%}
{%durga, am,%} n. a fortress (made) of earth, earth-fort.
{%—Mahī-dhara, as, ī, am,%} ‘earth-bearing,’ sup-
porting the earth; ({%as%}), m. a mountain; epithet of
Viṣṇu; N. of a Deva-putra; of a king; of a mer-
chant; of a Sūtra-dhāra; of a celebrated commen-
tator on the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā, &c. (who flourished
towards the end of the sixteenth century); of various
other commentators. {%—Mahīdhara-datta, as,%} m., N.
of a man. {%—Mahī-dhra, as,%} m. ({%dhra = dhara%}),
‘earth-supporter,’ a mountain; a symbolical expression
for the number seven [cf. {%kula-parvata%}]; epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Mahīdhraka, as,%} m., N. of a king; [cf.
{%mahāndhraka.%}] {%—Mahīna (˚hī-ina), as,%} m. ‘earth-
ruler,’ a king, prince. {%—Mahī-nātha, as,%} m. ‘earth-
lord,’ a king, &c. {%—Mahī-pa, as,%} m. ‘earth-pro-
tector,’ a king, &c.; N. of a lexicographer. {%—Mahī-%}
{%patana, am,%} n. falling to the earth, bowing down
to the ground, humble obeisance. {%—Mahī-pati, is,%}
m. ‘earth-lord,’ a king, sovereign, {%—Mahipati-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. sovereignty. {%—Mahī-pāla, as,%} m. ‘earth-
protector,’ a king, prince; N. of various sovereigns.
{%—Mahīpāla-putra, as,%} m. a king's son, prince.
{%—Mahī-putra, as,%} m. ‘son of the Earth,’ the
planet Mars. {%—Mahī-pṛṣṭha, am,%} n. the surface
of the earth. {%—Mahī-prakampa, as,%} m. ‘earth-
tremor,’ an earthquake. {%—Mahī-praroha, as,%} m.
‘earth-growing,’ a tree; [cf. {%mahī-ja, mahī-ruh.%}]
{%—Mahī-prācīra, am,%} n. ‘earth-fence,’ the sea.
{%—Mahī-prāvara, as,%} m. ‘earth-enclosure,’ the
sea. {%—Mahī-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a grammarian.
{%—Mahī-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘earth-supporter,’ a king,
sovereign. {%—Mahī-bhāra, as,%} m. ‘earth-burden,’ a
burden for the earth. {%—Mahī-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘earth-
enjoyer, earth-possessor,’ a king, ruler, sovereign.
{%—Mahī-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘earth-supporter,’ a mountain;
a king, sovereign, ruler. {%—Mahī-maghavan, ā,%} m.
‘earth-Indra,’ a king. {%—Mahī-maṇḍala, am,%} n.
the circumference of the earth, the whole earth.
{%—Mahī-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of earth, consisting
of earth, earthen. {%—Mahī-mahendra, as,%} m. ‘great
Indra of the earth,’ a king, sovereign. {%—Mahī-%}
{%mṛga, as,%} m. the earthly antelope (in Rāmāyaṇa
III. 49, 45, opposed to {%tārā-mṛga,%} q. v.) {%—Mahī-%}
{%rajas, as,%} n. ‘earth-dust,’ dust or particles of dust.
{%—Mahī-raṇa, as,%} m., N. of a son of Dharma by
Viśvā. {%—Mahī-rata, as,%} m., N. of a king, (also
read {%bahī-nara.%}) {%—Mahī-randhra, am,%} n. a hole
in the earth. {%—Mahī-ruh, ṭ,%} m. ‘earth-grower,’ a
plant, tree (Kirāt. V. 10; cf. {%kalpa-m˚%}). {%—Mahī-%}
{%ruha, as,%} m. ‘earth-growing,’ a plant, tree; Theca
Grandis. {%—Mahī-latā,%} f. an earth-worm, dew-worm.
{%—Mahī-śāsaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a Buddhist school.
{%—Mahīśvara (˚hī-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘earth-lord,’ a king,
prince, sovereign. {%—Mahī-saṅgama,%} N. of a place.
{%—Mahī-suta, as,%} m. ‘earth-son,’ the planet Mars.
{%—Mahī-sura, as,%} m. ‘earth-god,’ a Brāhman.
{%—Mahī-sūnu, us,%} m. {%= mahī-suta%}. {%—Mahy-ut-%}
{%tara, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>36732<pc>0763-b<k1>mahIya<k2>mahIya
{%Mahīya,%}¦ Nom. A. (ep. also P.) {%mahīyate (-ti),%}
{%-yitum,%} to be glad, to be joyous, to be happy, (in
this sense chiefly Vedic); to be exalted, rise to a
high position; to be highly esteemed or honoured;
to thrive, prosper: Pass. form {%mahīyyate,%} to be
honoured, to be exalted, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36733<pc>0763-b<k1>mahIyamAna<k2>mahIyamAna
{%Mahīyamāna%}¦ or {%mahīyyamāna, as, ā, am,%}
being worshipped or reverenced, being treated with
respect, being exalted.
<LEND>

<L>36734<pc>0763-b<k1>mahIyas<k2>mahIyas
{%Mahīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ greater, mightier, &c.,
very great, ({%mahīyān hāsaḥ,%} very loud laughter.)
<LEND>

<L>36735<pc>0763-b<k1>mahIyA<k2>mahIyA
{%Mahīyā,%}¦ f., Ved. joyousness, happiness, exultation.
<LEND>

<L>36736<pc>0763-b<k1>mahIyu<k2>mahIyu
{%Mahīyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. joyous, happy, rejoicing,
delighting; ({%a-mahīyu,%} N. of the author of Ṛg-
veda IX. 61.)
<LEND>

<L>36737<pc>0763-b<k1>mahIyE<k2>mahIyE
{%Mahīyai%}¦ in Ṛg-veda 1. 113, 6 (according to
[Page0763-c+ 65]
Sāy.) {%= mahyai = mahatyai,%} dat. c. said to mean
‘for greatness.’
<LEND>

<L>36738<pc>0763-c<k1>mahenadi<k2>mahenadi
{%Mahe-nadi,%}¦ voc. c. of {%mahi-nadī,%} in Ṛg-veda
VIII. 74, 15.
<LEND>

<L>36739<pc>0763-c<k1>mahemati<k2>mahemati
{%Mahemati, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. high-souled, liberally-
minded; (Sāy. {%= mahate phalāya matir yasya;%}
but according to modern scholars {%mahe-mate%} in
Ṛg-veda VIII. 13, 11, may be voc. sing. of {%mahi-%}
{%mati.%})
<LEND>

<L>36740<pc>0763-c<k1>mahevfD<k2>mahevfD
{%Mahe-vṛdh,%}¦ Ved. various reading for {%mahi-%}
{%vṛdh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36741<pc>0763-c<k1>mahat<k2>mahat
{#mahat#}¦ {%mahat.%} See p. 753, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36742<pc>0763-c<k1>mahadyuman<k2>mahadyuman
{#mahadyuman#}¦ {%maha-dyuman%} (probably {%maha%}
{%+ dyuman%}), N. of a Tīrtha; (according to others)
an epithet of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>36743<pc>0763-c<k1>mahan<k2>mahan
{#mahan#}¦ {%mahan, mahanīya,%} &c. See p. 753,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36744<pc>0763-c<k1>mahamadaedala<k2>mahamadaedala
{#mahamadaedala#}¦ {%mahamada-edala, as,%} m., N. of
a prince ({%= muhammad'adīl%}).
<LEND>

<L>36745<pc>0763-c<k1>mahammada<k2>mahammada
{#mahammada#}¦ {%mahammada, as,%} m., N. of a king
({%= muhammad%}).
<LEND>

<L>36746<pc>0763-c<k1>mahayAyya<k2>mahayAyya
{#mahayAyya#}¦ {%mahayāyya, mahayya.%} See p. 753,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36747<pc>0763-c<k1>mahar<k2>mahar
{#mahar#}¦ {%mahar, mahar-loka,%} &c. See p. 753,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36748<pc>0763-c<k1>mahareRu<k2>mahareRu
{#mahareRu#}¦ {%mahareṇu,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>36749<pc>0763-c<k1>mahartvij<k2>mahartvij
{#mahartvij#}¦ {%mahartvij,%} &c. See under {%mahā,%}
p. 754, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36750<pc>0763-c<k1>mahalla<k2>mahalla
{#mahalla#}¦ {%mahalla, as,%} m. (fr. Arabic <lang n="arabic">محل­</lang> {%ma-%}
{%hall%}), a eunuch in a king's palace or in a harem.
<LEND>

<L>36751<pc>0763-c<k1>mahallaka<k2>mahallaka
{%Mahallaka, as,%}¦ m. a large house, mansion; a
eunuch in a king's palace; ({%as, ikā, am%}), old,
feeble; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of a daughter of Pra-hlāda.
<LEND>

<L>36752<pc>0763-c<k1>mahallika<k2>mahallika
{%Mahallika, as,%}¦ m. {%= mahalla%} above.
<LEND>

<L>36753<pc>0763-c<k1>mahas<k2>mahas
{#mahas#}¦ {%mahas, mahas-vat,%} &c. See p. 753,
col. 3, and p. 754, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36754<pc>0763-c<k1>mahasa<k2>mahasa
{#mahasa#}¦ {%mahasa.%} See p. 754, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36755<pc>0763-c<k1>mahasenanareSvara<k2>mahasenanareSvara
{#mahasenanareSvara#}¦ {%mahasena-nareśvara = ma-%}
{%hāsena-nareśvara,%} q. v., (according to the commen-
tator {%maha = pūjya.%})
<LEND>

<L>36756<pc>0763-c<k1>mahasoRa<k2>mahasoRa
{#mahasoRa#}¦ {%mahasoṇa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36757<pc>0763-c<k1>mahA<k2>mahA
{#mahA#}¦ {%mahā.%} See p. 754, col. I.
<LEND>

<L>36758<pc>0763-c<k1>mahAkaNkara<k2>mahAkaNkara
{#mahAkaNkara#}¦ {%mahā-kaṅkara, mahā-kaccha,%} &c.
See under {%mahā,%} p. 754, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36759<pc>0763-c<k1>mahABiza<k2>mahABiza
{#mahABiza#}¦ {%mahābhiṣa, as,%} m., N. of a
sovereign of the race of Ikṣvāku.
<LEND>

<L>36760<pc>0763-c<k1>mahi<k2>mahi
{#mahi#}¦ {%mahi, mahi-keru,%} &c. See p. 762,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36761<pc>0763-c<k1>mahikA<k2>mahikA
{#mahikA#}¦ {%mahikā,%} f. mist, frost, (for {%mihikā,%}
q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>36762<pc>0763-c<k1>mahita<k2>mahita
{#mahita#}¦ {%mahita.%} See p. 762, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36763<pc>0763-c<k1>mahin<k2>mahin
{#mahin#}¦ {%mahin.%} See p. 762, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36764<pc>0763-c<k1>mahinDaka<k2>mahinDaka
{#mahinDaka#}¦ {%mahindhaka, as,%} m. a rat; an
ichneumon; the string of a pole for carrying loads.
<LEND>

<L>36765<pc>0763-c<k1>mahipa<k2>mahipa
{#mahipa#}¦ {%mahipa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>36766<pc>0763-c<k1>mahimat<k2>mahimat
{#mahimat#}¦ {%mahi-mat.%} See {%mahi,%} p. 762, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36767<pc>0763-c<k1>mahiman<k2>mahiman
{#mahiman#}¦ {%mahiman, mahimā.%} See p. 762,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36768<pc>0763-c<k1>mahimnAra<k2>mahimnAra
{#mahimnAra#}¦ {%mahimnāra, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>36769<pc>0763-c<k1>mahira<k2>mahira
{#mahira#}¦ {%mahira, as,%} m. (for {%mihira,%} q. v.),
the sun; [cf. {%māhira.%}] {%—Mahira-kula, as,%} m., N.
of a king; [cf. {%mihira-kula.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36770<pc>0763-c<k1>mahilA<k2>mahilA
{#mahilA#}¦ {%mahilā,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-s.
1. 55. fr. rt. I. {%mah%}), a woman, female; a woman
literally or figuratively intoxicated, (in Prākṛt {%= %}
[Page0764-a+ 66]
{%mada-mattā strī,%} cf. {%mahelā%}); a species of odori-
ferous plant {%(= reṇukā)%}. {%—Mahilākhyā (˚lā-ākh˚),%}
f. ({%= mahilā%}), a species of odoriferous plant. {%—Ma-%}
{%hilāhvayā (˚lā-āh˚),%} f. {%= priyaṅgu,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36771<pc>0764-a<k1>mahIlA<k2>mahIlA
{%Mahīlā,%}¦ f. a woman, female.
<LEND>

<L>36772<pc>0764-a<k1>mahIlukA<k2>mahIlukA
{%Mahīlukā,%}¦ f., Ved. epithet of a cow.
<LEND>

<L>36773<pc>0764-a<k1>mahelA<k2>mahelA
{%Mahelā%}¦ or {%mahelikā,%} f. a woman, female.
<LEND>

<L>36774<pc>0764-a<k1>mahilAropya<k2>mahilAropya
{#mahilAropya#}¦ {%mahilāropya, am,%} n., N. of a
city in the south; [cf. {%mihilāropya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36775<pc>0764-a<k1>mahiza<k2>mahiza
{#mahiza#}¦ {%mahiṣa.%} See p. 762, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36776<pc>0764-a<k1>mahI<k2>mahI
{#mahI#}¦ {%mahī, mahī-kampa,%} &c. See p. 763,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36777<pc>0764-a<k1>mahIkf<k2>mahIkf
{#mahIkf#}¦ {%mahī-kṛ.%} See p. 761, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36778<pc>0764-a<k1>mahIya<k2>mahIya
{#mahIya#}¦ {%mahīya.%} See p. 763, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36779<pc>0764-a<k1>mahIyatva<k2>mahIyatva
{#mahIyatva#}¦ {%mahīya-tva,%} see Gaṇa Vimuktādi
to Pāṇ. V. 2, 61; [cf. {%māhīya-tva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36780<pc>0764-a<k1>mahIlA<k2>mahIlA
{#mahIlA#}¦ {%mahīlā.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>36781<pc>0764-a<k1>mahecCa<k2>mahecCa
{#mahecCa#}¦ {%maheccha,%} &c. See p. 761, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36782<pc>0764-a<k1>mahetTa<k2>mahetTa
{#mahetTa#}¦ {%mahettha,%} N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>36783<pc>0764-a<k1>mahendra<k2>mahendra
{#mahendra#}¦ {%mahendra,%} &c. See p. 761, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36784<pc>0764-a<k1>maheraRA<k2>maheraRA
{#maheraRA#}¦ {%maheraṇā, ās,%} m. Boswellia Thu-
rifera; (also spelt {%maheruṇā.%})
<LEND>

<L>36785<pc>0764-a<k1>mahelA<k2>mahelA
{#mahelA#}¦ {%mahelā.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>36786<pc>0764-a<k1>maheSa<k2>maheSa
{#maheSa#}¦ {%maheśa, maheśvara,%} &c. See p. 762,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36787<pc>0764-a<k1>mahEkoddizwa<k2>mahEkoddizwa
{#mahEkoddizwa#}¦ {%mahaikoddiṣṭa,%} &c. See p. 762,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36788<pc>0764-a<k1>mahokza<k2>mahokza
{#mahokza#}¦ {%mahokṣa,%} &c. See p. 762, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36789<pc>0764-a<k1>mahowikA<k2>mahowikA
{#mahowikA#}¦ {%mahoṭikā%} or {%mahoṭī,%} f. the egg-
plant.
<LEND>

<L>36790<pc>0764-a<k1>mahoviSIya<k2>mahoviSIya
{#mahoviSIya#}¦ {%mahoviśīya, am,%} n., N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>36791<pc>0764-a<k1>mahOGa<k2>mahOGa
{#mahOGa#}¦ {%mahaugha, mahaujas.%} See p. 762,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36792<pc>0764-a<k1>mahna<k2>mahna
{#mahna#}¦ {%mahna%} in {%puru-m˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36793<pc>0764-a<k1>mahmadaKAna<k2>mahmadaKAna
{#mahmadaKAna#}¦ {%mahmada-khāna, as,%} m., N. of a
man (<nsi>= muhammad ḳhān</nsi>).
<LEND>

<L>36794<pc>0764-a<k1>mahman<k2>mahman
{#mahman#}¦ {%mahman,%} see Atharva-veda X. 2, 6.
<LEND>

<L>36795<pc>0764-a<k1>mahya<k2>mahya
{#mahya#}¦ {%mahya, as,%} m., N. of a son of Vivas-
vat; (also read {%sahya.%})
<LEND>

<L>36796<pc>0764-a<k1>mahyuttara<k2>mahyuttara
{#mahyuttara#}¦ {%mahy-uttara.%} See under {%mahī%} at
p. 763.
<LEND>

<L>36797<pc>0764-a<k1>mahlaRa<k2>mahlaRa
{#mahlaRa#}¦ {%mahlaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a king who
founded a temple called after him, Mahlaṇa-svāmin,
(perhaps more correctly {%malhaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>36798<pc>0764-a<k1>mahlARapura<k2>mahlARapura
{%Mahlāṇa-pura, am,%}¦ n., N. of a city, (perhaps
for {%mahlaṇa-pura.%})
<LEND>

<L>36799<pc>0764-a<k1>mA<k2>mA<h>1
{#mA#} 1¦. {%mā,%} ind. (causing a following {%ch%} to
be changed to {%cch,%} see Gram. 48. <nsi>c</nsi>), a particle of
prohibition and of negation, usually translatable by
‘not,’ or sometimes used as a conjunction and equi-
valent to ‘that — not, lest, would that — not;’ [cf.
the use of Gr. <lang n="greek">μή;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ne.</nsi>] {%Mā%} is most com-
monly employed in prohibition or deprecation, when
it may be joined with the imperative (e. g. {%mā%}
{%brūhi,%} speak not; {%mā lajjasva,%} be not ashamed;
{%maivaṃ vada,%} speak not thus); often also with the
aorist, especially in later Sanskrit, when the augment
is generally dropped (e. g. {%mā kṛthāḥ,%} do not
make; {%mā tyākṣīḥ,%} do not abandon; {%mā śucaḥ,%}
grieve not; {%mā bhaiṣīḥ,%} fear not; {%mā nīnaśaḥ,%}
destroy not; {%vyathām mānubhūḥ,%} feel not pain;
or with the sense ‘lest,’ as in Manu VIII. 15,
{%dharmo na hantavyo mā no dharmo hato va-%}
{%dhīt,%} justice must not be destroyed, lest justice being
destroyed destroy us); often with addition of the par-
ticle {%sma%} (e. g. {%mā sma vādīḥ,%} speak not; {%mā sma %}
[Page0764-b+ 80]
{%gamaḥ,%} go not); sometimes with the imperfect,
the augment being still cut off (e. g. {%mā sma%}
{%bhavat,%} may he not become; {%mā sma karot,%} let
him not do; {%mainam abhibhāṣathāḥ,%} do not
speak to him, cf. Pāṇ. VI. 4, 74); occasionally, in
epic poetry &c., with an aorist, without elision of
the augment (e. g. {%mā kālas tvām aty-agāt,%} let
not the season pass by thee; {%śraddhā no mā vy-%}
{%agamat,%} may faith not depart from us); not unfre-
quently with the potential, in the sense of ‘wishing
that anything may not happen’ (e. g. {%mā sma%}
{%janayet putram īdṛśam,%} may she not bring forth
such a son! {%mā Yamam paśyeyam,%} may I not see
Yama! {%mā kūryād akāryam,%} O that he may do
nothing wrong!); and even with the precative (e. g.
{%mā bhūyāt,%} may it not be!); more rarely with the
potential, in the sense of ‘prohibition’ (e. g. {%mā%}
{%smainam pratyudīkṣethāḥ,%} do not look at him);
sometimes with the future, in the sense of ‘lest,
that — not’ (e. g. {%mā tvāṃ śapsye,%} lest I curse thee,
that I may not curse thee); even with the fut. pass.
part. ({%maivam prārthyam,%} it must not be so re-
quested); and even with the pres. part. (e. g. {%mā%}
{%jīvan yo duḥkha-dagdho jīvati,%} he ought not
[to be] living who lives consumed by pain); some-
times {%mā%} takes the place of the simple negative {%na%}
(e. g. {%gaccha vā mā vā,%} you can go or not go;
{%mā jetavyaḥ,%} he is not to be conquered; {%mā gan-%}
{%tum arhasi,%} thou oughtest not to go; {%katham mā%}
{%bhūt,%} how may it not be); occasionally without a
verb, which must be supplied from the context (e. g.
{%mā śabdam,%} i. e. with ellipsis of {%kuruta,%} do not
make a noise; {%mā nāma rakṣiṇaḥ,%} may it not
be the watchmen ! {%maivam%} or {%mā tāvat,%} not so,
i. e. let it not be so; or with {%mā%} repeated, thus
{%mā mā, mā maivam%}). In the Veda {%mā%} is some-
times followed by the particle {%u,%} blending with it
into {%mo%} (e. g. Ṛg-veda V. 65, 6, {%mā maghonaḥ%}
{%pari khyatam mo asmākam [putrān],%} deny us
not who are rich in offerings, nor indeed our sons
[according to Sāy. {%mo = maiva%}]; and Ṛg-veda 1.
38, 6, {%mo ṣu vadhīt%} [Sāy. {%= sarvathā vadham%}
{%mā kārṣīt%}], let him not on any account destroy);
[cf. Zend and Old Pers. <nsi>mā;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">μή;</lang> perhaps Lat.
<nsi>ne.</nsi>] {%—Mā-cira, as, ā, am,%} not long, short; ({%am%}),
ind. without delay, shortly, quickly (generally after
an impv. or before an aor. without augment, and
sometimes for {%na-ciram,%} e. g. {%gaccha mā-ciram%}
or {%mā-ciraṃ gamaḥ,%} go without delay; {%vrajiṣ-%}
{%yāmi mā-ciram,%} I will set forth without delay).
{%—Mā-vilambam%} or {%mā-vilambitam,%} ind. without
delay, shortly, quickly.
<LEND>

<L>36800<pc>0764-b<k1>mA<k2>mA<h>2
{#mA#} 2¦. {%mā,%} cl. 3. P. A. (in Ved. P.)
{%mimāti, mimīte, mame, mātum,%} to low,
bellow, roar, bleat, sound, make any sound or cry
(especially said of cows, calves, goats, &c.; according
to Nirukta II. 9, {%māyum mimāti = māyuṃ śabdaṃ%}
{%karoti;%} cf. rt. {%mīm, mīmayati,%} 2. {%maya, mayu,%}
{%mayūra%}): part. of the Intens. {%memyat,%} in Ṛg-veda 1.
162, 2, said to mean ‘bleating as a goat;’ (according
to Sāy. = either {%hanyamāna,%} fr. rt. {%mī,%} or {%meme-%}
{%śabdaṃ kurvat.%})
<LEND>

<L>36801<pc>0764-b<k1>mAyu<k2>mAyu<h>1
1. {%māyu.%}¦ See p. 772, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36802<pc>0764-b<k1>mA<k2>mA<h>3
{#mA#} 3¦. {%mā,%} cl. 2. P. {%māti,%} cl. 3. A. {%mimīte%}
(3rd pl. {%mimate,%} part. {%mimāna%}), Impf.
{%amimīta%} (3rd pl. {%amimata%}), Pot. {%mimīta,%} Impv.
{%mimītām%} (2nd sing. {%mimīṣva,%} also P. {%mimīhi;%}
used according to Naigh. III. 19, {%yācñā-karmaṇi,%}
in the act of praying); cl. 4. A. {%māyate, mamau,%}
{%mame%} (3rd pl. {%mamire%}), {%māsyati, -te, amāsīt,%}
{%amāsta,%} Prec. {%meyāt, māsīṣṭa, mātum,%} to
measure, mete; to measure off, mark off, limit; to
measure (by any standard), compare with, ({%tadīyair%}
{%nayanair amimīta locane,%} she compared her eyes
with theirs, Kumāra-s. V. 15); to measure across,
measure or pass through, traverse (with {%adhvanaḥ,%}
in Ṛg-veda 1. 146, 3; but according to Sāy. {%mimāna%}
{%= sampādayitṛ,%} making, causing); to measure out,
apportion, deal out, impart, give, grant (e. g. in
Ṛg-veda IV. 44, 6, {%nū no rayim mimāthām%} is
[Page0764-c+ 81]
said to mean ‘mete out opulence for us’); to pre-
pare, arrange; to form, make, create, construct,
build, effect (Ved.); to display, exhibit, show, dis-
play one's self (e. g. in Ṛg-veda III. 29, 11, {%yad%}
{%amimīta mātari%} is said to mean ‘when he has
displayed himself in the maternal atmosphere or
firmament,’ where, according to Sāy., {%tejas%} is to be
understood); to correspond in measure, find measure
or room in (cl. 2. with loc., e. g. {%te yaśo-rāśir%}
{%bhuvana-tritayodare māti,%} thy mass of fame
finds room in the interior of the three worlds); to
infer, conclude: Pass. {%mīyate,%} Aor. {%amāyi,%} to be
measured &c., to be inferred: Caus. {%māpayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Aor. {%amīmapat,%} to cause to be measured or
built, to have measured out or prepared; to measure,
mete off; to build, erect: Desid. P. A. {%mitsati, -te%}
(Pāṇ. VII. 4, 54, 58): Intens. {%mamāti, māmeti,%}
{%memīyate%} (Pāṇ. VI. 4, 66); [cf. Zend <nsi>mā,</nsi> ‘to
measure or make;’ <nsi>mā,</nsi> f. ‘measure:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">μέ-τρο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μέτρ-ιο-ς, μῑ-μέ-ο-μαι, μῑ́-μη-σις, μῖ-μ-ο-ς:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>mê-tâ-re, mê-tâ-ri, mê-ti-or, mensa, mensûra:</nsi>
Old Slav. <nsi>me-ra:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>më-ra,</nsi> ‘measure;’ <nsi>ma-tú§-</nsi>
<nsi>ti,</nsi> ‘to measure;’ <nsi>méta-s,</nsi> ‘time, a year:’ Russ.
<nsi>mje-ra,</nsi> ‘measure;’ <nsi>mje-ritj,</nsi> ‘to measure:’ Hib.
<nsi>mead,</nsi> ‘a balance, a scale;’ <nsi>meadaighim,</nsi> ‘I weigh,
balance, consider.’]
<LEND>

<L>36803<pc>0764-c<k1>mA<k2>mA<h>4
4. {%mā, mās,%}¦ f. measure, (in the formula {%mā%}
{%chandaḥ, pra-mā chandaḥ, prati-mā chandaḥ%});
Ved. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>36804<pc>0764-c<k1>mAta<k2>mAta<h>1
1. {%māta%}¦ (at the end of comps. after a proper N.)
{%= mātṛ,%} (according to a Vārttika used only in voc.
sing. For 2. {%māta%} see p. 768, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>36805<pc>0764-c<k1>mAtaya<k2>mAtaya
{%Mātaya%}¦ (fr. {%mātṛ%}), Nom. P. {%mātayati,%} &c.;
{%amamātat = mātaram ākhyat,%} Schol. on Pāṇ. VII.
4, 2.
<LEND>

<L>36806<pc>0764-c<k1>mAtA<k2>mAtA
{%Mātā,%}¦ f. = 1. {%mātṛ,%} a mother, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36807<pc>0764-c<k1>mAtAlI<k2>mAtAlI
{%Mātālī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%mātā + ālī%}), ‘the mother's friend,’
N. of a being attending on Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>36808<pc>0764-c<k1>mAti<k2>mAti
{%Māti, is,%}¦ f. measure; accurate knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>36809<pc>0764-c<k1>mAtura<k2>mAtura
{%Mātura%}¦ (fr. {%mātṛ%}), a mother, (used at the end of
comps.; cf. {%dvai-m˚, bhādra-m˚,%} Pāṇ. IV. 1, 115.)
<LEND>

<L>36810<pc>0764-c<k1>mAtula<k2>mAtula
{%Mātula, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%mātṛ%} with change of {%r%}
into {%l%}), a maternal uncle; epithet of the solar year;
the thorn-apple tree [cf. {%mātula-putraka%}]; a species
of grain; a kind of snake [cf. {%mātulāhi%}]; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}),
f. the wife of a maternal uncle, maternal aunt;
hemp, common Bengal Śan, a species of Crotolaria;
({%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}), belonging to or existing in a
maternal uncle. {%—Mātula-putraka, as,%} m. the little
son of a maternal uncle; the fruit of the thorn-apple.
{%—Mātulāhi (˚la-ahi˚), is,%} m. a kind of speckled or
variegated snake.
<LEND>

<L>36811<pc>0764-c<k1>mAtulaka<k2>mAtulaka
{%Mātulaka, as,%}¦ m. maternal uncle (a more endear-
ing term than {%mātula%}); the thorn-apple; ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), belonging to or coming from a maternal uncle
(Pāṇ. IV. 2, 104).
<LEND>

<L>36812<pc>0764-c<k1>mAtulAnI<k2>mAtulAnI
{%Mātulānī,%}¦ f. the wife of a maternal uncle; hemp,
Crotolaria Juncea; a kind of pulse ({%= kalāya%}).
<LEND>

<L>36813<pc>0764-c<k1>mAtuleya<k2>mAtuleya
{%Mātuleya, as,%}¦ m. the son of a maternal uncle, a
cousin; ({%ī%}), f. a daughter of a maternal uncle.
<LEND>

<L>36814<pc>0764-c<k1>mAtulya<k2>mAtulya
{%Mātulya, am,%}¦ n. (perhaps) the house of a maternal
uncle.
<LEND>

<L>36815<pc>0764-c<k1>mAtf<k2>mAtf
{%Mātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a measurer (cf. {%dhānya-m˚;%}
in Nirukta XI. 5, the moon is called {%mātā,%} ‘the
measurer’); a maker, former, creator, arranger, pre-
parer (Ved.); a knower, one who infers correctly or
has true knowledge {%(= jñātṛ, pra-mātṛ); (tā),%}
m., N. of a particular mixed caste; N. of an author;
({%tā%}), f. (nom. du. {%mātărau,%} nom. pl. {%mātăras,%}
acc. pl. {%mātṝs,%} see Gram. 129), the maker (of the
child in the womb, cf. {%jā-mātṛ%}); a mother (some-
times at the end of adj. comps., e. g. {%Kuntī-m˚,%}
having Kuntī for a mother, i. e. son of Kuntī);
‘mother’ as a respectful term used in addressing
females, near relatives, and elderly women generally;
mother earth [cf. Ṛg-veda 1. 89, 4, V. 42, 16];
a cow ({%= go,%} a cow being sometimes called {%lokasya%}
{%mātā,%} mother of the world); space, ether, the firma-
ment [cf. {%mātari-śvan%}]; epithet of Lakṣmī (?);
epithet of Durgā; N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in Siddha-
pura (also read Siddha-vana) and Kāyāvarohaṇa;
[Page0765-a+ 81]
({%tarā%}), du., Ved. the two parents, father and mother;
epithet of heaven and earth; epithet of the two
pieces of wood used in kindling fire (regarded as the
parents of Agni, who is called {%dvi-mātṛ,%} having
two mothers; in this sense also {%mātaras,%} pl.);
({%taras%}), f. pl. the divine mothers or personified ener-
gies of the principal deities (sometimes reckoned as
seven in number, viz. Brāhmī or Brahmāṇī, Māhe-
śvarī, Kaumārī, Vaiṣṇavaī, Vārāhī, Indrāṇī or Aindrī
or Māhendrī, Cāmuṇḍā; sometimes eight, viz.
Brāhmī, Māheśvarī, Raudrī, Vārāhī, Vaiṣṇavī,
Kaumārī, Carma-muṇḍā, Kāla-saṅkarṣiṇī; some-
times nine, viz. Brahmāṇī, Vaiṣṇavī, Raudrī, Vārāhī,
Nārasiṃhikā, Kaumārī, Māhendrī, Cāmuṇḍā, Caṇ-
ḍikā; sometimes sixteen, viz. Gaurī, Padmā, Śacī,
Medhā, Sāvitrī, Vijayā, Jayā, Deva-senā, Svadhā,
Svāhā, Śānti, Puṣṭi, Dhṛti, Tuṣṭi, Ātma-devatā,
Kula-devatā; these divine mothers being closely
connected with the worship of the god Śiva and
attending on his son Skanda or Kārttikeya, to whom
at first only seven Mātṛs were assigned, but in the
later mythology an innumerable number, who are
sometimes represented as having displaced the original
divine mothers); N. of eight classes of female ances-
tors or female Manes (mothers, grandmothers, great-
grandmothers, paternal and maternal aunts, &c.);
according to Naigh. 1. 13, {%mātaraḥ = nadī,%} a river,
[cf. Ṛg-veda III. 9, 2, where the waters are also
called {%mātaraḥ,%} mothers; cf. also 1. 34, 8, where the
seven rivers, Gaṅgā &c., are called {%sapta-mātṛ;%}
according to native lexicographers {%mātṛ%} has also the
following senses, {%vi-bhūti, revatī, ākhukarṇī, in-%}
{%dra-vāruṇī, mahā-śrāvaṇī, jaṭā-māṃsī:%} cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">μήτηρ,</lang> Dor. <lang n="greek">μάτηρ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>mater;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>muotar;</nsi> Old Slav. <nsi>mati;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>mote;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>ma-</nsi>
<nsi>thair.</nsi>] {%—Mātara-pitarau,%} m. du. mother and
father, parents. {%—Mātari-puruṣa, as,%} m. a man
(who acts or speaks) against his mother, a cowardly
bully; [cf. {%pitari-śūra.%}] {%—Mātari-śva%} (fr. the
next), {%as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mātari-śvan, ā,%} m.
(according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 29, 11, fr.
{%mātari = antarikṣe,%} in the atmosphere, + {%śvasiti%}
{%= ceṣṭate,%} breathes or moves; or according to
others fr. {%mātari%} + rt. {%śvi%}), N. of a divine being
described in Ṛg-veda 1. 60, 1, &c. as bringing
down the hidden Agni to the Bhṛgus, and identified
by Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 93, 6, &c. with Vāyu, the
Wind; N. of Agni himself, (according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda 1. 96, 4, so called as {%sarvasya jagato%}
{%nirmātary antarikṣe śvasan vartamāṇaḥ%}); air,
wind, breeze (personified in Mahā-bh. Udyoga-p.
3599 as son of Garuḍa); N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Mātā-%}
{%pitṛ, tarau,%} m. du. mother and father, parents; [cf.
Pāṇ. VI. 3, 32.] {%—Mātā-pitṛ-vihīna, as, ā, am,%}
bereft of father and mother, without father or mother.
{%—Mātā-putra, au,%} m. du. mother and son. {%—Mātā-%}
{%maha, as,%} m. a maternal grandfather; ({%ī%}), f. a
maternal grandmother; ({%au%}), m. du. a grandfather
and grandmother on the mother's side; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
a mother's father, grandfather, and ancestors; {%(as, ī,%}
{%am), = mātāmahīya%} below. {%—Mātāmahīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} related or belonging to a maternal grandfather.
{%—Mātuḥ-śvasṛ%} or {%mātuḥ-svasṛ, ā,%} f. a mother's
sister, maternal aunt; [cf. {%mātṛ-ṣvasṛ.%}] {%—Mātṛ-%}
{%ka-cchida, as,%} m. ‘the cutter off of his mother's
head,’ an epithet of Paraśu-Rāma. {%—Mātṛ-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} done or performed towards a mother;
done by a mother. {%—Mātṛ-keśaṭa, as,%} m. a
mother's brother, maternal uncle. {%—Mātṛ-gaṇa, as,%}
m. the assemblage of divine mothers (as worshipped
in an especial manner in the western parts of India).
{%—Mātṛ-gandhinī,%} f. ‘having but the smell (i. e.
the name) of mother,’ an unnatural mother. {%—Mā-%}
{%tṛ-garbha, as,%} m. a mother's womb. {%—Mātṛgar-%}
{%bha-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in the mother's womb.
{%—Mātṛ-gāmin, ī,%} m. ‘going to a mother,’ one
who has committed incest with his mother. {%—Mātṛ-%}
{%gupta, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mātṛguptābhi-%}
{%ṣeṇana (˚ta-abh˚), am,%} n. an expedition against
Mātṛ-gupta. {%—Mātṛ-gotra, am,%} n. a mother's
family; ({%as, ā, am%}), belonging to a mother's family.
[Page0765-b+ 81]
{%—Mātṛ-grāma, as,%} m. the aggregate of mothers,
i. e. the female sex, womankind; N. of a village.
{%—Mātṛ-ghāta%} or {%mātṛ-ghātaka, as,%} or {%mātṛ-%}
{%ghātin, ī,%} or {%mātṛ-ghna, as,%} m. one who kills his
mother, a matricide. {%—Mātṛ-ghātuka, as,%} m. a
matricide; an epithet of Indra. {%—Mātṛ-cakra, am,%}
n. a kind of mystical circle, an astrological figure;
the circle or assemblage of divine mothers. {%—Mātṛ-%}
{%cakra-pramathana, as,%} m. ‘afflicter of the circle
of divine mothers (?),’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Mā-%}
{%tṛ-ceṭa, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mātṛ-tama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. very motherly or maternal (said of the
waters; according to Sāy. {%= mātṛ-vaj jagatāṃ%}
{%hita-kārin%}). {%—Mātṛ-tas,%} ind. on the mother's side,
in right of the mother. {%—Mātṛ-tā,%} f. maternity,
the state of a mother, the being a mother. {%—Mātṛ-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Mātṛ-datta, as,%}
m. ‘mother-given,’ N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
woman. {%—Mātṛ-dattīya,%} N. of a work. {%—Mātṛ-%}
{%deva, as,%} m. having a mother for one's god. {%—Mā-%}
{%tṛ-doṣa, as,%} m. the defect or inferiority of a
mother (who is of a lower caste, Manu X. 14).
{%—Mātṛ-nandana, as,%} m. ‘mother's joy,’ an epi-
thet of Kārttikeya. {%—Mātṛ-nāman, a,%} n., scil.
{%sūkta,%} epithet of a class of sacred texts in the
Atharva-veda; ({%ā%}), m., N. of the reputed author and
deity of these texts; ({%ā, mnī, a%}), named after the
mother; [cf. {%pitṛ-nāman.%}] {%—Mātṛ-nivātam,%} ind.
to a mother's shelter or protection, to a mother's
side (Pāṇ. VI. 2, 8). {%—Mātṛ-pakṣa, as, ā, am,%}
relating to the mother, belonging to the maternal
line. {%—Mātṛ-pālita, as,%} n., N. of a Dānava.
{%—Mātṛ-pitṛ-kṛtābhyāsa (˚ta-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
trained or exercised by one's father and mother.
{%—Mātṛ-pūjana, am,%} n. the worship of the divine
mothers. {%—Mātṛ-bandhu, us,%} m. a relation on the
mother's side; ({%u%}), n. blood relationship on the
mother's side. {%—Mātṛ-bandhū, ūs,%} f. a mother
only in name, an unnatural mother; [cf. {%brahma-%}
{%bandhu.%}] {%—Mātṛ-bāndhava, as,%} m. a relation on
the mother's side. {%—Mātṛ-bhāva, as,%} m. the state
or condition of a mother, maternity. {%—Mātṛ-bheda-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Mātṛ-bhogīṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fit or proper to be possessed by a
mother; [cf. Scholiast on Pāṇ. V. 1, 9.] {%—Mātṛ-%}
{%maṇḍala, am,%} n. the assemblage or company of
divine mothers. {%—Mātṛmaṇḍala-vid, t,%} m. a priest
of the Mātṛs. {%—Mātṛ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. pos-
sessing a mother, accompanied by a mother, having
a mother. {%—Mātṛ-mātṛ, tā,%} f. ‘the mother of
mothers,’ an epithet of Pārvatī. {%—Mātṛ-mukha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘mother-faced,’ a simple or foolish man,
simpleton. {%—Mātṛ-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} adorned
by a mother. {%—Mātṛ-modaka,%} N. of Uvaṭa's com-
mentary on the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā. {%—Mātṛ-yajña%}
or {%mātṛ-yāga, as,%} m. a sacrifice or oblation to the
Mātṛs. {%—Mātṛ-vat,%} ind. as a mother, like a mother,
as towards a mother. {%—Mātṛ-vatsala, as,%} m.
‘mother-loving,’ an epithet of Kārttikeya. {%—Mātṛ-%}
{%vadha, as,%} m. the murder of a mother, matricide.
{%—Mātṛ-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} behaving well to a
mother, dutiful to one's mother; ({%ī%}), m. a proper N.
{%—Mātṛ-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%} carrying one's mother;
({%inī%}), f. a kind of bird {%(= valgulā)%}. {%—Mātṛ-vidū-%}
{%ṣita, as, ā, am,%} tainted by the mother, inheriting
a taint through the mother. {%—Mātṛ-śāsita, as,%} m.
a man who is led or guided by his mother, a sim-
pleton. {%—Mātṛ-ṣaṣṭha, as, ī, am,%} having a
mother as a sixth person, six with a mother or inclu-
sively of a mother. {%—Mātṛ-ṣvasṛ, ā,%} f. (also in-
correctly {%mātṛ-svasṛ%}), a mother's sister, maternal
aunt. {%—Mātṛṣvaseya, as,%} m. the son of a maternal
aunt, a mother's sister's son; ({%ī%}), f. a mother's
sister's daughter, the daughter of a maternal aunt.
{%—Mātṛ-ṣvasrīya, as,%} m. a mother's sister's son,
the son of a maternal aunt; ({%ā%}), f. a mother's sister's
daughter. {%—Mātṛ-siṃhī,%} f. the plant Justicia Gen-
darussa. {%—Mātṛ-han, ā,%} m. (said to be Ved.),
murderer of his own mother, a matricide. {%—Mātrī-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to adopt as a
mother, see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VII. 4, 27.
<LEND>
[Page0765-c+ 81]

<L>36816<pc>0765-c<k1>mAtfka<k2>mAtfka
{%Mātṛka, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming from or belonging
to a mother, maternal; ({%as%}), m. a maternal uncle;
({%ā%}), f. a mother; source, origin; a divine mother;
a nurse; a grandmother; epithet of eight veins on
both sides of the neck, (probably so called after the
eight divine mothers); epithet of certain diagrams
written in characters to which a magical power is
ascribed; the aggregate of such characters or the
alphabet employed in such a manner, (probably only
the fourteen vowels with Anusvāra and Visarga were
originally so called, after the sixteen divine mothers);
a wooden peg driven into the ground for the support
of the staff of Indra's banner (Ved.); an epithet of
the Buddhist works included in the Abhidharma-
piṭaka; N. of the wife of Aryaman; {%= karaṇa.%}
{%—Mātṛkā-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of mystic
characters. {%—Mātṛkā-yantra, am,%} n. a kind of
mystical diagram. {%—Mātṛkārṇava (˚kā-ar˚), as,%}
m., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Mātṛkā-hṛdaya, am,%}
n., N. of a Tantra work.
<LEND>

<L>36817<pc>0765-c<k1>mAtra<k2>mAtra
{%Mātra, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. (the feminine {%ā%} being the
earlier and the more usual simple uncompounded
form), measure, quantity, sum, size, duration, measure
of any kind, whether of height, depth, breadth,
length, distance, time, number, (commonly at the
end of comps., and sometimes added redundantly;
the form at the end of adjective comps. is generally
deduced fr. {%mātrā,%} f., while other comps. are
assigned to {%mātra;%} when compounded to express
‘as long,’ a high, as broad, as thick, as deep, as
wide, as great, &c.,’ i. e. having a certain measure
or size, the fem. is usually in {%ī;%} when compounded
with pass. participles, the fem. form is usually in {%ā:%}
the following examples will serve to make the com-
mon usage of this word clear, {%—aṅgula-mātram,%} a
finger's breadth; {%jānu-mātre,%} at the height of the
knees; {%nara-mātre,%} at the depth of a man's length;
{%krośa-mātre,%} at the distance of a kos; {%rekhā-mā-%}
{%tram api na vyatīyus,%} they did not transgress even
the breadth of a line; {%tāla-mātra, as, ī, am,%} of
the size of a palm; {%naga-mātra, as, ī, am,%} large
as a mountain; {%yava-mātra, as, ī, am,%} of the size
of a barleycorn; {%etāvan-mātra%} or {%tāvan-mātra,%} as
great as this, as large as this, so much; {%artha-mā-%}
{%tram,%} a certain sum of money; {%varṣa-mātram,%}
for the period of a year; {%varṣa-mātreṇa,%} within
a year's time; {%kṣaṇa-mātram,%} for the space of a
moment, for an instant; {%bhūmi-ṣṭha-mātratas,%}
from the first moment of setting foot upon the earth;
{%śata-mātram,%} a hundred in number, about a hun-
dred); the full or simple measure of anything, the
whole, the entire thing or class of things, the one
thing and no more, the totality, (often in this sense
at the end of comps. and equivalent to ‘mere, only,
even, just,’ frequently, but not always, assuming the
gender and number of the word with which it is
compounded, e. g. {%nāma-mātram,%} nothing but the
name; {%manuṣya-mātraḥ kṛpaṇaḥ,%} a poor
wretch who is a mere man; {%padāti-mātraḥ,%} a
simple foot-soldier; {%uttara-mātram na dadāti,%}
he gives not even an answer; {%rati-mātram,%} mere
sensuality; {%varṣa-mātram,%} only a year; {%pāda-%}
{%mātram,%} a single Pāda; {%śloka-mātram,%} a single
verse; {%kiñcin-mātram,%} only a little; {%śabda-mā-%}
{%treṇa,%} by mere sound; {%vacana-mātreṇa,%} by mere
words; {%ukta-mātre vacane,%} on the mere utterance
of the speech; {%grantha-mātre,%} only in books;
{%jñāna-mātre,%} on the mere information; {%bhukta-%}
{%mātre,%} just after eating; {%darśana-mātram,%} mere
sight; {%jāta-mātra, as, ā, am,%} just born; {%na jīva-%}
{%mātram,%} not even a living germ; {%prāṇa-dhārana-%}
{%mātra, as, ā, am,%} barely sufficient for the support
of life; {%yātrā-mātram bhuñjīta,%} he should eat just
enough for support; {%āghrāta-mātra, as, ā, am,%}
merely or barely smelt; {%dhyāta-mātropagāmin,%}
coming merely when thought upon; {%Kṣatriya-%}
{%mātram,%} a Kṣatriya in general; {%jīva-mātraṃ na%}
{%hiṃseta,%} one should not hurt any living thing;
{%dvāra-mātre'pi gopuram,%} Gopura signifies a door
in general; in these meanings {%eka%} is sometimes redun-
dantly added, e. g. {%praṇipāta-mātraika-śaraṇas,%}
[Page0766-a+ 79]
one whose sole refuge is prostration of the body); a
definite measure, standard, rule, (in these and the
following senses usually {%ā,%} f.); the correct measure;
moderation; a unit of measure, a foot; the lowest
division of time, a moment; a prosodial instant, the
unit in metre, the length of time required to pro-
nounce a short syllable, the prosodial time of a short
vowel, (in this sense usually {%ā,%} f.; a long vowel
contains two Mātrās and a prolated vowel three);
a measure of time in music; a minute portion, par-
ticle, atom; a little, trifle; an element; the primitive
and subtle type of elementary matter; matter, sub-
stance, the material world, the world of sense (usually
{%ā,%} f.); materials, property, goods, possessions, house-
hold furniture, money, wealth, substance, means of
subsistence, livelihood; the upper or horizontal limb
of the Nāgarī characters; an ear-ring, jewel, orna-
ment; ({%ayā%}), ind. in small portions, in a slight
degree, moderately; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μέτρον.</lang>] {%—Mātrā-%}
{%chandas, as,%} or {%mātrā-vṛtta, am,%} n. metre mea-
sured only by the number of prosodial instants (a long
vowel containing two Mātrās and a prolated vowel
three), metre measured only by the time occupied
in pronunciation without any particular reference to
the kinds of feet. {%—Mātrā-bhastrā,%} f. a money-bag,
purse. {%—Mātrārdha (˚rā-ar˚), am,%} n. half-measure,
half of a prosodial instant. {%—Mātrā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
containing a particular measure. {%—Mātrā-vasti, is,%} m.
an oily clyster. {%—Mātrāśita (˚rā-āś˚), am,%} n. eating
moderately. {%—Mātrāśitīya, as, ā, am,%} treating of
moderate eating. {%—Mātrāśin (˚rā-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%}
eating moderately. {%—Mātrā-saṅga, as,%} m. attach-
ment to materials, regard for household possessions
or utensils (Manu VI. 57). {%—Mātrā-samaka,%} N. of
a class of metres. {%—Mātrā-sparśa, as,%} m. material
contact, the concurrence of material elements.
<LEND>

<L>36818<pc>0766-a<k1>mAtraka<k2>mAtraka
{%Mātraka = mātra%}¦ at the end of comps. (e. g.
{%chāyā-mātraka,%} lasting only as long as a shadow;
{%mantra-brāhmaṇa-mātrakāt,%} from the Mantras
and Brāhmaṇas alone; {%jāta-mātraka,%} just born);
({%ikā%}), f. {%= mātrā,%} the prosodial time of a short
vowel, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36819<pc>0766-a<k1>mAtratas<k2>mAtratas
{%Mātratas,%}¦ ind. {%= mātrāt, mātre%} (at the end of
comps., see under {%mātra%}), from the first moment, at
the moment of, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36820<pc>0766-a<k1>mAtrika<k2>mAtrika
{%Mātrika = mātra%}¦ at the end of comps.; ({%ā%}), f. a
prosodial instant, a simple sound, see under {%mātraka%}
above; ({%as, ā, am%}), material, of the nature of matter,
containing a short vowel (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>36821<pc>0766-a<k1>mAtrIya<k2>mAtrIya
{%Mātrīya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%mātrīyati, -te,%} &c., to
wish one's self a mother; to treat one as a mother
(with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>36822<pc>0766-a<k1>mAna<k2>mAna
{%Māna, māpaka,%}¦ &c. See pp. 770, 771.
<LEND>

<L>36823<pc>0766-a<k1>mita<k2>mita
{%Mita, meya,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>36824<pc>0766-a<k1>mAuTa<k2>mAuTa
{#mAuTa#}¦ {%māütha,%} N. of a place; (also read
{%māüṇatha.%})
<LEND>

<L>36825<pc>0766-a<k1>mAMScatu<k2>mAMScatu
{#mAMScatu#}¦ {%māṃścatu, us, us, u,%} Ved. (probably
some colour), light yellow, dun-coloured (an epithet
of Mitra or of a horse or horses; according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda VII. 44, 3, {%= manyamānān stuvato%}
{%janāṃś cetayate jānāti yadvā abhimanyamānāṃś%}
{%cātayate nāśayati yaḥ,%} one who is mindful of his
adorers, or destroying those that despise him; ac-
cording to Naigh. 1. 14, {%māṃścatvaḥ = aśvāḥ%}).
<LEND>

<L>36826<pc>0766-a<k1>mAMScatva<k2>mAMScatva
{%Māṃścatva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. yellowish, (this word
occurs with doubtful meaning in Ṛg-veda IX.
97, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>36827<pc>0766-a<k1>mAMs<k2>mAMs
{#mAMs#}¦ {%māṃs,%} n. {%= māṃsa,%} flesh, meat, &c.
(see below; {%māṃs%} is defective in nom. and acc. sing.
and du., the inst. is {%māṃsā,%} acc. pl. {%māṃsi,%} inst.
dat. abl. du. {%mānbhyām,%} &c.). {%—Māṃs-pacana,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} Ved. used for cooking meat (said of a
caldron). {%—Māṃs-pāka, as,%} m. {%= māṃsa-pāka,%}
q. v. (Pāṇ. VI. 1, 144).
<LEND>

<L>36828<pc>0766-a<k1>mAMsa<k2>mAMsa
{%Māṃsa, am,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. rt. {%man;%} a fanciful
derivation fr. {%māṃ sa%} is given in Manu V. 55),
flesh, meat, animal food, (according to some also {%as,%}
m.); the flesh of fish; the fleshy part or pulp of
fruit; ({%as%}), m., N. of a mixed caste ({%= māṃsa- %}
[Page0766-b+ 81]
{%vikretṛ,%} selling meat; cf. {%māṃsa-ccheda%}); a
worm; time; ({%ī%}), f. {%= jaṭā-māṃsī,%} Nardostachys
Jatamansi; a sort of drug; {%= māṃsa-cchadā;%} [cf.
Old Germ. <nsi>môs,</nsi> ‘food;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>Mus, Gemüse;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>manso;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>mēsa;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>maise,</nsi> ‘food,
victuals.’] {%—Māṃsa-kacchapa, as,%} m. a fleshy
abscess on the palate. {%—Māṃsa-kandī,%} f. a fleshy
protuberance or swelling of the flesh. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} fond of meat or flesh. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} flesh-making, flesh-preparing; ({%ī%}),
n. blood. {%—Māṃsa-khaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. a bit
of flesh or meat. {%—Māṃsa-granthi, is,%} m. flesh-
swelling, a gland. {%—Māṃsa-cchadā,%} f. a species of
plant. {%—Māṃsa-ccheda, as, ī,%} m. f. or {%māṃsa-%}
{%cchedin, ī,%} m. ‘flesh-cutter,’ N. of a mixed caste.
{%—Māṃsa-ja, am,%} n. ‘flesh-born,’ the marrow of
the flesh, adeps, fat. {%—Māṃsa-tāna, as,%} m. a polypus
in the throat. {%—Māṃsa-tejas, as,%} n. ‘flesh-marrow,’
fat, adeps; [cf. {%māṃsa-ja.%}] {%—Māṃsa-tva, am,%} n.
fleshiness, the being flesh; the derivation of the
word {%māṃsa%} (Manu V. 55). {%—Māṃsa-dagdha, am,%}
n. cauterizing of the flesh. {%—Māṃsa-dalana, as,%}
m. a plant, Amoora Rohitaka. {%—Māṃsa-drāvin, ī,%}
m. a species of sorrel, Rumex Vesicarius. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%niryāsa, as,%} m. the hair of the body. {%—Māṃsan-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at%} (fr. Ved. {%māṃsan%}), fleshy. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. ‘flesh-sucker,’ epithet of a Piśāca; of a
Dānava. {%—Māṃsa-pacana, as, ī, am,%} meat-cook-
ing; ({%am%}), n. a vessel for cooking meat. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%parivarjana, am,%} n. avoiding meat, abstaining
from animal food. {%—Māṃsa-parivikrayin, ī,%} m.
a flesh-monger, dealer in flesh. {%—Māṃsa-pāka,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of disease (destroying the mem-
brum virile). {%—Māṃsa-piṭaka, as, am,%} m. n. a
basket of meat, a large quantity of flesh or meat.
{%—Māṃsa-piṇḍa-gṛhīta-vadana, as, ā, am,%} car-
rying a piece of flesh in the mouth. {%—Māṃsa-pitta,%}
{%am,%} n. a bone. {%—Māṃsa-peśī,%} f. a piece of flesh;
an epithet of the fetus from the eighth till the four-
teenth day [cf. {%peśī%}]; a muscle. {%—Māṃsa-phalā,%}
f. the egg-plant, Solanum Melongena. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%bhakṣa, as, ā, am,%} or {%māṃsa-bhakṣaka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} flesh-eating, carnivorous, eating meat; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Māṃsa-bhakṣaṇa, am,%} n.
the act of eating meat, eating animal food. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%bhikṣā,%} f., Ved. begging for meat as alms, soliciting
flesh as alms. {%—Māṃsa-bhuj, k, k, k,%} flesh-eating,
eating meat. {%—Māṃsa-bhūtodana (˚ta-od˚), am,%}
n. ‘boiled rice mixed with meat,’ rice and meat.
{%—Māṃsa-bhettṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} flesh-cutting, inflict-
ing a flesh-wound, piercing the flesh. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of flesh; {%māṃsa-mayī%}
{%peśī,%} a piece of flesh. {%—Māṃsa-māsā,%} f. a species of
plant, {%= māṣa-parṇī;%} (also read {%māṃsa-māṣā.%})
{%—Māṃsa-mukha, as, ī, am,%} having flesh in the
mouth. {%—Māṃsa-yūtha, am,%} n. a quantity of flesh.
{%—Māṃsa-yoni, is, is, i,%} flesh-born; ({%is%}), m. a
creature of flesh and blood. {%—Māṃsa-rasa, as,%} m.
meat-broth, soup. {%—Māṃsa-ruci, is, is, i,%} fond of
flesh, having a relish for animal food. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%rohiṇī%} or {%māṃsa-rohī,%} f. a species of fragrant plant.
{%—Māṃsa-latā,%} f. ‘flesh-tendril,’ a wrinkle. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having or possessing flesh. {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%vikraya, as,%} m. the sale of meat. {%—Māṃsa-vikra-%}
{%yin, ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%māṃsa-vikretṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} selling
meat, a meat-seller; ({%māṃsa-vikrayin%} is used as a
term of reproach for a low or vile person.) {%—Māṃsa-%}
{%vṛddhi, is,%} f. an increase or growth of flesh.
{%—Māṃsa-śīla, as, ā, am,%} accustomed to eat meat;
fleshy. {%—Māṃsa-śoṇita, am,%} n. flesh and blood.
{%—Māṃsa-śoṇita-paṅkin, ī, inī, i,%} miry with flesh
and blood. {%—Māṃsa-saṅghāta, as,%} m. a swelling of
the flesh. {%—Māṃsa-sāra, as,%} m. ‘flesh-essence, flesh-
marrow,’ fat; ({%as, ā, am%}), having the flesh predo-
minant among the seven constituent parts of the
body. {%—Māṃsa-sneha, as,%} m. ‘flesh-marrow,’ adeps,
fat. {%—Māṃsa-hāsā,%} f. skin. {%—Māṃsād (˚sa-ad),%}
{%t, t, t,%} or {%māṃsāda (˚sa-ada%} or {%-āda%}), {%as, ā, am,%}
or {%māṃsādin (˚sa-ād˚), ī, inī, i,%} flesh-eating, car-
nivorous. {%—Māṃsārgala (˚sa-ar˚), as, am,%} m. n. a
piece of flesh hanging from the mouth (of a lion
[Page0766-c+ 74]
&c.). {%—Māṃsārbuda (˚sa-ar˚), as,%} m. a kind of
disease of the membrum virile. {%—Māṃsāśana (˚sa-%}
{%aś˚), am,%} n. flesh-meat; the act of eating flesh-
meat. {%—Māṃsāśi-tva, am,%} n. the state of one who
eats flesh, the devouring of flesh. {%—Māṃsāśin (˚sa-%}
{%āś˚), ī, inī, i,%} eating flesh, living upon meat.
{%—Māṃsāṣṭakā (˚sa-aṣ˚),%} f., N. of the eighth day
in the dark half of the month Māgha (on which
meat is offered to the Manes). {%—Māṃsāhāra (˚sa-%}
{%āh˚), as,%} m. animal food. {%—Māṃsaeṣṭā (˚sa-iṣ˚),%}
f. a kind of bird, the flesh of which is considered a
delicacy {%(= valgulā)%}. {%—Māṃsonnati (˚sa-un˚), is,%}
f. a swelling of the flesh. {%—Māṃsopajīvin (˚sa-%}
{%up˚), ī,%} m. living by flesh, a dealer in meat. {%—Māṃ-%}
{%saudana (˚sa-od˚), as,%} m. meat and boiled rice.
{%—Māṃsaudanika, as, ī, am%} (fr. the preceding),
see Pāṇ. IV. 4, 67.
<LEND>

<L>36829<pc>0766-c<k1>mAMsala<k2>mAMsala
{%Māṃsala, as, ā, am,%}¦ fleshy; lusty, brawny, mus-
cular; powerful, strong (sometimes applied to sound);
pulpy (as fruit). {%—Māṃsala-phalā,%} f. Solanum Me-
longena; [cf. {%māṃsa-phalā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36830<pc>0766-c<k1>mAMsika<k2>mAMsika
{%Māṃsika, as, ā, am, = māṃsāya prabhavati,%}¦
see Gaṇa Santāpādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 101; ({%as%}), m. a
butcher, a seller of meat.
<LEND>

<L>36831<pc>0766-c<k1>mAMsikA<k2>mAMsikA
{%Māṃsikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%māṃsī%}), the plant Nardostachys
Jatamansi.
<LEND>

<L>36832<pc>0766-c<k1>mAMsinI<k2>mAMsinI
{%Māṃsinī,%}¦ f. Nardostachys Jatamansi.
<LEND>

<L>36833<pc>0766-c<k1>mAMsIya<k2>mAMsIya
{%Māṃsīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%māṃsīyati,%} &c., Ved. to long
for flesh.
<LEND>

<L>36834<pc>0766-c<k1>mAMspfzwa<k2>mAMspfzwa
{#mAMspfzwa#}¦ {%māṃ-spṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved., ac-
cording to a Schol. a comp. fr. {%mām + spṛṣṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>36835<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkanda<k2>mAkanda
{#mAkanda#}¦ {%mākanda, as,%} m. the mango tree;
({%ī%}), f. the Myrobalan tree, Myrobalan; N. of other
plants (= Hindī {%mādrāṇī, mākunī%}); yellow sandal-
wood, yellow sanders; N. of a city on the Ganges.
<LEND>

<L>36836<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkandaka<k2>mAkandaka
{%Mākandaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ belonging to the town
Mākandī; ({%ikā%}), f. {%= mākandī,%} the city.
<LEND>

<L>36837<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkandika<k2>mAkandika
{%Mākandika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36838<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkara<k2>mAkara
{#mAkara#}¦ {%mākara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%makara%}),
related or belonging to the sea-monster Makara;
{%mākara ākara,%} ‘the mine of Makaras,’ the sea;
{%mākaram āsanam,%} a particular posture in sitting;
{%mākaro vyūhaḥ,%} a particular form of military array;
{%mākarī saptamī = makara-saptamī,%} the seventh
day in the light half of the month Māgha.
<LEND>

<L>36839<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkaranda<k2>mAkaranda
{#mAkaranda#}¦ {%mākaranda, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%maka-%}
{%randa%}), coming from or consisting of the juice of
flowers.
<LEND>

<L>36840<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkali<k2>mAkali
{#mAkali#}¦ {%mākali, is,%} m. the moon; N. of
Indra's charioteer; [cf. {%mātali.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36841<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkazweya<k2>mAkazweya
{#mAkazweya#}¦ {%mākaṣṭeya%} (fr. {%makaṣṭu%}), a pa-
tronymic.
<LEND>

<L>36842<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkAraDyAna<k2>mAkAraDyAna
{#mAkAraDyAna#}¦ {%mākāra-dhyāna, am,%} n. (pro-
bably fr. I. {%mā + kāra%}), a particular method of ab-
stract meditation, kind of reverie.
<LEND>

<L>36843<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkim<k2>mAkim
{#mAkim#}¦ {%mā-kim,%} see Gaṇa Cādi to Pāṇ. 1.
4, 57; [cf. {%na-kim.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36844<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkis<k2>mAkis
{%Mā-kis,%}¦ ind., Ved. not (= Lat. <nsi>ne,</nsi> e. g. Ṛg-veda
1. 147, 5, {%mā-kir%} no {%duritāya dhāyīḥ,%} consign us
not to misfortune); no one (= Lat. <nsi>ne-quis,</nsi> e. g.
Ṛg-veda VIII. 5, 39, {%mā-kir enā pathā gāt,%} let
none proceed by that path; according to Sāy. {%anena%}
{%mārgeṇa anyo na gantuṃ śaknoti%}).
<LEND>

<L>36845<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkIm<k2>mAkIm
{%Mā-kīm,%}¦ ind., see Gaṇa Cādi to Pāṇ. 1. 4, 57,
(according to Sāy.) {%= 1. mā;%} [cf. {%na-kīm.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36846<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkI<k2>mAkI
{#mAkI#}¦ {%mākī,%} f. du., Ved. (Sāy.) {%= nirmā-%}
{%tryau bhūta-jātasya,%} the two creators or originators
of all beings, (said of heaven and earth.)
<LEND>

<L>36847<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkIna<k2>mAkIna
{#mAkIna#}¦ {%mākīna, as, ā, am,%} (fr. 3. {%ma%}), Ved.
(according to Sāy.) my, mine.
<LEND>

<L>36848<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkuli<k2>mAkuli
{#mAkuli#}¦ {%mākuli, is,%} m. a kind of snake.
<LEND>

<L>36849<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkowa<k2>mAkowa
{#mAkowa#}¦ {%mākoṭa,%} N. of one of the places in
which Dākṣāyaṇī is worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>36850<pc>0766-c<k1>mAkzavya<k2>mAkzavya
{#mAkzavya#}¦ {%mākṣavya, as,%} m. (fr. {%makṣu%}),
[Page0767-a+ 77]
Ved. a patronymic, N. of a preceptor; [cf. {%māṃ-%}
{%kṣavya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36851<pc>0767-a<k1>mAkzika<k2>mAkzika
{#mAkzika#}¦ {%mākṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%makṣikā%}),
coming from or belonging to a bee; ({%am%}), n., scil.
{%madhu,%} honey; a kind of honey-like mineral sub-
stance or pyrites, (various kinds are described, see
{%svarṇa-m˚, rūpya-m˚, kāṃsya-m˚, viṭ-m˚%}); [cf.
Old Germ. <nsi>wahs,</nsi> ‘wax;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>väx, vex, veax;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>waszka-s;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>vosk.</nsi>] {%—Mākṣika-ja, am,%}
n. ‘honey-born,’ bees’-wax. {%—Mākṣika-phala, as,%}
m. a species of cocoa-nut {%(= madhu-nālikerika).%}
{%—Mākṣika-śarkarā,%} f. a kind of sugar, candied
sugar. {%—Mākṣika-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a place.
{%—Mākṣikāśraya (˚ka-āś˚), am,%} n. bees'-wax;
honey-comb.
<LEND>

<L>36852<pc>0767-a<k1>mAkzIka<k2>mAkzIka
{%Mākṣīka, am,%}¦ n. {%= mākṣika,%} honey. {%—Mā-%}
{%kṣīka-dhātu, u,%} n. a kind of pyrites (described
above). {%—Mākṣika-śarkarā,%} f. clarified sugar ({%=%}
{%sitākhaṇḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>36853<pc>0767-a<k1>mAKa<k2>mAKa
{#mAKa#}¦ {%mākha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%makha%}), of or
belonging to a sacrifice, sacrificial.
<LEND>

<L>36854<pc>0767-a<k1>mAgadya<k2>mAgadya
{#mAgadya#}¦ {%māgadya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%magadin%}),
see Gaṇa Pragadyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>36855<pc>0767-a<k1>mAgaDa<k2>mAgaDa
{#mAgaDa#}¦ {%māgadha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%magadha%}),
relating to or born in or living in or customary among
the Magadhas or the Magadha country; {%māgadhī%}
{%bhāṣā,%} the Magadha language; ({%as%}), m. a king
of the Magadhas; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people, the
Magadhas; opprobrious epithet of a mixed caste
(still numerous in Guzerat, and called the Bhāts),
the son of a Kṣatriya mother and Vaiśya father,
the poetical panegyrist of a king, a bard, minstrel
(whose duty is to recite the praises of kings in their
presence with allusions to their genealogy and the
deeds of their ancestors, or to attend the march of
an army and animate the soldiers by martial songs;
frequently associated with {%sūta%} and {%vandin%}); N. of
one of the seven sages in the fourteenth Manv-antara;
of a son of Yadu; white cummin; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
the warrior-caste in Śākya-dvīpa; ({%ā%}), f. a princess
of the Magadhas; long pepper; ({%ī%}), f. a princess of
the Magadhas; the daughter of a Kṣatriya mother
and Vaiśya father; the language of the Magadhas;
N. of a river ({%= śoṇā%}); Jasminum Auriculatum;
long pepper; white cummin; anise or dill; a species
of cardamoms (grown in Guzerat); refined sugar; a
kind of metre (Ved.). {%—Māgadha-deśīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} belonging to or born in the land of the Ma-
gadhas. {%—Māgadha-pura, am,%} n. ‘the city of the
Magadhas,’ N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>36856<pc>0767-a<k1>mAgaDaka<k2>mAgaDaka
{%Māgadhaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ikā%}),
f. long pepper.
<LEND>

<L>36857<pc>0767-a<k1>mAgaDika<k2>mAgaDika
{%Māgadhika, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the Magadhas.
<LEND>

<L>36858<pc>0767-a<k1>mAGa<k2>mAGa
{#mAGa#}¦ {%māgha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%maghā%}), related
to the constellation Maghā; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%māsa,%}
the month Māgha which begins with the winter
solstice (= January-February); N. of a poet (son of
Dattaka and author of the Śiśupāla-vadha or Māgha-
kāvya); ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%tithi,%} the day of full moon in
the month Māgha; Hingtsha Repens. {%—Māgha-%}
{%kāvya, am,%} n. the poem of Māgha, i. e. the Śiśu-
pāla-vadha. {%—Māgha-caitanya, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the eighth book of the Kalpa-latā. {%—Māgha-%}
{%pākṣika, as, ī, am,%} belonging to one of the two
halves of the month Māgha. {%—Māgha-māhātmya,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the majesty of the month Māgha,’ N. of a part
of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Māgha-snāna, am,%} n. bathing
or religious ablution in sacred pools &c. in the month
of Māgha. {%—Māghī-pakṣa-yajanīya, am,%} n. the
first day of the month Phālguna; [cf. {%yajanīya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36859<pc>0767-a<k1>mAGya<k2>mAGya
{%Māghya, am,%}¦ n. the flower of the Jasminum
Multiflorum or Pubescens.
<LEND>

<L>36860<pc>0767-a<k1>mAGamA<k2>mAGamA
{#mAGamA#}¦ {%māghamā,%} f. a female crab ({%= kar-%}
{%kaṭī%}).
<LEND>

<L>36861<pc>0767-a<k1>mAGavata<k2>mAGavata
{#mAGavata#}¦ {%māghavata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%magha-%}
{%vat%}), belonging to Indra; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%diś,%} the east.
{%—Māghavata-cāpa, as,%} m. the rainbow.
<LEND>
[Page0767-b+ 68]

<L>36862<pc>0767-b<k1>mAGavana<k2>mAGavana
{%Māghavana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%magha-van%}), belong-
ing to Indra, ruled by Indra (Pāṇ. VI. 4, 128).
<LEND>

<L>36863<pc>0767-b<k1>mAGona<k2>mAGona
{%Māghona, am,%}¦ n. liberality (Ved.); ({%ī%}), f., scil.
{%diś,%} the east, the eastern quarter.
<LEND>

<L>36864<pc>0767-b<k1>mANkz<k2>mANkz
{#mANkz#}¦ {%māṅkṣ%} (connected with rt.
{%kāṅkṣ%}), cl. I. P. {%māṅkṣati, māṅ-%}
{%kṣitum,%} to wish, long for, desire.
<LEND>

<L>36865<pc>0767-b<k1>mANkzavya<k2>mANkzavya
{#mANkzavya#}¦ {%māṅkṣavya, as,%} m. (fr. {%maṅkṣu%}),
a patronymic (Gaṇa Gargādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 105);
{%māṅkṣavyāyaṇī,%} f. (Gaṇa Lohitādi to Pāṇ. IV.
1, 18).
<LEND>

<L>36866<pc>0767-b<k1>mANgala<k2>mANgala
{#mANgala#}¦ {%māṅgala, am,%} n. (fr. {%maṅgala%}), Ved.
epithet of a particular liturgical formula addressed to
the Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>36867<pc>0767-b<k1>mANgali<k2>mANgali
{%Māṅgali, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic, N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>36868<pc>0767-b<k1>mANgalika<k2>mANgalika
{%Māṅgalika, as, ī, am,%}¦ auspicious, propitious,
tending to good fortune, wishing for prosperity, in-
dicating good fortune.
<LEND>

<L>36869<pc>0767-b<k1>mANgalikA<k2>mANgalikA
{%Māṅgalikā,%}¦ f. (fem. of an unused form {%māṅga-%}
{%laka%}), N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>36870<pc>0767-b<k1>mANgalya<k2>mANgalya
{%Māṅgalya, as, ā (?) , am, = maṅgalya,%}¦ conferring
happiness, auspicious; ({%as%}), m. Ægle Marmelos;
({%am%}), n. an auspicious thing, amulet; a benediction;
an auspicious or festive ceremony, festivity, festival;
prosperity, happiness, welfare, propitiousness. {%—Māṅ-%}
{%galya-mṛdaṅga, as,%} m. a tabour or drum beaten
on festive occasions. {%—Māṅgalyārhā (˚ya-ar˚),%} f.
a species of plant ({%= trāyamāṇā%}).
<LEND>

<L>36871<pc>0767-b<k1>mANguzya<k2>mANguzya
{#mANguzya#}¦ {%māṅguṣya, as,%} m. (fr. {%maṅguṣa%}),
a patronymic (Gaṇa Kurvādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 151).
<LEND>

<L>36872<pc>0767-b<k1>mAca<k2>mAca
{#mAca#}¦ {%māca, as,%} m. a way, road; [cf. {%mā-%}
{%ṭha, mātha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36873<pc>0767-b<k1>mAcala<k2>mAcala
{#mAcala#}¦ {%mācala, as,%} m. (perhaps fr. 1. {%mā +%}
{%cala%}), a thief, robber ({%= vandī-kāra%}); a crocodile,
&c. ({%= grāha%}); sickness, illness; [cf. {%kari-m˚,%}
{%gaja-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36874<pc>0767-b<k1>mAcAkIya<k2>mAcAkIya
{#mAcAkIya#}¦ {%mācākīya, as,%} m., N. of a gram-
marian.
<LEND>

<L>36875<pc>0767-b<k1>mAcAla<k2>mAcAla
{#mAcAla#}¦ {%mācāla%} in {%parṇa-m˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36876<pc>0767-b<k1>mAcikA<k2>mAcikA
{#mAcikA#}¦ {%mācikā,%} f. {%= makṣikā,%} a fly [cf.
{%gṛha-m˚%}]; a species of plant ({%= amba-ṣṭhā;%} cf.
{%kāka-m˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>36877<pc>0767-b<k1>mAcI<k2>mAcI
{%Mācī%}¦ in {%kāka-m˚%} and {%dhvāṅkṣa-m˚;%} cf. {%mā-%}
{%cikā%} above. {%—Mācī-pattra, am,%} n. a species of
medicinal plant ({%= sura-parṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>36878<pc>0767-b<k1>mAciram<k2>mAciram
{#mAciram#}¦ {%mā-ciram.%} See p. 764, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>36879<pc>0767-b<k1>mAjala<k2>mAjala
{#mAjala#}¦ {%mājala, as,%} m. a kind of bird, the
blue roller.
<LEND>

<L>36880<pc>0767-b<k1>mAjalapura<k2>mAjalapura
{%Mājala-pura, am,%}¦ n., N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>36881<pc>0767-b<k1>mAjika<k2>mAjika
{#mAjika#}¦ {%mājika, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36882<pc>0767-b<k1>mAjiraka<k2>mAjiraka
{#mAjiraka#}¦ {%mājiraka, as,%} m. (fr. {%majiraka%}),
a patronymic (Gaṇa Śivādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 112).
<LEND>

<L>36883<pc>0767-b<k1>mAjIja<k2>mAjIja
{#mAjIja#}¦ {%mājīja,%} N. of a place; (also read
{%mājuja%} and {%mājūja.%})
<LEND>

<L>36884<pc>0767-b<k1>mAYjizWa<k2>mAYjizWa
{#mAYjizWa#}¦ {%māñjiṣṭha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mañjiṣ-%}
{%ṭhā%}), red as madder, red as the dye made from
the Mañjiṣṭhā; ({%am%}), n. red, red colour.
<LEND>

<L>36885<pc>0767-b<k1>mAYjizWaka<k2>mAYjizWaka
{%Māñjiṣṭhaka%}¦ or {%māñjiṣṭhika, as, ī, am,%} red
as Bengal madder, dyed with madder, red.
<LEND>

<L>36886<pc>0767-b<k1>mAYjIraka<k2>mAYjIraka
{#mAYjIraka#}¦ {%māñjīraka, as,%} m. (fr. {%mañjīraka%}),
a patronymic (Gaṇa Śivādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 112).
<LEND>

<L>36887<pc>0767-b<k1>mAwAmraka<k2>mAwAmraka
{#mAwAmraka#}¦ {%māṭāmraka, as,%} m. a species of
tree.
<LEND>

<L>36888<pc>0767-b<k1>mAwiyAri<k2>mAwiyAri
{#mAwiyAri#}¦ {%māṭiyāri%} or {%māṭīyāri,%} N. of a
city.
<LEND>

<L>36889<pc>0767-b<k1>mAWa<k2>mAWa
{#mAWa#}¦ {%māṭha%} or {%māṭhya, as,%} m. a road; [cf.
{%mātha, māca.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36890<pc>0767-b<k1>mAWara<k2>mAWara
{#mAWara#}¦ {%māṭhara, as,%} m. (fr. {%maṭhara%}), a
[Page0767-c+ 73]
patronymic, a proper N.; = Vyāsa; N. of one of
the sun's attendants; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people;
({%ī%}), f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>36891<pc>0767-c<k1>mAWaraka<k2>mAWaraka
{%Māṭharaka,%}¦ see Gaṇa Dhūmādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2,
127.
<LEND>

<L>36892<pc>0767-c<k1>mAWarAyaRa<k2>mAWarAyaRa
{%Māṭharāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic (Gaṇa Hari-
tādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 100).
<LEND>

<L>36893<pc>0767-c<k1>mAWarya<k2>mAWarya
{%Māṭharya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%maṭhara%}), a patronymic,
see Schol. on Uṇādi-sūtras V. 39.
<LEND>

<L>36894<pc>0767-c<k1>mAWavya<k2>mAWavya
{#mAWavya#}¦ {%māṭhavya, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>36895<pc>0767-c<k1>mAWI<k2>mAWI
{#mAWI#}¦ {%māṭhī,%} f. armour, mail.
<LEND>

<L>36896<pc>0767-c<k1>mAq<k2>mAq
{#mAq#}¦ {%māḍ,%} cl. I. P. A. {%māḍati, -te,%} &c.,
to measure, weigh, (a various reading for
rt. {%māh.%})
<LEND>

<L>36897<pc>0767-c<k1>mAqa<k2>mAqa
{%Māḍa, as,%}¦ m. measure, weight, quantity; a species
of tree ({%= madya-druma,%} also read {%māḍā-druma%}).
<LEND>

<L>36898<pc>0767-c<k1>mAqava<k2>mAqava
{#mAqava#}¦ {%māḍava, as,%} m. a particular mixed
caste.
<LEND>

<L>36899<pc>0767-c<k1>mAqArya<k2>mAqArya
{#mAqArya#}¦ {%māḍārya%} (fr. {%maḍāra%}), see Gaṇa
Pragadyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>36900<pc>0767-c<k1>mAqi<k2>mAqi
{#mAqi#}¦ {%māḍi, is,%} m. a palace.
<LEND>

<L>36901<pc>0767-c<k1>mAqquka<k2>mAqquka
{#mAqquka#}¦ {%māḍḍuka%} or {%māḍḍukika, as,%} m.
(fr. {%maḍḍuka,%} q. v.), a drummer, player on the
Maḍḍuka.
<LEND>

<L>36902<pc>0767-c<k1>mAQi<k2>mAQi
{#mAQi#}¦ {%māḍhi, is,%} f. {%= dala-snasā,%} the fibre
or vein of a leaf ({%= pattra-śirā%}); the germ of
leaves, the young leaf before it opens; honouring,
respecting, reverencing, (in this sense fr. rt. {%mah%});
dejection, sadness, affliction; poverty, indigence,
manifestation of poverty, declaration of distress;
anger, passion; a back or double tooth; the hem
or border of a garment; N. of a district.
<LEND>

<L>36903<pc>0767-c<k1>mAQI<k2>mAQI
{%Māḍhī,%}¦ f. {%= danta-śirā,%} a back or double tooth.
<LEND>

<L>36904<pc>0767-c<k1>mARa<k2>mARa
{#mARa#}¦ {%māṇa, as,%} m. a species of plant ({%=%}
{%māṇaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>36905<pc>0767-c<k1>mARaka<k2>mARaka
{%Māṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a small shrub, Arum Indicum;
the bulbous root of the Arum Indicum; [cf. {%mā-%}
{%naka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36906<pc>0767-c<k1>mARava<k2>mARava
{#mARava#}¦ {%māṇava, as,%} m. a youth, lad, young-
ster, (especially) a young Brāhman; a man, little
man, manikin (used contemptuously); a pearl orna-
ment of sixteen strings [cf. {%ardha-m˚%}]; epithet of
one of the nine treasures of the Jainas.
<LEND>

<L>36907<pc>0767-c<k1>mARavaka<k2>mARavaka
{%Māṇavaka, as,%}¦ m. a lad or boy not exceeding
sixteen years of age; a little man, dwarf, ({%māyā-%}
{%māṇavako Hariḥ,%} Viṣṇu disguising himself under
the form of a dwarf); a manikin (contemptuously);
a silly or childish man, an ignorant or ridiculous
man, (in the drama used as an epithet of the Vidū-
shaka or jocose friend of the king); a pupil, scholar,
religious student; a pearl ornament of a particular
number of strings (e. g. of sixteen, twenty, or forty-
eight strings); ({%ikā%}), f. a young girl, damsel, wench;
({%am%}), n. {%= māṇavaka-krīḍa,%} a kind of metre, four
times <lang n="greek">¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯.</lang> {%—Māṇavaka-krīḍa, am, ā,%}
n. f. ‘boy's play,’ N. of a kind of metre. {%—Māṇa-%}
{%vaka-krīḍanaka%} or {%māṇavaka-krīḍitaka, am,%} n.
{%= māṇavaka-krīḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>36908<pc>0767-c<k1>mARavIna<k2>mARavIna
{%Māṇavīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ proper for boys or lads,
boyish, childish.
<LEND>

<L>36909<pc>0767-c<k1>mARavya<k2>mARavya
{%Māṇavya, am,%}¦ n. a multitude or company of boys
or lads, boyhood.
<LEND>

<L>36910<pc>0767-c<k1>mARahala<k2>mARahala
{#mARahala#}¦ {%māṇahala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people.
<LEND>

<L>36911<pc>0767-c<k1>mARikA<k2>mARikA
{#mARikA#}¦ {%māṇikā,%} f. a particular weight,
= 2 Kuḍavas, = 1 Śarāva, = 8 Palas.
<LEND>

<L>36912<pc>0767-c<k1>mARikAmbU<k2>mARikAmbU
{#mARikAmbU#}¦ {%māṇikāmbū, ūs,%} f., N. of a
woman, the mother of the Scholiast Viṭṭhala.
<LEND>

<L>36913<pc>0767-c<k1>mARikya<k2>mARikya
{#mARikya#}¦ {%māṇikya, am,%} n. a ruby [cf. {%raṅga-%}
{%m˚%}]; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
small house-lizard. {%—Māṇikya-candra, as,%} m., N.
of a king of Tīra-bhukti. {%—Māṇikya-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} made or consisting of rubies. {%—Māṇikya-malla, %}
[Page0768-a+ 72]
{%as,%} m., N. of a king (patron of Manohara-śarman
the commentator on the Śruta-bodha). {%—Māṇikya-%}
{%miśra, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Māṇikya-rāya, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Māṇikya-sūri, is,%} m., N. of a
Gujarāṭhī author and of other persons.
<LEND>

<L>36914<pc>0768-a<k1>mARicara<k2>mARicara
{#mARicara#}¦ {%māṇicara, as,%} m., Ved. (accord-
ing to a commentator) the tutelary genius of the
war-chariot.
<LEND>

<L>36915<pc>0768-a<k1>mARicAra<k2>mARicAra
{%Māṇicāra, as,%}¦ m. {%= māṇibhadra%} below.
<LEND>

<L>36916<pc>0768-a<k1>mARipAra<k2>mARipAra
{#mARipAra#}¦ {%māṇipāra, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>36917<pc>0768-a<k1>mARipAla<k2>mARipAla
{#mARipAla#}¦ {%māṇipāla,%} see Gaṇa Mahiṣyādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 4, 148.
<LEND>

<L>36918<pc>0768-a<k1>mARipAlika<k2>mARipAlika
{%Māṇipālika,%}¦ see Gaṇa Revatyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1,
146.
<LEND>

<L>36919<pc>0768-a<k1>mARibanDa<k2>mARibanDa
{#mARibanDa#}¦ {%māṇibandha, am,%} n. {%= māṇi-%}
{%mantha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36920<pc>0768-a<k1>mARiBadra<k2>mARiBadra
{#mARiBadra#}¦ {%māṇibhadra = maṇi-bhadra,%} a
king of the Yakṣas.
<LEND>

<L>36921<pc>0768-a<k1>mARivara<k2>mARivara
{%Māṇivara = māṇibhadra%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>36922<pc>0768-a<k1>mARimanTa<k2>mARimanTa
{#mARimanTa#}¦ {%māṇimantha, am,%} n. (fr. {%maṇi-%}
{%mantha%}), salt brought from the mountain Maṇi-
mantha, rock-salt, sea-salt.
<LEND>

<L>36923<pc>0768-a<k1>mARimanta<k2>mARimanta
{%Māṇimanta, am,%}¦ n. {%= māṇimantha%} above.
<LEND>

<L>36924<pc>0768-a<k1>mARirUpyaka<k2>mARirUpyaka
{#mARirUpyaka#}¦ {%māṇirūpyaka%} (fr. {%maṇi + rūpya%}),
see Pāṇ. IV. 2, 104.
<LEND>

<L>36925<pc>0768-a<k1>mARwi<k2>mARwi
{#mARwi#}¦ {%māṇṭi, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a teacher;
({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants; [cf. {%maṇṭi,%}
{%meṇṭha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36926<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqa<k2>mARqa
{#mARqa#}¦ {%māṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>36927<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqakarRi<k2>mARqakarRi
{#mARqakarRi#}¦ {%māṇḍakarṇi, is,%} m. (a patro-
nymic fr. {%maṇḍa-karṇa%}), N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>36928<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqapa<k2>mARqapa
{#mARqapa#}¦ {%māṇḍapa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%maṇḍapa%}),
belonging to a temple.
<LEND>

<L>36929<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqarika<k2>mARqarika
{#mARqarika#}¦ {%māṇḍarika%} (fr. {%maṇḍara%}), see
Gaṇa Aṅgulyādi to Pāṇ. V. 3, 108.
<LEND>

<L>36930<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqalika<k2>mARqalika
{#mARqalika#}¦ {%māṇḍalika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%maṇ-%}
{%ḍala%}), relating to a province, ruling a province;
({%as%}), m. the governor of a province.
<LEND>

<L>36931<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqava<k2>mARqava
{#mARqava#}¦ {%māṇḍava, am,%} n. (fr. {%maṇḍu%}), N. of
a Sāman; {%eḍam māṇḍavam,%} N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>36932<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqavI<k2>mARqavI
{%Māṇḍavī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%māṇḍavya%} below), N. of a
daughter of Kuśa-dhvaja and wife of Bharata; a N.
of Dākṣāyaṇī at Māṇḍavya.
<LEND>

<L>36933<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqavya<k2>mARqavya
{%Māṇḍavya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%maṇḍu%}), a patronymic,
N. of a teacher; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of
Māṇḍavya; N. of a people; ({%as, am%}), m. or n. (?),
N. of a place. {%—Māṇḍavya-pura, am,%} n., N. of a
city on the Godā. {%—Māṇḍavyeśvara (˚ya-īś˚), am,%}
n., N. of a Liṅga. {%—Māṇḍavyeśvara-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a place of pilgrimage.
<LEND>

<L>36934<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqavyAyana<k2>mARqavyAyana
{%Māṇḍavyāyana, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. (fr. {%māṇḍavya%}), a
patronymic (Gaṇa Lohitādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 18).
<LEND>

<L>36935<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqUka<k2>mARqUka
{#mARqUka#}¦ {%māṇḍūka, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%maṇḍūka%}),
N. of a school. {%—Māṇḍūkī-putra, as,%} m., N. of a
teacher.
<LEND>

<L>36936<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqUkAyana<k2>mARqUkAyana
{%Māṇḍūkāyana, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school. {%—Māṇ-%}
{%ḍūkāyanī-putra, as,%} m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>36937<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqUkAyani<k2>mARqUkAyani
{%Māṇḍūkāyani, is,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>36938<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqUki<k2>mARqUki
{%Māṇḍūki, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%maṇḍūka%}), a patronymic
(Pāṇ. IV. 1, 119).
<LEND>

<L>36939<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqUkeya<k2>mARqUkeya
{%Māṇḍūkeya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%maṇḍūka%}), a patronymic,
N. of a teacher; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his descendants; ({%am%}),
n. the doctrine or teaching of Māṇḍūkeya.
<LEND>

<L>36940<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqUkeyIya<k2>mARqUkeyIya
{%Māṇḍūkeyīya,%}¦ relating to or connected with Māṇ-
ḍūkeya.
<LEND>

<L>36941<pc>0768-a<k1>mARqUkya<k2>mARqUkya
{%Māṇḍūkya,%}¦ probably an adj. from {%māṇḍūka.%}
{%—Māṇḍūkya-śruti, is,%} f. the Māṇḍukya revela-
tion or teaching. {%—Māṇḍūkyopaniṣad (˚ya-up˚),%}
{%t,%} f., N. of a short but important Upaniṣad of the
Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>36942<pc>0768-a<k1>mAta<k2>mAta<h>2
{#mAta#} 2¦. {%māta, as, ī,%} m. f. (for 1. see p. 764,
col. 3), Ved. a metronymic from Mati in Vāṅmātī.
<LEND>
[Page0768-b+ 71]

<L>36943<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtaNga<k2>mAtaNga
{#mAtaNga#}¦ {%mātaṅga, as,%} m. (fr. {%mataṅga%}), an
elephant; any large animal like an elephant; (at the
end of comps.) anything the best of its kind (e. g.
{%valāhaka-mātaṅgās,%} ‘elephants of clouds,’ i. e. ‘best
of clouds,’ an epithet of the Saṃvartaka clouds; cf.
{%mātaṅga-nakra%} below); Ficus Religiosa; epithet
of the twenty-fourth astronomical Yoga; a Cāṇḍāla,
a man of the lowest rank, an outcast; a kind of
Kirāta mountaineer, barbarian; N. of the servant of
the seventh and of the twenty-fourth Arhat of the
present Ava-sarpiṇī; of a Pratyeka-buddha; of an
author; of a Nāga; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a mythical being
regarded as progenitress of the whole elephant tribe;
of a form of Durgā; of the wife of Vasiṣṭha.
{%—Mātaṅga-ja, as, ā, am,%} coming from or belong-
ing to an elephant, elephantine. {%—Mātaṅga-divā-%}
{%kara, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Mātaṅga-nakra,%}
{%as,%} m. a crocodile as large as an elephant. {%—Mā-%}
{%taṅga-makara, as,%} m. a kind of marine monster.
{%—Mātaṅga-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist Sūtra.
{%—Mātaṅgotsaṅga (˚ga-ut˚), as,%} m. the back of
an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>36944<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtaya<k2>mAtaya
{#mAtaya#}¦ {%mātaya.%} See p. 764, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36945<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtaripuruza<k2>mAtaripuruza
{#mAtaripuruza#}¦ {%mātari-puruṣa,%} &c. See
p. 765, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36946<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtariSva<k2>mAtariSva
{#mAtariSva#}¦ {%mātari-śva, mātari-śvan.%} See
p. 765, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36947<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtali<k2>mAtali
{#mAtali#}¦ {%mātali, is,%} m., N. of Indra's
charioteer, (said to be also read {%mātuli.%}) {%—Mātali-%}
{%sārathi, is,%} m. ‘having Mātali for his charioteer,’
an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>36948<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtalIya<k2>mAtalIya
{%Mātalīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or concerning
Mātali.
<LEND>

<L>36949<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtalI<k2>mAtalI
{#mAtalI#}¦ {%mātalī, ī,%} m. (only found in the
nom. sing. and without any case-ending, cf. {%pṛthī%}),
Ved., N. of a divine being associated with Yama and
the Manes.
<LEND>

<L>36950<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtavacasa<k2>mAtavacasa
{#mAtavacasa#}¦ {%mātavacasa, as,%} m., Ved. a patro-
nymic from Mata-vacas.
<LEND>

<L>36951<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtA<k2>mAtA
{#mAtA#}¦ {%mātā.%} See p. 764, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36952<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtApitf<k2>mAtApitf
{#mAtApitf#}¦ {%mātā-pitṛ, mātā-maha,%} &c. See
p. 765, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36953<pc>0768-b<k1>mAti<k2>mAti
{#mAti#}¦ {%māti, mātura,%} &c. See p. 764,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36954<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtula<k2>mAtula
{#mAtula#}¦ {%mātula.%} See p. 764, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36955<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtulaNga<k2>mAtulaNga
{#mAtulaNga#}¦ {%mātulaṅga%} or {%mātuliṅga%} or {%mā-%}
{%tuluṅga, as,%} m. (the original form is probably {%mā-%}
{%tuluṅga%}), a citron tree; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. another species
of citron tree, sweet lime; ({%am%}), n. a citron; (ac-
cording to a commentator {%mātulaṅga = ruddhaka,%}
perhaps for {%rucaka.%}) {%—Mātuluṅga-phala, am,%} n.
the fruit of the above tree. {%—Mātuluṅga-rasa, as,%}
m. the juice of the above tree. {%—Mātuluṅgāsava%}
{%(˚ga-ās˚), as,%} m. a liquor distilled from the above
tree.
<LEND>

<L>36956<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtuluNgaka<k2>mAtuluNgaka
{%Mātuluṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= mātuluṅga; (ikā),%} f.
the wild citron tree.
<LEND>

<L>36957<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtulAnI<k2>mAtulAnI
{#mAtulAnI#}¦ {%mātulānī.%} See p. 764, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36958<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtf<k2>mAtf
{#mAtf#}¦ {%mātṛ.%} See p. 764, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36959<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtfka<k2>mAtfka
{#mAtfka#}¦ {%mātṛka.%} See p. 765, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>36960<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtya<k2>mAtya
{#mAtya#}¦ {%mātya,%} see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 85.
<LEND>

<L>36961<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtra<k2>mAtra
{#mAtra#}¦ {%mātra, mātraka, mātrika.%} See p. 765,
col. 3, and p. 766, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>36962<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtsara<k2>mAtsara
{#mAtsara#}¦ {%mātsara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%matsara%}),
selfish, envious, jealous, stupid.
<LEND>

<L>36963<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtsarika<k2>mAtsarika
{%Mātsarika, as, ī, am,%}¦ envious, jealous, spiteful,
malicious; showing envy or jealousy, &c.
<LEND>

<L>36964<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtsarya<k2>mAtsarya
{%Mātsarya, am,%}¦ n. envy, jealousy, malice, spite,
({%mātsaryaṃ kṛ,%} to show jealousy); displeasure,
dissatisfaction.
<LEND>

<L>36965<pc>0768-b<k1>mAtsya<k2>mAtsya
{#mAtsya#}¦ {%mātsya, as, -sī (?) , am%} (fr. {%matsya%}),
[Page0768-c+ 75]
fishy, coming from or belonging to a fish, fish-like
(e. g. {%mātsyaṃ rūpam,%} a fish-like form, the form
or shape of a fish); ({%as%}), m., N. of a king of the
Matsyas; of a Ṛṣi. {%—Mātsya-purāṇa, am,%} n. {%=%}
{%matsya-purāṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36966<pc>0768-c<k1>mAtsyaka<k2>mAtsyaka
{%Mātsyaka, as, ī, am, = mātsya,%}¦ fishy, relating
to a fish; [cf. {%pauṇḍra-m˚;%} cf. also Hib. <nsi>measach,</nsi>
‘fishy.’]
<LEND>

<L>36967<pc>0768-c<k1>mAtsyaganDa<k2>mAtsyaganDa
{%Mātsyagandha, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%matsya-gandha%}),
N. of a race.
<LEND>

<L>36968<pc>0768-c<k1>mAtsyika<k2>mAtsyika
{%Mātsyika, as,%}¦ m. a fisherman; (wrongly read
{%mātsika.%})
<LEND>

<L>36969<pc>0768-c<k1>mAtsyeya<k2>mAtsyeya
{%Mātsyeya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the Matsya people.
<LEND>

<L>36970<pc>0768-c<k1>mATa<k2>mATa
{#mATa#}¦ {%mātha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%math%}), churn-
ing, stirring; hurting, injuring, killing, destruction,
annihilation; a way, road; [cf. {%māṭha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36971<pc>0768-c<k1>mATava<k2>mATava
{#mATava#}¦ {%māthava, as,%} m., Ved. a patronymic;
[cf. {%mādhava.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36972<pc>0768-c<k1>mATitika<k2>mATitika
{#mATitika#}¦ {%māthitika,%} an adj. fr. {%mathita%}
by Pāṇ. V. 3, 83, Vārttika 7.
<LEND>

<L>36973<pc>0768-c<k1>mATura<k2>mATura
{#mATura#}¦ {%māthura, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mathura%}),
coming from or belonging to Mathurā, an inhabitant
of Mathurā; composed by Mathura, related to Ma-
thura; composed by Mathura-nātha (e. g. {%māthurī%}
{%ṭippanī,%} the commentary of Mathura-nātha); ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of Citra-gupta and of other persons;
({%am%}), n. the gate leading to Mathurā. {%—Māthura-%}
{%deśya, as, ā, am,%} coming from or belonging to
the country of Mathurā.
<LEND>

<L>36974<pc>0768-c<k1>mATuraka<k2>mATuraka
{%Māthuraka, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the inhabitants of Ma-
thurā.
<LEND>

<L>36975<pc>0768-c<k1>mAda<k2>mAda
{#mAda#}¦ {%māda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%mad%}), {%= mada,%}
drunkenness, intoxication, stupor; joy, delight, exhi-
laration; pride, passion. {%—Mādānanda (˚da-ān˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>36976<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdaka<k2>mAdaka
{%Mādaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. Caus. of rt. 2. {%mad%}),
intoxicating, causing intoxication, stupefying; exhi-
larating, gladdening; ({%as%}), m. a gallinule {%(= dā-%}
{%tyūha)%}. {%—Mādaka-tva, am,%} n. the property or
state of causing intoxication.
<LEND>

<L>36977<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdana<k2>mAdana
{%Mādana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. Caus. of rt. 2. {%mad%}),
intoxicating, stupefying, maddening; gladdening,
exhilarating; ({%as%}), m. the god of love; Vanguiera
Spinosa; the thorn-apple; ({%ī%}), f., N. of two plants,
{%= mākandī, = vijayā; (am),%} n. the act of intoxi-
cating, intoxication, inebriation; exhilaration, the act
of delighting; cloves; ‘the stupefier,’ epithet of a
mythical weapon, (in this sense also read {%madana.%})
<LEND>

<L>36978<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdanIya<k2>mAdanIya
{%Mādanīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%mādana%} above), intoxi-
cating, inebriating; ({%am%}), n. an intoxicating drink.
<LEND>

<L>36979<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdayitnu<k2>mAdayitnu
{%Mādayitnu%}¦ or {%mādayiṣṇu, us, us, u%} (fr. Caus.
of rt. 2. {%mad%}), Ved. intoxicating, inebriating; glad-
dening.
<LEND>

<L>36980<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdAyana<k2>mAdAyana
{%Mādāyana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%mada%}), a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>36981<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdin<k2>mAdin
{%Mādin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. Caus. of rt. 2. {%mad%}), intoxicat-
ing, stupefying; gladdening; [cf. {%gandha-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>36982<pc>0768-c<k1>mAduGa<k2>mAduGa
{#mAduGa#}¦ {%mādugha, as, ī, am,%} relating to the
plant called Madugha.
<LEND>

<L>36983<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdurRA<k2>mAdurRA
{#mAdurRA#}¦ {%mādurṇā,%} f., N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>36984<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdfS<k2>mAdfS
{#mAdfS#}¦ {%mādṛś, k, k, k%} (fr. 3. {%ma%} + 2. {%dṛś%}),
like me, resembling me.
<LEND>

<L>36985<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdfkza<k2>mAdfkza
{%Mādṛkṣa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. 3. {%ma + dṛkṣa%}), {%=%}
{%mādṛśa%} below.
<LEND>

<L>36986<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdfSa<k2>mAdfSa
{%Mādṛśa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. 3. {%ma + dṛśa%}), like me,
resembling me.
<LEND>

<L>36987<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdya<k2>mAdya
{#mAdya#}¦ {%mādya,%} incorrectly for {%māndya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>36988<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdraka<k2>mAdraka
{#mAdraka#}¦ {%mādraka, as,%} m. (fr. {%madra%}), a
prince of the Madras; ({%ikā%}), f. a woman belonging
to the Madra nation, (more properly {%madrikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>36989<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdrakUlaka<k2>mAdrakUlaka
{%Mādrakūlaka%}¦ (fr. {%madra-kūla%}), see Gaṇa Dhū-
mādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 127.
<LEND>

<L>36990<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdranagara<k2>mAdranagara
{%Mādra-nagara%}¦ (fr. {%madra-nagara%}), see Scholiast
on Pāṇ. VII. 3, 24.
<LEND>

<L>36991<pc>0768-c<k1>mAdravatI<k2>mAdravatI
{%Mādravatī,%}¦ f. ‘princess of the Madras,’ N. of the
wife of Pari-kṣit; Mādrī the second wife of Pāṇḍu.
[Page0769-a+ 80]
{%—Mādravatī-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of the Madra
princess,’ epithet of either Nakula or Saha-deva.
<LEND>

<L>36992<pc>0769-a<k1>mAdrI<k2>mAdrI
{%Mādrī,%}¦ f. ‘princess of the Madras,’ N. of the
second wife of Pāṇḍu and mother of the twins Na-
kula and Saha-deva, (they were said to be the two
youngest of the sons of Pāṇḍu, q. v., but were really
the sons of Mādrī by the Aśvins, cf. {%nakula, kuntī%});
the wife of Saha-deva; wife of Kroṣṭu; wife of
Kṛṣṇa; a species of plant {%(= ati-viṣā)%}. {%—Mādri-%}
{%nandana, as,%} m. ({%mādri%} for {%mādrī%} to suit the
metre, cf. {%kunti-nandana%}), ‘son of Mādrī,’ epi-
thet of either Nakula or Saha-deva. {%—Mādrī-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘husband of Mādrī,’ epithet of Pāṇḍu.
{%—Mādrī-pṛthā-pati, is,%} m. ‘husband of Mādrī
and Pṛthā,’ N. of Pāṇḍu.
<LEND>

<L>36993<pc>0769-a<k1>mAdreya<k2>mAdreya
{%Mādreya, as,%}¦ m. ‘son of Mādrī,’ epithet of either
Nakula or Saha-deva; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>36994<pc>0769-a<k1>mAdrukasTalaka<k2>mAdrukasTalaka
{#mAdrukasTalaka#}¦ {%mādrukasthalaka%} (fr. {%madru-%}
{%ka-sthalī%}), see Gaṇa Dhūmādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 127.
<LEND>

<L>36995<pc>0769-a<k1>mADava<k2>mADava
{#mADava#}¦ {%mādhava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%madhu%}), made
of honey, honey-like, sweet; relating to spring,
vernal; belonging or peculiar to the descendants
of Madhu, i. e. the Yādavas, ({%mādhave 'hani,%} on a
spring day; {%mādhavī lakṣmīḥ,%} vernal beauty or,
in Hari-vaṃśa 9597, the fortune of the Yādavas;
{%mādhavī devī,%} N. of the earth); ({%as%}), m. an epithet
of the second month of spring; the month Vai-
śākha (= April-May); spring; a son or descendant
of Madhu, a man of the race of Yadu; an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa (Viṣṇu); of Paraśu-rāma (as an incarnation
of Viṣṇu); of Indra; of a son of the third Manu;
of one of the seven sages under Manu Bhautya; of
another ancient sage; of a leader of the Pañca-rātra
sect; of the author of the Rug-viniścaya; of the
father of Dādābhāī and grandfather of the astrological
writer Nārāyaṇa; of the father of the commentator
Someśvara; of various other persons; Bassia Lati-
folia or a species of leguminous plant, {%= kṛṣṇa-%}
{%mudga; (ī),%} f. honey-sugar, clayed or candied sugar;
an intoxicating drink made of honey, mead; ‘spring-
flower,’ Gærtnera Racemosa [cf. {%vāsantī%}]; a kind
of panic-grass; sacred basil; {%= misi%} (according to
some, a sort of dentifrice); a procuress, bawd; afflu-
ence in cattle or herds; a woman of the race of
Madhu or Yadu (e. g. An-antā, wife of Janam-ejaya;
Sampriyā, wife of Vidūratha; Kuntī, wife of Pāṇḍu);
N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in Śrī-śaila; of Durgā; of a
Mātṛ attending on Skanda; of a daughter of Yayāti;
of a commentary (probably named after the author
Mādhava); ({%am%}), n. sweetness; (in Schol. on Pāṇ.
IV. 4, 129, a fem. form {%mādhavā%} is given, agreeing
with {%tanūḥ.%}) {%—Mādhava-kara, as,%} m., N. of a
medical writer. {%—Mādhava-kāla-nirṇaya, as,%} m.,
N. of a work written by Mādhavācārya. {%—Mādhava-%}
{%gupta, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mādhava-carita, am,%}
n., N. of a work. {%—Mādhava-deva, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Mādhava-nidāna, am,%} n., N. of a work by
Mādhava {%(= rug-viniścaya)%}. {%—Mādhava-paṇḍita,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a scholar. {%—Mādhava-prācī,%} f., N.
of a place. {%—Mādhava-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of various
persons {%(= mādhavācārya)%}. {%—Mādhava-bhikṣu,%}
{%us,%} m. a proper N. {%(= mādhavāśrama)%}. {%—Mā-%}
{%dhava-māgadha, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Mādhava-%}
{%yatīndra, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mādhava-yogin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mādhava-rāmānanda-saras-%}
{%vatī (˚ma-ān˚),%} m., N. of the teacher of the com-
mentator Śivānanda. {%—Mādhava-vallī,%} f. Gærtnera
Racemosa. {%—Mādhava-śrī, īs,%} f. the beauty or glory
of spring. {%—Mādhava-siṃha%} and {%mādhava-sena,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of two kings. {%—Mādhava-senā-rājan,%}
{%ā,%} m. ‘king of the army of spring’ or ‘of sweet-
ness, N. of a king. {%—Mādhava-somayājin, ī,%} m.
a proper N. {%(= mādhavācārya)%}. {%—Mādhavācārya%}
{%(˚va-āc˚), as,%} m. ‘the learned Mādhava’ or ‘the
teacher Mādhava,’ N. of a celebrated scholar, son of
Māyaṇa and brother of Sāyaṇācārya and Bhoga-
nātha, q. q. v. v., (he is sometimes called simply Mā-
dhava, and regarded, together with Sāyaṇa, as, author
of the celebrated commentary on the Ṛg-veda; also
author of the Kāla-nirṇaya, of the Nyāya-mālā-vistara,
[Page0769-b+ 79]
of the commentary Parāśara-smṛti-vyākhyā, of the
Saṅkṣepa-śaṅkara-vijaya, of the Sarva-darśana-saṅ-
graha.) {%—Mādhavānanda-kāvya (˚va-ān˚), am,%}
n., N. of a poem by Nanda-paṇḍita. {%—Mādha-%}
{%vānala (˚va-an˚), as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Mā-%}
{%dhavānalākhyāna (˚va-anala-ākh˚), am,%} n., N.
of an erotic work by the above. {%—Mādhavāśrama%}
{%(˚va-āś˚), as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mādhavī-latā,%} f.
the creeper Gærtnera Racemosa (bearing white fra-
grant flowers). {%—Mādhavī-vana, am,%} n., N. of a
forest. {%—Mādhavendra-purī (˚va-in˚),%} m., N. of
an author. {%—Mādhaveṣṭā (˚va-iṣ˚),%} f. a species
of tuberous plant ({%= vārāhī-kanda%}); an epithet of
Durgā. {%—Mādhavocita (˚va-uc˚), am,%} n. a kind
of perfume {%(= kakkolaka)%}. {%—Mādhavodbhava%}
{%(˚va-ud˚), as,%} m. a species of plant ({%= rājādanī%}).
<LEND>

<L>36996<pc>0769-b<k1>mADavaka<k2>mADavaka
{%Mādhavaka, as,%}¦ m. a spirituous liquor (prepared
from honey or from the blossoms of the Bassia Lati-
folia); ({%ikā%}), f. Gærtnera Racemosa; a kind of
metre, four times ˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯
˘˘¯˘¯¯; N. of a woman; a female attendant.
<LEND>

<L>36997<pc>0769-b<k1>mADavIya<k2>mADavIya
{%Mādhavīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging or
devoted to Mādhava or to Mādhavācārya; composed
by him. {%—Mādhavīya-dhātu-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a
treatise on Sanskrit roots by Sāyaṇa (dedicated to his
brother Mādhava). {%—Mādhavīya-vedārtha-pra-%}
{%kāśa,%} N. of Sāyaṇa's commentary on the Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>36998<pc>0769-b<k1>mADavya<k2>mADavya
{%Mādhavya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Madhu,
see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 106.
<LEND>

<L>36999<pc>0769-b<k1>mADva<k2>mADva<h>1
1. {%mādhva, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%madhu%}), sweet; ({%ī%}),
f. a kind of spirituous liquor; {%= mādhavī,%} Gærtnera
Racemosa; {%= mādhura-kaṇṭaka,%} a kind of fish;
({%ī%}), m. du., Ved. ‘possessing or loving sweetness,’ an
epithet of the Aśvins; (Sāy.) {%= madhu-pūrṇa-pātra-%}
{%yuktau;%} (in this last sense perhaps fr. a base {%mā-%}
{%dhvi.%}) {%—Mādhvī-madhurā,%} f. a species of date
({%= madhura-kharjurikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>37000<pc>0769-b<k1>mADvaka<k2>mADvaka
{%Mādhvaka, am,%}¦ n. {%= mādhavaka,%} an intoxicating
beverage prepared from honey.
<LEND>

<L>37001<pc>0769-b<k1>mADvika<k2>mADvika
{%Mādhvika, as,%}¦ m. a person who collects honey.
<LEND>

<L>37002<pc>0769-b<k1>mADvIka<k2>mADvIka
{%Mādhvīka, am,%}¦ n. a kind of intoxicating drink
distilled from the blossoms of the Bassia Latifolia;
wine, spirit distilled from grapes; [cf. {%madhu-m˚.%}]
{%—Mādhvīka-phala, as,%} n. a species of cocoa-nut
({%= madhu-nālikeraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>37003<pc>0769-b<k1>mADuka<k2>mADuka
{#mADuka#}¦ {%mādhuka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%madhuka%}),
coming from or belonging to the Madhuka tree;
‘mead-maker,’ an epithet of the Maireyakas or of a
particular mixed caste.
<LEND>

<L>37004<pc>0769-b<k1>mADukara<k2>mADukara
{#mADukara#}¦ {%mādhukara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%madhu-%}
{%kara%}), coming from a bee or from honey, belonging
to a bee, resembling a bee, ({%mādhukarī vṛttiḥ,%} a
mode or course of life resembling that of a bee), be-
longing to honey, &c.; ({%ī%}), f. gathering alms after the
manner of a bee by going from door to door; alms
obtained from five different places by the third class
of religious mendicants.
<LEND>

<L>37005<pc>0769-b<k1>mADukarRika<k2>mADukarRika
{%Mādhukarṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%madhu-karṇa%}),
see Gaṇa Kumudādi 2. to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>37006<pc>0769-b<k1>mADucCandasa<k2>mADucCandasa
{%Mādhucchandasa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%madhu-cchan-%}
{%das%}), Ved. relating to or coming from Madhu-cchan-
das; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic of Agha-marṣaṇa; of
Jetṛ.
<LEND>

<L>37007<pc>0769-b<k1>mADuparkika<k2>mADuparkika
{%Mādhuparkika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%madhu-parka%}),
relating to the Madhu-parka; offered or presented
as a token of respect to a guest.
<LEND>

<L>37008<pc>0769-b<k1>mADumata<k2>mADumata
{%Mādhumata, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%madhu-mat%}), be-
longing to or descended from Madhu-mat; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. the inhabitants of Kaśmīra; belonging to the
river Madhu-matī, ({%mādhumataṃ jalam,%} water
from the Madhu-matī.)
<LEND>

<L>37009<pc>0769-b<k1>mADumataka<k2>mADumataka
{%Mādhumataka%}¦ (fr. {%madhu-mat%}), see Gaṇa Kac-
chādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 134.
<LEND>

<L>37010<pc>0769-b<k1>mADUkara<k2>mADUkara
{%Mādhūkara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%madhu-kara%}),
gathered or collected after the manner of bees.
<LEND>

<L>37011<pc>0769-b<k1>mADura<k2>mADura
{#mADura#}¦ {%mādhura, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%madhura%}),
composed by Madhura; relating to Madhurā; ({%ī%}),
f. sweetness, amiableness; mead; spirituous or vinous
liquor; ({%am%}), n. the blossom of Jasminum Zambac.
<LEND>
[Page0769-c+ 75]

<L>37012<pc>0769-c<k1>mADurya<k2>mADurya
{%Mādhurya, as, ā%}¦ or {%-rī (?), am%} (fr. {%madhura%}),
speaking sweetly or kindly; ({%am%}), n. sweetness,
pleasantness, attractiveness, gracefulness; kindness,
friendliness, amiability; (in rhetoric) the succession
of single words in a sentence.
<LEND>

<L>37013<pc>0769-c<k1>mADUka<k2>mADUka
{#mADUka#}¦ {%mādhūka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%madhūka%}),
made from Bassia Latifolia; (according to Kullūka)
{%= madhura-bhāṣin,%} sweetly speaking, kindly
speaking; an epithet of the Maitreyakas (a mixed
caste; cf. {%mādhuka,%} col. 2).
<LEND>

<L>37014<pc>0769-c<k1>mADUcI<k2>mADUcI
{#mADUcI#}¦ {%mādhūcī,%} m. du., Ved. (probably
formed after the analogy of {%mādhvī,%} see under
1. {%mādhva,%} col. 2), an epithet of the Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>37015<pc>0769-c<k1>mADUla<k2>mADUla
{#mADUla#}¦ {%mādhūla, as,%} m. (fr. {%madhūla%}), a
patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>37016<pc>0769-c<k1>mADya<k2>mADya
{#mADya#}¦ {%mādhya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%madhya%}),
middle, central, mid.
<LEND>

<L>37017<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyandina<k2>mADyandina
{%Mādhyandina, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%madhyan-dina%}),
Ved. belonging to midday, meridional, midday,
({%mādhyandine savane,%} at the midday rite); middle,
central; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a branch of the Vājasa-
neyins and of an astronomical school who fixed the
starting-point of planetary movements at noon; ({%am%}),
n., scil. {%tīrtha,%} N. of a Tīrtha; [cf. {%mādhyandi-%}
{%nīyaka.%}] {%—Mādhyandina-yuga,%} Ved. belonging
to the midday oblation. {%—Mādhyandina-śākhā,%} f.
the school of the Mādhyandinas.
<LEND>

<L>37018<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyandinAyana<k2>mADyandinAyana
{%Mādhyandināyana, as,%}¦ m. probably a patro-
nymic, N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>37019<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyandini<k2>mADyandini
{%Mādhyandini, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic, N. of a
grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>37020<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyandinIya<k2>mADyandinIya
{%Mādhyandinīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ usual or customary
at the midday oblation (Ved.); ‘belonging to the
school of the Mādhyandinas,’ an epithet of Nārā-
yaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>37021<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyandinIyaka<k2>mADyandinIyaka
{%Mādhyandinīyaka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>37022<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyandineya<k2>mADyandineya
{%Mādhyandineya = mādhyandina,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37023<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyama<k2>mADyama
{#mADyama#}¦ {%mādhyama, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%madhyama%}),
relating to the middle, middlemost, middle, central;
middle-born; ({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet of the Ṛṣis to
whom the middle portion (Maṇḍala II — VII) of the
Ṛg-veda Saṃhitā is attributed; N. of a race.
<LEND>

<L>37024<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyamaka<k2>mADyamaka
{%Mādhyamaka, as, ikā, am, = mādhyamika;%}¦
{%(ikā),%} f. epithet of the middle section of the Kā-
ṭhaka.
<LEND>

<L>37025<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyamakeya<k2>mADyamakeya
{%Mādhyamakeya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people, {%=%}
{%madhyamakeya.%}
<LEND>

<L>37026<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyamasTya<k2>mADyamasTya
{%Mādhyamasthya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%madhyama-stha%}),
the state of standing or being in the middle, see
Gaṇa Brāhmaṇādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 124; [cf. {%mā-%}
{%dhyasthya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37027<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyamika<k2>mADyamika
{%Mādhyamika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging
to the middle, middlemost, middle; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a Buddhist school; of a people in the central
part of India.
<LEND>

<L>37028<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyamineya<k2>mADyamineya
{%Mādhyamineya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%madhyamā%}), a
metronymic, see Gaṇa Kalyāṇyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1,
126.
<LEND>

<L>37029<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyasTa<k2>mADyasTa
{#mADyasTa#}¦ {%mādhyastha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%madhya-%}
{%stha%}), being in a middle state, indifferent, impartial,
neutral; ({%am%}), n. middle state or condition; indif-
ference, impartiality.
<LEND>

<L>37030<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyasTya<k2>mADyasTya
{%Mādhyasthya, am,%}¦ n. ‘the state of standing in
the middle or between two,’ indifference, impartiality,
neutrality; the office of umpire, mediation, inter-
cession.
<LEND>

<L>37031<pc>0769-c<k1>mADyAhnika<k2>mADyAhnika
{#mADyAhnika#}¦ {%mādhyāhnika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%madhyāhna%}), belonging to midday, taking place
at noon.
<LEND>

<L>37032<pc>0769-c<k1>mADva<k2>mADva<h>2
{#mADva#} 2¦. {%mādhva, as,%} m. (for 1. see col. 2),
an adherent of Madhva.
<LEND>

<L>37033<pc>0769-c<k1>mAn<k2>mAn
{#mAn#}¦ {%mān%} (connected with rt. {%man%}), cl.
1. P. {%mānati,%} &c., to honour, respect,
revere, worship; cl. 10. P. {%mānayati,%} &c. (pro-
perly Caus. of rt. {%man%}), to honour, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0770-a+ 81]

<L>37034<pc>0770-a<k1>mAna<k2>mAna<h>1
{#mAna#} 1¦. {%māna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%man%}), opinion,
conception, (also {%am,%} n.); a good opinion of one's
self, conceit, self-reliance, self-confidence, arrogance,
pride, haughtiness; honour, respect, consideration,
(also exceptionally {%am,%} n.); regard for others, de-
monstration of respect, paying honour; a wounded
sense of honour; anger or indignation excited by
jealousy (especially in women), female caprice, sulki-
ness, hatred; object, purpose, will (Ved.); (in astro-
logy) an epithet of the tenth house; a blockhead (?);
an agent (?); a barbarian (?); N. of the father of
Agastya (Ved.); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the family or descend-
ants of Māna (Ved.). {%—Māna-kalaha, as,%} m. any
quarrel caused by pride or jealousy, rivalry, jealousy;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Māna-kali, is,%} m.
quarrelling or dissension caused by pride, mutual
disdain or ill-will. {%—Māna-kṛt, t, t, t,%} showing
honour or respect (to others). {%—Māna-kṣati, is,%}
f. a wound inflicted on the honour (of another),
injury to reputation, wounding or hurting pride,
humiliation. {%—Māna-granthi, is,%} m. injury to
honour or pride. {%—Māna-tas,%} ind. from honour,
through honour, for honour's sake. {%—Māna-tuṅga,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Māna-tva, am,%} n.
haughtiness, arrogance, &c.; see 1. {%māna%} above.
 — 1. {%māna-da, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%māna%} + 2. {%da%}),
giving honour, paying honour, showing respect;
honour-giver, pride-inspirer, (a respectful mode of
addressing husbands and lovers, usually in voc. sing.);
({%as%}), m. a mystical epithet of the letter {%ā; (ās),%} m.
pl., N. of a people [cf. {%māla-da%}]; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of
the second Kalā or digit of the moon; ({%am%}), n.,
scil. {%astra,%} epithet of a particular magical weapon.
 — 2. {%māna-da, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%māna%} + 3. {%da%}),
destroying arrogance or pride. {%—Māna-dhana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} rich in honour. {%—Māna-dhmāta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} puffed up with pride. {%—Māna-para, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} wholly addicted to pride, intensely proud, very
arrogant (see {%para%}); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman.
{%—Māna-parikhaṇḍana, am,%} n. loss of honour,
wounding or offending pride, humiliation. {%—Māna-%}
{%prāṇa, as, ā, am,%} one to whom honour is (as dear)
as life, valuing honour or reputation as highly as life.
{%—Māna-bhaṅga, as,%} m. loss of honour, injury to
reputation, humiliation. {%—Māna-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} pos-
sessing pride, (according to Malli-nātha {%= ahaṅ-%}
{%kārin.%}) {%—Māna-manohara,%} N. of a work. {%—Mā-%}
{%namanohara-kara, as,%} m. the author of the above
{%(= vāg-īśvara)%}. {%—Māna-maya, as,%} m., N. of a
particular article of luxury (?) mentioned in Hari-vaṃśa
8455. {%—Māna-mahat, ān, atī, at,%} great in pride,
extremely proud. {%—Māna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
honour or pride, proud, haughty, disdainful, high-
spirited; ({%atī%}), f. a haughty or disdainful woman
(angry from wounded pride or jealousy). {%—Māna-%}
{%varjika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Māna-%}
{%varjita, as, ā, am,%} stripped of honour; humble,
lowly; defamatory, slanderous, abusive. {%—Māna-%}
{%vardhana, as, ī, am,%} enhancing honour, increasing
respect. {%—Māna-sāra, as,%} m., N. of a king of
Mālava. {%—Māna-siṃha, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mā-%}
{%na-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} destroying pride or honour,
humbling, an humbler, abaser. {%—Mānānanda (˚na-%}
{%ān˚), as,%} m., N. of an author of a Durgā-mantra.
{%—Mānāpamāne (˚na-ap˚),%} n. du. honour and
dishonour. {%—Mānārha (˚na-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy
of honour, entitled to respect. {%—Mānāsakta (˚na-%}
{%ās˚), as, ā, am,%} addicted to pride, haughty, arro-
gant, proud. {%—Mānotseka-parākrama-vyasanin%}
{%(˚na-ut˚), ī, inī, i,%} possessing pride, haughtiness,
prowess, and intense diligence. {%—Mānonnati (˚na-%}
{%un˚), is,%} f. the height of honour, high honour,
great respect. {%—Mānonmāda (˚na-un˚), as,%} m.
the infatuation of pride, infatuated or insane arro-
gance.
<LEND>

<L>37035<pc>0770-a<k1>mAnana<k2>mAnana
{%Mānana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. Caus. of rt. {%man%}),
honouring, serving as a honorarium or token of
respect; ({%ā, am%}), f. n. the act of honouring, paying
honour, showing respect.
<LEND>

<L>37036<pc>0770-a<k1>mAnanIya<k2>mAnanIya
{%Mānanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured, deserving
honour from any one (with gen.).
<LEND>
[Page0770-b+ 79]

<L>37037<pc>0770-b<k1>mAnayitavya<k2>mAnayitavya
{%Mānayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured or
respected, deserving honour.
<LEND>

<L>37038<pc>0770-b<k1>mAnayitf<k2>mAnayitf
{%Mānayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ honouring, respecting, an
honourer, one who honours or respects.
<LEND>

<L>37039<pc>0770-b<k1>mAnita<k2>mAnita
{%Mānita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured, respected; ({%am%}),
n. honouring, showing honour or respect, honour.
{%—Mānita-sena, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>37040<pc>0770-b<k1>mAnin<k2>mAnin
{%Mānin.%}¦ See s. v., p. 771, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37041<pc>0770-b<k1>mAnya<k2>mAnya
{%Mānya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be respected or honoured,
worthy of honour, honourable, respectable, venerable,
held in honour; a patronymic (Ved.); {%= maitrā-%}
{%varuṇi,%} author of Ṛg-veda VIII. 56, (in the last two
senses fr. {%māna,%} father of Agastya); ({%ā%}), f. Trigo-
nella Corniculata, (wrongly for {%mālyā.%}) {%—Mānya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. honourableness, respectability, worthiness.
<LEND>

<L>37042<pc>0770-b<k1>mAna<k2>mAna<h>2
{#mAna#} 2¦. {%māna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%mā%}), a
building, edifice, house, dwelling (Ved.); a prepara-
tion, decoction, (perhaps used in this sense with
reference to the Soma plant in Ṛg-veda X. 144, 5);
({%am%}), n. the act of forming or making (Ved.);
form, appearance (Ved.); the act of measuring or
meting, measure in general, dimension, computation
of time, &c. (e. g. {%nṛ-m˚,%} a man's height; {%antara-%}
{%m˚,%} difference of dimension; cf. {%tārakā-m˚, śata-%}
{%m˚, giri-m˚, chando-m˚%}); any instrument for
measuring, a measuring-rod, measure, rule, standard
[cf. {%ūrdhva-m˚, kūṭa-m˚%}]; (Ved.) a particular
measure or weight ({%= kṛṣṇala%} or {%raktikā,%} a
Guñjā seed; according to the commentators 100
Mānas = 5 Palas or Paṇas, or, according to others,
1/4 or 1/8 of a Khārī); likeness, resemblance ({%= upa-%}
{%māna%}); proof, demonstration, means of proof ({%=%}
{%pra-māṇa,%} q. v.). {%—3. māna-da, as, ā, am,%} mea-
suring. {%—Māna-daṇḍa, as,%} m. a measuring-rod.
{%—Māna-dhānikā,%} f. {%= karkaṭī,%} a cucumber. {%—Mā-%}
{%nam-paca, as, ā, am,%} see Schol. on Vopa-deva
XXVI. 55; [cf. {%alpam-p˚, mitam-p˚.%}] {%—Māna-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. the correct mode of measuring and
weighing (Manu IX. 330). {%—Māna-randhrā,%} f. a
kind of water-clock or clepsydra, a perforated copper
vessel which, placed in water and gradually filling,
serves to measure time, (according to some, {%māna-%}
{%randhrī;%} cf. {%tāmrī.%}) {%—Māna-sūtra, am,%} n. a
measuring-cord [cf. {%pramāṇa-sūtra%}]; a cord or
chain of gold or some other material worn round
the body. {%—Mānāṅgula-mahātantra (˚na-aṅ˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Mānādhyāya (˚na-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. ‘chapter on measurement’ (of time),
N. of the fourteenth chapter of the Sūrya-siddhānta.
{%—Mānonmānikā (˚na-un˚),%} f., see Gaṇa Śāka-
pārthivādi, Siddhānta-kaumudī on Pāṇ. II. 1, 69.
<LEND>

<L>37043<pc>0770-b<k1>mAnaka<k2>mAnaka
{%Mānaka%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) = 2. {%māna,%}
measure, &c.; ({%as, am%}), m. n. {%= māṇaka,%} Arum
Indicum, a plant having an edible root; ({%ikā%}), f. a
particular spirituous or vinous liquor; {%= māṇikā,%} a
particular weight (= 2 Añjalis, = 8 Palas; according
to others, the fourth or eighth part of a Khāri).
<LEND>

<L>37044<pc>0770-b<k1>mAnaHSila<k2>mAnaHSila
{#mAnaHSila#}¦ {%mānaḥśila, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%manaḥ-%}
{%śilā%}), consisting of realgar or red arsenic.
<LEND>

<L>37045<pc>0770-b<k1>mAnana<k2>mAnana
{#mAnana#}¦ {%mānana,%} &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37046<pc>0770-b<k1>mAnava<k2>mAnava
{#mAnava#}¦ {%mānava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%manu%}), de-
scended from man or from Manu, belonging or
proper to man or Manu, human; (Ved.) propitious
to men; ({%as%}), m. a human being, man; a lad, boy,
(for {%māṇava,%} q. v.); a patronymic of Nābhā-
nediṣṭha; of Śāryāta; of Cakṣus; of Nahuṣa;
of Bhṛgu; of Su-dyumna; of Karūṣa; of Deva-
hūti; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the children of men, mankind;
the subjects (of a king); N. of a school of the black
Yajur-veda; ({%ī%}), f. a daughter of man or Manu, a
woman; N. of a goddess (executing the commands
of the eleventh Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī);
N. of one of the eleven Vidyā-devīs; ({%am%}), n. a
man's length (as a measure, Ved.); {%= mānava-%}
{%kalpa-sūtra,%} q. v.; N. of a Sāman; a particular
mulct or fine; [cf. Goth. <nsi>manna,</nsi> fr. <nsi>mannan,</nsi>
perhaps for <nsi>manvan;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>Mann,</nsi> ‘a man.’]
{%—Mānava-kalpa-sūtra%} or {%mānava-sūtra, am,%}
n., N. of a well-known Sūtra work on Kalpa or
[Page0770-c+ 78]
ritual (see {%manu%}). {%—Mānava-deva, as,%} m. ‘man-
god, god among men,’ a king, prince. {%—Mānava-%}
{%dharma-śāstra, am,%} n., N. of the code of laws
attributed to Manu (see {%manu-saṃhitā%}). {%—Mānava-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘man-lord,’ a king, sovereign. {%—Mā-%}
{%navācala (˚va-ac˚), as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Mānavādya (˚va-ād˚), am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Mānavendra (˚va-in˚), as,%} m. ‘man-chief, man-
lord,’ a king. {%—Mānavottara (˚va-ut˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a Sāman. {%—Mānavopapurāṇa (˚va-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa. {%—Mānavaugha (˚va-%}
{%ogha),%} with {%guru,%} epithet of a particular class of
composers of mystical prayers [cf. the kindred words
Divyaugha, Siddhaugha].
<LEND>

<L>37047<pc>0770-c<k1>mAnavasya<k2>mAnavasya
{%Mānavasya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%mānavasyati, -te,%} &c.,
Ved. to act like men; (Sāy.) to wish for men.
<LEND>

<L>37048<pc>0770-c<k1>mAnavasyat<k2>mAnavasyat
{%Mānavasyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ acting like men;
(Sāy.) wishing for men, i. e. priests.
<LEND>

<L>37049<pc>0770-c<k1>mAnavIya<k2>mAnavIya
{%Mānavīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ descended or derived from
Manu; ({%am%}), n. a particular fine [cf. {%mānava%}].
<LEND>

<L>37050<pc>0770-c<k1>mAnaveya<k2>mAnaveya
{%Mānaveya, as, ā, am,%}¦ descended or derived from
Manu; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>37051<pc>0770-c<k1>mAnavya<k2>mAnavya
{%Mānavya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Manu, Pāṇ.
IV. 1, 105; ({%āyanī%}), f., see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 18; ({%am%}),
n. a number of boys, assemblage of youths, (for
{%māṇavya.%})
<LEND>

<L>37052<pc>0770-c<k1>mAnavartika<k2>mAnavartika
{#mAnavartika#}¦ {%mānavartika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of
a people; (also read {%mānavarjaka, mānavalaka,%}
{%gava-vartila;%} cf. {%mālavarti.%})
<LEND>

<L>37053<pc>0770-c<k1>mAnasa<k2>mAnasa
{#mAnasa#}¦ {%mānasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%manas%}), be-
longing to the mind or spirit, mental, spiritual, (as
opposed to {%śārīra,%} corporeal; {%mānasaṃ tīrtham,%}
a spiritual bathing-place or the lake Mānasa so called);
expressed only in the mind (e. g. {%mānasaṃ stotram,%}
a silent hymn of praise), tacit, implied; present in
the mind, only to be conceived in the mind, ({%ābha-%}
{%raṇair mānasaiḥ,%} with every conceivable orna-
ment); dwelling on the lake Mānasa, (in this sense
fr. {%mānasa, am,%} n. the lake Mānasa, see below);
({%as%}), m. a form of Viṣṇu; N. of a Nāga; of a
class of ascetics; of a son of Vapuṣ-mat; of a pre-
ceptor; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a particular class of Manes
(regarded as sons of Vasiṣṭha); epithet of the
Vaiśyas in Śāka-dvīpa; ({%ī%}), f., N. of one of the
sixteen Vidyā-devīs [cf. {%mahā-mānasikā%}]; ({%am%}),
n. the mental powers, mind, spirit, the seat or faculty
of reason and feeling, heart, soul, (in these senses
frequently at the end of a comp., cf. {%bhaya-san-%}
{%trasta-m˚);%} tacit or implied consent (in law); N.
of a sacred lake and place of pilgrimage on mount
Kailāsa in the Himālaya mountains, (the native place
of the wild geese or swans; constant allusions are
made to this lake in Hindū poetry, and the Haṃsa
or Rāja-haṃsa, a kind of wild goose, is described as
migrating to its shores every year at the breeding
season); a kind of salt. {%—Mānasa-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
frequenting lake Mānasa; ({%ī%}), m. a wild goose or
swan. {%—Mānasa-janman, ā,%} m. ‘mind-born,’ the
god of love; [cf. {%mano-janman.%}] {%—Mānasa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. thoughtfulness, spirituality, the belonging
to spirit, fulfilment of anything in mere thought.
{%—Mānasa-nayana, am,%} n. ‘guidance to the lake
Mānasa,’ N. of a logical work by Jīvana. {%—Mānasa-%}
{%nayana-prasādanī,%} f., N. of a commentary on the
above work. {%—Mānasa-ruj, k,%} f., Ved. mental or
spiritual disease. {%—Mānasa-vega, as, ā, am,%} swift
as spirit (i. e. thought); ({%as%}), m., N. of a king.
{%—Mānasa-śuc, k,%} f., Ved. mental sorrow or grief.
{%—Mānasa-santāpa, as,%} m. mental anguish, sorrow
of heart. {%—Mānasālaya (˚sa-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘dwelling
on the lake Mānasa,’ a wild goose or swan; [cf.
{%mānasaukas.%}] {%—Mānasottara (˚sa-ut˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a mountain range; [cf. {%uttara-mānasa.%}]
{%—Mānasollāsa (˚sa-ul˚), as,%} m., N. of a Vedānta
work by Sureśvara Ācārya or Dakṣiṇa Ācārya, a
disciple of Śaṅkara Ācārya. {%—Mānasollāsa-pra-%}
{%bandha%} and {%mānasollāsa-vṛttānta%} and {%māna-%}
{%sollāsa-vṛttānta-vilāsa, as,%} m. names of commen-
taries on the above work. {%—Mānasaukas (˚sa-ok˚), %}
[Page0771-a+ 75]
{%ās, ās, as,%} dwelling on the lake Mānasa; ({%ās%}), m.
a wild goose or swan, the Rāja-haṃsa.
<LEND>

<L>37054<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnasAyana<k2>mAnasAyana
{%Mānasāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Manas,
see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 110.
<LEND>

<L>37055<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnasika<k2>mAnasika
{%Mānasika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%manas%} or fr. {%mā-%}
{%nasa%}), mental, spiritual; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>37056<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnasya<k2>mAnasya
{%Mānasya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Manas, see
Pāṇ. IV. 1, 105.
<LEND>

<L>37057<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnaskfta<k2>mAnaskfta
{#mAnaskfta#}¦ {%mānas-kṛta, as,%} m., Ved. (ac-
cording to Mahī-dhara) {%= pūjāyā abhimānasya%}
{%vā kartṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>37058<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnasTalI<k2>mAnasTalI
{#mAnasTalI#}¦ {%māna-sthalī,%} f., {%mānasthalaka,%}
see Pāṇ. IV. 2, 127.
<LEND>

<L>37059<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnANka<k2>mAnANka
{#mAnANka#}¦ {%mānāṅka, as,%} m. (perhaps for {%mā-%}
{%lāṅka%}), N. of the author of the Vṛndā-vana.
<LEND>

<L>37060<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnAyana<k2>mAnAyana
{#mAnAyana#}¦ {%mānāyana, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>37061<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnAyya<k2>mAnAyya
{#mAnAyya#}¦ {%mānāyya, mānāyyāyanī,%} see Gaṇa
Gargādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 105, and Gaṇa Lohitādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 1, 18.
<LEND>

<L>37062<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnika<k2>mAnika
{#mAnika#}¦ {%mānika = mānin%} in {%paṇḍita-m˚,%}
q. v. (For {%mānikā%} see {%mānaka,%} p. 770, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>37063<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnita<k2>mAnita
{#mAnita#}¦ {%mānita.%} See p. 770, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37064<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnin<k2>mAnin
{#mAnin#}¦ {%mānin, ī, inī, i%} (fr. rt. {%man%} or fr. 1.
{%māna%}), thinking, being of opinion, (in these and
the following senses often at the end of comps.);
considering, regarding, taking for; fancying or ima-
gining one's self, taking one's self for [cf. {%paṇḍita-%}
{%m˚%}]; fancying that one possesses (e. g. {%kṣamatā-%}
{%mānin,%} fancying that one possesses ability); being
regarded or taken for; honouring, esteeming highly;
having a high opinion of one's self, proud, haughty,
proud of anything (e. g. {%dhanato mānī naraḥ,%} a
man proud of his wealth); maintaining one's honour,
proud (in a good sense); highly honoured or esteemed;
disdainful, angry, resentful, sulky; ({%ī%}), m. a lion;
({%inī%}), f. an angry or disdainful woman or one
offended with her lover; a species of odoriferous
plant ({%= phalī,%} i. e. {%priyaṅgu%}); N. of a daughter
of Vidūra-stha and wife of Ṛājya-vardhana; a kind
of metre, (probably incorrect for {%mālinī.%}) {%—Māni-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%māni-tva, am,%} n. (at the end of a comp.) the
fancying that one possesses, imagining or fancying one's
self, taking one's self for (e. g. {%ajñāne jñāna-mānitā,%}
the fancying when in ignorance that one has know-
ledge); haughtiness, pride; honouring, paying respect;
the being honoured, receiving honour.
<LEND>

<L>37065<pc>0771-a<k1>mAninDa<k2>mAninDa
{#mAninDa#}¦ {%mānindha, as,%} m., N. of an astro-
nomer, (also read {%manindha;%} cf. {%maṇittha.%})
<LEND>

<L>37066<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnutantavya<k2>mAnutantavya
{#mAnutantavya#}¦ {%mānutantavya, as,%} m. (fr. {%manu-%}
{%tantu%}), Ved. a patronymic of Aikādaśākṣa; [cf.
{%mārutantavya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37067<pc>0771-a<k1>mAnuza<k2>mAnuza
{#mAnuza#}¦ {%mānuṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%manus%}),
human, belonging to mankind, appertaining to men;
humane, kind, favourable or propitious to men; ({%as%}),
m. a man, human being, (often at the end of comps.,
and sometimes with fem. {%ā,%} cf. {%a-m˚, ati-m˚; kārya-%}
{%m˚,%} a human being in some sense of the word, incar-
nate in human form); epithet of the signs of the
zodiac Gemini, Virgo, and Libra; ({%ī%}), f. a woman;
scil. {%cikitsā,%} a branch of medicine, the administering
of drugs and herbs (as opposed to {%āsurī%} and {%daivī%}
{%cikitsā%}); ({%am%}), n. the manner or ways of men,
condition of man, humanity; the doings or actions
of man, human action or effort, manhood; N. of a
place. {%—Mānuṣa-tā,%} f. or {%mānuṣa-tva, am,%} n.
humanity, the state or condition of man, manhood,
manliness, human existence, man's estate. {%—Mānu-%}
{%ṣa-pradhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. fighting for men,
(used in Ṛg-veda 1. 52, 9. as an epithet of the
Maruts). {%—Mānuṣa-buddha, as,%} m. a human
Buddha, (opposed to {%dhyāni-buddha.%}) {%—Mānu-%}
{%ṣa-māṃsāda (sa-āda), as, ā, am,%} eating human
flesh. {%—Mānuṣa-rākṣasa, as,%} m. a fiend in
human form, a Rākṣasa-like man. {%—Mānuṣa- %}
[Page0771-b+ 73]
{%laukika, as, ī, am,%} belonging to the world of men,
proper for man, human. {%—Mānuṣa-sambhava, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} coming from a man, produced by men.
{%—Mānuṣopeta (˚ṣa-up˚), as, ā, am,%} joined with
human effort.
<LEND>

<L>37068<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnuzaka<k2>mAnuzaka
{%Mānuṣaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ human.
<LEND>

<L>37069<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnuzIBU<k2>mAnuzIBU
{%Mānuṣī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become
man, take human form.
<LEND>

<L>37070<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnuzya<k2>mAnuzya
{%Mānuṣya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%manuṣya%}), the being a
man, humanity, manhood, manliness, human nature,
man's estate; ({%as, -ṣī, am%}), human, manly, belong-
ing to man or humanity.
<LEND>

<L>37071<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnuzyaka<k2>mAnuzyaka
{%Mānuṣyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ human; ({%am%}), n. hu-
manity, human condition, human nature; a multi-
tude of men.
<LEND>

<L>37072<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnojYaka<k2>mAnojYaka
{#mAnojYaka#}¦ {%mānojñaka, am,%} n. (fr. {%mano-jña%}),
beauty, agreeableness, loveliness.
<LEND>

<L>37073<pc>0771-b<k1>mAntavya<k2>mAntavya
{#mAntavya#}¦ {%māntavya, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Mantu, see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 105.
<LEND>

<L>37074<pc>0771-b<k1>mAntavyAyanI<k2>mAntavyAyanI
{%Māntavyāyanī,%}¦ f., see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 18.
<LEND>

<L>37075<pc>0771-b<k1>mAntra<k2>mAntra
{#mAntra#}¦ {%māntra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mantra%}), Ved.
proper or peculiar to Vedic texts, belonging to sacred
texts, relating to mystical verses or spells.
<LEND>

<L>37076<pc>0771-b<k1>mAntravarRika<k2>mAntravarRika
{%Māntravarṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mantra-varṇa%}),
contained in the text of a Vedic hymn.
<LEND>

<L>37077<pc>0771-b<k1>mAntrika<k2>mAntrika
{%Māntrika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%mantra%}), one who recites
a text or spell, one conversant with spells or incan-
tations, an enchanter, sorcerer.
<LEND>

<L>37078<pc>0771-b<k1>mAntrita<k2>mAntrita
{#mAntrita#}¦ {%māntrita, ās,%} m. pl. the descend-
ants of Māntritya, see Pāṇ. IV. 2, III.
<LEND>

<L>37079<pc>0771-b<k1>mAntritya<k2>mAntritya
{%Māntritya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Mantrita,
see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 105.
<LEND>

<L>37080<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnT<k2>mAnT
{#mAnT#}¦ {%mānth,%} cl. I. P. {%mānthati,%} &c.,
(according to Vopa-deva, Dhātu-pāṭha
III. 9) = rt. {%manth%} or I. {%math,%} to hurt, injure, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37081<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnTya<k2>mAnTya
{%Mānthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Gaṇa Saṅkāśādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>37082<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnTarezaRi<k2>mAnTarezaRi
{#mAnTarezaRi#}¦ {%mānthareṣaṇi, is,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Manthareṣaṇa, see Schol. on Pāṇ. II.
4, 66.
<LEND>

<L>37083<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnTarya<k2>mAnTarya
{#mAnTarya#}¦ {%māntharya, am,%} n. (fr. {%manthara%}),
weakness.
<LEND>

<L>37084<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnTAla<k2>mAnTAla
{#mAnTAla#}¦ {%mānthāla, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
animal, (according to Mahī-dhara) a species of mouse.
<LEND>

<L>37085<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnda<k2>mAnda
{#mAnda#}¦ {%mānda, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%mand%} or 2.
{%mad%}), Ved. ‘gladdening,’ an epithet of water in certain
formularies; {%(as, ī, am),%} relating to the higher apsis
of a planet's course; {%māndaṃ karma,%} the process
of correction for the apsis; {%māndam phalam,%} the
equation of the apsis, (in these latter senses fr.
{%manda,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>37086<pc>0771-b<k1>mAndya<k2>mAndya
{%Māndya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%manda%}), slowness, sluggish-
ness, laziness; stupidity, torpor; apathy; weakness;
indisposition, illness, sickness; {%māndyaṃ kṛ,%} to
make one's self ill.
<LEND>

<L>37087<pc>0771-b<k1>mAndra<k2>mAndra
{%Māndra%}¦ (fr. {%mandra%}), see Gaṇa Chattrādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 4, 62.
<LEND>

<L>37088<pc>0771-b<k1>mAndAra<k2>mAndAra
{#mAndAra#}¦ {%māndāra%} or {%māndārava, as,%} m. a
species of tree ({%= mandāra;%} cf. {%mandārava%}).
<LEND>

<L>37089<pc>0771-b<k1>mAndArya<k2>mAndArya
{#mAndArya#}¦ {%māndārya%} (fr. {%mandāra%}), see Gaṇa
Pragadyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80; perhaps used as a
proper N. in Ṛg-veda 1. 165, 15.
<LEND>

<L>37090<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnDAtf<k2>mAnDAtf
{#mAnDAtf#}¦ {%māndhātṛ, tā,%} m. (according to
some fr. {%mām,%} ‘me,’ + {%dhātṛ,%} ‘a drinker,’ this king
having once sucked Amṛta from the finger of Indra,
who thereupon used the exclamation which afterwards
became the prince's name), N. of a king (son of
Yuvanāśva, author of Ṛg-veda X. 134; also read
{%mandhātṛ,%} q. v.); N. of a sovereign in more
recent times. {%—Māndhātā-pura, am,%} n., N. of a
city; (also read {%māndhāttā-tripura.%})
<LEND>

<L>37091<pc>0771-b<k1>mAnDAtra<k2>mAnDAtra
{%Māndhātra, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Māndhātṛ;
({%as%}), m. a patronymic from Mandhātṛ.
<LEND>
[Page0771-c+ 72]

<L>37092<pc>0771-c<k1>mAnDyoda<k2>mAnDyoda
{#mAnDyoda#}¦ {%māndhyoda, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic (?).
<LEND>

<L>37093<pc>0771-c<k1>mAnmaTa<k2>mAnmaTa
{#mAnmaTa#}¦ {%mānmatha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%manma-%}
{%tha%}), relating to or concerning love, excited by love,
belonging to the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>37094<pc>0771-c<k1>mAnya<k2>mAnya
{#mAnya#}¦ {%mānya.%} See p. 770, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37095<pc>0771-c<k1>mAnyamAna<k2>mAnyamAna
{#mAnyamAna#}¦ {%mānyamāna, as,%} m., Ved. a pa-
tronymic from Manyamāna; according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda VII. 18, 20, {%devakaṃ cin mānyamānaṃ%}
{%jaghantha%} may be translated, ‘thou hast slain Devaka
the son of Manyamāna;’ according to others, ‘thou
hast slain the god, the proud one.’
<LEND>

<L>37096<pc>0771-c<k1>mAnyava<k2>mAnyava
{#mAnyava#}¦ {%mānyava, as, ī, am,%} relating to
Manyu.
<LEND>

<L>37097<pc>0771-c<k1>mAnyavatI<k2>mAnyavatI
{#mAnyavatI#}¦ {%mānyavatī,%} f., N. of a princess;
(perhaps for {%mālya-vatī.%})
<LEND>

<L>37098<pc>0771-c<k1>mApaka<k2>mApaka
{#mApaka#}¦ {%māpaka, as, ikā, am%} (fr. Caus. of rt.
3. {%mā%}), serving for measuring or weighing, a
measurer, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37099<pc>0771-c<k1>mApana<k2>mApana
{%Māpana, as,%}¦ m. a pair of scales, balance; ({%ā%}), f.
measuring; measuring or meting out, making a place
for a sacrifice, measure; ({%am%}), n. the act of measur-
ing; forming, making, formation.
<LEND>

<L>37100<pc>0771-c<k1>mApatya<k2>mApatya
{#mApatya#}¦ {%māpatya, am,%} n. (perhaps fr. 1. {%mā%}
{%+ apatya,%} i. e. not a child in the ordinary sense,
cf. {%manasi-ja;%} according to others fr. Caus. of rt.
{%me%}), a term applied to the god of love or Kāma-
deva, (according to some, {%māpatya, as,%} m.)
<LEND>

<L>37101<pc>0771-c<k1>mAbara<k2>mAbara
{#mAbara#}¦ {%mābara,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>37102<pc>0771-c<k1>mAma<k2>mAma
{#mAma#}¦ {%māma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mama,%} gen. sing.
of 3. {%ma%}), mine, my; mother, uncle, (in this sense
like {%tāta,%} q. v., and commonly in voc. sing.)
<LEND>

<L>37103<pc>0771-c<k1>mAmaka<k2>mAmaka
{%Māmaka, as, ikā%}¦ or Ved. {%ī, am,%} my, mine;
selfish, greedy, covetous; ({%as%}), m. a miser, niggard;
a maternal uncle; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a Buddhist goddess;
[cf. {%māmukhī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37104<pc>0771-c<k1>mAmakIna<k2>mAmakIna
{%Māmakīna, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī (?), am,%} my, mine.
<LEND>

<L>37105<pc>0771-c<k1>mAmateya<k2>mAmateya
{%Māmateya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%mamatā%}), a metronymic
of Dīrgha-tamas; (also read {%sāmanteya.%})
<LEND>

<L>37106<pc>0771-c<k1>mAmanasAyati<k2>mAmanasAyati
{#mAmanasAyati#}¦ {%māmanasāyati, is,%} m. a patro-
nymic (?).
<LEND>

<L>37107<pc>0771-c<k1>mAmalladevI<k2>mAmalladevI
{#mAmalladevI#}¦ {%māmalla-devī,%} f., N. of the
mother of Śrī-harṣa (author of the Naiṣadhīya-
caritra).
<LEND>

<L>37108<pc>0771-c<k1>mAmiqi<k2>mAmiqi
{#mAmiqi#}¦ {%māmiḍi, is,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37109<pc>0771-c<k1>mAmuKI<k2>mAmuKI
{#mAmuKI#}¦ {%māmukhī,%} f., N. of a Buddhist
goddess.
<LEND>

<L>37110<pc>0771-c<k1>mAmudagajanavI<k2>mAmudagajanavI
{#mAmudagajanavI#}¦ {%māmuda-gajanavī,%} m. =
<lang n="arabic">محمود غزنوي</lang> i. e. Mahmūd of Ghaznī.
<LEND>

<L>37111<pc>0771-c<k1>mAmpaSya<k2>mAmpaSya
{#mAmpaSya#}¦ {%mām-paśya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%mām,%}
acc. of {%aham + paśya%}), Ved. regarding or looking
at me.
<LEND>

<L>37112<pc>0771-c<k1>mAya<k2>mAya
{#mAya#}¦ {%māya, as, ā, am%} (according to some
fr. rt. 3. {%mā,%} according to others fr. rt. {%man + ya%}),
illusory, possessing magical powers or powers of illu-
sion (said of Viṣṇu); ({%as%}), m. an illusionist, conjurer,
juggler; an evil spirit, Asura; ({%ā%}), f. art, wisdom,
(according to Naighaṇṭuka III. 9 {%= prajñā%}), extra-
ordinary or supernatural power, wonderful power,
(in these meanings only in the earlier language);
illusion, trick, artifice, deceit, deception, fraud, jug-
glery, sorcery, witchcraft; wickedness, villany; a
political trick, diplomatic artifice; an illusory image
or apparition, phantasm, phantom, anything unreal,
anything which deceives the sight (e. g. {%siṃha-m˚,%} a
phantasm in the form of a lion, a phantom lion);
philosophical illusion, idealism, unreality, (in the
Sāṅkhya system applied to Prakṛti as the source of
all apparent material objects); Illusion personified,
(sometimes identified with Durgā as the authoress of
spells, sometimes regarded as a daughter of Anṛta
and Nirṛti or Nikṛti and mother of Mrityu or as a
[Page0772-a+ 81]
daughter of Adharma); one of the four Pāśas or
snares which entangle the soul (with Śaivas); pity,
compassion; N. of the mother of Śākya-muni or
Buddha; N. of two metres, four times ¯¯¯¯,
¯˘˘¯¯˘˘¯¯, and ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯ twice
alternately with ¯¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯; ({%= māyā-%}
{%purī%}), N. of a city; of the city Gayā; ({%ās%}), f. pl.,
Ved. ideal products of the mind. {%—Māya-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. {%= māyā-vat,%} q. v. {%—Māyā-kāpālika,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a particular drama. {%—Māyā-%}
{%kāra, as,%} or {%māyā-kṛt, t,%} m. ‘illusion-maker,’ a
conjurer, juggler. {%—Māyā-caṇa, as, ā, am%} (see
{%caṇa%}), skilled in illusion, famous for juggling; illu-
sive, deceptive. {%—Māyācāra (˚yā-āc˚), as, ā, am,%}
practising illusion or deceit, acting deceitfully, (op-
posed to {%sādhu-ācāra.%}) {%—Māyā-jīvin, ī,%} m. ‘living
by illusion,’ a conjurer, juggler. {%—Māyā-tantra, am,%}
n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Māyātmaka (˚yā-āt˚), as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} consisting of illusion, essentially illusory.
{%—Māyā-da, as,%} m. ‘giving or causing illusion,’ an
alligator, crocodile. {%—Māyā-darśana, am,%} n., N.
of a chapter of the Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa. {%—Māyā-devī,%}
f., N. of the mother of the Buddha <lang n="greek">κατ’ ἐξοχήν</lang> or
Śākya-muni; of the wife of Pra-dyumna. {%—Māyā-%}
{%devī-suta, as,%} m. ‘the son of Māyā-devī,’ an epi-
thet of Śākya-muni. {%—Māyā-dhara, as, ī, am,%}
possessing illusion, skilled in magic, deceitful. {%—Mā-%}
{%yānvita (˚yā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} possessing illusion,
deceitful, guileful. {%—Māyā-paṭu, us, us%} or {%vī, u,%}
skilled in illusion or magical arts, delusive, fraudulent.
{%—Māyā-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of illusion,’ a master
in illusions, the husband of Illusion personified.
{%—Māyā-pur, ūr,%} or {%māyā-purī,%} f., N. of a city;
[cf. {%māyā.%}] {%—Māyā-prayoga, as,%} m. the application
or employment of magic. {%—Māyā-phala, am,%} n. a
gall-nut. {%—Māyābhyudayana (˚yā-abh˚), as,%} m., N.
of a Kāyastha (Rāja-taraṅgiṇī VIII. 1819). {%—Māyā-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of illusion, formed of
or creating illusion, illusive, illusory, deceptive, en-
chanted, unreal, magical. {%—Māyā-māṇavaka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} appearing magically as a boy or dwarf.
{%—Māyā-mṛga, as,%} m. an illusory antelope, a phan-
tom deer. {%—Māyā-yantra, am,%} n. enchantment.
{%—Māyāyantra-vimāna, as, am,%} m. n. an en-
chanted chariot, magical car. {%—Māyā-yoga, as,%} m.
the application or employment of illusion, employ-
ment of magical arts. {%—Māyā-yodhin, ī, inī, i,%}
fighting illusively or with deceitful artifices. {%—Māyā-%}
{%rasika, as, ā, am,%} taking pleasure in deceit, fond
of illusion or deceit; [cf. {%māyā-vasika.%}] {%—Māyā-%}
{%rāvaṇa, as,%} m. Rāvaṇa in an illusory or disguised
form. {%—Māyā-vacana, am,%} n. a deceptive or hypo-
critical speech. {%—Māyā-vaṭu, us,%} m., N. of a king
of the Śavaras. {%—Māyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
powers of illusion, having magical powers, employing
deceit, deceptive, illusory, unreal; skilled in magical
arts; ({%ān%}), m. an epithet of Kaṃsa; ({%atī%}), f., N. of
the wife of Pra-dyumna; of the wife of a Vidyā-
dhara; of a princess; of a particular magical art
personified; of an authoress of certain magical incan-
tations. {%—Māyā-vasika, as, ā, am,%} practising de-
ceit, deluding, a deceiver, cheat, (perhaps for {%māyā-%}
{%rasika.%}) {%—Māyā-vāda, as,%} m. ‘the doctrine of
illusion,’ a term applied to Buddhism. {%—Māyāvāda-%}
{%sandūṣaṇī,%} f. ‘destroyer of the doctrine of illusion,’
N. of a controversial work against the non-dualistic
doctrine of the Vedānta. {%—Māyā-vid, t, t, t,%} ‘illu-
sion-knowing,’ experienced or skilled in magical arts.
{%—Māyā-vin, ī, inī, i,%} possessing illusion or magical
powers; employing deceit, using tricks, deluding or
deceiving others; illusory, creating illusions; ({%ī%}), m.
a magician, conjurer, juggler; a cat; N. of a son of
Maya; {%(i),%} n. a gall-nut. {%—Māyā-suta, as,%} m. ‘son
of Māyā,’ epithet of Śākya-muni or Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>37113<pc>0772-a<k1>mAyAyin<k2>mAyAyin
{%Māyāyin, ī, inī, i, = māyā-vin%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>37114<pc>0772-a<k1>mAyika<k2>mAyika
{%Māyika, as, ā, am,%}¦ illusory, creating illusion;
practising deceit, deceiving others, deceitful, decep-
tive, trickish; ({%as%}), m. a conjurer, juggler; ({%am%}), n.
a gall-nut. {%—Māyika-bhairava, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra.
<LEND>

<L>37115<pc>0772-a<k1>mAyin<k2>mAyin
{%Māyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing powers of illusion,
[Page0772-b+ 71]
having supernatural powers; illusory, unreal, decep-
tive, subject to Māyā (said of the soul, cf. {%māyā%});
{%(ī),%} m. a conjurer, juggler, magician; a cheat, de-
ceiver; epithet of Brahmā; of Śiva; of Agni; of
Kāma; {%(i),%} n. magic, magical art [cf. {%dur-m˚%}]; a
gall-nut. {%—Māyi-phala, am,%} n. a gall-nut.
<LEND>

<L>37116<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyeya<k2>mAyeya
{%Māyeya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%māyā%}), see Gaṇa Nadyādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 4, 35.
<LEND>

<L>37117<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyaRa<k2>mAyaRa
{#mAyaRa#}¦ {%māyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Mādhava and Sāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>37118<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyava<k2>mAyava
{#mAyava#}¦ {%māyava, as,%} m. (fr. {%mayu%} or {%māyu%}),
Ved. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>37119<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyavat<k2>mAyavat
{#mAyavat#}¦ {%māya-vat.%} See col. I.
<LEND>

<L>37120<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyA<k2>mAyA
{#mAyA#}¦ {%māyā.%} See under {%māya,%} p. 771.
<LEND>

<L>37121<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyAkApAlika<k2>mAyAkApAlika
{#mAyAkApAlika#}¦ {%māyā-kāpālika, māyā-kāra,%}
&c. See col. I.
<LEND>

<L>37122<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyAti<k2>mAyAti
{#mAyAti#}¦ {%māyāti, is,%} m. {%= nara-bali,%} the
sacrifice or oblation to men.
<LEND>

<L>37123<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyika<k2>mAyika
{#mAyika#}¦ {%māyika, māyin.%} See col. I.
<LEND>

<L>37124<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyu<k2>mAyu<h>1
{#mAyu#} 1¦. {%māyu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%mā%}), Ved.
the act of bleating, lowing, bellowing, roaring, yell-
ing, braying, making any sound or cry; ‘the bleater
or bellower,’ a kind of animal or epithet of a Kim-
puruṣa [cf. {%mayu, maya, mayūra%}]; sometimes at
the end of comps., [cf. {%aja-m˚, ūrdhva-m˚, go-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37125<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyUka<k2>mAyUka
{%Māyūka, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably for {%māyuka%}), bel-
lowing, roaring, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37126<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyu<k2>mAyu<h>2
{#mAyu#} 2¦. {%māyu%} (probably fr. rt. 3. {%mā,%} to
measure), {%= āditya,%} the sun, (according to Nirukta
II. 9, XI. 42.)
<LEND>

<L>37127<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyu<k2>mAyu<h>3
{#mAyu#} 3¦. {%māyu, us, u,%} m. n. (in Uṇādi-s. I.
1. said to be fr. rt. I. {%mi,%} to throw or scatter through
the body), gall, bile, the bilious humor.
<LEND>

<L>37128<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyuka<k2>mAyuka
{#mAyuka#}¦ {%māyuka%} (according to Naigh. III.
2) {%= hrasva;%} [cf. {%pra-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37129<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyurAja<k2>mAyurAja
{#mAyurAja#}¦ {%māyurāja, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Kuvera [cf. {%mayu-rāja%}]; N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>37130<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyUka<k2>mAyUka
{#mAyUka#}¦ {%māyūka.%} See under 1. {%māyu%} above.
<LEND>

<L>37131<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyUra<k2>mAyUra
{#mAyUra#}¦ {%māyūra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mayūra%}), be-
longing to or coming from a peacock; made of
peacocks’ feathers; drawn by peacocks (said of a
chariot); dear to peacocks; ({%ī%}), f. a species of plant,
{%= aja-modā; (am),%} n. a flock of peacocks. {%—Mā-%}
{%yūra-kalpa, as,%} m., N. of a particular Kalpa or
long period of time.
<LEND>

<L>37132<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyUraka<k2>mAyUraka
{%Māyūraka, as,%}¦ m. a peacock-catcher, one who
catches wild peacocks either to tame them or in
order to make various articles with their feathers.
<LEND>

<L>37133<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyUrakarRa<k2>mAyUrakarRa
{%Māyūrakarṇa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%mayūra-karṇa%}), a
patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>37134<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyUrika<k2>mAyUrika
{%Māyūrika, as,%}¦ m. a fowler who catches peacocks,
peacock-catcher.
<LEND>

<L>37135<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyoBava<k2>mAyoBava
{#mAyoBava#}¦ {%māyobhava%} or (more correctly)
{%māyobhavya, am,%} n. (fr. {%mayo-bhū%}), Ved. well-
being, enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>37136<pc>0772-b<k1>mAyya<k2>mAyya
{#mAyya#}¦ {%māyya.%} See {%puru-m˚,%} p. 585, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37137<pc>0772-b<k1>mAr<k2>mAr
{#mAr#}¦ {%mār, r, r, r%} (fr. Caus. of rt. {%mṛ%}), a
killer, destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>37138<pc>0772-b<k1>mAra<k2>mAra
{%Māra, as, ī, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) killing,
destroying, slaying; ({%as%}), m. death, pestilence (Ved.);
slaying, killing; hindrance, obstruction, impediment,
opposition; the god of love; the passion of love;
(with Buddhists) the Destroyer, Evil One, Devil, (in
this sense also {%ās,%} m. pl.); the thorn-apple; ({%ī%}), f.
a plague, pestilence, epidemic; Pestilence personified
as the goddess of death, and identified with Durgā;
[cf. {%agha-māra, tṛṣṇā-m˚, paśu-m˚.%}] {%—Māra-%}
{%jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of Māra,’ N. of a Buddha.
{%—Māra-bīja, am,%} n. epithet of a particular magical
formula. {%—Māra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} full of love, im-
passioned, enamoured. {%—Mārāṅka (˚ra-aṅ˚), as, ā, %}
[Page0772-c+ 74]
{%am,%} displaying tokens of love. {%—Mārātmaka (˚ra-%}
{%āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} essentially destructive, murderous.
{%—Mārābhibhu (˚ra-abh˚), us,%} m. ‘overthrower of
Māra,’ epithet of a Buddha. {%—Mārāri (˚ra-ari),%}
{%is,%} m. ‘the enemy of the god of love,’ N. of Śiva.
{%—Mārī-mṛta,%} Ved. a spectre, apparition.
<LEND>

<L>37139<pc>0772-c<k1>mAraka<k2>mAraka
{%Māraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
killing, slaying; ({%as%}), m. any deadly or pestilential
disease, plague, pestilence; a slayer, destroyer, mur-
derer, the god of death; a falcon, hawk; ({%ikā%}), f.
a plague, pestilence.
<LEND>

<L>37140<pc>0772-c<k1>mArakAyika<k2>mArakAyika
{%Mārakāyika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%māra + kāya%}), be-
longing to the retinue or attendants of Māra (with
Buddhists).
<LEND>

<L>37141<pc>0772-c<k1>mAraRa<k2>mAraRa
{%Māraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of killing, slaying,
slaughter, being killed, destruction; a magical cere-
mony having for its object the destruction of an
enemy; (scil. {%astra%}), ‘the slayer,’ epithet of certain
mythical weapons; epithet of a particular process in
reducing metals, calcination; a kind of poison [cf.
{%maraṇa%}]; ({%ī%}), f. ‘the slayer,’ epithet of one of
the nine Samidhs.
<LEND>

<L>37142<pc>0772-c<k1>mAri<k2>mAri
{%Māri, is,%}¦ f. any deadly disease, pestilence, plague;
killing, slaying; ruin. {%—Māri-vyasana-vāraka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} averting plague and distress; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Kumāra-pāla.
<LEND>

<L>37143<pc>0772-c<k1>mArita<k2>mArita
{%Mārita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), killed, slain,
destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>37144<pc>0772-c<k1>mArin<k2>mArin
{%Mārin, ī, iṇī, i%}¦ (fr. rt. {%mṛ%} or fr. {%māra%}), dying;
killing, a slayer, murderer (at the end of comps.).
<LEND>

<L>37145<pc>0772-c<k1>mArIya<k2>mArIya
{%Mārīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>37146<pc>0772-c<k1>mAruka<k2>mAruka
{%Māruka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. dying, perishing.
<LEND>

<L>37147<pc>0772-c<k1>mAryamARa<k2>mAryamARa
{%Māryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being killed or destroyed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37148<pc>0772-c<k1>mArakata<k2>mArakata
{#mArakata#}¦ {%mārakata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%marakata%}),
of or belonging to an emerald, like an emerald,
emerald-coloured, having any of the properties or
qualities of an emerald. {%—Mārakata-tva, am,%} n. the
state or property of an emerald, emerald colour.
<LEND>

<L>37149<pc>0772-c<k1>mArajAtaka<k2>mArajAtaka
{#mArajAtaka#}¦ {%mārajātaka, as,%} m. a cat (?).
<LEND>

<L>37150<pc>0772-c<k1>mAradAkAra<k2>mAradAkAra
{#mAradAkAra#}¦ {%māradākāra, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37151<pc>0772-c<k1>mArava<k2>mArava
{#mArava#}¦ {%mārava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%maru%}), desert,
belonging to a wilderness or any wild, uncultivated
region, living or being in a wilderness; ({%ī%}), f. epithet
of a particular musical scale.
<LEND>

<L>37152<pc>0772-c<k1>mArica<k2>mArica
{#mArica#}¦ {%mārica, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%marica%}), made
of pepper, peppery; (with {%cūrṇa%}), ground or pounded
pepper.
<LEND>

<L>37153<pc>0772-c<k1>mAricika<k2>mAricika
{%Māricika, as, ā, am,%}¦ prepared or seasoned with
pepper, peppered.
<LEND>

<L>37154<pc>0772-c<k1>mArita<k2>mArita
{#mArita#}¦ {%mārita.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>37155<pc>0772-c<k1>mAriza<k2>mAriza
{#mAriza#}¦ {%māriṣa, as,%} m. (for {%mārṣa,%} q. v.),
an honourable man, a respectable or venerable person,
(in the voc. as a respectful mode of address, and in
dramatic language sometimes applied to the manager
or one of the principal actors); a species of pot-herb
or vegetable, Amaranthus Oleraceus [cf. {%alpa-mā-%}
{%riṣa, mārṣika%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people;
({%ā%}), f., N. of the mother of Dakṣa; of the wife of
Śūra; of a river.
<LEND>

<L>37156<pc>0772-c<k1>mArI<k2>mArI
{#mArI#}¦ {%mārī.%} See under {%māra,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37157<pc>0772-c<k1>mArIca<k2>mArIca
{#mArIca#}¦ {%mārīca, as, ī, am,%} belonging or
relating to or composed by Marīci; ({%as%}), m. son of
Marīci, a patronymic of Kaśyapa; N. of a Rākṣasa;
a royal elephant; a species of plant, {%= kakkola; (ī),%}
f., N. of a Buddhist goddess, the mother of Śākya-
muni ({%= māyā-devī,%} q. v.); N. of an Apsaras;
({%am%}), n. a collection or grove of pepper plants, (in
this sense fr. {%marīca%}); N. of a commentary on the
Siddhānta-śiromaṇi; [cf. {%marīca.%}] {%—Mārīcopapu-%}
{%rāṇa (˚ca-up˚), am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>37158<pc>0772-c<k1>mArIci<k2>mArIci
{%Mārīci, is,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Marīcī, see
Gaṇa Bāhvādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 96.
<LEND>

<L>37159<pc>0772-c<k1>mArIcya<k2>mArIcya
{%Mārīcya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Marīci, (used
as an epithet of the Agni-ṣvāttas.)
<LEND>
[Page0773-a+ 76]

<L>37160<pc>0773-a<k1>mAruRqa<k2>mAruRqa
{#mAruRqa#}¦ {%māruṇḍa, as,%} m. a serpent's egg;
cow-dung; a place spread with cow-dung; a road,
way.
<LEND>

<L>37161<pc>0773-a<k1>mAruta<k2>mAruta
{#mAruta#}¦ {%māruta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%marut%}), of or
belonging to the Maruts, proceeding from the Ma-
ruts, relating to or consisting of the Maruts; belong-
ing to air or wind, relating to or proceeding from
wind, windy, aerial; ({%as%}), m. {%= marut,%} air, wind;
the god of the wind; breath, breathing; the wind
in the body, vital air, one of the three humors of
the body; the trunk of an elephant; N. of a Marut;
a prince of the Maruts; a N. of Agni; (Ved.) a son
of the Maruts; (Ved.) an epithet of Viṣṇu and of
Rudra, &c.; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the Maruts (regarded as
children of Diti); N. of a people, (also read {%ma-%}
{%ḍaka%}); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%diś%} or
{%vidiś,%} the north-west quarter; ({%am%}), n., scil.
{%ṛkṣa%} or {%nakṣatra,%} the constellation Svāti; N. of
a Sāman; a burnt offering on conception (?). {%—Mā-%}
{%ruta-pūrṇa-randhra, as, ā, am,%} having cavities
filled with wind (said of reeds). {%—Māruta-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} consisting or having the essence of wind,
windy. {%—Māruta-vrata, am,%} n. ‘wind-like duty,’
penetrating everywhere (as a king by means of spies);
{%—Māruta-sūnu, us,%} m. ‘son of the wind,’ epithet
of Hanumat. {%—Mārutātmaja (˚ta-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘son
of the wind,’ epithet of fire; of Hanumat. {%—Māru-%}
{%tāpaha (˚ta-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} expelling the wind of
the body, removing windy humor; ({%as%}), m. Capparis
Trifoliata. {%—Mārutāpūrṇa (˚ta-āp˚), as, ā, am,%}
filled with wind. {%—Mārutāśana (˚ta-aś˚), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} feeding on air alone, fasting; ({%as%}), m. a snake
[cf. {%pavanāśana%}]; N. of one of Skanda's attendants;
of a Dānava. {%—Mārutāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as, ā, am,%}
(perhaps) having horses rapid as the wind; (Sāy.) a
patronymic from Marutāśva. {%—Māruteśvara-tīrtha%}
{%(˚ta-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>37162<pc>0773-a<k1>mAruti<k2>mAruti
{%Māruti, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%marut%} or {%māruta%}), ‘son of
the Maruts, son of the Wind,’ a patronymic of
Dyutāna (Ved.); of Bhīma; of Hanumat. {%—Mā-%}
{%ruti-praṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} led on or preceded by
Hanumat.
<LEND>

<L>37163<pc>0773-a<k1>mArutantavya<k2>mArutantavya
{#mArutantavya#}¦ {%mārutantavya%} for {%mānutanta-%}
{%vya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37164<pc>0773-a<k1>mArudeva<k2>mArudeva
{#mArudeva#}¦ {%mārudeva,%} N. of a mountain. See
{%marud-eva,%} p. 749, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37165<pc>0773-a<k1>mAruDa<k2>mAruDa
{#mAruDa#}¦ {%mārudha,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>37166<pc>0773-a<k1>mAruvAra<k2>mAruvAra
{#mAruvAra#}¦ {%māruvāra,%} N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>37167<pc>0773-a<k1>mArka<k2>mArka
{#mArka#}¦ {%mārka, as,%} m. {%= mārkava,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37168<pc>0773-a<k1>mArkawa<k2>mArkawa
{#mArkawa#}¦ {%mārkaṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%markaṭa%}),
apish, monkey-like. {%—Mārkaṭa-pipīlikā,%} f. a small
black ant.
<LEND>

<L>37169<pc>0773-a<k1>mArkawi<k2>mArkawi
{%Mārkaṭi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Markaṭa.
<LEND>

<L>37170<pc>0773-a<k1>mArkaRqa<k2>mArkaRqa
{#mArkaRqa#}¦ {%mārkaṇḍa, as,%} m. {%= mārkaṇḍeya%}
below; {%(as, ā, am),%} composed by Mārkaṇḍa.
{%—Mārkaṇḍa-purāṇa, am,%} n. {%= mārkaṇḍeya-%}
{%purāṇa%}. {%—Mārkaṇḍeśvara-tīrtha (˚ḍa-īś˚), am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>37171<pc>0773-a<k1>mArkaRqIya<k2>mArkaRqIya
{%Mārkaṇḍīya, am,%}¦ n. a species of shrub ({%= bhūmy-%}
{%āhulya%}).
<LEND>

<L>37172<pc>0773-a<k1>mArkaRqeya<k2>mArkaRqeya
{%Mārkaṇḍeya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Mṛ-
kaṇḍu, (according to others also Mṛkaṇḍa); N. of
an ancient sage (the reputed author or narrator of
the Mārkaṇḍeya-Purāṇa); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descend-
ants of Mārkaṇḍeya; ({%am%}), n. {%= mārkaṇḍeyasya%}
{%tīrtham; (as, ī, am),%} delivered or composed by
Mārkaṇḍeya. {%—Mārkaṇḍeya-purāṇa, am,%} n., N.
of one of the eighteen Purāṇas, (in this Purāṇa
Jaimini, the pupil of Vyāsa, applies to Mārkaṇḍeya
to be made acquainted with the nature of Vāsudeva
or Kṛṣṇa, and for an explanation of some of the
incidents of the Mahā-bhārata; the sage excuses
himself, and refers Jaimini to some sapient birds of
celestial origin, residing in the Vindhya mountains,
and profoundly versed in the Vedas; these birds,
whose chief is called Piṅgākṣa, answer Jaimini's
[Page0773-b+ 80]
questions and explain various difficult points, such as,
‘Why was Vāsudeva born a mortal? How was it
Draupadī became the wife of the five Pāṇḍus?’ &c.,
&c. The answer to these inquiries and the addition
of various legends constitute the bulk of this Purāṇa,
and make it a kind of supplement to the Mahā-
bhārata; it differs from all the other Purāṇas in its
narrative rather than sectarial character.)
<LEND>

<L>37173<pc>0773-b<k1>mArkava<k2>mArkava
{#mArkava#}¦ {%mārkava, as,%} m. Eclipta Prostrata;
(sometimes incorrectly spelt {%mārkara;%} cf. {%mar-%}
{%kara.%})
<LEND>

<L>37174<pc>0773-b<k1>mArg<k2>mArg
{#mArg#}¦ {%mārg%} (connected with rts. {%mṛg,%}
1. {%mṛj,%} but more properly to be regarded
as a Nom. fr. {%mārga%} below), cl. 1. 10. P. (ep. also
cl. 1. A) {%mārgati (-te), mārgayati, mārgitum,%}
{%mārgayitum,%} to seek, seek for; to hunt after, chase;
to search through, trace out; to seek after, seek to
obtain, strive to attain; to follow after, strive after;
to request, ask, beg, solicit anything from any one
(with abl. of the person and acc. of the thing, or
purchase or buy; to make or prepare a road (?); to
with double acc.), to ask in marriage; to seek to
go (?); to feather an arrow (?); to purify, adorn, (in
this sense evidently for rt. {%mārj = %} 1. {%mṛj,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>37175<pc>0773-b<k1>mArga<k2>mArga
{%Mārga, as,%}¦ m. (in some of its senses fr. {%mṛga%}),
hunting or tracing out game; following after, seek-
ing, search, investigation, inquiry; the track of a
wild animal, any track, path, road, way, {%(mārge,%}
on the way, on the road; {%madhye mārge,%} in the
middle of the way; {%mārgaṃ dā,%} with gen. of
the person, to give up the way to any one, move
out of any one's way; {%mārge pracalitaḥ,%} he set
out on his way); the path or course of a planet, of
the wind, &c.; (in medicine) a way, passage, chan-
nel, canal (in any part of the body); the intestinal
canal, anus; a way, means, ({%vigraha-mārga,%} a
means of warfare); the right way, proper course;
mode, manner, method, characteristic, usage, habit,
custom, use, ({%amārgeṇa,%} in an unfair manner;
{%malla-mārgāḥ,%} the usages of wrestlers; {%yuddha-%}
{%mārga,%} a mode of fighting, stratagem, manœuvre);
a title or head in law, ground for litigation; style,
diction; a high style of acting or dancing or singing
(as opposed to a vulgar style); (in dramatic language)
pointing out the way, indicating how anything is to
take place; (in geometry) a section; {%(as, ī, am),%}
coming from or belonging to wild animals, belonging
to an antelope or deer, (in this sense fr. {%mṛga%});
({%as%}), m. musk [cf. {%mṛga-mada%}]; the constellation
Mṛga-śiras; the month Mārgaśīrṣa (November-
December). {%—Mārga-toraṇa, am,%} n. a triumphal
arch erected over a road. {%—Mārga-darśaka, as,%} m.
‘way-shower,’ a guide. {%—Mārga-dāyinī,%} f. ‘giving
up the way,’ N. of Dākṣāyaṇī at Kedāra. {%—Mārga-%}
{%draṅga, as,%} m. a city or town on the road. {%—Mārga-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. a tree growing by the way-side.
{%—Mārga-dhenu, us,%} m. or {%mārga-dhenuka, am,%}
n. a Yojana, a measure of distance = 4000 fathoms
or 4 Kos, above 8 miles, (perhaps originally a mile-
stone representing a cow.) {%—Mārga-pa, as,%} or
{%mārga-pati, is,%} m. ‘road-inspector,’ N. of a parti-
cular official. {%—Mārga-patha, as,%} m. a course, road,
path. {%—Mārga-pālī,%} f. ‘road-protectress,’ N. of a
goddess. {%—Mārga-bandhana, am,%} n. a road-
obstruction, anything which blocks up a road, a bar-
ricade. {%—Mārga-madhya-ga, as, ā, am,%} going in
the middle of the road, being on the road. {%—Mārga-%}
{%rakṣaka, as,%} m. a road-keeper, guard. {%—Mārga-%}
{%rodhin, ī, inī, i,%} road-obstructing, blocking up a
road. {%—Mārga-vaṭī,%} f. epithet of the tutelary god-
dess of travellers. {%—Mārga-vaśānuga (˚śa-an˚)%} or
{%mārga-vaśāyāta (˚śa-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} remaining
on the road, going or situated along the road. {%—Mār-%}
{%ga-śākhin, ī,%} m. ‘way-side tree,’ a tree by the road-
side. {%—Mārgaśīrṣa,%} see col. 3. {%—Mārga-śodhaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘road-clearer,’ a pioneer. {%—Mārga-stha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} being on the road, a traveller. {%—Mārga-%}
{%harmya, am,%} n. a mansion or palace on a high-road.
{%—Mārgāgata (˚ga-āg˚)%} or {%mārgāyāta (˚ga-āy˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} come from the road or a journey, a
[Page0773-c+ 77]
traveller, wayfarer. {%—Mārgeśa (˚ga-īśa˚), as,%} m. {%=%}
{%mārga-pa,%} col. 2. {%—Mārgaiṣin (˚ga-eṣ˚), ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} ‘road-seeking,’ searching for a road or path.
{%—Mārgopadiś (˚ga-up˚), k,%} m. ‘road-shower,’ a
guide, leader.
<LEND>

<L>37176<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgaka<k2>mArgaka
{%Mārgaka, as,%}¦ m. the month Mārgaśīrṣa; [cf.
{%prati-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37177<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgaRa<k2>mArgaRa
{%Mārgaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ seeking, searching for; in-
vestigating; begging, requiring, asking, desiring;
({%as%}), m. a beggar, solicitor, suppliant, mendicant;
an arrow; a symbolical expression for the number
five derived from the five arrows of the god of love;
{%(am, ā),%} n. f. the act of seeking or searching for, inves-
tigation; research, inquiry; the act of begging, soli-
citation, affectionate solicitation or inquiry, (in some
of these senses usually {%ā,%} f.) {%—Mārgaṇa-tā,%} f. the
being an arrow, the state or nature of an arrow;
{%mārgaṇatāṃ gataḥ,%} become an arrow. {%—Mārgaṇa-%}
{%priyā,%} f., N. of a daughter of Prādhā.
<LEND>

<L>37178<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgaRaka<k2>mArgaRaka
{%Mārgaṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a beggar, solicitor, mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>37179<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgamARa<k2>mArgamARa
{%Mārgamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seeking, searching for,
tracing out, investigating.
<LEND>

<L>37180<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgayat<k2>mArgayat
{%Mārgayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ seeking, searching for,
investigating, hunting after.
<LEND>

<L>37181<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgaSira<k2>mArgaSira
{%Mārgaśira, as,%}¦ or {%mārgaśiras, ās,%} m. (fr.
{%mṛga-śiras%}), the month Mārgaśīrṣa.
<LEND>

<L>37182<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgaSIrza<k2>mArgaSIrza
{%Mārgaśīrṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ born under the constel-
lation Mṛga-śiras; (with and without {%māsa%}), N. of
the month in which the full moon enters the con-
stellation Mṛga-śiras, the tenth or (in later times)
the first month in the year = November-December;
({%ī%}), f. (with and without {%paurṇamāsī%}), the day on
which the full moon enters the constellation Mṛga-
śiras, the fifteenth day of the first half of the month
Mārgaśīrṣa.
<LEND>

<L>37183<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgaSIrzaka<k2>mArgaSIrzaka
{%Mārgaśīrṣaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= mārgaśīrṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>37184<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgAra<k2>mArgAra
{%Mārgāra, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (according to Mahī-dhara)
a patronymic from Mṛgāri; one who catches fish
with his hands.
<LEND>

<L>37185<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgika<k2>mArgika
{%Mārgika, as,%}¦ m. a hunter, huntsman; a traveller,
wayfarer.
<LEND>

<L>37186<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgita<k2>mArgita
{%Mārgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sought, searched, sought or
inquired after, pursued, hunted after; desired, re-
quired.
<LEND>

<L>37187<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgitavya<k2>mArgitavya
{%Mārgitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sought or sought
after; to be searched through; to be striven after.
<LEND>

<L>37188<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgin<k2>mArgin
{%Mārgin, ī,%}¦ m. one who clears or guards the way,
a pioneer, guide.
<LEND>

<L>37189<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgya<k2>mArgya<h>1
1. {%mārgya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see under rt. {%mārj%}
below), to be sought or searched for.
<LEND>

<L>37190<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgyamARa<k2>mArgyamARa
{%Mārgyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being hunted after or
searched for, being chased.
<LEND>

<L>37191<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgamarzi<k2>mArgamarzi
{#mArgamarzi#}¦ {%mārgamarṣi, is,%} m., N. of a son
of Viśvāmitra, (also read {%mārdamarṣi.%})
<LEND>

<L>37192<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgamitra<k2>mArgamitra
{#mArgamitra#}¦ {%mārgamitra, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>37193<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgayaTa<k2>mArgayaTa
{#mArgayaTa#}¦ {%mārgayatha, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic (?).
<LEND>

<L>37194<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgava<k2>mArgava
{#mArgava#}¦ {%mārgava, as,%} m. a particular mixed
caste (born from a Niṣāda and an Ayogava female).
<LEND>

<L>37195<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgaveya<k2>mArgaveya
{#mArgaveya#}¦ {%mārgaveya, as,%} m., Ved. the patro-
nymic or metronymic of a Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>37196<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgaSira<k2>mArgaSira
{#mArgaSira#}¦ {%mārgaśira, mārgaśīrṣa.%} See
above.
<LEND>

<L>37197<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgIyava<k2>mArgIyava
{#mArgIyava#}¦ {%mārgīyava%} or {%mārgīyavādya, am,%}
n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>37198<pc>0773-c<k1>mArj<k2>mArj
{#mArj#}¦ {%mārj,%} cl. 10. P. {%mārjayati, -yitum,%}
to wipe, scour, cleanse, purify, (in these
senses allied to rt. 1. {%mṛj,%} fr. which the derivatives
below may be formed); to sound, make a parti-
cular sound, (in this sense connected with rts. {%marc,%}
{%marv, mañj.%})
<LEND>

<L>37199<pc>0773-c<k1>mArgya<k2>mArgya<h>2
2. {%mārgya, as, ā, am%}¦ (properly fr. rt. 1. {%mṛj;%} for
1. see above), to be wiped away or removed, to be
scoured, to be cleansed or purified.
<LEND>

<L>37200<pc>0773-c<k1>mArja<k2>mArja
{%Mārja, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleaning, scouring; a cleaner,
scourer [cf. {%astra-m˚, śastra-m˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. an epi-
thet of Viṣṇu; purification, cleansing; a washerman.
<LEND>
[Page0774-a+ 77]

<L>37201<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjaka<k2>mArjaka
{%Mārjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ cleansing, scouring, clean-
ing, purifying; a cleaner, scourer, sweeper; (per-
haps) {%= mārjana,%} Symplocos Racemosa.
<LEND>

<L>37202<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjana<k2>mArjana
{%Mārjana, as, ī, am,%}¦ wiping away, cleansing,
purifying, washing; ({%as%}), m. Symplocos Racemosa;
({%ā%}), f. washing, cleansing, purifying; the sound of a
drum [cf. rt. {%mārj%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a broom, besom, brush;
N. of one of Durgā's female attendants; ({%am%}), n.
the act of wiping or rubbing off; the act of cleaning,
scouring, cleansing, sweeping; cleansing the person
by wiping or bathing or rubbing it with unguents;
the act of wiping away or effacing; {%(ucchiṣṭa-%}
{%mārjanam,%} removing leavings.)
<LEND>

<L>37203<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjanIya<k2>mArjanIya
{%Mārjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cleaned, to be
cleansed or purified; to be swept or brushed.
<LEND>

<L>37204<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjAra<k2>mArjAra
{%Mārjāra, as,%}¦ m. a cat, (probably so called from its
habit of constantly cleaning itself); a polecat, civet-
cat [cf. {%gandha-m˚%}]; a wild cat, {%= araṇya-mār-%}
{%jāra; (ī),%} f. a female cat; a civet-cat; musk.
{%—Mārjāra-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. ‘having the throat or
cry of a cat,’ a peacock. {%—Mārjāra-karaṇa, am,%} n.
a particular posture in sexual intercourse. {%—Mārjāra-%}
{%karṇikā%} or {%mārjāra-karṇī,%} f. ‘cat-eared,’ an epi-
thet of Cāmuṇḍā. {%—Mārjāra-gandhā,%} f. a species
of Mudga-parṇī or pulse, Phaseolus Trilobus. {%—Mār-%}
{%jāra-gandhikā,%} f. {%= mudga-parṇī,%} q. v. {%—Mār-%}
{%jāra-liṅgin, ī, inī, i,%} having the nature or charac-
teristics of a cat. {%—Mārjārī-kramaṇa, am,%} n. a
particular kind of coitus.
<LEND>

<L>37205<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjAraka<k2>mArjAraka
{%Mārjāraka, as,%}¦ m. a cat; a peacock (so called
from its cat-like cry).
<LEND>

<L>37206<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjAri<k2>mArjAri
{%Mārjāri, is,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Saha-deva.
<LEND>

<L>37207<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjArIya<k2>mArjArIya
{%Mārjārīya, as,%}¦ m. a cat; a Śūdra; one who
cleanses or purifies his body ({%= kāya-śodhana%}).
<LEND>

<L>37208<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjAla<k2>mArjAla
{%Mārjāla, as,%}¦ m. {%= mārjāra,%} a cat.
<LEND>

<L>37209<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjAlIya<k2>mArjAlIya
{%Mārjālīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ ‘fond of washing or ablu-
tion, delighting in purification,’ an epithet of Śiva in
Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 1628, (according to the Scholiast
{%= śuddha-deha = kirāta%}); ({%as%}), m. a cat; a Śūdra;
scil. {%dhiṣṇya,%} a heap of earth to the right of the
Vedi on which the sacrificial vessels are cleansed
(Ved.); N. of the seventeenth Kalpa.
<LEND>

<L>37210<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjAlya<k2>mArjAlya
{%Mārjālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. fond of washing or
ablution, delighting in purification; (according to
Sāy.) entitled to worship.
<LEND>

<L>37211<pc>0774-a<k1>mArjita<k2>mArjita
{%Mārjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (see rt. 1. {%mṛj,%} with which
this and the following may be connected), scoured,
cleansed, purified, swept, brushed, adorned; ({%ā%}), f.
curds with sugar and spice.
<LEND>

<L>37212<pc>0774-a<k1>mArzwavya<k2>mArzwavya
{%Mārṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cleansed, to be
scoured or purified, to be swept or brushed.
<LEND>

<L>37213<pc>0774-a<k1>mArzwi<k2>mArzwi
{%Mārṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. washing, cleaning, cleansing, puri-
fying, cleansing the person or anointing it with oil;
({%is%}), m., N. of a son of Sāraṇa. {%—Mārṣṭi-mat,%}
{%ān,%} m., N. of a son of Sāraṇa.
<LEND>

<L>37214<pc>0774-a<k1>mArqAkava<k2>mArqAkava
{#mArqAkava#}¦ {%mārḍākava, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Mṛḍāku.
<LEND>

<L>37215<pc>0774-a<k1>mArqAkavAyana<k2>mArqAkavAyana
{%Mārḍākavāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Mār-
ḍākava.
<LEND>

<L>37216<pc>0774-a<k1>mArqIka<k2>mArqIka
{#mArqIka#}¦ {%mārḍīka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%mṛḍ%}),
Ved. gladdening, rejoicing; ({%am%}), n. compassion,
grace, favour, (in this sense fr. {%mṛḍīka.%})
<LEND>

<L>37217<pc>0774-a<k1>mArqyarTa<k2>mArqyarTa
{#mArqyarTa#}¦ {%mārḍyartha, as,%} m., N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>37218<pc>0774-a<k1>mArtaRqa<k2>mArtaRqa
{#mArtaRqa#}¦ {%mārtaṇḍa, as,%} m. (fr. {%mṛtaṇḍa,%}
but the old form is probably {%mārtāṇḍa%} below), the
sun, the sun-god, (sometimes used in titles of books;
cf. {%chando-m˚, prameya-kamala-m˚%}); an Āditya;
a symbolical expression for the number twelve; a
hog, boar. {%—Mārtaṇḍa-tilaka-svāmin, ī,%} m., N.
of a preceptor. {%—Mārtaṇḍa-vallabhā,%} f. ‘beloved of
the sun,’ the plant Polanisia Icosandra.
<LEND>

<L>37219<pc>0774-a<k1>mArtARqa<k2>mArtARqa
{%Mārtāṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%mṛtāṇḍa%}), a bird (Ved.);
‘the bird in the sky,’ the sun, a statue of the sun-god.
<LEND>

<L>37220<pc>0774-a<k1>mArtavatsa<k2>mArtavatsa
{#mArtavatsa#}¦ {%mārtavatsa, am,%} n. (fr. {%mṛta-%}
{%vatsā%}), Ved. born dead, still-born.
<LEND>

<L>37221<pc>0774-a<k1>mArttika<k2>mArttika
{#mArttika#}¦ {%mārttika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mṛttikā%}),
[Page0774-b+ 75]
made of clay or loam, earthen; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
pitcher or earthenware vessel; the lid of a pitcher.
<LEND>

<L>37222<pc>0774-b<k1>mArttikAvata<k2>mArttikAvata
{%Mārttikāvata%}¦ (fr. {%mṛttikāvatī%}), N. of a country;
epithet of the king of that country; N. of a city;
{%(ās),%} m. pl., N. of a people; of a princely race.
<LEND>

<L>37223<pc>0774-b<k1>mArttikAvataka<k2>mArttikAvataka
{%Mārttikāvataka, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the country
Mārttikāvata.
<LEND>

<L>37224<pc>0774-b<k1>mArtya<k2>mArtya
{#mArtya#}¦ {%mārtya, as, ā (?) , am%} (fr. {%martya%}),
mortal, corporeal; ({%am%}), n. the corporeal or mortal
part, mortality.
<LEND>

<L>37225<pc>0774-b<k1>mArtyava<k2>mArtyava
{%Mārtyava, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. (fr. {%mṛtyu%}), a patronymic
of Antaka.
<LEND>

<L>37226<pc>0774-b<k1>mArtyuYjaya<k2>mArtyuYjaya
{%Mārtyuñjaya, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a patronymic from
Mṛtyuñ-jaya.
<LEND>

<L>37227<pc>0774-b<k1>mArtsna<k2>mArtsna
{#mArtsna#}¦ {%mārtsna, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%mṛtsnā%}), Ved.
ground fine or small.
<LEND>

<L>37228<pc>0774-b<k1>mArdaNga<k2>mArdaNga
{#mArdaNga#}¦ {%mārdaṅga, am,%} n. (fr. {%mṛdaṅga%}),
a city, town; ({%as%}), m. a drummer.
<LEND>

<L>37229<pc>0774-b<k1>mArdaNgika<k2>mArdaNgika
{%Mārdaṅgika, as,%}¦ m. a drummer.
<LEND>

<L>37230<pc>0774-b<k1>mArdamarzi<k2>mArdamarzi
{#mArdamarzi#}¦ {%mārdamarṣi.%} See {%mārgamarṣi.%}
<LEND>

<L>37231<pc>0774-b<k1>mArdava<k2>mArdava
{#mArdava#}¦ {%mārdava, as,%} m. (fr. {%mṛdu%}), a patro-
nymic; a particular mixed caste, (in this sense per-
haps incorrectly for {%mārgava%}); ({%am%}), n. softness, weak-
ness, suppleness, pliancy, kindness, indulgence, gentle-
ness, mildness, leniency, good nature; kindness or
gentleness towards (with gen., e. g. {%mārdavaṃ sarva-%}
{%bhūtānām,%} gentleness towards all living creatures).
{%—Mārdava-bhāva, as,%} m. the state of being soft
or pliant, pliancy, suppleness. {%—Mārdavī-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make soft, make weak or indul-
gent. {%—Mārdavī-kṛtā,%} f. made soft, weak, self-
indulgent, lax.
<LEND>

<L>37232<pc>0774-b<k1>mArdavAyana<k2>mArdavAyana
{%Mārdavāyana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%mārdava%}), a patro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>37233<pc>0774-b<k1>mArdeya<k2>mArdeya
{#mArdeya#}¦ {%mārdeya, as,%} m. {%= mṛder apatyam.%}
{%—Mārdeya-pura, am,%} n., N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>37234<pc>0774-b<k1>mArdvIka<k2>mArdvIka
{#mArdvIka#}¦ {%mārdvīka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mṛdvīkā%}),
coming from or made of grapes; ({%am%}), n. wine.
<LEND>

<L>37235<pc>0774-b<k1>mArza<k2>mArza
{#mArza#}¦ {%mārṣa, as,%} m. (fr. {%marṣa%}), a vene-
rable or honourable man, respectable person; a kind
of vegetable; [cf. {%māriṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37236<pc>0774-b<k1>mArzika<k2>mArzika
{%Mārṣika, as,%}¦ m. a kind of vegetable ({%= mā-%}
{%riṣa).%}
<LEND>

<L>37237<pc>0774-b<k1>mArzwavya<k2>mArzwavya
{#mArzwavya#}¦ {%mārṣṭavya, mārṣṭi.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37238<pc>0774-b<k1>mAla<k2>mAla
{#mAla#}¦ {%māla, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 3. {%mā%}),
N. of a district (lying west and south-west of Ben-
gal); a barbarian or mountaineer of a particular
tribe; an epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
barbarous tribe of people; ({%ā%}), f. a wreath, garland,
chaplet, crown; a row, line ({%= paṅkti,%} Kirātārju-
nīya V. 9); a chain, string, rosary, necklace [cf.
{%akṣa-m˚%}]; a collection, group [cf. {%nakṣatra-m˚%}];
a series, regular succession, ({%nāmnām mālā,%} a col-
lection of words arranged in order, a vocabulary, dic-
tionary; cf. {%nāma-m˚%}); (in rhetoric) a series of
epithets, a string of similes; (in the drama) the
offering of many things to obtain a wish; a streak,
{%(taḍin-mālā,%} a flash of lightning); N. of a river;
of a lexicon; of a metre containing two lines of
¯¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯ and two of ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘
¯¯ of another metre, four times ˘˘˘˘˘˘,
˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘¯ [cf. {%sraj%}]; of a Prākṛt metre of
twice 45 and 43+27 instants; ({%am%}), n. a field, a
forest or wood near a village; deceit, fraud, artifice;
{%(as, ā, am),%} low, base. {%—Māla-cakraka, am,%} n.
the hip-joint. {%—Māla-bhañjikā,%} f. ({%māla%} for {%mālā%}),
‘breaking the garland,’ N. of a game. {%—Māla-bhā-%}
{%rin, ī, iṇī, i%} ({%māla%} for {%mālā%}), bearing or wearing
a garland, having a chaplet or crown, garlanded.
{%—Mālā-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. the plant Achyranthes As-
pera. {%—Mālā-kanda, as,%} m. a species of bulbous
plant. {%—Mālā-kara%} or {%mālā-kāra, as,%} m. a wreath-
maker, garland-weaver, florist, gardener; the mixed
caste of gardeners; N. of a son of Viśva-karman by
a Śūdra woman or by Ghṛtācī; {%(ī),%} f. a woman
[Page0774-c+ 81]
who weaves garlands, a wreath-maker. {%—Mālā-kuṭa-%}
{%dantī,%} f., N. of a Rākṣasī. {%—Mālā-guṇa, as,%} m.
the string of a garland, a necklace. {%—Mālāguṇa-%}
{%parikṣiptā,%} f. ‘invested with the marriage string,’
a marriageable woman. {%—Mālā-guṇā,%} f., scil. {%lūtā,%}
a species of venomous spider. {%—Mālā-granthi, is,%}
m. {%= mālā-dūrvā,%} q. v. {%—Mālāṅka (˚lā-aṅ˚), as,%}
m., N. of a king (the author of a commentary on
the Mālatī-mādhava, and of the Vṛndā-vana). {%—Mā-%}
{%lā-tṛṇa%} or {%mālātṛṇaka, am,%} n. a fragrant grass,
Andropogon Schœnanthus. {%—Mālā-dīpaka, am,%} n.
(in rhetoric) a particular figure of speech, a closely
linked or connected climax. {%—Mālā-dūrvā,%} f. a
species of Dūrvā grass. {%—Mālā-dhara, as, ī, am,%}
having or wearing a garland, wearing a chaplet or
crown, crowned; N. of a class of divine beings; N.
of a man; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a Rākṣasī; ({%am%}), n. a
species of the Aty-aṣṭi metre, four times ˘˘˘˘˘
¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘¯¯˘¯. {%—Mālā-prastha, as,%} m.,
N. of a city. {%—Mālā-phala, am,%} n. the seed of
Elæocarpus Ganitrus (employed for rosaries). {%—Mālā-%}
{%manu, us,%} m., Ved. or {%mālā-mantra, as,%} m. a
sacred text or saying written in the form of a wreath.
{%—Mālā-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of garlands; con-
sisting of lines or streaks in regular succession.
{%—Mālāriṣṭā (˚lā-ar˚),%} f. a species of plant {%(=%}
{%pācī)%}. {%—Mālālikā%} or {%mālālī (˚la-āl˚),%} f. Trigo-
nella Corniculata. {%—Mālā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
a wreath or garland, garlanded, wreathed, crowned;
({%atī%}), f., N. of the wife of Upa-barhaṇa; of the
wife of Kuśa-dhvaja. {%—Mālopamā (˚lā-up˚),%} f.
‘string of comparisons,’ a particular figure in rhetoric
(e. g. ‘heroism adds glory to thy character, as heat to
the sun, the sun to the day, the day to the sky’).
<LEND>

<L>37239<pc>0774-c<k1>mAlaka<k2>mAlaka
{%Mālaka, as,%}¦ m. the Nimb tree, Melia Semper-
virens; a wood near a village; ({%ā%}), f. a garland;
{%(akī),%} f., see Gaṇa Gaurādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 41;
({%ikā%}), f. {%= mālā,%} a garland, &c.; a necklace; a row,
series, collection of things arranged in a line; a
species of jasmine ({%= saptalā%}); linseed, Linum Usi-
tatissimum [cf. {%nava-mālikā%}]; a kind of bird [cf.
{%mālika%}]; an intoxicating drink; a daughter; a
palace; N. of a river; ({%am%}), n. a garland, &c., a
ring; Hibiscus Mutabilis.
<LEND>

<L>37240<pc>0774-c<k1>mAlaya<k2>mAlaya<h>1
1. {%mālaya%}¦ (for 2. see p. 775, col. 1), Nom. P. {%mā-%}
{%layati%} (Aor. {%amamālat = mālām ākhyat%}), Schol.
on Pāṇ. VII. 4, 2.
<LEND>

<L>37241<pc>0774-c<k1>mAlAkA<k2>mAlAkA
{%Mālākā,%}¦ f. {%= mālikā.%} See under {%mālaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>37242<pc>0774-c<k1>mAli<k2>mAli
{%Māli, is, is, i,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) wreathed,
garlanded, crowned [cf. {%su-m˚%}]; ({%is%}), m., N. of a
son of the Rākṣasa Su-keśa.
<LEND>

<L>37243<pc>0774-c<k1>mAlika<k2>mAlika
{%Mālika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mālā%}), relating or belong-
ing to a garland; ({%as%}), m. a garland-maker, a
gardener, florist; a painter, colourist, dyer; a species
of bird; [cf. {%mālikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37244<pc>0774-c<k1>mAlikA<k2>mAlikA
{%Mālikā,%}¦ f. See under {%mālaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>37245<pc>0774-c<k1>mAlita<k2>mAlita
{%Mālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) garlanded,
crowned, encircled, encompassed, surrounded.
<LEND>

<L>37246<pc>0774-c<k1>mAlin<k2>mAlin
{%Mālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ garlanded, wearing a garland or
chaplet, crowned; (at the end of comps.) wearing a
garland or necklace of, crowned with, wreathed with,
encircled by (e. g. {%nagarī campaka-mālinī,%} a city
encircled by Campaka trees; {%pṛthivī samudra-%}
{%mālinī,%} the sea-girt earth; cf. {%aṃśu-m˚, ūrmi-m˚,%}
{%kirīṭa-m˚, marīci-m˚, hema-m˚%}); ({%ī%}), m. a wreath-
maker, garland-maker; a florist, gardener; N. of a
son of the Rākṣasa Su-keśa [cf. {%māli%}]; {%(inī),%} f.
the wife of a wreath-maker or gardener, a female
florist; N. of a city ({%= campā%}); N. of two plants
({%= agni-śikhā%} and {%dur-ālabhā%}); N. of a celestial
maiden; of a divine Mātṛ (one of the seven Mātṛs
of Skanda); an epithet of Durgā; N. of one of
Durgā's female attendants; epithet of a girl seven
years old (representing Durgā at the festival of that
goddess); N. of a Rākṣasī, the mother of Vibhī-
ṣaṇa; N. assumed by Draupadī (while resident
with king Virāṭa, cf. Mahā-bh. Virāṭa-p. 246);
N. of Śveta-karṇa's wife, daughter of Su-cāru;
of the wife of Priya-vrata; of the wife of Ruci and
mother of Manu Raucya; of the wife of Prasena-jit;
of the celestial Ganges ({%= Gaṅgā = Mandākinī%});
[Page0775-a+ 78]
of various other rivers; N. of various metres, four
times ¯˘¯¯¯¯, four times ˘˘˘˘¯˘˘¯˘¯
˘¯, four times ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯¯, ¯˘¯¯˘¯¯; the
personification of a particular musical mode; a poeti-
cal stanza consisting of alternate verses or hemistichs
of eight and seven syllables; it is especially used to
conclude a section or canto. {%—Mālinī-tantra, am,%}
n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Mālinī-vijaya, as,%} m., N. of
a work.
<LEND>

<L>37247<pc>0775-a<k1>mAlIya<k2>mAlIya<h>1
1. {%mālīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%mālīyati,%} &c., to wish one's
self a garland, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37248<pc>0775-a<k1>mAlIya<k2>mAlIya<h>2
2. {%mālīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ destined or fitted or suited
for a garland, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37249<pc>0775-a<k1>mAleya<k2>mAleya
{%Māleya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%māli%}), a patronymic, {%= mālin,%}
N. of a Rākṣasa; ({%ā%}), f. great cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>37250<pc>0775-a<k1>mAlya<k2>mAlya
{%Mālya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to a gar-
land, &c., proper or fit for a garland; ({%as%}), m. a
patronymic; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Trigonella Corniculata;
({%am%}), n. a wreath, garland, chaplet, crown; a flower.
{%—Mālyaguṇāya,%} Nom. A. (fr. {%mālya-guṇa%}), {%mā-%}
{%lyaguṇāyate,%} &c., to become the string of a garland,
to appear like a wreath, to become a garland.
{%—Mālya-jīvaka, as,%} m. one who lives by making
or selling wreaths. {%—Mālya-piṇḍaka, as,%} m., N.
of a Nāga. {%—Mālya-puṣpa, as,%} m. a kind of hemp
{%(= śaṇa)%}. {%—Mālya-puṣpikā,%} f. a species of plant
{%(= śaṇa-puṣpī)%}. {%—Mālya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} gar-
landed, crowned, adorned with crowns or garlands;
({%ān%}), m., N. of a Rākṣasa, the son of Su-keśa; of
one of Śiva's attendants; of a mountain or moun-
tainous range (described as one of the smaller moun-
tains of India proper, lying eastward of mount Meru);
({%atī%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Mālya-vṛtti, is,%} m. one
who subsists by making or selling garlands. {%—Mālyā-%}
{%paṇa (˚ya-āp˚), as,%} m. a market for the sale of
wreaths or garlands, garland market, flower market.
<LEND>

<L>37251<pc>0775-a<k1>mAlakOSa<k2>mAlakOSa
{#mAlakOSa#}¦ {%mālakauśa, as,%} m. {%= kauśika,%} a
particular Rāga or musical mode.
<LEND>

<L>37252<pc>0775-a<k1>mAlati<k2>mAlati
{#mAlati#}¦ {%mālati, is,%} f. {%= mālatī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>37253<pc>0775-a<k1>mAlatikA<k2>mAlatikA
{%Mālatikā,%}¦ f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
upon Skanda; of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>37254<pc>0775-a<k1>mAlatI<k2>mAlatI
{%Mālatī,%}¦ f. Jasminum Grandiflorum (both the
plant and its blossom; it bears fragrant white flowers
which open towards evening); a species of plant ({%=%}
{%viśalyā%}); Bignonia Suaveolens; a shrub, Echites
Caryophyllata; a bud, blossom; a maid, virgin,
young woman; moonshine, moonlight; night; N.
of various metres, viz. four times ˘¯˘˘¯˘, four
times ˘˘˘˘¯˘˘¯˘¯˘¯, and four times ¯˘˘
¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯¯; N. of a
river; of a woman; of Kalyāṇa-malla's commentary
on the Megha-dūta; (probably) {%= kāca-mala, =%}
{%mālatī-tīra-ja%}. {%—Mālatī-kṣāraka, as,%} m. (pro-
bably) borax. {%—Mālatī-tīra-ja, as,%} m. borax (found
on the bank of the Mālatī). {%—Mālatī-tīra-sam-%}
{%bhava, am,%} n. white borax. {%—Mālatī-pattrikā,%} f.
{%= jāti-pattrī,%} the outer shell of a nutmeg. {%—Mā-%}
{%latī-phala, am,%} n. a nutmeg. {%—Mālatī-mādhava,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘Mālatī and Mādhava,’ N. of a celebrated
drama by Bhava-bhūti (so called from the names of
the heroine and hero). {%—Mālatī-mālā,%} f. a garland
of jasmine blossoms; N. of a lexicon.
<LEND>

<L>37255<pc>0775-a<k1>mAlada<k2>mAlada
{#mAlada#}¦ {%mālada, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(also read {%mānada.%})
<LEND>

<L>37256<pc>0775-a<k1>mAlaya<k2>mAlaya<h>2
{#mAlaya#} 2¦. {%mālaya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%malaya;%}
for 1. {%mālaya%} see p. 774, col. 3), coming from the
Malaya mountains; ({%as%}), m. sandal-wood; N. of a
son of Garuḍa; ({%am%}), n. the unguent prepared from
sandal; a caravansary.
<LEND>

<L>37257<pc>0775-a<k1>mAlava<k2>mAlava
{#mAlava#}¦ {%mālava, as,%} m., N. of a country
(Malwa in central India); of a Rāga or particular
scale in music; of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inha-
bitants of Malwa; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; ({%ī%}), f. a
princess of the Mālavas; N. of the wife of Aśva-pati
and progenitress of the Mālavas; ({%am%}), n. a kind of
Prākṛt metre, 16+12+16+12 instants; {%(as, ī,%}
{%am),%} relating or belonging to the Mālavas. {%—Mā-%}
{%lava-gupta, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Mālava- %}
[Page0775-b+ 69]
{%deśa, as,%} m. the country of Mālava or Malwa.
{%—Mālava-nṛpati, is,%} m. a king of Mālava. {%—Mā-%}
{%lava-rudra, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Mālava-vi-%}
{%ṣaya, as,%} m. the country of Mālava or Malwa.
{%—Mālava-śrī, īs,%} f., N. of a particular musical
mode or scale. {%—Mālavādhīśa (˚va-adh˚)%} or {%mā-%}
{%lavendra (˚va-in˚), as,%} m. a king of Mālava.
<LEND>

<L>37258<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlavaka<k2>mAlavaka
{%Mālavaka,%}¦  relating to the province of Mālava or
Malwa; ({%as%}), m. the country of the Mālavas; a
native of Mālava or Malwa; ({%ikā%}), f. Ipomœa Tur-
pethum; N. of a woman. {%—Mālavikāgnimitra%}
{%(˚kā-ag˚), am,%} n. ‘Mālavikā and Agnimitra,’ N. of
a drama by Kālidāsa (so called from the names of
the heroine and hero).
<LEND>

<L>37259<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlavIya<k2>mAlavIya
{%Mālavīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ native of or belonging to
Mālava.
<LEND>

<L>37260<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlavya<k2>mAlavya
{%Mālavya, as,%}¦ m. epithet of one of the Mahā-
puruṣas born under particular constellations (Ved.);
a prince of the Mālavas. {%—Mālavya-deśa,%} N. of a
country.
<LEND>

<L>37261<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlavarti<k2>mAlavarti
{#mAlavarti#}¦ {%mālavarti, is,%} m., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>37262<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlasI<k2>mAlasI
{#mAlasI#}¦ {%mālasī,%} f., N. of a plant (com-
monly called Keśapuṣṭa).
<LEND>

<L>37263<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlahAyana<k2>mAlahAyana
{#mAlahAyana#}¦ {%mālahāyana, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>37264<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlA<k2>mAlA
{#mAlA#}¦ {%mālā.%} See under {%māla,%} p. 774.
<LEND>

<L>37265<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlAyana<k2>mAlAyana
{#mAlAyana#}¦ {%mālāyana, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>37266<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlin<k2>mAlin
{#mAlin#}¦ {%mālin,%} &c. See p. 774, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>37267<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlindya<k2>mAlindya
{#mAlindya#}¦ {%mālindya, as,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain.
<LEND>

<L>37268<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlinya<k2>mAlinya
{#mAlinya#}¦ {%mālinya, am,%} n. (fr. {%malina%}), foul-
ness, uncleanness, dirtiness, pollution, defilement, im-
purity; sinfulness; trouble, affliction; blackness,
obscurity.
<LEND>

<L>37269<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlu<k2>mAlu
{#mAlu#}¦ {%mālu, us,%} m., N. of a particular
mixed caste; N. of one of Śiva's attendants; ({%us%}),
f. a species of creeper ({%= pattra-vallī, pattra-latā%});
a woman. {%—Mālu-dhāna, as,%} m. a particular kind
of snake; ({%ī%}), f. a species of creeper.
<LEND>

<L>37270<pc>0775-b<k1>mAluka<k2>mAluka
{%Māluka, as,%}¦ m. Ocimum Sanctum; [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-%}
{%māluka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37271<pc>0775-b<k1>mAluda<k2>mAluda
{#mAluda#}¦ {%māluda,%} (with Buddhists) a parti-
cular high number.
<LEND>

<L>37272<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlUra<k2>mAlUra
{#mAlUra#}¦ {%mālūra, as,%} m. a fruit tree, Ægle
Marmelos; Feronia Elephantum.
<LEND>

<L>37273<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlla<k2>mAlla
{#mAlla#}¦ {%mālla, as,%} m. (fr. {%malla%}), N. of a
particular mixed caste.
<LEND>

<L>37274<pc>0775-b<k1>mAllavAstava<k2>mAllavAstava
{%Māllavāstava, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%malla-vāstu%}), see
Schol. on Pāṇ. IV. 2, 120.
<LEND>

<L>37275<pc>0775-b<k1>mAllavI<k2>mAllavI
{%Māllavī,%}¦ f. a wrestling or boxing match, exhibi-
tion of wrestlers ({%= malla-yātrā%}).
<LEND>

<L>37276<pc>0775-b<k1>mAlvya<k2>mAlvya
{#mAlvya#}¦ {%mālvya, am,%} n. (fr. {%malva%}), foolish-
ness, inconsiderateness, thoughtlessness, awkwardness,
(opposed to {%dhairya.%})
<LEND>

<L>37277<pc>0775-b<k1>mAvat<k2>mAvat
{#mAvat#}¦ {%mā-vat,%} ind., Ved. like me.
<LEND>

<L>37278<pc>0775-b<k1>mAvilambam<k2>mAvilambam
{#mAvilambam#}¦ {%mā-vilambam, mā-vilambitam.%}
See under 1. {%mā,%} p. 764.
<LEND>

<L>37279<pc>0775-b<k1>mAvella<k2>mAvella
{#mAvella#}¦ {%māvella, as,%} m., N. of a son of Vasu
(prince of Cedi).
<LEND>

<L>37280<pc>0775-b<k1>mAvellaka<k2>mAvellaka
{#mAvellaka#}¦ {%māvellaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people; (also read {%māvelaka, māvelvaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>37281<pc>0775-b<k1>mASabdika<k2>mASabdika
{#mASabdika#}¦ {%māśabdika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mā-%}
{%śabdaḥ,%} see 1. {%mā%}), commanding silence, prohibi-
tive, prohibiting; a prohibitor, forbidder.
<LEND>

<L>37282<pc>0775-b<k1>mAza<k2>mAza
{#mAza#}¦ {%māṣa, as,%} m. a bean, (the sing. is
used for the plant, the pl. for the fruit); Phaseolus
Radiatus, a valued kind of pulse having seeds marked
with black and grey spots, ({%akṛṣṭā māṣāḥ,%}
‘wild beans,’ epithet of a Ṛṣi-gaṇa, to whom Ṛg-
[Page0775-c+ 79]
veda IX. 86, 1. is ascribed); a particular weight of
gold, &c. = 5 Kṛṣṇalas = (1/16) Suvarṇa, (the weight
in common use is said to be about seventeen grains
troy); a cutaneous eruption resembling beans; a
fool, blockhead. {%—Māṣa-taila, am,%} n. an oily
preparation from beans. {%—Māṣa-parṇī,%} f. a kind
of leguminous shrub, Glycine Debilis {%(= pṛśni-%}
{%parṇī)%}. {%—Māṣa-vardhaka, as,%} m. a goldsmith,
jeweler. {%—Māṣa-śarāvin, ī,%} m., N. of a man.
{%—Māṣa-śas,%} ind. after the manner of a Māṣa,
Māṣa-wise, Māṣa by Māṣa. {%—Māṣājya (˚ṣa-%}
{%āj˚), am,%} n. a dish of beans dressed or cooked with
ghee. {%—Māṣāda (˚ṣa-ada˚)%} or {%˚ṣa-āda%}), {%as,%} m.
‘bean-eater,’ a tortoise. {%—Māṣāśa (˚ṣa-āśa˚), as,%}
m. ‘bean-eater,’ a horse. {%—Māṣoṇa%} or {%māṣona%}
{%(˚ṣa-ūna˚), as, ā, am,%} minus a Māṣa, lacking one
Māṣa; see Gaṇa Giri-nadyādi to Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 10.
<LEND>

<L>37283<pc>0775-c<k1>mAzaka<k2>mAzaka
{%Māṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a bean; a particular weight of
gold, &c. = 7 or 8 Guñjās, = according to some,
about 4(1/2) grains; ({%as, ā, am%}), amounting to or
worth a particular number of Māṣas, (at the end of
comps., cf. {%pañca-m˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>37284<pc>0775-c<k1>mAzaSarAvi<k2>mAzaSarAvi
{%Māṣaśarāvi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic, (probably fr.
{%māṣa-śarāvin.%})
<LEND>

<L>37285<pc>0775-c<k1>mAzi<k2>mAzi
{%Māṣi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Māṣa.
<LEND>

<L>37286<pc>0775-c<k1>mAzika<k2>mAzika
{%Māṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ worth one Māṣa, amounting
to or worth a particular number of Māṣas, (at the
end of comps., cf. {%pañca-m˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>37287<pc>0775-c<k1>mAzIRa<k2>mAzIRa
{%Māṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sown with beans; ({%am%}), n.
a bean field, a field producing black kidney-beans.
<LEND>

<L>37288<pc>0775-c<k1>mAzya<k2>mAzya
{%Māṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fitted or suited for beans
({%= māṣīṇa%}); amounting to or worth a particular
number of Māṣas, (used in this sense at the end of
comps. after numerals, &c., cf. {%dvi-m˚, adhyardha-%}
{%m˚%}); ({%am%}), n. a field of kidney-beans.
<LEND>

<L>37289<pc>0775-c<k1>mAs<k2>mAs<h>1
{#mAs#} 1¦. {%mās, ās,%} n., Ved. {%= māṃs,%} flesh,
meat.
<LEND>

<L>37290<pc>0775-c<k1>mAs<k2>mAs<h>2
{#mAs#} 2¦. {%mās, ās,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%mā;%} accord-
ing to Pāṇini and Vopa-deva used in all cases except
the nom. sing. du. pl. and acc. sing. du., according
to the lexicographers and Garga also in the nom.
sing.; inst. pl., Ved. {%mādbhis%}), the moon; a
month; [cf. {%pūrṇa-m˚, puṣpa-m˚;%} cf. also Zend
<nsi>maoñh</nsi>, ‘moon, month;’ <nsi>maoñha</nsi>, ‘moon:’ Gr.
<lang n="greek">μήν</lang> for <lang n="greek">μήνς,</lang> Ion. <lang n="greek">μείς, μήν-η, μην-ιαῖο-ς,</lang> Æol.
<lang n="greek">μῆνν-ος</lang> for <lang n="greek">μῆνσ-ος:</lang> Lat. <nsi>mensis, Mena, men-</nsi>
<nsi>struus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>mena, menoth-s:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>ma-</nsi>
<nsi>not:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>mona, monadh:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>menu,</nsi>
‘moon;’ <nsi>ménesi-s,</nsi> ‘month:’ Old Slav. <nsi>mese-ci,</nsi>
‘moon, month.’]
<LEND>

<L>37291<pc>0775-c<k1>mAsa<k2>mAsa
{%Māsa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (but usually m.), the moon
(cf. {%pūrṇa-m˚;%} in this sense occurring in Ved. in
the comp. {%sūrya-māsā,%} sun and moon, see Ṛg-veda
VIII. 83, 2, X. 64, 3, &c., where, however, {%māsā%}
may be referred to 2. {%mās%}); a month or the twelfth
part of the Hindū year, (usually a lunar month con-
sisting of thirty Tithis; there may be also a Saura or
solar month, equal to the sun's passage through a
sign of the zodiac, a Sāvana month consisting of
thirty risings and settings of the sun, a Nakṣatra
month regulated by the lunar asterisms, and a Bār-
haspatya month depending on the motions of the
planet Jupiter; the lunar month being of two kinds,
as reckoned from the new or full moon, completes
six modes of monthly computation); ({%māse,%} after
the lapse of a month); a symbolical expression for
the number twelve; [cf. Lat. <nsi>mensi-s;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>mios;</nsi>
Cambro-Brit. <nsi>mis</nsi>] {%—Māsa-kālika, as, ā, am,%}
lasting for a month, available for a month, monthly;
{%māsakālikaṃ vetanam,%} a month's wages. {%—Māsa-%}
{%cārika, as, ā, am,%} practising (anything) for a month.
{%—Māsa-jāta, as, ā, am,%} one month old. {%—Māsa-%}
{%jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing the months; ({%as%}), m. a
species of gallinule {%(= dātyūha)%}. {%—Māsa-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} monthly [cf. {%ardha-m˚, saṃvatsara-%}
{%tama%}]; completing a full month {%(= māsa-pūraṇa).%}
{%—Māsa-tāla, as, ā, am,%} having time measured
monthwise? (apparently applied to the sound of cym-
bals &c., which lasts a long while). {%—Māsa-tulya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} equal to a month or to a number of months.
<LEND>
[Page0776-a+ 76]

<L>37292<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsatraya<k2>mAsatraya
{%—Māsa-traya, am,%}¦ n. three months. {%—Māsatra-%}
{%yāvadhi (˚ya-av˚),%} ind. for the space of three
months. {%—Māsa-deya, as, ā, am,%} to be paid or
discharged in a month (as a debt). {%—Māsa-dhā,%}
ind. by the month, monthly. {%—Māsa-pāka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. maturing or producing results in a month.
{%—Māsa-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} a month before, a month
earlier, (in this sense {%pūrva%} has not the pronominal
declension.) {%—Māsa-pramita, as, ā, am,%} ‘measured
by months,’ occurring once a month; ({%as%}), m. new
moon. {%—Māsa-praveśa, as,%} m. the beginning of a
month. {%—Māsapraveśānayana (˚śa-ān˚), am,%} n.,
N. of an astronomical work. {%—Māsa-bhukti, is,%} f.
the (sun's) monthly course; [cf. {%pakṣa-bhukti.%}]
{%—Māsa-māna, as,%} m. a year. {%—Māsa-varttikā,%}
f. a species of wagtail {%(= sarṣapī)%}. {%—Māsa-śas,%}
ind. by the month, monthly, month by month; for
months. {%—Māsa-sañcayika, as, ā, am,%} having
provisions for a month. {%—Māsa-stoma, as,%} m., Ved.,
N. of an Ekāha. {%—Māsādhipa (˚sa-adh˚), as,%} and
Ved. {%māsādhipati (˚sa-adh˚), is,%} m. the regent
or planet presiding over a month. {%—Māsānumā-%}
{%sika, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%māsa + anu-māsa%}), performed
from month to month, monthly. {%—Māsānta (˚sa-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. the end of a month, day of new moon.
{%—Māsāpavarga (˚sa-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. con-
tinuing a month at the most. {%—Māsāvadhika (˚sa-%}
{%av˚), as, ā, am,%} having a month as the limit, happen-
ing in the period of a month at the latest. {%—Māsā-%}
{%hāra (˚sa-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} taking food only once
a month. {%—Māsopavāsa (˚sa-up˚), as,%} m. fasting
a whole month. {%—Māsopavāsinī (˚sa-up˚),%} f. a
woman who fasts a whole month; (ironically) a
lascivious woman, procuress.
<LEND>

<L>37293<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsaka<k2>mAsaka
{%Māsaka = māsa,%}¦ a month; [cf. {%cāturmāsaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37294<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsala<k2>mAsala
{%Māsala, as,%}¦ m. a year.
<LEND>

<L>37295<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsika<k2>mAsika
{%Māsika, as, ī, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) re-
lating or pertaining to a month [cf. {%ardha-m˚%}];
monthly, happening every month (e. g. {%māsikaṃ%}
{%śrāddham,%} a monthly Śrāddha; cf. {%aṣṭa-m˚%});
lasting or continuing for a month (e. g. {%māsiko%}
{%vyādhiḥ,%} a sickness which continues for a month);
performed or paid &c. within or after a month,
payable in a month, to be restored in a month;
engaged for a month or by the month (as a teacher,
servant, &c.); dedicated to a particular month;
({%am%}), n. a particular Śrāddha or funeral rite per-
formed every new moon. {%—Māsikānna (˚ka-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the food given at a monthly oblation to the
Manes (Manu XI. 157).
<LEND>

<L>37296<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsIna<k2>mAsIna
{%Māsīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ one month old; monthly.
<LEND>

<L>37297<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsya<k2>mAsya
{%Māsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) a month
old, lasting or continuing a month.
<LEND>

<L>37298<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsana<k2>mAsana
{#mAsana#}¦ {%māsana, am,%} n. Vernonia Anthelmin-
thica; the seed of this plant (?).
<LEND>

<L>37299<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsara<k2>mAsara
{#mAsara#}¦ {%māsara, am,%} n., Ved. a particular
made dish, a mixture of the water in which rice and
millet are boiled with yeast, grasses, &c.; ({%as%}), m.
the meal of parched barley mixed with sour milk or
buttermilk and covered with grass; the scum of
boiled rice, rice-gruel.
<LEND>

<L>37300<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsurakarRa<k2>mAsurakarRa
{#mAsurakarRa#}¦ {%māsurakarṇa, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Masura-karṇa.
<LEND>

<L>37301<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsurI<k2>mAsurI
{#mAsurI#}¦ {%māsurī,%} f. a beard.
<LEND>

<L>37302<pc>0776-a<k1>mAsUra<k2>mAsUra
{#mAsUra#}¦ {%māsūra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%masūra%}), of
the shape of a lentil, lentil-shaped; consisting or
made of lentils or pulse.
<LEND>

<L>37303<pc>0776-a<k1>mAh<k2>mAh
{#mAh#}¦ {%māh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%māhati, -te,%} &c.,
to measure, mete.
<LEND>

<L>37304<pc>0776-a<k1>mAhakasTalI<k2>mAhakasTalI
{#mAhakasTalI#}¦ {%māhaka-sthalī,%} f., N. of a
place.
<LEND>

<L>37305<pc>0776-a<k1>mAhakasTalaka<k2>mAhakasTalaka
{%Māhakasthalaka,%}¦ pertaining to the above.
<LEND>

<L>37306<pc>0776-a<k1>mAhaki<k2>mAhaki
{#mAhaki#}¦ {%māhaki, is,%} m. (probably a patro-
nymic fr. {%mahaka%}), N. of a preceptor; [cf. {%chan-%}
{%doga-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37307<pc>0776-a<k1>mAhata<k2>mAhata
{#mAhata#}¦ {%māhata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mahat%}), see
[Page0776-b+ 79]
Gaṇa Utsādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 86; ({%am%}), n. great-
ness (?), see Gaṇa Pṛthvādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 122.
<LEND>

<L>37308<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhana<k2>mAhana
{#mAhana#}¦ {%māhana, as,%} m. a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>37309<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhA<k2>mAhA
{#mAhA#}¦ {%māhā,%} f. a cow; [cf. {%mahā, mahī,%}
{%māheyī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37310<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAkula<k2>mAhAkula
{#mAhAkula#}¦ {%māhākula%} or {%māhākulīna, as, ī,%}
{%am%} (fr. {%mahā-kula%}), of noble family or lineage,
nobly born, of illustrious descent.
<LEND>

<L>37311<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAcamasya<k2>mAhAcamasya
{%Māhācamasya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic from
Mahā-camasa.
<LEND>

<L>37312<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAcitti<k2>mAhAcitti
{%Māhācitti, is, is, i%}¦ (fr. {%mahā-citta%}), see Gaṇa
Sutaṅgamādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>37313<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAjanika<k2>mAhAjanika
{%Māhājanika%}¦ or {%māhājanīna, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%mahā-jana%}), fit for or suitable to great persons; fit
for merchants.
<LEND>

<L>37314<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAtmika<k2>mAhAtmika
{%Māhātmika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mahātman%}), high-
minded, magnanimous, noble, lofty, exalted, digni-
fied, majestic; of great sanctity or honour; glorious.
<LEND>

<L>37315<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAtmya<k2>mAhAtmya
{%Māhātmya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%mahātman%}), greatness
of soul, high-mindedness, magnanimity, exalted state
or position, greatness, majesty, dignity; the peculiar
efficacy or virtue of any divinity or sacred shrine; a
work giving an account of the merits of any holy
place or object; [cf. {%devī-m˚, bhāva-nārāyaṇa-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37316<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAnada<k2>mAhAnada
{%Māhānada, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mahā-nada%}), relating
to a great river, see Gaṇa Utsādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 86.
<LEND>

<L>37317<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAnasa<k2>mAhAnasa
{%Māhānasa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mahānasa%}), relating
or belonging to a large carriage; belonging to a
kitchen, &c.; see Gaṇa Utsādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 86.
<LEND>

<L>37318<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAnAmana<k2>mAhAnAmana
{%Māhānāmana%}¦ or {%māhānāmika%} or {%māhānām-%}
{%nika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mahā-nāmnī%}), Ved. relating to
or connected with the Mahā-nāmnī verses; {%= mahā-%}
{%nāmnyo brahmacaryam asya, = mahā-nāmnīś%}
{%carati%} or {%tāsāṃ vrataṃ carati%} [cf. {%mahānām-%}
{%nika%}]; {%māhānāmika%} or {%māhānāmnika, as,%} m.
a Brāhman versed in the above portion of the
Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>37319<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAputri<k2>mAhAputri
{%Māhāputri, is, is, i%}¦ (fr. {%mahā-putra%}), see Gaṇa
Sutaṅgamādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>37320<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAprARa<k2>mAhAprARa
{%Māhāprāṇa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mahā-prāṇa%}), relat-
ing to the hard breathing or aspirate, having the
hard breathing, &c.; see Gaṇa Utsādi to Pāṇ. IV.
1, 86.
<LEND>

<L>37321<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhABAgya<k2>mAhABAgya
{%Māhābhāgya, am,%}¦ n. {%= mahā-bhāgya,%} great
good fortune, great prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>37322<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhArajana<k2>mAhArajana
{%Māhārajana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mahā-rajana%}), dyed
with saffron.
<LEND>

<L>37323<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhArAjika<k2>mAhArAjika
{%Māhārājika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mahā-rāja%}), attached
or devoted to or honouring the reigning prince;
imperial, fit for a great king, royal.
<LEND>

<L>37324<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhArAjya<k2>mAhArAjya
{%Māhārājya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%mahā-rāja%}), the rank of
a reigning prince or great sovereign.
<LEND>

<L>37325<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhArAzwra<k2>mAhArAzwra
{%Māhārāṣṭra, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mahā-rāṣṭra%}),
belonging to the Mahrattas or Marāṭhas; ({%ī%}), f. the
Mahratta language, (more properly Marāṭhī.)
<LEND>

<L>37326<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAvArttika<k2>mAhAvArttika
{%Māhāvārttika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mahā-vārttika%}),
familiar with Kātyāyana's Vārttikas.
<LEND>

<L>37327<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAvratI<k2>mAhAvratI
{%Māhāvratī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%mahā-vrata%}), the doctrine of
the Pāśupatas.
<LEND>

<L>37328<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhAvratIya<k2>mAhAvratIya
{%Māhāvratīya,%}¦ a wrong reading for {%mahāvratīya,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37329<pc>0776-b<k1>mAhendra<k2>mAhendra
{%Māhendra, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mahendra%}), relating
or belonging to great Indra (e. g. {%māhendraṃ dha-%}
{%nus,%} great Indra's bow, i. e. the rainbow; {%māhen-%}
{%dram ambhas,%} great Indra's water, i. e. rain-water;
{%māhendrī diś,%} great Indra's region, i. e. the eastern
quarter); fit or proper for mighty Indra; eastern,
running or flowing eastward; ({%as%}), m. {%= śubha-%}
{%daṇḍa-viśeṣa;%} a patronymic; epithet of the
seventh Muhūrta; ({%ī%}), f. the energy of Indra, one
of the seven divine Mātṛs and one of the Mātṛs of
Skanda; a cow; (scil. {%diś%}), the east; (scil. {%ṛc%}), a
hymn in praise of Indra (Ved.). {%—Māhendra-ja,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. (with Jainas) N. of a class of gods. {%—Mā-%}
{%hendra-vāṇī,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>37330<pc>0776-b<k1>mAheSI<k2>mAheSI
{%Māheśī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%maheśa%}), a N. of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>37331<pc>0776-b<k1>mAheSvara<k2>mAheSvara
{%Māheśvara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%maheśvara%}), relating
or belonging to the great lord Śiva; worshipping
Śiva; ({%as%}), m. a worshipper of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. the
[Page0776-c+ 71]
energy of Śiva, one of the divine Mātṛs (= pārvatī
or Durgā); N. of a river; a species of climbing
plant {%(= yava-tiktā)%}. {%—Māheśvara-tantra%} and
{%māheśvarī-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Mā-%}
{%heśvaropapurāṇa (˚ra-up˚), am,%} n., N. of an
Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>37332<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhika<k2>mAhika
{#mAhika#}¦ {%māhika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(also read {%māhiṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>37333<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhikIprasTa<k2>mAhikIprasTa
{#mAhikIprasTa#}¦ {%māhikīprastha,%} N. of a village
in the north of India; see also Schol. on Pāṇ. IV.
2, 110.
<LEND>

<L>37334<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhitTi<k2>mAhitTi
{#mAhitTi#}¦ {%māhitthi, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a
preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>37335<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhitya<k2>mAhitya
{#mAhitya#}¦ {%māhitya, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Mahita, see Gaṇa Gargādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 105;
({%māhitās,%} m. pl., see Gaṇa Kaṇvādi to Pāṇ. IV.
2, 111.)
<LEND>

<L>37336<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhitra<k2>mAhitra
{#mAhitra#}¦ {%māhitra, am,%} n., scil. {%sūkta,%} epithet
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 185 (beginning with the
words {%mahi trīṇām%}).
<LEND>

<L>37337<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhina<k2>mAhina
{#mAhina#}¦ {%māhina, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%mah%}),
Ved. great, exalted, joyful, joyous, gladsome, exhila-
rated; giving pleasure, yielding enjoyment; an epi-
thet of the place in which Soma is prepared; ({%am%}),
n. sovereignty, dominion, kingdom. {%—Māhinā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. exhilarated, excited; endowed with
might, mighty; (Sāy. {%= mahimopeta.%})
<LEND>

<L>37338<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhira<k2>mAhira
{#mAhira#}¦ {%māhira, as,%} m. an epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>37339<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhiza<k2>mAhiza
{#mAhiza#}¦ {%māhiṣa, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%mahiṣa%}),
coming from or belonging to a buffalo or buffalo cow;
({%as%}), m., N. of a district; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people; [cf. {%mahiṣa.%}] {%—Māhiṣa-sthalī,%} f., N.
of a place.
<LEND>

<L>37340<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhizaka<k2>mAhizaka
{%Māhiṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a buffalo herdsman, buffalo
keeper; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>37341<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhizika<k2>mAhizika
{%Māhiṣika, as,%}¦ m. a buffalo herdsman, one who
lives by keeping or breeding buffaloes; (said to
mean) the paramour of an unchaste woman, one
who lives by the prostitution of his wife; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}),
f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>37342<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhizya<k2>mAhizya
{%Māhiṣya, as,%}¦ m. a particular mixed caste, the
son of a Kṣatriya father and a Vaiśya mother, (whose
business is attendance on cattle with the practice of
astronomy and music.)
<LEND>

<L>37343<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhizmatI<k2>mAhizmatI
{#mAhizmatI#}¦ {%māhiṣmatī,%} f. of {%māhiṣmata%}
(fr. {%mahiṣmat%}), N. of a city founded by Mahiṣ-
mat or by Mucu-kunda.
<LEND>

<L>37344<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhizmateyaka<k2>mAhizmateyaka
{%Māhiṣmateyaka,%}¦ see Gaṇa Kattryādi to Pāṇ.
IV. 2, 95.
<LEND>

<L>37345<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhIna<k2>mAhIna
{#mAhIna#}¦ {%māhīna, as,%} m., Ved. (perhaps) a
patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>37346<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhIyatva<k2>mAhIyatva
{#mAhIyatva#}¦ {%māhīyatva,%} Ved. beginning with
the word {%mahīya-tva%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>37347<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhuradatta<k2>mAhuradatta
{#mAhuradatta#}¦ {%māhuradatta,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>37348<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhula<k2>mAhula
{#mAhula#}¦ {%māhula, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>37349<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhendra<k2>mAhendra
{#mAhendra#}¦ {%māhendra.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37350<pc>0776-c<k1>mAheya<k2>mAheya
{#mAheya#}¦ {%māheya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mahī%}), made
of earth, earthen, relating to the earth, terrestrial;
({%as%}), m. the son of the earth, the planet Mars;
coral; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ī%}), f. a cow.
<LEND>

<L>37351<pc>0776-c<k1>mAhela<k2>mAhela
{#mAhela#}¦ {%māhela, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>37352<pc>0776-c<k1>mi<k2>mi<h>1
{#mi#} 1¦. {%mi%} (in some of its senses connected
with rt. 3. {%mā%}), cl. 5. P. A. {%minoti, minute,%}
{%mamau%} or {%mimāya, mimye, māsyati, -te, amāsīt,%}
{%amāsta, mātum,%} Ved. to fix or fasten in the earth;
to found, establish; to erect, build; to measure; to
judge, observe, perceive; to cast, throw, throw away
or about, scatter; [cf. {%mayūkha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37353<pc>0776-c<k1>mit<k2>mit
{%Mit, t,%}¦ f., Ved. a post (erected or fixed in the
ground), a column; [cf. {%garta-m˚, upa-m˚, pra-%}
{%ti-m˚.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0777-a+ 75]

<L>37354<pc>0777-a<k1>mita<k2>mita<h>1
1. {%mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. fixed in the earth,
founded, established; erected, built; cast, thrown,
thrown away, scattered. {%—Mita-jñu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
having well-compacted or firm knees; (Sāy. {%= saṅ-%}
{%kucita-jānu; mita-jñubhiḥ = prahvair jānubhiḥ,%}
with bended knees.) — 1. {%mita-medha, as, ā, am,%}
having firmly established strength or power.
<LEND>

<L>37355<pc>0777-a<k1>miti<k2>miti<h>1
1. {%miti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. fixing, erecting, establishing.
<LEND>

<L>37356<pc>0777-a<k1>mi<k2>mi<h>2
{#mi#} 2¦. {%mi,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%mināti, minīte,%} &c.,
= rt. 1. {%mī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37357<pc>0777-a<k1>mikz<k2>mikz
{#mikz#}¦ {%mikṣ%} or {%mimikṣ%} (thought by some
to be desiderative forms fr. a lost rt. {%miś,%} contained
in the words {%miśra, miśla,%} but referred by native
commentators to the rt. 1. {%mih,%} q. v.), {%mimikṣati,%}
{%mimikṣus, mimikṣe,%} to mix, stir up, to give a
relish to; (A.) to mix, be mixed: Caus. {%mekṣayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to stir up, mix, mingle; [cf. {%myakṣ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37358<pc>0777-a<k1>miG<k2>miG
{#miG#}¦ {%migh%} = rt. 1. {%mih,%} only in {%nime-%}
{%ghamāna, as, ā, am%} [cf. {%megha%}], Ved.
emitting moisture; (Sāy. {%= nyañci avāṅmukhāni%}
{%vṛṣṭy-udakāni siñcat,%} sprinkling down rain-
water.)
<LEND>

<L>37359<pc>0777-a<k1>micitA<k2>micitA
{#micitA#}¦ {%micitā,%} f., N. of a river; (various
reading for {%niścitā.%})
<LEND>

<L>37360<pc>0777-a<k1>micCaka<k2>micCaka
{#micCaka#}¦ {%micchaka, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist
patriarch.
<LEND>

<L>37361<pc>0777-a<k1>miC<k2>miC
{#miC#}¦ {%mich,%} cl. 6. P. {%micchati, mimiccha,%}
{%micchitum,%} to annoy, hurt, pain; to
obstruct, hinder.
<LEND>

<L>37362<pc>0777-a<k1>miYj<k2>miYj
{#miYj#}¦ {%miñj,%} cl. 10. P. {%miñjayati, -yitum,%}
to speak; to shine.
<LEND>

<L>37363<pc>0777-a<k1>miYjikAmiYjika<k2>miYjikAmiYjika
{#miYjikAmiYjika#}¦ {%miñjikā-miñjika, am,%} n.,
N. of two beings sprung from the seed of Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>37364<pc>0777-a<k1>miRmiRa<k2>miRmiRa
{#miRmiRa#}¦ {%miṇmiṇa, as, ā, am,%} speaking
indistinctly through the nose.
<LEND>

<L>37365<pc>0777-a<k1>mit<k2>mit
{#mit#}¦ {%mit.%} See under rt. 1. {%mi,%} p. 776,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>37366<pc>0777-a<k1>mita<k2>mita<h>2
{#mita#} 2¦. {%mita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%mā;%} for
1. {%mita%} see above), measured, meted, measured
off, measured out, containing a particular measure,
measuring, ({%akṣarāṇi ṣaṭ-triṃśad Gāyatrī%}
{%mitā,%} the Gāyatrī measuring or consisting of
thirty-six syllables); defined, limited, bounded;
measured, moderate, regular, scanty, frugal, sparing,
little, brief, {{succint->succinct||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}, concise (e. g. {%mitaṃ dadāti,%}
he gives little or sparingly; {%mitā ṭīkā,%} a concise
commentary); examined, investigated, known, un-
derstood; ({%as%}), m., N. of a divine being (associated
with Sammita). {%—Mitaṅ-gama, as, ā, am,%} taking
measured steps, going deliberately or slowly; ({%as,%}
{%ā%}), m. f. an elephant. {%—2. mita-dru, us, us, u,%} run-
ning or moving in a measured manner (Sāy. {%= pari-%}
{%mita-gati;%} but in Ṛg-veda VII. 7, 1, Sāy. explains
{%mita-dru%} by {%dagdha-druma,%} consuming forests);
({%us%}), m. the ocean, sea. {%—Mita-dhvaja, as,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Mita-bhāṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} speaking
in a measured or deliberate manner, speaking seldom
or sparingly. {%—Mita-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} speaking
little, seldom speaking; ({%iṇī%}), f., N. of two concise
commentaries. {%—Mita-bhukta, as, ā, am,%} or {%mita-%}
{%bhuj, k, k, k,%} eating sparingly, moderate in diet,
moderate, temperate. {%—Mita-mati, is, is, i,%} narrow-
minded, having a contracted understanding. {%—2. mita-%}
{%medha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having few sacrifices. {%—Mi-%}
{%tam-paca, as, ā, am,%} cooking a measured portion
of food, cooking little; cooking food by measure, a
miser, sparing, niggardly, stingy, covetous; cooking
little (as applied to a culinary utensil), small-sized;
[cf. {%kim-paca.%}] {%—Mita-rāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%} roaring or
sounding moderately or in a measured manner, (used
in Nirukta XI. 13. to explain {%marut;%} according to
others a wrong reading for {%a-m˚,%} roaring beyond
measure.) {%—Mita-rocin,%} used in Nirukta XI. 13. to
explain {%marut%}. {%—Mita-vāc, k, k, k,%} of measured
speech, speaking little, prudent or deliberate in
[Page0777-b+ 80]
speaking. {%—Mita-vyayin, ī, inī, i,%} one who mea-
sures expenses, economical. {%—Mita-śāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
sleeping little or sparingly. {%—Mitākṣara (˚ta-ak˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having measured syllables, composed in
verse, metrical; short and comprehensive (as a
speech); ({%ā%}), f., N. of various concise commentaries;
of a celebrated commentary by Vijñāneśvara on
Yājñavalkya's Dharma-śāstra; of a commentary by
Hara-datta on the Gautama-smṛti; of a commentary
by Nityānandāśrama on the Chāndogya Upaniṣad.
{%—Mitākṣarā-kāra, as,%} m. ‘author of the Mitā-
kṣarā,’ an epithet of Vijñāneśvara. {%—Mitākṣarā-%}
{%vyākhyāna, am,%} n., N. of a commentary by
Lakṣmī-devī on Vijñāneśvara's Mitākṣarā. {%—Mi-%}
{%tākṣarā-siddhānta-saṅgraha, as,%} m., N. of an
abbreviation by Rādhā-manohara-śarman of Vijñā-
neśvara's Mitākṣarā; ({%as, ā, am%}), speaking with
caution, acting with circumspection. {%—Mitārtha (˚ta-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m. measured or accurate meaning; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am,%}), of measured or restricted meaning. {%—Mi-%}
{%tārthaka (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} of measured mean-
ing, speaking with caution; ({%as%}), m. a cautious
envoy. {%—Mitārtha-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} speaking
words of well-weighed or measured import. {%—Mitā-%}
{%śana (˚ta-aś˚), as, ī, am,%} eating little or sparingly,
moderate in diet, abstemious. {%—Mitāhāra (˚ta-āh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. moderate food, scanty diet, moderation in
eating; ({%as, ā, am%}), taking little food, sparing in
diet. {%—Mitokti (˚ta-uk˚), is,%} m. moderate or in-
frequent speech, speaking little.
<LEND>

<L>37367<pc>0777-b<k1>miti<k2>miti<h>2
2. {%miti, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. {%miti%} see col. 1), measuring,
measure, weight, value, quantity; determining; accu-
rate knowledge [cf. {%māti%}]; proof, evidence.
<LEND>

<L>37368<pc>0777-b<k1>mitvA<k2>mitvA
{%Mitvā,%}¦ ind. having measured, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37369<pc>0777-b<k1>mitra<k2>mitra<h>1
{#mitra#} 1¦. {%mitra, as,%} m. (originally {%mittra,%}
fr. rt. 2. {%mid,%} or according to some fr. rt. {%mith +%}
{%tra;%} cf. {%medin%}), a companion, associate, friend, (in
this sense generally neut., except in Ved.; see {%am,%} n.
below); N. of an Āditya or form of the sun (as a
Vedic deity commonly associated with Varuṇa, both
Mitra and Varuṇa being frequently invoked together
with another of the Ādityas called Aryaman; Mitra
is regarded in Ṛg-veda VIII. 47, 9, as son of Aditi;
elsewhere he is called the deity of the constellation
Anu-rādhā, and father of Ut-sarga: according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 89, 3, Mitra presides over the
day as Varuṇa over the night; hence the closest con-
nection subsists between these two deities, who are
more frequently invoked together than Varuṇa is
invoked singly; together they uphold and rule the
earth and sky, together they guard the world, toge-
ther they promote religious rites, avenge sin, and
are the lords of truth and light; associated with
Aryaman, they are represented as awful deities, haters,
and dispellers of all falsehood; in only one hymn,
Ṛg-veda III. 59, Mitra is celebrated alone, and is
there described as calling men to activity, sustaining
earth and sky, and beholding all creatures with un-
winking eye; in Ṛg-veda VII. 61, 1, the sun is
described as the eye of Mitra-Varuṇa); the sun;
N. of a Marut; of a son of Vasiṣṭha; of the third
Muhūrta; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras, (also read
{%Citra%}); N. of the mother of Maitreya and Maitreyī;
N. of one of the wives of Daśa-ratha, (cf. {%su-%}
{%mitrā;%} according to some, in this sense {%mitrī%});
({%am%}), n. a friend, ({%aurasam mitram,%} a friend con-
nected by blood relationship); an ally, the next
neighbour of a king; epithet of a mode of fighting,
(also read {%bhinna%}); friendship (Ved.). {%—Mitra-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. the making of friends, making
one's self friends. {%—Mitra-karman, a,%} n. a friendly
office. {%—Mitra-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desirous of friends,
wishing for friends. {%—Mitra-kārya, am,%} n. the
business of a friend, a friendly office, friendship.
{%—Mitra-kṛt, t,%} m. ‘friend-maker,’ N. of a son of
the twelfth Manu. {%—Mitra-kṛti, is,%} f., Ved. (ac-
cording to Sāy.) a friendly office. {%—Mitra-kaustu-%}
{%bha, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mitra-kru%} or {%mitra-krū,%}
Ved. (probably) N. of an evil being; see Ṛg-veda
X. 89, 14. {%—Mitra-gupta, as, ā, am,%} protected by
[Page0777-c+ 81]
Mitra; ({%as%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Mitra-gupti, is,%}
f. protection of friends. {%—Mitra-ghna, as, ī, am,%}
‘friend-killing,’ treacherous; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Rā-
kṣasa; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river, (also read {%citra-%}
{%ghnī.%}) {%—Mitra-jña, as,%} m., N. of a demon (said
to steal oblations). {%—Mitra-tā,%} f. or {%mitra-tva, am,%}
n. friendship, friendliness, alliance, intimacy, ({%mi-%}
{%tratāṃ samprāptaḥ,%} one who has become a friend.)
{%—Mitra-tūrya, am,%} n., Ved. victory or triumph of
friends. {%—Mitra-deva, as,%} m., N. of a man; of one
of the sons of the twelfth Manu. {%—Mitra-druh,%}
{%dhruk, k, k,%} or {%-dhruṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} (see 2. {%druh%}) or {%mitra-%}
{%drohin, ī, iṇī, i,%} seeking to injure a friend, the be-
trayer of a friend, a false or treacherous friend; [cf.
Zend <nsi>mithra-druj.</nsi>] {%—Mitra-droha, as,%} m. injury
or betrayal of a friend. {%—Mitra-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} or
{%mitra-dveṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} hating or injuring a friend;
({%ṭ%}), m. a treacherous friend. {%—Mitra-dharman, ā,%}
m., N. of a demon (said to steal oblations). {%—Mitra-%}
{%dhā,%} ind., Ved. in a friendly manner. {%—Mitra-%}
{%dhita, am,%} n. or {%mitra-dhiti, is,%} f. or {%mitra-dheya,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. a covenant or contract of friendship,
friendly compact. {%—Mitra-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of
friends or of friendship. {%—Mitra-pada, am,%} n.
‘Mitra's place,’ N. of a particular locality. {%—Mitra-%}
{%pratīkṣā,%} f. regard for a friend. {%—Mitra-bandhu-%}
{%hīna, as, ā, am,%} destitute of friends or relations.
{%—Mitra-bāhu, us,%} m., N. of one of the sons of
the twelfth Manu; of a son of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Mitra-%}
{%bha, am,%} n., Ved. a friendly constellation, Mitra's
Nakṣatra, i. e. Anu-rādhā. {%—Mitra-bhānu, us,%} m.,
N. of a king. {%—Mitra-bhāva, as,%} m. a state of
friendship, friendliness, friendly disposition. {%—Mitra-%}
{%bhū, ūs,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mitra-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
entertaining or receiving a friend. {%—Mitra-bheda,%}
{%as,%} m. separation of friends, breach of friendship;
N. of the first book of the Pañca-tantra. {%—Mitra-%}
{%mahas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. (perhaps) having plenty of
friends, rich in friends; having a friendly light,
causing a favourable lustre; (Sāy.) {%= mitrāṇām%}
{%pūjaka, anukūla-dīptimat, hitakāri-tejas,%} &c.
{%—Mitra-miśra, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Vīra-mitrodaya. {%—Mitra-yajña, as,%} m., N. of a
man. {%—Mitra-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. joining one's self
to a friend, joining a friend to one's self; ({%k%}), m.,
N. of a man; ({%jas%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants.
{%—Mitra-yuddha, am,%} n. a contest of friends, a
strife or quarrel between friends, conflict of allies,
feud. {%—Mitra-labdhi, is,%} f. {%= mitra-lābha%} below.
{%—Mitra-lābha, as,%} m. acquisition of friends or of
friendship, forming friendship; N. of the first book
of the Hitopadeśa. {%—Mitra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
friends, possessing friends; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a demon
(said to steal oblations); N. of a son of the twelfth
Manu; of a son of Kṛṣṇa; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a
daughter of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Mitra-vatsala, as, ā, am,%}
affectionate towards friends, winning, captivating,
engaging. {%—Mitra-vana, am,%} n. ‘Mitra's wood,’
N. of a forest. {%—Mitra-varaṇa, am,%} n. choice of
friends, the act of choosing of friends or acquaint-
ances. {%—Mitra-varcas, ās,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mitra-%}
{%vardha,%} see Gaṇa Dhūmādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 127;
[cf. {%maitravardhaka.%}] {%—Mitra-vardhana, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} making friends prosperous, prospering friends
(Ved.); N. of a demon (said to steal oblations).
{%—Mitra-vardhra,%} see Gaṇa Dhūmādi to Pāṇ. IV.
2, 127. {%—Mitra-varman, ā,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mi-%}
{%tra-vāha, as,%} m., N. of a son of the twelfth Manu.
{%—Mitra-vid, t,%} m. ‘a friend-knower,’ one who knows
friends, (various reading for {%mantra-vid,%} a spy.)
{%—Mitra-vinda, as, ā, am,%} ‘finding friends, acquir-
ing friends,’ epithet of an Agni; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
son of the twelfth Manu; of a son of Kṛṣṇa; of
a preceptor; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of an Iṣṭi; N. of a wife
of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Mitra-viṣaya, as,%} m. friendship.
{%—Mitra-vaira, am,%} n., Ved. dissension among
friends. {%—Mitra-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of various
persons. {%—Mitra-śis, īs, īs, īs%} ({%śis%} fr. rt. {%śās,%} cf.
{%āśis%}), ruling over friends or allies; see Vopa-deva
XXVI. 69. {%—Mitra-saptamī,%} f. epithet of the
seventh day in the light half of the month Mārga-
[Page0778-a+ 80]
śīrṣa. {%—Mitra-samprāpti, is,%} f. ‘acquistion of
friends,’ N. of the second book of the Pañca-tantra.
{%—Mitra-saha, as, ā, am,%} tolerant of friends, in-
dulgent towards friends; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king,
(also called {%Kalmāṣa-pāda%}); N. of a Brāhman.
{%—Mitra-sāha, as, ā, am, = mitra-saha%} above.
{%—Mitra-sāhvayā,%} f., N. of a divine being. {%—Mi-%}
{%tra-sena, as,%} m., N. of a son of the twelfth Manu;
of a grandson of Kṛṣṇa; of a Buddhist; of a king
of the Draviḍa country. {%—Mitra-hatyā,%} f. the mur-
der of a friend. {%—Mitra-han, ā,%} m. one who kills
or murders a friend; [cf. {%mitra-ghna.%}] {%—Mitra-%}
{%hū = mitraṃ hvayati,%} see Vopa-deva XXVI. 72.
{%—Mitrākhya (˚ra-ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} named after
Mitra. {%—Mitrācāra (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m. treatment of
friends, conduct to be observed towards a friend.
{%—Mitrātithi (˚ra-at˚), is,%} m., Ved. a proper N.
{%—Mitrānugrahaṇa (˚ra-an˚), am,%} n. the act of
favouring friends or causing them prosperity. {%—Mi-%}
{%trābhidroha (˚ra-abh˚), as,%} m. {%= mitra-droha,%}
q. v. {%—Mitrā-varuṇa, au,%} m. du. Mitra and Varuṇa,
see p. 777, under 1. {%mitra;%} ({%mitrā-varuṇayor aya-%}
{%nam,%} N. of a particular festival.) {%—Mitrāvaruṇa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. accompanied by Mitra and
Varuṇa. {%—Mitrāvaruṇīya, am,%} n. the office of the
Ṛtvij Mitrā-varuṇa. {%—Mitrā-vasu, us,%} m., N. of a
son of Viśvā-vasu, king of the Siddhas. {%—Mitrī-kṛ,%}
cl. 8. P. A. {%—karoti, -kurute,%} &c., to make a friend,
make any one a friend, make any one friendly to
one's self. {%—Mitrī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to
become a friend, make friends with (with inst.).
{%—Mitrī-bhūya,%} ind. becoming a friend or friendly.
{%—Mitreru (˚ra-īru˚), us, us, u,%} Ved. (Sāy.)
troubling friends, disturbing friends or friendly wor-
shippers {%(= mitrāṇāṃ yajamānānām īrayitṛ, =%}
{%mitrāṇām bādhaka)%}. {%—Mitreśvara (˚ra-īś˚),%} scil.
{%hara,%} N. of a statue of Śiva erected by Mitra-śarman.
{%—Mitrodaya (˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m. a friend's welfare,
the success or prosperity of a friend; sunrise; N. of
a work by Mitra-miśra on jurisprudence, (abbre-
viated from {%vīra-m˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>37370<pc>0778-a<k1>mitra<k2>mitra<h>2
2. {%mitra,%}¦ Nom. P. {%mitrati,%} &c., to be friendly,
act in a friendly manner.
<LEND>

<L>37371<pc>0778-a<k1>mitraka<k2>mitraka
{%Mitraka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37372<pc>0778-a<k1>mitraya<k2>mitraya
{%Mitraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%mitrayati,%} &c., (probably) to
befriend.
<LEND>

<L>37373<pc>0778-a<k1>mitrayu<k2>mitrayu
{%Mitrayu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. {%mitraya%} above), friendly-
minded; winning or acquiring friends, attractive; {%=%}
{%loka-yātrābhijña,%} possessing worldly prudence, ac-
quainted with the traditions and customs of mankind;
({%us%}), m. a friend; N. of a teacher; of a son of
Divo-dāsa; ({%avas%}), m. pl., N. of a race.
<LEND>

<L>37374<pc>0778-a<k1>mitrAya<k2>mitrAya
{%Mitrāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%mitrāyate,%} &c., (probably) to
desire or wish for a friend.
<LEND>

<L>37375<pc>0778-a<k1>mitrAyu<k2>mitrAyu
{%Mitrāyu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. {%mitrāya%} above), desiring
a friend, seeking friendship (Ved.); ({%us%}), m., N. of
a son of Divo-dāsa, (also read {%mitreyu%}); N. of a
preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>37376<pc>0778-a<k1>mitrin<k2>mitrin
{%Mitrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. befriended, having a friend;
united by friendship.
<LEND>

<L>37377<pc>0778-a<k1>mitriya<k2>mitriya
{%Mitriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ friendly, coming from or
relating to a friend.
<LEND>

<L>37378<pc>0778-a<k1>mitrIya<k2>mitrIya
{%Mitrīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%mitrīyati,%} &c., to treat any
one as a friend or companion, to seek to make a
friend of any one.
<LEND>

<L>37379<pc>0778-a<k1>mitrIyat<k2>mitrIyat
{%Mitrīyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ becoming a friend, acting
as a friend, deserving friendship.
<LEND>

<L>37380<pc>0778-a<k1>mitriya<k2>mitriya
{%Mitriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= mitriya;%} (at the end
of a comp.) see Gaṇa Vargyādi to Pāṇ. VI. 2, 131.
<LEND>

<L>37381<pc>0778-a<k1>mitvA<k2>mitvA
{#mitvA#}¦ {%mitvā.%} See p. 777, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37382<pc>0778-a<k1>miT<k2>miT
{#miT#}¦ {%mith%} (connected with rts. {%meth,%}
{%midh, medh,%} 1. {%mid, med, mil%}), cl. 1.
P. A. {%methati, mithati, methate,%} &c., to meet or
associate with; to unite, pair; to meet as rivals, be
mutually antagonistic, wrangle, contradict, revile; to
take hold of, grasp; to understand, perceive, know;
to hurt, injure; to strike, kill.
<LEND>

<L>37383<pc>0778-a<k1>miTatyA<k2>miTatyA
{%Mithatyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. alternately, emulously; (ac-
cording to Sāy. {%mithatyā%} is inst. c. of {%mithati =%}
{%hiṃsā.%})
<LEND>
[Page0778-b+ 81]

<L>37384<pc>0778-b<k1>miTas<k2>miTas
{%Mithas,%}¦ ind. together, mutually, reciprocally, with
each other, in common, to one another; from each
other; between one another, secretly, privately, in
secret; alternately, by turns. {%—Mithas-tur,%} Ved.
following closely on one another (as day and night),
alternating, emulous, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
VI. 49, 3, {%mithas-turā = parasparam bādha-%}
{%yantyau,%} mutually opposing each other.) {%—Mitha-%}
{%spṛdhya, as, ā, am,%} emulating or vying together,
mutually emulous. {%—Mitho-avadya-pa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. mutually averting calamities. {%—Mitho-yodha, as,%}
m., Ved. hand to hand fighting with one another.
<LEND>

<L>37385<pc>0778-b<k1>miTu<k2>miTu
{%Mithu,%}¦ ind., Ved. falsely, wrongly, pervertedly,
confusedly.
<LEND>

<L>37386<pc>0778-b<k1>miTuna<k2>miTuna
{%Mithuna, as, ā, am,%}¦ paired, forming a pair;
({%as%}), m., Ved. a pair (male and female, boy and
girl, son and daughter), a twin couple, a brace,
couple or pair in general, (in Ved. usually m. du.,
e. g. {%saptī mithunā,%} a pair of horses; {%go-mithunau,%}
a pair of cows; in the later language mostly neut.);
({%am%}), n. a pair, couple, brace; twins; union, junction;
congress of the sexes, pairing, cohabitation, copula-
tion; the sign of the zodiac Gemini, or the third arc
of 30° in a circle, (in this sense also {%as,%} m.); (in
gram.) a root compounded with a preposition; a
term applied to a particular kind of small statue at
the entrance of a temple. {%—Mithuna-tva, am,%} n.
or {%mithuna-bhāva, as,%} m. the state of being a
pair or forming a couple. {%—Mithuna-vratin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} devoted to sexual cohabitation, practising copula-
tion. {%—Mithunī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to
cause to pair or couple, effect the union of the sexes.
{%—Mithunī-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} coupling together, co-
habiting, having sexual intercourse. {%—Mithunī-bhā-%}
{%va, as,%} m. copulation, cohabitation, amorous incli-
nation. {%—Mithunī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to
become paired, to be joined or united in couples, be
arranged in pairs. {%—Mithunī-bhūya,%} ind. being
joined in pairs, forming or uniting in couples. {%—Mi-%}
{%thune-cara, as, ā, am,%} going in pairs, living in
pairs; ({%as%}), m. the Cakra-vāka.
<LEND>

<L>37387<pc>0778-b<k1>miTunAya<k2>miTunAya
{%Mithunāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%mithunāyate,%} &c., to co-
pulate, couple, pair, cohabit sexually.
<LEND>

<L>37388<pc>0778-b<k1>miTuyA<k2>miTuyA
{%Mithuyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. invertedly, distortedly, per-
versely, falsely, incorrectly; [cf. {%mithyā%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>37389<pc>0778-b<k1>miTus<k2>miTus
{%Mithus,%}¦ ind., Ved. {%= mithuyā%} above, ({%mithur%}
{%bhū,%} to turn out badly, fail); reciprocally, mutually
({%= mithas%}).
<LEND>

<L>37390<pc>0778-b<k1>miTUdfS<k2>miTUdfS
{%Mithū-dṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. seen or appearing alter-
nately.
<LEND>

<L>37391<pc>0778-b<k1>miTo<k2>miTo
{%Mitho,%}¦ ind. {%= mithas,%} q. v., cf. Gaṇa Svarādi to
Pāṇ. I. 1, 37.
<LEND>

<L>37392<pc>0778-b<k1>miTyA<k2>miTyA
{%Mithyā,%}¦ ind. (probably a contracted form for
{%mithuyā%} above), invertedly, distortedly, contrarily,
perversely, falsely, incorrectly, wrongly, improperly,
({%katham mayi mithyā pravartase,%} why dost thou
act improperly towards me ?); untruly, deceitfully,
in a lying manner, (with {%vad, vac, brū,%} to speak
falsely, to make a false assertion); in vain; {%mithyā%}
at the beginning of a comp. is often equivalent to an
adj., and translatable by ‘false, untrue, sham, unjust,’
&c.; Mithyā, Untruth, is personified as the wife of
A-dharma. {%—Mithyā-karman, a,%} n. false act, failure.
{%—Mithyā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make false,
falsify, utter a falsehood, contradict: Caus. P. {%-kāra-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to pronounce [a word] wrongly once:
Caus. A. {%-kārayate,%} to pronounce wrongly over and
over again; see Pāṇ. 1. 3, 71. {%—Mithyā-kopa, as,%}
m. feigned resentment, pretended anger. {%—Mithyā-%}
{%kraya, as,%} m. a false price. {%—Mithyā-graha%} or
{%mithyāgraha (˚yā-āg˚), as,%} m. improper persist-
ency, useless obstinacy. {%—Mithyācarat (˚yā-āc˚),%}
{%an, antī, at,%} acting or practising falsehood. {%—Mi-%}
{%thyā-caryā,%} f. false behaviour, hypocrisy. {%—Mithyā-%}
{%cāra (˚yā-āc˚), as, ā, am,%} dealing falsely, per-
versely; hypocritical, sanctimonious; ({%as%}), m. im-
proper or incorrect conduct, wrong treatment (in
medicine). {%—Mithyā-jalpita, am,%} n. a false report
or rumour. {%—Mithyā-jñāna, am,%} n. a false con-
ception, misapprehension, error, mistake. {%—Mithyā-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. falsity, unreality; illusion; (with Jainas)
[Page0778-c+ 78]
the lowest of the fourteen steps which lead to final
emancipation; inversion; perversion (as one of the
eighteen faults of a Jaina system). {%—Mithyātvin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} being in a state of illusion. {%—Mithyā-dar-%}
{%śana, am,%} n. a false appearance; false doctrine,
heresy. {%—Mithyā-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. false doctrine, he-
resy, denial of future existence, atheism. {%—Mithyā-%}
{%dhyavasiti (˚yā-adh˚), is,%} f. ‘fruitless trouble,’
epithet of a figure of speech expressing the impossi-
bility of a thing by making it depend upon some
impossible contingency (e. g. ‘only one who wears a
crown of air can engage the affections of a harlot’).
{%—Mithyā-nirasana, am,%} n. denial by oath.
{%—Mithyā-paṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} one who makes a
false pretence to learning, educated or learned only
in appearance. {%—Mithyāpavāda (˚yā-ap˚), as,%} m.
a false accusation. {%—Mithyā-puruṣa, as,%} m. a mere
sham person, a man only in appearance. {%—Mithyā-%}
{%pratijña, as, ā, am,%} false to one's promise, faithless,
treacherous. {%—Mithyā-pravādin, ī, inī, i,%} speaking
falsely, lying. {%—Mithyā-pravṛtti, is,%} f. an erro-
neous course of action, wrong function (of the senses),
misdirected effort. {%—Mithyā-prasupta, as, ā, am,%}
falsely or pretendedly asleep, feigning sleep. {%—Mi-%}
{%thyā-phala, am,%} n. an imaginary or vain advantage
or reward. {%—Mithyābhigṛdhna (˚yā-abh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} unjustly covetous. {%—Mithyābhidhā (˚yā-abh˚),%}
f. a false name. {%—Mithyābhidhāna (˚yā-abh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a false or untrue expression or assertion.
{%—Mithyābhiyoga (˚yā-abh˚), as,%} m. an unjust
claim, a false accusation, groundless charge. {%—Mi-%}
{%thyābhiśaṃsana, am,%} n. or {%mithyābhiśasti (˚yā-%}
{%abh˚), is,%} f. a false accusation. {%—Mithyābhiśaṃsin%}
{%(˚yā-abh˚), ī,%} m. a false or unjust accuser. {%—Mithyā-%}
{%bhiśāpa, as,%} m. an unjust claim, false accusation;
a false prediction. {%—Mithyā-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
&c., to be false, &c. {%—Mithyā-mati, is,%} f. false
opinion, error, ignorance, mistake. {%—Mithyā-māna,%}
{%as,%} m. false pride. {%—Mithyā-yoga, as,%} m. wrong
use or employment. {%—Mithyā-vadat, an, antī, at,%}
speaking falsely. {%—Mithyā-vadhyānukīrtana (˚ya-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. the proclaiming that any one has been
unjustly sentenced to death. {%—Mithyā-vākya, am,%}
n. an untruthful speech, falsehood, lie. {%—Mithyā-%}
{%vāc, k, k, k,%} whose words are false, untruthful, lying.
{%—Mithyā-vāda, as,%} m. false or untruthful speech,
a falsehood, lie; declaring the falsehood of an accu-
sation; {%(as, ā, am),%} speaking untruly, lying. {%—Mi-%}
{%thyā-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} speaking untruly, lying, a
liar; declaring an accusation to be false. {%—Mithyā-%}
{%vārttā,%} f. false report. {%—Mithyā-vyāpāra, as,%} m.
wrong occupation, meddling with another's affairs.
{%—Mithya-sākṣin, ī,%} m. a false witness. {%—Mithyā-%}
{%sākṣi-pradātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} bringing forward false
witnessess. {%—Mithyāhāra (˚yā-āh˚), as,%} m. impro-
per nourishment, wrong diet. {%—Mithyottara (˚yā-%}
{%ut˚), am,%} n. (in law) an untrue answer, false or
prevaricating reply. {%—Mithyopacāra (˚yā-up˚), as,%}
m. a feigned or pretended service or kindness; (in
medicine) wrong treatment.
<LEND>

<L>37393<pc>0778-c<k1>miTi<k2>miTi
{#miTi#}¦ {%mithi, is,%} m., N. of a son of Nimi
and king of Mithilā.
<LEND>

<L>37394<pc>0778-c<k1>miTita<k2>miTita
{#miTita#}¦ {%mithita, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37395<pc>0778-c<k1>miTila<k2>miTila
{#miTila#}¦ {%mithila, as,%} m., N. of a king, the
founder of Mithilā; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people,
probably the inhabitants; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a city said to
have been founded by Mithi or Mithila, (it was the
capital of Videha or the modern Tirhut, and residence
of king Janaka.) {%—Mithilādhipati (˚lā-adh˚), is,%}
m. lord of Mithilā, i. e. Janaka.
<LEND>

<L>37396<pc>0778-c<k1>miTyA<k2>miTyA
{#miTyA#}¦ {%mithyā.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37397<pc>0778-c<k1>mid<k2>mid<h>1
{#mid#} 1¦. {%mid,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%medati, -te,%} &c.,
= rt. {%mith,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37398<pc>0778-c<k1>mid<k2>mid<h>2
{#mid#} 2¦. {%mid%} or {%mind,%} cl. 1. A. {%medate,%}
{%mimide, mediṣyati, amidat, meditum;%}
cl. 4. P. A. {%medyati, -te, mimeda, mimide, mediṣ-%}
{%yati, amidat, meditum;%} cl. 10. P. {%mindayati,%}
{%medayati,%} &c., to become fat; to be unctuous or
[Page0779-a+ 71]
greasy; to liquefy, melt; to feel affection for any one,
love [cf. {%mitra,%} rt. {%snih%}]; to rejoice (Ved. ?); Caus.
{%medayati, -yitum,%} to fatten, make fat (Ved.); [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">μειδάω:</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>minna, minni,</nsi> ‘love:’
Lith. <nsi>myliu,</nsi> ‘I love;’ <nsi>miêlas,</nsi> ‘dear:’ Russ. <nsi>milyĭ,</nsi>
‘kind, affable.’]
<LEND>

<L>37399<pc>0779-a<k1>minna<k2>minna
{%Minna, as, ā, am,%}¦ become fat, fat; unctuous;
affectionately disposed towards any one.
<LEND>

<L>37400<pc>0779-a<k1>midDa<k2>midDa
{#midDa#}¦ {%middha, am,%} n. sloth, indolence;
sleepiness, torpor; dulness, heaviness of spirits or
intellect.
<LEND>

<L>37401<pc>0779-a<k1>miD<k2>miD
{#miD#}¦ {%midh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%medhati, -te,%}
{%medhitum,%} =rt. {%mith.%}
<LEND>

<L>37402<pc>0779-a<k1>mindA<k2>mindA
{#mindA#}¦ {%mindā,%} f., Ved. a bodily defect,
fault, blemish; [cf. Lat. <nsi>menda.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37403<pc>0779-a<k1>minmina<k2>minmina
{#minmina#}¦ {%minmina = miṇmiṇa,%} p. 777, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37404<pc>0779-a<k1>minv<k2>minv
{#minv#}¦ {%minv%} (connected with rts. {%ninv,%}
{%sinv%}), cl. 1. P. {%minvati,%} &c., to
sprinkle, moisten, water (= rt. {%pinv%}); to worship,
serve, gratify by service.
<LEND>

<L>37405<pc>0779-a<k1>mimaNkzA<k2>mimaNkzA
{#mimaNkzA#}¦ {%mimaṅkṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt.
{%majj%}) the wish to plunge into water, desire of
bathing or diving.
<LEND>

<L>37406<pc>0779-a<k1>mimaNkzu<k2>mimaNkzu
{%Mimaṅkṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ being about to plunge
into water, desirous of bathing or diving.
<LEND>

<L>37407<pc>0779-a<k1>mimata<k2>mimata
{#mimata#}¦ {%mimata, as,%} m. a proper N.; [cf.
{%maimata.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37408<pc>0779-a<k1>mimanTizA<k2>mimanTizA
{#mimanTizA#}¦ {%mimanthiṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of
rt. {%math%} or {%manth%}), the desire of stirring up or
shaking, desire of destroying, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37409<pc>0779-a<k1>mimanTizu<k2>mimanTizu
{%Mimanthiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to stir up,
wishing or being about to shake or destroy.
<LEND>

<L>37410<pc>0779-a<k1>mimardayizu<k2>mimardayizu
{#mimardayizu#}¦ {%mimardayiṣu%} or {%mimardiṣu,%}
{%us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of rt. 1. {%mṛd%}), wishing to crush,
being about to crush or grind to powder.
<LEND>

<L>37411<pc>0779-a<k1>mimikza<k2>mimikza
{#mimikza#}¦ {%mimikṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. 1. {%mih%}), Ved. mixed, mingled; (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VI. 34, 4, {%mimikṣa%} may {%=%}
{%vṛṣṭy-udakānāṃ sektṛ,%} the sprinkler of rain-
waters.)
<LEND>

<L>37412<pc>0779-a<k1>mimikzu<k2>mimikzu
{%Mimikṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. mixed, mingled; being
mixed, &c.; wishing to rain down, desirous of
bestowing; (Sāy. {%= varṣitum icchat.%})
<LEND>

<L>37413<pc>0779-a<k1>miyakz<k2>miyakz
{#miyakz#}¦ {%miyakṣ.%} See {%myakṣ,%} p. 800, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37414<pc>0779-a<k1>miyeDa<k2>miyeDa
{#miyeDa#}¦ {%miyedha, as,%} m. food set before the
gods, a sacrificial meal or oblation, (perhaps) {%= medha,%}
a sacrificial animal or victim, (according to Sāy. de-
rived fr. {%medha;%} cf. Zend <nsi>myazda.</nsi>)
<LEND>

<L>37415<pc>0779-a<k1>miyeDya<k2>miyeDya
{%Miyedhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ partaking of or receiving
the sacrificial food, worthy of the oblation; (Sāy. {%=%}
{%medhasya yajñasya yogya%} or {%yajñārha.%})
<LEND>

<L>37416<pc>0779-a<k1>miraPa<k2>miraPa
{#miraPa#}¦ {%mirapha,%} (with Buddhists) a parti-
cular high number.
<LEND>

<L>37417<pc>0779-a<k1>mirAKAna<k2>mirAKAna
{#mirAKAna#}¦ {%mirā-khāna, as,%} m., N. of a
Paṭhān chief ({%khāna = %} <lang n="arabic">خان</lang>).
<LEND>

<L>37418<pc>0779-a<k1>mirikA<k2>mirikA
{#mirikA#}¦ {%mirikā,%} f. a species of plant, (con-
nected with {%irikā,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>37419<pc>0779-a<k1>mirmira<k2>mirmira
{#mirmira#}¦ {%mirmira, as, ā, am,%} (fr. a form {%mir%}
= rt. 1. {%miṣ%}), Ved. (according to a commentator)
blinking.
<LEND>

<L>37420<pc>0779-a<k1>mil<k2>mil
{#mil#}¦ {%mil%} (thought by some to be ori-
ginally a Nom. fr. a Prākṛt form {%milla%}
{%= miśra%}), cl. 6. P. A. {%milati, -te, mimela, mi-%}
{%mile, melitum,%} (generally P.) to unite, be united
with, join, accompany; to meet together, come toge-
ther; to meet, assemble, associate; to mix, combine,
be present at; to be connected with; to meet or fall
in with (with inst. or gen. or loc. of the person or
with {%saha%} and inst.); to find; to meet, encounter,
({%dvandva-yuddhena dvau militau,%} two persons
met in single combat); to clash, impinge, concur;
[Page0779-b+ 76]
to happen, come to pass: Caus. {%melayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to meet, bring together, assemble, convene.
<LEND>

<L>37421<pc>0779-b<k1>milat<k2>milat
{%Milat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} joining, accompanying;
meeting; assembling; concurring, combining; hap-
pening. {%—Milad-vyādha, as, ā, am,%} uniting with
hunters, accompanied by huntsmen.
<LEND>

<L>37422<pc>0779-b<k1>milana<k2>milana
{%Milana, am,%}¦ n. the act of mixing with, coming
in contact with, associating with; concurring, en-
countering, coalescing, meeting; contact.
<LEND>

<L>37423<pc>0779-b<k1>milita<k2>milita
{%Milita, as, ā, am,%}¦ united, mixed, combined,
connected; found, met, encountered.
<LEND>

<L>37424<pc>0779-b<k1>militvA<k2>militvA
{%Militvā,%}¦ ind. having met together, having united.
<LEND>

<L>37425<pc>0779-b<k1>milin<k2>milin
{%Milin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ mixing with, combined with,
provided with, possessing.
<LEND>

<L>37426<pc>0779-b<k1>milA<k2>milA
{#milA#}¦ {%milā%} in {%dur-milā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37427<pc>0779-b<k1>milindaka<k2>milindaka
{#milindaka#}¦ {%milindaka, as,%} m. a kind of
snake.
<LEND>

<L>37428<pc>0779-b<k1>milImilin<k2>milImilin
{#milImilin#}¦ {%milīmilin, ī,%} m. an epithet of
Śiva (which is said to contain a Mantra addressed to
Śiva, consisting of the following eighteen syllables,
{%Om, rudra cīli cīli cili cili mili mili, om svāhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>37429<pc>0779-b<k1>millA<k2>millA
{#millA#}¦ {%millā,%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>37430<pc>0779-b<k1>miS<k2>miS
{#miS#}¦ {%miś%} (connected with rt. {%maś%}), cl.
1. P. {%meśati, meśitum,%} to make a noise,
sound; to be angry.
<LEND>

<L>37431<pc>0779-b<k1>miSara<k2>miSara
{#miSara#}¦ {%miśara,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>37432<pc>0779-b<k1>miSi<k2>miSi
{#miSi#}¦ {%miśi, is,%} or {%miśī,%} f. Anethum Pan-
mori and Anethum Sowa ({%= misi%}); common anise;
Indian spikenard, Nardostachys Jatamansi.
<LEND>

<L>37433<pc>0779-b<k1>miSfza<k2>miSfza
{#miSfza#}¦ {%miśṛṣa,%} N. of a place (also
written {%miśriṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>37434<pc>0779-b<k1>miSr<k2>miSr
{#miSr#}¦ {%miśr%} or {%misr%} (probably a Nom.
fr. {%miśra%} below), cl. 10. P. {%miśrayati,%}
{%miśrāpayati,%} &c., to mix, mingle, blend, combine,
unite, mix with (with inst.); to add; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μίσγ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μίγ-νυ-μι, ἐ-μίγ-ην, ἐ-μίχθη-ν, μίγ-α, μίγ-δα, μίγ-δην,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μιγ-άδες, μίξις:</lang> Lat. <nsi>misc-e-o, mix-tu-s, mis-</nsi>
<nsi>tu-s, mix-tû-ra, mis-tû-ra, mix-ti-o, mis-ti-o,</nsi>
<nsi>misc-ellu-s, miscell-âneu-s:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>miscjan,</nsi>
<nsi>misk-iu,</nsi> ‘mix thou:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>miscan:</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>mes-i-ti:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>misz-ti; misz-ini-s,</nsi> ‘a mongrel;’
<nsi>maisz-y-ti,</nsi> ‘to mix.’]
<LEND>

<L>37435<pc>0779-b<k1>miSra<k2>miSra
{%Miśra, as, ā, am,%}¦ (thought by some to be fr. a
lost rt. {%miś,%} connected with {%mikṣ,%} desiderative of
rt. 1. {%mih;%} by others referred to rt. {%miś%} above),
mixed, mingled, blended, joined; mixed or blended
with (with inst. or sometimes gen.), combined;
associated, connected, ({%na miśraḥ syāt pāpakṛd-%}
{%bhiḥ,%} one should not associate with the wicked);
mixing, adulterating (e. g. mixing or adulterating
corn); tangled, intertwined; manifold, diverse; (at
the end of a comp.) having a mixture or mixed
collection of anything, for the most part consisting
of, consisting chiefly of (e. g. {%badarī-miśraṃ kā-%}
{%nanam,%} a forest consisting for the most part of
Badarī trees; {%ārya-vidagdha-miśrās,%} for the most
part worthy and learned persons); ({%as%}), m. a respect-
able person (cf. {%ārya-m˚;%} in this sense frequently
used at the end or beginning of a proper name,
especially that of a scholar, by way of respect, cf.
{%Kṛṣṇa-m˚, Bhāva-m˚, Madhu-m˚;%} and some-
times used alone as an abbreviation for a name ending
in {%miśra,%} e. g. {%miśra = Maṇḍana-miśra%}); N. of the
author of the Karma-pradīpa and of various other
persons; epithet of a kind of elephant; ({%am%}), n.
mixing, mixture; a species of radish ({%= cāṇakya-%}
{%mūlaka)%}. {%—Miśra-keśava, as,%} m., N. of an author
{%(= Keśava-dāsa)%}. {%—Miśra-keśī,%} f., N. of an Apsaras.
{%—Miśra-caturbhuja, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Miśra-%}
{%ja, as,%} m. ‘of mixed birth or breed,’ a mule. {%—Miśra-%}
{%jāti, is, is, i,%} being of mixed birth or breed, of
mixed parentage, any one whose parents belong to
different castes. {%—Miśra-tā,%} f. mixedness, the being
mixed, mixing, mingling. {%—Miśra-dina-kara, as,%}
m., N. of a commentator on the Śiśupāla-badha.
{%—Miśra-dhānya, as, ā, am,%} made by mixing
[Page0779-c+ 79]
various kinds of grain; ({%am%}), n. mixed grain. {%—Mi-%}
{%śra-puṣpā,%} f. Trigonella Fœnum Græcum {%(= me-%}
{%thikā)%}. {%—Miśra-bhāva, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Bhāva-prakāśa, a medical work, (also {%Bhāva,%}
{%Bhāva-miśra.%}) {%—Miśra-laṭakana, as,%} m., N. of
the father of Miśra-bhāva. {%—Miśra-varṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} being of a mixed colour; ({%am%}), n. a kind of
black aloe wood {%(= kṛṣṇāguru)%}. {%—Miśravarṇa-%}
{%phalā,%} f. Solanum Melongena. {%—Miśra-vyavahāra,%}
{%as,%} m. (in arithmetic) investigation of mixture,
ascertainment of composition (as principal and in-
terest joined, &c.). {%—Miśra-śabda, as,%} m. a mule
{%(= miśra-ja)%}. {%—Miśrī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of
mixing, an ingredient, seasoning. {%—Miśrī-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
{%-karoti,%} &c., to make mixed, mix, mingle. {%—Miśrī-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. becoming mixed, mixing, mingling.
{%—Miśrī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to
become mixed, mix, intertwine.
<LEND>

<L>37436<pc>0779-c<k1>miSraka<k2>miSraka
{%Miśraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ mixing, adulterating, mingled,
miscellaneous; mixed, adulterated; ({%as%}), m. a mixer
or compounder; an adulterator of articles of com-
merce, mixer of bad wares with good ones; ({%am%}),
n. salt produced from salt soil; N. of a Tīrtha; of
a grove or garden of paradise; a particular kind
of song or singing. {%—Miśrakā-vaṇa, am,%} n., N. of
Indra's pleasure-grove.
<LEND>

<L>37437<pc>0779-c<k1>miSraRa<k2>miSraRa
{%Miśraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of mixing, uniting; (in
arithmetic) addition.
<LEND>

<L>37438<pc>0779-c<k1>miSraRIya<k2>miSraRIya
{%Miśraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be mixed or mingled.
<LEND>

<L>37439<pc>0779-c<k1>miSrita<k2>miSrita
{%Miśrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ mixed, mingled, blended,
united, joined; added; respected, respectable.
<LEND>

<L>37440<pc>0779-c<k1>miSrin<k2>miSrin
{%Miśrin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a Nāga.
<LEND>

<L>37441<pc>0779-c<k1>miSreyA<k2>miSreyA
{%Miśreyā,%}¦ f. (connected with {%miśi,%} q. v.), Anethum
Panmori or a species of anise.
<LEND>

<L>37442<pc>0779-c<k1>miSla<k2>miSla
{%Miśla = miśra%}¦ in {%ā-m˚, ni-m˚, sam-m˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>37443<pc>0779-c<k1>miz<k2>miz<h>1
{#miz#} 1¦. {%miṣ%} [cf. rt. {%mīl%}], cl. 6. P. {%mi-%}
{%ṣati, mimeṣa, meṣiṣyati, ameṣīt,%}
{%meṣitum%} (the simple rt. appears to be used only
in the present participle), to open the eyes, have the
eyes open; to look at, look at or look on unwil-
lingly, look on angrily or with the eyes contracted,
wink at (generally used in the present participle,
the construction being that of a genitive absolute,
e. g. {%miṣato bandhu-vargasya,%} the whole number
of relatives looking helplessly on, i. e. before their
very eyes or in spite of them; {%miṣatāṃ vaḥ,%} in
spite of you); to rival, contend with, resist, emulate;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μῖσος</lang> perhaps also <lang n="greek">μύω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>mico;</nsi> per-
haps <nsi>nico, nic-to,</nsi> fr. <nsi>nimic-o, nimic-to</nsi> = {%nimi-%}
{%ṣāmi:%} Russ. <nsi>migaju, mischu,</nsi> ‘I wink:’ Lith.
<nsi>mirkloju,</nsi> ‘I wink;’ <nsi>mêgmi,</nsi> ‘I sleep.’]
<LEND>

<L>37444<pc>0779-c<k1>miza<k2>miza
{%Miṣa, as,%}¦ m. rivalry, emulation, envy; ({%am%}), n.
deceit, fraud, trick, illusion, false appearance (e. g.
{%sūda-miṣaṃ śritaḥ,%} having assumed the form of
a cook; {%darśana-miṣāt,%} under the pretext of
seeing); [cf. {%mṛṣā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37445<pc>0779-c<k1>miz<k2>miz<h>2
{#miz#} 2¦. {%miṣ%} (connected with rt. 3.
{%mṛṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%meṣati, mimeṣa,%}
{%meṣitum,%} to sprinkle, moisten, wet.
<LEND>

<L>37446<pc>0779-c<k1>mizwa<k2>mizwa
{%Miṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled, moistened; nice,
savoury, dainty, delicate; sweet, sugary, (in this sense
thought by some to be for 1. {%mṛṣṭa%} fr. rt. 1. {%mṛj,%} to
cleanse); {%miṣṭam payas,%} water; ({%am%}), n. a sweet-
meat; a dainty or savoury dish. {%—Miṣṭa-kartri,%}
{%tā, trī, tṛ,%} a maker of dainties or delicacies, a
skilful cook. {%—Miṣṭa-pācaka, as, ikā, am,%} cook-
ing savoury food or delicacies. {%—Miṣṭa-bhuj, k, k,%}
{%k,%} an eater of dainties, eating delicacies. {%—Miṣṭa-%}
{%vākya, as, ā, am,%} speaking pleasantly or agreeably.
{%—Miṣṭānna (˚ṭa-an˚), am,%} n. sweet or savoury
food, sweetmeats, sauce, gravy, seasoning, a mixture
of sugar and acids &c. eaten with rice or bread.
{%—Miṣṭāśā (˚ṭa-āśā),%} f. desire for delicacies.
<LEND>

<L>37447<pc>0779-c<k1>mizamizAya<k2>mizamizAya
{#mizamizAya#}¦ {%miṣamiṣāya,%} Nom. A. {%miṣa-%}
{%miṣāyate,%} &c. (an onomatopoetic word), to crackle,
crepitate, make a crackling sound.
<LEND>

<L>37448<pc>0779-c<k1>mizi<k2>mizi
{#mizi#}¦ {%miṣi, is,%} f. spikenard; fennel, &c.,
{%= misi.%}
<LEND>

<L>37449<pc>0779-c<k1>mizikA<k2>mizikA
{%Miṣikā,%}¦ f. Nardostachys Jatamansi.
<LEND>
[Page0780-a+ 76]

<L>37450<pc>0780-a<k1>mis<k2>mis
{#mis#}¦ {%mis,%} cl. 4. P. {%misyati,%} &c., Ved.
to go.
<LEND>

<L>37451<pc>0780-a<k1>misara<k2>misara
{#misara#}¦ {%misara,%} N. of a place, (perhaps {%=%}
{%Misr,%} Egypt; cf. {%miśara.%})
<LEND>

<L>37452<pc>0780-a<k1>misaru<k2>misaru
{%Misaru,%}¦ N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>37453<pc>0780-a<k1>misarUmiSra<k2>misarUmiSra
{%Misarū-miśra, as,%}¦ m., N. of the author of the
Vivāda-candra.
<LEND>

<L>37454<pc>0780-a<k1>misi<k2>misi
{#misi#}¦ {%misi, is,%} f. a sort of fennel, Anethum
Sowa; Anethum Panmori; common anise, Pimpi-
nella Anisum; spikenard, Nardostachys Jatamansi;
a sort of lovage; {%= aja-modā; = uśīrī;%} [cf. {%miśi,%}
{%miṣi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37455<pc>0780-a<k1>misr<k2>misr
{#misr#}¦ {%misr.%} See {%miśr,%} p. 779, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37456<pc>0780-a<k1>mih<k2>mih<h>1
{#mih#} 1¦. {%mih,%} cl. 1. P. (in poetry also A.)
{%mehati (-te), mimeha, mekṣyati, ami-%}
{%kṣat, meḍhum,%} to make water, void or pass urine,
to rain down moisture, wet, moisten, sprinkle; to
emit seed or seminal fluid ({%= retaḥ-sekaṃ kṛ%}):
Caus. {%mehayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%amīmihat,%} to cause
to make water, &c.: Desid. {%mimikṣati,%} to wish
to mix or stir up, to mix, unite, mix intimately [cf.
{%mikṣ%}]: Intens. {%memehyate;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀ-μιχ-έ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὤμιξα, ὄ-μιχ-μα, ὀμίχ-λη, ὀμίχλη, μοιχ-ό-ς, μοιχ-ά-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μιαίνω, μιορός:</lang> Lat. <nsi>mi-n-g-o, mêj-o, mic-tu-s:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>maihstu-s,</nsi> ‘dung:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>mig, mîge,</nsi>
<nsi>mâh, migon:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>Mist:</nsi> Iceland. <nsi>mig:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>myz-u; mig-là,</nsi> ‘mist:’ Slav. <nsi>mĭg-la.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37457<pc>0780-a<k1>mih<k2>mih<h>2
2. {%mih, ṭ,%}¦ f., Ved. mist, fog; falling of water;
{%miho napāt,%} the demon of the mist.
<LEND>

<L>37458<pc>0780-a<k1>mihikA<k2>mihikA
{%Mihikā,%}¦ f. mist, fog; frost, snow; [cf. {%mahikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37459<pc>0780-a<k1>mihira<k2>mihira
{%Mihira, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. 1. 52. fr.
rt. 1. {%mih%} above), the sun (= the Persian <lang n="arabic">مهر</lang>); a
cloud (as raining down moisture); wind, air; the
moon; an old man, sage; N. of an author (an
abbreviation of Varāha-mihira; cf. {%padma-m˚%}).
{%—Mihira-kula, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Mihira-%}
{%datta, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mihira-pura, am,%} n.,
N. of a city built by Mihira-kula. {%—Mihira-rati,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a man (son of Bhaganarāya). {%—Mihi-%}
{%reśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a temple built by
Mihira-kula.
<LEND>

<L>37460<pc>0780-a<k1>mihirARa<k2>mihirARa
{%Mihirāṇa, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>37461<pc>0780-a<k1>mIQa<k2>mIQa
{%Mīḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ passed (as urine); urined,
watered; ({%am%}), n., also {%mīḷha, am,%} n., Ved. a
battle, combat, struggle.
<LEND>

<L>37462<pc>0780-a<k1>mIQuza<k2>mIQuza
{%Mīḍhuṣa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Indra by
Paulomī.
<LEND>

<L>37463<pc>0780-a<k1>mIQvas<k2>mIQvas
{%Mīḍhvas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (the declension follows that
of a perf. part., e. g. acc. sing. masc. {%mīḍhvāṃsam,%}
dat. {%mīḍhuṣe%} or {%mīḷhuṣe,%} cf. Mahā-bh. Vana-p.
1628, voc. Ved. {%mīḍhavas%}), bountiful, liberal (applied
to Rudra, Agni, Varuṇa, Mitra, Viṣṇu, Parjanya,
and Indra); pouring forth seed ({%= retaḥ-sektṛ%}),
prolific (applied to a goat); N. of a son of Dakṣa.
{%—Mīḍhuṣ-ṭama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most bountiful
or liberal; ({%as%}), m. the sun; Śiva; a thief.
<LEND>

<L>37464<pc>0780-a<k1>mihilAropya<k2>mihilAropya
{#mihilAropya#}¦ {%mihilāropya, am,%} n., N. of a
city in the south of India; [cf. {%mahilāropya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37465<pc>0780-a<k1>mI<k2>mI<h>1
{#mI#} 1¦. {%mī,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%mīnāti, mīnīte%} (Ved.
{%mināti%}), {%mimāya%} (3rd du. {%mimyatus%}),
{%mimye, māsyati, -te, amāsīt, amāsta, mātum%}
(Ved. forms {%meṣṭa, ameṣanta, amāyi,%} Ved. inf.
with {%pra, -miyam, -miye, -metos;%} ind. part. {%-māya,%}
cf. {%pra-mī;%} chiefly Vedic), to lessen, diminish,
reduce; to injure, destroy, kill; to violate, transgress;
to annul, change, alter; to be lessened, disappear, be
lost or destroyed; to stray, go astray; cl. 4. A. {%-mī-%}
{%yate,%} to perish, be destroyed, die: Caus. {%māpayati,%}
Aor. {%amīmapat,%} to cause to perish, destroy, kill,
Pāṇ. VII. 4, 93: Desid. {%mitsati, -te,%} Pāṇ. VII. 4,
54; [cf. Lat. <nsi>pro-minere, e-minere, minere, pro-</nsi>
<nsi>minare, e-minus, co-minus, minari.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37466<pc>0780-a<k1>mI<k2>mI<h>2
2. {%mī%}¦ in {%manyu-mī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37467<pc>0780-a<k1>mIta<k2>mIta
{%Mīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%pra-mīta.%} See {%pra-mī.%}
<LEND>

<L>37468<pc>0780-a<k1>mIna<k2>mIna
{%Mīna, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 3. fr.
rt. 1. {%mī%} above), a fish [cf. {%naḍa-m˚%}]; the sign of
[Page0780-b+ 77]
the zodiac, Pisces; N. of a teacher of the Yoga
system, {%= mīna-nātha; (ā),%} f., N. of a daughter of
Uṣā and wife of Kaśyapa. {%—Mīna-ketana, as,%} m.
‘fish-bannered,’ an epithet of the god of love.
{%—Mīna-gandhā.%} f. an epithet of Satya-vatī; [cf.
{%matsya-gandhā.%}] {%—Mīna-godhikā,%} f. a pool, pond.
{%—Mīna-ghātin, ī,%} m. ‘fish-killer,’ a fisherman; a
crane. {%—Mīna-tā,%} f. the state or condition of a fish.
{%—Mīna-dhāvana-toya, am,%} n. water in which fish
have been washed. {%—Mīna-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a
teacher of the Yoga system. {%—Mīna-netrā,%} f. a
species of Dūrvā grass ({%= gaṇḍa-dūrvā;%} cf. {%netra-%}
{%mīnā%}). {%—Mīna-raṅka%} or {%mīna-raṅga, as,%} m. a
kingfisher. {%—Mīna-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Mīna-rāja, as,%} m. the king of the fishes; N. of
an astrologer. {%—Mīnarāja-jātaka, am,%} n., N. of
an astrological work by Yavaneśvara. {%—Mīna-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessing fish, abounding in fish. {%—Mī-%}
{%nākṣa (˚na-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘fish-eyed,’ N. of a
Rākṣasa; ({%ī%}), f. a species of Soma plant, a kind of
Dūrvā grass [cf. {%matsyākṣī%}]; N. of a daughter of
Kuvera. {%—Mīnāghātin (˚na-āgh˚), ī,%} m. {%= mīna-%}
{%ghātin,%} q. v. {%—Mīnāṇḍa (˚na-aṇ˚), am,%} n. fish-
spawn, roe, milt; ({%ī%}), f. moist or brown sugar.
{%—Mīnālaya (˚na-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘abode of fish,’ the
sea, ocean.
<LEND>

<L>37469<pc>0780-b<k1>mInara<k2>mInara
{%Mīnara, as,%}¦ m. a kind of sea-monster ({%= makara%}).
<LEND>

<L>37470<pc>0780-b<k1>mInAmrIRa<k2>mInAmrIRa
{%Mīnāmrīṇa, as,%}¦ m. {%= dardurāmra,%} a kind of
sauce or condiment, fish-sauce; a wag-tail.
<LEND>

<L>37471<pc>0780-b<k1>mI<k2>mI<h>3
{#mI#} 3¦. {%mī,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%mayati, māyayati,%}
&c., to go, move; to understand, know;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>meare, movere.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37472<pc>0780-b<k1>mIqam<k2>mIqam
{#mIqam#}¦ {%mīḍam,%} ind. in a low tone, softly.
<LEND>

<L>37473<pc>0780-b<k1>mIQa<k2>mIQa
{#mIQa#}¦ {%mīḍha, mīḍhvas, mīḍhuṣe, mīḷhuṣe,%}
&c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37474<pc>0780-b<k1>mIna<k2>mIna
{#mIna#}¦ {%mīna.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37475<pc>0780-b<k1>mIm<k2>mIm
{#mIm#}¦ {%mīm,%} cl. 1. P. {%mīmati, mīmitum,%}
cl. 10. P. (or Caus.) {%mīmayati, -yitum,%}
to go, move; to sound; [cf. rt. 2. {%mā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37476<pc>0780-b<k1>mImAMsa<k2>mImAMsa
{#mImAMsa#}¦ {%mīmāṃsa,%} Desid. base of rt. {%man,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37477<pc>0780-b<k1>mImAMsaka<k2>mImAMsaka
{%Mīmāṃsaka, as,%}¦ m. one who thinks over or
reflects deeply upon, one who examines or proves;
an examiner, investigator, prover; a follower of the
Pūrva-mīmāṃsā system, (see below.)
<LEND>

<L>37478<pc>0780-b<k1>mImAMsana<k2>mImAMsana
{%Mīmāṃsana, as,%}¦ m. one who examines or proves,
a tester, prover, examiner, investigator.
<LEND>

<L>37479<pc>0780-b<k1>mImAMsA<k2>mImAMsA
{%Mīmāṃsā,%}¦ f. reflection, consideration, opinion,
investigation, examination, discussion, ({%kāvya-m˚,%}
the theory of poetry, art of poetry; N. of a work);
‘examination (of the sacred text),’ N. of one of three
great divisions of orthodox Hindū philosophy (divided
like the Nyāya and Sāṅkhya into two systems, viz.
the Pūrva-mīmāṃsā or Karma-mīmāṃsā founded by
Jaimini, and the Uttara-mīmāṃsā or Brahma-mīmāṃsā
or Śārīraka-mīmāṃsā by Bādarāyaṇa, the latter, how-
ever, is more commonly called the Vedānta system,
while the Pūrva-mīmāṃsā is usually called <nsi>the</nsi>
Mīmāṃsā; though the Mīmāṃsā by Jaimini is classed
among the six orthodox systems of philosophy, it
does not concern itself like the others with the
nature of soul, mind, and matter, but rather with a
correct interpretation of the ritual of the Veda and
the solution of doubts and discrepancies in regard to
the Vedic texts caused by the discordant explanations
of opposite schools; it may therefore be described as
a critical commentary on the first or ritual portion
of the Veda, and its only claim to the title of a
philosophy consists in its philosophical method of
interpretation, the topics being arranged according
to particular categories, such as authoritativeness,
indirect precept, &c., and treated according to a
kind of logical sequence, which commences with
the proposition to be discussed, the doubt arising
about it, the Pūrva-pakṣa or primâ facie and wrong
view of the question, the right argument or refuta-
tion of the Pūrva-pakṣa, and the conclusion; see,
[Page0780-c+ 78]
moreover, {%Pūrva-mīmāṃsā:%} Jaimini, whose date is
unknown, taught his system in twelve books, each
book containing either four or eight chapters, and
each chapter being subdivided into sections compris-
ing one or more Sūtras; the oldest commentary on
these obscure aphorisms being the Bhāṣya of Śabara-
svāmin, explained by the great Mīmāṃsā authority
Kumārila-svāmin or Kumārila-bhaṭṭa, and again elu-
cidated by Mādhavācārya in the Jaiminīya-nyāya-
mālā-vistara). {%—Mīmāṃsa-kṛt, t,%} m. ‘the author of
the Mīmāṃsā system,’ an epithet of Jaimini. {%—Mī-%}
{%māṃsā-kautūhala-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary by Vāsudeva Adhvarin (also called Vāsudeva
Dīkṣita) on the Mīmāṃsā-sūtras of Jaimini. {%—Mī-%}
{%māṃsā-kaustubha, as,%} m., N. of a commentary by
Khaṇḍa-deva on the Mīmāṃsā-sūtras of Jaimini.
{%—Mīmāṃsā-jīva-rakṣā,%} f., N. of a Mīmāṃsā
work. {%—Mīmāṃsā-tattva-candrikā,%} f., N. of a
work by Gopāla-bhaṭṭa on various Mīmāṃsā topics.
{%—Mīmāṃsā-tantra-vārttika, am,%} n., N. of a com-
mentary by Kumārila-svāmin on the Sūtras of Jai-
mini. {%—Mīmāṃsā-naya-viveka, as,%} m., N. of a
commentary by Bhavanātha-miśra on the Mīmāṃsā-
sūtras of Jaimini. {%—Mīmāṃsā-nyāya-prakāśa, as,%}
m., N. of a celebrated elementary work on the
Mīmāṃsā system by Āpa-deva (son of Ananta-deva
and pupil of Govinda). {%—Mīmāṃsā-paribhāṣā,%} f.,
N. of an elementary treatise by Kṛṣṇa-dīkṣita on
the Mīmāṃsā. {%—Mīmāṃsā-bhāṣya-vivaraṇa, am,%}
n., N. of a commentary by Kumāra-svāmin on a
work entitled Mīmāṃsā-bhāṣya. {%—Mīmāṃsārtha-%}
{%pradīpa (˚sā-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a disquisition by
Śaṅkara-śukla on the provableness of the Veda. {%—Mī-%}
{%māṃsā-vidhi-bhūṣaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Mīmāṃsā
work by Gopāla-bhaṭṭa, written in refutation of
the Vidhi-rasāyana. {%—Mīmāṃsā-śiromaṇi, is,%} m.
‘crest-gem of the Mīmāṃsā,’ epithet of an author,
(also called Nīla-kaṇṭha.) {%—Mīmāṃsā-sarvasva,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work by Halāyudha. {%—Mīmāṃsā-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} n., N. of the twelve books of aphorisms
by Jaimini on the interpretation of the Veda; see
{%Mīmāṃsā,%} col. 2. {%—Mīmāṃsā-stavaka, as,%} m., N.
of a Mīmāṃsā work by Rāghavānanda.
<LEND>

<L>37480<pc>0780-c<k1>mImAMsitvA<k2>mImAMsitvA
{%Mīmāṃsitvā,%}¦ ind. having considered or reflected
upon.
<LEND>

<L>37481<pc>0780-c<k1>mImAMsya<k2>mImAMsya
{%Mīmāṃsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thought over or
reflected upon, to be examined or considered.
<LEND>

<L>37482<pc>0780-c<k1>mIra<k2>mIra
{#mIra#}¦ {%mīra, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%mi,%}
perhaps connected with rt. 1. {%mih%}), the sea, ocean;
a particular part of a mountain; a limit, boundary;
a drink, beverage.
<LEND>

<L>37483<pc>0780-c<k1>mIramIrasuta<k2>mIramIrasuta
{#mIramIrasuta#}¦ {%mīramīra-suta, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%Mīramīrā,%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>37484<pc>0780-c<k1>mIl<k2>mIl
{#mIl#}¦ {%mīl%} (connected with rt. 1. {%miṣ,%}
and perhaps originally a Nom.), cl. 1.
P. {%mīlati, mimīla, mīliṣyati, amīlīt, mīlitum,%}
to close (the eyes), wink, twinkle, close or contract
the eyelids; to close, be closed (as the eyes); to fade,
disappear, vanish; to assemble, gather together, be col-
lected (= rt. {%mil%} intransitively): Caus. {%mīlayati,%} Aor.
{%amimīlat%} and {%amīmilat,%} to cause to close, close
(applied to the blossom of flowers as well as to the
eyes): Desid. {%mimīliṣati:%} Intens. {%memīlyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>37485<pc>0780-c<k1>mIlat<k2>mIlat
{%Mīlat, an, antī, at,%}¦ closing (as the eyes); wink-
ing, twinkling.
<LEND>

<L>37486<pc>0780-c<k1>mIlana<k2>mIlana
{%Mīlana, am,%}¦ n. the act of closing the eyes;
winking, blinking, twinkling; the closing of a
flower; (in rhetoric) a covert or concealed simile,
see {%mīlita%} below.
<LEND>

<L>37487<pc>0780-c<k1>mIlayitvA<k2>mIlayitvA
{%Mīlayitvā,%}¦ ind. having closed (as the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>37488<pc>0780-c<k1>mIlikA<k2>mIlikA
{%Mīlikā%}¦ in {%nīla-mīlika,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37489<pc>0780-c<k1>mIlita<k2>mIlita
{%Mīlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ closed; twinkled; half opened,
unblown, partly opened (as a young bud &c.); dis-
appeared, vanished; assembled, gathered together;
({%am%}), n. a simile merely implied (e. g. {%kṣauma-%}
{%vatyo na lakṣyante jyotsnāyām,%} ‘clad in linen
they are not perceived in the moonlight,’ where
comparison between the whiteness of the linen and
of the moonlight is implied.)
<LEND>
[Page0781-a+ 71]

<L>37490<pc>0781-a<k1>mIv<k2>mIv<h>1
{#mIv#} 1¦. {%mīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%mīvati, mīvitum,%}
to move.
<LEND>

<L>37491<pc>0781-a<k1>mUta<k2>mUta<h>1
1. {%mūta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see rt. 1. {%mū%}), moved,
in {%kāma-mūta,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37492<pc>0781-a<k1>mIv<k2>mIv<h>2
{#mIv#} 2¦. {%mīv%} (connected with rt. {%pīv%}),
cl. 1. P. {%mīvati, mīvitum,%} to grow fat,
to be large or corpulent.
<LEND>

<L>37493<pc>0781-a<k1>mIvaga<k2>mIvaga
{#mIvaga#}¦ {%mīvaga,%} (with Buddhists) a parti-
cular high number.
<LEND>

<L>37494<pc>0781-a<k1>mIvara<k2>mIvara
{#mIvara#}¦ {%mīvara, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%mī%}),
hurting, killing, hurtful, injurious, mischievous; vene-
rable, worthy of esteem; ({%as%}), m. a general, leader
of an army.
<LEND>

<L>37495<pc>0781-a<k1>mIvA<k2>mIvA
{#mIvA#}¦ {%mīvā,%} f. (probably fr. 2. {%mī;%} said to
be fr. 1. {%mī%}), the tape-worm, a worm generated in
the intestines, Ascarides; air, wind, (in this sense
also, according to some, {%mīvan, ā,%} m.); {%= śīkara (?);%}
{%= sāra (?).%}
<LEND>

<L>37496<pc>0781-a<k1>mu<k2>mu
{#mu#}¦ {%mu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%mū,%} q. v.), a bond,
binding, confinement; an epithet of Śiva; final
emancipation; a funeral pile; a reddish brown or
tawny colour.
<LEND>

<L>37497<pc>0781-a<k1>muMsala<k2>muMsala
{#muMsala#}¦ {%muṃsala,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>37498<pc>0781-a<k1>mukandaka<k2>mukandaka
{#mukandaka#}¦ {%mukandaka, as,%} m. probably an
error for {%su-kandaka,%} an onion.
<LEND>

<L>37499<pc>0781-a<k1>mukaya<k2>mukaya
{#mukaya#}¦ {%mukaya, as, ī,%} m. f., see Pāṇ. IV.
1, 63.
<LEND>

<L>37500<pc>0781-a<k1>mukAbilA<k2>mukAbilA
{#mukAbilA#}¦ {%mukābilā =%} <lang n="arabic">مقابلة</lang>
<LEND>

<L>37501<pc>0781-a<k1>mukAriRA<k2>mukAriRA
{#mukAriRA#}¦ {%mukāriṇā =%} <lang n="arabic">مقارنة</lang>
<LEND>

<L>37502<pc>0781-a<k1>muku<k2>muku
{#muku#}¦ {%muku, us,%} m. {%= mukti,%} liberation; (an
artificial word, formed fr. rt. 2. {%muc,%} to explain {%mu-%}
{%kun-da,%} q. v., for which purpose others assume {%mu-%}
{%kum,%} ind.)
<LEND>

<L>37503<pc>0781-a<k1>mukuwa<k2>mukuwa
{#mukuwa#}¦ {%mukuṭa, am,%} n. a tiara, diadem,
crown (said to be crescent-shaped; the {%kirīṭa%} being
pointed, and the {%mauli%} having three points); a
crest; a peak, point, head [cf. {%tri-m˚%}]; N. of a
place; ({%as%}), m. a proper N. (contracted fr. {%Rāja-%}
{%mukuṭa%}); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people or of a race;
({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending upon
Skanda; ({%ī%}), f. snapping the fingers ({%= mucuṭī,%}
fr. rt. 2. {%muc%}). {%—Mukuṭa-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
sacred bathing-place. {%—Mukuṭe-kārṣāpaṇa, am,%}
n. epithet of a tax or tribute raised for a royal
diadem (in the east of India). {%—Mukuṭeśvara (˚ṭa-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a king; ({%ī%}), f. a N. of Dā-
kṣāyaṇī in Mākoṭa (Mukuṭa). {%—Mukuṭeśvara-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>37504<pc>0781-a<k1>mukuwin<k2>mukuwin
{%Mukuṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crowned, wearing a diadem.
<LEND>

<L>37505<pc>0781-a<k1>mukuwwa<k2>mukuwwa
{#mukuwwa#}¦ {%mukuṭṭa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
(also read {%sukuṭṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>37506<pc>0781-a<k1>mukuRwI<k2>mukuRwI
{#mukuRwI#}¦ {%mukuṇṭī,%} f. a kind of weapon;
(perhaps an error for {%su-kuṇṭhī.%})
<LEND>

<L>37507<pc>0781-a<k1>mukunda<k2>mukunda
{#mukunda#}¦ {%mukun-da, as,%} m. (according to an
artificial etymology, fr. {%muku,%} q. v., {%mukun-da%}
being said to mean ‘giver of liberation’), N. of
Viṣṇu (sometimes transferred to Śiva); of a parti-
cular treasure; a kind of precious stone; quicksilver;
the resin of Boswellia Thurifera, gum olibanum; a
kind of drum or kettle-drum; N. of various learned
men ({%= Govinda, Vārāhatājika-mukunda, Mu-%}
{%kunda-paṇḍita%}); N. of a mountain. {%—Mukunda-%}
{%deva, as,%} m., N. of various princes of Orissa {%(=%}
{%vīra-m˚)%}. {%—Mukunda-priya, as,%} m., N. of a certain
teacher; of the father of the commentator Rāmā-
nanda. {%—Mukunda-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Mukunda-mālā,%} f. ‘Mukunda-garland,’ N. of a
prayer in twenty-two verses addressed to Mukunda
(Viṣṇu). {%—Mukunda-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a
Brāhman. {%—Mukunda-muni, is,%} or {%mukunda-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mukunda-rāma, as,%}
[Page0781-b+ 76]
m. a proper N. {%—Mukunda-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of
a scribe.
<LEND>

<L>37508<pc>0781-b<k1>mukundaka<k2>mukundaka
{%Mukundaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of grain reckoned
among the Ku-dhānyas; an onion ({%= su-kundaka,%}
{%su-kandaka;%} cf. {%mukandaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>37509<pc>0781-b<k1>mukundu<k2>mukundu
{%Mukundu, us,%}¦ m. {%= mukunda,%} the resin of Bos-
wellia Thurifera; gum olibanum.
<LEND>

<L>37510<pc>0781-b<k1>mukum<k2>mukum
{#mukum#}¦ {%mukum,%} ind. See {%muku,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37511<pc>0781-b<k1>mukura<k2>mukura
{#mukura#}¦ {%mukura, as,%} m. a mirror ({%= makura;%}
cf. {%karṇa-mukura, mati-m˚%}); the stick or handle
of a potter's wheel; Mimusops Elengi; Jasminum
Zambac ({%= kula-vṛkṣa%}); a bud ({%= mukula%}
below).
<LEND>

<L>37512<pc>0781-b<k1>mukurita<k2>mukurita
{%Mukurita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (probably) {%= mukulita%}
below; see Gaṇa Tārakādi to Pāṇ. V. 2, 31.
<LEND>

<L>37513<pc>0781-b<k1>mukula<k2>mukula
{#mukula#}¦ {%mukula, as, am,%} m. n. (perhaps con-
nected with rt. 2. {%muc%}), a bud, opening bud or
calyx of a flower, (in these senses also written {%ma-%}
{%kula,%} q. v.); anything shaped like a bud, ({%daśana-%}
{%m˚,%} a bud-like tooth); a bud-like junction or bring-
ing together of the fingers of the hand, (in this sense
only {%as,%} m.); the body; the soul or spirit; N. of
a king; of another person; ({%am%}), n. a kind of
metre, four times <lang n="meter">¯ ¯ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯.</lang> {%—Mukulāgra (˚la-%}
{%ag˚), am,%} n. a particular surgical instrument with
a bud-like point. {%—Mukulī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kartum,%} to close (the hands) in the form of a bud.
{%—Mukulī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} closed, shut (as a bud).
{%—Mukulī-bhāva, as,%} m. closing, being closed (as
a flower).
<LEND>

<L>37514<pc>0781-b<k1>mukulaya<k2>mukulaya
{%Mukulaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%mukulayati,%} &c., to close,
cause to close (the eyes, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>37515<pc>0781-b<k1>mukulita<k2>mukulita
{%Mukulita, as, ā, am,%}¦ budded, having buds, blos-
soming, full of blossoms; closed like a bud, half
closed; half shut (as the eye), blinking, winking;
closed, shut. {%—Mukulitākṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as, ī, am,%}
having half closed eyes.
<LEND>

<L>37516<pc>0781-b<k1>mukulin<k2>mukulin
{%Mukulin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ budding, budded, having buds.
<LEND>

<L>37517<pc>0781-b<k1>mukuzWa<k2>mukuzWa
{#mukuzWa#}¦ {%mukuṣṭha, as, ā, am, = manthara;%}
{%(as),%} m. a species of bean; [cf. {%makuṣṭha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37518<pc>0781-b<k1>mukuzWaka<k2>mukuzWaka
{%Mukuṣṭhaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of bean.
<LEND>

<L>37519<pc>0781-b<k1>mukUlaka<k2>mukUlaka
{#mukUlaka#}¦ {%mukūlaka, as,%} m. {%= makūlaka,%} a
species of plant (commonly Danti).
<LEND>

<L>37520<pc>0781-b<k1>mukta<k2>mukta
{#mukta#}¦ {%mukta, mukti,%} &c. See p. 782, col. 3,
and p. 783, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37521<pc>0781-b<k1>mukzIjA<k2>mukzIjA
{#mukzIjA#}¦ {%mukṣījā,%} f. a net, snare.
<LEND>

<L>37522<pc>0781-b<k1>muKa<k2>muKa
{#muKa#}¦ {%mukha, am,%} n. (said in Uṇādi-s. V.
20. to be fr. rt. {%khan,%} to dig, with the final rejected
and {%mu%} prefixed), the mouth; the face, countenance,
(in this sense often at the end of comps., e. g. {%bhrū-%}
{%kuṭī-mukha,%} a frowning face; especially at the end
of adj. comps. when the fem. is generally {%mukhī,%}
e. g. {%sakalendu-mukhī,%} a woman with a full moon-
like face; cf. {%aśru-m˚%}); the beak of a bird, snout
or muzzle of any animal, (in these senses said to be
also {%as,%} m.); a direction, quarter, (in this sense
also often at the end of comps., e. g. {%āśā-mukha,%}
{%diṅ-mukha,%} quarter or region of space; {%antar-%}
{%mukham,%} ind. in the direction of or towards the
interior; and more frequently at the end of adj.
comps. in the sense of ‘looking towards, facing,’
when the fem. is generally {%-mukhī,%} cf. {%ubhayato-m˚,%}
{%adho-m˚, udaṅ-m˚; makha-mukha,%} going to the
sacrifice); opening, aperture, mouth of a vessel, &c.;
entrance, egress (e. g. {%Vindhyāṭavī-mukhe,%} at the
entrance of the Vindhya forest; {%svargasya mukham,%}
the entrance into heaven); the entrance to a house;
the mouth or embouchure of a river; the fore part,
front, van (of an army), head, top; the head, tip or
point of anything, ({%stana-mukha,%} the tip or nipple
of the breast; {%aṅgulī-mukha,%} the tip of the finger;
{%śara-mukha,%} the point of an arrow); the edge of
any sharp instrument; surface, upper side (e. g.
{%viṣa-kumbham payo-mukham,%} a vessel of poison
with milk on the surface); the chief, principal, best,
most excellent (e. g. {%Nakṣatrāṇām mukhaṃ can- %}
[Page0781-c+ 81]
{%draḥ,%} the moon is chief of the Nakṣatras); intro-
duction, beginning, commencement, (often at the end
of comps. when the fem. is {%-mukhā%} or {%-mukhī,%} but
oftener the latter, e. g. {%Gaṅgā-mukhīnāṃ%} or {%Gaṅgā-%}
{%mukhānāṃ saritām,%} of the rivers beginning with
the Ganges; {%mahā-rathā Jayadratha-mukhāḥ,%}
the heroes beginning with Jayad-ratha, i. e. Jayad-
ratha and the other heroes; cf. the use of {%ādi%});
the opening or previous incidents of a drama, the
original cause or source of the action, the first act;
(in algebra) the first term, the intial quantity of the
progression; the apex or side opposite to the base
of a mathematical figure; source, cause, occasion,
ground; means, expedient; scripture, the Veda;
sound (?); Artocarpus Locucha or Lakuca, (in this
sense {%as,%} m.); ({%ena%}), ind. with reference to, according
to. {%—Mukha-kamala, am,%} n. ‘face-lotus,’ a lotus-
like face. {%—Mukha-khura, as,%} m. ‘mouth-razor,’ a
tooth. {%—Mukha-gandhaka, as,%} m. ‘mouth-scent-
ing,’ an onion. {%—Mukha-ghaṇṭā,%} f. ‘mouth-bell,’
a particular sound made with the mouth {%(= hula-%}
{%hulī)%}. {%—Mukha-candra, as,%} m. ‘face-moon,’ a
moon-like face, lovely face. {%—Mukha-capala, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘one whose mouth is ever moving,’ talkative,
loquacious, garrulous; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of Āryā metre.
{%—Mukha-capeṭikā,%} f. a slap on the face, box on
the ear; [cf. {%durjana-m˚.%}] {%—Mukha-cīrī,%} f. the
tongue. {%—Mukha-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced from or
in the mouth; ({%as%}), m. ‘mouth-born,’ a Brāhman,
(so called as being sprung from the mouth of Brahmā;
cf. Manu 1. 31.) {%—Mukha-jāha, am,%} n. the root
or point of issue of the mouth, the top of the
pharynx. {%—1. mukha-tas,%} ind. from or out of or at
the mouth, in the mouth, in the face; at the head,
in the front. {%—2. mukha-tas = mukhe tasyati,%} see
Scholiast on Pāṇ. III. 4, 61. {%—Mukha-daghna,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} reaching to the mouth. {%—Mukha-dū-%}
{%ṣaṇa, as,%} m. ‘mouth-defiler,’ an onion. {%—Mukha-%}
{%dūṣikā,%} f. ‘face-disfiguring,’ an eruption which dis-
figures the face of young people. {%—Mukha-dhautā,%}
f. a plant, Clerodendrum Siphonanthus. {%—Mukha-%}
{%nāsika, am,%} n. the mouth and nose. {%—Mukha-%}
{%nirīkṣaka, as,%} m. ‘face-gazer,’ an idler, lazy
person. {%—Mukha-nivāsinī,%} f. ‘dwelling in the
mouth,’ an epithet of Saravatī. {%—Mukha-paṭa, as,%}
m. ‘face-cloth,’ a veil. {%—Mukha-pāka, as,%} m. in-
flammation of the mouth. {%—Mukha-piṇḍa, as,%} m.
a lump or piece of food in the mouth, mouthful of
food. {%—Mukha-pūraṇa, am,%} n. filling the mouth,
a mouthful of water, a mouthful in general. {%—Mu-%}
{%kha-pratimukha,%} speech and reply (?). {%—Mukha-%}
{%prasāda, as,%} m. the light of the countenance,
graciousness of aspect. {%—Mukha-priya, as, ā, am,%}
pleasant in the mouth; ({%as%}), m. an orange. {%—Mu-%}
{%kha-prekṣa, as, ā, am,%} or {%mukha-prekṣin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} observing or watching the face (to detect
any one's intentions). {%—Mukha-bandha, as,%} m. a
preface. {%—Mukha-bandhana, am,%} n. ‘mouth-bind-
ing,’ the fastening of an aperture, a lid, cover; an
introduction, preface. {%—Mukha-bahūru-paj-ja (˚hu-%}
{%ūr˚), as, ā, am,%} sprung from the mouth, arm, thigh,
and foot (Manu. 1. 87). {%—Mukha-bāhūru-pāda-tas%}
{%(˚hu-ūr˚),%} ind. from the mouth, arms, thighs, and feet.
{%—Mukha-bhūṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘mouth-ornament,’
betel; tin (?). {%—Mukha-bheda, as,%} m. distortion
of the face. {%—Mukha-maṇḍanaka, as,%} m. a species
of tree {%(= tilaka)%}. {%—Mukha-maṇḍala, am,%} n.
‘face-orb,’ the face, countenance. {%—Mukha-maṇ-%}
{%ḍikā,%} f. a particular disease or the deity presiding
over it; (also read {%mukha-maṇḍinikā.%}) {%—Mukha-%}
{%maṇḍī,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
{%—Mukha-mādhurya, am,%} n. a particular disease of
the phlegm. {%—Mukha-mārjana, am,%} n. washing or
cleansing the mouth (after meals, &c.). {%—Mukha-%}
{%moda, as,%} m. Hyperanthera Moringa. {%—Mukham-%}
{%paca, as,%} m. a beggar. {%—Mukha-yantraṇa, am,%} n.
‘mouth-curb,’ the bit of a bridle. {%—Mukha-rāga,%}
{%as,%} m. colour of the face. {%—Mukha-ruj, k,%} f. or
{%mukha-roga, as,%} m. ‘mouth-disease,’ any disease
of the mouth. {%—Mukharogika, as, ā, am,%} relating
to mouth-disease. {%—Mukha-rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} diseased
[Page0782-a+ 81]
in the mouth. {%—Mukha-lāṅgala, as,%} m. ‘using the
snout for a plough,’ a hog. {%—Mukha-lepa, as,%} m.
anointing the face, anointing the upper side (of a
drum); a disease of the phlegmatic humor; [cf. {%āsyo-%}
{%palepa%}] {%—Mukha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing a
mouth, having a mouth. {%—Mukha-vallabha, as,%} m.
a pomegranate tree. {%—Mukha-vāṭikā,%} f. a species
of plant {%(= amba-ṣṭhā)%}. {%—Mukha-vādya, am,%} n.
a wind-instrument, any instrument of music sounded
with the mouth; (in the worship of Śiva) a kind of
musical sound made with the mouth (by striking it
with the hand). {%—Mukha-vāsa%} or {%mukha-vāsana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘mouth-perfume,’ a perfume used to scent the
breath; fragrant grass {%(= gandha-triṇa)%}. {%—Mu-%}
{%kha-vipulā,%} f. a kind of Āryā metre. {%—Mukha-%}
{%viluṇṭhikā,%} f. a she-goat. {%—Mukha-viṣṭhā,%} f. a
species of cockroach. {%—Mukha-vyādāna, am,%} n.
the act of opening the mouth wide, gaping. {%—Mu-%}
{%kha-śapha, as, ā, am,%} foul-mouthed, scurrilous.
{%—Mukha-śuddhi, is,%} f. cleanness of the face or
mouth, cleansing or purifying the mouth (as by
eating betel-nut, &c.). {%—Mukha-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%}
having only the face left; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Rāhu. {%—Mukha-śodhana, as, ī, am,%} ‘mouth-
cleansing,’ cleansing the mouth; sharp, pungent;
({%as%}), m. pungency, sharp or pungent flavour; ({%am%}),
n. the cleansing of the mouth; cinnamon. {%—Mukha-%}
{%śodhin, ī, inī, i,%} cleansing the mouth; ({%ī%}), m. a
lime or citron, citron tree. {%—Mukha-śoṣa, as,%} m.
dryness of the mouth. {%—Mukha-śoṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
suffering from dryness of the mouth. {%—Mukha-śrī,%}
{%īs,%} f. beauty of countenance, a beautiful face. {%—Mu-%}
{%kha-ṣṭhīla, as, ā, am%} (probably for {%mukhā-%}
{%ṣṭhīla%}), {%= mukha-śapha%}. {%—Mukha-sambhava,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘mouth-born,’ a Brāhman; [cf. {%mukha-ja.%}],
{%—Mukha-sukha, am,%} n. ‘ease of pronunciation,’
causing ease of pronunciation or facility of utterance.
{%—Mukha-sura, am,%} n. ‘lip-nectar,’ the moisture
of the lips. {%—Mukha-srāva, as,%} m. flow of saliva,
salivation, saliva. {%—Mukhākāra (˚kha-āk˚), as,%} m.
‘form of the countenance,’ mien, look, appearance.
{%—Mukhāgni (˚kha-ag˚), is,%} m. a forest conflagra-
tion; a sort of goblin with a face of fire; fire put
into the mouth of a corpse at the time of lighting
the funeral pile; a sacrificial or consecrated fire; [cf.
{%mukholkā.%}] {%—Mukhāgra (˚kha-ag˚), am,%} n. the
extremity of the mouth, extremity. {%—Mukhānila%}
{%(˚kha-an˚), as,%} m. ‘mouth-wind,’ wind of the mouth,
breath. {%—Mukhāmaya (˚kha-ām˚), as,%} m. disease of
the mouth. {%—Mukhāmṛta (˚kha-am˚), am,%} n. the
nectar of the mouth or countenance, (a term used in
flattering addresses.) {%—Mukhārcis (˚kha-ar˚), is,%} n.
‘mouth-flame,’ hot breath (?). {%—Mukhārjaka (˚kha-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m. a species of plant {%(= arjaka)%}. {%—Mu-%}
{%khāsava (˚kha-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘lip-moisture,’ nectar
of the lips. {%—Mukhāstra (˚kha-as˚), as,%} m. ‘mouth-
armed,’ a crab. {%—Mukhāsrāva (˚kha-ās˚), as,%} m.
= mukha-srāva. {%—Mukhī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
{%-bhavitum,%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ. III. 4, 61. {%—Mu-%}
{%khendu (˚kha-in˚), us,%} m. a moon-like face, beau-
tiful face. {%—Mukhe-bhava, as, ā, am,%} Ved. formed
in the mouth. {%—Mukhotkīrṇa (˚kha-ut˚), as,%} m.
a proper N. {%—Mukholkā (˚kha-ul˚),%} f. {%= mukhāgni,%}
a forest fire.
<LEND>

<L>37523<pc>0782-a<k1>muKatIya<k2>muKatIya
{%Mukhatīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. 1. {%mukha-tas;%} cf.
{%pārśvatīya%}), being in the mouth or in the front.
<LEND>

<L>37524<pc>0782-a<k1>muKara<k2>muKara
{%Mukhara, as, ā, am,%}¦ talkative, loquacious, gar-
rulous, noisy, making any continuous or tedious
sound (said of birds and bees and tinkling orna-
ments, cf. {%un-m˚%}); sounding, resonant or resound-
ing with (at the end of a comp., e. g. {%pratiśrun-%}
{%mukhara,%} resonant with echoes); expressive of,
({%avarṇa-mukharā giraḥ,%} voices expressive of re-
proach); foul-mouthed, scurrilous, speaking harshly
or abusively; ridiculing, mocking; ({%as%}), m. a crow;
a conch shell; a leader, principal, chief, ringleader;
N. of a Nāga; ({%ī%}), f. the bit of a bridle. {%—Mu-%}
{%khara-tā,%} f. talkativeness, garrulity, noisiness. {%—Mu-%}
{%kharī-karaṇa, am,%} n. making resonant, speaking
harshly, rallying, mocking. {%—Mukharī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
{%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make resonant, cause to resound.
<LEND>
[Page0782-b+ 76]

<L>37525<pc>0782-b<k1>muKaraka<k2>muKaraka
{%Mukharaka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.; ({%ikā%}), f. {%=%}
{%mukharī,%} the bit of a bridle; talking, conversation.
<LEND>

<L>37526<pc>0782-b<k1>muKaraya<k2>muKaraya
{%Mukharaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%mukharayati, -yitum,%} to
make noisy or resonant; to notify, declare.
<LEND>

<L>37527<pc>0782-b<k1>muKarita<k2>muKarita
{%Mukharita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rendered noisy, made
resonant, sounding, ringing.
<LEND>

<L>37528<pc>0782-b<k1>muKIya<k2>muKIya
{%Mukhīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
being at the top or head, being foremost, being at
the entrance.
<LEND>

<L>37529<pc>0782-b<k1>muKya<k2>muKya
{%Mukhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in or on the mouth or
face; belonging to the mouth or face, coming from
the mouth, &c.; being at the head or at the begin-
ning, principal, chief, prime, primary, original, first,
eminent, pre-eminent, first-rate, most excellent or
important, original; (at the end of a comp.) the
chief, most excellent among, first or best of (cf.
{%dvijāti-m˚, dvija-m˚, mantri-m˚, vāra-mukhyā;%}
sometimes even used like {%ādi,%} e. g. {%Nārāyaṇī-%}
{%mukhyam mātṛ-cakram,%} the whole circle of Mātṛs
beginning with Nārāyaṇī); ({%as%}), m. a leader, guide;
N. of a tutelary deity presiding over one part of an
astrological house which is divided into 81 or 63
divisions or Padas; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of
gods under Manu Sārvaṇi; ({%am%}), n. a principal or
essential rite, chief ordinance; reading or teaching
the Vedas; the month reckoned from new moon to
new moon. {%—Mukhya-cāndra,%} the principal lunar
month which ends with the conjunction (as opposed
to the {%gauṇa-cāndra%} or secondary lunar month
which ends with the opposition). {%—Mukhya-tas,%}
ind. principally, chiefly, particularly, especially, par
excellence. {%—Mukhya-tā,%} f. or {%mukhya-tva, am,%}
n. pre-eminence, the being best or chief, principal-
ness, primacy, highest rank or position. {%—Mukhya-%}
{%nṛpa, as,%} or {%mukhya-rāj, ṭ,%} m. a paramount
sovereign, reigning monarch. {%—Mukhyamantri-tā,%}
f. the office or rank of prime minister. {%—Mukhya-%}
{%mantrin, ī,%} m. a prime minister, chief councillor;
[cf. {%mantri-mukhya.%}] {%—Mukhya-śas,%} ind. princi-
pally, particularly, chiefly, before all, next. {%—Mu-%}
{%khyārtha (˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m. primary meaning (of a
word, as opposed to its {%gauṇārtha%} or secondary or
metaphorical meaning), original sense, first signifi-
cation; ({%as, ā, am%}), employed in or having the
original sense.
<LEND>

<L>37530<pc>0782-b<k1>muKaRqI<k2>muKaRqI
{#muKaRqI#}¦ {%mukhaṇḍī,%} or {%mukhuṇḍī,%} f. a kind
of weapon.
<LEND>

<L>37531<pc>0782-b<k1>muKulI<k2>muKulI
{#muKulI#}¦ {%mukhulī,%} f., N. of a Buddhist
goddess.
<LEND>

<L>37532<pc>0782-b<k1>mugadasa<k2>mugadasa
{#mugadasa#}¦ {%mugadasa, mugademu, mugala-sthā-%}
{%na,%} names of places.
<LEND>

<L>37533<pc>0782-b<k1>mugUha<k2>mugUha
{#mugUha#}¦ {%mugūha, as,%} m. a species of gallinule
({%= dātyūha%}).
<LEND>

<L>37534<pc>0782-b<k1>mugDa<k2>mugDa
{#mugDa#}¦ {%mugdha,%} &c. See under rt. 1. {%muh.%}
<LEND>

<L>37535<pc>0782-b<k1>muNga<k2>muNga
{#muNga#}¦ {%muṅga, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37536<pc>0782-b<k1>muNgawa<k2>muNgawa
{%Muṅgaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37537<pc>0782-b<k1>muc<k2>muc<h>1
{#muc#} 1¦. {%muc%} [cf. rt. {%muñc%}], cl. 1. A. {%mo-%}
{%cate, mocitum,%} = rt. {%mac,%} q. v., to cheat,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>37538<pc>0782-b<k1>muc<k2>muc<h>2
{#muc#} 2¦. {%muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%muñcati, -te,%}
{%mumoca, mumuce, mokṣyati, -te, amu-%}
{%cat, amukta%} (Vedic forms {%mucanti, muñcātu,%}
{%mumucre, mumoktu, mumugadhi, mā mauk =%}
{%mā muñca%} in Vājasaneyi-s. 1. 25, {%amumuktam,%}
{%mumocata, mumocati, mumocatam, mukṣata%}),
{%moktum,%} to loose, loosen, let loose, free, let go,
release, liberate, ({%kaṇṭham muñcati,%} he loosens his
throat or voice, i. e. raises a cry; {%vanāya dhenum%}
{%mumoca,%} he let the cow go into the wood; {%prāṇān%}
{%muc,%} to let loose the breath of life, i. e. to deprive
of life, kill); to set free, unloose, open; to let go,
relinquish, abandon, forsake, leave, quit, put off,
shake off, lay aside, give up, ({%deham muñcati,%} he
quits the body, i. e. dies; {%mucyatāṃ viṣādaḥ,%} let
despondency be shaken off); to give up, grant,
bestow; to sacrifice; to set on one side, take away,
[Page0782-c+ 81]
set apart, except; to let go, discharge, emit, effuse,
shed, send forth, send, throw, cast, fling, hurt, shoot,
({%vāṇamayaṃ varṣam mumoca,%} he discharged a
shower of arrows; {%Indro vajram mokṣyate,%} Indra
will hurl his thunderbolt; {%kūṭād ātmānam mumoca,%}
he threw himself down from a peak); to send away,
dismiss; to spit out; to void; to emit sounds, utter;
to put on (A.): Pass. {%mucyate%} (ep. also {%mucyati,%}
2nd Fut. {%mokṣyati%}), to be loosed, to be let loose
or set free, to be released from (with abl. or some-
times with inst., e. g. {%mucyate pātakaiḥ,%} he is loosed
from sins); to become loose, free or deliver one's
self, escape, ({%yady etebhyo mucyase,%} if thou deliver
thyself from these men; {%na me mokṣyati jīvan,%}
he shall not escape from me alive); to abandon, to
deviate or go astray from, ({%yadi dharmād na%}
{%mucyate,%} if he go not astray from virtue): Caus.
{%mocayati, -te,%} Aor. {%amūmucat, mocayitum,%} to
cause to loose, cause to be liberated, cause to let go,
cause to shed; to loose, unloose, set loose or free,
set at large, liberate; to open (a road); to redeem
from (with abl., Manu III. 37); to unyoke, unhar-
ness, ({%aśvān mocayati,%} he unyokes the horses);
to let go, give away, bestow; to cause to give up or
let go or discharge or shed; to gladden, delight,
rejoice, yield enjoyment: Desid. of Caus. {%mumoca-%}
{%yiṣati,%} Ved. to wish or intend to liberate, desire to
be freed from (the bondage of existence, &c.):
Desid. {%mumukṣati, -te,%} to wish or be about to set
free or let go or give up; to wish or be about to
hurl, wish to cast, ({%vajram mumukṣan,%} being
about to hurl a thunderbolt); to wish to free one's
self or get loose; to desire final liberation or beati-
tude [cf. rt. {%mokṣ, mokṣa%}]: Intens. {%momokti,%}
{%momucyate;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μύσσ-ω, μῦκ-ος, μυκτήρ, ἀπομυκτίζω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μύξα, Μυκάλη (?), Μυκήνη (?), μύξινος:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>mung-o, mucu-s, mûcêre, mûcor, mûcêdo:</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>mok-na-ti,</nsi> ‘to be wet;’ <nsi>moc†iti,</nsi> ‘to wet.’]
<LEND>

<L>37539<pc>0782-c<k1>mukta<k2>mukta
{%Mukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ loosened, loosed, let loose,
set free, relaxed, ({%muktair avayavaiḥ,%} with loos-
ened or relaxed limbs); unloosed, opened, open [cf.
{%mukta-hasta%}]; redeemed, released, extricated, libe-
rated, emancipated (from sin or from worldly exist-
ence), finally happy, saved; abandoned, relinquished,
quitted, left, put off, laid aside; given up; bestowed,
granted, given; discharged, emitted, shed, thrown,
cast, hurled, darted, shot, sent, sent forth, poured
forth, ({%varṇodakaiḥ kāñcana-śṛṅga-muktaiḥ,%}
with coloured waters poured forth from golden vials);
ejected, spit out; fallen; deprived; ({%as%}), m., N. of
one of the seven sages under Manu Bhautya; N.
of a cook in Rāja-taraṅgiṇī VII. 1635, &c.; ({%ā%}), f.,
scil. {%diś,%} the quarter just quitted by the sun (e. g. if
the sun be in the south, the south is said to be
{%prāptārkā,%} and the south-east {%muktā%}); a pearl (as
loosened or set free from the pearl-oyster shell); a
courtezan, harlot; a species of plant, {%= rāsnā; (am),%}
n. the spirit released from corporeal existence.
{%—Mukta-kaccha, as, ā, am,%} letting the hem of
the lower garment hang down or leaving it loose
and untucked; ({%as%}), m. a Buddhist. {%—Mukta-kañ-%}
{%cuka, as,%} m. a snake that has cast its slough.
{%—Mukta-kaṇṭha, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} having a loos-
ened or free throat, raising a cry, shrill; ({%am%}), ind.
aloud. {%—Mukta-kara, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} open-handed,
liberal, bountiful. {%—Mukta-keśa, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%}
‘loose-haired,’ having flowing hair, having the hair
dishevelled or hanging down. {%—Mukta-cakṣus,%}
{%us, us, us,%} having the eyes opened; ({%us%}), m. ‘cast-
ing glances,’ a lion. {%—Mukta-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} one
whose soul is liberated (from existence), emancipated.
{%—Mukta-tā,%} f. or {%mukta-tva, am,%} n. emancipation,
liberation, the being liberated from existence. {%—Mu-%}
{%kta-dhvani, is, is, i,%} giving out thunder (as a
cloud). {%—Mukta-nidra, as, ā, am,%} freed from sleep,
awakened. {%—Mukta-nirmoka, as, ā, am, = mukta-%}
{%kañcuka,%} q. v. {%—Mukta-phūtkāra, as, ā, am,%}
uttering a scream, screaming. {%—Mukta-phūtkṛti,%}
{%is,%} f. uttering a shriek, shrieking; hissing. {%—Mukta-%}
{%bandhana, as, ā, am,%} released from bonds, freed
from fetters. {%—Mukta-buddhi, is, is, i,%} one whose
[Page0783-a+ 81]
soul is liberated, emancipated. {%—Mukta-maṇḍūka-%}
{%kaṇṭha, as, ā, am,%} having frogs croaking loudly
(lit. with loosened throats). {%—Mukta-mūrdhaja,%}
{%as, ā, am, = mukta-keśa,%} q. v. {%—Mukta-rodho-%}
{%nitamba, as, ā, am,%} quitting the hip-like bank.
{%—Mukta-roṣa, as, ā, am,%} one who has laid
aside or relinquished anger. {%—Mukta-lajja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} casting away shame. {%—Mukta-vasana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who has put off his clothes, going about
naked; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of a Jaina ascetic.
{%—Mukta-vyāpāra, as, ā, am,%} one who has re-
signed an office or occupation. {%—Mukta-saṃśaya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} free from doubt, certain. {%—Mukta-saṅga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} free from worldly or selfish attachment,
disinterested. {%—Mukta-svāmin, ī,%} m. ‘lord of eman-
cipation,’ N. of a statue erected by a king (Rāja-
taraṅgiṇī IV. 188). {%—Mukta-hasta, as, ā, am,%}
open-handed, liberal, easily parting with possessions,
giving away, profuse; loosed, let go. {%—Muktā-kaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. (for {%muktā-karṇa%}), a proper N. {%—Muktā-%}
{%kalāpa, as,%} m. an ornament made of strings of
pearls, pearl necklace. {%—Muktākāra (˚tā-āk˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the look or appearance of a pearl.
{%—Muktākāra-tā,%} f. the form of a pearl, likeness
to a pearl. {%—Muktā-keśava, as,%} m., N. of a statue
of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Muktāgāra%} ({%˚tā-ag˚%}) or {%-āg˚%}), {%am,%} n.
‘pearl-abode,’ the pearl-oyster. {%—Muktā-guṇa, as,%}
m. a string of pearls; the excellence of a pearl, lustre
or water of a pearl. {%—Muktā-jāla, am,%} n. an orna-
ment of pearls, a string or multitude of pearls, a
pearly zone; [cf. {%muktā-phala-jāla.%}] {%—Muktā-%}
{%jāla-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or consisting of pearls.
{%—Muktātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā,%} m. the emancipated
soul, the soul released from matter; ({%ā, ā, a%}), one
whose soul is liberated, emancipated. {%—Muktā-dā-%}
{%man, ā,%} m. a string of pearls. {%—Muktā-paṭala,%}
{%am,%} n. a mass of pearls. {%—Muktāpīḍa (˚ta-āp˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king; of a poet. {%—Muktā-pura,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a mythical city in the Himālaya moun-
tains. {%—Muktā-puṣpa, as,%} m. Jasminum Multi-
florum or Pubescens. {%—Muktā-prasū, ūs,%} f. ‘pearl-
bearing,’ mother of pearl, the pearl-oyster; [cf.
{%muktā-mātṛ, mauktika-prasavā.%}] {%—Muktā-prā-%}
{%lamba, as,%} m. a string of pearls, pearl ornament,
(also read {%muktā-pralamba.%}) {%—Muktā-phala, am,%}
n. a pearl; a species of flower; the fruit of the Lavalī
plant, the custard apple; camphor; title of a work
by Vopa-deva; N. of a king of the Śavaras. {%—Mu-%}
{%ktāphala-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a king of the Vidyā-
dharas. {%—Muktāphala-jāla, am,%} n. {%= muktā-jāla.%}
{%—Muktāphala-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Muktāphala-parīkṣā,%} f., N. of the eighty-first
Adhyāya in the Varāha-brāhmaṇa-saṃhitā. {%—Muktā-%}
{%phala-latā,%} f. a string of pearls; [cf. {%muktā-latā.%}]
{%—Muktā-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘pearl-gem,’ a pearl; [cf.
{%muktā-ratna.%}] {%—Muktā-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or
consisting of pearls, pearly. {%—Muktā-mātṛ, tā,%} f.
mother of pearl, a pearl-oyster; [cf. {%muktā-prasū.%}]
{%—Muktāmukta (˚ta-am˚), as, ā, am,%} loosed and
not loosed (applied especially to weapons which may
be wielded or hurled, as clubs, javelins, &c.). {%—Mu-%}
{%ktāmbara (˚ta-am˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has put
off his clothes, naked; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of a Jaina
ascetic; [cf. {%mukta-vasana.%}] {%—Muktā-ratna, am,%}
n. ‘pearl-gem,’ a pearl; [cf. {%mauktika-ratna.%}]
{%—Muktā-latā,%} f. a string of pearls, pearl necklace;
N. of a woman. {%—Muktāvalī (˚tā-āv˚),%} f. a pearl
necklace; N. of various works; of a dictionary; of
a commentary on the Megha-dūta; of the wife of
Candra-ketu. {%—Muktāvalī-prakāśa, as,%} m., N.
of a commentary by Dinakara-bhaṭṭa on the Nyāya-
siddhānta-muktāvalī; of a commentary by Maṇi-
rāma. {%—Muktā-śukti, is,%} f. a pearl-oyster {%(= mau-%}
{%ktika-śukti)%}. {%—Muktāsana (˚ta-ās˚), as, ā, am,%}
leaving a seat, rising from a seat; ({%am%}), n. the
mode in which the emancipated are said to sit, a
particular posture of ascetics ({%= siddhāsana,%} q. v.).
{%—Muktā-sena, as,%} m., N. of a king of the Vidyā-
dharas. {%—Muktā-sthūla, as, ā, am,%} big as a pearl.
{%—Muktā-sphoṭa, as, ā,%} m. f. a pearl-oyster. {%—Mu-%}
{%ktā-sraj, k,%} f. a chaplet of pearls. {%—Muktā-hāra, %}
[Page0783-b+ 79]
{%as,%} m. a string of pearls, pearl necklace. {%—Mukte-%}
{%śvara (˚ta-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>37540<pc>0783-b<k1>muktaka<k2>muktaka
{%Muktaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ detached, separate, inde-
pendent; ({%am%}), n. a missile, any missile weapon;
a separate or detached Śloka the meaning of which
is complete in itself; simple prose (freed from all
compound words); a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>37541<pc>0783-b<k1>mukti<k2>mukti
{%Mukti, is,%}¦ f. loosing, release, deliverance, liberation,
setting free, becoming free, freedom, emancipation
(e. g. {%dāsatva-mukti,%} release from servitude; cf.
{%śāpa-m˚%}); final liberation or emancipation, final
beatitude, the delivery of the soul from the body
and exemption from further transmigration, the re-
absorption of the Jīvātman into the Paramātman or
Supreme Soul of the universe; unloosing, opening;
abandonment, putting off, giving up, leaving off;
discharging (rain, a missile, &c.); throwing, casting,
flinging, hurling, shooting, sending; discharge (of a
debt, cf. {%ṛna-m˚%}); N. of a divine being, the wife
of Satya. {%—Mukti-kṣetra, am,%} n. a place where
final emancipation is attainable; N. of a sacred place.
{%—Mukti-grantha, as,%} m. a book of precepts for
the attainment of final emancipation. {%—Mukti-cin-%}
{%tāmaṇi-māhātmya, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Mukti-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. lord of bliss or beatitude. {%—Mukti-pura,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Dvīpa. {%—Mukti-maṇḍapa, as,%} m.,
N. of a temple. {%—Mukti-matī,%} f., N. of a river,
(also read {%bhukti-matī%} and {%śukti-matī.%}) {%—Mukti-%}
{%mārga, as,%} m. the way of liberation, path to final
emancipation. {%—Mukti-mukta, as,%} m. incense, frank-
incense. {%—Mukti-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having freedom,
freed from (with abl.). {%—Mukti-vāda, as,%} m., N. of
a work. {%—Mukti-vicāra, as,%} m., N. of a philoso-
phical work. {%—Mukti-sena, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37542<pc>0783-b<k1>muktikA<k2>muktikA
{%Muktikā,%}¦ f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>37543<pc>0783-b<k1>muktvA<k2>muktvA
{%Muktvā,%}¦ ind. having loosed or freed or let go, ({%mu-%}
{%ktvā hāsam,%} having broken out into loud laughter);
having left or abandoned, having resigned; having
put on one side, having excepted, excepting, except,
({%yuddham muktvā nānyad asti me,%} except a
battle there is nothing else for me); having discharged
or shed, having thrown or flung.
<LEND>

<L>37544<pc>0783-b<k1>muc<k2>muc<h>3
3. {%muc, k, k, k,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) freeing
or delivering from [cf. {%aṃho-m˚%}]; discharging, drop-
ping, letting fall, emitting, throwing, shooting, sending,
({%śara-vṛṣṭi-muc,%} discharging showers of arrows;
{%jala-lava-muc,%} letting fall drops of rain; cf. {%a-m˚,%}
{%jala-m˚, toya-m˚, payo-m˚, parṇa-m˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>37545<pc>0783-b<k1>muca<k2>muca
{%Muca, as, ī, am,%}¦ in {%nakha-muca%} and {%a-mucī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37546<pc>0783-b<k1>mucira<k2>mucira
{%Mucira, as, ā, am,%}¦ liberal, munificent, generous [cf.
{%mukta-hasta%}]; ({%as%}), m. virtue; wind; a deity.
<LEND>

<L>37547<pc>0783-b<k1>mucyamAna<k2>mucyamAna
{%Mucyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being freed or released,
being abandoned by.
<LEND>

<L>37548<pc>0783-b<k1>muYcat<k2>muYcat
{%Muñcat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} or {%muñcāna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} loosing, freeing; giving up, relinquishing; dis-
charging, shooting, casting, shedding.
<LEND>

<L>37549<pc>0783-b<k1>mumukzat<k2>mumukzat
{%Mumukṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ desiring emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>37550<pc>0783-b<k1>mumukzA<k2>mumukzA
{%Mumukṣā,%}¦ f. desire of liberation or final eman-
cipation.
<LEND>

<L>37551<pc>0783-b<k1>mumukzu<k2>mumukzu
{%Mumukṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of freeing, wish-
ing to deliver or liberate; eager to be free (from
mundane existence), striving after emancipation;
wishing to let go or give up; wishing to emit or
discharge; about to shoot; ({%us%}), m. a sage striving
after emancipation. {%—Mumukṣu-tā,%} f. or {%mumu-%}
{%kṣu-tva, am,%} n. desire of liberation or of final
emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>37552<pc>0783-b<k1>mumucAna<k2>mumucAna
{%Mumucāna, as,%}¦ m. a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>37553<pc>0783-b<k1>mumucu<k2>mumucu
{%Mumucu, us,%}¦ m. (mentioned with Un-mucu and
Pra-mucu), N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>37554<pc>0783-b<k1>mumocayizu<k2>mumocayizu
{%Mumocayiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of liberating,
wishing to set free.
<LEND>

<L>37555<pc>0783-b<k1>moktavya<k2>moktavya
{%Moktavya, moktṛ,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>37556<pc>0783-b<k1>mucaka<k2>mucaka
{#mucaka#}¦ {%mucaka, as,%} m. lac, gum-lac.
<LEND>

<L>37557<pc>0783-b<k1>muci<k2>muci
{#muci#}¦ {%muci, is,%} m., N. of a Cakra-vartin.
<LEND>

<L>37558<pc>0783-b<k1>mucilinda<k2>mucilinda
{#mucilinda#}¦ {%mucilinda, as,%} m. a species of
flower; N. of a Nāga; of a Cakra-vartin; [cf.
{%mahā-m˚.%}] {%—Mucilinda-parvata, as,%} m., N. of
a mythical mountain; [cf. {%mahā-m˚.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0783-c+ 76]

<L>37559<pc>0783-c<k1>mucukunda<k2>mucukunda
{#mucukunda#}¦ {%mucukunda, as,%} m. Pterospermum
Suberifolium; N. of an ancient king (or Muni);
N. of a son of Mandhāṛ (who asked the gods to
grant him the enjoyment of long and unbroken
sleep as a reward for the assistance he had rendered
them in subduing the demons; the gods complied
with his request, and decreed that whosoever disturbed
him should be burnt to ashes by fire emanating from
his body; Kṛṣṇa, in order to destroy Kāla-yavana,
enticed him into the cave where Mucukunda was
asleep, and the latter being thus roused cast upon
Kāla-yavana an angry glance which reduced him
to ashes; see translation of Viṣṇu-Purāṇa, p. 567);
N. of a son of Yadu; of the father of Candra-bhāga;
of a poet of Kaśmīra; of a Daitya. {%—Mucukunda-%}
{%prasādaka, as,%} m. an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>37560<pc>0783-c<k1>mucuwI<k2>mucuwI
{#mucuwI#}¦ {%mucuṭī,%} f. (fr. rt. 2. {%muc%}), snapping
the fingers [cf. {%pucchaṭi%}]; the fist; a pair of forceps.
<LEND>

<L>37561<pc>0783-c<k1>muC<k2>muC
{#muC#}¦ {%much,%} cl. 1. P. {%mucchati,%} &c., a
various reading for rt. {%yuch,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37562<pc>0783-c<k1>muj<k2>muj
{#muj#}¦ {%muj,%} cl. 1. P. {%mojati,%} &c., and
{%muñj,%} cl. 1. P. {%muñjati,%} &c., to sound,
give out a particular sound; (according to Vopa-deva
also) cl. 10. P. {%mojayati,%} &c., and {%muñjayati,%} &c.,
to sound; to cleanse; [cf. rt. 1. {%mṛj:%} cf. also Gr.
<lang n="greek">μύζ-ω, ἔ-μυ-σα, μυγ-μό-ς, μῡκ-ά-ο-μαι, μέμυκα;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>mugio.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37563<pc>0783-c<k1>muYc<k2>muYc
{#muYc#}¦ {%muñc%} (connected with rts. {%mañc,%}
{%mruñc, mluñc%}), cl. 1. P. {%muñcati,%} &c.,
to go, move; cl. 1. A. {%muñcate,%} &c. = rt. {%mac,%}
q. v., to cheat, to be wicked, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37564<pc>0783-c<k1>muYcaka<k2>muYcaka
{%Muñcaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of tree ({%= muṣkaka-%}
{%vṛkṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>37565<pc>0783-c<k1>muYj<k2>muYj
{#muYj#}¦ {%muñj.%} See rt. {%muj%} above.
<LEND>

<L>37566<pc>0783-c<k1>muYja<k2>muYja
{%Muñja, as,%}¦ m. a sort of rush or grass, Saccharum
Munja (which grows to the height of ten feet and
is used to form the Brāhmanical mekhalā or girdle
as well as in basket-work); the Brāhmanical girdle
or the sacred cord of a Brāhman (as made of the
Muñja grass, but in this sense the more proper form
is {%mauñja;%} cf. Manu II. 27, 42, 43); an arrow (?);
N. of a person with the patronymic Sāma-śravasa;
of a Brāhman; of a poet and king of Dhārā; of a
prince of Campā. {%—Muñja-ketu, us,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Muñja-keśa, as,%} m. ‘rush-haired,’ epithet of
Śiva; of Viṣṇu; of a king; of a teacher; of a dis-
ciple of Vijitāsu. {%—Muñjakeśa-vat, ān,%} m. ‘having
rush-like hair,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Muñja-keśin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} having rush-like hair; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet
of Viṣṇu; a proper N. {%—Muñja-grāma, as,%} m.,
N. of a village, (also read {%ramya-grāma.%}) {%—Muñja-%}
{%nejana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according to Sāy.) freed
from grass or rushes {%(= tṛṇena śodhita, apagata-%}
{%tṛṇa)%}. {%—Muñjan-dhaya, as, ī, am,%} sucking rushes.
{%—Muñja-pṛṣṭha, as,%} m., N. of a place on the
Himālaya mountains. {%—Muñja-bandhana, am,%} n.
investiture with the Brāhmanical girdle or cord.
{%—Muñja-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of Muñja grass.
{%—Muñja-mekhalin, ī,%} m. ‘Muñja-girdled,’ an epi-
thet of Viṣṇu; of Śiva. {%—Muñja-vaṭa,%} N. of a
place of pilgrimage; [cf. {%muñjāvaṭa.%}] {%—Muñja-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} overgrown with rushes, rushy; ({%ān%}),
m. epithet of a particular species of Soma plant; N.
of a mountain of the Himālaya range. {%—Muñja-%}
{%vāsas, ās,%} m. ‘rush-clothed,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Muñ-%}
{%jāditya (˚ja-ād˚), is,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Muñ-%}
{%jādiri (˚ja-ad˚), is,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Muñjā-%}
{%vaṭa (˚ja-av˚),%} N. of a place {%(= muñja-pṛṣṭha).%}
{%—Muñjī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to reduce
to Muñja grass, i. e. to tear to shreds.
<LEND>

<L>37567<pc>0783-c<k1>muYjaka<k2>muYjaka
{%Muñjaka,%}¦ a various reading for {%mauñjaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37568<pc>0783-c<k1>muYjara<k2>muYjara
{%Muñjara, am,%}¦ n. the fibrous root of the lotus.
<LEND>

<L>37569<pc>0783-c<k1>muYjAta<k2>muYjAta
{%Muñjāta, as,%}¦ m. a species of plant.
<LEND>

<L>37570<pc>0783-c<k1>muYjAtaka<k2>muYjAtaka
{%Muñjātaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of tree; a kind of
vegetable {%(= puṣpa-śāka-bheda); = muñja.%}
<LEND>

<L>37571<pc>0783-c<k1>muYjAla<k2>muYjAla
{%Muñjāla, as,%}¦ m., N. of an astronomer.
<LEND>
[Page0784-a+ 78]

<L>37572<pc>0784-a<k1>muw<k2>muw
{#muw#}¦ {%muṭ%} (connected with rts. 1. {%mṛd, puṭ,%}
{%puṇḍ, puḍ, puth%}), cl. 1. 6. 10. P. {%moṭati,%}
{%muṭati, moṭayati,%} &c., to crush, grind, break, (see
{%moṭaka, moṭana%}); to blame, rebuke, (in this sense
only cl. 6. {%muṭati.%})
<LEND>

<L>37573<pc>0784-a<k1>muwa<k2>muwa
{%Muṭa%}¦ in {%nir-m˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37574<pc>0784-a<k1>muq<k2>muq
{#muq#}¦ {%muḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%moḍati,%} &c., = rt. {%muṭ%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>37575<pc>0784-a<k1>muR<k2>muR
{#muR#}¦ {%muṇ,%} cl. 6. P. {%muṇati,%} &c., to
promise.
<LEND>

<L>37576<pc>0784-a<k1>muRw<k2>muRw
{#muRw#}¦ {%muṇṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%muṇṭati,%} &c., = rt.
{%muṭ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>37577<pc>0784-a<k1>muRW<k2>muRW
{#muRW#}¦ {%muṇṭh,%} cl. 1. A. {%muṇṭhate,%} &c., to
run away; to protect, ({%pālane%} being
given as a various reading for {%palāyane.%})
<LEND>

<L>37578<pc>0784-a<k1>muRq<k2>muRq
{#muRq#}¦ {%muṇḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%muṇḍati,%} &c., to
grind, (in this sense = rt. {%muṭ%} and con-
nected with rt. 1. {%mṛd%}); to shave, shear; cl. 1. A.
{%muṇḍate, muṇḍitum,%} to be pure; to sink; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>mund-o, mundu-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37579<pc>0784-a<k1>muRqa<k2>muRqa
{%Muṇḍa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (perhaps connected with rt. 1.
{%mṛd%}), shaved, bald, having no hair on the head;
hornless, destitute of horns, having no horns (Ved.);
stripped of top leaves or branches, lopped (as a tree);
pointless, blunt; low, mean; ({%as%}), m. a man with
a shaved head; a bald or shaven head, bald pate,
shorn poll; the forehead; a tree stripped of its top
branches, the trunk of a lopped tree, a pollard; a
barber ({%= muṇḍaka%}); N. of a king; of a Daitya;
an epithet of Rāhu; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people;
({%ā%}), f. a (close-shaved) female mendicant; a species
of plant ({%= muṇḍīrikā%}); Bengal madder; ({%ī%}), f. a
species of plant ({%= mahā-śrāvaṇikā%}); N. of one
of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda; ({%am%}), n. the
head; iron [cf. {%muṇḍa-loha, muṇḍāyasa%}]; myrrh.
{%—Muṇḍa-caṇaka, as,%} m. a kind of pulse {%(=%}
{%kalāya)%}. {%—Muṇḍa-dhānya, am,%} n. a kind of grain
(without awns; cf. {%muṇḍa-śāli%}). {%—Muṇḍa-pṛṣ-%}
{%ṭha,%} N. of a place. {%—Muṇḍa-phala, as,%} m. a cocoa-
nut tree, (the fruit being one step towards a human
head made by Viśvāmitra when he proposed attempt-
ing a creation in opposition to that of Brahmā.)
{%—Muṇḍa-maṇḍalī,%} f. a number of shaven heads; a
number of troops of an inferior description. {%—Muṇḍa-%}
{%mālā,%} f. or {%muṇḍamālā-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra. {%—Muṇḍa-mālinī,%} f. a form of Durgā.
{%—Muṇḍa-loha, am,%} n. iron; [cf. {%aṣṭa-lohaka,%}
{%muṇḍāyasa, muṇḍita.%}] {%—Muṇḍa-vedāṅga, as,%}
m., N. of a serpent-demon. {%—Muṇḍa-śāli, is,%} m.
a species of rice. {%—Muṇḍākhyā (˚ḍa-ākh˚),%} f. a
species of plant {%(= mahā-śrāvaṇikā)%}. {%—Muṇḍā-%}
{%yasa (˚ḍa-ay˚), am,%} n. iron. {%—Muṇḍāsana%}
{%(˚ḍa-ās˚), am,%} n. a particular posture in sitting.
{%—Muṇḍeśvara-tīrtha (˚ḍa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of
a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>37580<pc>0784-a<k1>muRqaka<k2>muRqaka
{%Muṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. the lopped trunk or stem of a
tree, a tree stripped of its branches; a shaver, barber;
({%ikā%}), f. a species of plant; ({%am%}), n. the head; N.
of the chapters into which the Muṇḍakopaniṣad is
divided. {%—Muṇḍakopaniṣad (˚ka-up˚),%} f., N. of
a well-known Upaniṣad of the Atharva-veda (con-
taining three short chapters or Muṇḍakas, each of
which comprises two sections or Khaṇḍas, and said
to take its name from the word {%muṇḍa%} because
every one who comprehends its secret doctrine is
‘shorn,’ i. e. liberated from all error, a similar idea
being probably involved in the name of the Kṣuri-
kopanishad or ‘Razor Upaniṣad:’ the Muṇḍaka
is one of the most interesting of the numerous Upa-
niṣads, on account of the reasons which it gives
for the superiority of these works over the Veda and
its ritual; thus, according to Muṇḍaka I. 4, there
are two sciences, the higher and the inferior; the
inferior is the knowledge of the Ṛg-veda, Yajur-
veda, Sāma-veda, Atharva-veda, pronunciation, ritual,
grammar, explanation of Vedic texts, prosody, and
the astronomical calendar; but the higher knowledge
is that by which the imperishable Brahma is com-
[Page0784-b+ 77]
prehended). {%—Muṇḍakopaniṣad-dīpikā,%} f., N. of
a commentary on the above.
<LEND>

<L>37581<pc>0784-b<k1>muRqana<k2>muRqana
{%Muṇḍana, am,%}¦ n. shaving the head, tonsure;
protecting, defending, [cf. rt. {%muṇṭh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37582<pc>0784-b<k1>muRqanaka<k2>muRqanaka
{%Muṇḍanaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of rice, {%= muṇḍa-%}
{%śāli; (ikā),%} f. in {%mahā-m˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37583<pc>0784-b<k1>muRqaya<k2>muRqaya
{%Muṇḍaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%muṇḍayati, -yitum,%} to shave,
shear, cut off the hair, shave the head closely.
<LEND>

<L>37584<pc>0784-b<k1>muRqAra<k2>muRqAra
{%Muṇḍāra, am,%}¦ n., N. of a place at which the sun
was worshipped.
<LEND>

<L>37585<pc>0784-b<k1>muRqita<k2>muRqita
{%Muṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaved, closely shaven, bald.
shorn, lopped; ({%am%}), n. iron; [cf. {%muṇḍa-loha.%}]
{%—Muṇḍita-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} shaven-headed, bald-
pated.
<LEND>

<L>37586<pc>0784-b<k1>muRqitikA<k2>muRqitikA
{%Muṇḍitikā,%}¦ f. a species of plant, (commonly
{%muṇḍīrī%} or {%muṇḍinikā;%} cf. {%muṇḍanka.%})
<LEND>

<L>37587<pc>0784-b<k1>muRqin<k2>muRqin
{%Muṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ shaven, close-shaved, bald; horn-
less, having no horns; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Śiva;
a barber. {%—Muṇḍīśvara-tīrtha (˚ḍi-īś˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha; [cf. {%daṇḍi-muṇḍīśvara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37588<pc>0784-b<k1>muRqiBa<k2>muRqiBa
{%Muṇḍibha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a proper N., (the author
of Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā XXV. 9. is so called.)
<LEND>

<L>37589<pc>0784-b<k1>muRqIrikA<k2>muRqIrikA
{%Muṇḍīrikā,%}¦ f. a species of plant ({%= muṇḍā =%}
{%muṇḍitikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37590<pc>0784-b<k1>muRqIrI<k2>muRqIrI
{%Muṇḍīrī,%}¦ f. a species of plant ({%= śramaṇā, pra-%}
{%vrajitā%}).
<LEND>

<L>37591<pc>0784-b<k1>mutkala<k2>mutkala
{#mutkala#}¦ {%mutkala, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>37592<pc>0784-b<k1>mutKalin<k2>mutKalin
{#mutKalin#}¦ {%mutkhalin, ī,%} m., N. of a Deva-
putra.
<LEND>

<L>37593<pc>0784-b<k1>mutya<k2>mutya
{#mutya#}¦ {%mutya, am,%} n. a pearl.
<LEND>

<L>37594<pc>0784-b<k1>muTaSila<k2>muTaSila
{#muTaSila#}¦ {%muthaśila,%} (in astrology) N. of
the third Yoga (= <lang n="arabic">مُتّصِل</lang>).
<LEND>

<L>37595<pc>0784-b<k1>mud<k2>mud<h>1
{#mud#} 1¦. {%mud,%} cl. 10. P. {%modayati, moda-%}
{%yitum,%} to mix, mingle, blend, unite.
<LEND>

<L>37596<pc>0784-b<k1>mud<k2>mud<h>2
{#mud#} 2¦. {%mud,%} cl. 1. A. {%modate%} (ep. occa-
sionally P. {%modati,%} &c.), {%mumude, mo-%}
{%diṣyate, amodiṣṭa, moditum,%} to be glad or
joyous or happy, to rejoice, enjoy one's self, rejoice
in, have pleasure in (with inst. or loc., e. g. {%putra-%}
{%pautrair modasva,%} rejoice thou in children and
children's children; {%tasmin na modāmahe,%} we do
not take pleasure in that): Caus. {%modayati, amū-%}
{%mudat, modayitum,%} to rejoice, delight, give pleasure
or joy, exhilarate, yield enjoyment; [cf. Lith. <nsi>mu-</nsi>
<nsi>drùs.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37597<pc>0784-b<k1>mud<k2>mud<h>3
3. {%mud, t,%}¦ f. joy, pleasure, delight, joyfulness,
joyousness, gladness, happiness, rejoicing; Joy per-
sonified as the daughter of Tuṣṭi (Contentment);
intoxication; a species of medicinal plant ({%= vṛd-%}
{%dhi%}); a wife, woman (?). {%—Mud-bhāj, k, k, k,%} Ved.
possessing joy, feeling or experiencing pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>37598<pc>0784-b<k1>mudakara<k2>mudakara
{%Mudakara, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>37599<pc>0784-b<k1>mudA<k2>mudA
{%Mudā,%}¦ f. pleasure, enjoyment, joy, gladness. {%—Mu-%}
{%dānvita (˚dā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} filled with joy,
pleased, delighted. {%—Mudā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} rejoic-
ing, glad, delighted; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a daughter of
king Vidūratha. {%—Mudā-vasu, us,%} m., N. of a son
of Prajāti.
<LEND>

<L>37600<pc>0784-b<k1>mudita<k2>mudita
{%Mudita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rejoiced, joyful, happy, de-
lighted, glad; ({%as%}), m. epithet of a particular sort of
servant; ({%ā%}), f. joy, gladness; ({%am%}), n. pleasure,
happiness; a particular kind of sexual embrace.
{%—Mudita-bhadra, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37601<pc>0784-b<k1>mudira<k2>mudira
{%Mudira, as,%}¦ m. a cloud; a lover, libertine; a frog.
<LEND>

<L>37602<pc>0784-b<k1>mudI<k2>mudI
{%Mudī,%}¦ f. moonshine, moonlight.
<LEND>

<L>37603<pc>0784-b<k1>mudga<k2>mudga
{%Mudga, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%mud%} above,
Uṇādi-s. 1. 127), a sort of kidney-bean, Phaseolus
Radiatus or Phaseolus Mungo (both the plant and
its beans); a cover, covering, lid; a kind of sea-
bird, (in this sense for {%madgu,%} q. v.) {%—Mudga-%}
{%giri, is,%} m., N. of a city. {%—Mudga-parṇī,%} f. a sort
of kidney-bean, Phaseolus Trilobus. {%—Mudga-bhuj,%}
{%k,%} or {%mudga-bhojin, ī,%} m. ‘eating Mudga-beans,’
a horse. {%—Mudga-modaka, as,%} m. a kind of sweet-
meat or confectionery. {%—Mudga-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having beans, &c. {%—Mudgārdrakavaṭa (˚ga-ār˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of sweetmeat.
<LEND>
[Page0784-c+ 79]

<L>37604<pc>0784-c<k1>mudgapa<k2>mudgapa
{%Mudgapa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>37605<pc>0784-c<k1>mudgara<k2>mudgara
{%Mudgara, as,%}¦ m. (probably connected with {%mud-%}
{%ga%}), a hammer, mallet; a hammer-like weapon,
mace; a staff weighted at the bottom with iron for
breaking clods of earth; a kind of dumb-bell or
club-like piece of wood used for exercising the arms;
a bud ({%= koraka%}); a species of jasmine, (also {%am,%}
n. probably the blossom); N. of a Nāga; ({%am%}), n.
a particular posture in sitting. {%—Mudgara-gomin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mudgara-parṇaka, as,%} m.,
N. of a Nāga. {%—Mudgara-piṇḍaka, as,%} m., N. of
a Nāga. {%—Mudgarākāra (˚ra-āk˚), as, ā, am,%}
hammer-shaped, shaped like a mallet.
<LEND>

<L>37606<pc>0784-c<k1>mudgaraka<k2>mudgaraka
{%Mudgaraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
a hammer; ({%as%}), m. Averrhoa Carambola; [cf.
{%phala-mudgarikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37607<pc>0784-c<k1>mudgala<k2>mudgala
{%Mudgala, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. {%mudga%}), N. of
a Ṛṣi with the patronymic Bhārmyaśva, (said to
be the author of Ṛg-veda X. 102); N. of a disciple
of Śākalya; of a disciple of Deva-mitra; of a son of
Viśvāmitra; of various persons; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
descendants of Mudgala; N. of a people; ({%am%}), n. a
species of grass ({%= rohiṣa%}); N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>37608<pc>0784-c<k1>mudgalAnI<k2>mudgalAnI
{%Mudgalānī,%}¦ f., Ved. the wife of Mudgala.
<LEND>

<L>37609<pc>0784-c<k1>mudgazwa<k2>mudgazwa
{%Mudgaṣṭa, as,%}¦ m. a species of bean ({%= ma-%}
{%kuṣṭhaka,%} &c.; also spelt {%mudgaṣṭha, mud-%}
{%gaṣṭaka, mudgaṣṭhaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>37610<pc>0784-c<k1>mudra<k2>mudra
{%Mudra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. joyous, joyful, glad.
<LEND>

<L>37611<pc>0784-c<k1>mudga<k2>mudga
{#mudga#}¦ {%mudga.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37612<pc>0784-c<k1>mudra<k2>mudra
{#mudra#}¦ {%mudra.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>37613<pc>0784-c<k1>mudrA<k2>mudrA
{#mudrA#}¦ {%mudrā,%} f. a seal or any instrument
used for sealing or stamping, a seal-ring, signet-ring
[cf. {%aṅguli-m˚%}], any ring; the stamp or impression
made by a seal, &c., any stamp, print, impression,
mark, form, ({%mudrāṃ dā,%} to set or affix a seal to
anything); type, lithograph; a stamped coin, cash;
any coin or piece of money, a rupee; a medal; an
image, sign, badge, token (especially a token of
divine attributes impressed upon the body); shutting,
closing (e. g. {%oṣṭha-mudrā,%} closing of the lips,
sealed lips); a mystery; a general N. for certain
positions or intertwinings of the fingers commonly
practised in devotion or religious worship and held
to be symbolical [cf. {%tarka-m˚%}]; the natural expres-
sion of things by words (in rhetoric), calling things
by their right names. {%—Mudrā-kara, as,%} m. a
maker of seals, engraver, coiner. {%—Mudrākṣara%}
{%(˚rā-ak˚), am,%} n. type, print. {%—Mudrākṣepa%}
{%(˚rā-āk˚), as,%} m. taking away or removing a seal.
{%—Mudrāṅka%} or {%mudrāṅkita (˚rā-aṅ˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} stamped or marked with a seal, stamped, sealed,
signed, marked, printed. {%—Mudrā-bala, am,%} n.
(with Buddhists) a particular high number. {%—Mudrā-%}
{%mārga, as,%} m. an aperture believed to exist on the
crown of the head (through which the soul is said
to escape at death, {%= brahma-randhra%}). {%—Mudrā-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n. a printing-press. {%—Mudrāyantrā-%}
{%laya (˚ra-āl˚), as, am,%} m. n. a printing-office.
{%—Mudrā-rakṣaka, as,%} m. the keeper of the seals.
{%—Mudrā-rākṣasa, am,%} n. ‘the Rākṣasa and the
ring,’ N. of a drama by Viśākha-datta. {%—Mudrā-%}
{%lipi, is,%} f. print, lithograph.
<LEND>

<L>37614<pc>0784-c<k1>mudraRa<k2>mudraRa
{%Mudraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of sealing, sealing up,
closing.
<LEND>

<L>37615<pc>0784-c<k1>mudraya<k2>mudraya
{%Mudraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%mudrayati, mudrayitum,%} to
seal, stamp, print, mark, impress a stamp, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37616<pc>0784-c<k1>mudrikA<k2>mudrikA
{%Mudrikā,%}¦ f. a little seal, seal; seal-ring, signet-
ring [cf. {%aṅguli-m˚%}]; a stamp, impression; a stamped
coin; a particular surgical instrument; a sealed or
signed paper; N. of certain positions or intertwin-
ings of the fingers practised in devotion, (see {%mudrā%}
above.)
<LEND>

<L>37617<pc>0784-c<k1>mudrita<k2>mudrita
{%Mudrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sealed, stamped, impressed,
printed, marked, bearing the impress of anything;
contracted, closed, sealed up; unblown (as a flower);
arranged or intertwined in a particular form (said
of the fingers of the hand, cf. {%mudrā%}). {%—Mudrita-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} having the mouth closed, having
the lips sealed.
<LEND>
[Page0785-a+ 80]

<L>37618<pc>0785-a<k1>muDA<k2>muDA
{#muDA#}¦ {%mudhā,%} ind. (perhaps connected with
rt. 1. {%muh%} and {%mūḍha%}), in vain, uselessly, unprofit-
ably, to no purpose, without any purpose or object.
<LEND>

<L>37619<pc>0785-a<k1>muni<k2>muni
{#muni#}¦ {%muni, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%man,%}
to think or perceive, Uṇādi-s. IV. 122; perhaps
connected with <lang n="greek">μόνος,</lang> alone, whence the Eng. <nsi>monk</nsi>
is said to be derived; cf. also <lang n="greek">μία</lang> fr. <lang n="greek">εἷς</lang>), impulse
(Ved. ?); an inspired saint, holy man endowed with
divine inspiration or one who has attained more or
less of a divine nature by mortification and abstraction;
a sage, seer, ascetic, devotee, monk; (especially) a
recluse who lives alone and has taken the vow of
silence [cf. {%mauna%}]; epithet of Agastya; of Vyāsa;
of Pāṇini, &c. [cf. {%muni-traya%}]; of a Buddha or
Arhat [cf. {%śākya-muni%}]; of a son of Kuru; of a
son of Dyuti-mat, &c.; the internal monitor or
conscience, (according to Kullūka on Manu VIII. 91
{%= paramātman,%} the Supreme Spirit); N. of various
plants, Agati Grandiflora ({%= agasti, agastya%}); Bu-
chanania Latifolia; Butea Frondosa; Terminalia
Catappa; the mango tree; Artemisia Indica; ({%ayas%}),
m. pl. ‘the celestial Munis, the seven Munis,’ an
epithet of the seven stars of Ursa Major; a symbo-
lical expression for the number seven; ({%is%} or {%munī%}),
f. a female Muni; ({%is%}), f., N. of a daughter of
Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa, mother of a class of
Gandharvas and Apsarasas, (see {%mauneya.%}) {%—Muni-%}
{%keśa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} Ved. ‘monk-haired,’ wearing
long hair like a Muni. {%—Muni-kharjūrikā,%} f. a
species of date. {%—Muni-cita,%} see Gaṇa Sutaṅgamādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80. {%—Muni-cchada, as,%} m. ‘seven-
leaved,’ N. of a plant {%(= sapta-cchada)%}. {%—Muni-%}
{%jñāna-jyanta, as,%} m., N. of a scribe. {%—Muni-%}
{%taru, us,%} m. Agati Grandiflora. {%—Muni-tā,%} f. or
{%muni-tva, am,%} n. the state or character of a
Muni, saintship, monkhood. {%—Muni-traya, am,%}
n. ‘the Muni-triad,’ i. e. Pāṇini, Kātyāyana, and
Patañjali. {%—Muni-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a place.
{%—Muni-druma, as,%} m. ‘the sage Agastya's tree,’
Agati Grandiflora; Calosanthes Indica. {%—Muni-nir-%}
{%mita, as,%} m. a species of plant {%(= ḍiṇḍiśa)%}. {%—Muni-%}
{%padī,%} f., see Gaṇa Kumbhapadyādi to Pāṇ. V. 4,
139. {%—Muni-paramaparā,%} f., Ved. a tradition
handed down from one Muni to another in regular
succession. {%—Muni-pittala, am,%} n. copper. {%—Muni-%}
{%puṅgava, as,%} m. an eminent sage. {%—Muni-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. Artemisia Indica. {%—Muni-putraka, as,%} m.
a wagtail. {%—Muni-puṣpaka, am,%} n. the blossom
of Agati Grandiflora. {%—Muni-pūga, as,%} m. Areca
Triandra. {%—Muni-bheṣaja, am,%} n. ‘sage's medi-
cine,’ fasting; the fruit of the yellow Myrobalan;
Agati Grandiflora; Terminalia Chebula or Citrina.
{%—Muni-maraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a district. {%—Muni-%}
{%vana, am,%} n. a hermit's grove, a wood inhabited by
ascetics. {%—Muni-vara, as,%} m. an excellent Muni,
best of ascetics or holy sages. {%—Muni-vākya, am,%}
n. the saying or sentence of a holy sage. {%—Muni-%}
{%vīrya, as,%} m., N. of a divine being reckoned
among the Viśve Devāḥ. {%—Muni-vrata, as, ā, am,%}
observing the vow of a Muni, i. e. keeping perpetual
silence. {%—Muni-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. an excellent sage,
eminent saint. {%—Muni-sattra, am,%} n., Ved., N. of
an Iṣṭi, q. v. {%—Muni-suvrata, as,%} m., N. of the
twelfth Arhat of the past Ut-sarpiṇī; of the twen-
tieth of the present Ava-sarpiṇī, (also called simply
{%Muni.%}) {%—Muni-sthala,%} see Gaṇa Kumudādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80. {%—Muni-sthāna, am,%} n. an abode
of ascetics, the hermitage of a recluse or holy sage.
{%—Muni-hata, as,%} m. an epithet of king Puṣpa-
mitra. {%—Munīndra (˚ni-in˚), as,%} m. ‘chief of sages
or ascetics,’ a great sage or ascetic; epithet of a
Buddha; of Śākya-muni; of Bharata; of Śiva; of
a Dānava. {%—Munīndra-tā,%} f. the rank of a great
Muni. {%—Munī-vatī,%} f., see Gaṇa Śarādi to Pāṇ.
VI. 3, 120. {%—Munī-vaha,%} see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VI.
3, 121. {%—Munīśa (˚ni-īśa), as,%} m. ‘chief of sages
or ascetics,’ a great sage or ascetic. {%—Munīśvara%}
{%(˚ni-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘chief of sages or ascetics,’ a great
sage or ascetic; an epithet of Viṣṇu; of Buddha;
N. of a commentator on the Siddhānta-Śiromaṇi.
[Page0785-b+ 69]
{%—Muny-anna, āni,%} n. pl. the food of ascetics
(consisting mostly of roots and fruits). {%—Muny-%}
{%ayana, am,%} n., N. of an Iṣṭi, q. v. {%—Muny-%}
{%ālaya-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>37620<pc>0785-b<k1>munika<k2>munika
{%Munika, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37621<pc>0785-b<k1>muniSa<k2>muniSa
{%Muniśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ full of ascetics.
<LEND>

<L>37622<pc>0785-b<k1>munTahA<k2>munTahA
{#munTahA#}¦ {%munthahā, munthā,%} astrological
terms.
<LEND>

<L>37623<pc>0785-b<k1>munnaBawwa<k2>munnaBawwa
{#munnaBawwa#}¦ {%munnabhaṭṭa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37624<pc>0785-b<k1>mumukzA<k2>mumukzA
{#mumukzA#}¦ {%mumukṣā, mumukṣu.%} See p. 783,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37625<pc>0785-b<k1>mumucAna<k2>mumucAna
{#mumucAna#}¦ {%mumucāna, mumucu.%} See p. 783,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37626<pc>0785-b<k1>mumurat<k2>mumurat
{#mumurat#}¦ {%mumurat.%} See under rt. {%mṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>37627<pc>0785-b<k1>mumuzizu<k2>mumuzizu
{#mumuzizu#}¦ {%mumuṣiṣu.%} See p. 786, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37628<pc>0785-b<k1>mumUrzA<k2>mumUrzA
{#mumUrzA#}¦ {%mumūrṣā, mumūrṣu.%} See rt. {%mṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>37629<pc>0785-b<k1>mumokzayizu<k2>mumokzayizu
{#mumokzayizu#}¦ {%mumokṣayiṣu.%} See under rt.
{%mokṣ,%} p. 797, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37630<pc>0785-b<k1>mumocayizu<k2>mumocayizu
{#mumocayizu#}¦ {%mumocayiṣu.%} See p. 783, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37631<pc>0785-b<k1>mummaqideva<k2>mummaqideva
{#mummaqideva#}¦ {%mummaḍi-deva, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37632<pc>0785-b<k1>mummuni<k2>mummuni
{#mummuni#}¦ {%mummuni, is,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37633<pc>0785-b<k1>mur<k2>mur<h>1
{#mur#} 1¦. {%mur, ūr,%} Ved. (fr. rt. {%mṛ%}), a mortal,
(Sāy. {%= maraṇa-svabhāva, maraṇa-śīla.%})
<LEND>

<L>37634<pc>0785-b<k1>mur<k2>mur<h>2
{#mur#} 2¦. {%mur, ūr,%} f. (fr. rt. {%murch%}), fainting;
see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VI. 4, 21.
<LEND>

<L>37635<pc>0785-b<k1>mur<k2>mur<h>3
{#mur#} 3¦. {%mur, ūr%} (fr. rt. {%murv%}), binding,
tying.
<LEND>

<L>37636<pc>0785-b<k1>mur<k2>mur<h>4
{#mur#} 4¦. {%mur,%} cl. 6. P. {%murati,%} &c., to en-
compass, surround, encircle, entwine, bind
together; [cf. perhaps Lat. <nsi>murus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37637<pc>0785-b<k1>mur<k2>mur<h>5
5. {%mur, ūr,%}¦ Ved. a wall (?).
<LEND>

<L>37638<pc>0785-b<k1>mura<k2>mura
{%Mura, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Daitya slain by Kṛṣṇa;
({%ā%}), f. a species of fragrant plant (named after the
Daitya); said to be the N. of the wife of Nanda
and mother of Candra-gupta; ({%am%}), n. encompass-
ing, surrounding. {%—Mura-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of
Mura,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. {%—Mura-da,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘Mura-cutting,’ the discus of Viṣṇu. {%—Mura-%}
{%dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. ‘foe of Mura,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa or
Viṣṇu. {%—Mura-bhid, t,%} m. ‘cleaver of Mura,’ epi-
thet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. {%—Mura-mardana, as,%}
m. ‘crusher of Mura,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu.
{%—Mura-ripu, us,%} m. ‘enemy of Mura,’ epithet of
Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. {%—Mura-vairin, ī,%} m. ‘enemy
of Mura,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. {%—Mura-%}
{%han, hā,%} m. ‘slayer of Mura,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa or
Viṣṇu. {%—Murāri (˚ra-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of
Mura,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu; N. of the
author of the Murāri-nāṭaka or Anargha-rāghava;
N. of a commentary on the Kātantra grammar.
{%—Murāri-gupta, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of Caitanya.
{%—Murāri-nāṭaka, am,%} n., N. of a drama by Mu-
rāri, = Anargha-rāghava. {%—Murāri-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m.,
N. of a teacher. {%—Murāri-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a
scholar, = Murāri (author of the Murāri-nāṭaka).
{%—Murāri-vijaya, as,%} m., N. of a drama.
<LEND>

<L>37639<pc>0785-b<k1>muragaRqa<k2>muragaRqa
{#muragaRqa#}¦ {%muragaṇḍa, as,%} m. an eruption on
the face ({%= varaṇḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>37640<pc>0785-b<k1>muraNgI<k2>muraNgI
{#muraNgI#}¦ {%muraṅgī.%} See {%muruṅgī,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>37641<pc>0785-b<k1>muracIpattana<k2>muracIpattana
{#muracIpattana#}¦ {%muracī-pattana,%} N. of a town
in the Dekhan, (also read {%marīci-pattana.%})
<LEND>

<L>37642<pc>0785-b<k1>muraja<k2>muraja
{#muraja#}¦ {%muraja, as,%} m. (thought by some to
be a comp. of {%mura + ja%}), a kind of drum, tam-
bourine; a Śloka artificially arranged in the form of
a drum; ({%ā%}), f. a great drum; N. of Kuvera's wife.
{%—Muraja-phala, as,%} m. the jack fruit tree, Arto-
carpus Integrifolia.
<LEND>

<L>37643<pc>0785-b<k1>murajaka<k2>murajaka
{%Murajaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of Śiva's attendants.
<LEND>

<L>37644<pc>0785-b<k1>muraRqa<k2>muraRqa
{#muraRqa#}¦ {%muraṇḍa, as,%} m. a country to the
[Page0785-c+ 74]
north-west of Hindūstān (called also Lampāka, and
now Lamghan in Cabul); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people; [cf. {%muruṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37645<pc>0785-c<k1>murandalA<k2>murandalA
{#murandalA#}¦ {%murandalā,%} f., N. of a river ({%=%}
{%muralā;%} thought by some to be Narma-dā).
<LEND>

<L>37646<pc>0785-c<k1>muramaRqa<k2>muramaRqa
{#muramaRqa#}¦ {%muramaṇḍa%} (probably incorrect)
for {%muragaṇḍa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37647<pc>0785-c<k1>murala<k2>murala
{#murala#}¦ {%murala, as,%} m. (probably fr. rt. 4.
{%mur%}), a species of fresh-water fish; a king of the
Muralas; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a river in the country of the Keralas, {%= muran-%}
{%dalā,%} q. v.; ({%ī%}), f. a flute, pipe. {%—Muralī-dhara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘flute-bearer,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>37648<pc>0785-c<k1>muralikA<k2>muralikA
{%Muralikā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>37649<pc>0785-c<k1>muravAra<k2>muravAra
{#muravAra#}¦ {%muravāra, as,%} m., N. of a king of
the Turuṣkas.
<LEND>

<L>37650<pc>0785-c<k1>murasidAbAda<k2>murasidAbAda
{#murasidAbAda#}¦ {%murasidābāda,%} N. of a city
(<lang n="arabic">مرشد آباد</lang>).
<LEND>

<L>37651<pc>0785-c<k1>murAda<k2>murAda
{#murAda#}¦ {%murāda, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37652<pc>0785-c<k1>muru<k2>muru
{#muru#}¦ {%muru, us,%} m., N. of a country; N. of
a Daitya slain by Kṛṣṇa [cf. {%Mura%}]; (said to be)
a species of plant (in explanation of {%maurvī%}); a kind
of iron. {%—Muru-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a country; [cf.
{%maru-deśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37653<pc>0785-c<k1>muruNgI<k2>muruNgI
{#muruNgI#}¦ {%muruṅgī,%} f. Moringa Pterygos-
perma, (also spelt {%muraṅgī.%})
<LEND>

<L>37654<pc>0785-c<k1>muruRqa<k2>muruRqa
{#muruRqa#}¦ {%muruṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a king;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people, [cf. <lang n="greek">Μαροῦνδαι,</lang> a
people mentioned by Ptolemy.]
<LEND>

<L>37655<pc>0785-c<k1>muruRqaka<k2>muruRqaka
{%Muruṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a mountain in Udyāna.
<LEND>

<L>37656<pc>0785-c<k1>murutARadeSa<k2>murutARadeSa
{#murutARadeSa#}¦ {%murutāṇa-deśa, as,%} m., N. of
a country.
<LEND>

<L>37657<pc>0785-c<k1>murC<k2>murC
{#murC#}¦ {%murch,%} cl. 1. P. {%mūrchati, mumūrcha,%}
{%mūrchiṣyati, amūrchīt, mūrchitum,%}
to settle into a fixed or solid form, assume definite
shape or substance, acquire consistency; to congeal,
become dense, thicken, coagulate, stiffen; to become
torpid or stupefied, become senseless, lose conscious-
ness, faint away, swoon, be troubled in mind; to be
infatuated; to increase, grow, become strong, gather
strength, become stronger or more intense, acquire
vehemence or power, be powerful or effectual, take
effect, ({%mārutasya raṃhaḥ śilocchaye na mūr-%}
{%chati,%} the velocity of the wind has no power against
a mountain); to be a match for; to be frequent;
to fill, penetrate, pervade; to make to sound loudly,
play loudly: Caus. {%mūrchayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
settle into a fixed or solid form, give form to, form
(Ved.); to congeal, curdle (Ved.); to stupefy, cause
to faint, make senseless; to strengthen, augment;
to excite; to cause to sound loudly, play (a musical
instrument).
<LEND>

<L>37658<pc>0785-c<k1>mUrKa<k2>mUrKa
{%Mūrkha, as, ā, am,%}¦ stupid, foolish, silly, igno-
rant, dull, unintelligent; inexperienced in (with loc.);
({%as%}), m. a fool, blockhead; a sort of bean, Phaseolus
Radiatus. {%—Mūrkha-tā,%} f. or {%mūrkha-tva%} or
{%mūrkha-bhūya, am,%} n. stupidity, folly, foolishness,
dulness. {%—Mūrkha-bhrātṛka, as,%} m. one who has
a foolish brother. {%—Mūrkha-maṇḍala, am,%} n. a
collection or assemblage of fools. {%—Mūrkha-vyasani-%}
{%nāyaka, as, ā, am,%} having a foolish and vicious
commander. {%—Mūrkha-śata, am,%} n. a hundred fools.
{%—Mūrkhī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to
become stupid or foolish.
<LEND>

<L>37659<pc>0785-c<k1>mUrKiman<k2>mUrKiman
{%Mūrkhiman, ā,%}¦ m. dulness, stupidity, folly ({%=%}
{%mūrkha-tā%}).
<LEND>

<L>37660<pc>0785-c<k1>mUrCat<k2>mUrCat
{%Mūrchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ becoming senseless, faint-
ing, swooning.
<LEND>

<L>37661<pc>0785-c<k1>mUrCana<k2>mUrCana
{%Mūrchana, as, ī, am,%}¦ stupefying, causing insen-
sibility (applied to one of the five arrows of Kāma-
deva or Cupid); strengthening, augmenting, con-
firming; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. fainting, swooning, syncope;
vehemence, violence, prevalence, growth, increase,
(in this sense usually {%am,%} n.); swelling or rising of
[Page0786-a+ 77]
sounds, an intonation, note, a tone or semitone in
the musical scale, the seventh part of a Grāma or
scale, (each Grāma or scale consisted of seven notes
and contained also seven Mūrchanās); modulation,
melody, (in these senses usually {%ā,%} f.); a particular
process in metallic preparations, calcining quicksilver
with sulphur, (in this sense only {%am,%} n.)
<LEND>

<L>37662<pc>0786-a<k1>mUrCayitvA<k2>mUrCayitvA
{%Mūrchayitvā,%}¦ ind. having caused to thicken or
coagulate, having curdled (Ved.); having augmented;
having caused to sound loudly.
<LEND>

<L>37663<pc>0786-a<k1>mUrCA<k2>mUrCA
{%Mūrchā,%}¦ f. fainting, loss of consciousness, a swoon,
stupor; spiritual stupor or blindness, delusion, hallu-
cination; the rising of sounds, diatonic scale; a par-
ticular process in calcining metals. {%—Mūrchākṣepa%}
{%(˚chā-āk˚), as,%} m. (in rhetoric) expressing vehement
dissent or disapprobation by fainting. {%—Mūrchā-%}
{%parīta, as, ā, am,%} overcome with faintness or
swooning, fainting away, insensible, (according to a
Scholiast {%= niścetana.%}) {%—Mūrchā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
suffering from faintness, swooning away.
<LEND>

<L>37664<pc>0786-a<k1>mUrCAla<k2>mUrCAla
{%Mūrchāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ fainting, fainted, swooning,
insensible.
<LEND>

<L>37665<pc>0786-a<k1>mUrCita<k2>mUrCita
{%Mūrchita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stupefied, rendered sense-
less, fainted, fainting, insensible, bewildered, infatu-
ated; intoxicated; stupid, ignorant; rendered vehe-
ment or violent, intensified; grown, increased, aug-
mented, swollen; rising upwards, lofty; filled with;
calcined (as quicksilver; cf. {%mūrchana%}); ({%am%}), n.
epithet of a kind of song or air.
<LEND>

<L>37666<pc>0786-a<k1>mUrta<k2>mUrta
{%Mūrta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thickened, congealed, coagu-
lated, curdled (Ved.); settled into any fixed shape,
formed, substantial, solid, material, corporeal, em-
bodied, incarnate; real (said of the practically useful
division of time as opposed to the {%a-mūrta,%} the
unreal or imaginary division); stupefied, unconscious,
fainted, insensible. {%—Mūrta-tva, am,%} n. the posses-
sion of a form, embodiment, corporality, incarnate
existence, materiality. {%—Mūrta-mātra, am,%} n. that
which is merely material, only corporeal.
<LEND>

<L>37667<pc>0786-a<k1>mUrti<k2>mUrti
{%Mūrti, is,%}¦ f. (often written {%mūrtti%}), any solid
body, any tangible or material form, (in philosophy)
anything which has definite shape and limits (as
earth, air, fire, water, and mind, but not {%ākāśa,%}
ether), a material element (especially as a component
part of the human body), body, form, visible shape,
matter, substance; embodiment, manifestation, in-
carnation, personification, ({%mūrtir dharmasya śāś-%}
{%vatī,%} an eternal personification of justice; cf. {%tapo-%}
{%m˚%}); an image, statue, figure, form; beauty; N.
of the first astrological house; N. of a daughter of
Dakṣa and wife of Dharma; ({%is%}), m., N. of one
of the sages under the tenth Manu; [cf. perhaps Gr.
<lang n="greek">βρέτας, μορφή.</lang>] {%—Mūrti-tas,%} ind. from the form,
bodily, substantially. {%—Mūrti-tva, am,%} n. the being
or having a body, corporeity, embodiment, materiality,
({%mūrtitve parikalpitaḥ,%} made into bodily shape.)
{%—Mūrti-dhara, as, ā, am,%} having a body, em-
bodied, corporeal, incarnate. {%—Mūrti-pa, as,%} m.
‘image-keeper,’ a priest who guards an idol. {%—Mūrti-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. the state of assuming a solid form,
corporeity. {%—Mūrti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having a
material or bodily form, material, embodied, corpo-
real, incarnate, personified [cf. {%kha-m˚, viśva-m˚%}];
({%ān%}), m., N. of a son of Kuśa; ({%at%}), n. a body.
{%—Mūrti-maya, as, ī, am,%} possessing a particular
form. {%—Mūrti-mātrā,%} f. a particle of matter.
{%—Mūrti-liṅga,%} perhaps = Prāg-jyotiṣa, the city of
Naraka.
<LEND>

<L>37668<pc>0786-a<k1>murBiRI<k2>murBiRI
{#murBiRI#}¦ {%murbhiṇī,%} f. a chafing-dish, small
fire-place, fire-pan.
<LEND>

<L>37669<pc>0786-a<k1>murmura<k2>murmura
{#murmura#}¦ {%murmura, as,%} m. (an onomatopoetic
word), a fire made of chaff, burning chaff; the god
of love; N. of one of the horses of the sun; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>37670<pc>0786-a<k1>murv<k2>murv
{#murv#}¦ {%murv%} [cf. rt. 1. {%mū%}], cl. 1. P. {%mūrvati,%}
{%mūrvitum,%} to bind, tie; [cf. {%mūrvā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37671<pc>0786-a<k1>mul<k2>mul
{#mul#}¦ {%mul%} = rt. {%mūl,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0786-b+ 78]

<L>37672<pc>0786-b<k1>mulAlin<k2>mulAlin
{#mulAlin#}¦ {%mulālin, ī,%} m. or {%mulālī,%} f., Ved.
(probably) a species of edible lotus.
<LEND>

<L>37673<pc>0786-b<k1>muSawI<k2>muSawI
{#muSawI#}¦ {%muśaṭī, muśala, muśalikā, muśalin.%}
See {%musaṭī, musala, musalikā, musalin.%}
<LEND>

<L>37674<pc>0786-b<k1>muSallaha<k2>muSallaha
{#muSallaha#}¦ {%muśallaha%} or {%musallaha,%} an astro-
logical term (<lang n="arabic">مصالحة</lang>).
<LEND>

<L>37675<pc>0786-b<k1>muz<k2>muz<h>1
{#muz#} 1¦. {%muṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%moṣati, moṣi-%}
{%tum,%} = rt. {%maṣ,%} to kill, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37676<pc>0786-b<k1>muz<k2>muz<h>2
{#muz#} 2¦. {%muṣ%} [cf. rt. 1. {%mūṣ%}], cl. 9. P.
{%muṣṇāti%} (rarely cl. 6. P. {%muṣati%}), {%mu-%}
{%moṣa, moṣiṣyati, amoṣīt%} (Ved. forms {%mo-%}
{%ṣati, moṣatha, muṣāyate%}), {%moṣitum,%} to steal,
filch, pilfer, rob, plunder, seize, carry off; to steal,
away, tear away, ravish; to captivate, enrapture; to
surpass, excel; cl. 4. P. {%muṣyati, moṣitum,%} = rt.
{%mus,%} to break, destroy, (according to the commen-
tator on Bhaṭṭi-kāvya XV. 16, where {%amuṣaḥ%} is
explained by {%khaṇḍitavān asi%}): Pass. {%muṣyate:%}
Caus. {%moṣayati,%} Aor. {%amūmuṣat:%} Desid. {%mu-%}
{%muṣiṣati, -ṣitum,%} see Pāṇ. I. 2, 8: Intens.
{%momuṣyate, momoṣṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>37677<pc>0786-b<k1>mumuzizu<k2>mumuzizu
{%Mumuṣiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to steal, intend-
ing to rob; ({%us%}), m. a thief, robber. {%—Mumuṣiṣu-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like a thief.
<LEND>

<L>37678<pc>0786-b<k1>muz<k2>muz<h>3
3. {%muṣ, ṭ,%}¦ f. stealing, theft; ({%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ%}), robbing,
stealing, taking away (at the end of comps.); dis-
pelling (darkness, &c.); surpassing, excelling.
<LEND>

<L>37679<pc>0786-b<k1>muzaka<k2>muzaka
{%Muṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a mouse, {%= mūṣaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37680<pc>0786-b<k1>muzA<k2>muzA
{%Muṣā,%}¦ f. {%= mūṣā,%} a crucible.
<LEND>

<L>37681<pc>0786-b<k1>muzi<k2>muzi
{%Muṣi, is, is, i,%}¦ stealing, &c. (in {%mano-m˚,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>37682<pc>0786-b<k1>muzita<k2>muzita
{%Muṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stolen, robbed, plundered;
stript; deceived, cheated; ravished, carried off, torn
away, bereft of, deprived of, free from. {%—Muṣita-%}
{%cetas, ās, ās, as,%} bereft of sense, deprived of con-
sciousness.
<LEND>

<L>37683<pc>0786-b<k1>muzitaka<k2>muzitaka
{%Muṣitaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ stolen in a low or vile
manner; ({%am%}), n. stolen property.
<LEND>

<L>37684<pc>0786-b<k1>muzitvA<k2>muzitvA
{%Muṣitvā,%}¦ ind. having stolen, having carried off, &c.
<LEND>

<L>37685<pc>0786-b<k1>muzIvan<k2>muzIvan
{%Muṣīvan, ā,%}¦ m. ({%muṣīvāṇam,%} acc. c.), Ved. a
thief, robber.
<LEND>

<L>37686<pc>0786-b<k1>muzka<k2>muzka
{%Muṣka, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps originally ‘a little mouse,’
fr. {%muṣ%} = 2. {%mūṣ + ka%}), a testicle; the scrotum;
a species of tree ({%= muṣaka%}); a muscular or
stout person ({%= māṃsala%}); a thief; a crowd, heap,
quantity, multitude, mass; ({%au%}), m. du. pudenda
muliebria. {%—Muṣka-kacchū, ūs,%} f. an eruption on
the scrotum. {%—Muṣka-deśa, as,%} m. the region of
the scrotum. {%—Muṣka-dvaya, am,%} n. the two
testicles. {%—Muṣka-bhāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
large testicles, (Sāy. {%= pravṛddha-muṣka.%}) {%—Mu-%}
{%ṣka-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having testicles; an
epithet of Indra as author of Ṛg-veda X. 38.
{%—Muṣka-śūnya, as,%} m. ‘one who is without
testicles,’ a castrated person, eunuch, guard of the
women's apartments. {%—Muṣka-śopha, as,%} m. swell-
ing of the testicles. {%—Muṣka-srotas, as,%} n. the vas
deferens (in anatomy). {%—Muṣkābarha (˚ka-āb˚),%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. one who gelds or castrates.
<LEND>

<L>37687<pc>0786-b<k1>muzkaka<k2>muzkaka
{%Muṣkaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of tree (the ashes of
which are used as a cautery).
<LEND>

<L>37688<pc>0786-b<k1>muzkara<k2>muzkara
{%Muṣkara, as, ā, am,%}¦ having testicles; ({%as%}), m.
a man with large testicles; a species of small animal
or insect (Atharva-veda VI. 14, 2).
<LEND>

<L>37689<pc>0786-b<k1>muzwa<k2>muzwa
{%Muṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ a rare form for {%muṣita,%}
q. v.; ({%am%}), n. theft, robbery.
<LEND>

<L>37690<pc>0786-b<k1>muzwi<k2>muzwi
{%Muṣṭi, is,%}¦ m. f. stealing, filching, pilfering; the
closed or clenched hand (perhaps originally ‘the
hand closed to grasp anything stolen’); the fist,
({%gūḍhāṅguṣṭha-kṛta-muṣṭi,%} the clenched fist
with the thumbs turned in); a fistful, handful [cf.
{%darbha-m˚, kuśa-m˚, keśa-m˚, gāḍha-m˚%}]; a par-
ticular measure (= a handful = 1 Pala); a hilt or
handle (of a sword, &c.); a compendium, abridg-
ment; (according to Mahī-dhara on Vājasaneyi-s.
XXIII. 24) the penis ({%= liṅga%}); [cf. Old Germ.
<nsi>fust;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>fyst.</nsi>] {%—Muṣṭi-karaṇa, am,%} n.
clenching the fist. {%—Muṣṭi-tā,%} f. firmness of grasp.
{%—Muṣṭi-deśa, as,%} m. the part of a bow which is
[Page0786-c+ 77]
grasped in the hand, the middle of a bow. {%—Mu-%}
{%ṣṭi-dyūta, am,%} n. a kind of game, odd or even,
(commonly called {%puramuṭkhelā.%}) {%—Muṣṭin-%}
{%dhama, as, ī, am,%} blowing into the closed hand.
{%—Muṣṭin-dhaya, as, ā, am,%} sucking the fist
or closed hand; ({%as%}), m. a child, boy. {%—Muṣṭi-%}
{%pāta, as,%} m. pummelling, boxing. {%—Muṣṭi-pra-%}
{%hāra, as,%} m. a blow with the fist. {%—Muṣṭi-ban-%}
{%dha, as,%} m. clenching the fist, closing the hand (in
taking hold of anything); a handful. {%—Muṣṭi-%}
{%bandhana, am,%} n. the act of clenching the fist.
{%—Muṣṭi-mukha, as, ī, am,%} having a fist-like face.
{%—Muṣṭi-meya, as, ā, am,%} to be measured or
spanned with the hand, ({%madhyena muṣṭi-meyena,%}
with a waist which might be spanned with the
fingers.) {%—Muṣṭi-yuddha, am,%} n. a fight with
fists, pugilistic encounter. {%—Muṣṭi-saṅgrāha-pī-%}
{%ḍita, as, ā, am,%} squeezed by a grasp with the fist,
griped. {%—Muṣṭi-hatyā,%} f., Ved. a hand to hand
engagement. {%—Muṣṭi-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} Ved. fight-
ing hand to hand (said of common soldiers as opposed
to those who fought in chariots). {%—Muṣṭī-kṛ,%} cl.
8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to close the hand, clench the fist.
{%—Muṣṭī-kṛtya,%} ind. having clenched the fist.
{%—Muṣṭī-muṣṭi,%} ind. fist to fist, hand to hand
fighting, fisticuffs.
<LEND>

<L>37691<pc>0786-c<k1>muzwika<k2>muzwika
{%Muṣṭika, as,%}¦ m. a particular position of the
hands; a goldsmith; N. of an Asura; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of an outcast race, {%= ḍombās; (ā),%} f. the fist,
hand; ({%am%}), n. a fight with fists, pugilistic encounter,
fisticuffs. {%—Muṣṭika-ghna, as,%} m. ‘slayer of
Muṣṭika,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Muṣṭika-svas-%}
{%tika, as,%} m. a particular position of the hands in
dancing. {%—Muṣṭikā-kathana, am,%} n. talking with
the fingers. {%—Muṣṭikāntaka (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m.
‘annihilator of Muṣṭika,’ an epithet of Bala-deva,
the brother of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>37692<pc>0786-c<k1>muzRat<k2>muzRat
{%Muṣṇat, an, atī, at,%}¦ stealing, robbing, taking
away, depriving of; captivating; excelling, surpass-
ing, eclipsing.
<LEND>

<L>37693<pc>0786-c<k1>muzyamARa<k2>muzyamARa
{%Muṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being robbed, being
plundered.
<LEND>

<L>37694<pc>0786-c<k1>mustu<k2>mustu
{%Mustu, us,%}¦ m. f. {%= muṣṭi,%} the fist.
<LEND>

<L>37695<pc>0786-c<k1>muzala<k2>muzala
{#muzala#}¦ {%muṣala, muṣalya.%} See {%musala,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>37696<pc>0786-c<k1>muzWaka<k2>muzWaka
{#muzWaka#}¦ {%muṣṭhaka, as,%} m. black mustard.
<LEND>

<L>37697<pc>0786-c<k1>mus<k2>mus
{#mus#}¦ {%mus%} [cf. rt. 2. {%muṣ,%} cl. 4], cl. 4. P.
{%musyati,%} &c., to break in pieces, cleave,
divide, cut, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>37698<pc>0786-c<k1>musala<k2>musala
{%Musala, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (often spelt {%muṣala%} and
less correctly {%muśala%}), a pestle, a kind of wooden
pestle used for cleaning rice; a mace, club, ({%cakra-%}
{%musalaḥ saṅgrāmaḥ,%} a battle fought with discuses
and clubs); a particular surgical instrument; a par-
ticular constellation; the twenty-second astronomical
Yoga or division of the moon's path; N. of a son of
Viśvāmitra; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Curculigo Orchioides;
Salvinia Cucullata; the house-lizard. {%—Musalā-mu-%}
{%sali,%} ind. club against club. {%—Musalāyudha (˚la-%}
{%āy˚), as, ā, am,%} club-armed; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Bala-deva. {%—Musalī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bha-%}
{%vitum,%} to become a club. {%—Musalolūkhala (˚la-%}
{%ul˚), am,%} n. a pestle and mortar.
<LEND>

<L>37699<pc>0786-c<k1>musalaka<k2>musalaka
{%Musalaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a mountain; ({%ikā%}), f. a
common lizard.
<LEND>

<L>37700<pc>0786-c<k1>musalita<k2>musalita
{%Musalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Gaṇa Tārakādi to Pāṇ.
V. 2, 36.
<LEND>

<L>37701<pc>0786-c<k1>musalin<k2>musalin
{%Musalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ armed with a club; ({%ī%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva; of Bala-deva.
<LEND>

<L>37702<pc>0786-c<k1>musalIya<k2>musalIya
{%Musalīya%}¦ or {%musalya, as, ā, am,%} deserving to be
pounded to death or to be put to death with a club.
<LEND>

<L>37703<pc>0786-c<k1>musra<k2>musra
{%Musra, am,%}¦ n. a pestle; a tear (in this sense {%=%}
{%aśru,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>37704<pc>0786-c<k1>musawI<k2>musawI
{#musawI#}¦ {%musaṭī,%} f. a white variety of Pani-
cum Italicum, (also read {%muśaṭī.%})
<LEND>

<L>37705<pc>0786-c<k1>musallaha<k2>musallaha
{#musallaha#}¦ {%musallaha.%} See {%muśallaha,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37706<pc>0786-c<k1>musAragalva<k2>musAragalva
{#musAragalva#}¦ {%musāragalva,%} coral or a kind of
white coral.
<LEND>
[Page0787-a+ 79]

<L>37707<pc>0787-a<k1>must<k2>must
{#must#}¦ {%must,%} cl. 10. P. {%mustayati, musta-%}
{%yitum,%} to gather, collect, heap up, accu-
mulate.
<LEND>

<L>37708<pc>0787-a<k1>musta<k2>musta
{%Musta, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. a species of grass,
Cyperus Rotundus; ({%am%}), n. the root of the Musta
grass; [cf. {%bhadra-m˚.%}] {%—Musta-giri, is,%} m., N.
of a mountain. {%—Mustāda%} ({%˚ta-ada%} or {%˚ta-āda%}),
{%as,%} m. ‘grass-eater,’ a hog, a wild boar. {%—Mustābha%}
{%(˚ta-ābh˚), am,%} n. a species of Cyperus.
<LEND>

<L>37709<pc>0787-a<k1>mustaka<k2>mustaka
{%Mustaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. a species of grass,
Cyperus Rotundus; ({%as%}), m. a particular vegetable
poison.
<LEND>

<L>37710<pc>0787-a<k1>mustu<k2>mustu
{#mustu#}¦ {%mustu.%} See p. 786, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>37711<pc>0787-a<k1>musra<k2>musra
{#musra#}¦ {%musra.%} See p. 786, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>37712<pc>0787-a<k1>muh<k2>muh<h>1
{#muh#} 1¦. {%muh,%} cl. 4. P. {%muhyati, mumoha,%}
{%mohiṣyati%} or {%mokṣyati, amuhat, mo-%}
{%hitum%} or {%mogdhum%} or {%moḍhum,%} to become stupe-
fied or unconscious, to be faint, lose consciousness,
to be perplexed or embarrassed; to be disturbed in
mind; to err or be mistaken; to be foolish or
stupid or infatuated; to fail: Caus. {%mohayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Aor. {%amūmuhat,%} to stupefy, bewilder, per-
plex, infatuate, deprive of consciousness; to throw
into disorder; to cause to err; to mistake (A., e. g.
{%adhvānam mohayante,%} they mistake the way):
Intens. {%momuhyate, momogdhi, momoḍhi,%} to be
in great perplexity or greatly embarrassed.
<LEND>

<L>37713<pc>0787-a<k1>mugDa<k2>mugDa
{%Mugdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ stupefied, perplexed, stupid,
ignorant; infatuated, enamoured; foolish, silly, sim-
ple, mistaken, erring; inexperienced, artless, inno-
cent, rendered attractive by youthful simplicity,
charming, tender, lovely, beautiful; ({%ā%}), f. a young
and beautiful female. {%—Mugdha-kathā,%} f. a story
of a fool, tale about a fool. {%—Mugdha-tā,%} f. or
{%mugdha-tva, am,%} n. stupidity, silliness, ignorance;
simplicity, artlessness, loveliness, charmingness, grace-
fulness. {%—Mugdha-dṛś, k, k, k,%} lovely-eyed, hav-
ing beautiful eyes. {%—Mugdha-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} or
{%mugdha-buddhi, is, is, i,%} silly, simple, a simpleton.
{%—Mugdha-bodha, am,%} n. ‘instructing the igno-
rant’ (scil. {%vyākaraṇa%}), N. of a celebrated grammar
by Vopa-deva (a grammarian who is supposed to
have flourished in the thirteenth century, and who is
regarded as a great authority in Bengal). {%—Mugdha-%}
{%bodha-pariśiṣṭa, am,%} n. a supplement or appendix
to the Mugdha-bodha. {%—Mugdhabodha-pradīpa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a commentary on the Mugdha-bodha.
{%—Mugdhabodha-sambodhinī,%} f., N. of a com-
mentary on the Mugdha-bodha. {%—Mugdha-bodhinī,%}
f., scil. {%ṭīkā,%} N. of a commentary by Bharata-malla
on the Amara-koṣa and of a commentary by Bha-
rata-mallika (probably identical with the preceding
author) on the Bhaṭṭi-kāvya. {%—Mugdha-bhāva, as,%}
m. stupidity, simplicity, inexperience. {%—Mugdha-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} perplexed, embarrassed, infatuated,
mistaken. {%—Mugdhākṣī (˚dha-ak˚),%} f. a lovely-
eyed woman. {%—Mugdhāgraṇī (˚dha-ag˚), īs,%} m.
the greatest of simpletons, the stupidest of the stupid.
{%—Mugdhā-cakra, am,%} n. a particular mystical
circle. {%—Mugdhānana (˚dha-ān˚), as, ā, am,%}
lovely-faced.
<LEND>

<L>37714<pc>0787-a<k1>muh<k2>muh<h>2
2. {%muh, k, k, k,%}¦ or {%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} perplexing, embarrass-
ing, infatuating; [cf. {%mano-muh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37715<pc>0787-a<k1>muhira<k2>muhira
{%Muhira, as, ā, am,%}¦ foolish, stupid; ({%as%}), m. a
blockhead [cf. {%muhera%}]; ‘the bewilderer,’ epithet
of the god of love.
<LEND>

<L>37716<pc>0787-a<k1>muhu<k2>muhu
{%Muhu,%}¦ ind. {%= muhus,%} Ved. suddenly, in a moment.
<LEND>

<L>37717<pc>0787-a<k1>muhuka<k2>muhuka
{%Muhuka, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a moment, instant; [cf.
{%muhūrta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37718<pc>0787-a<k1>muhus<k2>muhus
{%Muhus,%}¦ ind. (perhaps originally ‘in a bewildering
manner’), suddenly, all at once, in a moment, in an
instant (Ved.); for a moment, for a time, awhile;
at every moment, repeatedly, constantly; {%muhus — %}
{%muhus,%} at one moment — at another; at one time
 — at another; {%muhur muhus,%} at every moment,
repeatedly, again and again, over and over again;
on the other hand; [cf. {%punar.%}] {%—Muhur-gīr, īr,%}
{%īr, īr,%} Ved. swallowing suddenly; (Sāy.) ever being
hymned {%(= sarvadā gīyamānaḥ)%}. {%—Muhur-bhā- %}
[Page0787-b+ 79]
{%ṣā,%} f. or {%muhur-vacas, as,%} n. repeating what is
said, repetition, tautology. {%—Muhur-bhuj, k,%} m.
‘constantly eating,’ a horse. {%—Muhuś-cārin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} occurring repeatedly, recurring over and over again.
{%—Muhus-kāma, as, ā, am,%} loving or desiring
again and again. {%—Muhus-tanais,%} ind. at repeated
intervals, repeatedly, constantly.
<LEND>

<L>37719<pc>0787-b<k1>muhUrta<k2>muhUrta
{%Muhūrta, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a moment, an instant,
any short space of time, ({%muhūrtāt,%} after an instant,
immediately, directly, at once; {%muhūrtena,%} after an
instant, after a little while; {%ku-muhūrta,%} an inau-
spicious moment, cf. {%dur-m˚, prati-m˚%}); a particu-
lar division of time (see Manu 1. 64); the thirtieth
part of a day, a period of forty-eight minutes; ({%as%}),
m. an astrologer; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the Muhūrtas or
Hours personified as the children of Muhūrtā; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a daughter of Dakṣa (wife of Dharma or
Manu and mother of the Muhūrtas). {%—Muhūrta-%}
{%kalpa-druma, as,%} m. and {%muhūrta-gaṇa-pati,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of works. {%—Muhūrta-cintāmaṇi, is,%}
m., N. of an astrological work by Rāma the son of
Ananta. {%—Muhūrta-ja, ās,%} m. pl. children of Mu-
hūrtā; [cf. {%mauhūrtika.%}] {%—Muhūrta-tattva, am,%}
n., N. of a work. {%—Muhūrta-dīpaka, as,%} m., N.
of an astrological work by Mahā-deva. {%—Muhūrta-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Muhūrta-mārtaṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an astrological work by Nārāyaṇa.
{%—Muhūrta-vallabhā,%} f., N. of a commentary on
the Muhūrta-mārtaṇḍa. {%—Muhūrta-stoma, ās,%} m.
pl., N. of an Ekāha.
<LEND>

<L>37720<pc>0787-b<k1>muhUrtaka<k2>muhUrtaka
{%Muhūrtaka = muhūrta,%}¦ a moment, instant; an
hour.
<LEND>

<L>37721<pc>0787-b<k1>muhera<k2>muhera
{%Muhera, as,%}¦ m. {%= muhira,%} a fool, blockhead; [cf.
perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">μῶρο-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>moru-s, mor-osu-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37722<pc>0787-b<k1>mUQa<k2>mUQa
{%Mūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ stupefied, bewildered, per-
plexed, confounded, confused [cf. {%diṅ-m˚%}], uncer-
tain how to act; infatuated; stupid, dull, silly, foolish,
simple, ignorant; mistaken, deceived, erring, gone
astray or adrift; wrong, out of the right place (as
the fetus in delivery), abortive; causing confusion,
confounding; epithet of a particular position in the
Yoga system; ({%as%}), m. a fool, blockhead, dolt, idiot;
a sluggard; ({%ās%}), m. pl. an epithet of the elements
in the Sāṅkhya philosophy. {%—Mūḍha-garbha, as,%}
m. difficult delivery; a dead fetus. {%—Mūḍha-%}
{%grāha, as,%} m. a confused notion, misconception,
infatuation. {%—Mūḍha-cakṣur-gada-cchetṛ, tā,%} m.
the remover of the defect of vision of the foolish.
{%—Mūḍha-cetana, as, ā, am,%} or {%mūḍha-cetas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} bewildered in mind, foolish, simple, silly.
{%—Mūḍha-tā,%} f. or {%mūḍha-tva, am,%} n. stupidity,
infatuation, bewilderment, confusion, simplicity, folly,
ignorance; error, mistake, ({%granthi-mūḍhatā,%} mis-
take or confusion in disentangling a knot.) {%—Mūḍha-%}
{%dhī, īs, īs, i,%} or {%mūḍha-buddhi,%} or {%mūḍha-mati,%}
{%is, is, i,%} ‘silly-minded, ’ silly, simple, foolish. {%—Mū-%}
{%ḍha-prabhu, us,%} m. the chief of fools, a great
blockhead. {%—Mūḍha-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of his descendants. {%—Mūḍha-vat,%}
ind. like a fool. {%—Mūḍha-sattva, as, ā, am,%} ‘silly-
minded,’ infatuated, insane. {%—Mūḍhātman (˚ḍha-%}
{%āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} bewildered or stupefied in mind, un-
conscious, insensible, foolish, a fool. {%—Mūḍheśvara%}
{%(˚ḍha-īś˚), as,%} m. the greatest of fools, a great sim-
pleton, arrant blockhead; N. of an ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>37723<pc>0787-b<k1>muhus<k2>muhus
{#muhus#}¦ {%muhus.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37724<pc>0787-b<k1>muhUrta<k2>muhUrta
{#muhUrta#}¦ {%muhūrta.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>37725<pc>0787-b<k1>mU<k2>mU<h>1
{#mU#} 1¦. {%mū%} (connected with rts. {%mav,%}
{%mavy%}), cl. 1. A. {%mavate%} (sometimes P. {%-ti%}),
to bind, tie, make fast: Caus. Aor. {%amīmavat:%}
Desid. of Caus. {%mimāvayiṣati,%} see Scholist on Pāṇ.
VII. 4, 80.
<LEND>

<L>37726<pc>0787-b<k1>mU<k2>mU<h>2
2. {%mū, ūs,%}¦ f. binding, tying.
<LEND>

<L>37727<pc>0787-b<k1>mUka<k2>mUka
{%Mūka, as, ā, am,%}¦ dumb, silent, speechless, mute
[cf. {%eḍa-m˚, kalla-m˚%}]; wretched, poor; ({%as%}), m.
a mute; a poor man; N. of a Dānava; of a Nāga;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>mutus.</nsi>] {%—Mūka-tā,%} f. or {%mūka-tva, am,%}
n. dumbness, muteness, silence. {%—Mūka-bhāva, as,%}
m. the state of being dumb, dumbness. {%—Mūkāṇ- %}
[Page0787-c+ 76]
{%ḍaja (˚ka-aṇ˚), as, ā, am,%} having the birds silent
(said of a forest). {%—Mūkāmbikā (˚ka-am˚),%} f. (per-
haps) a form of Durgā; {%mūkāmbikāyāḥ sadanam,%}
N. of a place. {%—Mūkī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make dumb, render speechless, put to
silence.
<LEND>

<L>37728<pc>0787-c<k1>mUkiman<k2>mUkiman
{%Mūkiman, ā,%}¦ m. dumbness, muteness, silence.
<LEND>

<L>37729<pc>0787-c<k1>mUta<k2>mUta<h>2
2. {%mūta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see rt. 1. {%mīv%}), bound,
tied; woven; ({%as, am%}), m. n., Ved. a woven basket;
a woven band of cloth or fillet. {%—Mūta-kārya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} consisting of plaited work or basket work.
<LEND>

<L>37730<pc>0787-c<k1>mUtaka<k2>mUtaka
{%Mūtaka, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a little basket.
<LEND>

<L>37731<pc>0787-c<k1>mUkalarAya<k2>mUkalarAya
{#mUkalarAya#}¦ {%mūkalarāya, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>37732<pc>0787-c<k1>mUcIpa<k2>mUcIpa
{#mUcIpa#}¦ {%mūcīpa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people;
[cf. {%mūtiba.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37733<pc>0787-c<k1>mUjavat<k2>mUjavat
{#mUjavat#}¦ {%mūja-vat, ān,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain; ({%antas%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>37734<pc>0787-c<k1>mUjAladeva<k2>mUjAladeva
{#mUjAladeva#}¦ {%mūjāla-deva, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37735<pc>0787-c<k1>mUQa<k2>mUQa
{#mUQa#}¦ {%mūḍha, mūḍha-cetas,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37736<pc>0787-c<k1>mUta<k2>mUta<h>1
{#mUta#} 1¦. and 2. {%mūta.%} See under rt. 1. {%mīv%}
and rt. 1. {%mū.%}
<LEND>

<L>37737<pc>0787-c<k1>mUtiba<k2>mUtiba
{#mUtiba#}¦ {%mūtiba, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>37738<pc>0787-c<k1>mUtra<k2>mUtra
{#mUtra#}¦ {%mūtra, am,%} n. (probably connected
with rt. 1. {%mih;%} but according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 162.
fr. rt. {%muc,%} to discharge; by others connected with
rts. 1. {%mīv%} and {%minv%}), the fluid secreted by the
kidneys, urine. {%—Mūtra-kara, as ī, am,%} producing
urine. {%—Mūtra-kṛcchra, am,%} n. painful discharge
of urine in minute quantities, strangury; a class of
urinary affections (of which eight kinds are enume-
rated, including gravel, stone, &c.). {%—Mūtra-kṛc-%}
{%chrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} labouring under painful discharge
of urine, suffering from strangury. {%—Mūtra-kṛta-%}
{%vāsas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. steeped or soaked in urine.
{%—Mūtra-kośa, as,%} m. the scrotum. {%—Mūtra-%}
{%kṣaya, as,%} m. insufficient secretion of urine. {%—Mū-%}
{%tra-granthi, is,%} m. a knot or induration on the
neck of the bladder. {%—Mūtra-ghāta = mūtrāghāta,%}
q. v. {%—Mūtra-jaṭhara, as, am,%} m. n. swelling of
the belly in consequence of retention of urine. {%—Mū-%}
{%tra-doṣa, as,%} m. urinary disease. {%—Mūtra-niro-%}
{%dha, as,%} m. obstruction or retention of urine. {%—Mū-%}
{%tra-patana, as,%} m. the civet cat. {%—Mūtra-patha,%}
{%as,%} m. the urinary passage. {%—Mūtra-parīkṣā,%} f.
examination of urine, uroscopy; N. of a chapter of
the Śārṅgadhara-saṃhitā. {%—Mūtra-puṭa, am,%} n.
‘urine-cavity,’ the lower belly. {%—Mūtra-purīṣa,%}
{%am,%} n. urine and excrement. {%—Mūtra-praseka, as,%}
m. the urethra. {%—Mūtra-phalā,%} f. Cucumis Utilissi-
mus ({%= karkaṭī%}); another species of cucumber {%(=%}
{%trapuṣī)%}. {%—Mūtra-bhāvita, as, ā, am,%} saturated
with urine. {%—Mūtra-mārga, as,%} m. ‘urine-canal,’
the urethra. {%—Mūtramārga-nirodhana, am,%} n.
obstruction of the urethra. {%—Mūtra-vardhaka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} increasing urine, diuretic. {%—Mūtra-vaha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} conveying urine. {%—Mūtra-vibandha-%}
{%ghna, as, ī, am,%} preventing suppression of urine,
causing discharge of urine. {%—Mūtra-viṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} poisonous with urine. {%—Mūtra-vṛddhi, is,%} f.
copious secretion of urine. {%—Mūtra-śakṛt, t,%} n.
urine and excrement. {%—Mūtra-śukra, am,%} n. a
disease in which semen and urine are ejected toge-
ther. {%—Mūtra-śūla, as,%} m. urinary colic. {%—Mūtra-%}
{%saṅkṣaya, as,%} m. insufficient secretion of urine
{%(= mūtra-kṣaya)%}. {%—Mūtra-saṅga, as,%} m. urinary
obstruction, a painful and bloody discharge of urine.
{%—Mūtra-saṅgin, ī, inī, i,%} suffering from the
above disease. {%—Mūtrāghāta (˚ra-āgh˚), as,%} m.
affection of the urine, urinary disease (of which twelve
or thirteen kinds are enumerated). {%—Mūtrātīta%}
{%(˚ra-at˚), as,%} m. ‘past the proper time for voiding
urine,’ a particular kind of retention of urine. {%—Mū-%}
{%trāśaya (˚ra-āś˚), as,%} m. ‘urine-receptacle,’ the
lower belly. {%—Mūtrāsāda = mūtrauka-sāda,%} q. v.
{%—Mūtrotsaṅga (˚ra-ut˚) = mūtra-saṅga,%} q. v.
{%—Mūtrauka-sāda (˚ra-ok˚), as,%} m. a disease in
[Page0788-a+ 74]
which the urine assumes various colours and is voided
with pain.
<LEND>

<L>37739<pc>0788-a<k1>mUtraya<k2>mUtraya
{%Mūtraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%mūtrayati, -yitum,%} to dis-
charge urine; to make water against or upon (with
acc.): Intens. {%momūtryate.%}
<LEND>

<L>37740<pc>0788-a<k1>mUtrala<k2>mUtrala
{%Mūtrala, as, ā, am,%}¦ promoting (the secretion of)
urine, diuretic; ({%ā%}), f. Cucumis Utilissimus; another
species of cucumber, {%= vālukī; (am),%} n. a species
of cucumber ({%= trapuṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>37741<pc>0788-a<k1>mUtrita<k2>mUtrita
{%Mūtrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ voided as urine, discharged
like urine; soiled with urine.
<LEND>

<L>37742<pc>0788-a<k1>mUtrya<k2>mUtrya
{%Mūtrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ urinary, belonging or relating
to urine.
<LEND>

<L>37743<pc>0788-a<k1>mUra<k2>mUra<h>1
{#mUra#} 1¦. {%mūra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= mūḍha,%}
stupefied, bewildered, stupid, dull, foolish; [cf. {%a-m˚,%}
{%a-pram˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37744<pc>0788-a<k1>mUra<k2>mUra<h>2
{#mUra#} 2¦. {%mūra, as, ā, am%} (perhaps fr. a form
{%mū%} = rt. 1. {%mīv%}), Ved. rushing, impetuous; (accord-
ing to Sāy.) destroying killing ({%= māraka,%} fr. rt.
{%mṛ%}). {%—Mūra-deva, as,%} m., Ved. epithet of a par-
ticular kind of demon; (Sāy.) sporting in destruction
({%= māraṇa-krīḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>37745<pc>0788-a<k1>mUra<k2>mUra<h>3
{#mUra#} 3¦. {%mūra, am,%} n., Ved. {%= mūla,%} a root.
<LEND>

<L>37746<pc>0788-a<k1>mUru<k2>mUru
{#mUru#}¦ {%mūru,%} N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>37747<pc>0788-a<k1>mUrKa<k2>mUrKa
{#mUrKa#}¦ {%mūrkha.%} See P. 785, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>37748<pc>0788-a<k1>mUrKalikA<k2>mUrKalikA
{#mUrKalikA#}¦ {%mūrkhalikā,%} f. an arrow in the
form of a bird's heart.
<LEND>

<L>37749<pc>0788-a<k1>mUrCana<k2>mUrCana
{#mUrCana#}¦ {%mūrchana.%} See p. 785, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>37750<pc>0788-a<k1>mUrRa<k2>mUrRa
{#mUrRa#}¦ {%mūrṇa.%} See under rt. {%mṝ,%} p. 793.
<LEND>

<L>37751<pc>0788-a<k1>mUrta<k2>mUrta
{#mUrta#}¦ {%mūrta, mūrti.%} See p. 786, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37752<pc>0788-a<k1>mUrDan<k2>mUrDan
{#mUrDan#}¦ {%mūrdhan, ā,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. 1. 158.
said to be fr. rt. {%murv,%} to bind), the forehead, brow,
skull; the head in general; a head, chief, leader,
superior, ({%sarveṣām bhūtānām mūrdhā rājā,%} the
king is the head of all creatures); the highest or
foremost or most prominent part, surface, top, point,
peak, summit, ({%parvatasya mūrdhā,%} the top or
peak of a mountain); ‘the summit,’ epithet of a
particular spiritual condition with Buddhists; (in
geometry) the base, (opposed to {%agra%}); {%mūrdhni%}
or {%mūrdhani,%} at the head or highest point, at the
beginning or commencement, in the front, ({%atiṣ-%}
{%ṭhan manujendrāṇām mūrdhni,%} he stood at the
head of the kings of men; {%saṅgrāma-mūrdhani,%}
in the front of the battle); before, above, over.
{%—Mūrdha-karṇī%} or {%mūrdha-karparī,%} f. or {%mūr-%}
{%dha-khola, am,%} n. a broad-brimmed hat (worn as
a shelter from rain); an umbrella. {%—Mūrdha-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘head-born,’ the hair of the head, (in this
sense usually {%ās,%} m. pl.); the mane; N. of a king (a
Cakra-vartin). {%—Mūrdhaja-rāga, as,%} m. colouring
or dyeing the hair. {%—Mūrdha-jyotis, is,%} n. {%= brahma-%}
{%randhra,%} q. v. {%—Mūrdha-tas,%} ind., Ved. upon the
head. {%—Mūrdha-tailika, as,%} m., with {%vasti,%} epithet
of a kind of Errhine for the head. {%—Mūrdhan-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing the word {%mūrdhan;%}
{%(ān),%} m., N. of a Gandharva; of an Āṅgirasa or
Vāma-devya, author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 88.
{%—Mūrdha-pāta, as,%} m. the splitting of the skull.
{%—Mūrdha-piṇḍa, as,%} m. a lump upon the head
(of an elephant in rut). {%—Mūrdha-puṣpa, as,%} m.
the tree Mimosa Sirissa {%(śirīṣa)%}. {%—Mūrdha-rasa,%}
{%as,%} m. the scum of boiled rice, rice-water. {%—Mūr-%}
{%dha-veṣṭana, am,%} n. a turban, fillet, diadem.
{%—Mūrdhānta (˚dha-an˚), as,%} m. the crown of
the head. {%—Mūrdhābhiṣikta (˚dha-abh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the head sprinkled, anointed, inaugu-
rated, consecrated, installed; ({%as%}), m. a consecrated
king; a man of the Kṣatriya or warrior caste; a
royal counsellor, minister; {%= mūrdhāvasikta%} below.
{%—Mūrdhābhiṣeka (˚dha-abh˚), as,%} m. ‘head-
sprinkling,’ the act of consecrating any one (as king),
anointing, inaugurating. {%—Mūrdhāvasikta (˚dha-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. epithet of a particular mixed caste, the
[Page0788-b+ 80]
son of a Brāhman father by a Kṣatriya mother; =
{%mūrdhābhiṣikta,%} a consecrated king.
<LEND>

<L>37753<pc>0788-b<k1>mUrDa<k2>mUrDa
{%Mūrdha = mūrdhan%}¦ (at the end of certain comps.,
cf. {%dvi-m˚, tri-m˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>37754<pc>0788-b<k1>mUrDaka<k2>mUrDaka
{%Mūrdhaka, as,%}¦ m. a Kṣatriya.
<LEND>

<L>37755<pc>0788-b<k1>mUrDanya<k2>mUrDanya
{%Mūrdhanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being on or in the head,
belonging to the head, capital; coming from the
head or skull, cerebral (a term applied to a class of
letters representing sounds formed high in the mouth
or by keeping back the tip of the tongue as far as
possible in the head and slightly turning it upwards,
e. g. {%ṛ, ṝ, ṭ, ṭh, ḍ, ḍh, ṇ, r, ṣ;%} these letters are
sometimes called linguals); uppermost, highest, su-
perior, pre-eminent; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the mother of
Veda-śiras.
<LEND>

<L>37756<pc>0788-b<k1>mUrDvan<k2>mUrDvan
{%Mūrdhvan, ā,%}¦ m. {%= mūrdhan.%}
<LEND>

<L>37757<pc>0788-b<k1>mUrvA<k2>mUrvA
{#mUrvA#}¦ {%mūrvā,%} f. (according to some also
{%mūrvī,%} f.; probably fr. rt. {%murv%}), Sanseviera Rox-
burghiana, a sort of creeper from the fibres of which
bow-strings and the girdle of the Kṣatriyas are made,
a sort of hemp for bow-strings; [cf. {%maurva.%}]
{%—Mūrvā-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of Mūrvā.
<LEND>

<L>37758<pc>0788-b<k1>mUrvikA<k2>mUrvikA
{%Mūrvikā,%}¦ f. {%= mūrvā.%}
<LEND>

<L>37759<pc>0788-b<k1>mUl<k2>mUl
{#mUl#}¦ {%mūl%} (more properly to be regarded
as a Nom. fr. {%mūla%} below), cl. 1. P.
{%mūlati%} (according to Vopa-deva also A. {%-te%}), {%mu-%}
{%mūla, mūlitum,%} to be rooted or firm, stand fast,
take or strike root: Caus. {%mūlayati%} (according to
Vopa-deva also {%molayati%}), {%mūlayitum,%} Aor. {%amū-%}
{%mulat,%} to plant, transplant; to grow, sprout, shoot,
germinate.
<LEND>

<L>37760<pc>0788-b<k1>mUla<k2>mUla
{%Mūla, am,%}¦ n. a root (literally and metaphorically);
the root of any plant or tree, ({%mūlaṃ kṛ,%} to take or
strike root); the root of Arum Campanulatum; the
root of long pepper and of Costus Speciosus or Ara-
bicus; basis, groundwork, beginning, origin, com-
mencement, cause, ({%mūlād ārabhya,%} having com-
menced at the beginning); the bottom of anything,
foot, ({%śailasya mūlam,%} the foot of a mountain);
basis, lower part, lower end, ({%vīṇāyā mūlam,%} the
lower end of a lute which rests against the body of
a player); the end or juncture of anything by which
it is joined to anything else [cf. {%bāhu-m˚, karṇa-%}
{%m˚%}]; outermost edge or border; original, original
text of any work (as distinguished from the scholia
or commentary); an old or hereditary servant or
dependant, an aboriginal native or inhabitant; ori-
ginal property, capital, principal, stock; a chief or
capital city; square root; the twenty-fourth or,
according to some, seventeenth or nineteenth lunar
asterism containing eleven stars, (in this sense {%as,%}
{%am,%} m. n.; cf. {%nakṣatra%}); immediate neigh-
bourhood or proximity; a copse, thicket; a vendor
not a true owner, (according to Kullūka on Manu
VIII. 202. {%mūlam = a-svāmī vikretā%}); a particular
position of the fingers [cf. {%mūla-bandha%}]; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Sadā-śiva; ({%ā%}), f. Asparagus Race-
mosus; the asterism Mūla; ({%ī%}), f. a species of small
house-lizard; ({%as, ā, am%}), original, first; own,
proper, peculiar, (in Manu VII. 184. {%mūla%} is said
to mean a king's own territory.) {%—Mūla-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. ‘root-machination,’ magical employment of
roots, magic; [cf. {%mūlī-karman, mūla-kṛt.%}]
{%—Mūla-kāra, as,%} m. the author of an original
work. {%—Mūla-kāraṇa, am,%} n. first or original
cause. {%—Mūla-kārikā,%} f. a fire-place, furnace, oven.
{%—Mūla-kṛcchra, as, am,%} m. n. ‘root-austerity,’
a kind of penance, living solely on roots. {%—Mūla-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. preparing roots for magical uses.
{%—Mūla-keśara, as,%} m. a citron. {%—Mūla-khā-%}
{%naka, as,%} m. ‘root-digger,’ one who digs for roots,
a collector of roots. {%—Mūla-guṇa, as,%} m. ‘root-
multiplier,’ the coefficient of a root (in algebra).
{%—Mūlaguṇa-jāti, is,%} f. assimilation and reduction
of the root's coefficient with a fraction. {%—Mūla-%}
{%grantha, as,%} m. an original text; an epithet of
the very words uttered by Śākya-muni. {%—Mūla-%}
{%ccheda, as,%} m. ‘root-cutting,’ cutting away the
roots, cutting up by the roots, uprooting. {%—Mūla-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘root-born,’ growing from roots, pro-
[Page0788-c+ 81]
duced from a root, radical; formed at the roots of
trees (as an ant-hill); ({%as%}), m. a plant growing
from a root (as a lotus); ({%am%}), n. green ginger.
{%—Mūla-jāti, is,%} f. chief or principal origin; {%= mū-%}
{%laguṇa-jāti,%} col. 2. {%—Mūla-tas,%} ind. from the root,
on the root, on the lower side (Ved.), ({%ā mūlatas,%}
from the root upwards, from the beginning.) {%—Mū-%}
{%la-trikoṇa, am,%} n. epithet of the third astrological
house. {%—Mūla-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition of
a root, the being a root, the having a foundation or
source in anything, ({%mūlatvāt prajānāṃ rājā%}
{%skandhaḥ,%} the king is the stem through his subjects
being the root; {%Veda-mūlatva,%} the statement that
the Veda is the original source of all knowledge;
{%Śāstra-mūlatva,%} the being founded upon the Śās-
tras.) {%—Mūla-deva, as,%} m. {%= mūra-deva,%} an epithet
of Kaṃsa [cf. {%mūla-bhadra%}]; N. of the murderer
of Su-mitra the son of Agni-mitra; of an author; of
a preceptor. {%—Mūla-dravya, am,%} n. original pro-
perty, capital, principal, stock; [cf. {%mūla-dhana.%}]
{%—Mūla-dvāra, am,%} n., Ved. principal door. {%—Mū-%}
{%la-dvāravatī,%} f. the original or ancient Dvāra-vatī,
the older part of that city; [cf. {%laghu-dvāravatī,%}
{%mūla-nagara.%}] {%—Mūla-dhana, am,%} n. original
property, capital. {%—Mūla-dhātu, us,%} m. lymph.
{%—Mūla-nagara, am,%} n. old town, (opposed to the
suburbs or {%śākhā-nagara.%}) {%—Mūla-nāśa%} or {%mūla-%}
{%nāśaka, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mūla-nikṛntana,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} cutting away the roots, utterly destroying,
destroying root and branch. {%—Mūla-parṇī,%} f. a
species of plant {%(= maṇḍūka-parṇī)%}. {%—Mūla-pāka,%}
{%as,%} m., see Pāṇ. VII. 3, 53. {%—Mūla-puruṣa, as,%}
m. the male representative of a family, the last
male of a race. {%—Mūla-puliśa-siddhānta, as,%}
m. the original Siddhānta of Puliśa. {%—Mūla-puṣ-%}
{%kara, am,%} n. {%= puṣkara-mūla,%} q. v. {%—Mūla-potī,%}
f. a species of culinary plant {%(= potikā)%}. {%—Mūla-%}
{%prakṛti, is,%} f. (in phil.) the original root or germ
out of which matter or all apparent forms are evolved,
the primary cause or ‘originant;’ ({%ayas%}), f. pl. the
four principal sovereigns to be considered in time of
war (viz. the Vi-jigīṣu, Ari, Madhyama, and Ud-
āsīna; cf. {%pra-kṛti, śākhā-prakṛti%}). {%—Mūla-%}
{%praṇihita, as, ā, am,%} (perhaps) placed under the
surveillance or brought under the notice of old
(thieves employed as spies; according to Kullūka on
Manu IX. 269 {%= rāja-niyukta-purāṇa-caura-%}
{%varge sāvadhāna-bhūtāḥ%}). {%—Mūla-phala-da, as,%}
m. the Jaka or bread-fruit tree. {%—Mūla-phalāśana%}
{%(˚la-aś˚), am,%} n. feeding on roots and fruits. {%—Mūla-%}
{%baṇig-dhana, am,%} n. a merchant's original property
or capital. {%—Mūla-bandha, as, ā, am,%} (probably)
having roots, deep-rooted; ({%as%}), m. a particular po-
sition of the fingers. {%—Mūla-barhaṇa, as, ī, am,%}
Ved. tearing up by the roots, uprooting; ({%ī, am%}),
f. n. the Nakṣatra Mūla; ({%am%}), n. the act of
uprooting. {%—Mūla-bhadra, as,%} m. an epithet of
Kaṃsa, the uncle of Kṛṣṇa; [cf. {%mūla-deva.%}]
{%—Mūla-bhava, as, ā, am,%} springing or growing
from roots. {%—Mūla-bhāra, as,%} m. a load of roots.
{%—Mūla-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become the root or
original. {%—Mūla-bhṛtya, as,%} m. an old or here-
ditary servant, one whose father, grandfather, &c.
were servants before him, (opposed to {%ā-gantu.%})
{%—Mūla-mantra, as,%} m. an original or funda-
mental text; an epithet of a particular sacred text.
{%—Mūla-mādhava,%} N. of a place. {%—Mūlamā-%}
{%dhava-tītha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place.
{%—Mūla-mitra, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mūla-rasa,%}
{%as,%} m. Sanseviera Zeylanica. {%—Mūla-rāja, as,%} m.,
N. of a king. {%—Mūla-rāmāyaṇa, am,%} n. the ori-
ginal Rāmāyaṇa, i. e. Vālmīki's Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Mūla-%}
{%vacana, am,%} n. ‘primary word,’ an original text.
{%—Mūla-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing edible roots;
(perhaps) practising magic with roots. {%—Mūla-vāpa,%}
{%as,%} m. one who plants roots. {%—Mūla-vārin, ī,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Mūla-vitta, am,%} n. ‘original property,’
capital, principal. {%—Mūla-vidyā,%} f. ‘principal science,’
epithet of a particular Mantra ({%= dvādaśākṣara,%}
q. v.). {%—Mūla-vināśana, am,%} n. radical or entire
destruction. {%—Mūla-vibhuja, as, ā, am,%} bending
[Page0789-a+ 81]
down roots; ({%as%}), m. a chariot. {%—Mūla-virecana,%}
{%am,%} n. a purgative prepared from roots. {%—Mūla-%}
{%vyasana-vṛtti, is,%} f. the hereditary occupation of
executing criminals (Manu X. 38). {%—Mūla-vratin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} living exclusively on roots. {%—Mūla-śakuna,%}
{%as,%} m. (in augury) the first bird. {%—Mūla-śākaṭa%} or
{%mūla-śākina, am,%} n. a field planted with edible
roots. {%—Mūla-śrīpati-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Mūla-saṅgha, as,%} m. a society or sect.
{%—Mūla-sarvāstivāda (˚va-as˚), ās,%} m. pl., N. of
a Buddhist school. {%—Mūla-sādhana, am,%} n. a chief
instrument, principal expedient. {%—Mūla-sūtra, am,%}
n. a principal Sūtra. {%—Mūla-sthala, am,%} n., N. of
a place. {%—Mūla-sthāna, am,%} n. principal place;
foundation, base; the air, atmosphere; God; Mool-
tan; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet of Gaurī. {%—Mūlasthāna-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha ({%= bhāskara%}).
{%—Mūla-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} existing from the begin-
ning; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Mūla-srotas, as,%} n.
the fountain-head of a river, principal current. {%—Mūla-%}
{%hara, as, ā, am,%} taking away the roots of anything,
uprooting, utterly destroying, eradicating. {%—Mūla-%}
{%hara-tva, am,%} n. the state of plucking up by the
roots, eradicating, utter ruin. {%—Mūlādhāra (˚la-%}
{%ādh˚), am,%} n., scil. {%cakra,%} epithet of a mystical
circle situated above the generative organs; (accord-
ing to a Scholiast) the navel. {%—Mūlābha (˚la-ābh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a radish. {%—Mūlābhidharma-śāstra (˚la-%}
{%abh˚), am,%} n. the original Abhidharma-śāstra {%—Mū-%}
{%lāyatana (˚la-āy˚), am,%} n. an original residence.
{%—Mūlāvidyā-vināśaka (˚la-av˚), as, ikā, am,%}
(probably) destroying ignorance at its roots, eradi-
cating ignorance. {%—Mūlāśin (˚la-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%}
‘root-eating,’ living upon roots. {%—Mūlāhvā (˚la-%}
{%āh˚), am,%} n. a radish. {%—Mūlī-karman, a,%} n. {%= mūla-%}
{%karman,%} q. v. {%—Mūlī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become a
root, become a source or origin. {%—Mūloccheda (˚la-%}
{%uc˚), as,%} m. cutting up the roots, utter destruction.
{%—Mūlotkhāta (˚la-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} dug up by
the roots, utterly destroyed; ({%am%}), n. digging up
roots. {%—Mūlotpāṭana (˚la-ut˚), am,%} n. the digging
up of roots. {%—Mūlotpāṭana-jīvin, ī,%} m. one who
lives by digging for roots {%(= mūla-khānaka)%}. {%—Mū-%}
{%lauṣadhi (˚la-oṣ˚), is,%} f. a species of plant.
<LEND>

<L>37761<pc>0789-a<k1>mUlaka<k2>mUlaka
{%Mūlaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (at the end of comps.)
having roots, rooted in, springing from; born under
the constellation Mūla; ({%as, am%}), m. n. an esculent
root; a radish [cf. {%cāṇakya-m˚, nepāla-m˚%}]; a
sort of yam; ({%as%}), m. a kind of vegetable poison;
N. of a prince, a son of Aśmaka; ({%ikā%}), f. a root.
{%—Mūlaka-paṇa, as,%} m. a handful or bunch of
radishes, &c. (for sale). {%—Mūlaka-parṇī,%} f. Moringa
Pterygosperma. {%—Mūlaka-potikā,%} f. a radish. {%—Mū-%}
{%laka-mūlā,%} f. the plant Lipeocercis Serrata.
<LEND>

<L>37762<pc>0789-a<k1>mUlasa<k2>mUlasa
{%Mūlasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Gaṇa Tṛṇādi to Pāṇ.
IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>37763<pc>0789-a<k1>mUlika<k2>mUlika
{%Mūlika, as, ā, am,%}¦ living on roots; radical,
original; primary, principal; ({%as%}), m. an ascetic,
devotee; ({%ā%}), f. a multitude or collection of roots.
{%—Mūlikārtha (˚ka-ar˚), as,%} m. a radical fact;
[cf. {%yoga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37764<pc>0789-a<k1>mUlin<k2>mUlin
{%Mūlin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a root or stock or origin,
&c.; ({%ī%}), m. a tree.
<LEND>

<L>37765<pc>0789-a<k1>mUlina<k2>mUlina
{%Mūlina, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a root, growing from
a root (not bulbous or tuberous; cf. {%phala-mūlina%});
{%= mūla-kṛt,%} q. v.; ({%as%}), m. a plant, tree.
<LEND>

<L>37766<pc>0789-a<k1>mUlera<k2>mUlera
{%Mūlera, as,%}¦ m. a king; Indian spikenard, Nar-
dostachys Jatamansi ({%= jaṭā-māṃsī, jaṭā%}).
<LEND>

<L>37767<pc>0789-a<k1>mUlya<k2>mUlya
{%Mūlya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being at the root; to be torn
up by the roots, to be eradicated; to be bought
for a price, to be bought, purchasable; ({%am%}), n. ori-
ginal value; price, worth, value, a sum of money
given as payment (e. g. {%dātum mūlyena,%} to part
with for a certain price, sell; {%dattvā kiñcin mūl-%}
{%yena,%} having given something in payment; {%mūl-%}
{%yena gṛhīta,%} bought for a price); wages, salary,
payment for service rendered; earnings, gain; {%=%}
{%mūla,%} capital, principal; an article purchased. {%—Mū-%}
{%lya-karaṇa, am,%} n. making the worth or value of
anything, turning into money. {%—Mūlya-vivarjita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} devoid of price, priceless, invaluable.
<LEND>
[Page0789-b+ 78]

<L>37768<pc>0789-b<k1>mUlAwa<k2>mUlAwa
{#mUlAwa#}¦ {%mūlāṭa, mūlāṭī,%} see Gaṇa Gaurādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 41.
<LEND>

<L>37769<pc>0789-b<k1>mUz<k2>mUz<h>1
{#mUz#} 1¦. {%mūṣ%} (= rt. 2. {%muṣ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%mūṣati, mūṣitum,%} to steal, rob, plunder.
2. {%mūṣ, ṭ,%} Ved. a mouse.
<LEND>

<L>37770<pc>0789-b<k1>mUza<k2>mUza
{%Mūṣa, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī,%} m. f. a rat, mouse; ({%ā%}), f. a
crucible, (said to be also {%as,%} m. and {%ī,%} f.); Lipeo-
cercis Serrata; {%= gavākṣa,%} a round window, air-
hole; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μῦς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>mus, mus-culu-s, mus-</nsi>
<nsi>cip-ula;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>mûs;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>mys-i.</nsi>] {%—Mū-%}
{%ṣā-karṇī,%} f. an aquatic plant, Salvinia Cucullata.
{%—Mūṣā-tuttha, am,%} n. a kind of vitriol. {%—Mū-%}
{%ṣī-karaṇa, am,%} n. melting in a crucible.
<LEND>

<L>37771<pc>0789-b<k1>mUzaka<k2>mUzaka
{%Mūṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a thief; a rat, mouse; a kind
of metre; a particular part of the face; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a people; ({%ikā%}), f. a rat, mouse, a female rat
or mouse; a species of leech; Salvinia Cucullata; a
crucible; ({%akā%}), f. a rat, mouse, female rat. {%—Mū-%}
{%ṣaka-karṇikā%} or {%mūṣaka-karṇī%} or {%mūṣaka-%}
{%mārī,%} f. {%= mūṣā-karṇī,%} q. v. {%—Mūṣakāda (˚ka-%}
{%ada), as,%} m. ‘mouse-eater,’ N. of a Nāga. {%—Mūṣa-%}
{%kārāti (˚ka-ar˚), is,%} m. ‘mouse's foe,’ a cat.
<LEND>

<L>37772<pc>0789-b<k1>mUzaRa<k2>mUzaRa
{%Mūṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of stealing, pilfering,
filching.
<LEND>

<L>37773<pc>0789-b<k1>mUzat<k2>mUzat
{%Mūṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ stealing, filching, plun-
dering.
<LEND>

<L>37774<pc>0789-b<k1>mUzika<k2>mUzika
{%Mūṣika, as,%}¦ m. a thief, plunderer; a rat, mouse
[cf. {%gandha-mūṣika, mahā-mūṣika%}]; Mimosa
Sirissa ({%= śirīṣa%}); N. of a country (the part of
the Malabar coast between Quilon and Cape Como-
rin); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people, (also read {%bhū-%}
{%ṣika%}); ({%ā%}), f., see under {%mūṣaka%}. {%—Mūṣika-%}
{%nirviśeṣa, as, ā, am,%} not differing from a mouse,
the same as a mouse. {%—Mūṣika-parṇī,%} f. an
aquatic plant, Salvinia Cucullata. {%—Mūṣika-ratha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘rat-vehicled, riding on a rat,’ an epithet of
Gaṇeśa (see {%gaṇeśa,%} p. 279). {%—Mūṣika-viṣāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a mouse's horn, i. e. an impossibility; [cf. {%śaśa-%}
{%viṣāṇa.%}] {%—Mūṣika-sthala, am,%} n. (probably) a
mole-hill. {%—Mūṣikāṅka (˚ka-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘cha-
racterized by a rat,’ epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Mūṣikāñ-%}
{%cana (˚ka-añ˚), as,%} m. ‘going on a rat,’ an epithet
of Gaṇeśa. {%—Mūṣikāda (˚ka-ada˚) = mūṣakāda.%}
{%—Mūṣikā-dat, an, atī, at,%} or {%mūṣikā-danta,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} ‘mouse-toothed,’ having the teeth
of a mouse. {%—Mūṣikāntakṛt (˚ka-an˚), t,%} m.
‘mouse-destroyer,’ a cat. {%—Mūṣikārāti = mūṣa-%}
{%kārāti%}. {%—Mūṣikāhvaya (˚ka-āh˚), as,%} m. Salvinia
Cucullata. {%—Mūṣikotkara (˚ka-ut˚)%} or {%˚kā-ut˚%}), {%as,%}
m. a mole-hill.
<LEND>

<L>37775<pc>0789-b<k1>mUzikakA<k2>mUzikakA
{%Mūṣikakā%}¦ or {%mūṣikikā,%} f. (diminutive of {%mū-%}
{%ṣikā%}), a little rat or mouse.
<LEND>

<L>37776<pc>0789-b<k1>mUzikAra<k2>mUzikAra
{%Mūṣikāra, as,%}¦ m. a male mouse.
<LEND>

<L>37777<pc>0789-b<k1>mUzita<k2>mUzita
{%Mūṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stolen, &c. {%= muṣita,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37778<pc>0789-b<k1>mUziparRikA<k2>mUziparRikA
{%Mūṣi-parṇikā,%}¦ f. {%= mūṣika-parṇī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37779<pc>0789-b<k1>mUzIka<k2>mUzIka
{%Mūṣīka, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. {%= mūṣika,%} a rat, mouse.
<LEND>

<L>37780<pc>0789-b<k1>mUzIkakarRI<k2>mUzIkakarRI
{%—Mūṣīka-karṇī,%}¦ f. {%= mūṣā-karṇī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37781<pc>0789-b<k1>mUzyAyaRa<k2>mUzyAyaRa
{#mUzyAyaRa#}¦ {%mūṣyāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%} born of
unknown parents, (probably for {%āmuṣyāyaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>37782<pc>0789-b<k1>mUsariHPa<k2>mUsariHPa
{#mUsariHPa#}¦ {%mūsariḥ-pha%} and {%mūsarīpha, as,%}
m., N. of the fourth Yoga.
<LEND>

<L>37783<pc>0789-b<k1>mf<k2>mf
{#mf#}¦ {%mṛ,%} cl. 6. A., but in Perf., Futures, and
Cond. only P. (ep. occasionally both P. and A.
in all the tenses), {%mriyate, mamāra, mariṣyati,%}
{%amṛta, mṛṣīṣṭa, martum%} (epic forms {%mriyati,%}
{%mriyanti, mriyeyam, mriyeyus, mamre, mamrire,%}
Ved. forms {%marati, marate, marāti, amarat;%}
the form {%mumurat,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 97, 3, is said
by Sāy. to {%= mārayatu = vināśayatu%}), to die, de-
cease, depart from life: Pass. {%mriyate%} (sometimes
used impersonally with inst. c.), Perf. {%mamre,%} Aor.
{%amāri:%} Caus. {%mārayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%amīmarat,%}
to cause to die, kill, slay, put to death: Desid. {%mu-%}
{%mūrṣati,%} to wish to die, be about to die, be at the
point of death, face death: Intens. {%memrīyate, mar-%}
{%marti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>mar,</nsi> ‘to die;’ <nsi>mare-ta,</nsi> ‘mortal;’
<nsi>maretan,</nsi> ‘man:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄ-μβρο-το-ς, ἀμ-βρόσ-ιο-ς, βρο-τό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μορ-τό-ς, μαραίν-ω, μαρα-σ-μό-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>mor-</nsi>
[Page0789-c+ 81]
<nsi>i-or-r, mor-(ti)-s, mor-tuu-us, mort-âli-s, mor-</nsi>
<nsi>bu-s, mar-c-e-o, marc-e-sc-o, marc-i-du-s:</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>uta-mœran, mordher, myrdhro, mordh:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>maur-th-r:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>mr-e-ti,</nsi> ‘to die;’ <nsi>mor-u,</nsi>
‘plague, death;’ <nsi>s-mrĭ-tĭ,</nsi> ‘death;’ <nsi>mrĭ-tvu,</nsi> ‘a
dead man:’ Russ. <nsi>u-miraju,</nsi> ‘to die;’ <nsi>mertvyi,</nsi>
‘dead;’ <nsi>s-mer-tj,</nsi> ‘death:’ Lith. <nsi>mir-ti,</nsi> ‘to die;’
<nsi>már-a-s,</nsi> ‘plague;’ <nsi>mórai,</nsi> ‘bier;’ <nsi>s-mer-ti,</nsi> ‘death:’
Hib. <nsi>marbhaim,</nsi> ‘I kill, slay;’ <nsi>marbhan,</nsi> ‘a corpse,
dead body.’]
<LEND>

<L>37784<pc>0789-c<k1>mumUrzA<k2>mumUrzA
{%Mumūrṣā,%}¦ f. (fr. Desid.), desire of death, wishing
to die, being at the point of death, impatience of life.
<LEND>

<L>37785<pc>0789-c<k1>mumUrzu<k2>mumUrzu
{%Mumūrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to die, being about
to die, being at the point of death.
<LEND>

<L>37786<pc>0789-c<k1>mfta<k2>mfta
{%Mṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dead, deceased, deathlike, tor-
pid, useless; calcined, reduced (said of metals); ({%am%}),
n. death, ({%mṛtebhyaḥ pramṛtaṃ yānti,%} they pass
from death to death, i. e. from one death to another);
{%= caitya,%} a grave; begging, food or alms obtained
by begging. {%—Mṛta-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} almost dead,
well-nigh dead, insensible, fainted. {%—Mṛta-gṛha,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘house of the dead,’ a grave. {%—Mṛta-cela,%}
{%am,%} n. the garments of the dead (worn by Caṇḍālas).
{%—Mṛta-jīvana, as, ī, am,%} giving life to the dead,
raising the dead to life. {%—Mṛta-dāra, as,%} m. one
whose wife is dead, a widower. {%—Mṛta-nātha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one whose lord is dead. {%—Mṛta-niryātaka,%}
{%as,%} m. one who carries out dead bodies. {%—Mṛta-pa,%}
{%as,%} m. a person who guards a dead body. {%—Mṛta-%}
{%pā, ās,%} m. a person who watches a dead body, a
man of the lowest caste who collects dead men's
clothes, conveys dead bodies to the river side to be
burnt, executes criminals, &c.; N. of an Asura.
{%—Mṛta-putra, as,%} m. one whose son is dead.
{%—Mṛta-praja, as, ā, am,%} one whose children are
dead. {%—Mṛta-prāya, as, ā, am,%} well-nigh dead,
almost dead. {%—Mṛta-bhraj,%} Ved. one who has lost
the power of erection. {%—Mṛta-matta%} or {%mṛta-%}
{%mattaka, as,%} m. a jackal. {%—Mṛta-manas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. unconscious, insensible. {%—Mṛta-vat,%} ind.
like one dead. {%—Mṛta-vatsā%} or {%mṛta-vatsikā,%} f.,
Ved. whose offspring or first-born child dies. {%—Mṛta-%}
{%vastra-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} wearing a dead man's clothes.
{%—Mṛta-vārṣika,%} the period of the short rains
(said to last twenty-four hours, while the {%vārṣika%}
last a month, and the {%dīrgha-vārṣika%} three months
all but a day). {%—Mṛta-śaṅkā,%} f. the fear entertained
of a person being dead. {%—Mṛta-śabda, as,%} m.,
Ved. report of any one's death. {%—Mṛta-saṃskāra,%}
{%as,%} m. funeral rites or ceremonies. {%—Mṛta-sañjī-%}
{%vana, as, ī, am,%} reviving the dead, bringing the
dead to life; ({%ī%}), f. the revival of a dead person, a
Mantra for reviving the dead; ({%am%}), n. the revival
of a dead person; bringing the dead to life. {%—Mṛta-%}
{%sañjīvin, ī, inī, i,%} reviving or giving life to the
dead, bringing the dead to life; ({%inī%}), f. epithet of
a kind of formula; a species of shrub ({%= gorakṣa-%}
{%dugdhā%}); N. of a commentary on Piṅgala's Chan-
daḥ-śāstra. {%—Mṛta-sūtaka, am,%} n. bringing forth a
still-born child; ({%as%}), m. a term applied to quicksilver
in a particular state. {%—Mṛta-snāta, as, ā, am,%} one
who has washed himself after a death or funeral,
bathed after mourning; dying immediately after
ablution. {%—Mṛta-snāna, am,%} n. ablution after a
death or funeral. {%—Mṛta-sva-moktṛ, tā,%} m. ‘let-
ting alone, i. e. not taking, the property of deceased
person,’ an epithet of Kumāra-pāla. {%—Mṛta-hāra,%}
{%as,%} or {%mṛta-hārin, ī,%} m. a carrier of the dead, one
who bears a corpse to the funeral pile. {%—Mṛtāṅga%}
{%(˚ta-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a dead body, corpse. {%—Mṛtāṅ-%}
{%gāra (˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mṛtāṇḍa%}
{%(˚ta-aṇ˚), am,%} n. a seemingly dead or lifeless egg
(as opposed to a living egg or testicle; cf. {%mār-%}
{%tāṇḍa,%} ‘a bird’ which is produced from the seemingly
lifeless egg); ({%as%}), m. the sun; [cf. {%mṛtaṇḍa.%}]
{%—Mṛtādhāna (˚ta-ādh˚), am,%} n. placing a dead
body (on the funeral pile). {%—Mṛtāśana (˚ta-aś˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} living upon the dead. {%—Mṛtāśauca%}
{%(˚ta-āś˚), am,%} n. impurity contracted through the
death of any one. {%—Mṛtāhan%} or {%mṛtāhas (˚ta-%}
{%ah˚),%} n. the day of any one's death. {%—Mṛtotthita %}
[Page0790-a+ 81]
{%(˚ta-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} risen from the dead. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%todbhava (˚ta-ud˚), as,%} m. the sea, ocean; (per-
haps for {%amṛtodbhava.%})
<LEND>

<L>37787<pc>0790-a<k1>mftaka<k2>mftaka
{%Mṛtaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a dead man, a corpse;
({%am%}), n. death, decease. {%—Mṛtakāntaka (˚ka-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. ‘consumer of corpses, demolisher of
carcases,’ a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>37788<pc>0790-a<k1>mfti<k2>mfti
{%Mṛti, is,%}¦ f. death, dying; [cf. Lat. <nsi>mors (mor-</nsi>
<nsi>ti-s);</nsi> Slav. <nsi>s-mrĭ-tĭ;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>s-mèr-ti-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37789<pc>0790-a<k1>mftiman<k2>mftiman
{%Mṛtiman, ā,%}¦ m. mortality.
<LEND>

<L>37790<pc>0790-a<k1>mftyu<k2>mftyu
{%Mṛtyu, us,%}¦ m. (ep. also f.), death, dying, decease,
demise, (a hundred kinds of death are enumerated
from disease or accident, and one natural kind from
old age); Death personified, the god of death, Yama
the judge of the dead; an epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of
a son of A-dharma by Nir-ṛti; an epithet of Brahmā;
N. of Māyā; of Kali; of a teacher; of Vyāsa in
the sixth Dvāpara; of one of the eleven Rudras; of
an Ekāha; of the eighth astrological house; of the
seventeenth astrological Yoga; the god of love [cf.
{%māra%}]; {%mṛtyor haraḥ%} and {%mṛtyor vikarṇa-bhāse,%}
names of Sāmans; {%akāla-mṛtyu,%} ‘untimely death,’
N. of a being attendant on Padma-pāṇi. {%—Mṛtyu-%}
{%kanyā,%} f. the goddess of death. {%—Mṛtyu-jit, t,%} m.
‘conqueror of death,’ N. of an author, (also called
Mṛtyujid-bhaṭṭāraka); N. of a work by the same
author. {%—Mṛtyuñ-jaya, as, ā, am,%} overcoming
death; ({%as%}), m. ‘death-conqueror,’ an epithet of
Śiva; N. of an author. {%—Mṛtyuñjaya-tīrtha%} and
{%mṛtyu-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of two Tīrthas. {%—Mṛtyu-%}
{%tūrya, am,%} n. a kind of drum beaten at funeral
ceremonies. {%—Mṛtyu-da, as, ā, am,%} death-giving,
fatal. {%—Mṛtyu-dūta, as,%} m., Ved. ‘death-messen-
ger,’ one who brings the news of a death. {%—Mṛtyu-%}
{%dvāra, am,%} n. death's door, the door that leads to
death. {%—Mṛtyu-nāśaka, as,%} m. ‘death-averter,’
quicksilver. {%—Mṛtyu-nāśana, am,%} n. ‘death-de-
stroying,’ the drink of immortality. {%—Mṛtyu-patha,%}
{%as,%} m. a way or path leading to death. {%—Mṛtyu-pā,%}
{%ās,%} m. ‘death-quaffing,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Mṛtyu-%}
{%pāśa, as,%} m. death's noose (these are variously rec-
koned at 101 or even more than 1000 in number).
{%—Mṛtyu-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘death-flowered,’ the
sugar cane (so called because it dies after the loss of
its flowers). {%—Mṛtyu-pratibaddha, as, ā, am,%}
subject or liable to death. {%—Mṛtyu-phala, as,%} m.
a species of cucumber, {%= mahā-kāla = mahākāla-%}
{%phala;%} ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. the plantain, Musa Sapientum;
({%am%}), n. a sort of fruit considered as poisonous.
{%—Mṛtyu-bandhu, us,%} m., Ved. ‘companion of
death,’ a man. {%—Mṛtyu-bīja,%} see {%mṛtyu-vīja.%}
{%—Mṛtyu-bhaṅguraka, as,%} m. a drum beaten at
funeral ceremonies. {%—Mṛtyu-bhaya, am,%} n. danger
or peril of death; fear of death. {%—Mṛtyu-bhīta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} afraid of death. {%—Mṛtyu-bhṛtya, as,%}
m. a servant of death; (figuratively) sickness, ma-
lady, disease. {%—Mṛtyu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having
death, subject to death. {%—Mṛtyu-māra, as,%} m.
(with Buddhists), N. of one of the four Māras or
devils. {%—Mṛtyu-mṛtyu, us,%} m. the death of death,
i. e. a remover or preventer of death. {%—Mṛtyu-%}
{%rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘death-king,’ the god of death, Yama.
{%—Mṛtyu-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} death-formed, having the
form of death; ({%iṇī%}), f. mystical epithet of the letter {%ś.%}
{%—Mṛtyu-laṅghanopaniṣad (˚na-up˚), t,%} f., N.
of an Upaniṣad. {%—Mṛtyu-loka, as,%} m. ‘death-
world,’ the world of death (the fifth of the seven
worlds), the world of the dead, abode of Yama.
{%—Mṛtyu-vañcana, as,%} m. ‘death-cheater,’ an epi-
thet of Śiva; a raven, carrion-crow; Ægle Mar-
melos. {%—Mṛtyu-vīja, as,%} m. ‘dying after the
production of seed,’ a bamboo, bamboo-cane.
{%—Mṛtyu-sañjīvana, as, ī, am,%} restoring from
death to life, making alive again [cf. {%mṛta-sañjī-%}
{%vana%}]; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a section of the Tantra-sāra.
{%—Mṛtyu-sāt,%} ind. to death, to the power of death;
{%mṛtyu-sāt kṛ,%} to deliver any one over to death.
{%—Mṛtyu-suta, ās,%} m. pl., Ved. ‘death's sons,’ epi-
thet of a class of Ketus. {%—Mṛtyu-sūti, is,%} f. ‘dying
in bringing forth,’ a female crab. {%—Mṛtyu-senā,%} f.
the army of the god of death. {%—Mṛtyu-hetu, us,%}
[Page0790-b+ 77]
m. cause of death; {%mṛtyu-hetave,%} dat. c. for the
sake of death, in order to kill.
<LEND>

<L>37791<pc>0790-b<k1>mftyuka<k2>mftyuka
{%Mṛtyuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) {%=%}
{%mṛtyu.%}
<LEND>

<L>37792<pc>0790-b<k1>mriyamARa<k2>mriyamARa
{%Mriyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ dying, departing from
life.
<LEND>

<L>37793<pc>0790-b<k1>mfkaRqa<k2>mfkaRqa
{#mfkaRqa#}¦ {%mṛkaṇḍa, as,%} or {%mṛkaṇḍu, us,%} m.,
N. of an ancient sage, the father of Mārkaṇḍeya.
<LEND>

<L>37794<pc>0790-b<k1>mfkz<k2>mfkz
{#mfkz#}¦ {%mṛkṣ%} = rt. {%mrakṣ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37795<pc>0790-b<k1>mfkza<k2>mfkza
{%Mṛkṣa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. (perhaps) a curry-comb,
comb or any instrument for scraping; (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 66, 3) purifying, cleansing;
rubbed, cleansed ({%= śodhaka, pra-kṣālita%}).
<LEND>

<L>37796<pc>0790-b<k1>mfkzakanAwaka<k2>mfkzakanAwaka
{%Mṛkṣaka-nāṭaka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Nāṭaka.
<LEND>

<L>37797<pc>0790-b<k1>mfkziRI<k2>mfkziRI
{%Mṛkṣiṇī,%}¦ f. (perhaps fr. rt. {%mrakṣ,%} in the sense
of ‘tearing up the ground’), Ved. (perhaps) a rapid
stream, torrent.
<LEND>

<L>37798<pc>0790-b<k1>mfg<k2>mfg
{#mfg#}¦ {%mṛg%} (more properly to be regarded
as a Nom. fr. {%mṛga%}), cl. 4. P., 10. A.
{%mṛgyati, mṛgayate%} (ep. also P. {%-ti%}), &c., to
chase, hunt, pursue; to seek, search for, seek after;
to investigate, examine; to strive for, aim at; to
visit; to desire or request or beg anything (acc.)
from another (abl., gen., or with {%sakāśāt%}); {%antar%}
{%mṛg,%} to examine or investigate inwardly, i. e. in
the mind: Pass. {%mṛgyate,%} to be searched or sought
after, to be pursued.
<LEND>

<L>37799<pc>0790-b<k1>mfga<k2>mfga
{%Mṛga, as,%}¦ m. a wild beast; an animal in general,
any quadruped, a deer, stag, antelope, musk-deer;
game in general; the spots on the moon represented
as a hare or antelope; the celestial antelope or the
Nakṣatra Mṛga-śiras; the sign of the zodiac Ca-
pricorn (or the tenth arc of 30° in a circle); an
elephant characterized by particular marks (one of
the three classes of elephants); a particular kind of
large bird (Ved.); epithet of a demon or of Vṛtra
in the form of a deer slain by Indra (Ved.); N. of a
celestial being or tutelary divinity occupying a parti-
cular place in an astrological house divided into eighty-
one compartments (Ved.); epithet of a particular
class of men whose conduct in coitus resembles that
of the roebuck; N. of the district in Śāka-dvīpa
inhabited principally by Brāhmans, (also read {%maṅga,%}
cf. {%maga%}); {%= mṛga-nābhi,%} musk; the month Mār-
gaśīrṣa; a particular Aja-pāla sacrifice; seeking,
search ({%= mārgaṇa%}); pursuit, hunting, chase; re-
search, inquiry, investigation; asking, soliciting, beg-
ging; ({%ī%}), f. a female deer or antelope, doe; N. of
the mythical progenitress of the antelopes; epithet
of a particular class of women; a particular metre,
four times ¯˘¯; demoniacal possession, epilepsy.
{%—Mṛga-kāka, au,%} m. du. a deer and a crow.
{%—Mṛga-kānana, am,%} n. a forest abounding in
game; a park, preserve; [cf. {%mṛgāraṇya, mṛ-%}
{%gayā-vana.%}] {%—Mṛga-kṣīra, am,%} n. antelope's
milk, doe's milk. {%—Mṛga-gāminī,%} f. a kind of
medicinal substance {%(= viḍaṅgā)%}. {%—Mṛga-gra-%}
{%haṇa, am,%} n. the capture of a deer. {%—Mṛga-car-%}
{%mīya, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Mṛga-caryā,%} f.
the acting like a deer (a kind of penance, see {%mṛga-%}
{%cārin%} below). {%—Mṛga-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} acting like
a deer (as certain devotees; cf. {%go-cārin,%} which
appears to mean ‘acting like a cow, using the mouth
instead of the hands’). {%—Mṛga-caiṭaka, as,%} m. (?),
a wild cat, pole-cat. {%—Mṛga-jambuka, au,%} m. du.
a deer and a jackal. {%—Mṛga-jala, am,%} n. ‘deer-
water,’ mirage; see {%mṛga-tṛṣ%}. {%—Mṛgajala-%}
{%snāna, am,%} n. bathing in the unreal waters of a
mirage, (a term for any impossibility.) {%—Mṛga-jāti,%}
{%ayas,%} f. pl. the deer species, whole race of deer.
{%—Mṛga-jālikā,%} f. a net for snaring game. {%—Mṛga-%}
{%jīvana, as,%} m. one who lives by hunting, a hunter,
huntsman. {%—Mṛga-tīrtha, am,%} n., Ved. ‘animal
track,’ epithet of the path by which the priests at
the end of the Savana leave the sacred place to attend
to their bodily wants. {%—Mṛga-tṛṣ, ṭ,%} or {%mṛga-%}
{%tṛṣā,%} or {%mṛga-tṛṣṇā,%} or {%mṛga-tṛṣṇi, is,%} or
[Page0790-c+ 81]
{%mṛga-tṛṣṇikā,%} f. ‘deer-thirst,’ mirage, vapour
floating over sands or deserts, fancied appearance of
water in deserts. {%—Mṛga-toya, am,%} n. the water
of a mirage. {%—Mṛga-tva, am,%} n. the being a deer
or antelope, the state or condition of a deer. {%—Mṛga-%}
{%daṃśa%} or {%mṛga-daṃśaka, as,%} m. ‘animal-biter,’
a hunting-dog, dog. {%—Mṛga-dāva, as,%} m. a wood
for game, park, preserve. {%—Mṛga-dṛś, k,%} f. ‘deer-
eyed,’ a woman with eyes like an antelope's; ({%k%}),
m. the sign of the zodiac Capricorn. {%—Mṛga-dyut,%}
{%t, t, t%} (see 1. {%dyut,%} p. 437), attacking a deer, a
hunter. {%—Mṛga-dyū, ūs, ūs, u,%} delighting or tak-
ing pleasure in deer; ({%ūs%}), m. a hunter. {%—Mṛga-%}
{%dvija, ās,%} m. pl. beasts and birds. {%—Mṛga-dhara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘bearing deer-like marks,’ the moon (which,
according to the Hindūs, is spotted like a deer or a
hare); N. of a minister of Prasena-jit. {%—Mṛga-%}
{%dhūma,%} N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Mṛga-dhūrta%} or {%mṛga-%}
{%dhūrtaka, as,%} m. ‘animal-deceiver,’ a jackal. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%ga-nayanā,%} f. a fawn-eyed woman. {%—Mṛga-nābhi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘deer's navel,’ musk; a musk-deer; [cf.
{%nābhi.%}] {%—Mṛganābhi-jā,%} f. musk. {%—Mṛganābhi-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} made or consisting of musk.
{%—Mṛga-nirmoka-vasana, as, ā, am,%} clothed in
the cast-off skin of a deer. {%—Mṛga-netra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the Nakṣatra Mṛga for a leader, re-
lating to this Nakṣatra; ({%ā%}), f. ‘fawn-eyed,’ a woman
with eyes like an antelope's. {%—Mṛga-pakṣin,%}
{%iṇas,%} m. pl. beasts and birds. {%—Mṛga-pati, is,%} m.
‘lord of the beasts,’ a lion; a tiger; a roebuck.
{%—Mṛga-pada, am,%} n. a deer's foot, deer's track
{%(= mṛgyāḥ padam)%}. {%—Mṛga-pālikā,%} f. a musk-
deer. {%—Mṛga-piplu, us,%} m. ‘deer-marked,’ the
moon. {%—Mṛga-pota%} or {%mṛga-potaka, as,%} m. a
young deer, fawn. {%—Mṛga-prabhu, us,%} m. ‘lord
of the beasts,’ the lion. {%—Mṛga-prekṣin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} looking at (anything) like a deer, having the eyes
of a deer; [cf. {%vṛka-p˚.%}] {%—Mṛga-badhājīva%}
{%(˚dha-āj˚), as,%} m. ‘living by killing deer,’ a deer-
killer, hunter. {%—Mṛga-bandhinī,%} f. a net for snar-
ing game or for confining deer. {%—Mṛga-bālaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a young deer. {%—Mṛga-bhakṣā,%} f. Nardo-
stachys Jatamansi. {%—Mṛga-bhojanī,%} f. coloquintida,
colocynth, bitter apple. {%—Mṛga-mada, as,%} m.
musk. {%—Mṛgamada-vāsā,%} f. a musk-bag. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%ga-manda, as,%} m. epithet of a class of elephants;
({%ā%}), f. the mythical progenitress of lions, Sṛmaras,
and Camaras; [cf. {%mṛga-vatī.%}] {%—Mṛga-mandra,%}
{%as,%} m. epithet of a class of elephants. {%—Mṛga-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} coming from or consisting of
wild animals. {%—Mṛga-māṃsa, am,%} n. deer's flesh,
venison. {%—Mṛga-mātṛkā,%} f. a species of wild
animal; a doe. {%—Mṛga-māsa, as,%} m. the month
Mārgaśīrṣa. {%—Mṛga-mukha, as,%} m. the sign of
the zodiac Capricorn; [cf. {%mṛgāsya.%}] {%—Mṛga-%}
{%yūtha, am,%} n. a herd of deer. {%—Mṛgayūtha-pa,%}
{%as,%} m. lord of the herd of deer. {%—Mṛga-rasā,%} f. a
species of plant {%(= mṛgādanī, saha-devī)%}. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%ga-rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘king of the beasts,’ a lion, the sign
of the zodiac Leo; a tiger. {%—Mṛga-rāja, as,%} m.
‘king of the beasts,’ a lion, the sign of the zodiac
Leo; a tiger; the moon. {%—Mṛgarāja-dhārin, ī,%}
m. (probably) the moon; ‘lion-shaped,’ the sign of
the zodiac Leo. {%—Mṛgarāja-lakṣman, ā, ā, a,%}
‘characterized by the lion (or the moon),’ bearing
that surname {%(= siṃha-cihna)%}. {%—Mṛga-rāṭikā,%} f.
a species of medicinal plant {%(= jīvantī)%}. {%—Mṛga-%}
{%ripu, us,%} m. ‘the enemy of wild animals,’ the lion.
{%—Mṛga-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} ‘deer-shaped,’ being in
the form of an antelope. {%—Mṛga-roma-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘produced from animal's hair,’ woollen. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%ga-lakṣman, ā,%} or {%mṛga-lāñchana, as,%} m.
‘spotted like a deer,’ the moon. {%—Mṛgalāñchana-%}
{%ja, as,%} m. ‘son of the moon,’ the planet Mercury.
{%—Mṛga-lekhā,%} f. the deer-like streak on the moon.
{%—Mṛga-locana, as,%} m. ‘deer-eyed,’ the moon;
({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a woman with eyes like an antelope's.
{%—Mṛga-vatī,%} f., N. of the mythical progenitress
of the bears and Sṛmaras. {%—Mṛga-vadhājīva%}
{%(˚dha-āj˚), as,%} m. ‘one who lives by killing wild
animals,’ a huntsman. {%—Mṛga-vana, am,%} n. a forest
[Page0791-a+ 81]
abounding in wild animals, a park, preserve. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%gavana-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-
place on the Narmadā river. {%—Mṛga-vallabha, as,%}
m. ‘liked by deer,’ a species of grass {%(= kundara),%}
{%—Mṛga-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘having a deer for a
vehicle,’ epithet of Vāyu, god of the wind (who is
sometimes represented mounted on an antelope),
air, wind. {%—Mṛga-vīthī,%} f. ‘deer-track,’ an epithet
of that portion of the moon's course which includes
the constellations Śravaṇā, Śata-bhiṣaj, and Pūrva-
bhadra-padā; [cf. {%mṛgākhya.%}] {%—Mṛga-vaiṇika,%}
{%am,%} n. epithet of a particular posture in sitting.
{%—Mṛga-vyādha, as,%} m. a hunter of wild animals,
huntsman; the dog-star or Sirius; an epithet of
Śiva; N. of one of the eleven Rudras. {%—Mṛga-%}
{%vyādha-sarpa-śūkara, ās,%} m. pl. the deer, hunter,
snake, and boar. {%—Mṛga-vyādhīya, as, ā, am,%}
relating to the hunter and the deer. {%—Mṛga-%}
{%vyāla-niṣevita, as, ā, am,%} infested by wild beasts
and serpents. {%—Mṛga-śāyikā,%} f. the lying or re-
clining posture of an antelope (e. g. {%śayīta mṛga-%}
{%śāyikām,%} let him lie as still as an antelope). {%—Mṛ-%}
{%ga-śāva, as,%} m. a young deer, fawn. {%—Mṛga-%}
{%śāvaka, as,%} m. {%= mṛga-śāva%}. {%—Mṛgaśāvākṣa%}
{%(˚va-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} ‘fawn-eyed,’ having eyes
like those of a young deer or fawn. {%—Mṛga-%}
{%śira, as, ā,%} m. f. the Nakṣatra Mṛga-śiras, (see
{%nakṣatra.%}) {%—Mṛga-śiras, as,%} n., N. of the tenth
or, according to some, third or fifth Nakṣatra or
lunar mansion (containing three stars, one of which
is <lang n="greek">λ</lang> Orionis and figured by an antelope's head; see
{%nakṣatra%}); ({%ās, ās, as%}), born under the Nakṣatra
Mṛga-śiras; ({%ās%}), m., scil. {%hasta,%} a particular posi-
tion of the hands. {%—Mṛga-śīrṣa, am,%} n. the con-
stellation Mṛga-śiras, (according to some also {%as, ā,%}
m. f.); ({%as, ā, am%}), born under the constellation Mṛga-
śiras; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%māsa,%} the month Mārgaśīrṣa;
scil. {%hasta,%} epithet of a particular position of the
hands, (also {%mṛga-śīrṣaka.%}) {%—Mṛga-śīrṣan, ā,%}
m. the constellation Mṛga-śiras. {%—Mṛga-śūkara,%}
{%au,%} m. du. a deer and a boar. {%—Mṛga-śṛṅga, am,%}
n. a stag's horn. {%—Mṛga-śṛṅga-vratin, inas,%} m.
pl., N. of a particular sect. {%—Mṛga-śreṣṭha, as,%}
m. ‘best of beasts, chief of animals,’ a tiger. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%ga-saktha, am,%} n. {%= mṛgasya sakthi,%} Pāṇ. V. 4,
98. {%—Mṛga-sattama, as,%} m. the best of antelopes.
{%—Mṛga-sattra, am,%} n., Ved., N. of a festival
lasting nineteen days. {%—Mṛga-han, ā,%} m. ‘deer-
slayer,’ a huntsman. {%—Mṛgākṣī (˚ga-ak˚),%} f. a
fawn-eyed woman, a woman with eyes like an ante-
lope's; coloquintida, colocynth; {%= tri-yāmā%}. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%gākhara (˚ga-ākh˚), as,%} m., Ved. the lair or den
of a wild beast, the hole of any wild animal. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%gākhya (˚ga-ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} named after the
deer, ({%mṛgākhyā, vīthī,%} a portion of the moon's
course which comprises three constellations beginning
with Maitra.) {%—Mṛgāṅka (˚ga-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘deer-
spotted, spotted like a deer,’ the moon; camphor;
the wind [cf. {%mṛga-vāhana%}]; N. of a sword (in
Kathā-sarit-s. X. 45); of a man. {%—Mṛgāṅka-datta,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Amara-datta (king of Ayodhyā);
of the father of Aruṇa-datta. {%—Mṛgāṅkadattīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating to Mṛgāṅka-datta. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%gāṅka-rasa, as,%} m. epithet of a kind of formula.
{%—Mṛgāṅka-lekhā,%} f., N. of the daughter of a
king of the Vidyā-dharas. {%—Mṛgāṅka-vatī,%} f., N.
of the wife of Dharma-dhvaja, king of Ujjayinī; of
the wife of Mṛgāṅka-sena. {%—Mṛgāṅka-sena, as,%}
m., N. of a king of the Vidyā-dharas. {%—Mṛgāṅ-%}
{%ganā (˚ga-aṅ˚),%} f. a female deer, doe. {%—Mṛgājina%}
{%(˚ga-aj˚), am,%} n. a deer-skin. {%—Mṛgājīva (˚ga-%}
{%āj˚), as,%} m. ‘subsisting by wild animals,’ a hunts-
man; a hyena. {%—Mṛgāṭavī (˚ga-aṭ˚),%} f. {%= mṛga-%}
{%kānana,%} q. v. {%—Mṛgāṇḍa-jā (˚ga-aṇ˚),%} f. musk.
{%—Mṛgād (˚ga-ad), t,%} m. ‘animal-devourer,’ a
tiger. {%—Mṛgādana (˚ga-ad˚), as,%} m. ‘animal-
devourer,’ a hyena; a hunting leopard; ({%ī%}), f. colo-
quintida, colocynth {%(= indra-vāruṇī)%}. {%—Mṛgā-%}
{%dhipa (˚ga-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘king of animals,’ a lion.
{%—Mṛgādhipatya (˚ga-ādh˚), am,%} n. dominion
over wild animals. {%—Mṛgādhirāja (˚ga-adh˚), as,%}
[Page0791-b+ 81]
m. {%= mṛgādhipa%}. {%—Mṛgāntaka (˚ga-an˚), as,%}
m. ‘animal-destroyer,’ a cheeta or hunting leopard.
{%—Mṛgārāti (˚ga-ar˚), is,%} m. ‘enemy of wild
animals,’ a lion; a dog. {%—Mṛgāri (˚ga-ari), is,%} m.
‘enemy of wild animals,’ a lion; a tiger; a dog,
hound; a species of Moringa with red blossoms ({%=%}
{%rakta-śigru;%} cf. {%mārgāra%}). {%—Mṛgā-vatī,%} f., N. of
Dākṣāyaṇī on the Yamunā; N. of several princesses.
{%—Mṛgāvatī-caritra, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%gāvidh (˚ga-āv˚), t,%} m. a deer-killer, huntsman.
{%—Mṛgāsya (˚ga-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘deer-faced,’
having the head or face of an antelope; ({%as%}), m.
the sign of the zodiac Capricorn; [cf. {%mṛga-%}
{%mukha.%}] {%—Mṛgī-kuṇḍa,%} N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Mṛgī-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state or condition of a female deer
or doe. {%—Mṛgī-dṛś, k,%} f. ‘deer-eyed, fawn-eyed,’
a woman with eyes like an antelope's. {%—Mṛgī-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘husband of Mṛgī,’ an epithet of
Kṛṣṇa. {%—Mṛgī-locanā,%} f. ‘fawn-eyed,’ a woman
with eyes like an antelope's. {%—Mṛgekṣaṇa (˚ga-%}
{%īk˚), am,%} n. the eye of an antelope or fawn, an eye
like a deer's ({%ā%}), f. ‘fawn-eyed,’ a woman with
eyes like an antelope's coloquintida, colocynth.
{%—Mṛgendra (˚ga-in˚), as,%} m. ‘king of beasts,’ a
lion; the sign of the zodiac Leo; a tiger; a parti-
cular metre, four times ˘¯˘; N. of an author;
({%am%}), n., N. of Mṛgendra's work; of a Tantra.
{%—Mṛgendra-caṭaka, as,%} m. a hawk, falcon.
{%—Mṛgendra-tā,%} f. lordship over the beasts, do-
minion over wild animals. {%—Mṛgendra-mukha,%}
{%am,%} n. a lion's mouth; a particular metre, four times
˘˘˘˘¯˘˘¯˘¯˘¯¯. {%—Mṛgendra-vṛṣabha,%}
{%au,%} m. du. a lion and a bull. {%—Mṛgendrāṇī,%} f.
Gendarussa Vulgaris ({%= aṭarūṣaka;%} cf. {%siṃhī%}).
{%—Mṛgendrāsana (˚ra-ās˚), am,%} n. ‘lion's seat,’
a throne; [cf. {%siṃhāsana.%}] {%—Mṛgendrāsya (˚ra-%}
{%ās˚), as,%} m. ‘lion-faced,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Mṛgervāru (˚ga-ir˚),%} coloquintida, colocynth;
a species of animal; a white deer (?). {%—Mṛgervā-%}
{%ruka (˚ga-ir˚),%} a species of animal (said to dwell
in holes or caves). {%—Mṛgeśvara (˚ga-īś˚), as,%} m.
‘lord of beasts,’ a lion; the sign of the zodiac Leo.
{%—Mṛgeṣṭa (˚ga-iṣ˚), as,%} m. a species of jasmine.
{%—Mṛgairvāru%} or {%mṛgairvāruka (˚ga-er˚) =%}
{%mṛgervāru%}. {%—Mṛgottama (˚ga-ut˚), as,%} m. best
of antelopes, a beautiful antelope or deer; ({%am%}), n.
the Nakṣatra Mṛga-śiras. {%—Mṛgottamāṅga (˚ga-%}
{%ut˚), am,%} n. ‘antelope-head,’ the Nakṣatra Mṛga-
śiras.
<LEND>

<L>37800<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgaRA<k2>mfgaRA
{%Mṛgaṇā,%}¦ f. seeking, searching, search, investiga-
tion, research, inquiry.
<LEND>

<L>37801<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgaRyu<k2>mfgaRyu
{%Mṛgaṇyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. hunting wild animals.
<LEND>

<L>37802<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgamARa<k2>mfgamARa
{%Mṛgamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seeking, pursuing, hunt-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>37803<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgaya<k2>mfgaya
{%Mṛgaya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. N. of a demon conquered
by Indra; [cf. {%mṛga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37804<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgayas<k2>mfgayas
{%Mṛgayas, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. a wild animal.
<LEND>

<L>37805<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgayA<k2>mfgayA
{%Mṛgayā,%}¦ f. hunting, the chase; the Chase per-
sonified as one of the attendants of Revanta. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%gayā-yāna, am,%} n. the going out to hunt, a hunting
expedition. {%—Mṛgayāraṇya (˚yā-ar˚)%} or {%mṛgayā-%}
{%vana, am,%} n. a forest prepared or suited for hunting,
a park, preserve; [cf. {%mṛga-kānana.%}] {%—Mṛgayā-%}
{%śīla, as, ā, am,%} accustomed to the chase, attached
to hunting.
<LEND>

<L>37806<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgayARa<k2>mfgayARa
{%Mṛgayāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ searching for, hunting
after, chasing, pursuing.
<LEND>

<L>37807<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgayitvA<k2>mfgayitvA
{%Mṛgayitvā,%}¦ ind. having searched, having investi-
gated.
<LEND>

<L>37808<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgayu<k2>mfgayu
{%Mṛgayu, us,%}¦ m. a huntsman; a jackal; an epi-
thet of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>37809<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgava<k2>mfgava
{%Mṛgava,%}¦ (with Buddhists) a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>37810<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgavya<k2>mfgavya
{%Mṛgavya, am,%}¦ n. hunting, the chase; the butt
or mark in archery, a target.
<LEND>

<L>37811<pc>0791-b<k1>mfgAra<k2>mfgAra
{%Mṛgāra, as,%}¦ m., N. of the author of the hymns
Atharva-veda IV. 23-29; of a minister of Prasena-
jit [cf. {%mṛga-dhara%}]; {%= mṛgāra-sūkta%} below.
{%—Mṛgāra-sūkta, am,%} n. the hymns Atharva-veda
IV. 23-29. {%—Mṛgāreṣṭi (˚ra-iṣ˚), is,%} f. epithet
of Taittirīya-saṃhitā IV. 7, 15, and of Atharva-veda
IV. 23-29.
<LEND>
[Page0791-c+ 78]

<L>37812<pc>0791-c<k1>mfgita<k2>mfgita
{%Mṛgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ chased, hunted after, sought,
searched for, pursued.
<LEND>

<L>37813<pc>0791-c<k1>mfgU<k2>mfgU
{%Mṛgū, ūs,%}¦ f., Ved. (according to Sāy.), N. of the
mother of Rāma Mārgaveya.
<LEND>

<L>37814<pc>0791-c<k1>mfgya<k2>mfgya
{%Mṛgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be hunted after, to be
sought or inquired after.
<LEND>

<L>37815<pc>0791-c<k1>mfgyamARa<k2>mfgyamARa
{%Mṛgyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being searched for,
being sought or inquired after.
<LEND>

<L>37816<pc>0791-c<k1>mfc<k2>mfc
{#mfc#}¦ {%mṛc, k,%} f. (fr. rt. {%marc%}), Ved. threaten-
ing; injury; a snare; [cf. {%a-mṛkta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37817<pc>0791-c<k1>mfcaya<k2>mfcaya
{%Mṛcaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (perhaps) liable to
destruction or decay, transitory, going, moving.
<LEND>

<L>37818<pc>0791-c<k1>mfccaya<k2>mfccaya
{#mfccaya#}¦ {%mṛc-caya, mṛc-chakaṭikā.%} See
under 2. {%mṛd,%} p. 792, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>37819<pc>0791-c<k1>mfC<k2>mfC
{#mfC#}¦ {%mṛch%} or {%march,%} cl. 6. A. {%mṛcchate,%}
&c., to pass away, perish.
<LEND>

<L>37820<pc>0791-c<k1>mfj<k2>mfj<h>1
{#mfj#} 1¦. {%mṛj%} [cf. rts. {%mārj, mṛś%}], cl. 2.
P. {%mārṣṭi%} (ep. also A. {%mārṣṭe,%} 3rd pl.
{%mṛjanti%} or {%mārjanti;%} Ved. 3rd sing. {%mṛjati, -te%}),
Impf. {%amārṭ%} (3rd pl. {%amṛjan%} or {%amārjan%}), Impv.
{%mārṣṭu%} (2nd sing. {%mṛḍḍhi%}), {%mamārja%} (3rd pl.
{%mamṛjus%} or {%mamārjus%}), {%mārjiṣyati%} or {%mārkṣ-%}
{%yati%} (Ved. {%mrakṣyate%}), {%amārjīt%} or {%amārkṣīt%}
(Ved. {%amṛkṣat%}), {%mārjitum%} or {%mārṣṭum,%} to wipe,
rub, cleanse, clean, purify, wash off, clear away; to rub,
stroke; to make smooth or glossy, curry (as a horse);
to deck, adorn, make ready; (A.) to wipe off (impu-
rity from one's self) upon some one else (loc. c.);
to go (Ved.); cl. 1. P. {%marjati, mṛñjati,%} &c., to
sound, (in this sense connected with rts. {%muj, muñj,%}
cf. rt. {%mārj%}); cl. 10. P. A. or Caus. {%mārjayati, -te%}
(Ved. {%marjayati, -te%}), {%-yitum,%} to wipe off; to wash
or cleanse one's self (in this sense only A.), purify
one's self, become purified; to adorn; to move
about, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 39, 3.
{%marjayanta = paricaryante%}): Pass. {%mṛjyate,%} Aor.
{%amārji,%} to be wiped or washed, &c.: Caus. {%mārja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%amamārjat%} or {%amīmṛjat,%} to
cause to wipe or cleanse, &c.: Desid. {%mimārjiṣati%}
or {%mimṛkṣati:%} Intens. {%marīmṛjyate%} (Ved. {%mar-%}
{%mṛjyate%}), {%marīmārṣṭi, marimārṣṭi, marmār-%}
{%ṣṭi,%} to rub or wipe off repeatedly, to keep rubbing
or wiping off; (A.) to be continually cleansing one's
self; [cf. Zend <nsi>marez,</nsi> ‘to wipe:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀμέλγ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἄμελξις, ἀμολγεύ-ς, ἀμολγαῖο-ς, ἀμέργ-ω, ἀμοργός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀμόργη, ὀμόργ-νυ-μι, ὄμοργ-μα, γλάγος</lang> (for
<lang n="greek">μλάγος), γάλα, γάλακτος</lang> (for <lang n="greek">μλακτο</lang>): Lat.
<nsi>mulg-e-o, mulc-tu-s, mulctra, mulctru-m, merg-a,</nsi>
<nsi>merg-e(t)s, mulier, lac</nsi> (for <nsi>mlac</nsi>): Old Germ.
<nsi>milch-u,</nsi> ‘I milk:’ Goth. <nsi>miluks,</nsi> ‘milk:’ Angl.
Sax. <nsi>meoluc, meolc, melcan, mearc, mearcian,</nsi>
<nsi>ge-mearc:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>mlz-a:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>melz-u:</nsi> perhaps Hib.
<nsi>breugaim,</nsi> ‘I soothe;’ <nsi>bleaghaim,</nsi> ‘I milk.’]
<LEND>

<L>37821<pc>0791-c<k1>mArjita<k2>mArjita
{%Mārjita, as, ā, am%}¦ (equally to be connected with
rt. {%mārj%}), wiped, cleansed, purified, clean, smooth,
bright; washed away, removed; rubbed, smeared,
besmeared, &c.; see {%mārjita,%} p. 774, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37822<pc>0791-c<k1>mfj<k2>mfj<h>2
2. {%mṛj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) wiping,
rubbing; wiping off or away.
<LEND>

<L>37823<pc>0791-c<k1>mfja<k2>mfja
{%Mṛja, as,%}¦ m. a kind of drum.
<LEND>

<L>37824<pc>0791-c<k1>mfjat<k2>mfjat
{%Mṛjat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} wiping away, cleansing,
effacing, (also {%pra-mṛjat,%} Kirātārj. III. 4, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>37825<pc>0791-c<k1>mfjA<k2>mfjA
{%Mṛjā,%}¦ f. wiping, cleansing, washing, purifying,
purification, ablution; purity, cleanliness; a pure
skin, clear complexion; complexion. {%—Mṛjā-na-%}
{%gara, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Mṛjānvaya (˚jā-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} possessing or endowed with clean-
liness, cleansed, clean. {%—Mṛjā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pos-
sessed of cleanliness.
<LEND>

<L>37826<pc>0791-c<k1>mfjita<k2>mfjita
{%Mṛjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wiped, wiped away, rubbed
off, removed.
<LEND>

<L>37827<pc>0791-c<k1>mfjya<k2>mfjya
{%Mṛjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cleansed, to be purified;
to be wiped away or removed (= 2. {%mārgya%}).
<LEND>

<L>37828<pc>0791-c<k1>mfzwa<k2>mfzwa<h>1
1. {%mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 793, col. 1),
washed, cleansed, clean, pure; smeared, besmeared;
prepared, dressed, savoury, ({%mṛṣṭam annam,%} deli-
cate food, dainties; cf. {%miṣṭa%}); ({%am%}), n. pepper.
{%—Mṛṣṭa-gandha, as,%} m. (probably) an agreeable
[Page0792-a+ 77]
or appetizing smell or savour. {%—Mṛṣṭagandha-%}
{%pavana, as,%} m. a fragrant breeze. {%—Mṛṣṭa-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} exceedingly delicate or savoury. {%—Mṛ-%}
{%ṣṭa-luñcita, as, ā, am,%} torn up (as a root) and
washed. {%—Mṛṣṭa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. containing
a form of rt. 1. {%mṛj%}. {%—Mṛṣṭa-vākya, as, ā, am,%}
speaking sweetly {%(= miṣṭa-vākya)%}. {%—Mṛṣṭa-%}
{%salila, as, ā, am,%} having bright or pure water.
<LEND>

<L>37829<pc>0792-a<k1>mfzwi<k2>mfzwi<h>1
1. {%mṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. see p. 793, col. 1), cleans-
ing, cleaning, preparation, dressing (of food, Manu
III. 255); a savoury repast, (according to Kullūka
{%= annādeḥ saṃskāra-viśeṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>37830<pc>0792-a<k1>mfzweruka<k2>mfzweruka
{%Mṛṣṭeruka, as, ā, am,%}¦ eating dainties or deli-
cacies, luxurious, selfish; liberal.
<LEND>

<L>37831<pc>0792-a<k1>mfq<k2>mfq
{#mfq#}¦ {%mṛḍ%} (Ved. {%mṛḷ%}), cl. 6. 9. P. {%mṛ-%}
{%ḍati, mṛḍnāti, mamarḍa, marḍiṣyati,%}
{%amarḍīt, marḍitum%} (Ved. cl. 6. P. {%mṛḷati,%} cl.
10. P. {%mṛḷayati,%} &c.), to be gracious or favour-
able, be gracious towards (with dat.); to forgive, par-
don, spare; to treat graciously, rejoice, delight, make
happy; to rejoice, be delighted or happy: Caus.
{%marḍayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%amīmṛḍat%} or {%amamar-%}
{%ḍat:%} Desid. {%mimarḍiṣati:%} Intens. {%marīmṛḍyate,%}
{%marīmarṭṭi;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μείλ-ια, μείλιχο-ς, μειλίχ-ιο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μει-λιχ-ίη, μειλίσσω, μειλ-εῖν:</lang> Lat. <nsi>blan-</nsi>
<nsi>dus:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>mild-s,</nsi> ‘affectionate:’ Old Germ. <nsi>mil-</nsi>
<nsi>ti,</nsi> ‘mild:’ Slav. <nsi>mil-ŭ,</nsi> ‘pitiable;’ <nsi>mil-ovati,</nsi> ‘to
pity;’ <nsi>mil-ostĭ,</nsi> ‘pity:’ Lith. <nsi>myl-iu; meilù-s,</nsi>
‘lovely;’ <nsi>méile,</nsi> ‘love.’]
<LEND>

<L>37832<pc>0792-a<k1>mfqa<k2>mfqa
{%Mṛḍa, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%mṛdu,%} col. 3], showing
mercy, gracious (Ved.); ({%as%}), m. a N. of Agni or
Fire; of Śiva; ({%ā, ī%}), f. an epithet of Pārvatī [cf.
{%mṛḍānī%}]; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%hiraṇya,%} a particular
weight of gold (?).
<LEND>

<L>37833<pc>0792-a<k1>mfqana<k2>mfqana
{%Mṛḍana, am,%}¦ n. the act of showing grace or
favour, making happy, delighting.
<LEND>

<L>37834<pc>0792-a<k1>mfqaya<k2>mfqaya
{%Mṛḍaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ showing grace or mercy;
{%a-mṛḍaya,%} unmerciful.
<LEND>

<L>37835<pc>0792-a<k1>mfqAku<k2>mfqAku
{%Mṛḍāku, us,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37836<pc>0792-a<k1>mfqAnI<k2>mfqAnI
{%Mṛḍānī,%}¦ f. the wife of Mṛḍa or Śiva, i. e. Pār-
vatī. {%—Mṛḍānī-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>37837<pc>0792-a<k1>mfqitf<k2>mfqitf
{%Mṛḍitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. {%= marḍitṛ,%} one who
shows favour.
<LEND>

<L>37838<pc>0792-a<k1>mfqIka<k2>mfqIka
{%Mṛḍīka, as,%}¦ m. ‘gracious,’ N. of Śiva; a fish;
(according to some) an antelope, [cf. {%mṛga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37839<pc>0792-a<k1>mfLayat<k2>mfLayat
{%Mṛḷayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. showing grace or
favour, favouring. {%—Mṛḷayat-tama, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. exceedingly gracious.
<LEND>

<L>37840<pc>0792-a<k1>mfLayAku<k2>mfLayAku
{%Mṛḷayāku, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. gracious, kindly dis-
posed, showing grace, making happy.
<LEND>

<L>37841<pc>0792-a<k1>mfLIka<k2>mfLIka
{%Mṛḷīka, am,%}¦ n., Ved. grace, mercy, kindness;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Vāsiṣṭha, author of the hymns
Ṛg-veda IX. 97, 25-27, and X. 150.
<LEND>

<L>37842<pc>0792-a<k1>mfqaNkaRa<k2>mfqaNkaRa
{#mfqaNkaRa#}¦ {%mṛḍaṅkaṇa, as,%} m. (according to
Uṇādi-s. IV. 24. fr. rt. {%mṛḍ%}), a child, boy.
<LEND>

<L>37843<pc>0792-a<k1>mfR<k2>mfR
{#mfR#}¦ {%mṛṇ%} (connected with rts. {%mṛ,%}
{%mṝ%}), cl. 6. P. {%mṛṇati, mamarṇa,%}
{%mṛṇitum,%} to kill, slay; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μάρναμαι.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>37844<pc>0792-a<k1>mfRAla<k2>mfRAla
{#mfRAla#}¦ {%mṛṇāla, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
also {%ī,%} f.), the edible fibrous root of some kinds of
lotus, a lotus fibre or small fibre attached to the stalk
of a water-lily; ({%ī%}), f. a lotus fibre; ({%am%}), n. the
root of the fragrant grass Andropogon Muricatus.
{%—Mṛṇāla-bhaṅga, as,%} m. the fracture of a lotus
fibre. {%—Mṛṇāla-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing lotus
fibres or roots. {%—Mṛṇāla-sūtra, am,%} n. the fibre
of a lotus stalk.
<LEND>

<L>37845<pc>0792-a<k1>mfRAlaka<k2>mfRAlaka
{%Mṛṇālaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) {%=%}
{%mṛṇāla; (ikā),%} f. the edible root of a lotus; a
proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37846<pc>0792-a<k1>mfRAlin<k2>mfRAlin
{%Mṛṇālin, ī,%}¦ m. a lotus; ({%inī%}), f. a lotus plant;
a group of lotuses; a place where lotuses grow.
<LEND>

<L>37847<pc>0792-a<k1>mfRmaya<k2>mfRmaya
{#mfRmaya#}¦ {%mṛṇ-maya,%} incorrectly for {%mṛn-%}
{%maya%} under 2. {%mṛd,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>37848<pc>0792-a<k1>mfta<k2>mfta
{#mfta#}¦ {%mṛta.%} See under rt. {%mṛ,%} p. 789, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>37849<pc>0792-a<k1>mftaRqa<k2>mftaRqa
{#mftaRqa#}¦ {%mṛtaṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of the father
of the sun; the sun; [cf. {%mṛtāṇḍa, mārtaṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0792-b+ 77]

<L>37850<pc>0792-b<k1>mftAmada<k2>mftAmada
{#mftAmada#}¦ {%mṛtāmada, am,%} n. blue vitriol.
<LEND>

<L>37851<pc>0792-b<k1>mftAlaka<k2>mftAlaka
{#mftAlaka#}¦ {%mṛtālaka%} or {%mṛttāla%} or {%mṛttā-%}
{%laka, am,%} n. (probably connected with 2. {%mṛd%}),
a kind of loam or clay.
<LEND>

<L>37852<pc>0792-b<k1>mftkara<k2>mftkara
{#mftkara#}¦ {%mṛt-kara.%} See under 2. {%mṛd%} below.
<LEND>

<L>37853<pc>0792-b<k1>mftyava<k2>mftyava
{#mftyava#}¦ {%mṛtyava,%} probably incorrect for
{%mṛt-paca%} below.
<LEND>

<L>37854<pc>0792-b<k1>mftyu<k2>mftyu
{#mftyu#}¦ {%mṛtyu.%} See p. 790, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>37855<pc>0792-b<k1>mftsA<k2>mftsA
{#mftsA#}¦ {%mṛtsā, mṛtsna.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>37856<pc>0792-b<k1>mfd<k2>mfd<h>1
{#mfd#} 1¦. {%mṛd%} [cf. rts. {%mrad, mṛḍ%}], cl. 9. P.
{%mṛdnāti%} (ep. also A. {%mṛdnīte%}), cl. 1. P.
{%mardati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%mamarda%} (3rd pl. {%mamṛ-%}
{%dus%} or {%mamardus%}), {%mamṛde, mardiṣyati, amar-%}
{%dīt, marditum,%} to press, squeeze; to grind, pound,
bruise, reduce to powder, pulverize; to crush, dash
to pieces, trample upon, treat harshly, lay waste; to
overcome, surpass; to rub, stroke, wipe, ({%hastena%}
{%mamṛde lalāṭam,%} he wiped his forehead with his
hand); to rub against, touch, graze, pass through (as
a constellation, in astronomy); to rub away, wipe
away, destroy; (according to Naigh. II. 14) to go,
(in this sense cl. 1. P.): Pass. {%mṛdyate,%} to be
pressed or ground, &c.: Caus. {%mardayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%amamardat%} or {%amīmṛdat,%} to press or squeeze
hard, to crush, break, trample upon, tread under foot,
oppress, treat harshly, wear out, torment, plague,
destroy, kill; to rub; to cause to be trampled upon,
&c.: Desid. {%mimardiṣati,%} to desire to crush, wish
to pound; to be about to crush, &c.: Intens. {%marī-%}
{%mṛdyate, marīmartti,%} &c.; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀ-μέρδ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μύλ-η, μέλδ-ω, ἀ-μαλδ-ύν-ω, ἄ-μαλο-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>mord-</nsi>
<nsi>e-o, mand-o, mol-o, mol-a, malleus</nsi> (for <nsi>mar-</nsi>
<nsi>deus</nsi>): Goth. <nsi>malvja,</nsi> ‘I pound;’ <nsi>mala,</nsi> ‘I grind;’
<nsi>malo,</nsi> ‘a moth:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>s-melte,</nsi> ‘to melt;’
<nsi>malt, meltan, miltan, smeortan:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>smilzu; smylt,</nsi> ‘serene, calm;’ <nsi>malz, smerzan:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>malù,</nsi> ‘I grind;’ <nsi>mald-inu, mal-inu,</nsi> ‘I
cause to be ground;’ <nsi>molj,</nsi> ‘a moth:’ Hib. <nsi>meilim,</nsi>
‘I grind;’ <nsi>millim,</nsi> ‘I spoil, ruin.’]
<LEND>

<L>37857<pc>0792-b<k1>mfttikA<k2>mfttikA
{%Mṛttikā,%}¦ f. earth, clay, loam; fresh earth; a
kind of fragrant earth. {%—Mṛttikā-vatī,%} f., N. of a
town.
<LEND>

<L>37858<pc>0792-b<k1>mftsA<k2>mftsA
{%Mṛtsā,%}¦ f. good earth or clay; earth, clay; a kind
of fragrant earth.
<LEND>

<L>37859<pc>0792-b<k1>mftsna<k2>mftsna
{%Mṛtsna, as, am,%}¦ m. n. dust, powder; ({%ā%}), f.
good earth or clay; a kind of fragrant earth; clay;
[cf. {%mārtsna.%}] {%—Mṛtsnā-bhāṇḍaka, am,%} n. a
kind of earthen vessel ({%= uṣṭrikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>37860<pc>0792-b<k1>mfd<k2>mfd<h>2
2. {%mṛd, t,%}¦ f. earth, soil, clay, loam; a piece of
earth, lump of clay; a mound of earth; a kind of
fragrant earth; [cf. {%pāṇḍu-m˚.%}] {%—Mṛc-caya, as,%} m.
a heap of earth. {%—Mṛc-chakaṭikā,%} f. (i. e. {%mṛt +%}
{%śakaṭikā%}), a small cart made of clay, toy-cart; ({%ā, am%}),
f. n., N. of a celebrated drama (supposed to be the oldest
Sanskrit play extant) by king Śūdraka. {%—Mṛccha-%}
{%kaṭikā-setu, us,%} m., N. of a commentary by Lallā-
dīkṣita on the above drama. {%—Mṛc-chilā-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am%} (i. e. {%mṛt + śilā + maya%}), made of clay
and stone. {%—Mṛt-kaṇa,%} a small lump or clod of
earth or clay. {%—Mṛtkaṇa-tā,%} f. the state of a clod
of earth. {%—Mṛt-kara, as,%} m. a worker in clay,
potter. {%—Mṛt-kāṃsya, am,%} n. an earthen pitcher,
earthen vessel. {%—Mṛt-kirā,%} f. ‘earth-scattering,’ an
earth-worm; a species of cricket. {%—Mṛt-khalinī,%}
f. a species of plant {%(= carma-kaśā)%}. {%—Mṛt-paca,%}
{%as,%} m. a baker of clay, potter. {%—Mṛt-pātra, am,%}
n. a vessel of clay, earthen vessel, earthenware.
{%—Mṛt-piṇḍa, as,%} m. a clod of earth, lump of clay.
{%—Mṛtpiṇḍa-tas,%} ind. from a lump of clay. {%—Mṛt-%}
{%prakṣepa,%} scattering earth over anything (as a
means of purification, Manu V. 125). {%—Mṛt-phalī,%}
f. Costus Speciosus or Arabicus. {%—Mṛd-āhvayā,%} f.
a species of fragrant earth. {%—Mṛd-ga, as, ā, am,%}
being in the earth, growing in clay; ({%as%}), m. a
species of fish. {%—Mṛd-ghaṭa, as,%} m. an earthen pot
or pitcher. {%—Mṛd-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a vessel of clay,
earthen pot, earthenware. {%—Mṛd-bhāṇḍāvaśeṣam %}
[Page0792-c+ 81]
{%(˚ḍa-av˚),%} ind. so that only an earthen vessel is left.
{%—Mṛd-vāri-śuci, is, is, i,%} purified with earth and
water (Manu V. 106). {%—Mṛn-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made of earth or clay, earthen; {%mṛn-mayam%}
{%pātram,%} an earthenware vessel. {%—Mṛn-maru, us,%}
m. a stone, rock (?). {%—Mṛl-loṣṭa, am,%} n. a lump
of clay, clod of earth.
<LEND>

<L>37861<pc>0792-c<k1>mfdava<k2>mfdava
{%Mṛdava, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%mṛdu%}), contrasting excel-
lence or merit of any kind with demerit (in drama-
tical language).
<LEND>

<L>37862<pc>0792-c<k1>mfdA<k2>mfdA
{%Mṛdā,%}¦ f., Ved. = 2. {%mṛd;%} [cf. probably Lat.
<nsi>merda;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>mulda;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>molde.</nsi>] {%—Mṛ-%}
{%dā-kara, as,%} m. a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>37863<pc>0792-c<k1>mfdita<k2>mfdita
{%Mṛdita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressed, squeezed; crushed,
bruised, pounded, ground, trampled upon, trampled
down, laid waste; rubbed; ({%am%}), n. a particular
disease of the membrum virile.
<LEND>

<L>37864<pc>0792-c<k1>mfdinI<k2>mfdinI
{%Mṛdinī,%}¦ f. good earth or soil.
<LEND>

<L>37865<pc>0792-c<k1>mfdu<k2>mfdu
{%Mṛdu, us, us%}¦ or {%vī, u%} (compar. {%mradīyas,%} su-
perl. {%mradiṣṭha,%} q. q. v. v.; cf. rt. {%mrad,%} from
which in Uṇādi-s. 1. 29. {%mṛdu%} is said to be de-
rived), ‘easily pressed or squeezed,’ soft, tender, sup-
ple, flexible, pliant; mild, gentle; weak, moderate;
blunt; slow; ({%us%}), m. the planet Saturn [cf. {%manda%}];
N. of a king; ({%vī%}), f. a vine with red grapes [cf. {%mṛ-%}
{%dvīkā%}]; ({%u%}), n. softness, mildness, gentleness; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">βραδύς</lang> (fr. <lang n="greek">μραδύς</lang> like <lang n="greek">βροτό-ς</lang> fr. <lang n="greek">μροτό-ς</lang>);
Lat. <nsi>bardus, mollis</nsi> (fr. <nsi>molvis</nsi> for <nsi>modvis</nsi> or
<nsi>morvis</nsi>), <nsi>mollities, mollīre, blandus;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>milti;</nsi> Mod. Germ., Angl. Sax., and Eng. <nsi>mild;</nsi>
Russ. <nsi>molodyĭ,</nsi> ‘young;’ Hib. <nsi>meirbh,</nsi> ‘slow,
tedious, weak.’] {%—Mṛdu-kṛṣṇāyasa, am,%} n. ‘soft-
iron,’ lead. {%—Mṛdu-koṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} having
relaxed bowels, relaxed, easily affected by medicine.
{%—Mṛdu-kriyā,%} f. the act of softening, mollify-
ing. {%—Mṛdu-gaṇa, as,%} m. {%= mṛdu-varga%} below.
{%—Mṛdu-gandhika, as,%} m. a species of plant.
{%—Mṛdu-gamana, as, ā, am,%} going softly, having
a soft or gentle gait; ({%ā%}), f. a goose or female swan.
{%—Mṛdu-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going softly, having a
soft or gentle gait. {%—Mṛdu-carmin, ī,%} m. a species
of birch tree {%(= carmin)%}. {%—Mṛdu-cāpa, as,%} m.,
N. of a Dānava. {%—Mṛdu-cchada, as,%} m. a species
of birch tree; a kind of mountain Pīlu tree. {%—Mṛdu-%}
{%jātīya, as, ā, am,%} somewhat soft, slightly weak.
{%—Mṛdu-tā,%} f. or {%mṛdu-tva, am,%} n. softness,
gentleness, tenderness, mildness, weakness; {%mṛdu-%}
{%tāṃ gam%} or {%vraj,%} to become mild or weak, be
appeased. {%—Mṛdu-tāla, as,%} m. a species of tree
{%(= śrī-tāla)%}. {%—Mṛdu-tīkṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} soft and
violent, gentle and harsh, (used as an epithet of the
two Nakṣatras Kṛttikā and Vi-śākhā.) {%—Mṛdu-%}
{%tvac, k,%} or {%mṛdu-tvaca, as,%} m. ‘having a soft
bark,’ a species of birch tree. {%—Mṛdu-pattra, as,%}
m. ‘soft-leafed,’ a rush, reed. {%—Mṛdu-paruṣa-%}
{%guṇa, au,%} m. du. ‘the qualities of mild and harsh,’
mildness and harshness. {%—Mṛdu-parvaka, as,%} m.
or {%mṛdu-parvan, a,%} n. ‘soft-jointed,’ a reed, cane.
{%—Mṛdu-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} ‘soft-handed,’ having a
delicate hand. {%—Mṛdu-pīṭhaka, as,%} m. a kind of
sheat-fish, silurus. {%—Mṛdu-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘having
soft flowers,’ Acacia Sirissa {%(= śirīṣa)%}. {%—Mṛdu-%}
{%pūrva, as, ā, am,%} commencing softly, friendly at
first, gentle, tender; ({%am%}), ind. mildly or friendly
at first, gently, tenderly, blandly, softly, coaxingly.
{%—Mṛdu-prayatna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (to be pro-
nounced) with a gentle effort. {%—Mṛdu-priya, as,%}
m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Mṛdu-prauḍha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} full of gentleness; mild and haughty. {%—Mṛdu-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. ‘having soft fruit,’ N. of various
plants {%(= vikaṅkata, vikaṇṭaka, madhu-nālike-%}
{%raka)%}. {%—Mṛdu-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} speaking sweetly.
{%—Mṛdu-mṛtsna, as, ā, am,%} consisting of soft or
fine particles or atoms. {%—Mṛdu-roma-vat, ān,%} or
{%mṛdu-lomaka, as,%} m. ‘having soft hair,’ a hare.
{%—Mṛdu-varga, as,%} m. the group of Nakṣatras
called {%mṛdu%} (viz. Anu-rādhā, Citrā, Revatī, and
Mṛga-śiras). {%—Mṛdu-vāc, k, k, k,%} ‘soft-voiced,’
mild in speech. {%—Mṛdu-vāta, as,%} m. a gentle
breeze, zephyr. {%—Mṛdu-vid, t,%} m., N. of a son of
Śvaphalka. {%—Mṛdu-sparśa, as, ā, am,%} soft to the
[Page0793-a+ 74]
touch, soft. {%—Mṛdu-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} tender-
hearted, kind. {%—{{Mṛdūtphala->Mṛdūtpala||20161210|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 311-315|confuses utphala for utpala "lotus"}} (˚du-ut˚), am,%} n.
the blue lotus, Nymphæa Cyanea. {%—Mṛdv-aṅga,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} ‘tender-limbed,’ delicately formed;
({%ī%}), f. a delicate woman; ({%am%}), n. tin. {%—Mṛdv-%}
{%avagraha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. easily indicating the
division of the members of a compound.
<LEND>

<L>37866<pc>0793-a<k1>mfduka<k2>mfduka
{%Mṛduka, as, ā, am,%}¦ soft, tender, gentle; ({%am%}),
ind. softly, gently, tenderly.
<LEND>

<L>37867<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdura<k2>mfdura
{%Mṛdura, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Śvaphalka, (also
read {%mudara.%}) {%—Mṛdura-svana,%} see under {%bhi-%}
{%dura-svana.%}
<LEND>

<L>37868<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdula<k2>mfdula
{%Mṛdula, as, ā, am,%}¦ soft, tender, mild, gentle;
({%am%}), n. water; Amyris Agallocha ({%= a-guru%}).
<LEND>

<L>37869<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdUas<k2>mfdUas
{%Mṛdū-as,%}¦ cl. 2. P. {%mṛdv-asti,%} &c., to be or
become soft.
<LEND>

<L>37870<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdUBAva<k2>mfdUBAva
{%Mṛdū-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. the becoming soft.
<LEND>

<L>37871<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdUBU<k2>mfdUBU
{%Mṛdū-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become soft.
<LEND>

<L>37872<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdyamana<k2>mfdyamana
{%Mṛdyamana, as, ā, am,%}¦ being crushed or bruised.
<LEND>

<L>37873<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdvIkA<k2>mfdvIkA
{%Mṛdvīkā,%}¦ f. a vine; a bunch of grapes.
<LEND>

<L>37874<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdaNkuru<k2>mfdaNkuru
{#mfdaNkuru#}¦ {%mṛdaṅkuru, us,%} or {%mṛdaṅkura, as,%}
m. the green pigeon, Columba Hariala.
<LEND>

<L>37875<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdaNga<k2>mfdaNga
{#mfdaNga#}¦ {%mṛdaṅga, as,%} m. (according to
Uṇādi-s. 1. 120. fr. rt. 1. {%mṛd%}), a kind of drum,
tabour; noise, din; a bamboo cane; ({%ī%}), f. a species
of plant {%(= ghoṣātakī)%}. {%—Mṛdaṅga-phala, as,%}
m. the jack or bread-fruit tree. {%—Mṛdaṅga-pha-%}
{%linī,%} f. {%= mṛdaṅgī.%}
<LEND>

<L>37876<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdaNgaka<k2>mfdaNgaka
{%Mṛdaṅgaka, am,%}¦ n. a kind of metre, four times
<lang n="greek">¯ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯.</lang>
<LEND>

<L>37877<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdara<k2>mfdara
{#mfdara#}¦ {%mṛdara, as, ā, am%} (perhaps fr. rt. 1.
{%mṛd,%} said to be fr. rt. {%mṛ%}), sporting, sportive;
passing quickly away, transient.
<LEND>

<L>37878<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdAnI<k2>mfdAnI
{#mfdAnI#}¦ {%mṛdānī,%} incorrect for {%mṛḍānī.%}
<LEND>

<L>37879<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdi<k2>mfdi
{#mfdi#}¦ {%mṛdi.%} See {%mārdeya.%}
<LEND>

<L>37880<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdunnaka<k2>mfdunnaka
{#mfdunnaka#}¦ {%mṛdunnaka, am,%} n. gold.
<LEND>

<L>37881<pc>0793-a<k1>mfdura<k2>mfdura
{#mfdura#}¦ {%mṛdura.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>37882<pc>0793-a<k1>mfD<k2>mfD<h>1
{#mfD#} 1¦. {%mṛdh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%mardhati, -te,%}
{%mardhitum,%} (Ved.) to kill, injure, hurt;
to contemn, neglect, forget, disregard, be disgusted
with (with acc.); to be moist; to moisten; [cf. pro-
bably Gr. <lang n="greek">μαλθακός;</lang> Goth. <nsi>maurthr;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>mordher, mordhor;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>multjan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37883<pc>0793-a<k1>mfD<k2>mfD<h>2
2. {%mṛdh, t,%}¦ f., Ved. (according to Sāy.) combat,
fight, battle; one who contemns or injures; an ad-
versary, foe, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>37884<pc>0793-a<k1>mfDa<k2>mfDa
{%Mṛdha, am,%}¦ n. combat, fight, war, battle; (said
to be also {%as,%} m.)
<LEND>

<L>37885<pc>0793-a<k1>mfDas<k2>mfDas
{%Mṛdhas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. war, battle; contempt, indif-
ference; {%mṛdhas-kṛ,%} to disdain, contemn, injure.
<LEND>

<L>37886<pc>0793-a<k1>mfDra<k2>mfDra
{%Mṛdhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. one who injures, an
enemy; ({%āṇi%}), n. pl. disdain, contempt, abuse,
insult, contumely. {%—Mṛdhra-vāc, k, k, k,%} Ved.
speaking injuriously or contumeliously, insulting.
<LEND>

<L>37887<pc>0793-a<k1>mfnmaya<k2>mfnmaya
{#mfnmaya#}¦ {%mṛn-maya, mṛl-loṣṭa,%} &c. See
under 2. {%mṛd.%}
<LEND>

<L>37888<pc>0793-a<k1>mfL<k2>mfL
{#mfL#}¦ {%mṛḷ,%} Ved. See under rt. {%mṛḍ.%}
<LEND>

<L>37889<pc>0793-a<k1>mfS<k2>mfS<h>1
{#mfS#} 1¦. {%mṛś%} (often confounded with
rt. 1. {%mṛṣ%}), cl. 6. P. {%mṛśati%} (some-
times also A. {%mṛśate%}), {%mamarśa, markṣyati%} or
{%mrakṣyati, amṛkṣat%} or {%amārkṣīt%} or {%amrā-%}
{%kṣīt, marṣṭum%} or {%mraṣṭum,%} to touch, stroke,
handle; to rub, rub off; to touch (mentally), con-
sider, reflect, deliberate; [cf. Lat. <nsi>mulc-e-o,</nsi> (pro-
bably also) <nsi>mulc-o:</nsi> perhaps Hib. <nsi>mear,</nsi> ‘a finger,
toe;’ <nsi>mearacht,</nsi> ‘fingering or touching a musical
instrument.’]
<LEND>

<L>37890<pc>0793-a<k1>mfS<k2>mfS<h>2
2. {%mṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) one who
strokes or touches, a stroker, (see Gram. 181.)
<LEND>

<L>37891<pc>0793-a<k1>mfzwa<k2>mfzwa<h>2
2. {%mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. and 3. see under
rts. 1. {%mṛj%} and 3. {%mṛṣ%}), touched, stroked, rubbed,
handled; considered, reflected upon, deliberated.
<LEND>

<L>37892<pc>0793-a<k1>mfzwi<k2>mfzwi<h>2
2. {%mṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. and 3. see p. 792, col. 1,
and this page, col. 2), touching, stroking, contact.
<LEND>
[Page0793-b+ 77]

<L>37893<pc>0793-b<k1>mfSaya<k2>mfSaya
{#mfSaya#}¦ {%mṛśaya%} for {%mṛcaya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37894<pc>0793-b<k1>mfz<k2>mfz<h>1
{#mfz#} 1¦. {%mṛṣ%} (often confounded with
rt. 1. {%mṛś%}), cl. 4. P. A. {%mṛṣyati, -te%}
(rarely cl. 1. P. A. {%marṣati, -te%}), {%mamarṣa, ma-%}
{%mṛṣe, marṣiṣyati, -te, amarṣīt%} (ep. {%amṛ-%}
{%ṣat%}), {%amarṣiṣṭa, marṣitum,%} to bear, endure,
suffer; to permit, let, allow; to bear patiently, ({%mu-%}
{%hūrtam mṛṣyatām,%} have patience for a moment);
to forget, let slip (from the mind), neglect; to par-
don, forgive, excuse; cl. 10. P. A. or Caus. {%marṣa-%}
{%yati, -te%} (according to Vopa-deva also {%mṛṣayati,%}
{%-te%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%amīmṛṣat%} or {%amamarṣat,%}
{%amīmṛṣata%} or {%amamarṣata,%} to bear, suffer;
endure, tolerate, allow, put up with; to forgive,
excuse, pardon; [cf. Goth. <nsi>marzjan;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>marrjan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>myrran.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>37895<pc>0793-b<k1>mfz<k2>mfz<h>2
2. {%mṛṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) one who
bears or endures, bearing, (see Gram. 181.)
<LEND>

<L>37896<pc>0793-b<k1>mfzA<k2>mfzA
{%Mṛṣā,%}¦ ind. (probably an old inst. fr. a form
{%mṛṣa,%} and perhaps meaning originally ‘with for-
getfulness’), in vain, to no purpose, uselessly; wrongly,
incorrectly, falsely, untruly, untruthfully, lyingly,
feignedly, (sometimes used like a substantive, e. g.
{%varjanīyam mṛṣā budhaiḥ,%} untruthfulness is to
be avoided by the wise); {%mṛṣā kṛ,%} to act falsely,
feign; Mṛṣā, as ‘Untruth,’ is personfied as the wife
of A-dharma. {%—Mṛṣā-jñāna, am,%} n. false or spu-
rious knowledge, ignorance, folly. {%—Mṛṣā-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. incorrectness, falsity. {%—Mṛṣā-dāna, am,%}
n. ‘false gift,’ feigned or insincere promise of a gift.
{%—Mṛṣā-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} having a false view or
opinion. {%—Mṛṣādhyāyin (˚ṣā-adh˚), ī,%} m. a
species of crane, Ardea Nivea, (compared to a reli-
gious hypocrite, hence its names {%tāpasa, dāmbhika,%}
{%tīrtha-sevin.%}) {%—Mṛṣānuśāsin (˚ṣā-an˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} punishing unjustly. {%—Mṛṣā-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
speaking falsely or untruthfully, a liar. {%—Mṛṣār-%}
{%thaka (˚ṣā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having a false
sense or meaning, untrue, absurd; ({%am%}), n. an
impossibility, absurdity (as a rabbit's horn, &c.).
{%—Mṛṣā-vāc, k,%} f. an untrue or satirical speech,
sarcasm, irony. {%—Mṛṣā-vāda, as,%} m. an untrue
speech, lie; sarcasm, irony; ({%as, ā, am%}), speaking
falsely or untruthfully, a liar. {%—Mṛṣā-vādin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} speaking falsely or untruthfully, a liar; ({%ī%}),
m. one who brings forward an unjust or unfounded
charge, a false accuser. {%—Mṛṣodya (˚ṣā-ud˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} speaking untruthfully, lying, a liar; ({%am%}),
n. untruthfulness, lying.
<LEND>

<L>37897<pc>0793-b<k1>mfzAya<k2>mfzAya
{%Mṛṣāya%}¦ (fr. {%mṛṣā%}), Nom. A. {%mṛṣāyate,%}
&c., to err, be mistaken, hold a wrong notion or
opinion.
<LEND>

<L>37898<pc>0793-b<k1>mfzita<k2>mfzita
{%Mṛṣita%}¦ in {%apa-mṛṣita,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37899<pc>0793-b<k1>mfz<k2>mfz<h>3
{#mfz#} 3¦. {%mṛṣ%} (connected with rt. 2.
{%miṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%marṣati, mamarṣa,%}
{%marṣitum,%} to sprinkle, pour out.
<LEND>

<L>37900<pc>0793-b<k1>mfzwa<k2>mfzwa<h>3
3. {%mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>37901<pc>0793-b<k1>mfzwi<k2>mfzwi<h>3
3. {%mṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. and 2. see under rts.
1. {%mṛj%} and 1. {%mṛś%}), sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>37902<pc>0793-b<k1>mfzAlaka<k2>mfzAlaka
{#mfzAlaka#}¦ {%mṛṣālaka, as,%} m. the mango tree.
<LEND>

<L>37903<pc>0793-b<k1>mfzwa<k2>mfzwa
{#mfzwa#}¦ {%mṛṣṭa.%} See under rts. 1. {%mṛj,%} 1. {%mṛś,%}
and 3. {%mṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>37904<pc>0793-b<k1>mF<k2>mF
{#mF#}¦ {%mṝ%} (connected with rts. {%mṛ%} and
{%mṛṇ%}), cl. 9. P. {%mṛṇāti, mamāra, mariṣ-%}
{%yati, amārīt, martum,%} Ved. to bruise, smash, crush,
break; kill, hurt, injure.
<LEND>

<L>37905<pc>0793-b<k1>mUrRa<k2>mUrRa
{%Mūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushed, broken; = 2. {%mūta,%}
bound; [cf. rt. {%murv.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37906<pc>0793-b<k1>me<k2>me
{#me#}¦ {%me,%} cl. 1. A. {%mayate, mame, māsyate,%}
{%amāsta, mātum,%} to change, exchange, barter:
Caus. {%māpayati, -yitum,%} to cross over, (perhaps fr.
rt. 3. {%mā%}): Desid. {%mitsate:%} Intens. {%memīyate,%}
{%māmeti, māmāti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀ-μείβ-ω, ἀμείβ-ο-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀ-μεύ-σα-οθαι, παρ-αμείβ-εινμ ἀμοιβή, μοῖ-το-ς:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>me-a-re, mov-e-o, mô-tu-s, mô-tio, mô-men-</nsi>
<nsi>tu-m, mu-ta-re, mû-tuu-s, communis, munus:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>maithms, maidjan, ga-mains:</nsi> Angl. Sax.
[Page0793-c+ 77]
<nsi>madhm, mane, man, ge-mœne:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>me-na,</nsi>
‘change:’ Lith. <nsi>mai-na-s,</nsi> ‘exchange;’ <nsi>mainý-ti,</nsi>
‘to change, exchange.’]
<LEND>

<L>37907<pc>0793-c<k1>mApayAna<k2>mApayAna
{%Māpayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), crossing
over (fr. rt. 3. {%mā ?%}).
<LEND>

<L>37908<pc>0793-c<k1>meka<k2>meka
{#meka#}¦ {%meka, as,%} m. (probably onomato-
poetic), a goat.
<LEND>

<L>37909<pc>0793-c<k1>mekala<k2>mekala
{#mekala#}¦ {%mekala, as,%} m., N. of a mountain;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people, (also wrongly read
{%melaka%}); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river {%(= mekala-kan-%}
{%yakā)%}. {%—Mekala-kanyakā%} or {%mekala-kanyā,%} f.
‘daughter of Mekala,’ an epithet of the Narmadā
river. {%—Mekalakanyakā-taṭa,%} N. of a district.
{%—Mekalādri (˚la-ad˚), is,%} m. the Mekala moun-
tain. {%—Mekalādri-jā,%} f. ‘sprung from the Mekala
mountain,’ an epithet of the Narmadā river.
<LEND>

<L>37910<pc>0793-c<k1>mekzaRa<k2>mekzaRa
{#mekzaRa#}¦ {%mekṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%mikṣ%}), Ved.
a wooden stick or spoon for stirring up the Caru or
taking small portions from it.
<LEND>

<L>37911<pc>0793-c<k1>meKalA<k2>meKalA
{#meKalA#}¦ {%mekhalā,%} f. a girdle, belt, waist-belt,
(in one or two instances {%as%} or {%am,%} m. or n.); the
zone of a woman; the triple zone worn by the first
three classes, (according to Manu II. 42. that of a
Brāhman ought to be of {%muñja,%} that of a Kṣatriya
of {%mūrvā,%} that of the Vaiśya of {%śaṇa%} or hemp);
the girth of a horse; a band or fillet; anything
girding or surrounding [cf. {%sāgara-m˚%}]; a sword-
belt, baldric; a sword-knot or string fastened to the
hilt; the place of the girdle, the hips; the cords or
lines drawn round an altar, or on the four sides of
the hole in which sacrificial fire is offered; the edge
or slope of a mountain [cf. {%ni-tamba%}]; Hemionitis
Cordifolia; N. of a place; of a woman; of the
Narmadā river, [cf. {%mekalā.%}] {%—Mekhala-kan-%}
{%yakā = mekala-kanyakā,%} q. v. {%—Mekhalā-pada,%}
{%am,%} n. the place of the girdle, the hips. {%—Mekhalā-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. investiture with the girdle; the
rites connected with such investiture. {%—Mekhalā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a girdle or belt, wearing a
fillet. {%—Mekhalā-vin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. wearing a
girdle. {%—Mekhalī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%}
to put on a girdle, to put on the sacrificial string.
<LEND>

<L>37912<pc>0793-c<k1>meKalAla<k2>meKalAla
{%Mekhalāla, as,%}¦ m. ‘having a girdle,’ epithet of
Śiva; (according to a Scholiast {%= mekhalayālaṅ-%}
{%kṛta.%})
<LEND>

<L>37913<pc>0793-c<k1>meKalika<k2>meKalika
{%Mekhalika, as, ā, am,%}¦ wearing a girdle.
<LEND>

<L>37914<pc>0793-c<k1>meKalin<k2>meKalin
{%Mekhalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wearing a girdle; ({%ī%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva; a Brāhmanical student or youth
who, previous to his marriage, wears a girdle suited
to his caste, Brahma-cārin.
<LEND>

<L>37915<pc>0793-c<k1>meG<k2>meG
{#meG#}¦ {%megh%} = rt. {%migh.%}
<LEND>

<L>37916<pc>0793-c<k1>meGa<k2>meGa
{%Megha, as,%}¦ m. a cloud, ({%kāla-m˚,%} a black cloud);
cloudy weather; a mass, multitude; a fragrant grass,
Cyperus Rotundus; N. of one of the six Rāgas or
musical scales; of a Rākṣasa; of the father of the
fifth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī; of a poet,
(also read {%meca%}); of a mountain; ({%am%}), n. talc;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀ-μίχ-λη;</lang> Goth. <nsi>milh-ma,</nsi> ‘a cloud;’
Lith. <nsi>mig-la,</nsi> ‘a mist.’] {%—Megha-kapha, as,%} m.
‘cloud-phlegm,’ hail. {%—Megha-karṇā,%} f., N. of one
of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Megha-kāla,%}
m. ‘cloud-time,’ the rainy season. {%—Megha-kūṭā-%}
{%bhigarjiteśvara (˚ṭa-abh˚, ˚ta-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of
a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Megha-gambhīra, as, ā, am,%}
deep as (the rumbling of) a cloud. {%—Megha-gar-%}
{%jana, am,%} n. ‘cloud-rumbling,’ thundering, thunder.
{%—Megha-giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Me-%}
{%ghaṅ-kara, as, ī, am,%} ‘cloud-making,’ producing
clouds. {%—Megha-cintaka, as,%} m. ‘anxious for
clouds,’ the Cātaka bird (supposed to drink only
rain-water, and therefore naturally eager for rainy
weather). {%—Megha-ja, as, ā, am,%} ‘cloud-born,’
coming from the clouds; ({%as%}), m. a large pearl.
{%—Megha-jāla, am,%} n. ‘cloud-collection,’ a mass
of clouds, thick clouds; talc. {%—Megha-jīvaka%}
or {%megha-jīvana, as,%} m. ‘living on clouds,’ the
Cātaka bird. {%—Megha-jyotis, is,%} n. (according to
[Page0794-a+ 81]
the Amara-koṣa, {%is,%} m.), ‘cloud-light,’ a flash of
lightning, the fire produced from lighting. {%—Megha-%}
{%ḍambara, as,%} m. thunder; [cf. {%meghāḍambara.%}]
{%—Megha-taru, us,%} m., Ved. ‘cloud-tree,’ a parti-
cular form of cloud. {%—Megha-timira, am,%} n. ‘cloud-
darkness,’ darkness resulting from a clouded sky,
cloudy or rainy weather. {%—Megha-tva, am,%} n. the
being a cloud, the state of a cloud, cloudiness; {%me-%}
{%ghatvam upa-gam,%} to become a cloud. {%—Megha-%}
{%dīpa, as,%} m. ‘cloud-light,’ lightning. {%—Megha-dun-%}
{%dubhi, is,%} m., N. of an Asura. {%—Megha-dundubhi-%}
{%svara-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Megha-dūta,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘cloud-messenger,’ N. of a celebrated poem
by Kālidāsa. {%—Meghadūta-pāda-samasyā,%} f., N.
of a work. {%—Meghadūtābhidha (˚ta-abh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} entitled ‘cloud-messenger.’ {%—Megha-dvāra, am,%}
n. ‘cloud-gate,’ heaven, the sky, ether. {%—Megha-%}
{%nāda, as,%} m. ‘cloud-noise,’ sound of rain, thunder;
({%as, ā, am%}), sounding or rumbling like thunder,
making a noise like thunder; ({%as%}), m. an epithet
of Varuṇa; N. of one of the attendants of Skanda;
of a Dānava; of a son of Rāvaṇa, afterwards called
Indra-jit, as having conquered Indra (see Rāmāyaṇa,
Uttara-kāṇḍa XXXIV); of a frog; Amaranthus Po-
lygonoides; the Palāśa tree, Butea Frondosa. {%—Me-%}
{%ghanāda-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of Megha-nāda or
Indra-jit, son of Rāvaṇa,’ an epithet of Lakṣamaṇa,
the favourite brother of Rāma (the account of his
fighting and killing Indra-jit is in Rāmāyaṇa,
Yuddha-kāṇḍa LXVII-LXX). {%—Meghanāda-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place on the Narmadā
river. {%—Meghanādānulāsin (˚da-an˚), ī,%} m. ‘re-
joicing in the rumbling of thunder-clouds,’ a peacock.
{%—Megha-nādin, ī, inī, i,%} sounding or making a
noise like thunder; crying with joy at the appear-
ance of clouds; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a Dānava. {%—Megha-%}
{%nāman, ā,%} m. ‘cloud-named,’ a fragrant grass, Cy-
perus Rotundus. {%—Megha-nirghoṣa, as,%} m. the
rumbling of clouds, thunder; ({%as, ā, am%}), sounding
or making a noise like thunder. {%—Megha-paṅkti,%}
{%is,%} f. a line or succession of clouds. {%—Megha-par-%}
{%vata, as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Megha-pālī,%} f.
a proper N. {%—Megha-puṣpa, am,%} n. ‘cloud-
blossom,’ water; river-water; hail; ({%as%}), m., N. of
one of the four horses of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Me-%}
{%gha-pṛṣṭha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Ghṛta-
pṛṣṭha. {%—Megha-pradīpa, as,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Megha-pravāha, as,%} m., N. of one of the
attendants of Skanda. {%—Megha-prasava, as,%} m.
‘cloud-offspring,’ water. {%—Megha-baddha, as,%} m.
epithet of a particular formula. {%—Megha-bala, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Megha-bhagīratha-ṭhakkura,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Megha-bhūti, is,%} m. a
thunderbolt. {%—Megha-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a daughter
of king Vijaya-pāla. {%—Megha-maṭha, as,%} m., N. of
a monastery or college built by and named after
Megha-vāhana. {%—Megha-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the
sphere of the clouds, region of the clouds, firma-
ment, atmosphere. {%—Megha-maya, as, ī, am,%}
formed or consisting of clouds, cloudy. {%—Megha-%}
{%māla, as, ā, am,%} ‘cloud-wreathed, cloud-capt,’
crowned with clouds; ({%as%}), m., N. of a mountain;
of a Rākṣasa; of a son of Kalki by Ramā; ({%ā%}), f. a
line or succession of clouds, gathering of clouds; N.
of a work by Ketali-kīrtti treating of the astrological
significance of various kinds of clouds; of one of the
Mātṛs attending upon Skanda. {%—Megha-mālin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} cloud-wreathed; ({%ī%}), m., N. of one of
Skanda's attendants; of an Asura; of a king. {%—Me-%}
{%gha-yoni, is,%} m. ‘cloud-source,’ smoke, fog. {%—Megha-%}
{%rava, as,%} m. ‘cloud-noise,’ thunder; ({%as, ā, am%}),
thundering like a cloud; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the
Mātṛs attending upon Skanda. {%—Megha-rāga, as,%}
m. the musical scale Megha (being supposed capable
of bringing down rain from heaven). {%—Megha-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Megha-rāji, is,%} or {%me-%}
{%gha-rājī,%} f. a line of clouds. {%—Megha-rāva, as,%} m.
‘cloud-sounding,’ a kind of water-bird. {%—Megha-%}
{%rekhā%} or {%megha-lekhā,%} f. a line of clouds. {%—1. me-%}
{%gha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} enveloped in clouds, overcast
with clouds; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a mountain. {%—2. me- %}
[Page0794-b+ 80]
{%gha-vat,%} ind. like a cloud. {%—Megha-vana,%} N. of
an Agra-hāra named after Megha-vāhana. {%—Megha-%}
{%vapus, us,%} m. ‘cloud-form,’ a mass of clouds which
appear to assume some shape. {%—Megha-varṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘cloud-coloured,’ having the hue of a cloud;
({%as%}), m., N. of a man; of a crow in the Hitopadeśa;
({%ā%}), f. the indigo plant. {%—Megha-vartman, a,%} n.
‘cloud-path,’ the atmosphere, sky. {%—Megha-vahni,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘cloud-fire,’ lightning. {%—Megha-vāsas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} ‘cloud-robed,’ clad in clouds; ({%ās%}), m., N.
of a Daitya. {%—Megha-vāhana, as, ā, am,%} ‘having
clouds for a vehicle,’ riding upon the clouds; ({%as%}),
m. an epithet of Indra; of Śiva; N. of a king; of
a king of Kaśmīra; of the twenty-second Kalpa.
{%—Megha-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%} riding upon a cloud;
({%inī%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending upon
Skanda, (also read {%meṣa-vāhinī.%}) {%—Megha-vitāna,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. ‘cloud-canopy,’ an expanded mass of
clouds, a sky overcast with clouds; ({%am%}), n. a par-
ticular metre, four times ˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯¯. {%—Me-%}
{%gha-visphūrjita, am,%} n. the rumbling of clouds,
thundering; thunder; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%vṛtti,%} a parti-
cular metre, four times ˘¯¯¯¯¯, ˘˘˘˘˘¯, ¯˘
¯¯˘¯¯, (in this sense also {%am,%} n.) {%—Megha-%}
{%vṛnda, am,%} n. a mass of clouds. {%—Megha-vega,%}
{%as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Megha-veśman, a,%} n. ‘cloud-
abode,’ the sky, atmosphere. {%—Megha-śyāma, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} dark as a cloud. {%—Megha-sakha, as,%} m.
‘cloud-friend,’ N. of a mountain. {%—Megha-saṅ-%}
{%ghāta, as,%} m. an assemblage or multitude of clouds.
{%—Megha-sandeśa, as,%} m. {%= megha-dūta,%} q. v.
{%—Megha-sandhi, is,%} m., N. of a king of Magadha.
{%—Megha-sambhava, as,%} m. ‘cloud-produced,’ N.
of a Nāga. {%—Megha-sāra, as,%} m. ‘cloud-essence,’ a
kind of camphor {%(= cīna-karpūra)%}. {%—Megha-su-%}
{%hṛd, t,%} m. ‘cloud-friend,’ a peacock (described as
delighting in the rainy season). {%—Megha-stanita,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘cloud-rumbling,’ thunder. {%—Meghastani-%}
{%todbhava (˚ta-ud˚), as,%} m. Asteracantha Longi-
folia. {%—Megha-svana, as, ā, am,%} ‘cloud-sounding,’
loud as a (thunder) cloud; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the
Mātṛs attending upon Skanda. {%—Megha-svara%} or
{%meghasvara-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Me-%}
{%gha-svāti, is,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Megha-hrāda,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} shouting or roaring like a thunder-cloud.
{%—Meghākhya (˚gha-ākh˚), as,%} m., N. of a Persian
king, (also read {%meghākṣa;%} = Prākṛt <nsi>mehākkho</nsi>);
({%am%}), n. Cyperus Rotundus; talc. {%—Meghāgama%}
{%(˚gha-āg˚), as,%} m. ‘approach of clouds,’ the rainy
season. {%—Meghācchanna%} or {%meghācchādita (˚gha-%}
{%āc˚), as, ā, am,%} overspread with clouds, covered
with clouds, clouded. {%—Meghāṭopa (˚gha-āṭ˚), as,%}
m. ‘cloud-swelling,’ a dense cloud. {%—Meghāḍam-%}
{%bara (˚gha-āḍ˚), as,%} m. ‘cloud-drum,’ thunder;
[cf. {%megha-ḍambara.%}] {%—Meghānandā (˚gha-ān˚),%}
f. ‘rejoicing in clouds,’ a kind of crane. {%—Meghā-%}
{%nandin (˚gha-ān˚), ī,%} m. ‘rejoicing in clouds,’ a
peacock; [cf. {%megha-suhṛd.%}] {%—Meghānta (˚gha-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. ‘coming at the end of the rainy season,’
the autumn. {%—Meghāri (˚gha-ari), is,%} m. ‘cloud-
enemy,’ the wind. {%—Meghāvatata (˚gha-av˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} overspread with clouds, overcast. {%—Meghāvalī%}
{%(˚gha-āv˚),%} f., N. of a princess. {%—Meghāsthi (˚gha-%}
{%as˚), i,%} n. ‘cloud-bone,’ hail. {%—Meghāspada (˚gha-%}
{%ās˚), am,%} n. ‘cloud-region,’ the atmosphere, sky,
ether, heaven. {%—Megheśvara-tīrtha (˚gha-īś˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha on the Revā or Narmadā
river. {%—Meghodaka (˚gha-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘cloud-
water,’ rain. {%—Meghodaya (˚gha-ud˚), as,%} m.
‘cloud-rising,’ rising clouds. {%—Meghaunmukhya%}
{%(˚gha-au˚), am,%} n. the act of looking up eagerly
or longing for clouds (said of a peacock).
<LEND>

<L>37917<pc>0794-b<k1>meGaya<k2>meGaya
{%Meghaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%meghayati, -yitum,%} to make
cloudy, cause cloudy weather.
<LEND>

<L>37918<pc>0794-b<k1>meGayat<k2>meGayat
{%Meghayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. making cloudy;
({%antī%}), f., N. of one of the seven Kṛttikās.
<LEND>

<L>37919<pc>0794-b<k1>meGAya<k2>meGAya
{%Meghāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%meghāyate, -yitum,%} Ved. to
form clouds, become cloudy.
<LEND>

<L>37920<pc>0794-b<k1>meGya<k2>meGya
{%Meghya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in the clouds;
according to Pāṇ. {%meghya%} at the end of a comp.
{%= megham arhati%} or {%megha iva.%}
<LEND>
[Page0794-c+ 70]

<L>37921<pc>0794-c<k1>mEGa<k2>mEGa
{%Maigha, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the clouds,
cloudy; descended from clouds (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>37922<pc>0794-c<k1>meNganATa<k2>meNganATa
{#meNganATa#}¦ {%meṅga-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a
race (?). {%—Meṅganātha-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37923<pc>0794-c<k1>meca<k2>meca
{#meca#}¦ {%meca, as,%} m., N. of a poet; [cf. {%megha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37924<pc>0794-c<k1>mecaka<k2>mecaka
{#mecaka#}¦ {%mecaka, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%mac%}), dark-blue, dark-coloured, black; ({%as%}), m.
dark-blue colour, black; blackness; an eye of a
peacock's tail; a teat, nipple; smoke; a cloud; Mo-
ringa Pterygosperma; a kind of gem; ({%am%}), n.
darkness; sulphuret of antimony. {%—Mecakāpagā%}
{%(˚ka-ap˚),%} f. ‘dark-blue river,’ an epithet of the
Yamunā. {%—Mecakābhidhā (˚ka-abh˚),%} f. a species
of creeper ({%= pātāla-garuḍī%}).
<LEND>

<L>37925<pc>0794-c<k1>mecakacAtanI<k2>mecakacAtanI
{#mecakacAtanI#}¦ {%mecakacātanī,%} f. a various
reading for {%macakacātanī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37926<pc>0794-c<k1>mecurudi<k2>mecurudi
{#mecurudi#}¦ {%mecurudi%} (?), N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>37927<pc>0794-c<k1>mew<k2>mew
{#mew#}¦ {%meṭ%} (= rt. {%mreṭ%}), cl. 1. P. {%meṭati,%}
{%meṭitum,%} to be mad.
<LEND>

<L>37928<pc>0794-c<k1>mewulA<k2>mewulA
{#mewulA#}¦ {%meṭulā,%} f. the myrobalan tree ({%=%}
{%āmalakī%}).
<LEND>

<L>37929<pc>0794-c<k1>meWa<k2>meWa
{#meWa#}¦ {%meṭha, as,%} m. an elephant keeper [cf.
{%meṇḍa%}]; an elephant driver ({%= yantṛ%}); a ram
[cf. {%meḍhara%}].
<LEND>

<L>37930<pc>0794-c<k1>meWi<k2>meWi
{#meWi#}¦ {%meṭhi, meṭhī.%} See {%methi%} below.
<LEND>

<L>37931<pc>0794-c<k1>meq<k2>meq
{#meq#}¦ {%meḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%meḍati,%} &c., = rt. {%meṭ%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>37932<pc>0794-c<k1>meqi<k2>meqi
{#meqi#}¦ {%meḍi%} or {%meḷi, is,%} m., Ved. crackling,
emitting sparks, rustling (said of wind, fire, &c.);
any jingling or murmuring sound; (a reading {%meḍavas%}
is given for the pl. {%meḍayas.%})
<LEND>

<L>37933<pc>0794-c<k1>meQI<k2>meQI
{#meQI#}¦ {%meḍhī,%} f. See {%methi%} below.
<LEND>

<L>37934<pc>0794-c<k1>meQra<k2>meQra
{#meQra#}¦ {%meḍhra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%mih + tra;%}
according to native lexicographers also {%as,%} m.), mem-
brum virile, the penis; ({%as%}), m. a ram; [cf. {%mī-%}
{%ḍhvas, meṇḍha, meṣa.%}] {%—Meḍhra-carman, a,%}
n. or {%meḍhra-tvac, k,%} f. the fore-skin, prepuce.
{%—Meḍhra-ja, as,%} m. an epithet of Śiva. {%—Meḍhra-%}
{%roga, as,%} m. venereal disease. {%—Meḍhra-śṛṅgī,%} f.
Odina Pennata ({%= meṣa-śṛṅgī,%} said to be a
milky plant, the fruit of which is crooked and there-
fore like a ram's horn).
<LEND>

<L>37935<pc>0794-c<k1>meQraka<k2>meQraka
{%Meḍhraka, as,%}¦ m. the penis; a ram.
<LEND>

<L>37936<pc>0794-c<k1>meRQa<k2>meRQa
{%Meṇḍha, as,%}¦ m. (formed fr. {%meḍhra%} above), a
ram.
<LEND>

<L>37937<pc>0794-c<k1>meRQaka<k2>meRQaka
{%Meṇḍhaka, as,%}¦ m. a ram; a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37938<pc>0794-c<k1>meRQra<k2>meRQra
{%Meṇḍhra, as,%}¦ m. {%= meṇḍha%} above; membrum
virile.
<LEND>

<L>37939<pc>0794-c<k1>meRWa<k2>meRWa
{#meRWa#}¦ {%meṇṭha, as,%} m. an elephant keeper or
feeder ({%= meṭha%}); N. of a poet ({%= bhartṛ-meṇ-%}
{%ṭha%}).
<LEND>

<L>37940<pc>0794-c<k1>meRqa<k2>meRqa
{%Meṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. an elephant keeper.
<LEND>

<L>37941<pc>0794-c<k1>metArya<k2>metArya
{#metArya#}¦ {%metārya, as,%} m. (with Jainas) N. of
one of the eleven Gaṇādhipas.
<LEND>

<L>37942<pc>0794-c<k1>metf<k2>metf
{#metf#}¦ {%metṛ, tā,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%mi%}), Ved. one
who erects a column; (but according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda IV. 6, 2, {%metā%} is f. and {%= sthūṇā,%} a column,
pillar.)
<LEND>

<L>37943<pc>0794-c<k1>meT<k2>meT
{#meT#}¦ {%meth%} (connected with rt. {%mith,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. P. A. {%methati, -te, methi-%}
{%tum,%} to meet; (A.) to meet one another, associate;
to reproach, revile; to strike, hurt, kill; to know,
understand.
<LEND>

<L>37944<pc>0794-c<k1>meTi<k2>meTi
{%Methi, is,%}¦ m. (perhaps connected with rt. 1. {%mi%}),
a pillar, post; a pillar in the middle of a threshing-
floor to which oxen are bound, any central body,
(also written {%medhi, medhī, meḍhī, meṭhi, meṭhī,%}
f.; {%meḍhī-bhūta%} or {%medhī-bhūta,%} forming a solid
pillar or centre); a post to which cattle are tied; a
prop for supporting the shafts of a carriage; ({%ī%}), f. {%= %}
[Page0795-a+ 77]
{%methikā%}. {%—Methi-ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. standing
at the post to which cattle are bound.
<LEND>

<L>37945<pc>0795-a<k1>meTikA<k2>meTikA
{%Methikā%}¦ or {%methinī,%} f. a sort of grass, Trigondella
Fœnum Græcum.
<LEND>

<L>37946<pc>0795-a<k1>med<k2>med
{#med#}¦ {%med%} = rt. 1. {%mid,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37947<pc>0795-a<k1>meda<k2>meda
{#meda#}¦ {%meda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%mid%}), fat ({%=%}
{%medas%} below); a species of plant ({%= alambuṣā%});
a particular mixed caste (the son of a Vaideha by a
Kārāvara female); N. of a serpent-demon; ({%ā%}), f.
a root resembling ginger (said to be one of the
eight principal medicines, used especially in cases of
fever and consumption); ({%ī%}), f., see Gaṇa Gaurādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 41. {%—Meda-ja, as,%} m. a species of
bdellium {%(= bhūmija-guggulu)%}. {%—Meda-pāṭa,%} N.
of a place. {%—Meda-pāṭha, as,%} m., N. of a branch
of the Vatsa family. {%—Meda-bhilla, as,%} m., N. of a
degraded tribe. {%—Meda-śiras, ās,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Medodbhavā (˚da-ud˚),%} f. {%= medā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>37948<pc>0795-a<k1>medaka<k2>medaka
{%Medaka, as,%}¦ m. spirituous liquor used for dis-
tillation.
<LEND>

<L>37949<pc>0795-a<k1>medana<k2>medana
{%Medana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the act of fattening.
<LEND>

<L>37950<pc>0795-a<k1>medas<k2>medas
{%Medas, as,%}¦ n. fat, marrow, lymph (as one of the
seven Dhātus or constituent elements of the body,
and supposed to be a serous or adipose secretion that
spreads amongst the muscular or fleshy fibres, per-
forming the same functions to the flesh that the
marrow of the bones performs to them; in Hindū
physiology its proper seat is said to be the abdomen);
vigour, energy (Ved.); corpulence; excessive fatness,
morbid or unnatural corpulence ({%= meda-doṣa%}); a
mystical term for the letter {%v;%} [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">μῡε-</lang>
<lang n="greek">λό-ς</lang> for <lang n="greek">μεδυλό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>medulla</nsi> for <nsi>medusla</nsi> or
<nsi>medurla.</nsi>] {%—Medaḥ-puccha%} or {%medaḥ-pucchaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the fat-tailed sheep. {%—Medaḥ-sāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one in whom the Dhātu fat predominates; ({%ā%}),
f. {%= medā%}. {%—Medas-kṛt, t,%} n. ‘fat-producing,’ the
body, flesh. {%—Medas-tejas, as,%} n. ‘strength of the
Medas,’ bone. {%—Medas-piṇḍa, as,%} m. a lump of
fat. {%—Medas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of fat,
fat. {%—Medas-vin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘having Medas,’ corpu-
lent, fat; robust, stout, strong. {%—Medo-gaṇḍa, as,%} m.,
Ved. a kind of fatty excrescence. {%—Medo-granthi, is,%}
m. a lump or knot of fat, a fatty tumor. {%—Medo-ja,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘produced by Medas,’ bone. {%—Medo-dharā,%}
f. a membrane in the abdomen containing the fat,
the omentum. {%—Medo-'rbuda, am,%} n. a fatty tumor
unattended with pain. {%—Medo-vatī,%} f. {%= medā.%}
{%—Medo-vaha, am,%} n. (in anatomy) a vessel con-
veying fat, a lymphatic. {%—Medo-vṛddhi, is,%} f.
increase of fat, corpulence; enlargement of the
scrotum.
<LEND>

<L>37951<pc>0795-a<k1>medin<k2>medin
{%Medin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. associated with another as
a friend or companion [cf. {%mitra%}]; a partner, con-
federate, ally; (Sāy.) having Medas, possessing
vigour or energy, {%= medasā yukta = balavat; (inī),%}
f. the earth, land, soil, ground, landed property;
spot, place [cf. {%yuddha-m˚%}]; Gmelina Arborea; {%=%}
{%medā,%} q. v.; N. of a lexicon; (sometimes in comps.
spelt {%medini.%}) {%—Medinī-koṣa,%} N. of a lexicon.
{%—Medinī-ja, as,%} m., Ved. ‘earth-born,’ the planet
Mars. {%—Medinī-drava, as,%} m. dust. {%—Medinī-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘lord of the earth or of the country,’ a prince,
king. {%—Medinīśa (˚nī-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of the
earth or of the country,’ a prince, king; ({%am%}), n.,
scil. {%tantra,%} N. of a Tantra.
<LEND>

<L>37952<pc>0795-a<k1>medura<k2>medura
{%Medura, as, ā, am,%}¦ fat; smooth, soft, bland, unc-
tuous; thick, dense; (with inst. or at the end of a
comp.) thick with, as thick as, full of, covered with.
<LEND>

<L>37953<pc>0795-a<k1>medurita<k2>medurita
{%Medurita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thick, thickened, made
dense; unctuous.
<LEND>

<L>37954<pc>0795-a<k1>medya<k2>medya
{%Medya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fat; thick, consistent, (opposed
to {%drava.%})
<LEND>

<L>37955<pc>0795-a<k1>medinI<k2>medinI
{#medinI#}¦ {%medinī,%} f. See under {%medin%} above.
<LEND>

<L>37956<pc>0795-a<k1>medura<k2>medura
{#medura#}¦ {%medura.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>37957<pc>0795-a<k1>meD<k2>meD
{#meD#}¦ {%medh%} (= rts. {%midh, mith%}), cl. 1. P.
A. {%medhati, -te,%} &c., to meet, associate,
accompany; to hurt, kill, immolate; to revile; to
[Page0795-b+ 81]
understand: Caus. {%medhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
understand.
<LEND>

<L>37958<pc>0795-b<k1>meDa<k2>meDa
{%Medha, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who kills or immolates;
({%as%}), m. (also {%am,%} n. in Ved.), the juice of meat,
broth, nourishing or strengthening drink (Ved.);
marrow (especially of the sacrificial victim), sap, pith,
essence (Ved.); a sacrificial animal, victim; an animal
sacrifice; an offering, oblation, sacrifice in general;
N. of the reputed author of Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā, 33,
92; N. of a son of Priya-vrata; see Gaṇa Pacādi
to Pāṇ. III. 1, 134; ({%ā%}), f. vitality, strength, vigour,
power, ability (Ved.); mental vigour or power, un-
derstanding, intelligence, intellect, prudence, wisdom;
retentiveness, memory; Intelligence personified as
the wife of Dharma and daughter of Dakṣa; a
form of Dākṣāyaṇī in Kaśmīra; a form of Saras-
vatī; a symbolical expression for the letter {%dh;%}
(according to native authorities also) a sacrifice;
(according to Naigh. II. 10) {%= dhana; (ās),%} f. pl.
the products of the understanding, ideas, perceptions,
thoughts, opinions. {%—Medha-ja, as,%} m. ‘sacrifice-
born,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Medha-pati, is,%} m.,
Ved. ‘lord of sacrifice,’ Rudra. {%—Medha-sāti, is,%}
f., Ved. (perhaps) expression of devotion, service or
worship of the gods; (according to Sāy.) the receiv-
ing or giving of the oblation. {%—Medhā-kāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. inspiring mental power, causing intelli-
gence, bestowing wisdom. {%—Medhā-kṛt, t, t, t,%}
causing mental power or intelligence; ({%t%}), m. a
species of culinary plant {%(= sitāvara)%}. {%—Medhā-%}
{%cakra, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Medhā-janana, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} productive of wisdom; (Ved.) N. of a rite
(and of its appropriate sacred text) for producing
mental and bodily strength in a new-born child or
in a youth. {%—Medhā-jit, t,%} m. an epithet of Kātyā-
yana. {%—Medhātithi (˚dhā-at˚), is,%} m., N. of a
Kāṇva (author of the hymns Ṛg-veda 1. 12 — 23,
VIII. 1, &c.; cf. {%medhyātithi%}); of the father of
Kaṇva; of a son of Manu Svāyambhuva; of one
of the seven sages under Manu Sāvarṇa; of a son
of Priya-vrata; of a lawyer or commentator on the
Mānava-dharma-śāstra; of a river; a parrot [cf.
{%medhā-vin%}]. {%—Medhā-rudra, as,%} m. an epithet of
Kālidāsa. {%—Medhā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing wis-
dom, intelligent, wise; ({%atī%}), f. a species of plant ({%=%}
{%mahā-jyotiṣmatī%}); a proper N. {%—Medhā-vara,%}
{%as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Medhāvi-tā,%} f. cleverness,
prudence, judiciousness. {%—Medhā-vin, ī, inī, i,%} pos-
sessed of mental power, intelligent, intellectual, wise,
judicious, endowed with sound judgment, having a
good memory; ({%ī%}), m. a learned man, sage, teacher,
Pandit; a parrot [cf. {%medhātithi%}]; an intoxicating
beverage, (in this sense perhaps an error for {%mā-%}
{%dhavī%}); N. of a Brāhman; of a king (son of
Su-naya and father of Nṛpañ-jaya); of a son of
Bhavya and of a Varṣa named after him; an epithet
of Vyāḍi; ({%inī%}), f. epithet of the wife of Brahmā.
{%—Medhā-sūkta, am,%} n. epithet of a particular Vedic
hymn.
<LEND>

<L>37959<pc>0795-b<k1>meDayu<k2>meDayu
{%Medhayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. full of sap or marrow,
strong, powerful; (Sāy.) {%= saṅgrāmecchu,%} eager for
war, or {%= yajña-kramaṇecchu.%}
<LEND>

<L>37960<pc>0795-b<k1>meDas<k2>meDas
{%Medhas, as,%}¦ n. {%= medha,%} a sacrifice (Ved.); ({%ās%}),
m., N. of a son of Manu Svāyambhuva; of a son of
Priya-vrata; ({%ās, ās, as%}), at the end of an adj.
comp. {%= medhā,%} intelligence, knowledge, understand-
ing (e. g. {%ātma-medhas,%} knowing or understanding
the Supreme Spirit); [cf. {%alpa-m˚, dur-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>37961<pc>0795-b<k1>meDasa<k2>meDasa
{%Medhasa, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37962<pc>0795-b<k1>meDA<k2>meDA
{%Medhā.%}¦ See under {%medha%} above.
<LEND>

<L>37963<pc>0795-b<k1>meDira<k2>meDira
{%Medhira, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%medhā%}), Ved. wise, in-
telligent, clever.
<LEND>

<L>37964<pc>0795-b<k1>meDizWa<k2>meDizWa
{%Medhiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%medhā-vin%}),
wisest, most intelligent.
<LEND>

<L>37965<pc>0795-b<k1>meDIyas<k2>meDIyas
{%Medhīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%medhā-vin%}),
wiser, more intelligent.
<LEND>

<L>37966<pc>0795-b<k1>meDya<k2>meDya
{%Medhya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%medha%}), full of sap,
vigorous, mighty (Ved.); fresh, uninjured (Ved.);
belonging to a sacrifice; fit for a sacrifice or oblation,
free from blemish (as a victim); clean, purified, pure
(not defiling by contact or by being eaten); {%= me- %}
[Page0795-c+ 74]
{%dhira,%} wise, intelligent, (in this sense fr. {%medhā;%}
according to Pāṇ. {%= medhāyām bhavaḥ; = medhām%}
{%arhati.%}) {%—Medhya-tama, as, ā, am,%} most pure,
purest. {%—Medhya-tara, as, ā, am,%} more pure,
purer. {%—Medhya-tā,%} f. or {%medhya-tva, am,%} n.
purity, (especially) ceremonial purity. {%—Medhya-%}
{%mandira, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Medhya-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of pure matter. {%—Me-%}
{%dhyātithi (˚ya-at˚), is,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi (a Kāṇva
and author of Ṛg-veda VIII. 1, 3-29, IX. 41-43).
<LEND>

<L>37967<pc>0795-c<k1>meDi<k2>meDi
{#meDi#}¦ {%medhi, medhī.%} See {%methi,%} p. 794, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>37968<pc>0795-c<k1>menA<k2>menA
{#menA#}¦ {%menā,%} f. a woman (Ved.); the female
of any animal (Ved.); speech, {%= vāc%} (Ved.); (ac-
cording to Mādhava) the sound of thunder; (accord-
ing to Sāy.) N. of the daughter of Vṛṣaṇ-aśva (the
latter being sometimes called Mena); N. of an
Apsaras (wife of Hima-vat and mother of Pārvatī);
of a river. {%—Menā-jā,%} f. ‘daughter of Menā,’ Pār-
vatī. {%—Menā-dhava, as,%} m. ‘husband of Menā,’
Hima-vat.
<LEND>

<L>37969<pc>0795-c<k1>menakA<k2>menakA
{%Menakā,%}¦ f., N. of the daughter of Vṛṣaṇ-aśva;
of an Apsaras (wife of Hima-vat). {%—Menakātmajā%}
{%(˚kā-āt˚),%} f. ‘daughter of Menakā,’ Pārvatī. {%—Me-%}
{%nakā-prāṇeśa, as,%} m. ‘husband of Menakā,’ Hima-
vat. {%—Menakā-hita, am,%} n., N. of a Rāsaka or
kind of drama.
<LEND>

<L>37970<pc>0795-c<k1>meni<k2>meni
{%Meni, is,%}¦ f., Ved. a missile weapon, a thunder-
bolt; a various reading for {%menā,%} speech (Naighaṇ-
ṭuka 1. 11).
<LEND>

<L>37971<pc>0795-c<k1>menilA<k2>menilA
{%Menilā,%}¦ f., N. of a princess.
<LEND>

<L>37972<pc>0795-c<k1>menula<k2>menula
{%Menula, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>37973<pc>0795-c<k1>menAda<k2>menAda
{#menAda#}¦ {%me-nāda, as, ā, am,%} making the
sound {%me; (as),%} m. a goat; a cat; a peacock.
<LEND>

<L>37974<pc>0795-c<k1>meni<k2>meni
{#meni#}¦ {%meni.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>37975<pc>0795-c<k1>menDikA<k2>menDikA
{#menDikA#}¦ {%mendhikā%} or {%mendhī,%} f. a plant,
Lawsonia Alba (a reddish dye is extracted from its
leaves, used for staining the palms of the hands, the
tips and nails of the fingers, and the soles of the
feet).
<LEND>

<L>37976<pc>0795-c<k1>mep<k2>mep
{#mep#}¦ {%mep,%} cl. 1. P. {%mepati, mepitum,%} to
go, move; to worship (?).
<LEND>

<L>37977<pc>0795-c<k1>meb<k2>meb
{#meb#}¦ {%meb%} (= rt. {%mev%}), cl. 1. A. {%mebate,%}
{%mebitum,%} to worship, serve.
<LEND>

<L>37978<pc>0795-c<k1>mema<k2>mema
{#mema#}¦ {%mema,%} (with Buddhists) a particular
high number.
<LEND>

<L>37979<pc>0795-c<k1>memiza<k2>memiza
{#memiza#}¦ {%memiṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens. of
rt. 1. {%miṣ%}), Ved. in {%ati-m˚,%} opening the eyes
wide, staring.
<LEND>

<L>37980<pc>0795-c<k1>meya<k2>meya
{#meya#}¦ {%meya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%mā%}), to be
measured, measurable, to be spanned [cf. {%muṣṭi-%}
{%m˚%}]; capable of being estimated, discernible.
<LEND>

<L>37981<pc>0795-c<k1>meraka<k2>meraka
{#meraka#}¦ {%meraka, as,%} m., N. of an enemy of
Viṣṇu; a seat covered with bark.
<LEND>

<L>37982<pc>0795-c<k1>meru<k2>meru
{#meru#}¦ {%meru, us,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. IV. 101,
said to be fr. rt. 1. {%mi%}), N. of a fabulous mountain
regarded as the Olympus of Hindū mythology, (it is
said to form the central point of Jambu-dvīpa, all
the planets revolving round it, and is compared to
the cup or seed-vessel of a lotus, the leaves of which
are formed by the different Dvīpas; its height is
said to be 84, 000 Yojanas, 16, 000 of which are
below the surface of the earth; its shape is variously
described, as square, conical, spherical, or spiral, and
its four faces are variously coloured, being white
towards the east, yellow to the south, black to the
west, and red to the north; the river Ganges falls
from heaven on its summit, and flows thence to the
surrounding worlds in four streams; the regents of
the four points of the compass occupy the corres-
ponding faces of the mountain, the whole of which
consists of gold and gems; its summit is the resi-
dence of Brahmā, and a place of meeting for the
gods, Ṛṣis, Gandharvas, &c.; when not regarded
as a fabulous mountain, it appears to mean the
[Page0796-a+ 79]
highland of Tartary north of the Himālaya); the
central or most prominent bead in a rosary, large
middle gem of a necklace; the most prominent
finger-joint in certain positions of the fingers; N. of
a Cakra-vartin; of a person mentioned in Rāja-
taraṅgiṇī VIII. 1418; epithet of a particular kind
of temple; N. of the palace of Gāndhārī, one of
the wives of Kṛṣṇa; ({%us%}), f., N. of the wife of
Nābhi and mother of Ṛṣabha. {%—Meru-kalpa, as,%}
m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Meru-kūṭa, as, am,%} m. n.
the summit of Meru; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Buddha.
{%—Meru-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra. {%—Meru-%}
{%tuṅga, as,%} m., N. of a Jaina. {%—Meru-duhitṛ, tā,%}
f. the daughter of Meru. {%—Meru-dṛśvan, ā, ā%} or
{%arī, a,%} one who has seen or visited Meru. {%—Meru-%}
{%devī,%} f., N. of a daughter of Meru (wife of Nābhi
and mother of Ṛṣabha, who was an incarnation of
Viṣṇu). {%—Meru-dhāman, ā,%} m. ‘having Meru for
a habitation,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Meru-dhvaja,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Meru-nanda, as,%} m., N.
of a son of Sva-rocis. {%—Meru-parvata, as,%} m. the
mountain Meru. {%—Meru-putrī,%} f. a daughter of
Meru. {%—Meru-pṛṣṭha, am,%} n. the summit of
Meru; heaven, the sky. {%—Meru-prabha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} resembling Meru; shining like Meru. {%—Meru-%}
{%prabha-vana, am,%} n., N. of a forest. {%—Meru-%}
{%prastāra, as,%} m. a term for a representation of all
the possible combinations of a metre having a fancied
resemblance to mount Meru. {%—Meru-bala-pra-%}
{%mardin, ī,%} m., N. of a king of the Yakṣas.
{%—Meru-bhūta, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Meru-%}
{%mandara, as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Meru-ma-%}
{%hībhṛt, t,%} m. mount Meru. {%—Meru-yantra, am,%}
n. (in mathematics) a figure shaped like a spindle.
{%—Meru-vardhana, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Meru-%}
{%varṣa, am,%} n., N. of a Varṣa. {%—Meru-vraja,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a city. {%—Meru-śikhara-dhara-ku-%}
{%māra-bhūta, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Meru-%}
{%śrī-garbha, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Meru-%}
{%sāvarṇa, as,%} or {%meru-sāvarṇi, is,%} m. a general N.
for the last four of the fourteen Manus. {%—Meru-%}
{%susambhava, as,%} m., N. of a king of the Kum-
bhāṇḍas. {%—Merv-adri-karṇikā,%} f. ‘having the
Meru mountain for a seed-vessel,’ the earth.
<LEND>

<L>37983<pc>0796-a<k1>meruka<k2>meruka
{%Meruka, as,%}¦ m. fragrant resin, incense; N. of a
district in the north-east of Madhya-deśa.
<LEND>

<L>37984<pc>0796-a<k1>meruwU<k2>meruwU
{#meruwU#}¦ {%meruṭū,%} (with Buddhists) a parti-
cular high number.
<LEND>

<L>37985<pc>0796-a<k1>merudu<k2>merudu
{%Merudu,%}¦ (with Buddhists) a particular high
number.
<LEND>

<L>37986<pc>0796-a<k1>meruRqA<k2>meruRqA
{#meruRqA#}¦ {%meruṇḍā,%} f. a particular goddess,
(probably incorrect for {%bheruṇḍā.%})
<LEND>

<L>37987<pc>0796-a<k1>mela<k2>mela
{#mela#}¦ {%mela, as, ā,%} m. f. (fr. rt. {%mil%}), meeting,
coming together, union, intercourse; an assembly,
company, society; (in modern dialects) a large con-
course of people collected at stated periods for reli-
gious or commercial purposes; a fair; ({%ā%}), f. a
musical scale; (with Buddhists) a particular high
number; any black substance used for writing, ink-
powder, ink, (in this and the following senses pro-
bably connected with Gr. <lang n="greek">μέλας</lang>); antimony, eye-
salve; the indigo plant. {%—Melā-nanda, as, ā,%} m. f.
an ink-bottle; [cf. {%melā-mandā%} below.] {%—Melā-%}
{%nandāya,%} Nom. A. {%melānandāyate,%} &c., to be-
come an ink-bottle. {%—Melāndhu, us,%} f. (? m.) or
{%melāndhuka (˚lā-an˚), as,%} m. an ink-bottle. {%—Me-%}
{%lā-mandā,%} f. an ink-bottle. {%—Melāmbu, us,%} m. an
ink-bottle; (probably for {%melāndhu.%})
<LEND>

<L>37988<pc>0796-a<k1>melaka<k2>melaka
{%Melaka, as,%}¦ m. meeting, union, coming together,
intercourse; a congress, assembly, a company [cf.
{%naṭaka-m˚%}]; {%melakaṃ kṛ,%} to assemble together;
{%graha-melaka,%} a conjunction of the planets. {%—Me-%}
{%laka-lavaṇa, am,%} n. a kind of salt ({%= mṛttikā-%}
{%lavaṇa;%} cf. {%kṣāra-melaka, kṣāra-mṛttikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>37989<pc>0796-a<k1>melana<k2>melana
{%Melana, am,%}¦ n. the act of meeting, union, coming
together, junction, assembling, associating with; an
encounter; mixing with, mixture; adding to.
<LEND>

<L>37990<pc>0796-a<k1>melayat<k2>melayat
{%Melayat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing to
be mixed or added to, mixing, adding.
<LEND>
[Page0796-b+ 75]

<L>37991<pc>0796-b<k1>melApaka<k2>melApaka
{%Melāpaka, as,%}¦ m. (fr. the Caus.), uniting, bring-
ing together; conjunction (of planets).
<LEND>

<L>37992<pc>0796-b<k1>melAyana<k2>melAyana
{%Melāyana, am,%}¦ n. mixing together, combination.
<LEND>

<L>37993<pc>0796-b<k1>melu<k2>melu
{%Melu%}¦ and {%meluda,%} (with Buddhists) a particular
high number.
<LEND>
<L>37993.1<pc>0796-b<k1>meluda<k2>meluda
{{Lbody=37993}}
<LEND>

<L>37994<pc>0796-b<k1>mev<k2>mev
{#mev#}¦ {%mev%} (= rts. {%mlev, meb%}), cl. 1. A.
{%mevate, mevitum,%} to worship, serve.
<LEND>

<L>37995<pc>0796-b<k1>mevAqa<k2>mevAqa
{#mevAqa#}¦ {%mevāḍa, as,%} m., N. of a man.
<LEND>

<L>37996<pc>0796-b<k1>mevArya<k2>mevArya
{#mevArya#}¦ {%mevārya%} for {%metārya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37997<pc>0796-b<k1>meSikA<k2>meSikA
{#meSikA#}¦ {%meśikā%} in {%kāla-m˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>37998<pc>0796-b<k1>meSI<k2>meSI
{#meSI#}¦ {%meśī,%} f., Ved. epithet of water in a
particular formula, (also read {%meṣī.%})
<LEND>

<L>37999<pc>0796-b<k1>meza<k2>meza
{#meza#}¦ {%meṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%miṣ;%} accord-
ing to some fr. rt. 1. {%miṣ%}), a ram, wether, sheep,
(in Ved. applied also to a fleece or anything woollen);
the sign of the zodiac Aries, or the first arc of 30°
in a circle; a kind of drug; a species of plant [cf.
{%meṣa-kusuma, meṣa-puṣpā%}]; N. of a demon
said to possess children; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of carda-
moms; ({%ī%}), f. an ewe; Nardostachys Jatamansi;
Dalbergia Ougeinensis; [cf. {%kāla-m˚.%}] {%—Meṣa-%}
{%kambala, as,%} m. a sheep's fleece or woollen dress
serving for an outer garment, a woollen rug or
blanket. {%—Meṣa-kusuma, as,%} m. Cassia Tora; [cf.
{%meṣākṣi-kusuma.%}] {%—Meṣa-pāla%} or {%meṣa-pā-%}
{%laka, as,%} m. a shepherd. {%—Meṣa-puṣpā,%} f. a
species of plant. {%—Meṣa-māṃsa, am,%} n. the flesh
of sheep, mutton. {%—Meṣa-yūtha, am,%} n. a flock
of sheep. {%—Meṣa-locana, as,%} m. Cassia Tora.
{%—Meṣa-vallī,%} f. Odina Pinnata. {%—Meṣa-vāhin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} riding on a ram; ({%inī%}), f., N. of one of
the Mātṛs attending on Skanda, (also read {%megha-%}
{%vāhinī.%}) {%—Meṣa-viṣāṇikā,%} f. {%= meṣa-śṛṅgī,%}
q. v. {%—Meṣa-śṛṅga, as,%} m. a species of tree
(enumerated among the {%drumāṇāṃ rājānaḥ%}); a
species of poisonous plant; ({%ī%}), f. Odina Pinnata.
{%—Meṣa-hṛt, t,%} m., N. of a son of Garuḍa, (also
read {%megha-hṛt.%}) {%—Meṣākṣi-kusuma (˚ṣa-%}
{%ak˚), as,%} m. Cassia Tora. {%—Meṣāṇḍa (˚ṣa-aṇ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having ram's testicles,’ an epithet of Indra.
{%—Meṣāntrī (˚ṣa-an˚),%} f. a species of plant ({%=%}
{%ajāntrī, chagalāntrī)%}. {%—Meṣālu (˚ṣa-ālu), us,%}
m. a species of plant {%(= varvarā)%}. {%—Meṣāhvaya%}
{%(˚ṣa-āh˚), as,%} m. Cassia Tora.
<LEND>

<L>38000<pc>0796-b<k1>mezaka<k2>mezaka
{%Meṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a species of vegetable, {%= jīva-%}
{%śāka; (ikā),%} f. an ewe; [cf. {%kāla-meṣikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38001<pc>0796-b<k1>mezAya<k2>mezAya
{%Meṣāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%meṣāyate,%} &c., to act like a
goat.
<LEND>

<L>38002<pc>0796-b<k1>mezAyita<k2>mezAyita
{%Meṣāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ acting like a ram or goat.
<LEND>

<L>38003<pc>0796-b<k1>mezUraRa<k2>mezUraRa
{#mezUraRa#}¦ {%meṣūraṇa, am,%} n. (a word bor-
rowed fr. the Gr. <lang n="greek">μεσουράνημα</lang>), epithet of the
tenth astrological house.
<LEND>

<L>38004<pc>0796-b<k1>meha<k2>meha
{#meha#}¦ {%meha, as,%} m. (according to some also)
{%am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%mih%}), making water; urine, ({%me-%}
{%haṃ kṛ,%} to make water; {%a-meha,%} retention of
urine); urinary disease, excessive flow of urine, dia-
betes; a ram ({%= meṣa%}); a goat; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μοιχός.</lang>]
{%—Meha-ghnī,%} f. ‘curing diabetes,’ Indian saffron.
{%—Meha-hāṭa,%} N. of a place; [cf. {%meda-pāṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38005<pc>0796-b<k1>mehat<k2>mehat
{%Mehat, an, antī, at,%}¦ urining, passing urine.
<LEND>

<L>38006<pc>0796-b<k1>mehatnU<k2>mehatnU
{%Mehatnū, ūs,%}¦ f., Ved., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>38007<pc>0796-b<k1>mehana<k2>mehana
{%Mehana, am,%}¦ n. the act of passing urine; mem-
brum virile, the penis; the urinary duct; urine;
({%as%}), m. a species of tree, {%= muṣkaka; (ā),%} f.
(according to some) {%= mahilā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38008<pc>0796-b<k1>mehanA<k2>mehanA
{%Mehanā,%}¦ ind., Ved. (lit. in streams), abundantly.
{%—Mehanā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. bestowing abun-
dantly.
<LEND>

<L>38009<pc>0796-b<k1>mehin<k2>mehin
{%Mehin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) making
water; suffering from a particular urinary disease.
<LEND>

<L>38010<pc>0796-b<k1>mEGa<k2>mEGa
{#mEGa#}¦ {%maigha.%} See p. 794, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38011<pc>0796-b<k1>mEtra<k2>mEtra
{#mEtra#}¦ {%maitra, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%mitra%}), coming
or derived from a friend, given by a friend, of or
belonging to a friend; friendly, amicable, well-dis-
posed, kind, benevolent, affectionate; of or belonging
[Page0796-c+ 81]
to the god Mitra, q. v.; ({%as%}), m. ‘a friend to all
creatures,’ a Brāhman who has arrived at the highest
state of human perfection; a particular mixed caste
or degraded tribe (the offspring of an outcast
Vaiśya, Manu X. 23; cf. {%maitreyaka%}); scil. {%san-%}
{%dhi,%} an alliance grounded on good-will; epithet of
the twelfth astrological Yoga; the anus, fundament;
a man's N. much used in grammatical examples [cf.
{%Caitra%} and the Latin <nsi>Caius</nsi>]; N. of a preceptor;
({%ī%}), f. (according to native authorities f. of {%maitrya%}),
friendship, friendliness, good-will, (in the Buddhist
system) universal charity, love; friendship for, good-
will towards (with loc.); association, intimate con-
nection, union, contact; Benevolence personified
(daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Dharma); the
Nakṣatra Anu-rādhā; ({%am%}), n. friendship; the
Nakṣatra Anu-rādhā presided over by Mitra; a
prayer addressed to Mitra early in the morning;
evacuation of excrement presided over by Mitra,
({%maitraṃ kṛ,%} to discharge excrement, see Manu
IV. 152); N. of a Sūtra work; (in Ved. said to be)
= 1. {%mitra,%} a friend. {%—Maitra-kanyaka, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Maitra-tā,%} f. friendship, friendliness,
benevolence, kindness. {%—Maitra-bha, am,%} n., N.
of the Nakṣatra Anu-rādhā. {%—Maitra-śākhā,%} f.,
N. of a school. {%—Maitra-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a
Sūtra work. {%—Maitrākṣa-jyotika (˚ra-ak˚), as,%}
m., N. of a particular class of evil beings or demons
who feed on purulent carcases (Manu XII. 72).
{%—Maitrī-nātha, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Maitrī-%}
{%pūrva, as, ā, am,%} preceded by friendship. {%—Maitrī-%}
{%bala, as, ā, am,%} whose strength is benevolence;
({%as%}), m. epithet of a Buddha; N. of a king (re-
garded as an incarnation of Śākya-muni). {%—Maitrī-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. state of friendliness, friendship.
<LEND>

<L>38012<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtraka<k2>mEtraka
{%Maitraka, am,%}¦ n. friendship.
<LEND>

<L>38013<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtravarDaka<k2>mEtravarDaka
{%Maitravardhaka%}¦ (fr. {%mitra-vardha;%} also read
{%maitravardhraka,%} fr. {%mitra-vardhra%}), see Gaṇa
Dhūmādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 127.
<LEND>

<L>38014<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrAbArhaspatya<k2>mEtrAbArhaspatya
{%Maitrābārhaspatya,%}¦ Ved. belonging or pertain-
ing to Mitra and Bṛhas-pati.
<LEND>

<L>38015<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrAyaRa<k2>mEtrAyaRa
{%Maitrāyaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%maitra + ayana%}), be-
nevolence; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic, see Gaṇa Naḍādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 1. 89, (in this sense fr. 1. {%mitra%}); N.
of the author of a Gṛhya-sūtra; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a school (named after Maitri); ({%ī%}), f., N. of the
mother of Pūrṇa; of a female teacher. {%—Maitrā-%}
{%yaṇa-gṛhya-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a work by
Prathama-puruṣa on the sixteen Saṃskāras.
<LEND>

<L>38016<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrAyaRaka<k2>mEtrAyaRaka
{%Maitrāyaṇaka,%}¦ see Gaṇa Arīhaṇāid to Pāṇ. IV.
2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38017<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrAyaRi<k2>mEtrAyaRi
{%Maitrāyaṇi%}¦ or {%maitrāyaṇī,%} N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>38018<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrAyaRIya<k2>mEtrAyaRIya
{%Maitrāyaṇīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school. {%—Mai-%}
{%trāyaṇīya-pariśiṣṭa, am,%} n., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>38019<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrAyaRya<k2>mEtrAyaRya
{%Maitrāyaṇya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>38020<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrAvaruRa<k2>mEtrAvaruRa
{%Maitrāvaruṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. descended or
derived from Mitra and Varuṇa, of or belonging to
them; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic (see Ṛg-veda VII.
33, 11); of Agastya; of Vālmīki; epithet of one of
the officiating priests (the first assistant of the Hotṛ,
who was also called Pra-śāstṛ; cf. {%kokila-m˚%}).
{%—Maitrāvaruṇa-śruti, is,%} f., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>38021<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrAvaruRi<k2>mEtrAvaruRi
{%Maitrāvaruṇi, is,%}¦ m. the son of Mitra and
Varuṇa, a patronymic of Mānya or Agastya; of
Vasiṣṭha; of Vālmīki.
<LEND>

<L>38022<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrAvaruRIya<k2>mEtrAvaruRIya
{%Maitrāvaruṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. relating to
the Maitrāvaruṇa Ṛtvij; ({%am%}), n. the office of the
preceding.
<LEND>

<L>38023<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtri<k2>mEtri
{%Maitri, is,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a teacher (from whom
the Maitry-upaniṣad derives its title).
<LEND>

<L>38024<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrika<k2>mEtrika
{%Maitrika, am,%}¦ n. (fr. 1. {%mitra%} or {%maitra%}), a
friendly office, (used at the end of an adj. comp.)
<LEND>

<L>38025<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtrin<k2>mEtrin
{%Maitrin, ī, iṇī, i%}¦ (fr. {%maitra%}), friendly, benevo-
lent, a friend.
<LEND>

<L>38026<pc>0796-c<k1>mEtreya<k2>mEtreya
{%Maitreya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%maitrī%}), friendly, re-
lating to a friend, benevolent; ({%as%}), m. (fr. {%mi-%}
{%trayu%}), a patronymic of Kauṣārava; of Glāva,
(according to a Scholiast a metronymic fr. {%mitrā%});
N. of a Bodhi-sattva and future Buddha; of the
Vidūṣaka in the Mṛc-chakaṭikā; of a grammarian
({%= maitreya-rakṣita%}); a particular mixed caste,
[Page0797-a+ 74]
{%= maitreyaka; (ī),%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad (pro-
bably as composed by Maitri); of the wife of Yājña-
valkya; of certain other women. {%—Maitreya-rak-%}
{%ṣita, as,%} m., N. of a grammarian. {%—Maitreya-%}
{%vana, am,%} n., N. of a forest. {%—Maitreya-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Sūtra work.
<LEND>

<L>38027<pc>0797-a<k1>mEtreyaka<k2>mEtreyaka
{%Maitreyaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a particular mixed
caste or degraded tribe (the offspring of a Vaideha
father by an Ayogavī, whose business is to praise
great men and announce the dawn by ringing a bell,
Manu X. 33); ({%ikā%}), f. descent from Mitrayu;
a contest between friends or allies ({%= mitra-yud-%}
{%dha%}).
<LEND>

<L>38028<pc>0797-a<k1>mEtrya<k2>mEtrya
{%Maitrya, am,%}¦ n. friendship.
<LEND>

<L>38029<pc>0797-a<k1>mETila<k2>mETila
{#mETila#}¦ {%maithila, as, ī, am,%} relating or be-
longing to Mithilā; ({%as%}), m. a king of Mithilā;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the people of Mithilā; ({%ī%}), f. an epithet
of Sītā (daughter of Janaka, king of Mithilā). {%—Mai-%}
{%thila-vācas-pati, is,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38030<pc>0797-a<k1>mETilika<k2>mETilika
{%Maithilika, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the inhabitants of Mithilā.
<LEND>

<L>38031<pc>0797-a<k1>mETileya<k2>mETileya
{%Maithileya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Maithilī.
<LEND>

<L>38032<pc>0797-a<k1>mETuna<k2>mETuna
{#mETuna#}¦ {%maithuna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mithuna%}),
paired, coupled, forming a pair or one of each sex;
united by marriage; relating or belonging to copu-
lation, ({%maithunaṃ vāsas,%} a garment worn during
sexual intercourse); entered into (as a marriage)
for the sake of cohabitation; ({%am%}), n. copulation,
coitus, sexual intercourse or connection; union, con-
nection; marriage, matrimony, (at the end of an
adj. comp. {%maithuna%} forms its fem. in {%ā.%}) {%—Mai-%}
{%thuna-gata, as, ā, am,%} engaged in copulation.
{%—Maithuna-jvara, as,%} m. the excitement of sexual
passion. {%—Maithuna-dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} cohabiting,
copulating. {%—Maithuna-vairāgya, am,%} n. abstinence
from sexual indulgence. {%—Maithunī-bhāva, as,%} m.
(fr. {%maithunī-bhū%}), copulation, sexual union.
<LEND>

<L>38033<pc>0797-a<k1>mETunika<k2>mETunika
{%Maithunika%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) {%= maithu-%}
{%nin.%}
<LEND>

<L>38034<pc>0797-a<k1>mETunikA<k2>mETunikA
{%Maithunikā,%}¦ f. union by marriage.
<LEND>

<L>38035<pc>0797-a<k1>mETunin<k2>mETunin
{%Maithunin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having sexual intercourse,
sexually united; ({%ī%}), m. one who has had sexual
connection with a woman; Ardea Sibirica, [cf.
{%kāmin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38036<pc>0797-a<k1>mETunya<k2>mETunya
{%Maithunya, as, ā%}¦ or {%-nī (?), am,%} proceeding
from sexual passion, caused by the desire for sexual
union; relating to copulation.
<LEND>

<L>38037<pc>0797-a<k1>mEDAtiTa<k2>mEDAtiTa
{#mEDAtiTa#}¦ {%maidhātitha, as, ī, am,%} Ved. re-
lating to Medhātithi; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38038<pc>0797-a<k1>mEDAva<k2>mEDAva
{%Maidhāva, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%medhā-vin%}), the son of
a wise man.
<LEND>

<L>38039<pc>0797-a<k1>mEDAvaka<k2>mEDAvaka
{%Maidhāvaka, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%medhā-vin%}), intelli-
gence, prudence, wisdom.
<LEND>

<L>38040<pc>0797-a<k1>mEDyAtiTa<k2>mEDyAtiTa
{%Maidhyātitha, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%medhyātithi%}), N. of
a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38041<pc>0797-a<k1>mEnAka<k2>mEnAka
{#mEnAka#}¦ {%maināka, as,%} m. (fr. {%menā%}), N. of a
mountain (son of Hima-vat by Menā or Menakā,
and said to have alone retained his wings when Indra
clipped those of the other mountains; according to
some this mountain was situated between the southern
point of the Indian peninsula and Laṅkā); N. of a
Daitya. {%—Maināka-svasṛ, sā,%} f. ‘sister of Maināka,’
an epithet of Pārvatī.
<LEND>

<L>38042<pc>0797-a<k1>mEnAla<k2>mEnAla
{#mEnAla#}¦ {%maināla%} or {%mainika, as,%} m. (fr.
{%mīna%}), a fisher, fisherman.
<LEND>

<L>38043<pc>0797-a<k1>mEneya<k2>mEneya
{#mEneya#}¦ {%maineya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>38044<pc>0797-a<k1>mEnda<k2>mEnda
{#mEnda#}¦ {%mainda, as,%} m., N. of an ape or
monkey-demon killed by Kṛṣṇa. {%—Mainda-mar-%}
{%dana, as,%} or {%mainda-han, hā,%} m. ‘killer of
Mainda,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>38045<pc>0797-a<k1>mEmata<k2>mEmata
{#mEmata#}¦ {%maimata%} and {%maimatāyana, as,%} and
{%maimatāyani, is,%} m. (fr. {%mimata%}), patronymics.
<LEND>

<L>38046<pc>0797-a<k1>mErava<k2>mErava
{#mErava#}¦ {%mairava, as, ī, am,%} relating or be-
longing to mount Meru.
<LEND>

<L>38047<pc>0797-a<k1>mErAvaRa<k2>mErAvaRa
{#mErAvaRa#}¦ {%mairāvaṇa, as,%} m., N. of an Asura.
<LEND>
[Page0797-b+ 77]

<L>38048<pc>0797-b<k1>mEreya<k2>mEreya
{#mEreya#}¦ {%maireya, as, am,%} m. n. (according to
the lexicographers only {%am,%} n.), a kind of intoxi-
cating drink (extracted from the blossoms of the
Lythrum Fructicosum, with sugar, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>38049<pc>0797-b<k1>mEreyaka<k2>mEreyaka
{%Maireyaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. {%= maireya%} above;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a mixed caste.
<LEND>

<L>38050<pc>0797-b<k1>mElinda<k2>mElinda
{#mElinda#}¦ {%mailinda, as,%} m. a bee.
<LEND>

<L>38051<pc>0797-b<k1>mESraDAnya<k2>mESraDAnya
{#mESraDAnya#}¦ {%maiśradhānya, am,%} n. (fr. {%miśra-%}
{%dhānya%}), a dish prepared by mixing various kinds
of grain.
<LEND>

<L>38052<pc>0797-b<k1>mEhika<k2>mEhika
{#mEhika#}¦ {%maihika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%meha%}), relat-
ing to urinary disease.
<LEND>

<L>38053<pc>0797-b<k1>mo<k2>mo
{#mo#}¦ {%mo (mā + u),%} Ved. and not, nor, not
indeed (see under 1. {%mā%}).
<LEND>

<L>38054<pc>0797-b<k1>moka<k2>moka
{#moka#}¦ {%moka, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 2. {%muc%}), the cast-
off skin of an animal [cf. {%nir-m˚%}]; ({%ī%}), f., Ved. night.
<LEND>

<L>38055<pc>0797-b<k1>moktavya<k2>moktavya
{%Moktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be set free or released
or liberated; to be let go or given up or delivered;
to be flung or hurled, to be wielded, to be sent (as
a missile).
<LEND>

<L>38056<pc>0797-b<k1>moktukAma<k2>moktukAma
{%Moktu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to let go, de-
siring to shoot or cast.
<LEND>

<L>38057<pc>0797-b<k1>moktf<k2>moktf
{%Moktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a releaser, liberator, deliverer,
rescuer, saviour; one who pays or discharges (a debt),
a payer.
<LEND>

<L>38058<pc>0797-b<k1>mokz<k2>mokz
{#mokz#}¦ {%mokṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%mokṣati, -te%}
(more properly to be regarded as an
anomalous Desid. fr. rt. 2. {%muc%}), to set free, liberate;
to free one's self from or wish to do so (A.); cl. 10.
P. (ep. also A.) {%mokṣayati (-yate), -yitum%} (perhaps
to be regarded as a Nom. fr. {%mokṣa%} below), to free,
set free, set at liberty, liberate, emancipate; to set
free from (with abl.); to detach, extract; to loose,
untie, undo; to wrest away, wrest from (with abl.);
to shed, cause to flow; to cast, hurl, fling.
<LEND>

<L>38059<pc>0797-b<k1>mumokzayizu<k2>mumokzayizu
{%Mumokṣayiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid.),
wishing to set free, desiring to liberate.
<LEND>

<L>38060<pc>0797-b<k1>mokza<k2>mokza
{%Mokṣa, as,%}¦ m. emancipation, deliverance, free-
dom, liberation, escape, release; release from worldly
existence, final emancipation, eternal bliss resulting
from the soul's final liberation and its exemption from
further transmigration; death; epithet of particular
sacred hymns conducive to final emancipation; de-
livery, discharge; the act of loosing, loosening,
untying, unbinding, undoing, solving, ({%praśna-m˚,%}
the settling of a question); acquittance of an obli-
gation; (in astronomy) the liberation of an obscured
planet, end of an eclipse, the last contact or separa-
tion of the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies; shedding,
causing to flow; the act of discharging, casting,
flinging, shooting; strewing, scattering; separating,
falling off, falling down; a species of tree {%(=%}
{%muṣkaka)%}. {%—Mokṣa-kāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} de-
sirous of liberation or final emancipation. {%—Mokṣa-%}
{%kriyā-samācāra, as, ā, am,%} affording a method
for effecting liberation. {%—Mokṣa-jñāna, am,%} n.
knowledge of the beatitude attained through final
emancipation. {%—Mokṣa-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Mokṣa-dā,%} f., N. of a female ascetic.
{%—Mokṣa-deva, as,%} m. an epithet applied to
Hiouen-thsang. {%—Mokṣa-dvāra, am,%} n. ‘gate of
emancipation,’ an epithet of the sun. {%—Mokṣa-%}
{%dharma, as,%} m. law or rule of emancipation.
{%—Mokṣadharma-parvan, a,%} n. ‘section relating
to the law or rules of emancipation,’ N. of a section
of the twelfth book of the Mahā-bhārata, from
Adhyāya 174 to the end. {%—Mokṣadharmārtha-%}
{%dīpikā (˚ma-ar˚),%} f., N. of a commentary on the
preceding section of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Mokṣa-%}
{%purī,%} f. ‘city of emancipation,’ an epithet of the
city of Kāñcī. {%—Mokṣa-bhāj, k, k, k,%} receiving
final emancipation. {%—Mokṣa-mahā-pariṣad, t,%} f.
‘great emancipation-assembly,’ the great Buddhist
general council. {%—Mokṣa-mārga, as,%} m. ‘path of
emancipation,’ N. of a Jaina work. {%—Mokṣa-%}
{%lakṣmī-vilāsa, as,%} m., N. of a temple. {%—Mokṣa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having final emancipation, con-
[Page0797-c+ 79]
nected with eternal bliss. {%—Mokṣa-viṃśaka, am,%} n.
‘twenty verses on emancipation,’ epithet of the verses
Hari-vaṃśa 14348 sqq. {%—Mokṣa-śāstra, am,%} n.
the doctrine of final emancipation. {%—Mokṣa-sā-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n. means of emancipation. {%—Mokṣān-%}
{%taraṅ-ga (˚ṣa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} nearest or next
to final emancipation. {%—Mokṣopāya (˚ṣa-up˚),%}
{%as,%} m. means of emancipation; a sage, saint, de-
votee (?).
<LEND>

<L>38061<pc>0797-c<k1>mokzaka<k2>mokzaka
{%Mokṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.)
setting at liberty, freeing, delivering, emancipating;
({%as%}), m. a species of tree; one who looses or unties
or sets free, a deliverer, liberator.
<LEND>

<L>38062<pc>0797-c<k1>mokzaRa<k2>mokzaRa
{%Mokṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ liberating, emancipating;
({%am%}), n. the act of loosing, loosening; emancipa-
tion, releasing, rescuing, setting at liberty, liberation;
letting go, giving up, resigning, abandoning, desert-
ing; squandering; shedding, causing to flow; [cf.
{%rakta-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38063<pc>0797-c<k1>mokzaRIya<k2>mokzaRIya
{%Mokṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be let go or liberated,
to be given up or resigned, to be disregarded or
neglected, ({%a-mokṣaṇīya,%} inevitable.)
<LEND>

<L>38064<pc>0797-c<k1>mokzamARa<k2>mokzamARa
{%Mokṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ setting free, liberating.
<LEND>

<L>38065<pc>0797-c<k1>mokzayat<k2>mokzayat
{%Mokṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ setting free, liberating.
<LEND>

<L>38066<pc>0797-c<k1>mokzayitf<k2>mokzayitf
{%Mokṣayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who frees or libe-
rates, a liberator, emancipator.
<LEND>

<L>38067<pc>0797-c<k1>mokzAya<k2>mokzAya
{%Mokṣāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%mokṣāyate, -yitum,%} to
become emancipated, tend to emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>38068<pc>0797-c<k1>mokzita<k2>mokzita
{%Mokṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set free, let go, liberated,
allowed to be at large.
<LEND>

<L>38069<pc>0797-c<k1>mokzin<k2>mokzin
{%Mokṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ striving after emancipation;
emancipated, redeemed.
<LEND>

<L>38070<pc>0797-c<k1>mokzya<k2>mokzya
{%Mokṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be set free or liberated;
to be saved.
<LEND>

<L>38071<pc>0797-c<k1>moga<k2>moga
{#moga#}¦ {%moga, as,%} m. the chicken-pox or
some similar disease.
<LEND>

<L>38072<pc>0797-c<k1>moGa<k2>moGa
{#moGa#}¦ {%mogha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%muh%}),
vain, useless, aimless, fruitless, unprofitable, ({%amo-%}
{%ghātithi,%} a guest who does not come causelessly or
uselessly); left, abandoned; idle; ({%as%}), m. an en-
closure, hedge, fence; ({%ā%}), f. the trumpet flower,
Bignonia Suaveolens; a species of plant, the seeds of
which are used as a vermifuge, {%= viḍaṅga; (am),%} ind.
in vain, uselessly. {%—Mogha-karman, ā, ā, a,%} one
whose actions are fruitless or unavailing, observing
useless ceremonies. {%—Mogha-jñāna, as, ā, am,%} one
whose knowledge is useless or unavailing, cultivating
any but religious wisdom. {%—Mogha-tā,%} f. vainness,
uselessness, aimlessness, erringness, ({%a-moghatayā%}
{%yutam astram,%} a weapon endowed with unerring-
ness, Kirātārj. VI. 40); idleness. {%—Mogha-puṣpā,%}
f. a barren woman. {%—Mogha-hāsin, ī, inī, i,%} laugh-
ing without any cause or occasion. {%—Moghāśa%}
{%(˚gha-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose hopes are vain.
{%—Moghī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make
vain, render useless, foil, frustrate, baffle, disappoint.
{%—Moghī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to
become useless or aimless, be foiled. {%—Moghī-bhūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} become useless, rendered vain, foiled.
<LEND>

<L>38073<pc>0797-c<k1>moGoli<k2>moGoli
{%Mogholi, is,%}¦ m. an enclosure, hedge, fence; [cf.
{%mogha%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>38074<pc>0797-c<k1>moca<k2>moca
{#moca#}¦ {%moca, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%muc%}), Mo-
ringa Pterygosperma; (probably) the plantain tree,
Musa Sapientum; ({%ā%}), f. Musa Sapientum ({%= ka-%}
{%dalī, rambhā%}); the cotton shrub; the indigo plant;
({%ī%}), f. Hingtscha Repens [cf. {%hila-mocī%}]; ({%am%}), n. a
plantain, banana (the fruit). {%—Moca-niryāsa%} or {%mo-%}
{%ca-rasa%} or {%moca-sāra%} or {%moca-srāva, as,%} or {%moca-%}
{%srut, t,%} m. the resin of Gossampinus Ramphii.
<LEND>

<L>38075<pc>0797-c<k1>mocaka<k2>mocaka
{%Mocaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. Caus. of rt. 2. {%muc%}),
liberating, emancipating; ({%as%}), m. a liberator, one
who has abandoned all worldly passion and desire,
an ascetic, devotee; Moringa Pterygosperma; the
plantain tree, Musa Sapientum; ({%ikā%}), f. Musa
Sapientum.
<LEND>

<L>38076<pc>0797-c<k1>mocana<k2>mocana
{%Mocana, as, ī, am,%}¦ releasing, freeing from;
casting, darting; ({%ī%}), f. a species of plant, {%= kaṇṭa-%}
{%kārī; (am),%} n. the act of releasing, liberating,
liberation, emancipation, setting free, loosing, ({%ṛṇa- %}
[Page0798-a+ 76]
{%mocana,%} the releasing from a debt, paying a debt
for any one); the act of unyoking, unharnessing;
letting loose, discharging, emitting. {%—Mocana-paṭ-%}
{%ṭaka,%} ‘clearing-cloth,’ a filter.
<LEND>

<L>38077<pc>0798-a<k1>mocanikA<k2>mocanikA
{%Mocanikā,%}¦ f. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38078<pc>0798-a<k1>mocanIya<k2>mocanIya
{%Mocanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be released or set free,
to be let loose; to be resigned or given up.
<LEND>

<L>38079<pc>0798-a<k1>mocayitavya<k2>mocayitavya
{%Mocayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be set free or re-
leased, (sometimes with inst. of the thing from which
there is release); capable of being set at liberty.
<LEND>

<L>38080<pc>0798-a<k1>mocayitf<k2>mocayitf
{%Mocayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ freeing, setting free, re-
leasing.
<LEND>

<L>38081<pc>0798-a<k1>mocayitvA<k2>mocayitvA
{%Mocayitvā,%}¦ ind. having freed or loosed, having
unharnessed.
<LEND>

<L>38082<pc>0798-a<k1>mocAwa<k2>mocAwa
{%Mocāṭa, as,%}¦ m. the pith or heart of the banana
tree; the fruit of the banana; a kind of pungent
seed, Nigella Indica; sandal-wood.
<LEND>

<L>38083<pc>0798-a<k1>moci<k2>moci
{%Moci%}¦ in {%hila-m˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38084<pc>0798-a<k1>mocita<k2>mocita
{%Mocita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be released, set at
liberty, emancipated.
<LEND>

<L>38085<pc>0798-a<k1>mocin<k2>mocin
{%Mocin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ setting free, liberating.
<LEND>

<L>38086<pc>0798-a<k1>mocya<k2>mocya
{%Mocya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be set free or released; to
be given up or restored.
<LEND>

<L>38087<pc>0798-a<k1>mocika<k2>mocika
{#mocika#}¦ {%mocika, as,%} m. a leather manu-
facturer, shoe-maker, &c.; [cf. Hindī <lang n="arabic">موچي</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>38088<pc>0798-a<k1>mowaka<k2>mowaka
{#mowaka#}¦ {%moṭaka, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%muṭ%}),
a globule, pill; {%moṭakaṃ netra-rogāṇām,%} a pill to
be used as a remedy against ophthalmia; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of an author; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a Rāgiṇī; ({%am%}), n.
a broken or crushed leaf.
<LEND>

<L>38089<pc>0798-a<k1>mowana<k2>mowana
{%Moṭana, as, ī, am,%}¦ crushing, pressing, rubbing,
grinding, tearing, destroying [cf. {%gaja-m˚%}]; ({%as%}),
m. wind, air; ({%am%}), n. the act of crushing, breaking,
grinding, strangling, ({%gala-moṭana,%} wringing the
neck); [cf. {%aṅguli-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38090<pc>0798-a<k1>mowanaka<k2>mowanaka
{%Moṭanaka, am,%}¦ n. crushing, entire destruction;
a kind of metre, four times ¯¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>38091<pc>0798-a<k1>mowA<k2>mowA
{#mowA#}¦ {%moṭā,%} f. Sida Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>38092<pc>0798-a<k1>mowi<k2>mowi
{#mowi#}¦ {%moṭi%} in {%karṇa-m˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38093<pc>0798-a<k1>mowwAyita<k2>mowwAyita
{#mowwAyita#}¦ {%moṭṭāyita, am,%} n. showing affec-
tion in the absence of a loved object by various ways
of recalling him to mind, the silent expression of
returned affection, (one of the ten Bhāvas or proper-
ties of women.)
<LEND>

<L>38094<pc>0798-a<k1>moQa<k2>moQa
{#moQa#}¦ {%moḍha, as,%} m., N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>38095<pc>0798-a<k1>moQaka<k2>moQaka
{%Moḍhaka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38096<pc>0798-a<k1>moRa<k2>moRa
{#moRa#}¦ {%moṇa, as,%} m. dried fruit; a kind of
fly ({%= nakra-makṣikā%}); a basket in which snakes
are carried.
<LEND>

<L>38097<pc>0798-a<k1>moRaka<k2>moRaka
{%Moṇaka,%}¦ a word used to explain {%ḍimbikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>38098<pc>0798-a<k1>motIrAma<k2>motIrAma
{#motIrAma#}¦ {%motīrāma, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Kānada.
<LEND>

<L>38099<pc>0798-a<k1>moda<k2>moda
{#moda#}¦ {%moda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%mud%}), pleasure,
delight, gladness, joyousness, joyfulness; fragrance,
perfume [cf. {%ā-moda%}]; N. of a Muni; ({%ā%}), f. {%=%}
{%aja-modā,%} q. v. {%—Moda-kara, as,%} m., N. of a
Muni. {%—Moda-modinī,%} f. ‘delighting by fragrance,’
Eugenia Jambolana {%(= jambu)%}. {%—Modākhya (˚da-%}
{%ākh˚), as,%} m. the mango tree. {%—Modā-giri, is,%}
m., N. of a country. {%—Modāḍhyā (˚da-āḍh˚),%} f.
{%= aja-modā,%} q. v. {%—Modā-pura, am,%} n., N. of
a city.
<LEND>

<L>38100<pc>0798-a<k1>modaka<k2>modaka
{%Modaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} delighting, rejoicing,
pleasing, gladdening, exhilarating, causing happiness
or delight; glad, cheerful; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a small
round sweetmeat or a sweetmeat in general; (in
medicine) a sort of pill; ({%as%}), m. a particular mixed
caste (the son of a Kṣatriya by a Śūdra mother);
({%am%}), n. a kind of metre, four times ¯˘˘¯˘˘¯
˘˘¯˘˘¯; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a particular mythical club
or weapon. {%—Modaka-kāra, as,%} m. a sweetmeat-
maker, confectioner. {%—Modaka-maya, as, ī, am,%}
composed of sweetmeats. {%—Modaka-śarāva, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a dish of sweetmeats.
<LEND>

<L>38101<pc>0798-a<k1>modakikA<k2>modakikA
{%Modakikā,%}¦ f. (at the end of a comp. after nu-
merals), a sweetmeat.
<LEND>
[Page0798-b+ 77]

<L>38102<pc>0798-b<k1>modana<k2>modana
{%Modana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), giving joy,
gratifying, gladdening, delighting, (generally at the
end of a comp., e. g. {%kravyāda-gaṇa-modana,%}
giving joy to numbers of beasts of prey, Mahā-bh.
Droṇa-p. 1576); ({%am%}), n. the act of pleasing or
affording pleasure; joy, pleasure; {%= ucchiṣṭa-mo-%}
{%dana,%} wax.
<LEND>

<L>38103<pc>0798-b<k1>modanIya<k2>modanIya
{%Modanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be rejoiced at, to be
delighted in, delightful.
<LEND>

<L>38104<pc>0798-b<k1>modamAna<k2>modamAna
{%Modamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ rejoicing, being glad.
<LEND>

<L>38105<pc>0798-b<k1>modayat<k2>modayat
{%Modayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ rejoicing, delighting;
({%antī%}), f. a sort of wild lovage, Ptychotis Ajowan;
Arabian jasmine.
<LEND>

<L>38106<pc>0798-b<k1>modayantikA<k2>modayantikA
{%Modayantikā,%}¦ f. {%= modayantī,%} Ptychotis Ajowan.
<LEND>

<L>38107<pc>0798-b<k1>modAkin<k2>modAkin
{%Modākin, ī,%}¦ m. (probably) N. of a hill (Mahā-bh.
Bhīṣma-p. 427).
<LEND>

<L>38108<pc>0798-b<k1>modAyani<k2>modAyani
{%Modāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Moda.
<LEND>

<L>38109<pc>0798-b<k1>modita<k2>modita
{%Modita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, gratified, delighted;
({%am%}), n. pleasure, delight.
<LEND>

<L>38110<pc>0798-b<k1>modin<k2>modin
{%Modin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ rejoicing, glad, pleased, cheerful,
merry, happy; making glad, gladdening, gratifying,
delighting, (often at the end of comps., cf. {%gīta-m˚%});
({%inī%}), f., N. of various plants ({%= aja-modā, mal-%}
{%likā, yūthikā, vṛtta-mallikā%}); musk; an intoxi-
cating beverage.
<LEND>

<L>38111<pc>0798-b<k1>modoza<k2>modoza
{%Modoṣa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>38112<pc>0798-b<k1>momuGa<k2>momuGa
{#momuGa#}¦ {%momugha, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens. of
rt. 1. {%muh%}), very much perplexed, greatly embar-
rassed; mad, insane.
<LEND>

<L>38113<pc>0798-b<k1>morawa<k2>morawa
{#morawa#}¦ {%moraṭa, as,%} m. a species of plant
with sweet juice ({%= kṣīra-moraṭa%}); the milk of a
cow recently calved, biestings, (according to lexico-
graphers, {%am,%} n.); ({%ā%}), f. {%= mūrvā,%} hemp used for
bow-strings, Sanseviera Roxburghiana; ({%am%}), n. the
root of the sugar-cane; the flower of Alangium
Hexapetalum; the root of this plant.
<LEND>

<L>38114<pc>0798-b<k1>morawaka<k2>morawaka
{%Moraṭaka, am,%}¦ n. the root of the sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>38115<pc>0798-b<k1>morAka<k2>morAka
{#morAka#}¦ {%morāka, as,%} m., N. of king Pravara-
sena's minister (founder of the temple called after
him {%morāka-bhavana%}).
<LEND>

<L>38116<pc>0798-b<k1>morikA<k2>morikA
{#morikA#}¦ {%morikā,%} f., N. of a female poet.
<LEND>

<L>38117<pc>0798-b<k1>morI<k2>morI
{%Morī,%}¦ N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>38118<pc>0798-b<k1>morvaRIkara<k2>morvaRIkara
{#morvaRIkara#}¦ {%morvaṇī-kara, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38119<pc>0798-b<k1>moza<k2>moza
{#moza#}¦ {%moṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%muṣ%}), a
robber, thief, plunderer; robbery, theft, stealing;
plundering, sacking, ({%nagara-moṣa,%} plundering a
city); anything robbed or stolen, stolen property.
{%—Moṣa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} one who practises theft, a
thief. {%—Moṣābhidarśana (˚ṣa-abh˚), am,%} n.
seeing or witnessing a robbery.
<LEND>

<L>38120<pc>0798-b<k1>mozaka<k2>mozaka
{%Moṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a thief, robber.
<LEND>

<L>38121<pc>0798-b<k1>mozaRa<k2>mozaRa
{%Moṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ robbing, plundering, carry-
ing off; ({%am%}), n. the act of robbing, plundering,
stealing, defrauding, embezzling.
<LEND>

<L>38122<pc>0798-b<k1>mozayitnu<k2>mozayitnu
{%Moṣayitnu, us,%}¦ m. (fr. the Caus.), a Brāhman;
the Indian cuckoo.
<LEND>

<L>38123<pc>0798-b<k1>mozA<k2>mozA
{%Moṣā,%}¦ f. robbery, theft.
<LEND>

<L>38124<pc>0798-b<k1>mozwf<k2>mozwf
{%Moṣṭṛ, ṭā,%}¦ m. a robber, thief.
<LEND>

<L>38125<pc>0798-b<k1>moha<k2>moha
{#moha#}¦ {%moha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%muh%}), uncon-
sciousness, loss of consciousness, fainting, a swoon;
delusion, bewilderment, perplexity, distraction,
phrenzy; weakness of intellect, ignorance, folly,
foolishness, infatuation; error, mistake, going astray;
pain, affliction; wonder, amazement, astonishment;
Infatuation (personified as the offspring of Brahmā);
(in phil.) darkness or delusion of mind preventing
the discernment of truth (leading men to believe in
the reality of worldly objects and to addict themselves
to mundane or sensual enjoyment); a magical art
employed to bewilder an enemy {%(= mohana); mo-%}
{%hāt,%} ind. through ignorance, from folly or infatuation.
{%—Moha-kalila, am,%} n. a thicket or snare of illu-
sion. {%—Moha-cūḍottara (˚ḍa-ut˚), am,%} n., N. of a
work. {%—Moha-jāla, am,%} n. the net of delusion,
the snare or fetters of illusory objects, the fascination
of the world. {%—Moha-nidrā,%} f. ‘sleep of infatua-
tion,’ thoughtless assurance, overweening confidence.
[Page0798-c+ 79]
{%—Moha-pāśa, as,%} m. the snare of (wordly) illu-
sion. {%—Moha-mantra, as,%} m. an infatuating spell,
deluding charm. {%—Moha-maya, as, ī, am,%} consist-
ing of infatuation, leading to delusion, perplexing.
{%—Moha-mudgara, as,%} m. ‘hammer of ignorance
or infatuation,’ N. of a metrical exposition of the
Vedānta philosophy; of another work. {%—Moha-%}
{%rātri, is,%} f. ‘night of bewilderment,’ the night when
the world is to be destroyed. {%—Moha-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} possessed of infatuation, infatuated, foolish, igno-
rant. {%—Moha-śāstra, am,%} n. erroneous or false
teaching, false doctrine. {%—Moha-śūlottara (˚la-ut˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Mohopamā (˚ha-up˚),%} f.
‘error-comparison,’ a rhetorical figure in which there
is a confusion of the subject and object of a comparison
(e. g. ‘regarding thy face, O dear one, as the moon,
I run after the moon as if it were thy face’).
<LEND>

<L>38126<pc>0798-c<k1>mohaka<k2>mohaka
{%Mohaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ bewildering, confusing,
infatuating, causing ignorance or folly.
<LEND>

<L>38127<pc>0798-c<k1>mohana<k2>mohana
{%Mohana, as, ī, am,%}¦ stupefying, depriving of con-
sciousness or sensation, bewildering, perplexing,
puzzling, confusing, deceiving, deluding, leading
astray, infatuating, fascinating; ({%as%}), m. the thorn-
apple; epithet of Śiva; N. of one of the five arrows
of Kāma-deva, the god of love; ({%ā%}), f. the flower
of a sort of jasmine; a sort of grass, Trigonella Cor-
niculata; ({%ī%}), f. Basella Cordifolia; a term for a
particular magical formula or incantation; N. of a
female demon (daughter of Garbha-hantṛ); of an
Apsaras; ({%am%}), n. the act of stupefying, bewildering,
perplexing, deluding, puzzling, deceiving, fascinating;
stupor, loss of sensation, unconsciousness, the being
deluded or infatuated, delusion, infatuation, decep-
tion, embarrassment, mistake; temptation, seduction;
sexual intercourse; a magical charm or incantation
used to bewilder an enemy; the formula used in
that process (especially certain magical hymns of
the Atharva-veda); any means employed for per-
plexing or deluding others; N. of a town. {%—Mo-%}
{%hana-canda, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mohana-dāsa%}
or {%mohana-dāsa-miśra, as,%} m., N. of the author
of a commentary on the Mahā-nāṭaka or Hanūman-
nāṭaka. {%—Mohana-prakṛti, is,%} m., N. of a pupil
of Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Mohana-bhoga, as,%} m. a parti-
cular kind of sweetmeat. {%—Mohana-latā,%} f. a plant
which has the power of fascinating. {%—Mohana-val-%}
{%likā%} or {%mohana-vallī,%} f. a species of plant. {%—Mo-%}
{%hanāstra (˚na-as˚), am,%} n. a weapon charmed to
fascinate or bewitch the person against whom it is
directed.
<LEND>

<L>38128<pc>0798-c<k1>mohanaka<k2>mohanaka
{%Mohanaka, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of the month
Caitra, (also written {%mohanika%}); ({%ikā%}), f. a
species of plant.
<LEND>

<L>38129<pc>0798-c<k1>mohanIya<k2>mohanIya
{%Mohanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to delusion, de-
pending on illusion or error, resulting from infatua-
tion, producing delusion; perplexing, puzzling, con-
fusing.
<LEND>

<L>38130<pc>0798-c<k1>mohayat<k2>mohayat
{%Mohayat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. the Caus.) stupefying,
bewildering, depriving of sense.
<LEND>

<L>38131<pc>0798-c<k1>mohayitf<k2>mohayitf
{%Mohayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who perplexes or
deludes, a perplexer, infatuator.
<LEND>

<L>38132<pc>0798-c<k1>mohita<k2>mohita
{%Mohita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stupefied, perplexed, bewil-
dered, infatuated, deluded, beguiled, fascinated, (often
in comps., e. g. {%kāma-mohita,%} infatuated by love.)
<LEND>

<L>38133<pc>0798-c<k1>mohin<k2>mohin
{%Mohin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ stupefying, confusing, puzzling,
perplexing, illusive, fallacious, beguiling, alluring,
fascinating; ({%inī%}), f. a fascinating woman; N. of an
Apsaras; the flower of a species of jasmine.
<LEND>

<L>38134<pc>0798-c<k1>mohuka<k2>mohuka
{%Mohuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being deluded, falling
into error or confusion, going astray.
<LEND>

<L>38135<pc>0798-c<k1>mOka<k2>mOka
{#mOka#}¦ {%mauka, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Mūka.
<LEND>

<L>38136<pc>0798-c<k1>mOkali<k2>mOkali
{#mOkali#}¦ {%maukali%} or {%maukuli, is,%} m. a crow,
raven; [cf. {%maudgali.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38137<pc>0798-c<k1>mOkunda<k2>mOkunda
{#mOkunda#}¦ {%maukunda, as, ī, am,%} relating to
Mukunda, i. e. Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>38138<pc>0798-c<k1>mOktika<k2>mOktika
{#mOktika#}¦ {%mauktika, am,%} n. (fr. {%muktā%}), a
pearl (properly ‘a collection of pearls’). {%—Mauktika-%}
{%gumphikā,%} f. a female stringer of pearls. {%—Mauk- %}
[Page0799-a+ 76]
{%tika-taṇḍula, as,%} m. a kind of white Yāvanāla.
{%—Mauktika-dāman, a,%} n. a string of pearls; a
kind of metre, four times ˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘.
{%—Mauktika-prasavā,%} f. a pearl muscle; [cf.
{%muktā-prasū.%}] {%—Mauktika-māraṇa, am,%} n., N.
of a subject treated of in the Dhātu-ratna-mālā.
{%—Mauktika-mālā,%} f. an ornament of pearls, a pearl
necklace; a species of metre, four times ¯˘˘¯¯, ˘˘
˘˘¯¯. {%—Mauktika-ratna, am,%} n. a pearl gem,
pearl; [cf. {%muktā-ratna.%}] {%—Mauktikaratna-tā,%} f.
the state or condition of a pearl. {%—Mauktika-śukti,%}
{%is,%} f. a pearl oyster; [cf. {%muktā-śukti.%}] {%—Mauktika-%}
{%sara, as,%} m. a string of pearls. {%—Mauktikābha%}
{%(˚ka-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} resembling pearls. {%—Mauk-%}
{%tikāvalī (˚ka-āv˚),%} f. a string of pearls; [cf. {%muk-%}
{%tāvalī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38139<pc>0799-a<k1>mOkya<k2>mOkya
{#mOkya#}¦ {%maukya, am,%} n. (fr. {%mūka%}), the state
of being dumb, dumbness, speechlessness.
<LEND>

<L>38140<pc>0799-a<k1>mOkza<k2>mOkza
{#mOkza#}¦ {%maukṣa, am,%} n. (fr. {%mokṣa%}), N. of
a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38141<pc>0799-a<k1>mOkzika<k2>mOkzika
{%Maukṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ (in astronomy) relating to
the release of a planet (from an eclipse), relating to
the end of an eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>38142<pc>0799-a<k1>mOKa<k2>mOKa
{#mOKa#}¦ {%maukha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mukha%}), relat-
ing or belonging to the mouth or face, frontal; ({%am%}),
n. a fault or defect connected with the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>38143<pc>0799-a<k1>mOKika<k2>mOKika
{%Maukhika, as, ī, am, = maukha%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>38144<pc>0799-a<k1>mOKya<k2>mOKya
{%Maukhya, am,%}¦ n. precedence, pre-eminence.
<LEND>

<L>38145<pc>0799-a<k1>mOKara<k2>mOKara
{#mOKara#}¦ {%maukhara%} (fr. {%mukhara%}), epithet of
a family or race (‘talkative?’).
<LEND>

<L>38146<pc>0799-a<k1>mOKari<k2>mOKari
{%Maukhari, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>38147<pc>0799-a<k1>mOKarI<k2>mOKarI
{%Maukharī,%}¦ f. {%= maukharya%} below.
<LEND>

<L>38148<pc>0799-a<k1>mOKarya<k2>mOKarya
{%Maukharya, am,%}¦ n. talkativeness, garrulity, lo-
quaciousness; scurrility, defamation, abusiveness,
abuse, calumny, vilification; ({%ā%}), the feminine form
of Maukhari above, (according to Scholiast on Pāṇ.
IV. 1, 79.)
<LEND>

<L>38149<pc>0799-a<k1>mOgDya<k2>mOgDya
{#mOgDya#}¦ {%maugdhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%mugdha%}),
simplicity, innocence, inexperience, silliness; a femi-
nine grace (asking a lover to tell what is already
known); charm, beauty; (also incorrectly written
{%maugdha.%})
<LEND>

<L>38150<pc>0799-a<k1>mOGya<k2>mOGya
{#mOGya#}¦ {%maughya, am,%} n. (fr. {%mogha%}), vain-
ness, uselessness.
<LEND>

<L>38151<pc>0799-a<k1>mOca<k2>mOca
{#mOca#}¦ {%mauca, am,%} n. (fr. {%moca%}), the fruit of
the banana or plantain tree.
<LEND>

<L>38152<pc>0799-a<k1>mOjavata<k2>mOjavata
{#mOjavata#}¦ {%maujavata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mūja-vat%}),
Ved. coming from or produced on the mountain
Mūja-vat; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic of Akṣa (author of
the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 34; also read {%maujavat%}).
<LEND>

<L>38153<pc>0799-a<k1>mOYja<k2>mOYja
{#mOYja#}¦ {%mauñja, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%muñja%}), made
of Muñja grass or its fibres; resembling Muñja grass;
({%as%}), m. a blade of Muñja grass; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%me-%}
{%khalā,%} a Brāhman's girdle or cord made of a triple
string of Muñja grass; any girdle. {%—Mauñjī-tṛṇā-%}
{%khya (˚ṇa-ākh˚), as,%} m. Muñja grass. {%—Mauñjī-%}
{%dhara, as, ā, am,%} wearing or carrying Muñja grass.
{%—Mauñjī-nibandhana, am,%} n. the binding on of
the girdle of Muñja grass, ligation of the sacrificial
cord (Manu II. 27). {%—Mauñjī-pattrā,%} f. Eleusine
Indica. {%—Mauñjī-bandhana, am,%} n. the ligation or
binding on of the Muñja grass girdle, investiture
with the sacred thread, (in Manu 11. 169. shortened
on account of the metre to {%mauñji-bandhana.%})
{%—Mauñjībandhana-cihnita, as, ā, am,%} distin-
guished by the ligation of the Muñja zone (Manu
II. 170).
<LEND>

<L>38154<pc>0799-a<k1>mOYjaka<k2>mOYjaka
{%Mauñjaka, as,%}¦ m. a blade of Muñja grass; (also
read {%muñjaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>38155<pc>0799-a<k1>mOYjakAyana<k2>mOYjakAyana
{%Mauñjakāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>38156<pc>0799-a<k1>mOYjavata<k2>mOYjavata
{%Mauñjavata, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. coming from the
mountain Muñja-vat; (also read {%maujavata,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>38157<pc>0799-a<k1>mOYjAyana<k2>mOYjAyana
{%Mauñjāyana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%muñja%}), a patronymic;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a warlike family; ({%ī%}), f. a princess
of the Mauñjāyanas.
<LEND>

<L>38158<pc>0799-a<k1>mOYjAyanIya<k2>mOYjAyanIya
{%Mauñjāyanīya, as,%}¦ m. a king of the Mauñjāyanas.
<LEND>
[Page0799-b+ 74]

<L>38159<pc>0799-b<k1>mOYjin<k2>mOYjin
{%Mauñjin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ girt with or wearing a girdle
of Muñja grass, ({%nāga-mauñjin,%} wearing a snake
for a girdle.)
<LEND>

<L>38160<pc>0799-b<k1>mOYjIya<k2>mOYjIya
{%Mauñjīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ made of Muñja grass.
<LEND>

<L>38161<pc>0799-b<k1>mOQya<k2>mOQya
{#mOQya#}¦ {%mauḍhya, as,%} m. (fr. {%mūḍha%}), a patro-
nymic; ({%am%}), n. stupidity, want of understanding,
folly, fatuity, ignorance, simplicity; spiritual folly.
<LEND>

<L>38162<pc>0799-b<k1>mORqinikAya<k2>mORqinikAya
{#mORqinikAya#}¦ {%mauṇḍi-nikāya, as,%} m. ({%mauṇḍi%}
fr. {%muṇḍa%}), a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38163<pc>0799-b<k1>mORqya<k2>mORqya
{#mORqya#}¦ {%mauṇḍya, am,%} n. (fr. {%muṇḍa%}),
shaving of the head, the having the head shaved,
tonsure; baldness.
<LEND>

<L>38164<pc>0799-b<k1>mOtra<k2>mOtra
{#mOtra#}¦ {%mautra, am,%} n. (fr. {%mūtra%}), a quantity
of urine, chamber-lye.
<LEND>

<L>38165<pc>0799-b<k1>mOda<k2>mOda
{#mOda#}¦ {%mauda, ās,%} m. pl. (probably fr. {%moda%}),
N. of a school; ({%as%}), m. a pupil of this school.
<LEND>

<L>38166<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdahAyana<k2>mOdahAyana
{%Maudahāyana, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>38167<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdaka<k2>mOdaka
{#mOdaka#}¦ {%maudaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%modaka%}),
relating to sweetmeats; dealing or trading in sweet-
meats; ({%am%}), n. a particular version of a sacred text
by Mauda, (in this sense connected with {%mauda%}
above.)
<LEND>

<L>38168<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdakika<k2>mOdakika
{%Maudakika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%modaka%}), consisting
or composed of sweetmeats; ({%as%}), m. a seller of
sweetmeats, confectioner.
<LEND>

<L>38169<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdanika<k2>mOdanika
{%Maudanika%}¦ (fr. {%modana%}), see Gaṇa Kāśyādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 116.
<LEND>

<L>38170<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdaneyaka<k2>mOdaneyaka
{%Maudaneyaka,%}¦ see Gaṇa Kattryādi to Pāṇ. IV.
2, 95.
<LEND>

<L>38171<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdamAnika<k2>mOdamAnika
{%Maudamānika%}¦ (fr. {%modamāna%}), see Gaṇa Kāś-
yādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 116.
<LEND>

<L>38172<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdAkin<k2>mOdAkin
{%Maudākin,%}¦ a various reading for {%modākin.%}
<LEND>

<L>38173<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdga<k2>mOdga
{#mOdga#}¦ {%maudga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mudga%}), relating
to a bean; ({%as%}), m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>38174<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdgika<k2>mOdgika
{%Maudgika, as, ī, am,%}¦ purchased with beans.
<LEND>

<L>38175<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdgIna<k2>mOdgIna
{%Maudgīna, as, ī, am,%}¦ sown with beans, fit for
being sown with kidney-beans, bearing beans (said
of a field).
<LEND>

<L>38176<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdgali<k2>mOdgali
{#mOdgali#}¦ {%maudgali, is,%} m. (fr. {%mudgala%}), a
crow [cf. {%maukali%}].
<LEND>

<L>38177<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdgalya<k2>mOdgalya
{%Maudgalya,%}¦ descended or sprung from Mudgala;
({%as%}), m. a proper N.; patronymic of Nāka; of
Śata-balākṣa; of Lāṅgalāyana; a particular mixed
caste; {%maudgalās,%} m. pl., see Gaṇa Kaṇvādi to Pāṇ.
IV. 2, 111.
<LEND>

<L>38178<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdgalyAyana<k2>mOdgalyAyana
{%Maudgalyāyana, as,%}¦ m. (patronymic fr. {%maud-%}
{%galya%}), N. of a pupil of Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>38179<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdgalyIya<k2>mOdgalyIya
{%Maudgalyīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or coming
from Maudgalya.
<LEND>

<L>38180<pc>0799-b<k1>mOdgika<k2>mOdgika
{#mOdgika#}¦ {%maudgika, maudgīna.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>38181<pc>0799-b<k1>mOna<k2>mOna
{#mOna#}¦ {%mauna, as,%} m. (fr. {%muni%}), a patro-
nymic; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a dynasty; ({%ī%}), f., N.
of the fifteenth day in the dark half of the month
Phālguna, when a ceremony of bathing in silence is
performed; ({%am%}), n. the office or position of a
Muni or holy sage; silence, taciturnity. {%—Mauna-%}
{%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Mauna-mantrāva-%}
{%bodha (˚ra-av˚), as,%} m., N. of a work by Sundara-
śukla. {%—Mauna-mudrā,%} f. the Mudrā or attitude
of silence. {%—Mauna-vrata, am,%} n. a vow of silence;
({%as, ā, am%}), observing a vow of silence, holding
one's tongue; [cf. {%muni-vrata.%}] {%—Maunavrata-%}
{%dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%mauna-vratin, ī, inī, i,%} ob-
serving a vow of silence. {%—Mauna-sammati, is,%} f.
silent assent.
<LEND>

<L>38182<pc>0799-b<k1>mOnika<k2>mOnika
{%Maunika, as, ī, am,%}¦ resembling a Muni or
inspired sage, like a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>38183<pc>0799-b<k1>mOniciti<k2>mOniciti
{%Mauniciti%}¦ (fr. {%muni-cita%}), see Gaṇa Sutaṅga-
mādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38184<pc>0799-b<k1>mOnin<k2>mOnin
{%Maunin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ silent, observing silence, taci-
turn, reserved, not speaking; ({%ī%}), m. {%= muni,%} an
ascetic, hermit, holy sage, one who has overcome his
passions and retired from the world; (sometimes at
the end of proper names, e. g. {%gopīnātha-m˚,%} the
[Page0799-c+ 77]
Muni Gopīnātha.) {%—Mauni-tva, am,%} n. silence,
taciturnity, reticence.
<LEND>

<L>38185<pc>0799-c<k1>mOnisTalika<k2>mOnisTalika
{%Maunisthalika%}¦ (fr. {%muni-sthala%}), see Gaṇa
Kumudādi 2. to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38186<pc>0799-c<k1>mOneya<k2>mOneya
{%Mauneya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%muni%}), N. of a school;
({%ās%}), m. f. pl. epithet of a class of Gandharvas and
Apsarasas; ({%am%}), n. the position or office of a
Muni (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>38187<pc>0799-c<k1>mOnda<k2>mOnda
{#mOnda#}¦ {%maunda, as,%} m. a proper N.; (also
read {%maudga, moda.%})
<LEND>

<L>38188<pc>0799-c<k1>mOrajika<k2>mOrajika
{#mOrajika#}¦ {%maurajika, as,%} m. (fr. {%muraja%}), a
drum-beater, drummer.
<LEND>

<L>38189<pc>0799-c<k1>mOrava<k2>mOrava
{#mOrava#}¦ {%maurava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%muru%}), coming
from or relating to the Daitya Muru.
<LEND>

<L>38190<pc>0799-c<k1>mOrva<k2>mOrva<h>1
1. {%maurva, as, ī, am,%}¦ made from the iron called
{%muru.%}
<LEND>

<L>38191<pc>0799-c<k1>mOrKya<k2>mOrKya
{#mOrKya#}¦ {%maurkhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%mūrkha%}), stu-
pidity, folly, fatuity, (sometimes less correctly read
{%maurkha.%})
<LEND>

<L>38192<pc>0799-c<k1>mOrya<k2>mOrya
{#mOrya#}¦ {%maurya, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Mura; a metronymic from Murā; N. of a dynasty
beginning with Candra-gupta. {%—Maurya-datta, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Maurya-putra, as,%} m. (with
Jainas), N. of one of the eleven Gaṇādhipas.
<LEND>

<L>38193<pc>0799-c<k1>mOrva<k2>mOrva<h>2
{#mOrva#} 2¦. {%maurva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%mūrvā%}), made
of the Sanseviera Roxburghiana, coming from or
relating to {%mūrvā%} or bow-string hemp; ({%ī%}), f. a
string or girdle made of {%mūrvā,%} the string of inves-
titure for a Kṣatriya (Manu II. 42); a bow-string;
(in geometry) the chord of an arc. {%—Maurvī-mekha-%}
{%lin, ī, inī, i,%} wearing a girdle made of {%mūrvā.%}
<LEND>

<L>38194<pc>0799-c<k1>mOrvikA<k2>mOrvikA
{%Maurvikā,%}¦ f. (in geometry) the chord of an arc.
<LEND>

<L>38195<pc>0799-c<k1>mOrvIka<k2>mOrvIka
{%Maurvīka%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) {%= maurvī,%}
a bow-string.
<LEND>

<L>38196<pc>0799-c<k1>mOla<k2>mOla
{#mOla#}¦ {%maula, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} (fr. {%mūla%}), pro-
ceeding from a root, radical, original; handed down
from antiquity (as an old custom, &c.); ancient, of
old standing; living from olden times or for genera-
tions in any country, indigenous; of pure or good
extraction, nobly born, of a good family; holding
an office from ancient times, brought up in a king's
service for generations, ({%maulo mantrī%} or {%maulaḥ%}
{%sacivaḥ,%} an old minister, one born in the country or
one whose forefathers have held the same office, see
Manu VII. 54, where, according to Kullūka, {%maulaḥ%}
{%= pitṛ-pitāmaha-krameṇa sevakaḥ%}); hereditary,
({%maulaḥ pārthivaḥ,%} an hereditary prince.)
<LEND>

<L>38197<pc>0799-c<k1>mOlaBArika<k2>mOlaBArika
{%Maulabhārika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%mūla-bhāra%}), car-
rying a load of roots.
<LEND>

<L>38198<pc>0799-c<k1>mOli<k2>mOli
{%Mauli, is,%}¦ m. (probably fr. {%mūla%}), the head, the
top of anything; the plant Jonesia Asoka; a patro-
nymic; ({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a tribe; ({%is%}), m. f. a
diadem [cf. {%mukuṭa%}], crown, crest; a tuft or lock
of hair left on the crown of the head after tonsure,
a top-knot ({%= cūḍā%}); hair ornamented and braided
round the head, {%= dhammila; (is),%} f. the earth, (in
this sense according to some {%maulī,%} f.) {%—Mauli-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. f. a crest gem, jewel worn in a diadem.
{%—Mauli-Maṇḍana, am,%} n. an ornament for the
head. {%—Mauli-mālā%} or {%mauli-mālikā,%} f. a wreath
or crown worn on the head. {%—Mauli-mālin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} having a wreath or crown on the top of the head;
{%udayācala-maulimālin,%} having the eastern moun-
tain for its crest (said of the sun). {%—Mauli-mukuṭa,%}
{%am,%} n. a diadem for the head, tiara; [cf. {%mukuṭa.%}]
{%—Mauli-ratna, am,%} n. a crest jewel, crown jewel,
head jewel. {%—Mauly-ābharaṇa, am,%} n. a head
ornament.
<LEND>

<L>38199<pc>0799-c<k1>mOlika<k2>mOlika
{%Maulika, as, ī, am,%}¦ producing roots, &c.; coming
from or belonging to the root, radical, original [cf.
{%mūlika%}]; chief, principal, being of low origin, (op-
posed to {%kulīna%}); inferior; ({%as%}), m. a digger of roots,
a dealer in roots; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>38200<pc>0799-c<k1>mOlikya<k2>mOlikya
{%Maulikya, am,%}¦ n. an abstract noun from {%mūlika,%}
see Gaṇa Purohitādi to Pāṇ. V. 1, 128.
<LEND>

<L>38201<pc>0799-c<k1>mOlin<k2>mOlin
{%Maulin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a diadem or crown,
diademed, crested; having at the top, (sometimes at
[Page0800-a+ 75]
the end of a comp., e. g. {%cakra-maulī śakaṭaḥ,%} a
cart having the wheels uppermost.)
<LEND>

<L>38202<pc>0800-a<k1>mOleya<k2>mOleya
{%Mauleya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>38203<pc>0800-a<k1>mOlya<k2>mOlya
{%Maulya, as, -lī, am,%}¦ being at the root; ({%am%}),
n. price, (for {%mūlya.%})
<LEND>

<L>38204<pc>0800-a<k1>mOli<k2>mOli
{#mOli#}¦ {%mauli.%} See p. 799, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38205<pc>0800-a<k1>mOSala<k2>mOSala
{#mOSala#}¦ {%mauśala, mauṣala,%} &c., incorrectly
for {%mausala%} below.
<LEND>

<L>38206<pc>0800-a<k1>mOziki<k2>mOziki
{#mOziki#}¦ {%mauṣiki, is,%} m. a metronymic
from Mūṣikā.
<LEND>

<L>38207<pc>0800-a<k1>mOzikIputra<k2>mOzikIputra
{%Mauṣikī-putra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>38208<pc>0800-a<k1>mOzwA<k2>mOzwA
{#mOzwA#}¦ {%mauṣṭā,%} f. (fr. {%muṣṭi%}), a combat with
fists, boxing match, sparring, playing at fisticuffs.
<LEND>

<L>38209<pc>0800-a<k1>mOzwika<k2>mOzwika
{%Mauṣṭika, as,%}¦ m. a cheat, impostor, rogue,
sharper.
<LEND>

<L>38210<pc>0800-a<k1>mOsala<k2>mOsala
{#mOsala#}¦ {%mausala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%musala%}),
club-shaped, club-formed; relating to the battle with
clubs, ({%mausalam parva = mausala-parvan%} be-
low); fought with clubs (as a battle); an epithet of
a Madhu-parka (composed of ghee and spirituous
liquor); ({%ās%}), m. pl. of {%mausalya%} below. {%—Mau-%}
{%sala-parvan, a,%} n. ‘Musala-section,’ N. of the six-
teenth book of the Mahā-bhārata (in which is de-
scribed the death of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and the
self-destruction of Kṛṣṇa's family through the curse
of some Brāhmans; it is narrated that in consequence
of this curse, the Andhakas and Yādavas indulged
in intoxicating liquors which led to a general quarrel
in which the infuriated relatives, having no weapons,
plucked the rushes [{%erakā%}], and with these, turned
to clubs by the working of the curse, slaughtered
each other).
<LEND>

<L>38211<pc>0800-a<k1>mOsalya<k2>mOsalya
{%Mausalya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Musala.
<LEND>

<L>38212<pc>0800-a<k1>mOsula<k2>mOsula
{#mOsula#}¦ {%mausula, as,%} m. a Moslim, Mussul-
mān, Muhammedan.
<LEND>

<L>38213<pc>0800-a<k1>mOhUrta<k2>mOhUrta
{#mOhUrta#}¦ {%mauhūrta, as,%} m. (fr. {%muhūrta%}), an
astrologer.
<LEND>

<L>38214<pc>0800-a<k1>mOhUrtika<k2>mOhUrtika
{%Mauhūrtika, as, ī, am,%}¦ lasting for a moment or
instant, momentary; relating to a particular time;
({%as%}), m. an astrologer; N. of a class of celestial
beings (children of Muhūrtā).
<LEND>

<L>38215<pc>0800-a<k1>mna<k2>mna
{#mna#}¦ {%mna%} in {%carma-mna,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38216<pc>0800-a<k1>mnA<k2>mnA
{#mnA#}¦ {%mnā%} (connected with rt. {%man,%} with
which {%mnā%} was originally identical), cl. 1.
P. {%manati, mamnau, mnāsyati, amnāsīt, mnā-%}
{%yāt%} or {%mneyāt, mnātum,%} to bind or fix in the
mind, repeat over in the mind, fix in the memory
by frequent repetition, repeat; to study or learn
diligently; to remember; to celebrate, praise (Ved.):
Pass. {%mnāyate:%} Caus. {%mnāpayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%amimnapat:%} Desid. {%mimnāsati:%} Intens. {%māmnā-%}
{%yate, māmnāti, māmneti;%} [for comparisons see
under rt. {%man.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38217<pc>0800-a<k1>mnAta<k2>mnAta
{%Mnāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed in the mind, repeated,
learnt, remembered; [cf. {%ā-m˚, samā-m˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38218<pc>0800-a<k1>myakz<k2>myakz
{#myakz#}¦ {%myakṣ%} (a Vedic verb, of which the
following forms are found, {%myakṣati, mimyakṣa,%}
{%mimikṣatus, mimikṣus, mimikṣire, amyak,%}
{%mimikṣat%}), to be fixed in or on; to be in any
place or state; to be near, to be present, to be at
hand; to go to, reach; to be associated or united;
(Sāy. {%= prāpnoti, saṅgacchate, saṃhato bha-%}
{%vati.%})
<LEND>

<L>38219<pc>0800-a<k1>mrakz<k2>mrakz
{#mrakz#}¦ {%mrakṣ%} or {%mṛkṣ%} (connected with
rts. 1. {%mṛj, makṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%mrak-%}
{%ṣati, mṛkṣati,%} &c., to accumulate, collect, as-
semble; to rub; cl. 10. P. {%mrakṣayati, mṛkṣa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to accumulate, collect; to combine, mix;
to rub, smear, anoint; to speak indistinctly or incor-
rectly; (according to some) to divide, cut.
<LEND>

<L>38220<pc>0800-a<k1>mrakza<k2>mrakza
{%Mrakṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbing, destroying, (in
{%tuvi-m˚,%} q. v.); ({%as%}), m. concealment of one's vices
or failings, hypocrisy, slyness. {%—Mrakṣa-kṛtvan,%}
{%ā, arī, a,%} Ved. rubbing to pieces, destroying (said of
Indra; Sāy. {%= vadha-kartṛ%}).
<LEND>
[Page0800-b+ 72]

<L>38221<pc>0800-b<k1>mrakzaRa<k2>mrakzaRa
{%Mrakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of rubbing in or on,
anointing, smearing the body with unguents; any-
thing to be rubbed on, ointment, oil.
<LEND>

<L>38222<pc>0800-b<k1>mrad<k2>mrad
{#mrad#}¦ {%mrad%} (another form of rt. 1. {%mṛd,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. A. {%mradate, mamrade, mra-%}
{%ditum,%} to rub; to grind, pound, reduce to powder;
to tread or trample on: Caus. {%mradayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%amamradat:%} Desid. {%mimradiṣate:%} Intens.
{%māmradyate, māmratti.%}
<LEND>

<L>38223<pc>0800-b<k1>mrada<k2>mrada
{%Mrada, mradas,%}¦ in {%ūrṇa-mrada, ūrṇa-mra-%}
{%das,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>38224<pc>0800-b<k1>mradaya<k2>mradaya
{#mradaya#}¦ {%mradaya%} (fr. {%mṛdu%}), Nom. P. {%mra-%}
{%dayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to make soft or smooth; to
polish.
<LEND>

<L>38225<pc>0800-b<k1>mradiman<k2>mradiman
{%Mradiman, ā,%}¦ m. softness, tenderness, mildness,
gentleness. {%—Mradimānvita (˚ma-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
endowed with softness, soft, mild, kind.
<LEND>

<L>38226<pc>0800-b<k1>mradizWa<k2>mradizWa
{%Mradiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%mṛdu%}), very
soft, exceedingly mild, softest.
<LEND>

<L>38227<pc>0800-b<k1>mradIyas<k2>mradIyas
{%Mradīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%mṛdu%}),
softer, milder.
<LEND>

<L>38228<pc>0800-b<k1>mrAtana<k2>mrAtana
{#mrAtana#}¦ {%mrātana, am,%} n. Cyperus Rotundus.
<LEND>

<L>38229<pc>0800-b<k1>mrit<k2>mrit
{#mrit#}¦ {%mrit%} [cf. rt. {%mṛ%}], cl. 4. P. {%mrityati,%}
Ved. to decay, moulder away, be dissolved.
<LEND>

<L>38230<pc>0800-b<k1>mriyamARa<k2>mriyamARa
{#mriyamARa#}¦ {%mriyamāṇa.%} See p. 790, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38231<pc>0800-b<k1>mruc<k2>mruc
{#mruc#}¦ {%mruc%} [cf. rts. {%mruñc, mluc%}], cl. 1.
P. {%mrocati,%} Aor. {%amrucat%} or {%amrocīt,%}
&c., to go, move: Desid. {%mumruciṣati, mumro-%}
{%ciṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>38232<pc>0800-b<k1>mroka<k2>mroka
{%Mroka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a destructive Agni (men-
tioned in Atharva-veda V. 31, 9); of a flame.
<LEND>

<L>38233<pc>0800-b<k1>mruYc<k2>mruYc
{#mruYc#}¦ {%mruñc,%} cl. 1. P. {%mruñcati,%} &c., =
rt. {%mruc%} above.
<LEND>

<L>38234<pc>0800-b<k1>mrew<k2>mrew
{#mrew#}¦ {%mreṭ%} or {%mreḍ%} (= rts. {%meṭ, mleṭ%}), cl.
1. P. {%mreṭati, mreḍati,%} to be mad.
<LEND>

<L>38235<pc>0800-b<k1>mlakta<k2>mlakta
{#mlakta#}¦ {%mlakta (?), as, ā, am,%} stolen.
<LEND>

<L>38236<pc>0800-b<k1>mlakz<k2>mlakz
{#mlakz#}¦ {%mlakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. {%mlakṣayati,%}
to cut, divide.
<LEND>

<L>38237<pc>0800-b<k1>mlAta<k2>mlAta
{#mlAta#}¦ {%mlāta, mlāna, mlāyin, mlāsnu.%} See
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38238<pc>0800-b<k1>mlizwa<k2>mlizwa
{#mlizwa#}¦ {%mliṣṭa,%} &c. See under rt. {%mlech%}
below.
<LEND>

<L>38239<pc>0800-b<k1>mluc<k2>mluc
{#mluc#}¦ {%mluc%} [cf. rt. {%mruc%}], cl. 1. P.
{%mlocati,%} Aor. {%amlucat%} or {%amlocīt,%}
&c., to go; to go down: Desid. {%mumluciṣati,%}
{%mumlociṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>38240<pc>0800-b<k1>mlukta<k2>mlukta
{%Mlukta%}¦ in {%apa-mlukta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. retired,
withdrawn, concealed, hidden.
<LEND>

<L>38241<pc>0800-b<k1>mluYc<k2>mluYc
{#mluYc#}¦ {%mluñc,%} cl. 1. P. {%mluñcati,%} &c.,
= rt. {%mluc%} above.
<LEND>

<L>38242<pc>0800-b<k1>mlup<k2>mlup
{#mlup#}¦ {%mlup,%} another form of rt. {%mluc%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>38243<pc>0800-b<k1>mlupta<k2>mlupta
{%Mlupta%}¦ in {%upa-mlupta, as, ā, am,%} retired, with-
drawn, concealed, hidden.
<LEND>

<L>38244<pc>0800-b<k1>mleC<k2>mleC
{#mleC#}¦ {%mlech,%} cl. 1. P. {%mlecchati, mimlec-%}
{%cha, mlecchitum,%} cl. 10. P. {%mleccha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to speak confusedly or barbarously;
to talk an unintelligible or foreign language, to speak
a provincial or barbarous dialect.
<LEND>

<L>38245<pc>0800-b<k1>mlizwa<k2>mlizwa
{%Mliṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. Pāṇ. VII. 2, 18], spoken
barbarously or indistinctly, indistinct (as speech),
foreign, barbarous; {%= mlāna,%} withered, faded, faint;
({%am%}), n. indistinct speech, a foreign language.
{%—Mliṣṭokti (˚ṭa-uk˚), is,%} f. indistinct or bar-
barous speech.
<LEND>

<L>38246<pc>0800-b<k1>mlecCa<k2>mlecCa
{%Mleccha, as,%}¦ m. a foreigner, barbarian, non-Arian,
man of an outcast race, (a generic term for a person
speaking any language but Sanskrit and not conform-
ing to the usual Hindū institutions); a wicked or
bad man, sinner; foreign or barbarous speech, igno-
rance of the language of the country; ({%am%}), n. copper.
{%—Mleccha-kanda, as,%} m. ‘foreign-root,’ Allium
[Page0800-c+ 79]
Ascalonicum, garlic. {%—Mleccha-jāti, is,%} m. a man
belonging to one of the Mleccha or barbarian races,
a barbarian, savage, mountaineer (as a Kirāta, Śa-
vara, Pulinda). {%—Mleccha-deśa, as,%} m. a foreign
or barbarous country, any country inhabited by
people of a language and institutions different from
the Hindūs. {%—Mleccha-nivaha, as,%} m. a host or
swarm of barbarians. {%—Mleccha-bhāṣā,%} f. a foreign
or barbarous language. {%—Mleccha-bhojana, as,%} m.
‘food of foreigners or barbarians,’ wheat; ({%am%}), n.
{%= yāvaka,%} half-ripe barley. {%—Mleccha-maṇḍala,%}
{%am,%} n. the country of the Mlecchas or barbarians.
{%—Mleccha-mukha, am,%} n. ‘foreign countenance,’
copper (see {%mlecchāsya%}). {%—Mleccha-vāc, k, k, k,%}
speaking a barbarous or foreign language, speaking
the language of the Mlecchas, (opposed to {%ārya-vāc,%}
speaking the language of the Āryas, Manu X. 45.)
{%—Mlecchākhya (˚cha-ākh˚), am,%} n. ‘called Mlec-
cha,’ copper. {%—Mlecchāśa (˚cha-āśa˚), as,%} m. ‘food
of barbarians,’ wheat; [cf. {%mleccha-bhojana.%}]
{%—Mlecchāsya (˚cha-ās˚), am,%} n. ‘barbarian-face,’
copper, (so named because the complexion of the
Greek and Muhammedan invaders of India was sup-
posed to be copper-coloured; cf. {%mlecchākhya.%})
<LEND>

<L>38247<pc>0800-c<k1>mlecCana<k2>mlecCana
{%Mlecchana, am,%}¦ n. the act of speaking unintel-
ligibly or confusedly; speaking in a foreign or bar-
barous tongue.
<LEND>

<L>38248<pc>0800-c<k1>mlecCita<k2>mlecCita
{%Mlecchita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken barbarously or un-
intelligibly, foreign, barbarian; ({%am%}), n. a foreign
tongue, ungrammatical speech.
<LEND>

<L>38249<pc>0800-c<k1>mlecCitaka<k2>mlecCitaka
{%Mlecchitaka, am,%}¦ n. the speaking in a language
unintelligible to others, foreign speech.
<LEND>

<L>38250<pc>0800-c<k1>mlew<k2>mlew
{#mlew#}¦ {%mleṭ%} or {%mleḍ%} (= rt. {%mreṭ%}), cl. 1.
P. {%mleṭati, mleḍati,%} &c., to be mad.
<LEND>

<L>38251<pc>0800-c<k1>mlev<k2>mlev
{#mlev#}¦ {%mlev%} [cf. rt. {%mev%}], cl. 1. A. {%mle-%}
{%vate,%} &c., to serve, worship, gratify by
service.
<LEND>

<L>38252<pc>0800-c<k1>mlE<k2>mlE
{#mlE#}¦ {%mlai,%} cl. 1. P. {%mlāyati%} (ep. also A.
{%mlāyate,%} and cl. 2. P. {%mlāti, mlānti%}),
{%mamlau (mamle), mlāsyati, amlāsīt, mlāyāt%} or
{%mleyāt, mlātum,%} to wither, fade, decay; to be
faint or languid, grow weary, languish; to become
weak or feeble; to become thin or emaciated; to
be dispirited or downcast; to be sad: Caus. {%mlāpa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to wither or fade; to enfeeble,
make languid or dispirited, emaciate; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">βλάπτω</lang>
= Caus. {%mlāpayati,%} <lang n="greek">μῶλυς, μωλυρύς.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>38253<pc>0800-c<k1>mlAta<k2>mlAta
{%Mlāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ faded, withered; made white
by tanning (said of leather).
<LEND>

<L>38254<pc>0800-c<k1>mlAna<k2>mlAna
{%Mlāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ withered, faded; wearied,
weary, wan; languid, languishing; enfeebled, ema-
ciated, faint, feeble, weak; dispirited, dejected, sad,
downcast, melancholy; foul, dirty [cf. {%mala%}]; black,
dark-coloured; ({%am%}), n. a withered or faded state,
withering, fading; absence of brightness or lustre.
{%—Mlāna-kṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%} withered and lan-
guishing. {%—Mlāna-tā,%} f. witheredness, the state of
being faded; the being out of spirits; lassitude,
languor. {%—Mlāna-manas, ās, ās, as,%} depressed in
mind, dispirited. {%—Mlāna-vaktra, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing a downcast countenance. {%—Mlāna-sraj, k, k, k,%}
having a withered or faded garland. {%—Mlānāṅga%}
{%(˚na-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having enfeebled limbs, weak-
bodied; ({%ī%}), f. a woman during the menses. {%—Mlā-%}
{%nendriya (˚na-in˚), as, ā, am,%} having enfeebled
senses.
<LEND>

<L>38255<pc>0800-c<k1>mlAni<k2>mlAni
{%Mlāni, is,%}¦ f. withering, fading, decay; languor,
faintness, lassitude, weariness, emaciation; growing
thin; dejection, sadness; foulness, filth.
<LEND>

<L>38256<pc>0800-c<k1>mlAyat<k2>mlAyat
{%Mlāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ fading, withering; lan-
guishing. {%—Mlāyad-vaktra, as, ā, am,%} having a
haggard or sorrowful face, having an emaciated
appearance.
<LEND>

<L>38257<pc>0800-c<k1>mlAyamAna<k2>mlAyamAna
{%Mlāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fading, withering, lan-
guishing.
<LEND>

<L>38258<pc>0800-c<k1>mlAyin<k2>mlAyin
{%Mlāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ becoming faded or withered;
growing thin or emaciated.
<LEND>

<L>38259<pc>0800-c<k1>mlAsnu<k2>mlAsnu
{%Mlāsnu, us, us, u,%}¦ becoming faded or withered;
growing thin or emaciated.
<LEND>
<H>{#ya#}
[Page0801-a+ 75]

<L>38260<pc>0801-a<k1>ya<k2>ya<h>1
{#ya#} 1¦. {%ya,%} the twenty-sixth consonant of
the Nāgarī alphabet, being the semivowel of the
vowels {%i, ī,%} and allied to the soft palatal consonant {%j,%}
and having the sound of the English {%y,%} (in Bengal
it is usually pronounced {%j.%}) {%—Ya-kāra, as,%} m. the
letter or sound {%ya%}. {%—Yakārādi-pada (˚ra-ād˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a word beginning with the letter or sound
{%ya.%}
<LEND>

<L>38261<pc>0801-a<k1>ya<k2>ya<h>2
{#ya#} 2¦. {%ya,%} (in prosody) a bacchic or foot
consisting of a short syllable followed by two long
ones.
<LEND>

<L>38262<pc>0801-a<k1>ya<k2>ya<h>3
{#ya#} 3¦. {%ya,%} the actual base of the relative
pronoun in declension, though {%yad,%} q. v., is used as
the base in comps. and in the derivative {%yadīya,%} (the
declension follows that of the demonstrative pronoun
{%tad,%} q. v., {%y%} being substituted for the initial letter of
that pronoun throughout.)
<LEND>

<L>38263<pc>0801-a<k1>ya<k2>ya<h>4
{#ya#} 4¦. {%ya, as,%} m. (in some senses fr. rt. 1.
{%yā%}), one who goes or moves, a goer, mover; air,
wind; a carriage; union, joining; restraining; fame,
celebrity; barley; light, lustre; abandoning; N. of
Yama; ({%ā%}), f. going, proceeding; a car, carriage;
restraining, checking; religious meditation; getting,
obtaining; N. of Lakṣmī; pudendum muliebre.
<LEND>

<L>38264<pc>0801-a<k1>yak<k2>yak
{#yak#}¦ {%yak,%} (in grammar) a term for the
syllable {%ya,%} which is the sign of the Passive.
<LEND>

<L>38265<pc>0801-a<k1>yakan<k2>yakan
{#yakan#}¦ {%yakan,%} a defective word optionally
substituted for {%yakṛt%} in certain cases. See below.
<LEND>

<L>38266<pc>0801-a<k1>yakft<k2>yakft
{#yakft#}¦ {%yakṛt, t,%} n. (all the cases except the
Nom. Voc. sing. du. pl., Acc. sing. du. are optionally
formed from a base {%yakan,%} hence Acc. pl. {%yakṛnti%}
or {%yakāni,%} Inst. sing. du. pl. {%yakṛtā%} or {%yaknā, ya-%}
{%kṛdbhyām%} or {%yakabhyām, yakṛdbhis%} or {%yaka-%}
{%bhis,%} see Pāṇ. VI. 1, 63, Vopa-deva III. 39, III. 165,
Gram. 144), the liver; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἧπαρ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>jecur;</nsi>
(perhaps) Angl. Sax. <nsi>lifer;</nsi> Lett. <nsi>ak-ni-s;</nsi> Bohem.
<nsi>jatra,</nsi> ‘the liver.’] {%—Yakṛt-kośa, as, am,%} m. n.
the cyst or membrane enveloping the liver. {%—Ya-%}
{%kṛd-ātmikā,%} f. a kind of cockroach. {%—Yakṛd-%}
{%udara%} or {%yakṛd-dālya%} or {%yakṛd-dāly-udara,%}
{%am,%} n. an enlargement of the liver. {%—Yakṛd-varṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} liver-coloured, of the colour of liver.
{%—Yakṛd-vairin, ī,%} m. Andersonia Rohitaka.
{%—Yakṛn-medas, as,%} n. liver and fat. {%—Yakṛl-%}
{%loma, ās,%} or {%yakṛl-loman, ānas,%} m. pl., N. of
a people.
<LEND>

<L>38267<pc>0801-a<k1>yakz<k2>yakz
{#yakz#}¦ {%yakṣ%} (connected with rt. 1. {%yaj%}),
cl. 1. P. {%yakṣati,%} (according to some
originally) to move, stir (as a living being); to
honour; cl. 10. A. {%yakṣayate, ayayakṣata,%} &c.,
to worship, honour; (according to Sāy. {%pra-yak-%}
{%ṣanta%} in Ṛg-veda 1. 132, 5 {%= prakarṣeṇa%}
{%yajante,%} they diligently worship.)
<LEND>

<L>38268<pc>0801-a<k1>yakza<k2>yakza
{%Yakṣa, am,%}¦ n. (the neut. form is found only in
Ved.), a living supernatural being (or a being deserv-
ing of worship, cf. rt. 1. {%yaj%}), an unsubstantial or
spiritual apparition, a ghost, spirit; (according to
Sāy.) worship, adoration ({%= pūjā%}); sacrifice ({%=%}
{%yajña%}); anything honoured or revered; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of certain mythical beings or demigods who,
like the Guhyakas, are attendants on Kuvera, the
god of wealth, and employed in the care of his
garden and treasures, (they are variously described
as sons of Pulastya, of Pulaha, of Krodhā, of Kaś-
yapa; or in Hari-vaṃśa 11794. as sprung from the
feet of Brahmā; according to the Vāyu-Purāṇa they
were descended from Khasā or Khaśā, who had two
sons, Yakṣa and Rakṣas, severally the progenitors
of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas; the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa
1. 5. narrates that they were produced by Brahmā as
beings emaciate with hunger, of hideous aspect, and
with long beards, and that crying out ‘let us eat,’
they were denominated Yakṣas, [fr. {%jakṣ,%} to eat];
in the Brahma-Purāṇa thirteen Yakṣas are appointed
[Page0801-b+ 81]
by Viṣṇu as guardians of a particular city; though
generally regarded as beings of a benevolent and
inoffensive disposition, like the Yakṣa described in
Kālidāsa's Megha-dūta, they are nevertheless occa-
sionally classed with Piśācas and other malignant
spirits; the Buddhists give them a prominent posi-
tion, describing them in some of their legends as
cruel demons who feast on human flesh and have
the power of raising storms; in others, as harmless
beings who delight in songs, dances, &c.); a sub-
division of a Vyantara (with Jainas); N. of Kuvera;
of a Muni; of the palace of Indra; ({%ī%}), f. a female
Yakṣa; N. of Kuvera's wife; {%(as, ā, am),%} a Vedic
word said to be formed fr. the Aor. of rt. 1. {%yaj,%}
and used at the end of a comp. {%—Yakṣa-kar-%}
{%dama, as,%} m. an ointment or perfumed paste con-
sisting of camphor, agallochum, musk, and kakkola,
or, according to some, saffron, in equal proportions;
(according to others the ointment also contains
sandal-wood.) {%—Yakṣa-kūpa, as,%} m. ‘Yakṣa-
tank,’ N. of a place. {%—Yakṣa-graha, as,%} m. ‘the
being possessed by Yakṣas,’ N. of a particular kind
of insanity. {%—Yakṣagraha-paripīḍita, as, ā, am,%}
afflicted with the preceding insanity. {%—Yakṣa-taru,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘Yakṣa-tree, ’ the Indian fig-tree. {%—Yakṣa-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%yakṣa-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition
of a Yakṣa, the being a Yakṣa. {%—Yakṣa-dara,%}
N. of a district. {%—Yakṣa-dāsī,%} f., N. of a wife of
Śūdraka. {%—Yakṣa-dṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. having the
look or appearance of a Yakṣa, having a living or
visible appearance, bodily, corporeal, (but according
to Sāy. {%= utsavasya draṣṭā,%} a gazer or spectator
at a festival.) {%—Yakṣa-dhūpa, as,%} m. the resin of
Shorea Robusta; resin in general; incense. {%—Yak-%}
{%ṣa-nāyaka, as,%} m., N. of the servant of the fourth
Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī. {%—Yakṣa-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. a king of the Yakṣas; N. of Kuvera.
{%—Yakṣa-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Yakṣa-%}
{%bali, is,%} m. an oblation to the Yakṣas. {%—Yakṣa-%}
{%bhṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. ‘Yakṣa-bearing,’ nourishing or
supporting the Yakṣas; receiving worship, receiving
that which is honoured; (Sāy. {%= pūjitaṃ havir-%}
{%ādikaṃ dadhānaḥ.%}) {%—Yakṣa-malla, as,%} m. (with
Buddhists) N. of one of the five Lokeśvaras. {%—Yak-%}
{%ṣa-rasa, as,%} m. a kind of intoxicating drink.
{%—Yakṣa-rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘king of the Yakṣas,’ N. of
Kuvera; of Maṇi-bhadra; a palæstrum or place pre-
pared for wrestling and boxing. {%—Yakṣa-rāja, as,%}
m. ‘Yakṣa-king,’ N. of Kuvera. {%—Yakṣarāṭ-purī,%}
f., N. of Alakā, the capital of Kuvera (supposed to
be situated on mount Kailāsa). {%—Yakṣa-rātri, is,%}
f. ‘the night of the Yakṣas,’ N. of a Hindū festival
({%= dīpālī,%} q. v.). {%—Yakṣa-varman, ā,%} m., N. of
a commentator on Śākaṭāyana. {%—Yakṣa-vitta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one whose property is like that of the Yakṣas,
one who has merely the guardianship of property
and does not make use of it himself. {%—Yakṣa-%}
{%sena, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Yakṣa-sthala, as,%}
m. (?), N. of a place. {%—Yakṣāṅganā (˚ṣa-aṅ˚),%}
f. a Yakṣa woman. {%—Yakṣāṅgī (˚ṣa-aṅ˚),%} f.,
N. of a river. {%—Yakṣādhipa (˚ṣa-adh˚), as%} or
{%yakṣādhipati (˚ṣa-adh˚), is,%} m. ‘lord of the
Yakṣas,’ N. of Vaiśravaṇa or Kuvera. {%—Yakṣā-%}
{%malaka (˚ṣa-ām˚), am,%} n. the fruit of a species
of date called Piṇḍa-kharjūra. {%—Yakṣāvāsa (˚ṣa-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m. ‘the abode or residence of the Yakṣas,’
the Indian fig-tree. {%—Yakṣī-tva, am,%} n. the state
or condition of a female Yakṣa, the being a Yakṣī.
{%—Yakṣendra (˚ṣa-in˚), as,%} m. a king of the
Yakṣas; N. of Kuvera. {%—Yakṣeś (˚ṣa-īś), ṭ,%}
m., N. of the servants of the eleventh and eighteenth
Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī. {%—Yakṣeśa (˚ṣa-%}
{%īśa%}) or {%yakṣeśvara (˚ṣa-īś˚), as,%} m. a king of
the Yakṣas; N. of Kuvera. {%—Yakṣoḍumbaraka%}
{%(˚ṣa-uḍ˚), am,%} n. the fruit of the Ficus Religiosa.
<LEND>

<L>38269<pc>0801-b<k1>yakzaka<k2>yakzaka
{%Yakṣaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= yakṣa,%} N. of certain mythi-
cal beings attending on Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>38270<pc>0801-b<k1>yakzaRa<k2>yakzaRa
{%Yakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. probably for {%jakṣaṇa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38271<pc>0801-b<k1>yakzan<k2>yakzan
{%Yakṣan,%}¦ probably for {%yakṣman,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38272<pc>0801-b<k1>yakzin<k2>yakzin
{%Yakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having life, living, really exist-
ing (said of Varuṇa); adorable, (Sāy. {%= yajanīya%});
[Page0801-c+ 78]
({%iṇī%}), f. {%= yakṣī,%} a female Yakṣa; N. of Kuvera's
wife; a sort of female fiend attached to the service
of Durgā and frequently, like a sylph or fairy, main-
taining intercourse with mortals. {%—Yakṣiṇī-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the state or condition of a female Yakṣa,
the being a Yakṣī.
<LEND>

<L>38273<pc>0801-c<k1>yakzu<k2>yakzu
{%Yakṣu, us,%}¦ m., {%avas,%} m. pl., N. of a family or
race.
<LEND>

<L>38274<pc>0801-c<k1>yakzma<k2>yakzma
{%Yakṣma, as,%}¦ m. sickness, disease in general or
N. of a large class of diseases (probably of a con-
sumptive nature); pulmonary disease, consumption.
{%—Yakṣma-nāśana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. destroying
or removing sickness; ({%as%}), m. the reputed author
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 161, (having the patro-
nymic Prājāpatya.)
<LEND>

<L>38275<pc>0801-c<k1>yakzman<k2>yakzman
{%Yakṣman, ā,%}¦ m. pulmonary consumption, con-
sumption, decline {%(= śoṣa, kṣaya)%}. {%—Yakṣma-%}
{%gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%} seized with consumption, afflicted
with or suffering from consumption. {%—Yakṣma-%}
{%grasta, as, ā, am,%} attacked by consumption. {%—Ya-%}
{%kṣma-graha, as,%} m. a consumptive seizure, attack
of consumption. {%—Yakṣma-ghnī,%} f. ‘destroying
consumption,’ grapes, raisins.
<LEND>

<L>38276<pc>0801-c<k1>yakzmin<k2>yakzmin
{%Yakṣmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ consumptive, phthisical;
({%ī%}), m. one who suffers from pulmonary consump-
tion (Manu III. 154).
<LEND>

<L>38277<pc>0801-c<k1>yakzmoDA<k2>yakzmoDA
{%Yakṣmodhā,%}¦ f. a kind of sickness.
<LEND>

<L>38278<pc>0801-c<k1>yakzya<k2>yakzya
{#yakzya#}¦ {%yakṣya, yakṣyamāṇa.%} See under
rt. 1. {%yaj.%}
<LEND>

<L>38279<pc>0801-c<k1>yaN<k2>yaN
{#yaN#}¦ {%yaṅ,%} (in grammar) a term for the
syllable {%ya,%} which is the sign of the Intensive.
{%—Yaṅ-anta, as,%} m. (in grammar) the Ātmane-
pada Intensive formed by reduplication and the
addition of the syllable {%ya%}. {%—Yaṅ-luk,%} the dropping
or omission of {%ya%} (i. e. according to the theory of
grammarians a blank substituted for the {%ya%} of the
Intensive). {%—Yaṅlug-anta, as,%} m. the Parasmai-
pada Intensive formed without {%ya%}. {%—Yaṅlug-anta-%}
{%śiromaṇi,%} N. of a treatise on the Intensive without
{%ya.%}
<LEND>

<L>38280<pc>0801-c<k1>yacCat<k2>yacCat
{#yacCat#}¦ {%yacchat, yacchamāna.%} See under
rt. {%yam,%} p. 809, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38281<pc>0801-c<k1>yacCandas<k2>yacCandas
{#yacCandas#}¦ {%yac-chandas.%} See under {%yad.%}
<LEND>

<L>38282<pc>0801-c<k1>yaj<k2>yaj<h>1
{#yaj#} 1¦. {%yaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%yajati, -te,%}
Impv. {%yajatu, yajatām%} (2nd sing. P.,
Ved. {%yakṣi,%} A. {%yakṣva,%} 2nd pl. {%yajadhva%} for
{%yajadhvam%}), Perf. {%iyāja%} (2nd sing. {%iyajitha%} or
{%iyaṣṭha%} or {%yejitha,%} 3rd du. {%ījatus,%} 3rd pl. {%ījus%}),
{%īje%} (3rd pl. {%ījire,%} part. {%ījāna,%} cf. Manu XI. 87),
1st Fut. {%yaṣṭā,%} 2nd Fut. {%yakṣyati, -te,%} Aor.
{%ayākṣīt%} (1st du. {%ayākṣva,%} 1st pl. {%ayākṣma,%}
3rd sing., Ved. {%ayāṭ,%} 2nd sing. {%ayās;%} other Vedic
forms {%yakṣat, yakṣatas, yakṣatām%}), {%ayaṣṭa%}
(1st sing. {%ayakṣi,%} 1st du. {%ayakṣvahi,%} 1st pl.
{%ayakṣmahi,%} 3rd pl. {%ayakṣata%}), Prec. {%ijyāt%} (3rd
du. {%ijyāstām,%} 3rd pl. {%ijyāsus%}), {%yakṣīṣṭa%} (2nd
pl. {%yakṣīdhvam%}), Cond. {%ayakṣyat, ayakṣ-%}
{%yata,%} Indec. part. {%iṣṭvā (iṣṭvīnam,%} Pāṇ. VII.
1, 48), Inf. {%yaṣṭum%} (ep. {%ījitum,%} Ved. {%yaṣṭave,%}
{%yajadhyai%}), to worship with sacrifices or oblations,
make an offering or oblation, sacrifice, (in Ved.
generally A. if the sacrificer makes the offering on
his own account, in the later language properly P.
when used with reference to the sacrificing priest,
and A. when referring to the person who provides
the sacrifice, see Scholiast on Pāṇ. I. 3, 72, and
Vopa-deva XXIII. 58); to sacrifice or make an
oblation to a particular deity (with acc. of the deity
to whom the sacrifice or offering is made, and inst.
of the means by which the sacrifice or oblation is
performed, e. g. {%haviṣā yakṣi devān,%} worship
the gods with an oblation; and dat. of the thing for
which the offering is made, e. g. {%yakṣvā sauma-%}
{%nasāya rudram,%} worship Rudra for a sound under-
standing; also with dat. or even loc. of the person
to whom the offering is made, or with {%prati%} after
the acc.; rarely with acc. of the thing for which
the offering is made, e. g. {%yajante asya sakhyam,%}
[Page0802-a+ 81]
they sacrifice for his friendship); to worship, adore,
honour, venerate, revere, respect; to consecrate,
dedicate, inaugurate; to invite to a sacrifice (Ved.);
to honour with one's presence, come to, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 75, 5. {%yakṣi = saṅgaccha-%}
{%sva%}): Pass. {%ijyate,%} Impf. {%aijyata%} (Pres. part. Pass.
{%ijyamāna,%} ep. {%ijyat%}), to be sacrificed, to be wor-
shipped, &c.: Caus. {%yājayati, -yate, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%ayīyajat,%} to cause to sacrifice or worship, &c.; to
assist at a sacrifice; to perform the office of the
sacrificing priest: Desid. {%yiyakṣati, -te,%} to desire
to sacrifice or worship, wish to make an offering:
Intens. {%yāyajyate, yāyajīti, yāyaṣṭi;%} [cf. Zend
<nsi>yaz,</nsi> ‘to honour, worship;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἅζ-ο-μαι, ἅγ-ιο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἅγ-νό-ς, ἅγίζω, ἕναγίζω, ἅγ-ος.</lang>.]
<LEND>

<L>38283<pc>0802-a<k1>yakzya<k2>yakzya
{%Yakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be sacrificed or wor-
shipped, &c., (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII.
60, 3 {%= yaṣṭavya.%})
<LEND>

<L>38284<pc>0802-a<k1>yakzyamARa<k2>yakzyamARa
{%Yakṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ about to perform a
sacrifice, wishing to make a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>38285<pc>0802-a<k1>yaj<k2>yaj<h>2
2. {%yaj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ%}¦ [cf. Pāṇ. VIII. 2, 36], sacrificing,
worshipping, a sacrificer, (at the end of a comp., cf.
{%divi-y˚, deva-y˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>38286<pc>0802-a<k1>yaja<k2>yaja
{%Yaja, as,%}¦ m. a sacrifice, &c. (at the end of a
comp.); {%= agni,%} fire. {%—Yaja-praiṣa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having a Praiṣa or invitation with the word
{%yaja.%}
<LEND>

<L>38287<pc>0802-a<k1>yajat<k2>yajat
{%Yajat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sacrificing, worshipping.
<LEND>

<L>38288<pc>0802-a<k1>yajata<k2>yajata
{%Yajata, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. worthy of worship, (Sāy.
{%= yajanīya, yaṣṭavya%}); adorable, holy, godly,
divine (said of Agni, Indra, and other gods, also of
the chariot of the Aśvins); august, sublime, dignified,
awe-inspiring, awful; ({%as%}), m. an officiating priest
at a sacrifice ({%= ṛtv-ij%}); the moon; N. of Śiva; of
a Ṛṣi with the patronymic Ātreya (author of the
hymns Ṛg-veda V. 67, 68; cf. Zend <nsi>yazata</nsi>).
<LEND>

<L>38289<pc>0802-a<k1>yajati<k2>yajati
{%Yajati, is,%}¦ m. a technical term for those sacrificial
ceremonies to which the verb {%yajati%} is applied (as
distinguished from {%juhoti,%} q. v.), a solemn sacrifice,
(according to Kullūka, {%juhoti-yajati-kriyāḥ =%}
{%homa-yāgādi-rūpāḥ kriyāḥ,%} oblations to fire and
solemn sacrifices, Manu II. 84.) {%—Yajati-deśa, as,%}
m. or {%yajati-sthāna, am,%} n. the place or position
south of the Vedi or sacrificial altar.
<LEND>

<L>38290<pc>0802-a<k1>yajatra<k2>yajatra
{%Yajatra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. worthy of worship
(Sāy. {%= yajanīya, yaṣṭavya%}), deserving of adora-
tion, adorable, worthy of sacrifice (said of Agni, of
Varuṇa, and the Ādityas, and of heaven and earth);
({%as%}), m. {%= agni = hotrin,%} a Brāhman who has main-
tained his consecrated fire; ({%am%}), n. {%= agni-hotra,%}
the maintenance of the sacrificial fire.
<LEND>

<L>38291<pc>0802-a<k1>yajaTa<k2>yajaTa
{%Yajatha,%}¦ Ved. (only found in the dat. {%yajathāya,%}
often = the inf. {%yaṣṭum%}), worship of the gods,
sacrifice, (Sāy. {%= yajña, yajana%}); an adorer, wor-
shipper, (Sāy. {%= yaṣṭṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>38292<pc>0802-a<k1>yajana<k2>yajana
{%Yajana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sacrificing, sacrifice, wor-
shipping; a place of sacrifice; N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>38293<pc>0802-a<k1>yajanIya<k2>yajanIya
{%Yajanīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%yajana%}), relating to
sacrifice or worship; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%ahan,%} the day
of sacrifice or consecration, i. e. the first day of the
month, [cf. {%māghī-pakṣa-y˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38294<pc>0802-a<k1>yajanta<k2>yajanta
{%Yajanta, as,%}¦ m. a sacrificer, worshipper (?).
<LEND>

<L>38295<pc>0802-a<k1>yajamAna<k2>yajamAna
{%Yajamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ worshipping, sacrificing,
&c.; ({%as%}), m. a person who institutes or performs
a regular sacrifice and pays the expences of it, a
person who employs a priest or priests to perform
a sacrifice or any fixed or occasional religious cere-
monies, any person who intends performing or is
able to bear the cost of a regular sacrifice; a patron,
host, rich man, householder, respectable person,
gentleman, (as the person who employs priests to
sacrifice is generally a householder, the title Yajamāna
has come to signify in modern times ‘the head of a
family,’ ‘chief of a caste or tribe,’ ‘head man of
a community;’ the family priest employed by a
Yajamāna is sometimes an hereditary functionary,
and cannot be dismissed as long as he performs his
functions efficiently); ({%ī%}), f. the wife of a Yajamāna.
{%—Yajamāna-tva, am,%} n. the rank or position of a
Yajamāna. {%—Yajamāna-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n., Ved.
the Brāhmaṇa of the Yajamāna. {%—Yajamāna-loka, %}
[Page0802-b+ 81]
{%as,%} m. the world or heaven of sacrificers. {%—Yaja-%}
{%māna-śiṣya, as,%} m. the pupil of a Brāhman who
defrays the expences of a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>38296<pc>0802-b<k1>yajamAnaka<k2>yajamAnaka
{%Yajamānaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= yajamāna,%} the person
paying the cost of a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>38297<pc>0802-b<k1>yajas<k2>yajas
{%Yajas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. honour, worship, sacrifice,
(Sāy. {%= yāga.%})
<LEND>

<L>38298<pc>0802-b<k1>yajA<k2>yajA
{%Yajā,%}¦ f., N. of a female tutelary being (mentioned
in connection with Sītā, Śamā, and Bhūti).
<LEND>

<L>38299<pc>0802-b<k1>yajAka<k2>yajAka
{%Yajāka, as, ā, am,%}¦ making offerings or presents,
liberal, munificent.
<LEND>

<L>38300<pc>0802-b<k1>yaji<k2>yaji
{%Yaji, is,%}¦ m. one who institutes or performs a
sacrifice, a sacrificer; sacrificing, honouring, worship-
ping, (at the end of a comp., cf. {%deva-y˚%}); a sacri-
fice, (in this sense the gender is doubtful); the root
{%yaj.%}
<LEND>

<L>38301<pc>0802-b<k1>yajin<k2>yajin
{%Yajin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ a worshipper, sacrificer, offerer of
oblations; worshipping, honouring.
<LEND>

<L>38302<pc>0802-b<k1>yajizWa<k2>yajizWa
{%Yajiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. worshipping very
much, worshipping or honouring in the highest
degree.
<LEND>

<L>38303<pc>0802-b<k1>yajizRu<k2>yajizRu
{%Yajiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ worshipping or adoring the
gods with sacrifices, making sacrifices to the deities,
sacrificing.
<LEND>

<L>38304<pc>0802-b<k1>yajIyas<k2>yajIyas
{%Yajīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. honouring more, mak-
ing better offerings or sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>38305<pc>0802-b<k1>yaju<k2>yaju
{%Yaju, us,%}¦ m., N. of one of the ten horses of
the moon.
<LEND>

<L>38306<pc>0802-b<k1>yajuza<k2>yajuza
{%Yajuṣa%}¦ in {%ṛg-yajuṣa, am,%} n. the Ṛg and the
Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>38307<pc>0802-b<k1>yajuzka<k2>yajuzka
{%Yajuṣka%}¦ in {%a-yajuṣka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38308<pc>0802-b<k1>yajuzya<k2>yajuzya
{%Yajuṣya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%yajus%}), Ved. relating
to ceremonial.
<LEND>

<L>38309<pc>0802-b<k1>yajus<k2>yajus
{%Yajus, us,%}¦ n. religious reverence, veneration, wor-
ship, oblation, sacrifice (Ved.); that by which a
sacrifice is effected, a sacrificial prayer or formula; a
text of the Yajur-veda or rather a technical term for
certain words or Mantras muttered in a peculiar
manner at a sacrifice, (these Mantras were properly
in prose as distinguished from the metrical {%ṛc%} which
was recited, and the metrical {%sāman%} which was
sung, see {%mantra,%} 2. {%ṛc;%} although, however, the
prose Yajus is a distinctive feature of the Yajur-veda,
this Veda is in real fact chiefly composed of verses
taken from the Ṛg-veda, which may then also be
called Yajus, cf. {%Yajur-veda%} below); N. of the
Yajur-veda, q. v., (in this sense also frequently {%ya-%}
{%jūṃṣi,%} n. pl.); ({%us%}), m., N. of a man. {%—Yajuḥ-%}
{%śākhin, ī, inī, i,%} familiar with a Śākhā of the
Yajur-veda. {%—Yajur-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of
verses of the Yajur-veda; [cf. {%ṛṅ-maya.%}] {%—Yajur-%}
{%lakṣmī, īs,%} f., N. of a particular formula. {%—Yajur-%}
{%vid, t, t, t,%} knowing the Yajus, conversant with
sacrificial formulas, one who is familiar with the
Yajur-veda. {%—Yajur-vidhāna, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Yajur-veda, as,%} m. ‘the sacrificial Veda,’ the
collective body of sacred Mantras or texts which con-
stitute the Yajur-veda, (these Mantras, though often
consisting of the prose Yajus, are frequently identical
with the Mantras of the Ṛg-veda, the Yajur-veda
being only a collection of liturgical forms or rather a
sort of sacrificial prayer-book for the Adhvaryu priests
formed out of the Ṛg-veda, which had to be dissected
and re-arranged with additional texts for sacrificial
purposes; to serve these purposes, the hymns of the
Ṛg-veda are scattered about piecemeal, verses of the
same hymn being often transposed, verses from dif-
ferent hymns combined, and even those of different
poets brought together into one and the same hymn;
in fact the compilation of the Yajur-veda resulted
from the gradual growth of a complicated ritual in
connection with those sacrifices without which the
Hindū believed it was impossible to secure the favour
of his gods, and for the performance of which the
unsystematic collection of hymns in the Ṛg-veda
was unsuited: the great characteristic feature of the
Yajur-veda is its division into two distinct collections
of texts, the one called Taittirīya-saṃhitā or Kṛṣṇa,
i. e. ‘Black’ [because in it the Saṃhitā or simple
collection of texts and Brāhmaṇa or explanation of
the rites in which the texts were employed is con-
[Page0802-c+ 80]
fused]; the other called Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā or Śukla,
i. e. ‘White’ [because in this, which is thought to be
the more recent of the two recensions, the Saṃhitā is
cleared from confusion with its Brāhmaṇa, and there-
fore looks white and orderly]: the order of sacrifices,
however, of both divisions of the Yajur-veda is simi-
lar, two of the principal being the Darśa-pūrṇa-māsa
or sacrifice to be performed at new and full moon, and
the Aśva-medha or horse-sacrifice; cf. {%Taittirīya-%}
{%saṃhitā, Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā.%}) {%—Yajurveda-%}
{%śrāddha,%} N. of a work (treating of the prayers and
rites to be used at the anniversaries of the death of
parents according to the school of the Yajur-veda).
{%—Yajur-vedin, ī, inī, i,%} familiar with the Yajur-
veda. {%—Yajurvedi-vṛṣotsarga-tattva (˚ṣa-ut˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of part of the Smṛti-tattva by Raghu-
nandana on the release of a bull according to the
teaching of the Yajur-veda. {%—Yajurvedi-śrāddha-%}
{%tattva, am,%} n., N. of certain verses by Raghu-
nandana on the anniversaries of the death of parents
according to the school of the Yajur-veda. {%—Ya-%}
{%juṣ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. performed with a
Yajus, consecrated or dedicated with a sacrificial
formula. {%—Yajuṣ-kṛtti, is,%} f., Ved. consecration or
dedication with a sacrificial formula. {%—Yajuṣ-kriyā,%}
f., Ved. a rite or ceremony accompanied with a
Yajus. {%—Yajuṣ-ṭama,%} Ved. superl. of {%yajus.%}
{%—Yajuṣ-ṭara,%} Ved. compar. of {%yajus%}. {%—Yajuṣ-%}
{%ṭas,%} ind., Ved. from a Yajus; in relation to a Yajus;
on the authority of the Yajur-veda. {%—Yajuṣ-ṭā,%} f.
or {%yajuṣ-ṭva, am,%} n., Ved. the state of a Yajus.
{%—Yajuṣ-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the Yajus,’ N. of
Viṣṇu. {%—Yajuṣ-pātra, am,%} n., see Gaṇa Kaskādi
to Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 48. {%—Yajuṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. any rite accompanied with a sacrificial formula,
({%yajuṣmatya iṣṭakās,%}) a term for certain bricks
used in building the sacrificial altar.) {%—Yajus-sāt,%}
ind. to the state of a Yajus. {%—Yajūdara (yajus +%}
{%udara), as,%} m., Ved. ‘Yajus-bellied, having the Yajus
for a belly,’ epithet of Brahman.
<LEND>

<L>38310<pc>0802-c<k1>yajYa<k2>yajYa
{%Yajña, as,%}¦ m. prayer, devotion, homage, praise,
(used in the older language with these meanings;
cf. Zend {%yaśna%}); worship of a deity, respect or
reverence for a deity, act of worship or devotional
act in general, (the five most important acts of de-
votion which ought to be performed daily by every
twice-born man are {%bhūta-y˚, manuṣya-y˚, pitṛ-%}
{%y˚, deva-y˚, brahma-y˚,%} q. q. v. v.; cf. {%mahā-y˚%});
a sacrifice (this is the most common sense of the
word), any offering or oblation, ({%cintā-yajña,%} a
sacrifice in thought, mental offering); Sacrifice (per-
sonified); a form of Viṣṇu; N. of a son of Ruci
by Ākūti; of Indra under Manu Svāyambhuva;
(according to native authorities also) N. of Agni; {%=%}
{%ātman; Yajña prājāpatya,%} N. of the reputed
author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 130. {%—Yajña-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. a sacrificial act, sacrificial rite or
ceremony; {%(ā, ā, a),%} occupied or engaged in a
sacrifice. {%—Yajña-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} resembling or
like a sacrifice, of the form or nature of an offering.
{%—Yajña-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘sacrifice-loving,’
desiring sacrifice, eager for worship. {%—Yajña-kāra,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} occupied or engaged in a sacrifice.
{%—Yajña-kāla, as,%} m. ‘sacrifice-time,’ a season for
sacrifice; N. of the last lunar day in each half of a
month. {%—Yajña-kīlaka, as,%} m. ‘sacrifice-post,’ the
post to which the victim is fastened. {%—Yajña-kuṇḍa,%}
{%am,%} n. a hole in the ground for receiving the sacri-
ficial fire. {%—Yajña-kṛt, t,t,t,%} ‘sacrifice-doing,’ wor-
shipping, performing or arranging a sacrifice, em-
ployed or occupied in a sacrifice; causing or occa-
sioning sacrifices; ({%t%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; a
priest conducting a sacrifice; N. of a king. {%—Yajña-%}
{%kṛntatra, am,%} n. a fragment or portion of a sacri-
fice. {%—Yajña-ketu, us,%} m., Ved. (perhaps) one who
is conversant with sacrifice; having the sacrifice for
a mark or sign, the announcer of a sacrifice, (Sāy.
{%= yajñaḥ prajñāpako yasya%}); N. of a Rākṣasa
(in Rāmāyaṇa VI. 18, 14). {%—Yajña-kopa, as,%} m.,
N. of a Rākṣasa. {%—Yajña-kratu, us,%} m. a sacri-
ficial rite or ceremony in honour of the gods; a
[Page0803-a+ 81]
complete rite or chief ceremony; a personification
of Viṣṇu; {%(avas),%} m. pl. the Yajña and Kratu
sacrifices. {%—Yajña-kriyā,%} f. sacrificial act, any sacri-
ficial rite or ceremony. {%—Yajña-gāthā,%} f. a sacrificial
verse or any memorial verse connected with the
ritual of a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-giri, is,%} m., N. of a
mountain. {%—Yajña-ghna, as, ī, am,%} ‘sacrifice-
destroying,’ interrupting sacrifices; ({%as%}), m. a demon
who interrupts sacrifices, a malicious or evil-omened
demon. {%—Yajña-chāga, as,%} m. a goat for sacrifice.
{%—Yajña-jña, as, ā, am,%} ‘sacrifice-knowing,’ con-
versant with sacrifices, understanding the worship of
the gods. {%—Yajña-tati, is,%} f., Ved. a sacrificial offer-
ing, performance of a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-tanū, ūs,%}
f. a form of worship; epithet of certain Vyāhṛtis;
of certain sacrificial bricks {%(iṣṭakā)%}. {%—Yajña-%}
{%tantra-sudhā-nidhi, is,%} m., N. of a work on
Vedic ritual by Sāyaṇācārya. {%—Yajña-tantra-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Sūtra work. {%—Yajña-trātṛ, tā,%} m.
‘sacrifice-protector,’ N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Yajña-dakṣi-%}
{%ṇā,%} f. a sacrificial gift or present, a fee or donation
given to the priests engaged in the performance
of a ceremony. {%—Yajña-datta, as,%} m. ‘sacrifice-
given,’ a proper N. (commonly used in examples).
{%—Yajñadattaka, as,%} m. (a diminutive), dear little
Yajña-datta. {%—Yajñadatta-vadha, as,%} m. ‘Yajña-
datta's death,’ N. of an episode of the Rāmāyaṇa.
{%—Yajñadatta-śarman, ā,%} m. a proper N. (often
used in examples). {%—Yajña-dīkṣā,%} f. initiation into
sacrifices, admission to sacrificial rites, due perform-
ance of the sacrifice (see Manu II. 169). {%—Yajña-%}
{%deva, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Yajña-dravya, am,%} n.
any sacrificial utensil, anything used for sacrifice, a
sacrificial vessel. {%—Yajña-druh, -dhruk%} or {%-dhruṭ,%}
m. an enemy of sacrifices, a Rākṣasa. {%—Yajña-%}
{%dhara, as, ā, am,%} bringing the sacrifice, bearing an
offering; ({%as%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Yajña-dhīra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. experienced in or conversant with
the worship of the gods; constant in sacrifice.
{%—Yajña-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Yajña-%}
{%nārāyaṇa-dīkṣita, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
{%—Yajña-nirvāha, as,%} m. the accomplishment or
carrying out of a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-nirvṛtti, is,%} f.
completion or reward of a sacrifice, fruit of a sacri-
ficial offering. {%—Yajña-niṣkṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. arrang-
ing the sacrifice. {%—Yajña-nī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. conduct-
ing worship, directing the sacrifice; ({%īs%}), m. a par-
taker of the sacrifice, (Sāy. {%= yajñasya nirvāha-%}
{%kaḥ.%}) {%—Yajña-nemi, is,%} m. ‘surrounded by sacri-
fices,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Yajña-pati, is,%} m. lord
of the sacrifice, (applied to the person who institutes
and bears the expence of a sacrificial ceremony); N.
of Soma and of Viṣṇu (as gods in whose honour
an offering is made); of an author. {%—Yajña-patnī,%}
f. the wife of the person who institutes a sacrifice,
(as taking part in the ceremony.) {%—Yajña-patha,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. path of worship, way of sacrifice.
{%—Yajña-pad%} or {%yajña-pād,%} Ved. (perhaps) walk-
ing on sacrifices, (a feminine form {%yajña-padī%} is
given.) {%—Yajña-paribhāṣā,%} f., N. of a Sūtra work
by Āpastambha. {%—Yajña-parus, us,%} n., Ved. a joint
or part of a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-paśu, us,%} m. an
animal for sacrifice, victim; a horse. {%—Yajña-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. a sacrificial vessel. {%—Yajñapātrīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} proper or suitable for a sacrificial vessel. {%—Yajña-%}
{%pārśva, am,%} n., N. of a work; ({%as%}), m., N. of an
author (according to some). {%—Yajña-puṃs pumān,%}
m. ‘soul of sacrifice,’ N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Yajña-puc-%}
{%cha, am,%} n., Ved. the tail, i. e. the last part or con-
clusion of a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-puraś-caraṇa, am,%}
n., N. of a work. {%—Yajña-puruṣa%} or {%yajña-pū-%}
{%ruṣa, as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Yajña-prayāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the eighty-fifth chapter of the Uttara-
kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Yajña-prī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved.
taking pleasure in sacrifices. {%—Yajña-phala-da, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} yielding the fruit of sacrifices; ({%as%}), m.
‘recompensing or rewarding for sacrifice,’ an epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Yajña-bandhu, us,%} m., Ved. com-
panion of sacrifice. {%—Yajña-bāhu, us,%} m. ‘arm of
sacrifice,’ N. of Agni; of Priya-vrata. {%—Yajña-%}
{%bhaṅga, as,%} m., N. of the Fifth Act of Vaidya-nātha's
[Page0803-b+ 81]
Citra-yajña-nāṭaka. {%—Yajña-bhāga, as,%} m. a part
or portion of a sacrifice; {%(as, ā, am),%} having a
share in a sacrifice, partaking of an offering; ({%as%}),
m. a god, deity. {%—Yajñabhāga-bhuj, k, k, k,%} en-
joying a share in a sacrifice; ({%k%}), m. a god, deity.
{%—Yajñabhāgeśvara (˚ga-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of Indra.
{%—Yajña-bhājana%} or {%yajña-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a
sacrificial vessel or utensil. {%—Yajña-bhāvana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} causing or promoting sacrifice; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Yajña-bhāvita, as, ā, am,%}
honoured with sacrifices (said of the gods). {%—Yajña-%}
{%bhuj, k, k, k,%} enjoying sacrifice, taking pleasure in
offerings; ({%k%}), m. a god, deity (especially Viṣṇu).
{%—Yajña-bhūmi, is,%} f. ‘sacrifice-ground,’ a place
for sacrifice. {%—Yajña-bhūṣaṇa, as,%} m. ‘sacrifice-
ornament,’ white Darbha grass. {%—Yajña-bhṛt, t,%} m.
‘sacrifice-bearer,’ an arranger or institutor of a sacri-
fice, one who institutes or bears the expence of a
sacrifice; an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Yajña-bhoktṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m. ‘enjoyer of sacrifice,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Yajña-%}
{%maṇḍala, am,%} n. a sacrificial ring or circle, place
for sacrifice. {%—Yajña-manas, ās, ās, as,%} having the
mind or attention set on sacrifices. {%—Yajña-man-%}
{%man, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. intent on sacrifices, delighting
in sacrifice, (Sāy. {%= yajñārtham matimat, yajvan.%})
{%—Yajña-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of sacrifices,
containing sacrifice. {%—Yajña-mahotsava (˚hā-ut˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a great sacrificial feast or ceremony. {%—Yajña-%}
{%māli, is,%} m. a proper N. {%—Yajña-mukha, am,%} n.,
Ved. an introduction to a sacrifice, commencement
of a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-muṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} ‘sacrifice-steal-
ing,’ robbing a sacrifice; {%(ṭ),%} m. a demon who lies
in wait and carries off a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-mūrti,%}
{%is,%} m. a proper N. {%—Yajña-meni,%} Ved. {%= āyudha%}
(according to the commentator). {%—Yajña-yaśasa,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. the beauty or splendor of a sacrifice.
{%—Yajña-yogya, as, ā, am,%} suited or proper for a
sacrifice; ({%as%}), m. Ficus Glomerata. {%—Yajña-rasa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘juice or fluid of sacrifice,’ the Soma. {%—Yajña-%}
{%rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘king of the sacrifice,’ the moon, (per-
haps for {%yajva-rāj;%} cf. {%yajvanām patiḥ%} under
{%yajvan.%}) {%—Yajña-ruci, is,%} m., N. of a Dānava.
{%—Yajña-retas, as,%} n. ‘seed of sacrifice,’ the Soma.
{%—Yajñarta (˚na-ṛta), as, ā, am,%} Ved. suitable or
proper for sacrifice (?); set apart for sacrifice (?).
{%—Yajña-liṅga, as,%} m. ‘having sacrifice for his
attribute,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Yajña-vacas, as,%} n.,
Ved. a sacrificial word or speech; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a
preceptor (having Rājastambāyana as his patronymic).
{%—Yajña-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having or possessing
sacrifice, worshipping. {%—Yajña-vanas,%} Ved. loving
sacrifice. {%—Yajña-varāha, as,%} m. Viṣṇu in the
boar-incarnation; [cf. {%yajña-sūkara.%}] {%—Yajña-%}
{%vardhana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. increasing or promoting
sacrifice. {%—Yajña-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Yajña-valka, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Yajña-vallī,%}
f. {%= soma-vallī,%} Cocculus Cordifolius. {%—Yajña-vāṭa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘sacrifice-enclosure,’ a place prepared and
enclosed for a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-vāma, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Yajña-vāstu, u,%} n., Ved. a place for
worship or sacrifice, sacrificial ground. {%—Yajña-vāha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} conducting or accompanying the sacrifice,
conveying the sacrifice to the gods; ({%as%}), m., N. of
one of Skanda's attendants. {%—Yajña-vāhana, as,%} m.
the conductor of a sacrifice, a Brāhman; ‘having
sacrifice for a vehicle,’ epithet of Viṣṇu; of Śiva.
{%—Yajña-vāhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. bringing or offer-
ing sacrifice, a worshipper, offerer of sacrifice; re-
ceiving sacrifice (said of the gods and of the Maruts).
{%—Yajña-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%} conducting or accompany-
ing the sacrifice, conveying the sacrifice to the gods.
{%—Yajña-vid, t, t, t,%} ‘sacrifice-knowing,’ skilled in
sacrifice. {%—Yajña-vidyā,%} f. knowledge of sacrifice,
skill in sacrifice. {%—Yajña-vibhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. one whose sacrifice has failed or is profitless.
{%—Yajña-vīrya, as,%} m. ‘whose might is sacrifice,’
epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Yajña-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. ‘sacri-
fice-tree,’ the banian or Indian fig-tree. {%—Yajña-%}
{%vṛddha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. exalted with sacrifices,
delighted with offerings (said of Indra). {%—Yajña-%}
{%vṛdh,%} Ved. pleased with sacrifices or abounding in
[Page0803-c+ 81]
sacrifices. {%—Yajña-vedi, is,%} or {%yajña-vedī,%} f. an
altar for sacrifice, a place prepared for a sacrifice.
{%—Yajña-veśasa, am,%} n., Ved. interruption of wor-
ship or sacrifice, desecration or profanation of sacrifice.
{%—Yajña-voḍhave (voḍhave,%} dat. c. of {%voḍhu,%} used
as an inf. of rt. {%vah%}), Ved. to accompany or attend
the sacrifice, to convey the offering to the gods.
{%—Yajña-vrata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. observing the
sacrifice, conforming to the ritual or observance of
sacrifice. {%—Yajña-śatru, us,%} m. an enemy of sacri-
fices; N. of a Rākṣasa. {%—Yajña-śaraṇa, am,%} n.
‘sacrifice-shed,’ a building or temporary structure
under which sacrifices are performed. {%—Yajña-śālā,%}
f. a sacrificial hall; {%= agni-śaraṇa,%} a house or place
for keeping the sacrificial fire. {%—Yajña-śāstra, am,%}
n. the science of sacrifice, ordinances or rules relating
to sacrifices. {%—Yajñaśāstra-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing
the rules or ordinances for sacrifices. {%—Yajña-śiṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} (anything) left from a sacrifice or oblation.
{%—Yajña-śiṣṭāśana (˚ṭa-aś˚), am,%} n. the eating
of the remains of a sacrifice, a repast on the remnants
of a sacrifice (Manu III. 118). {%—Yajña-śīla, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} accustomed to perform sacrifices, frequently per-
forming sacrifices; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Brāhman.
{%—Yajña-śeṣa, as, am,%} m. n. the remains or
residue of a sacrifice (Manu III. 285). {%—Yajña-śrī,%}
{%īs, īs, i,%} promoting or favourable to sacrifice, (Sāy.
{%= yajñasya sampad-rūpaḥ); (īs),%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Yajña-śreṣṭhā,%} f. Cocculus Cordifolius.
{%—Yajña-saṃśita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. excited by
offerings or sacrifices. {%—Yajña-saṃsthā,%} f., Ved. the
constitution or basis of a sacrifice, form of a sacrifice.
{%—Yajña-sadana, am,%} n. a sacrificial hall. {%—Yajña-%}
{%sadas, as,%} n. an assembly or number of people at
a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-samṛddhi, is,%} f., N. of the
eighty-sixth chapter of the Uttara-kāṇḍa of the
Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Yajña-sambhāra, as,%} m. apparatus or
materials for a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-sādh, t, t, t,%} Ved.
‘sacrifice-effecting,’ accomplishing sacrifices. {%—Yajña-%}
{%sādhana, as, ī, am,%} ‘sacrifice-effecting,’ accomplish-
ing sacrifices; occasioning or causing sacrifices, (used
as an epithet of Viṣṇu.) {%—Yajña-sāra, as,%} m.
‘essence of sacrifice,’ N. of Viṣṇu; Ficus Glome-
rata. {%—Yajña-sārathi,%} N. of a Sāman. {%—Yajña-%}
{%siddhi, is,%} f. the completion or accomplishment of
a sacrifice, the due performance of a sacrificial cere-
mony; obtaining the objects of a sacrifice. {%—Yajña-%}
{%sūkara, as,%} m. Viṣṇu in his incarnation as a boar
{%(= yajña-varāha)%}. {%—Yajña-sūtra, am,%} n. a sacred
cord worn over the left shoulder and under the right
arm at sacrifices, the sacrificial thread or cord, (see
{%yajñopavīta.) — Yajña-sena, as,%} m., N. of Dru-
pada; of a king of Vidarbha; of a Dānava; of
Viṣṇu; of various men. {%—Yajña-soma, as,%} m., N.
of several Brāhmans. {%—Yajña-sthala, am,%} n. a place
for sacrifice; N. of an Agra-hāra; of a Grāma; of
a town. {%—Yajña-sthāṇu, us,%} m. a sacrificial post or
stake. {%—Yajña-sthāna, am,%} n. a place for sacrifice.
{%—Yajña-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Yajña-%}
{%han, ā, -ghnī, a,%} destroying sacrifice, injuring or
vitiating sacrifice, interrupting worship; ({%ā%}), m., N.
of Śiva. {%—Yajña-hana, as, ā, am, = yajña-han%}
above; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Rākṣasa. {%—Yajña-hṛ-%}
{%daya, as, ā, am,%} ‘whose heart is sacrifice,’ liking
sacrifice above everything else, loving sacrifice.
{%—Yajña-hotṛ, tā,%} m. an offerer at a sacrifice;
invoker of the (gods who are) worthy of worship,
(Sāy. {%= yaṣṭavyānāṃ devānām āhvātṛ%}); N. of
a son of Manu Uttama. {%—Yajñāṃśa (˚ña-aṃ˚), as,%}
m. a part or share of a sacrifice. {%—Yajñāṃśa-bhuj,%}
{%k,%} m. ‘enjoying a share in sacrifices,’ a god, deity.
{%—Yajñāgāra%} ({%˚ña-ag˚%} or {%-āg˚%}), {%am,%} n. a shed for
sacrifice. {%—Yajñāṅga (˚ña-aṅ˚), am,%} n. ‘sacrifice-
limb,’ a part of a sacrifice, any means or instrument
or implement of a sacrifice; ({%as%}), m. the glomerous
fig-tree, Ficus Glomerata; Acacia Catechu; Clero-
dendrum Siphonanthus; N. of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa;
of Śiva; {%(ā),%} f. Cocculus Cordifolius. {%—Yajñātman%}
{%(˚ña-āt˚), ā,%} m. ‘soul of sacrifice,’ N. of Viṣṇu.
{%—Yajñātma-miśra, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Pārthasārathi-miśra. {%—Yajñānukāśin (˚ña-an˚), ī,%}
[Page0804-a+ 81]
{%inī, i,%} Ved. looking at or inspecting sacrifices, (accord-
ing to a commentator {%= yajña-tattva-prakāśana-%}
{%samartha.) — Yajñānta (˚ña-an˚), as,%} m. the con-
clusion or termination of a sacrifice; a supplementary
sacrifice. {%—Yajñānta-kṛt, t,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu.
{%—Yajñāyatana (˚ña-āy˚), am,%} n. a place for sacri-
fice. {%—Yajñāyudha (˚ña-āy˚), am,%} n., Ved. ‘sacri-
fice-instrument,’ any vessel or utensil employed at a
sacrifice, (ten are usually enumerated.) {%—Yajñāyu-%}
{%dhin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. having or furnished with sacri-
ficial utensils. {%—Yajñāri (˚ña-ari), is,%} m. ‘foe of
sacrifices,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Yajñārtha (˚ña-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} serving for a sacrifice; {%(am),%} ind. for
the sake of sacrifice. {%—Yajñārha (˚ña-ar˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deserving sacrifice; suitable or fit for sacrifice;
{%(au),%} m. du. epithet of the two Aśvins. {%—Yajñāva-%}
{%yava (˚ña-av˚), as,%} m. ‘whose limbs consist of
sacrifices,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Yajñāvasāna (˚ña-%}
{%av˚), am,%} n., N. of the ninety-third chapter of the
Uttara-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Yajñāśana (˚ña-%}
{%aś˚), as,%} m. ‘consumer of sacrifices,’ a god, deity.
{%—Yajñā-sāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. mighty in sacrifice;
bearing the sacrifice, (Sāy. {%= yajñasya voḍhṛ%} or
{%dhārayitṛ.) — Yajñeśa (˚ña-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of
worship or of sacrifice,’ epithet of Viṣṇu; of the sun.
{%—Yajñeśvara (˚ña-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of worship or
of sacrifice,’ epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of an author;
{%(ī),%} f., N. of a particular magical incantation.
{%—Yajñeśvarārya (˚ra-ār˚), as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Yajñeṣu (˚ña-iṣu), us,%} m. a proper N. {%—Yaj-%}
{%ñeṣṭa (˚ña-iṣ˚), am,%} n. a species of fragrant grass
{%(= dīrgha-rohiṣaka)%}. {%—Yajñoḍumbara (˚ña-%}
{%uḍ˚), as,%} m. {%= uḍumbara,%} Ficus Glomerata. {%—Yaj-%}
{%ñopakaraṇa (˚ña-up˚), am,%} n. ‘sacrifice-instrument,’
any utensil or implement useful or necessary for sacri-
fice. {%—Yajñopavīta (˚ña-up˚), am,%} n. the solemn
investiture of youths of the first three castes, Brāh-
mans, Kṣatriyas, and Vaiśyas, with a peculiar thread
or cord worn over the left shoulder and hanging
down diagonally across the body to the right hip, by
which they are considered regenerated and admitted
to the twice-born classes, see {%upa-naya;%} (in the
later language) the sacred thread itself, (originally, it
appears, worn at sacrifices and restricted to the first
three tribes, as explained above; in modern times
assumed by other mixed castes in various parts of
India, as by the Vaidyas or medical caste in Bengal;
according to Manu II. 44, a Brāhman's thread should
be of cotton, a Kṣatriya's of flax or hemp, a Vaiśya's
of woollen thread, and the youths should be invested
at particular ages, see {%upa-naya%} and cf. {%yajña-%}
{%sūtra;%} this thread is commonly called Janeo, which
is probably corrupted fr. {%yajñop˚.%}) {%—Yajñopavīta-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} or {%yajñopavītin, ī, inī, i,%} invested
with the sacred thread; [cf. {%upavītin.%}] {%—Yajñopā-%}
{%saka (˚ña-up˚), as,%} m. an honourer of sacrifices,
one who performs a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>38311<pc>0804-a<k1>yajYaka<k2>yajYaka
{%Yajñaka = yājaka,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38312<pc>0804-a<k1>yajYAya<k2>yajYAya
{%Yajñāya%}¦ (fr. {%yajña%}), Nom. P. {%yajñāyati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to perform a sacrifice or be diligent in sacri-
ficing.
<LEND>

<L>38313<pc>0804-a<k1>yajYAyajYiya<k2>yajYAyajYiya
{%Yajñāyajñiya, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Sāman, (so called
from the verse Ṛg-veda I. 168, 1, which begins with
{%yajñā-yajñā;%} it is also called Agniṣṭoma-sāman,
from coming at the end of the Agni-ṣṭoma.)
<LEND>

<L>38314<pc>0804-a<k1>yajYAyat<k2>yajYAyat
{%Yajñāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. one who performs
a sacrifice or is eager to make offerings.
<LEND>

<L>38315<pc>0804-a<k1>yajYAraNgeSapurI<k2>yajYAraNgeSapurI
{%Yajñāraṅgeśa-purī,%}¦ f., N. of a town, (perhaps
for {%yajña-raṅgeśa-purī.%})
<LEND>

<L>38316<pc>0804-a<k1>yajYika<k2>yajYika
{%Yajñika, as,%}¦ m. Butea Frondosa; {%= yajñadattaka,%}
(see Scholiast on Pāṇ. V. 3, 78; cf. {%devika.%})
<LEND>

<L>38317<pc>0804-a<k1>yajYin<k2>yajYin
{%Yajñin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having sacrifices, abounding in
sacrifices [cf. {%dākṣāyaṇayajñin%}]; ({%ī%}), m. epithet
of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>38318<pc>0804-a<k1>yajYiya<k2>yajYiya
{%Yajñiya, as, ā, am,%}¦ worthy of worship or sacrifice,
sharing in sacrifice; sacred, godly, divine, adorable,
(applied to gods and to anything belonging to them,
e. g. the chariot of the Aśvins; also to rivers, &c.);
active or eager in the worship of the gods, skilful in
sacrifice, having a capacity for sacrifice; pious, de-
voted, holy; belonging to worship, relating to a
[Page0804-b+ 79]
sacrifice, suitable or fit for sacrifice, sacrificial; ({%as%}),
m. a god, deity; N. of the Dvāpara or third Yuga.
{%—Yajñiya-deśa, as,%} m. ‘sacrificial country,’ the
country of the Hindūs, Hindūstān or that region
in which sacrificial ceremonies can be duly performed,
the country in which the black antelope is native,
see Manu II. 23. {%—Yajñiya-śālā,%} f. a hall for sacri-
fice, sacrificial hall; a temple, shrine.
<LEND>

<L>38319<pc>0804-b<k1>yajYiyat<k2>yajYiyat
{%Yajñiyat,%}¦ Ved. a word used in Śatapatha-Br. IX.
2, 3, 10. to explain {%adhvaryat.%}
<LEND>

<L>38320<pc>0804-b<k1>yajYIya<k2>yajYIya
{%Yajñīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ suitable or fit for sacrifice,
proper for the performance of a sacrifice, sacrificial;
({%as%}), m. the glomerous fig-tree, Ficus Glomerata.
{%—Yajñīya-brahma-pādapa, as,%} m. a species of
plant ({%= vikaṅkata%}).
<LEND>

<L>38321<pc>0804-b<k1>yajya<k2>yajya
{%Yajya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be worshipped, adorable; to
be sacrificed, &c.; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. worshipping, sacri-
ficing, in {%deva-y˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38322<pc>0804-b<k1>yajyamAna<k2>yajyamAna
{%Yajyamāna, as, ā, am, = ijyamāna.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>38323<pc>0804-b<k1>yajyu<k2>yajyu
{%Yajyu, us, us, u,%}¦ worshipping, adoring, honour-
ing; devout, pious, godly; taking part in a sacrifice,
an assistant priest at a sacrifice; ({%us%}), m. an Adhvaryu
priest or one conversant with the Yajur-veda; {%= ya-%}
{%jamāna.%}
<LEND>

<L>38324<pc>0804-b<k1>yajvan<k2>yajvan
{%Yajvan, ā, arī, a%}¦ (a feminine form in {%anī%} is said
to exist), worshipping, sacrificing; a worshipper,
adorer, honourer; a sacrificer, one who performs
sacrifices in due form or agreeably to the ritual of the
Veda, sacrificial, effective of sacrifices, (Sāy. {%= yāga-%}
{%niṣpādaka%}); {%yajvanām patiḥ,%} N. of the moon.
<LEND>

<L>38325<pc>0804-b<k1>yajvin<k2>yajvin
{%Yajvin, ī, inī, i, = yajvan%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>38326<pc>0804-b<k1>yazwavya<k2>yazwavya
{%Yaṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be worshipped, &c.
<LEND>

<L>38327<pc>0804-b<k1>yazwi<k2>yazwi<h>1
1. {%yaṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. {%yaṣṭi%} see s.v.), sacrificing,
(perhaps incorrect for 3. {%iṣṭi.%})
<LEND>

<L>38328<pc>0804-b<k1>yazwukAma<k2>yazwukAma
{%Yaṣṭu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ desiring to worship,
wishing or intending to sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>38329<pc>0804-b<k1>yazwf<k2>yazwf
{%Yaṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who worships or sacri-
fices, a worshipper, sacrificer ({%= yajamāna%}).
<LEND>

<L>38330<pc>0804-b<k1>yaRva<k2>yaRva
{#yaRva#}¦ {%yaṇva, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38331<pc>0804-b<k1>yaRvApatya<k2>yaRvApatya
{%Yaṇvāpatya%}¦ and {%yaṇvāpatyottara, am,%} n., N.
of two Sāmans.
<LEND>
<L>38331.1<pc>0804-b<k1>yaRvApatyottara<k2>yaRvApatyottara
{{Lbody=38331}}
<LEND>

<L>38332<pc>0804-b<k1>yat<k2>yat<h>1
{#yat#} 1¦. {%yat, yan, yatī, yat%} (fr. rt. 5. {%i%}),
going, passing, moving.
<LEND>

<L>38333<pc>0804-b<k1>yat<k2>yat<h>2
{#yat#} 2¦. {%yat%} (connected with rt. {%yam%}), cl.
1. A. (Ved. and ep. also P.) {%yatate (-ti),%}
{%yete%} (3rd pl. {%yetire%}), {%yatiṣyate, ayatiṣṭa, yati-%}
{%tum,%} to join, connect, unite (Ved. P.); to excite,
arouse (Ved. P., according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII.
36, 2. {%yatati = yātayati, pravartayati,%} he arouses,
animates to exertion); to join or attach one's self to,
unite one's self with, associate with (Ved. A.); to
come together or be arranged in order (Ved. A.);
to proceed, go (Ved.); to try to join one's self with
(with loc.); to endeavour to reach (Ved. A.); to
strive or endeavour after, struggle after, be eager or
anxious for (with loc. or dat. or even acc., or with
one of the following prepositional words, {%arthe,%}
{%arthāya, artham, hetos, prati,%} or with the inf.);
to exert one's self, endeavour, take pains, make
effort, persevere, observe caution, be watchful; to
strive against, be engaged in mutual contest, contend
together (Ved.): Caus. {%yātayati, -yate, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%ayīyatat,%} to join, connect, associate, unite
(Ved. P.); to join or attach one's self to (Ved. A.);
to join or unite to (Ved. P.); to requite, recompense,
repay, restore, return, give up; to cause to be repaid
or requited or restored; to receive in requital (A.);
to cause to strive or make effort, animate, encourage,
instigate; to cause to contend (Ved.); to pain,
harass, distress, torture, vex, annoy; to reprehend,
despise: Desid. {%yiyatiṣate:%} Intens. {%yāyatyate,%}
{%yāyatti;%} [cf. according to some Gr. <lang n="greek">ζητέω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>38334<pc>0804-b<k1>yatat<k2>yatat
{%Yatat, an, antī, at,%}¦ exerting one's self, striving
after, &c., (in Ṛg-veda V. 48, 5. {%yatat = uddha-%}
{%rat,%} extirpating.)
<LEND>

<L>38335<pc>0804-b<k1>yatana<k2>yatana
{%Yatana, am,%}¦ n. the act of making effort or exertion,
an effort, endeavour.
<LEND>

<L>38336<pc>0804-b<k1>yatanIya<k2>yatanIya
{%Yatanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be exerted or persevered
or striven after; (the neut. may be used impersonally,
[Page0804-c+ 79]
e. g. {%sadā yatanīyam muktau,%} one must always
strive after final emancipation.)
<LEND>

<L>38337<pc>0804-c<k1>yatamAna<k2>yatamAna
{%Yatamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ striving, endeavouring,
struggling, persevering, making effort, taking pains.
<LEND>

<L>38338<pc>0804-c<k1>yatavya<k2>yatavya
{%Yatavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. an unused {%yatu%}), Ved. {%=%}
{%prayatna-vat.%}
<LEND>

<L>38339<pc>0804-c<k1>yatAna<k2>yatAna
{%Yatāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. uniting or coming to-
gether (in regular order), ranging; proceeding, (Sāy.
{%= pravartamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>38340<pc>0804-c<k1>yatita<k2>yatita
{%Yatita, as, ā, am,%}¦ striven, endeavoured, attempted,
tried, striven after, (sometimes with inf. used pas-
sively, e. g. {%eṣa tvayā hantuṃ yatitaḥ,%} he was
attempted to be killed by thee); endeavouring, tak-
ing pains; (the neut. may be used impersonally,
e. g. {%yatitam mayā gantum,%} it was attempted by
me to go, it was my intention to go.)
<LEND>

<L>38341<pc>0804-c<k1>yatitavya<k2>yatitavya
{%Yatitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be strived for or after,
to be endeavoured; (the neut. is used impersonally
with loc., e. g. {%arthārjane yatitavyam,%} one must
strive for the acquisition of money.)
<LEND>

<L>38342<pc>0804-c<k1>yatuna<k2>yatuna
{%Yatuna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. going, moving, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%gantṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>38343<pc>0804-c<k1>yatta<k2>yatta<h>1
1. {%yatta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see under rt. {%yam%}),
endeavoured, making effort or exertion, taking care,
watchful; prepared, ready; ready for (e. g. {%raṇe%}
{%yattaḥ,%} ready for battle, or with an inf.); resolved;
cared for, attended to (as a chariot, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>38344<pc>0804-c<k1>yatna<k2>yatna
{%Yatna, as,%}¦ m. effort, endeavour, exertion, energy,
diligence, perseverance, zeal; labour, work, trouble,
pains, difficulty; effort for, endeavour after (with
loc., e. g. {%paropakṛtau yatnaḥ,%} an effort for the
benefit of another); {%yatnaṃ kṛ,%} to make effort,
use exertion, take pains, strive; {%(ena),%} ind. with
effort, diligently, vigorously, eagerly, with all one's
might; carefully; {%(āt),%} ind. from effort, with effort,
after great exertions; in spite of every effort; neces-
sarily. {%—Yatna-tas,%} ind. from effort, diligently, vigo-
rously, eagerly, zealously; carefully. {%—Yatna-prati-%}
{%pādya, as, ā, am,%} to be explained with difficulty,
difficult, not easy. {%—Yatna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pos-
sessing energy, making or using effort, energetic,
using exertion, strenuous, laborious, assiduous, perse-
vering, diligent; striving after, taking pains about
(with loc.). {%—Yatnavat-tva, am,%} n. the state or
condition of making effort, diligence, zealousness.
{%—Yatnākṣepa (˚na-āk˚), as,%} m. (in rhetoric) the
making an objection notwithstanding an effort to
repress it.
<LEND>

<L>38345<pc>0804-c<k1>yatya<k2>yatya
{%Yatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be strived for or after, to
be exerted.
<LEND>

<L>38346<pc>0804-c<k1>yata<k2>yata
{#yata#}¦ {%yata.%} See under rt. {%yam,%} p. 809.
<LEND>

<L>38347<pc>0804-c<k1>yatama<k2>yatama
{#yatama#}¦ {%yatama, as, ā, at%} (superl. of 3. {%ya%} or
{%yad;%} see Gram. 236), who or which (of many).
<LEND>

<L>38348<pc>0804-c<k1>yatamaTA<k2>yatamaTA
{%Yatamathā,%}¦ ind., Ved. in which of many ways,
({%yatamathā katamathā,%} in the same way, as
always.)
<LEND>

<L>38349<pc>0804-c<k1>yatara<k2>yatara
{%Yatara, as, ā, at%}¦ (compar. of 3. {%ya%}), who or
which (of two).
<LEND>

<L>38350<pc>0804-c<k1>yataraTA<k2>yataraTA
{%Yatarathā,%}¦ ind. in which of two ways.
<LEND>

<L>38351<pc>0804-c<k1>yatas<k2>yatas
{#yatas#}¦ {%yatas,%} ind. (fr. the pronom. base
3. {%ya;%} correlative of {%tatas,%} q. v., and often used
for the ablative or even instrumental cases {%yasmāt,%}
{%yebhyas, yasyās, yena,%} &c. of the relative pronoun
{%yad,%} but oftener as an adverb or conjunction), from
which, from what, whence; in consequence of
which, for which reason, wherefore; because, since,
whereas, as, for; from which place, wherefrom,
from any place; where, whither, in which direction;
from which time, from which time forward, ever
since, ({%yato jātā,%} from her birth up to the present
time, ever since her birth); that, so that, on con-
dition that; {%yato-yatas,%} from whichever, from
whatever, from whatever place, from wherever,
whencesoever, wherever, whithersoever; {%yatas-tatas,%}
from whichever, from which place soever, from this
or that person or place, from any one whatever,
from any place whatsoever, any whither, any where-
soever; {%yata eva kutaś ca,%} from this or that place,
from any place whatever; {%yataḥ-prabhṛti,%} whence-
[Page0805-a+ 76]
forward, from which time forward, from what time;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὅ-θε-ν;</lang> Slav. <nsi>jundu-se.</nsi>] {%—Yato-jā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} or {%yatodbhava (˚tas-ud˚), as, ā, am,%}
produced from which. {%—Yato-mūla, as, ā, am,%} ori-
ginating in or from which.
<LEND>

<L>38352<pc>0805-a<k1>yati<k2>yati<h>1
{#yati#} 1¦. {%yati%} (fr. the pronom. base 3. {%ya;%}
correlative of {%tati,%} q. v.; declined in plur. only, all
the cases except the nom. voc. acc. taking termina-
tions, e. g. inst. {%yatibhis,%} dat. and abl. {%yatibhyas,%}
gen. {%yatīnām,%} loc. {%yatiṣu,%} see Gram. 227. <nsi>a</nsi>),
as many (= Lat. <nsi>quot</nsi>); as often; how many; how
often. (For 2. {%yati%} see p. 809, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>38353<pc>0805-a<k1>yatiTa<k2>yatiTa
{%Yatitha, as, ī, am,%}¦ ‘as maniest, the as manieth;’
[cf. {%tatitha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38354<pc>0805-a<k1>yatiDA<k2>yatiDA
{%Yatidhā,%}¦ ind., Ved. in as many parts, in as many
ways.
<LEND>

<L>38355<pc>0805-a<k1>yatIyasa<k2>yatIyasa
{#yatIyasa#}¦ {%yatīyasa%} (?), {%am,%} n. silver.
<LEND>

<L>38356<pc>0805-a<k1>yatukA<k2>yatukA
{#yatukA#}¦ {%yatukā%} or {%yatūkā,%} f. a species of
plant ({%= rajanī, jananī%}).
<LEND>

<L>38357<pc>0805-a<k1>yatuna<k2>yatuna
{#yatuna#}¦ {%yatuna.%} See p. 804, col.3.
<LEND>

<L>38358<pc>0805-a<k1>yatkara<k2>yatkara
{#yatkara#}¦ {%yat-kara, yat-kāma, yat-kāraṇam,%}
{%yat-kratu,%} &c. See p. 808, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38359<pc>0805-a<k1>yatna<k2>yatna
{#yatna#}¦ {%yatna, yatya,%} &c. See p. 804, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38360<pc>0805-a<k1>yatra<k2>yatra
{#yatra#}¦ {%yatra,%} ind. (fr. the pronom. base 3.
{%ya;%} correlative of {%tatra,%} q. v., often used for the
loc. cases {%yasmin, yasyām, yeṣu,%} &c., but oftener
as an adverb or conjunction), in which place, where,
wherein, wherever, whither; when; whereas, be-
cause, since; that, so that; {%yatra yatra,%} wherever,
wheresoever, whithersoever, whensoever; {%yatra-%}
{%tatra,%} in any place whatever, anywhere, ({%yatra-%}
{%tatra dine,%} on any day whatever, on whatever day
you like); {%yatra-kutra,%} in any place whatever;
everywhere, in every part; {%yatra-kutracit%} or {%yatra-%}
{%kutrāpi,%} in whatever place, in some place or other,
in any place whatever, anywhere, in whichever (e. g.
{%yatra-kutrāpi janmani,%} in whichever birth); {%ya-%}
{%tra-kvacana%} or {%yatra-kvāpi%} or {%yatra-kva ca%} or
{%yatra-kva vā,%} wherever, whithersoever, anywhere,
anywhither; whenever, as often as, every time; at
any time; hither and thither. {%—Yatra-kāmam,%} ind.
wherever it pleases, according to pleasure or wish.
{%—Yatra-kāmāvasāya (˚ma-av˚), as,%} m. the super-
natural power of taking up an abode or transporting
one's self anywhere one likes, (this power is said to
belong to some Yogins.) {%—Yatrakāmāvasāyi-tā,%}
f. or {%yatrakāmāvasāyi-tva, am,%} n. {%= yatra-kāmā-%}
{%vasāya%} above. {%—Yatrakāmāvasāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
having the power of taking up a residence or trans-
porting one's self anywhere one wishes. {%—Yatra-%}
{%tatra-śaya, as, ā, am,%} lying down anywhere, sleep-
ing anywhere. {%—Yatra-sāyaṅ-gṛha%} or {%yatra-sā-%}
{%yam-pratiśraya, as, ā, am,%} having or taking up
an abode wherever the evening finds one, spending
the night anywhere where one happens to be. {%—Ya-%}
{%tra-stha, as, ā, am,%} where staying, in which place
abiding. {%—Yatrākūta (˚ra-āk˚), am,%} n., Ved. the
aim or object in view.
<LEND>

<L>38361<pc>0805-a<k1>yatratya<k2>yatratya
{%Yatratya, as, ā, am,%}¦ where being, dwelling in
which place, relating to which place, of which place,
whose (used relatively).
<LEND>

<L>38362<pc>0805-a<k1>yaTafzi<k2>yaTafzi
{#yaTafzi#}¦ {%yatha-ṛṣi, yatharcam,%} &c. See
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38363<pc>0805-a<k1>yaTA<k2>yaTA
{#yaTA#}¦ {%yathā,%} ind. (fr. the pronom. base
3. {%ya;%} correlative of {%tathā,%} q. v.), in which manner,
in which way, as, like as, like, (sometimes redun-
dantly connected with {%iva%}); as, for example; as truly
as, (in asseverations, followed by {%tathā%} or {%tena%}
{%satyena,%} so truly); that, so that, in order that (with
pot. or not unfrequently with pres. impf. perf. fut.
or aor.; in the earlier language {%yathā%} in this sense
is often found after the first word of a sentence);
that, whether, (often used as an introduction to a
direct sentence after verbs of knowing, believing,
hearing, doubting, &c., either with or without {%iti,%}
e. g. {%jñāyate yathā rājā tat kariṣyati,%} it is known
[Page0805-b+ 81]
that the king will do that; {%viddhi yathā sā punar%}
{%eṣyatīti,%} know that she will return); whereas,
since, because; when, as when, as if; as soon as; as
is right or proper ({%= yathā-vat%}); how! (as an
exclamation); {%yathā — tathā,%} as — so; as — just so,
(instead of {%tathā,%} the other similar correlatives {%evam,%}
{%eva, tadvat, tad evam%} are often found in the cor-
responding clause); {%yathā yathā — tathā tathā,%} in
whatever manner — in that manner; according as — so;
in whatever degree or proportion — in that degree or
proportion; by how much the more — by so much
the more; {%yathā-tathā,%} in whatever manner, in
any manner or way, in every way, as always, as ever;
{%yathā-kathañcit,%} in any way, in any manner, any
wise, somehow or other, anyhow; {%tad yathā,%} as
here follows, that is to say, namely, as for example;
{%yathā-kathā,%} as much as; {%yathā-kathā ca,%} now
and then, rarely, unfrequently; {%yathaiva (yathā%}
{%eva%}), just as. {%—Yatha-ṛṣi,%} ind., Ved. according
to the Ṛṣi (see Gram. 38. <nsi>h</nsi>). {%—Yatharcam%}
{%(˚thā-ṛc˚),%} ind. according to the Ṛc. {%—Yathartu%}
{%(˚thā-ṛtu%}), ind. according to the season; in accord-
ance with a fixed time, corresponding to the right
season. {%—Yathartuka (˚thā-ṛt˚), as, ā, am,%} cor-
responding to the season of the year. {%—Yathartu-%}
{%puṣpita, as, ā, am,%} bearing flowers or blossoms at
the right season. {%—Yatharṣi (˚thā-ṛṣi),%} ind. =
{%yatha-ṛṣi%} above. {%—Yathāṃśa-tas (˚thā-aṃ˚),%} ind.
according to shares or portions, in due proportion,
proportionably. {%—Yathā-kaniṣṭham,%} ind. accord-
ing to the youngest, from the youngest to the oldest;
[cf. {%yathā-jyeṣṭham.%}] {%—Yathā-kartabya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} as proper to be done; ({%am%}), n. what is right
or proper to be done (under any particular circum-
stances). {%—Yathā-karma,%} ind. in accordance with
(any) action, according to actions, in accordance with
duties; according to circumstances. {%—Yathā-karma-%}
{%guṇam,%} ind. in accordance with actions and qualities.
{%—Yatha-kalpam,%} ind. in conformity with ritual
or ceremonial, according to rule or rubric. {%—Yathā-%}
{%kāṇḍam,%} ind. according to Kāṇḍas or chapters.
{%—Yathā-kāma, as, ā, am,%} conformable to desire,
(acting) according to wish; ({%am%}), ind. according to
wish, as one likes, at pleasure, agreeably, easily,
comfortably. {%—Yathākāmārcitārthin (˚ma-ar˚,%}
{%˚ta-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} honouring suppliants by conform-
ing to their desires. {%—Yathā-kāmin, ī, inī, i,%} acting
according to will or pleasure, independent, wilful,
uncontrolled. {%—Yathākāmya, am,%} n. (probably in-
correct for {%yāthākāmya%}), will, inclination, pleasure.
{%—Yathā-kāyam,%} ind., Ved. ‘according to body or
form,’ according to the dimensions (of anything).
{%—Yathā-kāram,%} ind. according to which way, in
which manner. {%—Yathā-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} as acting,
acting in which way. {%—Yathā-kārya, as, ā, am, =%}
{%yathā-kartavya%}. {%—Yathā-kāla, as,%} m. the proper
time (for anything), a suitable moment, auspicious
time; ({%am%}), ind. according to time, in due time, at
the proper moment, at the right time. {%—Yathākāla-%}
{%prabodhin, ī, inī, i,%} watchful in proper seasons,
waking at the right time. {%—Yathā-kuladharmam,%}
ind. according to family usage, in conformity with
family customs. {%—Yathā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} as has
been done, as agreed, made or done according to
rule, done according to custom or agreement, usual,
customary, conventional; ({%am%}), ind. as happened,
according to usual practice, in the way agreed upon.
{%—Yathā-kṛṣṭam,%} ind., Ved. according to furrows,
furrow. after furrow. {%—Yathā-kḷpti,%} ind. in a suit-
able or fitting way. {%—Yathā-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
conforming to a plan or design, forming which plan.
{%—Yathā-kramam%} or {%yathā-krameṇa,%} ind. accord-
ing to order, in regular order or series, in due suc-
cession, regularly, methodically, successively, in a row,
respectively, in due form, properly. {%—Yathā-krośam,%}
ind., Ved. according to Krośas. {%—Yathā-kṣamam,%}
ind. according to power or ability, as much as pos-
sible. {%—Yathā-kṣemeṇa,%} ind. with all due safety or
security, safely, comfortably, peaceably. {%—Yathā-%}
{%khātam,%} ind., Ved. as dug or excavated. {%—Yathā-%}
{%khyam (˚thā-ākh˚),%} ind. according to names, as
[Page0805-c+ 81]
named. {%—Yathākhyāta (˚thā-ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} as
previously described or mentioned, before mentioned.
{%—Yathākhyānam (˚thā-ākh˚),%} ind. in accordance
with any narrative or statement, according to the cir-
cumstances narrated, as stated. {%—Yathā-gata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} as gone, as previously gone; {%yathāgata (˚thā-%}
{%āg˚),%} as come, as one came; as one came (into the
world), without sense, stupid [cf. {%yathā-jāta%}]; {%yathā-%}
{%gatam%} or {%yathāgatena,%} ind. by the way one came.
{%—Yathāgamam (˚thā-āg˚),%} ind. according to tra-
dition, as handed down. {%—Yathā-gātram,%} ind., Ved.
according to limbs, limb after limb. {%—Yathā-gu-%}
{%ṇam,%} ind. according to Guṇas or qualities. {%—Yathā-%}
{%gṛham,%} ind. according to houses or habitations,
({%yānti yathā-gṛham,%} they go to their respective
homes.) {%—Yathā-gṛhītam,%} ind., Ved. as taken, just
as laid hold of, as, come to hand, in regular order or
succession. {%—Yathā-gotra-kula-kalpam,%} ind. ac-
cording to the usages of a family or race. {%—Yathāgni%}
{%(˚thā-ag˚),%} ind., Ved. according to (the size of)
the fire. {%—Yathā-grahaṇam,%} ind., Ved. according
to any statement, conformably to what was men-
tioned. {%—Yathāṅgam (˚thā-aṅ˚),%} ind., Ved. accord-
ing to limbs or members, limb after limb. {%—Yathā-%}
{%camasam,%} ind., Ved. Camasa after Camasa. {%—Ya-%}
{%thācāram (˚thā-āc˚),%} ind. according to custom, as
usual, as customary. {%—Yathā-cārin%} or {%yathācārin%}
{%(˚thā-āc˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. as proceeding, as acting.
{%—Yathā-cintita, as, ā, am,%} as thought of or con-
sidered, previously considered. {%—Yathā-coditam,%}
ind., Ved. according to precept, in conformity with
injunction. {%—Yathā-chandasam,%} ind., Ved. accord-
ing to metre, one metre after another. {%—Yathā-jāta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} just as born; senseless, stupid, foolish, a
natural; barbarous, outcast; ({%am%}), ind. according to
race or family, family by family. {%—Yathā-jāti,%} ind.,
Ved. according to birth, according to kind or class, sort
by sort. {%—Yathā-joṣam,%} ind., Ved. according to
will or pleasure, according to one's satisfaction, (also
read {%yathā-yoṣam.%}) {%—Yathājñapta (˚thā-āj˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} as previously enjoined, before directed. {%—Ya-%}
{%thā-jñānam,%} ind. according to knowledge, to the
best of one's knowledge or judgment. {%—Yathā-%}
{%jyeṣṭham,%} ind. according to the oldest, by seni-
ority, according to rank, from the oldest to the
youngest. {%—Yathā-tattvam,%} ind. in accordance with
truth, as the case really is, according to actual fact,
exactly, precisely, strictly, accurately. {%—Yathā-tatha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} conformable to truth or the exact state
of the case, right, true, accurate; ({%am%}), ind. in con-
formity with truth or reality; precisely, exactly; as
is becoming or proper, fitly, duly, in a suitable
manner; ({%am%}), n. a detailed account of events, nar-
rative of particulars. {%—Yathā-tathyam%} or {%yathā-%}
{%tathyena,%} ind. in accordance with the truth, really,
truly. {%—Yathā-tṛpti,%} ind. to the heart's content, to
full satisfaction of one's desire. {%—Yathātmaka (˚thā-%}
{%āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} according to nature or character,
having which nature. {%—Yathā-datta, as, ā, am,%} as
given. {%—Yathā-darśanam,%} ind. according to every
occurrence, in every single case. {%—Yathā-dāyam,%}
ind. according to shares or portions. {%—Yathā-dik%} or
{%yathā-diśam,%} ind. according to the various quarters
of the sky; in all directions. {%—Yathādiṣṭa (˚thā-%}
{%ād˚), as, ā, am,%} as enjoined or directed, correspond-
ing to what has been enjoined, conformable to a
direction; ({%am%}), ind. in accordance with a direction
or injunction. {%—Yathā-dīkṣam,%} ind. in accordance
with religious observances. {%—Yathā-dṛṣṭam%} or
{%yathā-dṛṣṭi,%} ind. as seen or observed. {%—Yathā-%}
{%devatam,%} ind., Ved. deity after deity, divinity by
divinity. {%—Yathā-deśa-kāla-dehāvasthāna-viśe-%}
{%ṣam (˚ha-av˚),%} ind. according to differences of
place, time, and bodily constitution. {%—1. yathā-%}
{%deśam,%} ind. according to places. {%—2. yathādeśam%}
{%(˚thā-ād˚),%} ind. according to direction or injunction.
{%—Yathā-dravya, as, ā, am,%} according to property,
proportioned or conformable to wealth. {%—Yathā-%}
{%dharmam,%} ind. according to duty or right, in proper
form or order. {%—Yathādhikāram (˚thā-adh˚), am,%}
ind. according to authority. {%—Yathā-dhiṣṇyam,%}
[Page0806-a+ 81]
ind., Ved. according to the position or arrangement
of the Dhiṣṇya. {%—Yathādhīta (˚thā-adh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} as read, conformable to the text; ({%am%}), ind.
according to the text. {%—Yathādhyāpakam (˚thā-%}
{%adh˚),%} ind. according to the teacher, agreeably to
the instructions of a teacher. {%—Yathā-nāma,%} ind.,
Ved. according to name, name by name. {%—Yathā-%}
{%nārada-bhāṣita, as, ā, am,%} exactly as Nārada
announced, being just as Nārada stated. {%—Yathā-%}
{%niḥsṛptam,%} ind., Ved. as gone forth or out. {%—Ya-%}
{%thā-niruptam,%} ind., Ved. as presented or offered.
{%—Yathā-nirdiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} as directed or en-
joined, before mentioned or described, previously
directed. {%—Yathā-nilayam,%} ind. each in its own
resting-place or lair (said of animals). {%—Yathā-ni-%}
{%vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} wherever dwelling or abiding.
{%—Yathānīkam (˚thā-an˚),%} ind. according to the
extent of the army, as far as the host extended.
{%—Yathānupūrvam (˚thā-an˚)%} or {%yathānupūr-%}
{%vyam%} or {%yathānupūrvyā (˚thā-ān˚),%} ind. according
to a regular series, in regular order or succession,
successively. {%—Yathānubhūtam (˚thā-an˚),%} ind. ac-
cording to experience, by previous experience. {%—Ya-%}
{%thānurūpam (˚thā-an˚),%} ind. according to form or
rule, in exact conformity, orderly, properly. {%—Ya-%}
{%thā-nyastam,%} ind. as thrown down, as deposited.
{%—Yathā-nyāyam,%} ind. according to rule, according
to justice, justly, rightly, fitly, as is fitting or suitable,
properly. {%—Yathā-nyupta, as, ā, am,%} as presented
or offered, in the order presented. {%—Yathā-paṇyam,%}
ind. according to the (value of the) wares or com-
modities. {%—Yathā-padam,%} ind., Ved. according to
the Pada or word. {%—Yathāparādha-daṇḍa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} inflicting punishment in proportion to the crime.
{%—Yathāparādham (˚thā-ap˚),%} ind. according to
the offence or error. {%—Yathā-paru,%} ind., Ved. ac-
cording to joints, joint after joint, limb by limb.
{%—Yathā-puram,%} ind. as before, as on previous
occasions. {%—Yathā-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} being as
before, previous, former; ({%am%}), ind. as before, as
previously; in succession, one after another. {%—Ya-%}
{%thā-prajñam,%} ind. according to knowledge. {%—Ya-%}
{%thā-pratiguṇam,%} ind. according to qualities, to the
best of one's abilities. {%—Yathā-pratijñam,%} ind. ac-
cording to agreement, as settled or arranged. {%—Ya-%}
{%thā-pratirūpam,%} ind., Ved. as is suitable or fitting.
{%—Yathā-pratyarham,%} ind. according to merit.
{%—Yathā-pradiṣṭam,%} ind. according to direction
or precept, as is suitable or proper. {%—Yathā-pra-%}
{%deśam,%} ind. according to direction or precept, in a
suitable or proper manner; according to place, in
a suitable or proper place, at proper places, on all
sides. {%—Yathā-pradhānatas%} or {%yathā-pradhā-%}
{%nam,%} ind. according to precedence or superiority,
by rank. {%—Yathā-prayogam,%} ind. according to
usage or practice. {%—Yathā-praśnam,%} ind. in accord-
ance with the question. {%—Yathā-prastutam,%} ind.
conformably to the circumstances. {%—Yathā-prāṇam,%}
ind. according to one's whole soul, with all one's
might. {%—Yathā-prāpta, as, ā, am,%} as obtained or
arrived, in conformity with a particular state or con-
dition, suitable or conformable to circumstances;
({%am%}), ind. in conformity with rule, regularly, pro-
perly. {%—Yathāprāpta-svara, as,%} m. an accent ac-
cording to rule. {%—Yathā-prārthitam,%} ind. according
to wish, by request. {%—Yathā-prīti, is, is, i,%} in
accordance with love or affection, affectionate, loving.
{%—Yathā-phalam,%} ind. according to fruit, when
bearing fruit. {%—Yathā-balam,%} ind. according to
power, with all one's might, to the best of one's
ability; according to the (condition of the) army,
according to the (number of) forces. {%—Yathā-bījam%}
{%= yathā-vījam,%} q. v. {%—Yathā-buddhi,%} ind. accord-
ing to knowledge, to the best of one's judgment.
{%—Yathā-bhaktyā%} ({%bhaktyā,%} inst. c. of {%bhakti%}),
ind. with full or entire devotion. {%—Yathā-bhakṣi-%}
{%tam,%} ind. as eaten. {%—Yathā-bhavanam,%} ind. ac-
cording to houses, house by house. {%—Yathā-bhā-%}
{%gam,%} ind. according to shares or portions, according
to the share of each, proportionably; each in his
respective place, in the proper place. {%—Yathā-bhā- %}
[Page0806-b+ 81]
{%janam,%} ind., Ved. each in his proper place or posi-
tion. {%—Yathā-bhāva, as,%} m. conformity to any
destined state, destiny; {%(as, ā, am,)%} having which
nature or condition, being of which nature. {%—Yathā-%}
{%bhikāmam (˚thā-abh˚),%} ind. according to wish or
desire. {%—Yathābhijñāyam (˚thā-abh˚),%} ind., Ved.
as one has perceived or ascertained. {%—Yathābhi-%}
{%preta (˚thā-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} as wished or intended;
desired; ({%am%}), ind. according to one's desire or wish,
agreeably, pleasantly. {%—Yathābhimata (˚thā-abh˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} as wished, desired, approved; ({%am%}), ind.
according to wish or will, at pleasure. at will, wher-
ever desire leads one, ({%sarve yathābhimata-deśaṃ%}
{%gatāḥ,%} they all went to the place that each wished.)
{%—Yathābhirāmam (˚thā-abh˚),%} ind. according to
loveliness, according to the degree of charmingness
(belonging to each). {%—Yathābhirucita (˚thā-abh˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} accordant with taste or liking, pleasurable,
agreeable, pleasant, pleasing. {%—Yathābhirūpam%}
{%(˚thā-abh˚),%} ind. according to Scholiast on Pāṇ. II.
1, 7 {%= abhi-rūpasya yogyam,%} according to beauty
of form (?). {%—Yathābhilaṣita (˚thā-abh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} as wished, desired. {%—Yathābhilikhita (˚thā-%}
{%abh˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. painted in the manner stated.
{%—Yathābhivṛṣṭam (˚thā-abh˚),%} ind., Ved. ac-
cording to the quantity of rain that has fallen. {%—Ya-%}
{%thābhihitam (˚thā-abh˚),%} ind. as spoken. {%—Yathā-%}
{%bhīṣṭa (˚thā-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} as wished, liked,
desired, ({%yathābhīṣṭa-diśaṃ jagmuh,%} they went
to the quarter that each wished.) {%—Yathā-bhūtam,%}
ind. in accordance with fact, according to what has
happened; according to the truth. {%—Yathā-bhū-%}
{%yaso-vāda (bhūyasas,%} gen. c. of {%bhūyas%}), {%as,%} m.,
Ved. a general rule. {%—Yathābhyarthita (˚thā-%}
{%abh˚), as, ā, am,%} as already requested, previously
asked for. {%—Yathā-maṅgalam,%} ind., Ved. according
to custom. {%—Yathā-mati,%} ind. according to opinion;
to the best of one's judgment. {%—Yathā-manīṣitam,%}
ind. according to wish, by desire or request. {%—Yathā-%}
{%mātram,%} ind. according to measure or quantity.
{%—Yathā-mānam,%} ind. according to measure or
dimensions, according to the circumference. {%—Ya-%}
{%thā-mukham,%} ind. according to face or appearance,
from face to face. {%—Yathāmukhīna, as, ā, am,%}
looking straight at (with gen.). {%—Yathā-mukhyam,%}
ind. according to the chief (persons), as regards the
chiefs; {%(ena),%} ind. by way of precedence or prefer-
ence, before all. {%—Yathāmnātam (˚thā-ām˚)%} or {%ya-%}
{%thāmnāyam (˚thā-ām˚),%} ind. in accordance with
sacred tradition; according to the tenour of a sacred
text. {%—Yathā-yajus,%} ind. according to the Yajus.
{%—Yathāyatanam (˚thā-āy˚),%} ind., Ved. each in
his own place or abode. {%—Yathā-yatham,%} ind. (fr.
{%yathā + yathā%}), in a proper manner, as is fit or proper,
rightly, properly, suitably, fitly; in regular order,
severally, by degrees, gradually. {%—Yathā-yuktam%} or
{%yathā-yukti%} or {%yathāyukti-tas,%} ind. as is fitting,
in a proper manner, fitly, rightly, suitably, according
to circumstances. {%—Yathā-yūtham,%} ind. according
to herds, by flocks. {%—Yathā-yogam%} or {%yathā-yo-%}
{%gena,%} ind. as is fit, in a suitable manner, according
to circumstances, according to requirements; in due
order. {%—Yathā-yogya, as, ā, am,%} accordant with
propriety; ({%am%}), ind. as is fitting or proper, suitably,
properly, fitly. {%—Yathā-yoni,%} ind. according to the
womb, according to birth. {%—Yathārabdha (˚thā-%}
{%ār˚), as, ā, am,%} as begun or commenced, previously
commenced. {%—Yathārambham (˚thā-ār˚),%} ind. ac-
cording to the commencement, in regular order or
succession. {%—Yathā-rasam,%} ind. according to the
sentiments. {%—Yathā-rucam%} or {%yathā-ruci,%} ind. ac-
cording to taste, according to pleasure or liking.
{%—Yathā-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} accordant with (beauty
of) form, having a handsome form, suitable; ({%am%}),
ind. according to the form or appearance; in a
suitable way, properly, duly; of the same shape or
appearance. {%—Yathārtha (˚thā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
accordant with reality, conformable to truth or the
true meaning, agreeing with fact, true, actual, real,
genuine, right, fit, suitable; ({%am%}), ind. according to
the meaning, conformably to the sense, according to
[Page0806-c+ 81]
the aim or object, according to truth or fact, suitably,
fitly, truly, really. {%—Yathārthaka, as, ā, am, =%}
{%yathārtha,%} having a suitable meaning, right, true,
real. {%—Yathārtha-tattvam%} (i. e. {%yathā + artha-%}
{%t˚%}), ind. ‘according to the reality of the matter,’
in accordance with the truth, truly, really. {%—Ya-%}
{%thārtha-tas,%} ind. in accordance with the truth,
truly, rightly, fitly. {%—Yathārtha-tā,%} f. suitableness,
fitness, rectitude, propriety, genuineness, the state of
appearing to the greatest advantage (Kirātārj. VIII.
49). {%—Yathārtha-bhāṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} speaking fitly
or truly. {%—Yathārtha-varṇa, as,%} m. ‘having a true
colour or appearance,’ a spy, secret emissary; [cf.
{%yathārha-varṇa%}] {%—Yathārthākṣara (˚tha-ak˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} significant in every syllable, of which
the letters or syllables express the true sense. {%—Ya-%}
{%thārthita (˚thā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} as asked, pre-
viously asked. {%—Yathārthitvam (˚thā-ar˚),%} ind.
according to design or purpose. {%—Yathārpita (˚thā-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} as delivered. {%—Yathārha (˚thā-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} as deserving, according to merit,
corresponding to desert, as is fit or right, appropriate,
suitable, just, adequate; ({%am%}), ind. according to
merit or worth, agreeably to propriety, suitably, fitly.
{%—Yathārhaṇam (˚thā-ar˚),%} ind. according to
merit or worth; according to propriety. {%—Yathārha-%}
{%tas,%} ind. according to worth or merit, according to
propriety, as is proper or suitable, justly. {%—Yathārha-%}
{%varṇa, as,%} m. ‘having a suitable appearance,’ a spy,
secret agent. {%—Yathā-labdha, as, ā, am,%} as ob-
tained or met with, as found at first, previously
found. {%—Yathā-lābham,%} ind. according to what one
finds, just as it happens to occur; according to gain
or profit. {%—Yathā-liṅgam,%} ind., Ved. according to
characteristic marks or tokens. {%—Yathā-lokam,%} ind.,
Ved. according to room or place. {%—Yathāvakāśam%}
{%(˚thā-av˚),%} ind. according to room or space; in the
proper place; according to opportunity or leisure, on
the first opportunity, as occasion or leisure may
occur. {%—Yathā-vat,%} ind. according to propriety, as
is fitting, duly, becomingly, properly, rightly, suitably,
precisely, exactly, truly; according to law; as {%(=%}
{%yathā)%}. {%—Yathāvad-grahaṇa, am,%} n. right com-
prehension. {%—Yathā-vayas%} or {%yathā-vayasam,%} ind.
according to age, of the same age. {%—Yathā-varṇam,%}
ind. according to caste, by caste. {%—Yathā-varṇa-%}
{%vidhānam,%} ind. according to the rules or laws of
caste. {%—Yathā-vaśam,%} ind., Ved. according to
pleasure or inclination. {%—Yathāvasaram (˚thā-av˚),%}
ind. according to opportunity, as occasion may re-
quire, on every occasion. {%—Yathā-vastu,%} ind. accord-
ing to the state of the matter, precisely, exactly,
accurately, strictly. {%—Yathāvastham (˚thā-av˚),%} ind.
according to state or condition; according to circum-
stances, each according to his own circumstances.
{%—Yathāvāsam (˚thā-āv˚),%} ind. according to dwell-
ings, each to his own abode. {%—Yathā-vāstu,%} ind.
in accordance with the site or ground. {%—Yathā-%}
{%vittam,%} ind. by virtue of (the right of) property
(Ved.); according to possession, in proportion to
power or substance. {%—Yathā-vidyam,%} ind. according
to knowledge. {%—Yathā-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of which
kind or sort (= Lat. <nsi>qualis</nsi>); of such a kind or
sort, such as. {%—Yathā-vidhānam%} or {%yathā-vidhā-%}
{%nena,%} ind. according to prescription or rule, by
order. {%—Yathā-vidhi,%} ind. according to direction
or precept, according to rule, duly, fitly, suitably,
(in Hari-vaṃśa 7138. {%yathā-vidhim%} occurs on ac-
count of the metre.) {%—Yathā-vibhavam,%} ind. accord-
ing to power or ability, in proportion to property or
resources. {%—Yathā-vījam,%} ind. according to the seed
or germ. {%—Yathā-vīryam,%} ind. according to strength
or vigour, in respect of manliness or courage. {%—Ya-%}
{%thā-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} as happened or occurred, as
ensued; as done, as acted; ({%am%}), n. a previous occur-
rence or event; the circumstances or details of an
event, ({%avedayad yathā-vṛttam,%} he related the
details of the occurrence, he told exactly how it
happened); ({%am%}), ind. according to the occurrence
or event, according to all the circumstances, circum-
stantially, truly; according to the metre. {%—Yathā- %}
[Page0807-a+ 81]
{%vṛttānta (˚ta-an˚), as, am,%} m. n. an event or
adventure just as it occurred. {%—Yathā-vṛtti,%} ind.
according to way or mode of life. {%—Yathā-vṛd-%}
{%dham,%} ind. according to age or seniority. {%—Yathā-%}
{%vṛddhi,%} ind. according to increase, in accordance
with the waxing (of the moon, &c.). {%—Yathā-vya-%}
{%vahāram,%} ind. conformably to custom, according to
usage. {%—Yathā-vyādhi,%} ind. according to the (nature
of a) disease or sickness. {%—Yathā-vyutpatti,%} ind.
according to the view propounded; according to the
etymology. {%—Yathā-śakti%} or {%yathā-śaktyā,%} ind.
according to power or ability, to the utmost of one's
power, as far as possible. {%—Yathāśayam (˚thā-āś˚),%}
ind. according to intention or wish; according to
stipulation. {%—Yathā-śarīram,%} ind. according to
body, body by body. {%—Yathā-śāstram,%} ind. accord-
ing to the Śāstras or sacred codes of law, according
to the precepts of science, as the law ordains. {%—Ya-%}
{%thāśāstrānusārin (˚ra-an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} observing
the Śāstras or scriptures, following the precepts of
the sacred codes of law. {%—Yathā-śīlam,%} ind. in con-
formity with character, agreeably to disposition.
{%—Yathā-śraddham,%} ind. according to inclination
(Ved.); according to faith, in all faith, in all fidelity,
confidently, confidingly. {%—Yathāśramam (˚thā-āś˚),%}
ind. according to the Āśrama or period of life, (see
{%āśrama.%}) {%—Yathāśrayam (˚thā-āś˚),%} ind. accord-
ing to the connection or dependance (of anything),
according to the mode of connection (of one thing
with another). {%—Yathā-śruta, as, ā, am,%} corres-
ponding to (what has been) heard, agreeing with a
report; ({%am%}), n. a corresponding or suitable tra-
dition; ({%am%}), ind. as heard, as reported, according
to report; according to sacred precept or injunction,
according to Vedic precept. {%—Yathā-śruti,%} ind. ac-
cording to revealed precept, in accordance with the
injunctions of sacred books, conformably to the pre-
cepts of the Veda. {%—Yathā-śreṣṭham,%} ind. in order
of merit (so that the best is placed first); in order of
precedence. {%—Yathā-saṃstham,%} ind. according to
circumstances. {%—Yathā-saṃhitam,%} ind. in accord-
ance with the Saṃhitā. {%—Yathā-sakhyam,%} ind. ac-
cording to friendship. {%—Yathā-saṅkalpita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} corresponding to wish, in accordance with (a
proposed) plan, answering expectations. {%—Yathā-%}
{%saṅkhya,%} ‘Relative order,’ a figure in rhetoric which
separating each verb from its immediate subject so
arranges verbs with verbs and subjects with subjects
that each may answer to each; {%(am, ena),%} ind. ac-
cording to number, number for number (so that in
two rows composed of similar numbers the several
terms of one row correspond with those of the other).
{%—Yathā-saṅgam,%} ind. according to need or exi-
gence, as required, suitably, so as to adapt (itself),
opportunely. {%—Yathā-satyam,%} ind. in accordance
with truth, agreeably to the reality. {%—Yathāsanam%}
{%(˚thā-ās˚),%} ind., Ved. each in proper place or seat,
according to proper position. {%—Yathā-sandiṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} as agreed or directed; ({%am%}), ind. accord-
ing to direction or order. {%—Yathā-sandhi,%} ind., Ved.
according to Sandhi. {%—Yathā-samayam,%} ind. ac-
cording to agreement, according to established cus-
tom; according to time, at the proper time. {%—Ya-%}
{%thā-samāmnātam,%} ind. as repeated, according to
what has been mentioned. {%—Yathā-sampad,%} ind.,
Ved. according to the event, as may happen. {%—Ya-%}
{%thā-sampratyayam,%} ind. according to agreement.
{%—Yathā-sampradāyam,%} ind. according to tra-
dition, in accordance with traditional teaching or
usage. {%—Yathā-sambandham,%} ind. according to
relationship. {%—Yathā-sambhava, as, ā, am,%} accord-
ant with possibility, possible; ({%am%}), ind. compatibly,
according to the previous order, successively. {%—Yathā-%}
{%sambhavin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%yathā-sambhāvita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} compatible, corresponding, suitable, appropriate.
{%—Yathā-savanam,%} ind. according to the order of
the Savana (Ved.); according to the time, at the
proper season. {%—Yathā-sāma,%} ind., Ved. according to
the order of the Sāman. {%—Yathā-sāmarthyam,%} ind.
according to ability or power. {%—Yathā-sāram,%} ind.
according to quality or goodness. {%—Yathā-siddha, %}
[Page0807-b+ 81]
{%as, ā, am,%} as effected; just as prepared, just as
cooked (said of food). {%—Yathā-sukham,%} ind. ac-
cording to ease or pleasure, at ease, at will or pleasure,
comfortably, agreeably, pleasantly, happily. {%—Ya-%}
{%thāsukha-mukha, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having the face
turned in any direction one pleases. {%—Yathā-stut,%}
ind., Ved. according to the order of the Stut, Stut by
Stut. {%—Yathā-stutam%} or {%yathā-stomam,%} ind., Ved.
according to the order of the Stoma. {%—Yathā-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the right or proper place; ({%as, ā, am%}), each
in proper place, arranged in order; {%(am, e),%} ind.
according to place, each according to the right place,
all in regular order, according to rank, in order,
properly, suitably; instantly. {%—Yathā-sthāma,%} ind.,
Ved. in the proper place, in regular order {%(= yathā-%}
{%sthānam)%}. {%—Yathā-sthita, as, ā, am,%} accordant
with circumstances, standing properly; right, proper,
fit, true; ({%am%}), ind. according to place or circum-
stances; in statu quo; properly, truly, certainly,
assuredly. {%—Yathā-sthiti,%} ind. in accordance with
usage or custom, as usual, as on previous occasions.
{%—Yathā-smṛti,%} ind. according to recollection, ac-
cording to the precepts of the law-books. {%—Yathā-%}
{%smṛti-maya, as, ī, am,%} as remembered, as fixed in
the memory. {%—Yathā-sva, as, ā, am,%} each accord-
ing to (his, her, their) own, every one his own;
({%am%}), ind. each on (his, her, their) own account,
each for himself or in his own way, individually,
properly. {%—Yathā-svairam,%} ind. according to incli-
nation or wish, at pleasure, freely, independently.
{%—Yathāhāra (˚thā-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} having suit-
able food, eating anything that comes in the way.
{%—Yathekṣitam (˚thā-īk˚),%} ind. according to what
was actually seen, as beheld with one's own eyes.
{%—Yatheccha (˚thā-ic˚), as, ā, am,%} agreeable to
wish or desire; ({%ā%}), f. a suitable wish or desire;
{%yathecchayā,%} inst. c. according to wish, at will or
pleasure; ({%am%}), ind. according to wish or desire, at
pleasure, ad libitum, agreeably, pleasantly. {%—Yathec-%}
{%chakam,%} ind. {%= yatheccham%} above. {%—Yathetam%}
{%(˚thā-et˚),%} ind., Ved. as happened, as it turned out,
(also written {%yathaitam.%}) {%—Yathepasayā (˚thā-īp˚),%}
ind. according to wish or inclination, at pleasure.
{%—Yathepsita (˚thā-īp˚), as, ā, am,%} as wished,
agreeable to wish or expectation, wished for, desired;
({%am%}), ind. according to wish or desire, agreeably to
fancy, agreeably, pleasantly, spontaneously, ad libitum,
wantonly. {%—Yatheṣṭa (˚thā-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} as
wished or desired, agreeable to wish, accordant with
desire, wished for, desired, loved, dear; ({%am%}), ind.
according to wish or inclination, at pleasure, plea-
santly, agreeably; carelessly; according to sacrifice
(Ved.; in this sense fr. 2. {%iṣṭa%}). {%—Yatheṣṭa-gati,%}
{%is, is, i,%} or {%yatheṣṭa-cārin%} or {%yatheṣṭa-sañcārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} going according to will or inclination, going
where one wishes, independent, free; ({%ī%}), m. a bird.
{%—Yatheṣṭa-tas,%} ind. according to inclination or
wish, at pleasure, independently. {%—Yatheṣṭācāra%}
{%(˚ṭa-āc˚), as, ā, am,%} doing what one likes, unre-
strained, licentious. {%—Yatheṣṭāsana (˚ṭa-ās˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} sitting down as one likes. {%—Yathaitam =%}
{%yathetam%} above. {%—Yathokta (˚thā-uk˚), as, ā, am,%}
as said or spoken, as told or directed, previously told
or prescribed, enumerated before, above mentioned;
({%am%}), ind. according to what has been stated, as
mentioned before, as previously described or related;
{%yathoktena,%} in the above mentioned way. {%—Ya-%}
{%thokta-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} speaking as told, reporting
accurately what has been said. {%—Yathocita (˚thā-%}
{%uc˚), as, ā, am,%} accordant with propriety or equity,
proper, fit, suitable, becoming; ({%am%}), ind. suitably, fitly,
properly. {%—Yathottara (˚thā-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} follow-
ing in regular order or succession, succeeding one an-
other; ({%am%}), ind. in regular order or succession, one after
another. {%—Yathotsāham (˚thā-ut˚),%} ind. according to
power or ability, with all one's might. {%—Yathodaya%}
{%(˚thā-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. next following; ({%am%}),
ind. according to means or circumstances, in propor-
tion to one's income. {%—Yathodita (˚thā-ud˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} as said or spoken, previously told, before stated,
above mentioned; ({%am%}), ind. as mentioned before
[Page0807-c+ 80]
or above, according to a previous statement. {%—Ya-%}
{%thodgata (˚thā-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} as arisen; as one
came (into the world), without sense, childlike,
stupid; [cf. {%yathāgata.%}] {%—Yathoddiṣṭa (˚thā-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} as indicated or described, before
mentioned; ({%am%}), ind. in the manner stated, in the
above mentioned way. {%—Yathoddeśam (˚thā-ud˚),%}
ind. according to direction, in the manner pointed
out. {%—Yathodbhavam (˚thā-ud˚),%} ind. according to
rise or origin. {%—Yathopajoṣam (˚thā-up˚),%} ind.
according to inclination or pleasure, according to
desire. {%—Yathopadiṣṭa (˚thā-up˚), as, ā, am,%} as
specified or indicated, as stated, before mentioned;
({%am%}), ind. in the manner above mentioned or pre-
viously described. {%—Yathopadeśam (˚thā-up˚),%} ind.
according to advice or suggestion, according to in-
structions or orders. {%—Yathopapatti (˚thā-up˚),%} ind.
according to the event or occasion, as may happen.
{%—Yathopapanna (˚thā-up˚), as, ā, am,%} as happened,
occurring naturally, unconstrained, natural. {%—Yatho-%}
{%papādam (˚thā-up˚),%} ind., Ved. as may occur or
happen. {%—Yathopamā (˚thā-up˚),%} f. (in rhetoric)
a comparison expressed by {%yathā%}. {%—Yathopayogam%}
{%(˚thā-up˚),%} ind. according to use or need, according
to requirements or circumstances. {%—Yathopasmāram%}
{%(˚thā-up˚),%} ind., Ved. according to recollection, as
one may happen to remember. {%—Yathopādhi (˚thā-%}
{%up˚),%} ind. according to the condition or limitation,
according to the supposition. {%—Yathopta (˚thā-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} as sown, in proportion to the seed sown.
{%—Yathaukasam (˚thā-ok˚),%} ind., Ved. each accord-
ing to (his) abode. {%—Yathaucitya (˚thā-auc˚), am,%}
n. a corresponding or suitable way; {%yathaucityāt,%}
in a suitable manner, fitly, suitably; ({%am%}), ind. accord-
ing to propriety, properly, fitly, duly.
<LEND>

<L>38364<pc>0807-c<k1>yad<k2>yad
{#yad#}¦ {%yad, yas, yā, yad%} (the actual base of
this relative pronoun is {%ya,%} except in compounds
and in the derivative {%yadīya;%} its proper correlative
is {%tad,%} q. v., but other demonstrative pronouns and
pronominals, such as {%etad, idam, adas, tādṛśa,%}
{%īdṛśa, sarva,%} often occur in the correlative clauses;
see 3. {%ya%}), who, which, what, that, whoever, which-
ever, whatever, any. The relative {%yad%} often pre-
cedes the noun to which it refers, this noun being
either put in the same case with the relative or
joined with the demonstrative (e. g. {%yasya narasya%}
{%buddhiḥ sa balavān%} or {%yasya buddhiḥ sa naro%}
{%balavān,%} of whatever man there is intellect he is
strong); sometimes the relative stands alone, an
antecedent noun or pronoun being understood from
which it takes its gender and number (e. g. {%dha-%}
{%nena kiṃ yo na dadāti,%} what is the use of wealth
[to him] who does not give?); or the relative itself
may be dropped (e. g. {%na karoty a-kāryaṃ tam%}
{%āryam āhuḥ,%} they call him honourable [who] does
nothing improper to be done). Sometimes the rela-
tive {%yad,%} with or without its demonstrative, appears
to be used redundantly to eke out the metre, or
perhaps to give force to the noun with which it is
connected, even the neut. sing. being occasionally
thus used in connection with words of a different
gender and number, and the relative being itself
almost untranslatable (e. g. {%yan maraṇaṃ so 'sya%}
{%viśrāmaḥ,%} that very death is his rest; {%andho jaḍaḥ%}
{%pīṭha-sarpī saptatyā sthaviraś-ca yaḥ,%} a blind
man, an idiot, a cripple, and a man seventy years
old; {%yat kṣāntiḥ samaye śrutiḥ Śiva Śivety-%}
{%uktir mano-nirvṛtir asau mukti-mārge sthitiḥ,%}
forbearance, obedience to ordinances, saying ‘Śiva,
Śiva,’ contentment of mind, this is continuance on the
road of emancipation); and sometimes this redundant
or emphatic use of {%yad%} causes a sudden change of
construction from accusative to nominative (e. g.
{%apoheta rasān aśmano lavaṇaṃ caiva paśavo%}
{%ye ca,%} he should avoid liquids, stones, and salt, and
all cattle). The relative {%yad%} is often repeated to
express ‘whoever,’ ‘whatever,’ ‘whichever,’ &c. (e. g.
{%yo yaḥ,%} whatever man; {%yā yā,%} whatever woman;
{%yad yad,%} whatever thing; {%yo yo yāvatithaḥ,%}
whichever [is] how many soever degrees, i. e. in
[Page0808-a+ 81]
proportion as each of which is advanced in the series);
or the repetition of {%yad%} may be caused by a kind of
attraction, the second relative being equivalent to
an indefinite pronoun (e. g. {%yo yasya bhāvaḥ syāt,%}
whatever may be the disposition of any one; {%yad%}
{%rocate yasmai,%} whatever is pleasing to any one);
or the relative may be used to express similar inde-
finite meanings when joined with {%kaścit, kaścana,%}
{%ko 'pi, kaśca, ko vā%} (e. g. {%yaḥ kaścit%} or {%yaḥ-%}
{%kaścana,%} whosoever; {%yat kiñcit%} or {%yat kiñca,%}
whatsoever; {%yena kenāpy upāyena,%} by any means
whatsoever; {%yāni kāni ca mitrāṇi,%} any friends
whatsoever; {%yasmai kasmai ca,%} to any one what-
ever; {%yasmin kasmin vā deśe,%} in any country
whatever); or even with a demonstrative pronoun
(e. g. {%yasmai tasmai,%} to any one whatever; {%yas-%}
{%māt tasmāt,%} from any one, from this or that per-
son; {%yena tena karmaṇā,%} by any act whatever);
or sometimes the relative {%yad%} is used alone with the
indefinite sense ‘any one,’ &c. (e. g. {%striyaṃ spṛ-%}
{%śed yaḥ saṅgrahaṇaṃ smṛtam,%} should any one
touch a woman it is called an adulterous act; {%yām%}
{%ajāṃ vṛko hanyāt pāle tat kilviṣam bhavet,%}
if a wolf kill any she-goat the blame must be on the
keeper). {%Yad%} is also connected in a peculiar manner
with the personal pronouns, which, when placed
immediately after the relative, appear to derive force
or emphasis from this juxtaposition (e. g. {%yo 'ham,%}
I that very person who; {%yas tvam,%} thou that very
one who, &c.). {%Yad%} in the neut. sing. is used as
an adverbial conjunction equivalent to ‘for which
reason,’ ‘on which account,’ ‘wherefore,’ ‘since,’
‘as,’ ‘because,’ ‘when,’ ‘while,’ ‘if,’ ‘with regard
to,’ ‘as to,’ &c.; or still oftener as a simple con-
junction meaning ‘that,’ especially after the verbs of
saying, hearing, &c., or such words as {%kāma, yukta,%}
{%āścarya,%} &c. (e. g. {%dhīvarair uktaṃ yat — ,%} it was
said by the fishermen that — ; {%śrutaṃ tvayā yat — ,%}
it has been heard by thee that — ; {%āścaryaṃ yat — ,%}
it is a wonder that — ); frequently followed by a verb
in the indicative (e. g. {%ayaṃ nūtano nyāyo yad%}
{%arātiṃ hatvā santāpaḥ kriyate,%} this is a new
doctrine that having killed an enemy remorse is expe-
rienced); less frequently in the potential (e. g. {%eṣa%}
{%me kāmo yat sa rājyam āpnuyāt,%} this is my desire
that he may obtain the kingdom); {%yad api,%} although;
{%yac-ca,%} that (according to Pāṇ. III. 3, 148, with
potential, after expressions of impossibility, disbelief,
hope, disregard, reproach, and wonder, e. g. {%na%}
{%śrad-dadhe yac-ca tatra-bhavān vṛṣalaṃ yā-%}
{%jayet,%} I do not believe that your Highness will allow
a Śūdra to sacrifice); {%yad vā,%} or, or else, whether,
(in the writings of commentators {%yad vā%} generally
occurs when an alternative reading or meaning is
proposed, and may commonly be translated by ‘or,’
‘or else’): in philosophical writings {%yaḥ%} is said to
be used as a synonymn for {%puruṣaḥ:%} [cf. Zend
<nsi>ya:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὅ-ς, ἥ, ὅ, ἵνα, ὡς:</lang> Goth. <nsi>ja-bai,</nsi> ‘if;’ <nsi>jau,</nsi>
‘whether:’ Lith. <nsi>ji-s,</nsi> ‘he;’ <nsi>ji,</nsi> ‘she;’ <nsi>ju,</nsi> ‘it:’
Slav. <nsi>i, ja, je.</nsi>] {%—Yac-chandas, ās, ās, as,%} having
which metre. {%—Yac-chīla, as, ā, am (yad + śīla%}),
having which disposition. {%—Yat-kara, as, ī, am,%}
which doing or undertaking. {%—Yat-kāma, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. which desiring, wishing which. {%—Yat-%}
{%kāmyā,%} ind., Ved. with which view or design.
{%—Yat-kāraṇam%} or {%yat-kāraṇāt,%} ind. for which
cause or reason, on which account, in consequence
of which; since, because, as, while. {%—Yat-kārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} which doing or undertaking. {%—Yat-kiñce-%}
{%dam (˚ca-idam),%} the commencement of the sacred
text Ṛg-veda VII. 89, 5, (incorrectly read {%yat-%}
{%kiñcidam.%}) {%—Yat-kṛte,%} ind. on account of which,
for which reason, wherefore, why. {%—Yat-kratu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. having which resolution, forming which
plan. {%—Yad-abhāve,%} ind. in the absence of which,
for want of which, in default of which. {%—Yad-%}
{%artha, as, ā, am,%} having which object in view, hav-
ing which intention; {%(am, e),%} ind. on which account,
for which purpose, for the sake of which, wherefore,
why, &c.; as, since, when, because, whereas. {%—Yad-%}
{%ātmaka, as, ikā, am,%} having which being or exist-
[Page0808-b+ 81]
ence. {%—Yad-ṛcchā,%} f. acting as one lists, following
one's own inclination, self-will, spontaneity, wilful-
ness, independence, (according to native lexicogra-
phers {%= svairitā, svecchā, svācchandya, nirni-%}
{%mitta);%} accident, an accidental occurence or event,
chance, contingence, ({%yad-ṛcchayā,%} as one likes,
of one's own accord, spontaneously, by accident,
accidentally, incidentally, by chance, unexpectedly);
(in grammar) a noun which is neither a generic nor
specific term nor noun of agency, one either not
derived from authority or not possessing meaning.
{%—Yadṛcchā-tas,%} ind. spontaneously, by accident,
&c. ({%= yad-ṛcchayā%} above). {%—Yadṛcchābhijña%}
{%(˚chā-abh˚), as,%} m. a voluntary or self-offered
witness. {%—Yadṛcchā-lābha-tuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
satisfied with obtaining what comes spontaneously,
easily satisfied. {%—Yadṛcchā-saṃvāda, as,%} m. acci-
dental or spontaneous conversation, incidental inter-
course. {%—Yadṛcchika, as,%} m., scil. {%putra,%} a son
who offers himself for adoption. {%—Yad-devata%} or
{%yad-devatya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having which god-
head or divinity. {%—Yad-dvandva, am,%} n., N. of a
Sāman. {%—Yad-dhetos,%} ind. ({%dhetos%} for {%hetos,%} abl. c.
of {%hetu%}), from which reason or cause, on which
account. {%—Yad-bhaviṣya, as,%} m. one who says
‘what will be,’ or ‘what must be must be,’ one who
believes in the power of fate; a fatalist; N. of a fish
(in the Hitopadeśa). {%—Yadriyañc%} or {%yadryañc,%}
{%aṅ, drīcī, ak%} (fr. {%yad%} with {%adri%} substituted for {%ad%}
and rt. {%añc;%} cf. {%madryañc%}), Ved. moving or turn-
ing in which direction, extending to which point,
reaching whither or to what place or in which di-
rection, (incorrectly written {%yadrañc, yaddrañc.%})
{%—Yad-vat,%} ind. in which way, as, (used as a corre-
lative of {%tad-vat%} and {%evam.%}) {%—Yad-vada, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} talking anything, talking nonsense, saying no
matter what. {%—Yadvāhiṣṭhīya, am,%} n. (fr. {%yad%}
{%vāhiṣṭham,%} the first two words of Ṛg-veda V.
25, 7), N. of a Sāman. {%—Yad-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of
which sort (= Lat. <nsi>qualis</nsi>). {%—Yad-vṛtta, am,%} n.
anything which has occurred, an adventure; any form
of {%yad%}. {%—Yan-nimittam,%} ind. on which account,
for which reason, in consequence of which, through
which. {%—Yanmaṃhiṣṭhīya, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Yan-madhye,%} ind. in the centre of which. {%—Yan-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} formed or consisting of which.
{%—Yan-mātra, as, ā, am,%} having which measure,
of which dimensions or circumference, &c. {%—Yan-%}
{%mūrdhan, ā,%} m. the head of whom.
<LEND>

<L>38365<pc>0808-b<k1>yada<k2>yada
{%Yada = yad%}¦ above, (occurring only in the form
{%yadam%} at the end of an adverbial comp.)
<LEND>

<L>38366<pc>0808-b<k1>yadA<k2>yadA
{%Yadā,%}¦ ind. at what time, when, whenever, (gene-
rally followed in the correlative clause by {%tadā%} or
{%tatas%} or {%tarhi%} or in Ved. by {%ād it%}); whereas,
since, as; if; {%yadā yadā,%} whenever; {%yadā tadā,%}
at any time whatsoever; {%yadā yadā — tadā tadā,%}
as often as — so often; {%yadaiva — tadaiva,%} when
indeed — then indeed; {%yadā prabhṛti — tadā pra-%}
{%bhṛti,%} from whatever time — from that time forward;
{%yadā-kadā-ca,%} Ved. as often as, whenever; {%yadā-%}
{%kadā-cit,%} at any time; {%na yadā-kadā-cit,%} never
at any time; {%yadā%} is sometimes joined in the same
sentence with other relatives used indefinitely (e. g.
{%yo 'tti yasya yadā māṃsam,%} when any one eats
the flesh of any one).
<LEND>

<L>38367<pc>0808-b<k1>yadi<k2>yadi
{%Yadi,%}¦ ind. (in Ved. sometimes lengthened to {%yadī%}),
if, in case that; whether; if haply, if perchance; pro-
vided that, when. As a conjunction meaning ‘if,’
{%yadi%} is sometimes joined with the present indicative
(e. g. {%yadi jīvati bhadrāṇi paśyati,%} if he live he
will behold prosperity); sometimes with the poten-
tial (e. g. {%yadi rājā daṇḍaṃ na praṇayet,%} if the
king were not to inflict punishment; or with omis-
sion of {%yadi,%} e. g. {%vṛko hanyād ajām,%} if a wolf
should kill a goat); sometimes with the future (e. g.
{%yadi na kariṣyanti tat,%} if they will not do that);
sometimes with the aorist or even imperfect or perfect
(e. g. {%yadi Prajā-patir na vapur asrākṣīt,%} if
the Creator had not created the body; {%yady etan%}
{%na me 'kathayat,%} if he were not to tell me that;
{%yady āha,%} if he had said); sometimes with the con-
[Page0808-c+ 75]
ditional (e. g. {%yady anujñām adāsyat,%} if he should
give permission); sometimes {%yadi%} may be translated
by ‘that’ (e. g. {%nāśaṃse yadi jīvanti,%} I do not
expect that they are alive); rarely {%yadi%} is joined
redundantly with {%ced%} (e. g. {%yadi cet syāt,%} if it
should be); or with {%purā%} (e. g. {%purā yadi paśyāmi,%}
before that I see); {%yady-api,%} even if, although,
(followed by {%tathāpi,%} q. v., or {%tadapi%} in the corre-
lative clause); {%yadi vā,%} or if, or whether; or else, or;
or rather {%(= atha vā); yadi — yadi vā, yadi vā — %}
{%yadi vā, yadi vā — vā,%} if — or if, whether — or.
<LEND>

<L>38368<pc>0808-c<k1>yadIya<k2>yadIya
{%Yadīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to whom, whose,
belonging to which or what, ({%yadīya-karuṇāt,%}
from whose favour.)
<LEND>

<L>38369<pc>0808-c<k1>yadAvAjadAvarya<k2>yadAvAjadAvarya
{#yadAvAjadAvarya#}¦ {%yadāvājadāvarya,%} N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38370<pc>0808-c<k1>yadu<k2>yadu
{#yadu#}¦ {%yadu, us,%} m., N. of an ancient hero
(often mentioned in the Veda together with Turvaśa
or Turvasu, and described as preserved by Indra during
an inundation, see Ṛg-veda I. 174, 9); N. of a son
of Yayāti, (in the later mythology Yadu and Puru
are both sons of Yayāti, the fifth monarch of the
lunar dynasty, Kṛṣṇa being descended from Yadu
[cf. {%yadu-nātha%} below], and both Bharata and
Kuru, the ancestor of the Pāṇḍu princes, being
descended from Puru; Yadu is also described as a
brother of Turvasu); N. of a son of Vasu (king of
Cedi); of a son of Hary-aśva; (according to some)
N. of a country on the west of the Jumna river,
about Mathurā and Vṛndā-vana, over which Yadu
ruled, (according to other authorities the kingdom
of Yadu is the Dakṣiṇa or peninsula of India);
{%(avas),%} m. pl. the family and descendants of Yadu
[cf. {%yādava%}]; {%= daśārhāḥ,%} q. v. {%—Yadu-kulodvaha%}
{%(˚la-ud˚)%} or {%yadūdvaha, as,%} m. ‘supporter of the
family of Yadu,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Yadu-dhra, as,%}
m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Yadu-nātha, as,%} or {%yadu-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the Yadus,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Yadu-puṅgava, as,%} m. a chief of the Yadus.
{%—Yadu-vaṃśa, as,%} m. the family of Yadu. {%—Ya-%}
{%du-vīra-mukhya, as,%} m. ‘leader of the heroes of
Yadu,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Yadu-śreṣṭha, as,%} m.
‘best of the Yadus,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>38371<pc>0808-c<k1>yadfcCA<k2>yadfcCA
{#yadfcCA#}¦ {%yad-ṛcchā, yad-dhetos, yad-vat,%}
&c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38372<pc>0808-c<k1>yadyapi<k2>yadyapi
{#yadyapi#}¦ {%yady-api.%} See under {%yadi%} above.
<LEND>

<L>38373<pc>0808-c<k1>yadriyaYc<k2>yadriyaYc
{#yadriyaYc#}¦ {%yadriyañc, yadryañc.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38374<pc>0808-c<k1>yadvA<k2>yadvA
{#yadvA#}¦ {%yadvā,%} f. {%= buddhi,%} perception, mind,
intelligence (?) .
<LEND>

<L>38375<pc>0808-c<k1>yantavya<k2>yantavya
{#yantavya#}¦ {%yantavya, yanti, yantṛ,%} &c. See
p. 809, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38376<pc>0808-c<k1>yantr<k2>yantr
{#yantr#}¦ {%yantr%} (more properly regarded as
a Nom. fr. {%yantra,%} p. 809, col. 2, cf.
{%yantraya%}), cl. 1. 10. P. {%yantrati, yantrayati,%}
&c., to restrain, curb, check, bind, fasten, confine;
to strain; to force.
<LEND>

<L>38377<pc>0808-c<k1>yantraRa<k2>yantraRa
{%Yantraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of restraining, control-
ling, curbing, checking, binding, fastening, confining;
restraint, restriction, limitation, ({%āhāra-yantraṇa,%}
restriction in diet); a means of fastening, bond,
bandage; the application of a bandage (also {%ā,%} f.);
constraint, compulsion, force, torturing, pain, anguish,
(in these senses also {%ā,%} f.); guarding, protecting,
protection; ({%ī%}), f. a wife's younger sister.
<LEND>

<L>38378<pc>0808-c<k1>yantrita<k2>yantrita
{%Yantrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ restrained, curbed, checked;
bound, fastened, fettered, confined; bound by, sub-
ject to; one who strains every nerve, one who
makes exertions or takes pains. {%—Yantrita-katha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} restrained in speech, constrained to be
silent. {%—Yantrita-sāyaka, as,%} m. one who has fixed
an arrow (in a kind of self-acting bow or machine
which discharges itself when touched).
<LEND>

<L>38379<pc>0808-c<k1>yantra<k2>yantra
{#yantra#}¦ {%yantra, yantraya, yantrin,%} &c. See
p. 809, cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>38380<pc>0808-c<k1>yanmaya<k2>yanmaya
{#yanmaya#}¦ {%yan-maya, yan-mātra.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page0809-a+ 80]

<L>38381<pc>0809-a<k1>yaB<k2>yaB
{#yaB#}¦ {%yabh,%} cl. 1. P. {%yabhati, yayābha,%}
{%yapsyati, ayāpsīt, yabdhum,%} to know
carnally, have sexual intercourse with, lie with:
Desid. A. {%yiyapsate,%} to desire sexual intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>38382<pc>0809-a<k1>yaBana<k2>yaBana
{%Yabhana, am,%}¦ n. copulation, sexual intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>38383<pc>0809-a<k1>yaBya<k2>yaBya
{%Yabhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be carnally known.
<LEND>

<L>38384<pc>0809-a<k1>yiyapsyamAna<k2>yiyapsyamAna
{%Yiyapsyamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Desi.), desir-
ing to be carnally known.
<LEND>

<L>38385<pc>0809-a<k1>yam<k2>yam
{#yam#}¦ {%yam%} (connected with rt. 2. {%yat%}),
cl. 1. P. {%yacchati%} (Ved. and ep. also A.
{%yacchate,%} Ved. also {%yamati, -te%}), {%yayāma%} (2nd
sing. {%yayantha%} or {%yemitha,%} 3rd pl. P. {%yemus,%} 3rd
sing. A. {%yeme,%} 3rd pl. {%yemire,%} Part. A. {%yemāna%}),
{%yaṃsyati, ayaṃsīt%} (Vedic forms are {%yamat, yaṃsi,%}
{%yamus, yandhi, yanta, yantam, yaṃsat, yaṃsan,%}
{%ayāṃsam, ayān, ayāṃsi, yaṃsate, ayaṃsata%}), {%yan-%}
{%tum, yamitum%} (Ved. {%yamam, yantave, yami-%}
{%tavai%}), to sustain, support, hold up, maintain (Ved.);
to support one's self (A., Ved.); to raise, hold up,
lift up (Ved.); to raise (a sound, &c., Ved.); to
stretch out, extend, spread (Ved.); to keep in, hold
back, restrain, check, stop, rein, curb, tame, govern,
control, regulate, suppress; to offer, present, grant,
bestow, confer, give to any one (with loc. or dat.); to
present with anything (inst., Ved.); to offer or resign
one's self, give one's self up to (A., Ved.); to dis-
play, exhibit (Ved.); to go, approach (Ved.): Pass.
{%yamyate, ayāmi,%} to be raised or lifted up, &c.
(Ved.); to be held back or restrained, &c.; to be
offered, &c.: Caus. {%yamayati,%} (or according to
others) {%yāmayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ayīyamat,%} to cause
to hold back or restrain, &c.; to restrain, hold in,
check, keep in order, control; to offer, give, present,
serve with (food, &c.); Desid. {%yiyaṃsati:%} Intens.
{%yaṃyamyate, yaṃyamīti, yaṃyanti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ζημία,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἡνία, ἥμερος:</lang> Lat. <nsi>jejunus, frœna, emo</nsi> (for
<nsi>sumo</nsi>), <nsi>sub-imo, demo</nsi> (for <nsi>de-imo</nsi>): Lith. <nsi>immu,</nsi>
‘to take:’ Slav. <nsi>imami:</nsi> Russ. <nsi>imaju:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>iomai-</nsi>
<nsi>nim,</nsi> ‘I drive, force, compel;’ <nsi>iomain,</nsi> ‘a driving.’]
<LEND>

<L>38386<pc>0809-a<k1>yacCat<k2>yacCat
{%Yacchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ restraining, controlling.
<LEND>

<L>38387<pc>0809-a<k1>yacCamAna<k2>yacCamAna
{%Yacchamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. stretching out,
extending; distributing.
<LEND>

<L>38388<pc>0809-a<k1>yata<k2>yata
{%Yata, as, ā, am,%}¦ restrained, held in, curbed,
kept in check, governed, &c.; limited, moderate,
temperate; ({%am%}), n. the spurring or guiding of an
elephant by means of the rider's feet. {%—Yata-gir,%}
{%īr, īr, īr,%} one who restrains speech, keeping silence;
[cf. {%yata-vāc.%}] {%—Yataṅ-kara, as,%} m., Ved. one
who regulates, a regulator, (Sāy. {%= yamana-kartṛ.%})
{%—Yata-citta, as, ā, am,%} one who controls the
thoughts or restrains the feelings, subdued in mind.
{%—Yatacittātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} one who con-
trols the soul and spirit, of subdued or well-governed
mind. {%—Yata-manyu, us, us, u,%} restraining or con-
trolling anger. {%—Yata-mānasa, as, ā, am, = yata-%}
{%citta%} above. {%—Yata-maithuna, as, ā, am,%} abstain-
ing from sexual intercourse or restraining all desire
for it. {%—Yata-raśmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having well
held or guided reins. {%—Yatavāk-tva, am,%} n. the
state of being restrained in speech, reticence. {%—Yata-%}
{%vāc, k, k, k,%} restraining speech, observing silence,
reticent. {%—Yata-vrata, as, ā, am,%} observing vows,
keeping to engagements, holding to any promised
observance. {%—Yata-sruc, k, k, k,%} Ved. raising or
lifting up the sacrificial ladle, stretching out or extend-
ing the ladle; [cf. {%udyata-sruc.%}] {%—Yatātman (˚ta-%}
{%āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} self-restrained, restraining or curbing
the soul, governing one's self. {%—Yatātma-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having a subdued mind, self-restrained. {%—Ya-%}
{%tāhāra (˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} abstaining from food,
temperate in eating, abstemious. {%—Yatendriya (˚ta-%}
{%in˚), as, ā, am,%} having the organs of sense restrained,
of subdued passions, chaste, pure.
<LEND>

<L>38389<pc>0809-a<k1>yati<k2>yati<h>2
2. {%yati, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. see p. 805, col. 1), restraint,
control, check; guidance; stopping, ceasing, rest,
term; a pause (in music); cæsura (in prosody); a
widow, (in this sense also {%yatī;%} cf. {%yatinī%}); ({%is%}),
m. an ascetic, devotee, one who has restrained his
passions and abandoned the world; N. of a mythical
race of ascetics (connected with the Bhṛgus and,
[Page0809-b+ 81]
according to one legend, said to have taken part in
the creation of the world); N. of a son of Brahmā;
of a son of Nahuṣa; of a son of Viśvāmitra; (with
Jainas) N. of a class of ascetics; N. of Śiva; =
{%nikāra%}. {%—Yati-cāndrāyaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a par-
ticular kind of penance (Manu XI. 218). {%—Yati-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of a Yati or ascetic. {%—Yati-%}
{%dharma, as,%} m. the duty of an ascetic or devotee.
{%—Yati-dharman, ā,%} m., N. of a son of Śva-phalka.
{%—Yatidharma-samuccaya, as,%} m., N. of a work
on the duties of ascetics. {%—Yati-pañcaka, am,%} n.,
N. of five stanzas on the subject of ascetics. {%—Yati-%}
{%pātra, am,%} n. an ascetic's vessel, a wooden vessel
for collecting alms, (sometimes a hollow bamboo or
an earthen bowl or a gourd is used for that purpose.)
{%—Yati-bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} wanting the cæsura
(in grammar or prosody). {%—Yati-maithuna, am,%} n.
the copulation or cohabitation of devotees, the un-
chaste life of ascetics. {%—Yati-varya, as,%} m., N.
of the author of a commentary on Śiro-maṇi's
Dīdhiti. {%—Yati-vilāsa, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Yati-%}
{%sāntapana, am,%} n., N. of a particular kind of
penance, (a {%pañca-gavya%} lasting for three days.)
{%—Yaty-anuṣṭhāna-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a trea-
tise on the duties of ascetics by Śaṅkara Ānanda.
<LEND>

<L>38390<pc>0809-b<k1>yatin<k2>yatin
{%Yatin, ī,%}¦ m. = 2. {%yati,%} an ascetic; ({%inī%}), f. a widow.
<LEND>

<L>38391<pc>0809-b<k1>yatI<k2>yatI
{%Yatī.%}¦ See under 2. {%yati,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38392<pc>0809-b<k1>yatta<k2>yatta<h>2
2. {%yatta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 804, col. 3), =
{%yata,%} col. 1, (occurring rarely in ep. poetry, and only
when required by the exigency of metre.)
<LEND>

<L>38393<pc>0809-b<k1>yatvA<k2>yatvA
{%Yatvā,%}¦ ind. having restrained, having curbed or
controlled.
<LEND>

<L>38394<pc>0809-b<k1>yantavya<k2>yantavya
{%Yantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be held in or restrained; to
be checked or controlled, to be guided or managed.
<LEND>

<L>38395<pc>0809-b<k1>yanti<k2>yanti
{%Yanti, is,%}¦ f., see Pāṇ. VI. 4, 39.
<LEND>

<L>38396<pc>0809-b<k1>yanturam<k2>yanturam
{%Yanturam,%}¦ acc. sing. m., in Ṛg-veda III. 27, II,
VIII. 19, 2. explained by Sāy. as an irregularity for
{%yantāram,%} and used as an epithet of Agni ({%= sar-%}
{%vasya niyantāram,%} regulator of all).
<LEND>

<L>38397<pc>0809-b<k1>yantf<k2>yantf
{%Yantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ restraining, controlling; guid-
ing, directing, &c.; one who restrains, a governor,
ruler, director, manager, a guider, driver (of a chariot,
waggon, &c.); an elephant driver or rider; fixing,
one who fixes or makes fast (Ved.); giving, a giver
(Ved.); in Naighaṇṭuka III. 19. {%yantāras%} is enu-
merated among the {%yācñākarmāṇas.%}
<LEND>

<L>38398<pc>0809-b<k1>yantra<k2>yantra
{%Yantra, am,%}¦ n. a means or instrument for holding
or restraining or fastening anything, a prop, support,
stay, fence, barrier; a fetter, band, fastening, tie,
thong, cord, rein, trace, harness; a surgical instru-
ment (especially any blunt instrument, such as
tweezers, a vice, &c., opposed to {%śastra%}); any
instrument, machine, engine, implement, apparatus,
vessel, appliance, ({%kūpa-yantra,%} a machine for draw-
ing water from a well; cf. {%jala-y˚, taila-y˚, gola-%}
{%y˚%}); a lock, bolt, &c.; restraining, restraint, con-
straint, force, ({%yantreṇa,%} forcibly, violently); an
amulet, a diagram of a mystical nature or astrological
character used as an amulet. {%—Yantra-karaṇḍikā,%}
f. a kind of magical basket. {%—Yantrakarma-kṛt,%}
{%t,%} m. a person who makes instruments or machines,
a machinist, artisan. {%—Yantra-garuḍa, as,%} m. an
image of Garuḍa mechanically contrived to move by
itself. {%—Yantra-gṛha, am,%} n. an oil-mill; a manu-
factory. {%—Yantra-gola, as,%} m. a kind of pea.
{%—Yantra-ceṣṭita, am,%} n. any magical work or
operation, enchantment. {%—Yantra-takṣan, ā,%} m.
a constructer of machines, maker of instruments; a
preparer of charms or spells. {%—Yantra-dṛḍha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} secured by a lock or bolt (as a door). {%—Yan-%}
{%tra-dhārā-gṛha, am,%} n. a room fitted up with a
kind of shower-bath, a bath-room with flowing water;
[cf. {%dhārā-gṛha.%}] {%—Yantra-nāla, am,%} n. a me-
chanical pipe or tube, the pipe of a well. {%—Yantra-%}
{%putraka, as, ikā,%} m. f. a mechanical doll or puppet
fitted with strings or any contrivance for moving the
limbs. {%—Yantra-peṣaṇī,%} f. a hand-mill. {%—Yantra-%}
{%prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a work (attributed to
Madana-pāla). {%—Yantra-pravāha, as,%} m. an arti-
ficial stream of water, machine for watering. {%—Yan-%}
{%tra-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of a machine, arti-
[Page0809-c+ 79]
ficially made or constructed. {%—Yantra-mātṛkā,%} f.,
N. of one of the sixty-four Kalās. {%—Yantra-mārga,%}
{%as,%} m. an aqueduct, canal. {%—Yantra-mukta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} thrown by any kind of machine (said of wea-
pons). {%—Yantra-yukta, as, ā, am,%} furnished with
(all necessary) implements or apparatus, ({%yantra-%}
{%yuktā nauḥ,%} a boat fitted out with oars, sails, &c.)
{%—Yantra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing or furnished
with a machine. {%—Yantra-śara, as,%} m. a missile
shot off by machinery. {%—Yantra-sūtra, am,%} n. the
cord attached to a jointed doll or puppet. {%—Yantrā-%}
{%kāra (˚ra-āk˚)%} and {%yantroddhara (˚ra-ud˚), as,%}
m., N. of two works. {%—Yantrārūḍha (˚ra-ār˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fixed or mounted on the revolving engine
(of the universe). {%—Yantrālaya (˚ra-āl˚), as,%} m.
a printing-office, press. {%—Yantrotkṣiptopala (˚ra-%}
{%ut˚, ˚ta-up˚), as,%} m. a stone shot off by a machine
(sling, ballista, &c.). {%—Yantropala (˚ra-up˚), as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a mill-stone, mill.
<LEND>

<L>38399<pc>0809-c<k1>yantraka<k2>yantraka
{%Yantraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ restraining, a restrainer,
tamer, subduer; ({%as%}), m. one acquainted with instru-
ments or machinery, a maker of instruments or
machines, machinist, artisan; ({%am%}), n. a bandage
(in medicine); a turner's wheel, lathe.
<LEND>

<L>38400<pc>0809-c<k1>yantraya<k2>yantraya
{%Yantraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%yantrayati, -yitum,%} to bind,
confine, restrain, (see rt. {%yantr%}); to put on bandages,
&c.; to place in splints, &c.
<LEND>

<L>38401<pc>0809-c<k1>yantrin<k2>yantrin
{%Yantrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having or furnished with har-
ness or trappings (said of a horse); furnished with an
amulet; tormenting, a tormentor, harasser, painer;
{%(iṇī),%} f. a wife's younger sister.
<LEND>

<L>38402<pc>0809-c<k1>yama<k2>yama
{%Yama, as,%}¦ m. a rein, curb, bridle (Ved.); a
driver, charioteer (Ved.); restraining, controlling,
taming, keeping in check, restraint, ({%vācāṃ yamaḥ,%}
restraint of words, silence); self-control, any great
moral duty or observance, (as opposed to {%niyama,%}
a minor duty or observance, see Manu IV. 204;
some of the Yamas are as follow, ‘restraining the
organs of sense,’ ‘chastity, and the control of all
sensual desires,’ ‘refraining from violence or injury,’
‘patience,’ ‘truthfulness,’ ‘honesty’); a twin, one of
a pair or couple, a fellow, ({%yamau,%} ‘the twins,’ an
epithet of the Aśvins and of their twin children by
Mādrī, called Nakula and Sahadeva); a symbolical
expression for the number two; N. of the god who
presides over the Pitṛs, q. v., and rules the spirits of
the dead, (he is regarded in Post-vedic mythology
as the appointed Judge and ‘Restrainer’ or Punisher
of the dead, in which capacity he corresponds to the
Greek Pluto and to Minos; he is one of the eight
guardians of the world as regent of the South quarter,
in which direction in some region of the lower
world is his abode, called Yama-pura; thither a soul,
when it leaves the body, is said to repair, and there,
after the recorder, Citra-gupta, has read an account
of its actions kept in a book called Agra-sandhānī,
it receives a just sentence, either ascending to heaven
or to the world of the Pitṛs or being driven down
to one of the twenty-one hells [called the awful
provinces of the kingdom of Yama] to be born
again, after undergoing its appointed recompense
of bliss or pain, in higher or lower forms of being;
in unison with these functions Yama is sometimes
called ‘king of Justice’ or simply ‘Justice’ [see
{%dharma-rāja, dharma%}], sometimes ‘Rod-bearer’
or ‘Noose-bearer’ [see {%daṇḍa-dhara, pāśin%}], some-
times ‘lord of the Pitṛs or Manes’ [see {%pitṛ-pati%}],
sometimes ‘king of Death’ or simply ‘Death’ [see
{%mṛtyu-rāj, mṛtyu, kāla, antaka%}], sometimes
‘god of the Śrāddha’ [see {%śrāddha-deva%}]: in the
Vana-parvan of the Mahā-bhārata, 1. 16754, where
there is a story of his appearing to a dying man, he
is described as dressed in blood-red garments, with
a glittering form, a crown on his head, glowing
eyes, and, like Varuṇa, holding a noose, with which
he binds the spirit after drawing it from the body,
in size about the measure of a man's thumb: he is
otherwise represented as grim in aspect, green in
colour, clothed in red, riding on a buffalo, and
holding a club in one hand and noose in the other:
he is said to possess two four-eyed watch-dogs, called
[Page0810-a+ 81]
Karbura [<nsi>= Cerberus?</nsi>], ‘spotted,’ and Śyāma,
‘dark,’ which guard the road to his abode: in the
later mythology he is always represented as a terrible
deity inflicting tortures, called {%yātanā,%} on departed
souls: according to some the earlier legends point
to the original meanings of his name being ‘twin,’
and make him a kind of first man, Yama and his
twin sister Yamī being the first pair of beings
born from Vivasvat, ‘the Sun,’ and his wife Sa-
raṇyū; the seventh Manu, another form of the first
man, being also born from the Sun, and so regarded
as a brother of Yama, [see especially Ṛg-veda X. 10,
part of which is ascribed to the authorship of Yama
Vaivasvata, and cf. {%Vaivasvata%}]; Yama is, how-
ever, described as resisting sexual alliance with his
sister; Yama is also regarded as the regent of
the Nakṣatra Apabharaṇī or Bharaṇī, see {%yama-%}
{%devatā%}); N. of the author of a hymn to Viṣṇu;
of the author of a Dharma-śāstra; of the planet
Saturn, (Saturn being regarded as the son of Vivasvat
and Chāyā); of one of Skanda's attendants (men-
tioned together with Ati-yama); a crow [cf. {%yama-%}
{%dūtaka%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of deities with
Buddhists; ({%ī%}), f., N. of Yama's twin sister, who is
identified in Post-vedic mythology with the river
goddess Yamunā; ({%am%}), n. a pair, brace, couple;
(in gram.) the twin letter of any consonant, (when a
nasal consonant follows immediately after one of the
four other consonants in each class, the consonant
preceding the nasal may be doubled, and the inter-
posed letter is then called its {%yama%} or twin, thus in
{%kkṅ,%} the interposed {%k%} is a {%yama;%} but this inter-
posed letter is generally understood, and not written
in practice); pitch of the voice, tone of utterance,
key; ({%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}), twin-born, twin, double,
coupled, paired. {%—Yama-kālindī,%} f., N. of Sañjñā
(wife of the Sun and, according to one account,
mother of Yama). {%—Yama-kiṅkara, as,%} m. Yama's
servant, a messenger of death. {%—Yama-kīṭa, as,%} m.
a wood-louse; an earth-worm. {%—Yama-kīla, as,%}
m., N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Yama-ketu, us,%} m. Yama's
ensign or mark; a sign of death. {%—Yama-koṭi, is,%}
or {%yama-koṭī,%} f., N. of a mythical town (fabled
by astronomers to be situated 90° or 1235 Yojanas
east of Laṅkā). {%—Yama-kṣaya, as,%} m. Yama's
abode. {%—Yama-gāthā,%} f. a verse or hymn treating
of Yama. {%—Yama-gīta, am,%} n. ‘the hymn of Yama
(in praise of Viṣṇu),’ N. of the seventh chapter of
the third book of the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa, in which Yama
instructs his ministers to keep clear of the worshippers
of Viṣṇu, that god's votaries being admitted by him
to be exempt from his authority. {%—Yama-ghāṇṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an astronomical Yoga. {%—Yama-ghna,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘destroying Yama or death,’ epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Yama-ja, as, ā, am,%} twin-born; ({%as%}),
m. a twin; {%(au),%} m. du. twins. {%—Yama-jāta%} or
{%yama-jātaka, as, ā, am, = yama-ja%} above. {%—Ya-%}
{%ma-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of Yama,’ N. of Śiva.
{%—Yama-jihvā,%} f. ‘Yama's tongue,’ N. of a pro-
curess (in Kathā-sarit-s. LVII. 59). {%—Yama-tar-%}
{%paṇa, am,%} n. presenting libations to Yama on the
fourteenth day of the dark half of the month Āśvina.
{%—Yama-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Yama-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the being Yama, the name Yama.
{%—Yama-daṃṣṭra, as,%} m., N. of an Asura; of a
Rākṣasa; of a warrior on the side of the gods;
{%(ā),%} f. Yama's tooth, ({%Yamadaṃṣṭrāntaraṃ ga-%}
{%taḥ,%} one who has fallen into the jaws of Yama or
Death); ({%ās%}), f. pl. the last eight days of the month
Āśvina and the whole of Kārttika considered as a
period of general sickness. {%—Yama-daṇḍa, as,%} m.
Yama's rod. {%—Yama-dūta, as,%} m. Yama's messenger
or minister (employed to bring the souls of the dead
to Yama's judgment-seat, and thence conduct them
to their final destination); a crow (as boding evil
or death); ({%ī%}), f., N. of one of the nine Samidhs.
{%—Yama-dūtaka, as,%} m. Yama's messenger or
minister; a crow; ({%ikā%}), f. Indian tamarind. {%—Ya-%}
{%ma-devatā,%} f., N. of the lunar asterism Bharaṇī
as presided over by Yama, (also {%am,%} n.) {%—Yama-%}
{%daivata, as, ā, am,%} having Yama for lord or ruler.
[Page0810-b+ 81]
{%—Yama-druma, as,%} m. ‘Yama's tree,’ Bombax
Heptaphyllum. {%—Yama-dvitīyā,%} f., N. of the second
day in the light half of the month Kārttika (when
brothers and sisters dress up and exchange {{gifis->gifts||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} and
compliments in allusion to the attachment of Yama
and his sister Yamī; cf. {%bhrātṛ-dvitīyā%}). {%—Yama-%}
{%dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of an island. {%—Yama-dhānī,%} f.
Yama's dwelling or abode. {%—Yama-dhāra, as,%} m.
a kind of double-edged weapon. {%—Yama-nakṣatra,%}
{%am,%} n. Yama's asterism or lunar mansion, (see above
under {%yama.%}) {%—Yama-netra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hav-
ing Yama as a guide or leader. {%—Yama-pāśa, as,%}
m. the snare or noose of Yama. {%—Yama-pura, am,%}
n. the city or abode of Yama, (see above under
{%yama.%}) {%—Yama-puruṣa, as,%} m. Yama's servant or
minister. {%—Yama-prastha-pura, am,%} n., N. of a
town, where Yama was especially worshipped. {%—Ya-%}
{%ma-priya, as, ā, am,%} dear to Yama, beloved by
Yama; ({%as%}), m. the Indian fig-tree, Ficus Indica.
{%—Yama-bhaginī,%} f. ‘Yama's sister,’ the river Ya-
munā or Jumna. {%—Yama-mārga, as,%} m. Yama's
road or path. {%—Yamamārga-gamana, am,%} n. the
going or entering on Yama's road, receiving the
recompense for one's actions. {%—Yama-yātanā,%} f.
the torment or torture inflicted by Yama. {%—Yama-%}
{%ratha, as,%} m. ‘Yama's vehicle,’ i. e. a buffalo. {%—Ya-%}
{%ma-rāj, ṭ,%} m. king Yama. {%—Yama-rāja, as,%} m.
king Yama; N. of a physician. {%—Yama-rājan, ā,%}
m. king Yama; {%(ā, ā, a),%} Ved. having Yama as
king, subject to Yama. {%—Yama-rājya%} or {%yama-%}
{%rāṣṭra, am,%} n. Yama's kingdom, the dominion of
Yama. {%—Yamarkṣa (˚ma-ṛk˚), am,%} n., Ved. a
lunar mansion or asterism supposed to be under
Yama or Saturn. {%—Yama-loka, as,%} m. Yama's world,
the region of Yama. {%—Yama-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pos-
sessing restraint, one who governs himself or keeps
the passions in subjection, self-restrained, temperate,
moderate. {%—Yama-vatsā,%} f., Ved. a cow bearing
twin calves. {%—Yama-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘Yama's vehi-
cle,’ i. e. a buffalo. {%—Yama-viṣaya, as,%} m. Yama's
realm or empire. {%—Yama-vrata, am,%} n. a religious
observance or vow made to Yama; Yama's method
or manner (i. e. punishing offences without regard
to persons or without partiality, as one of the duties
of kings, see Manu IX. 307); N. of a Sāman.
{%—Yama-śikha, as,%} m., N. of a Vetāla. {%—Yama-%}
{%śrāya, as,%} m. the residence or place of resort of Yama,
the Southern quarter. {%—Yama-śreṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}
among whom Yama is the chief or takes precedence
(said of the Pitṛs). {%—Yama-śva, as,%} m. Yama's
dog, (see under {%yama.%}) {%—Yama-sadana, am,%} n.
Yama's seat or abode. {%—Yama-sabha, as, ā,%} m.
f. Yama's council or court of justice, the tribunal
of Yama. {%—Yamasabhīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to
Yama's court of justice. {%—Yama-sāt,%} ind. to the
power of Yama; {%yamasāt kṛ,%} to make over to
Yama, deliver over to the god of death; {%yamasāt%}
{%kṛta,%} made over to or devoted to Yama, sent to
Yama. {%—Yama-sādana, am,%} n. Yama's seat or
abode {%(= yama-sadana)%}. {%—Yama-sū, ūs,%} f. bring-
ing forth twins; ({%ūs%}), m. Yama's father, the Sun.
{%—Yama-sūkta, am,%} n., Ved. a hymn in honour
of Yama. {%—Yama-sūrya, am,%} n. a building with
two halls or porches, one with a western, the other
with a northern aspect. {%—Yama-stoma, as,%} m., N.
of an Ekāha. {%—Yama-svasṛ, sā,%} f. ‘Yama's sister,’
N. of the river Yamunā (commonly called Jumna); N.
of Durgā. {%—Yama-hārdikā,%} f., N. of one of Devī's
female attendants. {%—Yama-hāseśvara-tīrtha (˚sa-%}
{%īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Yamātirātra (˚ma-%}
{%at˚), as,%} m., Ved., N. of a Sattra of forty-nine days
duration. {%—Yamādarśana-trayodaśī (˚ma-ad˚),%}
f., N. of a particular thirteenth lunar day. {%—Yamā-%}
{%darśanatrayodaśī-vrata, am,%} n. a religious observ-
ance on the above day, (those who perform this are
said to be exempted from seeing Yama.) {%—Yamā-%}
{%ditya (˚ma-ād˚), as,%} m. a particular form of the
sun. {%—Yamānuga (˚ma-an˚), as, ā, am,%} following
Yama, being in attendance on Yama. {%—Yamānu-%}
{%cara (˚ma-an˚), as,%} m. a servant or attendant of
Yama. {%—Yamāntaka (˚ma-an˚), as,%} m. Yama (re-
[Page0810-c+ 81]
garded) as the destroyer or god of death [cf. {%kālān-%}
{%taka%}]; ‘Yama's destroyer,’ N. of Śiva; {%(au),%} m.
du. Yama and the god of death. {%—Yamāri (˚ma-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. ‘Yama's enemy,’ N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Ya-%}
{%mālaya (˚ma-āl˚), as,%} m. Yama's abode. {%—Yameśa%}
{%(˚ma-īśa), as, ā, am,%} having Yama as lord or
chief; ({%am%}), n. the Nakṣatra Bharaṇī. {%—Yame-%}
{%śvara (˚ma-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>38403<pc>0810-c<k1>yamaka<k2>yamaka
{%Yamaka, as,%}¦ m. restraint, check, &c., {%= yama,%}
(in this sense, according to some, {%am,%} n.); {%= vrata,%}
a religious obligation or observance; a twin, one of
a pair or couple, a fellow; scil. {%sneha,%} two similar
greasy substances, oil and ghee; ({%am%}), n. (in medi-
cine) a double band or bandage; (in artificial poetry)
the repeating or setting in opposition in the same
stanza of words or syllables different in meaning but
similar in sound, a kind of play on words or parono-
masia, (the following kinds are enumerated, {%yuk-%}
{%pāda-yamaka, a-yuk-pāda-y˚, ādyanta-y˚, pā-%}
{%dādi-y˚, pāda-madhya-y˚, pādānta-y˚, pādādi-%}
{%madhya-y˚, pādādyanta-y˚, madhyānta-y˚, kāñ-%}
{%cī-y˚, garbha-y˚, cakravāla-y˚, puṣpa-y˚, mahā-%}
{%y˚, mithuna-y˚, vṛtta-y˚, vipatha-y˚, samudga-%}
{%y˚, sarva-y˚, yamakāvalī-y˚%}); N. of a kind of
metre, four times ˘˘˘˘˘; a couple of similar
substances (as serum and marrow, oil and ghee); ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), twin, twin-born, fellow, doubled, twofold.
{%—Yamaka-kāvya, am,%} n., N. of an artificial poem
ascribed to Ghaṭa-karpara. {%—Yamaka-tva, am,%} n.
the being a Yamaka, (see above.)
<LEND>

<L>38404<pc>0810-c<k1>yamana<k2>yamana
{%Yamana, as, ī, am,%}¦ restraining, curbing, taming,
governing, managing; ({%as%}), m. the god Yama;
({%am%}), n. the act of restraining or holding, curbing;
binding; the being restrained, stopping, ceasing,
term, cessation, rest.
<LEND>

<L>38405<pc>0810-c<k1>yamala<k2>yamala
{%Yamala, as, ā, am,%}¦ twin, one of a pair or couple,
paired, doubled; ({%as%}), m. a term for the number
two; {%(au),%} m. du. twins, a pair, couple, brace; ({%ā%}),
f. a kind of hiccough; N. of a Tantra deity; of a
river; ({%ī%}), f. a pair; a sort of dress consisting of
two pieces (body and petticoat); ({%am%}), n. a pair.
{%—Yamala-śānti, is,%} f. a purificatory ceremony
after the birth of twins. {%—Yamalārjuna (˚la-ar˚),%}
{%au,%} m. du. two Arjuna trees which obstructed the
path of Kṛṣṇa, when a child, and were uprooted
by him, (according to Hari-vaṃśa 3449, his foster-
mother Yaśo-dā had tied him to an {%ulūkhala%} or
large wooden mortar, but such was the strength of
the child that he not only dragged away the mortar
but the twin Arjuna trees with which it came in
contact; these trees were afterwards personified as
the enemies of Kṛṣṇa, and in the later mythology
they are regarded as metamorphoses of Nala-kūbara
and Maṇi-grīva, two sons of Kuvera.) {%—Yamalār-%}
{%junaka (˚la-ar˚), au,%} m. du. {%= yamalārjuna.%}
{%—Yamalārjuna-bhañjana, as,%} m. or {%yamalār-%}
{%juna-han, ā,%} m. epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu.
{%—Yamalodbhava (˚la-ud˚), as,%} m. the birth of
twins.
<LEND>

<L>38406<pc>0810-c<k1>yamasAna<k2>yamasAna
{%Yamasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. champing the bit,
holding the reins or bridle; (Sāy. {%= tṛṇādikaṃ%}
{%niyacchat,%} holding or champing grass, &c.)
<LEND>

<L>38407<pc>0810-c<k1>yamAnikA<k2>yamAnikA
{%Yamānikā%}¦ or {%yamānī,%} f. Ptychotis Ajowan; [cf.
{%kṣetra-y˚, yavānikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38408<pc>0810-c<k1>yamAya<k2>yamAya
{%Yamāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%yamāyate, -yitum,%} to repre-
sent or be like Yama, the god of death.
<LEND>

<L>38409<pc>0810-c<k1>yamika<k2>yamika
{%Yamika, am,%}¦ n., with {%agastyasya,%} N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38410<pc>0810-c<k1>yamita<k2>yamita
{%Yamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ restrained, checked, curbed.
<LEND>

<L>38411<pc>0810-c<k1>yamin<k2>yamin
{%Yamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ restraining, curbing, controlling;
({%ī%}), m. one who restrains himself, a sage who has sub-
dued his senses; ({%inī%}), f., Ved. bringing forth twins.
<LEND>

<L>38412<pc>0810-c<k1>yamizWa<k2>yamizWa
{%Yamiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. guiding or managing
best, most skilful in restraining or guiding (horses).
<LEND>

<L>38413<pc>0810-c<k1>yamunA<k2>yamunA
{%Yamunā,%}¦ f., N. of a river, commonly called
the Jumna (personified as Yamī, the twin sister of
Yama, q. v., and hence regarded as daughter of the
Sun as well as sister of the seventh Manu or Manu
Vaivasvata; this celebrated river rises in the Himā-
laya mountains among the Jumnotri peaks at an
elevation of 10, 849 feet, and flows for 860 miles
[Page0811-a+ 74]
before it joins the Ganges at Allahabad, its water
being there clear as crystal, while that of the Ganges
is yellow; the confluence is a very sacred spot with
the Hindūs, and the river Sarasvatī being supposed
to join the other two rivers underground, the place
is called {%tri-veṇī,%} q. v.); N. of a daughter of the
Muni Mataṅga. {%—Yamunā-janaka, as,%} m. the
father of Yamunā; N. of the god of the Sun.
{%—Yamunā-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Ya-%}
{%munā-dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of a district. {%—Yamunā-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of Yamunā,’ N. of Viṣṇu.
{%—Yamunā-prabhava, as,%} m. the source of the
river Yamunā (celebrated as a place of pilgrimage).
{%—Yamunā-bhāj, k, k, k,%} living on the Yamunā.
{%—Yamunā-bhid, t,%} m., N. of Bala-deva (so called
from his having divided the river into two parts with
his ploughshare). {%—Yamunā-bhrātṛ, tā,%} m. the
brother of Yamunā, i. e. Yama. {%—Yamunāṣṭaka%}
{%(˚nā-aṣ˚), am,%} n., N. of a short poem (consisting
of eight stanzas) on the glories of the river Yamunā.
{%—Yamunāṣṭa-padī (˚nā-aṣ˚),%} f., N. of a short
poem on the Yamunā.
<LEND>

<L>38414<pc>0811-a<k1>yamya<k2>yamya<h>1
1. {%yamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ restrainable, to be curbed
or controlled.
<LEND>

<L>38415<pc>0811-a<k1>yamya<k2>yamya<h>2
2. {%yamya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%yama%}), Ved. being a
twin, (Sāy. {%= yama-rūpa, mithuna-bhūta%}); twin-
like, belonging to twins; ({%ā%}), f. night, (according
to Naighaṇṭuka 1. 7.)
<LEND>

<L>38416<pc>0811-a<k1>yamadagni<k2>yamadagni
{#yamadagni#}¦ {%yamadagni,%} an incorrect reading
for {%jamad-agni.%}
<LEND>

<L>38417<pc>0811-a<k1>yamanvan<k2>yamanvan
{#yamanvan#}¦ {%yamanvan, ā,%} m. or {%yamanvā,%} f. a
term for a form increased by Vṛddhi.
<LEND>

<L>38418<pc>0811-a<k1>yamayA<k2>yamayA
{#yamayA#}¦ {%yamayā,%} N. of the sixth astrono-
mical Yoga.
<LEND>

<L>38419<pc>0811-a<k1>yamayizRu<k2>yamayizRu
{#yamayizRu#}¦ {%yamayiṣṇu,%} in Sāma-veda I. 5,
1, 2, 3 {%= namayiṣṇu,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38420<pc>0811-a<k1>yamala<k2>yamala
{#yamala#}¦ {%yamala.%} See p. 810, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38421<pc>0811-a<k1>yamunda<k2>yamunda
{#yamunda#}¦ {%yamunda, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38422<pc>0811-a<k1>yamuzadeva<k2>yamuzadeva
{#yamuzadeva#}¦ {%yamuṣadeva,%} N. of a kind of
woven cloth mentioned in Rāja-taraṅgiṇi 1. 299.
<LEND>

<L>38423<pc>0811-a<k1>yamerukA<k2>yamerukA
{#yamerukA#}¦ {%yamerukā,%} f. a kind of drum or
gong on which the hours are struck.
<LEND>

<L>38424<pc>0811-a<k1>yayAti<k2>yayAti
{#yayAti#}¦ {%yayāti,%} m., N. of a celebrated
monarch of the lunar race (son of king Nahuṣa,
whom he succeeded; he first married the daughter
of Uśanas or Śukra, Devayānī, who had been thrown
into a well by Śarmiṣṭhā, daughter of Vṛṣa-parvan;
Yayāti having found her and wedded her, she de-
manded that Śarmiṣṭhā, who had ill-treated her,
should become her handmaid; this was granted, but
Yayāti then fell in love with the handmaid and
secretly married her, for which the father of Deva-
yānī inflicted on him premature decay; from the
two wives of Yayāti came the two lines of the lunar
race, Yadu being the son of Devayānī, and Puru of
Śarmiṣṭhā; Yayāti Nāhuṣa is represented as the
author of Ṛg-veda IX. 101, 4-6). {%—Yayāti-carita,%}
{%am,%} n. the history of Yayāti; N. of a drama in seven
acts by Rudra-deva (celebrating the amours of Yayāti
and Śarmiṣṭhā). {%—Yayāti-patana, am,%} n. ‘fall of
Yayāti,’ N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Yayāti-%}
{%vijaya, as,%} m. ‘Yayāti's victory,’ N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>38425<pc>0811-a<k1>yayAvara<k2>yayAvara
{#yayAvara#}¦ {%yayāvara%} for {%yāyāvara,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38426<pc>0811-a<k1>yayi<k2>yayi
{#yayi#}¦ {%yayi, is, is, i,%} or {%yayī, īs, īs, i%} (fr. rt.
1. {%yā%}), Ved. going, moving, hastening, swift, quick;
{%(īs),%} m. a horse; a road; Śiva; a cloud, (in this
sense the gender is doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>38427<pc>0811-a<k1>yayin<k2>yayin
{%Yayin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>38428<pc>0811-a<k1>yayivas<k2>yayivas
{%Yayivas, vān, yuṣī, vat,%}¦ who or what has gone.
<LEND>

<L>38429<pc>0811-a<k1>yayu<k2>yayu
{%Yayu, us, us, u,%}¦ going, moving, hastening, quick,
swift; ({%us%}), m. a horse fit for sacrifice (‘one running
about wild’); a horse (generally).
<LEND>

<L>38430<pc>0811-a<k1>yarhi<k2>yarhi
{#yarhi#}¦ {%yarhi%} (fr. the pronom. base 3. {%ya;%}
its proper correlative is {%tarhi%} or {%etarhi,%} but it may
[Page0811-b+ 79]
be followed by {%tadā, tatra, atha,%} &c.), when, at
what time, whenever, while, whereas, since, as,
because; ({%yarhi%} is found in construction with either
pres. or pot.; also with impf. or perf. or aor.)
<LEND>

<L>38431<pc>0811-b<k1>yava<k2>yava<h>1
{#yava#} 1¦. {%yava, as,%} m. Ved. the first half of
a month, (generally in the pl.; according to the
commentators {%= pūrva-pakṣāḥ;%} also written {%yāva.%})
<LEND>

<L>38432<pc>0811-b<k1>yavan<k2>yavan
{%Yavan, ā,%}¦ m. = 1. {%yava%} above.
<LEND>

<L>38433<pc>0811-b<k1>yavya<k2>yavya<h>1
1. {%yavya, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see col. 3), a month
(as containing a {%yava,%} see above).
<LEND>

<L>38434<pc>0811-b<k1>yava<k2>yava<h>2
{#yava#} 2¦. {%yava, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%yu%}), Ved.
warding off, keeping off, averting, preventing, re-
moving.
<LEND>

<L>38435<pc>0811-b<k1>yavayAvan<k2>yavayAvan
{%Yavayāvan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who keeps off or
averts.
<LEND>

<L>38436<pc>0811-b<k1>yava<k2>yava<h>3
{#yava#} 3¦. {%yava, as,%} m. (perhaps connected
with rt. 2. {%yu%}), barley, (in the earliest times pro-
bably any grain or corn yielding flour or meal); a
barely-corn; (as a measure of length) a barley-corn
= (1/6) or (according to others) (1/8) of an {%aṅgula;%} (as a
weight) a barley-corn = 6 grains of white mustard
seed or (according to others) = 12 mustard seeds =
(1/2) {%guñja;%} (in palmistry) a figure or mark on the
hand resembling a barley-corn, a natural line across
the thumb at the second joint compared to a grain
of barley and supposed to indicate good fortune; N.
of a particular astronomical Yoga, (viz. when the
favourable planets are situated in the fourth and
tenth mansions and the unfavourable ones in the first
and seventh); speed, velocity (?); a double convex
lens (?); [cf. Zend <nsi>yava;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ζεά;</lang> Lith. <nsi>jawa-s.</nsi>]
{%—Yava-krī, īs,%} m. a buyer or purchaser of barley;
a proper N.; [cf. {%yava-krīta.%}] {%—Yava-krīta, as,%}
m. ‘purchased with barley,’ N. of a son of Bharad-
vāja. {%—Yava-kṣāra, as,%} m. an alkali prepared
from the ashes of burnt barley-straw, saltpetre, nitre,
nitrate of potash. {%—Yava-kṣetra, am,%} n. a field of
barley. {%—Yava-kṣoda, as,%} m. barley-meal. {%—Yava-%}
{%khada,%} see Gaṇa Vrīhy-ādi to Pāṇ. V. 2, 116.
{%—Yava-godhūma-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced from
barley and wheat, prepared with barley and wheat.
{%—Yava-grīva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘barley-necked,’
whose neck is like a grain of barley (said of a fowl;
called also {%yava-śiras,%} q. v.). {%—Yava-caturthī,%} f. a
sort of game played on the fourth day in the light
half of the month Vaiśākha (when people throw
barley-meal over one another). {%—Yava-cūrṇa, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. barley-meal. {%—Yava-ja, as,%} m. {%= yava-%}
{%kṣāra;%} Ptychotis Ajowan {%(= yavānī)%}. {%—Yava-%}
{%tiktā,%} f. a species of plant {%(= śaṅkhinī)%}. {%—Yava-%}
{%dvīpa, as,%} m. the island Yava, (also written {%jala-%}
{%dvīpa.%}) {%—Yava-nāla, as,%} m. a sort of grass or
grain, Andropogon Bicolor; barley-straw (?) . {%—Ya-%}
{%vanāla-ja, as,%} m. an alkali made from the ashes
of the above plant, nitre; [cf. {%yava-kṣāra.%}] {%—Ya-%}
{%va-piṣṭa, am,%} n. barely-meal. {%—Yava-prakhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} resembling barley-meal; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
particular eruption or small tumor like a barely-corn.
{%—Yava-praroha, as,%} m. a shoot or ear of barley.
{%—Yava-phala, as,%} m. the bamboo cane; Indian
spikenard, Nardostachys Jatamansi; Wrightia Anti-
dysenterica; the tree Ficus Infectoria; an onion.
{%—Yava-busa, am,%} n. the husk or chaff of barley.
{%—Yavabusaka, as, ā, am,%} (to be paid) at the time
of the production of barley-husk (as a debt; cf.
Pāṇini IV. 3, 48). {%—Yava-mat, ān, atī, at,%} pos-
sessing or abounding in barley; containing barley,
mixed with barley; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a Gandharva;
of the author of a Vedic hymn; ({%atī%}), f. a kind of
metre, twice <lang n="greek">¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘, ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ˘</lang>
<lang n="greek">¯ ˘ ¯ ˘ ¯ ¯;</lang> ({%at%}), n. abundance of grain (Ved.).
{%—Yava-madhya, as, ā, am,%} having the middle
like a barely-corn, i. e. stout or broad in the centre
and thin or tapering at the ends; ({%as%}), m. a kind
of drum; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of metre; ({%am%}), n. a kind
of penance ({%= yava-madhyama,%} q. v.); a particular
measure of length. {%—Yava-madhyama, am,%} n. a
kind of lunar penance, (see {%cāndrāyaṇa.%}) {%—Yava-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of barley, made of
[Page0811-c+ 80]
barley. {%—Yava-mātra, as, ī, am,%} measuring a barley-
corn, as large as a grain of barley. {%—Yava-muṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} m. f. a handful of barley. {%—Yava-lāsa, as,%} m.
nitre, saltpetre. {%—Yava-vaktra, as, ā, am,%} having
a head or point like a grain of barley. {%—Yava-śiras,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} having a head shaped like a grain of
barley, (see {%yava-grīva.%}) {%—Yava-śūka%} or {%yava-%}
{%śūka-ja, as,%} m. {%= yava-kṣāra,%} a kind of alkaline
salt prepared from the ashes of burnt barley-straw.
{%—Yava-sura, am,%} n. malt-liquor, an intoxicating
drink prepared from barley, beer. {%—Yavākāra (˚va-%}
{%āk˚), as, ā, am,%} barley-shaped, shaped like a barley-
corn. {%—Yavāgra-ja (˚va-ag˚), as,%} m. {%= yava-%}
{%kṣāra,%} N. of a plant, Ptychotis Ajowan {%(= ya-%}
{%vānī)%}. {%—Yavāgrayaṇa (˚va-āg˚), am,%} n. the first-
lings or first-fruits of barley. {%—Yavāṅkura (˚va-aṅ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a shoot or blade of barley. {%—Yavācita (˚va-%}
{%āc˚), as, ā, am,%} laden with barley. {%—Yavād (˚va-%}
{%ad), t, t, t,%} eating barley, living on barley. {%—Ya-%}
{%vānna (˚va-an˚), am,%} n. barley-food, boiled barley.
{%—Yavāpatya (˚va-ap˚), am,%} n. {%= yava-kṣāra.%}
{%—Yavāmla-ja (˚va-am˚), am,%} n. sour barley-
gruel. {%—Yavāśir (˚va-āś˚), īr, īr, īr,%} mixed or
malted with barley. {%—Yavāhāra (˚va-āh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having barley for food, living on barley. {%—Ya-%}
{%vāhva (˚va-āh˚), as,%} m. {%= yava-kṣāra%}. {%—Yavot-%}
{%tha (˚va-ut˚), am,%} n. {%= yavāmla-ja%}. {%—Yavodara%}
{%(˚va-ud˚), am,%} n. the body or thick part of a grain of
barley used as a measure of length. {%—Yavorvarā (˚va-%}
{%ur˚),%} f., Ved. a filed sown with barley, barley-field.
<LEND>

<L>38437<pc>0811-c<k1>yavaka<k2>yavaka
{%Yavaka, as,%}¦ m. barley; {%= yava-prakāra,%} a sort
of barley.
<LEND>

<L>38438<pc>0811-c<k1>yavakya<k2>yavakya
{%Yavakya, as, ā, am,%}¦ producing barley, sown with
barley, fit for barley.
<LEND>

<L>38439<pc>0811-c<k1>yavakzA<k2>yavakzA
{%Yavakṣā,%}¦ f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>38440<pc>0811-c<k1>yavayu<k2>yavayu
{%Yavayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desiring barley or corn,
(Sāy. {%= yavecchu.%})
<LEND>

<L>38441<pc>0811-c<k1>yavasa<k2>yavasa
{%Yavasa, am,%}¦ n. (according to some also {%as,%} m.),
grass, fodder, food, pasturage, pasture, meadow grass.
{%—Yavasa-prathama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. beginning
with or depending on good pasturage, well-nurtured;
(according to Mahī-dhara on Vājasaneyi-s. XXI. 43.
first or best of all kinds of food.) {%—Yavasād (˚sa-%}
{%ad), t, t, t,%} Ved. eating or consuming grass, grazing,
pasturing, feeding. {%—Yavasānnodakendhana (˚sa-%}
{%anna-ud˚, ˚ka-in˚), am,%} n. grass, corn, water, and
fuel. {%—Yavasodaka (˚sa-ud˚), e,%} n. du. grass and
water.
<LEND>

<L>38442<pc>0811-c<k1>yavAgU<k2>yavAgU
{%Yavāgū, ūs,%}¦ f. (in Uṇādi-s. III. 81. said to come
fr. rt. 2. {%yu%}), sour gruel, rice-gruel (made from rice
boiled with water and said to be composed of six
measures of water to one of rice); any thin decoction
of other kinds of grain, &c., (according to some, a
decoction in which four measures of grain are steeped
in sixty-four measures of water and the whole boiled
down to half the original quantity.) {%—Yavāgū-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} consisting of Yavāgū.
<LEND>

<L>38443<pc>0811-c<k1>yavAnikA<k2>yavAnikA
{%Yavānikā,%}¦ f. Ptychotis Ajowan.
<LEND>

<L>38444<pc>0811-c<k1>yavAnI<k2>yavAnI
{%Yavānī,%}¦ f. a kind of bad barley; Ptychotis Ajowan.
<LEND>

<L>38445<pc>0811-c<k1>yavAsa<k2>yavAsa
{%Yavāsa, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. 2. {%yu%}), {%= yāsa,%}
Alhagi Maurorum; a species of Khadira; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of grass {%(= guṇḍāsinī)%}. {%—Yavāsa-śarkarā,%} f.
a kind of sugar made from Yavāsa.
<LEND>

<L>38446<pc>0811-c<k1>yavAsaka<k2>yavAsaka
{%Yavāsaka, as,%}¦ m. Alhagi Maurorum.
<LEND>

<L>38447<pc>0811-c<k1>yavAsinI<k2>yavAsinI
{%Yavāsinī,%}¦ f. a district abounding in Yavāsa.
<LEND>

<L>38448<pc>0811-c<k1>yavika<k2>yavika
{%Yavika%}¦ or {%yavila, as, ā, am,%} having or producing
barley.
<LEND>

<L>38449<pc>0811-c<k1>yavin<k2>yavin
{%Yavin, ī, inī, i, = yavika%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>38450<pc>0811-c<k1>yavya<k2>yavya<h>2
2. {%yavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. {%yavya%} see col. 2),
suitable or fit for barley; sown with or consisting of
barley; ({%as%}), m., Ved. a stock of barley or fruit;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a family of Ṛṣis; ({%am%}), n. a
field of barley; (Ved.) epithet of certain Homa-
mantras; ({%ā%}), f., Ved. a river, stream (in Ṛg-veda
VIII. 98, 8).
<LEND>

<L>38451<pc>0811-c<k1>yavyAvatI<k2>yavyAvatI
{%Yavyā-vatī,%}¦ f., Ved., N. of a river (in Ṛg-veda
VI. 27, 6, identified by Sāy. with Hariyūpīyā, which
he describes as the N. of a river or of a city); N. of
a district.
<LEND>

<L>38452<pc>0811-c<k1>yavakzAra<k2>yavakzAra
{#yavakzAra#}¦ {%yava-kṣāra.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page0812-a+ 75]

<L>38453<pc>0812-a<k1>yavagaRqa<k2>yavagaRqa
{#yavagaRqa#}¦ {%yavagaṇḍa, as,%} m. {%= yuva-gaṇḍa,%}
a kind of eruption on the face.
<LEND>

<L>38454<pc>0812-a<k1>yavana<k2>yavana
{#yavana#}¦ {%yavana, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. or 2. {%yu,%}
or connected with rt. {%ju%} = 1. {%jū%}), one who keeps
back; one who mixes, &c., see Gaṇa Nandyādi to
Pāṇ. III. 1, 134; a fast horse, courser, (in this sense
fr. rt. 1. {%jū%} and connected with {%javana,%} for which it
is sometimes a false reading); speed, velocity, (con-
nected with rt. 1. {%jū%}); an Ionian, Greek, (in Uṇādi-s.
II. 74. said to be fr. rt. 2. {%yu%}); a king of the
Greeks; a Muhammadan, (sometimes applied to
both the Muhammadan and European invaders of
India as coming from the same quarter); any
foreigner; a barbarian generally (Manu X. 44);
the country of the Yavanas (sometimes applied to
Bactria, Ionia, Greece, and more recently to Arabia);
a carrot; olibanum; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the Ionians or
Greeks; the Greek astrologers; N. of a dynasty;
({%ī%}), f. a Greek or Muhammadan woman; the wife
of a Yavana; {%= javanī,%} a curtain. {%—Yavana-deśa,%}
{%as,%} m. the country of the Yavanas. {%—Yavanadeśa-%}
{%ja,%} ‘growing in the country of the Yavanas,’ styrax
or benzoin. {%—Yavana-dviṣṭa, as,%} m. ‘hated or
disliked by Yavanas,’ bdellium. {%—Yavana-pura,%}
{%am,%} n. the city of the Yavanas, (probably) Alex-
andria. {%—Yavana-priya, am,%} n. ‘dear to Yavanas,’
pepper. {%—Yavana-muṇḍa, as,%} m. a bald Yavana,
one with a shaved head. {%—Yavana-sena, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Yavanācārya (˚na-āc˚), as,%} m. an
astronomical writer (frequently quoted by Varāha-
mihira and other ancient Hindū astronomers, perhaps
any Greek astronomer). {%—Yavanāri (˚na-ari), is,%}
m. ‘enemy of the Yavanas,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa or
Viṣṇu; of a king of Vārāṇasī. {%—Yavaneśvara%}
{%(˚na-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of the author of the Mīna-
rāja-jātaka. {%—Yavaneṣṭa (˚na-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%}
liked by the Yavanas; ({%as%}), m. a kind of onion or
garlic; Azadirachta Indica; ({%ā%}), f. the wild date
tree; ({%am%}), n. lead; an onion, garlic; pepper.
<LEND>

<L>38455<pc>0812-a<k1>yavanaka<k2>yavanaka
{%Yavanaka, as,%}¦ m. a particular kind of grain;
({%ikā%}), f. {%= yavanī,%} a Yavana woman; {%= javanikā,%}
a curtain or screen, an outer tent, a screen of cloth
surrounding a tent; a veil.
<LEND>

<L>38456<pc>0812-a<k1>yavanAnI<k2>yavanAnI
{%Yavanānī,%}¦ f. the writing of the Yavanas.
<LEND>

<L>38457<pc>0812-a<k1>yavanAla<k2>yavanAla
{#yavanAla#}¦ {%yava-nāla.%} See p. 811, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38458<pc>0812-a<k1>yavaya<k2>yavaya
{#yavaya#}¦ {%yavaya%} (fr. {%yuvan%}), Nom. P. {%yava-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to make young.
<LEND>

<L>38459<pc>0812-a<k1>yavayasa<k2>yavayasa
{#yavayasa#}¦ {%yavayasa, am,%} n., N. of a Varṣa
in Plaksha-dvīpa.
<LEND>

<L>38460<pc>0812-a<k1>yavasa<k2>yavasa
{#yavasa#}¦ {%yavasa.%} See p. 811, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38461<pc>0812-a<k1>yavAgU<k2>yavAgU
{#yavAgU#}¦ {%yavāgū.%} See p. 811, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38462<pc>0812-a<k1>yavAna<k2>yavAna
{#yavAna#}¦ {%yavāna, as, ā, am,%} quick, swift,
rash, (incorrectly for {%javāna,%} part. fr. rt. 1. {%jū.%})
<LEND>

<L>38463<pc>0812-a<k1>yavAnikA<k2>yavAnikA
{#yavAnikA#}¦ {%yavānikā.%} See p. 811, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38464<pc>0812-a<k1>yavAza<k2>yavAza
{#yavAza#}¦ {%yavāṣa = yevāṣa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38465<pc>0812-a<k1>yavAzika<k2>yavAzika
{%Yavāṣika,%}¦ see Gaṇa 1. Kumudādi to Pāṇ. IV.
2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38466<pc>0812-a<k1>yavAzin<k2>yavAzin
{%Yavāṣin,%}¦ see Gaṇa Prekṣādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38467<pc>0812-a<k1>yavizWa<k2>yavizWa
{#yavizWa#}¦ {%yaviṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (superl. of
{%yuvan%}), youngest, very young, last-born; ({%as%}), m.
a younger brother; N. of Agni (called ‘the youngest’
or ‘last-born’ of the gods, either as produced from
wood or as placed on the altar after everything else);
N. of a Brāhman; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his descendants;
{%agni yaviṣṭha,%} N. of the author of the hymn Ṛg-
veda VIII. 91; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>jungisto.</nsi>] — 1. {%ya-%}
{%viṣṭha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing the word {%ya-%}
{%viṣṭha%}. {%—2. yaviṣṭha-vat,%} ind. like a youth.
<LEND>

<L>38468<pc>0812-a<k1>yavizWya<k2>yavizWya
{%Yaviṣṭhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. youngest, {%= ya-%}
{%viṣṭha,%} (Sāy. {%= yuvatama.%})
<LEND>

<L>38469<pc>0812-a<k1>yavIyas<k2>yavIyas
{%Yavīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%yuvan%}),
younger; ({%ān%}), m. a younger brother; a Śūdra (as
opposed to one of the three higher castes); {%(asī),%} f.
a younger sister; [cf. Goth. <nsi>juhisa.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>38470<pc>0812-a<k1>yavIyasa<k2>yavIyasa
{%Yavīyasa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>
[Page0812-b+ 78]

<L>38471<pc>0812-b<k1>yavInara<k2>yavInara
{#yavInara#}¦ {%yavīnara, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Ajamīḍha; of a son of Dvimīḍha and of Bharmyāśva
and of Vāhyāśva.
<LEND>

<L>38472<pc>0812-b<k1>yavIyuD<k2>yavIyuD
{#yavIyuD#}¦ {%yavīyudh, t, t, t%} (fr. Intens. of rt.
1. {%yudh%}), Ved. eager to fight, fond of war, warlike,
(also written {%yavyudh.%})
<LEND>

<L>38473<pc>0812-b<k1>yavya<k2>yavya<h>1
{#yavya#} 1¦.2. {%yavya.%} See p. 811, cols. 2,3.
<LEND>

<L>38474<pc>0812-b<k1>yaSa<k2>yaSa
{#yaSa#}¦ {%yaśa.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38475<pc>0812-b<k1>yaSada<k2>yaSada
{#yaSada#}¦ {%yaśada, am,%} n. a species of mineral
(commonly called {%dastā,%} which according to some
is zinc or pewter).
<LEND>

<L>38476<pc>0812-b<k1>yaSas<k2>yaSas
{#yaSas#}¦ {%yaśas, as,%} n. (in Uṇādi-s. IV. 190.
said to be fr. rt. 1. {%aś;%} according to some for ori-
ginal {%daśas%} = Lat. <nsi>decus,</nsi> fr. a lost rt. {%daś%}), beautiful
or handsome appearance, beauty, splendor, magnifi-
cence, worth, excellence (Ved.); honour, glory,
praise, renown, fame, reputation, distinction, cele-
brity; Fame (personified as the son of Kāma and
Rati or of Dharma and Kīrtti); an object of honour
or respect, a person of respectability; favour, parti-
ality (Ved.); {%= udaka,%} water (Ved.); {%anna,%} food
(Ved.); {%= dhana,%} wealth (Ved.); N. of a Sāman;
({%ās%}), m. a proper N.; ({%ās, ās, as%}), Ved. beautiful,
handsome, splendid, resplendent; worthy, excellent;
renowned, honoured, respected, venerated; pleasant,
pleasing, agreeable, estimable; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">δοκ-έ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δόξα, δόγμα, δοκεύω, διδάσκω, δάκτυλος;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>dec-et, decus, dignu-s, doceo;</nsi> probably Angl. Sax.
<nsi>ta, tah;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>zeha.</nsi>] {%—Yaśaḥ-karṇa, as,%} m.,
N. of a king. {%—Yaśaḥ-kāya, as,%} m. a body consisting
of fame or glory, i. e. glory, reputation. {%—Yaśaḥ-%}
{%ketu, us,%} m., N. of various kings. {%—Yaśaḥ-paṭaha,%}
{%as,%} m. a drum, a double drum. {%—Yaśaḥ-pāla, as,%}
m., N. of a king. {%—Yaśaḥ-prakhyāpana, am,%} n.
spreading abroad or proclaiming the glory (of any
one). {%—Yaśaḥ-śarīra, am,%} n. {%= yaśaḥ-kāya%} above.
{%—Yaśaḥ-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%} having nothing left but
glory or fame, i. e. dead; ({%as%}), m. death, dying.
{%—Yaśaś-candra, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Yaśas-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} causing renown, conferring fame
or distinction, famous, glorious; ({%as%}), m., N. of
various men. {%—Yaśaskara-svāmin,%} N. of a temple
founded by a certain Yaśas-kara. {%—Yaśas-kāma, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} honour-loving, desirous or eager for fame,
ambitious. {%—Yaśas-kāmya,%} Nom. P. {%-kāmyati,%}
&c., to desire honour or fame, be eager for renown.
{%—Yaśas-kāmyat, an, antī, at,%} desiring fame, de-
sirous of glory. {%—Yaśas-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing honour,
conferring dignity or renown. {%—Yaśas-tama, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. most renowned or resplendent. {%—Ya-%}
{%śas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing honour or glory,
full of honour, honourable, glorious, famous; pleasant,
pleasing, excellent, handsome; agreeable, estimable;
({%atī%}), f., N. of a woman. {%—Yaśasvi-tama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} most famous or renowned. {%—Yaśas-vin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} possessing honour or glory, renowned, famous, cele-
brated, glorious; excellent, handsome; ({%inī%}), f. epithet
of a particular artery; N. of several plants, wild cotton
({%= vana-kārpāsī, yava-tiktā, mahā-jyotiṣmatī%});
N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda. {%—Yaśo-%}
{%gopi, is,%} m., N. of a commentator on the Śrauta-
sūtras of Kātyāyana. {%—Yaśo-ghna, as, ī, am,%} de-
stroying the appearance or beauty (Ved.); destroying
fame or reputation. {%—Yaśo-da, as, ā, am,%} glory-
giving, bestowing distinction, conferring fame or
renown; ({%as%}), m. quicksilver; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the
wife of the cowherd Nanda, (she resided at Go-kula,
and was the foster-mother of Kṛṣṇa, who immedi-
ately after his birth as son of Devakī and Vasu-deva
was entrusted to her care, that he might be protected
from the enmity of Kaṃsa); N. of the wife of
Mahā-vīra and daughter of Samara-vīra; N. of the
daughter of a class of Manes. {%—Yaśo-datta, as,%} m.
a proper N. {%—Yaśo-dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. glory-
giving, conferring beauty, (for {%yaśo-dā,%} f. of {%yaśo-%}
{%da,%} see above.) {%—Yaśodā-garbha-sambhūtā,%} f.
epithet of Durgā. {%—Yaśodā-nanda, as,%} m. Yaśo-
dā's son, i. e. Kṛṣṇa. {%—Yaśo-deva, as,%} m., N. of
[Page0812-c+ 79]
a Buddhist mendicant; of a son of Rāma-candra;
({%ī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Vainateya and wife of
Bṛhan-manas. {%—Yaśo-dhana, am,%} n. a fund or
stock of fame; ({%as, ā, am%}), whose wealth consists
of fame, rich in renown, renowned, famous (said of
persons); ({%as%}), m., N. of a king. {%—Yaśo-dhara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} maintaining or preserving glory, uphold-
ing renown; ({%as%}), m., N. of the fifth day of the
civil month {%(karma-māsa);%} of the eighteenth
Arhat of the preceding and of the nineteenth of the
future Utsarpiṇī; of a son of Kṛṣṇa by Rukmiṇī,
(also read {%yaśo-vara%}); of various other men; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of the fourth night of the civil month; of the
mother of Rāhula; of several other women. {%—Yaśo-%}
{%dhā, ās, ās, am,%} conferring splendor or fame.
{%—Yaśo-dhāman, a,%} n. site or abode of glory.
{%—Yaśo-nandi, is,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Yaśo-bha-%}
{%gin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. possessing fame, rich in glory,
famous, renowned. {%—Yaśo-bhagīna, as, ā, am,%} or
{%yaśo-bhagya, as, ā, am,%} Ved., see Pāṇ. IV. 4, 131.
{%—Yaśo-bhadra, as,%} m. (with Jainas) N. of one of
the six Śruta-kevalins. {%—Yaśo-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} bearing
fame, possessing renown, famous, renowned; bring-
ing glory. {%—Yaśo-matī,%} f., N. of the third lunar
night. {%—Yaśo-matya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Yaśo-mādhava, as,%} m. a form of Viṣṇu. {%—Ya-%}
{%śo-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist author. {%—Yaśo-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Yaśo-rāśi, is,%} m. a
heap or mass of glory, a glorious deed. {%—Yaśo-%}
{%lekhā%} f., N. of a princess. {%—Yaśo-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessing fame or glory; ({%atī%}), f., N. of various
women; of a district (originally of a stream; some-
times abbreviated into {%yaśo-vati%}); of a mythical
town on mount Meru. {%—Yaśo-vara, as,%} m., N. of
a son of Kṛṣṇa by Rukmiṇī, (see {%yaśo-dhara.%})
{%—Yaśo-vartman, a,%} n. the path of glory, road to
fame. {%—Yaśo-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a poet; of
several other men, ({%yaśo-varmaka%} is found at the
end of an adj. comp.) {%—Yaśo-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} de-
stroying fame or reputation. {%—Yaśo-hara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} taking away fame, depriving of reputation,
dishonouring; N. of a place, (gender doubtful.)
{%—Yaśohara-jit, t,%} m., N. of Kacu-rāya. {%—Yaśo-%}
{%hīna, as, ā, am,%} shorn of fame or glory.
<LEND>

<L>38477<pc>0812-c<k1>yaSa<k2>yaSa
{%Yaśa%}¦ at the end of a comp. {%= yaśas,%} cf. {%ati-y˚;%}
{%(am),%} n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38478<pc>0812-c<k1>yaSasa<k2>yaSasa
{%Yaśasa%}¦ at the end of a comp. {%= yaśas.%}
<LEND>

<L>38479<pc>0812-c<k1>yaSasya<k2>yaSasya
{%Yaśasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ famous, glorious, renowned,
celebrated, honoured; bestowing glory or distinction,
producing fame, creditable; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant ({%=%}
{%jīvantī%}); of another plant ({%= ṛddhi%}).
<LEND>

<L>38480<pc>0812-c<k1>yaSasyu<k2>yaSasyu
{%Yaśasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. seeking favour.
<LEND>

<L>38481<pc>0812-c<k1>yazwavya<k2>yazwavya
{#yazwavya#}¦ {%yaṣṭavya, yaṣṭṛ.%} See p. 804,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38482<pc>0812-c<k1>yazwi<k2>yazwi<h>2
{#yazwi#} 2¦. {%yaṣṭi, is,%} f. (rarely m.), or {%yaṣṭī,%}
f. (probably fr. rt. {%yam;%} for 1. {%yaṣṭi%} see p. 804,
col. 2), a staff, stick, wand; a staff armed with iron,
mace, club; a pole, column, pillar; a perch; a stem, sup-
port; a palisade; a flag-staff [cf. {%dhvaja-y˚%}]; a stalk,
stem, blade; a reed; a branch; the arm ({%= bhuja-%}
{%daṇḍa%}); anything thin or slender (e. g. {%aṅga-%}
{%yaṣṭi,%} a slender or delicate form; {%asi-yaṣṭi,%} a
sword-blade; cf. {%gātra-y˚, śarīra-y˚, bhuja-y˚%}); a
string, thread ({%= tantu%}), string of pearls, necklace
[cf. {%hāra-y˚%}]; a particular kind of pearl necklace;
liquorice ({%= yaṣṭī-madhuka, madhukā%}); sugar-
cane ({%= madhu-yaṣṭi%}); Clerodendrum Siphonan-
thus ({%= bhārgī%}); any creeping plant. {%—Yaṣṭi-%}
{%gṛha, am,%} n., N. of a district. {%—Yaṣṭi-graha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} carrying a stick or staff; ({%as%}), m. a club-
bearer, mace-bearer, staff-bearer. {%—Yaṣṭi-nivāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. a pole serving as a perch (for peacocks,
Raghu-v. XVI. 14); a pigeon-house standing on
upright poles; [cf. {%vāsa-yaṣṭi.%}] {%—Yaṣṭi-prāṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one whose strength or power is as slender
as a stalk or reed, powerless or feeble as a reed
({%= yaṣṭir veṇu-daṇḍa eva prāṇaḥ śaktir yasya%}
{%saḥ%}); out of breath. {%—Yaṣṭi-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
having a stick or staff, furnished with a flag-staff.
{%—Yaṣṭi-madhu, u,%} n. or {%yaṣṭi-madhukā,%} f.
[Page0813-a+ 77]
liquorice. {%—Yaṣṭi-yantra, am,%} n. a particular
astronomical instrument. {%—Yaṣṭī-puṣpa, as,%} m.,
N. of a plant, Putranjiva Roxburghii; [cf. {%putra-%}
{%jīva.%}] {%—Yaṣṭī-madhu, u,%} or {%yaṣṭī-madhuka,%}
{%am,%} n. {%= yaṣṭi-madhu%}. {%—Yaṣṭy-āghāta, as,%} m.
a blow with a stick, a cudgeling, beating. {%—Yaṣṭy-%}
{%āhva%} or {%yaṣṭy-āhvaya, as,%} m. liquorice.
<LEND>

<L>38483<pc>0813-a<k1>yazwika<k2>yazwika
{%Yaṣṭika, as,%}¦ m. a species of water-fowl ({%= jala-%}
{%kukkuṭa;%} cf. {%ko-yaṣṭi%}); a bird, the lapwing;
({%ā%}), f. a staff, stick, club; a particular pearl ornament
or necklace (especially of one string); an oblong
pond or tank; liquorice.
<LEND>

<L>38484<pc>0813-a<k1>yazwI<k2>yazwI
{%Yaṣṭī.%}¦ See under 2. {%yaṣṭi,%} p. 812, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38485<pc>0813-a<k1>yazwIka<k2>yazwIka
{%Yaṣṭīka, am,%}¦ n. liquorice {%(= yaṣṭi-madhu).%}
<LEND>

<L>38486<pc>0813-a<k1>yazwraska<k2>yazwraska
{#yazwraska#}¦ {%yaṣṭraska%} (?), {%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people.
<LEND>

<L>38487<pc>0813-a<k1>yas<k2>yas
{#yas#}¦ {%yas%} (probably connected with rt.
{%yam%}), cl. 4. 1. P. {%yasyati, yasati, ya-%}
{%yāsa, yasitum,%} to froth up, foam (Ved.; but ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 104, 2, {%yayastu%}
{%= āyāsam prāpnotu = upakṣīyatām%}), to make
great effort or exertion, strive, endeavour, labour,
preserve, trouble one's self; to strive after (with
dat.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ζέ-ω, (ζέν-νυμι, ἔ-ζεσ-μαι, ζέσ-σε-ν),</lang>
<lang n="greek">ζέα-μα, ζέ-μα, ζέ-σι-ς, ζεσ-τό-ς, ζῆ-λο-ς;</lang> Old
Germ. <nsi>jes-an, ger-ja-n.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>38488<pc>0813-a<k1>yasitvA<k2>yasitvA
{%Yasitvā%}¦ or {%yastvā,%} ind. making effort, endeavour-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>38489<pc>0813-a<k1>yaska<k2>yaska
{%Yaska, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the de-
scendants of Yaska; {%yaskā gairikṣitāḥ,%} N. of a
school.
<LEND>

<L>38490<pc>0813-a<k1>yasya<k2>yasya
{%Yasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be endeavoured, to be done
with energy or perseverance; (according to a com-
mentator) {%= vadhya,%} to be killed, fit or ready for
slaughter. {%—Yasya-tva, am,%} n. effort, energy; fit-
ness for slaughter; death.
<LEND>

<L>38491<pc>0813-a<k1>yasmAt<k2>yasmAt
{#yasmAt#}¦ {%yasmāt,%} ind. (abl. of 3. {%ya%} or {%yad;%}
correlative of {%tasmāt,%} q. v.), from which, from which
cause, since, as, because; that, in order that.
<LEND>

<L>38492<pc>0813-a<k1>yaha<k2>yaha
{#yaha#}¦ {%yaha, as,%} m. or {%yahas, as,%} n., Ved.
water; strength, power.
<LEND>

<L>38493<pc>0813-a<k1>yahu<k2>yahu
{#yahu#}¦ {%yahu, us, us, u,%} Ved. {%= mahat,%} great;
({%us%}), m. {%= apatya,%} offspring, a child, (in Ṛg-veda
VIII. 60, 13, Agni is called {%sahaso yahuḥ,%} Sāy. {%=%}
{%sahasaḥ putraḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>38494<pc>0813-a<k1>yahva<k2>yahva
{%Yahva, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= mahat,%} great, mighty,
powerful, &c.; (perhaps) being in continual motion
or activity, restless, active; continual, perpetual (said
of Agni, Rudra, and Soma); continually moving or
flowing; {%(vyas),%} f. pl., Ved. flowing or running
water, a river, ({%sapta yahvīḥ,%} the seven great rivers);
{%(vī),%} f. du. epithet of heaven and earth, of night
and day, of evening and morning, (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 142, 7, {%yahvī%} means ‘the two
children,’ according to some it may mean ‘the two
hands’); ({%as%}), m. {%= yajamāna,%} a sacrificer (accord-
ing to Uṇādi-s. 1. 154).
<LEND>

<L>38495<pc>0813-a<k1>yahvat<k2>yahvat
{%Yahvat%}¦ (fem. {%atī%}), Ved. {%= yahva%} above; (accord-
ing to Sāy. {%yahvatī = mahatī,%} great.)
<LEND>

<L>38496<pc>0813-a<k1>yA<k2>yA<h>1
{#yA#} 1¦. {%yā,%} cl. 2. P. (ep. also A.) {%yāti (-te),%}
Impf. {%ayāt%} (3rd pl. {%ayān%} or {%ayus%}), Pot.
{%yāyāt,%} Impv. {%yātu%} (2nd sing. {%yāhi%}), {%yayau%} (2nd
sing. {%yayātha%} or {%yayitha,%} 1st pl. {%yayima,%} Part.
{%yayivas%}), {%yāsyati, ayāsīt%} (Vedic forms {%ayāsus,%}
{%yāsat, yāsiṣṭham, yāsīṣṭa%}), {%yātum%} (Ved. {%yātave,%}
{%yātavai%}), to go, proceed, move, set out, march, travel,
journey; to go away, withdraw, retire; to pass
away, pass by, elapse (said of time); to extend, last
(said of time, e. g. {%māsaṃ yāti,%} it lasts for a month);
to take place, come to pass, prosper, succeed; to
proceed, behave, act; to go or come to, travel or
journey towards, approach, arrive at, reach (with acc.
or even dat. or loc. or with {%prati%} after an acc.);
to go or march against; to go to any state or con-
dition, to become, be (with acc. and especially acc.
of an abstract noun, e. g. {%vināśaṃ yāti,%} he goes to
destruction, i. e. he is destroyed; {%kāṭhinyaṃ yāti,%}
[Page0813-b+ 81]
it goes to hardness, i. e. becomes hard); to under-
take, obtain, get (with acc.); to go in to, have carnal
intercourse with (with acc.); to go to for any object,
request, implore, solicit (with double acc., e. g. {%yāmi%}
{%vo draviṇam,%} I go to you for money, I solicit
wealth of you; {%tvāṃ śaraṇaṃ yāmi,%} I go to thee
for help); to find out, discover, perceive. The
meanings of {%yā%} may be variously extended by com-
bining it with other words and phrases, e. g. {%pa-%}
{%lāyya yā,%} to run away; {%bahir yā,%} to go out;
{%adho yā,%} to go down, sink; {%kṣemeṇa yā,%} to
escape safely; {%khaṇḍaśo yā,%} to fall to pieces; {%śata-%}
{%dhā yā,%} to fall into a hundred pieces; {%yātrāṃ%}
{%yā,%} to undertake a journey; {%mṛgayāṃ yā,%} to go
out hunting; {%śirasā mahīṃ yā,%} to bow down to
the ground with the head; {%agocaraṃ nayanayor%}
{%yā,%} to become invisible; {%dveṣyatāṃ yā,%} to become
hated; {%vilayaṃ yā,%} to be dissolved; {%karṇau yā,%}
to come to the ears, be heard; {%kare yā,%} to come to
hand, be obtained; {%vaśaṃ yā,%} to be subject to
(with gen.); {%prakṛtiṃ yā,%} to return to one's
natural state; {%nidrāṃ yā,%} to fall asleep; {%nidhanaṃ%}
{%yā,%} to die; {%darśanaṃ yā,%} to become visible, be
seen; {%udayaṃ yā,%} to rise (said of stars, &c.): Pass.
{%yāyate,%} to be gone, &c.: Caus. {%yāpayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%ayīyapat,%} to make or cause to go or proceed,
cause to set off or march, command to go away,
drive away, remove, cure (a disease); to cause to
pass by or elapse, pass or spend (as time, night, &c.);
to cause to subsist, support; to cause to arrive at or
obtain (with a double acc., e. g. {%taṃ śriyaṃ yā-%}
{%payati,%} he causes him to obtain fortune); to induce:
Desid. {%yiyāsati,%} to wish or intend to go, to desire
to proceed, &c.: Intens. {%yāyāyate, yāyeti, yāyāti,%}
to go frequently, &c.; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἰάπτω</lang> (= Caus. {%yā-%}
{%payāmi%}), <lang n="greek">ἵημι, ἥ-σω</lang> ({%= yāsyāmi%}), perhaps also some
forms like <lang n="greek">ἰέναι:</lang> Lat. <nsi>jacio; Janus, janua.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>38497<pc>0813-b<k1>yA<k2>yA<h>2
2. {%yā, ās, ās, am%}¦ [cf. 4. {%ya,%} p. 801, col. 1],
going, proceeding, moving, &c. (at the end of a
comp., see {%eva-yā, tura-yā, deva-yā%}).
<LEND>

<L>38498<pc>0813-b<k1>yAt<k2>yAt<h>1
1. {%yāt, yān, yātī%}¦ or {%yāntī, yāt%} (for 2. {%yāt%} see
s.v.), going, proceeding, moving; that which moves
(e. g. Ṛg-veda I. 32, 15, {%Indro yāto 'vasitasya rājā,%}
Indra the sovereign of all that is movable and im-
movable). {%—Yāt-sattra, am,%} n., Ved. ‘continuing
sacrifice,’ N. of certain solemn ceremonies which go
on for a long period, (also called Sārasvata.)
<LEND>

<L>38499<pc>0813-b<k1>yAta<k2>yAta
{%Yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, proceeded, marched,
passed, &c.; gone to, attained, obtained (with acc.);
passed by or away, elapsed, escaped; ({%am%}), n. the
act of going, going, march, proceeding; motion,
(often confounded with {%yāna,%} q. v.); the past time
(e. g. {%yātam anāgataṃ ca,%} the past and the
future); the guiding or driving of an elephant with
a goad. {%—Yāta-yāma, as, ā, am,%} or {%yāta-yāman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} that which has completed its course or (ac-
cording to others) that which has stood for a night
(and so become flat and stale), used, spoiled, im-
paired, useless, rejected; raw, half ripe; who or
what has run out or completed a course, exhausted,
old, aged. {%—Yātayāma-tva, am,%} n. uselessness,
unprofitableness; old age. {%—Yātānuyāta (˚ta-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the going and following. {%—Yātāyāta (˚ta-%}
{%āy˚)%} or {%yātopayāta (˚ta-up˚), am,%} n. a going and
coming; intercourse. {%—Yātopayātika,%} see Gaṇa
Akṣa-dyūtādi to Pāṇ. IV. 4, 19.
<LEND>

<L>38500<pc>0813-b<k1>yAtavya<k2>yAtavya<h>1
1. {%yātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone or set out, to
be marched; to be gone against, to be assailed or
attacked, (the neuter is used impersonally.)
<LEND>

<L>38501<pc>0813-b<k1>yAtavya<k2>yAtavya<h>2
2. {%yātavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. 2. {%yātu%} below), service-
able against witchcraft, keeping off Rākṣasas.
<LEND>

<L>38502<pc>0813-b<k1>yAti<k2>yAti
{%Yāti, is,%}¦ f. (said to be fr. the Intens.), see Pāṇ. I.
1, 58.
<LEND>

<L>38503<pc>0813-b<k1>yAtika<k2>yAtika
{%Yātika, as,%}¦ m. a traveller, (probably incorrect for
{%yātrika.%})
<LEND>

<L>38504<pc>0813-b<k1>yAtu<k2>yAtu<h>1
1. {%yātu,%}¦ 3rd sing. Impv. of rt. 1. {%yā%} above (often
used as an interjection), let it go, let it pass, be it so,
no matter.
<LEND>

<L>38505<pc>0813-b<k1>yAtu<k2>yAtu<h>2
2. {%yātu, us, us, u,%}¦ a goer, one who goes or
moves; ({%us%}), m. a traveller, wayfarer; wind; time;
(perhaps) sorcery, witchcraft, (but according to Sāy.
[Page0813-c+ 81]
{%yātu%} means either {%karmaṇāṃ hiṃsā,%} injury of rites,
or {%pīḍā,%} pain, torture); a kind of evil spirit, Rākṣasa,
demon; ({%u%}), n. a weapon, (according to Sāy. as
inflicting {%yātanā,%} pain); a Rākṣasa, evil spirit,
demon. {%—Yātu-ghna, as, ī, am,%} destroying Yātus;
({%as%}), m. bdellium. {%—Yātu-cātana, as, ī, am,%} Ved.
‘Yātu-removing,’ driving away Rākṣasas. {%—Yātu-%}
{%jambhana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. ‘Yātu-destroying,’ de-
stroying Rākṣasas or demons. {%—Yātu-jū, ūs, ūs, u,%}
Ved. incited by Yātus, impelled by Rākṣasas; (Sāy.)
pressing forwards or eager to torment (said of demons).
{%—Yātu-dhāna, as,%} m. an evil spirit, Rākṣasa,
demon; ({%ī%}), f. a female Rākṣasa. {%—Yātu-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. practising witchcraft or sorcery, evil-
disposed, injurious, malignant; composed of demons
or Rākṣasas, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 133,
2, {%yātu-mat%} means either ‘possessing injury,’ ‘in-
flicting injury,’ or ‘possessing injurious weapons,’ or
‘possessing demons.’) {%—Yātu-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. skil-
ful in sorcery or witchcraft, learned in the practices
of Rākṣasas. {%—Yātu-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} Ved. destroy-
ing witchcraft.
<LEND>

<L>38506<pc>0813-c<k1>yAtumAvat<k2>yAtumAvat
{%Yātu-māvat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. (according to the
Pada text of the Ṛg-veda and Atharva-veda Prāti-
śākhya IV. 8. this word is divided {%yātu-māvat,%} not
{%yātumā-vat%} as might be expected), {%= yātu-mat,%}
‘practising sorcery, &c.,’ (but according to Sāy. {%yātu%}
{%= yātanā,%} ‘torment,’ and {%mā = vyāpāra,%} ‘practice,’
as if fr. 2. {%yātu%} with rt. 3. {%mā.%})
<LEND>

<L>38507<pc>0813-c<k1>yAtf<k2>yAtf<h>1
1. {%yātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (for 2. see p. 815, col. 2),
going, proceeding, &c., being on a journey or march;
{%(tā),%} m. a goer, traveller; a driver, charioteer, coach-
man; a destroyer, slayer, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda I. 32, 14 {%= hantṛ;%} according to modern
scholars the meaning may be ‘an avenger,’ as if fr.
rt. 2. {%yat;%} cf. 3. {%yāt, ṛṇa-yā.%})
<LEND>

<L>38508<pc>0813-c<k1>yAtfka<k2>yAtfka
{%Yātṛka, as,%}¦ m. a wayfarer, traveller, (wrongly
for {%yātrika.%})
<LEND>

<L>38509<pc>0813-c<k1>yAtrA<k2>yAtrA
{%Yātrā,%}¦ f. going, setting off, journey, travel, march,
the march of an army, expedition, ({%yātrāṃ yā%} or
{%dā,%} to undertake an expedition or campaign, take
the field); going on a pilgrimage; a company of
pilgrims; a festive train, procession, the procession
of idols; a feast, festival ({%= utsava%}); a sort of
dramatic entertainment; a road; support of life,
livelihood, subsistence, provisions; passing away time;
going to and fro; intercourse, ({%laukikī yātrā%} or
{%jagad-yātrā,%} worldly intercourse); way, means, ex-
pedient; practice, usage, custom; N. of a particular
kind of astrological work (especially of one by Varāha-
mihira, the full title of which is Yoga-yātrā). {%—Yā-%}
{%trā-karaṇa, am,%} n. the setting forth on a journey,
a march. {%—Yātrā-kāra, as,%} m. the author of a work
of the Yātrā class. {%—Yātrā-gamana, am,%} n. the
going on a journey or expedition. {%—Yātrā-prasaṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. engaging in or performing a pilgrimage.
{%—Yātrā-phala, am,%} n. the fruit of an expedition,
success of a campaign. {%—Yātrā-mahotsava (˚hā-%}
{%ut˚), as,%} m. a great festive procession. {%—Yātrār-%}
{%tham (˚rā-ar˚),%} ind. for the sake of marching. {%—Yā-%}
{%trotsava (˚rā-ut˚), as,%} m. a festive procession.
<LEND>

<L>38510<pc>0813-c<k1>yAtrika<k2>yAtrika
{%Yātrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to a march, relating
to an expedition or campaign, marching, journeying,
performing a pilgrimage; relating to the support of
life, requisite for subsistence; customary, usual; ({%as%}),
m. a traveller; a pilgrim; ({%am%}), n. a march, expe-
dition, campaign; provisions for a march, supplies,
&c.; N. of a particular class of astrological works;
[cf. {%yātrā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38511<pc>0813-c<k1>yAtrin<k2>yAtrin
{%Yātrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ being on a march, being in a
procession.
<LEND>

<L>38512<pc>0813-c<k1>yAna<k2>yAna
{%Yāna, as, am,%}¦ m. n. way, road, path (Ved.);
({%am%}), n. the act of going, moving, riding; marching
or proceeding (against an enemy), attacking; re-
treating, retreat; a journey; a procession; a con-
veyance or vehicle of any kind, carriage, waggon,
chariot, car; a litter, palanquin; (with Buddhists) the
vehicle or means of arriving at knowledge, the
means of release from repeated births; ({%ī%}), f., see
Gaṇa Gaurādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 41; [cf. Lat. <nsi>janua.</nsi>]
{%—Yāna-kara, as,%} m. ‘carriage-maker,’ a wheel-
[Page0814-a+ 81]
wright, carpenter. {%—Yāna-pātra%} or {%yāna-pātraka,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘going-vessel,’ a ship, boat. {%—Yānapātrikā,%}
f. a small vessel, boat. {%—Yāna-bhaṅga, as,%} m. the
fracture of a vessel or boat, shipwreck. {%—Yāna-%}
{%mukha, am,%} n. the fore part of a waggon or chariot,
the pole or part where the yoke is fixed. {%—Yāna-%}
{%yāna, am,%} n. riding in a carriage, driving in a
chariot, a drive. {%—Yāna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a
carriage or vehicle; travelling in a carriage. {%—Yāna-%}
{%śālā,%} f. a coach-house, cart-shed. {%—Yāna-svāmin,%}
{%ī,%} m. the owner of a vehicle.
<LEND>

<L>38513<pc>0814-a<k1>yAnaka<k2>yAnaka
{%Yānaka, as,%}¦ m. a vehicle, carriage.
<LEND>

<L>38514<pc>0814-a<k1>yApa<k2>yApa
{%Yāpa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. the Caus.), the causing to go;
[cf. {%kāla-y˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38515<pc>0814-a<k1>yApaka<k2>yApaka
{%Yāpaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing to
go or come, causing to pass away or spend, bringing,
granting, bestowing.
<LEND>

<L>38516<pc>0814-a<k1>yApana<k2>yApana
{%Yāpana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to go or pass away,
bringing to an end; mitigating, alleviating, curing;
prolonging or supporting life; ({%ā, am%}), f. n. the
causing to go, act of driving away or expelling, ex-
pulsion, removal, rejection; the cure or alleviation
(of a malady); the causing (time) to pass away,
spending time, wasting time, delay, procrastination;
loitering, staying; maintenance, support ({%= vartana,%}
{%yātrā%}); exercise, practice.
<LEND>

<L>38517<pc>0814-a<k1>yApanIya<k2>yApanIya
{%Yāpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to go, to be
passed or spent (as time); to be removed or cured,
to be expelled.
<LEND>

<L>38518<pc>0814-a<k1>yApayat<k2>yApayat
{%Yāpayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to go or pass,
spending.
<LEND>

<L>38519<pc>0814-a<k1>yApita<k2>yApita
{%Yāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to go; spent (as time);
expelled.
<LEND>

<L>38520<pc>0814-a<k1>yAptA<k2>yAptA
{%Yāptā,%}¦ f. twisted or plaited hair ({%= jaṭā%}).
<LEND>

<L>38521<pc>0814-a<k1>yApya<k2>yApya
{%Yāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be passed or spent (as time);
to be removed or cured; to be expelled or rejected;
low, vile, contemptible, little, trifling, unimportant.
{%—Yāpya-tva, am,%} n. curability. {%—Yāpya-yāna,%}
{%am,%} n. a palanquin, litter.
<LEND>

<L>38522<pc>0814-a<k1>yAma<k2>yAma<h>1
1. {%yāma, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. {%yāma%} see p. 816, col. 1),
motion, course, going, proceeding, coming; a road,
way, path (Ved.); progress (Ved.); a carriage,
chariot (Ved.); a night-watch, period or watch of
three hours, the eighth part of a day; a wandering
star, planet (?); {%yāmasya arkaḥ,%} N. of a Sāman;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of gods; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
daughter of Dakṣa (wife of Dharma or Manu;
sometimes written Yāmi); N. of an Apsaras; night.
{%—Yāma-kośa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. covering up or
obstructing the way, (Sāy. {%= mārga-pratiban-%}
{%dhaka.%}) {%—Yāma-ghoṣa, as,%} m. ‘sounding the
watches,’ a cock; a metal plate on which the night-
watches or hours are struck, a drum or gong used
for a similar purpose, (in this sense said to be also
{%ā,%} f.) {%—Yāma-tūrya, am,%} n. or {%yāma-dundubhi,%}
{%is,%} m. or {%yāma-nālī,%} f. a kind of drum or metal
plate on which the night-watches or hours are struck,
a clock. {%—Yāma-mātra, am,%} n. a mere watch,
only three hours. {%—Yāma-yama, as,%} m. a regular
or stated occupation for every hour. {%—Yāma-vatī,%} f.
‘possessing watches,’ night. {%—Yāma-vṛtti, is,%} f.
the being on watch, standing on guard. {%—Yāma-%}
{%śruta, as, ā, am,%} renowned for going or speed,
(Sāy. {%= śighra-gamanena viśruta.%})
<LEND>

<L>38523<pc>0814-a<k1>yAman<k2>yAman<h>1
1. {%yāman, a,%}¦ n. (for 2. see p. 816, col. 1), Ved.
going, motion, course; flight, flying; coming, arrival;
a march, expedition; the act of approaching or
addressing (with prayers, entreaties, &c.), invocation,
supplication; offering, oblation, sacrifice, ({%yāman%}
is used in some passages as a Ved. loc. without ter-
mination); {%punar-yāman, ā, ā, a,%} coming into
use again; [cf. {%yāta-yāman.%}] {%—Yāma-hū, ūs, ūs,%}
{%u,%} Ved. one who allows himself to be invoked by
prayers or offerings, ready or inclined to assist;
(Sāy.) to be invoked to come or to be invoked at
the right time ({%= gamanārtham āhvātavya%} or
{%kāle hvātavya%}). {%—Yāma-hūti, is,%} f., Ved. invo-
cation for assistance; (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
VIII. 8, 18, {%yāma-hūtiṣu = devānām āhvānaṃ%}
{%yeṣu yāgeṣu,%} in sacrifices at which there is an
invocation of the gods.)
<LEND>
[Page0814-b+ 78]

<L>38524<pc>0814-b<k1>yAmi<k2>yAmi<h>1
1. {%yāmi = yāmī%}¦ under 1. {%yāma.%} (For 2. {%yāmi%}
see p. 816, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>38525<pc>0814-b<k1>yAmika<k2>yAmika
{%Yāmika, as, ā, am,%}¦ being on watch or guard;
({%as%}), m. a night-watcher, watchman, one who an-
nounces the watches, one on guard or duty at night;
({%ikā%}), f. {%= yāminī,%} night. {%—Yāmika-bhaṭa, as,%} m.
a night-watcher, watchman.
<LEND>

<L>38526<pc>0814-b<k1>yAminaya<k2>yAminaya
{%Yāminaya%}¦ (fr. {%yāminī%}), Nom. P. {%yāminayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to appear like night.
<LEND>

<L>38527<pc>0814-b<k1>yAminI<k2>yAminI
{%Yāminī,%}¦ f. (fr. 1. {%yāma%}), night (as possessing
watches); N. of a daughter of Prahlāda; of the wife
of Tārkṣa (mother of Śalabha). {%—Yāminī-pati, is,%}
m. the husband or lord of night, the moon.
<LEND>

<L>38528<pc>0814-b<k1>yAmIra<k2>yAmIra
{%Yāmīra, as,%}¦ m. the moon; ({%ā%}), f. night.
<LEND>

<L>38529<pc>0814-b<k1>yAmeya<k2>yAmeya<h>1
1. {%yāmeya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. 1. {%yāmi%}), a metronymic.
<LEND>

<L>38530<pc>0814-b<k1>yAmyA<k2>yAmyA
{%Yāmyā,%}¦ f. (fr. 1. {%yāma%}), {%= yāminī,%} night, (for {%yā-%}
{%myā,%} the south, see under {%yāmya,%} p. 816, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>38531<pc>0814-b<k1>yAyAvara<k2>yAyAvara
{%Yāyāvara, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Intens.), going
repeatedly; wandering in all directions, having no
fixed or permanent abode; ({%as%}), m. a vagrant men-
dicant, saint; a horse selected for the horse sacrifice
(‘wandering at large’); a Brāhman who has pre-
served his household fire (?); N. of Jarat-kāru;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a family of Brāhmans (to which
Jarat-kāru belonged); ({%am%}), n. the life of a wan-
dering beggar.
<LEND>

<L>38532<pc>0814-b<k1>yAyin<k2>yAyin
{%Yāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ going, moving, travelling, jour-
neying, marching, running, riding, driving, flying;
a traveller, passenger; riding or going in or on,
(generally at the end of comps., e. g. {%gaja-yāyin,%}
riding on an elephant; cf. {%nau-y˚%}); going to, jour-
neying towards; going on an expedition, taking the
field, going to war; opposing each other (said of
planets; cf. {%graha-yuddha%}).
<LEND>

<L>38533<pc>0814-b<k1>yAvan<k2>yAvan<h>1
1. {%yāvan, ā,%}¦ m. (for 2. see p. 817, col. 1), Ved.
a rider, horseman, horse-soldier; an invader, aggres-
sor, enemy, (Sāy. {%= abhigantṛ%}); going, driving,
riding (at the end of a comp.; cf. {%agra-y˚, pūrva-%}
{%y˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>38534<pc>0814-b<k1>yAsyat<k2>yAsyat
{%Yāsyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to go, about
to proceed.
<LEND>

<L>38535<pc>0814-b<k1>yiyAsu<k2>yiyAsu
{%Yiyāsu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), wishing to go,
intending to set off or depart, desirous of taking the
field or entering on an expedition; intending to fly
away.
<LEND>

<L>38536<pc>0814-b<k1>yA<k2>yA<h>3
{#yA#} 3¦. {%yā,%} fem. of the relative pronoun
{%yad.%} See p. 807, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38537<pc>0814-b<k1>yAkftka<k2>yAkftka
{#yAkftka#}¦ {%yākṛtka%} (fr. {%yakṛt%}), see Pāṇ. VII.
3, 51.
<LEND>

<L>38538<pc>0814-b<k1>yAkza<k2>yAkza
{#yAkza#}¦ {%yākṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yakṣa%}), be-
longing or peculiar to the Yakṣas.
<LEND>

<L>38539<pc>0814-b<k1>yAga<k2>yAga
{#yAga#}¦ {%yāga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%yaj%}), an offer-
ing, oblation, sacrifice; any ceremony in which
offerings and oblations are presented. {%—Yāga-kar-%}
{%man, a,%} n. a sacrificial rite or ceremony. {%—Yāga-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. time of sacrifice. {%—Yāga-maṇḍapa,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a hall for sacrifices, a temple. {%—Yāga-%}
{%santāna, as,%} m., N. of Jayanta (son of Indra).
{%—Yāga-sūtra, am,%} n. the sacrificial cord, sacred
thread, (see {%yajña-sūtra.%})
<LEND>

<L>38540<pc>0814-b<k1>yAc<k2>yAc
{#yAc#}¦ {%yāc,%} cl. 1. P.A. {%yācati, -te, ya-%}
{%yāca, yayāce, yāciṣyati, -te, ayācīt,%}
{%ayāciṣṭa, yācitum,%} to ask, beg, solicit, pray, re-
quest, desire, entreat, require, implore, supplicate,
importune (with double acc., e. g. {%devaṃ varaṃ%}
{%yācate,%} he solicits a boon from the god; also with
abl. and rarely with gen. of person, e. g. {%annam%}
{%parāt%} or {%parasya yācate%} he begs food from an-
other; or the thing asked may be compounded with
{%arthe%} or {%artham,%} e. g. {%mokṣārtham yācate,%} he
asks for deliverance; or may be in acc. with
{%prati,%} e. g. {%sutam prati yayāce,%} he asked for
a son; or in dat., e. g. {%taṃ yayāce 'bhyava-%}
{%hārāya,%} he asked him for food); to offer any-
thing (acc.) to any one (dat.), tender (e. g. {%yācati%}
{%vittaṃ gurave,%} he offers property to the Guru); to
promise (?); {%kanyāṃ yāc,%} to be a suitor for a girl,
to ask a girl in marriage from any one (abl. or rarely
[Page0814-c+ 79]
acc.): Pass. {%yācyate:%} Caus. {%Yācayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%ayayācat,%} to cause to ask, &c.: Desid. {%yiyāciṣati,%}
{%-te,%} (in Ṛg-veda VIII. 67, 1, {%yāciṣāmahe = yā-%}
{%cāmahe%}): Intens. {%yāyācyate, yāyākti%} (1st sing.
{%yāyācmi%}), to ask repeatedly, importune; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">αἰτέω,</lang> which however may be connected with rt.
{%arth;%} cf. also, according to some, <lang n="greek">ζητέω.</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>38541<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcaka<k2>yAcaka
{%Yācaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ asking, one who asks or
solicits, a petitioner, asker, beggar; ({%ī%}), f. a female
beggar or petitioner. {%—Yācaka-vṛtti, is,%} f. the
occupation or profession of a beggar.
<LEND>

<L>38542<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcana<k2>yAcana
{%Yācana, am,%}¦ n. the act of asking, begging, re-
questing; asking in marriage, ({%duhitṛ-yācana,%} the
being a suitor for a daughter); ({%ā%}), f. asking, solicit-
ing, requesting, entreating, petitioning; a request,
petition, entreaty.
<LEND>

<L>38543<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcanaka<k2>yAcanaka
{%Yācanaka, as,%}¦ m. an asker, petitioner, an impor-
tunate man.
<LEND>

<L>38544<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcanIya<k2>yAcanIya
{%Yācanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be asked, to be desired
or requested.
<LEND>

<L>38545<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcamAna<k2>yAcamAna
{%Yācamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ asking, begging, re-
questing, soliciting.
<LEND>

<L>38546<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcita<k2>yAcita
{%Yācita, as, ā, am,%}¦ asked, prayed for, begged,
requested, solicited, entreated, importuned (with acc.,
e. g. {%Daśaratho Rāmaṃ yācitaḥ,%} Daśaratha was
asked for Rāma); requisite, necessary.
<LEND>

<L>38547<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcitaka<k2>yAcitaka
{%Yācitaka, am,%}¦ n. anything borrowed, any article
borrowed for use.
<LEND>

<L>38548<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcitavya<k2>yAcitavya
{%Yācitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be asked or solicited.
<LEND>

<L>38549<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcitf<k2>yAcitf
{%Yācitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who begs or solicits, an
asker, petitioner; a suitor, wooer.
<LEND>

<L>38550<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcitvA<k2>yAcitvA
{%Yācitvā,%}¦ ind. having asked, having solicited.
<LEND>

<L>38551<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcin<k2>yAcin
{%Yācin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ asking, desiring, requesting.
<LEND>

<L>38552<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcizRu<k2>yAcizRu
{%Yāciṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ disposed to ask, habitually
asking or begging, soliciting favours, importuning,
an importunate person. {%—Yāciṣṇu-tā,%} f. the habit
of soliciting favours, importunity.
<LEND>

<L>38553<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcYA<k2>yAcYA
{%Yācñā,%}¦ f. the act of asking, requesting, begging,
solicitation, asking alms, mendicancy, mendicity; a
petition, request, prayer, entreaty; the being a
suitor, making an offer of marriage. {%—Yācñā-jīvana,%}
{%am,%} n. subsisting by begging or mendicancy. {%—Yāc-%}
{%ñā-prāpta, as, ā, am,%} obtained by begging or
asking. {%—Yācñā-bhaṅga, as,%} m. failure of request,
an unsuccessful entreaty, useless request. {%—Yācñā-%}
{%vacas, as,%} n. words used in begging or entreating.
<LEND>

<L>38554<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcYya<k2>yAcYya
{%Yācñya, as,%}¦ m. or {%yācñyā,%} f., Ved. {%= yācñā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>38555<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcya<k2>yAcya
{%Yācya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be asked or solicited, to be
importuned, to be asked for alms, to be desired or
requested; to be required; ({%am%}), n. the making a
request.
<LEND>

<L>38556<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcyamAna<k2>yAcyamAna
{%Yācyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being asked or solicited,
being prayed for.
<LEND>

<L>38557<pc>0814-c<k1>yAcCrezWa<k2>yAcCrezWa
{#yAcCrezWa#}¦ {%yāc-chreṣṭha.%} See under 2. {%yāt.%}
<LEND>

<L>38558<pc>0814-c<k1>yAj<k2>yAj
{#yAj#}¦ {%yāj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ%} (fr. rt. 1. {%yaj%}), one who
sacrifices or offers oblations, an offerer, sacrificer;
[cf. {%hayamedha-yāj.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38559<pc>0814-c<k1>yAja<k2>yAja
{%Yāja, as,%}¦ m. a sacrificer (in {%ati-y˚,%} q. v.); boiled or
cooked rice; food in general; N. of a Brahmarṣi.
<LEND>

<L>38560<pc>0814-c<k1>yAjaka<k2>yAjaka
{%Yājaka, as,%}¦ m. (fr. the Caus.), a sacrificer, sacri-
ficing priest, one who offers sacrifices or oblations, a
priest officiating at a sacrifice, (often at the end of
a comp., cf. {%grāma-y˚, nakṣatra-y˚;%} sometimes
compounded with the person who institutes the sacri-
fice, e. g. {%Kṣatriya-yājaka,%} the sacrificer for a
Kṣatriya; cf. {%Śūdra-y˚%}); a royal elephant; a furious
elephant or one in rut. {%—Yājaka-tva, am,%} n. the
condition or office of a sacrificing priest.
<LEND>

<L>38561<pc>0814-c<k1>yAjana<k2>yAjana
{%Yājana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), the act of con-
ducting a sacrifice or causing it to be performed,
superintending or assisting at the sacrifices of others,
(sometimes with gen., e. g. {%vrātyānāṃ yājanaṃ%}
{%kṛtvā,%} having officiated at a sacrifice for outcasts,
Manu XI. 197; {%ayājya-yājana,%} sacrificing for those
who have no right to sacrifice, Manu III. 65.)
<LEND>

<L>38562<pc>0814-c<k1>yAjanIya<k2>yAjanIya
{%Yājanīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), to be made
or allowed to sacrifice, to be assisted at a sacrifice,
one for whom it is allowable to officiate.
<LEND>

<L>38563<pc>0814-c<k1>yAjamAna<k2>yAjamAna
{%Yājamāna, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%yajamāna%}), the part of a
[Page0815-a+ 79]
sacrificial ceremony performed by the Yajamāna or
institutor of the sacrifice himself.
<LEND>

<L>38564<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjamAnika<k2>yAjamAnika
{%Yājamānika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the Yaja-
māna, belonging to the institutor of a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>38565<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjayitf<k2>yAjayitf
{%Yājayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. (fr. the Caus.), one who con-
ducts a sacrifice or causes it to be performed, the
officiating priest at a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>38566<pc>0815-a<k1>yAji<k2>yAji
{%Yāji, is,%}¦ f. a sacrifice, oblation; ({%is%}), m. accord-
ing to Ujjvala-datta on Uṇādi-s. IV. 124 {%= yaṣṭṛ,%}
a sacrificer, the institutor of a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>38567<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjikA<k2>yAjikA
{%Yājikā,%}¦ f. a sacrifice, oblation.
<LEND>

<L>38568<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjin<k2>yAjin
{%Yājin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sacrificing, conducting a sacrifice,
one who officiates at a sacrifice, a sacrificer, (usually
at the end of comps.; cf. {%deva-y˚, bahu-y˚%}); wor-
shipping, adoring.
<LEND>

<L>38569<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjuka<k2>yAjuka
{%Yājuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) habi-
tually sacrificing or making offerings.
<LEND>

<L>38570<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYa<k2>yAjYa
{%Yājña, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%yajña%}), belonging to sacri-
fice.
<LEND>

<L>38571<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYatura<k2>yAjYatura
{%Yājñatura, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%yajña-tura%}), a patro-
nymic of Ṛṣabha; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38572<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYadattaka<k2>yAjYadattaka
{%Yājñadattaka%}¦ (fr. {%yajña-datta%}), see Gaṇa Arī-
haṇādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38573<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYadatti<k2>yAjYadatti
{%Yājñadatti, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Yajña-
datta; Kuvera (?) .
<LEND>

<L>38574<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYadeva<k2>yAjYadeva
{%Yājñadeva, as,%}¦ m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>38575<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYapata<k2>yAjYapata
{%Yājñapata%}¦ (fr. {%yajña-pati%}), see Gaṇa Aśva-
patyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 84.
<LEND>

<L>38576<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYavalka<k2>yAjYavalka
{%Yājñavalka, as, ī, am,%}¦ composed by or derived
from Yājñavalkya; ({%ās%}), m. pl. of {%yājñavalkya,%} see
Gaṇa Kaṇvādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, III.
<LEND>

<L>38577<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYavalkIya<k2>yAjYavalkIya
{%Yājñavalkīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Yājñaval-
kya, composed by or descended from Yājñavalkya;
({%am%}), n., scil. {%dharma-śāstra,%} the code of Yājña-
valkya.
<LEND>

<L>38578<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYavalkya<k2>yAjYavalkya
{%Yājñavalkya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%yajña-valkya%}), N. of an
ancient sage frequently quoted as an authority in the
Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa, (the first reputed teacher of
the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā or White Yajur-veda, revealed
to him by the Sun, cf. {%Taittirīya-saṃhitā, Vāja-%}
{%saneyi-saṃhitā%}); N. of the author of a celebrated
code of laws (by some identified with the preceding
sage; this code is only second in importance to that
of Manu, and with its most celebrated commentary,
the Mitākṣara, is the leading authority of the
Mithilā school; it is much later than Manu, and
probably in its present form dates from about the
first century of our era); the family of Yājñavalkya;
({%am%}), n., N. of an Upaniṣad; ({%as, kī, am%}), relating
to Yājñavalkya, composed by or derived from Yājña-
valkya. {%—Yājñavalkya-gītā,%} f., N. of a poem in
commendation of the practice of Yoga attributed to
Yājñavalkya. {%—Yājñavalkya-ṭīkā,%} f., N. of several
commentaries on the code of Yājñavalkya (besides
the Mitākṣara by Vijñāneśvara, there are other
commentaries by Deva-bodha, Dharmeśvara, Bhāruci,
Viśva-rūpa, and Śūla-pāṇi). {%—Yājñavalkya-dhar-%}
{%ma-śāstra, am,%} n. Yājñavalkya's code of laws.
{%—Yājñavalkya-śikṣā,%} f., N. of a treatise. {%—Yāj-%}
{%ñavalkya-smṛti, is,%} f. the body of law as delivered
by Yājñavalkya.
<LEND>

<L>38579<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYasena<k2>yAjYasena
{%Yājñasena, as,%}¦ or {%yājñaseni, is,%} m. (fr. {%yajña-%}
{%sena%}), a patronymic of Śikhaṇḍin; ({%ī%}), f. a patro-
nymic of Draupadī (as daughter of Yajñasena).
<LEND>

<L>38580<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYAyani<k2>yAjYAyani
{%Yājñāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Yajña.
<LEND>

<L>38581<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYika<k2>yAjYika
{%Yājñika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
sacrifice, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a sacrificer or the officiating
priest at a sacrificial ceremony, the institutor of a
sacrifice, one skilled in sacrificial rites, a Ritualist;
N. of various kinds of plants &c. used at a sacrifice;
of Kuśa grass; of a red-flowering Khadira; the
sacred fig-tree; Butea Frondosa. {%—Yājñika-deva,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a commentator on Kātyāyana's Śrauta-
sūtra. {%—Yājñika-vallabhā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Yāj-%}
{%ñikānanta (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Yājñikāśraya (˚ka-āś˚), as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>38582<pc>0815-a<k1>yAjYikya<k2>yAjYikya
{%Yājñikya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%yājñika%}), the laws or ob-
servances relating to sacrificial rites; sacrificial cere-
monies in general, a sacrifice.
<LEND>
[Page0815-b+ 74]

<L>38583<pc>0815-b<k1>yAjYiya<k2>yAjYiya
{%Yājñiya, as, ī, am, = yajñiya,%}¦ sacrificial, belong-
ing to sacrifices; fit or suitable for sacrifice; ({%as%}),
m. one skilled in sacrificial rites, (in this sense a
various reading for {%yājñika.%})
<LEND>

<L>38584<pc>0815-b<k1>yAjYIya<k2>yAjYIya
{%Yājñīya%}¦ probably incorrect for {%yajñīya.%}
<LEND>

<L>38585<pc>0815-b<k1>yAjya<k2>yAjya
{%Yājya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), to be made or
allowed to sacrifice, one on whose behalf a sacrifice is
made; to be sacrificed; sacrificial; ({%as%}), m. a sacrificer,
performer of a sacrifice for others; the person for
whom a sacrifice is performed, the master or insti-
tutor of a sacrifice; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%ṛc,%} the sacred text
uttered at the moment of making the offering, the
words of consecration used at a sacrifice; ({%am%}), n.
property or presents obtained by officiating at sacri-
fices. {%—Yājya-tā,%} f. or {%yājya-tva, am,%} n. the rank
or position of a sacrificer or of one for whom a
sacrifice is performed. {%—Yājya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
having the Yājyā or consecrating text.
<LEND>

<L>38586<pc>0815-b<k1>yAjvana<k2>yAjvana
{%Yājvana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%yajvan%}), the son of a sacri-
ficer.
<LEND>

<L>38587<pc>0815-b<k1>yAjurvEdika<k2>yAjurvEdika
{#yAjurvEdika#}¦ {%yājurvaidika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%yajur-veda%}), belonging or relating to the Yajur-
veda.
<LEND>

<L>38588<pc>0815-b<k1>yAjuza<k2>yAjuza
{%Yājuṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the Yajus, belong-
ing to the Yajur-veda; ({%as%}), m. an observer of reli-
gious ceremonies as prescribed in the Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>38589<pc>0815-b<k1>yAjuzmatI<k2>yAjuzmatI
{%Yājuṣmatī,%}¦ f., scil. {%iṣṭakā,%} a kind of brick used
for the sacrificial altar; [cf. {%yajuṣ-mat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38590<pc>0815-b<k1>yAjYa<k2>yAjYa
{#yAjYa#}¦ {%yājña, yājya.%} See col. 1. and above.
<LEND>

<L>38591<pc>0815-b<k1>yAt<k2>yAt<h>2
{#yAt#} 2¦. {%yāt,%} ind. (properly obsolete abl. fr.
the pronom. base 3. {%ya,%} cf. {%tāt;%} for 1. {%yāt%} see p. 813,
col. 2, for 3. {%yāt%} see below), inasmuch as, so far as,
so long as, since, (but according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
1. 80, 15, {%yāt = yāntam,%} pervading; VII. 88, 4, {%yāt%}
{%= yātaḥ = gacchataḥ,%} passing; VI. 21, 6, {%yāt =%}
{%yāni [karmāṇi%}], which [actions]; according to
some {%yāt%} is an interjection of pleasure; of alarm; of
restlessness.) {%—Yāc-chreṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (i. e. {%yāt%}
{%+ śreṣṭha%}), Ved. the best possible; [cf. {%yāvac-%}
{%chreṣṭha;%} but according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III.
53, 21, {%yāt%} is a separate word, and means ‘an
enemy,’ as if fr. rt. 2. {%yat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38592<pc>0815-b<k1>yAt<k2>yAt<h>3
{#yAt#} 3¦. {%yāt%} (fr. rt. 2. {%yat%}), in {%ṛṇa-yāt,%} Ved.
the avenger of guilt or debt.
<LEND>

<L>38593<pc>0815-b<k1>yAta<k2>yAta
{#yAta#}¦ {%yāta,%} &c. See p. 813, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38594<pc>0815-b<k1>yAtana<k2>yAtana
{#yAtana#}¦ {%yātana, am,%} n. (fr. the Caus. of rt.
2. {%yat%}), the act of requiting, requital, retaliation,
recompense, reward, return; {%vairasya yātanam,%}
requital of hostile acts, revenge, vengeance; ({%ā%}), f.
requital, ({%yātanām dā,%} to make requital, revenge);
recompense, retaliation, reward [cf. {%vaira-y˚%}]; acute
pain, torment, anguish, agony, (especially) punish-
ment inflicted by Yama, the pains of hell; personified
as the daughter of Fear {%(bhaya)%} and Death {%(mṛtyu)%}.
{%—Yātanārthīya (˚nā-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} fit for tor-
ment, capable of suffering, susceptible of the pains of
hell.
<LEND>

<L>38595<pc>0815-b<k1>yAtayat<k2>yAtayat
{%Yātayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ joining, connecting, uniting
(Ved.); existing, animating (Ved.); requiting, re-
compensing, &c. {%—Yātayaj-jana, as,%} m., Ved.
uniting or bringing men together; animating man-
kind, impelling men to exertion (said of Mitra,
Varuṇa, and Aryaman; according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda 1. 136, 3, the meaning as applied to Aryaman
may be ‘tormenting [irreligious] men in hell’).
<LEND>

<L>38596<pc>0815-b<k1>yAtalarAya<k2>yAtalarAya
{#yAtalarAya#}¦ {%yātala-rāya, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>38597<pc>0815-b<k1>yAtavya<k2>yAtavya
{#yAtavya#}¦ {%yātavya.%} See p. 813, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38598<pc>0815-b<k1>yAtasruca<k2>yAtasruca
{#yAtasruca#}¦ {%yātasruca, am,%} n. (fr. {%yata-sruc%}),
{%= yauktasruca,%} N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38599<pc>0815-b<k1>yAtAnaprasTa<k2>yAtAnaprasTa
{#yAtAnaprasTa#}¦ {%yātānaprastha,%} N. of a place.
{%Yātānaprasthaka,%} relating to the above place.
<LEND>

<L>38600<pc>0815-b<k1>yAtu<k2>yAtu
{#yAtu#}¦ {%yātu, yātu-ghna,%} &c. See p. 813.
<LEND>

<L>38601<pc>0815-b<k1>yAtf<k2>yAtf<h>2
{#yAtf#} 2¦. {%yātṛ, tā,%} f. (acc. {%yātaram,%} nom.
acc. du. {%yātarau,%} nom. pl. {%yātaras;%} said in Uṇādi-s.
[Page0815-c+ 74]
II. 98. to be fr. rt. 2. {%yat%}), a husband's brother's
wife. (For 1. {%yātṛ%} see p. 813, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>38602<pc>0815-c<k1>yAtnika<k2>yAtnika
{#yAtnika#}¦ {%yātnika, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%yatna%}), N.
of a Buddhist school.
<LEND>

<L>38603<pc>0815-c<k1>yAtya<k2>yAtya
{#yAtya#}¦ {%yātya, as,%} m. (fr. the Caus. of rt.
2. {%yat%}), ‘to be tormented, subject to the torments of
hell,’ an inhabitant of hell, a condemned spirit.
<LEND>

<L>38604<pc>0815-c<k1>yAtrA<k2>yAtrA
{#yAtrA#}¦ {%yātrā, yātrika,%} &c. See p. 813,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38605<pc>0815-c<k1>yAtsattra<k2>yAtsattra
{#yAtsattra#}¦ {%yāt-sattra.%} See p. 813, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38606<pc>0815-c<k1>yATa<k2>yATa
{#yATa#}¦ {%yātha%} (fr. rt. 1 {%yā%}), in {%dīrgha-yātha,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38607<pc>0815-c<k1>yATAkaTAca<k2>yATAkaTAca
{#yATAkaTAca#}¦ {%yāthākathāca, am,%} n. (fr. {%yathā%}
{%kathā ca%}), anything which occurs now and then;
that which happens under any circumstances.
<LEND>

<L>38608<pc>0815-c<k1>yATAkAmI<k2>yATAkAmI
{%Yāthākāmī,%}¦ f. or {%yāthākāmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%yathā-%}
{%kāma%}), the acting according to will or desire, doing
as one thinks fit or proper, conformity to one's
wishes.
<LEND>

<L>38609<pc>0815-c<k1>yATAtaTya<k2>yATAtaTya
{%Yāthātathya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%yathā-tatham%}), a
proper state or condition, proper way or course,
reality, rectitude, propriety, truth; {%(am, ena),%} ind.
according to truth, in reality, as is proper. {%—Yāthā-%}
{%tathya-tas,%} ind. from the truth, according to truth,
in reality.
<LEND>

<L>38610<pc>0815-c<k1>yATAtmya<k2>yATAtmya
{%Yāthātmya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%yathātman%}), real nature
or essence, true character.
<LEND>

<L>38611<pc>0815-c<k1>yATArTika<k2>yATArTika
{%Yāthārthika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%yathārtha%}), con-
formable to truth or reality, just, true, right, real.
<LEND>

<L>38612<pc>0815-c<k1>yATArTya<k2>yATArTya
{%Yāthārthya, am,%}¦ n. conformity with truth or
fact, consistency with reality, the true or real mean-
ing; suitableness, justness, rightness, application, use,
accomplishment, attainment of an object.
<LEND>

<L>38613<pc>0815-c<k1>yATAsaMstarika<k2>yATAsaMstarika
{%Yāthāsaṃstarika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%yathā-sam-%}
{%stara%}), letting the covering lie according (to the
original position).
<LEND>

<L>38614<pc>0815-c<k1>yAdaISa<k2>yAdaISa
{#yAdaISa#}¦ {%yāda-īśa, yādaḥ-pati.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>38615<pc>0815-c<k1>yAdamAna<k2>yAdamAna
{#yAdamAna#}¦ {%yādamāna, as, ā, am%} (Pres. part.
A. fr. an old form {%yād,%} which, according to Sāy., is
a substitute for rt. {%yāc%}), Ved. closely connected with,
seeking connection or association with, wishing to
mix, (Sāy. {%= saṅgatiṃ yācamāna,%} but in Ṛg-veda
VII. 69, 3 {%= gacchat%} or {%gamayat.%})
<LEND>

<L>38616<pc>0815-c<k1>yAdava<k2>yAdava
{#yAdava#}¦ {%yādava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yadu%}), relating
to Yadu, descended or coming from Yadu; ({%as%}), m.
a descendant of Yadu; N. of Kṛṣṇa; of a lexi-
cographer; of an astronomer; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
descendants of Yadu; {%= mādhavaḥ, vṛṣṇayāḥ;%}
{%(ī),%} f. a Yādava female; N. of Durgā; ({%am%}), n. a
stock of cattle. {%—Yādava-giri,%} N. of a country.
{%—Yādava-paṇḍita, as,%} m. {%= yādava-vyāsa%}. {%—Yā-%}
{%dava-rāya, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Yādava-vyāsa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of the Siddhānta-saṅgraha
and of a commentary on the Nyāya-siddhānta-mañ-
jarī. {%—Yādava-śārdūla, as,%} m. ‘Yādava-tiger,
chief of the Yādavas,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Yādavā-%}
{%cārya (˚va-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of a teacher. {%—Yāda-%}
{%vābhyudaya (˚va-abh˚), as,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Yādavendra (˚va-in˚), as,%} m., N. of Kṛṣṇa;
of an author. {%—Yādavodaya (˚va-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘rise
of the Yādavas,’ N. of a drama.
<LEND>

<L>38617<pc>0815-c<k1>yAdavaka<k2>yAdavaka
{%Yādavaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the descendants of Yadu.
<LEND>

<L>38618<pc>0815-c<k1>yAdva<k2>yAdva
{%Yādva, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to the family
of Yadu; ({%as%}), m. a son or descendant of Yadu.
<LEND>

<L>38619<pc>0815-c<k1>yAdas<k2>yAdas
{#yAdas#}¦ {%yādas, as,%} n. a fluid, water; a river;
semen; desire, lust (Ved. originally ‘close carnal
connection;’ cf. {%yādamāna%}); any animal living in
water, any large aquatic animal, a monster of the
deep, sea monster; {%yādasāṃ nāthaḥ%} or {%yādasām%}
{%prabhuḥ%} or {%yādasām patiḥ,%} ‘lord of sea ani-
mals,’ N. of Varuṇa; the ocean. {%—Yāda-īśa, as,%}
m. ‘lord of marine animals,’ the sea. {%—Yādaḥ-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘lord of sea animals,’ the ocean, sea; N.
of Varuṇa. {%—Yādo-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of sea
[Page0816-a+ 75]
monsters,’ N. of Varuṇa. {%—Yādo-nivāsa, as,%} m.
‘abode of sea animals,’ the ocean, sea.
<LEND>

<L>38620<pc>0816-a<k1>yAdu<k2>yAdu
{%Yādu, us,%}¦ m. a fluid, liquid, water.
<LEND>

<L>38621<pc>0816-a<k1>yAdura<k2>yAdura
{%Yādura, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. embracing sensually or
voluptuously, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I, 126,
6, {%yādurī = bahu-reto-yuktā.%})
<LEND>

<L>38622<pc>0816-a<k1>yAdfkza<k2>yAdfkza
{#yAdfkza#}¦ {%yā-dṛkṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. 3. {%ya +%}
{%dṛkṣa,%} fr. rt. 1. {%dṛś%}), looking or appearing like
which, what like, which like, as like, of which sort
or nature, (used correlatively to {%tādṛkṣa,%} q. v.: cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἥλιξ, ἡλίκος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>qualis.</nsi>)
<LEND>

<L>38623<pc>0816-a<k1>yAdfS<k2>yAdfS
{%Yādṛś, k, k, k%}¦ (Ved. nom. {%yādṛṅ%}), or {%yādṛśa,%}
{%as, ī, am%} (see 2. {%dṛś, dṛśa%}), which like, what
like, as like, of whatever kind or nature, whoever,
whichever, whatever, which, what, (used correlatively
to {%tādṛś%} and {%tādṛśa%}); {%yādṛśa, tādṛśa,%} any
one whatever, anybody whatsoever. {%—Yādṛg-guṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of whatever qualities.
<LEND>

<L>38624<pc>0816-a<k1>yAdfcCika<k2>yAdfcCika
{#yAdfcCika#}¦ {%yādṛcchika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yad-%}
{%ṛcchā%}), voluntary, spontaneous, independent; acci-
dental, casual, unexpected; ({%as%}), m. an officiating
priest who does as he pleases.
<LEND>

<L>38625<pc>0816-a<k1>yAdrADya<k2>yAdrADya
{#yAdrADya#}¦ {%yād-rādhya, as, ā, am%} (i. e. 1. {%yāt%}
{%+ rādhya%}), obtainable by moving or living creatures,
(according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda II. 38, 8 {%= gac-%}
{%chatāṃ rādhya;%} or according to modern scholars,
the word may be used adverbially, as if fr. 2. {%yāt +%}
{%rādhyam,%} ‘as far as is practicable,’ ‘as well or as
quickly as possible,’ cf. {%yāc-chreṣṭha.%})
<LEND>

<L>38626<pc>0816-a<k1>yAdva<k2>yAdva
{#yAdva#}¦ {%yādva.%} See p. 815, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38627<pc>0816-a<k1>yAna<k2>yAna
{#yAna#}¦ {%yāna,%} &c. See p. 813, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38628<pc>0816-a<k1>yAntrika<k2>yAntrika
{#yAntrika#}¦ {%yāntrika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yantra%}),
belonging to instruments or implements, relating to
blunt surgical instruments, (see {%yantra%}); artificially
or mechanically refined (said of sugar).
<LEND>

<L>38629<pc>0816-a<k1>yApaka<k2>yApaka
{#yApaka#}¦ {%yāpaka, yāpana, yāptā.%} See p. 814,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38630<pc>0816-a<k1>yABa<k2>yABa
{#yABa#}¦ {%yābha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%yabh%}), sexual
intercourse. {%—Yābha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having sexual
intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>38631<pc>0816-a<k1>yABis<k2>yABis
{#yABis#}¦ {%yābhis,%} ind. (inst. pl. fem. fr. the
pronom. base 3. {%ya,%} see {%yad%}), Ved. whereby, that,
in order that.
<LEND>

<L>38632<pc>0816-a<k1>yAma<k2>yAma<h>2
{#yAma#} 2¦. {%yāma, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%yam;%} for
1. {%yāma%} see p. 814, col. 1), restraint, forbearance,
&c., {%= yāma; (as, ī, am),%} relating to Yama, (in
this sense fr. {%yama%}); coming or derived from Yama,
done or ordered by Yama; ({%am%}), n., N. of several
Sāmans. {%—Yāmottara (˚ma-ut˚), am,%} n., N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38633<pc>0816-a<k1>yAmaka<k2>yAmaka
{%Yāmaka, au,%}¦ m. du., N. of the Nakṣatra Punar-
vasū; ({%ī%}), f. the voc. {%yāmaki%} is used as a term of
abuse.
<LEND>

<L>38634<pc>0816-a<k1>yAman<k2>yAman<h>2
2. {%yāman = yāmin%}¦ in {%antar-yāman.%} (For 1. see
p. 814, col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>38635<pc>0816-a<k1>yAmin<k2>yAmin
{%Yāmin%}¦ in {%antar-yāmin,%} q. v. (For {%yāminī%} see
p. 814, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>38636<pc>0816-a<k1>yAmya<k2>yAmya
{%Yāmya, as, -mī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to Yama,
like or resembling Yama, &c., ({%yāmya ṛkṣa,%} the
Nakṣatra Bharaṇī presided over by Yama); southern,
southerly, ({%yāmye%} or {%yāmyena,%} in the south, in
a southerly direction); ({%as%}), m., scil. {%nara%} or {%pu-%}
{%ruṣa%} or {%dūta,%} a servant of Yama; N. of Agastya;
of Śiva; of Viṣṇu; sandal-wood; ({%ā%}), f. the lunar
asterism Bharaṇī; scil. {%diś%} or {%āśā,%} the southern
quarter, south, (for {%yāmyā,%} night, see p. 814, col. 2.)
{%—Yāmya-tas,%} ind. from the south. {%—Yāmya-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Yāmya-pāśa, as,%}
m. the noose or fetter of Yama. {%—Yāmyāyana%}
{%(˚ya-āy˚), am,%} n. the sun's progress south of the
equator, the winter solstice {%(= dakṣiṇāyana).%}
{%—Yāmyottara (˚ya-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} southern and
northern, going from south to north. {%—Yāmyottara-%}
{%vṛtta, am,%} n. south and north circle, the solstitial
colure. {%—Yāmyodbhūta (˚yā-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} aris-
[Page0816-b+ 69]
ing or growing in the south; ({%as%}), m. a species of
tree ({%= śrī-tāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>38637<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmakinI<k2>yAmakinI
{#yAmakinI#}¦ {%yāmakinī,%} f. = 2. {%yāmi%} below.
<LEND>

<L>38638<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmadUta<k2>yAmadUta
{#yAmadUta#}¦ {%yāmadūta, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%yama-%}
{%dūta%}), N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>38639<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmaraTa<k2>yAmaraTa
{%Yāmaratha, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%yama-ratha%}), scil. {%vrata,%}
N. of a particular religious observance relating to
Yama.
<LEND>

<L>38640<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmanemi<k2>yAmanemi
{#yAmanemi#}¦ {%yāmanemi, is,%} m., N. of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>38641<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmala<k2>yAmala
{#yAmala#}¦ {%yāmala, am,%} n. {%= yamala,%} a pair;
N. of a class of Tantra works, (often wrongly written
{%jāmala.%})
<LEND>

<L>38642<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmalAyana<k2>yAmalAyana
{%Yāmalāyana%}¦ (fr. {%yamala%}), see Gaṇa Pakṣādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38643<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmalIya<k2>yAmalIya
{%Yāmalīya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%yāmala%}), N. of a work
or of a class of works.
<LEND>

<L>38644<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmAtf<k2>yAmAtf
{#yAmAtf#}¦ {%yāmātṛ, tā,%} or {%yāmātṛka, as,%} m.
{%= jāmātṛ,%} a daughter's husband, son-in-law; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">εἰνάτερ-ες;</lang> Lat. <nsi>janitr-i-c-es;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>eidum;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>adhum.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>38645<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmAyana<k2>yAmAyana
{#yAmAyana#}¦ {%yāmāyana, as,%} m. (fr. {%yama%}), a
patronymic of various authors of Vedic hymns; of
Ūrdhva-kṛśana; of Kumāra; of Damana; of Deva-
śravas; of Mathita; of Śaṅkha; of Saṅkasuka.
<LEND>

<L>38646<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmi<k2>yAmi<h>2
{#yAmi#} 2¦. {%yāmi, is,%} or {%yāmī,%} f. (for 1. {%yāmi%}
see p. 814, col. 2), {%= jāmi, svasṛ,%} a sister, female
relation; a daughter-in-law; a woman of rank or
respectability ({%= kula-strī%}).
<LEND>

<L>38647<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmeya<k2>yAmeya<h>2
2. {%yāmeya, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see p. 814, col. 2), a
sister's son, nephew.
<LEND>

<L>38648<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmika<k2>yAmika
{#yAmika#}¦ {%yāmika.%} See p. 814, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38649<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmitra<k2>yAmitra
{#yAmitra#}¦ {%yāmitra, as,%} m. {%= jāmitra.%}
<LEND>

<L>38650<pc>0816-b<k1>yAminI<k2>yAminI
{#yAminI#}¦ {%yāminī, yāmīra.%} See. p. 814, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38651<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmI<k2>yAmI
{#yAmI#}¦ {%yāmī.%} See under 1. {%yāma,%} p. 814,
col. 1, and 2. {%yāmi%} above.
<LEND>

<L>38652<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmuna<k2>yAmuna
{#yAmuna#}¦ {%yāmuna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yamunā%}), be-
longing or relating to the river Yamunā (commonly
called Jumna), coming from it, growing in it, &c.;
({%as%}), m. a metronymic; N. of a mountain; of an
author; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%am%}), n.,
scil. {%āñjana,%} antimony, collyrium; N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Yāmunācārya (˚na-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of a pre-
ceptor (author of the Stotra-ratna).
<LEND>

<L>38653<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmunezwaka<k2>yAmunezwaka
{#yAmunezwaka#}¦ {%yāmuneṣṭaka, am,%} n. lead.
<LEND>

<L>38654<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmundAyani<k2>yAmundAyani
{#yAmundAyani#}¦ {%yāmundāyani, is,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Yamunda.
<LEND>

<L>38655<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmundAyanika<k2>yAmundAyanika
{%Yāmundāyanika%}¦ or {%yāmundāyanīya, as,%} m.
patronymics from Yamunda, (used contemptuously,
cf. Pāṇ. IV. 1, 149.)
<LEND>

<L>38656<pc>0816-b<k1>yAmya<k2>yAmya
{#yAmya#}¦ {%yāmya.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38657<pc>0816-b<k1>yAyajUka<k2>yAyajUka
{#yAyajUka#}¦ {%yāyajūka, as, ā, am%} (fr. the Intens.
of rt. 1. {%yaj%}), frequently sacrificing, constantly mak-
ing offerings, devout; ({%as%}), m. a performer of fre-
quent sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>38658<pc>0816-b<k1>yAyAta<k2>yAyAta
{#yAyAta#}¦ {%yāyāta, as, ī, am,%} relating to Ya-
yāti, belonging to Yayāti, &c.; ({%am%}), n., N. of the
eighteenth chapter of the ninth book of the Bhāga-
vata-Purāṇa (containing an account of Yayāti).
<LEND>

<L>38659<pc>0816-b<k1>yAyAvara<k2>yAyAvara
{#yAyAvara#}¦ {%yāyāvara, yāyin.%} See p. 814,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38660<pc>0816-b<k1>yArkAyaRa<k2>yArkAyaRa
{#yArkAyaRa#}¦ {%yārkāyaṇa, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>38661<pc>0816-b<k1>yAva<k2>yAva<h>1
{#yAva#} 1¦. {%yāva%} = 1. {%yava,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38662<pc>0816-b<k1>yAva<k2>yAva<h>2
{#yAva#} 2¦. {%yāva, as, ī, am%} (fr. 3. {%yava%}), relat-
ing to barley, consisting of barley, made or prepared
from barely, {%= yāvaka; (as),%} m. a kind of food
prepared from barley; lac or the red dye prepared
from the cochineal insect.
<LEND>

<L>38663<pc>0816-b<k1>yAvaka<k2>yAvaka
{%Yāvaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a kind of food prepared
from barley, barley-gruel; half ripe barley; awnless
[Page0816-c+ 80]
barley; forced rice; a sort of kidney-bean; a kind
of pulse, Dolichos Biflorus; a kind of pulse said to
be peculiar to Kaśmīra; lac, the red dye.
<LEND>

<L>38664<pc>0816-c<k1>yAvakrItika<k2>yAvakrItika
{%Yāvakrītika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%yava-krīta%}), one con-
versant with the history of Yava-krīta.
<LEND>

<L>38665<pc>0816-c<k1>yAvat<k2>yAvat
{#yAvat#}¦ {%yāvat, ān, atī, at%} (fr. the pronom.
base 3. {%ya;%} correlative of {%tāvat,%} q. v.), as great, as
large, as much, as many (= Lat. <nsi>quot</nsi>), as often, as
far, as long, how much, how many, of what sort
or kind, (for examples see {%tāvat%}); {%yāvat-tāvat,%}
‘quantum-tantum,’ an expression used in algebra
for the relation of the first unknown quantity and
its co-efficient); {%yāvantaḥ kiyantaḥ,%} as many as.
{%Yāvat,%} ind. (i. e. acc. sing. neut. used adverbially),
as greatly, as much as, as many as, as often as; as far
as, as long as, while, whilst, during; meanwhile, in the
mean time; as soon as, the moment that; till, until,
until such a time as (with pres. or pot. or fut. or aor.
or impf.); that, in order that; when (followed by
the correlative {%tāvat,%} meaning ‘then’); even, just.
{%Yāvat%} meaning ‘during,’ ‘for,’ ‘until,’ ‘up to,’ ‘as
far as,’ &c. is often used like a preposition with an
acc. (e. g. {%varṣaṃ yāvat,%} for a year; {%māsam%}
{%ekaṃ yāvat,%} during one month; {%yāvad varṣāṇi%}
{%dvādaśa,%} for twelve years; {%śataṃ janmāni yāvat,%}
for a hundred births; {%sūryodayaṃ yāvat,%} until
sunrise; {%sarpa-vivaraṃ yāvat,%} up to the serpent's
hole); or with indeclinable words like {%adya%} (e. g.
{%adya yāvat,%} up to to-day); or sometimes with a
nominative followed by {%iti%} (e. g. {%anta iti yāvat,%} as
far as the end; {%triṃśad iti yāvat,%} as many as thirty,
up to thirty; {%pañca yāvad iti,%} up to five); {%yāvad-ā%}
and sometimes even {%yāvat%} alone may be used with
a following abl. to express ‘up to,’ ‘as far as,’
‘until,’ &c. (e. g. {%yāvad-ā samāpanāt%} or simply
{%yāvat samāpanāt,%} until the completion); {%yāvan%}
{%na,%} as long as not, before that, until that; {%na%}
{%param%} or {%na kevalam — yāvat,%} not only — but also;
{%yāvatā,%} ind. (i. e. inst. c. used adverbially), as far as,
as long as; up to, until; as soon as, the moment
that; {%yāvati,%} ind. (i. e. loc. c. used adverbially),
as far as, as long as, &c.; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἧμος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>quan-</nsi>
<nsi>tus?</nsi>]. {%—Yāvac-chakyam,%} ind. (i. e. {%yāvat + śak-%}
{%yam%}), as far as possible, according to ability. {%—Yā-%}
{%vac-chas,%} ind. (i. e. {%yāvat + śas%}), Ved. as often as,
as many times as, in as many ways as. {%—Yāvac-%}
{%chastram,%} ind. (i. e. {%yāvat + ś˚%}), Ved. as far as
the Śastra extends. {%—Yāvac-cheṣam,%} ind. (i. e.
{%yāvat + ś˚%}), Ved. as much as is left, as many as
remain. {%—Yāvac-chreṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (i. e. {%yāvat%}
{%+ ś˚%}), Ved. the best possible. {%—Yāvac-chlokam,%}
ind. (i. e. {%yāvat + ś˚%}), according to the number
of the Ślokas. {%—Yāvaj-janma,%} ind. throughout
life, all one's life long. {%—Yāvaj-jīvam%} or {%yāvaj-%}
{%jīvena,%} ind. throughout life, during the whole
of life, for life, for the rest of life. {%—Yāvajjīvika,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. life-long, as long as life, lasting for
life. {%—Yāvajjīvika-tā,%} f. the lasting for life. {%—Yā-%}
{%vat-kapālam,%} ind., Ved. according to the circum-
ference of the cup or bowl. {%—Yāvat-kāmam,%} ind.,
Ved. as much as one likes, according to desire,
{%—Yāvat-kālam,%} ind. for the whole period, as long
as (anything may last). {%—Yāvat-kṛtvas,%} ind., Ved.
as often as, as many times as. {%—Yāvat-tarasam,%}
ind., Ved. according to power or ability {%(= yāvad-%}
{%balam, yathā-śakti)%}. {%—Yāvat-tmūta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. as far as soaked with fat. {%—Yāvat-pramāṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} as great, as big, as large. {%—Yāvat-saṃ-%}
{%sāram,%} ind. as long as the world lasts. {%—Yāvat-%}
{%sattvam,%} ind. as far as ability goes, to the best of
one's understanding. {%—Yāvat-sabandhu,%} ind., Ved.
as far as relationship extends, inclusive of all relations.
{%—Yāvat-samasta, as, ā, am,%} as many as form the
whole, large as it is. {%—Yāvat-svam,%} ind., Ved. as
much as one possesses, according to one's property.
{%—Yāvad-aṅgīna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. forming as large
a member or limb. {%—Yāvad-antam%} or {%yāvad-an-%}
{%tāya,%} ind. as far as the end, to the last. {%—Yāvad-%}
{%abhīkṣṇam,%} ind. for a moment's duration, for an
instant. {%—Yāvad-amatram,%} ind. corresponding to
[Page0817-a+ 71]
the number of the vessels, as many drinking-vessels
as (there may be). {%—Yāvad-artha, as, ā, am,%} as
many as necessary, corresponding to requirement;
({%am%}), ind. as much as may be useful, according to
need. {%—Yāvad-aha, am,%} n., Ved. the corresponding
day (‘the how-manieth day’). {%—Yāvad-ā-bhūta-%}
{%samplavam,%} ind. up to the dissolution of the crea-
tion, to the end of the world. {%—Yāvadāyuḥ-pra-%}
{%māṇa, as, ā, am,%} measured by the duration of life,
lasting for life. {%—Yāvad-āyuṣam,%} ind., Ved. as
long as life lasts, all through life, for the whole of
life. {%—Yāvad-āyus,%} ind. as long as life lasts, all
through life, for life. {%—Yāvad-ittham,%} ind. as much
as necessary. {%—Yāvad-īpsitam,%} ind. as far as agree-
able, as much as desired. {%—Yāvad-ukta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. as far as stated, as much as stated. {%—Yāvad-%}
{%uttamam,%} ind. up to the furthest limit or boundary.
{%—Yāvad-gamam,%} ind. as fast as one can go, as
quickly as possible. {%—Yāvad-balam,%} ind. as far as
strength goes, as long as strength lasts, to the best of
one's ability, with all one's might or strength. {%—Yā-%}
{%vad-bhāṣita, as, ā, am,%} as far as has been said, as
much as said. {%—Yāvad-rājyam,%} ind. for the whole
reign. {%—Yāvad-vedam,%} ind. as much as gained or
obtained. {%—Yāvad-vyāpti,%} ind. to the utmost reach
or extent. {%—Yāvan-mātra, as, ā, am,%} having which
measure, of which size, as large, extending as far;
moderate, insignificant, unimportant, diminutive,
little; ({%am%}), ind. in some measure or degree, a
little.
<LEND>

<L>38666<pc>0817-a<k1>yAvatiTa<k2>yAvatiTa
{%Yāvatitha, as, ī, am%}¦ (a kind of ordinal of {%yāvat%}
or, according to some, an old superl.), ‘the how-
manieth,’ ‘as-manieth,’ in how many soever degrees
advanced.
<LEND>

<L>38667<pc>0817-a<k1>yAvan<k2>yAvan<h>2
{#yAvan#} 2¦. {%yāvan%} = 1. {%yava.%} (For 1. {%yāvan%}
see p. 814, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>38668<pc>0817-a<k1>yAvan<k2>yAvan<h>3
{#yAvan#} 3¦. {%yāvan%} (fr. rt. 1. {%yu%}) in {%ṛṇa-yāvan,%}
q. v.; [cf. 2. {%yava.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38669<pc>0817-a<k1>yAvana<k2>yAvana<h>1
{#yAvana#} 1¦. {%yāvana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yavana;%}
for 2. see col. 2, for 3. see col. 3), born or produced
in the land of the Yavanas; ({%as%}), m. incense (as
coming from the country of the Yavanas).
<LEND>

<L>38670<pc>0817-a<k1>yAvanAla<k2>yAvanAla
{#yAvanAla#}¦ {%yāvanāla, as,%} m. {%= yava-nāla,%}
q. v.; ({%ī%}), f. sugar extracted from Yava-nāla. {%—Yā-%}
{%vanāla-nibha%} or {%yāvanāla-śara, as,%} m. a kind
of cane or reed resembling the Yāvanāla.
<LEND>

<L>38671<pc>0817-a<k1>yAvayat<k2>yAvayat
{#yAvayat#}¦ {%yāvayat.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38672<pc>0817-a<k1>yAvaSUka<k2>yAvaSUka
{#yAvaSUka#}¦ {%yāvaśūka, as,%} m. (fr. {%yava-śūka%})
{%= yava-kṣāra,%} a kind of alkaline salt prepared
from the ashes of burnt barley-straw.
<LEND>

<L>38673<pc>0817-a<k1>yAvasa<k2>yAvasa
{#yAvasa#}¦ {%yāvasa, as,%} m. (fr. {%yavasa%}), a heap
or quantity of grass; fodder, provender, provisions.
<LEND>

<L>38674<pc>0817-a<k1>yAvAsa<k2>yAvAsa
{#yAvAsa#}¦ {%yāvāsa%} (fr. {%yavāsa%}), see Gaṇa Pa-
lāśādi to Pāṇ. IV. 3, 141.
<LEND>

<L>38675<pc>0817-a<k1>yAvya<k2>yAvya
{#yAvya#}¦ {%yāvya.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38676<pc>0817-a<k1>yASu<k2>yASu
{#yASu#}¦ {%yāśu,%} n. (perhaps connected with rt.
{%yas%}), embracing, embrace, sexual union, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 126, 6. {%yāśūni = prajanana-%}
{%sambandhīni karmāṇi = bhogāḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>38677<pc>0817-a<k1>yASoDareya<k2>yASoDareya
{#yASoDareya#}¦ {%yāśodhareya%} (fr. {%yaśo-dharā%}),
{%as,%} m. a metronymic of Rāhula (the son of Śākya-
muni).
<LEND>

<L>38678<pc>0817-a<k1>yASoBadra<k2>yASoBadra
{#yASoBadra#}¦ {%yāśobhadra%} (fr. {%yaśo-bhadra%}), {%as,%}
m., N. of the fourth day of the civil month ({%karma-%}
{%māsa%}).
<LEND>

<L>38679<pc>0817-a<k1>yAzwIka<k2>yAzwIka
{#yAzwIka#}¦ {%yāṣṭīka%} (fr. 2. {%yaṣṭi%}), {%as, ī, am,%}
armed with a stick or club, having a staff of office;
({%as%}), m. a warrior armed with a club.
<LEND>

<L>38680<pc>0817-a<k1>yAsa<k2>yAsa
{#yAsa#}¦ {%yāsa, as,%} m. {%= yavāsa,%} Alhagi Mau-
rorum; ({%ā%}), f. a species of thrush, Turdus Salica.
<LEND>

<L>38681<pc>0817-a<k1>yAska<k2>yAska
{#yAska#}¦ {%yāska, as,%} m. (fr. {%yaska%}), a patro-
[Page0817-b+ 78]
nymic, N. of the author of the Nirukta or commen-
tary on the difficult Vedic words contained in the
lists called Nighaṇṭus, (these consist of three divisions,
1. the Naighaṇṭuka or a list of synonymous words,
2. the Naigama or words usually occurring in the
Veda only, 3. the Daivata or words relating to deities
and sacrificial acts; according to some, these three
lists were drawn up by Yāska himself, and then com-
mented on in his Nirukta, which quotes Vedic pas-
sages in illustration of the words, and is the oldest
Vedic commentary extant; Yāska is supposed to
have lived before Pāṇini); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the pupils of
Yaska.
<LEND>

<L>38682<pc>0817-b<k1>yAskAyani<k2>yAskAyani
{%Yāskāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Yāska.
<LEND>

<L>38683<pc>0817-b<k1>yAskAyanIya<k2>yAskAyanIya
{%Yāskāyanīya%}¦ or {%yāskīya, ās,%} m. pl. the pupils
of Yāskāyani.
<LEND>

<L>38684<pc>0817-b<k1>yitTa<k2>yitTa
{#yitTa#}¦ {%yittha, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38685<pc>0817-b<k1>yiyakzat<k2>yiyakzat
{#yiyakzat#}¦ {%yiyakṣat, an, antī, at,%} or {%yiya-%}
{%kṣamāṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. the Desid. of rt. 1. {%yaj%}),
purposing to sacrifice, wishing to worship.
<LEND>

<L>38686<pc>0817-b<k1>yiyakzu<k2>yiyakzu
{%Yiyakṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing or intending to
sacrifice, desirous of worshipping.
<LEND>

<L>38687<pc>0817-b<k1>yiyavizu<k2>yiyavizu
{#yiyavizu#}¦ {%yiyaviṣu.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38688<pc>0817-b<k1>yiyAsu<k2>yiyAsu
{#yiyAsu#}¦ {%yiyāsu.%} See p. 814, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38689<pc>0817-b<k1>yu<k2>yu<h>1
{#yu#} 1¦. {%yu%} (said in Dhātu-pāṭha XXIV. 23.
to be {%a-miśraṇe,%} i. e. the opposite in meaning
to rt. 2. {%yu%} below, which is {%miśraṇe,%} but rt. 1. {%yu%} is
entirely Vedic), cl. 3. P. {%yuyoti,%} ({%yuyudhi%} according
to Pāṇ. III. 4, 88); Impv. 2nd sing. {%yuyodhi;%} the
other forms are Vedic, e. g. {%yuyota, yuyavat, yu-%}
{%vanta, ayāvi, yāvīs, yūṣam, yoṣat, yoṣati,%}
{%yauṣus, yauṣṭam, yaus,%} Inf. {%yotave, yotavai,%}
{%yotos,%} Ved. to separate, remove, exclude, ward off;
to protect from (with abl.); to keep off (with acc.);
to drive away, scatter, (Sāy. {%= pṛthak-kṛ%}); to keep
apart, to be or remain separate, (Sāy. {%= pṛthag-%}
{%bhū%}); cl. 10. A. {%yāvayate,%} &c., to despise (?):
Caus. {%yavayati, yāvayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
separate or remove or keep off, &c.: Intens. {%yoyū-%}
{%yate, yoyavīti,%} to be violently separated or rent
asunder, (Sāy. = {%atyartham Pṛthag-bhū.%})
<LEND>

<L>38690<pc>0817-b<k1>yAvana<k2>yAvana<h>2
2. {%yāvana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.; for 1. {%yāvana%}
see col. 1, for 3. see col. 3), the act of removing or
keeping off.
<LEND>

<L>38691<pc>0817-b<k1>yAvayat<k2>yAvayat
{%Yāvayat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing to
keep off, warding off, protecting. {%—Yāvayat-sakha,%}
{%as,%} m. a protecting friend or companion. {%—Yāva-%}
{%yad-dveṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. driving away hostile
beings (said of Uṣas, who is supposed to make the
Rākṣasas and other malignant spirits vanish at her
approach).
<LEND>

<L>38692<pc>0817-b<k1>yut<k2>yut<h>1
1. {%yut, t, t, t%}¦ (for rt. 2. {%yut%} see s.v.), keeping off,
preventing.
<LEND>

<L>38693<pc>0817-b<k1>yuta<k2>yuta<h>1
1. {%yuta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see col. 3), separated,
separate. {%—Yuta-dveṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. delivered
from enemies, relieved from foes, (Sāy. {%= pṛthag-%}
{%bhūta-śatruka.%})
<LEND>

<L>38694<pc>0817-b<k1>yu<k2>yu<h>2
{#yu#} 2¦. {%yu%} (allied to rt. 1. {%yuj%}), cl. 2. P.,
cl. 9. P.A. {%yauti%} (3rd pl. {%yuvanti%}), {%yunāti,%}
{%yunīte, yuyāva%} (2nd sing. {%yuyavitha,%} 3rd pl. {%yu-%}
{%yuvus%}), {%yuyuve, yaviṣyati, -te, ayāvīt, aya-%}
{%viṣṭa, yavitum,%} (these forms are rarely found in
classical Sanskrit, but the following are found in the
older language, {%yaumi, yuvate, yuvāse, yuvasva,%}
{%ayuvata, yute, yuvate, yutām, (ni) yuyotam, yu-%}
{%yavat, yuyuve, yuvitā, (ni)yūya%}), to attach, har-
ness, bind, fasten; to join, unite, connect; to mix,
combine; to gain possession of (Ved.); to bestow,
confer (Ved.); to worship, honour (according to
Naigh. III. 14): Pass. {%yūyate,%} 1st Fut. {%yāvitā,%} 2nd
Fut. {%yāviṣyate,%} Aor. {%ayāvi,%} Prec. {%yāviṣīṣṭa,%}
to be joined or mixed: Caus. {%yāvayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%ayīyavat:%} Desid. of Caus. {%yiyāvayiṣati:%}
Desid. {%yiyaviṣati, yuyūṣati,%} to wish to unite or
join; to yoke: Intens. {%yoyūyate, yoyavīti, yoyoti,%}
to unite very closely; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ζώ-ννυ-μι</lang> (perhaps
for <lang n="greek">ζωσνυμι), ζώ-νη, ζῶστρον;</lang> Lat. <nsi>juvare, jus,</nsi>
<nsi>juro, jubere.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page0817-c+ 75]

<L>38695<pc>0817-c<k1>yAvana<k2>yAvana<h>3
3. {%yāvana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.; for 1. see
col. 1, for 2. see col. 2), the act of uniting or join-
ing, mixing, mingling, blending.
<LEND>

<L>38696<pc>0817-c<k1>yAvya<k2>yAvya
{%Yāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be joined or mixed, to be
united or mingled; miscible; {%= yāpya,%} unimportant,
insignificant.
<LEND>

<L>38697<pc>0817-c<k1>yiyavizA<k2>yiyavizA
{%Yiyaviṣā,%}¦ f. (fr. the Desid.), the wish to mix
or blend.
<LEND>

<L>38698<pc>0817-c<k1>yiyavizu<k2>yiyavizu
{%Yiyaviṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to mix or blend;
wishing to fill or cover.
<LEND>

<L>38699<pc>0817-c<k1>yuta<k2>yuta<h>2
2. {%yuta, as, ā, am%}¦ (often at the end of comps.),
fastened to or on, attached to [cf. {%vaḍiśa-y˚%}]; added,
joined, united; connected or joined with, accom-
panied, attended by, furnished with, endowed with,
possessed of, filled with, covered with; ({%am%}), n. a
particular measure of length = 4 Hastas.
<LEND>

<L>38700<pc>0817-c<k1>yutaka<k2>yutaka
{%Yutaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached, connected, joined,
united; ({%am%}), n. a pair, couple; union, alliance,
friendship, forming friendship; a nuptial gift or
present ({%= yautaka%}); a sort of cloth or dress; a sort
of dress worn by women; the edge of a garment,
border of a woman's dress; the edge of a winnow-
ing basket; suspicion, doubt, uncertainty ({%= saṃ-%}
{%śaya%}); an asylum, refuge {%(= saṃ-śraya).%}
<LEND>

<L>38701<pc>0817-c<k1>yuti<k2>yuti
{%Yuti, is,%}¦ f. uniting, joining, junction, union; the
being furnished with (with inst.); the obtaining pos-
session of; the sum, total number; (in arithmetic)
addition; (in astronomy) conjunction.
<LEND>

<L>38702<pc>0817-c<k1>yu<k2>yu<h>3
{#yu#} 3¦. {%yu, us, us, u%} (fr. rt. 1. {%yā%}), Ved.
going, moving, (Sāy. {%= gacchat%}); coming to
misfortune, incurring evil, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII.
18, 13 {%= yātṛ, apagamana-śīla%} or {%duḥkhaṃ%}
{%gacchat.%})
<LEND>

<L>38703<pc>0817-c<k1>yu<k2>yu<h>4
{#yu#} 4¦. {%yu,%} the actual base of the dual and
plural numbers of the second personal pro-
noun, (see {%yuṣmad.%})
<LEND>

<L>38704<pc>0817-c<k1>yuk<k2>yuk
{#yuk#}¦ {%yuk%} (?) or {%yut%} (?), ind. badly, ill;
(these appear to be wrong forms.)
<LEND>

<L>38705<pc>0817-c<k1>yukta<k2>yukta
{#yukta#}¦ {%yukta, yukti,%} &c. See p. 818.
<LEND>

<L>38706<pc>0817-c<k1>yuga<k2>yuga
{#yuga#}¦ {%yuga, yugma, yugya,%} &c. See p. 818,
col. 2, and p. 819, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38707<pc>0817-c<k1>yugat<k2>yugat
{#yugat#}¦ {%yugat,%} in Naigh. II. 15. a various
reading for {%dyu-gat,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38708<pc>0817-c<k1>yuNg<k2>yuNg
{#yuNg#}¦ {%yuṅg,%} cl. 1. P. {%yuṅgati, yuyuṅga,%}
{%yuṅgitum,%} to desert, relinquish, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>38709<pc>0817-c<k1>yuNga<k2>yuNga
{#yuNga#}¦ {%yuṅga%} in {%a-yuṅga,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38710<pc>0817-c<k1>yuNgin<k2>yuNgin
{#yuNgin#}¦ {%yuṅgin, ī,%} m., N. of a particular
mixed caste.
<LEND>

<L>38711<pc>0817-c<k1>yuC<k2>yuC
{#yuC#}¦ {%yuch%} (connected with rt. 1. {%yu%}), cl.
1. P. {%yucchati, yuyuccha, yucchitum,%}
to leave, quit, go away, depart (Ved.); to err, be
negligent or inattentive.
<LEND>

<L>38712<pc>0817-c<k1>yuj<k2>yuj<h>1
{#yuj#} 1¦. {%yuj%} (connected with rt. 2. {%yu%}),
cl. 7. P. A. {%yunakti, yuṅkte%} (said to be
also cl. 1. P. {%yojati%}), {%yuyoja, yuyuje%} (Ved. 3rd pl.
{%yuyujre%}), {%yokṣyati, -te, ayujat%} or {%ayaukṣīt,%}
{%ayukta%} (epic forms {%(anu)yuñjase,%} 3rd sing. {%yuñjate,%}
{%ayuñjam, yuñjata;%} Vedic forms {%yuje, yunajate,%}
{%yoja, yojam, yojate, yuyojate, ayuji, ayujran,%}
{%yujanta, ayukṣata), yoktum%} (Ved. Inf. {%yuje%}),
to yoke, join, attach, join together, unite, fasten,
connect, add; to harness, put to (horses, &c.); to
join one's self to, come into union or conjunction
with (e. g. {%Rohiṇīṃ śaśī yunakti,%} the moon unites
with Rohiṇī); to adhere, cleave to (A.); to apply,
fit, fix; to use, employ, make use of; to make
ready, prepare, fit out, arrange; to appoint, institute;
to enjoin, charge; to put on, place on, fix on, fasten
on (as an arrow on a bow-string); to put in, infix,
insert, inject; to fix the mind ({%manas, cittam,%} &c.)
on anything (loc.); to direct, turn, bend the thoughts
({%cintām,%} &c.) towards any object (loc.); to concen-
trate or fix the mind (in order to obtain union with
the Universal Spirit); to be absorbed or deeply en-
gaged in meditation, meditate, think upon; to join
[Page0818-a+ 81]
or connect with (with inst.), bring into the posses-
sion of, furnish or endow with (with inst.), bestow
anything (acc.) upon any one (loc. or gen.), grant,
confer: Pass. {%yujyate%} (ep. also {%yujyati%}), Aor. {%ayoji,%}
to be yoked or joined; to be fastened or united; to
be harnessed; to be put to; to join or connect one's
self with, be in conjunction with, to adhere, cleave
to; to be applied; to be fit or proper, to be adapted
or suitable, to be right; to be made ready or pre-
pared; to be placed or fixed on, to be directed
towards; to be absorbed or immersed in; to medi-
tate; to be joined or endowed with or possessed of
(with inst.); to participate in, attain to, possess,
obtain (with inst.): Caus. {%yojayati, -yate, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%ayūyujat,%} to cause to join or unite; to cause
union or conjunction; to yoke, harness, put to; to
join, unite, fasten, connect, add; to apply, fix, fit,
place, lay; to use, make use of; to prepare, arrange,
equip, undertake, execute; to appoint, employ, com-
mission, appoint to (with loc.); to fix on, place on
or in; to fix the mind ({%manas%} or {%ātmānam%}) on,
direct the thoughts &c. to (with loc.); to concen-
trate the attention on, be immersed or engrossed in
(with loc.); to furnish or endow with (with inst.);
to make to possess or partake of (with inst.), cause
to share in, present with, bestow upon; to urge or
incite any one (acc.) to anything (dat.), to excite,
instigate; to surround; to think little of, esteem
lightly, despise (A.): Desid. {%yuyukṣati, -te,%} to
wish to join or unite, to desire to appoint, to desire
to place in any employment or occupation; to wish
to fix or place; to be about to place or put on; to
intend to fix (the mind) on; to wish to be absorbed
in: Intens. {%yoyujyate, yoyujīti, yoyokti;%} [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ζεύγ-νυ-μι (ἐ-ζύγ-η-ν), ζεῦγ-μα, ζεῦγ-ος, ὁμό-ζυξ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σύ-ζυξ, ζυγ-ό-ς, ζυγ-ό-ν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ju-n-g-o, ju-men-</nsi>
<nsi>tu-m, con-jux, jug-u-m, jugeru-m, juxta;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>juk, ga-juk;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>joh, joch;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>geo-</nsi>
<nsi>can, geoce;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>ig-o;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>junga-s, jung-iu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>38713<pc>0818-a<k1>yukta<k2>yukta
{%Yukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ yoked, joined, united, con-
nected, attached, fastened, harnessed; used, em-
ployed, prepared, fitted out, arranged, ready, arranged
in regular order, adapted, fitted, fit, suitable, just,
proper, right, moderate, due, ({%yuktaḥ kālena yaḥ,%}
one who makes use of the right opportunity; {%āyati-%}
{%yukta,%} suitable or profitable for the future); ap-
pointed, engaged, occupied; fixed on, intent on
(with loc. or at the end of a comp.); occupied with,
immersed in, engaged in, absorbed in, attentive,
attached to, given up or devoted to, absorbed in
abstract meditation or in the religious exercise called
Yoga; exercised in, skilled in, experienced, skilful,
clever; active, energetic; joined with, furnished
with, endowed with, filled with, possessed of, having,
possessing (with inst. or at the end of a comp.);
connected with, relating to; proved, inferred, de-
duced by argument; (in gram.) primitive, i. e. not
derivative; ({%am%}), ind. collectively, in troops (Ved.);
suitably, properly, rightly, fitly, duly, well; ({%as%}), m.
a sage or saint who has become united with the
Universal Soul, one who is so absorbed in meditating
on the Supreme Spirit as to be free from all feeling
and passion; N. of a son of Manu Raivata; of one
of the seven Ṛṣis under Manu Bhautya; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a plant (commonly called Elāni, cf. {%yukta-%}
{%rasā%}); ({%am%}), n. a team, yoke; a measure of four
cubits, (incorrectly for 2. {%yuta.%}) {%—Yukta-karman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} invested with any office or function, ap-
pointed to any work. {%—Yukta-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} or
{%yukta-kṛt, t, t, t,%} doing properly or suitably, acting
fitly. {%—Yukta-grāvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having the
stone (for bruising the Soma) prepared, (Sāy. =
{%udyata-grāvan.%}) {%—Yukta-tama, as, ā, am,%} most
fit; most absorbed in or intent on, very much
devoted to. {%—Yukta-tara, as, ā, am,%} more fit, very
intent on or attentive, very much on one's guard
(Manu VII. 186). {%—Yukta-tva, am,%} n. application,
use, employment; suitableness, fitness, propriety.
{%—Yukta-daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} employing or applying
punishment; punishing justly. {%—Yuktadaṇḍa-tā,%} f.
the inflicting of just punishment. {%—Yukta-manas, %}
[Page0818-b+ 81]
{%ās, ās, as,%} ready-minded, fixing the mind, attentive.
{%—Yukta-māṃsala, as, ā, am,%} Ved. properly stout or
fleshy. {%—Yukta-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a particular kind
of cleansing clyster; of a sort of elixir. {%—Yukta-rasā,%}
f. a species of plant ({%= yuktā)%}. {%—Yukta-rūpa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} suitably formed, symmetrical, suitable, proper,
fit, moderate; fit for, corresponding to (with loc. or
gen.); ({%am%}), ind. suitably. {%—Yukta-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. containing the verb {%yuj%}. {%—Yukta-śītoṣṇa%}
{%(˚ta-uṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} of moderate cold and heat.
{%—Yukta-sena, as, ā, am,%} one whose army is ready
(for marching). {%—Yuktasenīya, as, ā, am,%} relating
to one whose army is ready for marching. {%—Yuktā-%}
{%yas (˚ta-ay˚), as,%} n. ‘bound with iron,’ a sort of
spade or shovel. {%—Yuktāyukta (˚ta-ay˚), am,%} n.
the proper and improper, right and wrong. {%—Yuk-%}
{%tārohin (˚ta-ār˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} see Pāṇ. VI. 2, 81.
{%—Yuktārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having mean-
ing, filled with significance, sensible, rational, signi-
ficant. {%—Yuktāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. hav-
ing yoked horses; consisting of horses, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda V. 41, 5 {%= aśva-sahita,%} ac-
companied with horses.)
<LEND>

<L>38714<pc>0818-b<k1>yukti<k2>yukti
{%Yukti, is,%}¦ f. yoking, joining, junction, juncture,
union, connection, combination; putting to, harness-
ing; application, use, employment, practice, usage;
appliance, means, plan, scheme, expedient, ({%dravya-%}
{%yuktibhis,%} by the appliances of money); trick, con-
trivance, device, stratagem; charm, spell; suitableness,
adaptedness, adjustment, fitness, aptness, propriety,
correctness; skill, dexterity, ingenuity, art; reasoning,
argument, argumentation, inference, induction, deduc-
tion from circumstances; probability, provableness;
reason, ground, motive; (in the drama) connection
of events in the plot, concatenation of incidents, in-
telligent weighing of the circumstances; (in gram.)
connection of words, a sentence; (in law) enumera-
tion of circumstances, specification of place, time,
&c.; (in rhetoric) emblematic or mystical expression
of purpose; supplying an ellipsis; sum, total; mix-
ture or alloying of metals; conjunction (in astro-
nomy); {%yuktyā,%} inst. c. by means of, by virtue of
(at the end of a comp.); by device or stratagem,
cunningly, craftily, cleverly, artfully, skilfully, under
pretext or pretence; properly, suitably, fitly, duly;
{%yuktiṃ kṛ,%} to make arrangements, take measures;
to find a means, discover a remedy; to employ
stratagem. {%—Yukti-kathana, am,%} n. statement of
argument, giving reasons. {%—Yukti-kara, as, ī, am,%}
causing fitness, suitable, proper, fit; established,
proved. {%—Yukti-kalpa-taru, us,%} m. [cf. {%kalpa-%}
{%taru%}], ‘Kalpa tree of prosperity,’ N. of a work
ascribed to king Bhoja (describing the virtues and
good qualities that ought to be found in a king's
ministers, army, &c.). {%—Yukti-jña, as, ā, am,%}
knowing the proper application, knowing the means
or remedy; skilled in mixing (substances). {%—Yukti-%}
{%tas,%} ind. by means of, by virtue of (at the end of a
comp.); by stratagem or craft, craftily, cleverly,
artfully, under some pretence or pretext; in a suitable
manner, properly, fitly, duly, according to propriety
or justice. {%—Yukti-bhāṣā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Yuk-%}
{%ti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} joined, united, tied; possessing
fitness, full of contrivances or plans, fertile in expe-
dients, ingenious, clever, inventive, able, competent;
furnished with arguments, based on argument, proved.
{%—Yuktimat-tva, am,%} n. the being based on argu-
ment, the being proved. {%—Yukti-yukta, as, ā, am,%}
possessing fitness or aptness, experienced, expert,
skilful; possessing fitness or reason, suitable, proper,
fit; established, proved. {%—Yukti-śāstra, am,%} n. the
science of what is suitable or proper. {%—Yukti-sneha-%}
{%prapūraṇī,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Śāstra-
dīpikā by Rāma-kṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭa, (the work is also
called Siddhānta-candrikā.)
<LEND>

<L>38715<pc>0818-b<k1>yuktvA<k2>yuktvA
{%Yuktvā,%}¦ ind. having yoked, having joined, having
harnessed; having equipped or furnished; (a form
{%yuṅktvā%} is also found.)
<LEND>

<L>38716<pc>0818-b<k1>yuga<k2>yuga
{%Yuga, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a yoke; ({%am%}), n. a pair,
couple, brace; a double Śloka or two Ślokas so con-
nected that the sense is only completed by the two
[Page0818-c+ 81]
together; a race or generation of men, (generally in
Ved. with {%mānuṣa%} or {%manuṣya%}); a period or
astronomical cycle of five years, a lustrum, (especially
such a period in the cycle of Jupiter); an age of the
world, long mundane period of years, (of which there
are four, each preceded by a period called {%Sandhyā,%}
‘twilight,’ and followed by a period called {%Sandhyāṃśa,%}
‘portion of twilight;’ viz. 1. Kṛta or Satya, 2. Tretā,
3. Dvāpara, 4. Kali, of which the first three have
already elapsed, while the Kali is that in which we
are supposed to live; the first consists of 4000 divine
years with 400 for each of its twilights, the second
of 3000 with 300 for each twilight, the third of
2000 with 200 for each twilight, the fourth or Kali
of 1000 with 100 for each twilight; but since a divine
year equals 360 years of men, the four Yugas com-
prise severally 1, 728, 000, 1,296,000, 864,000,
and 432, 000 years, the aggregate 4,320, 000 con-
stituting ‘a great Yuga,’ or {%Mahā-yuga,%} q. v.: the
regularly descending numbers in the above series
represent a corresponding physical and moral deteri-
oration in those who live during each age, the present
or Kali-yuga being the worst; this last Yuga is sup-
posed to have commenced 3101 or 3102 years B.C.);
a measure of length (= 4 Hastas or cubits); a sym-
bolical expression for the number 4 and sometimes
for the number 12; N. of a particular position or
configuration of the moon; of a particular Nābhasa
constellation (of the class called Saṅkhyā-yoga, when
all the planets are situated in two houses); a species
of drug or medicinal plant ({%= vṛddhi%}); [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ζυγόν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>jugum;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>ioc, iuc, geoc.</nsi>]
{%—Yuga-kīlaka, as,%} m. the pin of a yoke. {%—Yuga-%}
{%kṣaya, as,%} m. the end of a Yuga, destruction of
the world. {%—Yuga-dīrgha, as, ā, am,%} long as a
chariot yoke. {%—Yugan-dhara, as, ā, am,%} holding
or bearing the yoke; ({%as, am%}), m. n. the pole of a
carriage or wood to which the yoke is fixed; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a particular magical formula spoken over
weapons; of a king; of a mountain; of a forest;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Yuga-pa, as,%} m., N.
of a Gandharva. {%—Yuga-pattra%} or {%yuga-pattraka,%}
{%as,%} m. mountain ebony, the plant Bauhinia Varie-
gata. {%—Yuga-pattrikā,%} f. the plant Dalbergia Sissoo.
{%—Yugapat-prāpti, is,%} f. simultaneous arrival, arriv-
ing all together. {%—Yuga-pad,%} ind. ‘being in the
same yoke or by the side of each other,’ together,
at one time, at the same time, simultaneously, at
once, all at once, all together. {%—Yuga-pārśvaka%} or
{%yuga-pārśva-ga, as, ā, am,%} going at the side of
the yoke (said of a young ox in training). {%—Yuga-%}
{%purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a section of the Garga-saṃ-
hitā. {%—Yuga-bāhu, us, us, u,%} ‘yoke-armed,’ having
arms like a yoke, long armed. {%—Yuga-bhaṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. the breaking of a yoke. {%—Yuga-mātra, am,%}
n. the length of a yoke; ({%as, ī, am%}), as large as a
yoke. {%—Yuga-varatra%} or {%yuga-varatrā,%} see Gaṇa
Khaṇḍikādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 45. {%—Yuga-vyāyata-%}
{%bāhu, us, us, u,%} having arms long as a yoke; long
armed. {%—Yugāṃśaka (˚ga-aṃ˚), as,%} m. ‘part of a
Yuga or lustrum,’ a year, (also {%yugāṃsaka.%}) {%—Yu-%}
{%gādi (˚ga-ādi), is,%} m. the commencement of a
Yuga, the beginning of the world. {%—Yugādi-kṛt,%}
{%t,%} m., N. of Śiva. {%—Yugādi-jina, as,%} m. the first
Jina of a Yuga. {%—Yugādijina-śrī, īs,%} m., N. of
Ṛṣabha. {%—Yugādīśa (˚di-īśa), as,%} m. ‘first lord
of a Yuga,’ N. of Ṛṣabha. {%—Yugādyā (˚ga-ād˚),%}
f. the first day of a Yuga or age of the world; the
anniversary of it. {%—Yugādhyakṣa (˚ga-adh˚), as,%}
m. ‘superintendent of a Yuga,’ epithet of Prajāpati;
of Śiva. {%—Yugānta (˚ga-an˚), as,%} m. the end of
the yoke; the meridian, midday, noon; the end
of a generation; the end of an age or Yuga, destruc-
tion of the world. {%—Yugāntaka, as,%} m. the end of
an age, end of the world. {%—Yugānta-bandhu, us,%}
m. a real and constant friend. {%—Yugāntara (˚ga-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. a kind of yoke, a peculiar yoke; the
second half of the arc cutting the meridian described
by the sun; another generation, a succeeding age.
{%—Yugāntāgni (˚ta-ag˚), is,%} m. the fire at the end
of the world. {%—Yugeśa (˚ga-īśa), as,%} m., Ved. the
[Page0819-a+ 81]
lord or ruler of a lustrum. {%—Yugorasya (˚ga-ur˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a particular array of troops.
<LEND>

<L>38717<pc>0819-a<k1>yugala<k2>yugala
{%Yugala, am,%}¦ n. a pair, couple, brace, ({%upānad-%}
{%yugalam,%} a pair of shoes; {%kaṇṭha-niveśita-hasta-%}
{%yugalā,%} having both her hands applied to her neck);
‘double prayer,’ N. of a prayer offered up to
Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa. {%—Yugala-bhakta, ās,%} m.
pl., N. of a subdivision of the Caitanya Vaiṣṇavas.
{%—Yugalākhya (˚la-ākh˚), as,%} m. a species of
plant.
<LEND>

<L>38718<pc>0819-a<k1>yugalaka<k2>yugalaka
{%Yugalaka, am,%}¦ n. a pair, couple, brace; a couple
of Ślokas or two verses so connected that the sense is
only completed by the two together.
<LEND>

<L>38719<pc>0819-a<k1>yugalAya<k2>yugalAya
{%Yugalāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%yugalāyate,%} &c., to be like
or represent a pair (of anything).
<LEND>

<L>38720<pc>0819-a<k1>yugalAyita<k2>yugalAyita
{%Yugalāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ representing or like a pair.
<LEND>

<L>38721<pc>0819-a<k1>yugAya<k2>yugAya
{%Yugāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%yugāyate,%} &c., to appear as
long as a Yuga, to seem like eternity.
<LEND>

<L>38722<pc>0819-a<k1>yugin<k2>yugin
{%Yugin%}¦ in {%vastrayugin,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38723<pc>0819-a<k1>yugma<k2>yugma
{%Yugma, as, ā, am,%}¦ even [cf. {%a-y˚%}]; ({%am%}), n. a
pair, couple, brace; twins; the sign of the zodiac
Gemini; a couple of Ślokas or two verses so con-
nected that the sense is only completed by the two
together; junction, union, mixing, uniting; conflu-
ence (of two streams). {%—Yugma-ja, au,%} m. du.
twins. {%—Yugma-pattra, as,%} m. mountain ebony,
Bauhinia Variegata {%(= yuga-pattra)%}. {%—Yugma-%}
{%pattrikā,%} f. Dalbergia Sissoo {%(= yuga-pattrikā).%}
{%—Yugma-parṇa, as,%} m. Bauhinia Variegata; Al-
stonia Scholaris. {%—Yugma-phalā,%} f., N. of various
plants {%(= indra-cirbiṭī, vṛścikālī, gandhikā).%}
{%—Yugma-phalottama (˚la-ut˚), as,%} m. Asclepias
Rosea. {%—Yugma-vipulā,%} f. a species of metre.
<LEND>

<L>38724<pc>0819-a<k1>yugmaka<k2>yugmaka
{%Yugmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ even; ({%am%}), n. a pair,
couple, brace; a couple of Ślokas or verses connected
by the construction of the sentence (the sense being
completed only by the two together).
<LEND>

<L>38725<pc>0819-a<k1>yugman<k2>yugman
{%Yugman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ or {%yugmat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
even.
<LEND>

<L>38726<pc>0819-a<k1>yugmin<k2>yugmin
{%Yugmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ an adj. fr. {%yugma.%}
<LEND>

<L>38727<pc>0819-a<k1>yugya<k2>yugya
{%Yugya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit or proper to be yoked or
harnessed; belonging to a yoke; yoked, harnessed;
drawn by (e. g. {%aśva-yugya,%} drawn by horses); any
yoked or draught animal; ({%am%}), n. a vehicle, car-
riage, car, chariot; {%jamadagner vrataṃ yugyam,%}
N. of a Sāman. {%—Yugya-vāha, as,%} m. a coachman,
driver. {%—Yugya-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in a car-
riage, a person in a carriage.
<LEND>

<L>38728<pc>0819-a<k1>yuj<k2>yuj<h>2
2. {%yuj, k, k, k%}¦ (often at the end of comps.;
when uncompounded the strong cases ought to
have a nasal inserted, e. g. {%yuṅ, yuñjau, yuñjas,%}
{%yuñjam, yuñjau%}), yoked, joined, connected, joined
to, harnessed, drawn by, ({%catur-yuj,%} drawn by four
horses; {%aśva-sahasra-yuj,%} drawn by a thousand
horses; {%hayottama-yuj,%} drawn by the best horses);
yoked or joined together, any one who is joined
or yoked, a yoke-fellow, yoke-mate, companion;
furnished or provided with, filled with, affected by,
possessed of, possessing (e. g. {%prīti-yuj,%} possessing
pleasure, pleased; {%kāma-yuj,%} possessing, i. e. grant-
ing desires, cf. {%dharma-yuj%}); exciting, an exciter,
({%yuṅ bhiyaḥ,%} exciter of fear); in couples or pairs,
even, not odd, not single, not separate [cf. {%a-yuj%}];
({%k%} or {%ṅ%}), m. a pair, couple, the number two; a
joiner, one who joins or unites; one who devotes
his time to abstract contemplation, a sage; a measure
of 300 poles (?); {%yujau,%} m. du. the sign of the
zodiac Gemini; the two Aśvins; [cf. Lat. <nsi>con-jux,</nsi>
<nsi>con-jug-is.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>38729<pc>0819-a<k1>yuja<k2>yuja
{%Yuja%}¦ = 2. {%yuj,%} ‘even,’ ‘not odd,’ in a few comps.
<LEND>

<L>38730<pc>0819-a<k1>yujya<k2>yujya
{%Yujya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. connected, united, friendly;
related, allied; suitable, fit, fitting, proper; of the same
kind, homogeneous; a kinsman; ({%am%}), n. union,
connection, relationship; {%jamadagner vrataṃ yuj-%}
{%yam,%} N. of a Sāman, (also read {%yugyam.%})
<LEND>

<L>38731<pc>0819-a<k1>yujyamAna<k2>yujyamAna
{%Yujyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being united or joined
or connected with (with inst.); being furnished or
provided with, possessing (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>38732<pc>0819-a<k1>yuYjaka<k2>yuYjaka
{%Yuñjaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ applying, performing, exer-
cising, practising, ({%dhyāna-yuñjaka,%} practising
devotion.)
<LEND>
[Page0819-b+ 77]

<L>38733<pc>0819-b<k1>yuYjat<k2>yuYjat
{%Yuñjat, an, atī, at,%}¦ uniting, joining; uniting spi-
ritually, practising devotion.
<LEND>

<L>38734<pc>0819-b<k1>yuYjAna<k2>yuYjAna
{%Yuñjāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ uniting, combining, joining
with; suitable, fitting, proper; successful, prosperous;
({%as%}), m. a driver, coachman, charioteer; a Brāhman,
one who by the religious exercise called Yoga endea-
vours to obtain union with the Supreme Soul.
<LEND>

<L>38735<pc>0819-b<k1>yuYjAnaka<k2>yuYjAnaka
{%Yuñjānaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ containing the word
{%yuñjāna.%}
<LEND>

<L>38736<pc>0819-b<k1>yuyukzamARa<k2>yuyukzamARa
{%Yuyukṣamāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), wish-
ing to join or unite; wishing to effect spiritual union
(with the divine essence), devout.
<LEND>

<L>38737<pc>0819-b<k1>yuyujAna<k2>yuyujAna
{%Yuyujāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (Perf. Part. A.), one who
has yoked or joined. {%—Yuyujāna-sapti, ī,%} m. du.,
Ved. having harnessed or yoked their horses (said of
the two Aśvins; Sāy. {%= rathe yujyamānāśvau%}).
<LEND>

<L>38738<pc>0819-b<k1>yoktavya<k2>yoktavya
{%Yoktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be yoked or joined or
united, to be united (spiritually); to be applied or
made use of, applicable, practicable; to be appointed
to (any office), to be charged with (with loc., e. g.
{%karmaṇi yoktavyaḥ,%} to be charged with a business);
to be fixed on or directed to (as the mind); to be
furnished or endowed with, to be made to be pos-
sessed of (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>38739<pc>0819-b<k1>yoktf<k2>yoktf
{%Yoktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who yokes or harnesses,
a harnesser, driver, coachman; an exciter, rouser.
<LEND>

<L>38740<pc>0819-b<k1>yoktra<k2>yoktra
{%Yoktra, am,%}¦ n. any instrument for tying or fas-
tening, a tie, fastening, band, cord, halter, rope,
thong, girth; the tie of the yoke of a plough; the
thongs by which an animal is attached to the pole
of a vehicle.
<LEND>

<L>38741<pc>0819-b<k1>yoktraka<k2>yoktraka
{%Yoktraka, am,%}¦ n. {%= yoktra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>38742<pc>0819-b<k1>yoktraya<k2>yoktraya
{%Yoktraya%}¦ (fr. {%yoktra%}), Nom. P. {%yoktrayati,%} &c.,
to tie, bind, fasten, wind round.
<LEND>

<L>38743<pc>0819-b<k1>yoga<k2>yoga
{%Yoga, yogya,%}¦ &c. See p. 821, col. 2, and
p. 823, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38744<pc>0819-b<k1>yojana<k2>yojana
{%Yojana, yojayitṛ, yojitṛ, yojya,%}¦ &c. See
p. 823, cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>38745<pc>0819-b<k1>yuYjanda<k2>yuYjanda
{#yuYjanda#}¦ {%yuñjanda,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>38746<pc>0819-b<k1>yut<k2>yut<h>2
{#yut#} 2¦. {%yut%} (allied to rts. {%jut, jyut, dyut;%}
for 1. {%yut%} see p. 817, col. 2), cl. 1. A.
{%yotate,%} &c., to shine; [cf. Hib. <nsi>iudh,</nsi> ‘a day;’
<nsi>an-iudh,</nsi> ‘to-day;’ <nsi>iodhna,</nsi> ‘brightness, purity;’
‘clean, pure.’]
<LEND>

<L>38747<pc>0819-b<k1>yuta<k2>yuta
{#yuta#}¦ {%yuta, yutaka.%} See under rts. 1. and 2.
{%yu,%} p. 817.
<LEND>

<L>38748<pc>0819-b<k1>yuti<k2>yuti
{#yuti#}¦ {%yuti.%} See p. 817, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38749<pc>0819-b<k1>yutkAra<k2>yutkAra
{#yutkAra#}¦ {%yut-kāra, yud-bhū.%} See under 2.
{%yudh,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38750<pc>0819-b<k1>yudDa<k2>yudDa
{#yudDa#}¦ {%yuddha.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38751<pc>0819-b<k1>yuD<k2>yuD<h>1
{#yuD#} 1¦. {%yudh,%} cl. 4. A. P. (in Post-Vedic
literature usually A. except where the metre
requires P.) {%yudhyate (-ti), yuyudhe%} (3rd pl. P.
{%yuyudhuḥ%}), {%yotsyate (yotsyati), ayuddha (ayo-%}
{%dhīt), yoddhum%} (Ved. Inf. {%yudhaye%}), to fight,
combat, oppose in battle (with acc.); to overcome
in battle, conquer, vanquish (with acc.); to fight or
contend with (with inst. or inst. with {%saha,%} e. g.
{%śatrubhiḥ%} or {%śatrubhiḥ saha yudhyate,%} he fights
with enemies); to fight for or about (with loc.,
Ved.); to wage war, fight, engage in battle or war;
(according to Naigh. II. 14) to go (P.): Pass. {%yu-%}
{%dhyate,%} to be fought: Caus. P. {%yodhayati%} (rarely
A. {%-te%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%ayūyudhat,%} to cause to fight,
make to fight with (with inst.); to order to fight;
to make war upon, attack, fight against, oppose; to
overcome in battle, vanquish, conquer; to defend:
Pass. of Caus. {%yodhyate,%} to be made to fight, &c.:
Desid. {%yuyutsati, -te%} (in ep. often P. on account
of the metre), to be desirous or anxious to fight; to
wish to conquer; to prepare to fight: Caus. of
Desid. {%yuyutsayati,%} to make desirous of fighting,
make eager for battle: Intens. {%yoyudhyate, yoyod-%}
{%dhi;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>yud:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὑσ-μλιην, ὑσ-μίν:</lang> Hib.
<nsi>iodhna,</nsi> ‘spears, arms’ (= {%ā-yudha%}); <nsi>iodnach,</nsi>
‘valiant;’ <nsi>iodhlan,</nsi> ‘a hero:’ (perhaps also) Angl.
Sax. <nsi>gudh:</nsi> (perhaps) Old Germ. <nsi>gund,</nsi> ‘battle.’]
<LEND>
[Page0819-c+ 81]

<L>38752<pc>0819-c<k1>yudDa<k2>yudDa
{%Yuddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ fought, encountered; over-
come, subdued, conquered; ({%am%}), n. war, battle,
conflict, fight, combat, struggle, contest, strife, en-
gagement; (in astronomy) opposition, conflict of the
planets. {%—Yuddha-kāṇḍa, am,%} n. ‘battle-section,’
N. of the sixth book of Vālmīki's Rāmāyaṇa; of
the sixth book of the Adhyātma-rāmāyaṇa. {%—Yud-%}
{%dhakāri-tva, am,%} n. making war, fighting. {%—Yud-%}
{%dha-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} making war, fighting, con-
tending, struggling, engaging in battle. {%—Yuddha-%}
{%kīrtti, is,%} m., N. of a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya.
{%—Yuddha-gāndharva, am,%} n. a battle like the
dance of the Gandharvas. {%—Yuddha-jayārṇava%}
{%(˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a section of the Jyotiḥ-
śāstra. {%—Yuddha-jayopāya (˚ya-up˚), as,%} m., N.
of a work. {%—Yuddha-jit, t, t, t,%} victorious in battle.
{%—Yuddha-dyūta, am,%} n. the game of war, luck
of battle, chance of war, (see {%dyūta.%}) {%—Yuddha-%}
{%dharma, as,%} m. the law of war. {%—Yuddha-parāṅ-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} averse from fighting. {%—Yuddha-%}
{%purī,%} f., N. of a town. {%—Yuddha-bhū, ūs,%} or
{%yuddha-bhūmi, is,%} f. battle-ground, a field of battle.
{%—Yuddha-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of war, re-
sulting from battle, relating to war, warlike, martial.
{%—Yuddha-mārga, as,%} m. a mode of fighting,
stratagem, manœuvre. {%—Yuddha-muṣṭi, is,%} m.,
N. of a son of Ugra-sena. {%—Yuddha-medinī,%} f.
battle-ground, a field of battle. {%—Yuddha-yojaka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} preparing for war, eager for battle.
{%—Yuddha-raṅga, as,%} m. ‘battle-arena,’ field of
battle; ({%as, ā, am%}), whose arena is battle; ({%as%}),
m., N. of Kārttikeya. {%—Yuddha-vastu, u,%} n. an
implement of war. {%—Yuddha-vidyā,%} f. the science
of war, military art. {%—Yuddha-vīra, as,%} m. ‘battle-
hero,’ a valiant man, warrior, hero, champion; he-
roism, bravery (as one of the Rasas). {%—Yuddha-%}
{%śakti, is,%} f. warlike vigour or prowess. {%—Yuddha-%}
{%śālin, ī, inī, i,%} warlike, courageous, valiant, bold.
{%—Yuddha-sāra, as,%} m. ‘battle-goer,’ a horse.
{%—Yuddhācārya (˚dha-āc˚), as,%} m. ‘war-pre-
ceptor,’ a military instructor, one who teaches the
use of arms. {%—Yuddhāji (˚dha-āji), is,%} m., N. of
a descendant of Aṅgiras. {%—Yuddhādhvan (˚dha-%}
{%adh˚), ā, ā, a,%} going or resorting to battle. {%—Yud-%}
{%dhārthin (˚dha-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} desirous of war,
seeking war. {%—Yuddhāvasāna (˚dha-av˚), am,%} n.
cessation of war, truce. {%—Yuddhodyama (˚dha-%}
{%ud˚),%} or {%yuddhodyoga (˚dha-ud˚), as,%} m. pre-
paring for battle, vigorous and active preparation for
war. {%—Yuddhonmatta (˚dha-un˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘battle-mad,’ fierce or frantic in battle; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a Rākṣasa. {%—Yuddhopakaraṇa (˚dha-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a war implement, accoutrements.
<LEND>

<L>38753<pc>0819-c<k1>yudDaka<k2>yudDaka
{%Yuddhaka, am,%}¦ n. {%= yuddha,%} war, battle, &c.
<LEND>

<L>38754<pc>0819-c<k1>yudDin<k2>yudDin
{%Yuddhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ relating to war or battle, &c.
<LEND>

<L>38755<pc>0819-c<k1>yuD<k2>yuD<h>2
2. {%yudh, t, t, t,%}¦ warring, fighting; a fighter, war-
rior, soldier, hero, champion; ({%t%}), f. war, fight,
battle, combat, conflict, struggle, contest. {%—Yut-%}
{%kāra, as, ī, am,%} Ved. making war, waging war,
fighting, contending. {%—Yud-bhū, ūs,%} f. battle-ground,
a field of battle. {%—Yudhā-jit, t, t, t (yudhā,%} inst. c.),
conquering or vanquishing by means of war; ({%t%}),
m., N. of a son of Kroṣṭu by a woman called
Mādrī; of a son of Kekaya (uncle of Bharata); of
a son of Vṛṣṇi; of a king of Ujjayinī. {%—Yudhā-%}
{%manyu, us,%} m. ({%yudhā,%} inst. c.), N. of a warrior
on the side of the Pāṇḍavas. {%—Yudhi-śreṣṭha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} pre-eminent in battle. {%—Yudhi-ṣṭhira, as,%}
m. ({%yudhi,%} loc. c. + {%sthira%}), ‘firm or steady in
battle,’ N. of the eldest of the five reputed sons
of Pāṇḍu, (though nominally the son of Pāṇḍu, he
was really the child of Pṛthā or Kuntī, Pāṇḍu's wife,
by the god Dharma or Yama, whence he is often
called Dharma-putra or Dharma-rāja; as the eldest
of the five Pāṇḍavas, he ultimately succeeded Pāṇḍu
as king, first reigning over Indra-prastha, and after-
wards, when the Kuru princes or sons of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra were defeated, at Hāstina-pura); N. of a son
of Kṛṣṇa; of two kings of Kaśmīra; of a potter
(in Pañca-tantra, p. 217); of a preceptor; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. the descendants of Yudhi-ṣṭhira, son of Pāṇḍu.
[Page0820-a+ 80]
{%—Yudhiṣṭhira-purogama, as, ā, am,%} having
Yudhi-ṣṭhira as leader, led on by Yudhi-ṣṭhira.
<LEND>

<L>38756<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDAMSrOzwi<k2>yuDAMSrOzwi
{%Yudhāṃśrauṣṭi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38757<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDAji<k2>yuDAji
{%Yudhāji,%}¦ cf. {%yaudhājaya.%}
<LEND>

<L>38758<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDAjit<k2>yuDAjit
{%Yudhā-jit, yudhā-manyu.%}¦ See under 2. {%yudh.%}
<LEND>

<L>38759<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDAjIva<k2>yuDAjIva
{%Yudhājīva, as,%}¦ m. a proper N., (perhaps for
{%yuddhājīva.%})
<LEND>

<L>38760<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDAna<k2>yuDAna
{%Yudhāna, as,%}¦ m. a man of the second or military
order, a warrior; an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>38761<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDAsura<k2>yuDAsura
{%Yudhāsura, as,%}¦ m., N. of king Nanda.
<LEND>

<L>38762<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDi<k2>yuDi
{%Yudhi,%}¦ Ved. fighting, contending, battle, (usually
occurring in the dat. {%yudhaye%} used as a Ved. Inf.
in the sense ‘to fight.’)
<LEND>

<L>38763<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDika<k2>yuDika
{%Yudhika, as, ā, am,%}¦ fighting, contending, (per-
haps an incorrect form.)
<LEND>

<L>38764<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDiNgama<k2>yuDiNgama
{%Yudhiṅ-gama, as, ā, am (yudhim,%}¦ acc. c.),
Ved. going to battle.
<LEND>

<L>38765<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDizWira<k2>yuDizWira
{%Yudhi-ṣṭhira.%}¦ See under 2. {%yudh.%}
<LEND>

<L>38766<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDenya<k2>yuDenya
{%Yudhenya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be fought with,
to be overcome in battle.
<LEND>

<L>38767<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDma<k2>yuDma
{%Yudhma, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. warlike, material; ({%as%}),
m. a warrior, champion, soldier, (Sāy. {%= yoddhṛ%});
a battle, fight; an arrow; a bow; (according to
some) {%= śeṣa-saṅgrāma; = śarabha.%}
<LEND>

<L>38768<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDya<k2>yuDya
{%Yudhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be fought with; to be
conquered or subdued, conquerable.
<LEND>

<L>38769<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDyamAna<k2>yuDyamAna
{%Yudhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fighting, making war.
<LEND>

<L>38770<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDyAmaDi<k2>yuDyAmaDi
{%Yudhyāmadhi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38771<pc>0820-a<k1>yuDvan<k2>yuDvan
{%Yudhvan, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. warlike, martial, a warrior.
<LEND>

<L>38772<pc>0820-a<k1>yuyutsat<k2>yuyutsat
{%Yuyutsat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing to fight.
<LEND>

<L>38773<pc>0820-a<k1>yuyutsA<k2>yuyutsA
{%Yuyutsā,%}¦ f. (fr. the Desid.), the wishing to fight,
desire for war, eagerness for battle, pugnacity, enmity.
{%—Yuyutsā-rahita, as, ā, am,%} without wish or in-
tention to fight, cowardly.
<LEND>

<L>38774<pc>0820-a<k1>yuyutsu<k2>yuyutsu
{%Yuyutsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to fight, desiring
war, eager for battle; anxious to fight with (with
inst. or with {%saha, sārdham,%} &c. with inst.); pug-
nacious, hostile, ambitious; ({%us%}), m. a combatant;
N. of one of the sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>38775<pc>0820-a<k1>yuyuDan<k2>yuyuDan
{%Yuyudhan, ā,%}¦ m., N. of a king of Mithilā.
<LEND>

<L>38776<pc>0820-a<k1>yuyuDAna<k2>yuyuDAna
{%Yuyudhāna, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Satyaka, (he
was one of the allies of the Pāṇḍavas); a Kṣatriya,
warrior; epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>38777<pc>0820-a<k1>yuyuDi<k2>yuyuDi
{%Yuyudhi%}¦ or {%yūyudhi, is, is, i,%} Ved. warlike,
martial, pugnacious.
<LEND>

<L>38778<pc>0820-a<k1>yotsyamAna<k2>yotsyamAna
{%Yotsyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ about to fight, ready to
fight.
<LEND>

<L>38779<pc>0820-a<k1>yodDavya<k2>yodDavya
{%Yoddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be fought or contended,
to be overcome in battle, (the neuter may be used
impersonally, e. g. {%kair mayā saha yoddhavyam,%}
by whom is it to be fought with me.)
<LEND>

<L>38780<pc>0820-a<k1>yodDukAma<k2>yodDukAma
{%Yoddhu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to fight,
anxious for battle.
<LEND>

<L>38781<pc>0820-a<k1>yodDf<k2>yodDf
{%Yoddhṛ, dhā,%}¦ m. a fighter, warrior, champion,
combatant, soldier.
<LEND>

<L>38782<pc>0820-a<k1>yoDa<k2>yoDa
{%Yodha, as,%}¦ m. a fighter, warrior, champion, com-
batant, soldier; battle, war (in {%dur-y˚, mitho-y˚,%}
q. q. v. v.); a kind of metre, four times ¯˘¯¯˘¯.
{%—Yodha-dharma, as,%} m. the law of soldiers,
military law, duty of the Kṣatriya caste. {%—Yodha-%}
{%mukhya, as,%} m. a chief warrior, leader. {%—Yodha-%}
{%vīra, as,%} m. a hero, warrior. {%—Yodha-saṃrāva,%}
{%as,%} m. challenging to battle, mutual defiance of
combatants. {%—Yodha-hara, as, ā, am,%} carrying
warriors. {%—Yodhāgāra (˚dha-āg˚), as,%} m. a soldier's
dwelling, barrack.
<LEND>

<L>38783<pc>0820-a<k1>yoDaka<k2>yoDaka
{%Yodhaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= yodha,%} a fighter, warrior.
<LEND>

<L>38784<pc>0820-a<k1>yoDana<k2>yoDana
{%Yodhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of fighting, battle, war,
strife. {%—Yodhana-pura-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>38785<pc>0820-a<k1>yoDanIpura<k2>yoDanIpura
{%Yodhanī-pura, am,%}¦ n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>38786<pc>0820-a<k1>yoDayat<k2>yoDayat
{%Yodhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ fighting, making war.
<LEND>

<L>38787<pc>0820-a<k1>yoDika<k2>yoDika
{%Yodhika,%}¦ epithet of a particular mode of fighting;
[cf. {%yaudhika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38788<pc>0820-a<k1>yoDin<k2>yoDin
{%Yodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ fighting, contending, waging
war, (at the end of comps., e. g. {%divyāstra-yodhin,%}
fighting with divine weapons; cf. {%haya-y˚%}); con-
quering, subduing, a conqueror (e. g. {%dānava-%}
{%yodhin,%} conquering the Dānavas); ({%ī%}), m. a warrior.
{%—Yodhi-vana, am,%} n., N. of a place.
<LEND>
[Page0820-b+ 75]

<L>38789<pc>0820-b<k1>yoDIyas<k2>yoDIyas
{%Yodhīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%yodha%}), more
warlike or martial.
<LEND>

<L>38790<pc>0820-b<k1>yoDeya<k2>yoDeya
{%Yodheya, as,%}¦ m. {%= yodha,%} a warrior, combatant;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a race.
<LEND>

<L>38791<pc>0820-b<k1>yoDya<k2>yoDya
{%Yodhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be fought, to be overcome
in battle, to be conquered or subdued, conquerable;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>38792<pc>0820-b<k1>yunT<k2>yunT
{#yunT#}¦ {%yunth%} = rt. {%punth,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38793<pc>0820-b<k1>yup<k2>yup
{#yup#}¦ {%yup,%} cl. 4. P. {%yupyati, yuyopa, ayu-%}
{%pat,%} &c., to confuse, trouble, perplex; to
efface, destroy, obliterate; to make level or smooth;
to be concealed, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I.
104, 4. {%yuyopa = gūḍham āsīt%}): Caus. {%yopayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to efface, obliterate, destroy: Intens. {%yo-%}
{%yupyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>38794<pc>0820-b<k1>yopana<k2>yopana
{%Yopana, am,%}¦ n. the act of effacing (foot-prints
or traces, &c.) or anything used for effacing or obli-
terating; the act of oppressing, obstructing, molest-
ing, perplexing, confusing, destroying, effacing, obli-
terating (sometimes at the end of comps.; cf. {%pada-y˚,%}
{%jana-y˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>38795<pc>0820-b<k1>yopayat<k2>yopayat
{%Yopayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ effacing, obliterating,
obstructing, perplexing.
<LEND>

<L>38796<pc>0820-b<k1>yuyu<k2>yuyu
{#yuyu#}¦ {%yuyu, us,%} m. a horse, (probably incor-
rect for {%yayu.%})
<LEND>

<L>38797<pc>0820-b<k1>yuyukKura<k2>yuyukKura
{#yuyukKura#}¦ {%yuyuk-khura, as,%} m. a hyena.
<LEND>

<L>38798<pc>0820-b<k1>yuyutsA<k2>yuyutsA
{#yuyutsA#}¦ {%yuyutsā, yuyutsu, yuyudhāna,%} &c.
See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38799<pc>0820-b<k1>yuyuvi<k2>yuyuvi
{#yuyuvi#}¦ {%yuyuvi.%} See {%yūyuvi,%} p. 821, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38800<pc>0820-b<k1>yuva<k2>yuva
{#yuva#}¦ {%yuva,%} the actual base of the dual of the
second personal pronoun, ({%yuvām,%} nom. acc. you two;
{%yuvābhyām,%} inst. dat. abl.; {%yuvayos,%} gen. loc.;
Ved. forms {%yuvam, yuvabhyām, yuvos.%}) {%—Yuva-%}
{%drik,%} ind., Ved. directed towards both of you.
{%—Yuva-dhita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. placed or arranged
for you both; beneficial to you both, (Sāy. {%yuvā-%}
{%bhyāṃ vihita.%}) {%—Yuvā-datta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
given by both of you. {%—Yuvā-nīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
brought by both of you. {%—Yuvā-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved.
yoked for you both, harnessed by you both. {%—Yuvā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. belonging to both of you.
<LEND>

<L>38801<pc>0820-b<k1>yuvat<k2>yuvat<h>1
1. {%yuvat%}¦ (for 2. {%yuvat%} see col. 3), Ved. abl. du.
of the 2nd personal pronoun, (according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda I. 109, 1. {%yuvat = yuvābhyām.%}) {%—Yuvad-%}
{%devatya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having (each of) you for
a divinity.
<LEND>

<L>38802<pc>0820-b<k1>yuvayu<k2>yuvayu
{%Yuvayu%}¦ or {%yuvāyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. longing for
both of you, (Sāy. {%yuvayu = yuvāṃ kāmayamā-%}
{%na%}); intended for you both.
<LEND>

<L>38803<pc>0820-b<k1>yuvAku<k2>yuvAku
{%Yuvāku, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. belonging to both of you.
<LEND>

<L>38804<pc>0820-b<k1>yuvaka<k2>yuvaka
{#yuvaka#}¦ {%yuvaka.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38805<pc>0820-b<k1>yuvan<k2>yuvan
{#yuvan#}¦ {%yuvan, ā, yuvati%} or {%yuvatī%} or {%yūnī, a%}
(said to be fr. rt. 2. {%yu,%} but according to some for
{%dyuvan,%} fr. 3. {%dyu%} or rt. 2. {%div,%} ‘to shine;’ com-
par. {%yavīyas,%} q. v.; superl. {%yaviṣṭha,%} q. v.), young,
youthful, juvenile, adult, arrived at puberty (applied
to men or animals); endowed with native or natural
strength, strong, excellent, good, healthy; ({%ā%}), m. a
youth, young man, a young animal; (in the Veda
{%yuvan%} is also applied to Indra, Agni, and various
other gods); the younger descendant of any one (an
elder descendant being still alive); N. of the ninth
year in Jupiter's cycle of sixty years; {%(yuvati, is),%}
f. a girl, young woman, any youthful female, any
young female animal, ({%ibha-yuvati,%} a young female
elephant; the term {%yuvati%} is also applied in the
Veda to Uṣas, Night and Morning, Heaven and
Earth); turmeric; {%(yuvatī),%} f. {%= yuvati,%} a young
woman; the sign of the zodiac Virgo; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>juveni-s, jun-ior, Junius, junix:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>juggs:</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>iong, iung, geong, geogudh:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>jauna-s:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>junu,</nsi> ‘a youth;’ <nsi>junosti,</nsi> ‘youth.’]
{%—Yuva-khalati, is, is, i,%} bald in youth; {%yuva-%}
{%khalatī,%} f. bald in girlhood. {%—Yuva-gaṇḍa, as,%} m.
an eruption on the face of young people. {%—Yuva- %}
[Page0820-c+ 75]
{%jarat, an, atī, at,%} appearing old in youth, becoming
old at an early age. {%—Yuva-jāni, is, is, i,%} Ved.
having a young wife. {%—Yuva-tā,%} f. or {%yuva-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. youthfulness, youth. {%—Yuvati-jana%} or {%yu-%}
{%vatī-jana, as,%} m. a young woman. {%—Yuvatīṣṭā%}
{%(˚ti-iṣ˚),%} f. yellow jasmine ({%= svarṇa-yūthikā).%}
{%—Yuva-palita, as, ā%} (?), {%am,%} grey-haired in youth.
{%—Yuva-pratyaya, as,%} m. a suffix forming the so-
called Yuvan patronymics. {%—Yuva-mārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
Ved. dying in youth. {%—Yuva-rāja, as,%} m. ‘young
king,’ an heir-apparent associated with the reigning
sovereign in the government, a crown prince; epithet
of Maitreya the future Buddha; one of the Jaina
Pontiffs. {%—Yuvarāja-tva%} or {%yuva-rājya, am,%} n.
the rank or position of an heir-apparent to a throne.
{%—Yuva-rājan, ā,%} m. {%= yuva-rāja%} above. {%—Yuva-%}
{%rāja-śabda-bhāj, k, k, k,%} possessing the title of
heir-apparent. {%—Yuva-valina, as, ā, am,%} having
wrinkles in youth or at an early age. {%—Yuvī-bhū,%}
cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to become young.
{%—Yuvī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become young.
<LEND>

<L>38806<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvaka<k2>yuvaka
{%Yuvaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= yuvan,%} a youth.
<LEND>

<L>38807<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvat<k2>yuvat<h>2
2. {%yuvat,%}¦ Ved. {%= yuvan,%} youthful, Ṛg-veda X.
39, 8. (For 1. {%yuvat%} see col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>38808<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvati<k2>yuvati
{%Yuvati%}¦ or {%yuvatī.%} See under {%yuvan,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38809<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvanyu<k2>yuvanyu
{%Yuvanyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. youthful, juvenile.
<LEND>

<L>38810<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvaSa<k2>yuvaSa
{%Yuvaśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. young, youthful, juvenile.
<LEND>

<L>38811<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvana<k2>yuvana
{#yuvana#}¦ {%yuvana%} (?), {%as,%} m. the moon.
<LEND>

<L>38812<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvanASva<k2>yuvanASva
{#yuvanASva#}¦ {%yuvanāśva, as,%} m., N. of the
father of Māndhātṛ; of various persons. {%—Yuva-%}
{%nāśva-ja, as,%} m. the son of Yuvanāśva, i. e. Mān-
dhātṛ (an early sovereign of the solar dynasty).
<LEND>

<L>38813<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvanyu<k2>yuvanyu
{#yuvanyu#}¦ {%yuvanyu, yuva-rāja,%} &c. See above.
<LEND>

<L>38814<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvA<k2>yuvA
{#yuvA#}¦ {%yuvā,%} f., Ved., N. of one of Agni's
arrows.
<LEND>

<L>38815<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvAdatta<k2>yuvAdatta
{#yuvAdatta#}¦ {%yuvā-datta, yuvāyu,%} &c. See
under {%yuva,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38816<pc>0820-c<k1>yuvAma<k2>yuvAma
{#yuvAma#}¦ {%yuvāma,%} N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>38817<pc>0820-c<k1>yuzwagrAma<k2>yuzwagrAma
{#yuzwagrAma#}¦ {%yuṣṭa-grāma, as,%} m., N. of a
village.
<LEND>

<L>38818<pc>0820-c<k1>yuzmad<k2>yuzmad
{#yuzmad#}¦ {%yuṣmad,%} a form derived from {%yuṣ-%}
{%mat,%} abl. pl. of the pronominal base 4. {%yu,%} and
serving for the base of the 2nd personal pronoun in
the plural number and at the beginning of some
compounds; the actual base, however, in most of
the plural cases is {%yuṣma,%} which is also found in a
few compounds, cf. {%yuṣmā-datta%} below; the fol-
lowing forms are found, {%yūyam,%} nom. pl. you;
{%yuṣmān,%} acc. you; {%yuṣmābhis,%} inst. by you;
{%yuṣmabhyam,%} dat. to you; {%yuṣmat%} or {%yuṣmat-%}
{%tas,%} abl. from you; {%yuṣmākam,%} gen. of you, (in
Ved. the final nasal may be dropped, e. g. {%yuṣmā-%}
{%kaika%} for {%yuṣmākam eka%}); {%yuṣmāsu%} (Ved. also
{%yuṣme%}), loc. in you, cf. Ṛg-veda VIII. 47, 8;
[cf. Zend <nsi>yūs;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὑμεῖς, Æol. ὔμμες</lang> (fr. <lang n="greek">ὔσμες</lang>);
Goth. and Lith. <nsi>ju-s.</nsi>] {%—Yuṣmad-artham,%} ind.
for you, on your account. {%—Yuṣmad-āyatta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} dependent upon you, at your disposal.
{%—Yuṣmad-vācya, am,%} n. (in gram.) the second
person. {%—Yuṣmad-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of your kind
or sort, like you. {%—Yuṣmā-datta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
given or bestowed by you; [cf. {%yuvā-datta.%}]
{%—Yuṣmā-dṛś, k, k, k,%} or {%yuṣmā-dṛśa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} like you, similar to you, resembling you, one
such as you; [cf. {%mādṛś, tvā-dṛś.%}] {%—Yuṣmā-%}
{%nīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. led or accompanied by you.
{%—Yuṣmā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. belonging to you.
{%—Yuṣmeṣita (˚mā-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. excited
or instigated by you. {%—Yuṣmota (˚mā-ūta), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. protected or loved by you.
<LEND>

<L>38819<pc>0820-c<k1>yuzmadIya<k2>yuzmadIya
{%Yuṣmadīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ your, yours, your own,
belonging to you.
<LEND>

<L>38820<pc>0820-c<k1>yuzmayat<k2>yuzmayat
{%Yuṣmayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. seeking you,
addressed to you, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda II.
39, 7 {%= yuvām icchat.%})
<LEND>
[Page0821-a+ 76]

<L>38821<pc>0821-a<k1>yuzmAka<k2>yuzmAka
{%Yuṣmāka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. your, yours; [cf.
{%yuṣmāka%} under {%yuṣmad.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38822<pc>0821-a<k1>yU<k2>yU
{#yU#}¦ {%yū, ūs,%} m. (according to some f.), soup,
pease-soup, broth ({%= yūṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>38823<pc>0821-a<k1>yUka<k2>yUka
{#yUka#}¦ {%yūka, as, ā,%} m. f. (said to be fr. rt. 2.
{%yu%}), a louse. {%—Yūka-devī,%} f., N. of a princess.
{%—Yūkā-likṣa, am,%} n. lice and nits.
<LEND>

<L>38824<pc>0821-a<k1>yUkara<k2>yUkara
{#yUkara#}¦ {%yūkara,%} see Gaṇa Kṛśāśvādi to Pāṇ.
IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38825<pc>0821-a<k1>yUti<k2>yUti
{#yUti#}¦ {%yūti, is,%} f. (fr. rt. 2. {%yu%}), joining,
mixing, mixture, junction, connection, union, addi-
tion; [cf. {%yuti, vahir-yūti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38826<pc>0821-a<k1>yUTa<k2>yUTa
{#yUTa#}¦ {%yūtha, as, am,%} m. n. (usually {%am,%} n.;
fr. rt. 2. {%yu%}), a flock, herd (of birds, animals, &c.);
a bevy, troop, band; a multitude, number, large
quantity; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of jasmine {%(= yūthikā).%}
{%—Yūtha-ga, as,%} m., N. of a class of gods under
Manu Cākṣuṣa. {%—Yūtha-nātha, as,%} m. the lord
of a band, leader of a troop, head of a flock or herd;
a large elephant. {%—Yūtha-pa, as,%} or {%yūtha-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. a keeper or protector of a troop, lord or
captain of a band; the leader of a herd (especially
of elephants), a large elephant. {%—Yūthapati-sakā-%}
{%śam,%} ind. to the chief of the herd. {%—Yūtha-pari-%}
{%bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} fallen out or strayed from the
herd. {%—Yūtha-paśu, us,%} m., N. of a particular tax
or tithe. {%—Yūtha-pāla, as,%} m. {%= yūtha-pa%}. {%—Yū-%}
{%tha-bhraṣṭa%} or {%yūtha-vibhraṣṭa, as, ā, am, =%}
{%yūtha-paribhraṣṭa%} above. {%—Yūtha-mukhya, as,%}
m. the chief or captain of a troop. {%—Yūtha-śas,%} ind.
in troops or bands, in flocks or herds, gregariously.
{%—Yūtha-hata, as, ā, am, = yūtha-paribhraṣṭa.%}
{%—Yūthāgraṇī (˚tha-ag˚), īs,%} m. a leader of a band
or troop. {%—Yūthī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to
make or form into a herd, to unite in a flock.
<LEND>

<L>38827<pc>0821-a<k1>yUTaka<k2>yUTaka
{%Yūthaka%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. {%= yūtha.%}
<LEND>

<L>38828<pc>0821-a<k1>yUTara<k2>yUTara
{%Yūthara,%}¦ an adj. fr. {%yūtha,%} see Gaṇa Aśmādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38829<pc>0821-a<k1>yUTikA<k2>yUTikA
{%Yūthikā,%}¦ f. a kind of jasmine, Jasminum Auricu-
latum; globe-amaranth; Clypea Hernandifolia.
<LEND>

<L>38830<pc>0821-a<k1>yUTya<k2>yUTya
{%Yūthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to a herd or
flock; being at the head of the herd; belonging to
a troop or herd of (at the end of a comp.).
<LEND>

<L>38831<pc>0821-a<k1>yUna<k2>yUna
{#yUna#}¦ {%yūna, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 2. {%yu%}), a band,
cord, string.
<LEND>

<L>38832<pc>0821-a<k1>yUni<k2>yUni
{%Yūni, is,%}¦ f. joining, connection, union.
<LEND>

<L>38833<pc>0821-a<k1>yUnarvan<k2>yUnarvan
{#yUnarvan#}¦ {%yūnarvan,%} a Vedic word of which
the sense is doubtful.
<LEND>

<L>38834<pc>0821-a<k1>yUnI<k2>yUnI
{#yUnI#}¦ {%yūnī,%} f. of {%yuvan,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38835<pc>0821-a<k1>yUpa<k2>yUpa
{#yUpa#}¦ {%yūpa, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 27. fr. rt. 2. {%yu,%} ‘to bind;’ but according to
some, more probably fr. rt. {%yup%}), a smooth post or
stake to which the sacrificial victim is fastened, any
sacrificial post, (usually made of bamboos or Khadira
wood; in Rāmāyaṇa I. 13, 24, 25, where the horse
sacrifice is described, twenty-one of these posts are
set up, six made of Vilva, six of Khadira, six of
Palāśa, one of Uḍumbara, one of Śleṣmātaka, and
one of Deva-dāru); a column erected in honour of
a victory, a trophy ({%= jaya-stambha%}); N. of a par-
ticular conjunction of the class {%Ākṛti-yoga%} (i. e.
when all the planets are situated in the first, second,
third, and fourth houses). {%—Yūpa-kaṭaka, as,%} m. a
wooden ring at the top of the sacrificial post; (ac-
cording to some) an iron ring at its base. {%—Yūpa-%}
{%karṇa, as,%} m. the part of a sacrificial post which is
sprinkled with ghee. {%—Yūpa-ketu, us,%} m., N. of
Bhūri-śravas. {%—Yūpa-cchedana, am,%} n. the cutting
of the sacrificial post. {%—Yūpa-dāru,%} n. the wood
for the sacrificial post. {%—Yūpa-dru, us,%} m. Acacia
Catechu (the wood of this tree being especially suit-
able for the sacrificial post). {%—Yūpa-druma, as,%} m.
{%= yūpa-dru%} above; {%= rakta-khadira%}. {%—Yūpa-%}
{%dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘having the sacrificial post as an
emblem,’ epithet of the sacrifice (personified). {%—Yū-%}
{%pa-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Pariśiṣṭa of Kātyā-
[Page0821-b+ 72]
yana. {%—Yūpa-lakṣya, as,%} m. a bird (said to be so
called as ‘having a post [round which a snare is
tied] for its aim’). {%—Yūpa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
a sacrificial post. {%—Yūpa-vāha, as,%} m., Ved. the
carrier or bearer of the sacrificial post. {%—Yūpa-%}
{%vraska, as,%} m. the cutter of the sacrificial post.
{%—Yūpākṣa (˚pa-ak˚), as,%} m., N. of a Rākṣasa,
(also read {%yūpākhya.%}) {%—Yūpāgra (˚pa-ag˚), am,%}
n. the top of the sacrificial post. {%—Yūpāhuti (˚pa-%}
{%āh˚), is,%} f. an offering at the erection of the sacri-
ficial post. {%—Yūpocchraya (˚pa-uc˚), as,%} m. the
ceremony of erecting the sacrificial post.
<LEND>

<L>38836<pc>0821-b<k1>yUpIya<k2>yUpIya
{%Yūpīya%}¦ or {%yūpya, as, ā, am,%} fit or suitable for
a sacrificial post.
<LEND>

<L>38837<pc>0821-b<k1>yUyam<k2>yUyam
{#yUyam#}¦ {%yūyam.%} See {%yuṣmad,%} p. 820, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>38838<pc>0821-b<k1>yUyuDi<k2>yUyuDi
{#yUyuDi#}¦ {%yūyudhi = yuyudhi,%} p. 820, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38839<pc>0821-b<k1>yUyuvi<k2>yUyuvi
{#yUyuvi#}¦ {%yūyuvi, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. 1. {%yu;%} ac-
cording to the Pada-pāṭha {%yuyuvi%}), Ved. setting
aside, removing.
<LEND>

<L>38840<pc>0821-b<k1>yUz<k2>yUz
{#yUz#}¦ {%yūṣ%} [cf. rt. {%jūṣ%}], cl. 1. P. {%yūṣati,%}
&c., to injure, hurt, wound; to kill; [cf.
Slav. <nsi>juchŭ.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>38841<pc>0821-b<k1>yUza<k2>yUza
{#yUza#}¦ {%yūṣa, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be con-
nected with rt. {%yūṣ%} above; cf. {%jūṣa%}), soup, broth,
pease-soup, the water in which pulse of various kinds
has been boiled; ({%as%}), m. the Indian mulberry tree;
[cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">ζωμός, ζύθος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>jus;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>jucha.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>38842<pc>0821-b<k1>yUzan<k2>yUzan
{%Yūṣan,%}¦ a form optionally substituted for {%yūṣa%}
in all the cases except Nom. Voc. sing. du. pl., Acc.
sing. du. (e. g. Acc. pl. {%yūṣān%} or {%yūṣṇaḥ,%} Inst.
sing. {%yūṣeṇa%} or {%yūṣṇā,%} du. {%yūṣābhyām%} or {%yū-%}
{%ṣabhyām,%} &c.).
<LEND>

<L>38843<pc>0821-b<k1>yUs<k2>yUs
{%Yūs = yūṣa%}¦ above; [cf. {%yū.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38844<pc>0821-b<k1>yena<k2>yena
{#yena#}¦ {%yena,%} ind. (inst. of 3. {%ya%} or {%yad%}), by
which, by means of which, by which way, in which
manner, in whatever way or manner, in which direc-
tion, whither, where, in whatever direction, where-
soever; on which account, in consequence of which,
wherefore; because, since, as; that, so that, in order
that (with pot. or pres. or fut.).
<LEND>

<L>38845<pc>0821-b<k1>yemana<k2>yemana
{#yemana#}¦ {%yemana, am,%} n. {%= jemana,%} eating.
<LEND>

<L>38846<pc>0821-b<k1>yeyajAmaha<k2>yeyajAmaha
{#yeyajAmaha#}¦ {%yeyajāmaha, as,%} m. a term for
the expression {%ye yajāmahe,%} which immediately
precedes the Yājyā or formula of consecration.
<LEND>

<L>38847<pc>0821-b<k1>yeyAyeya<k2>yeyAyeya
{#yeyAyeya#}¦ {%yeyāyeya (˚ya-ay˚), am,%} n. (fr. rt.
1. {%yā%}), that which is to be gone after and not to be
gone after.
<LEND>

<L>38848<pc>0821-b<k1>yevAza<k2>yevAza
{#yevAza#}¦ {%yevāṣa, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
noxious insect, (also read {%yavāṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>38849<pc>0821-b<k1>yez<k2>yez
{#yez#}¦ {%yeṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%yeṣati,%} &c., Ved. to
boil up, bubble; to flow, leak; cl. 1. A.
{%yeṣate,%} &c., to exert one's self, endeavour, perse-
vere, = rt. {%peṣ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38850<pc>0821-b<k1>yezat<k2>yezat
{%Yeṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ boiling up, bubbling; flow-
ing, leaking; (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 53, 22 = {%sra-%}
{%vat.%})
<LEND>

<L>38851<pc>0821-b<k1>yezwiha<k2>yezwiha
{#yezwiha#}¦ {%yeṣṭiha,%} Ved. epithet of a Muhūrta.
<LEND>

<L>38852<pc>0821-b<k1>yezWa<k2>yezWa
{#yezWa#}¦ {%yeṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (superl. fr. rt. 1. {%yā%}),
going very quickly, moving with the greatest rapidity,
(Sāy. Ṛg-veda VII. 56, 6 {%= yātṛtama, atiśayena%}
{%gantṛ,%} but Ṛg-veda V. 41, 3 {%= yantṛtama,%} re-
straining greatly, as if fr. rt. {%yam.%})
<LEND>

<L>38853<pc>0821-b<k1>yok<k2>yok
{#yok#}¦ {%yok,%} ind. {%= jyok,%} for a long time.
<LEND>

<L>38854<pc>0821-b<k1>yoktavya<k2>yoktavya
{#yoktavya#}¦ {%yoktavya, yoktṛ, yoktra,%} &c. See
p. 819, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>38855<pc>0821-b<k1>yoga<k2>yoga
{#yoga#}¦ {%yoga, as,%} m. (in one or two excep-
tional cases {%am,%} n.; fr. rt. 1. {%yuj%}), the act of yoking,
joining, junction, conjunction, uniting, union, con-
tact; the harnessing or putting to (of horses); a yoke,
team, ({%ṣaḍ-yoga,%} having a team of six); convey-
ance; the arraying or equipping (of an army),
[Page0821-c+ 81]
arrangement, disposition; applying, fixing, application,
use, employment, appointment, institution; the put-
ting on armour; armour; the fixing (of an arrow or
other weapon); application of a remedy or medicine,
remedy, cure; mode, manner, method, means, ({%yo-%}
{%gena%} or {%yogāt%} at the end of comps. = ‘by means
of,’ ‘by reason of,’ ‘through’); an expedient, artifice,
plan, device, ({%yogena,%} artfully, craftily); a super-
natural means, charm, incantation, spell, magic,
magical art; fraud, deceit [cf. {%yoga-nanda%}]; side,
part, argument; occasion, opportunity; fitness, pro-
priety, suitability, aptness, congruity, ({%yogena,%} suit-
ably, fitly, in accordance with, conformably to); the
performance or execution (of anything); undertaking,
occupation, work, business; gaining, acquiring, ac-
quisition [cf. {%yoga-kṣema%}]; accession of property,
substance, wealth, thing; connection, consequence,
result, ({%yogāt%} at the end of comps. = ‘in consequence
of,’ e. g. {%karma-yogāt,%} in consequence of actions,
i. e. of destiny); combination or mixing of various
materials, association, mixture; contact, (with Jainas)
contact or mixing with the outer world; (in the
Sāṅkhya phil.) one of the ten Mūlikārthas; con-
nection with, the partaking or possessing of (with
inst.); conjunction (in astronomy, cf. {%nakṣatra-%}
{%yoga%}), lucky conjuncture; (in arithmetic) addition,
sum, total; the being connected together, depend-
ance, relation, regular order or series, ({%kathā-yoga,%}
conversation); a period of time, ({%kāla-yogena,%} after
the lapse of some time; {%nava-yoga,%} nine times);
a combination or configuration of stars, a constella-
tion, asterism, (these with the moon are called in
astronomical works {%cāndra-yogāḥ,%} and are thirteen
in number; without the moon they are called {%kha-%}
{%yogāḥ%} or {%nābhasa-yogāḥ,%} and are divided into
{%ākṛti-yogāḥ, saṅkhyā-yogāḥ, āśraya-yogāḥ,%} and
{%dala-yogāḥ;%} two others are added, called {%dvigraha-%}
{%yogāḥ%}); (in astronomy) N. of a particular division
of time or astronomical period, (a period of variable
length during which the joint motion in longitude
of the sun and moon amounts to 30° 204; the term
{%yoga%} in this sense is a mere mode of indicating the
sum of the longitude of the sun and moon; twenty-
seven such Yogas are enumerated, beginning with
1. Viṣkambha, and ending with 27. Vaidhṛti, or
according to some authorities twenty-eight); the
leading or principal star of a lunar mansion; etymo-
logy, derivation of the meaning of a word from its
root; the etymological meaning of a word (opposed
to {%rūḍhi%}); (in gram.) the connection of words
together, dependence of one word upon another,
construction; a rule, aphorism, precept [cf. {%yoga-%}
{%vibhāga%}]; application of effort, endeavour, diligence,
assiduity, zeal, attention, ({%pūrṇena yogena%} or {%jala-%}
{%pūrṇena yogena,%} with all one's powers, with over-
flowing zeal); application or concentration of the
thoughts, fixing the mind on a particular point and
keeping the body in a fixed posture, abstract con-
templation, meditation; the systematic practice of
the above abstract contemplation or meditation; the
Yoga system of philosophy as established by Patañjali,
(the Yoga is the name of the second of the two
divisions of the Sāṅkhya system, its chief aim being
to teach the means by which the human soul may
attain complete union with Īśvara or the Supreme
Being, whose existence it establishes, while the origi-
nal system or Sāṅkhya proper, without acknowledging
a Supreme Being, teaches the successive development
of the Tattvas or principles of creation from an origi-
nal Tattva, called Prakṛti or Pradhāna; according to
Patañjali, the author of the second system, Yoga is
defined to be ‘the preventing of the modifications
of {%citta%} or the thinking principle [which modifica-
tions arise through the three Pramāṇas, perception,
inference, and verbal testimony, as well as through
incorrect ascertainment, fancy, sleep, and recollection]
by {%abhyāsa%} or the constant practice of keeping the
mind in its unmodified state [clear as crystal when
uncoloured by contact with other substances], and by
{%vairāgya%} or dispassion;’ this dispassion being ob-
tained by {%praṇidhāna%} or devotedness to Īśvara,
[Page0822-a+ 81]
the Supreme, who is defined as a particular Puruṣa
or spirit unaffected by afflictions, works, &c., and
having the appellation Praṇava or Om, which mono-
syllable is to be muttered and its meaning reflected
on in order to attain knowledge of the Supreme and
the prevention of the obstacles to Yoga: the eight
means or stages of Yoga or mental concentration
are, 1. {%yama,%} forbearance; 2. {%niyama,%} religious ob-
servances; 3. {%āsana,%} postures; 4. {%prāṇāyāma,%} regu-
lation of the breath; 5. {%pratyāhāra,%} restraint of the
senses; 6. {%dhāraṇā,%} steadying of the mind; 7. {%dhyā-%}
{%na,%} contemplation; 8. {%samādhi,%} profound medita-
tion, which, according to the Bhagavad-gītā VI. 13,
is to be practised by fixing the eyes on the tip of
the nose: true liberation is the cessation of all idea
of self and the separation of matter and spirit or
{%kaivalya,%} isolation: the self-mortification and asce-
ticism of the Yoga connects it closely with Buddhism);
the union of the individual soul with the universal
soul, devotion, pious seeking after God; any single
act or rite conducive to Yoga or abstract contem-
plation; (personified as) the son of Dharma and
Kriyā; a follower of the Yoga system of philosophy;
a traitor, violator of confidence, spy; N. of a com-
mentator on the Paramārtha-sāra; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
Pīvarī (daughter of the Pitṛs called Barhiṣads); of
a Śakti. {%—Yoga-kakṣā,%} f. {%= yoga-paṭṭa%}. {%—Yoga-%}
{%kanyā,%} f., N. of the infant daughter of Yaśo-dā
(substituted as the child of Devakī for the infant
Kṛṣṇa and therefore killed by Kaṃsa, but imme-
diately raised to heaven as a beautiful girl; as she
ascended she warned Kaṃsa of his doom, see Hari-
vaṃśa 3340). {%—Yoga-karaṇḍaka, as,%} m., N. of a
minister of Brahma-datta; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of a female
ascetic {%(pravrājikā)%}. {%—Yoga-kuṇḍalinī,%} f., N. of
an Upaniṣad. {%—Yoga-kṣema, as,%} m. the security
or secure possession of what has been acquired, the
keeping safe of property; the charge for securing
property (from accidents), insurance, (in Manu IX.
219. the term {%yoga-kṣema%} is applied to counsel-
lors, family priests, &c. as the cause of security);
property, substance, profit, gain; security, well-being,
welfare, prosperity; ({%am%}), n. or {%(au),%} m. du. gain
and security, maintenance and protection, the acqui-
sition and preservation of property, making fresh
gains as well as keeping what has been acquired, (in
these senses the word must be regarded as a Dvandva
comp.) {%—Yogakṣema-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing
gain and security, causing protection of what is
acquired, one who takes charge of property, a
keeper. {%—Yoga-gati, is,%} f. state of union, original
state, primitive condition. {%—Yoga-cakṣus, us,%} m.
‘contemplation-eyed,’ one whose eye is meditation,
epithet of a Brāhman. {%—Yoga-cara, as,%} m., N. of
Hanumat. {%—Yoga-candrikā,%} f., N. of a work.
{%—Yoga-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m., N. of a philosophical
treatise in four chapters by Śivānanda Sarasvatī.
{%—Yoga-cūrṇa, as, am,%} m. n. magical powder.
{%—Yoga-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by or arising from
Yoga or meditation; ({%am%}), n. agallochum. {%—Yoga-%}
{%tattva, am,%} n. the principle of Yoga; N. of an
Upaniṣad. {%—Yoga-tattva-prakāśa%} or {%yoga-tattva-%}
{%prakāśaka,%} N. of a work. {%—Yoga-tantra, am,%} n.
a book treating of the Yoga system of philosophy;
(with Buddhists) N. of a class of writings. {%—Yoga-%}
{%taraṅga, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Yoga-talpa, am,%}
n. ‘Yoga-couch,’ {%= yoga-nidrā%}. {%—Yoga-tas,%} ind.
conjointly; suitably, properly; conformably to, in
accordance with; seasonably, in due season; through
devotion, by the power of magic, &c.; by means of,
in consequence of, (often at the end of comps.)
{%—Yoga-tārakā%} or {%yoga-tārā,%} f. the chief star in a
Nakṣatra. {%—Yoga-tārāvalī,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Yo-%}
{%ga-tva, am,%} n. the state of Yoga. {%—Yoga-dāna,%}
{%am,%} n. gift of the Yoga, communicating the Yoga
doctrine; a fraudulent gift. {%—Yoga-dīpikā,%} f., N.
of a work. {%—Yoga-deva, as,%} m., N. of a Jaina
author. {%—Yoga-dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} doing homage
to the Yoga. {%—Yoga-dhāraṇā,%} f. continuance or
perseverance in devotion. {%—Yoga-nanda, as,%} m.
the false Nanda, (opposed to {%satya-nanda.%}) {%—Yoga- %}
[Page0822-b+ 81]
{%nātha, as,%} m. ‘Yoga-lord,’ N. of Śiva; of Datta.
{%—Yoga-nāvika, as,%} m. a kind of fish {%(= gargāṭa).%}
{%—Yoga-nidrā,%} f. ‘contemplation-sleep,’ a state of
half contemplation, half sleep, or a state between
sleep and wakefulness which admits of the full exer-
cise of the mental powers (supposed to be peculiar
to devotees), light sleep; (especially) the sleep of
Viṣṇu at the end of a Yuga; Viṣṇu's Sleep per-
sonified as a goddess and said to be a form of Durgā;
(according to others) the great sleep of Brahmā,
during the period between the annihilation and re-
production of the universe. {%—Yoga-nidrālu, us,%}
m., N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Yoga-nilaya, as,%} m., N. of
Śiva. {%—Yogan-dhara, as,%} m., N. of a particular
formula recited over weapons; N. of a minister of
Śatānīka; of Piṇḍola. {%—Yoga-paṭṭa%} or {%yoga-paṭ-%}
{%ṭaka, am,%} n. the cloth thrown over the back and
knees of an ascetic during meditation. {%—Yoga-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘Yoga-lord,’ N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Yoga-patnī,%} f.
‘wife of Yoga,’ N. of Pīvarī, (called also {%yogā%} and
{%yoga-mātṛ.%}) {%—Yoga-patha, as,%} m. the road lead-
ing to Yoga. {%—Yoga-pada, am,%} n. the state or con-
dition of contemplation. {%—Yoga-padaka, am,%} n.,
N. of a particular garment worn during contempla-
tion. {%—Yoga-pātañjala, as,%} m. a follower or dis-
ciple of Patañjali as teacher of the Yoga doctrine.
{%—Yoga-pādukā,%} f. a magical shoe (supposed to
carry the wearer wherever he wishes). {%—Yoga-pā-%}
{%raṅ-ga, as,%} m. ‘conversant with Yoga,’ N. of Śiva.
{%—Yoga-pīṭha, am,%} n. a particular posture during
religious contemplation. {%—Yoga-prāpta, as, ā, am,%}
obtained through abstract meditation. {%—Yoga-bala,%}
{%am,%} n. the force of devotion, the power of magic,
supernatural power. {%—Yoga-bīja, am,%} n., N. of a
work. {%—Yoga-bhāvanā,%} f. (in algebra) composition
of numbers by the sum of the products. {%—Yoga-%}
{%bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a commentary by Vyāsa.
{%—Yoga-bhāskara,%} N. of a work. {%—Yoga-bhraṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has fallen from the practice of
Yoga. {%—Yoga-maṇi-prabhā,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary on the Yoga-sūtra. {%—Yoga-maya, as, ī, am,%}
coming or resulting from Yoga or contemplation;
({%as%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Yogamaya-jñāna, am,%}
n. knowledge derived from contemplation. {%—Yoga-%}
{%mahiman, ā,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Yoga-mātṛ, tā,%}
f. mother of Yoga; epithet of Pīvarī. {%—Yoga-māyā,%}
f. the Māyā or magical power of the Yoga. {%—Yoga-%}
{%mārtaṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Yoga-mālā,%} f.
‘garland of magic &c.,’ N. of a work on magic.
{%—Yoga-muktāvalī (˚ta-āv˚),%} f., N. of a work.
{%—Yoga-mūrti-dhara, ās,%} m. pl. ‘bearing the form
of the Yoga,’ epithet of a class of Manes. {%—Yoga-%}
{%yājñavalkya, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Yoga-yātrā,%}
f. the road or way to union with the Supreme Spirit,
the way of profound meditation; N. of a work by
Varāha-mihira. {%—Yoga-yukta, as, ā, am,%} or {%yoga-%}
{%yogin, ī, inī, i,%} immersed in deep meditation, ab-
sorbed in the Yoga. {%—Yoga-yuj, k, k, k,%} possessing
Yoga. {%—Yoga-raṅga, as,%} m. the orange tree {%(=%}
{%nāraṅga)%}. {%—Yoga-ratna, am,%} n. a magical jewel;
‘jewel of remedies,’ N. of a work on medicine.
{%—Yoga-ratna-mālā,%} f. ‘string of jewels of spells,’
N. of a work on sorcery and various magical arts
ascribed to Nāgārjuna, (it is also called Āścarya-
ratna-mālā, and is probably an epitome of a much
larger work.) {%—Yoga-ratna-samuccaya, as,%} m.
‘collection of jewels of remedies,’ N. of a medical
work by Candraṭa. {%—Yoga-ratnākara (˚na-āk˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘mine of jewels of charms or remedies,’ N.
of a work. {%—Yoga-ratnāvalī (˚na-āv˚),%} f. ‘string
of jewels of charms,’ N. of a work. {%—Yoga-ratha,%}
{%as,%} m. the Yoga as a chariot. {%—Yoga-rasāyana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘Yoga-elixir,’ N. of certain verses or a com-
position ascribed to Śiva. {%—Yoga-rahasya, am,%} n.
‘Yoga-secret,’ N. of a work. {%—Yoga-rāja, as,%} m.
‘king of medicines,’ N. of a particular medicinal
preparation; a king or master in the Yoga. {%—Yoga-%}
{%rājopaniṣad (˚ja-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
{%—Yoga-rūḍha, as, ā, am,%} having a special as well
as an etymological and general meaning, (said of
certain words, e. g. {%paṅka-ja%} means ‘growing in
[Page0822-c+ 81]
mud’ and ‘a lotus-flower;’ the English word <nsi>parasol</nsi>
is an example of a similar kind.) {%—Yoga-rocanā,%}
f., N. of a kind of magical ointment (having the
power of making invisible or invulnerable). {%—Yoga-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} connected, united, joined; one
who applies himself to or practises the Yoga.
{%—Yoga-vartikā,%} f. a magical lamp, magic-lantern.
{%—Yoga-vaha, as, ā, am,%} bringing about, causing,
promoting, furthering. {%—Yoga-vācaspatya, am,%} n.,
N. of a work. {%—Yoga-vārttika, am,%} n., N. of a
commentary on the Pātañjala-bhāṣya by Vijñāna-
bhikṣu, (also called Pātañjala-bhāṣya-vārttika.)
{%—Yoga-vāsiṣṭha, am,%} n., N. of a work by an
unknown author treating of the way of obtaining
final happiness and reckoned among Vedānta treatises,
(it is in the form of a dialogue between Vasiṣṭha
and his pupil, the youthful Rāma, and is considered
as an appendage to the Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki, to
whom it is attributed; it is also called Vāsiṣṭha-
rāmāyaṇa.) {%—Yogavāsiṣṭha-tātparya-prakāśa,%}
N. of a commentary on the preceding work. {%—Yo-%}
{%gavāsiṣṭha-sāra, as,%} m., N. of an abridgement
or abstract of the Yoga-vāsiṣṭha. {%—Yogavāsiṣṭha-%}
{%sāra-candrikā,%} f. and {%yogavāsiṣṭhasāra-vivṛti,%}
{%is,%} f., N. of two commentaries on the preced-
ing abridgement. {%—Yogavāsiṣṭhīya, as, ā, am,%}
relating to the Yoga-vāsiṣṭha. {%—Yoga-vāha, as,%}
m. a term for the sounds Visarjanīya, Jihvāmūlīya,
Upadhmānīya, and Nāsikya; ({%ī%}), f. alkali; honey;
quicksilver. {%—Yoga-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%} contriving
artifices (?), plotting, scheming; ({%i%}), n. a menstruum
or medium for mixing medicines. {%—Yoga-vikraya,%}
{%as,%} m. a fraudulent sale. {%—Yoga-vid, t, t, t,%} know-
ing the (right) means, understanding the proper way
or method, skilful; conversant with the Yoga; ({%t%}),
m., N. of Śiva; a follower of the Yoga doctrines;
a practiser of devotional exercises; a magician; a
compounder of medicines. {%—Yoga-vibhāga, as,%} m.
the disuniting or separation of that which is usually
combined together into one, the separation of one
rule into two, making two rules of what might be
propounded as one. {%—Yoga-vṛtti-saṅgraha, as,%}
m., N. of certain selected annotations by Udayakara
Pāṭhaka on the Yoga-sūtras. {%—Yoga-śata, am,%} n.,
N. of a medical work. {%—Yoga-śatakākhyāna (˚ka-%}
{%ākh˚), am,%} n., N. of a work by Sanātana. {%—Yoga-%}
{%śabda, as,%} m. the word Yoga; a word the meaning
of which is plain from the etymology. {%—Yoga-śarī-%}
{%rin, ī, iṇī, i,%} ‘Yoga-bodied,’ whose body is Yoga.
{%—Yoga-śāyin, ī, inī, i,%} half asleep and half ab-
sorbed in religious meditation. {%—Yoga-śāstra, am,%}
n. the Śāstra relating to the Yoga system (especially
that of Patañjali); the Yoga philosophy, Yoga
doctrine. {%—Yoga-śikṣā,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad,
(for {%yoga-śikhā?%}). {%—Yoga-śikhā,%} f., N. of an Upa-
niṣad. {%—Yoga-saṃsiddhi, is,%} f. perfection in
Yoga. {%—Yoga-saṅgraha, as,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Yoga-samādhi, is,%} m. the absorption of the
soul in profound meditation peculiar to the Yoga
system. {%—Yoga-sāra,%} a universal remedy, panacea;
N. of a work on the Yoga system. {%—Yoga-sāra-%}
{%saṅgraha, as,%} m., N. of a short treatise on the
doctrines of the Yoga system by Vijñāna-bhikṣu.
{%—Yoga-siddha, as, ā, am,%} perfected by means of
the Yoga or profound abstraction; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
sister of Vācas-pati. {%—Yoga-siddhānta-candrikā%}
and {%yoga-siddhi-prakriyā,%} f., N. of two philoso-
phical works. {%—Yoga-siddhi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} ex-
perienced or skilful in the art of magic. {%—Yoga-%}
{%sudhā-nidhi, is,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Yoga-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n. the aphorisms on the Yoga system of philo-
sophy ascribed to Patañjali, (these consist of four
Pādas or chapters; the oldest commentary on them
is said to be by Vyāsa, and there are other commen-
taries on that by Vācaspati-miśra, Vijñāna-bhikṣu,
Bhoja-deva, Nāgoji-bhaṭṭa, &c.) {%—Yoga-sevā,%} f. the
practice or cultivation of religious abstraction.
{%—Yoga-stha, as, ā, am,%} remaining engrossed in
Yoga. {%—Yoga-hṛdaya, am,%} n. ‘heart of the Yoga,’
N. of a work. {%—Yogāgni-maya (˚ga-ag˚), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} Ved. filled with the fire of the Yoga, attained
[Page0823-a+ 81]
through the ardour of devotion. {%—Yogāṅga (˚ga-%}
{%aṅ˚), am,%} n. a means of attaining Yoga, (eight
such Aṅgas are enumerated, viz. {%yama, niyama,%}
{%āsana, prāṇāyāma, pratyāhāra, dhāraṇā, dhyā-%}
{%na,%} and {%samādhi,%} or according to another authority
six, viz. {%āsana, prāṇa-saṃrodha,%} with the last
four as enumerated above; see under {%yoga.%}) {%—Yo-%}
{%gācāra (˚ga-āc˚), as,%} m. the observance or practice
of the Yoga; N. of a Yoga work; a disciple or
follower of a particular Buddhist sect or school;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a particular sect or school of
Buddhists, (they maintain the eternal existence of
conscious sense or intelligence [{%vijñāna%}] alone.)
{%—Yogācārya (˚ga-āc˚), as,%} m. a teacher of the
art of magic; a teacher of the Yoga system of phi-
losophy. {%—Yogāñjana (˚ga-añ˚), am,%} n. a healing
ointment; the Yoga as a salve. {%—Yogātman (˚ga-%}
{%āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} whose soul or essence is Yoga; one
who fixes the mind on the Yoga system. {%—Yogā-%}
{%dhamana (˚ga-ādh˚), am,%} n. a fraudulent pledge.
{%—Yogānanda (˚ga-ān˚), as,%} m. the delight or joy
of the Yoga. {%—Yogānuśāsana (˚ga-an˚), am,%} n.
‘Yoga-instruction,’ the doctrine of the Yoga, the
system or precepts of Patañjali. {%—Yogānuśāsana-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} n. {%= yoga-sūtra%}. {%—Yogānta (˚ga-an˚)%}
or {%yogāntikā%} (scil. {%gati%}), N. of the seven divisions into
which, according to Parāśara, the orbit of Mercury is
divided. {%—Yogāpatti (˚ga-āp˚), is,%} f., Ved. modi-
fication of usage or custom. {%—Yogāmbara (˚ga-%}
{%am˚), as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist deity. {%—Yogāraṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= yoga-raṅga%}. {%—Yogārūḍha (˚ga-ār˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} engaged in profound meditation or devotion.
{%—Yogāsana (˚ga-ās˚), am,%} n. the posture or mode
of sitting proper for profound and abstract meditation,
a way of sitting similar to that of the Yoga. {%—Yo-%}
{%gendra (˚ga-in˚), as,%} m. a master or adept in the
Yoga. {%—Yogeśa (˚ga-īśa), as,%} m. a master of the
Yoga, any principal sage or Yogin, epithet of Yājña-
valkya; of Śiva; N. of the city of Brahmā. {%—Yo-%}
{%geśvara (˚ga-īś˚), as,%} m. a master or adept in the
Yoga, any principal sage or Yogin; one who has
obtained superhuman faculties, a magician; a deity,
the object of devout contemplation; epithet of
Kṛṣṇa; a Vetāla (as perfectly skilled in magical
arts); an epithet of Yājñavalkya [cf. {%yogeśa%}]; N.
of a son of Deva-hotra; of a Brahma-rākṣasa; ({%ī%}),
f. a mistress of the Yoga; a fairy; N. of a goddess;
of a Vidyā-dharī; a species of plant {%(= bandhyā-%}
{%karkoṭakī)%}. {%—Yogeśvara-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Yogeśvara-tva%} or {%yogaiśvarya (˚ga-%}
{%aiś˚), am,%} n. perfect mastery of the Yoga. {%—Yo-%}
{%geṣṭa (˚ga-iṣ˚), am,%} n. tin; lead. {%—Yogopani-%}
{%ṣad (˚ga-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>38856<pc>0823-a<k1>yogaka<k2>yogaka
{%Yogaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of Agni (as the nuptial fire).
<LEND>

<L>38857<pc>0823-a<k1>yogas<k2>yogas
{%Yogas, as,%}¦ n. meditation, religious abstraction;
the half of a lunar month.
<LEND>

<L>38858<pc>0823-a<k1>yogAya<k2>yogAya
{%Yogāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%yogāyate,%} &c., to become
Yoga, to be changed into religious contemplation or
devotion.
<LEND>

<L>38859<pc>0823-a<k1>yogi<k2>yogi
{%Yogi = yogin%}¦ (occasionally occurring in ep. where
the metre requires {%yogīnām%} for {%yoginām%}).
<LEND>

<L>38860<pc>0823-a<k1>yogita<k2>yogita
{%Yogita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bewitched, enchanted, under the
influence of charms or sorcery, mad, crazy, wild.
<LEND>

<L>38861<pc>0823-a<k1>yogin<k2>yogin
{%Yogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ who or what joins or effects
junction, being in conjunction with (at the end of a
comp., e. g. {%candra-yogin,%} being in conjunction
with the moon; cf. {%soma-y˚%}); connected with,
endowed or provided with, possessed of, relating to
(at the end of a comp., e. g. {%kāla-y˚,%} connected
with fate; cf. {%svādu-y˚%}); possessed of magical
powers; practising or following the Yoga philo-
sophy; ({%ī%}), m. a follower of the Yoga system, a
Yogin or contemplative saint, a devotee, ascetic in
general; a religious or devout man, a magician,
conjurer, one supposed to have obtained supernatural
powers; N. of Yājñavalkya; of Arjuna; of Viṣṇu;
of Śiva; of a Buddha; of a particular mixed caste;
({%inī%}), f. a female demon or being endowed with
magical power, a fairy, witch, sorceress (represented
as an attendant of Śiva or Durgā; eight Yoginīs
are enumerated as created by and attendant on
[Page0823-b+ 81]
Durgā); epithet of a particular Tantrika Śakti;
(with Buddhists) a woman representing any goddess
who is the object of adoration; N. of Durgā. {%—Yogi-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%yogi-tva, am,%} n. the being connected
with, the having reference or relation to (at the end
of a comp.), connection, relationship, the state or
condition of a Yogin. {%—Yogi-daṇḍa, as,%} m. a kind
of reed or cane {%(= vetra)%}. {%—Yogi-nidrā,%} f. ‘a
Yogin's sleep,’ light sleep, wakefulness. {%—Yoginī-%}
{%jāla-śambara, am,%} n. and {%yoginī-jñānārṇava (˚na-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m. and {%yoginī-tantra, am,%} n., N. of three
Tantra works. {%—Yoginī-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
{%—Yoginī-bhairava%} and {%yoginī-hṛdaya, am,%} n.,
N. of two Tantra works. {%—Yogi-patnī,%} f. a Yogin's
wife. {%—Yogi-mātṛ, tā,%} m. a Yogin's mother. {%—Yo-%}
{%gi-rāj, ṭ,%} m. a king among Yogins. {%—Yogīndra%}
{%(˚gi-in˚)%} or {%yogīśa (˚gi-īśa), as,%} m. a chief or lord
among contemplative saints; N. of Yājñavalkya.
{%—Yogīśvara (˚gi-īś˚), as,%} m. {%= yogīśa; (ī),%} f.,
N. of a goddess.
<LEND>

<L>38862<pc>0823-b<k1>yogIya<k2>yogIya
{%Yogīya%}¦ (fr. {%yoga%}), Nom. A. {%yogīyate,%} &c., to
regard as Yoga, treat as Yoga.
<LEND>

<L>38863<pc>0823-b<k1>yogya<k2>yogya
{%Yogya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%yoga%} and fr. rt. 1. {%yuj%}),
fit for the yoke (Ved.); belonging to a particular
remedy (Ved.); useful, serviceable, fit, becoming,
suitable, proper, appropriate, fit for, qualified for,
capable of, able to (with dat., loc. or even gen. or
at the end of a comp. or with active or passive
inf., e. g. {%sa tat-sādhanāya yogyaḥ,%} he is fit for
accomplishing that; {%neyaṃ vanasya yogyā,%} she is
not fit for a forest; {%karma-yogya,%} fit for work;
{%ime yogyā Rākṣasair yoddhum,%} they are able to
fight with the Rākṣasas; {%chettuṃ yogyaṃ tat,%}
that is fit to be cut); fit for Yoga, proper for reli-
gious meditation; ({%as%}), m. a calculator of expedients;
the asterism Puṣya; ({%ā%}), f. preparation, contrivance
(Ved. Sāy. Ṛg-veda III. 6, 6, ‘materials or appliance
for harnessing’); exercise, practice, (especially) bodily
exercise, gymnastics, warlike or martial exercise,
drill; N. of the wife of Sūrya; ({%am%}), n. a species
of plant ({%= ṛddhi%}); sandal-wood; a vehicle, con-
veyance, carriage; a cake; milk. {%—Yogya-tā,%} f. or
{%yogya-tva, am,%} n. suitableness, propriety, fitness,
consistency, appropriateness; ability, capability.
{%—Yogyatā-vāda, as,%} m., N. of certain verses by
an unknown author. {%—Yogyā-ratha, as,%} m. a car-
riage employed in military exercises.
<LEND>

<L>38864<pc>0823-b<k1>yojaka<k2>yojaka
{%Yojaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ uniting, joining; one who
yokes or harnesses, a harnesser, groom; an arranger,
preparer, contriver, effecter; [cf. {%yuddha-y˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38865<pc>0823-b<k1>yojana<k2>yojana
{%Yojana, am,%}¦ n. the act of joining, junction, har-
nessing, yoking; that which is yoked or harnessed
(as ‘a yoke of oxen,’ ‘pair or team of horses,’ ‘a
vehicle or its trappings;’ so explained by some in
Ṛg-veda VI. 62, 6, &c., but in Ṛg-veda I. 88, 5.
{%yojanam%} is explained to mean ‘a means for inducing
the gods to yoke their horses,’ i. e. a hymn); a stage
or distance gone in one harnessing or without un-
yoking; a particular measure of distance sometimes
regarded as about equal to an European league (i. e.
4 or 5 English miles, but more correctly = 4 Krośas
or about 9 miles; according to other calculations =
2(1/2) English miles, and according to some = 8 Krośas);
a way, course, road (Ved.); a line, row (Ved.?);
the act of applying, application, fixing, arranging,
preparing, preparation, ({%āhāra-y˚,%} preparation of
food); erecting, constructing, (in these senses some-
times {%ā,%} f.); application of the sense of a passage,
the putting together of the sense, construction (in
gram.); application of effort, exertion (Ved., Sāy. =
{%udyoga%}); the act of inciting or exciting, instigation;
application of the thoughts, concentration of the
mind, abstraction, directing the thoughts to one
point ({%= yoga%}); the Supreme Being or Soul of the
Universe; ({%ā%}), f. union, connection; grammatical
construction. {%—Yojana-gandha, as, ā, am,%} whose
scent or fragrance extends for a Yojana, diffusing
perfume to the distance of a Yojana; ({%ā%}), f. musk;
epithet of Satya-vatī the mother of Vyāsa; of Sītā.
{%—Yojana-gandhikā,%} f. epithet of Satya-vatī. {%—Yo-%}
{%jana-parṇī,%} f. Bengal madder, Rubia Munjista {%(= %}
[Page0823-c+ 77]
{%mañjiṣṭhā)%}. {%—Yojana-vallikā%} or {%yojana-vallī,%}
f. {%= yojana-parṇī,%} col. 2. {%—Yojana-śata, am,%} n.
a hundred Yojanas.
<LEND>

<L>38866<pc>0823-c<k1>yojanika<k2>yojanika
{%Yojanika, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of an adj.
comp. after a numeral) so many Yojanas long, mea-
suring so many Yojanas.
<LEND>

<L>38867<pc>0823-c<k1>yojanIya<k2>yojanIya
{%Yojanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be joined or united; to
be applied; to be added; to be made use of or
employed, serviceable, useful; to be connected with
(with inst.); to be set to work; to be grammati-
cally connected or arranged.
<LEND>

<L>38868<pc>0823-c<k1>yojanya<k2>yojanya
{%Yojanya%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp., e. g.
{%ṣaṣṭi-y˚,%} sixty Yojanas distant.
<LEND>

<L>38869<pc>0823-c<k1>yojayitavya<k2>yojayitavya
{%Yojayitavya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus. of rt.
1. {%yuj%}), to be joined or applied; to be used or
employed; to be chosen or selected; to be endowed
or furnished with (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>38870<pc>0823-c<k1>yojayitf<k2>yojayitf
{%Yojayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), who or
what {{joines->joins||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} or unites; joining, combining, one who
applies or sets, a setter (of precious stones), one who
enchases, &c.
<LEND>

<L>38871<pc>0823-c<k1>yojita<k2>yojita
{%Yojita, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined, united, mixed; applied,
arranged, concerted.
<LEND>

<L>38872<pc>0823-c<k1>yojitf<k2>yojitf
{%Yojitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (fr. rt. 1. {%yuj%}), one who
unites or joins, a joiner, uniter, connecter.
<LEND>

<L>38873<pc>0823-c<k1>yojya<k2>yojya
{%Yojya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. rt. 1. {%yuj%}), to be joined;
to be applied or directed to; to be appointed or
arranged; to be made use of or employed, to be
brought in use; to be added to (with loc.); to be
endowed or furnished with (with inst.); to be shared
in; one on whom the mind is to be fixed or concen-
trated, an object of Yoga.
<LEND>

<L>38874<pc>0823-c<k1>yowaka<k2>yowaka
{#yowaka#}¦ {%yoṭaka, as,%} m. a combination of
stars, &c., constellation.
<LEND>

<L>38875<pc>0823-c<k1>yotu<k2>yotu
{#yotu#}¦ {%yotu, us,%} m. (probably fr. rt. 2. {%yu%}),
{%= pari-māṇa,%} measure in general; cleaning; puri-
fying, separating (?fr. rt. 1. {%yu%}).
<LEND>

<L>38876<pc>0823-c<k1>yotra<k2>yotra
{#yotra#}¦ {%yotra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 2. {%yu%}), {%= yoktra,%}
a fastening, tie, band, cord, rope, line; the tie or
cord that fastens the yoke of the plough to the neck
of the ox. {%—Yotra-pramāda, as,%} m., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>38877<pc>0823-c<k1>yotsyamAna<k2>yotsyamAna
{#yotsyamAna#}¦ {%yotsyamāna.%} See p. 820, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38878<pc>0823-c<k1>yodDavya<k2>yodDavya
{#yodDavya#}¦ {%yoddhavya, yoddhṛ, yodha, yodhin,%}
&c. See p. 820, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38879<pc>0823-c<k1>yonala<k2>yonala
{#yonala#}¦ {%yonala, as,%} m. {%= yava-nāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>38880<pc>0823-c<k1>yoni<k2>yoni
{#yoni#}¦ {%yoni, is,%} m. f. (rarely fem. in the
older language; sometimes also {%yonī,%} f.; said to
be fr. rt. 2. {%yu%}), the womb, uterus, matrix, vulva,
vagina, female organs of generation; site of birth or
production, any place of birth or origin, native place;
a home, abode, site, lair, nest; birth, origin, source
[cf. {%jagad-y˚, karma-y˚%}], spring, fountain, (at the
end of an adj. comp. = ‘originating in,’ ‘arising or
proceeding from,’ ‘sprung from,’ ‘produced by,’ e. g.
{%aguru-yonir dhūpaḥ,%} aromatic vapour proceeding
from aloe wood); a repository, receptacle, seat; a
mine; family, race, stock, caste, the form of exist-
ence or station fixed by birth, a class or particular
nature of created existence (e. g. that of a man,
Brāhman, animal, &c.); the regent of the Nakṣatra
Pūrva-phalgunī; water; a mystical term for the
sound {%e%}. {%—Yoni-kuṇḍa, am,%} n., N. of a particular
mystical diagram. {%—Yoni-guṇa, as,%} m. the property
of a womb, quality of a place of origin. {%—Yoni-%}
{%grantha, as,%} m. {%= chandas,%} q. v. {%—Yoni-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} born or produced from the womb, viviparous,
(opposed to {%a-y˚,%} q. v.) {%—Yoni-tas,%} ind. from birth,
by blood. {%—Yoni-tva, am,%} n. the being an origin
or source; the arising from or being based on.
{%—Yoni-devatā,%} f. the Nakṣatra Pūrva-phalgunī.
{%—Yoni-deśa, as,%} m. the region of the womb or
the generative organs. {%—Yoni-dvāra, am,%} n. the
orifice of the womb; N. of a sacred bathing-place.
{%—Yoni-nāsā,%} f. the upper part of the female organ,
the point of union of the labiæ. {%—Yoni-bhraṃśa,%}
{%as,%} m. fall of the womb, prolapsus uteri. {%—Yoni-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. connected with the womb
[Page0824-a+ 76]
or with the mother. {%—Yoni-mukta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. released from birth or from being born again.
{%—Yoni-mukha, am,%} n. the orifice of the uterus.
{%—Yoni-mudrā,%} f., N. of a particular position of
the fingers. {%—Yoni-rañjana, am,%} n. the menstrual
excretion. {%—Yoni-roga, as,%} m. disease of the female
organs of generation. {%—Yoni-liṅga, am,%} n. the
clitoris. {%—Yoni-saṃvṛtti, is,%} f. contraction or
closure of the vagina. {%—Yoni-saṅkara, as,%} m.
‘confusion of births,’ mixture of caste by unlawful
intermarriage, misalliance. {%—Yoni-sambandha, as,%}
m. relation by marriage, affinity. {%—Yoni-sambhava,%}
{%as, ā, am, = yoni-ja%}. {%—Yony-arśas, as,%} n. a fleshy
excrescence in the female organ {%(= kanda),%} pro-
lapsus uteri (?) .
<LEND>

<L>38881<pc>0824-a<k1>yonin<k2>yonin
{%Yonin, ī, inī, i, = yoni,%}¦ at the end of an adj.
comp.
<LEND>

<L>38882<pc>0824-a<k1>yonya<k2>yonya
{%Yonya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. forming a womb or
receptacle (for the waters; Sāy. {%= udaka-nirga-%}
{%mana-dvāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>38883<pc>0824-a<k1>yopana<k2>yopana
{#yopana#}¦ {%yopana.%} See under rt. {%yup,%} p. 820.
<LEND>

<L>38884<pc>0824-a<k1>yozaRA<k2>yozaRA
{#yozaRA#}¦ {%yoṣaṇā,%} f. (probably fr. rt. 2. {%yu,%}
cf. {%yuvan;%} according to others connected with rt.
1. {%juṣ%}), a girl, maiden, young woman, wife; (ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda V. 52, 14) a hymn,
praise.
<LEND>

<L>38885<pc>0824-a<k1>yozan<k2>yozan
{%Yoṣan, aṇas,%}¦ f. pl. (apparently only used in
plur.), Ved. women, young women, maidens; epi-
thet of the ten fingers (in Ṛg-veda IX 1, 7, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>38886<pc>0824-a<k1>yozA<k2>yozA
{%Yoṣā,%}¦ f. a girl, young woman, woman, female,
wife; epithet of the early dawn (Ved., but according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 123, 9. {%yoṣā = miśrayantī,%}
blending); the female of an animal, a mare (Ved.);
speech, (Sāy. {%= mādhyamikā vāk.%})
<LEND>

<L>38887<pc>0824-a<k1>yozit<k2>yozit
{%Yoṣit, t,%}¦ f. a woman, female, wife; the female
(of an animal, e. g. {%ali-yoṣit,%} a female bee).
{%—Yoṣit-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done by a woman,
contracted by a female. {%—Yoṣit-pratiyātanā,%} f.
the image or statue of a woman. {%—Yoṣit-sarpa,%}
{%as,%} m. a serpent of a woman, a woman like a ser-
pent. {%—Yoṣid-ratna, am,%} n. a jewel of a woman,
a most excellent woman. {%—Yoṣin-maya, as, ī, am,%}
formed like a woman, representing a woman.
<LEND>

<L>38888<pc>0824-a<k1>yozitA<k2>yozitA
{%Yoṣitā,%}¦ f. a woman, female, wife.
<LEND>

<L>38889<pc>0824-a<k1>yozitvA<k2>yozitvA
{%Yoṣitvā,%}¦ ind. (said to be a kind of ind. part.
derived fr. {%yoṣit%}), having made into a woman.
<LEND>

<L>38890<pc>0824-a<k1>yos<k2>yos
{#yos#}¦ {%yos,%} ind. welfare, happiness, (gene-
rally used in Ved. after {%śam;%} according to Sāy.
{%yoḥ = yāvanam,%} ‘the warding off of dangers,’ as if
fr. rt. 1. {%yu,%} or {%sukhasya miśrayitā,%} ‘the mixer
or causer of happiness,’ as if fr. rt. 2. {%yu.%})
<LEND>

<L>38891<pc>0824-a<k1>yohula<k2>yohula
{#yohula#}¦ {%yohula, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38892<pc>0824-a<k1>yOkarIya<k2>yOkarIya
{#yOkarIya#}¦ {%yaukarīya%} (fr. {%yūkara%}), see Gaṇa
Kṛśāśvādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38893<pc>0824-a<k1>yOktasruca<k2>yOktasruca
{#yOktasruca#}¦ {%yuktasruca, am,%} n. (fr. {%yukta +%}
{%sruc%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38894<pc>0824-a<k1>yOktASva<k2>yOktASva
{%Yauktāśva, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%yuktāśva%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>38895<pc>0824-a<k1>yOktASvAdya<k2>yOktASvAdya
{%Yauktāśvādya%}¦ and {%yauktāśvottara, am,%} n., N.
of two Sāmans.
<LEND>
<L>38895.1<pc>0824-a<k1>yOktASvottara<k2>yOktASvottara
{{Lbody=38895}}
<LEND>

<L>38896<pc>0824-a<k1>yOktika<k2>yOktika
{#yOktika#}¦ {%yauktika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yukti%}), any-
thing which connects or binds, suitable, proper, fit;
founded on reasoning, logical; inferrible, deducible;
usual, customary; ({%as%}), m. a king's companion or
associate ({%= narma-saciva%}).
<LEND>

<L>38897<pc>0824-a<k1>yOga<k2>yOga
{#yOga#}¦ {%yauga, as,%} m. (fr. {%yoga%}), a follower
of the Yoga system of philosophy.
<LEND>

<L>38898<pc>0824-a<k1>yOgaka<k2>yOgaka
{%Yaugaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the religious
exercise called Yoga; [cf. {%yaugika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38899<pc>0824-a<k1>yOganDara<k2>yOganDara
{%Yaugandhara%}¦ or {%yaugandharaka, as, ī, am%}
(fr. {%yugan-dhara%}), relating to Yugan-dhara.
<LEND>

<L>38900<pc>0824-a<k1>yOganDarAyaRa<k2>yOganDarAyaRa
{%Yaugandharāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%yugan-dhara%}
and {%yogan-dhara%}), a patronymic; N. of a minister
of Udayana.
<LEND>

<L>38901<pc>0824-a<k1>yOganDarAyaRIya<k2>yOganDarAyaRIya
{%Yaugandharāyaṇīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or
belonging to Yaugandharāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>38902<pc>0824-a<k1>yOganDari<k2>yOganDari
{%Yaugandhari, is,%}¦ m. a king of the Yugan-dharas.
<LEND>
[Page0824-b+ 74]

<L>38903<pc>0824-b<k1>yOgapada<k2>yOgapada
{%Yaugapada, am,%}¦ n. {%= yaugapadya%} below.
<LEND>

<L>38904<pc>0824-b<k1>yOgapadya<k2>yOgapadya
{%Yaugapadya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%yuga-pad%}), simulta-
neousness, contemporaneousness; {%yaugapadyena =%}
{%yuga-pad,%} simultaneously, together.
<LEND>

<L>38905<pc>0824-b<k1>yOgavaratra<k2>yOgavaratra
{%Yaugavaratra, am,%}¦ n. {%= yuga-varatrāṇāṃ sa-%}
{%mūha,%} see Gaṇa Khaṇḍikādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 45.
<LEND>

<L>38906<pc>0824-b<k1>yOgika<k2>yOgika
{%Yaugika, as, ī, am,%}¦ useful, applicable; proper,
customary, usual; belonging to a remedy, remedial;
derivative, suiting the derivation, agreeing with the
etymology, derived from the etymology, ({%yaugikī%}
{%sañjñā,%} a word retaining that signification which
belongs to it according to its etymology; {%yaugika-%}
{%rūḍha,%} a word which has both an etymological and
special meaning, cf. {%yoga-rūḍha%}); relating to the
Yoga, proceeding or derived from the Yoga.
<LEND>

<L>38907<pc>0824-b<k1>yOjanaSatika<k2>yOjanaSatika
{#yOjanaSatika#}¦ {%yaujanaśatika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%yojana + śata%}), one who goes a hundred Yojanas;
one who deserves to be approached from a distance
of a hundred Yojanas; [cf. {%krauśaśatika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38908<pc>0824-b<k1>yOjanika<k2>yOjanika
{%Yaujanika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%yojana%}), going or
extending a Yojana.
<LEND>

<L>38909<pc>0824-b<k1>yOw<k2>yOw
{#yOw#}¦ {%yauṭ%} or {%yauḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%yauṭati,%}
{%yauḍati,%} &c., Caus. Aor. {%ayuyauṭat,%}
&c., to join or fasten together; [cf. {%yoṭaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38910<pc>0824-b<k1>yOtaka<k2>yOtaka
{#yOtaka#}¦ {%yautaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%yutaka%}),
anything which rightfully belongs to or is the pro-
perty of any one; ({%am%}), n. private property, (espe-
cially) property given at marriage, a woman's dowry,
nuptial gift, presents made to a bride at her marriage
by her father or friends; (according to some also) a
gift to the bridegroom.
<LEND>

<L>38911<pc>0824-b<k1>yOtaki<k2>yOtaki
{%Yautaki, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic; {%yautakyā,%} f., see
Gaṇa Krauḍy-ādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38912<pc>0824-b<k1>yOtuka<k2>yOtuka
{%Yautuka, am,%}¦ n. {%= yautaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>38913<pc>0824-b<k1>yOtava<k2>yOtava
{#yOtava#}¦ {%yautava, am,%} n. measure in general
({%= pautava,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>38914<pc>0824-b<k1>yOTika<k2>yOTika
{#yOTika#}¦ {%yauthika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yūtha%}), be-
longing to a band or troop, belonging to a flock or
herd; ({%as%}), m. one belonging to the same flock or
company, a companion, comrade.
<LEND>

<L>38915<pc>0824-b<k1>yOTya<k2>yOTya
{%Yauthya,%}¦ see Gaṇa Saṅkāśādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38916<pc>0824-b<k1>yODa<k2>yODa
{#yODa#}¦ {%yaudha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yodha%}), warlike,
martial.
<LEND>

<L>38917<pc>0824-b<k1>yODAjaya<k2>yODAjaya
{%Yaudhājaya, am,%}¦ n., N. of various Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>38918<pc>0824-b<k1>yODika<k2>yODika
{%Yaudhika,%}¦ epithet of a particular mode of fighting
(Hari-vaṃśa 15980; also read {%yodhika%}).
<LEND>

<L>38919<pc>0824-b<k1>yODizWira<k2>yODizWira
{%Yaudhiṣṭhira, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%yudhi-ṣṭhira%}),
relating or belonging to Yudhi-ṣṭhira; ({%as%}), m. a
descendant of Yudhi-ṣṭhira; ({%ī%}), f. a female de-
scendant of Yudhi-ṣṭhira.
<LEND>

<L>38920<pc>0824-b<k1>yODizWiri<k2>yODizWiri
{%Yaudhiṣṭhiri, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Yudhi-
ṣṭhira.
<LEND>

<L>38921<pc>0824-b<k1>yODeya<k2>yODeya
{%Yaudheya, as,%}¦ m. a king of the Yaudheyas; N.
of a son of Yudhi-ṣṭhira; {%= yoddhṛ,%} a warrior;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a warlike race.
<LEND>

<L>38922<pc>0824-b<k1>yODeyaka<k2>yODeyaka
{%Yaudheyaka = yaudheya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>38923<pc>0824-b<k1>yOna<k2>yOna<h>1
{#yOna#} 1¦. {%yauna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yoni%}), relating
to the womb or place of birth, uterine; concerning
or relating to marriage or to affinity; resulting
through marriage; connected by the mother's side,
connubial; ({%am%}), n. matrimonial connection, con-
jugal alliance, marriage, relationship by marriage;
(at the end of an adj. comp.) proceeding from,
arising from (e. g. {%agni-yauna,%} proceeding from
fire). {%—Yauna-sambandha, as,%} m. relationship by
marriage, affinity.
<LEND>

<L>38924<pc>0824-b<k1>yOna<k2>yOna<h>2
{#yOna#} 2¦. {%yauna, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people,
(probably contracted for Yavana.)
<LEND>

<L>38925<pc>0824-b<k1>yOpa<k2>yOpa
{#yOpa#}¦ {%yaupa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yūpa%}), relating
to the sacrificial post.
<LEND>

<L>38926<pc>0824-b<k1>yOpya<k2>yOpya
{%Yaupya,%}¦ see Gaṇa Saṅkāśādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>38927<pc>0824-b<k1>yOyuDAni<k2>yOyuDAni
{#yOyuDAni#}¦ {%yauyudhāni, is,%} m. a patronymic
from Yuyudhāna.
<LEND>

<L>38928<pc>0824-b<k1>yOvata<k2>yOvata
{#yOvata#}¦ {%yauvata, am,%} n. (fr. {%yuvati%}), a num-
[Page0824-c+ 74]
ber of girls, assemblage of young women; {%= yau-%}
{%tava.%}
<LEND>

<L>38929<pc>0824-c<k1>yOvateya<k2>yOvateya
{%Yauvateya, as,%}¦ m. the son of a young woman.
<LEND>

<L>38930<pc>0824-c<k1>yOvana<k2>yOvana
{#yOvana#}¦ {%yauvana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yuvan%}), ju-
venile; ({%am%}), n. youth, youthfulness, the prime of
life, bloom of youth, puberty, manhood, (at the end
of an adj. comp. the fem. ends in {%ā,%} cf. {%prāpta-y˚%});
a number of young people (especially of young
women); any youthful act or juvenile indiscretion;
N. of the third grade or degree in the mysteries of
the Śāktas. {%—Yauvana-kaṇṭaka, as, am,%} m. n.
an eruption common in youth, pimples &c. on the
face of young people. {%—Yauvana-darpa, as,%} m.
the pride of youth, rashness, juvenile indiscretion or
conceit. {%—Yauvana-daśā,%} f. the period of youth.
{%—Yauvana-piḍakā,%} f. {%= yauvana-kaṇṭaka.%}
{%—Yauvana-prānta, as, am,%} m. n. the extreme
verge or end of youth. {%—Yauvana-bhinna-śaiśava,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} whose childhood is divided by youth,
passing from childhood to manhood. {%—Yauvana-%}
{%matta, as, ā, am,%} intoxicated by (the pride of)
youth; ({%ā%}), f. a species of metre, four times ¯˘˘¯¯,
¯¯¯¯¯¯¯˘˘¯¯. {%—Yauvana-lakṣaṇa, am,%}
n. a sign or characteristic of youth; charm, loveli-
ness, grace; the female breast. {%—Yauvana-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} possessing youth, being in youth, young,
youthful. {%—Yauvana-śrī, īs,%} f. the beauty of youth-
fulness. {%—Yauvana-stha, as, ā, am,%} ‘being in the
bloom of youth,’ arrived at puberty, youthful, mar-
riageable. {%—Yauvanāvasthā (˚na-av˚),%} f. the state
of youth, youthfulness, puberty. {%—Yauvanodbheda%}
{%(˚na-ud˚), as,%} m. the ardour of youthful passion,
sexual love or inclination; Kāma-deva, the god of
love.
<LEND>

<L>38931<pc>0824-c<k1>yOvanaka<k2>yOvanaka
{%Yauvanaka, am,%}¦ n. {%= yauvana,%} youth.
<LEND>

<L>38932<pc>0824-c<k1>yOvanASva<k2>yOvanASva
{%Yauvanāśva, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%yuvanāśva%}), a patro-
nymic of Māndhātṛ; a patronymic of a grandson
of Māndhātṛ.
<LEND>

<L>38933<pc>0824-c<k1>yOvanASvaka<k2>yOvanASvaka
{%Yauvanāśvaka, as,%}¦ or {%yauvanāśvi, is,%} m. a
patronymic of Māndhātṛ.
<LEND>

<L>38934<pc>0824-c<k1>yOvanika<k2>yOvanika
{%Yauvanika, as,%}¦ m. (?), {%= yauvana,%} youth.
<LEND>

<L>38935<pc>0824-c<k1>yOvanin<k2>yOvanin
{%Yauvanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ youthful.
<LEND>

<L>38936<pc>0824-c<k1>yOvarAjika<k2>yOvarAjika
{%Yauvarājika, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%yuva-rāja%}), see
Gaṇa Kāśyādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 116.
<LEND>

<L>38937<pc>0824-c<k1>yOvarAjya<k2>yOvarAjya
{%Yauvarājya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%yuva-rāja%}), the rank or
office of a Yuva-rāja or heir-apparent associated in
the kingdom; the rights and privileges of heir-
apparent, right of succession to the kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>38938<pc>0824-c<k1>yOziRya<k2>yOziRya
{#yOziRya#}¦ {%yauṣiṇya, am,%} n. womanhood;
[cf. {%yoṣan.%}]
<LEND>

<L>38939<pc>0824-c<k1>yOzmAka<k2>yOzmAka
{#yOzmAka#}¦ {%yauṣmāka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%yuṣma%}),
your, yours, belonging to you.
<LEND>

<L>38940<pc>0824-c<k1>yOzmAkIRa<k2>yOzmAkIRa
{%Yauṣmākīṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ your, yours.
<LEND>
<H>{#ra#}

<L>38941<pc>0824-c<k1>ra<k2>ra<h>1
{#ra#} 1¦. {%ra,%} the twenty-seventh consonant of
the Nāgarī alphabet, being the semivowel of the
vowels {%ṛ, ṝ,%} and having the sound of the English <nsi>r</nsi>
in <nsi>real</nsi>. {%—Ra-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%ra.%}
<LEND>

<L>38942<pc>0824-c<k1>ra<k2>ra<h>2
{#ra#} 2¦. {%ra, as,%} m. fire; heat, warmth; burn-
ing, scorching; love, desire; speed; ({%ā%}), f. {%= vi-%}
{%bhrama;%} giving, {%= dāna;%} gold, {%= kāñcana; (ī),%}
f. going, motion, {%= gati; (am),%} n. {%= tejas,%} bright-
ness, splendor.
<LEND>

<L>38943<pc>0824-c<k1>ra<k2>ra<h>3
{#ra#} 3¦. {%ra,%} (in prosody) a cretic or a short
between two long syllables. {%—Ra-vipulā,%} f. ‘abound-
ing in cretics,’ N. of a metre.
<LEND>

<L>38944<pc>0824-c<k1>raMsu<k2>raMsu
{#raMsu#}¦ {%raṃsu, us, us, u%} (said by some to be
fr. rt. {%raṇ,%} but according to Nirukta VI. 17. and
Sāy. fr. rt. {%ram%}), Ved. cheerful, joyful, delightful;
({%u%}), ind. cheerfully, delightfully, (Sāy. {%= ramaṇī-%}
{%yeṣu,%} i. e. {%ājyādi-haviḥṣu,%} in oblations, &c.)
{%—Raṃsu-jihva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a pleasing
tongue or voice, (Sāy. {%= ramaṇīya-jvālopeta,%} pos-
sessing a pleasing tongue of flame.)
<LEND>
[Page0825-a+ 77]

<L>38945<pc>0825-a<k1>raMh<k2>raMh
{#raMh#}¦ {%raṃh%} (connected with rt. {%laṅgh;%} cf.
rt. {%raṅgh%}), cl. 1. P. {%raṃhati%} (also Ved. A.
{%raṃhate%}), {%raraṃha, raṃhitum,%} to go, move with
speed, hasten; to make to run or go rapidly, cause
to flow; to flow: Caus. {%raṃhayati%} (according to
some also {%raṃhāpayati%}), to cause to move rapidly,
urge on; to cause to flow; to go; to speak; to
shine, (in the last two senses a various reading for
rt. {%vaṃh%}); [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">τρέχ-ω;</lang> Goth. <nsi>thrag-</nsi>
<nsi>ja.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>38946<pc>0825-a<k1>raMha<k2>raMha
{%Raṃha = raṃhas%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>38947<pc>0825-a<k1>raMhaRa<k2>raMhaRa
{%Raṃhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. going swiftly, hastening.
<LEND>

<L>38948<pc>0825-a<k1>raMhati<k2>raMhati
{%Raṃhati, is,%}¦ f. (?), speed, velocity; the speed of
a chariot.
<LEND>

<L>38949<pc>0825-a<k1>raMhamARa<k2>raMhamARa
{%Raṃhamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving or flowing
rapidly, (Sāy. {%= vegaṃ kurvāṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>38950<pc>0825-a<k1>raMhas<k2>raMhas
{%Raṃhas, as,%}¦ n. speed, quickness, velocity; eager-
ness, vehemence, violence, impetuosity; N. of Śiva,
(Vehemence personified); of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>38951<pc>0825-a<k1>raMhasa<k2>raMhasa
{%Raṃhasa%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. {%= raṃhas.%}
<LEND>

<L>38952<pc>0825-a<k1>raMhi<k2>raMhi
{%Raṃhi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. the act of running or flowing,
a running stream; the making to run, pursuing,
hunting; speed, haste, flight.
<LEND>

<L>38953<pc>0825-a<k1>rArahARa<k2>rArahARa
{%Rārahāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. Intens.; in Pada-pāṭha
{%rarahāṇa%}), Ved. going quickly, hastening, swift.
<LEND>

<L>38954<pc>0825-a<k1>rak<k2>rak
{#rak#}¦ {%rak%} (connected with rts. {%rag, ragh,%}
{%lak, lag%}), cl. 10. P. {%rākayati,%} &c., to taste,
relish; to obtain, get.
<LEND>

<L>38955<pc>0825-a<k1>raka<k2>raka
{%Raka, as,%}¦ m. the sun gem; crystal; a hard
shower.
<LEND>

<L>38956<pc>0825-a<k1>rakasA<k2>rakasA
{#rakasA#}¦ {%rakasā,%} f. a mild form of leprosy.
<LEND>

<L>38957<pc>0825-a<k1>rakka<k2>rakka
{#rakka#}¦ {%rakka, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rakka-%}
{%jayā,%} f., N. of a statue of Śrī erected by Rakka.
<LEND>

<L>38958<pc>0825-a<k1>rakta<k2>rakta
{#rakta#}¦ {%rakta, raktaka, rakta-kaṅgu,%} &c. See
p. 826, col. 3, and p. 828, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38959<pc>0825-a<k1>rakti<k2>rakti
{#rakti#}¦ {%rakti,%} &c. See p. 828, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>38960<pc>0825-a<k1>rakz<k2>rakz<h>1
{#rakz#} 1¦. {%rakṣ%} (thought by some to be
connected with rt. {%rañj%} as a kind of Desid.
form of that rt.), cl. 1. P. {%rakṣati%} (Ved. and ep. also A.
{%rakṣate%}), {%rarakṣa, rakṣiṣyati, arakṣīt%} (an
earlier form {%arākṣīt%} is also given, Ved. Leṭ. {%rak-%}
{%ṣiṣat%}), {%rakṣitum,%} to guard, watch, take care of,
protect, preserve, save, keep, ({%rahasyaṃ rakṣ,%}
to keep a secret), hold, maintain, tend, ({%paśūn%}
{%rakṣ,%} to tend cattle); to govern, rule over, ({%kṣi-%}
{%tim%} or {%vasudhāṃ rakṣ,%} to govern the earth); to
spare, save; to protect or save from (with abl.); to
take care, beware of, be on one's guard against;
to take refuge or shelter (A.): Caus. {%rakṣayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%ararakṣat,%} to guard, watch, protect:
Desid. {%rirakṣiṣati,%} to wish to guard, intend to pro-
tect from (with abl.): Intens. {%rārakṣyate, rārāṣṭi,%}
to protect very carefully; [cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀρκ-έ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἄρκιο-ς, ἀλκτήρ, ἀλαλκτήρ, ἀλκή, ἀλέξω;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>arc-e-o, arx;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ga-rehsns.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>38961<pc>0825-a<k1>rakz<k2>rakz<h>2
2. {%rakṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ guarding, watching, protecting,
tending, &c. (at the end of a comp., cf. {%go-rakṣ%}).
<LEND>

<L>38962<pc>0825-a<k1>rakza<k2>rakza
{%Rakṣa, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a guard, guardian, protector,
keeper; protecting, preserving, watching, keeping,
&c. (often at the end of a comp., cf. {%go-r˚%}); ({%ā%}), f.
the act of protecting or guarding, protection, care,
preservation, security; a guard, watch; any preser-
vative, any act or right performed for protection or
preservation, a sort of bracelet or amulet, any mys-
tical token used as a charm; a tutelary divinity [cf.
{%mahā-r˚%}]; ashes (used as a preservative); ({%ā%} or {%ī%}),
f. a piece of thread or silk bound round the wrist on
particular occasions (especially on the full moon of
Śrāvaṇa, either as an amulet and preservative against
misfortune, or as a symbol of mutual dependence,
or as a mark of respect; among the Rājputs it is
sometimes sent by a lady of rank or family to a
person of influence whose protection she is desirous
of securing and whom she thus adopts, as it were, as a
male relative or brother). {%—Rakṣa-pāla%} or {%rakṣa-%}
{%pālaka, as,%} m. a protector, guard. {%—Rakṣa-bha-%}
{%gavatī,%} f. {%= prajñā-pāramitā%}. {%—Rakṣā-karaṇ- %}
[Page0825-b+ 80]
{%ḍaka, am,%} n. an amulet in the shape of a small
basket. {%—Rakṣā-gṛha, am,%} n. ‘watch-room,’ a
lying-in chamber, room appropriated to a lying-in
woman. {%—Rakṣādhikṛta (˚ṣā-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
entrusted with the protection or superintendence (of
a country, &c.), placed over the government; ({%as%}),
m. a superintendent or governor (of a province),
magistrate, superintendent of police. {%—Rakṣādhi-%}
{%pati (˚ṣā-adh˚)%} or {%rakṣā-pati, is,%} m. one placed
over for protection, a superintendent of police.
{%—Rakṣā-pattra, as,%} m. a kind of birch tree {%(=%}
{%bhūrja)%}. {%—Rakṣā-puruṣa, as,%} m. a watchman,
guard, protector. {%—Rakṣāpekṣaka (˚ṣā-ap˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a doorkeeper, porter; a guard of the women's
apartments; a catamite; an actor, mime. {%—Rakṣā-%}
{%pradīpa, as,%} m. a light kept burning for protection
(against evil spirits, &c.). {%—Rakṣā-bhūṣaṇa, am,%}
n. an ornament or amulet worn for protection (against
evil spirits, &c.). {%—Rakṣābhyadhikṛta (˚ṣā-%}
{%abh˚), as, ā, am,%} and {%as,%} m. {%= rakṣādhikṛta.%}
{%—Rakṣā-maṅgala, am,%} n. a ceremony performed
for protection (against evil spirits, &c.). {%—Rakṣā-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. a jewel worn as a preservative (against
evil spirits, &c.). {%—Rakṣā-malla, as,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Rakṣā-mahauṣadhi, is,%} f. a sovereign
remedy serving as a preservative (against evil spirits,
&c.). {%—Rakṣā-ratna, am,%} n. {%= rakṣā-maṇi.%}
{%—Rakṣā-ratna-pradīpa, as,%} m. a lamp shining
or brilliant with gems used as a preservative (against
evil spirits, &c.; cf. {%ratna-pradīpa%}). {%—Rakṣār-%}
{%tham (˚ṣā-ar˚),%} ind. for the sake of guarding, for
guarding. {%—Rakṣā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having or en-
joying protection, protected, guarded. {%—Rakṣā-sar-%}
{%ṣapa, as,%} m. mustard as a preservative (against evil
spirits).
<LEND>

<L>38963<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzaka<k2>rakzaka
{%Rakṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ who or what protects or
guards or tends [cf. {%go-r˚%}]; guarding, protecting;
({%as%}), m. a guardian, protector; a guard, watch;
({%ikā%}), f. a female guardian or protector; an amulet,
charm, anything worn as a preservative {%(= rakṣā).%}
{%—Rakṣakāmbā (˚ka-am˚),%} f., N. of the wife of
Rāmānuja.
<LEND>

<L>38964<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzaRa<k2>rakzaRa
{%Rakṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a protector, defender, guardian;
N. of Viṣṇu; ({%ā%}), f. the act of protecting or guard-
ing, watching over, protection; ({%ī%}), f. a rein, bridle;
({%am%}), n. the act of guarding, watching, protecting,
tending, caring for, preserving, protection, ({%paśū-%}
{%nāṃ rakṣaṇam,%} the tending of cattle); a ceremony
performed for protection or preservation. {%—Rakṣa-%}
{%ṇārtham (˚ṇa-ar˚),%} ind. for the sake of guarding or
protecting. {%—Rakṣaṇopāya (˚ṇa-up˚), as,%} m. a
means of safety.
<LEND>

<L>38965<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzaRAraka<k2>rakzaRAraka
{%Rakṣaṇāraka%}¦ or {%rakṣaṇīraka, as,%} m. (pro-
bably connected with rt. 1. {%rakṣ%}), morbid retention
of urine.
<LEND>

<L>38966<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzaRi<k2>rakzaRi
{%Rakṣaṇi, is,%}¦ f. a species of plant ({%= trāyamāṇā%}).
<LEND>

<L>38967<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzaRIya<k2>rakzaRIya
{%Rakṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be guarded or pre-
served, to be protected; to be watched or guarded
against, defensible.
<LEND>

<L>38968<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzat<k2>rakzat
{%Rakṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ guarding, protecting, pre-
serving.
<LEND>

<L>38969<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzamARa<k2>rakzamARa
{%Rakṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ protecting, guarding,
being on one's guard, watching against.
<LEND>

<L>38970<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzas<k2>rakzas<h>1
1. {%rakṣas, ās, ās, as%}¦ (for 2. see col. 2), protecting
(at the end of a comp., e. g. {%pathi-r˚,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>38971<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzA<k2>rakzA
{%Rakṣā,%}¦ f. guard, protection, &c.; see {%rakṣa,%}
col. 1; (for {%rakṣā = rākṣā,%} lac, see {%rākṣā.%})
<LEND>

<L>38972<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzi<k2>rakzi
{%Rakṣi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. guarding, protecting (at the
end of a comp., e. g. {%pathi-r˚, paśu-r˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>38973<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzika<k2>rakzika
{%Rakṣika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%rakṣā%}), a guard, protector,
policeman. {%—Rakṣika-puruṣa, as,%} m. a watch-
man, policeman.
<LEND>

<L>38974<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzita<k2>rakzita
{%Rakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ guarded, protected, taken
care of, preserved, maintained, kept; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a teacher of medicine; of a grammarian; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of an Apsaras. {%—Rakṣita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} con-
taining the idea of {%rakṣ%} or ‘protecting, &c.’
<LEND>

<L>38975<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzitaka<k2>rakzitaka
{%Rakṣitaka%}¦ in {%dāra-rakṣitaka,%} relating to the
guarding or protection of wives; ({%ikā%}), f. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>38976<pc>0825-b<k1>rakzitavya<k2>rakzitavya
{%Rakṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be guarded, to be
[Page0825-c+ 79]
protected or taken care of, to be guarded against or
kept off.
<LEND>

<L>38977<pc>0825-c<k1>rakzitf<k2>rakzitf
{%Rakṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who guards or protects,
a guardian, guard, protector, watch, sentinel.
<LEND>

<L>38978<pc>0825-c<k1>rakzin<k2>rakzin
{%Rakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ a guardian, protector, defender,
guard, sentinel; guarding, protecting, protecting
from (often at the end of comps., e. g. {%amṛta-%}
{%rakṣin,%} guarding the nectar; cf. {%ripu-r˚, sarva-%}
{%r˚%}). {%—Rakṣi-varga, as,%} m. an assemblage of guards
or sentinels, body-guard.
<LEND>

<L>38979<pc>0825-c<k1>rakzRa<k2>rakzRa
{%Rakṣṇa, as,%}¦ m. protection ({%= trāṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>38980<pc>0825-c<k1>rakzya<k2>rakzya
{%Rakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be guarded or protected,
to be taken care of; to be watched against; to be
concerned about, to be on one's guard against (with
abl.). {%—Rakṣya-tama, as, ā, am,%} to be protected
most carefully, requiring the greatest watching, most
worthy of protection.
<LEND>

<L>38981<pc>0825-c<k1>rakzyamARa<k2>rakzyamARa
{%Rakṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being guarded or
protected.
<LEND>

<L>38982<pc>0825-c<k1>rarakzARa<k2>rarakzARa
{%Rarakṣāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. excessively pro-
tecting.
<LEND>

<L>38983<pc>0825-c<k1>rakz<k2>rakz<h>3
{#rakz#} 3¦. {%rakṣ%} (probably a form of rt.
{%ṛkṣ%} = rts. {%riś,%} 1. {%riṣ,%} q. q. v. v.), Ved.
to hurt, injure, destroy, damage.
<LEND>

<L>38984<pc>0825-c<k1>rakzas<k2>rakzas<h>2
2. {%rakṣas, as,%}¦ n. hurt, injury, damage (Ved.,
but according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 104, 23.
{%rakṣas = Rākṣasa-jāti,%} ‘the race of Rākṣasas,’
and in I. 36, 20. {%rakṣas = balam,%} ‘strength’);
‘the injurer,’ (according to some a kind of euphe-
mism fr. rt. 1. {%rakṣ,%} like <lang n="greek">Εὐμενίδες</lang>); an evil
being or demon, an ogre, malignant spirit, a
Rākṣasa, (these beings play an important part in
the Hindū religious and mythological system; see
their description under {%rākṣasa%}); ({%ās%}), m., Ved.
an evil and malignant being, a nocturnal fiend or
Rākṣasa, (see {%rākṣasa.%}) {%—Rakṣa-īśa, as,%} m.
‘lord of the Rākṣasas,’ N. of Rāvaṇa. {%—Rakṣaḥ-%}
{%sabha, am,%} n. an assemblage or multitude of Rāk-
ṣasas. {%—Rakṣas-tva, am,%} n. the nature of a
Rākṣasa, demoniacal nature or disposition, fiend-
ishness, malignity, malice. {%—Rakṣas-pāśa, as,%} m.
a contemptible Rākṣasa, despicable demon; [cf.
{%pāśa.%}] {%—Rakṣas-vin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. having or
attended by Rākṣasas, demoniacal, evil-disposed,
malignant; (Sāy.) powerful, strong {%(= bala-vat).%}
{%—Rakṣo-gaṇa, as,%} m. a class or company of
demons. {%—Rakṣo-gaṇa-bhojana, as,%} m., N. of a
hell where human beings are eaten by Rākṣasas.
{%—Rakṣo-ghna, as, ī, am,%} driving back or repel-
ling Rākṣasas, killing or destroying Rākṣasas;
({%as%}), m. Semecarpus Anacardium; white mustard;
({%ī%}), f. Acorus Calamus; ({%am%}), n. sour rice-gruel.
{%—Rakṣo-jananī,%} f. ‘producing Rākṣasas,’ night.
{%—Rakṣo-'dhidevatā,%} f. the chief goddess of the
Rākṣasas. {%—Rakṣo-bhāṣ, ṭ,%} Ved. barking or mak-
ing a noise like a Rākṣasa, (see 2. {%bhāṣ.%}) {%—Rak-%}
{%ṣo-mukha, as,%} m. ‘Rākṣasa-faced,’ N. of a man;
({%ās%}), m. pl. his descendants. {%—Rakṣo-yuj, k, k, k,%}
Ved. associated with Rākṣasas. {%—Rakṣo-vāha,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race. {%—Rakṣo-vikṣobhiṇī,%} f.
‘agitating or exciting the Rākṣasas,’ N. of a god-
dess. {%—Rakṣo-haṇa, as, ā, am, = rakṣo-han.%}
{%—Rakṣohaṇaka,%} containing the word {%rakṣo-%}
{%haṇa%}. {%—Rakṣo-hatya, am,%} n., Ved. the killing or
destruction of Rākṣasas. {%—Rakṣo-han, hā, ghnī,%}
{%ha,%} Ved. destroying or killing Rākṣasas; {%(hā),%}
m., N. of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 162;
bdellium.
<LEND>

<L>38985<pc>0825-c<k1>rakzasya<k2>rakzasya
{%Rakṣasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ useful for (keeping off)
Rākṣasas, anti-demoniacal.
<LEND>

<L>38986<pc>0825-c<k1>raK<k2>raK
{#raK#}¦ {%rakh%} or {%raṅkh%} (connected with rts.
{%rikh, riṅkh%}), cl. 1. P. {%rakhati, raṅkhati,%}
&c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>38987<pc>0825-c<k1>rag<k2>rag
{#rag#}¦ {%rag,%} cl. 1. P. {%ragati, rarāga, aragīt,%}
&c., to doubt, suspect; cl. 10. P. {%rāgayati%}
= rt. {%rak,%} to taste, &c.
<LEND>

<L>38988<pc>0825-c<k1>raG<k2>raG
{#raG#}¦ {%ragh%} (= rt. {%rak%}), cl. 10. P. {%rāghayati,%}
to taste, relish; to obtain; cl. 1. A. {%raṅghate,%}
&c., to go, (see rt. {%raṅgh%}); [cf. Lith. <nsi>ragauja.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page0826-a+ 78]

<L>38989<pc>0826-a<k1>raGu<k2>raGu
{#raGu#}¦ {%raghu, us, ghvī, u%} (fr. rt. {%raṃh%} or
{%raṅgh%}), Ved. fleet, rapid, rushing, (Sāy. {%= śīghra-%}
{%gāmin%}); eager; light ({%= laghu%}), fickle; ({%us%}), m.
a racer, fleet courser (Ved.); N. of an ancient king
and ancestor of Rāma, (in the Raghu-vaṃśa he is
described as the son of Dilīpa and Su-dakṣiṇā, and
in III. 21. the name Raghu is said to have been
given to him as ‘going’ to the end of the Śāstras
and to the destruction of his enemies; he was the
father of Aja, the father of Daśa-ratha, and was
therefore great-grandfather of Rāma; but different
accounts are given of Rāma's genealogy, and in
Rāmāyaṇa II. 110, 28. Raghu is said to be son of
Kakutstha; in the Hari-vaṃśa two Raghus are men-
tioned among the ancestors of Rāma); N. of a son
of Śākya-muni; of the author of the Kavi-darpaṇa;
an abbreviation for Raghu-vaṃśa, q. v.; {%(avas),%} m.
pl. the Raghus or descendants of Raghu; [cf. {%rā-%}
{%ghava.%}] {%—Raghu-kāra, as,%} m., N. of Kālidāsa the
author of the Raghu-vaṃśa. {%—Raghu-ja, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. produced from a fleet courser or racer. {%—Ra-%}
{%ghu-ṭippaṇī,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Raghu-
vaṃśa. {%—Raghu-tanaya, as,%} m. son of Raghu, N.
of Rāma. {%—Raghu-deva, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Virudāvalī; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a commentary on
the Tattva-cintāmaṇi by Raghu-deva. {%—Raghu-dru,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. going or running quickly, running
like a race-horse. {%—Raghu-nandana, as,%} m. a
descendant or son of Raghu, N. of Rāma; N. of an
author of several treatises on religion and law. {%—Ra-%}
{%ghu-nātha, as,%} m., N. of Rāma; of various persons;
of the author of the Rasika-ramaṇa. {%—Raghu-pati,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of Rāma; of the father of the lexicogra-
pher Jaṭā-dhara. {%—Raghu-patma-jaṃhas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. light-winged, (Sāy.) having a light-falling
foot {%(= laghu-patana-samartha-pāda)%}. {%—Raghu-%}
{%patvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. lightly flying, going or
moving quickly; [cf. Lat. <nsi>acci-piter</nsi> = Sansk. {%āśu-%}
{%patvan.%}] {%—Raghu-pratinidhi, is,%} m. image or
counterpart of Raghu. {%—Raghu-pravara, as,%} m.,
N. of Rāma. {%—Raghu-manyu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
having light or little wrath, mild-tempered, (Sāy. =
{%laghu-krodha%}); full of eagerness or zeal. {%—Raghu-%}
{%yāman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. going quickly, moving lightly.
{%—Raghu-rāma, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Raghu-%}
{%vaṃśa, as,%} m. the race or family of Raghu; N.
of Kālidāsa's celebrated poem in honour of the race
of Raghu, (it consists of nineteen chapters or books;
cf. {%mahā-kāvya.%}) {%—Raghuvaṃśa-tilaka, as,%} m.
‘ornament of the race of Raghu,’ epithet of Rāma.
{%—Raghuvaṃśa-sañjīvanī,%} f., N. of Mallinātha's
commentary on the Raghu-vaṃśa. {%—Raghu-vara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of Rāma. {%—Raghu-vartani, is, is, i,%}
Ved. lightly rolling or turning (said of a chariot and
of a horse). {%—Raghu-vīra, as,%} m., N. of Rāma;
of an author (= Raghu-deva). {%—Raghu-ṣyad, t, t,%}
{%t%} (i. e. {%raghu + syad%}), Ved. moving quickly, hasty,
speedy, rapid, (Sāy. = {%śīghra-gamana, śīghraṃ%}
{%syandamāna.%}) {%—Raghūttama (˚ghu-ut˚), as,%} m.
‘best of the Raghus,’ N. of Rāma. {%—Raghūdvaha%}
{%(˚ghu-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘offspring of Raghu,’ N. of
Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>38990<pc>0826-a<k1>raGIyas<k2>raGIyas
{%Raghīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%raghu%}), Ved.
more rapid or fleet, very swift.
<LEND>

<L>38991<pc>0826-a<k1>raGuyat<k2>raGuyat
{%Raghuyat, an, antī, at%}¦ (Part. fr. an unused Nom.
{%raghuya%}), moving fleetly or rapidly, (Sāy. {%= śīghraṃ%}
{%gacchat.%})
<LEND>

<L>38992<pc>0826-a<k1>raGuyA<k2>raGuyA
{%Raghuyā,%}¦ ind. (fr. {%raghu%}), Ved. quickly, swiftly,
lightly, (Sāy. {%= śīghra-gāmin,%} as if {%raghu-yā.%})
<LEND>

<L>38993<pc>0826-a<k1>raGUyat<k2>raGUyat
{%Raghūyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. {%= raghuyat%} above.
<LEND>

<L>38994<pc>0826-a<k1>raNka<k2>raNka
{#raNka#}¦ {%raṅka, as, ā, am,%} niggardly, mean,
indigent, poor, miserable, hungry, ({%kaṅka-raṅka,%}
a hungry or half-starved crane; cf. {%jala-r˚, matsya-%}
{%r˚%}); slow; ({%as%}), m. a beggar.
<LEND>

<L>38995<pc>0826-a<k1>raNku<k2>raNku
{#raNku#}¦ {%raṅku, us,%} m. a species of deer or
antelope; N. of a place. {%—Raṅku-mālin, ī,%} m.,
N. of a Vidyā-dhara.
<LEND>

<L>38996<pc>0826-a<k1>raNktf<k2>raNktf
{#raNktf#}¦ {%raṅktṛ.%} See {%raktṛ,%} p. 828, col. 1.
<LEND>
[Page0826-b+ 74]

<L>38997<pc>0826-b<k1>raNkzu<k2>raNkzu
{#raNkzu#}¦ {%raṅkṣu,%} N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>38998<pc>0826-b<k1>raNK<k2>raNK
{#raNK#}¦ {%raṅkh%} = rt. {%rakh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>38999<pc>0826-b<k1>raNg<k2>raNg
{#raNg#}¦ {%raṅg%} (= rt. {%riṅg%}), cl. 1. P. {%raṅgati,%}
&c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>39000<pc>0826-b<k1>raNga<k2>raNga
{#raNga#}¦ {%raṅga, raṅgin,%} &c. See p. 828.
<LEND>

<L>39001<pc>0826-b<k1>raNgoji<k2>raNgoji
{#raNgoji#}¦ {%raṅgoji, is,%} or {%raṅgoji-bhaṭṭa, as,%}
m., N. of the father of Koṇḍabhaṭṭa and brother of
Bhaṭṭoji.
<LEND>

<L>39002<pc>0826-b<k1>raNG<k2>raNG
{#raNG#}¦ {%raṅgh%} [cf. rt. {%raṃh%}], cl. 1. A. {%raṅ-%}
{%ghate, raraṅghe, raṅghitum,%} to go, hasten,
run; cl. 10. P. or Caus. {%raṅghayati, -yitum,%} to
speak; to shine.
<LEND>

<L>39003<pc>0826-b<k1>raNGas<k2>raNGas
{%Raṅghas, as,%}¦ n. {%= raṃhas,%} haste, speed, velocity.
<LEND>

<L>39004<pc>0826-b<k1>rac<k2>rac
{#rac#}¦ {%rac,%} cl. 10. P. {%racayati, racayām-%}
{%āsa, racayitum,%} to make, form, fabricate,
create, produce; to prepare, get ready, contrive,
plan, arrange, dispose; to complete, effect; to com-
pose, write (a book or any literary work); to string
together; to adorn, decorate; to place in or on
(with loc.), fix on; to direct (the thoughts &c.)
towards: Caus. {%racayati,%} to cause to make or do
(with two acc.); to cause to move, put in motion;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>locare, locus:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>logian,</nsi> ‘to
place;’ <nsi>loh.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39005<pc>0826-b<k1>racana<k2>racana
{%Racana, am,%}¦ n. the act of making, forming, form-
ation, creation, arranging, putting in order, managing,
directing, preparing; {%(ā, am),%} f. n. arrangement,
disposition, management, preparation, performance,
accomplishment, fabrication; a literary production,
work, composition; dressing of the hair; stringing
flowers or garlands, the arrangement of troops, array;
a creation of the mind, artificial image, ({%artha-%}
{%racanā,%} striving after or accomplishing an object;
{%gīti-racanā,%} a musical or vocal composition; {%nivāsa-%}
{%racanā,%} a building); according to native lexicogra-
phers {%racanā = pari-spanda%} or {%pari-syanda, pra-%}
{%ti-yatna, granthana, gumpha, vyūha, niveśa,%}
{%sthiti;%} also {%= pāśa, bhāra, pakṣa, uccaya,%}
‘abundance,’ ‘quantity,’ when compounded with a
word meaning ‘hair’ (e. g. {%keśa-racanā,%} abundance
of hair); ({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of Tvaṣṭṛ.
<LEND>

<L>39006<pc>0826-b<k1>racayat<k2>racayat
{%Racayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making, forming, com-
posing.
<LEND>

<L>39007<pc>0826-b<k1>racayitf<k2>racayitf
{%Racayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who makes or com-
poses, a composer, author.
<LEND>

<L>39008<pc>0826-b<k1>racayitvA<k2>racayitvA
{%Racayitvā,%}¦ ind. having made or formed, having
arranged, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39009<pc>0826-b<k1>racita<k2>racita
{%Racita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made, formed, fabricated, pro-
duced, prepared, made ready, concerted, contrived,
planned, arranged, completed, effected, composed,
written; strung together; decorated, adorned; fas-
tened, placed in or on (with loc.); directed towards;
furnished or equipped with, provided with (with
inst. or at the end of a comp.); ({%as%}), m. a proper
N. {%—Racita-tva, am,%} n. the being composed or
written. {%—Racita-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} having the mind
directed to (with loc.), intent on. {%—Racita-paṅkti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} forming a line. {%—Racita-śikhara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the summit adorned. {%—Racitārtha (˚ta-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has obtained his object
({%= kṛtārtha%}).
<LEND>

<L>39010<pc>0826-b<k1>raj<k2>raj
{#raj#}¦ {%raj.%} See rt. {%rañj.%}
<LEND>

<L>39011<pc>0826-b<k1>raja<k2>raja
{%Raja, rajaka, rajani, rajas,%}¦ &c. See p. 828,
cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>39012<pc>0826-b<k1>raji<k2>raji
{#raji#}¦ {%raji, is,%} m., N. of a demon or king
subdued by Indra, (according to Sāy., Ṛg-veda VI.
26, 6, {%raji%} means ‘a maiden or a kingdom called
Raji;’ and X. 105, 2, ‘heaven and earth’ or ‘the
sun and moon,’ but the meaning is obscure); N. of a
son of Āyu.
<LEND>

<L>39013<pc>0826-b<k1>rajizWa<k2>rajizWa
{#rajizWa#}¦ {%rajiṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (superl. of {%ṛju%}),
Ved. {%= ṛjiṣṭha,%} most honest or upright.
<LEND>

<L>39014<pc>0826-b<k1>rajIyas<k2>rajIyas
{%Rajīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%ṛju%}), Ved. more
honest.
<LEND>
[Page0826-c+ 79]

<L>39015<pc>0826-c<k1>rajIkf<k2>rajIkf
{#rajIkf#}¦ {%rajī-kṛ, rajo-gātra,%} &c. See p. 829,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39016<pc>0826-c<k1>rajju<k2>rajju
{#rajju#}¦ {%rajju, us,%} f. (at the end of a comp.
sometimes {%us,%} m.; in the older language also {%rajjū,%}
Ved. acc. {%rajjvam,%} gen. {%rajjvās%} [Manu XI. 168]
and {%rajjos;%} said in Uṇādi-s. I. 16. to be fr. rt. {%sṛj;%}
according to some, perhaps for original {%srajyu,%} cf.
{%sraj%}), a rope, cord, string, line, (at the end of an adj.
comp. the fem. may be {%rajjukā%}); N. of certain
sinews or tendons proceeding from the vertebral
column (in anatomy); a lock of braided hair, braid
({%= veṇī%}); N. of a particular constellation; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>ligare, stringere;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>stricch, stric, strac-</nsi>
<nsi>chian;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>streccan.</nsi>] {%—Rajju-kaṇṭha, as,%}
m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Rajju-dāla, as,%} m., Ved.
a species of tree. {%—Rajju-dālaka, as,%} m. a kind of
wild-fowl. {%—Rajju-peḍā,%} f. a rope basket. {%—Rajju-%}
{%bhāra, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Rajju-mātra-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the condition of being only a rope.
{%—Rajju-vāla, as,%} m. {%= rajju-dālaka,%} a wild-fowl.
{%—Rajju-śārada, as, ā, am,%} newly drawn up by a
rope (said of water; Pāṇini VI. 2, 9). {%—Rajju-%}
{%sarja, as,%} m., Ved. a rope-maker. {%—Rajjūddhṛta%}
{%(˚ju-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} drawn up by means of a rope.
{%—Rajjv-avalambin, ī, inī, i,%} hanging by a string.
<LEND>

<L>39017<pc>0826-c<k1>rajjavya<k2>rajjavya
{%Rajjavya, am,%}¦ n., Ved. material for a rope.
<LEND>

<L>39018<pc>0826-c<k1>raYC<k2>raYC
{#raYC#}¦ {%rañch.%} See {%ni-rañchana.%}
<LEND>

<L>39019<pc>0826-c<k1>raYj<k2>raYj
{#raYj#}¦ {%rañj%} or {%raj,%} cl. 1. 4. P. A. {%rajati,%}
{%-te%} (ep. also {%rañjati%}), {%rajyati, -te, ra-%}
{%rañja%} (3rd pl. {%rarajatus%} or {%rarañjatus%}), {%rarañje,%}
{%raṅkṣyati, -te, arāṅkṣīt, araṅkta, rajyāt,%}
{%raṅkṣīṣṭa, raṅktum,%} to be dyed or coloured, to
redden, grow red, glow; to dye, tinge, colour; to
be affected or moved, to have the passions or feelings
roused, to be excited; to be pleased or delighted
with (with inst.); to attach one's self to, be attached
or devoted to, (perhaps in this sense connected with
rt. {%lag%}); fall in love with, be enamoured of (usually
with loc.); to go, (in this sense cl. 1. P. according
to Naighaṇṭuka II. 14): Caus. {%rañjayati, -yate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to dye, colour, paint, make red, redden,
illuminate; to rejoice, gratify, exhilarate, charm; to
cause to be attached, to conciliate; (according to
Naighaṇṭuka III. 14) = rt. {%arc,%} to worship, (also
{%rajayati%}); to hunt, (in this sense only {%rajayati%}):
Desid. {%riraṅkṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%rārajyate, rā-%}
{%raṅkti,%} to be greatly affected or excited; to be
intensely attached or devoted; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥέζ-ω, ῥαγ-εύ-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ῥηγ-εύ-ς, ῥεγ-εύ-ς, ῥέγ-ος, ῥέγ-μα, ῥήσσω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ῥῆγ-ος, λέγ-νον:</lang> probably Angl. Sax. <nsi>ge-regnian,</nsi>
‘to colour.’]
<LEND>

<L>39020<pc>0826-c<k1>rakta<k2>rakta
{%Rakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ coloured, dyed, painted, tinged,
stained; reddened, red, crimson, of a red colour; nasal-
ized (said of a vowel, cf. {%raṅga%}); affected by passion,
excited, incited, impassioned, passionately fond of,
attached, affected with love or interest towards; lov-
ing, dear, beloved; lovely, pleasant, agreeable, sweet,
charming; fond of play, engaging in pastime, sport-
ing; ({%as%}), m. red colour; safflower; Barringtonia
Acutangula; epithet of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. lac ({%= lākṣā%});
Abrus Precatorious; Bengal madder, Rubia Munjista;
{%= uṣṭra-kāṇḍī;%} N. of one of the seven tongues
of fire; the female personification of a particular
musical mode; ({%am%}), n. blood; copper; saffron;
the fruit of the Flacourtia Cataphracta; vermilion;
cinnabar; {%= padmaka;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥόδον;</lang> Hib. <nsi>rot.</nsi>]
{%—Rakta-kaṅgu, us,%} m. Panicum Italicum. {%—Rakta-%}
{%kaṇṭa, as,%} m. a species of Celastrus. {%—Rakta-%}
{%kaṇṭha, as, ī, am,%} or {%rakta-kaṇṭhin, ī, inī, i,%}
sweet-voiced, having an impassioned voice or note;
({%as%}), m. {%= kokila,%} the Indian cuckoo. {%—Raktakaṇ-%}
{%ṭha-khaga, as,%} m. a sweet-voiced bird. {%—Rakta-%}
{%kadamba, as,%} m. a red-flowering Kadamba. {%—Rak-%}
{%ta-kadalī,%} f. a species of Musa or plantain. {%—Rakta-%}
{%kanda, as,%} m. coral; N. of two bulbous plants {%(=%}
{%raktālu, rāja-palāṇḍu)%}. {%—Rakta-kandala, as,%} m.
coral. {%—Rakta-kamala%} or {%rakta-kambala, am,%} n.
a red lotus-flower. {%—Rakta-karavīra%} or {%rakta-%}
{%karavīraka, as,%} m. a red-flowering Oleander,
[Page0827-a+ 81]
Nerium Odorum Rubro-simplex. {%—Rakta-kañcana,%}
{%as,%} m. Bauhinia Variegata. {%—Rakta-kāṇḍā,%} f. a
red-flowering Punarnavā. {%—Rakta-kāṣṭha, am,%} n.
Cæsalpina Sappan. {%—Rakta-kumuda, am,%} n. the
flower of Nymphæa Rubra, red lotus. {%—Rakta-kṛ-%}
{%mijā,%} f. red lac. {%—Rakta-keśara, as,%} m. Rottleria
Tinctoria; the coral tree. {%—Rakta-kairava%} or {%rakta-%}
{%kokanada, am,%} n. the flower of Nymphæa Rubra,
a red lotus-flower. {%—Rakta-kośatakī,%} f. a species of
plant {%(= mahā-jālī)%}. {%—Rakta-khadira, as,%} m. a
red-flowering Khadira. {%—Rakta-khāḍava, as,%} m.
a species of foreign date. {%—Rakta-gandhaka, am,%}
n. myrrh. {%—Rakta-garbhā,%} f. Lawsonia Alba. {%—Rak-%}
{%ta-gulma, as,%} m. a particular form of the disease
called {%gulma%}. {%—Rakta-gulminī,%} f. a female suffering
from the above-mentioned disease. {%—Rakta-gairika,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of ochre. {%—Rakta-granthi, is,%} m. a
kind of Mimosa. {%—Rakta-grīva, as,%} m. ‘red-
necked,’ a kind of pigeon; a Rākṣasa. {%—Rakta-%}
{%ghna, as, ī, am,%} blood-destroying, corrupting the
blood; ({%as%}), m. Andersonia Rohitaka; ({%ī%}), f. a kind
of Dūrvā grass. {%—Rakta-candana, am,%} n. red
sandal; Cæsalpina Sappan; saffron. {%—Rakta-citra-%}
{%ka, as,%} m. a species of shrub. {%—Rakta-cillikā,%} f.
a kind of Chenopodium. {%—Rakta-cūrṇa, am,%} n.
vermilion. {%—Rakta-cchardi, is,%} f. vomiting or
spitting blood. {%—Rakta-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced
from blood. {%—Rakta-jantuka, as,%} m. a kind of
worm, an earth-worm. {%—Rakta-jihva, as, ā, am,%}
red-tongued; ({%as%}), m. a lion. {%—Rakta-tara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} more red; more attached, very attached; ({%am%}),
n. {%= rakta-gairika%}. {%—Rakta-tā,%} f. redness; the
nature of blood; the being affected by passion.
{%—Rakta-tuṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘red-beaked,’ a parrot.
{%—Rakta-tuṇḍaka, as,%} m. a kind of worm. {%—Rak-%}
{%ta-tṛṇā,%} f. a species of grass {%(= go-mūtrikā).%}
{%—Rakta-tejas, as,%} n. flesh. {%—Rakta-trivṛt, t,%} f. a
red-flowering Trivṛt. {%—Rakta-tva, am,%} n. redness;
the being affected by passion, affection. {%—Rakta-%}
{%dantikā%} or {%rakta-dantī,%} f. ‘red-toothed,’ N. of
Durgā or Pārvatī. {%—Rakta-dalā,%} f., N. of two
plants {%(= civillikā, nalikā)%}. {%—Rakta-dūṣaṇa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} corrupting or vitiating the blood. {%—Rak-%}
{%ta-dṛś, k,%} m. ‘red-eyed,’ a pigeon. {%—Rakta-dhātu,%}
{%us,%} m. red chalk or orpiment, earth, ruddle; copper.
{%—Rakta-nayana, as, ī, am,%} red-eyed, having red
eyes; ({%as%}), m. a kind of partridge, Perdix Rufa.
{%—Rakta-nāḍī,%} f. a fistulous ulcer on the gum caused
by a bad state of the blood. {%—Rakta-nāla = jīvantī,%}
a kind of lotus. {%—Rakta-nāsika, as,%} m. ‘red-
beaked,’ an owl. {%—Rakta-netra, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%}
red-eyed. {%—Raktanetra-tā,%} f. or {%raktanetra-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the state of having red or blood-shot eyes.
{%—Rakta-pa, as, ā, am,%} blood-drinking, blood-
sucking; ({%as%}), m. a Rākṣasa; ({%ā%}), f. a blood-
sucker, leech; a Ḍākinī or female fiend. {%—Rakta-%}
{%pakṣa, as,%} m. ‘red-winged,’ epithet of Garuḍa.
{%—Rakta-paṭa, as, ā, am,%} wearing a red cloth or
garment; ({%as%}), m. a kind of mendicant {%(= sāṅkhya-%}
{%bhikṣu)%}. {%—Raktapaṭī-kṛta, as,%} m. changed into
a {%rakta-paṭa%} mendicant. {%—Rakta-pattrā,%} f. Bœr-
havia Erecta Rosea. {%—Rakta-pattrāṅga, am,%} n. a
kind of red sandal. {%—Rakta-pattrikā,%} f., N. of two
plants {%(= nākulī, rakta-punarnavā)%}. {%—Rakta-%}
{%padī,%} f. a species of plant. {%—Rakta-padma, am,%}
n. a red lotus-flower, large red water-lily. {%—Rakta-%}
{%parṇa = rakta-punarnavā%}. {%—Rakta-pallava, as,%}
m. Jonesia Asoka. {%—Rakta-pākī,%} f. the egg-plant.
{%—Rakta-pāta, as,%} m. bloodshed, spilling of blood.
{%—Rakta-pātā,%} f. a leech. {%—Rakta-pāda, as, ā%} or
{%ī, am,%} red-footed; ({%as%}), m. a bird with red feet, a
parrot; an elephant; a war-chariot; ({%ī%}), f. Mimosa
Pudica. {%—Rakta-pāyin, ī, inī, i,%} blood-drinking;
({%ī%}), m. a bug; ({%inī%}), f. a blood-sucker, leech.
{%—Rakta-pārada, am, as,%} n. m. cinnabar. {%—Rakta-%}
{%piṭikā,%} f. a red boil or ulcer. {%—Rakta-piṇḍa, as,%}
m. Hibiscus Rosa Sinensis; ({%am%}), n. the flower of
this plant; a spontaneous discharge of blood from
the nose and mouth; a red pimple or boil; a species
of climbing plant, Ventilago Madraspatana. {%—Rakta-%}
{%piṇḍaka, as,%} m. {%= raktālu%}. {%—Rakta-pitta, am,%} n.
[Page0827-b+ 81]
‘blood-bile,’ a peculiar disturbance of the blood
caused by bile, plethora, spontaneous hemorrhages
from the mouth, nose, &c. (accompanied with fever,
head-ache, vomiting, purging, &c.). {%—Raktapitta-%}
{%kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} causing the above disease.
{%—Raktapitta-hā,%} f. ‘removing {%rakta-pitta,%}’ a
kind of Dūrvā grass. {%—Rakta-pittin, ī, inī, i,%} sub-
ject to or suffering from {%rakta-pitta%}. {%—Rakta-puc-%}
{%chaka, as, ikā, am,%} red-tailed; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of
lizard. {%—Rakta-punarnavā,%} f. a red-flowering Punar-
navā. {%—Rakta-puṣpa, am,%} n. a red flower; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), red-flowered, bearing red flowers; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of various plants, Bauhinia Variegata Purpuras-
cens; {%= kara-vīra; = dāḍima; = vaka; = bandhū-%}
{%ka; = pun-nāga; (ā),%} f. Bombax Heptaphyllum;
({%ī%}), f., N. of various plants, Grislea Tomentosa; {%=%}
{%pāṭali; = javā; = āvartakī; = nāga-damanī; =%}
{%karuṇī; = uṣṭra-kāṇḍī%}. {%—Rakta-puṣpaka, as,%}
m., N. of various plants. {%= palāśa; = parpata; =%}
{%śālmali; (ikā),%} f. Mimosa Pudica; {%= rakta-pu-%}
{%narnavā; = bhū-pāṭalī%}. {%—Rakta-pūya,%} N. of a
hell. {%—Rakta-pūraka, am,%} n. the dried peel or
integument of the {{mangostan->mangosteen||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}. {%—Rakta-pūrṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} full of blood. {%—Raktapūrṇa-tva, am,%} n.
the being full of blood, fulness of blood. {%—Rakta-%}
{%paitta%} or {%rakta-paittika,%} adjectives from {%rakta-%}
{%pitta%}. {%—Rakta-pradara, as,%} m., Ved. a flow of
blood from the womb. {%—Rakta-prameha, as,%} m. a
disease of the bladder, the passing of blood in the
urine. {%—Rakta-pravāha, as,%} m. a stream of blood.
{%—Rakta-prasava, as,%} m., N. of two plants {%(=%}
{%rakta-karavīra, raktāmlāna)%}. {%—Rakta-phala,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having or bearing red fruit; ({%as%}), m. the
Indian fig-tree; ({%ā%}), f. Momordica Monadelpha; {%=%}
{%svarṇa-vallī%}. {%—Rakta-phena-ja, as,%} m. a part of
the body, (probably) the lungs. {%—Rakta-bindu,%}
{%rakta-bīja,%} &c., see {%rakta-vindu,%} &c. {%—Rakta-%}
{%bhava, am,%} n. ‘blood-produced,’ flesh. {%—Rakta-%}
{%bhāva, as, ā, am,%} being in love, amorous, ena-
moured. {%—Rakta-mañjara, as,%} m. Barringtonia
Acutangula. {%—Rakta-maṇḍala, as, ā, am,%} having
a red disk (said of the moon); having devoted
subjects; ({%as%}), m. a species of red-spotted or red-
ringed snake; ({%ā%}), f. a particular venomous animal;
({%am%}), n. a red lotus-flower. {%—Rakta-maṇḍala-tā,%} f.,
Ved. the appearance of red spots on the body caused
by a bad state of the blood. {%—Rakta-matta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} drunk or satiated with blood (said of a leech).
{%—Rakta-matsya, as,%} m. a species of red fish.
{%—Rakta-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of blood, full
of blood, bloody. {%—Rakta-mastaka, as, ā, am,%}
red-headed; ({%as%}), m. a species of heron, Ardea
Sibirica. {%—Rakta-mādrī,%} f. a particular disease pe-
culiar to women. {%—Rakta-mukha, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%}
red-faced, having a red mouth; ({%as%}), m., N. of an
ape. {%—Rakta-mūtra-tā,%} f. the voiding of blood with
urine. {%—Rakta-mūlaka, as,%} m. a kind of mustard.
{%—Rakta-mūlā,%} f. Mimosa Pudica. {%—Rakta-meha,%}
{%as,%} m. the voiding of blood with urine. {%—Rakta-%}
{%mokṣa, as,%} m. or {%rakta-mokṣaṇa, am,%} n. blood-
letting, bleeding, venesection, &c. {%—Rakta-yaṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} or {%rakta-yaṣṭikā,%} f. Rubia Munjista. {%—Rakta-%}
{%yāvanāla, as,%} m. {%= tuvara-yāvanāla%}. {%—Rakta-%}
{%rāji, is,%} m. a particular venomous insect; a peculiar
disease of the eye. {%—Rakta-rājī,%} f. a particular
venomous insect; cress, Lepidium Sativum. {%—Rakta-%}
{%reṇu, us,%} m. vermilion; a bud of Butea Frondosa;
Rottleria Tinctoria; a sort of cloth; an angry man.
{%—Rakta-reṇukā,%} f. a bud of Butea Frondosa.
{%—Rakta-raivataka, am,%} n. a species of fruit tree
{%(= mahā-pārevata)%}. {%—Rakta-laśuna, as,%} m. a
kind of garlic. {%—Rakta-locana, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%}
red-eyed; ({%as%}), m. a pigeon. {%—Rakta-vaṭī%} or
{%rakta-varaṭī,%} f. small-pox. {%—Rakta-varga, as,%} m.
lac; N. of various plants, the pomegranate tree;
Butea Frondosa; Pentapetes Phœnicea; Rubia Mun-
jista; two kinds of saffron; safflower. {%—Rakta-var-%}
{%ṇa, as,%} m. red colour; the colour of blood; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am),%} red-coloured; ({%as%}), m. the cochineal insect,
{%= indra-gopa; (am),%} n. gold. {%—Rakta-vardha-%}
{%na, as, ī, am,%} increasing or promoting the formation
[Page0827-c+ 81]
of blood; ({%as%}), m. Solanum Melongena. {%—Rakta-%}
{%varṣābhū, ūs,%} f. {%= rakta-punarnavā%}. {%—Rakta-%}
{%vasana, as, ā, am,%} red-clad, clad in red garments,
clothed in red; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman in the fourth
order or stage of life as a religious mendicant.
{%—Rakta-vāta, as,%} m. a particular disease. {%—Rakta-%}
{%vāluka, am, ā,%} n. f. vermilion. {%—Rakta-vāsas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} or {%rakta-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} wearing red gar-
ments, clad in red. {%—Rakta-vikāra, as,%} m. altera-
tion or deterioration of blood. {%—Rakta-vidradhi,%}
{%is,%} m. a blood-red boil, a boil or ulcer filled with
blood. {%—Rakta-vindu, us,%} m. a red spot forming a
flaw in a jewel; a drop of blood. {%—Rakta-vīja, as,%}
m. the pomegranate tree; N. of an Asura. {%—Rakta-%}
{%vījakā,%} f. a species of plant {%(= taradī)%}. {%—Rakta-%}
{%vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a kind of tree. {%—Rakta-vṛttā,%} f.
Nyctanthes Arbor Tristis. {%—Rakta-śāli, is,%} m. red
rice, Oryza Sativa. {%—Rakta-śāsana, am,%} n. ver-
milion. {%—Rakta-śigru, us,%} m. red-flowering Śigru.
{%—Rakta-śīrṣaka, as,%} m. a kind of heron; Pinus
Longifolia; the resin of Pinus Longifolia. {%—Rakta-%}
{%śukra-tā,%} f. bloody condition of the semen. {%—Rakta-%}
{%śṛṅgika, am,%} n. poison, venom. {%—Rakta-śmaśru,%}
{%us, us, u,%} having a red beard. {%—Rakta-śmaśru-%}
{%śiroruha, as, ā, am,%} having a red beard and hair.
{%—Rakta-śyāma, as, ā, am,%} dark-red. {%—Rakta-%}
{%ṣṭhīvana-tā%} or {%rakta-ṣṭhīvī,%} f. the spitting of
blood. {%—Rakta-saṅkoca, as,%} m. safflower. {%—Rakta-%}
{%saṅkocaka, am,%} n. a red lotus-flower. {%—Rakta-%}
{%sañjña, am,%} n. saffron. {%—Rakta-sandaṃśikā,%} f. a
blood-sucker, leech. {%—Rakta-sandhyaka, am,%} n.
the flower of Nymphæa Rubra. {%—Rakta-saroruha,%}
{%am,%} n. a red lotus-flower. {%—Rakta-sarṣapa, as,%} m.
Sinapis Ramosa. {%—Rakta-sahā,%} f. the red globe-
amaranth. {%—Rakta-sāra, as, ā, am,%} whose essence
or predominating quality is blood, of a sanguinary
disposition; ({%as%}), m. a species of plant, {%= amla-%}
{%vetasa, rakta-khadira; (am),%} n. red sandal;
Cæsalpina Sappan. {%—Rakta-sūryamaṇi, is,%} m. a
beautiful red-flowering shrub (Hibiscus Phœniceus).
{%—Rakta-sūryāya,%} Nom. A. {%-sūryāyate,%} &c., to
represent or be like a red sun. {%—Rakta-saugan-%}
{%dhika, am,%} n. a red lotus-flower. {%—Rakta-srag-%}
{%anulepin, ī,%} m. (probably) ‘wearing a red garland
and being anointed,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Rakta-srāva,%}
{%as,%} m. a flow of blood, hemorrhage (Ved.); a kind
of sour sorrel or dock. {%—Rakta-haṃsā,%} f., N. of a
Rāgiṇī. {%—Rakta-hīna, as, ā, am,%} bloodless, cold-
blooded. {%—Raktākāra (˚ta-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘having a
red appearance,’ coral. {%—Raktākta (˚ta-āk˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} dyed red; sprinkled or besmeared with blood;
({%am%}), n. red sandal or Cæsalpina Sappan. {%—Raktā-%}
{%kṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} red-eyed, having red or
blood-shot eyes; fearful, dreadful, {%= krūra; (as),%} m.
a buffalo; Perdix Rufa; a pigeon; the Indian crane;
N. of a sorcerer; ({%am%}), n., N. of the fifty-eighth
year in a Jupiter's cycle of sixty years. {%—Raktākṣi%}
{%(˚ta-ak˚), is,%} or {%raktākṣin, ī,%} m., N. of the fifty-
eighth year in a Jupiter's cycle of sixty years. {%—Rak-%}
{%tāṅka (˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m. coral. {%—Raktāṅga (˚ta-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘red-bodied,’ a species of bird; a bug;
a species of plant ({%= kāmpilla, kampilla%}); the
planet Mars; the disk of the sun or moon; N. of a
serpent-demon; {%(ā, ī),%} f. a species of plant, {%= jī-%}
{%vantī; (ī),%} f. Rubia Munjista; coral; ({%am%}), n.
coral; saffron; a species of plant {%(= kampilla).%}
{%—Raktātisāra%} or {%raktātīsāra (˚ta-at˚), as,%} m.
‘blood-diarrhœa,’ dysentery, bloody flux. {%—Raktā-%}
{%dharā (˚ta-adh˚),%} f. a Kinnarī. {%—Raktādhāra%}
{%(˚ta-ādh˚), as,%} m. ‘blood-receptacle,’ the skin.
{%—Raktādhimantha (˚ta-adh˚), as,%} m. inflamma-
tion of the eyes, ophthalmia with discharge of blood.
{%—Raktānta (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} having red ex-
tremities, having the corners (of the eyes) inflamed.
{%—Raktāpaha (˚ta-ap˚), am,%} n. myrrh. {%—Raktā-%}
{%pāmārga (˚ta-ap˚), as,%} m. red-flowering Apā-
mārga. {%—Raktābha (˚ta-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} red-
looking, having a red appearance. {%—Raktābhiṣ-%}
{%yanda (˚ta-abh˚), as,%} m. ophthalmia brought on by
the state of the blood, redness of the vessels of the
eye with a watery discharge. {%—Raktāmiṣāda (˚ta- %}
[Page0828-a+ 81]
{%āmiṣa-ada), as, ā, am,%} eating blood and flesh.
{%—Raktāmbara (˚ta-am˚), am,%} n. a red garment;
({%as, ā, am%}), wearing a red cloth, clad in red gar-
ments; ({%as%}), m. any vagrant devotee wearing red
garments; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a goddess. {%—Raktāmbara-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the wearing of red garments (with
Buddhist monks). {%—Raktāmbara-dhara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} wearing red garments. {%—Raktāmbu-pūra (˚ta-%}
{%am˚), as,%} m. a stream or flood of blood. {%—Rak-%}
{%tāmbu-ruha (˚ta-am˚), am,%} n. a red lotus-flower.
{%—Raktāmra (˚ta-ām˚), as,%} m. a species of plant
{%(= kośāmra)%}. {%—Raktāruṇa (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
blood-red, red as blood. {%—Raktārbuda (˚ta-ar˚), as,%}
m. a bloody tumour. {%—Raktārman (˚ta-ar˚), a,%} n.
a particular disease of the eyes. {%—Raktārśas (˚ta-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} n. a form of hemorrhoids. {%—Raktālu (˚ta-ālu),%}
{%us,%} or {%raktāluka, as,%} m. a species of red yam,
Dioscorea Purpurea. {%—Raktāśaya (˚ta-āś˚), as,%} m.
‘blood-receptacle,’ any viscus containing or secreting
blood (as the heart, liver, spleen). {%—Raktāśoka (˚ta-%}
{%aś˚), as,%} m. red-flowering Aśoka. {%—Raktekṣu%}
{%(˚ta-ik˚), us,%} m. red sugar-cane. {%—Raktairaṇḍa%}
{%(˚ta-er˚), as,%} m. the red Ricinus or castor-oil plant.
{%—Raktairvāru (˚ta-er˚), us,%} m. a kind of cucum-
ber {%(= indra-vāruṇī)%}. {%—Raktotkliṣṭa (˚ta-ut˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a particular disease of the eyes. {%—Raktotpala%}
{%(˚ta-ut˚), as,%} m. Bombax Heptaphyllum; ({%am%}), n.
a red lotus, the flower of Nymphæa Rubra. {%—Rak-%}
{%totpalābha (˚la-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} being like the
colour of Nymphæa Rubra, resembling the red lotus.
{%—Raktopala (˚ta-up˚), am,%} n. red chalk, red
earth, red ochre or orpiment, indurated ochre or
clay iron-stone.
<LEND>

<L>39021<pc>0828-a<k1>raktaka<k2>raktaka
{%Raktaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ red; passionately attached
to, fond of, enamoured; pleasing, entertaining,
amusing; bloody, containing blood; ({%as%}), m. a red
garment; an amorous or impassioned man; a sporter,
player; N. of various plants bearing red flowers,
Pentapetes Phœnicea; the globe-amaranth; {%= rakta-%}
{%śigru; = raktairaṇḍa.%}
<LEND>

<L>39022<pc>0828-a<k1>raktalA<k2>raktalA
{%Raktalā,%}¦ f. {%= kāka-tuṇḍī.%}
<LEND>

<L>39023<pc>0828-a<k1>rakti<k2>rakti
{%Rakti, is,%}¦ f. pleasingness, attractiveness, charming-
ness, loveliness; the being attached, affection, attach-
ment, devotion, loyalty; {%= raktikā,%} the seed of Abrus
Precatorius. {%—Rakti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
charms, charming, lovely, attractive.
<LEND>

<L>39024<pc>0828-a<k1>raktikA<k2>raktikA
{%Raktikā,%}¦ f. Abrus Precatorius; the seed or grain
of this plant used as a weight = (1/6) or (1/7) or (2/15) of a
Māṣaka; (according to some, the seed weighs about
1(5/16) of a grain troy, the artificial Ratti or Raktikā
should be double that weight, but in common use it
averages nearly 2(1/4) grains.)
<LEND>

<L>39025<pc>0828-a<k1>raktiman<k2>raktiman
{%Raktiman, ā,%}¦ m. redness, red colour.
<LEND>

<L>39026<pc>0828-a<k1>raktf<k2>raktf
{%Raktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who colours or dyes, a
colourist, painter, (more correctly {%raṅktṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>39027<pc>0828-a<k1>raktvA<k2>raktvA
{%Raktvā%}¦ or {%raṅktvā,%} ind. having dyed; having
attached one's self to.
<LEND>

<L>39028<pc>0828-a<k1>raNga<k2>raNga
{%Raṅga, as,%}¦ m. colour, paint, pigment, dye, hue;
the nasal modification or nasalizing of a vowel; a
place of public amusement or for dramatic exhibi-
tions, theatre, play-house, amphitheatre, stage, arena,
place of public contest, place for athletic exercises or
feats, sports, &c.; a place of assembly; an assembly or
assemblage of spectators; a field of battle; dancing,
singing, acting, diversion, mirth; borax; an extract
obtained from Acacia Catechu; a proper N.; ({%am%}),
n. tin ({%= vaṅga;%} in this sense also {%as,%} m.). {%—Raṅga-%}
{%kāra%} or {%raṅga-kāraka, as,%} m. ‘a colour-maker,’
painter, colourist. {%—Raṅga-kāṣṭha, am,%} n. Cæsal-
pina Sappan. {%—Raṅga-kṣetra, am,%} n., N. of a
place. {%—Raṅga-cara, as,%} m. ‘a stage-goer,’ stage-
player, actor, player, performer, &c.; a gladiator.
{%—Raṅga-ja, am,%} n. red lead, vermilion. {%—Raṅga-%}
{%jīvaka, as,%} m. ‘living by colours,’ a painter, an
actor, performer. {%—Raṅga-da, as,%} m. borax; an
extract from Acacia Catechu; a particular white
paint {%(= sphaṭī, dṛḍha-raṅgā)%}. {%—Raṅga-datta,%}
(probably) {%am,%} n., N. of a drama. {%—Raṅga-dāyaka,%}
{%am,%} n. a particular kind of earth {%(= kaṅkuṣṭha).%}
{%—Raṅga-dṛḍhā,%} f. a sort of white paint {%(=%}
{%dṛḍha-raṅgā)%}. {%—Raṅga-devatā,%} f. a goddess sup-
[Page0828-b+ 81]
posed to preside over sports and diversions, the god-
dess or genius of pleasure. {%—Raṅga-dvār, r,%} f. a stage-
door, the door or entrance of a theatre. {%—Raṅga-dvāra,%}
{%am,%} n. a stage-entrance, stage-door; the prologue of
a play. {%—Raṅga-nātha, as,%} m., N. of various men;
of the author of a commentary on the Vikramorvaśī-
(A.D. 1656); of a commentator on the Sūrya-
siddhānta. {%—Raṅga-patākā,%} f., N. of a woman.
{%—Raṅga-pattrī%} or {%raṅga-puṣpī,%} f. the indigo
plant. {%—Raṅga-pīṭha, am,%} n. a place for dancing.
{%—Raṅga-praveśa, as,%} m. entering on the stage,
engaging in theatrical performances. {%—Raṅga-bhūti,%}
{%is,%} f. the night of full moon in the month Āśvina.
{%—Raṅga-bhūmi, is,%} f. a place for acting, stage,
theatre, arena; a battle-field, {%—Raṅga-maṅgala,%}
{%am,%} n. a stage-festival, rejoicing or festive ceremony
on the stage. {%—Raṅga-maṇḍapa, as, am,%} m. n. a
play-house, theatre. {%—Raṅga-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the
circuit of an arena or assembly. {%—Raṅga-madhya,%}
{%am,%} n. the middle of an arena. {%—Raṅga-malla,%}
{%as,%} m. a proper N.; ({%ī%}), f. the Indian lute. {%—Raṅga-%}
{%māṇikya, am,%} n. a ruby {%(= māṇikya)%}. {%—Raṅga-%}
{%mātṛ, tā,%} f. lac or the insect which forms the red
dye; a bawd; {%= truṭi%}. {%—Raṅga-mātṛkā,%} f. lac.
{%—Raṅga-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a king; of a learned
man, (also called Raṅgarāja-dīkṣita, &c.) {%—Raṅga-%}
{%lāsinī,%} f. Nyctanthes Arbor Tristis. {%—Raṅga-vatī,%}
f., N. of a woman (who killed her husband Ranti-
deva). {%—Raṅga-vallikā%} or {%raṅga-vallī,%} f., N. of
a kind of plant used at sacrifices. {%—Raṅga-vastu, u,%}
n. any colouring substance, paint. {%—Raṅga-vāṭa,%}
a place or arena enclosed for contests, plays, dancing,
&c. {%—Raṅga-vārāṅganā (˚ra-aṅ˚),%} f. a kind of
dancing girl. {%—Raṅga-vidyā-dhara, as,%} m. a pro-
ficient in or teacher of the art of acting. {%—Raṅga-%}
{%vīja, am,%} n. silver. {%—Raṅga-śālā,%} f. a play-house,
theatre, dancing-hall, dancing-room. {%—Raṅga-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} standing in an arena. {%—Raṅgāṅgaṇa%}
{%(˚ga-aṅ˚), am,%} n. the area of an amphitheatre or
arena, an arena or place of public contest. {%—Raṅ-%}
{%gāṅgā (˚ga-aṅ˚),%} f. a particular white substance
{%(= sphaṭī)%}. {%—Raṅgājīva (˚ga-āj˚), as,%} m. ‘living
by colours,’ a painter; one who lives by the stage,
an actor, performer. {%—Raṅgāri (˚ga-ari), is,%} m. a
fragrant Oleander. {%—Raṅgāvataraṇa (˚ga-av˚),%}
{%am,%} n. entering on the stage, engaging in theatrical
performances; the profession of an actor. {%—Raṅgā-%}
{%vatāraka (˚ga-av˚), as,%} or {%raṅgāvatārin, ī,%} m.
one who enters the stage or engages in theatrical
performances, a stage-player, actor. {%—Raṅgeśa (˚ga-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Raṅgeśvarī (˚ga-īś˚),%}
f. (probably) N. of the wife of Raṅgeśa. {%—Raṅ-%}
{%geṣṭhāluka (˚ṭha-āl˚), am,%} n. a kind of bulbous
root or onion, (also {%raṅgeṣṭhālu.%}) {%—Raṅgopa-%}
{%jīvin (˚ga-up˚), ī,%} or {%raṅgopajīvya, as,%} m. one
who lives by the stage, a stage-player, actor.
<LEND>

<L>39029<pc>0828-b<k1>raNgaRa<k2>raNgaRa
{%Raṅgaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (probably) dancing, merry-
making, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39030<pc>0828-b<k1>raNgin<k2>raNgin
{%Raṅgin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ colouring, dyeing, painting;
passionate, impassioned; attached to, devoted to,
finding enjoyment in; acting or exhibiting on a
stage, being an actor; {%(iṇī),%} f. Asparagus Race-
mosus.
<LEND>

<L>39031<pc>0828-b<k1>raja<k2>raja
{%Raja, as,%}¦ m. {%= rajas,%} dust [cf. {%nī-r˚%}]; the pollen
of flowers; the menstrual excretion, (in this sense
also {%am,%} n.); the quality of passion, (see {%rajas%});
emotion, affection; N. of one of Skanda's attendants;
of a king (a son of Vi-raja).
<LEND>

<L>39032<pc>0828-b<k1>rajaka<k2>rajaka
{%Rajaka, as,%}¦ m. a washerman (so called from his
being occupied in the cleaning or whitening of
clothes; the washermen are regarded as a degraded
caste of Hindūs); a parrot; N. of a king; ({%ī%}), f. a
washerman's wife, washerwoman; epithet of a woman
on the third day of the menses; ({%ikā%}), f. a washer-
woman.
<LEND>

<L>39033<pc>0828-b<k1>rajata<k2>rajata
{%Rajata, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. rt. 2. {%arj%}], white, whitish,
silver-coloured, silvery, ({%rajataṃ hiraṇyam,%} white
gold, i. e. silver); silver, made of silver, like silver;
({%am%}), n. silver [cf. {%arjuna%}]; gold; a pearl-ornament
or necklace; blood; ivory; N. of a particular moun-
tain (perhaps of Kailāsa); of a particular lake; an
[Page0828-c+ 81]
asterism, constellation; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀργό-ς, ἀργ-ή-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἄργυ-ρο-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>arg-entu-m;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>airgiod.</nsi>]
{%—Rajata-kumbha, as,%} m. a silver jar. {%—Rajata-%}
{%kūṭa,%} N. of a peak on the Malaya mountains.
{%—Rajata-daṃṣṭra, as,%} m., N. of a son of Vajra-
daṃṣṭra (a king of the Vidyā-dharas). {%—Rajata-%}
{%dyuti, is,%} m., N. of Hanumat. {%—Rajata-nābha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a particular fabulous being. {%—Rajata-%}
{%nābhi, is, is, i,%} having a white navel; ({%is%}), m., N.
of a descendant of Kuvera. {%—Rajata-parvata, as,%}
m. a silver mountain; N. of a particular mountain.
{%—Rajata-pātra%} or {%rajata-bhājana, am,%} n. a
silver cup, silver vessel of any kind. {%—Rajata-pras-%}
{%tha, as,%} m., N. of Kailāsa. {%—Rajata-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} made of silver, silver. {%—Rajata-vāha, as,%} m.,
N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his descendants. {%—Raja-%}
{%tādri (˚ta-ad˚), is,%} m. ‘silver-mountain,’ N. of
Kailāsa.
<LEND>

<L>39034<pc>0828-c<k1>rajatAkara<k2>rajatAkara
{%Rajatākara,%}¦ N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>39035<pc>0828-c<k1>rajana<k2>rajana
{%Rajana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a person with the patro-
nymic Kauṇeya; a ray, beam; ({%am%}), n. colouring,
dyeing; safflower.
<LEND>

<L>39036<pc>0828-c<k1>rajanaka<k2>rajanaka
{%Rajanaka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N. ({%= rajana%}).
<LEND>

<L>39037<pc>0828-c<k1>rajani<k2>rajani
{%Rajani, is,%}¦ or {%rajanī,%} f. (the latter is the more
common; said to be fr. rt. {%rañj%} in the sense ‘to
colour,’ cf. {%rajas%}), night; N. of Durgā; a species
of plant ({%= janī, jatūkā, jatu-kṛt%}); Curcuma
Longa, (all words meaning ‘night’ appear to be
used for this plant); Curcuma Aromatica; the indigo
plant; N. of a river; [cf. Hib. <nsi>reag,</nsi> ‘night.’]
{%—Rajani-kara, as,%} m. ‘the night-maker,’ the
moon. {%—Rajani-cara, as,%} m. ‘night-rover,’ a Rāk-
ṣasa; [cf. {%rajanī-cara.%}] {%—Rajanim-manya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} passing for or looking like night. {%—Rajani-%}
{%rākṣasī,%} f. night regarded as a Rākṣasī. {%—Rajanī-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. ‘the night-maker,’ the moon. {%—Ra-%}
{%janī-gandha, as,%} m. Polianthes Tuberosa; ({%ā%}), f. a
species of plant bearing white flowers. {%—Rajanī-%}
{%cara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} wandering in the night,
moving about by night; ({%as%}), m. epithet of the
moon; a Rākṣasa, an evil spirit; a night-watcher;
a thief. {%—Rajanīcara-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord or pro-
tector of night-wanderers,’ epithet of the moon,
(wrongly read {%rajanī-caya-nātha.) — Rajanī-jala,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘night-dew,’ rime, hoar-frost. {%—Rajanī-dvan-%}
{%dva, am,%} n. a period of two nights with the inter-
mediate day. {%—Rajanī-pati, is,%} m. ‘the lord or hus-
band of night,’ the moon. {%—Rajanī-mukha, am,%} n.
‘front or beginning of night,’ evening, nightfall.
{%—Rajanī-ramaṇa, as,%} m. ‘the husband of night,’
the moon. {%—Rajanī-hāsā,%} f. Nyctanthes Arbor
Tristis.
<LEND>

<L>39038<pc>0828-c<k1>rajanIya<k2>rajanIya
{%Rajanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be enjoyed, enjoyable,
charming.
<LEND>

<L>39039<pc>0828-c<k1>rajayitrI<k2>rajayitrI
{%Rajayitrī,%}¦ f. (fr. the Caus.), Ved. a female painter
or colourist.
<LEND>

<L>39040<pc>0828-c<k1>rajas<k2>rajas
{%Rajas, as,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. rt. {%rañj%} in the sense
‘to colour,’ cf. rt. 2. {%arj;%} according to some the
original meaning may have been ‘dimness,’ cf. {%ra-%}
{%jani%} and Goth. <nsi>riquis</nsi>), the sphere of vapour or
mist, region of clouds, atmosphere, air, firmament
(Ved.; sometimes represented as the expanse of
heaven or sky in general); any sphere or world or
division of the world (so used in Ved. according to
Yāska and Sāy.; the dual {%rajasī%} = ‘heaven and earth,’
or perhaps ‘the lower and higher atmospheres’ im-
mediately above the earth; {%trīṇi rajāṃsi%} = ‘the
three worlds’ or earth, atmosphere, and sky; some-
times even six such spheres are enumerated); vapour,
mist, clouds, rain-water, water (according to Nirukta
IV. 19); gloom, gloominess, dimness, darkness; im-
purity, dirt, dust, powder, speck of dust, any small
particle of matter, ({%go-rajas,%} a speck of dust on a
cow's hair; a mote in a sun-beam; {%eḍaka-rajas,%}
a speck of dust on a sheep's fleece); the dust or
pollen of flowers; cultivated or ploughed land (as
‘dusty’), arable land, fields; the ‘darkening’ quality,
passion, foulness, impurity; (in philosophy) the
second of the three Guṇas or qualities, (the three are
called {%sattva,%} goodness, {%rajas,%} passion, and {%tamas,%}
darkness; cf. {%guṇa;%} of these {%rajas%} is sometimes
[Page0829-a+ 81]
identified with {%tejas,%} energy or activity: it is said to
predominate in air, and to be active, urgent, and
variable); passion, emotion, feeling, affection; the
menstrual excretion; tin; (according to Nirukta IV.
19) {%= jyotis, ahan; (ās),%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi, son of
Vasiṣṭha. {%—Raja-udvāsa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one
who has put off soiled clothes; [cf. {%malodvāsas.%}]
{%—Rajaḥ-paṭala, am,%} n. a coating of dust. {%—Ra-%}
{%jaḥ-putra, as,%} m. the son of passion (a term
applied to a person when the object is to mark
his being of no particular note; cf. {%rajas-toka%}).
{%—Rajaḥ-pluta, as, ā, am,%} filled with (the quality
of) passion. {%—Rajaḥ-śaya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. silver,
made of silver. {%—Rajaḥ-śuddhi, is,%} f. a pure or
right condition of the menses. {%—Rajaḥ-spṛś, k, k,%}
{%k,%} touching the dust or the ground, touching the
earth. {%—Rajas-tamaska, as, ā, am,%} being under
the influence of the two qualities {%rajas%} and {%ta-%}
{%mas,%} (see above.) {%—Rajas-tamo-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made up or consisting of the qualities {%rajas%} and
{%tamas%}. {%—Rajas-tur, ūr, ūr, ūr,%} Ved. hastening
through the sky or atmosphere, (Sāy.) dust-scattering
({%= pāṃsos tvarayitṛ%}) or water-scattering {%(= uda-%}
{%kasya preraka)%}. {%—Rajas-toka, as, am,%} m. n. the
child or offspring of passion; avarice, greediness.
{%—Rajas-vala, as, ā, am,%} having water (Ved. {%=%}
{%udaka-vat%}); covered with dust, dusty; full of the
quality {%rajas,%} full of passion; ({%as%}), m. a buffalo;
({%ā%}), f. a menstruating woman, a female during the
menses; a marriageable woman. {%—Rajas-vin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} dusty, full of dust or pollen; full of the
quality {%rajas%}. {%—Rajī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to
change or turn into dust. {%—Rajeṣita%} (fr. {%raja%} for
{%rajas + iṣita%}), according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII.
46, 28. {%rajas = uṣṭra%} or {%gardabha, iṣita =%}
{%prāpita%}. {%—Rajo-gātra, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Vasiṣṭha. {%—Rajo-guṇa, as,%} m. the quality {%rajas%}
or passion, (see under {%rajas.%}) {%—Rajoguṇa-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} consisting of or having the quality {%rajas.%}
{%—Rajo-grahi, is, is, i,%} see Vopa-deva XXVI. 48.
{%—Rajo-darśana, am,%} n. the (first) appearance of
the menstrual excretion. {%—Rajo-nimīlita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} blinded by passion or desire. {%—Rajo-bandha,%}
{%as,%} m. suppression of menstruation. {%—Rajo-bala,%}
{%am,%} n. darkness, (perhaps more correctly {%rajo-vala.%})
{%—Rajo-megha, as,%} m. a cloud of dust. {%—Rajo-rasa,%}
{%as,%} m. darkness. {%—Rajo-hara, as,%} m. ‘remover of
impurity,’ a washerman. {%—Rajo-haraṇa-dhārin%}
(according to Halāyudha II. 189) {%= vratin.%}
<LEND>

<L>39041<pc>0829-a<k1>rajasa<k2>rajasa
{%Rajasa%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) {%= rajas%}
(e. g. {%a-prāpta-rajasā,%} not yet having menstruated);
({%as, ā, am%}), obscure, dark, dim, Ved.; (perhaps)
dirty, unclean, impure.
<LEND>

<L>39042<pc>0829-a<k1>rajasAnu<k2>rajasAnu
{%Rajasānu, us,%}¦ m. a cloud; soul, heart {%(= citta).%}
<LEND>

<L>39043<pc>0829-a<k1>rajaska<k2>rajaska
{%Rajaska%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.) {%= rajas%}
in {%nī-r˚, vi-r˚,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>39044<pc>0829-a<k1>rajasya<k2>rajasya<h>1
1. {%rajasya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%rajasyati,%} &c., to become
dust, to be scattered as dust.
<LEND>

<L>39045<pc>0829-a<k1>rajasya<k2>rajasya<h>2
2. {%rajasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. having the quality
{%rajas;%} dusty.
<LEND>

<L>39046<pc>0829-a<k1>rajita<k2>rajita
{%Rajita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for {%rañjita%}), affected, moved, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39047<pc>0829-a<k1>raYja<k2>raYja
{%Rañja%}¦ in {%jala-rañja,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39048<pc>0829-a<k1>raYjaka<k2>raYjaka
{%Rañjaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), {%= rañjana,%}
colouring, dyeing; causing affection or passion, ex-
citing love or pleasure, gladdening, rejoicing, pleas-
ing; ({%as%}), m. a colourist, dyer, painter; an inciter
of affection &c., stimulus; a species of plant ({%=%}
{%kampillaka%}); biliary humor on which vision de-
pends; {%(akī),%} f. a female colourer or dyer; ({%am%}),
n. red sandal; vermilion.
<LEND>

<L>39049<pc>0829-a<k1>raYjana<k2>raYjana
{%Rañjana, as, ī, am,%}¦ colouring, dyeing, ({%keśa-%}
{%rañjana,%} dyeing the hair); exciting passion or love;
gratifying, exhilarating, delighting, rejoicing, ({%jana-%}
{%rañjanī,%} ‘men-rejoicing,’ N. of a particular formula);
conciliating, befriending; ({%as%}), m. Saccharum Munja,
{%= muñja; (ī),%} f. the female personification of a
particular musical mode; (probably) friendly saluta-
tion; N. of various plants, the indigo plant; Nyc-
tanthes Arbor Tristis; saffron; a kind of fragrant
perfume; ({%am%}), n. the act of colouring, dyeing;
colour, dye; the act of pleasing, delighting, concili-
[Page0829-b+ 78]
ating, rejoicing, giving pleasure; nasalizing (in
gram.); red sandal-wood. {%—Rañjana-dru, us,%} m. a
kind of tree.
<LEND>

<L>39050<pc>0829-b<k1>raYjanaka<k2>raYjanaka
{%Rañjanaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of tree.
<LEND>

<L>39051<pc>0829-b<k1>raYjanIya<k2>raYjanIya
{%Rañjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be coloured or dyed;
to be rejoiced or pleased; anything which may be
rejoiced at.
<LEND>

<L>39052<pc>0829-b<k1>raYjita<k2>raYjita
{%Rañjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dyed, coloured, tinted; affected,
moved; highly delighted.
<LEND>

<L>39053<pc>0829-b<k1>raYjinI<k2>raYjinI
{%Rañjinī,%}¦ f., N. of various plants, the indigo plant;
Rubia Munjista; [cf. {%rañjanī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39054<pc>0829-b<k1>raw<k2>raw
{#raw#}¦ {%raṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%raṭati, rarāṭa,%} &c., to
shout, howl, yell, cry, scream, roar, bellow;
to call out, proclaim aloud; to shout with joy,
applaud: Caus. {%raṭayati,%} &c., to shout, &c.; to
speak [cf. rt. {%raṭh%}]: Intens. {%rāraṭīti,%} to scream
aloud.
<LEND>

<L>39055<pc>0829-b<k1>rawana<k2>rawana
{%Raṭana, am,%}¦ n. the act of shouting, &c.; cry or
shout of applause, approbation.
<LEND>

<L>39056<pc>0829-b<k1>rawantI<k2>rawantI
{%Raṭantī,%}¦ f., N. of the fourteenth day in the dark
half of the month Māgha.
<LEND>

<L>39057<pc>0829-b<k1>rawita<k2>rawita
{%Raṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ screamed, shouted, &c.; ({%am%}),
n. a roar, yell, scream, cry.
<LEND>

<L>39058<pc>0829-b<k1>rawwA<k2>rawwA
{#rawwA#}¦ {%raṭṭā,%} f., N. of a princess.
<LEND>

<L>39059<pc>0829-b<k1>raW<k2>raW
{#raW#}¦ {%raṭh%} [cf. rt. {%raṭ%}], cl. 1. P. {%raṭhati,%}
&c., to speak; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>rediôn, re-</nsi>
<nsi>dinôn;</nsi> Old Sax. <nsi>rethjôn, rethinôn,</nsi> ‘to speak;’
perhaps Goth. <nsi>rasda.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39060<pc>0829-b<k1>raqqa<k2>raqqa
{#raqqa#}¦ {%raḍḍa, as,%} m. a proper N.; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a princess.
<LEND>

<L>39061<pc>0829-b<k1>raR<k2>raR
{#raR#}¦ {%raṇ%} (thought by some to be deve-
loped out of a base {%ramṇā,%} fr. rt. {%ram%}),
cl. 1. P. (Ved. also cl. 4. P.) {%raṇati (raṇyati),%}
{%rarāṇa, arāṇīt%} (Ved. forms {%rāraṇa%} or in Pada-
pāṭha {%raraṇa, raṇiṣṭan%}), {%raṇitum,%} to rejoice,
exult; to take pleasure in (with loc., rarely with acc.,
Ved.); to delight (Ved.); to sound, ring, rattle,
jingle; to shout: Caus. P. A. {%raṇayati, raṇayate,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%arīraṇat%} or {%ararāṇat%} (Ved. forms
{%rāraṇat, arāraṇus, rārandhi, rārantu, rarā-%}
{%ṇata%}), to cause to rejoice; cause to be pleased,
delight; to rejoice or be pleased at, delight in (with
loc., Ved.); to make to sound, cause to sound forth;
to praise; to go (P.): Desid. {%riraṇiṣati:%} Intens.
{%raṃraṇyate, raṃraṇṭi;%} [cf. Hib. <nsi>ran,</nsi> ‘a squeal,
roar;’ <nsi>ranach,</nsi> ‘a roaring.’]
<LEND>

<L>39062<pc>0829-b<k1>raRa<k2>raRa
{%Raṇa, as,%}¦ m. joy, delight, gratification, pleasure
(Ved.); sound, noise; the quill or bow of a lute;
going, motion; ({%as, am%}), m. n. battle, war, combat,
fight, conflict. {%—Raṇa-karman, a,%} n. ‘war-busi-
ness,’ war, battle, combat, fighting. {%—Raṇa-kāmin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} desirous of war, wishing to fight. {%—Raṇa-%}
{%kāmya,%} Nom. P. {%-kāmyati,%} &c., to wish for battle.
{%—Raṇa-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. causing battle or
strife. {%—Raṇa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing joy, gratifying,
delighting (Ved.); fighting, a fighter, combatant,
warrior. {%—Raṇa-kṣitti, is,%} f. or {%raṇa-kṣetra, am,%}
n. or {%raṇa-kṣoṇi, is,%} f. place of battle, battle-field.
{%—Raṇa-gocara, as, ā, am,%} engaged in war, fight-
ing. {%—Raṇa-jaya, as,%} m. victory in battle. {%—Ra-%}
{%ṇañ-jaya, as,%} m. ({%raṇam,%} acc. c.), N. of a king.
{%—Raṇa-tūrya, am,%} n. a war-drum, military drum.
{%—Raṇa-dara, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Raṇa-dun-%}
{%dubhi, is,%} m. a military drum. {%—Raṇa-durgādhā-%}
{%raṇa-yantra, am,%} n., N. of a particular amulet.
{%—Raṇa-paṇḍita, as,%} m. ‘skilled in battle,’ a
warrior. {%—Raṇa-pura-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a
certain statue of Sūrya. {%—Raṇa-priya, as, ā, am,%}
battle-loving, fond of war or battle, warlike; ({%as%}),
m. a falcon; ({%am%}), n. the fragrant root of Andro-
pogon Muricatus. {%—Raṇa-bhaṭa, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Raṇa-bhū, ūs,%} or {%raṇa-bhūmi, is,%} f. a battle-
ground, field of battle. {%—Raṇa-matta, as, ā, am,%}
furious in battle; ({%as%}), m. an elephant. {%—Raṇa-%}
{%mārga-kovida, as, ā, am,%} experienced in the art
or ways of war. {%—Raṇa-mukha, am,%} n. the front
or van of battle; the van of an army. {%—Raṇa-%}
{%muṣṭi, is,%} m. a species of plant {%(= viṣa-muṣṭi). %}
[Page0829-c+ 81]
{%—Raṇa-mūrdhan, ā,%} m. the front or van of a
fight. {%—Raṇa-raṅka, as,%} m. the space between the
tusks of an elephant. {%—Raṇa-raṅga, as,%} m. ‘battle-
stage,’ a place or field of battle. {%—Raṇaraṅga-%}
{%malla, as,%} m. {%= bhoja-rāja,%} q. v. {%—Raṇa-raṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the buzzer,’ a gnat, musquito; ({%am%}), n. a
longing, anxious desire; regret (for a lost object).
{%—Raṇa-raṇaka, as, am,%} m. n. anxiety, anxious
regret for some beloved object; desire, love; ({%as%}),
m. the god of love. {%—Raṇa-lakṣmī, īs,%} f. the
fortune of war; the goddess of battle. {%—Raṇa-%}
{%vanya, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Raṇa-vādya, am,%}
n. a military instrument of music, martial music.
{%—Raṇa-viśārada, as, ā, am,%} skilled in war.
{%—Raṇa-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} having war or battle for a
profession. {%—Raṇa-śikṣā,%} f. the art or science of
war. {%—Raṇa-śiras, as,%} n. the head or front of a
battle. {%—Raṇa-śūra, as,%} m. a hero in war, warrior.
{%—Raṇa-saṃrambha, as,%} m. the fury of battle.
{%—Raṇa-saṅkula, am,%} n. the confusion or noise of
battle, a melée, mixed or tumultuary combat. {%—Ra-%}
{%ṇa-sajjā,%} f. military accoutrement. {%—Raṇa-sattra,%}
{%am,%} n. war or battle regarded as a sacrifice. {%—Raṇa-%}
{%sahāya, as,%} m. ‘war-helper,’ an ally. {%—Raṇa-stam-%}
{%bha, as,%} m. ‘battle-pillar,’ a monument of war or
battle, trophy, column; N. of a country (Chitore?).
{%—Raṇa-sthāna, am,%} n. a battle-place, field of
battle. {%—Raṇa-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a statue of
Śiva as lord of battle. {%—Raṇāgni (˚ṇa-ag˚), is,%} m.
the fire of battle, battle regarded as fire. {%—Raṇāgra%}
{%(˚ṇa-ag˚), am,%} n. the head or front of a battle.
{%—Raṇāṅga (˚ṇa-aṅ˚), am,%} n. ‘war-implement,’
weapon of war or battle, any weapon, a sword.
{%—Raṇāṅgana (˚ṇa-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a battle-place,
field of battle, (also {%raṇāṅgaṇa.%}) {%—Raṇāji (˚ṇa-%}
{%āji), is,%} m., N. of a Sādhya. {%—Raṇājira (˚ṇa-aj˚),%}
{%am,%} n. area or arena for fighting, battle-field. {%—Ra-%}
{%ṇātodya (˚ṇa-āt˚), am,%} n. a battle-drum, military
drum. {%—Raṇāditya (˚ṇa-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a king
of Kaśmīra; of another person. {%—Raṇānta-kṛt%}
{%(˚ṇa-an˚), t,%} m. ‘making an end of battle,’ N. of
Viṣṇu. {%—Raṇāpeta (˚ṇa-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} flying
away from battle (Kirāt. XV. 33). {%—Raṇābhiyoga%}
{%(˚ṇa-abh˚), as,%} m. engaging in battle, warlike en-
counter. {%—Raṇārambhā (˚ṇa-ār˚),%} f., N. of the
wife of Raṇāditya. {%—Raṇārambhā-svāmi-deva, as,%}
m., N. of a statue erected by Raṇārambhā. {%—Ra-%}
{%ṇālaṅkaraṇa (˚ṇa-al˚), as,%} m. a heron {%(= kaṅka).%}
{%—Raṇāvani (˚ṇa-av˚), is,%} f. battle-ground, a field
of battle. {%—Raṇāśva (˚ṇa-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Raṇe-cara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} going or mov-
ing about in the field of battle (said of Viṣṇu).
{%—Raṇeśa (˚ṇa-īśa)%} or {%raṇeśvara (˚ṇa-īś˚), as,%}
m. {%= raṇa-svāmin%}. {%—Raṇe-svaccha, as,%} m. a cock.
{%—Raṇaiṣin (˚ṇa-es˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} eager for battle.
{%—Raṇotkaṭa (˚ṇa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} furious or mad
in battle; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of Skanda's attendants;
of a Daitya. {%—Raṇotsāha (˚ṇa-ut˚), as,%} m. prowess
in battle. {%—Raṇoddāma (˚ṇa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%}
eager for battle. {%—Raṇoddeśa (˚ṇa-ud˚), as,%} m. a
field of battle; a part or quarter of a battle.
<LEND>

<L>39063<pc>0829-c<k1>raRaka<k2>raRaka
{%Raṇaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>39064<pc>0829-c<k1>raRat<k2>raRat
{%Raṇat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sounding, rattling; going.
{%—Raṇat-kāra, as,%} m. a rattling or clanking sound;
any sound; humming (of bees).
<LEND>

<L>39065<pc>0829-c<k1>raRita<k2>raRita
{%Raṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, sounding, rattling;
({%am%}), n. sound, any ringing or rattling sound.
<LEND>

<L>39066<pc>0829-c<k1>raRitf<k2>raRitf
{%Raṇitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. rejoicing in, delighting
in, (Sāy. {%= ramaṇa-śīla.%})
<LEND>

<L>39067<pc>0829-c<k1>raRya<k2>raRya
{%Raṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. agreeable, enjoyable,
delightful, pleasant; fit for fighting, warlike; ({%am%}),
n., Ved. joy, pleasure; war, battle. {%—Raṇya-jit, t,%}
{%t, t,%} Ved. conquering in battle, victorious in war.
{%—Raṇya-vāc, k, k, k,%} Ved. speaking agreeably.
<LEND>

<L>39068<pc>0829-c<k1>raRva<k2>raRva
{%Raṇva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. pleasant, delightful, agree-
able, lovely; joyous, gay; sounding; to be praised,
worthy of praise. {%—Raṇva-sandṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved.
looking lovely, appearing beautiful, (Sāy. {%= rama-%}
{%ṇīya-darśana.%})
<LEND>

<L>39069<pc>0829-c<k1>raRvan<k2>raRvan
{%Raṇvan,%}¦ in Ṛg-veda V. 44, 10, according to Sāy.
{%= ramaṇīya,%} agreeable, pleasant.
<LEND>
[Page0830-a+ 76]

<L>39070<pc>0830-a<k1>raRqa<k2>raRqa
{#raRqa#}¦ {%raṇḍa, as, ā, am%} (in Uṇādi-s. I. 113.
said to be fr. rt. {%ram%}), mutilated, maimed, crippled,
(incorrect for {%vaṇḍa,%} q. v.); faithless (in {%śākhā-%}
{%raṇḍa,%} q. v.); ({%as%}), m. a man who dies without
male issue; a barren tree; ({%ā%}), f. a term of abuse
in addressing women, a slut; a widow, ({%bāla-raṇḍā,%}
a young widow); Salvinia Cucullata; N. of a species
of metre. {%—Raṇḍāśramin (˚ḍa-āś˚), ī,%} m. one who
loses a wife after the forty-eighth year.
<LEND>

<L>39071<pc>0830-a<k1>raRqaka<k2>raRqaka
{%Raṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a barren tree.
<LEND>

<L>39072<pc>0830-a<k1>raRya<k2>raRya
{#raRya#}¦ {%raṇya, raṇva,%} &c. See p. 829, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39073<pc>0830-a<k1>raRv<k2>raRv
{#raRv#}¦ {%raṇv%} (= rts. {%ramb, riṇv, rimb%}), cl.
1. P. {%raṇvati,%} to go; (a form {%raṇv%} for
rt. {%raṇ%} occurs in Taittrīya-s. I. 2, 5, 1, where, accord-
ing to the commentator, {%raṇvatu = ramayatu.%})
<LEND>

<L>39074<pc>0830-a<k1>raRvita<k2>raRvita
{%Raṇvita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%raṇv%} for rt. {%raṇ%}), in
Ṛg-veda II. 3, 6. according to Sāy. {%= śabdita,%}
{%stuta,%} sounded, praised, or {%gacchat,%} going.
<LEND>

<L>39075<pc>0830-a<k1>rata<k2>rata
{#rata#}¦ {%rata, rati,%} &c. See p. 833, cols. 1, 2.
<LEND>

<L>39076<pc>0830-a<k1>ratAnDrI<k2>ratAnDrI
{#ratAnDrI#}¦ {%ratāndhrī,%} f. a fog, mist.
<LEND>

<L>39077<pc>0830-a<k1>ratAmbuka<k2>ratAmbuka
{#ratAmbuka#}¦ {%ratāmbuka, e,%} n. du. the two
cavities immediately above the hips.
<LEND>

<L>39078<pc>0830-a<k1>ratU<k2>ratU
{#ratU#}¦ {%ratū, ūs,%} f. (said to be fr. a Sautra rt.
{%ṛt%}), the river of heaven, the celestial Ganges; a
true speech.
<LEND>

<L>39079<pc>0830-a<k1>ratna<k2>ratna
{#ratna#}¦ {%ratna, am,%} n. (rarely {%as,%} m.; according
to Uṇādi-s. III. 14. fr. rt. {%ram%}), a gift, present
(Ved., in this sense perhaps connected with rt. 1. {%rā%});
property, goods, riches, possessions (Ved.); a jewel,
gem, treasure, precious stone, pearl; anything valu-
able or desirable, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 41,
6, &c. {%ratnam = ramaṇīyam%}); any precious thing,
anything excellent or best of its kind (e. g. {%putra-%}
{%ratna,%} an excellent son; {%go-ratnāni,%} excellent
cows; cf. {%puṃ-r˚, strī-r˚%}); a magnet, loadstone
[cf. {%maṇi%}]; {%= ratna-havis%} (Ved.); ({%as%}), m. a
proper N. {%—Ratna-kandala, as,%} m. coral. {%—Ratna-%}
{%kara, as,%} m., N. of Kuvera. {%—Ratna-karaṇḍaka,%}
N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Ratna-kalaśa, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Ratna-kalā,%} f., N. of a woman.
{%—Ratna-kīrtti, is,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Ratna-%}
{%kūṭa, as,%} m., N. of a mountain; of a Bodhi-sattva;
of an island. {%—Ratnakūṭa-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a
Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Ratna-ketu, us,%} m., N. of
a Buddha; of a Bodhi-sattva; (said to be a name
common to 2000 future Buddhas.) {%—Ratna-koṭi,%}
N. of a Samādhi. {%—Ratna-kośa%} or {%ratna-koṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘repository of jewels,’ N. of various works.
{%—Ratna-kṣetra-kūṭa-sandarśana, as,%} m., N. of
a Bodhi-sattva, (also written {%ratna-cchattra-kūṭa-%}
{%sandarśana.%}) {%—Ratna-khacita, as, ā, am,%} set or
studded with gems. {%—Ratna-khāni, is,%} f. a jewel-
mine, mine for precious stones. {%—Ratna-garbha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} holding precious stones, filled with jewels,
containing jewels; ({%as%}), m. the sea; N. of Kuvera;
of a Bodhi-sattva; of a commentator on the Viṣṇu-
Purāṇa; ({%ā%}), f. the earth. {%—Ratna-grīva-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Ratna-can-%}
{%dra, as,%} m., N. of a god (said to be the guardian
deity of a jewel-mine); of a Bodhi-sattva; of a son
of Vimbisāra. {%—Ratna-candrāmati, is,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Ratna-cūḍa, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva; of
a mythical king. {%—Ratna-cūḍā-paripṛcchā,%} f., N.
of a work. {%—Ratna-cchattra, am,%} n. ‘jewel-um-
brella,’ an umbrella (adorned) with precious stones.
{%—Ratnacchattra-kūṭa-sandarśana, as,%} m., N.
of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Ratnacchattrābhyudgatāva-%}
{%bhāsa (˚ra-abh˚, ˚ta-av˚), as,%} m., N. of a Buddha.
{%—Ratna-tejo-'bhyudgata-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a
Buddha. {%—Ratna-traya, am,%} n. (with Jainas)
‘jewel-triad,’ three jewels or excellent things (viz.
{%samyag-darśana, samyag-jñāna,%} and {%samyak-%}
{%cāritra%}). {%—Ratnatraya-parīkṣā,%} f., N. of a
treatise on the Vedānta by Apya-dīkṣita. {%—Ratna-%}
{%datta, as,%} m., N. of various persons. {%—Ratna-dar-%}
{%paṇa, as,%} m. ‘jewel-mirror,’ a looking-glass (orna-
[Page0830-b+ 81]
mented) with jewels; N. of a commentary on the
Sarasvatī-kaṇṭhābharaṇa. {%—Ratna-dīpa, as,%} m.
‘jewel-lamp,’ a lamp in which jewels give out light,
a gem serving as a light, (such gems are fabled to
be in Pātāla.) {%—Ratna-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work.
{%—Ratna-druma,%} (probably) coral; [cf. {%ratna-%}
{%vṛkṣa.%}] {%—Ratnadruma-maya, as, ī, am,%} made
or composed of coral, resembling coral. {%—Ratna-%}
{%dvīpa,%} ‘jewel-island, pearl-island,’ N. of a particular
island. {%—Ratna-dhara, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Jagad-dhara. {%—Ratna-dhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. getting
or possessing wealth, possessed of riches or precious
things, ({%ratnadhā-tama,%} superl. possessing great
riches.) {%—Ratna-dhenu, us,%} f. an offering of jewels
(properly in the shape of a cow, see {%dhenu%}). {%—Rat-%}
{%na-dheya, am,%} n., Ved. the giving away or distri-
bution of wealth, (according to Sāy. also {%= dātavyaṃ%}
{%ratnam,%} treasure that ought to be given, and {%ra-%}
{%maṇīya-dhanasya dātṛ,%} giver of precious wealth.)
{%—Ratna-dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Ratna-nadī,%} f. ‘jewel-river,’ N. of a river.
{%—Ratna-nābha, as,%} m. ‘having a jewel on the
navel,’ N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Ratna-nicaya, as,%} m. a
heap or collection of jewels, &c. {%—Ratna-nidhi, is,%}
m. ‘receptacle of pearls, mine of jewels,’ epithet of
the sea; of Meru; N. of Viṣṇu; a wagtail (in
this sense probably for {%rata-nidhi%}). {%—Ratna-pa-%}
{%rīkṣā,%} f. ‘jewel-testing,’ N. of a work. {%—Ratna-%}
{%parvata, as,%} m. ‘jewel-mountain,’ a mountain con-
taining jewels; N. of Meru. {%—Ratna-pāṇi, is,%} m.,
N. of a Bodhi-sattva; of a grammarian. {%—Ratna-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Ratna-pura, am,%} n.,
N. of a town. {%—Ratna-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a
dictionary. {%—Ratna-pradīpa, as,%} m. {%= ratna-dīpa.%}
{%—Ratna-prabha, as,%} m., N. of a particular class of
deities; of a king; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of the earth; N.
of a hell (with Jainas); of various women; of a
Nāgī; of the seventh Lambaka of the Kathā-sarit-
sāgara. {%—Ratna-bāhu, us,%} m. ‘jewel-armed,’ N. of
Viṣṇu. {%—Ratna-bhāj, k, k, k,%} distributing gifts or
wealth (Ved.); acquiring or possessing jewels, pos-
sessing treasures. {%—Ratna-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being
a gem or jewel. {%—Ratna-mañjarī,%} f., N.of a Vidyā-
dharī; of a woman in the Hitopadeśa. {%—Ratna-%}
{%mati, is,%} m. a proper N. {%—Ratna-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made or consisting of jewels, abundantly studded
with precious stones. {%—Ratna-mālā,%} f. a jewel
necklace, pearl necklace, &c.; N. of various works;
of a lexicon; of a Dharma-śāstra; of a work by
Śrī-pati {%(= jyotiṣa-r˚); = nyāya-ratnamālā.%}
{%—Ratnamālā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a necklace
of jewels or pearls; ({%atī%}), f., N. of one of Rādhā's
female attendants. {%—Ratnamālikā,%} f. (diminutive
fr. {%ratna-mālā%}), a little jewel necklace. {%—Ratna-%}
{%mālin, ī, inī, i,%} adorned with a necklace of jewels.
{%—Ratna-mukuṭa, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Ratna-mukhya, am,%} n. ‘chief of jewels,’ a
diamond. {%—Ratna-mudrā,%} f., N. of a Samādhi.
{%—Ratna-mudrā-hasta, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
{%—Ratna-megha-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist
Sūtra work. {%—Ratna-yaṣṭi, is,%} m., N. of a Bud-
dha. {%—Ratna-yugma-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Ratna-rakṣita, as,%} m., N. of one of the two
translators of the Karaṇḍa-vyūha into Tibetan. {%—Rat-%}
{%na-rāj, ṭ,%} m. ‘jewel-king,’ a ruby. {%—Ratna-rāji,%}
{%is,%} f. a string of pearls. {%—Ratna-rāśi, is,%} m. a heap
of precious stones, collection of jewels; the sea,
ocean. {%—Ratna-rekhā,%} f., N. of a princess. {%—Ratna-%}
{%liṅgeśvara (˚ga-īś˚), as,%} m. (with Buddhists)
Svayam-bhū in his visible form. {%—Ratna-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} accompanied with gifts (Ved.); possessing
wealth or treasure, abounding in precious stones,
decorated with jewels; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a mountain;
({%atī%}), f. the earth; N. of various women. {%—Ratna-%}
{%vardhana, as,%} m., N. of a person (who erected a
statue of Śiva called after him {%ratnavardhaneśa%}).
{%—Ratna-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a merchant. {%—Rat-%}
{%na-varṣa, as,%} m., N. of a king of the Yakṣas.
{%—Ratna-varṣuka, am,%} n., N. of the mythical
car Puṣpaka (supposed to rain or pour forth jewels;
see {%puṣpaka%}). {%—Ratna-viśuddha, as,%} m., N. of a
[Page0830-c+ 79]
world. {%—Ratna-vṛkṣa,%} (probably) coral. {%—Ratna-%}
{%śalākā,%} f. a sprout or sprig of jewels {%—Ratna-śāstra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work by Agastya. {%—Ratna-śikhara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Ratna-śikhin, ī,%} m.,
N. of a Buddha. {%—Ratna-śekhara, as,%} m., N. of
the author of the Guṇa-sthāna-prakaraṇa. {%—Ratna-%}
{%ṣaṣṭhī,%} f. the sixth day of a particular fortnight.
{%—Ratna-saṅgraha, as,%} m., N. of a work on law.
{%—Ratna-saṅghāta, as,%} m. a number or collection
of jewels. {%—Ratnasaṅghāta-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made or consisting of a number of jewels. {%—Ratna-%}
{%samudgala,%} N. of a Samādhi. {%—Ratna-sambhava,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Dhyāni-buddha; of a Buddha; of a
Bodhi-sattva; of the place where the Buddha Śaśi-
ketu is to appear. {%—Ratna-sāgara, as,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Ratna-sānu, us,%} m., N. of the mountain
Meru. {%—Ratna-sū, ūs, ūs, u,%} producing jewels;
({%ūs%}), f. the earth. {%—Ratna-sūti, is,%} f. the earth.
{%—Ratna-sena, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Ratna-sva-%}
{%min,%} N. of a temple founded by Ratna. {%—Ratna-%}
{%havis, is,%} n., Ved. N. of a particular oblation in
the Rāja-sūya having reference to whatever may be
reckoned among a king's most valuable treasures.
{%—Ratnākara (˚na-āk˚), as,%} m. a jewel-mine; the
sea, ocean; N. of a Buddha; of a Bodhi-sattva; of
a poet; of the author of the Vrata-kalpa-druma; of
various other persons; of a horse descended from
Uccaiḥ-śravas; of various works; of a Dharma-
śāstra; of a work on music; of a work on rhetoric;
of a town, (in this sense probably {%am,%} n.) {%—Ratnā-%}
{%kara-nighaṇṭa, as,%} m., N. of a dictionary. {%—Rat-%}
{%nāṅka (˚na-aṅ˚), as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu's car.
{%—Ratnāṅgurīyaka (˚na-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a finger-
ring (set) with precious stones, (also written {%rat-%}
{%nāṅgulīyaka.%}) {%—Ratnāḍhya (˚na-āḍh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} abounding in jewels. {%—Ratnā-devī,%} f., N. of
a princess. {%—Ratnādri (˚na-ad˚), is,%} m., N. of a
mythical mountain. {%—Ratnādhipati (˚na-adh˚),%}
{%is,%} m. a superintendent of treasures or valuables; N.
of a king. {%—Ratnā-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
{%—Ratnābharaṇa (˚na-ābh˚), am,%} n. an ornament
made of jewels. {%—Ratnārcis (˚na-ar˚), is,%} m., N.
of a Buddha. {%—Ratnāloka (˚na-āl˚), as,%} m. the
lustre or brilliance of a gem. {%—Ratnā-vatī,%} f., N.
of a town. {%—Ratnāvabhāsa (˚na-av˚), as,%} m., N.
of a Kalpa. {%—Ratnāvalī (˚na-āv˚),%} f. a string of
pearls, row of jewels, pearl necklace; N. of a parti-
cular rhetorical figure; of various women; of a cele-
brated comedy by Harṣa-deva; of a Tantra work;
of various other works. {%—Ratnāvalī-nibandha, as,%}
m., N. of a work. {%—Ratnāsana (˚na-ās˚), am,%} n.
a throne ornamented with jewels. {%—Ratnendra (˚na-%}
{%in˚), as,%} m. ‘jewel-chief,’ a very precious jewel.
{%—Ratneśvara (˚na-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of various
persons; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Liṅga. {%—Ratnottamā%}
{%(˚na-ut˚),%} f., N. of a Tantra deity. {%—Ratnodbhava%}
{%(˚na-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist saint. {%—Rat-%}
{%nolkā (˚na-ul˚),%} f., N. of a Tantra deity.
<LEND>

<L>39080<pc>0830-c<k1>ratnaka<k2>ratnaka
{%Ratnaka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39081<pc>0830-c<k1>ratnin<k2>ratnin
{%Ratnin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. having gifts, receiving
presents or offerings, possessing treasures, having
precious things, (Sāy. {%= ramaṇīya-dhana-vat%} or
{%ramaṇīya-phala-vat,%} having valuable riches or
rewards); epithet of certain persons in whose dwell-
ing the Ratna-havis (q. v.) is offered by a king.
<LEND>

<L>39082<pc>0830-c<k1>ratni<k2>ratni
{#ratni#}¦ {%ratni, is,%} m. f. (a corrupted form of
{%aratni%}), the elbow; a measure of length (= the dis-
tance from the elbow to the end of the closed fist, a
cubit); ({%is%}), m. the closed fist. {%—Ratni-pṛṣṭhaka,%}
{%am,%} n. the elbow.
<LEND>

<L>39083<pc>0830-c<k1>ratyaNga<k2>ratyaNga
{#ratyaNga#}¦ {%raty-aṅga.%} See under {%rati,%} p. 833.
<LEND>

<L>39084<pc>0830-c<k1>raTa<k2>raTa
{#raTa#}¦ {%ratha, as,%} m. (according to some fr.
rt. 4. {%ṛ,%} according to Uṇādi-s. II. 2. fr. rt. {%ram,%}
according to Nirukta IX. 11. fr. rt. {%raṃh%}), a two-
wheeled vehicle, carriage, car, chariot, war-chariot;
a vehicle or equipage in general, (applied also to the
vehicles of the gods; in Ved. applied sometimes to
the driver as well as the vehicle, but according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda V. 63, 7. {%ratha = raṃhaṇa-sva- %}
[Page0831-a+ 81]
{%bhāva,%} of a swift nature, going swiftly); a warrior,
hero, champion; the body; the foot; a limb, mem-
ber, part; Calamus Rotang; Dalbergia Ougeinensis;
{%= pauruṣa;%} pleasure, delight, desire [cf. {%mano-%}
{%ratha, ratha-jit%}]; ({%ī%}), f. a small carriage; [cf.
probably Gr. <lang n="greek">ῤέθος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>rota;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>rad;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>rad, lidh;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>lithus;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>ratas;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>roth.</nsi>] {%—Ratha-kaṭyā%} or {%ratha-kaḍyā,%} f. a
quantity of chariots, assemblage of cars. {%—Ratha-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. {%= ratha-kāra%} below. {%—Ratha-kal-%}
{%paka, as,%} m. an officer who has charge of a king's
chariots, the arranger or superintendent of a great
man's equipages. {%—Ratha-kāmya,%} Nom. P. {%-kām-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to long for a chariot, wish to be yoked
(said of a horse, &c.). {%—Ratha-kāya, am,%} n. the
whole body or collection of chariots (constituting one
division of an army). {%—Ratha-kāra%} or {%ratha-kā-%}
{%raka, as,%} m. a chariot-maker, coach-builder, wheel-
wright, carpenter (regarded as the son of a Māhiṣya
by a Karaṇī). {%—Rathakāra-tva, am,%} n. the trade
or business of a carriage-builder. {%—Ratha-kuṭum-%}
{%bika, as,%} or {%ratha-kuṭumbin, ī,%} m. a carriage-
driver, charioteer, coachman. {%—Ratha-kūbara, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a chariot-shaft, pole of a carriage. {%—Ra-%}
{%tha-kṛt, t,%} m. a carriage or chariot-maker, wheel-
wright (regarded as the son of a Māhiṣya by a
Karaṇī); N. of a Yakṣa. {%—Ratha-ketu, us,%} m. the
flag or banner of a chariot. {%—Ratha-krānta, as,%}
m., N. of a particular time (in music). {%—Ratha-%}
{%krīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. purchased for the price of a
chariot. {%—Ratha-kṣaya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. abiding
or remaining in a chariot. {%—Ratha-kṣobha, as,%}
m. the shaking about of a chariot. {%—Ratha-gaṇaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘car-numberer,’ (probably) an officer who
numbers or counts a great man's chariots. {%—Ratha-%}
{%garbhaka, as,%} m. ‘an embryo-carriage,’ i. e. a litter,
sedan-chair, palanquin. {%—Ratha-gupti, is,%} f. ‘car-
preservative,’ a fence of wood or iron protecting a
war-chariot from collisions, &c. {%—Ratha-gṛtsa, as,%}
m., Ved. a clever or skilful charioteer. {%—Ratha-go-%}
{%pana, am,%} n. {%= ratha-gupti%}. {%—Ratha-granthi, is,%}
m. the knot or fastening of a chariot. {%—Ratha-gho-%}
{%ṣa, as,%} m. the sound or rattling noise of a chariot.
{%—Ratha-cakra, am,%} n. a chariot-wheel. {%—Ratha-%}
{%cakra-cit, t, t, t,%} Ved. arranged in the form of a
chariot-wheel. {%—Ratha-caraṇa, as,%} m. ‘chariot-
foot,’ a chariot-wheel; the ruddy goose. {%—Ratha-%}
{%caryā,%} f. chariot-course, chariot-exercise, chariot-race,
travelling or going by carriage, (frequently in pl.)
{%—Ratha-carṣaṇa,%} Ved. a particular part of a
chariot, the middle part where people sit, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 5, 19. {%ratha-carṣaṇe%}
{%= rathasya draṣṭavye madhye deśe.%}) {%—Ratha-%}
{%citrā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Ratha-jaṅghā,%} f. a par-
ticular part of a carriage, the hinder part. {%—Ratha-%}
{%jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. conquering chariots, obtaining
chariots by conquest; gaining desire, winning affec-
tion, (see {%ratha.%}) {%—Ratha-jūti, is, is, i,%} Ved.
rushing along in a chariot; ({%is%}), m. (perhaps) a
proper N. {%—Ratha-jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge of
chariots, skill in driving. {%—Ratha-jñānin, ī, inī, i,%}
skilled in managing a chariot, skilful in driving a
carriage. {%—Ratha-jvara, as,%} m. a crow. {%—Ratha-%}
{%tur, ūr, ūr, ūr,%} Ved. urging a chariot, drawing a
carriage, (Sāy. Ṛg-veda I. 88, 2 {%= rathasya-pre-%}
{%rayitṛ.%}) {%—Ratha-dāru, u,%} n. wood suitable for
carriage building. {%—Ratha-dru, us,%} or {%ratha-dru-%}
{%ma, as,%} m. Dalbergia Ougeinensis. {%—Ratha-dhur,%}
{%ūr,%} f. the pole of a chariot, shaft of a carriage.
{%—Ratha-dhūr-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone or standing
upon the fore-part of a chariot. {%—Ratha-nābhi, is,%}
f. the nave of a chariot-wheel. {%—Ratha-nirghoṣa%}
or {%ratha-nirhrāda, as,%} m. the sound or rattling of
a chariot. {%—Ratha-nisvana, as,%} m. sound of a
chariot. {%—Ratha-nīḍa, as,%} m. the seat or inner
part of a chariot. {%—Ratha-nemi, is,%} f. the rim or
circumference of a chariot-wheel. {%—Rathan-tara,%}
{%am,%} n. ({%ratham,%} acc. c.), N. of various Sāmans;
({%as%}), m. a form of Agni (regarded as a son of
Tapas); ({%ī%}), f., N. of a wife of Taṃsu. {%—Ratha-%}
{%patha, as,%} m. a carriage road. {%—Ratha-paryāya, %}
[Page0831-b+ 81]
{%as,%} m. Calamus Rotang. {%—Ratha-pāda, as,%} m.
‘carriage-foot,’ a carriage or chariot-wheel. {%—Ratha-%}
{%puṅgava, as,%} m. chief of warriors. {%—Ratha-praṣ-%}
{%ṭha, as,%} m. any one who goes before or leads a
chariot. {%—Ratha-prā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. (according
to Sāy.) {%= rathasya pūrayitṛ,%} filling a chariot
(with riches, said of Vāyu); ({%ās%}), f., N. of a river.
{%—Ratha-prota, as, ā, am,%} Ved. fixed or fastened
in a car. {%—Ratha-proṣṭha, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Ratha-psā, ās,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Ratha-ban-%}
{%dha, as,%} m. ‘carriage-fastening,’ the fastenings or
harness of a chariot. {%—Ratha-maṇḍala, as, am,%}
m. n. a number of chariots. {%—Ratha-madhya-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} standing in the centre of a car. {%—Ratha-%}
{%mahotsava, as,%} m. a great car-festival, the solemn
procession of an idol on a car. {%—Ratha-mukha, am,%}
n. the front or fore-part of a carriage. {%—Ratha-%}
{%yātrā,%} f. ‘car-procession,’ the festive procession of
an idol on a car (especially the procession of the
car of Jagan-nātha). {%—Ratha-yāna, am,%} n. the
going by carriage or in a chariot. {%—Ratha-yāvan,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} Ved. going by carriage or in a chariot.
{%—Ratha-yuga, as,%} m. a chariot yoke. {%—Ratha-%}
{%yuj, k, k, k,%} yoking carriage, harnessed to chariots
(Ved.); ({%k%}), m. a charioteer. {%—Ratha-yuddha,%}
{%am,%} n. a chariot fight, a battle (between combatants
mounted) on chariots. {%—Ratha-yūtha, as, am,%} m.
n. a quantity or number of chariots. {%—Ratha-yo-%}
{%jaka, as,%} m. the yoker or harnesser of a chariot.
{%—Ratha-yodha, as,%} m. one who fights from a
chariot. {%—Ratha-rāja, as,%} m. ‘chariot-king,’ N. of
an ancestor of Śākya-muni. {%—Ratha-vaṃśa, as,%} m.
a number of carriages. {%—Ratha-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having or possessing carriages, accompanied with
chariots; containing the word {%ratha%}. {%—Ratha-vara,%}
{%as,%} m. an excellent chariot; excellent warrior. {%—Ra-%}
{%tha-vartman, a,%} n. a carriage-road, highway, street.
{%—Ratha-vāha, as, ī, am,%} drawing a carriage or
chariot; ({%as%}), m. a carriage-horse, a horse yoked in
a carriage; a coachman, charioteer. {%—Ratha-vā-%}
{%haka, as,%} m. a coachman, charioteer. {%—Ratha-vā-%}
{%hana, as,%} m. a proper N.; ({%am%}), n. a movable
platform or stand on which carriages may be placed.
{%—Ratha-vijñāna, as,%} m. or {%ratha-vidyā,%} f. skill
in managing chariots, the art of driving cars. {%—Ra-%}
{%tha-vimocana, am,%} n. the unyoking of a chariot.
{%—Ratha-vimocanīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to the
unyoking of chariots. {%—Ratha-vīti, is,%} m., Ved. a
proper N. {%—Ratha-vīthī,%} f. a carriage way, high-
road, street. {%—Ratha-vega, as,%} m. the speed or
velocity of a chariot. {%—Ratha-vraja%} or {%ratha-%}
{%vrāta, as,%} m. {%= ratha-vaṃśa%}. {%—Ratha-śakti, is,%}
f. the staff which supports the banner of a war-
chariot. {%—Ratha-śālā,%} f. a coach-house, carriage-
shed. {%—Ratha-śikṣā,%} f. the art of driving a chariot,
coachmanship. {%—Ratha-śiras, as,%} or {%ratha-śīrṣa,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. {%= ratha-mukha%}. {%—Ratha-śreṇi, is,%}
f. a row of carriages, line of chariots. {%—Ratha-%}
{%saṅga, as,%} m. a hostile encounter of chariots. {%—Ra-%}
{%tha-sattama, as,%} m. a most excellent chariot; the
best of warriors. {%—Ratha-saptamī,%} f., N. of the
seventh day in the light half of the month Māgha
(so called as the beginning of a Manvantara when a
new Sun ascended his car). {%—Ratha-sārathi, is,%} m.
a charioteer, coachman. {%—Ratha-sūtra, am,%} n. rules
or directions about carriage building. {%—Ratha-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being on a chariot, mounted on a car;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Rathas-pati, is,%} m. ({%rathas%}
probably a form of the genitive; cf. {%vanas-pati%}),
Ved. the deity presiding over pleasure (or over war-
chariots). {%—Ratha-spṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. touching the
chariot. {%—Ratha-svana, as,%} m. the sound or rattling
of chariots; ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. having the sound of
a chariot (?), having a sounding chariot; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a Yakṣa. {%—Rathākṣa (˚tha-ak˚), as,%} m. a
carriage axle; a measure of length, = 104 Aṅgulas;
N. of one of Skanda's attendants. {%—Rathāgrya (˚tha-%}
{%ag˚), as,%} m. the best warrior, (sometimes incorrectly
written {%rathāgra.%}) {%—Rathāṅga (˚tha-aṅ˚), am,%} n.
any part of a carriage, (in this sense also {%as,%} m.); a
carriage-wheel, chariot-wheel; a discus (especially
[Page0831-c+ 81]
that of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu); a potter's wheel or
lathe; ({%as%}), m. the ruddy goose, Anas Casarca, {%=%}
{%cakra-vāka; (ī),%} f. a species of plant, {%= ṛddhi;%}
{%(ā),%} f., see {%rathāhvā%}. {%—Rathāṅga-tulyāhvayana%}
{%(˚ya-āh˚), as,%} m. ‘(a bird) having the same name
as the wheel of a carriage,’ i. e. the Anas Casarca
or ruddy goose {%(= cakra-vāka)%}. {%—Rathāṅga-nā-%}
{%maka, as,%} or {%rathāṅga-nāman, ā,%} or {%rathāṅga-%}
{%sañjña,%} or {%rathāṅga-sāhva,%} or {%rathāṅgāhva (˚ga-%}
{%āh˚),%} or {%rathāṅgāhvaya (˚ga-āh˚), as,%} m. {%= ra-%}
{%thāṅga-tulyāhvayana%} above. {%—Rathāṅga-nemi,%}
{%is,%} f. the circumference or felly of a chariot-wheel.
{%—Rathāṅga-pāṇi, is,%} m. ‘having a wheel, i. e. a
discus in hand,’ N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Rathāṅga-śroṇi-%}
{%vimbā,%} f. having buttocks like a wheel, i. e. semi-
circular. {%—Rathānīka (˚tha-an˚), am,%} n. an array
or army of war-chariots. {%—Rathāntara (˚tha-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a preceptor, (for {%rathītara%}); N. of a
Kalpa. {%—Rathābhra (˚tha-abh˚)%} or {%rathābhra-%}
{%puṣpa, as,%} m. Calamus Rotang. {%—Rathā-rathi,%}
ind. (fr. {%ratha + ratha%}), carriage to carriage, chariot
against chariot, in closest fight; [cf. {%nakhā-nakhi.%}]
{%—Rathārūḍha (˚tha-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} mounted on
a chariot. {%—Rathāroha (˚tha-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} sit-
ting or mounted on a chariot, one who fights from
a chariot; ({%as%}), m. the mounting or ascending a
chariot, entering a carriage. {%—Rathārohin (˚tha-%}
{%ār˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} mounting a car, one who rides on or
fights from a chariot. {%—Rathārbhaka (˚tha-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a small carriage. {%—Rathā-vaṭṭa, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Rathāvayava (˚tha-av˚), as,%} m. any
part or portion of a carriage. {%—Rathāvarta (˚tha-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m., N. of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Ra-%}
{%thāśva (˚tha-aś˚), as,%} m. a carriage or chariot-
horse; {%(am),%} n. a carriage and horse. {%—Rathā-sah,%}
{%au,%} m. du., Ved. able or fit to draw a chariot (said
of the two horses of Vāyu). {%—Rathāhar (˚tha-ah˚)%}
or {%rathāhna (˚tha-ah˚)%} or {%rathāhnya, am,%} n.,
Ved. a day by carriage or chariot, a day's journey by
carriage. {%—Rathāhvā (˚tha-āh˚),%} f., N. of a river,
(also read {%rathāṅkā, rathāṅgā.%}) {%—Rathe-citra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. variegated or glittering on a
chariot. {%—Ratheśa (˚tha-īśa), as,%} m. the owner or
master of a carriage, a warrior or combatant fighting
from a chariot; ({%ā%}), f. the pole of a carriage, (for
the next.) {%—Ratheṣā (˚tha-īṣā),%} f. the pole or
shaft of a carriage, chariot-pole. {%—Ratheṣu (˚tha-%}
{%iṣu), us,%} m., N. of a kind of arrow. {%—Rathe-%}
{%ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. standing on a car or chariot,
moving or going by carriage, a warrior or combatant
fighting from a chariot; [cf. Zend <nsi>rathœstā.</nsi>]
{%—Rathoḍha (˚tha-ūḍha)%} or {%rathoḷha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. carried on a chariot or carriage. {%—Rathottama%}
{%(˚tha-ut˚), as,%} m. an excellent chariot or carriage.
{%—Rathotsava (˚tha-ut˚), as,%} m. the car-festival, a
solemn procession of an idol mounted on a car.
{%—Rathoddhata (˚tha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
haughty on his car; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a kind of metre,
four times ¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯; N. of a work.
{%—Rathodvaha (˚tha-ud˚)%} or {%rathopastha (˚tha-%}
{%up˚), as,%} m. the seat of a chariot, seat for driving,
driving-box (as lower than the main body of the car),
the hinder part of a car. {%—Rathoraga (˚tha-ur˚), ās,%}
m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Rathoṣmā (˚tha-uṣ˚),%}
f., N. of a river. {%—Rathaugha (˚tha-ogha), as,%} m.
a number of carriages or chariots. {%—Rathaujas%}
{%(˚tha-oj˚), ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having the strength of a
chariot, as strong as a chariot.
<LEND>

<L>39085<pc>0831-c<k1>raTaka<k2>raTaka
{%Rathaka, as,%}¦ m. a particular part of a house.
<LEND>

<L>39086<pc>0831-c<k1>raTayA<k2>raTayA
{%Rathayā,%}¦ f., Ved. desire for carriages or chariots.
<LEND>

<L>39087<pc>0831-c<k1>raTayu<k2>raTayu
{%Rathayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desiring or wishing for
carriages.
<LEND>

<L>39088<pc>0831-c<k1>raTarya<k2>raTarya
{%Ratharya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%ratharyati,%} &c., Ved. to go
or travel by carriage or chariot.
<LEND>

<L>39089<pc>0831-c<k1>raTarvI<k2>raTarvI
{%Ratharvī,%}¦ f., Ved. epithet of a serpent.
<LEND>

<L>39090<pc>0831-c<k1>raTasyA<k2>raTasyA
{%Rathasyā,%}¦ f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>39091<pc>0831-c<k1>raTika<k2>raTika
{%Rathika, as, ī, am,%}¦ going by carriage or chariot,
any one who travels or rides in a carriage, the owner
of a car or carriage.
<LEND>

<L>39092<pc>0831-c<k1>raTita<k2>raTita
{%Rathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ equipped or furnished with a
chariot.
<LEND>
[Page0832-a+ 78]

<L>39093<pc>0832-a<k1>raTin<k2>raTin
{%Rathin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having or possessing a chariot
or carriage, going in a car, travelling or riding in
a carriage; consisting of chariots; accustomed to
chariots (said of horses, Ved.); belonging to car-
riages; ({%ī%}), m. an owner of a carriage, lord of
chariots; a warrior who fights from a chariot; ({%inī%}),
f. a number of carriages or chariots.
<LEND>

<L>39094<pc>0832-a<k1>raTina<k2>raTina
{%Rathina, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessing a carriage, riding
in a chariot.
<LEND>

<L>39095<pc>0832-a<k1>raTira<k2>raTira
{%Rathira, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessing a carriage or
chariot, going in a carriage; hastening, quick,
speedy; ({%as%}), m. a warrior.
<LEND>

<L>39096<pc>0832-a<k1>raTirAya<k2>raTirAya
{%Rathirāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%rathirāyati,%} &c., Ved. to
go quickly, hasten; (Sāy.) to possess a chariot.
<LEND>

<L>39097<pc>0832-a<k1>raTirAyat<k2>raTirAyat
{%Rathirāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. hastening; having
chariots.
<LEND>

<L>39098<pc>0832-a<k1>raTI<k2>raTI
{%Rathī%}¦ (a Vedic word formed fr. {%ratha,%} and used
as both adj. and subst.; {%rathyam%} acc. sing., {%rathyas%}
acc. pl.), one going by chariot, one who is furnished
with a chariot or carriage; forming a cart-load, as
much as a cart will carry, carried on a waggon, be-
longing to a chariot; a carriage-driver, coachman,
charioteer, a warrior who fights from a chariot; a
guide, leader, master, lord. {%—Rathī-tama, as,%} m.,
Ved. chief or best of charioteers, (Sāy. {%= atiśayena%}
{%rathin%} or {%atiśayena raṃhitṛ.%}) {%—Rathī-tara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} a better or superior charioteer; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a preceptor; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his descendants.
<LEND>

<L>39099<pc>0832-a<k1>raTIkara<k2>raTIkara
{%Rathīkara, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39100<pc>0832-a<k1>raTIya<k2>raTIya
{%Rathīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%rathīyati,%} &c., to desire a
chariot; to go or travel in a chariot.
<LEND>

<L>39101<pc>0832-a<k1>raTIyat<k2>raTIyat
{%Rathīyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. desiring a chariot;
going in a chariot.
<LEND>

<L>39102<pc>0832-a<k1>raTya<k2>raTya
{%Rathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
carriage or chariot, accustomed to a carriage; delight-
ing in roads (?); ({%as%}), m. a carriage or chariot-horse,
(also {%ā,%} f.); a part of a chariot; ({%ā%}), f. a road for
carriages, high-road, main road, a place where several
roads meet; a number of carriages or chariots, assem-
blage of cars; ({%am%}), n., Ved. carriage equipments
or harness, chariot trappings, a wheel or any part
of a carriage; (perhaps) a chariot-race or contest
with chariots; a conveyance, carriage (?). {%—Rathya-%}
{%caryā,%} f. {%= ratha-caryā,%} q. v. {%—Rathyāvasarpaṇa%}
{%(˚yā-av˚), am,%} n. walking down a road. {%—Rathyo-%}
{%pasarpaṇa (˚yā-up˚), am,%} n. walking to a road.
<LEND>

<L>39103<pc>0832-a<k1>rad<k2>rad
{#rad#}¦ {%rad,%} cl. 1. P. {%radati, rarāda, raditum,%}
to scratch, scrape; to split, chop, divide,
tear, break, rend; to gnaw; to dig; to open (a
road &c., Ved.); to guide, lead, conduct (Ved.); to
convey anything to any one, give, dispense (Ved.);
[cf. Lat. <nsi>rad-o, rod-o, ros-trum,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>radius;</nsi>
probably Goth. <nsi>letan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>lœtan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39104<pc>0832-a<k1>rada<k2>rada
{%Rada, as, ā, am,%}¦ scratching, scraping, splitting,
rending, tearing, gnawing; ({%as%}), m. the act of
scratching or gnawing, &c.; a tooth; an elephant's
tusk; a symbolical expression for the number thirty-
two. {%—Rada-cchada, as,%} m. ‘tooth-covering,’ a
lip; [cf. {%danta-cchada.%}] {%—Radāṅkura (˚da-aṅ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the point of a tooth. {%—Radā-vasu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} Ved. dispensing wealth.
<LEND>

<L>39105<pc>0832-a<k1>radana<k2>radana
{%Radana, as,%}¦ m. a tooth, tusk; an elephant's tusk;
({%am%}), n. the act of splitting, tearing, rending, gnawing.
{%—Radana-cchada, as,%} m. {%= rada-cchada,%} a lip.
<LEND>

<L>39106<pc>0832-a<k1>radanikA<k2>radanikA
{%Radanikā,%}¦ f. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39107<pc>0832-a<k1>radanin<k2>radanin
{%Radanin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘tusked,’ an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>39108<pc>0832-a<k1>radin<k2>radin
{%Radin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘tusked,’ an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>39109<pc>0832-a<k1>radda<k2>radda
{#radda#}¦ {%radda, as,%} m., N. of the eleventh Yoga.
<LEND>

<L>39110<pc>0832-a<k1>radDa<k2>radDa
{#radDa#}¦ {%raddha, raddhṛ.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39111<pc>0832-a<k1>rady<k2>rady
{#rady#}¦ {%rady,%} cl. 1. P. {%radyati,%} &c., to be
firm.
<LEND>

<L>39112<pc>0832-a<k1>raD<k2>raD
{#raD#}¦ {%radh%} or {%randh,%} cl. 4. P. {%radhyati,%}
{%rarandha%} (1st pl. {%rarandhima%} or {%re-%}
{%dhma%}), {%radhiṣyati%} or {%ratsyati, aradhat%} or
{%arandhat%} (Vedic forms {%rāradhus, radham, ra-%}
{%dhāma, randhi, randhīs%}), Inf. {%raddhum, radhi-%}
{%tum, randhitum,%} to become subject to any one
(dat.), to be subdued (Ved.); to be destroyed,
[Page0832-b+ 75]
perish (Ved.); to be completed or matured [cf.
rt. {%rādh%}]; to bring into subjection, subdue; to op-
press, injure, hurt, torment, kill: Caus. P. {%randha-%}
{%yati%} (Ved. also A. {%-te%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%ararandhat%}
(Ved. {%rīradhat%}), to make subject, subdue; to pain,
torment, oppress, hurt, injure, destroy, bring to
nothing; to cook, prepare food: Desid. {%riradhi-%}
{%ṣati%} or {%riratsati:%} Intens. {%rāradhyate, rāraddhi,%}
to give into the power of, hand over to; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>lœdo;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>rendan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39113<pc>0832-b<k1>radDa<k2>radDa
{%Raddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ subdued, hurt, injured.
<LEND>

<L>39114<pc>0832-b<k1>radDf<k2>radDf
{%Raddhṛ, dhā,%}¦ m. one who subdues or oppresses,
a subduer, conqueror, oppressor, tormentor.
<LEND>

<L>39115<pc>0832-b<k1>raDita<k2>raDita
{%Radhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>39116<pc>0832-b<k1>raDitf<k2>raDitf
{%Radhitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ injurious, hurtful.
<LEND>

<L>39117<pc>0832-b<k1>raDra<k2>raDra
{%Radhra, as, ā, am%}¦ (said to be fr. rt. {%radh,%} but
in the first sense perhaps fr. a form {%radh%} = rt. {%ṛdh%}
or {%rādh,%} q. v.; cf. Zend {%aredra%}), Ved. prosperous,
happy, rich, wealthy, liberal; worshipping or gaining
the favour of the gods; injuring, (Sāy. = {%samṛddha%}
or {%rādhaka%} or {%ārādhaka%} or {%hiṃsaka.%}) {%—Radhra-%}
{%coda%} or {%radhra-codana, as,%} m., Ved. bestowing
wealth, assisting or encouraging the prosperous;
driver or impeller of enemies, (Sāy. = {%samṛddhā-%}
{%nām preraka%} or {%hiṃsakānāṃ codaka.%}) {%—Ra-%}
{%dhra-tura, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according to some) {%=%}
{%radhra-coda%} above, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda VI. 18, 4. {%radhra-turaḥ%} is gen. c. of {%radhra-%}
{%tur,%} a subduer, injurer, &c.)
<LEND>

<L>39118<pc>0832-b<k1>ranDaka<k2>ranDaka
{%Randhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ subduing, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>39119<pc>0832-b<k1>ranDana<k2>ranDana
{%Randhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who destroys, a de-
stroyer; ({%am%}), n. the act of destroying or annihilat-
ing; the act of cooking, preparation or dressing of
food.
<LEND>

<L>39120<pc>0832-b<k1>ranDanAya<k2>ranDanAya
{%Randhanāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%randhanāyati,%} &c., Ved.
to make subject, deliver into the power of, (Sāy. =
{%vaśī-kṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>39121<pc>0832-b<k1>ranDas<k2>ranDas
{%Randhas, ās,%}¦ or {%randhasa, as,%} m., N. of a man
belonging to the family of Andhaka.
<LEND>

<L>39122<pc>0832-b<k1>ranDi<k2>ranDi
{%Randhi, is,%}¦ f. subjection, subjugation (Ved.); the
being prepared or cooked; cooking.
<LEND>

<L>39123<pc>0832-b<k1>ranDita<k2>ranDita
{%Randhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ subdued; destroyed; cooked,
dressed (as food).
<LEND>

<L>39124<pc>0832-b<k1>ranDiza<k2>ranDiza
{%Randhiṣa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= hantṛ,%} a destroyer
(Vājasaneyi-s. VIII. 55).
<LEND>

<L>39125<pc>0832-b<k1>ran<k2>ran<h>1
{#ran#} 1¦. {%ran%} = rt. {%raṇ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39126<pc>0832-b<k1>ranti<k2>ranti<h>1
1. {%ranti, is,%}¦ m., Ved. (according to some) a
fighter, warrior, (but according to Sāy. {%ranti = ra-%}
{%mamāṇa, ramaṇa-śīla,%} delighting, taking pleasure,
as if fr. rt. {%ram,%} see 2. {%ranti%} at p. 833, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>39127<pc>0832-b<k1>rantya<k2>rantya
{%Rantya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (according to some)
agreeable, pleasant, (perhaps to be connected with rt.
{%ram,%} but in Ṛg-veda X. 29, 3. another reading has
{%raṃhya.%})
<LEND>

<L>39128<pc>0832-b<k1>ran<k2>ran<h>2
{#ran#} 2¦. {%ran%} in Ṛg-veda I. 120, 7, according
to Sāy. {%= rātārau = dātārau,%} ‘givers,’ as if pres. part.
of rt. 1. {%rā,%} the sing. being substituted for the dual.
<LEND>

<L>39129<pc>0832-b<k1>rantavya<k2>rantavya
{#rantavya#}¦ {%rantavya, ranti, rantṛ.%} See p. 833.
<LEND>

<L>39130<pc>0832-b<k1>rantu<k2>rantu
{#rantu#}¦ {%rantu, us,%} f. a way, road; a river.
<LEND>

<L>39131<pc>0832-b<k1>rantya<k2>rantya
{#rantya#}¦ {%rantya.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>39132<pc>0832-b<k1>randalA<k2>randalA
{#randalA#}¦ {%randalā,%} f., N. of Sañjñā (wife of
the Sun).
<LEND>

<L>39133<pc>0832-b<k1>ranD<k2>ranD
{#ranD#}¦ {%randh%} = rt. {%radh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39134<pc>0832-b<k1>ranDaka<k2>ranDaka
{%Randhaka, randhana,%}¦ &c. See above.
<LEND>

<L>39135<pc>0832-b<k1>ranDra<k2>ranDra
{#ranDra#}¦ {%randhra, am,%} n. (rarely also {%as,%} m.;
said to be fr. rt. {%radh,%} probably connected with rt.
{%rad%}), a slit, split, opening, fissure, aperture, hole,
chasm, vent, cavity, (nine openings are usually
reckoned in the human body, viz. two in the nose,
eyes, and ears respectively, one in the mouth, urethra,
and anus, and there is an imaginary tenth opening
in the skull); a symbolical expression for the number
nine; N. of a particular part of a horse's head; a
defect, fault, flaw, imperfection, weak part, assailable
point; N. of the eighth astrological mansion. {%—Ran- %}
[Page0832-c+ 77]
{%dhra-kaṇṭa, as,%} m. a species of plant {%(= jāla-%}
{%varvūraka)%}. {%—Randhra-prahārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} attack-
ing the weak places (of an enemy). {%—Randhra-%}
{%babhru, us,%} m. a rat. {%—Randhra-vaṃśa, as,%} m. a
hollow bamboo. {%—Randhrāgata (˚ra-āg˚), am,%} n.
a disease which attacks the throat of horses. {%—Ran-%}
{%dhrānusārin (˚ra-an˚)%} or {%randhrānveṣin (˚ra-%}
{%an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} looking out for flaws, picking holes,
seeking for weak or assailable points; [cf. {%chidrān-%}
{%veṣin.%}] {%—Randhrānveṣaṇa (˚ra-an˚), am,%} n.
the act of seeking for weak places, picking holes,
searching for flaws. {%—Randhrāpekṣin (˚ra-ap˚), ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} watching for weak or assailable places, spying
out holes, looking out for an assailable point.
<LEND>

<L>39136<pc>0832-c<k1>rap<k2>rap
{#rap#}¦ {%rap%} [cf. rt. {%lap%}], cl. 1. P. {%rapati,%}
{%rarāpa,%} &c., Ved. to talk (frivolously),
chatter; to murmur; to praise, (Sāy. {%arapat =%}
{%astaut%}): Intens., Ved. {%rārapīti,%} to make a loud
crackling noise.
<LEND>

<L>39137<pc>0832-c<k1>rApya<k2>rApya
{%Rāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be said or spoken.
<LEND>

<L>39138<pc>0832-c<k1>rapas<k2>rapas
{#rapas#}¦ {%rapas, as,%} n. [cf. {%repas%}], defect, fault,
sin; hurt, injury, (Sāy. {%= pāpa,%} but Ṛg-veda I. 69,
4. {%rapāṃsi = bādhakāni rākṣasādīni,%}  disturbing
or injurious Rākṣasas, &c.)
<LEND>

<L>39139<pc>0832-c<k1>rapS<k2>rapS
{#rapS#}¦ {%rapś,%} a Vedic root, only occurring
in the pres. part. below and with the
preps. {%pra%} and {%vi;%} [cf. {%vi-rapś.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39140<pc>0832-c<k1>rapSadUDan<k2>rapSadUDan
{%Rapśad-ūdhan, ā, ā%}¦ or {%dhnī, a,%} Ved. having a
full or distended udder, (Sāy. {%= mahodhaska.%})
<LEND>

<L>39141<pc>0832-c<k1>rapsu<k2>rapsu
{#rapsu#}¦ {%rapsu%} (according to Mahī-dhara) {%=%}
{%rūpa.%}
<LEND>

<L>39142<pc>0832-c<k1>rapsudA<k2>rapsudA
{%Rapsudā,%}¦ du., in Ṛg-veda VIII. 72, 12 (the
meaning is obscure).
<LEND>

<L>39143<pc>0832-c<k1>raP<k2>raP
{#raP#}¦ {%raph%} or {%ramph,%} cl. 1. P. {%raphati,%}
{%ramphati,%} &c., to go [cf. rt. {%rarph%}]; to
injure, hurt, kill; [cf. rts. {%riph, ṛph;%} cf. also Lat.
<nsi>rep-o, serp-o.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39144<pc>0832-c<k1>raPita<k2>raPita
{%Raphita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. injured, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>39145<pc>0832-c<k1>rabDf<k2>rabDf
{#rabDf#}¦ {%rabdhṛ.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>39146<pc>0832-c<k1>raB<k2>raB
{#raB#}¦ {%rabh%} (originally connected with rts.
{%grabh, labh%}), cl. 1. A. (in poetry also P.)
{%rabhate (-ti), rebhe, rapsyate, arabdha, rabdhum,%}
to seize, take (Ved.); to take hold of, clasp, embrace;
to desire vehemently, regret; to act rashly: Pass.
{%rabhyate, arambhi:%} Caus. {%rambhayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%ararambhat:%} Desid. {%ripsate:%} Intens. {%rāra-%}
{%bhyate, rārambhīti, rārabdhi;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥώννυμι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">λαμβάνω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>rabies, robur:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>arbaiths, li-</nsi>
<nsi>ban:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>earfedh, earfodh, leofian, lifian,</nsi>
<nsi>lybban,</nsi> (perhaps also) <nsi>a-refian,</nsi> ‘to bear;’ <nsi>a-rœfnan,</nsi>
‘to take away:’ Old Germ. <nsi>laba, labôn.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39147<pc>0832-c<k1>rabDf<k2>rabDf
{%Rabdhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ seizing, taking hold of;
beginning [cf. {%ā-rabh%}]; who or what seizes, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39148<pc>0832-c<k1>raBa<k2>raBa
{%Rabha, as,%}¦ m., N. of an ape (in Rāmāyaṇa IV.
33, 14).
<LEND>

<L>39149<pc>0832-c<k1>raBas<k2>raBas
{%Rabhas, as,%}¦ n. violence, impetuosity, ({%rabhasā,%}
with impetuosity, violently), zeal; force, energy,
power, strength, strengthening food, oblation (Ved.).
{%—Rabhas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessing impe-
tuosity, violent, impetuous, zealous. {%—Rabho-dā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. bestowing strength or force, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%balasya dātṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>39150<pc>0832-c<k1>raBasa<k2>raBasa
{%Rabhasa, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%rabhas%} above), impe-
tuous, violent, rapid, fierce, wild; eager; powerful,
strong, energetic; strengthening, invigorating (Ved.);
joyful; ({%as%}), m. violence, impetuosity, vehemence,
haste, speed, velocity, precipitation, ({%rabhasāt%} or
{%rabhasena,%} with violence, impetuously, in great
haste, quickly); passion, anger, ill temper, rage;
passionate fondness; joy, pleasure; regret, sorrow;
N. of a magical incantation recited over weapons;
of a Dānava; of a king (son of Rambha); of a
lexicographer; of a Rākṣasa; of an ape (in Rāmā-
yaṇa IV. 39,7). {%—Rabhasa-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a
lexicographer.
<LEND>

<L>39151<pc>0832-c<k1>raBasAna<k2>raBasAna
{%Rabhasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= rabhasa,%} impe-
tuous, violent, rapid.
<LEND>
[Page0833-a+ 79]

<L>39152<pc>0833-a<k1>raBi<k2>raBi
{%Rabhi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. (according to some) a particu-
lar part of a car or chariot, (but according to Sāy.,
Ṛg-veda VIII. 5, 29, {%rabhi%} is an adj. {%= ārambha-%}
{%ṇīya%} or {%ālambhana-bhūta,%} ‘supporting.’)
<LEND>

<L>39153<pc>0833-a<k1>raBizWa<k2>raBizWa
{%Rabhiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. most violent or
impetuous, very strong.
<LEND>

<L>39154<pc>0833-a<k1>raBIyas<k2>raBIyas
{%Rabhīyas%}¦ or {%rabhyas, ān, asī, as,%} Ved. more
impetuous, very strong.
<LEND>

<L>39155<pc>0833-a<k1>ramBa<k2>ramBa<h>1
1. {%rambha, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see p. 834, col. 1), a
prop, support, staff, stick; a bamboo; N. of the
fifth Kalpa; of a son of Āyu; of a son of Viviṃśati;
of a king of Vajra-rātra; of the father of the Asura
Mahiṣa and brother of Karambha; of an ape (in
Rāmāyaṇa IV. 39, 20, &c.); ({%ā%}), f. the plantain,
Musa Sapientum; a sort of rice; a kind of metre,
four times ˘˘˘˘¯¯¯¯; N. of Gaurī or of Dāk-
ṣāyaṇī in the Malaya mountains; N. of a celebrated
Apsaras (wife of Nala-kūbara and carried off by
Rāvaṇa; Rambhā is best known as a beautiful
nymph of Indra's paradise; she is sometimes regarded
as a form of Lakṣmī, when she sprang with thirteen
other precious things from the froth of the churned
ocean; she takes her place in Hindū mythology as
a kind of popular Venus or type of female beauty);
a harlot. {%—Rambhā-tṛtīyā,%} f., N. of the third day
of the first half of the month Jyaiṣṭha (so called
because Hindū women on this day imitate the
beautiful nymph Rambhā, who bathed on the same
day with particular ceremonies). {%—Rambhābhisāra%}
{%(˚bhā-abh˚), as,%} m. ‘the meeting or assaulting of
Rambhā,’ N. of a drama. {%—Rambhā-vrata, am,%}
n., N. of a particular ceremony, (see above.) {%—Ram-%}
{%bhoru (˚bha-ūru), us, us%} or {%ūs, u,%} having beautiful
thighs, (see {%ūru.%})
<LEND>

<L>39156<pc>0833-a<k1>ramBaka<k2>ramBaka
{%Rambhaka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39157<pc>0833-a<k1>ramBin<k2>ramBin
{%Rambhin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘carrying a stick,’ an old
man; (Sāy.) a door-keeper, porter; {%(iṇī),%} f., Ved.
(probably) a particular vessel or ornament.
<LEND>

<L>39158<pc>0833-a<k1>ripsu<k2>ripsu
{%Ripsu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid), wishing to seize
or take hold of, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39159<pc>0833-a<k1>raBineya<k2>raBineya
{#raBineya#}¦ {%rabhineya%} (?), a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39160<pc>0833-a<k1>raBeRaka<k2>raBeRaka
{#raBeRaka#}¦ {%rabheṇaka, as,%} m., N. of a serpent-
demon.
<LEND>

<L>39161<pc>0833-a<k1>ram<k2>ram
{#ram#}¦ {%ram,%} cl. 1. A. (in poetry also P.)
{%ramate (-ti), reme, raṃsyate, araṃsta%} (in
the Veda also cl. 9. P. {%ramṇāti,%} &c.) {%rantum,%} (and
with a preposition sometimes) {%ramitum,%} to stop,
stay, calm, tranquillize, (in these senses cl. 9. P.,
Ved.); to rest, repose, remain quiet, take one's ease
(cl. 1. A.); to remain, stay, pause; to like to stay or
remain; to make happy, rejoice, please (cl. 1. P.
and A.); to be pleased or delighted, to rejoice (cl. 1.
A.); to be pleased with or rejoice at, take delight in
(with loc. or inst. or with {%saha%} and inst.); to play
or sport with, dally with (with inst. or with {%saha%}
and inst., or with {%sārdham%} &c. and inst.); to have
sexual intercourse with (with inst.), know carnally
(with acc.); to couple (said of deer): Caus. {%rama-%}
{%yati%} (according to some also {%rāmayati%}), {%-yitum,%}
Aor. {%arīramat%} (Ved. {%ramayāmakaḥ,%} Pāṇ. III. 1,
42), to cause to stay, stop (Ved.); to calm, tranquil-
lize (Ved.); to delight, gratify, please, rejoice, amuse,
give pleasure, cause (sexual) enjoyment; to cause to
couple (said of deer); to be pleased or delighted, to
rejoice: Desid. {%riraṃsate:%} Intens. {%raṃramyate,%}
{%raṃranti, raṃramīti%} (Ved. {%rārandhi,%} according to
Sāy. {%= ramasva,%} cf. Pāṇ. VI. 4, 103); [cf. Zend
<nsi>ram, rām-a, airi-ma;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἠρέμα, ἠρεμα-ῖο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἠρεμ-ία, ἡρεμ-έ-ω, ἠρεμίζω, ἔρη-μο-ς, ἐρημ-ία,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐρημ-ό-ω, νω-λεμ-ές;</lang> Goth. <nsi>rim-is;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>rawa, ruowa, rawen, resti, rastjan;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>rest, restan;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>ram-a-s, rom-u-s, rim-ti,</nsi>
<nsi>ram-dy-ti;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>reamhain,</nsi> ‘pleasure.’]
<LEND>

<L>39162<pc>0833-a<k1>rata<k2>rata
{%Rata, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, delighted, amused,
gratified, satisfied, happy; enamoured of, fondly
attached to; delighted with, taking pleasure in,
pleased with (with inst.); intent on, addicted to;
devoted to, occupied in, engaged in (with loc.); in-
clined to, disposed; loved, beloved; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
[Page0833-b+ 81]
the mother of Day (in Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 2584);
({%am%}), n. pleasure, enjoyment, enjoyment of love,
sexual union, coition, copulation; the private parts
{%(= guhya)%}. {%—Rata-kīla, as,%} m. a dog. {%—Rata-%}
{%kūjita, am,%} n. lascivious murmur. {%—Rata-guru,%}
{%us,%} m. a husband. {%—Rata-jvara, as,%} m. a crow.
{%—Rata-tālin, ī,%} m. a libertine, voluptuary. {%—Rata-%}
{%tālī,%} f. a procuress, bawd. {%—Rata-nārāca, as,%} m.
(according to some) {%= rata-nārīca, as,%} (except in the
first meaning). {%—Rata-nārīca, as,%} m. a voluptuary;
a dog; N. of Kāma-deva, the god of love; lasci-
vious murmur. {%—Rata-nidhi, is,%} m. a species of
bird (the wagtail). {%—Rata-bandha, as,%} m. sexual
union. {%—Ratarddhika (˚ta-ṛd˚), am,%} n. a day;
bathing for pleasure; the aggregate of eight auspi-
cious objects. {%—Rata-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. con-
taining a form of the rt. {%ram%}. {%—Rata-vraṇa, as,%}
m. a dog. {%—Rata-śāyin, ī,%} m. a dog. {%—Rata-%}
{%hiṇḍaka, as,%} m. a ravisher or seducer of women; a
libertine. {%—Ratānduka (˚ta-an˚), as,%} m. a dog.
{%—Ratāmarda (˚ta-ām˚), as,%} m. a dog. {%—Ratā-%}
{%yanī (˚ta-ay˚),%} f. a prostitute, harlot. {%—Ratārthin%}
{%(˚ta-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} wishing for sexual enjoyment,
amorous, lascivious; ({%inī%}), f. a wanton woman.
{%—Ratotsava (˚ta-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘love-festival,’ feast
of sexual enjoyment. {%—Ratodvaha (˚ta-ud˚), as,%}
m. the Indian cuckoo.
<LEND>

<L>39163<pc>0833-b<k1>rati<k2>rati
{%Rati, is,%}¦ f. rest, repose (Ved.); pleasure, enjoy-
ment, delight, joy, amusement; love, affection, fond-
ness; fondness for, pleasure in, attachment or addic-
tion to (with loc.); the pleasure of love, sexual
passion, sexual intercourse; the pudenda; {%= rati-%}
{%gṛha,%} q. v.; the goddess of Love or Sexual Passion
personified as the wife of Kāma-deva; N. of the
sixth Kalā of the moon; of an Apsaras; of the wife
of Vibhu (mother of Pṛthu-ṣeṇa); of a magical
incantation recited over weapons; a mystical term
for the letter {%n;%} N. of a metre, four times ¯˘.
{%—Rati-kara, as, ī, am,%} pleasure-causing, joy-
making, preparing love or happiness; being in love,
enamoured, {%= kāmin; (as),%} m. epithet of a Samādhi.
{%—Rati-karman, a,%} n. sexual intercourse. {%—Rati-%}
{%kānta-tarka-vāg-īśa, as,%} m., N. of a commentator
on the Mugdha-bodha. {%—Rati-kuhara, am,%} n. pu-
dendum muliebre. {%—Rati-kriyā,%} f. sexual inter-
course. {%—Rati-kheda-supta, as, ā, am,%} sleeping
after the fatigue of sexual enjoyment. {%—Rati-guṇa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Deva-gandharva. {%—Rati-gṛha, as,%}
m. ‘pleasure-house,’ a brothel; pudendum muliebre.
{%—Rati-caraṇa-samanta-svara, as,%} m., N. of a
king of the Gandharvas. {%—Rati-janaka, as,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Rati-jaha, as,%} m., N. of a Samādhi.
{%—Rati-jña, as, ā, am,%} skilled in the art of love.
{%—Rati-taskara, as,%} m. a ravisher, seducer. {%—Rati-%}
{%nāga, as,%} m. a sort of coitus. {%—Rati-pati, is,%} m.
‘Rati's husband,’ i. e. Kāma-deva, the god of love.
{%—Rati-pāśa, as,%} m. a sort of coitus. {%—Rati-pra-%}
{%pūrṇa, as,%} m., N. of a particular Kalpa or age.
{%—Rati-priya, as,%} m. ‘beloved by Rati,’ i. e. Kāma-
deva; ({%ā%}), f. a N. of Dākṣāyaṇī, (also read {%ravi-%}
{%priyā.%}) {%—Rati-bhavana, am,%} n. ‘pleasure-abode,’
a house for prostitution, brothel. {%—Rati-mañjarī,%}
f., N. of an erotic work. {%—Rati-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
having enjoyment or pleasure, gay, cheerful, pleased,
gratified. {%—Rati-madā,%} f. an Apsaras. {%—Rati-man-%}
{%dira, am,%} n. ‘pleasure-house,’ a pleasure-room,
pleasure-temple; Love's dwelling; pudendum muli-
ebre. {%—Rati-mitra, as,%} m. a sort of coitus. {%—Rati-%}
{%raṇa-dhīra, as, ā, am,%} bold or energetic in Love's
contests. {%—Rati-ramaṇa, as,%} m. Rati's lover or
husband, i. e. Kāma-deva. {%—Rati-rasa, as,%} m. the
taste or pleasure of love, sexual enjoyment; {%(as, ā,%}
{%am),%} having the flavour or taste of love, as sweet as
love. {%—Rati-rasa-glāni, is,%} f. lassitude after sexual
enjoyment. {%—Rati-rahasya, am,%} n. ‘secrets or
mysteries of love,’ N. of an erotic work by Kokkvoka.
{%—Rati-lakṣa, am,%} n. sexual intercourse. {%—Rati-%}
{%lampaṭa, as, ā, am,%} desirous of sexual enjoyment,
lascivious, lustful. {%—Rati-lola, as,%} m., N. of a demon.
{%—Rati-vara, as,%} m. Rati's husband, Kāma-deva;
a gift or offering vowed to Rati. {%—Rati-vardhana, %}
[Page0833-c+ 81]
{%as, ī, am,%} increasing love. {%—Rati-vallī,%} f. love
regarded as a creeper. {%—Rati-śakti, is,%} f. the faculty
of sexual enjoyment, virile power. {%—Rati-śūra, as,%}
m. ‘love-hero,’ a man of great procreative power.
{%—Rati-saṃyoga, as,%} m. sexual union. {%—Rati-%}
{%saṃhita, as, ā, am,%} accompanied with love, abound-
ing in affection. {%—Rati-satvarā,%} f. Trigonella Cor-
niculata. {%—Rati-sarvasva, am,%} n. ‘the whole essence
of love,’ N. of a work on erotic subjects. {%—Rati-%}
{%sundara, as,%} m. a sort of coitus. {%—Rati-sena, as,%}
m., N. of a king of the Colas. {%—Raty-aṅga, am,%}
n. pudendum muliebre.
<LEND>

<L>39164<pc>0833-c<k1>ratikA<k2>ratikA
{%Ratikā,%}¦ f. a particular musical mode (?).
<LEND>

<L>39165<pc>0833-c<k1>ratI<k2>ratI
{%Ratī,%}¦ f. {%= rati,%} the wife of Kāma and goddess of
love, (lengthened on account of the metre.)
<LEND>

<L>39166<pc>0833-c<k1>ratvA<k2>ratvA
{%Ratvā,%}¦ ind. having sported or dallied.
<LEND>

<L>39167<pc>0833-c<k1>rantavya<k2>rantavya
{%Rantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be rejoiced at, to be
loved, lovable, lovely, amiable; ({%am%}), n. pleasure,
enjoyment, play.
<LEND>

<L>39168<pc>0833-c<k1>ranti<k2>ranti<h>2
2. {%ranti, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. see p. 832, col. 2), amuse-
ment, pleasure, delight (? Ved., if {%ranti%} has this
sense, it may equally be referred to rt. 1. {%ran;%} it is
said also to be used as a term of endearment for a
cow); ({%is%}), m., N. of a lexicographer {%(= ranti-deva).%}
{%—Ranti-deva, as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu; of a king
(son of Saṅkṛti); of a lexicographer; a dog. {%—Ranti-%}
{%nāra%} or {%ranti-bhāra, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>39169<pc>0833-c<k1>rantumanas<k2>rantumanas
{%Rantu-manas, ās, ās, as%}¦ ({%rantu%} for {%rantum,%}
inf. of rt. {%ram%}), inclined to take pleasure, wishing
to enjoy sexual pleasures.
<LEND>

<L>39170<pc>0833-c<k1>rantf<k2>rantf
{%Rantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. liking to remain, de-
lighting in.
<LEND>

<L>39171<pc>0833-c<k1>rama<k2>rama
{%Rama, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleasing, delighting, rejoicing,
gratifying, giving pleasure, delightful [cf. {%mano-%}
{%rama%}]; dear, beloved; ({%as%}), m. joy; a lover, hus-
band, spouse; the god of love, Kāma-deva; the red-
flowering Aśoka; ({%ā%}), f. a wife, mistress; N. of
Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune; good luck, fortune,
riches, opulence; splendor, pomp; N. of the eleventh
day in the dark half of the month Kārttika; of a
daughter of Śaśi-dhvaja and wife of Kalki. {%—Ramā-%}
{%kānta, as,%} m. ‘lover of Ramā,’ Viṣṇu. {%—Ramā-%}
{%dhava, as,%} m. ‘husband of Ramā,’ Viṣṇu. {%—Ra-%}
{%mādhipa (˚mā-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of Ramā,’
Viṣṇu. {%—Ramā-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of Ramā,’
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa; N. of a poet; of a commentator
on the Amara-kośa. {%—Ramā-pati, is,%} m. ‘husband
of Ramā,’ Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Ramā-priya, am,%}
n. ‘dear to Ramā,’ a lotus. {%—Ramā-veṣṭa, as,%} m.
turpentine. {%—Ramāśraya (˚mā-āś˚), as,%} m. ‘Ra-
mā's refuge or protection, ’ Viṣṇu. {%—Rameśa (˚mā-%}
{%īśa)%} or {%rameśvara (˚mā-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘Ramā's lord,’
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>39172<pc>0833-c<k1>ramaka<k2>ramaka
{%Ramaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ sporting, playing, dallying,
jesting; ({%as%}), m. a lover, wooer, suitor. {%—Ramaka-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. affection.
<LEND>

<L>39173<pc>0833-c<k1>ramaRa<k2>ramaRa
{%Ramaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing pleasure, pleasing,
gratifying, delighting, rejoicing, agreeable, delightful,
charming; ({%as%}), m. a lover, wooer, spouse, husband,
({%kṣapā-ramaṇa,%} the husband of night, the moon);
the god of love or Kāma-deva; an ass; a testicle; a
species of tree ({%= mahā-riṣṭa%}); N. of a mythical
son of Mano-harā; of Aruṇa or the charioteer of the
sun; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a charming
woman, a wife, mistress; a kind of metre, four times
˘˘¯; N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in Rāma-tīrtha; ({%ī%}), f. a
beautiful young woman, a mistress, wife; Aloe Indica
({%= bālā%}); a kind of metre, four times ˘˘¯ or four
times ˘˘¯˘˘¯; N. of a female serpent-demon;
({%am%}), n. sporting, playing, dalliance, amorous sport,
love, sexual pleasure or intercourse; joy or pleasure
in general; the hinder parts, the hip and loins, the
pudenda ({%= jaghana%}); the root of Trichosanthes
Diœca; N. of a forest. {%—Ramaṇa-vasati, is,%} f.
the dwelling-place of a lover.
<LEND>

<L>39174<pc>0833-c<k1>ramaRaka<k2>ramaRaka
{%Ramaṇaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Varṣa; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of the regent of this Varṣa, (he was a son of
Yajña-bāhu); of Dvīpa; of a son of Vīti-hotra.
<LEND>

<L>39175<pc>0833-c<k1>ramaRIya<k2>ramaRIya<h>1
1. {%ramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be enjoyed, pleasant,
agreeable, delightful, beautiful, lovely, charming,
handsome. {%—Ramaṇīya-tama, as, ā, am,%} most
[Page0834-a+ 75]
charming. {%—Ramaṇīya-tā,%} f. or {%ramaṇīya-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. pleasantness, agreeableness, delightfulness,
beauty, charm.
<LEND>

<L>39176<pc>0834-a<k1>ramaRIya<k2>ramaRIya<h>2
2. {%ramaṇīya%}¦ (fr. {%ramaṇī%}), Nom. A. {%ramaṇī-%}
{%yate,%} &c., to represent or take the place of a wife,
to be the mistress of any one (gen.).
<LEND>

<L>39177<pc>0834-a<k1>ramaRIyaka<k2>ramaRIyaka
{%Ramaṇīyaka, am,%}¦ n. pleasantness, beauty, (for
{%rāmaṇīyaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>39178<pc>0834-a<k1>ramaRya<k2>ramaRya
{%Ramaṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (probably) = 1. {%ramaṇīya.%}
<LEND>

<L>39179<pc>0834-a<k1>ramati<k2>ramati
{%Ramati, is,%}¦ f., Ved. a place of pleasant resort; {%(is,%}
{%is, i),%} liking to remain in one place, not straying (Ved.,
said of a cow); ({%is%}), m. a lover; paradise, heaven;
a crow; time; the god of love, Kāma-deva.
<LEND>

<L>39180<pc>0834-a<k1>ramARa<k2>ramARa
{%Ramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ playing, sporting, disporting.
<LEND>

<L>39181<pc>0834-a<k1>ramayat<k2>ramayat
{%Ramayat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing
delight, giving pleasure; enjoying.
<LEND>

<L>39182<pc>0834-a<k1>ramya<k2>ramya
{%Ramya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be enjoyed, enjoyable,
pleasing, pleasant, delightful, agreeable, beautiful,
handsome; ({%as%}), m. Michelia Champaka {%(= cam-%}
{%paka); = vaka-vṛkṣa;%} N. of a son of Āgnīdhra;
({%ā%}), f. night [cf. {%rāmyā%}]; Hibiscus Mutabilis; N.
of a female personification of a particular musical
mode; of a daughter of Meru (wife of Ramya); of
a river; ({%am%}), n. the root of Trichosanthes Diœca;
semen virile. {%—Ramya-grāma, as,%} m., N. of a
village. {%—Ramya-tā,%} f. or {%ramya-tva, am,%} n.
pleasantness, enjoyableness, agreeableness, pleasure,
beauty. {%—Ramya-puṣpa, as,%} m. Bombax Hepta-
phyllum. {%—Ramya-phala, as,%} m. a species of plant
{%(= kāraskara)%}. {%—Ramya-śrī, īs,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu.
{%—Ramya-sānu, us, us, u,%} having pleasant peaks
or summits (said of a mountain). {%—Ramyākṣi (˚ya-%}
{%ak˚), is,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39183<pc>0834-a<k1>ramyaka<k2>ramyaka
{%Ramyaka, as,%}¦ m. Melia Sempervirens; the root
of Trichosanthes Diœca; N. of a son of Āgnīdhra;
({%ā%}), f., scil. {%siddhi,%} N. of one of the eight perfec-
tions in the Sāṅkhya system, (in this sense also {%am,%}
n.); ({%am%}), n., N. of a Varṣa called after Āgnīdhra's
son Ramyaka.
<LEND>

<L>39184<pc>0834-a<k1>ramra<k2>ramra
{%Ramra, as,%}¦ m., N. of Aruṇa, the charioteer of
the sun [cf. {%ramaṇa%}]; beauty, splendor.
<LEND>

<L>39185<pc>0834-a<k1>ramaWa<k2>ramaWa
{#ramaWa#}¦ {%ramaṭha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
in the west of India, (also read {%ramaṭa, rāmaṭha%});
({%am%}), n. {%= rāmaṭha,%} Asa Fœtida. {%—Ramaṭha-%}
{%dhvani, is,%} m. Asa Fœtida.
<LEND>

<L>39186<pc>0834-a<k1>ramitaNgama<k2>ramitaNgama
{#ramitaNgama#}¦ {%ramitaṅgama, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39187<pc>0834-a<k1>ramP<k2>ramP
{#ramP#}¦ {%ramph.%} See rt. {%raph,%} p. 832.
<LEND>

<L>39188<pc>0834-a<k1>ramb<k2>ramb
{#ramb#}¦ {%ramb%} [cf. rt. {%rambh%} below], cl. 1.
A. {%rambate, rarambe,%} &c., to sound; to
go (cl. 1. P. {%rambati,%} cf. rt. {%raṇv%}); to hang down,
hang loosely (= rt. {%lamb%}).
<LEND>

<L>39189<pc>0834-a<k1>ramB<k2>ramB
{#ramB#}¦ {%rambh%} [cf. rts. {%ramb, lambh%}], cl. 1.
A. {%rambhate,%} &c., to sound, roar, bellow,
low (as cows), &c., make a noise; (for {%rambh,%} as a
form of rt. {%rabh,%} see rt. {%rabh%} at p. 832.)
<LEND>

<L>39190<pc>0834-a<k1>ramBa<k2>ramBa<h>2
2. {%rambha, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 833, col. 1),
sounding, roaring, lowing, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. a sounding,
roaring; the lowing (of cattle).
<LEND>

<L>39191<pc>0834-a<k1>ramBamARa<k2>ramBamARa
{%Rambhamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounding, roaring,
bellowing, lowing.
<LEND>

<L>39192<pc>0834-a<k1>ramya<k2>ramya
{#ramya#}¦ {%ramya, ramra,%} &c. See above.
<LEND>

<L>39193<pc>0834-a<k1>ray<k2>ray
{#ray#}¦ {%ray%} [cf. rt. {%lay%}], cl. 1. A. {%rayate, reye,%}
&c., {%rayitum,%} to go.
<LEND>

<L>39194<pc>0834-a<k1>raya<k2>raya
{#raya#}¦ {%raya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%rī%}), the stream of
a river, current; rapid flow, quick motion, velocity,
speed, swiftness, ({%rayāt%} or {%rayeṇa%} quickly, imme-
diately, straightway); course [cf. {%saṃvatsara-r˚%}];
impetuosity, vehemence, violence, ardour, zeal, im-
petuous onset; N. of a son of Purū-ravas; of a king.
{%—Raya-praśna-sūtra-siddhānta%} or {%rāya-p˚,%} N.
of a work. {%—Raya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing a
rapid current or course, swift.
<LEND>

<L>39195<pc>0834-a<k1>rayizWa<k2>rayizWa
{%Rayiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ very swift or fleet, very
vehement; ({%as%}), m., N. of Agni; of Kuvera; of
Brahman; ({%am%}), n., N. of various Sāmans.
<LEND>
[Page0834-b+ 74]

<L>39196<pc>0834-b<k1>rayaka<k2>rayaka
{#rayaka#}¦ {%rayaka, as,%} m. {%= ravaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>39197<pc>0834-b<k1>rayi<k2>rayi
{#rayi#}¦ {%rayi, is,%} m. (sometimes also {%is,%} f.; fr. rt.
1. {%rā;%} the following forms occur in the Veda, {%rayim,%}
{%rayibhis, rayīṇām, rayyā, rayyai, rayyām;%} cf. 2.
{%rai%}), Ved. property, goods, possessions, treasure, wealth;
stuff, materials; ({%rayer āṅgirasasya prastobhaḥ,%}
N. of a Sāman.) {%—Rayi-da, as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving
property, a bestower of wealth. {%—Rayi-pati, is,%} m.,
Ved. a lord of property or wealth. {%—Rayi-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. possessing property, well off, rich;
containing the word {%rayi%}. {%—Rayi-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved.
obtaining or possessing property or wealth. {%—Rayi-%}
{%vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. abounding in riches, (Sāy. =
{%rayyā%} or {%dhanena vṛddha.%}) {%—Rayi-ṣāc, k, k, k%}
(i. e. {%rayi + sāc%}), Ved. sharing or possessing pro-
perty, (Sāy. {%= dhana-samavāyin.%}) {%—Rayi-ṣāh, ṭ,%}
{%ṭ, ṭ%} (i. e. {%rayi + sāh%}), Ved. ruling over property,
(Sāy. {%= rayīṇām abhibhavitṛ.%}) {%—Rayi-ṣṭhā, ās,%}
{%ās, am%} (i. e. {%rayi + sthā%}) or {%rayi-sthāna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. being a receptacle of riches, possessing
wealth or property.
<LEND>

<L>39198<pc>0834-b<k1>rayikva<k2>rayikva
{%Rayikva, as,%}¦ m. {%= raikva,%} a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39199<pc>0834-b<k1>rayintama<k2>rayintama
{%Rayin-tama, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of an unused
form {%rayin;%} cf. Pāṇ. VIII. 2. 17), Ved. possessing
much property, very wealthy.
<LEND>

<L>39200<pc>0834-b<k1>rayIyat<k2>rayIyat
{%Rayīyat, an, antī, at%}¦ (pres. part. fr. a Nom. fr.
{%rayi%}), Ved. wishing for property, desiring riches.
<LEND>

<L>39201<pc>0834-b<k1>rayIzin<k2>rayIzin
{%Rayīṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. desiring treasures, (appa-
rently an incorrect form.)
<LEND>

<L>39202<pc>0834-b<k1>rayyAvawwa<k2>rayyAvawwa
{#rayyAvawwa#}¦ {%rayyāvaṭṭa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39203<pc>0834-b<k1>rarAwa<k2>rarAwa
{#rarAwa#}¦ {%rarāṭa, am,%} n. (an earlier form of
{%lalāṭa,%} q. v.), the forehead, brow; ({%ī%}), f. the fore-
head; twisted grass used in a particular manner for
the Havir-dhāna (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>39204<pc>0834-b<k1>rarAwya<k2>rarAwya
{%Rarāṭya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to the
forehead; ({%ā%}), f. twisted grass, (see {%rarāṭī%} above);
the horizon.
<LEND>

<L>39205<pc>0834-b<k1>rarAvan<k2>rarAvan
{#rarAvan#}¦ {%rarāvan, ā, ā, a%} (fr. rt. 1. {%rā%}),
liberal, bountiful, (Sāy. {%= haviḥ, prayacchat.%})
<LEND>

<L>39206<pc>0834-b<k1>rarP<k2>rarP
{#rarP#}¦ {%rarph%} [cf. rt. {%raph%}], cl. 1. P. {%rar-%}
{%phati,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>39207<pc>0834-b<k1>ralamAnATa<k2>ralamAnATa
{#ralamAnATa#}¦ {%ralamā-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a
poet; [cf. {%ramā-nātha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39208<pc>0834-b<k1>ralA<k2>ralA
{#ralA#}¦ {%ralā,%} f. a species of bird.
<LEND>

<L>39209<pc>0834-b<k1>rallaka<k2>rallaka
{#rallaka#}¦ {%rallaka, as,%} m. a woollen cloth,
woollen coverlet, blanket; a species of stag or deer;
an eyelash.
<LEND>

<L>39210<pc>0834-b<k1>rava<k2>rava
{#rava#}¦ {%rava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%ru%}), a cry, shriek,
bray, yell, howl, roar (of animals, wild beasts, &c.);
song, singing (of birds &c.); hum, humming; clamour,
outcry; talk; thunder; sound, noise (in general).
<LEND>

<L>39211<pc>0834-b<k1>ravaRa<k2>ravaRa
{%Ravaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crying, screaming, roaring,
shrieking, singing, making an outcry or noise of
any kind, sounding, sonorous ({%= śabdana%}); jesting,
a jester ({%= bhaṇḍaka%}); sharp, hot ({%= tīkṣṇa%});
unsteady, fickle, changing, {%= cañcala; (as),%} m. a
camel; the Koil or Indian cuckoo; N. of a man; of
a serpent-king; ({%am%}), n. brass, bell metal.
<LEND>

<L>39212<pc>0834-b<k1>ravat<k2>ravat
{%Ravat, an, antī, at%}¦ (for {%ruvat,%} q. v., pres. part. P.
of rt. 1. {%ru%}), {{cying->crying||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} out, raising a cry, bellowing.
<LEND>

<L>39213<pc>0834-b<k1>ravaTa<k2>ravaTa
{%Ravatha, as,%}¦ m. {%= rava%} (Ved.); the Koil or
Indian cuckoo.
<LEND>

<L>39214<pc>0834-b<k1>ravamARa<k2>ravamARa
{%Ravamāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (anomalous pres. part. A.
of rt. 1. {%ru%}), crying, roaring, raising a cry.
<LEND>

<L>39215<pc>0834-b<k1>ravas<k2>ravas
{%Ravas%}¦ in {%purū-ravas, bṛhad-ravas,%} q.q. v.v.
<LEND>

<L>39216<pc>0834-b<k1>ravARa<k2>ravARa
{%Ravāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= ravamāṇa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>39217<pc>0834-b<k1>ravitf<k2>ravitf
{%Ravitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who cries or calls
out, crier, screamer.
<LEND>

<L>39218<pc>0834-b<k1>ravaka<k2>ravaka
{#ravaka#}¦ {%ravaka, as,%} m., N. of a Dharaṇa or
particular weight of pearls (thirty making the Dha-
raṇa; also read {%rayaka, rivaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>39219<pc>0834-b<k1>ravaRaka<k2>ravaRaka
{#ravaRaka#}¦ {%ravaṇaka,%} a filter made of cane or
bamboo.
<LEND>

<L>39220<pc>0834-b<k1>ravi<k2>ravi
{#ravi#}¦ {%ravi, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%ru%}),
[Page0834-c+ 77]
a particular form of the sun (sometimes regarded as
one of the twelve Ādityas); the sun (in general) or
the god of the sun; a mountain; N. of a Sauvīraka;
of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; the right canal for the
passage of the vital air (?). {%—Ravi-kara, as,%} m., N.
of a commentator. {%—Ravi-kānta, as,%} m. a sort of
crystal {%(= sūrya-kānta)%}. {%—Ravi-gupta, as,%} m., N.
of a poet. {%—Ravi-cakra, am,%} n. a particular astro-
nomical diagram (the sun represented as a man car-
rying the stars on the various parts of his body).
{%—Ravi-ja, as,%} m. ‘child of the sun,’ N. of a parti-
cular Ketu; the planet Saturn. {%—Ravi-tanaya, as,%}
m. the son of the sun, the planet Saturn. {%—Ravi-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Ravi-tejas, as,%}
n. the radiance of the sun. {%—Ravi-datta, as,%} m.,
N. of a priest; of a poet. {%—Ravi-dina, am,%} n. the
day of the sun, Sunday. {%—Ravi-dīpta, as,%} sun-
lighted, sun-illuminated. {%—Ravi-deva, as,%} m., N.
of a poet. {%—Ravi-nandana, as,%} m. ‘son of the
sun,’ Manu Vaivasvata; the ape Sugrīva. {%—Ravi-%}
{%pattra, as,%} m. a sort of shrub. {%—Ravi-putra, as,%}
m. the son of the sun, the planet Saturn. {%—Ravi-%}
{%priya, as,%} m., N. of various plants, {%= lakuca; =%}
{%āditya-pattra; = rakta-karavīra; (ā),%} f., N. of
Dākṣāyaṇī in Gaṅgā-dvāra; ({%am%}), n. a red lotus-
flower; copper. {%—Ravi-bimba, am,%} n., Ved. the
sun's disk. {%—Ravi-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the sun's
orb or disk. {%—Ravi-ratna, am,%} n. {%= ravi-kānta.%}
{%—Ravi-ratnaka, am,%} n. ‘sun-jewel,’ a ruby.
{%—Ravi-locana, as,%} m. ‘sun-eyed,’ N. of Viṣṇu;
of Śiva. {%—Ravi-loha, am,%} n. copper. {%—Ravi-vāra,%}
{%as,%} m. or {%ravi-vāsara, as, am,%} m. n. the day of
the sun, Sunday. {%—Ravi-saṅkrānti, is,%} f. the sun's
entrance into a sign of the zodiac. {%—Ravi-sañjñaka,%}
{%am,%} n. copper (‘called after the sun’). {%—Ravi-sama-%}
{%prabha, as, ā, am,%} radiant as the sun. {%—Ravi-sā-%}
{%rathi, is,%} m. the sun's charioteer, i. e. Aruṇa or the
Dawn. {%—Ravi-suta, as,%} m. son of the sun, the planet
Saturn; the ape Sugrīva. {%—Ravi-sundara-rasa, as,%}
m., N. of a particular elixir. {%—Ravi-sūnu, us,%} m.
son of the sun, the planet Saturn.
<LEND>

<L>39221<pc>0834-c<k1>ravitf<k2>ravitf
{#ravitf#}¦ {%ravitṛ.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39222<pc>0834-c<k1>ravinda<k2>ravinda
{#ravinda#}¦ {%ravinda, am,%} n. {%= aravinda,%} a lotus,
lotus-flower.
<LEND>

<L>39223<pc>0834-c<k1>ravipulA<k2>ravipulA
{#ravipulA#}¦ {%ra-vipulā.%} See under 3. {%ra,%} p. 824.
<LEND>

<L>39224<pc>0834-c<k1>ravIzu<k2>ravIzu
{#ravIzu#}¦ {%ravīṣu, us,%} m. the god of love,
Kāma-deva, (also read {%varīṣu.%})
<LEND>

<L>39225<pc>0834-c<k1>raSanA<k2>raSanA
{#raSanA#}¦ {%raśanā,%} f. (connected with {%raśmi%}
below), a rope, cord, line; a rein, bridle; a girth,
girdle, zone, woman's zone or girdle, (in this and
the previous senses often incorrectly written {%rasanā%});
the tongue, (in this sense incorrect for {%rasanā%}); a
finger (according to Naigh. II. 5). {%—Raśana-sam-%}
{%mita, as, ā, am (raśana%} for {%raśanā%}), Ved. as
long as the rope on the sacrificial post. {%—Raśanā-%}
{%kalāpa, as,%} m. a woman's girdle formed out of
several strings or threads; [cf. {%kalāpa, raśmi-%}
{%kalāpa.%}] {%—Raśanākṛta (˚nā-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
guided by a cord, managed with a bridle. {%—Raśanā-%}
{%guṇa, as,%} m. the cord of a girdle. {%—Raśanāguṇā-%}
{%spada (˚ṇa-ās˚), am,%} n. the place for the girdle,
waist. {%—Raśanopamā (˚nā-up˚),%} f. ‘string of com-
parisons,’ a form of simile (when the object to which
anything is compared is made the subject of another
comparision, which again leads to a third and so on).
<LEND>

<L>39226<pc>0834-c<k1>raSanAya<k2>raSanAya
{%Raśanāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%raśanāyate,%} &c., to be
guided by a rein or bridle (?).
<LEND>

<L>39227<pc>0834-c<k1>raSanAyamAna<k2>raSanAyamAna
{%Raśanāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being guided
by a rein.
<LEND>

<L>39228<pc>0834-c<k1>raSmi<k2>raSmi
{#raSmi#}¦ {%raśmi, is,%} m. (in one passage {%is,%} f.;
connected with {%raśanā%} above; in Uṇādi-s. IV. 46.
said to be fr. {%raś,%} substituted for rt. 1. {%aś,%} to per-
vade; perhaps connected with rt. 1. {%las,%} to shine), a
string, rope, cord; a bridle, rein, leash; a measuring
cord or rope; a goad, whip; a finger (Ved.); a ray
of light, beam [cf. {%aṃśu%}]; an eyelash ({%= pakṣ-%}
{%man%}); (in Vājasaneyi-s. XV. 6. said to) {%= anna;%}
[Page0835-a+ 80]
[cf. probably Lat. <nsi>laqueus.</nsi>] {%—Raśmi-kalāpa, as,%}
m. a pearl-necklace &c. consisting of fifty-four (or
according to others fifty-six) threads. {%—Raśmi-ketu,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘beam-bannered,’ epithet of a Rākṣasa; of
a particular comet (Ved.). {%—Raśmi-krīḍa, as,%} m.,
N. of a Rākṣasa. {%—Raśmi-pati, is,%} m. a species of
plant {%(= ravi-pattra)%}. {%—Raśmi-pavitra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. purified by rays or beams. {%—Raśmi-pra-%}
{%bhāsa, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Raśmi-maṇḍala,%}
{%am,%} n. a circle or garland of rays. {%—Raśmi-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having rays or beams, radiant; ({%ān%}), m. the
sun; a proper N. {%—Raśmi-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed
of beams, consisting of rays. {%—Raśmi-mālin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} encircled or garlanded with rays. {%—Raśmi-muca,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘ray-emitting,’ the sun. {%—Raśmi-rāja, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Raśmi-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
rays, radiant; ({%ān%}), m. the sun, (also {%raśmī-vat.%})
{%—Raśmi-śata-śahasra-paripūrṇa-dhvaja, as,%}
m., N. of a Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>39229<pc>0835-a<k1>raSman<k2>raSman
{%Raśman,%}¦ only found in inst. c. m. {%raśmā = raś-%}
{%minā,%} by a rein (Ṛg-veda VI. 67, 1).
<LEND>

<L>39230<pc>0835-a<k1>raSmin<k2>raSmin
{%Raśmin%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. {%= raśmi.%}
<LEND>

<L>39231<pc>0835-a<k1>raSmisa<k2>raSmisa
{%Raśmisa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>39232<pc>0835-a<k1>ras<k2>ras<h>1
{#ras#} 1¦. {%ras%} [cf. rt. 1. {%rās%}], cl. 1. P. (some-
times also A.) {%rasati (-te), rarāsa, ra-%}
{%siṣyati, arāsīt%} or {%arasīt, rasitum,%} to roar, howl,
bellow, neigh, yell, cry, scream, cry out, sound, make
any sound or noise; to sing; to resound, reverberate;
(according to Naigh. III. 14) to praise: Caus. {%rāsa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%arīrasat:%} Desid. {%rirasiṣati:%}
Intens. {%rārasyate, rārasti,%} to cry out loudly, scream
aloud; [cf. Goth. <nsi>razda;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>rartjan,</nsi>
<nsi>rerjan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>reordian, rarian.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39233<pc>0835-a<k1>rasat<k2>rasat
{%Rasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ crying, sounding, making
any sound.
<LEND>

<L>39234<pc>0835-a<k1>rasana<k2>rasana<h>1
1. {%rasana, am,%}¦ n. the act of roaring or screaming,
crying, tinkling, sounding, &c., the shaking or rum-
bling (of the earth), croaking (of frogs); sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>39235<pc>0835-a<k1>rasita<k2>rasita<h>1
1. {%rasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, uttering inarticulate
sounds; ({%am%}), n. a roar, scream, cry, noise, sound;
the rattling of thunder. {%—Rasitāśin (˚ta-āś˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} consuming or destroying by mere noise.
<LEND>

<L>39236<pc>0835-a<k1>rasitf<k2>rasitf<h>1
1. {%rasitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who roars or bellows.
<LEND>

<L>39237<pc>0835-a<k1>rArasyamAna<k2>rArasyamAna
{%Rārasyamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Intens.), crying
out or howling very loud.
<LEND>

<L>39238<pc>0835-a<k1>ras<k2>ras<h>2
{#ras#} 2¦. {%ras%} (perhaps to be regarded as a
Nominal fr. {%rasa%} below), cl. 1. 4. 10. P.
{%rasati, rasyati, rasayati%} (also {%rasāpayati;%} in
Ved. occasionally A. {%rasayate%}), to taste, relish; to
feel, perceive, be sensible of; to love: Pass. {%rasyate:%}
Desid. {%rirasayiṣati,%} to desire to taste.
<LEND>

<L>39239<pc>0835-a<k1>rasa<k2>rasa
{%Rasa, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps connected with rt. {%ram%}),
the sap or juice of plants, juice of fruit; juice of the
sugar-cane, syrup; (metaphorically) the best or finest
or prime part of anything, essence, marrow; any
liquid or fluid, ({%gavāṃ rasaḥ,%} milk), water, liquor,
drink; milk; melted butter; any mixture, draught,
elixir, potion; nectar; poison, poisonous drink;
soup, broth; a constituent fluid or essential juice of
the body, serum, (especially) the primary juice called
chyle (formed from the food and changed by the
bile into blood); mercury, quicksilver (sometimes
regarded in philosophical works as a kind of quint-
essence of the human body or as possessing some
supernatural power over its juices; elsewhere regarded
as the seminal fluid of Śiva); semen virile; taste,
savour, flavour, relish, (the six principal tastes are said
to be {%madhura, amla, lavaṇa, kaṭuka, tikta,%} and
{%kaṣāya,%} q.q. v.v.); a symbolical expression for the
number six; anything used to give relish, a condi-
ment, sauce, spice, seasoning; the organ or instrument
of taste, the tongue; taste or inclination for anything,
appetite, enjoyment of anything, love, affection,
desire; anything that stimulates enjoyment, pleasure,
charm, grace, elegance, beauty, sweetness, spirit, wit;
taste, style, character (of a work); taste, sentiment,
feeling, emotion, pathos, affection, passion, dispo-
sition, (in dramatic composition ten Rasas are enu-
merated, viz. {%śṛṅgāra,%} love; {%vīra,%} heroism; {%bī-%}
{%bhatsa,%} disgust; {%raudra,%} anger or fury; {%hāsya,%}
[Page0835-b+ 81]
mirth; {%bhayānaka,%} terror; {%karuṇa,%} pity; {%adbhuta,%}
wonder; {%śānta,%} tranquillity or contentment; {%vāt-%}
{%salya,%} paternal fondness: according to some only
nine or eight are enumerated, the last or last two
being omitted); myrrh; any mineral or metallic salt
(as sulphur, borax, green vitriol, &c.); a metal or
mineral in a state of fusion; gold; a kind of metre
consisting of four times seventy syllables; {%= śabda?;%}
{%(ā),%} f. moisture, humidity (Ved.); N. of a river
(Ved.); a mythical stream supposed to flow round
the earth and the atmosphere (Ved.); the lower
world, hell [cf. {%rasā-tala%}]; the earth, ground, soil;
the tongue; N. of various plants, Clypea Hernandi-
folia; Boswellia Thurifera; Panicum Italicuml; a
vine or grape; {%= kākolī; (am),%} n. myrrh; milk;
taste; [cf. according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">δρόσος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ros,</nsi>
<nsi>ror-is</nsi> (for <nsi>ros-is</nsi>); Lith. <nsi>rassa;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>rosa.</nsi>]
{%—Rasa-karpūra, am,%} n. sublimate or muriate of
mercury (made with sulphur, mercury, and common
salt; the crystals formed in the first operation are
sublimed a second time). {%—Rasa-karman, a,%} n. or
{%rasa-kalpanā,%} f. preparation of quicksilver, any
process undergone by quicksilver. {%—Rasa-kalyā-%}
{%ṇinī-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a particular ceremony;
of the twenty-second chapter of the Bhaviṣyottara-
Purāṇa; of the sixty-second chapter of the Matsya-
Purāṇa. {%—Rasa-kulyā,%} f., N. of a river in Kuśa-
dvīpa. {%—Rasa-ketu, us,%} m., N. of a prince. {%—Rasa-%}
{%kesara, am,%} n. camphor. {%—Rasa-komala, am,%} n.
a particular mineral. {%—Rasa-kriyā,%} f. application of
fluid remedies or fomentations. {%—Rasa-gandha, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. gum-myrrh. {%—Rasa-gandhaka, as,%} m.
myrrh; brimstone, sulphur. {%—Rasa-garbha, am,%}
n. a collyrium made from the juice of the Curcuma
Xanthorrhiza; a mineral preparation, vermilion.
{%—Rasa-graha, as, ā, am,%} apprehending or per-
ceiving flavours, having a taste for enjoyments, ap-
preciating pleasures; ({%as%}), m. the organ of taste.
{%—Rasa-grāhaka, as, ikā, am,%} apprehending or
perceiving flavours, sensible of flavour. {%—Rasa-gha-%}
{%na, as, ā, am,%} Ved. full of juice, consisting entirely
of juice. {%—Rasa-ghna, as,%} m. borax. {%—Rasa-can-%}
{%drikā,%} f., N. of Śaṅkara's commentary on the
Abhijñāna-śakuntala. {%—Rasa-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m., N.
of a medical work. {%—Rasa-ja, as, ā, am,%} originating
in fluids, produced from liquids; proceeding from
chyle; born in passion; ({%as%}), m. sugar, molasses;
any insect engendered by the fermentation of liquids;
({%am%}), n. blood. {%—Rasa-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing
tastes, discriminating or appreciating flavour or excel-
lence, knowing what gives real enjoyment, knowing
the true essence of things, capable of discerning the
spirit or beauty of anything, well versed in any know-
ledge; ({%as%}), m. a poet or man of discrimination,
any writer who understands the Rasas; an alchemist
who understands the magical properties of mercury;
a physician; a preparer of mercurial and chemical
compounds; {%(ā, am),%} f. n. the tongue. {%—Rasajña-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%rasajña-tva, am,%} n. knowledge of flavours;
acquaintance with the true essence of things, poetical
skill or taste; alchemy; discrimination, skill, expe-
rience. {%—Rasa-jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge of tastes
(a branch of medical science). {%—Rasa-jyeṣṭha, as,%}
m. the first or best taste, sweet taste, sweetness; the
sentiment of love. {%—Rasa-tanmātra, am,%} n. the
subtile element or rudiment of taste. {%—Rasa-tama,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. the juice of all juices, best juice, essence
of essences. {%—Rasa-taraṅginī,%} f., N. of a treatise
on poetical sentiment or pathos by Bhānu-datta; of
another work. {%—Rasa-tas,%} ind. according to taste or
flavour. {%—Rasa-tā,%} f. or {%rasa-tva, am,%} n. fluidity,
juiciness, the being chyle, state of chyle. {%—Rasa-%}
{%tejas, as,%} n. ‘strength of the chyle,’ blood. {%—Rasa-%}
{%da, as, ā, am,%} emitting juice or sap, emitting resin;
({%as%}), m. ‘giver of fluids or mixtures,’ a physician.
{%—Rasa-darpaṇa, as,%} m. ‘mirror of the Rasas,’
N. of a medical work. {%—Rasa-dālikā,%} f. a kind of
sugar-cane. {%—Rasa-dīpikā,%} f. ‘lamp of the Rasas,’
N. of a medical work. {%—Rasa-drāvin, ī,%} m. a kind
of citron {%(= madhura-jambīra)%}. {%—Rasa-dhātu,%}
{%u,%} n. ‘fluid-metal,’ quicksilver. {%—Rasa-nātha, as,%}
[Page0835-c+ 81]
m. ‘chief of fluids,’ quicksilver, mercury. {%—Rasa-%}
{%nāyaka, as,%} m. ‘leader or lord of quicksilver,’ N. of
Śiva. {%—Rasa-nivṛtti, is,%} f. cessation or loss of
taste, &c. {%—Rasa-netrikā,%} f. realgar, red arsenic.
{%—Rasan-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= rasa-tama.%}
{%—Rasa-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a medical work.
{%—Rasa-pāka-ja, as,%} m. ‘produced by the cooking
of juices,’ sugar. {%—Rasa-pācaka, as,%} m. ‘cooker of
sauces or flavours,’ a cook. {%—Rasa-pārijāta, as,%} m.
‘the Pārijāta tree of Rasas,’ N. of a work on medi-
cine. {%—Rasa-puṣpa, am,%} n. a particular preparation
of mercury, a kind of muriate formed by subliming
in close vessels a mixture of sulphur, mercury, and
common salt. {%—Rasa-pradīpa, as,%} m. ‘lamp of
the Rasas,’ N. of a work on medicine; of a work
on rhetoric. {%—Rasa-prabandha, as,%} m. ‘connection
of Rasas,’ any poetical composition, (especially) a
drama. {%—Rasa-phala, as,%} m. a cocoa-nut tree (the
fruit of which contains a fluid). {%—Rasa-bandhana,%}
{%am,%} n. (probably) a particular part of the intestines.
{%—Rasa-bodha, as,%} m. knowledge of taste (especially
in poetic composition). {%—Rasa-bhaṅga, as,%} m. in-
terruption or cessation of passion or sentiment.
{%—Rasa-bhava, am,%} n. ‘produced from chyle,’
blood. {%—Rasa-bhasman, a,%} n. calx or oxide of
mercury. {%—Rasa-bheda, as,%} m. a particular prepa-
ration of quicksilver. {%—Rasa-bhedin, ī, inī, i,%} dis-
charging juice (said of fruits which burst with ripe-
ness). {%—Rasa-bhojana, as, ā, am,%} feeding on
liquids or fluids; ({%am%}), n. an entertainment given to
Brāhmans in which they are feasted with the juice
of mangoes. {%—Rasa-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a treatise by
Bhānu-datta on the Rasas, (describing the various
kinds of heroes and heroines, their feelings, passions,
and peculiarities.) {%—Rasa-maya, as, ī, am,%} formed
of juice or sap, consisting of fluid, juicy, liquid;
savoury; consisting of quicksilver; full of taste,
delightful, of great beauty, charming. {%—Rasa-mala,%}
{%am,%} n. the refuse of the juices (of the body), impure
excretions. {%—Rasa-mahārṇava, as,%} m. ‘ocean of
Rasas,’ N. of a work. {%—Rasa-matṛkā,%} f. ‘mother
of taste,’ the tongue. {%—Rasa-mātra, am,%} n. {%=%}
{%rasa-tanmātra%}. {%—Rasa-mūlā,%} f., N. of a Prākṛt
metre consisting of four times twenty-four instants.
{%—Rasa-yāmala, am,%} n., N. of a medical work.
{%—Rasa-yoga, ās,%} m. pl. scientifically mixed juices
or prepared mixtures. {%—Rasa-ratna, am,%} n. ‘jewel
of Rasas,’ N. of a medical work. {%—Rasa-ratna-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f. and {%rasa-ratna-pradīpa, as,%} m. and
{%rasa-ratna-hāra, as,%} m. and {%rasa-ratnākara%}
{%(˚na-āk˚), as,%} m. and {%rasa-ratnāvalī (˚na-āv˚),%}
f. and {%rasa-rahasya, am,%} n., N. of various works
treating of the Rasas and of medicine. {%—Rasa-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of fluids,’ quicksilver; {%= rasāñ-%}
{%jana%}. {%—Rasa-rāja-lakṣmī, īs,%} f. and {%rasa-rāja-%}
{%śaṅkara,%} and {%rasa-rājahaṃsa, as,%} m., N. of three
medical works. {%—Rasa-leha, as,%} m. quicksilver.
{%—Rasa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having juice or sap, full of
juice, juicy, succulent; tasteful, sapid, savoury, luscious,
well-seasoned, well-flavoured, strong; containing the
essence (of anything); moist, well-watered; tasty,
charming, elegant, graceful, beautiful; possessing
love and the other Rasas; impassioned, full of feel-
ing (in rhetoric applied to the poetical description of
inanimate objects as affected by emotions of love and
jealousy); spirited, witty; ({%atī%}), f. a kitchen; N.
of an erotic poem; of a supplement to the Saṅ-
kṣipta-sāra by Jūmara-nandin. {%—Rasavat-tā,%} f.
juiciness, savouriness, sapidity; tastefulness; elegance,
beauty, gracefulness. {%—Rasa-varja, as,%} m. avoidance
of tastes or flavours. {%—Rasa-vaha, as, ā, am,%} bring-
ing or producing juice. {%—Rasa-vikraya, as,%} m. the
sale of stimulating juices or liquors. {%—Rasa-vikra-%}
{%yin, ī,%} m. syrup-seller, liquor-seller, a dealer in
essences or spices. {%—Rasa-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing
tastes, knowing or appreciating flavours, having good
taste, discriminating. {%—Rasa-viśeṣa, as,%} m. a more
excellent juice or flavour. {%—Rasa-śāstra, am,%} n. the
science of Rasas, alchemy. {%—Rasa-śodhana, as,%} m.
borax; ({%am%}), n. purification of quicksilver. {%—Rasa-%}
{%saṅgraha-siddhānta, as,%} m., N. of a medical work.
[Page0836-a+ 80]
{%—Rasa-sāgara, as,%} m. ‘ocean of Rasas,’ N. of a
work on medicine; of a work on rhetoric. {%—Rasa-%}
{%sāra,%} N. of a commentary on the second book of
the Kiraṇāvalī. {%—Rasa-siddha, as, ā, am,%} brought
to perfection by means of quicksilver; skilled in
alchemy; well versed in or conversant with the
poetical Rasas, accomplished in poetry. {%—Rasa-sid-%}
{%dhānta-sāgara%} and {%rasa-sindhu%} and {%rasa-sudhā-%}
{%kara%} and {%rasa-sudhāmbhodhi (˚dhā-am˚)%} and
{%rasākara (˚sa-āk˚),%} N. of various works on medi-
cine or on the Rasas. {%—Rasa-siddhi, is,%} f. per-
fection attained by means of quicksilver, knowledge
of the art of performing various chemical operations
with mercury which with certain mystical rites secure
health and wealth to the adept; skill in alchemy.
{%—Rasa-sindūra, am,%} n. a sort of factitious cin-
nabar made with zinc, mercury, blue vitriol, and
nitre fused together. {%—Rasa-sthāna, am,%} n. cin-
nabar or vermilion. {%—Rasa-hṛdaya, am,%} n., N. of
a work on alchemy. {%—Rasā-khana, as,%} m. ‘digging
or scratching in the soil,’ a cock. {%—Rasāgraja (˚sa-%}
{%ag˚), am,%} n. {%= rasāñjana%}. {%—Rasāñjana (˚sa-añ˚),%}
{%am,%} n. vitriol of copper or a sort of collyrium pre-
pared from it with the addition of Curcuma or
(according to some) from the calx of brass with
Amomum Anthorrhiza or (according to others) from
lead-ore. {%—Rasāḍhya (˚sa-āḍh˚), as, ā, am,%}
abounding in juice or sap, abounding in moisture;
({%as%}), m. Spondias Mangifera. {%—Rasā-tala, am,%} n.,
N. of one of the seven hells or regions under the
earth, (see {%pātāla%}); the lower world or hell in general,
(not to be confounded with Naraka or the place of
punishment); N. of the fourth astrological mansion.
{%—Rasātmaka (˚sa-āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} having juice
or sap for its essence, consisting of nectar; having
the nature of liquid or fluid; characterized by sapi-
dity or savour; having taste or flavour; having grace
or elegance for its essence, elegant, beautiful. {%—Ra-%}
{%sādāna (˚sa-ād˚), am,%} n. the taking or drawing
up of moisture, drying up or absorption of fluid,
sucking, suction. {%—Rasādhāra (˚sa-ādh˚), as,%} m.
‘receptacle of fluids or moisture,’ the sun. {%—Rasā-%}
{%dhāraṇa (˚sa-ādh˚), am,%} n., Ved. retention of
moisture (by the sun's rays). {%—Rasādhika (˚sa-%}
{%adh˚), as, ā, am,%} full of taste, tasty, elegant,
abounding in enjoyments; ({%as%}), m. borax; ({%ā%}), f. a
species of plant. {%—Rasādhipatya (˚sā-ādh˚), am,%}
n. dominion over the lower world. {%—Rasādhyakṣa%}
{%(˚sa-adh˚), as,%} m. a superintendent of liquors or
fluids. {%—Rasānupradāna (˚sa-an˚), am,%} n., Ved.
the bestowing of moisture, (according to Yāska one
of the functions of Indra.) {%—Rasāntara (˚sa-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. another taste or flavour; another pleasure or
enjoyment; different passion or emotion, change of
feeling or sentiment. {%—Rasā-pāyin, ī,%} m. ‘drinking
with the tongue,’ a dog. {%—Rasābhāsa (˚sa-ābh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the semblance or mere appearance of senti-
ment, a sentiment attributed to an inanimate object;
the unsuitable manifestation of a sentiment. {%—Rasā-%}
{%bhiniveśa (˚sa-abh˚), as,%} m. accession of sentiment,
intentness of feeling or passion. {%—Rasābhivyañjikā%}
{%(˚sa-abh˚),%} f., N. of a commentary. {%—Rasābhyan-%}
{%tara (˚sa-abh˚), am,%} n. inside the waters. {%—Ra-%}
{%sāmṛta (˚sa-am˚)%} and {%rasāmṛta-sindhu%} and
{%rasāmbhodhi%} and {%rasāmbho-nidhi (˚sa-am˚),%} N.
of various medical works. {%—Rasāmla (˚sa-am˚), as,%}
m. a kind of sorrel ({%= amala-vetasa%}); vinegar made
from fruit; sour sauce, (especially) tamarind sauce;
{%= vṛkṣāmala, cukra%}. {%—Rasāyana (˚sa-ay˚), as,%}
m. a particular drug used as a vermifuge ({%= viḍaṅga%});
an alchemist; N. of Garuḍa; ({%ī%}), f. a canal or chan-
nel for the fluids (of the body), a vessel conveying
chyle, a lacteal or absorbent vessel; N. of various
plants, {%= guḍūcī, kāka-mācī, mahā-karañja, go-%}
{%rakṣa-dugdhā, māṃsa-cchadā; (am),%} n. a medi-
cine supposed to prevent old age and prolong life,
an elixir, elixir vitæ; any medicine or medicinal
compound; alchemy, chemistry, the employment
of mercury as a remedy or for magical purposes;
(according to native lexicographers also) buttermilk;
poison; long pepper (?). {%—Rasāyana-phalā,%} f. Ter-
[Page0836-b+ 81]
minalia Chebula or Citrina. {%—Rasāyana-śreṣṭha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘best of elixirs,’ mercury. {%—Rasārṇava (˚sa-%}
{%ar˚)%} and {%rasālaṅkāra (˚sa-al˚), as,%} m. two works
on medicine. {%—Rasālaya (˚sa-āl˚), as,%} m. the seat
or abode of the Rasas; the seat of enjoyments; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Rasāvatāra (˚sa-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a medical work. {%—Rasāśa (˚sa-āśa),%}
{%as,%} m. the drinking or consuming of liquors. {%—Ra-%}
{%sāśin (˚sa-āś˚), ī, inī, i,%} drinking or enjoying
liquids. {%—Rasāśir (˚sa-āś˚), īr, īr, īr,%} Ved. mixed
with juice or liquid, (Sāy.) mixed with milk. {%—Ra-%}
{%sāśvāsā (˚sa-āś˚),%} f. a kind of creeper {%(= palāśī).%}
{%—Rasāsvāda (˚sa-ās˚), as,%} m. the sipping of juices.
or liquids; the perception of enjoyment, sense of
joy or pleasure. {%—Rasāsvādin (˚sa-ās˚), ī, inī, i,%}
tasting juice, perceiving or apprehending flavours;
({%ī%}), m. ‘juice-sipper,’ a bee. {%—Rasāhva (˚sa-āh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. turpentine, the resin of Pinus Longifolia.
{%—Rasendra (˚sa-in˚), as,%} m. ‘chief of fluids or
metals,’ quicksilver, mercury; the philosopher's stone
(the touch of which turns iron to gold). {%—Rasendra-%}
{%kalpa-druma, as,%} m., N. of a work by Rāma-
kṛṣṇa treating of the preparation of mercury and
minerals or metals for medicinal uses. {%—Rasendra-%}
{%cintā-maṇi, is,%} m., N. of a similar work to the
above by Rāma-candra. {%—Raseśvara (˚sa-īś˚), as,%}
m. ‘lord of fluids or metals,’ mercury, quicksilver;
[cf. {%rasendra.%}] {%—Raseśvara-darśana, am,%} n. the
science of the application of mercury to various che-
mical and magical operations, the doctrine of alchemy.
{%—Raseśvara-siddhānta, as,%} m., N. of a work
establishing the efficacy of mercury in alchemy.
{%—Rasottama (˚sa-ut˚), as,%} m. Phaseolus Mungo,
{%= mudga; (am),%} n. (?), ‘best of liquids,’ milk.
{%—Rasotpatti (˚sa-ut˚), is,%} f. production of taste
or flavour; development of passion or sentiment;
generation of the vital fluids. {%—Rasodadhi (˚sa-ud˚),%}
{%is,%} m. ‘ocean of Rasas,’ N. of a rhetorical treatise on
the Rasas. {%—Rasodbhava (˚sa-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘pro-
duced in water,’ a pearl. {%—Rasopala (˚sa-up˚), am,%}
n. ‘water-stone,’ a pearl. {%—Rasollāsa (˚sa-ul˚), as,%}
m. ‘the spontaneous evolution of the fluids (or juices
of the body, without nutriment from without),’ N.
of one of the eight Siddhis or states of perfection,
(also written {%rasollāsā%}); springing up of desire,
increase of longing (for anything). {%—Rasaukas (˚sā-%}
{%ok˚), āṃsi,%} n. pl. the habitations of the lower world;
({%ās, ās, as%}), inhabiting the lower regions; ({%ās%}), m.
an inhabitant of the lower world.
<LEND>

<L>39240<pc>0836-b<k1>rasaka<k2>rasaka
{%Rasaka, as,%}¦ m. stewed or boiled meat, broth,
soup made from meat, (also {%am,%} n.)
<LEND>

<L>39241<pc>0836-b<k1>rasat<k2>rasat
{%Rasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ tasting, perceiving flavour.
<LEND>

<L>39242<pc>0836-b<k1>rasana<k2>rasana<h>2
2. {%rasana, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. {%rasana%} see p. 835,
col. 1), phlegm (regarded as the cause of taste to the
tongue); ({%ā%}), f. the tongue; N. of two plants, {%=%}
{%rāsnā; = gandha-bhadrā;%} (incorrectly) {%= raśanā;%}
{%(am),%} n. tasting, taste, flavour, savour; the organ of
taste; the being sensible of (anything), perception,
apprehension, sense. {%—Rasanā-rada, as,%} m. ‘having
the tongue for teeth,’ a bird. {%—Rasanā-lih, ṭ,%} m.
‘licking with the tongue,’ a dog. {%—Rasanendriya%}
{%(˚na-in˚), am,%} n. the organ of taste, the tongue.
<LEND>

<L>39243<pc>0836-b<k1>rasayati<k2>rasayati
{%Rasayati, is,%}¦ f. (fr. a Nom. base {%rasaya%}), taste,
flavour.
<LEND>

<L>39244<pc>0836-b<k1>rasayitavya<k2>rasayitavya
{%Rasayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be tasted, tasty,
palatable.
<LEND>

<L>39245<pc>0836-b<k1>rasayitf<k2>rasayitf
{%Rasayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who tastes, a taster.
<LEND>

<L>39246<pc>0836-b<k1>rasayitvA<k2>rasayitvA
{%Rasayitvā,%}¦ ind. having tasted.
<LEND>

<L>39247<pc>0836-b<k1>rasAyaka<k2>rasAyaka
{%Rasāyaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of grass.
<LEND>

<L>39248<pc>0836-b<k1>rasAyya<k2>rasAyya
{%Rasāyya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. a Nom. {%rasāya%}), Ved.
to be made savoury or tasteful; juicy, tasteful,
savoury.
<LEND>

<L>39249<pc>0836-b<k1>rasAla<k2>rasAla
{%Rasāla, as,%}¦ m., N. of various plants and trees,
the mango tree; the sugar-cane; a kind of sugar-
cane ({%= puṇḍraka%}); the olibanum tree; the bread-
fruit tree; wheat; a kind of grain; a kind of mouse;
({%ā%}), f. curds mixed with sugar and spices; the
tongue; Dūrvā grass; Desmodium Gangeticum; a
vine or grape; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of sugar-cane; ({%am%}),
n. frankincense; gum-myrrh.
<LEND>

<L>39250<pc>0836-b<k1>rasAlasA<k2>rasAlasA
{%Rasālasā,%}¦ f. any tubular vessel of the body (espe-
[Page0836-c+ 78]
cially one conveying the fluids), a vein, artery; a
nerve, tendon.
<LEND>

<L>39251<pc>0836-c<k1>rasAlihA<k2>rasAlihA
{%Rasālihā,%}¦ f. Hemionitis Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>39252<pc>0836-c<k1>rasika<k2>rasika
{%Rasika, as, ā, am, = sa-rasa,%}¦ tasty, savoury,
flavoured, well-tasted, sapid, tasteful (as a dish, com-
position, &c.), full of feeling or passion, impassioned,
graceful, elegant, beautiful; spirited, witty, facetious,
humourous; having a discriminating taste, apprehend-
ing or appreciating flavour or excellence, appreciative;
having a liking or passion for, taking pleasure in,
delighting in (sometimes with loc. or at the end of
a comp.); fanciful; lustful; ({%as%}), m. a man full of
feeling or passion; a libertine; Ardea Sibirica ({%=%}
{%sārasa%}); a horse; an elephant; ({%ā%}), f. the juice of
the sugar-cane, molasses; curds with sugar and spice;
the tongue [cf. {%rasanā%}]; a woman's girdle [cf.
{%raśanā%}]. {%—Rasika-tā,%} f. tastefulness, savouriness,
sapidity; taste, feeling, the having a taste for; taking
pleasure in. {%—Rasika-rañjanī,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary. {%—Rasika-ramaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a poem by
Raghu-nātha, (it consists of eighteen chapters, and
contains the life and adventures of Dur-vāsas, a
Vaiṣṇava preceptor and ascetic.) {%—Rasikā-bhārya,%}
{%as,%} m. a man who has a passionate wife or one full of
feeling. {%—Rasikeśvara, as,%} m. (probably fr. {%rasikā,%}
a passionate woman, + {%īśvara%}), N. of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>39253<pc>0836-c<k1>rasita<k2>rasita<h>2
2. {%rasita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 835, col. 1),
tasted; having taste or flavour or sentiment; covered
or overlaid with gold, gilded, plated, (in this sense fr.
{%rasa,%} gold, + {%ita%}); ({%am%}), n. vinous liquor, wine.
<LEND>

<L>39254<pc>0836-c<k1>rasitavat<k2>rasitavat
{%Rasita-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has tasted, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39255<pc>0836-c<k1>rasitf<k2>rasitf<h>2
2. {%rasitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ, = rasayitṛ,%}¦ a taster.
<LEND>

<L>39256<pc>0836-c<k1>rasin<k2>rasin
{%Rasin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having juice or sap, juicy, liquid;
tasteful, spirited, full of feeling, impassioned; having
good taste, having a taste for the beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>39257<pc>0836-c<k1>rasya<k2>rasya
{%Rasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ juicy, tasty, savoury, palatable;
({%ā%}), f., N. of two plants, {%= rāsnā; = pāṭhā; (am),%}
n. blood (supposed to be produced from chyle).
<LEND>

<L>39258<pc>0836-c<k1>rasyamAna<k2>rasyamAna
{%Rasyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being tasted.
<LEND>

<L>39259<pc>0836-c<k1>rasuna<k2>rasuna
{#rasuna#}¦ {%rasuna, as,%} m. {%= rasona, laśuna.%}
<LEND>

<L>39260<pc>0836-c<k1>rasona<k2>rasona
{%Rasona%}¦ or {%rasonaka, as,%} m. a kind of garlic,
shalote, Allium Ascalonicum.
<LEND>

<L>39261<pc>0836-c<k1>rasna<k2>rasna
{#rasna#}¦ {%rasna, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%ras%}),
a thing, object.
<LEND>

<L>39262<pc>0836-c<k1>rah<k2>rah
{#rah#}¦ {%rah%} (perhaps originally {%radh%}), cl. 1. P.
{%rahati, rarāha, rahitum,%} cl. 10. P. {%raha-%}
{%yati, ararahat%} or {%arīrahat (?), rahayitum,%} to
leave, quit, relinquish, abandon, desert, give up,
surrender, resign; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λανθάνω, ἔλαθον, λάθρα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀλήθης;</lang> (probably) <lang n="greek">ἔρημος;</lang> perhaps also <lang n="greek">λόχος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">λέχος:</lang> Lat. <nsi>lates; lectum, lego:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ligan,</nsi>
<nsi>lagjan:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>lecgan, licgan:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>leidmi,</nsi>
<nsi>leidziu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39263<pc>0836-c<k1>raha<k2>raha
{%Raha, as,%}¦ m. = 1. {%rahas%} below. {%—Raha-rūḍha-%}
{%bhāva, as, ā, am,%} withdrawn into privacy, being
private or in secret. {%—Raha-sū, ūs,%} f., Ved. a woman
bringing forth (a child) in secret, a bad woman who
conceals the birth of her child. {%—Raha-stha,%} see
under 1. {%rahas%} below.
<LEND>

<L>39264<pc>0836-c<k1>rahaRa<k2>rahaRa
{%Rahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of quitting, desertion,
abandonment; separation.
<LEND>

<L>39265<pc>0836-c<k1>rahayat<k2>rahayat
{%Rahayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ quitting, abandoning.
<LEND>

<L>39266<pc>0836-c<k1>rahas<k2>rahas<h>1
1. {%rahas, as,%}¦ n. (for 2. see p. 837, col. 1), loneliness,
solitariness, solitude, privacy, secrecy, retirement, ({%ra-%}
{%hasi,%} in secret, secretly, privily; {%rahassu,%} privately, in
private, secretly); a lonely or deserted place, private
or solitary abode, hiding-place; a secret, mystery,
mystical truth; sexual intercourse, copulation; a
privity; ({%as%}), ind. in a solitary place, in secret,
secretly, clandestinely, privately, privily, (opposed to
{%pra-kāśam.%}) {%—Rahaḥ-stha%} or {%raha-stha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} standing or being in a lonely place or in private,
being apart, being alone; being in the enjoyment of
love. {%—Rahas-kara, as, ī, am,%} executing a secret
commission. {%—Rahī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., or
{%rahī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to withdraw to
a solitary place, retire apart. {%—Rahī-bhūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} withdrawn to a lonely place, retired. {%—Raho- %}
[Page0837-a+ 79]
{%gata, as, ā, am,%} being in a lonely place, being alone;
secret, clandestine, concealed, private.
<LEND>

<L>39267<pc>0837-a<k1>rahasa<k2>rahasa
{%Rahasa%}¦ in {%anu-r˚,%} &c. = 1. {%rahas,%} p. 836, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39268<pc>0837-a<k1>rahasanandin<k2>rahasanandin
{%Rahasanandin%}¦ or {%rahasānandin (?), ī,%} m., N.
of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>39269<pc>0837-a<k1>rahasya<k2>rahasya
{%Rahasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ secret, private, clandestine,
concealed; mysterious; fit to be concealed; ({%am%}),
n. a secret, any secret doctrine or mystery, anything
hidden or recondite, mystical or esoteric teaching;
an Upaniṣad (Manu II. 165); ({%am%}), ind. in secret,
secretly, privately; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; of two
plants, {%= rāsnā; = pāṭhā%}. {%—Rahasya-traya-sāra,%}
‘essence of the three mystical doctrines,’ N. of a
treatise by Veṅkata Ācārya (being a short exposition
in verse of the doctrines of the Vedānta according to
Rāmānuja). {%—Rahasya-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} secret-
possessing, being in possession of a secret or mystery,
initiated into a secret rite or mystery. {%—Rahasya-%}
{%bheda, as,%} m. or {%rahasya-bhedana, am,%} n. or
{%rahasya-vibheda, as,%} m. revealing a secret, dis-
closure of a secret or mystery. {%—Rahasya-vrata, am,%}
n. ‘mystical-vow,’ the mystic science of obtaining
command over magical weapons.
<LEND>

<L>39270<pc>0837-a<k1>rahasyu<k2>rahasyu
{%Rahasyu, us,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39271<pc>0837-a<k1>rahAwa<k2>rahAwa
{%Rahāṭa, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps for {%raho-'ṭa%}), a coun-
sellor, minister; a ghost, spirit; a spring.
<LEND>

<L>39272<pc>0837-a<k1>rahAya<k2>rahAya
{%Rahāya%}¦ (fr. {%rahas%}), Nom. A. {%rahāyate,%} &c., to
be lonely or private, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39273<pc>0837-a<k1>rahita<k2>rahita
{%Rahita, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, quitted, forsaken, aban-
doned, deserted; lonely, solitary; deserted by, sepa-
rated from, free from, deprived of, void or destitute
of, without (with inst. or at the end of comps. or
sometimes at the beginning, e. g. {%bhartrā-rahitā,%} a
woman separated from her husband; {%ratna-rahita%}
or {%rahita-ratna,%} destitute of gems); ({%am%}), n. pri-
vacy, secrecy, ({%rahite,%} loc. c. in secret, in privacy,
secretly, privately.)
<LEND>

<L>39274<pc>0837-a<k1>rahIkf<k2>rahIkf
{%Rahī-kṛ, rahī-bhū.%}¦ See under 1. {%rahas,%} p. 836.
<LEND>

<L>39275<pc>0837-a<k1>rahas<k2>rahas<h>2
{#rahas#} 2¦. {%rahas, as,%} n. {%= raṃhas,%} swiftness,
rapidity. (For 1. {%rahas%} see p. 836, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>39276<pc>0837-a<k1>rahUgaRa<k2>rahUgaRa
{#rahUgaRa#}¦ {%rahūgaṇa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a family
belonging to the race of Aṅgiras; ({%as%}), m., N. of
the author of the hymns Ṛg-veda IX. 37, 38.
<LEND>

<L>39277<pc>0837-a<k1>rA<k2>rA<h>1
{#rA#} 1¦. {%rā,%} cl. 2. P. (Ved. also A.) {%rāti (-te),%}
{%rarau,%} &c. (Vedic forms {%rāsate, arāsata,%}
{%rāsan, rāsat%} [see 2. {%rās%}], {%rāsva, rarate, rarā-%}
{%thām, rarāsva, rarīdhvam, rirīhi, rare, rarāthe,%}
{%rarima, rarivas, rāsīya,%} Inf. {%rātave%}), to grant,
give, bestow, impart, give up, surrender.
<LEND>

<L>39278<pc>0837-a<k1>rarARa<k2>rarARa
{%Rarāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. giving, bountiful, (see
Ṛg-veda I. 117, 24.)
<LEND>

<L>39279<pc>0837-a<k1>rA<k2>rA<h>2
2. {%rā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) grant-
ing, bestowing, giving; (for {%rā,%} fem. of 2. {%ra,%} see
p. 824, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>39280<pc>0837-a<k1>rAkA<k2>rAkA
{%Rākā,%}¦ f. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 40. fr. rt.
1. {%rā%} above), the goddess presiding over the actual
day of full moon (or regarded as the Full Moon's
consort; Anu-mati is supposed to preside over the
previous day); the day of full moon, full moon; N.
of a daughter of Aṅgiras and Smṛti; of a daughter
of Aṅgiras and Śraddhā; of the wife of Dhātṛ and
mother of Prātṛ; of a Rākṣasī, mother of Khara
and Śūrpa-ṇakhā; of a daughter of Su-mālin; of a
river; itch, scab; a girl in whom menstruation has
just commenced. {%—Rākā-candra, as,%} m. full moon.
{%—Rākā-niśā,%} f. the night of full moon. {%—Rākā-%}
{%pati, is,%} or {%rākā-ramaṇa, as,%} m. ‘husband of
Rākā,’ full moon. {%—Rākā-vibhāvarī,%} f. the night
of full moon. {%—Rākāvibhāvarī-jāni, is,%} m. ‘the
consort of the night of Rākā,’ full moon. {%—Rākā-%}
{%śaśāṅka, as,%} or {%rākā-śaśin, ī,%} m. full moon.
{%—Rākendīvara-bandhu (˚kā-in˚), us,%} m. full
moon. {%—Rākeśa (˚kā-īśa), as,%} m. full moon; N.
of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>39281<pc>0837-a<k1>rAta<k2>rAta
{%Rāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ given (Ved. {%rātam astu,%} ‘let
it be given;’ cf. Lat. <nsi>ratum esto</nsi>), presented, be-
stowed (often at the end of comps.; cf. {%asmad-r˚,%}
{%kīrtti-r˚, deva-r˚, brahma-r˚); (as),%} m. a proper
N. {%—Rāta-manas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having a ready
[Page0837-b+ 78]
or willing mind, ready, willing. {%—Rāta-havis, is,%}
{%is, is,%} Ved. one who offers oblations. {%—Rāta-havya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. one who willingly presents offerings,
a liberal offerer or worshipper (of the gods), one to
whom the offering is presented, one who receives
the oblation; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi with the
patronymic Ātreya (author of Ṛg-veda V. 65,
66).
<LEND>

<L>39282<pc>0837-b<k1>rAti<k2>rAti
{%Rāti, is, is%}¦ or {%ī, i,%} Ved. ready or willing to give,
generous, favourable; ready, willing; ({%is%}), m. a
friend, (opposed to {%a-rāti%}); ({%is%}), f. the act of giving
or granting, bestowal, presentation, favour; a gift,
present, offering, oblation; {%Indrasya rātiḥ,%} N. of
a Sāman. {%—Rāti-ṣāc, k, k, k%} ({%ṣāc%} for {%sāc%}), Ved.
granting favours, dispensing gifts, liberal, bountiful,
generous.
<LEND>

<L>39283<pc>0837-b<k1>rAvan<k2>rAvan
{%Rāvan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. a giver, bestower; [cf. {%a-r˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39284<pc>0837-b<k1>rAula<k2>rAula
{#rAula#}¦ {%rāüla, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39285<pc>0837-b<k1>rAkiRI<k2>rAkiRI
{#rAkiRI#}¦ {%rākiṇī,%} f., N. of a Tantra goddess.
<LEND>

<L>39286<pc>0837-b<k1>rAkya<k2>rAkya
{#rAkya#}¦ {%rākya, as,%} &c., coming or descended
from Raka.
<LEND>

<L>39287<pc>0837-b<k1>rAkzasa<k2>rAkzasa
{#rAkzasa#}¦ {%rākṣasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%rakṣas,%}
q. v.), of or belonging to a Rakṣas or evil demon,
like a Rakṣas, demoniacal, infested by demons;
(scil. {%vivāha%} or {%vidhi%}) one of the eight forms of
marriage (the violent seizure and rape of a girl after
the defeat or destruction of her relatives, see Manu
III. 33); ({%as%}), m. an evil being or demon, an evil
or malignant spirit, a Rakṣas, (the Rākṣasas are
sometimes regarded as produced from Brahmā's
foot, sometimes with Rāvaṇa as descendants of
Pulastya; elsewhere they are styled children of
Khasā or Su-rasā; according to some they are dis-
tinguishable into three classes, one sort being of a
semi-divine nature and ranking with Yakṣas &c.,
another corresponding to Titans or relentless enemies
of the gods, and a third answering more to demons,
imps, fiends, goblins, going about at night, haunting
cemeteries, disturbing sacrifices and devout men,
animating dead bodies, ensnaring and even devouring
human beings, and generally hostile to the human
race; this last class is the one most commonly de-
noted by the term Rakṣas or Rākṣasa; their place
of abode, according to the Rāmāyaṇa, was Laṅkā in
Ceylon, where resided their chief, Rāvaṇa, q. v.; in
Rāmāyaṇa V. 10, 17, &c. they are fully described;
some have long arms, some are fat, others thin, some
dwarfish, others enormously tall and humpbacked,
some have only one eye, others only one ear, some
enormous paunches, others projecting teeth and
crooked thighs, while others can assume noble forms
and are beautiful to look upon; they are further
described as biped, triped, quadruped, with heads of
serpents, donkeys, horses, elephants, and every ima-
ginable deformity; cf. 2. {%rakṣas%}); a king of the
Rākṣasas; (with Jainas) one of the eight classes of
Vyantaras; epithet of the thirtieth Muhūrtha; one
of the astronomical Yogas or divisions of the moon's
path; N. of a minister of Nanda; of a poet; ({%as,%}
{%am),%} m. n. epithet of the forty-ninth year in the
Jupiter cycle of sixty years; ({%ī%}), f. a Rākṣasa
female, Rākṣasī or female demon; the island of
the Rākṣasas, i. e. Laṅkā or Ceylon; epithet of
a malignant spirit supposed to haunt one of the
four corners of a house; night; a kind of perfume
({%= caṇḍā%}); a large tooth, tusk. {%—Rākṣasa-kāvya,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a poem. {%—Rākṣasa-graha, as,%} m.
‘Rākṣasa-demon,’ epithet of a particular kind of
insanity or seizure (produced by evil spirits). {%—Rāk-%}
{%ṣasa-tā,%} f. or {%rākṣasa-tva, am,%} n. fiendishness,
the state or condition of a Rākṣasa. {%—Rākṣasā-%}
{%laya (˚sa-āl˚), as,%} m. abode of the Rākṣasas.
{%—Rākṣasī-karaṇa, as,%} m. the act of changing
into a Rākṣasa. {%—Rākṣasī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
become or changed into a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>39288<pc>0837-b<k1>rAkzA<k2>rAkzA
{#rAkzA#}¦ {%rākṣā,%} f. (sometimes written {%rakṣā%}),
{%= lākṣā,%} lac.
<LEND>

<L>39289<pc>0837-b<k1>rAkzoGna<k2>rAkzoGna
{#rAkzoGna#}¦ {%rākṣoghna, as, ī, am,%} treating of
[Page0837-c+ 80]
or relating to the slayer of a Rakṣas; {%agastyasya%}
{%rākṣoghnam%} and {%agne rākṣoghnam,%} N. of two
Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>39290<pc>0837-c<k1>rAkzosura<k2>rAkzosura
{%Rākṣo'sura, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or treating
of a Rakṣas and Asura; containing the words {%rak-%}
{%ṣas%} and {%asura.%}
<LEND>

<L>39291<pc>0837-c<k1>rAK<k2>rAK
{#rAK#}¦ {%rākh%} [cf. rt. {%lākh%}], cl. 1. P. {%rākhati,%}
&c., Caus. Aor. {%ararākhat,%} to be arid or
dry; to adorn; to suffice, be able or competent; to
impede, prevent.
<LEND>

<L>39292<pc>0837-c<k1>rAga<k2>rAga
{#rAga#}¦ {%rāga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%rañj%}), the act of
colouring or dyeing, tinting [cf. {%mūrdhaja-r˚%}];
colour, hue, tint, dye, red colour, (sometimes at the
end of an adj. comp., e. g. {%kṛmi-rāga, as, ā, am,%}
red as cochineal, dyed with cochineal); affection,
emotion, passion, feeling; a musical mode, (six pri-
mary modes or orders of sounds are enumerated,
viz. {%Bhairava, Kauśika, Hindola, Dīpaka, Śrī-%}
{%rāga,%} and {%Megha;%} or {%Śrī-rāga, Vasanta, Pañ-%}
{%cama, Bhairava, Megha,%} and {%Nata-nārāyaṇa;%}
or {%Mālava, Mallāra, Śrī-rāga, Vasanta, Hil-%}
{%lola,%} and {%Karṇāṭa:%} these six Rāgas or modes are
supposed to have been originally connected with the
six Ṛtus or seasons, each mode, like the several
seasons, moving some Rāga or affection of the mind;
they are personified, and each of the six is wedded to
five consorts, called Rāgiṇīs, and is the father of eight
sons; sometimes six Rāgiṇīs are assigned to each
Rāga); a musical note, harmony, music; the quality
Rajas, q. v.; feeling or mental affection in general,
love, sympathy, interest in anything, joy, pleasure;
vehement longing or desire; regret, sorrow; greedi-
ness, envy; anger, wrath; loveliness, beauty, charm,
attraction; nasalization; N. of a particular process in
the preparation of quicksilver; a king, prince; the
sun; the moon; {%(ā),%} f. Eleusine Coracana, a sort of
grain (commonly called Rāggy, much cultivated in
the south of India); N. of the second daughter of
Aṅgiras; [cf. according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀργή,</lang> perhaps
for <lang n="greek">ῥογή.</lang>] {%—Rāga-khāḍava,%} see {%rāga-ṣāḍava.%}
{%—Rāga-khāṇḍava, am,%} n. a kind of sweetmeat;
[cf. {%rāga-ṣāḍava.%}] {%—Rāga-khāṇḍavika, as,%} m. a
maker of the above sort of sweetmeat. {%—Rāga-%}
{%cūrṇa, as,%} m. Acacia Catechu (a tree yielding an
astringent resin, the wood of which is used in dye-
ing); a red powder (which the Hindūs throw over
each other at the vernal festival called Holi; cf.
{%holākā%}); red lead; lac; Kāma-deva, the god of
love. {%—Rāga-cchanna, as,%} m. the god of love or
Kāma-deva; N. of Rāma. {%—Rāga-da, as, ā, am,%}
colour-giving, colouring, passion-inspiring; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of shrub, {%= tairaṇī; (ā),%} f. ‘producing
various colours,’ crystal. {%—Rāga-dravya, am,%} n.
‘colour-substance,’ paint, dye. {%—Rāga-paṭṭa,%} a kind
of precious stone. {%—Rāga-puṣpa, as,%} m. Penta-
petes Phœnicea; the red globe-amaranth; ({%ī%}), f.
the Chinese rose. {%—Rāga-prasava, as,%} m. Penta-
petes Phœnicea; the red globe-amaranth. {%—Rāga-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. the connection of the Rāgas, ex-
pression or manifestation of affection, affection,
passion. {%—Rāga-bandhin, ī, inī, i,%} exciting or
inflaming the passions. {%—Rāga-bhañjana, as,%} m.,
N. of a Vidyā-dhara. {%—Rāga-mañjarikā,%} f. a dimi-
nutive from {%rāga-mañjarī%} below (‘wicked Rāga-
mañjarī’). {%—Rāga-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a woman.
{%—Rāga-maya, as, ī, am,%} ‘consisting of colour or
of red colour,’ red-coloured, red; dear, beloved.
{%—Rāga-mālā,%} f. ‘string or series of musical Rāgas,’
a chapter on the subject of musical Rāgas; N. of a
work on the musical Rāgas by Kṣema-karṇa.
{%—Rāga-yuj, k,%} m. a ruby. {%—Rāga-rajju, us,%} m.
Kāma-deva, the god of love. {%—Rāga-latā,%} f. ‘Pas-
sion-creeper, Passion-flower,’ N. of Rati (wife of
Kāma-deva). {%—Rāga-lekhā,%} f. a streak or line of
paint, stroke, the mark of dye. {%—Rāga-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having colour, coloured, red; impassioned. {%—Rā-%}
{%ga-vibodha, as,%} m., N. of a celebrated treatise on
the musical Rāgas and theory of music. {%—Rāga-%}
{%vṛnta, as,%} m. ‘Passion-stalk,’ N. of Kāma-deva,
the god of love. {%—Rāga-ṣāḍava, as,%} m. a sweet-
[Page0838-a+ 79]
meat made from grapes and pomegranates together
with a kind of broth made from Phaseolus Mungo;
(according to others) half ripe mango fruit made
into syrup with ginger, cardamoms, oil, butter, &c.,
(also written {%rāga-khāḍava, rāga-ṣāḍhava;%} cf.
{%rāga-khāṇḍava.%}) {%—Rāga-sūtra, am,%} n. any
coloured thread or string; a silk thread; the string
of a balance. {%—Rāgāṅgī (˚ga-aṅ˚)%} or {%rāgāḍhyā%}
{%(˚ga-āḍh˚),%} f. Rubia Munjista {%(= mañjiṣṭhā).%}
{%—Rāgātmaka (˚ga-āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} composed
of or characterized by passion, impassioned. {%—Rāgā-%}
{%nugāvivṛti (˚ga-an˚), is,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Rā-%}
{%gāndha (˚ga-an˚), as, ā, am,%} blind with passion
or desire. {%—Rāgānvita (˚ga-an˚), as, ā, am,%} having
colour or dye, coloured; affected by passion or
desire. {%—Rāgāyāta (˚ga-āy˚), am,%} n. excess of
passion, the coming on or uprising of excessive
passion. {%—Rāgārṇava (˚ga-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a
work on the musical Rāgas. {%—Rāgārha (˚ga-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} worthy of affection, any suitable object
of affection. {%—Rāgāśani (˚ga-aś˚), is,%} m. a Bud-
dha; a Jina. {%—Rāgodreka (˚ga-ud˚), as,%} m. excess
of passion.
<LEND>

<L>39293<pc>0838-a<k1>rAgadAli<k2>rAgadAli
{%Rāgadāli, is,%}¦ m. a kind of lentil ({%= masūra%}).
<LEND>

<L>39294<pc>0838-a<k1>rAgAru<k2>rAgAru
{%Rāgāru, us, us, u,%}¦ one who raises hopes of a gift
which he afterwards disappoints.
<LEND>

<L>39295<pc>0838-a<k1>rAgin<k2>rAgin
{%Rāgin, ī, iṇī, i%}¦ (fr. rt. {%rañj%} and fr. {%rāga%}),
coloured, dyed, painted, having a particular colour
(applied to a kind of Amaurosis or blindness when
it affects the second membrane of the eye, as opposed
to {%a-rāgin,%} which affects the first); red, of a red
colour; full of passion or feeling; impassioned,
labouring under emotion, given up to passion; full
of love, loving, affectionate, warm, susceptible, in
love; passionately fond of, devotedly attached to,
taking great pleasure in (with loc. or at the end of
a comp.), eagerly desirous of, having great taste or
relish for (anything); colouring, painting, dyeing;
rejoicing, delighting, gladdening, exhilarating; ({%ī%}),
m. a painter; a lover; a lustful man, libertine; a
sort of grain {%(= bahutara-kaṇiśa); (iṇī),%} f. a
modification of the musical mode called Rāga, (thirty
or thirty-six Ragiṇīs are enumerated, either five or
six being assigned to each Rāga and personified as
his wives); a wanton and intriguing woman; N. of
the eldest daughter of Menakā; a form of Lakṣmī.
{%—Rāgi-tā,%} f. the state of being coloured or impas-
sioned, affectionateness, tenderness, fondness for,
longing after, eager desire for (with loc. or at the
end of comps.).
<LEND>

<L>39296<pc>0838-a<k1>rAG<k2>rAG<h>1
{#rAG#} 1¦. {%rāgh%} [cf. rt. {%lāgh%}], cl. 1. A. {%rā-%}
{%ghate, rarāghe, rāghitum,%} to be able or
competent: Caus. {%rāghayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ara-%}
{%rāghat.%}
<LEND>

<L>39297<pc>0838-a<k1>rAG<k2>rAG<h>2
2. {%rāgh, rāk,%}¦ m. an able or efficient person.
<LEND>

<L>39298<pc>0838-a<k1>rAGava<k2>rAGava
{#rAGava#}¦ {%rāghava, as,%} m. (fr. {%raghu%}), a de-
scendant of Raghu; a patronymic of Aja; of Daśa-
ratha; (especially) of Rāma-candra; of a more
recent king (author of the Hasta-ratnāvalī); of the
author of the Gaṇeśa-stuti hymn; of a serpent-
demon; sea, ocean; a species of large fish; {%(au),%}
m. du. the two Rāghavas, i. e. Rāma and Lakṣ-
maṇa. {%—Rāghava-caitanya, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
{%—Rāghava-deva, as,%} m., N. of a poet; of the
father of Dāmodara and grandfather of Śārṅgadhara;
of the author of the Laghu-cintana. {%—Rāghava-%}
{%pāṇḍavīya, am,%} n., N. of an artificial poem by
Kavi-rāja giving a narrative of the acts of both
Rāghavas and Pāṇḍavas in such a way that it may
be interpreted either as a history of one or the other
family. {%—Rāghava-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Rā-%}
{%ghavānanda (˚va-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Hari-nanda; of the author of the Nyāyāvalī-dīdhiti;
of the author of a commentary on the Mānava-
dharma-śāstra. {%—Rāghavānuja-ga (˚va-an˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} referring to the younger brother of Rāma.
{%—Rāghavābhyudaya (˚va-abh˚), as,%} m. ‘rise of
Rāma,’ N. of a drama. {%—Rāghavāyaṇa (˚va-%}
{%ay˚), am,%} n. Rāma's history, i. e. the Rāmāyaṇa.
[Page0838-b+ 78]
{%—Rāghavendra (˚va-in˚), as,%} m. ‘Rāghava-chief,’
N. of several persons. {%—Rāghaveśvara (˚va-īś˚),%}
‘Rāghava-lord,’ N. of one of Śiva's Liṅgas.
<LEND>

<L>39299<pc>0838-b<k1>rAGavIya<k2>rAGavIya
{%Rāghavīya, am,%}¦ n. the work composed by Rā-
ghava.
<LEND>

<L>39300<pc>0838-b<k1>rANkala<k2>rANkala
{#rANkala#}¦ {%rāṅkala, as,%} m. a thorn.
<LEND>

<L>39301<pc>0838-b<k1>rANkava<k2>rANkava
{#rANkava#}¦ {%rāṅkava, as, ī, am,%} belonging to the
Raṅku species of deer; made from the hair of the
Raṅku deer, woollen; coming from Raṅku (said of
animals, see Pāṇ. IV. 2, 100); ({%am%}), n. woollen
cloth made of deer's hair, a woollen cover or gar-
ment; a rug, blanket. {%—Rāṅkavājina (˚va-aj˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a woollen skin. {%—Rāṅkavāstaraṇa (˚va-%}
{%ās˚), am,%} n. a woollen coverlet. {%—Rāṅkavāstṛta%}
{%(˚va-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} covered with a woollen rug.
<LEND>

<L>39302<pc>0838-b<k1>rANkavaka<k2>rANkavaka
{%Rāṅkavaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming from Raṅku
(said of men, see Pāṇ. IV. 2, 100).
<LEND>

<L>39303<pc>0838-b<k1>rANkavAyaRa<k2>rANkavAyaRa
{%Rāṅkavāyaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming from Raṅku
(said of animals).
<LEND>

<L>39304<pc>0838-b<k1>rANga<k2>rANga
{#rANga#}¦ {%rāṅga, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39305<pc>0838-b<k1>rANgaRa<k2>rANgaRa
{#rANgaRa#}¦ {%rāṅgaṇa, am,%} n. a kind of flower
(commonly called Raṅgan).
<LEND>

<L>39306<pc>0838-b<k1>rAcita<k2>rAcita
{#rAcita#}¦ {%rācita, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Racita.
<LEND>

<L>39307<pc>0838-b<k1>rAcitAyana<k2>rAcitAyana
{%Rācitāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Rācita.
<LEND>

<L>39308<pc>0838-b<k1>rAj<k2>rAj<h>1
{#rAj#} 1¦. {%rāj%} (perhaps connected with rt.
{%ṛj,%} originally {%raj%}), cl. 1. P. A. (in Ved.
only P.) {%rājati, -te%} (Ved. also cl. 2. {%rāṣṭi, arāḍ%}),
{%rarāja%} (2nd sing. {%rarājitha%} or {%rejitha,%} 3rd pl.
{%rarājuḥ%} or {%rejuḥ%}), {%rarāje%} or {%reje, rājitum%} (Ved.
{%rājase%}), to reign, rule, exercise sovereignty, to be a
king or sovereign, to be the first or chief (of any-
thing); to rule over (with gen.); to govern, direct
(with acc.); to be illustrious or eminent; to shine,
glitter, glisten, be radiant or splendid; to appear as:
Caus. {%rājayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ararājat,%} to reign,
rule; to illuminate, make radiant: Desid. {%rirāji-%}
{%ṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%rārājyate, rāraṣṭi;%} [cf. Lat.
<nsi>rego, di-rigo, rex;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ragino, reikja (=</nsi>
{%rājya%}), <nsi>reik-s,</nsi> ‘a chief;’ Old Germ. <nsi>rîchi.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39309<pc>0838-b<k1>rAj<k2>rAj<h>2
2. {%rāj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ shining, radiant (at the end of
comps.); {%(ṭ),%} m. {%= rājan,%} a king, sovereign, chief;
any principal object or anything the best of its kind
[cf. {%śaṅkha-rāj%}]; N. of an Ekāha; a metre of
four times twenty-two syllables; {%(ṭ),%} f., Ved., N. of
a goddess; (according to Mahī-dhara) {%= rājya,%} a
kingdom; [cf. Lat. <nsi>rex;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>reiks.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39310<pc>0838-b<k1>rAja<k2>rAja
{%Rāja, as,%}¦ m. (at the end of a comp.) {%= rājan,%} a
king, prince, sovereign, chief; any principal object
or anything the best of its kind; [cf. {%vyūha-r˚;%} at
the end of an adj. comp. the fem. ends in {%ā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39311<pc>0838-b<k1>rAjaka<k2>rAjaka
{%Rājaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ illuminating, irradiating,
splendid; ({%as%}), m. a little king, petty prince; =
{%rājan%} (often at the end of an adj. comp.); N.
of various persons; ({%am%}), n. a number of kings or
sovereigns.
<LEND>

<L>39312<pc>0838-b<k1>rAjakIya<k2>rAjakIya
{%Rājakīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%rājaka%}), of or belonging
to a king, kingly, princely, royal.
<LEND>

<L>39313<pc>0838-b<k1>rAjat<k2>rAjat
{%Rājat, an, antī, at,%}¦ ruling; shining, (an ano-
malous form {%rājatam%} for {%rājantam%} is given.)
<LEND>

<L>39314<pc>0838-b<k1>rAjan<k2>rAjan
{%Rājan, ā,%}¦ m. (for fem. {%rājñī%} see p. 840, col. 3), a
king, sovereign, prince, ruler, chief, governor, (at the
end of an adj. comp. the fem. may be formed in
three ways, viz. either like the masc. or fr. {%rāja,%} and
declined like the fem. of {%śiva,%} or with {%rājñī%} de-
clined like {%nadī,%} e. g. {%bahu-rājan,%} having many
kings, makes its fem. sing. du. either {%bahu-rājā,%}
{%rājānau%} or {%bahu-rājā, -rāje%} or {%bahu-rājñī, -rā-%}
{%jñyau,%} see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 28; sometimes {%rājan%} is found at
the end of a comp. where {%rāja%} would be more correct;
cf. {%nāga-rājan, kāśi-r˚%}); a man of the military
caste, Kṣatriya, a man of the royal tribe ({%= rāja-%}
{%nya%}); N. of Yudhi-ṣṭhira; a master; the moon;
Indra; a Yakṣa; N. of one of the eighteen attend-
ants on Sūrya (identified with a form of Guha);
government, guidance, (this is said to be the sense
in only one passage, Ṛg-veda X. 49, 4; according
to Sāy. {%rājani = rājanārtham.%}) {%—Rāja-ṛṣi = %}
[Page0838-c+ 80]
{%rājarṣi%}. {%—Rāja-kathā,%} f. a history of kings, royal
history. {%—Rāja-kadamba, as,%} m. ‘royal Kadamba,’
a sort of Kadamba. {%—Rāja-kandarpa, as,%} m., N.
of a work. {%—Rāja-kanyakā%} or {%rāja-kanyā,%} f. a
king's daughter, princess. {%—Rāja-kara, as,%} m.
king's tax, tribute paid to a king, royal tribute or
taxes. {%—Rāja-karkaṭī,%} f. a kind of cucumber {%(=%}
{%cīnākarkaṭī.)%}. {%—Rāja-karṇa, as,%} m. an elephant's
tusk. {%—Rāja-kartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘king-maker,’ one who
assists at the coronation of a king; {%(tāras),%} m. pl.
those who place the king on the throne. {%—Rāja-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. the business or duty of a king; any
service performed for a king, royal service; the
Soma ceremony; {%(āṇi),%} n. pl. royal or state affairs.
{%—Rāja-kalaśa, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rāja-kalā,%}
f. the sixteenth part of the moon's disk, a crescent
of the moon. {%—Rāja-kali, is,%} m. a bad king who
does not protect his subjects. {%—Rāja-kaśeru, us,%} m.
a fragrant grass, Cyperus Rotundus; ({%u%}), n. the root
of Cyperus Pertenuis. {%—Rāja-kārya, am,%} n. a
king's duty or business, state affairs. {%—Rāja-kuñ-%}
{%jara, as,%} m. ‘an elephant among kings,’ a great or
powerful monarch. {%—Rāja-kumāra, as,%} m. a king's
son, prince. {%—Rāja-kumārikā,%} f. a king's daughter,
princess. {%—Rāja-kula, am,%} n. a king's family, royal
family; the court of a king; a court of justice; a
royal palace. {%—Rājakula-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m. any learned
man attached to a royal household. {%—Rāja-kulya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of royal race, of regal descent. {%—Rāja-kuṣ-%}
{%māṇḍa, as,%} m. Solanum Melongena. {%—Rāja-kṛt,%}
{%t,%} m. {%= rāja-kartṛ%}. {%—Rāja-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made
or performed by a king. {%—Rāja-kṛta-pratijña, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has fulfilled the king's conditions.
{%—Rāja-kṛtya, am,%} n. king's duty or business,
state affairs. {%—Rāja-kṛtvan = rāja-kartṛ%} (followed
by an acc., Bhaṭṭi-k. VI. 130). {%—Rāja-kośātaka,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of fruit. {%—Rāja-kraya, as,%} m., Ved.
purchase of Soma. {%—Rāja-kriyā,%} f. the business of
a king, royal or state affairs. {%—Rāja-kṣavaka, as%}
m. a kind of mustard. {%—Rāja-kharjūrī,%} f. a kind
of date tree (= {%nṛpa-priyā%}). {%—Rāja-gaṇa, as,%} m.
a host of kings. {%—Rāja-gavī,%} f. Bos Grunniens.
{%—Rāja-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going to the king or
ruler, devolving or escheating to the sovereign (as
property &c. to which there are no heirs). {%—Rāja-%}
{%giri, is,%} m. ‘king's hill,’ N. of a place; a species of
vegetable {%(= rājādri)%}. {%—Rāja-guru, us,%} m. a king's
minister, royal counsellor. {%—Rāja-guhya, am,%} n. a
royal mystery. {%—Rāja-gṛha, as,%} m. a king's house,
royal dwelling, palace; N. of the chief city in Ma-
gadha (said to be nine Yojanas distant from Pāṭali-
putra); ({%as, ā, am%}), belonging to the city Rāja-gṛha.
{%—Rāja-gṛhaka, as, ā, am,%} of or belonging to the
city Rāja-gṛha. {%—Rāja-geha, as,%} m. {%= rāja-gṛha,%}
a palace. {%—Rāja-grīva, as,%} m. a species of fish. {%—Rā-%}
{%ja-gha, as,%} m. a king-killer, regicide; ({%as, ā, am%}),
sharp, hot. {%—Rāja-cihna, am,%} n. a mark or sign of
royalty, insignia of royalty, regalia. {%—Rāja-cihnaka,%}
{%am,%} n. the organs of generation {%(= upa-stha).%}
{%—Rāja-jakṣman%} for {%rāja-yakṣman,%} q. v. {%—Rā-%}
{%ja-jambū, ūs,%} f. a species of Jambū; a species of
date tree. {%—Rāja-tanaya, as,%} m. a king's son,
prince; ({%ā%}), f. a king's daughter, princess. {%—Rāja-%}
{%taraṅgiṇī,%} f. ‘stream or current history of kings,’
N. of a celebrated history of the kings of Kaśmīra
or Cashmere by Kalhaṇa (written A.D. 1148).
{%—Rāja-taru, us,%} m. Cathartocarpus or Cassia Fis-
tula; Pterospermum Acerifolium. {%—Rāja-taruṇī,%}
f., N. of a plant, the globe-amaranth. {%—Rāja-tas,%}
ind. from a king. {%—Rāja-tā,%} f. or {%rāja-tva, am,%} n.
kingship, royalty, the rank or function of a king,
sovereignty, princedom, kingly dignity or authority,
government. {%—Rāja-tāla, as,%} m. or {%rāja-tālī,%} f. a
betel-nut tree; ({%as%}), m., N. of a particular measure
or time in music. {%—Rāja-timiṣa, as,%} m. Cucumis
Sativus. {%—Rāja-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Rāja-tuṅga, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rāja-temi-%}
{%ṣa, as,%} m. {%= rāja-timiṣa. — Rāja-daṇḍa, as,%} m.
a king's sceptre, kingly authority, punishment in-
flicted by a king; fine payable to a king. {%—Rāja-%}
{%dattā,%} f. a proper N. {%—Rāja-danta, as,%} m. a prin-
[Page0839-a+ 81]
cipal tooth, front tooth; a proper N. {%—Rājadanti,%}
{%is,%} m. a patronymic from Rāja-danta. {%—Rāja-dar-%}
{%śana, am,%} n. the act of seeing or appearing before
a king, a royal audience; N. of a kind of artificial
composition. {%—Rāja-dāra, ās,%} m. pl. a king's wife,
royal consort; the wives of a king. {%—Rāja-duhitṛ,%}
{%tā,%} f. a king's daughter, princess. {%—Rāja-dūta, as,%}
m. a king's ambassador. {%—Rāja-dūrvā,%} f. a kind of
high-growing Dūrvā grass. {%—Rāja-dṛṣad, t,%} f.,
N. of the larger or lower mill-stone. {%—Rāja-deva,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a lexicographer {%(= bhoja-rāja-deva).%}
{%—Rāja-druma, as,%} m. {%= rāja-vṛkṣa%}. {%—Rāja-%}
{%droha, as,%} m. ‘the act of injuring a king,’ high trea-
son, rebellion. {%—Rāja-drohin, ī,%} m. ‘king-injurer,’
a traitor, rebel. {%—Rāja-dvār, r,%} f. or {%rāja-dvāra,%}
{%am,%} n. the king's gate, gate of a royal palace.
{%—Rāja-dvārika, as,%} m. a royal porter or gate-
keeper. {%—Rāja-dhattūra%} or {%rāja-dhattūraka, as,%}
m. a kind of thorn-apple. {%—Rāja-dharma, as,%} m.
a king's duty; ({%ās%}), m. pl. royal duties, rules or
laws relating to kings. {%—Rājadharma-kaustubha,%}
N. of a part of the Smṛti-kaustubha. {%—Rāja-dhar-%}
{%man, ā,%} m., N. of the king of the cranes or herons
(a son of Kaśyapa, Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 6337). {%—Rā-%}
{%jadharmānuśāsana (˚ma-an˚), am,%} n. ‘instruc-
tion in the duties of kings,’ N. of the first section of
the Śānti-p. of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Rāja-dhāna%} or
{%rāja-dhānaka, am,%} n. or {%rāja-dhānikā,%} or {%rāja-%}
{%dhānī,%} f. a royal city, metropolis, capital, a king's
residence, palace. {%—Rāja-dhānya, am,%} n. ‘royal
grain,’ Panicum Frumentaceum; a kind of rice.
{%—Rāja-dhāman, a,%} n. a king's residence, royal
palace. {%—Rāja-dhīra, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rāja-%}
{%dhura, as,%} m. or {%rāja-dhurā,%} f. ‘king's yoke,’ the
burden of government. {%—Rāja-dhustūraka%} or {%rāja-%}
{%dhūrta, as,%} m. a species of large Datura or thorn-
apple. {%—Rāja-nagarī,%} f. a royal city. {%—Rāja-nan-%}
{%dana, as,%} m. a king's son, prince. {%—Rāja-naya,%}
{%as,%} m. royal conduct or policy, the administration
of government, politics. {%—Rāja-nāpita, as,%} m. a
royal barber, a first-rate barber. {%—Rāja-nāman, ā,%}
m. Trichosanthes Diœca. {%—Rāja-nighaṇṭu, us,%} or
{%rāja-nighaṇṭa, as,%} m., N. of a dictionary of materia
medica (including many herbs and plants) by Hara-
hari-paṇḍita, (also written {%rāja-nirghaṇṭa.%}) {%—Rāja-%}
{%nirdhūta-daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} one who has under-
gone punishment from a king. {%—Rāja-niveśana,%}
{%am,%} n. a king's abode, palace. {%—Rāja-nīti, is,%} f.
royal conduct or policy, the administration of govern-
ment, statesmanship, politics. {%—Rāja-nīla, am,%} n.
an emerald. {%—Rājan-vat, ān, atī, at%} (anomalous for
{%rāja-vat,%} see Pāṇ. VIII. 2, 14), having a good
king, governed by a just monarch (Raghu-v. VI.
22). {%—Rāja-paṭola%} or {%rāja-paṭolaka, as,%} m. a
kind of cucumber, Trichosanthes Diœca; ({%ī%}), f. =
{%madhura-paṭolī (?)%}. {%—Rāja-paṭṭa, as,%} m. a kind
of precious stone, a diamond of inferior quality (said
to be brought from Virāṭa-deśa in the north-west of
India); a royal fillet or tiara. {%—Rāja-paṭṭikā,%} f. =
{%cātaka-pakṣin%}. {%—Rāja-pati, is,%} m. a lord of
kings. {%—Rāja-patnī,%} f. a king's wife, royal consort,
queen. {%—Rāja-patha, as,%} m. the king's highway, a
main road, public road, principal street. {%—Rāja-pa-%}
{%thāya,%} Nom. A. {%-pathāyate,%} &c., to represent or
be like a main road. {%—Rāja-pada, am,%} n. the rank
of a king, kingship. {%—Rāja-paddhati, is,%} f. a main
road, principal street. {%—Rāja-parṇī,%} f. Pæderia
Fœtida. {%—Rāja-palāṇḍu, us,%} m. a particular kind
of onion. {%—Rāja-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a king; of a
royal family. {%—Rāja-pitṛ, tā,%} m. a king's father.
{%—Rāja-pīlu, us,%} m. a species of tree {%(= mahā-%}
{%pīlu)%}. {%—Rāja-putra, as,%} m. a king's son, prince;
a Kṣatriya or man of the military tribe (in the
Hindū caste system); the son of a Vaiśya by an
Ambaṣṭhā or the son of a Kṣatriya by a Karaṇī;
a Rājpoot (the name of a class of persons who claim
descent from the ancient Kṣatriyas); the planet
Mercury (regarded as the son of the moon); a kind
of mango; ({%ī%}), f. a king's daughter, princess; a
female of the Rājpoot tribe; N. of several plants, a
bitter gourd ({%= kāṭu-tumbī%}); a kind of jasmine
[Page0839-b+ 81]
({%= jātī, mālatī%}); a kind of perfume ({%= reṇukā%});
a kind of metal ({%= rāja-rīti%}); a musk-rat; ({%ā%}), f.,
Ved. ‘having kings for sons,’ a mother of kings.
{%—Rāja-putraka, am,%} n. a number of king's sons,
assemblage of princes. {%—Rāja-putrikā,%} f. a kings
daughter, princess; a species of bird {%(= śarāri).%}
{%—Rāja-putrīya, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Rāja-pura,%}
{%am,%} n. a royal city, the residence of a king; N. of a
city; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a city. {%—Rāja-puruṣa, as,%} m. a
royal servant or attendant; a king's minister. {%—Rāja-%}
{%puṣpa, as,%} m. Mesua Roxburghii; ({%ī%}), f. a species
of plant {%(= karuṇī)%}. {%—Rāja-pūga, as,%} m. a kind
of Areca or betel-nut palm. {%—Rāja-pūruṣa, as,%} m.
{%= rāja-puruṣa%} above. {%—Rāja-pauruṣika, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} being in a king's service. {%—Rāja-pauruṣya,%}
{%am,%} n. (fr. {%rāja-puruṣa%}), the state of a royal
servant, the being a king's minister. {%—Rāja-pra-%}
{%kṛti, is,%} f. a king's minister. {%—Rāja-pradeya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} to be given or presented to a king. {%—Rāja-%}
{%prasāda, as,%} m. royal favour. {%—Rāja-priya, as,%}
m. a kind of onion; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant {%(=%}
{%karuṇī)%}. {%—Rāja-preṣya, as,%} m. a king's servant;
({%am%}), n. royal service, service of kings, (more cor-
rectly {%rāja-praiṣya.%}) {%—Rāja-phaṇijjhaka, as,%}
m. an orange tree. {%—Rāja-phala, am,%} n. ‘royal
fruit,’ the fruit of Trichosanthes Diœca; ({%as%}), m.
‘bearing royal fruit,’ a species of tree, {%= rājādanī;%}
{%(ā),%} f. Eugenia Jambolana. {%—Rāja-badara, as,%} m.
a species of jujube tree; ({%am%}), n. a sort of Justicia
plant; salt. {%—Rāja-bandha, as,%} m. imprisonment by
the king. {%—Rāja-balā,%} f. Pæderia Fœtida. {%—Rāja-%}
{%bāndhava, as,%} m. a relation of a king, royal rela-
tion; ({%ī%}), f. a female relation of a king. {%—Rāja-%}
{%bhaṭa, as,%} m. a king's soldier, soldier of the royal
army. {%—Rāja-bhaṭṭikā,%} f. a species of water-fowl.
{%—Rāja-bhadraka, as,%} m. Costus Speciosus or Ara-
bicus; Azadirachta Indica. {%—Rāja-bhaya, am,%} n.
king's risk, danger from a king, fear of a king.
{%—Rāja-bhavana, am,%} n. a king's abode, royal
palace. {%—Rāja-bhāryā,%} f. a king's wife, queen.
{%—Rāja-bhūya, am,%} n. {%= rāja-tā,%} royalty, &c.
{%—Rāja-bhṛt,%} see Gaṇa Saṅkalādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2,
75. {%—Rāja-bhṛta, as, ā, am,%} hired by the king,
being in the king's service; ({%as%}), m. a king's soldier.
{%—Rāja-bhṛtya, as,%} m. a servant of a king, royal
servant or minister, courtier, any public officer. {%—Rā-%}
{%ja-bhoga, as,%} m. a king's meal, royal repast. {%—Rāja-%}
{%bhogīna, as, ā, am,%} fit for a king's enjoyment,
suitable for a king's use. {%—Rāja-bhogya, as,%} m.
Buchanalia Latifolia; ({%am%}), n. nutmeg. {%—Rāja-bho-%}
{%jana, as, ā, am,%} eaten by kings. {%—Rāja-bhauta,%}
{%as,%} m. a king's fool or jester. {%—Rāja-bhrātṛ, tā,%}
m. a king's brother. {%—Rāja-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘royal
gem,’ a kind of precious stone. {%—Rāja-maṇḍūka,%}
{%as,%} m. a species of large frog. {%—Rāja-mantra-dhara,%}
{%as,%} m. a king's counsellor, royal minister. {%—Rāja-%}
{%mantrin, ī,%} m. a minister of state. {%—Rāja-man-%}
{%dira, am,%} n. the palace of a king, a royal mansion;
N. of the chief town of Kaliṅga. {%—Rāja-malla,%}
{%as,%} m. a royal wrestler. {%—Rāja-mahila,%} N. of a
town. {%—Rāja-mahendra-tīrtha (˚hā-in˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Rāja-mātṛ, tā,%} f. a king's mother.
{%—Rāja-mātra, am,%} n., Ved. every one claiming
the name of Rājan. {%—Rāja-mānuṣa, as,%} m. a
royal officer or minister, any public officer. {%—Rāja-%}
{%mārga, as,%} m. the king's highway, a royal or main
road, high road, high street, principal street (one
passable for horses and elephants); the way or
method of kings, procedure of kings (as warfare
&c.). {%—Rāja-mārtaṇḍa,%} N. of a commentary by
Bhoja-deva on Patañjali's Yoga-sūtras. {%—Rāja-mā-%}
{%ṣa, as,%} m. a kind of bean, Dolichos Catjang.
{%—Rāja-māṣya, as, ā, am,%} suited to the cultiva-
tion of Rāja-māṣa, consisting of or sown with this
plant (as a field &c.). {%—Rāja-mudga, as,%} m. a kind
of bean. {%—Rāja-mudrā,%} f. a royal signet or seal.
{%—Rāja-muni, is,%} m. {%= rājarṣi%}. {%—Rāja-mṛ-%}
{%gāṅka (˚ga-aṅ˚),%} N. of a particular medicinal com-
pound; of an astronomical work. {%—Rāja-yakṣma,%}
{%as,%} or (in later authors) {%rāja-yakṣman, ā,%} m. a
particular kind of dangerous disease; (in the later
[Page0839-c+ 81]
language) pulmonary consumption, atrophy. {%—Rāja-%}
{%yakṣma-nāman, ā,%} m., Ved., N. of a particular
mythical being (said to be connected with the build-
ing or foundation of a house). {%—Rāja-yakṣmin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} suffering from consumption, consumptive.
{%—Rāja-yajña, as,%} m. a king's sacrifice, royal offer-
ing. {%—Rāja-yāna, am,%} n. a royal vehicle, palanquin.
{%—Rāja-yudhvan, ā,%} m. a king's soldier, royal
warrior; one who makes war against a king. {%—Rāja-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. a constellation under which princes are
born or a configuration of planets &c. at the birth of
any person indicating him to be destined for kingship;
a particular stage in abstract meditation, an easy mode
of meditation as distinguished from the more rigo-
rous; [cf. {%yoga.%}] {%—Rāja-yogya, as, ā, am,%} befit-
ting a king, suitable for royalty, princely. {%—Rāja-%}
{%yoṣit, t,%} f. a king's wife, queen. {%—Rāja-raṅga,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘royal tin,’ silver. {%—Rāja-ratha, as,%} m. a
royal carriage. {%—Rāja-rākṣasa, as,%} m. ‘a Rāk-
ṣasa of a king,’ a bad king. {%—Rāja-rāj, ṭ,%} m. a
king of kings, supreme sovereign; N. of the moon.
{%—Rāja-rāja, as,%} m. a king of kings, supreme
sovereign, emperor; N. of Kuvera; of the moon;
of a man. {%—Rājarāja-tā,%} f. or {%rājarāja-tva%} or
{%rāja-rājya, am,%} n. the rank of a supreme sovereign
or emperor, dominion over all princes, universal
sovereignty. {%—Rāja-rāma-nagara, am,%} n., N. of
a town. {%—Rāja-rīti, is,%} f. a kind of brass or bell-
metal. {%—Rājarṣabha (˚ja-ṛṣ˚), as,%} m. the chief
of kings. {%—Rājarṣi (˚ja-ṛṣi), is,%} m. a royal
Ṛṣi or saint, Ṛṣi of royal descent, that holy and
superhuman personage which a king or man of the
military class may become by the performance of
great austerities (e. g. Purū-ravas, Viśvā-mitra, &c.;
see {%ṛṣi, viśvā-mitra%}). {%—Rājarṣin, ī,%} m. {%= rā-%}
{%jarṣi%} above. {%—Rāja-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. a royal
sign or token, any mark on the body &c. indicating
a future king; royal insignia, regalia. {%—Rāja-lakṣ-%}
{%man, a,%} n. a royal token, sign of royalty; ({%ā%}), m.
‘having the marks of royalty,’ N. of Yudhi-ṣṭhira.
{%—Rāja-lakṣmī, īs,%} f. the Fortune or Prosperity
of a king (personified as a goddess), a king's good
genius, the good fortune or glory of a king, royal
majesty or sovereignty; N. of a princess. {%—Rāja-%}
{%liṅga, am,%} n. a kingly mark, royal token. {%—Rāja-%}
{%līlā-nāman, āni,%} n. pl., N. of a collection of epithets
borne by Kṛṣṇa having reference to 118 of his di-
versions when he had attained to regal rank. {%—Rāja-%}
{%lekha, as,%} m. ‘king's writing,’ a royal letter or
edict. {%—Rāja-loka, as,%} m. a company of kings.
{%—Rāja-vaṃśa, as,%} m. a family of kings, royal
family, dynasty. {%—Rājavaṃśāvalī (˚śa-āv˚),%} f. the
genealogy of kings, royal pedigree. {%—Rājavaṃśīya%}
or {%rājavaṃśya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to a royal
family, of regal race or descent. {%—1. rāja-vat,%} ind.
like a king; as towards a king. {%—2. rāja-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having a king, possessing kings; ({%ān%}), m.,
N. of a son of Dyutimat; ({%atī%}), f., N. of the wife
of the Gandharva Deva-prabha. {%—Rāja-vadana, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Rāja-vadha, as,%} m., Ved. a
king's weapon. {%—Rāja-vandin, ī,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Rāja-varcas, as,%} n. kingly rank or dignity,
majesty. {%—Rāja-vartman, a,%} n. a king's high road,
principal street. {%—Rāja-vardhana, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Rāja-vallabha, as,%} m. a king's favourite; N.
of various plants ({%= rāja-badara, rājādanī, rā-%}
{%jāmra%}); N. of a kind of incense; of a work.
{%—Rāja-vallī,%} f. Momordica Charantia. {%—Rāja-%}
{%vaśībhūta, as, ā, am,%} subject to a king, loyal.
{%—Rājavaśībhūta-tā,%} f. loyalty, allegiance. {%—Rāja-%}
{%vasati, is,%} f. dwelling in a king's court; a royal
residence, palace. {%—Rāja-vārttika, am,%} n., N. of a
Sāṅkhya work. {%—Rāja-vāha, as,%} m. a horse. {%—Rāja-%}
{%vāhana, as,%} m., N. of a son of king Rāja-haṃsa.
{%—Rāja-vāhya, as,%} m. a royal elephant. {%—Rāja-vi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘royal bird,’ the blue jay. {%—Rāja-vidyā,%} f.
royal science, kingcraft, state policy, statesmanship,
administration of government, political economy.
{%—Rāja-vinoda-tāla, as,%} m. a kind of time or
measure in music. {%—Rāja-vihāra, as,%} m. a royal
convent. {%—Rāja-vījin, ī, inī, i,%} sprung from a
[Page0840-a+ 81]
royal progenitor, of royal parentage or descent.
{%—Rāja-vīthī,%} f. a principal street, high street, main
road. {%—Rāja-vīrya, am,%} n. the power of a king,
regal power. {%—Rāja-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. ‘royal tree,’
Cathartocarpus Fistula; Buchanania Latifolia (or the
Piyāl tree); Euphorbia Tirucalli. {%—Rāja-vṛtta, am,%}
n. the conduct of a king, the duty or occupation of
a sovereign. {%—Rāja-veśman, a,%} n. a king's abode,
palace. {%—Rāja-veṣa, as,%} m. a royal garment. {%—Rā-%}
{%ja-śaṇa, as,%} m. a plant from the fibres of which a
coarse cordage and canvas are prepared, Corchorus
Olitorius. {%—Rāja-śaphara, as,%} m. a species of fish
(the Hilsa fish). {%—Rāja-śayyā,%} f. a king's couch,
royal couch, royal seat or throne. {%—Rāja-śāka, as,%}
m. a kind of pot-herb {%(= vāstūka)%}. {%—Rāja-śāka-%}
{%nikā%} or {%rāja-śākinī,%} f. a kind of vegetable {%(= rāja-%}
{%giri)%}. {%—Rāja-śārdūla, as,%} m. ‘a tiger of a king,’
great king. {%—Rāja-śāsana, am,%} n. a royal edict or
order. {%—Rāja-śāstra, am,%} n. royal science, king-
craft, state policy, statesmanship, political economy.
{%—Rāja-śuka, as,%} m. a kind of parrot {%(= prājña).%}
{%—Rāja-śṛṅga, as,%} m. a species of fish, Macropte-
ronatus Magar; a sort of sheat fish; ({%am%}), n. a
royal Chattar or umbrella with a golden handle.
{%—Rāja-śekhara, as,%} m., N. of a king of Kerala
(the author of several dramas). {%—Rāja-śaila, as,%}
m., N. of a mountain. {%—Rāja-śyāmalopāsaka (˚la-%}
{%up˚), ās,%} m. pl., N. of a sect. {%—Rāja-śyāmāka, as,%}
m. a kind of grain. {%—Rāja-śrī, īs,%} f. the Fortune
or Prosperity of a king (personified; cf. {%rāja-%}
{%lakṣmī%}), the good fortune or glory of a king,
royal sovereignty or majesty. {%—Rāja-saṃśraya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having kings for a refuge or protection, de-
pendent on kings. {%—Rāja-saṃsad, t,%} f. a king's
assembly or court, court of justice. {%—Rāja-sattama,%}
{%as,%} m. a most excellent king. {%—Rāja-sattra, am,%}
n. a king's sacrifice, any sacrifice instituted by a king.
{%—Rāja-sadana, am,%} or {%rāja-sadman, a,%} n. a
royal dwelling, palace. {%—Rāja-sannidhāna, am,%} n.
the royal presence. {%—Rāja-sabhā,%} f. a royal assembly
or court, court of justice, royal council, privy council.
{%—Rājasabhā-stha, as, ā, am,%} being at a king's
court, a courtier. {%—Rāja-sarpa, as,%} m. a species of
large serpent. {%—Rāja-sarṣapa, as,%} m. black mus-
tard, Sinapis Ramosa; a seed of the above used as
a weight (= 3 Likṣās = (1/3) of a Gaura-sarṣapa).
{%—Rāja-sāt,%} ind. to the state of a king, to the
power of a king. {%—Rājasāt-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%}
&c., to give over to the power of a king, make de-
pendent on a king. {%—Rāja-sāyujya, am,%} n. ‘the
state of close union with royalty,’ sovereignty. {%—Rāja-%}
{%sārasa, as,%} m. ‘royal crane,’ a peacock. {%—Rāja-%}
{%siṃha, as,%} m. ‘a lion of a king,’ an illustrious king;
N. of a king. {%—Rāja-sukha, am,%} n. a sovereign's
happiness or welfare. {%—Rāja-suta, as,%} m. a king's
son, prince; ({%ā%}), f. a king's daughter, princess.
{%—Rāja-sundara-gaṇi, is,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
{%—Rāja-sū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. creating or making a
king. {%—Rāja-sūnu, us,%} m. a king's son, prince.
{%—Rāja-sūya, as, am,%} m. n. a great sacrifice or
religious ceremony performed at the coronation of a
supreme sovereign or universal monarch by the king
himself and his tributary princes, (such a sacrifice at
the inauguration of Yudhi-ṣṭhira is described in the
Sabhā-parvan of the Mahā-bhārata); a lotus; a
kind of rice; a mountain; {%rājasūyo mantraḥ,%} a
Mantra recited at the Rāja-sūya ceremony. {%—Rāja-%}
{%sūya-yājin, ī,%} m. a priest who officiates at a Rāja-
sūya sacrifice. {%—Rājasūyārambha-parvan (˚ya-%}
{%ār˚), a,%} n., N. of section 12-18 in the Sabhā-
parvan of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Rājasūyika, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} relating to the Rāja-sūya sacrifice. {%—Rāja-sū-%}
{%yeṣṭi (˚ya-iṣ˚), is,%} f. the Rāja-sūya sacrifice.
{%—Rāja-sevaka, as,%} m. a king's servant. {%—Rāja-%}
{%sevā,%} f. king's service, royal service. {%—Rāja-sevin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a king's servant. {%—Rāja-skandha, as,%} m. a
horse. {%—Rāja-stamba, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rāja-%}
{%stambāyana, as,%} and {%rājastambi, is,%} m. patro-
nymics from Rāja-stamba. {%—Rāja-strī,%} f. a king's
wife, queen. {%—Rājasthalaka,%} see Gaṇa Dhūmādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 127. {%—Rāja-sthalī,%} f., N. of a place.
[Page0840-b+ 81]
{%—Rāja-sva, am,%} n. the property of a king, royal
possessions; revenue, tribute. {%—Rāja-svarṇa, as,%}
m. a kind of thorn-apple. {%—Rāja-svāmin, ī,%} m.
‘lord of kings,’ N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Rāja-haṃsa, as,%}
m. ‘king goose,’ a flamingo (a sort of white goose
with red legs and bill); an illustrious king; N. of a
king of Magadha; of an author; ({%ī%}), f. the female
flamingo. {%—Rāja-hatyā,%} f. assassination of a king,
regicide. {%—Rāja-harmya, am,%} n. a king's palace,
royal palace. {%—Rāja-harṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘king's de-
light,’ the flower of Tabernæmontana Coronaria.
{%—Rāja-hastin, ī,%} m. a royal elephant, a handsome
elephant. {%—Rāja-hāra, as,%} m., Ved. a bearer or
bringer of Soma. {%—Rāja-hāsaka, as,%} m. a species
of fish, Cyprinus Catla. {%—Rājāgni (˚ja-ag˚), is,%} m.
the fire of a king, i. e. wrath of a king. {%—Rājāṅgaṇa%}
{%(˚ja-aṅ˚), am,%} n. royal court, the court-yard of a
palace. {%—Rājājñā (˚ja-āj˚),%} f. a king's edict, royal
decree or command, ordinance. {%—Rājātana (˚ja-%}
{%āt˚), as,%} m. Buchanania Latifolia; Butea Frondosa;
Mimusops Kauki. {%—Rājātmaka-stava (˚ja-āt˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a panegyric of Rāma. {%—Rājātyāvar-%}
{%taka (˚ja-at˚), as,%} m. {%= rājāvarta%}. {%—Rājādana%}
{%(˚ja-ad˚), as,%} m. Buchanania Latifolia; Mimusops
Kauki or Hexandra; Butea Frondosa [cf. {%rājātana%}];
({%ī%}), f. a species of tree, {%= kapīṣṭa, bhūpeṣṭa,%} &c.;
({%am%}), n. the nut of Buchanania Latifolia; the fruit
of the Mimusops. {%—Rājādeśa (˚ja-ād˚), as,%} m. a
king's command. {%—Rājādri (˚ja-ad˚), is,%} m. a
species of vegetable. {%—Rājādhikārin (˚ja-adh˚), ī,%}
m. ‘royal official,’ a judge. {%—Rājādhikṛta (˚ja-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. a judge (placed over [judicial affairs]
by a king). {%—Rājādhideva (˚ja-adh˚), as,%} m., N.
of Śūra; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Śūra. {%—Rājā-%}
{%dhirāja (˚ja-adh˚), as,%} m. a king of kings, supreme
king, paramount sovereign, mighty potentate. {%—Rā-%}
{%jādhiṣṭhāna (˚ja-adh˚), am,%} n. ‘royal city, royal
capital,’ a town in which a king has built a palace.
{%—Rājādhvan (˚ja-adh˚), ā,%} m. a royal road, prin-
cipal street. {%—Rājānaka (˚ja-an˚), as,%} m. an in-
ferior king, petty prince. {%—Rājānujīvin (˚ja-an˚),%}
{%ī,%} m. the dependent of a king, a king's servant.
{%—Rājānta-karaṇa (˚ja-an˚), as, ī, am,%} causing
the destruction of kings. {%—Rājānna (˚ja-an˚), am,%}
n. food obtained from a king or great personage; a
kind of rice of a superior quality (grown in Andhra).
{%—Rājānya-tva (˚ja-an˚), am,%} n., Ved. a change
of kings. {%—Rājāpasada (˚ja-ap˚), as,%} m. a de-
graded or outcast king. {%—Rājābharaṇa (˚ja-ābh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a king's ornament, regalia. {%—Rājābhiṣeka%}
{%(˚ja-abh˚), as,%} m. the consecration or coronation of
a king, royal inauguration or installation. {%—Rājāmra%}
{%(˚ja-ām˚), as,%} m. a superior kind of mango. {%—Rā-%}
{%jāmla (˚ja-am˚), as,%} m. {%= amla-vetasa%}. {%—Rājārka%}
{%(˚ja-ar˚), as,%} m. Calotropis Gigantea. {%—Rājārha%}
{%(˚ja-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} fit or suitable for a king,
worthy of a prince, royal, noble; ({%ā%}), f. Eugenia
Jambolana; ({%am%}), n. aloe wood, Agallochum; a
kind of rice {%(= rājānna)%}. {%—Rājārhaṇa (˚ja-ar˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a royal gift or offering of honour. {%—Rājā-%}
{%lābū (˚ja-al˚), ūs,%} f. a species of cucumber, (also
{%rājālābu.%}) {%—Rājāluka (˚ja-āl˚), as,%} m. a species
of tuberous plant or yam {%(= mahā-kanda)%}. {%—Rā-%}
{%jāvarata (˚ja-āv˚), as,%} m. a kind of diamond or
other gem (of an inferior quality, said to come from
the country Virāṭa, and regarded as a lucky possession
though not esteemed as an ornament; in the Rasa-
rāja-lakṣmī enumerated among the Rasas or metallic
substances). {%—Rājāvali, is,%} or {%rājāvalī (˚ja-āv˚),%}
f. a line of kings, a royal dynasty or genealogy; N.
of the history or chronicles of a particular line of
kings. {%—Rājāvalī-patākā,%} f., N. of a history of the
kings of Kaśmīra by Prājya-bhaṭṭa. {%—Rājāvalī-pā-%}
{%ṭaka,%} N. of the history or chronicles of a particular
line of kings. {%—Rājāśva (˚ja-aś˚), as,%} m., Ved. a
large or powerful stallion. {%—Rājāsana (˚ja-ās˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a royal seat, throne. {%—Rājāsandī (˚ja-ās˚),%}
f., Ved. a stool or stand on which the Soma is placed.
{%—Rājāhi (˚ja-ahi), is,%} m. a kind of large snake.
{%—Rājendra (˚ja-in˚), as,%} m. a lord of kings, king
of kings, supreme sovereign, emperor; N. of a poet;
[Page0840-c+ 81]
of a son of Kāśī-nātha. {%—Rājendra-gir, īr,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Rājeśvara (˚ja-īś˚), as,%} m. a king of
kings, supreme sovereign; a proper N. {%—Rājeṣṭa%}
{%(˚ja-iṣ˚), as,%} m. ‘liked by kings,’ a kind of onion,
{%= rāja-palāṇḍu; (am),%} n. a kind of rice {%(= rā-%}
{%jānna)%}. {%—Rājodvejana-sañjñaka (˚ja-ud˚), as,%}
m. a species of plant. {%—Rājopakaraṇa (˚ja-up˚),%}
{%āni,%} n. pl. the paraphernalia of a king, ensigns of
royalty. {%—Rājopajīvin (˚ja-up˚), inas,%} m. pl. the
subjects of a king. {%—Rājopasevā (˚ja-up˚),%} f. a
king's service, royal service. {%—Rājopasevin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} serving a king; ({%ī%}), m. a king's servant, royal
servant.
<LEND>

<L>39315<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjana<k2>rAjana
{%Rājana, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to a royal family,
of regal descent (but not belonging to the warrior
caste); ({%ī%}), f., N. of a river; ({%am%}), n., N. of a
Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>39316<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjanya<k2>rAjanya
{%Rājanya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%rājan%}), kingly, princely,
royal; ({%as%}), m. a royal personage, one of princely
rank, a nobleman; a man of the military or regal
tribe, a Kṣatriya, (the title Rājanya was the more
ancient designation of the second or Kṣatriya caste);
N. of Agni or Fire; a kind of date tree, {%= kṣīrikā;%}
{%(ās),%} m. pl. epithet of a particular family of warriors;
({%ā%}), f. a lady of royal rank. {%—Rājanya-tva, am,%} n.
the being a warrior or belonging to the military caste.
{%—Rājanya-bandhu, us,%} m. the friend or connec-
tion of a prince (generally used in contempt); a
Kṣatriya. {%—Rājanya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. con-
nected with one of royal rank.
<LEND>

<L>39317<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjanyaka<k2>rAjanyaka
{%Rājanyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ inhabited by warriors;
({%am%}), n. a number of Kṣatriyas, assemblage of
warriors.
<LEND>

<L>39318<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjamAna<k2>rAjamAna
{%Rājamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, glittering, radiant.
{%—Rājamāna-tva, am,%} n. splendor, radiance.
<LEND>

<L>39319<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjAna<k2>rAjAna
{%Rājāna%}¦ (fr. {%rājan%}), Nom. P. {%rājānati,%} &c., to
become a king (?).
<LEND>

<L>39320<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjAya<k2>rAjAya
{%Rājāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%rājāyate,%} to act or behave like
a king, to consider one's self a king.
<LEND>

<L>39321<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjika<k2>rAjika
{%Rājika, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%ṣoḍaśa-r˚,%} q. v., (for {%rā-%}
{%jikā,%} a streak, field, &c., see p. 841, col. 2.); ({%as%}),
m. a lord, chief, noble person; N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>39322<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjita<k2>rAjita
{%Rājita, as, ā, am,%}¦ illuminated, irradiated; adorned,
embellished.
<LEND>

<L>39323<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjIya<k2>rAjIya
{%Rājīya%}¦ (fr. {%rājan%}), Nom. P. {%rājīyati,%} &c., to
wish or long for a king.
<LEND>

<L>39324<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjIva<k2>rAjIva<h>1
1. {%rājīva, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 841, col. 2),
living at a king's expense ({%= rājopajīvin%}).
<LEND>

<L>39325<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjYI<k2>rAjYI
{%Rājñī,%}¦ f. (fem. of {%rājan%}), a queen, princess, the
wife of a king; epithet of the western quarter of the
Soul of the Universe (see Chāndogya-Upaniṣad III.
15, 2); N. of the wife of the Sun; deep-coloured
or yellowish red brass (consisting of three parts of
copper to one of zinc or tin); [cf. Lat. <nsi>regina;</nsi>
perhaps Goth. <nsi>raginon.</nsi>] {%—Rājñī-pada, am,%} n. the
rank or dignity of a queen.
<LEND>

<L>39326<pc>0840-c<k1>rAjya<k2>rAjya
{%Rājya, as,%}¦ &c., Ved. of or belonging to a king,
kingly, princely, royal; ({%am%}), n. kingship, royalty,
sovereignty, reign; a kingdom, country, principality,
empire, monarchy, government; administration or
exercise of government, ({%brāhmaṇa-r˚,%} a country
governed by Brāhmans; cf. {%sura-r˚.%}) {%—Rājya-kara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} exercising government, ruling; ({%as%}), m.
the tribute paid by tributary princes, (in this sense
fr. 2. {%kara.%}) {%—Rājya-kartṛ, tā,%} m. an adminis-
trator or officer of government; a king. {%—Rājya-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} exercising government or sovereignty,
ruling. {%—Rājya-cyuta, as, ā, am,%} fallen from
sovereignty; ({%as%}), m. a king who has lost his king-
dom, a deposed or dethroned monarch. {%—Rājya-%}
{%cyuti, is,%} f. loss of sovereignty, deposal, dethrone-
ment. {%—Rājya-tantra, am,%} n. (also {%āṇi,%} n. pl.),
the science or rules of government, theory or system
of administration, rule, government. {%—Rājya-devī,%}
f., N. of the mother of Vāṇa. {%—Rājya-dravya,%}
{%am,%} n. a requisite of sovereignty, any object neces-
sary for the consecration of a king. {%—Rājyadravya-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of or belonging to the
requisites of royalty. {%—Rājya-dhara, as,%} m. ‘exer-
cising rule,’ a proper N. {%—Rājya-dhurā,%} f. burden of
government, administration. {%—Rājya-paribhraṣṭa, %}
[Page0841-a+ 77]
{%as, ā, am,%} fallen from or deprived of a kingdom.
{%—Rājya-pāla, as,%} m. ‘kingdom-protector,’ N. of
a king. {%—Rājya-prada, as, ā, am,%} giving or con-
ferring a kingdom. {%—Rājya-bhaṅga, as,%} m. sub-
version of sovereignty. {%—Rājya-bhāj, k,%} m. the
possessor of a kingdom, a king. {%—Rājya-bhāra, as,%}
m. the weight of (the duties of) government. {%—Rājya-%}
{%bheda-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing division or discord
in a government. {%—Rājya-bhoga, as,%} m. the pos-
session of sovereignty, government of a kingdom.
{%—Rājya-bhraṃśa, as,%} m. ‘falling from sovereignty,’
deposition from a kingdom. {%—Rājya-bhraṣṭa, as,%}
m. one fallen from royalty, a deposed sovereign.
{%—Rājya-rakṣā,%} f. protection or defence of a king-
dom. {%—Rājya-lakṣmī, īs,%} f. the good fortune of
a kingdom, glory of sovereignty. {%—Rājya-līlā,%} f.
‘king-play,’ pretending to be a king. {%—Rājyalīlāya,%}
Nom. A. {%rājyalīlāyate,%} &c., to play the king, pre-
tend to be a king. {%—Rājyalīlāyita, am,%} n. the
playing at kings. {%—Rājya-lobha, as,%} m. desire for
royalty, lust of dominion, ambition. {%—Rājya-var-%}
{%dhana, as,%} m., N. of a king (son of Dama); of
another (son of Pratāpa-śīla or Prabhākara-vardhana).
{%—Rājya-vyavahāra, as,%} m. government business.
{%—Rājya-śrī, īs,%} f., N. of a daughter of Pratāpa-
śīla. {%—Rājya-sukha, am,%} n. the pleasure or sweets
of royalty, enjoyment of a kingdom. {%—Rājya-sena,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king of Nandī-pura. {%—Rājya-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%rājya-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} being in a
kingly office, bearing sway, ruling, governing. {%—Rā-%}
{%jya-sthiti, is,%} f. the being in a royal office, being a
king, bearing rule. {%—Rājya-hara, as, ā, am,%} spoiling
a kingdom, the spoiler of an empire. {%—Rājyāṅga%}
{%(˚ya-aṅ˚), am,%} n. ‘limb of royalty,’ a requisite of
regal administration (variously enumerated as seven,
eight, or nine, viz. the monarch, the prime minister,
a friend or ally, treasure, territory, a stronghold, an
army, the companies of citizens, and the Puro-hita
or spiritual adviser). {%—Rājyādhikāra (˚ya-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. authority over a kingdom; right or title to
a sovereignty. {%—Rājyāpaharaṇa (˚ya-ap˚), am,%}
n. the taking away or deprivation of a kingdom,
usurpation. {%—Rājyāpahāraka (˚ya-ap˚), as,%} m. a
usurper. {%—Rājyābhiṣikta (˚ya-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
inaugurated to an empire, crowned. {%—Rājyābhi-%}
{%ṣeka (˚ya-abh˚), as,%} m. inauguration to a king-
dom, coronation. {%—Rājyāśrama-muni (˚ya-āś˚),%}
{%is,%} m. ‘the monk of a royal hermitage,’ a king.
{%—Rājyaikaśeṣeṇa (˚ya-ek˚),%} ind. with the single
exception of the kingdom. {%—Rājyopakaraṇa (˚ya-%}
{%up˚), āni,%} n. pl. the instruments or paraphernalia
of government, insignia of sovereignty.
<LEND>

<L>39327<pc>0841-a<k1>rAzwra<k2>rAzwra
{%Rāṣṭra.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>39328<pc>0841-a<k1>rAjakineya<k2>rAjakineya
{#rAjakineya#}¦ {%rājakineya, as,%} m. (fr. {%rajakī%}),
a metronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39329<pc>0841-a<k1>rAjata<k2>rAjata
{#rAjata#}¦ {%rājata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%rajata%}), silvery,
made of silver, silver; ({%am%}), n. silver. {%—Rājatān-%}
{%vita, as, ā, am,%} covered or overlaid with silver.
<LEND>

<L>39330<pc>0841-a<k1>rAjani<k2>rAjani
{#rAjani#}¦ {%rājani, is,%} m. a patronymic from
Rajana.
<LEND>

<L>39331<pc>0841-a<k1>rAjasa<k2>rAjasa
{#rAjasa#}¦ {%rājasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%rajas%}), belong-
ing or relating to the quality {%rajas,%} attendant on
the quality of passion, endowed with or influenced
by the quality of passion, passionate; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
Durgā. {%—Rājasa-tva, am,%} n. the state or predo-
minance of the quality of passion.
<LEND>

<L>39332<pc>0841-a<k1>rAjasika<k2>rAjasika
{%Rājasika, as, ī, am, = rājasa%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>39333<pc>0841-a<k1>rAjasAi<k2>rAjasAi
{#rAjasAi#}¦ {%rājasāï,%} N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>39334<pc>0841-a<k1>rAjAsalaKaRa<k2>rAjAsalaKaRa
{#rAjAsalaKaRa#}¦ {%rājāsalakhaṇa, as,%} m. a pro-
per N.
<LEND>

<L>39335<pc>0841-a<k1>rAji<k2>rAji
{#rAji#}¦ {%rāji, is,%} or {%rājī,%} f. (according to
Uṇādi-s. IV. 124. fr. rt. {%rāj,%} but probably fr. {%raj,%}
for rt. {%ṛj%}), a streak, stripe, line, row, rank; a con-
tinuous or unbroken line; a line parting the hair;
black mustard ({%= rājikā;%} in this sense generally
{%rājī%}); ({%is%}), m., N. of a son of Āyu, (also read {%raji.%})
{%—Rāji-citra, as, ā, am,%} variegated with stripes
[Page0841-b+ 71]
(said of a species of snake). {%—Rāji-phalā,%} f. ‘having
striped fruit,’ a kind of cucumber {%(= cīnākarkaṭī).%}
{%—Rāji-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing stripes, striped;
epithet of a species of snake. {%—Rājī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} formed into lines, striped. {%—Rājī-phala, as,%}
m. Trichosanthes Diœca. {%—Rājī-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
{%= rāji-mat%} above.
<LEND>

<L>39336<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjikA<k2>rAjikA
{%Rājikā,%}¦ f. (for {%rājika%} see p. 840, col. 3), a stripe,
streak, line, row, range; a field; black mustard,
Sinapis Ramosa; a grain of mustard, mustard-seed
(as a weight = (1/3) of a Sarṣapa); a particular eruption
(enumerated among the Kṣudra-rogas). {%—Rājikā-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. white mustard, Sinapis Glauca.
<LEND>

<L>39337<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjila<k2>rAjila
{%Rājila, as, ā, am,%}¦ striped; ({%as%}), m. epithet of a
species of snake.
<LEND>

<L>39338<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjI<k2>rAjI
{%Rājī.%}¦ See under {%rāji,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39339<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjIva<k2>rAjIva<h>2
2. {%rājīva, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%rājī;%} for 1. see p. 840,
col. 3), streaked, striped; ({%as%}), m. a species of fish
(its spawn is said to be poisonous); a kind of deer;
the Indian crane; an elephant; N. of the pupil of
Viśva-nātha; ({%am%}), n. a blue lotus-flower. {%—Rājīva-%}
{%netra%} or {%rājīva-locana, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} lotus-eyed,
blue-eyed. {%—Rājīva-pṛśni, is, is, i,%} Ved. having
lotus-coloured spots or streaks.
<LEND>

<L>39340<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjIvinI<k2>rAjIvinI
{%Rājīvinī,%}¦ f. the plant Nelumbium Speciosum.
<LEND>

<L>39341<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjIka<k2>rAjIka
{#rAjIka#}¦ {%rājīka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>39342<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjeya<k2>rAjeya
{#rAjeya#}¦ {%rājeya, as, ī, am,%} coming or derived
from Raji.
<LEND>

<L>39343<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjeyu<k2>rAjeyu
{#rAjeyu#}¦ {%rājeyu, us,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39344<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjjukaRWin<k2>rAjjukaRWin
{#rAjjukaRWin#}¦ {%rājjukaṇṭhin, inas,%} m. pl. (fr.
{%rajju-kaṇṭha%}), the school of Rajju-kaṇṭha.
<LEND>

<L>39345<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjjudAla<k2>rAjjudAla
{%Rājjudāla, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%rajju-dāla%}), coming
from the Rajju-dāla tree.
<LEND>

<L>39346<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjjuBArin<k2>rAjjuBArin
{%Rājjubhārin, iṇas,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%rajju-bhāra%}), the
school of Rajju-bhāra.
<LEND>

<L>39347<pc>0841-b<k1>rAjYI<k2>rAjYI
{#rAjYI#}¦ {%rājñī, rājya,%} &c. See p. 840, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39348<pc>0841-b<k1>rAwi<k2>rAwi
{#rAwi#}¦ {%rāṭi, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%raṭ%}), war, battle;
{%= śarāri,%} (probably a mistake for {%āṭi,%} see {%rāḍi%}
below.)
<LEND>

<L>39349<pc>0841-b<k1>rAwikA<k2>rAwikA
{%Rāṭikā,%}¦ f. in {%mṛga-r˚,%} q. v., (perhaps) ‘causing
the deer to scream.’
<LEND>

<L>39350<pc>0841-b<k1>rAwu<k2>rAwu
{%Rāṭu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>39351<pc>0841-b<k1>rAqi<k2>rAqi
{#rAqi#}¦ {%rāḍi,%} said to {%= śarāri,%} (apparently a
mistake for {%āḍi.%})
<LEND>

<L>39352<pc>0841-b<k1>rAQA<k2>rAQA
{#rAQA#}¦ {%rāḍhā,%} f. (sometimes written {%rārā%}),
beauty, splendor, light, lustre; N. of a district in the
west of Bengal ({%= suhma%}); of the capital of this
district. {%—Rāḍhā-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>39353<pc>0841-b<k1>rAQIya<k2>rAQIya
{%Rāḍhīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the district or
town Rāḍhā.
<LEND>

<L>39354<pc>0841-b<k1>rARa<k2>rARa
{#rARa#}¦ {%rāṇa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%raṇ%}),
a leaf; a peacock's tail; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39355<pc>0841-b<k1>rARaka<k2>rARaka
{#rARaka#}¦ {%rāṇaka,%} N. of a commentary by
Someśvara Bhaṭṭa on the Tantra-vārttika; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of an author; ({%ikā%}), f. a bridle.
<LEND>

<L>39356<pc>0841-b<k1>rARaqya<k2>rARaqya
{#rARaqya#}¦ {%rāṇaḍya, as,%} m., N. of Dāmodara.
<LEND>

<L>39357<pc>0841-b<k1>rARAka<k2>rARAka
{#rARAka#}¦ {%rāṇāka, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39358<pc>0841-b<k1>rARAyana<k2>rARAyana
{#rARAyana#}¦ {%rāṇāyana, as,%} m. a patronymic
from Raṇa. {%—Rāṇāyanī-putra, am,%} n., N. of a
preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>39359<pc>0841-b<k1>rARAyanIya<k2>rARAyanIya
{%Rāṇāyanīya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the school of Rāṇāyana; ({%am%}), n. the Sūtras
of Rāṇāyana.
<LEND>

<L>39360<pc>0841-b<k1>rARAyanIyi<k2>rARAyanIyi
{%Rāṇāyanīyi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>39361<pc>0841-b<k1>rARi<k2>rARi
{%Rāṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Rāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>39362<pc>0841-b<k1>rARiga<k2>rARiga
{#rARiga#}¦ {%rāṇiga, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Jayāditya and uncle of Keśavārka.
<LEND>

<L>39363<pc>0841-b<k1>rARqya<k2>rARqya
{#rARqya#}¦ {%rāṇḍya%} or {%rāndrya%} (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VI. 23, 6) {%= ramaṇīya,%} agreeable,
gratifying.
<LEND>

<L>39364<pc>0841-b<k1>rAta<k2>rAta
{#rAta#}¦ {%rāta, rāti,%} &c. See p. 837, cols. 1, 2.
<LEND>
[Page0841-c+ 79]

<L>39365<pc>0841-c<k1>rAtantI<k2>rAtantI
{#rAtantI#}¦ {%rātantī%} (?), a festival on the four-
teenth day of the second half of the month Pauṣa
(when people bathe at the first appearance of dawn.)
<LEND>

<L>39366<pc>0841-c<k1>rAtula<k2>rAtula
{#rAtula#}¦ {%rātula, as,%} m., N. of a son of Śud-
dhodana.
<LEND>

<L>39367<pc>0841-c<k1>rAtra<k2>rAtra
{#rAtra#}¦ {%rātra, rātraka.%} See p. 842, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39368<pc>0841-c<k1>rAtri<k2>rAtri
{#rAtri#}¦ {%rātri, is,%} or {%rātrī,%} f. (in the older
language generally {%rātrī;%} probably fr. rt. {%ram%}),
night, the darkness or stillness of night [cf. {%rāma%}];
Night personified, ({%rātrau,%} at night, by night; {%rā-%}
{%trau śayanam,%} a festival on the eleventh day of the
first half of the month Āṣāḍha, regarded as the
night of the gods beginning with the summer solstice,
when Viṣṇu reposes for four months on the serpent
Śeṣa); {%= ati-rātra; = rātri-paryāya; = rātri-%}
{%sāman;%} one of the four bodies of Brahmā, (in this
and the following senses only {%rātri%}); {%= haridrā,%}
turmeric; {%Rātri bhāradvājī,%} f., N. of the authoress
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 127. {%—Rātri-kara, as,%}
m. ‘night-maker,’ the moon. {%—Rātri-kāla, as,%} m.
night-time. {%—Rātri-cara, as, ī, am,%} night-wander-
ing, prowling or roaming at night; ({%as%}), m. a night-
rover, night-prowler, thief, robber; a night-watcher,
watchman, guard, patrol; a Rākṣasa; a goblin,
ghost, fiend, evil spirit; ({%ī%}), f. a Rākṣasa female.
{%—Rātri-caryā,%} f. night-roving, roaming about at
night; a nightly act or ceremony. {%—Rātri-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced at night, appearing by night, noc-
turnal; ({%am%}), n. a star, constellation. {%—Rātri-jala,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘night-water,’ dew, mist, fog. {%—Rātri-jā-%}
{%gara, as,%} m. night-watching, wakefulness at night;
({%as, ā, am%}), watching at night, sitting up at night;
({%as%}), m. a dog. {%—Rātri-jāgaraṇa, am,%} n. the act
of sitting up all night. {%—Rātrijāgara-da, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} causing waking or wakefulness at night, keeping
awake at night; ({%as%}), m. a gnat, musquito. {%—Rā-%}
{%triñ-cara = rātri-cara%} above. {%—Rātri-tarā,%} f. (com-
par. of {%rātri%}), the depth or dead of night. {%—Rātri-%}
{%tithi, is,%} f. a lunar night. {%—Rātri-divam = rātrin-%}
{%divam%} below. {%—Rātri-nāśana, as,%} m. ‘night-
destroyer,’ the sun. {%—Rātrin-diva, am,%} n. a night
and day, day and night; {%(am, ā),%} ind. by night
and day. {%—Rātri-pada-vicāra, as,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Rātri-pariśiṣṭa, am,%} n. {%= rātri-sūkta.%}
{%—Rātri-paryāya, as,%} m., Ved. the three recurring
sentences in the recitation of the Ati-rātra. {%—Rātri-%}
{%puṣpa, am,%} n. ‘night-flower,’ a lotus-flower which
opens during the night. {%—Rātri-pūjā,%} f. night-wor-
ship, the nocturnal worship of a deity. {%—Rātri-bala,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} powerful by night, manifesting power at
night; ({%as%}), m. a Rākṣasa. {%—Rātri-bhojana, am,%}
n. night-eating, the act of taking food at night.
{%—Rātribhojana-niṣedha, as,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Rātrim-aṭa, as,%} m. {%= rātry-aṭa%}. {%—Rātri-maṇi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘night-jewel,’ the moon. {%—Rātri-māraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. night-killing, a murder committed in the
night. {%—Rātrim-manya, as, ā, am,%} thinking it
night; being regarded as night, appearing like night.
{%—Rātri-yoga, as,%} m. night-fall, the coming on of
night. {%—Rātri-rakṣaka, as,%} m. a night-guard,
watchman, night-watcher. {%—Rātri-rāga, as,%} m.
‘the colour of night,’ darkness, obscurity. {%—Rātri-%}
{%lagna-nirūpaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a treatise ascribed
to Kālidāsa. {%—Rātri-vāsas, as,%} n. a night-garment,
night-dress; the garment of night, i. e. darkness,
obscurity. {%—Rātri-vigama, as,%} m. departure of
night, break of day, dawn, day-light. {%—Rātri-viśle-%}
{%ṣa-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going apart at night, separating
at night; ({%ī%}), m. the ruddy goose, Anas Casarca.
{%—Rātri-veda, as,%} or {%rātri-vedin, ī,%} m. ‘night-
knower,’ a cock. {%—Rātri-ṣāman%} or {%rātri-sāman,%}
{%a,%} n. a Sāman belonging to the Ati-rātra. {%—Rātri-%}
{%sattra, am,%} n., Ved. a night sacrifice, night cere-
mony. {%—Rātri-sūkta%} or {%rātrī-sūkta, am,%} n. epithet
of certain hymns on Night appended to Ṛg-veda X.
127. {%—Rātri-hāsa, as,%} m. ‘laughing, i. e. opening
in the night,’ the white lotus. {%—Rātri-hiṇḍaka, as,%}
m. ‘moving about at night,’ a guard of the women's
apartments. {%—Rātrī-daivodāsa%} or {%rātrī-hava-dai- %}
[Page0842-a+ 79]
{%vodāsa, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Rātry-aṭa, as,%}
m. ‘night-moving,’ a Rākṣasa, goblin; a ghost; a
night-walker; a thief. {%—Rātry-andha, as, ā, am,%}
night-blind, unable to see by night. {%—Rātryandha-%}
{%tā,%} f. night-blindness. {%—Rātry-ahanī,%} n. du. night
and day. {%—Rātry-āgama, as,%} m. the coming on
or approach of night; [cf. {%ahar-āgama.%}] {%—Rātry-%}
{%āndhya, am,%} n. night-blindness.
<LEND>

<L>39369<pc>0842-a<k1>rAtra<k2>rAtra
{%Rātra, am,%}¦ n. (at the end of comps.) = {%rātri,%}
night; [cf. {%tri-r˚, pañca-r˚, divā-r˚;%} also used alone
in {%trīṇi rātrāṇi,%} Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 6230.]
<LEND>

<L>39370<pc>0842-a<k1>rAtraka<k2>rAtraka
{%Rātraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ nocturnal, nightly, lasting
a night [cf. {%pañca-r˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. a man who takes
up his abode in a harlot's house for one year; ({%am%}),
n. {%= pañca-rātra,%} a general term for the sacred
books of various Vaiṣṇava sects; (according to
others) a period of five nights collectively.
<LEND>

<L>39371<pc>0842-a<k1>rAtrika<k2>rAtrika
{%Rātrika%}¦ (at the end of a comp. after a numeral),
lasting a certain number of nights or days (e. g.
{%pañca-rātrika, as, ā, am,%} lasting five nights); suf-
ficient for or completed in a certain number of
nights or days [cf. {%eka-r˚%}]; ({%ā%}), f. night.
<LEND>

<L>39372<pc>0842-a<k1>rAtrIRa<k2>rAtrIRa
{%Rātrīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ lasting a certain number of
nights, completed &c. in a certain number of nights,
({%eka-rātrīṇa,%} completed in one night; cf. {%dvi-r˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>39373<pc>0842-a<k1>rAtryAkUpAra<k2>rAtryAkUpAra
{%Rātryākūpāra, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>39374<pc>0842-a<k1>rATakArika<k2>rATakArika
{#rATakArika#}¦ {%rāthakārika%} (fr. {%ratha-kāra%}),
see Gaṇa Kumudādi 2. to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>39375<pc>0842-a<k1>rATakArya<k2>rATakArya
{%Rāthakārya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Ratha-
kāra.
<LEND>

<L>39376<pc>0842-a<k1>rATagaRaka<k2>rATagaRaka
{%Rāthagaṇaka, am,%}¦ n. the occupation or office of
a Ratha-gaṇaka.
<LEND>

<L>39377<pc>0842-a<k1>rATajiteyI<k2>rATajiteyI
{%Rāthajiteyī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%ratha-jit%}), epithet of certain
Apsarases (Atharva-veda VI. 130, 1).
<LEND>

<L>39378<pc>0842-a<k1>rATantara<k2>rATantara
{%Rāthantara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%rathan-tara%}), Ved.
relating to the Rathantara Sāman; ({%as%}), m. a patro-
nymic; {%(ī),%} f., N. of a female teacher.
<LEND>

<L>39379<pc>0842-a<k1>rATantarAyaRa<k2>rATantarAyaRa
{%Rāthantarāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%rathan-tara%}), a
patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39380<pc>0842-a<k1>rATaprozWa<k2>rATaprozWa
{%Rāthaproṣṭha, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Asamāti.
<LEND>

<L>39381<pc>0842-a<k1>rATitara<k2>rATitara
{%Rāthitara, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%rathī-tara%}), Ved. a patro-
nymic of Satya-vacas.
<LEND>

<L>39382<pc>0842-a<k1>rATItarIputra<k2>rATItarIputra
{%Rāthītarī-putra, as,%}¦ m. son of Rāthītarī, N. of
a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>39383<pc>0842-a<k1>rATya<k2>rATya
{%Rāthya, as, ā%}¦ (?), {%am,%} belonging to a chariot, fit
for a chariot, useful for a carriage; {%= rathya%} (of which
it is a lengthened form, Ṛg-veda I. 157, 6).
<LEND>

<L>39384<pc>0842-a<k1>rAdDa<k2>rAdDa
{#rAdDa#}¦ {%rāddha, rāddhānta,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39385<pc>0842-a<k1>rAD<k2>rAD
{#rAD#}¦ {%rādh%} (connected with rts. {%ṛdh,%} 1. {%rā%}),
cl. 5. 4. P. {%rādhnoti, rādhyati%} (some-
times A. {%rādhyate%}), {%rarādha%} (2nd sing. {%rarādhi-%}
{%tha%} or {%redhitha,%} 3rd du. {%rarādhatus%} or {%redhatus,%}
3rd pl. {%rarādhus%} or {%redhus,%} but according to Pāṇ.
VI. 4, 123. the contracted forms are only used in
the sense ‘to injure, kill;’ see also Vopa-deva VIII.
52), {%rātsyati, arātsīt%} (1st pl. {%arātsma,%} 3rd pl.
{%arātsus%}), {%arādhiṣṭa%} (Vedic forms {%rādhati, arā-%}
{%dhat, rādhat%}), {%rāddhum,%} (without prep. this verb
is generally Ved.), to make favourable or kind, pro-
pitiate, conciliate, make agreeable (cl. 5); to be
favourable or merciful (cl. 4); to accomplish, per-
form, effect, finish, perfect, complete, make ready,
prepare, carry out, (generally cl. 5. or Ved. cl. I.
{%rādhati%}); to attain; to be accomplished or finished
(cl. 4); to succeed, prosper, be successful (cl. 4);
to be prepared or ready (cl. 4); to be ready for
(with dat. or loc.); to fall to the share of any one
(dat.); to put an end to, destroy, injure, exterminate:
Pass. {%rādhyate,%} Aor. {%arādhi,%} to be conciliated or
made favourable &c., to be appeased; to be accom-
plished, to be successful &c.: Caus. {%rādhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Aor. {%arīradhat,%} to make favourable, conci-
liate, propitiate, satisfy, appease; to accomplish,
perform, complete, bring to a successful issue, cause
to succeed; to make ready or prepared for (with
dat.): Desid. {%rirātsati,%} to wish to conciliate or pro-
pitiate; {%ritsati,%} to wish to injure, destroy, hurt
(Pāṇ. VII. 4, 54, Vārt.): Intens. {%rārādhyate, rā-%}
{%rādhi;%} [cf. according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">ἱλάσκομαι,</lang>
[Page0842-b+ 81]
<lang n="greek">ἵληθι, ἱλάομαι,</lang> &c.; according to others, <lang n="greek">ἔρδω</lang>
Goth. <nsi>rêda, ga-rêda, und-rêda.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39386<pc>0842-b<k1>rAdDa<k2>rAdDa
{%Rāddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ propitiated, conciliated; ac-
complished, perfected, completed, finished, performed,
done; prepared, ready; cooked, dressed; perfected
(as a religious vow), observed (as a fast); perfect in
mysterious or magical power, adept, initiated; ob-
tained, attained; appeared; successful, prosperous,
fortunate, happy; fallen to the share or lot of any
one. {%—Rāddhānta (˚dha-an˚), as,%} m. {%= siddhānta,%}
an established end or result, demonstrated conclusion,
a proved or established fact, demonstrated truth,
dogma; the conclusion of an argument. {%—Rāddhān-%}
{%tita, as, ā, am%} (fr. the preceding), logically demon-
strated, proved, established.
<LEND>

<L>39387<pc>0842-b<k1>rAdDi<k2>rAdDi
{%Rāddhi, is,%}¦ f. accomplishment, perfection, com-
pletion; success, prosperity, good fortune.
<LEND>

<L>39388<pc>0842-b<k1>rADa<k2>rADa
{%Rādha, as, am,%}¦ m. n. {%= rādhas,%} favour, good-
will; a gift, affluence, &c.; ({%as%}), m., N. of the
month Vaiśākha (= April-May; in this sense fr.
{%rādhā%} below); a proper N.; ({%ā%}), f. prosperity,
success; N. of the twenty-first Nakṣatra Vi-śākhā
(containing four stars in the shape of a festoon; the
stars are supposed to be <lang n="greek">α, ι, ν</lang> Libræ, and <lang n="greek">γ</lang> Scor-
pionis, cf. {%nakṣatra%}); a later form for {%anu-rādhā;%}
lightning; a particular attitude in shooting (standing
with the feet a span apart; cf. {%rādhā-bhedin%}); Em-
blic Myrobalan; the plant Clitoria Ternatea; N.
of the foster-mother of Karṇa, (she was the wife of
Adhiratha, who was the Sūta or charioteer of king Śūra,
and who found Karṇa, the illegitimate child of Pṛthā
or Kuntī by the Sun, when exposed by his mother on
the banks of the Jumna, and brought him up as his
own son); N. of a celebrated cowherdess or Gopī
(the favourite mistress and consort of Kṛṣṇa, q. v.,
during his residence in Vṛndā-vana amongst the cow-
herds, and a principal personage in Jayadeva's cele-
brated lyrical poem, the Gīta-govinda, q. v.; she is
sometimes supposed to typify the human soul, attracted
towards Kṛṣṇa as the divine goodness, sometimes the
divine or mystical love to which Kṛṣṇa returns at
the end of his more worldly amours; at a later
period she was worshipped as a goddess, and is occa-
sionally regarded as an Avatāra of Lakṣmī as Kṛṣṇa
is of Viṣṇu; she is also, under other aspects, iden-
tified with Dākṣāyaṇī); N. of a female slave.
{%—Rādha-gupta, as,%} m., N. of a minister of
Aśoka. {%—Rādha-raṅka, as,%} m. a plough; thin
rain; hail. {%—Rādha-raṅku, us,%} m. {%= sāra, śīkara,%}
{%jaladopala%}. {%—Rādhas-pati, is,%} m. [cf. {%rathas-%}
{%pati%}], Ved. a lord of gifts or wealth. {%—Rādhā-%}
{%kānta, as,%} m. ‘lover of Rādhā,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Rādhā-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m., N. of the author of
the Dhātu-ratnāvalī. {%—Rādhā-janmāṣṭamī (˚ma-%}
{%aṣ˚),%} f., N. of the eighth day of a particular fort-
night (commemorating the birthday of Rādhā; cf.
{%kṛṣṇa-j˚%}). {%—Rādhā-tanaya, as,%} m. son of Rā-
dhā, i. e. Karṇa. {%—Rādhā-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra. {%—Rādhā-dāmodara, as,%} m., N. of the
author of an elementary treatise on the Vedānta.
{%—Rādhā-nagarī,%} f., N. of a town in the neigh-
bourhood of Ujjayinī. {%—Rādhānurādhīya (˚dhā-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} relating to the Nakṣatras Rādhā
and Anurādhā. {%—Rādhā-bhedin, ī,%} m., N. of Ar-
juna, (according to some this name has reference
to a particular attitude in shooting, see {%rādhā%} above
and cf. {%rādhā-vedhin;%} according to others it was
given to Arjuna as having prevailed on Kṛṣṇa to
abandon Rādhā.) {%—Rādhā-mādhava, as,%} m., N.
of an author. {%—Rādhā-mohana-śarman, ā,%} m.,
N. of the author of the Mitākṣarā-siddhānta-saṅ-
graha. {%—Rādhā-ramaṇa, as,%} m., N. of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi%} or {%rādhā-sudhā-ni-%}
{%dhi, is,%} m., N. of a poem by Hari-vaṃśa Go-svāmin
celebrating the praises of Rādhā as worshipped in
Vṛndā-vana (supposed to have been written at the
end of the sixteenth century). {%—Rādhā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} possessed of prosperity or wealth, rich.
{%—Rādhā-vallabha, as,%} m. ‘the beloved of Rādhā,’
N. of Kṛṣṇa; epithet of various persons. {%—Rādhā-%}
{%vinoda, as,%} m., N. of a poem. {%—Rādhā-vedhin, ī,%}
[Page0842-c+ 77]
m., N. of Arjuna; [cf. {%rādhā-bhedin.%}] {%—Rādhā-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. son of Rādhā, i. e. Karṇa. {%—Rādheśa%}
or {%rādheśvara (˚dhā-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of Rādhā,’
Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>39389<pc>0842-c<k1>rADaka<k2>rADaka
{%Rādhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. liberal, bountiful.
<LEND>

<L>39390<pc>0842-c<k1>rADana<k2>rADana
{%Rādhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of pleasing, satisfying,
conciliating; pleasure, satisfaction; the act of accom-
plishing, effecting, completing, succeeding; obtain-
ing, acquisition; the means or instrument of accom-
plishing anything; ({%ā%}), f. speaking, speech.
<LEND>

<L>39391<pc>0842-c<k1>rADas<k2>rADas
{%Rādhas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. favour, good-will, kindness,
a gift of affection, a gift or present in general; bene-
ficence, liberality, munificence; accomplishment of
one's wishes, success, ({%alpa-rādhas,%} one who has
obtained but little success, unfortunate); striving to
accomplish or gain, ({%ananya-rādhas,%} striving after
nothing else); opulence, wealth, riches, affluence,
might, power. {%—Rādhas-pati,%} see under {%rādha.%}
{%—Rādho-gūrta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. agreeable through
kindness (according to Mahī-dhara); giving or be-
stowing wealth. {%—Rādho-deya, as, ā, am,%} to be pre-
sented with gifts or offerings; ({%am%}), n., Ved. the giving
of presents, bestowing wealth, showing favour.
<LEND>

<L>39392<pc>0842-c<k1>rADi<k2>rADi
{%Rādhi, rādhī,%}¦ see Gaṇa Bahvādi to Pāṇ. IV. 1,
45; [cf. {%kṛṣṭa-rādhi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39393<pc>0842-c<k1>rADika<k2>rADika
{%Rādhika, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king (son of Jaya-
sena); ({%ā%}), f. a diminutive of the name Rādhā
(expressive of endearment). {%—Rādhikā-vinoda, as,%}
m. {%= rādhā-vinoda.%}
<LEND>

<L>39394<pc>0842-c<k1>rADeya<k2>rADeya
{%Rādheya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%rādhā%}), a metronymic of
Karṇa (as passing for the child of his foster-mother
Rādhā, see {%rādhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>39395<pc>0842-c<k1>rADya<k2>rADya
{%Rādhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be conciliated or
propitiated, to be appeased or satisfied; to be accom-
plished or performed, achievable; to be completed;
to be obtained.
<LEND>

<L>39396<pc>0842-c<k1>rADrevaki<k2>rADrevaki
{#rADrevaki#}¦ {%rādhrevaki%} (?), a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39397<pc>0842-c<k1>rAndrya<k2>rAndrya
{#rAndrya#}¦ {%rāndrya,%} various reading for {%rāṇḍya.%}
<LEND>

<L>39398<pc>0842-c<k1>rAnDasa<k2>rAnDasa
{#rAnDasa#}¦ {%rāndhasa, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39399<pc>0842-c<k1>rApya<k2>rApya
{#rApya#}¦ {%rāpya.%} See rt. {%rap,%} p. 832, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39400<pc>0842-c<k1>rABasya<k2>rABasya
{#rABasya#}¦ {%rābhasya, am,%} n. (fr. {%rabhasa%}), velo-
city, impetuosity; eagerness, delight, joy, pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>39401<pc>0842-c<k1>rAma<k2>rAma
{#rAma#}¦ {%rāma, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ram%}), pleasing,
delighting, rejoicing; lovely, beautiful, charming,
pleasant; obscure, dark-coloured, dark, black [cf.
{%rātri%}]; white; ({%as%}), m. joy, pleasure; ‘the pleasing
or beautiful one,’ N. of three celebrated mytholo-
gical personages, commonly called Paraśu-rāma,
Rāma-candra, and Bala-rāma, (of these the first two
are always regarded as Avatāras of Viṣṇu, one born
at the beginning, the other at the end of the second
age: the first or Paraśu-rāma, ‘Rāma with the
axe,’ forms the sixth Avatāra; he is sometimes called
Jāmadagnya, as son of the sage Jamad-agni by
Reṇukā, and sometimes Bhārgava, as descended from
Bhṛgu, and he is the type of Brāhmanism arrayed in
opposition to the military caste, see {%paraśu-rāma:%}
the second, Rāma-candra, forms Viṣṇu's seventh
Avatāra, and is the hero of the great epic poem
called Rāmāyaṇa; his wife, Sītā, is sometimes re-
garded as an Avatāra of Lakṣmī; he has the patro-
nymic Dāśarathi, as son of Daśa-ratha, a king of the
solar dynasty, and Rāghava, as descended from Raghu
[see Raghu], and he typifies the conquering Kṣa-
triyas advancing southwards and subjugating the bar-
barous aborigines represented by the demon Rāvaṇa
and his followers, the Rākṣasas: the third, Bala-
rāma, ‘the strong Rāma,’ born in the third age, is
a kind of Hindū Hercules, the seventh son of Vasu-
deva and elder brother of Kṛṣṇa, both being de-
scended from Yadu [who with Puru formed the
two branches of the lunar dynasty]; he is sometimes
called Halāyudha, ‘armed with a plough,’ sometimes
Musalin, ‘club-armed,’ and although occasionally
regarded as Viṣṇu's eighth Avatāra, is more properly
an incarnation of the great serpent Śeṣa, see {%bala-%}
{%deva, bala-rāma:%} according to Jainas, a Rāma is
[Page0843-a+ 81]
enumerated among the nine white Balas [see {%bala%}]:
in Viṣṇu-Purāṇa III. 2. a Rāma is mentioned
among the seven Ṛṣis of the eighth Manvantara
presided over by Manu Sāvarṇi, cf. Hari-vaṃśa 453);
N. of the author of Ṛg-veda X. 110 (with the pa-
tronymic Jāmadagnya belonging to Paraśu-rāma);
N. of Varuṇa; of a person with the patronymic
Mārgaveya; of various others persons or teachers;
of a king of Malla-pura; of a king of Śṛṅga-vera;
a lover; a kind of deer; a horse; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a beautiful female, handsome
woman, a young and charming woman, a woman in
general; a woman of low origin; N. of various
plants ({%= śveta-kaṇṭakārī, gṛha-kanyā, ārāma-%}
{%śītalā, aśoka%}); Asa Fœtida ({%= hiṅgu%}); vermilion
({%= hiṅgula%}); a kind of pigment ({%= go-rocanā%});
ruddle; a river; a kind of metre, ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘
¯¯, ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯, ¯¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯, ¯
¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯; N. of an Apsaras; of a daughter
of Kumbhāṇḍa; of the mother of the ninth Arhat
of the present Ava-sarpiṇī; ({%ī%}), f., Ved. darkness,
night [cf. {%rātri%}]; ({%am%}), n. darkness; Chenopodium
Album; {%= kuṣṭha; = tamāla-pattra%}. {%—Rāma-%}
{%kaṇṭha, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Rāma-karī,%} f.
‘joy-causing,’ N. of one of the Rāgiṇīs or female
personifications of the musical modes. {%—Rāma-kar-%}
{%pūra%} or {%rāma-karpūraka, as,%} m. a species of
fragrant grass. {%—Rāma-kalpadruma, as,%} m., N. of
a work on law. {%—Rāma-kavaca, am,%} n. ‘Rāma's
breast-plate or charm,’ N. of part of the Brahma-
yāmala-tantra (in which Śiva narrates to Pārvatī the
most efficacious rites in the worship of Rāma). {%—Rā-%}
{%ma-kānta, as,%} m. a kind of sugar-cane; N. of a
Scholiast. {%—Rāma-kirī%} or {%rāma-kīrī%} (according to
some) {%= rāma-karī%}. {%—Rāma-kilviṣa, am,%} n. an
offence against Rāma. {%—Rāma-kutūhala, am,%} n.,
N. of a work. {%—Rāma-kumāra, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Rāma-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m., N. of various persons.
{%—Rāma-kṛṣṇa-kāvya%} or {%rāma-kṛṣṇa-viloma-%}
{%kāvya, am,%} n., N. of an artificial poem by the
astronomer Sūrya celebrating the praises of Rāma
and Kṛṣṇa (read either backwards or forwards; cf.
{%vilomākṣara-kāvya%}). {%—Rāma-kṛṣṇa-paddhati,%}
{%is,%} f., N. of work. {%—Rāma-kelī,%} f., N. of a Rāgiṇī
or musical mode. {%—Rāma-keśava-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Rāma-kautuka, am,%} n., N. of a
work. {%—Rāma-kṣetra, am,%} n., N. of a district.
{%—Rāma-gaṅgā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Rāma-gāyatrī,%}
f., N. of a particular hymn on Rāma. {%—Rāma-giri,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘Rāma's mountain,’ N. of several mountains
(especially, according to some, of Citra-kūṭa in Bun-
delkund and of another hill near Nagpore, now called
Ramtek). {%—Rāma-gīta-govinda,%} N. of a poem.
{%—Rāma-gītā,%} f., N. of a poem partly extracted
from the Adhyātma-rāmāyaṇa (in which spiritual
knowledge is shown to be better than ritualistic
observances; also {%ās,%} f. pl.). {%—Rāma-govinda-tīrtha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Rāma-grāma, as,%} m.,
N. of a kingdom. {%—Rāma-cakra, am,%} n., N. of a
particular mystical circle. {%—Rāma-candra, as,%} m.
‘Rāma-moon’ or ‘moon-like Rāma,’ N. of Rāma
the son of Daśa-ratha, the hero of the Rāmāyaṇa (see
under {%rāma,%} p. 842; although his name is connected
with the moon, he is not of the lunar race, like
Kṛṣṇa and Bala-rāma, but of the solar race of kings
beginning with Vivasvat or ‘the Sun,’ whose son
was Manu Vaivasvata or the Manu of the present
period, and whose son again was Ikṣvāku, from
whom sprang the two branches of the solar dynasty,
the chief of which or that of Ayodhyā may be said
to have commenced in Kakutstha, the ancestor of
Rāma-candra); N. of various kings, authors, pre-
ceptors &c. of later times. {%—Rāmacandra-campū,%}
{%ūs,%} f., N. of a work by Kavi-candra (see {%campū%}).
{%—Rāmacandra-caritra-sāra, am,%} n., N. of a
short poem by Agniveśa narrating the exploits of
Rāma-candra. {%—Rāmacandra-stava-rāja, as,%} m.,
N. of an extract from the Sanat-kumāra-saṃhitā (in
which Rāma-candra is represented as endowed with
the divine nature of Kṛṣṇa). {%—Rāmacandrāśrama%}
{%(˚ra-āś˚), as,%} m., N. of a commentator on the
[Page0843-b+ 80]
Sarasvatī-sūtra; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Rāma-%}
{%candrodaya (˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘rise of Rāma-
candra,’ N. of a work by Puruṣottama. {%—Rāma-%}
{%cara, as,%} m., N. of Bala-rāma. {%—Rāma-caraṇa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of the Rāma-vilāsa and of
a commentary on the Sāhitya-darpaṇa. {%—Rāma-ca-%}
{%rita, am,%} n. the exploits of Rāma-candra the son of
Daśa-ratha. {%—Rāma-cchardanaka, as,%} m. a species
of plant. {%—Rāma-ja, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rāma-%}
{%jananī,%} f. the mother of Rāma (applicable to the
mother of any one of the three Rāmas). {%—Rāma-%}
{%janman, a,%} n. the birth or birthday of Rāma.
{%—Rāma-jīvana, as,%} m., N. of a son of Rudra-
rāya. {%—Rāma-tapana,%} N. of an Upaniṣad; [cf.
{%tapana.%}] {%—Rāma-taruṇī,%} f. a species of tree.
{%—Rāma-tarka-vāg-īśa, as,%} m., N. of a gram-
marian. {%—Rāma-tāpanīya, am,%} n., N. of a well
known Upaniṣad (belonging to the Atharva-veda).
{%—Rāma-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of various persons. {%—Rāma-tva, am,%} n. the being
Rāma. {%—Rāma-datta, as,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Rāma-darśanāditas (˚na-ād˚),%} ind. after having
seen Rāma. {%—Rāma-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of various
persons. {%—Rāma-dūta, as,%} m. ‘Rāma's messenger,’
N. of Hanumat; a monkey; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of basil.
{%—Rāma-deva, as,%} m., N. of Rāma the son of
Daśa-ratha; of various persons. {%—Rāma-dvādaśī,%}
f., N. of the twelfth day in one of the halves of the
month Jyaiṣṭha. {%—Rāma-dhara, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Rāma-nagara, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Rāma-%}
{%navamī,%} f., N. of the ninth day in the light half of
the month Caitra, being the birthday of Rāma-
candra. {%—Rāma-navamī-nirṇaya, as,%} m., N. of
certain verses on the fast and feast to be observed on
the above day. {%—Rāma-nātha, as,%} m., N. of Rāma
the son of Daśa-ratha; of various persons. {%—Rāma-%}
{%nāma-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a particular religious
observance. {%—Rāma-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
grammarian. {%—Rāma-nārāyaṇa-jīva, as,%} and {%rā-%}
{%ma-nṛpati, is,%} m., N. of two kings. {%—Rāma-%}
{%nyāyālaṅkāra (˚ya-al˚)%} and {%rāma-paṇḍita%} and
{%rāma-pāla, as,%} m., N. of various persons. {%—Rāma-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a village. {%—Rāma-pūga, as,%}
m. a species of small Areca or betel-nut tree, Areca
Triandra. {%—Rāma-pūjā-śaraṇī,%} f., N. of a work.
{%—Rāma-pūrva-tāpanīya, am,%} n. the first part of
the Rāma-tāpanīya, q. v. {%—Rāma-prakāśa, as,%} m.,
N. of a commentary. {%—Rāma-prasāda-tarka-vāg-%}
{%īśa%} and {%rāma-prasāda-tarkālaṅkāra, as,%} m., N.
of two Paṇḍits. {%—Rāma-bāṇa = rāma-vāṇa,%} q. v.
{%—Rāma-bhakta, as,%} m. a worshipper of Rāma; a
proper N. {%—Rāma-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of various
persons. {%—Rāma-bhadra, as,%} m., N. of Rāma the
son of Daśa-ratha; of various persons. {%—Rāma-%}
{%mantra, as,%} m. a Mantra addressed to Rāma.
{%—Rāmamantra-paṭala, am,%} n. a collection of
Mantras addressed to Rāma. {%—Rāma-miśra%} and
{%rāma-mohana, as,%} m., N. of two persons. {%—Rāma-%}
{%yantra, am,%} n. a particular diagram. {%—Rāma-ra-%}
{%hasya, am,%} n., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Rāma-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Rāma-rāma, as,%} m., N.
of a preceptor. {%—Rāma-rudra-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of
an author; ({%ī%}), f., N. of his commentary on Dina-kara's
treatise relating to invocations. {%—Rāma-lavaṇa, am,%}
n. a kind of salt. {%—Rāma-liṅga-kṛti, is,%} m., N.
of an author. {%—Rāma-lekhā,%} f., N. of a princess.
{%—Rāma-vardhana, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rāma-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m., N. of a commentator on the Rāma-
gītā. {%—Rāma-vallabha, am,%} n. Cassia bark. {%—Rā-%}
{%ma-vājapeyin, ī,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Rāma-%}
{%vāṇa, as,%} m. ‘Rāma's arrow,’ a kind of sugar-cane;
a particular medicinal preparation. {%—Rāma-vilāsa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a poem by Rāma-caraṇa. {%—Rāma-%}
{%vilāsa-kāvya, am,%} n., N. of a poem in four chapters
by Hari-nātha (describing the amours of Rāma and
Sītā). {%—Rāma-vīṇā,%} f. ‘Rāma's lute,’ a kind of
lute, (said to be also applicable ironically to the horn
blown by Bala-rāma.) {%—Rāma-vyākaraṇa, am,%} n.,
N. of a grammatical work by Vopa-deva. {%—Rāma-%}
{%vratin, inas,%} m. pl. ‘devoted to Rāma,’ N. of a
sect. {%—Rāma-śara, as,%} m. a kind of sugar-cane.
[Page0843-c+ 81]
{%—Rāma-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of the author of the
Uṇādi-koṣa (a metrical work on words formed with
Uṇādi suffixes). {%—Rāma-śītalā,%} f. {%= ārāma-śītalā,%}
a fragrant plant. {%—Rāma-śrī-pāda, as,%} m., N. of a
preceptor. {%—Rāma-ṣaḍ-akṣara-mantra-rāja, as,%}
m. a particular Mantra or prayer of six syllables
addressed to Rāma. {%—Rāma-saṃyamin, ī,%} m., N.
of the author of certain Vedānta precepts in verse.
{%—Rāma-sakha, as,%} m. ‘Rāma's friend,’ N. of
Sugrīva. {%—Rāma-saras, as,%} n., N. of a sacred lake.
{%—Rāma-sahasra-nāma-stotra, am,%} n. ‘praise of
Rāma's thousand names,’ N. of a section of the Brahma-
yāmala-tantra. {%—Rāma-sāhi, is,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Rāma-siṃha, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rāma-sūkta,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a hymn. {%—Rāma-setu, us,%} m. ‘Rā-
ma's bridge,’ a ridge of sand now called Adam's
bridge. {%—Rāma-senaka, as,%} m. Gentiana Cherayta.
{%—Rāma-sevaka, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rāma-%}
{%stuti, is,%} f. and {%rāma-stotra, am,%} n. ‘Rāma's praise,’
N. of two works. {%—Rāma-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a
statue of Rāma. {%—Rāma-hṛdaya, am,%} n. ‘Rāma's
heart,’ N. of a part of the Adhyātma-rāmāyaṇa re-
vealing the supposed mystical essence of Rāma.
{%—Rāma-hrada, as,%} m. ‘Rāma's lake,’ N. of a
sacred bathing-place. {%—Rāmācakra,%} probably for
{%rāma-cakra%}. {%—Rāmācārya (˚ma-āc˚), as,%} m., N.
of various religious teachers. {%—Rāmā-cchardanaka,%}
various reading for {%rāma-cchardanaka%}. {%—Rāmāt-%}
{%maikya-prakāśikā (˚ma-āt˚),%} f., N. of a treatise
by Satya-jñānānanda-tīrtha Yati setting forth Rāma's
identity with the Supreme Soul. {%—Rāmā-devī,%} f., N.
of the mother of Jaya-deva. {%—Rāmādhikaraṇa%}
{%(˚ma-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} relating to Rāma. {%—Rā-%}
{%mānanda (˚ma-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a disciple of
Rāmānuja and founder of a subdivision of the Vaiṣ-
ṇava sect. {%—Rāmānanda-svāmin, ī,%} m. the author
of the Vaidya-bhūṣaṇa. {%—Rāmānuja (˚ma-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘younger brother of Rāma,’ (this title would
be applicable to Kṛṣṇa as born after Bala-rāma of
the same father); N. of a celebrated reformer, author
of several Vedānta treatises, (he belonged to the sect
of the Vaiṣṇavas, was regarded as an incarnation of
Śeṣa, and flourished in the twelfth century in
the south of India, where he combated the Śaivas);
{%Rāmānujam matam,%} the sect of Rāmānuja. {%—Rā-%}
{%mānuṣṭubh (˚ma-an˚), p,%} f., N. of a particular
prayer addressed to Rāma. {%—Rāmābhinanda (˚ma-%}
{%abh˚)%} or {%rāmābhyudaya (˚ma-abh˚), as,%} m., N.
of a drama. {%—Rāmāyaṇa (˚ma-ayana), am,%} n.
‘Rāma's goings or adventures,’ N. of Vālmīki's
famous epic poem describing the adventures of Rāma-
candra, (it contains about 24000 verses in seven
books, called Kāṇḍas, viz. 1. Bāla-kāṇḍa or Ādi-k˚,
2. Ayodhyā-k˚, 3. Araṇya-k˚, 4. Kiṣkindhyā-k˚,
5. Sundara-k˚, 6. Yuddha-k˚, 7. Uttara-k˚; the
seventh is thought to be a comparatively modern
addition, and gives the history of Rāma and Sītā after
their reunion and installation as king and queen of
Ayodhyā, afterwards dramatized by Bhava-bhūti in
the Uttara-rāma-caritra; Rāma's character, as de-
scribed in the Rāmāyaṇa, is that of a perfect man,
born to suffering and self-denial, which he bears
with more than human patience; the author, Vālmīki,
was probably a real person, and although there are
two recensions of the poem, of which the purest
belongs to the north-west of India, six books at least
are thought to be the work of one man, and not,
like the Mahā-bhārata, the production of different
epochs and minds); {%(as, ī, am),%} relating to the
history of Rāma; a descendant of Rāma, (see
Atharva-veda VI. 83, 3.) {%—Rāmāyaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}
relating or belonging to the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Rāmār-%}
{%cana-candrikā (˚ma-ar˚),%} f., N. of a work. {%—Rā-%}
{%mārya (˚ma-ār˚), as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Rā-%}
{%māliṅgana-kāma (˚mā-āl˚), as, ā, am,%} longing for
the embrace of a handsome person; ({%as%}), m. epithet
of the red-flowering globe-amaranth. {%—Rāmā-vak-%}
{%ṣojopama (˚ja-up˚), as, ā, am,%} resembling the
breasts of a beautiful woman; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
the Anas Casarca or ruddy goose. {%—Rāmāśrama%}
{%(˚ma-āś˚), as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rāmāśvamedha %}
[Page0844-a+ 75]
{%(˚ma-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘Rāma's horse-sacrifice,’ N. of a
part of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Rāmāśvamedhika, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} relating to Rāma's horse-sacrifice. {%—Rāmen-%}
{%dra-yati (˚ma-in˚), is,%} m., N. of the author of
a Vedānta treatise called the Viveka-sāra. {%—Rāmen-%}
{%dra-vana, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Rāmeśa%}
{%(˚ma-īśa), as,%} m. a proper N.; ({%am%}), n., N. of a
Liṅga. {%—Rāmeśvara (˚ma-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of
various persons; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Liṅga; of a
Tīrtha or sacred bathing-place. {%—Rāmeṣu (˚ma-%}
{%iṣu), us,%} m. ‘Rāma's arrow,’ epithet of a species
of sugar-cane; a proper N. {%—Rāmottara-tāpanīya%}
{%(˚ma-ut˚), am,%} n. the second part of the Rāma-
tāpanīya; [cf. {%rāma-pūrva-t˚.%}] {%—Rāmoda (˚ma-%}
{%uda), as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rāmodāyana, as,%} m.
(fr. the preceding), a patronymic. {%—Rāmopaniṣad%}
{%(˚ma-up˚), t,%} f., N. of one of the more recent
Upaniṣads of the Atharva-veda. {%—Rāmopādhyāya%}
{%(˚ma-up˚), as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Rāmopā-%}
{%saka (˚ma-up˚), as,%} m. a worshipper of Rāma-
candra the son of Daśa-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>39402<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmaka<k2>rAmaka
{%Rāmaka, as,%}¦ &c. (fr. the Caus. of rt. {%ram%}), one
who delights or gratifies, delighting; {%= ramaka,%}
q. v.; ({%as%}), m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>39403<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmaWa<k2>rAmaWa
{%Rāmaṭha, as, am,%}¦ m. n. Asa Fœtida; ({%as%}),
m. Alangium Hexapetalum; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people; ({%ī%}), f. {%= nāḍī-hiṅgu.%}
<LEND>

<L>39404<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmaRa<k2>rAmaRa
{%Rāmaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of two plants, Diospyros Embry-
opteris; {%= giri-nimba; (ā),%} f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>39405<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmaRi<k2>rAmaRi
{%Rāmaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39406<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmaRIyaka<k2>rAmaRIyaka
{%Rāmaṇīyaka, am,%}¦ n. (fr. 1. {%ramaṇīya%}), loveli-
ness, agreeableness, charmingness, delightfulness,
beauty; N. of a Dvīpa; {%(as, ī, am),%} lovely, agree-
able, beautiful, pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>39407<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmala<k2>rAmala
{%Rāmala, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39408<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmARqAra<k2>rAmARqAra
{%Rāmāṇḍāra, as,%}¦ m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>39409<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmi<k2>rAmi
{%Rāmi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%rāma%}), a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39410<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmin<k2>rAmin
{%Rāmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ delighting sexually, in {%kṣaṇa-%}
{%r˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39411<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmila<k2>rAmila
{%Rāmila, as,%}¦ m. a lover, husband; the god of
love, Kāma-deva; N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>39412<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmI<k2>rAmI
{%Rāmī,%}¦ f. See under {%rāma.%}
<LEND>

<L>39413<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmyA<k2>rAmyA
{%Rāmyā,%}¦ f., Ved. night; [cf. {%rātri.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39414<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmuza<k2>rAmuza
{#rAmuza#}¦ {%rāmuṣa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>39415<pc>0844-a<k1>rAmBa<k2>rAmBa
{#rAmBa#}¦ {%rāmbha, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%rambha%}), the
bamboo staff of a religious student.
<LEND>

<L>39416<pc>0844-a<k1>rAya<k2>rAya
{#rAya#}¦ {%rāya, as,%} m. a king, prince, (at the
beginning or end of a proper N. used as a title of
honour, {%= rājan,%} of which it is a corruption.) {%—Rā-%}
{%ya-mukuṭa, as,%} m., N. of the author of the Pada-
candrikā, a commentary on the Amara-koṣa; of
the author of a work on law. {%—Rāya-rāghava, as,%}
m., N. of the author of the Hasta-ratnāvalī.
<LEND>

<L>39417<pc>0844-a<k1>rAyaRa<k2>rAyaRa
{#rAyaRa#}¦ {%rāyaṇa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%rai%}), sounding, crying, making a noise; pain
{%(= pīḍā)%}. {%—Rāyaṇendra-sarasvatī (˚ṇa-in˚),%} m.,
N. of a commentator.
<LEND>

<L>39418<pc>0844-a<k1>rAyaBAwI<k2>rAyaBAwI
{#rAyaBAwI#}¦ {%rāyabhāṭī,%} f. the stream of a
river; [cf. {%raya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39419<pc>0844-a<k1>rAyaskAma<k2>rAyaskAma
{#rAyaskAma#}¦ {%rāyas-kāma, rāyas-poṣa, rāyo-%}
{%vāja,%} &c. See under 3. {%rai,%} p. 853, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39420<pc>0844-a<k1>rAyARanIya<k2>rAyARanIya
{#rAyARanIya#}¦ {%rāyāṇanīya, as,%} m., N. of a
preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>39421<pc>0844-a<k1>rAyAna<k2>rAyAna
{#rAyAna#}¦ {%rāyāna%} or {%rāyana%} (?), {%as,%} m. a
proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39422<pc>0844-a<k1>rArA<k2>rArA
{#rArA#}¦ {%rārā.%} See {%rāḍhā,%} p. 841, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39423<pc>0844-a<k1>rAla<k2>rAla
{#rAla#}¦ {%rāla%} or {%rālaka, as,%} m. the resin of
Shorea Robusta {%(= arāla)%}. {%—Rāla-kārya, as,%} m.
Shorea Robusta.
<LEND>

<L>39424<pc>0844-a<k1>rAva<k2>rAva
{#rAva#}¦ {%rāva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%ru%}), a cry,
shriek, roar, scream, yell, roaring, bellowing, vocife-
ration, the cry of any animal; a sound, noise in
general; [cf. {%rava.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39425<pc>0844-a<k1>rAvaRa<k2>rAvaRa
{%Rāvaṇa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), screaming, roar-
ing, crying, bellowing, bewailing, making lamentation;
[Page0844-b+ 77]
({%as%}), m. ‘the Vociferator,’ N. of the ruler of Laṅkā
or Ceylon and the famous chief of the Rākṣasas or
demons whose subjugation and destruction by Rāma-
candra, the seventh incarnation of Viṣṇu, form the
subject of the Rāmāyaṇa, (as son of Viśravas, he was
younger brother of Kuvera, but by a different mother,
Ilavilā being the mother of Kuvera, and Keśinī of
the three other brothers, Rāvaṇa, Vibhīṣaṇa, and
Kumbha-karṇa; both Rāvaṇa and Kuvera, the god
of wealth, are often called Paulastya, as grandchildren
of the Ṛṣi Pulastya, one of the seven or ten mind-
born sons of Brahmā, and as Kuvera is king of the
Yakṣas, so is Rāvaṇa of the Rākṣasas, the latter,
however, are always malignant beings [see {%rākṣasa%}],
and Rāvaṇa himself is one of the worst of the many
impersonations of evil common in Hindū mythology;
he is the Satan of the Rāmāyaṇa as Duryodhana is
of the Mahā-bhārata; he has ten heads [whence his
names Daśa-grīva, Daśānana, &c.] and twenty arms,
symbolizing strength; his power is described as so
great, that where he is ‘there the sun does not give
out its heat, the winds through fear of him do not
blow, the fire ceases to burn, and the ocean becomes
motionless;’ he even, by his power, defeated his own
brother Vaiśravaṇa or Kuvera, and carried off his self-
moving car, called Puṣpaka, the wonders of which
are described in the Rāmāyaṇa; this potency was,
as usual, acquired by self-inflicted austerities, which
had obtained from Brahmā a boon, in virtue of which
Rāvaṇa was invulnerable by gods and divine beings
of all kinds, though not by men or a god in human
form; as Viṣṇu became incarnate in Rāma-candra
to destroy Rāvaṇa, so other gods produced innume-
rable monkeys, bears, and various semi-divine animals
to do battle with the legions of demons, his subjects,
under Khara, Dūṣaṇa, and his other generals; see
{%hanu-mat%}); a patronymic from Ravaṇa; N. of the
author of a commentary on the Sāma-veda; of one
on the Ṛg-veda; of the author of the Arka-cikitsā;
of a king of Kaśmīra (mentioned together with Indra-
jit and Vibhīṣaṇa); ({%am%}), n. the act of screaming,
&c.; N. of a Muhūrta. {%—Rāvaṇa-gaṅgā,%} f. ‘Rā-
vaṇa's Ganges,’ N. of a river in Laṅkā (called after
the Rākṣasa Rāvaṇa). {%—Rāvaṇa-hasra,%} a parti-
cular stringed instrument. {%—Rāvaṇa-hrada, as,%} m.,
N. of a lake (from which the Śata-dru or Sutlej
takes its rise). {%—Rāvaṇāri (˚ṇa-ari), is,%} m. Rā-
vaṇa's enemy, i. e. Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>39426<pc>0844-b<k1>rAvaRi<k2>rAvaRi
{%Rāvaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Rāvaṇa, N. of
Indra-jit (eldest son of the demon Rāvaṇa) or of
any son of Rāvaṇa; of the author of a Bāla-tantra;
({%ayas%}), m. pl. the sons of Rāvaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>39427<pc>0844-b<k1>rAvin<k2>rAvin
{%Rāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ screaming, crying, roaring, bel-
lowing.
<LEND>

<L>39428<pc>0844-b<k1>rAvan<k2>rAvan
{#rAvan#}¦ {%rāvan.%} See p. 837, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39429<pc>0844-b<k1>rAvOwa<k2>rAvOwa
{#rAvOwa#}¦ {%rāvauṭa,%} N. of a royal race.
<LEND>

<L>39430<pc>0844-b<k1>rAS<k2>rAS
{#rAS#}¦ {%rāś,%} various reading for rt. {%rās,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39431<pc>0844-b<k1>rASaBa<k2>rASaBa
{#rASaBa#}¦ {%rāśabha,%} incorrect for {%rāsabha.%}
<LEND>

<L>39432<pc>0844-b<k1>rASi<k2>rASi
{#rASi#}¦ {%rāśi, is,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 132. fr. rt. 1. {%aś%}), a heap, mass, pile, accumu-
lation, congeries, group, multitude, quantity, number;
the figure or figures put down for an arithmetical
operation (such as multiplying, dividing, &c.); a
measure of quantity (Ved. {%= droṇa%}); a sign of the
zodiac (as being a certain sum or quantity of de-
grees), one twelfth part of the ecliptic, an astrolo-
gical house; N. of an Ekāha (Ved.). {%—Rāśi-gata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} placed in a heap, heaped, piled up,
accumulated; computed, summed up. {%—Rāśi-cakra,%}
{%am,%} n. the zodiacal circle, zodiac; epithet of a par-
ticular mystical circle. {%—Rāśi-traya, am,%} n. ‘triad
of numbers,’ the rule of three. {%—Rāśi-nāman, a,%}
n. a name given to a child taken from the Rāśi
under which he is born. {%—Rāśi-pa, as,%} m. the regent
of an astrological house. {%—Rāśi-pravibhāga, as,%} m.
a division or distribution of the twelve signs of the
zodiac (under the twenty-eight Nakṣatras); N. of
[Page0844-c+ 80]
the 102nd Adhyāya of Varāha-mihira's Vṛhat-saṃ-
hitā. {%—Rāśi-bhāga, as,%} m. a fraction. {%—Rāśibhā-%}
{%gānubandha (˚ga-an˚), as,%} m. the addition of a
fraction. {%—Rāśibhāgāpavāha (˚ga-ap˚), as,%} m. the
subtraction of a fraction. {%—Rāśi-bheda, as,%} m. a
portion or division of a zodiacal sign or astrological
house. {%—Rāśi-bhoga, as,%} m. the passage of the sun
or moon or any planet through a sign of the zodiac.
{%—Rāśi-vyavahāra, as,%} m. (in arithmetic) the
method for finding the quantity contained in a heap.
{%—Rāśi-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing or being in a
heap, heaped up, accumulated. {%—Rāśī-karaṇa, am,%}
n. the making into a heap, heaping up, piling to-
gether. {%—Rāśī-karaṇa-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a
work of the Pāśupatas. {%—Rāśī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-ka-%}
{%roti, -kurute,%} &c., to make or form into a heap,
heap together, pile up, accumulate. {%—Rāśī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} made into a heap, heaped up, accumu-
lated. {%—Rāśī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to be-
come a heap, be piled up or accumulated. {%—Rāśī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become a heap, accumulated, piled,
heaped. {%—Rāśy-aṃśa = navāṃśa,%} q. v. {%—Rāśy-adhi-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. the regent of an astrological house.
<LEND>

<L>39433<pc>0844-c<k1>rAzwra<k2>rAzwra
{#rAzwra#}¦ {%rāṣṭra, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%rāj;%} also
{%as,%} m. in Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 3050), a kingdom,
realm, empire, dominion, sovereignty; a district,
country, region, territory, inhabited country; a people,
nation, subjects; ({%as, am%}), m. n. any public calamity
(as famine, plague, &c.), affliction; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a king (a son of Kāśi). {%—Rāṣṭra-karṣaṇa, am,%}
n. distressing or oppressing a kingdom. {%—Rāṣṭra-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} desiring a kingdom. {%—Rāṣṭra-%}
{%kūṭa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race. {%—Rāṣṭra-gupti, is,%}
f. protection of a kingdom. {%—Rāṣṭra-gopa, as,%} m.
a guardian or protector of a kingdom. {%—Rāṣṭra-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n. system of government, government.
{%—Rāṣṭra-dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. giving dominion.
{%—Rāṣṭra-dipsu, us, us, u%} (see {%dipsu%}), Ved.
intending to injure a country or people, menacing a
country. {%—Rāṣṭra-devī,%} f., N. of the wife of Citra-
bhānu. {%—Rāṣṭra-pati, is,%} m. the lord of a kingdom,
king, sovereign, ({%rāṣṭrapata%} is given as an adj.
from this word.) {%—Rāṣṭra-pāla, as,%} m. a protector
or guardian of a kingdom, king, sovereign; N. of a
son of Ugra-sena; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a daughter of Ugra-
sena. {%—Rāṣṭra-pālikā,%} f., N. of a daughter of
Ugra-sena. {%—Rāṣṭra-bhaṅga, as,%} m. breaking up
or dissolution of a kingdom. {%—Rāṣṭra-bhaya, am,%}
n. fear for a kingdom, danger threatening a country.
{%—Rāṣṭra-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} supporting a kingdom,
taking care of the sovereignty; ({%t%}), m., N. of a son
of Bharata; {%(tas),%} m. pl. the subjects of a kingdom;
epithet of dice (in Atharva-veda VII. 109, 6); of
certain prayers and oblations; ({%t%}), f., N. of an
Apsaras. {%—Rāṣṭra-bhṛti, is,%} f. or {%rāṣṭra-%}
{%bhṛtya, am,%} n., Ved. maintenance of government,
support of authority. {%—Rāṣṭra-bheda, as,%} m. divi-
sion of a kingdom. {%—Rāṣṭra-vardhana, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} increasing the kingdom, exalting or extending
dominion; ({%as%}), m., N. of a minister of Daśa-ratha
and Rāma. {%—Rāṣṭra-vāsin, ī,%} m. an inhabitant of
a kingdom, subject. {%—Rāṣṭrānta-pāla (˚ra-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the protector of the borders of a country.
{%—Rāṣṭrābhivṛddhi (˚ra-abh˚), is,%} f. the increase
of a kingdom, exaltation of a kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>39434<pc>0844-c<k1>rAzwraka<k2>rAzwraka
{%Rāṣṭraka%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. {%= rāṣṭra,%}
a kingdom, &c.; ({%as, ikā, am%}), dwelling in a
kingdom or country; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of Solanum
({%= bṛhatī%}).
<LEND>

<L>39435<pc>0844-c<k1>rAzwri<k2>rAzwri
{%Rāṣṭri, is,%}¦ f. {%= rāṣṭrī,%} a female ruler, pro-
prietress, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39436<pc>0844-c<k1>rAzwrika<k2>rAzwrika
{%Rāṣṭrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to or inhabiting
a kingdom; ({%as%}), m. an inhabitant of a kingdom,
subject; the ruler of a kingdom, governor; [cf.
{%rāṣṭraka%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>39437<pc>0844-c<k1>rAzwrin<k2>rAzwrin
{%Rāṣṭrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. possessing or occupying
a kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>39438<pc>0844-c<k1>rAzwriya<k2>rAzwriya
{%Rāṣṭriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a kingdom
or country; born in a kingdom; ({%as%}), m. a king's
brother-in-law (in theatrical language).
<LEND>
[Page0845-a+ 75]

<L>39439<pc>0845-a<k1>rAzwrI<k2>rAzwrI
{%Rāṣṭrī,%}¦ f., Ved. a female ruler or sovereign or
proprietress; (Sāy.) {%= rājana-śīlā;%} a form {%rāṣṭrī,%}
m., is found in Ṛg-veda VI. 4, 5 (according to Sāy.)
{%= rājya-vat,%} possessing a kingdom, a sovereign.
<LEND>

<L>39440<pc>0845-a<k1>rAzwrIya<k2>rAzwrIya
{%Rāṣṭrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a country or
kingdom; ({%as%}), m. a king's brother-in-law.
<LEND>

<L>39441<pc>0845-a<k1>rAs<k2>rAs<h>1
{#rAs#} 1¦. {%rās%} (connected with rt. 1. {%ras%}),
cl. 1. A. {%rāsate, rarāse, rāsitum,%} to
scream, cry, yell, howl (said of animals); to sound,
make any cry or noise: Intens. {%rārāsyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>39442<pc>0845-a<k1>rArAsyamAna<k2>rArAsyamAna
{%Rārāsyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ crying aloud, uttering
loud lamentations.
<LEND>

<L>39443<pc>0845-a<k1>rAsa<k2>rAsa
{%Rāsa, as,%}¦ m. uproar, confused noise, din; noise,
sound in general; N. of a particular rustic dance (in
this sense probably connected with {%lāsa, lāsya,%} q. v.),
a kind of circular dance practised by cowherds, (especi-
ally) that in which Kṛṣṇa and the Gopīs engaged;
any sportive game or festive amusement, amorous
pastime, play in general; (according to some also)
speech; a chain. {%—Rāsa-krīḍā,%} f. a sportive dance,
the circular dance of Kṛṣṇa and the cowherdesses.
{%—Rāsa-maṇḍala, am,%} n. Kṛṣṇa's circular dance
or dancing-ground. {%—Rāsa-yātrā,%} f. a festival in
honour of Kṛṣṇa and his dances with the Gopīs on
the full moon of the month Kārttika. {%—Rāse-rasa,%}
{%as,%} m. ({%rāse,%} loc. c.), the dance described above;
pastime, sport, festive mirth; a company, assembly,
party; love, desire, sentiment; the sixth night after
delivery when the family sit up all night (?); alchemy;
[cf. {%rasa.%}] {%—Rāsotsava (˚sa-ut˚), as,%} m. the Rāsa
festival or festive dances.
<LEND>

<L>39444<pc>0845-a<k1>rAsaka<k2>rAsaka
{%Rāsaka, as, am,%}¦  m. n. a kind of drama or
dramatic entertainment.
<LEND>

<L>39445<pc>0845-a<k1>rAsaBa<k2>rAsaBa
{%Rāsabha, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounding, braying; neighing
(applied in Ṛg-veda III. 53, 5. to the horse of
Indra); ({%as%}), m. an ass, jackass, donkey, (in Ṛg-
veda I. 34, 9, I. 116, 2. the chariot of the Aśvins is
said to be drawn by a single ass, and other authorities
mention two asses, but in other places their car is
described as drawn by golden-winged, falcon-like,
swan-like horses); ({%ī%}), f. a she-ass. {%—Rāsabha-%}
{%dhūsara, as, ā, am,%}  ass-grey, grey as an ass, light
brown. {%—Rāsabha-yukta, as, ā, am,%} yoked with
asses, drawn by asses. {%—Rāsabha-vandinī,%} f. Arabian
jasmine. {%—Rāsabha-sena, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Rāsabhārāva (˚bha-ār˚), as,%} m. the braying of
asses. {%—Rāsabhāruṇa (˚bha-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} brown
as an ass.
<LEND>

<L>39446<pc>0845-a<k1>rAsya<k2>rAsya
{%Rāsya%}¦ in {%go-rāsya, as,%} m., N. of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>39447<pc>0845-a<k1>rAs<k2>rAs<h>2
{#rAs#} 2¦. {%rās,%} a form of rt. 1. {%rā,%} to give,
(to which forms like {%rāsate, arāsata,%}
{%rāsan, rāsat%} are sometimes referred; see Naigh.
III. 20.)
<LEND>

<L>39448<pc>0845-a<k1>rAsana<k2>rAsana
{#rAsana#}¦ {%rāsana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%rasanā%}), relating
to the tongue, perceptible by the tongue, pertaining to
the sense or organ of taste, savoury, palatable.
<LEND>

<L>39449<pc>0845-a<k1>rAsaBa<k2>rAsaBa
{#rAsaBa#}¦ {%rāsabha.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>39450<pc>0845-a<k1>rAsAyana<k2>rAsAyana
{#rAsAyana#}¦ {%rāsāyana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%rasāyana%}),
relating to an elixir, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39451<pc>0845-a<k1>rAsnA<k2>rAsnA
{#rAsnA#}¦ {%rāsnā,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-S. III.
15. fr. rt. 1. {%ras%}), a girdle (Ved.; cf. {%raśanā%}); N.
of two plants, Mimosa Octandra, a thorny shrub;
the ichneumon plant; a sort of perfume.
<LEND>

<L>39452<pc>0845-a<k1>rAsnAkA<k2>rAsnAkA
{%Rāsnākā,%}¦ f., Ved. a small girdle or band.
<LEND>

<L>39453<pc>0845-a<k1>rAsnAva<k2>rAsnAva
{%Rāsnāva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. having a girdle, girdled,
girt.
<LEND>

<L>39454<pc>0845-a<k1>rAspa<k2>rAspa
{#rAspa#}¦ {%rāspa,%} Ved. (according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda V. 43, 14) a sacrificial ladle (= 2. {%juhū%}).
<LEND>

<L>39455<pc>0845-a<k1>rAspira<k2>rAspira
{%Rāspira, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (according to Sāy.)
holding the sacrificial ladles, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39456<pc>0845-a<k1>rAspina<k2>rAspina
{#rAspina#}¦ {%rāspina, as, ā, am%} (according to
Sāy. either fr. rt. 1. {%ras%} or rt. {%rap%}), Ved. sounding
forth praise, praising.
<LEND>

<L>39457<pc>0845-a<k1>rAhakzati<k2>rAhakzati
{#rAhakzati#}¦ {%rāhakṣati, is,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39458<pc>0845-a<k1>rAhitya<k2>rAhitya
{#rAhitya#}¦ {%rāhitya, am,%} n. (fr. {%rahita%}), the
[Page0845-b+ 78]
being without anything, the being destitute of, free-
dom from anything, destitution, destituteness (at the
end of a comp., e. g. {%kṛpā-rāhitya,%} the being
without compassion).
<LEND>

<L>39459<pc>0845-b<k1>rAhila<k2>rAhila
{#rAhila#}¦ {%rāhila, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39460<pc>0845-b<k1>rAhu<k2>rAhu
{#rAhu#}¦ {%rāhu, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%rah;%}
probably connected with rts. {%rabh, grabh%}), ‘the
looser’ or ‘the seizer,’ N. of a Daitya or demon who
is supposed to seize the sun and moon and thus
cause eclipses, (according to the common myth
he was a son of Vipra-citti and Sinhikā, and had
four arms, his lower part ending in a tail; he was the
instigator of all mischief among the Daityas, and
when the gods had produced the Amṛta or nectar
from the churned ocean, he disguised himself like
one of them and drank a portion of it, but the Sun
and Moon having detected his fraud and informed
Viṣṇu, the latter severed his head and two of his
arms from the rest of his body; the portion of nectar
he had swallowed having secured his immortality,
the head and tail were transferred to the stellar
sphere, the head wreaking its vengeance on the Sun
and Moon by occasionally swallowing them for a
time, while the tail, under the name of Ketu, gave
birth to a numerous progeny of comets and fiery
meteors: in astronomy Rāhu is variously regarded
as a dragon's head, as the ascending node of the
moon, or as one of the planets); an eclipse or
(rather) the moment of occultation or obscuration;
the regent of the south-west quarter. {%—Rāhu-gata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘gone to Rāhu,’ darkened, ob-
scured, eclipsed. {%—Rāhu-grasana%} or {%rāhu-gra-%}
{%haṇa, am,%} n. ‘seizure or swallowing by Rāhu,’ an
eclipse of the sun or moon. {%—Rāhu-grasta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘swallowed by Rāhu,’ eclipsed. {%—Rāhu-grāsa%}
or {%rāhu-grāha, as,%} m. an eclipse of the sun or
moon, the immersion at an eclipse. {%—Rāhu-cchattra,%}
{%am,%} n. green ginger. {%—Rāhu-darśana, am,%} n.,
Ved. ‘appearance of Rāhu,’ an eclipse. {%—Rāhu-par-%}
{%van, a,%} n. the day or period of an eclipse. {%—Rāhu-%}
{%pīḍā,%} f. ‘oppression by Rāhu,’ an eclipse. {%—Rāhu-%}
{%pūjā,%} f. the worship of Rāhu. {%—Rāhu-bhedin, ī,%}
m. ‘severing Rāhu,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Rāhu-%}
{%mūrdha-bhid, t,%} or {%rāhu-mūrdha-hara, as,%} m.
‘decapitator of Rāhu,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Rāhu-%}
{%ratna, am,%} n. Rāhu's jewel, N. of a kind of jewel.
{%—Rāhu-saṃsparśa, as,%} m. contact with Rāhu,
i. e. an eclipse of the sun or moon. {%—Rāhu-sūtaka,%}
{%am,%} n. the birth or appearance of Rāhu, an eclipse
of the sun or moon. {%—Rāhūcchiṣṭa (˚hu-uc˚)%} or
{%rāhūtsṛṣṭa (˚hu-ut˚), am,%} n. ‘left or despised by
Rāhu,’ a shalote, Allium Ascalonicum.
<LEND>

<L>39461<pc>0845-b<k1>rAhavi<k2>rAhavi
{%Rāhavi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Rāhu.
<LEND>

<L>39462<pc>0845-b<k1>rAhula<k2>rAhula
{%Rāhula, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Śākya-muni; of
a son of Śuddhodana; of a minister of Hiouen-
thsang. {%—Rāhula-sū, ūs,%} m. father of Rāhula, i. e.
Śākya-muni.
<LEND>

<L>39463<pc>0845-b<k1>rAhulaka<k2>rAhulaka
{%Rāhulaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>39464<pc>0845-b<k1>rAhulata<k2>rAhulata
{%Rāhulata%}¦ (?), {%as,%} m., N. of a Buddhist patriarch.
<LEND>

<L>39465<pc>0845-b<k1>rAhUgaRa<k2>rAhUgaRa
{#rAhUgaRa#}¦ {%rāhūgaṇa, as,%} m. (fr. {%rahūgaṇa%}),
Ved. a patronymic of Gotama; ({%ās%}), m. pl. of the
following word.
<LEND>

<L>39466<pc>0845-b<k1>rAhUgaRya<k2>rAhUgaRya
{%Rāhūgaṇya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39467<pc>0845-b<k1>ri<k2>ri<h>1
{#ri#} 1¦. {%ri%} (connected with rts. 1. {%rī,%} 4. {%ṛ%}),
cl. 6. P. {%riyati, rirāya, reṣyati, araiṣīt,%}
{%retum,%} to go, move; cl. 5. P. {%riṇoti,%} &c., to hurt
[cf. rt. 4. {%ṛ%}]; cl. 9. P. A. {%riṇāti, riṇīte,%} &c., to
go, move; to draw out, drive out, set free, expel;
to separate, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 60,
2. {%ariṇīta = yojanāt prāpitavantaḥ%}); to emit; to
bestow, grant; to hurt, injure, kill; to be injured
(A.); to howl, &c. [cf. rt. 1. {%rī%}]: Caus. {%rāyayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%arīrayat:%} Desid. {%rirīṣati:%} Intens.
{%rerīyate, rerayīti, rereti.%}
<LEND>

<L>39468<pc>0845-b<k1>riRat<k2>riRat
{%Riṇat, an, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. injuring, hurting; setting
free.
<LEND>

<L>39469<pc>0845-b<k1>ri<k2>ri<h>2
{#ri#} 2¦. {%ri,%} at the end of adj. comps.; [cf.
{%ati-ri, bṛhad-ri.%}]
<LEND>
[Page0845-c+ 76]

<L>39470<pc>0845-c<k1>ri<k2>ri<h>3
{#ri#} 3¦. {%ri%} (a contraction of {%ṛṣabha%}), the
second note of the Hindū gamut.
<LEND>

<L>39471<pc>0845-c<k1>riHPa<k2>riHPa
{#riHPa#}¦ {%riḥpha, am,%} n. (fr. Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥιφή</lang>), Ved.
epithet of the twelfth astrological house.
<LEND>

<L>39472<pc>0845-c<k1>rikta<k2>rikta
{#rikta#}¦ {%rikta, riktha,%} &c. See below and
p. 846, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39473<pc>0845-c<k1>rikvan<k2>rikvan
{#rikvan#}¦ {%rikvan, ā,%} m., Ved. {%= stena,%} a thief
(according to Naigh. III. 24).
<LEND>

<L>39474<pc>0845-c<k1>rikzA<k2>rikzA
{#rikzA#}¦ {%rikṣā,%} f. a nit {%(= likṣā);%} a mote
in a sun-beam.
<LEND>

<L>39475<pc>0845-c<k1>riK<k2>riK
{#riK#}¦ {%rikh%} (connected with rts. {%riṅkh,%}
{%riṅg, rakh, raṅkh%}), cl. 1. P. {%rekhati,%}
&c., to go, move (so given by Vopa-deva, but by
other grammarians identified in this sense with rt.
{%riṅkh%} below); cl. 6. P. (not in use, but apparently
the original form of rt. {%likh,%} cl. 6. {%likhati,%} q. v.),
to scratch, scrape, write; [cf. {%rekhā;%} cf. also Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἐρείκω, ἐρέχθω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>39476<pc>0845-c<k1>riNK<k2>riNK
{#riNK#}¦ {%riṅkh%} (connected with rts. {%rikh,%}
{%rakh, raṅkh, riṅg, raṅg%}), cl. 1. P.
{%riṅkhati,%} &c., to go, move, creep, crawl (said of
young children); to go slowly; to slip.
<LEND>

<L>39477<pc>0845-c<k1>riNKa<k2>riNKa
{%Riṅkha, as,%}¦ m. See under {%riṅkhā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>39478<pc>0845-c<k1>riNKaRa<k2>riNKaRa
{%Riṅkhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of crawling, creeping
(said of children who creep on all fours).
<LEND>

<L>39479<pc>0845-c<k1>riNKA<k2>riNKA
{%Riṅkhā,%}¦ f. creeping, sliding; dancing; one of a
horse's paces; a horse's hoof; deceiving, disappoint-
ing, (according to some also {%as,%} m. in the previous
senses); the plant Carpopogon Pruriens.
<LEND>

<L>39480<pc>0845-c<k1>riNg<k2>riNg
{#riNg#}¦ {%riṅg%} (connected with rts. {%raṅg,%}
{%riṅkh,%} &c., see above), cl. 1. P. {%riṅgati,%}
&c., to go, move, creep, crawl (said of young children),
to move slowly or with difficulty; to slip: Caus.
{%riṅgayati,%} &c., to cause to creep.
<LEND>

<L>39481<pc>0845-c<k1>riNgaRa<k2>riNgaRa
{%Riṅgaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of moving, creeping,
crawling ({%= riṅkhaṇa%}); slipping, sliding; deviating
(from rectitude, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>39482<pc>0845-c<k1>riNgat<k2>riNgat
{%Riṅgat, an, antī, at,%}¦ creeping, crawling, moving.
<LEND>

<L>39483<pc>0845-c<k1>riNgamARa<k2>riNgamARa
{%Riṅgamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ creeping, crawling,
slipping.
<LEND>

<L>39484<pc>0845-c<k1>riNgi<k2>riNgi
{%Riṅgi, is,%}¦ f. going, moving, motion.
<LEND>

<L>39485<pc>0845-c<k1>riNgita<k2>riNgita
{%Riṅgita, am,%}¦ n. motion, surging (of waves).
<LEND>

<L>39486<pc>0845-c<k1>riNgin<k2>riNgin
{%Riṅgin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ creeping, crawling (said of young
children).
<LEND>

<L>39487<pc>0845-c<k1>ric<k2>ric
{#ric#}¦ {%ric,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%riṇakti, riṅkte,%}
{%rireca, ririce, rekṣyati, -te, aricat%} or
{%araikṣīt%} (Vedic forms {%arirecīt, araik%}), {%arikta%}
(1st sing. {%arikṣi%}), {%rektum,%} to empty, make empty,
evacuate, clear, purge, remove, separate, divide; to
resign, give up, deliver up, part with, sell, (but ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 24, 9. ‘to recover,
get back’); to leave, leave behind, bequeath; cl. 10.
1. P. {%recayati, recati,%} &c., to divide, separate; to
disconnect, disjoin; to leave, abandon; to join, mix:
Pass. {%ricyate,%} Aor. {%areci,%} to be emptied, &c.; to be
deprived of, lose, be freed from; to be destroyed,
perish: Caus. {%recayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%arīricat,%} to
cause to empty, make empty; to discharge, emit (as
breath); to abandon, give up: Desid. {%ririkṣati,%}
{%-te:%} Intens. {%rericyate, rerekti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>ric;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">λείπ-ω, λιμπάν-ω, λεῖμμα, λείψανο-ν, λοιπός;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>linqu-o, re-linqu-o, re-liqu-u-s, lic-e-t</nsi> (Osc. <nsi>lik-i-</nsi>
<nsi>tud = lice-to</nsi>), <nsi>lic-e-o-r;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>laib-a, bi-laib-jan,</nsi>
<nsi>af-lif-nan, leihvan;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>bi-lib-an;</nsi> Mod.
Germ. <nsi>bleibe;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>lyfan, be-lijan, lafan,</nsi>
<nsi>lœn, lœnan;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>lek-u, lik-ti, lek-as, pa-</nsi>
<nsi>laiki-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39488<pc>0845-c<k1>rika<k2>rika
{%Rika%}¦ (?), {%am,%} n. the heart, mind; law, litigation.
<LEND>

<L>39489<pc>0845-c<k1>rikta<k2>rikta
{%Rikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ emptied, cleared, purged;
empty, void; unloaded, unburdened; hollow, hol-
lowed (as the hands); having nothing, poor, indi-
gent; vain, worthless, valueless; epithet of one of
the four wagtails (employed in augury); free from,
devoid of, deprived of, destitute of, without; ({%ā%}), f.,
scil. {%tithi,%} epithet of the fourth, ninth, or fourteenth
days of the lunar fortnight; ({%am%}), n. an empty
[Page0846-a+ 76]
place, empty space, vacuum, void, vacuity; a desert,
wilderness, wood, forest. {%—Rikta-kumbha, am,%} n.,
Ved. (the sound of) an empty vessel, a hollow
sound, empty or senseless language. {%—Rikta-kṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. making empty, emptying; causing a
vacuum. {%—Rikta-guru,%} see Pāṇ. VI. 2, 42. {%—Rikta-%}
{%tā,%} f. emptiness, vacuity, void, empty space or space
in general. {%—Rikta-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} empty-handed,
bringing no present. {%—Rikta-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. an
empty vessel; {%(as, ā, am),%} having no vessels or
effects. {%—Rikta-mati, is, is, i,%} empty-minded,
thinking of nothing {%—Rikta-hasta, as, ā, am,%}
empty-handed, having empty hands, bringing no
present; carrying away no present. {%—Riktārka (˚ta-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m. a Sunday falling on one of the Riktā
days. {%—Riktī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make
empty or void, remove, take away; to steal; to
get back, recover. {%—Riktīkṛta-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%}
emptied or deprived of heart.
<LEND>

<L>39490<pc>0846-a<k1>riktaka<k2>riktaka
{%Riktaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ empty, void; unladen, un-
burdened.
<LEND>

<L>39491<pc>0846-a<k1>rikTa<k2>rikTa
{%Riktha, am,%}¦ n. (frequently written {%ṛktha%}), pro-
perty left at death, inheritance, portion, bequest;
property in general, possessions, substance, wealth;
gold. {%—Riktha-grāha, as, ā, am,%} receiving an in-
heritance, inheriting property; ({%as%}), m. an inheritor,
heir. {%—Riktha-jāta, am,%} n. the aggregate of a
property, collected estate (of a deceased person).
{%—Riktha-bhāgin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%riktha-bhāj, k, k,%}
{%k,%} inheriting or sharing property, dividing the pro-
perty (of a deceased person), an inheritor, heir.
{%—Riktha-vibhāga, as,%} m. the division or sharing
of (a deceased person's) property, partition of inherit-
ance; a share in an inheritance. {%—Riktha-hara%} or
{%riktha-hāra, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} receiving an inherit-
ance, inheriting property; ({%as%}), m. an heir. {%—Rik-%}
{%tha-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} receiving or inheriting pro-
perty; ({%ī%}), m. an heir, one who succeeds to property;
a maternal uncle; the seed of the Indian fig-tree.
<LEND>

<L>39492<pc>0846-a<k1>rikTAda<k2>rikTAda
{%Rikthāda (˚tha-āda), as, ā, am,%}¦ receiving an
inheritance; ({%as%}), m. an heir, son.
<LEND>

<L>39493<pc>0846-a<k1>rikTin<k2>rikTin
{%Rikthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ inheriting property; possessing
property, wealthy; ({%ī%}), m. an heir.
<LEND>

<L>39494<pc>0846-a<k1>rikTIya<k2>rikTIya
{%Rikthīya%}¦ in {%a-rikthīya, as, ā, am,%} incapable of
inheriting property, having no claim to inheritance.
<LEND>

<L>39495<pc>0846-a<k1>ricyamAna<k2>ricyamAna
{%Ricyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being emptied, being
purged, being left clear, being freed from, being
delivered from.
<LEND>

<L>39496<pc>0846-a<k1>ririkvas<k2>ririkvas
{%Ririkvas, vān,%}¦ m., Ved. one who has emaciated
or attenuated (his body by austerities, Ṛg-veda IV.
24, 3).
<LEND>

<L>39497<pc>0846-a<k1>reka<k2>reka
{%Reka, reca, recita,%}¦ &c. See p. 852, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39498<pc>0846-a<k1>rij<k2>rij
{#rij#}¦ {%rij%} (connected with rt. {%ṛñj%}), cl. 1.
A. {%rejate,%} &c., to fry; to parch; [cf. rt.
{%bhṛj.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39499<pc>0846-a<k1>riwi<k2>riwi
{#riwi#}¦ {%riṭi, is,%} f. the crackling or roaring
of flame; a musical instrument; black salt.
<LEND>

<L>39500<pc>0846-a<k1>riRInagara<k2>riRInagara
{#riRInagara#}¦ {%riṇī-nagara, am,%} n., N. of a
town.
<LEND>

<L>39501<pc>0846-a<k1>riRv<k2>riRv
{#riRv#}¦ {%riṇv%} or {%rimb%} (= rt. {%raṇv%}), cl. 1.
P. {%riṇvati, rimbati,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>39502<pc>0846-a<k1>rit<k2>rit
{#rit#}¦ {%rit, t, t, t%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ri%}), Ved. (per-
haps) moving, flowing, (Sāy. = {%gantṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>39503<pc>0846-a<k1>ritakvan<k2>ritakvan
{#ritakvan#}¦ {%ritakvan, ā,%} m., Ved. a thief,
(various reading for {%takvan,%} Naigh. III. 24.)
<LEND>

<L>39504<pc>0846-a<k1>ridDa<k2>ridDa
{#ridDa#}¦ {%riddha, as, ā, am%} (probably for {%ṛddha,%}
q. v.), ripe (said of grain).
<LEND>

<L>39505<pc>0846-a<k1>riDama<k2>riDama
{#riDama#}¦ {%ridhama, as,%} m. (perhaps connected
with {%riddha%} above), spring; love.
<LEND>

<L>39506<pc>0846-a<k1>rip<k2>rip<h>1
{#rip#} 1¦. {%rip%} (the old form of rt. {%lip,%} q. v.;
in Ṛg-veda V. 85,8. the form {%riripuḥ%}
{%= lepayanti = pāpam āropayanti%}), Ved. to smear,
smear or cover over; to defile, spoil; to deceive,
cheat.
<LEND>

<L>39507<pc>0846-a<k1>rip<k2>rip<h>2
2. {%rip, p,%}¦ f., Ved. injury, fraud, deceit, trick,
guile, (Sāy. = {%hiṃsā, māyā%}); the earth, (Sāy. {%= %}
[Page0846-b+ 79]
{%bhūmi%}); ({%p, p, p%}), injuring, an injurer, enemy,
deceiver, cheat, (Sāy. {%= ripu.%})
<LEND>

<L>39508<pc>0846-b<k1>ripu<k2>ripu
{%Ripu, us, us, u%}¦ (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 27. fr.
rt. {%rap;%} according to others, connected with rt. 1. {%ri%}
or with Caus. of rt. 1. {%rī;%} cf. rt. {%riph%}), injuring,
cheating, deceiving, fraudulent, treacherous, false
(Ved.); ({%us%}), m. a deceiver, cheat, rogue, thief
(Ved.); an enemy, adversary, foe; (in astrology) a
hostile planet; epithet of the sixth astrological house;
N. of a son of Śliṣṭi. {%—Ripu-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%}
slaying an enemy, killing foes; ({%inī%}), f. a species of
creeper; Abrus Precatorius. {%—Ripu-ghna, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} killing an enemy. {%—Ripuñ-jaya, as, ā, am,%}
conquering a foe, vanquishing enemies; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of several kings; of a son of Śliṣṭi; of a son
of Suvīra; of a son of Viśva-jit. {%—Ripu-tā,%} f. en-
mity, hostility. {%—Ripu-nipātin, ī, inī, i,%} causing
an enemy to fall, destroying a foe. {%—Ripu-bala,%}
{%am,%} n. an enemy's army. {%—Ripu-bhaya, am,%} n.
fear or danger from an enemy. {%—Ripu-bhavana,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%ripu-bhāva, as,%} m. epithet of the sixth
astrological house. {%—Ripu-malla, as,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Ripu-rakta, am,%} n. an enemy's blood.
{%—Ripu-rakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} preserving from an
enemy. {%—Ripu-rākṣasa, as,%} m., N. of an
elephant. {%—Ripu-varjita, as, ā, am,%} freed from
an enemy. {%—Ripu-vaśa, as, ā, am,%} subject to an
enemy. {%—Ripuvaśa-tva, am,%} n. subjection to an
enemy. {%—Ripu-sūdana, as, ī, am,%} destroying ene-
mies. {%—Ripu-sthāna, am,%} n. epithet of the sixth
astrological house.
<LEND>

<L>39509<pc>0846-b<k1>ripta<k2>ripta
{%Ripta, as, ā, am (= lipta),%}¦ Ved. anointed,
smeared, ({%api-ripta%} in Ṛg-veda I. 118, 7 {%= paṭa-%}
{%lena pihita-dṛṣṭi,%} i. e. blinded.)
<LEND>

<L>39510<pc>0846-b<k1>ripra<k2>ripra
{%Ripra, am,%}¦ n. (according to Uṇādi-s. V. 55. fr.
rt. 1. {%rī%}), dirt, impurity (Ved.); sin, (Sāy. {%= pāpa;%}
cf. Nirukta IV. 21); ({%as, ā, am%}), vile, bad; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of Śliṣṭi. {%—Ripra-vāha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. carrying off or removing impurity or sin,
(Sāy. {%= pāpasya voḍhṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>39511<pc>0846-b<k1>repa<k2>repa
{%Repa, as, ā, am,%}¦ low, vile, inferior, contemptible;
cruel, savage.
<LEND>

<L>39512<pc>0846-b<k1>repas<k2>repas
{%Repas, as,%}¦ n. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 189. fr.
rt. {%rap;%} cf. {%rapas%}), a spot, stain; a wrong or
blamable action, fault, sin; {%(ās, ās, as),%} low, vile,
contemptible; miserly, niggardly; wicked, aban-
doned, cruel, savage.
<LEND>

<L>39513<pc>0846-b<k1>ripsu<k2>ripsu
{#ripsu#}¦ {%ripsu.%} See p. 833, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39514<pc>0846-b<k1>riP<k2>riP
{#riP#}¦ {%riph%} [cf. rt. {%rih%}], cl. 6. P. {%riphati,%}
{%rirepha,%} &c., to utter a murmuring gut-
tural sound, to utter a rough or grating or burring
sound, to pronounce the letter {%r%} [cf. {%repha%} below];
to murmur or snarl at, revile, find fault with, blame,
despise; (according to lexicographers also capable of
the following senses), to speak, say, relate; to boast,
({%katthane%} being a various reading for {%kathane%});
to give; to fight; to hurl, kill, (in this sense = rts.
{%ṛph, rimph%}): Pass. {%riphyate,%} to be murmured or
spoken in a grating or burring manner, to have or
take the pronunciation of the letter {%r.%}
<LEND>

<L>39515<pc>0846-b<k1>riPat<k2>riPat
{%Riphat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} murmuring, uttering
a burring sound, pronouncing the letter {%r.%}
<LEND>

<L>39516<pc>0846-b<k1>riPita<k2>riPita
{%Riphita, as, ā, am,%}¦ uttered in a burring or
grating manner, pronounced with the sound of the
letter {%r.%}
<LEND>

<L>39517<pc>0846-b<k1>rePa<k2>rePa
{%Repha, as,%}¦ m. a burr, burring or grating sound, the
letter {%r;%} a cretic (see 3. {%ra%}); passion, affection of
the mind; ({%as, ā, am%}), low, vile, contemptible;
[cf. {%repa%} above.] {%—Repha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
containing a burring sound, having the sound of {%r.%}
{%—Repha-vipulā = ra-vipulā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39518<pc>0846-b<k1>rePas<k2>rePas
{%Rephas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ low, vile, contemptible;
wicked, abandoned; miserly, niggardly; cruel, savage;
[cf. {%repas%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>39519<pc>0846-b<k1>rePitvA<k2>rePitvA
{%Rephitvā,%}¦ ind. having uttered a burring or grating
sound, having pronounced with the sound of the
letter {%r.%}
<LEND>

<L>39520<pc>0846-b<k1>rePin<k2>rePin
{%Rephin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. containing a burring sound,
containing the letter {%r,%} having the nature of {%r.%}
<LEND>
[Page0846-c+ 73]

<L>39521<pc>0846-c<k1>riB<k2>riB
{#riB#}¦ {%ribh%} or {%rebh,%} cl. 1. A. {%rebhate%} (Ved.
also P. {%rebhati%}), {%rirebhe, rebhitum,%} to
crackle, creak; to murmur (as a stream &c.); to
sound in general; to chatter, babble, clatter; to talk
or speak aloud, shout with joy, rejoice [cf. rt. {%rih%}];
to praise, glorify, worship (Ved. P.): Pass. {%ribhyate,%}
to be praised or glorified; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥοίβδην, ῥοῖβδος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ῥοιβδέω.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>39522<pc>0846-c<k1>riBvan<k2>riBvan
{%Ribhvan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. (according to Naigh. III.
24) a thief; [cf. {%rihvan.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39523<pc>0846-c<k1>reBa<k2>reBa
{%Rebha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. crackling; sounding
loudly; {%(as),%} m. a praiser, reciter of praises, panegyrist,
celebrator; a talker, prattler, chatterer; N. of a
Ṛṣi (who was cast into a well by the Asuras, and
rescued by the Aśvins after having lain there for ten
nights and nine days, see Ṛg-veda I. 112, 5. 116,
24, &c.); N. of the author of Ṛg-veda VIII. 97
(having the patronymic Kāśyapa). {%—Rebha-sūnū,%}
m. du. two sons of Rebha, the authors of the hymns
Ṛg-veda IX. 99, 100.
<LEND>

<L>39524<pc>0846-c<k1>reBaRa<k2>reBaRa
{%Rebhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the lowing of kine.
<LEND>

<L>39525<pc>0846-c<k1>reBat<k2>reBat
{%Rebhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. crackling, sounding;
praising.
<LEND>

<L>39526<pc>0846-c<k1>reBila<k2>reBila
{%Rebhila%}¦ and {%rebhilaka, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>
<L>39526.1<pc>0846-c<k1>reBilaka<k2>reBilaka
{{Lbody=39526}}
<LEND>

<L>39527<pc>0846-c<k1>rimeda<k2>rimeda
{#rimeda#}¦ {%rimeda, as,%} m. = {%ari-meda.%}
<LEND>

<L>39528<pc>0846-c<k1>rimP<k2>rimP
{#rimP#}¦ {%rimph%} (connected with rt. {%ṛph;%}
cf. rt. {%riph%}), cl. 6. P. {%rimphati,%} to
hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>39529<pc>0846-c<k1>rimPa<k2>rimPa
{%Rimpha, am,%}¦ n. the zodiac.
<LEND>

<L>39530<pc>0846-c<k1>rimb<k2>rimb
{#rimb#}¦ {%rimb%} = rt. {%riṇv.%}
<LEND>

<L>39531<pc>0846-c<k1>riraMsA<k2>riraMsA
{#riraMsA#}¦ {%riraṃsā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. {%ram%}),
the desire to rejoice or be pleased, wish to sport;
desire of pleasure or sexual enjoyment, lasciviousness,
lustfulness.
<LEND>

<L>39532<pc>0846-c<k1>riraMsu<k2>riraMsu
{%Riraṃsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desiring to rejoice, wishing to
sport, wishing for sexual pleasures, lustful, wanton,
lascivious.
<LEND>

<L>39533<pc>0846-c<k1>riramayizu<k2>riramayizu
{%Riramayiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. Desid. of Caus.),
wishing to cause or give pleasure (especially sexual
pleasure).
<LEND>

<L>39534<pc>0846-c<k1>rirakzizA<k2>rirakzizA
{#rirakzizA#}¦ {%rirakṣiṣā,%} f. (fr. the Desid. of
rt. 1. {%rakṣ%}), the desire to watch or keep guard,
wish to protect.
<LEND>

<L>39535<pc>0846-c<k1>rirakzA<k2>rirakzA
{%Rirakṣā,%}¦ f. less correct for the above.
<LEND>

<L>39536<pc>0846-c<k1>rirakzizu<k2>rirakzizu
{%Rirakṣiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desiring to watch or keep
guard, wishing to protect.
<LEND>

<L>39537<pc>0846-c<k1>rirakzu<k2>rirakzu
{%Rirakṣu,%}¦ less correct for {%rirakṣiṣu%} above.
<LEND>

<L>39538<pc>0846-c<k1>ririkzu<k2>ririkzu
{#ririkzu#}¦ {%ririkṣu.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>39539<pc>0846-c<k1>rirI<k2>rirI
{#rirI#}¦ {%rirī,%} f. yellow brass, pale brass,
prince's metal; [cf. {%rīrī, rīti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39540<pc>0846-c<k1>rilhaRa<k2>rilhaRa
{#rilhaRa#}¦ {%rilhaṇa%} or {%rihlaṇa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39541<pc>0846-c<k1>rivaka<k2>rivaka
{#rivaka#}¦ {%rivaka, as,%} m. = {%ravaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>39542<pc>0846-c<k1>riS<k2>riS
{#riS#}¦ {%riś%} (according to some an older
form of rt. 1. {%liś,%} q. v.; closely connected
with rt. 1. {%riṣ,%} from which, in some forms and
meanings, it is not distinguishable; cf. also rts. {%ruś,%}
1. {%ruṣ%}), cl. 6. P. {%riśati, rireśa, rekṣyati, ari-%}
{%kṣat, reṣṭum,%} Ved. to tear, rend, tear off, break
off, pluck off, injure, hurt; to feed on, graze: Caus.
{%reśayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%arīriśat:%} Desid. {%ririkṣati,%}
to wish to injure: Intens. {%reriśyate, rereṣṭi;%} [cf.
Slav. <nsi>resati,</nsi> ‘to cut.’]
<LEND>

<L>39543<pc>0846-c<k1>ririkzat<k2>ririkzat
{%Ririkṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. wishing to injure,
&c.; ({%an%}), m. an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>39544<pc>0846-c<k1>ririkzu<k2>ririkzu
{%Ririkṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to injure or harm,
(this form is sometimes referred to rt. 1. {%riṣ.%})
<LEND>

<L>39545<pc>0846-c<k1>riSa<k2>riSa
{%Riśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. tearing, tearing off, injur-
ing; ({%as%}), m. an injurer, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>39546<pc>0846-c<k1>riSat<k2>riSat
{%Riśat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} Ved. tearing, injuring,
hurting; feeding or grazing upon, consuming, (Sāy.
{%= bhakṣaṇārthaṃ hiṃsat.%})
<LEND>

<L>39547<pc>0846-c<k1>riSAdas<k2>riSAdas
{%Riśādas, ās, ās, as%}¦ (a word of doubtful derivation
and meaning; said to be fr. {%riśa,%} an enemy, + {%ada%}
[Page0847-a+ 77]
fr. rt. {%ad%}), Ved. destroying those who injure, de-
stroying enemies, epithet of the Maruts, &c.; [cf.
Ṛg-veda I. 39, 4.]
<LEND>

<L>39548<pc>0847-a<k1>rizwa<k2>rizwa<h>1
1. {%riṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. {%riṣṭa%} see below),
Ved. torn, torn off, broken, injured; wearied.
<LEND>

<L>39549<pc>0847-a<k1>riSya<k2>riSya
{#riSya#}¦ {%riśya, as,%} m. = {%ṛśya,%} an antelope.
<LEND>

<L>39550<pc>0847-a<k1>riz<k2>riz<h>1
{#riz#} 1¦. {%riṣ%} (closely connected with rt.
{%riś,%} from which, in some forms and mean-
ings, it is not distinguishable; cf. also rts. {%ruś,%}
1. {%ruṣ%}), cl. 1. 4. P. {%reṣati, riṣyati%} (in ep. and
later authors also A. {%riṣyate%}), {%rireṣa, reṣiṣyati,%}
{%areṣīt%} or {%ariṣat%} (Vedic forms {%riṣat, riṣāma,%}
{%riṣāthana, reṣat, rīṣata%}), {%reṣitum%} or {%reṣṭum%}
(Ved. inf. {%riṣe%}), to injure, hurt, harm; to kill,
destroy, ruin; to give offence; to be injured or
destroyed, suffer wrong, perish (cl.4); to fail, mis-
carry, meet with misfortune or disaster (cl. 4): Caus.
{%reṣayati, -yate, -yitum,%} Aor. {%arīriṣat, arīri-%}
{%ṣata,%} to cause to be injured, injure, hurt, harm; to
cause to miscarry, make to fail; to fail, miscarry,
meet with misfortune or disaster (A.): Desid. {%riri-%}
{%ṣiṣati, rireṣiṣati,%} (according to some also {%ri-%}
{%rikṣati%}): Intens. {%reriṣyate, rereṣṭi;%} [cf. pro-
bably Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥαίω, ῥαιστός;</lang> Lat. <nsi>lœdo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39551<pc>0847-a<k1>riz<k2>riz<h>2
2. {%riṣ, ṭ,%}¦ f. injury; ({%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ%}), injuring, an injurer.
<LEND>

<L>39552<pc>0847-a<k1>riza<k2>riza
{%Riṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ injuring, destroying, &c.; [cf.
{%naghā-riṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39553<pc>0847-a<k1>rizaRya<k2>rizaRya
{%Riṣaṇya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%riṣaṇyati,%} &c. (Pāṇ. VII.
4, 36), Ved. to injure, harm, be hurtful; to reject
(a petition); to fail, miscarry.
<LEND>

<L>39554<pc>0847-a<k1>rizaRyu<k2>rizaRyu
{%Riṣaṇyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. injurious, hurtful, ma-
levolent, (Sāy. {%= hiṃsaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>39555<pc>0847-a<k1>rizIka<k2>rizIka
{%Riṣīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (probably) destroying, destruc-
tive, injurious.
<LEND>

<L>39556<pc>0847-a<k1>rizwa<k2>rizwa<h>2
2. {%riṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see above), injured,
hurt, wounded; unlucky; (according to some also)
lucky; ({%am%}), n. mischief, harm; misfortune, bad luck
({%= ariṣṭa%}); destruction, loss; sin; (according to
some also) good luck, prosperity; ({%as%}), m. a sword;
the soap plant, Sapindus Detergens; N. of a king;
of a Daitya or demon (destroyed by Viṣṇu); of a
son of a Manu; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the mother of the
Apsarases. {%—Riṣṭa-tāti, is, is, i,%} causing prosperity,
propitious; auspicious; [cf. {%śiva-tāti.%}] {%—Riṣṭa-%}
{%deha, as, ā, am,%} wounded in body.
<LEND>

<L>39557<pc>0847-a<k1>rizwaka<k2>rizwaka
{%Riṣṭaka, as,%}¦ m. Sapindus Detergens.
<LEND>

<L>39558<pc>0847-a<k1>rizwi<k2>rizwi
{%Riṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. injury, hurt, damage; failure, mis-
carriage, misfortune, bad luck; (according to some)
good luck; {%iṣu-riṣṭi,%} ‘the going astray or swerv-
ing of an arrow,’ N. of a Sāman; ({%is%}), m. {%= ṛṣṭi,%}
a sword, (according to some also {%is,%} f.)
<LEND>

<L>39559<pc>0847-a<k1>rizwIya<k2>rizwIya
{%Riṣṭīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%riṣṭīyati,%} &c. {%= riṣaṇya%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>39560<pc>0847-a<k1>rizva<k2>rizva
{%Riṣva, as, ā, am,%}¦ injurious, hurtful, mischievous.
<LEND>

<L>39561<pc>0847-a<k1>rizi<k2>rizi
{#rizi#}¦ {%riṣi, is,%} m. {%= ṛṣi.%}
<LEND>

<L>39562<pc>0847-a<k1>rizPa<k2>rizPa
{#rizPa#}¦ {%riṣpha, am,%} n. {%= riḥpha.%}
<LEND>

<L>39563<pc>0847-a<k1>rizya<k2>rizya
{#rizya#}¦ {%riṣya, as,%} m. {%= ṛṣya, ṛśya.%}
{%—Riṣya-mūka, as,%} m. {%= ṛṣya-mūka.%}
<LEND>

<L>39564<pc>0847-a<k1>rih<k2>rih
{#rih#}¦ {%rih%} (a Vedic form of rt. {%lih%}), the
following forms of this rt. are found, {%reḷhi,%}
{%rihati%} (3rd pl. {%rihanti,%} A. {%rihate%}), to lick, taste;
to caress, kiss; (also regarded as another form of rt.
{%riph,%} and therefore said to be capable of the follow-
ing meanings) to praise, worship; to say, speak; to
boast; to give [cf. rt. 1. {%rā%}]; to blame; to fight;
to hurt, injure; to kill, (in this sense said to be also
{%rehati%}): Intens. {%rerihyate,%} to lick again and again;
to caress, kiss.
<LEND>

<L>39565<pc>0847-a<k1>rihat<k2>rihat
{%Rihat, an, atī, at,%}¦ licking.
<LEND>

<L>39566<pc>0847-a<k1>rihARa<k2>rihARa
{%Rihāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. licking, caressing, wish-
ing to caress.
<LEND>

<L>39567<pc>0847-a<k1>rihAyas<k2>rihAyas
{%Rihāyas, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. a thief, robber (Naigh.
III. 24).
<LEND>

<L>39568<pc>0847-a<k1>rihvan<k2>rihvan
{%Rihvan, ā,%}¦ m. a thief; [cf. {%ribhvan.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39569<pc>0847-a<k1>rerihARa<k2>rerihARa
{%Rerihāṇa.%}¦ See s.v.
<LEND>

<L>39570<pc>0847-a<k1>riham<k2>riham
{#riham#}¦ {%riham,%} ind., Ved. various reading
for {%ṛhat,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0847-b+ 75]

<L>39571<pc>0847-b<k1>rI<k2>rI<h>1
{#rI#} 1¦. {%rī%} (connected with rt. 1. {%ri%}), cl.
9. P. A. {%riṇāti, riṇīte, rirāya%} (3rd du.
{%riryatus%}), {%rirye, reṣyati, reṣyate, araiṣīt,%}
{%areṣṭa, retum,%} to go, move; to hurt, injure, kill,
(see rt. 1. {%ri%}); to howl [cf. rt. 1. {%ru%}]; cl. 4. A.
{%rīyate,%} &c., to melt, become fluid, distil, drip,
trickle, ooze, drop, flow [cf. rt. 1. {%lī%}]: Caus. {%repa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%arīripat:%} Desid. {%rirīṣati,%}
{%-te:%} Intens. {%rerīyate, rerayīti;%} [cf. Goth. and
Angl. Sax. <nsi>rinnan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39572<pc>0847-b<k1>rIRa<k2>rIRa
{%Rīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ dropping, trickling, oozing,
distilling, flowing, leaking.
<LEND>

<L>39573<pc>0847-b<k1>rIti<k2>rIti
{%Rīti, is,%}¦ f. going, motion, moving, flowing, trick-
ling; a stream, river; a course; a line, streak; a
limit, boundary ({%= sīman%}); general course or way,
method, mode, manner, fashion; usage, observance,
custom, practice, natural property or disposition;
style, diction, (three styles of diction or composition
are enumerated, viz. {%vaidarbhī, gauḍī, pāñcāli,%} to
which a fourth is sometimes added, viz. {%lāṭikā,%} and
even a fifth and sixth, viz. {%āvantikā%} and {%māgadhī%});
bell-metal, brass, pale brass; calx of brass; rust of
iron; scoria of any metal or the oxide formed on
the surface of metals by their exposure to heat and
air. {%—Rīti-jña, as, ā, am,%} acquainted with estab-
lished usages or customs. {%—Rīti-puṣpa, am,%} n.
‘brass-efflorescence,’ calx of brass. {%—Rīti-praṣṭha,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a Praṣṭha weight of brass. {%—Rīti-%}
{%baddha, as, ā, am,%} brass-bound, studded or inlaid
with brass. {%—Rītī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being in a row,
standing in a line. {%—Rīty-ap, p, p, p,%} Ved. stream-
ing with rain.
<LEND>

<L>39574<pc>0847-b<k1>rItika<k2>rItika
{%Rītika, am,%}¦ n. calx of brass; ({%ā%}), f. bell-metal,
brass.
<LEND>

<L>39575<pc>0847-b<k1>rI<k2>rI<h>2
{#rI#} 2¦. {%rī = rai%} in {%ṛdhad-rī,%} (for {%rī,%} fem.
of 2. {%ra,%} see under 2. {%ra,%} p. 824.)
<LEND>

<L>39576<pc>0847-b<k1>rIjyA<k2>rIjyA
{#rIjyA#}¦ {%rījyā,%} f. reproach, censure [cf.
{%rīḍhā%}]; shame, modesty.
<LEND>

<L>39577<pc>0847-b<k1>rIWA<k2>rIWA
{#rIWA#}¦ {%rīṭhā,%} f. or {%rīṭhā-karañja, as,%} m. a
species of Karañja.
<LEND>

<L>39578<pc>0847-b<k1>rIQaka<k2>rIQaka
{#rIQaka#}¦ {%rīḍhaka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%rih%}), the back-bone.
<LEND>

<L>39579<pc>0847-b<k1>rIQA<k2>rIQA
{#rIQA#}¦ {%rīḍhā,%} f. (probably fr. rt. {%rih%}), dis-
respect. disregard, contempt, irreverence; [cf. {%ava-%}
{%līḍhā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39580<pc>0847-b<k1>rIra<k2>rIra
{#rIra#}¦ {%rīra, as,%} m., N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>39581<pc>0847-b<k1>rIrI<k2>rIrI
{#rIrI#}¦ {%rīrī,%} f. {%= rirī,%} yellow brass.
<LEND>

<L>39582<pc>0847-b<k1>rIv<k2>rIv
{#rIv#}¦ {%rīv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%rīvati, -te,%} &c., to
take.
<LEND>

<L>39583<pc>0847-b<k1>ru<k2>ru<h>1
{#ru#} 1¦. {%ru,%} cl. 2. P. {%rauti, ravīti%} (Ved. also
{%ruvati,%} and in some forms also A.), Impf.
{%araut%} or {%aravīt%} (1st du. {%aruva%} or {%aruvīva,%} 3rd
pl. {%aruvan%}), {%rurāva%} (1st du. {%ruruviva,%} 3rd pl. A.
{%ruruvire%}), {%ravitā%} or (according to Vopa-deva IX.
53) {%rotā, raviṣyati, arāvīt%} (A. {%arāviṣṭa,%} 3rd
pl. {%arāviṣus,%} Ved. {%aravanta%}), {%ravitum,%} and (ac-
cording to Vopa-deva) {%rotum,%} to cry or make any
particular sound or noise, bellow, roar, howl, yelp,
yell, bray, shout, shriek; to hum (as bees); to sound
in general; to cry aloud, to fill with noise or cries;
to praise (according to Naigh. III. 14): Pass. {%rū-%}
{%yate:%} Caus. {%rāvayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%arīravat%}
(anomalous form 3rd pl. {%arūruvan%}), to cause to
bellow or roar, &c., to cause an uproar; to fill with
shrieks, clamour, &c.: Desid. of Caus. {%rirāvayi-%}
{%ṣati:%} Desid. {%rurūṣati:%} Intens. {%rorūyate, -ti,%}
{%roravīti, roroti,%} to cry out loudly, bellow or roar
loudly, yelp loudly, scream aloud, to vociferate; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ὠρύ-ω, ὠρυ-θ-μό-ς, ὀρυ-μαγδό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>rû-mor,</nsi>
<nsi>rûm-i-to, râvi-s, rau-cu-s;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>ryn;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>rev-a, rju-ti,</nsi> ‘to roar.’]
<LEND>

<L>39584<pc>0847-b<k1>ru<k2>ru<h>2
2. {%ru, us,%}¦ m. sound, noise; fear, alarm; war,
battle.
<LEND>

<L>39585<pc>0847-b<k1>ruta<k2>ruta<h>1
1. {%ruta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see col. 3), sounded,
filled with the cry (of animals), made to resound,
[Page0847-c+ 75]
rendered vocal; ({%am%}), n. any cry or noise, yell,
roar, humming (of bees), the note of birds; song.
{%—Ruta-jña, as, ā, am,%} understanding the cries (of
animals); ({%as%}), m. an augur. {%—Ruta-vyāja, as,%} m.
simulated cry or sound; mimicry.
<LEND>

<L>39586<pc>0847-c<k1>rutAyata<k2>rutAyata
{%Rutāyata (?), as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. 1. {%ruta%}), rendered
vocal (by the sound of birds, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>39587<pc>0847-c<k1>ruvaRya<k2>ruvaRya
{%Ruvaṇya%}¦ (fr. an unused form {%ruvaṇa%}), Nom. P. {%ru-%}
{%vaṇyati,%} &c., Ved. to cry, utter harsh or loud cries.
<LEND>

<L>39588<pc>0847-c<k1>ruvaRyu<k2>ruvaRyu
{%Ruvaṇyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. sounding, clamouring.
<LEND>

<L>39589<pc>0847-c<k1>ruvat<k2>ruvat
{%Ruvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ crying out, bellowing, howling,
crying.
<LEND>

<L>39590<pc>0847-c<k1>ruvaTa<k2>ruvaTa
{%Ruvatha, as,%}¦ m. the bellowing of a bull (Ved.);
a dog.
<LEND>

<L>39591<pc>0847-c<k1>roravaRa<k2>roravaRa
{%Roravaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Intens.), Ved. a loud
cry or roaring, violent bellowing.
<LEND>

<L>39592<pc>0847-c<k1>roruvat<k2>roruvat
{%Roruvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. sounding or shouting
loudly, (referred by some to rt. 3. {%ru.%})
<LEND>

<L>39593<pc>0847-c<k1>roruvARa<k2>roruvARa
{%Roruvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crying loudly, making a
loud cry or sound.
<LEND>

<L>39594<pc>0847-c<k1>rorUya<k2>rorUya
{%Rorūya, as,%}¦ m. crying much, &c. (Vopa-deva
XXVI. 29).
<LEND>

<L>39595<pc>0847-c<k1>rorUyamARa<k2>rorUyamARa
{%Rorūyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crying loudly, making
a loud cry.
<LEND>

<L>39596<pc>0847-c<k1>ru<k2>ru<h>3
{#ru#} 3¦. {%ru,%} cl. 1. A. {%ravate, ruruve,%} &c.,
Ved. to break to pieces, dash to pieces; to
kill, hurt (?); to be angry (?); to go; to speak:
Caus. {%rāvayati,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>39597<pc>0847-c<k1>ru<k2>ru<h>4
4. {%ru, us,%}¦ m. cutting, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>39598<pc>0847-c<k1>ruta<k2>ruta<h>2
2. {%ruta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see col. 2), broken to
pieces, divided, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39599<pc>0847-c<k1>ruMS<k2>ruMS
{#ruMS#}¦ {%ruṃś,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%ruṃśati, ruṃśa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to speak; to shine (?).
<LEND>

<L>39600<pc>0847-c<k1>ruka<k2>ruka
{#ruka#}¦ {%ruka, as, ā, am,%} liberal, bountiful.
<LEND>

<L>39601<pc>0847-c<k1>rukkAma<k2>rukkAma
{#rukkAma#}¦ {%ruk-kāma.%} See under 2. {%ruc,%} p. 848.
<LEND>

<L>39602<pc>0847-c<k1>rukpratikriyA<k2>rukpratikriyA
{#rukpratikriyA#}¦ {%ruk-pratikriyā.%} See under
2. {%ruj,%} p. 848, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39603<pc>0847-c<k1>rukma<k2>rukma
{#rukma#}¦ {%rukma, rukmin,%} &c. See below.
<LEND>

<L>39604<pc>0847-c<k1>rukmat<k2>rukmat
{#rukmat#}¦ {%ruk-mat, ruṅ-mat.%} See under 2. {%ruc,%}
p. 848, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39605<pc>0847-c<k1>rukza<k2>rukza<h>1
{#rukza#} 1¦. {%rukṣa, as, ā, am,%} (for 2. see p. 848,
col. 1), rough, harsh, &c. {%= rūkṣa,%} q. v.; [cf. Angl.
Sax. <nsi>rug, ruh, ruw;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>rough, rugged.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39606<pc>0847-c<k1>ruksadman<k2>ruksadman
{#ruksadman#}¦ {%ruk-sadman, rug-anvita,%} &c.
See under 2. {%ruj,%} p. 848, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39607<pc>0847-c<k1>rugRa<k2>rugRa
{#rugRa#}¦ {%rugṇa, rugna.%} See p. 848, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39608<pc>0847-c<k1>ruc<k2>ruc<h>1
{#ruc#} 1¦. {%ruc%} (connected with rt. {%loc,%} q. v.),
cl. 1. A. (sometimes P. on account of the
metre), {%rocate (-ti), ruruce, rociṣyate, arucat,%}
{%arociṣṭa, rocitum%} (Ved. Inf. {%ruce%}), to shine, be
bright or resplendent (said of the sun, fire, stars,
&c.); to make bright or resplendent (Ved. P.); to
shine beautifully, appear beautiful, appear good; to
please, be agreeable; to please any one (dat. or gen.);
to be pleased, find pleasure in, approve, desire (some-
times with acc. or dat.); Pass. {%rucyate,%} Aor. {%aroci,%} to
be bright or radiant: Caus. {%rocayati, -yate, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%arūrucat,%} to cause to shine; to enlighten, illu-
minate, irradiate, make bright; to make pleasant
or agreeable; to please (A.), be pleasant to any one
(dat.); to cause to like; to cause any one (acc.) to
long for anything (dat.); to cause to appear beautiful
or good, to find pleasure in, like, approve, choose (A.);
to resolve: Pass. of Caus. {%rocyate,%} to be agreeable:
Desid. {%ruruciṣate, rurociṣate;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀμφι-λύκ-η,</lang>
<lang n="greek">λύχ-νο-ς, λευκό-ς, λοῦσσο-ν:</lang>]; Lat. <nsi>luc-eo,</nsi>
<nsi>lux, lu-men, lucidu-s, lu-na, Leucesius, di-luc-</nsi>
<nsi>ulu-m:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>liuh-ath,</nsi> ‘light;’ <nsi>lauhmoni,</nsi> ‘light-
ning;’ <nsi>liuhtjan:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>lichan, luchjan,</nsi>
<nsi>lochon:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>leoht, lioht, gelihtan, locian:</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>luca,</nsi> ‘a ray;’ <nsi>luna,</nsi> ‘the moon:’ Lith.
<nsi>lauka-s, lauki-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39609<pc>0847-c<k1>rukma<k2>rukma
{%Rukma, as, ā, am,%}¦ bright, radiant, clear; ({%as%}),
m. an ornament of gold, golden chain, (perhaps
also) an ornament of precious stones (Ved.); the
[Page0848-a+ 81]
plant Mesua Roxburghii; the thorn-apple; N. of a
son of Rucaka; ({%am%}), n. gold; iron. {%—Rukma-%}
{%kavaca, as,%} m., N. of a grandson of Uśanas.
{%—Rukma-kāraka, as,%} m. a worker in gold, gold-
smith. {%—Rukma-keśa, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Bhīṣmaka. {%—Rukma-pāśa, as,%} m., Ved. a string
on which golden ornaments are worn. {%—Rukma-pura,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘city of gold,’ N. of the city inhabited by
Garuḍa. {%—Rukma-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} having a
gold surface, coated or overlaid with gold, gold-
plated, gilded. {%—Rukma-prastaraṇa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having an outer garment decorated with gold.
{%—Rukma-bāhu, us,%} m., N. of a son of Bhīṣmaka.
{%—Rukma-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of gold, golden.
{%—Rukma-mālin, ī,%} m., N. of a son of Bhīṣmaka.
{%—Rukma-ratha, as,%} m. a golden car or chariot; the
chariot of Rukma-ratha, i. e. of Droṇa; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having a golden chariot; ({%as%}), m., N. of Droṇa; of
a son of Śalya; of a son of Mahat; of a son of
Bhīṣmaka. {%—Rukma-vakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
golden-breasted, having golden ornaments on the
breast (said of the Maruts). {%—Rukma-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} possessing gold, golden, ornamented with gold;
({%ān%}), m. a proper N., {%= rukmin; (atī),%} f. a parti-
cular metre, four times ¯˘˘¯¯¯˘˘¯¯; N. of
a granddaughter of Rukmin and wife of Aniruddha.
{%—Rukma-vāhana, as, ā, am,%} golden-carred, hav-
ing a golden chariot; ({%as%}), m., N. of Droṇa.
{%—Rukma-steya, am,%} n. stealing gold. {%—Rukmāṅ-%}
{%gada (˚ma-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} wearing a golden
bracelet on the upper arm; ({%as%}), m., N. of various
kings. {%—Rukmābha (˚ma-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} shining
like gold, bright as the purest gold. {%—Rukmeṣu%}
{%(˚ma-iṣu), us,%} m. ‘golden-arrowed,’ N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>39610<pc>0848-a<k1>rukmi<k2>rukmi
{%Rukmi, is,%}¦ m. a proper N. ({%= rukmin;%} in one
or two passages {%rukmim%} is used for {%rukmiṇam%} on
account of the metre).
<LEND>

<L>39611<pc>0848-a<k1>rukmin<k2>rukmin
{%Rukmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ wearing golden ornaments,
decorated with golden ornaments (Ved.), gilded,
gilt; ({%ī%}), m., N. of the eldest son of Bhīṣmaka
and adversary of Kṛṣṇa (who carried off his sister
Rukmiṇī; he was slain by Bala-deva); N. of a
mountain; {%(iṇī),%} f., N. of a daughter of Bhīṣmaka
carried off and espoused by Kṛṣṇa, (she is repre-
sented as the mother of Pra-dyumna, and in the
later mythology = ) the goddess Lakṣmī; N. of
Dākṣāyaṇī in Dvāravatī; of a daughter of Śreṣ-
thin Sulocana. {%—Rukmi-darpa, as,%} m., N. of Bala-
deva (so called as proud of having overcome Rukmin).
{%—Rukmi-dārin, ī,%} or {%rukmi-dāraṇa, as,%} or
{%rukmi-bhid, t,%} m. ‘destroyer of Rukmin,’ N. of
Bala-deva.
<LEND>

<L>39612<pc>0848-a<k1>rukza<k2>rukza<h>2
2. {%rukṣa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 847, col. 3),
Ved. shining, brilliant, radiant, glittering, (Sāy. =
{%dīpta.%})
<LEND>

<L>39613<pc>0848-a<k1>ruc<k2>ruc<h>2
2. {%ruc, k,%}¦ f. light, lustre, brightness; lightning;
splendor, beauty, loveliness; colour; appearance,
(sometimes at the end of a comp., e. g. {%janāḥ, sura-%}
{%rucaḥ,%} god-like men); pleasure, delight, liking,
wish, desire; [cf. Lat. <nsi>lux.</nsi>] {%—Ruk-kāma, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. desiring splendor, eager for lustre. {%—Ruk-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of brightness, shin-
ing; ({%ān%}), m., N. of Agni. {%—Ruṅ-mat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. containing the word {%ruc.%}
<LEND>

<L>39614<pc>0848-a<k1>ruca<k2>ruca
{%Ruca, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. bright, radiant, brilliant;
({%ā%}), f. light, lustre, beauty; pleasure, delight, desire,
liking; the note of the parrot or Maina.
<LEND>

<L>39615<pc>0848-a<k1>rucaka<k2>rucaka
{%Rucaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ agreeable, pleasing; sharp,
acrid; tonic, stomachic; ({%as%}), m. epithet of a kind
of four-sided column; epithet of one of the five
great personages born under particular constellations;
the citron, Citrus Medica; a pigeon; N. of a moun-
tain; of a son of Uśanas; ({%am%}), n. one of the five
kinds of bone in the human body (that of the teeth),
a tooth, (said to be also {%as,%} m.); a kind of golden
ornament, an ornament for the neck, a ring, an
ornament for a horse, (according to some {%as,%} m.); a
curl on a horse's neck; any object or substance sup-
posed to bring good luck, (also {%as,%} m.); epithet of
a sort of building or temple having terraces on three
sides and closed only on the north side; a stomachic,
[Page0848-b+ 81]
tonic; (according to native authorities also) Ricinus
Communis; a garland, wreath, crown; sochal salt;
natron, alkali; the perfume Rocanā; an anthel-
minthic medicine commonly called Viḍaṅga; {%= prot-%}
{%kaṭa; = utkaṭa; = svādyarasa%} (?).
<LEND>

<L>39616<pc>0848-b<k1>ruci<k2>ruci
{%Ruci, is,%}¦ f. light, lustre, brightness, splendor, beauty;
a ray of light; colour; appearance; liking, taste, re-
lish, zest, appetite, hunger; wish, desire, pleasure,
({%rucyā,%} with pleasure, willingly); passion; inclina-
tion, taste for, liking for, (at the end of comps. in
the sense ‘having a taste or liking for,’ cf. {%māṃsa-%}
{%r˚, hiṃsā-r˚%}); intent application to any object; (in
erotic works) epithet of a particular kind of lover's
embrace; a kind of yellow pigment ({%= go-rocanā%});
N. of an Apsaras; of the wife of Deva-śarman; ({%is%}),
m., N. of a Prajā-pati, the husband of Ākūti and
father of Yajña or Su-yajña and of Manu Raucya;
of a son of Viśvā-mitra; of a king; {%(is, is, i),%}
pleasing, pleasant, agreeable {%(= rucira)%}. {%—Ruci-%}
{%kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} causing pleasure, entertaining,
diverting, amusing, exciting desire; causing an appe-
tite or relish, tasteful, savoury, sapid, appetizing,
stomachic; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Keśava. {%—Ruci-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing a relish, relishing. {%—Ruci-tā,%} f.
or {%ruci-tva, am,%} n. the having a taste or liking for,
taking pleasure in (at the end of comps., cf. {%sa-%}
{%māna-ruci-tā, hiṃsā-ruci-tva%}); desire, interest,
({%ārambha-ruci-tā,%} engaging in enterprises from
mere liking or from interested motives, having a
taste for new enterprises.) {%—Ruci-datta, as,%} m.,
N. of a commentator on the Tattva-cintā-maṇi-
prakāśa. {%—Ruci-deva, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Ruci-%}
{%dhāman, ā, ā, a,%} having light for an abode; ({%a%}),
n. the abode of light (epithet of the sun). {%—Ruci-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Ruci-pati, is,%}
m., N. of a commentator on the Anarghya-rāghava.
{%—Ruci-parvan, ā,%} m. a proper N. {%—Ruci-prada,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} giving an appetite, appetizing. {%—Ruci-%}
{%prabha, as,%} m., N. of a Daitya. {%—Ruci-phala, am,%}
n. a kind of fruit {%(= amṛtāhva)%}. {%—Ruci-bhartṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m. ‘lord or bearer of light,’ the sun; ‘lord or
cherisher of pleasure,’ a husband. {%—Ruci-ruci%} in
{%ruci-ruce rocanam,%} N. of a Sāman. {%—Ruci-vaha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} bringing light. {%—Ruci-samprakḷpta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} prepared with good taste.
<LEND>

<L>39617<pc>0848-b<k1>rucita<k2>rucita
{%Rucita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brightened, bright, shining;
pleased; sweet, delicate, dainty; sharpened (said of
the appetite); digested. {%—Rucita-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. containing the meaning of {%rucita%} or of rt.
1. {%ruc.%}
<LEND>

<L>39618<pc>0848-b<k1>rucitvA<k2>rucitvA
{%Rucitvā%}¦ or {%rocitvā,%} having shone, &c. (Pāṇ. I.
2,26).
<LEND>

<L>39619<pc>0848-b<k1>rucira<k2>rucira
{%Rucira, as, ā, am,%}¦ bright, brilliant, radiant, light,
shining, glittering, beautiful; pleasing, agreeable, charm-
ing, pleasant; sweet, dainty, nice; stomachic, cordial,
restorative; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Sena-jit; ({%ā%}),
f. a kind of yellow pigment ({%= go-rocanā%}); N. of
a metre, four times thirty instants; of another, four
times ˘¯˘¯, ˘˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯; N. of a river;
({%am%}), n. saffron; a radish; cloves. {%—Rucira-ketu,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Rucira-dantauṣ-%}
{%ṭha (˚ta-oṣ˚), as, ī, am,%} having beautiful teeth
and lips. {%—Rucira-deva, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Rucira-dhī, īs,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Rucira-%}
{%prabhāsa-sambhava, as,%} m., N. of a serpent-
demon. {%—Rucira-vadana, as, ā, am,%} having a
pleasing or beautiful countenance. {%—Rucira-vāc, k,%}
{%k, k,%} having pleasant speech, eloquent. {%—Rucira-%}
{%śrī-garbha, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Rucirāñ-%}
{%jana (˚ra-añ˚), as,%} m. {%= śobhāñjana,%} Hyperanthera
Moringa. {%—Rucirānana (˚ra-ān˚), as, ā, am,%}
handsome-faced, beautiful. {%—Rucirāpāṅgī (˚ra-%}
{%ap˚),%} f. ‘having beautiful corners of the eyes,’ a
woman with beautiful eyes. {%—Rucirāśva (˚ra-aś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Sena-jit. {%—Rucirā-suta, as,%}
m. a metronymic of Pālakāpya.
<LEND>

<L>39620<pc>0848-b<k1>rucizya<k2>rucizya
{%Ruciṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleasing, pleasant, agree-
able, liked; giving an appetite, tonic, stomachic;
dainty, nice.
<LEND>

<L>39621<pc>0848-b<k1>rucI<k2>rucI
{%Rucī,%}¦ f. {%= ruci%} above.
<LEND>

<L>39622<pc>0848-b<k1>rucya<k2>rucya
{%Rucya, as, ā, am,%}¦ bright, radiant, beautiful,
[Page0848-c+ 77]
handsome, pleasing, agreeable, delightful; palatable,
delicious, giving an appetite, stomachic, tonic; ({%as%}),
m. a lover, husband; N. of various plants, Strychnos
Potatorum; rice; Ægle Marmelos; ({%am%}), n. a
digestive, tonic; {%= sauvarcala%}. {%—Rucya-kanda, as,%}
m. Arum Campanulatum.
<LEND>

<L>39623<pc>0848-c<k1>ruj<k2>ruj<h>1
{#ruj#} 1¦. {%ruj,%} cl. 6. P. {%rujati%} (rarely A. {%-te%}),
{%ruroja, rokṣyati, araukṣīt%} (in Vāja-
saneyi-s. XVI. 47. {%mā rok = bhaṅgam mā kārṣīḥ%}),
{%roktum,%} to break, break open, break to pieces, break
down, destroy; to bend; to pain, cause pain, afflict
with disease, disorder, injure: Pass. {%rujyate,%} to be
broken, &c.: Caus. {%rojayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%arūru-%}
{%jat,%} to cause to break, to injure, hurt, kill: Desid.
{%rurukṣati:%} Intens. {%rorujyate, rorokti;%} [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">λυγ-ρό-ς, λευγαλέο-ς, λοιγό-ς, λοίγιο-ς,</lang> perhaps
<lang n="greek">ὀ-ρύσσω, ὄ-ρυγμα, ὀ-ρυκτή, ὀ-ρυχή;</lang> Lat. <nsi>lug-e-o,</nsi>
<nsi>lug-u-bri-s, luc-tu-s, lu-e-s;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>luz-ti,</nsi> ‘to
break.’]
<LEND>

<L>39624<pc>0848-c<k1>rugRa<k2>rugRa
{%Rugṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (sometimes incorrectly written
{%rugna%}), broken, broken to pieces; thwarted, checked;
bent, crooked, curved; injured; diseased, sick, in-
firm. {%—Rugṇa-tā,%} f. or {%rugṇa-tva, am,%} n. broken-
ness, crookedness; infirmity, sickness, disease. {%—Rug-%}
{%ṇa-raya, as, ā, am,%} checked in an onset, foiled
in an attack.
<LEND>

<L>39625<pc>0848-c<k1>ruj<k2>ruj<h>2
2. {%ruj, k, k, k,%}¦ breaking, breaking or dashing to
pieces; ({%k%}), f. fracture; pain, sickness, illness, disease,
({%akṣi-ruj,%} a disease of the eye); toil, fatigue,
weariness, effort, trouble. {%—Ruk-pratikriyā,%} f.
counteraction of disease, treatment of sickness, prac-
tice of medicine, curing, remedying. {%—Ruk-sadman,%}
{%a,%} n. ‘seat of pain,’ excrement, feces. {%—Rug-an-%}
{%vita, as, ā, am,%} attended with pain, painful. {%—Rug-%}
{%dāha, as,%} m. a kind of fever. {%—Rug-bhaya, am,%}
n. fear of disease. {%—Rug-bheṣaja, am,%} n., Ved.
‘disease-medicine,’ any medicine or drug. {%—Rug-%}
{%viniścaya, as,%} m. ‘determination of disease,’ N. of
a work by Mādhava (treating of the causes and
diagnosis of eighty kinds of disease). {%—Rujas-kara,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} ({%rujas,%} acc. pl. + {%kara%}), causing or
producing pain.
<LEND>

<L>39626<pc>0848-c<k1>ruja<k2>ruja
{%Ruja, as, ā, am,%}¦ breaking, breaking to pieces,
destroying (at the end of comps., cf. {%valaṃ-r˚%}); ({%as%}),
m. a word of doubtful meaning in Atharva-veda XVI.
3, 2; ({%ā%}), f. breaking, fracture, rupture, destruction,
overthrow; pain, sickness, disease, illness, disorder;
Costus Speciosus or Arabicus {%(= kuṣṭha);%} an ewe.
{%—Rujā-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing pain, making
sick or ill, sickening; ({%as%}), m. sickness, disease;
sickness induced by passion or love (said to be one
of the Bhāvas or sentiments); ({%am%}), n. the acid
fruit of Averrhoa Carambola. {%—Rujāpaha (˚jā-ap˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} keeping off pain, removing sickness or dis-
ease. {%—Rujā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having pain or disease,
painful, diseased. {%—Rujā-vin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. painful.
{%—Rujā-saha, as,%} m. a species of fruit tree.
<LEND>

<L>39627<pc>0848-c<k1>rujAya<k2>rujAya
{%Rujāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%rujāyate,%} &c., to be sick or ill.
<LEND>

<L>39628<pc>0848-c<k1>rurukzaRi<k2>rurukzaRi
{%Rurukṣaṇi, is, is, i%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), Ved. wish-
ing or able to destroy.
<LEND>

<L>39629<pc>0848-c<k1>ruw<k2>ruw
{#ruw#}¦ {%ruṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%roṭate,%} &c., to strike
against, resist, oppose; to suffer pain; to
shine; cl. 10. P. {%roṭayati,%} &c., to be angry [cf.
rt. 1. {%ruṣ%}]; to shine; to speak.
<LEND>

<L>39630<pc>0848-c<k1>ruW<k2>ruW
{#ruW#}¦ {%ruṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%roṭhati,%} &c., to strike,
strike down, fell; cl. 1.A. {%roṭhate,%} &c., to
strike against, resist, oppose; to torment, pain; to
suffer pain; [cf. rt. {%ruṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39631<pc>0848-c<k1>roWamAna<k2>roWamAna
{%Roṭhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ paining; suffering pain.
<LEND>

<L>39632<pc>0848-c<k1>ruRaskarA<k2>ruRaskarA
{#ruRaskarA#}¦ {%ruṇaskarā,%} f. a cow easily milked,
a gentle cow.
<LEND>

<L>39633<pc>0848-c<k1>ruRA<k2>ruRA
{#ruRA#}¦ {%ruṇā,%} f., N. of a river flowing into
the Sarasvatī.
<LEND>

<L>39634<pc>0848-c<k1>ruRw<k2>ruRw
{#ruRw#}¦ {%ruṇṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%ruṇṭati,%} &c., to steal,
rob.
<LEND>

<L>39635<pc>0848-c<k1>ruRW<k2>ruRW
{#ruRW#}¦ {%ruṇṭh%} (= rt. {%luṇṭh%}), cl. 1. P. {%ruṇ-%}
{%ṭhati,%} &c., to go; to be lame; to be
[Page0849-a+ 79]
idle; to strike against, resist; to steal, (in this sense
a various reading for rt. {%ruṇṭ.%})
<LEND>

<L>39636<pc>0849-a<k1>ruRq<k2>ruRq
{#ruRq#}¦ {%ruṇḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%ruṇḍati,%} &c. = rt.
{%ruṇṭ,%} p. 848, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39637<pc>0849-a<k1>ruRqa<k2>ruRqa
{%Ruṇḍa, as, ā, am,%}¦ maimed, mutilated; ({%as%}), m.
according to some also ({%am%}), n. a headless body,
mere trunk (retaining life and continuing to mix in
battle).
<LEND>

<L>39638<pc>0849-a<k1>ruRqikA<k2>ruRqikA
{%Ruṇḍikā,%}¦ f. a field of battle; a female messenger
or go-between; the threshold of a door; superhuman
power ({%= vi-bhūti%}).
<LEND>

<L>39639<pc>0849-a<k1>ruta<k2>ruta
{#ruta#}¦ {%ruta,%} &c. See under rt. 1. {%ru,%} p. 847,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39640<pc>0849-a<k1>ruTa<k2>ruTa
{#ruTa#}¦ {%rutha, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39641<pc>0849-a<k1>rud<k2>rud<h>1
{#rud#} 1¦. {%rud%} [cf. rt. 1. {%ru%}], cl. 2. P. {%roditi%}
(Ved. also cl. 6. {%rudati,%} ep. also A. {%rudate%}),
Impf. {%arodīt%} or {%arodat%} (Pāṇ. VII. 3, 98, 99; 1st
sing. {%arodam,%} 3rd pl. {%arudan%}), Impv. {%roditu%} (2nd
sing. {%rudihi%}), Perf. {%ruroda%} (ep. {%rurude%}), 2nd Fut.
{%rodiṣyati%} (Ved. {%rotsyati%}), Aor. {%arodīt%} (3rd pl.
{%arodiṣus%}) or {%arudat, roditum,%} to weep, cry, shed
tears, wail, lament; to bewail, deplore; to roar, howl:
Pass. {%rudyate,%} Aor. {%arodi:%} Caus. {%rodayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Aor. {%arūrudat,%} to cause to weep or lament:
Desid. {%rurudiṣati:%} Intens. {%rorudyate, rorotti,%} to
weep very much; [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀῤῥωδέω;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>rud-o;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>riuzan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>reotan;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>raudoju;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>rudajun.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39642<pc>0849-a<k1>rud<k2>rud<h>2
2. {%rud, t, t, t,%}¦ weeping, crying, lamenting [cf.
{%agha-r˚%}]; ({%t%}), f. cry, wail, lamentation; sound,
noise; grief; pain, affliction; disease.
<LEND>

<L>39643<pc>0849-a<k1>rudat<k2>rudat
{%Rudat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} weeping, crying,
wailing, bewailing; ({%antī%}), f. a species of small shrub
({%= rudantikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>39644<pc>0849-a<k1>rudaTa<k2>rudaTa
{%Rudatha, as,%}¦ m. a child, a pupil, scholar; a dog;
a cock.
<LEND>

<L>39645<pc>0849-a<k1>rudana<k2>rudana
{%Rudana, am,%}¦ n. the act of crying, weeping,
lamentation.
<LEND>

<L>39646<pc>0849-a<k1>rudantikA<k2>rudantikA
{%Rudantikā,%}¦ f. ‘the weeper,’ epithet of a species
of small succulent shrub ({%= amṛta-sravā%}).
<LEND>

<L>39647<pc>0849-a<k1>rudamAna<k2>rudamAna
{%Rudamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ weeping, wailing, lament-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>39648<pc>0849-a<k1>rudita<k2>rudita
{%Rudita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wept, lamented, deplored;
weeping, crying, lamenting; wet with tears; ({%am%}),
n. a weeping, wailing, crying, lamentation.
<LEND>

<L>39649<pc>0849-a<k1>ruditvA<k2>ruditvA
{%Ruditvā,%}¦ ind. having wept, having lamented.
<LEND>

<L>39650<pc>0849-a<k1>rudyamAna<k2>rudyamAna
{%Rudyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being bewailed.
<LEND>

<L>39651<pc>0849-a<k1>rudra<k2>rudra
{%Rudra, as, ā, am%}¦ (according to Uṇādi-s. II. 22.
fr. rt. 1. {%rud%} above; according to others fr. rt. 1. {%ru%}
{%+ dra%} fr. rt. 2. {%dru,%} to run; connected with {%rodas,%}
q. v., and perhaps with {%rudhira%}), crying, howling,
roaring, one who cries or roars, dreadful, horrible,
terrific, awful; great, large; (according to the fanciful
etymologies of native writers, the following meanings
are also assigned to this word), driving away evil;
running about and roaring; praiseworthy, to be
praised, (according to Naigh. III. 16) {%= stotṛ,%} a
praiser, panegyrist, worshipper; ({%as%}), m. ‘the Roarer’
or ‘Howler,’ N. of the god of tempests and father
of the Rudras or Maruts, (originally perhaps the
mere personified roaring of the storms, but as the
crackling or raging of fire may resemble the sound
of wind, so in the Veda the god of storms is some-
times identified with the god of fire; though gene-
rally represented as a destroying deity whose terrible
shafts bring death or disease on men and cattle, he
is also addressed as benevolent and auspicious [{%śiva%}],
and is even supposed to have a healing efficacy from
his chasing away vapours and purifying the atmo-
sphere; hence he has various epithets in the Veda,
such as ‘multiform,’ ‘terrible as a wild beast,’ ‘tawny-
coloured,’ ‘wearing braided hair’ [{%kapardin%}], ‘ce-
lestial boar,’ ‘armed with a strong bow and fleet
arrows,’ ‘cause of prosperity to man and beast,’ ‘pos-
sessor of healing remedies,’ ‘greatest of physicians,’
&c.; he is of course ruler of the Rudras, who are
the same as the storm winds, more usually called
Maruts, and who are often associated with Indra [see
{%marut%}]: in the later mythology the epithet {%śiva,%}
[Page0849-b+ 81]
‘propitious,’ which does not occur as <nsi>a name</nsi> in the
Veda, was employed as the real name of the destroy-
ing deity, being at first applied as an euphemism to
propitiate him: moreover the character of the deity
lost its special connection with storms, and developed
into a personification of the destroying principle
generally, though even the Epic and Purānic Śiva
was regarded as the generator as well as destroyer:
moreover a new class of beings, described as eleven
in number, though still called Rudras, took the
place of the original Rudras or Maruts: in the Veda
only three groupings of deities into classes appear to
be recognised, Indra belonging to the Vasus, Varuṇa
to the Ādityas, and Rudra to the Rudras or Maruts;
but in Manu XI. 221. the Maruts are enumerated
as a fourth group, being there distinguished from
the eleven Rudras: in Viṣṇu-Purāṇa I. 7. Rudra
is said to have sprung from Brahmā's forehead, and
to have afterwards separated himself into a figure
half male and half female, the former portion sepa-
rating again into the eleven Rudras, who were so
called because they ‘ran about crying aloud’ [{%ruda-%}
{%nād drāvaṇāc-ca,%} cf. rts. 1. {%rud,%} 2. {%dru%}]; hence
these later Rudras are sometimes regarded as inferior
manifestations of Śiva, and most of their names are
also names of Śiva; these names are variously given
in the different Purāṇas; those of the Vāyu are
Ajaikapād, Ahvi-bradhna, Hara, Nir-ṛta, Īśvara,
Bhuvana, Aṅgāraka, Ardha-ketu, Mṛtyu, Sarpa,
Kapālin: according to other accounts the Rudras are
represented as children of Kaśyapa and Surabhī or of
Brahmā and Surabhī or of Bhūta and Su-rūpā); a
form or manifestation or N. of Śiva (in the later
mythology, as explained above; according to the
Viṣṇu-Purāṇa I. 8. Rudra is one of the eight forms
of Śiva; he is elsewhere reckoned among the Dik-
pālas as regent of the north-east quarter); a symbo-
lical expression for the number eleven (from the
eleven Rudras, see above); a mystical epithet of
the letter {%e;%} Calotropis Gigantea; N. of various
persons; of a lexicographer; of a poet; of a king;
{%(ās),%} m. pl. the Rudras (described above); an
abbreviated expression for the texts or hymns ad-
dressed to the Rudras [cf. {%rudra-japa%}]; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a wife of Vasu-deva; of a daughter of Rau-
drāśva; {%= rudra-jaṭā; (ī),%} f. a kind of lute or
guitar; [cf. {%rudra-vīṇā;%} cf. perhaps also Gr. <lang n="greek">λύρα.</lang>]
{%—Rudra-kalaśa, am,%} n. ‘Rudra's vessel,’ a parti-
cular kind of pot or vessel used in making oblations
to the planets. {%—Rudra-kavīndra (˚vi-in˚), as,%} m.
a proper N. {%(= rudra-bhaṭṭa)%}. {%—Rudra-kālī,%} f. a
form of Durgā. {%—Rudra-koṭi, is,%} f., N. of a place
of pilgrimage. {%—Rudra-koṣa, as,%} m., N. of a
lexicon by Rudra. {%—Rudra-gaṇa, as,%} m., Ved.
‘Rudra-class,’ the troop of beings called Rudras,
(see under {%rudra.%}) {%—Rudra-garbha, as,%} m. ‘Ru-
dra's offspring,’ N. of Agni. {%—Rudra-gīta, am, ā,%}
n. f. the song of Rudra (in which Agastya repeats
a dialogue between himself and Rudra). {%—Rudra-%}
{%caṇḍika,%} epithet of a particular text or formula.
{%—Rudra-caṇḍī,%} f. a form of Durgā; N. of a
section in the Rudra-yāmala. {%—Rudra-candra, as,%}
m., N. of a king. {%—Rudra-cchattra, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Rudra-ja, as,%} m. (according to some)
{%am,%} n. ‘produced from Rudra or Śiva,’ quicksilver
(supposed to be the semen of Śiva). {%—Rudra-jaṭā,%}
f. ‘Rudra's hair,’ N. of a species of creeper. {%—Ru-%}
{%dra-japa, as,%} m., N. of a particular prayer or
hymn addressed to Rudra. {%—Rudra-japana, am,%}
n. the recitation of the Rudra-japa in a low tone.
{%—Rudra-jāpaka, as, ikā, am,%} or {%rudra-jāpin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} one who recites the Rudra-japa in a low
tone. {%—Rudra-jāpya, am,%} n., N. of a particular
hymn or prayer extracted from the Vājasaneyi-saṃ-
hitā and addressed to Rudra. {%—Rudra-tanaya, as,%}
m. ‘Rudra's son,’ N. of the third black Vāsudeva;
of Punishment; epithet of a sword. {%—Rudra-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the being Rudra. {%—Rudra-datta, as,%} m.,
N. of an author; of a work on medicine. {%—Rudra-%}
{%dāman, ā,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Rudra-deva, as,%}
m., N. of various persons; of the author of the
[Page0849-c+ 81]
Yayāti-carita; of the author of a commentary on
the Prabodha-candrodaya. {%—Rudra-dhara, as,%} m.,
N. of an author. {%—Rudra-nyāya-vācaspati-bhaṭ-%}
{%ṭācārya (˚ta-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of an author {%(=%}
{%rudra-bhaṭṭācārya)%}. {%—Rudra-paṇḍita, as,%} m.,
N. of an author {%(= rudra-sūri)%}. {%—Rudra-patnī,%}
f. Rudra's wife, the goddess Durgā; linseed, Linum
Usitatissimum. {%—Rudra-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of
a work by Paraśu-rāma. {%—Rudra-pāla, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Rudra-putra, as,%} m. Rudra's son, a
patronymic of the twelfth Manu; [cf. {%rudra-sā-%}
{%varṇi.%}] {%—Rudra-pura, am,%} n., N. of a province.
{%—Rudra-pūjana, am,%} n. or {%rudra-pūjā,%} f. ‘wor-
ship of Rudra,’ N. of a work. {%—Rudra-pratāpa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king {%(= pratāpa-rudra)%}. {%—Rudra-%}
{%prayāga, as,%} m., N. of the sacred place where the
river Mandākinī joins the Ganges. {%—Rudra-priyā,%}
f. ‘dear to Rudra,’ epithet of Terminalia Chebula;
the goddess Pārvatī. {%—Rudra-bali, is,%} m. an oblation
of meat &c. presented to the Rudras. {%—Rudra-%}
{%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of the author of the Śṛṅgāra-
tilaka ({%= rudraṭa%}); of the author of a commentary
on the Vaidya-jīvana; {%= rudra-kavīndra%}. {%—Rudra-%}
{%bhaṭṭācārya (˚ṭa-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of an author
and commentator. {%—Rudra-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N.
of a work by Ahobala. {%—Rudra-bhū, ūs,%} or {%rudra-%}
{%bhūmi, is,%} f. ‘Rudra's ground,’ a cemetery. {%—Rudra-%}
{%bhūti, is,%} m., N. of a preceptor (having the patro-
nymic Drāhyāyaṇi). {%—Rudra-bhairavī,%} f. a form
of Durgā. {%—Rudra-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of
Rudra, having the essence of Rudra. {%—Rudra-%}
{%mahā-devī,%} f., N. of the wife of king Govinda-
canda. {%—Rudra-yajña, as,%} m. an oblation or sacri-
fice offered to Rudra. {%—Rudra-yāmala, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tantra work in the form of a dialogue
between Bhairava and Bhairavī. {%—Rudra-rāya, as,%}
m., N. of a king. {%—Rudra-rāśi, is,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Rudra-rodana, am,%} n. ‘Rudra's tears,’ i. e. gold.
{%—Rudra-roman, ā,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending upon Skanda. {%—Rudra-laṭā,%} f. {%= rudra-%}
{%jaṭā%}. {%—Rudra-loka, as,%} m. Rudra's world. {%—Ru-%}
{%dra-vaṭa,%} N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Rudra-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. having Rudra or the Rudras. {%—Rudravad-%}
{%gaṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. surrounded by the Rudra
troop. {%—Rudra-vartani, ī,%} m. du. ‘proceeding on
terrible roads,’ N. of the Aśvins, (Sāy. {%= rodana-%}
{%śīla-mārgau%} or {%stūyamāna-mārgau.%}) {%—Rudra-%}
{%viṃśati, is,%} f. epithet of the last twenty years in the
Jupiter cycle of sixty years. {%—Rudra-vidhāna, am,%}
n., N. of a work. {%—Rudra-vīṇā,%} f. epithet of a
particular religious observance. {%—Rudra-śarman, ā,%}
m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Rudra-sampradāyin, inas,%}
m. pl., N. of a sect. {%—Rudra-saras, as,%} n., N. of a
lake. {%—Rudra-sarga, as,%} m. Rudra's creation; the
creation of the eleven Rudras. {%—Rudra-sāman, a,%}
n., N. of a particular Sāman. {%—Rudra-sāvarṇi, is,%}
m., N. of the twelfth Manu; [cf. {%rudra-putra,%}
{%manu.%}] {%—Rudrasāvarṇika, as, ī, am,%} belonging
or relating to Rudra-sāvarṇi, being under Rudra-
sāvarṇi. {%—Rudra-siṃha, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Ru-%}
{%dra-sundarī,%} f., N. of a goddess. {%—Rudra-sū, ūs,%}
f. a mother of eleven children. {%—Rudra-sūkta, am,%}
n., N. of a particular hymn. {%—Rudra-sūri, is,%} m.,
N. of an author. {%—Rudra-sṛṣṭi, is,%} f. Rudra's
creation; the creation of the eleven Rudras; [cf.
{%rudra-sarga.%}] {%—Rudra-sena, as,%} m., N. of a
warrior. {%—Rudra-soma, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
{%—Rudra-skanda, as,%} m., N. of a commentator.
{%—Rudra-svarga, as,%} m. Rudra's heaven. {%—Rudra-%}
{%svāmin, ī,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rudra-himālaya, as,%}
m., N. of a peak of the Himālaya mountains.
{%—Rudra-hūti, is, is, i,%} Ved. (according to Mahī-
dhara on Vājasaneyi-s. XXXVIII. 16) being invoked
by praisers or worshippers. {%—Rudra-hṛdaya, am,%}
n., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Rudrākrīḍa (˚ra-āk˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘Rudra's play-ground,’ a cemetery, place
where dead bodies are burnt or buried (Rudra being
supposed to dance and sport in such places at evening
twilight). {%—Rudrākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘Rudra-
eyed,’ a kind of tree, Elæocarpus Ganitrus; ({%am%}),
n. the berry of this tree (used for rosaries); a rosary;
[Page0850-a+ 79]
N. of an Upaniṣad, (the gender here and in the preced-
ing sense is doubtful.) {%—Rudrākṣa-mālā,%} f. a rosary
made of Rudrākṣa berries. {%—Rudrācārya (˚ra-āc˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Rudrādhyāya (˚ra-adh˚), as,%}
m. epithet of particular prayers addressed to Rudra.
{%—Rudrādhyāyin, ī, inī, i,%} one who recites or
repeats the above prayers. {%—Rudrāyaṇa (˚ra-ay˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king of Roruka. {%—Rudrāri (˚ra-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. Rudra's enemy; N. of Kāma-deva;
{%(is, is, i),%} having Rudra for an enemy, hostile to
Rudra. {%—Rudrāvarta (˚ra-āv˚),%} N. of a place of
pilgrimage. {%—Rudrāvasṛṣṭa (˚ra-av˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. let go or hurled by Rudra. {%—Rudrāvāsa%}
{%(˚ra-āv˚), as,%} m. Rudra's abode, i. e. Kāśi or Be-
nares. {%—Rudraikādaśinī (˚ra-ek˚),%} f. the eleven
Rudra hymns. {%—Rudropaniṣad (˚ra-up˚), t,%} f., N.
of two Upaniṣads. {%—Rudropastha (˚ra-up˚), as,%}
m. ‘Rudra's generative organ,’ N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>39652<pc>0850-a<k1>rudraka<k2>rudraka
{%Rudraka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39653<pc>0850-a<k1>rudrawa<k2>rudrawa
{%Rudraṭa, as,%}¦ m. an abbreviated form of Rudra-
bhaṭṭa.
<LEND>

<L>39654<pc>0850-a<k1>rudrARI<k2>rudrARI
{%Rudrāṇī,%}¦ f. Rudra's wife, the goddess Durgā;
epithet of a girl eleven years of age, in whom men-
struation has not yet commenced, representing the
goddess Durgā at the Durgā festival.
<LEND>

<L>39655<pc>0850-a<k1>rudriya<k2>rudriya
{%Rudriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging or relating
to Rudra [cf. {%śata-rudriya%}], coming from Rudra;
relating to the Rudras, coming from them, &c.;
terrific, fearful, awful, impetuous; (according to Sāy.
also) uttering praise or giving pleasure; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the Maruts; ({%am%}), n. Rudra's majesty or power;
(Sāy.) pleasure, delight ({%= sukha%}).
<LEND>

<L>39656<pc>0850-a<k1>rurudizu<k2>rurudizu
{%Rurudiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), wishing or
intending to weep, inclined to cry.
<LEND>

<L>39657<pc>0850-a<k1>roda<k2>roda
{%Roda, as,%}¦ m., Ved. weeping, wailing, lamenting,
lamentation.
<LEND>

<L>39658<pc>0850-a<k1>rodana<k2>rodana
{%Rodana, am,%}¦ n. the act of weeping or wailing,
bewailing, lamentation; weeping, a tear, tears; ({%ī%}),
f. Alhagi Maurorum.
<LEND>

<L>39659<pc>0850-a<k1>rodamAna<k2>rodamAna
{%Rodamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ for {%rudamāna,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39660<pc>0850-a<k1>rodas<k2>rodas
{%Rodas, as,%}¦ n. heaven, &c. See p. 855, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39661<pc>0850-a<k1>roditavya<k2>roditavya
{%Roditavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bewailed or lamented.
<LEND>

<L>39662<pc>0850-a<k1>roditvA<k2>roditvA
{%Roditvā,%}¦ ind. {%= ruditvā.%}
<LEND>

<L>39663<pc>0850-a<k1>rorudat<k2>rorudat
{%Rorudat, an, atī, at,%}¦ weeping or wailing bitterly.
<LEND>

<L>39664<pc>0850-a<k1>rorudA<k2>rorudA
{%Rorudā,%}¦ f. violent weeping, excessive lamentation.
{%—Rorudā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} full of excessive lamen-
tation, weeping violently or intensely.
<LEND>

<L>39665<pc>0850-a<k1>rorudyamAna<k2>rorudyamAna
{%Rorudyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ weeping or crying
bitterly.
<LEND>

<L>39666<pc>0850-a<k1>rudDa<k2>rudDa
{#rudDa#}¦ {%ruddha.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39667<pc>0850-a<k1>rudra<k2>rudra
{#rudra#}¦ {%rudra.%} See p. 849, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39668<pc>0850-a<k1>ruD<k2>ruD<h>1
{#ruD#} 1¦. {%rudh%} (= rt. 1. {%ruh%}), cl. 1. P. {%ro-%}
{%dhati,%} &c., Ved. to sprout, shoot, grow,
germinate; [cf. {%nyag-rodha,%} 2. {%ava-rodha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39669<pc>0850-a<k1>roDa<k2>roDa<h>1
1. {%rodha, as,%}¦ m. sprouting, growing, &c.; [cf.
2. {%ava-r˚, nyag-r˚.%}] {%—Rodhāvarodha (˚dha-av˚),%}
probably ‘moving up and down.’
<LEND>

<L>39670<pc>0850-a<k1>ruD<k2>ruD<h>2
{#ruD#} 2¦. {%rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%ruṇaddhi,%}
{%runddhe%} (ep. also {%rundhati, rundhate,%}
{%rodhati,%} Impf. {%arundhat%}), {%rurodha, rurudhe,%}
{%rotsyati, -te, arudhat%} or {%arautsīt, aruddha%} (Ved.
forms {%araut, rudhmas, arautsi%}), {%roddhum%} (ep.
also {%rodhitum%}), to stop, check, arrest, restrain,
hinder, impede, prevent, obstruct, suppress, oppose;
to hold, withhold, retain, keep; to avert, keep off,
keep back; to shut, close, lock, shut up, lock up,
block up, close up, stop up, fill up; to besiege,
blockade, lay siege to, invest; to shut in, enclose,
surround, confine (with loc. of the place of confine-
ment or with double acc. according to Vopa-deva V.
6); to bind; to cover, cover up, cover over, obscure;
to oppress, torment, harass: Pass. {%rudhyate,%} Aor.
{%arodhi:%} Caus. {%rodhayati, -te%} (ep. also {%rundha-%}
{%yati%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%arūrudhat,%} to cause to stop;
to restrain, impede, obstruct; to cause to be con-
fined; cause to be besieged; to fetter, enchain; to
oppress, torment, harass: Desid. {%rurutsati, -te:%}
Intens. {%rorudhyate, roroddhi;%} [cf. perhaps Hib.
<nsi>rundha,</nsi> ‘secret, mysterious;’ <nsi>rundhachd,</nsi> ‘secrecy;’
[Page0850-b+ 80]
<nsi>ruindiamhar,</nsi> ‘a mystery;’ <nsi>ruine,</nsi> ‘secrecy:’ Goth.
<nsi>runa,</nsi> ‘a mystery:’ Old Germ. <nsi>runen, runazjan,</nsi>
which may be related to rt. 1. {%ru.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39671<pc>0850-b<k1>rudDa<k2>rudDa
{%Ruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ stopped, checked, impeded,
restrained, obstructed, suppressed, opposed; held,
withheld; kept, kept back; shut, closed, shut up,
secured; invested, besieged, blockaded; shut in,
enclosed, confined, surrounded, begirt, fenced in;
covered, covered up; ({%as%}), m., N. of a town; ({%ā%}),
f. a siege. {%—Ruddha-gir, īr, īr, īr,%} having the
utterance choked or impeded. {%—Ruddha-pravāha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the stream obstructed. {%—Ruddha-%}
{%mūtra, as, ā, am,%} having the urine suppressed;
suffering from retention of urine.
<LEND>

<L>39672<pc>0850-b<k1>rudDaka<k2>rudDaka
{%Ruddhaka, am,%}¦ n. citron, (perhaps for {%rucaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>39673<pc>0850-b<k1>rudDvA<k2>rudDvA
{%Ruddhvā,%}¦ ind. having stopped or checked, having
restrained or obstructed.
<LEND>

<L>39674<pc>0850-b<k1>ruD<k2>ruD<h>3
3. {%rudh, t, t, t,%}¦ stopping, restraining, impeding,
holding; [cf. {%kara-r˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39675<pc>0850-b<k1>ruDa<k2>ruDa
{%Rudha, as, ā, am,%}¦ stopping, restraining, hinder-
ing, repelling.
<LEND>

<L>39676<pc>0850-b<k1>ruDikrA<k2>ruDikrA
{%Rudhi-krā,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of an Asura or demon
conquered by Indra.
<LEND>

<L>39677<pc>0850-b<k1>runDat<k2>runDat
{%Rundhat, an, atī, at,%}¦ stopping, hindering, op-
posing, impeding; resisting, refusing.
<LEND>

<L>39678<pc>0850-b<k1>rurutsu<k2>rurutsu
{%Rurutsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to obstruct or oppose;
wishing to bind or tie up (as the hair).
<LEND>

<L>39679<pc>0850-b<k1>rodDavya<k2>rodDavya
{%Roddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be closed or shut.
<LEND>

<L>39680<pc>0850-b<k1>rodDf<k2>rodDf
{%Roddhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ one who stops or
obstructs, one who shuts in, a besieger.
<LEND>

<L>39681<pc>0850-b<k1>roDa<k2>roDa<h>2
2. {%rodha, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. {%rodha%} see col. 1), the
act of stopping, checking, arresting, restraining,
hindering, impeding, preventing, &c.; restraint,
stoppage, obstruction, suppression, prevention, pro-
hibition; shutting up, confining; closing, blocking
up; siege, blockade (of a town); attacking, making
war upon; a dam, bank, shore [cf. {%rodhas%} below];
a proper N.; N. of a hell. {%—Rodha-kṛt, t,%} m. epi-
thet of the forty-fifth year in the Jupiter cycle of sixty
years. {%—Rodha-cakra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (rivers) forming
eddies on the bank, (Sāy. {%= rodhana-śīlāni cakrāṇi%}
{%yāsu.%}) {%—Rodha-vakrā,%} f. {%= rodho-vakrā.%}
<LEND>

<L>39682<pc>0850-b<k1>roDaka<k2>roDaka
{%Rodhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ stopping, checking, re-
straining, confining, shutting up, besieging, block-
ading.
<LEND>

<L>39683<pc>0850-b<k1>roDana<k2>roDana
{%Rodhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ obstructing, impeding, being
an obstacle or hindrance; ({%as%}), m. the planet Mer-
cury; ({%ā%}), f. {%= rodhas; (am),%} n. the act of stop-
ping, checking, restraining, preventing, impeding,
oppressing; the act of confining, confinement, re-
straint; besieging, blockading.
<LEND>

<L>39684<pc>0850-b<k1>roDas<k2>roDas
{%Rodhas, as,%}¦ n. a bank, embankment, dam, ob-
struction; a mound, high bank, wall, a shore; the
brink of a well; a flank, epithet of a woman's hips;
[cf. {%taṭa.%}] {%—Rodhaḥ-patana-kaluṣa, as, ā, am,%}
(rendered) muddy by the falling in of a bank. {%—Ro-%}
{%dhas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having high banks
(said of rivers; Ved.); ({%atī%}), f., N. of a river.
{%—Rodho-vakrā,%} f. ‘winding along its banks,’ a
river. {%—Rodho-vatī,%} f. ‘having banks,’ a river.
{%—Rodho-vapra, as,%} m. a rapid river.
<LEND>

<L>39685<pc>0850-b<k1>roDin<k2>roDin
{%Rodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ stopping, checking, restraining,
hindering, preventing, prohibiting; shutting up,
closing; destroying; a species of plant, (gender
doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>39686<pc>0850-b<k1>roDya<k2>roDya
{%Rodhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be stopped or checked,
to be restrained, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39687<pc>0850-b<k1>ruDira<k2>ruDira
{#ruDira#}¦ {%rudhira, as, ā, am%} (according to
Uṇādi-s. I. 52. fr. rt. 2. {%rudh;%} according to some
fr. a lost rt. {%rudh;%} according to others connected
with rts. 1. {%rudh%} and 1. {%ruh;%} cf. {%rohita%}), red,
blood-red, bloody (Ved.); ({%as%}), m. the blood-red
planet, i. e. Mars; a kind of precious stone [cf. {%ru-%}
{%dhirākhya%}]; ({%am%}), n. blood; saffron; N. of a
town; [cf. {%śoṇita-pura:%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐρεύθ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐρυθ-ρός, ἔρευθ-ος, ἐρυθρ-ιά-ω, ἐρυσίβη, ῥούσιος:</lang>]
Lat. <nsi>ruber, rufu-s, rutilu-s</nsi> (for old <nsi>ruthilus</nsi>),
<nsi>rob-igo:</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>riod-r,</nsi> ‘ruddy;’ <nsi>rioda:</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>ga-riud-jo:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>rot, rost:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>read,</nsi>
<nsi>roder:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>rud-e-ti, ruzd-a:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>raud-a, rud-</nsi>
[Page0850-c+ 74]
<nsi>a-s, rūdi-s:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>ruadh, ruaid,</nsi> ‘red, reddish;’
<nsi>ruaidhim,</nsi> ‘I redden.’] {%—Rudhira-tāmrākṣa, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} having blood-red eyes. {%—Rudhira-pāyin, ī,%}
m. ‘drinking blood,’ a Rākṣasa or demon. {%—Ru-%}
{%dhira-pradigdha, as, ā, am,%} besmeared with
blood. {%—Rudhira-plāvita, as, ā, am,%} swimming
with blood, soaked in blood. {%—Rudhira-rūṣita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} covered with blood. {%—Rudhira-lepa, as,%} m.
blood-stain, smear of blood. {%—Rudhira-vindu, us,%} m.
a drop of blood. {%—Rudhirākṣa (˚ra-ak˚) = rudhi-%}
{%rākhya%} below (according to some). {%—Rudhirākhya%}
{%(˚ra-ākh˚), as, am,%} m. n. ‘blood-named, red as blood,’
epithet of a particular precious stone. {%—Rudhirādhyā-%}
{%ya (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the Kālikā-
Purāṇa treating of the sacrifice of animals. {%—Rudhi-%}
{%rānana (˚ra-ān˚), am,%} n. epithet of one of the five
retrograding motions of Mars. {%—Rudhirāndha%}
{%(˚ra-an˚),%} ‘whose waters are blood,’ N. of a hell.
{%—Rudhirāmaya (˚ra-ām˚), as,%} m. ‘blood-disease,’
hemorrhage {%(= rakta-pitta)%}. {%—Rudhirāvila (˚ra-%}
{%āv˚), as, ā, am,%} blood-stained, soiled with blood.
{%—Rudhirāśana (˚ra-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} feeding on
blood (said of Rākṣasas &c.). {%—Rudhirodgārin%}
{%(˚ra-ud˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} spitting blood, vomiting blood;
({%ī%}), m. epithet of the fifty-seventh year in the Jupiter
cycle of sixty years.
<LEND>

<L>39688<pc>0850-c<k1>rup<k2>rup<h>1
{#rup#} 1¦. {%rup%} (an older form of rt. 1. {%lup%}),
cl. 4. P. {%rupyati, ruropa, arupat,%} &c.,
to suffer violent or racking pain (Ved.); to violate,
confound, disturb: Caus. {%ropayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%arūrupat,%} to cause acute pain; to break off; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>rumpo, rupi,</nsi> &c.]
<LEND>

<L>39689<pc>0850-c<k1>ropa<k2>ropa<h>1
1. {%ropa,%}¦ 1. {%ropita,%} &c. See p. 855, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39690<pc>0850-c<k1>rup<k2>rup<h>2
{#rup#} 2¦. {%rup%} (connected with rt. 1. {%ruh%}),
Ved. the earth.
<LEND>

<L>39691<pc>0850-c<k1>ruBewi<k2>ruBewi
{#ruBewi#}¦ {%rubheṭi, is,%} f. fog, vapour.
<LEND>

<L>39692<pc>0850-c<k1>ruma<k2>ruma
{#ruma#}¦ {%ruma, as,%} m. a proper N. (Ved.); ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a salt-mine or salt-lake (in the district of
Sambhar in Ajmere); of a wife of the ape Su-grīva.
{%—Rumā-bhava, as, ā, am,%} obtained from the
Rumā salt-mines; [cf. {%raumaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39693<pc>0850-c<k1>rumaRvat<k2>rumaRvat
{%Rumaṇvat, ān,%}¦ m. a proper N.; N. of a moun-
tain (‘possessing salt’).
<LEND>

<L>39694<pc>0850-c<k1>rumra<k2>rumra
{#rumra#}¦ {%rumra, as, ā, am%} (in Uṇādi-s. II. 14.
said to be fr. rt. {%ram%}) {%= aruṇa,%} tawny; the dawn,
&c.; {%= śobana,%} bright, beautiful, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39695<pc>0850-c<k1>ruru<k2>ruru
{#ruru#}¦ {%ruru, us,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. IV. 103.
said to be fr. rt. 1. {%ru%}), a kind of deer; a species of
rapacious animal, a dog; a species of fruit tree; N.
of a son of the Ṛṣi Pramati by the Apsaras Ghṛ-
tācī; of a divine being enumerated among the Viśve
Devāḥ; of one of the seven Ṛṣis under Manu
Sāvarṇi (his patronymic is Kāśyapa); of a Dānava
or Daitya (said to have been slain by Durgā); of a
form of Bhairava, (sometimes called {%Ruru-bhairava.%})
{%—Ruru-muṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a mountain, (also
read {%uru-muṇḍa.%}) {%—Ruru-śīrṣan, ā, -ṣṇī, a,%}
Ved. ‘deer-headed,’ having a deer's horn or having
a destructive point (said of an arrow; Sāy. {%= śṛṅga-%}
{%śīrṣan%} or {%hantṛ-śiraska%}).
<LEND>

<L>39696<pc>0850-c<k1>ruruka<k2>ruruka
{%Ruruka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>39697<pc>0850-c<k1>rurukzaRi<k2>rurukzaRi
{#rurukzaRi#}¦ {%rurukṣaṇi.%} See p. 848, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39698<pc>0850-c<k1>rurutsu<k2>rurutsu
{#rurutsu#}¦ {%rurutsu.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39699<pc>0850-c<k1>rurudizu<k2>rurudizu
{#rurudizu#}¦ {%rurudiṣu.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39700<pc>0850-c<k1>ruvaRya<k2>ruvaRya
{#ruvaRya#}¦ {%ruvaṇya, ruvatha.%} See p. 847, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39701<pc>0850-c<k1>ruvu<k2>ruvu
{#ruvu#}¦ {%ruvu, us,%} m. [cf. {%uruvu%}], the castor-
oil tree, Ricinus Communis ({%= raktairaṇḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>39702<pc>0850-c<k1>ruvuka<k2>ruvuka
{%Ruvuka%}¦ or {%ruvūka, as,%} m. Ricinus Communis;
[cf. {%uruvuka, rūvuka,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>39703<pc>0850-c<k1>ruS<k2>ruS
{#ruS#}¦ {%ruś%} (connected with and in some
forms and meanings identified with rt.
1. {%ruṣ%}), cl. 6. P. {%ruśati, rurośa, rokṣyati,%}
{%arukṣat, roṣṭum,%} to hurt, injure, kill; to vex,
displease, annoy: Caus. {%rośayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
[Page0851-a+ 77]
{%arūruśat:%} Desid. {%rurukṣati:%} Intens. {%roruśyate,%}
{%roroṣṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>39704<pc>0851-a<k1>ruSat<k2>ruSat<h>1
1. {%ruśat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} hurting, injuring,
vexing, displeasing; cursing, imprecating.
<LEND>

<L>39705<pc>0851-a<k1>ruSaNgu<k2>ruSaNgu
{#ruSaNgu#}¦ {%ruśaṅgu, us,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>39706<pc>0851-a<k1>ruSat<k2>ruSat<h>2
{#ruSat#} 2¦. {%ruśat, an, atī%} or {%antī, at%} (probably
to be regarded as a participle connected with rt.
1. {%ruc%}), Ved. brilliant, bright, light-coloured, white;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λευκός</lang>] {%—Ruśat-paśu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having
white cattle; (Sāy.) having brilliant rays or blazing
with the oblation ({%= ruśad-raśmi%} or {%prakāśita-%}
{%havis%}). {%—Ruśad-ūrmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having glis-
tening waves, having bright flames (said of Fire;
Sāy. {%= dīpta-jvāla%}). {%—Ruśad-gu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
having white or bright cattle; bright-rayed, (Sāy.
{%= rocamāna-raśmi%}); ({%us%}), m. a proper N. {%—Ru-%}
{%śad-ratha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a light-coloured
carriage; ({%as%}), m. a proper N. {%—Ruśad-vatsa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having a bright or white calf or offspring,
(the Dawn is so called as parent of the Sun.)
<LEND>

<L>39707<pc>0851-a<k1>ruSanA<k2>ruSanA
{#ruSanA#}¦ {%ruśanā,%} f., N. of one of the wives
of Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>39708<pc>0851-a<k1>ruSama<k2>ruSama
{#ruSama#}¦ {%ruśama, as,%} m. a proper N.; ({%ā%}), f.
a proper N., (Ruśamā is said to have contended
with Indra as to which of the two would run fastest
round the earth, and to have won by the artifice of
only going round Kurukṣetra.)
<LEND>

<L>39709<pc>0851-a<k1>ruSeku<k2>ruSeku
{#ruSeku#}¦ {%ruśeku, us,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>39710<pc>0851-a<k1>ruz<k2>ruz<h>1
{#ruz#} 1¦. {%ruṣ%} (connected with and in
some forms and meanings identified with
rt. {%ruś;%} allied also to {%rukṣ%} in 1. {%rukṣa%}), cl.
1. P. {%roṣati, ruroṣa, roṣiṣyati, aroṣīt%} or
{%aruṣat, roṣitum%} or {%roṣṭum,%} to hurt, injure, kill;
to vex, annoy, displease, make angry, disgust; to
take ill, be offended (Ved.); cl. 4. {%ruṣyati,%} to be
vexed or annoyed; to be offended; to be cross or
angry; to injure, &c.: cl. 10. or Caus. {%roṣayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Aor. {%arūruṣat,%} to vex, annoy, displease, irritate;
to enrage, exasperate: Desid. {%ruruṣiṣati, ruroṣi-%}
{%ṣati:%} Intens. {%roruṣyate, roroṣṭi;%} [cf. probably
Gr. <lang n="greek">λύσσα, λυσσάω, λυσσαίνω,</lang> (perhaps also) <lang n="greek">ἀλυσταίνω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀλυκταίνω, ἀλαλὐκτημαι;</lang> Goth. <nsi>in-rauht-</nsi>
<nsi>jan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39711<pc>0851-a<k1>ruz<k2>ruz<h>2
2. {%ruṣ, ṭ,%}¦ f. anger, wrath, rage, fury, passion.
<LEND>

<L>39712<pc>0851-a<k1>ruzaNgu<k2>ruzaNgu
{%Ruṣaṅgu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>39713<pc>0851-a<k1>ruzat<k2>ruzat
{%Ruṣat, an, antī%}¦ or {%atī%} (as if fr. rt. {%ruś%}), {%at,%}
hurting, injuring, vexing, displeasing. {%—Ruṣad-gu,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>39714<pc>0851-a<k1>ruzA<k2>ruzA
{%Ruṣā,%}¦ f. = 2. {%ruṣ,%} anger, wrath, rage, fury.
{%—Ruṣānvita (˚ṣā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} filled with
anger, full of wrath.
<LEND>

<L>39715<pc>0851-a<k1>ruzita<k2>ruzita
{%Ruṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured; enraged, irritated,
&c., {%= ruṣṭa%} below.
<LEND>

<L>39716<pc>0851-a<k1>ruzwa<k2>ruzwa
{%Ruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ enraged, irritated, offended,
angry, furious; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>39717<pc>0851-a<k1>ruzwi<k2>ruzwi
{%Ruṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. anger, wrath, rage, fury, passion.
{%—Ruṣṭi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} angry, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39718<pc>0851-a<k1>ruzya<k2>ruzya<h>1
1. {%ruṣya, ruṣya-mat,%}¦ see Gaṇa Madhvādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 86.
<LEND>

<L>39719<pc>0851-a<k1>ruzya<k2>ruzya<h>2
2. {%ruṣya,%}¦ ind. having irritated or enraged, &c.
(Rāmāyaṇa II. 98, 12).
<LEND>

<L>39720<pc>0851-a<k1>ruzyat<k2>ruzyat
{%Ruṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being angry or offended.
<LEND>

<L>39721<pc>0851-a<k1>roz<k2>roz
{%Roṣ, ṭ,%}¦ m. one who hurts or injures, an injurer;
one who irritates or enrages.
<LEND>

<L>39722<pc>0851-a<k1>roza<k2>roza
{%Roṣa, as,%}¦ m. anger, rage, wrath, passion, fury.
{%—Roṣa-tāmrākṣa, as, ī, am,%} having eyes red
with anger. {%—Roṣa-parīta, as, ā, am,%} filled with
wrath. {%—Roṣa-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of anger,
proceeding from fury. {%—Roṣa-vāhaṇa, as, ā, am,%}
‘being a vehicle of anger,’ bearing or feeling wrath
{%(= ārūḍha-krodha)%}. {%—Roṣākṣepa (˚ṣa-āk˚),%}
{%as,%} m. (in rhetoric) angry expression of dissent, angry
reproach, ironical taunt. {%—Roṣāvaroha (˚ṣa-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a warrior on the side of the gods in
the war against the Asuras.
<LEND>

<L>39723<pc>0851-a<k1>rozaRa<k2>rozaRa
{%Roṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ angry, wrathful, passionate,
easily enraged; enraged at or against, ({%kṣatriya- %}
[Page0851-b+ 80]
{%roṣaṇa,%} exasperated at the Kṣatriyas); ({%as%}), m. a
touch-stone; quicksilver; an arid or desert soil con-
taining salt; Grewia Asiatica. {%—Roṣaṇa-tā,%} f. the
state of being easily enraged, proneness to anger,
irritability, wrath.
<LEND>

<L>39724<pc>0851-b<k1>rozita<k2>rozita
{%Roṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ enraged, exasperated, irritated.
<LEND>

<L>39725<pc>0851-b<k1>rozin<k2>rozin
{%Roṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ angry, wrathful, irritable, furious.
<LEND>

<L>39726<pc>0851-b<k1>rozwf<k2>rozwf
{%Roṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭṝ,%}¦ an injurer; one who is vexed
or angry, wrathful.
<LEND>

<L>39727<pc>0851-b<k1>ruh<k2>ruh<h>1
{#ruh#} 1¦. {%ruh%} (originally written {%rudh;%} cf.
rt. 1. {%rudh%}), cl. 1. P. {%rohati%} (ep. also A.
{%rohate%}), {%ruroha, rokṣyati, arukṣat%} (Ved. and
ep. {%aruhat%}), {%roḍhum%} (ep. {%rohitum,%} Ved. {%rohiṣyai,%}
Pāṇ. III. 4, 10), to rise, mount upwards, ascend,
climb; to spring up, shoot forth, sprout, germinate,
to be produced or born; to grow, grow up, be
developed or formed, grow larger, increase, increase
in size; to grow together, grow over, cicatrize,
heal; to reach to, attain: Caus. {%rohayati%} or (in the
later language) {%ropayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%arūruhat%}
or {%arūrupat,%} to cause to ascend, raise up, elevate;
to place in or on, fix, fasten; to deliver over, com-
mit, entrust; to plant, sow, put in the ground; to
cause to grow, cause to grow over or heal: Desid.
{%rurukṣati:%} Intens. {%roruhyate, roroḍhi;%} [cf. per-
haps Gr. <lang n="greek">λαό-ς, βασι-λεύ-ς:</lang> perhaps Lat. <nsi>rus, rur-</nsi>
<nsi>is:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>liugan, jugga-lauths; liudith,</nsi> ‘it
grows;’ <nsi>lauths,</nsi> ‘a man’ (gen. <nsi>laudi-s</nsi>): Old
Germ. <nsi>liut,</nsi> ‘a people;’ <nsi>liuti</nsi> (= Mod. Germ.
<nsi>Leute</nsi>), <nsi>sumarlota,</nsi> ‘a twig;’ <nsi>ruota,</nsi> ‘a set, twig:’
Old Sax. <nsi>ruoda:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>rod:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>rod-i-ti,</nsi>
‘to bring forth;’ <nsi>na-rodu,</nsi> ‘a people:’ Lith. <nsi>liu-</nsi>
<nsi>dinu,</nsi> ‘to produce;’ <nsi>rudu,</nsi> ‘autumn:’ Celt. <nsi>rho-</nsi>
<nsi>dara,</nsi> ‘a kind of plant;’ <nsi>rod-ra,</nsi> ‘a tree:’ Scot.
<nsi>ros,</nsi> ‘seed;’ <nsi>rosach,</nsi> ‘full of seed:’ Hib. <nsi>rosan,</nsi> ‘a
shrub;’ <nsi>rud,</nsi> ‘a wood, forest;’ <nsi>ruadh,</nsi> ‘strength,
value; strong;’ <nsi>romho,</nsi> ‘very much, great;’ <nsi>rom-</nsi>
<nsi>hoide,</nsi> ‘greatness;’ <nsi>ruidh,</nsi> ‘running, a race;’ <nsi>roid,</nsi>
‘a race;’ <nsi>ruaidhneach,</nsi> ‘hair;’ <nsi>laidir,</nsi> ‘strong,
stout;’ <nsi>laidireacht, laidireas,</nsi> ‘strength.’]
<LEND>

<L>39728<pc>0851-b<k1>ruh<k2>ruh<h>2
2. {%ruh, ṭ,%}¦ f. rising, ascending, ascent, sprouting,
germinating, growth; (at the end of a comp.) shoot-
ing up, germinating, growing, increasing; [cf. {%am-%}
{%bho-r˚, kṣiti-ra˚, bhūmī-ra˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39729<pc>0851-b<k1>ruha<k2>ruha
{%Ruha, as, ā, am,%}¦ rising, mounting, springing up,
germinating, growing, springing from, growing on,
produced on (at the end of a comp., cf. {%paṅka-r˚,%}
{%bhūmī-ra˚, mahī-ra˚%}); mounted, ascended upon; ({%ā%}),
f. bent grass, Panicum Dactylon.
<LEND>

<L>39730<pc>0851-b<k1>ruhaka<k2>ruhaka
{%Ruhaka, am,%}¦ n. a hole, vacuity, cave, chasm;
[cf. 1. {%ropa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39731<pc>0851-b<k1>ruhARa<k2>ruhARa
{%Ruhāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. attaining, gaining; gain-
ing over, delighting, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
I. 32, 8. {%mano ruhāṇa = cittām ārohat.%})
<LEND>

<L>39732<pc>0851-b<k1>ruhvan<k2>ruhvan
{%Ruhvan, ā,%}¦ m. a plant, tree.
<LEND>

<L>39733<pc>0851-b<k1>rUQa<k2>rUQa
{%Rūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ mounted, risen, ascended;
sprung up, born, produced; grown, grown up, in-
creased; budded, blown; large, bulky, great, much;
grown or spread about, diffused, commonly known,
notorious; certain, ascertained; traditional, generally
received, popular, customary, conventional, not to be
etymologically resolved; having a special meaning
or one not depending directly on the etymology
(said of words); obscure. {%—Rūḍha-praṇaya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} whose love or affection has grown strong. {%—Rū-%}
{%ḍha-yoga, as, ā, am,%} whose Yoga or devotion has
increased. {%—Rūḍha-yauvana, as,%} m. one who has
attained to youth or adolescence. {%—Rūḍha-vañśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of a high family. {%—Rūḍha-vacana, am,%}
n. {%= rūḍhi-śabda%} below. {%—Rūḍha-sauhṛda, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} whose friendship is grown or increased, firm
in friendship.
<LEND>

<L>39734<pc>0851-b<k1>rUQi<k2>rUQi
{%Rūḍhi, is,%}¦ f. ascending, rising, rise, ascent;
springing up, germination, birth, origin; growth,
increase; fame, renown, notoriety; tradition, cus-
tom, traditional or customary usage, common cur-
rency, general prevalence, popular or conventional
acceptation of words (as opposed to their direct ety-
mological meaning); the employment of a word in
a sense not borne out by its etymology. {%—Rūḍhi- %}
[Page0851-c+ 78]
{%śabda, as,%} m. a word not etymologically derived, a
word used in a conventional sense (as opposed to the
etymological, thus {%śatru%} as a Rūḍhi-śabda means
‘enemy,’ but in its etymological sense ‘a destroyer’).
{%—Rūḍhiśabda-tā,%} f. the state of being used in a
conventional sense (said of a word).
<LEND>

<L>39735<pc>0851-c<k1>rUQvA<k2>rUQvA
{%Rūḍhvā,%}¦ ind. having ascended, having grown, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39736<pc>0851-c<k1>roQf<k2>roQf
{%Roḍhṛ,%}¦ 2. {%ropa, roha,%} &c. See pp. 854, 855.
<LEND>

<L>39737<pc>0851-c<k1>ruhiruhikA<k2>ruhiruhikA
{#ruhiruhikA#}¦ {%ruhiruhikā,%} f. {%= utkaṇṭhā;%} [cf.
{%raṇa-raṇaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39738<pc>0851-c<k1>rUkz<k2>rUkz
{#rUkz#}¦ {%rūkṣ%} (more properly regarded as
a Nom. fr. {%rūkṣa%} below; cf. rts. 1. {%ruṣ,%}
{%rūṣ, rūṣita%}), cl. 10. P. {%rūkṣayati%} (according
to Vopa-deva also {%rūkṣāpayati%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor.
{%arurūkṣat,%} to be rough or harsh; to make dry or
emaciated (Ved.); to soil, smear (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>39739<pc>0851-c<k1>rUkza<k2>rUkza
{%Rūkṣa, as, ā, am%}¦ (perhaps fr. rt. 1. {%ruṣ,%} q. v.,
but according to Uṇādi-s. III. 66. fr. rt. 1. {%ruh;%}
and according to others connected with rt. {%rūṣ%} and
{%rūṣita;%} sometimes written {%rukṣa,%} see 1. {%rukṣa%}),
rough, harsh (to the touch), not smooth or soft;
rough to the taste, astringent, not bland; rough,
rugged, uneven, difficult; harsh, cruel, unkind, un-
couth, austere; firm, dry, arid, parched, emaciated;
({%as%}), m. a species of grass ({%= varaka%}); a tree [cf.
{%ruhvan,%} according to some for Prākṛt <nsi>rukkha =</nsi>
{%vṛkṣa%}]; ({%ā%}), f. Croton Polyandrum or Croton
Tiglium. {%—Rūkṣa-gandhaka, as,%} m. bdellium.
{%—Rūkṣa-tā,%} f. or {%rūkṣa-tva, am,%} n. roughness,
harshness, dryness, aridity, emaciation; harshness,
unkindness, unfriendliness. {%—Rūkṣa-darbha, as,%}
m. a kind of grass. {%—Rūkṣa-pattra, as,%} m. Tro-
phis Aspera {%(= śākhoṭa)%}. {%—Rūkṣa-peṣam,%} ind.,
with rt. {%piṣ,%} to pound dry, i. e. without adding
butter or any liquid (Pāṇ. III. 4, 35). {%—Rūkṣa-%}
{%priya, as,%} m. {%= ṛṣabhauṣadha%}. {%—Rūkṣa-%}
{%svādu-phala, as,%} m. a species of fruit tree. {%—Rū-%}
{%kṣī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make rough or
dry. {%—Rūkṣī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made rough, soiled,
besmeared, covered with, ({%pāṃsu-rūkṣīkṛta,%} soiled
or covered with dust; cf. {%rūṣita.%})
<LEND>

<L>39740<pc>0851-c<k1>rUkzaRa<k2>rUkzaRa
{%Rūkṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ making dry or thin, attenu-
ating (Ved.); ({%am%}), n. the act of making dry or
thin; (in medicine) treatment for reducing fat or
corpulence. {%—Rūkṣaṇātmikā (˚ṇa-āt˚),%} f. a species
of grain ({%= laṅkā%}).
<LEND>

<L>39741<pc>0851-c<k1>rUkzita<k2>rUkzita
{%Rūkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made rough, rough; soiled,
smeared; [cf. {%a-rūkṣita, rūṣita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39742<pc>0851-c<k1>rUKara<k2>rUKara
{#rUKara#}¦ {%rūkhara, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a Śaiva
sect.
<LEND>

<L>39743<pc>0851-c<k1>rUcaka<k2>rUcaka
{#rUcaka#}¦ {%rūcaka,%} incorrect for {%rucaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39744<pc>0851-c<k1>rUQa<k2>rUQa
{#rUQa#}¦ {%rūḍha, rūḍhi.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39745<pc>0851-c<k1>rUp<k2>rUp
{#rUp#}¦ {%rūp%} (more properly regarded as
a Nom. fr. {%rūpa%} below), cl. 10. P. {%rūpa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to form, mould, model, figure, represent,
to represent on the stage, exhibit in pantomime or
by gesture, act; to feign; to view, inspect, contem-
plate; (probably) to appear, (in this sense only A.
{%rūpayate,%} see Vopa-deva XXII. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>39746<pc>0851-c<k1>rUpa<k2>rUpa
{%Rūpa, am,%}¦ n. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 28. fr.
rt. 1. {%ru,%} but probably fr. a base {%rūp%} for {%rop,%} Caus.
of rt. 1. {%ruh;%} at the end of an adj. comp. the fem.
ends in {%ā%}), any outward appearance or phenomenon,
form, figure, shape, ({%rūpaṃ kṛ,%} to assume a form);
any object of vision or visible object (as colour &c.);
reflected form, image, representation, similitude, re-
semblance, semblance; the form of a noun or verb
&c. (in grammar), an inflected form by declension
or conjugation; a beautiful appearance, handsome form,
mien, or figure, shapeliness, beauty, elegance, grace;
natural state or condition, natural disposition, nature,
essence, property, character, characteristic, peculiarity,
feature, sign, symptom; kind, sort, species; mode,
manner; a single specimen, type, copy, pattern,
original, exemplar; discrete quantity, the number
one, the arithmetical unit; integer number, (in this
sense said to be plur.); known or absolute number,
a known quantity (expressed in algebra by the first
[Page0852-a+ 81]
syllable {%rū%}); a particular coin, (probably) a rupee [cf.
{%rūpaka, rūpya%}]; a drama, play, dramatic compo-
sition; (according to native lexicographers {%rūpa%} has
also the following meanings), cattle, a herd of cattle;
{%= mṛga,%} a beast; {%= śabda,%} sound, word; a Śloka,
verse; {%= granthāvṛtti,%} acquiring familiarity with
any book by frequent recitation or learning by heart;
({%as%}), m. a proper N.; ({%as%} or {%am%}), m. n. (?) , N. of
a place; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%Rūpa%} is frequently
used in compounds in the sense ‘formed of,’ ‘com-
posed of,’ ‘consisting of,’ ‘having the figure or
appearance of,’ ‘in the form of,’ ‘having the same
form or colour as,’ ‘like to’ (especially at the end of
adj. comps., e. g. {%manojña-rūpā strī,%} a beautifully-
formed woman; {%an-ācāra-rūpa,%} of an unusual ap-
pearance; {%aśoka-rūpa,%} having the colour of the
Aśoka, Aśoka-coloured; sometimes used almost re-
dundantly, cf. {%ghora-r˚%}). {%—Rūpa-kartṛ, tā,%} m.
‘maker of forms or figures,’ N. of Viśva-kṛt. {%—Rū-%}
{%pa-kāra, as,%} m. a maker of images, sculptor. {%—Rū-%}
{%pa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} making forms or figures; ({%t%}), m.
epithet of Tvaṣṭṛ (Ved.); a sculptor. {%—Rūpa-go-%}
{%svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Rūpa-graha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} apprehending forms, perceiving colours; ({%as%}),
m. the eye. {%—Rūpa-cintā-maṇi, is,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Rūpa-jīva%} for {%rūpājīva,%} q. v. {%—Rūpa-%}
{%jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing forms, perceiving or recog-
nising shapes, distinguishing or discriminating visible
objects (as colours &c.). {%—Rūpa-tattva, am,%} n.
‘reality of form,’ inherent property, natural dispo-
sition, nature, essence. {%—Rūpa-tama, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having most form or colour. {%—Rūpa-tas,%} ind.
according to form, by shape, in form. {%—Rūpa-tā,%}
f. or {%rūpa-tva, am,%} n. the state of being formed
or composed of (often at the end of comps., e. g.
{%duḥkha-rūpa-tā,%} the consisting of pain). {%—Rūpa-%}
{%dhara, as, ā, am,%} having the form or shape of,
being of the colour of (at the end of a comp., e. g.
{%go-rūpa-dhara,%} cow-shaped; cf. {%kāma-r˚%}); ({%as%}),
m., N. of a king. {%—Rūpa-dhātu, us,%} m. the element
of form, original seat or region of form (with Bud-
dhists; the other two elements being {%kāma-dh˚,%}
q. v., and {%arūpa-dh˚,%} ‘the element of formlessness’).
{%—Rūpadhāri-tva, am,%} n. the power of assuming
any form or shape. {%—Rūpa-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} bear-
ing a form, assuming a shape; endowed with a good
figure, possessed of beauty. {%—Rūpa-dhṛk%} or {%rūpa-%}
{%dhṛt, t, t, t%} (see {%dhṛk,%} p. 459), having the form
or shape of, resembling (at the end of a comp.,
e. g. {%kapi-rūpa-dhṛt,%} monkey-shaped; cf. {%vivi-%}
{%dha-r˚%}). {%—Rūpa-dheya, am,%} n., Ved. form, external
appearance; [cf. {%nāma-dheya.%}] {%—Rūpa-nayana,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a commentator. {%—Rūpa-nārāyaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Rūpa-nāśana, as,%} m.
‘form-destroying,’ an owl. {%—Rūpa-pa, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a people. {%—Rūpa-pati, is,%} m., Ved. ‘lord of
forms,’ epithet of Tvaṣṭṛ. {%—Rūpa-pura, am,%} n.,
N. of a town. {%—Rūpa-bhāgānubandha (˚ga-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the addition of a fraction to a unit. {%—Rūpa-%}
{%bhāgāpavāha (˚ga-ap˚), as,%} m. the deduction of a
fraction from a unit. {%—Rūpa-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} having
form or beauty. {%—Rūpa-bheda, as,%} m. diversity of
form, variety of manifestations; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Tantra
work. {%—Rūpa-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a woman; of a
work on medicine. {%—Rūpa-mātra, am,%} n. only
beauty. {%—Rūpa-mālā,%} f., N. of a grammatical work;
({%ī%}), ? f., N. of a metre, four times — -.
{%—Rūpa-yauvana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing beauty
and youth. {%—Rūpa-ratnākara (˚na-āk˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a work. {%—Rūpa-latā,%} f., N. of a princess.
{%—Rūpa-lāvaṇya, am,%} n. beauty of form, elegance,
loveliness. {%—Rūpa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having form or
colour, possessing shape or figure, possessed of body,
formed, embodied, bodily, corporeal; having a beauti-
ful form or figure, handsomely formed, handsome,
beautiful, lovely, graceful; having the form or ap-
pearance of (at the end of comps.); ({%atī%}), f. a
handsome or beautiful woman; N. of various women;
of a river. {%—Rūpa-vāhika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people,
(also read {%rūpa-vāsika.%}) {%—Rūpa-viparyaya, as,%}
m. a morbid change of bodily form. {%—Rūpa-vibhā- %}
[Page0852-b+ 81]
{%ga, as,%} m. the portioning of an integer number.
{%—Rūpa-śas,%} ind., Ved. in various forms, according
to different formations. {%—Rūpa-śālin, ī, inī, i,%} pos-
sessing form or figure, possessed of beauty, hand-
some, beautiful. {%—Rūpa-śikhā,%} f., N. of a daughter
of the Rākṣasa Agni-śikha. {%—Rūpa-samṛddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. perfect in form; perfectly beautiful.
{%—Rūpa-samṛddhi, is,%} f. perfection of form, a
suitable form. {%—Rūpa-sampatti, is,%} or {%rūpa-sam-%}
{%pad, t,%} f. perfection or excellence of form, beauty,
handsomeness, elegance. {%—Rūpa-siddhi, is,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Rūpa-sena, as,%} m., N. of a Vidyā-
dhara; of a king. {%—Rūpa-stha, as, ā, am,%} ‘being
in form,’ having form or figure. {%—Rūpa-hāni, is,%}
f. loss of form, (in the Nyāya one of the seven pre-
ventives of classification.) {%—Rūpājīva (˚pa-āj˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} making a living by beauty of form, living
by prostitution; ({%ā%}), f. a harlot, prostitute. {%—Rū-%}
{%pādhibodha (˚pa-adh˚), as,%} m. the perception of
form or of any visible object (by the senses). {%—Rūpā-%}
{%vacara (˚pa-av˚), ās,%} m. pl., N. of a class of gods
(with Buddhists); [cf. {%kāmāvacara.%}] {%—Rūpāvalī%}
{%(˚pa-āv˚),%} f. a string of inflections, series of varia-
tions of form through declension and conjugation,
&c. {%—Rūpāśraya (˚pa-āś˚), as,%} m. a reposi-
tory or receptacle of beauty, an exceedingly hand-
some person. {%—Rūpāstra (˚pa-as˚), as,%} m. ‘having
beauty for a weapon,’ Kāma-deva, the god of love.
{%—Rūpendriya (˚pa-in˚), am,%} n. the organ of form,
the organ which perceives form and colour, the eye.
{%—Rūpeśvara (˚pa-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a particular
god; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a goddess. {%—Rūpopajīvana (˚pa-%}
{%up˚), am,%} n. the gaining a livelihood by a handsome
figure. {%—Rūpopajīvin (˚pa-up˚), ī, inī, i,%} gaining
a livelihood by means of a handsome form.
<LEND>

<L>39747<pc>0852-b<k1>rUpaka<k2>rUpaka
{%Rūpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ appearing in an assumed form
(Ved.); illustrating by metaphor, describing by figu-
rative language, figurative; ({%as%}), m. a particular coin,
(probably) a rupee [cf. {%rūpya%}]; ({%ikā%}), f. swallow-
wort, Asclepias Lactifera: ({%am%}), n. form, figure,
shape, image (often at the end of a comp. in the
sense of ‘having the form of,’ ‘composed of,’ ‘con-
sisting in’); any manifestation or representation;
feature, sign, symptom; kind, species; (in rhetoric)
a metaphor, comparison, simile, the description of
one object under the form of another which it is
poetically supposed to resemble (especially a simile
or comparison when {%iva, vat,%} &c. are omitted: there
are three or four varieties of the figure Rūpaka,
e. g. the {%khaṇḍa-rūpaka%} or ‘imperfect metaphor,’
the {%ardha-rūpaka%} or ‘partial metaphor,’ and the
{%lalāmaka-rūpaka%} or ‘flowery metaphor;’ and they
differ from the Upamā or comparison chiefly in the
omission of the particles denoting resemblance,
such as {%iva, yathā, saha,%} or the Taddhita affix {%vat;%}
when this last is added the simile is called Taddhito-
pamā); a drama, play, theatrical performance, (one
of the two classes of dramatic composition divided
into ten species including the Nāṭaka or principal
play and the Prahasana or farce; see also {%pra-ka-%}
{%raṇa, bhāṇa,%} &c.; cf. {%upa-rūpaka%}); a particular
weight (= 3 Guñjās); {%= mūrta (mūrti?); = dhūrta.%}
{%—Rūpaka-tāla, as,%} m. a particular time in music.
{%—Rūpaka-vākya, am,%} n. or {%rūpaka-śabda, as,%}
m. a figurative expression.
<LEND>

<L>39748<pc>0852-b<k1>rUpaRa<k2>rUpaRa
{%Rūpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. figurative illustration, metaphorical
description; examination, investigation, proof.
<LEND>

<L>39749<pc>0852-b<k1>rUpayat<k2>rUpayat
{%Rūpayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ figuring, describing, repre-
senting, acting.
<LEND>

<L>39750<pc>0852-b<k1>rUpayitvA<k2>rUpayitvA
{%Rūpayitvā,%}¦ ind. having represented or acted.
<LEND>

<L>39751<pc>0852-b<k1>rUpasvin<k2>rUpasvin
{%Rūpasvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. handsome, beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>39752<pc>0852-b<k1>rUpika<k2>rUpika
{%Rūpika,%}¦ coined gold or silver, money.
<LEND>

<L>39753<pc>0852-b<k1>rUpiRikA<k2>rUpiRikA
{%Rūpiṇikā,%}¦ f. (dimin. fr. {%rūpiṇī%}), a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39754<pc>0852-b<k1>rUpita<k2>rUpita
{%Rūpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ formed, represented, exhibited,
imagined.
<LEND>

<L>39755<pc>0852-b<k1>rUpin<k2>rUpin
{%Rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having form or figure, possessed
of body, formed, embodied, corporeal; having a
beautiful form or figure, well-shaped, handsome,
beautiful; having the form or appearance of, having
the character of, characterized by, appearing as, like
(at the end of a comp., e. g. {%kāla-rūpin, ī,%} m. ‘having
[Page0852-c+ 76]
the form of Death,’ an epithet of Śiva; cf. {%deva-r˚%});
({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Aja-mīḍha.
<LEND>

<L>39756<pc>0852-c<k1>rUpya<k2>rUpya
{%Rūpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a beautiful form or
appearance, well-shaped, handsome, beautiful; bear-
ing a stamp, stamped, impressed; to be denoted
figuratively or metaphorically; formerly in the pos-
session of or possessed by (as an affix or at the end
of a comp., see Pāṇ. V. 3, 54, Vopa-deva VII. 67;
cf. also Pāṇ. IV. 3, 81); ({%as%}), m. a proper N.; N.
of a mountain; ({%am%}), n. silver; wrought silver,
silver or gold bearing a stamp or impression, stamped
coin; wrought gold. {%—Rūpya-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made or consisting of silver, containing silver. {%—Rū-%}
{%pya-mākṣika, am,%} n. silver Mākṣika, Hepatic
pyrites of iron. {%—Rūpyācala (˚ya-ac˚), as,%} m.
‘silver-mountain,’ N. of the mountain Kailāsa. {%—Rū-%}
{%pyādhyakṣa (˚ya-adh˚), as,%} m. a superintendent
of silver or of silver coinage, master of the mint.
<LEND>

<L>39757<pc>0852-c<k1>rUpyaka<k2>rUpyaka
{%Rūpyaka%}¦ in {%suvarṇa-rūpyaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39758<pc>0852-c<k1>rUma<k2>rUma
{#rUma#}¦ {%rūma,%} N. of a place, (also read {%rūpa.%})
<LEND>

<L>39759<pc>0852-c<k1>rUra<k2>rUra
{#rUra#}¦ {%rūra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hot, burning.
<LEND>

<L>39760<pc>0852-c<k1>rUvuka<k2>rUvuka
{#rUvuka#}¦ {%rūvuka, as,%} m. the castor-oil tree,
Ricinus Communis; [cf. {%ruvuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39761<pc>0852-c<k1>rUz<k2>rUz
{#rUz#}¦ {%rūṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%rūṣati,%} &c., to
adorn, decorate; to cover, smear [cf. rt.
{%rūkṣ, rūkṣita%}]; cl. 10. P. {%rūṣayati,%} &c., to
tremble; to burst.
<LEND>

<L>39762<pc>0852-c<k1>rUzaka<k2>rUzaka
{%Rūṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a plant, Gendarussa Vulgaris.
<LEND>

<L>39763<pc>0852-c<k1>rUzaRa<k2>rUzaRa
{%Rūṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of adorning, decoration;
covering, strewing, smearing, soiling.
<LEND>

<L>39764<pc>0852-c<k1>rUzita<k2>rUzita
{%Rūṣita, as, ā, am%}¦ (sometimes confounded with
{%ruṣita,%} q. v.), adorned, decorated; perfumed; in-
laid; covered (with dust &c.), strewed, overspread,
soiled, besmeared, smeared [cf. rt. {%rūkṣ, rūkṣita,%}
{%rudhira-r˚%}]; made rough or rugged [cf. {%rūkṣa%}];
pounded, (perhaps for {%ruṣita.%})
<LEND>

<L>39765<pc>0852-c<k1>re<k2>re
{#re#}¦ {%re,%} ind. a vocative particle (generally
used contemptuously or to express disrespect).
<LEND>

<L>39766<pc>0852-c<k1>reui<k2>reui
{#reui#}¦ {%reüi,%} N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>39767<pc>0852-c<k1>rek<k2>rek
{#rek#}¦ {%rek,%} cl. 1. A. {%rekate, rireke, rekitum,%}
to suspect, doubt.
<LEND>

<L>39768<pc>0852-c<k1>reka<k2>reka<h>1
1. {%reka, as,%}¦ m. suspicion, doubt, fear, care, anxiety,
concern; a man of a low caste, outcast; a frog; [cf.
{%bheka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39769<pc>0852-c<k1>reka<k2>reka<h>2
{#reka#} 2¦. {%reka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ric%}), emptying,
loosening, looseness, purging.
<LEND>

<L>39770<pc>0852-c<k1>reku<k2>reku
{%Reku, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. empty, void, deserted,
solitary, lonely, secret.
<LEND>

<L>39771<pc>0852-c<k1>rekRas<k2>rekRas
{%Rekṇas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. (in Uṇādi-s. IV. 198. the form
given is {%rikṇas%}), any property left (by a deceased
person), inherited possession, property, any valuable
object or possession, gold, (by some written {%reknas.%})
{%—Rekṇas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of valu-
able property, rich.
<LEND>

<L>39772<pc>0852-c<k1>reca<k2>reca
{%Reca, as,%}¦ m. the emptying of the lungs (in the
practice of Yoga), emission of breath; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
plant ({%= kampillaka%}); of another ({%= aṅkoṭha%}).
<LEND>

<L>39773<pc>0852-c<k1>recaka<k2>recaka
{%Recaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ emptying, purging, purga-
tive, aperient, cathartic; emptying the lungs, emitting
the breath; ({%as%}), m. the act of breathing out or exha-
lation, expiration or emission of breath, (especially)
expelling the breath out of one of the nostrils (in
the practice of Yoga); a syringe; N. of various
aperient medicines; the purging-nut plant, Croton
Jamalgota; nitre, saltpetre; N. of a forester in the
Vikramorvaśī; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%am%}),
n. a purge, cathartic.
<LEND>

<L>39774<pc>0852-c<k1>recana<k2>recana
{%Recana, as, ī, am,%}¦ purging, purgative, cathartic,
aperient; ({%ī%}), f., N. of various plants ({%= tri-vṛt,%}
{%dantī, gundrā, rocanikā, kāmpilla, kālāñjanī);%}
{%(am, ā),%} n. f. the act of emptying, making empty
or void, lessening, diminishing; emitting the breath;
purging, looseness; evacuation.
<LEND>

<L>39775<pc>0852-c<k1>recanaka<k2>recanaka
{%Recanaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= kampillaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>39776<pc>0852-c<k1>recita<k2>recita
{%Recita, as, ā, am,%}¦ left void or empty, freed from,
cleared; purged; ({%am%}), n., N. of one of a horse's
[Page0853-a+ 77]
paces, cantering [cf. rt. 1. {%rej%}]; a particular position
of the hands in dancing.
<LEND>

<L>39777<pc>0853-a<k1>recya<k2>recya
{%Recya, as,%}¦ m. {%= reca.%}
<LEND>

<L>39778<pc>0853-a<k1>reKa<k2>reKa
{#reKa#}¦ {%rekha, as,%} m. (fr. {%rikh%} = rt. {%likh%}), a
line, &c. ({%= rekhā%} below); a proper N.; ({%ā%}). f. a
line; a streak, stripe; a row, series [cf. {%lekhā%}];
a continuous line; drawing; the first or prime me-
ridian (considered to be a line drawn from Laṅkā
to Meru, i. e. from Ceylon supposed to lie on the
equator to the North-pole); {%= ābhoga,%} fulness, satis-
faction; {%= chadman,%} deceit, fraud; a small quantity,
little portion; [cf. probably Old Germ. <nsi>riga.</nsi>] {%—Re-%}
{%khāṃśa (˚khā-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a degree of longitude.
{%—Rekhākāra (˚khā-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} formed in
lines, striped. {%—Rekhā-gaṇita, am,%} n. ‘line-reckon-
ing,’ geometry. {%—Rekhāntara (˚khā-an˚), am,%} n.
geographical longitude, distance east or west from
the first meridian, (see {%rekhā%} above.) {%—Rekhā-nyāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. the marking down of lines or lineaments.
<LEND>

<L>39779<pc>0853-a<k1>reKaka<k2>reKaka
{%Rekhaka%}¦ in {%vindu-rekhaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39780<pc>0853-a<k1>reKAya<k2>reKAya
{%Rekhāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%rekhāyate,%} &c., to praise,
flatter; to vex, distress, annoy.
<LEND>

<L>39781<pc>0853-a<k1>reKAyani<k2>reKAyani
{%Rekhāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39782<pc>0853-a<k1>reKin<k2>reKin
{%Rekhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having lines (on the hand &c.),
lined.
<LEND>

<L>39783<pc>0853-a<k1>reca<k2>reca
{#reca#}¦ {%reca.%} See p. 852, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39784<pc>0853-a<k1>rej<k2>rej<h>1
{#rej#} 1¦. {%rej%} [cf. rt. 1. {%rāj%}], cl. 1. A. {%rejate%}
(Ved. also P. {%rejati%}), &c., to shine; to
shake, tremble, quiver, flicker (Ved.); to cause to
tremble or shake (Ved. P.); (according to Naigh. II.
14) to go (P.): Caus. {%rejayati,%} &c., to cause to
tremble or quake, to shake.
<LEND>

<L>39785<pc>0853-a<k1>rej<k2>rej<h>2
2. {%rej, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ shining; shaking, a shaker; ({%ṭ%}),
m., N. of Agni or fire.
<LEND>

<L>39786<pc>0853-a<k1>rejamAna<k2>rejamAna
{%Rejamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. quaking, trembling.
<LEND>

<L>39787<pc>0853-a<k1>rew<k2>rew
{#rew#}¦ {%reṭ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%reṭati, -te, rireṭa,%}
{%rireṭe, reṭitum,%} to speak; to ask, seek,
request: Caus. {%reṭayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%arireṭat:%}
Desid. {%rireṭiṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%rereṭyate, rereṭṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>39788<pc>0853-a<k1>req<k2>req
{#req#}¦ {%reḍ%} or {%reḷ%} (a Vedic rt. probably con-
nected with rt. 1. {%riṣ%}), to be angry, &c.,
(according to Naigh. II. 12. {%reḷate = krudhyati.%})
<LEND>

<L>39789<pc>0853-a<k1>reRu<k2>reRu
{#reRu#}¦ {%reṇu, us,%} m. (according to some also
{%us, u,%} f. n.; according to Uṇādi-s. III. 38. fr. rt.
1. {%rī%}), dust, a grain or atom of dust, sand, &c.; the
pollen of a flower; N. of a particular medicinal drug
({%= reṇukā, parpaṭa%}); N. of the author of the
hymns Ṛg-veda IX. 70, X. 89, (his patronymic is
Vaiśvāmitra); of a son of Vikukṣi; ({%us%}), f., N. of
a wife of Viśvā-mitra. {%—Reṇu-kakāṭa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. furrowing through or tossing up the dust; (Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda VI. 28, 4 {%= rajasa udbhedakaḥ.%})
{%—Reṇu-kārikā,%} f., N. of a Kārikā. {%—Reṇu-garbha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘sand-vessel,’ (probably) a kind of hour glass
(used for astronomical purposes). {%—Reṇu-tva, am,%} n.
the state or condition of dust, the being dust, dustiness.
{%—Reṇu-dīkṣita, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Reṇu-%}
{%pa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Reṇu-padavī,%} f.
a path of dust. {%—Reṇu-pālaka, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Reṇu-mat, ān,%} m., N. of a son of Viśvā-mitra
by Reṇu. {%—Reṇu-rūṣita, as, ā, am,%} covered with
dust, dusty; ({%as%}), m. an ass. {%—Reṇu-vāsa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} dwelling in dust, covered with the pollen of
flowers; ({%as%}), m. a bee. {%—Reṇu-śas,%} ind. to dust,
into dust, ({%reṇuśaḥ kṛ,%} to make into dust, turn to
dust.) {%—Reṇu-sāra%} or {%reṇu-sāraka, as,%} m. ‘essence
of dust, ‘camphor.
<LEND>

<L>39790<pc>0853-a<k1>reRuka<k2>reRuka
{%Reṇuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Yakṣa; of a mythical
elephant; of a particular formula recited over weapons;
({%ā%}), f. a particular drug or medicinal substance (said
to be fragrant, but bitter and slightly pungent in
taste, and of a greyish colour; it is procured in grains
about the size of pepper-corns); a sort of pulse; N.
of the wife of Jamad-agni and mother of Paraśu-
rāma, (she was the daughter of Reṇu and of king
Prasena-jit); N. of a Kārikā composed by Hari-hara.
{%—Reṇukācārya (˚ka-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of an author.
[Page0853-b+ 72]
{%—Reṇukā-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of Reṇukā,’ i. e. Pa-
raśu-rāma.
<LEND>

<L>39791<pc>0853-b<k1>reta<k2>reta
{#reta#}¦ {%reta, retaḥ-kulyā,%} &c. See below.
<LEND>

<L>39792<pc>0853-b<k1>retas<k2>retas
{#retas#}¦ {%retas, as,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%rī%}), a flow, flood,
stream, current, flow of water or rain (Ved.); flow of
semen, seminal fluid, semen, sperm, virile energy;
seed, offspring, progeny, posterity, descendants (Ved.);
quicksilver (regarded as ‘Śiva's semen’); sin, (Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda IV. 3, 7 {%= pāpa.%}) {%—Retaḥ-kulyā,%} f.
a stream or river of semen virile (in a particular hell).
{%—Retaḥ-sic, k, k, k,%} Ved. discharging semen; an
epithet of particular Iṣṭakās. {%—Retaḥ-sicya, am,%}
n., Ved. discharge of semen. {%—Retas-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. possessed of seed, abounding in seed, impregnat-
ing, prolific, productive; ({%ān%}), m. epithet of Agni.
{%—Retas-vin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. abounding in seed, pro-
lific, productive. {%—Reto-dhā, ās,%} f., Ved. the act of
impregnating, impregnation; ({%ās, ās, am%}), impreg-
nating, fertilizing; ({%ās%}), m. a father. {%—Reto-dheya,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. impregnation. {%—Reto-mārga, as,%} m.
the seminal duct or canal.
<LEND>

<L>39793<pc>0853-b<k1>reta<k2>reta
{%Reta = retas,%}¦ semen virile. {%—Reta-ja, as, ā, am,%}
born or produced from seed; any beloved offspring
or child; ({%ā%}), f. sand.
<LEND>

<L>39794<pc>0853-b<k1>retana<k2>retana
{%Retana, am,%}¦ n. semen virile.
<LEND>

<L>39795<pc>0853-b<k1>retasa<k2>retasa
{%Retasa%}¦ at the end of a comp. {%= retas;%} [cf. {%agni-%}
{%r˚, kapota-r˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39796<pc>0853-b<k1>retasya<k2>retasya
{%Retasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. conveying seed, (the first
verse of the Bahiṣpavamāna Stotra is so called.)
<LEND>

<L>39797<pc>0853-b<k1>retin<k2>retin
{%Retin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. abounding in seed; impreg-
nating.
<LEND>

<L>39798<pc>0853-b<k1>retya<k2>retya
{%Retya, am,%}¦ n. {%= rīti,%} bell-metal.
<LEND>

<L>39799<pc>0853-b<k1>retra<k2>retra
{%Retra, am,%}¦ n. semen virile; quicksilver; nectar,
ambrosia; perfumed or aromatic powder; (these
meanings are sometimes given to {%vetra,%} which is
confounded with {%retra.%})
<LEND>

<L>39800<pc>0853-b<k1>reDaka<k2>reDaka
{#reDaka#}¦ {%redhaka, as,%} m. a proper N., (also
read {%recaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>39801<pc>0853-b<k1>rep<k2>rep
{#rep#}¦ {%rep,%} cl. 1. A. {%repate,%} &c., to go,
move; to sound.
<LEND>

<L>39802<pc>0853-b<k1>repa<k2>repa
{#repa#}¦ {%repa, repas.%} See p. 846, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39803<pc>0853-b<k1>rePa<k2>rePa
{#rePa#}¦ {%repha, rephas, rephin.%} See p. 846,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39804<pc>0853-b<k1>reb<k2>reb
{#reb#}¦ {%reb%} = rt. {%rev,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39805<pc>0853-b<k1>reB<k2>reB
{#reB#}¦ {%rebh.%} See rt. {%ribh,%} p. 846, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39806<pc>0853-b<k1>remi<k2>remi
{#remi#}¦ {%remi,%} a Vedic adjective fr. rt. {%ram,%}
see Pāṇ. III. 2, 171, Vārtt. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39807<pc>0853-b<k1>rerivan<k2>rerivan
{#rerivan#}¦ {%rerivan, ā,%} m., Ved. {%= prerayitṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>39808<pc>0853-b<k1>reriha<k2>reriha
{#reriha#}¦ {%reriha, as, ā, am%} (fr. the Intens. of rt.
{%rih,%} q. v.), Ved. continually or repeatedly licking.
<LEND>

<L>39809<pc>0853-b<k1>rerihat<k2>rerihat
{%Rerihat, at, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. excessively licking, lick-
ing up, consuming.
<LEND>

<L>39810<pc>0853-b<k1>rerihARa<k2>rerihARa
{%Rerihāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. repeatedly licking or
caressing; ({%as%}), m., N. of Śiva; a thief; an Asura;
{%= ambara; = vara.%}
<LEND>

<L>39811<pc>0853-b<k1>rev<k2>rev
{#rev#}¦ {%rev%} or {%reb,%} cl. 1. A. {%revate, rebate,%}
&c., to go, move, flow; to leap, jump, go
by leaps.
<LEND>

<L>39812<pc>0853-b<k1>reva<k2>reva
{%Reva, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Ānarta and father of
Raivata; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the Narma-dā river (which
rises in one of the Vindhya mountains called Āmra-
kūṭa or more commonly Amarakantak in the province
of Gondwana, and after a westerly course of about
800 miles falls into the sea below Broach); the
indigo plant; N. of Rati (the wife of Kāma-deva);
({%am%}), n., N. of various Sāmans. {%—Revottaras (˚vā-%}
{%ut˚), ās,%} m., Ved. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39813<pc>0853-b<k1>revawa<k2>revawa
{%Revaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a boar; a bamboo cane; a whirl-
wind; a kind of poison; oil of the Morunga tree;
the fruit of the plantain; ({%am%}), n. a muscle or conch-
shell with its windings or spiral lines going from
right to left.
<LEND>
[Page0853-c+ 76]

<L>39814<pc>0853-c<k1>revaRa<k2>revaRa
{%Revaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39815<pc>0853-c<k1>revat<k2>revat
{#revat#}¦ {%re-vat, re-vatī.%} See below and p. 854.
<LEND>

<L>39816<pc>0853-c<k1>revata<k2>revata
{#revata#}¦ {%revata, as,%} m. the citron tree; Ca-
thartocarpus Fistula; N. of various persons; of a son
of Andhaka or of Ānarta; of the father of Revatī
and father-in-law of Bala-rāma; of a Varṣa (?) .
<LEND>

<L>39817<pc>0853-c<k1>revataka<k2>revataka
{%Revataka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.; ({%am%}), n. a species
of plant.
<LEND>

<L>39818<pc>0853-c<k1>revati<k2>revati
{%Revati, is,%}¦ f., N. of Rati (wife of Kāma-deva);
{%= re-vatī,%} the wife of Bala-rāma. {%—Revati-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. ({%revati%} for {%revatī%}), the son of Revatī.
<LEND>

<L>39819<pc>0853-c<k1>reSayadArin<k2>reSayadArin
{#reSayadArin#}¦ {%reśaya-dārin (reśaya = hiṃsat),%}
Ved. destroying those who injure, (used in Nirukta
VI. 14. to explain {%riśādas,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>39820<pc>0853-c<k1>reSI<k2>reSI
{#reSI#}¦ {%reśī,%} f., Ved. epithet of water.
<LEND>

<L>39821<pc>0853-c<k1>rez<k2>rez<h>1
{#rez#} 1¦. {%reṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%reṣate, rireṣe, re-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to howl, roar, yell (as wolves); to
neigh, whinny (as a horse; cf. rt. {%hreṣ%}); to utter
any inarticulate sound.
<LEND>

<L>39822<pc>0853-c<k1>rez<k2>rez<h>2
2. {%reṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ one who howls or neighs, howling,
neighing.
<LEND>

<L>39823<pc>0853-c<k1>rezaRa<k2>rezaRa<h>1
1. {%reṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the howl of a wolf, howling,
yelling, roaring.
<LEND>

<L>39824<pc>0853-c<k1>rezA<k2>rezA
{%Reṣā,%}¦ f. howling, yelling (of wolves); neighing.
<LEND>

<L>39825<pc>0853-c<k1>rezita<k2>rezita
{%Reṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ yelled, sounded; ({%am%}), n.
neighing, roaring.
<LEND>

<L>39826<pc>0853-c<k1>rez<k2>rez<h>3
{#rez#} 3¦. {%reṣ, ṭ%} (fr. rt. 1. {%riṣ%}), in Vājasa-
neyi-s. VI. 18. according to Mahī-dhara {%= riṣṭā%} or
{%hiṃsitā,%} (perhaps referrible to rt. {%riś,%} to injure.)
<LEND>

<L>39827<pc>0853-c<k1>reza<k2>reza
{%Reṣa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. injury, hurt, receiving injury.
<LEND>

<L>39828<pc>0853-c<k1>rezaRa<k2>rezaRa<h>2
2. {%reṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. injuring, hurting;
({%am%}), n. the act of injuring, injury, hurt, damage;
failure.
<LEND>

<L>39829<pc>0853-c<k1>rezin<k2>rezin
{%Reṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ injuring, hurting; [cf. {%puru-%}
{%ṣa-r˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39830<pc>0853-c<k1>rezwf<k2>rezwf
{%Reṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who injures or hurts,
an injurer.
<LEND>

<L>39831<pc>0853-c<k1>rezman<k2>rezman
{%Reṣman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. a storm, whirlwind, storm-
cloud, (according to Mahī-dhara) the dissolution or
destruction of the world. {%—Reṣma-cchinna%} or
{%reṣma-mathita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. rent or broken
by a storm, torn up by a tempest.
<LEND>

<L>39832<pc>0853-c<k1>rezmya<k2>rezmya
{%Reṣmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in or exposed to
a storm, involved in destruction (at the dissolution
of the world).
<LEND>

<L>39833<pc>0853-c<k1>rehat<k2>rehat
{#rehat#}¦ {%rehat,%} see Gaṇa Bhṛśādi to Pāṇ. III.
1, 12.
<LEND>

<L>39834<pc>0853-c<k1>rehAya<k2>rehAya
{%Rehāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%rehāyate,%} &c., see Gaṇa Bhṛ-
śādi to Pāṇ. III. 1, 12.
<LEND>

<L>39835<pc>0853-c<k1>rE<k2>rE<h>1
{#rE#} 1¦. {%rai,%} cl. 1. P. {%rāyati, rarau, rātum,%} to
bark, bark at (with acc.); to sound; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>latrare.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39836<pc>0853-c<k1>rE<k2>rE<h>2
2. {%rai, ās (?) ,%}¦ m. barking, sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>39837<pc>0853-c<k1>rE<k2>rE<h>3
{#rE#} 3¦. {%rai, rās,%} m. rarely f. (connected with
{%rayi,%} q. v., fr. rt. 1. {%rā;%} acc. {%rāyam,%} Ved. {%rām%} =
Lat. <nsi>rem;</nsi> for other cases see Gram. 132), property,
possessions, goods, wealth, gold; costliness; ({%rai%}),
ind., see Gaṇa Cādi to Pāṇ. I. 4. 57; [cf. Lat. <nsi>res.</nsi>]
{%—Rāyas-kāma, as, ā, am%} ({%rāyas,%} gen. c.), Ved.
desirous of property, anxious to become rich. {%—Rā-%}
{%yas-poṣa, as,%} m., Ved. increase of property or
riches, the possession of wealth, increase of pros-
perity; ({%as, ā, am%}), increasing riches (said of Kṛṣṇa).
{%—Rāyas-poṣaka, as, ikā, am,%} increasing riches.
{%—Rāyas-poṣa-dā, ās, ās, am,%} or {%rāyaspoṣa-%}
{%dāvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. granting increase of wealth,
bestowing increase of prosperity. {%—Rāyas-poṣa-%}
{%vani, is, is, i,%} Ved. procuring increase of riches
({%dhana-puṣṭeḥ sampādayitṛ%}). {%—Rāyo-vāja, as,%}
m. ({%rāyas,%} gen. c.), Ved. a proper N. {%—Rāyo-%}
{%vājīya, am,%} n. (fr. the preceding), N. of a Sāman.
{%—Rai-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to transform
into property.
<LEND>

<L>39838<pc>0853-c<k1>revat<k2>revat
{%Re-vat, ān, atī, at%}¦ ({%re%} contracted fr. {%rayi + vat%}),
having prosperity or wealth, rich, wealthy, opulent,
prosperous; grand in external appearance, shining,
[Page0854-a+ 78]
glittering, beautiful, illustrious; ({%at%}), ind., Ved. ra-
diantly, beautifully; ({%atī%}), f., N. of the fifth Nak-
ṣatra, (see {%nakṣatra;%} sometimes also {%atyas,%} f.
pl.); the day of Revatī; N. of the evil genius or
goddess presiding over a particular sickness, (some-
times identified with Durgā, sometimes with Aditi);
N. of the wife of Mitra; of a daughter of the Lustre
({%kānti%}) of the Nakṣatra Revatī and mother of
Manu Raivata; of the wife of Bala-rāma (daughter
of Kakudmin); of a wife of Amṛtodana; ({%atyas%})
f. pl. ‘the wealthy ones, the shining ones,’ epithet
of cows (Ved.); waters, water, a quantity of water
(Ved.); epithet of the verse Ṛg-veda I. 30, 13 (so
called from {%revatī%} being the first word; the Raivata
Sāman is formed from this verse; according to Pāṇ.
IV. 3, 34, Vārtt. 1. {%revatī%} = one born under the
Nakṣatra Revatī); {%revad yājñaturam,%} N. of a
Sāman. {%—Revatī-bhava, as,%} m. ‘son of Revatī,’
the planet Saturn. {%—Revatī-ramaṇa, as,%} m. the
husband of Revatī, i. e. Bala-rāma; N. of Viṣṇu.
{%—Revatīśa (˚tī-īśa), as,%} m. lord or husband of
Revatī, i. e. Bala-rāma. {%—Revatī-suta, as,%} m. ‘son
of Revatī,’ a N. of Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>39839<pc>0854-a<k1>revatya<k2>revatya
{%Revatya%}¦ (a Vedic adjective fr. {%revatī,%} Pāṇ. IV. 4,
122), illustrious, beautiful, &c. (?)
<LEND>

<L>39840<pc>0854-a<k1>revanta<k2>revanta
{%Revanta, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Sūrya and chief
of the Guhyakas; the fifth Manu of the present
Kalpa; [cf. {%raivata.%}] {%—Revanta-manu-sū, ūs,%} f.
mother of Manu Revanta, epithet of Sañjñā (wife of
Sūrya). {%—Revantottara (˚ta-ut˚),%} N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>39841<pc>0854-a<k1>rEkva<k2>rEkva
{%Raikva, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a proper N.; [cf. {%rayikva.%}]
{%—Raikva-parṇa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>39842<pc>0854-a<k1>rEya<k2>rEya
{%Raiya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%raiyati,%} &c., to desire riches.
<LEND>

<L>39843<pc>0854-a<k1>rEvata<k2>rEvata
{%Raivata, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%re-vat%}), coming or de-
scended from a wealthy family, rich, opulent, wealthy;
relating to Manu Raivata; belonging to or connected
with the Raivata Sāman (said of Indra, Savitṛ;
Ved.); ({%as%}), m. a cloud (Ved.); a kind of Soma;
a sort of vegetable; N. of a demon presiding over
a particular child's disease; N. of one of the eleven
Rudras; of Śiva; of the fifth Manu; of a Daitya;
of a Ṛṣi; of a Brahmarṣi; of a king; a patro-
nymic of Kakudmin (the ruler of Ānarta; in this
sense fr. {%revata%}); a metronymic of a son of Amṛ-
todana by Revatī; N. of a mountain near Kuśa-
sthalī, the capital of the country Ānarta; ({%ī%}), f. in
Mahā-bh. Anuśāsana-p. 6236, according to the com-
mentator {%= raivata%} above; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
{%—Raivata-madanikā,%} f., N. of a Goṣṭhī drama.
<LEND>

<L>39844<pc>0854-a<k1>rEvataka<k2>rEvataka
{%Raivataka,%}¦ see Gaṇa Arīhaṇādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2,
80; ({%as%}), m., N. of a mountain ({%= raivata%}); N.
of a porter (in the Śakuntalā); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
the inhabitants of the mountain Raivataka; ({%am%}),
n. a species of plant.
<LEND>

<L>39845<pc>0854-a<k1>rEvatika<k2>rEvatika
{%Raivatika, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Revatī.
<LEND>

<L>39846<pc>0854-a<k1>rEvatikIya<k2>rEvatikIya
{%Raivatikīya,%}¦ adj. fr. {%raivatika%} (Pāṇ. IV. 3,
131).
<LEND>

<L>39847<pc>0854-a<k1>rEvatya<k2>rEvatya
{%Raivatya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%revat%}), riches, wealth;
{%raivatya ṛṣabhaḥ,%} N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>39848<pc>0854-a<k1>rEKa<k2>rEKa
{#rEKa#}¦ {%raikha, as,%} m. (fr. {%rekha%}), a patro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>39849<pc>0854-a<k1>rERava<k2>rERava
{#rERava#}¦ {%raiṇava, as,%} m. (fr. {%reṇu%}), a patro-
nymic; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>39850<pc>0854-a<k1>rERukeya<k2>rERukeya
{%Raiṇukeya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%reṇukā%}), a metronymic
of Paraśu-rāma.
<LEND>

<L>39851<pc>0854-a<k1>rEtasa<k2>rEtasa
{#rEtasa#}¦ {%raitasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%retas%}), Ved. be-
longing to seed or semen, seminal.
<LEND>

<L>39852<pc>0854-a<k1>rEtika<k2>rEtika
{#rEtika#}¦ {%raitika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%rīti%}), of or
belonging to brass, brazen.
<LEND>

<L>39853<pc>0854-a<k1>rEtya<k2>rEtya
{%Raitya, as,%}¦ &c., made of brass, brazen.
<LEND>

<L>39854<pc>0854-a<k1>rEBa<k2>rEBa
{#rEBa#}¦ {%raibha, as,%} m. (fr. {%rebha%}), a patronymic;
({%ī%}), f., Ved., scil. {%ṛc,%} epithet of particular ritualistic
verses; N. of the three verses, Atharva-veda XX.
127, 4-6 (so called from the word {%rebha%} occurring
several times).
<LEND>

<L>39855<pc>0854-a<k1>rEBya<k2>rEBya
{%Raibhya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Rebha, N. of
a son of Sumati and father of Dushyanta.
<LEND>

<L>39856<pc>0854-a<k1>rEvata<k2>rEvata
{#rEvata#}¦ {%raivata.%} See above.
<LEND>
[Page0854-b+ 79]

<L>39857<pc>0854-b<k1>rEzRAyana<k2>rEzRAyana
{#rEzRAyana#}¦ {%raiṣṇāyana, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39858<pc>0854-b<k1>roka<k2>roka
{#roka#}¦ {%roka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%ruc%}), light,
lustre, brightness, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VI.
66, 6 {%= dīpti,%} ‘light,’ or {%bādhaka,%} ‘obstructing’);
buying with ready money; ({%am%}), n. a hole, cavity; a
boat, ship; moving, shaking; {%= kṛpaṇa-bheda.%}
<LEND>

<L>39859<pc>0854-b<k1>rokas<k2>rokas
{%Rokas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. light or any phenomenon of
light.
<LEND>

<L>39860<pc>0854-b<k1>roga<k2>roga
{#roga#}¦ {%roga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%ruj%}), ‘breaking
up of strength,’ infirmity, weakness, sickness, disease,
malady, ({%kṣud-roga,%} disease from hunger; {%kṣe-%}
{%triya-roga,%} an incurable disease, see {%kṣetriya%});
Disease regarded as an evil genius or demon; Costus
Speciosus or Arabicus. {%—Roga-grasta, as, ā, am,%}
seized with sickness, sick, diseased. {%—Roga-ghna,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} removing sickness, curative, remedial,
medicinal; ({%am%}), n. medicine. {%—Roga-jñāna, am,%}
n. knowledge of diseases. {%—Roga-da, as, ā, am,%}
giving or causing sickness. {%—Roga-nāśana, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} Ved. destroying sickness, removing disease.
{%—Roga-nigrahaṇa, am,%} n. suppression of disease.
{%—Roga-prada, as, ā, am,%} causing disease. {%—Roga-%}
{%bhaya, am,%} n. fear of disease. {%—Roga-bhāj, k, k, k,%}
possessing sickness, one who suffers from disease, ill,
sick. {%—Roga-bhū, ūs,%} f. the place or seat of sickness,
the body. {%—Roga-mukta, as, ā, am,%} freed from
sickness, recovered from illness. {%—Roga-murāri%}
{%(˚ra-ari), is,%} m., N. of a work on medicine. {%—Roga-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of sicknesses,’ consumption.
{%—Roga-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. the sign or symptoms
of a disease. {%—Roga-śāntaka, as,%} m. a curer of
disease, a physician. {%—Roga-śānti, is,%} f. cure or
alleviation of disease. {%—Roga-śilā,%} f. realgar, red
arsenic. {%—Roga-śilpin, ī,%} m. a species of plant (com-
monly called Śaralu), Cassia Fistula. {%—Roga-śreṣ-%}
{%ṭha, as,%} m. ‘the chief of sicknesses,’ fever. {%—Roga-%}
{%ha, am,%} n. ‘destroying disease,’ a drug, medicament.
{%—Roga-han, hā,%} m. ‘remover of disease,’ a phy-
sician. {%—Roga-hara, as, ā, am,%} taking away disease,
remedial, curative, medicinal; ({%am%}), n. medicine.
{%—Roga-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} taking away disease, curing,
curative; ({%ī%}), m. a physician. {%—Roga-hṛt, t, t, t,%}
curing disease; ({%t%}), m. a physician. {%—Rogāntaka%}
{%(˚ga-an˚), as, ī, am,%} ‘disease-destroying,’ curative,
medicinal; ({%as%}), m. a physician. {%—Rogānvita (˚ga-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} possessed of sickness, sick, diseased.
{%—Rogāyatana (˚ga-āy˚), am,%} n. the abode of
disease, seat of malady, the body. {%—Rogārta (˚ga-%}
{%ār˚), as, ā, am,%} suffering from sickness or disease,
afflicted with any disease. {%—Rogonmādita (˚ga-%}
{%un˚), as, ā, am,%} maddened with disease, mad (said
of a dog). {%—Rogopaśama (˚ga-up˚), as,%} m. cure or
alleviation of disease. {%—Rogolbaṇa-tā (˚ga-ul˚),%} f.,
Ved. the spreading or raging of diseases.
<LEND>

<L>39861<pc>0854-b<k1>rogita<k2>rogita
{%Rogita, as, ā, am,%}¦ diseased, suffering from sick-
ness; mad (said of a dog).
<LEND>

<L>39862<pc>0854-b<k1>rogin<k2>rogin
{%Rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ sick, sickly, diseased, ill, ({%manda-%}
{%rogin,%} seldom ill.) {%—Rogi-taru, us,%} m. ‘tree of
the sick, ‘epithet of the Aśoka tree. {%—Rogi-tā,%} f.
sickness, illness, a diseased state. {%—Rogi-vallabha,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘friend of the sick,’ medicine, a drug.
<LEND>

<L>39863<pc>0854-b<k1>rogizWa<k2>rogizWa
{%Rogiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%rogin%}), one who
is always sickly or ill.
<LEND>

<L>39864<pc>0854-b<k1>rogya<k2>rogya
{%Rogya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%roga%}), related to or con-
nected with disease, producing sickness, unwhole-
some, unhealthy; ({%rogya%} may also be a fut. part.
pass. fr. rt. 1. {%ruj,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>39865<pc>0854-b<k1>roca<k2>roca
{#roca#}¦ {%roca, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ruc%}), en-
lightening, illuminating, one who lightens or makes
bright; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king; [cf. {%go-r˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39866<pc>0854-b<k1>rocaka<k2>rocaka
{%Rocaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ brightening, enlightening,
&c. ({%= rocana%}); giving an appetite, ({%a-rocaka,%}
taking away appetite, depriving of appetite); pleas-
ing, agreeable; ({%as%}), m. hunger, appetite; a sto-
machic, stimulant, any medicine, fruit, &c. supposed
to strengthen the tone of the stomach and restore
lost appetite; N. of various plants, the plantain; a
kind of onion; a worker in glass or artificial orna-
ments.
<LEND>
[Page0854-c+ 77]

<L>39867<pc>0854-c<k1>rocakin<k2>rocakin
{%Rocakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having desire or appetite;
{%a-rocakin,%} free from desire or appetite.
<LEND>

<L>39868<pc>0854-c<k1>rocana<k2>rocana
{%Rocana, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} enlightening, making
bright, illuminating, irradiating, lightening, light,
bright, splendid, beautiful; causing or exciting de-
sire, giving pleasure or satisfaction, pleasing, agree-
able, pleasant, charming, lovely; sharpening or giving
an appetite, stomachic; ({%as%}), m. a stomachic; a
variety of the cotton tree; {%= palāṇḍu, ārag-badha,%}
{%karañja, aṅkoṭha, dāḍima;%} epithet of a demon
presiding over a particular disease; N. of one of the
five arrows of the god of love (‘exciter of pleasures’);
N. of a son of Viṣṇu by Dakṣiṇā; N. of Indra
under Manu Svārociṣa; of a mountain; ({%ā%}), f. the
bright sky, firmament, (see {%rocanam%} below); a
handsome woman; a particular yellow pigment (com-
monly called {%go-rocanā,%} q. v.); a red lotus-flower;
dark Śālmali (= <nsi>Marāṭhī kāḷī sāmvarī</nsi>) {%= vaṃśa-%}
{%rocanā,%} bamboo manna or Tabāṣīr; N. of a wife
of Vasu-deva; ({%ī%}), f., N. of various plants, Convol-
vulus Turpethum; {%= kāmpilla; = danti; = āma-%}
{%lakī;%} red arsenic, realgar; a particular yellow pig-
ment, {%= rocanā; (am),%} n. light, brightness (Ved.),
the bright sky, firmament, luminous sphere (of which
there are said to be three, see Ṛg-veda I. 102, 8;
in this sense sometimes {%ā,%} f.); a luminary (Ved.);
the raising a desire for; {%devānāṃ rocanam,%} N. of
a Sāman. {%—Rocana-phala, as,%} m. the citron tree;
({%ā%}), f. a species of cucumber. {%—Rocana-sthā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} Ved. abiding in light, dwelling in the firma-
ment. {%—Rocanā-kṛ,%} see Gaṇa Sākṣādādi to Pāṇ.
I. 4, 74. {%—Rocanā-mukha, as,%} m., N. of a Daitya.
{%—Rocanā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessing light,
shining, light, bright.
<LEND>

<L>39869<pc>0854-c<k1>rocanaka<k2>rocanaka
{%Rocanaka, as,%}¦ m. the citron tree; ({%ikā%}), f. a
species of plant ({%= śuṇḍā-rocanī, kāmpillikā%}); =
{%vaṃśa-rocanā,%} bamboo manna or Tabāṣīr.
<LEND>

<L>39870<pc>0854-c<k1>rocamAna<k2>rocamAna
{%Rocamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, glittering, bright,
splendid, resplendent; pleasing, gratifying, charming,
pleasant, agreeable, ({%a-rocamāna,%} not agreeable,
unpleasant); ({%as%}), m. a tuft or curl of hair on a
horse's neck; N. of a king; of one of the Mātṛs
attending upon Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>39871<pc>0854-c<k1>rocas<k2>rocas
{%Rocas%}¦ in {%sva-rocas.%}
<LEND>

<L>39872<pc>0854-c<k1>roci<k2>roci
{%Roci,%}¦ light, a beam, ray.
<LEND>

<L>39873<pc>0854-c<k1>rocin<k2>rocin
{%Rocin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ light, bright, (see {%mita-r˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>39874<pc>0854-c<k1>rociza<k2>rociza
{%Rociṣa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%rocis%}), N. of a son of Vibhā-
vasu by Uṣas.
<LEND>

<L>39875<pc>0854-c<k1>rocizRu<k2>rocizRu
{%Rociṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ shining, giving light, bright,
splendid, brilliant, beautiful, gaily adorned, elegantly
dressed, gay, blooming; giving an appetite. {%—Ro-%}
{%ciṣṇu-mukha, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having a bright
countenance.
<LEND>

<L>39876<pc>0854-c<k1>rocis<k2>rocis
{%Rocis, is,%}¦ n. light, splendor, brightness, brilliancy,
flame. {%—Rociṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing light,
giving light; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a son of Manu Svāro-
cisha.
<LEND>

<L>39877<pc>0854-c<k1>rocI<k2>rocI
{%Rocī,%}¦ f. a pot-herb, Hingtsha Repens.
<LEND>

<L>39878<pc>0854-c<k1>rocya<k2>rocya
{%Rocya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be illuminated or enlight-
ened.
<LEND>

<L>39879<pc>0854-c<k1>rowa<k2>rowa
{#rowa#}¦ {%roṭa%} in {%pūga-roṭa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39880<pc>0854-c<k1>rowakavrata<k2>rowakavrata
{%Roṭaka-vrata, am,%}¦ n. epithet of a particular reli-
gious observance.
<LEND>

<L>39881<pc>0854-c<k1>rowikA<k2>rowikA
{%Roṭikā,%}¦ f. bread or a kind of bread, wheaten cakes
toasted on an earthen or iron dish (= Hindūstānī
{%roṭī%}); {%yava-roṭikā,%} barley bread.
<LEND>

<L>39882<pc>0854-c<k1>rowI<k2>rowI
{%Roṭī,%}¦ f. bread, in {%phiraṅga-r˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>39883<pc>0854-c<k1>roq<k2>roq
{#roq#}¦ {%roḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%roḍati,%} &c., to be mad
(= rt. {%loḍ%}); to despise, disrespect, (in this
sense = rts. {%rauḍ, rauṭ.%})
<LEND>

<L>39884<pc>0854-c<k1>roqa<k2>roqa
{#roqa#}¦ {%roḍa, as, ā, am,%} satisfied, contented;
({%as%}), m. crushing, pounding ({%= kṣoda%}).
<LEND>

<L>39885<pc>0854-c<k1>roQf<k2>roQf
{#roQf#}¦ {%roḍhṛ, ḍhā, ḍhrī, ḍhṛ%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ruh%}),
one who ascends or grows, &c.
<LEND>

<L>39886<pc>0854-c<k1>roRIka<k2>roRIka
{#roRIka#}¦ {%roṇīka,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>39887<pc>0854-c<k1>roRIkIya<k2>roRIkIya
{%Roṇīkīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to Roṇīka.
<LEND>

<L>39888<pc>0854-c<k1>roda<k2>roda
{#roda#}¦ {%roda, rodana,%} &c. See p. 850, col. 1.
<LEND>
[Page0855-a+ 75]

<L>39889<pc>0855-a<k1>rodas<k2>rodas
{#rodas#}¦ {%rodas, as,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%rud;%} in Ni-
rukta VI. 1. {%rodas%} is connected with {%rodhas%} as if
fr. rt. 2. {%rudh%}), the seat of the roaring winds, heaven;
({%asī%}), n. du. heaven and earth, the upper and lower
world, (in Ṛg-veda IX. 22, 5. {%rodasoḥ,%} gen. du. {%=%}
{%dyāvā-pṛthivyoḥ.%}) {%—Rodaḥ-kuhara, am,%} n. the
canopy of heaven. {%—Rodas-tva, am,%} n., Ved. a word
used in explaining the etymology of {%rodasī.%}
<LEND>

<L>39890<pc>0855-a<k1>rodasI<k2>rodasI
{%Rodasī,%}¦ f. heaven; N. of the wife of Rudra and
mother of the Maruts; (Sāy. also) mother of the
Maruts or lightning; ({%asyau%} or {%asī%}), f. du. heaven
and earth, the upper and lower world, (in Ṛg-veda I.
33, 5. {%rodasyoḥ,%} gen. du. {%= dyāvā-pṛthivyoḥ;%} the
form {%rodasī%} for nom. acc. du. is also referred to {%rodas%}
above.) {%—Rodasi-prā, ās, ās, am%} ({%rodasi%} for {%ro-%}
{%dasī%}), Ved. filling heaven and earth ({%= dyāvā-%}
{%pṛthivyoḥ pūrayitṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>39891<pc>0855-a<k1>rodDavya<k2>rodDavya
{#rodDavya#}¦ {%roddhavya, roddhṛ.%} See p. 850,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39892<pc>0855-a<k1>roDa<k2>roDa<h>1
{#roDa#} 1¦. {%rodha.%} See p. 850, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39893<pc>0855-a<k1>roDa<k2>roDa<h>2
{#roDa#} 2¦. {%rodha, rodhas, rodhin,%} &c. See
p. 850, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39894<pc>0855-a<k1>roDra<k2>roDra
{#roDra#}¦ {%rodhra, as,%} m. (probably connected
with rt. 1. {%rudh%} and {%rudhira%}), the tree Symplocos
Racemosa (having yellow leaves; the red powder
thrown over persons during the Holī festival is pre-
pared from the bark of this tree); ({%am%}), n. sin, (in
this sense also {%as,%} m.); offence, injury, (in these
two senses probably connected with rt. 2. {%rudh.%})
{%—Rodhra-puṣpa, as,%} m. Bassia Latifolia; a species
of ringed snake. {%—Rodhra-puṣpaka, as,%} m. a
kind of grain (said to be a sort of {%śāli%}); a species
of ringed snake. {%—Rodhra-puṣpiṇī,%} f. Grislea To-
mentosa. {%—Rodhra-śūka, as,%} m. a kind of rice
(the ears of which are similar in colour to the flowers
of the Rodhra).
<LEND>

<L>39895<pc>0855-a<k1>ropa<k2>ropa<h>1
{#ropa#} 1¦. {%ropa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%rup%} = rt.
1. {%lup%}), confusing, disturbing; ({%am%}), n. a fissure,
chasm, hole, cavity, (in this sense possibly connected
with rt. 1. {%ruh,%} cf. {%ruhaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>39896<pc>0855-a<k1>ropaRa<k2>ropaRa<h>1
1. {%ropaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. causing bodily pain,
causing racking or griping pain; ({%am%}), n. according
to the commentator on Taittirīya-Brāhmaṇa III.
476, 9 {%= vimohana%} or {%upadrava.%}
<LEND>

<L>39897<pc>0855-a<k1>ropi<k2>ropi
{%Ropi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. acute or racking pain.
<LEND>

<L>39898<pc>0855-a<k1>ropita<k2>ropita<h>1
1. {%ropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bewildered, perplexed.
<LEND>

<L>39899<pc>0855-a<k1>ropuzI<k2>ropuzI
{%Ropuṣī,%}¦ f., Ved., according to some {%= ropi;%} ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 191, 13. ‘destroying,’
{%ropuṣīṇām = lopayitrīṇām = chettrīṇām.%}
<LEND>

<L>39900<pc>0855-a<k1>ropa<k2>ropa<h>2
{#ropa#} 2¦. {%ropa, as,%} m. (fr. the Caus. of rt.
1. {%ruh%}), the act of raising or setting up, &c. (=
2. {%ropaṇa%}); the planting (of trees); an arrow.
<LEND>

<L>39901<pc>0855-a<k1>ropaka<k2>ropaka
{%Ropaka, as,%}¦ m. a planter [cf. {%vṛkṣa-r˚%}]; a
weight of metal or a coin ((1/70) of a Suvarṇa; cf.
{%rūpaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>39902<pc>0855-a<k1>ropaRa<k2>ropaRa<h>2
2. {%ropaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to grow, causing
to grow over or cicatrize, healing; putting or placing
on, ({%am%}), n. the act of setting up or erecting, raising;
the act of planting, setting, &c.; healing, cicatrizing;
a healing application (used for sores).
<LEND>

<L>39903<pc>0855-a<k1>ropaRIya<k2>ropaRIya
{%Ropaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be set up or erected or
raised; to be planted; useful for healing or cicatrizing.
<LEND>

<L>39904<pc>0855-a<k1>ropayitf<k2>ropayitf
{%Ropayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who sets up or erects,
an erecter; a planter.
<LEND>

<L>39905<pc>0855-a<k1>ropita<k2>ropita<h>2
2. {%ropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to grow; raised,
erected, elevated; set, planted, placed in or upon.
<LEND>

<L>39906<pc>0855-a<k1>ropin<k2>ropin
{%Ropin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ raising, erecting, setting, planting.
<LEND>

<L>39907<pc>0855-a<k1>ropya<k2>ropya
{%Ropya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be raised or erected; to be
planted.
<LEND>

<L>39908<pc>0855-a<k1>ropaRAkA<k2>ropaRAkA
{#ropaRAkA#}¦ {%ropaṇākā,%} f., Ved. a kind of
bird, (Sāy.) a thrush ({%= śārikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>39909<pc>0855-a<k1>roma<k2>roma<h>1
{#roma#} 1¦. and 2. {%roma,%} 1. and 2. {%romaka,%} &c.
See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39910<pc>0855-a<k1>roman<k2>roman
{#roman#}¦ {%roman, a,%} n. (probably fr. rt. 1. {%ruh;%}
cf. {%loman;%} according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 150. fr. rt.
[Page0855-b+ 81]
1. {%ru%}), the hair on the body of men and animals,
(especially) short hair, bristles, wool, down, nap, &c.,
(less properly applicable to the long hair on the head
and beard of men, and to that on the mane and tail
of animals); the feathers of a bird; ({%āṇas%}), m. pl.,
N. of a people; [cf. Hib. <nsi>romach,</nsi> ‘hairy;’ <nsi>ro-</nsi>
<nsi>machad,</nsi> ‘hairiness;’ <nsi>roinfaith,</nsi> ‘hair-cloth;’ <nsi>roin,</nsi>
<nsi>roine,</nsi> ‘hair, fur;’ <nsi>roineach,</nsi> ‘hairy.’] {%—Roma-%}
{%kanda, as,%} m. a kind of bulbous root or vegetable
{%(= piṇḍālu)%}. {%—Roma-karṇaka, as,%} m. ‘hair-eared,’
a hare. {%—Roma-kūpa, as, am,%} m. n. ‘hair-hole,’ a
pore of the skin; [cf. {%roma-randhra.%}] {%—Roma-%}
{%kesara, am,%} n. the tail of the Bos Grunniens
used as a Chowri, a whisk; (also written {%roma-%}
{%keśara.%}) {%—Roma-garta, as,%} m. {%= roma-kūpa.%}
{%—Roma-guccha, as,%} m. or {%roma-gutsa, am,%}
n. the tail of the Bos Grunniens used as a
Chowri. {%—Romaṇ-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. {%= ro-%}
{%ma-vat,%} covered with hair, hairy. {%—Roma-tyaj,%}
{%k, k, k,%} Ved. losing the hair (said of a horse).
{%—Roma-pāda, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Roma-%}
{%pulaka, as,%} m. the bristling of the hairs of the
body, a thrill of joy or fear {%(= roma-harṣa).%}
{%—Roma-phalā,%} f. {%= romaśa-phala%}. {%—Roma-%}
{%baddha, as, ā, am,%} ‘hair-bound,’ made or fastened
with the hair of animals, woven with hair. {%—Roma-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. hair-texture. {%—Roma-bhūmi, is,%}
f. the place of the hair, i. e. the skin. {%—Roma-%}
{%mūrdhan, ā, ā%} or {%dhnī, a,%} having short hairs on
the head, covered with hair or down on the head
(said of insects). {%—Roma-ratāsāra, as,%} m. the
belly, (apparently a wrong form.) {%—Roma-randhra,%}
{%am,%} n. a hole through which a hair shoots out, a
pore of the skin. {%—Roma-rāji, is,%} or {%roma-rājī,%} f.
a row or line of hair, a streak of hair (on the abdo-
men of men and especially of women just above the
navel, said to be a sign of puberty). {%—Roma-rāji-%}
{%patha, as,%} m. the line of the hair above the navel,
(in {%tanu-r˚%} = ‘the waist.’) {%—Roma-latā%} or {%roma-%}
{%latikā,%} f. the winding line of hair above the navel
(of women). {%—Roma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of
hair, covered with hair, hairy, woolly. {%—Roma-vāhin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} cutting off hair, sharp enough to cut a hair.
{%—Roma-vikāra, as,%} m. or {%roma-vikriyā,%} f. change
of the hair of the body, bristling or erection of the
hair of the body, horripilation. {%—Roma-vidhvaṃsa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘hair-destroying,’ a louse. {%—Roma-vivara,%}
{%am,%} n. {%= roma-kūpa%}. {%—Roma-vedha, as,%} m., N.
of an author. {%—Roma-śuka, am,%} n. a kind of per-
fume. {%—Roma-harṣa, as,%} m. the bristling of the
hair of the body, a thrill or shudder (caused by joy,
fear, cold, &c.). {%—Roma-harṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}
causing the hair to bristle or stand erect, causing
excessive joy, causing a shudder or horror, awe-
inspiring, thrilling; ({%as%}), m. Terminalia Belerica
(the nuts of which are used as dice); N. of Sūta
(the pupil of Vyāsa and supposed narrator of the
events in the Purāṇas); N. of the father of Sūta;
({%am%}), n. {%= roma-harṣa%}. {%—Roma-harṣita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} thrilled with delight, having the hair of the
body bristling or erect with joy or horror. {%—1. ro-%}
{%māñca (˚ma-añ˚), as,%} m. ‘curling or erection of
the hair of the body,’ a thrill of rapture ({%= roma-%}
{%harṣa%}); thrill of horror, horripilation. {%—2. ro-%}
{%māñca%} (fr. the preceding), Nom. P. {%romāñcati,%}
&c., to have the hair erect from excessive rapture,
to feel a thrill of joy or horror. {%—Romāñca-kañcuka,%}
{%as,%} m. a coat of mail consisting (as it were) of the
down of the body erect through delight. {%—Romāñ-%}
{%cakin, ī,%} m., N. of a serpent-demon. {%—Romāñcikā,%}
f. a species of plant {%(= rudantī)%}. {%—Romāñcita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the hair of the body erect or thrilled
with joy or horror, enraptured. {%—Romānta (˚ma-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. the hairy side, i. e. the upper side of
the hand. {%—Romālī (˚ma-ālī),%} f. a row or line of
hair (above the navel; cf. {%roma-rāji%}); {%= vayaḥ-%}
{%sandhi,%} (probably) puberty. {%—Romālu (˚ma-ālu),%}
{%us,%} m. a sort of vegetable {%(= piṇḍālu)%}. {%—Romālu-%}
{%viṭapin, ī,%} m. a species of plant {%(= kumbhī)%}. {%—Ro-%}
{%māvalī (˚ma-āv˚),%} f. a row or line of hair (above
the navel; cf. {%romālī%}). {%—Romāśraya-phalā (˚ma- %}
[Page0855-c+ 74]
{%āś˚),%} f. a species of shrub. {%—Romodgati (˚ma-ud˚),%}
{%is,%} f. or {%romodgama (˚ma-ud˚)%} or {%romodbheda%}
{%(˚ma-ud˚), as,%} m. erection of the hair ({%= roma-%}
{%harṣa,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>39911<pc>0855-c<k1>roma<k2>roma<h>1
1. {%roma = roman%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp., e. g.
{%a-roma,%} having no hair, hairless; cf. {%sa-r˚%}); ({%as%}),
m. a hole, cavity [cf. 1. {%ropa%}]; ({%am%}), n. water.
<LEND>

<L>39912<pc>0855-c<k1>romaka<k2>romaka<h>1
1. {%romaka = roman%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp.).
<LEND>

<L>39913<pc>0855-c<k1>romaSa<k2>romaSa
{%Romaśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having thick hair, having
thick wool or bristles, hairy, woolly; ({%as%}), m. a
sheep, ram; a hog, boar; a sort of vegetable ({%=%}
{%piṇḍālu, kumbhī%}); N. of a Ṛṣi; of an astro-
nomer [cf. 2. {%romaka%}]; ({%ā%}), f. Cucumis Utilissi-
mus; N. of the reputed authoress of Ṛg-veda 1.
126, 7; ({%am%}), n. the pudenda (Ved.). {%—Romaśa-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. a species of plant ({%= ṭiṇḍiśa%}).
<LEND>

<L>39914<pc>0855-c<k1>roma<k2>roma<h>2
{#roma#} 2¦. {%roma,%} the city Rome.
<LEND>

<L>39915<pc>0855-c<k1>romaka<k2>romaka<h>2
2. {%romaka, as,%}¦ m. Rome; ‘the Roman’ as epi-
thet of a particular astronomer; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people (mentioned in Mahā-bh. Sabhā-p. 1837;
cf. {%romāṇas%} under {%roman%}); the people of the
Roman empire, the Romans; ({%am%}), n. a kind of
saline earth and the salt extracted from it; a kind
of magnet. {%—Romaka-pattana, am,%} n. the city of
Rome. {%—Romaka-siddhānta, as,%} m., N. of one
of the five chief Siddhāntas in the age of Varāha-
mihira. {%—Romakācārya (˚ka-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of a
teacher of astronomy.
<LEND>

<L>39916<pc>0855-c<k1>romakAyaRa<k2>romakAyaRa
{%Romakāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>39917<pc>0855-c<k1>romanTa<k2>romanTa
{#romanTa#}¦ {%romantha, as,%} m. (according to
some fr. {%ruj + mantha%}), ruminating, chewing the
cud, ({%gagaṇa-romantha, as,%} m. ‘ruminating on
the sky, ‘nonsense, absurdity); chewing; frequent
repetition; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐρεύγομαι, ἐρυγγάνω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὀρυγγἀνω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>rūmen</nsi> (for <nsi>rug-men</nsi>), <nsi>ruminare,</nsi>
<nsi>ructare;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>ita-ruchjan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>roc-</nsi>
<nsi>cettan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>39918<pc>0855-c<k1>romanTAya<k2>romanTAya
{%Romanthāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%romanthāyate,%} &c., to
ruminate, chew the cud.
<LEND>

<L>39919<pc>0855-c<k1>romanTAyamAna<k2>romanTAyamAna
{%Romanthāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ ruminating, chew-
ing the cud.
<LEND>

<L>39920<pc>0855-c<k1>romAYca<k2>romAYca<h>1
{#romAYca#} 1¦. and 2. {%romāñca.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>39921<pc>0855-c<k1>roravaRa<k2>roravaRa
{#roravaRa#}¦ {%roravaṇa, roruvat, rorūya.%} See
p. 847, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>39922<pc>0855-c<k1>roruka<k2>roruka
{#roruka#}¦ {%roruka,%} N. of a country or of a
town.
<LEND>

<L>39923<pc>0855-c<k1>rorudA<k2>rorudA
{#rorudA#}¦ {%rorudā.%} See p. 850, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39924<pc>0855-c<k1>rola<k2>rola
{#rola#}¦ {%rola, as,%} m. Flacourtia Cataphracta;
green ginger; ({%ā%}), f. a particular metre {%(= lolā).%}
{%—Rola-deva, as,%} m., N. of a painter.
<LEND>

<L>39925<pc>0855-c<k1>rolamba<k2>rolamba
{#rolamba#}¦ {%rolamba, as, ā, am,%} distrustful,
unbelieving (?); ({%as%}), m. a bee; dry or arid soil (?).
{%—Rolamba-kadamba, am,%} n. a swarm of bees.
<LEND>

<L>39926<pc>0855-c<k1>rolicandrU<k2>rolicandrU
{#rolicandrU#}¦ {%rolicandrū, ūs,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39927<pc>0855-c<k1>roSaMsA<k2>roSaMsA
{#roSaMsA#}¦ {%rośaṃsā (?),%} f. wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>39928<pc>0855-c<k1>roz<k2>roz
{#roz#}¦ {%roṣ, roṣa,%} &c. See p. 851, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>39929<pc>0855-c<k1>roha<k2>roha
{#roha#}¦ {%roha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%ruh%}), rising,
mounting upwards, ascending, springing up, growing
[cf. {%roha-śikhin%}]; riding on, ({%aśva-roha,%} riding
on a horse); ({%as%}), m. rising, height, altitude; the
raising or increasing of anything (as of a number
from a smaller to a higher denomination); the
growing, growth; a bud, blossom, shoot, sprout.
{%—Roha-ga, as,%} m., N. of a mountain {%(= rohaṇa).%}
{%—Roha-śikhin, ī,%} m. fire which mounts upwards,
ascending flame. {%—Roha-sena, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39930<pc>0855-c<k1>rohaka<k2>rohaka
{%Rohaka, as,%}¦ &c. {%= roḍhṛ;%} riding on [cf. {%kaṭi-%}
{%r˚%}], a rider; growing on [cf. {%grāva-r˚%}]; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of a kind of spirit or goblin.
<LEND>

<L>39931<pc>0855-c<k1>rohaRa<k2>rohaRa
{%Rohaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a mountain (Adam's peak
in Ceylon); ({%ī%}), f. a medicine for healing or cica-
trizing (a wound; Ved.); ({%am%}), n. a rising or
ascending; a means of ascending (Ved.); the act of
mounting up, riding on, sitting on, standing on
[Page0856-a+ 81]
({%jyā-rohaṇa,%} the putting or fastening on of a bow-
string); the growing over, healing; the proceeding
from, consisting of; semen virile. {%—Rohaṇa-druma,%}
{%as,%} m. the sandal tree.
<LEND>

<L>39932<pc>0856-a<k1>rohat<k2>rohat
{%Rohat, an, antī, at,%}¦ rising, mounting, ascending,
growing.
<LEND>

<L>39933<pc>0856-a<k1>rohanta<k2>rohanta
{%Rohanta, as,%}¦ m. a particular tree; a tree in
general; ({%ī%}), f. a particular creeper; a creeper in
general.
<LEND>

<L>39934<pc>0856-a<k1>rohas<k2>rohas
{%Rohas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. height, elevation.
<LEND>

<L>39935<pc>0856-a<k1>rohAya<k2>rohAya
{%Rohāya%}¦ (fr. {%rohat%} above), Nom. A. {%rohāyate,%}
&c., see Gaṇa Bhṛśādi to Pāṇ. III. 1, 12.
<LEND>

<L>39936<pc>0856-a<k1>rohi<k2>rohi
{%Rohi, is,%}¦ m. a kind of deer; a seed; a tree; a pious
or religious man, one observing a vow ({%= vratin%}).
<LEND>

<L>39937<pc>0856-a<k1>rohiRa<k2>rohiRa
{%Rohiṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ born under the asterism
Rohiṇī; ({%as%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu; of a man; of
various plants, {%= bhū-tṛṇa, vaṭa, rohitaka; (ās),%}
m. pl. the descendants of Rohiṇa; ({%am%}), n. epithet
of the ninth Muhūrta (a part of the forenoon,
extending to midday, in which Śrāddhas are espe-
cially to be observed).
<LEND>

<L>39938<pc>0856-a<k1>rohiRi<k2>rohiRi
{%Rohiṇi, is,%}¦ f. {%= rohiṇī,%} the Nakṣatra. {%—Rohiṇi-%}
{%tva, am,%} n., Ved. {%= rohiṇī-tva%}. {%—Rohiṇi-nandana,%}
{%as,%} m. the son of Rohiṇī, i. e. Bala-rāma. {%—Rohiṇi-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. ‘son of Rohiṇī,’ a proper N. {%—Ro-%}
{%hiṇi-ṣeṇa%} or {%rohiṇi-sena, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39939<pc>0856-a<k1>rohiRikA<k2>rohiRikA
{%Rohiṇikā,%}¦ f. a woman with a red face (either
from anger or from being coloured with pigments);
inflammation of the throat.
<LEND>

<L>39940<pc>0856-a<k1>rohiRI<k2>rohiRI
{%Rohiṇī,%}¦ f. (fem. of {%rohita,%} col. 2; see also the fem.
of {%rohin,%} col. 2), a red cow, (in the Veda perhaps also)
a red mare; a cow in general, (in Hindū mythology
Rohiṇī is represented as a daughter of Surabhi and
mother of cattle; she is also said to be the mother
of Kāma-dhenu, the cow of plenty); N. of the
ninth Nakṣatra or lunar asterism (personified as a
daughter of Dakṣa, and the favourite wife of the
Moon, called ‘the Red one,’ from the colour of the
star Aldebaran or principal star in the constellation;
the Nakṣatra contains five stars, probably <lang n="greek">α, β, γ, δ, ε,</lang>
Tauri, and according to Hindū notions is figured by
a wheeled carriage or sometimes by a temple or a
fish); N. of the lunar day belonging to the above
Nakṣatra; lightning; a young girl, one in whom
menstruation has just commenced, a girl nine years
of age; inflammation of the throat (of various kinds);
N. of various plants, a kind of vegetable ({%= kaṭu-%}
{%rohiṇī, soma-valka, kāśmarī, harītakī, mañjiṣ-%}
{%ṭhā%}); N. of a wife of Vasu-deva and mother of
Bala-rāma; of a wife of Kṛṣṇa; of the wife of
Mahā-deva; of a daughter of Hiraṇya-kaśipu; of
one of the sixteen Vidyā-devīs; (according to Pāṇ.
IV. 4, 34, Vārtt. 1, there is an adj. {%rohiṇī,%} meaning
‘born under the Nakṣatra Rohiṇī.’) {%—Rohiṇī-%}
{%kānta, as,%} m. ‘the lover of Rohiṇī,’ epithet of the
Moon. {%—Rohiṇī-candra-vrata%} and {%rohiṇī-candra-%}
{%śayana, am,%} n., N. of two religious observances.
{%—Rohiṇī-tanaya, as,%} m. the son of Rohiṇī, i. e.
Bala-rāma. {%—Rohiṇī-tapas,%} N. of a work. {%—Ro-%}
{%hiṇī-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Rohiṇī-tva,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. the state or condition of the Nakṣatra
Rohiṇī. {%—Rohiṇī-pati, is,%} m. the husband of Ro-
hiṇī, i. e. the Moon. {%—Rohiṇī-priya, as,%} m. the
lover of Rohiṇī, i. e. the Moon. {%—Rohiṇī-bhava,%}
{%as,%} m. the son of Rohiṇī, i. e. the planet Mercury.
{%—Rohiṇī-yoga, as,%} m. the conjunction of the moon
with the Nakṣatra Rohiṇī. {%—Rohiṇī-ramaṇa, as,%}
m. ‘the lover of the cow,’ a bull; the lover or
husband of Rohiṇī, i. e. the Moon. {%—Rohiṇī-val-%}
{%labha, as,%} m. the lover of Rohiṇī, i. e. the Moon.
{%—Rohiṇī-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a particular reli-
gious observance. {%—Rohiṇīśa (˚nī-īśa), as,%} m. the
lord or husband of Rohiṇī, i. e. the Moon. {%—Rohiṇī-%}
{%śakaṭa, as, am,%} m. n. an asterism, probably <lang n="greek">α, β,</lang>
<lang n="greek">γ, δ, ε,</lang> Tauri. {%—Rohiṇī-ṣeṇa, as,%} m. a proper N.;
[cf. {%rohiṇi-ṣeṇa.%}] {%—Rohiṇī-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of
Rohiṇī, ‘the planet Mercury. {%—Rohiṇy-aṣṭamī,%} f.
the eighth day in the dark half of the month Bhādra
when the moon is in conjunction with the Nakṣatra
Rohiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>39941<pc>0856-a<k1>rohit<k2>rohit
{%Rohit, t,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 99. fr. rt.
[Page0856-b+ 78]
1. {%ruh%}), the sun; a species of fish, {%= rohita; (t),%}
f. a red mare (Ved.); the female of a deer, doe; a
sort of creeper; ({%tas%}), f. pl. epithet of rivers (ac-
cording to Naigh. I. 13); the fingers (according to
Naigh. II. 5); ({%t, t, t%}), red, of a red colour. {%—Ro-%}
{%hid-aśva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having red mares (said
of Agni).
<LEND>

<L>39942<pc>0856-b<k1>rohita<k2>rohita
{%Rohita, as, ā%}¦ or (more commonly) {%rohiṇī, am%}
[cf. {%lohita%}], red, of a red colour [cf. {%rudhira%}];
coloured; ({%as%}), m. red (the colour), a red horse; a
fox; a form of Fire or the Sun (Ved.); another deity
in Atharva-veda XIII. 1; N. of the hymns of the
above Veda in which the god Rohita is mentioned;
a kind of deer; a species of fish, Cyprinus Ro-
hita; a kind of tree, Andersonia Rohitaka; a sort of
ornament made of precious stones; a particular form
of rainbow, (see {%rohitam%} below); N. of a son of
Hari-ścandra; of a Manu; of a son of Kṛṣṇa;
of a son of Vapuṣ-mat (king of Śālmala); of a
river; ({%ās%}), m. pl. epithet of a class of Gandharvas;
of a class of gods under the twelfth Manu; ({%iṇī%}), f.,
see col. 1; ({%am%}), n. a kind of rainbow appearing in
a straight form, Indra's bow unbent and invisible to
mortals; blood; saffron. {%—Rohita-kūla,%} N. of a
place. {%—Rohita-kūlīya%} and {%rohita-kūlīyādya%} and
{%rohita-kūlīyottara, am,%} n., N. of Sāmans. {%—Ro-%}
{%hita-giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Rohita-%}
{%girīya, ās,%} m. pl. the inhabitants of the mountain
Rohita-giri. {%—Rohita-pura, am,%} n., N. of the town
founded by Rohitaka the son of Hari-ścandra. {%—Ro-%}
{%hita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a red horse.
{%—Rohita-vastu,%} N. of a place. {%—Rohitākṣa (˚ta-%}
{%ak˚), as, ī, am,%} red-eyed, having red eyes. {%—Ro-%}
{%hitāñji (˚ta-añ˚), is, is, i,%} Ved. marked with red.
{%—Rohitāśva, as, ā, am,%} having red horses; ({%as%}),
m. the god of fire, Agni; N. of a son of Hari-
ścandra. {%—Rohitaita (˚ta-eta), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
variegated with red.
<LEND>

<L>39943<pc>0856-b<k1>rohitaka<k2>rohitaka
{%Rohitaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a tree, Andersonia Ro-
hitaka; N. of a river; of a Stūpa; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people; ({%ikā%}), f. a woman whose face is stained
with red pigments or red with rage. {%—Rohitakā-%}
{%raṇya (˚ka-ar˚), am,%} n. ‘Rohitaka-wood,’ N. of
a place.
<LEND>

<L>39944<pc>0856-b<k1>rohitAyana<k2>rohitAyana
{%Rohitāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic, (probably for
{%rauhitāyana.%})
<LEND>

<L>39945<pc>0856-b<k1>rohiteya<k2>rohiteya
{%Rohiteya, as,%}¦ m. Andersonia Rohitaka.
<LEND>

<L>39946<pc>0856-b<k1>rohin<k2>rohin
{%Rohin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ rising, mounting upwards, grow-
ing, increasing; grown, shot up, long, tall; ({%ī%}), m.,
N. of various trees, Andersonia Rohitaka; the sacred
fig-tree, Ficus Religiosa; the Indian fig-tree, Ficus
Indica; ({%iṇī%}), f., N. of various plants, [cf. {%rohiṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>39947<pc>0856-b<k1>rohiz<k2>rohiz
{%Rohiṣ, ṭ,%}¦ f. {%= rohit,%} a doe; {%= rauhiṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>39948<pc>0856-b<k1>rohiza<k2>rohiza
{%Rohiṣa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fragrant grass; a species
of fish; a kind of deer. {%—Rohiṣa-tṛṇa = bhūti.%}
<LEND>

<L>39949<pc>0856-b<k1>rohizyE<k2>rohizyE
{%Rohiṣyai,%}¦ dat. of an unused form {%rohiṣī%} or
{%rohiṣi,%} used as a Ved. inf.
<LEND>

<L>39950<pc>0856-b<k1>rohI<k2>rohI
{%Rohī,%}¦ f. {%= rohit,%} a doe.
<LEND>

<L>39951<pc>0856-b<k1>rohItaka<k2>rohItaka
{%Rohītaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= rohitaka,%} Andersonia Rohi-
taka; N. of a place or of a mountain, (according to
some a stronghold on the borders of Multan is so
called.)
<LEND>

<L>39952<pc>0856-b<k1>rOkma<k2>rOkma
{#rOkma#}¦ {%raukma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%rukma%}), golden,
adorned with gold.
<LEND>

<L>39953<pc>0856-b<k1>rOkmiReya<k2>rOkmiReya
{%Raukmiṇeya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Ruk-
miṇī, epithet of Pradyumna.
<LEND>

<L>39954<pc>0856-b<k1>rOkzaka<k2>rOkzaka
{#rOkzaka#}¦ {%raukṣaka, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39955<pc>0856-b<k1>rOkzAyaRa<k2>rOkzAyaRa
{%Raukṣāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39956<pc>0856-b<k1>rOkzya<k2>rOkzya
{#rOkzya#}¦ {%raukṣya, am,%} n. (fr. {%rūkṣa%}), rough-
ness, hardness, dryness, aridity, emaciation; rough-
ness, harshness, cruelty, uncouthness.
<LEND>

<L>39957<pc>0856-b<k1>rOcanika<k2>rOcanika
{#rOcanika#}¦ {%raucanika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%rocanā%}),
coloured with Rocanā, Rocanā-coloured, yellowish;
({%am%}), n. the tartar of the teeth.
<LEND>

<L>39958<pc>0856-b<k1>rOcya<k2>rOcya
{%Raucya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%rucya = bilva%}), a staff of
Bilva wood; (according to some) an ascetic with
a staff of Bilva wood, a patronymic of the thir-
teenth Manu; of the ninth Manu, (in these senses
[Page0856-c+ 76]
fr. {%ruci%}); ({%as,%} &c.), of or belonging to the thirteenth
Manu.
<LEND>

<L>39959<pc>0856-c<k1>rOw<k2>rOw
{#rOw#}¦ {%rauṭ%} or {%rauḍ%} (see rt. {%roḍ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%rauṭati, rauḍati,%} to despise, treat with
disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>39960<pc>0856-c<k1>rOQIya<k2>rOQIya
{#rOQIya#}¦ {%rauḍhīya, ās,%} m. pl. (probably fr.
{%rūḍhi%}), N. of a grammatical school.
<LEND>

<L>39961<pc>0856-c<k1>rOdra<k2>rOdra
{#rOdra#}¦ {%raudra, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%rudra%}), of
or belonging to Rudra or to the Rudras, &c., Rudra-
like, violent, impetuous, wrathful, irascible, savage,
wild, fearful, terrible, formidable; acute; addressed
to Rudra (said of a hymn); called after Rudra (said
of a river); bringing or betokening misfortune;
({%am%}), ind. fearfully, horribly; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic
of a descendant of Rudra; a worshipper of Rudra;
heat, warmth, ardor, passion, wrath, rage, (also {%am,%}
n.); the cold season of the year, winter; N. of
Yama; of the fifty-fourth year of the Jupiter cycle
of sixty years; N. of a particular Ketu (Ved.); ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a class of evil spirits; N. of a people;
({%ī%}), f., N. of Gaurī; a species of plant ({%= rudra-%}
{%jaṭā%}); N. of a commentary on the Siddhānta-muk-
tāvalī by Rudra-bhaṭṭācārya; ({%am%}), n. formidable-
ness, dreadfulness, fierceness, savageness; heat, warmth,
solar heat, sunshine; wrath, rage; N. of the Nak-
ṣatra Ārdrā when situated under Rudra; N. of
a Liṅga; of a Sāman. {%—Raudra-karman, a,%} n. a
terrible magic rite or one performed for some dread-
ful purpose; ({%ā, ā, a%}), doing dreadful acts, perform-
ing horrors; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
{%—Raudra-karmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} doing dreadful acts,
performing fearful things. {%—Raudra-tā,%} f. wild or
savage state, fierceness, fearful condition, horribleness,
formidableness, dreadfulness. {%—Raudra-darśana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of dreadful appearance, formidable, ter-
rific. {%—Raudra-pāda,%} (apparently) N. of a Nak-
ṣatra {%(= raudra = ārdrā)%}. {%—Raudra-manas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} Ved. savage-minded, fierce. {%—Raudrāśva%}
{%(˚ra-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a son or more distant
descendant of Puru. {%—Raudrī-bhāva, as,%} m. the
character of Rudra or Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>39962<pc>0856-c<k1>rOdraka<k2>rOdraka
{%Raudraka = rudreṇa kṛtam,%}¦ see Gaṇa Kulālādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 3, 118.
<LEND>

<L>39963<pc>0856-c<k1>rOdrAgna<k2>rOdrAgna
{%Raudrāgna, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%rudra + agni%}), Ved.
relating to Rudra and Agni.
<LEND>

<L>39964<pc>0856-c<k1>rOdrARI<k2>rOdrARI
{%Raudrāṇī%}¦ in {%raudrāṇī-stotra,%} probably for {%ru-%}
{%drāṇī-stotra.%}
<LEND>

<L>39965<pc>0856-c<k1>rOdrAyaRa<k2>rOdrAyaRa
{%Raudrāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>39966<pc>0856-c<k1>rOdri<k2>rOdri
{%Raudri, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>39967<pc>0856-c<k1>rODa<k2>rODa
{#rODa#}¦ {%raudha, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Rodha.
<LEND>

<L>39968<pc>0856-c<k1>rODAdika<k2>rODAdika
{#rODAdika#}¦ {%raudhādika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ru-%}
{%dhādi%}), belonging to the class of roots beginning
with {%rudh,%} i. e. the seventh class.
<LEND>

<L>39969<pc>0856-c<k1>rODira<k2>rODira
{#rODira#}¦ {%raudhira, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%rudhira%}),
bloody, consisting of blood, caused by blood.
<LEND>

<L>39970<pc>0856-c<k1>rOpya<k2>rOpya
{#rOpya#}¦ {%raupya, as,%} &c. (fr. {%rūpya%}), made of
silver, silver; like silver, silvery; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
place; ({%am%}), n. silver. {%—Raupya-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of silver, made of silver, silver. {%—Raupya-%}
{%māṣaka, as,%} m. a Māṣaka weight of silver.
<LEND>

<L>39971<pc>0856-c<k1>rOpyAyaRa<k2>rOpyAyaRa
{%Raupyāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39972<pc>0856-c<k1>rOpyAyaRi<k2>rOpyAyaRi
{%Raupyāyaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Rūpya.
<LEND>

<L>39973<pc>0856-c<k1>rOma<k2>rOma
{#rOma#}¦ {%rauma, as,%} m. a proper N.; ({%am%}), n.
a kind of salt ({%= raumaka%} below). {%—Rauma-la-%}
{%vaṇa, am,%} n. salt from the Rumā district, (see
below.)
<LEND>

<L>39974<pc>0856-c<k1>rOmaka<k2>rOmaka
{%Raumaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. 2. {%romaka%}), Roman,
spoken by the inhabitants of the Roman empire;
derived or coming from the astronomer Romaka;
({%am%}), n. a kind of salt procured from a salt-lake near
Sambhar in Ajmere, (in this sense fr. {%rumā.%})
<LEND>

<L>39975<pc>0856-c<k1>rOmakIya<k2>rOmakIya
{%Raumakīya%}¦ (fr. {%romaka%}), see Gaṇa Kṛśāvādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>39976<pc>0856-c<k1>rOmaRya<k2>rOmaRya
{#rOmaRya#}¦ {%raumaṇya%} (fr. {%roman%}), see Gaṇa
Saṅkāśādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>
[Page0857-a+ 73]

<L>39977<pc>0857-a<k1>rOmaSIya<k2>rOmaSIya
{%Raumaśīya%}¦ (fr. {%romaśa%}), see Gaṇa Kṛśāśvādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>39978<pc>0857-a<k1>rOmaharzaRaka<k2>rOmaharzaRaka
{%Raumaharṣaṇaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. {%romahar-%}
{%ṣaṇa%}), made or composed by Roma-harṣaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>39979<pc>0857-a<k1>rOmAyaRa<k2>rOmAyaRa
{%Raumāyaṇa%}¦ (fr. {%roman%}), see Gaṇa Pakṣādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>39980<pc>0857-a<k1>rOmya<k2>rOmya
{#rOmya#}¦ {%raumya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of particular
evil spirits in the service of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>39981<pc>0857-a<k1>rOrava<k2>rOrava
{#rOrava#}¦ {%raurava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ruru%}), made
of the hide of the deer called {%ruru;%} fearful, dread-
ful, terrible; unsteady, cheating, fraudulent, dishonest;
({%as%}), m. a savage; N. of one of the hells (Manu
IV. 88); of the fifth Kalpa; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of
the Ruru tree; N. of various Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>39982<pc>0857-a<k1>rOravaka<k2>rOravaka
{%Rauravaka = ruruṇā kṛtam,%}¦ see Gaṇa Kulālādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 3, 118.
<LEND>

<L>39983<pc>0857-a<k1>rOrukin<k2>rOrukin
{%Raurukin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%ruruka%}), the school
of Ruruka.
<LEND>

<L>39984<pc>0857-a<k1>rOSarman<k2>rOSarman
{#rOSarman#}¦ {%rauśarman, ā,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>39985<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhika<k2>rOhika
{#rOhika#}¦ {%rauhika = ruha iva,%} see Gaṇa
Aṅgulyādi to Pāṇ. V. 3, 108.
<LEND>

<L>39986<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhiRa<k2>rOhiRa
{#rOhiRa#}¦ {%rauhiṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%rohiṇī%}), born
under the Nakṣatra Rohiṇī; ({%as%}), m. the sandal
tree; the Indian fig-tree; N. of Agni; of a demon
vanquished by Indra; a proper N. (according to
Naigh. I. 10) {%= megha,%} a cloud; N. of a gramma-
tical school; ({%am%}), n. sandal-wood; N. of the ninth
Muhūrta of the day; {%indrasya rājana-rauhiṇe%}
and {%dhātū rauhiṇam,%} N. of particular Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>39987<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhiRaka<k2>rOhiRaka
{%Rauhiṇaka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>39988<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhiRAyana<k2>rOhiRAyana
{%Rauhiṇāyana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%rohiṇa%}), a patronymic
of Priya-vrata.
<LEND>

<L>39989<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhiRi<k2>rOhiRi
{%Rauhiṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic; {%rauhiṇer ekar-%}
{%ṣe rājanam,%} N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>39990<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhiReya<k2>rOhiReya
{%Rauhiṇeya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%rohiṇī%}), a metronymic;
a calf, (also {%ī,%} f.); N. of Bala-rāma; the planet
Mercury; ({%am%}), n. an emerald. {%—Rauhiṇeśvara-%}
{%tīrtha (˚ṇa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>39991<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhiRya<k2>rOhiRya
{%Rauhiṇya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39992<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhita<k2>rOhita
{%Rauhita, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%rohita%}), coming from the
animal or fish called {%rohita;%} relating to Manu Ro-
hita; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>39993<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhitaka<k2>rOhitaka
{%Rauhitaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%rohitaka%}), Ved. made
from the wood of the Andersonia Rohitaka.
<LEND>

<L>39994<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhityAyani<k2>rOhityAyani
{%Rauhityāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>39995<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhidaSva<k2>rOhidaSva
{%Rauhidaśva, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%rohid-aśva%}), a patro-
nymic of Vasu-manas.
<LEND>

<L>39996<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhiz<k2>rOhiz
{%Rauhiṣ, ṭ,%}¦ m. {%= rauhiṣa,%} a kind of deer.
<LEND>

<L>39997<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhiza<k2>rOhiza
{%Rauhiṣa, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 48.
fr. rt. 1. {%ruh;%} cf. {%rohit, rohita, rohiṣa%}), a kind
of deer; a species of fish, {%= rohita; (ī),%} f. a doe of
the Rauhiṣa species; a creeper {%(= latā); = dūrvā;%}
a sort of grass ({%= kat-tṛṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>39998<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhI<k2>rOhI
{%Rauhī,%}¦ f. the female of a particular kind of deer.
<LEND>

<L>39999<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhItaka<k2>rOhItaka
{%Rauhītaka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%rohītaka%}), coming
from the Andersonia Rohitaka, made of Andersonia
Rohitaka wood; coming from the district Rauhīta;
({%as%}), m. {%= rohītaka,%} Andesonia Rohitaka.
<LEND>

<L>40000<pc>0857-a<k1>rOhItadeSa<k2>rOhItadeSa
{%Rauhīta-deśa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>40001<pc>0857-a<k1>rOheya<k2>rOheya
{%Rauheya%}¦ (fr. {%roha%}), see Gaṇa Sakhyādi to Pāṇ.
IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>
<H>{#la#}

<L>40002<pc>0857-a<k1>la<k2>la<h>1
{#la#} 1¦. {%la,%} the twenty-eighth consonant of
the Nāgarī alphabet, being the semivowel of the
vowels {%ḷ, ḹ,%} and having the sound of the English
{%l%}. {%—La-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound {%la%}. {%—La-%}
{%kāra-vāda, as,%} m., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>40003<pc>0857-a<k1>la<k2>la<h>2
{#la#} 2¦. {%la,%} Pāṇini's general or technical term
for all the tenses and moods or verbal terminations.
<LEND>

<L>40004<pc>0857-a<k1>la<k2>la<h>3
{#la#} 3¦. {%la, as,%} m., N. of Indra; cutting (?).
<LEND>

<L>40005<pc>0857-a<k1>la<k2>la<h>4
{#la#} 4¦. {%la%} (for {%laghu%}), a short syllable.
<LEND>

<L>40006<pc>0857-a<k1>lak<k2>lak
{#lak#}¦ {%lak%} (= rt. {%rak%}), cl. 10. P. {%lākayati,%}
&c., to taste; to obtain.
<LEND>
[Page0857-b+ 76]

<L>40007<pc>0857-b<k1>laka<k2>laka
{%Laka, am,%}¦ n. the forehead; an ear or spike of
wild rice.
<LEND>

<L>40008<pc>0857-b<k1>lakaca<k2>lakaca
{%Lakaca%}¦ or (more generally) {%lakuca, as,%} m. a
kind of bread-fruit tree, Artocarpus Lacucha (a tree
containing a large quantity of sticky milky juice);
({%am%}), n. the fruit of this tree.
<LEND>

<L>40009<pc>0857-b<k1>lakuwa<k2>lakuwa
{#lakuwa#}¦ {%lakuṭa, as,%} m. {%= laguḍa,%} a club.
<LEND>

<L>40010<pc>0857-b<k1>lakuwin<k2>lakuwin
{%Lakuṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ carrying a club, armed with
a club.
<LEND>

<L>40011<pc>0857-b<k1>lakula<k2>lakula
{#lakula#}¦ {%lakula, lakulya,%} see Gaṇa Balādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>40012<pc>0857-b<k1>lakulin<k2>lakulin
{%Lakulin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>40013<pc>0857-b<k1>lakkaka<k2>lakkaka
{#lakkaka#}¦ {%lakkaka, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40014<pc>0857-b<k1>lakta<k2>lakta
{#lakta#}¦ {%lakta, as, ā, am, = rakta,%} red; [cf.
{%gūtha-lakta.%}] {%—Lakta-karman, ā,%} m. a red variety
of the Lodh tree (used in dyeing).
<LEND>

<L>40015<pc>0857-b<k1>laktaka<k2>laktaka
{%Laktaka, as,%}¦ m. lac, the red dye ({%= alaktaka%});
a dirty and tattered cloth, a rag, (in this sense {%=%}
{%naktaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>40016<pc>0857-b<k1>lakvanacandra<k2>lakvanacandra
{#lakvanacandra#}¦ {%lakvana-candra, as,%} m. a pro-
per N.
<LEND>

<L>40017<pc>0857-b<k1>lakz<k2>lakz
{#lakz#}¦ {%lakṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%lakṣate,%} to per-
ceive, apprehend, observe, see, view,
contemplate; cl. 10. P. A. (more properly regarded
as a Nom. fr. {%lakṣa%} below), {%lakṣayati, -te, ala-%}
{%lakṣat, alalakṣata, lakṣayitum,%} to mark,
sign, betoken, distinguish, denote, characterize, indi-
cate; to define or describe accurately; to signify,
express (especially indirectly); to aim at (a mark or
object); to consider, regard, think, call, name; to
observe, enquire into, examine; to notice (any par-
ticular marks), apprehend, recognise, know; to re-
mark, observe, perceive, see: Pass. {%lakṣyate,%} to be
marked; to be aimed at; to be meant or intended;
to be perceived or observed; to appear, seem: Caus.
{%lakṣayati,%} &c., to cause to be seen or exhibited,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>40018<pc>0857-b<k1>lakza<k2>lakza
{%Lakṣa, am,%}¦ n. (according to some for original
{%rakta,%} fr. rt. {%rañj;%} according to others fr. rt. {%lag,%}
cf. {%lakṣman, lakṣmī%}), a mark, sign, token; a
mark to aim or shoot at, target, butt, aim, object,
prey, prize ({%= lakṣyam;%} cf. {%labdha-l˚%}); appear-
ance, show, pretence, disguise, fraud; ({%as, am%}), m.
n. a lac, one hundred thousand, (said to be also {%ā,%}
f.) {%—Lakṣa-tā,%} f. the condition of being a mark
or aim. {%—Lakṣa-datta, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Lakṣa-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Lakṣa-%}
{%śas,%} ind. by hundreds of thousands, by lacs. {%—Lak-%}
{%ṣa-supta, as, ā, am,%} pretending to be asleep,
appearing asleep. {%—Lakṣa-homa, as,%} m. ‘lac-
oblation,’ N. of a particular offering to the planets.
{%—Lakṣādhīśa (˚ṣa-adh˚), as,%} m. a person
possessed of a lac (or of a hundred thousand rupees).
{%—Lakṣānta-purī (˚ṣa-an˚),%} f., N. of a town.
{%—Lakṣī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%} &c.,
to make a mark or object, to aim at, point at, look
at. {%—Lakṣī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made a mark, aimed
at, directed towards. {%—Lakṣīkṛta-ghrāṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} looking at the nose, fixing the gaze on the tip
of the nose. {%—Lakṣī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c.,
to become a mark or aim or object.
<LEND>

<L>40019<pc>0857-b<k1>lakzaka<k2>lakzaka
{%Lakṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ marking or indicating
(especially indirectly, i. e. not by name); hinting at,
expressing elliptically or by metonymy; a proper N.;
({%am%}), n. a lac, one hundred thousand.
<LEND>

<L>40020<pc>0857-b<k1>lakzaRa<k2>lakzaRa
{%Lakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. a mark, distinctive mark, sign,
symbol, token, indication, characteristic (often at the
end of comps., e. g. {%puruṣa-l˚,%} the mark or organ
of virility; at the end of adj. comps. the fem. is in
{%ā%} and rarely in {%ī%}); character, attribute, quality;
stroke, line, spot; a lucky mark, favourable sign;
a symptom or indication of disease; an accurate
mark, accurate description, definition; settled rate,
fixed tariff (Manu VIII. 406); a designation, appel-
lation, name, (sometimes at the end of comps.,
e. g. {%Ṛg-yajuḥ-sāma-lakṣaṇa,%} named Ṛg, Yajur,
[Page0857-c+ 81]
and Sāma); aiming at, aim, intention, scope, object,
signification; form, kind; subject, head, term, pro-
vince; effect, operation influence; cause, occasion;
observation, sight, seeing; ({%as%}), m. the Indian
crane, Ardea Sibirica; a proper N.; {%= lakṣmaṇa,%}
the brother of Rāma; ({%ā%}), f. aim, object, view; an
indirect indication or hint, elliptical mode of expres-
sion, ellipsis, a word or phrase understood though
not expressed, metonymy; indirect application of a
word (as distinguished from its literal meaning); {%=%}
{%lakṣmaṇā,%} the female of the Ardea Sibirica; a
goose; N. of an Apsaras. {%—Lakṣaṇa-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} sign-knowing, understanding marks (especially
those on the body), able to interpret or explain
them. {%—Lakṣaṇa-tva, am,%} n. the being a mark
or definition. {%—Lakṣaṇa-bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
deprived of good marks, fallen into misfortune, un-
lucky. {%—Lakṣaṇa-lakṣaṇā,%} f., N. of a particular
mode of expression by ellipsis or by metonymy.
{%—Lakṣaṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing marks or
signs, marked, distinguished, characterized, ({%triṃśal-%}
{%lakṣaṇa-vat,%} having thirty marks or character-
istics.) {%—Lakṣaṇa-vāda-rahasya, am,%} n., N. of
a short philosophical treatise. {%—Lakṣaṇa-saṅgra-%}
{%ha, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Lakṣaṇa-sannipāta,%}
{%as,%} m. the impressing or fixing of a mark, branding,
stigmatizing. {%—Lakṣaṇa-samuccaya, as,%} m., N.
of a work. {%—Lakṣaṇānvita (˚ṇa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
endowed with good marks, lucky. {%—Lakṣaṇoru%}
{%(˚ṇa-ūru), us, ūs, u,%} having good marks on the
thighs? (Pāṇ. IV. 1, 70).
<LEND>

<L>40021<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzaRaka<k2>lakzaRaka
{%Lakṣaṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ having marks or tokens
&c. (at the end of an adj. comp. {%= lakṣaṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>40022<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzaRin<k2>lakzaRin
{%Lakṣaṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing marks, &c.; {%=%}
{%lakṣaṇa-jña,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40023<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzaRIya<k2>lakzaRIya
{%Lakṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be perceived or re-
garded as, perceptible, to be expressed by ellipsis,
expressible by metonymy.
<LEND>

<L>40024<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzaRya<k2>lakzaRya
{%Lakṣaṇya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%lakṣaṇa%}), serving as
a mark or token, having good marks or signs.
<LEND>

<L>40025<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzayat<k2>lakzayat
{%Lakṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ marking, observing,
perceiving.
<LEND>

<L>40026<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzayitvA<k2>lakzayitvA
{%Lakṣayitvā,%}¦ ind. having perceived or observed,
having noticed.
<LEND>

<L>40027<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzita<k2>lakzita
{%Lakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ marked, denoted, character-
ized; characterized or recognisable by; defined;
expressed (indirectly), hinted at; aimed at; re-
marked, observed, perceived, discerned, discovered,
beheld, seen, evident; considered, regarded; enquired
into, examined. {%—Lakṣita-tva, am,%} n. the state of
being marked or expressed indirectly. {%—Lakṣita-%}
{%lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} having the marks (of any-
thing) perceived or evident.
<LEND>

<L>40028<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzitavya<k2>lakzitavya
{%Lakṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be marked or defined.
<LEND>

<L>40029<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzin<k2>lakzin
{%Lakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having good marks or signs.
<LEND>

<L>40030<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzma<k2>lakzma
{%Lakṣma = lakṣman%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp.
<LEND>

<L>40031<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzmaka<k2>lakzmaka
{%Lakṣmaka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40032<pc>0857-c<k1>lakzmaRa<k2>lakzmaRa
{%Lakṣmaṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%lakṣman%}), having
marks or signs, furnished with tokens or character-
istics; possessed of lucky signs or marks, lucky,
fortunate, prosperous, thriving; ({%as%}), m. the Indian
crane, Ardea Sibirica; N. of a Vāsiṣṭha; of a son of
Daśa-ratha by his wife Su-mitrā, (he was younger
brother and companion of Rāma during his travels
and adventures; Lakṣmaṇa and Śatru-ghna were
both sons of Su-mitrā, but Lakṣmaṇa alone is usually
called Saumitri; he so attached himself to Rāma as
to be called Rāma's second self; whereas Śatru-
ghna attached himself to Bharata); N. of various
other persons; ({%ā%}), f. the female of the Ardea
Sibirica; a goose; N. of various plants ({%= oṣadhi,%}
{%pṛśni-parṇī, putra-kandā, śveta-kaṇṭakārī%});
N. of a wife of Kṛṣṇa; of a daughter of Duryo-
dhana (carried off by Śāmba, son of Kṛṣṇa); of
an Apsaras; of the mother of the eighth Arhat of
the present Avasarpiṇī; ({%am%}), n. {%= lakṣaṇa,%} a
mark, sign, token, spot; a name. {%—Lakṣmaṇa-%}
{%kavaca, am,%} n., N. of a hymn in praise of Lakṣ-
maṇa. {%—Lakṣmaṇa-kuṇḍaka, am,%} n., N. of a
place. {%—Lakṣmaṇa-khaṇḍa-praśasti, is,%} f., N. of
a work. {%—Lakṣmaṇa-candra, as,%} m., N. of a king.
[Page0858-a+ 81]
{%—Lakṣmaṇa-deva, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Lakṣ-%}
{%maṇa-prasū, ūs,%} f. the mother of Lakṣmaṇa,
i. e. Su-mitrā, one of three wives of Daśa-ratha,
(she was also the mother of Śatru-ghna.) {%—Lakṣ-%}
{%maṇa-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Gīta-govinda-ṭīkā. {%—Lakṣmaṇa-rāja-deva, as,%} m.,
N. of a king. {%—Lakṣmaṇa-sena, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Lakṣmaṇa-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a statue of
Lakṣmaṇa. {%—Lakṣmaṇā-kanda = putra-kandā.%}
{%—Lakṣmaṇācārya (˚ṇa-āc˚), as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Lakṣmaṇānucara (˚ṇa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied by Lakṣmaṇa. {%—Lakṣmaṇoru (˚ṇa-ūru),%}
{%us, ūs, u,%} see {%lakṣaṇoru%} (Vopa-deva IV. 30).
<LEND>

<L>40033<pc>0858-a<k1>lakzmaRya<k2>lakzmaRya
{%Lakṣmaṇya, as,%}¦ m. a proper N., (according to
Sāy.) a son of Lakṣmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>40034<pc>0858-a<k1>lakzman<k2>lakzman
{%Lakṣman, a,%}¦ n. (according to some fr. rt. {%lag%}),
a mark, spot, sign, token, characteristic; definition;
{%= pradhāna,%} the chief, principal, most excellent.
<LEND>

<L>40035<pc>0858-a<k1>lakzmi<k2>lakzmi
{%Lakṣmi = lakṣmī,%}¦ (shortened on account of
the metre.) {%—Lakṣmi-vardhana, as, ī, am,%} in-
creasing good fortune. {%—Lakṣmi-sampanna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} possessed of good fortune.
<LEND>

<L>40036<pc>0858-a<k1>lakzmI<k2>lakzmI
{%Lakṣmī, īs%}¦ (rarely {%ī%}), f. (according to some fr.
rt. {%lag;%} according to others connected with rt. {%lañj,%}
to shine), a mark, sign, indication, token (Ved.;
sometimes even ‘a bad sign’ in Ved., but in this
sense usually with {%pāpī%}); a good sign, (in Ved.
usually with {%puṇyā%}); good fortune, good luck, for-
tune, prosperity, wealth, success, happiness; beauty,
grace, loveliness, charm, splendor; N. of the god-
dess of fortune and beauty, (frequently in the later
mythology identified with Śrī and regarded as the
wife of Viṣṇu or Nārāyaṇa; according to the legend
narrated in Rāmāyaṇa I. 45, 40-43, she sprang
with other precious things from the froth of the
ocean when churned by the gods and demons for
the recovery of the Amṛta [see {%mandara%}]; she
appeared with a lotus in her hand, whence she is
also called Padmā; she is, moreover, connected in
other ways with the lotus, and according to another
legend is said to have appeared at the creation
floating over the water on the expanded petals of a
lotus-flower; Lakṣmī is also variously regarded as
a wife of Sūrya, as a wife of Prajā-pati, as a wife of
Dharma and mother of Kāma, as sister [or mother]
of Dhātṛ and Vidhātṛ, as wife of Dattātreya); the
Good Genius or Fortune of a king personified; royal
power, dominion; superhuman power; N. of Dāk-
ṣāyaṇī in Bharatāśrama; of Sītā the wife of Rāma,
and of other women; the wife of a hero; N. of tur-
meric and various other auspicious plants ({%= ṛddhi,%}
{%vṛddhi, priyaṅgu, phalinī, sthala-padminī,%}
{%śamī%}); N. of the eleventh Kalā of the moon; of
a metre, four times ¯¯˘¯˘˘˘˘¯˘¯˘¯; of
another, four times ¯¯¯˘˘¯¯¯˘¯˘˘¯¯; =
{%dravya; = muktā,%} a pearl; [cf. Lith. <nsi>Laime,</nsi> ‘the
goddess of happiness.’] {%—Lakṣmī-kānta, as,%} m.
‘the beloved of Lakṣmī,’ epithet of Viṣṇu; {%Kal-%}
{%lāleśo Lakṣmī-kāntaḥ,%} N. of a deity. {%—Lakṣmī-%}
{%kula-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Lakṣmī-%}
{%kulārṇava (˚la-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Lakṣmī-gṛha, am,%} n. ‘abode of Lakṣmī,’
epithet of the red lotus-flower. {%—Lakṣmī-caritra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Lakṣmī-janārdana, am,%}
n. Lakṣmī and Janārdana. {%—Lakṣmī-tāla, as,%} m.
a kind of palm ({%= śrī-tāla%}); epithet of a particular
time in music. {%—Lakṣmī-tva, am,%} n. the being
Lakṣmī. {%—Lakṣmī-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a com-
mentator on Bhāskara's astronomy. {%—Lakṣmī-%}
{%devī,%} f., N. of the authoress of a commentary on
the Mitākṣarā-vyākhyāna. {%—Lakṣmī-dhara, as,%}
m., N. of a poet; of various other persons; (probably
{%am%}), n. a particular metre, four times ¯˘¯¯˘
¯¯˘¯¯˘¯. {%—Lakṣmī-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of
Lakṣmī, N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Lakṣmī-nārāyaṇa, au,%}
m. du., {%am,%} n. sing. Lakṣmī and {%Nārāyaṇa%}. {%—Lak-%}
{%ṣmī-nārāyaṇa-yati, is,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
{%—Lakṣmī-nivāsa, as,%} m. the abode of the god-
dess of fortune. {%—Lakṣmī-nivāsābhidhāna (˚sa-%}
{%abh˚%}), N. of a work. {%—Lakṣmī-nṛsiṃha, am,%} n.
Lakṣmī and ‘the man-lion;’ ({%as%}), m., N. of a
[Page0858-b+ 81]
king. {%—Lakṣmī-pati, is,%} m. the husband or lord
of Lakṣmī or Fortune; N. of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa;
a king or prince (as husband of Lakṣmī, who is
often regarded as the consort of a king); the betel-
nut tree; the clove tree. {%—Lakṣmī-putra, as,%}
m. the son of Lakṣmī; N. of Kāma; a horse;
epithet of Kuśa and Lava (the sons of Rāma and
Sītā). {%—Lakṣmī-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
{%—Lakṣmī-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘Lakṣmī's flower,’ a
ruby. {%—Lakṣmī-pūjana, am,%} n. the ceremony of
worshipping Lakṣmī performed by a bridegroom
in company with his bride (at the conclusion of the
marriage after the bride has been brought to her
husband's house). {%—Lakṣmī-pūjā,%} f. ‘the worship
of Lakṣmī,’ N. of a festival on the fifteenth day in
the dark half of the month Āśvina (said to be cele-
brated in modern times by bankers and traders to
propitiate Fortune). {%—Lakṣmī-praṇayin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} dear to Lakṣmī, a favourite of fortune. {%—Lakṣ-%}
{%mī-phala, as,%} m. Ægle Marmelos. {%—Lakṣmī-%}
{%yajus, us,%} n., N. of a particular sacred text. {%—Lak-%}
{%ṣmī-ramaṇa, as,%} m. the husband of Lakṣmī,
i. e. Viṣṇu. {%—Lakṣmī-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed
of fortune or good luck, lucky, prosperous, fortunate,
wealthy, rich, thriving; handsome, beautiful; the
bread-fruit tree, Artocarpus Integrifolia; another
tree {%(= śveta-rohita)%}. {%—Lakṣmī-varma-deva,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Lakṣmī-vallabha, as,%} m.
‘favourite of Lakṣmī,’ N. of an author. {%—Lakṣmī-%}
{%vasati, is,%} f. ‘abode of Lakṣmī,’ epithet of the
lotus-flower (Nelumbium Speciosum). {%—Lakṣmī-%}
{%vahiṣkṛta, as, ā, am,%} excluded from fortune,
destitute of wealth. {%—Lakṣmī-vāra, as,%} m. ‘Lak-
ṣmī's day, ‘Thursday. {%—Lakṣmī-veṣṭa, as,%} m.
turpentine ({%= śrī-veṣṭa,%} q. v.). {%—Lakṣmīśa (˚mī-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. the lord of Lakṣmī, i. e. Viṣṇu; a
prosperous man; the mango tree. {%—Lakṣmī-sakha,%}
{%as,%} m. a friend of the goddess of fortune, a favourite
of Lakṣmī. {%—Lakṣmī-sanātha, as, ā, am,%} en-
dowed with beauty or fortune. {%—Lakṣmī-samā-%}
{%hvayā,%} f. ‘having the name of Lakṣmī,’ N. of
Sītā. {%—Lakṣmī-saha-ja, as,%} m. ‘produced together
with Lakṣmī,’ the moon (supposed to have arisen
together with Lakṣmī from the ocean when churned
by the gods and Asuras, see {%lakṣmī,%} col. 1). {%—Lak-%}
{%ṣmī-sūkta, am,%} n. a particular hymn addressed to
Lakṣmī. {%—Lakṣmī-sena, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Lakṣmī-stotra, am,%} n. ‘praise of Lakṣmī,’ N.
of a particular hymn ascribed to Agastya. {%—Lakṣmy-%}
{%ārāma, as,%} m. the garden of Lakṣmī; N. of a
forest.
<LEND>

<L>40037<pc>0858-b<k1>lakzmIka<k2>lakzmIka
{%Lakṣmīka = lakṣmī%}¦ at the end of an adj.
comp. (e. g. {%putra-saṅkrānta-lakṣmīka,%} one
whose fortune has been transferred to a son; {%alak-%}
{%ṣmīka-tama,%} most unfortunate).
<LEND>

<L>40038<pc>0858-b<k1>lakzya<k2>lakzya
{%Lakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be marked, to be defined
or described; having marks or attributes, to be ex-
pressed indirectly; to be aimed at; to be regarded
as, deserving to be regarded; to be looked at or
observed, observable, perceptible, visible; to be re-
cognised or known, recognisable by (with inst. or at
the end of a comp.); ({%as%}), m. epithet of a magical
formula or charm recited over weapons; ({%am%}), n.
an aim, object, mark to be aimed at, butt, target,
prize; a lac or one hundred thousand; mere appear-
ance, sham, pretence [cf. {%lakṣya-supta%}]; a sign,
token (for {%lakṣman%}); an example, illustration (?).
{%—Lakṣya-krama, as, ā, am,%} having an indirectly
perceptible method (said of that which is suggested
by poetry but not expressed). {%—Lakṣya-jña-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. knowledge of a mark or aim; knowledge
of examples. {%—Lakṣya-tā,%} f. or {%lakṣya-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the being indirectly expressed; the being
an aim or object, ({%lakṣyatāṃ yā,%} to become
an aim or object); perceptibility, visibility, ({%lakṣ-%}
{%yatāṃ nī,%} to make visible.) {%—Lakṣya-bheda,%}
{%as,%} m. the cleaving of a mark. {%—Lakṣya-vīthī,%}
f. the visible or universally recognisable road, (ac-
cording to a commentator {%= brahma-loka-mārga.%})
{%—Lakṣya-vedhin, ī, inī, i,%} piercing or hitting
a mark. {%—Lakṣya-supta, as, ā, am,%} pretending
[Page0858-c+ 79]
to be asleep, shamming sleep. {%—Lakṣya-han, hā,%}
{%ghnī, ha,%} hitting the mark; ({%hā%}), m. an arrow.
{%—Lakṣyābhiharaṇa (˚ya-abh˚), am,%} n. the carry-
ing off of a prize. {%—Lakṣyī-kṛ, lakṣyī-kṛta, = lak-%}
{%ṣī-kṛ, lakṣī-kṛta,%} see under {%lakṣa%}. {%—Lakṣyī-%}
{%bhū = lakṣī-bhū.%}
<LEND>

<L>40039<pc>0858-c<k1>laK<k2>laK
{#laK#}¦ {%lakh%} or {%laṅkh%} (= rt. {%liṅkh%}), cl. 1.
P. {%lakhati, laṅkhati,%} &c., to go, move,
approach.
<LEND>

<L>40040<pc>0858-c<k1>laKimAdevI<k2>laKimAdevI
{#laKimAdevI#}¦ {%lakhimā-devī,%} f., N. of a prin-
cess, (a corruption fr. {%lakṣmī-devī.%})
<LEND>

<L>40041<pc>0858-c<k1>lag<k2>lag
{#lag#}¦ {%lag%} (this rt. is most extensively
and variously applied in spoken languages
allied to Sanskrit), cl. 1. P. {%lagati, lalāga, alagīt,%}
&c., to adhere, stick; to attach or fasten one's self
to, cling to, clasp; to touch, join, become united;
to meet, come in contact, intersect, cut (as lines); to
approach near, follow closely (on any event), ensue
or happen immediately; cl. 10. P. {%lāgayati,%} &c.,
to taste; to obtain, (in these senses = rts. {%lak, rak%}):
Caus. {%lagayati,%} &c., to cause to adhere, &c.; [cf.
perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">λήγω</lang> and, according to some, possibly
Lat. <nsi>ligare.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40042<pc>0858-c<k1>laganIya<k2>laganIya
{%Laganīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be attached, to be
clung to.
<LEND>

<L>40043<pc>0858-c<k1>lagita<k2>lagita
{%Lagita, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached to, adhered, con-
nected with; obtained, got; entered.
<LEND>

<L>40044<pc>0858-c<k1>lagitvA<k2>lagitvA
{%Lagitvā,%}¦ ind. having adhered, having clasped, hav-
ing closely approached so as to touch or join, ({%tasya%}
{%pādayor lagitvā,%} having clung to his feet.)
<LEND>

<L>40045<pc>0858-c<k1>lagna<k2>lagna<h>1
1. {%lagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see p. 860, col. 2),
attached, adhered, stuck, held fast; attached to, joined
to, connected with; coming in contact, meeting,
intersecting, cutting (said of lines); adhering or
clinging to, sticking to or upon, remaining on, im-
pressed upon, fastened in, sticking in; fastened on,
directed towards; followed or following closely, im-
mediately ensuing; intent on, closely occupied about;
auspicious; ({%as%}), m. a bard or minstrel (who awakes
the king in the morning); a furious elephant or one
in rut; ({%am%}), n. the point of contact or intersection
(of two lines), the point where the horizon and the
ecliptic or path of the planets meet; the point or arc
of the equator which corresponds to a given point
or arc of the ecliptic; the division of the equator
which rises in succession with each sign in an oblique
sphere; the point of the ecliptic which at a given
time is upon the meridian or at the horizon, ({%kṣi-%}
{%tije lagnam,%} horizon Lagna; {%madhya-lagna,%} me-
ridian Lagna); the moment of the sun's entrance into
a zodiacal sign; the rising of the sun or of the
planets; (in astrology) a scheme or figure of the
twelve houses or zodiacal signs (used as a horoscope);
the whole of the first astrological house; an auspicious
moment, a particular time fixed upon as lucky for
the performance of anything, (rarely {%as,%} m.); the
decisive moment, time for action, decisive measure,
(also {%as,%} m.) {%—Lagna-kāla, as,%} m. the moment or
time pointed out by astrologers as favourable for any
undertaking, an auspicious moment or time. {%—Lag-%}
{%na-graha, as, ā, am,%} insisting firmly on anything,
persisting steadfastly in, important, obtrusive. {%—Lag-%}
{%na-candrikā,%} f., N. of an astronomical work.
{%—Lagna-dina, am,%} n. or {%lagna-divasa, as,%} m.
an auspicious day, a day fixed upon or chosen as
favourable for any undertaking. {%—Lagna-devī,%} f.,
N. of a fabulous cow of stone. {%—Lagna-nakṣatra,%}
{%am,%} n. any auspicious constellation of the moon's
path. {%—Lagna-pattrikā,%} f. a paper on which the
auspicious moment for a marriage &c. is noted down.
{%—Lagna-bhuja, as,%} m. (in astronomy) ascensional
difference. {%—Lagna-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the circle of
signs, the zodiac. {%—Lagna-māsa, as,%} m. an auspi-
cious month. {%—Lagna-muhūrta, am,%} n. the auspi-
cious moment or period for a marriage, &c. {%—Lag-%}
{%na-velā,%} f. or {%lagna-samaya, as,%} m. {%= lagna-kāla.%}
{%—Lagna-śuddhi, is,%} f. auspiciousness of the signs
&c. for the commencement of any contemplated
work. {%—Lagnāsu (˚na-asu), avas,%} m. pl. (in astro-
[Page0859-a+ 76]
nomy) ascensional equivalents in respirations. {%—Lag-%}
{%nāha (˚na-aha), as,%} m. {%= lagna-dina.%}
<LEND>

<L>40046<pc>0859-a<k1>lagnaka<k2>lagnaka
{%Lagnaka, as,%}¦ m. a (fixed) surety or security, one
who is responsible; a bondsman, bail.
<LEND>

<L>40047<pc>0859-a<k1>lagnikA<k2>lagnikA
{%Lagnikā,%}¦ f. incorrect for {%nagnikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40048<pc>0859-a<k1>laga<k2>laga
{#laga#}¦ {%laga,%} (in prosody) an iambus.
<LEND>

<L>40049<pc>0859-a<k1>lagAlikA<k2>lagAlikA
{%Lagālikā,%}¦ f. a kind of metre, four times ˘¯˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>40050<pc>0859-a<k1>lagaqa<k2>lagaqa
{#lagaqa#}¦ {%lagaḍa, as, ā, am,%} beautiful, hand-
some; [cf. {%laḍaha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40051<pc>0859-a<k1>lagata<k2>lagata
{#lagata#}¦ {%lagata%} or {%lagadha, as,%} m., N. of the
author of a work on astronomy.
<LEND>

<L>40052<pc>0859-a<k1>laguqa<k2>laguqa
{#laguqa#}¦ {%laguḍa, as,%} m. (perhaps connected
with rt. {%lag%}), a stick, staff; a club, iron club. {%—La-%}
{%guḍa-hasta, as,%} m. ‘staff-in-hand,’ a man armed
with a stick or mace, a staff-bearer.
<LEND>

<L>40053<pc>0859-a<k1>lagura<k2>lagura
{%Lagura, as,%}¦ m. {%= laguḍa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40054<pc>0859-a<k1>lagna<k2>lagna
{#lagna#}¦ {%lagna,%} &c. See p. 858, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40055<pc>0859-a<k1>laGaw<k2>laGaw
{#laGaw#}¦ {%laghaṭ, ṭ,%} or {%laghaṭi, is,%} m. (accord-
ing to Uṇādi-s. I. 134. fr. rt. {%laṅgh%}), air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>40056<pc>0859-a<k1>laGantI<k2>laGantI
{%Laghantī,%}¦ f., N. of a river, (also read {%laṅghatī.%})
<LEND>

<L>40057<pc>0859-a<k1>laGaya<k2>laGaya
{#laGaya#}¦ {%laghaya, laghiman.%} See p. 860.
<LEND>

<L>40058<pc>0859-a<k1>laGu<k2>laGu
{#laGu#}¦ {%laghu, us, -ghvī%} or {%us, u%} (a later form
of {%raghu,%} q. v.; according to Uṇādi-s. I. 30. fr. rt.
{%laṅgh%}), quick, swift, fleet, rapid, light, nimble,
active; epithet of a particular mode of flying (pe-
culiar to birds); epithet of the Nakṣatras Hasta,
Aśvinī, and Puṣya; light, easy, not difficult or
heavy; easy of digestion; (in prosody) short or
light (i. e. a light vowel as opposed to a {%guru%}
or heavy, the proper term for a short vowel being
{%hrasva%}); lightly pronounced (said of the pronunci-
ation of {%va,%} as opposed to {%madhyama%} and {%guru%});
little, small, narrow, diminutive, slight, unimportant,
trivial, insignificant, trifling, of little worth or esti-
mation; weak, feeble, wretched, low, lowly, humble,
mean, contemptible, vain, frivolous; sapless, pithless;
young, younger; soft, low, gentle (as sound; op-
posed to {%a-laghu,%} loud); pleasing, agreeable, plea-
sant, handsome, beautiful; clean, pure; ({%u%}), ind.
quickly, rapidly, swiftly; lightly, easily, &c.; con-
temptibly, ({%laghu man,%} to think lightly of, despise);
({%us%}), f. Trigonella Corniculata; ({%ghvī%}), f. a slender
or delicate woman; a light carriage; Trigonella Cor-
niculata; ({%u%}), n. a particular measure of time (= 15
Kāṣṭhās = (1/15) Nāḍikā); Agallochum, a particular
kind of Agallochum; the root of Andropogon Muri-
catus; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐλαχύ-ς, ἐλαφρός, λαγώς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>lev-</nsi>
<nsi>i-s, levi-ta-s, levare, lepus</nsi> (for old <nsi>lephus</nsi>): Goth.
<nsi>leihts:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>lîhti:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>lîght:</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>lig-u-ku:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>lengva-s:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>lag,</nsi> ‘weak, feeble,
faint;’ <nsi>lagudhadh,</nsi> ‘diminution, weakening;’ <nsi>la-</nsi>
<nsi>guighthe,</nsi> ‘weakened, lessened;’ <nsi>laghad,</nsi> ‘fewness,
weakness;’ <nsi>lagaighim,</nsi> ‘I weaken;’ <nsi>laigidh, laigse,</nsi>
<nsi>laigsinn,</nsi> ‘weakness, infirmity;’ <nsi>lugh,</nsi> ‘little, swift,
active;’ <nsi>lughad,</nsi> ‘littleness.]’ {%—Laghu-kaṅkola, as,%}
m. Pimenta Acris. {%—Laghu-kaṇṭakā,%} f. Mimosa
Pudica. {%—Laghu-karkandhu, us,%} m. f. a small
kind of Zizyphus. {%—Laghu-karṇī,%} f. a species of
plant (= Marāṭhī {%moravela%}). {%—Laghu-kāya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} light-bodied; ({%as%}), m. a goat. {%—Laghu-%}
{%kāśmarya, as,%} m. a kind of tree. {%—Laghu-koṣṭha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a light stomach, having little in
the stomach. {%—Laghu-kaumudī,%} f. ‘the short Kau-
mudī, ‘N. of an epitome of the Siddhānta-kaumudī
by Varada-rāja. {%—Laghu-krama, as, ā, am,%} having
a quick or rapid step, going quickly, hastening;
({%am%}), ind. with quick step, quickly, hastily. {%—La-%}
{%ghu-kriyā,%} f. a small event, trifle. {%—Laghu-kha-%}
{%ṭvikā,%} f. a small bedstead or couch, easy chair.
{%—Laghu-khartara,%} N. of a family. {%—Laghu-%}
{%gaṅgādhara, as,%} m. a particular powder or medi-
cine (used in diarrhœa). {%—Laghu-garga, as,%} m. a
species of fish (probably a variety of the Pimelodus).
{%—Laghu-godhūma, as,%} m. a small kind of wheat.
{%—Laghu-graha-mañjari, is,%} f., N. of an astrolo-
gical work. {%—Laghu-candrikā,%} f., N. of a com-
[Page0859-b+ 81]
mentary by Brahmānanda-sarasvatī on the Advaita-
siddhi (described as a refutation of the Nyāya theory
from the point of view of the Vedānta). {%—Laghu-%}
{%citta, as, ā, am,%} light-minded, little-minded, having
little thought, thoughtless, frivolous, fickle, unsteady.
{%—Laghucitta-tā,%} f. light-mindedness, thoughtless-
ness, fickleness. {%—Laghu-citra-hasta, as, ā, am,%}
light and ready-handed. {%—Laghu-cintana, am,%} n.,
N. of an epitome of the Mīmāṃsā Sūtras by Rāghava-
deva. {%—Laghu-cintāmaṇi-rasa, as,%} m. epithet of
a particular fluid mixture. {%—Laghu-cirbhiṭā,%} f. co-
locynth. {%—Laghu-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} little-minded,
low-minded, frivolous. {%—Laghu-cchadā,%} f. a kind
of asparagus. {%—Laghu-cchedya, as, ā, am,%} easy to
be cut, easy to be extirpated, easily annihilated or
destroyed. {%—Laghu-jaṅgala, as,%} m. a sort of quail
{%(= lābaka)%}. {%—Laghu-jātaka, am,%} n., N. of a short
work by Varāha-mihira on horoscopes. {%—Laghu-%}
{%jātiviveka, as,%} m. ‘the short Jāti-viveka,’ N. of a
work. {%—Laghu-tara, as, ā, am,%} more quick, lighter,
easier, &c. {%(= laghīyas)%}. {%—Laghu-tā,%} f. or {%laghu-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. quickness, rapidity, agility, activity;
lightness, levity, ease, facility; shortness; smallness,
littleness, lowness, meanness, insignificance, unim-
portance, thoughtlessness, levity, frivolity; wanton-
ness; want of rank or dignity, humbleness of origin;
disregard, disrespect. {%—Laghu-dantī,%} f. a small kind
of Croton. {%—Laghu-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary. {%—Laghu-dundubhi, is,%} m. a small drum.
{%—Laghu-drākṣā,%} f. a small stoneless grape (com-
monly called Kishmish). {%—Laghu-drāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
fusing or liquefying easily, flowing rapidly (said of
quicksilver). {%—Laghu-dvāravatī,%} f. the young or
recent Dvāra-vatī, i. e. the more modern part of the
town. {%—Laghu-nābha-maṇḍala, am,%} n., N. of a
particular mystical circle. {%—Laghu-nāman, a,%} n.
Agallochum. {%—Laghu-nāradīya, am,%} n. the short
Nāradīya. {%—Laghu-nyāya-sudhā,%} f., N. of a com-
mentary on the Śata-ślokī. {%—Laghu-nyāsa, as,%} m.,
N. of a grammatical treatise. {%—Laghu-pañcamūla,%}
{%am,%} n. the smaller Pañca-mula, q. v. {%—Laghu-paṇ-%}
{%ḍita, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Laghu-patanaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘quickly flying, lightly falling,’ N. of a crow
(in the Hitopadeśa). {%—Laghu-pattraka, as,%} m. a
kind of plant {%(= rocanī)%}. {%—Laghu-pattra-phalā,%}
f. {%= laghūdumbarikā%}. {%—Laghu-pattrī,%} f. a species
of plant. {%—Laghu-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a work.
{%—Laghu-parāśara, as,%} m. the shorter Parāśara.
{%—Laghu-paribhāṣā-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a short
commentary on the grammatical Paribhāṣās. {%—La-%}
{%ghu-parṇī,%} f. {%= laghu-karṇī%}. {%—Laghu-pāka, as,%}
m. easy digestion, digestibility; ({%as, ā, am%}), easy
of digestion, easily digested. {%—Laghu-pākin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} easily digested. {%—Laghu-pātin, ī, inī, i,%}
quickly flying, lightly falling or alighting; ({%ī%}), m.,
N. of a crow. {%—Laghu-picchila, as,%} m. Cordia
Myxa. {%—Laghu-pulastya, as,%} m. the shorter or
lesser Pulastya. {%—Laghu-puṣpa, as,%} m. a kind of
Kadamba. {%—Laghu-prayatna, as, ā, am,%} using
little effort, indolent, impotent; pronounced with
slight articulation. {%—Laghu-badara, as, ī,%} m. f. a
kind of jujube tree. {%—Laghu-buddha-purāṇa, am,%}
n., N. of an epitome of the Lalita-vistara. {%—Laghu-%}
{%bodha, as,%} m. ‘easily understood,’ N. of a grammar.
{%—Laghu-brahmavaivarta, am,%} n., N. of an epi-
tome of the Brahma-vaivarta. {%—Laghu-brāhmī,%} f.
a species of plant. {%—Laghu-bhava, as,%} m. a low
station, humble birth. {%—Laghu-bhāgavata, am,%} n.
the short Bhāgavata. {%—Laghu-bhāva, as,%} m. light
state, lightness, ease, facility. {%—Laghu-bhuj, k, k, k,%}
eating little. {%—Laghu-bhūṣaṇa-kānti, is,%} f., N. of
a commentary. {%—Laghu-bhojana, am,%} n. a light
repast, slight refreshment. {%—Laghu-mañjūṣā,%} f.,
N. of a commentary. {%—Laghu-mantha, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%kṣudrāgnimantha,%} Premna Spinosa. {%—Laghu-%}
{%māṃsa, as,%} m. ‘having light (i. e. easily digested)
flesh, ‘a kind of partridge; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of Valeriana.
{%—Laghu-mānasa,%} N. of an astronomical work.
{%—Laghu-mitra, am,%} n. a slight or weak friend, an
ally of little power or value. {%—Laghu-mūla, am,%} n.
(in algebra) the lesser root of an equation, the least
[Page0859-c+ 81]
root with reference to the additive quantities; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), having a small root or beginning, easily
commenced. {%—Laghu-mūlaka, am,%} n. a radish.
{%—Laghu-yama, as,%} m. ‘the short Yama,’ N. of a
particular recension of Yama's law-book. {%—Laghu-%}
{%rāśi, is, is, i,%} (in arithmetic) composed of fewer terms
(as a side in an equation; opposed to {%bahu-rāśi,%}
q. v.). {%—Laghu-laya, am,%} n. the root of a fragrant
Andropogon Muricatus. {%—Laghu-lalita-vistara,%}
N. of an extract from the Lalita-vistara. {%—Laghu-%}
{%vasiṣṭha-siddhānta%} or {%laghu-vāsiṣṭha-siddhān-%}
{%ta, as,%} m., N. of an epitome of the Vasiṣṭha-sid-
dhānta. {%—Laghu-vākya-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of certain
Vedānta precepts by Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Laghu-vārt-%}
{%tika, am,%} n., N. of the last eight books of the
Tantra-vārttika; of a metrical epitome of the Mī-
māṃsā Sūtras by Kumārila. {%—Laghu-vāsas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} thinly or lightly dressed; wearing clean or pure
clothing. {%—Laghu-vikrama, as,%} m. a quick step;
({%as, ā, am%}), having a quick step, quick-footed,
with hasty step, hastening. {%—Laghu-vivara-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the state of having a narrow opening.
{%—Laghu-viṣṇu, us,%} m. ‘the short Viṣṇu,’ N. of
a particular recension of Viṣṇu's law-book. {%—La-%}
{%ghu-vṛtti, is,%} f. a short commentary; N. of a par-
ticular commentary; ({%is, is, i%}), badly behaved, ill-
conducted, ill-conditioned, of low practices, low, vile;
ill-done, mismanaged; having a light nature, light.
{%—Laghuvṛtti-tā,%} f. insignificance, meanness; bad
conduct, mismanagement. {%—Laghu-vedhin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} easily piercing, cleverly hitting. {%—Laghu-vaiyā-%}
{%karaṇa-siddhānta-mañjūṣā,%} f., N. of an epitome
of the Vaiyākaraṇa-siddhānta-mañjūṣa. {%—Laghu-%}
{%śabdaratna, am,%} n., N. of an epitome of the
Śabda-ratna. {%—Laghu-śabdendu-śekhara, as,%} m.,
N. of a commentary on the Siddhānta-kaumudī
(being an epitome of the Śabdendu-śekhara). {%—La-%}
{%ghu-śamī,%} f. a kind of Acacia. {%—Laghu-śānti-%}
{%purāṇa, am,%} n. an epitome of the Śānti-purāṇa.
{%—Laghu-śikhara-tāla, as,%} m., N. of a particular
time in music. {%—Laghu-śivapurāṇa, am,%} n. the
short Śiva-purāṇa. {%—Laghu-śaunakī,%} f. ‘the shorter
Śaunakī, ‘N. of a work. {%—Laghu-saṅgraha, as,%} m.
and {%laghu-saṅgrahiṇī-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of two
works. {%—Laghu-sattva, as, ā, am,%} ‘weak-natured,’
having a weak or fickle character, having an easy
disposition. {%—Laghusattva-tā,%} f. weakness of cha-
racter, fickleness. {%—Laghu-sāṅkhya-vṛtti%} or {%la-%}
{%ghu-sāṅkhya-sūtra-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of an epitome
of the Sāṅkhya-pravacana-bhāṣya. {%—Laghu-sāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of little importance, insignificant, unim-
portant, worthless. {%—Laghu-siddhānta-kaumudī,%}
f. {%= laghu-kaumudī,%} q. v. {%—Laghu-siddhānta-%}
{%candrikā,%} f., N. of a commentary. {%—Laghu-sudar-%}
{%śana, am,%} n. a particular medicinal powder. {%—La-%}
{%ghu-syada, as, ā, am, = raghu-ṣyad,%} going quickly.
{%—Laghu-hasta, as, ā, am,%} light-handed, ready-
handed, active, nimble, expert, clever; ({%as%}), m. a
good archer. {%—Laghuhasta-tā,%} f. or {%laghuhasta-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. ready-handedness, activity, expertness.
{%—Laghuhasta-vat, ān, atī, at, = laghu-hasta.%}
{%—Laghu-hārita, as,%} m. ‘the short Hārīta,’ N. of
a particular recension of Hārīta's law-book. {%—Laghu-%}
{%hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} light-hearted, fickle. {%—Laghu-%}
{%hema-dugdhā,%} f. Ficus Oppositifolia. {%—Laghū-ka-%}
{%raṇa, am,%} n. the act of making light, making less,
lessening, diminishing, diminution; thinking little
of, contemning. {%—Laghū-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made
light, reduced in weight, made easier or shorter,
abbreviated; lessened, reduced in importance, made
insignificant; thought lightly of. {%—Laghūkti (˚ghu-%}
{%uk˚), is,%} f. a brief mode of expression. {%—Laghūt-%}
{%thāna (˚ghu-ut˚)%} or {%laghu-samutthāna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} making active efforts, doing work rapidly. {%—La-%}
{%ghūdumbarikā (˚ghu-ud˚),%} f. Ficus Oppositifolia.
{%—Laghu-añjīra, am,%} n. a small fig. {%—Laghu-atri,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘the short Atri,’ N. of a particular recension
of Atri's law-book. {%—Laghv-ādy-uḍumbarāhvā%}
{%(˚ra-āh˚),%} f. {%= laghūdumbarikā%}. {%—Laghv-ārya-%}
{%siddhānta, as,%} m. an abbreviation of the Ārya-
siddhānta. {%—Laghu-āśin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%laghu-āhāra, %}
[Page0860-a+ 76]
{%as, ā, am,%} eating little, making a light repast,
moderate in diet, moderate, abstemious.
<LEND>

<L>40059<pc>0860-a<k1>laGaya<k2>laGaya
{%Laghaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%laghayati,%} &c., to make light,
lighten, lessen, diminish, alleviate, mitigate, soften.
<LEND>

<L>40060<pc>0860-a<k1>laGiman<k2>laGiman
{%Laghiman, ā,%}¦ m. lightness, levity, absence of
weight; a kind of {%siddhi%} or supernatural faculty of
assuming excessive lightness at will; smallness, dimi-
nutiveness, insignificance; frivolousness, fickleness;
meanness, lowness, diminution.
<LEND>

<L>40061<pc>0860-a<k1>laGizWa<k2>laGizWa
{%Laghiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%laghu%}), most
quick, very swift; lightest, very light; very small, &c.;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐλάχιστο-ς.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>40062<pc>0860-a<k1>laGIyas<k2>laGIyas
{%Laghīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%laghu%}), more
quick, very swift; lighter, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40063<pc>0860-a<k1>laGUya<k2>laGUya
{%Laghūya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%laghūyati,%} &c., Ved. to
think lightly of, despise.
<LEND>

<L>40064<pc>0860-a<k1>laGvI<k2>laGvI
{%Laghvī,%}¦ f. a delicate woman, &c. See under
{%laghu,%} p. 859, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40065<pc>0860-a<k1>laN<k2>laN
{#laN#}¦ {%laṅ,%} a technical term or symbol in
grammar for the terminations of the Imperfect or
First Preterite or for that tense itself.
<LEND>

<L>40066<pc>0860-a<k1>laNka<k2>laNka
{#laNka#}¦ {%laṅka, as,%} m. a proper N.; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of the chief town in Ceylon or of the whole
island (renowned as the capital and habitation of the
great Rākṣasa Rāvaṇa and his hosts of demons,
whose conquest by Rāma-candra, q. v., after the car-
rying off of his wife Sītā by Rāvaṇa, forms the subject
of the Rāmāyaṇa; according to some accounts
Laṅkā was much larger than the island of Ceylon is
at present or even distinct from Ceylon, the first
meridian of longitude which passed through Ujjayinī
being supposed to pass through Laṅkā also); {%= rā-%}
{%vaṇa-hrada;%} N. of a Śākinī or evil spirit; an
unchaste woman; a branch; a kind of grain.
{%—Laṅka-ṭaṅkaṭā,%} f., N. of a daughter of Sandhyā
(wife of Vidyut-keśa and mother of Su-keśa). {%—Laṅ-%}
{%kā-dāhin, ī,%} m. the burner of Laṅkā, i. e. Hanu-mat
(as having set fire to the city with his burning tail).
{%—Laṅkādhipati (˚kā-adh˚), is,%} or {%laṅkā-nātha,%}
{%as,%} or {%laṅkā-pati, is,%} m. lord of Laṅkā, i. e.
Rāvaṇa. {%—Laṅkāri (˚kā-ari), is,%} m. the enemy
of Laṅkā, i. e. Rāma. {%—Laṅkāvatāra (˚kā-av˚)%}
N. of a Buddhist Sūtra work, (abbreviated from
{%saddharma-l˚;%} it is one of the chief religious works
of the Buddhists, treating of their law and of many
abstruse philosophical problems.) {%—Laṅkā-sthāyin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} residing or being in Laṅkā; ({%ī%}), m. a
plant. {%—Laṅkeśa%} or {%laṅkeśvara (˚kā-īś˚), as,%} m.
the lord of Laṅkā, i. e. Rāvaṇa. {%—Laṅkeśa-vanāri-%}
{%ketu (˚na-ar˚), us,%} m. ‘having the enemy of the
grove of Ravāṇa (i. e. the monkey Hanu-mat) for
an ensign, ‘N. of Arjuna. {%—Laṅkodaya (˚kā-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. or {%laṅkodayāsu, avas,%} m. pl. (in astronomy)
the equivalents of the signs in right ascension (lite-
rally ‘ascension at Laṅkā’).
<LEND>

<L>40067<pc>0860-a<k1>laNkApikA<k2>laNkApikA
{%Laṅkāpikā%}¦ or {%laṅkāyikā%} or {%laṅkārikā%} or {%laṅ-%}
{%kopikā%} or {%laṅkoyikā,%} f. the plant Trigonella Cor-
niculata.
<LEND>

<L>40068<pc>0860-a<k1>laNK<k2>laNK
{#laNK#}¦ {%laṅkh.%} See rt. {%lakh,%} p. 858, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40069<pc>0860-a<k1>laNKanI<k2>laNKanI
{#laNKanI#}¦ {%laṅkhanī,%} f. the bit of a bridle.
<LEND>

<L>40070<pc>0860-a<k1>laNg<k2>laNg
{#laNg#}¦ {%laṅg,%} cl. 1. P. {%laṅgati,%} &c., to go;
to go lame, limp.
<LEND>

<L>40071<pc>0860-a<k1>laNga<k2>laNga<h>1
1. {%laṅga, as, ā, am,%}¦ lame, limping; ({%as%}), m.
limping, lameness.
<LEND>

<L>40072<pc>0860-a<k1>laNga<k2>laNga<h>2
{#laNga#} 2¦. {%laṅga, as,%} m. (probably connected
with rt. {%lag%}), union, association, connection; a lover,
paramour.
<LEND>

<L>40073<pc>0860-a<k1>laNgaka<k2>laNgaka
{%Laṅgaka, as,%}¦ m. a lover, paramour.
<LEND>

<L>40074<pc>0860-a<k1>laNgala<k2>laNgala
{%Laṅgala, am,%}¦ n. {%= lāṅgala,%} a plough; N. of a
kingdom, (also written {%lāṅgala.%})
<LEND>

<L>40075<pc>0860-a<k1>laNgima<k2>laNgima
{%Laṅgima%}¦ or {%laṅgiman%} (?), union. {%—Laṅgima-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} fit to be joined.
<LEND>

<L>40076<pc>0860-a<k1>laNgUla<k2>laNgUla
{%Laṅgūla, am,%}¦ n. {%= lāṅgūla,%} the tail of an animal.
<LEND>

<L>40077<pc>0860-a<k1>laNG<k2>laNG
{#laNG#}¦ {%laṅgh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%laṅghati, -te,%}
{%lalaṅgha, lalaṅghe, laṅghitum,%} to
leap, spring, go by leaps; to ascend, mount upon;
[Page0860-b+ 78]
to diminish, lessen, weaken, (in this sense connected
with {%laghu%}); to dry, dry up (P.); to fast, abstain
from food (A.); cl. 10. P. or Caus. {%laṅghayati,%}
&c., to jump or spring over, leap or step over, over-
step, go beyond (with acc.); to pass over, traverse;
to ascend, mount, cross over; to transgress, trample
upon, violate, disregard, disrespect, disdain, insult,
offend, displease, injure, prevent, hinder, oppose; to
go beyond, excel, surpass, outshine, outstrip; to cause
any one to go beyond his meal-time, cause to fast
[cf. {%su-laṅghita%}]; to speak; to shine: Desid. of
Caus. {%lilaṅghayiṣati,%} to intend to step over; [cf.
according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">λαγγάζω, λογγάζω, λαγχόνω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">λάχος, λόγχν, ἐλέγχω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>longus, lan-</nsi>
<nsi>guere;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>langên, ga-lingan, ga-langon;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>laggs;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>lang,</nsi> &c.]
<LEND>

<L>40078<pc>0860-b<k1>laNGaka<k2>laNGaka
{%Laṅghaka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who leaps over or
transgresses, one who insults or displeases, an offender,
transgressor, violator.
<LEND>

<L>40079<pc>0860-b<k1>laNGatI<k2>laNGatI
{%Laṅghatī,%}¦ f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>40080<pc>0860-b<k1>laNGana<k2>laNGana
{%Laṅghana, am,%}¦ n. the act of leaping or jumping,
going by leaps or jumps, springing, leaping over,
overstepping, stepping across; one of a horse's paces,
curvetting, bounding; ascending, mounting, attain-
ing; the act of assaulting or storming, capturing a
fort, capture, conquest; the act of jumping over,
passing over, overstepping, exceeding, going beyond
bounds, transgressing, violation; transgressing pro-
priety; despising, disregarding, disdain, contempt;
the act of offending or displeasing, injury, harm,
offence, affront; fasting, abstinence.
<LEND>

<L>40081<pc>0860-b<k1>laNGanIya<k2>laNGanIya
{%Laṅghanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be lept over, to be
stepped or passed over, to be passed, passable, attain-
able; transgressible, to be violated; to be disregarded;
to be injured or wronged; to be fasted. {%—Laṅgha-%}
{%nīya-tā,%} f. or {%laṅghanīya-tva, am,%} n. capability of
being lept or stepped over or transgressed; attain-
ability; capability of being injured.
<LEND>

<L>40082<pc>0860-b<k1>laNGita<k2>laNGita
{%Laṅghita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lept over, overstepped,
passed beyond, passed over, traversed, transgressed,
violated, disregarded, insulted.
<LEND>

<L>40083<pc>0860-b<k1>laNGitavya<k2>laNGitavya
{%Laṅghitavya, as, ā, am, = laṅghanīya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>40084<pc>0860-b<k1>laNGya<k2>laNGya
{%Laṅghya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be jumped or stepped
over; to be traversed or passed, attainable; capable
of being transgressed or violated; to be neglected or
disregarded; capable of being injured or wronged;
to be made to fast.
<LEND>

<L>40085<pc>0860-b<k1>laC<k2>laC
{#laC#}¦ {%lach%} (= rt. {%lāñch;%} connected with
rt. {%lakṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%lacchati, lalaccha,%}
&c., to mark.
<LEND>

<L>40086<pc>0860-b<k1>laj<k2>laj<h>1
{#laj#} 1¦. {%laj%} (= rt. {%lajj,%} q. v.), cl. 6. A.
{%lajate, leje, lajitum,%} to be ashamed:
Caus. {%lājayati:%} Desid. {%lilajiṣate:%} Intens. {%lālaj-%}
{%yate, lālakti.%}
<LEND>

<L>40087<pc>0860-b<k1>lajakArikA<k2>lajakArikA
{%Laja-kārikā,%}¦ f. ({%laja%} for {%lajjā%}), the sensitive
plant, Mimosa Pudica.
<LEND>

<L>40088<pc>0860-b<k1>laj<k2>laj<h>2
{#laj#} 2¦. {%laj%} (= rt. 1. {%lañj%}), cl. 1. P. {%la-%}
{%jati,%} &c., to fry, roast; to calumniate,
blame.
<LEND>

<L>40089<pc>0860-b<k1>laj<k2>laj<h>3
{#laj#} 3¦. {%laj%} (= rt. 2. {%lañj%}), cl. 10. P.
{%lajayati,%} &c., to appear, seem, shine;
to cover, (in this sense another reading for rt. {%jal.%})
<LEND>

<L>40090<pc>0860-b<k1>lajj<k2>lajj
{#lajj#}¦ {%lajj%} (perhaps connected with a
base {%rajya%} fr. rt. {%rañj;%} cf. rt. 1. {%laj%}),
cl. 6. A. {%lajjate%} (sometimes also P. {%lajjati%}), {%lalajje,%}
{%lajjiṣyate, alajjiṣṭa, lajjitum,%} to be ashamed,
blush: Caus. {%lajjayati:%} Desid. {%lilajjiṣate:%} Intens.
{%lālajjyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>40091<pc>0860-b<k1>lagna<k2>lagna<h>2
2. {%lagna, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 858, col. 3),
ashamed; (this part. is also referrible to rt. 1. {%laj.%})
<LEND>

<L>40092<pc>0860-b<k1>lajja<k2>lajja
{%Lajja, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his
descendants.
<LEND>

<L>40093<pc>0860-b<k1>lajjakA<k2>lajjakA
{%Lajjakā,%}¦ f. the wild cotton-tree, Gossypium.
<LEND>

<L>40094<pc>0860-b<k1>lajjat<k2>lajjat
{%Lajjat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} being ashamed,
blushing.
<LEND>

<L>40095<pc>0860-b<k1>lajjamAna<k2>lajjamAna
{%Lajjamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ blushing, feeling shame.
<LEND>

<L>40096<pc>0860-b<k1>lajjarI<k2>lajjarI
{%Lajjarī,%}¦ f. a white sensitive plant.
<LEND>

<L>40097<pc>0860-b<k1>lajjA<k2>lajjA
{%Lajjā,%}¦ f. shame, modesty, bashfulness; Shame
[Page0860-c+ 75]
(personified as the wife of Dharma and as the
mother of Vinaya); the sensitive plant, Mimosa
Pudica. {%—Lajjā-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} or {%lajjā-%}
{%kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} causing or occasioning shame,
shameful. {%—Lajjākṛti (˚jā-āk˚), is, is, i,%} feigning
modesty. {%—Lajjānvita (˚jā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessed of shame, ashamed, modest, bashful. {%—Lajjā-%}
{%rahita, as, ā, am,%} void of shame, shameless, im-
modest. {%—Lajjā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of shame,
full of shame, ashamed, bashful, modest; embar-
rassed, perplexed. {%—Lajjāvat-tva, am,%} n. bashful-
ness, modesty. {%—Lajjā-śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a modest
disposition, bashful, modest. {%—Lajjā-śūnya%} or {%lajjā-%}
{%hīna, as, ā, am,%} destitute of shame, void of modesty,
shameless, impudent.
<LEND>

<L>40098<pc>0860-c<k1>lajjAya<k2>lajjAya
{%Lajjāya,%}¦ Nom. (probably A.) {%lajjāyate,%} &c., to
be ashamed.
<LEND>

<L>40099<pc>0860-c<k1>lajjAyita<k2>lajjAyita
{%Lajjāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ashamed, abashed, embar-
rassed.
<LEND>

<L>40100<pc>0860-c<k1>lajjAlu<k2>lajjAlu
{%Lajjālu, us, us, u,%}¦ bashful, modest, shameful;
({%us%}), m. f. the sensitive plant, Mimosa Pudica.
<LEND>

<L>40101<pc>0860-c<k1>lajjita<k2>lajjita
{%Lajjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ashamed, abashed, modest,
bashful.
<LEND>

<L>40102<pc>0860-c<k1>lajjirI<k2>lajjirI
{%Lajjirī,%}¦ f. {%= lajjālu,%} Mimosa Pudica; [cf. {%laj-%}
{%jarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40103<pc>0860-c<k1>lajyA<k2>lajyA
{%Lajyā,%}¦ f. {%= lajjā,%} shame, modesty.
<LEND>

<L>40104<pc>0860-c<k1>laYcA<k2>laYcA
{#laYcA#}¦ {%lañcā,%} f. a present, bribe.
<LEND>

<L>40105<pc>0860-c<k1>laYCana<k2>laYCana
{#laYCana#}¦ {%lañchana,%} Eleusine Coracana (a
kind of grain).
<LEND>

<L>40106<pc>0860-c<k1>laYj<k2>laYj<h>1
{#laYj#} 1¦. {%lañj%} (= rt. 2. {%laj%}), cl. 1. P. {%lañ-%}
{%jati,%} &c., to fry, roast; to calumniate,
blame.
<LEND>

<L>40107<pc>0860-c<k1>laYj<k2>laYj<h>2
{#laYj#} 2¦. {%lañj%} (also read {%luñj%}), cl. 10. P.
{%lañjayati,%} &c., to be strong; to strike,
injure; to dwell; to give; to speak; to shine; to
be manifest.
<LEND>

<L>40108<pc>0860-c<k1>laYja<k2>laYja
{#laYja#}¦ {%lañja, as,%} m. a foot; the end of the
lower garment tucked into the waist-band; a tail;
{%= paṅgu; (ā),%} f. an adulteress; sleep; a current;
Lakṣmī.
<LEND>

<L>40109<pc>0860-c<k1>laYjikA<k2>laYjikA
{%Lañjikā,%}¦ f. a harlot, prostitute; [cf. perhaps Gr.
<lang n="greek">λαγ-αρό-ς,λάγ-νο-ς,</lang> Lat. <nsi>langu-e-o,</nsi>
<nsi>langu-i-du-s, langu-or, laxus, lac-tes.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40110<pc>0860-c<k1>law<k2>law<h>1
{#law#} 1¦. {%laṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%laṭati,%} &c., to be a
child, act or talk like a child, be childish;
to cry; [cf. rt. {%raṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40111<pc>0860-c<k1>lawa<k2>lawa
{%Laṭa, as,%}¦ m. one who speaks like a child, a block-
head, fool; a fault, defect; a thief. {%—Laṭa-parṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. {%= tvaca,%} large cinnamon.
<LEND>

<L>40112<pc>0860-c<k1>lawaka<k2>lawaka
{%Laṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a bad man, contemptible person.
<LEND>

<L>40113<pc>0860-c<k1>lawwa<k2>lawwa
{%Laṭṭa, as,%}¦ m. {%= laṭaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40114<pc>0860-c<k1>lawya<k2>lawya
{%Laṭya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%laṭyati,%} &c., to speak foolishly.
<LEND>

<L>40115<pc>0860-c<k1>lawva<k2>lawva
{%Laṭva, as,%}¦ m. a horse; a particular caste (said to
be a tribe of mountaineers); a dancing boy; a par-
ticular Rāga or scale in music; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
bird (said to be a kind of sparrow); safflower; a
kind of Karañja; the fruit of a kind of Karañja;
fruit in general; a curl on the forehead, &c. ({%=%}
{%bhramaraka%}); a game, gambling ({%= dyūta%}); a
bad or unchaste woman; a sweetmeat (?) ; {%= avadya;%}
{%= śilī.%}
<LEND>

<L>40116<pc>0860-c<k1>lawvAkA<k2>lawvAkA
{%Laṭvākā,%}¦ f. {%= laṭvā,%} a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>40117<pc>0860-c<k1>law<k2>law<h>2
{#law#} 2¦. {%laṭ,%} a technical term or symbol
in grammar for the terminations of the Present or
for that tense itself. {%—Laḍ-artha-vāda, as,%} m., N.
of a treatise on the meaning of the Present tense.
<LEND>

<L>40118<pc>0860-c<k1>lawakana<k2>lawakana
{#lawakana#}¦ {%laṭakana%} or {%laṭakana-miśra, as,%}
m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40119<pc>0860-c<k1>laq<k2>laq
{#laq#}¦ {%laḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%laḍati,%} &c., to play,
sport, frolic, dally (= rt. {%lal,%} q. v.); cl.
10. P. {%laḍayati, laḍāpayati,%} &c., to throw, toss;
to blame, (in this sense = rt. {%lāḍ%}); cl. 10. P. or
Caus. {%laḍayati,%} to loll the tongue, use or put out
the tongue, stir with the tongue, lick [cf. rt. {%lal%}];
to caress, foster, cherish ({%= lalayati, lālayati,%} see
[Page0861-a+ 76]
rt. {%lal%}); to stir, coagulate; to harass, annoy; to be
harassed or pained (?); to throw up or out (?) ; to
apprise (?); [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">λάλος, λαλέω, λῆρος;</lang>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>lallen.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40120<pc>0861-a<k1>laqita<k2>laqita
{%Laḍita = lalita,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40121<pc>0861-a<k1>laqaka<k2>laqaka
{#laqaka#}¦ {%laḍaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>40122<pc>0861-a<k1>laqaha<k2>laqaha
{#laqaha#}¦ {%laḍaha, as, ā, am,%} handsome, pleasing,
beautiful, charming; ({%as%}), m., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>40123<pc>0861-a<k1>laqqa<k2>laqqa
{#laqqa#}¦ {%laḍḍa, as,%} m. a wretch, villain, bad
man; [cf. {%laṭṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40124<pc>0861-a<k1>laqqu<k2>laqqu
{#laqqu#}¦ {%laḍḍu%} or {%laḍḍuka, as, am,%} m. n. a kind
of sweetmeat (made of coarsely ground gram or
other pulse, or of corn-flour, mixed up with sugar
and spices, and fried in ghee or oil; there are several
varieties of this sweetmeat).
<LEND>

<L>40125<pc>0861-a<k1>laqvA<k2>laqvA
{#laqvA#}¦ {%laḍvā,%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>40126<pc>0861-a<k1>laRq<k2>laRq
{#laRq#}¦ {%laṇḍ%} [cf. rt. {%olaṇḍ%}], cl. 10. P. {%laṇ-%}
{%ḍayati,%} &c., to cast upwards, throw or
toss up; to speak.
<LEND>

<L>40127<pc>0861-a<k1>laRqa<k2>laRqa
{#laRqa#}¦ {%laṇḍa, am,%} n. excrement.
<LEND>

<L>40128<pc>0861-a<k1>laRqra<k2>laRqra
{#laRqra#}¦ {%laṇḍra%} (probably fr. the French
{%Londres%}), London. {%—Laṇḍra-ja, as, ā, am,%} born
or produced in London.
<LEND>

<L>40129<pc>0861-a<k1>latA<k2>latA
{#latA#}¦ {%latā,%} f. (said to be fr. a Sautra rt.
{%lat%}), a creeper, creeping plant, winding plant in
general, (the brows, arms, curls, lightning, &c. are
frequently metaphorically compared to the form of
a creeper; cf. {%bhrū-l˚, bāhu-l˚, taḍil-l˚,%} &c.); a
plant of any kind; a branch; musk-creeper, {%= kastū-%}
{%rikā%} [cf. {%latā-kastūrikā%} below]; N. of various
plants, Panicum Italicum; Trigonella Corniculata;
Cardiospermum Halicacabum; Gærtnera Racemosa;
Panicum Dactylon; {%= kaivartikā; = sārivā;%} the
thong or lash of a whip, a whip; a string or thread
of pearls; a slender or graceful woman; a woman
in general; N. of a metre, four times ˘˘˘˘˘˘
¯˘¯¯, ˘¯¯˘¯¯˘¯; N. of an Apsaras; of a
daughter of Meru and wife of llāvṛta. {%—Latā-kara,%}
{%as,%} m. a particular position of the hands in dancing.
{%—Latā-karañja, as,%} m. Guilandina Bonduc. {%—Latā-%}
{%kastūrikā%} or {%latā-kastūrī,%} f. musk-creeper, a kind
of aromatic medicinal plant or substance (said to
grow in the Dekhan). {%—Latā-gṛha, as, am,%} m.
n. ‘creeper-house,’ a house or bower built or sur-
rounded with creepers, an arbour. {%—Latāṅgī (˚tā-%}
{%aṅ˚),%} f. a kind of plant {%(= karkaṭa-śṛṅgī)%}. {%—La-%}
{%tāṅguli (˚tā-aṅ˚), is,%} f. ‘creeper-finger,’ a branch
serving as a finger. {%—Latā-jihva, as,%} m. ‘creeper-
tongued,’ a snake. {%—Latā-taru, us,%} m., N. of various
trees, Shorea Robusta; Borassus Flabelliformis; the
orange tree. {%—Latā-druma, as,%} m. Shorea Robusta.
{%—Latānana (˚tā-ān˚), as,%} m. a particular position
of the hands in dancing. {%—Latānta (˚tā-an˚), am,%}
n. ‘the end of a creeper,’ a flower. {%—Latā-panasa,%}
{%as,%} m. the water-melon. {%—Latā-parṇa, as,%} m., N.
of Viṣṇu; ({%ī%}), f. Curculigo Orchioides; Trigonella
Fœnum Græcum. {%—Latā-pṛkkā,%} f. Trigonella Cor-
niculata. {%—Latā-pratāna, as,%} m. the tendril of a
creeper. {%—Latā-phala, am,%} n. the fruit of Tricho-
santhes Diœca. {%—Latā-bhadrā,%} f. Pæderia Fœtida.
{%—Latā-bhavana, am,%} n. an arbour {%(= latā-gṛha).%}
{%—Latā-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘creeper-jewel,’ coral. {%—Latā-%}
{%maṇḍapa, as,%} m. ‘creeper-pavilion,’ an arbour,
bower. {%—Latā-marut, t,%} f. Trigonella Corniculata.
{%—Latā-mādhavī,%} f. the Mādhavī creeper, Gærtnera
Racemosa. {%—Latā-mṛga, as,%} m. an ape, monkey.
{%—Latāmbuja (˚tā-am˚), am,%} n. a kind of cucum-
ber. {%—Latā-yaṣṭi, is,%} f. Bengal madder, Rubia
Munjista. {%—Latā-yāvaka, am,%} n. a shoot, sprout,
young or tender pasturage. {%—Latā-rasana, as,%} m.
‘creeper-tongued,’ a snake. {%—Latārka (˚tā-ar˚), as,%}
m. a green onion. {%—Latālaka (˚tā-al), as,%} m. an
elephant. {%—Latālaya (˚tā-āl˚), as,%} m. an abode or
dwelling made of creepers. {%—Latā-valaya, as, am,%}
m. n. {%= latā-gṛha,%} an arbour. {%—Latāvalaya-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessed of bowers or having bracelet-
[Page0861-b+ 73]
like creepers. {%—Latā-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the cocoa-nut
tree; Shorea Robusta. {%—Latā-veṣṭa, as,%} m., N.
of a mountain; a kind of coitus. {%—Latā-veṣṭana%}
or {%latā-veṣṭitaka, am,%} n. ‘creeper-embrace,’ an
embrace or kind of embrace. {%—Latā-veṣṭita, as,%}
m., N. of a mountain. {%—Latā-śaṅkha, as,%} m.
Shorea Robusta. {%—Latodgama (˚tā-ud˚), as,%} m.
the upward climbing of a creeper.
<LEND>

<L>40130<pc>0861-b<k1>latikA<k2>latikA
{%Latikā,%}¦ f. a small creeper or winding plant; a
string of pearls.
<LEND>

<L>40131<pc>0861-b<k1>latu<k2>latu
{#latu#}¦ {%latu, us,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40132<pc>0861-b<k1>lattikA<k2>lattikA
{#lattikA#}¦ {%lattikā,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 147. fr. a Sautra rt. {%lat,%} to hurt), a kind of lizard.
<LEND>

<L>40133<pc>0861-b<k1>ladanI<k2>ladanI
{#ladanI#}¦ {%ladanī,%} f., N. of a female poet.
<LEND>

<L>40134<pc>0861-b<k1>ladDa<k2>ladDa
{#ladDa#}¦ {%laddha (?) , as,%} m. a particular animal.
<LEND>

<L>40135<pc>0861-b<k1>ladDanadeva<k2>ladDanadeva
{#ladDanadeva#}¦ {%laddhana-deva, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40136<pc>0861-b<k1>lap<k2>lap<h>1
{#lap#} 1¦. {%lap,%} cl. 1. P. {%lapati%} (sometimes
also A. {%lapate%} when required by the
metre), {%lalāpa, lapitum,%} to chatter, prate, speak,
talk; to whisper; to wail, lament, weep: Caus. {%lā-%}
{%payati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%alīlapat%} or {%alalāpat,%} to
cause to talk: Desid. {%lilapiṣati:%} Intens. {%lālap-%}
{%yate, lālapti,%} to talk incessantly or excessively,
chatter senselessly, prattle; to bewail, lament; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔ-λακ-ο-ν, λέ-λακ-α, λά-σκ-ω, λακ-ε-ρό-ς, λα-</lang>
<lang n="greek">κέρυζα,</lang> (probably also) <lang n="greek">ὀλοφύρομαι,</lang> according to
some also <lang n="greek">λάλος, λαλέω</lang> (through reduplication, the
final letter of rt. {%lap%} being rejected): Lat. <nsi>loqu-o-r,</nsi>
<nsi>loquax, loquela, Ajus Locu-ti-us, la-mentum;</nsi>
<nsi>labium, labrum, lambo:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>reka:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>su-</nsi>
<nsi>rik-ti, rek-iu:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>labhraim,</nsi> ‘I speak;’ <nsi>labh-</nsi>
<nsi>radh,</nsi> ‘speech, discourse.’]
<LEND>

<L>40137<pc>0861-b<k1>lap<k2>lap<h>2
2. {%lap,%}¦ speaking, talking. See {%abhīlāpa-lap.%}
<LEND>

<L>40138<pc>0861-b<k1>lapana<k2>lapana
{%Lapana, am,%}¦ n. the act of speaking, talking;
the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>40139<pc>0861-b<k1>lapita<k2>lapita
{%Lapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ chattered, spoken, said; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a Śārṅgikā or particular bird (with which
Manda-pāla is said to have allied himself); ({%am%}),
n. voice, speech.
<LEND>

<L>40140<pc>0861-b<k1>lApa<k2>lApa
{%Lāpa, as,%}¦ m. chattering, speaking, talking.
<LEND>

<L>40141<pc>0861-b<k1>lApikA<k2>lApikA
{%Lāpikā%}¦ in {%antar-lāpikā,%} f. a sort of riddle or
enigma; [cf. {%vahir-l˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40142<pc>0861-b<k1>lApin<k2>lApin
{%Lāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ speaking, saying, declaring; be-
wailing, lamenting.
<LEND>

<L>40143<pc>0861-b<k1>lApya<k2>lApya
{%Lāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken, &c.; to be
lamented.
<LEND>

<L>40144<pc>0861-b<k1>lAlapyamAna<k2>lAlapyamAna
{%Lālapyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking incessantly;
wailing or bewailing greatly, supplicating much, (a
form {%lālapyat%} is also found.)
<LEND>

<L>40145<pc>0861-b<k1>lapewikA<k2>lapewikA
{#lapewikA#}¦ {%lapeṭikā,%} f., N. of a place of pil-
grimage.
<LEND>

<L>40146<pc>0861-b<k1>lapeta<k2>lapeta
{#lapeta#}¦ {%lapeta, as,%} m., N. of a demon pre-
siding over a particular disease of children.
<LEND>

<L>40147<pc>0861-b<k1>lapsikA<k2>lapsikA
{#lapsikA#}¦ {%lapsikā,%} N. of a kind of prepared
food.
<LEND>

<L>40148<pc>0861-b<k1>lapsuda<k2>lapsuda
{#lapsuda#}¦ {%lapsuda, am,%} n., Ved. {%= kūrca,%} the
beard (of a goat &c.).
<LEND>

<L>40149<pc>0861-b<k1>lapsudin<k2>lapsudin
{%Lapsudin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. having a beard, bearded
(said of a goat &c.).
<LEND>

<L>40150<pc>0861-b<k1>laba<k2>laba
{#laba#}¦ {%laba, as,%} m., Ved. a quail [cf. {%lava%}];
N. of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 119,
(his patronymic is Aindra.) {%—Laba-sūkta, am,%} n.,
N. of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 119.
<LEND>

<L>40151<pc>0861-b<k1>labDa<k2>labDa
{#labDa#}¦ {%labdha, labdhaka,%} &c. See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40152<pc>0861-b<k1>laB<k2>laB
{#laB#}¦ {%labh%} (probably a later form of rt.
{%rabh%}), cl. 1. A. {%labhate%} (ep. also P. {%la-%}
{%bhati;%} a nasal is also sometimes inserted, e. g.
{%lambhate, alambhata,%} as if fr. a rt. {%lambh%}), {%lebhe,%}
{%lapsyate, alabdha, labdhum,%} to take, seize, take
hold of, catch, catch hold of; to receive, ({%garbhaṃ%}
{%labh,%} to receive an embryo, conceive, become preg-
nant), obtain, get, acquire, enjoy; to meet with,
find, gain possession of, have, possess; to recover,
[Page0861-c+ 81]
regain; to gain the power of doing anything, be
able, be permitted (with infinitive, e. g. {%labhate%}
{%draṣṭum,%} he is able or is allowed to see); to per-
ceive, know, understand, learn: Pass. {%labhyate,%}
Aor. {%alābhi%} or {%alambhi%} (with prep. only {%alambhi%}),
to be taken or received, to be gained or obtained,
&c.; to be found; to be contained; to take (Passive
reflexive): Caus. {%lambhayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ala-%}
{%lambhat,%} to cause to take or receive, cause to obtain,
&c. (generally with a double acc.; rarely with acc.
and inst.); to give, bestow; to obtain, receive; to
find out, discover; to cause to suffer: Desid. {%lipsate%}
(sometimes P. when required by the metre; Ved.
also {%līpsate%}), to wish to seize or take hold of, to
strive to obtain, desire to receive or obtain, long for:
Intens. {%lālabhyate, lālambhīti, lālabdhi;%} [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">λάφυρον, λαμβάνω, εἴληφα, λαῖλαψ,</lang> probably
<lang n="greek">λέβης, λίπτω:</lang> Old Pruss. <nsi>labba-s,</nsi> ‘goods, posses-
sions;’ <nsi>lab-s,</nsi> ‘good:’ Lith. <nsi>laba-s,</nsi> ‘good,’ <nsi>lobis,</nsi>
‘possessions, goods:’ Slav. <nsi>lov-i-ti:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>lamh,</nsi> ‘a
hand.’]
<LEND>

<L>40153<pc>0861-c<k1>labDa<k2>labDa
{%Labdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken, seized, taken hold of,
obtained, received, got, gained, won, acquired; per-
ceived, apprehended, known, obtained (as a quotient
by division &c.; cf. {%labdhi%}); ({%ā%}), f. a woman
whose husband or lover is faithless; epithet of a
particular heroine. {%—Labdha-kāma, as, ā, am,%} one
who has gained his wishes. {%—Labdha-kīrtti, is, is,%}
{%i,%} one who has won fame or glory. {%—Labdha-cetas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} one who has recovered his right mind,
restored to sense, recovered. {%—Labdha-janman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} one who has obtained birth, born. {%—Labdha-%}
{%datta, as,%} m. ‘restoring what one has received,’ a
proper N. {%—Labdha-dhana, as, ā, am,%} one who
has acquired wealth, wealthy. {%—Labdha-nāman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} one who has gained a name, well spoken of,
famous, celebrated. {%—Labdha-nāśa, as,%} m. the loss
of what has been acquired. {%—Labdha-praṇāśa, as,%}
m. the loss of anything acquired; N. of the fourth
book of the Pañca-tantra. {%—Labdha-pratiṣṭha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has acquired fame or renown.
{%—Labdha-praśamana, am,%} n. the securing of
what has been acquired, keeping acquisitions in
safety; (according to Kullūka on Manu VII. 56)
bestowing acquisitions on a proper recipient. {%—Lab-%}
{%dhapraśamana-svastha, as, ā, am,%} at ease by
(reason of) the securing or secure possession of
acquisitions. {%—Labdha-lakṣa, as, ā, am,%} one who
has hit the mark, one who has obtained the prize;
skilled in the use of missiles; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.
{%—Labdha-lakṣya, as, ā, am, = labdha-lakṣa.%}
{%—Labdha-vara, as, ā, am,%} one who has obtained
a boon or favour; ({%as%}), m. a proper N. {%—Labdha-%}
{%varṇa, as, ā, am,%} one who has learnt his letters,
lettered, learned, sage, skilful, clever. {%—Labdhavar-%}
{%ṇa-bhāj, k, k, k,%} honouring the learned. {%—Labdha-%}
{%vidya, as, ā, am,%} one who has acquired knowledge
or wisdom, learned, educated. {%—Labdha-śabda, as,%}
{%ā, am, = labdha-nāman%}. {%—Labdha-sañjña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who has recovered his senses, restored to
consciousness. {%—Labdha-siddhi, is, is, i,%} one who
has attained perfection. {%—Labdhānujña (˚dha-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has obtained leave of absence.
{%—Labdhāntara (˚dha-an˚), as, ā, am,%} one who
has found an opportunity. {%—Labdhāvakāśa (˚dha-%}
{%av˚)%} or {%labdhāvasara (˚dha-av˚), as, ā, am,%} one
who has found an opportunity or gained scope, one
who has obtained leisure. {%—Labdhodaya (˚dha-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has received birth or
production (Kumāra-s. I. 25); one who has attained
prosperity, prosperous.
<LEND>

<L>40154<pc>0861-c<k1>labDaka<k2>labDaka
{%Labdhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ obtained, received, got,
attained; [cf. {%duḥkha-labdhikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40155<pc>0861-c<k1>labDavat<k2>labDavat
{%Labdhavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has obtained or
gained or received.
<LEND>

<L>40156<pc>0861-c<k1>labDavya<k2>labDavya
{%Labdhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be obtained or received,
to be gained or attained, obtainable, &c. See {%labhya.%}
<LEND>

<L>40157<pc>0861-c<k1>labDi<k2>labDi
{%Labdhi, is,%}¦ f. obtaining, gaining, acquisition,
acquirement, attainment; anything gained or ob-
tained, gain, advantage, profit; the quotient (in
arithmetic).
<LEND>
[Page0862-a+ 80]

<L>40158<pc>0862-a<k1>labDf<k2>labDf
{%Labdhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ one who obtains or
receives, a receiver, gainer, recipient.
<LEND>

<L>40159<pc>0862-a<k1>labDrima<k2>labDrima
{%Labdhrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtained, received, attained.
<LEND>

<L>40160<pc>0862-a<k1>labDvA<k2>labDvA
{%Labdhvā,%}¦ ind. having obtained or gained, having
got.
<LEND>

<L>40161<pc>0862-a<k1>laBa<k2>laBa
{%Labha%}¦ in {%iṣal-l˚, dur-l˚,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>40162<pc>0862-a<k1>laBana<k2>laBana
{%Labhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of obtaining or getting,
the meeting with, gaining possession of; the act of
conceiving, conception.
<LEND>

<L>40163<pc>0862-a<k1>laBasa<k2>laBasa
{%Labhasa, as,%}¦ m. a horse's foot-rope, a rope for
tying a horse ({%= vāji-bandhana%}); wealth, riches;
one who asks or solicits, a solicitor.
<LEND>

<L>40164<pc>0862-a<k1>laBya<k2>laBya
{%Labhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be found or met with,
capable of being acquired, acquirable, obtainable,
attainable, procurable, to be reached (see {%prāṃśu-l˚%});
to be understood or known, intelligible; suitable,
proper, fit; to be furnished or provided with.
<LEND>

<L>40165<pc>0862-a<k1>laByamAna<k2>laByamAna
{%Labhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being obtained, being
acquired. &c.
<LEND>

<L>40166<pc>0862-a<k1>lamBa<k2>lamBa
{%Lambha, as,%}¦ m. the obtaining or attaining, attain-
ment, acquirement; finding, meeting with, recovery;
gain; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of fence or enclosure.
<LEND>

<L>40167<pc>0862-a<k1>lamBaka<k2>lamBaka
{%Lambhaka, as,%}¦ m. one who obtains, an obtainer,
one who finds, a finder.
<LEND>

<L>40168<pc>0862-a<k1>lamBana<k2>lamBana
{%Lambhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of obtaining or re-
ceiving, attainment, recovery; the act of procuring,
causing to get; abuse, reviling (?).
<LEND>

<L>40169<pc>0862-a<k1>lamBanIya<k2>lamBanIya
{%Lambhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be obtained or re-
ceived, to be attained, attainable.
<LEND>

<L>40170<pc>0862-a<k1>lamBam<k2>lamBam
{%Lambham,%}¦ ind. having taken or obtained, ({%lam-%}
{%bhaṃ lambham%} repeatedly taking, &c.)
<LEND>

<L>40171<pc>0862-a<k1>lamBayat<k2>lamBayat
{%Lambhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to obtain,
procuring, producing.
<LEND>

<L>40172<pc>0862-a<k1>lamBita<k2>lamBita
{%Lambhita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), caused to
obtain or receive, given, procured, gained; height-
ened, improved; cherished; applied, employed,
adapted; addressed, spoken to; abused (?). {%—Lam-%}
{%bhita-kānti, is, is, i,%} one who has acquired lustre
or beauty.
<LEND>

<L>40173<pc>0862-a<k1>lamBuka<k2>lamBuka
{%Lambhuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. one who is accus-
tomed to receive.
<LEND>

<L>40174<pc>0862-a<k1>lABa<k2>lABa
{%Lābha, as,%}¦ m. obtaining, receiving, gaining, get-
ting, meeting with, finding, acquirement, acquisition;
gain, advantage, profit; capture, conquest; appre-
hension, comprehension, perception, knowledge; en-
joying; {%= prāpti,%} N. of the eleventh astrological
house or lunar mansion; [cf. Slav. <nsi>lovu.</nsi>] {%—Lābha-%}
{%kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} or {%lābha-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing
gain, making or procuring profit, gainful, profitable.
{%—Lābha-lipsā,%} f. greediness of gain, avarice, covet-
ousness. {%—Lābha-lipsu, us, us, u,%} desirous of gain
or profit, covetous, grasping. {%—Lābha-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having gain or profit; being in possession of.
{%—Lābhālābha (˚bha-al˚), au,%} m. du. profit and loss,
advantage and disadvantage, gain and detriment.
<LEND>

<L>40175<pc>0862-a<k1>lABaka<k2>lABaka
{%Lābhaka, as,%}¦ m. gain, profit, advantage.
<LEND>

<L>40176<pc>0862-a<k1>lABam<k2>lABam
{%Lābham,%}¦ ind. {%= lambham.%}
<LEND>

<L>40177<pc>0862-a<k1>lABin<k2>lABin
{%Lābhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ obtaining, gaining, meeting
with, finding, receiving, acquiring.
<LEND>

<L>40178<pc>0862-a<k1>lABya<k2>lABya
{%Lābhya, am,%}¦ n. {%= lābha%} (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>40179<pc>0862-a<k1>lipsA<k2>lipsA
{%Lipsā,%}¦ f. (fr. the Desid.), the desire to gain, wish
to acquire or obtain, desire for possessing.
<LEND>

<L>40180<pc>0862-a<k1>lipsita<k2>lipsita
{%Lipsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished to be obtained,
coveted, desired.
<LEND>

<L>40181<pc>0862-a<k1>lipsitavya<k2>lipsitavya
{%Lipsitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirable to be obtained,
to be wished for.
<LEND>

<L>40182<pc>0862-a<k1>lipsu<k2>lipsu
{%Lipsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to gain or obtain, de-
siring to become possessed of (with acc.), eager for,
desirous of, covetous. {%—Lipsu-tā,%} f. the state of
wishing to obtain, covetousness.
<LEND>

<L>40183<pc>0862-a<k1>lipsya<k2>lipsya
{%Lipsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be wished to be obtained,
desirable to be acquired, eligible.
<LEND>

<L>40184<pc>0862-a<k1>lIpsitavya<k2>lIpsitavya
{%Līpsitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. worthy of being
acquired, desirable.
<LEND>

<L>40185<pc>0862-a<k1>lam<k2>lam
{#lam#}¦ {%lam%} (a later form of rt. {%ram%}), cl.
1. P. {%lamati (= ramati), lalāma (=%}
{%rarāma),%} &c., to delight in, sport, enjoy (sexually).
<LEND>

<L>40186<pc>0862-a<k1>lamaka<k2>lamaka
{%Lamaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= ramaka,%} a lover, wooer, para-
mour, (according to Ujjvala-datta, Uṇādi-s. II. 33,
{%= tīrtha-śodhaka%}); a proper N.
<LEND>
[Page0862-b+ 78]

<L>40187<pc>0862-b<k1>lamna<k2>lamna
{#lamna#}¦ {%lamna, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a particular
tribe.
<LEND>

<L>40188<pc>0862-b<k1>lampaka<k2>lampaka
{#lampaka#}¦ {%lampaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a Jaina
sect.
<LEND>

<L>40189<pc>0862-b<k1>lampawa<k2>lampawa
{#lampawa#}¦ {%lampaṭa, as, ā, am%} (perhaps con-
nected with rt. {%lap;%} cf. {%limpaṭa%}), covetous, greedy,
desirous, lustful; hankering after, addicted to (licen-
tious pleasures), lascivious, dissolute; ({%as%}), m. a
libertine, lecher, dissolute person. {%—Lampaṭa-tā,%} f.
or {%lampaṭa-tva, am,%} n. eagerness, greediness; liber-
tinism, lasciviousness, dissoluteness, lewdness.
<LEND>

<L>40190<pc>0862-b<k1>lampAka<k2>lampAka
{%Lampāka, as, ā, am, = lampaṭa; (as),%}¦ m., N.
of a country ({%= muraṇḍa;%} according to some the
district of Lamghan in Cabul).
<LEND>

<L>40191<pc>0862-b<k1>lampA<k2>lampA
{#lampA#}¦ {%lampā,%} f., N. of a town; of a king-
dom. {%—Lampā-paṭaha, as,%} m. a kind of drum ({%=%}
{%pratipatti-paṭaha, ṭaṭṭarī%}).
<LEND>

<L>40192<pc>0862-b<k1>lamPa<k2>lamPa
{#lamPa#}¦ {%lampha, as,%} m. a leap, spring, jump;
[cf. {%jhampa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40193<pc>0862-b<k1>lamPana<k2>lamPana
{%Lamphana, am,%}¦ n. leaping, springing, jumping,
(a form {%ul-lamphana,%} ‘jumping up,’ is given.)
<LEND>

<L>40194<pc>0862-b<k1>lamb<k2>lamb
{#lamb#}¦ {%lamb%} (a later form of rt. {%ramb%}), cl.
1. A. {%lambate%} (sometimes also P. {%lam-%}
{%bati%}), {%lalambe, lambiṣyate, alambiṣṭa, lam-%}
{%bitum,%} to hang down, depend, dangle, hang from,
hang on or upon, depend on or from; to sink, sink
down, go down, decline, fall, set (as the sun); to be
fastened to, be attached to, hold on to, rest on; to
fall behind, stay behind, lag behind, be retarded; to
delay, tarry; to sound (fr. rt. {%ramb;%} cf. rt. {%lambh%}):
Caus. {%lambayati,%} &c., to cause to hang down or
depend, let down; to hang up, suspend; to cause to
be fastened or attached, join; to stretch out, extend;
to depress, (perhaps) discourage; [cf. Lat. <nsi>labi;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>rambus;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>limpian, ge-limp;</nsi> Eng.
<nsi>limp.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40195<pc>0862-b<k1>lamba<k2>lamba
{%Lamba, as, ā, am,%}¦ hanging down, depending,
pendulous, pendent, dangling; hanging on or upon,
attached to; long, tall; expanded, great, large;
spacious, capacious; ({%as%}), m. a perpendicular (in
geometry); complement of latitude, co-latitude (in
astronomy), the arc between the pole of any place
and the zenith; epithet of a particular throw or
move (at a kind of chess or a game like backgam-
mon or draughts); N. of a Muni; of a Daitya; a
present, bribe (?) , {%= nartaka, aṅga, kānta; (ā),%}
f. a kind of bitter gourd or cucumber; N. of one of
the Mātṛs attending upon Skanda; N. of Durgā or
Gaurī; of Lakṣmī; of a daughter of Dakṣa and
wife of Dharma or Manu; of a Rākṣasī. {%—Lamba-%}
{%karṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having pendulous ears, long-
eared; ({%as%}), m. a he-goat, goat; an elephant; a
hawk, falcon; a Rākṣasa; Alangium Hexapetalum;
N. of one of Śiva's attendants; of an ass (in one of
the stories of the Pañca-tantra); of a hare (in the
Pañca-tantra). {%—Lamba-keśa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} hav-
ing hanging or flowing hair. {%—Lamba-keśaka, as,%}
m. ‘long-haired,’ N. of a Muni. {%—Lamba-guṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. the sine of the co-latitude (in astronomy).
{%—Lamba-jaṭhara, as, ā, am,%} big-bellied. {%—Lam-%}
{%ba-jihva, as, ā, am,%} letting the tongue hang out;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Rākṣasa. {%—Lamba-jyā%} or {%lamba-%}
{%jyakā,%} f. the sine of the co-latitude (in astronomy).
{%—Lamba-dantā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= saiṃhalī).%}
{%—Lamba-payodharā,%} f. a woman with large or
pendent breasts; N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
upon Skanda. {%—Lamba-rekhā,%} f. the complement
of latitude, co-latitude (in astronomy). {%—Lamba-%}
{%vījā,%} f. {%= lamba-dantā%}. {%—Lamba-sphic, k, k, k,%}
having large or protuberant buttocks. {%—Lambākṣa%}
{%(˚ba-ak˚), as,%} m., N. of a Muni. {%—Lambālaka%}
{%(˚ba-al˚), as, ā, am,%} having pendulous curls or
ringlets. {%—Lambālaka-tva, am,%} n. pendulosity of
ringlets. {%—Lambodara (˚ba-ud˚), as, ī, am,%} having
a large or protuberant belly, pot-bellied; ({%as%}), m. a
voracious person, glutton; N. of Gaṇeśa; of a king;
of a Muni; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a female demon. {%—Lam-%}
{%boṣṭha (˚ba-oṣ˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having a large
[Page0862-c+ 76]
or prominent under-lip; ({%as%}), m. a camel, (also
written {%lambauṣṭha.%})
<LEND>

<L>40196<pc>0862-c<k1>lambaka<k2>lambaka
{%Lambaka, as,%}¦ m. a perpendicular (in geometry);
the complement of latitude, co-latitude (in astro-
nomy); N. of a particular implement or vessel; N.
of the fifteenth astronomical Yoga; N. of the larger
sections or books of the Kathā-sarit-sāgara (of which
there are eighteen, containing in all 124 Taraṅgas
or chapters); ({%ikā%}), f. the uvula or soft palate.
{%—Lambikā-kokilā,%} f., N. of a deity.
<LEND>

<L>40197<pc>0862-c<k1>lambana<k2>lambana
{%Lambana, as, ā, am,%}¦ hanging down, depending,
pendulous; causing to hang down; ({%as%}), m., N. of
Śiva; phlegm, the phlegmatic humor; ({%am%}), n.
hanging down, depending, descending, falling; fringe;
a long necklace (depending from the neck to the
navel); the parallax in longitude (of the moon), the
interval of the lines between the earth's centre and
surface; epithet of a particular mode of fighting;
N. of a Varṣa in Kuśa-dvīpa. {%—Lambana-vidhi,%}
{%is,%} m. the rule for calculating the above parallax (in
astronomy).
<LEND>

<L>40198<pc>0862-c<k1>lambamAna<k2>lambamAna
{%Lambamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ hanging down, depend-
ing, descending, dangling, falling, going down;
being large or bulky.
<LEND>

<L>40199<pc>0862-c<k1>lambikA<k2>lambikA
{%Lambikā,%}¦ f. See under {%lambaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40200<pc>0862-c<k1>lambita<k2>lambita
{%Lambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ hanging down, pendent;
suspended; sunk, gone down, set; laying hold of,
attached to, supported or resting on; {%= vi-lambita,%}
slow (of time in music).
<LEND>

<L>40201<pc>0862-c<k1>lambin<k2>lambin
{%Lambin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hanging down, depending, pen-
dent, hanging down as far as, hanging on or upon;
({%inī%}), f. one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>40202<pc>0862-c<k1>lambuka<k2>lambuka
{%Lambuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a serpent-demon; N. of
the fifteenth astronomical Yoga, (for {%lambaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>40203<pc>0862-c<k1>lambuzA<k2>lambuzA
{%Lambuṣā,%}¦ f. a necklace of seven strings.
<LEND>

<L>40204<pc>0862-c<k1>lamB<k2>lamB
{#lamB#}¦ {%lambh%} (= rt. {%rambh%}), cl. 1. A.
{%lambhate,%} &c., to sound.
<LEND>

<L>40205<pc>0862-c<k1>lamBa<k2>lamBa
{#lamBa#}¦ {%lambha, lambhana,%} &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40206<pc>0862-c<k1>lay<k2>lay
{#lay#}¦ {%lay%} (= rt. {%ray%}), cl. 1. A. {%layate,%}
&c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>40207<pc>0862-c<k1>laya<k2>laya
{#laya#}¦ {%laya, layana,%} &c. See p. 868, cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>40208<pc>0862-c<k1>laramAnATa<k2>laramAnATa
{#laramAnATa#}¦ {%laramā-nātha, as,%} m., N. of an
author; [cf. {%ralamā-nātha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40209<pc>0862-c<k1>larb<k2>larb
{#larb#}¦ {%larb,%} cl. 1. P. {%larbati,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>40210<pc>0862-c<k1>lal<k2>lal
{#lal#}¦ {%lal%} (= rt. {%laḍ%}), cl. 1. P. A. {%lalati,%}
{%lalate,%} &c., to play, sport, frolic, dally;
to play (with the tongue); cl. 10. P. {%lalayati,%} &c.,
to loll the tongue, &c. (see rt. {%laḍ%}): Caus. P. {%lāla-%}
{%yati,%} &c. (according to some also {%lalayati%}), to cause
to sport or dally; to caress, fondle, coax, cherish,
nurse, love; A. {%lālayate,%} &c., to desire, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40211<pc>0862-c<k1>lala<k2>lala
{%Lala, as, ā, am,%}¦ sporting, frolicking, playful;
lolling, wagging; wishing, desirous. {%—Lala-jihva =%}
{%lalaj-jihva%} below.
<LEND>

<L>40212<pc>0862-c<k1>lalat<k2>lalat
{%Lalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ playing, sporting, dallying;
playing with the tongue, &c. {%—Lalaj-jihva, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} playing with the tongue, lolling the tongue,
moving the tongue hither and thither; fierce, savage;
({%as%}), m. a camel; a dog. {%—Lalad-ambu, us,%} m. a
particular plant ({%= limpāka%}).
<LEND>

<L>40213<pc>0862-c<k1>lalana<k2>lalana
{%Lalana, as, ā, am,%}¦ playing, coruscating (said of
light, colour, &c.); sporting; ({%as%}), m., N. of various
plants, {%= sāla, priyāla; (ā),%} f. a wanton woman;
a woman (in general), a wife; the tongue; N. of
several metres, four times ¯˘˘¯¯, ¯˘˘¯˘˘¯;
four times ¯˘˘¯¯, ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯; a particular
kind of Gāthā; N. of a mythical being; ({%am%}), n.
play, sport, pleasure, dalliance; the playing or mov-
ing to and fro of the tongue; lolling the tongue.
{%—Lalanā-priya, as, ā, am,%} dear to women, liked
by females; ({%as%}), m. Nauclea Cadamba; ({%am%}), n.
{%= hrī-vera,%} a kind of drug. {%—Lalanā-varūthin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} surrounded by a troop of women.
<LEND>

<L>40214<pc>0862-c<k1>lalanikA<k2>lalanikA
{%Lalanikā,%}¦ f. a little woman, a miserable woman.
<LEND>

<L>40215<pc>0862-c<k1>lalantikA<k2>lalantikA
{%Lalantikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%lalantī,%} fem. of {%lalat%}), a long
pendulous necklace; a lizard, chameleon.
<LEND>
[Page0863-a+ 81]

<L>40216<pc>0863-a<k1>lalamAna<k2>lalamAna
{%Lalamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sporting, playing, dallying.
<LEND>

<L>40217<pc>0863-a<k1>lalAka<k2>lalAka
{%Lalāka, as,%}¦ m. the penis.
<LEND>

<L>40218<pc>0863-a<k1>lalita<k2>lalita
{%Lalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sported, played, playing, sport-
ing, dallying, wanton, frolicsome, amorous, volup-
tuous; lovely, handsome, beautiful, graceful, elegant,
naive, simple, artless, gay, cheerful; soft, gentle;
pleasing, charming, pleasant, agreeable, wished for,
desired, loved; trembling, tremulous, shaken; {%= ca-%}
{%lita; (am),%} ind. sweetly, agreeably, gracefully;
({%as%}), m. epithet of a particular position of the hands
in dancing; N. of a particular musical scale or Rāga,
(according to some {%lalitā,%} f.); ({%ā%}), f. a wanton
woman, a woman in general; musk; N. of a god-
dess; of a form of Durgā or Pārvatī; of a Gopī
(identified with Durgā and Rādhikā); of a river;
of various metres, 30 + 32 instants; four times
˘˘˘˘˘˘¯¯¯¯˘¯; four times ¯¯˘¯˘˘˘¯
˘¯˘¯; four times ¯˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯;
four times ¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯;
twice ¯˘¯˘˘¯˘¯, ˘˘¯˘˘˘˘¯˘¯; ({%am%}), n.
sport, dalliance, amorous gesture, love; grace, beauty,
charm, charmingness, gracefulness of gait, softness
and delicacy of motion, languid gestures in a woman
(expressive of amorous sentiment, ‘lolling,’ ‘lan-
guishing, ‘&c.); any natural and artless act (as that
of a child); simplicity, innocency, ingenuousness; N.
of two metres, four times ˘˘˘˘˘˘˘˘¯˘˘¯;
four times ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯¯¯¯˘¯; N. of a town.
{%—Lalita-caitya, as,%} m., N. of a particular Caitya.
{%—Lalita-tāla, as,%} m., N. of a particular time (in
music). {%—Lalita-pada, as, ā, am,%} consisting of
amorous words; elegantly composed; a kind of
metre, four times ˘˘˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯¯. {%—Lalita-%}
{%pada-bandhana, am,%} n. an amorous composition
in verse, a metrical composition treating of love.
{%—Lalita-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Lalita-%}
{%purāṇa, am,%} n. {%= lalita-vistara-purāṇa%}. {%—La-%}
{%lita-prahāra, as,%} m. a soft or gentle blow. {%—La-%}
{%lita-mādhava, am,%} n., N. of a drama by Rūpa.
{%—Lalita-lalita, as, ā, am,%} excessively beautiful,
very handsome. {%—Lalita-locana, as, ā, am,%} beauti-
ful-eyed; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the daughter of a Vidyā-dhara
Vāma-datta. {%—Lalita-vanitā,%} f. a lovely woman.
{%—Lalita-vistara, as,%} m. or {%lalita-vistara-purā-%}
{%ṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Sūtra work giving a detailed
record of the simple and natural acts in the life of
Buddha or Śākya-muni. {%—Lalita-vyūha, as,%} m.
epithet of a particular kind of Samādhi or meditation
(with Buddhists); N. of a Deva-putra; of a Bodhi-
sattva. {%—Lalitā-tṛtīyā, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra
work. {%—Lalitā-tṛtīya,%} f. epithet of a particular
third day. {%—Lalitāditya (˚ta-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of
a king of Kaśmīra. {%—Lalitāditya-pura, am,%} n.,
N. of a town founded by Lalitāditya. {%—Lalitā-pañ-%}
{%camī,%} f. the fifth day of the moon's increase in
the month Āśvina on which the worship of the
goddess Lalitā or Pārvatī is celebrated. {%—Lalitāpīḍa%}
{%(˚ta-āp˚), as,%} m., N. of a king of Kaśmīra. {%—La-%}
{%litābhinaya (˚ta-abh˚), as,%} m. erotic performance,
representation of love scenes. {%—Lalitā-mādhava =%}
{%lalita-mādhava%}. {%—Lalitācana-candrikā (˚tā-%}
{%ar˚),%} f., N. of a work on the worship of Lalitā.
{%—Lalitārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having an
amorous meaning. {%—Lalitārtha-bandha, as, ā, am,%}
composed in words of love or in words having an
amorous meaning. {%—Lalitā-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a
particular religious observance. {%—Lalitā-ṣaṣṭhī,%}
f. epithet of a particular sixth day. {%—Lalitā-sap-%}
{%tamī,%} f. epithet of the seventh day in the light half
of the month Bhādra.
<LEND>

<L>40219<pc>0863-a<k1>lalitaka<k2>lalitaka
{%Lalitaka%}¦ or {%lalitika, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>40220<pc>0863-a<k1>laliTa<k2>laliTa
{%Lalitha, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>40221<pc>0863-a<k1>lalItikA<k2>lalItikA
{%Lalītikā,%}¦ f., N. of a place of pilgrimage.
<LEND>

<L>40222<pc>0863-a<k1>lAla<k2>lAla
{%Lāla, as,%}¦ m., N. of an astronomer; ({%ā%}), f. saliva,
spittle, slaver. {%—Lāla-candra, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Lāla-vat, ān, atī, at%} ({%lāla%} for {%lālā%}), causing
saliva to flow. {%—Lāla-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of an astro-
nomer. {%—Lālā-bhakṣa, as,%} m. ‘having saliva for
food, ‘N. of the hell appropriated to those who eat
their meals without first offering food to the gods,
to the Manes, or to guests. {%—Lālā-meha, as,%} m.
[Page0863-b+ 79]
passing mucous urine. {%—Lālā-viṣa, as, ā, am,%}
whose saliva is poison (said of venomous insects).
{%—Lālā-srava, as,%} m. ‘distilling saliva,’ a spider.
{%—Lālā-srāva, as,%} m. a flow of saliva or spittle;
‘emitting saliva,’ a spider. {%—Lālā-srāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
causing a flow of saliva.
<LEND>

<L>40223<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlaka<k2>lAlaka
{%Lālaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus. of rt. {%lal%}),
caressing, fondling, coaxing, seducing; ({%ikā%}), f. a
jesting or evasive reply, equivoque.
<LEND>

<L>40224<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlana<k2>lAlana
{%Lālana, as, ī, am,%}¦ caressing, fondling, coaxing;
({%as%}), m. a particular venomous animal, a sort of
mouse; ({%am%}), n. the act of caressing, fondling,
coaxing, dandling; spoiling, indulging, over-indulg-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>40225<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlanIya<k2>lAlanIya
{%Lālanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caressed or fondled or
coaxed.
<LEND>

<L>40226<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlayat<k2>lAlayat
{%Lālayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ caressing, coaxing; stroking.
<LEND>

<L>40227<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlayitavya<k2>lAlayitavya
{%Lālayitavya, as, ā, am, = lālanīya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>40228<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlAya<k2>lAlAya
{%Lālāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%lālāyate,%} &c., to emit saliva,
slaver.
<LEND>

<L>40229<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlAyita<k2>lAlAyita
{%Lālāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ emitting or discharging
saliva.
<LEND>

<L>40230<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlika<k2>lAlika
{%Lālika, as,%}¦ m. a buffalo; [cf. {%lāvika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40231<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlita<k2>lAlita
{%Lālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caressed, tenderly cherished,
fondled, nursed, coaxed, indulged, seduced; loved,
desired; ({%am%}), n. pleasure, joy, love.
<LEND>

<L>40232<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlitaka<k2>lAlitaka
{%Lālitaka, as,%}¦ m. a fondling, darling, little favourite,
pet.
<LEND>

<L>40233<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlitya<k2>lAlitya
{%Lālitya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%lalita%}), loveliness, grace,
beauty, pleasingness, pleasantness, sweetness, loveli-
ness, charm, grace, beauty; gaiety; amorous or lan-
guid gestures.
<LEND>

<L>40234<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlin<k2>lAlin
{%Lālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ caressing, fondling, coaxing; ({%ī%}),
m. a seducer; ({%inī%}), f. a wanton.
<LEND>

<L>40235<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlIla<k2>lAlIla
{%Lālīla, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>40236<pc>0863-b<k1>lAlya<k2>lAlya
{%Lālya, as, ā, am, = lālanīya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>40237<pc>0863-b<k1>lalalla<k2>lalalla
{#lalalla#}¦ {%lalalla,%} an onomatopoetic word
representing a lisping sound.
<LEND>

<L>40238<pc>0863-b<k1>lalAwa<k2>lalAwa
{#lalAwa#}¦ {%lalāṭa, am,%} n. (a later form of {%ra-%}
{%rāṭa,%} q. v.), the forehead, brow, ({%lalāṭe,%} ‘on the
forehead, in front;’ the destiny of every individual
is conceived by the Hindūs to be written on the
forehead.) {%—Lalāṭa-taṭa, am,%} n. the slope of the
forehead, the forehead. {%—Lalāṭan-tapa, as, ā, am,%}
burning the forehead (as the sun). {%—Lalāṭa-paṭṭa,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%lalāṭa-paṭṭikā,%} f. ‘the plate’ or flat surface
of the forehead, the forehead; a tiara, fillet. {%—La-%}
{%lāṭa-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Lalāṭa-pha-%}
{%laka, am,%} n. the flat surface of the forehead. {%—La-%}
{%lāṭa-rekhā,%} f. a line on the forehead supposed to
indicate long life; a wrinkled or corrugated brow;
a coloured sectarial mark on the forehead. {%—Lalā-%}
{%ṭākṣa (˚ṭa-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} having an eye in the
forehead; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>40239<pc>0863-b<k1>lalAwaka<k2>lalAwaka
{%Lalāṭaka, am,%}¦ n. a beautiful forehead; the fore-
head, brow; ({%ikā%}), f. an ornament worn on the fore-
head; a mark made with sandal on the forehead.
<LEND>

<L>40240<pc>0863-b<k1>lalAwikAya<k2>lalAwikAya
{%Lalāṭikāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%lalāṭikāyate,%} &c., to re-
present or be like a mark on the forehead.
<LEND>

<L>40241<pc>0863-b<k1>lalAwikAyamAna<k2>lalAwikAyamAna
{%Lalāṭikāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ representing a mark
on the forehead.
<LEND>

<L>40242<pc>0863-b<k1>lalAwUla<k2>lalAwUla
{%Lalāṭūla, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a high or handsome
forehead.
<LEND>

<L>40243<pc>0863-b<k1>lalAwya<k2>lalAwya
{%Lalāṭya, as,%}¦ &c. {%= rarāṭya,%} of or belonging to
the forehead.
<LEND>

<L>40244<pc>0863-b<k1>lalAma<k2>lalAma
{#lalAma#}¦ {%lalāma, am,%} n. (probably connected
with rt. {%lal;%} cf. {%lalāṭa%}), a mark or spot on the
forehead, mark or spot in general; an ornament
for the forehead, ornament, decoration, embellish-
ment in general, (in this sense also {%as,%} m.); a
coloured mark on the forehead of a horse or bull,
&c.; a sign, symbol, token, mark of caste, &c.; a
banner, flag, ensign; a line, row; any one who is
the ornament of his class, any eminent or principal
person, (in this sense even {%am,%} n.); anything the
best of its kind, any grand or beautiful object; emi-
nence, beauty, dignity; a tail; a mane; a horn (?) ;
({%as, ī, am%}), having a mark or spot on the forehead,
marked with a blaze (said of cattle); beautiful, agree-
[Page0863-c+ 77]
able, charming; ({%as%}), m. a horse; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
female demon (Ved.); a kind of ornament for the
ears. {%—Lalāma-gu, us,%} m., Ved. a facetious term for
the penis. {%—Lalāma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a mark
or spot; having an ornament.
<LEND>

<L>40245<pc>0863-c<k1>lalAmaka<k2>lalAmaka
{%Lalāmaka, am,%}¦ n. a chaplet or wreath of flowers
worn on the forehead. {%—Lalāmaka-rūpaka, am,%}
n. (in rhetoric) a flowery metaphor.
<LEND>

<L>40246<pc>0863-c<k1>lalAman<k2>lalAman
{%Lalāman, a,%}¦ n. {%= lalāma,%} an ornament, decora-
tion; a mark, sectarial mark; sign, symbol, token;
a banner, flag; any one who is the ornament of his
class; any chief or principal person or thing; a tail;
a horn (?) ; a species of stanza having ten syllables
in the first two Pādas, eleven in the third, and thir-
teen in the fourth; a horse, (in this sense probably
{%ā,%} m.); {%= ramya; = sukha.%}
<LEND>

<L>40247<pc>0863-c<k1>lalita<k2>lalita
{#lalita#}¦ {%lalita,%} &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40248<pc>0863-c<k1>lalyAna<k2>lalyAna
{#lalyAna#}¦ {%lalyāna,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>40249<pc>0863-c<k1>lalla<k2>lalla
{#lalla#}¦ {%lalla, as,%} m., N. of an astronomer;
of certain other persons; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a courtezan
(in Rāja-tarangiṇī VIII. 1834, &c.). {%—Lalla-vā-%}
{%rāha-suta, as,%} m. the son of Lalla and Vārāha, N.
of the author of the Nakṣatra-samuccaya.
<LEND>

<L>40250<pc>0863-c<k1>lalliya<k2>lalliya
{#lalliya#}¦ {%lalliya, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40251<pc>0863-c<k1>lallujIlAla<k2>lallujIlAla
{#lallujIlAla#}¦ {%lallujīlāla, as,%} m., N. of an
author.
<LEND>

<L>40252<pc>0863-c<k1>lava<k2>lava
{#lava#}¦ {%lava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%lū%}), the act of
cutting, reaping (of corn), mowing, plucking or
gathering (of flowers, &c.); that which is cut or
shorn off, a shorn fleece, wool, hair; anything cut
off, a section, fragment, fraction, piece, particle, bit,
drop, small piece, small quantity, little, ({%jala-l˚,%} a
drop of water; {%tṛṇa-l˚,%} a piece of straw; {%aparā-%}
{%dha-l˚,%} a little blame); a minute division of time,
the sixtieth of a twinkling, half a second, a moment,
an instant, (according to others (1/4000) or (1/5400) or
(1/20250) of a Muhūrta); a degree (in astronomy);
the numerator of a fraction; loss, destruction; sport
[cf. {%lala%}]; N. of a son of Rāma-candra and Sītā,
(he and Rāma's other son Kuśa were the two rhap-
sodists who first committed the Rāmāyaṇa to memory
and recited it at assemblies, see Rāmāyaṇa I. 4. and
cf. {%kuśīlava%}); N. of a king of Kaśmīra (father of
Kuśa); a kind of quail, Perdix Chinensis; ({%am%}),
ind. a little; {%lavam api,%} even a little; ({%am%}), n.
nutmeg; cloves; the root of Andropogon Muricatus.
{%—Lava-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—Lava-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} lasting only for a moment. {%—Lava-%}
{%śas,%} ind. in small pieces or fragments, bit by bit,
piecemeal, in minute divisions or instants, after an
instant, after some moments. {%—Lavepsu (˚va-īp˚),%}
{%us, us, u,%} wishing to cut or reap.
<LEND>

<L>40253<pc>0863-c<k1>lavaka<k2>lavaka
{%Lavaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who cuts or reaps, &c.,
a cutter, reaper, shearer; N. of a particular substance,
(see {%sa-l˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>40254<pc>0863-c<k1>lavaNga<k2>lavaNga
{%Lavaṅga, as,%}¦ m. the clove tree; ({%am%}), n. cloves.
{%—Lavaṅga-kalikā,%} f. cloves.
<LEND>

<L>40255<pc>0863-c<k1>lavaNgaka<k2>lavaNgaka
{%Lavaṅgaka, am,%}¦ n. cloves; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of a
woman.
<LEND>

<L>40256<pc>0863-c<k1>lavana<k2>lavana
{%Lavana, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who cuts, &c., a cutter,
reaper; ({%ī%}), f. a particular fruit tree, Anona Reticu-
lata; ({%am%}), n. the act of cutting, reaping, mowing,
&c. (of corn); an implement for cutting, sickle,
knife, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40257<pc>0863-c<k1>lavanIya<k2>lavanIya
{%Lavanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut, to be reaped or
mown.
<LEND>

<L>40258<pc>0863-c<k1>lavanya<k2>lavanya
{%Lavanya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a particular tribe of men.
<LEND>

<L>40259<pc>0863-c<k1>lavaya<k2>lavaya
{%Lavaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%lavayati,%} &c., {%= lavam āca-%}
{%ṣṭe,%} Pāṇ. I. 1, 58, Vārtt. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40260<pc>0863-c<k1>lavAka<k2>lavAka
{%Lavāka, as,%}¦ m. an implement for cutting, sickle,
reaping-hook; the act of cutting.
<LEND>

<L>40261<pc>0863-c<k1>lavARaka<k2>lavARaka
{%Lavāṇaka, as,%}¦ m. an implement for cutting, a
sickle, reaping-hook.
<LEND>

<L>40262<pc>0863-c<k1>lavi<k2>lavi
{%Lavi, is, is, i,%}¦ cutting, sharp, edged (as a tool or
instrument); ({%is%}), m. {%= lavitra.%}
<LEND>

<L>40263<pc>0863-c<k1>lavitra<k2>lavitra
{%Lavitra, am,%}¦ n. an implement for cutting, a
sickle, reaping-hook, scythe.
<LEND>
[Page0864-a+ 77]

<L>40264<pc>0864-a<k1>lavya<k2>lavya
{%Lavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut, to be mown or
hewn down.
<LEND>

<L>40265<pc>0864-a<k1>lavawa<k2>lavawa
{#lavawa#}¦ {%lavaṭa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40266<pc>0864-a<k1>lavaRa<k2>lavaRa
{#lavaRa#}¦ {%lavaṇa, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%lū;%} according to others for original {%ravaṇa%}),
salt, (especially) sea-salt, rock or fossil salt, ({%go-la-%}
{%vaṇa,%} as much salt as is given to a cow); factitious
salt or salt obtained from saline earth; ({%as%}), m. salt-
ness, saline taste; the sea of salt water; N. of a
hell; of a Rākṣasa or Daitya; of a king belonging
to the family of Hari-ścandra; of a son of Rāma;
of a river; {%= bala, asthi-bheda (?) ; (ā),%} f. lustre,
beauty [cf. {%lāvaṇya%}]; a species of plant ({%= mahā-%}
{%jyotiṣmatī%}); N. of a small river in Tirhut; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of several rivers; ({%as, ā, am%}), saline, salt,
briny, brinish; handsome, beautiful. {%—Lavaṇa-kiṃ-%}
{%śukā,%} f. a species of plant. {%—Lavaṇa-kṣāra, as,%}
m. a kind of salt {%(= loṇāra)%}. {%—Lavaṇa-khāni, is,%}
f. a salt-mine; the district of Sambher in Ajmere
celebrated for its fossil salt. {%—Lavaṇa-jala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having salt water; ({%as%}), m. the sea, ocean.
{%—Lavaṇa-jala-dhi%} or {%lavaṇa-jala-nidhi, is,%} m.
‘receptacle of salt water,’ the sea, ocean. {%—Lavaṇa-%}
{%jalodbhava (˚la-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} produced in the
sea; ({%as%}), m. a muscle, shell. {%—Lavaṇa-tā,%} f. or
{%lavaṇa-tva, am,%} n. saltness, brinishness. {%—Lavaṇa-%}
{%tṛṇa, am,%} n. a kind of grass. {%—Lavaṇa-toya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having salt water; ({%as%}), m. the sea, ocean.
{%—Lavaṇa-dhenu, us,%} f. an offering of salt, (see
{%dhenu.%}) {%-Lavaṇa-pāṭalikā,%} f. a salt-bag. {%—La-%}
{%vaṇa-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Lavaṇa-pra-%}
{%gāḍha, as, ā, am,%} strongly impregnated with salt.
{%—Lavaṇa-mada, as,%} m. {%= lavaṇa-kṣāra%}. {%—La-%}
{%vaṇa-mantra, as,%} m. a prayer accompanied with
an offering of salt. {%—Lavaṇa-meha, as,%} m. a kind
of urinary disease (discharging salty urine). {%—La-%}
{%vaṇa-mehin, ī, inī, i,%} suffering from the above
disease. {%—Lavaṇa-vāri, is, is, i,%} having salt water;
({%i%}), n. the sea, ocean. {%—Lavaṇa-samudra, as,%} m.
the sea of salt water, salt-sea, sea, ocean. {%—Lavaṇa-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n., N. of a place. {%—Lavaṇākara (˚ṇa-%}
{%āk˚), as,%} m. a salt-mine; (metaphorically) a mine
of grace or beauty. {%—Lavaṇāntaka (˚ṇa-an˚), as,%}
m. the slayer of the Rākṣasa Lavaṇa, N. of Śatru-
ghna. {%—Lavaṇābdhi (˚ṇa-ab˚), is,%} m. ‘receptacle
of salt water, ‘the sea, ocean. {%—Lavaṇābdhi-ja,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘produced from the sea,’ sea-salt. {%—Lava-%}
{%ṇāmbu-rāśi (˚ṇa-am˚), is,%} m. ‘a mass of salt water,’
the sea, ocean. {%—Lavaṇāmbhas (˚ṇa-am˚), as,%} n.
salt water; ({%ās%}), m. ‘having salt water,’ the sea,
ocean. {%—Lavaṇārṇava (˚ṇa-ar˚)%} or {%lavaṇālaya%}
{%(˚ṇa-āl˚), as,%} m. the sea of salt water, ocean. {%—La-%}
{%vaṇāśva (˚ṇa-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—La-%}
{%vaṇottama (˚ṇa-ut˚), am,%} n. ‘best salt,’ river or
rock salt; nitre. {%—Lavaṇottha (˚ṇa-ut˚), am,%} n. a
kind of salt {%(= loṇāra)%}. {%—Lavaṇotsa (˚ṇa-ut˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Lavaṇoda (˚ṇa-uda),%}
{%am,%} n. salt water, brine; ({%as%}), m. ‘containing salt
water, ‘the sea of salt water, ocean. {%—Lavaṇodaka%}
{%(˚ṇa-ud˚), am,%} n. salt water, brine; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having or containing salt water; ({%as%}), m. the sea,
ocean. {%—Lavaṇodadhi (˚ṇa-ud˚), is,%} m. ‘receptacle
of salt water,’ the sea, ocean.
<LEND>

<L>40267<pc>0864-a<k1>lavaRaya<k2>lavaRaya
{%Lavaṇaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%lavaṇayati,%} to salt, season
with salt.
<LEND>

<L>40268<pc>0864-a<k1>lavaRasya<k2>lavaRasya
{%Lavaṇasya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%lavaṇasyati,%} to desire salt,
long for salt.
<LEND>

<L>40269<pc>0864-a<k1>lavaRAraja<k2>lavaRAraja
{%Lavaṇāraja, am,%}¦ n. a kind of salt ({%= loṇāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>40270<pc>0864-a<k1>lavaRiman<k2>lavaRiman
{%Lavaṇiman, ā,%}¦ m. saltness; grace, beauty, loveli-
ness.
<LEND>

<L>40271<pc>0864-a<k1>lavaRIya<k2>lavaRIya
{%Lavaṇīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%lavaṇīyati,%} &c., (probably)
to wish for salt (Pāṇ. VII. 1, 51).
<LEND>

<L>40272<pc>0864-a<k1>lavana<k2>lavana
{#lavana#}¦ {%lavana,%} &c. See p. 863, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40273<pc>0864-a<k1>lavalI<k2>lavalI
{#lavalI#}¦ {%lavalī,%} f. Averrhoa Acida; a kind
of metre. {%—Lavalī-phala, am,%} n. the fruit of the
above.
<LEND>

<L>40274<pc>0864-a<k1>laveraRi<k2>laveraRi
{#laveraRi#}¦ {%laveraṇi, is,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>
[Page0864-b+ 78]

<L>40275<pc>0864-b<k1>lavya<k2>lavya
{#lavya#}¦ {%lavya.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40276<pc>0864-b<k1>laS<k2>laS
{#laS#}¦ {%laś,%} cl. 10. P. {%lāśayati,%} &c., to
exercise an art, do anything scientifically
(= rt. 1. {%las,%} cl. 10, of which it is sometimes con-
sidered a various reading).
<LEND>

<L>40277<pc>0864-b<k1>laSuna<k2>laSuna
{#laSuna#}¦ {%laśuna, am,%} n., (rarely) {%as,%} m. garlic,
(sometimes written {%lasuna.%})
<LEND>

<L>40278<pc>0864-b<k1>laSunIya<k2>laSunIya
{%Laśunīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ garlicky.
<LEND>

<L>40279<pc>0864-b<k1>laz<k2>laz
{#laz#}¦ {%laṣ,%} cl. 1. 4. P. A. {%laṣati, -te,%}
{%laṣyati, -te, lalāṣa, leṣe, laṣiṣ-%}
{%yati, -te, alāṣīt%} or {%alaṣīt, alaṣiṣṭa, laṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to wish, desire, long for, be eager for (with
acc.); cl. 10. P. {%lāṣayati,%} to exercise an art, do
anything scientifically, (in this sense a various reading
for rt. {%laś%} above): Pass. {%laṣyate,%} Aor. {%alāṣi:%}
Caus. {%lāṣayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%alīlaṣat:%} Desid.
{%lilaṣiṣati:%} Intens. {%lālaṣyate, lālaṣṭi,%} to long
for eagerly; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λά-ω,</lang> (Dor. <lang n="greek">λῶ, λῇς, λῇ,</lang> 3rd
pl. <lang n="greek">λῶντι</lang>), <lang n="greek">λῆ-μα, λῆ-σι-ς, λι-λα-ί-ο-μαι, λε-λίη-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">λία-ν, λαρός, λωΐων, λήλαντος,</lang> probably <lang n="greek">λα-μία,</lang>
<lang n="greek">λάμος, λάρυγξ, λαιμός, λαίτμα;</lang> Lat. <nsi>las-c-</nsi>
<nsi>ivu-s;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>lus-tu-s, lus-to-n;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>lust,</nsi>
<nsi>lyst, lystan;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>las-k-a-ti,</nsi> ‘to flatter;’ Bohem.
<nsi>las-ka,</nsi> ‘love.’]
<LEND>

<L>40280<pc>0864-b<k1>lazaRa<k2>lazaRa
{%Laṣaṇa, as,%}¦ &c., one who desires or longs for.
<LEND>

<L>40281<pc>0864-b<k1>lazaRAvatI<k2>lazaRAvatI
{%Laṣaṇā-vatī,%}¦ f., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>40282<pc>0864-b<k1>lazita<k2>lazita
{%Laṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished, desired, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40283<pc>0864-b<k1>lazva<k2>lazva
{%Laṣva, as,%}¦ m. a dancer, actor.
<LEND>

<L>40284<pc>0864-b<k1>lAlazyamARa<k2>lAlazyamARa
{%Lālaṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ eagerly longing for.
<LEND>

<L>40285<pc>0864-b<k1>lazamaRa<k2>lazamaRa
{#lazamaRa#}¦ {%laṣamaṇa, as,%} m. ({%= lakhamaṇa,%}
{%= lakṣmaṇa%}), a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40286<pc>0864-b<k1>lazamAdevI<k2>lazamAdevI
{%Laṣamā-devī,%}¦ f. ({%= lakṣmī-devī%}), N. of a
princess.
<LEND>

<L>40287<pc>0864-b<k1>las<k2>las<h>1
{#las#} 1¦. {%las,%} cl. 1. P. {%lasati, lalāsa%} (3rd
du. {%lesatuḥ%}), {%alāsīt%} or {%alasīt, lasitum,%}
to shine, flash, glitter, coruscate, glance; to appear,
come to light, arise; to sound, resound, (connected
with rt. 1: {%ras%}); to embrace; to play, sport, move
about rapidly, dance, jump, skip about [cf. {%rāsa%}];
cl. 10. P. {%lāsayati,%} &c., to exercise an art, do any-
thing scientifically or skilfully, (in this sense = rts. {%laś,%}
{%laṣ%}): Pass. {%lasyate,%} Aor. {%alāsi,%} &c.: Caus. {%lāsa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%alīlasat,%} to cause to sport or play,
to cause to dance, teach to dance; to dance: Intens.
{%lālasyate,%} (this form does not seem to occur, but
cf. {%lālasa%}); [cf. probably Lat. <nsi>ludo,</nsi> (according to
some) <nsi>lascivus, lascivire.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40288<pc>0864-b<k1>las<k2>las<h>2
2. {%las, as, as, as,%}¦ shining, glittering; [cf. {%a-las.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40289<pc>0864-b<k1>lasa<k2>lasa
{%Lasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, glancing, playing, mov-
ing hither and thither [cf. {%a-lasa%}]; ({%ā%}), f. saffron,
turmeric.
<LEND>

<L>40290<pc>0864-b<k1>lasaka<k2>lasaka
{%Lasaka = lāsaka%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>40291<pc>0864-b<k1>lasat<k2>lasat
{%Lasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shining, glittering, flashing,
glancing; sporting, playing. {%—Lasad-aṃśu, us, us, u,%}
having flashing or glancing rays (said of the sun).
<LEND>

<L>40292<pc>0864-b<k1>lasamAna<k2>lasamAna
{%Lasamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, glittering; sport-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>40293<pc>0864-b<k1>lasita<k2>lasita
{%Lasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ played, sported, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40294<pc>0864-b<k1>lasta<k2>lasta
{%Lasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ embraced, grasped; skilled,
skilful.
<LEND>

<L>40295<pc>0864-b<k1>lastaka<k2>lastaka
{%Lastaka, as,%}¦ m. the middle of a bow (the part
grasped).
<LEND>

<L>40296<pc>0864-b<k1>lastakin<k2>lastakin
{%Lastakin, ī,%}¦ m. a bow.
<LEND>

<L>40297<pc>0864-b<k1>lAsa<k2>lAsa
{%Lāsa, as,%}¦ m. the act of jumping, skipping or
moving about, sporting, dancing, (probably con-
nected with {%rāsa%}); dancing as practised by women;
dalliance, wanton sport; soup, broth, boiled pulse,
pea-water; saliva (? in {%a-lāsa,%} q. v.). {%—Lāsa-vatī,%}
f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>40298<pc>0864-b<k1>lAsaka<k2>lAsaka
{%Lāsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who sports or gambols,
playing; moving hither and thither, going through
various evolutions; ({%as%}), m. a dancer, actor; N. of
Śiva; a peacock; N. of a dancer; embracing, en-
folding, surrounding; ({%ikā%}), f. a female dancer; a
harlot, wanton; a kind of dramatic performance;
({%akī%}), f. a female dancer, dancing girl; ({%am%}), n. =
a turret, tower, room on the top of a building ({%=%}
{%aṭṭaka%}).
<LEND>
[Page0864-c+ 73]

<L>40299<pc>0864-c<k1>lAsayat<k2>lAsayat
{%Lāsayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to dance, causing
to move about.
<LEND>

<L>40300<pc>0864-c<k1>lAsin<k2>lAsin
{%Lāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ moving to and fro, dancing.
<LEND>

<L>40301<pc>0864-c<k1>lAsya<k2>lAsya
{%Lāsya, am,%}¦ n. a dance, dancing; a dance accom-
panied with instrumental music and singing; a dance
in which the emotions of love are mimically repre-
sented, the dance of the Indian dancing girls, a Nach
dance (confined to attitude and gesticulation, with a
shuffling motion of the feet seldom lifted from the
ground; this style is said to have been invented by
Pārvatī and communicated by her to the daughter
of Vāṇāsura, by whom her female friends and com-
panions were instructed in it; it is opposed to the
Tāṇḍava, the more boisterous dance of Śiva and his
followers); a part or particular kind of drama or dra-
matic representation (said to be the occasional intro-
duction of music and singing; also a style of dramatic
composition in which there is abrupt transition from
Prākṛt to Sanskrit and from Sanskrit to Prākṛt,
&c.); ({%as%}), m. a dancer; ({%ā%}), f. a female dancer,
dancing girl. {%—Lāsyāṅga (˚ya-aṅ˚), am,%} n. that
part of a drama in which the Lāsya described above
is introduced.
<LEND>

<L>40302<pc>0864-c<k1>lAsyaka<k2>lAsyaka
{%Lāsyaka, am,%}¦ n. {%= lāsya,%} a dance, dancing in
general.
<LEND>

<L>40303<pc>0864-c<k1>lasikA<k2>lasikA
{#lasikA#}¦ {%lasikā,%} f. spittle, saliva, (perhaps
a later form of {%rasikā,%} or connected with rt. 1. {%las;%}
cf. {%lālā%} fr. rt. {%lal.%})
<LEND>

<L>40304<pc>0864-c<k1>lasIkA<k2>lasIkA
{%Lasīkā,%}¦ f. spittle, saliva; the juice of the sugar-
cane; lymph; matter, pus.
<LEND>

<L>40305<pc>0864-c<k1>lasoParaYja<k2>lasoParaYja
{#lasoParaYja#}¦ {%lasopharañja,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>40306<pc>0864-c<k1>lasta<k2>lasta
{#lasta#}¦ {%lasta, lastaka,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40307<pc>0864-c<k1>laspUjanI<k2>laspUjanI
{#laspUjanI#}¦ {%laspūjanī,%} f., Ved. a large needle.
<LEND>

<L>40308<pc>0864-c<k1>lahakA<k2>lahakA
{#lahakA#}¦ {%lahakā,%} f., see Gaṇa Kṣipakādi to
Pāṇ. VII. 3, 45, Vārtt. 6.
<LEND>

<L>40309<pc>0864-c<k1>lahara<k2>lahara
{#lahara#}¦ {%lahara, as,%} m., N. of a people, (also
read {%lahaḍa, laḍaha%}); N. of a province in Kaśmīra,
(perhaps the present Lahore.)
<LEND>

<L>40310<pc>0864-c<k1>lahari<k2>lahari
{#lahari#}¦ {%lahari, is,%} or {%laharī,%} f. a large wave,
billow.
<LEND>

<L>40311<pc>0864-c<k1>lahika<k2>lahika
{#lahika#}¦ {%lahika, as,%} m. a diminutive from
Lahoḍa.
<LEND>

<L>40312<pc>0864-c<k1>lahoqa<k2>lahoqa
{%Lahoḍa, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40313<pc>0864-c<k1>lahya<k2>lahya
{#lahya#}¦ {%lahya, as,%} m. a proper N.; ({%ās%}), m.
pl. the descendants of Lahya.
<LEND>

<L>40314<pc>0864-c<k1>lA<k2>lA<h>1
{#lA#} 1¦. {%lā,%} cl. 2. P. {%lāti, lalau%} (3rd pl.
{%laluḥ%}), &c., to take, receive, obtain.
<LEND>

<L>40315<pc>0864-c<k1>lA<k2>lA<h>2
2. {%lā, ās,%}¦ f. the act of taking, receiving; the
giving.
<LEND>

<L>40316<pc>0864-c<k1>lAta<k2>lAta
{%Lāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken, received, obtained.
<LEND>

<L>40317<pc>0864-c<k1>lAti<k2>lAti
{%Lāti, is,%}¦ f. taking, receiving, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40318<pc>0864-c<k1>lAtvA<k2>lAtvA
{%Lātvā,%}¦ ind. having taken.
<LEND>

<L>40319<pc>0864-c<k1>lAkinI<k2>lAkinI
{#lAkinI#}¦ {%lākinī,%} f., N. of a Tantra goddess;
[cf. {%rākiṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40320<pc>0864-c<k1>lAkuca<k2>lAkuca
{#lAkuca#}¦ {%lākuca, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%lakuca%}), be-
longing or relating to the Lakuca tree.
<LEND>

<L>40321<pc>0864-c<k1>lAkuci<k2>lAkuci
{%Lākuci, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Lakuca.
<LEND>

<L>40322<pc>0864-c<k1>lAkuwika<k2>lAkuwika
{#lAkuwika#}¦ {%lākuṭika%} for {%lāguḍika%} or (accord-
ing to some) for {%lālāṭika.%}
<LEND>

<L>40323<pc>0864-c<k1>lAkzakI<k2>lAkzakI
{#lAkzakI#}¦ {%lākṣakī,%} f., N. of Sītā.
<LEND>

<L>40324<pc>0864-c<k1>lAkzaRa<k2>lAkzaRa
{#lAkzaRa#}¦ {%lākṣaṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%lakṣaṇa%}),
relating to signs or marks, knowing characteristic
signs or marks.
<LEND>

<L>40325<pc>0864-c<k1>lAkzaRi<k2>lAkzaRi
{%Lākṣaṇi, i,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Lakṣaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>40326<pc>0864-c<k1>lAkzaRika<k2>lAkzaRika
{%Lākṣaṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ knowing marks, acquainted
with signs; relating to marks or signs, indicatory,
characteristic; expressing indirectly or figuratively;
having a figurative or metaphorical meaning, secon-
dary, inferior, subordinate; technical; ({%as%}), m. one
who knows or explains signs; a technical term, a
word implying a definition. {%—Lākṣaṇika-tva, am,%}
n. the expressing by signs or figures.
<LEND>

<L>40327<pc>0864-c<k1>lAkzaRya<k2>lAkzaRya
{%Lākṣaṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ conversant with signs or
[Page0865-a+ 74]
marks, explaining or interpreting signs, relating to a
sign or mark, indicative.
<LEND>

<L>40328<pc>0865-a<k1>lAkzA<k2>lAkzA
{#lAkzA#}¦ {%lākṣā,%} f. (probably a later form of
{%rākṣā,%} and perhaps connected with {%rāga%} fr. rt.
{%rañj,%} to dye; according to some connected with
{%lakṣa,%} from the thousands of insects forming the
red dye), a species of plant (Ved.); a kind of red
dye, lac (obtained from the cochineal insect or a
similar insect as well as from the resin of a particular
tree; according to some the nest of the insect is
formed of a resinous substance used as sealing-wax
and commonly termed Shel-lac); the insect or animal
which produces the red dye. {%—Lākṣā-taru, us,%} m.
the tree Butea Frondosa (the insect being especially
found in this tree). {%—Lākṣā-prasāda%} or {%lākṣā-%}
{%prasādana, as,%} m. the red Lodh tree (an astringent
infusion prepared from its bark is used to fix colour
in dyeing). {%—Lākṣā-rakta, as, ā, am,%} coloured or
dyed with lac. {%—Lākṣā-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. Butea
Frondosa.
<LEND>

<L>40329<pc>0865-a<k1>lAkzika<k2>lAkzika
{%Lākṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to lac, coloured or
dyed with lac, made of lac; relating to a large num-
ber or to a lac, (in this sense fr. {%lakṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>40330<pc>0865-a<k1>lAkzeya<k2>lAkzeya
{#lAkzeya#}¦ {%lākṣeya, as,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>40331<pc>0865-a<k1>lAkzma<k2>lAkzma
{#lAkzma#}¦ {%lākṣma, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%lakṣmī%}), ad-
dressed to Lakṣmī.
<LEND>

<L>40332<pc>0865-a<k1>lAkzmaRa<k2>lAkzmaRa
{#lAkzmaRa#}¦ {%lākṣmaṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%lakṣ-%}
{%maṇa%}), relating to the plant Lakṣmaṇā; ({%as%}), m. a
patronymic from Lakṣmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>40333<pc>0865-a<k1>lAkzmaRi<k2>lAkzmaRi
{%Lākṣmaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Lakṣmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>40334<pc>0865-a<k1>lAkzmaReya<k2>lAkzmaReya
{%Lākṣmaṇeya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Lakṣ-
maṇa.
<LEND>

<L>40335<pc>0865-a<k1>lAkzyika<k2>lAkzyika
{#lAkzyika#}¦ {%lākṣyika, as, ī, am, = lakṣyam%}
{%adhīte veda vā,%} Pāṇ. IV. 2, 60, Vārtt. 7.
<LEND>

<L>40336<pc>0865-a<k1>lAK<k2>lAK
{#lAK#}¦ {%lākh%} (= rt. {%rākh%}), cl. 1. P. {%lākhati,%}
&c., to grow dry, be dry or arid; to
adorn; to suffice, be competent; to prevent.
<LEND>

<L>40337<pc>0865-a<k1>lAguqika<k2>lAguqika
{#lAguqika#}¦ {%lāguḍika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%laguḍa%}),
armed with a club; ({%as%}), m. a sentinel.
<LEND>

<L>40338<pc>0865-a<k1>lAG<k2>lAG
{#lAG#}¦ {%lāgh%} (= rt. {%rāgh%}), cl. 1. A. {%lā-%}
{%ghate,%} &c., to be able or equal to, to
be competent or suffice.
<LEND>

<L>40339<pc>0865-a<k1>lAGarakolasa<k2>lAGarakolasa
{#lAGarakolasa#}¦ {%lāgharakolasa, as,%} m. a par-
ticular form of jaundice.
<LEND>

<L>40340<pc>0865-a<k1>lAGava<k2>lAGava
{#lAGava#}¦ {%lāghava, am,%} n. (fr. {%laghu%}), quick-
ness, swiftness, rapidity, speed; lightness, levity;
activity, alacrity, versatility, dexterity, readiness; ease,
facility; health; littleness, smallness, minuteness,
delicacy, fineness; insignificance, unimportance,
meanness; frivolity, inconsiderateness, rashness; (in
prosody) shortness of a vowel or syllable; shortness
of expression, brevity, conciseness; making light
of, undervaluing, slighting, slight, disrespect, con-
tempt, disgrace. {%—Lāghavānvita (˚va-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} possessed of brevity. {%—Lāghavāyana (˚va-āy˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>40341<pc>0865-a<k1>lAGavika<k2>lAGavika
{%Lāghavika, as, ī, am,%}¦ being quick or light, being
short or brief.
<LEND>

<L>40342<pc>0865-a<k1>lANkAkAyani<k2>lANkAkAyani
{#lANkAkAyani#}¦ {%lāṅkākāyani, is,%} m. a metro-
nymic from Laṅkā.
<LEND>

<L>40343<pc>0865-a<k1>lANkAyana<k2>lANkAyana
{%Lāṅkāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Laṅka.
<LEND>

<L>40344<pc>0865-a<k1>lANgala<k2>lANgala
{#lANgala#}¦ {%lāṅgala, am,%} n. (probably con-
nected with rt. {%lag;%} according to Uṇādi-s. I. 108.
fr. rt. {%laṅg%}), a plough; a particular appearance pre-
sented by the moon; a plough-shaped beam or
timber (used in the construction of a house); the
palm tree; a kind of flower; membrum virile, (pro-
bably incorrect for {%lāṅgūla%}); ({%as%}), m. a kind of
rice; N. of a son of Śuddhoda and grandson of
Śākya; ({%ī%}), f., N. of various plants, Jussiæa Repens;
Hemionitis Cordifolia; Rubia Munjista; Hedysarum
Lagopodioides; {%= lāṅgalin,%} the cocoa-nut tree; N. of
a river. {%—Lāṅgala-graha, as,%} m. ‘plough-holder,’
a ploughman, cultivator, peasant. {%—Lāṅgala-gra- %}
[Page0865-b+ 77]
{%haṇa, am,%} n. the act of holding or guiding the
plough, ploughing. {%—Lāṅgala-cakra, am,%} n. a par-
ticular plough-shaped diagram. {%—Lāṅgala-daṇḍa%} or
{%lāṅgala-daṇḍaka, as,%} m. the pole or beam of a
plough. {%—Lāṅgala-dhvaja, as, ā, am,%} having a
plough for an ensign or characteristic; ({%as%}), m., N.
of Bala-rāma, (see {%lāṅgalin.%}) {%—Lāṅgala-paddhati,%}
{%is,%} f. a plough's path or line, furrow. {%—Lāṅgala-%}
{%phāla, as, am,%} m. n. a ploughshare. {%—Lāṅgalākhya%}
{%(˚la-ākh˚)%} or {%lāṅgalāhvaya (˚la-āh˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘plough-named, called after a plough,’ (a term ap-
plied to the plant Jussiæa Repens; probably {%ā,%} f.)
{%—Lāṅgalāpakarṣin (˚la-ap˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} draw-
ing the plough (said of an ox). {%—Lāṅgalīṣā%}
({%˚la-īṣā,%} anomalous), f. the pole of a plough.
<LEND>

<L>40345<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgalaka<k2>lANgalaka
{%Lāṅgalaka%}¦ at the end of a comp. {%= lāṅgala,%} a
plough; ({%as%}), m. a plough-shaped incision (in sur-
gery); ({%ikā,-ikī%}), f. {%= lāṅgalī,%} Jussiæa Repens.
<LEND>

<L>40346<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgalAyana<k2>lANgalAyana
{%Lāṅgalāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Lāṅgala.
<LEND>

<L>40347<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgali<k2>lANgali
{%Lāṅgali, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%lāṅgala%}), a patronymic, N.
of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>40348<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgalika<k2>lANgalika
{%Lāṅgalika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to a
plough; ({%as%}), m. epithet of a particular vegetable
poison; ({%ī%}), f. Methonica Superba; [cf. {%lāṅgalikī%}
under {%lāṅgalaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40349<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgalin<k2>lANgalin
{%Lāṅgalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ furnished with or possessing
a plough; ({%ī%}), m., N. of Bala-deva (who is repre-
sented as armed with a ploughshare); N. of a pre-
ceptor; the cocoa-nut tree; a snake.
<LEND>

<L>40350<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgula<k2>lANgula
{#lANgula#}¦ {%lāṅgula, am,%} n. (probably fr. rt.
{%lag;%} but see {%lāṅgūla%}), a tail; membrum virile.
<LEND>

<L>40351<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgulikA<k2>lANgulikA
{%Lāṅgulikā,%}¦ f. Uraria Lagopodioides.
<LEND>

<L>40352<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgulinI<k2>lANgulinI
{%Lāṅgulinī,%}¦ f., N. of a river; [cf. {%lāṅgūlinī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40353<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgUla<k2>lANgUla
{%Lāṅgūla, am,%}¦ n. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 90.
fr. rt. {%laṅg%}), a tail, a hairy tail; membrum virile;
a granary?; ({%ī%}), f. Uraria Lagopodioides.
<LEND>

<L>40354<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgUlikA<k2>lANgUlikA
{%Lāṅgūlikā,%}¦ f. Hemionitis Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>40355<pc>0865-b<k1>lANgUlin<k2>lANgUlin
{%Lāṅgūlin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ tailed, having a tail; ({%ī%}), m.
a monkey, ape; a kind of medicinal plant; ({%inī%}),
f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>40356<pc>0865-b<k1>lAj<k2>lAj
{#lAj#}¦ {%lāj%} or {%lāñj%} [cf. rt. 2. {%laj%}], cl. 1. P.
{%lājati%} (in Nirukta VI. 9. {%lājate%}), {%lāñ-%}
{%jati,%} &c., to fry, roast, parch; to blame, censure.
<LEND>

<L>40357<pc>0865-b<k1>lAja<k2>lAja
{%Lāja, as,%}¦ m. (supposed by some to be connected
with rt. 1. {%bhrajj%} or {%bhṛj%}), fried or parched grain;
wetted or sprinkled grain; ({%ās%}), m. pl. parched or
roasted grain, (also {%ā,%} f.); ({%am%}), n. the root of
Andropogon Muricatus.
<LEND>

<L>40358<pc>0865-b<k1>lAji<k2>lAji
{%Lāji, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a quantity of parched grain,
(according to a commentator on Taittirīya-Brāhmaṇa
III. 9, 4, 8, {%lāji%} is voc. c. fr. {%lājin = lājopala-%}
{%kṣita.%})
<LEND>

<L>40359<pc>0865-b<k1>lAjI<k2>lAjI
{%Lājī,%}¦ f., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>40360<pc>0865-b<k1>lAYC<k2>lAYC
{#lAYC#}¦ {%lāñch%} (connected with rt. {%lakṣ,%}
from which it is probably corrupted;
cf. rt. {%lach%}), cl. 1. P. {%lāñchati, lalāñcha,%} &c., to
mark, distinguish, decorate, deck.
<LEND>

<L>40361<pc>0865-b<k1>lAYCana<k2>lAYCana
{%Lāñchana, am,%}¦ n. a mark, sign, token, spot; a
landmark; a mark of ignominy, stain, spot; a name,
appellation.
<LEND>

<L>40362<pc>0865-b<k1>lAYCita<k2>lAYCita
{%Lāñchita, as, ā, am,%}¦ marked, distinguished, cha-
racterized, designated; decorated, decked; furnished
with (with inst. or at the end of a comp.).
<LEND>

<L>40363<pc>0865-b<k1>lAYj<k2>lAYj
{#lAYj#}¦ {%lāñj%} = rt. {%lāj%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40364<pc>0865-b<k1>lAwa<k2>lAwa
{#lAwa#}¦ {%lāṭa, ās,%} m. pl. (according to some
formed fr. {%rāṣṭra%}), N. of a people and of the
district inhabited by them (= <lang n="greek">Λαρικη</lang> of Ptolemy);
({%as%}), m. a king of the Lāṭas; clothes, dress; old or
worn-out clothes, shabby ornaments, &c.; idle or
childish language; repetition of words in the same
sense but in a different application; ({%as, ī, am%}),
relating to the Lāṭas, of or belonging to Lāṭa; old,
worn, spoiled, &c. {%—Lāṭācārya (˚ṭa-āc˚), as,%} m.
the teacher of the Lāṭas, N. of an astronomer. {%—Lā-%}
{%ṭānuprāsa (˚ṭa-an˚), as,%} m. ‘Lāṭa-repetition,’ the
repetition of a word in the same sense but with a
different application, (see {%lāṭaka.%})
<LEND>
[Page0865-c+ 67]

<L>40365<pc>0865-c<k1>lAwaka<k2>lAwaka
{%Lāṭaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ of or belonging to the
Lāṭas, customary among them; ({%ikā%}), f. a particular
style of speech or composition, (see {%rīti.%})
<LEND>

<L>40366<pc>0865-c<k1>lAwIya<k2>lAwIya
{%Lāṭīya, as, ā, am, = lāṭaka.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>40367<pc>0865-c<k1>lAwya<k2>lAwya
{#lAwya#}¦ {%lāṭya,%} Nom. P. {%lāṭyati,%} &c., to live.
<LEND>

<L>40368<pc>0865-c<k1>lAwyAyana<k2>lAwyAyana
{#lAwyAyana#}¦ {%lāṭyāyana, as,%} m., N. of the
author of a Sūtra work.
<LEND>

<L>40369<pc>0865-c<k1>lAq<k2>lAq
{#lAq#}¦ {%lāḍ%} (= rt. {%laḍ%}), cl. 10. P. {%lāḍayati,%}
{%lāḍāpayati,%} &c., to toss, throw; to
blame, reproach; to fondle, cherish, caress, &c. ({%=%}
{%lālayati,%} see rt. {%lal%}).
<LEND>

<L>40370<pc>0865-c<k1>lAqa<k2>lAqa
{#lAqa#}¦ {%lāḍa, as,%} m. a proper N.; N. of a
royal race. {%—Lāḍa-khāna, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>40371<pc>0865-c<k1>lAqana<k2>lAqana
{%Lāḍana, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.; ({%am%}), n. a various
reading for {%lālana.%}
<LEND>

<L>40372<pc>0865-c<k1>lAqama<k2>lAqama
{#lAqama#}¦ {%lāḍama, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40373<pc>0865-c<k1>lAqi<k2>lAqi
{#lAqi#}¦ {%lāḍi, is,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>40374<pc>0865-c<k1>lARWanI<k2>lARWanI
{#lARWanI#}¦ {%lāṇṭhanī%} (?), f. {%= kulaṭā.%}
<LEND>

<L>40375<pc>0865-c<k1>lAta<k2>lAta
{#lAta#}¦ {%lāta, lāti,%} &c. See rt. 1. {%lā,%} p. 864.
<LEND>

<L>40376<pc>0865-c<k1>lAtavya<k2>lAtavya
{#lAtavya#}¦ {%lātavya, as,%} m. a patronymic from
Latu; N. of a chamberlain (in the Vikramorvaśī).
<LEND>

<L>40377<pc>0865-c<k1>lAnta<k2>lAnta
{#lAnta#}¦ {%lānta, as,%} m. a mystical term for
the letter {%va.%}
<LEND>

<L>40378<pc>0865-c<k1>lAntakaja<k2>lAntakaja
{#lAntakaja#}¦ {%lāntaka-ja, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
class of deities (with Jainas).
<LEND>

<L>40379<pc>0865-c<k1>lAndra<k2>lAndra
{#lAndra#}¦ {%lāndra, lāndraka,%} see Gaṇa Yāvādi
to Pāṇ. V. 4, 29.
<LEND>

<L>40380<pc>0865-c<k1>lApa<k2>lApa
{#lApa#}¦ {%lāpa, lāpin,%} &c. See p. 861, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40381<pc>0865-c<k1>lAba<k2>lAba
{#lAba#}¦ {%lāba%} (often written {%lāva%}), {%as,%} m. {%=%}
{%laba,%} a sort of quail, Perdix Chinensis; ({%ā%}), f. the
female of this bird. {%—Lābākṣa (˚ba-ak˚)%} or {%lā-%}
{%bākṣaka, as,%} m. ‘quail-eyed,’ a kind of rice.
<LEND>

<L>40382<pc>0865-c<k1>lAbaka<k2>lAbaka
{%Lābaka, as,%}¦ m. a sort of quail.
<LEND>

<L>40383<pc>0865-c<k1>lAbu<k2>lAbu
{#lAbu#}¦ {%lābu%} or {%lābū = a-lābu.%}
<LEND>

<L>40384<pc>0865-c<k1>lAbukI<k2>lAbukI
{%Lābukī,%}¦ f. a kind of lute.
<LEND>

<L>40385<pc>0865-c<k1>lAbukAyana<k2>lAbukAyana
{#lAbukAyana#}¦ {%lābukāyana, as,%} m., N. of a
philosophical writer mentioned in the Jaimini-sūtras,
(probably incorrect for {%lāmakāyana.%})
<LEND>

<L>40386<pc>0865-c<k1>lAB<k2>lAB
{#lAB#}¦ {%lābh,%} cl. 10. P. {%lābhayati,%} &c.,
to throw, direct.
<LEND>

<L>40387<pc>0865-c<k1>lABa<k2>lABa
{#lABa#}¦ {%lābha,%} &c. See p. 862, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40388<pc>0865-c<k1>lAmakAyana<k2>lAmakAyana
{#lAmakAyana#}¦ {%lāmakāyana, as,%} m. (fr. {%lamaka%}),
a patronymic; N. of a preceptor; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the
descendants of Lamaka.
<LEND>

<L>40389<pc>0865-c<k1>lAmakAyani<k2>lAmakAyani
{%Lāmakāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>40390<pc>0865-c<k1>lAmakAyanin<k2>lAmakAyanin
{%Lāmakāyanin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the school of Lāma-
kāyana.
<LEND>

<L>40391<pc>0865-c<k1>lAmagAyani<k2>lAmagAyani
{%Lāmagāyani, is,%}¦ m. {%= lāmakāyani.%}
<LEND>

<L>40392<pc>0865-c<k1>lAmajjaka<k2>lAmajjaka
{#lAmajjaka#}¦ {%lāmajjaka, am,%} n. the root of the
fragrant grass Andropogon Muricatus.
<LEND>

<L>40393<pc>0865-c<k1>lAmpawya<k2>lAmpawya
{#lAmpawya#}¦ {%lāmpaṭya, am,%} n. (fr. {%lampaṭa%}),
lasciviousness, lustfulness, lewdness, dissoluteness.
<LEND>

<L>40394<pc>0865-c<k1>lAyaka<k2>lAyaka
{#lAyaka#}¦ {%lāyaka.%} See p. 868, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40395<pc>0865-c<k1>lAyam<k2>lAyam
{#lAyam#}¦ {%lāyam,%} a word of uncertain mean-
ing in Ṛg-veda X. 42, 1, (perhaps an indec. part.
fr. rt. 1. {%lī%}), having bent down, bending; (according
to Sāy.) {%= saṃśleṣaṇam = hṛdaya-vedhinaṃ%}
{%śaram.%}
<LEND>

<L>40396<pc>0865-c<k1>lAla<k2>lAla
{#lAla#}¦ {%lāla, lālaka, lālita,%} &c. See p. 863,
cols. 1, 2.
<LEND>

<L>40397<pc>0865-c<k1>lAlapyamAna<k2>lAlapyamAna
{#lAlapyamAna#}¦ {%lālapyamāna.%} See p. 861,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40398<pc>0865-c<k1>lAlasa<k2>lAlasa
{#lAlasa#}¦ {%lālasa, as, ā, am%} (fr. the Intens.
of rt. 1. {%las,%} but probably connected also with rt.
{%laṣ%}), eagerly longing for, ardently desirous of, eager
after; finding pleasure in, devoted to, totally given
up to [cf. {%śoka-l˚%}]; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. longing or ardent
[Page0866-a+ 70]
desire, eagerness; regret, sorrow; asking, soliciting;
the longing of a pregnant woman; dalliance?; ({%ā%}),
f. a particular metre, four times ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯˘¯¯,
˘¯¯˘¯¯˘¯.
<LEND>

<L>40399<pc>0866-a<k1>lAlasIka<k2>lAlasIka
{%Lālasīka, am,%}¦ n. sauce, gravy.
<LEND>

<L>40400<pc>0866-a<k1>lAlAwa<k2>lAlAwa
{#lAlAwa#}¦ {%lālāṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%lalāṭa%}), being
in or on the forehead, relating to it, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40401<pc>0866-a<k1>lAlAwi<k2>lAlAwi
{%Lālāṭi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>40402<pc>0866-a<k1>lAlAwika<k2>lAlAwika
{%Lālāṭika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the forehead,
being on the forehead; relating to fate, arising from
destiny; looking attentively at the forehead (of a
master), attentive; useless, low, vile; ({%as%}), m. an atten-
tive servant, one who watches a master's countenance
and learns by it what is necessary to be done; one
who is unfit for work (as depending too much on
the look of his superior), a careless person or idler
(perhaps as always gazing at the countenances of
others); a mode of embracing.
<LEND>

<L>40403<pc>0866-a<k1>lAlAwI<k2>lAlAwI
{%Lālāṭī,%}¦ f. {%= lalāṭa,%} the forehead.
<LEND>

<L>40404<pc>0866-a<k1>lAlAmika<k2>lAlAmika
{#lAlAmika#}¦ {%lālāmika, as, ī, am, = lalāmaṃ%}
{%gṛhṇāti,%} Pāṇ. IV. 4, 40.
<LEND>

<L>40405<pc>0866-a<k1>lAlika<k2>lAlika
{#lAlika#}¦ {%lālika.%} See p. 863, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40406<pc>0866-a<k1>lAlukA<k2>lAlukA
{#lAlukA#}¦ {%lālukā,%} f. a sort of necklace.
<LEND>

<L>40407<pc>0866-a<k1>lAva<k2>lAva
{#lAva#}¦ {%lāva.%} See p. 870, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40408<pc>0866-a<k1>lAvaRa<k2>lAvaRa
{#lAvaRa#}¦ {%lāvaṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%lavaṇa%}), saline,
salt, salted, cooked or dressed with salt.
<LEND>

<L>40409<pc>0866-a<k1>lAvaRika<k2>lAvaRika
{%Lāvaṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to salt, impregnated
with salt, prepared or dressed with salt, salted; deal-
ing in salt; lovely, beautiful, graceful; ({%as%}), m. a
dealer in salt, salt merchant; ({%am%}), n. a vessel holding
salt, salt-cellar.
<LEND>

<L>40410<pc>0866-a<k1>lAvaRya<k2>lAvaRya
{%Lāvaṇya, am,%}¦ n. saltness, the taste or property of
salt; beauty, loveliness, charm. {%—Lāvaṇya-kalita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} endowed with beauty. {%—Lāvaṇya-mañ-%}
{%jarī,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Lāvaṇya-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} full of taste, full of loveliness or beauty, lovely,
beautiful, handsome. {%—Lāvaṇya-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessed of beauty or grace, beautiful, lovely; ({%atī%}),
f., N. of various women. {%—Lāvaṇya-śrī, īs,%} f.
‘wealth of beauty,’ great beauty. {%—Lāvaṇyārjita%}
{%(˚ya-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} obtained through beauty;
({%am%}), n. the private property of a married woman
(consisting of that which has been presented to her
at her marriage as a token of respect or kindness or
by her father or mother-in-law).
<LEND>

<L>40411<pc>0866-a<k1>lAvARaka<k2>lAvARaka
{#lAvARaka#}¦ {%lāvāṇaka, as,%} m., N. of a district
adjacent to Magadha, (sometimes incorrectly written
{%lāvānaka%}); N. of the third Lambaka of the Kathā-
sarit-sāgara.
<LEND>

<L>40412<pc>0866-a<k1>lAvika<k2>lAvika
{#lAvika#}¦ {%lāvika, as,%} m. {%= lālika,%} a buffalo.
<LEND>

<L>40413<pc>0866-a<k1>lAvu<k2>lAvu
{#lAvu#}¦ {%lāvu, lāvū,%} &c. See {%lābu,%} &c., p. 865,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40414<pc>0866-a<k1>lAveraRi<k2>lAveraRi
{#lAveraRi#}¦ {%lāveraṇi, is,%} m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>40415<pc>0866-a<k1>lAveraRIya<k2>lAveraRIya
{%Lāveraṇīya,%}¦ see Gaṇa Gahādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 138.
<LEND>

<L>40416<pc>0866-a<k1>lAvya<k2>lAvya
{#lAvya#}¦ {%lāvya.%} See p. 870, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40417<pc>0866-a<k1>lAzuka<k2>lAzuka
{#lAzuka#}¦ {%lāṣuka, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%laṣ%}),
covetous, greedy.
<LEND>

<L>40418<pc>0866-a<k1>lAsa<k2>lAsa
{#lAsa#}¦ {%lāsa, lāsin, lāsya.%} See p. 864.
<LEND>

<L>40419<pc>0866-a<k1>lAsPowanI<k2>lAsPowanI
{#lAsPowanI#}¦ {%lāsphoṭanī,%} f. a gimlet, auger.
<LEND>

<L>40420<pc>0866-a<k1>lAharimalla<k2>lAharimalla
{#lAharimalla#}¦ {%lāharimalla, as,%} m., N. of a
general.
<LEND>

<L>40421<pc>0866-a<k1>lAhya<k2>lAhya
{#lAhya#}¦ {%lāhya, as,%} m. (fr. {%lahya%}), a patro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>40422<pc>0866-a<k1>lAhyAyani<k2>lAhyAyani
{%Lāhyāyani, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%lāhya%}), a patronymic of
Bhujyu.
<LEND>

<L>40423<pc>0866-a<k1>li<k2>li
{#li#}¦ {%li, is,%} m. (a doubtful word, meaning
according to some) weariness, fatigue; loss, destruc-
tion; end, term; equality, sameness; a bracelet.
<LEND>

<L>40424<pc>0866-a<k1>likuca<k2>likuca
{#likuca#}¦ {%likuca, as,%} m. {%= lakuca.%}
<LEND>

<L>40425<pc>0866-a<k1>likzA<k2>likzA
{#likzA#}¦ {%likṣā,%} f. (also written {%likkā%}), a nit,
[Page0866-b+ 80]
young louse, the egg of a louse; a minute measure
of weight, (according to some, a poppy seed or =
8 Trasa-reṇus or motes.)
<LEND>

<L>40426<pc>0866-b<k1>likzikA<k2>likzikA
{%Likṣikā,%}¦ f. {%= likṣā,%} a nit.
<LEND>

<L>40427<pc>0866-b<k1>liKya<k2>liKya
{%Likhya, as,%}¦ m. a nit, the egg of a louse; ({%ā%}), f.
a nit; a minute measure of weight; [cf. {%likṣā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40428<pc>0866-b<k1>liK<k2>liK
{#liK#}¦ {%likh%} (the original form of this
rt. was probably {%rikh,%} q. v.), cl. 6. P.
{%likhati%} (according to some also A. {%likhate%}), {%lilekha,%}
{%lekhiṣyati, alekhīt, lekhitum%} or {%likhitum,%} to
scratch, scrape, furrow, tear up, scarify, lance; to
pick, peck (said of birds); to scratch or make an
incision in or on, draw a line or streak, make a
mark or sign, write, copy, write down, engrave, in-
scribe; to sketch, trace, portray, draw, delineate,
depict, draw a picture, paint; to make smooth,
polish; to graze, touch; to unite sexually with a
female: Pass. {%likhyate,%} Aor. {%alekhi,%} to be written:
Caus. {%lekhayati%} (also, according to some, {%likhāpa-%}
{%yati%}), Aor. {%alīlikhat,%} to cause to scratch or write,
&c.; to scratch; to write: Desid. {%lilikhiṣati, li-%}
{%lekhiṣati.%}
<LEND>

<L>40429<pc>0866-b<k1>liKa<k2>liKa
{%Likha, as, ā, am,%}¦ scratching, writing; a writer,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>40430<pc>0866-b<k1>liKat<k2>liKat
{%Likhat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} scratching, writing,
&c.; painting, delineating.
<LEND>

<L>40431<pc>0866-b<k1>liKana<k2>liKana
{%Likhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of scratching; writing,
inscribing; a writing, written document, manuscript,
scripture.
<LEND>

<L>40432<pc>0866-b<k1>liKita<k2>liKita
{%Likhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ scratched, scraped, scarified;
written; drawn, delineated, portrayed, sketched,
traced, painted; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi and author
of a work on law (frequently mentioned together
with Śaṅkha, q. v.); N. of Śaṅkha's brother, whose
hands were cut off by king Su-dyumna as a punish-
ment for eating some fruit without leave (described
in Śānti-p. 668); ({%am%}), n. a writing, written docu-
ment or composition, book, scripture.
<LEND>

<L>40433<pc>0866-b<k1>liKitvA<k2>liKitvA
{%Likhitvā,%}¦ ind. having scratched; having written
or delineated.
<LEND>

<L>40434<pc>0866-b<k1>leKa<k2>leKa
{%Lekha, as,%}¦ m. [cf. {%rekha%}], a writing, letter, epistle,
manuscript, document, written document of any kind,
({%kūṭa-lekha,%} a spurious or forged document); a
god, deity; a proper N.; ({%ā%}), f. a scratch, streak,
line, ({%gaṇḍa-lekhā,%} ‘cheek-line,’ the outline of the
cheek; cf. {%vidyul-l˚%}); stripe, stroke, furrow, row,
groove; writing, handwriting, drawing lines, deline-
ation, drawing, painting; a drawing, likeness, repre-
sentation, figure, impression, mark; the curved line
or pale streak of the young moon (when only faintly
discernible), the moon's crescent; hem, border, rim,
brim, edge, the horizon; {%= śikhā, cūḍāgra; (ās),%}
m. pl., N. of a class of gods under Manu Cākṣuṣa.
{%—Lekha-pattra, am,%} n. or {%lekha-pattrikā,%} f. a
written document, writing, letter, epistle; writ, deed.
{%—Lekha-pratilekha-lipi, is,%} f. a particular kind of
writing. {%—Lekharṣabha (˚kha-ṛṣ), as,%} m. ‘best
of deities, ‘N. of Indra. {%—Lekha-sandeśa-hārin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} taking or conveying a written message or
instructions. {%—Lekha-hāra%} or {%lekha-hāraka, as,%}
m. a letter-carrier, the bearer of a letter. {%—Lekha-%}
{%hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} taking or conveying a letter. {%—Le-%}
{%khākṣara (˚kha-ak˚), am,%} n. writing, (opposed to
{%ālekhya,%} painting.) {%—Lekhādhikārin (˚kha-adh˚),%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘presiding over written documents,’ a king's
secretary. {%—Lekhābhra (˚kha-abh˚), as,%} m., N. of
a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. his descendants. {%—Lekhā-bhrū,%}
{%ūs,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Lekhārha (˚kha-ar˚), as,%}
m. ‘fit for writing on,’ a kind of palm tree (the
leaves of which are used for writing on). {%—Lekhā-%}
{%valaya, as, am,%} m. n. an encircling line.
<LEND>

<L>40435<pc>0866-b<k1>leKaka<k2>leKaka
{%Lekhaka, as,%}¦ m. a writer, scribe, copyist, clerk,
amanuensis, secretary; one who delineates or paints;
writing down, transcribing, (in this sense perhaps
{%am,%} n.) {%—Lekhaka-pramāda, as,%} m. an error or
mistake of a copyist. {%—Lekhaka-muktā-maṇi, is,%}
m. ‘pearl-gem for scribes,’ N. of a treatise on the
art of writing by Hari-dāsa (especially intended for
scribes belonging to a royal court).
<LEND>

<L>40436<pc>0866-b<k1>leKana<k2>leKana
{%Lekhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ scratching, scraping, scarify-
[Page0866-c+ 76]
ing, making an incision, lancing; writing; exciting,
stimulating; ({%as%}), m. Saccharum Spontaneum, a sort
of grass or reed of which pens are made; ({%ī%}), f. an
instrument for writing, a writing-reed, pen, style,
(also written {%lekhani%} when required by the metre);
a spoon, ladle; ({%am%}), n. the act of scratching or
scraping; cutting or making incisions (in surgery);
scarifying; the act of writing or writing down, tran-
scribing, copying; scripture; an instrument or im-
plement for scraping or furrowing; a kind of birch
the bark of which is used for writing on [cf. {%bhūrja%}],
the leaf of the palm tree used for the same purpose;
grazing, touching, coming in contact (said of heavenly
bodies); thinning, attenuating, reducing corpulency.
{%—Lekhana-vasti, is,%} f. a kind of clyster or enema
for thinning or reducing corpulency. {%—Lekhana-sā-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n. writing materials.
<LEND>

<L>40437<pc>0866-c<k1>leKani<k2>leKani
{%Lekhani.%}¦ See under {%lekhana%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40438<pc>0866-c<k1>leKanika<k2>leKanika
{%Lekhanika, as,%}¦ m. one who makes another sign
a document instead of himself, signing by proxy, or
making a mark (from inability to write); the bearer
of a letter, a letter-carrier, postman, express.
<LEND>

<L>40439<pc>0866-c<k1>leKanikA<k2>leKanikA
{%Lekhanikā%}¦ in {%citra-l˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40440<pc>0866-c<k1>leKanIya<k2>leKanIya
{%Lekhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be written; to be drawn
or painted; serving as a scraper or as a lancet, &c.;
({%am%}), n. an accusation or defence in law (required to
be given in writing) .
<LEND>

<L>40441<pc>0866-c<k1>leKAya<k2>leKAya
{%Lekhāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%lekhāyati,%} &c., to be wanton,
sport wantonly; to waver, totter, stumble, slip.
<LEND>

<L>40442<pc>0866-c<k1>leKita<k2>leKita
{%Lekhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ scratched, written, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40443<pc>0866-c<k1>leKitvA<k2>leKitvA
{%Lekhitvā,%}¦ ind. {%= likhitvā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40444<pc>0866-c<k1>leKin<k2>leKin
{%Lekhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ scratching, scraping; writing;
grazing, touching; ({%inī%}), f. a spoon, ladle.
<LEND>

<L>40445<pc>0866-c<k1>leKya<k2>leKya<h>1
1. {%lekhya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%lekhyati,%} &c., {%= lekhāya%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>40446<pc>0866-c<k1>leKya<k2>leKya<h>2
2. {%lekhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be scratched or scraped,
to be scarified; to be written or transcribed, proper
to be written; to be drawn or painted; portrayed,
painted; to be written down or numbered among
(loc.); ({%am%}), n. writing, the art of writing; copying,
transcribing; delineation, drawing, painting; a writ-
ing, document, letter, manuscript; a written accusa-
tion or defence; an inscription; a painted figure.
{%—Lekhya-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done in writing, signed,
executed. {%—Lekhya-gata, as, ā, am,%} represented
in painting, painted. {%—Lekhya-cūrṇikā,%} f. a writing-
pencil, drawing-pencil, paint-brush. {%—Lekhya-pattra%}
or {%lekhya-pattraka, as,%} m. the palmyra or palm
tree; ({%am%}), n. a palm leaf for writing on; a written
paper, writing, letter. {%—Lekhya-prasaṅga, as,%} m.
a written contract, record, document. {%—Lekhya-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} delineated, painted. {%—Lekhya-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. a writing place, office. {%—Lekhyā-%}
{%rūḍha (˚ya-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} committed to writing,
recorded.
<LEND>

<L>40447<pc>0866-c<k1>leKyaka<k2>leKyaka
{%Lekhyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ written, epistolary.
<LEND>

<L>40448<pc>0866-c<k1>liKiKilla<k2>liKiKilla
{#liKiKilla#}¦ {%likhikhilla%} (?) {%as,%} m. a pea-
cock.
<LEND>

<L>40449<pc>0866-c<k1>liKya<k2>liKya
{#liKya#}¦ {%likhya.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40450<pc>0866-c<k1>liNK<k2>liNK
{#liNK#}¦ {%liṅkh%} (= rt. {%lakh%}), cl. 1. P. {%liṅ-%}
{%khati,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>40451<pc>0866-c<k1>ligu<k2>ligu
{#ligu#}¦ {%ligu, u,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 37.
fr. rt. {%lag%}), the mind, heart; ({%us%}), m. a fool, block-
head; a deer; part of the earth; a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40452<pc>0866-c<k1>liN<k2>liN
{#liN#}¦ {%liṅ,%} a technical term in grammar for
the terminations of the Potential and Precative or
for these Moods themselves (the Precative being
usually distinguished by the fuller term {%liṅ āśiṣi%} or
{%āśir-liṅ%}). {%—Liṅ-artha-vāda, as,%} m. ‘explanation of
the sense of Liṅ, ‘N. of a grammatical treatise.
<LEND>

<L>40453<pc>0866-c<k1>liNkavArAhatIrTa<k2>liNkavArAhatIrTa
{#liNkavArAhatIrTa#}¦ {%liṅka-vārāha-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>40454<pc>0866-c<k1>liNg<k2>liNg
{#liNg#}¦ {%liṅg,%} cl. 1. P. {%liṅgati,%} &c., to
go; cl. 10. P. {%liṅgayati,%} &c. (more
properly regarded as a Nom. fr. {%liṅga,%} p. 867), to
change or inflect a noun according to its gender;
[Page0867-a+ 81]
to paint, variegate; [cf. probably Old Germ. <nsi>hring,</nsi>
<nsi>hringjan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hring.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40455<pc>0867-a<k1>liNga<k2>liNga
{%Liṅga, am,%}¦ n. (perhaps connected with rt. {%lag%}),
a mark, sign, token, emblem, badge, anything which
distinguishes or defines, distinguishing or discrimi-
nating mark, characteristic mark, characteristic, sec-
tarian mark; a symptom, mark of disease; a false
badge, any badge or mark assumed with a view to
deceive; a spot, stain; a proof, evidence, means of
proof, proof from a sure sign or token; (in logic)
{%= vyāpya,%} the predicate of a proposition or the
mark which characterizes the subject (as in the pro-
position ‘there is fire because there is smoke, and
fire has smoke, ‘smoke is the {%liṅga%}), inference,
conclusion, reason, ({%kāvya-liṅga,%} a particular figure
of speech in which the grounds of a statement are
explained after the statement has been made); the
sign of gender or sex, organ of generation; gender
(in grammar, cf. {%puṃ-liṅga%}); the male organ;
Śiva's genital organ or Śiva worshipped in the form
of a Phallus, (this is usually of stone or marble, and
set up in temples appropriated to Śiva; there were
formerly twelve principal Śiva-liṅgas in India, of
which two or three of the best known are Soma-nātha
in Gujarāt, Mahākāla at Ujjayinī, Viśveśvara at Be-
nares, &c.); the image of a god, an idol; the subtile
frame or body which is not destroyed by death, the
indestructible original of the gross or visible body
[cf. {%liṅga-śarīra, sūkṣma-ś˚%}]; {%= prātipadika,%} a
nominal base, the crude form or base of a noun
(shortened by Vopa-deva into {%li%}); (according to
some) Prakṛti or Pradhāna (i. e. the primary germ
out of which all phenomena are evolved in the
Sāṅkhya phil.); the effect or product (i. e. according
to others, that which is evolved out of a primary
cause, and becomes in its turn a producer, {%= vyakta%}
in the Sāṅkhya phil.); the order of the religious
student; N. of a Purāṇa, (see {%liṅga-purāṇa.%})
{%—Liṅga-jā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= liṅginī)%}. {%—Liṅga-%}
{%tas,%} ind. from a mark or sign, according to marks,
&c. {%—Liṅgato-bhadra, am,%} n. epithet of a parti-
cular magical circle. {%—Liṅga-tva, am,%} n. the state
of being a Liṅga or mark, &c. {%—Liṅga-deha, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. the subtile or primary body, see {%liṅga-%}
{%śarīra%}. {%—Liṅga-dvādaśa-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a
particular religious ceremony. {%—Liṅga-dhara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} wearing marks, carrying distinctive signs,
({%mithyā-liṅgadhara,%} wearing false marks, a hypo-
crite; cf. {%suhṛl-l˚.%}) {%—Liṅga-dhāraṇa, as, ī, am,%}
wearing a badge; ({%am%}), n. the act of wearing a
badge or any characteristic mark, the wearing of
a Liṅga or Phallus. {%—Liṅga-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} wear-
ing a badge, wearing the Liṅga of Śiva; ({%ī%}), m. {%=%}
{%liṅga-vat,%} q. v.; ({%iṇī%}), f., N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in
Naimiṣa. {%—Liṅga-nāśa, as,%} m. loss of character-
istic marks; a particular disease of the eyes, (loss of
vision from cataract &c., considered to be a discolora-
tion of the pupil); loss of the penis. {%—Liṅga-pa-%}
{%rāmarśa, as,%} m. the groping after or seeking for
a sign or token (in logic), the consideration of a sign
or characteristic (as that smokiness is a sign of fire).
{%—Liṅga-pīṭha, am,%} n. the pedestal of a Liṅga.
{%—Liṅga-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of one of the eigh-
teen Purāṇas (in which Śiva, supposed to be present
in the Agni-liṅga or great fiery Liṅga, gives an
account of the creation &c. as well as of his own
incarnations in opposition to those of Viṣṇu).
{%—Liṅga-pratiṣṭhā-vidhi, is,%} m. rules for the
establishment of a Liṅga. {%—Liṅga-māhātmya, am,%}
n. the majesty or pre-eminence of the Liṅga, N. of
a section of several Purāṇas. {%—Liṅga-mūrti, is, is,%}
{%i,%} having the form of the Phallus (said of Śiva).
{%—Liṅga-lepa, as,%} m., N. of a particular disease.
{%—Liṅga-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having marks, possessed
of signs or tokens; having various sexes or genders;
furnished with a Liṅga or wearing a small repre-
sentation of the Liṅga of Śiva round the neck or on
one arm (applied as an epithet to a particular Śaiva
sect, also called Jaṅgamas). {%—Liṅga-vardhana, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} causing erections of the male organ; ({%as%}),
m. Feronia Elephantum. {%—Liṅga-vardhin, ī, inī, %}
[Page0867-b+ 77]
{%ī,%} causing erections; ({%inī%}), f. Achyranthes Aspera.
{%—Liṅga-viparyaya, as,%} m. change of gender.
{%—Liṅga-viśeṣa-vidhi, is,%} m. rules for the different
genders, N. of a grammatical treatise ascribed to
Vara-ruci. {%—Liṅga-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} making a live-
lihood by false appearance or assumed outward marks,
hypocritical; ({%is%}), m. a religious hypocrite, one who
assumes the dress &c. of an ascetic to gain a liveli-
hood. {%—Liṅga-vedī,%} f. the pedestal of a Liṅga.
{%—Liṅga-śarīra, am,%} n. the subtile body which
accompanies the grosser in all its transmigrations and
is not destroyed by death. {%—Liṅga-śāstra, am,%} n.
a grammatical treatise on gender. {%—Liṅga-sam-%}
{%bhūtā,%} f., N. of a particular plant. {%—Liṅga-stha, as,%}
m. a religious student. {%—Liṅga-hanī,%} f. {%= mūrvā.%}
{%—Liṅgāgra (˚ga-ag˚), as,%} m. glans penis. {%—Liṅ-%}
{%gānuśāsana (˚ga-an˚), am,%} n. the doctrine or laws
of grammatical gender. {%—Liṅgārcana (˚ga-ar˚),%}
{%am,%} n. worship of the Liṅga or Phallus. {%—Liṅgār-%}
{%cana-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Liṅ-%}
{%gārcā-pratiṣṭhā-vidhi (˚ga-ar˚), is,%} m., N. of
a work.
<LEND>

<L>40456<pc>0867-b<k1>liNgaka<k2>liNgaka
{%Liṅgaka%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. {%= liṅga;%}
{%(as),%} m. the elephant or wood apple, Feronia Ele-
phantum; [cf. {%liṅga-vardhana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40457<pc>0867-b<k1>liNgana<k2>liNgana
{%Liṅgana, am,%}¦ n. {%= ā-liṅgana,%} embracing, an
embrace.
<LEND>

<L>40458<pc>0867-b<k1>liNgin<k2>liNgin
{%Liṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a mark or sign, wearing
a distinguishing mark; having the character of,
characterized by (at the end of a comp.); wearing
or bearing the insignia (of any office or character),
bearing false marks or signs, a hypocrite; only
having the appearance or acting the part of (at the
end of a comp.; cf. {%dvija-l˚%}); having a right to
wear signs or badges, one whose external appearance
corresponds with his inner character; possessing or
furnished with a Liṅga; having a subtile body; ({%ī%}),
m. a Brāhman of a particular order, a religious
student, an ascetic; N. of Parameśvara (as the sus-
tainer of Liṅga or Pradhāna, cf. {%liṅga,%} col. 1); a
worshipper of Śiva in the Phallic type; a hypocrite
or pretended devotee; {%= vyāpaka,%} the subject of a
proposition, that which possesses a characteristic mark
(as in the proposition ‘there is fire because there is
smoke, and fire has smoke, ‘fire is the {%liṅgin%}); the
cause or source (i. e. that original substance into
which a Liṅga is resolved, see under {%liṅga%}); an
elephant; ({%inas%}), m. pl., N. of a particular Śaiva
sect [cf. {%liṅga-vat%}]; ({%inī%}), f. a particular plant.
{%—Liṅgi-veṣa, as,%} m. the dress or the insignia of
a religious student (the skin, staff, bowl, &c.), the
dress or appearance of a follower of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>40459<pc>0867-b<k1>liNgya<k2>liNgya
{%Liṅgya,%}¦ ind. = 2. {%ā-liṅgya,%} having embraced.
<LEND>

<L>40460<pc>0867-b<k1>liNgAlikA<k2>liNgAlikA
{#liNgAlikA#}¦ {%liṅgālikā,%} f. a kind of mouse.
<LEND>

<L>40461<pc>0867-b<k1>licCavi<k2>licCavi
{#licCavi#}¦ {%licchavi,%} N. of a regal race.
<LEND>

<L>40462<pc>0867-b<k1>liw<k2>liw
{#liw#}¦ {%liṭ,%} a technical term in grammar for
the terminations of the Reduplicated Perfect tense or
for this tense itself.
<LEND>

<L>40463<pc>0867-b<k1>liwya<k2>liwya
{#liwya#}¦ {%liṭya,%} Nom. P. {%liṭyati,%} &c., to be
little; to think little of.
<LEND>

<L>40464<pc>0867-b<k1>liDu<k2>liDu
{#liDu#}¦ {%li-dhu,%} (in grammar) a technical
term for Nominal verbs, (said to be a contraction of
{%liṅga,%} ‘the crude base of a noun,’ and {%dhātu,%} ‘a
root.’)
<LEND>

<L>40465<pc>0867-b<k1>lindu<k2>lindu
{#lindu#}¦ {%lindu,%} Ved. {%= picchala,%} slimy, slip-
pery.
<LEND>

<L>40466<pc>0867-b<k1>lip<k2>lip
{#lip#}¦ {%lip%} (the later and classical form
of rt. {%rip%}), cl. 6. P. A. {%limpati, -te,%}
{%lilepa, lilipe, lepsyati, -te, alipat, alipata%} or
{%alipta, leptum,%} to smear, besmear, anoint, daub,
plaster, paint; to spread over, cover; to stain, soil,
pollute, defile, contaminate; to inflame, kindle,
burn: Pass. {%lipyate,%} to be smeared or anointed; to
stick, cleave, adhere to: Caus. {%lepayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%alīlipat,%} to cause to smear, &c.; to smear,
anoint, cover; to cause to be covered or decorated:
Desid. {%lilipsati, -te:%} Intens. {%lelipyate, lelepti;%}
[Page0867-c+ 81]
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λίπ-α, λίπ-ος, λιπαρό-ς, λιπ-αρ-ής, λιπαρ-έ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀ-λείφ-ω, ἄλειφ-αρ, ἄλειφα, λισσός:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>limpidus, lippus, li-no, li-mus, de-libuo;</nsi> probably
also <nsi>liquidus, liqueo:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>salba:</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>salbôn:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>sealf:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>lep-i-ti, lep-u:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>limp-u, lip-ti, lip-u-s:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>laib, laibe,</nsi>
‘mire, clay.’]
<LEND>

<L>40467<pc>0867-c<k1>lipa<k2>lipa
{%Lipa, as,%}¦ m. smearing, anointing, plastering.
<LEND>

<L>40468<pc>0867-c<k1>lipi<k2>lipi
{%Lipi, is,%}¦ or {%lipī,%} f. smearing, besmearing, anoint-
ing, plastering, spreading over; painting, drawing;
writing, transcribing, handwriting; the art of writing;
written characters, the letters; a writing, written
paper or book, manuscript, document, letter. {%—Lipi-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. an anointer, white-washer, plasterer;
a writer, scribe; an engraver. {%—Lipi-kāra, as,%} m. a
writer, scribe, copyist. {%—Lipi-jña, as, ā, am,%} one who
understands writing, one who can write. {%—Lipi-%}
{%nyāsa, as,%} m. ‘the act of putting down written
characters, ‘writing, transcribing. {%—Lipi-phalaka,%}
{%am,%} n. a writing-tablet, leaf for writing on. {%—Lipi-%}
{%śālā,%} f. a writing-school. {%—Lipi-saṅkhyā,%} f. a
number of written characters. {%—Lipi-sajjā,%} f. imple-
ments or materials for writing.
<LEND>

<L>40469<pc>0867-c<k1>lipikA<k2>lipikA
{%Lipikā,%}¦ f. {%= lipi,%} a writing, written paper, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40470<pc>0867-c<k1>lipta<k2>lipta<h>1
1. {%lipta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. {%lipta%} see p. 868, col. 1),
smeared, besmeared, anointed; stained, soiled, de-
filed; smeared with poison, poisoned, envenomed;
eaten. {%—Lipta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has smeared
or anointed, &c. {%—Lipta-hasta, as, ā, am,%} having
the hands smeared or stained. {%—Liptāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚),%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having the body anointed with
unguents, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40471<pc>0867-c<k1>liptaka<k2>liptaka
{%Liptaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ smeared, covered with poison;
({%as%}), m. a poisoned arrow.
<LEND>

<L>40472<pc>0867-c<k1>limpa<k2>limpa
{%Limpa, as,%}¦ m. smearing, anointing, plastering;
({%as%}), m., N. of one of Śiva's attendants.
<LEND>

<L>40473<pc>0867-c<k1>limpawa<k2>limpawa
{%Limpaṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ libidinous, lustful, lecherous;
({%as%}), m. a libertine; [cf. {%lampaṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40474<pc>0867-c<k1>limpat<k2>limpat
{%Limpat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} smearing, anointing,
plastering.
<LEND>

<L>40475<pc>0867-c<k1>limpAka<k2>limpAka
{%Limpāka, as,%}¦ m. an ass; a citron or lime tree;
({%am%}), n. the fruit of the lime tree, a citron.
<LEND>

<L>40476<pc>0867-c<k1>limpi<k2>limpi
{%Limpi, is,%}¦ f. {%= lipi,%} a writing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40477<pc>0867-c<k1>livi<k2>livi
{%Livi, is,%}¦ or {%livī,%} f. writing, transcribing, a writing,
&c., {%= lipi%}. {%—Livi-kara%} or {%liviṅ-kara, as,%} m. a
writer, scribe.
<LEND>

<L>40478<pc>0867-c<k1>lepa<k2>lepa
{%Lepa, as,%}¦ m. the act of smearing, besmearing,
daubing, anointing, plastering, anything smeared
on, salve, ointment, unguent, plaster, mortar, chu-
nam, white-wash; a coating of paint, &c.; the
wipings of the hand after offering funeral oblations
to three ancestors, (these wipings being considered
as an oblation to paternal ancestors in the fourth,
fifth, and sixth degrees); impurity, dirt, any grease
or dirt sticking to vessels, &c., a spot, stain, pollu-
tion, defilement, moral impurity, sin; food, victuals.
{%—Lepa-kara, as,%} m. plaster-maker, mortar-maker
or plasterer, bricklayer, white-washer. {%—Lepa-kā-%}
{%minī,%} f. {%= añjanī%}. {%—Lepa-bhāgin, ī,%} m. ‘sharing
the Lepa, ‘a paternal ancestor in the fourth, fifth,
and sixth degrees (Manu III. 216). {%—Lepa-bhuj,%}
{%k,%} m. ‘eating the Lepa,’ {%= lepa-bhāgin.%}
<LEND>

<L>40479<pc>0867-c<k1>lepaka<k2>lepaka
{%Lepaka, as,%}¦ m. a plasterer, bricklayer; one who
moulds or models; (a form {%lepaka%} for {%lepa%} is found
at the end of some comps., see {%a-l˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>40480<pc>0867-c<k1>lepana<k2>lepana
{%Lepana, as,%}¦ m. olibanum, incense; ({%am%}), n.
the act of smearing, besmearing, daubing, spreading
on; anything smeared on, salve, ointment, plaster,
mortar, white-wash; flesh, meat.
<LEND>

<L>40481<pc>0867-c<k1>lepanIya<k2>lepanIya
{%Lepanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be smeared or anointed,
fit to be plastered.
<LEND>

<L>40482<pc>0867-c<k1>lepin<k2>lepin
{%Lepin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ smearing or besmearing with,
covering with; smeared with, covered with; ({%ī%}), m. a
plasterer, bricklayer, one who moulds or models.
<LEND>

<L>40483<pc>0867-c<k1>lepya<k2>lepya
{%Lepya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be smeared or anointed;
to be defiled, to be spotted or stained; moulded,
modeled; ({%am%}), n. plastering, spreading or smearing
ointment or mortar, making models, moulding,
modeling. {%—Lepya-kṛt, t,%} m. one who makes
models, a bricklayer, plasterer. {%—Lepya-nārī,%} f.
(probably) a modeled figure of a woman. {%—Lepya- %}
[Page0868-a+ 75]
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} made of mortar or clay, moulded;
({%ī%}), f. a doll, puppet. {%—Lepya-yoṣit, t,%} f. {%= lepya-%}
{%nārī%}. {%—Lepya-strī,%} f. a woman covered with un-
guents, a perfumed woman.
<LEND>

<L>40484<pc>0868-a<k1>lipta<k2>lipta<h>2
{#lipta#} 2¦. {%lipta, as, ā, am%} (according to
Uṇādi-s. V. 55. fr. rt. 1. {%lī;%} for 1. {%lipta%} see p. 867,
col. 3), united, joined, connected, embraced.
<LEND>

<L>40485<pc>0868-a<k1>liptA<k2>liptA
{#liptA#}¦ {%liptā%} or {%liptikā,%} f. a minute, the
sixtieth part of a degree; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λεπτός.</lang>] {%—Liptī-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., Ved. to reduce to minutes.
<LEND>

<L>40486<pc>0868-a<k1>lipsA<k2>lipsA
{#lipsA#}¦ {%lipsā, lipsu, lipsya,%} &c. See p. 862,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40487<pc>0868-a<k1>libi<k2>libi
{#libi#}¦ {%libi, libī, = livi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40488<pc>0868-a<k1>libujA<k2>libujA
{#libujA#}¦ {%libujā,%} f., Ved. a creeping plant,
creeper.
<LEND>

<L>40489<pc>0868-a<k1>limpa<k2>limpa
{#limpa#}¦ {%limpa, limpi,%} &c. See p. 867, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40490<pc>0868-a<k1>limbaBawwa<k2>limbaBawwa
{#limbaBawwa#}¦ {%limba-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40491<pc>0868-a<k1>liS<k2>liS<h>1
{#liS#} 1¦. {%liś%} (according to some a later
form of rt. 1. {%riś%}), cl. 6. P. {%liśati%} (ac-
cording to some also A. {%liśate%}), to tear off, hurt,
injure, (in this sense only if identified with rt. 1. {%riś%});
to go, move; cl. 4. P. {%liśyati%} (also A. {%liśyate%}),
{%lileśa, liliśe, lekṣyati, -te, alikṣat, alikṣata,%}
{%leṣṭum,%} to be small, lessen, become small [cf. rts.
{%kṛś, kliś%}]: Caus. {%leśayati, alīliśat:%} Desid. {%li-%}
{%likṣate:%} Intens. {%leliśyate, leleṣṭi;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀλί-</lang>
<lang n="greek">γος,</lang> perhaps also <lang n="greek">λίγδος;</lang> Lith. <nsi>lesas.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40492<pc>0868-a<k1>liS<k2>liS<h>2
2. {%liś, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ (probably) one who tears off or
injures, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40493<pc>0868-a<k1>liSa<k2>liSa
{%Liśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (probably) tearing, injuring, &c.;
(see {%kuliśa.%})
<LEND>

<L>40494<pc>0868-a<k1>lizwa<k2>lizwa
{%Liṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ lessened, decreased, reduced.
<LEND>

<L>40495<pc>0868-a<k1>leSa<k2>leSa
{%Leśa, as,%}¦ m. smallness, littleness; a small part or
portion, particle, atom, bit, little bit, slight trace, small
quantity, little (frequently at the end of comps., cf.
{%daṇḍa-l˚, sveda-l˚%}); a particular division or short
space of time (= 2 Kalās); epithet of a particular
modulation of sound or melody; (in rhetoric) a par-
ticular figure of speech, employment of a comparison
instead of a direct statement; representing as a dis-
advantage what is otherwise regarded as an advantage
and vice versa; N. of a king (a son of Su-hotra).
{%—Leśokta (˚śa-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} briefly said, only
hinted or insinuated.
<LEND>

<L>40496<pc>0868-a<k1>leSyA<k2>leSyA
{%Leśyā,%}¦ f. light.
<LEND>

<L>40497<pc>0868-a<k1>lezwavya<k2>lezwavya
{%Leṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (probably) to be torn off
or injured.
<LEND>

<L>40498<pc>0868-a<k1>lezwu<k2>lezwu
{%Leṣṭu, us,%}¦ m. a clod, lump of earth; [cf. {%loṣṭa,%}
{%loṣṭu.%}] {%—Leṣṭu-ghna%} or {%leṣṭu-bhedana, as,%} m.
a clod-breaker, clod-crusher, a harrow or other agri-
cultural implement used for breaking clods.
<LEND>

<L>40499<pc>0868-a<k1>lizva<k2>lizva
{#lizva#}¦ {%liṣva, as,%} m. {%= laṣva,%} a dancer,
actor.
<LEND>

<L>40500<pc>0868-a<k1>lih<k2>lih<h>1
{#lih#} 1¦. {%lih%} (a later form of rt. {%rih%}), cl.
2. P. A. {%leḍhi, līḍhe%} (2nd sing. P. {%le-%}
{%kṣi,%} 2nd and 3rd du. {%līḍhas%}), Impf. P. {%aleṭ%} or
{%aleḍ%} (2nd sing. {%aleṭ,%} 2nd du. {%alīḍham%}), Impv. P.
{%leḍhu%} (2nd sing. {%līḍhi%}), {%lileha, lilihe, lekṣyati,%}
{%-te, alikṣat, alikṣata%} or {%alīḍha, leḍhum,%} to
lick; to lick up; to taste, sip, lap, take any food by
licking or lapping: Pass. {%lihyate,%} Aor. {%alehi,%} to be
licked, &c.: Caus. {%lehayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%alīlihat,%}
to cause to lick: Desid. {%lilikṣati, -te:%} Intens.
{%lelihyate, leleḍhi,%} to lick frequently, be constantly
licking, play with the tongue, dart out the tongue;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λείχ-ω, λιχ-μά-ω, λιχ-μά-ζ-ω, λιχ-ανό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">λίχ-νο-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>li-n-g-o, lig-uri-o, pol-lex;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>bi-laigô-n;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>lecchôn;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>liccian;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>liz-a-ti;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>lez-iu, liz-u-s;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>lighim,</nsi>
<nsi>im-lighim,</nsi> ‘I lick.’]
<LEND>

<L>40501<pc>0868-a<k1>lih<k2>lih<h>2
2. {%lih, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ licking, licking up, tasting.
<LEND>

<L>40502<pc>0868-a<k1>liha<k2>liha
{%Liha%}¦ in {%go-liha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40503<pc>0868-a<k1>lihat<k2>lihat
{%Lihat, an, atī, at,%}¦ licking, licking up, tasting.
<LEND>

<L>40504<pc>0868-a<k1>lihyamAna<k2>lihyamAna
{%Lihyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being licked.
<LEND>

<L>40505<pc>0868-a<k1>lIQa<k2>lIQa
{%Līḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ licked, tasted, licked up, de-
[Page0868-b+ 80]
voured, eaten. {%—Līḍha-mukta, as, ā, am,%} tasted
and ejected, rejected after being tasted; (a com-
pound formed like {%dagdha-prarūḍha,%} ‘growing
again after being burnt.’)
<LEND>

<L>40506<pc>0868-b<k1>lIQvA<k2>lIQvA
{%Līḍhvā,%}¦ ind. having licked or licked up.
<LEND>

<L>40507<pc>0868-b<k1>leliha<k2>leliha
{%Leliha, as,%}¦ m. (fr. the Intens.), ‘constantly licking,’
a kind of parasitical worm; a serpent, snake; ({%ā%}), f. a
particular Mudrā or position of the fingers.
<LEND>

<L>40508<pc>0868-b<k1>lelihat<k2>lelihat
{%Lelihat, at, atī, at,%}¦ constantly licking or playing
with the tongue.
<LEND>

<L>40509<pc>0868-b<k1>lelihAna<k2>lelihAna
{%Lelihāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ frequently licking or darting
out the tongue; ({%as%}), m. a snake, serpent; epithet
of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. a particular Mudrā or position of
the fingers.
<LEND>

<L>40510<pc>0868-b<k1>lelihyamAna<k2>lelihyamAna
{%Lelihyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ constantly darting out
the tongue.
<LEND>

<L>40511<pc>0868-b<k1>leha<k2>leha
{%Leha, as,%}¦ m. licking, tasting; one who licks, a
licker, sipper, ({%madhuno lehaḥ,%} a sipper of honey,
a bee, {%= madhu-lih%}); anything to be taken by
licking, a lambative, electuary; food; epithet of one
of the ten ways in which an eclipse can take place;
({%ī%}), f. a particular disease of the tips of the ears.
<LEND>

<L>40512<pc>0868-b<k1>lehaka<k2>lehaka
{%Lehaka, as,%}¦ m. one who licks, a licker, taster.
<LEND>

<L>40513<pc>0868-b<k1>lehana<k2>lehana
{%Lehana, am,%}¦ n. the act of licking, tasting or
lapping with the tongue.
<LEND>

<L>40514<pc>0868-b<k1>lehanIya<k2>lehanIya
{%Lehanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be licked, &c., {%= lehya%}
below.
<LEND>

<L>40515<pc>0868-b<k1>leham<k2>leham
{%Leham,%}¦ ind. having licked, &c., ({%kṣīra-leham,%}
having licked milk.)
<LEND>

<L>40516<pc>0868-b<k1>lehin<k2>lehin
{%Lehin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ licking, a licker; [cf. {%madhu-l˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40517<pc>0868-b<k1>lehina<k2>lehina
{%Lehina, as,%}¦ m. borax.
<LEND>

<L>40518<pc>0868-b<k1>lehya<k2>lehya
{%Lehya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be licked, lickable, capable
of being licked, to be lapped or licked up or eaten
by licking; ({%am%}), n. nectar, ambrosia, food that is
licked or sipped, a lambative, syrup, electuary;
food in general.
<LEND>

<L>40519<pc>0868-b<k1>lI<k2>lI<h>1
{#lI#} 1¦. {%lī,%} cl. 9. P. {%lināti%} (this form not
usually found), to adhere; to obtain (?);
cl. 1. P. {%layati%} (not usually found), to melt, liquefy,
dissolve; cl. 4. A. {%līyate%} (this is the usual form),
{%lilye, leṣyati%} or {%lāsyati, leṣyate%} or {%lāsyate,%}
{%aleṣṭa%} or {%alāsta, letum, lātum,%} to cling or press
closely, join or adhere firmly, adhere or stick to-
gether, cling to, embrace; to lie, recline, lie or rest
upon, sit upon, dwell in, stay in, haunt, lurk in, hide
in, cower down in; to be viscous or sticky; to be
solvable, to be dissolved; to be absorbed in; to be
devoted to; to disappear, vanish: Pass. {%līyate,%} Aor.
{%alāyi:%} Caus. (generally with prep. {%vi%}), {%-lāpayati%} or
{%-lāyayati%} or {%-līnayati%} or {%-lālayati,%} to melt, liquefy,
dissolve, &c., (see {%vi-lī;%} according to Pāṇ. I. 3, 70,
the form {%lāpayate%} in Ātmane-pada is used in the
sense of ‘to obtain honour,’ ‘cause to be honoured’):
Desid. {%lilīṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%lelīyate, lelayīti,%}
{%leleti%} (for {%lelāyati,%} which some consider an intensive
form of a rt. {%lī,%} see {%lelāya%}); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λεῖμαξ:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>līmus, po-lire, linere;</nsi> according to some, <nsi>liqueo,</nsi>
<nsi>liquo:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>lim, leim:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>lime,</nsi>
<nsi>lam.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40520<pc>0868-b<k1>laya<k2>laya
{%Laya, as,%}¦ m. the act of clinging, adhering, stick-
ing, union, adherence; embracing, an embrace ({%=%}
{%śleṣa, saṃ-śleṣaṇa%}); the act of lying, cowering,
lurking, hiding; melting, fusion, solution, melting
away, dissolution, absorption, extinction, disappearing,
vanishing, disappearance, destruction, reduction (of
the Universe &c.) into its original state, death,
({%layaṃ yā%} or {%gam,%} &c., to go to dissolution, melt
away, disappear, vanish; to be destroyed, perish);
rest, repose; place of rest, residence, house, dwelling;
mental inactivity, spiritual indifference, slackness of
mind; time (in music, regarded as of three kinds,
viz. {%druta,%} ‘quick,’ {%madhya,%} ‘mean or moderate,’
and {%vilambita,%} ‘slow’); a pause in music; a parti-
cular agricultural implement, (perhaps a sort of harrow
or hoe, Ved.); ({%am%}), n. the root of Andropogon
Muricatus; ({%as, ā, am%}), making the mind inactive
or indifferent. {%—Laya-kāla, as,%} m. time of disso-
lution or destruction. {%—Laya-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone
to dissolution, dissolved, melted. {%—Laya-putrī,%} f.
‘daughter of (musical) time,’ a female dancer,
[Page0868-c+ 79]
actress. {%—Layārambha (˚ya-ār˚)%} or {%layālamba%}
{%(˚ya-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘moving according to time,’ a
dancer, actor. {%—Layārka (˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m. the sun
at the dissolution of the world.
<LEND>

<L>40521<pc>0868-c<k1>layana<k2>layana
{%Layana, am,%}¦ n. the act of clinging, adhering,
lying, &c.; rest, repose; a place of rest, house.
<LEND>

<L>40522<pc>0868-c<k1>lAyaka<k2>lAyaka
{%Lāyaka, as,%}¦ &c., clinging, sticking, adhering, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40523<pc>0868-c<k1>lI<k2>lI<h>2
2. {%lī, īs,%}¦ f. clinging to, adhering, embracing, &c.;
liquefying, melting; {%= capala;%} [cf. {%lelāya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40524<pc>0868-c<k1>lIna<k2>lIna
{%Līna, as, ā, am,%}¦ clung or pressed closely together,
embraced, clung to, adhered to, attached to; clinging
to, sticking to, embracing, adhering, lying, lying on,
resting on, staying in, lurking, hiding, entered into;
dissolved, melted, absorbed, absorbed in or into,
swallowed up in; intimately united with; devoted
to, given up to; disappeared, effaced, vanished, de-
parted; ({%am%}), n. the being dissolved, melting, being
absorbed in, disappearance. {%—Līna-tā,%} f. or {%līna-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of clinging together or adher-
ing, adhesion, adhesiveness; the lying hidden or
concealed. {%—Līnāli (˚na-al˚), is, is, i,%} having bees
adhering (to anything), embraced or clung to by
bees.
<LEND>

<L>40525<pc>0868-c<k1>lelya<k2>lelya
{%Lelya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Intens., Vopa-deva XXVI.
29), clinging or adhering very closely, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40526<pc>0868-c<k1>lIkA<k2>lIkA
{#lIkA#}¦ {%līkā,%} f. epithet of particular evil
spirits.
<LEND>

<L>40527<pc>0868-c<k1>lIkkA<k2>lIkkA
{#lIkkA#}¦ {%līkkā%} or {%līkṣā,%} f. {%= likṣā.%}
<LEND>

<L>40528<pc>0868-c<k1>lIlA<k2>lIlA
{#lIlA#}¦ {%līlā,%} f. (supposed by some to be a
corruption of {%krīḍā;%} perhaps connected with rt.
1. {%las%} or with {%lelāya%}), play, sport, diversion, amuse-
ment, pastime; wanton sport, amorous pastime
(shown in the imitation of a lover's gait, manner,
&c.), wantonness; mere sport or play, mere amuse-
ment, joking, frivolity, child's play, ease or facility
in doing anything, ({%līlayā,%} out of sport, sportively,
for amusement, as a mere joke, with the greatest
ease, without effort); sportive appearance, semblance,
dissembling, dissimulation, pretence, disguise, sham;
air, mien, manner; grace, beauty, charm, loveliness;
a species of metre, four times ¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘¯˘˘
¯˘˘¯. {%—Līlā-kamala, am,%} n. a woman's toy-
lotus, a lotus-flower held in the hand as a plaything.
{%—Līlā-kara, as,%} m. a particular metre. {%—Līlā-%}
{%kalaha, as,%} m. a quarrel or dispute in play, sham-
fight, mock-fight. {%—Līlā-khela, as, ā, am,%} moving
or sporting playfully, playful; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. a kind
of metre, four times ¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯
{%—Līlāgāra (˚lā-āg˚)%} or {%līlā-gṛha%} or {%līlā-geha,%}
{%am,%} n. a pleasure-house, place of amusement or sport.
{%—Līlāṅga (˚lā-an˚), as, ī, am,%} having graceful or
playful limbs (said of a bull &c.). {%—Līlācala (˚lā-%}
{%ac˚), as,%} m., N. of a district. {%—Līlā-tanu, us,%} f. a
form assumed for mere sport or pleasure. {%—Līlā-%}
{%tāṇḍava-paṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} skilled in sportive
dances (said of Śiva). {%—Līlā-tāmarasa, am,%} n. a
lotus-flower held in the hand as a plaything. {%—Līlā-%}
{%dagdha, as, ā, am,%} burnt to ashes or consumed
without effort. {%—Līlādri (˚lā-ad˚), is,%} m. {%= līlā-%}
{%cala%}. {%—Līlā-naṭana, am,%} n. a sportive dance.
{%—Līlā-padma, am,%} n. a toy-lotus, (see {%līlā-ka-%}
{%mala.%}) {%—Līlā-parvata, as,%} m., N. of a mountain.
{%—Līlābja (˚lā-ab˚), am,%} n. {%= līlā-kamala%}. {%—Lī-%}
{%lābharaṇa (˚lā-ābh˚), am,%} n. a sham ornament (as
a bracelet made of a string of lotuses). {%—Līlā-%}
{%madhu-kara, as,%} m., N. of a drama. {%—Līlā-ma-%}
{%nuṣya, as,%} m. a sham man, man in disguise, one
not really a man. {%—Līlā-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting
of play or amusement, playful, sportive, relating to
play or amusement. {%—Līlā-mātreṇa,%} ind. out of
mere sport, in mere play, without the least effort.
{%—Līlā-mānuṣa-vigraha, as, ā, am,%} having a
human body merely for amusement, assuming the
shape of a man for a pretext or pretence; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Līlāmbuja (˚lā-am˚), am,%} n.
{%= līlā-kamala%}. {%—Līlāyudha (˚lā-āy˚), ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a people, (perhaps for {%nīlāyudha.%}) {%—Līlā-%}
{%rati, is,%} f. sportive amusement, sport, amusement.
{%—Līlāravinda (˚lā-ar˚), am,%} n. {%= līlā-kamala. %}
[Page0869-a+ 75]
{%—Līlā-vajra, am,%} n. an implement or instrument
shaped like a thunderbolt. {%—Līlā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessed of grace or beauty, graceful, beautiful,
charming; ({%atī%}), f. a beautiful and charming woman,
a wanton woman; N. of Durgā; of the wife of the
Asura Maya; of a merchant's daughter (in the
Hitopadeśa); a kind of metre; N. of a section of
the Siddhānta-śiromaṇi; of a well known treatise
on arithmetic, algebra, and geometry by Bhāskara
Ācārya; of an elementary treatise on the Vaiśeṣika
philosophy ({%= nyāya-l˚,%} q. v.); of a work on medi-
cine. {%—Līlāvatāra (˚lā-av˚), as,%} m. the descent (of
Viṣṇu on the earth) for his own amusement. {%—Lī-%}
{%lāvadhūta (˚lā-av˚), as, ā, am,%} gracefully waved
about. {%—Līlā-vāpī,%} f. a pleasure-tank or lake. {%—Līlā-%}
{%veśman, a,%} n. a pleasure-house; [cf. {%līlāgāra.%}]
{%—Līlā-śuka, as,%} m. ‘pleasure-parrot,’ N. of the
poet Vilva-maṅgala. {%—Līlā-sādhya, as, ā, am,%} to
be effected with ease. {%—Līlā-svātma-priya, as,%} m.,
N. of an author held in esteem by the Tāntrikas or
worshippers of Durgā. {%—Līlodyāna (˚lā-ud˚), am,%}
n. a pleasure-garden, pleasure-grounds.
<LEND>

<L>40529<pc>0869-a<k1>lIlAya<k2>lIlAya
{%Līlāya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%līlāyati, -yate, -yitum,%} to
play, sport, amuse one's self.
<LEND>

<L>40530<pc>0869-a<k1>lIlAyat<k2>lIlAyat
{%Līlāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ or {%līlāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}
playing, sporting, dallying, sporting wantonly.
<LEND>

<L>40531<pc>0869-a<k1>lIlAyita<k2>lIlAyita
{%Līlāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ done playfully or sportively,
written sportively; ({%am%}), n. play, sport, amusement.
<LEND>

<L>40532<pc>0869-a<k1>lIlopavatI<k2>lIlopavatI
{%Līlopavatī (?),%}¦ f. a kind of metre, four times
¯¯¯¯, ¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯.
<LEND>

<L>40533<pc>0869-a<k1>luk<k2>luk<h>1
{#luk#} 1¦. {%luk,%} an artificial root probably
meaning ‘to meet together,’ and apparently only in-
vented to explain {%lukeśvara;%} the forms {%lukiṣyasi%}
and {%lukitasya%} being also given.
<LEND>

<L>40534<pc>0869-a<k1>lukeSvara<k2>lukeSvara
{%Lukeśvara (˚ka-īś˚), am,%}¦ n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>40535<pc>0869-a<k1>luk<k2>luk<h>2
{#luk#} 2¦. {%luk%} (probably fr. Pass. of rt. {%luñc;%}
cf. {%luc%} below; the loc. c. however is {%luki,%} not {%luci%}),
a technical term or symbol in grammar to express
‘the dropping out’ or ‘disappearance’ of Pratyayas
or affixes; (it is properly regarded as a substitute for
an affix, preventing the appearance of any other affix
in its place, and neutralizing the effect which this affix
would have had on the base; the symbols {%luk, lup,%}
and {%ślu%} are distinguished from {%lopa,%} q. v., and are
called {%lu-mat,%} as containing the syllable {%lu.%})
<LEND>

<L>40536<pc>0869-a<k1>luN<k2>luN
{#luN#}¦ {%luṅ,%} a technical term or symbol in
grammar for the termination of the Aorist or Third
Preterite or for that Tense itself.
<LEND>

<L>40537<pc>0869-a<k1>luNga<k2>luNga
{#luNga#}¦ {%luṅga = mātuluṅga,%} a citron.
<LEND>

<L>40538<pc>0869-a<k1>luYc<k2>luYc
{#luYc#}¦ {%luñc,%} cl. 1. P. {%luñcati, luluñca,%} &c.,
to pluck, pull, tug, tear, pare, peel; to
pull or pluck out, pull off, tear off: Pass. {%lucyate,%}
to be plucked or pulled out, &c.; [cf. probably Lat.
<nsi>runcare;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>liuhhan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>lyccan;</nsi>
(according to some) Slav. <nsi>luc-i-ti;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>raupja;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>raufe.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40539<pc>0869-a<k1>luc<k2>luc
{%Luc, k,%}¦ f. plucking out or off, cutting off; drop-
ping out; [cf. 2. {%luk.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40540<pc>0869-a<k1>lucitvA<k2>lucitvA
{%Lucitvā,%}¦ ind. having plucked or pulled out; having
torn off.
<LEND>

<L>40541<pc>0869-a<k1>luYca<k2>luYca
{%Luñca, as, ā, am,%}¦ pulling or tearing out, one
who plucks or pulls.
<LEND>

<L>40542<pc>0869-a<k1>luYcaka<k2>luYcaka
{%Luñcaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who plucks or pulls
out, a tearer, &c. [cf. {%keśa-l˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. (perhaps)
a kind of grain.
<LEND>

<L>40543<pc>0869-a<k1>luYcana<k2>luYcana
{%Luñcana, am,%}¦ n. the act of plucking, tearing,
pulling out, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40544<pc>0869-a<k1>luYcita<k2>luYcita
{%Luñcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ plucked, pulled, plucked out,
&c.; peeled. {%—Luñcita-keśa, as,%} m. ‘having the
hair torn out, ‘N. of a Jaina ascetic (so called as
pulling out the hair of the head and body by way
of mortification).
<LEND>

<L>40545<pc>0869-a<k1>luYcitvA<k2>luYcitvA
{%Luñcitvā,%}¦ ind. having plucked or pulled out, &c.;
[cf. {%lucitvā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40546<pc>0869-a<k1>luYj<k2>luYj
{#luYj#}¦ {%luñj%} = rt. 2. {%lañj,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page0869-b+ 77]

<L>40547<pc>0869-b<k1>luw<k2>luw<h>1
{#luw#} 1¦. {%luṭ%} [cf. rts. {%ruṭ,%} 1. {%luṭh%}], cl. 1. A.
{%loṭate,%} &c., to repel, resist, oppose; to
suffer pain, be affected with grief; to shine; cl. 10.
P. {%loṭayati,%} to speak; to shine.
<LEND>

<L>40548<pc>0869-b<k1>luw<k2>luw<h>2
{#luw#} 2¦. {%luṭ%} [cf. rt. 2. {%luṭh%}], cl. 1. 4. P.
{%loṭati, luṭyati, luloṭa, aloṭīt%} or {%aluṭat,%}
{%loṭitum,%} to roll, roll about, roll on the ground, wal-
low; to be connected or in contact with (?); cl. 1. A.
{%loṭate,%} &c., to go (according to Naigh. II. 14): Caus.
{%loṭayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%alūluṭat%} or {%aluloṭat.%}
<LEND>

<L>40549<pc>0869-b<k1>lowana<k2>lowana
{%Loṭana, am,%}¦ n. rolling, wallowing, tumbling.
<LEND>

<L>40550<pc>0869-b<k1>luw<k2>luw<h>3
{#luw#} 3¦. {%luṭ,%} a technical term or symbol in
grammar for the terminations of the First Future or
for that Tense itself.
<LEND>

<L>40551<pc>0869-b<k1>luW<k2>luW<h>1
{#luW#} 1¦. {%luṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%loṭhati, luloṭha,%}
{%aluṭhat, loṭhitum,%} to strike, knock down;
cl. 1. A. {%loṭhate, luluṭhe, aloṭhiṣṭa,%} to resist,
oppose, repel; to suffer pain; to go (according to
Naigh. II. 14); cl. 10. P. {%loṭhayati%} [cf. rt. {%luṇṭh%}],
to rob, plunder, steal, pillage, sack.
<LEND>

<L>40552<pc>0869-b<k1>luW<k2>luW<h>2
{#luW#} 2¦. {%luṭh,%} cl. 6. P. {%luṭhati, luloṭha,%}
{%aluṭhat,%} &c., {%luṭhitum,%} to roll, roll
about, move about, move to and fro, roll on the
ground, wallow, welter; to roll down; to agitate,
move, stir, (in this sense = rt. {%luḍ%}): Caus. {%loṭha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%alūluṭhat%} or {%aluloṭhat,%} to cause
to roll, make to move to and fro: Desid. {%luluṭhi-%}
{%ṣate,%} to wish to roll, intend to roll, to be on the
point of rolling; [cf. Hib. <nsi>liuth,</nsi> ‘I move, hasten.’]
<LEND>

<L>40553<pc>0869-b<k1>luWat<k2>luWat
{%Luṭhat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} rolling, rolling on the
ground, falling down; flowing, trickling (?).
<LEND>

<L>40554<pc>0869-b<k1>luWana<k2>luWana
{%Luṭhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of rolling, rolling or
wallowing on the earth, rolling on the ground with
sorrow. {%—Luṭhaneśvara-tīrtha (˚na-īś˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>40555<pc>0869-b<k1>luWamAna<k2>luWamAna
{%Luṭhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ rolling, moving to and
fro.
<LEND>

<L>40556<pc>0869-b<k1>luWita<k2>luWita
{%Luṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rolled, rolled down, rolling
on the ground (as a horse &c.); fallen; ({%am%}), n.
the rolling on the ground (of a horse).
<LEND>

<L>40557<pc>0869-b<k1>luWeSvara<k2>luWeSvara
{%Luṭheśvara (˚ṭha-īś˚), am,%}¦ n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>40558<pc>0869-b<k1>loWa<k2>loWa
{%Loṭha, as,%}¦ m. rolling, rolling on the ground.
<LEND>

<L>40559<pc>0869-b<k1>loWana<k2>loWana
{%Loṭhana, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40560<pc>0869-b<k1>luq<k2>luq
{#luq#}¦ {%luḍ%} (= rt. {%lul,%} cf. rts. 2. {%luṭ,%} 2. {%luṭh%}),
cl. 1. P. {%loḍati,%} &c., to agitate, move
about, stir, churn, disturb; cl. 6. P. {%luḍati,%} &c., to
adhere, be attached; to cover: Caus. {%loḍayati,%} &c.,
to set in motion, agitate, disturb.
<LEND>

<L>40561<pc>0869-b<k1>loqana<k2>loqana
{%Loḍana, am,%}¦ n. the act of agitating or disturbing.
<LEND>

<L>40562<pc>0869-b<k1>loqayat<k2>loqayat
{%Loḍayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ agitating, disturbing.
<LEND>

<L>40563<pc>0869-b<k1>loqita<k2>loqita
{%Loḍita, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%lolita%}], agitated, troubled.
<LEND>

<L>40564<pc>0869-b<k1>loqyamAna<k2>loqyamAna
{%Loḍyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being agitated, being
stirred.
<LEND>

<L>40565<pc>0869-b<k1>luRw<k2>luRw
{#luRw#}¦ {%luṇṭ%} [cf. rts. {%ruṇṭ, ruṇṭh,%} 1. {%luṭh,%}
{%luṇḍ%}], cl. 1. P. {%luṇṭati,%} &c., to rob,
plunder; cl. 10. P. {%luṇṭayati,%} &c., to rob, plunder;
to peel, (for rt. {%luñc%}); to disregard, despise.
<LEND>

<L>40566<pc>0869-b<k1>luRwaka<k2>luRwaka
{%Luṇṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of vegetable; a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40567<pc>0869-b<k1>luRwA<k2>luRwA
{%Luṇṭā,%}¦ f. robbing; rolling, (for {%luṭhana,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>40568<pc>0869-b<k1>luRwAka<k2>luRwAka
{%Luṇṭāka, as,%}¦ m. a robber, thief; a crow.
<LEND>

<L>40569<pc>0869-b<k1>luRwita<k2>luRwita
{%Luṇṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ robbed, plundered; peeled,
(for {%luñcita.%})
<LEND>

<L>40570<pc>0869-b<k1>luRW<k2>luRW
{#luRW#}¦ {%luṇṭh%} (= rt. {%ruṇṭh%}), cl. 1. P. {%luṇ-%}
{%ṭhati,%} &c., to go; to stir up, agitate,
excite, set in motion (= rts. 2. {%luṭh, luḍ%}); to be
idle; to be lame; to repel, resist; to steal, rob,
plunder, pillage [cf. rts. {%ruṇṭ, luṇṭ,%} 1. {%luṭh%}]: Caus.
{%luṇṭhayati,%} to rob, steal, plunder, sack; to peel,
(for rt. {%luñc.%})
<LEND>

<L>40571<pc>0869-b<k1>luRWaka<k2>luRWaka
{%Luṇṭhaka, as,%}¦ m. a robber, plunderer.
<LEND>

<L>40572<pc>0869-b<k1>luRWat<k2>luRWat
{%Luṇṭhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ stirring up, exciting, agi-
tating; rolling, (for {%luṭhat.%})
<LEND>

<L>40573<pc>0869-b<k1>luRWana<k2>luRWana
{%Luṇṭhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of plundering, pillaging.
<LEND>

<L>40574<pc>0869-b<k1>luRWanadI<k2>luRWanadI
{%Luṇṭha-nadī,%}¦ f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>40575<pc>0869-b<k1>luRWayat<k2>luRWayat
{%Luṇṭhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ plundering, pillaging.
<LEND>

<L>40576<pc>0869-b<k1>luRWA<k2>luRWA
{%Luṇṭhā,%}¦ f. robbing, pillaging, &c.; rolling, &c.,
(for {%luṭhana,%} q. v.)
<LEND>
[Page0869-c+ 78]

<L>40577<pc>0869-c<k1>luRWAka<k2>luRWAka
{%Luṇṭhāka, as,%}¦ m. a robber; a crow.
<LEND>

<L>40578<pc>0869-c<k1>luRWi<k2>luRWi
{%Luṇṭhi, is,%}¦ f. plundering, pillaging, sacking.
<LEND>

<L>40579<pc>0869-c<k1>luRWita<k2>luRWita
{%Luṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ plundered, pillaged, robbed,
stolen; peeled, (for {%luñcita.%})
<LEND>

<L>40580<pc>0869-c<k1>luRWI<k2>luRWI
{%Luṇṭhī,%}¦ f. {%= luṭhana,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40581<pc>0869-c<k1>luRq<k2>luRq
{#luRq#}¦ {%luṇḍ%} (= rts. {%ruṇṭ, luṇṭ,%} 1. {%luṭh%}),
cl. 1. 10. P. {%luṇḍati, luṇḍayati,%} &c.,
to rob, plunder.
<LEND>

<L>40582<pc>0869-c<k1>luRqikA<k2>luRqikA
{#luRqikA#}¦ {%luṇḍikā,%} f. a ball, round mass
(of anything); proper behaviour, fitting conduct.
<LEND>

<L>40583<pc>0869-c<k1>luRqI<k2>luRqI
{%Luṇḍī,%}¦ f. proper behaviour, becoming conduct,
acting and judging rightly.
<LEND>

<L>40584<pc>0869-c<k1>luRqIkf<k2>luRqIkf
{%Luṇḍī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to roll into a
ball, roll up, roll together. {%—Luṇḍī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} made into a ball, rolled up together.
<LEND>

<L>40585<pc>0869-c<k1>lunT<k2>lunT
{#lunT#}¦ {%lunth%} [cf. rts. 1. {%luṭh,%} 1. {%luṭ%}], cl.
1. P. {%lunthati,%} &c., to strike, hurt,
kill; to afflict; to suffer pain.
<LEND>

<L>40586<pc>0869-c<k1>lup<k2>lup<h>1
{#lup#} 1¦. {%lup%} (a later form of rt. 1. {%rup%}),
cl. 6. P. A. {%lumpati, -te, lulopa, lulupe,%}
{%lopsyati, -te, alupat, alupta, loptum,%} to break,
fracture, violate, break in pieces, cut, cut off, mutilate,
destroy, injure, spoil; to seize, pounce upon; to rob,
plunder, take away, deprive of; to suppress, elide, erase,
cause to disappear; cl. 4. P. {%lupyati, lulopa, lopiṣ-%}
{%yati, lopitum,%} to be suppressed or destroyed [cf. {%lup-%}
{%yate%} below]; to disturb, bewilder, perplex, confound
[cf. rt. {%lubh,%} with which {%lup%} appears to be connected;
see {%lolupa%}]: Pass. {%lupyate,%} Aor. {%alopi,%} to be
broken or violated; to be suppressed or lost, be
elided, suffer elision, disappear (in grammar): Caus.
{%lopayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%alūlupat%} or {%alulopat,%} to
cause to break or violate; to break, infringe, violate,
offend against, thwart, injure; to omit, neglect, miss;
to cause to swerve from (with abl.): Desid. {%lulup-%}
{%sati, -te, lulopiṣati,%} &c.: Intens. {%lolupyate, lo-%}
{%lopti,%} to confound, disturb, bewilder, perplex; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">λυπ-ρό-ς, λυπ-ή, λυπ-έ-ω, λυπη-ρό-ς,</lang> perhaps
also <lang n="greek">Ὄλυμπος:</lang> Lat. <nsi>rump-o:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>raubon:</nsi>
(probably) Goth. <nsi>raupjan,</nsi> ‘to pull out:’ Angl. Sax.
<nsi>reaf, reafian:</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>rŷf:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>rup-e-ti,</nsi>
<nsi>rup-u-s:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>lom-i-ti:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>reubaim,</nsi> ‘I tear,
lacerate;’ <nsi>reuban,</nsi> ‘plundering, robbery;’ <nsi>lomaim,</nsi>
‘I sheer, shave, make bare.’]
<LEND>

<L>40587<pc>0869-c<k1>lup<k2>lup<h>2
2. {%lup,%}¦ falling or dropping out, suppression, elision,
cutting off, rejection, ({%lup%} is one of the three tech-
nical terms for grammatical elision classed with {%luk,%}
q. v.; it is especially applicable to a Taddhita affix,
implying its disappearance and preventing the ap-
pearance of any other affix in its place.)
<LEND>

<L>40588<pc>0869-c<k1>lupta<k2>lupta
{%Lupta, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken, violated, injured,
destroyed; robbed, plundered, deprived of; omitted,
left off, neglected; suppressed, cut off, elided (in
grammar), rejected, fallen or dropped out, disap-
peared, lost, obsolete, disused; ({%am%}), n. stolen pro-
perty, plunder, booty. {%—Lupta-tā,%} f. the state of
being cut off or elided, disappearance, suppression,
non-existence. {%—Lupta-dharma-kriya, as, ā, am,%}
excluded from or deprived of religious ordinances.
{%—Lupta-pada, as, ā, am,%} wanting (whole) words.
{%—Lupta-piṇḍodaka-kriya (˚ḍa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%}
deprived of funeral rites. {%—Lupta-pratibha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deprived of reason. {%—Lupta-visarga-tā,%} f. the
dropping of Visarga. {%—Luptopama (˚ta-up˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} wanting or failing in the particle of compa-
rison; ({%ā%}), f. (in rhetoric) a mutilated or elliptical
simile (the conjunction expressing comparison being
omitted), a metaphor.
<LEND>

<L>40589<pc>0869-c<k1>lupyamAna<k2>lupyamAna
{%Lupyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being broken, being cut
off, being perplexed or confused.
<LEND>

<L>40590<pc>0869-c<k1>lopa<k2>lopa
{%Lopa, as,%}¦ m. breaking, violation, fracture, mutila-
tion, cutting off, destruction; robbing, plundering,
stealing, deprivation, want, deficiency, loss, interrup-
tion, intermission, omission, separation, disappear-
ance, dropping or falling out, rejection, annulling,
cancelling, erasure, grammatical elision, ({%lopa%} is the
technical term for elision generally as distinguished
from the terms {%lup, ślu, luk,%} which are only appli-
[Page0870-a+ 80]
cable to affixes; when {%lopa%} of an affix takes place,
a blank is substituted, which exerts the same influence
on the base as the affix itself, but when either {%luk%} or
{%lup%} or {%ślu%} of an affix is enjoined, then the affix is
not only dropped but it is also inoperative on the
base; thus in the 1st pl. of {%kati,%} where {%jas%} is said
to be elided by {%luk,%} the change of the final of the
base to Guṇa does not take place, i. e. both the affix
and its effect on the base are abolished; moreover,
{%lopa%} may refer only to the last letter of an affix,
whereas by {%luk%} &c. the dropping of the whole affix
is implied); ({%ā%}), f. {%= lopāmudrā%}. {%—Lopāpatti (˚pa-%}
{%āp˚), is,%} f. the being cut off or elided, the being
dropped. {%—Lopāmudrā (˚pa-am˚),%} f., N. of the
reputed wife of Agastya (regarded as the authoress
of Ṛg-veda I. 179, 4). {%—Lopāmudrā-pati, is,%} m.
‘husband of Lopāmudrā,’ N. of the sage Agastya.
<LEND>

<L>40591<pc>0870-a<k1>lopaka<k2>lopaka
{%Lopaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ interrupting, annihilating,
({%dhāra-lopaka, am,%} n. [probably] epithet of a par-
ticular ceremony); ({%as%}), m. violation.
<LEND>

<L>40592<pc>0870-a<k1>lopana<k2>lopana
{%Lopana, am,%}¦ n. the act of omitting or violating,
violation; [cf. {%vrata-l˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40593<pc>0870-a<k1>lopAka<k2>lopAka
{%Lopāka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of jackal.
<LEND>

<L>40594<pc>0870-a<k1>lopApaka<k2>lopApaka
{%Lopāpaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of jackal; ({%ikā%}), f. the
female of this jackal.
<LEND>

<L>40595<pc>0870-a<k1>lopASa<k2>lopASa
{%Lopāśa, as,%}¦ m. a jackal, fox, or a similar animal;
[cf., according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀλώπηξ</lang>.]
<LEND>

<L>40596<pc>0870-a<k1>lopASaka<k2>lopASaka
{%Lopāśaka, as,%}¦ m. a jackal; a proper N.; ({%ikā%}),
f. the female of a jackal, a female fox.
<LEND>

<L>40597<pc>0870-a<k1>lopin<k2>lopin
{%Lopin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ causing loss, doing an injury or
wrong, injuring; liable or subject to elision, suffering
elision.
<LEND>

<L>40598<pc>0870-a<k1>loptf<k2>loptf
{%Loptṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who interrupts or violates,
a violator, injurer.
<LEND>

<L>40599<pc>0870-a<k1>loptra<k2>loptra
{%Loptra, am, ī,%}¦ n. f. stolen property, plunder, booty.
<LEND>

<L>40600<pc>0870-a<k1>lopya<k2>lopya
{%Lopya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be broken or destroyed; to
be rejected or elided, to be omitted or passed over;
(perhaps) being among thickets or inaccessible places
(Ved.; cf. {%ulupa%}).
<LEND>

<L>40601<pc>0870-a<k1>lubDa<k2>lubDa
{#lubDa#}¦ {%lubdha, lubdhaka,%} &c. See below.
<LEND>

<L>40602<pc>0870-a<k1>luB<k2>luB
{#luB#}¦ {%lubh,%} cl. 4. P. {%lubhyati, lulobha%}
(A. {%lulubhe%}), {%lobhiṣyati, alubhat, lo-%}
{%bhitum, lobdhum,%} to desire greatly or eagerly,
covet, long for anything (dat. or loc.); to be inter-
ested in; to allure, ({%māṃ lulubhe,%} he allured me);
to be perplexed or disturbed, become disordered, go
astray; cl. 6. P. {%lubhati,%} &c., Aor. {%alobhīt,%} to be-
wilder, confound, perplex, disturb: Caus. {%lobhayati,%}
&c., to cause to desire or long for, make greedy; ex-
cite greediness or covetousness, excite lust; to allure,
entice, entice away, seduce, attract; to disturb, de-
range: Desid. {%lulubhiṣati, lulobhiṣati:%} Intens.
{%lolubhyate, lolobdhi;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λίψ, λιψ-ουρία,</lang>
<lang n="greek">λίπ-τ-ομαι, ἐλευθερός:</lang> Lat. <nsi>lub-et, lib-et, lib-ī-do,</nsi>
<nsi>lib-er, Libentina:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>liub-s,</nsi> ‘dear;’ <nsi>brothra-</nsi>
<nsi>lub-o, us-laubjan:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>liub-an, môt-luba,</nsi>
<nsi>lob, lob-ô-n:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>leof, lyfan, lufian, lof,</nsi>
<nsi>leaf, left:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>ljub-i-ti,</nsi> ‘to love;’ <nsi>liub-y, ljub-</nsi>
<nsi>imi, liub-y-ti, liub-jaus:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>lubju.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40603<pc>0870-a<k1>lubDa<k2>lubDa
{%Lubdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ desiring, covetous, greedy,
avaricious; desirous of, longing for, (sometimes with
loc., e. g. {%yaśasi lubdhaḥ,%} desirous of fame); ({%as%}),
m. a hunter; a lustful man, libertine. {%—Lubdha-%}
{%jana, as, ā, am,%} having covetous followers. {%—Lub-%}
{%dha-tā,%} f. or {%lubdha-tva, am,%} n. greediness, ava-
riciousness, covetousness, eager desire for.
<LEND>

<L>40604<pc>0870-a<k1>lubDaka<k2>lubDaka
{%Lubdhaka, as,%}¦ m. a covetous or greedy man; a
lustful man, libertine; a hunter; the star Sirius (so
called according to a legend which narrates that Śiva
transformed himself into a hunter in order to shoot
an arrow [represented by the three stars in the belt
of Orion lying in a direct line with Sirius] at Brahmā
transformed into a deer and pursuing his own daughter
metamorphosed into a doe for the purpose of com-
mitting incest with her; cf. {%mṛga-vyādha%}); epi-
thet of the hinder parts.
<LEND>

<L>40605<pc>0870-a<k1>lubDvA<k2>lubDvA
{%Lubdhvā,%}¦ ind. having desired or longed for, hav-
ing coveted.
<LEND>

<L>40606<pc>0870-a<k1>luBita<k2>luBita
{%Lubhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ perplexed, disturbed, de-
luded, fascinated.
<LEND>
[Page0870-b+ 78]

<L>40607<pc>0870-b<k1>luBitvA<k2>luBitvA
{%Lubhitvā,%}¦ ind. having perplexed or disturbed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40608<pc>0870-b<k1>luByat<k2>luByat
{%Lubhyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ desiring greatly, coveting,
longing for.
<LEND>

<L>40609<pc>0870-b<k1>loBa<k2>loBa
{%Lobha, as,%}¦ m. eager desire or wish, covetousness,
cupidity, avarice, greediness, greed; Avarice perso-
nified (as a son of Puṣṭi or of Dambha and Māyā);
desire for or after (with gen. or at the end of a
comp.). {%—Lobha-mañjarī,%} f. the pearl of covetous-
ness. {%—Lobha-mohita, as, ā, am,%} beguiled by covet-
ousness, infatuated through avarice. {%—Lobha-viraha,%}
{%as,%} m. absence of avarice; ({%as, ā, am%}), free from
cupidity. {%—Lobhākṛṣṭa (˚bha-āk˚), as, ā, am,%}
attracted by greediness, tempted by covetousness.
{%—Lobhānvita (˚bha-an˚), as, ā, am,%} possessed of
covetousness, avaricious, greedy. {%—Lobhābhipātin%}
{%(˚bha-abh˚), ī, inī, i,%} hastening through eager desire,
rushing greedily. {%—Lobhotkarṣa (˚bha-ut˚), as,%} m.
excess of avarice, excessive greed or avarice.
<LEND>

<L>40610<pc>0870-b<k1>loBana<k2>loBana
{%Lobhana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), alluring, en-
ticing, attracting, charming; ({%am%}), n. the act of
alluring, allurement, enticement, temptation; gold.
<LEND>

<L>40611<pc>0870-b<k1>loBanIya<k2>loBanIya
{%Lobhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be desired or longed
for, alluring, enticing, seductive, attractive. {%—Lobha-%}
{%nīya-tama, as, ā, am,%} most worthy of being de-
sired, most attractive. {%—Lobhanīyatamākṛti (˚ma-%}
{%āk˚), is, is, i,%} having a most attractive figure.
<LEND>

<L>40612<pc>0870-b<k1>loBayAna<k2>loBayAna
{%Lobhayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ alluring, enticing, seducing.
<LEND>

<L>40613<pc>0870-b<k1>loBayitvA<k2>loBayitvA
{%Lobhayitvā,%}¦ ind. having allured or enticed.
<LEND>

<L>40614<pc>0870-b<k1>loBAyana<k2>loBAyana
{%Lobhāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>40615<pc>0870-b<k1>loBita<k2>loBita
{%Lobhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ allured, enticed, seduced.
{%—Lobhita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has allured,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>40616<pc>0870-b<k1>loBitvA<k2>loBitvA
{%Lobhitvā,%}¦ ind. See {%lubhitvā, lubdhvā.%}
<LEND>

<L>40617<pc>0870-b<k1>loBin<k2>loBin
{%Lobhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ desirous, greedy, covetous, ava-
ricious, longing for, eager after, desirous of (often at
the end of comps., e. g. {%dhana-lobhin,%} desirous of
wealth); alluring, enticing, attracting.
<LEND>

<L>40618<pc>0870-b<k1>loBya<k2>loBya
{%Lobhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eagerly desired, desir-
able, alluring, enticing, attractive; ({%as%}), m. Phaseolus
Mungo.
<LEND>

<L>40619<pc>0870-b<k1>loByamAna<k2>loByamAna
{%Lobhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being allured or enticed.
<LEND>

<L>40620<pc>0870-b<k1>lumat<k2>lumat
{#lumat#}¦ {%lu-mat.%} See under 2. {%luk,%} p. 869.
<LEND>

<L>40621<pc>0870-b<k1>lumb<k2>lumb
{#lumb#}¦ {%lumb,%} cl. 1. P. {%lumbati,%} &c., to
torment, harass; cl. 10. P. {%lumbayati,%}
&c., to torment; to be invisible.
<LEND>

<L>40622<pc>0870-b<k1>lumbikA<k2>lumbikA
{#lumbikA#}¦ {%lumbikā,%} f. a particular musical
instrument.
<LEND>

<L>40623<pc>0870-b<k1>lumbinI<k2>lumbinI
{#lumbinI#}¦ {%lumbinī,%} f., N. of a princess; of
a grove named after this princess.
<LEND>

<L>40624<pc>0870-b<k1>lumbinIya<k2>lumbinIya
{%Lumbinīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the above.
<LEND>

<L>40625<pc>0870-b<k1>lul<k2>lul
{#lul#}¦ {%lul%} (closely connected with rt.
{%luḍ%}), cl. 1. P. {%lolati,%} &c., to move
about, move hither and thither, roll about; to stir,
agitate, disturb, make tremulous; cl. 6. P. {%lulati,%}
&c. (for {%luḍati,%} see rt. {%luḍ%}), to adhere, be attached:
Caus. {%lolayati,%} &c., to set in motion, agitate, dis-
turb, confound, put in confusion.
<LEND>

<L>40626<pc>0870-b<k1>lulita<k2>lulita
{%Lulita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, agitated, tossed about,
moved to and fro, moving hither and thither, shaking
about, fluttering, tremulous, heaving, waving, curling,
disturbed, confused, bewildered; disarranged, injured,
destroyed; adhering, coming in contact, touching;
agreeable, elegant (for {%lalita?%}). {%—Lulita-maṇ-%}
{%ḍana, as, ā, am,%} having ornaments tossed about in
confusion.
<LEND>

<L>40627<pc>0870-b<k1>lola<k2>lola
{%Lola, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving hither and thither, shak-
ing, rolling, tossing, swinging about, dangling, pen-
dent, tremulous, trembling, quivering, agitated,
alarmed, unsteady, restless, uneasy; changeable, in-
constant, fickle; desiring, desirous, coveting, long-
ing for, eager or anxious for, greedy, lustful; ({%as%}),
m. a proper N.; ({%ā%}), f. the tongue; lightning;
the goddess of fortune or Lakṣmī (as ‘the fickle or
changeable one’); N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in Utpalāvar-
taka; of the mother of the Daitya Madhu; of a
female personification in Hindū music; of a metre,
four times twenty-four instants [cf. {%rolā%}]; of another,
four times ¯¯¯˘˘¯¯, ¯¯¯˘˘¯¯. {%—Lola- %}
[Page0870-c+ 77]
{%kuṇḍala, as, ā, am,%} having dangling or pendent
ear-rings. {%—Lola-ghaṭa (?) ,%} the wind. {%—Lola-jihva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a rolling or restless tongue, in-
satiable, greedy. {%—Lola-tā,%} f. or {%lola-tva, am,%} n.
movableness, tremulousness, fickleness, unsteadiness,
restlessness; eager desire for, cupidity, lustfulness,
lust. {%—Lola-lola, as, ā, am,%} being in constant
motion, continually moving, ever restless. {%—Lolākṣi%}
{%(˚la-ak˚), is, is, i,%} having a rolling eye. {%—Lolā-%}
{%kṣikā,%} f. (a woman) with a rolling eye. {%—Lolā-%}
{%pāṅga (˚la-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} having tremulous or
quivering outer corners (said of the eyes). {%—Lolārka%}
{%(˚la-ar˚), as,%} m. a form of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>40628<pc>0870-c<k1>lolat<k2>lolat
{%Lolat, an, antī, at,%}¦ moving to and fro, rolling,
tossing about. {%—Lolad-bhuja, as, ā, am,%} having
swinging arms.
<LEND>

<L>40629<pc>0870-c<k1>lolana<k2>lolana
{%Lolana, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>40630<pc>0870-c<k1>lolamAna<k2>lolamAna
{%Lolamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ rolling, tossing, rolling on
the ground.
<LEND>

<L>40631<pc>0870-c<k1>lolita<k2>lolita
{%Lolita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved hither and thither,
waved to and fro, shaken, agitated, tremulous, trem-
bling; [cf. {%loḍita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40632<pc>0870-c<k1>lulApa<k2>lulApa
{#lulApa#}¦ {%lulāpa, as,%} m. (said to be con-
nected with rt. {%lul%}), a buffalo. {%—Lulāpa-kanda, as,%}
m. a kind of plant with a tuberous root {%(= mahiṣa-%}
{%kanda)%}. {%—Lulāpa-kāntā,%} f. a buffalo cow.
<LEND>

<L>40633<pc>0870-c<k1>lulAya<k2>lulAya
{%Lulāya, as,%}¦ m. a buffalo.
<LEND>

<L>40634<pc>0870-c<k1>luSa<k2>luSa
{#luSa#}¦ {%luśa, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi with the
patronymic Dhānāka (author of the hymns Ṛg-veda
X. 35, 36).
<LEND>

<L>40635<pc>0870-c<k1>luSAkapi<k2>luSAkapi
{#luSAkapi#}¦ {%luśākapi, is,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40636<pc>0870-c<k1>luz<k2>luz
{#luz#}¦ {%luṣ%} [cf. rt. {%lūṣ%}], cl. 1. P. {%loṣati,%}
&c., to rob, plunder.
<LEND>

<L>40637<pc>0870-c<k1>luzaBa<k2>luzaBa
{#luzaBa#}¦ {%luṣabha, as,%} m. (according to
Uṇādi-s. III. 124. fr. rt. 1. {%ruṣ%}), an elephant in
rut; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λύσσα.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>40638<pc>0870-c<k1>luh<k2>luh
{#luh#}¦ {%luh%} (connected with rt. {%lubh%}), cl.
1. P. {%lohati,%} &c., to covet.
<LEND>

<L>40639<pc>0870-c<k1>lU<k2>lU<h>1
{#lU#} 1¦. {%lū,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%lunāti%} (Ved. also
cl. 5. {%lunoti%}), {%lunīte, lulāva%} (2nd sing. {%lu-%}
{%lavitha,%} 3rd du. {%luluvatus%}), {%luluve%} (2nd pl. {%lulu-%}
{%vidhve%} or {%luluviḍhve%}), {%laviṣyati, -te, alāvīt,%}
{%alaviṣṭa%} (2nd pl. {%alavidhvam%} or {%alaviḍhvam%}),
{%lavitum,%} to cut, sever, divide, clip, reap, pluck,
gather; to cut off, cut up, cut to pieces, destroy:
Pass. {%lūyate,%} Aor. {%alāvi:%} Caus. {%lāvayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%alīlavat, alīlavata,%} to cause to cut: Desid.
of Caus. {%lilāvayiṣati:%} Desid. {%lulūṣati, -te:%}
Intens. {%lolūyate, loloti,%} to cut completely off: Desid.
of Intens. {%lolūyiṣate;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λύ-ω, λύ-α, λύ-σι-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">λυ-τήρ, λύ-τρο-ν, ἀπο-λαύω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>re-lu-o,</nsi>
<nsi>so-lv-o</nsi> (for <nsi>se-lu-o</nsi>), <nsi>so-lu-tu-s, lu-o, lucrum;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>lau-s-j-a, laus, us-laus-ein-s, fra-lius-an;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>leosan, lysan, leas, los;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>lauju;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>ru-a-ti, runo, rus-i-ti.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40640<pc>0870-c<k1>lava<k2>lava
{%Lava, lavaka, lavanīya,%}¦ &c. See p. 863, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40641<pc>0870-c<k1>lavitvA<k2>lavitvA
{%Lavitvā,%}¦ ind. having cut, having cut off or
gathered. See {%lūtvā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>40642<pc>0870-c<k1>lAva<k2>lAva
{%Lāva, as, ī, am,%}¦ cutting, severing, dividing, reap-
ing; plucking, gathering, ({%kusuma-lāvī,%} a female
gatherer of flowers); cutting off; cutting to pieces,
destroying, killing [cf. {%śatru-l˚%}]; {%= lāba,%} a quail,
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40643<pc>0870-c<k1>lAvaka<k2>lAvaka
{%Lāvaka, as,%}¦ m. a cutter, divider, reaper; {%= lā-%}
{%baka,%} a quail, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40644<pc>0870-c<k1>lAvin<k2>lAvin
{%Lāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ cutting, reaping; gathering,
plucking; [cf. {%puṣpa-l˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40645<pc>0870-c<k1>lAvya<k2>lAvya
{%Lāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut, to be reaped, to be
cut through.
<LEND>

<L>40646<pc>0870-c<k1>lunat<k2>lunat
{%Lunat, an, atī, at,%}¦ or {%lunāna, as, ā, am,%} cut-
ting, severing, dividing, reaping, cutting off, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40647<pc>0870-c<k1>lU<k2>lU<h>2
2. {%lū, ūs, ūs, u,%}¦ cutting, dividing, cutting off,
plucking.
<LEND>

<L>40648<pc>0870-c<k1>lUtvA<k2>lUtvA
{%Lūtvā,%}¦ ind. having cut or divided, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40649<pc>0870-c<k1>lUna<k2>lUna
{%Lūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, severed, clipped; reaped;
plucked, gathered (said of flowers); cut off, cut
down, wounded; nibbled at, bitten; destroyed;
[Page0871-a+ 69]
({%am%}), n. {%= lūma,%} a tail. {%—Lūna-yavam,%} ind. after
the barley has been cut, after barley-harvest. {%—Lūna-%}
{%viṣa, as, ā, am,%} having poison in the tail.
<LEND>

<L>40650<pc>0871-a<k1>lUnaka<k2>lUnaka
{%Lūnaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, divided; ({%as%}), m. a cut,
division, wound, anything cut or broken; sort,
species, difference; an animal.
<LEND>

<L>40651<pc>0871-a<k1>lUni<k2>lUni
{%Lūni, is,%}¦ f. the act of cutting, reaping, cutting off;
rice (?) .
<LEND>

<L>40652<pc>0871-a<k1>lUnI<k2>lUnI
{%Lūnī,%}¦ see Vopa-deva III. 61.
<LEND>

<L>40653<pc>0871-a<k1>lUyamAna<k2>lUyamAna
{%Lūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being cut, being plucked
or gathered. {%—Lūyamāna-yavam,%} ind. when the
barley is cut.
<LEND>

<L>40654<pc>0871-a<k1>loluva<k2>loluva
{%Loluva, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Intens.), cutting much
or often.
<LEND>

<L>40655<pc>0871-a<k1>lolUyA<k2>lolUyA
{%Lolūyā,%}¦ f. determination to cut. {%—Lolūyā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} resolved to cut or cut off.
<LEND>

<L>40656<pc>0871-a<k1>lUkza<k2>lUkza
{#lUkza#}¦ {%lūkṣa, as, ā, am, = rūkṣa%} in {%a-l˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40657<pc>0871-a<k1>lUtA<k2>lUtA
{#lUtA#}¦ {%lūtā,%} f. a spider; an ant; a kind of
cutaneous disease (said to be produced by moisture
from a spider). {%—Lūtā-tantu, us,%} m. a spider's web,
cobweb. {%—Lūtā-markaṭaka, as,%} m. an ape; Arabian
jasmine; {%= putrī%}. {%—Lūtāri (˚tā-ari), is,%} m. ‘spider-
enemy, ‘a kind of shrub ({%= dugdha-phenī%}).
<LEND>

<L>40658<pc>0871-a<k1>lUtikA<k2>lUtikA
{%Lūtikā,%}¦ f. a spider.
<LEND>

<L>40659<pc>0871-a<k1>lUma<k2>lUma
{#lUma#}¦ {%lūma, am,%} n. (connected with {%lūna,%}
q. v.), a tail, a hairy tail (as a horse's or monkey's).
{%—Lūma-viṣa, as,%} m. ‘having poison in the tail,’
any animal that stings with the tail (as a scorpion).
<LEND>

<L>40660<pc>0871-a<k1>lUz<k2>lUz
{#lUz#}¦ {%lūṣ%} [cf. rts. {%luṣ, rūṣ%}], cl. 1. P. {%lū-%}
{%ṣati,%} &c., to adorn, decorate; cl. 10. P.
{%lūṣayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%alūluṣat,%} to hurt, injure,
kill; to rob, steal, (also cl. 1. P. {%loṣati.%})
<LEND>

<L>40661<pc>0871-a<k1>lUza<k2>lUza
{%Lūṣa%}¦ in {%arka-l˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40662<pc>0871-a<k1>lUha<k2>lUha
{#lUha#}¦ {%lūha, as, ā, am,%} bad?; ({%as%}), m. a
proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40663<pc>0871-a<k1>lUhasudatta<k2>lUhasudatta
{%Lūhasudatta, as,%}¦ m. a proper N. ({%= lūha%}).
<LEND>

<L>40664<pc>0871-a<k1>xN<k2>xN
{#xN#}¦ {%ḷṅ,%} a technical term or symbol for
the terminations of the Conditional or for that Mood
itself.
<LEND>

<L>40665<pc>0871-a<k1>xw<k2>xw
{#xw#}¦ {%ḷṭ,%} a technical term or symbol for
the terminations of the Second Future or for that
Tense itself.
<LEND>

<L>40666<pc>0871-a<k1>leka<k2>leka
{#leka#}¦ {%leka, as,%} m. (said to be) N. of an
Āditya.
<LEND>

<L>40667<pc>0871-a<k1>lekuYcika<k2>lekuYcika
{#lekuYcika#}¦ {%lekuñcika, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40668<pc>0871-a<k1>leKa<k2>leKa
{#leKa#}¦ {%lekha, lekhana, lekhin, lekhya,%} &c.
See p. 866, cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>40669<pc>0871-a<k1>lew<k2>lew
{#lew#}¦ {%leṭ,%} a technical term for the termina-
tions of the Vedic Mood or for this Mood itself,
(this is a kind of Subjunctive Mood only found in
the Vedas; its characteristic is the insertion of short
{%a,%} often lengthened to {%ā,%} between the base and ter-
minations.)
<LEND>

<L>40670<pc>0871-a<k1>lewa<k2>lewa
{#lewa#}¦ {%leṭa, as,%} m., N. of a particular mixed
caste.
<LEND>

<L>40671<pc>0871-a<k1>lewya<k2>lewya
{#lewya#}¦ {%leṭya%} ({%= loṭya,%} q. v.), Nom. P. {%leṭ-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to deceive, cheat; to be first; to sleep;
to shine.
<LEND>

<L>40672<pc>0871-a<k1>leRqa<k2>leRqa
{#leRqa#}¦ {%leṇḍa, am,%} n. excrement; [cf. {%laṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40673<pc>0871-a<k1>leta<k2>leta
{#leta#}¦ {%leta, as, am,%} m. n. tears; [cf. {%lota.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40674<pc>0871-a<k1>ledarI<k2>ledarI
{#ledarI#}¦ {%ledarī,%} f., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>40675<pc>0871-a<k1>lep<k2>lep
{#lep#}¦ {%lep,%} cl. 1. A. {%lepate,%} &c., to go; to
worship, serve.
<LEND>

<L>40676<pc>0871-a<k1>lepa<k2>lepa
{#lepa#}¦ {%lepa, lepana, lepya,%} &c. See p. 867,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40677<pc>0871-a<k1>leya<k2>leya
{#leya#}¦ {%leya, as,%} m. (fr. Gr. <lang n="greek">λέων</lang>), Ved. the
sign of the zodiac Leo.
<LEND>

<L>40678<pc>0871-a<k1>lelayA<k2>lelayA
{#lelayA#}¦ {%lelayā.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40679<pc>0871-a<k1>lelAya<k2>lelAya
{#lelAya#}¦ {%lelāya%} (by some regarded as an
[Page0871-b+ 74]
Intens. fr. an unused rt. {%lī,%} as distinguished fr. rt. 1.
{%lī%}), Nom. P. A. {%lelāyati, -te, alelāyat, alelet, ale-%}
{%līyata, lelāyitum,%} Ved. to move to and fro, quiver,
flicker, tremble, quake, shake; [cf. {%lelayā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40680<pc>0871-b<k1>lelayA<k2>lelayA
{%Lelayā,%}¦ ind. (probably to be connected with {%le-%}
{%lāya%} above, though formed fr. the Intens. of rt.
1. {%lī%}), Ved. quivering, flickering, shaking about.
<LEND>

<L>40681<pc>0871-b<k1>lelAyat<k2>lelAyat
{%Lelāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ trembling.
<LEND>

<L>40682<pc>0871-b<k1>lelAyamAnA<k2>lelAyamAnA
{%Lelāyamānā,%}¦ f. one of the seven tongues of fire.
<LEND>

<L>40683<pc>0871-b<k1>leliha<k2>leliha
{#leliha#}¦ {%leliha, lelihāna,%} &c. See p. 868.
<LEND>

<L>40684<pc>0871-b<k1>lelya<k2>lelya
{#lelya#}¦ {%lelya.%} See p. 868, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40685<pc>0871-b<k1>levAra<k2>levAra
{#levAra#}¦ {%levāra, as,%} m., N. of an Agra-hāra.
<LEND>

<L>40686<pc>0871-b<k1>leSa<k2>leSa
{#leSa#}¦ {%leśa.%} See p. 868, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40687<pc>0871-b<k1>lezwavya<k2>lezwavya
{%Leṣṭavya, leṣṭu,%}¦ &c. See p. 868, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40688<pc>0871-b<k1>lesika<k2>lesika
{#lesika#}¦ {%lesika, as,%} m. a rider on an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>40689<pc>0871-b<k1>leha<k2>leha
{#leha#}¦ {%leha, lehana, lehya.%} See p. 868, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40690<pc>0871-b<k1>lEKa<k2>lEKa
{#lEKa#}¦ {%laikha, as,%} m. (fr. {%lekha%}), a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>40691<pc>0871-b<k1>lEKABreya<k2>lEKABreya
{%Laikhābhreya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Lekhā-
bhra; a metronymic from Lekhā-bhrū.
<LEND>

<L>40692<pc>0871-b<k1>lEgavAyana<k2>lEgavAyana
{#lEgavAyana#}¦ {%laigavāyana, as,%} m. a patro-
nymic from Ligu.
<LEND>

<L>40693<pc>0871-b<k1>lEgavya<k2>lEgavya
{%Laigavya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Ligu.
<LEND>

<L>40694<pc>0871-b<k1>lENga<k2>lENga
{#lENga#}¦ {%laiṅga, am,%} n. (fr. {%liṅga%}), N. of a
Purāṇa; of an Upa-Purāṇa; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of creeper
({%= liṅginī%}).
<LEND>

<L>40695<pc>0871-b<k1>lENgika<k2>lENgika
{%Laiṅgika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or depending on
a mark or token; ({%as%}), m. a maker of images or
statues, statuary.
<LEND>

<L>40696<pc>0871-b<k1>lER<k2>lER
{#lER#}¦ {%laiṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%laiṇati,%} &c., to go,
approach; to send; to embrace, &c. (=
rt. {%paiṇ,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>40697<pc>0871-b<k1>lo<k2>lo
{#lo#}¦ {%lo, laus,%} m. a noun of agency said to
be derived fr. {%lavaya,%} q. v.; a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40698<pc>0871-b<k1>lok<k2>lok
{#lok#}¦ {%lok%} (more properly to be regarded
as a Nom. fr. {%loka%} below, or, according to
some, as a secondary rt. developed out of {%ruc, roka,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. A. {%lokate, luloke, lokitum,%} to see, per-
ceive; cl. 10. P. or Caus. {%lokayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%alulokat,%} to look, look at, view, contemplate; to
see, perceive, be aware of, know; to shine; to
speak, ({%bhāṣārtha%} being a various reading for
{%bhāsārtha%}); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λεύσσ-ω,</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>luog-</nsi>
<nsi>e-m;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>look;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>lauk-i-u;</nsi> Lett. <nsi>lûkô-t,</nsi>
‘to see.’]
<LEND>

<L>40699<pc>0871-b<k1>loka<k2>loka
{%Loka, as,%}¦ m. (cf. {%roka;%} in the oldest texts of the
Ṛg-veda {%loka%} is generally preceded by {%u,%} which
according to the Pada-pāṭha = the particle 3. {%u,%} and
according to some may be an abbreviation of {%uru,%}
wide, or derived from the prep. {%ava,%} cf. {%uru-loka,%}
{%ava-kāśa%}), open space (Ved.), space, room, inter-
mediate space (Ved.; in Ṛg-veda VIII. 100, 12,
{%dehi lokam = avakāśam pra-yaccha,%} make room),
the vast space, the wide world, sky, heaven; any
division of the universe, (three Lokas are com-
monly given, viz. heaven, earth, and the lower
world, but the fuller classification enumerates four-
teen, seven descending one below the other and
constituting together the lower world, sometimes
called hell [see {%pātāla%}], and seven higher regions
rising one above the other, as follow, 1. {%Bhūr-loka,%}
the earth; 2. {%Bhuvar-l˚,%} the space between the
earth and the sun, the region of the Munis, Siddhas,
&c.; 3. {%Svar-l˚,%} the heaven of Indra above the
sun or between the sun and the polar star; 4. {%Ma-%}
{%har-l˚,%} said to be one krore of Yojanas above the
polar star and to be the abode of Bhṛgu and other
saints who survive the destruction of the three worlds
situated below; during the conflagration of these
lower worlds the saints ascend to 5. {%Janar-l˚,%} which
is described as the abode of Brahmā's sons Sanat-
kumāra, &c.; 6. {%Tapar-l˚,%} where the deified Vai-
rāgins reside; 7. {%Satya-l˚%} or {%Brahma-l˚%} or the
abode of Brahmā, translation to which world exempts
beings from further birth: the first three worlds are
[Page0871-c+ 81]
destroyed at the end of each Kalpa or day of
Brahmā, the last three at the end of his life or of 100
of his years; the fourth Loka is equally permanent,
but is uninhabitable from heat at the time that the
first three are burning: another enumeration calls
these seven worlds, earth, sky, heaven, middle region,
place of births, mansion of the blest, and abode of
truth, placing the sons of Brahmā in the sixth divi-
sion and affirming the fifth or {%Janar-l˚%} to be that
where animals destroyed in the general conflagration
are born again); a symbolical expression for the
number seven; the world, earth, ({%iha loke,%} in this
world, on the earth, opposed to {%paratra, para-%}
{%loke,%} &c.); any place, region, tract, district, province;
the inhabitants of the world, the human race, man-
kind, folk, man, men (in this sense also {%ās,%} m. pl.),
people, subjects (as contrasted with the king); a
company, community; common life, ordinary prac-
tice, (especially) common usage (as contrasted with
ancient usage or idiom of the Veda; {%loke,%} ‘in ordi-
nary usage, in the language of the people, ‘as opposed
to {%vede, chandasi%}); seeing, looking, sight, regard;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>locus;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>laukas,</nsi> ‘a plain.’] {%—Loka-%}
{%kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. ‘thorn of men,’ a wicked or inju-
rious man, criminal; epithet of Rāvaṇa. {%—Loka-%}
{%kathā,%} f. a popular legend or fable. {%—Loka-kartṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m. the creator of the world (applied to Brahmā,
Viṣṇu, and Śiva). {%—Loka-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} re-
sembling or appearing like the world, becoming
manifested in the form of the world; regarded by
the world; ({%as%}), m. a period or age of the world.
{%—Loka-kānta, as, ā, am,%} world-loved, liked by
every one, pleasing to all, popular; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
medicinal herb. {%—Loka-kāra, as,%} m. {%= loka-kartṛ.%}
{%—Loka-kāraṇa-karaṇa, am,%} n. cause of the causes
of the world (a name applied to Śiva). {%—Loka-kṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} making or creating free space, setting free
(Ved.); ({%t%}), m. {%= loka-kartṛ,%} the creator of the
world. {%—Loka-kṛtnu, us, us, u,%} Ved. {%= loka-kṛt,%}
creating space. {%—Loka-kṣit, t, t, t,%} Ved. dwelling
in the sky, inhabiting heaven. {%—Loka-gati, is,%} f.
‘the way of the world,’ actions of men. {%—Loka-%}
{%gāthā,%} f. a verse or song (handed down orally)
among men. {%—Loka-guru, us,%} m. a teacher of the
world, instructor of the people. {%—Loka-cakṣus, us,%}
n. ‘eye of the world,’ the sun, (according to some
{%us,%} m.); ({%ūṃṣi%}), n. pl. the eyes of men. {%—Loka-%}
{%cara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} wandering through the world.
{%—Loka-cāritra, am,%} n. the way or proceedings of
the world. {%—Loka-cārin, ī, iṇī, i, = loka-cara.%}
{%—Loka-jananī,%} f. ‘the mother of the world,’ epithet
of Lakṣmī. {%—Loka-jit, t, t, t,%} winning or conquer-
ing a region (Ved.); conquering Heaven; ({%t%}), m. a
conquerer of the world; a sage; N. of a Buddha.
{%—Loka-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing the world, under-
standing men. {%—Lokajña-tā,%} f. knowledge of the
world, knowledge of mankind. {%—Loka-jyeṣṭha, as,%}
m. ‘the most distinguished or excellent among men,’
epithet of Buddha. {%—Loka-tattva, am,%} n. ‘world-
truth, ‘knowledge of the world, knowledge of man-
kind. {%—Loka-tantra, am,%} n. the system or course of
the world, {%—Loka-tas,%} ind. from the world, according
to ordinary life, popularly, as is usual or customary.
{%—Loka-tuṣāra, as,%} m. ‘eath's-dew,’ camphor.
{%—Loka-traya, am, ī,%} n. f. ‘world-triad,’ the three
worlds (heaven, earth, and the lower regions). {%—Lo-%}
{%ka-dambhaka, as, ikā, am,%} deceiving the world,
cheating or deluding mankind. {%—Loka-dvāra, am,%}
n. the door or gate of heaven. {%—Lokadvārīya, am,%}
n. (fr. the preceding), N. of a Sāman. {%—Loka-%}
{%dhātu, us,%} m. epithet of a particular division of the
world (with Buddhists). {%—Loka-dhātṛ, tā,%} m. ‘the
creator or supporter of the world, ‘epithet of Śiva.
{%—Loka-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of worlds,’ epithet of
Brahmā; of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa; of Śiva; a governor
or ruler of the people, a king, sovereign; a Buddha;
N. of a Buddha; of the author of the Pada-mañjarī.
{%—Lokanātha-rasa, as,%} m., N. of a particular me-
dicinal preparation. {%—Loka-nindita, as, ā, am,%}
blamed by the world, generally censured, found
fault with by men. {%—Loka-netṛ, tā,%} m. guide or
[Page0872-a+ 81]
ruler of the world; epithet of Śiva. {%—Loka-pa, as,%}
m. protector or guardian of the world, world-pro-
tector ({%= loka-pāla,%} q. v.). {%—Loka-pakti, is,%} f.
world-reputation, general respectability, esteem among
men. {%—Loka-pati, is,%} m. the lord of the world;
epithet of Brahmā; of Viṣṇu; a lord or ruler of
people, a king, sovereign. {%—Loka-patha, as,%} m. way
of the world, general or universal way, the usual way.
{%—Loka-paddhati, is,%} f. general or universal way.
{%—Loka-pāla, as,%} m. a world-protector, guardian
of the world, regent of a quarter of the world, any
presiding deity, (the Loka-pālas are sometimes re-
garded as deities appointed by Brahmā at the creation
of the world to act as guardians of different orders of
beings, but more commonly they are identified with
the deities presiding over the four cardinal and four
intermediate points of the compass, which, according to
Manu V. 96, are 1. Indra, guardian of the East; 2. Agni,
of the South-east; 3. Yama, of the South; 4. Sūrya, of
the South-west; 5. Varuṇa, of the West; 6. Pavana or
Vāyu, of the North-west; 7. Kuvera, of the North;
8. Soma or Candra, of the North-east: other authorities
substitute Nir-ṛti for 4. and Īśānī or Pṛthivī for 8);
a protector or ruler of the people, king, sovereign,
prince; N. of a king; protection of the people.
{%—Loka-pālaka, as,%} m. {%= loka-pāla,%} a world-pro-
tector, ruler of the universe; a king, sovereign.
{%—Lokapāla-tā,%} f. or {%lokapāla-tva, am,%} n. the
being a Loka-pāla or guardian of the world. {%—Loka-%}
{%pitāmaha, as,%} m. progenitor or creator of the world,
the great forefather of mankind; epithet of Brahmā.
{%—Loka-puṇya,%} N. of a place. {%—Loka-puruṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘world-man,’ the World personified. {%—Loka-%}
{%pūjita, as, ā, am,%} honoured by the world, univer-
sally worshipped; ({%as%}), m. a proper N. {%—Loka-%}
{%prakāśaka, am,%} n., N. of a compilation by Kṣe-
mendra. {%—Loka-prakāśana, as,%} m. ‘world-illumi-
nator, ‘the sun. {%—Loka-pratyaya, as,%} m., Ved.
world-currency, universal prevalence (of a custom,
&c.). {%—Loka-pradīpa, as,%} m. ‘light of the world,’
N. of a Buddha. {%—Loka-pravāda, as,%} m. popular
talk, common saying, current report, general rumour,
news, popular opinion, commonly used expression.
{%—Loka-pravāhin, ī, inī%} or {%iṇī, i,%} flowing
through the world. {%—Loka-prasiddha, as, ā, am,%}
celebrated in the world, generally established or
received, universally known or acknowledged, well-
known, notorious. {%—Loka-prasiddhi, is,%} f. uni-
versal establishment or reception (of any custom
&c.), general notoriety or prevalence. {%—Loka-ban-%}
{%dhu, us,%} m. ‘universal friend, friend of all,’ epithet
of the sun; of Śiva. {%—Loka-bāndhava, as,%} m. ‘the
friend of all,’ epithet of the sun. {%—Loka-bāhya,%} see
{%loka-vāhya%}. {%—Loka-bhartṛ, tā,%} m. supporter of
the people. {%—Loka-bhāj, k, k, k,%} Ved. occupying
space. {%—Loka-bhāvana, as, ī, am,%} or {%loka-bhāvin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} world-creating; promoting the welfare of
men or of the world. {%—Loka-maya, as, ī, am,%}
containing space or room, spacious (Ved.); contain-
ing the universe. {%—Loka-maryādā,%} f. popular ob-
servance, established usage or custom. {%—Loka-mātṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m. the mother of the world; epithet of Lakṣmī.
{%—Loka-mārga, as,%} m. general or universal way,
prevalent custom. {%—Lokam-pṛṇa, as, ā, am,%} filling
the world, penetrating everywhere; ({%ā%}), f., Ved.,
scil. {%iṣṭakā,%} epithet of the bricks used for building
the sacrificial altar (set up with the usual formula
{%lokam pṛṇa,%} those which have a peculiar formula
being called {%yajuṣ-matī,%} q. v.); scil. {%ṛc,%} the
formula {%lokam pṛṇa%}. {%—Loka-yātrā,%} f. the busi-
ness and traffic of men, intercourse or business of
the world, worldly affairs, popular usages and cus-
toms, conduct of men, ordinary actions or conduct,
&c.; support of life. {%—Loka-yātrika, as, ī, am,%}
relating to the business or traffic of the world.
{%—Loka-rakṣa, as,%} m. ‘protector of the people,’
a king, sovereign. {%—Loka-rañjana, am,%} n. pleasing
the world, gaining public confidence, popularity.
{%—Loka-rava, as,%} m. the talk of the world, popular
report. {%—Loka-lekha, as,%} m. a general writing,
public document, ordinary letter. {%—Loka-locana, %}
[Page0872-b+ 81]
{%am,%} n. (according to some {%as,%} m.), ‘the eye of the
world, ‘the sun; ({%āni%}), n. pl. the eyes of men.
{%—Lokalocanāpāta (˚na-āp˚), as,%} m. the attacks
of men's eyes, i. e. the prying eyes of men. {%—Loka-%}
{%vacana, am,%} n. people's talk, public rumour, popular
report. {%—Loka-vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing the world.
{%—Loka-vartana, am,%} n. the conduct of men,
general mode of acting, usual behaviour. {%—Loka-%}
{%vāda, as,%} m. the talk of the world, popular report,
public rumour, common talk, news. {%—Loka-vārttā,%}
f. the world's news, popular report or rumour. {%—Lo-%}
{%ka-vāhya, as, ā, am,%} excluded from the world,
expelled from society, excommunicated; differing
from the world, singular, eccentric; ({%as%}), m. an
outcast. {%—Loka-vikruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} abused by
the world, censured by mankind, universally blamed
or condemned. {%—Loka-vijñāta, as, ā, am,%} univer-
sally known or celebrated. {%—Loka-vid, t, t, t,%} know-
ing or understanding the world; ({%t%}), m. epithet of
a Buddha. {%—Loka-vidviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} hated by
men, universally hated, disliked by people generally,
unpopular. {%—Loka-vidhi, is,%} m. the creator of the
world, disposer of the universe; order or mode of
proceeding prevalent in the world. {%—Loka-vinā-%}
{%yaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a particular class of deities
presiding over diseases. {%—Loka-vindu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. creating room or space, gaining or obtaining
freedom. {%—Loka-vindu-sāra, am,%} n., N. of the last
of the fourteen Pūrvas or most ancient Jaina writings.
{%—Loka-viśruta, as, ā, am,%} universally celebrated,
far-famed, famous, current. {%—Loka-viśruti, is,%} f.
world-wide fame, notoriety; unfounded rumour or
report. {%—Loka-visarga, as,%} m. the creation of the
world. {%—Loka-vistāra, as,%} m. universal spreading,
general extension or diffusion. {%—Loka-vīra, ās,%} m.
pl. the world's heroes. {%—Loka-vṛtta, am,%} n. worldly
intercourse, idle conversation; a universal custom.
{%—Loka-vṛttānta, as,%} m. the events or occurrences
of the world, course or proceedings of the world,
circumstances of life, human conduct. {%—Loka-vya-%}
{%vahāra, as,%} m. the affairs or business of the world,
popular usage, general custom or course; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), universally used, commonly current. {%—Loka-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n. any observance prevalent in the
world or among men, general practice or way of
proceeding, general mode of life; N. of several
Sāmans. {%—Loka-śruti, is,%} f. world-wide fame or
reputation, universal notoriety. {%—Loka-saṃvyava-%}
{%hāra, as,%} m. commerce or intercourse with the
world, worldly business, trade and traffic. {%—Loka-%}
{%saṃsṛti, is,%} f. the course of the world, fate, destiny.
{%—Loka-saṅkara, as,%} m. confusion of mankind,
general confusion in the world, acting a false cha-
racter among men. {%—Loka-saṅkṣaya, as,%} m. the
destruction of the world. {%—Loka-saṅgraha, as,%} m.
intercourse with the world, worldly experience; the
propitiation or conciliation of men; the whole of
the universe; the welfare of the world. {%—Loka-sani,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. causing room or space, effecting a
free course. {%—Loka-sākṣika, as, ī, am,%} having
the world as a witness, attested by the world or by
others; ({%am%}), ind. before or in the presence of
witnesses. {%—Loka-sākṣin, ī,%} m. witness of the
world, universal witness; epithet of Brahman; of
Fire; {%(ī, inī, i),= loka-sākṣika%} above. {%—Loka-%}
{%sāt,%} ind. for the general good. {%—Lokasāt-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} made or done for the general good. {%—Loka-%}
{%sādhaka, as, ikā, am,%} creating worlds. {%—Loka-%}
{%sāman, a,%} n., N. of a Sāman. {%—Loka-siddha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} world-established, current among the people,
generally done, usual, customary, popular, fashion-
able, common; universally admitted, generally re-
ceived. {%—Loka-sīmātivartin (˚ma-at˚), ī, inī, i,%}
passing beyond ordinary limits, extraordinary, super-
natural. {%—Loka-sundara, as, ī, am,%} generally es-
teemed beautiful, universally considered handsome;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Loka-sthala, am,%} n.
an incident of ordinary life, common or ordinary
occurrence. {%—Loka-sthiti, is,%} f. a universal law,
generally established rule or maxim. {%—Loka-spṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} Ved. {%= loka-sani%} (?). {%—Loka-hāsya, as, ā, am,%}
[Page0872-c+ 81]
world-derided, ridiculed by mankind, any object of
general ridicule. {%—Lokahāsya-tā,%} f. universal ridi-
culousness. {%—Loka-hita, am,%} n. the welfare of the
world, general weal. {%—Lokākāśa (˚ka-āk˚), as,%} m.
space, sky; (according to the Jainas) a worldly
region, the abode of unliberated beings. {%—Lokākṣi%}
{%(˚ka-ak˚), is,%} m. ‘eye of the world,’ N. of a pre-
ceptor. {%—Lokācāra (˚ka-āc˚), as,%} m. usage or
practice of the world, common practice, ordinary
conduct, general or popular custom, universal habit.
{%—Lokātiga (˚ka-at˚), as, ā, am,%} going beyond
the usage of the world, extraordinary, supernatural.
{%—Lokātiśaya (˚ka-at˚), as, ā, am,%} superior to
the world, surpassing ordinary usage {%(= lokātiga).%}
{%—Lokātman (˚ka-āt˚), ā,%} m. the soul of the
universe. {%—Lokādi (˚ka-ādi), is,%} m. the begin-
ning of the world, the beginner or creator of the
world. {%—Lokādhipa (˚ka-adh˚), as,%} m. a ruler or
governor of the world, a god, deity. {%—Lokādhipati%}
{%(˚ka-adh˚), is,%} m. the ruler or lord of the world.
{%—Lokānugraha (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m. the welfare of
the world, prosperity of all people, general weal.
{%—Lokānurāga (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m. the love of man-
kind, universal love or attachment, general bene-
volence, philanthrophy, charity. {%—Lokāntara (˚ka-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. another world, the next world, a future
life, decease, death, ({%lokāntaraṃ gam%} or {%yā,%} to
go into the next world, die.) {%—Lokāntara-gata%} or
{%lokāntara-prāpta, as, ā, am,%} gone to another
world, deceased, dead. {%—Lokāntarika (˚ka-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} dwelling or situated between the worlds.
{%—Lokāpavāda (˚ka-ap˚), as,%} m. the reproach or
censure of the world, general evil report, public
scandal, general outcry against, popular accusation.
{%—Lokābhibhāvin (˚ka-abh˚), ī, inī, i,%} overcom-
ing the world; overspreading or pervading the world
(said of light). {%—Lokābhilaṣita (˚ka-abh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} world-desired, universally coveted, generally
liked; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Lokābhyudaya%}
{%(˚ka-abh˚), as,%} m. the prosperity of the world,
general welfare. {%—Lokāyata (˚ka-āy˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘world-extended (?),’ materialistic, atheistical; ({%am%}),
n., scil. {%śāstra%} or {%mata%} or {%tantra,%} materialism, the
system of atheistical philosophy (taught by Cārvāka);
({%as%}), m. a materialist. {%—Lokāyatika (˚ka-āy˚), as,%}
m. a materialist, follower of the Cārvāka system,
atheist, unbeliever. {%—Lokāyana (˚ka-ay˚), as,%} m.
‘refuge of the world,’ epithet of Nārāyaṇa. {%—Lokā-%}
{%loka (˚ka-al˚), am,%} n., or {%au,%} m. du. world and no
world, the visible and invisible world; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a mythical belt or circle of mountains surrounding
the outermost of the seven seas and dividing the
visible world from the region of darkness, (the sun
being within this circle these mountains are supposed
to form a kind of wall, light on one side and dark
on the other; cf. {%cakra-bāla.%}) {%—Lokāvekṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ka-av˚), am,%} n. consideration for the world,
anxiety or care for the welfare of mankind. {%—Lokeśa%}
{%(˚ka-īśa), as,%} m. the lord or ruler of the world;
epithet of Brahmā; N. of a Buddha; quicksilver.
{%—Lokeśa-prabhavāpyaya (˚va-ap˚), as, ā, am,%}
owing both origin and end to the guardians of the
world. {%—Lokeśvara (˚ka-īś˚), as,%} m. the lord or
ruler of the world; N. of a Buddha. {%—Lokeśvarāt-%}
{%majā (˚ra-āt˚),%} f. ‘Lokeśvara's daughter,’ N. of a
Buddhist goddess. {%—Lokeṣṭi (˚ka-iṣ˚), is,%} f., Ved.,
N. of a particular Iṣṭi. {%—Lokaikabandhu (˚ka-%}
{%ek˚), us,%} m. ‘the only friend of the world,’ epithet
of Gotama and of Śākya-muni. {%—Lokaiṣaṇā (˚ka-%}
{%eṣ˚),%} f. desire or longing after heaven. {%—Lokokti%}
{%(˚ka-uk˚), is,%} f. a general or common saying, any
saying commonly current among men, a proverb.
{%—Lokottara (˚ka-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} excelling or
surpassing the world, beyond what is common or
general, unusual, extraordinary; ({%as%}), m. an un-
common person, a king, prince. {%—Lokottara-pari-%}
{%varta,%} N. of a Buddhist Sūtra work. {%—Lokottara-%}
{%vādin, inas,%} m. pl., N. of a Buddhist sect (probably
so called from their pretending to be superior to or
above the rest of the world). {%—Lokoddhāra (˚ka-%}
{%ud˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>
[Page0873-a+ 75]

<L>40700<pc>0873-a<k1>lokana<k2>lokana
{%Lokana, am,%}¦ n. the act of looking, seeing, viewing.
<LEND>

<L>40701<pc>0873-a<k1>lokanIya<k2>lokanIya
{%Lokanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be seen or perceived,
visible, worthy of being looked at.
<LEND>

<L>40702<pc>0873-a<k1>lokita<k2>lokita
{%Lokita, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen, beheld, looked at, viewed,
perceived.
<LEND>

<L>40703<pc>0873-a<k1>lokin<k2>lokin
{%Lokin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. possessing a world, occupy-
ing the world, possessing the best world; ({%inas%}),
m. pl. the inhabitants of the universe.
<LEND>

<L>40704<pc>0873-a<k1>lokya<k2>lokya
{%Lokya, as, ā, am,%}¦ granting a free sphere of action,
giving free space (Ved.); diffused over the world,
world-wide; conducive to the attainment of a better
world, heavenly; usual, customary, ordinary, right,
real, actual; ({%am%}), n. free space or sphere (Ved.).
{%—Lokya-tā,%} f., Ved. (according to a commentator)
the attainment of a better world.
<LEND>

<L>40705<pc>0873-a<k1>loga<k2>loga
{#loga#}¦ {%loga, as,%} m. (perhaps connected with
rt. 1. {%ruj%}), Ved. a clod of earth, lump of clay, clod,
(Sāy. {%= loṣṭa.%}) {%—Logākṣa (˚ga-ak˚), as,%} m.
‘clod-eyed,’ a proper N. {%—Logeṣṭakā (˚ga-iṣ˚),%}
f., Ved. a brick made from a lump of clay.
<LEND>

<L>40706<pc>0873-a<k1>loc<k2>loc
{#loc#}¦ {%loc%} (connected with rts. {%lok,%}
1. {%ruc%}), cl. 1. A. {%locate, luloce, loci-%}
{%tum,%} to see, behold, look or gaze at, view, inspect,
perceive; cl. 10. P. {%locayati,%} &c., to speak; to
shine (?) : Caus. {%locayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%alulocat,%}
to cause to see: Desid. {%lulociṣate:%} Intens. {%loloc-%}
{%yate%}; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λεύσσ-ω;</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>luog-e-m;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>lauk-i-u;</nsi> Lett. <nsi>luko-t,</nsi> ‘to see.']
<LEND>

<L>40707<pc>0873-a<k1>loca<k2>loca
{%Loca, as,%}¦ m. sight?; ({%am%}), n. tears; [cf. {%lota,%}
{%leta.%}] {%—Loca-markaṭa%} or {%loca-mastaka, as,%} m.
cock's comb, the flower Celosia Cristata.
<LEND>

<L>40708<pc>0873-a<k1>locaka<k2>locaka
{%Locaka, as,%}¦ m. a stupid or senseless person, (per-
haps as gazing or staring in a senseless manner); the
pupil of the eye; lamp-black (used as a stibium); a dark
or black dress; a lump of flesh; a particular ornament
worn by women on the forehead; a particular ear-
ornament, ear-ring; a bow-string; the plantain tree,
Musa Sapientum; a wrinkled skin, wrinkled or con-
tracted eyebrow; the cast-off skin of a snake; ({%ikā%}),
f. a kind of pastry.
<LEND>

<L>40709<pc>0873-a<k1>locana<k2>locana
{%Locana, as, ī, am,%}¦ illuminating, brightening;
visible, ({%a-locana,%} invisible); ({%as%}), m., N. of an
author; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a Buddhist goddess; ({%ī%}), f. a
species of plant; ({%am%}), n. the organ of sight, in-
strument of vision, the eye, (at the end of an adj.
comp. the fem. generally ends in {%ā,%} cf. {%cāru-l˚,%}
{%vāma-l˚);%} N. of a work. {%—Locana-kāra, as,%} m.
the author of the Locana. {%—Locana-gocara, as,%} m.
the range or horizon of the eye; ({%as, ā, am%}),
within the range of vision. {%—Locana-patha%} or {%lo-%}
{%cana-mārga, as,%} m. the path or range of the eyes,
sphere of vision. {%—Locana-hita, as, ā, am,%} useful
or serviceable for the eyes; ({%ā%}), f. blue vitriol (used
as a collyrium). {%—Locanāmaya (˚na-ām˚), as,%} m.
eye-disease, ophthalmia. {%—Locanoḍḍāraka (˚na-%}
{%uḍ˚),%} N. of a Grāma. {%—Locanotsa (˚na-ut˚),%} N.
of a place.
<LEND>

<L>40710<pc>0873-a<k1>low<k2>low<h>1
{#low#} 1¦. {%loṭ%} (= rt. {%loḍ%}), cl. 1. P. {%loṭati,%}
&c., to be mad or foolish.
<LEND>

<L>40711<pc>0873-a<k1>low<k2>low<h>2
{#low#} 2¦. {%loṭ,%} a technical term or symbol
in grammar for the terminations of the Imperative
or for that Mood itself.
<LEND>

<L>40712<pc>0873-a<k1>lowA<k2>lowA
{#lowA#}¦ {%loṭā%} or {%loṭikā,%} f. sorrel.
<LEND>

<L>40713<pc>0873-a<k1>lowya<k2>lowya
{#lowya#}¦ {%loṭya%} ({%= leṭya,%} q. v.), Nom. P. {%loṭ-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to deceive, cheat; to be first; to sleep;
to shine.
<LEND>

<L>40714<pc>0873-a<k1>loWa<k2>loWa
{#loWa#}¦ {%loṭha, loṭhana.%} See p. 869, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40715<pc>0873-a<k1>loq<k2>loq
{#loq#}¦ {%loḍ%} (= rts. {%roḍ, loṭ, lauḍ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%loḍati,%} &c., to be foolish or mad.
<LEND>

<L>40716<pc>0873-a<k1>loqana<k2>loqana
{#loqana#}¦ {%loḍana.%} See under rt. {%luḍ,%} p. 869.
<LEND>

<L>40717<pc>0873-a<k1>loqya<k2>loqya
{#loqya#}¦ {%loḍya%} in {%aṅka-l˚, aṅga-l˚,%} &c.,
q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>40718<pc>0873-a<k1>loRatfRa<k2>loRatfRa
{#loRatfRa#}¦ {%loṇa-tṛṇa, am,%} n. {%= lavaṇa-tṛṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>40719<pc>0873-a<k1>loRA<k2>loRA
{%Loṇā,%}¦ f. (for {%lavaṇā%}), a kind of sorrel ({%= kṣu-%}
{%drāmlikā%}).
<LEND>
[Page0873-b+ 76]

<L>40720<pc>0873-b<k1>loRAmlA<k2>loRAmlA
{%Loṇāmlā%}¦ (i. e. {%loṇa-lavaṇa-am˚),%} f. a kind
of sorrel.
<LEND>

<L>40721<pc>0873-b<k1>loRAra<k2>loRAra
{%Loṇāra, as,%}¦ m. a kind of salt.
<LEND>

<L>40722<pc>0873-b<k1>loRikA<k2>loRikA
{%Loṇikā,%}¦ f. {%= loṇāmlā;%} Portulacca Oleracea.
<LEND>

<L>40723<pc>0873-b<k1>loRI<k2>loRI
{%Loṇī%}¦ in {%amla-l˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40724<pc>0873-b<k1>loRitaka<k2>loRitaka
{#loRitaka#}¦ {%loṇitaka, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>40725<pc>0873-b<k1>lota<k2>lota
{#lota#}¦ {%lota, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 86. fr. rt. 1. {%lū%}), tears [cf. {%leta%}]; a token, sign,
mark, spot; ({%am%}), n. booty, plunder, stolen pro-
perty ({%= loptra%}).
<LEND>

<L>40726<pc>0873-b<k1>lotra<k2>lotra
{%Lotra, am,%}¦ n. tears; booty, plunder, stolen goods.
<LEND>

<L>40727<pc>0873-b<k1>lodI<k2>lodI
{#lodI#}¦ {%lodī,%} N. of a family or race.
<LEND>

<L>40728<pc>0873-b<k1>loDa<k2>loDa
{#loDa#}¦ {%lodha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. desirous, per-
plexed, confused ({%= lubdha%} according to the Nirukta
and Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 53, 23, according to
others it may mean ‘red’ or may be the name of a
particular animal); ({%as%}), m. {%= lodhra%} below.
<LEND>

<L>40729<pc>0873-b<k1>loDra<k2>loDra
{#loDra#}¦ {%lodhra, as,%} m. {%= rodhra,%} a tree the
bark of which is used in dyeing, Symplocos Race-
mosa.
<LEND>

<L>40730<pc>0873-b<k1>loDraka<k2>loDraka
{%Lodhraka, as,%}¦ m. {%= lodhra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40731<pc>0873-b<k1>lopa<k2>lopa
{#lopa#}¦ {%lopa, lopana, loptṛ,%} &c. See p. 869,
col. 3, and p. 870, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40732<pc>0873-b<k1>loBa<k2>loBa
{#loBa#}¦ {%lobha, lobhin, lobhya.%} See p. 870,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40733<pc>0873-b<k1>loma<k2>loma
{#loma#}¦ {%loma, lomaka,%} &c. See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40734<pc>0873-b<k1>loman<k2>loman
{#loman#}¦ {%loman, a,%} n. (a later form of {%roman,%}
q. v.), the hair on the body of men and animals,
(especially) short hair, wool, down, feathers, nap, &c.,
(not so properly applicable to the hair of the head
and beard nor to the mane and tail of animals); a
tail (according to some). {%—Loma-karaṇī,%} f. a species
of plant {%(= māṃsa-cchadā)%}. {%—Loma-karṇa, as,%} m.
‘hair-eared,’ a hare. {%—Loma-kīṭa, as,%} m. ‘hair-
insect, ‘a louse. {%—Loma-kūpa%} or {%loma-garta, as,%}
m. ‘hair-hole,’ a pore of the skin. {%—Loma-ghna,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘hair-destruction,’ loss of the hair through
disease, morbid baldness. {%—Loma-pāda, as,%} m., N.
of a king of the Aṅgas. {%—Lomapāda-purī,%} f.
Champā, the capital of Loma-pāda (the modern
Bhāgalpur and its vicinity). {%—Loma-pravāhin, ī,%}
{%iṇī%} or {%inī, i, = loma-vāhin%}. {%—Loma-phala, am,%}
n. the fruit of Dillenia Indica. {%—Loma-maṇi, is,%} m.
an amulet made of hair. {%—Loma-yūka, as,%} m. a
hair-louse. {%—Loma-vat, ān, atī, at, = roma-vat,%}
having hair, hairy. {%—Loma-vāhin, ī, inī, i,%} bearing
or carrying hair, having feathers, feathered (said of an
arrow); {%= roma-vāhin,%} sharp enough to cut a hair.
{%—Loma-vivara, am,%} n. {%= roma-vivara,%} ‘hair-
hole, ‘a pore of the skin. {%—Loma-viṣa, as, ā, am,%}
having poisonous hair, whose hair is poisonous (said
of tigers and other animals). {%—Loma-vetāla, as,%} m.
epithet of a particular demon. {%—Loma-śātana, am,%}
n. an application for removing the hair of the body,
a depilatory. {%—Loma-saṃharṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}
causing the hair of the body to bristle, producing
horripilation. {%—Loma-sātana,%} incorrect for {%loma-ś˚.%}
{%—Loma-sāra, as,%} m. an emerald. {%—Loma-harṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. the bristling or erection of the hair of the
body, thrill or shudder (caused by excessive joy, fear,
&c.), horripilation [cf. {%roma-harṣa%}]; N. of a
Rākṣasa. {%—Loma-harṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} causing
bristling or erection of the hair of the body, pro-
ducing horripilation, causing a shudder, exciting
horror, exciting a thrill of joy, thrilling; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of Sūta (the pupil of Vyāsa and father of Sauti,
who repeated the Mahā-bhārata to the Ṛṣis, cf.
{%roma-harṣaṇa%}); ({%am%}), n. the bristling of the
hair of the body, horripilation, thrilling with delight,
shuddering with horror. {%—Loma-harṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
{%= loma-harṣaṇa%}. {%—Loma-hārin, ī, iṇī, i, = lo-%}
{%ma-vāhin%}. {%—Loma-hṛt, t, t, t,%} removing the hair
of the body, depilatory; ({%t%}), m. yellow orpiment.
{%—Lomāñca (˚ma-añ˚), as,%} m. curling or erection
of the hair of the body, a thrill of rapture, shudder,
&c., {%= romāñca%}. {%—Lomālikā (˚ma-āl˚),%} f. a fox (?).
[Page0873-c+ 75]
{%—Lomāvali (˚ma-āv˚), is,%} f. the line of hair from
the breast to the navel.
<LEND>

<L>40735<pc>0873-c<k1>loma<k2>loma
{%Loma%}¦ at the end of comps. {%= loman; (am),%} n.
a hairy tail, tail.
<LEND>

<L>40736<pc>0873-c<k1>lomaka<k2>lomaka
{%Lomaka = loman%}¦ in {%prati-l˚, mṛdu-l˚, (a-lo-%}
{%maka,%} having no hair, hairless.)
<LEND>

<L>40737<pc>0873-c<k1>lomakAgfha<k2>lomakAgfha
{%Lomakāgṛha, am,%}¦ n. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40738<pc>0873-c<k1>lomakin<k2>lomakin
{%Lomakin, ī,%}¦ m. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>40739<pc>0873-c<k1>lomaDi<k2>lomaDi
{%Lomadhi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>40740<pc>0873-c<k1>lomaSa<k2>lomaSa
{%Lomaśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ hairy, woolly, downy, shaggy,
bristly, covered with hair &c., made of hair, mixed
with hair; containing hair; consisting in sheep or
other woolly animals (as property &c.); woollen;
overgrown with grass &c.; ({%as%}), m. a ram, sheep;
N. of a Ṛṣi; of a cat (in Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 4934);
({%ā%}), f. a fox; a female jackal ({%= śṛgālī%}); an ape;
green vitriol; N. of various plants, Nardostachys
Jatamansi; Leea Hirta; Carpopogon Pruriens; Sida
Cordifolia; Sida Rhombifolia; orris root ({%= vacā%});
Cucumis Utilissimus; {%= gandha-māṃsī; = śaṇa-%}
{%puṣpī;%} N. of a Śākinī or female divinity of an
inferior class; an attendant on Durgā; ({%am%}), n. a
kind of metre. {%—Lomaśa-karṇa, as,%} m. a species
of animal living in holes. {%—Lomaśa-kāṇḍā,%} f. Cu-
cumis Utilissimus. {%—Lomaśa-parṇinī,%} f. Glycine
Debilis. {%—Lomaśa-puṣpaka, as,%} m. Acacia Sirissa.
{%—Lomaśa-mārjāra, as,%} m. the civet cat. {%—Lo-%}
{%maśa-vakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. covered with hair
on the breast or body. {%—Lomaśa-saktha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%lomaśa-sakthi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having hair
or bristles on the thighs or hind feet; (according to
Mahī-dhara on Vājasaneyi-s. 24, 1 {%= bahu-roma-%}
{%pucchika%}), having a hairy tail.
<LEND>

<L>40741<pc>0873-c<k1>lomaSya<k2>lomaSya
{%Lomaśya, am,%}¦ n. hairiness, woolliness; rough-
ness; N. of a particular pronunciation of the sibi-
lants (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>40742<pc>0873-c<k1>lomAyayaRi<k2>lomAyayaRi
{%Lomāyayaṇi (?) , is,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>40743<pc>0873-c<k1>lomASa<k2>lomASa
{%Lomāśa, as,%}¦ m. a jackal or fox; [cf. {%lomaśā,%}
{%lopāśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40744<pc>0873-c<k1>lomASikA<k2>lomASikA
{%Lomāśikā,%}¦ f. the female of the jackal or fox.
<LEND>

<L>40745<pc>0873-c<k1>lorAya<k2>lorAya
{#lorAya#}¦ {%lorāya,%} Nom. P. {%lorāyati,%} &c.,
(said to be {%vilocane.%})
<LEND>

<L>40746<pc>0873-c<k1>lola<k2>lola
{#lola#}¦ {%lola, lolita,%} &c. See p. 870.
<LEND>

<L>40747<pc>0873-c<k1>lolikA<k2>lolikA
{#lolikA#}¦ {%lolikā,%} f. a sort of sorrel, Oxalis
Pusilla, (according to some Rumex Vesicarius.)
<LEND>

<L>40748<pc>0873-c<k1>lolimbarAja<k2>lolimbarAja
{#lolimbarAja#}¦ {%lolimba-rāja, as,%} m., N. of
the author of the Vaidya-jīvana.
<LEND>

<L>40749<pc>0873-c<k1>lolupa<k2>lolupa
{#lolupa#}¦ {%lolupa, as, ā, am%} (fr. the Intens.
of rt. 1. {%lup%}), very destructive, destroying; very de-
sirous, very eager, ardently longing for, covetous, (in
these senses a corruption of {%lolubha%} below); ({%ā%}), f.
eager desire, appetite, longing, eagerness. {%—Lolupa-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%lolupa-tva, am,%} n. eager desire or longing;
greediness, cupidity, desire, lust, lustfulness.
<LEND>

<L>40750<pc>0873-c<k1>loluBa<k2>loluBa
{#loluBa#}¦ {%lolubha, as, ā, am%} (fr. the Intens.
of rt. {%lubh%}), very desirous, eagerly longing for or
coveting, ardently wishing for, greedy after.
<LEND>

<L>40751<pc>0873-c<k1>loluva<k2>loluva
{#loluva#}¦ {%loluva, lolūyā.%} See p. 871, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40752<pc>0873-c<k1>lolora<k2>lolora
{#lolora#}¦ {%lolora, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>40753<pc>0873-c<k1>lollawa<k2>lollawa
{#lollawa#}¦ {%lollaṭa, as,%} m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>40754<pc>0873-c<k1>loSaSarAyaRi<k2>loSaSarAyaRi
{#loSaSarAyaRi#}¦ {%lośaśarāyaṇi%} (?), {%is,%} m., N.
of an author.
<LEND>

<L>40755<pc>0873-c<k1>lozw<k2>lozw
{#lozw#}¦ {%loṣṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%loṣṭate, luloṣṭe,%}
{%loṣṭitum,%} to heap up, accumulate, gather
into a heap or lump.
<LEND>

<L>40756<pc>0873-c<k1>lozwa<k2>lozwa
{%Loṣṭa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (according to Uṇādī-s. III.
92. fr. rt. 1. {%lū%}), a lump of earth or clay, clod [cf.
{%loga%}]; a particular object serving as a mark; ({%as%}),
m. a proper N.; ({%am%}), n. rust of iron, iron filings.
{%—Loṣṭa-ghna, as,%} m. an agricultural implement
for breaking clods, a harrow. {%—Loṣṭa-dhara, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Loṣṭa-bhedana, as, am,%} m. n.
‘a clod-crusher,’ harrow. {%—Loṣṭa-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made of clay or earth, earthen. {%—Loṣṭa-mardin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} crushing or breaking clods. {%—1. loṣṭa-vat, %}
[Page0874-a+ 80]
{%ān, atī, at,%} containing clods, mixed with lumps or
particles of earth. {%—2. loṣṭa-vat,%} ind. like a clod,
as a lump of earth. {%—Loṣṭākṣa (˚ṭa-ak˚), as,%} m.
a proper N.; [cf. {%logākṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40757<pc>0874-a<k1>lozwaka<k2>lozwaka
{%Loṣṭaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= loṣṭa,%} a clod; a particular
object serving as a mark; a spot, (according to some
{%am,%} n.); N. of various persons.
<LEND>

<L>40758<pc>0874-a<k1>lozwan<k2>lozwan
{%Loṣṭan = loṣṭa,%}¦ a clod.
<LEND>

<L>40759<pc>0874-a<k1>lozwaSa<k2>lozwaSa
{%Loṣṭaśa, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40760<pc>0874-a<k1>lozwu<k2>lozwu
{%Loṣṭu, us,%}¦ m. {%= loṣṭa,%} a clod.
<LEND>

<L>40761<pc>0874-a<k1>lozwra<k2>lozwra
{%Loṣṭra, loṣṭha, loṣṭhaka,%}¦ incorrect for {%loṣṭa,%}
{%loṣṭaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>40762<pc>0874-a<k1>lostAnI<k2>lostAnI
{#lostAnI#}¦ {%lostānī,%} a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40763<pc>0874-a<k1>loha<k2>loha
{#loha#}¦ {%loha, as, ā, am%} (probably a later
form of {%roha,%} fr. rt. 1. {%ruh,%} or fr. a lost rt. {%rudh,%}
cf. {%rohita, lohita, rudhira%}), red, reddish, copper-
coloured; made of copper, coppery; made of iron;
({%as, am%}), m. n. red metal, copper; iron (either
crude or wrought); steel; any metal; gold; a
weapon; a fish-hook; blood; ({%as%}), m. the red goat
[cf. {%lohāja%}]; a proper N.; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people; ({%am%}), n. aloe wood, Agallochum. {%—Loha-%}
{%kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. a kind of thorny shrub, Vanguiera
Spinosa. {%—Loha-kānta, as,%} m. a magnet, loadstone.
{%—Loha-kāra, as,%} m. a worker in iron, smelter of
iron, iron-smith, blacksmith; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the Tantra
goddess Atibalā. {%—Loha-kāraka, as,%} m. an iron-
smith, blacksmith. {%—Lohakāra-bhastrā,%} f. a black-
smith's bellows. {%—Loha-kiṭṭa, am,%} n. rust of iron
or iron filings. {%—Loha-giri, is,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain. {%—Loha-ghātaka, as,%} m. ‘iron-striker,’ a
blacksmith. {%—Loha-cāriṇī,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Lo-%}
{%ha-cūrṇa, am,%} n. rust of iron, iron filings. {%—Loha-%}
{%ja, am,%} n. bell-metal; rust of iron or iron filings.
{%—Loha-jaṅgha, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Loha-jāla, am,%} n. an
iron net, a coat of mail. {%—Loha-jit, t,%} m. ‘con-
quering iron (in hardness), ‘a diamond. {%—Loha-tā-%}
{%raṇī,%} f., N. of a river, (also read {%loha-tāriṇī, loha-%}
{%cāriṇī.%}) {%—Loha-dāraka, as,%} m., N. of one of the
twenty-one hells (Manu IV. 90). {%—Loha-drāvin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} melting copper or iron, fusing metal; ({%ī%}),
m. borax. {%—Loha-nagara, am,%} n., N. of a town.
{%—Loha-nāla, as,%} m. an iron arrow. {%—Loha-pāśa,%}
{%as,%} m. an iron chain. {%—Loha-pura,%} N. of a place.
{%—Loha-pṛṣṭha, as,%} m. ‘iron-backed,’ a heron.
{%—Loha-pratimā,%} f. an iron image; an anvil.
{%—Loha-baddha, as, ā, am,%} studded with iron (as
a war-club). {%—Loha-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of iron
or copper, composed or consisting of iron, iron.
{%—Loha-māraka, as, ikā, am,%} calcining metal;
({%as%}), m. Achyranthes Triandra. {%—Loha-muktikā,%} f.
a red pearl. {%—Loha-mekhala, as, ā, am,%} wearing
a metal girdle; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda. {%—Loha-yaṣṭī,%} f., N. of a
place. {%—Loha-rajas, as,%} n. iron-dust, rust of iron
or iron filings. {%—Loha-rājaka, am,%} n. silver. {%—Lo-%}
{%ha-liṅga, am,%} n. a boil or abscess filled with blood.
{%—Loha-vara, am,%} n. the most precious metal, gold.
{%—Loha-varman, a,%} n. iron armour, mail. {%—Loha-%}
{%vāla, as,%} m. a kind of rice. {%{{—Loha-śanku->—Loha-śaṅku||20161210|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 311-315|dental nasal -> guttural}}, us,%} m.
an iron pike, iron stake or spike; ({%us%}), m. ‘iron-
spiked, ‘N. of one of the twenty-one hells (Manu
IV. 90). {%—Loha-śleṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%} uniting
metals; ({%as%}), m. borax. {%—Loha-saṅkara, am,%} n.
blue steel. {%—Lohākara (˚ha-āk˚), as,%} m., N. of a
town. {%—Lohā-karṇa, as, ī, am%} ({%lohā%} for {%loha%}),
Ved. red-eared. {%—Lohāṅgāraka (˚ha-aṅ˚),%} N. of a
hell (‘pit of red-hot charcoal’). {%—Lohācala (˚ha-%}
{%ac˚), as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Lohāja (˚ha-%}
{%aja), as,%} m. the red goat. {%—Lohāja-vaktra, as,%}
m., N. of one of Skanda's attendants. {%—Lohāṇḍa%}
({%˚ha-aṇ˚%} or {%˚ha-āṇ˚%}), see Gaṇa Gaurādi to Pāṇ.
IV. 1, 41. {%—Lohābhisāra (˚ha-abh˚), as,%} m., N.
of a military ceremony performed on the tenth day
after the Nī-rājana, (this ceremony or lustration of
arms was formerly observed by kings before com-
mencing a campaign, but is now usually confined to
the domestic decoration and worship of the soldiers’
weapons); {%= lohābhihāra%}. {%—Lohābhihāra (˚ha- %}
[Page0874-b+ 81]
{%abh˚), as,%} m. {%= nī-rājana%}. {%—Lohāmiṣa (˚ha-%}
{%ām˚), am,%} n. the flesh of the red-haired goat. {%—Lo-%}
{%hāyasa (˚ha-āy˚), am,%} n., Ved. any metal mixed
with copper. {%—Lohārgala (˚ha-ar˚), am,%} n., N.
of a Tīrtha. {%—Lohottama (˚ha-ut˚), am,%} n. the
best metal, gold.
<LEND>

<L>40764<pc>0874-b<k1>lohaka<k2>lohaka
{%Lohaka = loha%}¦ in {%aṣṭa-lohaka, indu-l˚, tri-l˚,%}
{%pañca-l˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>40765<pc>0874-b<k1>lohara<k2>lohara
{%Lohara,%}¦ N. of a district.
<LEND>

<L>40766<pc>0874-b<k1>lohala<k2>lohala
{%Lohala, as, ā, am,%}¦ iron, made of iron; lisping,
speaking inarticulately; ({%as%}), m. the principal ring
of a chain (?) .
<LEND>

<L>40767<pc>0874-b<k1>lohi<k2>lohi
{%Lohi,%}¦ n. a kind of borax.
<LEND>

<L>40768<pc>0874-b<k1>lohikA<k2>lohikA
{%Lohikā,%}¦ f. an iron pot or vessel (being a sort of
large shallow bowl, sometimes of iron, but usually
of wood and bound with iron, used for washing
rice, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>40769<pc>0874-b<k1>lohita<k2>lohita<h>1
1. {%lohita, as, ā%}¦ or {%lohinī, am%} (a later form of
{%rohita,%} q. v.), red, red-coloured, reddish; made of
copper, copper, metal; ({%as%}), m. red (the colour),
any red colour; a particular disease attacking the
eyelids; a kind of precious stone; a species of rice;
a sort of bean or lentil; Dioscorea Purpurea; a kind
of fish, Cyprinus Rohita; a sort of deer; a snake,
serpent; the planet Mars; N. of a Nāga or serpent-
demon; of a river (the Brahma-putra); of a sea; of
a lake; of a country; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class
of gods under the twelfth Manu; the descendants
of Lohita; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the seven tongues
of fire; of two plants {%(= varāha-krāntā, rakta-%}
{%punarnavā); = lohinī%} below; ({%inī%}), f. a woman
with a red-coloured skin or red with anger; ({%am%}),
n. copper, metal; blood, (in this sense also {%as,%} m.);
battle; saffron; red sanders; a kind of sandal-wood
({%= go-śīrṣa%}); a kind of Agallochum; an imperfect
form of rainbow. {%—Lohita-kalmāṣa, as, ī, am,%}
variegated with red, red-spotted. {%—Lohita-kūṭa,%} N.
of a place. {%—Lohita-kṛṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} of a
reddish black colour, dark-red. {%—Lohita-kṣaya,%}
{%as,%} m. loss of blood. {%—Lohita-kṣayaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} suffering from loss of blood. {%—Lohita-kṣīra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. yielding red or bloody milk. {%—Lo-%}
{%hita-gaṅga,%} N. of a place; ({%am%}), ind, where the
Ganges appears red. {%—Lohita-gaṅgaka,%} N. of a
place. {%—Lohita-grīva, as, ā, am,%} red-necked, hav-
ing a red neck; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Agni. {%—Lohita-%}
{%candana, am,%} n. saffron. {%—Lohita-jahnu, us,%} m.
a proper N. {%—Lohita-tā,%} f. or {%lohita-tva, am,%} n.
redness, red colour. {%—Lohita-dhvaja, as, ā, am,%}
red-bannered, having a red flag; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a particular association of persons. {%—Lohita-nayana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} red-eyed, having the eyes reddened with
anger or passion. {%—Lohita-pāda-deśa, as,%} m., N.
of a place. {%—Lohita-pittin, ī, inī, i,%} subject to
hemorrhage, suffering from hemorrhage; [cf. {%rakta-%}
{%pittin.%}] {%—Lohita-pura,%} N. of a place. {%—Lohita-%}
{%puṣpa, as, ā, am,%} red-flowering, bearing red
flowers. {%—Lohita-puṣpaka, as, ā, am,%} red-flower-
ing; ({%as%}), m. the granate tree. {%—Lohita-muktā,%} f.
a red pearl. {%—Lohita-mṛttikā,%} f. red earth, red
chalk, ruddle. {%—Lohita-rāga, as,%} m. a red colour,
red hue. {%—Lohita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing blood.
{%—Lohita-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%} having red or blood-
stained garments. {%—Lohita-śatapattra, am,%} n. a
red lotus-flower. {%—Lohita-śavala%} or {%lohita-sāraṅ-%}
{%ga, as, ā, am%} variegated with red, dappled with red.
 — 1. {%lohitākṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as,%} m. a red die (used
in gaming). {%—2. lohitākṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as, ī, am,%}
red-eyed; ({%as%}), m. a kind of snake; the Indian
cuckoo; N. of Viṣṇu; of one of Skanda's attend-
ants; of a man; ({%ī%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda; scil. {%sirā,%} an artery or vein
situated either at the thigh-joint or at the arm-joint;
({%am%}), n. a part of the arm and of the thigh, the
place where these are joined to the body, the arm-
joint, thigh-joint, hip. {%—Lohitā-giri, is,%} m. ({%lohitā%}
for {%lohita%}), N. of a mountain. {%—Lohitāṅga (˚ta-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘red-limbed,’ the planet Mars; a species
of plant {%(= kampillaka)%}. {%—Lohitānana (˚ta-ān˚),%}
{%as, ī, am,%} red-faced; ({%as%}), m. an ichneumon. {%—Lo-%}
{%hitā-mukhī,%} f., N. of a club (in the Rāmāyaṇa).
[Page0874-c+ 78]
{%—Lohitāyas (˚ta-ay˚), as,%} n. ‘red-iron,’ copper.
{%—Lohitāyasa, as, ā, am,%} made of red metal; ({%am%}),
n. (probably) copper. {%—Lohitārṇa (˚ta-ar˚), as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Lohitārdra (˚ta-ār˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} wet or dripping with blood, soaked in blood.
{%—Lohitārman (˚ta-ar˚), a,%} n. a red swelling or
blood-shot appearance in the whites of the eyes.
{%—Lohitāvabhāsa (˚ta-av˚), as, ā, am,%} having a
red appearance, reddish. {%—Lohitāśoka (˚ta-aś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a red-flowering Aśoka. {%—Lohitāśva (˚ta-%}
{%aś˚), as, ā, am,%} having or driving red horses. {%—Lo-%}
{%hitāsya (˚ta-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} having a red or blood-
stained mouth. {%—Lohitāhi (˚ta-ahi), is,%} m. a red
snake. {%—Lohitī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to be
or become red, to be reddened. {%—Lohitekṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ta-īk˚), as, ā, am,%} red-eyed. {%—Lohitaita (˚ta-%}
{%eta), as, ā, am, = rohitaita,%} variegated with red.
{%—Lohitotpala (˚ta-ut˚), am,%} n. the flower of
Nymphæa Rubra. {%—Lohitoda (˚ta-uda), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having blood-red water, having red water, hav-
ing blood instead of water; ({%as%}), m., N. of a parti-
cular hell. {%—Lohitorṇa (˚ta-ūr˚), as, ī, am,%} having
red wool.
<LEND>

<L>40770<pc>0874-c<k1>lohita<k2>lohita<h>2
2. {%lohita,%}¦ Nom. P. {%lohitati,%} &c., to be or become
red, redden.
<LEND>

<L>40771<pc>0874-c<k1>lohitaka<k2>lohitaka
{%Lohitaka, as, ikā%}¦ or {%lohinikā, am,%} red, of a
red colour, reddish; ({%as%}), m. a ruby; a kind of rice;
the planet Mars; N. of a Stūpa; ({%ikā%}), f. a parti-
cular vein or artery; a species of plant; ({%am%}), n.
bell-metal; calx of brass.
<LEND>

<L>40772<pc>0874-c<k1>lohitAya<k2>lohitAya
{%Lohitāya,%}¦ Nom. P. A. {%lohitāyati, -te,%} &c., to
be or become red, redden, grow red.
<LEND>

<L>40773<pc>0874-c<k1>lohitAyana<k2>lohitAyana
{%Lohitāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic, (probably for
{%lauhitāyana.%})
<LEND>

<L>40774<pc>0874-c<k1>lohitAyani<k2>lohitAyani
{%Lohitāyani, is,%}¦ f. a patronymic, (perhaps for {%lau-%}
{%hitāyani.%})
<LEND>

<L>40775<pc>0874-c<k1>lohitiman<k2>lohitiman
{%Lohitiman, ā,%}¦ m. redness, red colour.
<LEND>

<L>40776<pc>0874-c<k1>lohitya<k2>lohitya
{%Lohitya, as,%}¦ m. a kind of rice; N. of a man; of
the Brahma-putra river; of a village; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a
celestial female (in Hari-vaṃśa 9534); of a river.
<LEND>

<L>40777<pc>0874-c<k1>lohinikA<k2>lohinikA
{%Lohinikā.%}¦ See under {%lohitaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40778<pc>0874-c<k1>lohinI<k2>lohinI
{%Lohinī.%}¦ See under 1. {%lohita,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40779<pc>0874-c<k1>lohinIkA<k2>lohinIkA
{%Lohinīkā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%lohinī%}), Ved. red glow or lustre.
<LEND>

<L>40780<pc>0874-c<k1>lohinya<k2>lohinya
{%Lohinya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic, (probably for {%lo-%}
{%hitya.%})
<LEND>

<L>40781<pc>0874-c<k1>lOkAkza<k2>lOkAkza
{#lOkAkza#}¦ {%laukākṣa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
school, (perhaps for {%laugākṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>40782<pc>0874-c<k1>lOkAyatika<k2>lOkAyatika
{#lOkAyatika#}¦ {%laukāyatika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%lokāyata%}), following the teaching of Cārvāka; ({%as%}),
m. a follower of Cārvāka, a materialist, atheist.
<LEND>

<L>40783<pc>0874-c<k1>lOkika<k2>lOkika
{#lOkika#}¦ {%laukika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%loka%}), worldly,
mundane, terrestrial, popular, familiar (as opposed to
{%a-laukika,%} ‘technical’), belonging to ordinary life,
occurring in every-day life, vulgar, common, usual,
ordinary, fashionable, publicly received, customary,
temporal, secular, not sacred (as opposed to {%vaidika,%}
{%ārṣa, śāstrīya%}); belonging to the world of (at the
end of a comp., e. g. {%brahma-laukika,%} belonging
to the world of Brahmā); ({%ās%}), m. pl. common or
ordinary men (as opposed to ‘the learned, initiated,’
&c.), men in general, the human race; men familiar
with the ways of the world, men of the world;
({%am%}), n. anything occurring in the world, the laws
or ordinances of the world, general custom, usage.
{%—Laukika-tā,%} f. or {%laukika-tva, am,%} n. worldli-
ness, commonness, worldly currency or custom, popu-
larity, usual custom, usage, general prevalence. {%—Lau-%}
{%kika-viṣaya-vicāra, as,%} m. ‘consideration of ordi-
nary objects, ‘N. of a philosophical treatise.
<LEND>

<L>40784<pc>0874-c<k1>lOkya<k2>lOkya
{%Laukya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the world,
being in the world, extended through the world,
generally diffused, worldly, mundane, terrestrial,
human, general, ordinary, common, common-place;
({%as%}), m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40785<pc>0874-c<k1>lOgAkzi<k2>lOgAkzi
{#lOgAkzi#}¦ {%laugākṣi, is,%} m. (fr. {%logākṣa%}),
a patronymic, N. of the author of a Dharma-śāstra.
{%—Laugākṣi-bhāskara, as,%} m., N. of the author
of several modern philosophical works.
<LEND>
[Page0875-a+ 75]

<L>40786<pc>0875-a<k1>lOWaraTa<k2>lOWaraTa
{#lOWaraTa#}¦ {%lauṭharatha, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40787<pc>0875-a<k1>lOq<k2>lOq
{#lOq#}¦ {%lauḍ%} (= rts. {%loṭ, loḍ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%lauḍati,%} &c., to be foolish or mad.
<LEND>

<L>40788<pc>0875-a<k1>lOpAyana<k2>lOpAyana
{#lOpAyana#}¦ {%laupāyana, as,%} m., Ved. a patro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>40789<pc>0875-a<k1>lOpsa<k2>lOpsa
{#lOpsa#}¦ {%laupsa, as,%} m., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>40790<pc>0875-a<k1>lOma<k2>lOma
{#lOma#}¦ {%lauma%} (fr. {%loman%}), see Gaṇa Saṅka-
lādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 75, and Gaṇa Śarkarādi to Pāṇ.
V. 3, 107.
<LEND>

<L>40791<pc>0875-a<k1>lOmakAyana<k2>lOmakAyana
{%Laumakāyana%}¦ (fr. {%lomaka%}), see Gaṇa Pakṣādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>40792<pc>0875-a<k1>lOmakAyani<k2>lOmakAyani
{%Laumakāyani, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Lomaka.
<LEND>

<L>40793<pc>0875-a<k1>lOmakIya<k2>lOmakIya
{%Laumakīya%}¦ (fr. {%lomaka%}), see Gaṇa Kṛśāśvādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>40794<pc>0875-a<k1>lOmanya<k2>lOmanya
{%Laumanya%}¦ (fr. {%loman%}), see Gaṇa Saṅkāśādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>40795<pc>0875-a<k1>lOmaSIya<k2>lOmaSIya
{%Laumaśīya%}¦ (fr. {%lomaśa%}), see Gaṇa Kṛśāśvādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>40796<pc>0875-a<k1>lOmaharzaRaka<k2>lOmaharzaRaka
{%Laumaharṣaṇaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ composed by
Loma-harṣaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>40797<pc>0875-a<k1>lOmaharzaRi<k2>lOmaharzaRi
{%Laumaharṣaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Loma-
harṣaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>40798<pc>0875-a<k1>lOmAyana<k2>lOmAyana
{%Laumāyana%}¦ (fr. {%loman%}), see Gaṇa Pakṣādi to
Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80; ({%ās%}), m. pl. of the following.
<LEND>

<L>40799<pc>0875-a<k1>lOmAyanya<k2>lOmAyanya
{%Laumāyanya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Loman.
<LEND>

<L>40800<pc>0875-a<k1>lOmi<k2>lOmi
{%Laumi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Loman.
<LEND>

<L>40801<pc>0875-a<k1>lOlAha<k2>lOlAha
{#lOlAha#}¦ {%laulāha,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>40802<pc>0875-a<k1>lOlya<k2>lOlya
{#lOlya#}¦ {%laulya, am,%} n. (fr. {%lola%}), restlessness,
instability, inconstancy, fickleness; lustfulness, eager-
ness, eager desire, greediness, passion, ({%a-laulya,%}
{%am,%} n. absence of all desire.) {%—Laulya-tā,%} f. lustful-
ness, eager desire. {%—Laulya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} eagerly
desirous, eager, greedy, avaricious, lustful.
<LEND>

<L>40803<pc>0875-a<k1>lOSa<k2>lOSa
{#lOSa#}¦ {%lauśa, am,%} n. (fr. {%luśa%}), N. of various
Sāmans.
<LEND>

<L>40804<pc>0875-a<k1>lOha<k2>lOha
{#lOha#}¦ {%lauha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%loha%}), made of
copper or metal, coppery, metallic; made of iron,
composed or consisting of iron, belonging to iron,
iron; coming from or belonging to the red-coloured
goat; copper-coloured, red; ({%ā%}), f. a metal or iron
cooking-pot, kettle, pan; ({%am%}), n. iron, metal.
{%—Lauha-kāra, as,%} m. {%= loha-kāra,%} a blacksmith.
{%—Lauha-cāraka, as,%} m., N. of a hell; [cf. {%loha-%}
{%dāraka.%}] {%—Lauha-ja, am,%} n. {%= loha-ja,%} the rust
of iron. {%—Lauha-pradīpa, as,%} m., N. of a treatise
on metals. {%—Lauha-bandha, as, am,%} m. n. an
iron chain, iron fetters. {%—Lauha-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n.
an iron vessel, metal mortar. {%—Lauha-bhū, ūs,%} f. a
metal pan, boiler, caldron, kettle. {%—Lauha-mala,%}
{%am,%} n. the rust of iron. {%—Lauha-śaṅku, us,%} m. {%=%}
{%loha-śaṅku%}. {%—Lauha-śāstra, am,%} n. a Śāstra treat-
ing of metals. {%—Lauhācārya (˚ha-āc˚), as,%} m. a
teacher of metallurgy or the art of working metals.
{%—Lauhātman (˚ha-āt˚), ā,%} m. {%= lauha-bhū.%}
{%—Lauheṣa (˚ha-īṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} having a metal
pole (said of a carriage).
<LEND>

<L>40805<pc>0875-a<k1>lOhAyana<k2>lOhAyana
{%Lauhāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Loha.
<LEND>

<L>40806<pc>0875-a<k1>lOhAyasa<k2>lOhAyasa
{%Lauhāyasa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%lohāyasa%}), made of
metal, metallic, made of copper, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40807<pc>0875-a<k1>lOhi<k2>lOhi
{#lOhi#}¦ {%lauhi, is,%} m., N. of a son of Aṣṭaka.
<LEND>

<L>40808<pc>0875-a<k1>lOhita<k2>lOhita
{#lOhita#}¦ {%lauhita, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%lohita%}), the
trident of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>40809<pc>0875-a<k1>lOhitaDvaja<k2>lOhitaDvaja
{%Lauhitadhvaja, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%lohita-dhvaja%}), a
follower of the Lohita-dhvajas.
<LEND>

<L>40810<pc>0875-a<k1>lOhitIka<k2>lOhitIka
{%Lauhitīka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. 1. {%lohita%}), reddish, hav-
ing a reddish lustre.
<LEND>

<L>40811<pc>0875-a<k1>lOhitya<k2>lOhitya
{%Lauhitya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. 1. {%lohita%}), a patronymic;
N. of a river, the Brahma-putra; of a sea; of a
mountain; of a Tīrtha, (in this sense probably {%am,%}
n.); ({%am%}), n. red colour, redness.
<LEND>

<L>40812<pc>0875-a<k1>lOhityAyanI<k2>lOhityAyanI
{%Lauhityāyanī,%}¦ f. (feminine form of the above),
a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>40813<pc>0875-a<k1>lpI<k2>lpI
{#lpI#}¦ {%lpī%} or {%lyī,%} cl. 9. P. {%lpināti, lyināti,%}
&c., to join, unite, be attached to, mix
with, (various readings for rt. 1. {%lī.%})
<LEND>
[Page0875-b+ 76]

<L>40814<pc>0875-b<k1>lyuw<k2>lyuw
{#lyuw#}¦ {%lyuṭ,%} (in grammar) a technical symbol
for the Kṛt affix {%ana.%}
<LEND>

<L>40815<pc>0875-b<k1>lvI<k2>lvI
{#lvI#}¦ {%lvī,%} cl. 9. P. {%lvināti, lvīnāti,%} &c., to
go, move, approach, (a various reading for
rt. {%vlī%} or {%plī.%})
<LEND>

<L>40816<pc>0875-b<k1>lvIna<k2>lvIna
{%Lvīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone.
<LEND>
<H>{#va#}

<L>40817<pc>0875-b<k1>va<k2>va<h>1
{#va#} 1¦. {%va,%} the twenty-ninth consonant of
the Devanāgarī alphabet, being the semivowel of the
vowels {%u, ū,%} and having the sound of the English
<nsi>v,</nsi> except when forming the last member of a con-
junct consonant, in which case it is pronounced like
<nsi>w;</nsi> it is often confounded with the labial consonant
{%b,%} with which it may frequently be interchanged.
<LEND>

<L>40818<pc>0875-b<k1>va<k2>va<h>2
{#va#} 2¦. {%va, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%vā%}), air, wind;
the arm; N. of Varuṇa; addressing; conciliation;
auspiciousness; reverence; a dwelling; the residence
of Varuṇa; the ocean, water; a tiger; cloth; the escu-
lent root of the water-lily; ({%ā%}), f. going; hurting, in-
jury; an arrow; weaving; ({%am%}), n. a sort of incantation
or Mantra (of which the object is the deity Varuṇa);
{%= pra-cetas; (as, ā, am),%} strong, powerful.
<LEND>

<L>40819<pc>0875-b<k1>va<k2>va<h>3
{#va#} 3¦. {%va,%} ind. {%= iva,%} like, as.
<LEND>

<L>40820<pc>0875-b<k1>vaMSa<k2>vaMSa
{#vaMSa#}¦ {%vaṃśa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%van,%}
to sound, or connected with rt. {%vaṅk%}), a bamboo
cane, bamboo; a staff; a term for the rafters and laths
fastened to the beams of a house (as generally made
of split bamboos), or laths running across a roof [cf.
{%prācīna-vaṃśa, prāg-vaṃśa%}], a cross-beam, joint;
a sort of sugar-cane; the Śāl tree, Shorea Robusta;
a reed-pipe, tube, flute, pipe, fife; the back-bone,
spine [cf. {%pṛṣṭha-v˚%}]; the central projecting part
of a cimeter or sabre; the joints in a bamboo; the
line of a pedigree or genealogy (from its resemblance
to the succession of joints in a bamboo), a lineage,
race, family, stock; offspring, a son; a dynasty, race
of kings; a succession or collection of similar things
(as of chariots, stars, &c.), an assemblage, multitude,
host; a particular measure of length (= 10 Hastas);
bamboo-manna; N. of Viṣṇu ?; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an
Apsaras (a daughter of Prādhā); ({%ī%}), f. a flute,
pipe; an artery, vein; a particular weight (= 4 Kar-
shas); bamboo-manna; [cf. Goth. <nsi>rausa,</nsi> ‘a reed;’
Old Germ. <nsi>rohr.</nsi>] {%—Vaṃśa-ṛṣi, is,%} m. a Ṛṣi
mentioned in a Vaṃśa-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Vaṃśa-kaṭhina,%}
{%as,%} m. a clump or thicket of bamboos. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%kapha, am,%} n. ‘bamboo-phlegm,’ cottony or floc-
culent seeds floating in the air. {%—Vaṃśa-kara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} making or founding a family, propagating or
perpetuating a race; ({%as%}), m. an ancestor; a proper
N.; ({%ā%}). f., N. of a river rising in the Mahendra
mountains. {%—Vaṃśa-karpūra-rocanā,%} f. {%= vaṃśa-%}
{%rocanā,%} q. v. {%—Vaṃśakarma-kṛt, t, t, t,%} doing
bamboo-work, engaged in the manufacture of baskets,
&c. {%—Vaṃśa-karman, a,%} n. bamboo-work, manu-
facture of baskets, &c. {%—Vaṃśa-kīrtti, is, is, i,%}
having great family renown, celebrated. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t, = vaṃśakarma-kṛt; (t),%} m. the
founder of a family. {%—Vaṃśa-kramāgata (˚ma-%}
{%āg˚), as, ā, am,%} descended or inherited lineally,
what comes from one's family in regular succession,
obtained by family inheritance. {%—Vaṃśa-kṣaya, as,%}
m. decay of a family. {%—Vaṃśa-kṣīri,%} f. bamboo-
manna. {%—Vaṃśa-gulma,%} N. of a sacred bathing-
place. {%—Vaṃśa-caritra, am,%} n. the history of any
race or dynasty, a genealogical account of the doings
of any family. {%—Vaṃśa-cintaka, as,%} m. one familiar
with pedigrees, a genealogist. {%—Vaṃśa-cchettṛ, tā,%}
m. one who cuts off the line of descent, the last of
a family or race. {%—Vaṃśa-ja, as, ā, am,%} made of
or produced from bamboos; born in the family of,
belonging to the family of (with loc. or at the end
of a comp.), sprung from a good family; ({%as%}), m.
the seed of the bamboo; ({%ā, am%}), f. n. bamboo-
manna. {%—Vaṃśa-taṇḍula, as,%} m. the seed of the
bamboo. {%—Vaṃśa-dalā,%} f. a kind of plant or grass
[Page0875-c+ 81]
(= vaṃśa-pattrī, jīrikā). {%—Vaṃśa-dhara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} carrying or holding a bamboo, &c.; maintain-
ing or supporting a family. {%—Vaṃśa-dhānya, am,%}
n. the seed of the bamboo. {%—Vaṃśa-dhārā,%} f., N. of
a river rising in the Mahendra mountains. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%dhārin, ī, iṇī, i, = vaṃśa-dhara%}. {%—Vaṃśa-nartin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘family-dancer,’ a buffoon. {%—Vaṃśa-nāḍikā,%} f.
a tube or pipe made of bamboo. {%—Vaṃśa-nātha, as,%}
m. the head of a family, chief of a race. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%nālikā,%} f. a pipe or lute made of bamboo, a reed,
flute. {%—Vaṃśa-netra, am,%} n. a kind of sugar-cane,
the root of sugar-cane {%(= ikṣu-mūla)%}. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. a bamboo leaf; a kind of metre, {%=%}
{%vaṃśapattra-patita; (as),%} m. a reed; ({%ī%}), f. a
particular kind of grass; {%= nāḍī-hiṅgu%}. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%pattraka, as,%} m. a reed; white sugar-cane; a sort
of fish, Cynoglossus Lingua; ({%am%}), n. yellow orpi-
ment. {%—Vaṃśapattra-patita, am,%} n. ‘fallen on a
bamboo leaf, ‘a species of metre, four times ¯˘˘
¯˘¯˘˘˘¯, ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯. {%—Vaṃśa-paramparā,%}
f. family succession, lineage, descent. {%—Vaṃśa-pātra-%}
{%kāriṇī,%} f. a woman who makes bamboo vessels or
baskets. {%—Vaṃśa-pīta, as,%} m., N. of a plant {%(=%}
{%kaṇa-guggulu)%}. {%—Vaṃśa-puṣpā,%} f., N. of a plant
{%(= saha-devī)%}. {%—Vaṃśa-pūraka, am,%} n. a kind of
sugar-cane {%(= ikṣu-mūla)%}. {%—Vaṃśa-pratiṣṭhā-%}
{%na-kara, as,%} m. one who establishes his family on
a firm foundation.{%—Vaṃśa-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n., N.
of a chronological list of ancient teachers. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%bhāra, as,%} m. a load of bamboos.{%—Vaṃśa-bhṛt,%}
{%t,%} m. the supporter of a family, head of a race.
{%—Vaṃśa-bhojya, as, ā, am,%} to be possessed by
a family, hereditary; ({%am%}), n. an hereditary estate.
{%—Vaṃśa-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of bamboo.
{%—Vaṃśa-mūlaka, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-
place. {%—Vaṃśa-rāja, as,%} m. a very high or lofty
bamboo; N. of a king. {%—Vaṃśa-rocanā%} or {%vaṃśa-%}
{%locanā,%} f. an earthy concretion of a milk-white
colour formed in the hollow of the bamboo and
known by the name of bamboo-manna. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%lakṣmī, īs,%} f. the fortune of a family. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%vardhana, as, ī, am,%} increasing or prospering a
family; ({%am%}), n. the act of causing prosperity to
a family. {%—Vaṃśa-vardhin, ī, inī, i,%} increasing or
exalting a family. {%—Vaṃśa-vitati, is,%} f. a clump or
thicket of bamboos; family, descent. {%—Vaṃśa-vidā-%}
{%riṇī,%} f. a woman employed in splitting bamboos.
{%—Vaṃśa-viśuddha, as, ā, am,%} (made) of a good
bamboo; of a pure or good family. {%—Vaṃśa-vistara,%}
{%as,%} m. a complete genealogy. {%—Vaṃśa-vṛddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. prosperity of a family. {%—Vaṃśa-śarkarā,%}
f. {%= vaṃśa-rocanā%}. {%—Vaṃśa-śalākā,%} f. a bamboo
peg or screw at the lower end of a Vīṇā or lute,
(according to some) the bamboo pipe that forms the
body of the lute; any small bamboo pin or stake
(as the bar of a cage, &c.). {%—Vaṃśa-samācāra, as,%}
m. family usage. {%—Vaṃśa-stanita, am,%} n. a species
of the Jagatī metre {%(= vaṃśa-stha-vila)%}. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%stha, am,%} n. (or {%ā,%} f.?), a particular metre {%(=%}
{%vaṃśa-stha-vila)%}. {%—Vaṃśa-stha-vila, am,%} n. the
hollow or cavity found in a bamboo cane; N. of a
species of the Jagatī metre, four times ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘
¯˘¯˘¯ (the beginning of the Ṛtu-saṃhāra is in
this metre.) {%—Vaṃśa-sthiti, is,%} f. the state or con-
dition of a family. {%—Vaṃśa-hīna, as, ā, am,%} desti-
tute of family or descendants, having no kindred.
{%—Vaṃśāgata (˚śa-āg), as, ā, am,%} what comes
from one's family, inherited, obtained by inheritance.
{%—Vaṃśāgra (˚śa-ag˚), am,%} n. the point or end of
a bamboo cane; the shoot of a bamboo. {%—Vaṃśa-%}
{%kura (˚śa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a bamboo shoot or sprout.
{%—Vaṃśānukīrtana (˚śa-an˚), am,%} n. the publish-
ing or proclaiming a family, genealogy. {%—Vaṃśānu-%}
{%krama (˚śa-an˚), as,%} m. family succession, genea-
logy, lineal inheritance. {%—Vaṃśānuga (˚śa-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being on or along the central projecting
part of a sword; passing from family to family.
{%—Vaṃśānucarita (˚śa-an˚), am,%} n. the history of
a family or dynasty, a genealogical list (one of the
five Lakṣaṇas or distinguishing marks of a Pu-
rāṇa). {%—Vaṃśānuvaṃśa-carita (˚śa-an˚), am,%} n.
[Page0876-a+ 78]
the history of both old and more recent families
(one of the five Lakṣaṇas of a Purāṇa). {%—Vaṃśā-%}
{%vatī,%} f. a proper N. {%—Vaṃśāvalī (˚śa-āv˚),%} f. the
line of a family, a pedigree, genealogy. {%—Vaṃśāhva%}
{%(˚śa-āh˚), as,%} m. bamboo-manna. {%—Vaṃśī-dhara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} holding a flute or pipe; ({%as%}), m. a flute-
player, piper; N. of Kṛṣṇa; of a learned man.
{%—Vaṃśī-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} holding or carrying a
flute; ({%ī%}), m. a flute-player; N. of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Vaṃśī-%}
{%vadana, as,%} m., N. of a Scholiast.
<LEND>

<L>40821<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMSaka<k2>vaMSaka
{%Vaṃśaka, as,%}¦ m. a large kind of sugar-cane; a joint
in a bamboo; a small fish, Cynoglossus Lingua; N. of
a king; ({%ikā%}), f. a kind of pipe or flute; aloe wood,
Agallochum, (in this sense also {%am,%} n.; cf. {%vaṃśika.%})
<LEND>

<L>40822<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMSika<k2>vaMSika
{%Vaṃśika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
bamboo, pertaining to a family &c., lineal, genealo-
gical; ({%am%}), n. aloe wood; [cf. {%vaṃśikā%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>40823<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMSin<k2>vaMSin
{%Vaṃśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ belonging to a family; [cf.
{%sva-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40824<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMSivAdya<k2>vaMSivAdya
{%Vaṃśi-vādya, am,%}¦ n. a flute, pipe, (probably
wrong for {%vaṃśī-vādya.%})
<LEND>

<L>40825<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMSI<k2>vaMSI
{%Vaṃśī.%}¦ See under {%vaṃśa,%} p. 875, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40826<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMSIya<k2>vaMSIya
{%Vaṃśīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ of or belonging to a family,
of a good family, of the same family.
<LEND>

<L>40827<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMSya<k2>vaMSya
{%Vaṃśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or attached to the
main beam; connected with the back-bone or spine;
of or belonging to a family; of a good family, of
the same family; peculiar to a family; genealogical,
lineal; ({%as%}), m. a cross-beam, joist; a bone in the
arm; a bone in the leg; a member of a family; a
son, lineal descendant, posterity; an ancestor, fore-
father; a kinsman from seven generations above and
seven below; a pupil; ({%ās%}), m. pl. ancestors.
<LEND>

<L>40828<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMsaga<k2>vaMsaga
{#vaMsaga#}¦ {%vaṃsaga, as,%} m., Ved. a bull.
<LEND>

<L>40829<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMh<k2>vaMh
{#vaMh#}¦ {%vaṃh.%} See rt. {%baṃh,%} p. 671, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40830<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMhizWa<k2>vaMhizWa
{%Vaṃhiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (see {%baṃhiṣṭha%}), most,
very much or great.
<LEND>

<L>40831<pc>0876-a<k1>vaMhIyas<k2>vaMhIyas
{%Vaṃhīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (see {%baṃhīyas%}), more,
greater; very much or large.
<LEND>

<L>40832<pc>0876-a<k1>vak<k2>vak
{#vak#}¦ {%vak%} (a form of rt. {%vaṅk,%} q. v.), to go
crookedly, &c., (in Ṛg-veda VII. 21, 3.
{%vāvakre = nirgacchanti,%} they issued forth.)
<LEND>

<L>40833<pc>0876-a<k1>vaka<k2>vaka
{%Vaka, as,%}¦ m. a heron, crane, Ardea Nivea; a
hypocrite, cheat, rogue, deceiver (the crane being
regarded as an animal of great cunning and deceit
as well as sagacity); a particular tree, Sesbana Gran-
diflora; an apparatus for calcining or subliming
metals or minerals (consisting of two crucibles, one
inverted over the other and placed over a fire); N.
of a Ṛṣi (having the patronymic Dālbhi or Dālbhya);
of a Rākṣasa or demon (killed by Bhīma or Bhīma-
sena, see {%vaka-vadha%}); of an Asura (said to have
assumed the form of a crane and to have been con-
quered by Kṛṣṇa); of Kuvera; of a king; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ī%}), f. {%= pūtanā%}. {%—Vaka-%}
{%kaccha,%} N. of a district. {%—Vaka-kalpa, as,%} m., N.
of a particular Kalpa or period of the world. {%—Vaka-%}
{%cara, as,%} m. {%= vaka-vratin%}. {%—Vaka-ciñcikā,%} f. a
sort of fish. {%—Vaka-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of Vaka,’
N. of Bhīma-sena. {%—Vaka-tva, am,%} n. the state or
condition of a crane. {%—Vaka-dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of
a Dvīpa. {%—Vaka-dhūpa, as,%} m. a compound per-
fume, (also read {%vṛka-dhūpa.%}) {%—Vaka-nakha, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Viśvā-mitra, (also read {%vaka-naka.%})
{%—Vaka-nisūdana, as,%} m. ‘destroyer of Vaka,’ N.
of Bhīma-sena. {%—Vaka-pañcaka, am,%} n. a space of
time consisting of the last five Tithis of the bright
half of the month Kārttika. {%—Vaka-puṣpa, as,%}
m. a kind of tree, Æschynomene Grandiflora; ({%am%}),
n. the flower of this tree. {%—Vaka-yantra, am,%} n.
‘crane-like instrument,’ epithet of a particular form
of retort. {%—Vaka-rāja, as,%} m. the king of the cranes
(named Rāja-dharman, he was son of Kaśyapa, see
Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 6336). {%—Vaka-vadha, as,%} m.
‘the killing of Vaka,’ N. of a section of the Ādi-
parvan of the Mahā-bh. 6103-6315 (describing
how Bhīma, while resident in the city of Eka-cakrā,
delivered his family and the whole neighbourhood
[Page0876-b+ 81]
from the tyranny of the demon named Vaka or
Baka, who forced the citizens to send him every day
a dish of food by a man whom he always devoured
as his daintiest morsel at the end of the repast).
{%—Vaka-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a kind of tree. {%—Vaka-%}
{%vṛtti, is, is, i,%} one who acts or behaves like a crane,
hypocritical; ({%is%}), m. a false or hypocritical devotee,
hypocrite (compared to the crane which stations itself
cunningly by a pool apparently absorbed in meditation
till it sees a fish on which to dart). {%—Vaka-vairin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘Vaka's enemy,’ N. of Bhīma-sena. {%—Vaka-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n. ‘crane-like observance,’ the conduct
of a crane, hypocrisy. {%—Vakavrata-cara, as,%} m.
one who acts like a crane, a hypocrite. {%—Vaka-vra-%}
{%tika, as,%} or {%vaka-vratin, ī,%} m. ‘one whose acts or
observances are like those of a crane, ‘a false devotee,
religious hypocrite, one who assumes the appearance
of devotion or meditation for interested purposes,
(see {%vaka-vṛtti.%}) {%—Vaka-saktha, as,%} m. a proper
N.; ({%ās%}), m. pl. Vaka-saktha's descendants. {%—Vaka-%}
{%saha-vāsin, ī,%} m. ‘dwelling in the same abode as
the crane, ‘a lotus. {%—Vakāri (˚ka-ari), is,%} m.
‘enemy of Vaka,’ N. of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Vakeśa (˚ka-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m., N. of a temple founded by Vaka.
<LEND>

<L>40834<pc>0876-b<k1>vakAcI<k2>vakAcI
{%Vakācī,%}¦ f. a sort of fish ({%= vaka-ciñcikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>40835<pc>0876-b<k1>vakAya<k2>vakAya
{%Vakāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vakāyati,%} &c., to represent or
act like the Asura Vaka.
<LEND>

<L>40836<pc>0876-b<k1>vakAyat<k2>vakAyat
{%Vakāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ acting like the Asura Vaka.
<LEND>

<L>40837<pc>0876-b<k1>vakula<k2>vakula
{%Vakula, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%vak%} or {%vaṅk%}),
a kind of tree, Mimusops Elengi; a kind of drug;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant, {%= kaṭukā; (ī),%} f. a sort of
drug (commonly called Kākolī); ({%am%}), n. the fra-
grant flower of Mimusops Elengi. {%—Vakulāvalikā%}
{%(˚la-āv˚),%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>40838<pc>0876-b<k1>vakulita<k2>vakulita
{%Vakulita, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with Mimusops
Elengi.
<LEND>

<L>40839<pc>0876-b<k1>vakUla<k2>vakUla
{%Vakūla, as,%}¦ m. the Vakula tree.
<LEND>

<L>40840<pc>0876-b<k1>vakerukA<k2>vakerukA
{%Vakerukā,%}¦ f. a small crane; the branch of a tree
bent by the wind.
<LEND>

<L>40841<pc>0876-b<k1>vakowa<k2>vakowa
{%Vakoṭa, as,%}¦ m. a crane.
<LEND>

<L>40842<pc>0876-b<k1>vakra<k2>vakra
{%Vakra, as, ā, am,%}¦ crooked, winding, tortuous,
curved, bent, bowed, meandering, curled, curly (as
hair &c.); having an apparently backward motion,
retrograde (said of planets); prosodially long (the
form of the long mark being supposed to be curved),
crooked in disposition, cunning, fraudulent, dishonest,
prevaricating, indirect, evasive, ambiguous; cruel,
malignant; ({%as%}), m. the planet Mars; the planet
Saturn; Rudra or Śiva; the Asura Tripura; N. of
a king of the Karūṣas; of a Rākṣasa; {%= parpaṭa;%}
{%(ās),%} m. pl., N. of a people, (also read {%cakra%}); ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a particular musical instrument; scil. {%gati,%}
N. of a particular variation in the course of Mercury;
({%am%}), n. the winding course of a river, the arm or
bend of a stream; the apparent retrograde motion
of a planet; (in surgery) a form of fracture (when a
bone is bent in a particular way or only partially
broken); [cf. according to some, Lat. <nsi>varus:</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>fiar,</nsi> ‘crooked, wicked;’ <nsi>fiaras,</nsi> ‘crookedness;’ <nsi>fia-</nsi>
<nsi>raim,</nsi> ‘I incline, bend.’] {%—Vakra-kaṇṭa, as,%} m.
‘having crooked thorns,’ the jujube tree. {%—Vakra-%}
{%kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. Acacia Catechu. {%—Vakra-khaḍga%}
or {%vakra-khaḍgaka, as,%} m. a bent sword, a cimeter,
sabre. {%—Vakra-gati, is,%} f. crooked or winding course,
tortuous motion, apparent retrograde motion or re-
trogression (said of the course of Mars &c.); ({%is, is,%}
{%i%}), moving crookedly or tortuously, meandering.
{%—Vakra-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going crookedly, moving
tortuously or in zigzag, fraudulent, dishonest. {%—Va-%}
{%kra-grīva, as,%} m. ‘crooked-necked,’ a camel. {%—Va-%}
{%kra-cañcu, us,%} m. ‘crooked-beaked,’ a parrot.
{%—Vakra-tā,%} f. or {%vakra-tva, am,%} n. crookedness,
curvature, curvedness, tortuousness; retrograde motion
(in astronomy); the going crooked or wrong, failure,
mishap; perverseness, falseness, dishonesty, ambi-
guity, prevarication. {%—Vakra-tuṇḍa, as, ā, am,%}
crooked-beaked, having a crooked face; ({%as%}), m. a
parrot; N. of Gaṇeśa (so called as represented with
the trunk of an elephant). {%—Vakra-daṃṣṭra, as,%}
m. ‘crooked-tusked,’ a boar, (wrongly read {%vaktra-%}
{%d˚.%}) {%—Vakra-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. oblique vision, an
[Page0876-c+ 75]
oblique look, squint; malignant regard, hostile view;
({%is, is, i%}), looking asquint, squint-eyed, squinting;
looking malignantly or with an evil eye at any one;
jealous, envious. {%—Vakra-nakra, as,%} m. ‘crooked-
beaked, ‘a parrot; a low or depraved man. {%—Vakra-%}
{%nāla, am,%} n. a sort of wind-instrument. {%—Vakra-%}
{%nāsa, as, ā, am,%} crooked-nosed, having a crooked
beak; ({%as%}), m. a proper N. {%—Vakra-nāsika, as,%}
m. ‘crooked-nosed,’ an owl. {%—Vakra-pāda, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} crooked-legged. {%—Vakra-puccha%} or {%vakra-%}
{%pucchika, as,%} m. ‘crooked-tailed,’ a dog. {%—Vakra-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Vakra-puṣpa, as,%}
m., N. of a plant, Sesbana Grandiflora; Butea Fron-
dosa. {%—Vakra-bāladhi, is,%} m. ‘crooked-tailed,’ a
dog. {%—Vakra-bhaṇita, am,%} n. indirect speech,
equivocation, prevarication, evasion. {%—Vakra-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. the state of being bent, curvature, crooked-
ness; cunning, craft, deceit. {%—Vakra-rekhā,%} f. a
curved line. {%—Vakra-lāṅgūla, am,%} n. a crooked
tail; ({%as%}), m. ‘crooked-tailed,’ a dog. {%—Vakra-%}
{%vaktra, as,%} m. ‘crooked-faced, having a crooked
snout, ‘a hog, boar. {%—Vakra-śalyā,%} f. a kind of
small shrub or bush. {%—Vakra-śṛṅga, as, ī, am,%}
having crooked or bent horns. {%—Vakra-saṃstha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} placed transversely. {%—Vakrāgra (˚ra-%}
{%ag˚), am,%} n., N. of a plant (commonly called Bétu).
{%—Vakrāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a crooked limb;
({%as%}), m. a goose; the ruddy goose (‘having a curved
body’); a snake. {%—Vakrāṅghri (˚ra-aṅ˚), is,%} m.
a crooked leg. {%—Vakrī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of
making crooked, bending, distorting. {%—Vakrī-kṛ,%}
cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make curved or crooked.
{%—Vakrī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made crooked or curved,
bent. {%—Vakrī-bhāva, as,%} m. curvature, curve;
fraudulent or dishonest disposition. {%—Vakrī-bhū,%} cl.
1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become crooked or bent;
to retrograde (said of planets). {%—Vakrī-bhūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} become crooked, curved, bent, dishonest. {%—Va-%}
{%kretara (˚ra-it˚), as, ā, at,%} reverse of crooked,
straight, not curved or curled. {%—Vakrokti (˚ra-uk˚),%}
{%is,%} f. indirect or perverse speech, equivocation, pre-
varication, evasive speech or reply, evasion; hint,
insinuation; pun; sarcasm. {%—Vakrokti-jīvita, am,%}
n., N. of a work. {%—Vakroṣṭhi, is,%} or {%vakroṣṭhikā,%}
f. (fr. {%vakra + oṣṭha%}), a slight smile, one in which
the lips are drawn on one side without the teeth
being shewn.
<LEND>

<L>40843<pc>0876-c<k1>vakratu<k2>vakratu
{%Vakratu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a deity.
<LEND>

<L>40844<pc>0876-c<k1>vakrAtapa<k2>vakrAtapa
{%Vakrātapa, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people, (also read
{%cakrāti.%})
<LEND>

<L>40845<pc>0876-c<k1>vakri<k2>vakri
{%Vakri, is, is, i,%}¦ equivocating, speaking falsely,
uttering untruths, prevaricating, lying.
<LEND>

<L>40846<pc>0876-c<k1>vakrita<k2>vakrita
{%Vakrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ curved, crooked, bent; entering
on an apparently retrograde course (said of a planet).
<LEND>

<L>40847<pc>0876-c<k1>vakrin<k2>vakrin
{%Vakrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ crooked; retrograding, moving
backwards (said of Mars and other planets); dis-
honest, fraudulent; ({%ī%}), m. a Jaina or Bauddha.
<LEND>

<L>40848<pc>0876-c<k1>vakrima<k2>vakrima
{%Vakrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent, curved.
<LEND>

<L>40849<pc>0876-c<k1>vakriman<k2>vakriman
{%Vakriman, ā,%}¦ m. crookedness, curvature; crafti-
ness, cunning, duplicity, ambiguity.
<LEND>

<L>40850<pc>0876-c<k1>vakva<k2>vakva
{%Vakva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. winding about, moving
crookedly, rolling, hastening.
<LEND>

<L>40851<pc>0876-c<k1>vakala<k2>vakala
{#vakala#}¦ {%vakala, as,%} m., Ved. inner rind, bast.
<LEND>

<L>40852<pc>0876-c<k1>vakasuhARa<k2>vakasuhARa
{#vakasuhARa#}¦ {%vakasuhāṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>40853<pc>0876-c<k1>vakula<k2>vakula
{#vakula#}¦ {%vakula.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>40854<pc>0876-c<k1>vakuSa<k2>vakuSa
{#vakuSa#}¦ {%vakuśa, as,%} m., N. of a particular
animal dwelling in the foliage of trees.
<LEND>

<L>40855<pc>0876-c<k1>vakk<k2>vakk
{#vakk#}¦ {%vakk%} [cf. rts. {%vaṣk, vask, vaṅk%}],
cl. 1. A. {%vakkate, vakkitum,%} to go.
<LEND>

<L>40856<pc>0876-c<k1>vakkalin<k2>vakkalin
{#vakkalin#}¦ {%vakkalin, ī,%} m. (formed fr. {%val-%}
{%kalin%}), N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>40857<pc>0876-c<k1>vakkasa<k2>vakkasa
{#vakkasa#}¦ {%vakkasa = vakvasa.%}
<LEND>

<L>40858<pc>0876-c<k1>vakkula<k2>vakkula
{#vakkula#}¦ {%vakkula, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40859<pc>0876-c<k1>vaktavya<k2>vaktavya
{#vaktavya#}¦ {%vaktavya, vaktra.%} See p. 877, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>40860<pc>0876-c<k1>vakra<k2>vakra
{#vakra#}¦ {%vakra,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page0877-a+ 73]

<L>40861<pc>0877-a<k1>vakrama<k2>vakrama
{#vakrama#}¦ {%va-krama, as,%} m. (for {%ava-krama%}),
flight, retreat.
<LEND>

<L>40862<pc>0877-a<k1>vakraya<k2>vakraya
{#vakraya#}¦ {%va-kraya, as,%} m. (for {%ava-kraya,%}
q. v.), price.
<LEND>

<L>40863<pc>0877-a<k1>vakrolaka<k2>vakrolaka
{#vakrolaka#}¦ {%vakrolaka, as,%} m., N. of a village;
({%am%}), n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>40864<pc>0877-a<k1>vakvan<k2>vakvan
{#vakvan#}¦ {%vakvan.%} See p. 878, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40865<pc>0877-a<k1>vakvasa<k2>vakvasa
{#vakvasa#}¦ {%vakvasa, as,%} m. a particular intoxi-
cating drink.
<LEND>

<L>40866<pc>0877-a<k1>vakz<k2>vakz
{#vakz#}¦ {%vakṣ%} (closely connected with rt.
2. {%ukṣ,%} q. v.), cl. 1. P. (Ved. also A.)
{%vakṣati, vavakṣa,%} (in the Veda only the follow-
ing Perfect forms are found, {%vavakṣa, vavakṣi-%}
{%tha, vavakṣus, vavakṣe, vavakṣire), vakṣi-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to grow, increase, become tall; to accu-
mulate; to be great or strong, to be powerful, (ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 64, 3. {%vavakṣuḥ =%}
{%prāpayitum icchanti,%} they wish to bring; II. 22,
3. {%vavakṣitha = voḍhum icchasi,%} thou desirest to
support, as if fr. rt. 1. {%vah%}); to be angry: Caus.
{%vakṣayati,%} &c., Ved. to make grow, cause to
increase, cause to be strong; [cf. Zend <nsi>ukhs,</nsi> ‘to
grow:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">αὔξ-ω, αὐξ-άν-ω, αὔξ-η, αὔξ-η-σι-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">αὔξ-η-μα:</lang> Lat. <nsi>vas-tus:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vahs-ja, vahs-tu-s:</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>weaxan:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>augu, auks-tas:</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>fasaim,</nsi> ‘I grow;’ <nsi>fasamhuil,</nsi> ‘growing.’]
<LEND>

<L>40867<pc>0877-a<k1>vakzaRa<k2>vakzaRa
{%Vakṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. (perhaps) strengthen-
ing, refreshing; ({%am%}), n. the breast; (perhaps)
refreshment, strengthening, (according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda VI. 23, 6. {%vakṣaṇāni = vāhakāni sto-%}
{%trāṇi,%} as if fr. rt. 1. {%vah%}); fire (according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda V. 19, 5); ({%ās%}), f. pl. the stomach,
abdomen, interior, (perhaps connected with rt.
1. {%vah%}); the sides, flank; the bed of a river; (ac-
cording to Naigh. I. 13) {%= nadī,%} a river. {%—Vak-%}
{%ṣaṇe-sthā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. being in fire, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%vahnau sthita.%})
<LEND>

<L>40868<pc>0877-a<k1>vakzaRi<k2>vakzaRi
{%Vakṣaṇi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. (perhaps) strengthening,
making strong.
<LEND>

<L>40869<pc>0877-a<k1>vakzaTa<k2>vakzaTa
{%Vakṣatha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the act of strengthening,
invigorating; growing, increasing; growth.
<LEND>

<L>40870<pc>0877-a<k1>vakzas<k2>vakzas
{%Vakṣas, as,%}¦ n. (according to some originally
{%pakṣas%}), strength (Ved.); the breast, bosom, chest,
(in this sense perhaps fr. rt. 1. {%vah%}); ({%ās%}), m. an
ox, bullock; [cf. perhaps Lat. <nsi>pectus;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>uchd,</nsi>
‘the breast.’] {%—Vakṣaḥ-sammardinī,%} f. a wife (as
pressing or reclining on her husband's breast). {%—Vak-%}
{%ṣaḥ-sthala%} or {%vakṣas-sthala, am,%} n. the place of
the breast, the breast, bosom, heart. {%—Vakṣas-taṭā-%}
{%ghāta (˚ṭa-āgh˚), as,%} m. a blow on the chest; [cf.
{%taṭa.%}] {%—Vakṣo-grīva, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Viśvā-mitra. {%—Vakṣo-ja, as,%} m. or {%au,%} m. du.
‘chest-born,’ the female breast; [cf. {%uro-ja.%}] {%—Vak-%}
{%ṣo-maṇḍalin, ī,%} m., scil. {%hasta,%} a position of the
hands in dancing. {%—Vakṣo-ruh, ṭ,%} or {%vakṣo-ruha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘chest-growing,’ the female breast.
<LEND>

<L>40871<pc>0877-a<k1>vakzI<k2>vakzI
{%Vakṣī,%}¦ f., Ved. (according to Sāy.) flame; [cf.
{%vakṣaṇa%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>40872<pc>0877-a<k1>vakzu<k2>vakzu
{#vakzu#}¦ {%vakṣu,%} the Oxus.
<LEND>

<L>40873<pc>0877-a<k1>vakzyamARa<k2>vakzyamARa
{#vakzyamARa#}¦ {%vakṣyamāṇa.%} See p. 878, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40874<pc>0877-a<k1>vaK<k2>vaK
{#vaK#}¦ {%vakh%} or {%vaṅkh,%} cl. 1. P. {%vakhati,%}
{%vaṅkhati, vakhitum%} or {%vaṅkhitum,%} to
go, move, move about; [cf. Lat. <nsi>vacillo;</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>wankôn, wanchôn.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40875<pc>0877-a<k1>vagalA<k2>vagalA
{#vagalA#}¦ {%vagalā%} or {%vagalā-mukhī,%} f. a god-
dess worshipped by the Tāntrikas.
<LEND>

<L>40876<pc>0877-a<k1>vagAha<k2>vagAha
{#vagAha#}¦ {%va-gāha, as,%} m. (for {%ava-gāha%}),
bathing, ablution.
<LEND>

<L>40877<pc>0877-a<k1>vagAhya<k2>vagAhya
{%Va-gāhya,%}¦ ind. having bathed, bathing, dipping
into; having entered.
<LEND>

<L>40878<pc>0877-a<k1>vagnu<k2>vagnu
{#vagnu#}¦ {%vagnu, vagvanu.%} See p. 878, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40879<pc>0877-a<k1>vaGA<k2>vaGA
{#vaGA#}¦ {%vaghā,%} f., Ved. a kind of noxious
animal.
<LEND>
[Page0877-b+ 73]

<L>40880<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNk<k2>vaNk
{#vaNk#}¦ {%vaṅk%} (probably connected with rt.
{%vañc;%} cf. rt. {%vak,%} with which rt. {%vaṅk%} is
identical; cf. also rt. {%vaṅg%}), cl. 1. A. {%vaṅkate, vaṅki-%}
{%tum,%} to go or proceed crookedly, be crooked; to go;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀγκή, ἄγκος, ἀγκών, ἀγκύλος, ἄγκυρα,</lang>
(probably) <lang n="greek">ὄκνος:</lang> Lat. <nsi>angulus; vacillare, vacare,</nsi>
<nsi>vacuus:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>winkil, waga, wagon, waga,</nsi>
<nsi>wank, wankon:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>vincel, wœg, woh, wog,</nsi>
<nsi>wo, wancol:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>wingis.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40881<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNka<k2>vaNka
{%Vaṅka, as,%}¦ m. the bend or elbow of a river, the
winding course of a stream; crookedness; ({%ā%}), f. the
pummel of a saddle. {%—Vaṅka-sena, as,%} m. a kind
of tree ({%= vaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>40882<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNkawaka<k2>vaNkawaka
{%Vaṅkaṭaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>40883<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNkara<k2>vaNkara
{%Vaṅkara, as,%}¦ m. {%= vaṅka,%} the bending of a river.
<LEND>

<L>40884<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNkAlakAcArya<k2>vaNkAlakAcArya
{%Vaṅkālakācārya (˚ka-āc˚), as,%}¦ m., N. of an
astronomer.
<LEND>

<L>40885<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNkAlA<k2>vaNkAlA
{%Vaṅkālā,%}¦ f., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>40886<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNkiRI<k2>vaNkiRI
{%Vaṅkiṇī,%}¦ f. a kind of plant ({%= kola-nāsikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>40887<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNkila<k2>vaNkila
{%Vaṅkila, as,%}¦ m. a thorn.
<LEND>

<L>40888<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNku<k2>vaNku
{%Vaṅku, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. going crookedly, (Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda I. 51, 11 {%= vakra-gamana-śīla;%} but
Ṛg-veda V. 45, 6 {%= vana-gāmin,%} going to the
wood); going hurriedly, hastening (according to
some).
<LEND>

<L>40889<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNkya<k2>vaNkya
{%Vaṅkya, as, ā, am,%}¦ crooked, curved, flexible,
pliant.
<LEND>

<L>40890<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNkri<k2>vaNkri
{%Vaṅkri, is,%}¦ m. a rib, the rib of any animal (as of
a horse, ox, &c.); the ribs of a building; the timber
of a roof; a particular musical instrument.
<LEND>

<L>40891<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNkzaRa<k2>vaNkzaRa
{#vaNkzaRa#}¦ {%vaṅkṣaṇa, am,%} n. (probably con-
nected with {%vakṣaṇa%} under rt. {%vakṣ%}), the groin,
the pubic and iliac regions; the joint of the thigh.
<LEND>

<L>40892<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNkzu<k2>vaNkzu
{#vaNkzu#}¦ {%vaṅkṣu, us,%} f. a small arm or branch
of the Ganges [cf. {%vaṅka, vaṅku%}]; the Oxus;
[cf. {%vakṣu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40893<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNK<k2>vaNK
{#vaNK#}¦ {%vaṅkh%} = rt. {%vakh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40894<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNKara<k2>vaNKara
{#vaNKara#}¦ {%vaṅkhara, as, ā, am, = cāru; (us),%}
m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40895<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNg<k2>vaNg
{#vaNg#}¦ {%vaṅg%} [cf. rt. {%vaṅk%}], cl. 1. P. {%vaṅ-%}
{%gati, vaṅgitum,%} to go; to go lamely,
limp.
<LEND>

<L>40896<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNga<k2>vaNga
{#vaNga#}¦ {%vaṅga, as,%} m. Bengal proper or the
eastern parts of the modern province; N. of the son
of Bali; of a king of the lunar race (regarded as
the common ancestor of the people of Bengal);
cotton; the egg-plant, Solanum Melongena; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the inhabitants of the above country; ({%am%}),
n. tin; lead; [cf. Hib. <nsi>ban,</nsi> ‘copper.’] {%—Vaṅga-ja,%}
{%am,%} n. brass, red-lead. {%—Vaṅga-jīvana, am,%} n.
silver. {%—Vaṅga-deśa, as,%} m. the country of Bengal.
{%—Vaṅga-sena, as,%} m. {%= vaṅka-sena;%} a proper N.
{%—Vaṅga-senaka, as,%} m. the Sesbana Grandiflora.
{%—Vaṅgāri (˚ga-ari), is,%} m. yellow orpiment.
<LEND>

<L>40897<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNgana<k2>vaNgana
{%Vaṅgana, as,%}¦ m. the egg-plant, Solanum Melon-
gena; [cf. {%vaṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40898<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNgIya<k2>vaNgIya
{%Vaṅgīya,%}¦ see Gaṇa Gahādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 138.
<LEND>

<L>40899<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNgalA<k2>vaNgalA
{#vaNgalA#}¦ {%vaṅgalā,%} f., N. of a particular
Rāgiṇī or modification of a musical mode, (see
{%rāgin.%})
<LEND>

<L>40900<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNgAla<k2>vaNgAla
{%Vaṅgāla, as,%}¦ m., N. of the son of the Rāga or
musical mode called Bhairava; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the
wife of the Rāga Bhairava, (see {%rāga.%})
<LEND>

<L>40901<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNgAlikA<k2>vaNgAlikA
{%Vaṅgālikā,%}¦ f. {%= vaṅgālī.%}
<LEND>

<L>40902<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNgulA<k2>vaNgulA
{%Vaṅgulā,%}¦ f. {%= vaṅgalā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40903<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNgiri<k2>vaNgiri
{#vaNgiri#}¦ {%vaṅgiri, is,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>40904<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNgfda<k2>vaNgfda
{#vaNgfda#}¦ {%vaṅgṛda, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a demon.
<LEND>

<L>40905<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNG<k2>vaNG
{#vaNG#}¦ {%vaṅgh,%} cl. 1. A. {%vaṅghate, vaṅghi-%}
{%tum,%} to go; to begin moving; to begin;
to move swiftly; to blame or censure.
<LEND>

<L>40906<pc>0877-b<k1>vaNGa<k2>vaNGa
{#vaNGa#}¦ {%vaṅgha, as,%} m. a kind of tree.
<LEND>

<L>40907<pc>0877-b<k1>vac<k2>vac
{#vac#}¦ {%vac,%} cl. 2. P. (in the non-conjuga-
tional tenses also A.), {%vakti%} (1st sing.
[Page0877-c+ 81]
{%vacmi,%} &c., see Gram. 650; Ved. also cl. 3. P.
{%vivakti,%} 1st sing. {%vivakmi,%} as if fr. a form {%vak;%}
said to be also cl. 1. P. {%vacati%}), {%uvāca%} (Ved. {%[pra]-%}
{%vavāca,%} Ṛg-veda I. 67, 4), {%uce%} (2nd sing. {%ūciṣe,%}
Ved. {%[pra]vavakṣe%}), {%vakṣyati, -te, avocat,%}
{%avocata%} (other anomalous forms fr. the base
{%voc%} are {%vocasi, vocanti, vocāma, voces, vocema,%}
&c., {%voca, vocatu, voce, vocanta, voceya, voce-%}
{%mahi%}), {%vaktum%} (Ved. {%vaktave, vaktos%}), to say,
speak, ({%punar vac,%} to speak again, answer, reply);
to tell, declare, utter, (sometimes with a double acc.,
e. g. {%tam idaṃ vākyam uvāca,%} he spoke this
speech to him); to mention, describe; to call,
name; to recite, repeat; to announce, proclaim,
publish; to speak ill of, revile (with acc.): Pass.
{%ucyate,%} Aor. {%avāci,%} to be said or spoken; to be
spoken about; to be told; to be admonished; to
be called or named, &c.; to be regarded as, pass
for: Caus. {%vācayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvacat,%} to
cause to say or speak, order to speak; to cause to
be recited, cause (anything written) to be uttered or
pronounced, to read; to say, tell, declare; to promise:
Desid. {%vivakṣati,%} &c., to desire to say or speak,
&c.: Pass. of Desid. {%vivakṣyate;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐπ</lang> (for
<lang n="greek">ϝεπ</lang> for <lang n="greek">ϝεκ</lang>) in <lang n="greek">εἶπ-ο-ν, ἔπ-ος, ὄψ, ὄσσα, ἐν-οπ-ή,</lang>
<lang n="greek">θεό-προπος, πέπρωται:</lang> Lat. <nsi>vŏc-are, vox, vôc-is,</nsi>
<nsi>in-vī-tare, con-viciu-m;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wah-an, ga-</nsi>
<nsi>wah-anian, gi-wah-t:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>er-wähnen:</nsi>
Old Pruss. <nsi>en-wack-e-mai,</nsi> ‘we invoke;’ <nsi>en-wacke:</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>faighim,</nsi> ‘I speak, talk;’ <nsi>faigh,</nsi> ‘a prophet;’
<nsi>faighle, faighleadh,</nsi> ‘words, talk.’]
<LEND>

<L>40908<pc>0877-c<k1>vaktavya<k2>vaktavya
{%Vaktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken or uttered, fit
or proper to be said; to be named or called; to be
spoken to or addressed; to be spoken about or
against, having a bad name or reputation, blam-
able, reprehensible, vile, low, base, bad; liable to be
called upon for an account, answerable, accountable,
responsible; subject, dependent; ({%am%}), n. a rule,
precept, sentence, dictum, aphorism, speech; speak-
ing; reproach, censure. {%—Vaktavya-tā,%} f. or {%vak-%}
{%tavya-tva, am,%} n. the state of being fit or proper
to be said or spoken about, the state of being spoken
against, the having a bad name or reputation, re-
proachableness, blamableness, reprehension, blame;
responsibility; subjection, dependence.
<LEND>

<L>40909<pc>0877-c<k1>vakti<k2>vakti
{%Vakti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. speech; [cf. {%ukti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40910<pc>0877-c<k1>vaktu<k2>vaktu
{%Vaktu, us,%}¦ m. (according to Sāy. {%= paruṣa-%}
{%vākyānāṃ vaktṛ%}), a speaker of harsh language,
reviler; (but according to modern scholars {%vaktave%}
in Ṛg-veda VII. 31, 5. is a Vedic infin.)
<LEND>

<L>40911<pc>0877-c<k1>vaktukAma<k2>vaktukAma
{%Vaktu-kāma, as, ā, am%}¦ ({%vaktu%} for {%vaktum%}), in-
tending to speak, desirous of speaking, about to speak.
<LEND>

<L>40912<pc>0877-c<k1>vaktumanas<k2>vaktumanas
{%Vaktu-manas, ās, ās, as%}¦ ({%vaktu%} for {%vaktum%}),
having a mind to speak, being about to speak.
<LEND>

<L>40913<pc>0877-c<k1>vaktf<k2>vaktf
{%Vaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who speaks, a speaker;
speaking, saying, loquacious, talkative; speaking
well or sensibly, eloquent, learned, wise; speaking
truly, honest, sincere; ({%tā%}), m. a speaker, orator,
expounder, teacher; [cf. Lat. <nsi>auctor.</nsi>] {%—Vaktṛ-tā,%}
f. or {%vaktṛ-tva, am,%} n. ability to speak, talkative-
ness, eloquence, elocution. {%—Vaktṛtva-śakti, is,%} f.
ability to speak, eloquence.
<LEND>

<L>40914<pc>0877-c<k1>vaktfka<k2>vaktfka
{%Vaktṛka, as, ā, am,%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp.
{%= vaktṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>40915<pc>0877-c<k1>vaktra<k2>vaktra
{%Vaktra, am,%}¦ n. the organ of speech, the mouth;
the face; a muzzle, snout, proboscis, beak, &c.; the
point (of an arrow), the spout of a jug or vessel;
beginning, commencement; (in algebra) the initial
quantity or first term of a progression; a sort of
metre containing four times eight syllables (said to
be like the {%śloka%}); a sort of garment; the root of
Tabernæmontana Coronaria; [cf. perhaps Lat. <nsi>la-</nsi>
<nsi>trare</nsi> for <nsi>vactrare.</nsi>] {%—Vaktra-khura, as,%} m. ‘mouth-
hoof, ‘a tooth. {%—Vaktra-ja, as,%} m. ‘sprung from
the mouth (of Brahmā), ‘a Brāhman. {%—Vaktra-%}
{%tāla, am,%} n. a musical instrument played with the
mouth; (said to mean also ‘making a noise by strik-
ing the mouth with the hand at the moment of utter-
ing sound.’) {%—Vaktra-tuṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘having a pro-
boscis instead of a face, ‘N. of Gaṇeśa. {%—Vaktra-%}
{%dala, am,%} n. a part of the mouth, the palate.
[Page0878-a+ 81]
{%—Vaktra-dvāra, am,%} n. the opening of the mouth.
{%—Vaktra-paṭa,%} a veil. {%—Vaktra-paṭṭa, as,%} m. a
bag containing corn tied round a horse's head.
{%—Vaktra-parispanda, as,%} m. ‘motion of the
mouth, ‘speech, discourse. {%—Vaktra-bhedin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} mouth-piercing, mouth-cutting, pungent, bitter,
sharp. {%—Vaktra-yodhin, ī, inī, i,%} fighting with the
mouth; ({%ī%}), m., N. of an Asura. {%—Vaktra-ran-%}
{%dhra, am,%} n. the aperture of the mouth. {%—Vaktra-%}
{%ruha,%} ‘growing on the face,’ hair growing on
the face, hair on the proboscis (of elephants &c.).
{%—Vaktra-roga, as,%} m. mouth-disease, a disease of
the mouth. {%—Vaktra-rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} suffering from
a disease of the mouth. {%—Vaktra-vāsa, as,%} m.
‘mouth-scenting,’ an orange. {%—Vaktra-śodhana,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} cleansing or purifying the mouth; ({%am%}),
n. the act of cleansing the mouth; the fruit of
Averrhoa Carambola; a lime, citron. {%—Vaktra-%}
{%śodhin, ī, inī, i,%} purifying the mouth; ({%ī%}), m. the
citron tree; ({%i%}), n. a citron or lime. {%—Vaktrāsava%}
{%(˚ra-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘mouth-liquor,’ saliva.
<LEND>

<L>40916<pc>0878-a<k1>vaktraka<k2>vaktraka
{%Vaktraka%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. {%= vaktra.%}
<LEND>

<L>40917<pc>0878-a<k1>vaktva<k2>vaktva
{%Vaktva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= vaktavya,%} to be
uttered or spoken; (according to Sāy. {%vaktvānām%}
{%= vaktavyānāṃ veda-vākyānām.%})
<LEND>

<L>40918<pc>0878-a<k1>vakman<k2>vakman
{%Vakman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. (Sāy. {%= mārga%}), path, road;
({%= vacana, stotra%}), speech, hymn of praise. {%—Vak-%}
{%ma-rāja-satya, as,%} m., Ved. faithful to those who
are the rulers or ordainers of hymns (of praise).
<LEND>

<L>40919<pc>0878-a<k1>vakmya<k2>vakmya
{%Vakmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be praised, worthy
of celebration, praiseworthy.
<LEND>

<L>40920<pc>0878-a<k1>vakvan<k2>vakvan
{%Vakvan, ā, -varī, a,%}¦ Ved. (according to modern
scholars) {%= vakva,%} p. 876, col. 3; ({%ā%}), m. a speaker,
singer, chanter, great talker, chatterer.
<LEND>

<L>40921<pc>0878-a<k1>vakzyamARa<k2>vakzyamARa
{%Vakṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ about to be said or
described, intended to be spoken about afterwards,
to be mentioned hereafter or subsequently. {%—Vakṣ-%}
{%yamāṇa-tva, am,%} n. the being about to be men-
tioned, the being about to be spoken of hereafter.
<LEND>

<L>40922<pc>0878-a<k1>vagnu<k2>vagnu
{%Vagnu, us, us, u,%}¦ talkative; ({%us%}), m. a speaker;
a sound; the cry (of an animal), croak (of a frog,
Ṛg-veda VII. 103, 2).
<LEND>

<L>40923<pc>0878-a<k1>vagvana<k2>vagvana
{%Vagvana, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (perhaps) talkative,
chattering; praising.
<LEND>

<L>40924<pc>0878-a<k1>vagvanu<k2>vagvanu
{%Vagvanu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. a sound, noise, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%śabda.%})
<LEND>

<L>40925<pc>0878-a<k1>vaca<k2>vaca
{%Vaca, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking, talking, saying, &c.
[cf. {%ku-v˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. a parrot; {%= sūrya,%} the sun;
{%= kāraṇa; (ā),%} f. a kind of talking bird, Turdus
Salica ({%= sārikā%}); a kind of aromatic root, (accord-
ing to some, orris root); ({%am%}), n. the act of speak-
ing, talk; [cf. {%dur-v˚.%}] {%—Vacācārya (˚ca-āc˚), as,%}
m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Vacārca (˚ca-ar˚), as,%} m.
a sun-worshipper, Parsee.
<LEND>

<L>40926<pc>0878-a<k1>vacaknu<k2>vacaknu
{%Vacaknu, us, us, u,%}¦ talkative, loquacious, eloquent;
({%us%}), m. a Brāhman; a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40927<pc>0878-a<k1>vacaRqA<k2>vacaRqA
{%Vacaṇḍā,%}¦ f. a kind of talking bird, Turdus Salica
or the Maina.
<LEND>

<L>40928<pc>0878-a<k1>vacaRqI<k2>vacaRqI
{%Vacaṇḍī,%}¦ f. {%= vacaṇḍā; = vartti;%} a kind of
weapon.
<LEND>

<L>40929<pc>0878-a<k1>vacana<k2>vacana
{%Vacana, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking, a speaker, elo-
quent (Ved.); to be praised, laudable (Ved.);
being pronounced (Ved.); mentioning, indicat-
ing, pointing out, signifying (at the end of a
comp.); ({%am%}), n. the act of speaking or pronounc-
ing, speaking, uttering, declaring, ordering, enjoin-
ing, declaration, affirmation, promise; pronunciation;
the pronunciation of a letter (in grammar); the act
of reciting or repeating, recitation; mentioning,
naming, being called; a speech, word, expression,
utterance, sentence, message; a text, dictum, apho-
rism, rule, precept, passage of a sacred book or code
of laws; counsel, advice, instruction; proclamation,
edict, order, injunction, command, ({%vacanāt,%} and less
frequently {%vacanena,%} ‘in the name of,’ e. g. {%mama%}
{%vacanāt,%} ‘in my name,’ ‘by my order’); sound,
voice; the meaning of a word (in grammar); num-
ber (in grammar; cf. {%eka-v˚, dvi-v˚, bahu-v˚%}); dry
ginger. {%—Vacana-kara, as, ī, am,%} making a speech,
speaking; acting according to injunction, doing what
one is told, obeying orders, obedient; ({%as%}), m. the
[Page0878-b+ 80]
author or enunciator of a precept. {%—Vacana-kārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} doing what is commanded, obeying orders,
obedient. {%—Vacana-krama, as,%} m. order of words,
discourse. {%—Vacana-gocara, as, ā, am,%} forming a
subject of conversation. {%—Vacana-gaurava, am,%} n.
respect for an order, deference to a command. {%—Va-%}
{%cana-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} accepting or obeying orders,
attentive to a command, obedient, compliant, con-
formable, submissive, humble. {%—Vacana-paṭu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} skilful in speech, eloquent. {%—Vacana-mātra,%}
{%am,%} n. mere words, assertion unsupported by facts.
{%—Vacana-viruddha, as, ā, am,%} opposed to a
declaration or precept, contrary to a text. {%—Vacana-%}
{%virodha, as,%} m. inconsistency of precepts or texts,
incongruity, contradiction. {%—Vacana-vyakti, is,%} f.
distinctness or perspicuity of a text. {%—Vacana-śata,%}
{%am,%} n. a hundred speeches, repeated speech or decla-
ration. {%—Vacana-sahāya, as,%} m. a companion for
(the sake of) conversation, any sociable companion
with whom one may talk. {%—Vacanānuga (˚na-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} following advice or orders, obedient,
submissive. {%—Vacanā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. pos-
sessed of speech, eloquent, gifted with the power of
praising or singing; making a sound, lowing (as
kine; Sāy. {%= hambhā-ravādi-śabda-vat%}). {%—Vacanī-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make a reproach.
{%—Vacanī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made a reproach, ex-
posed to censure or abuse. {%—Vacane-sthita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} abiding in a command, obeying orders, com-
pliant, conformable, obedient. {%—Vacanopakrama%}
{%(˚na-up˚), as,%} m. commencement of a speech, ex-
ordium.
<LEND>

<L>40930<pc>0878-b<k1>vacanIya<k2>vacanIya
{%Vacanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken or uttered,
fit or proper to be said, mentionable; to be called
or named; to be spoken about or against, to be
reproved, censurable, liable to reproach; ({%am%}), n.
reproach, censure, blame. {%—Vacanīya-tā,%} f. or {%va-%}
{%canīya-tva, am,%} n. liability to be spoken about or
against; rumour, report, evil report, blamableness,
detraction, scandal; blame, reprehension.
<LEND>

<L>40931<pc>0878-b<k1>vacara<k2>vacara
{%Vacara, as,%}¦ m. a cock; a low person.
<LEND>

<L>40932<pc>0878-b<k1>vacalu<k2>vacalu
{%Vacalu, us,%}¦ m. {%= śatru,%} a malevolent person,
enemy; offence, fault (?) .
<LEND>

<L>40933<pc>0878-b<k1>vacas<k2>vacas
{%Vacas, as,%}¦ n. speech, voice; a speech, word; a
hymn; singing, song (of birds); advice, counsel;
proclamation, edict, command, order; a sentence;
declaration of fate, oracle; number (in grammar,
cf. {%dvi-v˚%}). {%—Vacaḥ-krama, as,%} m. course of speech,
mode of address, discourse. {%—Vacasām-pati, is,%} m.
‘lord of speeches,’ N. of Bṛhas-pati; the planet
Jupiter. {%—Vacas-kara, as, ī, am,%} accomplishing the
words or commands of another; doing what is en-
joined or commanded, obedient, compliant. {%—Vaco-%}
{%graha, as, ā, am,%} receiving words or commands,
comprehending or apprehending words; ({%as%}), m. the
ear. {%—Vaco-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. harnessed at (his)
word; harnessed with hymns. {%—Vaco-vid, t, t, t,%}
Ved. skilful in speech, eloquent; knowing hymns.
<LEND>

<L>40934<pc>0878-b<k1>vacasa<k2>vacasa<h>1
1. {%vacasa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 880), talkative,
eloquent, wise; (at end of comp.) {%= vacas%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40935<pc>0878-b<k1>vacasya<k2>vacasya<h>1
1. {%vacasya%}¦ (fr. {%vacas%}), Nom. A. {%vacasyate,%} &c.,
Ved. to babble, rattle (said of the sound of the
running Soma); to be praised or glorified, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%stūyate.%})
<LEND>

<L>40936<pc>0878-b<k1>vacasya<k2>vacasya<h>2
2. {%vacasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (perhaps) worthy
of mention, praiseworthy, celebrated; (or perhaps
for 1. {%vacasyu,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>40937<pc>0878-b<k1>vacasyA<k2>vacasyA
{%Vacasyā,%}¦ f. (fr. 1. {%vacasya%}), Ved. desire of
speaking, readiness of speech, eloquence; desire of
praise.
<LEND>

<L>40938<pc>0878-b<k1>vacasyu<k2>vacasyu<h>1
1. {%vacasyu, us, us, u%}¦ (for 2. see p. 880, col. 1),
Ved. eloquent; desirous of praise, (Sāy. {%= stuti-kā-%}
{%ma.%})
<LEND>

<L>40939<pc>0878-b<k1>vaci<k2>vaci
{%Vaci,%}¦ Ved. name, appellation.
<LEND>

<L>40940<pc>0878-b<k1>vacyamAna<k2>vacyamAna<h>1
1. {%vacyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being spoken or
uttered, (Sāy. {%= ucyamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>40941<pc>0878-b<k1>vacyamAna<k2>vacyamAna<h>1
{#vacyamAna#} 1¦. and 2. {%vacyamāna.%} See above
and p. 880, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>40942<pc>0878-b<k1>vacCalA<k2>vacCalA
{#vacCalA#}¦ {%vacchalā,%} a various reading for
{%vatsalā.%}
<LEND>
[Page0878-c+ 80]

<L>40943<pc>0878-c<k1>vacCikA<k2>vacCikA
{#vacCikA#}¦ {%vacchikā%} in {%dīrgha-v˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40944<pc>0878-c<k1>vaj<k2>vaj
{#vaj#}¦ {%vaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%vajati, vavāja%} (2nd
sing. {%vavajitha,%} 3rd du. {%vavajatus%}), {%va-%}
{%jitum,%} to go, roam about [cf. rt. {%vraj%}]; to increase;
to be hard or strong, (these senses are assumed to
explain {%vajra, vāja,%} &c., q. v., but a lost rt. {%uj =%}
{%vaj%} may be conjectured; cf. {%ugra, ojas,%} &c.); cl.
10. P. {%vājayati,%} &c., to make possessed of food or
strength, to desire or ask for food or strength, (in
these senses more properly a Nom. fr. {%vāja,%} see
{%vājaya%}); to prepare the way; to trim or feather an
arrow, to prepare, make; to go; [cf. Zend <nsi>vaz,</nsi>
<nsi>vaz-y-ant, vaz-d-vare;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὑγι-ής, ὑγιη-ρό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὑγίε-ια, ὑγιαίν-ω, ὑγιάζ-ω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>veg-e-o, vig-e-o,</nsi>
<nsi>veg-e-tu-s, vig-or, vig-il, aug-eo, aug-men-tu-m,</nsi>
(perhaps) <nsi>vagarī;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>auka, vokrs;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>auhon;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>eacan,</nsi> (probably also) <nsi>wacor,</nsi>
<nsi>wacian;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>ug-i-s, ug-a, aug-u, aug-mu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40945<pc>0878-c<k1>vajra<k2>vajra
{%Vajra, as, ā, am,%}¦ adamantine, hard, impene-
trable; severe; shaped like a kind of cross with two
transverse lines bisecting each other diagonally, cross,
forked, zigzag; ({%as, am%}), m. n. (in the earlier lan-
guage {%as,%} m.), the thunderbolt and weapon of Indra
(said to have been formed out of the bones of a
celebrated Ṛṣi called Dadhīca or Dadhīci, see {%da-%}
{%dhīca, dadhīcy-asthi;%} it is sometimes described
as circular like the Cakra or discus of Viṣṇu or
shaped like a quoit but with a broader circumference
and smaller central hole, and when made to revolve
and launched at an enemy, the fire of lightning is
supposed to issue in destructive flames from its
periphery, elicited by the intensity of its centrifugal
energy; the thunderbolt is also regarded as having
the form of two transverse bolts or lines crossing
each other thus X); any destructive weapon like a
discus or thunderbolt (as used by various gods, evil
beings, or persons of superhuman power, e. g. by
Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa, the Rākṣasas, and Viśvā-mitra); a
thunderbolt in general or the lightning supposed to
issue from the centrifugal energy of the circular thun-
derbolt of Indra; a diamond, (this gem being con-
sidered to possess the hardness of the thunderbolt or
to be of the same substance); sour gruel; ({%as%}), m.
a form of military array; a particular kind of column
or pillar; a particular figure or diagram the form of
which is supposed to resemble that of the thunder-
bolt; any symbol with two lines crossing each other
in a diagonal direction; a particular form of the
moon; N. of various plants, Euphorbia Antiquorum;
Asteracantha Longifolia; white-flowering Kuśa grass;
N. of the fifteenth of the twenty-seven Yogas or
astronomical periods of time, (see {%yoga%}); of a parti-
cular Soma ceremony; of a particular penance; a
kind of very tenacious mortar or hard cement; N.
of a son of Aniruddha or of a grandson of Kṛṣṇa; of
a son of Viśvā-mitra; of a son of Manu Sāvarṇa; of
one of the seven Jaina Daśa-pūrvins; of a Ṛṣi;
of a minister of Narendrāditya; of a son of Bhūti;
of a king; ({%ā%}), f. Cocculus Cordifolius; Euphorbia
Antiquorum; N. of Durgā; of a daughter of Vai-
śvānara; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of Euphorbia; ({%am%}), n. a
kind of hard iron, steel; a kind of talc; {%= vāg-%}
{%vajra,%} thunder-like denunciation, very harsh or
severe language; a particular mode of sitting; Em-
blic Myrobalan; the blossom of the sesamum or of
any plant called Vajra; N. of a particular configura-
tion of the planets and stars (viz. when the favour-
able planets are situated in the first and seventh houses
and the unfavourable ones in the fourth and tenth);
{%= bālaka,%} a child, pupil; [cf. Zend <nsi>vaz-ra,</nsi> ‘a club;’
Old Germ. <nsi>weggi;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wœcg, wecg.</nsi>]
{%—Vajra-kaṅkaṭa, as,%} m. ‘adamantine-armoured,’
N. of Hanumat the monkey god. {%—Vajra-kaṇṭa,%}
{%as,%} m. Euphorbia Neriifolia or Antiquorum. {%—Vajra-%}
{%kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. {%= vajra-kaṇṭa;%} Asteracantha Lon-
gifolia. {%—Vajra-kaṇṭaka-śālmalī,%} f. a cotton tree
with very hard thorns; N. of a hell. {%—Vajra-%}
{%kanda, as,%} m. a sort of esculent root, (perhaps)
yam. {%—Vajra-kapāṭa-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having ada-
mantine doors. {%—Vajra-kapālin, ī,%} m., N. of a
[Page0879-a+ 81]
Buddha. {%—Vajra-karṇa, as,%} m. {%= vajra-kanda.%}
{%—Vajra-kālikā,%} f., N. of the mother of Śākya-
muni. {%—Vajra-kālī,%} f. epithet of a Jina-śakti.
{%—Vajra-kīṭa, as,%} m. a kind of penetrating insect
which bores holes in wood and stone, (see {%vajra-%}
{%daṃṣṭra.%}) {%—Vajra-kīla, as,%} m. a thunderbolt.
{%—Vajra-kīlāya,%} Nom. A. {%-kīlāyate,%} &c., to act
or be like a thunderbolt. {%—Vajra-kīlāyita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} struck as it were by thunderbolts. {%—Vajra-%}
{%kukṣi,%} N. of a cave. {%—Vajra-kūṭa, as,%} m. ‘dia-
mond-peak, ‘a mountain consisting of diamonds;
N. of a mountain; of a mythical town on the
Himālaya mountains. {%—Vajra-ketu, us,%} m. ‘having
a Vajra for an ensign, ‘N. of the demon Naraka.
{%—Vajra-kṣāra, am,%} n. an alkaline earth or an
impure carbonate of soda. {%—Vajra-garbha, as,%} m.,
N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Vajra-gopa, as,%} m. {%= indra-%}
{%gopa%}. {%—Vajra-ghāta, as,%} m. a thunder-stroke, stroke
of a thunderbolt, thunder-clap, thunderbolt. {%—Vajra-%}
{%ghoṣa, as, ā, am,%} sounding like a thunderbolt.
{%—Vajra-cañcu, us,%} m. ‘hard-beaked,’ a vulture;
[cf. {%vajra-tuṇḍa.%}] {%—Vajra-carman, ā,%} m. ‘having
a very hard or impenetrable skin, ‘a rhinoceros.
{%—Vajra-cihna, am,%} n. a Vajra-like mark. {%—Vajra-%}
{%cchedaka-prajñā-pāram-itā,%} f., N. of a Buddhist
Sūtra work, (also {%vajra-cchedikā.%}) {%—Vajra-jit, t,%}
m. ‘conquering the thunderbolt,’ N. of Garuḍa (who
was invulnerable to the strokes of Indra's bolt; cf.
{%vajri-jit%}). {%—Vajra-jvalana, am,%} n. ‘thunder-flash,’
lightning. {%—Vajra-jvālā,%} f. ‘thunder-flash' light
ning; N. of a granddaughter of Vairocana. {%—Vajra-%}
{%ṭīka, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Vajra-ṇakhā,%} f. a
proper N., (see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 58; cf. {%vajra-nakha.%}]
{%—Vajra-tara, as,%} m. epithet of a kind of very
tenacious mortar or cement. {%—Vajra-tā,%} f. or {%vajra-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. great hardness or impenetrableness,
severity. {%—Vajra-tuṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} hard-beaked;
({%as%}), m. a vulture; a mosquito, gnat; N. of Garuḍa;
of Gaṇeśa; the plant Cactus Opuntia. {%—Vajra-tulya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘resembling a diamond,’ the azure stone,
lapis lazuli. {%—Vajra-daṃṣṭra, as, ā, am,%} having
teeth as hard as adamant; ({%as%}), m. {%= vajra-kīṭa;%}
N. of a Rākṣasa; of an Asura; of a king of the
Vidyā-dharas; of a lion (in the Pañca-tantra). {%—Va-%}
{%jra-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} holding a thunderbolt in
the right hand; ({%as%}), m., N. of Indra. {%—Vajra-%}
{%daṇḍa, as, ā, am,%} having a staff studded with
diamonds. {%—Vajra-daṇḍaka, am,%} n. the plant
Cactus Opuntia. {%—Vajra-datta, as,%} m., N. of a son
of Bhaga-datta; of a Buddhist author. {%—Vajra-%}
{%danta, as, ā, am,%} ‘hard-toothed,’ a hog, boar; a
rat. {%—Vajra-daśana, as, ā, am,%} having hard teeth;
({%as%}), m. a rat. {%—Vajra-dṛḍha-netra, as,%} m., N.
of a king of the Yakṣas. {%—Vajra-deśa, as,%} m.,
N. of a district. {%—Vajra-deha, as, ā, am,%} or {%vajra-%}
{%dehin, ī, inī, i,%} having a frame hard as adamant,
having a very robust or hardy body. {%—Vajra-dru,%}
{%us,%} or {%vajra-druma, as,%} m., N. of certain plants,
Euphorbia of various species. {%—Vajradruma-kesara-%}
{%dhvaja, as,%} m., N. of a king of the Gandharvas.
{%—Vajra-dhara, as, ā, am,%} holding a thunderbolt;
({%as%}), m., N. of Indra; of a Buddhist saint; of a
king. {%—Vajra-dhātrī,%} f., N. of the wife of Vairo-
cana. {%—Vajra-nakha, as, ā, am,%} having hard claws.
{%—Vajra-nagara, am,%} n., N. of the city of the
Dānava Vajra-nābha. {%—Vajra-nābha, as, ā, am,%}
having a hard nave (as a wheel &c.); ({%as%}), m. the
discus of Kṛṣṇa; N. of one of Skanda's attendants;
of a Dānava; of a king (a son of Uktha, also a son
of Unnābha, also a son of Sthala). {%—Vajranābhīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating to (the Dānava) Vajra-nābha.
treating of him. {%—Vajra-nirghoṣa, as,%} m. a clap
of thunder. {%—Vajra-niṣpeṣa, as,%} m. sound pro-
duced by the clashing or concussion of thunder-
clouds, a clap of thunder. {%—Vajra-pañjara,%} epithet
of certain prayers addressed to Durgā; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a Dānava. {%—Vajra-pattrikā,%} f. Asparagus Race-
mosus. {%—Vajra-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} ‘thunderbolt-handed,’
holding a thunderbolt in the hand, grasping a thun-
derbolt; whose thunderbolt is the hand (said of
Brāhmans); ({%is%}), m., N. of Indra; of a class of
[Page0879-b+ 81]
divine beings (with Buddhists); of a Dhyāni-Bodhi-
sattva. {%—Vajrapāṇi-tva, am,%} n. the state of one
who holds a thunderbolt in the hand. {%—Vajra-pā-%}
{%ṇin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘thunderbolt-handed,’ grasping a thun-
derbolt. {%—Vajra-pāta, as,%} m. the fall of a thunder-
bolt, a stroke of lightning; ({%as, ā, am%}), falling like
a thunderbolt. {%—Vajra-pāṣāṇa, as,%} m. ‘diamond-
stone,’ a kind of spar or valuable stone. {%—Vajra-%}
{%pura, am,%} n., N. of the city of the Dānava Vajra-
nābha. {%—Vajra-puṣpa, am,%} n. ‘diamond-flower,’
a valuable flower; the blossom of sesamum; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of fennel, Anethum Sowa. {%—Vajra-prabha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Vidyā-dhara. {%—Vajra-prabhāva, as,%}
m., N. of a king of the Karūṣas. {%—Vajra-prastā-%}
{%riṇī,%} f., N. of a Tantra goddess. {%—Vajra-prastā-%}
{%riṇī-mantra, ās,%} m. pl. an epithet of particular
magical formulas. {%—Vajra-prāya, as, ā, am,%} like
adamant, adamantine, exceedingly hard. {%—Vajra-%}
{%badha,%} see {%vajra-vadha%}. {%—Vajra-bāhu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} ‘thunderbolt-armed,’ holding a thunderbolt in the
hand, wielder of the thunderbolt (said of Indra, of
Indra and Agni, and of Rudra); ({%us%}), m., N. of a
king of Orissa; of another person. {%—Vajra-bhūmi,%}
{%is,%} f., N. of a place. {%—Vajra-bhūmi-rajas, as,%} n. a
particular precious stone {%(= vaikrānta)%}. {%—Vajra-%}
{%bhṛkuṭi, is,%} f., N. of a Tantra goddess. {%—Vajra-%}
{%bhṛt, t, t, t,%} carrying or wielding a thunderbolt;
({%t%}), m., N. of Indra. {%—Vajra-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘thun-
derbolt-gem, ‘a diamond. {%—Vajra-maṇḍā,%} f., N. of
a Dhāraṇī. {%—Vajra-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of dia-
mond, hard as diamond, hard, adamantine; hard-
hearted. {%—Vajra-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Vajra-mukuṭa, as,%} m., N. of a son of Pratāpa-
mukuṭa. {%—Vajra-muṣṭi, is, is, i,%} holding a thun-
derbolt in the fist; having a hard or iron fist; ({%is%}),
m., N. of Indra; of a Rākṣasa; of a Kṣatriya or
warrior. {%—Vajra-mūlī,%} f. a kind of leguminous
shrub {%(= māṣa-parṇī)%}. {%—Vajra-yoginī,%} f., N. of
a goddess. {%—Vajra-ratha, as, ā, am,%} whose thun-
derbolt is a war-chariot (said of a Kṣatriya). {%—Va-%}
{%jra-rada, as, ā, am,%} having teeth or tusks as hard
as adamant; ({%as%}), m. a hog, boar. {%—Vajra-rātra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Vajra-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
shaped like a Vajra, crossed, (see {%vajra.%}) {%—Vajra-%}
{%lipi, is,%} f. a particular style of writing. {%—Vajra-lepa,%}
{%as,%} m. a particular kind of very hard mortar or
cement. {%—Vajralepa-ghaṭita, as, ā, am,%} joined
with adamantine cement. {%—Vajra-lepāya,%} Nom. A.
{%vajralepāyate,%} &c., to be like Vajra-lepa, to be as
hard or tenacious as cement. {%—Vajra-lohaka,%} a
magnet, loadstone. {%—Vajra-vadha, as,%} m. death by
a thunderbolt or lightning; oblique or cross multi-
plication. {%—Vajra-vara-candra, as,%} m., N. of a
king of Orissa. {%—Vajra-vallī,%} f. a species of sun-
flower, Heliotropium Indicum. {%—Vajra-vah%} or {%va-%}
{%jra-vāh, ṭ,%} m. carrying or wielding a thunderbolt.
{%—Vajra-vāraka, as,%} m. a title of respect applied
to certain sages. {%—Vajra-vārāhī,%} f., N. of the mother
of Śākya-muni; [cf. {%vajra-kālikā.%}] {%—Vajra-vidrā-%}
{%viṇī,%} f., N. of a Buddhist goddess. {%—Vajra-viṣ-%}
{%kambha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Garuḍa. {%—Vajra-%}
{%vihata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. struck by a thunderbolt or
lightning. {%—Vajra-vījaka, as,%} m. a kind of creeper,
Guilandina Bonduc. {%—Vajra-vīra, as,%} m., N. of
Mahā-kāla. {%—Vajra-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a kind of
plant, Cactus Opuntia. {%—Vajra-vega, as,%} m., N.
of a Rākṣasa; of a Vidyā-dhara. {%—Vajra-vyūha,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of military array. {%—Vajra-śarīra, as,%}
{%ā, am, = vajra-deha,%} q. v. {%—Vajra-śalya, as,%} m.
‘having hard quills or prickles,’ a porcupine. {%—Vajra-%}
{%śākhā,%} f., N. of a branch or sect of the Jainas
founded by Vajra-svāmin. {%—Vajra-śīrṣa, as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Bhṛgu. {%—Vajra-śṛṅkhalā,%} f. a
female personification peculiar to the Jainas and one
of their sixteen Vidyā-devīs. {%—Vajra-śṛṅkhalikā,%}
f. Asteracantha Longifolia. {%—Vajra-saṃhata, as,%}
m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Vajra-saṅghāta, as,%} m.
having the hardness or compactness of adamant
(applied to Bhīma in Mahā-bh. Ādi-p. 4775); epi-
thet of a kind of mortar or cement. {%—Vajra-sattva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a soul or heart of adamant; ({%as%}),
[Page0879-c+ 81]
m., N. of a Dhyāni-buddha. {%—Vajrasattvātmikā%}
{%(˚va-āt˚),%} f., N. of the wife of Vajra-sattva. {%—Vajra-%}
{%samādhi, is,%} m. a particular kind of abstract medi-
tation with Buddhists. {%—Vajra-samutkīrṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} perforated by a diamond or any hard instrument.
{%—Vajra-sāra, as, ā, am,%} having the essence or
nature of a diamond, hard as a diamond; made of
diamond; a diamond (gender doubtful); ({%as%}), m. a
proper N. {%—Vajrasāra-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of
the essence of a diamond, hard as a diamond, made
of diamond. {%—Vajrasārī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c.,
to make hard as diamond. {%—Vajra-sūci, is,%} or
{%vajra-sūcī,%} f. a diamond needle; N. of an Upani-
shad ascribed to Śaṅkarācārya; of a work by Aśva-
ghoṣa. {%—Vajra-sūrya, as,%} m., N. of a Buddha.
{%—Vajra-sena, as,%} m., N. of a king of Śrāvastī; of
a preceptor. {%—Vajra-sthāna, am,%} n., N. of a place.
{%—Vajra-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of one of the seven
Jaina Daśa-pūrvins. {%—Vajra-hasta, as, ā, am,%}
‘thunderbolt-handed,’ wielding the thunderbolt (said
of Indra, Agni, the Maruts, Śiva, &c.); ({%ā%}), f., N.
of one of the nine Samidhs; of a Buddhist goddess.
{%—Vajra-hūṇa, as,%} m., N. of a place. {%—Vajra-%}
{%hṛdaya, am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Va-%}
{%jrāṃśu (˚ra-aṃ˚), us,%} m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Vajrākara (˚ra-āk˚), as,%} m. a diamond mine;
N. of a place. {%—Vajrākāra (˚ra-āk˚), as, ā, am,%}
or {%vajrākṛti (˚ra-āk˚), is, is, i,%} shaped like a thun-
derbolt, having the shape of a Vajra, having trans-
verse lines, (see {%vajra%}); any cross-shaped symbol, (a
symbol shaped like a cross was formerly used in gram-
mars as the sign of the Jihvāmūlīyas.) {%—Vajrākhya%}
{%(˚ra-ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} having the name of Vajra,
called Vajra; ({%as%}), m. a kind of mineral spar; [cf.
{%vajra-pāṣāṇa.%}] {%—Vajrāghāta (˚ra-āgh˚), as,%} m.
the stroke of a thunderbolt, a stroke of lightning;
any sudden shock or calamity. {%—Vajrāṅkita (˚ra-%}
{%aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} marked with a Vajra or with a
Vajra-like symbol, (see {%vajra.%}) {%—Vajrāṅkuśī (˚ra-%}
{%aṅ˚),%} f., N. of a Tantra goddess. {%—Vajrāṅga (˚ra-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. a snake, (probably for {%vakrāṅga%});
({%ī%}), f. a sort of grain, Coix Barbata; Heliotropium
Indicum. {%—Vajrācārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m. ‘diamond-
like teacher, ‘N. of a preceptor. {%—Vajrāditya (˚ra-%}
{%ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a king of Kaśmīra. {%—Vajrābha%}
{%(˚ra-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} diamond-like, resembling a
diamond; ({%as%}), m. a kind of spar or valuable stone,
(perhaps) the opal; [cf. {%vajrākhya.%}] {%—Vajrābhyāsa%}
{%(˚ra-abh˚), as,%} m. multiplication crosswise or zigzag,
cross multiplication. {%—Vajrāmbujā (˚ra-am˚),%} f.,
N. of a Tantra goddess. {%—Vajrāyudha (˚ra-āy˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} thunderbolt-armed, having the thunder-
bolt for a weapon; ({%as%}), m., N. of Indra; a proper
N. {%—Vajrāśani (˚ra-aś˚), is,%} m. f. Indra's thunder-
bolt. {%—Vajrāsana (˚ra-ās˚), am,%} n. a diamond seat
or throne; a particular way of sitting. {%—Vajrāsu%}
{%= vajrāṃśu%} (according to one reading). {%—Vajrā-%}
{%sthi-śṛṅkhalā (˚ra-as˚),%} f. Asteracantha Longifolia,
(perhaps resolvable into the name of two plants, viz.
Vajra-śṛṅkhalā and Asthi-śṛṅkhalā.) {%—Vajrāhata%}
{%(˚ra-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} struck by a thunderbolt.
{%—Vajrāhikā (˚ra-ah˚),%} f. Carpopogon Pruriens.
{%—Vajrī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the making into a Vajra
or into the form of a thunderbolt. {%—Vajrī-bhūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} become a thunderbolt, turned into a
thunderbolt. {%—Vajrendra (˚ra-in˚), as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Vajreśvarī (˚ra-īś˚),%} f., N. of a Buddhist god-
dess. {%—Vajrodarī (˚ra-ud˚),%} f., N. of a Rākṣasī.
<LEND>

<L>40946<pc>0879-c<k1>vajraka<k2>vajraka
{%Vajraka, am,%}¦ n., scil. {%taila,%} a kind of oil pre-
pared with various substances (used as a remedy
for cutaneous eruptions); a particular appearance or
phenomenon of the sky; {%= vajra-kṣāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>40947<pc>0879-c<k1>vajrAya<k2>vajrAya
{%Vajrāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vajrāyate,%} &c., to become a
thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>40948<pc>0879-c<k1>vajrin<k2>vajrin
{%Vajrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ holding or wielding the thunder-
bolt (said of Indra, Agni, Śiva, &c.); containing
the word {%vajra%} (Ved.); ({%ī%}), m. ‘the Thunderer,’
N. of Indra; a Buddha or Jaina deified saint; ({%iṇī%}),
f. epithet of certain Iṣṭakās (Ved.). {%—Vajri-jit, t,%}
m. ‘conqueror of Indra,’ N. of Garuḍa, (see {%vajra-%}
{%jit.%})
<LEND>
[Page0880-a+ 76]

<L>40949<pc>0880-a<k1>vajrivas<k2>vajrivas
{%Vajrivas,%}¦ voc. c. a Vedic form (see Ṛg-veda I.
121, 14) {%= vajra-van,%} voc. c. of {%vajra-vat,%} having
or wielding a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>40950<pc>0880-a<k1>vajaARa<k2>vajaARa
{#vajaARa#}¦ {%vajaāṇa%} and {%vajahūṇa,%} N. of
places; [cf. {%vajra-hūṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40951<pc>0880-a<k1>vajrawa<k2>vajrawa
{#vajrawa#}¦ {%vajraṭa, as,%} m., N. of the father of
Uvaṭa.
<LEND>

<L>40952<pc>0880-a<k1>vajrolI<k2>vajrolI
{#vajrolI#}¦ {%vajrolī,%} f. a particular position of
the fingers.
<LEND>

<L>40953<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYc<k2>vaYc
{#vaYc#}¦ {%vañc%} (probably connected with rt.
{%vaṅk%}), cl. 1. P. {%vañcati, vavañca,%} Prec.
{%vacyāt, vañcitum,%} to move to and fro, shake,
vibrate, tremble, totter, rock about, waver (Ved.);
to go crookedly; to go slyly or secretly, sneak along;
to go, go to, arrive at; to pass over, wander over,
go astray: Pass. {%vacyate,%} Ved. to move or rock to
and fro, roll, hurry along, (but according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda I. 46, 3. {%vacyante = ucyante,%} as if fr. rt.
{%vac,%} to speak, proclaim, address, &c.): Caus. P.
{%vañcayati,%} &c., to move or go away from,
avoid, escape, shun, evade (generally P. and with
acc.): Caus. A. {%vañcayate,%} &c., to cause to go
astray, deceive, defraud, delude, trick, cheat, (in these
senses properly A., but sometimes also P.): Pass. of
Caus. {%vañcyate,%} to be deceived: Desid. {%vivañci-%}
{%ṣate:%} Intens. {%vanīvacyate, vanīvañcīti;%} [cf. pro-
bably  Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄτη, ἀτάω, ἀπάτη, ἀτάσθαλος, ἀτύξομαι;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>vafer.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>40954<pc>0880-a<k1>vaktvA<k2>vaktvA
{%Vaktvā%}¦ or {%vacitvā,%} ind. {%= vañcitvā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>40955<pc>0880-a<k1>vacasa<k2>vacasa<h>2
2. {%vacasa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 878, col. 2),
Ved. oscillating, moving about, rolling (said of car-
riages).
<LEND>

<L>40956<pc>0880-a<k1>vacasyu<k2>vacasyu<h>2
2. {%vacasyu, us, us, u%}¦ (for 1. see p. 878, col. 2),
Ved. shaking, tossing, tottering.
<LEND>

<L>40957<pc>0880-a<k1>vacyamAna<k2>vacyamAna<h>2
2. {%vacyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being urged on
or incited, being inspired, (according to Sāy. {%vacya-%}
{%māna%} = both {%ucyamāna%} and {%preryamāṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>40958<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcaka<k2>vaYcaka
{%Vañcaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), deceiving,
cheating, one who deceives, a deceiver, rogue, cheat,
knave; fraudulent, deceitful, crafty; ({%as%}), m. a
jackal; a musk-rat; a tame or house-ichneumon.
<LEND>

<L>40959<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcaTa<k2>vaYcaTa
{%Vañcatha, as,%}¦ m. a deceiver, rogue, knave, cheat;
the Indian cuckoo; cheating.
<LEND>

<L>40960<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcana<k2>vaYcana
{%Vañcana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. (fr. the Caus.), the act of
deceiving, cheating, defrauding, fraud, deceit, ({%vañ-%}
{%canam%} or {%vañcanāṃ kṛ,%} to practise fraud, cheat);
illusion, delusion, hallucination. {%—Vañcana-tā,%} f.
trickery, deception, roguishness. {%—Vañcana-pra-%}
{%vaṇa, as, ā, am,%} inclined to fraud or deception.
{%—Vañcana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} deceitful, crafty, fraudu-
lent.
<LEND>

<L>40961<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcanIya<k2>vaYcanIya
{%Vañcanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be avoided or shunned;
to be deceived, capable of being cheated.
<LEND>

<L>40962<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcayitavya<k2>vaYcayitavya
{%Vañcayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be tricked or cheated.
<LEND>

<L>40963<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcayitf<k2>vaYcayitf
{%Vañcayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who deceives, a
deceiver, cheat.
<LEND>

<L>40964<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcayitvA<k2>vaYcayitvA
{%Vañcayitvā,%}¦ ind. having cheated or deceived,
having deluded.
<LEND>

<L>40965<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcita<k2>vaYcita
{%Vañcita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), deceived,
tricked, cheated, deluded, imposed upon; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of riddle or enigma.
<LEND>

<L>40966<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcitaka<k2>vaYcitaka
{%Vañcitaka%}¦ in {%pakṣa-v˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>40967<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcitvA<k2>vaYcitvA
{%Vañcitvā,%}¦ ind. having cheated or deceived, &c.
<LEND>

<L>40968<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcin<k2>vaYcin
{%Vañcin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ deceiving, cheating (at the end
of a comp.).
<LEND>

<L>40969<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcuka<k2>vaYcuka
{%Vañcuka%}¦ or {%vañcūka, as, ī, am,%} deceptive, fraudu-
lent, dishonest, crafty.
<LEND>

<L>40970<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcya<k2>vaYcya
{%Vañcya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone, to be avoided,
&c.; to be cheated.
<LEND>

<L>40971<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYcati<k2>vaYcati
{#vaYcati#}¦ {%vañcati, is,%} m. fire; [cf. {%añcati.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40972<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYjarA<k2>vaYjarA
{#vaYjarA#}¦ {%vañjarā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>40973<pc>0880-a<k1>vaYjula<k2>vaYjula
{#vaYjula#}¦ {%vañjula, as,%} m. the tree Dalbergia
Ougeinensis; another tree, Jonesia Aśoka; common
cane or ratan, Calamus Rotang; a kind of flower,
Hibiscus Mutabilis; a sort of bird; ({%ā%}), f. a cow
that yields abundance of milk; N. of a river. {%—Vañ- %}
[Page0880-b+ 80]
{%jula-druma, as,%} m. the Aśoka tree. {%—Vañjula-%}
{%priya, as,%} m. the ratan, Calamus Rotang.
<LEND>

<L>40974<pc>0880-b<k1>vaYjulaka<k2>vaYjulaka
{%Vañjulaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of plant; a sort of bird.
<LEND>

<L>40975<pc>0880-b<k1>vaw<k2>vaw<h>1
{#vaw#} 1¦. {%vaṭ%} (probably connected with rt.
1. {%vṛt%}), cl. 1. P. {%vaṭati, vavāṭa, vaṭitum,%}
to surround, encompass; cl. 10. P. {%vaṭayati,%} &c.,
to tie, string, connect; to divide, partition: Caus.
{%vaṭayati, -yitum,%} to speak.
<LEND>

<L>40976<pc>0880-b<k1>vawa<k2>vawa
{%Vaṭa, as,%}¦ m. the banyan or Indian fig-tree, Ficus
Indica, (said to be also {%am,%} n.); a small shell, the
Cypræa Moneta or cowry; a sort of bird; a little
ball, globule, pill, small lump or roundish mass; a
cake made of pulse ground and fried with oil or
butter [cf. {%vaṭaka%}]; a round figure, circle, cipher;
equality in shape or dimension; N. of one of
Skanda's attendants; ({%as, ī, am%}), m. f. n. a string,
rope, tie; ({%ī%}), f. a pill, bolus; a kind of tree ({%=%}
{%nadī-vaṭa); gaḍhā vaṭī,%} a particular position in
the game of Catur-aṅga or chess. {%—Vaṭa-kaṇikā%} or
{%vaṭa-kaṇīkā,%} f. a very small particle of the Indian
fig-tree. {%—Vaṭa-ja, as,%} m., see Pāṇ. VI. 2, 82.
{%—Vaṭa-tale,%} ind. at the bottom of an Indian fig-tree,
under a banyan tree. {%—Vaṭa-tīrtha-nātha,%} N. of a
Liṅga. {%—Vaṭa-pattra, as,%} m. a kind of white basil;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of jasmine; a plant from the fibrous
leaves of which bow-strings are made, Aletris Hyacin-
thoides; Sanseviera Zeylanica; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of
plant {%(= irāvatī)%}. {%—Vaṭa-yakṣiṇī-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Vaṭa-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling in
the Indian fig-tree; ({%ī%}), m. a Yakṣa. {%—Vaṭeśvara%}
{%(˚ṭa-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a Liṅga; of the author of
a commentary on the drama called Mudrā-rākṣasa.
{%—Vaṭeśvara-siddhānta, as,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Vaṭodakā (˚ṭa-ud˚),%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>40977<pc>0880-b<k1>vawaka<k2>vawaka
{%Vaṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a small lump or round mass, ball,
globule; a kind of cake made of pulse fried in oil
or butter, (said to be also {%am,%} n.); a particular
weight, = 8 Māṣas or 2 Śāṇas; ({%ikā%}), f. a pill,
bolus; a chess-man, (see under {%vaṭa%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>40978<pc>0880-b<k1>vawakinI<k2>vawakinI
{%Vaṭakinī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%vaṭaka%}), N. of a particular night
of full moon (when it is customary to eat Vaṭaka
cakes).
<LEND>

<L>40979<pc>0880-b<k1>vawara<k2>vawara
{%Vaṭara, as, ā, am,%}¦ wicked, villainous, unsteady;
({%as%}), m. a thief; a cock; a cloth worn round the
head, turban; a mat; a fragrant grass, Cyperus;
a churning-stick.
<LEND>

<L>40980<pc>0880-b<k1>vawAkara<k2>vawAkara
{%Vaṭākara, as,%}¦ m. a cord, string ({%= varāṭaka,%}
{%vaṭāraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>40981<pc>0880-b<k1>vawAraka<k2>vawAraka
{%Vaṭāraka, as,%}¦ m. a cord, string, rope ({%= varā-%}
{%ṭaka, vaṭākara%}); N. of a man; ({%ās%}), m. pl. this
man's descendants. {%—Vaṭāraka-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made or consisting of a rope, made of string.
<LEND>

<L>40982<pc>0880-b<k1>vawi<k2>vawi
{%Vaṭi, is,%}¦ f. a sort of ant ({%= divī%} and {%upajihvā%});
a kind of louse or other insect.
<LEND>

<L>40983<pc>0880-b<k1>vawika<k2>vawika
{%Vaṭika, as,%}¦ m. a pawn or common man at chess.
<LEND>

<L>40984<pc>0880-b<k1>vawin<k2>vawin
{%Vaṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a string, stringed; circular,
globular; ({%ī%}), m. {%= vaṭika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40985<pc>0880-b<k1>vawiBa<k2>vawiBa
{%Vaṭibha, as, ā, am,%}¦ having or containing the
insect called Vaṭi.
<LEND>

<L>40986<pc>0880-b<k1>vawI<k2>vawI
{%Vaṭī,%}¦ f. See under {%vaṭa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>40987<pc>0880-b<k1>vawu<k2>vawu
{%Vaṭu, us,%}¦ m. (also written {%baṭu%}), a boy, lad,
stripling, youth; a young Brāhman or Brahma-cārin,
religious student; N. of a class of priests; a form
of Śiva (so called from being represented by boys in
the rites of the Śāktas); a plant, Colosanthes Indica
or Bignonia Indica. {%—Vaṭu-mātra,%} a mere stripling.
{%—Vaṭu-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having the form of a lad
or stripling. {%—Vaṭū-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of
making into a youth, the introduction of a boy to
his preceptor [cf. {%upa-nayana%}], investiture with
the sacred thread.
<LEND>

<L>40988<pc>0880-b<k1>vawuka<k2>vawuka
{%Vaṭuka, as,%}¦ m. a boy, lad, youth; a young Brāh-
man or religious student; a stupid fellow, blockhead;
N. of a class of priests; a form of Śiva (among the
Śāktas). {%—Vaṭuka-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Vaṭuka-bhairava, as,%} m. a form
of Bhairava.
<LEND>

<L>40989<pc>0880-b<k1>vawUrin<k2>vawUrin
{%Vaṭūrin%}¦ or {%mahā-vaṭūrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. broad,
wide, wide-spreading, (Sāy. {%= veṣṭana-śīla%} or {%ati-%}
{%vistṛta.%})
<LEND>
[Page0880-c+ 72]

<L>40990<pc>0880-c<k1>vawya<k2>vawya
{%Vaṭya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the Vaṭa or Indian
fig-tree; a kind of mineral, (gender doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>40991<pc>0880-c<k1>vaw<k2>vaw<h>2
{#vaw#} 2¦. {%vaṭ,%} ind., Ved. an interjection or
exclamation used in sacrificial ceremonies.
<LEND>

<L>40992<pc>0880-c<k1>vawAvIka<k2>vawAvIka
{#vawAvIka#}¦ {%vaṭāvīka, as,%} m. one who assumes
a false name; notorious thief (?).
<LEND>

<L>40993<pc>0880-c<k1>vawwa<k2>vawwa
{#vawwa#}¦ {%vaṭṭa, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vaṭṭa-deva,%}
{%as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>40994<pc>0880-c<k1>vaW<k2>vaW
{#vaW#}¦ {%vaṭh%} (also written {%baṭh%}), cl. 1. P.
{%vaṭhati, vavāṭha%} (3rd pl. {%vavaṭhus%}), {%va-%}
{%ṭhitum,%} to be large; to be powerful or able; to
be fat.
<LEND>

<L>40995<pc>0880-c<k1>vaWara<k2>vaWara
{#vaWara#}¦ {%vaṭhara, as, ā, am%} (according to
Uṇādi-s. V. 39. fr. rt. {%vac%} with substitution of {%ṭh%}
for {%c%}), stupid, slow, dull; vile, wicked, abandoned
[cf. {%vaṭara%}]; ({%as%}), m. a fool, blockhead; a phy-
sician; a water-pot; {%= śabda-kāra; = vakra.%}
<LEND>

<L>40996<pc>0880-c<k1>vaqaBi<k2>vaqaBi
{#vaqaBi#}¦ {%vaḍabhi, is,%} or {%vaḍabhī,%} f. the wooden
frame of a roof; a flat roof, house-top, top room,
turret, top floor, balcony, any temporary erection on
the top of a palace, awning, tent; [cf. {%valabhi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>40997<pc>0880-c<k1>vaqavA<k2>vaqavA
{#vaqavA#}¦ {%vaḍavā,%} f. (also written {%vaḍabā, ba-%}
{%ḍavā,%} q. v.), a female horse, mare, (also {%vaḍava, as,%}
m. in Taittirīya-s. II. 1, 8, 3, in the sense of a horse
resembling a mare); the nymph Aśvinī (who, in
the form of a mare as the wife of Vivasvat or the
Sun, became the mother of the two Aśvins, see
{%aśvinī%}); the personification of the constellation
represented by a horse's head; a female slave; a
harlot, prostitute; N. of a woman (having the patro-
nymic Prātitheyī); of a wife of Vasu-deva (having
the epithet Pari-cārikā, Hari-vaṃśa 1949); of a river;
of a place of pilgrimage. {%—Vaḍava-dhenu, us,%} f., Ved.
a mare. {%—Vaḍavāgni (˚vā-ag˚), is,%} m. ‘mare's fire,’
submarine fire or the fire of the lower regions (fabled
to be at the South-pole and not extinguishable by
the sea water; see {%aurva, baḍavāgni%}). {%—Vaḍavā-%}
{%nala (˚vā-an˚), as,%} m. {%= vaḍavāgni;%} a kind of
medicinal powder (composed of pepper and other
pungent materials and used to facilitate digestion).
{%—Vaḍavā-mukha, am,%} n. ‘the mare's mouth,’ the
entrance to the lower regions at the South-pole;
({%as, ī, am%}), belonging to the submarine fire at the
South-pole; ({%as%}), m. the submarine fire described
above; N. of Śiva; a personification of a Maharṣi
(identified with Nārāyaṇa); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
mythical people. {%—Vaḍavā-vaktra, am,%} n. {%= va-%}
{%ḍavā-mukha%}. {%—Vaḍavā-hṛta,%} a term applied to
a kind of slave.
<LEND>

<L>40998<pc>0880-c<k1>vaqavin<k2>vaqavin
{%Vaḍavin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ an adjective formed from
{%vaḍavā,%} see Gaṇa Vrīhyādi to Pāṇ. V. 2, 116.
<LEND>

<L>40999<pc>0880-c<k1>vaqA<k2>vaqA
{#vaqA#}¦ {%vaḍā%} or {%vaḍikā,%} f. {%= vaṭa,%} pulse ground
and fried with oil or butter.
<LEND>

<L>41000<pc>0880-c<k1>vaqiSa<k2>vaqiSa
{#vaqiSa#}¦ {%vaḍiśa, am,%} n. (rarely {%as,%} m., and
according to some also {%ā, ī,%} f.), a hook, fish-hook;
a particular surgical instrument in the form of a
hook; [cf. {%valiśa.%}] {%—Vaḍiśa-yuta, as, ā, am,%}
joined to or fastened on a hook (said of a bait).
<LEND>

<L>41001<pc>0880-c<k1>vaqOsaka<k2>vaqOsaka
{#vaqOsaka#}¦ {%vaḍausaka,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>41002<pc>0880-c<k1>vaqra<k2>vaqra
{#vaqra#}¦ {%vaḍra, as, ā, am,%} large, great.
<LEND>

<L>41003<pc>0880-c<k1>vaR<k2>vaR
{#vaR#}¦ {%vaṇ%} (also written {%baṇ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%vaṇati, vavāṇa%} (Caus. Aor. {%avīvaṇat%} or
{%avavāṇat%}), {%vaṇitum,%} to sound.
<LEND>

<L>41004<pc>0880-c<k1>vaRa<k2>vaRa
{%Vaṇa, as,%}¦ m. sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>41005<pc>0880-c<k1>vaRaTalagrAma<k2>vaRaTalagrAma
{#vaRaTalagrAma#}¦ {%vaṇathala-grāma, as,%} m. (pro-
bably a corruption of {%vana-sthala-g˚),%} N. of a
village.
<LEND>

<L>41006<pc>0880-c<k1>vaRij<k2>vaRij
{#vaRij#}¦ {%vaṇij, k,%} m. (also written {%baṇij,%}
q. v.), a merchant, trader; the sign of the zodiac
Libra or the Scales; ({%k%}), f. trade, merchandise. {%—Va-%}
{%ṇik-karman, a,%} n. or {%vaṇik-kriyā,%} f. the business
or occupation of a trader, trade, merchandise.
[Page0881-a+ 75]
{%—Vaṇik-patha, as,%} m. (see {%baṇik-patha%}), ‘trader's
path, ‘a trader's business, merchandise, traffic; a
merchant's shop; a merchant; the zodiacal sign
Libra or the Scales. {%—Vaṇik-sārtha, as,%} m. a com-
pany of traders or merchants, caravan. {%—Vaṇig-%}
{%jana, as,%} m. a tradesman, merchant; tradespeople,
merchants. {%—Vaṇig-bandhu, vaṇig-bhāva, vaṇig-%}
{%vaha,%} see {%baṇig-b˚,%} &c. {%—Vaṇig-vṛtti, is,%} f. ‘live-
lihood by trade,’ trade, traffic, retail or petty trade, low
trade, huckstering. {%—Vaṇiṅ-mārga, as,%} m. ‘trader's
path or road,’ a merchant's shop, &c. ({%= vipaṇi%}).
<LEND>

<L>41007<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRija<k2>vaRija
{%Vaṇija, as,%}¦ m. {%= vaṇij,%} a merchant; the zodiacal
sign Libra; N. of a particular Karaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>41008<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRijaka<k2>vaRijaka
{%Vaṇijaka, as,%}¦ m. a merchant.
<LEND>

<L>41009<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRijya<k2>vaRijya
{%Vaṇijya, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. trade, traffic, (for {%vāṇijya;%}
cf. {%baṇijya.%})
<LEND>

<L>41010<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRw<k2>vaRw
{#vaRw#}¦ {%vaṇṭ%} (also written {%baṇṭ,%} connected
with rt. {%vaṇḍ%}), cl. 1. 10. P. {%vaṇṭati,%}
{%vaṇṭayati%} (also, according to some, {%vaṇṭāpayati%}),
&c., to partition, apportion, share, separate, divide.
<LEND>

<L>41011<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRwa<k2>vaRwa
{%Vaṇṭa, as,%}¦ m. a part, portion; the handle of a sickle;
an unmarried man; ({%as, ā, am%}), unmarried.
<LEND>

<L>41012<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRwaka<k2>vaRwaka
{%Vaṇṭaka, as,%}¦ m. dividing; an apportioner, distri-
buter; a part, portion, share.
<LEND>

<L>41013<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRwana<k2>vaRwana
{%Vaṇṭana, am,%}¦ n. the act of portioning, apportion-
ing, partitioning, dividing into shares.
<LEND>

<L>41014<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRwanIya<k2>vaRwanIya
{%Vaṇṭanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be apportioned, divisi-
ble, to be divided.
<LEND>

<L>41015<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRwita<k2>vaRwita
{%Vaṇṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ divided into shares, distri-
buted.
<LEND>

<L>41016<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRwAla<k2>vaRwAla
{#vaRwAla#}¦ {%vaṇṭāla%} or {%vaṇṭhāla, as,%} m. a
spade, shovel, hoe; a boat; a kind of battle, the
contest of heroes; [cf. {%vaṇḍāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41017<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRW<k2>vaRW
{#vaRW#}¦ {%vaṇṭh,%} cl. 1. A. {%vaṇṭhate, vavaṇṭhe,%}
{%vaṇṭhitum,%} to go or move alone, go un-
accompanied.
<LEND>

<L>41018<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRWa<k2>vaRWa
{%Vaṇṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ crippled, maimed; unmarried;
({%as%}), m. an unmarried man; a servant; a dwarf; a
javelin; [cf. {%vaṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41019<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRWara<k2>vaRWara
{%Vaṇṭhara, as,%}¦ m. the new shoot of the Tāl or
palm tree; the sheath that envelopes the young
bamboo; a rope for tying a goat, &c.; the female
breast; a dog's tail; a dog; a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>41020<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRq<k2>vaRq
{#vaRq#}¦ {%vaṇḍ%} (connected with rt. {%vaṇṭ%}),
cl. 1. A. {%vaṇḍate, vavaṇḍe, vaṇḍitum,%}
to partition, apportion, share, divide; to surround,
encompass; to cover; cl. 10. P. {%vaṇḍayati,%} &c.,
to partition, share, divide.
<LEND>

<L>41021<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRqa<k2>vaRqa
{#vaRqa#}¦ {%vaṇḍa, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%van%} or {%vaṇ%}), maimed, defective, crippled (espe-
cially in the hands or feet or tail), one whose
hands have been cut off [cf. {%vaṇṭha%}]; impotent,
emasculated [cf. {%paṇḍa%}]; ({%as%}), m. a man who is
circumcised or has no prepuce, (probably a wrong
reading for {%caṇḍa%}); an ox without a tail [cf. {%a-vaṇḍa%}];
({%ā%}), f. an unchaste woman, (probably a wrong reading
for {%raṇḍā.%})
<LEND>

<L>41022<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRqara<k2>vaRqara
{%Vaṇḍara, as,%}¦ m. a niggard, miser; a eunuch or
attendant on the women's apartments.
<LEND>

<L>41023<pc>0881-a<k1>vaRqAla<k2>vaRqAla
{#vaRqAla#}¦ {%vaṇḍāla, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%vaṇḍ%}), a particular mode of fighting, the contest of
heroes; a boat; a spade, a hoe.
<LEND>

<L>41024<pc>0881-a<k1>vat<k2>vat<h>1
{#vat#} 1¦. {%vat,%} ind. an affix (technically termed
{%vati%}) added to words to imply likeness or resem-
blance, and generally translatable by ‘as,’ ‘like’ (e. g.
{%brāhmaṇa-vat,%} like a Brāhman).
<LEND>

<L>41025<pc>0881-a<k1>vat<k2>vat<h>2
{#vat#} 2¦. {%vat,%} a Vedic rt. usually connected
with {%api,%} (probably) cl. 1. {%vatati,%} &c.,
to understand, comprehend, apprehend, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 3, 10. {%vatema = sambha-%}
{%jemahi,%} ‘may we share in or possess or obtain,’
where {%vat%} is said to stand for rt. 1. {%van%}): Caus.
{%vātayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvatat,%} to cause to under-
stand, make intelligible; to excite, awaken, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%prāpayati, āgamayati, prerayati.%})
<LEND>
[Page0881-b+ 77]

<L>41026<pc>0881-b<k1>vatat<k2>vatat
{%Vatat, an, antī, at,%}¦ understanding, comprehending,
(Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 60, 6 {%= gacchat,%} going.)
<LEND>

<L>41027<pc>0881-b<k1>vAtayat<k2>vAtayat
{%Vātayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to understand;
exciting, &c., (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I.
165, 13. {%api-vātayat = sampūrṇam prāpayat,%}
causing to obtain completely.)
<LEND>

<L>41028<pc>0881-b<k1>vata<k2>vata<h>1
{#vata#} 1¦. {%vata,%} ind. in the earlier language
generally written {%bata,%} q. v.; for 2. {%vata%} see
p. 883, col. 1), a particle expressing sorrow, com-
passion, pleasure, surprise, &c., and generally trans-
latable by ‘ah!’ ‘alas!’ ‘oh!’ also used as a vocative
particle; (in later Sanskrit {%vata%} is often found in
the middle of a sentence.)
<LEND>

<L>41029<pc>0881-b<k1>vataMsa<k2>vataMsa
{#vataMsa#}¦ {%va-taṃsa%} or {%va-taṃsaka, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%ava-taṃsa,%} a garland; a ring-shaped ornament, ear-
ring, ear-ornament; a crest.
<LEND>

<L>41030<pc>0881-b<k1>vataRqa<k2>vataRqa
{#vataRqa#}¦ {%vataṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a Muni; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the descendants of Vataṇḍa, ({%Taṇḍa-vataṇ-%}
{%ḍās,%} m. pl. the descendants of Taṇḍa and Vataṇḍa);
({%ī%}), f. a {{female decendant->female descendant||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} of Vataṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>41031<pc>0881-b<k1>vati<k2>vati
{#vati#}¦ {%vati,%} see under rt. 1. {%van.%} (For the
affix {%vati%} see 1. {%vat,%} col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>41032<pc>0881-b<k1>vatU<k2>vatU
{#vatU#}¦ {%vatū, ūs,%} f. a river of heaven; ({%ūs%}), m. one
who speaks the truth, a road; a disease of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>41033<pc>0881-b<k1>vatokA<k2>vatokA
{#vatokA#}¦ {%va-tokā,%} f. {%= ava-tokā,%} a cow mis-
carrying from accident.
<LEND>

<L>41034<pc>0881-b<k1>vatsa<k2>vatsa
{#vatsa#}¦ {%vatsa, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 62. fr. rt. {%vad%}), a calf, a young animal or the
young of any animal, offspring, child, ({%vatsa,%} voc. c.
‘my dear child, my darling,’ used as a term of en-
dearment; {%jīvad-vatsā,%} a woman whose child is still
alive); a son, boy, ({%bāla-vatsā,%} a woman whose
son is still a boy); a year [cf. {%vatsara%}]; N. of a
son or descendant of Kaṇva; of a descendant of
Agni (author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 187); of a
descendant of Kaśyapa; of the author of a law-book;
of a son of Pratardana; of a son of Prasena-jit; of
a son of Akṣa-mālā; of a son of Uru-kṣepa; of a
son of Soma-śarman; N. of a country (its chief town
is Kauśāmbhī); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of Vatsa;
N. of the inhabitants of Vatsa and of the country;
({%ā%}), f. a female calf; a little daughter, little girl,
({%vatse,%} voc. c. ‘my dear child,’ used as a term of
endearment); ({%am%}), n. the breast, chest, (according
to some authorities also {%as,%} m.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἰτ-αλό-ς</lang>
(for <lang n="greek">ϝιταλός,</lang>); Lat. <nsi>vitulu-s, vitula;</nsi> Osk. <nsi>Viteliu</nsi>
<nsi>(= Italia);</nsi> Slav. <nsi>tel-ici;</nsi> Bohem. <nsi>tel-e;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>telycza.</nsi>] {%—Vatsa-kāma, as, ā, am,%} child-loving,
fondly loving or affectionate towards offspring; ({%ā%}),
f. a cow longing for her calf; a mother anxious after
her child. {%—Vatsa-guru, us,%} m. a teacher of children,
preceptor. {%—Vatsa-tantrī, īs,%} f. a rope for tying calves.
{%—Vatsa-tara, as,%} m. ‘more than a calf,’ a weaned
calf, young ox or bull, bullock, steer, (also applied
to the young of goats); ({%ī%}), f. a heifer. {%—Vatsata-%}
{%rārṇa (˚ra-ṛṇa), am,%} n. the debt or loan of a
bullock (?) ; see Vopa-deva II. 9. {%—Vatsa-tva, am,%}
n. the state or condition of a calf. {%—Vatsa-danta,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘calf-toothed,’ a kind of arrow (having a
point like the tooth of a calf); ({%am%}), n. an arrow
point like a calf's tooth. {%—Vatsa-napāt,%} m., N. of
a descendant of Babhru. {%—Vatsa-nābha, as,%} m. a
particular tree; a particular kind of strong poison
prepared from the root of a kind of aconite (said to
resemble the nipple of a cow; the poison is also
called Mīthā zahr); a proper N.; ({%am%}), n. a hole
of a particular shape in the frame of a bedstead.
{%—Vatsa-nābhaka, as,%} m. the poison described
above. {%—Vatsa-pa, as,%} m. a keeper of calves; N. of
a demon (Ved.). {%—Vatsa-pati, is,%} m. a king or lord
of the Vatsas, (or) N. of a king. {%—Vatsa-pattana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘Vatsa town,’ N. of a city in the north of
India, (also called Kauśāmbhī.) {%—Vatsa-pāla, as,%}
m. a keeper of calves; N. of Kṛṣṇa; of Bala-deva.
{%—Vatsa-pālana, am,%} n. the act of keeping calves.
{%—Vatsa-pracetas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. minding or
taking care of Vatsa or the Vatsas, (Sāy. {%= stotari %}
[Page0881-c+ 79]
{%prakṛṣṭa-jñāna,%} favourably-minded towards a
worshipper.) {%—Vatsa-prī, īs,%} m., N. of the author
of the hymns Ṛg-veda IX. 68, X. 45, 46, (his
patronymic is Bhālandana.) {%—Vatsa-prīti, is,%} m. {%=%}
{%vatsa-prī%}. {%—Vatsa-bandhā,%} f. a cow longing for
her calf. {%—Vatsa-bālaka, as,%} m., N. of a brother
of Vasu-deva. {%—Vatsa-bhūmi, is,%} f. the land of the
Vatsas, N. of a country; ({%is%}), m., N. of a son of
Vatsa. {%—Vatsa-mitra, as,%} m., N. of a certain Go-
bhila. {%—Vatsa-mukha, as, ī, am,%} calf-faced, having
the face of a calf. {%—Vatsa-rāja, as,%} m. a king of
the Vatsas; a proper N. {%—Vatsa-rāja-deva, as,%} m.,
N. of a poet. {%—Vatsa-rājya, am,%} n. sovereignty or
authority over the Vatsas. {%—Vatsa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having or possessing a calf; ({%ān%}), m., N. of one of
the sons of Śūra. {%—Vatsa-vinda, as,%} m. a proper N.;
({%ās%}), m. pl. Vatsa-vinda's descendants. {%—Vatsa-vṛd-%}
{%dha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Uru-kriya. {%—Vatsa-%}
{%vyūha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Vatsa. {%—Vatsa-śālā,%} f.
a calf-shed; ({%as, ā, am%}), born in a calf-shed. {%—Vat-%}
{%sākṣī (˚sa-ak˚),%} f. a kind of cucumber, Cucumis
Madraspatanus. {%—Vatsāṅka (˚sa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Vatsājīva (˚sa-āj˚), as, ā, am,%} living
by calves, obtaining a livelihood by keeping calves;
({%as%}), m. epithet of a Piṅgala. {%—Vatsādana (˚sa-%}
{%ad˚), as, ī, am,%} eating calves; ({%as%}), m. a wolf; ({%ī%}),
f. ‘eating its own offspring,’ Cocculus Cordifolius (so
called as not bringing all its berries to maturity).
{%—Vatsāsura (˚sa-as˚), as,%} m., N. of an Asura.
{%—Vatseśa%} or {%vatseśvara (˚sa-īś˚), as,%} m. a king
of Vatsa.
<LEND>

<L>41035<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsaka<k2>vatsaka
{%Vatsaka, as,%}¦ m. a little calf, calf, or young animal
in general; a child, offspring; a medicinal plant,
Wrightia Antidysenterica; N. of a son of Śūra; of
an Asura; ({%ikā%}), f. a calf, female calf, a heifer,
young cow; ({%am%}), n. green or black sulphate of
iron. {%—Vatsaka-vīja, am,%} n. the seed of Wrightia
Antidysenterica.
<LEND>

<L>41036<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsara<k2>vatsara
{%Vatsara, as,%}¦ m. the fifth year in a cycle of five or
six years; the sixth year in a cycle of six years; a
year; the Year personified as a son of Dhruva and
Bhrami; N. of Viṣṇu; of a Sādhya; of a son of
Kaśyapa; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔτος (ϝέρος), ἐτήσιο-ς, ἐτησίαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">δυσετηρία;</lang> Lat. <nsi>vetus, vetus-tu-s, vetulu-s;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>wasara;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>vetuchu.</nsi>] {%—Vatsarādi (˚ra-ādi), is,%}
m. the first month of the Hindū year, the month
Mārgaśīrṣa. {%—Vatsarāntaka (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m.
‘Year-destroyer,’ N. of the month Phālguna. {%—Vat-%}
{%sarārṇa (˚ra-ṛṇa), am,%} n. a debt or loan for a
year (?); see Vopa-deva II. 9.
<LEND>

<L>41037<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsala<k2>vatsala
{%Vatsala, as, ā, am,%}¦ child-loving, affectionate
towards offspring, affectionate in general; kind, lov-
ing, tender; fond of, wholly given up to, devoted to,
longing for (sometimes with loc., e. g. {%gāvo vatseṣu%}
{%vatsalāḥ,%} cows longing for their calves); ({%as%}), m. a
fire fed with grass (i. e. quickly burning away); N.
of one of Skanda's attendants; ({%ā%}), f. a cow fond of
her calf; ({%am%}), n. affection, fondness. {%—Vatsala-tā,%}
f. or {%vatsala-tva, am,%} n. affectionateness, loving-
ness, tenderness, affection.
<LEND>

<L>41038<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsalaya<k2>vatsalaya
{%Vatsalaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vatsalayati,%} &c., to make
tender or affectionate (especially towards offspring or
children).
<LEND>

<L>41039<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsAya<k2>vatsAya
{%Vatsāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vatsāyati,%} &c., to represent
or be like a calf.
<LEND>

<L>41040<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsAyat<k2>vatsAyat
{%Vatsāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ acting like a calf.
<LEND>

<L>41041<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsAra<k2>vatsAra
{%Vatsāra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Kaśyapa.
<LEND>

<L>41042<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsin<k2>vatsin
{%Vatsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a calf; ({%ī%}), m. (perhaps)
‘having many children,’ N. of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>41043<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsiman<k2>vatsiman
{%Vatsiman, ā,%}¦ m. childhood, youth, early youth.
<LEND>

<L>41044<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsIya<k2>vatsIya
{%Vatsīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ proper or fit for a calf; ({%as%}),
m. a cowherd.
<LEND>

<L>41045<pc>0881-c<k1>vatsaRurakatIrTa<k2>vatsaRurakatIrTa
{#vatsaRurakatIrTa#}¦ {%vatsaṇuraka-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>41046<pc>0881-c<k1>vaTsara<k2>vaTsara
{#vaTsara#}¦ {%vathsara, as,%} m. {%= vatsara%} (accord-
ing to the grammarian Pauṣkarasādi).
<LEND>

<L>41047<pc>0881-c<k1>vad<k2>vad
{#vad#}¦ {%vad%} (sometimes lengthened in ep.
into {%vād%} on account of the metre), cl. 1. P.
A. {%vadati, vadate, uvāda%} (3rd du. {%ūdatus,%} 3rd
[Page0882-a+ 81]
pl. {%ūdus;%} according to Vopa-deva VIII. 52, 2nd sing.
also {%veditha,%} 3rd du. {%vedatus,%} 3rd pl. {%vedus%}), {%ūde%} (3rd
du. {%ūdāte,%} 3rd pl. {%ūdire%}), {%vadiṣyati, -te, avādīt,%}
{%avadiṣṭa,%} Prec. {%udyāt, vaditum,%} to speak, say,
utter, tell, speak to, address (with acc. of the thing
said and of the person addressed and sometimes with
prep. {%abhi%} and acc., both P. and A. being used
indiscriminately, e. g. {%yad vadasi mām,%} that which
thou sayest to me; {%mām abhi vadati,%} he speaks
to me; {%kiṃ vadāmi%} or {%vade,%} what must I say?
{%maivaṃ vada%} or {%vadasva,%} do not speak so; {%sa-%}
{%tyaṃ vada%} or {%vadasva,%} speak the truth; {%devānāṃ%}
{%vacanāt tvāṃ vadāmi%} or {%vade,%} I speak to thee in
the name of the gods; {%prativākyaṃ vada%} or {%vada-%}
{%sva,%} speak a reply); to speak about, declare, proclaim,
announce, communicate, inform, notify; to maintain,
affirm; to designate, call, name; to raise the voice,
sign, utter a cry (said of birds &c.); to discuss, dispute
about, contend, quarrel (Ved. A.); to be called, be con-
sidered (Ved. A.); to state authoritatively (?), be an
authority (A.); to exert one's self, strive for (A.):
Pass. {%udyate,%} Aor. {%avādi,%} Part. {%udita%} (see 2. {%udita%}),
to be said or spoken, to be addressed or spoken to;
to be declared or announced, to be published or
proclaimed: Caus. {%vādayati, -yate, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%avīvadat,%} to cause to speak or say, to urge or invite
to speak; to cause to sound forth, play (a musical
instrument; generally P.), to play music; to cause
to be played by any one (inst.); to speak, recite,
rehearse: Pass. of Caus. {%vādyate:%} Desid. {%vivadi-%}
{%ṣati, -te,%} to desire to speak: Intens. {%vāvadyate,%}
{%vāvatti, vāvadīti,%} to speak aloud; to sound loudly;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὕδ-ω, ὑδ-έ-ω, ὕδ-η-ς, ἀ(ϝ)είδ-ω, ἀοιδό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀοιδή, ἀηδών,</lang> (according to some) <lang n="greek">αὐδή, αὐδάω,</lang>
(perhaps also) <lang n="greek">φράζω, φραδάω:</lang> (probably) Lat. <nsi>vas</nsi>
<nsi>(vad-is):</nsi> (perhaps) Old Germ. <nsi>far-wāzan:</nsi> Old
Sax. <nsi>for-wātan:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>vad-i-n-u,</nsi> ‘I call:' Slav.
<nsi>vad-i-ti, vāda,</nsi> ‘accusation;’ <nsi>us-ta,</nsi> ‘mouth:’ Hib.
<nsi>feadaim,</nsi> ‘I say;' (perhaps) <nsi>luadhaim,</nsi> ‘I men-
tion;’ <nsi>raidim,</nsi> ‘I say.’]
<LEND>

<L>41048<pc>0882-a<k1>vada<k2>vada
{%Vada, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking, able to speak, speak-
ing well or sensibly, (frequently at the end of comps.;
cf. {%priyaṃ-v˚, ku-v˚%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of a so-called
Veda (with the Magians).
<LEND>

<L>41049<pc>0882-a<k1>vadaka<k2>vadaka
{%Vadaka = vada%}¦ in {%dur-vadaka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41050<pc>0882-a<k1>vadat<k2>vadat
{%Vadat, an, antī, at,%}¦ speaking, saying, telling.
<LEND>

<L>41051<pc>0882-a<k1>vadana<k2>vadana
{%Vadana, am,%}¦ n. the act of speaking or saying;
sounding (Ved.); the mouth, face, countenance,
({%kāla-vadana,%} ‘the face of Time,’ N. of a Śaiva
work), aspect, appearance, look; the front, point;
the first term, initial quantity or term of a progres-
sion (in algebra); the summit or apex of a triangle;
[cf. Hib. <nsi>aodann,</nsi> ‘the face;’ <nsi>eudan,</nsi> ‘the fore-
head.’] {%—Vadana-dantura, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Vadana-madirā,%} f. the wine or nectar of the
mouth. {%—Vadana-roga, as,%} m. mouth-disease.
{%—Vadana-śyāmikā,%} f. blackness of the face; a
kind of disease. {%—Vadana-saroja, am,%} n. ‘face-
lotus, ‘the face of a mistress. {%—Vadanāmaya (˚na-%}
{%ām˚), as,%} m. mouth-disease, face-sickness. {%—Vada-%}
{%nāsava (˚na-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘mouth-liquor,’ saliva,
spittle. {%—Vadanī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to
become a face, be changed into a face. {%—Vadanī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} changed into a face. {%—Vada-%}
{%nendu (˚na-in˚), us,%} m. ‘face-moon,’ the face.
<LEND>

<L>41052<pc>0882-a<k1>vadanta<k2>vadanta
{%Vadanta%}¦ in {%kiṃ-v˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41053<pc>0882-a<k1>vadanti<k2>vadanti
{%Vadanti, is,%}¦ or {%vadantī,%} f. speech, discourse, talk,
(according to some only used in {%kiṃ-v˚,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>41054<pc>0882-a<k1>vadantika<k2>vadantika
{%Vadantika, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>41055<pc>0882-a<k1>vadanya<k2>vadanya
{%Vadanya, as, ā, am, = vadānya%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>41056<pc>0882-a<k1>vadamAna<k2>vadamAna
{%Vadamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking, saying, telling;
calling; explaining, declaring; glorifying, boasting.
<LEND>

<L>41057<pc>0882-a<k1>vadAnya<k2>vadAnya
{%Vadānya, as, ā, am,%}¦ eloquent, speaking kindly
or agreeably, affable; bountiful, liberal, munificent,
(in this sense probably for 1. {%ava-dānya); (as),%}
m., N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>41058<pc>0882-a<k1>vadAvada<k2>vadAvada
{%Vadāvada, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%vadāvadin, ī, inī, i%}
(probably an old Intens., cf. 2. {%mahāmaha%}), speak-
ing much, talkative, chattering, speaking, a speaker;
able to speak well, eloquent.
<LEND>

<L>41059<pc>0882-a<k1>vaditavya<k2>vaditavya
{%Vaditavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be said or spoken.
<LEND>
[Page0882-b+ 76]

<L>41060<pc>0882-b<k1>vaditf<k2>vaditf
{%Vaditṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ saying, speaking, a speaker.
<LEND>

<L>41061<pc>0882-b<k1>vadizWa<k2>vadizWa
{%Vadiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. speaking very well,
speaking best.
<LEND>

<L>41062<pc>0882-b<k1>vadya<k2>vadya
{%Vadya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken &c., (used only
in comp., cf. {%a-vadya, an-avadya%}); an epithet of
the days of the dark lunar fortnight, (see {%vadya-%}
{%pakṣa%}); ({%am%}), n. speech, speaking about, con-
versing, (only at the end of a comp., cf. {%brahma-v˚,%}
{%satya-v˚.%}) {%—Vadya-pakṣa, as,%} m. the dark fort-
night of the lunar month (in which the moon is
waning).
<LEND>

<L>41063<pc>0882-b<k1>vadara<k2>vadara
{#vadara#}¦ {%vadara, vadari,%} &c. See {%badara,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>41064<pc>0882-b<k1>vadarika<k2>vadarika
{%Vadarika, as,%}¦ m. a jujube tree.
<LEND>

<L>41065<pc>0882-b<k1>vadAma<k2>vadAma
{#vadAma#}¦ {%vadāma, as,%} m. (fr. the Persian
<lang n="arabic">بادام</lang>), an almond.
<LEND>

<L>41066<pc>0882-b<k1>vadAla<k2>vadAla
{#vadAla#}¦ {%vadāla, as,%} m. a kind of Silurus or
sheat-fish; an eddy or whirlpool.
<LEND>

<L>41067<pc>0882-b<k1>vadAlaka<k2>vadAlaka
{%Vadālaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= vadāla,%} a kind of sheat-fish.
<LEND>

<L>41068<pc>0882-b<k1>vadi<k2>vadi
{#vadi#}¦ {%vadi,%} ind. (according to some for {%ba-%}
{%di,%} contracted fr. {%bahula-dina,%} but cf. {%vadya%}), in
the dark half of any month, (affixed to the names of
months in giving dates at the end of MSS.; cf.
{%vaiśākha-v˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>41069<pc>0882-b<k1>vaddivAsa<k2>vaddivAsa
{#vaddivAsa#}¦ {%vaddivāsa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>41070<pc>0882-b<k1>vadDrI<k2>vadDrI
{#vadDrI#}¦ {%vaddhrī.%} See under {%vadhra,%} p. 883.
<LEND>

<L>41071<pc>0882-b<k1>vaD<k2>vaD
{#vaD#}¦ {%vadh%} (a defective rt. frequently
written {%badh,%} see 3. {%badh,%} properly only
used in the Aorist and Precative tenses, the other tenses
being supplied fr. rt. {%han,%} q. v.), Aor. P. A. {%ava-%}
{%dhīt, avadhiṣṭa, (mā vadhiṣṭhāḥ,%} do not kill);
Prec. 1st sing. {%vadhyāsam,%} 3rd sing. {%vadhyāt,%} (in
the Veda the Potential also occurs, e. g. 1st sing.
{%vadheyam,%} 3rd sing. {%vadhet;%} in epic poetry the
2nd Fut. P. A. {%vadhiṣyati, -te,%} and some tenses
and forms of the Pass.; other Vedic forms are {%va-%}
{%dhīm, vadhiṣṭana%}), to strike; to slay, kill, put
to death, destroy, murder: Pass. {%vadhyate%} (ep. P.
{%vadhyati%}), 3rd sing. Impv. {%vadhyatām,%} Aor. {%ava-%}
{%dhi,%} Prec. {%vadhiṣīṣṭa,%} to be slain or killed: Caus.
{%vadhyati, -yitum,%} to kill, slay; [cf. according to
some, Lat. <nsi>lœdo:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>fœthaim,</nsi> ‘I kill;’ <nsi>fœthadh,</nsi>
‘killing;’ <nsi>fesaim,</nsi> ‘I kill, destroy;’ <nsi>feadhm,</nsi> ‘kill-
ing.’]
<LEND>

<L>41072<pc>0882-b<k1>vaDa<k2>vaDa
{%Vadha, as,%}¦ m. one who kills or slays, a killer,
slaughterer; a vanquisher, victor; a deadly weapon,
Indra's thunderbolt (Ved.); the act of striking, kill-
ing, slaying, slaughter, murder, death, destruction;
a blow, stroke, corporal punishment; paralysis;
destruction, disappearance (said of inanimate objects);
multiplication. {%—Vadha-karmādhikārin (˚ma-%}
{%adh˚), ī,%} m. ‘one who superintends the act of put-
ting to death,’ an executioner, hangman. {%—Vadha-%}
{%kāṅkṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} wishing for death. {%—Vadha-%}
{%kāmyā,%} f. the desire to kill, intention to hurt.
{%—Vadha-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%} living by the death (of
animals); ({%ī%}), m. a butcher; a hunter, fowler.
 — 1. {%vadha-tra, as, ā, am%} (for 2. {%vadhatra%}
see col. 3), protecting from death or destruction.
{%—Vadha-daṇḍa,%} capital punishment; corporal
punishment (e. g. whipping &c., Manu VIII. 129).
{%—Vadha-nirṇeka, as,%} m. expiation for killing,
atonement for murder or manslaughter. {%—Vadha-%}
{%bhūmi, is,%} f. execution-ground, place of execution.
{%—Vadha-sthalī,%} f. or {%vadha-sthāna, am,%} n. a
place of execution; a slaughter-house. {%—Vadhāṅ-%}
{%gaka (˚dha-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a prison. {%—Vadhārha%}
{%(˚dha-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} deserving death. {%—Vadhai-%}
{%ṣin (˚dha-eṣ˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} desirous of killing, in-
tending to kill. {%—Vadhodarka (˚dha-ud˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} resulting in death, effecting death. {%—Vadhodyata%}
{%(˚dha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} prepared or ready to kill,
intending to put to death, murderous; an assassin,
murderer. {%—Vadhopāya (˚dha-up˚), as,%} m. an in-
strument or means of putting to death.
<LEND>

<L>41073<pc>0882-b<k1>vaDaka<k2>vaDaka
{%Vadhaka, as, akā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} killing, destructive,
pernicious, injurious; ({%as%}), m. one who kills, a
[Page0882-c+ 79]
murderer, assassin; an executioner, hangman, (also
written {%badhaka%}); a particular sort of reed or rush.
<LEND>

<L>41074<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDatra<k2>vaDatra<h>2
2. {%vadhatra, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. {%vadha-tra%} see
col. 2), ‘an instrument of death,’ deadly weapon,
dart.
<LEND>

<L>41075<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDanA<k2>vaDanA
{%Vadhanā,%}¦ f., Ved. a deadly weapon.
<LEND>

<L>41076<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDar<k2>vaDar
{%Vadhar,%}¦ n., Ved. a destructive weapon, the weapon
or thunderbolt of Indra, a thunderbolt ({%= vajra%}).
<LEND>

<L>41077<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDarya<k2>vaDarya
{%Vadharya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vadharyati,%} &c., to desire
the thunderbolt of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>41078<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDaryat<k2>vaDaryat
{%Vadharyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ desiring the thunderbolt
of Indra; ({%antī%}), f. ‘casting a bolt,’ i. e. (according
to some) lightning; (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
I. 161, 9) a line of clouds or the earth.
<LEND>

<L>41079<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDas<k2>vaDas
{%Vadhas = vadhar%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>41080<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDasna<k2>vaDasna
{%Vadhasna%}¦ (apparently only used in the inst. pl.
{%vadhasnais%}), Ved. a destructive or deadly weapon,
the weapon of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>41081<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDasnu<k2>vaDasnu
{%Vadhasnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. bearing a deadly
weapon, (Sāy. {%= prahāreṇa prasravaṇa-śīla.%})
<LEND>

<L>41082<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDika<k2>vaDika
{%Vadhika,%}¦ musk.
<LEND>

<L>41083<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDitra<k2>vaDitra
{%Vadhitra, am,%}¦ n. the god of love, love, sexual
love.
<LEND>

<L>41084<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDin<k2>vaDin
{%Vadhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ incurring death, killed by, (at
the end of a comp.)
<LEND>

<L>41085<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDya<k2>vaDya
{%Vadhya, as, ā, am%}¦ (frequently written {%badhya%}),
to be slain or killed, to be put to death, punished
with death; to be punished or chastised, to be cor-
porally punished, subject to corporal punishment;
vulnerable, liable to be killed, to be destroyed, to
be annihilated; ({%as%}), m. an enemy. {%—Vadhya-ghna,%}
{%as,%} m. killing one sentenced to death, carrying out
the duties of public executioner. {%—Vadhya-tā,%} f. or
{%vadhya-tva, am,%} n. the state of being sentenced to
be killed or of deserving death; fitness to be killed;
destruction. {%—Vadhya-paṭaha, as,%} m. a drum
beaten at the time of the execution of a criminal.
{%—Vadhya-bhū, ūs,%} or {%vadhya-bhūmi, is,%} f. a
place of public execution. {%—Vadhya-mālā,%} f. a gar-
land placed on one condemned to death or about to
be executed. {%—Vadhya-vāsas, as,%} n. the clothes of
a criminal who has been executed (given to a Caṇ-
ḍāla, Manu X. 56). {%—Vadhya-śilā,%} f. a stone or
rock on which malefactors are executed, executioner's
block, scaffold; a slaughter-house, shambles. {%—Va-%}
{%dhya-sthāna, am,%} n. a place of execution.
<LEND>

<L>41086<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDyat<k2>vaDyat
{%Vadhyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being struck, being killed.
<LEND>

<L>41087<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDyamAna<k2>vaDyamAna
{%Vadhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being killed, being
destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>41088<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDyA<k2>vaDyA
{%Vadhyā,%}¦ f. killing, murder; [cf. {%ātma-v˚, brah-%}
{%ma-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41089<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDri<k2>vaDri
{%Vadhri, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. ‘one whose testicles are
cut out, ‘castrated, emasculated, unmanly ({%= chinna-%}
{%muṣka,%} opposed to {%vṛṣan%}). {%—Vadhri-matī,%} f.
(fem. of an unused form {%vadhri-mat%}), Ved. having
an impotent husband; a proper N. {%—Vadhri-vāc,%}
{%k, k, k,%} Ved. speaking unmanly or useless words, idly
talking, (Sāy. {%= jalpaka.%}) {%—Vadhry-aśva, as,%} m.
‘having castrated horses,’ a proper N.; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the family of Vadhry-aśva.
<LEND>

<L>41090<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDrikA<k2>vaDrikA
{%Vadhrikā,%}¦ m. (Pāṇ. I. 2, 52, Vārtt. 3), a cas-
trated person, eunuch.
<LEND>

<L>41091<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDA<k2>vaDA
{#vaDA#}¦ {%vadhā,%} ind. a various reading for
{%vadhvā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41092<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDu<k2>vaDu
{#vaDu#}¦ {%vadhu, vadhukā.%} See p. 883, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>41093<pc>0882-c<k1>vaDU<k2>vaDU
{#vaDU#}¦ {%vadhū, ūs,%} f. (fr. {%vadh%} = rt. 1. {%vah;%} or,
according to others, fr. rt. {%bandh,%} and then more
properly written {%badhū%}), a bride or newly mar-
ried woman (as ‘recently brought or led home’), a
young wife, spouse; a woman in general, female,
girl, maiden, (in Ṛg-veda VIII. 19, 36. perhaps ‘a
handmaid’ or ‘female slave’ or, according to some,
‘a mare or animal used for draught;’ cf. {%vadhū-%}
{%mat%}); the female of any animal (e. g. {%mṛga-%}
{%vadhū,%} the female of a deer, cf. {%vyāghra-v˚%}); a
daughter-in-law; the wife of a younger relation,
younger brother's wife, nephew's wife, younger
female relation; N. of various plants, Trigonella
Corniculata; Echites Frutescens; Curuma Zerumbet;
[Page0883-a+ 77]
[cf. Hib. <nsi>badhbh,</nsi> ‘an evil-minded woman, witch.’]
{%—Vadhū-kāla, as,%} m. the time during which a
woman is held to be a bride. {%—Vadhū-gṛha-pra-%}
{%veśa%} or {%vadhū-praveśa, as,%} m. the ceremony of the
entrance of a bride into the house of her husband.
{%—Vadhū-jana, as,%} m. a woman, female, wife.
{%—Vadhū-darśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. looking at a
bride. {%—Vadhū-pakṣa, as,%} m. the party or side of
the bride (at a wedding). {%—Vadhū-patha, as,%} m.,
Ved. the path or way of a bride. {%—Vadhū-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having or possessing a wife, ac-
companied by a wife, having women; furnished or
harnessed with yoke animals or with female animals
suitable for draught; fit for harness, suitable for the
yoke. {%—Vadhū-vastra, am,%} n. bridal apparel. {%—Va-%}
{%dhū-sarā,%} f., N. of a river (fabled to have sprung
from the weeping eyes of Pulomā, wife of Bhṛgu).
<LEND>

<L>41094<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDu<k2>vaDu
{%Vadhu, us,%}¦ or {%vadhukā,%} f. {%= vadhū,%} a young wife
or woman in general; a son's wife, daughter-in-law.
<LEND>

<L>41095<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDuwI<k2>vaDuwI
{%Vadhuṭī%}¦ or {%vadhūṭī,%} f. a young woman living in
her father's house (whether married or not); a son's
wife, daughter-in-law.
<LEND>

<L>41096<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDUyu<k2>vaDUyu
{%Vadhūyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. one who loves his wife,
longing for a wife, desiring marriage, eager to marry,
uxorious, lustful; one who seeks a wife, a wooer,
suitor.
<LEND>

<L>41097<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDvatI<k2>vaDvatI
{%Vadhvatī,%}¦ f. {%= vadhūṭī.%}
<LEND>

<L>41098<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDUwaSayana<k2>vaDUwaSayana
{#vaDUwaSayana#}¦ {%vadhūṭaśayana, as,%} m. a lattice,
window.
<LEND>

<L>41099<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDna<k2>vaDna
{#vaDna#}¦ {%vadhna, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people,
(more correctly written {%vadhra.%})
<LEND>

<L>41100<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDya<k2>vaDya
{#vaDya#}¦ {%vadhya,%} &c. See p. 882, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41101<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDra<k2>vaDra
{#vaDra#}¦ {%vadhra, am,%} n. (more properly written
{%badhra,%} q. v.), a leathern strap or thong; lead; ({%ī%}),
f. a leathern strap or thong, (sometimes spelt {%vad-%}
{%dhrī.%})
<LEND>

<L>41102<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDraka<k2>vaDraka
{%Vadhraka,%}¦ lead.
<LEND>

<L>41103<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDrasva<k2>vaDrasva
{%Vadhrasva,%}¦ a various reading for {%vadhry-aśva.%}
<LEND>

<L>41104<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDrya<k2>vaDrya
{%Vadhrya, as,%}¦ m. (also written {%badhrya%}), a shoe,
slipper.
<LEND>

<L>41105<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDri<k2>vaDri
{#vaDri#}¦ {%vadhri,%} &c. See p. 882, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41106<pc>0883-a<k1>vaDvA<k2>vaDvA
{#vaDvA#}¦ {%vadhvā,%} ind., see Gaṇa Cādi to Pāṇ.
I. 4, 57.
<LEND>

<L>41107<pc>0883-a<k1>van<k2>van<h>1
{#van#} 1¦. {%van,%} cl. 1. P. {%vanati,%} &c., to
sound; to serve, honour, worship, help,
aid; cl. 8. P. A. {%vanoti, vanute, vavāna, vavane,%}
&c. (Vedic forms {%vanāti, vanās, vavanma, vavne,%}
{%vaṃsāma, vaṃsīmahi, vanuyāma, vanavat [ =%}
{%vanuyāt = hiṃsyāt], vaniṣat, vanuṣanta, vani-%}
{%ṣanta, vanta%} [as if cl. 2], {%vaṃsva, vāvanas, vā-%}
{%vandhi%}), Inf. {%vanitum%} (Ved. {%[pra]vantave%}), to
ask, request, beg, seek; (the following senses are
mostly peculiar to Ved.), to like, love; to wish, de-
sire; to obtain, acquire, procure, furnish, offer, give;
to gain or obtain by conquest, become master of,
conquer, possess; to make ready, prepare for, aim
at; to hurt, injure: Caus. {%vanayati%} (when com-
bined with preps.), {%vānayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
sound, &c.; to act, transact business; to hurt, kill;
(the rt. {%van%} in cl. 10. 1. {%vānayati, vanati,%} &c.
also means ‘to confide,’ ‘believe in,’ but in this sense
is a various reading for rt. 2. {%tan,%} q. v.); [cf. per-
haps Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀνίνημι, ὀνήσω, ὄνειαρ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>Ven-us, ve-</nsi>
<nsi>nustas, veneror;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vens;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wini,</nsi>
<nsi>winia, wunna;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wyn, ge-wenian, to-</nsi>
<nsi>wenan;</nsi> (according to some also) Gr. <lang n="greek">φένω, φόνος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">φονεύς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>funus;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>bana,</nsi> ‘death.’]
<LEND>

<L>41108<pc>0883-a<k1>vata<k2>vata<h>2
2. {%vata, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 881, col. 2), sounded,
spoken, uttered; asked, begged; killed, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>41109<pc>0883-a<k1>vati<k2>vati
{%Vati, is,%}¦ f. (perhaps) asking, begging, (see Pāṇ. VI.
4, 37.)
<LEND>

<L>41110<pc>0883-a<k1>van<k2>van<h>2
2. {%van%}¦ (only used in the loc. and gen. pl. {%vaṃsu,%}
{%vanām%}), Ved. = 1. {%vana,%} a wooden vessel, (accord-
ing to Sāy. {%vaṃsu = udakeṣu); = araṇi,%} the wood
used for kindling fire by attrition, (according to Sāy.
{%garbho vanām%} = the offspring of the pieces of wood
so used); love, worship (according to some).
<LEND>
[Page0883-b+ 81]

<L>41111<pc>0883-b<k1>vana<k2>vana<h>1
1. {%vana, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. {%vana%} see p. 885, col. 1), a
wood, forest, grove, thicket, a quantity of lotuses or
other plants growing in a thick bed or cluster (e. g.
{%kumuda-v˚,%} a bed or cluster of water-lilies); wood,
timber; a wooden vessel or barrel (for the Soma
juice); ‘the vessel in the sky,’ i. e. a cloud (Ved.);
water (Ved.); a fountain, spring; a place of abode,
residence; dwelling in a forest, residence abroad;
(according to Naigh. I. 4) {%= raśmi,%} a ray of light;
(according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 24, 7) light ({%=%}
{%tejas%}); the body of a carriage (so suggested by
modern scholars as an interpretation in Ṛg-veda VIII.
34, 18); worshipping; (perhaps) longing, earnest
desire; Cyperus Rotundus; ({%ā%}), f. {%= araṇi,%} wood
used to produce fire by attrition; (in Ṛg-veda III.
1, 13) Wood for so kindling fire personified; ({%ī%}), f.
a wood, forest; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Uśīnara;
of one of the ten orders of mendicants founded by
a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya, the members of which
order affix {%vana%} to their names; [cf. {%rāmendra-%}
{%vana.%}] {%—Vana-kacu, us,%} m. the plant Arum Colo-
casia. {%—Vana-kaṇā,%} f. wild pepper. {%—Vana-kaṇ-%}
{%ḍula (?) , as,%} m. {%= vana-śūraṇa%}. {%—Vana-kadalī,%}
f. wild banana or plantain. {%—Vana-kanda, as,%} m.,
N. of two kinds of tuberous plants {%(= vana-śūraṇa,%}
{%dharaṇī-kanda)%}. {%—Vana-kapīvat, ān,%} m., N. of
a son of Pulaha, (also read {%ghana-k˚, dhana-k˚.%})
{%—Vana-karin, ī,%} m. a wild elephant. {%—Vana-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} loving the forest, fond of wander-
ing in woods. {%—Vana-kārpāsī,%} f. the wild cotton
tree, (also written {%vana-kārpāsi.%}) {%—Vana-kukkuṭa,%}
{%as,%} m. a wild fowl, jungle fowl. {%—Vana-kuñjara,%}
{%as,%} m. a wild elephant. {%—Vana-kokilaka, am,%} n.
a kind of metre, four times ˘˘˘˘¯˘¯, ˘˘˘¯˘˘,
¯˘˘¯ {%—Vana-koli, is,%} f. the wild jujube. {%—Vana-%}
{%krakṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (perhaps) crackling or
bubbling in the Soma vessel; (according to Sāy.)
scattered or distributed in wooden vessels or attract-
ing water ({%kāṣṭheṣu pātreṣu viprakīrṇa%} or
{%udakānaṃ karṣaka%}); distributing water (accord-
ing to others). {%—Vana-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. a wood,
forest. {%—Vana-gaja, as,%} m. a wild elephant. {%—Vana-%}
{%gava, as,%} m. the wild ox, Bos Gavæus. {%—Vana-%}
{%gahana, am,%} n. the depth or thick part of a forest;
a thicket. {%—Vana-gupta, as,%} m. a spy, emissary.
{%—Vana-gulma, as,%} m. a forest shrub or bush,
wild shrub. {%—Vana-go, gaus,%} f. the Gāyal, Bos
Gavæus. {%—Vana-gocara, as, ā, am,%} dwelling in a
forest, frequenting forests; living in water; ({%as%}), m.
a hunter, forester; ({%am%}), n. a forest. {%—Vana-gholī,%}
f. {%= araṇya-gholī%}. {%—Vanaṅ-karaṇa, am,%} n., Ved.
‘water-making (?),’ epithet of a particular part of
the body, (Sāy. {%vanam = udakaṃ kriyate visṛj-%}
{%yate yena.%}) {%—Vana-candana, am,%} n. aloe wood
or Agallochum; a sort of pine, Pinus Deodora.
{%—Vana-candrikā,%} f. a kind of jasmine, Jasminum
Zambac. {%—Vana-campaka, as,%} m. the wild Cam-
paka tree. {%—Vana-cara, as, ī, am,%} roaming in
woods, living in a forest, haunting forests, sylvan;
({%as%}), m. an inhabitant of forests, woodman, forester;
a wild animal; the fabulous eight-legged animal
called Śarabha. {%—Vana-caryā,%} f. the roaming about
in a forest, residence in a wood. {%—Vana-cārin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i, = vana-cara%} above. {%—Vana-cchāga, as,%} m.
a wild goat; a boar, hog. {%—Vana-cchid, t, t, t,%}
cutting wood, felling timber; ({%t%}), m. a woodcutter.
{%—Vana-ccheda, as,%} m. cutting timber. {%—Vana-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} forest-born, born or produced in a wood,
sylvan, wild; ({%as%}), m. an elephant, a fragrant grass,
Cyperus Rotundus; N. of certain other plants ({%=%}
{%gulma, vana-śūraṇa, tumburu%}); the wild citron
tree; ({%ā%}), f. Phaseolus Trilobus; the wild cotton tree;
wild ginger; N. of certain other plants ({%= vanyo-%}
{%pādakī, aśva-gandhā, gandha-pattrā, miśreyā%});
({%am%}), n. ‘produced in water,’ a blue lotus-flower.
{%—Vana-jīra, as,%} m. wild cumin. {%—Vana-jīvin, ī,%}
m. ‘living in the wood,’ a woodman, forester.
{%—Vana-tikta, as,%} m. a sort of myrobalan, Termi-
nalia Chebula; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant {%(= śveta-%}
{%buhnā, grīṣmā)%}. {%—Vana-tiktikā,%} f. Clypea Her-
nandifolia. {%—Vana-da, as,%} m. ‘giving or distributing
[Page0883-c+ 81]
rain, ‘a cloud. {%—Vana-damana, as,%} m. {%= araṇya-%}
{%damana%}. {%—Vana-dāraka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people. {%—Vana-dāha, as,%} m. a forest conflagration.
{%—Vana-dīpa, as,%} m. {%= vana-campaka%}. {%—Vana-%}
{%dīya-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a commentator. {%—Vana-%}
{%devatā,%} f. a forest goddess, Dryad. {%—Vana-druma,%}
{%as,%} m. a forest tree, a tree growing in a wood.
{%—Vana-dvipa, as,%} m. a wild elephant. {%—Vana-%}
{%dhārā,%} f. an avenue of trees. {%—Vana-dhiti, is,%} f.,
Ved. (perhaps) a layer of wood to be laid on the
altar; (Sāy.) the instrument to be applied to a forest
to cut down the trees, a hatchet; [cf. {%svadhiti,%}
perhaps for {%sva-dhiti.%}] {%—Vana-dhenu, us,%} f. the
cow or female of the Bos Gavæus. {%—Vana-nitya,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva. {%—Vana-pa, as,%}
m. a forest protector, woodman. {%—Vana-pannaga,%}
{%as,%} m. a serpent living in woods. {%—Vana-parvan,%}
{%a,%} n. ‘forest-Parva,’ N. of the third book of the
Mahā-bhārata (describing the abode of Yudhiṣṭhira
and his brothers, the Pāṇḍava princes, in the Kām-
yaka forest and adjacent district). {%—Vana-pallava,%}
{%as,%} m. Hyperanthera Moringa. {%—Vana-pāṃsula, as,%}
m. a hunter, deer-killer. {%—Vana-pādapa, as,%} m. a
forest tree. {%—Vana-pārśva, as,%} m. the neighbour-
hood of a wood, a wood. {%—Vana-pāla, as,%} m. a
forest protector, woodman; a proper N. {%—Vana-%}
{%pippalī,%} f. wild pepper. {%—Vana-puṣpa, am,%} n. a
forest-flower, field-flower; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of dill, Ane-
thum Sowa. {%—Vanapuṣpa-maya, as, ī, am,%} made
or consisting of forest-flowers. {%—Vana-pūraka, as,%}
m. the wild citron tree. {%—Vana-pūrva, as,%} m., N.
of a village. {%—Vana-prakṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. liv-
ing in water, (a various reading for {%vana-krakṣa.%})
{%—Vana-praveśa, as,%} m. the act of entering a wood,
(especially) a festive procession into a forest for the
purpose of cutting wood for an idol; commencing
to live as a hermit. {%—Vana-prastha,%} a wood situated
on an elevation or on table-land; N. of a place;
({%as, ā, am%}), retiring into a forest, withdrawing into
the woods, leading the life of an anchorite, (see
{%vānaprastha.%}) {%—Vana-priya, as, ā, am,%} loving
the wood, fond of the forest; ({%as%}), m. the Indian
cuckoo; ({%am%}), n. the cinnamon tree, a kind of
Cassia. {%—Vana-phala, am,%} n. wood fruit, wild fruit.
{%—Vana-barbara, vana-barhiṇa,%} &c., see {%vana-v˚.%}
{%—Vana-bhadrikā,%} f. Sida Cordifolia. {%—Vana-bhuj,%}
{%k,%} m. a particular medicinal herb {%(= ṛṣabha).%}
{%—Vana-bhū, ūs,%} f. woody ground, the neighbour-
hood of a wood. {%—Vana-makṣikā,%} f. a gad-fly.
{%—Vana-mallī,%} f. wild jasmine. {%—Vana-mānuṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘wild-man,’ the orang-outang; the Lemur
Tardigradus. {%—Vana-mālā,%} f. a garland of wood-
flowers, the chaplet worn by Kṛṣṇa; a kind of
metre, four times ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯˘¯¯, ˘¯¯˘¯¯˘¯
N. of a work; ({%as, ā, am%}), adorned with a garland
of wood-flowers; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Kṛṣṇa or
Viṣṇu. {%—Vanamālā-dhara, as, ā, am,%} wearing a
chaplet of wood-flowers; ({%am%}), n. a kind of metre,
four times ˘˘˘˘˘¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘¯¯˘¯. {%—Va-%}
{%na-mālikā,%} f. {%= vana-mālā;%} N. of a plant ({%=%}
{%vārāhī-kanda%}); a particular metre ({%= vana-mā-%}
{%linī%}); N. of one of Rādhā's female attendants; of
a river. {%—Vana-mālin, ī, inī, i,%} adorned with a
chaplet of wood-flowers; ({%ī%}), m. epithet of Kṛṣṇa
or Viṣṇu; N. of a poet; ({%inī%}), f. {%= vārāhī,%} (pro-
bably a kind of plant, according to others a female
energy of Kṛṣṇa); N. of the town Dvārakā.
{%—Vanamālīśā%} (fr. {%vana-mālin + īśa%}), f. ‘having
as a husband one adorned with a chaplet of wood-
flowers, i. e. Kṛṣṇa, ‘epithet of Rādhā. {%—Vana-%}
{%muc, k, k, k,%} pouring forth rain, scattering water;
({%k%}), m. a cloud. {%—Vana-mudga, as, ā,%} m. f. a sort
of kidney-bean, Phaseolus Trilobus. {%—Vana-mūta,%}
{%as,%} m. a cloud, {%—Vana-mūrdha-jā,%} f. a kind of
plant {%(= karkaṭa-śṛṅgī)%}. {%—Vana-mūla, as,%} m.
the shrub Tetranthera Lanceifolia. {%—Vana-mūla-%}
{%phala, am,%} n. roots and fruit of the forest. {%—Vana-%}
{%mṛga, as,%} m. a forest deer. {%—Vana-mocā,%} f. wild
plantain. {%—Vana-rakṣaka, as,%} m. the keeper of
a garden or forest. {%—Vana-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of
the forest, ‘the lion; the plant Verbesina Scandens.
[Page0884-a+ 81]
{%—Vana-rāji, is,%} or {%vana-rājī,%} f. a row of trees; a
long tract of forest; a path in a forest; ({%ī%}), f., N.
of a female slave belonging to Vasu-deva; ({%is, is%} or
{%ī, i%}), embellishing or beautifying a forest. {%—Vana-%}
{%rājya, am,%} n., N. of a kingdom. {%—Vana-rāṣṭra%}
or {%vana-rāṣṭraka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Vana-ruha, am,%} n. ‘growing in water,’ a lotus-
flower. {%—Vanarddhi (˚na-ṛd˚), is,%} m. an ornament
of the forest. {%—Vana-lakṣmī, īs,%} f. an ornament of
the wood; the plantain, Musa Sapientum. {%—Vana-%}
{%latā,%} f. a creeper growing in the forest. {%—Vana-%}
{%lekhā,%} f. {%= vana-rāji%}. {%—Vana-varāha, as,%} m. a
wild hog. {%—Vana-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} residing in the
woods. {%—Vana-varvara, as,%} m. a kind of basil,
Ocimum Sanctum. {%—Vana-varvarikā,%} f. a kind of
plant {%(= doṣā-kleśī)%}. {%—Vana-varhiṇa, as,%} m. a
wild peacock. {%—Vanavarhiṇa-tva, am,%} n. the con-
dition of a wild peacock. {%—Vana-vallarī,%} f. a kind
of grass. {%—Vana-vahni, is,%} m. a forest fire, wood
on fire, forest conflagration. {%—Vana-vāta, as,%} m. a
forest wind. {%—Vana-vāsa, as,%} m. the living in a
wood, residence in a forest; a wild or unsettled
manner of life, wandering habits; N. of a country;
({%as, ā, am%}), residing in a forest or wood; ({%as%}), m.
a wood-dweller, inhabitant of forests. {%—Vana-vā-%}
{%saka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Vana-vāsana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘wood-dweller,’ a pole-cat, civet-cat. {%—Vana-%}
{%vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling in a wood; ({%ī%}), m. a
dweller in woods, inhabitant of a forest, forester,
hermit, anchorite; N. of a country in the south of
India; of various plants ({%= ṛṣabha, muṣkaka,%}
{%vārāhī-kanda, śālmalī-kanda, nīla-mahiṣa-%}
{%kanda%}). {%—Vana-vāsya,%} N. of a country {%(= vana-%}
{%vāsin)%}. {%—Vana-vāhyaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Vana-viḍāla, as,%} m. a kind of wild cat, Felis
Caracal. {%—Vana-virodhin, ī,%} m. ‘wood-enemy,’ N.
of one of the Hindū months, (that succeeding Ni-
dāgha, q. v.) {%—Vana-vīja%} or {%vana-vījaka%} or {%vana-%}
{%vīja-pūraka, as,%} m. the wild citron tree. {%—Vana-%}
{%vṛntākī,%} f. the egg-plant. {%—Vana-vrīhi, is,%} m.
wild rice. {%—Vana-śūkarī,%} f. cowach, Mucuna Pru-
ritus. {%—Vana-śūraṇa, as,%} m. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%araṇya-śūraṇa)%}. {%—Vana-śṛṅgāṭa%} or {%vana-śṛṅ-%}
{%gāṭaka, as,%} m. the plant Asteracantha Longifolia.
{%—Vana-śobhana, am,%} n. ‘water-beautifier,’ a lotus-
flower. {%—Vana-śvan, ā,%} m. ‘forest-dog,’ a jackal;
a tiger; a civet-cat, pole-cat. {%—Vana-ṣad, t, t, t,%}
{%= vana-sad%} below. {%—Vana-saṅkaṭa, as,%} m. a sort
of pulse, Ervum Hirsutum. {%—Vana-sad, t, t, t,%} abid-
ing or dwelling in a wood; ({%t%}), m. a forester. {%—Va-%}
{%na-sannivāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling in a forest; ({%ī%}),
m. a forester. {%—Vana-samūha, as,%} m. a thick
forest, a quantity of groves or forests, a thick wood.
{%—Vana-sampraveśa, as,%} m. the entering into a
wood, (especially) a festive procession into a forest
for the purpose of cutting wood for an idol. {%—Vana-%}
{%sarojinī,%} f. the wild cotton plant. {%—Vana-sāhvayā,%}
f. a kind of creeping plant {%(= vanyopādakī)%}. {%—Va-%}
{%na-stamba, as,%} m., N. of a son of Gada. {%—Vana-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} forest-abiding, living in the wood;
({%as%}), m. a deer, gazelle; a hermit, ascetic; ({%ā%}), f.
the holy fig-tree {%(= aśvathī)%}. {%—Vana-sthalī,%} f. the
neighbourhood of a forest, a wood. {%—Vana-sthāna%} (?),
N. of a kingdom. {%—Vana-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} being
or abiding in a wood; ({%ī%}), m. a hermit, anchorite.
{%—Vana-sthita, as, ā, am,%} situate or being in a
forest. {%—Vanas-pati, is,%} m. ({%vanas%} probably a form
of the gen., cf. {%rathas-pati%}), ‘the king of the wood,’
a large forest tree, a large tree bearing fruit, but
apparently having no blossoms (as several species of
the fig, the jack-tree, &c.); any tree; the god of
large trees, (in Ṛg-veda VIII. 23, 25. Agni is
described as ‘the son of the Vanaspatis’); the Soma
plant (regarded as the king of plants); Bignonia
Suaveolens; a stem, trunk; a beam, timber, pole,
post; the sacrificial posts (enumerated among the
Āprī divinities); an offering to Vanas-pati; the
timber of which a car or carriage is made (Ved.);
a drum made of wood (Ved.); a wooden amulet; a
block on which criminals are executed; an ascetic;
N. of a son of Ghṛta-pṛṣṭha. {%—Vanaspati-kāya, %}
[Page0884-b+ 81]
{%as,%} m. the whole body or world of plants. {%—Vanas-%}
{%pati-sava, as,%} m., N. of an Ekāha. {%—Vana-sraj, k%} or
{%g,%} f. a garland of forest-flowers. {%—Vana-hari, is,%} m.
a lion (?). {%—Vana-haridrā,%} f. wild turmeric. {%—Va-%}
{%na-hāsa, as,%} m. a sort of grass, Saccharum Spon-
taneum; a fragrant oleander. {%—Vana-hāsaka, as,%}
m. Saccharum Spontaneum. {%—Vana-hutāśana (˚ta-%}
{%aś˚), as,%} m. a forest conflagration. {%—Vanākampa%}
{%(˚na-āk˚), as,%} m. the shaking of the trees of a wood
by the wind. {%—Vanākhu (˚na-ākhu), us,%} m. ‘wood-
rat, ‘a hare. {%—Vanākhuka, as,%} m. a sort of bean,
Phaseolus Mungo. {%—Vanāgni (˚na-ag˚), is,%} m. a
forest conflagration, burning of a wood. {%—Vanāja%}
{%(˚na-aja), as,%} m. the wild goat. {%—Vanāṭana (˚na-%}
{%aṭ˚), am,%} n. the act of roaming or wandering about
in a forest. {%—Vanāṭu (˚na-āṭu?), us,%} m. ‘wood-
roamer,’ a kind of blue fly. {%—Vanādhivāsin (˚na-%}
{%adh˚), ī, inī, i,%} dwelling in a forest. {%—Vanānta%}
{%(˚na-an˚), as,%} m. the skirts of a wood, neighbour-
hood of a forest; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a wood for a
boundary, bounded by a wood. {%—Vanāntara (˚na-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. the middle or interior of a wood, ({%va-%}
{%nāntarāt,%} out of the wood); another wood. {%—Va-%}
{%nāntara-cara, as, ā, am,%} wandering about in a
forest. {%—Vanāpaga (˚na-ap˚),%} a forest stream,
river. {%—Vanābjinī (˚na-ab˚),%} f. a lotus-plant grow-
ing in the water. {%—Vanābhilāva (˚na-abh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} wood-destroying. {%—Vanāmala (˚na-ām˚), as,%}
m. ({%āmala%} for {%āmalaka%}), Carissa Carandas; [cf.
{%kṛṣṇa-pāka.%}] {%—Vanāmbikā (˚na-am˚),%} f., N. of
a tutelary divinity in the family of Dakṣa. {%—Va-%}
{%nāmra (˚na-ām˚), as,%} m., N. of a plant {%(= ko-%}
{%śāmra)%}. {%—Vanāriṣṭā (˚na-ar˚),%} f. wild turmeric
{%(= vana-haridrā)%}. {%—Vanārcaka (˚na-ar˚), as,%} m.
‘wood-worshipper,’ a flower-gatherer, florist, maker of
garlands. {%—Vanārdrakā (˚na-ār˚),%} f. wild ginger;
({%am%}), n. the root of wild ginger. {%—Vanālakta (˚na-%}
{%al˚), am,%} n. ‘wild lac,’ red earth, ruddle. {%—Vanā-%}
{%laya (˚na-āl˚), as,%} m. a forest-abode, forest-habita-
tion. {%—Vanālaya-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%} living in forests.
{%—Vanālikā (˚na-al˚),%} f. a sun-flower, Heliotropium
Indicum. {%—Vanālī (˚na-ālī),%} f. {%= vana-rājī%}. {%—Va-%}
{%nāśrama (˚na-āś˚), as,%} m. abode in the forest, the
third Āśrama or stage in a Brāhman's life (when he
is a Vānaprastha or hermit, see {%āśrama%}). {%—Vanā-%}
{%śramin, ī,%} m. (fr. the preceding), a Vānaprastha or
Brāhman dwelling in the woods, one in the third
period of life, an anchorite. {%—Vanāśraya (˚na-āś˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} living in the forest; ({%as%}), m. an inha-
bitant of the wood; a sort of crow or raven. {%—Vanā-%}
{%śrita (˚na-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has sought
refuge in the woods, repaired to the forest, leading
the life of a hermit. {%—Vane-kiṃśuka, ās,%} m. pl.
‘Butea Frondosa in the wood,’ anything found unex-
pectedly. {%—Vane-kṣudrā,%} f. the tree Pongamia
Glabra (commonly called Karañja). {%—Vane-cara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} wandering in a forest, dwelling in or
inhabiting a wood; ({%as%}), m. an inhabitant of the
forest, forester, anchorite, hermit; a sylvan, satyr; an
imp, demon; a wild beast. {%—Vanecarāgrya (˚ra-%}
{%ag˚), as,%} m. ‘chief of foresters,’ an ascetic, anchorite,
sage. {%—Vane-jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. born or generated
in the woods. {%—Vane-bilvaka, ās,%} m. pl. an Ægle
Marmelos in the forest; (metaphorically) anything
found unexpectedly. {%—Vane-rāj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. shining
or blazing in the wood; ({%ṭ%}), m. epithet of Agni.
{%—Vane-śaya, as, ā, am,%} living in the woods.
{%—Vane-ṣah%} (i. e. {%vane + sah%}), {%ṣāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved.
overpowering or prevailing in the wood or over the
wood, (Sāy. {%= kāṣṭhānām abhibhavitṛ.%}) {%—Vane-%}
{%sarja, as,%} m. Terminalia Tomentosa. {%—Vanaika-%}
{%deśa (˚na-ek˚), as,%} m. a part of a wood or thicket.
{%—Vanotsāha (˚na-ut˚), as,%} m. a rhinoceros. {%—Va-%}
{%noddeśa (˚na-ud˚), as,%} m. the neighbourhood of a
forest, a particular spot in a wood. {%—Vanodbhava%}
{%(˚na-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} produced in a forest, being in
a wood; ({%ā%}), f. the wild cotton plant. {%—Vanopa-%}
{%plava (˚na-up˚), am,%} n. a forest conflagration.
{%—Vanorvī (˚na-ur˚),%} f. the neighbourhood of a
forest. {%—Vanauka (˚na-oka), as,%} m. {%= vanaukas,%}
an inhabitant of a wood. {%—Vanaukas (˚na-ok˚), %}
[Page0884-c+ 81]
{%ās, ās, as,%} living in a forest; ({%ās%}), m. an inha-
bitant of a wood, a forester; an anchorite, ascetic,
hermit; an animal living in woods, an ape, wild
boar, &c. {%—Vanaugha (˚na-ogha), as,%} m. ‘thick
forest, ‘N. of a district or mountain in the west of
India. {%—Vanauṣadhi (˚na-oṣ˚), is,%} f. a medicinal
herb growing wild.
<LEND>

<L>41112<pc>0884-c<k1>vanad<k2>vanad
{%Vanad,%}¦ m. (only in pl. {%vanadas%}), a praiser,
honourer, one who joins in praising; sounding forth
loudly, praising greatly, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda II. 4, 5. {%vanadaḥ = vanantaḥ = sambhaktāraḥ%}
or may be for {%ava-nadaḥ = bhṛśaṃ śabdayantaḥ%}
{%= stotāraḥ;%} according to Durga {%vanadaḥ%} is for
{%vana-dāḥ,%} ‘givers of the desirable oblation;’ accord-
ing to modern scholars {%vanad%} may perhaps mean
‘longing, earnest desire.’)
<LEND>

<L>41113<pc>0884-c<k1>vanana<k2>vanana
{%Vanana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. longing, desire, (Sāy.)
wealth, {%= dhana; (ā),%} f. (perhaps) wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>41114<pc>0884-c<k1>vananIya<k2>vananIya
{%Vananīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be desired, desir-
able.
<LEND>

<L>41115<pc>0884-c<k1>vananva<k2>vananva
{%Vananva,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vananvati,%} &c., Ved. to be
in possession, be at hand, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII.
102, 19. {%vananvati = kāṣṭhāni hanti,%} [the axe]
fells timber.)
<LEND>

<L>41116<pc>0884-c<k1>vananvat<k2>vananvat
{%Vananvat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. (according to Sāy. {%=%}
{%vanana-vat = dhana-vat = udaka-vat = sam-%}
{%bhakta-vat%}), possessing wealth, &c., bountiful; (ac-
cording to modern scholars) possessing, being in
possession.
<LEND>

<L>41117<pc>0884-c<k1>vanayitf<k2>vanayitf
{%Vanayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who causes to ask, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41118<pc>0884-c<k1>vanas<k2>vanas
{%Vanas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. (perhaps) desire, longing;
attractiveness, loveliness, (Sāy. {%= tejas,%} glory, or
{%dhana,%} wealth); a wood; [cf. Lat. <nsi>venus</nsi> in <nsi>venus-</nsi>
<nsi>tas.</nsi>] {%—Vanar-gu, us, us, u,%} moving about in a wood;
wandering in a forest or wilderness, (Sāy. {%= vana-%}
{%gāmin%}); ({%us%}), m. {%= stena%} (according to Naigh. III.
24). {%—Vanar-ja, as,%} m. a particular plant ({%=%}
{%śṛṅgī%}).
<LEND>

<L>41119<pc>0884-c<k1>vanasa<k2>vanasa
{%Vanasa,%}¦ see Gaṇa Tṛṇādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>41120<pc>0884-c<k1>vanaspati<k2>vanaspati
{%Vanas-pati.%}¦ See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>41121<pc>0884-c<k1>vanasyu<k2>vanasyu
{%Vanasyu%}¦ in {%gir-v˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41122<pc>0884-c<k1>vanAyu<k2>vanAyu
{%Vanāyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Purū-ravas; of a
Dānava; of a district inhabited by the Vanāyus;
({%avas%}), m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Vanāyu-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced or bred in Vanāyu.
<LEND>

<L>41123<pc>0884-c<k1>vani<k2>vani
{%Vani, is,%}¦ m., Ved. fire, Agni, the god of fire;
({%is%}), f. wish, desire; ({%is, is, i%}), used at the end of
comps., see {%brahma-v˚, kṣatra-v˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>41124<pc>0884-c<k1>vanikA<k2>vanikA
{%Vanikā,%}¦ f. a little wood, grove, (in {%aśoka-v˚,%} a grove
of Aśoka trees; also {%aśoka-vanika, am,%} n.)
<LEND>

<L>41125<pc>0884-c<k1>vanikAvAsa<k2>vanikAvAsa
{%Vanikāvāsa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a village.
<LEND>

<L>41126<pc>0884-c<k1>vanita<k2>vanita
{%Vanita, as, ā, am,%}¦ solicited, begged, asked,
wished for, desired, loved; served; ({%ā%}), f. a loved
woman, wife, mistress; a woman in general; the
female of an animal; a particular metre, four times
˘˘¯˘˘¯; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>winia,</nsi> ‘a wife;’ Hib.
<nsi>ban,</nsi> ‘a woman.’] {%—Vanitā-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. hating
women, a misogynist. {%—Vanitā-bhogin, ī,%} m. a
woman like a serpent, serpent of a woman. {%—Va-%}
{%nitā-mukha, ās,%} m. pl. ‘woman-faced,’ N. of a
people. {%—Vanitā-vilāsa, as,%} m. the wantonness of
women.
<LEND>

<L>41127<pc>0884-c<k1>vanitAsa<k2>vanitAsa
{%Vanitāsa, am,%}¦ n., N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>41128<pc>0884-c<k1>vanitf<k2>vanitf
{%Vanitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ an asker, &c.; one who
possesses or owns, a possessor (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>41129<pc>0884-c<k1>vanin<k2>vanin
{%Vanin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. the rt. and in some meanings
fr. 1. {%vana%}), Ved. worshipping, honouring, serving;
desiring, wishing for; distributing, bestowing, giving
(said of the Maruts &c.); rain-dispensing; having
water, granting water, abounding in water; belong-
ing to a wood, living in a wood; filled with or
possessed of wood; ({%ī%}), m. a tree; the Soma plant;
a Brāhman residing in the forest, one in the third
stage of life, a Vānaprastha.
<LEND>

<L>41130<pc>0884-c<k1>vanina<k2>vanina
{%Vanina, am,%}¦ n., Ved. anything growing in a
forest, a tree.
<LEND>

<L>41131<pc>0884-c<k1>vanila<k2>vanila
{%Vanila,%}¦ see Gaṇa Kāśādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>41132<pc>0884-c<k1>vanizWa<k2>vanizWa
{%Vaniṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. obtaining most;
bestowing or imparting most, very munificent or
liberal, (Sāy. {%= dātṛtama.%})
<LEND>

<L>41133<pc>0884-c<k1>vanizWu<k2>vanizWu
{%Vaniṣṭhu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. part of the entrails of
[Page0885-a+ 75]
an animal offered in sacrifice; the rectum; (according
to others) a part of the intestines near the omentum,
(Sāy. {%= sthavirāntra.%})
<LEND>

<L>41134<pc>0885-a<k1>vanizRu<k2>vanizRu
{%Vaniṣṇu,%}¦ incorrect for {%vaniṣṭhu.%}
<LEND>

<L>41135<pc>0885-a<k1>vanI<k2>vanI
{%Vanī,%}¦ f. See under 1. {%vana,%} p. 883, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41136<pc>0885-a<k1>vanIka<k2>vanIka
{%Vanīka%}¦ or {%vanīpaka%} or {%vanīyaka, as,%} m. a
beggar, mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>41137<pc>0885-a<k1>vanIya<k2>vanIya
{%Vanīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vanīyati,%} &c., to beg, ask
alms; to entreat, request.
<LEND>

<L>41138<pc>0885-a<k1>vanIyas<k2>vanIyas
{%Vanīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ asking or obtaining more,
obtaining most; to be honoured, to be favoured,
(Sāy. {%= sambhajanīya = sambhāvya%}); imparting
or bestowing most.
<LEND>

<L>41139<pc>0885-a<k1>vanIvan<k2>vanIvan
{%Vanīvan, ā, ā, a%}¦ (an Intensive form), asking for,
demanding, (Sāy. {%= vanana-vat.%})
<LEND>

<L>41140<pc>0885-a<k1>vanu<k2>vanu
{%Vanu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. one who plots against or
injures, a malignant or malicious person, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%hiṃsaka%}); an adherent (?).
<LEND>

<L>41141<pc>0885-a<k1>vanuza<k2>vanuza
{%Vanuṣa%}¦ (fr. {%vanus%}), Nom. A. {%vanuṣate,%} &c.,
Ved. to obtain, acquire; (Sāy.) to worship.
<LEND>

<L>41142<pc>0885-a<k1>vanuzya<k2>vanuzya
{%Vanuṣya%}¦ (fr. {%vanus%}), Nom. P. A. {%vanuṣyati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., Ved. to have a design upon, plot against,
seek to injure, to be fond of battle; to emulate
(with inst.); to overpower, defeat, attack, (according
to Naigh. II. 12 {%= krudhyati;%} according to Nirukta
V. 2 {%= hanti%}); (A.) to wish for, desire, (Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda IX. 7, 6. {%vanuṣyate = sevyate.%})
<LEND>

<L>41143<pc>0885-a<k1>vanuzyat<k2>vanuzyat
{%Vanuṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ seeking to injure, ma-
levolent, hostile, an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>41144<pc>0885-a<k1>vanus<k2>vanus
{%Vanus, us, us, us,%}¦ Ved. desiring, anxious for, eager,
zealous; devoted, attached to, loving; enjoying, an
enjoyer, worshipping, a worshipper, honourer, (Sāy.
{%= sambhaktṛ%}); ({%us%}), m. any one eager to injure
(others), an enemy, plotter, warrior; the act of possess-
ing, enjoying, distributing, (Sāy. {%= sambhajana.%})
<LEND>

<L>41145<pc>0885-a<k1>vanejya<k2>vanejya
{%Vanejya, as,%}¦ m. a kind of mango.
<LEND>

<L>41146<pc>0885-a<k1>vaneyu<k2>vaneyu
{%Vaneyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva.
<LEND>

<L>41147<pc>0885-a<k1>vanti<k2>vanti
{%Vanti, is,%}¦ f., see Pāṇ. VI. 4, 39.
<LEND>

<L>41148<pc>0885-a<k1>vantf<k2>vantf
{%Vantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who enjoys or possesses,
a possessor, owner, (Sāy. {%= sambhaktṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>41149<pc>0885-a<k1>vanya<k2>vanya
{%Vanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ growing in woods, of or be-
longing to a wood, forest, produced in a wood, living
in woods, wild, savage; being or existing in a wood
(said of Agni, Ved.); made of wood, wooden; ({%as%}),
m. an animal of the forest, wild animal, wild beast;
a wild plant; N. of particular wild plants {%(= vana-%}
{%śūraṇa, vārāhī-kanda, deva-nāla); (ā),%} f. a
multitude of groves, a large forest; abundance of
water, a flood, deluge; N. of various plants, Physalis
Flexuosa; {%= madgu-parṇī, gopāla-karkaṭī, guñjā,%}
{%miśreyā, bhadra-mustā, gandha-pattrā; (am),%}
n. anything grown in a wood, the fruit or roots of
wild plants; {%= tvaca;%} [cf. other meanings of the
word {%vanya%} in {%cakṣur-v˚, ajīta-punarvaṇya.%}]
{%—Vanya-dvipa, as,%} m. a wild elephant. {%—Vanya-%}
{%pakṣin, ī,%} m. a wild bird, forest bird; [cf. {%pura-%}
{%pakṣin.%}] {%—Vanya-vṛtti, is,%} f. forest fare. {%—Va-%}
{%nyāśana (˚ya-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} eating wild fruits, &c.
{%—Vanyetara (˚ya-it˚), as, ā, at,%} different from
wild tame, civilized.
<LEND>

<L>41150<pc>0885-a<k1>vanyopAdakI<k2>vanyopAdakI
{%Vanyopādakī,%}¦ f. a kind of creeper.
<LEND>

<L>41151<pc>0885-a<k1>vavanvas<k2>vavanvas
{%Vavanvas, vān, uṣī, vat,%}¦ Ved. one who has
desired or asked.
<LEND>

<L>41152<pc>0885-a<k1>vana<k2>vana<h>2
{#vana#} 2¦. {%vana,%} ind. (for 1. {%vana%} see p. 883,
col. 2), see Gaṇa Cādi to Pāṇ. I. 4, 57.
<LEND>

<L>41153<pc>0885-a<k1>vanara<k2>vanara
{#vanara#}¦ {%vanara, as,%} m. {%= vānara.%}
<LEND>

<L>41154<pc>0885-a<k1>vanargu<k2>vanargu
{#vanargu#}¦ {%vanar-gu.%} See under {%vanas,%} p. 884.
<LEND>

<L>41155<pc>0885-a<k1>vanahabandi<k2>vanahabandi
{#vanahabandi#}¦ {%vanahabandi,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>41156<pc>0885-a<k1>vanAhira<k2>vanAhira
{#vanAhira#}¦ {%vanāhira, as,%} m. a hog, wild boar.
<LEND>

<L>41157<pc>0885-a<k1>vanIvAhana<k2>vanIvAhana
{#vanIvAhana#}¦ {%vanīvāhana, am,%} n. (an anoma-
lous Intens. fr. rt. 1. {%vah%}), Ved. the act of carrying
or moving hither and thither.
<LEND>

<L>41158<pc>0885-a<k1>vanOkas<k2>vanOkas
{#vanOkas#}¦ {%vanaukas, vanauṣadhi.%} See
p. 884, cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>41159<pc>0885-a<k1>vantava<k2>vantava
{#vantava#}¦ {%vantava (?) , as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>
[Page0885-b+ 80]

<L>41160<pc>0885-b<k1>vand<k2>vand
{#vand#}¦ {%vand%} (connected with rt. {%vad%}), cl.
1. A. (Ved. and ep. sometimes P.) {%van-%}
{%date, vavande%} (Ved. {%vavanda, vavandima%}), {%avan-%}
{%diṣṭa, vanditum%} (Ved. Inf. {%vandadhyai%}), to
praise, celebrate, laud, extol, eulogize, bless, pro-
nounce a blessing; to show honour, do homage,
salute respectfully, greet, make obeisance to; to
venerate, worship, adore: Pass. {%vandyate,%} Aor.
{%avandi,%} to be praised, &c.: Caus. {%vandayati, -yate,%}
{%-yitum,%} Aor. {%avavandat, avavandata,%} to show
honour to any one, make obeisance to, greet respect-
fully.
<LEND>

<L>41161<pc>0885-b<k1>vanda<k2>vanda
{%Vanda, as, ā, am,%}¦ praising, extolling; [cf. {%deva-%}
{%vanda.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41162<pc>0885-b<k1>vandaka<k2>vandaka
{%Vandaka, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a praiser, &c.; a parasitical
plant.
<LEND>

<L>41163<pc>0885-b<k1>vandaTa<k2>vandaTa
{%Vandatha, as,%}¦ m. a praiser, panegyrist, eulogist,
bard; one deserving praise.
<LEND>

<L>41164<pc>0885-b<k1>vandadvAra<k2>vandadvAra
{%Vandad-vāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. blessing the mul-
titude, i. e. men, (in Sāma-veda I. 1, 2, 3, 6. for
{%vande dārum,%} which is the correct reading in the
corresponding passage of the Ṛg-veda.)
<LEND>

<L>41165<pc>0885-b<k1>vandadvIra<k2>vandadvIra
{%Vandad-vīra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. blessing heroes,
(in Sāma-veda I. 4, 2, 3, 1. for {%mandad-vīra,%}
which is the correct reading in the corresponding
passage of the Ṛg-veda.)
<LEND>

<L>41166<pc>0885-b<k1>vandana<k2>vandana
{%Vandana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Ṛṣi (described in
Ṛg-veda I. 112, 5. as having been cast into a well,
along with Rebha, by the Asuras, and rescued by the
Aśvins); ({%ā%}), f. praise, praising, worship, adoration;
a mark or sign worn on the body (made with ashes
&c.); ({%ī%}), f. making obeisance, reverence, worship,
adoring; begging, soliciting, asking; the hip (?) ; a
drug for reviving the dead; ({%am%}), n. the act of
praising, praise; obeisance to a Brāhman or superior
(by touching the feet &c.), reverence, adoration;
the face, mouth ({%= vadana%}); a parasitical plant
(perhaps a kind of lichen); a disease attacking the
limbs or joints, a cutaneous eruption, scrofula (some-
times personified as a demon). {%—Vandana-mālā%} or
{%vandana-mālikā,%} f. a festoon suspended across gate-
ways (in honour of the arrival of any distinguished
personage, or on the occasion of a marriage or other
festival). {%—Vandana-śrut, t, t, t,%} Ved. listening to
praise, a hearer of praises, (Sāy. {%= stutīnāṃ śrotṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>41167<pc>0885-b<k1>vandanIya<k2>vandanIya
{%Vandanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised or wor-
shipped, praiseworthy, adorable, to be greeted with
homage, to be saluted or made obeisance to; ({%as%}),
m. a yellow-flowering Verbesina; ({%ā%}), f. the yellow
pigment called {%go-rocanā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41168<pc>0885-b<k1>vandamAna<k2>vandamAna
{%Vandamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ praising, celebrating, pro-
nouncing a blessing, honouring, reverencing.
<LEND>

<L>41169<pc>0885-b<k1>vandayitvA<k2>vandayitvA
{%Vandayitvā,%}¦ ind. (fr. the Caus.), having praised,
having saluted or shown honour to, having made
obeisance to.
<LEND>

<L>41170<pc>0885-b<k1>vandA<k2>vandA
{%Vandā,%}¦ f. a parasitical plant, the parasitical plant
Epidendrum Tesselatum, &c.; a female beggar or
mendicant; {%= vandi, vandī.%}
<LEND>

<L>41171<pc>0885-b<k1>vandAka<k2>vandAka
{%Vandāka, as,%}¦ m., {%ā, ī,%} f. a parasitical plant.
<LEND>

<L>41172<pc>0885-b<k1>vandAra<k2>vandAra
{%Vandāra, as,%}¦ m. a parasitical plant.
<LEND>

<L>41173<pc>0885-b<k1>vandAru<k2>vandAru
{%Vandāru, us, us, u,%}¦ praising, celebrating; respect-
ful, reverential, civil, complimentary, polite; ({%us%}), m.
a panegyrist, bard; a proper N.; ({%u%}), n. praise.
<LEND>

<L>41174<pc>0885-b<k1>vandi<k2>vandi<h>1
1. {%vandi, is,%}¦ m. (for 2. {%vandi%} see col. 3), a praiser,
panegyrist, &c. ({%= vandin%}).
<LEND>

<L>41175<pc>0885-b<k1>vandita<k2>vandita
{%Vandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised, extolled, celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>41176<pc>0885-b<k1>vanditavya<k2>vanditavya
{%Vanditavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised or cele-
brated, laudable, to be treated with awe or respect,
one to whom obeisance is to be made.
<LEND>

<L>41177<pc>0885-b<k1>vanditf<k2>vanditf
{%Vanditṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who praises or
celebrates, a praiser.
<LEND>

<L>41178<pc>0885-b<k1>vandin<k2>vandin
{%Vandin, ī,%}¦ m. one who praises or extols, a praiser,
panegyrist, encomiast, bard, poet, herald (whose duty
is to proclaim the titles of a great man as he passes
along, or who sings the praises of a prince in
his presence or accompanies an army to chaunt
martial songs; these bards are regarded as belonging
to a distinct tribe, being considered the descendants
of a Kṣatriya by a Śūdra female); a captive, slave,
(in this sense more properly written {%bandin,%} cf.
[Page0885-c+ 75]
2. {%vandi.%}) {%—Vandi-pāṭha, as,%} m. the panegyric
of a bard or Vandin, eulogium.
<LEND>

<L>41179<pc>0885-c<k1>vandinIkA<k2>vandinIkA
{%Vandinīkā%}¦ or {%vandinīyā,%} f., N. of Dākṣāyaṇī.
<LEND>

<L>41180<pc>0885-c<k1>vandya<k2>vandya
{%Vandya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, laudable, com-
mendable, praiseworthy; to be reverentially saluted,
to be honoured or worshipped, adorable, very vene-
rable; to be regarded or respected; ({%as%}), m. a
proper N.; ({%ā%}), f. {%= vandā,%} a parasitical plant; {%=%}
{%go-rocanā;%} N. of a Yakṣī. {%—Vandya-tā,%} f. lauda-
bility, praiseworthiness, venerableness.
<LEND>

<L>41181<pc>0885-c<k1>vandyamAna<k2>vandyamAna
{%Vandyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being praised or cele-
brated, being saluted or greeted.
<LEND>

<L>41182<pc>0885-c<k1>vandra<k2>vandra
{%Vandra, as, ā, am,%}¦ praising, worshipping, honour-
ing, doing homage; ({%as%}), m. a worshipper, votary,
follower; ({%am%}), n. prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>41183<pc>0885-c<k1>vandi<k2>vandi<h>2
{#vandi#} 2¦. {%vandi, is,%} or {%vandī,%} f. (more pro-
perly written {%bandi, bandī;%} probably connected
with rt. {%bandh,%} cf. the Persian <lang n="arabic">بنده</lang> for 1. {%vandi%}
see col. 2), a captive or prisoner in general
(male or female); a woman in captivity, female
captive or slave; an animal confined in a cage; a
ladder or stairs; plunder, booty, spoil. {%—Vandi-%}
{%grāha, as,%} m. ‘plunder-seizer,’ a housebreaker
(especially one breaking into a temple or place where
sacred fire is preserved). {%—Vandi-caura, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%vandi-grāha%} above. {%—Vandī-kāra, as,%} m. one who
commits robbery, a robber, thief, housebreaker, bur-
glar. {%—Vandī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to make captive, take prisoner, capture,
rob. {%—Vandī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made prisoner, taken
captive. {%—Vandī-pāla, as,%} m. a keeper of prisoners,
a jailor.
<LEND>

<L>41184<pc>0885-c<k1>vandIka<k2>vandIka
{#vandIka#}¦ {%vandīka, as,%} m. (also written {%ban-%}
{%dīka%}), N. of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>41185<pc>0885-c<k1>vanDA<k2>vanDA
{#vanDA#}¦ {%vandhā,%} ind., see Gaṇa Ūry-ādi to
Pāṇ. I. 4, 61.
<LEND>

<L>41186<pc>0885-c<k1>vanDur<k2>vanDur
{#vanDur#}¦ {%vandhur.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>41187<pc>0885-c<k1>vanDura<k2>vanDura
{#vanDura#}¦ {%vandhura, am,%} n. (probably con-
nected with rt. {%bandh%} and perhaps more properly
written {%bandhura%}), the seat of a charioteer, the
fore part of a chariot or place at the end of the
shafts, a carriage-seat or driver's box; the frame-
work [cf. {%hiraṇya-v˚%}] of a carriage, (the word {%van-%}
{%dhuram%} occurs frequently in Ved. and is variously
explained by Sāy. as {%nīḍa-bandhanādhāra-bhūtam,%}
{%unnatānata-rūpa-bandhana-kāṣṭham, veṣṭi-%}
{%taṃ sāratheḥ sthānam, sārathy-āśraya-sthānam,%}
&c.; the car of the Aśvins, which is described as
‘three-wheeled’ as well as triple in other parts of
its construction, is said to be also {%tri-vandhura%} or
{%tri-bandhura,%} i. e. ‘having three poles or pieces
of wood for securing the occupant’ or ‘having a
triple standing-place or seat for the charioteer.’)
{%—Vandhure-ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am%} (i. e. {%vandhure,%}
loc. c. + {%sthā%}), Ved. standing or sitting on the
chariot-seat.
<LEND>

<L>41188<pc>0885-c<k1>vanDur<k2>vanDur
{%Vandhur,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= vandhura%} above; (in Atharva-
veda III. 9, 3. the sense is doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>41189<pc>0885-c<k1>vanDurAyu<k2>vanDurAyu
{%Vandhurāyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. having a standing-
place in front or a seat for driving (said of the car
of the Aśvins).
<LEND>

<L>41190<pc>0885-c<k1>vanDula<k2>vanDula
{#vanDula#}¦ {%vandhula, as,%} m. (also written {%ban-%}
{%dhula,%} q. v.), N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>41191<pc>0885-c<k1>vannA<k2>vannA
{#vannA#}¦ {%vannā,%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>41192<pc>0885-c<k1>vanra<k2>vanra
{#vanra#}¦ {%vanra, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 28. fr. rt. 1. {%van%}), a co-partner, co-heir.
<LEND>

<L>41193<pc>0885-c<k1>vap<k2>vap
{#vap#}¦ {%vap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%vapati, vapate,%}
{%uvāpa%} (1st sing. {%uvapa%} or {%uvāpa,%} 2nd
sing. {%uvapitha%}), {%ūpe%} (according to some also {%[ā]vepe%}),
{%vapsyati, -te%} (ep. {%vapiṣyati%}), {%avāpsīt, avapta,%}
{%vaptum,%} to shear, cut, shave (the hair, beard, &c.,
Ved.); to shear off, crop off, eat off, graze, mow
(grass &c., in Ṛg-veda VI. 6, 4. {%vapanti = muṇ-%}
{%ḍayanti%}); to shave one's self, be shaven or shorn
(Ved. A.); to strew, scatter (especially seed), sow
[Page0886-a+ 81]
seed, sow, plant; to throw, cast (dice &c.); to pro-
create, beget; to weave, (in this sense probably a
kind of Caus. of rt. {%ve%}): Pass. {%upyate%} (Part. {%upta,%}
q. v.; the forms {%upita%} and {%vapita%} are also given),
to be scattered or sown: Caus. {%vāpayati, -yate,%}
{%-yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvapat,%} to cause to shear or shave
(Ved.); to cause to be shorn (Ved. A.); to sow,
put in the ground, plant: Desid. {%vivapsati, -te:%}
Intens. {%vāvapyate, vāvapti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀπυίω, οἴφω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">οἰφέω,</lang> (perhaps also) <lang n="greek">ὅπλοω, ὑφαίνω;</lang> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>wif, wœpen;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vepn.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41194<pc>0886-a<k1>vapa<k2>vapa
{%Vapa, as,%}¦ m. shaving, shearing; one who sows, a
sower; sowing seed; weaving; ({%ā%}), f. the skin or
covering of the intestines, omentum; the mucous or
glutinous secretion of the bones or flesh, marrow, fat
({%= medas,%} q. v.); a mound or heap thrown up by
ants; a cavity, hollow, hole. {%—Vapā-kṛt, t,%} m.
marrow. {%—Vapā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} furnished with
omentum, enveloped in omentum, covered with fat,
&c. {%—Vapodara (˚pā-ud˚), as, ī, am,%} Ved. fat-
bellied, corpulent (said of Indra).
<LEND>

<L>41195<pc>0886-a<k1>vapana<k2>vapana
{%Vapana, am,%}¦ n. the act of shearing, shaving; the
act of sowing seed, sowing; semen virile; ({%ī%}), f. a
barber's shop.
<LEND>

<L>41196<pc>0886-a<k1>vapanIya<k2>vapanIya
{%Vapanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shorn [cf. {%keśa-v˚%}];
to be sown.
<LEND>

<L>41197<pc>0886-a<k1>vapA<k2>vapA
{%Vapā.%}¦ See under {%vapa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>41198<pc>0886-a<k1>vapila<k2>vapila
{%Vapila, as,%}¦ m. a procreator, father.
<LEND>

<L>41199<pc>0886-a<k1>vapu<k2>vapu
{%Vapu, us,%}¦ m. a body; ({%us%}), f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>41200<pc>0886-a<k1>vapuna<k2>vapuna
{%Vapuna, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%vap%}), a deity;
({%am%}), n. knowledge, (probably for {%vayuna.%})
<LEND>

<L>41201<pc>0886-a<k1>vapurDara<k2>vapurDara
{%Vapur-dhara.%}¦ See under {%vapus%} below.
<LEND>

<L>41202<pc>0886-a<k1>vapuza<k2>vapuza
{%Vapuṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= vapus,%} having form
or beautiful form, handsome, (according to modern
Vedic scholars also) wonderful; ({%am%}), n. beauty or
elegance of form, wonderful figure, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
III. 2, 15. {%vapuṣāya = rūpārtham,%} for beauty of
form, on account of beauty of form); body, form,
(at the end of a comp., cf. {%varāha-v˚%}); ({%ā%}), f. a
particular article of commerce ({%= havuṣā?%}).
<LEND>

<L>41203<pc>0886-a<k1>vapuzya<k2>vapuzya<h>1
1. {%vapuṣya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vapuṣyati,%} &c., Ved. to
cause beauty or lustre of form, (Sāy. {%vapur-dīptiṃ%}
{%kṛ%}); to desire form or beauty of form, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%vapur iṣ%}); to wonder, be astonished, (this latter
sense is thought probable by modern scholars.)
<LEND>

<L>41204<pc>0886-a<k1>vapuzya<k2>vapuzya<h>2
2. {%vapuṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. having form or
beauty of form, handsome; conducive to bodily
welfare, (Sāy. {%= vapuṣi hita%}); wonderfully beauti-
ful, wonderful.
<LEND>

<L>41205<pc>0886-a<k1>vapus<k2>vapus
{%Vapus, us, us, us,%}¦ having form or beautiful form
(Ved.), embodied, handsome, (according to modern
Vedic scholars also) wonderful; ({%us%}), n. form, figure,
shape, body, person, appearance; essence, nature,
character; a beautiful form or figure; beautiful ap-
pearance, beauty, ({%vapuṣe,%} dat. c. for beauty of
form, in order to be beautiful); beautiful or won-
derful appearance of any kind, (according to modern
Vedic scholars) marvellous phenomenon, wonder;
water (according to Naigh. I. 12); N. of a daughter
of Dakṣa and wife of Dharma. {%—Vapuḥ-prakar-%}
{%ṣa, as,%} m. excellence of form, personal beauty.
{%—Vapuḥ-srava, as,%} m. a humor of the body.
{%—Vapur-dhara, as, ā, am,%} having form, em-
bodied, having beautiful form, beautiful, handsome.
{%—Vapuṣ-ṭama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most beautiful
or excellent in form, most beautiful or handsome;
most wonderful; ({%ā%}), f. Hibiscus Mutabilis; N.
of the wife of Janam-ejaya. {%—Vapuṣ-ṭara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. more or most beautiful in form,
more handsome, more or most wonderful. {%—Va-%}
{%puṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having a body, corpo-
real, corporate, embodied; having a beautiful form,
beautiful, handsome; containing the word {%vapus;%}
{%(ān),%} m., N. of a deity enumerated among the
Viśve Devāḥ; of a son of Priya-vrata; of a king
of Kuṇḍina; ({%atī%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending upon Skanda. {%—Vapuṣ-mata, as,%} m.,
N. of a king of Kuṇḍina, (for {%vapuṣ-mat.%})
{%—Vapus-sāt,%} ind. into the state of a body, to a
form or body.
<LEND>

<L>41206<pc>0886-a<k1>vaptavya<k2>vaptavya
{%Vaptavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sown; to be immitted
[Page0886-b+ 78]
seminally; to be impregnated or begotten; to be
implanted, to be given or conferred.
<LEND>

<L>41207<pc>0886-b<k1>vaptf<k2>vaptf
{%Vaptṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who shears, a shearer,
cutter, shaver; one who sows or plants, a planter,
sower, husbandman; ({%tā%}), m. one who fertilizes or
fecundates, a procreator, progenitor, father; a poet,
sage.
<LEND>

<L>41208<pc>0886-b<k1>vapyanIla<k2>vapyanIla
{%Vapya-nīla,%}¦ N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>41209<pc>0886-b<k1>vapra<k2>vapra
{%Vapra, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a rampart, earth-work,
mud-wall, mound, hillock, earth taken from the
ditch of a town and raised as a wall or buttress;
the foundation of a building; the gate of a fortified
city; the bank of a river, shore or bank in general,
({%anu-vapram,%} along the bank or shore, Kirāt. VI.
4); the slope or declivity of a hill, table-land on a
mountain; a ditch; the circumference of a sphere or
globe; a sown field, field in general; dust, earth;
the butting of an elephant or bull, (see {%vapra-%}
{%krīḍā%}); {%= niṣ-kuṭa, vana-ja, vājikā%} (?), {%pāṭīra;%}
{%(am),%} n. lead [cf. {%vardhra%}]; ({%as%}), m. a father
[cf. {%vaptṛ%}]; {%= prajā-pati;%} N. of a Vyāsa in the
fourteenth division of the Dvāpara age; of a son of
the fourteenth Manu; ({%ā%}), f. Bengal madder ({%=%}
{%mañjiṣṭhā%}); N. of the mother of Nimi (the
twenty-first Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī); ({%ī%}),
f. a hillock, ant-hill. {%—Vapra-kriyā,%} f. {%= vapra-%}
{%krīḍā%} below. {%—Vapra-krīḍā,%} f. the playful butting
(of an elephant or bull) against a bank or mound of
any kind, (this is called {%taṭāghāta%} in Kumāra-s. II.
50.) {%—Vaprānata (˚ra-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} bowed or
stooping to butt at a bank or wall. {%—Vaprāntar%}
{%(˚ra-an˚),%} ind. in or between banks or mounds.
{%—Vaprābhighāta (˚ra-abh˚), as,%} m. butting at a
bank or mound. {%—Vaprāmbhaḥ-sruti, is,%} f. the
stream of water flowing along a bank or issuing
from a bank, a rivulet. {%—Vaprāmbhas (˚ra-am˚),%}
{%as,%} n. the water flowing along a bank.
<LEND>

<L>41210<pc>0886-b<k1>vapraka<k2>vapraka
{%Vapraka, as,%}¦ m. the circumference of a sphere.
<LEND>

<L>41211<pc>0886-b<k1>vapri<k2>vapri
{%Vapri = kṣetra,%}¦ a field; {%= dur-gati, samudra.%}
<LEND>

<L>41212<pc>0886-b<k1>vapsas<k2>vapsas
{%Vapsas,%}¦ Ved. form, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda I. 181, 8 {%= vapus%} or {%rūpa.%})
<LEND>

<L>41213<pc>0886-b<k1>vapAwikA<k2>vapAwikA
{#vapAwikA#}¦ {%va-pāṭikā,%} f. {%= ava-pāṭikā,%} lacera-
tion of the prepuce.
<LEND>

<L>41214<pc>0886-b<k1>vappa<k2>vappa
{#vappa#}¦ {%vappa%} or {%vappaka, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>41215<pc>0886-b<k1>vappawadevI<k2>vappawadevI
{%Vappaṭa-devī,%}¦ f., N. of a princess, (also read
{%vapyaṭa-devī.%})
<LEND>

<L>41216<pc>0886-b<k1>vappIya<k2>vappIya
{%Vappīya%}¦ or {%vappīyaka, as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>41217<pc>0886-b<k1>vappIha<k2>vappIha
{#vappIha#}¦ {%vappīha, as,%} m. Cuculus Melano-
leucus ({%= cātaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>41218<pc>0886-b<k1>vaBr<k2>vaBr
{#vaBr#}¦ {%vabhr%} (perhaps more properly writ-
ten {%babhr,%} which may be a reduplicated
form of rt. {%bhram%}), cl. 1. P. {%vabhrati, vavabhra,%}
{%avabhrīt, vabhritum,%} to go, go astray.
<LEND>

<L>41219<pc>0886-b<k1>vam<k2>vam
{#vam#}¦ {%vam,%} cl. 1. P. {%vamati%} (Ved. also
{%vamiti%}), {%vavāma%} (2nd sing. {%vavamitha,%}
3rd pl. {%vavamus%} by Pāṇ. VI. 4, 126; according to
some {%vemitha, vemus%}), {%vamiṣyati, avamīt%} (Pāṇ.
VII. 2, 5), {%vamitum,%} to vomit, eject from the
mouth, spit out; to eject, emit, send forth, give
forth, give out, give off, divulge; to reject: Pass.
{%vamyate,%} Aor. {%avāmi%} (Part. {%vānta%} and {%vamita%}):
Caus. {%vāmayati, vamayati%} (with prepositions the
latter only is used), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvamat,%} to cause
to vomit, sicken: Desid. {%vivamiṣati:%} Intens. {%vaṃ-%}
{%vamyate, vaṃvanti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>vam,</nsi> ‘to vomit;’
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐμ-έ-ω, ἔμ-ε-το-ς, ἔμ-εσι-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>vom-o, vom-</nsi>
<nsi>i-tu-s, vom-i-tio;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vamm, ana-vammjan;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>wemman;</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>vom-a, vœma;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>vem-j-u, vem-ti, vem-alai.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41220<pc>0886-b<k1>vama<k2>vama
{%Vama, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. vomiting, ejecting, giving out.
<LEND>

<L>41221<pc>0886-b<k1>vamaTu<k2>vamaTu
{%Vamathu, us,%}¦ m. vomiting, ejecting from the
mouth; water ejected from an elephant's trunk; {%=%}
{%kāśa,%} a cough (?) .
<LEND>

<L>41222<pc>0886-b<k1>vamana<k2>vamana
{%Vamana, am,%}¦ n. the act of vomiting, ejecting
anything from the mouth; causing vomiting, an
emetic; offering oblations to fire; taking, getting;
pain, paining; ({%as%}), m. hemp; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people; ({%ī%}), f. a leech.
<LEND>
[Page0886-c+ 77]

<L>41223<pc>0886-c<k1>vamanIya<k2>vamanIya
{%Vamanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be vomited; ({%ā%}), f. a fly.
<LEND>

<L>41224<pc>0886-c<k1>vami<k2>vami
{%Vami, is,%}¦ f. vomiting, sickness, nausea, qualmishness;
an emetic; ({%is%}), m., N. of fire; a rogue, cheat.
<LEND>

<L>41225<pc>0886-c<k1>vamita<k2>vamita
{%Vamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ vomited, made to vomit,
sickened.
<LEND>

<L>41226<pc>0886-c<k1>vamitavya<k2>vamitavya
{%Vamitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be vomited, to be
ejected from the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>41227<pc>0886-c<k1>vamitvA<k2>vamitvA
{%Vamitvā,%}¦ ind. having vomited, having been sick.
<LEND>

<L>41228<pc>0886-c<k1>vamin<k2>vamin
{%Vamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ vomiting, being sick.
<LEND>

<L>41229<pc>0886-c<k1>vAnta<k2>vAnta
{%Vānta, vānti.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>41230<pc>0886-c<k1>vamBa<k2>vamBa
{#vamBa#}¦ {%vambha, as,%} m. {%= vaṃśa,%} a bamboo, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41231<pc>0886-c<k1>vamBArava<k2>vamBArava
{#vamBArava#}¦ {%vambhā-rava, as,%} m. (onomato-
poetic), the lowing of cattle, (better written {%bambhā-%}
{%rava.%})
<LEND>

<L>41232<pc>0886-c<k1>vammAgadeSa<k2>vammAgadeSa
{#vammAgadeSa#}¦ {%vammāga-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a
district.
<LEND>

<L>41233<pc>0886-c<k1>vamra<k2>vamra
{#vamra#}¦ {%vamra, as,%} m. (or more frequently)
{%ī,%} f. (probably connected with {%valmī%}), an ant, (said
to be also {%ā,%} f.); ({%as%}), m. a proper N., (Vamra
Vaikhānasa is the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X.
99); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μύρμο-ς, μύρμ-ηξ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>form-ica.</nsi>]
{%—Vamrī-kūṭa, am,%} n. an ant-hill.
<LEND>

<L>41234<pc>0886-c<k1>vamraka<k2>vamraka
{%Vamraka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a small ant; ({%as, ā, am%}),
small, little ({%= hrasva,%} according to Naigh. III. 2).
<LEND>

<L>41235<pc>0886-c<k1>vay<k2>vay
{#vay#}¦ {%vay,%} cl. 1. A. {%vayate, veye, vayitum,%} to
go; (for cl. 1. P. {%vayati,%} &c., see rt. {%ve.%})
<LEND>

<L>41236<pc>0886-c<k1>vaya<k2>vaya
{#vaya#}¦ {%vaya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ve%}), one who
weaves, a weaver; ({%ī%}), f., Ved. a female weaver.
<LEND>

<L>41237<pc>0886-c<k1>vayat<k2>vayat
{%Vayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ weaving, interweaving;
({%an%}), m., Ved. a proper N.; (according to some
{%vayata.%})
<LEND>

<L>41238<pc>0886-c<k1>vayana<k2>vayana
{%Vayana, am,%}¦ n. the act of weaving, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41239<pc>0886-c<k1>vayiyu<k2>vayiyu
{%Vayiyu,%}¦ Ved. anything woven, cloth, clothes, (Ṛg-
veda VIII. 19, 37. according to Durga {%= vastrādi.%})
<LEND>

<L>41240<pc>0886-c<k1>vayizyat<k2>vayizyat
{%Vayiṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. about to weave.
<LEND>

<L>41241<pc>0886-c<k1>vayam<k2>vayam
{#vayam#}¦ {%vayam%} (nom. pl. of {%aham,%} see {%asmad,%}
p. 108), we.
<LEND>

<L>41242<pc>0886-c<k1>vayas<k2>vayas
{#vayas#}¦ {%vayas, as,%} n. (in some senses fr. rt.
1. {%vī%}), food, victuals, sacrificial food, oblation, offering
(Ved.); energy (both bodily and mental), strength,
vigour, power, might (Ved.); soundness, health
(Ved.); the time of health and strength, youth, the
prime of life; any period of life, age, time of life,
stage of existence, year of life or age; any period,
step, degree, kind; a bird, any winged animal, the
winged tribe (especially applied to smaller birds, cf.
2. {%vi%}). {%—Vayaḥ-pariṇati, is,%} f. ripeness of age.
{%—Vayaḥ-pramāṇa, am,%} n. measure or length of
life, duration of life, age. {%—Vayaḥ-sandhi, is,%} m.
‘age-junction,’ puberty. {%—Vayaḥ-sama, as, ā, am,%}
of the same age, equal in age. {%—Vayaḥ-stha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} being in the period of youth or in the prime of
life, young, youthful; grown up, mature, middle-
aged; strong, powerful; ({%as%}), m. a contemporary,
associate, friend; ({%ā%}), f. a female contemporary,
female friend or companion [cf. {%vayasyā%}]; N. of
several plants, Emblica Officinalis; the moon-plant,
Asclepias Acida; a medicinal root ({%= kākolī, kṣīra-%}
{%kākolī%}); Terminalia Chebula or Citrina; Cocculus
Cordifolius; Bombax Heptaphyllum; {%= aty-amla-%}
{%parṇī;%} small cardamoms. {%—Vayaḥ-sthāna, am,%}
n. the firmness or freshness of youth. {%—Vayaḥ-%}
{%sthāpana, as, ī, am,%} maintaining or preserving the
freshness of youth. {%—Vayas-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%}
causing life or health; of mature age (?) . {%—Vayas-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. causing strength, preserving health
or youth; giving life, (Sāy. {%āyuṣya-prada.%}) {%—Va-%}
{%yas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of power or
vigour, mighty, vigorous; possessing or supplying
food, (Sāy. {%= anna-yukta.%}) {%—Vayo-gata, as, ā, am,%}
arrived at age, come of age, advanced in years, old,
aged; ({%am%}), n. the departure of youth; {%vayo-gate,%}
when youth is past. {%—Vayo-jū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. ex-
citing or increasing strength. {%—Vayo-'tiga%} or {%vayo-%}
{%'tīta, as, ā, am,%} advanced in age, exceedingly old
or decrepit; passing beyond or liberated from all
periods or stages of existence. {%—Vayo-dhas, ās, ās, %}
[Page0887-a+ 80]
{%as,%} Ved. {%= vayo-dhā%} below. {%—Vayo-dhā, ās, ās,%}
{%am%} (acc. {%-dhām,%} voc. {%-dhas,%} nom. pl. m. f. {%-dhās,%}
borrowing some of its cases fr. {%vayo-dhas%} above),
Ved. giving strength, bestowing or granting health;
possessing strength, powerful, mighty, vigorous,
youthful, young, middle-aged; giving food, (Sāy.
{%= annasya dātṛ%}); ({%ās%}), f. strength, power, might,
vigour. {%—Vayo-'dhika, as, ā, am,%} superior in years,
older in age; very old or advanced in age, exceed-
ingly old; ({%as%}), m. an old man. {%—Vayo-dheya, am,%}
n., Ved. power, energy, vigour. {%—Vayo-nādha, as,%}
{%ā, am%} ({%nādha%} fr. rt. {%nah%}), Ved. (perhaps) esta-
blishing health. {%—Vayo-vayaḥ-śaya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. resting on all kinds of food or where food of
every kind rests. {%—Vayo-'vasthā,%} f. a stage or state
of life (generally considered to be three, viz. {%bāla-%}
{%tva,%} childhood, {%taruṇa-tva,%} youth, and {%vṛddha-%}
{%tva,%} old age). {%—Vayo-vidha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. of
the kind or nature of birds. {%—Vayo-vṛddha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} advanced in years, old. {%—Vayo-vṛdh, t, t, t,%}
Ved. increasing strength or energy, strengthening,
invigorating (said of the Maruts and of Morning and
Night); increasing food, (Sāy. {%= annasya vardha-%}
{%yitṛ.%}) {%—Vayo-hāni, is,%} f. loss of youth or vigour,
the growing old.
<LEND>

<L>41243<pc>0887-a<k1>vayasa<k2>vayasa
{%Vayasa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= vayas,%} a bird; ({%am%}), n.
age, (at the end of a comp., e. g. {%madhyama-vaya-%}
{%sam,%} middle age; cf. {%uttara-v˚, pūrva-v˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>41244<pc>0887-a<k1>vayasin<k2>vayasin
{%Vayasin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ being in any age or period of
life, (at the end of comps., see {%pūrva-v˚, pratha-%}
{%ma-v˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>41245<pc>0887-a<k1>vayaska<k2>vayaska
{%Vayaska = vayas,%}¦ age, (at the end of an adj. comp.,
e. g. {%abhinava-vayaskā,%} a woman in the fresh bloom
of youth.)
<LEND>

<L>41246<pc>0887-a<k1>vayasya<k2>vayasya
{%Vayasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to age, being of
the same age, contemporary; ({%as%}), m. a contempo-
rary, associate, companion, friend; ({%ā%}), f. a female
companion or friend, a woman's confidante or faith-
ful female servant; scil. {%iṣṭakā,%} Ved. epithet of
nineteen bricks used for building the sacrificial altar
(so called from the word {%vayas%} being contained in
the formula of consecration). {%—Vayasya-tva, am,%}
n. or {%vayasya-bhāva, as,%} m. the condition of being
a contemporary, companionship, friendship.
<LEND>

<L>41247<pc>0887-a<k1>vayasyaka<k2>vayasyaka
{%Vayasyaka, as,%}¦ m. a contemporary, friend.
<LEND>

<L>41248<pc>0887-a<k1>vayA<k2>vayA
{%Vayā,%}¦ f., Ved. strength, power, (according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda I. 165, 15. {%vayām = vayam,%} we); a
branch, twig; a race, family, (according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda X. 124, 3. {%vayāyāḥ = gantavyāyāḥ.%})
{%—Vayā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. {%= vayas-vat,%} pos-
sessed of power or vigour; (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VI. 2,
5. {%vayā = śākhā = putra-pautrādi,%} having pos-
terity, peopled with descendants.)
<LEND>

<L>41249<pc>0887-a<k1>vayAka<k2>vayAka
{%Vayāka, as,%}¦ m. a little branch, tendril, creeper
({%= latā%}).
<LEND>

<L>41250<pc>0887-a<k1>vayAkin<k2>vayAkin
{%Vayākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. having little branches or
tendrils, ramifying (said of the Soma plant).
<LEND>

<L>41251<pc>0887-a<k1>vayuna<k2>vayuna<h>1
1. {%vayuna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (perhaps) having vital
power, endowed with life (in Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa
VIII. 2, 2, 8).
<LEND>

<L>41252<pc>0887-a<k1>vayiyu<k2>vayiyu
{#vayiyu#}¦ {%vayiyu.%} See under {%vaya,%} p. 886,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41253<pc>0887-a<k1>vayuna<k2>vayuna<h>2
{#vayuna#} 2¦. {%vayuna, am,%} n. (according to
Uṇādi-s. III. 61. fr. rt. {%vī,%} substituted for rt. {%aj%}), a
mark, token, sign, characteristic (Ved.); a rule,
ordinance, sacred rite, appointment, order; manner,
custom, mode of acting, actions; distinctness, clear-
ness, (in the preceding senses generally Ved. and
frequently {%āni,%} n. pl.); the faculty of perceiving,
consciousness, knowledge, wisdom, information, in-
struction, (Sāy. {%= prajñā, prajñāna, jñāna-sā-%}
{%dhana, jñāna%}); a temple; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son
of Kṛśāśva and Dhiṣaṇā; ({%ā%}), f. knowledge; N.
of a daughter of Svadhā. {%—Vayuna-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. wisdom-bestowing, endowed with wisdom or
sense, (Sāy. {%= prajñopeta%}); clear, distinct, bright,
(Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VI. 21, 3 {%= prakāśa-vat.%}) {%—Va-%}
{%yuna-śas,%} ind., Ved. according to rule or order, in
due order, in the order of knowledge, (Sāy. {%= jñāna-%}
{%krameṇa.%}) {%—Vayunā-vid, t, t, t%} (in the Pada-pāṭha
[Page0887-b+ 79]
text {%vayuna-vid%}), Ved. learned in rules, well versed
in ordinances.
<LEND>

<L>41254<pc>0887-b<k1>vayovaNga<k2>vayovaNga
{#vayovaNga#}¦ {%vayovaṅga (?) , am,%} n. lead.
<LEND>

<L>41255<pc>0887-b<k1>vayya<k2>vayya
{#vayya#}¦ {%vayya, as,%} m., Ved., N. of an Asura
(a companion of Turvīti, both of whom Indra helped
over a stream which obstructed their course; but
according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 54, 6. {%vayyam =%}
{%vayya-kula-jam,%} Vayya being merely a patronymic
of Turvīti); a companion, friend (?) .
<LEND>

<L>41256<pc>0887-b<k1>var<k2>var
{#var#}¦ {%var,%} the form assumed by the rt.
{%vṛ%} (q. v.) in cl. 10. and causal, and in the
following derivatives.
<LEND>

<L>41257<pc>0887-b<k1>vara<k2>vara
{%Vara, as,%}¦ m. surrounding, encompassing; circum-
ference, compass, space, room (Ved., cf. {%uru,%} with
which {%vara%} in this sense is connected); stopping,
checking ({%= nivāraṇa, nigraha,%} Ved.); the act of
selecting, choosing, appointing, engaging; request-
ing, soliciting, entreating; choice, election, wish,
desire, request, boon, blessing, favour, (rarely {%am,%}
n.); anything chosen as a present, gift, reward,
recompense; any desirable object, benefit, advantage,
privilege; a dowry; charity, alms; a kind of grain
({%= varaṭa%}); bdellium; a sparrow; ({%as, ā, am%}),
one who chooses, a chooser, choosing, selecting, &c.;
one who solicits a girl in marriage, a suitor, wooer,
lover, (in these senses only masc.); a bridegroom, hus-
band (m.); a bridegroom's friend; a son-in-law (m.);
a dissolute man (m.); wished for, desirable, valuable,
precious, excellent, best; the best, most excellent
or eminent, (frequently with gen. pl., e. g. {%saritāṃ%}
{%varā,%} the best of rivers: also with a loc. and even
abl. pl., e. g. {%nareṣu varaḥ,%} the best among men;
{%nārībhyo varā,%} the best of women: frequently also
at the end of a comp., cf. {%ratha-v˚, nara-v˚%});
better, preferable, better than (with abl. and some-
times even with gen., e. g. {%granthibhyo dhāriṇo%}
{%varāḥ,%} those who remember are better than those
who merely read books; {%kāmo dharmārthayor%}
{%varaḥ,%} pleasure is better than religion or wealth);
eldest; ({%am%}), ind. preferably, rather, better, prefer-
able, (in Ved. sometimes with abl., e. g. {%agnibhyo%}
{%varam,%} better than fires; or sometimes with abl.
and {%ā,%} e. g. {%sakhibhya ā varam,%} better than com-
panions); it is better that, it would be best if (with
pres., e. g. {%varaṃ gacchāmi,%} it is better that I go;
or even with ellipsis of the verb, e. g. {%varaṃ siṃhāt,%}
it would be better if [death should happen] from the
lion; sometimes with pot., e. g. {%varaṃ tat kuryāt,%}
better that he should do that); better than, rather than,
(in these senses {%varam%} is followed by {%na%} or {%na ca%}
or {%na tu%} or {%na punar%} &c., and may be translated
by ‘better and not;’ {%varam mṛtyur na cākīrttiḥ,%}
better death than infamy, or better death and not
infamy); ({%ā%}), f., N. of several plants and vegetable
products, the three kinds of myrobalan; Clypea
Hernandifolia; Asparagus Racemosus; Cocculus
Cordifolius; a sort of perfume ({%= reṇukā%}); tur-
meric; {%= brāhmī, medā, vidaṅga;%} N. of Pārvatī;
of a river; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Asparagus Racemosus;
N. of Chāyā the wife of Sūrya; ({%am%}), n. saffron;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>vir:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vair, vaila:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wela:</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>wel, wela:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>wyras:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>fear,</nsi>
‘good;’ ‘a husband.’] {%—Vara-kalyāṇa, as,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Vara-kāṣṭhakā,%} f. the plant Clero-
dendrum Siphonanthus; a grain similar to Varāṭikā.
{%—Vara-kīrtti, is,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vara-kratu,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of Indra. {%—Vara-ga, as,%} m., N. of a
place. {%—Vara-ghaṇṭikā%} or {%vara-ghaṇṭī,%} f. the
plant Asparagus Racemosus. {%—Vara-candana, am,%}
n. a dark sort of sandal-wood; a sort of pine, Pinus
Deodora. {%—Vara-ja = vare-ja,%} Pāṇ. VI. 3, 16.
{%—Vara-jānuka, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Vara-%}
{%tanu, us, ūs, u,%} having a beautiful body or person;
({%ūs%}), f. an elegant woman; a kind of metre, four
times ˘˘˘˘¯˘˘¯˘¯˘¯˘. {%—Vara-tantu, us,%}
m., N. of an ancient preceptor; ({%avas%}), m. pl.
Vara-tantu's descendants. {%—Vara-tama, as, ā, am,%}
most preferable or excellent. {%—Vara-tikta, as,%} m.
Wrightia Antidysenterica. {%—Vara-tiktaka, as,%} m.,
[Page0887-c+ 81]
N. of a plant, Azadirachta Indica; of another, {%=%}
{%parpaṭa; (ikā),%} f. Clypea Hernandifolia. {%—Vara-%}
{%toyā,%} f. ‘having excellent water,’ N. of a river.
{%—Vara-tvaca, as,%} m. the Nimb tree, Azadirachta
Indica. {%—Vara-da, as, ā, am,%} granting wishes,
conferring a boon, ready to fulfil requests or answer
prayers, propitious, favourable; ({%as%}), m. a bene-
factor; N. of Agni in Śāntika; fire for burnt offer-
ings of a propitiatory character; N. of one of Skanda's
attendants; of a particular class of Manes; of a
Dhyāni-buddha; ({%ā%}), f. a young woman, girl,
maiden; N. of a guardian goddess in the family of
Vara-tantu; N. of various plants, Physalis Flexuosa;
Polanisia Icosandra; Helianthus; Linum Usitatissi-
mum; the root of yam; {%= tri-parṇī;%} N. of a river.
{%—Vara-dakṣiṇā,%} f. a present made to the bride-
groom by the father of the bride in giving her away;
a term for expence or costs incurred in fruitless en-
deavours to recover a loss. {%—Varada-caturthī,%} f.,
N. of the fourth day in the light half of the month
Māgha. {%—Vara-datta, as, ā, am,%} given as a boon,
granted in consequence of a request; ({%as%}), m. a
proper N. {%—Varada-rāja, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Laghu-kaumudī and of the Madhya-siddhānta-
kaumudī; of various other persons. {%—Varada-rā-%}
{%jīya, as, ā, am,%} coming from or relating to Varada-
rāja, composed by Varada-rāja. {%—Vara-darśinī,%} in
Rāmāyaṇa II. 55, 21, probably incorrect for {%vara-%}
{%varṇinī%}. {%—Varada-hasta, as,%} m. the beneficent
hand (of a deity or benefactor of any kind). {%—Va-%}
{%radā-caturthī,%} f. {%= varada-caturthī%}. {%—Vara-dā-%}
{%tu, us,%} m. a kind of tree {%(= dvāra-dātu)%}. {%—Vara-%}
{%dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ, = vara-da%}. {%—Varadādhīśa-%}
{%yajvan (˚da-adh˚), ā,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Va-%}
{%ra-dāna, am,%} n. the granting a boon or request,
giving compensation or reward; N. of a place of
pilgrimage. {%—Varadāna-maya, as, ī, am,%} caused
by the granting a request, arising from the grant of
a favour or bestowal of a boon. {%—Vara-dānika, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} caused by bestowing a boon. {%—Vara-dāru,%}
Tectona Grandis. {%—Vara-dāruka,%} a kind of plant
with poisonous leaves. {%—Vara-dāśvas = vara-da.%}
{%—Vara-druma, as,%} m. ‘excellent-tree,’ Agallochum.
{%—Vara-dharma, as,%} m. a noble act of justice, ex-
cellent work, &c. {%—Varadharmī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-ka-%}
{%roti,%} &c., to do a noble act towards any one. {%—Vara-%}
{%nārī,%} f. the best woman, a most excellent woman.
{%—Vara-niścaya, as,%} m. the determining or choos-
ing of a person to be a husband, choice of a bride-
groom. {%—Vara-pakṣa, as,%} m. the party or side
of a bridegroom at a wedding. {%—Vara-pakṣiṇī,%}
f., N. of a Tantra goddess. {%—Vara-pakṣīya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} belonging to the party of the bridegroom.
{%—Vara-paṇḍita, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Vara-%}
{%parṇākhya (˚ṇa-ākh˚), as,%} m. Lipeocercis Serrata.
{%—Vara-pāṇḍya, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vara-pī-%}
{%taka,%} talc. {%—Vara-pota,%} a kind of plant {%(= śreṣṭha-%}
{%śāka)%}. {%—Vara-prada, as, ā, am, = vara-da,%} con-
ferring a boon, granting a favour; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
Lopāmudrā. {%—Vara-pradāna, am,%} n. {%= vara-dāna,%}
the bestowal of a boon. {%—Vara-prabha, as, ā, am,%}
having excellent brightness; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Bodhi-
sattva. {%—Vara-prasthāna, am,%} n. the setting out
of a bridegroom in procession towards the house of
the bride for the celebration of the marriage. {%—Va-%}
{%ra-phala, as, ā, am,%} possessing or yielding the
best fruits; ({%as%}), m. the cocoa-nut tree. {%—Vara-%}
{%bālhīka, am,%} n. saffron, (also written {%vara-vāh-%}
{%līka.%}) {%—Vara-mukhī,%} f. a kind of perfume {%(=%}
{%reṇukā)%}. {%—Vara-yātrā,%} f. the procession of a suitor
or bridegroom (to the house of the bride). {%—Vara-%}
{%yuvati, is,%} or {%vara-yuvatī,%} f. a beautiful young
woman, handsome girl; a kind of metre, four times
¯˘˘¯˘¯˘¯¯˘˘˘˘˘˘¯. {%—Vara-yogya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} worthy of a boon or reward. {%—Vara-yo-%}
{%nika,%} (probably) a kind of plant {%(= kesara)%}. {%—Va-%}
{%ra-ruci, is,%} m., N. of a poet, grammarian, lexico-
grapher, and writer on medicine, (sometimes identi-
fied with Kātyāyana, the reputed author of the
Vārttikas or supplementary rules of Pāṇini; he is
placed by some among the nine gems of the court
[Page0888-a+ 81]
of Vikramāditya, and by others among the ornaments
of the court of Bhoja; he was the author of the
Prākṛt grammar called Prākṛta-prakāśa, and is said
to be the first grammarian who reduced the various
dialects of Prākṛt to a system); N. of Śiva. {%—Vara-%}
{%rūpa, as, ā, am,%} having an excellent or noble form;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Buddha. {%—Vara-labdha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who has obtained a boon; received as a
boon; ({%as%}), m. Michelia Champaka; Bauhinia Va-
riegata. {%—Vara-vatsalā,%} f. a mother-in-law. {%—Vara-%}
{%varṇa, as,%} m. ‘best-coloured,’ gold; [cf. {%su-varṇa.%}]
{%—Vara-varṇin, ī, inī, i,%} having a beautiful com-
plexion or colour; ({%inī%}), f. a woman with a beautiful
complexion, an excellent or handsome woman, a
virtuous woman; a woman in general; N. of Durgā;
of Sarasvatī; of Lakṣmī; turmeric; lac; a brownish
yellow pigment; a kind of plant {%(= priyaṅgu,%}
{%phalinī)%}. {%—Vara-vāraṇa, as,%} m. a fine elephant.
{%—Vara-vāsi, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Vara-%}
{%vāhlīka,%} see {%vara-bālhīka%}. {%—Vara-vṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} received as a boon or reward. {%—Vara-vṛddha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of Śiva. {%—Vara-śikha, as,%} m., Ved., N.
of an Asura whose family was destroyed by Indra
(Ṛg-veda VI. 27, 4, 5). {%—Vara-śīta,%} cinnamon.
{%—Vara-śreṇī,%} f. a kind of plant. {%—Vara-sad, t, t,%}
{%t,%} Ved. dwelling in an orb or sphere, (Sāy. {%= vara-%}
{%ṇīye maṇḍale sīdat,%} dwelling in the most excellent
orb, i. e. the sun.) {%—Vara-sundarī,%} f. a very beauti-
ful woman; a kind of metre, four times ¯˘˘˘¯˘
˘˘¯˘˘˘¯¯. {%—Vara-surata, as, ā, am,%} well ac-
quainted with the secrets of sexual enjoyment, very
wanton. {%—Vara-sena (?) ,%} N. of a mountain pass.
{%—Vara-strī,%} f. an excellent woman. {%—Vara-sraj,%}
{%k,%} f. a bridegroom's garland, the garland placed by
a maiden on the head of a chosen suitor. {%—Varāṅga%}
{%(˚ra-aṅ˚), am,%} n. the best or most beautiful member
of the body; the head; the female pudenda; the
principal piece or part; an elegant form or body;
({%as, ā, am%}), having an excellent form, excellent or
beautiful in all parts; ({%as%}), m. an elephant; epithet
of a Nakṣatra year consisting of 324 days; N. of
Viṣṇu; ({%ī%}), f. turmeric; N. of a daughter of Dṛ-
shad-vat and wife of Sañjāti; ({%am%}), n. Cassia bark,
green cinnamon; sorrel (?) . {%—Varāṅgaka, am,%} n.
{%= varāṅga,%} Cassia bark. {%—Varāṅganā (˚ra-aṅ˚),%}
f. a beautiful or noble woman. {%—Varāṅga-rūpopeta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} handsome and well shaped. {%—Varāṅgin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘beautiful-limbed,’ sorrel, Rumex Vesicarius.
{%—Varājīvin (˚ra-āj), ī,%} m. an astrologer. {%—Va-%}
{%rājya (˚ra-āj˚), am,%} n. the choicest ghee or clarified
butter. {%—Varādana (˚ra-ad˚), am,%} n. a sort of
Mimusops {%(= rājādana)%}. {%—Varānanā (˚ra-ān˚),%}
f. a lovely-faced woman. {%—Varābhidha (˚ra-abh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. one who has a good name; sorrel, Rumex Ve-
sicarius. {%—Varāmra (˚ra-am˚), as,%} m. a sort of acid
fruit tree, Carissa Carandas. {%—Varāroha (˚ra-ār˚),%}
{%as,%} m. an excellent rider; a rider on an elephant or
horse; a rider in general; mounting, riding; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), having fine hips; ({%as%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu,
(perhaps incorrect for {%varāha%}); ({%ā%}), f. a handsome
or elegant woman, noble lady; N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in
Someśvara; the hip or flank. {%—Varārthin (˚ra-ar˚),%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} seeking for a boon, asking for a blessing.
{%—Varārha (˚ra-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy of a boon;
exceedingly worthy, being in high esteem; very
costly or expensive. {%—Varāli (˚ra-āli), is,%} m. the
moon; a division of music; [cf. {%varāḍī.%}] {%—Varā-%}
{%likā,%} f. (fr. {%vara + āli%}), N. of Durgā. {%—Varāsana%}
{%(˚ra-ās˚), am,%} n. an excellent seat, the best seat, a
throne; N. of a town; the China rose, Hibiscus
Rosa Sinensis; a cistern, reservoir, (for {%vār-āsana,%}
q. v.); ({%as, ā, am%}), having an excellent seat; ({%as%}),
m. a door-keeper; a lover, paramour. {%—Vare-ja =%}
{%vara-ja,%} Pāṇ. VI. 3, 16. {%—Varendra (˚ra-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a chief, sovereign; Indra; N. of a part of
Bengal; ({%ī%}), f. ancient Gauḍa or Gaur, the capital
and district so named (according to some). {%—Vareśa%}
{%(˚ra-īśa), as, ā, am,%} presiding over boons, able to
grant wishes. {%—Vareśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as, ā, am, =%}
{%vareśa; (as),%} m., N. of Śiva. {%—Varoru (˚ra-ūru),%}
{%us,%} m. a beautiful thigh; ({%us, us%} or {%ūs, u%}), having
[Page0888-b+ 81]
beautiful thighs; ({%us%} or {%ūs%}), f. a beautiful-thighed
woman, well-formed woman, (see {%ūru.%})
<LEND>

<L>41258<pc>0888-b<k1>varaMvarA<k2>varaMvarA
{%Varaṃvarā,%}¦ f. a particular plant ({%= cakra-parṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>41259<pc>0888-b<k1>varaka<k2>varaka
{%Varaka, as,%}¦ m. a cloak; one who asks a female
in marriage; a wish, request, boon; a kind of wild
bean, Phaseolus Trilobus; a particular medicinal
plant ({%= parpaṭa%}); a kind of grass {%(= rūkṣa);%}
{%= śara-parṇikā;%} N. of a king, (also read {%dha-%}
{%naka, kanaka%}); ({%am%}), n. a towel, cloth, wiper;
the cover or awning of a boat.
<LEND>

<L>41260<pc>0888-b<k1>varawa<k2>varawa
{%Varaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of grain (probably the seed
of safflower or Carthamus Tinctorius); a kind of
wasp; a gander; an artisan of a particular class
(placed among Mlecchas or barbarians); ({%ā%}), f. the
seed of Carthamus Tinctorius; a kind of wasp; a
goose; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of wasp; ({%am%}), n. a jasmine
flower.
<LEND>

<L>41261<pc>0888-b<k1>varawaka<k2>varawaka
{%Varaṭaka, as,%}¦ m. or {%varaṭṭikā,%} f. a kind of
grain ({%= varaṭa%} above).
<LEND>

<L>41262<pc>0888-b<k1>varaRa<k2>varaRa
{%Varaṇa, as,%}¦ m. a rampart, mound, wall of ma-
sonry, &c., outer enclosure; a causeway, bridge; the
tree Cratæva Roxburghii (found in every part of
India; it is used in medicine, and supposed to pos-
sess magical virtues; cf. {%varuṇa, setu%}); any tree;
a camel; a kind of ornament or decoration on a
bow; N. of a particular magical formula recited over
weapons; N. of Indra; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people;
of a kingdom; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a small river (running
past the north of Benares into the Ganges and now
called Burnah); ({%am%}), n. the act of screening, cover-
ing, protecting, supporting; enclosing, encircling,
surrounding, encompassing; keeping off, prohibiting;
the act of choosing, selecting, choice of a bride; wish-
ing, requesting, soliciting. {%—Varaṇa-mālā%} or {%va-%}
{%raṇa-sraj, k,%} f. the garland placed by a maiden on
the head of a selected suitor. {%—Varaṇā-vatī,%} f., Ved.
(perhaps) N. of a river (in Atharva-veda IV. 7, 1).
<LEND>

<L>41263<pc>0888-b<k1>varaRaka<k2>varaRaka
{%Varaṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ covering, covering over,
concealing.
<LEND>

<L>41264<pc>0888-b<k1>varaRasI<k2>varaRasI
{%Varaṇasī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%varaṇā%}), Benares, (more usually
written {%vārāṇasī,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>41265<pc>0888-b<k1>varaRIya<k2>varaRIya
{%Varaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be chosen, to be selected,
&c.; to be solicited (for a boon &c.).
<LEND>

<L>41266<pc>0888-b<k1>varaRqa<k2>varaRqa
{%Varaṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. a multitude; an eruption on the
face; a veranda, portico; a heap of grass; the string
of a fish-hook; a packet, package; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
thrush ({%= sārikā%}); a dagger, knife; the wick of a
lamp. {%—Varaṇḍālu (˚ḍa-ālu), us,%} m. a kind of
bulbous plant ({%= phala-puccha%}); the castor-oil
tree, Ricinus Communis.
<LEND>

<L>41267<pc>0888-b<k1>varaRqaka<k2>varaRqaka
{%Varaṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a small mound of earth; the
seat or canopy on an elephant, a howdah; an eruption
on the face; a wall; ({%as, ā, am%}), round; large,
great, large in compass or circumference; miserable,
wretched, miserly; fearful, terrified.
<LEND>

<L>41268<pc>0888-b<k1>varaRya<k2>varaRya
{%Varaṇya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%varaṇyati,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>41269<pc>0888-b<k1>varatkarI<k2>varatkarI
{%Varatkarī,%}¦ f. a sort of perfume ({%= reṇukā%}).
<LEND>

<L>41270<pc>0888-b<k1>varatrA<k2>varatrA
{%Varatrā,%}¦ f. a strap, thong, strip of leather, girth;
an elephant's or horse's girth.
<LEND>

<L>41271<pc>0888-b<k1>varayitavya<k2>varayitavya
{%Varayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be chosen or selected.
<LEND>

<L>41272<pc>0888-b<k1>varayitf<k2>varayitf
{%Varayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a suitor, wooer, lover,
bridegroom, husband.
<LEND>

<L>41273<pc>0888-b<k1>varayu<k2>varayu
{%Varayu, us,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>41274<pc>0888-b<k1>varala<k2>varala
{%Varala, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a sort of gad-fly or wasp;
({%ā%}), f. a goose; ({%ī%}), f. {%= varaṭā.%}
<LEND>

<L>41275<pc>0888-b<k1>varas<k2>varas
{%Varas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. width, breadth, room, space;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">εὖρος.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>41276<pc>0888-b<k1>varasAna<k2>varasAna
{%Varasāna,%}¦ Ved. {%= dārika%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 86).
<LEND>

<L>41277<pc>0888-b<k1>varasyA<k2>varasyA
{%Varasyā,%}¦ f., Ved. wish. desire, request.
<LEND>

<L>41278<pc>0888-b<k1>varAka<k2>varAka
{%Varāka, as, ā, am,%}¦ pitiable, miserable, unhappy,
poor, wretched, low, vile; impure; ({%as%}), m., N. of
Śiva; battle, war; N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>41279<pc>0888-b<k1>varAwa<k2>varAwa
{%Varāṭa, as,%}¦ m. a cowry (used as a coin); a rope,
cord; ({%ī%}), f. {%= varāḍī.%}
<LEND>

<L>41280<pc>0888-b<k1>varAwaka<k2>varAwaka
{%Varāṭaka, as, ikā,%}¦ m. f. a cowry, Cypræa Mo-
neta = (1/20) of a Kākiṇī or (1/80) of a Paṇa); ({%as%}), m.
the seed-vessel of a lotus-flower; a rope, cord, string;
({%ikā%}), f. the plant Mirabilis Jalapa; ({%am%}), n. a par-
ticular vegetable poison. {%—Varāṭaka-rajas, ās,%} m.
a kind of plant, Mesua Roxburghii.
<LEND>
[Page0888-c+ 81]

<L>41281<pc>0888-c<k1>varAqI<k2>varAqI
{%Varāḍī,%}¦ f. (?), N. of a Rāga.
<LEND>

<L>41282<pc>0888-c<k1>varARa<k2>varARa
{%Varāṇa, as,%}¦ m. {%= varaṇa,%} the tree Cratæva Rox-
burghii; N. of Indra, (in this sense said to be a
Pres. Part. A. of rt. {%vṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>41283<pc>0888-c<k1>varARasI<k2>varARasI
{%Varāṇasī,%}¦ f. the city of Benares, (more usually
written {%vārāṇasī,%} see {%varaṇasī.%})
<LEND>

<L>41284<pc>0888-c<k1>varAtuzwa<k2>varAtuzwa
{%Varātuṣṭa, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>41285<pc>0888-c<k1>varAya<k2>varAya
{%Varāya,%}¦ Nom. A. (?)  {%varāyate,%} &c., to represent
or become like a boon.
<LEND>

<L>41286<pc>0888-c<k1>varAyita<k2>varAyita
{%Varāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ become like a boon.
<LEND>

<L>41287<pc>0888-c<k1>varAla<k2>varAla
{%Varāla,%}¦ cloves.
<LEND>

<L>41288<pc>0888-c<k1>varAlaka<k2>varAlaka
{%Varālaka,%}¦ cloves; ({%as%}), m. Carissa Carandas.
<LEND>

<L>41289<pc>0888-c<k1>varitf<k2>varitf
{%Varitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who covers or screens;
a chooser, choosing, &c.; [cf. {%varītṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41290<pc>0888-c<k1>varin<k2>varin
{%Varin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a divine being enumerated
among the Viśve Devāḥ.
<LEND>

<L>41291<pc>0888-c<k1>variman<k2>variman
{%Variman, ā, a,%}¦ m. n. circumference, circuit,
compass (Ved.); width, breadth, extent, greatness,
expanse (Ved., in this sense an abstract noun of {%uru,%}
q. v.); excellence, superiority, pre-eminence, (in this
sense fr. {%vara%}); the most excellent, best, (used as
an adj. for {%variṣṭha.%})
<LEND>

<L>41292<pc>0888-c<k1>varivas<k2>varivas
{%Varivas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. room, width, space, ({%vari-%}
{%vaḥ kṛ,%} to make room or space, procure ample
space); freedom, relief, comfort, ease, rest, repose,
bliss, happiness; wealth, treasure ({%= dhana%} according
to Sāy. and Naigh. II. 10); worship, service, honour.
{%—Varivas-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. acquiring room, pro-
curing space, affording relief, freeing, delivering,
(Sāy. {%= dhanasya kartṛ,%} the causer or giver of
wealth.) {%—Varivo-da, as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving room
or space, granting freedom or relief. {%—Varivo-dhā,%}
{%ās, ās, am,%} Ved. causing room, making a free
course; granting bliss; (Sāy.) conferring riches ({%=%}
{%dhanasya dātṛ%}). {%—Varivo-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. ob-
taining or causing room, granting freedom, bestowing
comfort or repose; granting treasures or affluence;
bestowing honour, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41293<pc>0888-c<k1>varivasita<k2>varivasita
{%Varivasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (another form of {%vari-%}
{%vasyita%} below), served, honoured, adored (said of a
deity or of a spiritual teacher).
<LEND>

<L>41294<pc>0888-c<k1>varivasya<k2>varivasya
{%Varivasya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%varivasyati,%} &c., to grant
room or space, give room to, give relief, concede,
grant, permit (Ved.); to make happy or comfort-
able, show favour, serve, honour, adore, worship;
(Sāy.) to desire wealth.
<LEND>

<L>41295<pc>0888-c<k1>varivasyat<k2>varivasyat
{%Varivasyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ granting room or space;
(Sāy.) desiring wealth.
<LEND>

<L>41296<pc>0888-c<k1>varivasyA<k2>varivasyA
{%Varivasyā,%}¦ f. service, honour, worship, devotion,
devoted obedience to a spiritual teacher.
<LEND>

<L>41297<pc>0888-c<k1>varivasyita<k2>varivasyita
{%Varivasyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ served, honoured, adored,
reverenced.
<LEND>

<L>41298<pc>0888-c<k1>varizWa<k2>varizWa
{%Variṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ the most excellent, best,
dearest, most preferable ({%= vara-tama%}); better
than (with abl.); widest, broadest, largest, greatest,
most extensive, heaviest, (in these senses regarded as
a superl. of {%uru%}); the most conspicuous (in a bad
sense), worst, most wicked; ({%as%}), m. the Francoline
partridge; the orange tree; N. of a son of Manu
Cākṣuṣa; of one of the seven sages in the eleventh
Manv-antara; of a Daitya; ({%ā%}), f. Polanisia Icosan-
dra; ({%am%}), n. copper; pepper; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄριστος;</lang>
Lith. <nsi>wrausas,</nsi> ‘noblest, oldest.’] {%—Variṣṭhāśra-%}
{%ma (˚ṭha-āś˚), as,%} m., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>41299<pc>0888-c<k1>varizWaka<k2>varizWaka
{%Variṣṭhaka, as, ā, am, = variṣṭha,%}¦ most excel-
lent, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41300<pc>0888-c<k1>varItf<k2>varItf
{%Varītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who covers or screens,
covering, screening; [cf. {%varitṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41301<pc>0888-c<k1>varIman<k2>varIman
{%Varīman, a,%}¦ n. ({%= variman,%} q. v.), circumfer-
ence, width, breadth, extent (Ved.); ({%ā%}), m. excel-
lence, superiority, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41302<pc>0888-c<k1>varIyas<k2>varIyas
{%Varīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ more excellent, better, pre-
ferable; the most excellent, best; larger, very large,
wider, broader, most extensive, (in this sense regarded
as a compar. of {%uru,%} cf. {%variṣṭha%}); extremely
young or tender; ({%as%}), ind. wider, more distant,
further off or away; ({%as%}), n., Ved. {%= varivas,%} rest,
repose; ({%ān%}), m., N. of one of the twenty-seven
divisions of the ecliptic, the eighteenth astronomical
Yoga; of a son of Manu Sāvarṇa; of a son of
Pulaha by Gati; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀρείων;</lang> Lat. <nsi>melior</nsi> (<nsi>v</nsi>
[Page0889-a+ 81]
being changed into <nsi>m</nsi>); Lith. <nsi>wyresnis,</nsi> ‘nobler,
older.’]
<LEND>

<L>41303<pc>0889-a<k1>varu<k2>varu
{%Varu, us,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>41304<pc>0889-a<k1>varuRa<k2>varuRa
{%Varuṇa, as,%}¦ m. ‘Universal encompasser, All-en-
veloper, ‘N. of an Āditya, (as a Vedic deity com-
monly associated with Mitra and presiding over the
night as Mitra over the day [see 1. {%mitra%}], but
often celebrated separately, whereas Mitra is rarely
invoked alone; Varuṇa is one of the oldest of the
Vedic gods, corresponding in name and partly in
character to the <lang n="greek">Οὐρανός</lang> of the Greeks, and is
often regarded as the supreme deity, being then
styled ‘king of the gods’ or ‘king of both gods and
men’ or ‘king of the universe;’ no other deity has
such grand attributes and functions assigned to him;
he is described as fashioning and upholding heaven
and earth, as possessing extraordinary power and
wisdom called {%māyā,%} as sending his spies or messen-
gers throughout both worlds, as numbering the very
winkings of men's eyes, as hating falsehood, as
seizing transgressors with his {%pāśa%} or noose, as in-
flicting diseases, especially dropsy, as pardoning sin,
as the guardian of immortality; though generally
associated with Mitra, he is also invoked in the Veda
together with Indra, and in later Vedic literature
together with Agni, with Yama, and with Viṣṇu;
in Ṛg-veda IV. 1, 2. he is even called the brother
of Agni; though not generally regarded in the Veda
as a god of the ocean, yet he is often connected with
the waters, especially the waters of the atmosphere
or firmament, and in one place [Ṛg-veda VII. 64, 2]
is called with Mitra {%Sindhu-pati,%} ‘lord of the sea or
of rivers;’ hence in the later mythology he became
a kind of Neptune, and is there best known in his
character of god of the ocean; in the Mahā-bhārata
Varuṇa is said to be a son of Kardama and father of
Puṣkara, and is also variously represented as one
of the Deva-gandharvas, as a Nāga, as a king of the
Nāgas, and as an Asura; he is the regent of the
western quarter [cf. {%loka-pāla%}] and of the Nakṣatra
Śata-bhiṣaj; the Jainas consider Varuṇa as a servant
of the twentieth Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī);
the sun (‘the warder off or dispeller of darkness,’
cf. Ṛg-veda V. 48, 5, Sāy. {%= tamo-vāraka%}); the
firmament; the ocean, waters; N. of a particular
magical formula recited over weapons; the tree Cra-
tæva Roxburghii [cf. {%varaṇa%}]; ({%ās%}), m. pl. (per-
haps) the gods generally (so explained by some in
Atharva-veda III. 4, 6); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; [cf.
Zend <nsi>Varena;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">Οὐρανό-ς;</lang> Hib. <nsi>burne,</nsi> ‘water.’]
{%—Varuṇa-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. seized by Va-
ruṇa, afflicted with disease (especially with dropsy;
see under {%varuṇa%}). {%—Varuṇa-grāha, as,%} m., Ved.
seizure by Varuṇa. {%—Varuṇa-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of
a sacred bathing-place. {%—Varuṇa-tva, am,%} n. the
state or nature of Varuṇa. {%—Varuṇa-datta, as,%} m.
a proper N. {%—Varuṇa-deva%} or {%varuṇa-daivata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having Varuṇa for a deity; ({%am%}), n. the
Nakṣatra Śata-bhiṣaj. {%—Varuṇa-dhrut, t, t, t,%}
Ved. deceiving Varuṇa; (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda VII. 60, 9. {%varuṇa-dhrutaḥ = varuṇena%}
{%hiṃsitaḥ.%}) {%—Varuṇa-pāśa, as,%} m. Varuṇa's snare
or noose (Ved.); a shark. {%—Varuṇa-puruṣa, as,%}
m. a servant of Varuṇa. {%—Varuṇa-praghāsa, ās,%}
m. pl. the second of certain periodical oblations
offered on the full moon of Āṣāḍha or Śrāvaṇa
and observed for the purpose of obtaining exemption
from the snares or bonds of Varuṇa, (so called from
the custom of eating barley on this festival in honour
of the god Varuṇa.) {%—Varuṇa-praśiṣṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ruled over or guided by Varuṇa. {%—Varuṇa-%}
{%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of an astronomer. {%—Varuṇa-%}
{%mati, is,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Varuṇa-mitra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Gobhila. {%—Varuṇa-meni, is,%} f.,
Ved. Varuṇa's wrath. {%—Varuṇa-rājan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved.
having Varuṇa as king. {%—Varuṇa-loka, as,%} m.
Varuṇa's world or sphere; Varuṇa's province, i. e.
water. {%—Varuṇa-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a warrior
on the side of the gods in their war against the
Daityas. {%—Varuṇa-śeṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. being
Varuṇa's posterity; (Sāy.) having descendants capable
[Page0889-b+ 81]
of protecting ({%= vārakāḥ putrā yeṣam;%} accord-
ing to Sāy. {%śeṣas = apatya%}). {%—Varuṇa-śrād-%}
{%dha, am,%} n., N. of a particular funeral offering.
{%—Varuṇa-sava, as,%} m., Ved. Varuṇa's aid or
approval. {%—Varuṇa-senā%} or {%varuṇa-senikā,%} f., N.
of a princess. {%—Varuṇa-srotasa, as,%} m., N. of a
mountain, (also read {%varuṇa-śrotasa.%}) {%—Varu-%}
{%ṇāṅga-ruha (˚ṇa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘Varuṇa's offspring
or scion, ‘a patronymic of Agastya. {%—Varuṇātmajā%}
{%(˚ṇa-āt˚),%} f. ‘Varuṇa's daughter,’ spirituous or vinous
liquor (so called from being one of the precious
things produced at the churning of the ocean). {%—Va-%}
{%ruṇādri (˚ṇa-ad˚), is,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Va-%}
{%ruṇālaya (˚ṇa-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘Varuṇa's habitation,’
the sea, ocean, ({%karuṇā-varuṇālaya,%} the sea of
compassion.) {%—Varuṇāvāsa (˚ṇa-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘Va-
ruṇa's abode, ‘the sea, ocean. {%—Varuṇeśa (˚ṇa-īśa),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having Varuṇa as lord or governor; ({%am%}),
n. the Nakṣatra Śata-bhiṣaj. {%—Varuṇeśa-deśa,%}
{%as,%} m. the district or sphere governed by Varuṇa.
{%—Varuṇeśvara-tīrtha (˚ṇa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Varuṇoda (˚ṇa-uda), am,%} n. ‘Varuṇa's
water, ‘N. of a sea. {%—Varuṇopaniṣad (˚ṇa-up˚),%}
{%t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>41305<pc>0889-b<k1>varuRaka<k2>varuRaka
{%Varuṇaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= varuṇa,%} Cratæva Roxburghii.
<LEND>

<L>41306<pc>0889-b<k1>varuRAnI<k2>varuRAnI
{%Varuṇānī,%}¦ f. Varuṇa's wife.
<LEND>

<L>41307<pc>0889-b<k1>varuRAvi<k2>varuRAvi
{%Varuṇāvi, is,%}¦ or {%varuṇāvis,%} f., N. of Lakṣmī.
<LEND>

<L>41308<pc>0889-b<k1>varuRika<k2>varuRika
{%Varuṇika%}¦ or {%varuṇiya%} or {%varuṇila, as,%} m.
(diminutives fr. {%varuṇa-datta%}), see Pāṇ. V. 3, 84.
<LEND>

<L>41309<pc>0889-b<k1>varuRya<k2>varuRya
{%Varuṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. coming from Varuṇa,
belonging to him, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41310<pc>0889-b<k1>varutf<k2>varutf
{%Varutṛ, tā, trī, tṛ, = varūtṛ.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>41311<pc>0889-b<k1>varutra<k2>varutra
{%Varutra, am,%}¦ n. an upper and outer garment,
cloak, mantle.
<LEND>

<L>41312<pc>0889-b<k1>varula<k2>varula
{%Varula, as,%}¦ &c. {%= sambhakta%} (according to the
Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>41313<pc>0889-b<k1>varUtf<k2>varUtf
{%Varūtṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who wards off or
protects, a protector, defender; ({%tā%}), m. a god who
protects, guardian deity, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 55,
1 {%= sambhaktṛ%}); N. of an Asura priest, (in the
Kāṭhaka-Brāhmaṇa II. 30, 1. Tṛṣṭha and Varūtṛ
are said to be priests of the Asuras); ({%trī%}), f. a female
defender, guardian goddess; N. of a goddess (some-
times invited to a sacrifice along with Sarasvatī); of
a class of guardian goddesses, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I.
22, 10. {%varūtrī = varaṇīyā,%} to be chosen, excel-
lent; III. 62, 3. {%varūtrīḥ = sarvaiḥ sambhajanīyā%}
{%devapatnyaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>41314<pc>0889-b<k1>varUTa<k2>varUTa
{%Varūtha, am,%}¦ n. protection, defence, shelter (Ved.);
a sort of wooden ledge or fender fastened round a
chariot as a defence against collision, (in this sense
also {%as,%} m.); armour, a coat of mail; a shield
(made of leather &c.); a house, dwelling (so called
according to Sāy. because it shelters from the cold
and wind); a family or assemblage of sons &c.
(Ved.); any multitude, host, swarm, flock, quantity,
assemblage; ({%as%}), m. the Indian cuckoo; time; {%=%}
{%nija-rāṣṭraka%} (?); N. of a Grāma; of a person
mentioned in the Mārkaṇḍeya-Purāṇa. {%—Varūtha-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. the leader of a multitude or host, com-
mander of an army, general. {%—Varūtha-śas,%} ind. in
multitudes or hosts, in heaps or masses. {%—Varūthā-%}
{%dhipa (˚tha-adh˚), as,%} m. the leader of a multitude
or army.
<LEND>

<L>41315<pc>0889-b<k1>varUTin<k2>varUTin
{%Varūthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wearing or carrying defensive
arms or armour; furnished with a protecting plank
or ledge (said of a chariot); having a fender; afford-
ing protection or defence, sheltering; being in a
carriage or chariot; surrounded by a quantity or
troop (at the end of a comp., cf. {%lalanā-v˚);%} ({%ī%}),
m. a guard, defender; a car; ({%inī%}), f. a multitude,
troop, army; N. of an Apsaras. {%—Varūthinī-pati,%}
{%is,%} m. the leader of an army.
<LEND>

<L>41316<pc>0889-b<k1>varUTya<k2>varUTya
{%Varūthya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. affording protection
or shelter, sheltering, protected; to be chosen or
worshipped, (Sāy. {%= varaṇīya = sambajanīya%});
domestic, favourable or auspicious to a family or
house, (Sāy. {%= gṛhārha.%})
<LEND>

<L>41317<pc>0889-b<k1>vareR<k2>vareR
{%Vareṇ,%}¦ a Kvip formation fr. {%vareṇyaya%} (accord-
ing to Puruṣottama-deva, cf. Uṇādi-s. III. 98).
<LEND>

<L>41318<pc>0889-b<k1>vareRya<k2>vareRya
{%Vareṇya, as, ā, am%}¦ (perhaps a kind of anom.
[Page0889-c+ 76]
fut. pass. part. of rt. {%vṛ%}), desirable, to be wished
for, eligible; excellent, superior, chief, principal, pre-
eminent; ({%as%}), m., N. of a particular class of Manes;
of a son of Bhṛgu; ({%ā%}), f., N. of Śiva's wife;
({%am%}), n. saffron. {%—Vareṇya-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
having excellent understanding, intelligent, wise,
learned, (Sāy. {%= varaṇīya-prajña.%})
<LEND>

<L>41319<pc>0889-c<k1>vareRyaya<k2>vareRyaya
{%Vareṇyaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vareṇyayati,%} &c. (Uṇādi-s.
III. 98).
<LEND>

<L>41320<pc>0889-c<k1>vareya<k2>vareya
{%Vareya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vareyati,%} &c., Ved. to be a
suitor, ask in marriage.
<LEND>

<L>41321<pc>0889-c<k1>vareyu<k2>vareyu
{%Vareyu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. one who woos, a wooer,
suitor.
<LEND>

<L>41322<pc>0889-c<k1>vartu<k2>vartu<h>1
1. {%vartu%}¦ in {%dur-vartu,%} q. v. (For 2. {%vartu%} see
p. 892, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>41323<pc>0889-c<k1>vartf<k2>vartf
{%Vartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who keeps back or
off, one who wards off, one who resists or opposes;
an encourager, propeller, (Sāy. {%= vārayitṛ, nivāra-%}
{%yitṛ, pravartayitṛ, preraka.%})
<LEND>

<L>41324<pc>0889-c<k1>vartra<k2>vartra
{%Vartra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. keeping or warding off,
protecting, defending; ({%am%}), n. a dike, dam.
<LEND>

<L>41325<pc>0889-c<k1>varaRwa<k2>varaRwa
{#varaRwa#}¦ {%varaṇṭa%} in {%jala-v˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41326<pc>0889-c<k1>varambarA<k2>varambarA
{#varambarA#}¦ {%varambarā,%} f. the Nux Vomica
plant.
<LEND>

<L>41327<pc>0889-c<k1>varahaka<k2>varahaka
{#varahaka#}¦ {%varahaka,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>41328<pc>0889-c<k1>varAraka<k2>varAraka
{#varAraka#}¦ {%varāraka, am,%} n. a diamond.
<LEND>

<L>41329<pc>0889-c<k1>varASi<k2>varASi
{#varASi#}¦ {%varāśi,%} coarse cloth, &c.; (see {%ba-%}
{%rāsī.%})
<LEND>

<L>41330<pc>0889-c<k1>varAsi<k2>varAsi
{#varAsi#}¦ {%varāsi (?)  = varāśi%} above; ({%is%}), m.
a swordsman (?) .
<LEND>

<L>41331<pc>0889-c<k1>varAha<k2>varAha
{#varAha#}¦ {%varāha, as,%} m. (thought by some
to be fr. rt. 1. {%vṛh,%} to tear up roots, &c.), a boar,
hog, wild boar, (at the end of a comp. {%varāha%}
denotes ‘superiority,’ ‘pre-eminence,’ see Gaṇa Vyā-
ghrādi to Pāṇ. II. 1, 5, 6); (according to Naigh. I.
10, &c.) {%= megha,%} a cloud; a bull; a ram; Del-
phinus Gangeticus; N. of Viṣṇu in the third or
boar-incarnation (in which he raised the earth from
the bottom of the sea with his tusks, cf. {%varāhāva-%}
{%tāra%}); an array of troops in the form of a boar;
N. of a Daitya; of a Muni; of Varāha-mihira; of
a mountain; of one of the eighteen Dvīpas; a par-
ticular measure; Cyperus Rotundus; {%= vārāhī-kan-%}
{%da;%} N. of an Upaniṣad; of a Purāṇa (see {%varāha-%}
{%purāṇa%}); ({%ī%}), f., N. of two plants ({%= bhadra-%}
{%mustā, sūkara-kanda%}); [cf. Lat. <nsi>verres, porcus;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>farh, varh, farah;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>Fer-</nsi>
<nsi>kel;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>parsa-s;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>porosenok;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>uir-</nsi>
<nsi>chin.</nsi>] {%—Varāha-kanda, as,%} m. an esculent root,
a sort of yam. {%—Varāha-karṇa, as,%} m. ‘boar-eared,’
epithet of a kind of arrow; N. of a Yakṣa; ({%ī%}), f.
Physalis Flexuosa. {%—Varāha-karṇikā,%} f. a kind of
missile weapon. {%—Varāha-kalpa, as,%} m. the period
during which Viṣṇu assumed the form of a boar.
{%—Varāha-kāntā,%} f. a kind of yam. {%—Varāha-%}
{%kālin, ī,%} m. a kind of sunflower, Helianthus Annus.
{%—Varāha-krāntā,%} f. a sort of sensitive plant, Mi-
mosa Pudica; (according to some) Lycopodium
Imbricatum. {%—Varāha-daṃṣṭra, as, ā,%} m. f.
‘boar-toothed,’ N. of a disease (placed among the
Kṣudra-rogas). {%—Varāha-dat, an, atī, at,%} or {%va-%}
{%rāha-danta, as, ā, am,%} having boar's teeth. {%—Va-%}
{%rāha-datta, as,%} m., N. of a merchant (in the
Kathā-sarit-s. 37, 100). {%—Varāha-dvādaśī,%} f., N.
of a festival in honour of the boar-incarnation of
Viṣṇu (observed on the twelfth day in the light half
of the month Māgha). {%—Varāha-dvīpa,%} N. of a
Dvīpa. {%—Varāha-nāman, ā,%} m. the plant Mimosa
Pudica; an esculent root, yam. {%—Varāha-purāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the fifteenth Purāṇa celebrating Viṣṇu
in his boar-incarnation; [cf. {%purāṇa.%}] {%—Varāha-%}
{%mihira, as,%} m., N. of an astronomer (son of
Āditya-dāsa and author of the Vṛhaj-jātaka, the
Vṛhat-saṃhitā, &c.). {%—Varāha-mūla, am,%} n., N.
of a place having a statue of Viṣṇu in his form of
a boar. {%—Varāha-vat,%} ind. like a boar. {%—Varāha- %}
[Page0890-a+ 70]
{%vapuṣa, am,%} n. the body of a boar. {%—Varāha-%}
{%śṛṅga, as,%} m. ‘boar-horned,’ N. of Śiva. {%—Va-%}
{%rāha-śaila, as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Varāha-%}
{%saṃhitā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Varāha-svāmin, ī,%}
m., N. of a mythical king. {%—Varāhādri (˚ha-ad˚),%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Varāhāvatāra (˚ha-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. the boar-incarnation, the third incarna-
tion of Viṣṇu, (in which Viṣṇu, in the form of a
boar, raised up on one of his tusks the earth which
lay buried beneath the waters when the whole world
had become one ocean.) {%—Varāhāśva (˚ha-aś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Daitya.
<LEND>

<L>41332<pc>0890-a<k1>varAhaka<k2>varAhaka
{%Varāhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a serpent-demon; ({%ikā%}),
f. Mucuna Pruritus; ({%am%}), n., N. of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>41333<pc>0890-a<k1>varAhayu<k2>varAhayu
{%Varāhayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. eager after boars,
useful or fit for boar-hunting.
<LEND>

<L>41334<pc>0890-a<k1>varAhu<k2>varAhu
{%Varāhu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. a boar, hog; killing dis-
tinguished enemies (said of the Maruts, Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda I. 88, 5 {%= utkṛṣṭasya śatror hantṛ;%} other
interpretations of Sāy. are {%utkṛṣṭānāṃ devatā-%}
{%nām āhvātṛ, utkṛṣṭasya vṛṣṭy-āhartṛ, va-%}
{%rasya haviṣo bhakṣayitṛ, varāhāra,%} cf. {%vara;%}
Sāy. also applies the epithet Varāhavaḥ to gods of
the middle sphere).
<LEND>

<L>41335<pc>0890-a<k1>varitf<k2>varitf
{#varitf#}¦ {%varitṛ, variman.%} See p. 888, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41336<pc>0890-a<k1>varivas<k2>varivas
{#varivas#}¦ {%varivas, varivo-da,%} &c. See p. 888,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41337<pc>0890-a<k1>variSI<k2>variSI
{#variSI#}¦ {%variśī,%} f. {%= vaḍiśī, vaḍiśa,%} a fish-
hook.
<LEND>

<L>41338<pc>0890-a<k1>variza<k2>variza
{#variza#}¦ {%variṣa, as,%} m. (a modern form of
{%varṣa,%} q. v., cf. {%hariṣa,%} the separation of an {%r%}
from a following consonant by an intervening {%i%} being
not unfrequent in modern Sanskrit), rain; ({%ās%}), f. pl.
the rains, rainy season; ({%am%}), n. a year. {%—Variṣā-%}
{%priya, as,%} m. ‘the friend of the rainy season,’ the Cā-
taka bird (being supposed to drink only rain-water).
<LEND>

<L>41339<pc>0890-a<k1>varizWa<k2>varizWa
{#varizWa#}¦ {%variṣṭha, varīman, varīyas.%} See
p. 888, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41340<pc>0890-a<k1>varI<k2>varI
{#varI#}¦ {%varī, -ryas,%} f. pl. (for {%varī,%} fem. of
{%vara,%} see under {%vara,%} p. 887, col. 2), Ved. streams,
rivers (according to Naigh. I. 13; cf. {%vār, vāri%}).
{%—Varī-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of the father of the Gan-
dharva Nārada. {%—Varī-dharā,%} f. a kind of metre,
the first, second, and fourth lines consisting of ¯¯˘¯¯
˘˘¯˘¯¯, and the third ˘¯˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯¯.
<LEND>

<L>41341<pc>0890-a<k1>varIvarda<k2>varIvarda
{#varIvarda#}¦ {%varīvarda, as,%} m. {%= balīvarda,%} an
ox, bull.
<LEND>

<L>41342<pc>0890-a<k1>varIvfjat<k2>varIvfjat
{#varIvfjat#}¦ {%varīvṛjat, at, atī, at%} (fr. Intens.
of rt. {%vṛj%}), Ved. turning aside, diverting, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 24, 4 {%= bhriśaṃ hiṃsat,%}
excessively injuring, overthrowing repeatedly.)
<LEND>

<L>41343<pc>0890-a<k1>varIvfta<k2>varIvfta
{#varIvfta#}¦ {%varīvṛta, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens. of
rt. 1. {%vṛt%}), Ved. turning frequently, rolling.
<LEND>

<L>41344<pc>0890-a<k1>varIzu<k2>varIzu
{#varIzu#}¦ {%varīṣu, us,%} m., N. of Kāma-deva;
[cf. {%ravīṣu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41345<pc>0890-a<k1>varu<k2>varu
{#varu#}¦ {%varu.%} See p. 889, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>41346<pc>0890-a<k1>varuka<k2>varuka
{#varuka#}¦ {%varuka, as,%} m. a species of inferior
grain.
<LEND>

<L>41347<pc>0890-a<k1>varuwa<k2>varuwa
{#varuwa#}¦ {%varuṭa, as,%} m., N. of a class of
Mlecchas, (also read {%varaṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>41348<pc>0890-a<k1>varuqa<k2>varuqa
{%Varuḍa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a low mixed caste (one of
the seven low castes called Antya-ja, whose occupation
is splitting canes).
<LEND>

<L>41349<pc>0890-a<k1>varuRa<k2>varuRa
{#varuRa#}¦ {%varuṇa,%} &c. See p. 889, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>41350<pc>0890-a<k1>varutra<k2>varutra
{#varutra#}¦ {%varutra, varūtṛ,%} &c. See p. 889,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41351<pc>0890-a<k1>varUTa<k2>varUTa
{#varUTa#}¦ {%varūtha,%} &c. See p. 889, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41352<pc>0890-a<k1>vareRa<k2>vareRa
{#vareRa#}¦ {%vareṇa, as,%} m. a wasp [cf. {%varola%}];
({%ā%}), f. probably incorrect for {%vareṇyā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41353<pc>0890-a<k1>vareRya<k2>vareRya
{#vareRya#}¦ {%vareṇya, vareya.%} See p. 889, cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>
[Page0890-b+ 77]

<L>41354<pc>0890-b<k1>varowa<k2>varowa
{#varowa#}¦ {%varoṭa, as,%} m., N. of a plant ({%=%}
{%maruvaka%}); ({%am%}), n. its flower.
<LEND>

<L>41355<pc>0890-b<k1>varola<k2>varola
{#varola#}¦ {%varola, as,%} m. a kind of wasp; ({%ī%}),
f. a smaller kind of wasp.
<LEND>

<L>41356<pc>0890-b<k1>varkara<k2>varkara
{#varkara#}¦ {%varkara, as, ī,%} m. f. (fr. rt. {%vṛk?%}),
any young domestic animal; ({%as%}), m. a kid, lamb;
a goat; pleasure, pastime, sport, mirth, festivity.
{%—Varkara-karkara,%} (perhaps) of all kinds or sorts.
<LEND>

<L>41357<pc>0890-b<k1>varkarAwa<k2>varkarAwa
{#varkarAwa#}¦ {%varkarāṭa, as,%} m. a side glance,
wink, leer; the rays of the ascending sun; the marks
of a lover's finger-nails on the bosom of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>41358<pc>0890-b<k1>varkarIkuRqa<k2>varkarIkuRqa
{#varkarIkuRqa#}¦ {%varkarīkuṇḍa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>41359<pc>0890-b<k1>varkuwa<k2>varkuwa
{#varkuwa#}¦ {%varkuṭa, as,%} m. a pin, bolt.
<LEND>

<L>41360<pc>0890-b<k1>varga<k2>varga
{#varga#}¦ {%varga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vṛj%}), one who
excludes or removes; a class or multitude of similar
things (animate or inanimate), division, group, class,
tribe, troop, company, society, family, party, side,
(frequently compounded with numerals, e. g. {%tri-%}
{%varga,%} any group or division consisting of three
objects, a triad, cf. {%catur-v˚,%} &c.); any series or
group of words classified together, a class or series of
consonants in the alphabet (seven such classes being
given, viz. {%ka-varga,%} ‘the class of Guttural letters;’
{%ca-varga,%} ‘the Palatals;’ {%ṭa-varga,%} ‘the Cerebrals;’
{%ta-varga,%} ‘the Dentals;’ {%pa-varga,%} ‘the Labials;’
{%ya-varga,%} ‘the Semivowels and the aspirate {%h:%}’ the
first consonant of each Varga is called {%varga-pra-%}
{%thama%} or simply {%prathama,%} the second {%varga-%}
{%dvitīya%} or {%dvitīya,%} &c.); everything embraced
or comprehended under any department or head,
everything included under a category; a sphere,
province; the whole class of objects or pursuits of
life, (viz. {%kāma, artha,%} and {%dharma,%} see {%tri-%}
{%varga%}); a section, chapter, division of a book; a
subdivision of an Adhyāya in the Ṛg-veda, (ac-
cording to the arrangement which has reference to
mere bulk and not authorship, the Saṃhitā consists
of 8 Aṣṭakas, which are divided into 64 Adhyāyas
or lessons, and these into 2006 Vargas or sections,
and these into Ṛcs and Padas, see {%maṇḍala%}); a
similar subdivision in the Bṛhad-devatā; (in algebra)
the square or second power of a number, ({%pañca-%}
{%varga,%} the square of five; cf. {%bhinna-v˚%}); {%= bala,%}
strength (fr. rt. {%vṛj%} in a sense ‘to be strong,’ see
{%vargas;%} cf. {%ūrj;%} cf. also Zend <nsi>verez;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ϝἐργά-</lang>
<lang n="greek">ζομαι</lang>); N. of a country; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras;
[cf. probably Lat. <nsi>vulgus.</nsi>] {%—Varga-karman, a,%} n.
an operation relating to square numbers. {%—Varga-%}
{%ghana, am,%} n. the cube of a square. {%—Varga-%}
{%ghana-ghāta, as,%} m. the fifth power (in arithmetic).
{%—Varga-pada, am,%} n. square root. {%—Varga-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m. a protector of a company or tribe (of
dependants &c.). {%—Varga-prakṛti, is,%} f. an affected
square (in arithmetic). {%—Varga-prathama, as,%} m.
the first letter of a Varga, (see above.) {%—Varga-%}
{%praśaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%} praising one's own company
(of relatives, dependants, &c.). {%—Varga-mūla, am,%}
n. square root. {%—Varga-varga, as,%} m. the square
of a square, a biquadratic number. {%—Varga-varga-%}
{%varga, as,%} m. the square of a squared square.
{%—Varga-śas,%} ind. according to divisions, in groups.
{%—Varga-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing by a party or
side, faithful or devoted to a party. {%—Vargāntya%}
{%(˚ga-an˚), as,%} m. the last consonant in the first five
classes of consonants, a nasal. {%—Vargī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} made into classes, classified, arranged; (in
algebra) raised to a square, squared. {%—Vargottama%}
{%(˚ga-ut˚), as,%} m. the last consonant in one of the
first five classes of consonants, a nasal letter; the
chief or most remarkable of a class, epithet of the Ram,
the Bull, and the Twins (being the first signs in a
particular grouping of the sings of the zodiac).
<LEND>

<L>41361<pc>0890-b<k1>vargaRA<k2>vargaRA
{%Vargaṇā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%vargaya%}), multiplication.
<LEND>

<L>41362<pc>0890-b<k1>vargaya<k2>vargaya
{%Vargaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vargayati,%} &c., to multiply.
<LEND>

<L>41363<pc>0890-b<k1>vargas<k2>vargas
{%Vargas,%}¦ Ved. {%= bala-nāma%} (Naigh. II. 9).
<LEND>

<L>41364<pc>0890-b<k1>vargin<k2>vargin
{%Vargin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ belonging to a class, devoted
to a side or party.
<LEND>
[Page0890-c+ 80]

<L>41365<pc>0890-c<k1>vargIRa<k2>vargIRa
{%Vargīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the class or
category of, belonging to the family or party of (at
the end of a comp., cf. {%mad-v˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>41366<pc>0890-c<k1>vargIya<k2>vargIya
{%Vargīya, as, ā, am, = vargīṇa%}¦ above; belonging
to a class of consonants, ({%ka-vargīya,%} a Guttural;
{%pa-vargīya,%} a Palatal.)
<LEND>

<L>41367<pc>0890-c<k1>vargya<k2>vargya
{%Vargya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a class or divi-
sion, belonging to a side or party, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a
member of a society, a colleague.
<LEND>

<L>41368<pc>0890-c<k1>varja<k2>varja
{%Varja, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from, devoid of (at the end
of comps.); excluding, excepting, with the exception
of; ({%as%}), m. the act of leaving, abandoning; leaving
out; ({%am%}), ind. see below.
<LEND>

<L>41369<pc>0890-c<k1>varjaka<k2>varjaka
{%Varjaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.),
excluding, exclusive of; avoiding, shunning, leaving,
leaving out.
<LEND>

<L>41370<pc>0890-c<k1>varjana<k2>varjana
{%Varjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of excluding, avoiding,
leaving, abandoning, giving up, renouncing; deser-
tion; exception; the act of killing, hurting, injury.
<LEND>

<L>41371<pc>0890-c<k1>varjanIya<k2>varjanIya
{%Varjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be excluded, to be
avoided or shunned, improper, censurable, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>41372<pc>0890-c<k1>varjam<k2>varjam
{%Varjam,%}¦ ind. excluding, exclusive of, with the
omission or exception of, without (at the end of a
comp., cf. {%mantra-v˚%}); excepting, except.
<LEND>

<L>41373<pc>0890-c<k1>varjayitavya<k2>varjayitavya
{%Varjayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be avoided or
shunned.
<LEND>

<L>41374<pc>0890-c<k1>varjayitf<k2>varjayitf
{%Varjayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who excludes or
avoids or shuns; one who pours out, a discharger.
<LEND>

<L>41375<pc>0890-c<k1>varjayitvA<k2>varjayitvA
{%Varjayitvā,%}¦ ind. having excluded, having shunned
or avoided, having omitted or excepted, excepting,
leaving out.
<LEND>

<L>41376<pc>0890-c<k1>varjita<k2>varjita
{%Varjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ excluded, abandoned, avoided;
relinquished; left, remnant; deprived of, destitute of,
without (with inst. or at the end of a comp., e. g.
{%chidra-v˚,%} without a break, uninterrupted); ex-
cepted; given.
<LEND>

<L>41377<pc>0890-c<k1>varjin<k2>varjin
{%Varjin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ avoiding, shunning.
<LEND>

<L>41378<pc>0890-c<k1>varjya<k2>varjya
{%Varjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be excluded, to be shunned
or avoided, to be excepted, to be left out; with the
exception of, exclusive of (at the end of a comp.,
e. g. {%tvad-varjyam,%} except thee); ({%am%}), n. a point
in each lunar mansion during which no business should
be begun.
<LEND>

<L>41379<pc>0890-c<k1>varc<k2>varc
{#varc#}¦ {%varc,%} cl. 1. A. {%varcate, vavarce,%}
{%varcitum,%} to shine, be bright.
<LEND>

<L>41380<pc>0890-c<k1>varca<k2>varca
{%Varca, as,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient sage ({%= su-var-%}
{%caka%}).
<LEND>

<L>41381<pc>0890-c<k1>varcala<k2>varcala
{%Varcala%}¦ in {%su-varcalā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41382<pc>0890-c<k1>varcas<k2>varcas
{%Varcas, as,%}¦ n. vital power, vigour, energy, efficacy,
efficiency, activity, the illuminating power of fire or
of the sun, (in the preceding senses mostly Ved.);
light, lustre, brightness, brilliancy; form, figure, shape,
colour; excrement, ordure, feces; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a
son of Soma; of a son of Su-tejas; of a Rākṣasa.
{%—Varcas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessing vital
energy or vigour, vigorous, active; shining, bright;
containing the word {%varcas%}. {%—Varcas-vin, ī, inī, i,%}
full of power or vigour, vigorous, active, energetic;
bright; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Varcas and grandson
of Soma. {%—Varco-graha, as,%} m. obstruction of the
feces, constipation. {%—Varco-dā%} or {%varco-dhā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. granting power, bestowing vigour or
energy.
<LEND>

<L>41383<pc>0890-c<k1>varcasa<k2>varcasa
{%Varcasa, am,%}¦ n. (at the end of a comp.) {%= varcas,%}
({%candra-varcasa,%} moon-shine.)
<LEND>

<L>41384<pc>0890-c<k1>varcasin<k2>varcasin
{%Varcasin%}¦ in {%brahma-v˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41385<pc>0890-c<k1>varcaska<k2>varcaska
{%Varcaska, as, am,%}¦ m. n. power, vigour, bright-
ness, &c. ({%= varcas%}); ordure, excrement.
<LEND>

<L>41386<pc>0890-c<k1>varcasya<k2>varcasya
{%Varcasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ bestowing vital power or
vigour (Ved.); relating to {%varcas;%} acting on the
excrement; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%iṣṭakā,%} a term applied to
certain sacrificial bricks (at the laying of which a par-
ticular Mantra containing the word {%varcas%} is used).
<LEND>

<L>41387<pc>0890-c<k1>varcAya<k2>varcAya
{%Varcāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%varcāyate, -yitum,%} to shine.
<LEND>

<L>41388<pc>0890-c<k1>varcin<k2>varcin
{%Varcin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of an Asura or demon
(who with his family and dependants was slain by
Indra [Ṛg-veda II. 14, 6], or by Indra and Viṣṇu
jointly, Ṛg-veda VII. 99, 5).
<LEND>

<L>41389<pc>0890-c<k1>varcawI<k2>varcawI
{#varcawI#}¦ {%varcaṭī (?) ,%} f. a kind of rice; a
harlot.
<LEND>
[Page0891-a+ 80]

<L>41390<pc>0891-a<k1>varja<k2>varja
{#varja#}¦ {%varja,%} &c. See p. 890, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41391<pc>0891-a<k1>varR<k2>varR
{#varR#}¦ {%varṇ%} (more properly regarded as
a Nom. fr. {%varṇa%} below), cl. 10. P. {%var-%}
{%ṇayati%} (according to some also A. {%—te), varṇayām-%}
{%āsa, avavarṇat, -ta, varṇayitum%} (anom. Inf.
{%varṇitum%}), to paint, colour, dye; to depict, deli-
neate, picture, write, describe, enumerate, relate,
tell, explain, illustrate; to praise, extol; to illumi-
nate; to spread, extend; to exert one's self; to
send, cast (or to grind, pound): Pass. {%varṇyate,%} Aor.
{%avarṇi,%} to be coloured; to be described; to be
praised, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41392<pc>0891-a<k1>varRa<k2>varRa
{%Varṇa, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 10. fr.
rt. {%vṛ%}), a covering, cloak, mantle; a cover, covering,
lid; outward appearance, exterior, form, figure;
colour, hue, tint, dye, paint; lustre, beauty; a
coloured cloth thrown over an elephant, housings;
staining or anointing the body with coloured un-
guents; dress, embellishment; gold; the purity of
gold as ascertained by its streak; sort, kind, species,
class, race, tribe; class of men, order, caste (as being
originally perhaps connected with colour or com-
plexion; but the word {%varṇa%} is more properly
applicable to the four principal classes described in
Manu's code, viz. Brāhmans, Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas,
and Śūdras, and not to the numerous mixed castes
of later times; the more modern word for ‘caste’
is {%jāti%}); a letter, sound, vowel, syllable, word, (in
these and some of the preceding senses said to be
also {%am,%} n.); quality, property; a musical mode; a
particular time in music, the order or arrangement
of a song, &c.; praise, commendation, renown,
fame, glory, celebrity; (in algebra) an unknown
magnitude or quantity; (in arithmetic) the figure
one, (according to some) a coefficient; a religious
observance; ({%am%}), n. coloured unguent or perfume;
saffron; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant or leguminous shrub,
Cajanus Indicus; [cf. Slav. <nsi>vran,</nsi> ‘black;] a raven:’
Russ. <nsi>voronj,</nsi> ‘the azure colour of swords;’ <nsi>vornoi,</nsi>
‘black;’ <nsi>voron,</nsi> ‘a raven:’ Lith. <nsi>warnas,</nsi> ‘a raven.’]
{%—Varṇa-kavi, is,%} m., N. of a son of Kuvera.
{%—Varṇa-kūpikā,%} f. any vessel containing colour
or paint, an ink-bottle, ink-stand. {%—Varṇa-kṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} causing or giving colour. {%—Varṇa-krama, as,%}
m. order or succession of colours; order of castes;
order or series of letters, alphabetical arrangement,
the alphabet; ({%eṇa%}), ind. according to the order of
the castes {%—Varṇa-gata, as, ā, am,%} ‘gone to
colour,’ coloured, described; algebraical. {%—Varṇa-%}
{%cāraka, as,%} m. a painter, colourer. {%—Varṇa-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced from castes, relating to castes.
{%—Varṇa-jyeṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} highest in caste;
({%as%}), m. a Brāhman. {%—Varṇa-tanu, us,%} f., N. of a
particular Mantra addressed to Sarasvatī. {%—Varṇa-%}
{%tas,%} ind. by or with colour &c. {%—Varṇa-tā,%} f. or
{%varṇa-tva, am,%} n. the state of colour, colour,
({%anya-varṇa-tva,%} the being of another colour);
the state or condition of caste, division into classes;
the state or condition of a letter or sound. {%—Varṇa-%}
{%tāla, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Varṇa-tūli, is,%} or
{%varṇa-tūlikā%} or {%varṇa-tūlī,%} f. ‘letter-brush,’ a pen,
pencil, paint-brush. {%—Varṇa-da, as, ā, am,%} giving
colour, colouring, dyeing; giving tribe, &c.; ({%am%}),
n. a kind of fragrant yellow wood. {%—Varṇa-dātṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m. a granter or bestower of colour, &c.; ({%trī%}), f.
turmeric. {%—Varṇa-dūta, as,%} m. ‘a letter as a mes-
senger,’ a letter, epistle. {%—Varṇa-dūṣaka, as, ikā,%}
{%am,%} violating or disturbing the distinctions of caste.
{%—Varṇa-deśanā,%} f. ‘instruction in sounds,’ N. of a
lexicon. {%—Varṇa-dvaya-maya, as, ī, am,%} consist-
ing of two syllables. {%—Varṇa-dharma, as,%} m. the
particular duty or occupation of each caste or tribe.
{%—Varṇa-pāta, as,%} m. the dropping or omission of
a letter in pronunciation. {%—Varṇa-pātra, am,%} n. a
vessel or receptacle for colours, paint-box, (according
to some this word should be {%varṇa-pattra,%} a leaf
on which a painter mixes his colours, a pallet.)
{%—Varṇa-puṣpa, am,%} n. the blossom of the globe-
amaranth; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant {%(= uṣṭra-kāṇḍī).%}
{%—Varṇa-puṣpaka, as,%} m. globe-amaranth. {%—Var- %}
[Page0891-b+ 81]
{%ṇa-prakarṣa, as,%} m. excellence or beauty of
colour. {%—Varṇa-prabodha, as,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Varṇa-prasādana, am,%} n. aloe wood, Agallo-
chum. {%—Varṇa-bhedinī,%} f. a kind of plant (?).
{%—Varṇa-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of colours;
consisting of letters or sounds. {%—Varṇa-mātṛ, tā,%}
f. ‘letter-mother,’ a pen, pencil, &c. {%—Varṇa-mā-%}
{%tṛkā,%} f., N. of Sarasvatī. {%—Varṇa-mātrā,%} f. a kind
of metre. {%—Varṇa-mālā,%} f. order or series of letters,
(especially) rows of letters (written on a board or in a
diagram), the alphabet. {%—Varṇa-rāśi, is,%} m. ‘mul-
titude or series of letters,’ the alphabet. {%—Varṇa-%}
{%rekhā%} or {%varṇa-lekhā%} or {%varṇa-lekhikā,%} f. chalk
or a white substance often confounded with chalk.
{%—Varṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having colour, &c.; ({%atī%}),
f. turmeric. {%—Varṇa-varti, is,%} or {%varṇa-vartikā,%} f. a
writing-pen, pencil, &c. {%—Varṇa-vādin, ī,%} m. a speaker
of praise, panegyrist. {%—Varṇa-viparyaya, as,%} m.
the change or substitution of one letter for another.
{%—Varṇa-vilāsinī,%} f. turmeric. {%—Varṇa-viloḍaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a plagiarist; a house-breaker. {%—Varṇa-viveka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘distinction of words,’ N. of a dictionary.
{%—Varṇa-vṛtta, am,%} n. metre regulated by the
number of syllables, (this term applies to a common
class of metres, such as the Śloka or Anuṣṭubh, the
Indra-vajrā, &c., which are regulated by the number
of syllables in the half-line; cf. {%mātrā-vṛtta.%})
{%—Varṇa-vyavasthiti, is,%} f. ‘caste-system,’ insti-
tution of caste. {%—Varṇa-śikṣā,%} f. instruction in
sounds or letters. {%—Varṇa-śreṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} be-
longing to the best of the tribes; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman
or member of the highest caste. {%—Varṇa-saṃyoga,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘union of tribe or caste,’ matrimonial con-
nection or marriage between persons of the same
caste. {%—Varṇa-saṃsarga, as,%} m. mixture or con-
fusion of castes, matrimonial connection or marriage
with members of other castes. {%—Varṇa-saṃhāra,%}
{%as,%} m. an assemblage or mixture of different castes,
an assembly in which all the four tribes are repre-
sented. {%—Varṇa-saṅkara, as,%} m. mixture or blend-
ing of colours; mixture or confusion of castes through
intermarriage with different castes; a tribe of different
origin, a man descended from a father and mother
of different castes. {%—Varṇa-saṅkarika, as, ā, am,%}
one who causes a mixture of castes by marrying a
member of a different caste. {%—Varṇa-saṅghāṭa%} or
{%varṇa-saṅghāta%} or {%varṇa-samāmnāya, as,%} m. an
assemblage or aggregate of letters, the alphabet.
{%—Varṇa-sthāna, am,%} n. the place or organ of
utterance of any sound or letter, (of these there are
eight, such as ‘the throat’ &c., see under {%sthāna.%})
{%—Varṇa-hīna, as, ā, am,%} deprived of caste, out-
cast. {%—Varṇāgama (˚ṇa-āg˚), as,%} m. the addition
of a letter to a word. {%—Varṇāṅkā (˚ṇa-aṅ˚),%} f.
‘letter-marker,’ a pen. {%—Varṇātman (˚ṇa-āt˚), ā,%}
m. ‘consisting of sounds or letters,’ a word. {%—Var-%}
{%ṇādhipa (˚ṇa-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘caste-presider,’ a
planet presiding over a class or caste. {%—Varṇānya-%}
{%tva (˚ṇa-an˚), am,%} n. change of complexion. {%—Var-%}
{%ṇāpasada (˚ṇa-ap˚), as,%} m. one who goes out
from caste, excluded from caste, an outcast. {%—Var-%}
{%ṇāpeta (˚ṇa-ap˚), as,%} m. destitute of caste, born
in a mixed caste, outcast, degraded. {%—Varṇārha%}
{%(˚ṇa-ar˚), as,%} m. a sort of bean, Phaseolus Mungo.
{%—Varṇāśrama (˚ṇa-āś˚), am,%} n. caste and order,
class and stage of life, (see {%āśrama%}.) {%—Varṇā-%}
{%śrama-dharma, as,%} m. the duties of caste and
order. {%—Varṇāśrama-vat, ān, atī, at,%} or {%varṇā-%}
{%śramin, ī, inī, i,%} possessed of caste and order. {%—Var-%}
{%ṇī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become or be
changed into an articulate sound. {%—Varṇeśvarī%}
{%(˚ṇa-īś˚),%} f., N. of a goddess. {%—Varṇodaka (˚ṇa-%}
{%ud˚), am,%} n. coloured water. {%—Varṇopeta (˚ṇa-%}
{%up˚), as, ā, am,%} having tribe or caste.
<LEND>

<L>41393<pc>0891-b<k1>varRaka<k2>varRaka
{%Varṇaka, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a mask, the dress of an
actor, &c.; paint, pigment; colour for painting,
paint, anything for smearing on the body; ({%as%}), m.
a panegyrist, encomiast, bard, strolling player or
singer; a letter, syllable ({%= varṇa,%} generally at the
end of an adj. comp.); a kind of plant; the sandal
tree, sandal; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of outer or upper gar-
[Page0891-c+ 80]
ment, mantle; fine gold, purity of gold; ({%ikā%}), f. a
mask, dress of an actor, &c.; colour; ink; a pen,
pencil; ({%am%}), n. paint, pigment (as orpiment, in-
digo, &c.); sandal; a chapter, section, division; a
circle, orb; (perhaps) a model or specimen, (in this
sense the gender is doubtful.) {%—Varṇaka-daṇ-%}
{%ḍaka,%} a painting-stick; N. of a metre. {%—Varṇaka-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} composed or consisting of colours,
painted.
<LEND>

<L>41394<pc>0891-c<k1>varRakita<k2>varRakita
{%Varṇakita,%}¦ see Gaṇa Tārakādi to Pāṇ. V. 2, 36.
<LEND>

<L>41395<pc>0891-c<k1>varRawa<k2>varRawa
{%Varṇaṭa, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>41396<pc>0891-c<k1>varRana<k2>varRana
{%Varṇana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of painting, colour-
ing, delineation, description, representation, explana-
tion, describing, expatiating, pointing out qualities,
&c.; writing; a statement, assertion; ({%ā%}), f. praise,
commendation, panegyric.
<LEND>

<L>41397<pc>0891-c<k1>varRanIya<k2>varRanIya
{%Varṇanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be painted or coloured,
to be delineated or described; to be praised; to be
illustrated, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41398<pc>0891-c<k1>varRayitavya<k2>varRayitavya
{%Varṇayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be delineated or
described, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41399<pc>0891-c<k1>varRayitf<k2>varRayitf
{%Varṇayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who colours or de-
picts or describes.
<LEND>

<L>41400<pc>0891-c<k1>varRayitvA<k2>varRayitvA
{%Varṇayitvā,%}¦ ind. having depicted, having de-
scribed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41401<pc>0891-c<k1>varRayizyat<k2>varRayizyat
{%Varṇayiṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to
depict or describe.
<LEND>

<L>41402<pc>0891-c<k1>varRasa<k2>varRasa
{%Varṇasa,%}¦ see Gaṇa Tṛṇādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>41403<pc>0891-c<k1>varRAwa<k2>varRAwa
{%Varṇāṭa, as,%}¦ m. a painter; a singer; one who
makes his living by his wife; a lover.
<LEND>

<L>41404<pc>0891-c<k1>varRASA<k2>varRASA
{%Varṇāśā,%}¦ f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>41405<pc>0891-c<k1>varRi<k2>varRi
{%Varṇi%}¦ (gender doubtful), gold.
<LEND>

<L>41406<pc>0891-c<k1>varRika<k2>varRika
{%Varṇika%}¦ in {%aikavarṇika,%} being of one kind, &c.;
({%as%}), m. a writer, scribe, secretary, (for {%vārṇika.%})
<LEND>

<L>41407<pc>0891-c<k1>varRita<k2>varRita
{%Varṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ painted, delineated; described,
explained; praised, eulogized, extolled. {%—Varṇita-%}
{%vat, an, atī, at,%} one who has painted or described,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>41408<pc>0891-c<k1>varRin<k2>varRin
{%Varṇin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (at the end of a comp.), having
the colour or appearance of; belonging to a tribe;
belonging to the caste of (e. g. {%brāhmaṇa-varṇin,%}
belonging to the Brāhman caste); ({%ī%}), m. a person
belonging to one of the four castes; a Brāhman in
the first order of life, a religious student or Brahma-
cārin, q. v.; a painter; a writer, scribe; (perhaps)
a kind of plant; ({%inas%}), m. pl., N. of a particular
sect; ({%inī%}), f. a woman belonging to one of the
higher castes, caste-woman; a woman or wife in
general; turmeric. {%—Varṇi-liṅgin, ī,%} m. one wear-
ing the marks of a religious student. {%—Varṇi-vadha,%}
{%as,%} m. killing or occasioning the death of a man
belonging to one of the four castes.
<LEND>

<L>41409<pc>0891-c<k1>varRila<k2>varRila
{%Varṇila,%}¦ see Gaṇa Picchādi to Pāṇ. V. 2, 100.
<LEND>

<L>41410<pc>0891-c<k1>varRya<k2>varRya<h>1
1. {%varṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be delineated or described,
to be pictured, describable.
<LEND>

<L>41411<pc>0891-c<k1>varRya<k2>varRya<h>2
2. {%varṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to colour, useful for
colour, giving colour; ({%am%}), n. {%= varṇa,%} saffron.
<LEND>

<L>41412<pc>0891-c<k1>varRyamAna<k2>varRyamAna
{%Varṇyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being painted; being
described; being extolled or praised.
<LEND>

<L>41413<pc>0891-c<k1>varRasi<k2>varRasi
{#varRasi#}¦ {%varṇasi%} (according to Uṇādi-s. IV.
107. fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), water; [cf. {%parṇasi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41414<pc>0891-c<k1>varRu<k2>varRu
{%Varṇu, us,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 38. fr.
rt. {%vṛ%}), N. of a river and of the adjacent district;
the sun.
<LEND>

<L>41415<pc>0891-c<k1>varta<k2>varta
{#varta#}¦ {%varta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%vṛt%}), manner
of existence or subsistence, livelihood, living (gene-
rally at the end of comps., cf. {%kalya-v˚, bahu-v˚,%}
&c.). {%—Varta-janman, ā,%} m. a cloud. {%—Varta-loha,%}
{%am,%} n. a sort of brass, mixed or bell-metal.
<LEND>

<L>41416<pc>0891-c<k1>vartaka<k2>vartaka
{%Vartaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what abides or exists,
abiding, existing, living; given up to, devoted or
attached to (generally at the end of comps.); ({%as%}),
m. a sort of quail; a horse's hoof; ({%akā, akī, ikā%}),
f. a quail; ({%am%}), n. a sort of brass or bell-metal ({%=%}
{%varta-loha%}).
<LEND>

<L>41417<pc>0891-c<k1>vartana<k2>vartana
{%Vartana, as, ā, am, = vartiṣṇu,%}¦ abiding, stay-
ing; stationary, stable; causing to move or live,
giving life, causing to be; ({%as%}), m. a dwarf; ({%ī%}), f.
staying, abiding, living, life; a way, road, path;
rubbing, grinding, pounding ({%= peṣaṇa%}); sending
[Page0892-a+ 81]
off, dispatching ({%= preṣaṇa,%} according to some);
a spindle or distaff, the ball at one end of a spindle;
({%am%}), n. the act of turning or moving, revolving;
rolling on, moving forward, moving about; staying,
abiding, living, abode, residence; causing to move;
causing to be or exist; appointing; living on, sup-
porting life by (with inst. or at the end of a comp.),
livelihood, subsistence; earnings, hire, wages, salary;
occupation, profession; intercourse, commerce, traffic;
proceeding, conduct, behaviour; colouring, covering
with colour (such as lac &c.); a spindle or distaff or
(according to some) a ball of cotton from which the
threads are spun; a ball, globe. {%—Vartana-dāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the gift of means of subsistence or wages.
{%—Vartana-viniyoga, as,%} m. appointment or assign-
ment of means of subsistence, i. e. of salary, wages,
&c. {%—Vartanābhāva (˚na-abh˚), as,%} m. want of
means of subsistence, destitution.
<LEND>

<L>41418<pc>0892-a<k1>vartani<k2>vartani
{%Vartani, is,%}¦ f. a wheel (Ved.), the circle or felloe
of a wheel (Ved.); the track of a wheel (Ved.); the
track of a road, way, road, course; the eyelashs
[cf. {%vartman%}]; ({%is%}), m. the eastern country or
eastern India; {%= stotra,%} see Gaṇa Uñchādi to Pāṇ.
VI. 1, 160.
<LEND>

<L>41419<pc>0892-a<k1>vartanin<k2>vartanin
{%Vartanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. having wheels (at the
end of a comp., e. g. {%eka-vartanin,%} having one
wheel; cf. {%sahasra-v˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>41420<pc>0892-a<k1>vartanIya<k2>vartanIya
{%Vartanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be lived, to be stayed
or dwelt in.
<LEND>

<L>41421<pc>0892-a<k1>vartamAna<k2>vartamAna
{%Vartamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ turning, turning round,
revolving, moving; being, existing, living, being
present; dwelling or abiding in; ({%am%}), n. presence;
(in grammar) the present tense. {%—Vartamāna-tā,%}
f. or {%vartamāna-tva, am,%} n. the being present, the
condition of present time. {%—Vartamānākṣepa (˚na-%}
{%āk˚), as,%} m. denying or not agreeing with any pre-
sent event or circumstances.
<LEND>

<L>41422<pc>0892-a<k1>vartayat<k2>vartayat
{%Vartayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to turn; causing to
be or exist; living, subsisting; dwelling, abiding.
<LEND>

<L>41423<pc>0892-a<k1>vartas<k2>vartas
{%Vartas, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. the eyelashes; [cf. {%var-%}
{%tani.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41424<pc>0892-a<k1>varti<k2>varti
{%Varti, is,%}¦ or {%vartī,%} f. anything rolled or wrapped
round, a pad or kind of bandage on a wound;
ointment, unguent, perfume for the person, rouge,
eye-salve, collyrium or any cosmetic remedy pre-
pared from various substances and dried in the shape
of a ball or pill; the wick of a lamp; a lamp, a
magical lamp; the projecting threads or unwoven
ends of woven cloth, a kind of fringe; a projecting
rim or protuberance round a vessel; a swelling or
polypus in the throat; a swelling or protuberance
formed by internal rupture, ({%mūtra-varti,%} rupture
of the scrotum); a surgical instrument, bougie; a
streak, line, stripe, ruled line.
<LEND>

<L>41425<pc>0892-a<k1>vartika<k2>vartika
{%Vartika, as,%}¦ m. {%= vartaka,%} a sort of quail.
<LEND>

<L>41426<pc>0892-a<k1>vartikA<k2>vartikA
{%Vartikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%varti%}), {%= dīrgha-yaṣṭi;%} the
wick of a lamp [cf. {%yoga-v˚%}]; a paint-brush;
colour, paint; Odina Pinnata; a quail, (see under
{%vartaka,%} p. 891, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>41427<pc>0892-a<k1>vartita<k2>vartita
{%Vartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be or exist, brought
about, accomplished.
<LEND>

<L>41428<pc>0892-a<k1>vartitavya<k2>vartitavya
{%Vartitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be lived or dwelt, to
be stayed, to be remained or continued, to be carried
out, to be accomplished or performed.
<LEND>

<L>41429<pc>0892-a<k1>vartitvA<k2>vartitvA
{%Vartitvā,%}¦ ind. having lived, having dwelt, having
remained, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41430<pc>0892-a<k1>vartin<k2>vartin
{%Vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ turning, moving, going; abid-
ing, staying, resting, being, situated, (frequently at
the end of comps., cf. {%hasta-v˚, samīpa-v˚%}); being or
remaining fixed in any position or condition; conduct-
ing one's self, behaving, acting, practising, perform-
ing; acting with propriety, ({%a-vartin,%} behaving
improperly.) {%—Varti-tā,%} f. or {%varti-tva, am,%} n.
conduct to be observed towards (e. g. {%guru-varti-tā,%}
proper behaviour to a superior).
<LEND>

<L>41431<pc>0892-a<k1>vartira<k2>vartira
{%Vartira, as,%}¦ m. {%= vartīra.%}
<LEND>

<L>41432<pc>0892-a<k1>vartizRu<k2>vartizRu
{%Vartiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ turning, revolving, circular;
abiding, staying, being stationary or fixed; standing
firm in battle, facing (an enemy).
<LEND>

<L>41433<pc>0892-a<k1>vartizyamARa<k2>vartizyamARa
{%Vartiṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ about to be, about to
take place, future.
<LEND>
[Page0892-b+ 78]

<L>41434<pc>0892-b<k1>vartis<k2>vartis
{%Vartis, is,%}¦ n., Ved. circuit, orbit; a way, road ({%=%}
{%mārga,%} according to Mahī-dhara); a residence,
dwelling, abode ({%= gṛha,%} according to Sāy.).
<LEND>

<L>41435<pc>0892-b<k1>vartIra<k2>vartIra
{%Vartīra, as,%}¦ m. a sort of quail or partridge; [cf.
{%vartaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41436<pc>0892-b<k1>vartu<k2>vartu<h>2
2. {%vartu%}¦ in {%tri-vartu,%} q. v. (For 1. {%vartu%} see
p. 889, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>41437<pc>0892-b<k1>vartula<k2>vartula
{%Vartula, as, ā, am,%}¦ round, circular, globular,
spherical; ({%as%}), m. a kind of pulse, a pea; a ball;
N. of one of Śiva's attendants; ({%ā%}), f. a ball at the
end of a spindle to assist its rotation, the ring be-
longing to a spindle; ({%ī%}), f. a plant bearing a seed
resembling pepper, Scindapsus Officinalis; ({%am%}), n.
a circle; the round bulb of a kind of onion. {%—Var-%}
{%tulākāra (˚la-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} of circular shape,
round, globular, spherical.
<LEND>

<L>41438<pc>0892-b<k1>vartmaka<k2>vartmaka
{%Vartmaka%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. {%= vartman%}
below, ({%rakta-vartmaka, as,%} m. ‘having red eye-
lids, ‘a kind of bird.)
<LEND>

<L>41439<pc>0892-b<k1>vartman<k2>vartman
{%Vartman, a,%}¦ n. the track of a wheel or of a road,
a way, road, path, track, course, passage, ({%vartmanā,%}
inst. c. by the way of, frequently at the end of
comps., e. g. {%ambudhi-vartmanā,%} by sea; {%ākāśa-%}
{%vartmanā,%} through the air; {%dvāra-vartmanā,%}
through the door); an edge, border; an eyelid
(as encircling the eye). {%—Vartma-karman, a,%} n.
the business or science of road-making, engineer-
ing. {%—Vartma-da, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a school be-
longing to the Atharva-veda. {%—Vartma-pāta, as,%}
m. deviation from the road, aberration. {%—Vartma-%}
{%bandha%} or {%vartma-vibandhaka, as,%} m. a disease
attacking the eyelids and obstructing their proper
movement. {%—Vartma-roga, as,%} m. a disease of the
eyelids. {%—Vartma-śarkarā,%} f., N. of certain hard
excrescences on the eyelids. {%—Vartmāyāsa (˚ma-%}
{%āy˚), as,%} m. ‘road-fatigue,’ weariness after a journey.
{%—Vartmāvarodha (˚ma-av˚), as,%} m. rigidity of
the eyelids (preventing them from closing). {%—Vart-%}
{%monmukha (˚ma-un˚), as, ī, am,%} looking up at the
path.
<LEND>

<L>41440<pc>0892-b<k1>vartmani<k2>vartmani
{%Vartmani, is,%}¦ f. {%= vartani,%} a road, way, track.
<LEND>

<L>41441<pc>0892-b<k1>vartsyat<k2>vartsyat<h>1
1. {%vartsyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at%} (for 2. see
below), about to be or take place.
<LEND>

<L>41442<pc>0892-b<k1>vartarUka<k2>vartarUka
{#vartarUka#}¦ {%vartarūka, as,%} m. standing water,
a pool, puddle; a crow's nest; a door-keeper, cham-
berlain; N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>41443<pc>0892-b<k1>vartf<k2>vartf
{#vartf#}¦ {%vartṛ, vartra.%} See p. 889, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41444<pc>0892-b<k1>vartsa<k2>vartsa
{#vartsa#}¦ {%vartsa, as,%} m., Ved. (according to a
commentator) a swelling or fleshy formation of the
gum on the inner side of the jaw; [cf. {%barsva.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41445<pc>0892-b<k1>vartsya<k2>vartsya
{%Vartsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the above swelling.
<LEND>

<L>41446<pc>0892-b<k1>vartsyat<k2>vartsyat<h>2
{#vartsyat#} 2¦. {%vartsyat, an, atī%} or {%antī, at%} (fut.
part. of rt. {%vṛdh;%} for 1. see above), intending or
going to augment.
<LEND>

<L>41447<pc>0892-b<k1>varD<k2>varD
{#varD#}¦ {%vardh,%} cl. 10. P. {%vardhayati%} (also
{%vardhāpayati%}), &c., to cut, divide, shear,
cut off; to fill, (in this sense perhaps rather a Caus.
of rt. {%vṛdh,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>41448<pc>0892-b<k1>varDa<k2>varDa<h>1
1. {%vardha, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. {%vardha%} see col. 3),
cutting, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>41449<pc>0892-b<k1>varDaka<k2>varDaka<h>1
1. {%vardhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ cutting, dividing, cut-
ting off, shearing [cf. {%māṣa-v˚, śmaśru-v˚%}]; ({%as%}),
m. a carpenter.
<LEND>

<L>41450<pc>0892-b<k1>varDaki<k2>varDaki
{%Vardhaki, is,%}¦ or {%vardhakin, ī,%} m. a carpenter.
<LEND>

<L>41451<pc>0892-b<k1>varDana<k2>varDana<h>1
1. {%vardhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of cutting or cutting
off; [cf. {%nābhi-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41452<pc>0892-b<k1>varDApaka<k2>varDApaka
{%Vardhāpaka, as,%}¦ m. (probably) one who performs
the ceremony of cutting the umbilical cord; (perhaps)
the presents distributed at this ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>41453<pc>0892-b<k1>varDApana<k2>varDApana
{%Vardhāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of cutting or divid-
ing; the cutting of the umbilical cord; the ceremony
in commemoration of the day of the above rite; a
birthday ceremony, festival on a birthday or any
festive occasion when wishes for prosperity and other
congratulatory expressions are offered, (in this sense
equally referrible to the Caus. of rt. {%vṛdh%}), (pro-
bably) {%= vardhāpaka,%} presents distributed at the
ceremony of cutting the umbilical cord.
<LEND>
[Page0892-c+ 80]

<L>41454<pc>0892-c<k1>varDApanaka<k2>varDApanaka
{%Vardhāpanaka = vardhāpana,%}¦ the cutting of the
umbilical cord, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41455<pc>0892-c<k1>varDita<k2>varDita<h>1
1. {%vardhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, off, divided;
filled, full, (in this sense probably rather to be placed
under 2. {%vardhita%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>41456<pc>0892-c<k1>varDa<k2>varDa<h>2
{#varDa#} 2¦. {%vardha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vṛdh;%} for
1. {%vardha%} see col. 2), increasing, augmenting,
strengthening; exhilarating, animating, &c.; ({%as%}),
m. the act of increasing, giving increase or prosperity,
making happy; increase, augmentation; the plant
Clerodendrum Siphonanthus; ({%am%}), n. lead, red
lead. {%—Vardha-māla, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>41457<pc>0892-c<k1>varDaka<k2>varDaka<h>2
2. {%vardhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ increasing, strength-
ening, &c.; ({%as%}), m. the plant Clerodendrum Sipho-
nanthus.
<LEND>

<L>41458<pc>0892-c<k1>varDana<k2>varDana<h>2
2. {%vardhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ increasing, augmenting,
growing, thriving; enlarging, causing to increase,
magnifying, strengthening; exhilarating, making joy-
ful, animating; bestowing prosperity; ({%as%}), m. a
granter of increase, bestower of prosperity; N. of
Śiva; a tooth growing over another tooth; N. of
one of Skanda's attendants; of a son of Kṛṣṇa and
Mitra-vindā; ({%ī%}), f. a broom, brush; a water-jar of
a particular shape; ({%am%}), n. the act of increasing,
growing, thriving; increase, growth, prosperity, suc-
cess; the act of making larger, enlargement, making
great, magnifying; elevation; a means of strength-
ening, restorative; animation, exhilaration; rearing,
educating. {%—Vardhana-śīla, as, ā, am,%} having a
tendency to increase or grow, increasing, growing.
{%—Vardhana-sūri, is,%} m., N. of a Jaina preceptor.
{%—Vardhana-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a particular
temple or statue.
<LEND>

<L>41459<pc>0892-c<k1>varDanikA<k2>varDanikA
{%Vardhanikā,%}¦ f. (with Buddhists) a small vessel in
which the sacred water is kept.
<LEND>

<L>41460<pc>0892-c<k1>varDanIya<k2>varDanIya
{%Vardhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be increased or
strengthened, to be made prosperous or happy.
{%—Vardhanīya-tā,%} f. or {%vardhanīya-tva, am,%} n.
augmentability.
<LEND>

<L>41461<pc>0892-c<k1>varDamAna<k2>varDamAna
{%Vardhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ increasing, growing,
thriving, prospering, prosperous; ({%as%}), m. the castor-
oil plant, Ricinus Communis (so called from its
vigorous growth); sweet citron, (also {%ā,%} f.); a par-
ticular way of joining the hands; a kind of riddle or
charade; N. of Viṣṇu; of a mountain and district
(now called Bardwān; in this sense also {%ā,%} f.); of a
Grāma; of various persons; of the last and most
celebrated of the twenty-four Arhats of the present
Ava-sarpiṇī; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. a dish or platter of a particular shape (some-
times used as a lid or cover to water-jars, &c.); a
house having no door or entrance on the south side;
a kind of mystical figure or diagram; a palace or
temple built in the shape of the above diagram; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a commentary written by Vardhamāna;
({%ā%}), f. a species of Gāyatrī metre; ({%am%}), n. a kind
of metre. {%—Vardhamāna-dvāra, am,%} n. the gate
leading to Vardhamāna, N. of a gate in Hastināpura.
{%—Vardhamāna-pura, am,%} n. the town of Bardwān.
{%—Vardhamāna-purīya, as, ā, am,%} coming from
or born in Vardhamāna-pura. {%—Vardhamāna-mati,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva. {%—Vardhamāna-miśra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a grammarian (author of the Kā-
tantra-vistara). {%—Vardhamānendu (˚na-in˚), us,%}
m., N. of a commentary on the Vardhamānī. {%—Var-%}
{%dhamāneśa (˚na-īśa), as,%} m., N. of a particular
temple or statue.
<LEND>

<L>41462<pc>0892-c<k1>varDamAnaka<k2>varDamAnaka
{%Vardhamānaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= vardhamāna,%} a dish
or saucer of a particular shape, a lid or cover; a par-
ticular way of joining the hands; N. of a class of
persons following a particular trade; of a district or
of a people; of a serpent-demon; a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>41463<pc>0892-c<k1>varDayitf<k2>varDayitf
{%Vardhayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who causes to grow
or increase; one who rears or educates, a guardian.
<LEND>

<L>41464<pc>0892-c<k1>varDita<k2>varDita<h>2
2. {%vardhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ increased, grown, ex-
panded; [cf. 1. {%vardhita%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>41465<pc>0892-c<k1>varDitf<k2>varDitf
{%Vardhitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who increases
or strengthens.
<LEND>

<L>41466<pc>0892-c<k1>varDin<k2>varDin
{%Vardhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ increasing, growing, thriving;
augmenting, strengthening, &c. (at the end of comps.).
<LEND>
[Page0893-a+ 75]

<L>41467<pc>0893-a<k1>varDizRu<k2>varDizRu
{%Vardhiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ increasing, growing,
thriving; strengthening, enlarging, expanding.
<LEND>

<L>41468<pc>0893-a<k1>varDman<k2>varDman
{%Vardhman%}¦ in {%antra-vardhman,%} internal rupture
or hernia ({%= antra-vṛddhi%}). {%—Vardhma-roga, as,%}
m. the above disease.
<LEND>

<L>41469<pc>0893-a<k1>varDra<k2>varDra
{%Vardhra, as,%}¦ m. (also written {%varddhra%}), a strap
or leather band of any kind (Ved.); ({%am%}), n. a
leather strap, thong, girth for securing a saddle, (also
{%ī,%} f.); leather; lead.
<LEND>

<L>41470<pc>0893-a<k1>varDrikA<k2>varDrikA
{%Vardhrikā,%}¦ f. a strap, thong; (perhaps) a person
as supple or flexible as leather.
<LEND>

<L>41471<pc>0893-a<k1>varpas<k2>varpas
{#varpas#}¦ {%varpas, as,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%vṛ%}),
Ved. a pretended or assumed form, any form, shape,
figure, aspect, (Sāy. {%= rūpa%}); plot, trick, artifice,
stratagem, design, scheme; (Sāy.) praise ({%= stotra%});
anything which opposes or wards off ({%= āvaraka,%}
{%vāraka%}); [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">μορφή.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>41472<pc>0893-a<k1>varpaRIti<k2>varpaRIti
{%Varpa-ṇīti, is, is, i%}¦ (fr. {%varpa = varpas + nīti%}),
taking a pretended form, acting artfully; (Sāy.)
mighty in warding off enemies, (Ṛg-veda III. 34,
3 {%= yuddhe para-prahārāṇāṃ nivāraka.%})
<LEND>

<L>41473<pc>0893-a<k1>varPas<k2>varPas
{%Varphas,%}¦ a various reading for {%varpas%} above.
<LEND>

<L>41474<pc>0893-a<k1>varP<k2>varP
{#varP#}¦ {%varph,%} cl. 1. P. {%varphati,%} &c., to go,
move; to kill.
<LEND>

<L>41475<pc>0893-a<k1>varman<k2>varman
{#varman#}¦ {%varman, a,%} n. (according to some
also) {%ā,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), defensive armour, a coat of
mail, armour; a bulwark, shelter, defence, protection,
(frequently found at the end of the names of Kṣa-
triyas); bark, rind; N. of particular preservative
formulas or prayers; of the mystical syllable {%hum.%}
{%—Varma-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. a kind of medicinal
plant, Gardenia Latifolia or Fumaria Parviflora.
{%—Varma-kaṣā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= carma-ka-%}
{%ṣā)%}. {%—Varmaṇ-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having armour
or a coat of mail. mailed. {%—Varma-mantra, as,%} m.
a particular sacred Mantra. {%—Varma-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} having armour or a coat of mail, mailed; ({%at%}),
n. an unfortified (?) town. {%—Varma-hara, as, ā%} or
{%ī, am,%} wearing armour or mail, old enough to wear
armour, being young or of a military age; ({%as%}), m.
one who takes arms or spoils another of them.
<LEND>

<L>41476<pc>0893-a<k1>varma<k2>varma
{%Varma, as, ā, am,%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp.
{%= varman.%}
<LEND>

<L>41477<pc>0893-a<k1>varmaka<k2>varmaka
{%Varmaka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>41478<pc>0893-a<k1>varmaRa<k2>varmaRa
{%Varmaṇa, as,%}¦ m. the orange tree.
<LEND>

<L>41479<pc>0893-a<k1>varmAya<k2>varmAya
{%Varmāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%varmāyate,%} &c., see Pāṇ.
IV. 1, 15.
<LEND>

<L>41480<pc>0893-a<k1>varmika<k2>varmika
{%Varmika, as, ā, am,%}¦ clad in armour, mailed.
<LEND>

<L>41481<pc>0893-a<k1>varmita<k2>varmita
{%Varmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ clad in armour, mailed,
accoutred.
<LEND>

<L>41482<pc>0893-a<k1>varmin<k2>varmin
{%Varmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ clad in armour, mailed.
<LEND>

<L>41483<pc>0893-a<k1>varmi<k2>varmi
{#varmi#}¦ {%varmi, is,%} m. a kind of fish, (com-
monly called {%vāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>41484<pc>0893-a<k1>varmuza<k2>varmuza
{%Varmuṣa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fish, (commonly
called {%vāmirūṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>41485<pc>0893-a<k1>varya<k2>varya
{#varya#}¦ {%varya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), to be
chosen, eligible; to be wooed, to be solicited, to be
asked or obtained in marriage; excellent, eminent,
chief, principal, the best, (frequently at the end of
comps., e. g. {%nara-varya,%} the best of men, an excel-
lent man); ({%as%}), m. the god of love, Kāma-deva;
({%ā%}), f. a girl choosing her own husband (?) .
<LEND>

<L>41486<pc>0893-a<k1>varva<k2>varva
{#varva#}¦ {%varva,%} (perhaps) a particular coin.
<LEND>

<L>41487<pc>0893-a<k1>varvawa<k2>varvawa
{#varvawa#}¦ {%varvaṭa, as, ī,%} m. f. a sort of bean,
(see {%barbaṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>41488<pc>0893-a<k1>varvaRA<k2>varvaRA
{#varvaRA#}¦ {%varvaṇā,%} f. {%= barbaṇā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41489<pc>0893-a<k1>varvara<k2>varvara
{#varvara#}¦ {%varvara, as, ā, am%} (also written {%bar-%}
{%bara,%} q. v.; said to be fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), stammering,
babbling; curled, curly, woolly; ({%as%}), m. a man of
low origin, barbarian (see {%barbara%}), one belonging
to a degraded tribe or occupation, an outcast, a
piteous wretch; curly hair; a kind of shrub, Clero-
dendrum Siphonanthus; another plant ({%= kṛṣṇa-%}
{%varvaraka%}); a sort of worm; the noise or clash
of weapons; a mode of dancing; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
[Page0893-b+ 79]
basil; a sort of pot-herb; a particular flower; a kind
of fly or bee; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of basil; a kind of fly
or bee; {%= varvara, varvarīka; (am),%} n. {%= var-%}
{%varī, varvarīka;%} vermilion; gum-myrrh; yellow
sandal-wood. {%—Varvarottha (˚ra-ut˚), am,%} n. ‘grow-
ing in the land of barbarians, ‘white sandal-wood.
<LEND>

<L>41490<pc>0893-b<k1>varvaraka<k2>varvaraka
{%Varvaraka, am,%}¦ n. a sort of sandal-wood; [cf.
{%kṛṣṇa-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41491<pc>0893-b<k1>varvari<k2>varvari
{%Varvari, is,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>41492<pc>0893-b<k1>varvarila<k2>varvarila
{%Varvarila,%}¦ see Gaṇa Kāśādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>41493<pc>0893-b<k1>varvarIka<k2>varvarIka
{%Varvarīka, as,%}¦ m. curly or woolly hair; a kind
of shrub ({%= brāhmaṇa-yaṣṭikā%}); a kind of basil
{%(= aja-gandhikā);= carcarīka; (am),%} n. {%= var-%}
{%vara, varvarī.%}
<LEND>

<L>41494<pc>0893-b<k1>varvA<k2>varvA
{%Varvā,%}¦ f. {%= varvarī,%} a kind of basil.
<LEND>

<L>41495<pc>0893-b<k1>varvi<k2>varvi
{#varvi#}¦ {%varvi, is, is, i%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 53. fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), voracious; ({%is%}), m. a glutton.
<LEND>

<L>41496<pc>0893-b<k1>varvUra<k2>varvUra
{#varvUra#}¦ {%varvūra, as,%} m. a kind of plant ({%=%}
{%yugalākhya%}).
<LEND>

<L>41497<pc>0893-b<k1>varSman<k2>varSman
{#varSman#}¦ {%varśman, ā,%} m. Zend {%bareśman.%}
<LEND>

<L>41498<pc>0893-b<k1>varza<k2>varza
{#varza#}¦ {%varṣa, as, am,%} m. n. (in some senses
fr. rt. {%vṛṣ,%} in others fr. rt. {%vṛ,%} to surround, &c., cf.
Uṇādi-s. III. 62), rain, raining, a shower of rain;
sprinkling, effusion; seminal sprinkling or effusion;
a cloud; a year, ({%varṣe varṣe,%} year by year, every
year; {%ā varṣāt,%} for a whole year; {%varṣāt,%} after a year;
{%varṣeṇa,%} in a year, within a year); a day (?) ; a divi-
sion of the world or known continent, (in this sense
probably fr. rt. {%vṛ%}); the plains or low land situated
between certain principal mountains, (nine such
divisions are enumerated, viz. Kuru, Hiraṇmaya,
Ramyaka, Ilāvṛta, Hari, Ketu-mālā, Bhadrāśva,
Kinnara, and Bhārata); India ({%= Bhārata-varṣa,%}
{%Jambu-dvīpa%}); ({%āṇi%}), n. pl. the rains, rainy season
(Ved.); ({%ā%}), f. rain, the rains; a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%koṭi-varṣā), (ās),%} f. pl. the rains, rainy season,
monsoon (lasting two months according to the Hindū
classification of the seasons which divides the whole
year into six seasons [see {%ṛtu%}], the rains falling in
some places during Śrāvaṇa and Bhādra, and in
others during Bhādra and Āśvina; but the duration
of the monsoon is longer in parts of India, being
reckoned on the west coast from about June to
October); rain; ({%as%}), m., N. of a grammarian;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔρσ-η</lang> (Hom. <lang n="greek">ἐέρσ-η, ἕρσ-η, ἑρσή-εις.</lang>)]
{%—Varṣa-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} making or pro-
ducing rain; ({%as%}), m. a cloud; ({%ī%}), f. a cricket
(this animal chirping in wet weather). {%—Varṣa-%}
{%karman, a,%} n., Ved. the act of raining, &c. {%—Var-%}
{%ṣa-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desiring or anxious for rain.
{%—Varṣa-kṛtya, as, ā, am,%} to be done or com-
pleted in a year; ({%am%}), n., N. of a work by Vidyā-
pati. {%—Varṣa-ketu, us,%} m. a red-flowering Punar-
navā; N. of a son of Ketu-mat. {%—Varṣa-kośa%} or
{%varṣa-koṣa, as,%} m. ‘year-sheath,’ a month; an
astrologer. {%—Varṣa-gaṇita-paddhati, is,%} f., N.
of a work. {%—Varṣa-giri, is,%} m. a Varṣa moun-
tain, i. e. a mountain separating a Varṣa, (see {%var-%}
{%ṣa-parvata.%}) {%—Varṣa-ja, as, ā, am,%} born or
produced in the rainy season. {%—Varṣa-dhara, as,%}
m. ‘restrainer of generative power,’ a eunuch or
attendant on the women's apartments; a cloud.
{%—Varṣa-dharṣa, as,%} m. a eunuch or attendant
on the women's apartments. {%—Varṣa-nirṇij, k,%}
{%k, k,%} Ved. clothed with rain (said of the Maruts);
(Sāy. on Ṛg-veda V. 57, 4 {%= vṛṣṭeḥ śodhayitṛ,%}
rain-purifier, or {%varṣam eva rūpaṃ yeṣām,%} hav-
ing the form of rain.) {%—Varṣa-parvata, as,%} m.
one of the mountainous ranges supposed to separate
the various Varṣas or divisions of the globe from
each other, (six names are enumerated from north
to south, viz. Hima-vat, Hema-kūṭa, Niṣadha, Nīla,
Śveta, and Śṛṅgin or Śṛṅga-vat; Meru consti-
tutes a seventh, and other names are given.) {%—Var-%}
{%ṣa-pākin, ī,%} m. ‘ripening in the rains,’ the hog
plum, Spondias Mangifera. {%—Varṣa-puṣpā,%} f. a
kind of plant {%(= saha-devī)%}. {%—Varṣa-pūga, as,%}
m. a series or succession of years. {%—Varṣa-prati-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. obstruction of rain, drought. {%—Var- %}
[Page0893-c+ 80]
{%ṣa-praveśa, as,%} m. the entrance into a new year.
{%—Varṣa-priya, as,%} m. ‘fond of rain,’ the Cātaka,
Cuculus Melanoleucus. {%—Varṣa-mātra, am,%} n. one
year only. {%—Varṣartu (˚ṣa-ṛtu), us,%} m. the
rainy season. {%—Varṣa-lambhaka, as,%} &c. (per-
haps) marking off or bounding a Varṣa. {%—Var-%}
{%ṣa-vara, as,%} m. a eunuch, one employed in the
women's apartments. {%—Varṣa-vardhana, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} causing increase of years; ({%am%}), n. increase of
years. {%—Varṣa-vṛddhi, is,%} f. ‘year-increase,’ birth-
day. {%—Varṣa-śata, am,%} n. a century. {%—Varṣaśa-%}
{%tādhika (˚ta-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} more than a century.
{%—Varṣa-sahasra, am,%} n. a thousand years. {%—Var-%}
{%ṣāṃśa%} or {%varṣāṃśaka (˚ṣa-aṃ˚), as,%} m. ‘por-
tion of a year, ‘a month. {%—Varṣā-kāla, as,%} m. the
rainy season. {%—Varṣākālīna, as, ā, am,%} belonging
to or produced in the rainy season. {%—Varṣāghoṣa%}
{%(˚ṣa-āgh˚), as,%} m. ‘uttering cries in the rainy
season, ‘a frog. {%—Varṣāṅga (˚ṣa-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
‘member or portion of a year,’ a month; ({%ī%}), f.,
N. of a plant {%(= punar-navā)%}. {%—Varṣā-prabhañ-%}
{%jana, as, ā, am,%} rain-scattering; ({%as%}), m. a high
wind, a gale. {%—Varṣā-bhava, as,%} m. ‘produced in
the rains, ‘N. of a plant {%(= rakta-punarnavā).%}
{%—Varṣā-bhū, ūs,%} m. ‘produced in the rains,’ a
frog; ({%ūs%} or {%vī%}), f. a female frog, any small frog;
hogweed; an earth-worm. {%—Varṣāmada (˚ṣa-%}
{%ām˚), as,%} m. ‘krejoicing in the rains,’ a peacock.
{%—Varṣāmbu (˚ṣa-am˚), u,%} n. rain-water. {%—Var-%}
{%ṣāmbu-pravaha, as,%} m. a receptacle or reservoir
of rain-water. {%—Varṣāmbhaḥ-pāraṇā-vrata (˚ṣa-%}
{%am˚), as,%} m. ‘breakfasting on rain-water,’ the Cā-
taka bird, (see {%cātaka.%}) {%—Varṣāyuta (˚ṣa-ay˚),%}
{%am,%} n. ten thousand years. {%—Varṣā-rātra, as,%} m.
a night in the rainy season, rainy season. {%—Var-%}
{%ṣārcis (˚ṣa-ar˚), is,%} m. the planet Mars (as visible
in the rainy season). {%—Varṣā-laṅkāyikā,%} f., N.
of a plant {%(= pṛkkā)%}. {%—Varṣāvasāna (˚ṣa-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the close of the rains,’ autumn, the autumnal
season. {%—Varṣā-śaradau,%} f. du. the rainy season
and autumn. {%—Varṣā-samaya, as,%} m. {%= varṣā-%}
{%kāla%}. {%—Varṣe-ja, as, ā, am,%} born or produced in
the rains. {%—Varṣaika (˚ṣa-eka?), as, ā, am,%}
yearly, annual. {%—Varṣopala (˚ṣa-up˚), as,%} m.
‘rain-stone,’ hail.
<LEND>

<L>41499<pc>0893-c<k1>varzaka<k2>varzaka
{%Varṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ raining, falling like rain;
{%= varṣa,%} a year (at the end of an adj. comp., e. g.
{%pañca-varṣaka,%} five years old).
<LEND>

<L>41500<pc>0893-c<k1>varzaRa<k2>varzaRa
{%Varṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. raining, rain; sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>41501<pc>0893-c<k1>varzaRi<k2>varzaRi
{%Varṣaṇi, is,%}¦ f. raining, &c. ({%= varṣaṇa%}); abid-
ing, staying; action, act; a rite, sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>41502<pc>0893-c<k1>varzat<k2>varzat
{%Varṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ raining, showering, sprink-
ling, ({%varṣati,%} loc. c. while it rains, Manu IV. 38);
a summer-house, (gender doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>41503<pc>0893-c<k1>varzamARa<k2>varzamARa
{%Varṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ raining, showering,
sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>41504<pc>0893-c<k1>varzika<k2>varzika
{%Varṣika, as, ā, am,%}¦ raining, rainy, relating or
belonging to the rains; shedding, showering, pouring
down; ({%am%}), n. aloe wood or Agallochum.
<LEND>

<L>41505<pc>0893-c<k1>varzita<k2>varzita
{%Varṣita, am,%}¦ n. rain.
<LEND>

<L>41506<pc>0893-c<k1>varzitf<k2>varzitf
{%Varṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ raining, raining down, one
who pours forth, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41507<pc>0893-c<k1>varzin<k2>varzin
{%Varṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ raining, showering, sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>41508<pc>0893-c<k1>varzuka<k2>varzuka
{%Varṣuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ rainy, watery. {%—Varṣu-%}
{%kābda (˚ka-ab˚), as,%} m. a rainy cloud. {%—Varṣu-%}
{%kāmbuda (˚ka-am˚), as,%} m. a rain-cloud.
<LEND>

<L>41509<pc>0893-c<k1>varzma<k2>varzma
{%Varṣma, am,%}¦ n. body, form, {%= varṣman%} below.
<LEND>

<L>41510<pc>0893-c<k1>varzman<k2>varzman
{%Varṣman, a,%}¦ n. body, form, shape; measure;
height, elevation; a handsome form; ({%ā, ā, a%}), Ved.
holding rain, (Sāy. {%= udakasya vāraka.%}) {%—Varṣ-%}
{%ma-vīrya, am,%} n. vigour of body. {%—Varṣmābha%}
{%(˚ma-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} resembling the body or
form (of anything).
<LEND>

<L>41511<pc>0893-c<k1>varzya<k2>varzya
{%Varṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be rained or showered;
to be sprinkled; of or belonging to rain, rainy.
<LEND>

<L>41512<pc>0893-c<k1>varzizWa<k2>varzizWa
{#varzizWa#}¦ {%varṣiṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (superl. of
{%varṣa,%} substituted for {%vṛddha;%} cf. {%vṛṣan%}), oldest,
very old; largest, greatest, strongest; best, most ex-
cellent (Ved.). {%—Varṣiṣṭha-kṣatra, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having the greatest power or might.
<LEND>
[Page0894-a+ 78]

<L>41513<pc>0894-a<k1>varzIyas<k2>varzIyas
{%Varṣīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%vṛddha%}),
older, very old, very aged.
<LEND>

<L>41514<pc>0894-a<k1>varh<k2>varh
{#varh#}¦ {%varh%} (also written {%barh,%} q. v.), cl. 1.
A. {%varhate, vavarhe, varhitum,%} to speak,
tell; to hurt, injure, kill; to give; to protect, cover;
to be pre-eminent; cl. 10. P. {%varhayati,%} &c., to
speak; to kill, hurt; to shine; to be excellent or
pre-eminent.
<LEND>

<L>41515<pc>0894-a<k1>varha<k2>varha
{#varha#}¦ {%varha, as, am,%} m. n. (probably fr. rt.
2. {%vṛh;%} also written {%barha,%} q. v.), a tail-feather,
plumage of the tail, the tail of a bird, (especially) a
peacock's tail [cf. {%citra-barha%}]; a leaf; a retinue,
train; ({%am%}), n. a kind of perfume ({%= granthi-%}
{%parṇa,%} commonly called Ganthiāla). {%—Varha-ketu,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of one of the sons of the ninth Manu.
{%—Varha-bhāra, as,%} m. ‘tail-burden,’ a peacock's
tail; a tuft of peacock's feathers on the shaft of a
lance or on the handle of a club.
<LEND>

<L>41516<pc>0894-a<k1>varhaRa<k2>varhaRa
{%Varhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (also written {%barhaṇa%}), a leaf;
the act of pulling out, (in this sense fr. rt. 1. {%vṛh.%})
<LEND>

<L>41517<pc>0894-a<k1>varhAya<k2>varhAya
{%Varhāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%varhāyate,%} &c., to be like
the tail (of a peacock).
<LEND>

<L>41518<pc>0894-a<k1>varhAyita<k2>varhAyita
{%Varhāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. the above), resembling
the eyes on a peacock's tail.
<LEND>

<L>41519<pc>0894-a<k1>varhiRa<k2>varhiRa
{%Varhiṇa, as,%}¦ m. a peacock; ({%as, ā, am%}), adorned
with peacock's feathers. {%—Varhiṇa-lakṣaṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} adorned with peacock's feathers. {%—Varhiṇa-%}
{%vāja, as,%} m. an arrow feathered with a peacock's
plumes. {%—Varhiṇa-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘riding on a
peacock, ‘epithet of Skanda or Kārttikeya.
<LEND>

<L>41520<pc>0894-a<k1>varhin<k2>varhin
{%Varhin, ī,%}¦ m. a peacock; N. of a Deva-gandharva
descended from Prādhā; of a holy sage; ({%i%}), n. a
kind of perfume {%(= varhi-puṣpa)%}. {%—Varhi-ku-%}
{%suma, am,%} n. {%= varhi-puṣpa%}. {%—Varhi-citraka,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the forty-seventh Adhyāya of Varāha-
mihira's Vṛhat-saṃhitā; [cf. {%mayūra-citraka.%}]
{%—Varhi-dhvajā,%} f. ‘symbolized by a peacock,’ an
epithet of Durgā. {%—Varhi-puṣpa, am,%} n. a kind of
perfume. {%—Varhi-yāna, as,%} m. ‘having a peacock for
a vehicle, ‘an epithet of Skanda. {%—Varhi-vāhana, as,%}
m. ‘riding on a peacock,’ an epithet of Gaṇeśa (?) .
<LEND>

<L>41521<pc>0894-a<k1>varhizWa<k2>varhizWa
{#varhizWa#}¦ {%varhiṣṭha, as, ā, am%} (superl. of
{%vṛhat%}), largest, strongest, broadest, thickest, highest,
very large, &c.; ({%am%}), n. a species of fragrant grass,
Andropogon Muricatus; the resin of Pinus Longi-
folia; ({%am%}), ind., Ved. most mighty, very loudly;
(also often written {%barhiṣṭha.%})
<LEND>

<L>41522<pc>0894-a<k1>varhis<k2>varhis
{#varhis#}¦ {%varhis, is,%} m. n. (in the earlier lan-
guage generally written {%barhis,%} q. v.), Kuśa grass,
&c., (according to some only n., see {%barhis%}); sacri-
fice, oblation, (according to some only m.); ({%is%}), m.
fire, light, lustre, splendor; ({%is%}), n. a kind of
vegetable perfume ({%= granthi-parṇa,%} commonly
called Ganthiāla). {%—Varhiḥ-puṣpa,%} &c., see {%bar-%}
{%hiḥ-puṣpa,%} &c., under {%barhis,%} p. 675, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>41523<pc>0894-a<k1>val<k2>val
{#val#}¦ {%val%} [cf. rts. 1. {%bal, vall, vṛ%}], cl. 1.
A. {%valate, vavale, valitum,%} to cover,
enclose; to be covered or surrounded, to be enclosed;
to move round in a circle; to go, approach, hasten;
to be attached to, be drawn towards; to move to
and fro; to increase: Caus. {%valayati%} or {%vālayati,%}
to cause to move, move; to cherish, &c. (see {%bāla-%}
{%yati%} under rt. 2. {%bal%}); [cf. Hib. <nsi>falaim,</nsi> ‘I hedge,
enclose.’]
<LEND>

<L>41524<pc>0894-a<k1>vala<k2>vala
{%Vala, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a cloud (according to Naigh. I.
10); N. of an Asura (fabled to have stolen the cows
of the gods and to have concealed them in a cave;
Indra surrounded the cave with his army and recovered
the cattle; in Ṛg-veda X. 68, 9, he is said to have
assumed the form of a bull and to have been destroyed
by Bṛhas-pati; elsewhere he is identified with a
cloud); ({%am%}), n. strength, force; an army, &c. (see
{%bala%}). {%—Valaṃ-ruja, as,%} m., Ved. one who breaks
the clouds.
<LEND>

<L>41525<pc>0894-a<k1>valaga<k2>valaga
{%Valaga (?) ,%}¦ a kind of magical Mantra.
<LEND>

<L>41526<pc>0894-a<k1>valana<k2>valana
{%Valana, am,%}¦ n. turning, moving round in a circle;
agitation; deflection (in astronomy). {%—Valanāṃśa%}
{%(˚na-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a degree of deflection.
<LEND>
[Page0894-b+ 78]

<L>41527<pc>0894-b<k1>valaBi<k2>valaBi
{%Valabhi, is,%}¦ m. or {%valabhī,%} f. (also written {%va-%}
{%ḍabhi%}), the wooden frame of a thatch, a roof; a
turret or temporary building on the roof of a house;
{%= vallabhī%}. {%—Valabhi-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>41528<pc>0894-b<k1>valaya<k2>valaya
{%Valaya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (sometimes written {%ba-%}
{%laya%}), a bracelet, armlet, ring; a zone, girdle of a
married woman; a circle, boundary, circumference,
({%dig-valaya,%} the circumference of the sky, the
universe); ({%as%}), m. a boundary, enclosure, fence;
a branch; sore throat, inflammation of the larynx,
&c. {%—Valaya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of or en-
dowed with bracelets, &c. {%—Valayī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} made into a bracelet or girdle, girdled. {%—Valayī-%}
{%kṛta-vāsuki, is,%} m. ‘who has made the serpent Vā-
suki his bracelet, ‘epithet of Śiva. {%—Valayī-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} become or serving as a girdle, surrounding.
<LEND>

<L>41529<pc>0894-b<k1>valayita<k2>valayita
{%Valayita, as, ā, am,%}¦ encircled, surrounded, encom-
passed, enclosed; whirling round.
<LEND>

<L>41530<pc>0894-b<k1>valayin<k2>valayin
{%Valayin%}¦ in {%jyotir-lekhā-v˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41531<pc>0894-b<k1>valAka<k2>valAka
{%Valāka, as,%}¦ m. (also written {%balāka,%} q. v.), a
crane; ({%ā%}), f. a female crane; a crane in general;
a flight of cranes; a mistress or loved woman; ({%ā,%}
{%ī%}), f. a small kind of crane.
<LEND>

<L>41532<pc>0894-b<k1>valAkin<k2>valAkin
{%Valākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having or attended by cranes.
<LEND>

<L>41533<pc>0894-b<k1>vali<k2>vali
{%Vali, is,%}¦ m. (usually written {%bali,%} q. v.), tax,
tribute, offering, oblation, &c. (see {%bali%}); ({%is, ī%}),
f. a line or streak made with fragrant unguents on
the person; a natural line or fold of skin, wrinkle,
fold of skin over the navel (especially of women).
{%—Vali-kriyā,%} f. making offerings to all beings;
making lines on the person, &c. {%—Vali-mukha,%}
&c., see {%bali-mukha.%}
<LEND>

<L>41534<pc>0894-b<k1>valika<k2>valika
{%Valika, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the edge of a thatched
roof.
<LEND>

<L>41535<pc>0894-b<k1>valita<k2>valita
{%Valita, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded; moved, moving;
turned, constrained; wrinkled, having wrinkles, con-
tracted into wrinkles; [cf. 2. {%balita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41536<pc>0894-b<k1>valiBa<k2>valiBa
{%Valibha, as, ā, am,%}¦ having the fold of skin called
{%vali;%} having wrinkles, wrinkled, (see {%balibha.%})
<LEND>

<L>41537<pc>0894-b<k1>valI<k2>valI
{%Valī,%}¦ f. See under {%vali%} above.
<LEND>

<L>41538<pc>0894-b<k1>valIka<k2>valIka
{%Valīka, am,%}¦ n. the edge of a thatched roof.
<LEND>

<L>41539<pc>0894-b<k1>valUka<k2>valUka
{%Valūka, am,%}¦ n. the root of a lotus; ({%as%}), m. a
bird.
<LEND>

<L>41540<pc>0894-b<k1>valUla<k2>valUla
{%Valūla, as, ā, am, = balūla,%}¦ strong, powerful.
<LEND>

<L>41541<pc>0894-b<k1>valka<k2>valka
{%Valka, am,%}¦ n. the bark of a tree; the scales of a
fish. {%—Valka-taru, us,%} m. a species of tree {%(=%}
{%pūga)%}. {%—Valka-druma, as,%} m. a kind of birch
tree. {%—Valka-lodhra, as,%} m. a kind of Lodhra
tree; {%= paṭṭikā-lodhra%}. {%—Valka-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having bark, having scales; wearing a bark dress;
({%ān%}), m. a fish. {%—Valka-vāsas, as,%} n. clothing
made of bark.
<LEND>

<L>41542<pc>0894-b<k1>valkala<k2>valkala
{%Valkala, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the bark of a tree; a
garment made of bark (worn by ascetics, &c.); ({%ā%}),
f. {%= śilā-valkā,%} a medicinal substance said to be of
cooling and lithonthryptic properties, (commonly
called {%silābāk.%}) {%—Valkala-kṣetra-māhātmya,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the praise of Valkala-kṣetra,’ part of the
Adhyātma-rāmāyaṇa. {%—Valkala-saṃvīta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} clad in bark, clothed in a bark dress. {%—Valka-%}
{%lājina-saṃvṛta (˚la-aj˚), as, ā, am,%} clad in bark
and deer-skin.
<LEND>

<L>41543<pc>0894-b<k1>valkalin<k2>valkalin
{%Valkalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ dressed in bark, clothed in a
bark dress.
<LEND>

<L>41544<pc>0894-b<k1>valkila<k2>valkila
{%Valkila, as,%}¦ m. a thorn.
<LEND>

<L>41545<pc>0894-b<k1>valkuta<k2>valkuta
{%Valkuta, am,%}¦ n. bark, rind.
<LEND>

<L>41546<pc>0894-b<k1>valakeSvaratIrTa<k2>valakeSvaratIrTa
{#valakeSvaratIrTa#}¦ {%valakeśvara-tīrtha (˚ka-īś˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>41547<pc>0894-b<k1>valakza<k2>valakza
{#valakza#}¦ {%valakṣa, as, ī, am,%} white; ({%as%}), m.
white, the colour; [cf. {%palakṣa, balakṣa, ava-%}
{%lakṣa.%}] {%—Valakṣa-gu, us,%} m. ‘having white
rays of light, ‘the moon.
<LEND>

<L>41548<pc>0894-b<k1>valagna<k2>valagna
{#valagna#}¦ {%va-lagna, as, am,%} m. n. {%= ava-%}
{%lagna,%} the waist, middle.
<LEND>

<L>41549<pc>0894-b<k1>valantikA<k2>valantikA
{#valantikA#}¦ {%valantikā,%} f. a particular air or
mode in music.
<LEND>

<L>41550<pc>0894-b<k1>valamba<k2>valamba
{#valamba#}¦ {%va-lamba, as,%} m. {%= ava-lamba,%} a
perpendicular.
<LEND>
[Page0894-c+ 74]

<L>41551<pc>0894-c<k1>valamBa<k2>valamBa
{#valamBa#}¦ {%valambha,%} N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>41552<pc>0894-c<k1>valAsaka<k2>valAsaka
{#valAsaka#}¦ {%valāsaka, as,%} m. (perhaps for {%ava-%}
{%lāsaka%}), the Koïl or Indian cuckoo; a frog.
<LEND>

<L>41553<pc>0894-c<k1>valAhaka<k2>valAhaka
{#valAhaka#}¦ {%valāhaka, as,%} m. a cloud, thunder-
cloud; N. of one of the seven clouds at the destruc-
tion of the world; a mountain; a kind of crane
({%= valāka%}); N. of a Daitya; of a brother of Jayad-
ratha; one of the Nāgas; one of the four horses of
Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>41554<pc>0894-c<k1>valira<k2>valira
{#valira#}¦ {%valira, as, ā, am,%} squint-eyed,
squinting.
<LEND>

<L>41555<pc>0894-c<k1>valiSa<k2>valiSa
{#valiSa#}¦ {%valiśa, am, ī,%} n. f. or {%valiśi, is,%} f. a
fish-hook; [cf. {%vaḍiśa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41556<pc>0894-c<k1>valiSAna<k2>valiSAna
{#valiSAna#}¦ {%valiśāna, as,%} m., Ved. a cloud
(Naigh. I. 10).
<LEND>

<L>41557<pc>0894-c<k1>valk<k2>valk
{#valk#}¦ {%valk,%} cl. 10. P. {%valkayati, -yitum,%}
to speak.
<LEND>

<L>41558<pc>0894-c<k1>valka<k2>valka
{#valka#}¦ {%valka, valkala.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41559<pc>0894-c<k1>valg<k2>valg
{#valg#}¦ {%valg,%} cl. 1. P. {%valgati, vavalga,%}
{%valgitum,%} to go, move; to go by leaps,
jump, bounce; to gallop; to move in different ways;
to fluctuate; [cf. perhaps Angl. Sax. <nsi>wlœnce;</nsi> Engl.
<nsi>walk.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41560<pc>0894-c<k1>valgat<k2>valgat
{%Valgat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going, jumping.
<LEND>

<L>41561<pc>0894-c<k1>valgana<k2>valgana
{%Valgana, am,%}¦ n. the act of going by leaps, bound-
ing, jumping.
<LEND>

<L>41562<pc>0894-c<k1>valgA<k2>valgA
{%Valgā,%}¦ f. a bridle, rein. {%—Valgāṅka (˚gā-aṅ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} holding a bridle.
<LEND>

<L>41563<pc>0894-c<k1>valgita<k2>valgita
{%Valgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ leaped, jumped, gone by
bounds or leaps; ({%am%}), n. a bound, gallop, one of
the paces of a horse.
<LEND>

<L>41564<pc>0894-c<k1>valgu<k2>valgu
{#valgu#}¦ {%valgu, us, us, u%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
I. 20. fr. rt. {%val;%} according to others fr. rt. {%valg%}),
handsome, beautiful, lovely, sweet, precious; ({%u%}),
ind. beautifully; ({%us%}), m. a goat. {%—Valgu-pattra,%}
{%as,%} m. a sort of wild pulse ({%= vana-mudga%}).
<LEND>

<L>41565<pc>0894-c<k1>valguka<k2>valguka
{%Valguka, as, ā, am,%}¦ handsome, beautiful; ({%am%}),
n. sandal; a wood; price.
<LEND>

<L>41566<pc>0894-c<k1>valgula<k2>valgula
{%Valgula, as,%}¦ m. the flying fox; ({%ā%}), f. a species
of bird.
<LEND>

<L>41567<pc>0894-c<k1>valgulikA<k2>valgulikA
{%Valgulikā,%}¦ f. a cockroach.
<LEND>

<L>41568<pc>0894-c<k1>valgUya<k2>valgUya
{%Valgūya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%valgūyati, -yitum,%} to be
beautiful or handsome; to be mild or gentle; to
honour, praise, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 50, 70 {%=%}
{%stauti%}).
<LEND>

<L>41569<pc>0894-c<k1>valgUyat<k2>valgUyat
{%Valgūyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ becoming handsome or
beautiful; honouring.
<LEND>

<L>41570<pc>0894-c<k1>valB<k2>valB
{#valB#}¦ {%valbh,%} cl. 1. A. {%valbhate, vavalbhe,%}
{%valbhitum,%} to eat, devour.
<LEND>

<L>41571<pc>0894-c<k1>valBana<k2>valBana
{%Valbhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of eating; food.
<LEND>

<L>41572<pc>0894-c<k1>valBita<k2>valBita
{%Valbhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ eaten, devoured.
<LEND>

<L>41573<pc>0894-c<k1>valmI<k2>valmI
{#valmI#}¦ {%valmī,%} f. an ant; [cf. {%vamrī;%} per-
haps for {%varmī.%}] {%—Valmī-kūṭa, am,%} n. an ant-hill,
hillock.
<LEND>

<L>41574<pc>0894-c<k1>valmika<k2>valmika
{%Valmika, as,%}¦ m. for {%valmīka,%} an ant-hill, &c.;
see below.
<LEND>

<L>41575<pc>0894-c<k1>valmiki<k2>valmiki
{%Valmiki, is, i,%}¦ m. n. an ant-hill, &c.; see below.
<LEND>

<L>41576<pc>0894-c<k1>valmIka<k2>valmIka
{%Valmīka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (in Uṇādi-s. IV. 25.
derived fr. rt. {%val%}), an ant-hill, mole-hill, a hillock
or ground thrown up by white ants, moles, &c.;
({%as%}), m. swelling of the neck or of the chest and
other parts of the body, elephantiasis; the poet
Vālmīki. {%—Valmīka-mātra, as, ī, am,%} being of
the size of an ant-hill. {%—Valmīka-śīrṣa, am,%} n. a
kind of antimony (used as a collyrium).
<LEND>

<L>41577<pc>0894-c<k1>valyul<k2>valyul
{#valyul#}¦ {%valyul%} or {%valyūl%} [cf. {%palyul%}],
cl. 10. P. {%valyūlayati, -yitum,%} to
cut, cut off; to purify.
<LEND>

<L>41578<pc>0894-c<k1>vall<k2>vall
{#vall#}¦ {%vall%} [cf. rt. {%val%}], cl. 1. A. {%vallate,%}
{%vavalle, vallitum,%} to be covered; to go,
move.
<LEND>

<L>41579<pc>0894-c<k1>valla<k2>valla
{%Valla, as,%}¦ m. covering; winnowing corn; a
Māṣa of silver; a weight of three Raktikās or
Ratīs; prohibiting, prohibition.
<LEND>
[Page0895-a+ 79]

<L>41580<pc>0895-a<k1>vallakI<k2>vallakI
{%Vallakī,%}¦ f. the Vīṇā or Indian lute.
<LEND>

<L>41581<pc>0895-a<k1>vallaBa<k2>vallaBa
{%Vallabha, as, ā, am%}¦ (in Uṇādi-s. III. 125. said
to be fr. rt. {%vall%}), beloved, desired, dear; supreme,
superintending, superintendent; ({%as%}), m. a lover,
husband, friend, favourite, ({%kāma-vallabha,%} the
cinnamon tree); a superintendent, overseer; a chief
herdsman; a horse (especially one with good marks);
N. of a grammarian; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people;
({%ā%}), f. a beloved female, wife, mistress; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
a city in Gujarāt, the capital of a line of kings.
{%—Vallabha-tama, as, ā, am,%} most beloved, dear-
est. {%—Vallabha-tā,%} f. or {%vallabha-tva, am,%} n. the
state of being loved or a favourite, love. {%—Vallabha-%}
{%deva, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Vallabha-pālaka, as,%}
m. a horse-keeper, groom. {%—Vallabhācārya (˚bha-%}
{%āc˚), as,%} m., N. of a great teacher of the Vaiṣṇava
sect, (he was a successor of a less celebrated teacher
named Viṣṇu-svāmin, and his followers are some-
times called Vallabhācāryas, sometimes Rudra-sam-
pradāyins; he was born, it is said, in the forest of
Campāraṇya in 1479; at an early age he commenced
travelling to propagate his doctrines, and at the court
of Kṛṣṇa-deva, king of Vijaya-nagara, succeeded
so well in his controversies with the Śaivas that the
Vaiṣṇavas chose him as their chief; he then went
to other parts of India, and finally settled down at
Benares, where he composed seventeen works, the
most important of which were a commentary on the
Vedānta and Mīmāṃsā Sūtras and another on the Bhā-
gavata-Purāṇa, which last, as inculcating the worship
of Kṛṣṇa, is the chief religious work on which this
sect rest their doctrines; he left behind eighty-four
disciples, of each of whom some history or story is
told, which stories are often repeated to large audiences
on festive or solemn occasions; the Tilaka mark on
the forehead of the Vallabhācāryas is described as
consisting of two perpendicular lines meeting in a
semicircle at the root of the nose and having a round
spot of red between them.) {%—Vallabhāṣṭaka-vi-%}
{%vṛti (˚bha-aṣ˚), is,%} f., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>41582<pc>0895-a<k1>vallaBAyita<k2>vallaBAyita
{%Vallabhāyita, am,%}¦ n. a kind of coitus; [cf. {%pu-%}
{%ruṣāyita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41583<pc>0895-a<k1>vallara<k2>vallara
{%Vallara, am,%}¦ n. Agallochum or aloe wood (the
black variety).
<LEND>

<L>41584<pc>0895-a<k1>vallari<k2>vallari
{%Vallari, is,%}¦ or {%vallarī,%} f. a branching foot-stalk,
compound pedicle; a creeping or twining plant.
<LEND>

<L>41585<pc>0895-a<k1>vallava<k2>vallava
{%Vallava, as,%}¦ m. a herdsman [cf. {%go-v˚%}]; a name
of Bhīma-sena; a cook; ({%ī%}), f. a cowherdess.
<LEND>

<L>41586<pc>0895-a<k1>valli<k2>valli
{%Valli, is,%}¦ or {%vallī,%} f. a creeper, any climbing or
creeping plant; ({%is%}), f. the earth; ({%ī%}), f. a plant,
Ligusticum Ajwæn; N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Valli-%}
{%kaṇṭakārikā,%} f. the plant Solanum Jacquini. {%—Valli-%}
{%dūrvā,%} f. a kind of grass. {%—Valli-śākaṭa-potikā,%} f.
{%= mūla-potī%}. {%—Valli-sūraṇa, as,%} m. a kind of
plant {%(= atyamla-parṇī)%}. {%—Vallī-gaḍa, as,%} m. a
kind of fish (commonly called {%bholā%} or {%bālikaḍā%}).
{%—Vallī-ja, am,%} n. ‘creeper-grown,’ pepper. {%—Vallī-%}
{%mudga, as,%} m. a kind of kidney-bean. {%—Vallī-%}
{%vadarī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= bhū-vadarī)%}. {%—Vallī-%}
{%vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the Śāl tree, Shorea Robusta; [cf.
{%śāla, sāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41587<pc>0895-a<k1>vallura<k2>vallura
{%Vallura, am,%}¦ n. an arbour, bower; any place
overgrown with creeping plants; a thicket, wood; an
uncultivated field or place overrun with wild grass;
a desert, place destitute of water, wilderness, wild,
solitude; a field; a branching foot-stalk, compound
pedicle.
<LEND>

<L>41588<pc>0895-a<k1>vallUra<k2>vallUra
{%Vallūra, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. dried flesh; hog's
flesh, the flesh of the wild hog; ({%am%}), n. an uncul-
tivated field or one overrun with grass; a thicket;
a desert ({%= vana-kṣetra; = vāhana; = ūṣara-%}
{%bhūmi%}).
<LEND>

<L>41589<pc>0895-a<k1>vallyA<k2>vallyA
{%Vallyā,%}¦ f. Emblic Myrobalan ({%= dhātrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>41590<pc>0895-a<k1>valva<k2>valva
{#valva#}¦ {%valva.%} See {%balva,%} p. 677, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>41591<pc>0895-a<k1>valvaja<k2>valvaja
{#valvaja#}¦ {%valvaja, as,%} m. (also written {%bal-%}
{%baja,%} q. v.), a sort of coarse grass, Eleusine Indica;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of grass (called in Hindī {%sāve vāge%}
and, according to some, a different species from
{%valvaja,%} its synonyms are {%tṛṇa-valvajā, tṛṇekṣu %}
[Page0895-b+ 77]
{%dṛḍha-kṣurā, dṛḍha-tṛṇā, dṛḍha-pattrī, pā-%}
{%nīyāśrā, mauñjī-pattrā%}).
<LEND>

<L>41592<pc>0895-b<k1>valSa<k2>valSa
{#valSa#}¦ {%valśa, as,%} m. (or {%am,%} n.?), Ved. a
branch; [cf. {%sahasra-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41593<pc>0895-b<k1>valh<k2>valh
{#valh#}¦ {%valh%} (also written {%balh;%} cf. rt.
{%varh%}), cl. 1. A. {%valhate,%} &c., to be
good or excellent, be pre-eminent; to speak; to kill,
hurt; to give or to cover; cl. 10. P. {%valhayati,%}
&c., to speak, tell; to shine.
<LEND>

<L>41594<pc>0895-b<k1>valhika<k2>valhika
{#valhika#}¦ {%valhika, valhīka, = balhika, bal-%}
{%hīka,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>41595<pc>0895-b<k1>vava<k2>vava
{#vava#}¦ {%vava, as,%} m. the first of the eleven
Karaṇas or astrological divisions of time.
<LEND>

<L>41596<pc>0895-b<k1>vavarjuzI<k2>vavarjuzI
{#vavarjuzI#}¦ {%vavarjuṣī,%} f. (see rt. {%vṛj%}), Ved.
one who has effaced or atoned for.
<LEND>

<L>41597<pc>0895-b<k1>vavra<k2>vavra
{#vavra#}¦ {%vavra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), Ved.
surrounding, enveloping, (Sāy. {%= vṛṇvat%}); ({%as%}), m.
darkness, (Sāy. {%= vāraka%}); a cavern, abyss, (Sāy.
{%= garta%}); a hole, well ({%= kūpa,%} according to
Naigh. III. 23).
<LEND>

<L>41598<pc>0895-b<k1>vavri<k2>vavri
{%Vavri, is,%}¦ m. an enveloping shape or form (ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 116, 10, V. 74, 5),
any form (according to Naigh. III. 7 {%= rūpa%}); N.
of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda V. 19, (his
patronymic is Ātreya.)
<LEND>

<L>41599<pc>0895-b<k1>vavrivas<k2>vavrivas
{%Vavrivas, vān, uṣī, vat,%}¦ Ved. one who has en-
veloped or obstructed.
<LEND>

<L>41600<pc>0895-b<k1>vaS<k2>vaS
{#vaS#}¦ {%vaś,%} cl. 2. P. {%vaṣṭi%} (2nd sing.
{%vakṣi,%} 3rd du. {%uṣṭas,%} 3rd pl. {%uśanti%}),
Impf. {%avaṭ%} (3rd du. {%auṣṭām%}), Pot. {%uśyāt,%} Impv.
{%vaṣṭu%} (2nd sing. {%uḍḍhi%}), {%uvāśa%} (1st du. {%ūśiva%}),
{%vaśiṣyati, avaśīt%} or {%avāśīt, vaśitum%} (Ved. also
cl. 3. P. {%vivaṣṭi%}), to desire, wish, long for, will;
to favour, accept favourably: Pass. {%uśyate,%} Aor.
{%avāśi,%} to be desired or wished, &c.: Caus. {%vāśa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvaśat,%} to cause to desire or
wish, make favourable or thankful, give, grant:
Desid. {%vivaśiṣati:%} Intens. {%vāvaśyate, vāvaśīti%}
or {%vāvaṣṭi,%} to desire very much, love [cf. {%vāva-%}
{%śāna%}]; to exult; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἑκ-ών, ἀ-έκων, ἕκ-η-τι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἕκ-η-λο-ς, εὔκηλος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>in-vi-tu-s</nsi> for <nsi>in-vic-(i)-</nsi>
<nsi>tu-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41601<pc>0895-b<k1>vaSa<k2>vaSa
{%Vaśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ willing, subdued, subject, sub-
missive, obedient, tamed, overpowered, enthralled,
humbled; subdued by charms or incantations; fasci-
nated, charmed, enchanted; ({%as, am%}), m. n. wish,
desire; will, authority, power, influence, control, supre-
macy, mastership; subjection, submission, the state of
being tamed or overpowered, ({%vaśe kṛ,%} to bring into
subjection, overpower; {%vaśe bhū,%} to be subjected; to
be obedient to the will of another); birth; ({%as%}), m.
the residence of harlots; N. of a Ṛṣi preserved by
the Aśvins; {%Vaśa Aśvya,%} N. of the author of Ṛg-
veda VIII. 46; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a tribe or race;
({%ā%}), f. a woman; a wife; a daughter; a husband's
sister; a cow; a barren cow; a barren woman; a
female elephant; {%vaśāt,%} ind. through the power or
influence of, by the force of, in virtue of, by means
of, for the sake of (at the end of a comp.). {%—Va-%}
{%śaṃ-vada, as, ā, am,%} speaking submissively to the
will (of another), compliant, submissive, acknowledg-
ing subjection. {%—Vaśaṃvada-tva, am,%} n. speaking
compliantly. {%—Vaśa-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing sub-
jection, subjugating. {%—Vaśa-kriyā,%} f. the act of sub-
duing or overpowering (especially by drugs, gems,
charms, or incantations); the drugs &c. so used. {%—Va-%}
{%śa-ga, as, ā, am,%} obedient, subject, vassal; ({%ā%}), f. an
obedient wife. {%—Vaśaṅ-gata, as, ā, am,%} subject to
the will (of another), obedient, reduced to vassalage.
{%—Vaśa-tas,%} ind. in consequence of the power of, on
account of or through the influence of. {%—Vaśa-tā,%} f.
subjection, the being under the control of. {%—Vaśa-%}
{%nī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. performing the will or fulfilling the
pleasure (of another). {%—Vaśa-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} acting
obediently to the will (of another), obsequious. {%—Va-%}
{%śāḍhyaka (˚śa-āḍh˚?), as,%} m. a porpoise, the
Gangetic porpoise. {%—Vaśānuga (˚śa-an˚), as, ā, %}
[Page0895-c+ 79]
{%am,%} obedient or subject to the will (of another),
submissive; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a male or female servant.
{%—Vaśā-pāyin, ī,%} m. a dog, (for {%vasā-pāyin,%} q. v.)
{%—Vaśī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of making subject,
subjugating, overcoming by charms, &c., enchanting,
charming. {%—Vaśī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%}
to make subject to another's will, bring into subjec-
tion, subjugate. {%—Vaśī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} subjected
to the will (of another), brought into subjection, sub-
dued, enthralled, bewitched, fascinated. {%—Vaśī-bhū,%}
cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to become subject to
another's will. {%—Vaśī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become
subject, subjugated, brought under control.
<LEND>

<L>41602<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSakA<k2>vaSakA
{%Vaśakā,%}¦ f. an obedient wife, submissive woman.
<LEND>

<L>41603<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSana<k2>vaSana
{%Vaśana, am,%}¦ n. wishing, desiring, willing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41604<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSanIya<k2>vaSanIya
{%Vaśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be wished or willed.
<LEND>

<L>41605<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSAku<k2>vaSAku
{%Vaśāku, us,%}¦ m. a bird (?) .
<LEND>

<L>41606<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSi<k2>vaSi
{%Vaśi, is,%}¦ m. subjugation, fascination, bewitching,
holding others in magical submission to the will;
({%i%}), n. the state of being subject, subjection.
<LEND>

<L>41607<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSika<k2>vaSika
{%Vaśika, as, ā, am,%}¦ void, empty; ({%ā%}), f. aloe
wood.
<LEND>

<L>41608<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSin<k2>vaSin
{%Vaśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having will or power; having or
being in authority, powerful, being in subjection,
subdued, subjugated, under control, obedient; ({%ī%}),
m. a ruler, lord (Ved.); a sage with subdued pas-
sions; ({%inī%}), f. the Śamī tree, Acacia or Mimosa
Suma; a parasite plant. {%—Vaśi-tā,%} f. or {%vaśi-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. subjugation, dominion; subduing by magical
means, fascinating, bewitching.
<LEND>

<L>41609<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSira<k2>vaSira
{%Vaśira, am,%}¦ n. sea salt [cf. {%vasuka%}]; ({%as%}), m.
the tree Achyranthes Aspera; a sort of pepper ({%=%}
{%gaja-pippalī;%} cf. {%vasira%}); orris root.
<LEND>

<L>41610<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSizWa<k2>vaSizWa
{%Vaśiṣṭha, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vaśin%}), N. of a celebrated
Ṛṣi or divine sage, (originally written {%vasiṣṭha,%}
but in the later language regarded as a superl. of
{%vaśin,%} meaning ‘the most self-subdued;’ for an
account of him see {%vasiṣṭha,%} p. 896, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>41611<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSIra<k2>vaSIra
{%Vaśīra, as,%}¦ m. {%= gaja-pippalī,%} a plant bearing a
pungent fruit resembling pepper, (also written {%va-%}
{%śira;%} cf. {%vasira.%})
<LEND>

<L>41612<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSya<k2>vaSya
{%Vaśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be subjected, able to be
subdued, controllable, governable; subdued, tamed,
humbled; under control, obedient, dutiful, docile,
tame, humble; ({%as%}), m. a dependant, slave; ({%ā%}), f. a
docile and obedient wife; ({%am%}), n. cloves. {%—Vaśya-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%vaśya-tva, am,%} n. subjugation, fitness for
subjection, humility. {%—Vaśyātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} of subdued mind.
<LEND>

<L>41613<pc>0895-c<k1>vaSyaka<k2>vaSyaka
{%Vaśyaka, as, ā, am, = vaśya%}¦ above; ({%ā%}), f. an
obedient wife; [cf. {%a-vaśyaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41614<pc>0895-c<k1>vaz<k2>vaz
{#vaz#}¦ {%vaṣ%} (also written {%baṣ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%vaṣati, vavāṣa, vaṣitum,%} to hurt,
strike, kill.
<LEND>

<L>41615<pc>0895-c<k1>vazaw<k2>vazaw
{#vazaw#}¦ {%vaṣaṭ,%} ind. (probably for {%vakṣat,%}
Vedic Leṭ of rt. 1. {%vah;%} cf. {%śrauṣaṭ%}), an exclama-
tion used on making an oblation to a deity with fire,
‘may he (the god of fire) bear it to the gods!’ (fol-
lowed by a dat., e. g. {%Pūṣṇe vaṣaṭ.%}) {%—Vaṣaṭ-%}
{%kartṛ, tā,%} m. the priest who makes the oblation
with the exclamation {%vaṣaṭ%}. {%—Vaṣaṭ-kāra, as,%}
m. making the exclamation {%vaṣaṭ,%} the formula
{%vaṣaṭ%} or a burnt offering made with this formula;
N. of one of the thirty-three so-called Vedic deities
(which, according to one account, are thus reckoned,
eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Ādityas, Prajā-
pati, and Vaṣaṭ-kāra). {%—Vaṣaṭ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
offered in fire with the exclamation {%vaṣaṭ,%} ‘may
he bear it to the gods!’ (said of an oblation); ({%am%}),
n. an oblation made in fire to the gods with the
formula {%vaṣaṭ%}. {%—Vaṣaṭ-kṛti, is,%} f. an oblation
made in fire with the exclamation {%vaṣaṭ.%}
<LEND>

<L>41616<pc>0895-c<k1>vazk<k2>vazk
{#vazk#}¦ {%vaṣk,%} cl. 1. A., 10. P. {%vaṣkate,%}
{%vaṣkayati,%} &c., to see [cf. rt. {%viṣk%}];
to go.
<LEND>

<L>41617<pc>0895-c<k1>vazkaya<k2>vazkaya
{%Vaṣkaya, as,%}¦ m. a one-year-old calf (according
to Śākaṭāyana); [cf. {%vaskaya;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">μὀσχος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μοσχάς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>vacca.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41618<pc>0895-c<k1>vazkayaRI<k2>vazkayaRI
{%Vaṣkayaṇī%}¦ or {%vaṣkayiṇī,%} f. a cow that has
[Page0896-a+ 78]
full-grown calves, a cow bearing many calves; [cf.
{%vaskayaṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41619<pc>0896-a<k1>vas<k2>vas<h>1
{#vas#} 1¦. {%vas,%} a root assumed by some to
explain Ṛg-veda VI. 38, 2. {%dūrāc cid%}
{%ā vasato asya karṇā,%} his ears hear even from a
great distance, but according to Sāy. fr. rt. 6. {%vas.%}
<LEND>

<L>41620<pc>0896-a<k1>vas<k2>vas<h>2
{#vas#} 2¦. {%vas%} (sometimes written {%bas%}), cl.
4. P. {%vasyati, vavāsa, vasitum,%} to be
straight or unbending, to be fixed or erect; to make
firm, fix.
<LEND>

<L>41621<pc>0896-a<k1>vas<k2>vas<h>3
{#vas#} 3¦. {%vas%} (a Vedic rt. which probably
afterwards passed into {%uṣ,%} cf. 2. {%uṣ, vi-%}
{%vasvat, uṣas%}), cl. 6. P. {%ucchati, uvāsa,%} Leṭ
{%ucchāt,%} Inf. {%vastave,%} Ved. to shine: Caus. {%vāsa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to cause to shine; [cf. Goth. <nsi>uhtvo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41622<pc>0896-a<k1>vas<k2>vas<h>4
{#vas#} 4¦. {%vas,%} cl. 10. P. {%vāsayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%avīvasat,%} to love; to cut, cut off,
divide; to accept, take; to offer; to kill.
<LEND>

<L>41623<pc>0896-a<k1>vas<k2>vas<h>5
{#vas#} 5¦. {%vas,%} cl. 2. A. {%vaste, vavase, va-%}
{%siṣyate, avasiṣṭa, vasitum,%} to wear
(as clothes), to put on (clothes &c.), cover with
dress, dress: Pass. {%vasyate:%} Caus. {%vāsayati, -te:%}
Desid. {%vivasiṣate:%} Intens. {%vāvasyate, vāvasti;%}
[cf. Zend <nsi>vanh, vas-tra;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἕν-νυ-μι</lang> (for <lang n="greek">ϝεσνυμι</lang>),
<lang n="greek">εἶ-μα</lang> (= Ved. {%vasman%}), <lang n="greek">ἱμάτ-ιο-ν, ἔσ-θ-ος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐσ-θ-ή-ς, ἑ-ᾰνό-ς, ἑ-ᾱνό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ves-ti-s, vesti-o;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>ga-vas-jan, vas-ti;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>werian.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41624<pc>0896-a<k1>vas<k2>vas
{%Vas%}¦ (at the end of a comp.), wearing.
<LEND>

<L>41625<pc>0896-a<k1>vasat<k2>vasat<h>1
1. {%vasat, an, atī, at,%}¦ wearing, putting on (clothes).
<LEND>

<L>41626<pc>0896-a<k1>vasana<k2>vasana<h>1
1. {%vasana, am,%}¦ n. cloth, clothes, dress, attire;
covering, clothing; an ornament worn by women
round the loins, (in this sense also {%ā,%} f.) {%—Vasa-%}
{%nārṇa (˚na-ṛṇa), am,%} n. debt of a cloth.
<LEND>

<L>41627<pc>0896-a<k1>vasarhan<k2>vasarhan
{%Vasarhan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘assuming various vestures,’
epithet of Agni, (according to Sāy. Ṛg-veda I. 122, 3
{%= vasanārha%} or {%= vāsakānāṃ vṛkṣādīnāṃ han-%}
{%tṛ%} or {%= vāsārha,%} i. e. {%vāsarasya gamayitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>41628<pc>0896-a<k1>vasAna<k2>vasAna
{%Vasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ wearing, putting on (clothes).
<LEND>

<L>41629<pc>0896-a<k1>vasi<k2>vasi<h>1
1. {%vasi, is,%}¦ m. f. (?) , clothes. (For 2. see col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>41630<pc>0896-a<k1>vasita<k2>vasita<h>1
1. {%vasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ worn, put on.
<LEND>

<L>41631<pc>0896-a<k1>vasitf<k2>vasitf
{%Vasitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who wears, wearing.
<LEND>

<L>41632<pc>0896-a<k1>vasitvA<k2>vasitvA
{%Vasitvā,%}¦ ind. having worn, having put on (clothes),
wearing.
<LEND>

<L>41633<pc>0896-a<k1>vasti<k2>vasti<h>1
1. {%vasti, is,%}¦ m. f. (?) , cloth. (only the pl. {%vastayas%}
seems to be used, and is said to mean ‘the ends or
skirt of a cloth.)
<LEND>

<L>41634<pc>0896-a<k1>vastf<k2>vastf
{%Vastṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who clothes, a
clother; (perhaps) shining, lighting up, illuminating,
(connected with rt. 3. {%vas.%})
<LEND>

<L>41635<pc>0896-a<k1>vastra<k2>vastra
{%Vastra, am,%}¦ n. (said to be sometimes {%as,%} m.), cloth,
clothes, garment, raiment, apparel, dress, vesture, night-
dress, bed-clothes, a covering, cover. {%—Vastra-kuṭṭi-%}
{%ma, am,%} n. ‘cloth-hut,’ an umbrella; a tent. {%—Vastra-%}
{%gṛha, am,%} n. ‘cloth-house,’ a tent. {%—Vastra-gran-%}
{%thi, is,%} m. the knot which fastens the lower garments
above the hips. {%—Vastra-cchanna, as, ā, am,%} clad
in clothes. {%—Vastra-da, as, ā, am,%} giving clothes.
{%—Vastra-nirṇejaka, as,%} m. a washer of clothes,
washerman. {%—Vastra-panjala, as,%} m., N. of a
plant {%(= kola-kanda)%}. {%—Vastra-paridhāna, am,%}
n. the putting on of clothes, dressing. {%—Vastra-pu-%}
{%trikā,%} f. a doll, puppet. {%—Vastra-pūta, as, ā, am,%}
purified with a cloth, filtered through a cloth (said
of water). {%—Vastra-bhūṣaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
tree; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant {%(= mañjiṣṭhā).%}
{%—Vastra-bhedaka, as,%} or {%vastra-bhedin, ī,%} m. a
cloth-cutter, tailor. {%—Vastra-mathi, is, is, i,%} Ved.
carrying off clothes by force, stealing clothes, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%vastra-māthin.%}) {%—Vastra-yugala, am,%} n. two
garments. {%—Vastra-yugin, ī, inī, i,%} having or pos-
sessing a couple of garments. {%—Vastra-yugma, am,%}
n. a pair of garments or clothes of any kind. {%—Vas-%}
{%tra-yoni, is,%} f. the basis or material of cloth (as
cotton, silk, wool, &c.). {%—Vastra-rañjana, as,%} m.
‘cloth-colourer,’ safflower. {%—Vastra-vilāsa, as,%} m.
foppery in dress. {%—Vastra-veṣṭita, as, ā, am,%}
covered with clothes, well clad. {%—Vastrāgāra (˚ra-%}
{%āg˚), as, am,%} m. n. a clothier's shop; a tent.
[Page0896-b+ 80]
{%—Vastrāñcala (˚ra-añ˚), am,%} n. the end or hem
of a garment. {%—Vastrānta (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m. the
end of a garment. {%—Vastrāpahāraka (˚ra-ap˚),%}
{%as,%} or {%vastrāpahārin, ī,%} m. a stealer of clothes.
{%—Vastrārdha (˚ra-ar˚), am,%} n. the half of a gar-
ment. {%—Vastrārdha-prāvṛta%} or {%vastrārdha-saṃ-%}
{%vīta%} or {%vastrārdha-saṃvṛta, as, ā, am,%} covered
or clothed with half a garment. {%—Vastrāvakarta%}
{%(˚ra-av˚), as,%} m. a fragment of a garment. {%—Vas-%}
{%trotkarṣaṇa (˚ra-ut˚), am,%} n. the act of taking
off clothes.
<LEND>

<L>41636<pc>0896-b<k1>vastraya<k2>vastraya
{%Vastraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vastrayati, -yitum,%} to dress
one's self.
<LEND>

<L>41637<pc>0896-b<k1>vasna<k2>vasna<h>1
1. {%vasna, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see p. 897, col. 2), cloth,
a cloth, clothes; skin.
<LEND>

<L>41638<pc>0896-b<k1>vasman<k2>vasman<h>1
1. {%vasman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. a garment.
<LEND>

<L>41639<pc>0896-b<k1>vas<k2>vas<h>6
{#vas#} 6¦. {%vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%vasati%} (ep. also A.
{%vasate%}), {%uvāsa, vatsyati%} (ep. {%vasiṣyati%}),
avātsīt (ep. {%avosīt%}), {%vastum,%} to dwell, live, to
inhabit, dwell in, abide in (with loc. or even acc.,
e. g. {%vaneṣu vas,%} to dwell in woods; {%nadīr vas,%}
to live in rivers); to dwell with, live near (with loc.
or with {%saha%} governing an inst.); to spend (time),
pass (a night); cl. 10. P. {%vasayati,%} &c., to dwell:
Pass. {%uṣyate%} (Part. {%uṣita,%} see 2. {%uṣita,%} s. v.), to
be dwelt: Caus. {%vāsayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvasat,%}
to cause to dwell, to lodge; to people; to receive
hospitably or as a guest; to let abide; to dwell, in-
habit: Desid. {%vivatsati,%} to wish to dwell: Intens.
{%vāvasyate, vāvasti,%} to remain, be in, be engaged
in; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἄστυ, ϝάστυ, ἀστεῖο-ς, ἀστό-ς, ἑστία,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὑπερ-ῷον,</lang> (probably also) <lang n="greek">εὐνή, ἰαύω, αὐλή, αὖλις:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>Vesta, vesti-bulum, verna,</nsi> (perhaps also) <nsi>vās,</nsi>
<nsi>vāsum:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>visan, vas</nsi> = Eng. <nsi>was:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>wisu, was,</nsi> ‘I was; he was;’ <nsi>warumes,</nsi> ‘we were;’
<nsi>weren, wonen:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>war, gewesen, Wesen,</nsi>
<nsi>an-wesend:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wesan, ed-wist, werig,</nsi>
<nsi>wunian:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>fosaim,</nsi> ‘I stay, lodge;’ <nsi>fosra,</nsi> ‘a
dwelling, abode;’ <nsi>arasaim,</nsi> ‘I dwell;’ <nsi>aras,</nsi> ‘a
dwelling-house.’]
<LEND>

<L>41640<pc>0896-b<k1>vasat<k2>vasat<h>2
2. {%vasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dwelling, inhabiting, lodging.
<LEND>

<L>41641<pc>0896-b<k1>vasati<k2>vasati
{%Vasati, is,%}¦ or {%vasatī,%} f. a dwelling-place, dwelling,
house, abode, residence, ({%kāma-v˚,%} ‘abode of love,’
a term belonging to erotic composition); abiding; a
Jaina monastery; night, (in this sense perhaps con-
nected with rt. 5. {%vas%}); [cf. Hib. <nsi>fosadh,</nsi> ‘staying.’]
<LEND>

<L>41642<pc>0896-b<k1>vasana<k2>vasana<h>2
2. {%vasana, am,%}¦ n. a dwelling, residence, house.
{%—Vasana-sadman, a,%} n. a dwelling-house, abode,
habitation.
<LEND>

<L>41643<pc>0896-b<k1>vasamAna<k2>vasamAna
{%Vasamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ dwelling, abiding.
<LEND>

<L>41644<pc>0896-b<k1>vasavya<k2>vasavya
{%Vasavya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%vasu%}), Ved. a quantity of
goods or treasure, wealth, opulence.
<LEND>

<L>41645<pc>0896-b<k1>vasi<k2>vasi<h>2
2. {%vasi, is,%}¦ m. (for 1. see col. 1), dwelling, abode;
a dwelling.
<LEND>

<L>41646<pc>0896-b<k1>vasita<k2>vasita<h>2
2. {%vasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dwelling, inhabiting [cf.
2. {%uṣita%}]; stored (said of grain); ({%am%}), n. abiding,
abode, residence; ({%ā%}), f. incorrect for {%vaśi-tā.%}
<LEND>

<L>41647<pc>0896-b<k1>vasira<k2>vasira
{%Vasira, am,%}¦ n. sea salt; ({%as%}), m. {%= gaja-pippalī,%}
a plant bearing a pungent seed or fruit resembling
pepper, (according to some also {%am,%} n.; cf. {%vaśira.%})
<LEND>

<L>41648<pc>0896-b<k1>vasizWa<k2>vasizWa
{%Vasiṣṭha, as,%}¦ m. (superl. of {%vasu%} or {%vasu-%}
{%mat;%} cf. {%vasīyas%}), ‘the most wealthy,’ N. of a very
celebrated Vedic Ṛṣi or inspired sage (owner of
the ‘cow of plenty,’ called Nandinī, offspring of
Surabhi, which by granting all desires made him, as
his name implies, master of every {%vasu%} or desirable
object; he was the typical representative of Brāh-
manical dignity, and the legends of his conflict with
Viśvā-mitra, who raised himself from the military
to the sacerdotal class, though probably founded on
the actual struggles which took place between the
Brāhmans and Kṣatriyas, were doubtless mostly in-
vented to impress the mind with the power and
superiority of the priesthood; a great many hymns
of the Ṛg-veda are ascribed to these two great
rivals, those of the seventh Maṇḍala, besides some
others, being attributed to Vasiṣṭha, while those of
the third Maṇḍala are assigned to Viśvā-mitra; in
one of Vasiṣṭha's hymns he is represented as king
Su-dās's family priest, an office to which Viśvā-mitra
[Page0896-c+ 81]
also aspired; in another hymn Vasiṣṭha claims to
have been inspired by Varuṇa, and in another [Ṛg-
veda VII. 33, 11] he is called the son of the Apsaras
Urvaśī by Mitra and Varuṇa, whence his patronymic
Maitrāvaruṇi; in Manu I. 35. he is enumerated
among the ten Prajā-patis or Patriarchs produced by
Manu Svāyambhuva for the peopling of the universe;
in the Mahā-bhārata he is mentioned as the family
priest of the solar race or family of Ikṣvāku and
Rāma-candra, and in the Purāṇas as one of the
arrangers of the Vedas in the Dvāpara age; in the
first and second chapters of the Raghu-vaṃśa he is
described as releasing king Dilīpa from his curse of
childlessness by directing him to attend upon the cow
Nandinī in atonement for an offence he had uninten-
tionally committed against the parent cow Surabhi;
according to one account Vasiṣṭha married Ūrjā,
‘Strength;’ according to another, Arundhatī, one of
the Pleiades, by whom he had seven sons [see
{%arundhatī%}]; other legends make him one of the
seven great patriarchal sages regarded as forming the
stars of the Great Bear [see {%ṛṣi%}]; his name is often
written Vaśiṣṭha, q. v., in which case it must be
connected with {%vaśa%} and {%vaśin%}); N. of the author
of a law-book (perhaps intended to be ascribed to
the Vedic Ṛṣi above); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the family of
Vasiṣṭha; ({%Vasiṣṭhasyāṅkuśa%} and {%Vasiṣṭhasyā-%}
{%nupadam,%} N. of two Sāmans.) {%—Vasiṣṭha-tantra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Vasiṣṭha-putra,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. ‘the sons or descendants of Vasiṣṭha,’ N.
of the authors of Ṛg-veda VII. 33, 10-14. {%—Va-%}
{%siṣṭha-pramukha, as, ā, am,%} preceded or led
by Vasiṣṭha. {%—Vasiṣṭha-prācī,%} f., N. of a place.
{%—Vasiṣṭha-bhṛgv-atri-sama, as, ā, am,%} equal
to (the three great saints) Vasiṣṭha, Bhṛgu, and
Atri (all three being reckoned among the nine
Prajā-patis, Manu I. 35). {%—Vasiṣṭha-saṃhitā,%} f.,
N. of a philosophical treatise; {%= yoga-vāsiṣṭha.%}
{%—Vasiṣṭhāpavāha (˚ṭha-ap˚), as,%} m., N. of a place
on the Sarasvatī (where that river carried the Ṛṣi Va-
siṣṭha away so that he escaped from Viśvā-mitra).
<LEND>

<L>41649<pc>0896-c<k1>vasIyas<k2>vasIyas
{%Vasīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%vasu%} or {%vasu-mat,%}
cf. {%vasiṣṭha%}), more wealthy, better, more excellent.
<LEND>

<L>41650<pc>0896-c<k1>vasu<k2>vasu
{%Vasu, us, us%}¦ or {%vī%} (Ved.), {%u,%} good (Ved.); wealthy,
rich (Ved.); sweet, sweet-flavoured; dry, dried;
({%us%}), m. (pl. {%vasavas%}), N. of a kind of god or
semi-divine being belonging to a class of eight
(forming one of the nine Gaṇas or classes enume-
rated under Gaṇa-devatā, q. v.; the eight Vasus were
originally personifications, like other Vedic deities, of
natural phenomena, and are usually mentioned with
the other Gaṇas or classes common in the Veda, viz.
the eleven Rudras and the twelve Ādityas, constitut-
ing with them and with Dyaus, ‘Heaven,’ and Pṛ-
thivī, ‘Earth’ [or, according to some, with Indra and
Prajā-pati, or, according to others, with the two
Aśvins], the number of thirty-three gods to which
reference is frequently made: the names of the
Vasus, according to the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa, are, 1. Āpa
[connected with {%ap,%} ‘water’]; 2. Dhruva, ‘the
Pole-star’ 3. Soma, ‘the Moon;’ 4. Dhava or
Dhara; 5. Anila, ‘Wind;’ 6. Anala or Pāvaka,
‘Fire;’ 7. Pratyūṣa, ‘the Dawn;’ 8. Prabhāsa,
‘Light;’ but their appellations are variously given
by different authorities, Ahan, ‘Day,’ being some-
times substituted for 1; in their relationship to Fire
and Light they appear to belong to the Vedic rather
than Purānic period of mythology); a symbolical
expression for the number eight; N. of Agni or
Fire; of Śiva; of Kuvera, the god of wealth; of a
king; of a Ṛṣi with the patronymic Bhāradvāja
(author of the hymns Ṛg-veda IX. 80-82); the
sun; a ray of light; a rein; the tie of a yoke; a
halter; a tree; the tree Sesbana Grandiflora; the
plant Trophis Aspera; a lake, pool; a kind of fish;
({%us%}), f. light, radiance; ({%u%}), n. wealth, riches (abl.
gen., Ved. {%vasvas%}); a thing, substance; gold; a
gem, jewel; water; a sort of salt; a yellow kind of
kidney-bean; a medicinal root (commonly called
Vṛddhi; said to be also {%us,%} f.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐΰς, ἐόων.</lang>]
{%—Vasu-karṇa, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi with the
[Page0897-a+ 81]
patronymic Vāsukra (author of the hymns Ṛg-veda
X. 65, 66). {%—Vasu-kīṭa, as,%} or {%vasu-kṛmi, is,%} m.
‘money-worm,’ a suppliant, beggar. {%—Vasu-kṛt, t,%}
m., N. of a Ṛṣi with the patronymic Vāsukra (author
of the hymns Ṛg-veda X. 20 — 26). {%—Vasu-kra, as,%}
m., N. of a Ṛṣi with the patronymic Aindra (author
of the hymns Ṛg-veda X. 27, 29, and part of 28);
of another Ṛṣi with the patronymic Vāsiṣṭha
(author of Ṛg-veda IX. 97, 28 — 30). {%—Vasukra-%}
{%patnī,%} f., N. of the authoress of Ṛg-veda X. 28, 1.
{%—Vasu-gupta, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vasuguptā-%}
{%cārya (˚ta-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Vasu-%}
{%cchidrā,%} f., N. of a tree {%(= mahā-meda)%}. {%—Vasu-%}
{%tāti, is,%} f., Ved. wealth, riches, (Sāy. {%= dhana.%})
{%—Vasu-tti, is,%} f. (for {%vasu-datti;%} cf. {%deva-tta%}), Ved.
granting wealth. {%—Vasu-tvana, am,%} n., Ved. wealth,
riches. {%—Vasu-dā, ās,%} m. f., Ved. one who grants
wealth or treasures; ({%ā%}), f. the earth, (fem. of {%vasu-%}
{%da.%}) {%—Vasu-deva, as,%} m., N. of the father of Kṛṣṇa,
(he was the son of Śūra, a descendant of Yadu of
the lunar line, and was also called Ānaka-dundubhi,
q. v., because at his birth the gods, foreseeing that
Viṣṇu would take a human form in his family,
sounded the drums of heaven with joy; he was a
brother of Kuntī or Pṛthā, the mother of the Pāṇḍu
princes, who were thus cousins of Kṛṣṇa, see
1. {%kṛṣṇa%}); a proper N. {%—Vasu-devatā,%} f. the
constellation Dhaniṣṭha (presided over by the Vasus).
{%—Vasudeva-bhū, ūs,%} m. ‘son of Vasu-deva,’ epi-
thet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Vasudevyā,%} f. the asterism Dha-
niṣṭha [cf. {%vasu-devatā%}]; the ninth day of the
fortnight. {%—Vasu-dharmikā,%} f. crystal. {%—Vasu-dhā,%}
f. ‘containing wealth,’ the earth. {%—Vasudhā-khar-%}
{%jūrikā,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Vasudhā-dhara, as,%}
m. a mountain. {%—Vasudhādhipa (˚dhā-adh˚), as,%}
m. a king. {%—Vasu-dhāna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. possess-
ing wealth, a possesser of wealth. {%—Vasudhā-na-%}
{%gara, am,%} n. the capital of Varuṇa in the western
ocean. {%—Vasu-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} treasure-holding;
({%ā%}), f. a female Śakti peculiar to the Jainas; the
capital of Kuvera, (also read {%vasu-bhārā.%}) {%—Vasu-%}
{%dhiti, is,%} f., Ved. the bestowal of wealth, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 8, 2 {%= yajamā-nābhīṣṭa-%}
{%phala-rūpa-dhanasya dānam%}); ({%is, is, i%}), be-
stowing wealth, (Sāy. {%= dhanasya dhātṛ,%} Ṛg-veda
I. 181, 1.) {%—Vasu-dheya, am,%} n., see Nirukta
IX. 42, 43. {%—Vasun-dhara, as,%} m. containing
wealth; N. of a poet; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people; ({%ā%}), f. the earth. {%—Vasu-pati, is,%} m., Ved. a
lord of wealth or of good things. {%—Vasu-prabhā,%}
f. one of the seven tongues of fire. {%—Vasu-prāṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘life of the Vasus,’ fire or its deity Agni.
{%—Vasu-bharita, as, ā, am,%} full of treasures. {%—Va-%}
{%su-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing treasures, wealthy,
rich; ({%atī%}), f. the earth; a proper N. {%—Vasu-ma-%}
{%nas, ās,%} m., N. of the author of Ṛg-veda X. 179, 3
(having the patronymic Rauhidaśva). {%—Vasu-ruc, k,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Vasu-retas, ās,%} m. fire. {%—Vasu-%}
{%rocis, is,%} m., Ved. a proper N.; ({%is%}), n. a religious
ceremony in which the deities called Vasus are espe-
cially worshipped; {%Vasurociṣo 'ṅgirasaḥ,%} N. of
the authors of Ṛg-veda VIII. 34, 16-18. {%—Vasu-%}
{%vani, is,%} f., Ved. a request or prayer for wealth; ({%is,%}
{%is, i%}), a giver of wealth. {%—Vasu-vāhana, as, ī, am,%}
bringing treasures. {%—Vasuvit-tama%} (superl. of {%vasu-%}
{%vid%}), {%as, ā, am,%} Ved. one who bestows great wealth.
{%—Vasu-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. granting treasures. {%—Vasu-%}
{%śravas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. famous or renowned for
wealth. {%—Vasu-śruta, as,%} m., Ved. (probably) one re-
nowned for wealth; N. of the author of the hymns
Ṛg-veda V. 3 — 6 (having the patronymic Ātreya).
{%—Vasu-śreṣṭha, am,%} n. ‘the best of treasure,’
silver; wrought gold. {%—Vasu-ṣeṇa, as,%} m., N. of
Karṇa (half brother of the Pāṇḍu princes by the
same mother, Pṛthā; the name is supposed by some
to have reference to his wealth, which he liberally
distributed, cf. {%karṇa%}). {%—Vasu-sampūrṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} filled with wealth. {%—Vasu-sthalī,%} f. the city
of Kuvera. {%—Vasu-haṭṭa%} or {%vasuhaṭṭaka, as,%} m.
{%= vaka-puṣpa%} or Sesbana Grandiflora. {%—Vasūpa-%}
{%māna (˚su-up˚), as, ā, am,%} resembling or equal to
[Page0897-b+ 81]
Kuvera (the god of wealth). {%—Vasor-dhārā,%} f. ‘a
stream or source of wealth, ‘N. of a particular liba-
tion to Agni; of a sacred bathing-place; of the wife
of Agni. {%—Vasu-aukasārā,%} f. the city of Indra, i. e.
Amarā-vatī; the residence of Kuvera, i. e. Alakā; a
river or lake attached to Amarā-vatī and Alakā (re-
garded as belonging to either Indra or Kuvera).
<LEND>

<L>41651<pc>0897-b<k1>vasuka<k2>vasuka
{%Vasuka%}¦ or {%vasūka, as,%} m. a kind of tree, Sesbana
Grandiflora; a kind of shrub, Asclepias Gigantea;
({%am%}), n. sea salt [cf. {%vasira%}]; a fossil salt (brought
from Sambhar lake in Rājputāna).
<LEND>

<L>41652<pc>0897-b<k1>vasula<k2>vasula
{%Vasula, as,%}¦ m. a god, deity.
<LEND>

<L>41653<pc>0897-b<k1>vasUyu<k2>vasUyu
{%Vasūyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desiring riches; {%Vasūyava%}
{%Ātreyāḥ,%} N. of the authors of Ṛg-veda V. 25 — 26.
<LEND>

<L>41654<pc>0897-b<k1>vasta<k2>vasta
{%Vasta, am,%}¦ n. an abode, house; a part ({%= bhāga,%}
perhaps an error for {%chāga%}); ({%as%}), m. a goat, (more
commonly written {%basta,%} q. v.) {%—Vasta-karṇa, as,%}
m. the Śāl tree. {%—Vasta-gandhā, vasta-modā,%} &c.,
see {%basta-g˚,%} &c. {%—Vastājina (˚ta-aj˚), am,%} n. a
goat's skin. {%—Vastāntrī (˚ta-an˚),%} f. benzoin or
storax; a plant (see {%bastāntrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>41655<pc>0897-b<k1>vastavya<k2>vastavya
{%Vastavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ inhabitable, habitable, to be
dwelt in, to be resided or remained at, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41656<pc>0897-b<k1>vasti<k2>vasti<h>2
2. {%vasti, is,%}¦ m. f. (for 1. see p. 896, col. 1),
abiding, dwelling, staying; the lower belly, abdomen,
the hypogastric or pubic region; the pelvis; the
bladder; a clyster, syringe, bag made of bladder or
gut with a wooden or metallic nozzle. {%—Vasti-kar-%}
{%māḍhya (˚ma-āḍh˚), as,%} m. the soap berry, Sapin-
dus Detergens. {%—Vasti-mala, am,%} n. ‘bladder-
excretion, ‘urine. {%—Vasti-śiras, as,%} n. the neck of
the bladder; the pipe of a clyster. {%—Vasti-śodhana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘bladder-cleanser,’ a diuretic.
<LEND>

<L>41657<pc>0897-b<k1>vastu<k2>vastu
{%Vastu, u,%}¦ n. any really existing or abiding sub-
stance or essence; (in phil.) the real (opposed to
{%a-vastu,%} that which does not really exist, the unreal;
{%a-dvitīya-vastu,%} the one real substance which has
no second); object, the object (of love &c.); thing,
matter, article, commodity; substance, wealth, pro-
perty; natural disposition, essential property, nature,
essence; material essence, body, stuff, materials, in-
gredients; the pith or substance of anything; the
main plot or subject of a poem or play; means,
mode, plan, project, design; ({%us%}), f., Ved. day,
dawn (gen. sing. {%vastos%}). {%—Vastu-kṣaṇāt,%} ind. at
the very moment, at the right moment. {%—Vastu-%}
{%tas,%} ind. in fact, in reality, really, actually, in very
deed, verily, essentially, substantially; as a natural
consequence, owing to the very nature of a thing, of
course; in fine. {%—Vastu-tā,%} f. substantiality, essen-
tiality, reality, ({%parihāsa-vastutā,%} the condition of
being the object of derision.) {%—Vastu-pāla, as,%} m.,
N. of a poet. {%—Vastu-mātra, am,%} n. the mere out-
line of any subject, skeleton of a discourse. {%—Vas-%}
{%tu-racanā,%} f. arrangement of matter, style (e. g.
{%saṅkṣiptā vastu-racanā,%} a compressed or concise
style). {%—Vastu-vat, ān, atī, at,%} supplied with commo-
dities. {%—Vastu-vinimaya, as,%} m. exchange of goods,
barter. {%—Vastu-vivarta, as, ā, am,%} enveloping
reality, (in the Vedānta said of {%avastu%} or unreality,
i. e. of the external world conceived of as illusory.)
{%—Vastu-hāni, is,%} f. loss of substance or property.
{%—Vastūtthāpana (˚tu-ut˚), am,%} n. the production
of any change or incident in a play by magic. {%—Vas-%}
{%tūpahita (˚tu-up˚), as, ā, am,%} applied to a suitable
object, placed on a proper object. {%—Vastv-antara,%}
{%am,%} n. another thing, another object or subject.
{%—Vastv-abhāva, as,%} m. absence of reality, unsub-
stantial existence; loss or destruction of property.
<LEND>

<L>41658<pc>0897-b<k1>vastuka<k2>vastuka
{%Vastuka, am,%}¦ n. a pot-herb, Chenopodium Album,
(also written {%vāstuka, vāstūka,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>41659<pc>0897-b<k1>vastUkI<k2>vastUkI
{%Vastūkī,%}¦ f. a kind of plant.
<LEND>

<L>41660<pc>0897-b<k1>vastya<k2>vastya
{%Vastya, am,%}¦ n. an abode, house ({%= pastya,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>41661<pc>0897-b<k1>vasna<k2>vasna<h>2
2. {%vasna, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 6. fr.
rt. 6. {%vas;%} for 1. see p. 896, col. 2), hire, wages,
price; ({%am%}), n. abiding, dwelling; wealth, substance,
thing; wages, hire; death; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὦνο-ς</lang> (for
<lang n="greek">ϝόσνος</lang>); <lang n="greek">ὠνή, ὠνέ-ο-μαι;</lang> Lat. <nsi>venu-m, ven-eo,</nsi>
<nsi>ven-do;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>ven-i-ti, ven-o.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41662<pc>0897-b<k1>vasnika<k2>vasnika
{%Vasnika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to hire or price, earn-
ing wages, mercenary, hireling; purchasable.
<LEND>
[Page0897-c+ 75]

<L>41663<pc>0897-c<k1>vasnya<k2>vasnya
{%Vasnya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. hired.
<LEND>

<L>41664<pc>0897-c<k1>vasman<k2>vasman<h>2
2. {%vasman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. abode, habitation.
<LEND>

<L>41665<pc>0897-c<k1>vasyas<k2>vasyas
{%Vasyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (for {%vasīyas%}), Ved. more
wealthy, more excellent, better, more precious, more
glorious; ({%as%}), n. more excellent wealth, very excel-
lent treasure.
<LEND>

<L>41666<pc>0897-c<k1>vasvI<k2>vasvI
{%Vasvī,%}¦ f. [cf. {%vasu%}], Ved. glorious, excellent, (Sāy.
{%= vāsayitrī, praśasyā, praśastā.%})
<LEND>

<L>41667<pc>0897-c<k1>vasatIvarI<k2>vasatIvarI
{#vasatIvarI#}¦ {%vasatīvarī,%} f., Ved. water used
in the preparation of Soma.
<LEND>

<L>41668<pc>0897-c<k1>vasanta<k2>vasanta
{#vasanta#}¦ {%vasanta, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-
s. III. 128. fr. rt. 6. {%vas;%} perhaps connected with
rt. 3. {%vas,%} ‘to shine’), spring, the vernal season (com-
prising, according to some, the months Caitra and Vai-
śākha or from the middle of March to that of May; see
{%ṛtu%}); the deified personification of spring; dysentery,
diarrhœa; small-pox; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a particular scale
or musical mode; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔαρ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ver;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>vesna.</nsi>]
{%—Vasanta-kāla, as,%} m. the vernal season. {%—Va-%}
{%santa-kusuma, as,%} m. ‘having blossoms in spring,’
the tree Cordia Myxa or Latifolia. {%—Vasantakusu-%}
{%mākara (˚ma-āk˚), as,%} m. a kind of plant. {%—Va-%}
{%santa-ghoṣin, ī,%} m. ‘singing in spring,’ the Koïl
or Indian cuckoo. {%—Vasanta-ja, as, ā, am,%} ‘spring-
born, ‘produced in spring; ({%ā%}), f. a festival in honour
of Kāmadeva or the god of love (held in the month
Caitra, about the commencement of spring). {%—Va-%}
{%santa-tilaka, as, am,%} m. n., N. of a variety of
the Śakvarī or Śakkarī metre in Sanskrit prosody,
four times ¯¯˘¯˘˘˘¯˘˘¯˘¯¯. {%—Vasanta-%}
{%dūta, as,%} m. the Koïl or Indian cuckoo (see {%kokila%});
the month Caitra (March-April); the fifth Rāga or
musical mode (called also Hindola); the mango tree;
({%ī%}), f. the trumpet flower; the creeper Gærtnera
Racemosa. {%—Vasanta-dru, us,%} or {%vasanta-druma,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘spring-tree,’ the mango tree, Mangifera
Indica (which blossoms in March or April and is
then an object of great beauty). {%—Vasanta-pañcamī,%}
f. the fifth day of the light half of the month Māgha.
{%—Vasanta-bandhu, us,%} m. ‘friend of the spring,’
epithet of Kāmadeva or the god of love. {%—Vasanta-%}
{%mālikā,%} f., N. of a kind of metre. {%—Vasanta-yo-%}
{%dha, as,%} m. ‘spring-combatant,’ epithet of the god
of love. {%—Vasanta-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a gram-
marian; of the author of a work on augury. {%—Va-%}
{%santa-sakha, as,%} m. ‘friend of the spring,’ epithet
of the god of love. {%—Vasantotsava (˚ta-ut˚), am,%}
n. the spring festival or celebration of the return of
spring (formerly held on the full moon of Caitra, but
now on the full moon of Phālguna and identified
with the Dolā-yātrā or Holī).
<LEND>

<L>41669<pc>0897-c<k1>vasantaka<k2>vasantaka
{%Vasantaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Bignonia Indica.
<LEND>

<L>41670<pc>0897-c<k1>vasavya<k2>vasavya
{#vasavya#}¦ {%vasavya.%} See p. 896, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41671<pc>0897-c<k1>vasA<k2>vasA
{#vasA#}¦ {%vasā,%} f. (perhaps fr. rt. 3. {%vas,%} ‘to
shine, ‘or according to some fr. rt. 6. {%vas,%} ‘to dwell’),
the serum or marrow of the flesh (considered by
some authorities as distinct from the marrow of the
bones, but by others as the same substance), marrow,
adeps, fat, grease, suet, any fatty oily substance or
oily exudation; the brain. {%—Vasā-chaṭā,%} f. the mass
of the brain. {%—Vasāḍhya (˚sā-āḍh˚)%} or {%vasāḍhya-%}
{%ka, as,%} m. the Gangetic porpoise, Delphinus Gan-
geticus, (also written {%vaśāḍhyaka.%}) {%—Vasā-pāyin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘grease-drinker,’ a dog, (also written {%vaśā-%}
{%pāyin.%}) {%—Vasā-mūra,%} N. of a place. {%—Vasāvaśe-%}
{%ṣa-malina (˚sā-av˚), as, ā, am,%} dirty with the
remains of fat.
<LEND>

<L>41672<pc>0897-c<k1>vasAra<k2>vasAra
{#vasAra#}¦ {%vasāra (?) , am,%} n. wish, purpose.
<LEND>

<L>41673<pc>0897-c<k1>vasira<k2>vasira
{#vasira#}¦ {%vasira.%} See p. 896, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41674<pc>0897-c<k1>vasizWa<k2>vasizWa
{#vasizWa#}¦ {%vasiṣṭha.%} See p. 896, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41675<pc>0897-c<k1>vasu<k2>vasu
{#vasu#}¦ {%vasu.%} See p. 896, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41676<pc>0897-c<k1>vasUrA<k2>vasUrA
{#vasUrA#}¦ {%vasūrā,%} f. a harlot, prostitute, un-
chaste woman.
<LEND>

<L>41677<pc>0897-c<k1>vask<k2>vask
{#vask#}¦ {%vask%} [cf. rt. {%vaṣk%}], cl. 1. A. {%vas-%}
{%kate,%} to go.
<LEND>
[Page0898-a+ 74]

<L>41678<pc>0898-a<k1>vaska<k2>vaska
{%Vaska, as,%}¦ m. going, motion; application, perse-
verance.
<LEND>

<L>41679<pc>0898-a<k1>vaskaya<k2>vaskaya
{%Vaskaya, as,%}¦ m. a calf one year old, a yearling;
[cf. {%vaṣkaya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41680<pc>0898-a<k1>vaskayaRI<k2>vaskayaRI
{%Vaskayaṇī,%}¦ f. a cow bearing many calves, or one
that has full-grown calves; [cf. {%vaṣkayaṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41681<pc>0898-a<k1>vaskarAwikA<k2>vaskarAwikA
{#vaskarAwikA#}¦ {%vaskarāṭikā,%} f. a scorpion.
<LEND>

<L>41682<pc>0898-a<k1>vast<k2>vast
{#vast#}¦ {%vast,%} cl. 10. A. {%vastayate, -yitum,%}
to hurt or kill; to torment; to go or
move; to ask, beg, solicit.
<LEND>

<L>41683<pc>0898-a<k1>vasta<k2>vasta
{#vasta#}¦ {%vasta, vasti.%} See p. 897, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41684<pc>0898-a<k1>vastar<k2>vastar
{#vastar#}¦ {%vastar,%} ind., Ved. early, in the
morning.
<LEND>

<L>41685<pc>0898-a<k1>vasna<k2>vasna
{#vasna#}¦ {%vasna.%} See p. 896, col. 2, and p. 897,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41686<pc>0898-a<k1>vasnana<k2>vasnana
{#vasnana#}¦ {%vasnana, am,%} n. an ornament for a
woman's loins, a zone, girdle.
<LEND>

<L>41687<pc>0898-a<k1>vasnasA<k2>vasnasA
{#vasnasA#}¦ {%va-snasā,%} f. (for {%ava-snasā%}), a ten-
don, a nerve, a fibre (described as a hollow string-
like tube, attached to the bones and supposed to
serve as a passage for the vital air).
<LEND>

<L>41688<pc>0898-a<k1>vasyas<k2>vasyas
{#vasyas#}¦ {%vasyas.%} See p. 897, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41689<pc>0898-a<k1>vasvI<k2>vasvI
{#vasvI#}¦ {%vasvī.%} See p. 897, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41690<pc>0898-a<k1>vah<k2>vah<h>1
{#vah#} 1¦. {%vah%} (connected with rt. 1. {%ūh,%}
q. v.; cf. 1. {%ūḍha%}), cl. 1. P. A. {%vahati,%}
{%-te, uvāha%} (2nd sing. {%uvahitha%} or {%uvoḍha%}), {%ūhe,%}
{%vakṣyati%} (ep. also {%vahiṣyati%}), {%-te, avākṣīt%} (3rd
du. {%avoḍhām,%} 3rd pl. {%avākṣus%}), {%avoḍha%} (1st sing.
{%avakṣi,%} 3rd du. {%avakṣātām,%} 3rd pl. {%avakṣata%}),
Prec. {%uhyāt, vakṣīṣṭa%} (Ved. forms {%vakṣi, vak-%}
{%ṣati, vakṣva%}), {%voḍhum%} (Ved. Inf. {%vahadhyai,%}
{%voḷhave, voḍhave,%} see {%yajña-v˚%}), to bear, carry, con-
vey, transport; to draw, lead; to convey in a carriage,
&c.; to carry away, carry off; to bring or carry near;
to take in marriage, marry a wife; to be carried or
borne along, proceed, move; to feel, experience,
have; to flow; to breathe; to spit out, vomit (pro-
bably for rt. {%vam%}): Pass. {%uhyate,%} Aor. {%avāhi,%} to be
borne or carried; to ride, (Pres. part. {%uhyat, an,%}
{%antī, at,%} or {%uhyamāna, as, ā, am,%} being carried
or borne): Caus. {%vāhayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avī-%}
{%vahat,%} to cause to bear or carry, cause to convey or
draw; to cause to be conveyed (A.); to ship or place
in a boat; to cause to be brought or led; to cause
to take in marriage; to cause to proceed or move,
guide, drive, impel, direct; to travel (A.), proceed, go;
to go to, visit; to carry out, perform, finish: Pass. of
Caus. {%vāhyate,%} to be caused to bear or carry, to be
made to convey: Desid. {%vivakṣati, -te:%} Intens.
{%vāvahyate, vāvoḍhi;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὄχο-ς, ὀχέ-ο-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὀχεύ-ω, ὄχη-μα, ὄχ-λο-ς, ὀχ-λέ-ω, ὀχ-ετό-ς, αὐχήν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἄχθος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>veho, vehi-culu-m, vehe-s, vectura,</nsi>
<nsi>via, vexo, vêlu-m</nsi> (for <nsi>veh-lu-m</nsi>), <nsi>uxor,</nsi> probably
<nsi>bajulus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ga-vig-an, ga-vag-ja, vêg-s, vig-s;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>wag-an, wâga;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wegan, weg,</nsi>
<nsi>wœgan, weddian;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>vez-a, vozu, vez-lo;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>vez-u, vez-ima-s, veze;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>feon,</nsi> ‘a carriage.’]
<LEND>

<L>41691<pc>0898-a<k1>vah<k2>vah<h>2
2. {%vah%}¦ in {%vajra-vah,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41692<pc>0898-a<k1>vaha<k2>vaha
{%Vaha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bearing, carrying, conveying,
bringing (often at the end of comps., e. g. {%puṣpa-%}
{%gandha-v˚,%} ‘bringing flowers and perfumes,’ and
sometimes with a passive sense, cf. {%dur-v˚, su-v˚%});
one who bears or carries; ({%as%}), m. the act of bearing
or conveying; any vehicle or means of conveyance
(as a car, carriage, horse, &c.); the shoulder of an
ox; a road, way; a measure of four Droṇas; air,
wind; any male river; a current; ({%ā%}), f. a river,
stream in general. {%—Vahaṃ-liha, as,%} m. ‘shoulder-
licking (?), ‘an ox.
<LEND>

<L>41693<pc>0898-a<k1>vahat<k2>vahat
{%Vahat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bearing, carrying, conveying;
wearing, taking, assuming; possessing, having.
<LEND>

<L>41694<pc>0898-a<k1>vahata<k2>vahata
{%Vahata, as,%}¦ m. an ox; a traveller.
<LEND>

<L>41695<pc>0898-a<k1>vahati<k2>vahati
{%Vahati, is,%}¦ m. an ox; air, wind; a friend, coun-
sellor; ({%ī%}), f. a river, stream.
<LEND>
[Page0898-b+ 80]

<L>41696<pc>0898-b<k1>vahatu<k2>vahatu
{%Vahatu, us,%}¦ m. an ox; a traveller (Ved.); a mar-
riage, bridal, nuptial ceremony, (Sāy. {%= vivāha.%})
<LEND>

<L>41697<pc>0898-b<k1>vahana<k2>vahana
{%Vahana, am,%}¦ n. the act of bearing, carrying, con-
veying; flowing (as a stream); any vehicle or means
of conveyance; a raft, float, boat.
<LEND>

<L>41698<pc>0898-b<k1>vahanIya<k2>vahanIya
{%Vahanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be carried or borne;
portable.
<LEND>

<L>41699<pc>0898-b<k1>vahanta<k2>vahanta
{%Vahanta, as,%}¦ m. air, wind; an infant.
<LEND>

<L>41700<pc>0898-b<k1>vahamAna<k2>vahamAna
{%Vahamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ bearing, carrying, con-
veying, being carried or riding on (with inst.); pos-
sessing, having; flowing.
<LEND>

<L>41701<pc>0898-b<k1>vahala<k2>vahala
{%Vahala, am,%}¦ n. a raft, float; ({%as, ā, am%}), hard,
firm, compact, &c., (in this sense more correctly
written {%bahala,%} q. v.) {%—Vahala-gandha,%} &c., see
{%bahala-g˚,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>41702<pc>0898-b<k1>vahita<k2>vahita
{%Vahita, as, ā, am,%}¦ borne, conveyed, carried;
obtained; known, celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>41703<pc>0898-b<k1>vahitra<k2>vahitra
{%Vahitra%}¦ or {%vahitraka, am,%} n. a raft, float, boat,
vessel.
<LEND>

<L>41704<pc>0898-b<k1>vahin<k2>vahin
{%Vahin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ bearing, conveying; ({%inī%}), f. a
boat, vessel.
<LEND>

<L>41705<pc>0898-b<k1>vahizWa<k2>vahizWa
{%Vahiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. carrying heavy bur-
dens, bearing much, (Sāy. {%= voḍhṛ-tama.%})
<LEND>

<L>41706<pc>0898-b<k1>vahIru<k2>vahIru
{%Vahīru, us,%}¦ m. (?), a tendon, nerve, muscle.
<LEND>

<L>41707<pc>0898-b<k1>vahni<k2>vahni
{%Vahni, is, is, i,%}¦ bearing, carrying, bringing (Ved.);
luminous, bright (Ved.); ({%is%}), m. one who bears an
oblation (to the gods), a sacrificer, priest (Ved.);
‘borne along,’ an epithet of the Maruts (Ved.); of
Soma (Ved.); of the gods in general (Ved.); fire
(= Agni); a horse (Naigh. I. 14); any vehicle;
lead-wort, Plumbago Zeylanica; the marking-nut
plant; the fire of the stomach, digestive faculty,
gastric fluid; digestion, appetite. {%—Vahni-kara, as,%}
{%ā%} or {%ī, am,%} making fire, igniting, lighting; pro-
moting digestion, giving appetite, stomachic; ({%ī%}), f.,
N. of the tree Grislea Tomentosa. {%—Vahni-kāṣṭha,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of Agallochum used as incense. {%—Vah-%}
{%ni-gandha, as,%} m. incense; resin. {%—Vahni-garbha,%}
{%as,%} m. a bamboo; a sort of Mimosa, Mimosa Suma.
{%—Vahni-cakrā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= kalikārī).%}
{%—Vahni-jvālā,%} f., N. of the plant Grislea Tomen-
tosa. {%—Vahni-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most luminous,
brightest. {%—Vahni-taskara-pārthiva, ās,%} m. pl. fire,
robbers, and the king. {%—Vahni-damanī,%} f., N. of
a plant. {%—Vahni-dāha-samudbhava, as, ā, am,%}
produced by burning. {%—Vahni-dīpaka, as,%} m. saf-
flower; ({%ikā%}), f. {%= aja-modā%}. {%—Vahni-nāman, ā,%}
m. ‘called after fire,’ the marking-nut plant; lead-
wort. {%—Vahni-nī,%} f., N. of a plant, Nardostachys
Jatamansi. {%—Vahni-purāṇa,%} N. of a Purāṇa.
{%—Vahni-puṣpī,%} f., N. of a plant {%(= dhātakī).%}
{%—Vahni-bhogya, am,%} n. ‘that which is to be con-
sumed by fire,’ ghee or clarified butter. {%—Vahni-%}
{%mantha, as,%} m. the tree Premna Spinosa (the wood
of which is used to procure fire by attrition). {%—Vah-%}
{%ni-māraka, am,%} n. fire-destroyer. {%—Vahni-mitra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘friend of fire,’ air, wind. {%—Vahni-retas, ās,%}
m. ‘fire-semen,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Vahni-loha%}
or {%vahni-lohaka, am,%} n. ‘fire-like iron,’ copper.
{%—Vahni-vadhū, ūs,%} f. the wife of Agni or Fire.
{%—Vahni-varṇa, am,%} n. ‘fire-coloured,’ the red
water-lily. {%—Vahni-vallabha, as,%} m. ‘fire-beloved,’
resin. {%—Vahni-vīja, am,%} n. ‘fire-seed,’ gold; the
common lime {%(= nimbūka); = raṃ-vīja,%} i. e. the
mystical syllable {%ram%} (repeated as the peculiar prayer
of fire in the Tantra system). {%—Vahni-śikha, am,%}
n. safflower, Carthamus Tinctorius; saffron; ({%ā%}), f.
a pot-herb, Echites Dichotoma; [cf. {%agni-śikhā.%}]
{%—Vahni-śikhara, as,%} m. the flower Celosia Cris-
tata or cock's comb. {%—Vahni-sakha, as,%} m. ‘friend
of fire, ‘the wind; a kind of plant {%(= jīraka).%}
{%—Vahni-sañjñaka, as,%} m. {%= citraka,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41708<pc>0898-b<k1>vahya<k2>vahya
{%Vahya, am,%}¦ n. a vehicle, carriage, conveyance of
any sort, cart, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. the wife of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>41709<pc>0898-b<k1>vahis<k2>vahis
{#vahis#}¦ {%vahis,%} ind. (in the earlier language
usually written {%bahis,%} q. v.; according to some con-
nected with rt. 1. {%vah,%} according to others with
{%avadhi%}), out, without, outwards, outside; on the
outside, out-of-doors, in the open air, outside of
(with abl. or gen.); besides, except (with abl. or
[Page0898-c+ 81]
gen.; in Manu IV. 72. {%vahis%} is said to mean ‘except
on the hair’); apart, separately, away from others;
{%vahir bhū,%} to become or be on the outside, go
outside. {%—Vahiḥ-kuṭī-cara,%} see {%vahiṣ-kuṭī-cara.%}
{%—Vahiḥ-śīta, as, ā, am,%} cool or cooling on the out-
side. {%—Vahiḥ-śri,%} ind., Ved. externally, in an external
direction (?) . {%—Vahiḥ-saṃstha, as, ā, am,%} situated
outside (the town). {%—Vahiḥ-stha%} or {%vahiḥ-sthita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%vahiḥ-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} being out-
side, external, outer. {%—Vahir-aṅga, as,%} m. an
external part, outer limb or member; property (as
an external possession); a stranger, indifferent person;
the preliminary part of a religious ceremony; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), relating to the exterior, external, exterior, un-
essential, (opposed to {%antar-aṅga,%} q. v.) {%—Vahir-%}
{%aṅga-tā,%} f. or {%vahiraṅga-tva, am,%} n. the state
of being external, exteriority, externality. {%—Vahir-%}
{%ante,%} ind. externally and internally. {%—Vahir-argala,%}
{%as,%} m. an outer bolt or bar. {%—Vahir-artha, as,%} m.
an external object. {%—Vahir-indriya, am,%} n. an
outer organ, outward sense, organ of sense or per-
ception (as the eye &c.), an organ of action (as the
hand &c.). {%—Vahir-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone out or
forth, manifested in an external or bodily form.
{%—Vahir-gamana, am,%} n. the act of going out or
forth. {%—Vahir-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going out or forth.
{%—Vahir-giri, is,%} m. a country situated on the other
side of a mountain; ({%ayas%}), m. pl. the inhabitants
of such a country. {%—Vahir-geham,%} ind. outside the
house, out-of-doors, abroad. {%—Vahir-grāmam,%} ind.
outside a village. {%—Vahir-deśa, as,%} m. a foreign
country; a place without a town or village; the out-
skirts of a town or village. {%—Vahir-dvāra, am,%} n.
an outer gate; the space outside a gate or door.
{%—Vahirdvāra-prakoṣṭhaka, am,%} n. a covered
terrace in front of the door of a house, a portico or
porch before a house. {%—Vahir-dhvajā,%} f., N. of
Durgā. {%—Vahir-niḥsāraṇa, am,%} n. the act of re-
moving or turning out, expulsion, removal. {%—Va-%}
{%hir-nirgamana, am,%} n. the act of going out or
away from (with abl.). {%—Vahir-bhava, as, ā, am,%}
being on the outside, produced externally, external,
(opposed to {%antar-ja,%} q. v.) {%—Vahir-bhavana, am,%}
n. the being out or outside, the coming out, emana-
tion. {%—Vahir-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being out, being
outside, expelled, excluded; expired (said of a period
of time); inattentive, careless. {%—Vahir-manas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} external to the mind, external. {%—Vahir-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} one who turns his face away,
turning away from, indifferent to, averse from;
greatly devoted to external things; coming out of
the mouth, (opposed to {%antar-mukha%}); ({%as%}), m.
a deity, (in this sense incorrect for {%barhir-mukha.%})
{%—Vahir-yātrā,%} f. or {%vahir-yāna, am,%} n. a journey
out, excursion. {%—Vahir-yūti, is, is, i,%} placed or
fastened outside. {%—Vahir-yoga, as, ā, am,%} relating
to the exterior, external; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.;
({%ās%}), m. pl. Vahir-yoga's descendants. {%—Vahir-lam-%}
{%ba, as, ā, am,%} having the perpendicular outside, obtuse-
angular; ({%ā%}), f. an obtuse-angled triangle (whose
perpendicular falls outside). {%—Vahir-lāpikā,%} f. a kind
of enigma, one not containing a solution, (opposed
to {%antar-lāpikā.%}) {%—Vahir-loma, as, ā, am,%} having
hair outside, having the hair turned outwards. {%—Va-%}
{%hir-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being on the outside. {%—Vahir-%}
{%vāsas, as,%} n. an outer or upper garment, (opposed
to {%antar-vāsas.%}) {%—Vahir-vikāra, as,%} m. ‘outward
change or disfigurement, ‘syphilis. {%—Vahir-vṛtti,%}
{%is,%} f. occupation with external objects. {%—Vahir-vedi,%}
{%is,%} f. the space outside the Vedi or sacrificial altar; {%vahir-%}
{%vedyām%} or {%vahir-vedi,%} ind. outside the sacrificial altar.
{%—Vahir-vedika, as, ā, am,%} performed or taking
place outside the Vedi. {%—Vahir-vyasana, am,%} n.
‘external vice,’ evil practices or dissolute conduct out-
of-doors; licentiousness, immorality. {%—Vahir-vya-%}
{%sanin, ī, inī, i,%} practising vice, addicted to immoral
practices, dissolute. {%—Vahiś-cara, as, ā, am,%} going
out, bustling about outside, looking after external
matters; being on the outside, external, foreign;
({%as%}), m. ‘crawling out of its shell,’ a crab. {%—Vahiṣ-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. an outer or external organ; expelling,
[Page0899-a+ 78]
expulsion, excluding, excepting; expulsion from (with
abl.). {%—Vahiṣ-kāra, as,%} m. putting or placing out-
side, expulsion, exclusion. {%—Vahiṣ-kārya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fit to be removed or expelled, deserving re-
jection. {%—Vahiṣ-kuṭī-cara, as,%} m. a crab (as
‘crawling out of its shell,’ cf. {%vahiś-cara%}). {%—Va-%}
{%hiṣ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} turned out, thrust out,
expelled, excluded, rejected, excommunicated; ex-
cepted; manifested in an external form. {%—Vahiṣ-%}
{%kṛti, is,%} f. {%= vahiṣ-kāra%}. {%—Vahiṣ-kriya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} excluded from sacred rites. {%—Vahiṣ-kriyā,%} f.
an outer act, external rite or ceremony. {%—Vahiṣ-%}
{%paṭa,%} an upper or outer garment. {%—Vahiṣ-prākāra,%}
{%as,%} m. an outer wall or rampart. {%—Vahiṣ-prāṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. external breath or life, anything as dear as
life, anything near the heart; money; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having the breath or life existing outside (i. e. having
one dear as life existing externally to one's self).
<LEND>

<L>41710<pc>0899-a<k1>vahizka<k2>vahizka
{%Vahiṣka, as, ā, am,%}¦ outer, external.
<LEND>

<L>41711<pc>0899-a<k1>vahizwAt<k2>vahizwAt
{%Vahiṣṭāt,%}¦ ind. on the outside, without, abroad.
{%—Vahiṣṭāj-jyotis, is,%} f. epithet of a Triṣṭubh the
last Pāda of which contains eight syllables.
<LEND>

<L>41712<pc>0899-a<k1>vahequka<k2>vahequka
{#vahequka#}¦ {%vaheḍuka, as,%} m. the Vibhītaka tree.
<LEND>

<L>41713<pc>0899-a<k1>vahni<k2>vahni
{#vahni#}¦ {%vahni, vahni-kara, vahya,%} &c. See
p. 898, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41714<pc>0899-a<k1>vahli<k2>vahli
{#vahli#}¦ {%vahli, is,%} m., N. of a country, (more
correctly written {%balhi.%})
<LEND>

<L>41715<pc>0899-a<k1>vahlika<k2>vahlika
{%Vahlika, vahlīka.%}¦ See {%balhika, balhīka.%}
<LEND>

<L>41716<pc>0899-a<k1>vA<k2>vA<h>1
{#vA#} 1¦. {%vā,%} ind. (excluded, like the Lat. <nsi>ve,</nsi>
from the first place in a sentence, and generally com-
ing immediately after the word to which it refers),
as, like, so (not commonly used in this sense); either,
or, whether; either — or not, i. e. optionally, (in
grammar the word {%vā%} is placed after a rule to
denote its being optional); else; or if, but if; but;
only, no other; indeed, truly, even, very (in as-
severation or confirmation); and (as a conjunction);
{%vā%} is also sometimes used as an expletive; it is also
somewhat pleonastically or perhaps emphatically added
to an interrogative pronoun especially when followed
by the negative {%na%} (e. g. {%ko vā na, ke vā na,%} which
may be translated by ‘very on,’ ‘all’); {%vā — vā,%}
either — or; on the one side — on the other; {%atha vā,%}
or else; or, or if, or rather, but, certainly, see {%atha;%}
{%na vā,%} or not; {%yadi vā,%} or if, or whether, whether,
whether or no, see under {%yadi,%} p. 808; {%yad vā,%}
or, or else; {%kiṃ vā,%} whether? {%kiṃ vā — na vā,%} is
it — or not? see under {%kim;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἤ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ve.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41717<pc>0899-a<k1>vA<k2>vA<h>2
{#vA#} 2¦. {%vā%} (according to some originally
{%av + ā,%} cf. <lang n="greek">ἄημι</lang>), cl. 2. P. {%vāti, vavau,%}
{%vāsyati, avāsīt, vātum,%} to blow (as the wind); to
move, go; to pierce, strike, hurt, injure; cl. 4. P.
{%vāyati,%} &c., to be dried up (by the wind), become
dry or languid, to dry, (in this sense, according to
some, the form of the rt. is {%vai%}); to be extin-
guished; (according to some authorities also cl. 10.
P. in the senses, to be happy; to go, move; to
worship): Caus. {%vāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
blow, cause to move, excite; to cut, shave, (in
this sense confounded with Caus. of rt. {%vap%}):
Desid. {%vivāsati,%} Ved. to wish to blow, wish to fan;
to favour, honour, worship (Naigh. III. 5); to be
favourable or kind towards; to bestow, grant; [cf.
Zend vā: Gr. <lang n="greek">.α-ω, ἄ-ος, ἄη-μι, ἀή-τη-ς, ἄ-ελλα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">αὔ-ρα, ἀ-ήρ, ἀ-ΐ-σθ-ω, ἀά-ζ-ω, ἆσθ-μα, μετέωρος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀείρω, ἄρδην, ἀρτάω, ἀορτήρ, αἰωρέω</lang> (probably
also) <lang n="greek">αὐλός, οὖρος; ἀϋτμήν</lang> ({%= ātman%}), <lang n="greek">ἀτμή:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>ven-tu-s, a-er,</nsi> probably also <nsi>vanus, vapor</nsi> (fr. the
Caus.): Goth. <nsi>vaian, vind-s:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wa-dal,</nsi>
‘a fan;’ <nsi>wat, wait, waiet, wahet,</nsi> ‘to blow:’ Slav.
<nsi>ve-j-a:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>ve-je-s,</nsi> ‘wind;’ <nsi>o-ra-s:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>bad,</nsi>
‘wind:’ Pers. <nsi>bād.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41718<pc>0899-a<k1>vAt<k2>vAt<h>1
1. {%vāt, ān, ātī%}¦ or {%āntī, āt%} (for rt. 2. {%vāt%} see
p. 902, col. 2), blowing; going, moving.
<LEND>

<L>41719<pc>0899-a<k1>vAta<k2>vAta<h>1
1. {%vāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. {%vāta%} see p. 902, col. 2),
blown; ({%as%}), m. wind, air, breeze; the god of the wind
(usually called Vāyu, q. v., but addressed under the
name Vāta in Ṛg-veda X. 168. and X. 186); wind
[Page0899-b+ 81]
or air as one of the humors of the body; morbid
affection of the windy humor, rheumatism, gout,
inflammation of the joints; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐτώσιος;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>ventus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vinds;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wind, weder;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>weder.</nsi>] {%—Vāta-karman, a,%} n. breaking
wind. {%—Vāta-kuṇḍalikā,%} f. scanty and painful flow
of urine. {%—Vāta-kumbha, as,%} m. the part of an
elephant's forehead below the frontal sinuses. {%—Vāta-%}
{%ketu, us,%} m. ‘wind-sign,’ dust. {%—Vāta-keli, is,%} m.
amorous sport or converse, speaking in whispers;
the marks of finger-nails on a lover's person. {%—Vāta-%}
{%gāmin, ī,%} m. ‘wind-goer,’ a bird. {%—Vāta-gulma,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘wind-cluster,’ a gale, high wind; acute gout
or rheumatism. {%—Vāta-gopā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. hav-
ing the Wind as protector. {%—Vāta-grasta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘wind-seized,’ epileptic; rheumatic. {%—Vāta-%}
{%ghna, as, ī, am,%} removing disorders of the wind;
({%ī%}), f. the shrub Hedysarum Gangeticum. {%—Vāta-%}
{%codita, as, ā, am,%} driven by the wind. {%—Vāta-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} produced by or arising from wind. {%—Vā-%}
{%ta-java, as, ā, am,%} fleet as the wind. {%—Vāta-jūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. impelled or driven by the wind.
{%—Vāta-jūti, is,%} m., N. of the author of Ṛg-veda
X. 136, 2 (having the patronymic Vātaraśana).
{%—Vāta-jvara, as,%} m. ‘wind-fever,’ fever arising
from vitiated wind. {%—Vātajvara-pratīkāra, as,%} m.
the remedying or counteraction of the above disease.
{%—Vāta-tūla, am,%} n. cottony or flocculent seeds
floating in the air. {%—Vāta-tviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. bril-
liant or radiant with the wind (said of the Maruts).
{%—Vāta-thuḍā,%} f. (?) , a gale, a high wind; acute gout
or rheumatism; a disease, a sort of small-pox; a
handsome woman. {%—Vāta-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘wind-
sign, ‘a cloud. {%—Vātan-dhama,%} see Vopa-deva XXVI.
55. {%—Vāta-pitta, am,%} n. ‘wind-bile,’ a form of
rheumatism or rheumatic fever. {%—Vātapitta-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced by the above disease. {%—Vāta-%}
{%pittaja-śūla, am,%} n. a form of the disease called
{%śūla%}. {%—Vāta-putra, as,%} m. ‘son of the wind,’ N. of
Bhīma; the monkey Hanumat; a cheat, swindler.
{%—Vāta-potha%} or {%vāta-pothaka, as,%} m. the Palāśa
tree, Butea Frondosa. {%—Vāta-prakopa, as,%} m. (in
medicine) excess of wind. {%—Vāta-prabala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} (in medicine) having an excess of wind. {%—Vāta-%}
{%pramī, īs,%} m. f. ‘wind-surpassing,’ a swift antelope,
(see Gram. 126. <nsi>f.</nsi>) {%—Vāta-phulla, as, ā, am,%}
‘wind-inflated,’ swollen or puffed up with wind.
{%—Vāta-phullāntra (˚la-an˚), am,%} n. ‘wind-swollen
stomach, ‘flatulence in the bowels, colic. {%—Vātam-%}
{%aja, as, ā, am,%} going towards or against the wind;
({%as%}), m. a swift antelope. {%—Vāta-maṇḍalī,%} f. ‘wind-
circle, ‘a whirlwind. {%—Vāta-mṛga, as,%} m. ‘wind-
deer, ‘a swift antelope. {%—Vāta-raṃha, as, ā, am,%}
or {%vāta-raṃhas, ās, ās, as,%} having the impetuosity
of the wind, swift as the wind. {%—Vāta-rakta, am,%}
n. acute gout or rheumatism (ascribed to a vitiated
state of the ‘wind and blood’). {%—Vātarakta-ghna,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘destroying or curing the disease Vāta-rakta,’
a plant or shrub ({%= kukkura,%} commonly called Ku-
kurmurā). {%—Vātaraktāri (˚ta-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy
of Vāta-rakta, ‘a plant, Menispermum Glabrum ({%=%}
{%pitta-ghnī%}). {%—Vāta-raṅga, as,%} m. the fig-tree {%(= aś-%}
{%vattha)%}. {%—Vāta-rūṣa, as,%} m. [cf. rt. {%rūṣ%}], a gale,
storm; the rainbow; a bribe. {%—Vāta-roga, as,%} m.
‘wind-disease,’ rheumatism, gout. {%—Vātarogin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} afflicted with gout or rheumatism, rheumatic.
{%—Vātarddhi (˚ta-ṛd˚), is,%} m. a sort of cup made
of wood and iron or a vessel made of wood with
an iron stand; a mace, a club or stick bound with
iron. {%—Vāta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} windy, gusty. {%—Vāta-%}
{%valāsaka, as,%} m. nervous fever (?) . {%—Vāta-vasti,%}
{%is,%} f. suppression of urine. {%—Vāta-vikāra, as,%} m.
disease of the wind, rheumatism. {%—Vāta-vṛddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. swelled testicle. {%—Vāta-vega, as,%} m. ‘fleet as
wind, ‘N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Vāta-vairin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘enemy of wind-disease,’ the castor-oil tree,
&c.; [cf. {%vātāri.%}] {%—Vāta-vyādhi, is,%} m. any mor-
bid affection of the wind. {%—Vātavyādhi-cikitsā,%}
f. the cure of the above disease. {%—Vātavyādhi-ni-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. the cause of the above disease. {%—Vāta-%}
{%śīrṣa, am,%} n. ‘wind-source,’ the lower belly. {%—Vā- %}
[Page0899-c+ 81]
{%ta-śūla, am,%} n. ‘wind-pain,’ colic with flatulence.
{%—Vāta-śoṇita, am,%} n. acute gout or rheumatism
(ascribed to a vitiated state of ‘the wind and blood’).
{%—Vāta-saha, as, ā, am,%} suffering from wind-
disease, gouty, rheumatic; bearing wind, able to
resist gusts and gales. {%—Vāta-sārathi, is,%} m. ‘hav-
ing the wind for a charioteer, ‘Agni or Fire. {%—Vā-%}
{%ta-skandha, am,%} n. the part of the atmosphere
where the wind blows. {%—Vāta-svana, as, ā, am,%}
sounding or roaring like the wind. {%—Vāta-han, ā,%}
{%ghnī, a, = vāta-ghna,%} q. v. {%—Vātāṭa (˚ta-aṭa), as,%}
m. ‘wind-goer,’ a horse of the sun; an antelope. {%—Vā-%}
{%tāṇḍa (˚ta-aṇ˚), as,%} m. a disease of the testicles.
{%—Vātātisāra (˚ta-at˚), as,%} m. dysentery produced
by vitiated wind. {%—Vātāda (˚ta-āda), as,%} m. a kind
of fruit tree. {%—Vātānulomana (˚ta-an˚), am,%} n.
forcing the wind in the right direction or downwards
(as in inflating the lungs). {%—Vātā-parjanyā,%} m. du.,
Ved. the gods Vāta and Parjanya (who are invoked
together in Ṛg-veda X. 66, 10, &c.). {%—Vātāpi%}
{%(˚ta-āpi?), is,%} m., N. of an Asura (devoured by
Agastya). {%—Vātāpi-dviṣ, ṭ,%} or {%vātāpi-sūdana, as,%}
or {%vātāpi-han, ā,%} m. ‘destroyer of the Asura Vā-
tāpi, ‘epithet of the Muni Agastya. {%—Vātāpya (˚ta-%}
{%āp˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. swelling or filling with air or
wind, fermenting; ({%am%}), n. fermentation; water;
Soma; (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IX. 93, 5 {%=%}
{%udaka.%}) {%—Vātāmodā (˚ta-ām˚),%} f. musk. {%—Vātāya%}
{%(˚ta-aya), am,%} n. ‘wind-going,’ a leaf. {%—Vātāyana%}
{%(˚ta-ay˚), am,%} n. ‘wind-passage, air-passage,’ a window,
air-hole, loop-hole; a porch, portico; a covered shed,
pavilion; ({%as%}), m. a horse; a patronymic of Anila
(author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 168); of Ula
(author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 186). {%—Vātāyana-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} standing or being at the window.
{%—Vātāyu (˚ta-ayu), us,%} m. an antelope, deer.
{%—Vātāri (˚ta-ari), is,%} f. ‘enemy of wind-disease,’
the castor-oil tree; a plant, Asparagus Racemosus.
{%—Vātālī (˚ta-ālī),%} f. a whirlwind, gale. {%—Vātāśva%}
{%(˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m. a swift horse or one of good breed.
{%—Vātāsaha (˚ta-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} suffering from
wind-disease, rheumatic, gouty. {%—Vātāhata (˚ta-%}
{%āh˚), as, ā, am,%} stirred or shaken by the wind;
struck by wind-disease, affected by rheumatism.
{%—Vātāhata-nau, naus,%} f. a ship tossed by the
winds. {%—Vātāhati (˚ta-āh˚), is,%} f. ‘wind-stroke,’ a
violent gust of wind, the action of the wind; an
attack of rheumatism or gout, occurrence of arthritic
pains. {%—Vāteśvara-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Vātona (˚ta-ūna), as, ā, am,%} deficient in wind
or the windy humor; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant {%(= go-%}
{%jihvā)%}. {%—Vātopajūta (˚ta-up˚)%} or {%vātopadhūta%}
{%(˚ta-up˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. raised by the wind.
<LEND>

<L>41720<pc>0899-c<k1>vAtaka<k2>vAtaka
{%Vātaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Marsilea Quadrifolia.
<LEND>

<L>41721<pc>0899-c<k1>vAtakin<k2>vAtakin
{%Vātakin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ rheumatic, gouty.
<LEND>

<L>41722<pc>0899-c<k1>vAtaya<k2>vAtaya
{%Vātaya%}¦ (fr. 1. {%vāta,%} but cf. rt. 2. {%vāt%}), Nom. P. {%vāta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to blow (as the wind), blow gently, to
raise a wind, fan, ventilate; to blow favourably, to
serve, &c. (see rt. 2. {%vāt%}).
<LEND>

<L>41723<pc>0899-c<k1>vAtara<k2>vAtara
{%Vātara, as, ā, am,%}¦ windy, stormy; swift (as the
wind); [cf. Goth. <nsi>vintrus;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>winter.</nsi>]
{%—Vātarāyaṇa (˚ra-ay˚), as,%} m. an arrow; arrow's
flight, discharge of an arrow, bow-shot; a saw; a
mountain-peak; a mad-man, intoxicated person; an
idler, useless person; the Sarala tree, a sort of pine.
<LEND>

<L>41724<pc>0899-c<k1>vAtala<k2>vAtala
{%Vātala, as, ā, am,%}¦ windy, stormy; flatulent; ({%as%}),
m. wind; a sort of pulse, Cicer Arietinum; ({%ā%}), f. a
morbid state of the uterus. {%—Vātala-maṇḍalī,%} f.
a whirlwind.
<LEND>

<L>41725<pc>0899-c<k1>vAtAyana<k2>vAtAyana
{%Vātāyana, as,%}¦ m. See above.
<LEND>

<L>41726<pc>0899-c<k1>vAti<k2>vAti
{%Vāti, is,%}¦ m. air, wind; the sun; the moon. {%—Vāti-%}
{%ga, as, ā, am,%} acquainted with or working in mine-
rals, &c., a mineralogist, metallurgist; ({%as%}), m. the
egg-plant, Solanum Melongena. {%—Vāti-gama%} or
{%vātiṅ-gaṇa, as,%} m. the egg-plant ({%= bhaṇṭākī,%}
{%vārttāku%}).
<LEND>

<L>41727<pc>0899-c<k1>vAtika<k2>vAtika
{%Vātika, as, ī, am,%}¦ windy, stormy; affected by
wind-disease, rheumatic; produced by or proceeding
from disorder of the wind; mad; ({%am%}), n. fever or
inflammation ascribed to a vitiated state of the wind
or aerial humor.
<LEND>
[Page0900-a+ 71]

<L>41728<pc>0900-a<k1>vAtIya<k2>vAtIya
{%Vātīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ windy, relating or belonging
to wind, &c.; ({%am%}), n. sour rice-gruel ({%= kāñjika,%}
q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>41729<pc>0900-a<k1>vAtula<k2>vAtula
{%Vātula, as, ā, am,%}¦ inflated with wind, affected
by wind-disease, gouty, rheumatic; mad, crazy; ({%as%}),
m. a whirlwind, gale. {%—Vātula-tantra%} and {%vātulot-%}
{%tara-tantra (˚la-ut˚), am,%} n., N. of two Tantra
works.
<LEND>

<L>41730<pc>0900-a<k1>vAtuli<k2>vAtuli
{%Vātuli, is,%}¦ f. a large bat (commonly called ‘the
flying fox’).
<LEND>

<L>41731<pc>0900-a<k1>vAtUla<k2>vAtUla
{%Vātūla, as, ā, am,%}¦ inflated with wind; affected
with wind-disease; gouty, rheumatic; mad, insane,
inebriate; ({%as%}), m. a whirlwind, gale, hurricane;
[cf. {%vātula.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41732<pc>0900-a<k1>vAtf<k2>vAtf
{%Vātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. ‘the blower,’ air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>41733<pc>0900-a<k1>vAtyA<k2>vAtyA
{%Vātyā,%}¦ f. a strong wind, gale, storm, whirlwind,
hurricane. {%—Vātyaupamya (˚yā-au˚), am,%} n. re-
semblance to a storm.
<LEND>

<L>41734<pc>0900-a<k1>vAna<k2>vAna<h>1
1. {%vāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ blown (as the wind), blown
upon so as to be dried, dry, dried; ({%as, ā, am%}), m.
f. n. dry or dried fruit.
<LEND>

<L>41735<pc>0900-a<k1>vAna<k2>vAna<h>2
2. {%vāna, am,%}¦ n. (for 3. see p. 903, col. 1), blowing;
living; going, moving, rolling; the rolling of water
or of the tide; the high wave in Indian rivers (com-
monly called ‘the Bore’); a perfume, fragrance.
<LEND>

<L>41736<pc>0900-a<k1>vAMSa<k2>vAMSa
{#vAMSa#}¦ {%vāṃśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vaṃśa%}), made of
bamboo, of or belonging to bamboo; ({%ī%}), f. bamboo
manna.
<LEND>

<L>41737<pc>0900-a<k1>vAMSika<k2>vAMSika
{%Vāṃśika, as,%}¦ a bamboo-cutter, &c.; a flute-
player, piper, fifer.
<LEND>

<L>41738<pc>0900-a<k1>vAHkiwi<k2>vAHkiwi
{#vAHkiwi#}¦ {%vāḥ-kiṭi, vāḥ-puṣpa,%} &c. See
under {%vār,%} p. 904.
<LEND>

<L>41739<pc>0900-a<k1>vAka<k2>vAka<h>1
{#vAka#} 1¦. {%vāka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vaka;%} for 2. {%vāka%}
see col. 3), belonging or relating to a crane; ({%am%}),
n. a flight of cranes.
<LEND>

<L>41740<pc>0900-a<k1>vAkucI<k2>vAkucI
{#vAkucI#}¦ {%vākucī,%} f. (said to be fr. {%vā%} for {%vāta,%}
‘wind,’ and rt. {%kuc,%} ‘to contract’), the plant Serratula
Anthelmintica.
<LEND>

<L>41741<pc>0900-a<k1>vAkula<k2>vAkula
{#vAkula#}¦ {%vākula, am,%} n. (fr. {%vakula%}), scil.
{%phala,%} the fruit of the Vakula tree.
<LEND>

<L>41742<pc>0900-a<k1>vAkya<k2>vAkya
{#vAkya#}¦ {%vākya.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41743<pc>0900-a<k1>vAgA<k2>vAgA
{#vAgA#}¦ {%vāgā,%} f. a bridle.
<LEND>

<L>41744<pc>0900-a<k1>vAgujI<k2>vAgujI
{#vAgujI#}¦ {%vāgujī,%} f. the plant Serratula An-
thelmintica ({%= soma-rājī%}).
<LEND>

<L>41745<pc>0900-a<k1>vAguRa<k2>vAguRa
{#vAguRa#}¦ {%vāguṇa, as,%} m. the plant Averrhoa
Carambola ({%= karmaraṅga%}).
<LEND>

<L>41746<pc>0900-a<k1>vAgurA<k2>vAgurA
{#vAgurA#}¦ {%vāgurā,%} f. (fr. rt. 2. {%vā?%}), a net (for
catching deer or wild animals), trap, toils, snare,
noose. {%—Vāgurā-vṛtti, is,%} f. livelihood obtained
by snaring or catching wild animals; ({%is%}), m. one
who lives by snaring animals.
<LEND>

<L>41747<pc>0900-a<k1>vAgurika<k2>vAgurika
{%Vāgurika, as,%}¦ m. one who uses nets for catching
deer, &c., a deer-catcher, hunter.
<LEND>

<L>41748<pc>0900-a<k1>vAgusa<k2>vAgusa
{#vAgusa#}¦ {%vāgusa, as,%} m. a sort of large fish.
<LEND>

<L>41749<pc>0900-a<k1>vAGat<k2>vAGat
{#vAGat#}¦ {%vāghat, t,%} m. (according to some fr.
rt. 1. {%vah,%} probably Pres. part. of a lost rt. {%vāgh%} = Lat.
<nsi>vāgire,</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">εὔχομαι</lang>), Ved. praying; a priest (ac-
cording to Naigh. III. 18 {%= ṛtvij%}); {%= medhāvin%}
(Naigh. III. 15); a horse, (Sāy. {%= vāhaka = aśva%}).
<LEND>

<L>41750<pc>0900-a<k1>vAGella<k2>vAGella
{#vAGella#}¦ {%vāghella,%} N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>41751<pc>0900-a<k1>vANka<k2>vANka
{#vANka#}¦ {%vāṅka, as,%} m. (fr. {%vaṅka%}), the ocean,
the sea.
<LEND>

<L>41752<pc>0900-a<k1>vANkz<k2>vANkz
{#vANkz#}¦ {%vāṅkṣ%} [cf. rts. {%kāṅkṣ, vāñch,%}
{%vaś%}], cl. 1. P. {%vāṅkṣati, vavāṅkṣa,%}
{%vāṅkṣitum,%} to wish, desire; [cf. Old Germ.
<nsi>wunsc, wunskian:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wiscan:</nsi> Cambro-
Brit. <nsi>gwanc,</nsi> ‘desire:’ perhaps Hib. <nsi>miangas,</nsi> ‘in-
clination, appetite;’ <nsi>mianuighim,</nsi> ‘I desire, wish,
intend.’]
<LEND>

<L>41753<pc>0900-a<k1>vANmaya<k2>vANmaya
{#vANmaya#}¦ {%vāṅ-maya, vāṅ-mukha,%} &c. See
col. 3.
<LEND>
[Page0900-b+ 81]

<L>41754<pc>0900-b<k1>vAc<k2>vAc
{#vAc#}¦ {%vāc, k,%} f. (fr. rt. {%vac%}), speech, voice, talk,
language, discourse, speaking (often at end of comps.,
cf. {%anṛta-v˚, duṣṭa-v˚%}); a word, saying, phrase,
proverb; assertion, asseveration, assurance, promise
[cf. {%abhaya-v˚%}]; voice, sound; N. of Sarasvatī, goddess
of speech, (in the Veda and Brāhmaṇas Vāc or Speech
is herself the goddess, and is represented as created
by Prajā-pati and married to him; one of the hymns
of the Ṛg-veda [X. 125] is attributed to this goddess
under the title of Vāc Āmbhṛṇī; in other places she
is called the mother of the Vedas and wife of Indra;
cf. Taittirīya-Br. II. 8, 8, 5, Śatapatha-Br. VII. 5, 2,
52); [cf. Lat. <nsi>voc-s;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ὄπ-ς.</lang>] {%—Vāk-kalaha,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘speech-strife,’ quarrel, dispute. {%—Vāk-kīra,%}
{%as,%} m. a wife's brother, (said to be fr. {%vāc,%} speech,
and {%kīra,%} a parrot.) {%—Vāk-capala, as, ā, am,%}
frivolous or inconsistent in speech, an idle or careless
talker, chattering, impertinent. {%—Vāk-cāpalya, am,%}
n. frivolity of speech, gossiping, chattering, idle or
improper talk. {%—Vāk-chala, am,%} n. ‘fraud in speech,’
prevarication, equivocation. {%—Vāk-chalānvita (˚la-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} equivocating, evasive. {%—Vāk-paṭu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} skilled in speech, eloquent. {%—Vākpaṭu-tā,%}
f. or {%vākpaṭu-tva, am,%} n. skill or ability in speech,
eloquence. {%—Vāk-pati, is, is, i,%} eloquent; ({%is%}), m.
‘lord of speech,’ N. of Vṛhas-pati. {%—Vākpati-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Vāk-patha, as, ā, am,%}
suitable or seasonable for discourse. {%—Vāk-pāruṣya,%}
{%am,%} n. harshness or severity of language; violence in
words, abusive or contumelious language, scurrility,
defamation. {%—Vāk-pracodana, am,%} n. a command
expressed in words; ({%āt%}), ind. at the words of com-
mand, in obedience to an order. {%—Vāk-pratoda, as,%}
m. goading words, cutting or taunting language.
{%—Vāk-pralāpa, as,%} m. eloquence. {%—Vāk-prasā-%}
{%rin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. spreading out or abounding in
speech, eloquent. {%—Vāk-saṃyama, as,%} m. restraint
or control of speech, modesty. {%—Vāg-apahāraka,%}
{%as,%} m. a stealer of words or books; a reader of pro-
hibited works or passages. {%—Vāg-artha, au,%} m. du.
a word and its sense (between which, according to
the Mīmāṃsā, there is an eternal connection). {%—Vāg-%}
{%asi, is,%} f. ‘speech-sword,’ sharp or cutting speech.
{%—Vāg-āḍambara, as,%} m. ‘confused sound of words,’
bombast. {%—Vāg-īśa, as, ā, am,%} one who is a master
of language, eloquent; ({%as%}), m. an orator, author,
poet, &c.; an epithet of Vṛhas-pati, the preceptor of
the gods; of Brahmā; ({%ā%}), f. the goddess of speech or
eloquence, Sarasvatī. {%—Vāg-īśvara, as,%} m. a master of
language, an orator, learned man; (with Buddhists) a
deified sage ({%= Mañju-ghoṣa%}); Brahmā; the author
of the Māna-manohara; ({%ī%}), f. Sarasvatī (goddess
of speech). {%—Vāg-uttara, am,%} n. speech and reply.
{%—Vāg-ṛṣabha, as,%} m. any one eminent in speech,
an eloquent or learned man. {%—Vāgṛṣabha-tva, am,%}
n. eminence or excellence in speaking, eloquence,
learning, erudition. {%—Vāg-guda, as,%} m. a sort of
bird. {%—Vāg-guli, is,%} m. the betel-bearer (of a king
or prince &c.). {%—Vāggulika, as,%} m. a betel-bearer.
{%—Vāg-ghasta-vat, ān, atī, at%} (i. e. {%vāc + hasta%}),
possessed of speech and hands. {%—Vāg-jāla, am,%} n.
‘multitude of words,’ bombast. {%—Vāg-ḍambara, as,%}
m. graceful or eloquent language. {%—Vāg-daṇḍa, as,%}
m. ‘speech-assault,’ abusive or scurrilous language,
reproof, reprimand; speech-control, restraint of speech
(Manu XII. 10). {%—Vāg-daṇḍa-ja, as, ā, am,%} spring-
ing from scurrilous language and open assault (Manu
VII. 48). {%—Vāg-datta, as, ā, am,%} ‘given by word
of mouth, ‘promised; ({%ā%}), f. a betrothed virgin.
{%—Vāg-daridra, as, ā, am,%} poor in speech, of few
words, speaking little or humbly, speaking guardedly.
{%—Vāg-dala, am,%} n. ‘speech-leaf,’ a lip. {%—Vāg-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. ‘gift by word of mouth,’ the promise
of a maiden in marriage. {%—Vāg-duṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
speaking ill or abusively, abusive, scurrilous; speak-
ing ungrammatically; ({%as%}), m. a rude or scurrilous
speaker, defamer; a Brāhman who has past the
proper time of life without investiture with the
sacred thread, &c. {%—Vāg-devatā,%} f. ‘speech-divinity,’
epithet of Sarasvatī. {%—Vāg-devī,%} f. ‘the goddess of
speech or eloquence, ‘epithet of Sarasvatī. {%—Vāgdevī- %}
[Page0900-c+ 81]
{%kula, am,%} n. ‘the family of Sarasvatī,’ science, learn-
ing, eloquence. {%—Vāg-daivatya, as, ā, am,%} having
speech for a divinity, sacred to Sarasvatī. {%—Vāg-%}
{%doṣa, as,%} m. ‘speech-vice,’ the act of speaking ill,
defamation, abuse; ungrammatical speech; uttering
a disagreeable sound. {%—Vāg-bandhana, am,%} n.
‘speech-binding,’ the stopping of speech, silencing.
{%—Vāg-bhaṭa, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Vāgbhaṭālaṅkāra, a work on rhetoric; of the author
of the Aṣṭāṅga-hṛdaya-saṃhitā. {%—Vāg-bhaṭṭa, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Vāg-manasa,%} see {%vāṅ-manasa.%}
{%—Vāg-mūla, as, ā, am,%} having root or origin in
speech. {%—Vāg-yata, as, ā, am,%} reserved in speech,
taciturn, silent. {%—Vāg-yāma, as,%} m. a dumb man,
one silent from necessity. {%—Vāg-yuddha, am,%} n.
war of words, controversy, vehement debate or dis-
cussion. {%—Vāg-rodha, as,%} m. the stopping of speech,
silencing. {%—Vāg-vajra, am,%} n. ‘thunder of words,’
boisterous or harsh language. {%—Vāg-vidagdha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} skilled in language, clever in speech; ({%ā%}), f.
a kindly-speaking or fascinating woman. {%—Vāg-vi-%}
{%niḥsṛta, as, ā, am,%} emitted or put forth by speech.
{%—Vāg-vilāsa, as,%} m. graceful or elegant speech.
{%—Vāg-vyaya, as,%} m. expenditure of words or
speech, waste of breath. {%—Vāg-vyāpāra, as,%} m.
manner of speaking, style or habit of speech; cus-
tomary phraseology. {%—Vāṅ-niścaya, as,%} m. ‘speech-
settlement, ‘marriage contract, affiance by word of
mouth. {%—Vāg-niṣṭhā,%} f. abiding by one's words,
punctuality in fulfilling a promise, faithfulness. {%—Vāṅ-%}
{%matī,%} f., N. of a sacred stream (said to be situated
on the summit of the Himālaya). {%—Vāṅ-madhura,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} sweet in speech. {%—Vāṅ-manasa, am,%} n.
or {%e,%} n. du. speech and mind. {%—Vāṅ-maya, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} relating to speech; endowed with speech; con-
sisting of words; eloquent, rhetorical; ({%ī%}), f. the
goddess Sarasvatī; ({%am%}), n. speech, language;
eloquence; rhetoric. {%—Vāṅmayādhikṛta-tā,%} f.
the state of presiding over eloquence (said of the
goddess of speech). {%—Vāṅ-mātra, am,%} n. mere
words, words alone, only speech. {%—Vāṅ-mukha, am,%}
n. the opening or commencement of a speech, an
exordium. {%—Vācaṃ-yama, as,%} m. ‘speech-restrainer,’
a sage who practises rigid taciturnity. {%—Vācam-%}
{%īṅkhaya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘word-moving,’ i. e.
singing a hymn; ‘making a sound,’ epithet of the
Soma. {%—Vācasām-pati, is,%} m. (probably for {%vā-%}
{%cāmpati%}), ‘lord of speech,’ N. of Vṛhas-pati. {%—Vā-%}
{%cas-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of speech,’ N. of Vṛhas-pati
(preceptor of the gods and regent of the planet
Jupiter); N. of a grammarian and lexicographer
(the author of the Adhyāsa-bhāṣya-vyākhyā com-
mentary, also author of a work called Kalpa-taru and
of the Ātaṅka-darpaṇa). {%—Vācaspati-govinda, as,%}
m., N. of the author of a commentary on the
Megha-dūta. {%—Vācaspati-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a
celebrated lawyer (the author of several works on
law, among which the Kṛtya-kalpa-latā, the Tīrtha-
cintā-maṇi, the Vivāda-cintā-maṇi, &c. are enume-
rated); of an author of various works, especially of
the Bhāmatī-nibandha and Sāṅkhya-tattva-kaumudī;
of the author of several commentaries. {%—Vācas-%}
{%patya, as, ā, am,%} declared by Vācas-pati; ({%am%}),
n. fine language, an eloquent speech, harangue.
{%—Vāco-yukti, is, is, i,%} possessing fitness or dex-
terity of speech. {%—Vācoyukti-paṭu, us, us%} or {%vī, u,%}
skilled in fitness of speech, eloquent.
<LEND>

<L>41755<pc>0900-c<k1>vAka<k2>vAka<h>2
2. {%vāka, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounding, speaking (at the
end of some comps., cf. {%cakra-v˚, cīrī-v˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>41756<pc>0900-c<k1>vAkya<k2>vAkya
{%Vākya, am,%}¦ n. speech, saying, assertion, statement,
word, ({%mama vākyāt,%} by my order, in my name);
a sentence, period; a rule, precept, aphorism; (in
astronomy) the solar process for all astronomical com-
putations. {%—Vākya-khaṇḍana, am,%} n. refutation of
an assertion. {%—Vākya-tas,%} ind. conformably to the
saying. {%—Vākya-pada, am,%} n. a word in a sentence.
{%—Vākya-padīya, am,%} n.? (relating to the words
of a sentence), N. of a poem on grammar by Bhartṛ-
hari. {%—Vākya-paddhati, is,%} f. the manner or rule
of constructing sentences. {%—Vākya-prabandha, as,%}
m. connection or relation of sentences, connected
[Page0901-a+ 80]
composition. {%—Vākya-prayoga, as,%} m. employment
or application of speech or language. {%—Vākya-racanā,%}
f. the arrangement or construction of sentences, syntax.
{%—Vākya-vajra-viṣama, as, ā, am,%} rough or
course by (using) thunderbolt-like words. {%—Vākya-%}
{%vinyāsa, as,%} m. the arrangement or order of a
sentence, syntax. {%—Vākya-viśārada, as, ā, am,%}
skilled in speech, eloquent. {%—Vākya-śeṣa, as,%} m.
the remainder of a speech (i. e. anything intended to
be said but left unsaid). {%—Vākya-sāra,%} N. of a work.
{%—Vākya-sudhā,%} f., N. of a philosophical treatise
ascribed to Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Vākya-stha%} or {%vākya-%}
{%sthita, as, ā, am,%} being or contained in a sentence;
attentive to what is said. {%—Vākya-sphoṭa,%} see {%spho-%}
{%ṭa%}. {%—Vākyārtha (˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m. the meaning
of a word or sentence. {%—Vākyālāpa (˚ya-āl˚), as,%}
m. talking, conversation.
<LEND>

<L>41757<pc>0901-a<k1>vAgara<k2>vAgara
{%Vāgara, as,%}¦ m. a sage, holy man, one desirous of
final emancipation; a scholar, Paṇḍit, learned Brāh-
man; a hero, brave man, intrepid or fearless person;
certainty, ascertainment; a whetstone; an obstacle,
impediment, obstruction; submarine fire; a wolf.
<LEND>

<L>41758<pc>0901-a<k1>vAgAru<k2>vAgAru
{%Vāgāru, us, us, u%}¦ (said to be fr. {%vāc,%} compounded
with {%āru%} fr. rt. 4. {%ṛ,%} q. v.), breaking promise or
faith, disappointing, a disappointer, deceiver.
<LEND>

<L>41759<pc>0901-a<k1>vAgASani<k2>vAgASani
{%Vāgāśani, is,%}¦ m. a Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>41760<pc>0901-a<k1>vAgmin<k2>vAgmin
{%Vāgmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ speaking much, loquacious, talka-
tive, verbose, wordy; speaking well, eloquent; ({%ī%}), m.,
N. of Vṛhas-pati (preceptor of the gods). {%—Vāgmi-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%vāgmi-tva, am,%} n. loquacity, eloquence.
<LEND>

<L>41761<pc>0901-a<k1>vAgya<k2>vAgya
{%Vāgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking little, speaking cau-
tiously or humbly (perhaps fr. {%vāc + ya%} fr. rt. {%yam;%}
cf. {%vāg-yata%}); speaking truly; ({%as%}), m. modesty,
humility, self-disparagement; doubt, alternative (?).
{%—Vāgya-tas,%} ind. silently.
<LEND>

<L>41762<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcaka<k2>vAcaka
{%Vācaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking, declaratory, expla-
natory, expressive of, significant, expressing, signifying;
verbal, expressed by words; ({%as%}), m. a speaker, reader;
a significant sound, word; a messenger. {%—Vācaka-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%vācaka-tva, am,%} n. expressiveness, signifi-
cance. {%—Vācaka-pada, am,%} n. an expressive or sig-
nificant word, explicit term.
<LEND>

<L>41763<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcana<k2>vAcana
{%Vācana, am,%}¦ n. the act of reciting or reading,
recitation; the act of relating or declaring, procla-
mation, declaration; [cf. {%svasti-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41764<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcanaka<k2>vAcanaka
{%Vācanaka, am,%}¦ n. an enigma, riddle.
<LEND>

<L>41765<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcanika<k2>vAcanika
{%Vācanika, as, ī, am,%}¦ verbal, expressed by words,
textual.
<LEND>

<L>41766<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcA<k2>vAcA
{%Vācā,%}¦ f. speech; a holy word, sacred text; an oath.
<LEND>

<L>41767<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcAwa<k2>vAcAwa
{%Vācāṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ talkative, talking much or idly.
<LEND>

<L>41768<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcAla<k2>vAcAla
{%Vācāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ talkative, chattering, talking
much or idly; boasting.
<LEND>

<L>41769<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcika<k2>vAcika
{%Vācika, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} verbal, oral; communicated
by speech or by word of mouth, ({%pāruṣye daṇḍa-%}
{%vācike,%} the two violences, whether by blows or speech,
i. e. assault and slander); ({%am%}), n. news, tidings, intel-
ligence. {%—Vācika-pattra, am,%} n. a letter, dispatch; a
newspaper, gazette. {%—Vācika-hāraka, as,%} m. ‘news-
conveyer,’ a letter, epistle; a messenger, courier.
<LEND>

<L>41770<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcin<k2>vAcin
{%Vācin%}¦ in {%jāti-vācin, ī, inī, i,%} expressing genus,
generic; [cf. {%jāti-vācaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41771<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcya<k2>vAcya
{%Vācya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken or said, proper to
be said; to be spoken against or {{gainsayed->gainsaid||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}, blamable,
censurable, vile, bad, contemptible, low, outcast; to
be predicated (of anything), attributive, adjective,
declinable as an adjective, taking three genders; ({%as%}),
m. a patronymic of the Ṛṣi Prajā-pati; ({%am%}), n.
that which may be said of anything; blame, censure;
(in gram.) a predicate; the voice of a verb (e. g.
{%kartari-vācyam,%} the active voice; {%karmaṇi-vā-%}
{%cyam,%} the passive voice). {%—Vācya-citra, as, ā, am,%}
fanciful in sense (as poetry). {%—Vācya-tā,%} f. or {%vācya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. blamableness, blame, reproach; ill repute,
infamy; the quality of being predicable; conjugation.
{%—Vācya-vajra, am,%} n. ‘thunder of words,’ boisterous
or severe language; [cf. {%vāg-vajra.%}] {%—Vācyārtha%}
{%(˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m. expressed meaning (in rhetoric).
<LEND>

<L>41772<pc>0901-a<k1>vAcyamAna<k2>vAcyamAna
{%Vācyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being made to speak;
being read aloud.
<LEND>

<L>41773<pc>0901-a<k1>vAca<k2>vAca
{#vAca#}¦ {%vāca, as,%} m. a plant. See {%madana.%}
<LEND>
[Page0901-b+ 79]

<L>41774<pc>0901-b<k1>vAja<k2>vAja
{#vAja#}¦ {%vāja, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vaj%}), strength,
vigour, energy (Ved.); food, sacrificial food (Ved.);
wealth (Ved.); speed; a month, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
III. 27, 1. {%vājāḥ = māsāḥ%}); battle, conflict, contest,
(according to Naigh. II. 17; {%vāje vāje,%} in every con-
flict); a wing; a feather, the feather of an arrow
[cf. {%gṛdhra-v˚, citra-v˚, pattra-v˚%}]; sound; N. of
a Muni; of one of the Ṛbhus or sons of Su-dhanvan,
see {%ṛbhu; (ās),%} m. pl., N. of certain semi-divine
or deified personages of the family of Vāja and
closely connected or identified with the Ṛbhus, see
{%ṛbhu; (am),%} n. ghee or clarified butter; an oblation
of rice offered at a Śrāddha or obsequial ceremony;
rice or food in general; water; an acetous mixture
of ground meal and water left to ferment; a Mantra
or prayer concluding a sacrifice; [cf. perhaps Eng.
<nsi>wing.</nsi>] {%—Vāja-karman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. performing
mighty works. {%—Vāja-gandhya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having the smell of strength, i. e. having a little
strength. {%—Vāja-dāvan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. granting food,
(Sāy. {%= anna-prada.%}) {%—Vāja-draviṇas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. possessing strength or food. {%—Vāja-pati, is,%}
m., Ved. lord of strength or food, &c. {%—Vāja-pastya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. in whose house there is food, having
a house abounding in food or overflowing with plenty.
{%—Vāja-peya, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr. {%vāja,%}
‘an acetous mixture of meal and water,’ {%+ peya,%} ‘to be
drunk’ by the gods), a particular sacrifice; N. of the
sixth book of the Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Vāja-%}
{%pramaha, as, ā, am,%} famous or illustrious for
wealth, (Sāy. {%= dhanair prakṛṣṭam mahas tejo%}
{%yasya%} or {%dhanair pramahanīya.%}) {%—Vāja-prasūta,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} Ved. bearing food or strength. {%—Vāja-bho-%}
{%jin, ī,%} m., Ved. a particular sacrifice; see {%vāja-%}
{%peya%}. {%—Vājam-bhara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bearing
food or oblations; a patronymic of Sapti, (in this
case written {%vājambhara.%}) {%—Vāja-ratna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} rich in food, &c.; having agreeable food, &c.
{%—Vāja-śravas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. bestower of food
(said of Agni). {%—Vāja-sani, is, is, i,%} or {%vāja-sā, ās,%}
{%ās, am%} (see rt. {%san%}), Ved. granting food or strength.
{%—Vāja-sātama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. a liberal dispenser
of food. {%—Vāja-sāti, is,%} f., Ved. the granting of
strength or food; gaining food; a sacrifice; war,
battle (as yielding spoil); ({%is, is, i%}), granting food
or strength. {%—Vājī-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} strength-
ening, stimulating, aphrodisiac. {%—Vājī-karaṇa, am,%}
n. the act of strengthening or stimulating, excitement
of amorous desires by aphrodisiacs, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41775<pc>0901-b<k1>vAjaya<k2>vAjaya
{%Vājaya%}¦ [cf. rt. {%vaj,%} cl. 10], Nom. P., Ved. {%vāja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to desire or ask for strength or food; to
worship, (according to Naigh. III. 14 {%= arcati.%})
<LEND>

<L>41776<pc>0901-b<k1>vAjayat<k2>vAjayat
{%Vājayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. desiring food or
strength, (Sāy. {%= annam icchat.%})
<LEND>

<L>41777<pc>0901-b<k1>vAjayu<k2>vAjayu
{%Vājayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desiring or asking for
strength or food.
<LEND>

<L>41778<pc>0901-b<k1>vAjasaneya<k2>vAjasaneya
{%Vājasaneya, as,%}¦ m. (according to the Śabda-k.),
N. of a Vedic work compiled by Janam-ejaya, after-
wards destroyed through the curse of Vaiśampāyana,
(according to the Matsya-Purāṇa a dispute arose
between Janam-ejaya and Vaiśampāyana in conse-
quence of the former's patronage of the Vājasaneyin
branch of the Yajur-veda founded by Yājñavalkya in
opposition to Vaiśampāyana, the author of the Black or
Taittirīya branch); a follower of the sect of the Vāja-
saneyins. {%—Vājasaneya-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n. a Brāh-
maṇa of the Vājasaneyin branch of the Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>41779<pc>0901-b<k1>vAjasaneyaka<k2>vAjasaneyaka
{%Vājasaneyaka, as,%}¦ m. a Vājasaneyin; ({%am%}), n. a
text of the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā.
<LEND>

<L>41780<pc>0901-b<k1>vAjasaneyin<k2>vAjasaneyin
{%Vājasaneyin, ī,%}¦ m. a member of the sect of the Vā-
jasaneyins, a follower of the White Yajur-veda; a N. of
Yājñavalkya. {%—Vājasaneyi-śākhā,%} f. the branch or
sect of the Vājasaneyins. {%—Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā,%} f.
‘the collection of the Vājasaneyins,’ (i. e. the collection
of hymns of the White Yajur-veda ascribed to the Ṛṣi
Yājñavalkya and called ‘white’ or {%śukla%} to distinguish
it from the Black or Dark Yajur-veda, which was
the name given to the oldest collection or Taittirīya-
saṃhitā [q. v.] of the Yajur-veda, because in this
last, the separation between the Saṃhitā or collection
[Page0901-c+ 80]
of Mantras and the Brāhmaṇa portion is greatly
obscured, and the two are blended together; whereas
the White Saṃhitā is clearly distinguished from the
Brāhmaṇa; it is divided into 40 Adhyāyas with
303 Anuvākas, comprising 1975 sections or Kaṇ-
ḍikās; the legend relates that the Yajus in its ori-
ginal form was taught by the Ṛṣi Vaiśampāyana
to his pupil Yājñavalkya, but that the latter having
incurred his teacher's anger was made to disgorge all
the texts he had learnt, which were then picked up
by Vaiśampāyana's other disciples in the form of
partridges [see {%taittirīya-saṃhitā%}]; Yājñavalkya
then hymned the Sun, who gratified by his homage,
appeared in the form of a {%vājin%} or horse, and consented
to give him fresh Yajus texts, which were not known
to his former master; those who studied these texts
were called Vājins from the shape assumed by the
Sun.)
<LEND>

<L>41781<pc>0901-c<k1>vAjin<k2>vAjin
{%Vājin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. possessing strength, possessed
of food or sacrificial food, possessing wings; swift,
powerful, strong, impetuous, quick; hastening (to
aid others); epithet of the horse in general and of
the representations of the Sun in the shape of a
horse (see Dadhi-krā, Dadhi-krāvan, Tārkṣya); of
Indra; of Bṛhas-pati and other gods; ({%ī%}), m. a
horse; a follower of the Vājasaneyin branch of the
Yajur-veda; an arrow; a bird; a plant, Justicia Adhe-
natoda; ({%inas%}), m. pl., N. of the Ṛbhus (Ṛg-veda
IV. 37, 4); ({%inī%}), f. food (Ved.); a mare; N. of
Uṣas (goddess of the dawn); of the mother of
Bharad-vāja. {%—Vāji-gandha, as,%} m. the plant Phy-
salis Flexuosa, (also written {%vājigandhaka.%}) {%—Vāji-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%vāji-tva, am,%} n. the state of having strength
or food or wings; the state or nature of a horse. {%—Vāji-%}
{%danta%} or {%vājidantaka, as,%} m. the plant Justicia Adhe-
natoda. {%—Vājinī-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of Vā-
jinī, i. e. of food, &c. (the adj. being used for the sub-
stantive), yielding nutriment; possessed of sacrifices;
abounding in worship or prayers (which are offered
at dawn), highly honoured; ({%atī%}), f. epithet of Uṣas
(goddess of the dawn); of Sarasvatī (goddess of
speech or eloquence). {%—Vājinī-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved.
lord of wealth; (Sāy.) abiding in the sacrificial rite;
rich in food (said of Indra, Agni, Vāyu, and the
Aśvins). {%—Vājin-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very strong
or vigorous. {%—Vāji-pṛṣṭha, as,%} m. the globe-
amaranth. {%—Vāji-bhakṣa, as,%} m., N. of a plant,
chick-pea. {%—Vāji-bhūmi, is,%} f. a place where horses
are bred or a spot abounding in or suitable for
horses. {%—Vāji-bhojana, as,%} m. ‘affording food to
horses,’ a sort of kidney-bean {%(= mudga)%}. {%—Vāji-%}
{%mat, ān,%} m. a kind of cucumber, (see {%paṭola.%})
{%—Vāji-medha, as,%} m. the horse sacrifice; [cf. {%aśva-%}
{%medha.%}] {%—Vāji-śālā,%} f. ‘horse-house,’ a stable.
<LEND>

<L>41782<pc>0901-c<k1>vAjina<k2>vAjina
{%Vājina, am,%}¦ n. impetuosity, prowess, a heroic act,
heroism (Ved.); a conflict, contest (Ved.); the scum
of curdled milk; curd of two-milk whey or whey
from which the curds have been separated.
<LEND>

<L>41783<pc>0901-c<k1>vAjineya<k2>vAjineya
{%Vājineya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the son of Vājinī, i. e.
Bharad-vāja.
<LEND>

<L>41784<pc>0901-c<k1>vAYC<k2>vAYC
{#vAYC#}¦ {%vāñch%} [cf. rt. {%vāṅkṣ%}], cl. 1. P.
(sometimes also A.) {%vāñchati (-te),%}
{%vavāñcha, avāñchīt, vāñchitum,%} to desire, wish;
to wish for, ask for, seek after, pursue: Pass. {%vāñch-%}
{%yate,%} Aor. {%avāñchi,%} to be wished, &c.: Caus. {%vāñ-%}
{%chayati, -te,%} Aor. {%avavāñchat,%} to cause to wish,
&c.; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>wunsc,</nsi> ‘wish;’ <nsi>wunskian,</nsi>
‘to wish;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>wiscan:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>wish.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>41785<pc>0901-c<k1>vAYCaka<k2>vAYCaka
{%Vāñchaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing, desiring; a wisher,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>41786<pc>0901-c<k1>vAYCat<k2>vAYCat
{%Vāñchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing, desiring.
<LEND>

<L>41787<pc>0901-c<k1>vAYCana<k2>vAYCana
{%Vāñchana, am,%}¦ n. the act of desiring, wishing.
<LEND>

<L>41788<pc>0901-c<k1>vAYCanIya<k2>vAYCanIya
{%Vāñchanīya,%}¦ to be wished for, desirable.
<LEND>

<L>41789<pc>0901-c<k1>vAYCA<k2>vAYCA
{%Vāñchā,%}¦ f. wish, desire; desire for (with loc.,
Kirāt. IV. 25). {%—Vāñchā-siddhi, is,%} f. the accom-
plishment of a wish.
<LEND>

<L>41790<pc>0901-c<k1>vAYCita<k2>vAYCita
{%Vāñchita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished, desired, longed for;
wishing, desiring; ({%am%}), n. wish, desire.
<LEND>

<L>41791<pc>0901-c<k1>vAYCitavya<k2>vAYCitavya
{%Vāñchitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be wished or desired,
desirable, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0902-a+ 77]

<L>41792<pc>0902-a<k1>vAYCitvA<k2>vAYCitvA
{%Vāñchitvā,%}¦ ind. having wished, having desired.
<LEND>

<L>41793<pc>0902-a<k1>vAYCin<k2>vAYCin
{%Vāñchin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wishing, desirous; lustful; ({%inī%}),
f. a libidinous woman; a wanton.
<LEND>

<L>41794<pc>0902-a<k1>vAYCya<k2>vAYCya
{%Vāñchya, as, ā, am, = vāñchanīya,%}¦ p. 901, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41795<pc>0902-a<k1>vAYCyamAna<k2>vAYCyamAna
{%Vāñchyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being wished or de-
sired.
<LEND>

<L>41796<pc>0902-a<k1>vAw<k2>vAw
{#vAw#}¦ {%vāṭ,%} ind. an exclamation on making
an oblation of butter, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41797<pc>0902-a<k1>vAwa<k2>vAwa
{#vAwa#}¦ {%vāṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vaṭa%}), made or
consisting of the Indian fig-tree or its wood, &c.;
({%as, ī, am%}), m. f. n. an enclosure, piece of enclosed
ground, court-yard; a garden, park, orchard, planta-
tion; the enclosure of a town or village, fence, wall,
hedge, &c.; a road; a sort of grain, Panicum Spi-
catum; the groin; ({%ī%}), f. the site of a house or
building; a house, dwelling; a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%vāṭyālaka)%}. {%—Vāṭa-dhāna, as,%} m. the descendant
of an outcast Brāhman by a Brāhman female; N. of
a degraded tribe. {%—Vāṭa-śṛṅkhalā,%} f. the chain
of an enclosure, a sort of fence (?). {%—Vāṭī-dīrgha,%}
{%as,%} m. a sort of grass or reed ({%= ikkaṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>41798<pc>0902-a<k1>vAwikA<k2>vAwikA
{%Vāṭikā,%}¦ f. the site of a house; a garden, orchard;
the plant Sida Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>41799<pc>0902-a<k1>vAwidIrGa<k2>vAwidIrGa
{%Vāṭi-dīrgha, as,%}¦ m. {%= vāṭī-dīrgha.%}
<LEND>

<L>41800<pc>0902-a<k1>vAwya<k2>vAwya
{%Vāṭya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a house or garden;
({%as%}), m., see Nirukta II. 1; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Sida Cor-
difolia. {%—Vāṭya-puṣpa, am,%} n. sandal; saffron; ({%ī%}),
f. the plant Sida Cordifolia, (also called Atibalā.)
<LEND>

<L>41801<pc>0902-a<k1>vAwyAla<k2>vAwyAla
{%Vāṭyāla, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a herbaceous shrub, Sida
Cordifolia.
<LEND>

<L>41802<pc>0902-a<k1>vAwyAlaka<k2>vAwyAlaka
{%Vāṭyālaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Sida Cordifolia (com-
monly called Bariyāla).
<LEND>

<L>41803<pc>0902-a<k1>vAwwaka<k2>vAwwaka
{#vAwwaka#}¦ {%vāṭṭaka, am,%} n. fried barley.
<LEND>

<L>41804<pc>0902-a<k1>vAq<k2>vAq
{#vAq#}¦ {%vāḍ%} (more properly written {%bāḍ,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. A. {%vāḍate, vāḍitum,%} to bathe;
to dive and emerge.
<LEND>

<L>41805<pc>0902-a<k1>vAqava<k2>vAqava
{#vAqava#}¦ {%vāḍava, as,%} m. submarine fire (see
under {%vaḍavā, baḍavā%}); a Brāhman; ({%am%}), n. a
stud, a collection of mares. {%—Vāḍavāgni (˚va-ag˚),%}
{%is,%} m. the fire of the lower regions, hell; see {%vaḍa-%}
{%vāgni.%}
<LEND>

<L>41806<pc>0902-a<k1>vAqaveya<k2>vAqaveya
{%Vāḍaveya, as,%}¦ m. a bull; ({%au%}), m. du. the two
Aśvins as the sons of Vaḍavā or Aśvinī (see {%aśvinī%}).
<LEND>

<L>41807<pc>0902-a<k1>vAqavya<k2>vAqavya
{%Vāḍavya, am,%}¦ n. a number of Brāhmans.
<LEND>

<L>41808<pc>0902-a<k1>vAQa<k2>vAQa
{#vAQa#}¦ {%vāḍha, as, ā, am%} (probably the origi-
nal form of {%ūḍha,%} past part. of rt. 1. {%vah;%} compar.
{%sādhīyas,%} superl. {%sādhiṣṭha,%} q. q. v. v.; cf. {%bahu,%}
{%vahala%}), hard, firm; much, abundant, excessive, ex-
ceeding; ({%am%}), ind. much, excessively; indeed,
truly; very well, very good, well, yes, indeed, truly,
surely, positively; consequently. {%—Vāḍha-vikrama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of excessive prowess, powerful, very
strong, mighty.
<LEND>

<L>41809<pc>0902-a<k1>vARa<k2>vARa<h>1
{#vARa#} 1¦. {%vāṇa, as, ā, am%} (often written {%bāṇa,%}
q. v.; fr. rt. {%vaṇ,%} ‘to sound’), sounding (Kirāt. XV.
10), making a sound; ({%as%}), m. a reed, reed-shaft,
shaft, arrow, (in this and some other senses said to
be also {%am,%} n.); a symbolical expression for the
number five (from the five arrows of Kāma-deva,
cf. {%pañca-vāṇa%}); a particular kind of reed or cane;
a pipe, flute, lute, (in Ṛg-veda I. 85, 10. the Maruts
are described as {%vāṇam dhamantaḥ,%} ‘blowing on
their pipe’ or ‘playing on their lute,’ {%vāṇa%} being
explained by Sāy. as ‘a kind of lute with a hundred
strings’); a sound, voice; a word spoken, agreement
(Ved., Sāy. {%= vacana%}); a mark for arrows, aim; the
udder of a cow; alone, solitary ({%= kevala%}); N. of
an Asura (a son of Bali, an enemy of Viṣṇu, and
favourite of Śiva); of one of Skanda's attendants;
of a king; of a poet (the author of the Kādambarī,
of the Harṣa-carita, and perhaps also of the Ratnā-
valī); of a person (mentioned in Rāja-taraṅginī VI.
318); fire (?), lightning (?); ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a blue-
flowering Barleria; the hind part or feathered end
of an arrow; ({%ī%}), f. sound, speech, ({%kaṭhorā vāṇī,%}
a harsh speech); voice; praise, laudation; a literary
production; N. of Sarasvatī (the goddess of speech
[Page0902-b+ 76]
and eloquence); ({%am%}), n. the flower of Barleria;
the body. {%—Vāṇa-gaṅgā,%} f. ‘arrow Ganges,’ N. of
a river flowing past Someśa (and said to have been
produced by Rāvaṇa by cleaving a mountain with an
arrow). {%—Vāṇa-gocara, as,%} m. the range of an
arrow. {%—Vāṇa-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of the Asura
Vāṇa,’ an epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Vāṇa-tūṇa, as,%} m.
‘arrow-quiver,’ a quiver. {%—Vāṇatūṇī-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} made into a quiver. {%—Vāṇa-dhi, is,%} m.
‘arrow-receptacle,’ a quiver. {%—Vāṇa-nāśā,%} f., N. of
a river. {%—Vāṇa-nikṛta, as, ā, am,%} pierced or
wounded by an arrow. {%—Vāṇa-pañcānana, as,%} m.,
N. of a poet. {%—Vāṇa-patha, as,%} m. ‘arrow-path,’
the range of an arrow, a bow-shot. {%—Vāṇapathātīta%}
{%(˚tha-at˚), as, ā, am,%} passed beyond the range of
an arrow. {%—Vāṇa-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} ‘arrow-handed,’
having arrows in the hand, armed with arrows.
{%—Vāṇa-pāta, as,%} m. arrow-fall, an arrow-shot (as
a measure of distance), the range of an arrow. {%—Vā-%}
{%ṇapāta-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being within the range
of an arrow. {%—Vāṇa-puṅkhā,%} f. the feathered end
of an arrow or that part of an arrow which includes
the feathers and shaft. {%—Vāṇa-pur, ūr,%} f. or {%vāṇa-%}
{%pura, am,%} n. the capital of Vāṇa-rāja. {%—Vāṇa-%}
{%bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Vāṇa-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} consisting of arrows, arrowy. {%—Vāṇa-mukti,%}
{%is,%} f. or {%vāṇa-mokṣaṇa, am,%} n. discharge of an
arrow, shooting an arrow. {%—Vāṇa-yojana, am,%} n.
‘arrow-union,’ a quiver. {%—Vāṇa-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king-
Vāṇa,’ epithet of the Asura. {%—Vāṇa-rekhā,%} f. a
long wound made by an arrow. {%—Vāṇa-liṅga, am,%}
n., N. of a Liṅga on the bank of the Narma-dā river.
{%—Vāṇa-varṣaṇa, am,%} n. or {%vāṇa-vṛṣṭi, is,%} f.
showering down arrows or darts. {%—Vāṇa-varṣin,%}
{%ī, iṇi, i,%} showering arrows. {%—Vāṇa-vāra, as,%} m.
‘arrow-defender,’ a breastplate, cuirass, armour. {%—Vā-%}
{%ṇa-sandhāna, am,%} n. the fitting of an arrow to the
bow-string. {%—Vāṇa-siddhi, is,%} f. the hitting of a
mark by an arrow. {%—Vāṇa-sutā,%} f. ‘daughter of
Vāṇa,’ epithet of Uṣā or the Dawn (wife of Ani-
ruddha, see Uṣā). {%—Vāṇa-han, ā,%} or {%vāṇāri (˚ṇa-%}
{%ari˚), is,%} m. ‘killer or enemy of Vāṇa,’ an epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Vāṇāvalī (˚ṇa-āv˚),%} f. a series of five
Ślokas (containing only one sentence). {%—Vāṇāśraya%}
{%(˚ṇa-āś˚), as,%} m. ‘arrow-receptacle,’ a quiver.
{%—Vāṇāsana (˚ṇa-as˚), am,%} n. ‘arrow-discharger,’
a bow. {%—Vāṇeśvara (˚ṇa-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a
temple.
<LEND>

<L>41810<pc>0902-b<k1>vARin<k2>vARin
{%Vāṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having an arrow or arrows; speak-
ing; ({%inī%}), f. a sharp or clever woman, an intriguing
woman; an actress, dancer, Nāch girl; a drunken
woman, one literally or figuratively intoxicated.
<LEND>

<L>41811<pc>0902-b<k1>vARIcI<k2>vARIcI
{%Vāṇīcī,%}¦ f., Ved. speech or the goddess of speech.
<LEND>

<L>41812<pc>0902-b<k1>vARa<k2>vARa<h>2
{#vARa#} 2¦. {%vāṇa%} (fr. rt. {%ve%}) for 2. {%vāna,%} q. v.
{%—Vāṇa-daṇḍa, as,%} m. a weaver's loom (for {%vāna-%}
{%daṇḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>41813<pc>0902-b<k1>vARi<k2>vARi
{%Vāṇi, is,%}¦ f. weaving; a weaver's loom; a species
of the Aṣṭi metre, (also written {%vāṇī.%})
<LEND>

<L>41814<pc>0902-b<k1>vARija<k2>vARija
{#vARija#}¦ {%vāṇija, as,%} m. (usually spelt {%bā-%}
{%ṇija,%} q. v.), a merchant.
<LEND>

<L>41815<pc>0902-b<k1>vARijya<k2>vARijya
{%Vāṇijya, am,%}¦ n. traffic, trade, (see {%bāṇijya.%})
<LEND>

<L>41816<pc>0902-b<k1>vARI<k2>vARI
{#vARI#}¦ {%vāṇī,%} f. See under 1. {%vāṇa,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>41817<pc>0902-b<k1>vARIcI<k2>vARIcI
{#vARIcI#}¦ {%vāṇīcī.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>41818<pc>0902-b<k1>vAt<k2>vAt<h>2
{#vAt#} 2¦. {%vāt%} (probably to be regarded as
a Nom. fr. 1. {%vāta,%} cf. rt. 2. {%vat, vātaya;%}
for 1. {%vāt%} see p. 899, col. 1), cl. 10. P. {%vātayati,%}
&c., to blow, blow gently; to fan, ventilate; to blow
favourably; to serve, make happy, act favourably
(towards one setting out on a journey); to go.
<LEND>

<L>41819<pc>0902-b<k1>vAta<k2>vAta<h>2
{#vAta#} 2¦. {%vāta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%van;%} for
1. {%vāta%} see p. 899, col. 1), {%= vanita,%} solicited, wished
for, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41820<pc>0902-b<k1>vAtaraSana<k2>vAtaraSana
{#vAtaraSana#}¦ {%vātaraśana, as,%} m., Ved. a patro-
nymic; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of certain Ṛṣis or semi-
divine beings.
<LEND>

<L>41821<pc>0902-b<k1>vAtula<k2>vAtula
{#vAtula#}¦ {%vātula,%} See p. 900, col. 1.
<LEND>
[Page0902-c+ 80]

<L>41822<pc>0902-c<k1>vAtsaka<k2>vAtsaka
{#vAtsaka#}¦ {%vātsaka, am,%} n. (fr. {%vatsa%}), a herd
of calves.
<LEND>

<L>41823<pc>0902-c<k1>vAtsalya<k2>vAtsalya
{%Vātsalya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%vatsala%}), affection or ten-
derness towards offspring, affection or love in general;
fondness, fond or foolish partiality. {%—Vātsalya-ban-%}
{%dhin, i, inī, i,%} evincing tenderness, displaying affec-
tion.
<LEND>

<L>41824<pc>0902-c<k1>vAtsAyana<k2>vAtsAyana
{%Vātsāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a philosophical writer.
<LEND>

<L>41825<pc>0902-c<k1>vAtsI<k2>vAtsI
{%Vātsī,%}¦ f. (fr. {%vatsa?%}), the daughter of a Śūdra
woman by a Brāhman. {%—Vātsī-putra, as,%} m. ‘son
of a Vātsī,’ a barber.
<LEND>

<L>41826<pc>0902-c<k1>vAtsya<k2>vAtsya
{%Vātsya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vatsa%}), N. of a Muni. {%—Vātsya-%}
{%gulmaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>41827<pc>0902-c<k1>vAtsyAyana<k2>vAtsyAyana
{%Vātsyāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni and of a
writer on amorous subjects (author of the Kāma-
sūtras and of the Nyāya-bhāṣya). {%—Vātsyāyana-%}
{%sūtra = kāma-sūtra.%}
<LEND>

<L>41828<pc>0902-c<k1>vAtsyAyanIya<k2>vAtsyAyanIya
{%Vātsyāyanīya, am,%}¦ n. the Kāma-sūtras of Vātsyā-
yana.
<LEND>

<L>41829<pc>0902-c<k1>vAda<k2>vAda
{#vAda#}¦ {%vāda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vad%}), speaking,
talking, ({%kāma-vāda,%} talking as one pleases, speak-
ing freely); discourse, speech, assertion, proposition,
allegation; statement, discussion, dispute, controversy,
words; explanation, exposition (of holy texts &c.);
demonstrated conclusion; reply; a plaint, accusation;
report, rumour; sound, sounding. {%—Vāda-kara, as,%}
{%ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} or {%vāda-kṛt, t, t, t,%} making a discus-
sion, causing a dispute. {%—Vāda-cañcu, us, us, u,%}
clever in repartee, a good jester. {%—Vāda-prativāda,%}
{%as,%} m. or {%au,%} m. du. a set disputation, assertion and
counter assertion, statement and contradiction, con-
troversy, disputation. {%—Vāda-yuddha, am,%} n. a war
of words, controversial war, controversy, dispute.
{%—Vādayuddha-pradhāna, as, ā, am,%} skilled in
the war of controversy, an eminent controversialist.
{%—Vāda-rata, as, ā, am,%} adhering to or following
any particular proposition or doctrine; addicted to
controversy, disputatious. {%—Vāda-vādin, ī,%} m. a
Jaina {%(= ārhata)%}. {%—Vāda-vivāda, as,%} m. or {%au,%}
m. du. a discussion about any statement, argument and
disputation, debate, dispute, argumentation, litigation.
{%—Vāda-sādhana, am,%} n. the proof of an assertion,
the maintaining of an argument, controversy. {%—Vā-%}
{%dānuvāda (˚da-an˚), au,%} m. du. assertion and
reply, attack and rejoinder, plea and counterplea,
accusation and defence, plaint and reply, controversy,
dispute, disputation.
<LEND>

<L>41830<pc>0902-c<k1>vAdaka<k2>vAdaka
{%Vādaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ (fr. Caus. of rt. {%vad%}), making
a speech, speaking; ({%as%}), m. a speaker; a musician.
<LEND>

<L>41831<pc>0902-c<k1>vAdana<k2>vAdana
{%Vādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sounding, sound; in-
strumental music, the sound of musical instruments.
{%—Vādana-daṇḍa, as,%} m. a stick &c. for striking
a musical instrument.
<LEND>

<L>41832<pc>0902-c<k1>vAdayat<k2>vAdayat
{%Vādayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to speak, causing
to sound; sounding, playing a musical instrument.
<LEND>

<L>41833<pc>0902-c<k1>vAdi<k2>vAdi
{%Vādi, is, is, i,%}¦ speaking; learned; wise, sage,
skilful. {%—Vādi-rāj, ṭ,%} m. a Bauddha sage; {%= mañju-%}
{%ghoṣa, mañju-śrī.%}
<LEND>

<L>41834<pc>0902-c<k1>vAdita<k2>vAdita
{%Vādita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus. of rt. {%vad%}), made
to speak, caused to be uttered; made to sound,
sounded, played.
<LEND>

<L>41835<pc>0902-c<k1>vAditra<k2>vAditra
{%Vāditra, am,%}¦ n. a musical instrument; instrumental
music. {%—Vāditra-gaṇa, as,%} m. a band of music.
<LEND>

<L>41836<pc>0902-c<k1>vAdin<k2>vAdin
{%Vādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ speaking, discoursing; asserting,
declaring; disputing; ({%ī%}), m. a speaker; a disputant;
a plaintiff, accuser; an explainer, expounder (of the law,
Śāstras, &c.); the leading or key-note (in music).
{%—Vādi-tva, am,%} n. in {%satya-vādi-tva%}. {%—Vādīn-%}
{%dra (˚di-in˚), as,%} m., N. of a philosopher.
<LEND>

<L>41837<pc>0902-c<k1>vAdiSa<k2>vAdiSa
{%Vādiśa, as,%}¦ m. a learned and good man, a sage,
seer.
<LEND>

<L>41838<pc>0902-c<k1>vAdya<k2>vAdya
{%Vādya, am,%}¦ n. any musical instrument. {%—Vādya-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. a musician. {%—Vādya-nirghoṣa, as,%}
m. the sound of musical instruments. {%—Vādya-%}
{%bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a multitude of musical instruments,
a band; any musical instrument. {%—Vādyabhāṇḍa-%}
{%mukha, am,%} n. the mouth or top part or point of
a musical instrument.
<LEND>

<L>41839<pc>0902-c<k1>vAdyamAna<k2>vAdyamAna
{%Vādyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being made to speak
or sound, played.
<LEND>
[Page0903-a+ 73]

<L>41840<pc>0903-a<k1>vAdara<k2>vAdara
{#vAdara#}¦ {%vādara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vadara%} for
{%badara,%} q. v.), made or consisting of cotton, &c.
(see {%bādara%}); ({%ā%}), f. the cotton plant.
<LEND>

<L>41841<pc>0903-a<k1>vAdarika<k2>vAdarika
{%Vādarika, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who collects cotton, &c.
(See {%bādarika.%})
<LEND>

<L>41842<pc>0903-a<k1>vAdaraNga<k2>vAdaraNga
{#vAdaraNga#}¦ {%vādaraṅga, as,%} m. the sacred fig-
tree. (See {%aśvattha.%})
<LEND>

<L>41843<pc>0903-a<k1>vAdarAyaRa<k2>vAdarAyaRa
{#vAdarAyaRa#}¦ {%vādarāyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of Vyāsa,
(also written {%bādarāyaṇa,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>41844<pc>0903-a<k1>vAdala<k2>vAdala
{#vAdala#}¦ {%vādala, am,%} n. [cf. {%bādara%}], liquorice
or the root of the Abrus Precatorius (used for it).
<LEND>

<L>41845<pc>0903-a<k1>vAdAnya<k2>vAdAnya
{#vAdAnya#}¦ {%vādānya, as, ā, am%} (for {%vadānya,%}
q. v.), munificent, liberal, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41846<pc>0903-a<k1>vAdAla<k2>vAdAla
{#vAdAla#}¦ {%vādāla, as,%} m. the sheat fish (=
{%vadāla, sahasra-daṃṣṭra%}).
<LEND>

<L>41847<pc>0903-a<k1>vAdira<k2>vAdira
{#vAdira#}¦ {%vādira, am,%} n., N. of a particular
tree (resembling the Vadarī or Badarī).
<LEND>

<L>41848<pc>0903-a<k1>vAD<k2>vAD
{#vAD#}¦ {%vādh%} (more correctly written {%bādh,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. A. {%vādhate, vavādhe, vā-%}
{%dhiṣyate, avādhiṣṭa, vādhitum,%} to press, oppress,
vex, give pain, distress.
<LEND>

<L>41849<pc>0903-a<k1>vADana<k2>vADana
{%Vādhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of oppressing, paining,
vexing, &c. (See {%bādhana.%})
<LEND>

<L>41850<pc>0903-a<k1>vADA<k2>vADA
{%Vādhā,%}¦ f. pain, affliction, opposition. (See {%bādha.%})
<LEND>

<L>41851<pc>0903-a<k1>vADukya<k2>vADukya
{#vADukya#}¦ {%vādhukya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vadhukā%}),
marriage.
<LEND>

<L>41852<pc>0903-a<k1>vADU<k2>vADU
{#vADU#}¦ {%vādhū, ūs,%} f. (probably connected
with rt. 1. {%vah%}), a vessel, boat, raft.
<LEND>

<L>41853<pc>0903-a<k1>vADUya<k2>vADUya
{#vADUya#}¦ {%vādhūya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vadhū%}), Ved. a
bride's garment, bridal dress.
<LEND>

<L>41854<pc>0903-a<k1>vADrIRasa<k2>vADrIRasa
{#vADrIRasa#}¦ {%vādhrīṇasa, as,%} m. a rhinoceros;
(according to some also {%vādhrīnasa.%})
<LEND>

<L>41855<pc>0903-a<k1>vAna<k2>vAna<h>3
{#vAna#} 3¦. {%vāna, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%ve%}), the act of
weaving, sewing; a mat of straw; a hole in the wall
of a house. {%—Vāna-daṇḍa, as,%} m. a weaver's loom;
[cf. {%vāṇa-daṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41856<pc>0903-a<k1>vAnIya<k2>vAnIya
{%Vānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be woven, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41857<pc>0903-a<k1>vAna<k2>vAna<h>4
{#vAna#} 4¦. {%vāna, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%vana%}), belonging
or relating to a wood or forest; relating to a dwelling
in a wood or to a house, &c.; ({%am%}), n. a multitude
of woods, collection of groves or thickets.
<LEND>

<L>41858<pc>0903-a<k1>vAnaprasTa<k2>vAnaprasTa
{%Vānaprastha, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vana-prastha%}), a
Brāhman of the third order who has passed through
the stages of student and householder and has left
his house and family for the woods, (see {%āśrama%});
a hermit, anchorite; a class of supernatural beings;
the tree Bassia Latifolia; the Palāśa tree, Butea
Frondosa. {%—Vānaprastha-dharma, as,%} m. the law
or duty of a Vānaprastha. {%—Vānaprasthāśrama%}
{%(˚tha-āś˚), as, am,%} m. n. the Āśrama or order of
a Vānaprastha.
<LEND>

<L>41859<pc>0903-a<k1>vAnara<k2>vAnara
{%Vānara, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vanara,%} which is probably fr.
1. {%vana,%} ‘a wood;’ according to others fr. {%vā,%} ‘like,’
{%nara,%} ‘a man’), a monkey, ape; ({%ī%}), f. a female
monkey or ape; cowach, Carpopogon Pruriens; ({%as,%}
{%ī, am%}), belonging to a monkey, monkey-like. {%—Vā-%}
{%nara-priya, as,%} m. ‘dear to monkeys,’ the tree
Mimusops Kauki. {%—Vānarākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as,%} m.
‘monkey-eyed,’ a wild goat. {%—Vānarāghāta (˚ra-%}
{%āgh˚), as,%} m. ‘monkey-stroke,’ i. e. ‘struck or in-
jured by monkeys,’ the tree Symplocos Racemosa
(commonly called Lodhra or Lodh). {%—Vānarāpa-%}
{%sada (˚ra-ap˚), as,%} m. a contemptible monkey.
{%—Vānarendra (˚ra-in˚), as,%} m. ‘monkey-chief,’
epithet of Sugrīva; of Hanu-mat. {%—Vānareśvara-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>41860<pc>0903-a<k1>vAnala<k2>vAnala
{%Vānala, as,%}¦ m. (probably fr. 1. {%vana%}), the black
species of Tulasī or holy basil, Ocymum Sanctum.
<LEND>

<L>41861<pc>0903-a<k1>vAnaspatya<k2>vAnaspatya
{%Vānaspatya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vanas-pati%}), a tree the
fruit of which is produced from blossom ({%= puṣpa-%}
{%jāta-phala-vṛkṣa;%} cf. {%vanas-pati,%} which is said
to be used in a different sense; examples of a Vānas-
patya are the Mango, Eugenia, &c.).
<LEND>
[Page0903-b+ 77]

<L>41862<pc>0903-b<k1>vAnA<k2>vAnA
{%Vānā,%}¦ f. (probably fr. 1. {%vana%}), a quail.
<LEND>

<L>41863<pc>0903-b<k1>vAnIra<k2>vAnIra
{%Vānīra, as,%}¦ m. (fr. 1. {%vana,%} ‘a wood or water’), a
sort of cane or ratan, Calamus Rotang, a reed. {%—Vā-%}
{%nīra-gṛha, am,%} n. or {%ās,%} m. pl. an arbour of reeds.
{%—Vānīra-ja, am,%} n. a plant ({%= kuṣṭha,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>41864<pc>0903-b<k1>vAnIraka<k2>vAnIraka
{%Vānīraka, as,%}¦ m. a sort of rush or grass, Saccha-
rum Munja; [cf. {%muñja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41865<pc>0903-b<k1>vAneya<k2>vAneya
{%Vāneya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to a wood
or to water, &c.; ({%as%}), m. the fragrant grass Cyperus
Rotundus.
<LEND>

<L>41866<pc>0903-b<k1>vAnyA<k2>vAnyA
{%Vānyā,%}¦ f. a collection of woods, multitude of
groves or thickets; [cf. {%vanyā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41867<pc>0903-b<k1>vAnAyu<k2>vAnAyu
{#vAnAyu#}¦ {%vānāyu, us,%} m. (fr. {%vanāyu%}), a coun-
try to the north-west of India, also called Vanāyu.
{%—Vānāyu-ja, as,%} m. ‘Vānāyu-born,’ a Vānāyu or Va-
nāyu horse (regarded as of a particularly good breed).
<LEND>

<L>41868<pc>0903-b<k1>vAnIra<k2>vAnIra
{#vAnIra#}¦ {%vānīra.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>41869<pc>0903-b<k1>vAnta<k2>vAnta
{#vAnta#}¦ {%vānta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vam%}), vomited,
ejected from the mouth, effused; one who has vo-
mited; {%vānte,%} ind. when one has vomited; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a Particular family of priests. {%—Vānta-vṛṣṭi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} (a cloud &c.) that has vomited out rain.
{%—Vāntāda (˚ta-ada˚), as,%} m. ‘eating what is vomited,’
a dog. {%—Vāntāśin (˚ta-aś˚), ī,%} m. ‘eating what is
vomited,’ a foul-feeding demon.
<LEND>

<L>41870<pc>0903-b<k1>vAnti<k2>vAnti
{%Vānti, is,%}¦ f. the act of vomiting, ejecting from
the mouth. {%—Vānti-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing vomiting,
emetic; ({%t%}), m. the thorny plant Vangueria Spinosa.
{%—Vānti-da, as, ā, am,%} causing vomiting, emetic;
({%ā%}), f. a medicinal plant ({%= kaṭukī%}); Helleborus
Niger or Wrightea Antidysenterica or Calotropis
Gigantea.
<LEND>

<L>41871<pc>0903-b<k1>vAntvA<k2>vAntvA
{%Vāntvā,%}¦ ind. having vomited, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41872<pc>0903-b<k1>vAma<k2>vAma<h>1
1. {%vāma, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see below), the act of
vomiting.
<LEND>

<L>41873<pc>0903-b<k1>vAmaka<k2>vAmaka<h>1
1. {%vāmaka, as,%}¦ &c. (for 2. see col. 3), one who
vomits.
<LEND>

<L>41874<pc>0903-b<k1>vAmin<k2>vAmin
{%Vāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ vomiting, ejecting from the
mouth.
<LEND>

<L>41875<pc>0903-b<k1>vAndana<k2>vAndana
{#vAndana#}¦ {%vāndana, as,%} m. a patronymic of
Duvasyu (author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 100).
<LEND>

<L>41876<pc>0903-b<k1>vApa<k2>vApa
{#vApa#}¦ {%vāpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vap%} or connected
with Caus. of rt. {%ve%}), sowing seed; weaving; shear-
ing, shaving. {%—Vāpa-daṇḍa, as,%} m. a weaver's
loom; [cf. {%vāya-daṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41877<pc>0903-b<k1>vApaka<k2>vApaka
{%Vāpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to sow (seed &c.);
causing to weave, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41878<pc>0903-b<k1>vApana<k2>vApana
{%Vāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to sow or
sowing; shaving, shearing.
<LEND>

<L>41879<pc>0903-b<k1>vApi<k2>vApi
{%Vāpi, is,%}¦ or {%vāpī,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV.
124. fr. rt. {%vap%}), a large oblong pond, an oblong
reservoir of water, a pool or lake; {%krīḍā-vāpī,%} f.,
Ved. ‘pleasure-pond,’ a pond in which tortoises,
fishes, &c. are kept for amusement. {%—Vāpī-ha, as,%}
m. ‘abandoning pools,’ the Cātaka bird, Cuculus
Melanoleucos.
<LEND>

<L>41880<pc>0903-b<k1>vApita<k2>vApita
{%Vāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be sown, sown (as
seed); shaven, shorn.
<LEND>

<L>41881<pc>0903-b<k1>vApya<k2>vApya
{%Vāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sown, to be cast or
thrown; ({%as%}), m. Costus Speciosus ({%= kuṣṭha%}).
<LEND>

<L>41882<pc>0903-b<k1>vAma<k2>vAma<h>2
{#vAma#} 2¦. {%vāma, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (according to
Uṇādi-s. 1. 139. fr. rt. 2. {%vā;%} according to others
fr. rt. 1. {%van,%} ‘to hurt or to like’), reverse, adverse,
opposite, contrary, inverted; left, not right; crooked;
bad, vile, base, wicked; short; beautiful, handsome,
pleasing; ({%as%}), m., N. of Śiva; of Kāma (god of
love); a breast, udder; a pot-herb, Chenopodium
Album; an animal, sentient being; a snake; ({%am%}),
n. anything desirable or pleasing, wealth, possessions;
({%ā%}), f. a woman; N. of Gaurī; of Lakṣmī; of
Sarasvatī; ({%ī%}), f. a mare; a she-ass; a young
female elephant; the female of the jackal; [cf. Old
Germ. <nsi>winistar;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wynstre.</nsi>] {%—Vāma-%}
{%jāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. produced from wealth. {%—Vā-%}
{%ma-juṣṭa, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work {%(= vāma-%}
{%keśvara-tantra)%}. {%—Vāma-tā,%} f. or {%vāma-tva, am,%}
n. contrariety, perverseness; wickedness, craftiness;
[Page0903-c+ 80]
disfavour; loveliness. {%—Vāma-dṛś, k,%} f. a woman.
{%—Vāma-deva, as,%} m., N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi (having
the patronymic Gautama, author of the hymns Ṛg-
veda IV. 1 — 41, 45 — 48, comprising nearly the whole
fourth Maṇḍala); of Śiva; of an author. {%—Vāma-%}
{%devya, as,%} m. a patronymic of Aṃho-muc (author
of Ṛg-veda X. 127); of Bṛhad-uktha; of Mūrdhan-
vat. {%—Vāma-nīti, is, is, i,%} Ved. leading or guiding
to wealth, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VI. 47, 7. {%vananīyā-%}
{%nāṃ dhanānāṃ netṛ.%}) {%—Vāma-netra, am,%} n. a
mystical name of the long vowel {%ī; (ā),%} f. a woman
with beautiful eyes, a handsome woman in general.
{%—Vāma-mārga, as,%} m. the left hand way or ritual;
see {%vāmācāra%}. {%—Vāma-locana, as, ā, am,%} fine-
eyed; ({%ā%}), f. a handsome-eyed woman. {%—Vāma-%}
{%śīla, as, ā, am,%} refractory in disposition; ({%as%}), m.
an epithet of Kāma. {%—Vāmākṣa (˚ma-ak˚), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} having beautiful eyes; ({%ī%}), f. a woman with
lovely eyes. {%—Vāmākṣi (˚ma-ak˚), i,%} n. the left eye.
{%—Vāmācāra (˚ma-āc˚), as,%} m. the left hand ritual
or doctrine of the Tantras, i. e. the worship of the
Śakti or Female Energy personified as the wife of
Śiva according to the grosser system (in which the
eating of flesh, drinking of spirits, &c. is practised,
cf. {%dakṣiṇācāra%}). {%—Vāmācārin, ī,%} m. a follower
of the left hand ritual of the Tantras. {%—Vāmāpīḍana%}
{%(˚ma-āp˚?), as,%} m. the tree Salvadora Persica, &c.
{%(= pīlu)%}. {%—Vāmāvarta (˚ma-āv˚), as,%} m. a conch-
shell with the spiral running from right to left.
{%—Vāmoru (˚ma-ūru˚), us, us%} or {%ūs, u,%} having
handsome thighs; ({%us%} or {%ūs%}), f. a handsome-thighed
woman. {%—Vāmoru-tarā%} or {%vāmorū-tarā,%} f. a very
handsome-thighed woman.
<LEND>

<L>41883<pc>0903-c<k1>vAmaka<k2>vAmaka<h>2
2. {%vāmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, not right; ({%am%}), n.
a kind of gesture. {%—Vāmakeśvara-tantra (˚ka-īś˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work.
<LEND>

<L>41884<pc>0903-c<k1>vAmikA<k2>vAmikA
{%Vāmikā,%}¦ f. an epithet of the goddess Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>41885<pc>0903-c<k1>vAmana<k2>vAmana
{#vAmana#}¦ {%vāmana, as, ā, am%} (probably fr. 2. {%vā-%}
{%ma;%} said to be fr. rt. {%vam%}), dwarfish, short in stature,
a dwarf; depressed, pressed flat or down; low, vile,
base; ({%as%}), m. Viṣṇu in his dwarf incarnation, (this
was the fifth of the descents of Viṣṇu, and under-
taken to humble the pride of the Daitya Bali, who
had acquired dominion over the three worlds [see
{%bali%}]; the germ of the story of this incarnation
seems to be contained in Śatapatha-Br. I. 2, 5, 1,
the later legend is given in Rāmāyaṇa I. 31, 2);
the elephant that supports the south quarter; the tree
Alangium Hexapetalum; N. of the author of the
Kāvyālaṅkāra-vṛtti; of the Kāśikā-vṛtti commen-
tary; ({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras; ({%ī%}), f. a female
dwarf; a sort of woman; a mare; a disease of the
Vagina. {%—Vāmana-tanu, us, us%} or {%vī, u,%} dwarf-
bodied. {%—Vāmana-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of one
of the eighteen Purāṇas (said to have been related
by Pulastya to Nārada, and containing an account
of the dwarf incarnation of Viṣṇu; see {%purāṇa%}).
{%—Vāmana-prādurbhāva, as,%} m. the manifestation
or incarnation of the dwarf; see above. {%—Vāmana-%}
{%rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} dwarf-formed, being in the form of
a dwarf. {%—Vāmana-vṛtti, is,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary on Pāṇini's grammar by Vāmana Jayāditya, (see
{%kāśika.%}) {%—Vāmana-vṛtti-ṭīkā,%} f., N. of a commen-
tary by Maheśvara on the Kāvyālaṅkāra-vṛtti. {%—Vā-%}
{%mana-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a particular Vrata to be
observed on the twelfth day of Śrāvaṇa in celebration
of Viṣṇu's dwarf incarnation. {%—Vāmana-sūkta, am,%}
n., N. of a Vedic hymn. {%—Vāmana-svāmin, ī,%} m.,
N. of a poet. {%—Vāmanākṛti (˚na-āk˚), is, is, i,%}
dwarf-shaped, dwarfish. {%—Vāmanācārya (˚na-āc˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a commentator. {%—Vāmanāvatāra (˚na-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. the dwarf incarnation; see under {%vāmana%}
above. {%—Vāmanāvatāra-kathana, am,%} n. the story
of the dwarf incarnation, N. of a chapter of the
Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Vāmanī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} pressed
down, shortened, flattened. {%—Vāmanendra-svā-%}
{%min, ī,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vāmanopapurāṇa (˚na-%}
{%up˚), am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>41886<pc>0903-c<k1>vAmanikA<k2>vAmanikA
{%Vāmanikā,%}¦ f. a female dwarf; a sort of woman.
<LEND>

<L>41887<pc>0903-c<k1>vAmalUra<k2>vAmalUra
{#vAmalUra#}¦ {%vāmalūra, as,%} m. (connected with
[Page0904-a+ 77]
{%vamrā, valmī, valmīka%}), an ant-hill, mole-hill,
hillock thrown up by white ants.
<LEND>

<L>41888<pc>0904-a<k1>vAmila<k2>vAmila
{#vAmila#}¦ {%vāmila, as, ā, am%} (probably con-
nected with 2. {%vāma%}), proud, haughty, deceitful;
handsome, beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>41889<pc>0904-a<k1>vAya<k2>vAya
{#vAya#}¦ {%vāya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ve%}), weaving,
sewing. {%—Vāya-daṇḍa, as,%} m. a weaver's loom.
<LEND>

<L>41890<pc>0904-a<k1>vAyaka<k2>vAyaka
{%Vāyaka, as,%}¦ m. a weaver [cf. {%paṭṭikā-v˚%}]; a
heap, multitude, number.
<LEND>

<L>41891<pc>0904-a<k1>vAyin<k2>vAyin
{%Vāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ weaving, sewing.
<LEND>

<L>41892<pc>0904-a<k1>vAyata<k2>vAyata
{#vAyata#}¦ {%vāyata, as,%} m. (fr. {%vayat%}), Ved. ‘son
of Vayat,’ a patronymic of Pāśa-dyumna.
<LEND>

<L>41893<pc>0904-a<k1>vAyana<k2>vAyana
{#vAyana#}¦ {%vāyana%} or {%vāyanaka, am,%} n. (said to
be fr. rt. 2. {%vā%}), sweetmeats or cakes which may be
eaten during a religious fast, presents of sweetmeats
&c. (forming part of an offering to a deity, or pre-
pared on festive occasions, such as marriages &c., and
sent as presents to friends and acquaintances).
<LEND>

<L>41894<pc>0904-a<k1>vAyava<k2>vAyava
{#vAyava#}¦ {%vāyava.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41895<pc>0904-a<k1>vAyasa<k2>vAyasa
{#vAyasa#}¦ {%vāyasa, as,%} m. (probably fr. {%vayas,%}
‘age,’ but according to Uṇādi-s. III. 120. fr. rt. {%vay%}),
‘the long-lived one,’ a crow; Agallochum or fragrant
aloe ({%= aguru%}); turpentine; ({%as, ī, am%}), used by
crows (?); consisting of birds; ({%ī%}), f. a female crow;
a species of fig, Ficus Oppositifolia; a particular
vegetable, Solanum Indicum. {%—Vāyasādanī (˚sa-%}
{%ad˚),%} f. a kind of plant or tree {%(= kāka-tuṇḍī).%}
{%—Vāyasāri (˚sa-ari˚), is,%} m. or {%vāyasārāti (˚sa-%}
{%ar˚), is,%} m. ‘crow's enemy,’ an owl. {%—Vāyasāhvā%}
{%(˚sa-āh˚),%} f. an esculent vegetable, Solanum Indicum
{%(= kāka-mācikā)%}. {%—Vāyasekṣu (˚sa-ik˚), us,%} m.
a sort of long grass, Saccharum Spontaneum.
<LEND>

<L>41896<pc>0904-a<k1>vAyasolI<k2>vAyasolI
{%Vāyasolī%}¦ or {%vāyasolikā,%} f. a medicinal root (=
{%kākolī%}).
<LEND>

<L>41897<pc>0904-a<k1>vAyu<k2>vAyu
{#vAyu#}¦ {%vāyu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%vā%}), air, wind,
the god of the wind (often associated with Indra in the
Ṛg-veda, but not occupying a very prominent posi-
tion; in the Puruṣa-sūkta he is said to have sprung
from the breath of Puruṣa, and elsewhere is described
as the son-in-law of Tvaṣṭṛ; he is said to move in
a shining car drawn by a pair of red or purple horses
or by several teams consisting of ninety-nine or a
hundred or even a thousand horses; he is often
made to occupy the same chariot with Indra, and in
conjunction with him honoured with the first draught
of the Soma libation; he is rarely connected with
the Maruts, although in 1. 134, 4. he is said to have
begotten them from the rivers of heaven; he is
regent of the north-west quarter, see {%loka-pāla%});
the air of the body, a vital air (of which five are
reckoned, viz. {%prāṇa, apāna, samāna, udāna,%}
and {%vyāna%}); morbid affection of the windy humor.
{%—Vāyu-ketu, us,%} m. ‘wind-sign,’ i. e. ‘sign of wind,’
dust. {%—Vāyu-keśa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. having hair
(waving) in the wind (said of the Gandharvas).
{%—Vāyu-koṇa, as,%} m. ‘wind-corner,’ the north-west.
{%—Vāyu-gaṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘wind-swelling,’ flatulence,
indigestion. {%—Vāyu-gati, is, is, i,%} going like the
wind, swift as the wind, fleet. {%—Vāyu-gīta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} chanted by the breeze. {%—Vāyu-gulma, as,%} m.
‘wind-cluster,’ a whirlwind, hurricane; a whirlpool,
eddy. {%—Vāyu-gocara, as,%} m. the track or range of
the wind. {%—Vāyu-gopā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. having
the Wind as protector. {%—Vāyu-grasta, as, ā, am,%}
‘wind-seized,’ affected by wind, flatulent, epileptic,
mad. {%—Vāyu-ghna, as, ī, am,%} ‘wind-destroying,’
curing windy disorders. {%—Vāyu-ja,%} ‘air-born,’ N.
of a tree. {%—Vāyu-jāta, as,%} m. ‘wind-born,’ epithet
of Hanu-mat. {%—Vāyu-tanaya%} or {%vāyu-nandana,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= vāyu-putra%}. {%—Vāyu-dāru, us,%} m. ‘air-
tearer, air-scatterer,’ a cloud. {%—Vāyu-nānā-tva, am,%}
n. diversity or multiplicity of air (said to be inferred
from the concurrence [{%sammūrchana%}] of two winds).
{%—Vāyu-nighna, as, ā, am,%} ‘subject to wind,’ mad,
frantic. {%—Vāyu-nivṛtti, is,%} f. ‘cessation of wind,’
a calm, lull; cure of windy disorders. {%—Vāyu-pañ-%}
{%caka, am,%} n. the set of five vital airs. {%—Vāyu-pa- %}
[Page0904-b+ 80]
{%ramāṇu, us,%} m. a primary aerial atom. {%—Vāyu-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. ‘son of the wind,’ epithet of
Bhīma; of Hanu-mat. {%—Vāyu-purāṇa, am,%} n.,
N. of one of the eighteen Purāṇas, (it is probably
one of the oldest, and is supposed to have been
revealed by the god Vāyu; it treats of the creation
of the world, the origin of the four classes, the
worship of Śiva, &c.) {%—Vāyu-phala, am,%} n. ‘wind-
fruit,’ the rainbow; hail. {%—Vāyu-bhakṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} air-eating, fasting; ({%as%}), m. a snake; an ascetic.
{%—Vāyu-bhakṣaṇa, am,%} n. the act of eating or
living on air, fasting. {%—Vāyu-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} be-
come air, become like the wind; going everywhere
at will. {%—Vāyu-mārga, as,%} m. the path or track of
the wind. {%—Vāyu-rugṇa, as, ā, am,%} broken off by
the wind. {%—Vāyu-roṣā,%} f. ‘raging with wind,’
night. {%—Vāyu-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. the character or
property of air (viz. touch). {%—Vāyu-vartman, ā,%} m.
‘wind-path,’ the atmosphere, sky, heaven. {%—Vāyu-%}
{%vāha, as,%} m. ‘having the wind for a vehicle,’ smoke,
vapour. {%—Vāyu-vāhinī,%} f. ‘wind-conveying,’ a vessel
of the body, artery, vein, nerve, &c. (supposed to con-
vey the aerial humor). {%—Vāyu-vega, as,%} m. the ve-
locity of the wind, a gust or blast of wind; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having the velocity of wind, fleet as the wind; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Vāyuvega-sama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} equal to the velocity of wind, swift as
the wind. {%—Vāyu-saṃhitā,%} f. the ‘Vāyu compen-
dium’ or collection of legends according to the Vāyu-
Purāṇa. {%—Vāyu-sakha, as,%} or {%vāyu-sakhi, khā,%} m.
‘wind-friend, having the wind for a friend,’ fire.
{%—Vāyu-sama, as, ā, am,%} equal to the wind, swift;
like air or wind, unsubstantial. {%—Vāyu-sambhava,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘wind-born,’ epithet of Hanu-mat. {%—Vāyu-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. {%= vāyu-putra%} above. {%—Vāyu-hīna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} destitute of wind, having a deficiency of
the windy humor. {%—Vāyu-agni, ī,%} m. du. Vāyu
and Agni, the gods of wind and fire. {%—Vāyu-āspada,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘place or site of the wind,’ the atmosphere,
sky, ether.
<LEND>

<L>41898<pc>0904-b<k1>vAyava<k2>vAyava
{%Vāyava, as, ī, am,%}¦ windy, relating or belonging
to the wind or to Vāyu; given by Vāyu; aerial; ({%ī%}),
f. the quarter or region of the wind, the north-west
(as presided over by Vāyu in his character of the
sixth Loka-pāla).
<LEND>

<L>41899<pc>0904-b<k1>vAyavIya<k2>vAyavIya
{%Vāyavīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the wind or
Vāyu, belonging to air or wind, aerial. {%—Vāyavīya-%}
{%purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>41900<pc>0904-b<k1>vAyavya<k2>vAyavya
{%Vāyavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the wind, coming
from or relating to Vāyu, sacred to Vāyu, aerial.
{%—Vāyavya-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>41901<pc>0904-b<k1>vAyya<k2>vAyya
{#vAyya#}¦ {%vāyya, as,%} m., Ved. ‘son of Vayya,’
epithet of Satya-śravas (represented as a poet and an
Ātreya).
<LEND>

<L>41902<pc>0904-b<k1>vAr<k2>vAr
{#vAr#}¦ {%vār, r,%} n. (fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), water; [cf. {%va-%}
{%ruṇa:%} cf. also Zend {%vāra,%} ‘rain:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">οὖρο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">οὐρ-έ-ω, οὐρ-ί-α, οὐράνη, οὐρή-θρα, οὔρη-μα,</lang> perhaps
also <lang n="greek">ὑρτήρ, ὕρχη:</lang> Lat. <nsi>ur-ina, urin-a-ri, urina-</nsi>
<nsi>tor, urceus, urna; mare;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>mari:</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>more;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>burn,</nsi> ‘water;’ <nsi>fairge,</nsi> ‘ocean;’
<nsi>fual,</nsi> ‘urine;’ <nsi>muir:</nsi> Welsh <nsi>mor.</nsi>] {%—Vāḥ-kiṭi, is,%}
m. ‘water-pig,’ a porpoise, the Gangetic porpoise {%(=%}
{%śiśumāra)%}. {%—Vāḥ-puṣpa, am,%} n. cloves. {%—Vāḥ-%}
{%sadana, am,%} n. ‘water-abode,’ a reservoir of water,
cistern, large water-jar. {%—Vāḥ-stha, as, ā, am,%}
standing or remaining in water. {%—Vārāṃ-nidhi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘receptacle of waters,’ the ocean. {%—Vār-%}
{%āsana, am,%} n. ‘water-seat,’ a reservoir of water,
cistern, large water-jar. {%—Vār-kārya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. to be performed with water, (Sāy. {%= vārbhir%}
{%niṣpādya%}); granting or effecting rain. {%—Vār-ca,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘water-going,’ a gander, goose (Vopa-deva
XXVI. 33). {%—Vār-da, as, ā, am,%} water-giving;
({%as%}), m. a cloud. {%—Vār-dara, am,%} n. water; speech;
silk; the seed of the Abrus Precatorius; the seed of
the Mango; a conch-shell ({%= dakṣiṇāvarta%}); a
sort of curl on the right side of a horse's neck (re-
garded as an auspicious mark). {%—Vārdala, am,%} n.
(fr. {%vārda + la%}), a rainy day, bad weather; ({%as%}), m.
an ink-stand. {%—Vār-dhi, is,%} m. ‘water-holder,’ the
[Page0904-c+ 79]
ocean. {%—Vārdhi-bhava%} or {%vār-dheya, am,%} n. a
kind of salt {%(= droṇi-lavaṇa)%}. {%—Vārdhi-vat,%} ind.
like the ocean. {%—Vār-bhaṭa, as,%} m. ‘water-com-
batant,’ an alligator. {%—Vār-muc, k,%} m. ‘water-dis-
charger,’ a cloud. {%—Vār-rāśi, is,%} m. ‘water-heap,’
the ocean. {%—Vār-vaṭa, as,%} m. ‘water-enclosure (?),’
a boat, vessel.
<LEND>

<L>41903<pc>0904-c<k1>vAra<k2>vAra<h>1
1. {%vāra, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see p. 905, col. 1), anything
which covers or surrounds, a cover; a multitude, quan-
tity, heap; a flock, herd, troop; time; a day of the
week [cf. {%ravi-v˚, soma-v˚, maṅgala-v˚, budha-v˚,%}
{%guru-v˚, śukra-v˚, śani-v˚%}]; a moment, occasion, op-
portunity; turn, time (used adverbially like the English
‘times,’ or like the French ‘fois,’ e. g. {%vāreṇa%} or
{%bahu-vāram%} or {%vāraṃ vāram,%} many times, repeat-
edly, often); N. of Śiva; anything which causes an
obstruction, a gate, door, door-way; the plant Achy-
ranthes Aspera ({%= kubja%}); the opposite bank of a
river or of the sea, (for {%pāra%}); ({%am%}), n. a vessel for
holding spirituous liquor; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἦρα:</lang> Hib. <nsi>vair,</nsi>
‘an hour, time;’ <nsi>air uairibh,</nsi> ‘sometimes;’ Cambro-
Brit. <nsi>aur;</nsi> Old Island. <nsi>var</nsi> in <nsi>tvis-var,</nsi> ‘twice;’
<nsi>thris-var,</nsi> ‘thrice:’ Old Germ. <nsi>or, o,</nsi> in <nsi>zuir-or,</nsi>
<nsi>zuir-o,</nsi> twice:’ Pers. <lang n="arabic">بار</lang> <nsi>bār,</nsi> ‘time;’ <lang n="arabic">بارى</lang> <nsi>bāre,</nsi>
‘once;’ <nsi>ber</nsi> in <nsi>September, October,</nsi> &c.] {%—Vāra-%}
{%nārī,%} f. a common woman, harlot, courtezan. {%—Vā-%}
{%ra-buṣā%} or {%vāra-būṣā,%} f. the plantain or banana
({%= kadalī;%} cf. {%vāraṇa-buṣā%}). {%—Vāra-mukhyā,%}
f. the chief of a number of harlots, a royal
courtezan. {%—Vāra-yuvati, is,%} f. or {%vāra-yoṣit,%}
{%t,%} f. a courtezan, harlot; a dancing-girl. {%—Vāra-%}
{%vadhū, ūs,%} f. the chief of a number of harlots.
{%—Vāra-vāṇa, as, am,%} m. n. armour, mail, an iron
cuirass or thick quilted jacket (so called as ‘ward-
ing off arrows,’ cf. {%vāṇa-vāra%}). {%—Vāra-vāṇi, is,%} m.
a player on the flute; a principal singer, musician; a
judge; a year; ({%is%} or {%ī%}), f. a harlot or the chief of
a number of harlots. {%—Vāra-vilāsinī,%} f. a harlot.
{%—Vāra-velā,%} f. a period of the day in which any act
is suspended. {%—Vāra-sundarī,%} f. a harlot, prostitute.
{%—Vāra-sevā,%} f. the practice of harlotry, prostitution;
a number of courtezans. {%—Vāra-strī,%} f. a harlot,
courtezan. {%—Vārāṅganā (˚ra-aṅ˚),%} f. a harlot.
<LEND>

<L>41904<pc>0904-c<k1>vAraka<k2>vAraka
{%Vāraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ restraining, opposing, ob-
structing, resisting, anything which restrains or ob-
structs, an obstacle; ({%as%}), m. a sort of horse; a
horse in general; one of a horse's paces; ({%am%}), n.
the seat of pain; a sort of perfume or fragrant grass
({%= bāla, hrī-vera%}).
<LEND>

<L>41905<pc>0904-c<k1>vArakin<k2>vArakin
{%Vārakin, ī,%}¦ m. an opposer, obstructor, enemy;
the ocean; a horse with good marks; an ascetic,
a hermit who lives on leaves.
<LEND>

<L>41906<pc>0904-c<k1>vAraRa<k2>vAraRa
{%Vāraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ warding off, keeping off,
restraining, resisting, opposing; ({%am%}), n. the act of
restraining, keeping back, warding, warding off,
guarding, protecting, defending, defence, resistance,
opposition, prohibition, obstacle, impediment; ({%as%}),
m. armour, mail, a cuirass; an elephant. {%—Vāraṇa-%}
{%prativāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} having armour for a de-
fence, protected by armour; keeping off elephants.
{%—Vāraṇa-buṣā%} or {%vāraṇa-busā,%} f. the plantain
or banana, Musa Sapientum. {%—Vāraṇa-vallabhā,%} f.
the plantain tree. {%—Vāraṇa-sāhavaya, am,%} n. ‘hav-
ing a name synonymous with an elephant,’ epithet
of Hastinā-pura or Hāstina-pura; [cf. {%gaja-sāhvaya.%}]
{%—Vāraṇendra (˚ṇa-in˚), as,%} m. ‘elephant-chief,’
a large and excellent elephant.
<LEND>

<L>41907<pc>0904-c<k1>vAraRAvata<k2>vAraRAvata
{%Vāraṇāvata, as, am,%}¦ m. n., N. of a town (sup-
posed to be the modern Allahabad).
<LEND>

<L>41908<pc>0904-c<k1>vAraRAvataka<k2>vAraRAvataka
{%Vāraṇāvataka, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to Vāraṇāvata.
<LEND>

<L>41909<pc>0904-c<k1>vAraRIya<k2>vAraRIya
{%Vāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be warded off, to be
restrained or resisted.
<LEND>

<L>41910<pc>0904-c<k1>vArayitf<k2>vArayitf
{%Vārayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a protector; a husband.
<LEND>

<L>41911<pc>0904-c<k1>vArayitvA<k2>vArayitvA
{%Vārayitvā,%}¦ ind. having warded or driven off, having
restrained or prohibited, having repelled or expelled.
<LEND>

<L>41912<pc>0904-c<k1>vAri<k2>vAri
{%Vāri,%}¦ n. water; a fluid, fluidity; a particular drug
or perfume, {%= bāla, hrī-vera; (is),%} f., N. of Saras-
vatī (goddess of speech or eloquence); the place for
tying or fastening an elephant; a captive, prisoner;
({%is%} or {%ī%}), f. a water-pot, pitcher, jar; a rope for
[Page0905-a+ 80]
fastening an elephant; a hole or trap for catching
elephants. {%—Vāri-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. an aquatic plant,
Trapa Bispinosa {%(= śṛṅgāṭaka)%}. {%—Vāri-karṇikā,%}
f. the plant Pistia Stratiotes {%(= kha-mūlī)%}. {%—Vāri-%}
{%karpūra, as,%} m. the Ilīśa fish, (see {%ilīśa.%}). {%—Vāri-%}
{%kubja%} or {%vāri-kubjaka, as,%} m. the aquatic plant
Trapa Bispinosa. {%—Vāri-krimi, is,%} m. ‘water-worm,’
a leech. {%—Vāri-catvara, as,%} m. a piece of water;
the aquatic plant Pistia Stratiotes. {%—Vāri-cara, as,%}
{%ā%} or {%ī, am,%} living or moving in water, aquatic;
({%as%}), m. a fish. {%—Vāri-cāmara, am,%} n. a sort of
aquatic fish, Vallisneria {%(= śaivāla)%}. {%—Vāri-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} born or produced in or by water; ({%as%}), m. a
conch-shell; any bivalve shell; ({%am%}), n. a lotus;
salt. {%—Vāri-jāvan,%} see Vopa-deva XXVI. 69. {%—Vā-%}
{%ri-taskara, as,%} m. ‘water-thief,’ a cloud. {%—Vāri-trā,%}
f. ‘protecting from water,’ an umbrella, a screen of
leaves carried on the head as an umbrella. {%—Vāri-%}
{%da, as, ā, am,%} water-giving, yielding water; ({%as%}),
m. a cloud; ({%am%}), n. a sort of vegetable perfume
{%(= bāla)%}. {%—Vāri-durga, as, ā, am,%} inaccessible by
reason of water. {%—Vāri-dra, as,%} m. the Cātaka
bird, Cuculus Melanoleucus. {%—Vāri-dhara, as,%} m.
‘water-holder,’ a cloud. {%—Vāri-dhārā,%} f. a shower
of rain. {%—Vāri-dhi, is,%} m. ‘water-holder,’ the sea,
ocean. {%—Vāri-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of the waters,’ the
deity Varuṇa; the ocean; a cloud; the habitation of
the serpent race. {%—Vāri-nidhi, is,%} m. ‘water-recep-
tacle,’ the ocean. {%—Vāri-patha, as, am,%} m. n. ‘water-
path,’ a voyage. {%—Vāri-pathika, as, ī, am,%} proceeding
or conveyed by water. {%—Vāri-parṇī%} or {%vāri-pālikā,%} f.
Pistia Stratiotes. {%—Vāri-pravāha, as,%} m. a current
or flow of water, a water-fall, cascade. {%—Vāri-praśnī,%}
f. the aquatic plant Pistia Stratiotes. {%—Vāri-badarā,%}
f. the plant Flacourtia Cataphracta ({%= prācīnāma-%}
{%laka%}). {%—Vāri-bālaka, am,%} n. a perfume ({%= bāla%}).
{%—Vāri-bhava, am,%} n. (probably) a kind of plant
({%= śrotoñjana%}). {%—Vāri-masi, is,%} m. ‘water-ink,’ a
cloud. {%—Vāri-muc, k,%} m. ‘water-discharger,’ a cloud.
{%—Vāri-mūli,%} f. the aquatic plant Pistia Stratiotes.
{%—Vāri-ra, as, ā, am,%} giving or shedding water;
({%as%}), m. a cloud. {%—Vāri-ratha, as,%} m. ‘water-car-
riage,’ a raft, boat, float. {%—Vārirārava (˚ra-ār˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} sounding like clouds or like thunder.
{%—Vāri-rāśi, is,%} m. ‘water-heap,’ a large body of
water, the sea, ocean; a lake. {%—Vāri-ruha, am,%} n.
‘water-grower,’ a lotus. {%—Vāri-loman, ā,%} m. ‘hav-
ing watery hair,’ epithet of Varuṇa. {%—Vāri-vadana,%}
{%am,%} n. the fruit Flacourtia Cataphracta. {%—Vāri-vara,%}
{%am,%} n. the fruit of the tree Carissa Carandas {%(=%}
{%kara-marda)%}. {%—Vāri-vallabhā,%} f. a kind of plant
{%(= vidārī)%}. {%—Vāri-vāsa, as,%} m. a distiller of spirit,
dealer in spirituous liquors. {%—Vāri-vāha%} or {%vāri-%}
{%vāhana, as,%} m. ‘water-bearer,’ a cloud. {%—Vārivāha-%}
{%jāla, am,%} n. a mass of clouds. {%—Vāri-śa, as,%} m.
(said to be fr. {%vāri + śa%} fr. rt. {%śī,%} to sleep), N. of
Viṣṇu. {%—Vāri-sambhava, am,%} n. ‘water-produced,’
cloves; a kind of antimony ({%= sauvīrāñjana%}); the
root of the plant Andropogon Muricatus {%(= uśīra);%}
{%(as),%} m. a kind of cane {%(= yāvanāla-śara)%}. {%—Vāri-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} standing in water, reflected in the
water (said of the sun, Maun IV. 37). {%—Vārīśa%}
{%(˚ri-īśa˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of waters,’ the ocean. {%—Vāry-%}
{%udbhava, am,%} n. ‘water-born,’ a lotus. {%—Vāry-oka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘water-dwelling,’ a leech.
<LEND>

<L>41913<pc>0905-a<k1>vArita<k2>vArita
{%Vārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ warded off, prevented, hin-
dered, impeded, restrained.
<LEND>

<L>41914<pc>0905-a<k1>vArIwa<k2>vArIwa
{%Vārīṭa, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. {%vāri,%} a trap, {%+ aṭa,%}
going), an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>41915<pc>0905-a<k1>vAru<k2>vAru
{%Vāru, us,%}¦ m. a royal or war elephant carrying a
standard ({%= vijaya-kuñjara%}).
<LEND>

<L>41916<pc>0905-a<k1>vArya<k2>vArya
{%Vārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be warded off or prevented,
to be checked or impeded, to be stopped or obstructed;
to be chosen, to be selected or appointed; eligible,
desirable, excellent; ({%am%}), n. anything to be chosen
or desired, a blessing, boon; ({%āṇi%}), n. pl. goods,
possessions.
<LEND>

<L>41917<pc>0905-a<k1>vAryamARa<k2>vAryamARa
{%Vāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being prevented, being
impeded or prohibited or resisted.
<LEND>

<L>41918<pc>0905-a<k1>vAra<k2>vAra<h>2
{#vAra#} 2¦. {%vāra, as,%} m., Ved. for {%vāla = bāla,%}
[Page0905-b+ 73]
a tail; the tail (of sheep &c.) used to filter Soma
juice, (also {%am,%} n.); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the hairs of a tail.
{%—Vāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a tail, (see
Nirukta I. 20.)
<LEND>

<L>41919<pc>0905-b<k1>vArakIra<k2>vArakIra
{#vArakIra#}¦ {%vārakīra, as,%} m. a wife's brother,
brother-in-law ({%= śyālaka%}); submarine fire ({%= vā-%}
{%ḍava%}); a louse; a small comb; a horse of high spirit,
war horse, charger; a bearer of burdens, porter.
<LEND>

<L>41920<pc>0905-b<k1>vAraNka<k2>vAraNka
{#vAraNka#}¦ {%vāraṅka, as,%} m. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>41921<pc>0905-b<k1>vAraNga<k2>vAraNga
{#vAraNga#}¦ {%vāraṅga, as,%} m. the handle of a
sword or knife or sickle, &c.; the narrow end to
which the handle is fastened.
<LEND>

<L>41922<pc>0905-b<k1>vArawa<k2>vArawa
{#vArawa#}¦ {%vāraṭa, am,%} n. a field; a number of
fields; ({%ā%}), f. a goose ({%= varaṭā,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>41923<pc>0905-b<k1>vAralA<k2>vAralA
{%Vāralā,%}¦ f. a wasp; a goose ({%= varaṭā%}).
<LEND>

<L>41924<pc>0905-b<k1>vAraRasI<k2>vAraRasI
{#vAraRasI#}¦ {%vāraṇasī,%} f. {%= vārāṇasī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>41925<pc>0905-b<k1>vAratantavIya<k2>vAratantavIya
{#vAratantavIya#}¦ {%vāratantavīya, as, ā, am,%} com-
posed by Vara-tantu (as a book &c.).
<LEND>

<L>41926<pc>0905-b<k1>vAratra<k2>vAratra
{#vAratra#}¦ {%vāratra, am,%} n. (fr. {%varatrā%}), a
leather thong, leather fit for making thongs.
<LEND>

<L>41927<pc>0905-b<k1>vAraruca<k2>vAraruca
{#vAraruca#}¦ {%vāraruca, as, ī, am,%} composed by
Vara-ruci.
<LEND>

<L>41928<pc>0905-b<k1>vAralA<k2>vAralA
{#vAralA#}¦ {%vāralā,%} f. See under {%vāraṭa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>41929<pc>0905-b<k1>vAralIka<k2>vAralIka
{#vAralIka#}¦ {%vāralīka, as,%} m. a sort of grass,
Eleusine Indica ({%= valva-jā%}).
<LEND>

<L>41930<pc>0905-b<k1>vArARasI<k2>vArARasI
{#vArARasI#}¦ {%vārāṇasī,%} f. the holy city Benares,
(also written {%varāṇasī,%} q. v.) {%—Vārāṇasī-māhāt-%}
{%mya, am,%} n. ‘the glory of Benares,’ N. of a section
in the Kūrma and other Purāṇas.
<LEND>

<L>41931<pc>0905-b<k1>vArARaseya<k2>vArARaseya
{%Vārāṇaseya, as, ī, am,%}¦ produced at or born in
Benares, &c.
<LEND>

<L>41932<pc>0905-b<k1>vArAha<k2>vArAha
{#vArAha#}¦ {%vārāha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%varāha%}), re-
lating or belonging to a boar, boarish; ({%as%}), m. a
boar; a kind of tree, {%= mahā-piṇḍītaka; (ī),%} f. a sow;
N. of one of the divine mothers or Mātṛs attending
on Skanda; of a Yoginī; of the Śakti of Viṣṇu
in the form of a boar; the earth; a measure; a
particular kind of bulbous plant (said to be an escu-
lent root or yam, {%= badarā, ghṛṣṭi%}). {%—Vārāha-%}
{%karṇī,%} f. or {%vārāha-pattrī,%} f. a kind of plant ({%=%}
{%aśva-gandhā,%} q. v.). {%—Vārāha-kalpa, as,%} m. ‘boar
Kalpa,’ N. of the now existing Kalpa or day of
Brahmā (being the first of the second Parārdha
of Brahmā's existence). {%—Vārāha-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Vārāha-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of
one of the eighteen Purāṇas (said to have been
revealed to the Earth by Viṣṇu in the form of a
boar; it contains an account of the creation, the
various forms of Viṣṇu, and a vast number of
legends and directions relating to the Vaiṣṇava sect).
{%—Vārāhāṅgī (˚ha-aṅ˚),%} f. the plant Croton Poly-
andrum {%(= dantī)%}. {%—Vārāhī-kanda, as,%} m. a kind
of bulbous plant {%(= brāhmī-kanda)%}. {%—Vārāhī-tan-%}
{%tra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work.
<LEND>

<L>41933<pc>0905-b<k1>vArAhIya<k2>vArAhIya
{%Vārāhīya, am,%}¦ n., N. of a work or a class of
works; [cf. {%yāmalīya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41934<pc>0905-b<k1>vArAhyA<k2>vArAhyA
{%Vārāhyā,%}¦ f. a female descendant of Varāha (Pāṇ.
IV. 1, 78).
<LEND>

<L>41935<pc>0905-b<k1>vAruWa<k2>vAruWa
{#vAruWa#}¦ {%vāruṭha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%vṛ%}), a bier, the bed on which a corpse is carried.
<LEND>

<L>41936<pc>0905-b<k1>vAruRa<k2>vAruRa
{#vAruRa#}¦ {%vāruṇa, as, ī, am,%} connected with or
belonging to Varuṇa, sacred to or given by Varuṇa, q. v.;
epithet of a weapon; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the nine
divisions of Bhārata Varṣa; ({%am%}), n. water; ({%ī%}), f.
the western quarter or region presided over by Varuṇa
[cf. {%loka-pāla%}]; the west; N. of the lunar asterism
commonly called Śata-bhiṣaj (of which Varuṇa is
the ruling deity; cf. {%nakṣatra%}); a particular kind
of spirit (prepared from hogweed ground with the
juice of the date or palm and then distilled), any
spirituous liquor; a species of Dūrbā grass. {%—Vāru-%}
{%ṇa-karman, a,%} n. ‘Varuṇa's work,’ any work con-
nected with the supply of water, the digging of
[Page0905-c+ 75]
tanks or wells, &c. {%—Vāruṇa-tīrtha, am,%} n., N.
of a Tīrtha. {%—Vāruṇī-vallabha, as,%} m. ‘beloved
by the asterism Vāruṇī,’ epithet of Varuṇa. {%—Vāru-%}
{%ṇendra (˚ṇa-in˚), as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vāruṇe-%}
{%śvara-tīrtha (˚ṇa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Vāruṇopapurāṇa (˚ṇa-up˚), am,%} n., N. of an
Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>41937<pc>0905-c<k1>vAruRi<k2>vAruRi
{%Vāruṇi, is,%}¦ m. ‘son of Varuṇa,’ the saint Agastya;
a patronymic of Bhṛgu; of Satya-dhṛti.
<LEND>

<L>41938<pc>0905-c<k1>vAruRqa<k2>vAruRqa
{#vAruRqa#}¦ {%vāruṇḍa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%vṛ%}), the chief of the serpent race; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
the rheum or excretion of the eyes; the wax of the
ear; a vessel for baling water out of a boat; ({%ī%}), f.
a door-step.
<LEND>

<L>41939<pc>0905-c<k1>vArendrI<k2>vArendrI
{#vArendrI#}¦ {%vārendrī,%} f. (said to be fr. {%varen-%}
{%dra%}), N. of a tract of country north of the Ganges or
a part of Bengal and Behar now called Rājṣāhi.
<LEND>

<L>41940<pc>0905-c<k1>vArkArya<k2>vArkArya
{#vArkArya#}¦ {%vār-kārya,%} &c. See under {%vār,%}
p. 904, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41941<pc>0905-c<k1>vArkeRya<k2>vArkeRya
{#vArkeRya#}¦ {%vārkeṇya, as,%} m. (fem. {%vārkeṇī%}), ac-
cording to Pāṇ. V. 3, 115. this word is formed from
{%vṛka,%} and the pl. is {%vṛkās,%} which appears to mean
‘soldiers or fighting men in the country Vāhīka.’
<LEND>

<L>41942<pc>0905-c<k1>vArkza<k2>vArkza
{#vArkza#}¦ {%vārkṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vṛkṣa%}), made
of or belonging to a tree; consisting of trees, arboreous;
made of bark; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a sort of female Dryad
mentioned in the Mahā-bhārata; ({%am%}), n. a forest.
<LEND>

<L>41943<pc>0905-c<k1>vArkzya<k2>vArkzya
{%Vārkṣya, as, ī, am,%}¦ made of a tree, made with
trees; ({%am%}), n. a fence &c. made with felled trees
or wooden stakes, a stockade.
<LEND>

<L>41944<pc>0905-c<k1>vArRika<k2>vArRika
{#vArRika#}¦ {%vārṇika, as,%} m. (fr. {%varṇa%}), a scribe,
writer.
<LEND>

<L>41945<pc>0905-c<k1>vArtA<k2>vArtA
{#vArtA#}¦ {%vārtā,%} f., often incorrectly written
for {%vārttā.%} See under {%vārtta%} below.
<LEND>

<L>41946<pc>0905-c<k1>vArtAka<k2>vArtAka
{#vArtAka#}¦ {%vārtāka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%vṛt,%} Uṇā-
di-s. III. 79), the egg-plant, Solanum Melongena.
<LEND>

<L>41947<pc>0905-c<k1>vArtAki<k2>vArtAki
{%Vārtāki, is,%}¦ or {%vārtākī,%} f. {%= vārtāka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>41948<pc>0905-c<k1>vArtAkin<k2>vArtAkin
{%Vārtākin, ī,%}¦ m. {%= vārtāka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>41949<pc>0905-c<k1>vArtAku<k2>vArtAku
{%Vārtāku, us,%}¦ m. (or according to some f.) {%= vār-%}
{%tāka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>41950<pc>0905-c<k1>vArtikA<k2>vArtikA
{#vArtikA#}¦ {%vārtikā,%} f. (fr. {%vartaka,%} q. v.), a
kind of quail.
<LEND>

<L>41951<pc>0905-c<k1>vArtIra<k2>vArtIra
{#vArtIra#}¦ {%vārtīra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vartīra%}), con-
nected with a quail or partridge.
<LEND>

<L>41952<pc>0905-c<k1>vArtta<k2>vArtta
{#vArtta#}¦ {%vārtta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%vṛtti,%} cf. {%vṛtta%}),
being in a good state, healthy, hale, well; practising
any business or profession; ({%ā%}), f. abiding, staying,
being; livelihood, business, profession; agriculture,
trade, the occupation of the Vaiśya; an account of
anything that has happened, tidings, report, rumour,
news, intelligence, (in this sense sometimes {%vārttās,%}
pl.); a particular figure of rhetoric, simple descrip-
tion, the mere narration of facts without rhetorical or
poetical embellishment; the egg-plant [cf. {%vārtāka%}];
({%am%}), n. welfare, health; chaff. {%—Vārttā-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. the practice of agriculture or trade. {%—Vārttā-%}
{%nuyoga (˚tā-an˚), as,%} m. inquiry after news or
health. {%—Vārttā-mātra, am,%} n. mere report; super-
ficial knowledge. {%—Vārttārambha (˚tā-ār˚), as,%} m.
commercial enterprise, (according to Kullūka {%kṛṣi-%}
{%bāṇijya-paśupālanādi-vārttā tad-ārambho dha-%}
{%nopāyārthaḥ.%}) {%—Vārttā-vaha, as,%} m. a news-
bearer, messenger; a vendor of grain, rice, oil, &c.,
a chandler. {%—Vārttā-vṛtti, is,%} m. one whose
business is agriculture, a householder. {%—Vārttā-%}
{%vyatikara, as,%} m. the passing of a rumour from
one to another, general report, common rumour.
{%—Vārttā-hara, as,%} m. a carrier of tidings, mes-
senger, courier.
<LEND>

<L>41953<pc>0905-c<k1>vArttAyana<k2>vArttAyana
{%Vārttāyana, as,%}¦ m. a news-bearer, newsmonger,
intelligencer, spy, emissary, agent, ambassador.
<LEND>

<L>41954<pc>0905-c<k1>vArttika<k2>vArttika
{%Vārttika, as, ī, am%}¦ (sometimes written {%vārtika%}),
relating to news, bringing or conveying intelligence,
&c.; explanatory, glossarial, containing or relating to
a critical gloss or annotation, see {%vārttikam%} below;
[Page0906-a+ 73]
({%as%}), m. an intelligencer, an informer, spy, agent,
envoy; a man of the third or Vaiśya tribe, a hus-
bandman, trader; ({%ikā%}), f. a sort of quail, (more
properly {%vārtikā;%} cf. {%vartaka%}); ({%am%}), n. an ex-
planatory or supplementary rule, critical gloss or
annotation (added to a grammatical or philosophical
Sūtra and defined to be ‘the exposition of the mean-
ing, of that which is said, of that which is left unsaid,
and of that which is ill or imperfectly said;’ the term
Vārttika is, however, especially applied to Kātyāya-
na's critical annotations on the aphorisms of Pāṇini's
grammar, the object of each Vārttika being to limit
a too general rule, amplify a too limited one, and
give the relations of the Sūtras of Pāṇini to each
other). {%—Vārttika-kāra, as,%} m. an epithet of Kā-
tyāyana as the author of the Vārttikas to Pāṇini's
grammatical aphorisms; of Kumārila.
<LEND>

<L>41955<pc>0906-a<k1>vArtraGna<k2>vArtraGna
{#vArtraGna#}¦ {%vārtraghna, as,%} m. (fr. {%vṛtra-ghna%}),
‘son of the Vṛtra-slayer,’ epithet of Arjuna (as son
of Indra).
<LEND>

<L>41956<pc>0906-a<k1>vArtrahatya<k2>vArtrahatya
{%Vārtrahatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to the
destruction of Vṛtra.
<LEND>

<L>41957<pc>0906-a<k1>vArda<k2>vArda
{#vArda#}¦ {%vār-da, vār-dara, vārdala.%} See under
{%vār,%} p. 904, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41958<pc>0906-a<k1>vArdDaka<k2>vArdDaka
{#vArdDaka#}¦ {%vārddhaka, am,%} n. (fr. {%vṛddha%}), a
collection of old men; old age; the imbecility or
infirmity of old age.
<LEND>

<L>41959<pc>0906-a<k1>vArdDakya<k2>vArdDakya
{%Vārddhakya, am,%}¦ n. old age, senility.
<LEND>

<L>41960<pc>0906-a<k1>vArdDakzatri<k2>vArdDakzatri
{%Vārddhakṣatri, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vṛddha-kṣatra%}),
a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>41961<pc>0906-a<k1>vArdDuka<k2>vArdDuka
{%Vārddhuka, am,%}¦ n. {%= vārddhaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>41962<pc>0906-a<k1>vArdDuzi<k2>vArdDuzi
{#vArdDuzi#}¦ {%vārddhuṣi, is,%} m. (fr. {%vṛddhi,%} q. v.,
or perhaps better spelt {%vārdhuṣi%} fr. rt. {%vṛdh%}), one
who exacts high interest, a usurer.
<LEND>

<L>41963<pc>0906-a<k1>vArdDuzika<k2>vArdDuzika
{%Vārddhuṣika, as,%}¦ m. one who lives by lending
money at a high rate of interest, a usurer.
<LEND>

<L>41964<pc>0906-a<k1>vArdDuzin<k2>vArdDuzin
{%Vārddhuṣin, ī,%}¦ m. a usurer.
<LEND>

<L>41965<pc>0906-a<k1>vArdDuzya<k2>vArdDuzya
{%Vārddhuṣya, am,%}¦ n. high interest, usurious loan,
usury.
<LEND>

<L>41966<pc>0906-a<k1>vArDi<k2>vArDi
{#vArDi#}¦ {%vār-dhi.%} See under {%vār,%} p. 904, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>41967<pc>0906-a<k1>vArDra<k2>vArDra
{#vArDra#}¦ {%vārdhra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vardhra%}), made
of leather, leathern; ({%am, ī%}), n. f. a leather thong.
<LEND>

<L>41968<pc>0906-a<k1>vArDrIRasa<k2>vArDrIRasa
{%Vārdhrī-ṇasa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vārdhrī + nasa%}), a
rhinoceros (perhaps so called as having a leather-like
snout); a white goat with long ears; (according to
some) a kind of fabulous bird.
<LEND>

<L>41969<pc>0906-a<k1>vArBawa<k2>vArBawa
{#vArBawa#}¦ {%vār-bhaṭa, vār-vaṭa.%} See p. 904,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>41970<pc>0906-a<k1>vArmaRa<k2>vArmaRa
{#vArmaRa#}¦ {%vārmaṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%varman%}), a col-
lection of coats of mail.
<LEND>

<L>41971<pc>0906-a<k1>vArmiRa<k2>vArmiRa
{%Vārmiṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%varmin%}), a multitude of
men in armour.
<LEND>

<L>41972<pc>0906-a<k1>vArya<k2>vArya
{#vArya#}¦ {%vārya, vāryamāṇa.%} See p. 905, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>41973<pc>0906-a<k1>vArvaRA<k2>vArvaRA
{#vArvaRA#}¦ {%vārvaṇā,%} f. a kind of blue fly ({%= nīlī;%}
cf. {%varvaṇā%}).
<LEND>

<L>41974<pc>0906-a<k1>vArSa<k2>vArSa
{#vArSa#}¦ {%vārśa, am,%} n. (fr. {%vṛśa%}), N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>41975<pc>0906-a<k1>vArza<k2>vArza
{#vArza#}¦ {%vārṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%varṣa%}), belong-
ing to the rains, &c., belonging to a year, yearly,
annual.
<LEND>

<L>41976<pc>0906-a<k1>vArzika<k2>vArzika
{%Vārṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the rainy season,
growing in the rains, filled with rain, yearly, annual,
belonging to a year; lasting a whole year (e. g. a
river the water of which does not dry up in the
hot season); ({%am%}), n. a medicinal plant ({%= trāya-%}
{%māṇā%}).
<LEND>

<L>41977<pc>0906-a<k1>vArzilA<k2>vArzilA
{%Vārṣilā,%}¦ f. hail.
<LEND>

<L>41978<pc>0906-a<k1>vArzuka<k2>vArzuka
{%Vārṣuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ raining, showering, sprinkling,
wetting.
<LEND>

<L>41979<pc>0906-a<k1>vArzagaRya<k2>vArzagaRya
{#vArzagaRya#}¦ {%vārṣagaṇya, as,%} m., N. of an
author.
<LEND>

<L>41980<pc>0906-a<k1>vArzadaMSa<k2>vArzadaMSa
{#vArzadaMSa#}¦ {%vārṣadaṃśa, as,%} m. (fr. {%vṛṣad-%}
{%aṃśa%}), a patronymic, (some form two distinct patro-
nymics, {%Vārṣada%} and {%Āṃśa.%})
<LEND>
[Page0906-b+ 69]

<L>41981<pc>0906-b<k1>vArzaBARavI<k2>vArzaBARavI
{#vArzaBARavI#}¦ {%vārṣabhāṇavī%} or {%vārṣabhā-%}
{%navī,%} f. (fr. {%vṛṣa-bhāṇu%}), the daughter of Vṛṣa-
bhāṇu, i. e. Rādhā.
<LEND>

<L>41982<pc>0906-b<k1>vArzAgira<k2>vArzAgira
{#vArzAgira#}¦ {%vārṣāgira, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%vṛ-%}
{%ṣāgir%}), Ved. the five sons of Vṛṣāgir (viz. Am-
barīṣa, Ṛjrāśva, Bhayamāna, Saha-deva, and Su-
rādhas, authors of the hymn Ṛg-veda I. 100).
<LEND>

<L>41983<pc>0906-b<k1>vArzwihavya<k2>vArzwihavya
{#vArzwihavya#}¦ {%vārṣṭihavya, as,%} m. a patronymic
of Upa-stuta (author of Ṛg-veda X. 115).
<LEND>

<L>41984<pc>0906-b<k1>vArzReya<k2>vArzReya
{#vArzReya#}¦ {%vārṣṇeya, as,%} m. a descendant of
Vṛṣṇi, epithet of Kṛṣṇa; N. of Nala's charioteer.
{%—Vārṣṇeya-sahita, as, ā, am,%} accompanied by
Vārṣṇeya. {%—Vārṣṇeya-sārathi, is, is, i,%} having
Vārṣṇeya for a charioteer.
<LEND>

<L>41985<pc>0906-b<k1>vArha<k2>vArha
{#vArha#}¦ {%vārha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%varha%}), made of
the feathers of a peacock's tail.
<LEND>

<L>41986<pc>0906-b<k1>vArhiRa<k2>vArhiRa
{%Vārhiṇa, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%varhiṇa%}), derived from
a peacock (as feathers).
<LEND>

<L>41987<pc>0906-b<k1>vArhata<k2>vArhata
{#vArhata#}¦ {%vārhata, am,%} n. See {%bārhata.%}
<LEND>

<L>41988<pc>0906-b<k1>vArhadraTa<k2>vArhadraTa
{#vArhadraTa#}¦ {%vārhadratha, as,%} or {%vārhadrathi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘son of Vṛhad-ratha,’ epithet of Jarā-sandha.
See {%bārhadratha.%}
<LEND>

<L>41989<pc>0906-b<k1>vArhaspata<k2>vArhaspata
{#vArhaspata#}¦ {%vārhaspata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vṛhas-%}
{%pati%}), sacred to or declared by Vṛhas-pati; see
Bṛhas-pati.
<LEND>

<L>41990<pc>0906-b<k1>vArhaspatya<k2>vArhaspatya
{%Vārhaspatya, am,%}¦ n. the science taught by Vṛhas-
pati, rules of conduct, ethical precepts, ethics, morality.
<LEND>

<L>41991<pc>0906-b<k1>vAla<k2>vAla
{#vAla#}¦ {%vāla, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%val?%}), hair; ({%as,%}
{%ā%}), m. f. a tail; [cf. {%bāla.%}] {%—Vāla-dhi, vāla-hasta,%}
&c., see {%bāla-dhi,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>41992<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlaka<k2>vAlaka
{#vAlaka#}¦ {%vālaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%val;%} cf. {%va-%}
{%laya%}), a bracelet; a finger-ring, (also {%ā,%} f.)
<LEND>

<L>41993<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlaKilya<k2>vAlaKilya
{#vAlaKilya#}¦ {%vālakhilya, am,%} n. a collection
of eleven additional or apocryphal hymns inserted
between the forty-eighth and forty-ninth hymns of
the eighth Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda; [cf. {%bāla-%}
{%khilya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>41994<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlammadeSa<k2>vAlammadeSa
{#vAlammadeSa#}¦ {%vālamma-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a
country.
<LEND>

<L>41995<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlava<k2>vAlava
{#vAlava#}¦ {%vālava, as,%} m. the second of the
eleven Karaṇas or astrological divisions of time, (see
{%karaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>41996<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlavitu<k2>vAlavitu
{#vAlavitu#}¦ {%vālavitu, us,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>41997<pc>0906-b<k1>vAli<k2>vAli
{#vAli#}¦ {%vāli.%} See {%bāli.%}
<LEND>

<L>41998<pc>0906-b<k1>vAliKilyeSvaratIrTa<k2>vAliKilyeSvaratIrTa
{#vAliKilyeSvaratIrTa#}¦ {%vālikhilyeśvara-tīrtha%}
{%(˚ya-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>41999<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlukA<k2>vAlukA
{#vAlukA#}¦ {%vālukā,%} f. (more commonly written
{%bālukā,%} q. v.), sand, gravel; ({%ī%}), f. a species of
cucumber. {%—Vālukeśvara-tīrtha (˚kā-īś˚), am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>42000<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlukin<k2>vAlukin
{%Vālukin, ī,%}¦ m. {%= bhālukin.%}
<LEND>

<L>42001<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlka<k2>vAlka
{#vAlka#}¦ {%vālka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%valka%}), made of
the bark of trees.
<LEND>

<L>42002<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlkala<k2>vAlkala
{%Vālkala, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%valkala%}), made of bark;
({%ī%}), f. spirituous liquor; ({%am%}), n. a bark dress worn
by ascetics.
<LEND>

<L>42003<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlmIka<k2>vAlmIka
{#vAlmIka#}¦ {%vālmīka, as,%} m. (fr. {%valmīka,%} q. v.)
{%= vālmīki%} below; a proper N. {%—Vālmīkeśvara-%}
{%tīrtha (˚ka-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>42004<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlmIki<k2>vAlmIki
{%Vālmīki, is,%}¦ m. (also spelt {%vālmiki%}), N. of the
celebrated author of the Rāmāyaṇa, (so called, ac-
cording to some, because when immersed in thought
he allowed himself to be overrun with ants like an
ant-hill; according to one tradition he began life as
a robber, but repenting of his misdeeds betook him-
self to a hermitage on a hill in the district of Banda
in Bundelkund, where he eventually received Sītā,
the wife of Rāma, when banished by her husband.)
<LEND>

<L>42005<pc>0906-b<k1>vAlmIkIya<k2>vAlmIkIya
{%Vālmīkīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ composed by Vālmīki.
<LEND>
[Page0906-c+ 74]

<L>42006<pc>0906-c<k1>vAllaBya<k2>vAllaBya
{#vAllaBya#}¦ {%vāllabhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vallabha%}), the
state of being a favourite or of being beloved.
<LEND>

<L>42007<pc>0906-c<k1>vAva<k2>vAva
{#vAva#}¦ {%vāva,%} ind. (i. e. probably {%vā + eva%}),
verily, indeed, (sometimes used in a question.)
<LEND>

<L>42008<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvadat<k2>vAvadat
{#vAvadat#}¦ {%vāvadat, at, atī, at%} (fr. Intens. of
rt. {%vad%}), Ved. uttering or causing loud sounds.
<LEND>

<L>42009<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvadUka<k2>vAvadUka
{%Vāvadūka, as, ā, am,%}¦ talking much, gabbling,
prattling; eloquent. {%—Vāvadūka-tā,%} f. or {%vāvadūka-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. garrulity, loquaciousness.
<LEND>

<L>42010<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvadyamAna<k2>vAvadyamAna
{%Vāvadyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ talking much, uttering
loud sounds.
<LEND>

<L>42011<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvaya<k2>vAvaya
{#vAvaya#}¦ {%vāvaya, as,%} m. a sort of basil, Ocy-
mum Sanctum.
<LEND>

<L>42012<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvaSAna<k2>vAvaSAna<h>1
{#vAvaSAna#} 1¦. {%vāvaśāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. the
Intens. of rt. {%vaś;%} for 2. see below), Ved. eagerly
desiring or longing for, ardently loving.
<LEND>

<L>42013<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvahi<k2>vAvahi
{#vAvahi#}¦ {%vāvahi, is, is, i%} (fr. the Intens. of
rt. 1. {%vah%}), bearing or carrying much.
<LEND>

<L>42014<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvAtf<k2>vAvAtf
{#vAvAtf#}¦ {%vāvātṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. one who is
favourable to or serves another, a worshipper, (in the
Pada text {%vavātṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>42015<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvuwa<k2>vAvuwa
{#vAvuwa#}¦ {%vāvuṭa, as,%} m. a raft, boat, vessel.
<LEND>

<L>42016<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvft<k2>vAvft
{#vAvft#}¦ {%vāvṛt%} (rather to be regarded as
an old Intens. of rt. 3. {%vṛt,%} q. v.), cl.
4. A. {%vāvṛtyate,%} &c., to choose, select, prefer, love,
like; to serve.
<LEND>

<L>42017<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvftta<k2>vAvftta
{%Vāvṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ chosen, selected, appointed.
<LEND>

<L>42018<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvftyamAna<k2>vAvftyamAna
{%Vāvṛtyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ choosing, preferring.
<LEND>

<L>42019<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvfDAna<k2>vAvfDAna
{#vAvfDAna#}¦ {%vāvṛdhāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vṛdh,%}
in the Pada-pāṭha {%vavṛdhāna%}), Ved. growing, in-
creasing.
<LEND>

<L>42020<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvfDenya<k2>vAvfDenya
{%Vāvṛdhenya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be increased, (Sāy.
{%= vardhanīya.%})
<LEND>

<L>42021<pc>0906-c<k1>vAS<k2>vAS
{#vAS#}¦ {%vāś%} (also written {%vās%}), cl. 4. A.
{%vāśyate%} (ep. also cl. 1. P. A. {%vāśati,%}
{%-te%}), {%vavāśe, vāśiṣyate, avāśiṣṭa, vāśitum,%} to
roar, howl, low (as a cow), cry, shriek, sing (like a
bird), sound; to call: Caus. {%vāśayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%avavāśat%} (Ved. also {%avīvaśat%}), to cause to roar or
sound: Desid. {%vivāśiṣate:%} Intens. {%vāvāśyate, vā-%}
{%vāṣṭi%} (in Ved. the vowel of the rt. is sometimes
shortened), to roar vehemently, cry repeatedly, praise
repeatedly.
<LEND>

<L>42022<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvaSat<k2>vAvaSat
{%Vāvaśat, at, atī, at%}¦ (anom. intens. part.), Ved.
sounding or lowing loudly.
<LEND>

<L>42023<pc>0906-c<k1>vAvaSAna<k2>vAvaSAna<h>2
2. {%vāvaśāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (anom. intens. part.),
Ved. roaring aloud, sounding, crackling, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 26, 2 {%= śabdāyamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>42024<pc>0906-c<k1>vASa<k2>vASa
{%Vāśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. roaring, crying; ({%ā%}), f. the
plant Justicia Ganderussa; [cf. {%vāsa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42025<pc>0906-c<k1>vASaka<k2>vASaka
{%Vāśaka, as,%}¦ &c., roaring, crying, sounding, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42026<pc>0906-c<k1>vASat<k2>vASat
{%Vāśat, an, antī, at,%}¦ roaring, crying, singing (like
a bird &c.).
<LEND>

<L>42027<pc>0906-c<k1>vASana<k2>vASana
{%Vāśana, as, ā, am,%}¦ roaring, singing, crying; ({%am%}),
n. the cry or song of birds, hum of bees, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42028<pc>0906-c<k1>vASi<k2>vASi
{%Vāśi, is,%}¦ m. fire or the god of fire.
<LEND>

<L>42029<pc>0906-c<k1>vASikA<k2>vASikA
{%Vāśikā,%}¦ f. (for {%vāsikā,%} q. v.), the plant Justicia
Ganderussa.
<LEND>

<L>42030<pc>0906-c<k1>vASita<k2>vASita
{%Vāśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ roared, cried, called out, sung;
perfumed, scented, (in this sense incorrect for 1. {%vā-%}
{%sita%}); ({%am%}), n. the cry of birds or animals; ({%ā%}), f.
a woman; a female elephant.
<LEND>

<L>42031<pc>0906-c<k1>vASI<k2>vASI
{%Vāśī,%}¦ f., Ved. roaring, crying, singing; a weapon
of the Maruts, an axe, spear, weapon in general;
(according to some, perhaps) the roaring thunder-
bolt, (according to Sāy. {%= ārākhyam āyudham%});
voice, speech ({%= vāc,%} Naigh. I. 11); a war-cry.
{%—Vāśī-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. roaring; having or
bearing the weapon called {%vāśī,%} armed with an axe,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>42032<pc>0906-c<k1>vASurA<k2>vASurA
{%Vāśurā,%}¦ f. night.
<LEND>

<L>42033<pc>0906-c<k1>vASra<k2>vASra
{%Vāśra, as, ā, am,%}¦ bellowing, lowing, roaring
(Ved.); ({%as%}), m. a bull (Ved.); a day, (also read
{%vāsra;%} cf. {%vāsara%}); ({%ā%}), f. a cow (Ved.); (espe-
[Page0907-a+ 78]
cially) a cow with a calf; a mother; ({%am%}), n. an
edifice, dwelling, building; a place where four roads
meet; dung.
<LEND>

<L>42034<pc>0907-a<k1>vASizWa<k2>vASizWa
{#vASizWa#}¦ {%vāśiṣṭha, as, ī, am%} (better written
{%vāsiṣṭha,%} q. v.), relating to Vaśiṣṭha or Vasiṣṭha;
descended from Vaśiṣṭha, see {%vāsiṣṭha; (ī),%} f. the
Go-matī or Goomtī river (which passes Lucknow and
falls into the Ganges below Benares).
<LEND>

<L>42035<pc>0907-a<k1>vAzkala<k2>vAzkala
{#vAzkala#}¦ {%vāṣkala, as, ā, am,%} large, great;
({%as%}), m. a warrior; a proper N.; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a family or race (the descendants of Viśvā-mitra;
also written {%vāskala%}).
<LEND>

<L>42036<pc>0907-a<k1>vAzpa<k2>vAzpa
{#vAzpa#}¦ {%vāṣpa%} (also written {%vāspa%}), {%as, am,%}
m. n. (perhaps connected with {%vār;%} according to
Uṇādi-s. III. 28. fr. rt. {%vādh,%} the final being changed
to {%ṣ;%} cf. {%aśru%}), vapour, hot vapour, steam, mist;
an incipient tear, water swimming in the eye, a tear,
tears; iron; a kind of pot-herb, {%= vāṣpikā; (as),%}
m., N. of one of the five pupils of Śākya-muni;
({%ī%}), f. a drug (commonly {%hiṅgu-pattrī%}); [cf. Lat.
<nsi>vappa,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>vapor.</nsi>] {%—Vāṣpa-kaṇṭha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having tears in the throat, choking with tears.
{%—Vāṣpa-kala, as, ā, am,%} inarticulate through tears.
{%—Vāṣpa-durdina, as, ā, am,%} clouded by tears.
{%—Vāṣpa-pūra, as,%} m. a flood of tears. {%—Vāṣpa-%}
{%pramocana, am,%} n. the shedding of tears, act of shed-
ding tears. {%—Vāṣpa-mocana, am,%} n. the shedding
of tears. {%—Vāṣpa-viklava, as, ā, am,%} overcome or
agitated with tears, confused with weeping. {%—Vāṣpa-%}
{%vindu, us,%} m. a tear-drop, tear. {%—Vāṣpa-sandigdha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} indistinct or hesitating through suppressed
tears. {%—Vāṣpākula (˚pa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} inter-
rupted by tears. {%—Vāṣpāmbu-pūra (˚pa-am˚), as,%}
m. a flood of tears. {%—Vāṣpāvilekṣaṇa (˚pa-āvila-%}
{%īk˚),%} having the eyes dimmed by tears. {%—Vāṣpod-%}
{%bhava (˚pa-ud˚),%} the rising or starting of tears.
<LEND>

<L>42037<pc>0907-a<k1>vAzpaka<k2>vAzpaka
{%Vāṣpaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of vegetable or pot-herb,
{%= māriṣa; (ā),%} f. a drug ({%= hiṅgu-pattrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>42038<pc>0907-a<k1>vAzpAya<k2>vAzpAya
{%Vāṣpāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vāṣpāyate, -yitum,%} to weep,
shed tears; to emit vapour or steam.
<LEND>

<L>42039<pc>0907-a<k1>vAzpikA<k2>vAzpikA
{%Vāṣpikā%}¦ or {%vāṣpīkā,%} f. a drug ({%= hiṅgu-pattrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>42040<pc>0907-a<k1>vAzpin<k2>vAzpin
{%Vāṣpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ discharging or shedding tears
(at the end of a comp.).
<LEND>

<L>42041<pc>0907-a<k1>vAs<k2>vAs
{#vAs#}¦ {%vās%} (perhaps rather to be regarded
as a Nom. fr. 1. {%vāsa%} below), cl. 10. P.
{%vāsayati%} (ep. also A. {%vāsayate%}), {%-yitum,%} to fill with
(perfumes &c.); to infuse (fragrant odours or other
qualities), steep, macerate; to perfume, make fra-
grant, fumigate, incense; to spice, season; cl. 4. A.
{%vāsyate,%} to sound, cry, (in this sense for rt. {%vāś,%}
q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>42042<pc>0907-a<k1>vAsa<k2>vAsa<h>1
1. {%vāsa, as,%}¦ m. perfuming, perfume; ({%as, ā%}), m. f.
the plant Justicia Ganderussa. {%—Vāsa-tāmbūla, am,%}
n. betel mixed with fragrant substances (such as car-
damoms, camphor, &c.). {%—Vāsa-yoga, as,%} m. fra-
grant powder sprinkled on the clothes, (especially)
the red powder scattered about at the Holī festival.
<LEND>

<L>42043<pc>0907-a<k1>vAsaka<k2>vAsaka<h>1
1. {%vāsaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} perfuming, fumi-
gating, filling with perfume; ({%as, ā%} or {%ikā%}), m. f.
‘giving perfume,’ the plant Justicia Ganderussa.
<LEND>

<L>42044<pc>0907-a<k1>vAsana<k2>vAsana<h>1
1. {%vāsana, am,%}¦ n. the act of perfuming, fumigating
with fragrant vapours or incense, infusing, steeping.
<LEND>

<L>42045<pc>0907-a<k1>vAsikA<k2>vAsikA
{%Vāsikā,%}¦ f. See under 1. {%vāsaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>42046<pc>0907-a<k1>vAsita<k2>vAsita<h>1
1. {%vāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ infused, steeped, perfumed,
scented, made fragrant, filled with fragrance; spiced,
seasoned (as sauces &c.); ({%am%}), n. the cry of birds,
sound, (for {%vāśita,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>42047<pc>0907-a<k1>vAsa<k2>vAsa<h>2
{#vAsa#} 2¦. {%vāsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 6. {%vas%}), dwell-
ing, resting, living; a dwelling-place, house, habita-
tion; site, situation, abode, place of staying or abid-
ing, [cf. Hib. <nsi>fos,</nsi> ‘staying, resting.’] {%—Vāsa-karṇī,%}
f. a hall where public exhibitions (as Nāches &c. are
held). {%—Vāsa-gṛha, am,%} n. ‘dwelling-house,’ the
inner part of a house, an inner or sleeping-room,
bed-chamber. {%—Vāsa-paryaya, as,%} m. change of
residence. {%—Vāsa-bhavana, am,%} n. or {%vāsa-bhūmi,%}
{%is,%} f. a place of abode, dwelling-place, house. {%—Vāsa-%}
{%yaṣṭi, is,%} f. a pole or pillar for a bird to perch on,
[Page0907-b+ 79]
a roosting perch. {%—Vāsa-veśman, a,%} n. the inner
part of a house. {%—Vāsāgāra (˚sa-āg˚), am,%} n.
‘abiding apartment,’ the inner or sleeping apartment.
{%—Vāsaukas (˚sa-ok˚), as,%} n. ‘dwelling-house,’ the
inner or private apartments.
<LEND>

<L>42048<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsaka<k2>vAsaka<h>2
2. {%vāsaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} causing to inhabit,
making to dwell or abide, populating.
<LEND>

<L>42049<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsateya<k2>vAsateya
{%Vāsateya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%vasati%}), habitable, fit or
proper to be dwelt in; ({%ī%}), f. night.
<LEND>

<L>42050<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsana<k2>vAsana<h>2
2. {%vāsana, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to an abode, fit
for a dwelling; ({%am%}), n. causing to abide; abiding,
abode; a particular posture (conceived to be pecu-
liarly proper for ascetics during abstract meditation;
also said to be practised by princes, when it is de-
scribed as sitting with the knees bent and the feet
turned backwards); any receptacle or vessel, a water-
jar, box, basket; knowledge; ({%ā%}), f. knowledge de-
rived from memory, the present consciousness of past
perceptions or an impression remaining unconsciously
in the mind from past good or evil actions and
hence producing pleasure or pain ({%= saṃskāra%});
fancy, imagination, idea, inclination [cf. {%dur-v˚%}];
false fancy, ignorance; expectation, desire, trust,
confidence. {%—Vāsana-stha, as, ā, am,%} placed in a
box or basket, packed, folded. {%—Vāsanā-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} full of imagination, consisting in fancy. {%—Vā-%}
{%sanāmaya-tva, am,%} n. the state of being full of
imagination.
<LEND>

<L>42051<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsi<k2>vAsi
{%Vāsi, is,%}¦ m. abiding, dwelling; ({%is, ī%}), m. f. a small
hatchet or axe, chopper, adze, chisel; [cf. {%vāśī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42052<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsita<k2>vAsita<h>2
2. {%vāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ peopled, populous (as a
country); flourishing, famous, celebrated; possessed
of, possessing, having; ({%am%}), n. the act of rendering
populous or causing to be inhabited; knowledge
(especially derived from memory, see {%vāsanā%}).
<LEND>

<L>42053<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsin<k2>vAsin<h>1
1. {%vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ abiding, staying, inhabiting; ({%ī%}),
m. an inhabitant (at the end of a comp.); ({%inī%}), f. a
sort of white Jhiṇṭī or Barleria ({%= śukla-jhiṇṭī%}).
<LEND>

<L>42054<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsa<k2>vAsa<h>3
{#vAsa#} 3¦. {%vāsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 5. {%vas%}), dress-
ing, dress, cloth, clothes. {%—Vāsa-sajjā,%} f. a woman
dressed in all her ornaments to receive her lover.
<LEND>

<L>42055<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsaka<k2>vAsaka<h>3
3. {%vāsaka, as,%}¦ m. clothing, clothes. {%—Vāsaka-%}
{%sajjā%} or {%vāsaka-sajjikā,%} f. a woman dressed in all
her ornaments to receive her lover.
<LEND>

<L>42056<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsana<k2>vAsana<h>3
3. {%vāsana, as, ā, am,%}¦ enveloping, covering, cloth-
ing; ({%am%}), n. cloth, clothes; an envelope.
<LEND>

<L>42057<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsas<k2>vAsas
{%Vāsas, as,%}¦ n. cloth, clothes, dress, a garment; a
pall; a curtain. {%—Vāsaḥ-kuṭī,%} f. a tent. {%—Vāsaḥ-%}
{%khaṇḍa, as, am,%} m. n. a piece of cloth, a rag.
{%—Vāso-da, as, ā, am,%} giving clothes. {%—Vāso-yu-%}
{%ga, am,%} n. a pair of garments, suit of clothes, (the
dress of the Hindūs usually consisting of two pieces
of cloth, viz. a lower garment fastened round the
waist, and an upper one thrown loosely over the
shoulders.)
<LEND>

<L>42058<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsita<k2>vAsita<h>3
3. {%vāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ clothed, dressed; ({%ā%}), f. a
woman; a female elephant; the female of cattle.
<LEND>

<L>42059<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsin<k2>vAsin<h>2
2. {%vāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having or wearing clothes,
dressed, arrayed, clothed, ({%pīta-kauśeya-vāsinī,%} a
woman wearing a yellow silk garment.)
<LEND>

<L>42060<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsya<k2>vAsya
{%Vāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be clothed; to be covered
or pervaded.
<LEND>

<L>42061<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsata<k2>vAsata
{#vAsata#}¦ {%vāsata, as,%} m. an ass.
<LEND>

<L>42062<pc>0907-b<k1>vAsanta<k2>vAsanta
{#vAsanta#}¦ {%vāsanta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vasanta%}),
vernal, relating to spring, suitable to spring, produced
in the spring season; being in the spring of life,
young; attentive or diligent (in the performance of
religious ceremonies &c.); situated, (? perhaps con-
nected with 2. {%vāsa%}); ({%as%}), m. a camel; the Indian
cuckoo; a young elephant, any young animal; the
southern or western wind ({%= malayānila,%} q. v.); a
sort of kidney-bean (Phaseolus Mungo), a kind of
black bean ({%= kṛṣṇa-mudga%}); the plant Vangueria
Spinosa; a dissolute man; ({%ī%}), f. a large creeper,
Gærtnera Racemosa; a species of jasmine, Jasminum
Auriculatum ({%= mādhavī, yūthī%}); long pepper;
the trumpet-flower; N. of a deity; a festival in
honour of Kāma-deva (held in the month Caitra;
in some places Durgā is worshipped at this festival);
[Page0907-c+ 73]
a species of the Śakvarī metre. {%—Vāsantī-pūjā,%} f.
the worship of Durgā in the month Caitra.
<LEND>

<L>42063<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsantaka<k2>vAsantaka
{%Vāsantaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ vernal, sown or grown in
spring; suitable to the spring season; relating or
belonging to it, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42064<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsantika<k2>vAsantika
{%Vāsantika, as, ī, am,%}¦ vernal; ({%as%}), m. the
buffoon or Vidūṣaka in a drama (see {%vidūṣaka%});
an actor, dancer (the spring being the season for
dancing, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>42065<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsara<k2>vAsara
{#vAsara#}¦ {%vāsara, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%vas;%} cf.
{%uṣas%}), Ved. shining, giving light, (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 48, 7. {%vāsarāṇi = jagad-%}
{%vāsakāni%}); ({%as, am%}), m. n. a day; ({%as%}), m. one of
the Nāgas or serpents, a kind of snake; ({%ī%}), f. epi-
thet of a cow. {%—Vāsara-saṅga, as,%} m. ‘day-junc-
tion,’ the morning.
<LEND>

<L>42066<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsava<k2>vAsava
{#vAsava#}¦ {%vāsava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vasu%}), belong-
ing to Indra; accompanied by the Vasus; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of Indra; ({%ī%}), f. the mother of Vyāsa. {%—Vāsava-%}
{%dattā,%} f., N. of the wife of Nidhi-pati; of a work by
Subandhu (describing the amours of Kandarpa-ketu
and Vāsava-dattā). {%—Vāsaveśvara-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Vāsavopama (˚va-up˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} resembling or like Indra.
<LEND>

<L>42067<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsin<k2>vAsin<h>1
{#vAsin#} 1¦. and 2. {%vāsin.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42068<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsizumPa<k2>vAsizumPa
{#vAsizumPa#}¦ {%vāsiṣumpha,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>42069<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsizwa<k2>vAsizwa
{#vAsizwa#}¦ {%vāsiṣṭa, am,%} n. blood.
<LEND>

<L>42070<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsizWa<k2>vAsizWa
{#vAsizWa#}¦ {%vāsiṣṭha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vasiṣṭha,%}
q. v., cf. {%vāśiṣṭha%}), belonging to Vasiṣṭha, com-
posed by or revealed to the Ṛṣi Vasiṣṭha (as the
seventh Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda); ({%as%}), m. a son
or descendant of Vasiṣṭha (applied as a patronymic
to various Ṛṣis); ({%ī%}), f. a female descendant of
Vasiṣṭha; ({%am%}), n. {%= yoga-vāsiṣṭha%}. {%—Vāsiṣṭha-%}
{%rāmāyaṇa, am,%} n. {%= yoga-vāsiṣṭha%}. {%—Vāsiṣṭha-%}
{%{{lainga-purāṇa->laiṅga-purāṇa||20161210|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 311-315|dental nasal -> guttural}}, am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa. {%—Vā-%}
{%siṣṭha-sāra, as,%} m. {%= yoga-v˚%}. {%—Vāsiṣṭhopapu-%}
{%rāṇa (˚ṭha-up˚), am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>42071<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsu<k2>vAsu
{#vAsu#}¦ {%vāsu, us,%} m. (fr. rt. 6. {%vas%}), N. of
Viṣṇu (as dwelling in all beings); the soul; the
Supreme Being considered as the soul of the universe.
{%—Vāsu-pūjya, as,%} m. the twelfth Jina of the present
era. {%—Vāsu-bhadra, as,%} m. a N. of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>42072<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsU<k2>vAsU
{%Vāsū, ūs,%}¦ f. (in theatrical language) a young girl,
maiden.
<LEND>

<L>42073<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsuki<k2>vAsuki
{#vAsuki#}¦ {%vāsuki, is,%} m. (fr. {%vasuka,%} said to
be a N. of Kaśyapa), the serpent Vāsuki, sovereign
of the snakes. {%—Vāsuki-hrada, as,%} m., N. of a
lake.
<LEND>

<L>42074<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsukeya<k2>vAsukeya
{%Vāsukeya, as,%}¦ m. the serpent Vāsuki. {%—Vāsu-%}
{%keya-svasṛ, sā,%} f. ‘sister of Vāsuki,’ epithet of the
goddess Manasā (presiding over serpents and regarded
as wife of Jarat-kāru).
<LEND>

<L>42075<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsukra<k2>vAsukra
{#vAsukra#}¦ {%vāsukra, as,%} m. (fr. {%vasu-kra%}), Ved.
a patronymic of Vasu-karṇa; of Vasu-kṛt.
<LEND>

<L>42076<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsudeva<k2>vAsudeva
{#vAsudeva#}¦ {%vāsudeva, as,%} m. (fr. {%vasu-deva%}),
‘son of Vasu-deva,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa; a descendant
of Vasu-deva; N. of a class of persons peculiar to
the Jainas; N. of an author; of a poet; of a phy-
sician. {%—Vāsudeva-priyaṅkarī,%} f. a kind of shrub
{%(= śatāvarī)%}. {%—Vāsudevopaniṣad (˚va-up˚), t,%}
f., N. of one of the more recent Upaniṣads of the
Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>42077<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsurA<k2>vAsurA
{#vAsurA#}¦ {%vāsurā,%} f. (fr. rt. 6. {%vas%} or rt. {%vās%}),
night; the earth; a woman; a female elephant.
<LEND>

<L>42078<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsoda<k2>vAsoda
{#vAsoda#}¦ {%vāso-da, vāso-yuga.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42079<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsOkas<k2>vAsOkas
{#vAsOkas#}¦ {%vāsaukas.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42080<pc>0907-c<k1>vAskala<k2>vAskala
{#vAskala#}¦ {%vāskala.%} See {%vāṣkala,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42081<pc>0907-c<k1>vAsta<k2>vAsta
{#vAsta#}¦ {%vāsta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vasta%}), made or
derived from a goat, coming from goats, goatish,
(also written {%bāsta.%})
<LEND>

<L>42082<pc>0907-c<k1>vAstika<k2>vAstika
{%Vāstika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to goats; ({%am%}), n. a
collection of goats.
<LEND>
[Page0908-a+ 76]

<L>42083<pc>0908-a<k1>vAstava<k2>vAstava
{#vAstava#}¦ {%vāstava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vastu%}), sub-
stantial, real; being anything in the true sense of the
word, substantiated, fixed, determined, demonstrated;
({%ā%}), f. dawn; ({%am%}), n. anything fixed or appointed.
{%—Vāstavoṣā,%} f. ‘real twilight,’ night, (according
to some this is not a compound but two words,
{%uṣā,%} ‘dawn,’ being the explanation of {%vāstavā.%})
<LEND>

<L>42084<pc>0908-a<k1>vAstavika<k2>vAstavika
{%Vāstavika, as, ī, am,%}¦ substantial, real, material,
genuine; demonstrated.
<LEND>

<L>42085<pc>0908-a<k1>vAstavya<k2>vAstavya
{#vAstavya#}¦ {%vāstavya, as, ā, am%} (anom. fut.
part. of rt. 6. {%vas%}), fit to be abided or dwelt in, fit
to be inhabited; making a habitation, inhabiting,
dwelling; ({%as%}), m. a dweller, resident, inhabitant,
citizen, dependant; [cf. {%grāma-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42086<pc>0908-a<k1>vAstu<k2>vAstu
{#vAstu#}¦ {%vāstu, us, u,%} m. n. (fr. rt. 6. {%vas;%} see
Uṇādi-s. 1. 77), the site or foundation of a house,
ground suitable for building a house, a building-place,
building-ground, site, ground [cf. {%pura-v˚%}]; a house,
habitation, abode, region; ({%u%}), n. a kind of vegetable
{%(= vāstuka)%}. {%—Vāstu-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a part of
the Smṛti-tattva. {%—Vāstu-pradīpa,%} N. of a work.
{%—Vāstu-yāga, as,%} m. a sacrificial rite observed on
measuring the ground and laying the foundation of
a house. {%—Vāstu-yāga-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a part
of the Smṛti-tattva (giving the rules for the above
rite). {%—Vāstu-śāstra, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Vāstu-%}
{%saṃśamana%} or {%vāstu-saṃśamanīya, am,%} n. a cere-
mony performed on laying the foundation or setting
out the ground for a new house, a sacrifice performed
on preparing a foundation or on entering a new man-
sion. {%—Vāstu-ha, am,%} n. in Aitareya-Br. V. 14. in-
terpreted to mean ‘what is left on the sacred spot.’
{%—Vāstoṣ-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of the Vāstu,’ i. e.
‘protector of the foundation of a house,’ or generally
‘house-protector,’ N. of one of the more recent deities
of the Ṛg-veda (regarded as presiding over the founda-
tion of a house, and addressed in VII. 54. and VII. 55);
an epithet of Indra, (also written {%vāstos-pati.%})
<LEND>

<L>42087<pc>0908-a<k1>vAstuka<k2>vAstuka
{%Vāstuka%}¦ or {%vāstūka, am,%} n. the pot-herb Che-
nopodium Album.
<LEND>

<L>42088<pc>0908-a<k1>vAstukI<k2>vAstukI
{%Vāstukī,%}¦ f. a species of vegetable ({%= cillī%}).
<LEND>

<L>42089<pc>0908-a<k1>vAsteya<k2>vAsteya
{#vAsteya#}¦ {%vāsteya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vasti%}), relat-
ing or belonging to the belly, abdominal.
<LEND>

<L>42090<pc>0908-a<k1>vAstra<k2>vAstra
{#vAstra#}¦ {%vāstra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vastra%}), made
of cloth, covered with cloth, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42091<pc>0908-a<k1>vAsTa<k2>vAsTa
{#vAsTa#}¦ {%vā-stha = vāḥ-stha.%} See under {%vār.%}
<LEND>

<L>42092<pc>0908-a<k1>vAspa<k2>vAspa
{#vAspa#}¦ {%vāspa, as,%} m. (more correctly written
{%vāṣpa,%} q. v.), a tear, tears, hot vapour, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42093<pc>0908-a<k1>vAspeya<k2>vAspeya
{%Vāspeya, as,%}¦ m. the tree Nāga-keśara, (commonly
called {%Nāgeśar.%})
<LEND>

<L>42094<pc>0908-a<k1>vAsya<k2>vAsya
{#vAsya#}¦ {%vāsya.%} See p. 907, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42095<pc>0908-a<k1>vAh<k2>vAh<h>1
{#vAh#} 1¦. {%vāh%} (also written {%bāh;%} connected
with rt. 1. {%vah%}), cl. 1. A. {%vāhate%} (ep. also P.
{%vāhati%}), {%vavāhe, vāhitum,%} to endeavour, make effort,
strive, exert one's self, try: Caus. {%vāhayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to labour or work, use, employ, occupy.
<LEND>

<L>42096<pc>0908-a<k1>vAhana<k2>vAhana<h>1
1. {%vāhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of making effort, en-
deavouring, exertion.
<LEND>

<L>42097<pc>0908-a<k1>vAhayat<k2>vAhayat
{%Vāhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to labour, employ-
ing, making use of.
<LEND>

<L>42098<pc>0908-a<k1>vAhita<k2>vAhita<h>1
1. {%vāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ exerted, endeavoured; mys-
tified.
<LEND>

<L>42099<pc>0908-a<k1>vAh<k2>vAh<h>2
{#vAh#} 2¦. {%vāh, ṭ, -hī, ṭ%} (fr. rt. 1. {%vah%}), bear-
ing, carrying, &c. (at the end of comps.; cf. {%bhāra-%}
{%v˚, vajra-v˚,%} Gram. 182. <nsi>c</nsi>).
<LEND>

<L>42100<pc>0908-a<k1>vAha<k2>vAha
{%Vāha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bearing, carrying, ({%ati-bhāra-%}
{%vāha,%} carrying too heavy burdens); ({%as%}), m. bear-
ing, carrying, drawing; a bearer, porter, carrier of
burdens, &c.; any animal used for draught, a beast
of burden; a horse; a buffalo; a bull; any vehicle,
carriage, conveyance, car; the arm; air, wind; a
measure of capacity containing ten Kumbhas (nearly
equal to the weight of an English wey). {%—Vāha-%}
{%dviṣat, an,%} m. a buffalo (said to be so called as
‘hostile to the horse’). {%—Vāha-bhraṃś, -bhraṭ, ṭ, ṭ%}
(or {%vāha-bhraṃs, -bhrat, t, t%}), falling from a vehi-
[Page0908-b+ 79]
cle, &c. {%—Vāha-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. ‘best of draught-
animals,’ a horse.
<LEND>

<L>42101<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhaka<k2>vAhaka
{%Vāhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ bearing, carrying, convey-
ing, conducting; ({%as%}), m. a porter, carrier; the driver
of a chariot; a horseman.
<LEND>

<L>42102<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhana<k2>vAhana<h>2
2. {%vāhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of carrying, bearing,
conveying, conducting; the act of driving or govern-
ing (horses); a vehicle, chariot, carriage, a convey-
ance of any kind; any animal used in riding or
draught, a horse, an elephant; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Muni; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>wagana,</nsi> ‘a chariot;’ Hib.
<nsi>feun,</nsi> ‘a chariot.’]
<LEND>

<L>42103<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhayitvA<k2>vAhayitvA
{%Vāhayitvā,%}¦ ind. having caused to be conveyed.
<LEND>

<L>42104<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhas<k2>vAhas
{%Vāhas, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. one who carries or bears (at
the end of comps.; cf. {%stoma-v˚, nṛ-v˚, gir-v˚,%}
{%brahma-v˚%}); ‘one who bears the oblation or sacrifice’
[cf. {%yajña-v˚%}], epithet of Agni; ({%as%}), n. a hymn,
(Sāy. {%= stotra.%})
<LEND>

<L>42105<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhasa<k2>vAhasa
{%Vāhasa, as,%}¦ m. a water-course; a large snake
(especially the boa constrictor); the pot-herb Mar-
silia Dentata.
<LEND>

<L>42106<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhika<k2>vAhika
{%Vāhika, as,%}¦ m. a car or vehicle drawn by oxen;
a large drum.
<LEND>

<L>42107<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhita<k2>vAhita<h>2
2. {%vāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be borne or con-
veyed; ({%am%}), n. a heavy burden.
<LEND>

<L>42108<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhin<k2>vAhin
{%Vāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ bearing, carrying (often at the
end of comps.); ({%ī%}), m. a chariot; ({%inī%}), f. an army,
body of forces; a division of an army (consisting of
81 elephants, 81 cars, 243 horse, 405 foot), a
battalion; a river. {%—Vāhi-ttha, am,%} n. (for {%vāhi-%}
{%stha%}), the part of an elephant's forehead below the
frontal globes. {%—Vāhinī-niveśa, as,%} m. the camp of
an army. {%—Vāhinī-pati, is,%} m. the lord or leader
of an army, a general, commanding officer; ‘lord of
rivers,’ epithet of the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>42109<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhizWa<k2>vAhizWa
{%Vāhiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. bearing or carrying
best, bearing most effectually, (according to Nirukta
V. 1 {%= voḍhṛ-tama.%})
<LEND>

<L>42110<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhIka<k2>vAhIka<h>1
1. {%vāhīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ carrying, bearing burdens;
({%as%}), m. an ox; N. of a priest.
<LEND>

<L>42111<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhuka<k2>vAhuka
{%Vāhuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a charioteer.
<LEND>

<L>42112<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhya<k2>vAhya<h>1
1. {%vāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be carried or borne; ({%am%}),
n. a carriage, vehicle; ({%as%}), m. any beast of burden,
an ox, horse, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42113<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhyamAna<k2>vAhyamAna
{%Vāhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being borne, being
carried or conveyed, being conducted; being driven,
being urged or incited; being induced.
<LEND>

<L>42114<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhAdura<k2>vAhAdura
{#vAhAdura#}¦ {%vāhādura.%} See {%bāhādura.%}
<LEND>

<L>42115<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhirvedika<k2>vAhirvedika
{#vAhirvedika#}¦ {%vāhirvedika.%} See {%bāhirvedika.%}
<LEND>

<L>42116<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhIka<k2>vAhIka<h>2
{#vAhIka#} 2¦. {%vāhīka, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%vahis%}), outer,
external; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a country (said to be
part of the Pañjāb).
<LEND>

<L>42117<pc>0908-b<k1>vAhya<k2>vAhya<h>2
{#vAhya#} 2¦. {%vāhya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%vahis,%} q. v.;
in the Veda usually written {%bāhya,%} q. v.), being out-
side, situated without (a city &c.), outer, external,
exterior (often at the end of a comp.; cf. {%dharma-%}
{%v˚, nagara-v˚, veda-v˚%}); not belonging to the
family or the country, strange, foreign; expelled
from caste or from society, an outcast, one of a low
tribe; ({%as%}), m. a foreigner; a proper N.; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of the descendants of Vāhya; of a people;
({%ā%}), f., scil. {%tvac,%} the outer bark of a tree; ({%am,%}
{%ena, e%}), ind. outside, on the outside of, without;
({%āt%}), ind. from without. {%—Vāhya-kakṣa, as,%} m.
the outer side (of a house). {%—Vāhya-karaṇa, am,%}
n. an external organ of sense. {%—Vāhya-karṇa, as,%}
m., N. of a Nāga. {%—Vāhya-kuṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of
Nāga. {%—Vāhya-taddhita, as,%} m. (in grammar) an
external Taddhita affix. {%—Vāhya-tara, as, ā, am,%}
more external or foreign, of a lower caste, a lower
outcast (Manu X. 30). {%—Vāhya-tas,%} ind. externally,
out-of-doors, &c.; out of, outside of (with gen. or abl.).
{%—Vāhya-tā,%} f. or {%vāhya-tva, am,%} n. the state of being
outside, exclusion, deviation from. {%—Vāhyato-nara,%}
{%ās,%} m. pl. ‘external men,’ N. of a people. {%—Vāhya-%}
{%druti, is,%} f. ‘external solution,’ a process in the
preparation of quicksilver. {%—Vāhya-prayatna, as,%}
m. (in grammar) the external effort in the production
of articulate sounds. {%—Vāhya-rata, am,%} n. ‘external
[Page0908-c+ 79]
coition,’ (probably) the gratification of the sexual
impulse externally to the vulva. {%—Vāhya-vastu, u,%}
n. external wealth or riches. {%—Vāhya-vāsin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} dwelling outside the village or town (said of Caṇ-
ḍālas). {%—Vāhya-sambhoga, as,%} m. external coi-
tion; [cf. {%vāhya-rata.%}] {%—Vāhyāntar (˚ya-an˚),%}
ind. outside and inside, externally and internally.
{%—Vāhyāyāma (˚ya-āy˚), as,%} m. a particular disease
of the nerves. {%—Vāhyālaya (˚ya-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘ex-
ternal abode,’ the abode of outcasts, i. e. the country
of the Vāhīkas. {%—Vāhyendriya (˚ya-in˚), am,%} n.
an outer organ of sense.
<LEND>

<L>42118<pc>0908-c<k1>vAhyakA<k2>vAhyakA
{%Vāhyakā,%}¦ f., N. of a Sṛñjarī (an older sister of
Upa-vāhyakā and one of the two wives of Bhaja-
māna, Hari-vaṃśa 2001).
<LEND>

<L>42119<pc>0908-c<k1>vAhyAyani<k2>vAhyAyani
{#vAhyAyani#}¦ {%vāhyāyani, is,%} m. (fr. {%vahya%}),
a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>42120<pc>0908-c<k1>vAhli<k2>vAhli
{#vAhli#}¦ {%vāhli, is,%} f. (also written {%bāhli, bālhi,%}
q. v.), N. of a country lying north-west of Afghānistān,
Balkh. {%—Vāhli-ja, as, ā, am,%} born or bred in Balkh;
({%as%}), m. a Balkh-bred horse.
<LEND>

<L>42121<pc>0908-c<k1>vAhlika<k2>vAhlika
{%Vāhlika%}¦ or {%vāhlīka, as,%} m. (also written {%bāhlika,%}
{%bālhika, bālhīka,%} q. v.), a country lying north-west
of Afghānistān, Balkh; a horse from Balkh (considered
to be of a good breed); one of the principal Gan-
dharvas or choristers of heaven; a proper N.; ({%am%}),
n. saffron; Asa Fœtida; ({%as, ī, am%}), of or belonging
to the Vāhlīkas, spoken by the Vāhlīkas, ({%vāhlīkī%}
{%bhāṣā,%} the language spoken by the Vāhlīkas.)
{%—Vāhlīka-deśa, as,%} m. the country of the Vāhlīkas,
{%—Vāhlīka-deśya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the
country of the Vāhlīkas.
<LEND>

<L>42122<pc>0908-c<k1>vi<k2>vi<h>1
{#vi#} 1¦. {%vi,%} ind. (thought by some to be for
an original {%dvi,%} meaning ‘in two parts;’ as a prepo-
sition or prefix to verbs it is opposed to {%sam,%} q. v.,
and expresses) apart, apart from, asunder, in different
directions, to and fro, about, away, away from, off,
&c. (e. g. {%vi-yuj,%} to disjoin, separate; {%vi-dṝ,%} to
tear asunder; {%vi-kṝ,%} to scatter in different direc-
tions; {%vi-cal,%} to move to and fro; {%vi-cchid,%} to cut
away, cut off); when prefixed to some roots, {%vi%} gives
a meaning opposite to the idea contained in the
simple rt. (e. g. {%krī,%} to buy; {%vi-krī,%} to sell; {%smṛ,%}
to remember; {%vi-smṛ,%} to forget); in other cases
it appears either not to affect or simply to intensify
that idea [cf. {%naś, vi-naś, hiṃs, vi-hiṃs%}]. {%Vi%} may
also be used with verbs or nouns, and other parts of
speech derived from verbs, to express ‘division’ [cf.
{%vi-bhid, vi-bheda, vi-bhaj, vi-bhāga%}]; ‘distinction’
[cf. {%vi-śiṣ, vi-śeṣa, vi-vic, vi-veka%}]; ‘discrimi-
nation’ [cf. {%vy-avacchid, vy-avaccheda%}]; ‘distri-
bution,’ ‘arrangement,’ ‘order’ [cf. {%vi-dhā, vi-%}
{%dhāna%}]; ‘opposition’ [cf. {%vi-rudh, vi-rodha%}];
‘discussion,’ ‘deliberation’ [cf. {%vi-car, vi-cāra%}];
‘privation’ [cf. {%vi-nī, vi-nayana%}]. {%Vi%} may
also be used with nouns, adjective or substantive,
not immediately connected with verbs, to express
‘difference’ [cf. {%vi-lakṣaṇa%}]; ‘variety’ [cf. {%vi-%}
{%citra%}]; ‘distinction’ [cf. {%vi-śeṣa%}]; ‘intensity,’
‘greatness,’ ‘largeness’ [cf. {%vi-karāla%}]; ‘change’
[cf. {%vi-kāra%}]; ‘manifoldness’ [cf. {%vi-vidha%}]; ‘con-
trariety’ [cf. {%vi-loma%}]; ‘impropriety,’ ‘deviation
from right’ [cf. {%vi-janman, vi-karmika%}]; ‘nega-
tion’ or ‘privation’ (e. g. {%vi-jana,%} devoid of men;
in this sense {%vi%} is used like {%nis,%} q. v., and like 3. {%a,%}
q. v.); in this latter signification the use of {%vi%} often
corresponds to that of the Latin <nsi>dis, se,</nsi> and the English
prefixes <nsi>a, ex, de, dis, in, un,</nsi> &c.; [cf. Old Germ.
<nsi>wi-dar,</nsi> ‘against;’ Pers. <lang n="arabic">بى</lang> <nsi>bī,</nsi> ‘without;’ perhaps
Lat. <nsi>vê,</nsi> in words like <nsi>ve-cors, ve-sanus, vi</nsi> in <nsi>di-</nsi>
<nsi>vi-dere;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>be,</nsi> ‘without;’ Slav. <lang n="slavic">beζ</lang> (perhaps =
{%vahis%}).]
<LEND>

<L>42123<pc>0908-c<k1>vi<k2>vi<h>2
{#vi#} 2¦. {%vi, is,%} m. f. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 133. fr. rt. {%vā,%} the final of the rt. being rejected;
a form {%vī%} is also given, and according to some the
word {%vi%} may be fr. rt. 1. {%vī%}), Ved. a goer; a bird
[cf. {%vīka%}]; a horse (from its fleetness); a rein (ac-
cording to Sāy.); epithet of the Soma; of a sacri-
ficer; the eye (?); heaven (?); the region of the
[Page0909-a+ 75]
wind (?); [cf. Zend <nsi>vi;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">οἰ-ωνό-ς, αἰ-ε-τό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὤϊον, ὠόν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>avis, ovum;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>ei;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>œg.</nsi>] — 1. {%vi-gata, am,%} n. (for 2. see under {%vi-%}
{%gam%}), the flight of birds. {%—1. vi-cchāya, am,%} n.
(for 2. see s. v.), the shadow of a flock of birds.
<LEND>

<L>42124<pc>0909-a<k1>viMSa<k2>viMSa
{#viMSa#}¦ {%viṃśa, viṃśaka,%} &c. See below.
<LEND>

<L>42125<pc>0909-a<k1>viMSati<k2>viMSati
{#viMSati#}¦ {%viṃśati, is,%} f. (perhaps contracted
fr. {%dvi-daśati,%} ‘two tens’), twenty, a score; ({%tī%}), f.
du. two twenties; ({%tayas%}), f. pl. many twenties;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">εἴκατι, εἴκοαι</lang> (Lacon. <lang n="greek">βείκατι</lang>); Lat. <nsi>vi-</nsi>
<nsi>ginti;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>fichead;</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>ugaint.</nsi>] {%—Viṃ-%}
{%śatika, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} worth twenty, produced
from or bought with twenty, &c. {%—Viṃśati-tama,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} twentieth. {%—Viṃśati-bhāga, as,%} m. a
twentieth part. {%—Viṃśati-varṣa-deśīya, as, ā, am,%}
about twenty years old. {%—Viṃśatīśa (˚ti-īśa), as,%} or
{%viṃśatīśin, ī,%} m. a governor of twenty villages.
<LEND>

<L>42126<pc>0909-a<k1>viMSa<k2>viMSa
{%Viṃśa, as, ī, am,%}¦ twentieth; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%bhāga,%}
a twentieth part ({%= viṃśati-bhāga,%} Manu VIII. 398);
({%as%}), m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>42127<pc>0909-a<k1>viMSaka<k2>viMSaka
{%Viṃśaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ twenty, an aggregate of twenty.
<LEND>

<L>42128<pc>0909-a<k1>viMSat<k2>viMSat
{%Viṃśat%}¦ in {%eka-v˚, pari-v˚,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>42129<pc>0909-a<k1>viMSatima<k2>viMSatima
{%Viṃśatima,%}¦ abbreviated for {%viṃśati-tama%} in {%pañ-%}
{%caviṃśatima,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>42130<pc>0909-a<k1>viMSin<k2>viMSin
{%Viṃśin, ī,%}¦ m. twenty, a score; a lord of twenty
towns.
<LEND>

<L>42131<pc>0909-a<k1>vik<k2>vik
{#vik#}¦ {%vik,%} (in Pāṇini's system) the aug-
ment {%vi%} at the end of a syllable of reduplication,
(see Intens. of rt. 2. {%dyut.%})
<LEND>

<L>42132<pc>0909-a<k1>vika<k2>vika
{#vika#}¦ {%vika, am,%} n. the milk of a cow that
has just calved.
<LEND>

<L>42133<pc>0909-a<k1>vikaNkawa<k2>vikaNkawa
{#vikaNkawa#}¦ {%vi-kaṅkaṭa, as,%} m. the plant
Asteracantha Longifolia ({%= go-kṣura%}).
<LEND>

<L>42134<pc>0909-a<k1>vikaNkata<k2>vikaNkata
{#vikaNkata#}¦ {%vi-kaṅkata, as,%} m. a kind of tree
({%= granthila%}).
<LEND>

<L>42135<pc>0909-a<k1>vikaca<k2>vikaca<h>1
{#vikaca#} 1¦. {%vi-kaca, as, ā, am,%} blown, opened,
expanded (as a flower &c.), spread; ({%as%}), m. a Bud-
dhist mendicant; epithet of Ketu or the personified
descending node. {%—Vikacī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kartum,%} to cause to blow or expand, to open.
<LEND>

<L>42136<pc>0909-a<k1>vikaca<k2>vikaca<h>2
2. {%vi-kaca, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no hair, hairless,
bald.
<LEND>

<L>42137<pc>0909-a<k1>vikawa<k2>vikawa<h>1
{#vikawa#} 1¦. {%vi-kaṭa, as, ā, am%} (see {%kaṭa%}), large,
great; formidable, hideous, ugly, uncouth, horrible,
frightful; large-toothed; knitted (said of the brows),
frowning; changed in form or appearance; beautiful;
obscure, obsolete; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.; ({%am%}), n.
a boil, tumour; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of female divinity
peculiar to Buddhists. {%—Vikaṭa-mūrti, is, is, i,%} hav-
ing a hideous or distorted shape, deformed, ugly.
{%—Vikaṭānana (˚ṭa-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘ugly-faced,’ N.
of one of the sons of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>42138<pc>0909-a<k1>vikawa<k2>vikawa<h>2
2. {%vi-kaṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no mat, without a
mat.
<LEND>

<L>42139<pc>0909-a<k1>vikaRwaka<k2>vikaRwaka
{#vikaRwaka#}¦ {%vi-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m. a herbaceous
plant, Hedysarum Alhagi or Alhagi Maurorum (as
‘having no thorns’ or as ‘having spreading thorns,’
{%= yavāsa%}).
<LEND>

<L>42140<pc>0909-a<k1>vikatT<k2>vikatT
{#vikatT#}¦ {%vi-katth,%} cl. 1. A. {%-katthate%} (some-
times also P. {%-katthati%}), {%-katthitum,%} to boast, vaunt,
boast of (with inst., e. g. {%vidyayā vikatthate,%} he
boasts of his learning); to praise, praise ironically,
mock; to humiliate; to speak ill of (with acc.); to
proclaim loudly, make a noise about anything.
<LEND>

<L>42141<pc>0909-a<k1>vikatTana<k2>vikatTana
{%Vi-katthana, as, ā, am,%}¦ boasting, vaunting,
boastful, speaking boastfully or ostentatiously, prais-
ing; praising ironically; ({%am%}), n. the act of boast-
ing; the act of proclaiming loudly; the act of prais-
ing, praise; ironical or false praise, irony.
<LEND>

<L>42142<pc>0909-a<k1>vikatTanIya<k2>vikatTanIya
{%Vi-katthanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be vaunted, to be
boasted of, to be praised, commendable; to be praised
ironically; ridiculous.
<LEND>

<L>42143<pc>0909-a<k1>vikatTamAna<k2>vikatTamAna
{%Vi-katthamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ boasting, vaunting.
<LEND>

<L>42144<pc>0909-a<k1>vikatTayitvA<k2>vikatTayitvA
{%Vi-katthayitvā,%}¦ ind. (anom. for {%vi-katthya%}), hav-
ing praised ironically, having mocked.
<LEND>
[Page0909-b+ 72]

<L>42145<pc>0909-b<k1>vikatTA<k2>vikatTA
{%Vi-katthā,%}¦ f. boasting, boast, vaunt; praise; ironi-
cal praise, irony; proclaiming.
<LEND>

<L>42146<pc>0909-b<k1>vikatTin<k2>vikatTin
{%Vi-katthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ boasting, vaunting, pro-
claiming.
<LEND>

<L>42147<pc>0909-b<k1>vikamp<k2>vikamp
{#vikamp#}¦ {%vi-kamp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kampate, -kam-%}
{%pitum,%} to tremble greatly, quiver, heave, move about,
move from or change a position; to become changed
or deformed; to shrink or retreat from: Caus. P.
{%-kampayati, -yitum,%} to cause to tremble, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42148<pc>0909-b<k1>vikapita<k2>vikapita
{%Vi-kapita, as, ā, am, = vi-kampita.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>42149<pc>0909-b<k1>vikampa<k2>vikampa
{%Vi-kampa, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, heaving; un-
steady, not firm, inconstant; shrinking from.
<LEND>

<L>42150<pc>0909-b<k1>vikampamAna<k2>vikampamAna
{%Vi-kampamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, quivering,
heaving.
<LEND>

<L>42151<pc>0909-b<k1>vikampita<k2>vikampita
{%Vi-kampita, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, tremulous,
quivering, moving about, ({%a-vikampita,%} not trem-
bling, immovable); palpitating, heaving; agitated,
unsteady, broken, interrupted; shrinking from.
<LEND>

<L>42152<pc>0909-b<k1>vikara<k2>vikara
{#vikara#}¦ {%vi-kara,%} &c. See under {%vi-kṛ,%}
p. 910, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42153<pc>0909-b<k1>vikarAla<k2>vikarAla
{#vikarAla#}¦ {%vi-karāla, as, ā, am,%} very formida-
ble or terrible, frightful. {%—Vikarāla-tā,%} f. formidable-
ness, dreadfulness.
<LEND>

<L>42154<pc>0909-b<k1>vikarRa<k2>vikarRa<h>1
{#vikarRa#} 1¦. {%vi-karṇa, as, ī, am,%} having large
ears; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the Kuru princes (on
the side of Duryodhana in the war against the Pāṇ-
ḍavas).
<LEND>

<L>42155<pc>0909-b<k1>vikarRa<k2>vikarRa<h>2
2. {%vi-karṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ earless, having no ears.
<LEND>

<L>42156<pc>0909-b<k1>vikarRika<k2>vikarRika
{%Vi-karṇika, as,%}¦ m. the district called Sārasvata
(in the north-west of Hindūstān, generally considered
to be part of the Pañjāb, said to be so called as
being ‘the region from which Karṇa was excluded’).
<LEND>

<L>42157<pc>0909-b<k1>vikartana<k2>vikartana
{#vikartana#}¦ {%vi-kartana.%} See under {%vi-kṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>42158<pc>0909-b<k1>vikarman<k2>vikarman
{#vikarman#}¦ {%vi-karman.%} See p. 910, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42159<pc>0909-b<k1>vikarza<k2>vikarza
{#vikarza#}¦ {%vi-karṣa,%} &c. See under {%vi-kṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>42160<pc>0909-b<k1>vikala<k2>vikala
{#vikala#}¦ {%vi-kala, as, ā, am%} (see {%kalā%}), de-
prived of a part, destitute of a portion, deprived of
a limb or member, defective, imperfect; wanting,
failing; decayed, impaired, withered, waned; con-
fused, confounded, agitated, sorrowful; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a Daitya; ({%ā, ī%}), f. a woman in whom menstru-
ation has ceased; ({%ā%}), f. the sixtieth part of a
Kalā, the second of a degree. {%—Vikala-pāṇika, as,%}
m. one who has a mutilated or withered hand, a
cripple. {%—Vikala-vadha, as,%} m. ‘death of Vikala,’
N. of a chapter in the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Vikalāṅga%}
{%(˚la-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having mutilated or defective
limbs, deformed, crippled, maimed. {%—Vikalī-karaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the act of depriving of a limb, mutilating,
maiming, breaking, spoiling; confusing, agitating.
{%—Vikalī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to deprive
of a limb, mutilate, maim, spoil, break; to agitate,
confound. {%—Vikalī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} mutilated,
maimed, impaired, broken, injured; lame; sick;
confused, distressed. {%—Vikalī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
mutilated, maimed, defective; agitated, distressed.
{%—Vikalendriya (˚la-in˚), as, ā, am,%} having any
of the organs of sense impaired or defective.
<LEND>

<L>42161<pc>0909-b<k1>vikalpa<k2>vikalpa
{#vikalpa#}¦ {%vi-kalpa,%} &c. See under {%vi-kḷp.%}
<LEND>

<L>42162<pc>0909-b<k1>vikalmaza<k2>vikalmaza
{#vikalmaza#}¦ {%vi-kalmaṣa, as, ā, am,%} spotless,
sinless, guiltless.
<LEND>

<L>42163<pc>0909-b<k1>vikaSvara<k2>vikaSvara
{#vikaSvara#}¦ {%vi-kaśvara, as, ā, am,%} for {%vi-kas-%}
{%vara,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>42164<pc>0909-b<k1>vikazA<k2>vikazA
{#vikazA#}¦ {%vi-kaṣā,%} f. {%= vi-kasā,%} Bengal mad-
der.
<LEND>

<L>42165<pc>0909-b<k1>vikazvara<k2>vikazvara
{%Vi-kaṣvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ for {%vi-kasvara,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>42166<pc>0909-b<k1>vikas<k2>vikas
{#vikas#}¦ {%vi-kas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kasati, -kasitum,%} to
burst, become split or divided or rent asunder; to
open, become expanded, blossom, bloom, blow (as
a flower): Caus. P. {%-kāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
open, cause to expand or blow.
<LEND>

<L>42167<pc>0909-b<k1>vikasa<k2>vikasa
{%Vi-kasa, as,%}¦ m. the moon; ({%ā%}), f. Bengal madder.
<LEND>
[Page0909-c+ 75]

<L>42168<pc>0909-c<k1>vikasat<k2>vikasat
{%Vi-kasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ opening, expanding; bud-
ding, blowing; glowing.
<LEND>

<L>42169<pc>0909-c<k1>vikasita<k2>vikasita
{%Vi-kasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ blown (as a flower), budded,
opened, expanded. {%—Vikasita-kumudendīvarālo-%}
{%kin (˚da-in˚, ˚ra-āl˚), ī, inī, i,%} looking like the
expanded white and blue lotus. {%—Vikasita-vadana-%}
{%kamala, as, ā, am,%} opening [her] lotus-like mouth.
<LEND>

<L>42170<pc>0909-c<k1>vikasta<k2>vikasta
{%Vi-kasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. split or rent asunder,
divided, mutilated, (Sāy. {%= vi-cchinna.%})
<LEND>

<L>42171<pc>0909-c<k1>vikasvara<k2>vikasvara
{%Vi-kasvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ opening, expanding; ({%ā%}),
f. a kind of plant ({%= rakta-punarnavā%}).
<LEND>

<L>42172<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAsa<k2>vikAsa
{%Vi-kāsa, as,%}¦ m. opening, expanding, expansion,
blossoming, blooming, budding.
<LEND>

<L>42173<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAsaka<k2>vikAsaka
{%Vi-kāsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to expand or blow.
<LEND>

<L>42174<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAsana<k2>vikAsana
{%Vi-kāsana, am,%}¦ n. the causing to expand or blow,
expansion.
<LEND>

<L>42175<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAsita<k2>vikAsita
{%Vi-kāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to open or blow,
expanded; radiant, (in this sense better {%vi-kāśita.%})
<LEND>

<L>42176<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAsin<k2>vikAsin
{%Vi-kāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ expanding, opening, budding,
blowing.
<LEND>

<L>42177<pc>0909-c<k1>vikANkzA<k2>vikANkzA
{#vikANkzA#}¦ {%vi-kāṅkṣā,%} f. freedom from de-
sire or eagerness, hesitation.
<LEND>

<L>42178<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAra<k2>vikAra
{#vikAra#}¦ {%vi-kāra,%} &c. See under {%vi-kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>42179<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAla<k2>vikAla
{#vikAla#}¦ {%vi-kāla, as,%} m. twilight, evening,
afternoon, the close of day; [cf. {%vaikālika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42180<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAlaka<k2>vikAlaka
{%Vi-kālaka, as,%}¦ m. twilight, evening; ({%ikā%}), f. {%=%}
{%māna-randhrā,%} a perforated copper vessel (which
when placed in a pan of water marks the time by
gradually filling); a sort of clepsydra or water-clock.
<LEND>

<L>42181<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAS<k2>vikAS
{#vikAS#}¦ {%vi-kāś,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kāśate, -kāśitum,%}
to appear, become visible, shine forth: Caus. P. {%-kā-%}
{%śayati, -yitum,%} to cause to appear or shine forth, dis-
play, blazon abroad, publish; illuminate, make clear.
<LEND>

<L>42182<pc>0909-c<k1>vikASa<k2>vikASa<h>1
1. {%vi-kāśa, as,%}¦ m. appearance, becoming visible,
display, manifestation, exhibition; open or splendid
appearance; expanse, sky, heaven, ether; an open or
direct course ({%= prasāra,%} Kirāt. XV. 52); an ob-
lique course ({%= viṣama-gati,%} Kirāt. XV. 52);
opening; budding, blowing (as a flower, but in these
senses better {%vi-kāsa%}); pleasure, joy, enjoyment.
 — 1. {%vikāśa-tā,%} f. or 1. {%vikāśa-tva, am,%} n. appear-
ance, display; expansion, diffusion. {%—Vikāśa-bhṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} possessing expansion, full-blown.
<LEND>

<L>42183<pc>0909-c<k1>vikASa<k2>vikASa<h>2
2. {%vi-kāśa, as,%}¦ m. absence of manifestation or
display, solitude, loneliness, privacy. {%—2. vikāśa-tā,%}
f. or 2. {%vikāśa-tva, am,%} n. absence of manifestation,
loneliness, solitude.
<LEND>

<L>42184<pc>0909-c<k1>vikASaka<k2>vikASaka
{%Vi-kāśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ displaying, causing to
appear or shine forth, illustrating; causing to expand
or bloom, opening ({%= vi-kāsaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>42185<pc>0909-c<k1>vikASana<k2>vikASana
{%Vi-kāśana, am,%}¦ n. manifestation, display, exhi-
bition, extent; expansion, blowing (of a flower; but
in this sense better {%vi-kāsana%}); the causing to ex-
pand or blow ({%= vi-kāsana%}).
<LEND>

<L>42186<pc>0909-c<k1>vikASita<k2>vikASita
{%Vi-kāśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made visible, displayed,
made to shine, illumined, resplendent; expanded.
<LEND>

<L>42187<pc>0909-c<k1>vikASin<k2>vikASin
{%Vi-kāśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ becoming visible or apparent,
becoming manifested, shining forth; expanding, spread-
ing, developing, opening, budding, blowing, (in these
senses better {%vi-kāsin.%})
<LEND>

<L>42188<pc>0909-c<k1>vicAkasat<k2>vicAkasat
{%Vi-cākasat, at, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>42189<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAzin<k2>vikAzin
{#vikAzin#}¦ {%vi-kāṣin%} for {%vikāsin%} and {%vikāśin,%}
q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>42190<pc>0909-c<k1>vikAsa<k2>vikAsa
{#vikAsa#}¦ {%vi-kāsa, vi-kāsita.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>42191<pc>0909-c<k1>vikira<k2>vikira
{#vikira#}¦ {%vi-kira, vi-kirat,%} &c. See under
{%vi-kṝ,%} p. 910, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>42192<pc>0909-c<k1>vikukzi<k2>vikukzi
{#vikukzi#}¦ {%vi-kukṣi, is,%} m., N. of a son of
Ikṣvāku.
<LEND>

<L>42193<pc>0909-c<k1>vikuYc<k2>vikuYc
{#vikuYc#}¦ {%vi-kuñc,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kuñcayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to contract; to bend or turn back.
<LEND>

<L>42194<pc>0909-c<k1>vikuYcita<k2>vikuYcita
{%Vi-kuñcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ contracted, crisped, curled;
drawn into wrinkles, knitted (as the brow), frowning.
{%—Vikuñcita-lalāṭa-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} having a scowling
brow.
<LEND>

<L>42195<pc>0909-c<k1>vikuRWa<k2>vikuRWa
{#vikuRWa#}¦ {%vi-kuṇṭha%} (perhaps ‘not blunted,’
[Page0910-a+ 78]
‘not worn out,’ ‘ever fresh;’ cf. {%a-kuṇṭha%}), N. of
Viṣṇu's heaven; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the mother of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>42196<pc>0910-a<k1>vikuRWita<k2>vikuRWita
{%Vi-kuṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtuse, blunt; weak,
feeble.
<LEND>

<L>42197<pc>0910-a<k1>vikusra<k2>vikusra
{#vikusra#}¦ {%vi-kusra, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. II. 15.
said to be fr. rt. {%kas%} with {%vi%}), the moon, (said to
be also written {%vi-krasra.%})
<LEND>

<L>42198<pc>0910-a<k1>vikUj<k2>vikUj
{#vikUj#}¦ {%vi-kūj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kūjati, -kūjitum,%}
to coo, chirp, sing (as a bird &c.), make any cry or
sound, hum, buzz.
<LEND>

<L>42199<pc>0910-a<k1>vikUjana<k2>vikUjana
{%Vi-kūjana, am,%}¦ n. cooing, chirping, humming,
grumbling, rumbling, ({%antra-vikūjana,%} rumbling
of the bowels.)
<LEND>

<L>42200<pc>0910-a<k1>vikUR<k2>vikUR
{#vikUR#}¦ {%vi-kūṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kūṇayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to contract.
<LEND>

<L>42201<pc>0910-a<k1>vikURana<k2>vikURana
{%Vi-kūṇana, am,%}¦ n. a side-glance, leer, wink.
<LEND>

<L>42202<pc>0910-a<k1>vikURikA<k2>vikURikA
{%Vi-kūṇikā,%}¦ f. the nose.
<LEND>

<L>42203<pc>0910-a<k1>vikf<k2>vikf
{#vikf#}¦ {%vi-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%}
{%-kartum,%} to make different, form variously, give a
different shape to anything, transform, alter, change,
convert, cause to alter; to cause any one to change
his state or opinions; to cause to change for the
worse, distort, deprave, pervert, deform, render de-
formed, spoil; to display; to form or produce variously
(as sound, A.); to be changed, undergo a change,
change for the worse, deteriorate, change one's state or
opinions (A.); to rejoice (A.); to feel aversion (A.);
to act in various ways (A.); to decorate in various
manners; to move to and fro, become restless (A.);
to put into practice, exercise; to distribute; to ex-
tend; to destroy, annihilate; to act in a hostile or un-
friendly way towards (with gen. or loc. of the person);
to contend together: Pass. {%vi-kriyate,%} &c., to be
changed, undergo a change; to act as a substitute for,
act in place of (with acc., Ved.): Caus. {%-kārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to change or be changed.
<LEND>

<L>42204<pc>0910-a<k1>vikara<k2>vikara
{%Vi-kara, as,%}¦ m. sickness, disease, loss of health.
<LEND>

<L>42205<pc>0910-a<k1>vikaraRa<k2>vikaraRa
{%Vi-karaṇa, as,%}¦ m., scil. {%pratyaya,%} (in grammar)
a term for the affix or conjugational characteristic
which is placed between the root and terminations,
the inserted conjugational affix; (according to Pāṇini
these affixes are {%śap, śapo luk, ślu, śyan, śnu,%}
{%śa, śnam, u, yak,%} and {%cli%} with its substitutes {%tāsi,%}
{%sya,%} and {%sip,%} the first eight of which are added in
the Present, Imperfect, Imperative, and Potential,
and before a Kṛt which contains a mute palatal {%ś,%}
when these affixes denote the Kartṛ or Agent, i. e.
the Active; when, however, they denote the Karman
or Bhāva, i. e. the Passive or Neuter, then {%yak%} is
added; {%cli%} is added in the Aorist, {%tāsi%} in the Ist
Future, {%sya%} in the 2nd Future and Conditional, and
{%sip%} before Leṭ.)
<LEND>

<L>42206<pc>0910-a<k1>vikarman<k2>vikarman<h>1
1. {%vi-karman, a,%}¦ n. various business or duty; pro-
hibited or unlawful act, fraud; retiring from business;
({%ā, ā, a%}), acting variously; acting wrongly. {%—Vi-%}
{%karma-kṛt, t, t, t,%}  acting in various ways, acting
wrongly or illegally, one who does forbidden acts.
{%—Vikarma-kriyā,%} f. an illegal or immoral act,
vicious conduct. {%—Vikarma-stha, as, ā, am,%} doing
what is illegal or immoral, addicted to vice, engaged
in prohibited acts; engaged in various business.
<LEND>

<L>42207<pc>0910-a<k1>vikarman<k2>vikarman<h>2
2. {%vi-karman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ not acting, free from action.
<LEND>

<L>42208<pc>0910-a<k1>vikarmika<k2>vikarmika
{%Vikarmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ transacting various affairs;
doing forbidden acts; acting wrongly; ({%as%}), m. a
clerk or superintendant of markets or fairs.
<LEND>

<L>42209<pc>0910-a<k1>vikAra<k2>vikAra
{%Vi-kāra, as,%}¦ m. change of form or nature, altera-
tion or deviation from any natural state; change for
the worse, change from a state of health, disease,
sickness; a wound; change of mind; change from
the quiescent condition of the soul, perturbation,
emotion, passion, feeling, excitement; (in the Sāṅkhya
philosophy) a production or that which is evolved
from a previous source or {%pra-kṛti,%} q. v., a modifi-
cation or result of the modification of the {%prakṛtayaḥ%}
or producers. {%—Vikāra-tas,%} ind. from change, through
change. {%—Vikāra-tva, am,%} n. the state of change,
condition of transforming, transformation.
<LEND>

<L>42210<pc>0910-a<k1>vikArita<k2>vikArita
{%Vi-kārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be changed, made
[Page0910-b+ 79]
to undergo a change, converted, perverted; rendered
unfavourable or unfriendly.
<LEND>

<L>42211<pc>0910-b<k1>vikArin<k2>vikArin
{%Vi-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ producing a change, modifying;
undergoing a change; producing a change for the
worse, spoiling; feeling emotion, falling in love; ({%ī%}),
m., N. of the seventh year of Jupiter's cycle.
<LEND>

<L>42212<pc>0910-b<k1>vikurvARa<k2>vikurvARa
{%Vi-kurvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ undergoing or causing
a change of form or of mind, &c.; feeling emotions
of joy, &c., rejoicing, being glad.
<LEND>

<L>42213<pc>0910-b<k1>vikfta<k2>vikfta
{%Vi-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ altered, changed, modified, trans-
formed, changed in form or feeling; changed for the
worse, sick, diseased, mutilated, maimed, deformed,
disfigured; unnatural; imperfect, unfinished, incom-
plete; affected by passion, overcome by emotion; enter-
taining feelings of disgust or aversion, averse, estranged;
strange, extraordinary; ({%am%}), n. change, alteration;
change for the worse, a diseased state; disgust, aver-
sion. {%—Vikṛta-darśana, as, ā, am,%} changed in
appearance. {%—Vikṛta-buddhi, is, is, i,%} changed
in mind, estranged, made unfriendly or ill-disposed.
{%—Vikṛta-locana, as, ā, am,%} having excited eyes.
{%—Vikṛta-vadana, as, ā, am,%} having a distorted
face, ugly-faced. {%—Vikṛtākāra (˚ta-āk˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} changed in form or appearance, misshaped,
distorted in form. {%—Vikṛtākṛti (˚ta-āk˚), is, is, i,%}
having a deformed shape or aspect. {%—Vikṛtāṅga%}
{%(˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} changed in form, having mis-
shaped limbs, deformed. {%—Vikṛtānana (˚ta-ān˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a distorted countenance, ugly-faced.
<LEND>

<L>42214<pc>0910-b<k1>vikfti<k2>vikfti
{%Vi-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. change, alteration of any kind (as
of purpose, mind, form, nature, &c.), change from
a natural or healthy state, sickness, disease; change
from a quiescent state, emotion, anger, wrath, fear;
(in the Sāṅkhya philosophy) a production or that
which is evolved from a previous {%pra-kṛti%} or pro-
ducer (see {%vi-kāra,%} col. 1); fermented or spirituous
liquor; a species of metre (the stanza consisting of
four lines of two syllables each, variously arranged);
{%= ḍimbha%} (according to Śabda-k.); ({%is%}), m., N. of
a king. {%—Vikṛti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of
change, changed; diseased, wounded; changeable.
{%—Vikṛti-vijñānīya,%} N. of a chapter in the Ash-
ṭāṅga-hṛdaya-saṃhitā.
<LEND>

<L>42215<pc>0910-b<k1>vikftI<k2>vikftI
{%Vi-kṛtī,%}¦ f. {%= vi-kṛti%} above.
<LEND>

<L>42216<pc>0910-b<k1>vikriyA<k2>vikriyA
{%Vi-kriyā,%}¦ f. alteration, change; transformation,
change of mind, &c., any change from a natural or
quiescent state, disease, injury, mischief, emotion,
anger, any sudden affection or seizure [cf. {%bhūta-v˚,%}
{%roma-v˚%}]; a preparation or dish of rice, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42217<pc>0910-b<k1>vikft<k2>vikft
{#vikft#}¦ {%vi-kṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛntati, -kartitum,%}
to cut into or through, divide by cutting, tear to
pieces, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>42218<pc>0910-b<k1>vikarta<k2>vikarta
{%Vi-karta, vi-karttṛ%}¦ in {%go-v˚,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>42219<pc>0910-b<k1>vikartana<k2>vikartana
{%Vi-kartana, as,%}¦ m. the sun; the plant Calotropis
Gigantea ({%= arka%}); a son who has usurped his
father's kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>42220<pc>0910-b<k1>vikfS<k2>vikfS
{#vikfS#}¦ {%vi-kṛś,%} Caus. {%-karśayati, -yitum,%} to
make thin, emaciate, attenuate; to distort, deform.
<LEND>

<L>42221<pc>0910-b<k1>vikfz<k2>vikfz
{#vikfz#}¦ {%vi-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-karṣati,%} cl. 6. P.
A. {%-kṛṣati, -te, -karṣṭum%} or {%-kraṣṭum,%} to draw
asunder, tear asunder, drag apart, draw across, drag hither
and thither, draw different ways, drag to and fro, drag
excessively, drag along, drag after, draw away, draw
out, pull out, extend, draw away from; to withdraw,
deprive of, withhold, keep back; to destroy; to pull or
drag or draw (in general); to draw a furrow, plough
(cl. 6); to draw (a bow-string, cl. 1), bend (a bow).
<LEND>

<L>42222<pc>0910-b<k1>vikarza<k2>vikarza
{%Vi-karṣa, as,%}¦ m. dragging or drawing asunder,
pulling apart, pulling out; an arrow.
<LEND>

<L>42223<pc>0910-b<k1>vikarzaRa<k2>vikarzaRa
{%Vi-karṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m. ‘the distractor,’ one of the
five arrows of Kāmadeva; ({%am%}), n. the act of draw-
ing asunder, pulling, drawing, dragging; the drawing
(of a bow); the act of dragging or throwing across,
a cross throw (in wrestling &c.).
<LEND>

<L>42224<pc>0910-b<k1>vikarzat<k2>vikarzat
{%Vi-karṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dragging asunder or across.
<LEND>

<L>42225<pc>0910-b<k1>vikfzwa<k2>vikfzwa
{%Vi-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ dragged asunder, drawn
asunder or apart; analyzed; dragged hither and
thither; dragged excessively; drawn towards, attracted,
dragged, drawn, pulled, drawn (as a bow-string); drawn
[Page0910-c+ 79]
out, extended, protracted, long; sounded, making a
noise {%(= śabdāyamāna)%}. {%—Vikṛṣṭa-kāla, as,%} m.
a long period, ({%vikṛṣṭa-kālais,%} ind. for a long
time or extended period.)
<LEND>

<L>42226<pc>0910-c<k1>vikfzya<k2>vikfzya
{%Vi-kṛṣya,%}¦ ind. having drawn or dragged asunder.
<LEND>

<L>42227<pc>0910-c<k1>vikfzyamARa<k2>vikfzyamARa
{%Vi-kṛṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being dragged asunder,
being dragged or pulled about hither and thither.
<LEND>

<L>42228<pc>0910-c<k1>vikF<k2>vikF
{#vikF#}¦ {%vi-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -karitum%} or
{%-karītum,%} to scatter in different directions, throw
about, sprinkle, toss about, disperse; to spread about,
expand, extend; to dissolve; to scatter over, over-
whelm, cover, fill with; to tear asunder, split, rend;
to revile; to contaminate.
<LEND>

<L>42229<pc>0910-c<k1>vikira<k2>vikira
{%Vi-kira, as,%}¦ m. scattering, tearing, one who scat-
ters or tears, a bird, a scattered portion or fallen
fragment, anything dropped; a well.
<LEND>

<L>42230<pc>0910-c<k1>vikiraRa<k2>vikiraRa
{%Vi-kiraṇa, am,%}¦ n. (according to Śabda-k. {%vi-%}
{%kīraṇa%}), the act of scattering, throwing or spreading
about, dispersing, tearing; spreading abroad; know-
ledge, fame; ({%as%}), m. gigantic swallow wort, Calo-
tropis Gigantea ({%= arka%}).
<LEND>

<L>42231<pc>0910-c<k1>vikirat<k2>vikirat
{%Vi-kirat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} scattering about,
sprinkling, throwing in different directions, covering
(with arrows &c.).
<LEND>

<L>42232<pc>0910-c<k1>vikIrRa<k2>vikIrRa
{%Vi-kīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ scattered or spread about,
extended, diffused; celebrated, famous. {%—Vikīrṇa-%}
{%keśa%} or {%vikīrṇa-mūrdhaja, as, ā, am,%} having
dishevelled hair. {%—Vikīrṇa-roman, a,%} n. or {%vikīrṇa-%}
{%sañjña, am,%} n. a sort of perfume ({%= sthauṇeya%}).
<LEND>

<L>42233<pc>0910-c<k1>vikIrya<k2>vikIrya
{%Vi-kīrya,%}¦ ind. having scattered about, having
spread in different directions.
<LEND>

<L>42234<pc>0910-c<k1>vikIryamARa<k2>vikIryamARa
{%Vi-kīryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being scattered, being
tossed about, being agitated, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42235<pc>0910-c<k1>vikxp<k2>vikxp
{#vikxp#}¦ {%vi-kḷp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kalpate, -kalpi-%}
{%tum,%} to change or alternate with (with inst.); to be
doubtful or questionable, be subject to doubt or alter-
native, be optional or not decided: Caus. P. {%-kalpa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to prepare or arrange or dispose differ-
ently; to prescribe variously; to make, compose,
form; to change or exchange with anything; to
divide (Ved.); to weigh alternatives, admit anything
as doubtful or optional; to choose one out of two
alternatives (Ved.); to doubt, consider as doubtful,
be doubtful about, consider with distrust; to consider
possible, conjecture, presume; to reflect upon.
<LEND>

<L>42236<pc>0910-c<k1>vikalpa<k2>vikalpa
{%Vi-kalpa, as,%}¦ m. alternation, alternative, option;
distinction; uncertainty, ambiguity; indecision, doubt,
hesitation; error, mistake, ignorance; (in rhetoric)
antithesis of opposites; (in grammar) admission of
an option or alternative, the allowing a rule to be
observed or not at pleasure; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people, (also read {%vikalya.%}) {%—Vikalpa-jāla,%} a snare-
like dilemma from which there is no escape. {%—Vikal-%}
{%popahāra (˚pa-up˚), as,%} m. an optional offering.
<LEND>

<L>42237<pc>0910-c<k1>vikalpaka<k2>vikalpaka
{%Vi-kalpaka,%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp. {%= vi-%}
{%kalpa;%} [cf. {%nir-v˚, sa-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42238<pc>0910-c<k1>vikalpana<k2>vikalpana
{%Vi-kalpana, am,%}¦ n. the giving or allowing an
option or alternative, admitting of doubt or uncer-
tainty; indecision; inconsideration.
<LEND>

<L>42239<pc>0910-c<k1>vikalpayat<k2>vikalpayat
{%Vi-kalpayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ preparing or disposing
differently, composing; exchanging with; weighing
alternatives, deliberating, doubting.
<LEND>

<L>42240<pc>0910-c<k1>vikalpita<k2>vikalpita
{%Vi-kalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made optional, held to be
optional; (in grammar) optionally enforced, applied
or not at pleasure, ({%a-vikalpita,%} not subject to
doubt, undoubted.)
<LEND>

<L>42241<pc>0910-c<k1>vikalpin<k2>vikalpin
{%Vi-kalpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing doubt or indecision,
possessing an illusion, ({%nīlāśoka-vikalpi-keśa-ni-%}
{%karaḥ,%} having a mass of hair possessing the illusion
of the dark Aśoka.)
<LEND>

<L>42242<pc>0910-c<k1>vikeSa<k2>vikeSa<h>1
{#vikeSa#} 1¦. {%vi-keśa, as, ī, am,%} having loose or
dishevelled hair; ({%ī%}), f. a woman with loose hair; a
small braid or tress of hair first tied up separately and
then collected into the Veṇī or larger braid.
<LEND>

<L>42243<pc>0910-c<k1>vikeSa<k2>vikeSa<h>2
2. {%vi-keśa, as, ī, am,%}¦ hairless, without hair, bald;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Muni; ({%ī%}), f. a woman without
hair; N. of the wife of Śiva manifested in the form
of Mahī or the Earth (one of his eight Tanus or
visible forms).
<LEND>
[Page0911-a+ 77]

<L>42244<pc>0911-a<k1>vikeSikA<k2>vikeSikA
{%Vi-keśikā,%}¦ f. a piece of rag smeared with ghee or
other substances and applied as a dressing to a sore,
a kind of pledget.
<LEND>

<L>42245<pc>0911-a<k1>vikoka<k2>vikoka
{#vikoka#}¦ {%vi-koka, as,%} m. [cf. {%koka%}], N. of an
Asura (son of Vṛka and killed by Kalki).
<LEND>

<L>42246<pc>0911-a<k1>vikoza<k2>vikoza
{#vikoza#}¦ {%vi-koṣa%} or {%vi-kośa, as, ā, am,%} with-
out a case or covering, without a husk, unsheathed
(as a sword &c.), uncovered, denuded.
<LEND>

<L>42247<pc>0911-a<k1>vikOtuka<k2>vikOtuka
{#vikOtuka#}¦ {%vi-kautuka, as, ī, am,%} having no
desire or curiosity, incurious, indifferent.
<LEND>

<L>42248<pc>0911-a<k1>vikka<k2>vikka
{#vikka#}¦ {%vikka, as,%} m. a young elephant.
<LEND>

<L>42249<pc>0911-a<k1>vikta<k2>vikta
{#vikta#}¦ {%vikta.%} See under rt. {%vic,%} p. 913, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42250<pc>0911-a<k1>vikrandita<k2>vikrandita
{#vikrandita#}¦ {%vi-krandita, as, ā, am%} (see rt.
{%krand%}), crying or calling out, complaint.
<LEND>

<L>42251<pc>0911-a<k1>vikram<k2>vikram
{#vikram#}¦ {%vi-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krāmati, -kra-%}
{%mate, -kramitum,%} to step beyond, go beyond, pass
beyond, to step on, go on, walk on, step aside, move
or go aside, move away; to step or move apart (P.),
become divided; to step over, stride over, step
through, stride or stalk through, go through; to ad-
vance, proceed, walk, pass, go; to attack, fight against,
show valour or prowess (P.); to rise to or towards:
Caus. P. {%-kramayati, -yitum,%} to cause to step or
stride over or through.
<LEND>

<L>42252<pc>0911-a<k1>vikrama<k2>vikrama
{%Vi-krama, as,%}¦ m. stepping or going beyond, step-
ping or striding over; a step, stride, pace [cf. {%tri-v˚%}];
going, proceeding, walking; overpowering, overcom-
ing; heroism, prowess, heroic valour, great power or
strength; strength in general, ({%vikramaṃ kṛ,%} to dis-
play prowess, use one's strength); N. of a king, (see
{%vikramāditya%}); N. of Viṣṇu; of a city; of the forty-
eighth year of Jupiter's cycle. {%—Vikrama-karman, a,%}
n. an act of prowess, feat of valour. {%—Vikrama-keśa-%}
{%rin, ī,%} m. ‘valour-lion,’ N. of king Vikramāditya.
{%—Vikrama-carita%} or {%vikrama-caritra, am,%} n.
‘Vikrama's acts,’ N. of thirty-two stories (describ-
ing the acts of Vikramāditya). {%—Vikrama-bāhu,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Vikrama-siṃha%} or {%vikrama-%}
{%sena, as,%} m., N. of king Vikramāditya. {%—Vikrama-%}
{%hīna, as, ā, am,%} destitute of valour, wanting in
courage. {%—Vikramāditya (˚ma-ād˚), as,%} m. ‘valour-
sun,’ N. of a celebrated Hindū king (of Ujjayinī or
Oujein and founder of the era called Saṃvat [see
{%saṃvat%}], which begins 57 B. C.; he is said to have
driven out the Śakas or Scythians and to have esta-
blished his dominion over almost the whole of
Northern India; he was one of the wisest of Hindū
kings and a great patron of literature; nine cele-
brated men of letters flourished at his court [see
{%nava-ratna%}], and innumerable legends are related
of him [cf. {%vikrama-carita, siṃhāsana-dvātriṃśat-%}
{%putrikā-vārttā%}] all teeming with exaggerations and
absurdities; according to some he fell in a battle
with his rival Śāli-vāhana, king of the south country
or Deccan, and the legendary date given for his death
is Kali Yuga 3044; there are, however, other kings
called Vikramāditya, and the name has been applied
to king Bhoja and even to Śāli-vāhana). {%—Vikra-%}
{%māditya-koṣa,%} N. of a work. {%—Vikramārka%}
{%(˚ma-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of king Vikramāditya. {%—Vi-%}
{%kramārjita (˚ma-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} acquired or con-
quered by valour. {%—Vikramorvaśī (˚ma-ur˚),%} f.
‘valour-[won] Urvaśī,’ N. of one of the three cele-
brated dramas of Kālidāsa.
<LEND>

<L>42253<pc>0911-a<k1>vikramaRa<k2>vikramaRa
{%Vi-kramaṇa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a step, pace, stride;
the stride of Viṣṇu, (see {%tri-vikrama.%})
<LEND>

<L>42254<pc>0911-a<k1>vikramaRIya<k2>vikramaRIya
{%Vi-kramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be stepped on, to
be overcome or overpowered.
<LEND>

<L>42255<pc>0911-a<k1>vikramamARa<k2>vikramamARa
{%Vi-kramamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ stepping or passing
beyond, traversing, proceeding; striding along, taking
giant steps; displaying strength, overpowering.
<LEND>

<L>42256<pc>0911-a<k1>vikramin<k2>vikramin
{%Vikramin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ displaying valour or prowess,
powerful, courageous, strong; chivalrous, gallant, ag-
gressive; ({%ī%}), m. a hero; a lion; N. of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>42257<pc>0911-a<k1>vikrAnta<k2>vikrAnta
{%Vi-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ stepped or passed beyond;
valiant, mighty, victorious, overcoming; ({%as%}), m. a
hero, warrior; a lion; N. of a Prajā-pati; ({%am%}), n.
[Page0911-b+ 75]
a step, stride; valour, prowess, military achievement;
the jewel called {%vaikrānta%}. {%—Vikrānta-gati, is,%} m.
a man with a portly gait. {%—Vikrānta-bhīma,%} N.
of a drama.
<LEND>

<L>42258<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrAnti<k2>vikrAnti
{%Vi-krānti, is,%}¦ f. stepping on, striding; a horse's
canter or gallop; heroism, valour, power, prowess.
<LEND>

<L>42259<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrAntf<k2>vikrAntf
{%Vi-krāntṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ displaying prowess, valiant;
victorious; ({%tā%}), m. a hero, victor.
<LEND>

<L>42260<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrAmat<k2>vikrAmat
{%Vi-krāmat, an, antī, at,%}¦ stepping beyond or
aside, striding on, passing beyond; stalking; dis-
playing valour or strength.
<LEND>

<L>42261<pc>0911-b<k1>vicakramARa<k2>vicakramARa
{%Vi-cakramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. striding, traversing.
<LEND>

<L>42262<pc>0911-b<k1>vikraya<k2>vikraya
{#vikraya#}¦ {%vi-kraya.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>42263<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrasra<k2>vikrasra
{#vikrasra#}¦ {%vi-krasra = vi-kusra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>42264<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrAnti<k2>vikrAnti
{#vikrAnti#}¦ {%vi-krānti.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>42265<pc>0911-b<k1>vikriyA<k2>vikriyA
{#vikriyA#}¦ {%vi-kriyā.%} See p. 910, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42266<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrI<k2>vikrI
{#vikrI#}¦ {%vi-krī,%} cl. 9. A. {%-krīṇīte, -kretum,%} to
buy and sell, barter, trade (Ved.); to sell, vend; to
sell or exchange for (with inst., e. g. {%gavāṃ saha-%}
{%sreṇa vikrīṇe,%} I sell for a thousand cows): Desid. A.
{%-cikrīṣate,%} to wish to sell, to desire to sell or ex-
change for (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>42267<pc>0911-b<k1>vikraya<k2>vikraya
{%Vi-kraya, as,%}¦ m. sale, selling, vending. {%—Vikra-%}
{%ya-pattra, am,%} n. a bill of sale. {%—Vikrayānuśaya%}
{%(˚ya-an˚), as,%} m. rescission of sale. {%—Vikrayārtham%}
{%(˚ya-ar˚),%} ind. for sale.
<LEND>

<L>42268<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrayaRa<k2>vikrayaRa
{%Vi-krayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of selling, vending.
<LEND>

<L>42269<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrayika<k2>vikrayika
{%Vikrayika, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who sells, selling;
({%as%}), m. a vender, salesman, dealer.
<LEND>

<L>42270<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrayin<k2>vikrayin
{%Vikrayin, ī,%}¦ m. a seller, vender.
<LEND>

<L>42271<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrAyaka<k2>vikrAyaka
{%Vi-krāyaka%}¦ or {%vi-krāyika, as,%} m. a vender, seller.
<LEND>

<L>42272<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrIta<k2>vikrIta
{%Vi-krīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sold; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
Prajā-pati; ({%am%}), n. sale.
<LEND>

<L>42273<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrIya<k2>vikrIya
{%Vi-krīya,%}¦ ind. having sold.
<LEND>

<L>42274<pc>0911-b<k1>vikretf<k2>vikretf
{%Vi-kretṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who sells, a vender,
seller, selling.
<LEND>

<L>42275<pc>0911-b<k1>vikreya<k2>vikreya
{%Vi-kreya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sold, saleable, vendible.
<LEND>

<L>42276<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrIq<k2>vikrIq
{#vikrIq#}¦ {%vi-krīḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krīḍati, -krīḍitum,%}
to play with, to make a plaything of (with acc.); to
sport.
<LEND>

<L>42277<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrIqita<k2>vikrIqita
{%Vi-krīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ played with, played; ({%am%}),
n. play, sport.
<LEND>

<L>42278<pc>0911-b<k1>vikruS<k2>vikruS
{#vikruS#}¦ {%vi-kruś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati, -kroṣṭum,%}
to cry out, exclaim; to raise a cry; to sound; to
invoke any one (acc.); to revile.
<LEND>

<L>42279<pc>0911-b<k1>vikruSya<k2>vikruSya
{%Vi-kruśya,%}¦ ind. having screamed, bawling, crying out.
<LEND>

<L>42280<pc>0911-b<k1>vikruzwa<k2>vikruzwa
{%Vi-kruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ called out, cried out, ex-
claimed; harsh, abusive, cruel, unkind (as speech);
({%am%}), n. a cry of alarm or for help; abuse.
<LEND>

<L>42281<pc>0911-b<k1>vikroSat<k2>vikroSat
{%Vi-krośat, an, antī, at,%}¦ crying out, bawling,
screaming, shrieking; reviling.
<LEND>

<L>42282<pc>0911-b<k1>vikroSana<k2>vikroSana
{%Vi-krośana, am,%}¦ n. the act of calling out; abas-
ing, reviling.
<LEND>

<L>42283<pc>0911-b<k1>vikroSamAna<k2>vikroSamAna
{%Vi-krośamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ crying aloud, screaming.
<LEND>

<L>42284<pc>0911-b<k1>vikrozwf<k2>vikrozwf
{%Vi-kroṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who calls or cries
out, calling out; a reviler.
<LEND>

<L>42285<pc>0911-b<k1>viklam<k2>viklam
{#viklam#}¦ {%vi-klam,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-klāmati, -klām-%}
{%yati, -klamitum,%} to become faint or weak or weary;
to be dispirited or dejected, lose heart, despond,
despair.
<LEND>

<L>42286<pc>0911-b<k1>viklAnta<k2>viklAnta
{%Vi-klānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ dispirited, fatigued, wearied.
<LEND>

<L>42287<pc>0911-b<k1>viklav<k2>viklav
{#viklav#}¦ {%vi-klav,%} cl. 1. A. {%-klavate, -klavitum,%}
to become agitated or confused, to feel alarm, fear.
<LEND>

<L>42288<pc>0911-b<k1>viklava<k2>viklava
{%Vi-klava, as, ā, am%}¦ (according to some fr. rt.
{%klu%} with {%vi%}), overcome with fear or agitation, con-
fused, agitated, bewildered, confounded; excited,
alarmed; disgusted. {%—Viklava-tā,%} f. or {%viklava-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. agitation, confusion; alarm, fear.
<LEND>

<L>42289<pc>0911-b<k1>viklid<k2>viklid
{#viklid#}¦ {%vi-klid,%} cl. 4. P. {%-klidyati,%} &c., to
become very wet or moist.
<LEND>

<L>42290<pc>0911-b<k1>viklinna<k2>viklinna
{%Vi-klinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ very wet or moist,
thoroughly wetted; decayed, shrivelled, withered;
old. {%—Viklinna-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} ‘moist-hearted,’
tender-hearted, one whose heart is easily moved
with pity.
<LEND>
[Page0911-c+ 74]

<L>42291<pc>0911-c<k1>vikleda<k2>vikleda
{%Vi-kleda, as,%}¦ m. moistening or wetting thoroughly,
dissolution.
<LEND>

<L>42292<pc>0911-c<k1>viklizwa<k2>viklizwa
{#viklizwa#}¦ {%vi-kliṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (see rt. {%kliś%}),
excessively afflicted or distressed, much hurt or in-
jured, destroyed; ({%am%}), n. a fault in pronunciation.
<LEND>

<L>42293<pc>0911-c<k1>vikleSa<k2>vikleSa
{%Vi-kleśa, as,%}¦ m. ‘indistinctness,’ an incorrect pro-
nunciation of the dentals.
<LEND>

<L>42294<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzaRam<k2>vikzaRam
{#vikzaRam#}¦ {%vi-kṣaṇam,%} ind. momentarily,
for a moment.
<LEND>

<L>42295<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzan<k2>vikzan
{#vikzan#}¦ {%vi-kṣan%} or {%vi-kṣaṇ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-kṣa-%}
{%ṇoti, -kṣaṇitum,%} to wound or hurt severely, kill.
<LEND>

<L>42296<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzata<k2>vikzata
{%Vi-kṣata, as, ā, am,%}¦ excessively wounded or hurt,
torn asunder, struck about; ({%am%}), n. wounding.
<LEND>

<L>42297<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzar<k2>vikzar
{#vikzar#}¦ {%vi-kṣar,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kṣarati, -kṣa-%}
{%ritum,%} to flow away, flow into.
<LEND>

<L>42298<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzal<k2>vikzal
{#vikzal#}¦ {%vi-kṣal,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kṣālayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to wash off, wash away.
<LEND>

<L>42299<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzAlita<k2>vikzAlita
{%Vi-kṣālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ washed off; bathed.
<LEND>

<L>42300<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzAva<k2>vikzAva
{#vikzAva#}¦ {%vi-kṣāva, as,%} m. (see rt. {%kṣu%}),
sneezing, cough; a sound.
<LEND>

<L>42301<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzi<k2>vikzi
{#vikzi#}¦ {%vi-kṣi,%} Caus. {%-kṣayayati, -kṣapa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Ved. to waste, destroy completely, ruin.
<LEND>

<L>42302<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzIRa<k2>vikzIRa
{%Vi-kṣīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>42303<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzIRaka<k2>vikzIRaka
{%Vi-kṣīṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a destroyer; N. of the chief
of a class of demigods attendant on Śiva (described
as the ministers of destruction by pestilential diseases
&c.); a meeting or assembly of the gods; a place
prohibited to eaters of meat.
<LEND>

<L>42304<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzip<k2>vikzip
{#vikzip#}¦ {%vi-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣipati, -te,%}
{%-kṣeptum,%} to throw apart or asunder, throw hither
and thither; to throw away or about, send hither and
thither, disperse, scatter, distribute; to extend, stretch
out; to let loose a bow-string, to shoot off; to cast,
throw; to cast off or aside, discard; to reject, refute.
<LEND>

<L>42305<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzipat<k2>vikzipat
{%Vi-kṣipat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} throwing apart,
throwing away, throwing about, tossing; scattering;
agitating; pulling, twitching, twanging.
<LEND>

<L>42306<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzipta<k2>vikzipta
{%Vi-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown apart or asunder,
thrown about, cast; scattered, dispersed; discarded;
sent, dispatched; agitated, bewildered, perplexed;
refuted, falsified.
<LEND>

<L>42307<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzipya<k2>vikzipya
{%Vi-kṣipya,%}¦ ind. having thrown apart or aside,
having cast off or discarded; having stretched out.
<LEND>

<L>42308<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzipyamARa<k2>vikzipyamARa
{%Vi-kṣipyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being thrown or
hurled off, being thrown out, being foiled, disgraced.
<LEND>

<L>42309<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzepa<k2>vikzepa
{%Vi-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. the act of throwing apart or
asunder, ({%caraṇa-v˚,%} throwing asunder of the feet,
striding with the legs apart); throwing away, cast-
ing, throwing, projection (see {%vikṣepa-śakti%});
sending, dispatching; scattering; confusion, per-
plexity, alarm, fear; looking about vaguely or wildly;
refuting an argument; celestial or polar latitude.
{%—Vikṣepa-dhruva, as,%} m. (in astronomy) the
greatest inclination of a planet's orbit. {%—Vikṣepa-%}
{%śakti, is,%} f. the power of Māyā, the projective power
of ignorance (according to the Vedānta phil.) or that
power of projection which raises up on the soul en-
veloped by it the appearance of an external world.
<LEND>

<L>42310<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzepaRa<k2>vikzepaRa
{%Vi-kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of throwing asunder
or away, throwing; scattering, dispersing; sending,
dispatching; confusion proceeding from error.
<LEND>

<L>42311<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzIra<k2>vikzIra
{#vikzIra#}¦ {%vi-kṣīra, as,%} m. the tree Calotro-
pis Gigantea.
<LEND>

<L>42312<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzud<k2>vikzud
{#vikzud#}¦ {%vi-kṣud,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-kṣuṇatti,%}
{%-kṣuntte, -kṣottum,%} to pound to pieces, bruise,
crush, comminute.
<LEND>

<L>42313<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzuRRa<k2>vikzuRRa
{%Vi-kṣuṇṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pounded or ground to
pieces.
<LEND>

<L>42314<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzuD<k2>vikzuD
{#vikzuD#}¦ {%vi-kṣudh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-kṣudhyati,%}
{%-kṣoddhum,%} to be hungry.
<LEND>

<L>42315<pc>0911-c<k1>vikzuB<k2>vikzuB
{#vikzuB#}¦ {%vi-kṣubh,%} cl. 1. A., 4. 9. P.
{%-kṣobhate, -kṣubhyati, -kṣubhnāti, -kṣobhi-%}
{%tum,%} to be shaken about or agitated or tossed about,
to become greatly disturbed or moved, to be dis-
[Page0912-a+ 72]
ordered; to confuse, disturb (cl. 9): Caus. {%-kṣobha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to move or shake, agitate, excite,
disturb, confuse, throw into disorder (as an army).
<LEND>

<L>42316<pc>0912-a<k1>vikzoBa<k2>vikzoBa
{%Vi-kṣobha, as,%}¦ m. shaking, agitating, agitation,
confusion, conflict, struggle, trepidation, alarm, panic.
<LEND>

<L>42317<pc>0912-a<k1>vikzoBita<k2>vikzoBita
{%Vi-kṣobhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken about, agitated,
tossed about, scattered.
<LEND>

<L>42318<pc>0912-a<k1>vikzoBya<k2>vikzoBya
{%Vi-kṣobhya,%}¦ ind. having agitated or disturbed,
disturbing.
<LEND>

<L>42319<pc>0912-a<k1>viKa<k2>viKa
{#viKa#}¦ {%vikha, as, ā, am,%} noseless; [cf. {%vikhu,%}
{%vikhya, vikhra, vikhru, vigra.%}] {%—Vikha-nas, ās,%}
m. epithet of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>42320<pc>0912-a<k1>viKaRq<k2>viKaRq
{#viKaRq#}¦ {%vi-khaṇḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-khaṇḍayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to break into fragments, break up, cut. or
divide into pieces; to cleave or tear asunder, dis-
member; to scatter, disturb, trouble; to interrupt.
<LEND>

<L>42321<pc>0912-a<k1>viKaRqita<k2>viKaRqita
{%Vi-khaṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken up, cut into
pieces, divided; torn apart or asunder, cleft in two;
refuted.
<LEND>

<L>42322<pc>0912-a<k1>viKan<k2>viKan
{#viKan#}¦ {%vi-khan,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-khanati, -te,%}
{%-khanitum,%} to dig up.
<LEND>

<L>42323<pc>0912-a<k1>viKAnasa<k2>viKAnasa
{%Vi-khānasa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of hermit (said to be
so called from living on roots; cf. {%vaikhānasa%}).
<LEND>

<L>42324<pc>0912-a<k1>viKAda<k2>viKAda
{#viKAda#}¦ {%vi-khāda, as,%} m., Ved. {%= saṅgrāma%}
(according to Naigh. II. 17).
<LEND>

<L>42325<pc>0912-a<k1>viKAsA<k2>viKAsA
{#viKAsA#}¦ {%vikhāsā,%} f. the tongue.
<LEND>

<L>42326<pc>0912-a<k1>viKid<k2>viKid
{#viKid#}¦ {%vi-khid,%} cl. 6. P. {%-khindati, -khet-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to strike or tear asunder, rend apart.
<LEND>

<L>42327<pc>0912-a<k1>viKu<k2>viKu
{#viKu#}¦ {%vikhu, us, us, u,%} noseless; [cf. {%vikha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42328<pc>0912-a<k1>viKya<k2>viKya
{%Vikhya, as, ā, am, = vikhu,%}¦ noseless.
<LEND>

<L>42329<pc>0912-a<k1>viKura<k2>viKura
{#viKura#}¦ {%vi-khura, as,%} m. ‘hoofless,’ a goblin,
demon, Rākṣasa; a thief.
<LEND>

<L>42330<pc>0912-a<k1>viKyA<k2>viKyA
{#viKyA#}¦ {%vi-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti, -khyātum,%}
to look about, look at, view, see; to shine; to make
visible, illuminate; to celebrate; to call, name:
Caus. {%-khyāpayati, -yitum,%} to make visible; to
make known, communicate, announce, declare, pro-
claim, promulgate, publish abroad, celebrate.
<LEND>

<L>42331<pc>0912-a<k1>viKyAta<k2>viKyAta
{%Vi-khyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ generally known, notorious,
renowned, famous, celebrated; known as, called,
named; avowed, confessed.
<LEND>

<L>42332<pc>0912-a<k1>viKyAti<k2>viKyAti
{%Vi-khyāti, is,%}¦ f. fame, celebrity, notoriety.
<LEND>

<L>42333<pc>0912-a<k1>viKyApana<k2>viKyApana
{%Vi-khyāpana, am,%}¦ n. making known, declaring,
announcing, publishing; explanation, exposition;
avowing, acknowledging, confessing.
<LEND>

<L>42334<pc>0912-a<k1>viKra<k2>viKra
{#viKra#}¦ {%vikhra, as, ā, am,%} noseless; [cf.
{%vikha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42335<pc>0912-a<k1>viKru<k2>viKru
{%Vikhru, us, us, u, = vikhra,%}¦ noseless.
<LEND>

<L>42336<pc>0912-a<k1>vigaR<k2>vigaR
{#vigaR#}¦ {%vi-gaṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-gaṇayati, -yitum,%}
to reckon, compute, calculate; to deliberate, con-
sider, reflect; to esteem, regard; to consider as; to
disregard, take no notice of.
<LEND>

<L>42337<pc>0912-a<k1>vigaRana<k2>vigaRana
{%Vi-gaṇana, am,%}¦ n. reckoning, computing; con-
sidering, deliberating; reckoning off, discharge of a
debt.
<LEND>

<L>42338<pc>0912-a<k1>vigaRayya<k2>vigaRayya
{%Vi-gaṇayya,%}¦ ind. having reckoned; having de-
liberated or weighed; not having considered.
<LEND>

<L>42339<pc>0912-a<k1>vigaRita<k2>vigaRita
{%Vi-gaṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reckoned, calculated; con-
sidered, weighed; reckoned off, discharged (as a
debt).
<LEND>

<L>42340<pc>0912-a<k1>vigad<k2>vigad
{#vigad#}¦ {%vi-gad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gadati, -gaditum,%}
to talk about, speak about, repeat, spread a report.
<LEND>

<L>42341<pc>0912-a<k1>vigada<k2>vigada
{%Vi-gada,%}¦ Ved. talking or sounding variously.
<LEND>

<L>42342<pc>0912-a<k1>vigadita<k2>vigadita
{%Vi-gadita, as, ā, am,%}¦ talked about, spoken about,
spread abroad (as a report).
<LEND>

<L>42343<pc>0912-a<k1>viganDaka<k2>viganDaka
{#viganDaka#}¦ {%vi-gandhaka, as,%} m. ‘having a
bad smell,’ the Iṅgudī tree.
<LEND>

<L>42344<pc>0912-a<k1>viganDi<k2>viganDi
{%Vi-gandhi, is, is, i,%}¦ smelling badly, having an
unpleasant smell, stinking.
<LEND>

<L>42345<pc>0912-a<k1>viganDikA<k2>viganDikA
{%Vigandhikā,%}¦ f. {%= hapuṣā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>42346<pc>0912-a<k1>vigam<k2>vigam
{#vigam#}¦ {%vi-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%}
to go away, pass away, depart, disappear, cease, die,
[Page0912-b+ 77]
disperse: Caus. {%-gamayati, -yitum,%} to cause to go
or pass away; to spend.
<LEND>

<L>42347<pc>0912-b<k1>vigata<k2>vigata<h>2
2. {%vi-gata, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. {%vi-gata%} see under
2. {%vi%}), gone away, departed, disappeared, ceased, gone;
dead; parted, severed, separated; freed or exempt from,
devoid of; lost; destitute of light, obscured, gloomy,
dark. {%—Vigata-kalmaṣa, as, ā, am,%} free from
stain or soil, unsoiled, free from sin, sinless; pure,
righteous. {%—Vigata-klama, as, ā, am,%} one whose
fatigues have ceased, relieved from fatigue. {%—Vi-%}
{%gata-jñāna, as, ā, am,%} one who has lost his wits.
{%—Vigata-jvara, as, ā, am,%} cured of fever; freed
from feverishness or morbid feeling, freed from
trouble or distress of mind; exempt from decay.
{%—Vigata-bhī, īs, īs, i,%} one whose fears are gone,
free from fear. {%—Vigata-manyu, us, us, u,%} free
from resentment. {%—Vigata-rāga, as, ā, am,%} devoid
of passion or affection. {%—Vigata-lakṣaṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} devoid of good or lucky marks, unfortunate, un-
lucky. {%—Vigata-śrīka, as, ā, am,%} destitute of for-
tune, unfortunate, unprosperous. {%—Vigata-saṅkal-%}
{%pa, as, ā, am,%} devoid of purpose or design, without
resolution. {%—Vigata-sneha, as, ā, am,%} void of affec-
tion. {%—Vigata-sneha-sauhṛda, as, ā, am,%} one
who has relinquished love and friendship. {%—Vigata-%}
{%spṛha, as, ā, am,%} devoid of wish or desire, in-
different. {%—Vigatārtavā (˚ta-ār˚),%} f. a woman in
whom the menstrual excretion has ceased, one past
child-bearing or one past the age of fifty-five.
<LEND>

<L>42348<pc>0912-b<k1>vigama<k2>vigama
{%Vi-gama, as,%}¦ m. departure, secession, decease,
death, withdrawing, relinquishment, separation.
<LEND>

<L>42349<pc>0912-b<k1>vigAma<k2>vigAma
{%Vi-gāma, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a step, pace, stride, (in
Ṛg-veda I. 155, 4. applied to the three strides of
Viṣṇu; Sāy. {%= vividha-gamana.%})
<LEND>

<L>42350<pc>0912-b<k1>vigara<k2>vigara
{#vigara#}¦ {%vi-gara, as,%} m. ‘not swallowing,’ an
abstemious man; a naked ascetic; a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>42351<pc>0912-b<k1>vigarj<k2>vigarj
{#vigarj#}¦ {%vi-garj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-garjati, -garjitum,%}
to roar out, cry out.
<LEND>

<L>42352<pc>0912-b<k1>vigarh<k2>vigarh
{#vigarh#}¦ {%vi-garh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-garhate, -garhi-%}
{%tum,%} to blame, abuse, reproach, revile; to disdain,
despise, contemn: Caus. {%-garhayati, -yitum,%} to
revile, rail at, vituperate.
<LEND>

<L>42353<pc>0912-b<k1>vigarhaRa<k2>vigarhaRa
{%Vi-garhaṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. blaming, blame, abusing,
abuse, censure, reproach.
<LEND>

<L>42354<pc>0912-b<k1>vigarhaRIya<k2>vigarhaRIya
{%Vi-garhaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ reprehensible, blam-
able, bad, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>42355<pc>0912-b<k1>vigarhita<k2>vigarhita
{%Vi-garhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ abused, reviled, blamed;
disdained, despised; reprobated, scouted, condemned;
prohibited; low, vile; wicked, bad.
<LEND>

<L>42356<pc>0912-b<k1>vigarhya<k2>vigarhya<h>1
1. {%vi-garhya, as, ā, am,%}¦  reprehensible, blamable.
{%—Vigarhya-kathā,%} f. reprehensible speech, scandal.
<LEND>

<L>42357<pc>0912-b<k1>vigarhya<k2>vigarhya<h>2
2. {%vi-garhya,%}¦ ind. having blamed or reviled.
<LEND>

<L>42358<pc>0912-b<k1>vigal<k2>vigal
{#vigal#}¦ {%vi-gal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-galati, -galitum,%}
to flow or ooze or trickle away, drain off, fall in
drops, drip, distil; to melt away, liquefy, pass away,
disappear, fade away, disperse; to fall down or out,
drop down, drop out; to become loose or untied.
<LEND>

<L>42359<pc>0912-b<k1>vigalat<k2>vigalat
{%Vi-galat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flowing away, trickling,
dropping, oozing; melting away, dissolving, fading,
dispersing.
<LEND>

<L>42360<pc>0912-b<k1>vigalita<k2>vigalita
{%Vi-galita, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowed away, flowing,
trickled, distilled, oozed, fallen, dropped, melted
away, liquefied, dissolved; dissipated, dispersed,
gone, decayed; slackened, untied (as a knot);
loose, disordered (as hair or dress), untied, detached.
{%—Vigalita-keśa, as, ā, am,%} having dishevelled hair.
{%—Vigalita-nīvi, is, is, i,%} having the knot untied.
<LEND>

<L>42361<pc>0912-b<k1>vigA<k2>vigA
{#vigA#}¦ {%vi-gā%} (see rt. 1. {%gā%}), cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti,%}
{%gātum,%} Ved. to go or pass away, disappear.
<LEND>

<L>42362<pc>0912-b<k1>vigAna<k2>vigAna
{#vigAna#}¦ {%vi-gāna.%} See under {%vi-gai,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>42363<pc>0912-b<k1>vigAh<k2>vigAh
{#vigAh#}¦ {%vi-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -gāhitum,%}
{%gāḍhum,%} to plunge or dive into (with acc. or loc.),
bathe in; to agitate or stir about, disturb; to enter
into or engage upon; to enter, penetrate, advance
into, pervade; to come on, set in (as a season, the
night, &c.): Pass. {%-gāhyate,%} to be plunged into or
penetrated, to be entered into or engaged upon.
<LEND>
[Page0912-c+ 76]

<L>42364<pc>0912-c<k1>vigAQa<k2>vigAQa
{%Vi-gāḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ plunged into, ({%ambhasi%}
{%vigāḍha-mātre,%} at the very moment of the water
being plunged into), bathed in, immersed, bathed,
bathing; come on, advanced, set in, taken place;
deep, excessive.
<LEND>

<L>42365<pc>0912-c<k1>vigAQf<k2>vigAQf
{%Vi-gāḍhṛ, ḍhā, ḍhrī, ḍhṛ,%}¦ one who plunges
into; one who agitates or disturbs.
<LEND>

<L>42366<pc>0912-c<k1>vigAha<k2>vigAha
{%Vi-gāha, as,%}¦ m. the act of plunging into (literally
or figuratively), bathing.
<LEND>

<L>42367<pc>0912-c<k1>vigAhamAna<k2>vigAhamAna
{%Vi-gāhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ plunging into, bathing;
advancing into, penetrating, advancing, proceeding;
perceiving, knowing.
<LEND>

<L>42368<pc>0912-c<k1>vigAhya<k2>vigAhya
{%Vi-gāhya,%}¦ ind. having plunged into, having bathed,
having entered.
<LEND>

<L>42369<pc>0912-c<k1>vigAhyamAna<k2>vigAhyamAna
{%Vi-gāhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being plunged into,
being agitated, being entered or penetrated.
<LEND>

<L>42370<pc>0912-c<k1>viguRa<k2>viguRa
{#viguRa#}¦ {%vi-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} void of qualities;
having no merit, worthless, bad, barren.
<LEND>

<L>42371<pc>0912-c<k1>vigup<k2>vigup
{#vigup#}¦ {%vi-gup,%} Desid. A. {%-jugupsate,%} to
shrink away from, shun.
<LEND>

<L>42372<pc>0912-c<k1>vigUQa<k2>vigUQa
{#vigUQa#}¦ {%vi-gūḍha, as, ā, am%} (see rt. 1. {%guh%}),
concealed, hidden; blamed, reproached, censured.
{%—Vigūḍha-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} proceeding or acting
secretly.
<LEND>

<L>42373<pc>0912-c<k1>vigE<k2>vigE
{#vigE#}¦ {%vi-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gātum,%} to
sing variously, sing discordantly or badly; to decry,
abuse, reproach, blame.
<LEND>

<L>42374<pc>0912-c<k1>vigAna<k2>vigAna
{%Vi-gāna, am,%}¦ n. singing discordantly, defamation,
ill report, detraction, scandal; censure, reproach.
<LEND>

<L>42375<pc>0912-c<k1>vigIta<k2>vigIta
{%Vi-gīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sung or said variously; badly
sung; decried, abused, reproached; contradicted,
contradictory, inconsistent.
<LEND>

<L>42376<pc>0912-c<k1>vigIti<k2>vigIti
{%Vi-gīti, is,%}¦ f. singing in various ways, singing ill;
reproach, abuse; contradiction; a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>42377<pc>0912-c<k1>vigna<k2>vigna
{#vigna#}¦ {%vigna.%} See under rt. 1. {%vij.%}
<LEND>

<L>42378<pc>0912-c<k1>vigra<k2>vigra
{#vigra#}¦ {%vigra, as, ā, am%} (perhaps for {%vi-agra%}),
noseless [cf. {%vikha,%} &c.]; wise, (according to Naigh.
III. 15 {%= medhā-vin.%})
<LEND>

<L>42379<pc>0912-c<k1>vigraT<k2>vigraT
{#vigraT#}¦ {%vi-grath%} or {%vi-granth%} (see rt. 1. {%grath%}),
cl. 9. P. {%-grathnāti, -granthitum,%} to connect, tie
or bind together, wind round.
<LEND>

<L>42380<pc>0912-c<k1>vigraTita<k2>vigraTita
{%Vi-grathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected; containing
knots; having tubercles; clotted; bound up, hin-
dered, obstructed, impeded.
<LEND>

<L>42381<pc>0912-c<k1>vigrah<k2>vigrah
{#vigrah#}¦ {%vi-grah%} (see rt. {%grah%}), cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛhṇāti, -gṛhṇīte%} (Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti, -gṛbhṇīte%}),
{%-grahītum,%} to stretch out or apart, spread out; to hold
apart, keep separate, distribute into parts, divide, dis-
solve, resolve, separate (anything into its constituent
elements), isolate; to quarrel, fight, war, wage war,
wage war against (with acc.); to assault, seize, lay
hold of, take up; to receive in a friendly manner,
welcome; to perceive, observe: Caus. {%-grāhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to fight, cause to wage war against:
Desid. {%-jighṛkṣati,%} to wish to fight against.
<LEND>

<L>42382<pc>0912-c<k1>vigfhIta<k2>vigfhIta
{%Vi-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ stretched out or apart,
separated, divided, dissolved; isolated; opposed;
encountered (as in fight), warred against; obstructed;
seized, taken up.
<LEND>

<L>42383<pc>0912-c<k1>vigfhya<k2>vigfhya
{%Vi-gṛhya,%}¦ ind. having stretched out or apart,
having warred against or contended with.
<LEND>

<L>42384<pc>0912-c<k1>vigfhyamARa<k2>vigfhyamARa
{%Vi-gṛhyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being warred upon
or contended with.
<LEND>

<L>42385<pc>0912-c<k1>vigraha<k2>vigraha
{%Vi-graha, as,%}¦ m. stretching out or apart, extension,
expansion; shape, form, figure; the body; (in gram-
mar) separation, resolution, analysis, resolution of a
compound word into its constituent parts, the separa-
tion or analysis of any word capable of separation,
(such words are Kṛdantas, Taddhitas, all Samāsas
or compound words, Ekaśeṣas, and all derivative
verbs like desideratives &c.; the only words incapable
of resolution being the simple verb, the singular of the
noun, and a few indeclinables not derived from roots;
all compounds being called {%nitya%} or ‘fixed,’ when
their meaning cannot be ascertained through an
analysis of their component parts; cf. {%jamad-agni%});
[Page0913-a+ 77]
a division, part, portion; ({%as, am%}), m. n. opposi-
tion, encounter, quarrel, combat, strife, war, battle;
conflict (of the planets); disfavour. {%—Vigraha-para,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} intent on war, engaged in fighting. {%—Vi-%}
{%graha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having form or figure, em-
bodied, incarnate; having a handsome form or shape,
fine, beautiful. {%—Vigrahāvara (˚ha-av˚), am,%} n.
‘the posterior of the body,’ the back.
<LEND>

<L>42386<pc>0913-a<k1>vigrAhya<k2>vigrAhya<h>1
1. {%vi-grāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be warred upon or
contended with.
<LEND>

<L>42387<pc>0913-a<k1>vigrAhya<k2>vigrAhya<h>2
2. {%vi-grāhya,%}¦ ind. having caused to wage war or
fight with.
<LEND>

<L>42388<pc>0913-a<k1>vijigrAhayizu<k2>vijigrAhayizu
{%Vi-jigrāhayiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. Desid. of Caus.),
wishing to cause to fight or wage war.
<LEND>

<L>42389<pc>0913-a<k1>vijiGfkzu<k2>vijiGfkzu
{%Vi-jighṛkṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. Desid.), wishing to
make war or fight with, determined to encounter or
oppose.
<LEND>

<L>42390<pc>0913-a<k1>vigrIva<k2>vigrIva
{#vigrIva#}¦ {%vi-grīva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the
neck or head cut off, decapitated.
<LEND>

<L>42391<pc>0913-a<k1>viglE<k2>viglE
{#viglE#}¦ {%vi-glai,%} Caus. {%-glāpayati, -yitum,%} to
make distressed, afflict, grieve.
<LEND>

<L>42392<pc>0913-a<k1>viGaw<k2>viGaw
{#viGaw#}¦ {%vi-ghaṭ%} [cf. {%vi-ghaṭṭ%} below], cl. 1. A.
{%-ghaṭate, -ghaṭitum,%} to become separate, crumble
away, fly apart, burst, disperse; to be broken or
interrupted; to be destroyed: Caus. {%-ghaṭayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to tear apart, separate, disperse; to remove,
displace.
<LEND>

<L>42393<pc>0913-a<k1>viGawana<k2>viGawana
{%Vi-ghaṭana, am,%}¦ n. breaking up, destruction,
ruin, misfortune.
<LEND>

<L>42394<pc>0913-a<k1>viGawikA<k2>viGawikA
{%Vi-ghaṭikā,%}¦ f. a particular measure of time, the
sixtieth part of a Ghaṭikā or Gharī, equal to twenty-
four seconds ({%= pala%}).
<LEND>

<L>42395<pc>0913-a<k1>viGawita<k2>viGawita
{%Vi-ghaṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ separated, divided, severed;
[cf. {%vi-ghaṭṭita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42396<pc>0913-a<k1>viGaww<k2>viGaww
{#viGaww#}¦ {%vi-ghaṭṭ,%} cl. 1. A., 10. P. {%-ghaṭṭate,%}
{%-ghaṭṭayati, -ghaṭṭitum, -ghaṭṭayitum,%} to strike
or force asunder, break asunder, burst open, open (a
door &c.); to separate, disperse; to strike, shake,
rub against, touch; to break (an agreement), violate,
betray.
<LEND>

<L>42397<pc>0913-a<k1>viGawwana<k2>viGawwana
{%Vi-ghaṭṭana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. striking asunder, forc-
ing apart; opening, separating, undoing, untying;
striking, rubbing, friction; hurting, offending.
<LEND>

<L>42398<pc>0913-a<k1>viGawwita<k2>viGawwita
{%Vi-ghaṭṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck apart, severed,
dispersed, opened, disclosed, untied, undone; struck,
rubbed, touched; excessively shaken, churned; hurt,
offended.
<LEND>

<L>42399<pc>0913-a<k1>viGawwin<k2>viGawwin
{%Vi-ghaṭṭin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ striking apart, striking,
touching.
<LEND>

<L>42400<pc>0913-a<k1>viGana<k2>viGana<h>1
{#viGana#} 1¦. {%vi-ghana, as, ā, am,%} cloudless,
destitute of clouds. {%—Vighanendu (˚na-in˚), us,%} m.
a cloudless moon.
<LEND>

<L>42401<pc>0913-a<k1>viGana<k2>viGana<h>2
{#viGana#} 2¦. {%vi-ghana, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-han%}), an
implement for striking, a mallet, hammer; one who
destroys or overpowers.
<LEND>

<L>42402<pc>0913-a<k1>viGanin<k2>viGanin
{%Vi-ghanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. slaying, killing; ({%ī%}),
m. one who slays, a slayer, destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>42403<pc>0913-a<k1>viGAta<k2>viGAta
{%Vi-ghāta, as,%}¦ m. destruction, killing; a blow;
opposition, prohibition, prevention, impediment,
obstacle; abandoning. {%—Vighāta-siddhi, is,%} f. the
settling or removal of obstacles or impediments.
<LEND>

<L>42404<pc>0913-a<k1>viGAtin<k2>viGAtin
{%Vi-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ slaying, killing, wounding,
destroying; removing; opposing, impeding, pre-
venting.
<LEND>

<L>42405<pc>0913-a<k1>viGna<k2>viGna
{%Vi-ghna, as,%}¦ m. (occasionally also {%am,%} n.), obstacle,
impediment, hindrance, obstruction, interruption, pre-
vention, opposition; any difficulty or trouble; the Ca-
ronda or Carissa Carondas. {%—Vighna-kara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} causing any obstacle or interruption, opposing,
impeding, obstructing. {%—Vighna-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}
causing obstacles. {%—Vighna-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} causing
obstacles, impeding, obstructing; fearful, formidable,
terrible. {%—Vighna-dhvaṃsa, as,%} m. the removal of
obstacles. {%—Vighna-nāyaka, as,%} m. ‘obstacle-chief,’
an epithet of Gaṇeśa, (this deity being supposed
capable of causing or removing difficulties and being
therefore worshipped at the commencement of any
[Page0913-b+ 75]
undertaking.) {%—Vighna-nāśaka, as, ā, am,%} who or
what removes obstacles or difficulties; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Vighna-nāśana, am,%} n. the
destruction or removal of obstacles; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Vighna-pratikriyā,%} f. the
counteraction or removal of an impediment. {%—Vi-%}
{%ghna-rāja, as,%} m. ‘obstacle-king,’ epithet of Gaṇeśa.
{%—Vighna-leśa, as,%} m. a slight obstacle or impedi-
ment. {%—Vighna-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having obstacles,
obstructed by difficulties or impediments. {%—Vighna-%}
{%vighāta, as,%} m. the removal of obstacles. {%—Vighna-%}
{%vināyaka, as,%} m. ‘obstacle-remover,’ epithet of Ga-
ṇeśa. {%—Vighna-siddhi, is,%} f. the settling or removal
of obstacles. {%—Vighna-hantṛ, tā,%} m. a remover or
destroyer of obstacles. {%—Vighna-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
removing obstacles; ({%ī%}), m. an epithet of Gaṇeśa.
{%—Vighneśa%} or {%vighneśāna%} or {%vighneśvara (˚na-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. ‘obstacle-lord,’ epithet of Gaṇeśa. {%—Vi-%}
{%ghneśa-vāhana, as,%} m. the vehicle of Gaṇeśa, a rat.
{%—Vighneśāna-kāntā (˚na-īś˚),%} f. ‘loved by Ga-
ṇeśa,’ a kind of white Dūrvā grass.
<LEND>

<L>42406<pc>0913-b<k1>viGnaka<k2>viGnaka
{%Vighnaka%}¦ (at the end of comps.) {%= vi-ghna,%}
preventing, hindering.
<LEND>

<L>42407<pc>0913-b<k1>viGnaya<k2>viGnaya
{%Vighnaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vighnayati, -yitum,%} to im-
pede, check, obstruct.
<LEND>

<L>42408<pc>0913-b<k1>viGnita<k2>viGnita
{%Vighnita, as, ā, am,%}¦ impeded, stopped, prevented,
obstructed.
<LEND>

<L>42409<pc>0913-b<k1>viGasa<k2>viGasa
{#viGasa#}¦ {%vi-ghasa, as,%} m. (see rt. {%ghas%}), the
residue of an oblation of food (offered to the gods,
to the Manes, to a guest, or to a spiritual preceptor);
food in general; ({%am%}), n. bee's-wax. {%—Vighasāśa%}
{%(˚sa-āśa), as,%} or {%vighasāśin, ī,%} m. one who eats
the remains of an offering.
<LEND>

<L>42410<pc>0913-b<k1>viGAta<k2>viGAta
{#viGAta#}¦ {%vi-ghāta,%} &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42411<pc>0913-b<k1>viGuz<k2>viGuz
{#viGuz#}¦ {%vi-ghuṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ghoṣati, -gho-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to cry or proclaim aloud; to sound, re-
sound; to fill with noise.
<LEND>

<L>42412<pc>0913-b<k1>viGuzwa<k2>viGuzwa
{%Vi-ghuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ cried out, proclaimed
loudly, cried; made to resound, resounding, reso-
nant, vocal.
<LEND>

<L>42413<pc>0913-b<k1>viGuzya<k2>viGuzya
{%Vi-ghuṣya,%}¦ ind. having proclaimed aloud.
<LEND>

<L>42414<pc>0913-b<k1>viGozaRa<k2>viGozaRa
{%Vi-ghoṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of proclaiming aloud,
proclamation, crying.
<LEND>

<L>42415<pc>0913-b<k1>viGUrR<k2>viGUrR
{#viGUrR#}¦ {%vi-ghūrṇ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ghūrṇati, -te,%}
{%-ghūrṇitum,%} to roll about, whirl about, shake about,
be agitated; to roll (the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>42416<pc>0913-b<k1>viGUrRat<k2>viGUrRat
{%Vi-ghūrṇat, an, antī, at,%}¦ rolling about, shaking;
rolling (the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>42417<pc>0913-b<k1>viGUrRita<k2>viGUrRita
{%Vi-ghūrṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rolled or shaken about;
rolled (as the eyes); rolling, shaking.
<LEND>

<L>42418<pc>0913-b<k1>viGfta<k2>viGfta
{#viGfta#}¦ {%vi-ghṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. destitute
of moisture.
<LEND>

<L>42419<pc>0913-b<k1>viGfzwa<k2>viGfzwa
{#viGfzwa#}¦ {%vi-ghṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} excessively
rubbed or ground; rubbed; sore.
<LEND>

<L>42420<pc>0913-b<k1>viGna<k2>viGna
{#viGna#}¦ {%vi-ghna.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42421<pc>0913-b<k1>viGrA<k2>viGrA
{#viGrA#}¦ {%vi-ghrā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jighrati, -ghrātum,%}
to smell or scent out, find out by smelling, perceive,
discover; to smell at, smell.
<LEND>

<L>42422<pc>0913-b<k1>viNKa<k2>viNKa
{#viNKa#}¦ {%viṅkha, as,%} m. a horse's hoof.
<LEND>

<L>42423<pc>0913-b<k1>vic<k2>vic
{#vic#}¦ {%vic,%} cl. 7. 3. P. A. {%vinakti%} (1st
sing. {%vinacmi,%} 2nd sing. {%vinakṣi,%} 3rd
pl. {%viñcanti%}), {%viṅkte, vevekti%} (3rd du. {%viviktas,%}
Ṛg-veda VIII. 12, 24), {%vevikte (?), viveca, vivice,%}
{%vekṣyati, -te, avicat, avaikṣīt, avikta, vektum,%}
to divide, separate, sever; to remove from, deprive
of (with inst.); to discriminate, discern, judge: Pass.
{%vicyate,%} Aor. {%aveci:%} Caus. {%vecayati,%} Aor. {%avīvicat:%}
Desid. {%vivikṣati;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">εἴκω,</lang> (perhaps also)
<lang n="greek">ἑκάς, ἴχ-ν-ος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>vito</nsi> for <nsi>vic-(i)-to,</nsi> (according
to some also) <nsi>vinco, vicis, invicem, vicissim;</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>wichan,</nsi> (perhaps also) <nsi>wehsal;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>wican, wrixl.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>42424<pc>0913-b<k1>vikta<k2>vikta
{%Vikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ separated; empty, (probably for
{%rikta,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>42425<pc>0913-b<k1>vicakila<k2>vicakila
{#vicakila#}¦ {%vi-cakila, as,%} m. a kind of jas-
[Page0913-c+ 78]
mine; another flowering plant (Artemisia, commonly
called Dona); a particular shrub, Vangueria Spinosa.
<LEND>

<L>42426<pc>0913-c<k1>vicakz<k2>vicakz
{#vicakz#}¦ {%vi-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe, -caṣṭum,%}
to appear, shine (Ved.); to see distinctly, view, look
at (Ved.); to perceive, descry, observe (Ved.); to
make manifest (Ved.); to tell, declare, proclaim,
announce: Caus. {%-cakṣayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
see distinctly, make clear (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>42427<pc>0913-c<k1>vicakzaRa<k2>vicakzaRa
{%Vi-cakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ clear-seeing, far-sighted,
all-seeing, discerning, circumspect, knowing, clever,
wise, sensible; able, proficient, skilful, ({%kārya-v˚,%}
clever or skilful in managing affairs); ({%as%}), m. a
learned Brāhman, Paṇḍit, a holy teacher; ({%ā%}), f. a
sort of sun-flower ({%= nāga-dantī%}).
<LEND>

<L>42428<pc>0913-c<k1>vicakzas<k2>vicakzas
{%Vi-cakṣas, ās,%}¦ m. a teacher, preceptor, spiritual
instructor.
<LEND>

<L>42429<pc>0913-c<k1>vicakzus<k2>vicakzus
{#vicakzus#}¦ {%vi-cakṣus, us, us, us,%} eyeless, des-
titute of sight, blind; perplexed, sad; ({%us%}), m. a
proper N.
<LEND>

<L>42430<pc>0913-c<k1>vicatura<k2>vicatura
{#vicatura#}¦ {%vi-catura, as, ā, am,%} see Vopa-deva
VI. 29.
<LEND>

<L>42431<pc>0913-c<k1>vicaya<k2>vicaya
{#vicaya#}¦ {%vi-caya,%} &c. See p. 914, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42432<pc>0913-c<k1>vicar<k2>vicar
{#vicar#}¦ {%vi-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati, -caritum,%} to
move or spread in different directions (Ved.); to go
or move about, wander, roam, rove, ramble about;
to go or gad about wantonly (Manu IX. 20), wander
from the right path; to go or walk through, run
through, pass through, pervade; to march against,
attack; to run out, come to an end; to go about
with, associate or have intercourse with (with inst.);
to proceed, act; to conduct one's self, behave, live;
to make, do, perform, accomplish; to go badly, fail:
Caus. {%-cārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to go or roam
about; to cause to wander from the right path, se-
duce; to reflect, consider, deliberate, ponder, excogi-
tate; to examine, investigate, ascertain; to doubt,
be doubtful, hesitate.
<LEND>

<L>42433<pc>0913-c<k1>vicarat<k2>vicarat
{%Vi-carat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wandering, roaming, going
about; marching; acting, making, performing.
<LEND>

<L>42434<pc>0913-c<k1>vicarita<k2>vicarita
{%Vi-carita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone or roamed about, &c.;
({%am%}), n. roaming, roving about, wandering.
<LEND>

<L>42435<pc>0913-c<k1>vicAra<k2>vicAra
{%Vi-cāra, as,%}¦ m. deliberation, discussion, consider-
ation, reflection, investigation, examination, trial,
disputation, dispute; the exercise of judgment or
reason, discriminating, distinguishing, judging, dis-
crimination, judgment, selection, decision, determin-
ation; doubt, hesitation; prudence. {%—Vicāra-kartṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m. one who makes investigation, a judge, investi-
gator. {%—Vicāra-cintāmaṇi,%} N. of a work on gram-
mar. {%—Vicāra-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing how to
discriminate or judge, able to decide on the merits
of a case, a judge. {%—Vicāra-bhū, ūs,%} f. a place for
discussion, any place for deliberation or judicial in-
vestigation, a tribunal; the judgment-seat of Yama
(judge of the dead). {%—Vicāra-mūḍha, as, ā, am,%}
foolish or mistaken in judgment. {%—Vicāra-śāstra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Vicāra-śīla, as, ā, am,%}
disposed to deliberation or reflection, considerate,
deliberative, reflective, thoughtful. {%—Vicāra-sthala,%}
{%am,%} n. a place for discussion or investigation, tribunal;
a logical disputation. {%—Vicārārtha-samāgama (˚ra-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m. assembling for the sake of trial or judg-
ment, an assembly for investigation or discussion.
<LEND>

<L>42436<pc>0913-c<k1>vicAraka<k2>vicAraka
{%Vi-cāraka, as,%}¦ m. an investigator, discriminator,
judge. {%—Vicāraka-tā,%} f. or {%vicāraka-tva, am,%} n.
investigation, deliberation, discussion.
<LEND>

<L>42437<pc>0913-c<k1>vicAraRa<k2>vicAraRa
{%Vi-cāraṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. deliberation, considera-
tion, examination, discussion, investigation, the exer-
cise of judgment; hesitation, doubt; ({%ā%}), f. the
Mīmāṃsā system of philosophy, (see {%mīmāṃsā.%})
<LEND>

<L>42438<pc>0913-c<k1>vicAraRIya<k2>vicAraRIya
{%Vi-cāraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be deliberated about,
to be discussed or investigated.
<LEND>

<L>42439<pc>0913-c<k1>vicArita<k2>vicArita
{%Vi-cārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ deliberated about, considered,
examined, inquired into, discussed, judged; decided,
determined; ({%am%}), n. deliberation, discussion.
<LEND>

<L>42440<pc>0913-c<k1>vicArin<k2>vicArin
{%Vi-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ moving about, wandering;
wanton, dissolute, lascivious; deliberating, judging
discussing.
<LEND>
[Page0914-a+ 76]

<L>42441<pc>0914-a<k1>vicArya<k2>vicArya<h>1
1. {%vi-cārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be deliberated, to be
weighed or discussed, &c.; questionable, doubtful.
<LEND>

<L>42442<pc>0914-a<k1>vicArya<k2>vicArya<h>2
2. {%vi-cārya,%}¦ ind. having deliberated, having con-
sidered, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42443<pc>0914-a<k1>vicAryamARa<k2>vicAryamARa
{%Vi-cāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being investigated or
discussed, being under inquiry.
<LEND>

<L>42444<pc>0914-a<k1>vicIrRa<k2>vicIrRa
{%Vi-cīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone through, wandered
through; occupied or inhabited by; entered.
<LEND>

<L>42445<pc>0914-a<k1>vicarcikA<k2>vicarcikA
{#vicarcikA#}¦ {%vi-carcikā,%} f. cutaneous erup-
tion, itch, herpes, scab.
<LEND>

<L>42446<pc>0914-a<k1>vicarcita<k2>vicarcita
{#vicarcita#}¦ {%vi-carcita, as, ā, am,%} rubbed,
smeared, anointed, rubbed with fragrant unguents,
applied (as an unguent).
<LEND>

<L>42447<pc>0914-a<k1>vicarzaRi<k2>vicarzaRi
{#vicarzaRi#}¦ {%vi-carṣaṇi, is, is, i%} (see {%car-%}
{%ṣaṇi%}), Ved. seeing through, far-seeing, discerning,
gifted with discernment, all-beholding, (Sāy. {%= viśe-%}
{%ṣeṇa sarvasya draṣṭṛ%}); swift, active.
<LEND>

<L>42448<pc>0914-a<k1>vical<k2>vical
{#vical#}¦ {%vi-cal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-calati, -calitum,%} to
move about, move to and fro, shake, waver, totter,
tremble; to move or go away, depart from, swerve
or deviate from (with abl.), go astray; to fall off
or down; to be agitated or troubled: Caus. {%-cāla-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to move about, shake, wave,
cause to tremble, make unsteady, trouble; to cause
to go away or depart from, cause to turn off or swerve
from, detach from, lead away from; to excite, stir
up; to destroy, rescind.
<LEND>

<L>42449<pc>0914-a<k1>vicala<k2>vicala
{%Vi-cala, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving about, shaking,
wavering, tottering, unsteady, unfixed; conceited.
<LEND>

<L>42450<pc>0914-a<k1>vicalat<k2>vicalat
{%Vi-calat, an, antī, at,%}¦ moving about, going to
and fro, shaking, waving.
<LEND>

<L>42451<pc>0914-a<k1>vicalana<k2>vicalana
{%Vi-calana, am,%}¦ n. the act of moving or going
away from, deviating from, deviation; unsteadiness,
fickleness; conceit, self-praise.
<LEND>

<L>42452<pc>0914-a<k1>vicalita<k2>vicalita
{%Vi-calita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone or moved away, de-
parted, swerved, deviated from.
<LEND>

<L>42453<pc>0914-a<k1>vicAla<k2>vicAla
{%Vi-cāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming between, intervening.
<LEND>

<L>42454<pc>0914-a<k1>vicAkaSat<k2>vicAkaSat
{#vicAkaSat#}¦ {%vi-cākaśat, at, atī, at%} (Intens.
part. fr. rt. {%kāś%} with {%vi%}), Ved. shining very brightly,
resplendent; seeing, perceiving, beholding.
<LEND>

<L>42455<pc>0914-a<k1>vicAra<k2>vicAra
{#vicAra#}¦ {%vi-cāra.%} See p. 913, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>42456<pc>0914-a<k1>vici<k2>vici<h>1
{#vici#} 1¦. {%vi-ci%} (see rt. 1. {%ci%}), cl. 5. P. A.
{%-cinoti, -cinute, -cetum,%} to segregate, separate or
sever from (a mass), divide, select, pick out; to take
away, remove, efface, destroy (Ved.); to clear, pre-
pare (a way or road; in this sense the form {%vici-%}
{%yantu%} is used in Ṛg-veda I. 90, 4); to gather to-
gether, collect, bring together; to distribute (Ved.);
to pile or heap up in a wrong way, disarrange.
<LEND>

<L>42457<pc>0914-a<k1>vicayizWa<k2>vicayizWa
{%Vi-cayiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. removing most
effectually, effacing, (Sāy. {%= ati-śayena nāśaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>42458<pc>0914-a<k1>vici<k2>vici<h>2
2. {%vi-ci, is,%}¦ m. f. a wave ({%= vīcī,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>42459<pc>0914-a<k1>vicinvat<k2>vicinvat<h>1
1. {%vi-cinvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ selecting, picking out;
gathering together, collecting (as winnings &c.).
<LEND>

<L>42460<pc>0914-a<k1>vicI<k2>vicI
{%Vi-cī,%}¦ f. a wave (= 2. {%vi-ci%} above).
<LEND>

<L>42461<pc>0914-a<k1>vici<k2>vici<h>3
{#vici#} 3¦. {%vi-ci%} (see rt. 2. {%ci;%} cf. {%vi-cit%}), cl.
5. P. A. (Ved. also cl. 3. P.) {%-cinoti, -cinute, -ci-%}
{%keti, -cetum,%} to discern, distinguish, make anything
discernible or clear, cause to appear; to search
through, investigate, inspect, examine; to search for,
look for, long for.
<LEND>

<L>42462<pc>0914-a<k1>vicaya<k2>vicaya
{%Vi-caya, as,%}¦ m. search, searching for, research,
investigation.
<LEND>

<L>42463<pc>0914-a<k1>vicayana<k2>vicayana
{%Vi-cayana, am,%}¦ n. the act of searching for, search,
research, seeking.
<LEND>

<L>42464<pc>0914-a<k1>vicita<k2>vicita
{%Vi-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ searched through, searched.
<LEND>

<L>42465<pc>0914-a<k1>viciti<k2>viciti
{%Vi-citi, is,%}¦ f. searching, search, research, consider-
ation.
<LEND>

<L>42466<pc>0914-a<k1>vicinvat<k2>vicinvat<h>2
2. {%vi-cinvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ searching for, searching,
seeking, considering, investigating, discriminating.
<LEND>

<L>42467<pc>0914-a<k1>vicinvatka<k2>vicinvatka
{%Vicinvatka, as,%}¦ m. search, discrimination, judg-
ment; a hero.
<LEND>

<L>42468<pc>0914-a<k1>vicinvAna<k2>vicinvAna
{%Vi-cinvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ searching for, searching,
considering, deliberating, thinking.
<LEND>

<L>42469<pc>0914-a<k1>viceya<k2>viceya
{%Vi-ceya, as, ā, am,%}¦ discernible, distinguishable;
to be searched for. {%—Viceya-tāraka, as, ā, am,%}
[Page0914-b+ 77]
having stars which have to be searched for, i. e.
separated by long intervals ({%= virala-nakṣatra%}).
<LEND>

<L>42470<pc>0914-b<k1>vicit<k2>vicit
{#vicit#}¦ {%vi-cit%} (see rt. 4. {%cit,%} which is pro-
bably connected with rt. 2. {%ci;%} cf. 3. {%vi-ci%}), cl. 1. P.
A. {%-cetati, -te, -cetitum,%} to perceive, notice, observe,
know, comprehend, understand, distinguish; to be
perceived or known (A.), to appear: Caus., Ved.
{%-citayati, -yitum,%} to perceive, distinguish: Desid.
{%-cikitsati,%} to wish to distinguish; to reflect, consider,
ponder; to hesitate about, doubt, be uncertain.
<LEND>

<L>42471<pc>0914-b<k1>vicikitsat<k2>vicikitsat
{%Vi-cikitsat, an, antī, at,%}¦ doubting, being in doubt
or uncertainty.
<LEND>

<L>42472<pc>0914-b<k1>vicikitsA<k2>vicikitsA
{%Vi-cikitsā,%}¦ f. doubt, uncertainty; error, mistake.
<LEND>

<L>42473<pc>0914-b<k1>vicitta<k2>vicitta
{%Vi-citta, as, ā, am,%}¦ perceived, observed, perceiv-
able, manifest.
<LEND>

<L>42474<pc>0914-b<k1>vicitra<k2>vicitra
{#vicitra#}¦ {%vi-citra, as, ā, am,%} variegated,
diversified, speckled, spotted, party-coloured, various,
varied, motley; painted, coloured; handsome, beauti-
ful; wonderful, surprising; ({%ā%}), f. a white deer; ({%am%}),
n. a variegated colour, party-colour; surprise; speech
implying apparently the reverse of the meaning in-
tended. {%—Vicitra-caritra, as, ā, am,%} behaving in
a wonderful manner. {%—Vicitra-cīnāṃśuka, am,%} n.
variegated China cloth; shot or watered China silk.
{%—Vicitra-tā,%} f. or {%vicitra-tva, am,%} n. variegation,
variety of colour, &c., spottedness; variety, diversity;
wonderfulness, wonder. {%—Vicitra-deha, as, ī, am,%}
having a variegated or painted body; elegantly
formed; ({%as%}), m. a cloud. {%—Vicitra-rūpa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having various forms or diversified aspects,
various, diverse. {%—Vicitra-vīrya, as,%} m., N. of a
celebrated king of the lunar race (descended in
regular line from Soma, Purūravas, Puru, Dushyanta,
Bharata, Kuru, and lastly Śāntanu, who was his
father, his mother being Satyavatī; the latter before
her marriage with Śāntanu had borne a son, named
Vyāsa, to the sage Parāśara, which son, when his
half-brother Vicitra-vīrya died childless, married his
two widows and by them became the father of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu). {%—Vicitravīrya-sū, ūs,%}
f. epithet of Satyavatī (mother of Vicitra-vīrya by
Śāntanu and of Vyāsa by Parāśara). {%—Vicitrāṅga%}
{%(˚ra-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having variegated or beautiful
limbs, having a spotted body, well-formed, elegant,
handsome; ({%as%}), m. a peacock; a tiger.
<LEND>

<L>42475<pc>0914-b<k1>vicitraka<k2>vicitraka
{%Vicitraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ wonderful, surprising; ({%as%}),
m. the birch tree; ({%am%}), n. wonder, astonishment.
<LEND>

<L>42476<pc>0914-b<k1>vicitrita<k2>vicitrita
{%Vi-citrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ variegated, spotted, coloured,
painted; wonderful.
<LEND>

<L>42477<pc>0914-b<k1>vicint<k2>vicint
{#vicint#}¦ {%vi-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cintayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to perceive, discern, observe (Ved.); to think
of, reflect or muse upon (with acc.); to consider,
ponder, regard, care for; to find out, devise, investi-
gate; to imagine.
<LEND>

<L>42478<pc>0914-b<k1>vicintayat<k2>vicintayat
{%Vi-cintayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ thinking about, brood-
ing over.
<LEND>

<L>42479<pc>0914-b<k1>vicintita<k2>vicintita
{%Vi-cintita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thought of, meditated on,
considered.
<LEND>

<L>42480<pc>0914-b<k1>vicintya<k2>vicintya<h>1
1. {%vi-cintya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thought about or
imagined.
<LEND>

<L>42481<pc>0914-b<k1>vicintya<k2>vicintya<h>2
2. {%vi-cintya,%}¦ ind. having thought or reflected upon.
<LEND>

<L>42482<pc>0914-b<k1>vicintyamAna<k2>vicintyamAna
{%Vi-cintyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being thought of or
considered.
<LEND>

<L>42483<pc>0914-b<k1>vicIrRa<k2>vicIrRa
{#vicIrRa#}¦ {%vi-cīrṇa.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42484<pc>0914-b<k1>vicumb<k2>vicumb
{#vicumb#}¦ {%vi-cumb,%} cl. 1. P. {%-cumbati, -cumbi-%}
{%tum,%} to kiss, kiss warmly.
<LEND>

<L>42485<pc>0914-b<k1>vicUrR<k2>vicUrR
{#vicUrR#}¦ {%vi-cūrṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cūrṇayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to grind, pound, pulverize, crush to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>42486<pc>0914-b<k1>vicUrRita<k2>vicUrRita
{%Vi-cūrṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushed or dashed to
pieces, shattered, smashed.
<LEND>

<L>42487<pc>0914-b<k1>vicft<k2>vicft
{#vicft#}¦ {%vi-cṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-cṛtati, -cartitum,%}
Ved. to untie, detach, disconnect, loosen, open, spread
out, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 67, 4. {%vi-%}
{%cṛtanti = stutīr grathnanti,%} they string together
or compose praises.)
<LEND>

<L>42488<pc>0914-b<k1>vicftO<k2>vicftO
{%Vi-cṛtau,%}¦ m. du. ‘two releasers,’ N. of two stars
the rising of which promotes relief from disease.
<LEND>
[Page0914-c+ 76]

<L>42489<pc>0914-c<k1>vicftta<k2>vicftta
{%Vi-cṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. opened, spread, (Sāy.
{%= prasārita.%})
<LEND>

<L>42490<pc>0914-c<k1>vicetana<k2>vicetana
{#vicetana#}¦ {%vi-cetana, as, ā, am,%} senseless,
unconscious, lifeless, inanimate, dead.
<LEND>

<L>42491<pc>0914-c<k1>vicetas<k2>vicetas
{%Vi-cetas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ senseless, mindless, ignorant,
stupid; sad, perplexed, unhappy; wise (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>42492<pc>0914-c<k1>vicezw<k2>vicezw
{#vicezw#}¦ {%vi-ceṣṭ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ceṣṭati, -te,%}
{%-ceṣṭitum,%} to move the limbs about, writhe, wallow,
struggle, stretch, sprawl; to exert one's self; to bestir
one's self, strive, be active, act; to struggle or act against
(with loc.); to conduct or behave one's self: Caus.
{%-ceṣṭayati, -yitum,%} to set in motion, rouse to action.
<LEND>

<L>42493<pc>0914-c<k1>vicezwat<k2>vicezwat
{%Vi-ceṣṭat, an, antī, at,%}¦ struggling, making exer-
tion, striving; sprawling.
<LEND>

<L>42494<pc>0914-c<k1>vicezwamAna<k2>vicezwamAna
{%Vi-ceṣṭamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ struggling, writhing,
striving, exerting one's self.
<LEND>

<L>42495<pc>0914-c<k1>vicezwayat<k2>vicezwayat
{%Vi-ceṣṭayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ setting in motion,
rousing to action.
<LEND>

<L>42496<pc>0914-c<k1>vicezwA<k2>vicezwA
{%Vi-ceṣṭā,%}¦ f. movement, effort, exertion, conduct,
behaviour.
<LEND>

<L>42497<pc>0914-c<k1>vicezwita<k2>vicezwita
{%Vi-ceṣṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ struggled, striven, tried,
endeavoured, acted, exerted, done; investigated, in-
quired into; acted badly, done foolishly, misdone,
ill-judged; = 2. {%vi-gata; (am),%} n. exertion, enter-
prise, effort, undertaking; action, act; gesture; sen-
sation (e. g. {%anaṅga-viceṣṭitam,%} a thrilling sensa-
tion or movement produced by love); evil or malicious
act, machination, trickery.
<LEND>

<L>42498<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCad<k2>vicCad<h>1
{#vicCad#} 1¦. {%vi-cchad%} (see rt. 1. {%chad%}), cl. 10. P.
{%-cchādayati, -yitum,%} to uncover, unclothe, undress.
<LEND>

<L>42499<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCad<k2>vicCad<h>2
{#vicCad#} 2¦. {%vi-cchad%} (see rt. 3. {%chad%}), cl. 10.
P. A. or Caus. {%-chandayati, -te, -yitum,%} to render
or return homage (?).
<LEND>

<L>42500<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCanda<k2>vicCanda
{%Vi-cchanda%}¦ or {%vi-cchandaka, as,%} m. a building
consisting of several stories and surrounded by a
portico; a palace, temple.
<LEND>

<L>42501<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCandas<k2>vicCandas
{%Vi-cchandas%}¦ (?), an inferior kind of metre; [cf.
{%chandas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42502<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCardaka<k2>vicCardaka
{#vicCardaka#}¦ {%vi-cchardaka, as,%} m. ({%= vi-cchan-%}
{%daka%} above), a large building, temple, palace; [cf.
2. {%chardis.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42503<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCardana<k2>vicCardana
{#vicCardana#}¦ {%vi-cchardana, am,%} n. (said to be
fr. rt. {%chṛd%} with {%vi%}), the act of vomiting, ejecting,
disregarding; wasting (?).
<LEND>

<L>42504<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCardita<k2>vicCardita
{%Vi-cchardita, as, ā, am,%}¦ vomited, ejected; disre-
garded, neglected; diminished, impaired.
<LEND>

<L>42505<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCAya<k2>vicCAya<h>2
{#vicCAya#} 2¦. {%vi-cchāya, as, ā, am%} (for 1. see
p. 909, col. 1), destitute of shadow, shadowless; ({%as%}),
m. a jewel, gem.
<LEND>

<L>42506<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCAyaya<k2>vicCAyaya
{%Vi-cchāyaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%-cchāyayati,%} &c., to free
from shadow.
<LEND>

<L>42507<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCid<k2>vicCid
{#vicCid#}¦ {%vi-cchid%} (see rt. 1. {%chid%}), cl. 7. P.
A. {%-cchinatti, -cchintte, -cchettum,%} to cut or tear
asunder, cleave or split in two, break asunder, divide,
separate; to cut off, break off; to interrupt, inter-
cept, disturb; to destroy; to be divided (Ved.):
Pass. {%-cchidyate,%} to be cut asunder; to be cut off or
destroyed; to come to an end, cease.
<LEND>

<L>42508<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCitti<k2>vicCitti
{%Vi-cchitti, is,%}¦ f. cutting asunder, dividing, sepa-
rating, separation; cutting off, excision; breaking
off, fracture; interruption, cessation; absence, disap-
pearance, loss, destruction; cesura, pause in a verse;
boundary, limit (as of a house &c.); N. of certain
amorous gestures practised by a mistress or heroine
in a drama (described as irregularity or carelessness
in dress and decoration); colouring or marking the
body with coloured unguents.
<LEND>

<L>42509<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCidya<k2>vicCidya
{%Vi-cchidya,%}¦ ind. having cut asunder; having se-
parated; separatively, interruptedly, ({%vicchidya vi-%}
{%cchidya,%} on separate occasions.)
<LEND>

<L>42510<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCidyamAna<k2>vicCidyamAna
{%Vi-cchidyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being cut off, being
destroyed or exterminated.
<LEND>

<L>42511<pc>0914-c<k1>vicCinna<k2>vicCinna
{%Vi-cchinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut asunder, severed, se-
parated, divided, parted, scattered, distributed, por-
tioned, shared; cut off; broken off, broken, inter-
rupted, prevented, intercepted, ceased, ended, termi-
[Page0915-a+ 77]
nated; hidden, absent; variegated, diversified, coloured,
anointed, smeared or marked with unguents; crooked,
curved. {%—Vicchinna-dhūma-prasara, as, ā, am,%}
having the free course of the smoke interrupted.
<LEND>

<L>42512<pc>0915-a<k1>vicCeda<k2>vicCeda
{%Vi-ccheda, as,%}¦ m. cutting asunder, dividing, sepa-
ration, disjunction, cutting off, breaking off, breaking,
interruption, termination; prohibition, prevention,
removal; the division of a book, a section, chapter;
dissension, difference; space, interval.
<LEND>

<L>42513<pc>0915-a<k1>vicCedaka<k2>vicCedaka
{%Vi-cchedaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ cutting asunder, di-
viding, separating, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a cutter off, divider,
sector.
<LEND>

<L>42514<pc>0915-a<k1>vicCedana<k2>vicCedana
{%Vi-cchedana, am,%}¦ n. the act of cutting asunder,
severing, dividing, separating, &c.; destruction.
<LEND>

<L>42515<pc>0915-a<k1>vicCedanIya<k2>vicCedanIya
{%Vi-cchedanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cut asunder, to
be divided or separated, &c.; divisible.
<LEND>

<L>42516<pc>0915-a<k1>vicCur<k2>vicCur
{#vicCur#}¦ {%vi-cchur%} (see rt. {%chur%}), cl. 6. P.
{%-cchurati, -cchuritum,%} to inlay; to overspread.
<LEND>

<L>42517<pc>0915-a<k1>vicCurita<k2>vicCurita
{%Vi-cchurita, as, ā, am,%}¦ inlaid; coated, overspread,
covered; anointed, besmeared; suffused.
<LEND>

<L>42518<pc>0915-a<k1>vicCo<k2>vicCo
{#vicCo#}¦ {%vi-ccho%} (see rt. {%cho%}), Caus. {%-cchā-%}
{%yayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to cut about, wound.
<LEND>

<L>42519<pc>0915-a<k1>vicyu<k2>vicyu
{#vicyu#}¦ {%vi-cyu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-cyavate, -cyotum,%} to
fall asunder, fall to pieces, split in two, perish; to fall
or depart from, deviate or swerve from (with abl.);
to fall off or down, decline; to fail, err, make a mis-
take; to displace (Ved.): Caus. {%-cyāvayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to fall to pieces, throw down, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>42520<pc>0915-a<k1>vicyuta<k2>vicyuta
{%Vi-cyuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen apart, fallen down,
slipped off; fallen or deviated from, displaced, thrown
down; (in surgery) separated from the living part,
sloughed.
<LEND>

<L>42521<pc>0915-a<k1>vicyuti<k2>vicyuti
{%Vi-cyuti, is,%}¦ f. falling to pieces; downfall, deca-
dence, decline; deviation from; severance, separa-
tion; failure, miscarriage, ({%garbha-v˚,%} miscarriage
of the fetus.)
<LEND>

<L>42522<pc>0915-a<k1>viC<k2>viC
{#viC#}¦ {%vich%} (connected with rt. 1. {%vī%}), cl.
6. P. {%vicchati%} or {%vicchāyati, viviccha%}
or {%vicchāyāñ-cakāra%} (Part. {%vivicchvas%} or {%viviśvas%}),
{%avicchīt%} or {%avicchāyīt, vicchitum%} or {%vicchāyitum,%}
to go, approach; cl. 10. P. {%vicchayati, -yitum,%} to
speak; to shine [cf. {%viśna%}]: Intens. {%vevicchīti;%} [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">οἰχνέω, οἴχομαι.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>42523<pc>0915-a<k1>vij<k2>vij<h>1
{#vij#} 1¦. {%vij,%} cl. 7. P. {%vinakti, viveja, vi-%}
{%jiṣyati, avijīt,%} cl. 6. A. (usually with
prep. {%ud%}) {%vijate, vivije, vijiṣyate, avijiṣṭa, vi-%}
{%jitum,%} to shake, tremble; to be agitated; to tremble
with fear; to fear, be afraid; to be distressed or
afflicted; cl. 3. P. A. (= rt. {%vic,%} with which, as a verb
of the 3rd class in the sense ‘to separate, discrimi-
nate,’ it may be identified, see rt. {%vic%}) {%vevekti, ve-%}
{%vikte,%} &c., to separate, divide; to separate by the
reason, distinguish, discriminate, judge; to be sepa-
rate, &c.: Pass. {%vijyate,%} Aor. {%aveji:%} Caus. {%veja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvijat,%} to terrify, frighten:
Desid. {%vivijiṣati:%} Intens. {%vevijyate, vevekti,%} to
shake or tremble violently; [cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀΐσσω;</lang>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>wicelian, wince.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>42524<pc>0915-a<k1>vigna<k2>vigna
{%Vigna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, trembling, agitated,
disturbed, alarmed; [cf. {%ud-vigna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42525<pc>0915-a<k1>vij<k2>vij<h>2
2. {%vij,%}¦ m., Ved., according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
1. 92, 10. {%vijaḥ = pakṣiṇaḥ,%} ‘birds,’ but according
to modern scholars the meaning is rather ‘dice.’
<LEND>

<L>42526<pc>0915-a<k1>vija<k2>vija
{%Vija, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who trembles or is agitated;
a gamester, gambler; a harasser, vexer, (Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda II. 12, 5 {%= ud-vejaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>42527<pc>0915-a<k1>vijitavya<k2>vijitavya
{%Vijitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be apprehended or feared.
<LEND>

<L>42528<pc>0915-a<k1>vijitf<k2>vijitf
{%Vijitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what separates or
divides, separating, &c.; ({%tā%}), m. a discriminator,
distinguisher, judge; a partner, co-heir.
<LEND>

<L>42529<pc>0915-a<k1>vijagDa<k2>vijagDa
{#vijagDa#}¦ {%vi-jagdha, as, ā, am%} (see rt. 1. {%jakṣ%}),
eaten up, devoured.
<LEND>

<L>42530<pc>0915-a<k1>vijawIkf<k2>vijawIkf
{#vijawIkf#}¦ {%vi-jaṭī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to comb out braided or matted hair.
<LEND>

<L>42531<pc>0915-a<k1>vijan<k2>vijan
{#vijan#}¦ {%vi-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate, -janitum,%} to
be born or produced; to bear young, generate, en-
gender, bring forth, produce; to be transformed.
<LEND>
[Page0915-b+ 74]

<L>42532<pc>0915-b<k1>vijanana<k2>vijanana
{%Vi-janana, am,%}¦ n. the act of generating or bearing
young, bringing forth, procreation, birth, delivery.
<LEND>

<L>42533<pc>0915-b<k1>vijanita<k2>vijanita
{%Vi-janita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought forth, engendered,
begotten, born, produced.
<LEND>

<L>42534<pc>0915-b<k1>vijanman<k2>vijanman
{%Vi-janman, a,%}¦ n. separate birth, birth in general;
({%ā, ā, a%}), born illegitimately, bastard; ({%ā%}), m. a
bastard, illegitimate child, the son of an outcast or
of a degraded Vaiśya.
<LEND>

<L>42535<pc>0915-b<k1>vijAta<k2>vijAta
{%Vi-jāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ born separately; base born,
of mixed origin; generated; born; transformed;
({%ā%}), f. a woman who has borne children, a mother,
matron.
<LEND>

<L>42536<pc>0915-b<k1>vijAti<k2>vijAti
{%Vi-jāti, is,%}¦ f. different origin or birth; different
species; different caste or tribe or kind.
<LEND>

<L>42537<pc>0915-b<k1>vijAtIya<k2>vijAtIya
{%Vi-jātīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ of different or mixed origin;
of different birth or caste; of different tribe or species;
of a different kind or sort, dissimilar.
<LEND>

<L>42538<pc>0915-b<k1>vijAman<k2>vijAman
{%Vi-jāman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. variously born, manifold,
(Sāy. {%= vi-janman.%})
<LEND>

<L>42539<pc>0915-b<k1>vijAyamAna<k2>vijAyamAna
{%Vi-jāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being born or pro-
duced; generating, producing offspring.
<LEND>

<L>42540<pc>0915-b<k1>vijAvan<k2>vijAvan
{%Vi-jāvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. variously productive,
prolific, widely-spreading.
<LEND>

<L>42541<pc>0915-b<k1>vijana<k2>vijana
{#vijana#}¦ {%vi-jana, as, ā, am,%} free from people,
private, lonely, solitary; ({%am%}), n. a solitary place,
desert; ({%e%}), ind. privately.
<LEND>

<L>42542<pc>0915-b<k1>vijapila<k2>vijapila
{#vijapila#}¦ {%vijapila, am,%} n. (etymology
doubtful), mud ({%= paṅka%}).
<LEND>

<L>42543<pc>0915-b<k1>vijaya<k2>vijaya
{#vijaya#}¦ {%vi-jaya, vijayin,%} &c. See below.
<LEND>

<L>42544<pc>0915-b<k1>vijayina<k2>vijayina
{#vijayina#}¦ {%vijayina, as, ā, am,%} sauce mixed
with the water of boiled rice; [cf. {%vijala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42545<pc>0915-b<k1>vijara<k2>vijara
{#vijara#}¦ {%vi-jara, as, ā, am,%} free from decay,
fresh, young; ({%am%}), n. a stalk.
<LEND>

<L>42546<pc>0915-b<k1>vijala<k2>vijala
{#vijala#}¦ {%vijala, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. sauce &c.
mixed with rice-water or gruel ({%= vijina, picchila%}).
<LEND>

<L>42547<pc>0915-b<k1>vijalp<k2>vijalp
{#vijalp#}¦ {%vi-jalp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jalpati, -jalpitum,%}
to speak foolishly, chatter, talk, speak (in general).
<LEND>

<L>42548<pc>0915-b<k1>vijalpa<k2>vijalpa
{%Vi-jalpa, as,%}¦ m. speech, talk, idle or foolish talk.
<LEND>

<L>42549<pc>0915-b<k1>vijalpita<k2>vijalpita
{%Vi-jalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken foolishly, spoken
or talked about.
<LEND>

<L>42550<pc>0915-b<k1>vijAta<k2>vijAta
{#vijAta#}¦ {%vi-jāta, vi-jāti.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>42551<pc>0915-b<k1>vijAnat<k2>vijAnat
{#vijAnat#}¦ {%vi-jānat.%} See under {%vi-jñā.%}
<LEND>

<L>42552<pc>0915-b<k1>vijAman<k2>vijAman
{#vijAman#}¦ {%vi-jāman.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>42553<pc>0915-b<k1>vijAmAtf<k2>vijAmAtf
{#vijAmAtf#}¦ {%vi-jāmātṛ, tā,%} m., Ved. an in-
ferior daughter's husband, defective son-in-law (ex-
plained by Yāska as ‘one who has not all the neces-
sary qualifications,’ see Nirukta VI. 9, where it is also
said that the people of the south always speak of
this word as denoting ‘a man who has purchased his
wife’).
<LEND>

<L>42554<pc>0915-b<k1>viji<k2>viji
{#viji#}¦ {%vi-ji,%} cl. 1. A. {%-jayate%} (rarely P. {%-ja-%}
{%yati%}), {%-jetum,%} to conquer, vanquish, be victorious,
overcome, defeat, overpower; to win or acquire by
conquest; to contend victoriously with (with inst.);
to surpass, excel: Caus. {%-jāpayati, -yitum%} (anom.
Aor. {%ajījayat%}), to cause to conquer; to conquer:
Desid. {%-jigīṣati,%} to wish to conquer; to attack.
<LEND>

<L>42555<pc>0915-b<k1>vijaya<k2>vijaya
{%Vi-jaya, as,%}¦ m. conquest, victory, triumph, over-
coming, defeating, overpowering, excelling; a divine
car, chariot of the gods; N. of Arjuna; of Yama;
of a son of Cuñcu; of a son of Jaya; of a son of
Sañjaya; of a son of Jayad-ratha; of a king of the
Āndhra race; of the father of the twenty-first Jina;
of one of the persons named Śukla-Balas by the
Jainas [cf. {%bala%}]; of the founder of Buddhist
civilisation in Ceylon; of a particular auspicious
period; of the first year of Jupiter's cycle; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of the goddess Durgā; of one of her
female attendants; of one of the wives of Yama;
of a daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Kṛśāśva; of
various plants, hemp, Cannabis Sativa, or the tops
of the plant used as a narcotic; yellow myrobalan,
Terminalia Chebula; orris root; N. of a particular
Tithi or lunar day (the third, eighth, or thirteenth
[Page0915-c+ 78]
of a fortnight); of a festival in honour of Durgā (on
the tenth day of the light half of the month Āśvina,
when the image of Durgā is cast into the water);
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Vijaya-kuñjara, as,%}
m. a royal or war elephant (which carries a standard).
{%—Vijaya-cchanda, as,%} m. a kind of necklace, one
of 500 rows or strings. {%—Vijaya-ḍiṇḍima, as,%} m.
‘drum of victory,’ a large military drum. {%—Vijaya-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Vijaya-daśamī,%}
f. the tenth day of the light half of the month
Āśvina, the day of the Daśa-harā, &c. {%—Vijaya-%}
{%nagara, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Vijaya-nandana,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a sovereign of the race of Ikṣvāku.
{%—Vijaya-phala, as, ā, am,%} having victory for a
result. {%—Vijaya-mardala, as,%} m. ‘drum of victory,’
a large military drum. {%—Vijaya-rāma, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Vijaya-lakṣmī, īs,%} f., N. of the
mother of Veṅkaṭa. {%—Vijaya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} pos-
sessing victory, triumphant. {%—Vijaya-siddhi, is,%} f.
accomplishment of victory, success. {%—Vijayābhinan-%}
{%dana (˚ya-abh˚), as,%} m., N. of a great warrior yet
to arise and to be the founder of an era. {%—Vijayā-%}
{%bhyupāya (˚ya-abh˚), as,%} m. means of victory.
{%—Vijayārtham (˚ya-ar˚),%} ind. on account of vic-
tory, for victory. {%—Vijayārthin (˚ya-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%}
seeking victory, desirous of conquest. {%—Vijayā-sap-%}
{%tamī,%} f. the seventh day of the light half of a month
falling on a Sunday. {%—Vijayeśa (˚ya-īśa), as,%} m.
‘lord of victory,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Vijayotsava%}
{%(˚ya-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘victory-festival,’ N. of a festival
in honour of Viṣṇu celebrated on the tenth day of the
light half of the month Āśvina ({%= vijaya-daśamī%}).
<LEND>

<L>42556<pc>0915-c<k1>vijayanta<k2>vijayanta
{%Vi-jayanta, as,%}¦ m. ‘the victorious,’ epithet of
Indra.
<LEND>

<L>42557<pc>0915-c<k1>vijayamAna<k2>vijayamAna
{%Vi-jayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ conquering, victorious,
triumphant.
<LEND>

<L>42558<pc>0915-c<k1>vijayin<k2>vijayin
{%Vijayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ conquering, victorious, trium-
phant; ({%ī%}), m. a conqueror.
<LEND>

<L>42559<pc>0915-c<k1>vijigIza<k2>vijigIza
{%Vi-jigīṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirous of victory, wishing
to overcome or conquer; emulous; ({%ā%}), f. a desire
to conquer or overcome or subdue, wish to surpass,
desire to excel, competition, emulation, ambition.
{%—Vijigīṣā-vivarjita, as, ā, am,%} devoid of am-
bition.
<LEND>

<L>42560<pc>0915-c<k1>vijigIzat<k2>vijigIzat
{%Vi-jigīṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing or striving to
conquer.
<LEND>

<L>42561<pc>0915-c<k1>vijigIzin<k2>vijigIzin
{%Vi-jigīṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ desirous to conquer or over-
come, desirous of victory.
<LEND>

<L>42562<pc>0915-c<k1>vijigIzu<k2>vijigIzu
{%Vi-jigīṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of victory or con-
quest, desirous to overcome or surpass, emulative,
emulous, ambitious; ({%us%}), m. a warrior; an invader,
antagonist; a disputant; an opponent.
<LEND>

<L>42563<pc>0915-c<k1>vijita<k2>vijita
{%Vi-jita, as, ā, am,%}¦ conquered, subdued, defeated,
won, gained. {%—Vijita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who
has conquered. {%—Vijitātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%}
one who has conquered himself, self-subdued. {%—Vi-%}
{%jitāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a son of Pṛthu.
{%—Vijitāsana (˚ta-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} indifferent about
a seat. {%—Vijitendriya (˚ta-in˚), as, ā, am,%} having
the organs of sense or passions subdued.
<LEND>

<L>42564<pc>0915-c<k1>vijiti<k2>vijiti
{%Vi-jiti, is,%}¦ f. conquest, victory, triumphing over,
vanquishing; victory over various enemies.
<LEND>

<L>42565<pc>0915-c<k1>vijitya<k2>vijitya
{%Vi-jitya,%}¦ ind. having conquered, having won.
<LEND>

<L>42566<pc>0915-c<k1>vijetf<k2>vijetf
{%Vi-jetṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ victorious, a victor, conqueror,
gainer, winner, ({%purāṃ vijetṛ,%} ‘conqueror of towns,’
an epithet of Śiva.)
<LEND>

<L>42567<pc>0915-c<k1>vijigrAhayizu<k2>vijigrAhayizu
{#vijigrAhayizu#}¦ {%vi-jigrāhayiṣu, vi-jighṛ-%}
{%kṣu.%} See p. 913, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42568<pc>0915-c<k1>vijina<k2>vijina
{#vijina#}¦ {%vijina, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. sauce
&c. mixed with rice-water or gruel; [cf. {%vijala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42569<pc>0915-c<k1>vijila<k2>vijila
{%Vijila%}¦ or {%vijivila = vijina%} above.
<LEND>

<L>42570<pc>0915-c<k1>vijihIrzA<k2>vijihIrzA
{#vijihIrzA#}¦ {%vi-jihīrṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of {%vi-%}
{%hṛ%}), wish or intention to roam about or take one's
pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>42571<pc>0915-c<k1>vijihIrzu<k2>vijihIrzu
{%Vi-jihīrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing or seeking to
roam about or sport.
<LEND>

<L>42572<pc>0915-c<k1>vijihma<k2>vijihma
{#vijihma#}¦ {%vi-jihma, as, ā, am,%} curved, bent;
crooked in mind or purpose, dishonest, depraved.
[Page0916-a+ 75]
{%—Vijihma-tā,%} f. or {%vijihma-tva, am,%} n. crooked-
ness, dishonesty, craftiness.
<LEND>

<L>42573<pc>0916-a<k1>vijIv<k2>vijIv
{#vijIv#}¦ {%vi-jīv,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jīvati, -jīvitum,%} to
revive, return to life.
<LEND>

<L>42574<pc>0916-a<k1>vijula<k2>vijula
{#vijula#}¦ {%vijula, as,%} m. the silk-cotton tree.
<LEND>

<L>42575<pc>0916-a<k1>vijfmB<k2>vijfmB
{#vijfmB#}¦ {%vi-jṛmbh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-jṛmbhate, -jṛm-%}
{%bhitum,%} to yawn, gape; to open (intrans.), unfold,
expand, become expanded or developed or exhibited,
spread out, blossom; to extend; to spring open, spring
back (as a bow); to become displayed, break forth
or out, appear, rise; to display activity or energy,
exhibit courage, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42576<pc>0916-a<k1>vijfmBaRa<k2>vijfmBaRa
{%Vi-jṛmbhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. yawning, gaping; expand-
ing, unfolding, displaying, exhibiting, extending;
blossoming, budding; pastime, sport (especially
amorous).
<LEND>

<L>42577<pc>0916-a<k1>vijfmBita<k2>vijfmBita
{%Vi-jṛmbhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ yawned, gaped; ex-
panded, opened, unfolded, displayed, exhibited, acted;
blossomed; arisen, appeared; sported, wantoned;
({%am%}), n. pastime, sport; wish, desire; act. {%—Vi-%}
{%jṛmbhita-sneha, as, ā, am,%} displaying affection.
<LEND>

<L>42578<pc>0916-a<k1>vijeh<k2>vijeh
{#vijeh#}¦ {%vi-jeh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-jehate, -jehitum,%} to
open the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>42579<pc>0916-a<k1>vijehamAna<k2>vijehamAna
{%Vi-jehamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. opening wide;
darting forth, (Sāy. {%= prakṣipat.%})
<LEND>

<L>42580<pc>0916-a<k1>vijozas<k2>vijozas
{#vijozas#}¦ {%vi-joṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. dis-
united, estranged from each other, no longer friends.
<LEND>

<L>42581<pc>0916-a<k1>vijjana<k2>vijjana
{#vijjana#}¦ {%vijjana, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. sauce &c.
mixed with rice-water or gruel.
<LEND>

<L>42582<pc>0916-a<k1>vijjala<k2>vijjala
{%Vijjala, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. {%= vijjana%} above;
({%am%}), n. an arrow. {%—Vijjala-pura,%} N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>42583<pc>0916-a<k1>vijjila<k2>vijjila
{%Vijjila, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. sauce &c. mixed with
rice-gruel.
<LEND>

<L>42584<pc>0916-a<k1>vijjAkA<k2>vijjAkA
{#vijjAkA#}¦ {%vijjākā,%} f., N. of a female poet.
<LEND>

<L>42585<pc>0916-a<k1>vijjUlikA<k2>vijjUlikA
{#vijjUlikA#}¦ {%vijjūlikā,%} f., N. of a kind of
plant ({%= jatukā%}).
<LEND>

<L>42586<pc>0916-a<k1>vijYa<k2>vijYa
{#vijYa#}¦ {%vi-jña.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>42587<pc>0916-a<k1>vijYA<k2>vijYA
{#vijYA#}¦ {%vi-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti, -jānīte,%}
{%jñātum,%} to distinguish, discern, understand, observe,
perceive, know, recognise, know thoroughly or well,
have a right knowledge of; to be familiar with; to
find out, investigate, inquire, ascertain, learn, learn
from (with gen.); to hear, to consider as; to explain;
to become wise or learned (Manu IV. 20): Caus.
{%-jñapayati%} and {%-jñāpayati, -yitum,%} to make known,
declare, report, communicate, announce to any one
(acc.); to make any one understand, apprise, teach,
instruct; to make a representation or request (in a
respectful manner), ask, beg; to inform any one of
anything (with two acc.): Desid. {%-jijñāsati,%} to wish
to understand or know, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42588<pc>0916-a<k1>vijAnat<k2>vijAnat
{%Vi-jānat, an, atī, at,%}¦ distinguishing, understand-
ing, knowing, recognising, possessing various or
extended knowledge, wise, considerate; ({%an%}), m. a
wise man, sage.
<LEND>

<L>42589<pc>0916-a<k1>vijijYAsA<k2>vijijYAsA
{%Vi-jijñāsā,%}¦ f. a desire of knowing distinctly, wish
to prove or try.
<LEND>

<L>42590<pc>0916-a<k1>vijYa<k2>vijYa
{%Vi-jña, as, ā, am,%}¦ knowing, intelligent; wise,
learned; proficient, conversant, clever, experienced,
skilful, prudent, discreet; ({%as%}), m. a wise man.
{%—Vijña-tā,%} f. or {%vijña-tva, am,%} n. intelligence,
wisdom, learning, skill, cleverness. {%—Vijña-buddhi,%}
{%is,%} f. Indian spikenard ({%= jaṭā-māṃsī%}).
<LEND>

<L>42591<pc>0916-a<k1>vijYapta<k2>vijYapta
{%Vi-jñapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made known, reported, re-
presented; apprised, respectfully informed or told.
<LEND>

<L>42592<pc>0916-a<k1>vijYapti<k2>vijYapti
{%Vi-jñapti, is,%}¦ f. information, representation, re-
spectful statement or communication; a report, an-
nouncement.
<LEND>

<L>42593<pc>0916-a<k1>vijYAta<k2>vijYAta
{%Vi-jñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ discerned, understood, known,
perceived; celebrated, famous, notorious. {%—Vijñā-%}
{%tārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} one who is acquainted
with any matter or the true state of a case.
<LEND>

<L>42594<pc>0916-a<k1>vijYAtf<k2>vijYAtf
{%Vi-jñātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who knows or under-
stands, an experienced person.
<LEND>

<L>42595<pc>0916-a<k1>vijYAna<k2>vijYAna
{%Vi-jñāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of distinguishing or per-
[Page0916-b+ 78]
ceiving or recognising, discerning, understanding,
comprehending, distinction, intelligence, knowledge,
science, learning, worldly knowledge of any kind
(including all subjects except that understanding of
the true nature of God or Brahma which is acquirable
only by abstract meditation and the study of the
Vedas), wisdom; business, employment; music.
{%—Vijñāna-kanda, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vijñāna-%}
{%kaumudī,%} f., N. of a Buddhist woman. {%—Vijñāna-%}
{%pāda, as,%} m. (see {%pāda%}), an epithet of Vyāsa. {%—Vi-%}
{%jñāna-bhikṣu, us,%} m., N. of the author of the Yoga-
sāra-saṅgraha, the Yoga-vārttika, the Sāṅkhya-sāra,
and the Brahmādarśa. {%—Vijñāna-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of knowledge or intelligence, all knowledge,
intellectual (said of the first or innermost of the
several sheaths of the soul). {%—Vijñānamaya-koṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. the sheath consisting of intelligence, the in-
telligent sheath (of the soul, according to the Vedānta
philosophy) or that sheath which is caused by the
understanding being associated with the organs of
perception. {%—Vijñāna-mātṛka, as,%} m. ‘parent of
knowledge,’ an epithet of Buddha. {%—Vijñāna-lalita,%}
N. of a work. {%—Vijñāna-vāda, as,%} m. the theory
of Vi-jñāna, ideal theory. {%—Vijñāneśvara (˚na-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. ‘master of knowledge,’ N. of the author
of the Mitākṣarā commentary.
<LEND>

<L>42596<pc>0916-b<k1>vijYAnika<k2>vijYAnika
{%Vijñānika, as, ī, am,%}¦ learned, well-informed,
clever, skilful, proficient, conversant.
<LEND>

<L>42597<pc>0916-b<k1>vijYApaka<k2>vijYApaka
{%Vi-jñāpaka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), who or
what makes known or apprises, making known,
giving information; ({%as%}), m. an informant; an
instructor.
<LEND>

<L>42598<pc>0916-b<k1>vijYApana<k2>vijYApana
{%Vi-jñāpana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of making known
or acquainting, teaching; representing, informing;
information, instruction; respectful communication or
representation.
<LEND>

<L>42599<pc>0916-b<k1>vijYApanIya<k2>vijYApanIya
{%Vi-jñāpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made known or
represented, to be apprised.
<LEND>

<L>42600<pc>0916-b<k1>vijYApita<k2>vijYApita
{%Vi-jñāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ apprised, informed, in-
structed; respectfully told or represented.
<LEND>

<L>42601<pc>0916-b<k1>vijYApti<k2>vijYApti
{%Vi-jñāpti, is,%}¦ f. representing, informing; respectful
communication or representation.
<LEND>

<L>42602<pc>0916-b<k1>vijYAya<k2>vijYAya
{%Vi-jñāya,%}¦ ind. having known or perceived, having
understood, having ascertained, having recognised.
<LEND>

<L>42603<pc>0916-b<k1>vijYeya<k2>vijYeya
{%Vi-jñeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be perceived or known
or understood; cognizable, intelligible, comprehen-
sible, discernible, recognizable.
<LEND>

<L>42604<pc>0916-b<k1>vijvara<k2>vijvara
{#vijvara#}¦ {%vi-jvara, as, ā, am,%} free from fever
or pain; free from distress; exempt from decay.
<LEND>

<L>42605<pc>0916-b<k1>viJarJara<k2>viJarJara
{#viJarJara#}¦ {%vi-jharjhara, as, ā, am,%} making a
harsh or rattling sound, discordant.
<LEND>

<L>42606<pc>0916-b<k1>viYilavindu<k2>viYilavindu
{#viYilavindu#}¦ {%viñilavindu,%} N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>42607<pc>0916-b<k1>viYjAmara<k2>viYjAmara
{#viYjAmara#}¦ {%viñjāmara, am,%} n. the white of
the eye.
<LEND>

<L>42608<pc>0916-b<k1>viYjolI<k2>viYjolI
{#viYjolI#}¦ {%viñjolī,%} f. a line, row, range.
<LEND>

<L>42609<pc>0916-b<k1>viw<k2>viw
{#viw#}¦ {%viṭ%} (also written {%biṭ;%} cf. rt. 1. {%viḍ%}),
cl. 1. P. {%veṭati, veṭitum,%} to sound; to
curse, swear at, revile.
<LEND>

<L>42610<pc>0916-b<k1>viwa<k2>viwa
{%Viṭa, as,%}¦ m. a voluptuary; a paramour; (in the
drama) the companion of a prince or dissolute young
man or sometimes of a courtezan, (he resembles in
some respects the Vidūṣaka, being generally repre-
sented as a parasite on familiar terms with his asso-
ciate, but at the same time accomplished in the arts
of poetry, music, and singing); a catamite; a rogue,
cheat; N. of a mountain; the Khayar tree, Mimosa
Catechu; a medicinal salt ({%= viḍ-lavaṇa%}); a rat;
the orange tree; a branch and its shoot. {%—1. viṭa-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. a keeper of catamites. {%—Viṭa-priya, as,%}
m. a kind of tree {%(= mudgara)%}. {%—Viṭa-mākṣika,%}
{%as,%} m. a sort of mineral {%(= tāpya)%}. {%—Viṭa-lavaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a medicinal salt ({%= viḍ-lavaṇa,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>42611<pc>0916-b<k1>viwapa<k2>viwapa<h>2
2. {%viṭapa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 145. fr. rt. {%viṭ%} in the sense ‘to sound’), the
young branch of a tree or creeper; a new shoot or
sprout, branch (in general); a bush; a clump, cluster,
thicket, tuft; spreading, expansion; the septum of the
scrotum. {%—Viṭapa-śas,%} ind. in branches, in shoots.
<LEND>
[Page0916-c+ 75]

<L>42612<pc>0916-c<k1>viwapin<k2>viwapin
{%Viṭapin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having branches; ({%ī%}), m. a tree
(in general); the large Indian fig-tree, Ficus Indica.
{%—Viṭapi-mṛga, as,%} m. ‘tree-animal,’ a monkey,
ape; [cf. {%taru-mṛga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42613<pc>0916-c<k1>viwaNka<k2>viwaNka
{#viwaNka#}¦ {%vi-ṭaṅka%} or {%vi-ṭaṅkaka, as, am,%} m.
n. (see rt. {%ṭaṅk%}), a dove-cot, an aviary (perhaps in
this sense fr. 2. {%vi,%} a bird, {%+ ṭaṅka%}); the loftiest
point.
<LEND>

<L>42614<pc>0916-c<k1>viwaNkita<k2>viwaNkita
{%Vi-ṭaṅkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ marked, stamped, laden
with.
<LEND>

<L>42615<pc>0916-c<k1>viwi<k2>viwi
{#viwi#}¦ {%viṭi, is,%} f. yellow sanders. {%—Viṭi-kaṇ-%}
{%ṭhī-rava, as,%} m., N. of the grammarian Varada-rāja.
<LEND>

<L>42616<pc>0916-c<k1>viwkArikA<k2>viwkArikA
{#viwkArikA#}¦ {%viṭ-kārikā, viṭ-cara,%} &c. See
under 3. {%viṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>42617<pc>0916-c<k1>viwWala<k2>viwWala
{#viwWala#}¦ {%viṭṭhala, as,%} m. (or commonly {%viṭh-%}
{%ṭhala%}), N. of a god worshipped at Pandhar-pur or
Punderpoor in the Bombay presidency, (he is stated
to be an incarnation of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa himself,
who is believed to have visited this city); N. of the
author of the Prasāda commentary and of the Vaiṣ-
ṇava-siddhānta-dīpikā. {%—Viṭṭhala-dīkṣita, as,%} m.,
N. of the author of the Kuṇḍa-maṇḍapa-siddhi.
<LEND>

<L>42618<pc>0916-c<k1>viwpaRya<k2>viwpaRya
{#viwpaRya#}¦ {%viṭ-paṇya, viṭ-pati,%} &c. See
under 2. {%viś.%}
<LEND>

<L>42619<pc>0916-c<k1>viWaNka<k2>viWaNka
{#viWaNka#}¦ {%viṭhaṅka, as, ā, am,%} bad, vile.
<LEND>

<L>42620<pc>0916-c<k1>viWara<k2>viWara
{#viWara#}¦ {%viṭhara, as,%} m. an epithet of Vṛhas-
pati.
<LEND>

<L>42621<pc>0916-c<k1>viq<k2>viq<h>1
{#viq#} 1¦. {%viḍ%} (= rt. {%viṭ,%} q. v.), cl. 1. P. {%ve-%}
{%ḍati, veḍitum,%} to call out, cry out against,
curse, swear at, revile; to break (?).
<LEND>

<L>42622<pc>0916-c<k1>viq<k2>viq<h>2
2. {%viḍ, ṭ,%}¦ f. a fragment, bit (?).
<LEND>

<L>42623<pc>0916-c<k1>viqa<k2>viqa
{%Viḍa, am,%}¦ n. a kind of factitious salt (procured
by boiling earth impregnated with saline particles);
a particular kind of fetid salt (used medicinally as a
tonic aperient, commonly called Vit-lavan or Bit-
noben, cf. {%viḍ-lavaṇa;%} it is black in colour and is
prepared by fusing fossil salt with a small portion of
Emblic Myrobalan, the product being muriate of soda
with small quantities of muriate of lime, sulphur,
and oxide of iron); a fragment, bit, portion (?).
{%—Viḍa-gandha, am,%} n. the medicinal salt described
above.
<LEND>

<L>42624<pc>0916-c<k1>viqaNga<k2>viqaNga
{%Viḍaṅga, as, ā, am,%}¦ clever, able, skilful, con-
versant; ({%as, am%}), m. n. Erycibe Paniculata, a
vegetable and medicinal substance (considered of
great efficacy as a vermifuge).
<LEND>

<L>42625<pc>0916-c<k1>viqamb<k2>viqamb
{#viqamb#}¦ {%vi-ḍamb,%} cl. 10. P. {%-ḍambayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to imitate, act like ({%= anu-kṛ%}), copy, emulate,
simulate (with acc., e. g. {%taḍid-vilasitāni viḍamba-%}
{%yanti,%} they imitate the flashes of lightning); to
give anything another form, transform, distort; to
impose upon, deceive, cheat; to ridicule, deride,
mock; to afflict.
<LEND>

<L>42626<pc>0916-c<k1>viqamba<k2>viqamba
{%Vi-ḍamba, as,%}¦ m. imitation; afflicting, distress-
ing, annoyance.
<LEND>

<L>42627<pc>0916-c<k1>viqambana<k2>viqambana
{%Vi-ḍambana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. imitation, copying,
assuming a similar appearance or dress, disguise,
masquerade, transformation, imposture, ({%ku-viḍam-%}
{%banā,%} f. base imposture); deceiving, deception,
fraud, breach of faith; disappointing, frustrating;
afflicting, distressing, vexation, mortification, pain,
distress; ridiculing, ridiculousness, ludicrousness.
<LEND>

<L>42628<pc>0916-c<k1>viqambanIya<k2>viqambanIya
{%Vi-ḍambanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be imitated, to be
assumed as a disguise; to be distressed or annoyed.
<LEND>

<L>42629<pc>0916-c<k1>viqambayat<k2>viqambayat
{%Vi-ḍambayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ imitating, copying;
assuming, putting on (a borrowed dress or appear-
ance).
<LEND>

<L>42630<pc>0916-c<k1>viqambita<k2>viqambita
{%Vi-ḍambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ imitated, copied, assumed,
put on (as a borrowed from &c.), simulated, trans-
formed, distorted; mocked at, ridiculed, derided;
deceived, disappointed, frustrated; vexed, mortified;
distressed, low, poor, abject; ({%am%}), n. an object of
ridicule or contempt, despicable object.
<LEND>

<L>42631<pc>0916-c<k1>viqambin<k2>viqambin
{%Viḍambin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ imitating, resembling; causing
deception or error.
<LEND>
[Page0917-a+ 72]

<L>42632<pc>0917-a<k1>viqAraka<k2>viqAraka
{#viqAraka#}¦ {%viḍāraka, as,%} m. {%= viḍālaka,%} a cat.
<LEND>

<L>42633<pc>0917-a<k1>viqAla<k2>viqAla
{#viqAla#}¦ {%viḍāla, as,%} m. (also written {%biḍāla,%}
in Uṇādi-s. I. 117. said to be fr. rt. {%viḍ,%} ‘to cry out;’
according to others perhaps fr. {%viś + āla,%} ‘having
habitation with man’), a cat; the eye-ball; ({%ī%}), f. a
female cat; N. of a plant ({%= vidārī,%} q. v.). {%—Viḍāla-%}
{%pada, as,%} m. a measure of weight (the same as the
Karṣa or weight of sixteen Māṣas). {%—Viḍāla-pa-%}
{%daka, am,%} n. the measure of a Karṣa.
<LEND>

<L>42634<pc>0917-a<k1>viqAlaka<k2>viqAlaka
{%Viḍālaka, as,%}¦ m. a cat; application of ointment
to the exterior of the eye (especially to the eyelids
when the lashes have fallen off or are ulcerated);
({%am%}), n. yellow orpiment.
<LEND>

<L>42635<pc>0917-a<k1>viqAlI<k2>viqAlI
{%Viḍālī,%}¦ f. See under {%viḍāla%} above.
<LEND>

<L>42636<pc>0917-a<k1>viqI<k2>viqI
{#viqI#}¦ {%vi-ḍī,%} cl. 1. 4. A. {%-ḍayate, -ḍīyate,%}
{%-ḍayitum,%} to fly asunder, fly apart, fly separately,
fly on one side or obliquely.
<LEND>

<L>42637<pc>0917-a<k1>viqIna<k2>viqIna
{%Vi-ḍīna, am,%}¦ n. the act of flying apart or ob-
liquely, one of the different modes of flight attributed
to birds; [cf. {%a-viḍīna;%} other modes of flight are
{%ava-ḍīna, uḍḍīna, ni-ḍīna, pra-ḍīna, pari-ḍīna,%}
{%saṇ-ḍīna, ḍīna-ḍīnaka,%} q. q. v. v.]
<LEND>

<L>42638<pc>0917-a<k1>viqInaka<k2>viqInaka
{%Vi-ḍīnaka, am,%}¦ n. flying apart.
<LEND>

<L>42639<pc>0917-a<k1>viqula<k2>viqula
{#viqula#}¦ {%viḍula, as,%} m. a sort of cane, Cala-
mus Rotang.
<LEND>

<L>42640<pc>0917-a<k1>viqUraja<k2>viqUraja
{#viqUraja#}¦ {%viḍūra-ja, am,%} n. lapis lazuli,
(for {%vidūra-ja,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>42641<pc>0917-a<k1>viqojas<k2>viqojas
{#viqojas#}¦ {%viḍ-ojas%} or {%viḍ-aujas, ās,%} m. (said
to be fr. {%viḍ%} or 2. {%viś + ojas%}), N. of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>42642<pc>0917-a<k1>viqganDa<k2>viqganDa
{#viqganDa#}¦ {%viḍ-gandha, viḍ-graha,%} &c. See
under 3. {%viṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>42643<pc>0917-a<k1>viRw<k2>viRw
{#viRw#}¦ {%viṇṭ%} (= rt. {%vuṇṭ%}), cl. 10. P. {%viṇṭa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to kill; to waste away, perish,
decay.
<LEND>

<L>42644<pc>0917-a<k1>vitaMsa<k2>vitaMsa
{#vitaMsa#}¦ {%vi-taṃsa, as,%} m. (see rt. {%taṃs%}), a bird-
cage (perhaps fr. 2. {%vi,%} a bird, {%+ taṃsa%}), any net or
chain or apparatus for confining beasts or birds; [cf.
{%vī-taṃsa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42645<pc>0917-a<k1>vitakz<k2>vitakz
{#vitakz#}¦ {%vi-takṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-takṣati, -takṣi-%}
{%tum, -taṣṭum,%} Ved. to cut off; to cleave or split in
pieces; to carve out, plane off, chisel; to wound.
<LEND>

<L>42646<pc>0917-a<k1>vitazwa<k2>vitazwa
{%Vi-taṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ hewn or carved out, planed,
fashioned.
<LEND>

<L>42647<pc>0917-a<k1>vitaq<k2>vitaq
{#vitaq#}¦ {%vi-taḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tāḍayati, -yitum,%}
to strike or dash to pieces; to strike back; to strike
against (with loc.); to wound.
<LEND>

<L>42648<pc>0917-a<k1>vitaRqa<k2>vitaRqa
{#vitaRqa#}¦ {%vi-taṇḍa, as,%} m. (probably con-
nected with {%vi-taḍ%} above), a sort of lock or bolt
with three divisions or wards; an elephant; ({%ā%}), f.
cavil, captious objection, hypercriticism, perverse or
frivolous argument (especially, in the Nyāya phil.,
idly carping at the arguments or assertions of another
without attempting to establish the opposite side of
the question), frivolous or fallacious controversy or
wrangling, debate, criticism (in general); an esculent
root, Arum Colocasia; the oleander plant, Nerium
Odorum; a ladle, spoon; benzoin or storax (?).
<LEND>

<L>42649<pc>0917-a<k1>vitaRqaka<k2>vitaRqaka
{%Vi-taṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of the author of a
Dharma-śāstra.
<LEND>

<L>42650<pc>0917-a<k1>vitata<k2>vitata
{#vitata#}¦ {%vi-tata.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42651<pc>0917-a<k1>vitaTa<k2>vitaTa
{#vitaTa#}¦ {%vi-tatha, as, ā, am,%} untrue, false,
incorrect, unreal, vain, futile; [cf. {%yathā-tatha.%}]
{%—Vitatha-prayatna, as, ā, am,%} one whose efforts
are futile, endeavouring in vain. {%—Vitatha-maryāda,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} incorrect in behaviour. {%—Vitathī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} rendered vain or futile.
<LEND>

<L>42652<pc>0917-a<k1>vitaTya<k2>vitaTya
{%Vi-tathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ untrue ({%= vi-tatha%} above).
<LEND>

<L>42653<pc>0917-a<k1>vitadru<k2>vitadru
{#vitadru#}¦ {%vitadru, us,%} f., N. of a river said to
be situated in the Pañjāb.
<LEND>

<L>42654<pc>0917-a<k1>vitan<k2>vitan
{#vitan#}¦ {%vi-tan,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-tanoti, -tanute, -ta-%}
{%nitum,%} to stretch out, spread through, extend, expand,
lengthen out, spread over, cover over, fill; to spread
[Page0917-b+ 78]
(a net, snare, &c.); to stretch (a cord &c.); to
draw or bend (a bow); to unfold, develop, manifest,
exhibit; to carry out, execute, perform, accomplish
(any rite or ceremony); to offer an oblation, sacrifice,
&c.; to effect, cause, produce; to prepare, make
ready, arrange.
<LEND>

<L>42655<pc>0917-b<k1>vitata<k2>vitata
{%Vi-tata, as, ā, am,%}¦ stretched out, extended,
spread out, stretched, expanded; lengthened out,
lengthened, elongated, large, broad, wide; spread
over, covered, prepared, diffused, performed, accom-
plished, celebrated; effected; ({%am%}), n. any stringed
instrument, such as a lute, &c. {%—Vitata-tva, am,%}
n. extendedness, extension, expansiveness, largeness.
{%—Vitata-dhanvan, ā,%} m. one who has drawn a
bow to its full stretch. {%—Vitata-vapus, us, us, us,%}
having an elongated body. {%—Vitatī-karaṇa, am,%} n.
the act of stretching out, spreading. {%—Vitatī-kṛ,%} cl.
8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to stretch out,
expand, spread. {%—Vitatī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} stretched
out, spread, expanded.
<LEND>

<L>42656<pc>0917-b<k1>vitati<k2>vitati
{%Vi-tati, is,%}¦ f. stretching out, spreading, extension,
expansion; collection, quantity; a clump, cluster (of
trees &c.).
<LEND>

<L>42657<pc>0917-b<k1>vitatya<k2>vitatya
{%Vi-tatya,%}¦ ind. having stretched or spread out, hav-
ing spread through; having stretched, having drawn
or bent (as a bow); stretching into, extending far.
<LEND>

<L>42658<pc>0917-b<k1>vitanvat<k2>vitanvat
{%Vi-tanvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ stretching or spreading
out, stretching, extending, expanding, bending (a
bow &c.).
<LEND>

<L>42659<pc>0917-b<k1>vitanvAna<k2>vitanvAna
{%Vi-tanvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ extending, spreading out, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42660<pc>0917-b<k1>vitAna<k2>vitAna
{%Vi-tāna, as, am,%}¦ m. n. stretching or spreading
out, expansion; an awning, canopy, cover; a cushion;
an oblation, sacrifice; the sacrificial hearth on which the
sacred fires are kept, or the sacred fire itself; a heap,
quantity; season, opportunity; ({%am%}), n. a form of
the metre Anuṣṭubh or verse of four lines of eight
syllables each, (each line of the stanza is said to con-
sist of two Iambics, one Trochee, and one Spondee);
leisure, rest, interval of occupation; ({%as, ā, am%}),
empty, vacant; pithless, sapless; dull, stupid; wicked,
abandoned. {%—Vitāna-mūlaka, am,%} n. the fragrant
root of Andropogon Muricatus {%(= uśīra)%}. {%—Vitāna-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a canopy or awning. {%—Vi-%}
{%tānī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of overspreading or
covering. {%—Vatānī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -ku-%}
{%rute, -kartum,%} to spread over, extend over (as a
canopy &c.), form an awning, overshadow. {%—Vi-%}
{%tānī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} spread or extended over (as
a canopy).
<LEND>

<L>42661<pc>0917-b<k1>vitAnaka<k2>vitAnaka
{%Vitānaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. an awning, canopy,
(especially) a cloth spread over a large open hall or
court (in which dancing, singing, &c. are exhibited);
an expanse; a heap, quantity; ({%as%}), m. the Māḍa
tree.
<LEND>

<L>42662<pc>0917-b<k1>vitAnAya<k2>vitAnAya
{%Vi-tānāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%-tānāyate,%} &c., to become
a canopy, turn into an awning.
<LEND>

<L>42663<pc>0917-b<k1>vitAyamAna<k2>vitAyamAna
{%Vi-tāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being stretched out,
being spread abroad or overspread, being covered or
shaded.
<LEND>

<L>42664<pc>0917-b<k1>vitanu<k2>vitanu
{#vitanu#}¦ {%vi-tanu, us, vī, u,%} very thin, delicate,
graceful.
<LEND>

<L>42665<pc>0917-b<k1>vitantu<k2>vitantu
{#vitantu#}¦ {%vi-tantu, us,%} m. a good horse; ({%us%}),
f. a widow.
<LEND>

<L>42666<pc>0917-b<k1>vitap<k2>vitap
{#vitap#}¦ {%vi-tap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-tapati, -te, -tap-%}
{%tum,%} to give out heat, be hot, burn; to warm one's
self (or any member of the body, A.); to be heated,
to feel or suffer pain; to pervade, penetrate (Ved.):
Caus. {%-tāpayati, -yitum,%} to make hot, heat, warm.
<LEND>

<L>42667<pc>0917-b<k1>vitamas<k2>vitamas
{#vitamas#}¦ {%vi-tamas, ās, ās, as,%} free from
darkness, light; exempt from the quality of igno-
rance.
<LEND>

<L>42668<pc>0917-b<k1>vitaraRa<k2>vitaraRa
{#vitaraRa#}¦ {%vi-taraṇa.%} See under {%vi-tṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>42669<pc>0917-b<k1>vitark<k2>vitark
{#vitark#}¦ {%vi-tark,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tarkayati, -yitum,%}
to reason or think about, make conjectures about
(with acc.), to infer, conjecture, guess, suppose,
imagine, think, believe; to anticipate, expect; to
deliberate or reflect about, discuss (with acc.); to
consider as, take for; to find out, ascertain.
<LEND>
[Page0917-c+ 73]

<L>42670<pc>0917-c<k1>vitarka<k2>vitarka
{%Vi-tarka, as,%}¦ m. reasoning, argument, inference,
conjecture, guess, supposition, opinion, anticipation,
discussion; deliberation, consideration of probabilities
or alternatives, doubt, apprehension; a teacher, an
instructor in divine knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>42671<pc>0917-c<k1>vitarkaRa<k2>vitarkaRa
{%Vi-tarkaṇa, am,%}¦ n. reasoning, conjecturing, in-
ferring, drawing an inference, argument, discussion,
reflection; doubt.
<LEND>

<L>42672<pc>0917-c<k1>vitarkita<k2>vitarkita
{%Vi-tarkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ conjectured, imagined,
anticipated, ({%a-vitarkita,%} unexpected.)
<LEND>

<L>42673<pc>0917-c<k1>vitarkya<k2>vitarkya<h>1
1. {%vi-tarkya,%}¦ ind. having deliberated or con-
sidered, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42674<pc>0917-c<k1>vitarkya<k2>vitarkya<h>2
2. {%vi-tarkya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be conjectured or
supposed or imagined, questionable, doubtful.
<LEND>

<L>42675<pc>0917-c<k1>vitarj<k2>vitarj
{#vitarj#}¦ {%vi-tarj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarjati, -tarjitum,%}
to threaten, menace, revile, abuse, inveigh against,
blame.
<LEND>

<L>42676<pc>0917-c<k1>vitarturam<k2>vitarturam
{#vitarturam#}¦ {%vi-tarturam, vi-tarturāṇa.%} See
p. 918, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42677<pc>0917-c<k1>vitardi<k2>vitardi
{#vitardi#}¦ {%vi-tardi, is,%} f. or {%vitardikā,%} f. or
{%vitardī,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%tṛd%}), a raised square
piece of ground in the centre of a house or temple;
a kind of covered terrace in the middle of a court-
yard; a quadrangular seat or bench made of wood, a
place in a court-yard for sitting in or standing under;
a floor on four posts, a kind of altar or temporary
stage or shed in the middle of a court-yard (for per-
forming sacrifices &c. {%= vedikā%}); a covered tempo-
rary platform on which idols are sometimes placed;
a verandah, balcony.
<LEND>

<L>42678<pc>0917-c<k1>vitardDi<k2>vitardDi
{%Vi-tarddhi, is,%}¦ f. or {%vi-tarddhikā,%} f. or {%vi-%}
{%tarddhī,%} f. {%= vi-tardi%} above.
<LEND>

<L>42679<pc>0917-c<k1>vitala<k2>vitala
{#vitala#}¦ {%vi-tala, am,%} n. the second in order
of the seven lower regions or regions under the
earth; [cf. {%pātāla.%}] {%—Vitala-loka, as,%} m. the world
or lower region of Vi-tala.
<LEND>

<L>42680<pc>0917-c<k1>vitastapurI<k2>vitastapurI
{#vitastapurI#}¦ {%vitasta-purī,%} f., N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>42681<pc>0917-c<k1>vitastA<k2>vitastA
{#vitastA#}¦ {%vitastā,%} f., N. of a river in the
Pañjāb, now called Jhelum or Betusta or Behut (the
Hydaspes of the Greeks; cf. {%pañca-nada%}).
<LEND>

<L>42682<pc>0917-c<k1>vitasti<k2>vitasti
{#vitasti#}¦ {%vi-tasti, is,%} f. (said to be fr. rt.
{%tas%} or {%taṃs%} with prep. {%vi%}), a long span measured by
the extended thumb and little finger, equal to twelve
Aṅgulas. {%—Vitasti-deśya, as, ā, am,%} almost a Vi-
tasti long.
<LEND>

<L>42683<pc>0917-c<k1>vitasTAna<k2>vitasTAna
{#vitasTAna#}¦ {%vi-tasthāna, vi-tiṣṭhamāna.%} See
under 1. {%vi-ṣṭhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>42684<pc>0917-c<k1>vitAna<k2>vitAna
{#vitAna#}¦ {%vi-tāna.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42685<pc>0917-c<k1>vitimira<k2>vitimira
{#vitimira#}¦ {%vi-timira, as, ā, am,%} free from
darkness, clear.
<LEND>

<L>42686<pc>0917-c<k1>vitIrRa<k2>vitIrRa
{#vitIrRa#}¦ {%vi-tīrṇa.%} See under {%vi-tṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>42687<pc>0917-c<k1>vitud<k2>vitud
{#vitud#}¦ {%vi-tud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-tudati, -te, -tot-%}
{%tum,%} to pierce, strike, sting; to tear, scratch; to
scourge, whip: Caus. {%-todayati,%} Ved. {%-tudāyati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to pierce, strike, tear.
<LEND>

<L>42688<pc>0917-c<k1>vitudyamAna<k2>vitudyamAna
{%Vi-tudyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being pierced, being
struck, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42689<pc>0917-c<k1>vitunna<k2>vitunna
{%Vi-tunna, am,%}¦ n. the pot-herb Marsilia Quadri-
folia ({%= su-niṣaṇṇaka%}); the aquatic plant Śaivala,
Vallisneria Octandra; ({%ā%}), f. the tree Flacourtia Cata-
phracta ({%= tāmalakī%}).
<LEND>

<L>42690<pc>0917-c<k1>vitunnaka<k2>vitunnaka
{%Vitunnaka, as,%}¦ m. Flacourtia Cataphracta; ({%am%}),
n. coriander seed; blue vitriol; ({%ikā%}), f. Flacourtia
Cataphracta.
<LEND>

<L>42691<pc>0917-c<k1>vituzwa<k2>vituzwa
{#vituzwa#}¦ {%vi-tuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} displeased, dis-
satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>42692<pc>0917-c<k1>vitUstaya<k2>vitUstaya
{#vitUstaya#}¦ {%vi-tūstaya%} (fr. {%tūsta,%} q. v. {%+ vi%}),
Nom. P. {%-tūstayati, -yitum,%} to comb out matted or
braided hair ({%= keśān vijaṭī-kṛ%}), clean or smooth
the hair.
<LEND>

<L>42693<pc>0917-c<k1>vitfd<k2>vitfd
{#vitfd#}¦ {%vi-tṛd,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-tṛṇatti, -tṛntte,%}
{%-tarditum,%} to pierce, bore, cleave; to break through;
to excavate.
<LEND>
[Page0918-a+ 73]

<L>42694<pc>0918-a<k1>vitfp<k2>vitfp
{#vitfp#}¦ {%vi-tṛp,%} cl. 4. P. {%-tṛpyati, -tarpitum,%}
{%-tarptum, -traptum,%} to be satisfied, become satiated.
<LEND>

<L>42695<pc>0918-a<k1>vitfpta<k2>vitfpta
{%Vi-tṛpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfied, satiated.
<LEND>

<L>42696<pc>0918-a<k1>vitfz<k2>vitfz
{#vitfz#}¦ {%vi-tṛṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-tṛṣyati, -tarṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to be thirsty: Caus. {%-tarṣayati, -yitum,%} to
make thirsty, cause to thirst.
<LEND>

<L>42697<pc>0918-a<k1>vitfzRa<k2>vitfzRa
{#vitfzRa#}¦ {%vi-tṛṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} free from
thirst or desire, satisfied, content. {%—Vitṛṣṇa-tā,%} f.
or {%vitṛṣṇa-tva, am,%} n. freedom from desire, satiety.
<LEND>

<L>42698<pc>0918-a<k1>vitF<k2>vitF
{#vitF#}¦ {%vi-tṝ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati, -taritum, -ta-%}
{%rītum,%} to pass across or over, cross over, go over, go
or pass through, pervade; to convey or bring away;
to give away; to give, grant, bestow, allow, yield,
afford, favour with, ({%uttaraṃ vitṝ,%} to favour with
an answer); to give (medicine), apply a remedy; to
forgive; to cause, produce ({%= janayati,%} Kirāt. V.
31); to do, perform, effect; to increase, enhance:
Caus. {%-tārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to go through,
to carry through, accomplish: Intens., Ved. {%-tartūr-%}
{%yate,%} to pass over vehemently, labour or perform
energetically.
<LEND>

<L>42699<pc>0918-a<k1>vitaraRa<k2>vitaraRa
{%Vi-taraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of crossing or passing
over; donation, gift; giving up, abandoning.
<LEND>

<L>42700<pc>0918-a<k1>vitaram<k2>vitaram
{%Vi-taram,%}¦ ind., Ved. widely, vastly, exceedingly,
(Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 100, 12 {%= aty-antam.%})
<LEND>

<L>42701<pc>0918-a<k1>vitaritrat<k2>vitaritrat
{%Vi-taritrat, at, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. excessively carrying
through or accomplishing.
<LEND>

<L>42702<pc>0918-a<k1>vitarturam<k2>vitarturam
{%Vi-tarturam,%}¦ ind., Ved. with alternate movements,
alternately, (Sāy. {%= paraspara-vyatihāreṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>42703<pc>0918-a<k1>vitarturARa<k2>vitarturARa
{%Vi-tarturāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. alternating; (Sāy.)
injuring, despoiling ({%= hiṃsat,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 47, 17).
<LEND>

<L>42704<pc>0918-a<k1>vitIrRa<k2>vitIrRa
{%Vi-tīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crossed, passed, gone over
or through; subdued, overcome; effaced; conveyed;
given, bestowed, conferred, yielded, afforded; widely
distant. {%—Vitīrṇa-tara, as, ā, am,%} more widely
distant, situated further off.
<LEND>

<L>42705<pc>0918-a<k1>vitt<k2>vitt
{#vitt#}¦ {%vitt,%} cl. 10. P. (probably rather to
be regarded as a Nom. fr. {%vitta,%} col. 2),
{%vittayati, -yitum,%} to abandon (especially by giving
away), to give, give alms.
<LEND>

<L>42706<pc>0918-a<k1>vitta<k2>vitta
{#vitta#}¦ {%vitta, vittaka, vitti.%} See cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>42707<pc>0918-a<k1>vitrapa<k2>vitrapa
{#vitrapa#}¦ {%vitrapa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>42708<pc>0918-a<k1>vitras<k2>vitras
{#vitras#}¦ {%vi-tras,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-trasati, -tras-%}
{%yati, -trasitum,%} to tremble, be frightened: Caus.
{%-trāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to tremble, terrify.
<LEND>

<L>42709<pc>0918-a<k1>vitrasta<k2>vitrasta
{%Vi-trasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ frightened, alarmed, terrified.
<LEND>

<L>42710<pc>0918-a<k1>vitrAsa<k2>vitrAsa
{%Vi-trāsa, as,%}¦ m. fear, terror, alarm.
<LEND>

<L>42711<pc>0918-a<k1>vitrAsita<k2>vitrAsita
{%Vi-trāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to tremble, fright-
ened, terrified. {%—Vitrāsita-vihaṅgama, as, ā, am,%}
having (its) birds frightened away.
<LEND>

<L>42712<pc>0918-a<k1>vitvakzaRa<k2>vitvakzaRa
{#vitvakzaRa#}¦ {%vi-tvakṣaṇa, as,%} m., Ved. {%= vi-%}
{%śeṣeṇa tanū-kartṛ,%} one who greatly thins or
emaciates or destroys (his enemies; see rt. {%tvakṣ%}).
<LEND>

<L>42713<pc>0918-a<k1>vitsana<k2>vitsana
{#vitsana#}¦ {%vitsana, as,%} m. an ox, bull ({%=%}
{%vṛṣabha%}).
<LEND>

<L>42714<pc>0918-a<k1>viT<k2>viT
{#viT#}¦ {%vith%} (= rts. {%veth,%} 1. {%vidh%}), cl. 1. A.
{%vethate, vivithe%} or {%vivethe, vethiṣyate,%}
{%avethiṣṭa, vethitum,%} to ask, beg.
<LEND>

<L>42715<pc>0918-a<k1>viTura<k2>viTura
{#viTura#}¦ {%vithura, as, ā, am%} (connected with
rt. {%vyath%}), agitated, troubled, (Sāy. {%= vyathita%});
trembling, frail, fragile, weak, feeble, poor, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%hīna%}); ({%as%}), m. a thief; a demon, Rākṣasa; ({%ā%}),
f. a widow (according to Sāy.).
<LEND>

<L>42716<pc>0918-a<k1>viTurya<k2>viTurya
{%Vithurya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vithuryati, -yitum,%} Ved. to
be agitated or troubled, (Sāy. {%= vyathate.%})
<LEND>

<L>42717<pc>0918-a<k1>viTyA<k2>viTyA
{#viTyA#}¦ {%vithyā,%} f. a kind of plant (commonly
called Go-jihvā).
<LEND>

<L>42718<pc>0918-a<k1>vid<k2>vid<h>1
{#vid#} 1¦. {%vid,%} cl. 2. P. {%vetti%} (ep. also A.
{%vitte,%} 3rd pl. A. {%vidate%} or {%vidrate;%} a form
of the Perf., viz. {%veda%} contracted from {%viveda,%} is
often substituted for the Pres. {%vetti;%} 3rd pl. {%vidus,%}
contracted from {%vividus,%} being also much used for
{%vidanti, vettha%} for {%vetsi,%} &c.), Impf. {%avet%} (Ist
[Page0918-b+ 81]
sing. {%avedam,%} 2nd sing. {%avet%} or {%aves,%} 3rd pl. {%avi-%}
{%dus%} and according to Vopa-deva also {%avidan;%} 3rd
pl. A. {%avidata%} or {%avidrata%}), Pot. {%vidyāt,%} Impv.
{%vettu%} or {%vidāṃ-karotu%} (3rd pl. A. {%vidatām%} or {%vi-%}
{%dratām%}), {%viveda%} (according to Vopa-deva also {%vi-%}
{%dām-babhūva%}), {%vediṣyati%} (sometimes {%vetsyati%}),
{%avedīt, veditum%} (originally ‘to see,’ = Lat. <nsi>video</nsi>);
to perceive, understand, know, learn, ascertain, find
out, experience, feel; to consider, regard, look upon,
value, take for, name, call (especially in the 3rd pl.
{%viduḥ%} of {%veda%} above, used with a present significa-
tion, e. g. {%taṃ sthaviraṃ viduḥ,%} they consider or
call him aged; {%rājarṣir iti māṃ viduḥ,%} they
consider me a Rājarṣi); to notice, take notice of
(with gen.; Ved.); to convey, bestow, grant (Ved.);
cl. 6. P. A. {%vindati, -te%} (in Ṛg-veda I. 7, 7. {%vin-%}
{%dhe%} = 1st sing. A. {%vinde,%} 3rd pl. ep. {%vindate%}), Pot.
{%vindet%} (ep. {%vindyāt,%} Ved. 1st sing. P. {%videyam,%}
A. {%videya%}), {%viveda%} (3rd sing. Ved. {%vividat = lab-%}
{%dha-vān%} in Ṛg-veda VII. 21, 6), {%vivide%} (2nd sing.
{%vividiṣe,%} Ved. {%vivitse;%} 3rd pl. Ved. {%vidre = lab-%}
{%dha-vantaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 87, 6), {%vediṣyati, -te%} (or
according to others {%vetsyati, -te%}), {%avidat, avidata,%}
{%veditum%} (or {%vettum%}), to find, discover, meet with; to
obtain, gain, get, acquire, possess; to take in mar-
riage, choose a husband or wife, marry, (in this sense
generally A.); to convey, cause to obtain, grant (Ved.,
in Ṛg-veda I. 86, 8. {%vidā = vida,%} which according
to Sāy. is for 2nd pl. Impv. {%= lambhayata%}); cl. 7.
A. (ep. also P.) {%vintte (vinatti), vivide, vetsyate,%}
{%avitta, vettum,%} to perceive, understand, know; to
consider, regard, value, take for; to find, meet with,
obtain; to reason, reflect: Pass. or cl. 4. A. {%vidyate,%}
{%vivide, vetsyate,%} Aor. {%avedi,%} to be known; to be
found or obtained; to happen; to be or exist:
Caus. {%vedayati, -yate, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvidat,%} to
cause to know, make known, announce, report, in-
form of, apprise, tell, narrate, teach (sometimes with
loc. of person); to cause to find or discover; to
know; to perceive, feel; to be perceived or felt (A.,
Manu XII. 13); to dwell, inhabit (?): Desid. {%vivi-%}
{%diṣati, -te, vivitsati, -te,%} to desire to know, strive
to know; to wish to find or discover: Intens. {%vevid-%}
{%yate, vevetti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἴδ-ο-ν, εἶδ-ο-ν</lang> (i. e. <lang n="greek">ἔϝιδον</lang>),
<lang n="greek">εἴδ-ο-μαι, οἶδ-α</lang> ({%= veda%}), <lang n="greek">εἶδ-ος. εἴδ-ωλο-ν, ἴνδαλμα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀ-ειδ-ής, ἀ-ίδη-ς, ἄ-ῐστ-ο-ς, είδ-ώς, ἴδ-μην, ἴστωρ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἰστορ-έ-ω, ἴδ-ρι-ς, ἰνδ-άλλομαι, ὕδνης, ὕδω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὑδέω, ἀείδω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>vid-eo, visu-s</nsi> (Umbr. <nsi>virs-e-</nsi>
<nsi>to</nsi>), <nsi>vis-o, vi-tru-m:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vait, un-vit-i,</nsi> ‘igno-
rance;’ <nsi>vit-an, far-veit-l, vitôth, in-veitan, veit-</nsi>
<nsi>vods:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wizan, gi-wizo, wîzago, wîza-</nsi>
<nsi>gôn:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>witan, wita, ge-wit, ge-wittig,</nsi>
<nsi>wisian, ge-wis, wite,</nsi> ‘punishment;’ <nsi>witnian,</nsi> ‘to
punish:’ Slav. <nsi>vid-e-ti,</nsi> ‘to see;’ <nsi>ved-e-ti,</nsi> ‘to know:’
Lith. <nsi>veid-a-s, vyzd-i-s, veizd-mi:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>fêth,</nsi>
‘science, instruction;’ (perhaps) <nsi>feidhim,</nsi> ‘I mani-
fest, relate;’ <nsi>feidir,</nsi> ‘power;’ (perhaps also) <nsi>aithnim,</nsi>
<nsi>aithnighim,</nsi> ‘I know;’ <nsi>aithne,</nsi> ‘known;’ ‘know-
ledge;’ <nsi>fios,</nsi> ‘knowledge;’ <nsi>fiosach,</nsi> ‘knowing.’]
<LEND>

<L>42719<pc>0918-b<k1>vitta<k2>vitta
{%Vitta, as, ā, am%}¦ (according to Pāṇ. VIII. 2, 56.
the forms {%vitta%} and {%vinna%} belong to the root when
used in cl. 7; according to Vopa-deva also in cl. 6),
known, notorious, famous; found out, discovered,
investigated, examined, discussed, judged; found,
acquired, gained, possessed; ({%am%}), n. wealth, pro-
perty, possessions, goods, money, substance, thing;
power. {%—Vitta-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desirous of wealth.
{%—Vitta-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by wealth. {%—Vitta-%}
{%jāni, is, is, i,%} one who has taken or married a wife,
(Sāy. {%= labdha-bhārya.%}) {%—Vitta-da, as,%} m. ‘wealth-
giver,’ one who gives away property, a benefactor.
{%—Vitta-dugdha, am,%} n. ‘wealth-milk,’ wealth like
milk. {%—Vitta-mātrā,%} f. ‘materials of property,’
wealth. {%—Vitta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having property,
wealthy, opulent, rich. {%—Vitta-vardhana, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} increasing wealth, lucrative, profitable. {%—Vitta-%}
{%vivardhana, as, ī, am,%} increasing property or
capital, bearing interest. {%—Vitta-śāṭhya, am,%} n.
cheating in money matters. {%—Vitta-hīna, as, ā, am,%}
deprived of wealth, indigent. {%—Vittāgama (˚ta-āg˚),%}
{%as,%} m. acquisition of property, any source of wealth,
[Page0918-c+ 81]
means of acquiring property. {%—Vitteśa (˚ta-īśa), as,%}
m. ‘lord of riches,’ epithet of Kuvera. {%—Vittehā%}
{%(˚ta-īhā),%} f. desire of wealth, cupidity, avarice.
<LEND>

<L>42720<pc>0918-c<k1>vittaka<k2>vittaka
{%Vittaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ known, famous.
<LEND>

<L>42721<pc>0918-c<k1>vitti<k2>vitti
{%Vitti, is,%}¦ f. knowledge, judgment, investigation,
discussion, discrimination; probability, likelihood;
acquisition, gain.
<LEND>

<L>42722<pc>0918-c<k1>vittvA<k2>vittvA
{%Vittvā,%}¦ ind. having found or met with, having
obtained; having married.
<LEND>

<L>42723<pc>0918-c<k1>vid<k2>vid<h>2
2. {%vid, t, t, t,%}¦ who or what knows, a knower,
knowing; obtaining [cf. {%varivo-vid%}]; ({%t%}), f. know-
ing, knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>42724<pc>0918-c<k1>vida<k2>vida
{%Vida, as, ā, am,%}¦ knowing, a knower (= 2. {%vid%}
at the end of comps.); ({%as%}), m. a knower; a wise
man, sage; ({%ā%}), f. knowledge, learning; understand-
ing, intellect.
<LEND>

<L>42725<pc>0918-c<k1>vidat<k2>vidat
{%Vidat, an, atī, at,%}¦ knowing, learned, wise, intel-
ligent; granting, bestowing (Ved.). {%—Vidad-aśva,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘granting horses,’ a proper N. {%—Vidad-vasu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. possessing wealth, granting wealth.
<LEND>

<L>42726<pc>0918-c<k1>vidaTa<k2>vidaTa
{%Vidatha, am,%}¦ n. anything known, knowledge
(Ved.); a sacrificial rite, sacrifice, ceremony, rite
(Ved.); battle (according to some); ({%as%}), m. a
sacrifice (according to Naigh. III. 17); a wise or
learned man, sage, scholar; a saint, devotee, ascetic;
a proper N. (Ved.); [cf. Goth. <nsi>vitoth.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>42727<pc>0918-c<k1>vidaTin<k2>vidaTin
{%Vidathin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a king (father of
Ṛjiśvan).
<LEND>

<L>42728<pc>0918-c<k1>vidaTya<k2>vidaTya
{%Vidathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. worthy of sacrifice or
sacrificial worship, adorable.
<LEND>

<L>42729<pc>0918-c<k1>vidAna<k2>vidAna
{%Vidāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. knowing, wise, one
who knows, a knower, (Sāy. {%= vidvas%}); known,
discovered; making known, showing, exhibiting,
(Sāy. {%= pra-jñāpayat.%})
<LEND>

<L>42730<pc>0918-c<k1>vidita<k2>vidita
{%Vidita, as, ā, am,%}¦ perceived, known, understood;
apprised, informed; represented; promised, agreed;
({%as%}), m. a learned man, sage; ({%am%}), n. knowledge,
information, representation.
<LEND>

<L>42731<pc>0918-c<k1>viditvA<k2>viditvA
{%Viditvā,%}¦ ind. having perceived, having known,
having ascertained or considered.
<LEND>

<L>42732<pc>0918-c<k1>vidu<k2>vidu
{%Vidu, us,%}¦ m. the hollow between the frontal globes
of an elephant; a hippopotamus.
<LEND>

<L>42733<pc>0918-c<k1>vidura<k2>vidura
{%Vidura, as, ā, am,%}¦ knowing, wise, intelligent;
({%as%}), m. a learned or clever man; an intriguer; N.
of the younger brother of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu,
(they were all three sons of Vyāsa, but only the
latter two by the two widows of Vicitra-vīrya; when
Vyāsa wanted a third son, the elder widow sent him
one of her slave-girls, dressed in her own clothes,
and this girl became the mother of Vidura, who is
sometimes called Kṣattṛ as if he were the son of a
Kṣatriya man and Śūdra woman: Vidura is described
as {%sarva-buddhimatāṃ varaḥ,%} and is one of the
wisest characters in the Mahā-bhārata, always ready
with good advice both for his nephews, the Pāṇḍavas,
and for his brother Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.)
<LEND>

<L>42734<pc>0918-c<k1>vidula<k2>vidula
{%Vidula, as,%}¦  m. a sort of reed or ratan (Calamus
Rotang); the same reed growing in water (Calamus
Fasciculatus); gum-myrrh; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>42735<pc>0918-c<k1>viduzI<k2>viduzI
{%Viduṣī,%}¦ f. (fem. of {%vidvas,%} q. v.), a wise woman.
{%—Viduṣi-tarā%} or {%viduṣī-tarā,%} f. a very wise
woman ({%= vidvat-tarā,%} Vopa-deva VII. 49).
<LEND>

<L>42736<pc>0918-c<k1>viduzwara<k2>viduzwara
{%Viduṣ-ṭara, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= vidvat-tara,%}
more wise, very wise.
<LEND>

<L>42737<pc>0918-c<k1>viduzmat<k2>viduzmat
{%Viduṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ full of learned men.
<LEND>

<L>42738<pc>0918-c<k1>vidus<k2>vidus
{%Vidus, us, us, us,%}¦ Ved. {%= vidvas,%} wise.
<LEND>

<L>42739<pc>0918-c<k1>vidman<k2>vidman
{%Vidman,%}¦ Ved. knowledge (according to Sāy. {%=%}
{%jñāna%}). {%—Vidmanāpas, ās, ās, as%} (for {%vidmanā%}
{%+ apas%}), Ved. pervading all things by knowledge
or knowing all acts, (according to Nirukta XI. 33 {%=%}
{%vidita-karman,%} according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I.
31, 1. {%vidmanāpasaḥ = jñānena vyāpnuvānāḥ%}
or {%jñāta-karmāṇaḥ%}), executing work with know-
ledge, working skilfully ({%= utkṛṣṭa-jñānena%}
{%niṣpādya-karman%}).
<LEND>

<L>42740<pc>0918-c<k1>vidmana<k2>vidmana
{%Vidmana,%}¦ an adj. formed by Sāy. from {%vidman%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>42741<pc>0918-c<k1>vidyamAna<k2>vidyamAna
{%Vidyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being perceived or known,
being found, being present (sometimes applied to
present time in grammar), being in existence, exist-
ing, being, being preserved; actual, real, possessed
[Page0919-a+ 81]
(as property), being in one's possession. {%—Vidya-%}
{%māna-keśa, as, ā, am,%} one who possesses hair.
{%—Vidyamāna-tā,%} f. or {%vidyamāna-tva, am,%} n.
existence, presence. {%—Vidyamāna-mati, is, is, i,%}
possessing understanding.
<LEND>

<L>42742<pc>0919-a<k1>vidyA<k2>vidyA
{%Vidyā,%}¦ f. knowledge, ({%kāla-v˚,%} knowledge of time,
i. e. of the almanac), learning, scholarship, philosophy,
science, (according to some there are four Vidyās or
sciences, 1. {%trayī,%} the triple Veda; 2. {%ānvīkṣikī,%}
logic and metaphysics; 3. {%daṇḍa-nīti,%} the science of
government; 4. {%vārttā,%} practical arts, such as agri-
culture, commerce, medicine, &c.; and Manu VII.
43. adds a fifth, viz. {%ātma-vidyā,%} knowledge of soul
or sublime theological truth: according to others,
Vidyā has fourteen divisions, viz. the four Vedas,
the six Vedāṅgas, the Purāṇas, the Mīmāṃsā, Nyāya,
and Dharma or law; or with the four Upa-vedas,
eighteen divisions); a spell, incantation; the god-
dess Durgā; the tree Premna Spinosa; magical skill;
a kind of magical pill (which placed in the mouth
is supposed to give the power of ascending to heaven).
{%—Vidyā-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing wisdom, giving
knowledge or science; ({%as%}), m. a learned man, (in
this sense the word may also be divided into {%vidyā-%}
{%ākara,%} ‘a mine of learning.’) {%—Vidyākara-vāja-%}
{%peyin, ī,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Vidyāgama (˚yā-%}
{%āg˚), as,%} m. acquirement of knowledge, proficiency
in science. {%—Vidyā-caṇa, as, ā, am,%} or {%vidyā-%}
{%cuñcu, us, us, u%} ({%caṇa%} and {%cuñcu%} are regarded by
Pāṇini as Taddhita affixes), famous for learning or
knowledge. {%—Vidyā-tas,%} ind. from learning, than
learning (after a compar.). {%—Vidyā-dala, as,%} m.
‘science-leafed,’ N. of the Bhūrja or Bhojpattra tree
(the leaves of which are used for writing). {%—Vidyā-%}
{%dātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} one who gives or imparts know-
ledge, a teacher, instructor. {%—Vidyā-dāna, am,%} n.
the giving of knowledge, teaching. {%—Vidyā-devī,%} f.
‘goddess of learning,’ a female divinity peculiar to
the Jainas, (sixteen are named, Rohiṇī, Prajñaptī,
Vajra-śṛṅkhalā, Kuliśāṅkuśā, Cakreśvarī, Nara-
dattā, Kālī, Mahā-kālī, Gaurī, Gandhārī, Sarvāstra-
mahājvālā, Mānavī, Vairāṭyā, A-cchuptā, Mānasī,
Mahā-mānasikā.) {%—Vidyā-dhana, am,%} n. wealth
consisting in learning, money acquired by scholarship.
{%—Vidyā-dhara, as,%} m. ‘magical-knowledge holder,’
a particular kind of good or evil genius attending
upon the gods, (according to Kullūka on Manu XII.
47 {%= devānuyāyin%}); a kind of spirit or fairy; N.
of several persons; ({%ī%}), f. a female of the same class
of genii, a fairy, sylph. {%—Vidyādhara-tāla, as,%} m.,
N. of a particular time in music. {%—Vidyādharā-%}
{%cārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Vidyā-%}
{%dharī-parijana, as, ā, am,%} attended by Vidyā-
dharīs. {%—Vidyādhāra (˚yā-ādh˚), as,%} m. a recep-
tacle of knowledge. {%—Vidyādhirāja (˚yā-adh˚), as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Vidyā-nagara, am,%} n., N. of a
city. {%—Vidyā-nanda, as,%} m. ‘pleasure of know-
ledge,’ N. of a chapter of the Pañca-daśī; of an
author. {%—Vidyā-nivāsa, as,%} m., N. of the author
of a commentary on the Mugdha-bodha. {%—Vidyā-%}
{%nivāsa-bhaṭṭācārya, as,%} m., N. of the author of
the Sac-carita-mīmāṃsā. {%—Vidyānupālana (˚yā-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. the act of cherishing or patronising
learning, encouragement or cultivation of science;
acquiring learning, studying. {%—Vidyānupālin (˚yā-%}
{%an˚), ī, inī, i,%} cherishing or encouraging science,
acquiring learning. {%—Vidyānusevana (˚yā-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the cultivation of science or learning. {%—Vi-%}
{%dyānusevin (˚yā-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} cultivating learning,
engaged in study. {%—Vidyānta (˚yā-an˚), am,%} n.
the end of knowledge. {%—Vidyā-pati, is,%} m., N. of
a poet; of the author of the Gaṅgā-vākyāvalī; of
the author of the Varṣa-kṛtya. {%—Vidyā-pradāna,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the bestowing of knowledge,’ N. of a sec-
tion of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Vidyā-prāpti, is,%} f.
acquirement of knowledge; any acquisition made by
learning. {%—Vidyā-phala, am,%} n. the fruit of learn-
ing. {%—Vidyābhimāna (˚yā-abh˚), am,%} n. the fancy
or idea that one possesses learning. {%—Vidyābhimāna-%}
{%vat (˚yā-abh˚), ān, atī, at,%} fancying that one pos-
sesses learning, imagining one's self learned. {%—Vidyā- %}
[Page0919-b+ 78]
{%bhyāsa (˚yā-abh˚), as,%} m. practice or pursuit of
learning, application to books, study. {%—Vidyāraṇya%}
{%(˚yā-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of a poet; of the author of
the Vidyārtha-dīpikā. {%—Vidyā-ratna, am,%} n. the
jewel of learning; valuable knowledge. {%—Vidyā-%}
{%ratnākara (˚na-āk˚), as,%} m., N. of a work by
Dhana-pati. {%—Vidyārambha (˚yā-ār˚), as,%} m.
‘commencement of knowledge,’ N. of a section in
the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Vidyārjana (˚yā-ar˚), am,%}
n. the acquirement of knowledge; acquiring anything
by knowledge or by teaching. {%—Vidyārjita (˚yā-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} acquired or gained by knowledge.
{%—Vidyārtha (˚yā-ar˚), as,%} m. the seeking for
knowledge. {%—Vidyārtha-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work
by Vidyāraṇya. {%—Vidyārtha-prakāśikā,%} f., N. of
a work. {%—Vidyārthin (˚yā-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} seeking
for knowledge, studious; ({%ī%}), m. a student, pupil,
scholar, disciple. {%—Vidyālaṅkāra-bhaṭṭācārya (˚yā-%}
{%al˚), as,%} m., N. of the author of annotations on
Goyīcandra's commentary. {%—Vidyā-labdha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} acquired or gained by learning. {%—Vidyālaya%}
{%(˚yā-āl˚), as,%} m. abode or seat of learning, a school,
college; N. of a place. {%—Vidyā-lābha, as,%} m.
acquisition of learning; any acquirement gained by
learning. {%—Vidyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of
learning or science, learned. {%—Vidyā-vayo-vṛddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} advanced in learning and years. {%—Vidyā-%}
{%vinoda, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Vidyā-viśiṣṭa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} distinguished by learning, possessed of science
or scholarship. {%—Vidyā-vihīna, as, ā, am,%} deprived
of knowledge, misinstructed, ignorant. {%—Vidyā-%}
{%vṛddha, as, ā, am,%} old in knowledge, increased or
advanced in learning. {%—Vidyā-vyavasāya, as,%} m.
the pursuit of science. {%—Vidyā-vrata-snātaka%} or
{%vidyā-snātaka, as,%} m. a Brāhman who has finished
his period of studentship, (see {%snātaka.%}) {%—Vidyā-%}
{%hīna, as, ā, am,%} destitute of knowledge or learning,
uninstructed, ignorant. {%—Vidyopārjana (˚yā-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n. acquisition of knowledge. {%—Vidyopārjita%}
{%(˚yā-up˚), as, ā, am,%} acquired by learning.
<LEND>

<L>42743<pc>0919-b<k1>vidvas<k2>vidvas
{%Vidvas, vān, uṣī, vat,%}¦ one who knows, knowing,
understanding (with acc., Ṛg-veda X. 8, 8; Kirāt.
XI. 30), learned, ({%kāla-v˚,%} ‘learned in time,’ an
almanac-maker); intelligent, wise; ({%vān%}), m. a wise
man, scholar, sage, seer. {%—Vidvaj-jana, as,%} m. a
wise man, a sage, seer. {%—Vidvat-kalpa, as, ā, am,%}
a little learned, slightly learned. {%—Vidvat-tama, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} wisest, very wise. {%—Vidvat-tara, as, ā, am,%}
wiser, very wise; [cf. {%viduṣ-ṭara.%}] {%—Vidvat-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. scholarship, science, wisdom. {%—Vidvad-de-%}
{%śīya%} or {%vidvad-deśya, as, ā, am, = vidvat-kalpa.%}
{%—Vidvan-moda-taraṅgiṇī,%} f., N. of a philoso-
phical work by Rāma-deva.
<LEND>

<L>42744<pc>0919-b<k1>vinda<k2>vinda
{%Vinda, vindamāna,%}¦ &c. See p. 925, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>42745<pc>0919-b<k1>vinna<k2>vinna
{%Vinna, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%vitta%}], known; discussed,
judged; obtained, gained; married; placed, fixed.
<LEND>

<L>42746<pc>0919-b<k1>vividivas<k2>vividivas
{%Vividivas, ān, uṣī, at,%}¦ one who has known or
obtained or found.
<LEND>

<L>42747<pc>0919-b<k1>vividvas<k2>vividvas
{%Vividvas, ān, uṣī, at,%}¦ one who has known,
knowing, wise; one who has obtained.
<LEND>

<L>42748<pc>0919-b<k1>veda<k2>veda
{%Veda, vedya,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>42749<pc>0919-b<k1>vidaMS<k2>vidaMS
{#vidaMS#}¦ {%vi-daṃś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-daśati, -daṃṣṭum,%}
to bite into pieces, bite asunder, bite; to crush.
<LEND>

<L>42750<pc>0919-b<k1>vidaMSa<k2>vidaMSa
{%Vi-daṃśa, as,%}¦ m. any pungent food which excites
thirst ({%= ava-daṃśa%}).
<LEND>

<L>42751<pc>0919-b<k1>vidaSyamAna<k2>vidaSyamAna
{%Vi-daśyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being bitten.
<LEND>

<L>42752<pc>0919-b<k1>vidagDa<k2>vidagDa
{#vidagDa#}¦ {%vi-dagdha.%} See under {%vi-dah.%}
<LEND>

<L>42753<pc>0919-b<k1>viday<k2>viday
{#viday#}¦ {%vi-day,%} cl. 1. A. {%-dayate, -dayitum,%}
Ved. to divide asunder, separate; to dissipate, dispel,
(Sāy. {%= vi-bādhate%}); to destroy, injure greatly; to
consume, devour, (Sāy. {%= bhakṣayati%}); to distri-
bute, grant, bestow, (Sāy. {%= viśeṣeṇa dadāti.%})
<LEND>

<L>42754<pc>0919-b<k1>vidayamAna<k2>vidayamAna
{%Vi-dayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ dividing; dissipating;
destroying; distributing.
<LEND>

<L>42755<pc>0919-b<k1>vidara<k2>vidara
{#vidara#}¦ {%vi-dara.%} See under {%vi-dṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>42756<pc>0919-b<k1>vidarBa<k2>vidarBa
{#vidarBa#}¦ {%vi-darbha, as, ā,%} m. f. (said to be
fr. {%vi,%} ‘without,’ {%+ darbha,%} ‘sacred grass,’ supposed
not to grow in Vidarbha because the son of a saint
[Page0919-c+ 77]
died of a wound inflicted by a sharp blade of this
grass), a district and city to the south-west of Bengal,
the modern Berar proper; ({%as%}), m. the king of
Vidarbha; any dry or desert soil; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a people. {%—Vidarbha-jā,%} f. ‘Vidarbha-born,’ epi-
thet of the wife of the saint Agastya; of Damayantī
(wife of Nala and heroine of the poem so called);
of Rukmiṇī (wife of Kṛṣṇa). {%—Vidarbha-tanayā%}
or {%vidarbha-rāja-tanayā%} or {%vidarbha-subhrū, ūs,%}
f. ‘daughter of the king of Vidarbha,’ Damayantī.
{%—Vidarbha-nagarī,%} f. the city of Vidarbha. {%—Vi-%}
{%darbha-pati, is,%} or {%vidarbha-rāj, ṭ,%} or {%vidarbha-%}
{%rāja, as,%} or {%vidarbha-rājan, ā,%} or {%vidarbhādhi-%}
{%pati (˚bha-adh˚), is,%} m. the king of Vidarbha.
{%—Vidarbha-rājadhānī,%} f. the city or capital of
Vidarbha. {%—Vidarbhābhimukha (˚bha-abh˚), as,%}
{%ī, am,%} having the face turned towards Vidarbha,
facing Vidarbha.
<LEND>

<L>42757<pc>0919-c<k1>vidarSin<k2>vidarSin
{#vidarSin#}¦ {%vi-darśin.%} See under {%vi-dṛś.%}
<LEND>

<L>42758<pc>0919-c<k1>vidal<k2>vidal
{#vidal#}¦ {%vi-dal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dalati, -dalitum,%}
to break or burst asunder, burst or break to pieces;
to be rent or split; to open, expand, blow.
<LEND>

<L>42759<pc>0919-c<k1>vidala<k2>vidala<h>1
1. {%vi-dala, as, ā, am,%}¦ rent asunder, split; opened,
expanded, blown (as a flower &c.); ({%as%}), m. rend-
ing, dividing, separating; a cake; mountain ebony,
Bauhinia Variegata; ({%ā%}), f. a plant, {%= trivṛt; (am),%}
n. a shallow basket made of split bamboos or any
vessel of wicker-work; split peas; pomegranate bark;
the cuttings or chips of any substance, anything pared
or split; a twig. {%—Vidalī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act
of rending asunder, dividing, &c. {%—Vidalī-kṛ,%} cl.
8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to rend asunder,
tear, split, divide. {%—Vidalī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} rent
asunder, split, torn, broken; cut, divided, separated.
<LEND>

<L>42760<pc>0919-c<k1>vidalana<k2>vidalana
{%Vi-dalana, am,%}¦ n. the act of tearing or rending
asunder, splitting.
<LEND>

<L>42761<pc>0919-c<k1>vidalita<k2>vidalita
{%Vi-dalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ burst asunder, rent, torn,
split; crushed; blown, expanded (as a flower).
<LEND>

<L>42762<pc>0919-c<k1>vidala<k2>vidala<h>2
{#vidala#} 2¦. {%vi-dala, as, ā, am,%} having no
leaves, leafless.
<LEND>

<L>42763<pc>0919-c<k1>vidas<k2>vidas
{#vidas#}¦ {%vi-das,%} cl. 4. P. {%-dasyati, -dasitum,%}
Ved. to waste away, become exhausted, fail, be want-
ing, wither away, come to an end, (Sāy. {%= upa-%}
{%kṣīyate, vi-śuṣyati.%})
<LEND>

<L>42764<pc>0919-c<k1>vidasta<k2>vidasta
{%Vi-dasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ wasted away, exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>42765<pc>0919-c<k1>vidah<k2>vidah
{#vidah#}¦ {%vi-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dagdhum,%}
to burn out, cauterize (a wound &c.); to burn, con-
sume by fire, scorch, parch, shrivel up, destroy by fire:
Pass. {%-dahyate,%} to be burnt; to suffer from internal
heat, burn, be inflamed; to be consumed by grief;
to be puffed up, boast.
<LEND>

<L>42766<pc>0919-c<k1>vidagDa<k2>vidagDa<h>1
1. {%vi-dagdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ burnt, inflamed; con-
sumed by fire or internal heat; cooked; digested;
destroyed, decomposed, corrupt, spoiled, turned sour;
clever, shrewd, well-bred, knowing, witty, sharp;
subtle, cunning, crafty, sly, artful, intriguing; ({%as%}),
m. a learned or clever man, a scholar, Paṇḍit; a
libertine, intriguer; N. of a teacher of the school
of the Vājasaneyins or White Yajur-veda; ({%ā%}), f. a
sharp or knowing woman. {%—Vidagdha-tā,%} f. or
{%vidagdha-tva, am,%} n. sharpness, shrewdness, clever-
ness, wit; elegance. {%—Vidagdha-mādhava, am,%}
n., N. of a drama ascribed to Rūpa (containing seven
acts and written A. D. 1549; it relates to the loves
of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā, and is in fact the Gīta-
govinda dramatised). {%—Vidagdha-mukha-maṇḍa-%}
{%na, am,%} n., N. of a work by Dharma-dāsa.
<LEND>

<L>42767<pc>0919-c<k1>vidagDa<k2>vidagDa<h>2
2. {%vi-dagdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ unburnt, uncooked,
undigested, ill-concocted.
<LEND>

<L>42768<pc>0919-c<k1>vidAha<k2>vidAha
{%Vi-dāha, as,%}¦ m. burning; great heat, inflamma-
tion, pungency.
<LEND>

<L>42769<pc>0919-c<k1>vidAhin<k2>vidAhin
{%Vi-dāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ burning, hot; pungent, acrid;
({%i%}), n. any substance that causes inflammation.
<LEND>

<L>42770<pc>0919-c<k1>vidA<k2>vidA<h>1
{#vidA#} 1¦. {%vi-dā%} (see rt. 1. {%dā%}), cl. 3. P. {%-da-%}
{%dāti, -dātum,%} to give out, distribute, grant.
<LEND>

<L>42771<pc>0919-c<k1>vidatta<k2>vidatta
{%Vi-datta, as, ā, am,%}¦ given out, distributed.
<LEND>

<L>42772<pc>0919-c<k1>vidA<k2>vidA<h>2
{#vidA#} 2¦. {%vi-dā%} ({%= vi-do,%} see rt. 3. {%dā%}), cl.
[Page0920-a+ 71]
2. 4. P. {%-dāti, -dyati, -dātum,%} to cut up, cut in pieces,
bruise, pound; to destroy; to be destroyed, perish
(Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>42773<pc>0920-a<k1>vidA<k2>vidA<h>3
{#vidA#} 3¦. {%vi-dā%} (see rt. 4. {%dā%}), cl. 4. P. {%-dyati,%}
{%dātum,%} to unbind, untie; to release; deliver from
(with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>42774<pc>0920-a<k1>vidAya<k2>vidAya
{#vidAya#}¦ {%vidāya, as,%} m. (perhaps not a
Sanskrit word, cf. <lang n="arabic">وداع</lang>), permission to go away,
dismissal with good wishes.
<LEND>

<L>42775<pc>0920-a<k1>vidAra<k2>vidAra
{#vidAra#}¦ {%vi-dāra.%} See under {%vi-dṝ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42776<pc>0920-a<k1>viditya<k2>viditya
{#viditya#}¦ {%vi-ditya.%} See under {%vi-do,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42777<pc>0920-a<k1>vidiS<k2>vidiS
{#vidiS#}¦ {%vi-diś, k,%} f. an intermediate point
of the compass; an intermediate district. {%—Vidik-%}
{%caṅga, as,%} m. a sort of yellow bird ({%= haridrāṅga%}).
<LEND>

<L>42778<pc>0920-a<k1>vidiSA<k2>vidiSA
{#vidiSA#}¦ {%vidiśā,%} f. Vidiśā, the capital of the
district of Daśārṇā; N. of a river in Malwa.
<LEND>

<L>42779<pc>0920-a<k1>vidIp<k2>vidIp
{#vidIp#}¦ {%vi-dīp,%} cl. 4. A. (ep. also P.) {%-dīpyate%}
{%(-ti), -dīpitum,%} to shine forth, blaze forth, shine very
brightly: Caus. P. {%-dīpayati, -yitum,%} to illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>42780<pc>0920-a<k1>vidIrRa<k2>vidIrRa
{#vidIrRa#}¦ {%vi-dīrṇa.%} See under {%vi-dṝ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42781<pc>0920-a<k1>vidu<k2>vidu
{#vidu#}¦ {%vi-du%} or {%vi-dū%} (see rt. 2. {%du%}), cl. 5. P.
{%-dunoti, -dotum,%} to consume or destroy (especially
by burning); to pain, afflict; cl. 5. A., cl. 4. A. (P.)
{%-dunute, -dūyate (-ti),%} to be consumed by grief,
&c.; to suffer pain, pine away with sorrow, &c.;
to be agitated or disturbed.
<LEND>

<L>42782<pc>0920-a<k1>vidUna<k2>vidUna
{%Vi-dūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ distressed, agitated, afflicted,
pained.
<LEND>

<L>42783<pc>0920-a<k1>vidUyat<k2>vidUyat
{%Vi-dūyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being distressed or afflicted;
agitated.
<LEND>

<L>42784<pc>0920-a<k1>vidura<k2>vidura
{#vidura#}¦ {%vidura, vidula.%} See p. 918, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>42785<pc>0920-a<k1>viduz<k2>viduz
{#viduz#}¦ {%vi-duṣ,%} Caus. P. {%-dūṣayati, -yitum,%}
to corrupt, defile, contaminate, spoil; to disgrace,
offend; to revile, abuse, blame, censure.
<LEND>

<L>42786<pc>0920-a<k1>vidUzaka<k2>vidUzaka
{%Vi-dūṣaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ corrupting, defiling, cor-
ruptive, contaminating, a defiler; censorious, detract-
ing, a detractor, abuser; jocular, facetious, witty;
({%as%}), m. a jester, joker, wag, buffoon; (in the
drama) the jocose companion and confidential friend
of the principal character or hero of the play, (this
character acts the same confidential part towards the
king or prince, who is the hero of the piece, that her
female companions do towards the heroine; he is
also the personage whose business is to excite mirth
by being ridiculous in person and attire, and by allow-
ing himself to become the universal butt of others;
a curious regulation requires him to be a Brāhman,
that is, of a caste higher than that of the king him-
self; see Śakuntalā, Act 2); a libertine, catamite.
<LEND>

<L>42787<pc>0920-a<k1>vidUzaRa<k2>vidUzaRa
{%Vi-dūṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of corrupting or de-
filing; corruption, contamination; censuring, reviling,
abuse, satire.
<LEND>

<L>42788<pc>0920-a<k1>viduzwara<k2>viduzwara
{#viduzwara#}¦ {%viduṣ-ṭara.%} See p. 918, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>42789<pc>0920-a<k1>vidUna<k2>vidUna
{#vidUna#}¦ {%vi-dūna, vi-dūyat.%} See under {%vi-du.%}
<LEND>

<L>42790<pc>0920-a<k1>vidUra<k2>vidUra
{#vidUra#}¦ {%vi-dūra, as, ā, am,%} very far, remote;
({%as%}), m., N. of a city and mountain whence the lapis
lazuli is brought. {%—Vidūra-ga, as, ā, am,%} going far
or wide, spreading. {%—Vidūra-ja, am,%} n. ‘produced
in Vidūra,’ the lapis lazuli; [cf. {%vaidūrya.%}] {%—Vi-%}
{%dūra-tas,%} ind. from afar, from a distance; far. {%—Vi-%}
{%dūra-bhūmi, is,%} f., N. of a country ({%= vi-dūra%}).
{%—Vidūrādri (˚ra-ad˚), is,%} m., N. of a mountain
(said to be in Ceylon).
<LEND>

<L>42791<pc>0920-a<k1>vidUraTa<k2>vidUraTa
{#vidUraTa#}¦ {%vidūratha, as,%} m., N. of a king
(a son of Su-ratha); of a son of Bhajamāna.
<LEND>

<L>42792<pc>0920-a<k1>vidfS<k2>vidfS
{#vidfS#}¦ {%vi-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati, -draṣṭum,%}
to see through, see clearly, see: Pass. {%-dṛśyate,%} to
be clearly visible, become apparent, appear: Caus.
{%-darśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to see, show; to teach.
<LEND>

<L>42793<pc>0920-a<k1>vidarSin<k2>vidarSin
{%Vi-darśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ seeing clearly, seeing through,
penetrating.
<LEND>
[Page0920-b+ 78]

<L>42794<pc>0920-b<k1>vidF<k2>vidF
{#vidF#}¦ {%vi-dṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-dṛṇāti, -daritum,%}
{%-darītum,%} to tear asunder or to pieces, rend asunder,
split open: Pass. {%-dīryate,%} to be torn or rent asunder,
to burst open; to be torn with grief or anguish:
Caus. {%-dārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to burst asunder;
to rend, tear in pieces, crush; to tear open, open; to
saw in pieces; to break or burst through; to tear up,
rip up: Intens., Ved. {%-dardarīti,%} to tear or split in
pieces, rend asunder, crush.
<LEND>

<L>42795<pc>0920-b<k1>vidara<k2>vidara
{%Vi-dara, as,%}¦ m. tearing asunder, rending; ({%am%}),
n. the Indian prickly pear, Cactus Indicus ({%= viśva-%}
{%sāraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>42796<pc>0920-b<k1>vidAra<k2>vidAra
{%Vi-dāra, as,%}¦ m. tearing asunder, rending; cutting;
war, battle; an inundation, overflow, the rising of a
river or pond above its banks; ({%ī%}), f. the plant He-
dysarum Gangeticum ({%= śāla-parṇī%}); the climbing
plant Ipomœa Paniculata; a swelling in the groin,
bubo, &c. {%—Vidārī-gandhā,%} f. the plant Hedysarum
Gangeticum.
<LEND>

<L>42797<pc>0920-b<k1>vidAraka<k2>vidAraka
{%Vi-dāraka, as,%}¦ m. a render, tearer, divider; a
tree or rock in the middle of a stream dividing its
course; a hole or pit for water sunk in the bed of a
dry river, &c.; ({%ikā%}), f. the plant Hedysarum Gan-
geticum; a swelling in the groin, bubo; ({%am%}), n.
alkaline earth ({%= vajra-kṣāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>42798<pc>0920-b<k1>vidAraRa<k2>vidAraRa
{%Vi-dāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of rending or tearing
asunder, splitting, ripping up, severing, breaking, di-
viding; paining, afflicting; killing, massacre, slaughter;
({%as, ā%}), m. f. war, battle; ({%as%}), m. a tree or rock
in the middle of a stream to which a boat is fastened;
the tree Pterospermum Acerifolium ({%= karṇikāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>42799<pc>0920-b<k1>vidArayat<k2>vidArayat
{%Vi-dārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ tearing asunder, rend-
ing, ripping, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>42800<pc>0920-b<k1>vidArita<k2>vidArita
{%Vi-dārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn asunder, rent, split,
broken open.
<LEND>

<L>42801<pc>0920-b<k1>vidArin<k2>vidArin
{%Vi-dārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ rending asunder, tearing, break-
ing; ({%iṇī%}), f. the plant Gmelina Arborea ({%= kāś-%}
{%marī,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>42802<pc>0920-b<k1>vidAru<k2>vidAru
{%Vi-dāru, us,%}¦ m. a lizard, chameleon ({%= krakaca-%}
{%pād%}).
<LEND>

<L>42803<pc>0920-b<k1>vidArya<k2>vidArya
{%Vi-dārya,%}¦ ind. having torn asunder, having split
or rent, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42804<pc>0920-b<k1>vidAryamARa<k2>vidAryamARa
{%Vi-dāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being rent asunder,
being split in pieces.
<LEND>

<L>42805<pc>0920-b<k1>vidIrRa<k2>vidIrRa
{%Vi-dīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rent asunder, torn, split, burst
or broken open, ripped up, expanded, opened.
<LEND>

<L>42806<pc>0920-b<k1>vidIryamARa<k2>vidIryamARa
{%Vi-dīryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being rent or torn
asunder, being split or broken or cut in pieces.
<LEND>

<L>42807<pc>0920-b<k1>vidfti<k2>vidfti
{%Vi-dṛti, is,%}¦ f. (probably fr. {%vi-dṝ%}), a suture, seam.
<LEND>

<L>42808<pc>0920-b<k1>videSa<k2>videSa
{#videSa#}¦ {%vi-deśa, as,%} m. another country,
foreign country, abroad; any place away from home.
{%—Videśa-ga, as, ā, am,%} going abroad or to a foreign
country. {%—Videśa-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone abroad.
{%—Videśa-gamana, am,%} n. the act of going abroad,
travelling in foreign lands. {%—Videśa-ja, as, ā, am,%}
born or produced in a foreign country, foreign, exotic,
a foreigner. {%—Videśa-stha, as, ā, am,%} remaining
abroad, living in foreign lands or in a distant country.
{%—Videśasthāśauca (˚tha-aś˚), am,%} n. impurity
resulting from living abroad.
<LEND>

<L>42809<pc>0920-b<k1>videSin<k2>videSin
{%Videśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ belonging to another country,
foreign, exotic; a foreigner, stranger.
<LEND>

<L>42810<pc>0920-b<k1>videSIya<k2>videSIya
{%Videśīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to a foreign
country, foreign.
<LEND>

<L>42811<pc>0920-b<k1>videha<k2>videha
{#videha#}¦ {%vi-deha, as, ā, am,%} without body, bodi-
less, incorporeal; trunkless; ({%as%}), m. a sovereign of the
family of Janaka, king of Mithilā; N. of the author
of a work on medicine; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a district in
the province of Behar (ancient Mithilā or the modern
Tirhut); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the people of Videha. {%—Vi-%}
{%deha-mukti, is,%} f. incorporeal deliverance. {%—Videha-%}
{%mukty-ādi-kathana, am,%} n., N. of a short treatise
on the duties and exercises of ascetics.
<LEND>

<L>42812<pc>0920-b<k1>vido<k2>vido
{#vido#}¦ {%vi-do%} (see 2. {%vi-dā%}), cl. 2. 4. P. {%-dāti,%}
{%-dyati, -dātum,%} to cut into pieces, cut up, crush;
to destroy.
<LEND>

<L>42813<pc>0920-b<k1>viditya<k2>viditya
{%Vi-ditya,%}¦ ind. (?), having cut up or destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>42814<pc>0920-b<k1>vidDa<k2>vidDa
{#vidDa#}¦ {%viddha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vyadh,%} q. v.),
[Page0920-c+ 77]
pierced, perforated, penetrated, stabbed, wounded;
beaten, lashed, whipped; thrown, cast, sent, directed;
opposed, impeded; resembling, like; ({%as%}), m. the
tree Echites Scholaris; ({%am%}), n. a wound. {%—Viddha-%}
{%karṇa, as, ī, am,%} having bored ears, having the ears
pierced or slit; ({%as, ā%} or {%ī%}), m. f. a species of plant
({%= pāṭhā,%} q. v.). {%—Viddha-karṇikā,%} f. {%= viddha-%}
{%karṇī%}. {%—Viddha-śāla-bhañjikā,%} f., N. of a drama
by Rāja-śekhara.
<LEND>

<L>42815<pc>0920-c<k1>vidmanApas<k2>vidmanApas
{#vidmanApas#}¦ {%vidmanāpas.%} See p. 918, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>42816<pc>0920-c<k1>vidyamAna<k2>vidyamAna
{#vidyamAna#}¦ {%vidyamāna.%} See p. 918, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>42817<pc>0920-c<k1>vidyA<k2>vidyA
{#vidyA#}¦ {%vidyā.%} See p. 919, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42818<pc>0920-c<k1>vidyut<k2>vidyut<h>1
{#vidyut#} 1¦. {%vi-dyut,%} cl. 1. A. {%-dyotate%} (ep. also
P. {%-dyotati;%} Perf. {%-didyute%}), {%-dyotitum,%} to shine
forth, radiate, flash, be brilliant or radiant, sparkle;
to light, lighten; to illuminate: Caus. {%-dyotayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to illuminate, irradiate, enlighten, make
brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>42819<pc>0920-c<k1>vidavidyutat<k2>vidavidyutat
{%Vi-davidyutat, at, atī, at%}¦ (Intens. part. Ved.),
shining brightly, shining.
<LEND>

<L>42820<pc>0920-c<k1>vidyut<k2>vidyut<h>2
2. {%vi-dyut, t,%}¦ f. lightning; a thunderbolt (a
weapon of the Maruts); a species of the Atijagatī
metre; ({%t%}), m., N. of an Asura. {%—Vidyuj-jihva, as,%}
m. ‘lightning-tongued,’ a kind of Rākṣasa. {%—Vi-%}
{%dyuj-jvālā,%} f. the flashing of lightning; N. of a
particular plant {%(= kali-kārī)%}. {%—Vidyut-keśa, as,%}
m., N. of a Rākṣasa (son of Heti and father of
Su-keśa). {%—Vidyut-keśin, ī,%} m., N. of a king of the
Rākṣasas. {%—Vidyut-patāka, as,%} m. ‘having light-
ning for its banner,’ epithet of one of the seven kinds
of cloud at the destruction of the world; [cf. {%valā-%}
{%haka.%}] {%—Vidyut-pāta, as,%} m. the falling or darting
of lightning, a stroke of lightning. {%—Vidyut-prabha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the splendor of lightning, flashing
like lightning. {%—Vidyut-priya, am,%} n. ‘lightning-
loved,’ bell-metal. {%—Vidyut-vat%} or {%vidyun-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having or containing lightning, electrical (a
cloud &c.). {%—Vidyud-unmeṣa, as,%} m. a flash of
lightning. {%—Vidyud-dāman, a,%} n. ‘a garland or
mass of lightning,’ a flash or streak of zigzag light-
ning. {%—Vidyud-dyota, as,%} m. the brightness or
brilliance of lightning. {%—Vidyud-ratha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having lightning for a vehicle (said of the
Maruts). {%—Vidyun-mahas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. brilliant
or radiant with lightning (said of the Maruts; Sāy.
{%= vidyotamāna-tejas%}). {%—Vidyun-mālā,%} f. ‘gar-
land of lightning,’ N. of a metre in Sanskrit prosody.
{%—Vidyun-mālin, ī,%} m. ‘garlanded with lightning,’
N. of an Asura. {%—Vidyul-latā,%} f. ‘lightning-creeper,’
forked or zigzag lightning. {%—Vidyul-lekhā,%} f. a streak
of lightning, flash of lightning, forked lightning.
<LEND>

<L>42821<pc>0920-c<k1>vidyut<k2>vidyut<h>3
3. {%vi-dyut, t, t, t,%}¦ devoid of splendor, lustreless.
<LEND>

<L>42822<pc>0920-c<k1>vidyutaya<k2>vidyutaya
{%Vidyutaya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vidyutayate, -yitum,%} Ved.
to flash or gleam (like lightning), be radiant.
<LEND>

<L>42823<pc>0920-c<k1>vidyotana<k2>vidyotana
{%Vi-dyotana, as, ī, am,%}¦ irradiating, illuminating,
enlightening; illustrating.
<LEND>

<L>42824<pc>0920-c<k1>vidyotamAna<k2>vidyotamAna
{%Vi-dyotamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, blazing,
flashing, lightening, ({%vidyotamāne,%} ind. when the
lightning flashes, when it lightens.)
<LEND>

<L>42825<pc>0920-c<k1>vidra<k2>vidra
{#vidra#}¦ {%vidra, am,%} n. (probably fr. {%vi-dṝ%} or
connected with rt. {%vyadh%}), tearing, splitting, pierc-
ing, perforating; a fissure, hole, chasm.
<LEND>

<L>42826<pc>0920-c<k1>vidraDa<k2>vidraDa
{%Vidradha, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably connected with
rt. {%vyadh%}), Ved. divided, (according to Yāska {%=%}
{%viddha,%} according to Durga {%= vikuṣitādhobhāga;%}
see Nirukta IV. 15.)
<LEND>

<L>42827<pc>0920-c<k1>vidraDi<k2>vidraDi
{%Vidradhi, is,%}¦ m. an abscess (especially when deep-
seated or internal). {%—Vidradhi-nāśana, as,%} m.
‘abscess-destroyer,’ the tree Hyperanthera Morunga
({%= śobhāñjana,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>42828<pc>0920-c<k1>vidrA<k2>vidrA
{#vidrA#}¦ {%vi-drā%} or {%vi-drai,%} cl. 2. 1. (or 4.) P.
{%-drāti, -drāyati, -drātum,%} (probably) to awake out
of sleep.
<LEND>

<L>42829<pc>0920-c<k1>vidrARa<k2>vidrARa
{%Vi-drāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ awakened out of sleep,
awaking.
<LEND>

<L>42830<pc>0920-c<k1>vidru<k2>vidru
{#vidru#}¦ {%vi-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -drotum,%}
to run in different directions, disperse, escape; to
[Page0921-a+ 77]
part asunder, become divided, burst asunder; to flow
asunder, melt, become melted, liquefy: Caus. {%-drā-%}
{%vayati, -yitum,%} to cause to disperse, drive away,
put to flight, frighten away, scare, chase away.
<LEND>

<L>42831<pc>0921-a<k1>vidrava<k2>vidrava
{%Vi-drava, as,%}¦ m. running in different directions,
running away, flight, panic, agitation; retreat, escape;
flowing out, oozing; flowing asunder, melting, lique-
faction; censure, abuse, reproach; intellect, under-
standing.
<LEND>

<L>42832<pc>0921-a<k1>vidrAva<k2>vidrAva
{%Vi-drāva, as,%}¦ m. running away, flight, panic,
retreat; liquefaction.
<LEND>

<L>42833<pc>0921-a<k1>vidrAvaka<k2>vidrAvaka
{%Vi-drāvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ driving away; causing
to flow or melt, liquefying.
<LEND>

<L>42834<pc>0921-a<k1>vidrAvaRa<k2>vidrAvaRa
{%Vi-drāvaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of driving away,
chasing, defeating; causing to flow or melt, lique-
fying.
<LEND>

<L>42835<pc>0921-a<k1>vidrAvita<k2>vidrAvita
{%Vi-drāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to disperse, driven
away, put to flight; liquefied, fused.
<LEND>

<L>42836<pc>0921-a<k1>vidruta<k2>vidruta
{%Vi-druta, as, ā, am,%}¦ flown, fled; running hither
and thither, going fast; agitated, alarmed; liquefied,
liquid, fluid (as an oily or metallic substance when
heated).
<LEND>

<L>42837<pc>0921-a<k1>vidruma<k2>vidruma
{#vidruma#}¦ {%vi-druma, as,%} m. a tree bearing
precious gems; coral; a young sprout or shoot.
{%—Vidruma-taṭa, as, ā, am,%} having banks of coral.
{%—Vidruma-dehalī,%} f. a threshold of coral. {%—Vi-%}
{%druma-latā,%} f. a branch of coral; a sort of vegetable
perfume. {%—Vidruma-latikā,%} f. a kind of perfume
({%= nalikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>42838<pc>0921-a<k1>vidrE<k2>vidrE
{#vidrE#}¦ {%vi-drai%} (see {%vi-drā%}), cl. 1. P. {%-drā-%}
{%yati, -drātum,%} to awake from one's sleep.
<LEND>

<L>42839<pc>0921-a<k1>vidvas<k2>vidvas
{#vidvas#}¦ {%vidvas, vidvat-tva,%} &c. See p. 919.
<LEND>

<L>42840<pc>0921-a<k1>vidviz<k2>vidviz<h>1
{#vidviz#} 1¦. {%vi-dviṣ,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-dveṣṭi,%}
{%-dviṣṭe, -dveṣṭum,%} to dislike, hate, be hostile to;
(A.) to hate each other mutually, dislike one another:
Caus. {%-dveṣayati, -yitum,%} to cause to dislike or
hate, make hostile, render an enemy, make hostile
towards one another.
<LEND>

<L>42841<pc>0921-a<k1>vidviz<k2>vidviz<h>2
2. {%vi-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ hostile, inimical; an enemy,
foe.
<LEND>

<L>42842<pc>0921-a<k1>vidviza<k2>vidviza
{%Vi-dviṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ hating, inimical, adverse;
({%as%}), m. an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>42843<pc>0921-a<k1>vidvizat<k2>vidvizat
{%Vi-dviṣat, an, atī, at,%}¦ hating, hostile; an enemy,
foe.
<LEND>

<L>42844<pc>0921-a<k1>vidvizwa<k2>vidvizwa
{%Vi-dviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ hated, disliked, odious.
{%—Vidviṣṭa-tā,%} f. hatred, dislike, hostility.
<LEND>

<L>42845<pc>0921-a<k1>vidveza<k2>vidveza
{%Vi-dveṣa, as,%}¦ m. enmity, hatred, contempt. {%—Vi-%}
{%dveṣa-vīra, as,%} m., N. of a chief of the Śaivas.
<LEND>

<L>42846<pc>0921-a<k1>vidvezaka<k2>vidvezaka
{%Vi-dveṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ hating, hostile; a
hater, enemy.
<LEND>

<L>42847<pc>0921-a<k1>vidvezaRa<k2>vidvezaRa
{%Vi-dveṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m. one who hates, a hater; ({%ī%}),
f. a woman of a resentful disposition; ({%am%}), n. caus-
ing abhorrence, hatred, enmity.
<LEND>

<L>42848<pc>0921-a<k1>vidvezin<k2>vidvezin
{%Vi-dveṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ hating, hostile, inimical;
({%ī%}), m. an enemy. {%—Vidveṣi-prabhava, as, ā, am,%}
proceeding from an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>42849<pc>0921-a<k1>vidvezwf<k2>vidvezwf
{%Vi-dveṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who hates, an enemy;
hating, hostile, inimical, adverse.
<LEND>

<L>42850<pc>0921-a<k1>viD<k2>viD<h>1
{#viD#} 1¦. {%vidh%} (= rt. {%vith%}), cl. 1. A. {%ve-%}
{%dhate, vedhitum,%} to ask, beg.
<LEND>

<L>42851<pc>0921-a<k1>viD<k2>viD<h>2
{#viD#} 2¦. {%vidh%} (thought by some to have
been developed out of {%vi-dhā%} and rt.
{%vyadh%}), cl. 6. P. {%vidhati, vivedha, vedhiṣyati,%}
{%avedhīt, vedhitum,%} to dispose (Ved.); to perform
(Ved.); to administer, govern, rule, command; to wor-
ship, honour, sacrifice; to pierce, (in this sense for rt.
{%vyadh%}): Caus. {%vedhayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvidhat:%}
Desid. {%vividhiṣati%} and {%vivedhiṣati:%} Intens. {%ve-%}
{%vidhyate, vevidhīti, veveddhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>42852<pc>0921-a<k1>viDa<k2>viDa<h>1
1. {%vidha, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. (more properly fr. rt. {%vyadh%}),
piercing, penetrating, penetration. (For 2. {%vi-dha%}
see under {%vi-dhā,%} col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>42853<pc>0921-a<k1>viDat<k2>viDat
{%Vidhat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} Ved. worshipping,
honouring.
<LEND>

<L>42854<pc>0921-a<k1>viDana<k2>viDana
{#viDana#}¦ {%vi-dhana, as, ā, am,%} devoid of
wealth, having no riches, poor. {%—Vidhana-tā,%} f.
destitution, poverty.
<LEND>
[Page0921-b+ 79]

<L>42855<pc>0921-b<k1>viDartf<k2>viDartf
{#viDartf#}¦ {%vi-dhartṛ, vi-dharman,%} &c. See
under {%vi-dhṛ,%} p. 922, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42856<pc>0921-b<k1>viDavana<k2>viDavana
{#viDavana#}¦ {%vi-dhavana,%} &c. See p. 922, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>42857<pc>0921-b<k1>viDavA<k2>viDavA
{#viDavA#}¦ {%vi-dhavā,%} f. (see 2. {%dhava%}), a hus-
bandless woman, a widow; [cf. Lat. <nsi>vidua, vi-</nsi>
<nsi>duus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>viduvo;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wuduwe, wu-</nsi>
<nsi>duwa;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>vidova;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>feadhb;</nsi> perhaps Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἠΐθεος.</lang>] {%—Vidhavā-gāmin, ī,%} m. one who has in-
tercourse with a widow. {%—Vidhavā-dharma, as,%}
m. ‘the duty of widows,’ N. of a section of the
Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Vidhavāvedana (˚vā-āv˚), am,%}
n. marrying a widow.
<LEND>

<L>42858<pc>0921-b<k1>viDA<k2>viDA
{#viDA#}¦ {%vi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte,%}
{%-dhātum,%} to distribute, apportion, bestow, grant; to
procure, furnish; to give out, diffuse; to extend (Ved.);
to put in order, arrange, regulate, dispose, make ready,
prepare, attend to; to prescribe, ordain, direct, enjoin,
settle, fix; to appoint, commission, depute; to place
on, put on or in, put down, lay down, lay aside; to
place, put, lay (in general); to hold, possess, assume,
take; to form, build, create; to perform, effect,
accomplish, produce, establish, cause, occasion, render,
make, do, act, act towards, treat as, (these senses
may be almost endlessly modified by using {%vi-dhā,%}
like {%kṛ,%} in connection with various nouns, e. g. {%siṃ-%}
{%hatvaṃ vidhā,%} to change into a lion; {%kāmaṃ vi-%}
{%dhā,%} to fulfil a wish; {%vṛttiṃ vidhā,%} to fix a liveli-
hood or maintenance; {%hṛdaye vidhā,%} to lay to
heart; {%śastrāṇi vidhā,%} to lay down arms; {%mantraṃ%}
{%vidhā,%} to hold a consultation; {%rājyaṃ vidhā,%} to
carry on a government, rule; {%pūjāṃ vidhā,%} to do
honour to, show respect to, worship; {%śaucaṃ vidhā,%}
to perform purification; {%lajjāṃ vidhā,%} to display
bashfulness; {%maitryaṃ vidhā,%} to make friendship;
{%sandhiṃ vidhā,%} to conclude peace; {%kalahaṃ vidhā,%}
to pick a quarrel; {%vairaṃ vidhā,%} to declare war; {%ko-%}
{%lāhalaṃ vidhā,%} to raise a clamour; {%taṃ nṛpaṃ%}
{%vidadhuḥ,%} they made him king): Pass. {%-dhīyate,%}
to be distributed or apportioned; to be arranged or
attended to; to be prescribed or settled, &c.; to
be taken or reckoned for, &c.: Caus. {%-dhāpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to put in order or arrange or fix;
to cause to put, cause to be laid: Desid. {%-dhitsati,%}
{%-te,%} to wish to distribute or bestow, to wish to arrange,
try to fix; to wish or intend to do or perform or
accomplish or effect; to wish to render, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42859<pc>0921-b<k1>vidaDat<k2>vidaDat
{%Vi-dadhat, at, atī, at,%}¦ distributing, granting, pro-
curing, arranging, prescribing, fixing, performing, &c.;
holding, having, assuming, wearing.
<LEND>

<L>42860<pc>0921-b<k1>viDa<k2>viDa<h>2
2. {%vi-dha, as,%}¦ m. form, manner, measure, kind, sort
(often at the end of comps., see {%evaṃ-v˚, tathā-v˚,%}
{%dvi-v˚, bahu-v˚,%} &c.); fold (at the end of comps.,
especially after numerals, see {%aṣṭa-v˚, sapta-v˚%});
the food of elephants; prosperity; ({%ā%}), f. form,
formula, rule; manner, kind, sort; act, action; doing
well, prosperity, affluence; wages, hire; fodder, the
food of elephants, horses, &c.; [cf. Old Pruss. <nsi>wida-s,</nsi>
<nsi>wid-s, sta-wida-s, sta-wids,</nsi> ‘of such sort;’ <nsi>ka-</nsi>
<nsi>wid-s</nsi> (fem. <nsi>ka-wida</nsi>), ‘of which kind;’ <nsi>kitta-</nsi>
<nsi>widin, kitte-widei,</nsi> ‘in any way.’]
<LEND>

<L>42861<pc>0921-b<k1>viDas<k2>viDas
{%Vi-dhas, ās,%}¦ m., N. of Brahmā; [cf. {%vedhas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42862<pc>0921-b<k1>viDAtavya<k2>viDAtavya
{%Vi-dhātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be done according to
rule, to be observed (as a rite or ceremony); to be
prescribed or regulated; to be done or performed or
effected.
<LEND>

<L>42863<pc>0921-b<k1>viDAtf<k2>viDAtf
{%Vi-dhātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ arranging, disposing, mak-
ing, creating; {%= medhāvin%} (according to Naigh. III.
15); ({%tā%}), m. an arranger, disposer, maker, creator;
N. of Brahmā (as creator of the world); N. of Viśva-
karman; fate, destiny; N. of Kāma (god of love);
of a son of Bhṛgu; of a son of Viṣṇu and Lakṣmī;
spirituous liquor; ({%trī%}), f. long pepper. {%—Vidhātṛ-%}
{%bhū, ūs,%} m. ‘son of Brahmā,’ epithet of Nārada,
(see {%nārada.%}) {%—Vidhātṛ-vaśāt,%} ind. from the will
of Brahmā; through the power of fate or destiny.
{%—Vidhātrāyus (˚tṛ-āy˚), us,%} m. the sunflower;
sunshine, (according to Śabda-k. {%= sūrya-śobhā.%})
<LEND>

<L>42864<pc>0921-b<k1>viDAna<k2>viDAna
{%Vi-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of arranging, disposing,
prescribing, enjoining, ordering, performing, making;
[Page0921-c+ 81]
arrangement, disposition, creation; act, action, (espe-
cially) the performance of prescribed acts or rites; rule,
precept, ordinance, injunction, regulation, sacred text;
act of worship, rite, ceremony; form, formula, mode,
method, manner, ({%tathā-v˚,%} following such a mode
or method); means, expedient; gaining, obtaining,
taking, possessing; wealth; act of hostility; conflict
of opposite feelings; an elephant's fodder; (in gram-
mar) affixing, prefixing, taking as an affix, &c.; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), acting, performing, possessing, assuming,
wearing, having. {%—Vidhāna-ga, as,%} m. ‘rule-goer,’
a Paṇḍit, a wise or learned man, teacher. {%—Vidhāna-%}
{%jña, as,%} m. one who knows rules or rites, a Paṇḍit,
wise man. {%—Vidhāna-yukta, as, ā, am,%} agreeable
to rule, conformable to sacred precept.
<LEND>

<L>42865<pc>0921-c<k1>viDAnaka<k2>viDAnaka
{%Vi-dhānaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ disposing, arranging,
one who knows how to arrange; ({%am%}), n. affliction,
distress, pain ({%= vyathā%}).
<LEND>

<L>42866<pc>0921-c<k1>viDAya<k2>viDAya
{%Vi-dhāya,%}¦ ind. having disposed or arranged, having
placed or put on; having taken or assumed, &c.;
having formed or created; having rendered.
<LEND>

<L>42867<pc>0921-c<k1>viDAyaka<k2>viDAyaka
{%Vi-dhāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ disposing, arranging,
performing; consigning, delivering, one who entrusts
or deposits anything or causes it to be fixed or secure.
{%—Vidhāyaka-tva, am,%} n. consignment or delivery
of anything, making anything firm or secure.
<LEND>

<L>42868<pc>0921-c<k1>viDAyin<k2>viDAyin
{%Vi-dhāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ disposing, arranging; mak-
ing, forming, building; causing, occasioning; placing,
fixing, securing; delivering, entrusting; establishing
a rule or law.
<LEND>

<L>42869<pc>0921-c<k1>viDAsyat<k2>viDAsyat
{%Vi-dhāsyat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} wishing or pur-
posing to arrange; intending to direct or enjoin or
prescribe, wishing to make or do or perform, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42870<pc>0921-c<k1>viDi<k2>viDi
{%Vi-dhi, is,%}¦ m. a rule, form, formula, sacred pre-
cept, injunction, rubric, sacred text or scripture, text
prescribing any act or observance, order, command,
ordinance, statute, law, direction for the performance
of a rite as given in the Brāhmaṇa portion of the
Veda, (according to Sāy. the Brāhmaṇa consists of
two parts, 1. Vidhi or commandment, e. g. {%yajeta,%}
he ought to sacrifice; {%kuryāt,%} he ought to perform;
2. Artha-vāda or explanatory statements as to the
origin of rites and use of the Mantras, mixed up with
legends and illustrations), any prescribed act or rite or
ceremony, an act or action in general, behaviour, con-
duct, mode of life, method, manner, way, means;
kind, sort; creation; the creator; N. of Brahmā;
of Viṣṇu; fate, destiny, luck; time; fodder, food
for elephants or horses; a physician; ({%is%}), f., N. of
a goddess. {%—Vidhi-ghna, as, ī, am,%} ‘rule-destroy-
ing,’ one who deviates from or disregards rules, dis-
turbing modes of proceeding. {%—Vidhi-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘rule-knowing,’ one who knows the prescribed
mode or form; learned in ritual; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman
who knows the ritual, a ritualist. {%—Vidhi-tas,%} ind.
according to rule. {%—Vidhi-darśaka, as,%} or {%vidhi-%}
{%darśin, ī,%} m. ‘rule-shower,’ a priest whose business
is to see that everything at a sacrifice is done accord-
ing to prescribed rules and to correct any deviation
from them. {%—Vidhi-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} prescribed
or approved by rule. {%—Vidhi-deśaka, as,%} m. ‘rule-
shower,’ a priest who corrects errors at a sacrifice. {%—Vi-%}
{%dhi-dvaidha, am,%} n. diversity of rule, variance of rite.
{%—Vidhi-paryāgata, as, ā, am,%} come into possession
through destiny. {%—Vidhi-pūrvakam,%} ind. after due
observance of rule, according to rule. {%—Vidhi-pra-%}
{%yukta, as, ā, am,%} performed according to rule.
{%—Vidhi-prayoga, as,%} m. the application of a rule,
acting according to rule. {%—Vidhi-prasaṅga, as,%} m.
application of a rule, acting upon a rule. {%—Vidhi-%}
{%yajña, as,%} m. a ceremonial act of worship. {%—Vidhi-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. the occurrence of fated or predestined
events; combining for any act or rite. {%—Vidhi-ra-%}
{%sāyana,%} N. of a work by Appayya Dīkṣita (con-
futing the Mīmāṃsā as expounded by Bhaṭṭa Kumā-
rila). {%—Vidhi-vat,%} ind. agreeably to rule, according to
law, in due form, conformably to established ordinances.
{%—Vidhi-vadhū, ūs,%} f. ‘wife of Brahmā,’ epithet of
Sarasvatī. {%—Vidhi-vihita, as, ā, am,%} established by
rule, prescribed by law. {%—Vidhi-hīna, as, ā, am,%}
destitute of rule, unauthorised, irregular.
<LEND>
[Page0922-a+ 78]

<L>42871<pc>0922-a<k1>viDitsat<k2>viDitsat
{%Vi-dhitsat, an, antī, at, = vi-dhitsamāna%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>42872<pc>0922-a<k1>viDitsamAna<k2>viDitsamAna
{%Vi-dhitsamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to bestow;
desiring to fix or place; wishing to perform; having
certain intentions, following certain aims.
<LEND>

<L>42873<pc>0922-a<k1>viDitsA<k2>viDitsA
{%Vi-dhitsā,%}¦ f. the wish to arrange; desire to do or
make; design, purpose, desire.
<LEND>

<L>42874<pc>0922-a<k1>viDitsita<k2>viDitsita
{%Vi-dhitsita, am,%}¦ n. design, purpose, intention.
<LEND>

<L>42875<pc>0922-a<k1>viDitsu<k2>viDitsu
{%Vi-dhitsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to arrange; intending
to make; purposing to perform.
<LEND>

<L>42876<pc>0922-a<k1>viDIyamAna<k2>viDIyamAna
{%Vi-dhīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being arranged, being
enjoined, being defined, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42877<pc>0922-a<k1>viDeya<k2>viDeya
{%Vi-dheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be arranged or prescribed;
to be enjoined (as a rule &c.); to be performed or
practised or done; liable to be ruled or governed or
influenced by, governable, subject to; compliant, sub-
missive, tractable. {%—Vidheya-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing
what ought to be done. {%—Vidheya-tā,%} f. or {%vidheya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. fitness to be prescribed or enjoined; fitness
for enactment (as a rule or law), necessary or proper
act or conduct; tractableness, docility, submission.
{%—Vidheya-pada, am,%} n. an object to be accom-
plished. {%—Vidheya-mārga, as,%} m. the seeking to
do a necessary act. {%—Vidheyātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā,%} m.
‘having a well-governed nature,’ epithet of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>42878<pc>0922-a<k1>vihita<k2>vihita
{%Vi-hita, as, ā, am,%}¦ arranged, settled, &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>42879<pc>0922-a<k1>viDAv<k2>viDAv<h>1
{#viDAv#} 1¦. {%vi-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-te, -dhāvitum,%} to run or flow through, flow off (as
water), to percolate or trickle through, flow away; to
run or flee away (in disorder), be dispersed; to run
through; to rush upon.
<LEND>

<L>42880<pc>0922-a<k1>viDAvat<k2>viDAvat
{%Vi-dhāvat, an, antī, at,%}¦ running away, running
through.
<LEND>

<L>42881<pc>0922-a<k1>viDAv<k2>viDAv<h>2
{#viDAv#} 2¦. {%vi-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-te, -dhāvitum,%} to wash off, wash away, cleanse off.
<LEND>

<L>42882<pc>0922-a<k1>viDOta<k2>viDOta
{%Vi-dhauta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleansed by washing.
<LEND>

<L>42883<pc>0922-a<k1>viDu<k2>viDu<h>1
{#viDu#} 1¦. {%vidhu, us,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
I. 24. fr. rt. {%vyadh,%} ‘to pierce,’ because the moon
pierces the absent with sorrowful feelings; more pro-
bably connected with rt. 2. {%vidh%} or with {%vi-dhā%}), one
who arranges or disposes or rules or maintains (Ved.);
the moon; N. of Brahmā; of Viṣṇu; a Rākṣasa,
fiend; an expiatory oblation; camphor. {%—Vidhu-%}
{%kṣaya, as,%} m. the wane of the moon, the dark
days of the month. {%—Vidhun-tuda, as,%} m. ‘moon-
troubler,’ epithet of Rāhu or the personified ascend-
ing Node (causing the moon's eclipses). {%—Vidhu-%}
{%pañjara, as,%} m. a scimitar, sabre. {%—Vidhu-priyā,%}
f. ‘dear to the moon,’ a lunar mansion or Nakṣatra
(personified as a nymph, the daughter of Dakṣa and
wife of the Moon, see {%nakṣatra%}).
<LEND>

<L>42884<pc>0922-a<k1>viDura<k2>viDura
{%Vidhura, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably fr. rt. {%vyadh,%} cf. {%vi-%}
{%thura%}), agitated, troubled, distressed, bewildered, con-
fused (with fear, liquor, &c.), trembling; suffering se-
paration or absence from a mistress or lover, being in
a state of bereavement, abandoned; adverse, hostile;
({%as%}), m. a widower; ({%am%}), n. agitation of mind,
anxiety, alarm, terror; danger; separation from a
mistress or lover; ({%ā%}), f. curds mixed with sugar
and spices. {%—Vidhura-tā,%} f. a state of agitation or
trouble of mind, state of trepidation or alarm. {%—Vi-%}
{%dhura-darśana, am,%} n. the sight of anything alarm-
ing; a feeling of agitation or uneasiness.
<LEND>

<L>42885<pc>0922-a<k1>viDu<k2>viDu<h>2
{#viDu#} 2¦. {%vi-dhu = vi-dhū%} below.
<LEND>

<L>42886<pc>0922-a<k1>viDU<k2>viDU
{#viDU#}¦ {%vi-dhū,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-dhūnoti, -dhūnute%}
(later also {%-dhunoti, -dhunute%}), cl. 6. P. {%-dhuvati,%}
{%-dhavitum, -dhotum,%} to shake about, move to and fro,
agitate, excite, wave about, toss about; to shake off,
drive away, disperse, remove, destroy; to shake off
from one's self, relinquish, abandon, leave off (A.);
to fan, agitate by blowing: Pass. {%-dhūyate,%} to be
shaken about, to be waved about, to be fanned, &c.:
Caus. {%-dhūnayati, -yitum,%} to cause to shake about,
shake violently, agitate, cause to stagger.
<LEND>

<L>42887<pc>0922-a<k1>viDavana<k2>viDavana
{%Vi-dhavana, am,%}¦ n. the act of shaking about,
agitation, trembling.
<LEND>

<L>42888<pc>0922-a<k1>viDavya<k2>viDavya
{%Vi-dhavya, am,%}¦ n. agitation, trembling, tremor.
<LEND>

<L>42889<pc>0922-a<k1>viDAvya<k2>viDAvya
{%Vi-dhāvya, am,%}¦ n. agitation, shaking about, tre-
pidation.
<LEND>
[Page0922-b+ 77]

<L>42890<pc>0922-b<k1>viDuta<k2>viDuta
{%Vi-dhuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken about; shaken off,
driven away; abandoned, relinquished, left off. {%—Vi-%}
{%dhuta-bandhana, as, ā, am,%} released from bonds.
<LEND>

<L>42891<pc>0922-b<k1>viDuti<k2>viDuti
{%Vi-dhuti, is,%}¦ f. shaking, trembling, trepidation.
<LEND>

<L>42892<pc>0922-b<k1>viDunana<k2>viDunana
{%Vi-dhunana, am,%}¦ n. the act of shaking or tossing
about, trembling, tremor.
<LEND>

<L>42893<pc>0922-b<k1>viDunvat<k2>viDunvat
{%Vi-dhunvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ shaking, tossing about,
waving about.
<LEND>

<L>42894<pc>0922-b<k1>viDunvAna<k2>viDunvAna
{%Vi-dhunvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking about, tossing.
<LEND>

<L>42895<pc>0922-b<k1>viDuvat<k2>viDuvat
{%Vi-dhuvat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} shaking or waving
about, brandishing.
<LEND>

<L>42896<pc>0922-b<k1>viDuvana<k2>viDuvana
{%Vi-dhuvana, am,%}¦ n. trembling, tremor.
<LEND>

<L>42897<pc>0922-b<k1>viDUta<k2>viDUta
{%Vi-dhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken or tossed about,
waved, waving; trembling, tremulous; unsteady;
shaken off, dispelled, removed; abandoned; ({%am%}),
n. the repelling of affection, repugnance. {%—Vidhūta-%}
{%kalmaṣa, as, ā, am,%} having sin dispelled or re-
moved, delivered from sin. {%—Vidhūta-keśa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} who or what has tossed about the hair (Kirāt.
VIII. 33). {%—Vidhūta-nidra, as, ā, am,%} roused
from sleep, awakened.
<LEND>

<L>42898<pc>0922-b<k1>viDUti<k2>viDUti
{%Vi-dhūti, is,%}¦ f. agitation, tremor; shaking.
<LEND>

<L>42899<pc>0922-b<k1>viDUnana<k2>viDUnana
{%Vi-dhūnana, am,%}¦ n. causing to shake or tremble,
shaking, trembling, tremor.
<LEND>

<L>42900<pc>0922-b<k1>viDUnayat<k2>viDUnayat
{%Vi-dhūnayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ violently shaking.
<LEND>

<L>42901<pc>0922-b<k1>viDUnita<k2>viDUnita
{%Vi-dhūnita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken about, tossed
about, agitated, alarmed; harassed, annoyed.
<LEND>

<L>42902<pc>0922-b<k1>viDUya<k2>viDUya
{%Vi-dhūya,%}¦ ind. having shaken about, having
shaken off, having removed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42903<pc>0922-b<k1>viDUyat<k2>viDUyat
{%Vi-dhūyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being shaken, being
agitated or waved about.
<LEND>

<L>42904<pc>0922-b<k1>viDUyamAna<k2>viDUyamAna
{%Vi-dhūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being shaken, being
agitated, being waved about.
<LEND>

<L>42905<pc>0922-b<k1>viDUma<k2>viDUma
{#viDUma#}¦ {%vi-dhūma, as, ā, am,%} smokeless.
<LEND>

<L>42906<pc>0922-b<k1>viDf<k2>viDf
{#viDf#}¦ {%vi-dhṛ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-dhārayati, -yitum,%}
to keep asunder, keep apart, separate, divide, distri-
bute; to arrange; to manage; to keep off; to lay hold
of, seize; to keep back, withhold, restrain, obstruct;
to hold up, bear, carry, support, maintain, sustain,
preserve, take care of; to keep fixed, (with {%manas,%}
to fix the mind upon.)
<LEND>

<L>42907<pc>0922-b<k1>viDartf<k2>viDartf
{%Vi-dhartṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who supports, a sup-
porter, bearer, sustainer ({%= vidhārayitṛ,%} Nirukta
XII. 14); the performer of various functions, (Sāy.
{%= vividha-kāraka.%})
<LEND>

<L>42908<pc>0922-b<k1>viDarman<k2>viDarman
{%Vi-dharman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. the function of support-
ing (the universe); various function or office; bear-
ing, supporting; epithet of the sky (as the bearer of
light and rain); epithet of the vessel used in the pre-
paration of the Soma juice; order, rule, right, might.
<LEND>

<L>42909<pc>0922-b<k1>viDAra<k2>viDAra
{%Vi-dhāra, as,%}¦ m., Ved. bearing, supporting; epi-
thet of the sky (as the bearer of rain and light).
<LEND>

<L>42910<pc>0922-b<k1>viDfta<k2>viDfta
{%Vi-dhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ kept asunder or apart,
separated; seized, grasped, held; taken, assumed,
possessed; withheld, restrained, ({%a-vidhṛta,%} unre-
strained, unchecked); ({%am%}), n. disregard of an
injunction or wish; dissatisfaction. {%—Vidhṛtāyudha%}
{%(˚ta-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} holding weapons.
<LEND>

<L>42911<pc>0922-b<k1>viDfti<k2>viDfti
{%Vi-dhṛti, is,%}¦ f. arrangement, rule, regulation,
ordinance.
<LEND>

<L>42912<pc>0922-b<k1>viDfz<k2>viDfz
{#viDfz#}¦ {%vi-dhṛṣ,%} Caus. {%-dharṣayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to violate, ravish; to spoil, injure; to annoy,
trouble.
<LEND>

<L>42913<pc>0922-b<k1>viDmA<k2>viDmA
{#viDmA#}¦ {%vi-dhmā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhamati, -dhmā-%}
{%tum,%} to blow away, blow off; to scatter, disperse,
destroy.
<LEND>

<L>42914<pc>0922-b<k1>viDyat<k2>viDyat
{#viDyat#}¦ {%vidhyat,%} &c. See under rt. {%vyadh.%}
<LEND>

<L>42915<pc>0922-b<k1>viDvaMs<k2>viDvaMs
{#viDvaMs#}¦ {%vi-dhvaṃs%} or {%vi-dhvas,%} cl. 1. A.
{%-dhvaṃsate%} (ep. also P. {%-ti%}), {%-dhvaṃsitum,%} to fall
to pieces, crumble into dust or powder; to be scat-
tered or whirled about (like dust), be dispersed; to
be destroyed, perish: Caus. {%-dhvaṃsayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to fall to pieces or crumble, dash to pieces,
crush, destroy, annihilate; to injure.
<LEND>

<L>42916<pc>0922-b<k1>viDvaMsa<k2>viDvaMsa
{%Vi-dhvaṃsa, as,%}¦ m. falling to pieces, ruin, de-
struction; aversion, disrespect, enmity, dislike; in-
sult, offence.
<LEND>
[Page0922-c+ 78]

<L>42917<pc>0922-c<k1>viDvaMsamAna<k2>viDvaMsamAna
{%Vi-dhvaṃsamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ falling or crumbling
to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>42918<pc>0922-c<k1>viDvaMsita<k2>viDvaMsita
{%Vi-dhvaṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dashed or broken to
pieces, destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>42919<pc>0922-c<k1>viDvaMsin<k2>viDvaMsin
{%Vi-dhvaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling to pieces, falling
asunder, being scattered or dispersed, falling down,
being ruined, perishing; causing to fall, ruining,
destroying; hostile, adverse.
<LEND>

<L>42920<pc>0922-c<k1>viDvasta<k2>viDvasta
{%Vi-dhvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen asunder, fallen to
pieces, destroyed, ruined, scattered about or tossed
up, whirled up (as dust); obscured, darkened, oblite-
rated, eclipsed (in astronomy). {%—Vidhvasta-naga-%}
{%rāśrama (˚ra-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} having ruined cities
and hermitages. {%—Vidhvasta-para-guṇa, as,%} m.
one who detracts from the merits of another.
<LEND>

<L>42921<pc>0922-c<k1>vinaNgfsa<k2>vinaNgfsa
{#vinaNgfsa#}¦ {%vinaṅ-gṛsa, as,%} m., Ved. accord-
ing to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IX. 72, 3 {%= kamanīyaṃ%}
{%stotraṃ gṛhṇāti yaḥ; (au),%} m. du. the two arms
(according to Naigh. II. 4).
<LEND>

<L>42922<pc>0922-c<k1>vinad<k2>vinad
{#vinad#}¦ {%vi-nad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nadati, -naditum,%}
to sound forth, cry out, scream out, roar, bellow; to
thunder (as clouds); to roar or scream at (with acc.);
to fill with cries: Caus. {%-nādayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to sound or resound, cause to make a noise; to fill
with noise or cries; to sound aloud: Pass. of Caus.
{%-nādyate,%} to be made to sound, be made to cry, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42923<pc>0922-c<k1>vinada<k2>vinada
{%Vi-nada, as,%}¦ m. sound, noise; a kind of tree,
Echites Scholaris.
<LEND>

<L>42924<pc>0922-c<k1>vinadat<k2>vinadat
{%Vi-nadat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shouting, bellowing, lowing.
<LEND>

<L>42925<pc>0922-c<k1>vinadin<k2>vinadin
{%Vi-nadin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ roaring, thundering, grumbling.
<LEND>

<L>42926<pc>0922-c<k1>vinadI<k2>vinadI
{%Vi-nadī,%}¦ f., N. of a river, (also read {%vainadī.%})
<LEND>

<L>42927<pc>0922-c<k1>vinadya<k2>vinadya
{%Vi-nadya,%}¦ ind. having sounded, sounding.
<LEND>

<L>42928<pc>0922-c<k1>vinAdita<k2>vinAdita
{%Vi-nādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to resound, caused to
sound aloud.
<LEND>

<L>42929<pc>0922-c<k1>vinAdin<k2>vinAdin
{%Vi-nādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sounding forth, crying out.
<LEND>

<L>42930<pc>0922-c<k1>vinAdyamAna<k2>vinAdyamAna
{%Vi-nādyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being made to sound
or cry.
<LEND>

<L>42931<pc>0922-c<k1>vinand<k2>vinand
{#vinand#}¦ {%vi-nand,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nandati, -te,%}
{%-nanditum,%} to rejoice, be glad or joyful.
<LEND>

<L>42932<pc>0922-c<k1>vinam<k2>vinam
{#vinam#}¦ {%vi-nam,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-namati, -te,%}
{%-nantum,%} to bend down, bow down, stoop: Caus.
{%-namayati, -nāmayati, -yitum,%} to bend down, bend
a bow; (in grammar) to cerebralize or change into
a cerebral letter.
<LEND>

<L>42933<pc>0922-c<k1>vinata<k2>vinata
{%Vi-nata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent down, bowed, stooping,
inclined, sunk down, depressed, deepened; curved,
crooked; humble, modest; depressed, dispirited; (in
grammar) changed into a cerebral letter, see {%vi-%}
{%nāma%} below; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Su-dyumna;
({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the wives of Kaśyapa and
mother of Aruṇa and Garuḍa, (in Mahā-bh. Ādi-p.
2520, Vinatā is enumerated among the thirteen
daughters of Dakṣa; the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa makes
her the wife of Tārkṣa; the Vāyu describes the
metres of the Veda as her daughters, while the Padma
gives her only one daughter, Saudāminī); a sort of
basket. {%—Vinata-kāya, as, ā, am,%} having the body
bent, stooping. {%—Vinatānana (˚ta-ān˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the face bent or cast down, dejected, dispirited.
{%—Vinatā-sūnu, us,%} m. epithet of Aruṇa (charioteer
of the Sun); of Garuḍa (younger brother of Aruṇa).
{%—Vinatodara (˚ta-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} with bending
waist, bending at the waist.
<LEND>

<L>42934<pc>0922-c<k1>vinati<k2>vinati
{%Vi-nati, is,%}¦ f. bowing down, bending; humility,
modesty.
<LEND>

<L>42935<pc>0922-c<k1>vinamana<k2>vinamana
{%Vi-namana, am,%}¦ n. the act of bending down,
bowing, bending.
<LEND>

<L>42936<pc>0922-c<k1>vinamita<k2>vinamita
{%Vi-namita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bowed down, inclined,
declined.
<LEND>

<L>42937<pc>0922-c<k1>vinamra<k2>vinamra
{%Vi-namra, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent down, bowed; de-
pressed; humble, modest.
<LEND>

<L>42938<pc>0922-c<k1>vinamraka<k2>vinamraka
{%Vinamraka, am,%}¦ n. the flower of the plant Ta-
gara.
<LEND>

<L>42939<pc>0922-c<k1>vinAma<k2>vinAma
{%Vi-nāma, as,%}¦ m. (in grammar) conversion into a
cerebral letter, the substitution of {%ṣ%} for {%s%} and {%ṇ%}
for {%n.%}
<LEND>

<L>42940<pc>0922-c<k1>vinAmya<k2>vinAmya
{%Vi-nāmya,%}¦ ind. (fr. the Caus.), having bent down.
<LEND>

<L>42941<pc>0922-c<k1>vinaya<k2>vinaya
{#vinaya#}¦ {%vi-naya.%} See under {%vi-nī,%} p. 925.
<LEND>
[Page0923-a+ 75]

<L>42942<pc>0923-a<k1>vinard<k2>vinard
{#vinard#}¦ {%vi-nard,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nardati, -te,%}
{%-narditum,%} to cry out, roar out, make a loud sound,
thunder.
<LEND>

<L>42943<pc>0923-a<k1>vinardat<k2>vinardat
{%Vi-nardat, an, antī, at,%}¦ crying out, making a
loud noise, sounding forth.
<LEND>

<L>42944<pc>0923-a<k1>vinardamAna<k2>vinardamAna
{%Vi-nardamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounding loudly,
thundering.
<LEND>

<L>42945<pc>0923-a<k1>vinaS<k2>vinaS
{#vinaS#}¦ {%vi-naś,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-naśati, -naśyati,%}
{%-naśitum, -naṃṣṭum,%} to be completely lost or
ruined; to be destroyed, perish; to disappear, vanish;
to come to nothing, be frustrated: Caus. {%-nāśayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to be lost or ruined, destroy, anni-
hilate; to cause to disappear or vanish.
<LEND>

<L>42946<pc>0923-a<k1>vinaSana<k2>vinaSana
{%Vi-naśana, am,%}¦ n. perishing, loss, disappearance;
destruction; N. of the place where the river Sa-
rasvatī is lost in the sand; a country in the north-
west of Delhi (said to be the same as Kuru-kṣetra
or the country adjacent to the modern Paniput; see
Manu II. 21). {%—Vinaśana-kṣetra, am,%} n. the
district of Vinaśana.
<LEND>

<L>42947<pc>0923-a<k1>vinaSyat<k2>vinaSyat
{%Vi-naśyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being lost or ruined,
perishing, decaying.
<LEND>

<L>42948<pc>0923-a<k1>vinaSvara<k2>vinaSvara
{%Vi-naśvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ liable to be destroyed,
perishable.
<LEND>

<L>42949<pc>0923-a<k1>vinazwa<k2>vinazwa
{%Vi-naṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ utterly lost or ruined, dis-
appeared, perished; destroyed; spoilt, corrupted.
<LEND>

<L>42950<pc>0923-a<k1>vinazwi<k2>vinazwi
{%Vi-naṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. utter loss or destruction, ruin,
disappearance.
<LEND>

<L>42951<pc>0923-a<k1>vinASa<k2>vinASa
{%Vi-nāśa, as,%}¦ m. utter loss, annihilation, perdition,
ruin, destruction, decay, death; removal. {%—Vināśa-%}
{%dharman, ā, ā, a,%} or {%vināśa-dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
subject to the law of decay. {%—Vināśa-sambhava,%}
{%as,%} m. a source of destruction, cause of subsequent
non-existence of a composite body {%(avayavin).%}
{%—Vināśonmukha (˚śa-un˚), as, ā, am,%} about to
perish, verging on decay, full ripe or mature.
<LEND>

<L>42952<pc>0923-a<k1>vinASaka<k2>vinASaka
{%Vi-nāśaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ annihilating, destroying;
a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>42953<pc>0923-a<k1>vinASana<k2>vinASana
{%Vi-nāśana, as, ī, am,%}¦ destroying, destructive,
ruinous; ({%as%}), m. one who destroys, a destroyer;
({%am%}), n. destruction, annihilation.
<LEND>

<L>42954<pc>0923-a<k1>vinASayat<k2>vinASayat
{%Vi-nāśayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ destroying, annihilating.
<LEND>

<L>42955<pc>0923-a<k1>vinASayitf<k2>vinASayitf
{%Vi-nāśayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who destroys, a
destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>42956<pc>0923-a<k1>vinASita<k2>vinASita
{%Vi-nāśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ utterly destroyed, ruined.
<LEND>

<L>42957<pc>0923-a<k1>vinASin<k2>vinASin
{%Vi-nāśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ perishing, being destroyed; un-
dergoing transformation; destructive, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>42958<pc>0923-a<k1>vinasa<k2>vinasa
{#vinasa#}¦ {%vi-nasa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} noseless,
without a nose.
<LEND>

<L>42959<pc>0923-a<k1>vinAsaka<k2>vinAsaka
{%Vi-nāsaka%}¦ or {%vi-nāsika, as, ī, am,%} noseless.
<LEND>

<L>42960<pc>0923-a<k1>vinA<k2>vinA
{#vinA#}¦ {%vinā,%} ind. (probably a kind of inst.
of 1. {%vi%}), without, except (with acc., inst., or occa-
sionally abl., e. g. {%bhūṣaṇam%} or {%bhūṣaṇena%} or
{%bhūṣaṇād vinā,%} without ornament); short of, ex-
clusive of. {%—Vinā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} ‘made-without,’
deprived of, bereaved, abandoned, left, relinquished.
{%—Vinānyonyam (˚nā-an˚),%} ind. without each
other, one without the other. {%—Vinokti (˚nā-uk˚),%}
{%is,%} f. ‘the utterance of {%vinā,%}’ i. e. the use of the
word {%vinā%} in composition (e. g. {%kā niśā śaśinā%}
{%vinā,%} what is the night without the moon?).
<LEND>

<L>42961<pc>0923-a<k1>vinAqikA<k2>vinAqikA
{#vinAqikA#}¦ {%vi-nāḍikā%} or {%vi-nāḍī,%} f. a period
of twenty-four seconds, the sixtieth part of a Nāḍī or
Indian hour.
<LEND>

<L>42962<pc>0923-a<k1>vinATa<k2>vinATa
{#vinATa#}¦ {%vi-nātha, as, ā, am,%} having no lord
or master, unprotected, unowned, deserted.
<LEND>

<L>42963<pc>0923-a<k1>vinAyaka<k2>vinAyaka
{#vinAyaka#}¦ {%vi-nāyaka.%} See p. 925, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>42964<pc>0923-a<k1>vinAruhA<k2>vinAruhA
{#vinAruhA#}¦ {%vināruhā,%} f. a kind of plant ({%=%}
{%tri-parṇikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>42965<pc>0923-a<k1>vinAha<k2>vinAha
{#vinAha#}¦ {%vi-nāha, as,%} m. (see rt. 1. {%nah%}), a
top or cover for the mouth of a well; [cf. {%vīnāha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>42966<pc>0923-a<k1>viniHkampa<k2>viniHkampa
{#viniHkampa#}¦ {%vi-niḥ-kampa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
motionless, immovable.
<LEND>

<L>42967<pc>0923-a<k1>viniHSvas<k2>viniHSvas
{#viniHSvas#}¦ {%vi-niḥ-śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śvasiti,%}
{%-śvasitum,%} to breathe hard, sigh, heave a deep sigh.
<LEND>
[Page0923-b+ 73]

<L>42968<pc>0923-b<k1>viniHSvasya<k2>viniHSvasya
{%Vi-niḥśvasya,%}¦ ind. having sighed, having heaved
a sigh.
<LEND>

<L>42969<pc>0923-b<k1>viniHsf<k2>viniHsf
{#viniHsf#}¦ {%vi-niḥ-sṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati, -sartum,%}
to go forth, issue out.
<LEND>

<L>42970<pc>0923-b<k1>viniHsaraRa<k2>viniHsaraRa
{%Vi-niḥsaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of going forth or
out, issuing forth.
<LEND>

<L>42971<pc>0923-b<k1>viniHsfta<k2>viniHsfta
{%Vi-niḥsṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forth or out, issued
forth, sprung from.
<LEND>

<L>42972<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikf<k2>vinikf
{#vinikf#}¦ {%vi-ni-kṛ%} (see rt. 1. {%kṛ%}), cl. 8. P. A.
{%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to act badly towards,
ill-treat, offend, hurt, injure.
<LEND>

<L>42973<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikfta<k2>vinikfta
{%Vi-nikṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ ill-treated, injured, damaged.
<LEND>

<L>42974<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikft<k2>vinikft
{#vinikft#}¦ {%vi-ni-kṛt%} (see rt. 2. {%kṛt%}), cl. 6. P.
{%-kṛntati, -kartitum,%} to cut or hew in pieces, cut
off, cut away, cut about, mutilate; to tear off; to
destroy.
<LEND>

<L>42975<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikftta<k2>vinikftta
{%Vi-nikṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut or hewn in pieces,
mutilated.
<LEND>

<L>42976<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikftya<k2>vinikftya
{%Vi-nikṛtya,%}¦ ind. having cut away or asunder,
having destroyed, having dissipated.
<LEND>

<L>42977<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikF<k2>vinikF
{#vinikF#}¦ {%vi-ni-kṝ%} (see rt. 1. {%kṝ%}), cl. 6. P.
{%-kirati, -karitum%} or {%-karītum,%} to scatter in dif-
ferent directions, throw about; to scatter or cast
down; to scatter over, cover; to cast off, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>42978<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikIrRa<k2>vinikIrRa
{%Vi-nikīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ scattered over, covered;
spread over; crowded, filled; outstretched; dispersed.
<LEND>

<L>42979<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikz<k2>vinikz
{#vinikz#}¦ {%vi-nikṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nikṣati,%} &c.
(Ved. Inf. {%vinikṣe%}), to pierce, penetrate.
<LEND>

<L>42980<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikzaRa<k2>vinikzaRa
{%Vi-nikṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of piercing; [cf.
Nirukta IV. 18.]
<LEND>

<L>42981<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikzip<k2>vinikzip
{#vinikzip#}¦ {%vi-ni-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣi-%}
{%pati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw or cast down, over-
throw; to put or place down; to put or place in or
on, infix, insert; to deposit, deliver over, entrust
with; to occupy with or engage in.
<LEND>

<L>42982<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikzipta<k2>vinikzipta
{%Vi-nikṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or tossed down;
fixed, infixed, inserted; deposited; dispatched, sent.
<LEND>

<L>42983<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikzipya<k2>vinikzipya
{%Vi-nikṣipya,%}¦ ind. having thrown or flung down,
having put down, having delivered over, having given
into charge.
<LEND>

<L>42984<pc>0923-b<k1>vinikzepa<k2>vinikzepa
{%Vi-nikṣepa, as,%}¦ m. the act of throwing or tossing
down, sending.
<LEND>

<L>42985<pc>0923-b<k1>vinigaqa<k2>vinigaqa
{#vinigaqa#}¦ {%vi-nigaḍa, as, ā, am,%} fetterless,
without fetters. {%—Vinigaḍī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kartum,%} to render fetterless, unfetter, unshackle.
<LEND>

<L>42986<pc>0923-b<k1>vinigad<k2>vinigad
{#vinigad#}¦ {%vi-ni-gad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gadati, -gadi-%}
{%tum,%} to speak to, address, accost: Pass. {%-gadyate,%}
to be called or named.
<LEND>

<L>42987<pc>0923-b<k1>viniguh<k2>viniguh
{#viniguh#}¦ {%vi-ni-guh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-gūhati,%}
{%-te, -gūhitum%} or {%-goḍhum,%} to cover over, conceal,
hide.
<LEND>

<L>42988<pc>0923-b<k1>vinigUhita<k2>vinigUhita
{%Vi-nigūhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, concealed, hidden.
<LEND>

<L>42989<pc>0923-b<k1>vinigrah<k2>vinigrah
{#vinigrah#}¦ {%vi-ni-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti,%}
{%gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} to lay hold of, seize; to hold in,
keep back, keep in check, restrain, obstruct, impede.
<LEND>

<L>42990<pc>0923-b<k1>vinigfhya<k2>vinigfhya
{%Vi-nigṛhya,%}¦ ind. having seized, having restrained.
<LEND>

<L>42991<pc>0923-b<k1>vinigraha<k2>vinigraha
{%Vi-nigraha, as,%}¦ m. restraining, subduing, restraint;
disjunction, mutual opposition, an antithesis which im-
plies that when two propositions are antithetically stated
peculiar stress is laid on one of them. {%—Vinigra-%}
{%hārtha (˚ha-ar˚), as,%} m. the sense of the above
antithesis. {%—Vinigrahārthīya, as, ā, am,%} standing
in the sense of the above antithesis.
<LEND>

<L>42992<pc>0923-b<k1>viniGnat<k2>viniGnat
{#viniGnat#}¦ {%vi-nighnat.%} See under {%vi-ni-han.%}
<LEND>

<L>42993<pc>0923-b<k1>vinicUrR<k2>vinicUrR
{#vinicUrR#}¦ {%vi-ni-cūrṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cūrṇayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to grind or crush to pieces, pulverize, pound,
rub.
<LEND>

<L>42994<pc>0923-b<k1>vinidra<k2>vinidra
{#vinidra#}¦ {%vi-nidra, as, ā, am,%} sleepless, awake;
blown, budded. {%—Vinidra-karaṇa, am,%} n. rendering
sleepless. {%—Vinidra-tā,%} f. or {%vinidra-tva, am,%} n.
sleeplessness, wakefulness, vigilance, waking.
<LEND>

<L>42995<pc>0923-b<k1>viniDA<k2>viniDA
{#viniDA#}¦ {%vi-ni-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put or lay down in different
[Page0923-c+ 75]
places, distribute; to put off; to lay or put down;
to put away; to place or put on; to put by, lay aside,
store up; to fix upon, direct, (with {%dṛṣṭim,%} &c.,
to fix the eyes upon; with {%manas,%} &c., to fix or
direct the mind upon; with {%hṛdi%} or {%hṛdaye,%} to fix
in the heart, keep fixed in the heart, bear in mind.)
<LEND>

<L>42996<pc>0923-c<k1>viniDAya<k2>viniDAya
{%Vi-nidhāya,%}¦ ind. having put in different places,
having distributed; having placed or taken, &c.
<LEND>

<L>42997<pc>0923-c<k1>vinihita<k2>vinihita
{%Vi-nihita, as, ā, am,%}¦ put off or down, &c.; fixed
on, directed. {%—Vinihita-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} having
the eyes fixed upon, eagerly looking at, intent on.
{%—Vinihita-manas, ās, ās, as,%} having the mind
fixed upon, intent upon, devoted to.
<LEND>

<L>42998<pc>0923-c<k1>viniDvaMs<k2>viniDvaMs
{#viniDvaMs#}¦ {%vi-ni-dhvaṃs%} or {%vi-ni-dhvas,%} cl.
1. A. {%-dhvaṃsate, -dhvaṃsitum,%} to fall to pieces, be
dispersed, be destroyed, perish, disappear, vanish; (2nd
sing. Impv. {%vinidhvaṃsa,%} be off! take thyself off!)
<LEND>

<L>42999<pc>0923-c<k1>viniDvasta<k2>viniDvasta
{%Vi-nidhvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroyed, ruined, struck
down.
<LEND>

<L>43000<pc>0923-c<k1>vinind<k2>vinind
{#vinind#}¦ {%vi-nind,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nindati%} (ep. also
A. {%-te%}), {%-ninditum,%} to reproach, revile, abuse.
<LEND>

<L>43001<pc>0923-c<k1>vinipaw<k2>vinipaw
{#vinipaw#}¦ {%vi-ni-paṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pāṭayati,%} &c.,
to split open, split up, cleave.
<LEND>

<L>43002<pc>0923-c<k1>vinipAwya<k2>vinipAwya
{%Vi-nipāṭya,%}¦ ind. having split open, having severed.
<LEND>

<L>43003<pc>0923-c<k1>vinipat<k2>vinipat
{#vinipat#}¦ {%vi-ni-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -pati-%}
{%tum,%} to fall down, fall headlong, fall in or into; fall
upon, attack, assail; fly down, fly away: Caus. {%-pā-%}
{%tayati, -yitum,%} to cause to fall down, throw down;
to kill, deprive of life; to destroy, annihilate: Pass.
of Caus. {%-pātyate,%} to be thrown down.
<LEND>

<L>43004<pc>0923-c<k1>vinipatita<k2>vinipatita
{%Vi-nipatita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen down; flown down;
flying away.
<LEND>

<L>43005<pc>0923-c<k1>vinipatya<k2>vinipatya
{%Vi-nipatya,%}¦ ind. having fallen down, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43006<pc>0923-c<k1>vinipAta<k2>vinipAta
{%Vi-nipāta, as,%}¦ m. falling down, falling; a great
fall, ruin, any great calamity or unavoidable evil;
decay, death, destruction; pain, distress; disrespect.
{%—Vinipāta-śaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%} announcing misfortune
or destruction, portentous.
<LEND>

<L>43007<pc>0923-c<k1>vinipAtita<k2>vinipAtita
{%Vi-nipātita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown down; killed,
destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>43008<pc>0923-c<k1>vinipAtya<k2>vinipAtya
{%Vi-nipātya,%}¦ ind. having killed.
<LEND>

<L>43009<pc>0923-c<k1>vinimajj<k2>vinimajj
{#vinimajj#}¦ {%vi-ni-majj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-majjati,%}
&c., to plunge in or under, dive under, bathe.
<LEND>

<L>43010<pc>0923-c<k1>vinimagna<k2>vinimagna
{%Vi-nimagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ plunged, bathed, im-
mersed.
<LEND>

<L>43011<pc>0923-c<k1>vinimIl<k2>vinimIl
{#vinimIl#}¦ {%vi-ni-mīl,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mīlati, -mī-%}
{%litum,%} to close the eyes, wink, connive; to close or
shut (as the eyes &c.).
<LEND>

<L>43012<pc>0923-c<k1>vinimIlita<k2>vinimIlita
{%Vi-nimīlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ closed, shut (as the eyes
&c.). {%—Vinimīlitekṣaṇa (˚ta-īk˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the eyes closed.
<LEND>

<L>43013<pc>0923-c<k1>vinime<k2>vinime
{#vinime#}¦ {%vi-ni-me,%} cl. 1. A. {%-mayate, -mātum,%}
to exchange, barter.
<LEND>

<L>43014<pc>0923-c<k1>vinimaya<k2>vinimaya
{%Vi-nimaya, as,%}¦ m. exchange, barter, ({%vinima-%}
{%yena,%} alternately); a pledge, deposit, security; trans-
mutation (of letters).
<LEND>

<L>43015<pc>0923-c<k1>vinimeza<k2>vinimeza
{#vinimeza#}¦ {%vi-nimeṣa, as,%} m. (see rt. 1. {%miṣ%}),
winking or twinkling of the eyes, a wink, sign.
<LEND>

<L>43016<pc>0923-c<k1>viniyam<k2>viniyam
{#viniyam#}¦ {%vi-ni-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati,%}
{%-yantum,%} to restrain, check, control, keep in check,
hold back, regulate; to retrench, limit.
<LEND>

<L>43017<pc>0923-c<k1>viniyata<k2>viniyata
{%Vi-niyata, as, ā, am,%}¦ restrained, checked, regu-
lated, retrenched. {%—Viniyata-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} hav-
ing a controlled or regulated mind. {%—Viniyatāhāra%}
{%(˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} moderate in food or diet, ab-
stemious.
<LEND>

<L>43018<pc>0923-c<k1>viniyama<k2>viniyama
{%Vi-niyama, as,%}¦ m. restraining, restraint, regulat-
ing, control, government.
<LEND>

<L>43019<pc>0923-c<k1>viniyamya<k2>viniyamya
{%Vi-niyamya,%}¦ ind. having restrained, having
checked, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43020<pc>0923-c<k1>viniyuj<k2>viniyuj
{#viniyuj#}¦ {%vi-ni-yuj,%} cl. 7. A. (rarely P.)
{%-yuṅkte (-yunakti), -yoktum,%} to unyoke, disjoin,
disconnect, detach, separate; to discharge (an arrow
&c.); to attach to, appoint, fix, assign, commit,
commission, charge; to apply, use, employ: Pass.
[Page0924-a+ 76]
{%-yujyate,%} to be separated, fall into decay; to be
appointed, to be applied, &c.: Caus. {%-yojayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to appoint, commission, employ, use, in-
trust, enjoin, command; to offer, present; to per-
form.
<LEND>

<L>43021<pc>0924-a<k1>viniyukta<k2>viniyukta
{%Vi-niyukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ separated, sundered, loosed,
detached, parted, parted with; absent; attached to,
appointed, commissioned to; applied to, employed in;
enjoined, commanded. {%—Viniyuktātman (˚ta-āt˚),%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} having the mind fixed on or directed towards.
<LEND>

<L>43022<pc>0924-a<k1>viniyujya<k2>viniyujya
{%Vi-niyujya,%}¦ ind. having appointed.
<LEND>

<L>43023<pc>0924-a<k1>viniyoktavya<k2>viniyoktavya
{%Vi-niyoktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be appointed, to
be employed in, to be applied to; to be enjoined or
commanded.
<LEND>

<L>43024<pc>0924-a<k1>viniyoga<k2>viniyoga
{%Vi-niyoga, as,%}¦ m. unyoking, separating, parting,
separation, detachment; separating from, parting with
(any body or anything); giving up, leaving, aban-
doning; appointment to (any office); application to,
employment in; commission, charge; impediment.
{%—Viniyoga-saṅgraha, as,%} m., N. of a Pariśiṣṭa
of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>43025<pc>0924-a<k1>viniyojita<k2>viniyojita
{%Vi-niyojita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disjoined, detached; joined
to, attached to; appointed to, employed for or in,
applied to (any particular duty or purpose, with loc.,
e. g. {%adhi-patitve viniyojita,%} appointed to the
sovereignty); commissioned, charged, deputed.
<LEND>

<L>43026<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirgam<k2>vinirgam
{#vinirgam#}¦ {%vi-nir-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go out, issue out; to go away, depart;
to escape from; to leave; to disengage or liberate
one's self from (with abl.); to become put out or
beside one's self.
<LEND>

<L>43027<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirgata<k2>vinirgata
{%Vi-nirgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone out, gone out of
or from, escaped from, liberated or freed from (with
abl.).
<LEND>

<L>43028<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirgama<k2>vinirgama
{%Vi-nirgama, as,%}¦ m. the act of going forth, going
out, departure.
<LEND>

<L>43029<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirji<k2>vinirji
{#vinirji#}¦ {%vi-nir-ji,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -jetum,%} to
conquer completely; to overpower, master; to win.
<LEND>

<L>43030<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirjaya<k2>vinirjaya
{%Vi-nirjaya, as,%}¦ m. complete victory, conquest.
<LEND>

<L>43031<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirjita<k2>vinirjita
{%Vi-nirjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely conquered, over-
powered, overcome, won.
<LEND>

<L>43032<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirjitya<k2>vinirjitya
{%Vi-nirjitya,%}¦ ind. having completely subdued or
conquered.
<LEND>

<L>43033<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirjYA<k2>vinirjYA
{#vinirjYA#}¦ {%vi-nir-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to distinguish, discriminate, dis-
cern, find out, investigate.
<LEND>

<L>43034<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirRI<k2>vinirRI
{#vinirRI#}¦ {%vi-nir-ṇī%} (see rt. 1. {%nī%}), cl. 1. P. A.
{%-ṇayati, -te, -ṇetum,%} to settle completely, decide or
determine clearly.
<LEND>

<L>43035<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirRaya<k2>vinirRaya
{%Vi-nirṇaya, as,%}¦ m. complete settlement or de-
cision, ascertainment; certainty; a settled rule.
<LEND>

<L>43036<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirRIta<k2>vinirRIta
{%Vi-nirṇīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ settled or determined
clearly, ascertained, certain.
<LEND>

<L>43037<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirRIya<k2>vinirRIya
{%Vi-nirṇīya,%}¦ ind. having clearly decided or settled.
<LEND>

<L>43038<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirdah<k2>vinirdah
{#vinirdah#}¦ {%vi-nir-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati, -dag-%}
{%dhum,%} to burn completely, burn up, consume by fire,
destroy totally.
<LEND>

<L>43039<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirdagDa<k2>vinirdagDa
{%Vi-nirdagdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely burnt up or
consumed, utterly destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>43040<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirdahat<k2>vinirdahat
{%Vi-nirdahat, an, antī, at,%}¦ burning up, utterly
consuming or destroying.
<LEND>

<L>43041<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirdahana<k2>vinirdahana
{%Vi-nirdahana, am,%}¦ n. the act of burning or de-
stroying utterly.
<LEND>

<L>43042<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirdiS<k2>vinirdiS
{#vinirdiS#}¦ {%vi-nir-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to point out, show, indicate, denote,
mark; to direct, enjoin, announce, declare; to de-
termine, settle, fix, resolve; to appoint, assign, charge
with any business (loc.).
<LEND>

<L>43043<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirdizwa<k2>vinirdizwa
{%Vi-nirdiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pointed out, stated,
declared, directed, enjoined; assigned.
<LEND>

<L>43044<pc>0924-a<k1>vinirDU<k2>vinirDU
{#vinirDU#}¦ {%vi-nir-dhū%} (see rt. 1. {%dhu%} and
1. {%dhū%}), cl. 5. P. A. {%-dhūnoti, -dhūnute%} (in the
ater language also {%-dhunoti, -dhunute%}), {%-dhotum,%}
{%-dhavitum,%} to shake off; to drive away, blow away,
scatter in every direction, dissipate; to wave about,
shake about, agitate.
<LEND>
[Page0924-b+ 73]

<L>43045<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirDuta<k2>vinirDuta
{%Vi-nirdhuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken off, dispelled;
shaken or waved about, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>43046<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirDUta<k2>vinirDUta
{%Vi-nirdhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken off, driven away;
scattered in all directions, dissipated, dispersed; shaken
about, waved about.
<LEND>

<L>43047<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirDUya<k2>vinirDUya
{%Vi-nirdhūya,%}¦ ind. having shaken off or driven
away; having scattered or dispersed; having waved
about.
<LEND>

<L>43048<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirbanDa<k2>vinirbanDa
{#vinirbanDa#}¦ {%vi-nirbandha, as,%} m. persistence,
pertinacity, pertinacious pursuit.
<LEND>

<L>43049<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirBaYj<k2>vinirBaYj
{#vinirBaYj#}¦ {%vi-nir-bhañj,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhanakti,%}
{%-bhaṅktum,%} to break to pieces, break asunder, break
through, break down.
<LEND>

<L>43050<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirBagna<k2>vinirBagna
{%Vi-nirbhagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken asunder, broken
down. {%—Vinirbhagna-nayana, as, ā, am,%} having
the eyes dashed out.
<LEND>

<L>43051<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirBarts<k2>vinirBarts
{#vinirBarts#}¦ {%vi-nir-bharts,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-bhart-%}
{%sayati, -te, -yitum,%} to threaten or chide vehemently,
scold.
<LEND>

<L>43052<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirBartsya<k2>vinirBartsya
{%Vi-nirbhartsya,%}¦ ind. having threatened, having
greatly reviled.
<LEND>

<L>43053<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirBid<k2>vinirBid
{#vinirBid#}¦ {%vi-nir-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhintte, -bhettum,%} to split or cleave asunder, cleave;
to pierce, shoot through: Pass. {%-bhidyate,%} to be
split, to open.
<LEND>

<L>43054<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirBidya<k2>vinirBidya
{%Vi-nirbhidya,%}¦ ind. having split asunder, having
pierced or shot through.
<LEND>

<L>43055<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirBinna<k2>vinirBinna
{%Vi-nirbhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ split asunder, cleft;
opened; pierced.
<LEND>

<L>43056<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirBuj<k2>vinirBuj
{#vinirBuj#}¦ {%vi-nir-bhuj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-bhujati,%}
{%-bhoktum,%} to bend or turn on one side.
<LEND>

<L>43057<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirmaT<k2>vinirmaT
{#vinirmaT#}¦ {%vi-nir-math%} or {%vi-nir-manth,%} cl.
1. 9. P. {%-mathati, -manthati, -mathnāti,%} &c., to
churn out, stir or shake about, crush, stamp to pieces,
annihilate.
<LEND>

<L>43058<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirmaTya<k2>vinirmaTya
{%Vi-nirmathya,%}¦ ind. having churned, having crushed
or annihilated.
<LEND>

<L>43059<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirmA<k2>vinirmA
{#vinirmA#}¦ {%vi-nir-mā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-māti,%} cl. 3. 4.
A. {%-mimīte, -māyate, -mātum,%} to make or form
out of; to form, fashion, construct, build, prepare,
make, create.
<LEND>

<L>43060<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirmARa<k2>vinirmARa
{%Vi-nirmāṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of forming or making.
<LEND>

<L>43061<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirmAtf<k2>vinirmAtf
{%Vi-nirmātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who forms or makes,
a maker, builder, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43062<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirmita<k2>vinirmita
{%Vi-nirmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ formed or made of, con-
structed, built, made, created, prepared; kept, cele-
brated, observed (as a feast); determined, destined;
laid out (as a garden).
<LEND>

<L>43063<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirmuc<k2>vinirmuc
{#vinirmuc#}¦ {%vi-nir-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati,%}
{%-te, -moktum,%} to loosen, free from; to set free,
liberate; to discharge, shoot off; to abandon, give
up: Pass. {%-mucyate,%} to be liberated or set free, to
be freed from.
<LEND>

<L>43064<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirmukta<k2>vinirmukta
{%Vi-nirmukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ liberated, escaped, let
loose or free; exempt, free from; discharged, shot.
<LEND>

<L>43065<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirmucya<k2>vinirmucya
{%Vi-nirmucya,%}¦ ind. having loosened or set free;
having abandoned or deserted; having discharged.
<LEND>

<L>43066<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirmUQa<k2>vinirmUQa
{#vinirmUQa#}¦ {%vi-nirmūḍha, as, ā, am,%} not stul-
tified, not made void or vain. {%—Vinirmūḍha-pra-%}
{%tijña, as, ā, am,%} one who is faithful to a promise
or agreement.
<LEND>

<L>43067<pc>0924-b<k1>viniryat<k2>viniryat
{#viniryat#}¦ {%vi-niryat, an, atī, at%} (Pres. part.
of rt. 5. {%i%} with {%nis%} and {%vi%}), going out or forth,
issuing.
<LEND>

<L>43068<pc>0924-b<k1>viniryA<k2>viniryA
{#viniryA#}¦ {%vi-nir-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to go forth, go out, issue, set out.
<LEND>

<L>43069<pc>0924-b<k1>viniryARa<k2>viniryARa
{%Vi-niryāṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of going forth, setting
out.
<LEND>

<L>43070<pc>0924-b<k1>viniryAta<k2>viniryAta
{%Vi-niryāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forth or out, set out.
<LEND>

<L>43071<pc>0924-b<k1>viniryuj<k2>viniryuj
{#viniryuj#}¦ {%vi-nir-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti,%}
{%-yuṅkte, -yoktum,%} to dispatch, send forth, shoot,
cast.
<LEND>

<L>43072<pc>0924-b<k1>vinirliK<k2>vinirliK
{#vinirliK#}¦ {%vi-nir-likh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-likhati, %}
[Page0924-c+ 74]
{%-lekhitum,%} to scratch out, scratch in, make an in-
cision.
<LEND>

<L>43073<pc>0924-c<k1>vinirvarR<k2>vinirvarR
{#vinirvarR#}¦ {%vi-nir-varṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-varṇayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to look at, contemplate.
<LEND>

<L>43074<pc>0924-c<k1>vinirvft<k2>vinirvft
{#vinirvft#}¦ {%vi-nir-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate, -var-%}
{%titum,%} to proceed out, come forth, be produced; to
come to an end.
<LEND>

<L>43075<pc>0924-c<k1>vinirvftta<k2>vinirvftta
{%Vi-nirvṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ proceeded, proceeding,
produced, occurred; completed, finished.
<LEND>

<L>43076<pc>0924-c<k1>vinivid<k2>vinivid
{#vinivid#}¦ {%vi-ni-vid,%} Caus. {%-vedayati, -yitum,%}
to make known, tell, inform, report, communicate.
<LEND>

<L>43077<pc>0924-c<k1>vinivedita<k2>vinivedita
{%Vi-nivedita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made known, announced.
<LEND>

<L>43078<pc>0924-c<k1>viniviS<k2>viniviS
{#viniviS#}¦ {%vi-ni-viś,%} Caus. {%-veśayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to enter; to introduce; to place or put
on; to add.
<LEND>

<L>43079<pc>0924-c<k1>viniveSa<k2>viniveSa
{%Vi-niveśa, as,%}¦ m. entrance, settling down (in a
place); an impression.
<LEND>

<L>43080<pc>0924-c<k1>vinivf<k2>vinivf
{#vinivf#}¦ {%vi-ni-vṛ,%} Caus. {%-vārayati, -yitum,%}
to keep off, ward off; to hinder, prevent; to pro-
hibit, forbid: Pass. of Caus. {%-vāryate,%} to be kept
off; to be prevented.
<LEND>

<L>43081<pc>0924-c<k1>vinivAraRa<k2>vinivAraRa
{%Vi-nivāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of keeping off or
preventing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43082<pc>0924-c<k1>vinivArita<k2>vinivArita
{%Vi-nivārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ kept off, prevented, hin-
dered, opposed; screened, covered, kept out of view.
<LEND>

<L>43083<pc>0924-c<k1>vinivft<k2>vinivft
{#vinivft#}¦ {%vi-ni-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate, -var-%}
{%titum,%} to turn back, return, turn away, go back; to
desist from, cease from (with abl.); to cease, end,
disappear: Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
turn back; to restrain, withhold; to avert, divert;
to cause to cease or desist; to renounce; to annul.
<LEND>

<L>43084<pc>0924-c<k1>vinivartita<k2>vinivartita
{%Vi-nivartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to turn back,
diverted; caused to cease, stopped.
<LEND>

<L>43085<pc>0924-c<k1>vinivftta<k2>vinivftta
{%Vi-nivṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned back, returned,
turned away; stopped, ceased, ended, refrained,
desisted from, freed from, desisting from; retired,
withdrawn. {%—Vinivṛtta-kāma, as, ā, am,%} one
whose desires have ceased, foiled in one's wishes.
<LEND>

<L>43086<pc>0924-c<k1>vinivftti<k2>vinivftti
{%Vi-nivṛtti, is,%}¦ f. cessation, stopping, desisting,
abstaining; stop, end, term.
<LEND>

<L>43087<pc>0924-c<k1>viniSam<k2>viniSam
{#viniSam#}¦ {%vi-ni-śam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śāmyati, -śa-%}
{%mitum,%} to hear, listen, apprehend.
<LEND>

<L>43088<pc>0924-c<k1>viniSamya<k2>viniSamya
{%Vi-niśamya,%}¦ ind. having heard.
<LEND>

<L>43089<pc>0924-c<k1>viniScar<k2>viniScar
{#viniScar#}¦ {%vi-niś-car (-nis-car),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ca-%}
{%rati, -caritum,%} to go forth in all directions.
<LEND>

<L>43090<pc>0924-c<k1>viniScala<k2>viniScala
{#viniScala#}¦ {%vi-niścala, as, ā, am,%} immovable,
firm, steady.
<LEND>

<L>43091<pc>0924-c<k1>viniSci<k2>viniSci
{#viniSci#}¦ {%vi-niś-ci (-nis-ci),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-ci-%}
{%noti, -cinute, -cetum,%} to debate about, weigh, in-
vestigate, to regard as ascertained or certain, arrive
at a fixed decision, determine, resolve.
<LEND>

<L>43092<pc>0924-c<k1>viniScaya<k2>viniScaya
{%Vi-niścaya, as,%}¦ m. decision, resolution; fixing,
ascertaining, settling, ascertainment, certainty, ({%aṅga-%}
{%viniścaya,%} the fixing or settling of a horoscope.)
{%—Viniścaya-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing the certainty
of anything.
<LEND>

<L>43093<pc>0924-c<k1>viniScita<k2>viniScita
{%Vi-niścita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ascertained, determined,
settled, decided, certain. {%—Viniścitārtha (˚ta-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a decided meaning.
<LEND>

<L>43094<pc>0924-c<k1>viniScitya<k2>viniScitya
{%Vi-niścitya,%}¦ ind. having ascertained or determined,
having concluded, having decided.
<LEND>

<L>43095<pc>0924-c<k1>viniSvas<k2>viniSvas
{#viniSvas#}¦ {%vi-ni-śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śvasiti, -śva-%}
{%situm,%} to draw a deep breath, heave a deep sigh,
sigh, breath hard.
<LEND>

<L>43096<pc>0924-c<k1>viniSvasat<k2>viniSvasat
{%Vi-niśvasat, an, atī, at,%}¦ drawing in the breath,
breathing hard, sighing, puffing and blowing.
<LEND>

<L>43097<pc>0924-c<k1>viniSvasya<k2>viniSvasya
{%Vi-niśvasya,%}¦ ind. having breathed hard, having
sighed, sighing.
<LEND>

<L>43098<pc>0924-c<k1>viniSvAsa<k2>viniSvAsa
{%Vi-niśvāsa, as,%}¦ m. breathing hard, strong expi-
ration, sighing, a sigh.
<LEND>

<L>43099<pc>0924-c<k1>vinizkram<k2>vinizkram
{#vinizkram#}¦ {%vi-niṣ-kram (-nis-kram),%} cl. 1.
P. A. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to step
forth, go out, issue forth.
<LEND>

<L>43100<pc>0924-c<k1>vinizkramya<k2>vinizkramya
{%Vi-niṣkramya,%}¦ ind. having gone forth.
<LEND>
[Page0925-a+ 75]

<L>43101<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizkrAnta<k2>vinizkrAnta
{%Vi-niṣkrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forth, come out.
<LEND>

<L>43102<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizkrAmat<k2>vinizkrAmat
{%Vi-niṣkrāmat, an, antī, at,%}¦ stepping forth,
coming out.
<LEND>

<L>43103<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizkriya<k2>vinizkriya
{#vinizkriya#}¦ {%vi-niṣkriya, as, ā, am,%} abstain-
ing or desisting from ceremonial rites.
<LEND>

<L>43104<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizwap<k2>vinizwap
{#vinizwap#}¦ {%vi-niṣ-ṭap (-nis-tap),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-tapati, -taptum,%} to heat or roast thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>43105<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizwapta<k2>vinizwapta
{%Vi-niṣṭapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well roasted, well fried.
<LEND>

<L>43106<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizpaw<k2>vinizpaw
{#vinizpaw#}¦ {%vi-niṣ-paṭ (-nis-paṭ),%} cl. 10. P.
{%-pāṭayati, -yitum,%} to split or cleave asunder.
<LEND>

<L>43107<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizpat<k2>vinizpat
{#vinizpat#}¦ {%vi-niṣ-pat (-nis-pat),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-patati, -patitum,%} to fall out of, fly forth from,
rush out, jump forth, leap out, come forth; to go
or run away.
<LEND>

<L>43108<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizpatita<k2>vinizpatita
{%Vi-niṣpatita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rushed forth, lept out.
<LEND>

<L>43109<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizpatya<k2>vinizpatya
{%Vi-niṣpatya,%}¦ ind. having rushed out, having
come forth.
<LEND>

<L>43110<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizpiz<k2>vinizpiz
{#vinizpiz#}¦ {%vi-niṣ-piṣ (-nis-piṣ),%} cl. 7. P.
{%-pinaṣṭi, -peṣṭum,%} to grind to pieces, crush, bruise;
to rub together.
<LEND>

<L>43111<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizpizwa<k2>vinizpizwa
{%Vi-niṣpiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ ground to pieces,
crushed into powder, smashed.
<LEND>

<L>43112<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizpizya<k2>vinizpizya
{%Vi-niṣpiṣya,%}¦ ind. having ground or rubbed to-
gether, having battered.
<LEND>

<L>43113<pc>0925-a<k1>vinizpeza<k2>vinizpeza
{%Vi-niṣpeṣa, as,%}¦ m. grinding to pieces, bruising,
rubbing together.
<LEND>

<L>43114<pc>0925-a<k1>vinisUd<k2>vinisUd
{#vinisUd#}¦ {%vi-ni-sūd,%} Caus. {%-sūdayati, -yitum,%}
to kill or destroy utterly.
<LEND>

<L>43115<pc>0925-a<k1>vinisf<k2>vinisf
{#vinisf#}¦ {%vi-ni-sṛ = vi-niḥ-sṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>43116<pc>0925-a<k1>vinisfta<k2>vinisfta
{%Vi-nisṛta = vi-niḥsṛta.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>43117<pc>0925-a<k1>vinistap<k2>vinistap
{#vinistap#}¦ {%vi-nis-tap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati,%} &c.,
see {%vi-niṣ-tap;%} ({%s%} is only retained before {%t%} when
<nsi>repeated</nsi> action is intended; in other cases it becomes
{%ṣ%} by Pāṇini VIII. 3, 102.)
<LEND>

<L>43118<pc>0925-a<k1>vinihan<k2>vinihan
{#vinihan#}¦ {%vi-ni-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -han-%}
{%tum,%} to strike down, strike, kill, wound.
<LEND>

<L>43119<pc>0925-a<k1>viniGnat<k2>viniGnat
{%Vi-nighnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ striking down, wound-
ing; killing.
<LEND>

<L>43120<pc>0925-a<k1>vinihata<k2>vinihata
{%Vi-nihata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck down, struck,
wounded; completely killed; overcome; ({%as%}), m. a
great or unavoidable calamity, the infliction of fate
or heaven; a portent, comet, meteor.
<LEND>

<L>43121<pc>0925-a<k1>vinihatya<k2>vinihatya
{%Vi-nihatya,%}¦ ind. having struck.
<LEND>

<L>43122<pc>0925-a<k1>vinihnuta<k2>vinihnuta
{#vinihnuta#}¦ {%vi-nihnuta, as, ā, am%} [cf. {%ni-%}
{%hnuta%}], hidden, concealed.
<LEND>

<L>43123<pc>0925-a<k1>vinI<k2>vinI
{#vinI#}¦ {%vi-nī,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati, -netum,%} to
lead away, take away, remove; to lead, conduct,
bring, guide; to train, educate; to tame, govern; to
advise, instruct, direct, give directions; to conduct,
perform; to bend down, incline; to pour out; to
present, offer; to spend, pass (time); to spend, pay
(money); to spread: Pass. {%-nīyate,%} to be led or
guided &c., to be conducted or performed &c.
<LEND>

<L>43124<pc>0925-a<k1>vinaya<k2>vinaya
{%Vi-naya, as,%}¦ m. leading, guidance, moral training,
training, discipline; gentlemanly refinement, gentle-
manlike bearing; good behaviour, propriety of con-
duct, decorum, decency; modesty, affability, humi-
lity, mildness; reverence, obeisance, courtesy; conduct
or behaviour (in general); N. of a son of Dharma;
({%ā%}), f. the plant Sida Cordifolia; ({%as, ā, am%}), cast,
thrown; secret; a man of subdued senses; a mer-
chant, trader, (these four senses are given on the
authority of the Śabda-k.) {%—Vinaya-grāhin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} conforming to rules of discipline, compliant, tract-
able, humble. {%—Vinaya-piṭaka, as,%} m. ‘basket of
discipline,’ N. of those Buddhist works which contain
moral precepts and rules of discipline; [cf. {%tri-piṭaka.%}]
{%—Vinaya-pradhāna, as, ā, am,%} having humility
pre-eminent, of which modesty is chief. {%—Vinaya-%}
{%pramāthin, ī, inī, i,%} violating propriety, behaving
ill or improperly. {%—Vinaya-bhāj, k, k, k,%} possess-
ing propriety or modesty, well-behaved, modest.
{%—Vinaya-yogin, ī, inī, i,%} possessing humility.
{%—Vinaya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of modesty,
well-behaved, modest. {%—Vinaya-vāc, k, k, k,%} speak-
[Page0925-b+ 79]
ing humbly or modestly; ({%k%}), f. modest speech.
{%—Vinaya-stha, as, ā, am,%} conforming to disci-
pline, compliant, tractable, governable. {%—Vinayāva-%}
{%nata (˚ya-av˚), as, ā, am,%} bending down modestly,
bowing low with modesty.
<LEND>

<L>43125<pc>0925-b<k1>vinayana<k2>vinayana
{%Vi-nayana, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} taking away, remov-
ing; ({%am%}), n. the act of leading away, removing,
taking away; training, education, instruction, accom-
plishment.
<LEND>

<L>43126<pc>0925-b<k1>vinAyaka<k2>vinAyaka
{%Vi-nāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ taking away, removing;
({%as%}), m. a remover (of obstacles); a Buddha or
Buddhist deified teacher; N. of the god Gaṇeśa; of
Garuḍa (the bird and vehicle of Viṣṇu); of a poet;
a Guru or spiritual preceptor; an obstacle, impedi-
ment, difficulty; ({%ikā%}), f. the wife of Garuḍa. {%—Vi-%}
{%nāyaka-carita, am,%} n., N. of the seventy-third
chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa or second part of the
Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Vināyaka-paṇḍita, as,%} m., N.
of a poet; {%= nanda-paṇḍita%}. {%—Vināyaka-bhaṭṭa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a modern author. {%—Vināyaka-bho-%}
{%jana-varṇanā,%} f., N. of a chapter of the Gaṇeśa-
Purāṇa. {%—Vināyakāvatāra-varṇana (˚ka-av˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of part of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Vinā-%}
{%yakāvirbhāva (˚ka-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘manifestation of
Gaṇeśa,’ N. of the sixth chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa
or second part of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Vināyakot-%}
{%patti (˚ka-ut˚), is,%} f. ‘birth of Gaṇeśa,’ N. of the
102nd chapter of the first part of the Liṅga-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>43127<pc>0925-b<k1>vinIta<k2>vinIta
{%Vi-nīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ led away, taken away, removed;
led, conveyed; taken; thrown, sent, dismissed; well-
trained, educated, disciplined, refined, gentleman-
like, well-behaved, well-controlled; compliant, go-
vernable, tractable; modest, demure, meek, virtuous,
gentle, placid, decent, decorous; having the passions
restrained, having the senses under subjection; tamed,
broken in (as a horse, ox, &c.); chastised, punished;
plain, neat (in dress &c.); lovely, handsome; ({%as%}),
m. a trained horse; a merchant, trader; N. of a son
of Pulastya. {%—Vinīta-tva, am,%} n. modesty, decency,
decorum. {%—Vinīta-veṣa, as,%} m. a modest or ap-
propriate garb, plain attire. {%—Vinītātman (˚ta-āt˚),%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} having a well-controlled mind, well-behaved;
humble, lowly.
<LEND>

<L>43128<pc>0925-b<k1>vinItaka<k2>vinItaka
{%Vi-nītaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. any medium of convey-
ance ({%= vainītaka,%} q. v.); a bearer (carrying a
litter); a horse (dragging a carriage).
<LEND>

<L>43129<pc>0925-b<k1>vinIti<k2>vinIti
{%Vi-nīti, is,%}¦ f. training, good behaviour, reverence,
obeisance, homage.
<LEND>

<L>43130<pc>0925-b<k1>vinIya<k2>vinIya<h>1
1. {%vi-nīya,%}¦ ind. having taken away or removed;
having conducted; having guided or trained; having
inclined; having passed (as time &c.).
<LEND>

<L>43131<pc>0925-b<k1>vinIya<k2>vinIya<h>2
2. {%vi-nīya, as,%}¦ m. sediment, dregs; sin.
<LEND>

<L>43132<pc>0925-b<k1>vinetf<k2>vinetf
{%Vi-netṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a leader, guide, instructor, teacher;
a governor, chastiser, ruler, king.
<LEND>

<L>43133<pc>0925-b<k1>vineya<k2>vineya
{%Vi-neya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken away or removed;
to be governed or directed, governable, tractable.
<LEND>

<L>43134<pc>0925-b<k1>vinezyat<k2>vinezyat
{%Vi-neṣyat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} wishing or in-
tending to take away, wishing to deprive of, wishing
to conduct, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43135<pc>0925-b<k1>vinIla<k2>vinIla
{#vinIla#}¦ {%vi-nīla, as, ā, am,%} dark-blue, blue.
{%—Vinīla-bandhana, as, ā, am,%} having dark-blue
stalks.
<LEND>

<L>43136<pc>0925-b<k1>vinu<k2>vinu
{#vinu#}¦ {%vi-nu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-navate,%} &c., Ved. to
go or spread in different directions, (Sāy. {%= vividhaṃ%}
{%vy-āp.%})
<LEND>

<L>43137<pc>0925-b<k1>vinud<k2>vinud
{#vinud#}¦ {%vi-nud,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-nudati, -te,%}
{%-nottum,%} to drive asunder, drive away, scare away,
dispel, remove; to wound; to strike (the cords of a
lute &c.), play (on a musical instrument): Caus.
{%-nodayati, -yitum,%} to drive away, dispel, remove;
to pass away or spend (time &c.); to divert, amuse,
entertain; to delight in (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>43138<pc>0925-b<k1>vinudyamAna<k2>vinudyamAna
{%Vi-nudyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being driven away,
being sent away, being dispatched.
<LEND>

<L>43139<pc>0925-b<k1>vinoda<k2>vinoda
{%Vi-noda, as,%}¦ m. driving away, removing, dismiss-
ing, abandoning; diversion, sport, pastime, play;
interest, interesting pursuit or occupation, pleasure,
gratification, happiness; eagerness, vehemence; N.
of a work on music.
<LEND>
[Page0925-c+ 78]

<L>43140<pc>0925-c<k1>vinodana<k2>vinodana
{%Vi-nodana, am,%}¦ n. the act of driving away or re-
moving; diversion, play, sport, pastime, enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>43141<pc>0925-c<k1>vinodita<k2>vinodita
{%Vi-nodita, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven away, dispelled,
dissipated, dispersed; dismissed; diverted, amused;
delighted, made happy; allayed, soothed.
<LEND>

<L>43142<pc>0925-c<k1>vinodin<k2>vinodin
{%Vi-nodin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ driving away; diverting.
<LEND>

<L>43143<pc>0925-c<k1>vinokti<k2>vinokti
{#vinokti#}¦ {%vinokti.%} See under {%vinā,%} p. 923.
<LEND>

<L>43144<pc>0925-c<k1>vind<k2>vind
{#vind#}¦ {%vind.%} See rt. 1. {%vid,%} p. 918.
<LEND>

<L>43145<pc>0925-c<k1>vinda<k2>vinda
{%Vinda, as, ā, am,%}¦ finding, getting, gaining, one
who finds, &c.; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Jaya-sena;
of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
<LEND>

<L>43146<pc>0925-c<k1>vindamAna<k2>vindamAna
{%Vindamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ finding, acquiring, ob-
taining, gaining, taking.
<LEND>

<L>43147<pc>0925-c<k1>vindu<k2>vindu
{%Vindu, us, us, u,%}¦ intelligent, knowing; liberal,
munificent; finding, obtaining [cf. {%loka-v˚%}]; ({%us%}),
m. a detached particle, drop, (in the Vedas usually
spelt {%bindu,%} q. v., and in this sense, according to
some, fr. rt. {%bid%} or {%bind%}); a drop of water or other
liquid, tear-drop [cf. {%jala-v˚, vāṣpa-v˚;%} rarely
neut., e. g. in Mahā-bh. Droṇa-p. 2113. {%aśru-vin-%}
{%dūni,%} ‘drops of tears’]; a drop of water taken as a
measure; a spherule, globule, spot, dot, mark; a
mark or spot of coloured paint on an elephant's
trunk; the dot over a letter representing the Anu-
svāra; (in manuscripts) a mark over an erased word
to show that the word ought not to be erased [cf.
{%kuṇḍalanā%}]; a mark made by the teeth of a lover
on the lips of his mistress; a peculiar mark like a
dot made in cauterizing; a particular part of the
mystic rites of the Śaivas; the part of the forehead
between the eyebrows; (in the drama) the unex-
pected development of a secondary incident (which,
like a drop of oil in water, expands and furnishes an
important element in the plot); N. of the author of
a Rasa-paddhati; ({%avas%}), m. pl., N. of a warrior
tribe. {%—Vindu-ghṛta, am,%} n., Ved., N. of a parti-
cular medicinal compound taken in small quantities.
{%—Vindu-cita, as,%} m. a kind of deer or other animal
{%(= rohiṣa)%}. {%—Vindu-citraka, as,%} m. the spotted
antelope. {%—Vindu-jāla%} or {%vindu-jālaka, am,%} n.
a mass of dots or spots; coloured marks or spots on
an elephant's face and trunk. {%—Vindu-tantra, as,%}
m. a die, dice; a kind of chess-board. {%—Vindu-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a sacred bathing-place. {%—Vin-%}
{%du-deva, as,%} m. {%= ṇa,%} a Buddhist deity; N. of
Śiva. {%—Vindu-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a teacher of
the Haṭha-vidyā. {%—Vindu-pattra, as,%} m. a species
of birch tree. {%—Vindu-pattraka,%} a species of ama-
ranth used as a vegetable. {%—Vindu-phala, am,%} n.
a pearl. {%—Vindu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing drops,
formed into balls or globules (Ved.); ({%ān%}), m., N.
of a son of Marīci by Vindu-matī; ({%atī%}), f. epithet
of certain verses mentioned in the Śārṅgadhara-
paddhati; N. of a particular treatise; of the wife of
Marīci and mother of Vindu-mat; of a daughter
of Śaśa-vindu and wife of Māndhātṛ; of various
other women. {%—Vindu-mādhava, as,%} m. a form
of Viṣṇu. {%—Vindu-rekhaka, as,%} m. a kind of bird.
{%—Vindu-rekhā,%} f. a row or line of points or dots;
N. of a daughter of Caṇḍa-vikrama. {%—Vindu-vā-%}
{%sara, as,%} m. the day of fecundation or conception.
{%—Vindu-saṅgraha, as,%} m., N. of a work on
medicine. {%—Vindu-sandīpana, am,%} n., N. of a
commentary on the Siddhānta-tattva-vindu. {%—Vindu-%}
{%saras, as,%} n., N. of a sacred lake, (also written
{%vindu-sara.%}) {%—Vindu-sāra, as,%} m., N. of a king
(a son of Candra-gupta). {%—Vindu-sena, as,%} m., N.
of a king (a son of Kṣatraujas). {%—Vindu-hrada,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a lake.
<LEND>

<L>43148<pc>0925-c<k1>vinduka<k2>vinduka
{%Vinduka, as,%}¦ m. {%= vindu,%} a drop, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43149<pc>0925-c<k1>vindukita<k2>vindukita
{%Vindukita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered with drops.
<LEND>

<L>43150<pc>0925-c<k1>vinD<k2>vinD
{#vinD#}¦ {%vindh,%} a Vedic rt. (of which the
form {%vindhe,%} ‘I know,’ occurs in Ṛg-
veda I. 7, 7), referred by some to rt. {%vidh%} or {%vyadh,%}
and by others connected with rt. {%vind,%} (see Nirukta
VI. 18.)
<LEND>

<L>43151<pc>0925-c<k1>vinDapattra<k2>vinDapattra
{#vinDapattra#}¦ {%vindha-pattra, as,%} m. a plant
(commonly called Bel Suṇṭh).
<LEND>
[Page0926-a+ 78]

<L>43152<pc>0926-a<k1>vinDya<k2>vinDya
{#vinDya#}¦ {%vindhya, as,%} m. (perhaps connected
with rt. {%bind%} or {%bid,%} ‘to divide’), N. of a range of
mountains connecting the Northern extremities of
the Western and Eastern Ghauts, and separating Hin-
dūstān proper from the Dekhan, (the Vindhya range
is reckoned among the seven principal mountains of
Bhārata-varṣa [see {%kulācala,%} p. 240, col. 3], and
according to Manu II. 21. forms the Southern limit
of Madhya-deśa or the middle region, regarded as
the sacred land of the Hindūs; according to a legend
related in the Vana-parvan of the Mahā-bhārata,
1. 8782 &c., the personified Vindhya mountain,
jealous of Himālaya, demanded that the sun should
revolve round him in the same way as about Meru,
which the sun declining to do, the Vindhya then began
to elevate himself that he might bar the progress of
both sun and moon; the gods alarmed, asked the
aid of the saint Agastya, who approached the moun-
tain and requested that by bending down he would
afford him an easy passage to the South country,
begging at the same time that he would retain a low
position till his return; this the mountain promised
to do, but Agastya never returned, and the Vindhya
range consequently never attained the elevation of
the Himālaya); a hunter; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant
or tree ({%= lavalī%}); small cardamoms {%(= truṭi).%}
{%—Vindhya-kandara,%} N. of a place. {%—Vindhya-%}
{%kūṭa%} or {%vindhya-kūṭana, as,%} m. epithet of the
saint Agastya. {%—Vindhya-parvata, as,%} m. the Vindhya
mountains. {%—Vindhya-mūlika, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people. {%—Vindhya-vāsin, ī,%} m. ‘dwelling in the
Vindhya,’ epithet of the celebrated grammarian and
lexicographer Vyāḍi; ({%inī%}), f., N. of Durgā; a
village and temple sacred to Durgā under the forms
of Yoga-māyā and Bhoga-māyā (said to be a place
of great resort, situated about three miles from Mirza-
pur on the Ganges). {%—Vindhya-śakti, is,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Vindhya-śaila, as,%} m. the Vindhya
mountains. {%—Vindhya-stha, as,%} m. ‘living in the
Vindhya,’ epithet of Vyāḍi (regarded as an inspired
grammarian and Muni). {%—Vindhyācala (˚ya-ac˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the Vindhya range of mountains. {%—Vindhyā-%}
{%ṭavī (˚ya-aṭ˚),%} f. the great Vindhya forest (which
appears to have spread at one time from near Ma-
thurā to the Narma-dā). {%—Vindhyādri-vāsinī,%} f. {%=%}
{%vindhya-vāsinī%}. {%—Vindhyāvali (˚ya-āv˚), is,%} or
{%vindhyāvalī,%} f., N. of the wife of the Asura Bali.
{%—Vindhyāvalī-putra%} or {%vindhyāvalī-suta (˚ya-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. ‘son of Vindhyāvalī,’ N. of the Asura
Vāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>43153<pc>0926-a<k1>vinna<k2>vinna
{#vinna#}¦ {%vinna.%} See p. 919, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>43154<pc>0926-a<k1>vinnapa<k2>vinnapa
{#vinnapa#}¦ {%vinnapa, as,%} m. (perhaps fr. {%vinna,%}
q. v. {%+ pa%}), the saint Agastya.
<LEND>

<L>43155<pc>0926-a<k1>vinyas<k2>vinyas
{#vinyas#}¦ {%vi-ny-as (vi-ni-),%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati,%}
{%-asitum,%} to put or place down in different places;
to put down, deposit; to place in order, adjust, dis-
pose, arrange, distribute; to put or place on, lay on;
to set the mind on; to fix the eyes upon; to put or
place into; to deliver over.
<LEND>

<L>43156<pc>0926-a<k1>vinyasta<k2>vinyasta
{%Vi-nyasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed down, deposited,
fixed; inlaid, paved; delivered; offered, presented.
<LEND>

<L>43157<pc>0926-a<k1>vinyasya<k2>vinyasya
{%Vi-nyasya,%}¦ ind. having put or laid down; having
laid on, &c.; having arranged or disposed.
<LEND>

<L>43158<pc>0926-a<k1>vinyasyat<k2>vinyasyat
{%Vi-nyasyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ putting down, putting
or placing on; setting or fixing the eyes upon;
arranging, fixing, settling, determining.
<LEND>

<L>43159<pc>0926-a<k1>vinyAsa<k2>vinyAsa
{%Vi-nyāsa, as,%}¦ m. putting or placing down, de-
positing, entrusting; a deposit; orderly arrangement,
disposition; any site or receptacle on or in which
anything is placed or deposited; collecting, collection,
assemblage.
<LEND>

<L>43160<pc>0926-a<k1>vinyAka<k2>vinyAka
{#vinyAka#}¦ {%vinyāka, as,%} m. the tree Echites
Scholaris ({%= viddha%}).
<LEND>

<L>43161<pc>0926-a<k1>vip<k2>vip<h>1
{#vip#} 1¦. {%vip%} [cf. rts. {%vap, vyap%}], cl. 10.
P. {%vepayati%} (Ved. also {%vipayati%}), {%-yi-%}
{%tum,%} to throw, cast; to strew, scatter, (Ṛg-veda VII.
21, 2. {%vipayanti barhiḥ,%} they strew the sacred
grass; Sāy. {%= stṛṇanti.%})
<LEND>
[Page0926-b+ 78]

<L>43162<pc>0926-b<k1>vip<k2>vip<h>2
{#vip#} 2¦. {%vip, p, p, p,%} Ved. (perhaps con-
nected with rt. 1. {%vip,%} in the sense ‘pouring out,’ ‘ut-
tering’), uttering hymns of praise, praising; ({%p%}), m.
a singer of hymns, praiser; {%= vipra; = medhāvin,%}
a wise man; ({%p%}), f. praise, a hymn; a finger. {%—Vi-%}
{%paś-cit, t, t, t,%} excogitating praise or hymns of praise
(Ved.); wise, learned, prudent; ({%t%}), m. a Ṛṣi, sage,
teacher, learned Brāhman ({%= medhāvin,%} Naigh. III.
15); N. of the Indra in the second Manv-antara.
{%—Vipo-dhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. singing hymns.
<LEND>

<L>43163<pc>0926-b<k1>vipa<k2>vipa
{%Vipa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a praiser ({%= medhāvin,%} ac-
cording to Naigh. III. 15); ({%ā%}), f. {%= vāc%} (according
to Naigh. I. 11).
<LEND>

<L>43164<pc>0926-b<k1>vipra<k2>vipra
{%Vipra, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. II. 28. fr. rt.
{%vap,%} ‘to strew;’ cf. rt. 1. {%vip%}), an utterer of praise,
singer of hymns, Ṛṣi, praiser, poet, any one skilled
in hymns; a Brāhman, priest; a sage, seer, wise
man ({%= medhāvin,%} Naigh. III. 15); a foot of four
short syllables (in prosody); N. of a son of Dhruva;
of a son of Śrutañ-jaya. {%—Vipra-kanyā,%} f. a Brāh-
man girl, maiden of the sacerdotal class, Brāhmaṇī.
{%—Vipra-kāṣṭha, am,%} n. the cotton tree ({%= tūla-%}
{%vṛkṣa%}). {%—Vipra-cūḍāmaṇi, is,%} m. ‘Brāhman-
jewel,’ an excellent Brāhman. {%—Vipra-jana, as,%} m.
a person of the sacerdotal caste, a Brāhman; a com-
pany of Brāhmans. {%—Vipra-jūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
impelled or urged by priests, invoked by the wise,
(Sāy. {%= medhāvibhir ṛtvigbhiḥ preritaḥ,%} Ṛg-
veda I. 3, 5.) {%—Vipra-jūti, is,%} m., N. of the author
of Ṛg-veda X. 136, 3, (having the patronymic
Vātaraśana.) {%—Vipra-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most
wise, wisest. {%—Vipra-deva, as,%} m., N. of a leader
of the Bhāgavata sect. {%—Vipra-priya, as,%} m.
‘Brāhman-favourite,’ epithet of the Palāśa tree.
{%—Vipra-bandhu, us,%} m., N. of the author of Ṛg-
veda V. 24, 4, X. 57-60, (having the patronymic
Gaupāyana or Laupāyana.) {%—Vipra-rājya, am,%} n.
the kingdom or sovereignty of the Brāhmans or
priests. {%—Viprarṣi (˚ra-ṛṣi), is,%} m. a Brāhman-
ṛṣi, a sage of the Brāhmanical class (e. g. Vasiṣṭha).
{%—Vipra-lobhin, ī,%} m. ‘Brāhman-enticing,’ epithet
of the Kiṅkirāta tree. {%—Vipra-vacas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. possessing the hymns of Ṛṣis or poets, (Sāy.
{%= vividha-prakṛṣṭa-vacana.%}) {%—Vipra-samā-%}
{%gama, as,%} m. a concourse of Brāhmans. {%—Vipra-%}
{%sāt,%} ind. to the state of a Brāhman. {%—Vipra-sevā,%}
f. attendance on Brāhmans, service of a Brāhman
master (Manu X. 123). {%—Vipra-sva, am,%} n. the
property of a Brāhman. {%—Viprāpavāda (˚ra-ap˚),%}
{%as,%} m. abuse of a Brāhman. {%—Viprendra (˚ra-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m. chief of Brāhmans.
<LEND>

<L>43165<pc>0926-b<k1>vipaktrima<k2>vipaktrima
{#vipaktrima#}¦ {%vi-paktrima, vi-pakva.%} See un-
der {%vi-pac.%}
<LEND>

<L>43166<pc>0926-b<k1>vipakza<k2>vipakza
{#vipakza#}¦ {%vi-pakṣa, as, ā, am,%} being on a
different or opposite side, opposed, adverse, contrary,
inimical; ({%as%}), m. an opponent, enemy, adversary,
rival; a disputant; (in grammar) an exception;
(in logic) a negative instance, a syllogism in which
the major term is not found; an instance on the
opposite side (as ‘there cannot be fire in a lake,
because there is no smoke there’). {%—Vipakṣa-tas,%}
ind. hostilely, inimically; from a rival, ({%caramaṃ%}
{%vipakṣataḥ,%} after a rival, Kirāt. VIII. 54.) {%—Vi-%}
{%pakṣa-tā,%} f. or {%vipakṣa-tva, am,%} n. hostility,
enmity, opposition, controversy, contradiction. {%—Vi-%}
{%pakṣa-bhāva, as,%} m. hostile disposition, state of
hostility. {%—Vipakṣa-śūla, as,%} m., N. of a chief of
a sect called Ārādhya. {%—Vipakṣākrānta (˚ṣa-%}
{%āk˚), as, ā, am,%} seized by an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>43167<pc>0926-b<k1>vipakzas<k2>vipakzas
{%Vi-pakṣas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. placed or yoked on
both sides (e. g. {%yuñjanti kāmyā harī vipakṣasā%}
{%rathe,%} they harness the two favourite bay horses
[of Indra] to the chariot on both sides, Ṛg-veda
I. 6, 2).
<LEND>

<L>43168<pc>0926-b<k1>vipakzapAta<k2>vipakzapAta
{#vipakzapAta#}¦ {%vi-pakṣapāta, as, ā, am,%} free
from partizanship, impartial, indifferent; ({%as%}), m.
impartiality, indifference.
<LEND>

<L>43169<pc>0926-b<k1>vipac<k2>vipac
{#vipac#}¦ {%vi-pac,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-pacati, -te, %}
[Page0926-c+ 77]
{%paktum,%} to cook thoroughly, overcook; to
roast; to dissolve by cooking or boiling, melt,
liquefy; to digest; to mature, ripen: Pass. {%-pac-%}
{%yate,%} to be cooked or baked; to be digested; to be
completely matured or ripened; to be developed:
Caus. {%-pācayati, -yitum,%} to cook thoroughly, over-
cook; to dissolve by cooking, melt, liquefy.
<LEND>

<L>43170<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaktrima<k2>vipaktrima
{%Vi-paktrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly matured,
ripened; fulfilled, developed, come to pass (as the
consequence of former actions).
<LEND>

<L>43171<pc>0926-c<k1>vipakva<k2>vipakva
{%Vi-pakva, as, ā, am,%}¦ cooked, dressed; ripened,
matured.
<LEND>

<L>43172<pc>0926-c<k1>vipAka<k2>vipAka
{%Vi-pāka, as,%}¦ m. cooking thoroughly, cooking,
dressing; ripening, maturing, ripeness, maturity;
conversion of food into a state differing from its
original one, digestion; change of state (in general);
unexpected consequence of actions, unexpected event
or occurrence, improbable result; the consequence
or result of any action either in this or in a former
birth matured by the operation of time; calamity,
distress, poverty, difficulty, embarrassment; flavour,
taste; ({%as, ā, am%}), having mature fruit, fruitful,
(Sāy. {%= paripakva-phala.%}) {%—Vipāka-visphūrja-%}
{%thu, us,%} m. the thunder or thunderbolt of the con-
sequences (of sins committed in a former birth).
<LEND>

<L>43173<pc>0926-c<k1>vipAkin<k2>vipAkin
{%Vi-pākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having unexpected consequences
or results, resulting in, followed by.
<LEND>

<L>43174<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaYcI<k2>vipaYcI
{#vipaYcI#}¦ {%vi-pañcī,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%pañc%}
with {%vi%}), play, sport, pastime; a lute.
<LEND>

<L>43175<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaYcikA<k2>vipaYcikA
{%Vi-pañcikā,%}¦ f. a lute ({%= vīṇā%}).
<LEND>

<L>43176<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaw<k2>vipaw
{#vipaw#}¦ {%vi-paṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pāṭayati, -yitum,%}
to split in two, tear open; to tear out, eradicate,
root up, destroy; to open, unfold.
<LEND>

<L>43177<pc>0926-c<k1>vipAwana<k2>vipAwana
{%Vi-pāṭana, am,%}¦ n. the act of splitting in two,
tearing open, uprooting, eradication; driving away,
spoliation.
<LEND>

<L>43178<pc>0926-c<k1>vipAwita<k2>vipAwita
{%Vi-pāṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ split or torn open, rooted up,
eradicated, destroyed. {%—Vipāṭitāriṣṭa (˚ta-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} destroying or driving away ill luck.
<LEND>

<L>43179<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaW<k2>vipaW
{#vipaW#}¦ {%vi-paṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paṭhati, -paṭhitum,%}
to read through, read.
<LEND>

<L>43180<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaR<k2>vipaR
{#vipaR#}¦ {%vi-paṇ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-paṇate%} (ep. also
P. {%-ti%}), {%-paṇitum,%} to sell; to bet.
<LEND>

<L>43181<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaRa<k2>vipaRa
{%Vi-paṇa, as,%}¦ m. or {%vi-paṇana, am,%} n. sale,
contract of sale; low or petty traffic.
<LEND>

<L>43182<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaRat<k2>vipaRat
{%Vi-paṇat, an, antī, at,%}¦ selling.
<LEND>

<L>43183<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaRi<k2>vipaRi
{%Vi-paṇi, is,%}¦ m. f. or {%vi-paṇī,%} f. a place where
things are sold, a shop, stall, fair, market, market-
place; the street of a market; any article or com-
modity for sale; traffic. {%—Vipaṇi-madhya-ga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} being in the midst of the market.
<LEND>

<L>43184<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaRin<k2>vipaRin
{%Vi-paṇin, ī,%}¦ m. a dealer, trafficker, shopkeeper,
merchant.
<LEND>

<L>43185<pc>0926-c<k1>vipat<k2>vipat
{#vipat#}¦ {%vi-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -patitum,%}
to fall or break through, dash through (Ved., Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda I. 168, 6. {%vi-patatha = viśīrṇam%}
{%pātayatha%}); to fall off, fly apart, fall asunder, burst
asunder, be reft asunder, be divided or separated:
Caus. {%-pātayati, -yitum,%} to cause to fly off or away,
shoot off, discharge (arrows &c.); to cause to fly
apart or burst asunder; to destroy, kill.
<LEND>

<L>43186<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaTa<k2>vipaTa
{#vipaTa#}¦ {%vi-patha, as, am,%} m. n. a different
path, wrong way, bad road; ({%as%}), m., Ved. a kind
of war-chariot. {%—Vipatha-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going
in a wrong way or evil course. {%—Vipatha-yamaka,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of Yamaka, q. v., in which the parono-
masia is only at the beginning and end of the verse.
<LEND>

<L>43187<pc>0926-c<k1>vipaTi<k2>vipaTi
{%Vi-pathi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. going on paths that spread
in different directions.
<LEND>

<L>43188<pc>0926-c<k1>vipad<k2>vipad<h>1
{#vipad#} 1¦. {%vi-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, -pat-%}
{%tum,%} to go apart, go badly or wrongly, fail, mis-
carry; to fall into a bad state, fall into misfortune;
to be disabled or incapacitated; to perish, die; to
hinder, obstruct: Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to go wrong, cause to perish, destroy, kill.
<LEND>

<L>43189<pc>0926-c<k1>vipatti<k2>vipatti<h>1
1. {%vi-patti, is,%}¦ f. going wrongly, adversity, cala-
mity, misfortune, disaster, mishap, (opposed to {%sam- %}
[Page0927-a+ 76]
{%patti%}); pain, agony; death, dying. {%—Vipatti-kāla,%}
{%as,%} m. a season of adversity or distress. {%—Vipatti-%}
{%yukta, as, ā, am,%} attended with misfortune, unfor-
tunate. {%—Vipatti-rahita, as, ā, am,%} free from mis-
fortune, prosperous, happy.
<LEND>

<L>43190<pc>0927-a<k1>vipatti<k2>vipatti<h>2
2. {%vi-patti, is,%}¦ m. a distinguished or excellent
foot-soldier ({%= viśiṣṭaḥ padātiḥ,%} Kirāt. XV. 16).
<LEND>

<L>43191<pc>0927-a<k1>vipad<k2>vipad<h>2
2. {%vi-pad, t,%}¦ f. going wrongly, calamity, adversity,
distress, misfortune; death. {%—Vipat-kāla, as,%} m. a
time of calamity, season of misfortune, adversity,
{%—Vipat-phala, as, ā, am,%} resulting in misfortunes,
calamitous in result. {%—Vipat-sāgara, as,%} m. an
ocean of misfortunes, heavy calamity. {%—Vipad-ud-%}
{%dharaṇa, am,%} n. or {%vipad-uddhāra, as,%} m. extri-
cation from misfortune. {%—Vipad-grasta, as, ā, am,%}
seized or devoured by misfortune, overtaken by or
involved in calamity. {%—Vipad-daśā,%} f. a state of
misfortune, calamitous condition. {%—Vipad-yukta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} attended with misfortune, unhappy, un-
fortunate. {%—Vipad-rahita, as, ā, am,%} free from
misfortune, prosperous.
<LEND>

<L>43192<pc>0927-a<k1>vipadA<k2>vipadA
{%Vi-padā,%}¦ f. misfortune, adversity, calamity, distress.
<LEND>

<L>43193<pc>0927-a<k1>vipanna<k2>vipanna
{%Vi-panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone wrong, fallen into
adversity or misfortune, unfortunate, afflicted, dis-
tressed; declined, failed; disabled, incapacitated;
lost, destroyed, annihilated; dead, defunct; ({%as%}), m.
a snake. {%—Vipannāpatya (˚na-ap˚), ā,%} f. a woman
who has lost a child by abortion.
<LEND>

<L>43194<pc>0927-a<k1>vipannaka<k2>vipannaka
{%Vipannaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfortunate; dead; de-
stroyed.
<LEND>

<L>43195<pc>0927-a<k1>vipAdana<k2>vipAdana
{%Vi-pādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of destroying, destroy-
ing, killing, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>43196<pc>0927-a<k1>vipAdanIya<k2>vipAdanIya
{%Vi-pādanīya%}¦ or {%vi-pādayitavya%} or {%vi-pādya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} proper to be destroyed, fit to be killed,
destructible.
<LEND>

<L>43197<pc>0927-a<k1>vipAdita<k2>vipAdita
{%Vi-pādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroyed, killed.
<LEND>

<L>43198<pc>0927-a<k1>vipanya<k2>vipanya
{#vipanya#}¦ {%vi-panya%} (probably fr. {%vipanyā%}
below), Nom. A. {%-panyate,%} &c., Ved. to praise in
various ways, praise, (Sāy. {%= vividhaṃ stu.%})
<LEND>

<L>43199<pc>0927-a<k1>vipanyA<k2>vipanyA
{%Vipanyā,%}¦ f., Ved. desire of praising; praise.
<LEND>

<L>43200<pc>0927-a<k1>vipanyu<k2>vipanyu
{%Vipanyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desirous of praising,
wishing to praise, diligent in praise, singing praises,
praising, (Sāy. {%= stotṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>43201<pc>0927-a<k1>vipayas<k2>vipayas
{#vipayas#}¦ {%vi-payas, ās, ās, as,%} waterless,
destitute of water.
<LEND>

<L>43202<pc>0927-a<k1>viparikram<k2>viparikram
{#viparikram#}¦ {%vi-pari-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krā-%}
{%mati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to step or walk round
or on all sides, go round, circumambulate.
<LEND>

<L>43203<pc>0927-a<k1>viparikrAnta<k2>viparikrAnta
{%Vi-parikrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has shown
valour (in battle), courageous, powerful.
<LEND>

<L>43204<pc>0927-a<k1>viparikrAmam<k2>viparikrAmam
{%Vi-parikrāmam,%}¦ ind., Ved. having walked round,
going all about.
<LEND>

<L>43205<pc>0927-a<k1>viparigA<k2>viparigA
{#viparigA#}¦ {%vi-pari-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gā-%}
{%tum,%} to go over, be overturned or upset (as a cart).
<LEND>

<L>43206<pc>0927-a<k1>viparicCid<k2>viparicCid
{#viparicCid#}¦ {%vi-pari-cchid (-chid),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-cchinatti, -cchintte, -cchettum,%} to cut on all sides,
cut round, cut to pieces, cut off, destroy utterly.
<LEND>

<L>43207<pc>0927-a<k1>viparicCinna<k2>viparicCinna
{%Vi-paricchinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut on all sides, cut
to pieces, cut off, utterly destroyed. {%—Viparicchinna-%}
{%mūla, as, ā, am,%} having the roots cut completely
round or off, entirely uprooted.
<LEND>

<L>43208<pc>0927-a<k1>vipariRam<k2>vipariRam
{#vipariRam#}¦ {%vi-pari-ṇam (-nam),%} Pass. {%-ṇam-%}
{%yate,%} to be changed into; to undergo change or
alteration.
<LEND>

<L>43209<pc>0927-a<k1>vipariRamana<k2>vipariRamana
{%Vi-pariṇamana, am,%}¦ n. changing, alteration, un-
dergoing change or alterations.
<LEND>

<L>43210<pc>0927-a<k1>vipariRAma<k2>vipariRAma
{%Vi-pariṇāma, as,%}¦ m. change of state or form,
transformation, change, alteration.
<LEND>

<L>43211<pc>0927-a<k1>vipariRAmin<k2>vipariRAmin
{%Vi-pariṇāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ undergoing or producing
change of state or form.
<LEND>

<L>43212<pc>0927-a<k1>viparitap<k2>viparitap
{#viparitap#}¦ {%vi-pari-tap,%} cl. 4. A. or Pass.
{%-tapyate,%} to be greatly distressed, suffer great pain.
<LEND>

<L>43213<pc>0927-a<k1>vipariDA<k2>vipariDA
{#vipariDA#}¦ {%vi-pari-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to exchange, change, alter.
<LEND>

<L>43214<pc>0927-a<k1>vipariDAya<k2>vipariDAya
{%Vi-paridhāya,%}¦ ind. having changed, having
changed a dress.
<LEND>
[Page0927-b+ 77]

<L>43215<pc>0927-b<k1>vipariDAv<k2>vipariDAv
{#vipariDAv#}¦ {%vi-pari-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhā-%}
{%vati, -te, -dhāvitum,%} to run about, run in all direc-
tions; to run through, overrun.
<LEND>

<L>43216<pc>0927-b<k1>viparimuc<k2>viparimuc
{#viparimuc#}¦ {%vi-pari-muc,%} Pass. {%-mucyate,%} to
be freed from, be released from.
<LEND>

<L>43217<pc>0927-b<k1>viparimlE<k2>viparimlE
{#viparimlE#}¦ {%vi-pari-mlai,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-mlāyati,%}
{%-te, -mlātum,%} to fade or wither away entirely.
<LEND>

<L>43218<pc>0927-b<k1>viparimlAna<k2>viparimlAna
{%Vi-parimlāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely faded, com-
pletely withered.
<LEND>

<L>43219<pc>0927-b<k1>viparilup<k2>viparilup
{#viparilup#}¦ {%vi-pari-lup,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-lum-%}
{%pati, -te, -loptum,%} to break to pieces or destroy
utterly, break up, annihilate.
<LEND>

<L>43220<pc>0927-b<k1>viparilupta<k2>viparilupta
{%Vi-parilupta, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken or destroyed
utterly, broken up.
<LEND>

<L>43221<pc>0927-b<k1>viparilopa<k2>viparilopa
{%Vi-parilopa, as,%}¦ m. breaking or destroying utterly.
<LEND>

<L>43222<pc>0927-b<k1>viparivft<k2>viparivft
{#viparivft#}¦ {%vi-pari-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
&c., {%-vartitum,%} to turn round, revolve, move in a
circle; to roll about; to go to and fro, wander all
round, wander about; to turn round or back, return;
to be changed or altered; to surround, attend upon
(with acc.): Caus. {%-vartayati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause
to turn round or revolve.
<LEND>

<L>43223<pc>0927-b<k1>viparivartana<k2>viparivartana
{%Vi-parivartana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to turn round,
causing to return; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%vidyā,%} a magical
knowledge producing the return of any one; ({%am%}),
n. turning about, turning away from or back.
<LEND>

<L>43224<pc>0927-b<k1>viparivartamAna<k2>viparivartamAna
{%Vi-parivartamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ wandering or
roaming about.
<LEND>

<L>43225<pc>0927-b<k1>viparivartita<k2>viparivartita
{%Vi-parivartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned away from or
back, reverted, averted.
<LEND>

<L>43226<pc>0927-b<k1>viparivartya<k2>viparivartya
{%Vi-parivartya,%}¦ ind. having turned round, having
turned away.
<LEND>

<L>43227<pc>0927-b<k1>viparivftti<k2>viparivftti
{%Vi-parivṛtti, is,%}¦ f. turning round, revolution.
<LEND>

<L>43228<pc>0927-b<k1>viparI<k2>viparI
{#viparI#}¦ {%vi-parī (-pari-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-pary-eti,%}
{%-etum,%} to go or turn round in an opposite direction;
to turn round the wrong way; to go round, return.
<LEND>

<L>43229<pc>0927-b<k1>viparIta<k2>viparIta
{%Vi-parīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned round, turned the
wrong way, reversed, inverted, inverse, converse,
opposite, adverse, perverse, contrary, repugnant; con-
trary to what is right, wrong, contrary to rule, incor-
rect; being the reverse of anything (abl.); being in
altered or changed circumstances; acting in an oppo-
site manner, having a contrary disposition, going
asunder or in opposite directions, different; cross;
disagreeable; inauspicious, unfavourable; ({%ā%}), f. a
perverse woman; a disloyal or unchaste wife. {%—Vi-%}
{%parīta-kara, as, ī, am,%} or {%viparīta-kārin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} or {%viparīta-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} acting in a con-
trary manner, perverse, contradictory. {%—Viparīta-%}
{%krīḍā,%} f., N. of the 125th chapter of the Śārṅga-
dhara-paddhati. {%—Viparīta-gati, is, is, i,%} going
backwards, going in a contrary or reverse direction;
({%is%}), f. inverse or reverse motion. {%—Viparīta-cetas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} contrary-minded, having a perverted mind
or impaired mental faculties. {%—Viparīta-tā,%} f. or
{%viparīta-tva, am,%} n. contrariety, inversion, per-
verseness, reverse or opposite state or condition;
counterpart. {%—Viparīta-pathyā,%} f. a sort of metre.
{%—Viparīta-bodha, as, ā, am,%} having a perverted
understanding or intellect. {%—Viparīta-rata, am,%} n.
inverted sexual intercourse. {%—Viparīta-lakṣaṇā,%} f.
ironical description of an object by mentioning its
contrary properties. {%—Viparīta-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} act-
ing or behaving in a contrary manner. {%—Viparītā-%}
{%khyānakī (˚ta-ākh˚),%} f. a sort of metre. {%—Viparī-%}
{%tāyana (˚ta-ay˚), am,%} n. a contrary Ayana or
progress of the sun from solstice to solstice. {%—Vipa-%}
{%rītāyana-gata, as, ā, am,%} (in astronomy) situated
in contrary Ayanas.
<LEND>

<L>43230<pc>0927-b<k1>viparyaya<k2>viparyaya
{%Vi-paryaya, as,%}¦ m. reverse, inversion, contra-
riety, ({%viparyaye,%} on the contrary; {%rātrer vipar-%}
{%yayaḥ,%} the contrary of night, i. e. day); inverted
order or succession, perverseness, obstruction, opposi-
tion; change, interchange, exchange, barter, ({%dra-%}
{%vya-v˚,%} exchange of goods, buying and selling, trade);
morbid change, reverse of fortune, calamity, mis-
fortune, adverse fate; error, transgression, trespass;
[Page0927-c+ 71]
misapprehension, mistake, failure of conception; per-
verseness of disposition; change of purpose or conduct,
enmity, hostility; overthrow, destruction, annihilation.
<LEND>

<L>43231<pc>0927-c<k1>viparyAya<k2>viparyAya
{%Vi-paryāya, as,%}¦ m. {%= vi-paryaya,%} reverse, con-
trariety, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43232<pc>0927-c<k1>vipare<k2>vipare
{#vipare#}¦ {%vi-pare (-parā-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-paraiti,%}
{%-paraitum,%} Ved. to go back again, return.
<LEND>

<L>43233<pc>0927-c<k1>viparRaka<k2>viparRaka
{#viparRaka#}¦ {%vi-parṇaka, as,%} m. the Palāśa tree,
Butea Frondosa.
<LEND>

<L>43234<pc>0927-c<k1>viparyas<k2>viparyas
{#viparyas#}¦ {%vi-pary-as (-pari-as),%} cl. 4. A.
{%-asyate, -asitum,%} to throw or turn over, overturn,
turn the wrong way, reverse, invert; to change
about, interchange, exchange.
<LEND>

<L>43235<pc>0927-c<k1>viparyasta<k2>viparyasta
{%Vi-paryasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reversed, inverted, re-
verse, opposite, contrary; interchanged, inverted (in
grammar); erroneously conceived to be real. {%—Vi-%}
{%paryasta-putrā,%} f. a woman bearing no male chil-
dren. {%—Viparyasta-manaś-ceṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing mind and actions perverted or inverted.
<LEND>

<L>43236<pc>0927-c<k1>viparyasya<k2>viparyasya
{%Vi-paryasya,%}¦ ind. having turned over, having
inverted, having changed or exchanged.
<LEND>

<L>43237<pc>0927-c<k1>viparyAsa<k2>viparyAsa
{%Vi-paryāsa, as,%}¦ m. reverse, contrariety, opposi-
tion; interchange [cf. {%vi-paryaya%}]; error, mistake,
delusion, imagining what is unreal or false to be real
or true, error, mistake; ({%am%}), ind., Ved. alternately.
<LEND>

<L>43238<pc>0927-c<k1>viparyAvft<k2>viparyAvft
{#viparyAvft#}¦ {%vi-pary-ā-vṛt (-pari-ā-vṛt),%} cl.
1. A. {%-vartate,%} &c., to be turned back: Caus. {%-var-%}
{%tayati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to turn away from,
cause to be overturned.
<LEND>

<L>43239<pc>0927-c<k1>viparyUh<k2>viparyUh
{#viparyUh#}¦ {%vi-pary-ūh (-pari-ūh),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-ūhati, -ūhitum,%} Ved. to place or fix separately.
<LEND>

<L>43240<pc>0927-c<k1>viparva<k2>viparva
{#viparva#}¦ {%vi-parva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. dismem-
bered, mutilated, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I.
187, 1 {%= vicchinna-sandhika.%})
<LEND>

<L>43241<pc>0927-c<k1>vipala<k2>vipala
{#vipala#}¦ {%vi-pala, am,%} n. a moment, instant
(= a Pala or second or, according to some, (1/6)th of it);
a simple breathing (or, according to some, (1/10)th
of it).
<LEND>

<L>43242<pc>0927-c<k1>vipalAy<k2>vipalAy
{#vipalAy#}¦ {%vi-palāy%} (fr. rt. {%ay%} = rt. 5. {%i%} with
{%palā%} for {%parā%} and {%vi%}), cl. 1. A. {%-palāyate, -yitum,%}
to run away in different directions.
<LEND>

<L>43243<pc>0927-c<k1>vipalAyana<k2>vipalAyana
{%Vi-palāyana, am,%}¦ n. running away, flying in
different directions.
<LEND>

<L>43244<pc>0927-c<k1>vipalAyita<k2>vipalAyita
{%Vi-palāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ run away, running away,
routed, put to flight.
<LEND>

<L>43245<pc>0927-c<k1>vipalyaNg<k2>vipalyaNg
{#vipalyaNg#}¦ {%vi-paly-aṅg (-pari-aṅg),%} Caus.
{%-aṅgayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to envelop, surround.
<LEND>

<L>43246<pc>0927-c<k1>vipalyay<k2>vipalyay
{#vipalyay#}¦ {%vi-paly-ay%} (fr. rt. {%ay%} = rt. 5. {%i%}
with {%pali%} for {%pari%} and {%vi%}), cl. 1. A. {%-palyayate,%}
&c., Ved. to go back, turn round, return.
<LEND>

<L>43247<pc>0927-c<k1>vipavya<k2>vipavya
{#vipavya#}¦ {%vi-pavya.%} See under {%vi-pū,%} P. 928.
<LEND>

<L>43248<pc>0927-c<k1>vipaSin<k2>vipaSin
{#vipaSin#}¦ {%vi-paśin, ī,%} m. (probably fr. rt.
1. {%paś%} with {%vi%}), a Buddhist saint, the first of the
seven principal Buddhas.
<LEND>

<L>43249<pc>0927-c<k1>vipaSya<k2>vipaSya
{%Vi-paśya, am,%}¦ n. knowledge (?).
<LEND>

<L>43250<pc>0927-c<k1>vipaScit<k2>vipaScit
{#vipaScit#}¦ {%vipaś-cit.%} See under 2. {%vip.%}
<LEND>

<L>43251<pc>0927-c<k1>vipA<k2>vipA
{#vipA#}¦ {%vi-pā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-pibati,%} &c., {%-pātum,%}
to drink at different times; to drink up.
<LEND>

<L>43252<pc>0927-c<k1>vipipAna<k2>vipipAna
{%Vi-pipāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. drinking much or
variously; drinking especially, (Sāy. {%= viśeṣeṇa%}
{%pibat,%} Ṛg-veda I. 112, 15; {%= vipīta-vat%} or {%vi-%}
{%pibat,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 22, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>43253<pc>0927-c<k1>vipIta<k2>vipIta
{%Vi-pīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ drunk up. {%—Vipīta-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} one who has drunk up.
<LEND>

<L>43254<pc>0927-c<k1>vipAka<k2>vipAka
{#vipAka#}¦ {%vi-pāka.%} See under {%vi-pac.%}
<LEND>

<L>43255<pc>0927-c<k1>vipAwana<k2>vipAwana
{#vipAwana#}¦ {%vi-pāṭana.%} See under {%vi-paṭ.%}
<LEND>

<L>43256<pc>0927-c<k1>vipAwala<k2>vipAwala
{#vipAwala#}¦ {%vi-pāṭala, as, ā, am,%} pale-red.
<LEND>

<L>43257<pc>0927-c<k1>vipAWa<k2>vipAWa
{#vipAWa#}¦ {%vipāṭha, as,%} m. (perhaps for {%vi-%}
{%pāṭa,%} fr. rt. {%paṭ%}), a kind of large arrow (described
by the commentator on the Mahā-bhārata as {%viśālo%}
{%vaiśākhī-mukha-vat%}).
<LEND>
[Page0928-a+ 74]

<L>43258<pc>0928-a<k1>vipARqu<k2>vipARqu
{#vipARqu#}¦ {%vi-pāṇḍu, us, us, u,%} pale, pallid
(Kirāt. IV. 24), painted with different yellow colours.
<LEND>

<L>43259<pc>0928-a<k1>vipARqura<k2>vipARqura
{%Vi-pāṇḍura, as, ā, am,%}¦ pale, pallid, white.
<LEND>

<L>43260<pc>0928-a<k1>vipAdikA<k2>vipAdikA
{#vipAdikA#}¦ {%vi-pādikā,%} f. (fr. {%pāda%} with {%vi%}),
a disease of the foot, a sore or tumour on the foot;
a riddle, enigma.
<LEND>

<L>43261<pc>0928-a<k1>vipApA<k2>vipApA
{#vipApA#}¦ {%vi-pāpā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>43262<pc>0928-a<k1>vipAla<k2>vipAla
{#vipAla#}¦ {%vi-pāla, as, ā, am,%} having no keeper
or attendant, unguarded, unattended.
<LEND>

<L>43263<pc>0928-a<k1>vipAS<k2>vipAS
{#vipAS#}¦ {%vi-pāś, ṭ,%} f. (according to Sāy. fr.
rt. {%paṭ%} or rt. {%paś%}), the Vipāś or Vipāśā river, (see
below.) {%—Vipāṭ-chutudrī,%} f. du. the rivers Vipāś and
Śutudrī, (in Ṛg-veda III. 33. is a dialogue between
Viśvā-mitra and these two rivers.)
<LEND>

<L>43264<pc>0928-a<k1>vipASa<k2>vipASa
{%Vi-pāśa, as, ā, am,%}¦ unnoosed, uncorded, unfast-
ened, untied, unfettered, freed from a noose, devoid
of fastenings or ties; ({%ā%}), f. the Vipāśā or Beas
river, one of the five rivers of the Pañjāb (said to
be so called as having destroyed the cord which the
Muni Vasiṣṭha had tied round his neck when about
to hang himself through grief for the death of his
son slain by Viśvā-mitra; this river is considered
to be indentical with the Hyphasis of Arrian, the
Greek name being a corruption of Bipasha; it rises
in the Himālaya, and after a course of about 220
miles joins the Sutlej south-east of Amritsar).
<LEND>

<L>43265<pc>0928-a<k1>vipASin<k2>vipASin
{%Vi-pāśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. without fastenings, with
unloosed or dissevered fastenings or cords.
<LEND>

<L>43266<pc>0928-a<k1>vipina<k2>vipina
{#vipina#}¦ {%vipina, am,%} n. (according to Uṇā-
di-s. II. 52. fr. rt. {%vep%}), a wood, forest, thicket, grove.
{%—Vipina-tilaka,%} a species of metre.
<LEND>

<L>43267<pc>0928-a<k1>vipinAya<k2>vipinAya
{%Vipināya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vipināyate,%} &c., to be like
a wood or thicket.
<LEND>

<L>43268<pc>0928-a<k1>vipula<k2>vipula
{#vipula#}¦ {%vi-pula, as, ā, am%} (see rt. {%pul%}),
large, great, extensive, broad, wide, spacious, roomy,
capacious; abundant; deep, profound; ({%as%}), m. the
mountain Meru (or the western branch of it); the
Himālaya mountain; a respectable man; N. of a
pupil of Deva-śarman (who guarded the virtue of
Ruci, his preceptor's wife, when tempted by Indra
during her husband's absence); ({%ā%}), f. the earth;
N. of Dākṣāyaṇī in Vipula; a form of the Āryā
metre in which the line is irregularly divided by the
cesura or pause, (three species of this form are rec-
koned, viz. Ādi-vipulā, having the pause in the first
line; Antya-vipulā, having it in the second; Ubhaya-
vipulā, having it in both lines.) {%—Vipula-cchāya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having ample shade, shady, umbrageous.
{%—Vipula-jaghanā,%} f. a woman with large hips.
{%—Vipula-tā,%} f. or {%vipula-tva, am,%} n. largeness,
greatness, magnitude, extent, width, spaciousness.
{%—Vipula-mati, is, is, i,%} endowed with great un-
derstanding. {%—Vipula-rasa, as,%} m. ‘having abun-
dant juice,’ the sugar-cane. {%—Vipula-vrata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who practises great devotion. {%—Vipula-%}
{%śroṇī,%} f. (a woman) having swelling hips, round-
limbed. {%—Vipulāyatākṣa (˚la-āy˚, ˚ta-ak˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having large and long eyes. {%—Vipulekṣaṇa%}
{%(˚la-ik˚), as, ī, am,%} large-eyed. {%—Vipuloraska%}
{%(˚la-ur˚), as, ā, am,%} broad-chested.
<LEND>

<L>43269<pc>0928-a<k1>vipulaka<k2>vipulaka
{#vipulaka#}¦ {%vi-pulaka, as, ī, am,%} free from
erection of the hair, devoid of horripilation.
<LEND>

<L>43270<pc>0928-a<k1>vipulina<k2>vipulina
{#vipulina#}¦ {%vi-pulina, as, ā, am,%} without
islands, having no islands or sandbanks.
<LEND>

<L>43271<pc>0928-a<k1>vipuzwa<k2>vipuzwa
{#vipuzwa#}¦ {%vi-puṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} ill-fed, under-
fed; [cf. {%puṣṭa-vipuṣṭau.%}]
<LEND>

<L>43272<pc>0928-a<k1>vipU<k2>vipU
{#vipU#}¦ {%vi-pū,%} cl. 9. P. {%-punāti, -pavitum,%} to
cleanse thoroughly, purify effectually.
<LEND>

<L>43273<pc>0928-a<k1>vipavya<k2>vipavya
{%Vi-pavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cleansed or purified.
<LEND>

<L>43274<pc>0928-a<k1>vipUya<k2>vipUya<h>1
1. {%vi-pūya, as,%}¦ m. the Muñja grass, Saccharum
Munja (so called from being cleaned before being
made into ropes).
<LEND>

<L>43275<pc>0928-a<k1>vipUya<k2>vipUya<h>2
2. {%vi-pūya,%}¦ ind., Ved. having purified, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43276<pc>0928-a<k1>vipfkvat<k2>vipfkvat
{#vipfkvat#}¦ {%vipṛkvat%} [cf. rt. 1. {%pṛc%}], Ved. {%= %}
[Page0928-b+ 72]
{%sarvato vyāptam,%} that which is everywhere diffused,
(Ṛg-veda V. 2, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>43277<pc>0928-b<k1>vipfc<k2>vipfc
{#vipfc#}¦ {%vi-pṛc, k,%} f. (see rt. 1. {%pṛc%}), Ved.
disuniting, expelling, driving away, (Sāy. {%= pṛthak-%}
{%karaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>43278<pc>0928-b<k1>vipfcCam<k2>vipfcCam
{#vipfcCam#}¦ {%vi-pṛccham,%} ind. to ask, to make
various inquiries, (Sāy. {%= vividham praṣṭum,%}
Ṛg-veda VII. 86, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>43279<pc>0928-b<k1>vipfTa<k2>vipfTa
{#vipfTa#}¦ {%vi-pṛtha, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Citraka.
<LEND>

<L>43280<pc>0928-b<k1>vipfTu<k2>vipfTu
{#vipfTu#}¦ {%vi-pṛthu, us,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>43281<pc>0928-b<k1>vipoDA<k2>vipoDA
{#vipoDA#}¦ {%vipo-dhā.%} See under 2. {%vip.%}
<LEND>

<L>43282<pc>0928-b<k1>vipra<k2>vipra
{#vipra#}¦ {%vipra, vipra-kanyā,%} &c. See p. 926,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>43283<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakf<k2>viprakf
{#viprakf#}¦ {%vi-pra-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -ku-%}
{%rute, -kartum,%} to treat with disrespect, hurt, injure;
to offend, disturb, oppress.
<LEND>

<L>43284<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakAra<k2>viprakAra
{%Vi-prakāra, as,%}¦ m. treating with disrespect, in-
jury, offence; contumely, abuse; opposition, coun-
teraction; retaliation; wickedness; various manner.
<LEND>

<L>43285<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakArin<k2>viprakArin
{%Vi-prakārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ treating with contempt,
opposing, opposed to, retaliating.
<LEND>

<L>43286<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakfta<k2>viprakfta
{%Vi-prakṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ treated with disrespect
or contempt, injured, offended, oppressed; reviled,
abused; opposed, counteracted; retaliated, requited.
<LEND>

<L>43287<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakfti<k2>viprakfti
{%Vi-prakṛti, is,%}¦ f. injury, offence; abuse, con-
tumely; retort, retaliation.
<LEND>

<L>43288<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakfz<k2>viprakfz
{#viprakfz#}¦ {%vi-pra-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-karṣati,%}
{%-karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to draw apart, draw away,
draw out.
<LEND>

<L>43289<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakarza<k2>viprakarza
{%Vi-prakarṣa, as,%}¦ m. distance, remoteness.
<LEND>

<L>43290<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakfzwa<k2>viprakfzwa
{%Vi-prakṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn or removed
away, drawn out, extended, protracted, lengthened;
remote, distant; carried away, carried off; ({%am%}),
ind. far, far away. {%—Viprakṛṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. re-
moteness, distance.
<LEND>

<L>43291<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakfzwaka<k2>viprakfzwaka
{%Vi-prakṛṣṭaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ remote, distant.
<LEND>

<L>43292<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakF<k2>viprakF
{#viprakF#}¦ {%vi-pra-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -kari-%}
{%tum%} or {%-karītum,%} to scatter or throw about, spread
abroad.
<LEND>

<L>43293<pc>0928-b<k1>viprakIrRa<k2>viprakIrRa
{%Vi-prakīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown about, scattered
or spread abroad, dispersed; dishevelled, loose;
dashed to pieces; outstretched, expanded, wide,
broad. {%—Viprakīrṇa-śiroruha, as, ā, am,%} having
dishevelled or flowing hair.
<LEND>

<L>43294<pc>0928-b<k1>vipragam<k2>vipragam
{#vipragam#}¦ {%vi-pra-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go apart or asunder, be dispersed or
scattered.
<LEND>

<L>43295<pc>0928-b<k1>vipracitti<k2>vipracitti
{#vipracitti#}¦ {%vipracitti, is,%} m., N. of a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>43296<pc>0928-b<k1>vipracint<k2>vipracint
{#vipracint#}¦ {%vi-pra-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cintayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to meditate or reflect on, think about.
<LEND>

<L>43297<pc>0928-b<k1>vipracintya<k2>vipracintya
{%Vi-pracintya,%}¦ having reflected on, having thought
about.
<LEND>

<L>43298<pc>0928-b<k1>vipraRaS<k2>vipraRaS
{#vipraRaS#}¦ {%vi-pra-ṇaś (-naś),%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-ṇa-%}
{%śati, -ṇaśyati, -naṃṣṭum, -naṣṭum%} (see 2. {%pra-%}
{%ṇaś%}), to be lost, disappear; to have no effect or result,
bear no fruit: Caus. {%-ṇāśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
be lost.
<LEND>

<L>43299<pc>0928-b<k1>vipranazwa<k2>vipranazwa
{%Vi-pranaṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (not {%vi-praṇaṣṭa,%} see
2. {%pra-ṇaś;%} cf. Pāṇ. VIII. 4, 36), lost, disappeared,
vanished; vain, fruitless. {%—Vipranaṣṭa-viśeṣaka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has lost his discriminative faculty.
<LEND>

<L>43300<pc>0928-b<k1>vipratikf<k2>vipratikf
{#vipratikf#}¦ {%vi-prati-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c.,
to counteract, oppose.
<LEND>

<L>43301<pc>0928-b<k1>vipratikAra<k2>vipratikAra
{%Vi-pratikāra, as,%}¦ m. counteraction, opposition,
contradiction, reverse; retaliation.
<LEND>

<L>43302<pc>0928-b<k1>vipratikfta<k2>vipratikfta
{%Vi-pratikṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ counteracted, opposed;
requited.
<LEND>

<L>43303<pc>0928-b<k1>vipratipad<k2>vipratipad
{#vipratipad#}¦ {%vi-prati-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to go in different or opposite directions, go
hither and thither, turn here and there; to be per-
plexed or confused, be uncertain how to act, waver;
[Page0928-c+ 73]
to differ, be of different opinions or interests, be
mutually opposed.
<LEND>

<L>43304<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratipatti<k2>vipratipatti
{%Vi-pratipatti, is,%}¦ f. going in different or opposite
directions, perplexity, confusion; difference, opposition
(of opinion or interests), mutual contrariety, dis-
crepancy, contest, dispute, contradiction, conflict (of
evidence), dissent, objection (in argument); various
acquirement or acquisition, conversancy; mutual con-
nection or relation.
<LEND>

<L>43305<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratipadya<k2>vipratipadya
{%Vi-pratipadya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be mutually opposed
or contradicted, to be contested; to be variously
acquired.
<LEND>

<L>43306<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratipadyamAna<k2>vipratipadyamAna
{%Vi-pratipadyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being disputed
or contested; being in course of acquirement.
<LEND>

<L>43307<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratipanna<k2>vipratipanna
{%Vi-pratipanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone in different or
opposite directions, perplexed, confused, bewildered;
mutually opposed, opposite, dissentient, being at
variance; contradicted, disputed, contested; con-
versant or acquainted with in various ways; mutually
connected.
<LEND>

<L>43308<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratiBA<k2>vipratiBA
{#vipratiBA#}¦ {%vi-prati-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti,%}
{%-bhātum,%} to appear as, seem.
<LEND>

<L>43309<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratizidDa<k2>vipratizidDa
{#vipratizidDa#}¦ {%vi-pratiṣiddha, as, ā, am%} (fr.
rt. {%sidh%} with {%prati%} and {%vi%}), contradicted, opposed,
prohibited, forbidden.
<LEND>

<L>43310<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratizeDa<k2>vipratizeDa
{%Vi-pratiṣedha, as,%}¦ m. a grammatical term im-
plying that two different operations can be undertaken
according to two different rules (the last mentioned
being then generally regarded as operative {%para-%}
{%vipratiṣedhena,%} ‘by the prohibition of the other’).
<LEND>

<L>43311<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratisAra<k2>vipratisAra
{#vipratisAra#}¦ {%vi-pratisāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sṛ%}
with {%prati%} and {%vi%}), repentance; evil, wickedness,
evil action; hate, enmity, rage, wrath.
<LEND>

<L>43312<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratIsAra<k2>vipratIsAra
{%Vi-pratīsāra, as,%}¦ m. {%= vi-pratisāra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>43313<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratF<k2>vipratF
{#vipratF#}¦ {%vi-pra-tṝ,%} Caus. {%-tārayati, -yitum,%}
to impose upon, deceive, cheat.
<LEND>

<L>43314<pc>0928-c<k1>vipratArita<k2>vipratArita
{%Vi-pratārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ imposed upon, deceived.
<LEND>

<L>43315<pc>0928-c<k1>vipraT<k2>vipraT
{#vipraT#}¦ {%vi-prath,%} cl. 1. A. {%-prathate%} (Ved.
also P. {%-prathati%}), {%-prathitum,%} to spread out, extend
(Ved. P.), to be widely extended, be expanded or
spread abroad: Caus. {%-prathayati, -yitum,%} to spread
out, extend, spread abroad, celebrate; to display,
exhibit.
<LEND>

<L>43316<pc>0928-c<k1>vipraTayat<k2>vipraTayat
{%Vi-prathayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ spreading abroad,
diffusing.
<LEND>

<L>43317<pc>0928-c<k1>vipraTita<k2>vipraTita
{%Vi-prathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread out, spread abroad,
widely diffused or extended.
<LEND>

<L>43318<pc>0928-c<k1>vipradaha<k2>vipradaha
{#vipradaha#}¦ {%vi-pra-daha, as,%} m. (probably fr. rt.
1. {%dah%} with {%pra%} and {%vi%}), dried fruit or roots, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43319<pc>0928-c<k1>vipraduzwa<k2>vipraduzwa
{#vipraduzwa#}¦ {%vi-praduṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (see rt. {%duṣ%}),
very sensual or dissolute, spoiled, vitiated, defiled;
corrupt, bad. {%—Vipraduṣṭa-bhāva, as, ā, am,%}
having a very vicious or sensual disposition, vicious,
sensual, corrupt, bad.
<LEND>

<L>43320<pc>0928-c<k1>vipraduh<k2>vipraduh
{#vipraduh#}¦ {%vi-pra-duh,%} cl. 2. P. {%-dogdhi, -dog-%}
{%dhum,%} Ved. to receive, accept, take, (Sāy. {%vipra-%}
{%duhanti = labhante,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 24, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>43321<pc>0928-c<k1>vipraDAv<k2>vipraDAv
{#vipraDAv#}¦ {%vi-pra-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-te, -dhāvitum,%} to run in different directions, disperse.
<LEND>

<L>43322<pc>0928-c<k1>vipranazwa<k2>vipranazwa
{#vipranazwa#}¦ {%vi-pranaṣṭa.%} See {%vi-pra-ṇaś.%}
<LEND>

<L>43323<pc>0928-c<k1>viprabuD<k2>viprabuD
{#viprabuD#}¦ {%vi-pra-budh,%} cl. 4. A., 1. P. {%-budh-%}
{%yate, -bodhati,%} &c., to awake: Caus. {%-bodhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to awaken, arouse; to admonish, advise,
explain.
<LEND>

<L>43324<pc>0928-c<k1>viprabudDa<k2>viprabudDa
{%Vi-prabuddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ awakened, awake.
<LEND>

<L>43325<pc>0928-c<k1>vipraboDita<k2>vipraboDita
{%Vi-prabodhita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), aroused,
admonished, explained.
<LEND>

<L>43326<pc>0928-c<k1>vipramatta<k2>vipramatta
{#vipramatta#}¦ {%vi-pramatta%} (?), see Kathā-s. 34,
255.
<LEND>

<L>43327<pc>0928-c<k1>vipramuc<k2>vipramuc
{#vipramuc#}¦ {%vi-pra-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati,%}
{%-te, -moktum,%} to loosen, unfasten, take off; to liberate,
release, set free, deliver; to discharge, cast, hurl,
shoot: Pass. {%-mucyate,%} to be liberated or released.
<LEND>
[Page0929-a+ 77]

<L>43328<pc>0929-a<k1>vipramukta<k2>vipramukta
{%Vi-pramukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ set free, loosed, loosened,
let go, escaped, liberated; discharged, shot; free
from, ({%guṇa-v˚,%} free from qualities.) {%—Vipramukta-%}
{%bhaya, as, ā, am,%} removed from danger, free from
fear.
<LEND>

<L>43329<pc>0929-a<k1>vipramucya<k2>vipramucya
{%Vi-pramucya,%}¦ ind. having taken off, having libe-
rated or released, having discharged.
<LEND>

<L>43330<pc>0929-a<k1>vipramocya<k2>vipramocya
{%Vi-pramocya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be liberated or freed
from.
<LEND>

<L>43331<pc>0929-a<k1>vipramuh<k2>vipramuh
{#vipramuh#}¦ {%vi-pra-muh,%} Caus. {%-mohayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to bring into confusion or disorder, render
confused.
<LEND>

<L>43332<pc>0929-a<k1>vipramohita<k2>vipramohita
{%Vi-pramohita, as, ā, am,%}¦ utterly bewildered, in-
fatuated; fascinated.
<LEND>

<L>43333<pc>0929-a<k1>viprayA<k2>viprayA
{#viprayA#}¦ {%vi-pra-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%} to
go asunder, run away in disorder.
<LEND>

<L>43334<pc>0929-a<k1>viprayARa<k2>viprayARa
{%Vi-prayāṇa, am,%}¦ n. going or flying away, flight,
retreat.
<LEND>

<L>43335<pc>0929-a<k1>viprayAta<k2>viprayAta
{%Vi-prayāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone apart or asunder,
fled in all directions, run away in disorder.
<LEND>

<L>43336<pc>0929-a<k1>viprayuj<k2>viprayuj
{#viprayuj#}¦ {%vi-pra-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti,%}
{%-yuṅkte, -yoktum,%} to disunite, separate, dissever,
deprive of (with inst.): Pass. {%-yujyate,%} to be dis-
united, be separated from (with inst.): Caus. {%-yoja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to disunite, cause to be separated from
(with inst.), to deprive of, free from, release from.
<LEND>

<L>43337<pc>0929-a<k1>viprayukta<k2>viprayukta
{%Vi-prayukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ disjoined, disunited, sepa-
rated, severed, divorced; separated from, freed from,
released from (with inst. or at the end of a comp.,
e. g. {%bandhana-v˚,%} freed from fetters); deprived of,
without (e. g. {%maṇi-v˚,%} without jewels); absent from,
away from.
<LEND>

<L>43338<pc>0929-a<k1>viprayujya<k2>viprayujya
{%Vi-prayujya,%}¦ ind. having separated, having de-
prived of.
<LEND>

<L>43339<pc>0929-a<k1>viprayoga<k2>viprayoga
{%Vi-prayoga, as,%}¦ m. disjunction, disunion, dissocia-
tion, severance, separation, divorce, absence, the sepa-
ration of lovers; separation from (with inst. and even
with {%saha,%} e. g. {%priyair%} or {%priyaiḥ saha vipra-%}
{%yogaḥ,%} separation from loved objects); quarrel, disa-
greement; the being fit or deserving.
<LEND>

<L>43340<pc>0929-a<k1>viprayojita<k2>viprayojita
{%Vi-prayojita, as, ā, am,%}¦ separated from, deprived
of, freed or delivered from (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>43341<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralap<k2>vipralap
{#vipralap#}¦ {%vi-pra-lap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-lapati, -lapi-%}
{%tum,%} to discourse or speak about variously, discuss;
to talk idly, prate, prattle, wrangle; to complain,
lament, bewail.
<LEND>

<L>43342<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralapita<k2>vipralapita
{%Vi-pralapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ discussed, debated about.
<LEND>

<L>43343<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralapta<k2>vipralapta
{%Vi-pralapta, am,%}¦ n. discussion, debate, disquisition.
<LEND>

<L>43344<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralApa<k2>vipralApa
{%Vi-pralāpa, as,%}¦ m. talking idly, prattling, prattle,
unmeaning discourse, nonsense, mutual contradiction,
wrangling, quarrelling, quarrel; infraction of a pro-
mise or engagement, deception.
<LEND>

<L>43345<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralaB<k2>vipralaB
{#vipralaB#}¦ {%vi-pra-labh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-labhate%} (ep.
also {%-lambhate%}), {%-labdhum,%} to overreach, deceive,
cheat; to mock, insult, to disregard, violate; to
receive back, regain, recover: Caus. {%-lambhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to mock, insult; to offend against, violate.
<LEND>

<L>43346<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralabDa<k2>vipralabDa
{%Vi-pralabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ cheated, deceived,
tricked; hurt, injured; disappointed; ({%ā%}), f. a female
disappointed by her lover's breaking his appointment,
(one of the incidental characters in a drama.)
<LEND>

<L>43347<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralabDf<k2>vipralabDf
{%Vi-pralabdhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ deceiving; one
who deceives, a deceiver, traitor.
<LEND>

<L>43348<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralamBa<k2>vipralamBa
{%Vi-pralambha, as,%}¦ m. overreaching, deceiving,
tricking, disappointing, deceiving by false assertions
or by not keeping a promise, deception, deceit (in
general); quarrel, disagreement; separation of lovers;
disunion, disjunction.
<LEND>

<L>43349<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralamBaka<k2>vipralamBaka
{%Vi-pralambhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ deceiving, a
deceiver, fallacious. {%—Vipralambha-tva, am,%} n.
deceptiveness, fallaciousness.
<LEND>

<L>43350<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralamBana<k2>vipralamBana
{%Vi-pralambhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of overreaching
or deceiving, deception.
<LEND>

<L>43351<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralamBin<k2>vipralamBin
{%Vi-pralambhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ deceiving, deceptive
fallacious.
<LEND>

<L>43352<pc>0929-a<k1>vipralI<k2>vipralI
{#vipralI#}¦ {%vi-pra-lī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate,%} &c., to
dissolve away, become dissolved; to be dispersed.
<LEND>
[Page0929-b+ 72]

<L>43353<pc>0929-b<k1>vipralaya<k2>vipralaya
{%Vi-pralaya, as,%}¦ m. dissolution, annihilation.
<LEND>

<L>43354<pc>0929-b<k1>vipralIna<k2>vipralIna
{%Vi-pralīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ dispersed or scattered in
all directions (said of a defeated army).
<LEND>

<L>43355<pc>0929-b<k1>vipraluq<k2>vipraluq
{#vipraluq#}¦ {%vi-pra-luḍ,%} Caus. {%-loḍayati, -yitum,%}
to stir about, agitate, disturb, throw into disorder or
confusion, disorder, disarrange, spoil.
<LEND>

<L>43356<pc>0929-b<k1>vipraloqita<k2>vipraloqita
{%Vi-praloḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disarranged, spoiled.
<LEND>

<L>43357<pc>0929-b<k1>vipralup<k2>vipralup
{#vipralup#}¦ {%vi-pra-lup,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-lumpati,%}
{%-te, -loptum,%} to tear away, carry off, snatch away,
rob, plunder; to break in upon, interrupt, disturb,
confound: Pass. {%-lupyate,%} to be robbed or plundered.
<LEND>

<L>43358<pc>0929-b<k1>vipralupta<k2>vipralupta
{%Vi-pralupta, as, ā, am,%}¦ snatched away, carried off,
plundered; broken in upon, interrupted, disturbed.
<LEND>

<L>43359<pc>0929-b<k1>vipralumpaka<k2>vipralumpaka
{%Vi-pralumpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ rapacious, exacting,
avaricious.
<LEND>

<L>43360<pc>0929-b<k1>vipraluB<k2>vipraluB
{#vipraluB#}¦ {%vi-pra-lubh,%} Caus. A. {%-lobhayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to allure, entice, try to lead astray or deceive.
<LEND>

<L>43361<pc>0929-b<k1>vipralU<k2>vipralU
{#vipralU#}¦ {%vi-pra-lū,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-lunāti, -lu-%}
{%nīte, -lavitum,%} to cut off, sever, pluck, gather.
<LEND>

<L>43362<pc>0929-b<k1>vipralUna<k2>vipralUna
{%Vi-pralūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off, plucked off,
gathered.
<LEND>

<L>43363<pc>0929-b<k1>vipravad<k2>vipravad
{#vipravad#}¦ {%vi-pra-vad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vadati, -va-%}
{%date, -vaditum,%} to speak variously, be at variance
with one another, disagree.
<LEND>

<L>43364<pc>0929-b<k1>vipravas<k2>vipravas
{#vipravas#}¦ {%vi-pra-vas%} (see rt. 6. {%vas%}), cl. 1. P.
{%-vasati, -vastum,%} to dwell at a distance, dwell abroad,
be absent: Caus. {%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
dwell away, banish, expel; to take away, remove.
<LEND>

<L>43365<pc>0929-b<k1>vipravasita<k2>vipravasita
{%Vi-pravasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ withdrawn, departed.
<LEND>

<L>43366<pc>0929-b<k1>vipravAsa<k2>vipravAsa
{%Vi-pravāsa, as,%}¦ m. dwelling at a distance, residence
in a foreign country, staying abroad.
<LEND>

<L>43367<pc>0929-b<k1>vipravAsana<k2>vipravAsana
{%Vi-pravāsana, am,%}¦ n. banishment, expulsion;
residence abroad.
<LEND>

<L>43368<pc>0929-b<k1>vipravAsita<k2>vipravAsita
{%Vi-pravāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ banished, removed.
<LEND>

<L>43369<pc>0929-b<k1>viprozita<k2>viprozita
{%Vi-proṣita, as, ā, am (vi-pra-uṣita),%}¦ dwelling
abroad, absent, away from; banished. {%—Viproṣita-%}
{%bhartṛkā,%} f. a woman whose husband or lover is
absent.
<LEND>

<L>43370<pc>0929-b<k1>viprozya<k2>viprozya
{%Vi-proṣya,%}¦ ind. having dwelt abroad, having been
absent, returning after having been absent.
<LEND>

<L>43371<pc>0929-b<k1>vipravyaD<k2>vipravyaD
{#vipravyaD#}¦ {%vi-pra-vyadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-vidhyati,%}
{%-vyaddhum,%} to strike through, strike down.
<LEND>

<L>43372<pc>0929-b<k1>vipravidDa<k2>vipravidDa
{%Vi-praviddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck through, struck.
<LEND>

<L>43373<pc>0929-b<k1>vipraSnikA<k2>vipraSnikA
{#vipraSnikA#}¦ {%vi-praśnikā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%prach%} with
{%vi%}), a female fortune-teller.
<LEND>

<L>43374<pc>0929-b<k1>viprasf<k2>viprasf
{#viprasf#}¦ {%vi-pra-sṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati,%} &c., to
spread, be expanded or extended.
<LEND>

<L>43375<pc>0929-b<k1>viprasTA<k2>viprasTA
{#viprasTA#}¦ {%vi-pra-sthā,%} cl. 1. A. (sometimes
P.) {%-tiṣṭhate (-ti), -sthātum,%} to go away, depart;
to extend, be extended.
<LEND>

<L>43376<pc>0929-b<k1>viprahIRa<k2>viprahIRa
{#viprahIRa#}¦ {%vi-prahīṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%hā%}
with {%pra%} and {%vi%}), deprived of, destitute of.
<LEND>

<L>43377<pc>0929-b<k1>vipriya<k2>vipriya
{#vipriya#}¦ {%vi-priya, as, ā, am,%} unpleasant,
disagreeable, disliked, distasteful, unbeloved; ({%am%}),
n. offence, transgression. {%—Vipriya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
doing what is displeasing, acting unkindly, offensive.
<LEND>

<L>43378<pc>0929-b<k1>vipruta<k2>vipruta
{#vipruta#}¦ {%vi-pruta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= vi-pluta,%}
immersed, submerged; having torn or wounded
limbs, (Sāy. {%= viśliṣṭāvayava.%})
<LEND>

<L>43379<pc>0929-b<k1>vipruz<k2>vipruz
{#vipruz#}¦ {%vi-pruṣ, ṭ,%} f. (also written {%vi-pluṣ,%}
see rts. 1. {%pruṣ, pluṣ%}), a drop of water or other
liquid; a spot, mark, dot. {%—Vipruḍ-ḍhoma, as,%} m.,
Ved. an expiatory offering designed to atone for the
drops of Soma accidentally let fall at a sacrifice. {%—Vi-%}
{%pruṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} filled with drops.
<LEND>

<L>43380<pc>0929-b<k1>vipre<k2>vipre
{#vipre#}¦ {%vi-pre (-pra-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-praiti, -prai-%}
{%tum,%} to go forth in different directions, depart in
different ways; to be dispersed or scattered.
<LEND>

<L>43381<pc>0929-b<k1>vipreta<k2>vipreta
{%Vi-preta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forth, departed.
<LEND>

<L>43382<pc>0929-b<k1>viprekz<k2>viprekz
{#viprekz#}¦ {%vi-prekṣ (-pra-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-prekṣate, -prekṣitum,%} to look here and there,
look on all sides; to regard, consider.
<LEND>
[Page0929-c+ 76]

<L>43383<pc>0929-c<k1>viprozita<k2>viprozita
{#viprozita#}¦ {%vi-proṣita,%} &c. See under {%vi-%}
{%pra-vas,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>43384<pc>0929-c<k1>viplu<k2>viplu
{#viplu#}¦ {%vi-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, -plotum,%} to
swim or float or drift in different directions, float
about, fluctuate, be submerged; to be dispersed or
scattered; to fall into disorder or confusion, become
disarranged or confused; to be lost or ruined, to come
to disgrace or dishonour: Caus. {%-plāvayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to swim or float about, cause to drift hither
and thither; to make known, spread abroad, make
public, divulge; to bring to ruin or calamity; to
perplex, confuse, confound, (in this sense the form
{%vi-plavayati%} is found.)
<LEND>

<L>43385<pc>0929-c<k1>viplava<k2>viplava
{%Vi-plava, as,%}¦ m. floating or drifting about or in
different directions; confusion, perplexity, contra-
riety, opposition, perversity; trouble, disaster, evil,
calamity; sin, wickedness; the rust on a mirror
(Kirāt. II. 26); tumult, rapine, extortion; predatory
or devastating warfare, devastation; affray, scuffle,
disturbance; terrifying an enemy by shouts and
gestures; spreading abroad, divulging, ({%viplavaṃ%}
{%gam,%} to become known.) {%—Viplava-tas,%} ind. in
consequence of misfortune, by reason of disturbance.
<LEND>

<L>43386<pc>0929-c<k1>viplavamAna<k2>viplavamAna
{%Vi-plavamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ floating or drifting
about, falling into disorder.
<LEND>

<L>43387<pc>0929-c<k1>viplAva<k2>viplAva
{%Vi-plāva, as,%}¦ m. causing tumult or disturbance,
devastating; deluging, inundating; a horse's canter
or gallop.
<LEND>

<L>43388<pc>0929-c<k1>viplAvita<k2>viplAvita
{%Vi-plāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to drift or swim about,
turned adrift, floated; spread abroad, divulged.
<LEND>

<L>43389<pc>0929-c<k1>viplAvya<k2>viplAvya
{%Vi-plāvya,%}¦ ind. having caused to swim or float
about; having caused to be deluged or devastated,
having confused or disturbed; having divulged, hav-
ing made public or common, (applied in Manu XI.
198. to the teaching of the Veda to improper persons
or at improper seasons.)
<LEND>

<L>43390<pc>0929-c<k1>vipluta<k2>vipluta
{%Vi-pluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned adrift, confounded,
disturbed, fallen into confusion, scattered, dispersed;
devastated, ravaged; ruined, disgraced, dishonoured,
lost, disappeared; overwhelmed; drowned, deluged,
bathed; obscured, dimmed, disfigured; depraved,
wicked, abandoned, dissolute, addicted to evil prac-
tices, guilty of lewdness or promiscuous intercourse;
contrary, adverse, averse. {%—Vipluta-netra%} or {%vi-%}
{%pluta-locana, as, ā, am,%} having eyes bathed or
dimmed (with tears, joy, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>43391<pc>0929-c<k1>vipluz<k2>vipluz
{#vipluz#}¦ {%vi-pluṣ, ṭ,%} f. (also written {%vi-pruṣ;%}
see rts. {%pluṣ,%} 1. {%pruṣ%}), a drop of any fluid; a
spot, dot.
<LEND>

<L>43392<pc>0929-c<k1>vipsA<k2>vipsA
{#vipsA#}¦ {%vipsā,%} f. {%= vīpsā,%} repetition, suc-
cession.
<LEND>

<L>43393<pc>0929-c<k1>viPal<k2>viPal
{#viPal#}¦ {%vi-phal,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-phalati, -te,%}
{%-phalitum,%} to bear or produce fruit, become fruitful.
<LEND>

<L>43394<pc>0929-c<k1>viPala<k2>viPala
{#viPala#}¦ {%vi-phala, as, ā, am,%} fruitless, use-
less, ineffectual, unmeaning, vain, idle; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of plant or tree ({%= ketakī%}), {%—Viphala-tā,%} f.
or {%viphala-tva, am,%} n. fruitlessness, unprofitableness.
{%—Viphala-preraṇa, as, ā, am,%} flung in vain.
{%—Viphalī-karaṇa, am,%} n. frustrating, foiling, de-
feating; doing anything in vain. {%—Viphalī-kṛ,%} cl.
8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to make fruit-
less or useless, frustrate, foil. {%—Viphalī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} rendered fruitless or ineffectual, frustrated; done
in vain. {%—Viphalīkṛta-yatna, as, ā, am,%} making
fruitless efforts. {%—Viphalī-bhaviṣṇu, us, us, u,%}
becoming or become useless or unprofitable. {%—Vi-%}
{%phalībhaviṣṇu-tā,%} f. or {%viphalībhaviṣṇu-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. unprofitableness. {%—Viphalī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P.
{%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to become useless, be unprofit-
able. {%—Viphalī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become useless.
<LEND>

<L>43395<pc>0929-c<k1>vibanD<k2>vibanD
{#vibanD#}¦ {%vi-bandh,%} cl. 9. P. {%-badhnāti, -band-%}
{%dhum,%} to bind or fasten on different sides, fasten on
both sides, fasten; to stretch out, extend: Intens.
{%-bābadhe,%} Ved. to lavish, bestow liberally, distribute,
(according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 36, 5. {%vi-bāba-%}
{%dhe = vi-badhnāti = dadāti;%} according to others
[Page0930-a+ 78]
the form {%vi-bābadhe%} is assigned to {%vi-bādh%}); to set
free.
<LEND>

<L>43396<pc>0930-a<k1>vibadDa<k2>vibadDa
{%Vi-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound or fastened on different
sides, fastened; entirely stopped, obstructed, consti-
pated.
<LEND>

<L>43397<pc>0930-a<k1>vibaDya<k2>vibaDya
{%Vi-badhya,%}¦ ind. having bound or fastened.
<LEND>

<L>43398<pc>0930-a<k1>vibanDa<k2>vibanDa
{%Vi-bandha, as,%}¦ m. binding, obstruction, constipa-
tion, ischury.
<LEND>

<L>43399<pc>0930-a<k1>vibanDana<k2>vibanDana
{%Vi-bandhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of fastening or bind-
ing on both sides, ({%paraspara-vibandhana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} mutually bound, depending on each other.)
<LEND>

<L>43400<pc>0930-a<k1>vibAD<k2>vibAD
{#vibAD#}¦ {%vi-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate, -bādhi-%}
{%tum,%} to press or drive asunder or in different direc-
tions; to press hard upon, drive away, chase away;
to oppress, molest, harass, torment, persecute, pain,
injure: Intens. {%vi-bābadhe%} (see under {%vi-bandh%}).
<LEND>

<L>43401<pc>0930-a<k1>vibADA<k2>vibADA
{%Vi-bādhā,%}¦ f. pressure, pain, agony, anguish.
<LEND>

<L>43402<pc>0930-a<k1>vibAlya<k2>vibAlya
{#vibAlya#}¦ {%vi-bālya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. passed
beyond a state of youth, in full vigour; swollen (said
of a river).
<LEND>

<L>43403<pc>0930-a<k1>vibuD<k2>vibuD
{#vibuD#}¦ {%vi-budh,%} cl. 4. A. {%-budhyate, -bod-%}
{%dhum,%} to awake (intrans.), be awake or awakened;
to become conscious, perceive, observe, learn, ascer-
tain: Caus. {%-bodhayati, -yitum,%} to awaken; to
cause to perceive or observe, make conscious, restore
to consciousness.
<LEND>

<L>43404<pc>0930-a<k1>vibudDa<k2>vibudDa<h>1
1. {%vi-buddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ wide awake, awakened,
aroused, awake, expanded, blossomed; clever, expe-
rienced, knowing, skilful (e. g. {%karmasu vibud-%}
{%dhaḥ,%} skilful in business). {%—Vibuddha-kamala, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having expanded lotuses.
<LEND>

<L>43405<pc>0930-a<k1>vibudDa<k2>vibudDa<h>2
2. {%vi-buddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ without consciousness,
unconscious.
<LEND>

<L>43406<pc>0930-a<k1>vibuDa<k2>vibuDa
{%Vi-budha, as,%}¦ m. a learned or wise man, teacher,
Paṇḍit; a god, immortal; the moon; N. of the
author of the Janma-pradīpa. {%—Vibudha-priyā,%} f.
‘favourite of the gods,’ N. of a metre. {%—Vibudha-%}
{%vijaya, as,%} m. a victory (won) by the gods. {%—Vi-%}
{%budha-vidviṣ, ṭ,%} or {%vibudha-śatru, us,%} m. a foe
of the gods; a demon. {%—Vibudhādhipati (˚dha-%}
{%adh˚), is,%} or {%vibudheśvara (˚dha-īś˚), as,%} m. the
lord of the immortals.
<LEND>

<L>43407<pc>0930-a<k1>vibuDAna<k2>vibuDAna
{%Vi-budhāna, as,%}¦ m. a wise man, teacher, pre-
ceptor.
<LEND>

<L>43408<pc>0930-a<k1>vibuDya<k2>vibuDya
{%Vi-budhya,%}¦ ind. having become conscious, having
perceived or learnt.
<LEND>

<L>43409<pc>0930-a<k1>viboDa<k2>viboDa<h>1
1. {%vi-bodha, as,%}¦ m. awaking; perceiving, observ-
ing, discovering; intelligence; (in the drama) the
unfolding of the faculties, becoming conscious, awak-
ing, (one of the Vyabhicāra-bhāvas.)
<LEND>

<L>43410<pc>0930-a<k1>viboDa<k2>viboDa<h>2
2. {%vi-bodha, as,%}¦ m. want of consciousness, inat-
tention, absence of mind.
<LEND>

<L>43411<pc>0930-a<k1>viboDana<k2>viboDana
{%Vi-bodhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of awakening, awak-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>43412<pc>0930-a<k1>viboDita<k2>viboDita
{%Vi-bodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ awakened, aroused; caused
to perceive or know, instructed.
<LEND>

<L>43413<pc>0930-a<k1>vibboka<k2>vibboka
{#vibboka#}¦ {%vibboka, as,%} m. (also written {%bib-%}
{%boka, vivvoka,%} q. q. v. v.), (in erotic poetry) affec-
tation of indifference to a beloved object through
pride and conceit.
<LEND>

<L>43414<pc>0930-a<k1>vibrU<k2>vibrU
{#vibrU#}¦ {%vi-brū,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-bravīti, -brūte,%}
&c. (see rt. {%brū%}), to speak out, say, speak, utter;
to speak in detail, particularize, interpret, explain,
declare; to speak of or about (with acc.); to speak
at variance; to say what is false, declare falsely, ex-
plain falsely; to contradict, disagree with, be at vari-
ance with; to dispute, contend about (Ved. A.).
<LEND>

<L>43415<pc>0930-a<k1>vibruvat<k2>vibruvat
{%Vi-bruvat, an, atī%}¦ (ep. {%antī%}), {%at,%} speaking out,
speaking, saying, declaring, particularizing, interpret-
ing; speaking falsely, saying what is untrue or
unjust.
<LEND>

<L>43416<pc>0930-a<k1>vibruvARa<k2>vibruvARa
{%Vi-bruvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking out, saying,
declaring, uttering.
<LEND>

<L>43417<pc>0930-a<k1>viBaj<k2>viBaj
{#viBaj#}¦ {%vi-bhaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bhajati, -te,%}
{%-bhaktum%} (Ved. inf. {%-bhājam%}), to divide, apportion,
distribute, assign; to share together or with each other,
participate in (A.); to take possession of; to separate,
divide, part, cut; to honour, worship: Caus. {%-bhāja- %}
[Page0930-b+ 79]
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to distribute or divide or share,
apportion: Pass. of Caus. {%-bhājyate,%} to be caused
to be divided, be apportioned.
<LEND>

<L>43418<pc>0930-b<k1>viBakta<k2>viBakta
{%Vi-bhakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ divided, portioned, par-
titioned; parted, separated, distinct; different, multi-
farious; retired, secluded, isolated; measured; regu-
lar, symmetrical; ornamented; ({%as%}), m. an epithet
of Kārttikeya; ({%am%}), n. solitude, separatedness;
isolation. {%—Vibhakta-ja, as,%} m. a son born after
the partition of the family property between his
parents and brethren.
<LEND>

<L>43419<pc>0930-b<k1>viBakti<k2>viBakti
{%Vi-bhakti, is,%}¦ f. a division, partition; part, portion,
share of inheritance, &c.; (in grammar) inflection
of nouns, declension, an affix of declension, case;
(according to Pāṇini's system) a termination or in-
flection either of a case or of the persons of a tense,
(certain Taddhita affixes which are used like case-
terminations have also the name {%vi-bhakti.%})
<LEND>

<L>43420<pc>0930-b<k1>viBaktf<k2>viBaktf
{%Vi-bhaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who distributes or
dispenses, a dispenser, distributer.
<LEND>

<L>43421<pc>0930-b<k1>viBajanIya<k2>viBajanIya
{%Vi-bhajanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be apportioned or
partitioned; to be divided, divisible.
<LEND>

<L>43422<pc>0930-b<k1>viBajya<k2>viBajya
{%Vi-bhajya,%}¦ ind. having divided or parted, having
portioned or distributed, having allotted.
<LEND>

<L>43423<pc>0930-b<k1>viBajyamAna<k2>viBajyamAna
{%Vi-bhajyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being divided or
parted; being apportioned.
<LEND>

<L>43424<pc>0930-b<k1>viBAga<k2>viBAga
{%Vi-bhāga, as,%}¦ m. division, separation, disjunction,
(one of the twenty-four Guṇas of the Nyāya); por-
tion, part, share; the share or portion of an inherit-
ance; partition of inheritance, law of inheritance, distri-
bution, apportionment; arrangement; a section, ({%kūr-%}
{%ma-v˚,%} a section of a globe, hemisphere); the numerator
of a fraction (in arithmetic). {%—Vibhāga-kalpanā,%} f.
apportioning or allotment of shares or portions. {%—Vi-%}
{%bhāga-tas,%} ind. according to a part or share, pro-
portionately. {%—Vibhāga-dharma, as,%} m. the law of
division, rule of inheritance. {%—Vibhāga-pattrikā,%} f.
a deed of partition. {%—Vibhāga-bhāj, k,%} m. one who
shares in a portion of property already distributed,
(applied especially to a son by a father and mother
of the same tribe, born subsequently to a distribution
of property amongst his parents and brethren, in which
case he inherits the portion allotted or reserved to
the parents.) {%—Vibhāga-śas,%} ind. according to a
part or share, part by part, share by share, propor-
tionately. {%—Vibhāgecchu (˚ga-ic˚), us, us, u,%} wish-
ing for a partition or distribution.
<LEND>

<L>43425<pc>0930-b<k1>viBAjana<k2>viBAjana
{%Vi-bhājana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to share
or distribute, participation.
<LEND>

<L>43426<pc>0930-b<k1>viBAjita<k2>viBAjita
{%Vi-bhājita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be divided, dis-
tributed, apportioned, partitioned.
<LEND>

<L>43427<pc>0930-b<k1>viBAjya<k2>viBAjya
{%Vi-bhājya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be divided or appor-
tioned, portionable, divisible.
<LEND>

<L>43428<pc>0930-b<k1>viBAjyamAna<k2>viBAjyamAna
{%Vi-bhājyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being caused to be
divided, being distributed or apportioned.
<LEND>

<L>43429<pc>0930-b<k1>viBaYj<k2>viBaYj
{#viBaYj#}¦ {%vi-bhañj,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhanakti, -bhaṅk-%}
{%tum,%} to break asunder, break to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>43430<pc>0930-b<k1>viBagna<k2>viBagna
{%Vi-bhagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken asunder, broken to
pieces, shattered, crushed.
<LEND>

<L>43431<pc>0930-b<k1>viBaNga<k2>viBaNga
{%Vi-bhaṅga, as,%}¦ m. breaking, fracture; division;
stopping, stoppage, obstruction; bending, contracting
(especially of the eyebrows); expression or play of
features.
<LEND>

<L>43432<pc>0930-b<k1>viBaNgin<k2>viBaNgin
{%Vibhaṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wavy, undulating, wrinkled.
<LEND>

<L>43433<pc>0930-b<k1>viBava<k2>viBava
{#viBava#}¦ {%vi-bhava,%} &c. See under 1. {%vi-bhū.%}
<LEND>

<L>43434<pc>0930-b<k1>viBA<k2>viBA<h>1
{#viBA#} 1¦. {%vi-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -bhātum,%}
to shine or gleam forth; to shine brightly, glitter; to
appear as, appear to be, seem; to come to light, be
visible, appear; to lighten up, illuminate, brighten.
<LEND>

<L>43435<pc>0930-b<k1>viBA<k2>viBA<h>2
2. {%vi-bhā,%}¦ f. light, lustre; a ray of light; beauty.
{%—Vibhā-kara, as,%} m. ‘light-maker,’ the sun; fire;
N. of a kind of plant or tree ({%= arka, citraka%}).
{%—Vibhā-vas, ān,%} m. (a doubtful word), the sun (?).
{%—Vibhā-vasu, us, us, u,%} abounding in light, (Sāy.
{%dīpti-rocana%}); ({%us%}), m. the sun, fire; the moon;
a sort of necklace or garland; N. of a Gandharva
(who is said to have stolen the Soma from Gāyatrī
as she was carrying it to the gods). {%—Vibhā-sāh, ṭ,%}
{%ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. splendor-surpassing.
<LEND>
[Page0930-c+ 77]

<L>43436<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAt<k2>viBAt
{%Vi-bhāt, ān, ātī,%}¦ or {%āntī, āt,%} shining, splendid;
({%ātī%}), f. epithet of the dawn.
<LEND>

<L>43437<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAta<k2>viBAta
{%Vi-bhāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, bright, luminous;
({%am%}), n. dawn, day-break.
<LEND>

<L>43438<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAvan<k2>viBAvan
{%Vibhā-van, vā, varī, va,%}¦ Ved. radiant, shining,
resplendent, illuminating, (in Ṛg-veda X. 8, 4. {%vi-%}
{%bhāvā%} is by some translated ‘the divider,’ as if from
{%vi-bhū%}); ({%varī%}), f. the dawn ({%= uṣas,%} Naigh. I.
8); night, (in this sense {%vi%} is probably privative);
turmeric; a harlot, bawd; the shreds of a garment
torn in a scuffle (?).
<LEND>

<L>43439<pc>0930-c<k1>viBARqaka<k2>viBARqaka
{#viBARqaka#}¦ {%vibhāṇḍaka, as,%} m., N. of a
hermit; of a Muni (son of Kaśyapa and father of
Ṛṣya-śṛṅga).
<LEND>

<L>43440<pc>0930-c<k1>viBARqI<k2>viBARqI
{%Vi-bhāṇḍī,%}¦ f. a kind of creeping plant ({%= ā-var-%}
{%takī%}).
<LEND>

<L>43441<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAva<k2>viBAva
{#viBAva#}¦ {%vi-bhāva.%} See p. 931, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>43442<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAz<k2>viBAz
{#viBAz#}¦ {%vi-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate, -bhā-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to speak variously; to speak against, revile,
abuse.
<LEND>

<L>43443<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAzA<k2>viBAzA
{%Vi-bhāṣā,%}¦ f. an alternative, option, one of two
ways; (in grammar) the allowing a rule to be
optional, (it is of two kinds, viz. 1. {%prāpta-v˚%} or
{%prāpte v˚,%} an option allowed in a particular opera-
tion which another rule makes necessary; 2. {%aprāp-%}
{%ta-v˚%} or {%aprāpte v˚,%} an option allowed in a particu-
lar operation which another rule makes impossible.)
<LEND>

<L>43444<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAzita<k2>viBAzita
{%Vi-bhāṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made optional (in gram-
mar).
<LEND>

<L>43445<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAzya<k2>viBAzya
{%Vi-bhāṣya,%}¦ ind. having reviled or abused.
<LEND>

<L>43446<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAs<k2>viBAs
{#viBAs#}¦ {%vi-bhās,%} cl. 1. A. (Ved. also P.)
{%-bhāsate (-bhāsati), -bhāsitum,%} to shine brightly
or pleasantly, be bright: Caus. {%-bhāsayati,%} &c., to
cause to shine, illuminate, brighten.
<LEND>

<L>43447<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAsA<k2>viBAsA
{%Vi-bhāsā,%}¦ f. shining brightly, light, lustre.
<LEND>

<L>43448<pc>0930-c<k1>viBAsita<k2>viBAsita
{%Vi-bhāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made bright, lighted, illu-
minated, shining.
<LEND>

<L>43449<pc>0930-c<k1>viBid<k2>viBid
{#viBid#}¦ {%vi-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhintte, -bhettum,%} to split or break in two, break
in pieces, cleave apart or asunder, cleave, divide,
separate, pierce, open; to loosen, untie; to scatter,
disperse, dispel, drive away, destroy; to disunite,
cause disunion, set at variance, estrange: Pass. {%-bhid-%}
{%yate,%} to burst asunder; to become disunited; to be
set at variance, be estranged or alienated; to change,
become changed: Caus. {%-bhedayati, -yitum,%} to
divide; to alienate, estrange; to dispel, remove.
<LEND>

<L>43450<pc>0930-c<k1>vibiBitsu<k2>vibiBitsu
{%Vi-bibhitsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to break asunder,
purposing to cleave or pierce.
<LEND>

<L>43451<pc>0930-c<k1>viBidya<k2>viBidya
{%Vi-bhidya,%}¦ ind. having split in two, having cut
asunder, having cleaved; having divided or separated,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>43452<pc>0930-c<k1>viBidyamAna<k2>viBidyamAna
{%Vi-bhidyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being broken or
split asunder; being divided or scattered; being
pierced or wounded.
<LEND>

<L>43453<pc>0930-c<k1>viBindu<k2>viBindu
{%Vi-bhindu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. splitting or cleaving
asunder, dissevering, shattering; ({%us%}), m., Ved. a
proper N.
<LEND>

<L>43454<pc>0930-c<k1>viBinna<k2>viBinna
{%Vi-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken or split asunder,
divided, pierced, broken, wounded; scattered, dis-
persed, dispelled, destroyed; bewildered estranged,
alienated, perplexed, deceived; moved to and fro;
disappointed; become faithless; various, different;
mixed, intermixed, mingling (with inst.); ({%as%}), m.
an epithet of Śiva. {%—Vibhinna-tamisra, as, ā, am,%}
having the darkness dispelled. {%—Vibhinna-tā,%} f. or
{%vibhinna-tva, am,%} n. the state of being broken or
split asunder; the state of being scattered, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43455<pc>0930-c<k1>viBettf<k2>viBettf
{%Vi-bhettṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who splits or breaks asun-
der, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>43456<pc>0930-c<k1>viBeda<k2>viBeda
{%Vi-bheda, as,%}¦ m. breaking asunder, dividing,
breaking, division, separation; piercing, wounding;
violating; bewildering, perplexing, confusing; con-
tradiction; enmity, opposition; variety, distinction.
<LEND>

<L>43457<pc>0930-c<k1>viBedana<k2>viBedana
{%Vi-bhedana, am,%}¦ n. the act of splitting or cleaving
asunder; breaking, dividing; separating, setting at
variance.
<LEND>
[Page0931-a+ 78]

<L>43458<pc>0931-a<k1>viBI<k2>viBI<h>1
{#viBI#} 1¦. {%vi-bhī,%} cl. 3. P. {%-bibheti,%} &c., to
be afraid of, fear: Caus. {%-bhīṣayati,%} &c., to
frighten, terrify, intimidate.
<LEND>

<L>43459<pc>0931-a<k1>viBI<k2>viBI<h>2
2. {%vi-bhī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ free from fear.
<LEND>

<L>43460<pc>0931-a<k1>viBIta<k2>viBIta
{%Vi-bhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fearless; ({%as, ā, am%}), m. f. n.
the plant Terminalia Belerica.
<LEND>

<L>43461<pc>0931-a<k1>viBItaka<k2>viBItaka
{%Vibhītaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ m. f. n. the tree Termi-
nalia Belerica.
<LEND>

<L>43462<pc>0931-a<k1>viBIzaka<k2>viBIzaka
{%Vi-bhīṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ frightening, terrifying,
intimidating, threatening, bullying; ({%ikā%}), f. the act
of terrifying, terror; a means of terrifying. {%—Vibhī-%}
{%ṣikā-sthāna, am,%} n. an object or means of terri-
fying.
<LEND>

<L>43463<pc>0931-a<k1>viBIzaRa<k2>viBIzaRa
{%Vi-bhīṣaṇa, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} terrifying, intimi-
dating, terrific, fearful, terrible, formidable, horrible;
bullying or blustering (as language); ({%am, ā%}), n. f.
the act of terrifying, the property of exciting fear, a
means of terrifying, terror; ({%as%}), m., N. of a brother
of Rāvaṇa, (his other brothers were Kuvera [by a
different mother] and Kumbha-karṇa; both Rāvaṇa
and Vibhīṣaṇa are said to have propitiated Brahmā
by their penances, so that the god granted them
both boons, and the boon chosen by Vibhīṣaṇa
was that he should never, even in the greatest cala-
mity, stoop to any mean or wicked action; hence
he is represented in the Rāmāyaṇa as opposing and
endeavouring to counteract the malice of his brother
Rāvaṇa, in consequence of which he was so ill-
treated and insulted by Rāvaṇa that, leaving Laṅkā,
he joined the side of Rāma, by whom, after the
death of Rāvaṇa, Vibhīṣaṇa was placed on the
throne of Laṅkā); N. of several kings, (in later
times Vibhīṣaṇa appears to have been used as a
general name of the kings of Laṅkā.) {%—Vibhīṣaṇa-%}
{%vākya, am,%} n. ‘speech of Vibhīṣaṇa,’ N. of several
chapters in the Sundara-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa.
{%—Vibhīṣaṇābhiṣeka (˚ṇa-abh˚), as,%} m. ‘inau-
guration of Vibhīṣaṇa,’ N. of the ninety-first chapter
of the Sundara-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa (according
to one recension).
<LEND>

<L>43464<pc>0931-a<k1>viBIzayat<k2>viBIzayat
{%Vi-bhīṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ terrifying, causing
terror or alarm.
<LEND>

<L>43465<pc>0931-a<k1>viBIdaka<k2>viBIdaka
{#viBIdaka#}¦ {%vibhīdaka, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of
tree (from the nuts of which dice are made; cf.
{%vi-bhītaka%}); dice, gambling, (Sāy. {%= akṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>43466<pc>0931-a<k1>viBugna<k2>viBugna
{#viBugna#}¦ {%vi-bhugna, as, ā, am%} (rt. 1. {%bhuj%}),
bent, bowed, crooked.
<LEND>

<L>43467<pc>0931-a<k1>viBU<k2>viBU<h>1
{#viBU#} 1¦. {%vi-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bhavati, -te,%}
{%-bhavitum,%} to arise, be produced, become developed,
be manifested, expand, appear; to pervade; to be
equal to, suffice for; to prevail, have power, be
capable of, be able to (with inf.): Caus. {%-bhāvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to arise, cause to be developed or
expand, make manifest, develop, cause to appear
clearly, manifest, reveal, show forth, display; to
cause to be apart, separate; to perceive distinctly,
find out, trace out, discover, ascertain, detect, ob-
serve, know, feel; to recognise; to suppose, fancy,
imagine; to suppose anything (acc.) of or about
any one (loc.); to think about, reflect upon; to
make clear, establish, prove, decide; to convict, con-
vince: Pass. of Caus. {%-bhāvyate,%} to be considered
or regarded as, to appear, seem.
<LEND>

<L>43468<pc>0931-a<k1>viboBuvat<k2>viboBuvat
{%Vi-bobhuvat, at, atī, at%}¦ (fr. the Intens.), Ved.
spreading in every direction.
<LEND>

<L>43469<pc>0931-a<k1>viBava<k2>viBava
{%Vi-bhava, as,%}¦ m. power, might, supreme power,
superhuman power; substance, thing, property,
wealth; magnanimity, lofty-mindedness; emanci-
pation from existence; N. of the thirty-sixth year
of Jupiter's cycle. {%—Vibhava-tas,%} ind. according to
power, according to dignity or majesty; in regal state
or ceremony. {%—Vibhava-mada, as,%} m. the pride
of power. {%—Vibhava-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of
power, wealthy.
<LEND>

<L>43470<pc>0931-a<k1>viBavat<k2>viBavat
{%Vi-bhavat, an, antī, at,%}¦ pervading, prevailing.
<LEND>

<L>43471<pc>0931-a<k1>viBAva<k2>viBAva
{%Vi-bhāva, as,%}¦ m. any condition which excites or
develops a particular state of mind or body, (in
dramatic composition one of the three divisions of
[Page0931-b+ 80]
Bhāvas, the other two being Anu-bhāvas and Sāt-
tvika-bhāvas, see {%bhāva%}); any causative or exciting
property (as dress, perfumes, &c. causing amorous
desire, extravagant gesture causing mirth, distress
causing tenderness, arms and tumult causing wrath
or heroism); a friend, acquaintance.
<LEND>

<L>43472<pc>0931-b<k1>viBAvaka<k2>viBAvaka
{%Vi-bhāvaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to appear clearly,
manifesting, showing, illustrating; discussing.
<LEND>

<L>43473<pc>0931-b<k1>viBAvana<k2>viBAvana
{%Vi-bhāvana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the causing to appear
distinctly, clear perception, distinguishing or perceiv-
ing distinctly, conception, imagination, examination,
discrimination, judgment, clear ascertainment; dis-
cussion; (in rhetoric) description of effects not
arising from the usual causes, peculiar causation; or,
according to some, description by negatives, bring-
ing out the qualities of any object more clearly than
by positive description. {%—Vibhāvanālaṅkāra (˚nā-%}
{%al˚), as,%} m. (in rhetoric) the rhetorical figure de-
scribed above.
<LEND>

<L>43474<pc>0931-b<k1>viBAvanIya<k2>viBAvanIya
{%Vi-bhāvanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ distinguishable, ascer-
tainable, to be judged or determined.
<LEND>

<L>43475<pc>0931-b<k1>viBAvita<k2>viBAvita
{%Vi-bhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to appear clearly,
manifested; proved, established; judged, discrimi-
nated; perceived, ascertained, seen, conceived, known,
understood, convicted, convinced. {%—Vibhāvita-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the state of being perceived or judged.
<LEND>

<L>43476<pc>0931-b<k1>viBAvin<k2>viBAvin
{%Vibhāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ filled with amorous sentiments,
exciting emotion of love, (see {%vi-bhāva,%} col. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>43477<pc>0931-b<k1>viBAvya<k2>viBAvya
{%Vi-bhāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ distinguishable, to be
clearly perceived or seen or observed; remarkable;
to be conceived or imagined.
<LEND>

<L>43478<pc>0931-b<k1>viBu<k2>viBu
{%Vi-bhu, us, us,%}¦ or {%vī, u%} (in Ved. the fem. is
always {%vibhvī,%} Pāṇ. IV. 1, 47), being everywhere,
pervading all material things, developing in all direc-
tions, omnipresent, eternal (Ved.); mighty, very
powerful or great, excellent, eminent, supreme; ca-
pable, able to (with inf., e. g. {%pūrayituṃ vibhuḥ,%}
able to fill); firm, solid, hard; ({%us%}), m. (Ved. acc.
{%vibhvam,%} Ved. nom. pl. {%vibhvas%}), ether; space;
time; the soul; a lord, ruler, sovereign, master,
owner (often used in addressing a superior); N. of
Brahmā; of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of a son of Bhṛgu;
a servant. {%—Vibhu-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved. mighty
in action, effecting much, (Sāy. {%= bahu-karman.%})
{%—Vibhu-tā,%} f. or {%vibhu-tva, am,%} n. might, power,
capacity, supremacy. {%—Vibhu-pramita, am,%} n., Ved.
the hall of Brahmā. {%—Vibhu-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. mighty, powerful. {%—Vibhū-vasu, us, us, u%}
(for {%vibhu-vasu%}), Ved. having mighty treasures or
wealth.
<LEND>

<L>43479<pc>0931-b<k1>viBU<k2>viBU<h>2
2. {%vi-bhū, ūs,%}¦ &c., Ved. expanding, pervading,
epithet of a particular Prāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>43480<pc>0931-b<k1>viBUta<k2>viBUta
{%Vi-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ arisen, produced, developed,
manifested, appeared, displayed; great, mighty.
{%—Vibhūta-dyumna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. abounding
in glory or in food, (Sāy. {%= prabhūta-yaśas%} or
{%prabhūtānna.%}) {%—Vibhūta-rāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. mak-
ing great gifts.
<LEND>

<L>43481<pc>0931-b<k1>viBUti<k2>viBUti
{%Vi-bhūti, is,%}¦ m. great power, might, dominion,
supremacy, dignity; great success, prosperity, wel-
fare; superhuman power (consisting of eight facul-
ties, especially attributed to Śiva, but supposed also
to be attainable by human beings through a course
of austere worship in honour of that deity, viz. {%aṇi-%}
{%man,%} the power of becoming as minute as an atom;
{%laghiman,%} extreme lightness; {%prāpti,%} the power
of attaining or reaching anything, as illustrated by
the power of touching the moon with the tip of
the finger; {%prākāmya,%} irresistible will; {%mahiman,%}
illimitable bulk; {%īśitā,%} supreme dominion; {%vaśitā,%}
the power of subjugating by magic; and {%kāmāva-%}
{%sāyitā,%} the power of suppressing all desires); the
ashes of cow-dung &c. (with which Śiva is said to
smear his body, and hence used in imitation of him
by devotees); ({%is, is, i%}), Ved. very powerful, mighty.
{%—Vibhūti-dvādaśī,%} f., N. of a particular Vrata or
religious observance. {%—Vibhūti-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
powerful, possessed of excellence or dignity, super-
human; smeared with ashes. {%—Vibhūti-yoga, as,%}
m., N. of the sixth canto of the Śiva-gītā.
<LEND>
[Page0931-c+ 79]

<L>43482<pc>0931-c<k1>viBvan<k2>viBvan
{%Vi-bhvan, ā,%}¦ &c., Ved. displayed, developed, dif-
fused; great, mighty; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a son of
Su-dhanvan (brother of Ṛbhu, q. v., regarded as
one of the three Ṛbhus). {%—Vibhva-taṣṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. cut out or fashioned by Vibhvan (said of
the rivers which were supposed to be carved out by
him, as the artificer of Varuṇa); modelled by Vi-
bhvan, very perfect or handsome (according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda V. 58, 4). {%—Vibhvā-sah%} ({%vibhvā%} for
{%vibhva%}), Ved. conquering or overcoming the mighty,
(Sāy. {%= mahato-'bhibhavitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>43483<pc>0931-c<k1>viBUz<k2>viBUz
{#viBUz#}¦ {%vi-bhūṣ,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%-bhūṣati,%}
{%-bhūṣayati, -bhūṣitum, -bhūṣayitum,%} to deco-
rate, adorn; to shine forth, appear, (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 112, 4. {%vibhūṣati%} may {%= vy-%}
{%āpto bhavati,%} the rt. {%bhūṣ%} being sometimes used
in the Veda as another form of rt. 1. {%bhū,%} in the
sense of ‘to obtain, attain.’)
<LEND>

<L>43484<pc>0931-c<k1>viBUzaRa<k2>viBUzaRa
{%Vi-bhūṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. decoration, ornament. {%—Vi-%}
{%bhūṣaṇodbhāsin (˚ṇa-ud˚), ī, inī, i,%} glittering
with ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>43485<pc>0931-c<k1>viBUzA<k2>viBUzA
{%Vi-bhūṣā,%}¦ f. ornament, decoration; light, lustre,
splendor, beauty.
<LEND>

<L>43486<pc>0931-c<k1>viBUzita<k2>viBUzita
{%Vi-bhūṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ adorned, decorated, orna-
mented. {%—Vibhūṣitāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%}
decorated about the body.
<LEND>

<L>43487<pc>0931-c<k1>viBUzin<k2>viBUzin
{%Vi-bhūṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ adorning, decorating;
adorned, decorated.
<LEND>

<L>43488<pc>0931-c<k1>viBUzya<k2>viBUzya
{%Vi-bhūṣya,%}¦ ind. having adorned or decorated.
<LEND>

<L>43489<pc>0931-c<k1>viBf<k2>viBf
{#viBf#}¦ {%vi-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bharati, -te,%} cl.
3. P. A. {%-bibharti, -bibhṛte,%} &c., {%-bhartum,%} to
support; to bear or carry in different directions,
spread out; to distribute, diffuse (A.): Intens. (for
Intensive forms see under rt. {%bhṛ%}), to move to and
fro, wave about, brandish, toss about; to roam or
sport about, (according to Sāy. in this sense for
{%vi-hṛ;%} cf. {%vi-bhṛtra.%})
<LEND>

<L>43490<pc>0931-c<k1>viBfta<k2>viBfta
{%Vi-bhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ upheld, supported, main-
tained, held, retained.
<LEND>

<L>43491<pc>0931-c<k1>viBftra<k2>viBftra
{%Vi-bhṛtra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. borne in various direc-
tions, (Sāy. {%= nānā-sthāneṣu vihṛta%}); employed
in various sacred rites, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda I. 71, 3. {%vi-bhṛtrāḥ = agni-hotrādi-karmaṇi%}
{%viharantyaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>43492<pc>0931-c<k1>viBftvan<k2>viBftvan
{%Vi-bhṛtvan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who bears or sup-
ports.
<LEND>

<L>43493<pc>0931-c<k1>viBraMS<k2>viBraMS
{#viBraMS#}¦ {%vi-bhraṃś%} (sometimes written {%vi-%}
{%bhraṃs%}), cl. 4. P., 1. A. {%-bhraśyati, -bhraṃśate,%}
{%-bhraṃśitum,%} to fall down, fall, go to ruin, decay;
to fall away, fall off; to disappear, vanish; to be
unfortunate, fail; to fall away from, stray from, be
separated from (with abl.); to be deprived of, lose:
Caus. {%-bhraṃśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to fall off,
strike or knock off, break off, to cause to fall, lead
astray, seduce; to cause to disappear or vanish,
destroy, annihilate, ruin; to divert from (with abl.),
deprive of.
<LEND>

<L>43494<pc>0931-c<k1>viBraMSa<k2>viBraMSa
{%Vi-bhraṃśa, as,%}¦ m. falling away, &c.; a precipice.
<LEND>

<L>43495<pc>0931-c<k1>viBraMSita<k2>viBraMSita
{%Vi-bhraṃśita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), caused
to fall away; struck off, broken off; led astray,
seduced; made to disappear, destroyed; deprived of.
{%—Vibhraṃśita-jñāna, as, ā, am,%} deprived of
reason or consciousness. {%—Vibhraṃśita-puṣpa-%}
{%pattra, as, ā, am,%} having the flowers and leaves
knocked off.
<LEND>

<L>43496<pc>0931-c<k1>viBraMSin<k2>viBraMSin
{%Vi-bhraṃśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling away, falling off;
dropping, falling, fallen.
<LEND>

<L>43497<pc>0931-c<k1>viBrazwa<k2>viBrazwa
{%Vi-bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen away or off, broken
off or from, separated from, gone astray; fallen, de-
cayed, failed, ruined, lost, disappeared, vanished.
{%—Vibhraṣṭa-timira, as, ā, am,%} whose darkness
has vanished or disappeared (said of the sky). {%—Vi-%}
{%bhraṣṭa-harṣa, as, ā, am,%} fallen from or deprived
of joy.
<LEND>

<L>43498<pc>0931-c<k1>viBram<k2>viBram
{#viBram#}¦ {%vi-bhram,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-bhramati,%}
{%-bhrāmyati, -bhramitum,%} to wander or roam about,
roam through or over; to flit or hover about; to move
to and fro, roll about; to disperse, scatter, scare or
frighten away; to fall into disorder or confusion,
[Page0932-a+ 76]
become disarranged or bewildered: Caus. {%-bhrama-%}
{%yati, -bhrāmayati, -yitum,%} to confuse, perplex.
<LEND>

<L>43499<pc>0932-a<k1>viBrama<k2>viBrama
{%Vi-bhrama, as,%}¦ m. roaming or wandering about,
whirling round, whirling or rolling about, going
round, any whirling motion; error, mistake, blunder,
erroneous use or application; hurry, confusion, agita-
tion, perturbation, flurry (one of the classes of femi-
nine action proceeding from love, as when a woman
through flurry puts on her ornaments in the wrong
places); amorous action of any kind; caprice, whim;
beauty, grace; play (of the eyes); rapture; doubt,
apprehension; ({%ā%}), f. old age. {%—Vibhrama-tantra%}
or {%vibhrama-sūtra,%} N. of a treatise on grammar
(attributed to Hema-candra).
<LEND>

<L>43500<pc>0932-a<k1>viBramat<k2>viBramat
{%Vi-bhramat, an, antī, at,%}¦ roaming about, roaming
through, whirling round.
<LEND>

<L>43501<pc>0932-a<k1>viBramitvA<k2>viBramitvA
{%Vi-bhramitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having whirled
or frightened away.
<LEND>

<L>43502<pc>0932-a<k1>viBrAnta<k2>viBrAnta
{%Vi-bhrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ whirled about, agitated,
bewildered, hurried, flurried, confused (through pre-
cipitation &c.). {%—Vibhrānta-nayana, as, ā, am,%}
having rolling eyes. {%—Vibhrānta-manas, ās, ās, as,%}
bewildered or confused in mind. {%—Vibhrānta-śīla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} confused in mind or disposition; drunk,
intoxicated, insane; ({%as%}), m. a monkey; the disk of
the sun or moon.
<LEND>

<L>43503<pc>0932-a<k1>viBrAnti<k2>viBrAnti
{%Vi-bhrānti, is,%}¦ f. whirling round, going round,
error, confusion; hurry, flurry, precipitation.
<LEND>

<L>43504<pc>0932-a<k1>viBrAj<k2>viBrAj<h>1
{#viBrAj#} 1¦. {%vi-bhrāj,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhrājate, -bhrā-%}
{%jitum%} (Ved. inf. {%vibhrājam%}), to shine forth, shine,
glitter, gleam, be bright or radiant; to shine through:
Caus. {%-bhrājayati, -yitum,%} to cause to radiate or
beam or shine.
<LEND>

<L>43505<pc>0932-a<k1>viBrAj<k2>viBrAj<h>2
2. {%vi-bhrāj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ shining, splendid, luminous;
elegant, richly dressed or decorated; ({%ṭ%}), m., N. of
the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 170 (having
the patronymic Saurya).
<LEND>

<L>43506<pc>0932-a<k1>viBrAjat<k2>viBrAjat
{%Vi-bhrājat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shining, glittering.
<LEND>

<L>43507<pc>0932-a<k1>viBrAjamAna<k2>viBrAjamAna
{%Vi-bhrājamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ resplendent, glittering,
shining, dazzling, radiant, bright.
<LEND>

<L>43508<pc>0932-a<k1>viBrAjita<k2>viBrAjita
{%Vi-bhrājita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made splendid or bright,
caused to shine.
<LEND>

<L>43509<pc>0932-a<k1>viBrAzwi<k2>viBrAzwi
{%Vi-bhrāṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. radiance, flame, blaze.
<LEND>

<L>43510<pc>0932-a<k1>viBvan<k2>viBvan
{#viBvan#}¦ {%vi-bhvan.%} See p. 931, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>43511<pc>0932-a<k1>vimaMh<k2>vimaMh
{#vimaMh#}¦ {%vi-maṃh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-maṃhate,%} &c., Ved.
to distribute, bestow.
<LEND>

<L>43512<pc>0932-a<k1>vimaMhamAna<k2>vimaMhamAna
{%Vi-maṃhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. distributing,
giving.
<LEND>

<L>43513<pc>0932-a<k1>vimajj<k2>vimajj
{#vimajj#}¦ {%vi-majj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-majjati,%} &c., to
plunge or dive in, enter into, (probably wrongly for
{%ni-majj%}): Caus. {%-majjayati,%} &c., to submerge,
cause to plunge into or enter in.
<LEND>

<L>43514<pc>0932-a<k1>vimata<k2>vimata
{#vimata#}¦ {%vi-mata, vi-mati.%} See under {%vi-man.%}
<LEND>

<L>43515<pc>0932-a<k1>vimatsara<k2>vimatsara
{#vimatsara#}¦ {%vi-matsara, as, ā, am,%} free from
envy or jealousy, unenvious, unambitious.
<LEND>

<L>43516<pc>0932-a<k1>vimaT<k2>vimaT
{#vimaT#}¦ {%vi-math%} or {%vi-manth,%} cl. 1. 9. P. {%-ma-%}
{%thati, -manthati, -mathnāti%} (Ved. generally A.
{%-mathnīte%}), &c., {%-mathitum, -manthitum,%} to crush
or dash to pieces, rend asunder, bruise (Ved. A.); to
cut to pieces, annihilate, destroy, disperse, scatter; to
confuse, perplex, bewilder, embarrass.
<LEND>

<L>43517<pc>0932-a<k1>vimaTita<k2>vimaTita
{%Vi-mathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushed or dashed to
pieces, rent asunder, bruised, destroyed, annihilated.
<LEND>

<L>43518<pc>0932-a<k1>vimaTnat<k2>vimaTnat
{%Vi-mathnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ dashing to pieces, crush-
ing, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>43519<pc>0932-a<k1>vimaTya<k2>vimaTya
{%Vi-mathya,%}¦ ind. having crushed completely, having
destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>43520<pc>0932-a<k1>vimATa<k2>vimATa
{%Vi-mātha, as,%}¦ m. the act of crushing or destroy-
ing utterly.
<LEND>

<L>43521<pc>0932-a<k1>vimATin<k2>vimATin
{%Vi-māthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crushing or dashing to pieces,
destroying.
<LEND>

<L>43522<pc>0932-a<k1>vimad<k2>vimad
{#vimad#}¦ {%vi-mad,%} cl. 4. P. {%-mādyati%} (Ved. also
{%-madati%}), &c., {%-maditum,%} to become perplexed or
confused, be disconcerted; to confound, embarrass,
disturb: Caus. {%-mādayati,%} &c., {%-yitum,%} to cause to
be perplexed, to confuse, embarrass; to intoxicate.
<LEND>
[Page0932-b+ 75]

<L>43523<pc>0932-b<k1>vimatta<k2>vimatta
{%Vi-matta, as, ā, am,%}¦ intoxicated; being in rut,
ruttish.
<LEND>

<L>43524<pc>0932-b<k1>vimada<k2>vimada
{%Vi-mada, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from intoxication;
joyless; ({%as%}), m., N. of the author of the hymns
Ṛg-veda X. 20-26 (having the patronymic Aindra
or Prājāpatya; Vasu-kṛt Vāsukra is also regarded
as the author of these hymns).
<LEND>

<L>43525<pc>0932-b<k1>vimadita<k2>vimadita
{%Vi-madita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), {%= vi-matta.%}
<LEND>

<L>43526<pc>0932-b<k1>vimaDya<k2>vimaDya
{#vimaDya#}¦ {%vi-madhya,%} Ved. an unfathomable
depth, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 51, 3. explains {%tamaso%}
{%vimadhye%} by {%atyanta-gāḍhāndhakāre,%} ‘in un-
fathomable darkness.’)
<LEND>

<L>43527<pc>0932-b<k1>viman<k2>viman
{#viman#}¦ {%vi-man,%} cl. 8. 4. A., 1. P. {%-manute,%}
{%-manyate, -manati,%} &c., {%-mantum,%} to distinguish
(?, Ved.); to dishonour, offend: Caus. {%-mānayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to dishonour, slight, treat with disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>43528<pc>0932-b<k1>vimata<k2>vimata
{%Vi-mata, as, ā, am,%}¦ disagreed, disagreeing, dis-
senting, disapproving; at variance, inconsistent, averse,
hostile to; slighted, despised, offended, displeased; of
a different mind or disposition; ({%as%}), m. an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>43529<pc>0932-b<k1>vimati<k2>vimati
{%Vi-mati, is,%}¦ f. difference of mind or opinion,
dissent, disagreement; dislike, aversion; stupidity.
{%—Vimati-tā,%} f. difference of opinion, want of mind,
stupidity.
<LEND>

<L>43530<pc>0932-b<k1>vimAna<k2>vimAna<h>1
1. {%vi-māna, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (for 2. see under 2.
{%vi-mā%}), disrespect, dishonour.
<LEND>

<L>43531<pc>0932-b<k1>vimAnanA<k2>vimAnanA
{%Vi-mānanā,%}¦ f. dishonour, disrespect, contempt.
<LEND>

<L>43532<pc>0932-b<k1>vimAnita<k2>vimAnita
{%Vi-mānita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dishonoured, slighted,
treated with disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>43533<pc>0932-b<k1>vimanas<k2>vimanas
{#vimanas#}¦ {%vi-manas, ās, ās, as,%} changed in
mind or feeling; averse, displeased; out of one's
mind, distraught, depressed in mind or spirit, sad,
distressed, discomposed; heart-broken; absent in
mind, thinking of something else; perplexed, dis-
ordered, bewildered.
<LEND>

<L>43534<pc>0932-b<k1>vimanaska<k2>vimanaska
{%Vi-manaska, as, ā, am,%}¦ out of one's mind, de-
pressed in spirit, heart-broken, sad, melancholy, be-
wildered.
<LEND>

<L>43535<pc>0932-b<k1>vimanIkfta<k2>vimanIkfta
{%Vimanī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ altered in mind or
feeling; displeased, offended; depressed in mind,
sad, sorrowful.
<LEND>

<L>43536<pc>0932-b<k1>vimanIBUta<k2>vimanIBUta
{%Vimanī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ become changed in
mind or feeling; brought into a melancholy frame
of mind.
<LEND>

<L>43537<pc>0932-b<k1>vimanT<k2>vimanT
{#vimanT#}¦ {%vi-manth.%} See {%vi-math,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>43538<pc>0932-b<k1>vimanyu<k2>vimanyu
{#vimanyu#}¦ {%vi-manyu, us, us, u,%} free from anger
or passion, free from grief.
<LEND>

<L>43539<pc>0932-b<k1>vimaya<k2>vimaya
{#vimaya#}¦ {%vi-maya, as,%} m. (see rt. {%me%}), change,
exchange, barter.
<LEND>

<L>43540<pc>0932-b<k1>vimarda<k2>vimarda
{#vimarda#}¦ {%vi-marda,%} &c. See under {%vi-mṛd.%}
<LEND>

<L>43541<pc>0932-b<k1>vimarSa<k2>vimarSa
{#vimarSa#}¦ {%vi-marśa,%} &c. See under {%vi-mṛś.%}
<LEND>

<L>43542<pc>0932-b<k1>vimarza<k2>vimarza
{#vimarza#}¦ {%vi-marṣa,%} &c. See under {%vi-mṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>43543<pc>0932-b<k1>vimala<k2>vimala
{#vimala#}¦ {%vi-mala, as, ā, am,%} stainless, free
from dirt or impurity, spotless, pure, clean; white,
transparent, beautiful; ({%as%}), m. an Arhat or Jaina
deified sage; N. of the father of Padma-pāda; of a
son of Su-dyumna; ({%ā%}), f. a particular plant, {%= saptalā,%}
(commonly called Charmaghās); a sort of soil; N.
of Dākṣāyaṇī; ({%am%}), n. silver gilt; talc. {%—Vimala-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Vimala-tā,%}
f. or {%vimala-tva, am,%} n. stainlessness, cleanliness,
purity, clearness. {%—Vimala-dāna, am,%} n. a gift or
offering to a deity. {%—Vimala-nātha-purāṇa,%} N. of
a Jaina work by Kṛṣṇa-dāsa. {%—Vimala-prabhā,%} f.,
N. of one of the wives of Narendrāditya. {%—Vimala-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. ‘clear-gem,’ crystal. {%—Vimalātmaka%}
{%(˚la-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} pure-minded, clean, pure. {%—Vi-%}
{%malātman (˚la-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} pure-souled, unde-
filed, pure. {%—Vimalāditya (˚la-ād˚), as,%} m. ‘clear-
sun,’ a particular form of the sun. {%—Vimalādri (˚la-%}
{%ad˚), is,%} m. ‘pure mountain,’ N. of the mountain
Vimala or Girnar in Gujarāt, (this mountain is cele-
brated for its inscriptions; it is also called Śatruñ-jaya,
q. v.) {%—Vimalārthaka (˚la-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} of pure
purpose, pure-minded; pure, clean, clear. {%—Vima- %}
[Page0932-c+ 73]
{%lāśva (˚la-aś˚),%} N. of a country in Kaśmīra. {%—Vimalī-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of making pure. {%—Vimalī-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make clean or pure.
{%—Vimaleśvara-tīrtha (˚la-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a
chapter in the Śiva-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>43544<pc>0932-c<k1>vimalogyatantra<k2>vimalogyatantra
{%Vimalogya-tantra, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Tantra work.
<LEND>

<L>43545<pc>0932-c<k1>vimastakita<k2>vimastakita
{#vimastakita#}¦ {%vi-mastakita, as, ā, am,%} be-
headed, decapitated.
<LEND>

<L>43546<pc>0932-c<k1>vimahat<k2>vimahat
{#vimahat#}¦ {%vi-mahat, ān, atī, at,%} very great,
immense.
<LEND>

<L>43547<pc>0932-c<k1>vimahas<k2>vimahas
{%Vi-mahas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. of various or excellent
might or splendor, very vigorous, very brilliant or
resplendent.
<LEND>

<L>43548<pc>0932-c<k1>vimahi<k2>vimahi
{%Vi-mahi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. very large or great, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%viśeṣeṇa mahat.%})
<LEND>

<L>43549<pc>0932-c<k1>vimA<k2>vimA<h>1
{#vimA#} 1¦. {%vi-mā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-mimīte,%} &c. (see rt.
2. {%mā%}), Ved. to bellow, roar, cry (?).
<LEND>

<L>43550<pc>0932-c<k1>vimA<k2>vimA<h>2
{#vimA#} 2¦. {%vi-mā%} (see rt. 3. {%mā%}), cl. 2. P., 3. 4.
A. {%-māti, -mimīte, -māyate, -mātum,%} (Ved.) to
measure out, to traverse, pass over (a course); (Ved.)
to set in order, set right, prepare; to count, count
over; to measure; to pervade; to make in various
ways.
<LEND>

<L>43551<pc>0932-c<k1>vimAna<k2>vimAna<h>2
2. {%vi-māna, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (for 1. {%vi-māna%} see
under {%vi-man%}), a measure; a car or chariot of the
gods (sometimes serving as a seat or throne, sometimes
self-moving and carrying its occupant through the
skies; other descriptions make the Vimāna more like
a house or palace, and one kind is said to be seven
stories high; that of Rāvaṇa was called {%puṣpaka,%}
q. v.); any car or vehicle; a horse; a palace, the
palace of an emperor or supreme monarch. {%—Vimāna-%}
{%gamana, am,%} n. ‘going in a car,’ N. of the fifty-
second chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-
Purāṇa. {%—Vimāna-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} travelling in a
celestial car. {%—Vimāna-tā,%} f. the state or condition
of a chariot. {%—Vimāna-prabhutā,%} f. the ownership
or possession of a celestial chariot. {%—Vimāna-yāna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} going or driving in a car. {%—Vimāna-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. the driver of a chariot of the gods. {%—Vimāna-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like a self-moving car, (Kirāt. VII. 4.) {%—Vi-%}
{%māna-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing on a divine chariot.
<LEND>

<L>43552<pc>0932-c<k1>vimimAna<k2>vimimAna
{%Vi-mimāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ measuring out, preparing,
making; measured, conceived, (according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda I. 155, 6 {%= vividham mimāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>43553<pc>0932-c<k1>vimAMsa<k2>vimAMsa
{#vimAMsa#}¦ {%vi-māṃsa, as, am,%} m. n. unclean
meat (as the flesh of dogs &c.).
<LEND>

<L>43554<pc>0932-c<k1>vimAtf<k2>vimAtf
{#vimAtf#}¦ {%vi-mātṛ, tā,%} f. a stepmother, a fa-
ther's wife. {%—Vimātṛ-ja, as,%} m. a stepmother's son.
<LEND>

<L>43555<pc>0932-c<k1>vimAnanA<k2>vimAnanA
{#vimAnanA#}¦ {%vi-mānanā,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>43556<pc>0932-c<k1>vimAya<k2>vimAya
{#vimAya#}¦ {%vi-māya, as, ā, am,%} devoid of magic,
free from illusion.
<LEND>

<L>43557<pc>0932-c<k1>vimArga<k2>vimArga
{#vimArga#}¦ {%vi-mārga, as,%} m. a bad road, by-
road; a wrong road (literally or figuratively); evil
conduct, immorality; a broom, brush; [cf. rt. {%mārg.%}]
{%—Vimārga-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going in a wrong
road, following an evil course.
<LEND>

<L>43558<pc>0932-c<k1>vimArgaRa<k2>vimArgaRa
{%Vi-mārgaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of searching or seek-
ing for.
<LEND>

<L>43559<pc>0932-c<k1>vimi<k2>vimi
{#vimi#}¦ {%vi-mi%} (see rt. 1. {%mi%}), cl. 5. P. A. {%-mi-%}
{%noti, -minute, -mātum,%} Ved. to fix, build, erect.
<LEND>

<L>43560<pc>0932-c<k1>vimita<k2>vimita
{%Vi-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed, built; ({%am%}), n., Ved. a
square shed or large building resting on four posts.
<LEND>

<L>43561<pc>0932-c<k1>viminvat<k2>viminvat
{%Vi-minvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ fixing; (Sāy.) separating
and fixing ({%= pari-cchindat sthāpayat,%} Ṛg-veda
IV. 56. 1).
<LEND>

<L>43562<pc>0932-c<k1>vimiSr<k2>vimiSr
{#vimiSr#}¦ {%vi-miśr,%} cl. 10. P. {%-miśrayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to mix or mingle together.
<LEND>

<L>43563<pc>0932-c<k1>vimiSra<k2>vimiSra
{%Vi-miśra, as, ā, am,%}¦ mixed or mingled together,
commingled.
<LEND>

<L>43564<pc>0932-c<k1>vimiSrita<k2>vimiSrita
{%Vi-miśrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ mixed together, mingled;
mixed with, attended or accompanied by.
<LEND>

<L>43565<pc>0932-c<k1>vimukta<k2>vimukta
{#vimukta#}¦ {%vi-mukta,%} &c. See under 1. {%vi-muc.%}
<LEND>
[Page0933-a+ 77]

<L>43566<pc>0933-a<k1>vimuKa<k2>vimuKa
{#vimuKa#}¦ {%vi-mukha, as, ī, am,%} having the face
turned away or cast down, averted; disinclined, op-
posed. {%—Vimukha-tā,%} f. or {%vimukha-tva, am,%} n. the
state of having the face averted, turning away; dis-
inclination, opposition; disappearance, departure.
<LEND>

<L>43567<pc>0933-a<k1>vimuKin<k2>vimuKin
{%Vimukhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having the face averted, turned
away; averse from, hostile. {%—Vimukhi-tā,%} f. or {%vi-%}
{%mukhi-tva, am,%} n. a state of aversion, enmity;
opposition; departure.
<LEND>

<L>43568<pc>0933-a<k1>vimuKIkf<k2>vimuKIkf
{%Vimukhī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make the face averted, turn away the face,
turn away from, leave. {%—Vimukhī-karaṇa, am,%} n.
the act of turning away or averting the face, leaving.
{%—Vimukhī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} turned away from,
averted, departed.
<LEND>

<L>43569<pc>0933-a<k1>vimugDa<k2>vimugDa
{#vimugDa#}¦ {%vi-mugdha.%} See under {%vi-muh%}
below.
<LEND>

<L>43570<pc>0933-a<k1>vimuc<k2>vimuc<h>1
{#vimuc#} 1¦. {%vi-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati,%}
{%-te, -moktum,%} to unloose, loosen, unharness, un-
fasten, untie, release, set free, liberate; to take off
(clothes), undress; to free from (with abl.); to leave
off, stop, cease; to become loose (A.); to yield, re-
linquish, quit, give up, lose; to emit, pour forth, shed,
send forth; to assume, take: Pass. {%-mucyate,%} to be
loosened, become detached; to be freed from (with
abl. or inst.); to escape; to be deprived of (with
inst.): Caus. {%-mocayati, -yitum,%} to loosen, set free,
unfasten, liberate: Desid. {%-mumukṣati, -te,%} to wish
to set free, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43571<pc>0933-a<k1>vimukta<k2>vimukta
{%Vi-mukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ loosed, let loose, liberated;
freed from (with inst. or abl., e. g. {%pāśaiḥ%} or {%pāśe-%}
{%bhyo vimuktaḥ,%} freed from fetters); quitted, aban-
doned; issued from, given vent to; hurled, thrown,
discharged. {%—Vimukta-kaṇṭha, as, ā, am,%} having
a loosened throat or voice, raising a loud cry. {%—Vi-%}
{%mukta-pragraha, as, ā, am,%} having loosened reins.
<LEND>

<L>43572<pc>0933-a<k1>vimukti<k2>vimukti
{%Vi-mukti, is,%}¦ f. liberation, release, remission;
escape, salvation, final emancipation (from all future
existence); separation, parting. {%—Vimukti-patha,%}
{%as,%} m. the path or way of final emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>43573<pc>0933-a<k1>vimuc<k2>vimuc<h>2
2. {%vi-muc, k, k, k,%}¦ one who lets loose or sends
forth, a creator; a deliverer; ({%k%}), m., N. of Prajā-
pati; a cloud, (Sāy. {%= jala-vimocaka megha.%})
<LEND>

<L>43574<pc>0933-a<k1>vimucya<k2>vimucya<h>2
2. {%vi-mucya,%}¦ ind. having let go; having quitted,
quitting, releasing.
<LEND>

<L>43575<pc>0933-a<k1>vimucyamAna<k2>vimucyamAna
{%Vi-mucyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being let loose or
liberated; being poured forth or sent forth.
<LEND>

<L>43576<pc>0933-a<k1>vimuYcat<k2>vimuYcat
{%Vi-muñcat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} unloosing, loosen-
ing; shedding, letting fall.
<LEND>

<L>43577<pc>0933-a<k1>vimoktavya<k2>vimoktavya
{%Vi-moktavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be let loose or set
free or discharged.
<LEND>

<L>43578<pc>0933-a<k1>vimocana<k2>vimocana
{%Vi-mocana, as,%}¦ m. one who delivers, a deliverer,
liberator, (Sāy. {%= pāpād vimocayitṛ%}); ({%am%}), n.
the act of unloosing, liberating, unharnessing, unyok-
ing; liberation, emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>43579<pc>0933-a<k1>vimocita<k2>vimocita
{%Vi-mocita, as, ā, am,%}¦ loosened, liberated, set free.
<LEND>

<L>43580<pc>0933-a<k1>vimudra<k2>vimudra
{#vimudra#}¦ {%vi-mudra, as, ā, am,%} unsealed, un-
closed; opened as a bud or flower, budded, blown.
<LEND>

<L>43581<pc>0933-a<k1>vimuh<k2>vimuh
{#vimuh#}¦ {%vi-muh,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-muhyati, -te,%}
{%-mogdhum%} or {%-moḍhum,%} to be confused, become
perplexed or bewildered; to faint away: Caus. {%-mo-%}
{%hayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be confused, disturb,
deprive of consciousness, infatuate, bewilder, lead
astray, bewitch.
<LEND>

<L>43582<pc>0933-a<k1>vimugDa<k2>vimugDa
{%Vi-mugdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ confused, bewildered,
infatuated.
<LEND>

<L>43583<pc>0933-a<k1>vimuhyamAna<k2>vimuhyamAna
{%Vi-muhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being bewildered or
stupefied, embarrassed.
<LEND>

<L>43584<pc>0933-a<k1>vimUQa<k2>vimUQa<h>1
1. {%vi-mūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ confounded, bewildered,
discomposed; beguiled, led astray, seduced, tempted;
foolish. {%—Vimūḍha-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%vimūḍha-%}
{%dhī, īs, īs, i,%} foolish-minded, foolish, simple. {%—Vi-%}
{%mūḍha-bhāva, as,%} m. bewildered state, perplexed
condition, confusion. {%—Vimūḍha-sañjña, as, ā, am,%}
bewildered in mind, senseless, unconscious. {%—Vimū-%}
{%ḍhātman (˚ḍha-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} foolish-minded, sense-
less, foolish, beguiled.
<LEND>
[Page0933-b+ 79]

<L>43585<pc>0933-b<k1>vimUQa<k2>vimUQa<h>2
2. {%vi-mūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ not foolish or infatuated,
wise; ({%as%}), m. a kind of divine being.
<LEND>

<L>43586<pc>0933-b<k1>vimohana<k2>vimohana
{%Vi-mohana, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} alluring, seducing,
seductive, bewitching, tempting, fascinating, one who
fascinates, &c.; ({%as, am%}), m. n., N. of one of the di-
visions of Naraka (see {%naraka%}); ({%am%}), n. the act of
seducing, seduction, temptation, exciting the passions.
<LEND>

<L>43587<pc>0933-b<k1>vimohita<k2>vimohita
{%Vi-mohita, as, ā, am,%}¦ allured, seduced, bereft of con-
sciousness, beguiled; stupefied, infatuated, bewitched.
<LEND>

<L>43588<pc>0933-b<k1>vimfj<k2>vimfj
{#vimfj#}¦ {%vi-mṛj,%} cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi%} (some-
times also A. {%-mārṣṭe%}), {%-mārjitum, -mārṣṭum,%}
to rub off or out, purify, cleanse; to rub, stroke; to
rub dry, wipe off, wipe; to rub on, anoint: Intens.,
Ved. {%-māmṛjīti,%} to cleanse, purify.
<LEND>

<L>43589<pc>0933-b<k1>vimfjya<k2>vimfjya
{%Vi-mṛjya,%}¦ ind. having rubbed or stroked, having
wiped or swept away, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43590<pc>0933-b<k1>vimfzwa<k2>vimfzwa<h>1
1. {%vi-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed off, purified,
cleansed, wiped. {%—Vimṛṣṭa-rāga, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing the colour refined or purified.
<LEND>

<L>43591<pc>0933-b<k1>vimfd<k2>vimfd
{#vimfd#}¦ {%vi-mṛd,%} cl. 9. 1. P. {%-mṛdnāti, -mar-%}
{%dati,%} &c., {%-marditum,%} to press or crush to pieces,
bruise, pound, trample down, lay waste, devastate,
destroy; to rub together: Caus. {%-mardayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to crush to pieces, bruise; to rub.
<LEND>

<L>43592<pc>0933-b<k1>vimarda<k2>vimarda
{%Vi-marda, as,%}¦ m. crushing, bruising; devasta-
tion, destruction, pressing or rubbing together, fric-
tion; the trituration of perfumes; rubbing against,
touch, contact; conjunction of the sun and moon,
total obscuration, eclipse; war, battle; weariness,
tediousness; the plant Cassia Esculenta. {%—Vimar-%}
{%dārdha (˚da-ar˚), am,%} n. the time from the appa-
rent conjunction to the end of an eclipse. {%—Vimar-%}
{%dottha (˚da-ut˚), as,%} m. a scent arising from the
trituration of perfumes.
<LEND>

<L>43593<pc>0933-b<k1>vimardaka<k2>vimardaka
{%Vi-mardaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who crushes or
pounds, a crusher, destroyer, &c.; ({%as%}), m. pound-
ing, grinding, destroying; rolling; the trituration of
perfumes; the conjunction of the sun and moon,
an eclipse; a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>43594<pc>0933-b<k1>vimardana<k2>vimardana
{%Vi-mardana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of grinding,
pounding, crushing, trampling down, rubbing; the
trituration of perfumes; the conjunction of the sun
and moon, an eclipse; destroying, killing.
<LEND>

<L>43595<pc>0933-b<k1>vimardita<k2>vimardita
{%Vi-mardita, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushed to pieces, bruised,
pounded, broken to pieces, trampled on; rubbed,
anointed; [cf. {%sneha-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>43596<pc>0933-b<k1>vimardin<k2>vimardin
{%Vi-mardin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crushing to pieces, destroy-
ing, removing,
<LEND>

<L>43597<pc>0933-b<k1>vimfdita<k2>vimfdita
{%Vi-mṛdita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bruised, ground, pounded;
broken, rubbed. {%—Vimṛdita-dhvaja, as, ā, am,%}
having a crushed or broken banner.
<LEND>

<L>43598<pc>0933-b<k1>vimfdya<k2>vimfdya
{%Vi-mṛdya,%}¦ ind. having bruised or pounded or
crushed, having trampled upon; having rubbed.
<LEND>

<L>43599<pc>0933-b<k1>vimfS<k2>vimfS
{#vimfS#}¦ {%vi-mṛś%} (often confounded with {%vi-%}
{%mṛṣ,%} q. v.), cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati, -marṣṭum,%}
{%-mraṣṭum,%} to touch (with the hands), feel, stroke,
rub; to touch (mentally), be sensible of, be aware
of, perceive; to ponder, meditate, consider, reflect on,
deliberate about; to observe; to investigate, examine;
to think about with hesitation, hesitate about doing
anything (with inf.): Caus. {%-marśayati, -yitum,%} to
ponder, reflect on, consider.
<LEND>

<L>43600<pc>0933-b<k1>vimarSa<k2>vimarSa
{%Vi-marśa, as,%}¦ m. consideration, deliberation, in-
vestigation, trial, examination by reason, reasoning,
discussion, hesitation; a conflicting judgment. {%—Vi-%}
{%marśa-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} uttering discussions, one
who reasons, a reasoner.
<LEND>

<L>43601<pc>0933-b<k1>vimarSana<k2>vimarSana
{%Vi-marśana, am,%}¦ n. the act of investigating, dis-
cussing, investigation.
<LEND>

<L>43602<pc>0933-b<k1>vimarSin<k2>vimarSin
{%Vi-marśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ deliberating, thinking about,
reflecting.
<LEND>

<L>43603<pc>0933-b<k1>vimfSat<k2>vimfSat
{%Vi-mṛśat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} reflecting, con-
sidering, musing.
<LEND>

<L>43604<pc>0933-b<k1>vimfSya<k2>vimfSya<h>1
1. {%vi-mṛśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be deliberated about
or investigated, to be discussed or reflected upon.
<LEND>

<L>43605<pc>0933-b<k1>vimfSya<k2>vimfSya<h>2
2. {%vi-mṛśya,%}¦ ind. having considered, after due
deliberation or reflection, ({%a-vimṛśya,%} without due
deliberation.) {%—Vimṛśya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} acting
after due deliberation.
<LEND>
[Page0933-c+ 76]

<L>43606<pc>0933-c<k1>vimfzwa<k2>vimfzwa<h>2
2. {%vi-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ reflected on, considered,
weighed.
<LEND>

<L>43607<pc>0933-c<k1>vimfz<k2>vimfz
{#vimfz#}¦ {%vi-mṛṣ%} (in many passages where this
verb occurs the forms used may equally be referred
to {%vi-mṛś%}), cl. 1. 4. P. A. {%-marṣati, -te, -mṛṣ-%}
{%yati, -te, -marṣitum,%} to bear with indifference.
<LEND>

<L>43608<pc>0933-c<k1>vimarza<k2>vimarza
{%Vi-marṣa, as,%}¦ m. dissatisfaction, displeasure;
want of forbearance, impatience, (in these senses {%vi%}
is privative); change in the prosperous course of a
dramatic plot, unforeseen reverse or adverse event in
the course of a love-story. {%—Vimarṣāṅga (˚ṣa-%}
{%aṅ˚),%} a division of the dramatic Vimarṣa (of which
there are said to be thirteen).
<LEND>

<L>43609<pc>0933-c<k1>vimarzaRa<k2>vimarzaRa
{%Vi-marṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king of the Kirātas.
<LEND>

<L>43610<pc>0933-c<k1>vimarzin<k2>vimarzin
{%Vi-marṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ disliking, dissatisfied, averse;
impatient, intolerant.
<LEND>

<L>43611<pc>0933-c<k1>vimokz<k2>vimokz
{#vimokz#}¦ {%vi-mokṣ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-mokṣayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to set free, liberate, let loose.
<LEND>

<L>43612<pc>0933-c<k1>vimokza<k2>vimokza
{%Vi-mokṣa, as,%}¦ m. liberation, freedom, letting
loose, letting off; discharging, shooting, dismissing;
becoming loose or free, escape, final emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>43613<pc>0933-c<k1>vimokzaRa<k2>vimokzaRa
{%Vi-mokṣaṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. untying, the act of
setting free, liberation, release; discharging, ({%aṇḍa-%}
{%v˚,%} the act of laying eggs); quitting, abandoning,
resigning.
<LEND>

<L>43614<pc>0933-c<k1>vimokzin<k2>vimokzin
{%Vi-mokṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ setting free, liberating.
<LEND>

<L>43615<pc>0933-c<k1>vimba<k2>vimba
{#vimba#}¦ {%vimba%} or {%vimva, as, am,%} m. n. (ac-
cording to Uṇādi-s. IV. 95. fr. rt. 1. {%vī,%} but the
etymology is doubtful; frequently written {%bimba%}),
the disk of the sun or moon; any disk, a ball,
hemisphere; any round or disk-like appearance; a
looking-glass, mirror; a jar, water-pot (?); an image,
shadow, reflected or represented form, picture, type;
the object compared (as opposed to {%prati-vimba,%} ‘the
counterpart’ to which it is compared); ({%as%}), m. a
lizard, chameleon; a proper N.; ({%ā, ī%}), f. a plant
bearing a bright-red gourd, Momordica Monadelpha;
({%ā%}), f., N. of two metres, four times ˘˘˘˘˘¯˘¯¯;
four times ¯¯¯¯¯, ˘˘˘˘˘˘¯, ¯¯˘¯¯˘¯; N.
of the wife of Bālāditya (a king of Kaśmīra); of the
mother of king Vimbi-sāra; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of
the Momordica Monadelpha, (the lips are frequently
compared to this fruit; cf. {%vimboṣṭha.%}) {%—Vimba-%}
{%jā,%} f. the plant Momordica Monadelpha or the
gourd. {%—Vimba-phala, am,%} n. the fruit of the
Vimba. {%—Vimba-sāra,%} a various reading for {%vimbi-%}
{%sāra%}. {%—Vimbāgata (˚ba-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘gone to
an image,’ reflected. {%—Vimbeśvara (˚bā-īś˚),%} N. of
a temple founded by the princess Vimbā. {%—Vim-%}
{%boṣṭha%} or {%vimbauṣṭha (˚ba-oṣ˚), as, ā,%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} having lips like the Vimba fruit, red-lipped,
‘cherry-lipped.’
<LEND>

<L>43616<pc>0933-c<k1>vimbaka<k2>vimbaka
{%Vimbaka, am,%}¦ n. the disk of the sun or moon;
the fruit of the Momordica Monadelpha; ({%ikā%}), f.
the disk of the sun or moon; a cucurbitaceous plant,
Momordica Monadelpha.
<LEND>

<L>43617<pc>0933-c<k1>vimbaki<k2>vimbaki
{%Vimbaki, is,%}¦ m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>43618<pc>0933-c<k1>vimbawa<k2>vimbawa
{%Vimbaṭa, as,%}¦ m. the mustard plant, Sinapis Di-
chotoma.
<LEND>

<L>43619<pc>0933-c<k1>vimbara<k2>vimbara
{%Vimbara,%}¦ a particular high number.
<LEND>

<L>43620<pc>0933-c<k1>vimbAva<k2>vimbAva
{%Vimbāva, am,%}¦ n., see Vārtt. to Pāṇ. V. 2, 109.
<LEND>

<L>43621<pc>0933-c<k1>vimbita<k2>vimbita
{%Vimbita, as, ā, am,%}¦ imaged, reflected, pictured,
painted.
<LEND>

<L>43622<pc>0933-c<k1>vimbin<k2>vimbin
{%Vimbin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ coming from or relating to
Vimba. {%—Vimbi-sāra, as,%} m., N. of a king of Ma-
gadha (a contemporary of Śākya-muni; also written
{%vimbi-sara, vidhi-sāra, vidmi-sāra, vindu-sena,%}
{%vindhya-sena%}).
<LEND>

<L>43623<pc>0933-c<k1>vimbiya<k2>vimbiya
{%Vimbiya, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>43624<pc>0933-c<k1>vimbu<k2>vimbu
{#vimbu#}¦ {%vimbu, us,%} m. the betel-nut tree.
<LEND>

<L>43625<pc>0933-c<k1>vimrad<k2>vimrad
{#vimrad#}¦ {%vi-mrad,%} cl. 1. A. {%-mradate,%} &c.,
Ved. to make soft or tender, to soften.
<LEND>

<L>43626<pc>0933-c<k1>vimrit<k2>vimrit
{#vimrit#}¦ {%vi-mrit,%} cl. 4. P. {%-mrityati,%} &c.,
Ved. to fall to pieces, crumble away, decay.
<LEND>

<L>43627<pc>0933-c<k1>vimlE<k2>vimlE
{#vimlE#}¦ {%vi-mlai,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-mlāyati, -te,%}
&c., to wither away, fade, languish, become weak
[Page0934-a+ 77]
or feeble or weary: Caus. {%-mlāpayati, -yitum,%} to
make to wither or languish, cause to fade or disap-
pear; to weary, enfeeble.
<LEND>

<L>43628<pc>0934-a<k1>vimlAna<k2>vimlAna<h>1
1. {%vi-mlāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ faded or withered away;
refreshed, fresh, pure.
<LEND>

<L>43629<pc>0934-a<k1>vimlAna<k2>vimlAna<h>2
2. {%vi-mlāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfaded, free from decay;
unsoiled.
<LEND>

<L>43630<pc>0934-a<k1>vimlApana<k2>vimlApana<h>1
1. {%vi-mlāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to wither
or fade away, causing to languish.
<LEND>

<L>43631<pc>0934-a<k1>vimlApana<k2>vimlApana<h>2
2. {%vi-mlāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of removing decay
or fatigue; refreshing, reviving; cleaning, wiping.
<LEND>

<L>43632<pc>0934-a<k1>viyat<k2>viyat<h>1
{#viyat#} 1¦. {%vi-yat,%} cl. 1. A. {%-yatate, -yatitum,%}
to dispose in various rows (?): Caus. {%-yātayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to place in rows, arrange, dispose of; to do
penance; to pain, torment, harass, disturb; to punish.
<LEND>

<L>43633<pc>0934-a<k1>viyat<k2>viyat<h>2
{#viyat#} 2¦. {%vi-yat, t,%} n. (probably connected
with {%vi-yam%} below; but according to some, pres.
part. of rt. 5. {%i%} with 2. {%vi;%} according to others fr.
rt. 1. {%vī%}), sky, heaven, ether, atmosphere. {%—Viyac-%}
{%cārin, ī,%} m. ‘sky-goer,’ a kite ({%= cilla%}). {%—Viyad-%}
{%gaṅgā,%} f. ‘sky-Ganges,’ the heavenly Ganges; the
galaxy. {%—Viyad-gati, is,%} f. going or moving in the
air. {%—Viyad-bhūti, is,%} f. ‘sky-power,’ darkness.
{%—Viyan-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘sky-gem,’ the sun.
<LEND>

<L>43634<pc>0934-a<k1>viyati<k2>viyati
{%Vi-yati, is,%}¦ m. (perhaps connected with the above),
a bird; N. of a son of Nahuṣa.
<LEND>

<L>43635<pc>0934-a<k1>viyam<k2>viyam
{#viyam#}¦ {%vi-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati, -yantum,%}
to stretch out, extend, spread out; to present, grant,
bestow, give; to stretch apart; to restrain: Caus.
{%-yāmayati, -yitum,%} to cause to stretch out, extend,
expand.
<LEND>

<L>43636<pc>0934-a<k1>viyata<k2>viyata
{%Vi-yata, as, ā, am,%}¦ stretched out, extended, kept
apart; ({%am%}), ind. separately, at intervals, intermit-
tingly.
<LEND>

<L>43637<pc>0934-a<k1>viyama<k2>viyama
{%Vi-yama, as,%}¦ m. restraint, check; rest, cessation,
stop; pain, distress.
<LEND>

<L>43638<pc>0934-a<k1>viyAma<k2>viyAma
{%Vi-yāma, as,%}¦ m. restraint, &c. ({%= vi-yama%}).
<LEND>

<L>43639<pc>0934-a<k1>viyA<k2>viyA
{#viyA#}¦ {%vi-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%} to go
away, depart, leave; to go through, pervade, pass
through, go across, to run through, drive through;
to pierce, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>43640<pc>0934-a<k1>viyAta<k2>viyAta
{%Vi-yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ ‘gone apart or from the right
path,’ abandoned; shameless, impudent, ill-behaved.
<LEND>

<L>43641<pc>0934-a<k1>viyu<k2>viyu
{#viyu#}¦ {%vi-yu%} (see rt. 1. {%yu%}), cl. 3. P. {%-yu-%}
{%yoti,%} &c., to be separated or parted, to separate (in-
trans.), be dissolved; to be separated from or deprived
of (with inst.); to separate, exclude, deprive of (with
inst.); to keep off, ward off.
<LEND>

<L>43642<pc>0934-a<k1>viyuta<k2>viyuta
{%Vi-yuta, as, ā, am%}¦ (see 1. and 2. {%yuta,%} p. 817),
separated, deprived of, separated from (with inst.,
e. g. {%vatsair viyutāḥ,%} [cows] separated from their
calves). {%—Viyutārthaka (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} void
of meaning.
<LEND>

<L>43643<pc>0934-a<k1>viyotf<k2>viyotf
{%Vi-yotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. separating; warding
off, defending; (Sāy.) one who does not mix, not
mixing ({%= duḥkhānām amiśrayitṛ,%} Ṛg-veda IV.
55, 2).
<LEND>

<L>43644<pc>0934-a<k1>viyuj<k2>viyuj
{#viyuj#}¦ {%vi-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti, -yuṅkte,%}
{%-yoktum,%} to disjoin, detach, separate, divide; to free
or liberate from, separate from (with inst., rarely
with abl.); to relax, be slackened, give way, yield
(A.): Pass. {%-yujyate,%} to be separated from, be de-
prived of (with inst.); to be relaxed, yield, give way:
Caus. {%-yojayati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to be disjoined,
separate; to free or deliver from, deprive of (with
inst. or abl.).
<LEND>

<L>43645<pc>0934-a<k1>viyukta<k2>viyukta
{%Vi-yukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ disjoined, detached, sepa-
rated, sundered, severed; separated from, free from,
deprived of, deserted by (with inst. or at the end of
a comp.); failing, deficient.
<LEND>

<L>43646<pc>0934-a<k1>viyujya<k2>viyujya
{%Vi-yujya,%}¦ ind. having separated or detached, hav-
ing freed or delivered from.
<LEND>

<L>43647<pc>0934-a<k1>viyoga<k2>viyoga
{%Vi-yoga, as,%}¦ m. separation, disunion, disjunction;
loss, death, absence (especially of lovers). {%—Viyoga-%}
{%bhāj, k, k, k,%} suffering separation. {%—Viyoga-vāhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} excluded from separation, not separated.
{%—Viyogāvasāna (˚ga-av˚), as, ā, am,%} ending or
[Page0934-b+ 77]
terminating in separation. {%—Viyogāvasāna-tva, am,%}
n. termination in separation.
<LEND>

<L>43648<pc>0934-b<k1>viyogin<k2>viyogin
{%Viyogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ being separated or disjoined;
apart, absent, remote; ({%ī%}), m. the ruddy goose; ({%inī%}), f.
a woman separated from her husband or lover; a kind
of metre having two unequal half lines, the first con-
taining ten and the second eleven syllables, as follow,
˘˘¯˘˘¯˘¯˘¯, ˘˘¯¯˘˘¯˘¯˘¯, (the fourth
Canto of the Kumāra-sambhava is chiefly written in
this metre.)
<LEND>

<L>43649<pc>0934-b<k1>viyojayat<k2>viyojayat
{%Vi-yojayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ separating, separating
from; depriving of; lavishing, expending.
<LEND>

<L>43650<pc>0934-b<k1>viyojita<k2>viyojita
{%Vi-yojita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), separated,
disjoined, disunited; separated from, parted from,
deprived of.
<LEND>

<L>43651<pc>0934-b<k1>viyotf<k2>viyotf
{#viyotf#}¦ {%vi-yotṛ.%} See under {%vi-yu,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>43652<pc>0934-b<k1>viyoni<k2>viyoni
{#viyoni#}¦ {%vi-yoni, is,%} or {%vi-yonī,%} f. various
or manifold birth, (according to Kullūka on Manu
XII. 27. ‘the womb of animals’); an ignominious
birth. {%—Viyoni-janmādhyāya (˚ma-adh˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a chapter of Varāha-mihira's Vṛhaj-jātaka.
<LEND>

<L>43653<pc>0934-b<k1>vira<k2>vira
{#vira#}¦ {%vira, as,%} m. (according to Sāy. fr. rt.
{%vṛ%}), Ved. one who goes or departs this life ({%=%}
{%gantṛ = preta%}). {%—Virā-sah%} or {%virā-sāh, -ṣāṭ, ṭ,%}
{%ṭ,%} Ved. bearing or leading departed spirits, (Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda I. 35, 6 {%= pretān puruṣān sahate yaḥ;%}
cf. {%jalā-sah, turā-ṣāh.%})
<LEND>

<L>43654<pc>0934-b<k1>virakta<k2>virakta
{#virakta#}¦ {%vi-rakta.%} See under {%vi-rañj,%}  col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>43655<pc>0934-b<k1>virakz<k2>virakz
{#virakz#}¦ {%vi-rakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rakṣati, -rakṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to watch over, guard, protect.
<LEND>

<L>43656<pc>0934-b<k1>virac<k2>virac
{#virac#}¦ {%vi-rac,%} cl. 10. P. {%-racayati, -yitum%}
(Aor. {%vy-araracat;%} in one passage {%-arīracat%}), to
arrange, construct, fabricate, contrive, form, make,
prepare; to compose, write (a book); to put on,
lay on, inlay; to effect, perform: Pass. {%-racyate%}
(Aor. {%vy-araci%}), to be arranged or composed.
<LEND>

<L>43657<pc>0934-b<k1>viracana<k2>viracana
{%Vi-racana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of arranging,
arrangement; constructing, contriving, contrivance;
making; compiling, composing, composition, com-
pilation; embellishing; embellishment, any artificial
or ornamental fabric.
<LEND>

<L>43658<pc>0934-b<k1>viracanIya<k2>viracanIya
{%Vi-racanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made, to be com-
posed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43659<pc>0934-b<k1>viracayat<k2>viracayat
{%Vi-racayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ arranging, making,
fabricating, composing, embellishing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43660<pc>0934-b<k1>viracayya<k2>viracayya
{%Vi-racayya,%}¦ ind. having arranged, having com-
posed; having marked out.
<LEND>

<L>43661<pc>0934-b<k1>viracita<k2>viracita
{%Vi-racita, as, ā, am,%}¦ arranged, trimmed, con-
structed, formed, contrived, made, prepared; written,
compiled, composed; put on, worn; put in, inlaid, set;
embellished, ornamented, furnished with (with inst.).
{%—Viracita-vapus, us, us, us,%} having the body
arranged.
<LEND>

<L>43662<pc>0934-b<k1>viraja<k2>viraja
{#viraja#}¦ {%vi-raja.%} See under {%vi-rajas%} below.
<LEND>

<L>43663<pc>0934-b<k1>virajas<k2>virajas
{#virajas#}¦ {%vi-rajas, ās, ās, as,%} free from dust;
devoid of passion, passionless; free from the men-
strual excretion; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a son of Paurṇa-
māsa; of a son of Vasiṣṭha; of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra; ({%ās%}), f. a woman who has ceased to men-
struate. {%—Vi-rajas-tamas, ās, ās, as,%} free from (the
qualities of) passion and ignorance. {%—Virajo-'mbara-%}
{%bhūṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} having apparel and ornaments
free from dust.
<LEND>

<L>43664<pc>0934-b<k1>viraja<k2>viraja
{%Vi-raja, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from dust; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of Viṣṇu; of a son of Tvaṣṭṛ; ({%ā%}), f. a plant
(commonly called Kavitthānī); Dūrvā grass; N. of
a river; of the wife of Nahuṣa (daughter of a class
of Manes called Sva-svadha). {%—Virajā-kṣetra, am,%}
n., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>43665<pc>0934-b<k1>virajaska<k2>virajaska
{%Vi-rajaska, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from dust, &c., {%= vi-%}
{%rajas; (ā),%} f. a woman who has ceased to menstruate.
<LEND>

<L>43666<pc>0934-b<k1>virajIkf<k2>virajIkf
{%Virajī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to render free from dust or passion. {%—Virajī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} freed from dust, unsoiled, clean; exempt
from passion.
<LEND>

<L>43667<pc>0934-b<k1>virajIBU<k2>virajIBU
{%Virajī-bhū,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to
become free from dust or passion. {%—Virajī-bhūta, %}
[Page0934-c+ 76]
{%as, ā, am,%} free from dust, clean, clear; free from
passion, pure, holy.
<LEND>

<L>43668<pc>0934-c<k1>viraYca<k2>viraYca
{#viraYca#}¦ {%vi-rañca, as,%} m. (perhaps connected
with {%vi-rac%}), N. of Brahmā; [cf. {%viriñca.%}]
<LEND>

<L>43669<pc>0934-c<k1>viraYci<k2>viraYci
{%Vi-rañci, is,%}¦ m., N. of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>43670<pc>0934-c<k1>viraYj<k2>viraYj
{#viraYj#}¦ {%vi-rañj,%} cl. 1. 4. P. A. {%-rajati, -te,%}
{%-rajyati, -te, -raṅktum,%} to be changed in colour,
be discoloured, lose the natural colour; to become
changed in disposition, become indifferent to, take
no interest in, regard with indifference, become
estranged or disaffected, grow cold: Caus. {%-rañja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to colour, dye, make of various colours;
to cause to be indifferent, make estranged, cause to
dislike.
<LEND>

<L>43671<pc>0934-c<k1>virakta<k2>virakta
{%Vi-rakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ discoloured, changed in
colour; changed in disposition, disaffected, estranged,
averse, indifferent; displeased; free from passion or
affection, void of attachment to worldly objects, (in
these senses {%vi%} appears to be privative); impassioned,
feeling excessive passion, (in these senses {%vi%} only
intensifies the root.) {%—Virakta-citta, as, ā, am,%}
disaffected at heart, estranged. {%—Virakta-prakṛti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} whose chiefs or principal officers are disaf-
fected. {%—Virakta-bhāva, as, ā, am,%} having the heart
or affections estranged, disinclined to, disliking.
<LEND>

<L>43672<pc>0934-c<k1>virakti<k2>virakti
{%Vi-rakti, is,%}¦ f. change of disposition or feeling,
estrangement, alienation of mind, aversion, disincli-
nation, dissatisfaction; absence of affection or attach-
ment, freedom from passion, weanedness from the
world, (in these senses {%vi%} appears to be privative.)
<LEND>

<L>43673<pc>0934-c<k1>virAga<k2>virAga
{%Vi-rāga, as,%}¦ m. change of colour or feeling, change
of nature, (applied in Vedic grammar to the change
in consonants which mutually affect each other);
absence of desire or passion, indifference, disinclina-
tion; disregard of all sensual enjoyment either in
this world or the next; stoicism. {%—Virāga-viṣa-%}
{%bhṛt, t, t, t,%} cherishing the poison of dislike, har-
bouring the poison of aversion. {%—Virāgārha (˚ga-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} qualified for freedom from passion.
<LEND>

<L>43674<pc>0934-c<k1>virAgin<k2>virAgin
{%Virāgin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ changed in feeling, estranged;
void of passion or desire.
<LEND>

<L>43675<pc>0934-c<k1>virawa<k2>virawa
{#virawa#}¦ {%viraṭa, as,%} m. a kind of black Agal-
lochum; N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>43676<pc>0934-c<k1>viraR<k2>viraR
{#viraR#}¦ {%vi-raṇ,%} Caus. {%-raṇayati, -yitum,%} to
make to sound forth, cause to sound, play upon (a
musical instrument).
<LEND>

<L>43677<pc>0934-c<k1>viraRa<k2>viraRa
{#viraRa#}¦ {%viraṇa, am,%} n. a fragrant grass used
in certain religious ceremonies, Andropogon Aroma-
ticum or Muricatum; [cf. {%vīraṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>43678<pc>0934-c<k1>viraTa<k2>viraTa
{#viraTa#}¦ {%vi-ratha, as, ā, am,%} having no car or
chariot, chariotless.
<LEND>

<L>43679<pc>0934-c<k1>virad<k2>virad
{#virad#}¦ {%vi-rad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-radati,%} &c., Ved. to
divide, separate, sever, cut through, open; to conduct,
convey; to bestow.
<LEND>

<L>43680<pc>0934-c<k1>virapS<k2>virapS
{#virapS#}¦ {%vi-rapś%} (according to some {%rapś%}
may be fr. an old Desid. form of rt. {%rap%} or {%rabh,%}
according to Sāy. {%rapś%} is fr. rt. {%rap = lap%}), cl. 1. A.
{%-rapśate,%} &c., Ved. to be full to overflowing, be
ready to burst, to be distended or inflated; to have
too much of (inst.); to be praised or hymned, (Sāy.
{%= vividhaṃ stūyate%}); to shine forth variously,
(Sāy. {%= vividhaṃ rājate%}); to sound forth, utter a
murmuring sound.
<LEND>

<L>43681<pc>0934-c<k1>virapSa<k2>virapSa
{%Vi-rapśa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. sound, voice, utterance,
(Sāy. {%virapśam = vākyam;%} but in Ṛg-veda IV.
50, 3. {%virapśam = viśeṣeṇa śabdena stotraṃ%}
{%yathā bhavati tathā.%})
<LEND>

<L>43682<pc>0934-c<k1>virapSin<k2>virapSin
{%Vi-rapśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. copious, abundant,
great, powerful, mighty, (according to Nirukta III.
3 {%= mahat%}); singing, sounding forth, loud-sounding,
uttering various sounds of praise, having various
sounds or utterances, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
IV. 17, 20. {%virapśī = bahu-vidha-śabdavān;%} in
Ṛg-veda I. 8, 8. {%virapśī = vividha-vākya-yuktā,%}
and appears to be used for {%virapśinī%}); shaking,
tossing, rocking.
<LEND>
[Page0935-a+ 78]

<L>43683<pc>0935-a<k1>viram<k2>viram
{#viram#}¦ {%vi-ram,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ramati%} (rarely
also A. {%-ramate%}), {%-rantum,%} to cease or desist from,
rest from (with abl.); to leave off or discontinue
anything (especially applied to discontinuing a speech,
e. g. {%virarāma%} or even {%vacanaṃ virarāma,%} he
ceased speaking), stop, pause, end, come to an end
(e. g. {%rātrir vyaraṃsīt,%} the night ended): Caus.
{%-ramayati, -rāmayati, -yitum,%} to cause to leave
off or discontinue, make to cease or desist from; to
bring to an end, finish.
<LEND>

<L>43684<pc>0935-a<k1>virata<k2>virata
{%Vi-rata, as, ā, am,%}¦ ceased from, desisting from
(with abl., e. g. {%pāpād virataḥ,%} ceased from sin),
stopped, ceased (e. g. {%virateṣu muniṣu,%} when the
Munis had ceased speaking); rested, ended, con-
cluded. {%—Virata-prasaṅga, as, ā, am,%} one who has
left off a habit or practice, one whose occupation has
ceased, having no occupation. {%—Viratāśaya (˚ta-%}
{%āś˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose desires have ceased, one
who has resigned worldly intentions.
<LEND>

<L>43685<pc>0935-a<k1>virati<k2>virati
{%Vi-rati, is,%}¦ f. cessation, discontinuance, stop, rest,
pause, end, term; indifference.
<LEND>

<L>43686<pc>0935-a<k1>virama<k2>virama
{%Vi-rama, as,%}¦ m. ceasing, desisting, cessation;
sunset.
<LEND>

<L>43687<pc>0935-a<k1>viramat<k2>viramat
{%Vi-ramat, an, antī, at,%}¦ ceasing, desisting, resting,
stopping; sporting or playing about.
<LEND>

<L>43688<pc>0935-a<k1>viramita<k2>viramita
{%Vi-ramita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), made to
cease, stopped.
<LEND>

<L>43689<pc>0935-a<k1>viramya<k2>viramya
{%Vi-ramya,%}¦ ind. having ceased or desisted.
<LEND>

<L>43690<pc>0935-a<k1>virAma<k2>virAma
{%Vi-rāma, as,%}¦ m. leaving off, cessation, rest, repose,
discontinuance (of working, speaking, &c.); stop-
page, stop, pause, pause of the voice, stoppage of
sound; (in gram.) ‘the stop,’ N. of a small oblique
stroke placed under a consonant to denote that it is
quiescent, i. e. that it has no vowel inherent or other-
wise pronounced after it, (this mark is sometimes used
in the middle of conjunctions of consonants; but its
proper use, according to native grammarians, is only
as a stop at the end of a sentence ending in a conso-
nant); end, conclusion, term; N. of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>43691<pc>0935-a<k1>virala<k2>virala
{#virala#}¦ {%virala, as, ā, am%} (perhaps for {%vila-%}
{%la,%} possessing holes), having interstices, separated by
intervals (whether of space or time); not close or
compact, open in texture, not thick or dense, fine,
thin, delicate; loose, relaxed, wide apart; rare, un-
frequent; single; remote; little, few; ({%am%}), ind.
rarely, seldom, unfrequently; ({%am%}), n. sour curds,
coagulated milk {%(= dadhi)%}. {%—Virala-jānuka, as,%}
m. ‘having knees wide apart,’ a bandy-legged man.
{%—Virala-dravā,%} f. gruel made of rice or other grain
with the addition of ghee, &c. {%(= ślakṣṇa-yavāgū).%}
{%—Viralāgata (˚la-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} happening
rarely, of unfrequent occurrence, rare. {%—Viralī-kṛ,%}
cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make rare, lessen, diminish.
{%—Viraletara (˚la-it˚), as,%} &c., ‘other than wide
apart,’ dense, thick, compact, close.
<LEND>

<L>43692<pc>0935-a<k1>viralita<k2>viralita
{%Viralita, as, ā, am,%}¦ not compacted, not dense, ({%a-vi-%}
{%ralita-kapolam,%} ind. with closely-united cheeks.)
<LEND>

<L>43693<pc>0935-a<k1>viras<k2>viras
{#viras#}¦ {%vi-ras,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rasati, -rasitum,%} to
cry out, cry aloud, scream, shriek.
<LEND>

<L>43694<pc>0935-a<k1>virasa<k2>virasa
{#virasa#}¦ {%vi-rasa, as, ā, am,%} juiceless, sapless,
flavourless, tasteless, insipid; painful; ({%as%}), m. pain.
<LEND>

<L>43695<pc>0935-a<k1>virah<k2>virah
{#virah#}¦ {%vi-rah,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%-rahati, -rahayati,%}
{%-rahitum,%} &c., to abandon, desert, relinquish, leave.
<LEND>

<L>43696<pc>0935-a<k1>viraha<k2>viraha
{%Vi-raha, as,%}¦ m. separation, parting, absence, (espe-
cially) the separation of lovers; separation from (with
inst.); loneliness, distance; want; abandonment, de-
sertion, cessation, relinquishment. {%—Viraha-guṇita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} increased by separation. {%—Viraha-ja%} or
{%viraha-janita, as, ā, am,%} arising from or produced
by separation. {%—Viraha-jvara, as,%} m. the anguish
of separation. {%—Viraha-vyāpad, t, t, t,%} impaired or
decreased by absence. {%—Viraha-śayana, am,%} n. a
solitary couch or bed, i. e. one slept on alone. {%—Vi-%}
{%rahādhigama (˚ha-adh˚), as,%} m. experiencing the
absence of any one, (according to Malli-nātha {%=%}
{%viraha-jñāna.%}) {%—Virahānala (˚ha-an˚), as,%} m.
the fire of separation. {%—Virahārta (˚ha-ār˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} pained by the absence of a lover. {%—Virahā- %}
[Page0935-b+ 79]
{%vasthā (˚ha-av˚),%} f. a state of separation or absence.
{%—Virahotkaṇṭhitā (˚ha-ut˚),%} f. a woman who longs
after her absent lover or husband, one distressed by
the absence of her husband (said to be one of the
incidental characters in a drama).
<LEND>

<L>43697<pc>0935-b<k1>virahayat<k2>virahayat
{%Vi-rahayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ abandoning, relinquish-
ing, deserting.
<LEND>

<L>43698<pc>0935-b<k1>virahayya<k2>virahayya
{%Vi-rahayya,%}¦ ind. having abandoned, having for-
saken, leaving.
<LEND>

<L>43699<pc>0935-b<k1>virahita<k2>virahita
{%Vi-rahita, as, ā, am,%}¦ abandoned, deserted, for-
saken, relinquished, left, left alone, solitary, lonely,
retired or withdrawn from company, separated; de-
void of, exempt from, bereft of, destitute of, free
from (with inst. or at the end of a comp., and
sometimes even with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>43700<pc>0935-b<k1>virahin<k2>virahin
{%Virahin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ being separated from, absent
(from another), apart from; lonely, solitary; ({%iṇī%}),
f. a woman separated from her husband or suffering
the pangs of absence from her lover; wages, hire.
<LEND>

<L>43701<pc>0935-b<k1>virAga<k2>virAga
{#virAga#}¦ {%vi-rāga,%} &c. See p. 934, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>43702<pc>0935-b<k1>virAj<k2>virAj<h>1
{#virAj#} 1¦. {%vi-rāj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-rājati%} (in Ved.
only P.), {%-te, -rājitum,%} to reign over, rule, govern
(Ved. P.); to be illustrious or eminent, be conspicuous,
appear to advantage, shine forth, shine out, shine,
glitter; to appear as: Caus. {%-rājayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to shine forth, make to glitter, fill with bright-
ness, give radiance or lustre, brighten, illuminate.
<LEND>

<L>43703<pc>0935-b<k1>virAj<k2>virAj<h>2
2. {%vi-rāj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ shining, radiant; ({%ṭ%}), m. splendor,
beauty; a man of the regal or military class; the
first progeny of Brahmā, (according to Manu I. 32,
&c., Brahmā having divided his own substance into
male and female, produced from the female the male
power Virāj, who then produced the first Manu or
Manu Svāyambhuva, who then created the ten Prajā-
patis; the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa states that the male
half of Brahmā was Manu, and the other half Śata-
rūpā, and does not allude to the intervention of Virāj;
other Purāṇas describe the union of Śata-rūpā with
Virāj or Puruṣa in the first instance, and with Manu
in the second; as a sort of secondary creator, Virāj
is sometimes called Prajā-pati, while in Ṛg-veda X.
90, 5. he is represented as born from Puruṣa, and
Puruṣa from him; in the Atharva-veda VIII. 10,
24, XI. 8, 30, Virāj is spoken of as a female, and
regarded as a cow, being elsewhere, however, identi-
fied with Prāṇa); ‘ruler of the various forms of
bodies,’ N. of Intellect located in and ruling over
the collective aggregate of bodies, the consciousness
which perceives collections or aggregates (in the
Vedānta phil.); the body; N. of a son of Rādhā;
of a district; ({%ṭ%}), f. a particular Vedic metre consisting
of four Pādas of ten syllables each, (in Ṛg-veda X.
130, 5. this metre is represented as attaching itself
to Mitra and Varuṇa, and in Aitareya-Br. I. 4. Virāj
is mystically regarded as ‘food,’ and invocations are
directed to be made in this metre when food is the
especial object of prayer.) {%—Virāṭ-kāmā,%} f. a Vedic
form of the Sammā metre. {%—Virāṭ-kṣetra, am,%} n.,
N. of a district. {%—Virāṭ-pūrvā,%} f. a Vedic form of
the Tri-ṣṭubh metre. {%—Virāṭ-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of
Virāj,’ epithet of a class of Pitṛs called Soma-sads
(Manu III. 195). {%—Virāṭ-sthānā,%} f. a Vedic form of
the Tri-ṣṭubh metre. {%—Virāṭ-svarūpa, as, ā, am,%}
consisting of Virāj, (applied to the Supreme Being.)
{%—Virāḍ-deha, as,%} m. ‘having the body of Virāj,’
a term for the universe. {%—Virāḍ-rūpā,%} f. a Vedic
form of the Tri-ṣṭubh metre (3 × 11 + 8 or rather +
7, giving forty syllables in all).
<LEND>

<L>43704<pc>0935-b<k1>virAja<k2>virAja
{%Vi-rāja, as,%}¦ m. = 2. {%vi-rāj.%}
<LEND>

<L>43705<pc>0935-b<k1>virAjat<k2>virAjat
{%Vi-rājat, an, antī%}¦ (ep. also {%atī%}), {%at,%} shining,
splendid; handsome.
<LEND>

<L>43706<pc>0935-b<k1>virAjamAna<k2>virAjamAna
{%Vi-rājamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, brilliant, splen-
did, handsome, gorgeous.
<LEND>

<L>43707<pc>0935-b<k1>virAjayat<k2>virAjayat
{%Vi-rājayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to shine, giving
radiance or lustre to, brightening.
<LEND>

<L>43708<pc>0935-b<k1>virAjita<k2>virAjita
{%Vi-rājita, as, ā, am,%}¦ illuminated, irradiated, splen-
did; made visible, manifested.
<LEND>

<L>43709<pc>0935-b<k1>virAwa<k2>virAwa
{#virAwa#}¦ {%virāṭa, as,%} m., N. of one of the
midland or north-west districts of India (perhaps
[Page0935-c+ 73]
Berar); N. of an ancient king of a particular district
in India, (the Pāṇḍavas being obliged to live in con-
cealment during the thirteenth year of their exile,
journied to the court of this king and entered his
service in various disguises.) {%—Virāṭa-ja, as,%} m. {%=%}
{%rāja-paṭṭa,%} a sort of inferior diamond (said to be
found in the country Virāṭa). {%—Virāṭa-parvan, a,%}
n., N. of the fourth book of the Mahā-bhārata (describ-
ing the adventures of the Pāṇḍu princes when living
in the service of king Virāṭa).
<LEND>

<L>43710<pc>0935-c<k1>virAwaka<k2>virAwaka
{%Virāṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a diamond of inferior quality.
<LEND>

<L>43711<pc>0935-c<k1>virARin<k2>virARin
{#virARin#}¦ {%vi-rāṇin, ī,%} m. (probably fr. rt.
{%raṇ%} with {%vi%}), an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>43712<pc>0935-c<k1>virAD<k2>virAD
{#virAD#}¦ {%vi-rādh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-rādhyati,%} &c.,
{%-rāddhum,%} to lose or be deprived of anything (inst.,
Ved.); to hurt, offend, injure, do an injury: Caus.
{%-rādhayati, -yitum,%} to oppose, thwart, be at vari-
ance, disagree.
<LEND>

<L>43713<pc>0935-c<k1>virAdDa<k2>virAdDa
{%Vi-rāddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ opposed, thwarted; injured,
hurt, offended, treated with disrespect, reviled, abused.
<LEND>

<L>43714<pc>0935-c<k1>virAdDf<k2>virAdDf
{%Vi-rāddhṛ, dhā, dhrī, dhṛ,%}¦ opposing, thwarting;
offending, injuring; abusive, calumnious.
<LEND>

<L>43715<pc>0935-c<k1>virADa<k2>virADa
{%Vi-rādha, as,%}¦ m. opposition, prevention; vexa-
tion, annoyance; a kind of Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>43716<pc>0935-c<k1>virADana<k2>virADana
{%Vi-rādhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of opposing, injuring,
hurting; pain, agony, anguish.
<LEND>

<L>43717<pc>0935-c<k1>virADayat<k2>virADayat
{%Vi-rādhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ opposing, being at
variance, disagreeing with.
<LEND>

<L>43718<pc>0935-c<k1>virADAna<k2>virADAna
{%Vi-rādhāna, am,%}¦ n. pain ({%= vi-rādhana%}).
<LEND>

<L>43719<pc>0935-c<k1>virADyat<k2>virADyat
{%Vi-rādhyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ opposing, thwarting;
offending, annoying, injuring, being at variance.
<LEND>

<L>43720<pc>0935-c<k1>virAla<k2>virAla
{#virAla#}¦ {%virāla, as,%} m. {%= viḍāla,%} a cat, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>43721<pc>0935-c<k1>virAva<k2>virAva
{#virAva#}¦ {%vi-rāva.%} See p. 936, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>43722<pc>0935-c<k1>viri<k2>viri
{#viri#}¦ {%vi-ri%} or {%vi-rī%} (see rts. 1. {%ri, rī%}), cl. 9.
P. A. {%-riṇāti, -riṇīte, -retum,%} Ved. to cleave asunder,
separate, cut to pieces, kill, destroy, (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 19, 3. {%vi-riṇāḥ = vy-ariṇāḥ =%}
{%viśeṣeṇa hatavān asi.%})
<LEND>

<L>43723<pc>0935-c<k1>viric<k2>viric
{#viric#}¦ {%vi-ric,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-riṇakti, -riṅkte,%}
{%-rektum,%} to empty, make empty, evacuate: Pass.
{%-ricyate,%} to extend or be extended, reach out, sur-
pass, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 16, 5. {%vi-%}
{%reci = ati-ririce, adhiko babhūva%}); to be emptied
or purged: Caus. {%-recayati, -yitum,%} to cause purg-
ing, purge, empty, make empty, cleanse, purify.
<LEND>

<L>43724<pc>0935-c<k1>virikta<k2>virikta
{%Vi-rikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ evacuated, emptied, purged.
<LEND>

<L>43725<pc>0935-c<k1>vireka<k2>vireka
{%Vi-reka, as,%}¦ m. purging, evacuation of the bowels;
a purgative, cathartic.
<LEND>

<L>43726<pc>0935-c<k1>virecana<k2>virecana
{%Vi-recana, am,%}¦ n. purging, evacuation of the
bowels; a purgative. {%—Virecana-dravya, am,%} n.
any purging substance or medicine.
<LEND>

<L>43727<pc>0935-c<k1>virecita<k2>virecita
{%Vi-recita, as, ā, am,%}¦ purged, emptied, evacuated.
<LEND>

<L>43728<pc>0935-c<k1>virecya<k2>virecya
{%Vi-recya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be purged or emptied.
<LEND>

<L>43729<pc>0935-c<k1>viriYca<k2>viriYca
{#viriYca#}¦ {%vi-riñca%} or {%vi-riñcana, as,%} m. a N.
of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>43730<pc>0935-c<k1>viriYci<k2>viriYci
{%Vi-riñci, is,%}¦ m., N. of Brahmā; of Viṣṇu; of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>43731<pc>0935-c<k1>viriPita<k2>viriPita
{#viriPita#}¦ {%vi-riphita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. de-
prived of the sound of {%r;%} pronounced or uttered
with great effort.
<LEND>

<L>43732<pc>0935-c<k1>viribDa<k2>viribDa
{#viribDa#}¦ {%vi-ribdha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ribh%} with
{%vi%}), sounded; ({%as%}), m. a note, tone, sound ({%= svara%}).
<LEND>

<L>43733<pc>0935-c<k1>viriBita<k2>viriBita
{%Vi-ribhita,%}¦ see Scholiast on Pāṇ. VII. 2, 18.
<LEND>

<L>43734<pc>0935-c<k1>vireBita<k2>vireBita
{%Vi-rebhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, uttered.
<LEND>

<L>43735<pc>0935-c<k1>viriS<k2>viriS
{#viriS#}¦ {%vi-riś%} or {%vi-liś%} (see rt. {%riś%}), cl. 6. A.
{%-riśate,%} &c., Ved. to be dragged or rent apart, to be
disarranged or disordered; to be torn off, break off,
become rent or torn.
<LEND>

<L>43736<pc>0935-c<k1>virizwa<k2>virizwa
{%Vi-riṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. rent asunder, broken
off, out of due order; ({%am%}), n. a defect in a sacri-
fice, (also written {%vi-liṣṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>43737<pc>0935-c<k1>virI<k2>virI
{#virI#}¦ {%vi-rī.%} See {%vi-ri%} above.
<LEND>

<L>43738<pc>0935-c<k1>viru<k2>viru
{#viru#}¦ {%vi-ru,%} cl. 2. P. {%-rauti, -ravīti, -ravitum,%}
to roar aloud, scream or shout out, cry, buzz, hum,
[Page0936-a+ 78]
yell, bray; to sound, jingle, rattle; to lament, weep,
appeal to with lamentations, call on, invoke: Caus.
{%-rāvayati, -yitum,%} to roar or scream aloud, fill with
noise or clamour; to make to sound or resound.
<LEND>

<L>43739<pc>0936-a<k1>virava<k2>virava
{%Vi-rava, as,%}¦ m., Ved. outcry, clamour, sound,
noise.
<LEND>

<L>43740<pc>0936-a<k1>virAva<k2>virAva
{%Vi-rāva, as,%}¦ m. crying or shouting out, clamour,
sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>43741<pc>0936-a<k1>virAvin<k2>virAvin
{%Vi-rāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ shouting or roaring out, re-
sounding, crying, singing; lamenting; ({%iṇī%}), f. weep-
ing, crying; a broom; N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>43742<pc>0936-a<k1>viruta<k2>viruta
{%Vi-ruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ roared aloud, screamed; re-
sounded, resounding, filled with cries, ({%mayūra-%}
{%viruta,%} filled with the cries of peacocks); ({%am%}), n.
shrieking, howling, crying, singing, humming (of
bees), chirping; clamour, noise, din, howling (of the
wind &c.), sound, tone.
<LEND>

<L>43743<pc>0936-a<k1>viruvat<k2>viruvat
{%Vi-ruvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ howling, crying, shrieking,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>43744<pc>0936-a<k1>viruc<k2>viruc
{#viruc#}¦ {%vi-ruc,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rocate%} (Ved. also
P. {%-rocati,%} in Raghu-v. VI. 5. and in one or two
other later works the Aor. P. {%vy-arucat%} is found),
{%-rocitum,%} to shine forth, glitter, be bright or radiant;
to be conspicuous, become visible, appear; to become
eminent or famous; to cause to shine, illuminate,
make bright (P.); to please, delight: Caus. {%-roca-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to shine, illuminate, brighten;
to find pleasure in, delight in; to sport with.
<LEND>

<L>43745<pc>0936-a<k1>virukmat<k2>virukmat
{%Virukmat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. shining, brilliant,
splendid; ({%ān%}), m. a bright weapon.
<LEND>

<L>43746<pc>0936-a<k1>viroka<k2>viroka
{%Vi-roka, as,%}¦ m. a ray of light; ({%am%}), n. a hole,
chasm.
<LEND>

<L>43747<pc>0936-a<k1>virokin<k2>virokin
{%Vi-rokin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. shining, glowing, gleam-
ing, bright.
<LEND>

<L>43748<pc>0936-a<k1>virocana<k2>virocana
{%Vi-rocana, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, illuminating; ({%as%}),
m. the sun; the moon; fire; N. of the son of
Prahlāda or Prahrāda; ({%am%}), n. (?), light, lustre.
{%—Virocana-vadha, as,%} m., N. of a chapter of the
Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Virocana-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. ‘son of Virocana,’ epithet of Bali
(sovereign of Mahābali-pura).
<LEND>

<L>43749<pc>0936-a<k1>virocamAna<k2>virocamAna
{%Vi-rocamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, glittering,
radiant.
<LEND>

<L>43750<pc>0936-a<k1>virocayat<k2>virocayat
{%Vi-rocayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to shine, mak-
ing bright.
<LEND>

<L>43751<pc>0936-a<k1>virocizRu<k2>virocizRu
{%Vi-rociṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ shining; illuminating,
making visible.
<LEND>

<L>43752<pc>0936-a<k1>viruj<k2>viruj
{#viruj#}¦ {%vi-ruj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-rujati, -roktum,%} to
break to pieces, tear asunder; to destroy.
<LEND>

<L>43753<pc>0936-a<k1>virugRa<k2>virugRa
{%Vi-rugṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (less correctly written {%vi-%}
{%rugna%}), broken to pieces, torn asunder; bent;
blunted; destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>43754<pc>0936-a<k1>virujya<k2>virujya
{%Vi-rujya,%}¦ ind. having broken to pieces, having
torn asunder.
<LEND>

<L>43755<pc>0936-a<k1>virud<k2>virud
{#virud#}¦ {%vi-rud,%} cl. 2. P. {%-roditi, -roditum,%}
to weep or cry aloud, sob, lament, bewail.
<LEND>

<L>43756<pc>0936-a<k1>viruda<k2>viruda
{%Vi-ruda, as,%}¦ m. crying; proclaiming; a laudatory
poem, panegyric. {%—Virudāvalī (˚da-āv˚),%} f., N. of
a poem by Raghu-deva celebrating the praises of a
certain king of Mithilā.
<LEND>

<L>43757<pc>0936-a<k1>virudita<k2>virudita
{%Vi-rudita, am,%}¦ n. loud lamentation, intense grief,
bewailing.
<LEND>

<L>43758<pc>0936-a<k1>viruD<k2>viruD<h>1
{#viruD#} 1¦. {%vi-rudh (= vi-ruh),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ro-%}
{%dhati,%} &c., Ved. to grow or sprout out, shoot forth.
<LEND>

<L>43759<pc>0936-a<k1>viruD<k2>viruD<h>2
{#viruD#} 2¦. {%vi-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ruṇaddhi,%}
{%-runddhe, -roddhum,%} to hinder, obstruct; to en-
counter opposition (A., Ved.): Pass. {%-rudhyate%} (ep.
also P. {%-ti%}), to be impeded or checked or kept back
or withheld; to be opposed to, contend with, com-
bat (with inst., or with inst. and {%saha,%} or with gen.,
or with loc., or with acc. and {%prati%}); to be at
variance, disagree, be inconsistent; to fail: Caus.
{%-rodhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to hinder or obstruct,
to render hostile, set at variance; to oppose, en-
counter, fight against, contend with: Pass. of Caus.
{%-rodhyate,%} to be impeded or kept back; to be ren-
dered hostile or set at variance: Desid. {%-rurutsati,%}
to wish to oppose, intend commencing hostility.
<LEND>
[Page0936-b+ 79]

<L>43760<pc>0936-b<k1>virudDa<k2>virudDa
{%Vi-ruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ opposed, hindered, checked,
restrained, arrested, obstructed, blocked or shut up,
besieged, barred or locked up, blockaded; opposed
or contrasted in quality (as sweet to sour &c.); con-
trary, repugnant, opposite, contradictory, perverse,
reverse, (a reason) proving the reverse (in logic);
incongruous, inconsistent, incompatible, mutually dis-
agreeing (as medicine and food); hostile, adverse, at
variance, at enmity; unpropitious, unfavourable, dis-
agreeable; prohibited, forbidden; excluded, disquali-
fied; doubtful, uncertain; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of
deities; ({%am%}), n. opposition, hostility, disagreement,
discord, a feeling of repugnance; ({%am%}), ind. per-
versely, incongruously. {%—Viruddha-tā,%} f. or {%virud-%}
{%dha-tva, am,%} n. opposition, contrariety, perverseness,
incongruity; hostility, enmity, disagreeableness. {%—Vi-%}
{%ruddha-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} having a hostile disposition,
malevolently disposed, malignant. {%—Viruddha-pra-%}
{%saṅga, as,%} m. a prohibited or unlawful occupation.
{%—Viruddha-bhuj, k, k, k,%} eating incompatible or
unsuitable food. {%—Viruddha-bhojana, am,%} n. in-
compatible food. {%—Viruddha-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n.,
N. of a section of the Purāṇa-sarva-sva. {%—Virud-%}
{%dhācaraṇa (˚dha-āc˚), am,%} n. a wrong or improper
course of conduct. {%—Viruddhānna (˚dha-an˚), am,%}
n. incompatible or forbidden food.
<LEND>

<L>43761<pc>0936-b<k1>virodDavya<k2>virodDavya
{%Vi-roddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be opposed, to be
obstructed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43762<pc>0936-b<k1>viroDa<k2>viroDa
{%Vi-rodha, as,%}¦ m. opposition, obstruction, hin-
drance, impediment; impediment to the successful
progress of a plot (in a drama); restraint, check;
blocking up, surrounding, investing, siege, blockade,
confinement; contradiction (in logic), contrariety,
antithesis, contrast; inconsistency, opposition of
qualities (in food, medicine, &c.); hostility, enmity,
animosity, quarrel, war, calamity, misfortune; ({%ī%}),
f. a fixed rule, ordinance (?). {%—Virodha-kāraka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} causing opposition or disagreement,
fomenting quarrels. {%—Virodha-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing
hindrance or opposition; an enemy; ({%t%}), m., N. of
the nineteenth year of Jupiter's cycle. {%—Virodhā-%}
{%bhāsa (˚dha-ābh˚), as,%} m. the semblance of oppo-
site qualities, a particular figure in rhetoric. {%—Vi-%}
{%rodhālaṅkāra (˚dha-al˚), as,%} m. (in rhetoric) ‘the
ornament of contradiction,’ a particular figure of
speech or mode of writing. {%—Virodhokti (˚dha-%}
{%uk˚), is,%} f. adverse or contradictory speech, quarrel,
dispute, mutual contradiction.
<LEND>

<L>43763<pc>0936-b<k1>viroDaka<k2>viroDaka
{%Vi-rodhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ opposing, contradicting,
incongruous.
<LEND>

<L>43764<pc>0936-b<k1>viroDana<k2>viroDana
{%Vi-rodhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of opposing, hinder-
ing, obstructing, preventing, blockading, besieging,
encountering, defying; opposition, resistance, con-
tradiction; incongruity, inconsistency.
<LEND>

<L>43765<pc>0936-b<k1>viroDita<k2>viroDita
{%Vi-rodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ opposed, contended against,
fought with, rendered hostile, set at variance.
<LEND>

<L>43766<pc>0936-b<k1>viroDin<k2>viroDin
{%Vi-rodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ opposing, hindering, prevent-
ing, obstructing, besieging; obstructive; excluding,
disqualifying; inimical, adverse, hostile; contradic-
tory, inconsistent; having opposite or incompatible
qualities (as food, medicine, &c.); contentious, quar-
relsome; ({%ī%}), m. an opponent, enemy; N. of the
fifty-seventh year of Jupiter's cycle; ({%inī%}), f. a woman
who causes enmity or promotes quarrels (between
husband and wife &c.).
<LEND>

<L>43767<pc>0936-b<k1>viroDya<k2>viroDya<h>1
1. {%vi-rodhya,%}¦ ind. having opposed, having con-
tended with.
<LEND>

<L>43768<pc>0936-b<k1>viroDya<k2>viroDya<h>2
2. {%vi-rodhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be opposed or con-
tended against.
<LEND>

<L>43769<pc>0936-b<k1>viruz<k2>viruz
{#viruz#}¦ {%vi-ruṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-roṣati,%} &c., {%-ro-%}
{%ṣitum%} or {%-roṣṭum,%} to displease, annoy, irritate.
<LEND>

<L>43770<pc>0936-b<k1>viruzwa<k2>viruzwa
{%Vi-ruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ very angry, very much irri-
tated.
<LEND>

<L>43771<pc>0936-b<k1>viruzyamARa<k2>viruzyamARa
{%Vi-ruṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being very angry at
(with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>43772<pc>0936-b<k1>viroza<k2>viroza
{%Vi-roṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ very angry, wrathful.
<LEND>

<L>43773<pc>0936-b<k1>viruh<k2>viruh
{#viruh#}¦ {%vi-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati, -roḍhum,%}
to grow or shoot out, shoot forth, sprout, bud; to
go forth, arise, proceed; to mount, ascend, increase:
Caus. {%-rohayati, -ropayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
[Page0936-c+ 77]
grow, plant; to cause to grow over or cicatrize, heal;
to thrust out, remove, expel, dethrone.
<LEND>

<L>43774<pc>0936-c<k1>virUQa<k2>virUQa
{%Vi-rūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown or shot out, budded,
blossomed; grown, increased, arisen, produced, born;
ascended, mounted, ridden. {%—Virūḍha-bodha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one whose intelligence has increased or matured.
<LEND>

<L>43775<pc>0936-c<k1>viropaRa<k2>viropaRa
{%Vi-ropaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to grow, planting;
causing to grow over, healing.
<LEND>

<L>43776<pc>0936-c<k1>viropita<k2>viropita
{%Vi-ropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ planted; caused to grow
over, healed. {%—Viropita-vraṇa, as, ā, am,%} one
whose wound is healed or cicatrized.
<LEND>

<L>43777<pc>0936-c<k1>viroha<k2>viroha
{%Vi-roha, as,%}¦ m. growing out, shooting forth.
<LEND>

<L>43778<pc>0936-c<k1>virohaRa<k2>virohaRa
{%Vi-rohaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of growing out, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43779<pc>0936-c<k1>virUkzaRa<k2>virUkzaRa
{#virUkzaRa#}¦ {%vi-rūkṣaṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt.
{%rūkṣ%} with {%vi%}), making rough or dry, drying, astrin-
gent; ({%am%}), n. the act of roughening or contract-
ing, acting as an astringent; censure, blame, reviling,
abuse; oath, imprecation.
<LEND>

<L>43780<pc>0936-c<k1>virUkzita<k2>virUkzita
{%Vi-rūkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made rough; smeared
over, covered.
<LEND>

<L>43781<pc>0936-c<k1>virUp<k2>virUp
{#virUp#}¦ {%vi-rūp,%} cl. 10. P. {%-rūpayati, -yitum,%}
to deform, make deformed, disfigure, mutilate.
<LEND>

<L>43782<pc>0936-c<k1>virUpa<k2>virUpa
{%Vi-rūpa, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} deformed, badly formed,
misshapen, ugly, unusual in form or nature, mon-
strous, unnatural; of various form, multiform, diver-
sified; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the descendants of
Vaivasvata Manu; N. of a descendant of Aṅgiras
(author of the hymns Ṛg-veda VIII. 43, 44, 64);
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a family belonging to the race
of Aṅgiras; ({%am%}), n. deformity, irregular or mon-
strous shape; difference of form, variety of nature or
character; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of Yama. {%—Vi-%}
{%rūpa-karaṇa, am,%} n. deformation, disfiguring. {%—Vi-%}
{%rūpa-cakṣus, us,%} m. ‘diversely-eyed,’ epithet of
Śiva, (see {%virūpākṣa.%}) {%—Virūpa-tā,%} f. deformity,
malformation. {%—Virūpa-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} having a
deformed shape, of a monstrous form, misshapen.
{%—Virūpākṣa (˚pa-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} diversely-
eyed, having deformed eyes; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of
Śiva (as represented with an odd number of eyes,
one being in his forehead, cf. {%tri-locana%}); N. of a
Rudra; of a teacher of the Haṭha-vidyā.
<LEND>

<L>43783<pc>0936-c<k1>virUpaka<k2>virUpaka
{%Vi-rūpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ deformed, misshapen;
monstrous, frightful, hideous; ({%as%}), m. a nickname.
<LEND>

<L>43784<pc>0936-c<k1>virUpita<k2>virUpita
{%Vi-rūpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ deformed, disfigured, muti-
lated.
<LEND>

<L>43785<pc>0936-c<k1>virepas<k2>virepas
{#virepas#}¦ {%vi-repas, ās, ās, as%} (see rt. 1. {%rip%}),
stainless, faultless, without blemish or defect.
<LEND>

<L>43786<pc>0936-c<k1>virePa<k2>virePa
{#virePa#}¦ {%vi-repha, as,%} m. the absence of the
letter {%r;%} a river, stream.
<LEND>

<L>43787<pc>0936-c<k1>vireBita<k2>vireBita
{#vireBita#}¦ {%vi-rebhita.%} See under {%vi-ribdha.%}
<LEND>

<L>43788<pc>0936-c<k1>viroza<k2>viroza
{#viroza#}¦ {%vi-roṣa.%} See under {%vi-ruṣ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>43789<pc>0936-c<k1>vil<k2>vil
{#vil#}¦ {%vil,%} cl. 6. P. {%vilati, velitum,%} to
cover, conceal, clothe; to break or
divide, (in this sense more usually written {%bil%}); cl.
10. P. {%velayati, -yitum,%} to throw, cast, direct, send.
<LEND>

<L>43790<pc>0936-c<k1>vila<k2>vila
{%Vila, am,%}¦ n. an aperture, opening, hole, chasm,
vacuity; a burrow, cave, cavern, den; the vagina;
({%as%}), m. one of Indra's horses; a sort of reed or
cane, Calamus Rotang. {%—Vila-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} mak-
ing holes, burrowing; ({%ī%}), m. a mouse. {%—Vilaṅ-%}
{%gama, as,%} m. ‘hole-goer,’ a serpent, snake. {%—Vi-%}
{%la-dhāvana, as, ī, am,%} Ved. (sensu obsceno)
rimam tergens. {%—Vila-yoni, is, is, i,%} of the breed
of Vila (said of horses). {%—Vila-vāsa, as, ā, am,%}
living in holes, burrowing; ({%as%}), m. an animal
which lives in holes; a polecat {%(= jāhaka)%}. {%—Vila-%}
{%vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living in a hole, burrowing; ({%ī%}), m.
a snake. {%—Vila-śaya, as, ī, am,%} living or burrowing
in holes; ({%as%}), m. any animal that lives in holes; a
snake. {%—Vila-śāyin, ī, inī, i,%} lying in a hole, living
in holes; ({%ī%}), m. any animal that lives in holes.
{%—Vile-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living or burrowing in holes;
({%ī%}), m. a snake. {%—Vile-śaya, as,%} m. any animal
living in holes; a snake; a rat; a hare or rabbit;
N. of a teacher of the Haṭha-vidyā. {%—Vileśvara%}
{%(˚la-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a place of pilgrimage;
[Page0937-a+ 78]
(perhaps incorrectly for {%bilveśvara.%}) {%—Vilaukas%}
{%(˚la-ok˚), ās, ās, as,%} living in a hole; ({%ās%}), m. any
animal that lives in holes.
<LEND>

<L>43791<pc>0937-a<k1>vilasa<k2>vilasa
{%Vilasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Gaṇa Tṛṇādi to Pāṇ. IV.
2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>43792<pc>0937-a<k1>vilakz<k2>vilakz
{#vilakz#}¦ {%vi-lakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-lakṣayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to distinguish, mark, characterize; to
observe, perceive, see, notice; to be without the
power of fixing the eye on any object, to become
bewildered or confused or embarrassed.
<LEND>

<L>43793<pc>0937-a<k1>vilakza<k2>vilakza
{%Vi-lakṣa, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%lakṣa%} with {%vi%} in a
privative sense or expressing difference), markless,
unmarked, having no distinguishing mark or aim;
having no characteristic mark or property; having a
different mark, having a character different to what
is usual or natural, strange, extraordinary; bewildered,
embarrassed; astonished, surprised; abashed, ashamed.
{%—Vilakṣa-tā,%} f. or {%vilakṣa-tva, am,%} n. absence
of mark or aim, absence of distinguishing property;
confusion, bewilderment, surprise; shame. {%—Vi-%}
{%lakṣī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make bewil-
dered or confused, scoff at, insult. {%—Vilakṣī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} scoffed at, insulted.
<LEND>

<L>43794<pc>0937-a<k1>vilakzaRa<k2>vilakzaRa<h>1
1. {%vi-lakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of distinguishing,
perceiving, seeing, observing.
<LEND>

<L>43795<pc>0937-a<k1>vilakzaRa<k2>vilakzaRa<h>2
2. {%vi-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having no distinguish-
ing marks; having different or opposite marks or
characteristics, having distinguishing qualities or
features, other, different, strange, extraordinary;
({%am%}), n. any state or condition which is without
distinguishing mark or for which no cause can be
assigned, vain or causeless state.
<LEND>

<L>43796<pc>0937-a<k1>vilakzita<k2>vilakzita<h>1
1. {%vi-lakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ distinguished, marked,
recognised, discerned, perceived, seen, observed,
noticed, discernible by; perplexed, dismayed, dis-
concerted, affected without cause, embarrassed, puz-
zled, vexed, annoyed, disappointed.
<LEND>

<L>43797<pc>0937-a<k1>vilakzita<k2>vilakzita<h>2
2. {%vi-lakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ undistinguished, un-
discriminated, unmarked.
<LEND>

<L>43798<pc>0937-a<k1>vilakzya<k2>vilakzya
{%Vi-lakṣya,%}¦ ind. having perceived or noticed, hav-
ing observed; having become bewildered or confused.
<LEND>

<L>43799<pc>0937-a<k1>vilag<k2>vilag
{#vilag#}¦ {%vi-lag,%} cl. 1. P. {%-lagati,%} &c., to
hang to, cling to, stick to, hold on to (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>43800<pc>0937-a<k1>vilagita<k2>vilagita
{%Vi-lagita, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached to, &c., (but see
{%vi-lagita%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>43801<pc>0937-a<k1>vilagna<k2>vilagna
{%Vi-lagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ clung to, clinging to, fastened
or attached to, resting on, fixed on, connected with;
brought close to; gone by, passed away; slender,
thin, delicate (said of the waist); ({%am%}), n. {%= lagna,%}
the rising of constellations, a horoscope, &c.; the
waist, middle (as connecting the upper and lower
parts of the body). {%—Vilagna-madhyā,%} f. a woman
with a slender waist.
<LEND>

<L>43802<pc>0937-a<k1>vilagya<k2>vilagya
{%Vi-lagya,%}¦ ind. having clung to, having stuck to.
<LEND>

<L>43803<pc>0937-a<k1>vilagita<k2>vilagita
{#vilagita#}¦ {%vi-lagita%} or {%vi-laṅgita,%} referred
to rt. {%laṅg%} with {%vi%} in Pāṇ. VI. 4, 24, Vārtt. 1.
<LEND>

<L>43804<pc>0937-a<k1>vilaNG<k2>vilaNG
{#vilaNG#}¦ {%vi-laṅgh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-laṅghati, -te,%}
{%-laṅghitum,%} to leap or spring about, jump, skip; cl.
10. P. or Caus. {%-laṅghayati, -yitum,%} to leap or jump
over, overstep, pass over, pass or rise beyond, pass
by, transgress, violate, neglect, contemn; to over-
come, surmount, get the better of, surpass, excel,
frustrate; to rise towards, ascend to; to give up,
abandon; to act wrongly towards, offend; to cause
to pass over the right time for eating, cause to fast,
make to abstain from food.
<LEND>

<L>43805<pc>0937-a<k1>vilaNGana<k2>vilaNGana
{%Vi-laṅghana, am,%}¦ n. the act of passing beyond,
transgressing, overstepping; striking against, trans-
gression, offence.
<LEND>

<L>43806<pc>0937-a<k1>vilaNGanIya<k2>vilaNGanIya
{%Vi-laṅghanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be overstepped or
passed over, to be transgressed.
<LEND>

<L>43807<pc>0937-a<k1>vilaNGayitvA<k2>vilaNGayitvA
{%Vi-laṅghayitvā,%}¦ anom. ind. part. having surpassed
or surmounted.
<LEND>

<L>43808<pc>0937-a<k1>vilaNGita<k2>vilaNGita
{%Vi-laṅghita, as, ā, am,%}¦ overleaped, overstepped,
transgressed; overcome, surpassed, excelled. {%—Vi-%}
{%laṅghitākāśa (˚ta-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} passing or rising
beyond the sky.
<LEND>

<L>43809<pc>0937-a<k1>vilaNGin<k2>vilaNGin
{%Vi-laṅghin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ transgressing, ascending to.
<LEND>
[Page0937-b+ 78]

<L>43810<pc>0937-b<k1>vilaNGya<k2>vilaNGya
{%Vi-laṅghya,%}¦ ind. having jumped or passed over,
having omitted or neglected.
<LEND>

<L>43811<pc>0937-b<k1>vilajj<k2>vilajj
{#vilajj#}¦ {%vi-lajj,%} cl. 6. A. {%-lajjate%} (some-
times also P. {%-lajjati%}), {%-lajjitum,%} to become ashamed
or abashed, feel ashamed, blush.
<LEND>

<L>43812<pc>0937-b<k1>vilajja<k2>vilajja
{%Vi-lajja, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%lajjā%} with {%vi%} in a priva-
tive sense), shameless, unabashed.
<LEND>

<L>43813<pc>0937-b<k1>vilajjat<k2>vilajjat
{%Vi-lajjat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} being ashamed,
feeling ashamed, modest, bashful.
<LEND>

<L>43814<pc>0937-b<k1>vilajjamAna<k2>vilajjamAna
{%Vi-lajjamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ ashamed, abashed,
modest, blushing.
<LEND>

<L>43815<pc>0937-b<k1>vilajjita<k2>vilajjita
{%Vi-lajjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ashamed, abashed.
<LEND>

<L>43816<pc>0937-b<k1>vilap<k2>vilap
{#vilap#}¦ {%vi-lap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-lapati, -te, -la-%}
{%pitum, -laptum,%} to wail, moan, weep, cry, utter
cries or lamentations, to mourn, bewail, lament (with
acc.), complain; to speak variously, talk much or
idly, prattle, chatter, talk (in general): Caus. {%-lāpa-%}
{%yati, -yate, -yitum,%} to cause to mourn or lament;
to cause to speak much (A.).
<LEND>

<L>43817<pc>0937-b<k1>vilapat<k2>vilapat
{%Vi-lapat, an, antī%}¦ (ep. also {%atī%}), {%at,%} lamenting,
wailing, moaning, complaining; prating, talking idly
or wildly; talking, speaking.
<LEND>

<L>43818<pc>0937-b<k1>vilapana<k2>vilapana
{%Vi-lapana, am,%}¦ n. the act of lamenting, wailing,
complaining, &c.; chattering, talking idly or wildly;
talking; the dirt or sediment of any oily substance
(as of clarified butter &c.). {%—Vilapana-vinoda, as,%}
m. removing (grief) by weeping.
<LEND>

<L>43819<pc>0937-b<k1>vilapamAna<k2>vilapamAna
{%Vi-lapamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ lamenting, wailing,
weeping.
<LEND>

<L>43820<pc>0937-b<k1>vilapita<k2>vilapita
{%Vi-lapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lamented, bewailed; chat-
tered; spoken idly, spoken; ({%am%}), n. lamentation,
wailing; a moan, wail.
<LEND>

<L>43821<pc>0937-b<k1>vilapizyat<k2>vilapizyat
{%Vi-lapiṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to lament
or bewail.
<LEND>

<L>43822<pc>0937-b<k1>vilapya<k2>vilapya
{%Vi-lapya,%}¦ ind. having bewailed or lamented,
lamenting, bewailing.
<LEND>

<L>43823<pc>0937-b<k1>vilapyat<k2>vilapyat
{%Vi-lapyat, an, antī, at%}¦ (ep. for {%vi-lapat%}),
lamenting, bewailing.
<LEND>

<L>43824<pc>0937-b<k1>vilApa<k2>vilApa
{%Vi-lāpa, as,%}¦ m. lamentation, crying, wailing,
moaning, complaint; a moan, wail, groan.
<LEND>

<L>43825<pc>0937-b<k1>vilaB<k2>vilaB
{#vilaB#}¦ {%vi-labh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-labhate, -labdhum,%}
to take away, remove; to grant, bestow, provide;
to consign, hand over, deliver: Caus. {%-lambhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to receive or fall to the share of
9with double acc.): Desid. {%-lipsate,%} to desire to
take away, wish to share.
<LEND>

<L>43826<pc>0937-b<k1>vilabDa<k2>vilabDa
{%Vi-labdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken away, taken; given,
bestowed, consigned.
<LEND>

<L>43827<pc>0937-b<k1>vilamBa<k2>vilamBa
{%Vi-lambha, as,%}¦ m. giving, gift, donation; libe-
rality.
<LEND>

<L>43828<pc>0937-b<k1>vilamb<k2>vilamb
{#vilamb#}¦ {%vi-lamb,%} cl. 1. A. {%-lambate%} (ep.
also P. {%-lambati%}), {%-lambitum,%} to hang on both
sides (Ved.), hang down, hang on, hang to or from,
be attached to (with loc.); to sink, set, decline; to
continue hanging, linger, loiter, delay (e. g. {%mā vi-%}
{%lambasva,%} do not delay), tarry, hesitate, procrasti-
nate: Pass. {%-lambyate,%} to be lingered or loitered,
to be delayed: Caus. {%-lambayati, -te, -yitum,%} to
cause to linger or loiter, detain, delay; to spend un-
profitably, waste, lose; to put off, procrastinate; to
loiter, delay.
<LEND>

<L>43829<pc>0937-b<k1>vilamba<k2>vilamba
{%Vi-lamba, as,%}¦ m. hanging or falling down, pen-
dulousness; slowness, tardiness, delay, procrastina-
tion; N. of the sixth year of Jupiter's cycle.
<LEND>

<L>43830<pc>0937-b<k1>vilambat<k2>vilambat
{%Vi-lambat, an, antī, at,%}¦ hanging down, falling
down, delaying.
<LEND>

<L>43831<pc>0937-b<k1>vilambana<k2>vilambana
{%Vi-lambana, am,%}¦ n. hanging down or from, de-
pending; delaying, delay, procrastination, retarding.
<LEND>

<L>43832<pc>0937-b<k1>vilambamAna<k2>vilambamAna
{%Vi-lambamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ hanging down, hang-
ing from; hanging or suspended on; declining, set-
ting (said of the sun).
<LEND>

<L>43833<pc>0937-b<k1>vilambikA<k2>vilambikA
{%Vi-lambikā,%}¦ f. retardation of the feces, constipation.
<LEND>

<L>43834<pc>0937-b<k1>vilambita<k2>vilambita
{%Vi-lambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ hanging or falling down,
depending; pendulous; hanging on, closely con-
nected with or dependent on; retarded, procrasti-
nated, slow, tardy; slow (as time in music or in
chanting the Veda &c.; cf. {%vṛtti%}); spent use-
lessly, wasted; ({%am%}), ind. slowly, tardily; ({%am%}), n.
[Page0937-c+ 77]
delay, ({%a-vilambitam,%} ind. without delay); ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. slow time. {%—Vilambita-gati, is, is, i,%}
slow or tardy in motion; epithet of a kind of metre.
{%—Vilambita-phala, as, ā, am,%} having the fruit
or fulfilment delayed.
<LEND>

<L>43835<pc>0937-c<k1>vilambin<k2>vilambin
{%Vi-lambin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hanging down or from, de-
pending, pendulous; delaying, retarding, dilatory,
slow; ({%ī%}), m. the thirty-second year of the Indian
cycle.
<LEND>

<L>43836<pc>0937-c<k1>vilambya<k2>vilambya
{%Vi-lambya,%}¦ ind. having lingered or loitered,
loitering, dallying, ({%a-vilambya,%} without delay.)
<LEND>

<L>43837<pc>0937-c<k1>vilaya<k2>vilaya
{#vilaya#}¦ {%vi-laya,%} &c. See under {%vi-lī,%} p. 938.
<LEND>

<L>43838<pc>0937-c<k1>vilalA<k2>vilalA
{#vilalA#}¦ {%vi-lalā,%} f. (probably fr. rt. {%lal%} with
{%vi%}), a sort of plant, Sida Cordifolia ({%= śveta-balā%}).
<LEND>

<L>43839<pc>0937-c<k1>vilas<k2>vilas
{#vilas#}¦ {%vi-las,%} cl. 1. P. {%-lasati, -lasitum,%} to
gleam, flash, glitter, shine; to shine forth, come to
light, appear, arise, be manifested; to play, sport, be
sportive or wanton, be amused or delighted; to jump
or frisk about, move about, dart, wave; to sound,
echo.
<LEND>

<L>43840<pc>0937-c<k1>vilasat<k2>vilasat
{%Vi-lasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flashing, shining, glitter-
ing, brilliant, beautiful, splendid; shining forth, ap-
pearing; playing, sporting, sportive, wanton; frisk-
ing or moving about, waving, darting, flashing (as
lightning); sounding, echoing. {%—Vilasat-patāka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a gleaming or waving flag. {%—Vi-%}
{%lasan-marīci, is, is, i,%} having rays of light gleam-
ing or playing.
<LEND>

<L>43841<pc>0937-c<k1>vilasana<k2>vilasana
{%Vi-lasana, am,%}¦ n. the act of flashing, gleaming,
sporting, dallying, play, sport.
<LEND>

<L>43842<pc>0937-c<k1>vilasita<k2>vilasita
{%Vi-lasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gleaming, glittering, shin-
ing, shining forth, appearing, appeared, manifested;
played, sported; sportive, wanton; ({%am%}), n. gleam-
ing, flashing; appearance, manifestation, ({%vidyā-v˚,%}
manifestation of knowledge); a gleam, flash; sport,
play, pastime, dalliance, wanton gestures; a brilliant
action, action or gesture (in general).
<LEND>

<L>43843<pc>0937-c<k1>vilAsa<k2>vilAsa
{%Vi-lāsa, as,%}¦ m. sport, pastime, play, merriness,
(especially) amorous pastime, diversion (with women,
dancers, singers, &c.), dalliance, coquetry, affecta-
tion of coyness, wantonness, (a form of feminine
gesture considered as indicative of amorous senti-
ments, such as change of place, posture, gait, look,
hiding at the approach of a lover, assuming a look
of displeasure, &c.); grace, elegance, charm, beauty.
{%—Vilāsa-kānana, am,%} n. a pleasure-grove, pleasure-
ground. {%—Vilāsa-mandira, am,%} n. a pleasure-house,
summer-house. {%—Vilāsa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} sportive,
playful, dallying, wanton; ({%atī%}), f. a wanton or
coquettish woman. {%—Vilāsa-vibhavānasa%} (?), {%as,%}
{%ā, am,%} greedy, covetous.
<LEND>

<L>43844<pc>0937-c<k1>vilAsana<k2>vilAsana
{%Vi-lāsana, am,%}¦ n. (perhaps for the more correct
form {%vi-lasana%}), sport, pastime, play, dalliance,
wantonness; fascination.
<LEND>

<L>43845<pc>0937-c<k1>vilAsikA<k2>vilAsikA
{%Vi-lāsikā,%}¦ f. a drama in one act on any light
subject or adventure.
<LEND>

<L>43846<pc>0937-c<k1>vilAsin<k2>vilAsin
{%Vi-lāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wanton, sportive, coquettish,
playful, dallying; ({%ī%}), m. a sporter, voluptuary, sen-
sualist; fire; the moon; a snake; an epithet of
Viṣṇu; of Kṛṣṇa; of Śiva; of Kāma, god of
love; ({%inī%}), f. a wanton woman, harlot; a coquettish
woman, any woman.
<LEND>

<L>43847<pc>0937-c<k1>vilAtA<k2>vilAtA
{#vilAtA#}¦ {%vilātā,%} f., Ved. a young girl (?).
<LEND>

<L>43848<pc>0937-c<k1>vilAla<k2>vilAla
{#vilAla#}¦ {%vi-lāla, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%lal%} with {%vi%}),
an instrument, machine ({%= yantra%}); a cat, (in this
sense {%= viḍāla, virāla,%} q. q. v. v.)
<LEND>

<L>43849<pc>0937-c<k1>viliK<k2>viliK
{#viliK#}¦ {%vi-likh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-likhati, -lekhitum%}
(Ved. inf. {%-likhas%}), to scratch, scratch up, tear, tear
open, scarify, scrape, rub, rub against, touch, reach
to; to scratch in or on, make a furrow or mark,
make an incision, write, write down, delineate, paint:
Caus. {%-lekhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to scratch, cause
to write.
<LEND>

<L>43850<pc>0937-c<k1>viliKat<k2>viliKat
{%Vi-likhat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} scratching, tearing,
scraping, writing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43851<pc>0937-c<k1>viliKana<k2>viliKana
{%Vi-likhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of scratching, scraping,
writing, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0938-a+ 78]

<L>43852<pc>0938-a<k1>viliKita<k2>viliKita
{%Vi-likhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ scratched, scraped, scarified.
<LEND>

<L>43853<pc>0938-a<k1>viliKya<k2>viliKya
{%Vi-likhya,%}¦ ind. having scratched, having written, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43854<pc>0938-a<k1>vileKana<k2>vileKana
{%Vi-lekhana, am,%}¦ n. making an incision or mark
or furrow; dividing, splitting; digging, delving,
rooting up.
<LEND>

<L>43855<pc>0938-a<k1>vileKin<k2>vileKin
{%Vi-lekhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ scratching, scraping, touching,
reaching.
<LEND>

<L>43856<pc>0938-a<k1>vilip<k2>vilip
{#vilip#}¦ {%vi-lip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-limpati, -te,%}
{%-leptum,%} to smear over, besmear, plaster, spread over,
anoint; to smear or spread on; to pollute: Pass.
{%-lipyate,%} to be anointed, be smeared over.
<LEND>

<L>43857<pc>0938-a<k1>vilipta<k2>vilipta
{%Vi-lipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ smeared over, besmeared,
anointed, plastered, smeared.
<LEND>

<L>43858<pc>0938-a<k1>vilimpita<k2>vilimpita
{%Vi-limpita, as, ā, am%}¦ (said to be fr. the Caus.),
smeared over, besmeared.
<LEND>

<L>43859<pc>0938-a<k1>vilepa<k2>vilepa
{%Vi-lepa, as,%}¦ m. ointment, unguent, (especially
the fragrant unguent of sandal, agallochum, &c.);
anointing, plastering; mortar, plaster; ({%ī%}), f. rice-
gruel.
<LEND>

<L>43860<pc>0938-a<k1>vilepana<k2>vilepana
{%Vi-lepana, am,%}¦ n. the act of smearing, anointing,
plastering over, smearing or anointing the body
(with fragrant oils, &c.); perfume for the person (as
unguent or oil of sandal, saffron, camphor, bdellium,
&c.); ointment of any kind; ({%ī%}), f. a woman
scented with perfumes, &c.; rice-gruel.
<LEND>

<L>43861<pc>0938-a<k1>vilepanin<k2>vilepanin
{%Vilepanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing unguents or per-
fumes, ({%a-vilepanin,%} deprived of ointments.)
<LEND>

<L>43862<pc>0938-a<k1>vilepikA<k2>vilepikA
{%Vi-lepikā,%}¦ f. rice-gruel.
<LEND>

<L>43863<pc>0938-a<k1>vilepin<k2>vilepin
{%Vi-lepin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ smearing or plastering over,
one who anoints, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43864<pc>0938-a<k1>vilepya<k2>vilepya
{%Vi-lepya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spread over or plastered;
({%as%}), m. rice-gruel.
<LEND>

<L>43865<pc>0938-a<k1>viliS<k2>viliS
{#viliS#}¦ {%vi-liś = vi-riś,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>43866<pc>0938-a<k1>vilizwa<k2>vilizwa
{%Vi-liṣṭa = vi-riṣṭa.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>43867<pc>0938-a<k1>vilisteNgA<k2>vilisteNgA
{#vilisteNgA#}¦ {%vilisteṅgā,%} f., N. of a Dānavī
(of whom Indra was enamoured).
<LEND>

<L>43868<pc>0938-a<k1>vilih<k2>vilih
{#vilih#}¦ {%vi-lih,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-leḍhi, -līḍhe,%}
{%-leḍhum,%} to lick, lick up, lap.
<LEND>

<L>43869<pc>0938-a<k1>vilelihat<k2>vilelihat
{%Vi-lelihat, at, atī, at%}¦ (Intens. pres. part.; in
Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 8075. {%vi-lelihan,%} nom. case
masc.), licking continually.
<LEND>

<L>43870<pc>0938-a<k1>vilelihAna<k2>vilelihAna
{%Vi-lelihāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ continually or repeatedly
licking.
<LEND>

<L>43871<pc>0938-a<k1>vilI<k2>vilI
{#vilI#}¦ {%vi-lī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate, -lātum%} or {%-le-%}
{%tum,%} to cling to, lie close to, stick to, cleave to, be
united or addicted or attached to; to settle on, alight
or perch on; to become disunited or dissolved, be-
come liquid, melt away; to become dissipated or
dispersed, become ineffectual; to fall to pieces, be
destroyed, perish, vanish, disappear, become hidden;
cl. 1. P. {%-layati,%} to make liquid or fluid, melt:
Caus. {%-līnayati, -lāpayati, -lālayati, -lāyayati,%}
(according to some grammarians this last is the form
to be used when not speaking of liquefying butter or
similar substances, see Pāṇ. VII. 3, 39), {%-yitum,%} to
cause to become disunited or dissolved, cause to be
dissolved in (with loc.); to make liquid, dissolve,
melt; to cause to vanish or disappear, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>43872<pc>0938-a<k1>vilaya<k2>vilaya
{%Vi-laya, as,%}¦ m. dissolution, liquefaction, death,
destruction, destruction of the world, ({%vilayaṃ gam,%}
to be dissolved, to end.)
<LEND>

<L>43873<pc>0938-a<k1>vilayana<k2>vilayana
{%Vi-layana, am,%}¦ n. the act of dissolving, liquefy-
ing, dissolution, liquefaction, destroying; corroding,
eating away; removing, taking away; attenuating;
an attenuant, escharotic (in medicine).
<LEND>

<L>43874<pc>0938-a<k1>vilApita<k2>vilApita
{%Vi-lāpita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), caused to be
dissolved, liquefied.
<LEND>

<L>43875<pc>0938-a<k1>vilApyamAna<k2>vilApyamAna
{%Vi-lāpyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being caused to be
dissolved, being liquefied.
<LEND>

<L>43876<pc>0938-a<k1>vilAya<k2>vilAya
{%Vi-lāya,%}¦ ind. {%= vi-līya,%} Pāṇ. VI. 1, 51.
<LEND>

<L>43877<pc>0938-a<k1>vilAyam<k2>vilAyam
{%Vi-lāyam,%}¦ ind. becoming dissolved, melting away,
becoming dispersed, ({%abhra-vilāyam,%} in the manner
of the dissolving of a cloud, Kirāt. XI. 79.)
<LEND>

<L>43878<pc>0938-a<k1>vilAyita<k2>vilAyita
{%Vi-lāyita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), made liquid,
dissolved, melted.
<LEND>

<L>43879<pc>0938-a<k1>vilIna<k2>vilIna
{%Vi-līna, as, ā, am,%}¦ clinging to, sticking or cleav-
ing to, attached to, addicted to, immersed in; settled
on, alighting on [cf. {%śākhā-v˚%}]; contiguous to, in
[Page0938-b+ 77]
contact with, united or blended with; infused into
the mind, imagined; dissolved, liquid, liquefied,
melted, semifluid (as melted oil or butter, &c.);
disappeared, perished, vanished. {%—Vilīna-ṣaṭpada,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having bees clinging or attached.
<LEND>

<L>43880<pc>0938-b<k1>vilIya<k2>vilIya
{%Vi-līya,%}¦ ind. having settled down, having become
dissolved, having disappeared.
<LEND>

<L>43881<pc>0938-b<k1>vilIyat<k2>vilIyat
{%Vi-līyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ clinging to, settling; be-
coming dissolved, liquefying.
<LEND>

<L>43882<pc>0938-b<k1>vilIyamAna<k2>vilIyamAna
{%Vi-līyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being dissolved or
melted, &c., disappearing, being hidden.
<LEND>

<L>43883<pc>0938-b<k1>viluYc<k2>viluYc
{#viluYc#}¦ {%vi-luñc,%} cl. 1. P. {%-luñcati, -luñcitum,%}
to tear off, tear out, pluck off, tear to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>43884<pc>0938-b<k1>viluYcana<k2>viluYcana
{%Vi-luñcana, am,%}¦ n. the act of tearing off.
<LEND>

<L>43885<pc>0938-b<k1>viluW<k2>viluW
{#viluW#}¦ {%vi-luṭh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-luṭhati, -luṭhitum,%}
to roll, roll or move about, move to and fro, quiver,
flicker; to agitate, move, stir, rouse, excite.
<LEND>

<L>43886<pc>0938-b<k1>viluWat<k2>viluWat
{%Vi-luṭhat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} rolling, moving to
and fro, sparkling.
<LEND>

<L>43887<pc>0938-b<k1>viluWita<k2>viluWita
{%Vi-luṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, excited.
<LEND>

<L>43888<pc>0938-b<k1>viluq<k2>viluq
{#viluq#}¦ {%vi-luḍ%} (closely connected with {%vi-%}
{%lul%}), Caus. {%-loḍayati,%} &c., to agitate, stir about,
stir up, rouse, move to and fro, toss about; to turn
over, upset; to disarrange, disturb, disorder, confuse,
throw into disorder or confusion.
<LEND>

<L>43889<pc>0938-b<k1>viloqana<k2>viloqana
{%Vi-loḍana, am,%}¦ n. the act of agitating, shaking,
stirring, churning, rolling, tossing.
<LEND>

<L>43890<pc>0938-b<k1>viloqayitf<k2>viloqayitf
{%Vi-loḍayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. an agitator, disturber.
<LEND>

<L>43891<pc>0938-b<k1>viloqita<k2>viloqita
{%Vi-loḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, shaken, churned;
rolling or tumbling on the ground; ({%am%}), n. butter-
milk ({%= takra%}).
<LEND>

<L>43892<pc>0938-b<k1>viloqyamAna<k2>viloqyamAna
{%Vi-loḍyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being agitated, being
stirred about or up, being tossed about; being thrown
into disorder, being disarranged.
<LEND>

<L>43893<pc>0938-b<k1>viluRwya<k2>viluRwya
{#viluRwya#}¦ {%vi-luṇṭya,%} ind. having taken
away, having taken off the husk, (in Pañca-tantra,
p. 121, 13, a better reading has {%luñcitvā.%})
<LEND>

<L>43894<pc>0938-b<k1>viluRW<k2>viluRW
{#viluRW#}¦ {%vi-luṇṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-luṇṭhati, -luṇ-%}
{%ṭhitum,%} to carry off, rob, plunder, steal: Pass.
{%-luṇṭhyate,%} to be plundered or ravaged.
<LEND>

<L>43895<pc>0938-b<k1>viluRWana<k2>viluRWana
{%Vi-luṇṭhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of plundering, robbing.
<LEND>

<L>43896<pc>0938-b<k1>viluRWita<k2>viluRWita
{%Vi-luṇṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ robbed, plundered, pil-
laged; rolled or rolling about ({%= vi-luṭhita%}).
<LEND>

<L>43897<pc>0938-b<k1>vilup<k2>vilup
{#vilup#}¦ {%vi-lup,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-lumpati, -te,%}
{%-loptum,%} to tear or break off, cut off; to tear or
break to pieces, pull out or up; to tear or carry
away, carry off, ravish, seize, plunder, rob, pillage;
to destroy, confound, ruin; to fall to pieces, be
ruined (A.): Pass. {%-lupyate,%} to be torn away or
carried off, be plundered, be destroyed, perish, be
lost, disappear, fail: Caus. {%-lopayati, -yitum,%} to
tear or carry away, withhold, keep back; to cause to
disappear, destroy, ruin, oppress, extinguish.
<LEND>

<L>43898<pc>0938-b<k1>vilupta<k2>vilupta
{%Vi-lupta, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn off or away, broken off,
broken; carried off or away, snatched away, seized,
taken, plundered, robbed; destroyed, ruined, lost;
impaired, mutilated.
<LEND>

<L>43899<pc>0938-b<k1>vilumpaka<k2>vilumpaka
{%Vi-lumpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ one who breaks or cuts
off; one who seizes or robs; a robber, ravisher.
<LEND>

<L>43900<pc>0938-b<k1>vilumpat<k2>vilumpat
{%Vi-lumpat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} tearing or pluck-
ing off, tearing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43901<pc>0938-b<k1>vilopa<k2>vilopa
{%Vi-lopa, as,%}¦ m. carrying off, seizing, taking away;
a break or interruption in the Saṃhitā (according
to the Prātiśākhyas).
<LEND>

<L>43902<pc>0938-b<k1>vilopana<k2>vilopana
{%Vi-lopana, am,%}¦ n. the act of tearing or breaking
to pieces, cutting off, destroying, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>43903<pc>0938-b<k1>vilopita<k2>vilopita
{%Vi-lopita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn away, broken, ruined,
destroyed, oppressed, extinguished, put out.
<LEND>

<L>43904<pc>0938-b<k1>viluB<k2>viluB
{#viluB#}¦ {%vi-lubh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-lubhyati, -lobhi-%}
{%tum%} or {%-lobdhum,%} to become disordered or disar-
ranged, fall into disorder or confusion: Caus. {%-lobha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to lead astray, perplex, confuse; to
allure, entice, tempt; to divert, amuse, delight.
<LEND>

<L>43905<pc>0938-b<k1>viluBita<k2>viluBita
{%Vi-lubhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disordered, disarranged,
disturbed, agitated, bewildered; tossed or shaken
about. {%—Vilubhita-plava, as, ā, am,%} going in an
agitated manner.
<LEND>
[Page0938-c+ 75]

<L>43906<pc>0938-c<k1>viloBa<k2>viloBa
{%Vi-lobha, as,%}¦ m. attraction, delusion, seduction.
<LEND>

<L>43907<pc>0938-c<k1>viloBana<k2>viloBana
{%Vi-lobhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of leading astray, per-
plexing, beguiling; allurement, attraction, temptation,
seduction; flattering, praise, commendation (especially
by contrast with inferiority).
<LEND>

<L>43908<pc>0938-c<k1>viloBayat<k2>viloBayat
{%Vi-lobhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ alluring, enticing;
diverting, amusing, delighting.
<LEND>

<L>43909<pc>0938-c<k1>viloBita<k2>viloBita
{%Vi-lobhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ allured, beguiled; deceived;
flattered, praised.
<LEND>

<L>43910<pc>0938-c<k1>viloBya<k2>viloBya
{%Vi-lobhya,%}¦ ind. having enticed or beguiled, having
fascinated, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43911<pc>0938-c<k1>viloByamAna<k2>viloByamAna
{%Vi-lobhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being allured or en-
ticed, being fascinated, being overcome.
<LEND>

<L>43912<pc>0938-c<k1>vilul<k2>vilul
{#vilul#}¦ {%vi-lul%} (closely connected with {%vi-%}
{%luḍ%}), cl. 1. P. {%-lolati,%} &c., to move or roll about;
to become disarranged or confused: Caus. {%-lolayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to move or roll about, agitate, dis-
turb.
<LEND>

<L>43913<pc>0938-c<k1>vilulita<k2>vilulita
{%Vi-lulita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved hither and thither;
shaken down, falling down, rolling down; shaken,
shaking about, agitated, waving, tremulous, unsteady,
fickle; disordered, disarranged. {%—Vilulitālaka (˚ta-%}
{%al˚), as, ā, am,%} having disordered or dishevelled
locks.
<LEND>

<L>43914<pc>0938-c<k1>vilola<k2>vilola
{%Vi-lola, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving or shaking about;
shaking, trembling, tremulous, fickle, unsteady, loose;
rolling (as the eye), rolling or tossing about, waving.
{%—Vilola-tā,%} f. or {%vilola-tva, am,%} n. tremulousness,
unsteadiness; rolling (of the eyes). {%—Vilola-hāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having necklaces tossing about.
<LEND>

<L>43915<pc>0938-c<k1>vilolana<k2>vilolana
{%Vi-lolana, am,%}¦ n. the act of shaking; stirring,
agitating.
<LEND>

<L>43916<pc>0938-c<k1>vilolita<k2>vilolita
{%Vi-lolita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved hither and thither,
shaken about, agitated, tossed about. {%—Vilolita-dṛś,%}
{%k, k, k,%} rolling the eyes, having tremulous eyes.
<LEND>

<L>43917<pc>0938-c<k1>vilUna<k2>vilUna
{#vilUna#}¦ {%vi-lūna, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} cut asunder,
cut off, cut, (Pāṇ. IV. 1, 52, Vārtt. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>43918<pc>0938-c<k1>vilok<k2>vilok
{#vilok#}¦ {%vi-lok,%} cl. 1. A. {%-lokate, -lokitum,%}
to look at or upon, regard; to examine, test, study;
cl. 10. P. or Caus. {%-lokayati, -yitum,%} to look at,
look on or upon, look towards, behold, regard, ob-
serve, consider, examine; to perceive, see, discover,
be aware of; to look over or beyond (with acc.):
Pass. {%-lokyate,%} to be seen, be visible.
<LEND>

<L>43919<pc>0938-c<k1>vilokana<k2>vilokana
{%Vi-lokana, am,%}¦ n. the act of looking or regarding,
discerning, seeing, spying; sight, observation.
<LEND>

<L>43920<pc>0938-c<k1>vilokanIya<k2>vilokanIya
{%Vi-lokanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked at; worthy
of being looked at, agreeable, beautiful. {%—Vilokanīya-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%vilokanīya-tva, am,%} n. a state worthy of
being looked at, loveliness, beauty.
<LEND>

<L>43921<pc>0938-c<k1>vilokayat<k2>vilokayat
{%Vi-lokayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ looking at, seeing; dis-
cerning.
<LEND>

<L>43922<pc>0938-c<k1>vilokita<k2>vilokita
{%Vi-lokita, as, ā, am,%}¦ looked at, beheld, seen,
observed, regarded, examined, contemplated; ({%am%}),
n. a look, glance.
<LEND>

<L>43923<pc>0938-c<k1>vilokya<k2>vilokya
{%Vi-lokya,%}¦ ind. having looked at, having seen or
observed, having perceived or noticed or witnessed;
having regard to, paying attention to.
<LEND>

<L>43924<pc>0938-c<k1>viloka<k2>viloka
{#viloka#}¦ {%vi-loka, as, ā, am,%} apart from the
world, solitary, lonely.
<LEND>

<L>43925<pc>0938-c<k1>vilocana<k2>vilocana
{#vilocana#}¦ {%vi-locana, am,%} n. the eye, sight.
{%—Vilocana-pāta, as,%} m. a cast or glance of the
eye, a glance, look. {%—Vilocanāmbu (˚na-am˚), u,%}
n. ‘eye-water,’ tears.
<LEND>

<L>43926<pc>0938-c<k1>vilowaka<k2>vilowaka
{#vilowaka#}¦ {%vi-loṭaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%luṭ%} with
{%vi%}), a sort of fish, Clupea Cultrata ({%= nala-mīna%}).
<LEND>

<L>43927<pc>0938-c<k1>viloqana<k2>viloqana
{#viloqana#}¦ {%vi-loḍana,%} &c. See under {%vi-luḍ,%}
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>43928<pc>0938-c<k1>vilopa<k2>vilopa
{#vilopa#}¦ {%vi-lopa,%} &c. See under {%vi-lup.%}
<LEND>

<L>43929<pc>0938-c<k1>viloBa<k2>viloBa
{#viloBa#}¦ {%vi-lobha,%} &c. See under {%vi-lubh.%}
<LEND>

<L>43930<pc>0938-c<k1>viloma<k2>viloma
{#viloma#}¦ {%vi-loma, as, ī, am,%} against the hair,
against the grain, out of the usual or proper course,
reverse, inverted, inverse, turned the wrong way,
turned backward, contrary, opposite; produced in
the reverse order [cf. {%viloma-ja%}]; ({%as%}), m. reverse
[Page0939-a+ 77]
order, opposite course, reverse; a snake; a dog; an
epithet of Varuṇa (the regent of the waters); ({%am%}),
n. a water-wheel or machine for raising water from
a well ({%= ara-ghaṭṭaka%}); ({%ī%}), f. Emblic Myrobalan.
{%—Viloma-kriyā,%} f. reverse action, doing anything
in reverse order or backwards; (in arithmetic) rule of
inversion. {%—Viloma-ja%} or {%viloma-jāta, as, ā, am,%}
‘born out of the proper course or in the reverse
order,’ i. e. one whose father and mother have their
stations reversed, the father being of an inferior caste
and the mother of a superior. {%—Viloma-jihva, as,%}
m. an elephant (as having a tongue which moves
backwards ?). {%—Viloma-trairāśika, am,%} n. rule of
three inverse. {%—Viloma-varṇa, as,%} m. ‘of reverse
caste,’ a man of mixed or inferior birth, (see {%viloma-%}
{%ja%} above.) {%—Viloma-vidhi, is,%} m. an inverted rite,
reversed ceremony; (in arithmetic) rule of inversion.
{%—Vilomākṣara-kāvya (˚ma-ak˚), am,%} n. a poem
which may be read either backwards or forwards; {%=%}
{%rāma-kṛṣṇa-kāvya,%} q. v. {%—Vilomotpanna (˚ma-%}
{%ut˚), as, ā, am, = viloma-ja%} above.
<LEND>

<L>43931<pc>0939-a<k1>vilomita<k2>vilomita
{%Vi-lomita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reversed, inverted, made
averse or disaffected.
<LEND>

<L>43932<pc>0939-a<k1>vilola<k2>vilola
{#vilola#}¦ {%vi-lola, vi-lolita,%} &c. See p. 938.
<LEND>

<L>43933<pc>0939-a<k1>vilohita<k2>vilohita
{#vilohita#}¦ {%vi-lohita, as, ā, am,%} of a deep-red
or purple colour; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Rudra and Fire
(as identified with Rudra); ({%ā%}), f. (according to
some), epithet of one of the tongues of fire; [cf. {%su-%}
{%lohita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>43934<pc>0939-a<k1>villa<k2>villa
{#villa#}¦ {%villa, am,%} n. (probably connected with
{%vila%}), a pit, hole, a basin for water round the root
of a tree ({%= ālavāla%}); Asa Fetida. {%—Villa-mūlā,%}
f. a sort of yam ({%= vārāhī%}).
<LEND>

<L>43935<pc>0939-a<k1>vilva<k2>vilva
{#vilva#}¦ {%vilva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vil,%} also written
{%bilva,%} q. v.), the tree Ægle Marmelos (commonly
called Bel); ({%am%}), n. the fruit of the Bel; a particu-
lar weight, (see {%bilva.%}) For the compounds of {%vilva%}
see {%bilva.%}
<LEND>

<L>43936<pc>0939-a<k1>vivakvas<k2>vivakvas
{#vivakvas#}¦ {%vivakvas, vān,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vac,%} q. v.),
Ved. one who repeats (praises), praising, a praiser,
(Sāy. {%= stutīnāṃ vaktṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>43937<pc>0939-a<k1>vivakzA<k2>vivakzA
{#vivakzA#}¦ {%vivakṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. {%vac%}), a
wish or desire to speak; meaning, sense; intention, pur-
pose, wish, desire; a question. {%—Vivakṣā-vaśāt,%} ind.
according to the meaning (of a speaker or writer).
<LEND>

<L>43938<pc>0939-a<k1>vivakzaRa<k2>vivakzaRa
{%Vivakṣaṇa, as,%}¦ &c., Ved. (fr. rt. {%vac%} or rt. 1.
{%vah%}), ‘making eloquent,’ or according to Sāy. ‘bring-
ing to heaven’ ({%= svarga-prāpaṇa-śīla%}), an epithet
of Soma.
<LEND>

<L>43939<pc>0939-a<k1>vivakzat<k2>vivakzat
{%Vivakṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ desiring to mention,
wishing or intending to speak.
<LEND>

<L>43940<pc>0939-a<k1>vivakzamARa<k2>vivakzamARa
{%Vivakṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing or desiring
to speak about.
<LEND>

<L>43941<pc>0939-a<k1>vivakzita<k2>vivakzita
{%Vivakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished or intended to be
spoken or said; purposed, intended; meant, signified,
really meant, literal (not figurative); wished, desired;
favourite, handsome; ({%am%}), n. what is intended to be
said or declared, meaning, sense, purpose, intention,
any desired object or aim; ({%ā%}), f. meaning, purpose,
wish (?). {%—Vivakṣita-tva, am,%} n. the being intended
or meant to be said.
<LEND>

<L>43942<pc>0939-a<k1>vivakzu<k2>vivakzu
{%Vivakṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to speak, intending
to say.
<LEND>

<L>43943<pc>0939-a<k1>vivac<k2>vivac
{#vivac#}¦ {%vi-vac%} (see rt. {%vac%}), cl. 2. P. {%-vakti%} (in
the non-conjugational tenses also A.), {%-vaktum,%} to de-
clare, announce, explain, interpret, solve; to dispute
about, speak against, oppose in argument; to speak va-
riously or differently, to dispute with one another (A.).
<LEND>

<L>43944<pc>0939-a<k1>vivaktf<k2>vivaktf
{%Vi-vaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who declares or ex-
plains, &c.
<LEND>

<L>43945<pc>0939-a<k1>vivAka<k2>vivAka
{%Vi-vāka, as,%}¦ m. one who decides causes, a judge;
[cf. {%praśna-v˚, prāḍ-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>43946<pc>0939-a<k1>vivAc<k2>vivAc
{%Vi-vāc, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. of various speech, having
various speeches, variously praising, (according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda VI. 33, 2. {%vi-vācaḥ = vividha-stuti-%}
{%rūpā vāco yeṣām,%} whose words have the form of
many kinds of praise); ({%k%}), f., Ved. various speech or
[Page0939-b+ 74]
praise; N. of a particular sacrifice in which various
prayers and praises are repeated; dispute, controversy,
contention, strife ({%= saṅgrāma,%} Naigh. II. 17).
<LEND>

<L>43947<pc>0939-b<k1>vivaYcizu<k2>vivaYcizu
{#vivaYcizu#}¦ {%vivañciṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid. of
rt. {%vañc%}), wishing to deceive; crafty, deceitful.
<LEND>

<L>43948<pc>0939-b<k1>vivatsA<k2>vivatsA
{#vivatsA#}¦ {%vi-vatsā,%} f. a calfless cow, one
whose calf is dead.
<LEND>

<L>43949<pc>0939-b<k1>vivad<k2>vivad
{#vivad#}¦ {%vi-vad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vadati, -te, -va-%}
{%ditum,%} to dispute, oppose in argument, contradict,
controvert, litigate, dispute about, discuss about (with
loc. of the thing disputed about); to dispute with or
engage in a discussion with any one (acc.); to cry out:
Caus. {%-vādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to dispute or liti-
gate, commence an action or lawsuit: Intens. {%-vāva-%}
{%dīti,%} &c., to roar aloud.
<LEND>

<L>43950<pc>0939-b<k1>vivadat<k2>vivadat
{%Vi-vadat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wrangling, disputing, argu-
ing, contending, debating, contradicting; litigating.
<LEND>

<L>43951<pc>0939-b<k1>vivadamAna<k2>vivadamAna
{%Vi-vadamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ disputing, contending,
mutually disagreeing or contradictory; litigating;
crying out.
<LEND>

<L>43952<pc>0939-b<k1>vivadita<k2>vivadita
{%Vi-vadita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disputed, controverted, liti-
gated.
<LEND>

<L>43953<pc>0939-b<k1>vivAda<k2>vivAda
{%Vi-vāda, as,%}¦ m. a dispute, quarrel, controversy,
debate, contest, strife, contention; an argument;
contest at law, legal dispute, litigation, lawsuit; crying
out, sound. {%—Vivāda-kalpataru, us,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Vivāda-candra, as,%} m., N. of a compen-
dium of civil law by an author named Misarū-miśra.
{%—Vivāda-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m., N. of a work by Vā-
caspati-miśra. {%—Vivāda-bhaṅgārṇava (˚ga-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a compendium of civil law by Jagan-
nātha (compiled at the close of the eighteenth cen-
tury). {%—Vivāda-śamana, am,%} n. the allaying or
settling of a dispute, pacification. {%—Vivāda-saṃ-%}
{%vāda-bhū, ūs,%} f. a matter or subject of controversy
and discussion. {%—Vivādānugata (˚da-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘gone through a lawsuit,’ disputed, litigated.
{%—Vivādārthin (˚da-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} seeking for a
dispute; ({%ī%}), m. a litigant, prosecutor, plaintiff. {%—Vi-%}
{%vādāspadī-bhūta (˚da-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} become the
subject of a lawsuit, litigated, contested at law.
<LEND>

<L>43954<pc>0939-b<k1>vivAdin<k2>vivAdin
{%Vivādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ disputing, contending, litigating,
disputatious, contentious; a litigant, party in a lawsuit.
<LEND>

<L>43955<pc>0939-b<k1>vivAvadat<k2>vivAvadat
{%Vi-vāvadat, at, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. roaring aloud.
<LEND>

<L>43956<pc>0939-b<k1>vivaD<k2>vivaD
{#vivaD#}¦ {%vi-vadh%} (a defective verb, see rt.
{%vadh%}), Ved. to destroy utterly.
<LEND>

<L>43957<pc>0939-b<k1>vivaDa<k2>vivaDa
{#vivaDa#}¦ {%vi-vadha, as,%} m. (probably fr. rt. 1.
{%vah%} with {%vi%}), a yoke for carrying burdens, a load;
a road, highway; storing grain, hay, &c.; a ewer,
pitcher; [cf. {%vī-vadha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>43958<pc>0939-b<k1>vivaDika<k2>vivaDika
{%Vivadhika, as,%}¦ m. a man who carries a burden;
a dealer, peddler, hawker; [cf. {%vīvadhika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>43959<pc>0939-b<k1>vivandizu<k2>vivandizu
{#vivandizu#}¦ {%vivandiṣu, us, us, u%} (fr. Desid.
of rt. {%vand%}), intending to praise; wishing to salute.
<LEND>

<L>43960<pc>0939-b<k1>vivap<k2>vivap
{#vivap#}¦ {%vi-vap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vapati, -te, -vap-%}
{%tum,%} to strew or scatter about.
<LEND>

<L>43961<pc>0939-b<k1>vyupta<k2>vyupta
{%Vy-upta.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>43962<pc>0939-b<k1>vivara<k2>vivara
{#vivara#}¦ {%vi-vara,%} &c. See under {%vi-vṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>43963<pc>0939-b<k1>vivarjana<k2>vivarjana
{#vivarjana#}¦ {%vi-varjana,%} &c. See under {%vi-vṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>43964<pc>0939-b<k1>vivarRa<k2>vivarRa
{#vivarRa#}¦ {%vi-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} colourless, want-
ing colour, changing colour, pale, wan, pallid; bad-
coloured, discoloured; low, vile; unlettered, ignorant,
stupid; ({%as%}), m. a man of low caste or of degrading
occupation, an outcast. {%—Vivarṇa-maṇī-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} (a bracelet &c.) which has its jewels ren-
dered discoloured. {%—Vivarṇa-vadana, as, ā, am,%}
pale-faced.
<LEND>

<L>43965<pc>0939-b<k1>vivarta<k2>vivarta
{#vivarta#}¦ {%vi-varta,%} &c. See under {%vi-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>43966<pc>0939-b<k1>vivarD<k2>vivarD
{#vivarD#}¦ {%vi-vardh,%} cl. 10. P. {%-vardhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cut off, sever.
<LEND>

<L>43967<pc>0939-b<k1>vivarDana<k2>vivarDana<h>1
1. {%vi-vardhana, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see {%vi-vṛdh%}), the
act of cutting off, cutting, dividing.
<LEND>

<L>43968<pc>0939-b<k1>vivarDita<k2>vivarDita<h>1
1. {%vi-vardhita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see {%vi-vṛdh%}),
cut off, cut, divided.
<LEND>
[Page0939-c+ 76]

<L>43969<pc>0939-c<k1>vivarzat<k2>vivarzat
{#vivarzat#}¦ {%vi-varṣat.%} See under {%vi-vṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>43970<pc>0939-c<k1>vival<k2>vival
{#vival#}¦ {%vi-val,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-valati, -te, -va-%}
{%litum,%} to turn away, avert.
<LEND>

<L>43971<pc>0939-c<k1>vivalita<k2>vivalita
{%Vi-valita, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned away, averted.
<LEND>

<L>43972<pc>0939-c<k1>vivalg<k2>vivalg
{#vivalg#}¦ {%vi-valg,%} cl. 1. P. {%-valgati,%} &c., to
leap, jump, spring; to burst asunder.
<LEND>

<L>43973<pc>0939-c<k1>vivaSa<k2>vivaSa
{#vivaSa#}¦ {%vi-vaśa, as, ā, am,%} unrestrained, un-
subdued, uncontrolled; independant; subject, sub-
jected; apprehensive of death; desirous of death (as
having the soul free from worldly cares and fears).
<LEND>

<L>43974<pc>0939-c<k1>vivas<k2>vivas<h>1
{#vivas#} 1¦. {%vi-vas%} (see rts. 3. {%vas,%} 2. {%uṣ,%} 2. {%vy-%}
{%uṣ%}), cl. 6. P. {%-ucchati,%} &c., Ved. to shine forth,
shine, dawn: Caus. {%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
shine.
<LEND>

<L>43975<pc>0939-c<k1>vivasvat<k2>vivasvat
{%Vivasvat, ān,%}¦ m. ‘the brilliant one,’ N. of the
Sun, (sometimes regarded as one of the eight Ādityas
or sons of Aditi, his father being Kaśyapa; elsewhere
he is said to be a son of Dākṣāyaṇī and Kaśyapa;
in epic poetry he is held to be the father of Manu
Vaivasvata [or according to another legend of Manu
Sāvarṇi by Sa-varṇā], and therefore a kind of parent
of the human race [see Manu]; in Ṛg-veda X. 17,
1. he is described as the father of Yama Vaivasvata,
and in Ṛg-veda X. 17, 2. as father of the Aśvins by
Saraṇyū, and elsewhere as father of both Yama and
Yamī; according to Nīla-kaṇṭha, the name {%vivasvat%}
is derived fr. 2. {%vi-vas,%} in the sense {%viśeṣeṇa ācchā-%}
{%dayati%}); N. of Aruṇa (charioteer of the Sun); of
the seventh or present Manu, (more properly called
Vaivasvata, as son of Vivasvat); a god; N. of the
author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 13 (having the
patronymic Āditya); N. of the author of a Dharma-
śāstra; ({%atī%}), f., N. of the city of the Sun.
<LEND>

<L>43976<pc>0939-c<k1>vivasvan<k2>vivasvan
{%Vivasvan, ā,%}¦ &c., Ved. shining, possessing bright-
ness; (Sāy. also ‘possessing wealth;’ in Ṛg-veda
VIII. 102, 22. {%vivasvabhiḥ = ṛtvigbhiḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>43977<pc>0939-c<k1>vivAsana<k2>vivAsana<h>1
1. {%vi-vāsana, am,%}¦ n. manifestation, (Sāy. {%= pra-%}
{%kāśana.%})
<LEND>

<L>43978<pc>0939-c<k1>vyuzwa<k2>vyuzwa
{%Vy-uṣṭa.%}¦ See under 2. {%vy-uṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>43979<pc>0939-c<k1>vivas<k2>vivas<h>2
{#vivas#} 2¦. {%vi-vas,%} cl. 2. A. {%-vaste, -vasitum,%} to
exchange clothes; to wear, put on (a garment), clothe:
Caus. {%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} to clothe, put on, cover:
Pass. of Caus. {%-vāsyate,%} to be clothed or clad in.
<LEND>

<L>43980<pc>0939-c<k1>vivas<k2>vivas<h>3
{#vivas#} 3¦. {%vi-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati, -vastum,%}
to change an abode, to depart, go off, retire, with-
draw; to dwell, abide; to pass, spend (time &c.);
to pass away: Caus. {%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
dwell apart, banish, expel, drive into exile, transport,
dismiss.
<LEND>

<L>43981<pc>0939-c<k1>vivAsa<k2>vivAsa<h>1
1. {%vi-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. banishment, expulsion. {%—Vivāsa-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. causing banishment, banishment,
transporting.
<LEND>

<L>43982<pc>0939-c<k1>vivAsana<k2>vivAsana<h>2
2. {%vi-vāsana, am,%}¦ n. the act of banishing, banish-
ment, exile.
<LEND>

<L>43983<pc>0939-c<k1>vivAsita<k2>vivAsita
{%Vi-vāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ banished, expelled, forced
into exile, transported.
<LEND>

<L>43984<pc>0939-c<k1>vivAsya<k2>vivAsya
{%Vi-vāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be expelled or exiled.
<LEND>

<L>43985<pc>0939-c<k1>vivAsyamAna<k2>vivAsyamAna
{%Vi-vāsyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being banished, being
exiled.
<LEND>

<L>43986<pc>0939-c<k1>vyuzita<k2>vyuzita
{%Vy-uṣita, vy-uṣṭa,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>43987<pc>0939-c<k1>vivasana<k2>vivasana
{#vivasana#}¦ {%vi-vasana, as, ā, am,%} destitute of
garments, unclothed, naked; ({%as%}), m. a Jaina ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>43988<pc>0939-c<k1>vivastra<k2>vivastra
{%Vi-vastra, as, ā, am,%}¦ devoid of clothing, unclothed,
naked.
<LEND>

<L>43989<pc>0939-c<k1>vivAsa<k2>vivAsa<h>2
2. {%vi-vāsa, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%vi-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%}
without clothes, naked.
<LEND>

<L>43990<pc>0939-c<k1>vivah<k2>vivah
{#vivah#}¦ {%vi-vah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vahati, -voḍhum,%} to
bear away, remove, carry off, lead away; to conduct
home, take in marriage, marry: Caus. {%-vāhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to marry, give in marriage; to marry.
<LEND>

<L>43991<pc>0939-c<k1>vivaha<k2>vivaha
{%Vi-vaha, as,%}¦ m. ‘carrying away,’ epithet of one
of the seven tongues of fire.
<LEND>

<L>43992<pc>0939-c<k1>vivAha<k2>vivAha
{%Vi-vāha, as,%}¦ m. the taking a wife, marriage, (eight
kinds of marriage are enumerated in Manu III. 21,
viz. Brāhma, Daiva, Ārṣa, Prājāpatya, Āsura, Gān-
dharva, Rākṣasa, and Paiśāca; see also Yājñavalkya
[Page0940-a+ 76]
I. 58 — 61.) {%—Vivāha-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desirous of
marriage. {%—Vivāha-catuṣṭaya, am,%} n. a quadru-
ple marriage, the marrying four wives. {%—Vivāha-%}
{%tattva, am,%} n., N. of a part of the Smṛti-tattva.
{%—Vivāha-dīkṣā,%} f. the marriage rite, marriage
ceremony. {%—Vivāha-dīkṣā-tilaka, as, am,%} m. n.
a Tilaka made on the forehead for a matrimonial cere-
mony. {%—Vivāha-dīkṣā-vidhi, is,%} m. the preparatory
rites of matrimony. {%—Vivāha-yajña, as,%} m. a matri-
monial sacrifice. {%—Vivāha-vidhi, is,%} m. the law of
marriage. {%—Vivāha-vṛndā-vana,%} N. of an astro-
logical work by Keśavārka. {%—Vivāhārtha (˚ha-ar˚),%}
{%as,%} m. purpose of marriage, a marriage suit. {%—Vivā-%}
{%hecchu (˚ha-ic˚), us, us, u,%} desirous of marriage.
<LEND>

<L>43993<pc>0940-a<k1>vivAhita<k2>vivAhita
{%Vi-vāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to marry, married.
<LEND>

<L>43994<pc>0940-a<k1>vivAhin<k2>vivAhin
{%Vivāhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ taking a wife, marrying; re-
lating to marriage; [cf. {%a-vivāhin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>43995<pc>0940-a<k1>vivAhya<k2>vivAhya
{%Vi-vāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be married, marriageable;
({%as%}), m. a son-in-law; a bridegroom.
<LEND>

<L>43996<pc>0940-a<k1>vivoQf<k2>vivoQf
{%Vi-voḍhṛ, ḍhā,%}¦ m. one who takes in marriage, a
bridegroom, husband.
<LEND>

<L>43997<pc>0940-a<k1>vyUQa<k2>vyUQa
{%Vy-ūḍha.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>43998<pc>0940-a<k1>vivA<k2>vivA
{#vivA#}¦ {%vi-vā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vāti, -vātum,%} to blow on
all sides, blow in every direction, blow, blow through.
<LEND>

<L>43999<pc>0940-a<k1>vivAt<k2>vivAt
{%Vi-vāt, ān, ātī%}¦ or {%āntī, āt,%} blowing on all sides,
blowing, blowing gently.
<LEND>

<L>44000<pc>0940-a<k1>vivAyamana<k2>vivAyamana
{%Vi-vāyamana, as, ā, am,%}¦ blowing.
<LEND>

<L>44001<pc>0940-a<k1>vivAka<k2>vivAka
{#vivAka#}¦ {%vi-vāka, vi-vāc.%} See under {%vi-vac.%}
<LEND>

<L>44002<pc>0940-a<k1>vivASa<k2>vivASa
{#vivASa#}¦ {%vivāśa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a mythical
caste in Plaksha-dvīpa (corresponding to the Vaiśyas).
<LEND>

<L>44003<pc>0940-a<k1>viviMSati<k2>viviMSati
{#viviMSati#}¦ {%vi-viṃśati, is,%} m., N. of one of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra's sons.
<LEND>

<L>44004<pc>0940-a<k1>vivikvas<k2>vivikvas
{#vivikvas#}¦ {%vivikvas, ān,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vic%}), Ved.
one who possesses discrimination, discriminating; an
epithet of Indra (in Ṛg-veda III. 57, 1).
<LEND>

<L>44005<pc>0940-a<k1>vivikz<k2>vivikz
{#vivikz#}¦ {%vivikṣ, vivikṣat,%} &c. See under
rt. 1. {%viś,%} p. 941, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>44006<pc>0940-a<k1>vivigna<k2>vivigna
{#vivigna#}¦ {%vi-vigna, as, ā, am,%} very agitated
or alarmed, terrified; very angry.
<LEND>

<L>44007<pc>0940-a<k1>vivic<k2>vivic
{#vivic#}¦ {%vi-vic,%} cl. 7. 3. P. A. {%-vinakti,%}
{%-viṅkte, -vevekti, -vevikte, -vektum,%} to separate or
divide asunder, rend or tear asunder; to distinguish,
discriminate, decide, judge between (two sides of a
question); to alter; to tear up, remove: Caus. {%-veca-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to separate, distinguish, discriminate.
<LEND>

<L>44008<pc>0940-a<k1>vivikta<k2>vivikta
{%Vi-vikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ separated, disjoined, detached,
kept apart, scattered, abstracted, sequestered; single,
alone, lonely, solitary, private, deserted; distinguished,
discriminated, judged; discriminative, judicious; pro-
found (as judgment or thought); pure, faultless;
intent on; ({%am%}), n. separation, loneliness, privacy,
abstraction; a solitary place. {%—Vivikta-tarka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} clear in reasoning. {%—Vivikta-tā,%} f. the
being separated, separation, loneliness, privacy; an
empty or free space. {%—Vivikta-bhāva, as, ā, am,%}
having a mind separated or abstracted (from other
pursuits), intent on any object. {%—Vivikta-varṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having letters or syllables distinctly enunciated.
{%—Vivikta-sevin, ī, inī, i,%} seeking solitude, solitary,
retired, recluse. {%—Viviktāsana (˚ta-ās˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a secluded seat, sitting in a sequestered place.
<LEND>

<L>44009<pc>0940-a<k1>vivici<k2>vivici
{%Vi-vici, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. separating, discriminating,
a discriminator, (Sāy. {%= vivecaka%}); ({%is%}), m. ‘the
separator,’ epithet of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>44010<pc>0940-a<k1>vivicya<k2>vivicya
{%Vi-vicya,%}¦ ind. having discriminated or judged,
having discussed or considered; having properly dis-
criminated; dividing or discriminating in regular
order; severally, one by one.
<LEND>

<L>44011<pc>0940-a<k1>viveka<k2>viveka
{%Vi-veka, as,%}¦ m. discrimination, judgment, the
faculty of distinguishing and classifying things ac-
cording to their real properties; (in the Vedānta
system) the power of separating the invisible Spirit
from the visible world, (or spirit from matter, truth
from untruth, reality from mere semblance or illu-
sion); true knowledge; discretion; discussion, in-
vestigation; a receptacle for water, reservoir, basin
[Page0940-b+ 78]
({%= jala-droṇī%}). {%—Viveka-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced
or arising from discrimination. {%—Viveka-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} skilled in discrimination, intelligent. {%—Viveka-%}
{%jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge arising from discrimina-
tion, faculty of discrimination. {%—Viveka-tā,%} f. or
{%viveka-tva, am,%} n. judgment, discrimination, the
faculty of judgment. {%—Vivekadṛśva-tā,%} f. or {%viveka-%}
{%dṛśva-tva, am,%} n. the character of a discerning man,
discrimination, discernment. {%—Viveka-dṛśvan, ā,%}
m. one who sees or is conversant with true know-
ledge, a wise or discerning man. {%—Viveka-padavī,%}
f. ‘path of discrimination,’ reflection. {%—Viveka-vilāsa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Viveka-sāra,%} N. of a general
Vedānta disquisition in sixteen sections by Rāmendra-
yati. {%—Viveka-sindhu,%} N. of an elementary treatise
on the Vedānta by Mukunda-rāja.
<LEND>

<L>44012<pc>0940-b<k1>vivekin<k2>vivekin
{%Vivekin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ discriminating, discriminative,
judicious, prudent, discreet; ({%ī%}), m. a judge, dis-
criminator, sage, philosopher. {%—Viveki-tā,%} f. or {%vi-%}
{%veki-tva, am,%} n. discriminativeness, discrimination,
discussion.
<LEND>

<L>44013<pc>0940-b<k1>vivektavya<k2>vivektavya
{%Vi-vektavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be distinguished or
discriminated, to be discussed or judged.
<LEND>

<L>44014<pc>0940-b<k1>vivektf<k2>vivektf
{%Vi-vektṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who judges, a judge, decider
(of questions or causes), sage, wise man.
<LEND>

<L>44015<pc>0940-b<k1>vivecana<k2>vivecana
{%Vi-vecana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of discrimination,
discriminating or distinguishing (as truth from false-
hood, reality from semblance), the making a distinc-
tion; investigation, judgment, decision.
<LEND>

<L>44016<pc>0940-b<k1>vivecanIya<k2>vivecanIya
{%Vi-vecanīya%}¦ or {%vi-vecya, as, ā, am,%} to be distin-
guished or judged, to be discussed, distinguishable.
<LEND>

<L>44017<pc>0940-b<k1>vivecita<k2>vivecita
{%Vi-vecita, as, ā, am,%}¦ discriminated, distinguished,
investigated.
<LEND>

<L>44018<pc>0940-b<k1>vividivas<k2>vividivas
{#vividivas#}¦ {%vividivas, vividvas.%} See p. 919.
<LEND>

<L>44019<pc>0940-b<k1>viviDa<k2>viviDa
{#viviDa#}¦ {%vi-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of various sorts
or kinds, divers, manifold, sundry, various, multiform;
({%am%}), n. variety of action or gesture. {%—Vividha-%}
{%rūpa-dhṛt, t, t, t,%} having various forms. {%—Vividhā-%}
{%gama (˚dha-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} comprising various
sacred (or traditional) works. {%—Vividhopala-bhū-%}
{%ṣita (˚dha-up˚), as, ā, am,%} decorated with various
jewels.
<LEND>

<L>44020<pc>0940-b<k1>viviSivas<k2>viviSivas
{#viviSivas#}¦ {%viviśivas, viviśvas.%} See p. 941.
<LEND>

<L>44021<pc>0940-b<k1>vivIta<k2>vivIta
{#vivIta#}¦ {%vi-vīta, as,%} m. an inclosed spot of
ground (abounding in grass, wood, &c.), a preserved
or inclosed pasture ground, paddock. {%—Vivīta-bhartṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m. the owner of a preserved or inclosed pasture.
<LEND>

<L>44022<pc>0940-b<k1>vivf<k2>vivf
{#vivf#}¦ {%vi-vṛ,%} cl. 5. 9. P. A. {%-vṛṇoti, -vṛṇute,%}
{%vṛṇāti, -vṛṇīte%} (in the Veda the form {%vy-avar%}
frequently becomes {%vy-āvar%} or {%vy-āvaḥ%}), {%-varitum,%}
{%-varītum,%} to uncover, spread out, open, unfold, dis-
play, discover, reveal, make clear, illuminate, make
manifest, proclaim, publish, explain, describe, com-
ment upon; to cover over, cover up, stop up; to
obtain (Ved., according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 90,
4. {%vivavruḥ = vyavṛṇvan = alabhanta%}).
<LEND>

<L>44023<pc>0940-b<k1>vivara<k2>vivara
{%Vi-vara, as,%}¦ m. expansion, opening, widening,
separation; ({%am%}), n. a fissure, hole, chasm, cave,
cavern, burrow, hollow, vacuity; a sequestered or
solitary place; interval, intermediate space, space; a
breach, fault, flaw, defect, vulnerable place, weak
point, wound; a symbolical expression for the number
nine, (see {%randhra.%}) {%—Vivara-nālikā,%} f. a pipe,
fife, flute. {%—Vivare-sad, t, t, t,%} abiding in inter-
mediate space, an inhabitant of the sky.
<LEND>

<L>44024<pc>0940-b<k1>vivaraRa<k2>vivaraRa
{%Vi-varaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of uncovering, spreading
out, expanding, opening, unfolding, displaying, ex-
posing, laying bare or open; explanation, exposition,
interpretation, gloss, comment, translation; detailing,
describing, description, specification, detailed account;
a sentence.
<LEND>

<L>44025<pc>0940-b<k1>vivarizu<k2>vivarizu
{%Vivariṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to make manifest
or display; wishing to explain or declare.
<LEND>

<L>44026<pc>0940-b<k1>vivAra<k2>vivAra
{%Vi-vāra, as,%}¦ m. dilatation, expansion; open or
expanded state of the organs of speech, expansion of
the throat in articulation, (one of the Ābhyantara-
prayatnas or efforts of articulate utterance which take
place within the mouth, opposed to {%saṃ-vāra.%})
<LEND>
[Page0940-c+ 78]

<L>44027<pc>0940-c<k1>vivfRvat<k2>vivfRvat
{%Vi-vṛṇvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ making manifest, explain-
ing, declaring.
<LEND>

<L>44028<pc>0940-c<k1>vivfRvAna<k2>vivfRvAna
{%Vi-vṛṇvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ uncovering, explaining,
publishing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44029<pc>0940-c<k1>vivfta<k2>vivfta
{%Vi-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ uncovered, unconcealed, ({%a-vi-%}
{%vṛta,%} hidden, concealed), unclosed, opened, open
(as the organs of speech for articulation); bare, barren
(as ground, earth, &c.); spread out, expanded, ex-
tended, extensive, ample, spacious, large; displayed,
unfolded, exposed, discovered, made manifest, evi-
dent; published, divulged, proclaimed, explained,
interpreted, expounded; ({%am%}), ind. openly, in the
sight of every one; ({%ā%}), f. a particular disease, an
ulcer attended with much pain and heat; ({%am%}), n.
(in grammar) open articulation, approach of the tongue
towards the organ of speech but without contact.
{%—Vivṛta-pauruṣa, as, ā, am,%} one whose prowess
is displayed, displaying valour. {%—Vivṛta-smayana,%}
{%am,%} n. an open smile, a smile by which the teeth
are shown. {%—Vivṛtākṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} open-
eyed, large-eyed; ({%as%}), m. a cock. {%—Vivṛtāsya%}
{%(˚ta-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} open-mouthed.
<LEND>

<L>44030<pc>0940-c<k1>vivftavat<k2>vivftavat
{%Vivṛtavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has opened.
<LEND>

<L>44031<pc>0940-c<k1>vivfti<k2>vivfti
{%Vi-vṛti, is,%}¦ f. expansion, making clear, manifesta-
tion; display; exposure, discovery; explanation, ex-
position, gloss, comment, interpretation. {%—Vivṛti-%}
{%vimarśinī,%} f., N. of a work by Abhinava-gupta.
<LEND>

<L>44032<pc>0940-c<k1>vivftya<k2>vivftya
{%Vi-vṛtya,%}¦ ind. having uncovered, having opened,
having expanded, displaying wide.
<LEND>

<L>44033<pc>0940-c<k1>vivfkRa<k2>vivfkRa
{#vivfkRa#}¦ {%vi-vṛkṇa.%} See under {%vi-vraśc.%}
<LEND>

<L>44034<pc>0940-c<k1>vivfj<k2>vivfj
{#vivfj#}¦ {%vi-vṛj,%} Caus. or cl. 10. P. A. {%-varja-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} to exclude; to avoid, shun, abandon,
leave; to distribute, give: Pass. of Caus. {%-varjyate,%}
to be avoided.
<LEND>

<L>44035<pc>0940-c<k1>vivarjana<k2>vivarjana
{%Vi-varjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of excluding, abandon-
ing, leaving, shunning.
<LEND>

<L>44036<pc>0940-c<k1>vivarjanIya<k2>vivarjanIya
{%Vi-varjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be excluded, to be
abandoned, to be shunned or avoided, to be quitted.
<LEND>

<L>44037<pc>0940-c<k1>vivarjayat<k2>vivarjayat
{%Vi-varjayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ avoiding, shunning,
leaving.
<LEND>

<L>44038<pc>0940-c<k1>vivarjita<k2>vivarjita
{%Vi-varjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, abandoned; avoided
by, shunned by (with inst. or at the end of a comp.);
destitute of, deprived of, entirely free or exempt
from, without, ({%māna-vivarjitam,%} ind. without
honour, dishonourably); excepting, excluding; dis-
tributed, given.
<LEND>

<L>44039<pc>0940-c<k1>vivarjya<k2>vivarjya
{%Vi-varjya,%}¦ ind. having avoided, having abandoned.
<LEND>

<L>44040<pc>0940-c<k1>vivfkta<k2>vivfkta
{%Vi-vṛkta, as, ā, am,%}¦ abandoned, left; ({%ā%}), f. a
woman disliked or deserted by her husband ({%= dur-%}
{%bhagā%}).
<LEND>

<L>44041<pc>0940-c<k1>vivfR<k2>vivfR
{#vivfR#}¦ {%vi-vṛṇ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-vṛṇati,%} &c., or
Caus., to exhilarate.
<LEND>

<L>44042<pc>0940-c<k1>vivft<k2>vivft
{#vivft#}¦ {%vi-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate%} (rarely P.
{%-vartati%}), {%-vartitum,%} to turn round, roll round, re-
volve, whirl round; to roll onwards, become unrolled;
to roll over; to turn or roll about, roll or turn hither
and thither, move about, wind about; to move
through; to roll or turn away from, depart from,
turn back, return; to roll down, descend; to attack:
Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to cause to turn round or
revolve, cause to alternate.
<LEND>

<L>44043<pc>0940-c<k1>vivarta<k2>vivarta
{%Vi-varta, as,%}¦ m. turning round, revolving, revolu-
tion, going or whirling round; dancing; rolling
onwards; unrolling, rolling back, returning, rolling
about, moving hither and thither, changing from one
state to another, passing through various existences
or states of being; modification, altered condition;
human error (consisting in the mistaking unreal
objects and conceiving them to be what they are
not, as mirage for water, a rope for a snake, &c.);
the unreal (as opposed to Brahma the only real
essence); collection, assemblage, heap, multitude.
{%—Vivarta-vāda, as,%} m. maintaining or asserting
that Brahma or the one eternal essence manifests
himself in various illusory forms.
<LEND>

<L>44044<pc>0940-c<k1>vivartana<k2>vivartana
{%Vi-vartana, am,%}¦ n. (in some senses fr. the Caus.),
turning round, revolving, revolution (as of a wheel
&c.), whirling or going round, circumambulating
[Page0941-a+ 75]
(an altar &c.); reverential salutation; rolling back,
returning; rolling down, descending; passing through
a change or succession of various states or existences;
existing, being, abiding, continuing; tossing to and
fro; causing to revolve or go round; whirling round;
causing to change, overturning.
<LEND>

<L>44045<pc>0941-a<k1>vivartamAna<k2>vivartamAna
{%Vi-vartamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ turning back or round,
revolving, rolling onwards, turning back, declining,
setting (as the sun), returning, recoiling; continuing
or abiding (in any course of action).
<LEND>

<L>44046<pc>0941-a<k1>vivartita<k2>vivartita
{%Vi-vartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned round, revolved,
rolled or rolling about; whirled round; turned or
moved about, moving hither and thither; unrolled,
unfolded; returned, turned back or away, averted,
turned the wrong way, distorted, bent, bent down.
<LEND>

<L>44047<pc>0941-a<k1>vivartin<k2>vivartin
{%Vi-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ turning round, revolving;
turning back.
<LEND>

<L>44048<pc>0941-a<k1>vivftta<k2>vivftta
{%Vi-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned or twisted round,
whirling, revolving, rolling.
<LEND>

<L>44049<pc>0941-a<k1>vivftti<k2>vivftti
{%Vi-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. turning round, revolution, rolling,
whirling, tumbling; (in grammar) interval between
two vowels, hiatus. {%—Vivṛtti-pūrva, as, ā, am,%}
preceded by a hiatus. {%—Vivṛtty-abhiprāya, as,%} m.
an intended or apparent hiatus.
<LEND>

<L>44050<pc>0941-a<k1>vivftsat<k2>vivftsat
{#vivftsat#}¦ {%vivṛtsat.%} See under rt. 1. {%vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>44051<pc>0941-a<k1>vivfD<k2>vivfD
{#vivfD#}¦ {%vi-vṛdh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vardhate, -var-%}
{%dhitum,%} to grow up, increase, swell, become en-
larged, become powerful; to prosper, thrive; to
spring up, arise; to have reason to rejoice or be
congratulated: Caus. {%-vardhayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to grow or increase, enlarge, augment, magnify,
amplify; to cause to prosper, advance, further; to
elevate; to gratify, exhilarate.
<LEND>

<L>44052<pc>0941-a<k1>vivarDat<k2>vivarDat
{%Vi-vardhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ increasing, growing
bigger, thriving, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44053<pc>0941-a<k1>vivarDana<k2>vivarDana<h>2
2. {%vi-vardhana, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. see {%vi-vardh%}),
the act of increasing, augmenting, increase, growth,
augmentation, amplification, aggrandizement; ({%as, ā%}
or {%ī, am%}), growing, increasing, advancing, furthering.
<LEND>

<L>44054<pc>0941-a<k1>vivarDamAna<k2>vivarDamAna
{%Vi-vardhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ growing up, increas-
ing, thriving.
<LEND>

<L>44055<pc>0941-a<k1>vivarDita<k2>vivarDita<h>2
2. {%vi-vardhita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see {%vi-vardh%}),
increased, augmented, enlarged; advanced, furthered;
gratified, delighted.
<LEND>

<L>44056<pc>0941-a<k1>vivfdDa<k2>vivfdDa
{%Vi-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown up, increased, en-
larged, enhanced, augmented, intensified; large,
abundant. {%—Vivṛddha-matsara, as, ā, am,%} whose
anger or resentment is increased.
<LEND>

<L>44057<pc>0941-a<k1>vivfdDi<k2>vivfdDi
{%Vi-vṛddhi, is,%}¦ f. growth, increase, great growth,
augmentation, enlargement; prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>44058<pc>0941-a<k1>vivfz<k2>vivfz
{#vivfz#}¦ {%vi-vṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-varṣati, -varṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to rain down, rain: Caus. {%-varṣayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to rain, rain down upon.
<LEND>

<L>44059<pc>0941-a<k1>vivarzat<k2>vivarzat
{%Vi-varṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ deluging with rain.
<LEND>

<L>44060<pc>0941-a<k1>vivfh<k2>vivfh
{#vivfh#}¦ {%vi-vṛh%} (see rt. 1. {%vṛh%}), cl. 6. P. {%-vṛhati,%}
{%-varhitum,%} Ved. to rend asunder, tear to pieces, break
up, split; to tear away, draw away, tear out, remove.
<LEND>

<L>44061<pc>0941-a<k1>vivfQa<k2>vivfQa
{%Vi-vṛḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. torn asunder, rent.
<LEND>

<L>44062<pc>0941-a<k1>vivfhat<k2>vivfhat
{#vivfhat#}¦ {%vivṛhat, an,%} m., N. of the author
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 163 (having the patro-
nymic Kāśyapa).
<LEND>

<L>44063<pc>0941-a<k1>vive<k2>vive
{#vive#}¦ {%vi-ve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vayati, -te,%} &c.,
Ved. to interweave.
<LEND>

<L>44064<pc>0941-a<k1>vyUta<k2>vyUta
{%Vy-ūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. interwoven, &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>44065<pc>0941-a<k1>viven<k2>viven
{#viven#}¦ {%vi-ven,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-venati, -te,%} &c., to
be hostile or ill-disposed, (in Ṛg-veda V. 78, 1. {%mā%}
{%vi-venatam = mā vi-kāmau bhavatam,%} [O Aśvins]
be not ill-disposed.)
<LEND>

<L>44066<pc>0941-a<k1>vivell<k2>vivell
{#vivell#}¦ {%vi-vell,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vellati,%} &c., to
struggle, tremble.
<LEND>

<L>44067<pc>0941-a<k1>vivoQf<k2>vivoQf
{#vivoQf#}¦ {%vi-voḍhṛ.%} See under {%vi-vah.%}
<LEND>

<L>44068<pc>0941-a<k1>vivrata<k2>vivrata
{#vivrata#}¦ {%vi-vrata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. perform-
ing various religious actions or ceremonies; many-
actioned (said of horses; Sāy. {%= vividha-karman%}).
<LEND>

<L>44069<pc>0941-a<k1>vivraSc<k2>vivraSc
{#vivraSc#}¦ {%vi-vraśc,%} cl. 6. P. {%-vṛścati,%} &c.,
[Page0941-b+ 79]
Ved. to cut off, cut asunder, separate, sever; to
destroy; to be cut asunder, cut off, (Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda III. 53, 22 {%= vicchidyate.%})
<LEND>

<L>44070<pc>0941-b<k1>vivfkRa<k2>vivfkRa
{%Vi-vṛkṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. entirely severed or
cut asunder, cut off, (Sāy. {%= viśeṣataś chinna.%})
<LEND>

<L>44071<pc>0941-b<k1>vivfScat<k2>vivfScat
{%Vi-vṛścat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} Ved. cutting
asunder, separating, scattering.
<LEND>

<L>44072<pc>0941-b<k1>vivvoka<k2>vivvoka
{#vivvoka#}¦ {%vivvoka, as,%} m. (etymology doubt-
ful), affectation of indifference, (one of the ten forms
of amorous dalliance practised by women to excite
love; cf. {%vi-kṛta.%})
<LEND>

<L>44073<pc>0941-b<k1>viS<k2>viS<h>1
{#viS#} 1¦. {%viś%} (some of the forms and
meanings of this rt. are identical with
those of rt. 2. {%viṣ%}), cl. 6. P. {%viśati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}),
{%viveśa, vekṣyati, avikṣat, veṣṭum%} (Ved. Impv.
2nd sing. {%viviḍḍhi = praviśa,%} according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda I. 27, 10, but cf. rt. 2. {%viṣ%}), to
enter, enter in (with acc.); to pierce, penetrate;
to pervade; to sit or settle down on (with acc.); to
come to, come into the possession of, fall to the lot
of; to undertake, begin, (in Naigh. II. 14. {%veśiṣṭi%}
is enumerated among the {%gati-karmāṇaḥ%}): Caus.
{%veśayati, -yitum, avīviśat,%} to cause to enter, &c.:
Desid. {%vivikṣati:%} Intens. {%veviśyate, veveṣṭi;%} [cf.
Zend <nsi>vīś,</nsi> ‘to come;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ἵκ-ω, ἱκ-νέ-ο-μαι, ἱκ-αν-ω, ἱκ-έ-τη-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἱκ-τήρ, ἱκ-τήρ, ἱκετή-σιο-ς, ἱκ-ανό-ς, ἴκ-μενο-ς.</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>44074<pc>0941-b<k1>vivikz<k2>vivikz
{%Vivikṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ or {%ḍ, ḍ, ḍ%} (fr. the Desid.), one
who wishes to enter, (see Vopa-deva III. 151.)
<LEND>

<L>44075<pc>0941-b<k1>vivikzat<k2>vivikzat
{%Vivikṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing to enter.
<LEND>

<L>44076<pc>0941-b<k1>vivikzu<k2>vivikzu
{%Vivikṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing or intending to enter.
<LEND>

<L>44077<pc>0941-b<k1>viviSivas<k2>viviSivas
{%Viviśivas, ān, uṣī, at,%}¦ one who has entered,
(see Pāṇ. VII. 2, 68.)
<LEND>

<L>44078<pc>0941-b<k1>viviSvas<k2>viviSvas
{%Viviśvas, ān, uṣī, at, = viviśivas%}¦ above; [cf.
also {%viviśvas%} under rt. {%vich.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44079<pc>0941-b<k1>viS<k2>viS<h>2
2. {%viś, ṭ,%}¦ m. (Ved. loc. pl. {%vikṣu,%} Ṛg-veda IV.
37, 1), a man who settles down on or occupies the soil,
an agriculturist, merchant, a man of the third or agri-
cultural caste ({%= vaiśya,%} q. v.); a man in general;
people; N. of any class of gods designated by troops
(Ved.); ({%ṭ%}), f. entrance; a family, house, tribe,
host, race (Ved.); a daughter; [cf. Zend <nsi>vīś,</nsi> ‘a
house, hamlet;’ Goth. <nsi>vaihts;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wiht;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>ni-wiht, eo-wiht, neo-wiht.</nsi>] {%—Viṭ-%}
{%paṇya, am,%} n. the wares of a man of the mercantile
class, goods, merchandise. {%—Viṭ-pati, is,%} m. a chief
of men of the mercantile class, head merchant; a
daughter's husband, son-in-law. {%—Viṭ-śūdra, ās,%} m.
pl. Vaiśyas and Śūdras. {%—Viśām-pati, is,%} m. a lord
of men, lord of people, a king, sovereign, (perhaps
so called as especially ‘lord of the Vaiśyas,’ the
Brāhmans being his superiors and the Kṣatriyas his
equals.) {%—Viś-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of the house,
lord of men, lord of the people, king; epithet of
Agni; [cf. Zend <nsi>viś-paiti;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>wies-patis, wies-</nsi>
<nsi>patene;</nsi> Mold. <nsi>hospodar;</nsi> (perhaps also) Gr. <lang n="greek">δεσπότης.</lang>
] {%—Viś-patnī,%} f., Ved. the mistress or protec-
tress of mankind (applied to the fire of attrition).
<LEND>

<L>44080<pc>0941-b<k1>viSa<k2>viSa
{%Viśa%}¦ = 2. {%viś%} (at the end of a comp.); ({%am%}), n.
the film or fibres of the stalk of the water-lily ({%=%}
{%viṣa, visa%}). {%—Viśaṃ-varā,%} f. {%= pallī%}. {%—Viśa-%}
{%kaṇṭhin, ī,%} m. a kind of crane; [cf. {%visa-kaṇ-%}
{%ṭhikā.%}] {%—Viśākara (˚śa-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘filled with
fibres,’ the plant Euphorbia ({%= bhadra-cūḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>44081<pc>0941-b<k1>viSat<k2>viSat
{%Viśat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} entering, entering into,
penetrating, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44082<pc>0941-b<k1>viSya<k2>viSya
{%Viśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to the people,
kindly disposed to the people, (Sāy. {%= viḍbhyo hita.%})
<LEND>

<L>44083<pc>0941-b<k1>vizwa<k2>vizwa<h>1
1. {%viṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 946, col. 3), en-
tered, penetrated, pervaded. {%—Viṣṭa-pura, as,%} m.,
N. of a Ṛṣi; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>44084<pc>0941-b<k1>vizwi<k2>vizwi<h>1
1. {%viṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. see p. 946, col. 3), N. of
particular astronomical Karaṇas; N. of a daughter
of Sūrya and Chāyā. {%—Viṣṭi-vrata, am,%} n. a parti-
cular religious ceremony in honour of Viṣṭi.
<LEND>

<L>44085<pc>0941-b<k1>veSa<k2>veSa
{%Veśa, veśya,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>44086<pc>0941-b<k1>viSaNk<k2>viSaNk
{#viSaNk#}¦ {%vi-śaṅk,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śaṅkate, -śaṅki-%}
{%tum,%} to suspect, doubt.
<LEND>

<L>44087<pc>0941-b<k1>viSaNka<k2>viSaNka
{%Vi-śaṅka, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%vi%} privative {%+ śaṅkā%}),
fearless, undaunted; ({%am%}), ind. fearlessly.
<LEND>
[Page0941-c+ 75]

<L>44088<pc>0941-c<k1>viSaNkanIya<k2>viSaNkanIya
{%Vi-śaṅkanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be suspected or
doubted, doubtful, suspicious; questionable.
<LEND>

<L>44089<pc>0941-c<k1>viSaNkamAna<k2>viSaNkamAna
{%Vi-śaṅkamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ suspecting, doubting,
fearing, apprehending.
<LEND>

<L>44090<pc>0941-c<k1>viSaNkA<k2>viSaNkA
{%Vi-śaṅkā,%}¦ f. suspicion, doubt, fear, apprehension.
<LEND>

<L>44091<pc>0941-c<k1>viSaNkawa<k2>viSaNkawa
{#viSaNkawa#}¦ {%vi-śaṅkaṭa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (for {%vi-%}
{%saṅkaṭa%}), great, large; strong, vehement; ({%am%}),
ind. vehemently.
<LEND>

<L>44092<pc>0941-c<k1>viSad<k2>viSad
{#viSad#}¦ {%vi-śad,%} Caus. {%-śātayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to fall to pieces, break to pieces; to rend
asunder; to scatter in all directions.
<LEND>

<L>44093<pc>0941-c<k1>viSada<k2>viSada
{%Vi-śada, as, ā, am%}¦ (said to be connected with
{%vi-śad%} above), clear, pure, pellucid, spotless, perspi-
cuous; white, of a white colour; evident, apparent,
obvious, manifest; beautiful; ({%as%}), m. white, the
colour. {%—Viśada-prabha, as, ā, am,%} of pure efful-
gence, shedding pure light. {%—Viśadī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
{%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make clear, explain, illustrate.
<LEND>

<L>44094<pc>0941-c<k1>viSAtana<k2>viSAtana
{%Vi-śātana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing to
fall to pieces, rending asunder; setting free, de-
livering.
<LEND>

<L>44095<pc>0941-c<k1>viSAtayitvA<k2>viSAtayitvA
{%Vi-śātayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having broken in
pieces, having scattered.
<LEND>

<L>44096<pc>0941-c<k1>viSaya<k2>viSaya
{#viSaya#}¦ {%vi-śaya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śī%} with {%vi%}),
doubt, uncertainty; refuge, asylum.
<LEND>

<L>44097<pc>0941-c<k1>viSayin<k2>viSayin
{%Viśayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ dubious, uncertain; doubting.
<LEND>

<L>44098<pc>0941-c<k1>viSAya<k2>viSAya
{%Vi-śāya, as,%}¦ m. sleeping and watching alternately
(applied to watchmen who sleep and watch by turns;
cf. {%upa-śāya%}).
<LEND>

<L>44099<pc>0941-c<k1>viSara<k2>viSara
{#viSara#}¦ {%vi-śara,%} &c. See under {%vi-śṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>44100<pc>0941-c<k1>viSala<k2>viSala
{#viSala#}¦ {%viśala, as,%} m. (for {%viśāla?%}), N. of the
son of Abja; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a town; [cf. {%vaiśalī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44101<pc>0941-c<k1>viSalya<k2>viSalya
{#viSalya#}¦ {%vi-śalya, as, ā, am,%} free from
thorns or darts; free from trouble or embarrass-
ment, without care or pain; ({%ā%}), f. a twining shrub,
Menispermum Cordifolium; a sort of pot-herb; the
plant Croton Polyandrum (commonly called Danti);
Convolvulus Turpethum (commonly called Teori);
a sort of fruit, Langaliya; (probably) N. of a stream
or river. {%—Viśalya-kṛt, t, t, t,%} freeing from pain
or distress; ({%t%}), m. the climbing plant Echites Di-
chotoma. {%—Viśalyā-saṅgama, as,%} m. ‘union with
Viśalyā,’ N. of a chapter of the Revā-māhātmya.
{%—Viśalyā-sambhava, as,%} m. ‘origin of Viśalyā,’
N. of a chapter of the Revā-māhātmya.
<LEND>

<L>44102<pc>0941-c<k1>viSas<k2>viSas
{#viSas#}¦ {%vi-śas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śasati, -śasitum,%} to
cut up, dissect, kill, destroy; to immolate, sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>44103<pc>0941-c<k1>viSasana<k2>viSasana
{%Vi-śasana, am,%}¦ n. the act of cutting up, dissect-
ing; killing, slaying, immolating, slaughter; ruin;
N. of one of the divisions of Naraka; ({%as%}), m. a
sabre, crooked sword.
<LEND>

<L>44104<pc>0941-c<k1>viSasita<k2>viSasita
{%Vi-śasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut up, dissected; killed, im-
molated; rude, ill-mannered, (see 1. {%vi-śasta%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>44105<pc>0941-c<k1>viSasitf<k2>viSasitf
{%Vi-śasitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who cuts up or dissects
(Manu V. 51), a dissector; a killer, immolator.
<LEND>

<L>44106<pc>0941-c<k1>viSasta<k2>viSasta<h>1
1. {%vi-śasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut up, dissected; bold,
fierce, ill-mannered, rude.
<LEND>

<L>44107<pc>0941-c<k1>viSastf<k2>viSastf
{%Vi-śastṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who kills or dis-
sects; ({%tā%}), m. an immolator, sacrificer; a Cāṇḍāla.
<LEND>

<L>44108<pc>0941-c<k1>viSasya<k2>viSasya
{%Vi-śasya,%}¦ ind. having cut up or dissected, having
immolated.
<LEND>

<L>44109<pc>0941-c<k1>viSasta<k2>viSasta<h>2
{#viSasta#} 2¦. {%vi-śasta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śaṃs%}
with {%vi%}), praised, celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>44110<pc>0941-c<k1>viSastra<k2>viSastra
{#viSastra#}¦ {%vi-śastra, as, ā, am,%} weaponless,
disarmed, unarmed. {%—Viśastra-tva, am,%} n. an un-
armed or defenceless condition.
<LEND>

<L>44111<pc>0941-c<k1>viSAkAra<k2>viSAkAra
{#viSAkAra#}¦ {%viśākāra, as,%} m. the plant Eu-
phorbia, (probably for {%viśākara,%} see under {%viśa.%})
<LEND>

<L>44112<pc>0941-c<k1>viSAKa<k2>viSAKa
{#viSAKa#}¦ {%vi-śākha, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%śākhā%} with
{%vi%}), branchless; having spreading branches; ({%as%}),
m., N. of Kārttikeya; of a son of Kārttikeya (as son
of Agni); an attitude in shooting (standing with
the feet a span apart); a solicitor, petitioner, beggar;
a spindle; ({%ā%}), f. or ({%e%}), f. du., N. of one of the
lunar asterisms (figured by a decorated gateway or
[Page0942-a+ 74]
arch and containing four or originally two stars
placed under the regency of a dual divinity, {%Indrāgnī,%}
Indra and Agni; it is probably to be connected with
the quadrangle of stars <lang n="greek">ι, α , β, γ</lang> Libræ; see {%nak-%}
{%ṣatra%}); the cucurbitaceous plant Momordica Cha-
rantia, (in this sense fem. sing.) {%—Viśākha-ja, as,%}
m. ‘born under the asterism Viśākha,’ the orange,
Citrus Aurantium (as coming into season when the
sun is in this asterism, or about the end of October).
{%—Viśākha-datta, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Mudrā-rākṣasa drama. {%—Viśākha-yūpa, as,%} m.,
N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>44113<pc>0942-a<k1>viSAKala<k2>viSAKala
{%Viśākhala, am,%}¦ n. an attitude in shooting. (See
{%vi-śākha.%})
<LEND>

<L>44114<pc>0942-a<k1>viSAKila<k2>viSAKila
{#viSAKila#}¦ {%viśākhila, as,%} m., N. of an
author.
<LEND>

<L>44115<pc>0942-a<k1>viSAtana<k2>viSAtana
{#viSAtana#}¦ {%vi-śātana,%} &c. See under {%vi-śad.%}
<LEND>

<L>44116<pc>0942-a<k1>viSApa<k2>viSApa
{#viSApa#}¦ {%viśāpa, as,%} m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>44117<pc>0942-a<k1>viSAraRa<k2>viSAraRa
{#viSAraRa#}¦ {%vi-śāraṇa.%} See under {%vi-śṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>44118<pc>0942-a<k1>viSArada<k2>viSArada
{#viSArada#}¦ {%viśārada, as, ā, am%} (said to be
connected with {%viśāla%}), learned, wise; skilful, skilled
in, versed in, conversant with (often at the end of
comps., cf. {%sarva-śāstra-v˚%}); famous, celebrated;
confident, bold, presuming.
<LEND>

<L>44119<pc>0942-a<k1>viSAla<k2>viSAla
{#viSAla#}¦ {%viśāla, as, ā, am%} (in Uṇādi-s. I.
117. said to be fr. rt. 1. {%viś;%} according to some
connected with 2. {%vi-śri%}), large, great, wide, broad,
extensive; great, eminent, illustrious; ({%as%}), m. a
sort of deer; a sort of bird; N. of a son of Tṛṇa-
vindu; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the city Ujjayinī or Ougein;
of another town (see {%vaiśālī, vaiśalī%}); the bitter
apple, Cucumis Colocynthis; ({%ī%}), f. a particular plant
{%(= aja-modā)%}. {%—Viśāla-kula, am,%} n. a great or
illustrious family; ({%as, ā, am%}), of noble family.
{%—Viśāla-kula-sambhava, as, ā, am,%} sprung from
an illustrious race. {%—Viśāla-tā,%} f. or {%viśāla-tva, am,%}
n. largeness, greatness, width, breadth, expansion,
magnitude, bulk; eminence, distinction. {%—Viśāla-%}
{%tvac, k,%} m. ‘having large bark,’ the tree Echites
Scholaris. {%—Viśāla-nagara, am,%} n., N. of a town.
{%—Viśāla-netra, as, ā, am,%} large-eyed. {%—Viśāla-%}
{%purī,%} f., N. of a town. {%—Viśālākṣa (˚la-ak˚), as,%}
{%ī, am,%} large-eyed, having beautiful eyes; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of Śiva; of Garuḍa; N. of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra; ({%ī%}), f. epithet of Pārvatī; N. of a daughter
of Śāṇḍilya.
<LEND>

<L>44120<pc>0942-a<k1>viSikzu<k2>viSikzu
{#viSikzu#}¦ {%vi-śikṣu, us, us, u%} (see {%śikṣu%}),
Ved. especially instructing or accomplishing, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%viśeṣeṇa śikṣayitṛ, sādhayitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>44121<pc>0942-a<k1>viSiKa<k2>viSiKa
{#viSiKa#}¦ {%vi-śikha, as, ā, am,%} devoid of the
Śikhā or tuft of hair left on the head after tonsure;
pointless, without a point or top, without a crest;
weak (Ved. ?); ({%as%}), m. an arrow; an iron crow,
(in these and some following senses {%vi%} may denote
intensity or largeness); a sort of Śara or reed; ({%ā%}),
f. a spade; a hoe; a minute arrow; a sort of pin or
needle; a spindle; a highway, broad or carriage
road; a barber's wife; a sick room or the dwelling
of the sick. {%—Viśikha-śreṇī%} or {%viśikhāvalī (˚kha-%}
{%āv˚),%} f. a line of arrows.
<LEND>

<L>44122<pc>0942-a<k1>viSiYj<k2>viSiYj
{#viSiYj#}¦ {%vi-śiñj,%} cl. 2. A. {%-śiṅkte, -śiñjitum,%}
to sound, resound, tinkle.
<LEND>

<L>44123<pc>0942-a<k1>viSiYjAna<k2>viSiYjAna
{%Vi-śiñjāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounding, singing, uttering
cries; tinkling.
<LEND>

<L>44124<pc>0942-a<k1>viSita<k2>viSita
{#viSita#}¦ {%vi-śita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%śi%} or rt.
{%śo%} with {%vi%}), sharpened, sharp.
<LEND>

<L>44125<pc>0942-a<k1>viSipa<k2>viSipa
{#viSipa#}¦ {%viśipa, am,%} n. (in Uṇādi-s. III. 145.
said to be fr. rt. 1. {%viś%}), a house; a palace; a temple.
<LEND>

<L>44126<pc>0942-a<k1>viSiSipra<k2>viSiSipra
{#viSiSipra#}¦ {%viśi-śipra, as,%} m. (so divided in
the Pada text), Ved. ‘deprived of jaws’ or ‘noseless,’
N. of a person represented in Ṛg-veda V. 45, 6, as
conquered by Manu, (Sāy. {%= vigata-hanu;%} Sāy. also
says that Manu may stand for Indra, and Viśi-śipra
may mean Vṛtra.)
<LEND>
[Page0942-b+ 81]

<L>44127<pc>0942-b<k1>viSiz<k2>viSiz
{#viSiz#}¦ {%vi-śiṣ,%} cl. 7. P. {%-śinaṣṭi, -śeṣṭum,%}
to distinguish, make distinct or different; to particu-
larize, specify, define, describe; to excel (with acc.):
Pass. {%-śiṣyate,%} to be distinguished; to differ or be
different from; to be better than or more excellent
than (with abl. and sometimes with inst., e. g. {%mau-%}
{%nāt satyaṃ viśiṣyate,%} truth is more excellent than
silence; {%yajñaiḥ sthitir viśiṣyate,%} continuance
in duty is better than sacrifices); to be of more
weight; to be best: Caus. {%-śeṣayati, -yitum,%} to
distinguish, make distinct or different, define.
<LEND>

<L>44128<pc>0942-b<k1>viSizwa<k2>viSizwa
{%Vi-śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ distinguished, distinct, par-
ticular, especial, special, peculiar; having distinctive
qualities or exclusive properties; superior, excellent,
choice, more excellent, better; distinguished by, en-
dowed with, possessed of, having; ({%as%}), m., N. of
Viṣṇu. {%—Viśiṣṭa-tā,%} f. or {%viśiṣṭa-tva, am,%} n.
distinction, individuality, the having distinguishing
or characteristic qualities, speciality, peculiarity (of
any kind); excellence, superiority, eminence. {%—Vi-%}
{%śiṣṭa-buddhi, is,%} f. ‘differenced knowledge,’ dis-
tinguishing knowledge (e. g. the knowledge of ‘a
man carrying a staff’ which distinguishes him from
‘a man’ indifferently). {%—Viśiṣṭa-varṇa, as, ā, am,%}
having a distinguished colour. {%—Viśiṣṭādvaita-vā-%}
{%din (˚ṭa-ad˚), ī, inī, i,%} one who asserts the identity
of what is distinct, i. e. of the two distinct things
Prakṛti and Puruṣa with Brahma. {%—Viśiṣṭopamā%}
{%(˚ṭa-up˚),%} f. a particular comparison. {%—Viśiṣṭopa-%}
{%mā-yukta (˚ṭa-up˚), am,%} n., scil. {%rūpaka,%} a meta-
phor which contains a particular comparison (said to
be a variety of the Rūpaka or metaphor general).
<LEND>

<L>44129<pc>0942-b<k1>viSeza<k2>viSeza
{%Vi-śeṣa, as,%}¦ m. the act of distinguishing or dis-
criminating, discrimination; difference, distinction,
individuality, individual identity (consisting in dis-
tinction from every other individual or species),
characteristic difference, peculiar mark, special pro-
perty, speciality, peculiarity (sometimes at the begin-
ning of compounds and to be translated by ‘peculiar,’
‘special,’ &c., cf. {%viśeṣa-guṇa%}); particularity; (in
the Vaiśeṣika school of the Nyāya phil.) the eternal
distinguishing nature or individual essence of each of
the nine Dravyas or substances (i. e. of each of the
five atoms of earth, water, fire, air, and mind, and
of ether, time, space, and soul; these nine eternal
substances are said to be so essentially different that
one can never be the other); predicament (in logic);
peculiar attribute; (in grammar) a word which de-
fines or limits the meaning of another word, (any
word in which the general meaning of another word
is merged is said to be the Viśeṣa of that word); a
distinguishing mark made on the forehead with
sandal; species, kind, sort, variety, mode, manner,
various method (often at the end of comps., e. g.
{%vṛkṣa-viśeṣa,%} a kind of tree; {%tapo-viśeṣāḥ,%}
m. pl. various kinds of penance: and sometimes to
be translated by ‘different,’ ‘special,’ e. g. {%puruṣa-%}
{%v˚,%} a different man; {%daśā-v˚,%} a special condition);
variation, change, alteration for the better, amend-
ment; a favourable turn or crisis in sickness; a dis-
tinct or different object; a limb, member; distinc-
tion, peculiar merit, excellence, superiority; the best
of anything (at the end of comps. or even at the
beginning, and sometimes to be translated by ‘excel-
lent,’ ‘superior,’ e. g. {%rasa-v˚,%} an excellent juice, cf.
{%prasādhana-v˚%}); a particular figure in rhetoric
(said to be of three kinds, cf. {%viśeṣokti,%} col. 3);
N. of the mundane egg; {%viśeṣeṇa%} or {%viśeṣāt,%}
ind. especially, particularly, even more. {%—Viśeṣa-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} peculiarly desirous or amorous.
{%—Viśeṣa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} making a distinction, dis-
tinguishing. {%—Viśeṣa-guṇa, as,%} m. a special or
distinct quality, distinguishing property; an object
or substance of a single and distinct kind (as soul,
time, space, ether, and the atoms of earth, water,
fire, air, and mind). {%—Viśeṣa-jña, as, ā, am,%}
knowing distinctions, critical, intelligent, wise, dis-
criminating, a connoisseur. {%—Viśeṣa-tas,%} ind. espe-
cially, particularly, in particular, specifically. {%—Viśe-%}
{%ṣa-dharma, as,%} m. a peculiar or different duty; a
special law. {%—Viśeṣa-padārtha (˚da-ar˚), as,%} m.
[Page0942-c+ 81]
(in the Nyāya) the category of particularity. {%—Viśe-%}
{%ṣa-pratiṣedha, as,%} m. a special exception. {%—Vi-%}
{%śeṣa-pramāṇa, am,%} n. special authority. {%—Viśe-%}
{%ṣa-bhāvanā,%} f. reflecting on or perceiving differ-
ences; (in mathematics) a particular operation in
extracting roots, composition by the difference of the
products. {%—Viśeṣa-ramaṇīya, as, ā, am,%} especially
delightful, particularly pleasant. {%—Viśeṣa-lakṣaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. any specific or characteristic mark or sign.
{%—Viśeṣa-liṅga, am,%} n. a particular mark, specific
property, attribute of a subordinate class. {%—Viśeṣa-%}
{%vacana, am,%} n. a special text, different text, special
rule or precept. {%—Viśeṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed
of some distinguishing property, peculiar, excellent,
superior, better. {%—Viśeṣa-vidvas, ān,%} m. eminently
learned, a sage, philosopher. {%—Viśeṣa-vidhi, is,%}
m. a special rule or observance, special form. {%—Vi-%}
{%śeṣa-vyāpti, is,%} f. (in logic) a form of Vyāpti or
pervasion, (according to Śabda-k. {%= pratiyogi-vya-%}
{%dhikaraṇa-svasamānādhikaraṇātyantābhāvā-%}
{%pratiyogitva.%}) {%—Viśeṣa-śālin, ī, inī, i,%} possessing
peculiar merit or excellence. {%—Viśeṣa-śāstra, am,%}
n. (in grammar) a special rule ({%= apa-vāda%}). {%—Vi-%}
{%śeṣātideśa (˚ṣa-at˚), as,%} m. a special supplemen-
tary rule. {%—Viśeṣārtham (˚ṣa-ar˚),%} ind. for the
sake of distinction or difference. {%—Viśeṣārthin%}
{%(˚ṣa-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} seeking for excellence or dis-
tinction; particular in searching for (anything). {%—Vi-%}
{%śeṣokti (˚ṣa-uk˚), is,%} f. (in rhetoric) ‘statement
of distinction’ or ‘description of excellence,’ (either
coupling cause with effect so as to explain any pecu-
liar condition or enhancing the beauty of a subject by
dwelling upon certain adverse circumstances in spite
of which this excellence exists); enumeration of
merits, panegyric. {%—Viśeṣocchvasita (˚ṣa-uc˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the peculiar breath or life (of another), a
peculiar treasure (applied to an object especially dear).
{%—Viśeṣoddeśa (˚ṣa-ud˚), as,%} m. (in the Nyāya)
a particular kind of enunciation.
<LEND>

<L>44130<pc>0942-c<k1>viSezaka<k2>viSezaka
{%Vi-śeṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ distinguishing, discrimina-
tive, characteristic, attributive; ({%as, am%}), m. n. any
distinguishing property or characteristic; an attribute,
predicate; a mark on the forehead made with sandal
&c. (worn either as an ornament or for sectarial dis-
tinction; {%pattra-viśeṣaka,%} strokes or lines drawn
on the face with pigments); discriminative faculty
or perception; a particular arrangement of poetical
composition. {%—Viśeṣaka-cchedya, am,%} n. a parti-
cular form of Tilaka or sectarial mark, (according to
Śabda-k. {%= catuḥṣaṣṭi-kalāntargata-ṣaṣṭha-%}
{%kalā.%})
<LEND>

<L>44131<pc>0942-c<k1>viSezaRa<k2>viSezaRa
{%Vi-śeṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ distinguishing, discrimina-
tive, attributive; distinctive (as a property &c.);
({%am%}), n. the act of distinguishing or discriminating,
distinction, discrimination; a distinguishing mark or
attribute; a word which particularizes or defines
another word, the ‘differencer’ or distinguisher of
another word (which other word is called {%vi-śeṣya,%}
q. v.); an epithet, attribute, adjective; a word used
in apposition. {%—Viśeṣaṇa-tā,%} f. the state of a dis-
tinguisher or of distinguishing, the being a distin-
guishing mark; the being an adjective; individuality.
{%—Viśeṣaṇatā-sambandha, as,%} m. the relation of
predicability, relation of predicate to subject. {%—Vi-%}
{%śeṣaṇa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} endowed with discrimi-
nation; having a distinguishing attribute. {%—Viśe-%}
{%ṣaṇa-varga, as,%} m., N. of a division of the Śabda-
ratnāvalī lexicon.
<LEND>

<L>44132<pc>0942-c<k1>viSezaRIya<k2>viSezaRIya
{%Vi-śeṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be distinguished or
discriminated; to be marked as different or distinct;
to be particularized.
<LEND>

<L>44133<pc>0942-c<k1>viSezita<k2>viSezita
{%Vi-śeṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ distinguished, made different
or distinct, defined, separated, divided; having as an
attribute, distinguished by an attribute; predicated;
excellent, superior.
<LEND>

<L>44134<pc>0942-c<k1>viSezya<k2>viSezya
{%Vi-śeṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be distinguished or dis-
criminated; requiring to be defined or determined;
distinguished, pre-eminent, principal, primary, chief;
({%am%}), n. the word to be ‘differenced’ or distin-
guished, the thing or object to be particularized or
defined by another word (which other word is called
[Page0943-a+ 76]
{%viśeṣaṇa,%} q. v.), a substantive, noun, the object or
subject of a predicate, (according to some, in these
senses, also masc.) {%—Viśeṣya-tā,%} f. the being to be
described or defined; the condition of a substantive.
<LEND>

<L>44135<pc>0943-a<k1>viSezyaka<k2>viSezyaka
{%Vi-śeṣyaka%}¦ in {%tadvad-viśeṣyaka, as, ā, am,%}
relating to (an object) possessing such an attribute.
<LEND>

<L>44136<pc>0943-a<k1>viSIrzan<k2>viSIrzan
{#viSIrzan#}¦ {%vi-śīrṣan, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. headless,
without a head.
<LEND>

<L>44137<pc>0943-a<k1>viSIla<k2>viSIla
{#viSIla#}¦ {%vi-śīla, as, ā, am,%} ill-behaved,
indecorous, immoral; badly conducted, ill-mannered,
not observing approved usages.
<LEND>

<L>44138<pc>0943-a<k1>viSuD<k2>viSuD
{#viSuD#}¦ {%vi-śudh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śudhyati, -śod-%}
{%dhum,%} to be completely purified or cleansed; to
become pure: Caus. {%-śodhayati, -yitum,%} to purify,
cleanse.
<LEND>

<L>44139<pc>0943-a<k1>viSudDa<k2>viSudDa
{%Vi-śuddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely purified or
cleansed; cleared; clean; pure, free from all vice or
fault; pious, virtuous, honest; humble, modest,
compliant; rectified, corrected, accurate; ({%am%}), n.
a kind of mystical circle in the body, (see {%cakra,%}
cf. {%viśuddhi-cakra.%}) {%—Viśuddha-dhiṣaṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the understanding or mind purified.
{%—Viśuddha-bhāva, as, ā, am,%} having a pure mind
or disposition, pure-minded. {%—Viśuddha-vaṃśya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of a pure family. {%—Viśuddha-sattva-%}
{%pradhāna, as, ā, am,%} chiefly characterized by pure
goodness. {%—Viśuddhātman (˚dha-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%}
having a pure soul, pure-minded, innocent. {%—Viśud-%}
{%dheśva-tantra (˚dha-iś˚), am,%} n., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>44140<pc>0943-a<k1>viSudDi<k2>viSudDi
{%Vi-śuddhi, is,%}¦ f. complete purity; purifying; pu-
rification, sanctification, holiness; rectitude, rectifica-
tion, correction, correctness, removal of error or doubt;
equality, sameness, similarity; (in algebra) a sub-
tractive quantity. {%—Viśuddhi-cakra, am,%} n. a kind
of mystical circle or mark in the body (said by
some to be in the region of the throat). {%—Viśuddhi-%}
{%bhāj, k, k, k,%} possessing purity, free from sin or
vice, pure.
<LEND>

<L>44141<pc>0943-a<k1>viSoDana<k2>viSoDana
{%Vi-śodhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of purifying, cleaning,
freeing from soil, defect, or sin; expiation; ({%ī%}), f. a
particular plant or tree ({%= dantī%}); N. of the capital
of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>44142<pc>0943-a<k1>viSoDanIya<k2>viSoDanIya
{%Vi-śodhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be purified or
cleansed, to be freed from taint or sin; to be rectified
or corrected.
<LEND>

<L>44143<pc>0943-a<k1>viSoDita<k2>viSoDita
{%Vi-śodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ purified, cleansed, freed
from soil or taint.
<LEND>

<L>44144<pc>0943-a<k1>viSoDitavya<k2>viSoDitavya
{%Vi-śodhitavya, as, ā, am, = vi-śodhanīya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>44145<pc>0943-a<k1>viSoDin<k2>viSoDin
{%Vi-śodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ purifying, cleaning, clearing;
({%inī%}), f. a particular plant {%(= nāga-dantī)%}. {%—Viśo-%}
{%dhi-tā,%} f. or {%viśodhi-tva, am,%} n. purifying, clean-
ing; clearing, freeing from obstructions; rectifying,
correcting. {%—Viśodhinī-vīja, am,%} n. {%= jaya-pāla%}
(according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>44146<pc>0943-a<k1>viSoDya<k2>viSoDya
{%Vi-śodhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be purified or cleaned,
to be freed from taint or fault; to be rectified;
({%am%}), n. a debt.
<LEND>

<L>44147<pc>0943-a<k1>viSuB<k2>viSuB
{#viSuB#}¦ {%vi-śubh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śobhate, -śobhi-%}
{%tum,%} to shine brightly, be beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>44148<pc>0943-a<k1>viSuz<k2>viSuz
{#viSuz#}¦ {%vi-śuṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śuṣyati, -śoṣṭum,%}
to become very dry, dry up, to become withered:
Caus. {%-śoṣayati, -yitum,%} to make dry, dry up,
desiccate.
<LEND>

<L>44149<pc>0943-a<k1>viSuzka<k2>viSuzka
{%Vi-śuṣka, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely dried up, very
dry; withered; thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>44150<pc>0943-a<k1>viSozaRa<k2>viSozaRa
{%Vi-śoṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ drying, desiccative; epithet
of a weapon; ({%am%}), n. the act of drying, desiccating,
desiccation.
<LEND>

<L>44151<pc>0943-a<k1>viSozita<k2>viSozita
{%Vi-śoṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely dried up, dried.
<LEND>

<L>44152<pc>0943-a<k1>viSUla<k2>viSUla
{#viSUla#}¦ {%vi-śūla, as, ā, am,%} destitute of a
spear or pike, without a spear.
<LEND>

<L>44153<pc>0943-a<k1>viSfNKala<k2>viSfNKala
{#viSfNKala#}¦ {%vi-śṛṅkhala, as, ā, am,%} unfettered,
unshackled, unchecked, unrestrained, uncurbed; dis-
solute.
<LEND>

<L>44154<pc>0943-a<k1>viSF<k2>viSF
{#viSF#}¦ {%vi-śṝ,%} Pass. {%-śīryate,%} to be broken
or split in pieces; to crumble or fall to pieces, lose
[Page0943-b+ 76]
cohesion, be dissolved, become rotten, decay; to
waste away, become emaciated; to shrivel or fade
away, disappear.
<LEND>

<L>44155<pc>0943-b<k1>viSara<k2>viSara
{%Vi-śara, as,%}¦ m. splitting, bursting; destroying,
killing, slaying, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>44156<pc>0943-b<k1>viSaraRa<k2>viSaraRa
{%Vi-śaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of splitting, destroying,
killing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44157<pc>0943-b<k1>viSAraRa<k2>viSAraRa
{%Vi-śāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of splitting, shattering,
destroying.
<LEND>

<L>44158<pc>0943-b<k1>viSIrRa<k2>viSIrRa
{%Vi-śīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ shattered, broken to pieces,
wrecked; decayed, withered, rotten, dried up, dry;
shrunk, shrivelled; impaired, wasted. {%—Viśīrṇa-%}
{%parṇa, as,%} m. the Nimb tree {%(= nimba)%}. {%—Vi-%}
{%śīrṇa-mūrti, is,%} m. ‘having his body destroyed or
reduced to ashes,’ epithet of Kāma-deva.
<LEND>

<L>44159<pc>0943-b<k1>viSIrya<k2>viSIrya
{%Vi-śīrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be broken to pieces or
dissolved; likely or fit to crumble or fall to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>44160<pc>0943-b<k1>viSIryat<k2>viSIryat
{%Vi-śīryat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being shattered or dashed
to pieces, crumbling away.
<LEND>

<L>44161<pc>0943-b<k1>viSIryamARa<k2>viSIryamARa
{%Vi-śīryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being shattered or de-
stroyed or wasted; wasting away, decaying, perishing.
<LEND>

<L>44162<pc>0943-b<k1>viSoka<k2>viSoka
{#viSoka#}¦ {%vi-śoka, as, ā, am,%} freed from grief,
free from sorrow, happy; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Muni;
the Aśoka tree; ({%ā%}), f. exemption from grief, (one
of the original properties of man.) {%—Viśoka-koṭa,%}
N. of a mountain. {%—Viśoka-deva, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Viśoka-parvan, a,%} n., N. of a section of the
Mahā-bhārata.
<LEND>

<L>44163<pc>0943-b<k1>viScakadra<k2>viScakadra
{#viScakadra#}¦ {%viś-cakadra, as,%} m. (said to be fr.
{%vi-s%} for {%vi + cakadra,%} cf. {%viśva-kadru%}), Ved. (ac-
cording to some) a low man who deals in dogs, a
dog-dealer, (according to others) a dog (regarded as
a despicable animal). {%—Viścakadrākarṣa (˚ra-%}
{%āk˚), as,%} m. (according to some) one who drags about
or chastises the above, (see Nirukta II. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>44164<pc>0943-b<k1>viSna<k2>viSna
{#viSna#}¦ {%viśna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vich,%} Pāṇ. VI.
4, 19), lustre, splendor.
<LEND>

<L>44165<pc>0943-b<k1>viSpalA<k2>viSpalA
{#viSpalA#}¦ {%viśpalā,%} f. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>44166<pc>0943-b<k1>viSraR<k2>viSraR
{#viSraR#}¦ {%vi-śraṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-śraṇayati, -śrā-%}
{%ṇayati, -yitum,%} to give away, distribute, present.
<LEND>

<L>44167<pc>0943-b<k1>viSraRana<k2>viSraRana
{%Vi-śraṇana, am,%}¦ n. the act of giving away, dis-
tribution, gift, donation.
<LEND>

<L>44168<pc>0943-b<k1>viSrARana<k2>viSrARana
{%Vi-śrāṇana, am,%}¦ n. {%= vi-śraṇana%} above.
<LEND>

<L>44169<pc>0943-b<k1>viSrARita<k2>viSrARita
{%Vi-śrāṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ given away, distributed,
bestowed.
<LEND>

<L>44170<pc>0943-b<k1>viSrARya<k2>viSrARya
{%Vi-śrāṇya,%}¦ ind. having given or bestowed.
<LEND>

<L>44171<pc>0943-b<k1>viSraT<k2>viSraT
{#viSraT#}¦ {%vi-śrath%} (connected with {%vi-ślath,%}
q. v.), cl. 10. P. {%-śrathayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to
loosen, relax, untie, release; to become loose.
<LEND>

<L>44172<pc>0943-b<k1>viSram<k2>viSram
{#viSram#}¦ {%vi-śram,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śrāmyati%} (ep.
even cl. 1. {%-śramati%}), {%-śramitum,%} to cease from
labour or toil, rest, repose; to cease: Pass. {%-śram-%}
{%yate,%} Aor. {%vy-aśrami%} or {%vy-aśrāmi:%} Caus. {%-śra-%}
{%mayati%} (ep. {%-śrāmaya%}), {%-yitum,%} to cause to rest,
make to cease from toil.
<LEND>

<L>44173<pc>0943-b<k1>viSrama<k2>viSrama
{%Vi-śrama, as,%}¦ m. rest, repose, quiet; cessation
from labour or fatigue, remission of work, relaxation;
N. of a scribe.
<LEND>

<L>44174<pc>0943-b<k1>viSramita<k2>viSramita
{%Vi-śramita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to rest; completely
wearied, exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>44175<pc>0943-b<k1>viSramya<k2>viSramya
{%Vi-śramya,%}¦ ind. having rested, having reposed,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>44176<pc>0943-b<k1>viSrAnta<k2>viSrAnta
{%Vi-śrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ rested, reposed, reposing;
ceased, ceasing, desisting from; calm, composed.
<LEND>

<L>44177<pc>0943-b<k1>viSrAnti<k2>viSrAnti
{%Vi-śrānti, is,%}¦ f. rest, repose, cessation from toil or
occupation.
<LEND>

<L>44178<pc>0943-b<k1>viSrAma<k2>viSrAma
{%Vi-śrāma, as,%}¦ m. rest, repose, cessation from toil
or occupation; pause, stop, cessation; tranquillity,
composure.
<LEND>

<L>44179<pc>0943-b<k1>viSramB<k2>viSramB
{#viSramB#}¦ {%vi-śrambh%} (also written {%vi-srambh%}),
cl. 1. A. {%-śrambhate, -śrambhitum,%} to entrust,
confide, be confident.
<LEND>

<L>44180<pc>0943-b<k1>viSrabDa<k2>viSrabDa
{%Vi-śrabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ entrusted, trusted, con-
fided, confided in, confided to; trusty, trustworthy,
confidential; confiding, confident, fearless; firm,
quiet, steady; reposed, rested, tranquil, patient,
[Page0943-c+ 76]
meek, lowly-minded, not lofty; excessive, exceeding,
much; ({%am%}), n. confidingly, trustfully, without
fear, without hesitation, quietly. {%—Viśrabdha-tā,%} f.
or {%viśrabdha-tva, am,%} n. trustiness; trustworthiness.
{%—Viśrabdha-navoḍhā,%} f. a confiding bride, (one of
the several classes into which brides are divided.)
<LEND>

<L>44181<pc>0943-c<k1>viSramBa<k2>viSramBa
{%Vi-śrambha, as,%}¦ m. trust, confidence; rest; the
relaxing of the organs of utterance, lowering or sink-
ing of the voice (applied to the An-udātta accent in
grammar); affection, affectionate inquiry; playful or
amorous quarrel, festive or sportive tumult; killing.
{%—Viśrambhālāpa (˚bha-āl˚), as,%} m. confidential
talk, affectionate conversation.
<LEND>

<L>44182<pc>0943-c<k1>viSramBin<k2>viSramBin
{%Vi-śrambhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ trusting, confiding, con-
fiding in; trusty, faithful, trustworthy.
<LEND>

<L>44183<pc>0943-c<k1>viSravas<k2>viSravas
{#viSravas#}¦ {%vi-śravas, vi-śrāva.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>44184<pc>0943-c<k1>viSrARita<k2>viSrARita
{#viSrARita#}¦ {%vi-śrāṇita, vi-śrāṇya.%} See under
{%vi-śraṇ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>44185<pc>0943-c<k1>viSri<k2>viSri<h>1
{#viSri#} 1¦. {%vi-śri, is,%} m. death (according to
Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>44186<pc>0943-c<k1>viSri<k2>viSri<h>2
{#viSri#} 2¦. {%vi-śri,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-śrayati, -śra-%}
{%yate, -śrayitum,%} Ved. to be opened, be set open (A.);
to be diffused, diffuse, spread out, expand (A.); to
devote one's self to, serve, enjoy (A.); to open,
spread out, spread over (P.); to have recourse to,
approach.
<LEND>

<L>44187<pc>0943-c<k1>viSraya<k2>viSraya
{%Vi-śraya, as,%}¦ m. the having recourse to, depend-
ance upon, abode, asylum.
<LEND>

<L>44188<pc>0943-c<k1>viSrayamARa<k2>viSrayamARa
{%Vi-śrayamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. diffusing, spread-
ing, serving, enjoying, (Sāy. {%= ni-ṣevamāṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>44189<pc>0943-c<k1>viSrayin<k2>viSrayin
{%Vi-śrayin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having recourse to, living or
dwelling in; depending on, serving.
<LEND>

<L>44190<pc>0943-c<k1>viSru<k2>viSru<h>1
{#viSru#} 1¦. {%vi-śru,%} Pass. {%-śrūyate,%} to be heard
in various places; to be heard of far and wide, to be
celebrated: Caus. {%-śrāvayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
be heard everywhere, cause to be heard, narrate;
to cause to resound; to call out.
<LEND>

<L>44191<pc>0943-c<k1>viSravas<k2>viSravas
{%Vi-śravas, ās,%}¦ m., N. of the father of Kuvera and
of Rāvaṇa; (according to the Rāmāyaṇa, Viśravas was
son of the sage Pulastya, who was the son of Brahmā;
cf. {%vaiśravaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>44192<pc>0943-c<k1>viSrAva<k2>viSrAva<h>1
1. {%vi-śrāva, as,%}¦ m. great fame or celebrity.
<LEND>

<L>44193<pc>0943-c<k1>viSrAvaRa<k2>viSrAvaRa<h>1
1. {%vi-śrāvaṇa, am,%}¦ n. causing to hear, narrating,
apprising.
<LEND>

<L>44194<pc>0943-c<k1>viSrAvya<k2>viSrAvya
{%Vi-śrāvya,%}¦ ind. having caused to be heard.
<LEND>

<L>44195<pc>0943-c<k1>viSruta<k2>viSruta<h>1
1. {%vi-śruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ heard of far and wide,
noted, renowned, celebrated, famous, notorious, well
known; pleased, delighted, happy. {%—Viśruta-vat,%}
{%ān,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Viśrutābhijana (˚ta-abh˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of a renowned family, of noted birth.
<LEND>

<L>44196<pc>0943-c<k1>viSruti<k2>viSruti<h>1
1. {%vi-śruti, is,%}¦ f. celebrity, fame, notoriety.
<LEND>

<L>44197<pc>0943-c<k1>viSru<k2>viSru<h>2
{#viSru#} 2¦. {%vi-śru = vi-sru,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44198<pc>0943-c<k1>viSrAva<k2>viSrAva<h>2
2. {%vi-śrāva, as,%}¦ m. flowing forth or away, drop-
ping.
<LEND>

<L>44199<pc>0943-c<k1>viSrAvaRa<k2>viSrAvaRa<h>2
2. {%vi-śrāvaṇa, am,%}¦ n. causing to flow forth;
bleeding, (see {%vi-srāvaṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>44200<pc>0943-c<k1>viSruta<k2>viSruta<h>2
2. {%vi-śruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowed away, flowing forth.
<LEND>

<L>44201<pc>0943-c<k1>viSruti<k2>viSruti<h>2
2. {%vi-śruti, is,%}¦ f. flowing, oozing.
<LEND>

<L>44202<pc>0943-c<k1>viSlaT<k2>viSlaT
{#viSlaT#}¦ {%vi-ślath%} [cf. {%vi-śrath%}], cl. 1. P.
{%-ślathati,%} cl. 10. P. {%-ślathayati,%} &c., to be loose
or relaxed; to loosen.
<LEND>

<L>44203<pc>0943-c<k1>viSlaTa<k2>viSlaTa
{%Vi-ślatha, as, ā, am,%}¦ untied, loose, relaxed, lan-
guid. {%—Viślathāṅga (˚tha-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} having
relaxed limbs, relaxed, weak, nerveless.
<LEND>

<L>44204<pc>0943-c<k1>viSliz<k2>viSliz
{#viSliz#}¦ {%vi-śliṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śliṣyati, -śleṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to be disunited or separated, be divided, be
broken: Caus. {%-śleṣayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be
disunited, separate.
<LEND>

<L>44205<pc>0943-c<k1>viSlizwa<k2>viSlizwa
{%Vi-śliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ disunited, disjoined, sepa-
rated.
<LEND>

<L>44206<pc>0943-c<k1>viSleza<k2>viSleza
{%Vi-śleṣa, as,%}¦ m. disunion, disjunction, separation
(especially of lovers, or of husband and wife); distance,
absence, bereavement; a chasm; (in arithmetic) the
converse of addition. {%—Viśleṣa-jāti, is,%} f. (in arith-
metic) the assimilation of difference, the reduction
of fractional difference.
<LEND>
[Page0944-a+ 80]

<L>44207<pc>0944-a<k1>viSlezita<k2>viSlezita
{%Vi-śleṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disunited, severed, sepa-
rated, divided.
<LEND>

<L>44208<pc>0944-a<k1>viSlezin<k2>viSlezin
{%Vi-śleṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ disunited, severed, falling from.
<LEND>

<L>44209<pc>0944-a<k1>viSloka<k2>viSloka
{#viSloka#}¦ {%vi-śloka, as,%} m. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>44210<pc>0944-a<k1>viSva<k2>viSva
{#viSva#}¦ {%viśva, as, ā, am%} (in Uṇādi-s. I. 151.
said to be fr. rt. 1. {%viś,%} ‘to pervade;’ according to some
connected with rt. {%śvi%} with {%vi;%} declined as a pro-
nominal, like {%sarva,%} nom. pl. masc. {%viśve,%} see Gram.
238; cf. {%śaśvat, śāśvata%}), all, every, every one,
({%viśvasmād Indra uttaraḥ,%} Indra is higher than
all, Ṛg-veda X. 86, 1), entire, whole, universal;
({%as%}), m., N. of a kind of deity belonging to a class
of ten (forming one of the nine Gaṇas or classes
enumerated under Gaṇa-devatā, q. v.: in Ṛg-veda
X. 130, 5. they are associated with the Jagatī metre,
and called Viśve devāḥ, which may have originally
denoted ‘all the gods collectively,’ though the intro-
duction of the Viśvas under the name {%viśva-devāḥ%}
or {%viśve-devāḥ,%} as a separate troop or Gaṇa of deities,
seems to have taken place at an early period: accord-
ing to the Viṣṇu and other Purāṇas they were sons
of Viśvā, daughter of Dakṣa, and their names are
given as follow, 1. Vasu, 2. Satya, 3. Kratu, 4.
Dakṣa, 5. Kāla, 6. Kāma, 7. Dhṛti, 8. Kuru, 9.
Purū-ravas, 10. Mādravas; two others are added by
some authorities, viz. 11. Rocaka or Locana, 12.
Dhvani [also written Dhūri ?]: they are particularly
worshipped at the Śrāddhas or funeral obsequies in
honour of deceased ancestors: moreover, according
to Manu III. 90, 121, offerings should be made to
them daily, — these privileges having been bestowed
on them, it is said, by Brahmā and the Pitṛs, as a
reward for certain severe austerities they had per-
formed on the Himālaya: sometimes, however, it is
difficult to decide whether the expression {%viśve devāḥ%}
refers to all the gods or to the particular troop of
deities described above); N. of Intellect in the Ve-
dānta philosophy, or (according to some) the faculty
which perceives Singleness, (perhaps translatable by
‘the Pervader;’ according to a commentator {%=%}
{%sthūla-śarīra-vyaṣṭy-upahita-caitanya,%} ‘intel-
lect located in the distributive aggregate of material
bodies’); N. of a well known lexicon, {%= viśva-pra-%}
{%kāśa,%} q. v.; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter of Dakṣa and
wife of Dharma; the plant Aconitum Ferox; a tree
used for dying red (commonly called Atis = Betula);
the shrub Asparagus Racemosus ({%= śatāvarī%});
another plant ({%= pippalī%}); dry ginger; ({%am%}), n.
the whole world, universe, whole creation; dry ginger.
{%—Viśva-kadru, us, us, u,%} wicked, vile; ({%us%}), m.
a dog trained for the chase; sound, noise. {%—Viśva-%}
{%karman, ā,%} m. ‘one who does universal acts, all-
doer, all-creator, all-maker,’ N. of the architect or
artist of the gods (said to be son of Brahmā, and in
the later mythology sometimes identified with Tvash-
ṭṛ, q. v., not only as an architect, but as a kind of
chief engineer or forger of divine weapons, and in-
ventor of the {%agny-astra,%} q. v.; in this capacity
Viśva-karman is said to have revealed the Sthāpatya-
veda, q. v., or fourth Upa-veda, and to preside over
all manual labours as well as the sixty-four mechanical
arts, [whence he is worshipped by Kārus or artizans];
in the Vedic mythology, however, the office of Indian
Vulcan is assigned to Tvaṣṭṛ as a distinct deity,
Viśva-karman being rather identified with Prajā-pati
[Brahmā] himself as the creator of all things and
architect of the universe; in the hymns Ṛg-veda X.
81, 82. he is represented as the universal Father and
Generator, the one all-seeing God, who has on every
side eyes, faces, arms, and feet, who blows forth heaven
and earth with his arms and wings, who knows all
worlds, gives the gods their names, and is beyond
the comprehension of mortals; in Nirukta X. 26.
and elsewhere in the Brāhmaṇas he is called a son
of Bhuvana, and Viśva-karman Bhauvana is described
as the author of the two Ṛg-veda hymns X. 81, 82,
mentioned above; moreover, a doubtful legend is told
of his having offered up all beings, including himself,
in sacrifice; the Rāmāyaṇa represents him as having
built the city of Laṅkā for the Rākṣasas, and as
[Page0944-b+ 81]
having generated the ape Nala, who made Rāma's
bridge from the continent to the island; the name
Viśva-karman, meaning ‘doing all acts,’ appears to
be sometimes applicable as an epithet to any great
divinity); epithet of Sūrya or the Sun; of one of the
seven principal rays of the sun (supposed to supply
heat to the planet Mercury); epithet of Mahā-deva
(Mahā-bh. Śānti-parvan 10332); epithet of Indra
(Ṛg-veda VIII. 87, 2); of a son of the Vasu Pra-
bhāsa; any great saint. {%—Viśvakarma-sutā%} or
{%viśvakarma-jā,%} f. ‘daughter of Viśva-karman,’
epithet of Sañjñā (one of the wives of the Sun).
{%—Viśva-kāya, as, ā, am,%} whose body is the universe
(said of Viṣṇu); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a goddess. {%—Viśva-%}
{%kārya, as,%} m., N. of one of the seven principal rays
of the sun (supposed to supply heat to the planet
Venus; cf. {%viśva-karman%}). {%—Viśva-kṛt, t, t, t,%}
making or creating all; ({%t%}), m. the creator or maker
of all things; epithet of Viśva-karman, son of Brahmā,
(see above); N. of a son of Gādhi or Gāthin, and
brother of Viśvā-mitra. {%—Viśva-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
made by Viśva-karman (?). {%—Viśva-kṛṣṭi, is, is,%}
{%i,%} Ved. (probably) known to all men; [cf. {%viśva-%}
{%carṣaṇi.%}] {%—Viśva-ketu, us,%} m. ‘whose banner is
the universe,’ epithet of A-niruddha, (a form of Kāma,
as son of Pradyumna.) {%—Viśva-koṣa, as,%} m. the
lexicon called Viśva {%(= viśva-prakāśa)%}. {%—Viśva-ga,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘going everywhere,’ N. of Brahmā. {%—Viśva-%}
{%gandha, as,%} m. ‘having much odour,’ an onion;
({%ā%}), f. ‘having all fragrance,’ the earth (as having
the quality of odour, see {%guṇa%}); ({%am%}), n. myrrh
{%(= vola)%}. {%—Viśva-guṇādarśa (˚ṇa-ād˚), as,%} m.
‘mirror of the virtues of the world,’ N. of a work by
Veṅkaṭa (relating the history of Southern India).
{%—Viśva-gudh, ghut, t, t,%} all-enveloping. {%—Viśva-%}
{%gūrta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. approved by every body,
accomplisher of all deeds, prepared for all acts, (Sāy.
{%= sarveṣu kāryeṣūdyata,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 1, 22.)
{%—Viśva-goptṛ, tā,%} m. ‘preserver of the universe,’
epithet of Viṣṇu; of Indra. {%—Viśva-granthi, is,%} f.
the plant Cissus Pedata {%(= haṃsa-padī)%}. {%—Viśvaṅ-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} all-creating, making all; ({%as%}),
m. the eye. {%—Viśva-cakra, am,%} n., N. of a par-
ticular kind of large gift or offering consisting of a
mass of pure gold. {%—Viśva-cakṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
all-seeing. {%—Viśva-cakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. all-seeing,
all-beholding, (said of Viśva-karman, Ṛg-veda X. 81,
2, and of Sūrya I. 50, 2.) {%—Viśva-candra, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. all-radiant, all-brilliant. {%—Viśva-carṣaṇi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. known to all men, extending everywhere,
world-wide, seeing everything, comprising all men.
{%—Viśva-jana, am,%} n. all men, all mankind, man-
kind generally. {%—Viśva-janīna, as, ā, am,%} fit or
good for all men, suitable to all mankind. {%—Viśva-%}
{%janīna-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} whose conduct or actions are
for the benefit of the whole world. {%—Viśva-janīya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} relating or suitable to all men. {%—Viśva-%}
{%janya, as, ā, am,%} belonging or relating to all man-
kind, fit or good for all men, universally beneficial.
{%—Viśva-jit, t, t, t,%} all-conquering, all-subduing;
({%t%}), m., N. of a particular ceremony or sacrifice; the
cord or noose of Varuṇa; N. of a son of Gādhi and
brother of Viśvā-mitra; of a son of Satya-jit. {%—Viśva-%}
{%jinva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. all-refreshing, all-sustaining.
{%—Viśva-jū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. all-impelling, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%viśvasya prerayitṛ,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 33, 8.) {%—Viśva-%}
{%tas,%} &c., see p. 945, col. 3. {%—Viśva-tur, ūr, ūr, ūr,%}
Ved. all-subduing, conquering everything. {%—Viśva-%}
{%darśata, as, ā, am,%} Ved. all-conspicuous, visible to
all; to be honoured by all. {%—Viśva-deva, as,%} m. a
Viśva-deva or deity of a particular class, see under
{%viśva; (ā),%} f. the plant Hedysarum Lagopodioides;
({%as, ā, am%}), possessing all divine attributes, contain-
ing all the gods. {%—Viśva-devya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
distinguished by all divine attributes; relating or ac-
ceptable to all the gods, Ṛg-veda III. 2, 5. {%—Viśva-%}
{%dohas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. milking or yielding all
things, all-productive. {%—Viśva-dhara, as,%} m. ‘all-
containing,’ a proper N. {%—Viśva-dhāyas, ās, ās, as%}
(see 1. and 2. {%dhāyas%}), Ved. one who bears every-
thing, all-sustaining, all-nourishing. {%—Viśva-dhārin, %}
[Page0944-c+ 81]
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} all-maintaining, all-sustaining; ({%ī%}), m. a
deity; ({%iṇī%}), f. the earth. {%—Viśva-dhṛk, k, k,%} sus-
taining everything, (see {%dhṛk.%}) {%—Viśva-dhenā,%} f.,
Ved. ‘all-cherisher, all-fosterer,’ epithet of the earth.
{%—Viśva-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of the universe,’ N. of
Śiva (especially as the object of adoration at Benares,
cf. {%viśveśa%}); N. of the author of the Candra-kalā
drama, the Sāhitya-darpaṇa, and various other works;
of several other authors and commentators. {%—Viśva-%}
{%nātha-deva, as,%} m., N. of the author of the Kuṇḍa-
maṇḍapa-kaumudī. {%—Viśvanātha-pañcānana%} or
{%viśvanātha-bhaṭṭācārya, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Bhāṣā-pariccheda, and of a commentary on
the Nyāya-sūtra of Gotama. {%—Viśva-pā, ās,%} m. ‘all-
protecting, all-nourishing,’ the sun; the moon; fire.
{%—Viśva-pāla, as,%} m. ‘all-protector,’ N. of a mer-
chant. {%—Viśva-pāvana, as, ī, am,%} world-purifying;
({%ī%}), f. holy basil {%(= tulasī)%}. {%—Viśva-piś,%} Ved. having
all sorts of ornaments; (Sāy.) having many forms
{%(= bahu-rūpa)%}. {%—Viśva-puṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} all-nourishing.
{%—Viśva-pūjitā,%} f. ‘adored by all,’ holy basil {%(=%}
{%tulasī)%}. {%—Viśva-peśas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. containing
all beauties; multiform, (Sāy. {%= bahu-vidha-rūpa-%}
{%yukta.%}) {%—Viśva-prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a lexicon
by Maheśvara (more briefly called Viśva). {%—Viśva-%}
{%psan, ā,%} m. (according to some corrupted form
{%viśva + bhasan,%} cf. {%bhasad%}), a god; fire or the
deity of fire, Agni; the moon; the sun. {%—Viśva-%}
{%psnya, as, ā, am%} ({%psnya%} said to be for {%psanya%} fr.
rt. {%psā%}), Ved. feeding everything; having many
forms or whose forms pervade everything, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%vyāpta-rūpa.%}) {%—Viśva-budbuda, as,%} m. the world
regarded as a bubble. {%—Viśva-bodha, as,%} m. a
Buddha or Buddhist deified saint. {%—Viśva-bharas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. all-bearing, all-supporting. {%—Viśva-%}
{%bhānu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having light on all sides, all-
illumining, (Sāy. {%= sarvato vyāpta-tejaska.%}) {%—Vi-%}
{%śva-bhāvana, as,%} m. ‘creator of the universe,’ N. of
Viṣṇu. {%—Viśva-bhuj, k, k, k,%} all-enjoying, all-pos-
seesing; eating all things; ({%k%}), m. epithet of Indra.
{%—Viśva-bhujā,%} f., N. of a tutelary goddess. {%—Viśva-%}
{%bhū, ūs,%} m. the third of the Buddhas (according to
some systems). {%—Viśva-bheṣaja, am,%} n. ‘univer-
sal-medicine,’ dry ginger; ({%as%}), m., Ved. a universal
remedy, panacea. {%—Viśva-bhojana, am,%} n. the eating
of all sorts of food. {%—Viśva-bhojas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
all-nourishing, one who enjoys all things, granting
all enjoyment. {%—Viśva-bhrāj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. all-illumi-
nating. {%—Viśva-madā,%} f. ‘all-delighting,’ N. of one
of the seven tongues of fire. {%—Viśva-manas, ās,%}
m., N. of the author of the hymns Ṛg-veda VIII.
23-26 (having the patronymic Vaiyaśva). {%—Viśva-%}
{%manus, us, us, us,%} Ved. (probably) known to all
men; [cf. {%viśva-kṛṣṭi.%}] {%—Viśva-mānuṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. (probably) known to all men [cf. {%viśva-%}
{%manus%}]; ({%as%}), m. every mortal, (Sāy. {%= sarvo ma-%}
{%nuṣyaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 45, 42.) {%—Viśvam-inva,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. expanding everywhere, pervading
everything, (Sāy. {%= viśvaṃ vyāpnuvāna%}); gratify-
ing all, (Sāy. {%= viśva-tarpaṇa.%}) {%—Viśva-mukhī,%} f.,
N. of Dākṣāyaṇī (as worshipped in Jālandhara).
{%—Viśva-mūrti, is, is, i,%} one whose form is the
universe, existing in all forms; an epithet of the Su-
preme Spirit. {%—Viśvamūrti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having
or taking all forms, existing in all forms, omnipresent.
{%—Viśvam-ejaya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. shaking everything,
making everything tremble; [cf. {%janam-ejaya.%}]
{%—Viśva-medinī,%} f., N. of a lexicon. {%—Viśvam-%}
{%bhara, as, ā, am,%} supporting the universe, all-sus-
taining, all-maintaining; ({%as%}), m. the Supreme Being;
epithet of Viṣṇu; of Indra; ({%ā%}), f. the earth. {%—Viś-%}
{%vambharādhipa (˚rā-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of the
earth,’ a king. {%—Viśva-yoni, is,%} m. ‘source of the
universe,’ N. of Brahmā; of Viṣṇu. {%—Viśva-ratha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a son of Gādhi and brother of Viśvā-
mitra. {%—Viśva-rāj, ṭ,%} m. a universal sovereign.
{%—Viśva-rucī,%} f. ‘all-glittering,’ epithet of one of
the seven tongues of fire, (sometimes regarded as a
goddess.) {%—Viśva-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} taking all forms,
existing in all forms, of every kind, universal, omni-
present; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Viṣṇu; N. of a
[Page0945-a+ 81]
son of Tvaṣṭṛ (a three-headed monster slain by
Indra); of a lexicographer; of a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya;
of several other persons; ({%am%}), n. Agallochum.
{%—Viśvarūpa-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the
greatest variety of forms or colours. {%—Viśvarūpa-%}
{%darśana, am,%} n., N. of two chapters in the Krīḍā-
khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Viśvarūpācārya%}
{%(˚pa-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of the author of a Vārttika.
{%—Viśva-retas, ās,%} m. ‘containing the seed of all
things,’ epithet of Brahmā. {%—Viśva-rocana, as,%} m.
an esculent root, Arum Colocasia. {%—Viśva-liṅga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. containing the distinguishing word {%viśva.%}
{%—Viśva-locana = viśva-prakāśa%}. {%—Viśva-vada,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a so-called Veda (with the Magians).
{%—Viśva-vasu, us,%} m. ‘wealth of all,’ N. of a son
of Purū-ravas. {%—Viśva-vāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pos-
sessed of all desirable things, containing all good
things, granting all boons (Ṛg-veda VII. 10, 4);
adored or cherished by all, (Sāy. {%= viśvair varaṇīya,%}
Ṛg-veda I. 113, 19); ({%ā%}), f., N. of the authoress
of the hymn Ṛg-veda V. 28 (belonging to the
family of Atri). {%—Viśva-vārya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. all-
desired, (Sāy. {%= viśvair varaṇīya,%} Ṛg-veda VIII.
19, 11.) {%—Viśva-vāh, -vāṭ, viśvauhī, -vāṭ%} (inst. c.
{%viśvauhā,%} cf. {%bhāra-vāh%}), all-sustaining. {%—Viśva-%}
{%vid, t, t, t,%} ved. knowing everything, omniscient.
{%—Viśva-vidhāyin, ī,%} m. all-making, all-arranging, a
creator, deity. {%—Viśva-vṛtti, is,%} f. universal practice.
{%—Viśva-vedas, ās, ās, as,%} one who knows all things,
all-knowing, omniscient, obtaining or possessing all;
a sage, saint. {%—Viśva-vyacas, ās,%} f. ‘all-embracing,’
epithet of Aditi. {%—Viśva-vyāpaka, as, ā, am,%} all-
pervading, everywhere diffused. {%—Viśva-vyāpin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} all-diffused, all-pervading, ubiquitous, omni-
present. {%—Viśva-vyāpti, is,%} f. universal diffusion or
permeation. {%—Viśva-śambhū, ūs,%} m. one who is the
source of all prosperity; epithet of Viśva-karman
(Ṛg-veda X. 81, 7; in Ṛg-veda I. 160, 4. the dual
form {%viśva-bhuvā,%} ‘all-beneficial,’ is an epithet of
{%Rodasī,%} or heaven and earth). {%—Viśva-śardhas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} Ved. displaying great power, making great
exertion, (Sāy. {%= vyāpta-bala%} or {%bahūtsāha.%})
{%—Viśva-śārada, as,%} m., Ved. epithet of the disease
called Takman (as likely to occur every autumn).
{%—Viśva-śuci, is, is, i,%} Ved. all-enlightening, purifying
everything (said of Agni). {%—Viśva-saha, as, ā, am,%}
all-bearing, all-enduring; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of
Ilavila; ({%ā%}), f. the earth; epithet of one of the tongues
of fire. {%—Viśva-sāman, ā,%} m., N. of the author of
the hymn Ṛg-veda V. 22 (having the patronymic
Ātreya). {%—Viśva-sāraka, am,%} n. ‘having all es-
sence,’ the prickly pear, Cactus Indicus. {%—Viśva-%}
{%suvid, t, t, t,%} Ved. granting everything well, giving
every good thing, bestowing every sort of wealth.
{%—Viśva-sṛj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} creating the universe; ({%ṭ%}), m.
a creator of the universe (of whom there are ten ac-
cording to some accounts); an epithet of Brahmā.
{%—Viśva-sena, as,%} m. epithet of the eighteenth Mu-
hūrta. {%—Viśva-saubhaga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. bestow-
ing all blessings, containing all good things. {%—Viśva-%}
{%sphaṭika, as,%} m., N. of a king of Magadha.
{%—Viśva-sraṣṭṛ, ṭā,%} m. the creator of the universe,
God. {%—Viśvāṅga (˚va-aṅ˚), as,%} m. universal-mem-
bered (said of Viṣṇu). {%—Viśvātman (˚va-āt˚), ā,%} m.
‘Universe-spirit,’ the Soul of the Universe, the Univer-
sal Spirit, the Supreme Being, God; Brahman; Śiva;
Viṣṇu. {%—Viśvā-dhāyas, ās,%} m. (for {%viśva-dhāyas,%}
q. v.), ‘all-sustaining,’ a deity, god. {%—Viśvā-nara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘rulling all men, benefiting all men,’ epithet
of Savitṛ; N. of the father of Agni. {%—Viśvāntara%}
{%(˚va-an˚), as,%} m., Ved., N. of a son of Su-shadman.
{%—Viśvāpsu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having all forms,
multiform, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 148.
{%apsu = rūpa, viśvāpsu = nānā-rūpa;%} but cf.
{%psu.%}) {%—Viśvā-mitra, as,%} m. (according to some
authorities for {%viśva + amitra,%} and meaning ‘no
friend to all;’ but more probably for {%viśva-mitra,%} ‘the
friend of all,’ the final of {%viśva%} being lengthened),
N. of a celebrated Kṣatriya, described as son of
Gāthin or Gādhi, deriving his lineage from an an-
cestor of Kuśika, named Purū-ravus, of the lunar race
[Page0945-b+ 81]
of kings, and himself sovereign of Kanyā-kubja or
Kanoj, (according to one account he was brother of
Satya-vatī, wife of Ṛcīka and mother by him of
Jamad-agni, q. v., who was the father of Paraśu-rāma;
he had one hundred sons, fifty of whom offended
their father, and being degraded by him to the con-
dition of outcasts, became the progenitors of various
barbarous tribes and Dasyus: the fame of Viśvā-
mitra rests chiefly on his contests with the great
Brāhman Vasiṣṭha, and his success in elevating him-
self, though a Kṣatriya, to the rank of a Brāhman,
see Manu VII. 42: the Rāmāyaṇa, which makes
him a companion and counsellor of the young Rāma-
candra, records [I. 51-65] how Viśvā-mitra, on his
accession to the throne, visited the hermitage of
Vasiṣṭha, and seeing there the cow of plenty [proba-
bly typical of {%go,%} ‘the earth’], offered the Muni un-
told treasures in exchange for it, but being refused,
prepared to take it by force; a long contest ensued
between the king and the saint [symbolical of the
struggles between the Kṣatriya and Brāhmanical
classes], which ended in the defeat of Viśvā-mītra,
whose vexation was such that, in order to become a
Brāhman and thus conquer his rival, he devoted
himself to intense austerities, gradually increasing the
rigour of his mortification through thousands of years,
till he successively earned the titles of Rājarṣi, Ṛṣi,
Maharṣi, and finally Brahmarṣi; during the course
of these penances Indra and the gods jealous of his
increasing power — as exhibited in his transporting
king Tri-śaṅku to the skies, and in saving his nephew
Śunaḥ-śepha, son of his own brother-in-law Ṛcīka,
out of the hands of Indra, to whom he had been
promised by king Ambarīṣa as a victim in a sacri-
fice — sent first the nymph Menakā and subsequently
Rambhā to seduce him from his passionless life, and
his surrender to the allurements of the first of these
nymphs led to the birth of a daughter called Śakun-
talā, q. v., the heroine of the celebrated drama; the
rivalry between Viśvā-mitra and Vasiṣṭha is alluded
to in many passages of the Ṛg-veda; it is thought,
therefore, that as caste distinctions had not then
become fixed, the later myths on the subject of this
rivalry may have rested on a Vedic legend, according
to which king Su-dās, having employed Vasiṣṭha as
his domestic priest, allowed on various occasions Viśvā-
mitra also to officiate, which of course led to jealousies
and quarrels between these two functionaries: the whole
of the hymns of the third Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-veda
and a few others are attributed to Viśvā-mitra or to
members of his family); {%Viśvāmitrasyātyardha,%}
N. of a Sāman; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the family or descendants
of Viśvā-mitra; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Viśvāmitra-%}
{%priya, as,%} m. ‘dear to Viśvā-mitra,’ the cocoa-nut
tree, (the fruit being said to have been created by
that saint.) {%—Viśvāmitra-sṛṣṭi, is,%} f., Viśvā-
mitra's creation, (in allusion to several things fabled
to have been created by this saint in rivalry of Brahmā,
e. g. the fruit of the Palmyra in imitation of the
human skull, the buffalo in imitation of the cow, the
ass of the horse, &c.) {%—Viśvāyu (˚va-āy˚), us, us,%}
{%u,%} Ved. containing all life, of full vitality, life-sustain-
ing, abounding in food; going everywhere, (accord-
ing to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 28, 2 {%= sarvato gantṛ.%})
{%—Viśvāyu-poṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. feeding or
nourishing all living beings. {%—Viśvāyu-vepas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. whose energy goes everywhere or pervades
all things, (Sāy. {%= sarva-gata-bala,%} Ṛg-veda VIII.
43, 25.) {%—Viśvā-rāj, ṭ,%} m. a king of the universe.
{%—Viśvā-vasu, us,%} m. ‘wealth of all,’ N. of one of
the Gandharvas (regarded as the author of the hymn
Ṛg-veda X. 139); epithet of one of the Manus;
N. of a poet; of the thirteenth year of Jupiter's cycle;
({%us%}), f. epithet of a particular night. {%—Viśvā-sah%} or
{%viśvā-sāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. all-conquering, subduing all
foes. {%—Viśve-devās,%} m. pl. the Viśva-devas, see
{%viśva;%} (according to the Śabda-k. there is a form
{%Viśve-devās,%} nom. m. sing. meaning ‘Fire,’ cf. {%viśve-%}
{%vedas.%}) {%—Viśve-devṛ, ā,%} m. the clitoris (?). {%—Viśve-%}
{%bhojas, ās,%} m. (for {%viśva-bh˚%}), an epithet of Indra.
{%—Viśve-vedas, ās,%} m. (for {%viśva-v˚%}), an epithet of
[Page0945-c+ 80]
Agni or Fire. {%—Viśveśa (˚va-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of
the universe,’ N. of Śiva (as worshipped at Benares,
where a celebrated temple is appropriated to him,
cf. {%viśva-nātha%} above); the Supreme Spirit; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Dharma.
{%—Viśveśvara (˚va-īś˚), as,%} m. lord of the uni-
verse, {%= viśveśa%} above; N. of the author of the
Madana-pārijāta, the Mahārṇava, the Smṛti-kau-
mudī, and a commentary on the Mitākṣarā; of the
author of a commentary on the Aṣṭā-vakra-saṃhitā.
{%—Viśveśvara-tīrtha, as,%} m., N. of a commentator;
({%am%}), n., N. of a place. {%—Viśveśvara-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m.,
N. of the author of the Karma-vipāka. {%—Viśvaika-%}
{%sāra (˚va-ek˚),%} ‘sole essence of the universe,’ N. of
a plain in Kaśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>44211<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvaka<k2>viSvaka
{%Viśvaka, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of the father of Vish-
ṇāpū; of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda VIII. 75
(having the patronymic Kārṣṇi); ({%ā%}), f. a sort of
gull, Larus Ridibundus.
<LEND>

<L>44212<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvaksena<k2>viSvaksena
{%Viśvak-sena, as,%}¦ m., for {%viṣvak-sena,%} see under
{%viṣv-añc,%} p. 948.
<LEND>

<L>44213<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvagaSva<k2>viSvagaSva
{%Viśvag-aśva, viśvag-gati,%}¦ &c., for {%viṣvag-aśva,%}
&c., see under {%viṣv-añc,%} p. 948.
<LEND>

<L>44214<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvaYc<k2>viSvaYc
{%Viśvañc,%}¦ an incorrect form for {%viṣv-añc,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44215<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvatas<k2>viSvatas
{%Viśva-tas,%}¦ ind. everywhere, all around, univer-
sally. {%—Viśvataś-cakṣus, us, us, us,%} Ved. having
eyes on every side, (Ṛg-veda VIII. 81, 3.) {%—Viś-%}
{%vatas-pād, t,%} m., Ved. having feet on every side;
epithet of Viśva-karman. {%—Viśvato-dāvan, ā,%} &c.,
Ved. granting from all sides. {%—Viśvato-dhī, īs,%} m.,
Ved. supporter of the universe, (Sāy. {%= sarva-jagato%}
{%dhāraka.%}) {%—Viśvato-bāhu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having
arms on every side. {%—Viśvato-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
having a face on every side, facing all sides.
<LEND>

<L>44216<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvaTA<k2>viSvaTA
{%Viśvathā,%}¦ ind. everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>44217<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvadAnIm<k2>viSvadAnIm
{%Viśvadānīm,%}¦ ind., Ved. at all times, at all seasons;
[cf. {%tadānīm, i-dānīm.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44218<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvadryaYc<k2>viSvadryaYc
{%Viśvadryañc, aṅ, īcī, ak%}¦ (fr. {%viśva + adri%} sub-
stituted for the final {%a + añc%}), moving everywhere or
universally, going in all directions, (better written
{%viṣvadryañc.%})
<LEND>

<L>44219<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvaDa<k2>viSvaDa
{%Viśvadha,%}¦ ind., Ved. at all times, on every occasion.
<LEND>

<L>44220<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvaDA<k2>viSvaDA
{%Viśvadhā,%}¦ ind., Ved. on all sides, everywhere,
(Sāy. {%= bahu-vidham.%})
<LEND>

<L>44221<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvantara<k2>viSvantara
{%Viśvantara, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king (son of Su-
shadman; perhaps for {%viśvāntara%}).
<LEND>

<L>44222<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvayu<k2>viSvayu
{%Viśvayu, us,%}¦ m. (for {%viśvāyu?%}), air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>44223<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvaha<k2>viSvaha
{%Viśvaha,%}¦ ind., Ved. on all days, at all times, (Sāy.
{%= sarveṣv apy ahaḥsu, sarvadā.%})
<LEND>

<L>44224<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvahA<k2>viSvahA
{%Viśvahā,%}¦ ind., Ved. everywhere, in every place.
<LEND>

<L>44225<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvAhA<k2>viSvAhA
{%Viśvāhā,%}¦ ind. (probably fr. {%viśva + ahan%}), every
day, at all times, (Sāy. {%= sarvadā.%})
<LEND>

<L>44226<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvyA<k2>viSvyA
{%Viśvyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. from every place, from every
quarter, (Sāy. {%= viśva-tas, sarvāsu dikṣu.%})
<LEND>

<L>44227<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvas<k2>viSvas
{#viSvas#}¦ {%vi-śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śvasiti, -śvasitum,%}
to confide, trust, confide in, trust in, depend on (with
loc. or gen.), to be trustful or confident, to be free
from apprehension: Caus. {%-śvāsayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to trust, inspire with confidence, give confidence
to, free from apprehension, console, encourage.
<LEND>

<L>44228<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvasana<k2>viSvasana
{%Vi-śvasana, am,%}¦ n. trusting, confiding in.
<LEND>

<L>44229<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvasanIya<k2>viSvasanIya
{%Vi-śvasanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be trusted or relied
on, reliable, trustworthy, credible. {%—Viśvasanīya-tā,%}
f. trustworthiness, credibility.
<LEND>

<L>44230<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvasita<k2>viSvasita
{%Vi-śvasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ trusted; believed or con-
fided in.
<LEND>

<L>44231<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvasta<k2>viSvasta
{%Vi-śvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ trusted, confided in, relied
on; worthy of trust, deserving confidence; faithful;
full of confidence, bold, fearless, unsuspecting; ({%ā%}),
f. a widow. {%—Viśvasta-vat,%} ind. as if confiding, as
though trustful.
<LEND>

<L>44232<pc>0945-c<k1>viSvAsa<k2>viSvAsa
{%Vi-śvāsa, as,%}¦ m. trust, confidence, faith, belief, re-
liance; a confidential communication, secret. {%—Viśvā-%}
{%sa-kāraṇa, am,%} n. cause of confidence, motive of trust.
{%—Viśvāsa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} inspiring confidence, causing
trust. {%—Viśvāsa-ghāta, as,%} m. destruction of confi-
dence, breach of faith, violation of trust, treachery.
{%—Viśvāsa-ghātaka, as,%} or {%viśvāsa-ghātin, ī,%} m.
destroying confidence, one who betrays confidence,
a traitor. {%—Viśvāsa-janman, ā, ā, a,%} produced from
[Page0946-a+ 77]
confidence. {%—Viśvāsa-devī,%} f., N. of the patroness
of Vidyā-pati (to whom he dedicated his Gaṅgā-
vākyāvalī, a work on the worship of the waters of
the Ganges). {%—Viśvāsa-pātra, am,%} n. a confidential
agent, one worthy to be trusted. {%—Viśvāsa-prati-%}
{%panna, as, ā, am,%} possessed of confidence, confiding,
trusting. {%—Viśvāsa-prada, as, ā, am,%} giving or in-
spiring confidence. {%—Viśvāsa-bhaṅga, as,%} m. breach
of faith, violation of confidence. {%—Viśvāsa-bhūmi,%}
{%is,%} f. ground for trust, an object of trust, a trust-
worthy person, any one worthy of confidence. {%—Vi-%}
{%śvāsa-sthāna, am,%} n. an object or person of trust
or confidence, anything which produces confidence;
a hostage. {%—Viśvāsaikasāra (˚sa-ek˚), as,%} m. one
whose sole essence is trust; a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>44233<pc>0946-a<k1>viSvAsana<k2>viSvAsana
{%Vi-śvāsana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. causing to trust or con-
fide, producing confidence.
<LEND>

<L>44234<pc>0946-a<k1>viSvAsayitvA<k2>viSvAsayitvA
{%Vi-śvāsayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having caused or
persuaded to trust, having inspired confidence.
<LEND>

<L>44235<pc>0946-a<k1>viSvAsika<k2>viSvAsika
{%Vi-śvāsika, as, ā, am,%}¦ trusty, confidential. {%—Vi-%}
{%śvāsika-tara, as, ā, am,%} more trusty.
<LEND>

<L>44236<pc>0946-a<k1>viSvAsita<k2>viSvAsita
{%Vi-śvāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to trust, inspired
with confidence.
<LEND>

<L>44237<pc>0946-a<k1>viSvAsin<k2>viSvAsin
{%Viśvāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ confiding, trusting, believing,
confiding in; trusty, honest.
<LEND>

<L>44238<pc>0946-a<k1>viSvAsya<k2>viSvAsya<h>1
1. {%vi-śvāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be trusted or confided
in, trustworthy; to be believed; to be made to trust
or inspired with confidence; to be encouraged. {%—Vi-%}
{%śvāsya-tā,%} f. trustworthiness.
<LEND>

<L>44239<pc>0946-a<k1>viSvAsya<k2>viSvAsya<h>2
2. {%vi-śvāsya,%}¦ ind. having made to trust, having in-
spired with confidence or hope; having encouraged.
<LEND>

<L>44240<pc>0946-a<k1>viSvAcI<k2>viSvAcI
{#viSvAcI#}¦ {%viśvācī,%} f. (probably fr. {%viśva +%}
{%ac%} or {%añc,%} making a form {%viśvāc%} or {%viśvāñc,%} cf.
{%ghṛtācī, viṣvāñc%}), N. of one of the Apsarases or
nymphs of Svarga.
<LEND>

<L>44241<pc>0946-a<k1>viSvi<k2>viSvi
{#viSvi#}¦ {%vi-śvi,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śvayati, -śvayitum,%}
to be spread or extended in all directions; to be
manifested, appear, shine forth, (Sāy. {%= vy-aśvait =%}
{%sarvaṃ jagad vyāpnot%} or {%tejasā pravṛddhāsīt.%})
<LEND>

<L>44242<pc>0946-a<k1>viz<k2>viz<h>1
{#viz#} 1¦. {%viṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%veṣati, viveṣa,%}
{%vekṣyati, avikṣat, veṣṭum%} or (ac-
cording to Vopa-deva) {%veṣitum,%} to sprinkle, pour
out; cl. 9. P. {%viṣṇāti,%} &c., to separate, disjoin.
<LEND>

<L>44243<pc>0946-a<k1>vizwvA<k2>vizwvA
{%Viṣṭvā%}¦ or {%veṣitvā,%} ind. having sprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>44244<pc>0946-a<k1>viz<k2>viz<h>2
{#viz#} 2¦. {%viṣ,%} cl. 3. P. A. (some of the
forms of this rt. are liable to be con-
founded with those of rt. 1. {%viś%}), {%veveṣṭi, veviṣṭe%}
(Impv. 2nd sing. {%viviḍḍhi = kuru%} according to Ni-
rukta X. 8; {%= praviśa,%} see under rt. 1. {%viś%}), {%viveṣa,%}
{%viviṣe, vekṣyati, -te, avikṣat%} or {%aviṣat%} (?),
{%avikṣata, veṣṭum,%} (in Naigh. II. 6. {%veṣṭi%} is
enumerated among the {%kānti-karmāṇaḥ;%} in Naigh.
II. 14. {%veṣiṣṭi%} and {%viṣiṣṭi%} are mentioned among
the {%gati-karmāṇaḥ%}), to pervade, spread through, ex-
tend through, go through, penetrate, invest; to spread,
extend; to embrace; to go to, go against, meet (in
a hostile manner); to cause to obtain, convey, (Sāy.
{%= prāpayati%}); to accomplish, perform; to eat,
consume (according to Naigh. II. 8).
<LEND>

<L>44245<pc>0946-a<k1>viz<k2>viz<h>3
3. {%viṣ, ṭ,%}¦ f. spreading, diffusion; feces, ordure,
excrement; ({%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ%}), spreading, diffusing, all-pervad-
ing (Ved.); ({%ṭ%}), m. one who pervades, a pervading
deity (Ved.). {%—Viṭ-kārikā,%} f. ‘ordure-maker,’ a kind
of bird (probably a variety of the Turdus Salica).
{%—Viṭ-khadira, as,%} m. a kind of fetid Mimosa.
{%—Viṭ-cara, as,%} m. ‘filth-goer,’ a tame or village
hog. {%—Viṭ-saṅga, as,%} m. coherence or obstruction
of the feces, constipation. {%—Viṭ-sārikā,%} f. a sort of
thrush or variety of the bird inaccurately called
‘Maina’ in Bengal. {%—Viḍ-gandha, as,%} m. a medi-
cinal salt ({%= viḍ-lavaṇa%}). {%—Viḍ-graha, as,%} m.
seizure or obstruction of the feces, constipation. {%—Viḍ-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} produced from ordure; ({%am%}), n. a
fungus. {%—Viḍ-bhava, as, ā, am,%} born or produced
from ordure. {%—Viḍ-bhuj, k, k, k,%} feeding on ordure
(Manu XII. 56). {%—Viḍ-lavaṇa, am,%} n. a medicinal
salt (commonly called Vitlaban or Bitnoben). {%—Viḍ-%}
{%varāha, as,%} m. a village or tame hog.
<LEND>
[Page0946-b+ 81]

<L>44246<pc>0946-b<k1>viza<k2>viza
{%Viṣa, as, am,%}¦ n. poison, venom, bane, any-
thing baneful or deadly; ({%am%}), n. water; the fibres
attached to the stalk of the lotus; gum-myrrh; a
kind of very active vegetable poison, Aconitum Ferox,
{%= vatsa-nābha; (ā),%} f. a tree (commonly called
Atis, the bark of which is used as a red dye, also
called {%ati-viṣā%}); excrement; (for {%vi-ṣā,%} ‘intel-
lect,’ see under {%vi-ṣo.%}) {%—Viṣa-kaṇṭakinī,%} f. a
kind of plant {%(= bandhyā-karkoṭakī)%}. {%—Viṣa-%}
{%kanda, as,%} m. a species of bulbous plant ({%= nīla-%}
{%kanda%}). {%—Viṣa-kumbha, as,%} m. a jar of poison.
{%—Viṣa-khā, ās,%} m. one who digs for the fibres of
the stem of the lotus, (also written {%bisa-khā.%}) {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣa-granthi,%} N. of a plant (?). {%—Viṣa-ghā,%} f. a
kind of twining shrub, Menispermum Cordifolium
or Cocculus Cordifolius {%(= guḍūcī)%}. {%—Viṣa-ghātin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} poison-destroying, antidotal, an antidote;
({%ī%}), m. the tree Mimosa Sirissa {%(= śirīṣa)%}. {%—Viṣa-%}
{%ghna, as, ī, am,%} destroying or counteracting poison,
antidotal, an antidote; ({%as%}), m. the tree Mimosa
Sirissa; the plant Hedysarum Alhagi; Beleric Myro-
balan, Terminalia Belerica; ({%ī%}), f. the pot-herb
Hingtsha Repens; another plant (commonly called
Bicchati); turmeric; bitter apple or colocynth.
{%—Viṣa-juṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} possessed of poison,
poisonous; poisoned. {%—Viṣa-tā,%} f. or {%viṣa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the state or condition of poison, poisonous-
ness. {%—Viṣa-tulya, as, ā, am,%} resembling poison,
fatal, deadly. {%—Viṣa-da, as, ā, am,%} yielding or
giving poison, poisonous; shedding water; ({%as%}), m.
a cloud; ({%am%}), n. green vitriol. {%—Viṣa-daṃṣṭrā,%}
f. a medicinal plant and antidote ({%= sarpa-kaṅkāli%}).
{%—Viṣa-dantaka, as,%} m. ‘having poisonous teeth,’
a snake. {%—Viṣa-darśana-mṛtyuka, as,%} m. ‘dying
at the sight of poison,’ a kind of pheasant; [cf. {%viṣa-%}
{%mṛtyu.%}] {%—Viṣa-dāyaka, as, ikā, am,%} or {%viṣa-%}
{%dāyin, ī, inī, i,%} giving poison, poisoning. {%—Viṣa-%}
{%digdha, as, ā, am,%} smeared with poison, empoisoned,
poisoned. {%—Viṣa-dūṣaṇa, am,%} n. corrupting by
poison, poisoning. {%—Viṣa-doṣa-hara, as, ā, am,%}
taking away the ill effects of poison. {%—Viṣa-druma,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of poison tree, Upas tree. {%—Viṣa-%}
{%dhara, as, ā, am,%} holding or containing poison,
venomous, poisonous; ({%as%}), m. a snake. {%—Viṣa-%}
{%dhara-nilaya, as,%} m. ‘abode of snakes,’ Pātāla
or the lower regions. {%—Viṣa-dharmā,%} f. cowach,
Carpopogon Pruriens. {%—Viṣa-dhātrī,%} f. ‘poison-
holder,’ N. of a goddess presiding over snakes, (she
was wife of the Ṛṣi Jarat-kāru and sister of Vāsuki;
cf. {%manasā.%} {%—Viṣa-nāśaka, as, ikā, am,%} poison-
destroying, antidotal. {%—Viṣa-nāśana, as,%} m. ‘poison-
destroyer,’ an antidote; the tree Mimosa Sirissa;
({%am%}), n. the act of removing or curing poison.
{%—Viṣa-nāśin, ī, inī, i,%} poison-destroying, any
antidote; ({%inī%}), f. a kind of plant {%(= viṣa-daṃṣ-%}
{%ṭrā)%}. {%—Viṣa-nimitta, as, ā, am,%} caused by poison.
{%—Viṣa-nud, t,%} m. ‘poison-expeller,’ the plant
Bignonia Indica. {%—Viṣa-pīta, as, ā, am,%} one who
has drunk poison. {%—Viṣa-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘having
poisonous flowers,’ the plant Vangueria Spinosa;
({%am%}), n. the blue lotus. {%—Viṣa-puṣpaka, as,%} m.
sickness or disease caused by eating poisonous flowers.
{%—Viṣa-prayoga, as,%} m. the use or employment
of poison, administering poison as a medicine. {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣa-bhakṣaṇa, am,%} n. the act of eating poison,
taking poison. {%—Viṣa-bhiṣaj, k,%} m. a poison-
doctor; a dealer in antidotes, one who pretends to
cure the bites of snakes. {%—Viṣa-bhujaṅga, as,%} m.
a poisonous snake. {%—Viṣa-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} bearing or
containing poison, venomous, poisonous; ({%t%}), m. a
snake. {%—Viṣa-mantra, as,%} m. a snake-charmer,
snake-catcher, one who pretends to charm snakes,
one who cures the bite of snakes; ({%am%}), n. a charm
for curing snake-bites. {%—Viṣa-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of poison, poisonous. {%—Viṣa-muṣṭi, is,%}
f. a kind of shrub possessing medicinal properties (com-
monly called Bishdori or Karsinh). {%—Viṣa-mṛtyu,%}
{%us,%} m. a sort of bird, a kind of pheasant (‘to whom
poison is death,’ cf. {%viṣa-darśana-mṛtyuka%}).
{%—Viṣa-rasa, as,%} m. ‘poison-juice,’ a poisoned
draught or potion. {%—Viṣa-vallarī,%} f. a poisonous
[Page0946-c+ 80]
creeper. {%—Viṣa-vidyā,%} f. ‘poison-science,’ the ad-
ministration of antidotes, the cure of poisons by drugs
or charms. {%—Viṣa-vidhāna, am,%} n. administering
poison judiciously or by way of ordeal. {%—Viṣa-%}
{%vimuktātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} one whose soul
or whose nature is released from poison. {%—Viṣa-%}
{%vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a poison tree, the Upas tree. {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣa-vega, as,%} m. ‘poison-force,’ the effect of poison
(shown by various bodily effects or changes). {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣa-vaidya, as,%} m. ‘poison-doctor,’ a dealer in
antidotes or one professing to cure the bites of
snakes. {%—Viṣa-vairiṇī,%} f. ‘poison-enemy,’ a kind
of grass used as an antidote ({%= nir-viṣā,%} q. v.).
{%—Viṣa-śālūka, as,%} m. the root of the lotus. {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣa-śūka, as,%} m. or {%viṣa-śṛṅgin, ī,%} m. ‘having
a poisonous sting,’ a wasp. {%—Viṣa-sūcaka, as,%} m.
‘poison-indicator,’ the Greek partridge, Perdix Rufa
{%(= cakora)%}. {%—Viṣa-sṛkkan, ā,%} m. ‘poison-
mouthed,’ a wasp. {%—Viṣa-ha, as, ā, am,%} removing
poison; ({%ā%}), f., N. of various plants {%(= deva-dālī;%}
{%= nir-viṣā)%}. {%—Viṣa-hantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} destroy-
ing or counteracting poison; ({%trī%}), f., N. of various
plants {%(= a-parājitā; = nir-viṣā)%}. {%—Viṣa-hara,%}
{%as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} removing venom, antidotal; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}),
f. the goddess who protects from the venom of snakes,
(see {%viṣa-dhātrī, manasā.%}) {%—Viṣa-hṛdaya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} poison-hearted, cherishing hatred or hostility,
malicious, malignant. {%—Viṣākta (˚ṣa-ak˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} smeared with poison, poisoned. {%—Viṣāgni%}
{%(˚ṣa-ag˚), is,%} m. the fire of poison. {%—Viṣāṅkura%}
{%(˚ṣa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘having a poisoned point,’ a
spear, dart. {%—Viṣādanī (˚ṣa-ad˚),%} f. ‘poison-
destroying,’ a kind of creeper {%(= palāśī)%}. {%—Viṣā-%}
{%nana (˚ṣa-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘having a poisonous mouth,’
a snake. {%—Viṣāntaka (˚ṣa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} poison-
destroying, antidotal; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva,
(so called because he swallowed the deadly poison
produced at the churning of the ocean.) {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣāpaha (˚ṣa-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} poison-repelling,
antidotic, an antidote, ({%mantrair viṣāpahaiḥ,%}
with texts or charms which have the power of repel-
ling poison); ({%as%}), m. a kind of tree, {%= muṣkaka;%}
{%(ā),%} f. a kind of birth-wort, Aristolochia Indica ({%=%}
{%arka-mūlā;%} various other plants, {%= indra-vāruṇī;%}
{%= nir-viṣā; = nāga-damanī; = sarpa-kaṅkāli-%}
{%kā)%}. {%—Viṣābhāvā (˚ṣa-abh˚),%} f. ‘having no poison,’
a species of plant {%(= nir-viṣā)%}. {%—Viṣāyudha%}
{%(˚ṣa-āy˚), as,%} m. ‘armed with venom,’ a snake.
{%—Viṣārāti (˚ṣa-ar˚), is,%} m. ‘poison-enemy,’ a
species of plant ({%= kṛṣṇa-dhattūraka%}). {%—Viṣāri%}
{%(˚ṣa-ari), is,%} m. ‘poison-enemy,’ a kind of plant
or tree {%(= mahā-cañcū; = ghṛta-karañja)%}. {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣāsya (˚ṣa-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘poison-mouthed,’ a
snake; ({%ā%}), f. the marking-nut plant, Semecarpus
Anacardium. {%—Viṣāsvāda (˚ṣa-ās˚), as, ā, am,%}
tasting poison (Manu XI. 9; cf. {%madhv-āpāta%}).
<LEND>

<L>44247<pc>0946-c<k1>vizaRi<k2>vizaRi
{%Viṣaṇi, is,%}¦ m. a sort of snake.
<LEND>

<L>44248<pc>0946-c<k1>vizala<k2>vizala
{%Viṣala, as,%}¦ m. poison, venom.
<LEND>

<L>44249<pc>0946-c<k1>vizAya<k2>vizAya
{%Viṣāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%viṣāyate, -yitum,%} to become
poison, turn into poison.
<LEND>

<L>44250<pc>0946-c<k1>vizAra<k2>vizAra
{%Viṣāra, as,%}¦ m. a snake.
<LEND>

<L>44251<pc>0946-c<k1>vizAlu<k2>vizAlu
{%Viṣālu, us, us, u,%}¦ venomous, poisonous.
<LEND>

<L>44252<pc>0946-c<k1>vizita<k2>vizita<h>1
1. {%viṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. extended, spread, cast,
(perhaps for 2. {%vi-ṣita,%} see under {%vi-ṣi.%})
<LEND>

<L>44253<pc>0946-c<k1>vizwa<k2>vizwa<h>2
2. {%viṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 941, col. 2),
pervaded; ({%ā%}), f. the feces, excrement.
<LEND>

<L>44254<pc>0946-c<k1>vizwi<k2>vizwi<h>2
2. {%viṣṭi, is, is, i%}¦ (for 1. see p. 941, col. 2), per-
forming, labouring; ({%is%}), f. pervading, penetrating;
occupation, act, action; hire, wages; unpaid labour;
sending, dispatching; consigning to hell.
<LEND>

<L>44255<pc>0946-c<k1>vizwvI<k2>vizwvI
{%Viṣṭvī,%}¦ ind., Ved. having pervaded; having per-
formed, (Sāy. {%= vyāpya, kṛtvā;%} in Naigh. II. 1.
enumerated among the {%karma-nāmāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>44256<pc>0946-c<k1>vizya<k2>vizya
{%Viṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ worthy of poison, deserving
death by poison.
<LEND>

<L>44257<pc>0946-c<k1>vizaYj<k2>vizaYj
{#vizaYj#}¦ {%vi-ṣañj (-sañj),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṣajati,%}
{%-ṣaṅktum,%} to attach to, fix or fasten to, fix on;
to hang or suspend upon (anything).
<LEND>

<L>44258<pc>0946-c<k1>vizakta<k2>vizakta
{%Vi-ṣakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ firmly fixed or fastened to
or entangled in (with loc.); clinging closely, adhering
[Page0947-a+ 79]
to, firmly rooted; in contact with, hung or sus-
pended on (anything); emaciated, (Sāy. {%= viśeṣeṇa%}
{%saktāvayava, kṛśāvayava.%})
<LEND>

<L>44259<pc>0947-a<k1>vizaNga<k2>vizaNga
{%Vi-ṣaṅga, as,%}¦ m. attachment, contact; hanging
or depending on.
<LEND>

<L>44260<pc>0947-a<k1>vizaRqa<k2>vizaRqa
{#vizaRqa#}¦ {%viṣaṇḍa, am,%} n. the fibres of the
stalk of the water-lily.
<LEND>

<L>44261<pc>0947-a<k1>vizatvara<k2>vizatvara
{#vizatvara#}¦ {%viṣatvara, as,%} m. a buffalo.
<LEND>

<L>44262<pc>0947-a<k1>vizad<k2>vizad
{#vizad#}¦ {%vi-ṣad (-sad),%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%-ṣīdati%}
(Impf. {%vy-aṣīdat,%} or {%vy-asīdat,%} Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 119;
Perf. {%vi-ṣasāda,%} Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 118), {%-ṣattum,%} to
sink down, be exhausted; to be sorrowful or afflicted
or dejected; to despair, despond; to be afraid: Caus.
{%-ṣādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to sink down, exhaust,
make sorrowful or fearful, afflict, vex, grieve.
<LEND>

<L>44263<pc>0947-a<k1>vizaRRa<k2>vizaRRa
{%Vi-ṣaṇṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ dejected, sad, desponding,
spiritless, downcast, out of spirits, wanting in energy,
disinclined to exertion. {%—Viṣaṇṇa-tā,%} f. or {%vi-%}
{%ṣaṇṇa-tva, am,%} n. dejection, sadness, want of
energy or spirit, languor, lassitude (especially as one
of the effects of unsuccessful love). {%—Viṣaṇṇa-mu-%}
{%kha, as, ī, am,%} or {%viṣaṇṇa-vadana, as, ā, am,%}
dejected in countenance, looking sad or dejected.
{%—Viṣaṇṇa-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} having a sorrowful
aspect, being in a sorrowful mood.
<LEND>

<L>44264<pc>0947-a<k1>vizAda<k2>vizAda
{%Vi-ṣāda, as,%}¦ m. dejection, depression, lowness of
spirits, despondency, want of energy, languor, lassi-
tude (especially as the result of unrequited love);
sadness, sorrow, affliction; disappointment, despair
(one of the Vyabhicāri-bhāvas); fear, weakness;
dulness, stupidity, insensibility ({%= moha%}).
<LEND>

<L>44265<pc>0947-a<k1>vizAdita<k2>vizAdita
{%Vi-ṣādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to sink down,
made sorrowful, dejected.
<LEND>

<L>44266<pc>0947-a<k1>vizAdin<k2>vizAdin
{%Viṣādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ dejected, disconsolate, sad.
<LEND>

<L>44267<pc>0947-a<k1>vizIdat<k2>vizIdat
{%Vi-ṣīdat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sinking down, despond-
ing, sorrowing, despairing.
<LEND>

<L>44268<pc>0947-a<k1>vizama<k2>vizama
{#vizama#}¦ {%vi-ṣama, as, ā, am,%} uneven, rough,
rugged, hilly, difficult of access; unequal, irregular;
odd, not even (in numbers); different; difficult, hard
to be understood (as a book); rough, coarse, rude,
cross; disagreeable, painful, troublesome, vexatious;
odd, unusual, unequalled, unparalleled; intermittent,
inconstant; unfair, dishonest, partial; bad, adverse,
unpropitious; wicked; fearful, awful, unhappy; ({%as%}),
m., N. of Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n. unevenness, inequality;
oddness (of numbers); an inaccessible place, thicket,
pit, precipice; difficulty, pain, misfortune; (in rhe-
toric) description of unusual or incompatible cause
and effect; ({%am%}), ind. unequally, unfairly. {%—Viṣa-%}
{%ma-karṇa, as,%} m. (or {%am,%} n. ?), a quadrangle or
tetragon with unequal diagonals; the hypothenuse
of a right-angled triangle (especially as formed be-
tween the gnomon of a dial and the two sides of the
shadow). {%—Viṣama-karman, a,%} n. an odd or un-
equalled act; (in arithmetic or algebra) the finding
of two quantities when the difference of their squares
is given and either the sum or difference of the
quantities. {%—Viṣama-kāla, as,%} m. an unfavourable
time, inauspicious season. {%—Viṣama-khāta, am,%}
n. an irregular excavation or solid, one with unequal
sides. {%—Viṣama-caturasra%} or {%viṣama-catur-%}
{%bhuja, am,%} n. an unequal four-sided figure, a tra-
pezium. {%—Viṣama-cchada, as,%} m. ‘having uneven
or odd leaves,’ the plant Echites Scholaris. {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣama-cchāyā,%} f. ‘uneven-shadow,’ the shadow of the
gnomon at noon when the sun is on the equinoctial
line. {%—Viṣama-jvara, as,%} m. irregular fever, irre-
gularly remittent fever. {%—Viṣama-tribhuja, as,%}
m. a scalene triangle. {%—Viṣama-dhātu, us, us, u,%}
one whose bodily humors are unequally proportioned,
unhealthy. {%—Viṣama-nayana, as,%} m. ‘having
three or an odd number of eyes,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Viṣama-pada, as, ī, am,%} having unequal foot-
marks. {%—Viṣama-bhojana, am,%} n. eating at irre-
gular hours. {%—Viṣama-maya, as, ī, am,%} produced
by or resulting from inequality. {%—Viṣama-rūpya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} produced by or resulting from unequal
quantities or qualities. {%—Viṣama-lakṣmī, īs,%} f.
adverse fortune, bad luck. {%—Viṣama-vibhāga, as,%}
[Page0947-b+ 77]
m. unequal division of property amongst co-heirs.
{%—Viṣama-śāyin, ī, inī, i,%} sleeping irregularly.
{%—Viṣama-śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} ‘unfairly left,’ unjust,
unfair (as applied to a division of property &c.).
{%—Viṣama-śīla, as, ā, am,%} ‘having an uneven dis-
position,’ cross tempered, rough, difficult. {%—Viṣa-%}
{%ma-sāhasa, am,%} n. irregular boldness, temerity,
daring. {%—Viṣama-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing un-
evenly; being in an inaccessible position; being in
embarrassed circumstances, being in difficulty or mis-
fortune. {%—Viṣamākṣa (˚ma-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘having
three or an odd number of eyes,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Viṣamānna (˚ma-an˚), am,%} n. irregular or
unusual food. {%—Viṣamāyudha (˚ma-āy˚), as,%} m.
‘having five or an odd number of arrows,’ an epithet
of Kāma-deva. {%—Viṣamāvatāra (˚ma-av˚), as,%}
m. descending on uneven ground. {%—Viṣamāśana%}
{%(˚ma-aś˚), am,%} n. eating irregularly (either as to
quantity or time). {%—Viṣamāśaya (˚ma-āś˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having an unfair disposition, dishonest, crafty.
{%—Viṣamī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become
uneven or irregular, to stumble. {%—Viṣamekṣaṇa%}
{%(˚ma-īk˚), as,%} m. {%= viṣamākṣa,%} an epithet of
Śiva. {%—Viṣameṣu (˚ma-iṣ˚), us,%} m. ‘having an
odd number of arrows,’ an epithet of Kāma-deva;
[cf. {%viṣamāyudha.%}] {%—Viṣamonnata (˚ma-%}
{%un˚), as, ā, am,%} unevenly raised. {%—Viṣamopala%}
{%(˚ma-up˚), as, ā, am,%} having rough stones or rocks.
<LEND>

<L>44269<pc>0947-b<k1>vizamita<k2>vizamita
{%Viṣamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made uneven or irregular,
made crooked, frowning, ({%viṣamita-cakṣuṣā,%}
with frowning or scowling eye); made difficult to
be walked on.
<LEND>

<L>44270<pc>0947-b<k1>vizamIya<k2>vizamIya
{%Viṣamīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected with or pro-
duced by inequality, resulting from inequalities, un-
equal, uneven, irregular.
<LEND>

<L>44271<pc>0947-b<k1>vizaya<k2>vizaya
{#vizaya#}¦ {%vi-ṣaya.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>44272<pc>0947-b<k1>vizah<k2>vizah
{#vizah#}¦ {%vi-ṣah (-sah),%} cl. 1. A. {%-ṣahate,%}
{%-ṣahitum%} or {%-soḍhum%} (not {%-ṣoḍhum,%} Pāṇ. VIII.
3, 115), to endure, bear, suffer, sustain; to be able
to resist or overcome; to be able to conquer; to be
able to settle or determine; to be able to do any-
thing (with infin., e. g. {%vihātum viṣehe,%} he was
able to quit).
<LEND>

<L>44273<pc>0947-b<k1>vizahya<k2>vizahya<h>1
1. {%vi-ṣahya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be borne or endured;
possible to be determined, ({%sīmāyām aviṣahyā-%}
{%yām,%} when a boundary is not possible to be settled,
Manu VIII. 265); possible.
<LEND>

<L>44274<pc>0947-b<k1>vizahya<k2>vizahya<h>2
2. {%vi-ṣahya,%}¦ ind. having endured, having borne,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>44275<pc>0947-b<k1>visoQa<k2>visoQa
{%Vi-soḍha, as, ā, am%}¦ (Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 115), en-
dured, borne.
<LEND>

<L>44276<pc>0947-b<k1>vizA<k2>vizA
{#vizA#}¦ {%vi-ṣā,%} ind. See {%vi-ṣo.%}
<LEND>

<L>44277<pc>0947-b<k1>vizARa<k2>vizARa
{#vizARa#}¦ {%viṣāṇa, as, am,%} m. n. (probably
fr. {%vi-ṣo,%} thought by others to be fr. rt. 2. {%viṣ%}),
a horn, the horn of any animal (usually neut., {%kha-%}
{%rī-v˚,%} an ass's horn, i. e. a mere chimera or impos-
sibility, {%= śaśa-v˚,%} q. v.), the tusk of an elephant or
boar; ({%ī%}), f. a particular plant (the fruit of which is
compared to a ram's horn, {%= meṣa-śṛṅgī%}); a medi-
cinal root, {%= kṣīra-kākolī; (am),%} n. a sort of
medicinal plant, Costus Speciosus {%(= kuṣṭha)%}. {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣāṇa-koṣa, as,%} m. the hollow of a horn. {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣāṇonnāmita-skandha (˚ṇa-un˚), as, ā, am,%}
having shoulders raised up towards (or high enough
to meet) the horns. {%—Viṣāṇollikhita-skandha%}
{%(˚ṇa-ul˚), as, ā, am,%} whose shoulders are grazed
or scratched by his horns (said of the leader of a
herd of cattle to mark superiority).
<LEND>

<L>44278<pc>0947-b<k1>vizARikA<k2>vizARikA
{%Viṣāṇikā,%}¦ f. a sort of plant ({%= meṣa-śṛṅgī%}).
<LEND>

<L>44279<pc>0947-b<k1>vizARin<k2>vizARin
{%Viṣāṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having horns, horned, having
huge tusks; ({%ī%}), m. any horned animal or animal
having tusks; a bull; an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>44280<pc>0947-b<k1>vizAda<k2>vizAda
{#vizAda#}¦ {%vi-ṣāda.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>44281<pc>0947-b<k1>vizi<k2>vizi
{#vizi#}¦ {%vi-ṣi (-si),%} cl. 5. 9. P. A. {%-ṣiṇoti,%}
{%-ṣiṇute, -ṣiṇāti, -ṣiṇīte, -ṣetum,%} to bind to
(any one or anything), attach, connect; to conciliate,
appease (Ved.); to unbind, loosen.
<LEND>
[Page0947-c+ 81]

<L>44282<pc>0947-c<k1>vizaya<k2>vizaya
{%Vi-ṣaya, as,%}¦ m. an object of sense, (these are
five in number, the five {%indriya%} or organs of sense
having each their proper {%viṣaya%} or object, viz. 1.
{%śabda,%} ‘sound,’ for the ear, cf. {%śruti-viṣaya;%}
2. {%sparśa,%} ‘tangibility,’ for the skin; 3. {%rūpa,%}
‘form’ or ‘colour,’ for the eye; 4. {%rasa,%} ‘savour,’
for the tongue; 5. {%gandha,%} ‘odour,’ for the nose:
and these five Viṣayas are sometimes called the
Guṇas or ‘properties’ of the five elements, ether, air,
fire, water, earth, respectively; cf. {%śruti-viṣaya-%}
{%guṇa%}); a symbolical expression for the number five;
anything perceptible by the senses, any object (of
affection, of desire, of art, &c.); object of concern
or attention, worldly object or aim, pursuit, affair,
concern, business, transaction; worldly or sensual en-
joyment, pleasure of sense, sensuality, subject, subject-
matter, topic, the subject of a book, (at the end of an
adj. comp. = ‘being on the subject of,’ ‘treating of,’
‘relating to,’ e. g. {%dhana-viṣaya, as, ā, am,%} re-
lating to wealth); subject of an argument, general
head, (one of the Adhikaraṇas, see {%adhi-karaṇa%});
a country, native country, home, region, district,
province, kingdom, realm, domain, empire, place;
department, field, sphere, element, peculiar province,
peculiar abode (e. g. a particular study is the {%viṣaya%}
of its professors, a particular town of its citizens, water
of fish, air of birds, &c.); that which comes within
the range of sight, horizon, scope, range, compass,
reach [cf. {%cakṣur-v˚%}]; refuge, asylum; anything
indigenous or peculiar to a province, &c.; a religious
obligation or observance; a collection of villages;
a lover, husband; semen virile; {%viṣaye,%} loc. c. sing.
in or on any object, (often used by commentators to
denote that a word is in the loc. c.), on the subject
of, in relation to, in regard to, concerning, regarding,
with reference to, ({%atra viṣaye,%} with regard to
this object; {%strīṇāṃ viṣaye,%} concerning women;
{%dhana-viṣaye,%} on the subject of wealth.) {%Viṣaya%}
may be often used in some of the above senses at
the end of adj. comps. (e. g. {%avakāśa-viṣaya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having space as a sphere of action; {%ananya-v˚,%}
having regard to no other object; cf. {%palāyana-v˚,%}
{%a-cakṣur-v˚%}). {%—Viṣaya-karman, a,%} n. worldly
business or act. {%—Viṣaya-kāma, as,%} m. desire of
worldly goods or pleasures. {%—Viṣaya-grāma, as,%}
m. the aggregate or assemblage of objects of sense
or visible objects. {%—Viṣaya-jñāna, am,%} n. acquaint-
ance with worldly affairs. {%—Viṣaya-tā,%} f. or {%viṣaya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the character or condition of an object, the
relation between an object and the knowledge of it
(in phil.). {%—Viṣaya-pratyabhijñāna, am,%} n. the
recognition of objects (in phil.). {%—Viṣaya-pravaṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} attached to objects of sense, addicted to
sensual objects. {%—Viṣaya-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} engaged
in the affairs of life. {%—Viṣaya-vicāra, as,%} m., N.
of a treatise by Gadādhara. {%—Viṣaya-saṅga-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} produced by addiction to sensuality.
{%—Viṣaya-sukha, am,%} n. the pleasures of sense.
{%—Viṣaya-spṛhā,%} f. desire for objects of sense,
longing for sensual objects. {%—Viṣayātmaka (˚ya-%}
{%āt˚), as, ā, am,%} consisting of or identified with
sensual or worldly objects, having a sensual nature,
sensual, carnal. {%—Viṣayābhirati (˚ya-abh˚), is,%} f.
the enjoyment of objects of sense. {%—Viṣayāsakta%}
{%(˚ya-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} attached to objects of sense,
devoted to the world. {%—Viṣayī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the
making anything an object of perception or thought,
taking cognizance of an object. {%—Viṣayī-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make anything an object of
sense or an object of thought; to apprehend, take
cognizance of, perceive. {%—Viṣayī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
made an object of sense or activity; perceived. {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣayī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to become
an object of sense or perception; to become an object
of concern or attention; to become the province or
property of any one or anything. {%—Viṣayī-bhūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} become or made an object of perception,
&c. {%—Viṣayaiṣin (˚ya-eṣ˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} desirous
of objects of sense, devoted to worldly pursuits.
{%—Viṣayopasevā (˚ya-up˚),%} f. addiction to plea-
sures of sense, sensuality.
<LEND>
[Page0948-a+ 80]

<L>44283<pc>0948-a<k1>vizayaka<k2>vizayaka
{%Viṣayaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to an object; (at
the end of comps.) having for an object or subject,
relating to, having reference to, on the subject of,
treating of, concerning. {%—Viṣayaka-tva, am,%} n.
the being an object, the state of an object or affair
or circumstance.
<LEND>

<L>44284<pc>0948-a<k1>vizayAyin<k2>vizayAyin
{%Viṣayāyin, ī,%}¦ m. (according to some fr. {%viṣaya +%}
{%yin = vin%}), any one addicted to objects of sense or
attentive to worldly objects; a man of business, man
of the world; a king; a sensualist, voluptuary, epicu-
rean; epithet of Kāma-deva (the god of love); a
materialist, one who disbelieves the existence of
anything not cognizable by the senses; an organ of
sense.
<LEND>

<L>44285<pc>0948-a<k1>vizayin<k2>vizayin
{%Viṣayin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ relating to objects of sense,
attached to sensual objects, engaged or interested in
worldly occupations or enjoyments; sensual, carnal,
worldly; ({%ī%}), m. a king (as ruling a country or en-
gaged in the business of government); a man of
business, man of the world, worldling; a sensualist,
voluptuary; epithet of Kāma-deva (god of love);
a materialist, one who disbelieves or denies the exist-
ence of everything except objects of sense; ({%i%}), n.
an organ of sense.
<LEND>

<L>44286<pc>0948-a<k1>vizayIya<k2>vizayIya
{%Viṣayīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to an object, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44287<pc>0948-a<k1>vizita<k2>vizita<h>2
2. {%vi-ṣita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 946, col. 3;
for 3. see under {%vi-ṣo%}), unfastened, loosened, let
loose, unarrested, discharged, (Sāy. {%= vi-mukta, vi-%}
{%ṣyūta.%})
<LEND>

<L>44288<pc>0948-a<k1>vizu<k2>vizu
{#vizu#}¦ {%viṣu,%} ind. (perhaps connected with
1. {%vi%} or for an original {%dviṣu,%} loc. pl. of {%dvi,%} see
1. {%vi%}), in two equal parts, equally, variously, differ-
ently, manifold, many; same, like. {%—Viṣu-pada,%}
{%am,%} n. the autumnal equinox (?). {%—Viṣu-rūpa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. of various or different shape or colour,
&c. {%—Viṣū-vṛt, t, t, t%} ({%viṣū%} for {%viṣu%}), Ved.
turning or moving everywhere, existing everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>44289<pc>0948-a<k1>vizuRa<k2>vizuRa
{%Viṣuṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having various motion or
extension, moving variously, going in various ways,
having various forms, (Sāy. {%= viṣv-añc%} or {%viṣvag-%}
{%añcana%} or {%nānā-rūpa%}); having uniform motion;
adverse, hostile, disorderly, wicked, (Sāy. {%= vi-ṣama,%}
Ṛg-veda VII. 21, 5; {%= parāṅ-mukha,%} Ṛg-veda V.
34, 6); ({%as%}), m. the equinox ({%= viṣuva%} below).
<LEND>

<L>44290<pc>0948-a<k1>vizupa<k2>vizupa
{%Viṣupa, am,%}¦ n. {%= viṣuva,%} the equinox.
<LEND>

<L>44291<pc>0948-a<k1>vizuva<k2>vizuva
{%Viṣuva, am,%}¦ n. (abbreviated from {%viṣu-vat%}),
‘point of equal separation,’ the equinoctial point, the
first point of Aries or Libra into which the sun enters
at the vernal or autumnal equinox. {%—Viṣuva-%}
{%cchāyā,%} f. the shadow of the gnomon or index of a
dial at noon when the sun is on the equinoctial
points. {%—Viṣuva-dina, am,%} n. the day of the
equinox. {%—Viṣuva-rekhā,%} f. the equinoctial line.
{%—Viṣuva-saṅkrānti, is,%} f. the sun's equinoctial
passage, the passing of the sun into the next sign at
either equinox.
<LEND>

<L>44292<pc>0948-a<k1>vizuvat<k2>vizuvat
{%Viṣu-vat, t,%}¦ n. (probably formed fr. {%viṣu +%}
{%vat%}), ‘possessing a separation into two equal parts,’
the point of equal separation, i. e. the equinoctial
point or equinox; the central day in a Sattra or
sacrificial session. {%—Viṣuvat-prabhā,%} f. the equi-
noctial shadow. {%—Viṣuvat-saṅkrānti, is,%} f. the
sun's equinoctial passage, the passing of the sun into
the next sign at either equinox. {%—Viṣuvad-bhā, ās,%}
f. the equinoctial shadow. {%—Viṣuvad-vṛtta, am,%}
n. the equinoctial circle or line. {%—Viṣuvan-maṇ-%}
{%ḍala, am,%} n. the equinoctial circle or line.
<LEND>

<L>44293<pc>0948-a<k1>vizvaYc<k2>vizvaYc
{%Viṣv-añc, aṅ, -ṣūcī, ak%}¦ (fr. {%viṣu + añc;%} some-
times incorrectly written {%viśvañc%}), going everywhere,
all-pervading; separating into two or into several
parts, different, various; alternately (as day and
night); ({%ak%}), n. the equinox; ({%ak%}), ind. every way,
all around, all about, everywhere; alternately, (Sāy.
{%= saṃyak,%} Ṛg-veda I. 146, 3.) {%—Viṣvak-ṣeṇa%}
or {%viṣvak-sena, as,%} m. (sometimes written {%viśvak-%}
{%sena%}), ‘whose hosts or powers go everywhere,’
epithet of Viṣṇu, or of a particular form of that
deity to whom the fragments of a sacrifice are
offered; N. of the fourteenth Manu; of a king;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant (commonly called Priyaṅgu).
[Page0948-b+ 76]
{%—Viṣvaksena-priyā,%} f. ‘beloved of Viṣṇu,’ an
epithet of Lakṣmī; a sort of yam, Dioscorea.
{%—Viṣvag-aśva, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Viṣvag-%}
{%āyat, an, antī, at,%} spreading or going in every
direction. {%—Viṣvag-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone all about,
spread, extended. {%—Viṣvag-gati, is,%} f. going all
about, going everywhere, entering into every (topic).
{%—Viṣvag-jyotis, is,%} m., N. of the eldest of the
100 sons of Śata-jit. {%—Viṣvag-vāyu, us,%} m. a
kind of noxious wind which blows from all quarters.
<LEND>

<L>44294<pc>0948-b<k1>vizvadryaYc<k2>vizvadryaYc
{%Viṣvadryañc, aṅ, -drīcī, ak%}¦ (fr. {%viṣu + adri +%}
{%añc;%} cf. {%tadryañc, madryañc%}), going everywhere,
all-pervading, going in all directions.
<LEND>

<L>44295<pc>0948-b<k1>vizvAYc<k2>vizvAYc
{%Viṣvāñc, āṅ,%}¦ m. (for {%viṣv-añc%}), Ved., N. of an
Asura who had the power of going everywhere (Ṛg-
veda I. 117, 16).
<LEND>

<L>44296<pc>0948-b<k1>vizUcikA<k2>vizUcikA
{#vizUcikA#}¦ {%vi-ṣūcikā,%} f. cholera, {%= vi-śū-%}
{%cikā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44297<pc>0948-b<k1>vizUvat<k2>vizUvat
{#vizUvat#}¦ {%viṣūvat, ān, atī, at%} (in the Pada
text of Ṛg-veda I. 84, 10. {%viṣu-vat%}), Ved. pervad-
ing, (Sāy. {%= vyāpti-yukta,%} as if fr. rt. 2. {%viṣ%});
poured forth (as Soma juice); prepared in the sacri-
fice, (as if for {%vi-ṣuvat%} fr. rt. 3. {%su%}); ({%ān%}), m. a
particular kind of sacrifice; [cf. {%viṣu-vat.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44298<pc>0948-b<k1>vizo<k2>vizo
{#vizo#}¦ {%vi-ṣo (-so),%} cl. 4. P. {%-ṣyati, -ṣātum,%}
Ved. to gush out, rush forth; to bring to an end or
issue, cause to issue out; to open, distend, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%vivṛtaṃ kṛ%}); to offer.
<LEND>

<L>44299<pc>0948-b<k1>vizA<k2>vizA
{%Vi-ṣā,%}¦ ind. (said in Uṇādi-s. IV. 36. to be fr.
{%vi-ṣo%} above), intellect, understanding. (For {%viṣā%}
see under {%viṣa,%} p. 946, col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>44300<pc>0948-b<k1>vizita<k2>vizita<h>3
3. {%vi-ṣita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 946, col. 3;
for 2. see col. 1), opened, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44301<pc>0948-b<k1>vizyat<k2>vizyat
{%Vi-ṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ throwing, hurling, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%pra-kṣipat,%} Ṛg-veda V. 45, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>44302<pc>0948-b<k1>vizk<k2>vizk
{#vizk#}¦ {%viṣk%} [cf. rt. {%vaṣk%}], cl. 10. P.
{%viṣkayati, -yitum,%} to see, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>44303<pc>0948-b<k1>vizkand<k2>vizkand
{#vizkand#}¦ {%vi-ṣkand%} (also written {%vi-skand,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. P. {%-ṣkandati%} (or {%-skandati%}), {%-ṣkan-%}
{%tum%} (or {%-skantum%}), to go in different directions,
wander about, stray, disperse; to go away.
<LEND>

<L>44304<pc>0948-b<k1>vizkanttf<k2>vizkanttf
{%Vi-ṣkanttṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ going in various direc-
tions, dispersing; going away.
<LEND>

<L>44305<pc>0948-b<k1>vizkanda<k2>vizkanda
{%Vi-ṣkanda, as,%}¦ m. dispersing, going away.
<LEND>

<L>44306<pc>0948-b<k1>viskanna<k2>viskanna
{%Vi-skanna, as, ā, am%}¦ (not {%vi-ṣkaṇṇa,%} see Pāṇ.
VIII. 3, 73), gone in various directions, dispersed,
gone away.
<LEND>

<L>44307<pc>0948-b<k1>vizkaB<k2>vizkaB
{#vizkaB#}¦ {%vi-ṣkabh.%} See {%vi-ṣkambh.%}
<LEND>

<L>44308<pc>0948-b<k1>vizkamB<k2>vizkamB
{#vizkamB#}¦ {%vi-ṣkambh%} (also written {%vi-%}
{%skambh,%} q. v.), cl. 5. 9. P., 1. A. {%-ṣkabhnoti,%}
{%-ṣkabhnāti, -skambhate%} (Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 77),
{%-ṣkambhitum%} (Ved. Inf. {%viṣkabhe,%} Sāy. {%= vi-%}
{%ṣkambhaṇāya%}), to fix firmly, support, prop; to
obstruct; to fix asunder, fix separately, hold asunder;
to set free, allow to come forth, escape.
<LEND>

<L>44309<pc>0948-b<k1>vizkabDa<k2>vizkabDa
{%Vi-ṣkabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed firmly, obstructed,
impeded.
<LEND>

<L>44310<pc>0948-b<k1>vizkaBita<k2>vizkaBita
{%Vi-ṣkabhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. fixed or held asunder,
separately fixed.
<LEND>

<L>44311<pc>0948-b<k1>vizkamBa<k2>vizkamBa
{%Vi-ṣkambha as,%}¦ m. obstacle, hindrance, impedi-
ment, resistance; the bolt or bar of a door, the sup-
porting beam or pillar of a house; a post; a tree;
the first of the twenty-seven astronomical periods
called Yogas, the leading star of the first lunar man-
sion; an interlude or introductory scene (coming
between the acts [{%aṅkayor madhya-vartī%}] and
performed by an inferior actor or actors [{%nīca-pātra-%}
{%prayojitaḥ%}], who explain to the audience the pro-
gress of the plot, and thus bind firmly together the
story of the drama by concisely alluding to what is
supposed to have happened in the intervals of the
acts or what is likely to happen at the end, cf. {%pra-%}
{%veśaka%}); spreading, extension; the breadth or dia-
meter of a circle; action, doing anything; a parti-
cular posture practised by Yogins or devotees.
<LEND>

<L>44312<pc>0948-b<k1>vizkamBaka<k2>vizkamBaka
{%Vi-ṣkambhaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= vi-ṣkambha%} above.
<LEND>
[Page0948-c+ 76]

<L>44313<pc>0948-c<k1>vizkamBaRa<k2>vizkamBaRa
{%Vi-ṣkambhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of obstructing,
impeding, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44314<pc>0948-c<k1>vizkamBita<k2>vizkamBita
{%Vi-ṣkambhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ impeded, hindered,
obstructed, precluded, shut out from.
<LEND>

<L>44315<pc>0948-c<k1>vizkamBin<k2>vizkamBin
{%Vi-ṣkambhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ obstructive, impeding;
({%ī%}), m. the bolt or bar of a door.
<LEND>

<L>44316<pc>0948-c<k1>vizkira<k2>vizkira
{#vizkira#}¦ {%viṣ-kira, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-kṝ%} with eu-
phonic {%s%} inserted, cf. {%vi-kira%}), scattering about, tearing
to pieces; one who scatters about or tears in pieces;
a cock; a bird (in general).
<LEND>

<L>44317<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwa<k2>vizwa
{#vizwa#}¦ {%viṣṭa.%} See p. 946, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>44318<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwan<k2>vizwan
{#vizwan#}¦ {%vi-ṣṭan (vi-stan),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṣṭanati,%}
{%-ṣṭanitum,%} to groan, sigh.
<LEND>

<L>44319<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwap<k2>vizwap
{#vizwap#}¦ {%viṣṭap, p,%} f. (probably connected
with {%vi-ṣṭambh%} below), ‘anything fixed,’ a place,
region, world; the firmament, heaven, (Sāy. {%= svarga-%}
{%loka.%})
<LEND>

<L>44320<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwapa<k2>vizwapa
{%Viṣṭapa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a world, region, place,
(Sāy. {%= sthāna;%} cf. {%piṣṭapa%}); a vessel, cup (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>44321<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwamB<k2>vizwamB
{#vizwamB#}¦ {%vi-ṣṭambh (-stambh),%} cl. 5. 9. P.
{%-ṣṭabhnoti, -ṣṭabhnāti%} (Perf. {%vi-tastambha%}),
{%-ṣṭambhitum,%} to prop or fix asunder, hold or keep
apart, fix firmly, prop, support; to place or put down
firmly, plant (the feet) firmly; to obstruct, stop, pro-
hibit, hinder: Caus. {%-ṣṭambhayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to stop, obstruct; to paralyse.
<LEND>

<L>44322<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwabDa<k2>vizwabDa
{%Vi-ṣṭabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed apart; fixed firmly,
propped, supported, stayed, fixed, firm, well-supported,
placed firmly, planted in or upon; obstructed, stopped,
hindered, paralysed, made stiff or motionless. {%—Vi-%}
{%ṣṭabdha-tā,%} f. firmness, confidence.
<LEND>

<L>44323<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwaBa<k2>vizwaBa
{%Vi-ṣṭabha, am,%}¦ n. ‘that which is fixed or planted
firmly,’ the world.
<LEND>

<L>44324<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwaBita<k2>vizwaBita
{%Vi-ṣṭabhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed firmly, propped,
supported.
<LEND>

<L>44325<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwaBya<k2>vizwaBya
{%Vi-ṣṭabhya,%}¦ ind. having fixed asunder, having
propped, having planted (the feet) firmly, having rested
upon, having stopped, having made to stand still.
<LEND>

<L>44326<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwamBa<k2>vizwamBa
{%Vi-ṣṭambha, as,%}¦ m. a support, supporter, prop
(Ved.); planting firmly, placing in or on; stepping,
planting the feet; obstruction, impediment, hindrance,
obstacle; stopping, staying; obstruction of the urine or
feces, ischury, constipation; paralysis, loss of motion.
<LEND>

<L>44327<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwamBin<k2>vizwamBin
{%Vi-ṣṭambhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ obstructing, stopping, im-
peding, hindering; checking (as perspiration &c.),
chilling; making motionless.
<LEND>

<L>44328<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwara<k2>vizwara
{#vizwara#}¦ {%vi-ṣṭara, as,%} m. ({%= vi-stara,%} see
under {%vi-stṛ%}), anything spread out, a layer, bed,
couch; a seat, stool, chair, couch, &c.; the seat of
the presiding Brāhman at a sacrifice (either real or
in effigy); a seat made of twenty-five straws of Kuśa
grass tied up in a sheaf; a handful of Kuśa grass; a
tree. {%—Viṣṭara-bhāj, k, k, k,%} occupying a seat,
seated. {%—Viṣṭara-śravas, ās,%} m. ‘having broad or
spreading ears (?),’ an epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Viṣṭara-stha, as, ā, am,%} sitting on a seat, re-
clining on a bed (of leaves &c.). {%—Viṣṭarottara%}
{%(˚ra-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} covered with Kuśa grass.
<LEND>

<L>44329<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwAra<k2>vizwAra
{%Vi-ṣṭāra, as,%}¦ m. (only used for {%vi-stāra%} when
metre is denoted, according to Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 94,
III. 3, 34), expansion, extension. {%—Viṣṭāra-paṅkti,%}
{%is,%} f. a particular form of Paṅkti metre (consisting
of four lines, the first and last lines having eight syl-
lables each and the second and third twelve each).
{%—Viṣṭāra-bṛhatī,%} f. a species of Bṛhatī metre
(containing eight syllables in the first and fourth lines
and ten in the second and third lines).
<LEND>

<L>44330<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwArin<k2>vizwArin
{%Viṣṭārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. epithet of a kind of ob-
lation.
<LEND>

<L>44331<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwi<k2>vizwi
{#vizwi#}¦ {%viṣṭi.%} See p. 941, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>44332<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwiras<k2>vizwiras
{#vizwiras#}¦ {%viṣṭiras,%} pl., this word occurs in
Ṛg-veda II. 13, 10. in connection with {%ṣaṭ,%} and
is said by Sāy. to mean the six widely spread objects
({%vistīrṇāḥ ṣaṭ%}), viz. heaven, earth, day, night,
water, and plants.
<LEND>

<L>44333<pc>0948-c<k1>vizwu<k2>vizwu
{#vizwu#}¦ {%vi-ṣṭu (-stu),%} cl. 2. P. {%-ṣṭauti, -ṣṭa- %}
[Page0949-a+ 78]
{%vīti%} (Impf. {%vy-aṣṭaut%} or {%vy-astaut,%} Pāṇ. VIII. 3,
71), {%-ṣṭotum,%} to praise very much, extol with praises.
<LEND>

<L>44334<pc>0949-a<k1>vizwAva<k2>vizwAva
{%Vi-ṣṭāva,%}¦ N. of a division of the Vi-ṣṭuti (?).
<LEND>

<L>44335<pc>0949-a<k1>vizwuta<k2>vizwuta
{%Vi-ṣṭuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised highly, extolled.
<LEND>

<L>44336<pc>0949-a<k1>vizwuti<k2>vizwuti
{%Vi-ṣṭuti, is,%}¦ f. a variety of arrangement for re-
citing the verses of the Tri-vṛt Stoma, (three such
varieties are enumerated, viz. {%udyatī, parivartinī,%}
and {%kulāyinī%}); ({%ayas%}), f. pl., N. of particular trea-
tises on Vedic ritual.
<LEND>

<L>44337<pc>0949-a<k1>vizWala<k2>vizWala
{#vizWala#}¦ {%vi-ṣṭhala%} (i. e. {%vi-sth˚%}), {%am,%} n. a re-
mote place, a spot situated apart or at a distance.
<LEND>

<L>44338<pc>0949-a<k1>vizWA<k2>vizWA<h>1
{#vizWA#} 1¦. {%vi-ṣṭhā (-sthā),%} cl. 1. A. {%-tiṣṭhate%}
(ep. also P. {%-ti%}), Aor. {%vy-aṣṭhāt, -ṣṭhātum,%} to
stand apart; to stand firmly, remain stationary or
fixed, stay, abide, remain, dwell, stop; to be diffused
or spread abroad; to spread everywhere, be present
in; to go out; to attack, invade.
<LEND>

<L>44339<pc>0949-a<k1>vitasTAna<k2>vitasTAna
{%Vi-tasthāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (for {%vi-tiṣṭhamāna%}),
stopping, being stopped or impeded.
<LEND>

<L>44340<pc>0949-a<k1>vitizWamAna<k2>vitizWamAna
{%Vi-tiṣṭhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ remaining fixed or
stationary, abiding, staying, being permanent.
<LEND>

<L>44341<pc>0949-a<k1>vizWA<k2>vizWA<h>2
2. {%vi-ṣṭhā,%}¦ f., Ved. intermediate space, interval.
<LEND>

<L>44342<pc>0949-a<k1>vizWita<k2>vizWita
{%Vi-ṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ abiding, stopping; fixed.
<LEND>

<L>44343<pc>0949-a<k1>vizWA<k2>vizWA<h>3
{#vizWA#} 3¦. {%viṣṭhā,%} f. (probably connected
with {%viṣṭā,%} see under 2. {%viṣṭa%}), feces, excrement.
<LEND>

<L>44344<pc>0949-a<k1>vizRApU<k2>vizRApU
{#vizRApU#}¦ {%viṣṇāpū, ūs,%} m., Ved., N. of a Ṛṣi
(restored to his father Viśvaka by the Aśvins).
<LEND>

<L>44345<pc>0949-a<k1>vizRu<k2>vizRu
{#vizRu#}¦ {%viṣṇu, us, us, u%} (in Uṇādi-s. III.
39. said to be fr. rt. 2. {%viṣ,%} ‘to pervade;’ according
to some fr. rt. 1. {%viś%}), all-pervading, encompassing,
pervading, penetrating (Ved); ({%us%}), m., N. of one
of the principal Hindū deities, (in the later mythology
regarded as ‘the preserver,’ and with Brahmā ‘the
creator’ and Śiva ‘the destroyer,’ constituting the
well-known Tri-mūrti or triad; although Viṣṇu
comes second in the triad he is identified with the
supreme deity by his worshippers; in the Vedic
period, however, he is not placed in the foremost
rank, and though frequently invoked with Indra,
Varuṇa, the Maruts, Rudra, Vāyu, and the Ādityas,
his superiority to these is never stated, and he is even
described in one place as celebrating the praises of
Indra and deriving his power from that god [cf.
his later name {%Indrānuja,%} ‘younger brother of
Indra’], the point which distinguishes him from the
other Vedic deities being chiefly his striding over the
heavens, which he is said to do in three paces [see
{%tri-vikrama%}], explained as denoting the threefold
manifestations of light in the form of fire, lightning,
and the sun, or as designating the three daily stations
of the sun in his rising, culminating, and setting;
the later legend of the Vāmana Ava-tāra grew out
of this Vedic conception [see {%bali%}]; he does not
appear to have been included at first among the
Ādityas or sons of Aditi, whose number in the Vedic
period varies from six to eight, though in later times,
when their number was raised to twelve, represent-
ing the sun in the twelve months of the year, Viṣṇu
is accorded the foremost place among them; in the
Brāhmaṇas he is identified with sacrifice, and in one
described as a dwarf; in the Mahā-bhārata and Rāmā-
yaṇa he is not connected with the sun, but gradually
rises to the supremacy which he now enjoys as the most
popular deity of modern Hindū worship, and although
in some passages of the former he is represented as
paying homage to Śiva [cf. his name {%Śiva-kīrtana%}],
the great rivalry between these gods and their wor-
shippers — who are respectively called Vaiṣṇavas and
Śaivas, and who each exalt their favourite to the first
place in the Hindū Pantheon — is not fully developed
till the period of the Purāṇas: the distinguishing
feature in the character of the Post-vedic Viṣṇu is
his condescending to become incarnate in a portion
of his essence on ten principal occasions, to set right
particular disturbances or deliver mankind from certain
great dangers; his ten principal incarnations or Ava-
tāras are, 1. the Matsya or ‘fish;’ 2. the Kūrma or
‘tortoise;’ 3. the Varāha or ‘boar;’ 4. the Nara-
[Page0949-b+ 81]
siṃha or ‘man-lion;’ 5. the Vāmana or ‘dwarf’ [see
{%bali%}]; 6. Paraśu-rāma or ‘Rāma with the axe,’
i. e. Rāma, son of Jamad-agni; 7. Rāma-candra or
‘the illustrious Rāma,’ i. e. Rāma, the son of Daśa-
ratha and hero of the Rāmāyaṇa; 8. Kṛṣṇa or
‘the dark One,’ who is held by the Vaiṣṇavas to be
not so much an incarnation of Viṣṇu as the very
essence of Viṣṇu or rather Viṣṇu himself, so that
the Bala-rāma incarnation, which is sometimes mixed
up with this eighth Ava-tāra, is also occasionally
substituted for it; 9. Buddha or ‘the enlightened
One,’ by adopting whom the Brāhmans appear to
have desired to effect a compromise between their
own creed and Buddhism; 10. Kalki, which is
yet to come; see these various incarnations s. v.;
some of the Purāṇas multiply these Ava-tāras to the
number of twenty-two or even twenty-four; as the
supreme being Viṣṇu is often identified with Nārā-
yaṇa, the personified Puruṣa or primeval living spirit
[described as moving on the waters, reclining on
Śeṣa, the serpent of infinity, while the god Brahmā
emerges from a lotus growing from his navel; cf.
Manu I. 10]; the wife of Viṣṇu is Lakṣmī or
Śrī, and his paradise is called Vaikuṇṭha; he is
usually represented with a peculiar mark on his breast
called Śrī-vatsa, and as holding a {%śaṅkha%} or conch-
shell called Pāñcajanya, a {%cakra%} or quoit-like missile-
weapon called Su-darśana, a {%gadā%} or club called Kau-
modakī, and a {%padma%} or lotus; he has also a bow
called Śārṅga, and a sword called Nandaka; his {%vāhana%}
or vehicle is Garuḍa, q. v.; he has a jewel on his
wrist called Syamantaka, another on his breast called
Kaustubha, and the river Ganges is said to issue from
his foot; the demons slain by him in his character of
‘preserver from evil,’ or by Kṛṣṇa as identified
with him, are Madhu, Dhenuka, Cāṇūra, Yamala,
and Arjuna [see {%yamalārjuna%}], Kālanemi, Haya-
grīva, Śakaṭa, Ariṣṭa, Kaiṭabha, Kaṃsa, Keśin,
Mura, Sālva, Mainda, Dvi-vida, Rāhu, Hiraṇya-
kaśipu, Vāṇa, Kāliya, Naraka, Bali; he is wor-
shipped under a thousand names, which are all
enumerated in the Anuśāsana-parvan of the Mahā-
bhārata, II. 6950-7056; for his epithet, ‘younger
brother of Indra,’ see {%bali;%} he is sometimes regarded
as the divinity of the lunar mansion called Śravaṇa;
Viṣṇu Prājāpatya is said to be the author of Ṛg-
veda X. 184); N. of Agni or fire; of one of the
Vasus; of an ancient law-giver or writer of a law-
book; a pure or pious person ({%= śuddha%}). {%—Viṣṇu-%}
{%ṛkṣa, am,%} n. (according to the Śabda-k.) the
Nakṣatra or lunar mansion called Śravaṇa (presided
over by Viṣṇu). {%—Viṣṇu-kanda,%} a species of bul-
bous root {%(= jala-vāsa, bahu-sampuṭa)%}. {%—Viṣṇu-%}
{%kavi, is,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Viṣṇu-kāñcī,%} f., N. of
a town (said to have been founded by Śaṅkara).
{%—Viṣṇu-kāntī-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place.
{%—Viṣṇu-krama, as,%} m. the step of Viṣṇu; [cf.
{%tri-vikrama.%}] {%—Viṣṇu-krāntā,%} f. the plant Clitorea
Ternatea ({%= a-parājitā%}). {%—Viṣṇu-gupta, as,%} m.
‘hidden by Viṣṇu,’ N. of the Muni Vātsyāyana;
of the saint Kauṇḍinya (said to have been concealed
by Viṣṇu when pursued by Śiva, whom he had in-
censed); N. of the sage Cāṇakya; of a follower of
Śaṅkarācārya; a species of root {%(= viṣṇu-kanda).%}
{%—Viṣṇu-guptaka, am,%} n. a kind of root {%(= cā-%}
{%ṇakya-mūlaka)%}. {%—Viṣṇu-gṛha, am,%} n. ‘Viṣṇu's
abode,’ N. of a country or city, (also called Stamba-
pura.) {%—Viṣṇu-cakra, am,%} n. the discus or quoit-
like weapon of Viṣṇu; epithet of a particular mys-
tical circle (formed from the lines in the hand).
{%—Viṣṇu-candra, as,%} m., N. of an astronomer.
{%—Viṣṇu-tattva-nirṇaya, as,%} m. ‘investigation or
proof of the essence of Viṣṇu,’ N. of a work.
{%—Viṣṇu-tīrtha, am,%} n. ‘Viṣṇu's Tīrtha,’ N. of
a place of pilgrimage. {%—Viṣṇu-tulya-parākrama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having power equal to that of Viṣṇu,
{%—Viṣṇu-taila, am,%} n. a kind of medicinal oil (said
to have been fabricated by the Aśvins, {%= pūraṇa%}).
{%—Viṣṇu-datta, as,%} m. ‘Viṣṇu-given,’ a proper N.
{%—Viṣṇu-dattaka, as,%} m., N. of a scribe. {%—Viṣṇu-%}
{%dāsa, as,%} m. ‘Viṣṇu's slave,’ N. of a Brāhman.
[Page0949-c+ 81]
{%—Viṣṇu-daivata, as,%} &c., having Viṣṇu for a
presiding deity. {%—Viṣṇu-daivatya, as, ā, am,%}
having Viṣṇu for a presiding deity; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
the eleventh and twelfth lunar day of each fort-
night. {%—Viṣṇu-dharma, as,%} m. a kind of
Śrāddha. {%—Viṣṇu-dharmottara (˚ma-ut˚), am,%}
n., N. of a work consisting of a dialogue between
the son of Janam-ejaya and Śaunaka, &c. {%—Viṣṇu-%}
{%dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. ‘hating Viṣṇu,’ (with Jainas) an
epithet of nine beings at enmity with Vāsudeva
{%(= prati-vāsudeva)%}. {%—Viṣṇu-pañjara, am,%} n.
a kind of mystical prayer or charm for securing
the favour of Viṣṇu, (see {%pañjara.%}) {%—Viṣṇu-%}
{%pada, am,%} n. ‘station or step of Viṣṇu,’ the
meridian sky (Ved. {%= mādhyandinam antari-%}
{%kṣam%}), the sky, heaven, atmosphere; an image of
the foot of Viṣṇu worshipped at Gayā; the sea of
milk; a lotus; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the Ganges (as issuing
from Viṣṇu's foot); one of the twelve Saṅkrāntis
or sun's passages into a sign of the zodiac (especially
the first sign after the equinox). {%—Viṣṇupada-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha sacred to Viṣṇu.
{%—Viṣṇupadī-cakra, am,%} n. a particular astrologi-
cal circle or diagram. {%—Viṣṇupady-utpatti, is,%} f.
‘source of the Viṣṇu-padī,’ N. of a chapter in the
Sṛṣṭi-khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Viṣṇu-pura,%}
{%am,%} n. Viṣṇu's city or abode; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a city.
{%—Viṣṇu-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of one of the most
celebrated of the eighteen Purāṇas, (this Purāṇa con-
forms more than any other to the definition {%pañca-%}
{%lakṣaṇa,%} q. v.; it is divided into six books, the first
treats of the details of creation, and explains how the
universe proceeded from Pra-kṛti or the eternal germ
of all material things, and how after the world had
been fitted for the reception of living creatures, it was
peopled by the Prajā-patis or patriarchs and their
posterity, who are described as governing the earth
during the Svāyambhuva Manv-antara; the second
continues the kings of this period, and the mention
of Bharata, who gave his name to India, leads to
many curious geographical and astronomical details;
the third treats of the Vedas and other sacred writings,
as well as of caste and the principal Hindū institutions;
the fourth gives a list of dynasties and a kind of his-
torical chronicle mixed with fable; the fifth is entirely
devoted to the life of Kṛṣṇa; the sixth contains an
account of the dissolution of the world and the end
and renovation of all things.) {%—Viṣṇu-prīti, is,%}
f. land granted rent-free to Brāhmans in honour of
Viṣṇu or to maintain his worship. {%—Viṣṇu-bhakta,%}
{%as,%} m. a worshipper of Viṣṇu. {%—Viṣṇu-bhakti,%}
{%is,%} f. the worship of Viṣṇu. {%—Viṣṇu-bhakti-can-%}
{%drodaya (˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Viṣṇu-%}
{%bhakti-rahasya, am,%} n. ‘mystery of the worship of
Viṣṇu,’ N. of a work. {%—Viṣṇu-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N.
of a scribe. {%—Viṣṇu-mandira, am,%} n. Viṣṇu's
temple; {%= viṣṇu-gṛha,%} q. v. {%—Viṣṇu-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} emanated from Viṣṇu. {%—Viṣṇu-māyā,%} f.
‘Viṣṇu's illusion,’ N. of Durgā. {%—Viṣṇu-māhāt-%}
{%mya, am,%} n. ‘the glory or majesty of Viṣṇu,’ N.
of a chapter of the Liṅga-Purāṇa. {%—Viṣṇu-mitra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a priest; of the author of a Prāti-
śākhya commentary (with the surname Kumāra).
{%—Viṣṇu-yaśas, ās,%} m., N. of the son of Brahma-
yaśas and father of Kalki. {%—Viṣṇu-yāmala-tantra,%}
N. of a Tantra work. {%—Viṣṇu-ratha, as,%} m. ‘Vish-
ṇu's chariot,’ N. of Garuḍa, the bird and vehicle of
Viṣṇu. {%—Viṣṇu-rahasya, am,%} n. ‘mystical doc-
trine of Viṣṇu,’ N. of a work. {%—Viṣṇu-rāta, as,%}
m. ‘Viṣṇu-given,’ N. of king Parīkṣit. {%—Viṣṇu-%}
{%liṅgī,%} f. a quail. {%—Viṣṇu-loka, as,%} m. Viṣṇu's
world; {%= brahma-loka%} (according to some accounts;
or placed above it, according to others). {%—Viṣṇu-%}
{%vallabha, as, ā, am,%} beloved by Viṣṇu; ({%ā%}), f.
the plant Echites Caryophyllata; a small fragrant
shrub, Ocymum Sanctum; an epithet of Lakṣmī.
{%—Viṣṇu-vājapeyin, ī,%} m., N. of an author.
{%—Viṣṇu-vāhana%} or {%viṣṇu-rāhya, as,%} m. ‘Vish-
ṇu's vehicle,’ epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Viṣṇu-śarman,%}
{%ā,%} m., N. of a leader of the sect of Bhaktas; of the
author of the Pañca-tantra; of a scribe. {%—Viṣṇu- %}
[Page0950-a+ 73]
{%saras-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha sacred to
Viṣṇu. {%—Viṣṇu-sahasra-nāma-kathana, am,%} n.
‘enumeration of the thousand names of Viṣṇu,’ N.
of a small portion of the Ānuśāsanika section of the
Anuśāsana-parvan (ll. 6936-7078) of the Mahā-
bhārata. {%—Viṣṇu-sahasra-nāma-bhāṣya, am,%}
n., N. of a commentary by Śaṅkarācārya on the
thousand names of Viṣṇu. {%—Viṣṇu-siṃha, as,%} m.
a proper N. {%—Viṣṇu-sūkta, am,%} n., N. of a Vedic
hymn. {%—Viṣṇu-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of the original
teacher of the Vaiṣṇava sect of the Rudra-sampradā-
yins, (he was the predecessor of a more celebrated
teacher called Vallabhācārya, q. v.); a temple or
statue built in honour of Viṣṇu. {%—Viṣṇūttara (˚ṇu-%}
{%ut˚),%} a grant of land rent-free for the worship of
Viṣṇu. {%—Viṣṇūtsava (˚ṇu-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘Viṣṇu's
festival,’ a particular day sacred to Viṣṇu. {%—Viṣṇv-%}
{%avatāra, as,%} m. a descent or incarnation of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>44346<pc>0950-a<k1>vizRUya<k2>vizRUya
{%Viṣṇūya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%viṣṇūyati,%} &c., to treat as
Viṣṇu, act towards any one (loc.) as Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>44347<pc>0950-a<k1>vizpand<k2>vizpand
{#vizpand#}¦ {%vi-ṣpand (vi-spand),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-ṣpandate, -ṣpanditum,%} to throb, beat; to
struggle.
<LEND>

<L>44348<pc>0950-a<k1>vizpanda<k2>vizpanda
{%Vi-ṣpanda, as,%}¦ m. throbbing, beating.
<LEND>

<L>44349<pc>0950-a<k1>vizparDas<k2>vizparDas
{#vizparDas#}¦ {%vi-ṣpardhas (vi-spardas), ās, ās,%}
{%as%} [cf. {%vi-spardh%}], Ved. emulating, envious, (Sāy.
{%vi-spardhasaḥ = vividha-spardhāḥ,%} Ṛg-veda V.
87, 4); free from emulation or rivalry, (Sāy. {%= vi-%}
{%gata-spardha.%})
<LEND>

<L>44350<pc>0950-a<k1>vizpaS<k2>vizpaS
{#vizpaS#}¦ {%vi-ṣpaś (vi-spaś), ṭ,%} m., Ved. one
who frees from obstruction, a deliverer; an especial
adversary, (Sāy. {%= viśeṣeṇa bādhaka,%} Ṛg-veda I.
189, 6; cf. {%vi-spaṣṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>44351<pc>0950-a<k1>vizpita<k2>vizpita
{#vizpita#}¦ {%vi-ṣpita, as,%} m. (probably con-
nected with rts. {%pī, pyai, sphāy%}), Ved. (according to
some) a desert; expanse, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda VII. 60, 7. {%viṣpitasya = vyāptitasya kar-%}
{%maṇaḥ;%} according to Durga {%= vistīrṇa = itaś-%}
{%cetaś-ca sarvataḥ prāpta.%})
<LEND>

<L>44352<pc>0950-a<k1>vizpuliNgaka<k2>vizpuliNgaka
{#vizpuliNgaka#}¦ {%vi-ṣpuliṅgaka, as,%} m. (or {%ā,%}
f. ?), Ved. a spark of fire ({%= vi-sphuliṅga,%} q. v.;
this word occurs in Ṛg-veda I. 191, 12, where,
according to Sāy., it may mean one of the twenty-
one sparks produced by a multiplication of the seven
tongues of fire or may be a synonym of {%caṭikā,%} a
female sparrow, of which there are twenty-one vari-
eties, eaters of poison with impunity).
<LEND>

<L>44353<pc>0950-a<k1>vizPAra<k2>vizPAra
{#vizPAra#}¦ {%vi-ṣphāra, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-ṣphar%}
{%= vi-ṣphur%} below), vibrating; the twang of a bow,
&c. See {%vi-sphāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>44354<pc>0950-a<k1>vizPur<k2>vizPur
{#vizPur#}¦ {%vi-ṣphur,%} cl. 6. P. {%-ṣphurati,%} &c.
See {%vi-sphur,%} which is an alternative form according
to Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 76.
<LEND>

<L>44355<pc>0950-a<k1>vizPurat<k2>vizPurat
{%Vi-ṣphurat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} Ved. {%= vi-%}
{%sphurat,%} quivering; injuring, harassing, (Sāy. {%= vi-%}
{%hiṃsat.%})
<LEND>

<L>44356<pc>0950-a<k1>vizPul<k2>vizPul
{#vizPul#}¦ {%vi-ṣphul = vi-sphul,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44357<pc>0950-a<k1>vizya<k2>vizya
{#vizya#}¦ {%viṣya.%} See p. 946, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>44358<pc>0950-a<k1>vizyat<k2>vizyat
{#vizyat#}¦ {%vi-ṣyat.%} See under {%vi-ṣo,%} p. 948.
<LEND>

<L>44359<pc>0950-a<k1>vizyand<k2>vizyand
{#vizyand#}¦ {%vi-ṣyand%} (also written {%vi-syand;%}
according to Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 72. {%vi-syand%} is the only
form allowed when the verb is used with reference
to living beings), cl. 1. A. {%-ṣyandate%} or {%-syandate,%}
&c. (see rt. {%syand%}), to flow out or away, flow off,
trickle down.
<LEND>

<L>44360<pc>0950-a<k1>vizyanda<k2>vizyanda
{%Vi-ṣyanda, as,%}¦ m. flowing, trickling, issuing
forth.
<LEND>

<L>44361<pc>0950-a<k1>vizyandamAna<k2>vizyandamAna
{%Vi-ṣyandamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowing, trickling.
<LEND>

<L>44362<pc>0950-a<k1>vizva<k2>vizva
{#vizva#}¦ {%viṣva, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
2. {%viṣ%}), injurious, hurtful, mischievous.
<LEND>

<L>44363<pc>0950-a<k1>vizvaYc<k2>vizvaYc
{#vizvaYc#}¦ {%viṣv-añc, viṣvak-ṣeṇa,%} &c. See
under {%viṣu,%} p. 948.
<LEND>

<L>44364<pc>0950-a<k1>vizvan<k2>vizvan
{#vizvan#}¦ {%vi-ṣvan (vi-svan),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṣvaṇati, %}
[Page0950-b+ 75]
{%-ṣvaṇitum%} (Impf. {%vy-aṣvaṇat,%} Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 63),
to make a sound in eating, smack the lips (restricted
to this sense according to Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 69; if any
other sound is denoted, the dental {%s%} remains, see {%vi-%}
{%svan,%} cf. {%ava-ṣvan%}).
<LEND>

<L>44365<pc>0950-b<k1>vizvaRana<k2>vizvaRana
{%Vi-ṣvaṇana, am,%}¦ n. smacking the lips in eating,
eating with a noise.
<LEND>

<L>44366<pc>0950-b<k1>vizvARa<k2>vizvARa
{%Vi-ṣvāṇa, as,%}¦ m. eating with a noise, noisy
eating; [cf. {%ava-ṣvāṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44367<pc>0950-b<k1>vis<k2>vis
{#vis#}¦ {%vis%} (connected with rts. {%bis, pis,%}
&c.), cl. 1. P. {%vesati,%} (if identified with
rt. {%bis,%} then cl. 4. P. {%visyati%}), {%vesitum,%} to go, move;
to cast, throw, send (cl. 4).
<LEND>

<L>44368<pc>0950-b<k1>visa<k2>visa
{%Visa, am,%}¦ n. (in Ved. more usually {%bisa,%} q. v., cf.
{%viśa%}), the film or fibre of the water-lily or lotus, the
fibres of the stalk or the stalk itself. {%—Visa-kaṇṭhikā,%}
f. or {%visa-kaṇṭhin, ī,%} m. a small crane. {%—Visa-%}
{%kusuma, am,%} n. ‘fibre-(produced) flower,’ a lotus-
flower. {%—Visa-khādikā,%} f. ‘the eating of fibres or
shoots,’ N. of a play mentioned in Vātsyāyana's
Kāma-sūtra. {%—Visa-granthi, is,%} m. a knot on the
stalk of the lotus (used for filtering or clearing water);
a particular disease of the eyes. {%—Visa-ccheda, as,%}
m. a cutting or portion of the fibres of the lotus.
{%—Visa-ja, am,%} n. ‘fibre-produced,’ a lotus-flower,
lotus. {%—Visa-tantu, us,%} m. a lotus fibre. {%—Visa-nā-%}
{%bhi, is,%} m. a quantity of lotuses; the plant Nelum-
bium Speciosum {%(= padminī)%}. {%—Visa-nāsikā,%} f.
‘having a nose like a lotus-stalk,’ a sort of crane.
{%—Visa-puṣpa, am,%} n. a lotus-flower. {%—Visa-pra-%}
{%sūna, am,%} n. a lotus-flower, lotus (Nelumbium Spe-
ciosum). {%—Visa-vartman, a,%} n. a particular disease
of the eyelid. {%—Visākara (˚sa-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘abound-
ing in fibres,’ a species of Euphorbia ({%= bhadra-%}
{%cūḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>44369<pc>0950-b<k1>visala<k2>visala
{%Visala, am,%}¦ n. a sprout, bud, young shoot; [cf.
{%kisala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44370<pc>0950-b<k1>visinI<k2>visinI
{%Visinī,%}¦ f. an assemblage of lotus-flowers; the lotus
plant Nelumbium Speciosum; lotus fibres.
<LEND>

<L>44371<pc>0950-b<k1>visila<k2>visila
{%Visila, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming from or relating to
Visa.
<LEND>

<L>44372<pc>0950-b<k1>visaMyukta<k2>visaMyukta
{#visaMyukta#}¦ {%vi-saṃyukta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%yuj%}
with {%sam%} and {%vi%}), disjoined, detached, separate,
abstaining from, keeping aloof from, omitting.
<LEND>

<L>44373<pc>0950-b<k1>visaMyoga<k2>visaMyoga
{%Vi-saṃyoga, as,%}¦ m. disjunction, separation, omis-
sion.
<LEND>

<L>44374<pc>0950-b<k1>visaMvad<k2>visaMvad
{#visaMvad#}¦ {%vi-saṃ-vad,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vadati, -va-%}
{%ditum,%} to assert falsely; to fail in an agreement,
break one's word, break a promise, to disappoint,
deceive; to contradict, raise objections, disagree with,
murmur against: Caus. {%-vādayati, -yitum,%} to make
disappointed, disappoint; to fail to prove.
<LEND>

<L>44375<pc>0950-b<k1>visaMvAda<k2>visaMvAda
{%Vi-saṃvāda, as,%}¦ m. false assertion, breaking or
falsifying one's word, deceiving by a false assertion,
breaking a promise, disappointing, deceiving; con-
tradiction, disagreeing, disagreement.
<LEND>

<L>44376<pc>0950-b<k1>visaMvAdita<k2>visaMvAdita
{%Vi-saṃvādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disappointed, deceived,
contradicted.
<LEND>

<L>44377<pc>0950-b<k1>visaMvAdin<k2>visaMvAdin
{%Visaṃvādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ breaking one's word, dis-
appointing, deceiving; cunning, crafty, fraudulent;
contradicting, disagreeing; disputing, contesting,
contentious.
<LEND>

<L>44378<pc>0950-b<k1>visaMSayam<k2>visaMSayam
{#visaMSayam#}¦ {%vi-saṃśayam,%} ind. without doubt,
without suspicion, undoubtedly.
<LEND>

<L>44379<pc>0950-b<k1>visaMzWula<k2>visaMzWula
{#visaMzWula#}¦ {%vi-saṃṣṭhula, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%sthā%} with {%sam%} and {%vi;%} cf. {%apa-ṣṭhu, apa-ṣṭhula,%}
p. 53, col. 2), unsteady, agitated. {%—Visaṃṣṭhula-%}
{%gamana, as, ā, am,%} going unsteadily, tottering,
staggering.
<LEND>

<L>44380<pc>0950-b<k1>visaNkawa<k2>visaNkawa
{#visaNkawa#}¦ {%vi-saṅkaṭa, as,%} m. a lion; the
Ingudī tree.
<LEND>

<L>44381<pc>0950-b<k1>visaNgata<k2>visaNgata
{#visaNgata#}¦ {%vi-saṅgata, as, ā, am,%} uncon-
nected, inconsistent, not in harmony.
<LEND>

<L>44382<pc>0950-b<k1>visaYjYa<k2>visaYjYa
{#visaYjYa#}¦ {%vi-sañjña, as, ā, am,%} insensible,
unconscious; bereft of sense, lifeless.
<LEND>
[Page0950-c+ 75]

<L>44383<pc>0950-c<k1>visannAha<k2>visannAha
{#visannAha#}¦ {%vi-sannāha, as, ā, am,%} without a
coat of mail; without clothes, unclothed, naked.
<LEND>

<L>44384<pc>0950-c<k1>visammuh<k2>visammuh
{#visammuh#}¦ {%vi-sam-muh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-muhyati,%}
{%-mohitum%} or {%-mogdhum%} or {%-moḍhum,%} to be utterly
bewildered or infatuated.
<LEND>

<L>44385<pc>0950-c<k1>visammUQa<k2>visammUQa
{%Vi-sammūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ utterly bewildered.
<LEND>

<L>44386<pc>0950-c<k1>visara<k2>visara
{#visara#}¦ {%vi-sara, vi-sāra,%} &c. See below.
<LEND>

<L>44387<pc>0950-c<k1>visarga<k2>visarga
{#visarga#}¦ {%vi-sarga, vi-sarjana,%} &c. See under
{%vi-sṛj%} below.
<LEND>

<L>44388<pc>0950-c<k1>visala<k2>visala
{#visala#}¦ {%visala.%} See under rt. {%vis,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>44389<pc>0950-c<k1>visAmagrI<k2>visAmagrI
{#visAmagrI#}¦ {%vi-sāmagrī,%} f. the absence of
means, the absence of causes calculated to produce
an effect (in phil.).
<LEND>

<L>44390<pc>0950-c<k1>visi<k2>visi
{#visi#}¦ {%vi-si.%} See under {%vi-ṣi,%} (according to
Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 70. the participle must be {%vi-ṣita.%})
<LEND>

<L>44391<pc>0950-c<k1>visUcana<k2>visUcana
{#visUcana#}¦ {%vi-sūcana, am,%} n. making known.
<LEND>

<L>44392<pc>0950-c<k1>visUcikA<k2>visUcikA
{%Vi-sūcikā,%}¦ f. (rt. {%sūc%}), symptom of disease; spas-
modic cholera.
<LEND>

<L>44393<pc>0950-c<k1>visUraRa<k2>visUraRa
{#visUraRa#}¦ {%vi-sūraṇa, am, ā,%} n. f. (fr. rt. {%sūr%}
with {%vi%}), sorrow, distress.
<LEND>

<L>44394<pc>0950-c<k1>visUrita<k2>visUrita
{%Vi-sūrita, am,%}¦ n. repentance; ({%ā%}), f. a fever.
<LEND>

<L>44395<pc>0950-c<k1>visf<k2>visf
{#visf#}¦ {%vi-sṛ,%} cl. 1. 3. P. {%-sarati, -sisarti%}
(Ved. also A. {%-te%}), {%-sartum,%} to go forth or in various
directions, spread out, stretch out, unfold, display
(Ved.), to be spread out, be extended, extend, spread
through, stretch; to return: Pass. {%-sriyate,%} to be
spread out, (Perf. {%vi-sasre,%} it was spread abroad):
Caus. {%-sārayati, -yitum,%} to stretch forth, extend.
<LEND>

<L>44396<pc>0950-c<k1>visara<k2>visara
{%Vi-sara, as,%}¦ m. going forth or abroad; going;
spreading, extending; a multitude, crowd, assemblage,
flock, herd.
<LEND>

<L>44397<pc>0950-c<k1>visaraRa<k2>visaraRa
{%Vi-saraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of going forth or out,
spreading.
<LEND>

<L>44398<pc>0950-c<k1>visAra<k2>visAra
{%Vi-sāra, as,%}¦ m. going out or forth, spreading out,
expansion, diffusion; flowing, creeping, sliding, glid-
ing along; a fish; ({%am%}), n. a wood; timber; ({%ī%}),
f. the region of the winds.
<LEND>

<L>44399<pc>0950-c<k1>visArita<k2>visArita
{%Vi-sārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to go forth or spread,
set on foot, occasioned; effected, performed. {%—Vi-%}
{%sāritāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} having an expanded
or extended body.
<LEND>

<L>44400<pc>0950-c<k1>visArin<k2>visArin
{%Vi-sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going forth or in all directions,
spreading over or through, spreading, diffusing;
creeping along; flowing, gliding; ({%ī%}), m. a fish;
({%iṇī%}), f. a kind of shrub ({%= māṣa-parṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>44401<pc>0950-c<k1>visArya<k2>visArya
{%Vi-sārya,%}¦ ind. having spread out, having extended.
<LEND>

<L>44402<pc>0950-c<k1>visfta<k2>visfta
{%Vi-sṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread out, extended, ex-
panded, drawn (as a bow-string); uttered. {%—Visṛta-%}
{%guṇa, as, ā, am,%} having the string (of a bow &c.)
stretched out.
<LEND>

<L>44403<pc>0950-c<k1>visftvara<k2>visftvara
{%Vi-sṛtvara, as, ī, am,%}¦ spreading about, becoming
diffused; gliding along, creeping, flowing, sliding.
<LEND>

<L>44404<pc>0950-c<k1>visfmara<k2>visfmara
{%Vi-sṛmara, as, ā, am,%}¦ creeping along, moving
onwards gently, flowing, gliding.
<LEND>

<L>44405<pc>0950-c<k1>visfj<k2>visfj
{#visfj#}¦ {%vi-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati%} (ep. also
A. {%-te%}), {%-sraṣṭum,%} to send forth, let go, emit, let
loose, pour forth; to create, produce; to let fall,
drop, shed; to cast, hurl, throw, discharge, throw
away; to emit sound, utter, sound forth; to send
away, dismiss, abandon, cast off, repudiate, reject;
to bestow, give, grant; to deliver, hand over to:
Caus. {%-sarjayati, -yitum,%} to send forth, emit, pour
forth, shed; to send away, dismiss; to spare; to repel,
repudiate, get rid of; to reject, put off; to lose.
<LEND>

<L>44406<pc>0950-c<k1>visarga<k2>visarga
{%Vi-sarga, as,%}¦ m. sending forth, letting go, emis-
sion, letting loose; creating, creation; emanation;
voiding, evacuation (of excrement &c.); getting rid
of, sending away, dismissal, abandonment, rejection,
relinquishment; giving away, gift, donation; de-
parture; separation; final emancipation, beatitude,
exemption from worldly existence; the sun's southern
course; light, lustre, splendor; (in grammar) N. of a
symbol usually marked by two perpendicular dots [:]
representing a hard and distinctly audible aspiration,
(it usually, though not always, occurs at the end of a
[Page0951-a+ 78]
word, and is really a kind of sibilant, often taking the
place of final {%s%} and {%r%} when these letters pass into
aspirations; it must be preceded by a vowel, but
cannot be followed by one; it is called Visarga either
from its liability to be rejected or from its being
pronounced with a full <nsi>emission</nsi> of breath.)
<LEND>

<L>44407<pc>0951-a<k1>visarjana<k2>visarjana
{%Vi-sarjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sending forth,
emitting, letting loose, sending among, dismissing,
dispatching, dismissal; setting a bull at liberty on
particular occasions; throwing the image of a deity
into holy water (as the concluding rite of a festival);
abandoning, relinquishing, quitting, abandonment,
giving up; giving away, gift, donation.
<LEND>

<L>44408<pc>0951-a<k1>visarjanIya<k2>visarjanIya
{%Vi-sarjanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sent forth or
emitted; to be abandoned or left, to be given away,
&c.; proper or fit to be abandoned; ({%as%}), m. = Vi-
sarga (in grammar).
<LEND>

<L>44409<pc>0951-a<k1>visarjayitvA<k2>visarjayitvA
{%Vi-sarjayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having let go,
having dismissed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44410<pc>0951-a<k1>visarjita<k2>visarjita
{%Vi-sarjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sent forth, let go, emitted,
sent away, dismissed; abandoned, left; given away,
given.
<LEND>

<L>44411<pc>0951-a<k1>visfjat<k2>visfjat
{%Vi-sṛjat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} letting go, sending
forth, emitting, abandoning; giving away, giving.
<LEND>

<L>44412<pc>0951-a<k1>visfjya<k2>visfjya<h>1
1. {%vi-sṛjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be let go, to be aban-
doned, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44413<pc>0951-a<k1>visfjya<k2>visfjya<h>2
2. {%vi-sṛjya,%}¦ ind. having let go, having sent away
or dismissed, having discharged, having got rid of,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>44414<pc>0951-a<k1>visfzwa<k2>visfzwa
{%Vi-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ let go, sent forth, emitted,
emanated, created; let fall, shed; sent away, dis-
missed, discharged; shot off; cast off, abandoned,
relinquished, parted with; got rid of, cast out, ex-
pelled; given away, bestowed, granted. {%—Visṛṣṭa-%}
{%bhūmi, is, is, i,%} having space or room given, one
who is allowed room (to sit down &c.). {%—Visṛṣṭa-%}
{%rāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. munificent in gifts.
<LEND>

<L>44415<pc>0951-a<k1>visfzwi<k2>visfzwi
{%Vi-sṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. letting go, sending forth, emana-
tion, creation; dismissing, abandonment, leaving,
quitting; giving, offering.
<LEND>

<L>44416<pc>0951-a<k1>visfp<k2>visfp
{#visfp#}¦ {%vi-sṛp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarpati, -sarptum%}
or {%-sraptum%} (Ved. Inf. {%vi-sṛpas%}), to creep away or
about, go or run away, sneak off, roam about,
escape; to fly about, glide, soar, hover about; to
flow over (with acc.); to spread about, become dif-
fused; to wander, wind, meander.
<LEND>

<L>44417<pc>0951-a<k1>visarpa<k2>visarpa
{%Vi-sarpa, as,%}¦ m. creeping about; flying to and
fro, gliding; going or spreading about; an unwished
for consequence of any act; a particular disease,
erysipelatous inflammation, a sort of dry spreading
itch. {%—Visarpa-ghna, am,%} n. bee's-wax (as destroy-
ing the above disease?). {%—Visarpa-cikitsā,%} f. the
cure of the above disease.
<LEND>

<L>44418<pc>0951-a<k1>visarpaRa<k2>visarpaRa
{%Vi-sarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of creeping or going
about; soaring, gliding, flying, going gently; spread-
ing, extending, diffusion.
<LEND>

<L>44419<pc>0951-a<k1>visarpat<k2>visarpat
{%Vi-sarpat, an, antī, at,%}¦ creeping about, going
along; flying gently, gliding, soaring, hovering
about.
<LEND>

<L>44420<pc>0951-a<k1>visarpamARa<k2>visarpamARa
{%Vi-sarpamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ creeping about, flying
or hovering about; wandering.
<LEND>

<L>44421<pc>0951-a<k1>visarpi<k2>visarpi
{%Visarpi, is,%}¦ m. a cutaneous disease ({%= vi-sarpa%}
above).
<LEND>

<L>44422<pc>0951-a<k1>visarpikA<k2>visarpikA
{%Vi-sarpikā,%}¦ f. a sort of dry spreading itch.
<LEND>

<L>44423<pc>0951-a<k1>visarpin<k2>visarpin
{%Vi-sarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ creeping about; gliding, going
gently; spreading over or along; winding.
<LEND>

<L>44424<pc>0951-a<k1>viskand<k2>viskand
{#viskand#}¦ {%vi-skand.%} See {%vi-ṣkand.%}
<LEND>

<L>44425<pc>0951-a<k1>viskanttf<k2>viskanttf
{%Vi-skanttṛ, vi-skanda.%}¦ See under {%vi-ṣkand.%}
<LEND>

<L>44426<pc>0951-a<k1>viskanna<k2>viskanna
{%Vi-skanna.%}¦ See under {%vi-ṣkand.%}
<LEND>

<L>44427<pc>0951-a<k1>viskamB<k2>viskamB
{#viskamB#}¦ {%vi-skambh,%} according to Pāṇ.
VIII. 3, 77. the {%s%} is retained only in A.; see {%vi-%}
{%ṣkambh.%}
<LEND>

<L>44428<pc>0951-a<k1>vista<k2>vista
{#vista#}¦ {%vista, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%vis%}), a weight of gold (= eighty Raktikās or a
Karṣa of sixteen Māṣas, about half an ounce troy).
<LEND>

<L>44429<pc>0951-a<k1>vistf<k2>vistf
{#vistf#}¦ {%vi-stṛ,%} cl. 5. or {%vi-stṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-stṛṇoti, -stṛṇute, -stṛṇāti, -stṛṇīte, -startum%}
or {%-staritum%} or {%-starītum,%} to spread out, spread
[Page0951-b+ 77]
abroad, diffuse, extend, expand; to spread or strew
or scatter about: Pass. {%-staryate%} or {%-stīryate,%} to be
spread abroad or widely diffused: Caus. {%-stārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to extend, expand, make broad or wide,
widen, broaden.
<LEND>

<L>44430<pc>0951-b<k1>vistara<k2>vistara
{%Vi-stara, as,%}¦ m. [cf. {%vi-ṣṭara%}], spreading, ex-
tension, expansion, prolixity, diffuseness, detailed
description, minute detail; affectionate solicitation;
anything spread out, a layer, bed; a seat, a stool;
abundance, quantity, multitude, number, assemblage,
a large company; ({%eṇa%}), ind. diffusely, at length,
fully, in detail. {%—Vistara-tas%} or {%vistara-śas,%} ind.
diffusely, at length, fully, in detail, with full parti-
culars. {%—Vistara-tā,%} f. expansion, spreading.
<LEND>

<L>44431<pc>0951-b<k1>vistaraRIya<k2>vistaraRIya
{%Vi-staraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spread or ex-
tended, capable of being extended or expanded.
<LEND>

<L>44432<pc>0951-b<k1>vistAra<k2>vistAra
{%Vi-stāra, as,%}¦ m. spreading, expansion, extension,
diffusion; breadth, amplitude; vastness, expanse;
particularising at length, detail, amplification; the
breadth or diameter of a circle; the branch of a tree
with its new shoots; a shrub.
<LEND>

<L>44433<pc>0951-b<k1>vistAraRa<k2>vistAraRa
{%Vi-stāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of spreading or extend-
ing or enlarging.
<LEND>

<L>44434<pc>0951-b<k1>vistArita<k2>vistArita
{%Vi-stārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread, extended, enlarged,
expanded; fully stated, amplified.
<LEND>

<L>44435<pc>0951-b<k1>vistArin<k2>vistArin
{%Vi-stārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ extending, large; powerful.
<LEND>

<L>44436<pc>0951-b<k1>vistIrRa<k2>vistIrRa
{%Vi-stīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread about, strewed about,
strewed, spread out, extended, spread, expanded;
broad; large, great, roomy, wide. {%—Vistīrṇa-tā,%} f.
or {%vistīrṇa-tva, am,%} n. breadth, diffusion, extension,
vastness, largeness, amplitude. {%—Vistīrṇa-parṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a sort of esculent root, Arum Indicum (=
{%mānaka%}). {%—Vistīrṇoraḥsthala (˚ṇa-ur˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a broad chest or breast.
<LEND>

<L>44437<pc>0951-b<k1>vistIrya<k2>vistIrya
{%Vi-stīrya,%}¦ ind. having spread or diffused.
<LEND>

<L>44438<pc>0951-b<k1>vistfta<k2>vistfta
{%Vi-stṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ diffused, extended, spread;
diffuse; expanded, broad; ample.
<LEND>

<L>44439<pc>0951-b<k1>vistfti<k2>vistfti
{%Vi-stṛti, is,%}¦ f. spreading, expansion; extent,
width, breadth; the diameter of a circle.
<LEND>

<L>44440<pc>0951-b<k1>visTAna<k2>visTAna
{#visTAna#}¦ {%vi-sthāna, as, ā, am,%} (in Vedic
grammar) belonging to another place or order of
letters (e. g. {%vi-sthāne sparśa udaye ma-kāraḥ,%}
the letter {%m,%} when a consonant of any other class
follows).
<LEND>

<L>44441<pc>0951-b<k1>vispand<k2>vispand
{#vispand#}¦ {%vi-spand.%} See {%vi-ṣpand,%} p. 950.
<LEND>

<L>44442<pc>0951-b<k1>visparD<k2>visparD
{#visparD#}¦ {%vi-spardh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-spardhate,%}
{%-spardhitum,%} to vie with, emulate, envy.
<LEND>

<L>44443<pc>0951-b<k1>visparDamAna<k2>visparDamAna
{%Vi-spardhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ vying with, emu-
lating, envying.
<LEND>

<L>44444<pc>0951-b<k1>visparDA<k2>visparDA
{%Vi-spardhā,%}¦ f. absence of envy; [cf. {%vi-ṣpar-%}
{%dhas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44445<pc>0951-b<k1>vispazwa<k2>vispazwa
{#vispazwa#}¦ {%vi-spaṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (see rt. {%spaś;%}
cf. {%vi-ṣpaś%}), clear, apparent, manifest, evident, dis-
tinct, open; plain, intelligible; ({%am%}), ind. clearly,
evidently.
<LEND>

<L>44446<pc>0951-b<k1>visPar<k2>visPar
{#visPar#}¦ {%vi-sphar.%} See under {%vi-sphur.%}
<LEND>

<L>44447<pc>0951-b<k1>visPAra<k2>visPAra
{%Vi-sphāra, vi-sphārita,%}¦ &c. See below.
<LEND>

<L>44448<pc>0951-b<k1>visPur<k2>visPur
{#visPur#}¦ {%vi-sphur%} (also written {%vi-ṣphur,%}
q. v.; the base is changed to {%vi-sphar%} in the Caus.
and in some derivatives, e. g. {%vi-sphāra%}), cl. 6. P.
{%-sphurati,%} &c., {%-sphuritum,%} to quiver, tremble,
throb, vibrate, flash, flicker, glitter; to struggle
against, resist: Pass. {%-sphuryate%} (Perf. {%vi-pusphure,%}
Kirāt. XIV. 30), to be flashed: Caus. {%-sphārayati,%}
{%-sphorayati, -yitum,%} to cause to tremble, make to
quiver or vibrate, draw (a bow); to make to glitter
or flash, cause to shine: Pass. of Caus. {%-sphāryate,%}
to be made to quiver or vibrate (as a bow).
<LEND>

<L>44449<pc>0951-b<k1>visPAra<k2>visPAra
{%Vi-sphāra, as,%}¦ m. (also written {%vi-ṣphāra%}),
trembling, quivering, vibrating, agitating; the twang
of a bow-string.
<LEND>

<L>44450<pc>0951-b<k1>visPArayat<k2>visPArayat
{%Vi-sphārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to tremble or
vibrate, drawing (a bow), drawing to the full stretch.
<LEND>

<L>44451<pc>0951-b<k1>visPArita<k2>visPArita
{%Vi-sphārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to vibrate or trem-
ble; twanged or drawn (as a bow-string); shaken;
trembling, tremulous, flashing; made open, displayed,
manifested, evident, apparent.
<LEND>
[Page0951-c+ 77]

<L>44452<pc>0951-c<k1>visPAryamARa<k2>visPAryamARa
{%Vi-sphāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being drawn or
twanged (as a bow-string); being made open or
manifest.
<LEND>

<L>44453<pc>0951-c<k1>visPurat<k2>visPurat
{%Vi-sphurat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} quivering, throb-
bing, trembling; swelling, enlarging; struggling,
resisting.
<LEND>

<L>44454<pc>0951-c<k1>visPuramARa<k2>visPuramARa
{%Vi-sphuramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ quivering, throbbing,
trembling. {%—Visphuramāṇauṣṭha (˚ṇa-oṣ˚), as,%}
{%ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having quivering or trembling lips.
<LEND>

<L>44455<pc>0951-c<k1>visPurita<k2>visPurita
{%Vi-sphurita, as, ā, am,%}¦ quivering, shaken, tre-
mulous; swollen, enlarged.
<LEND>

<L>44456<pc>0951-c<k1>visPurya<k2>visPurya
{%Vi-sphurya,%}¦ ind. (Mahā-bh. Vana-parvan 15639.
{%vi-sphūrya%}), having trembled or quivered, quivering.
<LEND>

<L>44457<pc>0951-c<k1>visPurj<k2>visPurj
{#visPurj#}¦ {%vi-sphurj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sphūrjati,%}
{%-sphūrjitum,%} to roar, resound, thunder.
<LEND>

<L>44458<pc>0951-c<k1>visPUrjaTu<k2>visPUrjaTu
{%Vi-sphūrjathu, us,%}¦ m. roaring, resounding, thun-
dering, rumbling; a clap of thunder; rolling. {%—Vi-%}
{%sphūrjathu-prakhya, as, ā, am,%} like or resembling
a clap of thunder.
<LEND>

<L>44459<pc>0951-c<k1>visPUrjita<k2>visPUrjita
{%Vi-sphūrjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ resounded, resounding;
({%am%}), n. roar, shout; rolling.
<LEND>

<L>44460<pc>0951-c<k1>visPul<k2>visPul
{#visPul#}¦ {%vi-sphul%} (also written {%vi-ṣphul,%}
Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 76; connected with {%vi-sphur,%} col. 2),
cl. 6. P. {%-sphulati, -sphulitum,%} to quiver; to leap
about, jump for joy, go (merrily).
<LEND>

<L>44461<pc>0951-c<k1>visPulat<k2>visPulat
{%Vi-sphulat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} trembling, shaking,
quivering; going briskly or (merrily); appearing.
<LEND>

<L>44462<pc>0951-c<k1>visPuliNga<k2>visPuliNga
{%Vi-sphuliṅga, as,%}¦ m. a spark of fire; a sort of
poison.
<LEND>

<L>44463<pc>0951-c<k1>visPowa<k2>visPowa
{#visPowa#}¦ {%vi-sphoṭa, as, ā,%} m. f. a boil,
tumour, pustule; small-pox.
<LEND>

<L>44464<pc>0951-c<k1>vismi<k2>vismi
{#vismi#}¦ {%vi-smi,%} cl. 1. A. {%-smayate%} (some-
times also P. {%-smayati%}), {%-smetum,%} to wonder, be sur-
prised; to wonder at, be surprised at (with inst., loc.,
or acc.); to admire; to be proud of (with inst.):
Caus. {%-smāyayati, -smāpayati, -te, -yitum,%} to
cause to wonder; to astonish any one (acc.) with
anything (inst.).
<LEND>

<L>44465<pc>0951-c<k1>vismaya<k2>vismaya
{%Vi-smaya, as,%}¦ m. wonder, surprise, amazement,
astonishment, admiration; dismay; pride, arrogance;
doubt, uncertainty, perplexity; (in the drama) one
of the Bhāvas. {%—Vismaya-kara, as, ī, am,%}
causing astonishment or admiration. {%—Vismayaṅ-%}
{%gama, as, ā, am,%} being an object of astonishment,
astonishing. {%—Vismaya-harṣa-mūla, as, ā, am,%}
caused by astonishment and joy. {%—Vismayākula%}
{%(˚ya-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} bewildered with wonder,
amazed, astounded. {%—Vismayānvita (˚ya-an˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} filled with wonder, astonished, surprised.
{%—Vismayāviṣṭa (˚ya-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} filled with
astonishment or wonder. {%—Vismayotphulla-nayana%}
or {%vismayotphulla-locana (˚ya-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing eyes wide open or staring with astonishment.
<LEND>

<L>44466<pc>0951-c<k1>vismayat<k2>vismayat
{%Vi-smayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wondering, admiring,
being surprised, being dismayed.
<LEND>

<L>44467<pc>0951-c<k1>vismayin<k2>vismayin
{%Vismayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ astonished, surprised, amazed.
<LEND>

<L>44468<pc>0951-c<k1>vismApana<k2>vismApana
{%Vi-smāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing wonder
or surprise, exciting astonishment; ({%as, ī, am%}),
astonishing, surprising; ({%as%}), m. illusion, deceit; a
city of the Gandharvas (a kind of magical or en-
chanted city that appears and disappears unexpect-
edly); an epithet of Kāma (god of love).
<LEND>

<L>44469<pc>0951-c<k1>vismita<k2>vismita
{%Vi-smita, as, ā, am,%}¦ astonished, surprised, amazed,
wonderstruck, astounded, dismayed, disconcerted, per-
plexed; ({%ā, am%}), f. n. a species of the Ati-dhṛti
metre {%(= megha-visphūrjita)%}. {%—Vismita-mānasa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} surprised or perplexed in mind. {%—Vismi-%}
{%tānana (˚ta-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} having a surprised
face.
<LEND>

<L>44470<pc>0951-c<k1>vismiti<k2>vismiti
{%Vi-smiti, is,%}¦ f. astonishment, wonder, surprise.
<LEND>

<L>44471<pc>0951-c<k1>vismera<k2>vismera
{%Vi-smera, as, ā, am,%}¦ wondering, astonished, sur-
prised.
<LEND>

<L>44472<pc>0951-c<k1>vismf<k2>vismf
{#vismf#}¦ {%vi-smṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-smarati%} (ep. also
A. {%-te%}), {%-smartum,%} to forget, be unmindful of, lose
the remembrance of (with acc. or gen.): Pass.
{%-smaryate,%} Aor. {%vy-asmāri,%} to be forgotten: Caus.
{%-smārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to forget.
<LEND>
[Page0952-a+ 75]

<L>44473<pc>0952-a<k1>vismaraRa<k2>vismaraRa
{%Vi-smaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of forgetting, ob-
livion.
<LEND>

<L>44474<pc>0952-a<k1>vismaraRIya<k2>vismaraRIya
{%Vi-smaraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be forgotten; worthy
of being forgotten.
<LEND>

<L>44475<pc>0952-a<k1>vismarat<k2>vismarat
{%Vi-smarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ forgetting, losing the
remembrance of, unmindful of (anything).
<LEND>

<L>44476<pc>0952-a<k1>vismarya<k2>vismarya
{%Vi-smarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be forgotten.
<LEND>

<L>44477<pc>0952-a<k1>vismfta<k2>vismfta
{%Vi-smṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ forgotten, passed out of the
memory or recollection. {%—Vismṛta-pūrva-saṃskā-%}
{%ra, as, ā, am,%} forgetting a former promise or reso-
lution. {%—Vismṛta-saṃskāra, as, ā, am,%} one who
forgets an agreement.
<LEND>

<L>44478<pc>0952-a<k1>vismfti<k2>vismfti
{%Vi-smṛti, is,%}¦ f. forgetting, forgetfulness, loss of
memory, oblivion.
<LEND>

<L>44479<pc>0952-a<k1>vismftya<k2>vismftya
{%Vi-smṛtya,%}¦ ind. having forgotten.
<LEND>

<L>44480<pc>0952-a<k1>visyand<k2>visyand
{#visyand#}¦ {%vi-syand.%} See {%vi-ṣyand,%} p. 950.
<LEND>

<L>44481<pc>0952-a<k1>visyanda<k2>visyanda
{%Vi-syanda,%}¦ &c. See {%vi-ṣyanda.%}
<LEND>

<L>44482<pc>0952-a<k1>visra<k2>visra
{#visra#}¦ {%visra, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%vis%}),
a smell like that of raw meat; ({%ā%}), f. a particular
substance smelling like raw meat {%(= hapuṣā).%}
{%—Visra-gandhi, is,%} m. ‘smelling like raw meat,’
yellow orpiment. {%—Visra-tā,%} f. or {%visra-tva, am,%} n.
rawness of smell.
<LEND>

<L>44483<pc>0952-a<k1>visraMs<k2>visraMs
{#visraMs#}¦ {%vi-sraṃs,%} cl. 1. A. {%-sraṃsate, -sraṃ-%}
{%situm,%} to fall asunder, fall down, drop; slip off:
Caus. {%-sraṃsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to drop.
<LEND>

<L>44484<pc>0952-a<k1>visraMsa<k2>visraMsa
{%Vi-sraṃsa, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. falling down, falling asun-
der, relaxation, laxness, weakness, debility, decay.
<LEND>

<L>44485<pc>0952-a<k1>visraMsana<k2>visraMsana
{%Vi-sraṃsana, am,%}¦ n. the act of falling; flowing,
dropping; loosening, unfastening, untying; a laxative,
aperient.
<LEND>

<L>44486<pc>0952-a<k1>visras<k2>visras
{%Vi-sras,%}¦ Ved. {%= vi-srasta%} below (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 48, 5).
<LEND>

<L>44487<pc>0952-a<k1>visrasA<k2>visrasA
{%Vi-srasā,%}¦ f. decay, decrepitude, weakness, the in-
firmity of old age.
<LEND>

<L>44488<pc>0952-a<k1>visrasta<k2>visrasta
{%Vi-srasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen down, loosened,
detached; infirm, weak. {%—Visrasta-hāra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the necklace slipped off.
<LEND>

<L>44489<pc>0952-a<k1>visramB<k2>visramB
{#visramB#}¦ {%vi-srambh = vi-śrambh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44490<pc>0952-a<k1>visrabDa<k2>visrabDa
{%Vi-srabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ trusted, confided in;
steady, diligent; tame, humble, placid, &c. (See
{%vi-śrabdha.%})
<LEND>

<L>44491<pc>0952-a<k1>visramBa<k2>visramBa
{%Vi-srambha, as,%}¦ m. trust, confidence; affection,
regard, affectionate solicitation; acquaintance; kill-
ing, &c. (See {%vi-śrambha.%})
<LEND>

<L>44492<pc>0952-a<k1>visramBin<k2>visramBin
{%Vi-srambhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ trusting, confiding in, &c.
(See {%vi-śrambhin.%})
<LEND>

<L>44493<pc>0952-a<k1>visras<k2>visras
{#visras#}¦ {%vi-sras.%} See under {%vi-sraṃs%} above.
<LEND>

<L>44494<pc>0952-a<k1>visru<k2>visru
{#visru#}¦ {%vi-sru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sravati, -srotum,%} to
flow forth or away, flow, stream, trickle, ooze: Caus.
{%-srāvayati, -yitum,%} to cause to flow forth (as blood
&c.).
<LEND>

<L>44495<pc>0952-a<k1>visrAva<k2>visrAva
{%Vi-srāva, as,%}¦ m. flowing forth, dropping, trickling.
<LEND>

<L>44496<pc>0952-a<k1>visrAvaRa<k2>visrAvaRa
{%Vi-srāvaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to flow out;
bleeding; distilling; a spirit distilled from molasses.
<LEND>

<L>44497<pc>0952-a<k1>visrAvaRIya<k2>visrAvaRIya
{%Vi-srāvaṇīya, as, ā, am, = vi-srāvya%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>44498<pc>0952-a<k1>visrAvita<k2>visrAvita
{%Vi-srāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to flow out; bled.
<LEND>

<L>44499<pc>0952-a<k1>visrAvitavya<k2>visrAvitavya
{%Vi-srāvitavya, as, ā, am, = vi-srāvya%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>44500<pc>0952-a<k1>visrAvya<k2>visrAvya
{%Vi-srāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made to flow; to be
bled, requiring bleeding.
<LEND>

<L>44501<pc>0952-a<k1>visruta<k2>visruta
{%Vi-sruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowed forth, flowed, dropped,
flowing; spread, diffused, stretched.
<LEND>

<L>44502<pc>0952-a<k1>visruti<k2>visruti
{%Vi-sruti, is,%}¦ f. flowing forth, oozing, flow.
<LEND>

<L>44503<pc>0952-a<k1>visruh<k2>visruh
{#visruh#}¦ {%vi-sruh,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%ruh%} or {%sru%} with
{%vi-s%}), Ved. a stream, river, (Sāy. {%visruhaḥ = nadyaḥ,%}
Ṛg-veda VI. 7, 6); a plant, (perhaps {%vi-sruhā;%}
according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda V. 44, 3. {%visruhā =%}
{%visruhāṇām = oṣadhīnām,%} ‘of plants;’ cf. {%vīrudh,%}
{%vīrudhā.%})
<LEND>

<L>44504<pc>0952-a<k1>visvan<k2>visvan
{#visvan#}¦ {%vi-svan,%} cl. 1. P. {%-svanati, -svani-%}
{%tum,%} to sound forth, sound, (but see {%vi-ṣvan.%})
<LEND>

<L>44505<pc>0952-a<k1>visvara<k2>visvara
{#visvara#}¦ {%vi-svara, as, ā, am,%} discordant, un-
harmonious, unmusical.
<LEND>

<L>44506<pc>0952-a<k1>visvAda<k2>visvAda
{#visvAda#}¦ {%vi-svāda, as, ā, am,%} tasteless,
flavourless, insipid.
<LEND>
[Page0952-b+ 76]

<L>44507<pc>0952-b<k1>vihaga<k2>vihaga
{#vihaga#}¦ {%viha-ga, vihaṅ-ga,%} &c. See {%vi-ha%}
under 1. {%vi-hā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>44508<pc>0952-b<k1>vihan<k2>vihan
{#vihan#}¦ {%vi-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti%} (ep. even cl.
4. P. {%-hanyati%}), {%-hantum,%} to strike apart, separate;
to strike down, strike violently, strike; to destroy
utterly, kill, destroy; to afflict; to oppose, impede,
resist; to strike back, reject, refuse, deny; to hinder,
interrupt, obstruct: Caus. {%-ghātayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to be killed or destroyed; to afflict, drive into
straits.
<LEND>

<L>44509<pc>0952-b<k1>vihat<k2>vihat
{%Vi-hat,%}¦ f. a cow that miscarries from unseasonable
gestation.
<LEND>

<L>44510<pc>0952-b<k1>vihata<k2>vihata
{%Vi-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck, killed, completely
destroyed; hurt; opposed, impeded, resisted; ({%as%}),
m. a Buddhist or Jaina temple.
<LEND>

<L>44511<pc>0952-b<k1>vihati<k2>vihati
{%Vi-hati, is,%}¦ f. striking, killing; defeat; failure;
({%is%}), m. a friend, companion.
<LEND>

<L>44512<pc>0952-b<k1>vihanana<k2>vihanana
{%Vi-hanana, am,%}¦ n. the act of striking; killing
outright; hurting, injury; opposition, obstruction,
impediment; a bow for cleaning cotton; [cf. {%tūla-%}
{%kārmuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44513<pc>0952-b<k1>vihara<k2>vihara
{#vihara#}¦ {%vi-hara,%} &c. See under {%vi-hṛ,%}
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>44514<pc>0952-b<k1>viharza<k2>viharza
{#viharza#}¦ {%vi-harṣa, as,%} m. excessive joy or
gladness, pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>44515<pc>0952-b<k1>vihava<k2>vihava
{#vihava#}¦ {%vi-hava.%} See under {%vi-hve,%} p. 953.
<LEND>

<L>44516<pc>0952-b<k1>vihavya<k2>vihavya
{#vihavya#}¦ {%vi-havya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. to be
offered; ({%as%}), m., N. of a descendant of Aṅgiras
(author of Ṛg-veda X. 128).
<LEND>

<L>44517<pc>0952-b<k1>vihas<k2>vihas
{#vihas#}¦ {%vi-has,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hasati, -hasitum,%}
to laugh gently, smile, laugh; to laugh at (with
acc.).
<LEND>

<L>44518<pc>0952-b<k1>vihasat<k2>vihasat
{%Vi-hasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ laughing, smiling.
<LEND>

<L>44519<pc>0952-b<k1>vihasana<k2>vihasana
{%Vi-hasana, am,%}¦ n. laughing gently, smiling (=
{%madhyama-hāsya%}), laughing.
<LEND>

<L>44520<pc>0952-b<k1>vihasita<k2>vihasita
{%Vi-hasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ smiled, laughed; smiled
at; ({%am%}), n. a gentle laugh, smile, laugh.
<LEND>

<L>44521<pc>0952-b<k1>vihasya<k2>vihasya
{%Vi-hasya,%}¦ ind. having smiled; laughing at, ridi-
culing, contemning.
<LEND>

<L>44522<pc>0952-b<k1>vihasyamAna<k2>vihasyamAna
{%Vi-hasyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being laughed at,
being smiled upon.
<LEND>

<L>44523<pc>0952-b<k1>vihAsa<k2>vihAsa
{%Vi-hāsa, as,%}¦ m. a gentle laugh, smile.
<LEND>

<L>44524<pc>0952-b<k1>vihasta<k2>vihasta
{#vihasta#}¦ {%vi-hasta, as, ā, am,%} handless, help-
less; confounded, perplexed, bewildered; wise,
learned.
<LEND>

<L>44525<pc>0952-b<k1>vihA<k2>vihA<h>1
{#vihA#} 1¦. {%vi-hā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-jihīte,%} &c., Ved.
to go apart, (Sāy. {%vi-jihīṣva = vi-gaccha,%} Ṛg-
veda V. 78, 5), become expanded, open, gape open
(Lat. <nsi>dehisco,</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">χαίνω</lang>).
<LEND>

<L>44526<pc>0952-b<k1>viha<k2>viha
{%Vi-ha%}¦ (for 2. {%vi-hā%} below), the sky, air (only
used in comps.). {%—Viha-ga, as,%} m. ‘sky-goer,’ a
bird; a cloud; an arrow; the sun; the moon; a
planet. {%—Vihagopaghuṣṭa (˚ga-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
resounding with (the notes) of birds, resonant with
birds. {%—Vihaṅ-ga, as, ā, am,%} sky-going, flying,
going swiftly; ({%as%}), m. a bird; a cloud; an arrow;
the sun; the moon. {%—Vihaṅ-gama, as,%} m. ‘sky-
goer,’ a bird; the sun; ({%ā%}), f. a pole or yoke for
carrying burdens {%(= bhāra-yaṣṭi)%}. {%—Vihaṅga-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of the birds,’ epithet of Garuḍa
(the vehicle of Viṣṇu).
<LEND>

<L>44527<pc>0952-b<k1>vihaNgikA<k2>vihaNgikA
{%Vihaṅgikā,%}¦ f. a sort of pole or yoke for carrying
burdens.
<LEND>

<L>44528<pc>0952-b<k1>vihA<k2>vihA<h>2
2. {%vi-hā,%}¦ ind. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 36. fr.
1. {%vi-hā%}), heaven, paradise, sky.
<LEND>

<L>44529<pc>0952-b<k1>vihAyas<k2>vihAyas
{%Vi-hāyas, ās, ās, as%}¦ (probably formed fr. 1. {%vi-hā%}
above, as 1. {%dhāyas%} fr. rt. 1. {%dhā%}), ‘expanding,’
extensive, vast, great ({%= mahat%} according to Naigh.
III. 3), all-pervading; (Sāy. {%= vividha-gamana-%}
{%yukta%}); (perhaps) going quickly, impetuous, spirited,
active; ({%ās, as%}), m. n. the open air, air, space (Gr.
<lang n="greek">χάος</lang>), sky, atmosphere; ({%ās%}), m. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>44530<pc>0952-b<k1>vihAyasa<k2>vihAyasa
{%Vi-hāyasa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. heaven, sky, atmo-
sphere; ({%as%}), m. a bird.
<LEND>

<L>44531<pc>0952-b<k1>vihAyasA<k2>vihAyasA
{%Vi-hāyasā,%}¦ ind. (inst. c. of {%vi-hāyas%} above),
through the sky or air; heaven, sky, atmosphere.
<LEND>
[Page0952-c+ 77]

<L>44532<pc>0952-c<k1>vihA<k2>vihA<h>3
{#vihA#} 3¦. {%vi-hā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jahāti%} (2nd sing.
Impv. {%vi-jahīhi,%} Kirāt. XI. 31), {%-hātum,%} to relin-
quish, quit, abandon, leave, give up or lay aside
entirely, lose: Caus. {%-hāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
quit or abandon.
<LEND>

<L>44533<pc>0952-c<k1>vihApita<k2>vihApita
{%Vi-hāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to abandon or give
up; made to yield, extorted, given up, given; ({%am%}),
n. gift, donation.
<LEND>

<L>44534<pc>0952-c<k1>vihAya<k2>vihAya
{%Vi-hāya,%}¦ ind. having abandoned or left.
<LEND>

<L>44535<pc>0952-c<k1>vihAyata<k2>vihAyata
{%Vi-hāyata, am,%}¦ n. (?), donation, gift.
<LEND>

<L>44536<pc>0952-c<k1>vihIna<k2>vihIna
{%Vi-hīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely abandoned, left,
deserted, destitute, bereaved, deprived of, void or
devoid of, free from, without. {%—Vihīna-tā,%} f. the
state of being wholly abandoned, abandonment. {%—Vi-%}
{%hīna-yoni, is, is, i,%} low-born, base-born, brutish.
<LEND>

<L>44537<pc>0952-c<k1>vihAra<k2>vihAra
{#vihAra#}¦ {%vi-hāra,%} &c. See {%vi-hṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>44538<pc>0952-c<k1>vihiMs<k2>vihiMs
{#vihiMs#}¦ {%vi-hiṃs,%} cl. 7. 1. P. {%-hinasti, -hiṃsati,%}
{%-hiṃsitum,%} to injure severely, injure, hurt, damage.
<LEND>

<L>44539<pc>0952-c<k1>vihiMsaka<k2>vihiMsaka
{%Vi-hiṃsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ injuring, hurting.
<LEND>

<L>44540<pc>0952-c<k1>vihiMsat<k2>vihiMsat
{%Vi-hiṃsat, an, antī, at,%}¦ injuring, harming, hurt-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>44541<pc>0952-c<k1>vihiMsita<k2>vihiMsita
{%Vi-hiṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured, hurt, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44542<pc>0952-c<k1>vihita<k2>vihita<h>1
{#vihita#} 1¦. {%vi-hita, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%vi-dhā%}),
distributed, apportioned, bestowed; put in order,
arranged, appointed, determined, fixed, settled, pre-
scribed, enjoined, enacted, decreed, ordained, ordered;
proper to be done; deposited, placed; done, per-
formed, undertaken, acted, made; framed, con-
structed, formed; furnished with, possessed of. {%—Vi-%}
{%hita-durga-racana, as, ā, am,%} one who has en-
joined the building of a fortress. {%—Vihitāgas (˚ta-%}
{%āg˚), ās, ās, as,%} one who has committed a fault,
offending, faulty, wicked. {%—Vihitāñjali (˚ta-añ˚),%}
{%is, is, i,%} making a respectful obeisance.
<LEND>

<L>44543<pc>0952-c<k1>vihitavat<k2>vihitavat
{%Vihita-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has performed
or undertaken.
<LEND>

<L>44544<pc>0952-c<k1>vihiti<k2>vihiti
{%Vi-hiti, is,%}¦ f. action, performance, acting, doing;
arrangement.
<LEND>

<L>44545<pc>0952-c<k1>vihitrima<k2>vihitrima
{%Vihitrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ done according to rule.
<LEND>

<L>44546<pc>0952-c<k1>vihita<k2>vihita<h>2
{#vihita#} 2¦. {%vi-hita, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%vi%} privative
{%+ hita%}), improper, unfit, unsuitable, not good.
<LEND>

<L>44547<pc>0952-c<k1>vihIna<k2>vihIna
{#vihIna#}¦ {%vi-hīna.%} See under 3. {%vi-hā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>44548<pc>0952-c<k1>vihutmatI<k2>vihutmatI
{#vihutmatI#}¦ {%vi-hut-matī,%} f. (a Kvip formation
fr. rt. {%hu%} with prep. {%vi%} and affix {%mat%}), a special
oblation or offering, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
1. 134, 6. {%vihutmatīnām = viśeṣeṇa homavatī-%}
{%nām%} or else {%āhvānavatīnām.%})
<LEND>

<L>44549<pc>0952-c<k1>vihf<k2>vihf
{#vihf#}¦ {%vi-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te, -har-%}
{%tum,%} to take away, remove, destroy; to go in
various directions; to walk or roam about or ramble
for pleasure, saunter, amuse or divert one's self, sport,
(in Ṛg-veda 1. 28, 7. {%vijarbhṛtas = viśeṣeṇa%}
{%punaḥ punar vihāraṃ kurutaḥ%}); to vary, change,
alternate, mix; to spend or pass (time &c.); to
live.
<LEND>

<L>44550<pc>0952-c<k1>vihara<k2>vihara
{%Vi-hara, as,%}¦ m. taking away; expanding, going
apart or in different directions, separation, disunion,
absence; changing, exchanging.
<LEND>

<L>44551<pc>0952-c<k1>viharaRa<k2>viharaRa
{%Vi-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of taking away or
removing, taking; going about for pleasure or exer-
cise, rambling, roaming, taking a walk or airing;
expatiating; relaxation, pastime, pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>44552<pc>0952-c<k1>viharaRIya<k2>viharaRIya
{%Vi-haraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken away; to be
rambled or sported.
<LEND>

<L>44553<pc>0952-c<k1>viharat<k2>viharat
{%Vi-harat, an, antī, at,%}¦ roaming for pleasure,
sauntering about, ranging at large.
<LEND>

<L>44554<pc>0952-c<k1>vihartf<k2>vihartf
{%Vi-hartṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who takes away, a robber;
one who rambles about, rambling, roaming; a roamer.
<LEND>

<L>44555<pc>0952-c<k1>vihAra<k2>vihAra
{%Vi-hāra, as,%}¦  m. taking away, removing; expan-
sion, opening; too great expansion of the organs of
speech (consisting in too great lengthening or drawl-
ing in pronunciation; opposed to {%saṃ-hāra;%} cf.
{%vy-āsa%}); walking for pleasure or amusement, taking
an airing, wandering, roaming, gadding, going about;
sporting, play, sport, recreation, pastime, pleasure,
relaxation; a pleasure-garden, garden; a Buddhist or
Jaina temple or convent (originally the hall where
[Page0953-a+ 77]
the Buddhist priests met or walked about; afterwards
these halls were used as temples, and sometimes be-
came the centre of a whole monastic establishment);
a temple; the palace of Indra or a banner ({%= vai-%}
{%jayanta?%}); a palace; N. of a district; the shoulder;
a sort of bird, {%= vindu-rekhaka;%} (in Vedic ritual)
a term for varying a verse (by taking it to pieces,
joining to each of its Pādas a Pāda taken from
another verse, and reciting both parts in such a way
as if they formed only one verse; cf. {%vy-atimarśa%}).
{%—Vihāra-gṛha, am,%} n. a pleasure-house, play-
house, theatre. {%—Vihāra-bhūmi, is,%} f. ground or
place for roaming about, grazing ground, pasturage.
{%—Vihāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} taking pleasure or relax-
ation, enjoying one's self.
<LEND>

<L>44556<pc>0953-a<k1>vihAraka<k2>vihAraka
{%Vihāraka%}¦ or {%vihārika, as, ikā, am,%} roaming or
walking about, a roamer; belonging to a Buddhist
temple or convent.
<LEND>

<L>44557<pc>0953-a<k1>vihArin<k2>vihArin
{%Vihārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ expanding; taking pleasure or
relaxation, wandering or roaming about for pleasure,
enjoying one's self; beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>44558<pc>0953-a<k1>vihfta<k2>vihfta
{%Vi-hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ expanded; sported, played;
taken out, transposed, varied, (in Vedic ritual applied
to the transposing of the Pādas in singing the Ṣo-
ḍaśī hymns, see {%vi-hāra%}); ({%am%}), n. one of the ten
blandishments or feminine modes of indicating love,
hesitation or reluctance to avow feelings to a lover,
(some of the others are {%līlā, lalita, kuṭṭamita,%}
{%moṭṭāyita, vi-cchitti, kila-kiñcita,%} &c., q. q. v. v.)
<LEND>

<L>44559<pc>0953-a<k1>vihfti<k2>vihfti
{%Vi-hṛti, is,%}¦ f. taking away; opening, expansion;
sport, pastime, pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>44560<pc>0953-a<k1>vihftya<k2>vihftya
{%Vi-hṛtya,%}¦ ind. having opened or spread out,
having expanded; having roamed about or sported,
having rambled, having disported.
<LEND>

<L>44561<pc>0953-a<k1>viheWa<k2>viheWa
{#viheWa#}¦ {%vi-heṭha, as,%} m. (see rt. {%heṭh%}), hurt,
injury; the act of afflicting or harassing.
<LEND>

<L>44562<pc>0953-a<k1>viheWaka<k2>viheWaka
{%Vi-heṭhaka, as,%}¦ m. an injurer, one who inflicts
pain or injury on another; a reviler.
<LEND>

<L>44563<pc>0953-a<k1>viheWana<k2>viheWana
{%Vi-heṭhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of injuring, hurting,
wounding, killing; afflicting, distressing; rubbing,
grinding; injury, harm, pain, sorrow, affliction.
<LEND>

<L>44564<pc>0953-a<k1>vihru<k2>vihru
{#vihru#}¦ {%vi-hru%} ({%hru = hvṛ,%} cf. {%vi-hvṛ%} below),
cl. 9. P. {%-hruṇāti,%} &c., Ved. to injure, hurt, destroy,
(Sāy. {%vi-hruṇāti = vi-hvarati,%} Ṛg-veda I. 166,
12.)
<LEND>

<L>44565<pc>0953-a<k1>vihruta<k2>vihruta
{%Vi-hruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. injured, hurt, spoiled
[cf. {%a-v˚%}]; fractured, dissevered, (Sāy. {%= vi-cchinna,%}
{%vi-bādhita.%})
<LEND>

<L>44566<pc>0953-a<k1>vihlaRa<k2>vihlaRa
{#vihlaRa#}¦ {%vihlaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a native of
Kaśmīra (author of the following poem). {%—Vihlaṇa-%}
{%kāvya, am,%} n. ‘the poem of Vihlaṇa,’ N. of a poem
(containing the Caura-pañcāśikā, said to have been
recited when Vihlaṇa was on the point of being put
to death by king Vīra-siṃha, whose daughter he had
secretly espoused).
<LEND>

<L>44567<pc>0953-a<k1>vihval<k2>vihval
{#vihval#}¦ {%vi-hval,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hvalati, -hvali-%}
{%tum,%} to shake or move about, stagger, tremble, be
agitated.
<LEND>

<L>44568<pc>0953-a<k1>vihvala<k2>vihvala
{%Vi-hvala, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaking about, agitated,
alarmed, perturbed, disquieted, confused, overcome
with fear, beside one's self, delirious; distressed,
afflicted; languishing; desponding; fused, liquid.
{%—Vihvala-tā,%} f. or {%vihvala-tva, am,%} n. agitation,
perturbation, consternation, anxiety. {%—Vihvalī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} made confused or agitated; fused, liquid.
<LEND>

<L>44569<pc>0953-a<k1>vihvalat<k2>vihvalat
{%Vihvalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ trembling, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>44570<pc>0953-a<k1>vihvalita<k2>vihvalita
{%Vi-hvalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, alarmed, stag-
gering.
<LEND>

<L>44571<pc>0953-a<k1>vihvf<k2>vihvf
{#vihvf#}¦ {%vi-hvṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hvarati, -hvartum,%}
Ved. to be crooked, curved; to hurt (?).
<LEND>

<L>44572<pc>0953-a<k1>vihve<k2>vihve
{#vihve#}¦ {%vi-hve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-hvayati, -te,%} &c.,
to call upon, invoke, worship.
<LEND>

<L>44573<pc>0953-a<k1>vihava<k2>vihava
{%Vi-hava, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an invocation, invitation.
<LEND>

<L>44574<pc>0953-a<k1>vI<k2>vI<h>1
{#vI#} 1¦. {%vī,%} cl. 2. P. {%veti%} (2nd sing. Impv.
{%vīhi,%} 3rd pl. {%vyantu%}), {%vivāya, veṣyati,%}
{%avaiṣīt, vetum,%} to go, move; to go towards, ap-
proach, (in Ṛg-veda I. 77, 2. {%veḥ%} 2nd sing. Impf.
[Page0953-b+ 80]
{%= veti = gacchati%}); to pervade; to bring, convey,
offer; to attain, obtain, accept; to conceive, become
pregnant, engender, bring forth; to desire, love, wish
for, (according to Nirukta IX. 42, 43. {%vītām = pi-%}
{%batām%} or {%kāmayetām%}); to eat, enjoy, consume,
partake of (with gen. or acc.); to send, throw, hurl,
cast; to drive (in this sense regarded as a substitute
for rt. {%aj%}): Pass. or cl. 4. A. {%vīyate,%} to be gone,
&c.: Caus. {%vāyayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvayat,%} to
cause to go or approach; to cause to obtain or
accept; to cause to eat or partake of; to cause to
desire or love; to cause to conceive (in this sense
also {%vāpayati%}): Desid. {%vivīṣati:%} Intens. {%vevīyate,%}
{%vevayīti, veveti,%} (see also {%vevī%}); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">οἴσω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">οἴαξ, οἰήϊον;</lang> Lat. <nsi>in-vītus, in-vitare.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>44575<pc>0953-b<k1>vI<k2>vI<h>2
2. {%vī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ Ved. going, moving, (according to
Sāy. {%veḥ = gantryāḥ,%} Ṛg-veda III. 5, 5); pervad-
ing, extensive, (Sāy. {%= vyāpta,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 5, 8);
({%īs%}), f. the act of going, motion; covering. (For {%vī,%}
‘a bird,’ see under 2. {%vi,%} p. 908.)
<LEND>

<L>44576<pc>0953-b<k1>vIka<k2>vIka
{%Vīka, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 47. fr. {%vī,%}
a substitute for rt. {%aj%}), a bird; air, wind; the mind.
<LEND>

<L>44577<pc>0953-b<k1>vIta<k2>vIta<h>1
1. {%vīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, approached; led round
the sacrificial fire (said of a horse, Ṛg-veda 1. 162,
15); accepted, acceptable, approved, liked, loved;
desired, wished for, beautiful (Ved.); tranquil, quiet,
tame, unfit for war; ({%as%}), m. a horse or elephant
untrained or unfit for war; ({%am%}), n. the goading of
an elephant. {%—Vīta-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most
acceptable, (Sāy. {%= atiśayena kānta,%} Ṛg-veda VII.
1, 18.) {%—Vīta-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
beautiful backs (said of horses, Sāy. {%= kānta-pṛṣ-%}
{%ṭha,%} Ṛg-veda I. 162, 7). {%—Vīta-vāra, as, ā, am%}
(see 2. {%vāra%}), Ved. having a handsome tail, (Sāy.
{%= krānta-bala, prāpta-bala,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 46,
23.)
<LEND>

<L>44578<pc>0953-b<k1>vIti<k2>vIti
{%Vīti, is,%}¦ f. going, moving, motion; engendering,
producing; eating, food, ({%vītī,%} Ved. inst. {%= vītyā,%}
‘with food,’ Ṛg-veda VI. 16, 46); enjoyment;
cleaning, cleansing; light, lustre; ({%is%}), m. a horse.
{%—Vīti-hotra, as,%} m., N. of Agni or fire; of the
sun; of a son of Priya-vrata; of a son of Tāla-
jaṅgha; ({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. one who offers the
sacrificial meal to the gods; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
sect of fire-worshippers; of a branch of the Haihaya
tribe. {%—Vīti-hotraka, as,%} m., N. of Agni or fire;
of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>44579<pc>0953-b<k1>vyat<k2>vyat
{%Vyat, an, atī, at,%}¦ going, moving, &c., (Sāy.
{%vyantaḥ = gacchantaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 1, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>44580<pc>0953-b<k1>vI<k2>vI<h>3
{#vI#} 3¦. {%vī (vi-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%vy-eti%} (3rd pl.
{%vi-yanti%}), Impf. {%vy-ait,%} Perf. {%vīyāya, vy-etum%} (for
{%vyayati, vyayayati,%} see {%vyay%}), to go apart or in
different directions; to go or extend in every direc-
tion, to be diffused or scattered, become distributed
or divided; to go away, disappear, vanish, be lost;
to go through, traverse: cl. 4. A. {%vīyate,%} to go
apart or away, &c., (Sāy. {%vīyase = gacchasi,%} Ṛg-
veda IX. 86, 37; according to some {%vīyase%} is an
Intens. form.)
<LEND>

<L>44581<pc>0953-b<k1>vIta<k2>vIta<h>2
2. {%vīta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 3. {%vīta%} see under rt. {%vye%}),
gone away, departed, disappeared; set free, loosed,
let go, exempt, freed from, devoid of. {%—Vīta-kal-%}
{%maṣa, as, ā, am,%} freed from taint or sin. {%—Vīta-%}
{%kāma, as, ā, am,%} free from desire. {%—Vīta-ghṛṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one from whom mercy has departed,
merciless. {%—Vītaghṛṇa-tā,%} f. mercilessness. {%—Vīta-%}
{%janma-jarasa, as, ā, am,%} not subject to birth or
old age. {%—Vīta-dambha, as, ā, am,%} free from pride,
not proud, humble, lowly. {%—Vīta-bhaya, as, ā, am,%}
fearless, undaunted; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Vīta-bhī, īs, īs, i,%} free from fear, intrepid. {%—Vīta-%}
{%matsara, as, ā, am,%} free from envy, free from
passion. {%—Vīta-manyu, us, us, u,%} exempt or free
from sorrow; free from resentment or anger. {%—Vīta-%}
{%mala, as, ā, am,%} free from obscurity or darkness,
clear, pure. {%—Vīta-moha, as, ā, am,%} freed from
illusion. {%—Vīta-rāga, as, ā, am,%} having the passions
gone, free from passions or affections, dispassionate,
devoid of desire, calm, tranquil; colourless, bleached;
({%as%}), m. a sage with subdued passions; a deified
[Page0953-c+ 76]
Buddhist or Jaina saint. {%—Vīta-rāga-stuti, is,%} f., N.
of a work. {%—Vīta-viruddha-buddhi, is, is, i,%} one
whose hostile feelings have passed away, without
hostile intentions, peaceable. {%—Vīta-śaṅka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} freed from fear, fearless. {%—Vīta-śoka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} free from care or sorrow; ({%as%}), m. the Aśoka
tree, Jonesia Aśoka. {%—Vīta-śoka-bhayābādha (˚ya-%}
{%āb˚), as, ā, am,%} free from the disturbance of sorrow
and fear. {%—Vīta-spṛha, as, ā, am,%} free from wish
or desire. {%—Vīta-havya, as,%} m., N. of a descendant
of Aṅgiras (author of the hymn Ṛg-veda VI. 15);
of a king. {%—Vītoccaya-bandha (˚ta-uc˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the fastening of the knot gone, (Kirāt.
VIII. 51.) {%—Vītottara (˚ta-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} having
no answer, unable or disinclined to reply; ({%am%}), ind.
without answering.
<LEND>

<L>44582<pc>0953-c<k1>vikASa<k2>vikASa<h>1
{#vikASa#} 1¦. {%vī-kāśa, as,%} m. (for 1. {%vi-kāśa%}),
manifestation, display; ether, heaven.
<LEND>

<L>44583<pc>0953-c<k1>vIkASa<k2>vIkASa<h>2
2. {%vī-kāśa, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. {%vi-kāśa%}), absence of
manifestation; solitude, privacy.
<LEND>

<L>44584<pc>0953-c<k1>vIkz<k2>vIkz
{#vIkz#}¦ {%vīkṣ (vi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%vīkṣate%} (ep.
also P. {%-ti%}), {%vīkṣitum,%} to see, behold, view, ob-
serve, look at, consider, regard, discern, ({%hṛdi%}
{%vīkṣ,%} to see in the heart, ponder); to look upon
as, regard as (e. g. {%pitṛ-vad vīkṣ,%} to look upon as
a father): Pass. {%vīkṣyate,%} to be seen; to look
like, appear, seem.
<LEND>

<L>44585<pc>0953-c<k1>vIkza<k2>vIkza
{%Vīkṣa, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. sight, gazing at, seeing,
investigation; ({%am%}), n. surprise, astonishment; any
visible object. {%—Vīkṣāpanna (˚ṣa-āp˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who experiences surprise, astonished, sur-
prised.
<LEND>

<L>44586<pc>0953-c<k1>vIkzaRa<k2>vIkzaRa
{%Vīkṣaṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of seeing or
observing, looking at, sight.
<LEND>

<L>44587<pc>0953-c<k1>vIkzaRIya<k2>vIkzaRIya
{%Vīkṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ visible, perceptible, ob-
servable.
<LEND>

<L>44588<pc>0953-c<k1>vIkzamARa<k2>vIkzamARa
{%Vīkṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seeing, looking at, ob-
serving, regarding.
<LEND>

<L>44589<pc>0953-c<k1>vIkzita<k2>vIkzita
{%Vīkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen, viewed, beheld, re-
garded, considered; ({%am%}), n. a look, glance, sight.
<LEND>

<L>44590<pc>0953-c<k1>vIkzya<k2>vIkzya<h>1
1. {%vīkṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ visible, perceptible; to be
gazed at, astonishing, wonderful; ({%am%}), n. any visible
object, anything to be gazed at; wonder, surprise;
({%as%}), m. a dancer, actor; a horse.
<LEND>

<L>44591<pc>0953-c<k1>vIkzya<k2>vIkzya<h>2
2. {%vīkṣya,%}¦ ind. having seen or viewed, having
considered.
<LEND>

<L>44592<pc>0953-c<k1>vIkzyamARa<k2>vIkzyamARa
{%Vīkṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being seen or beheld,
being gazed at.
<LEND>

<L>44593<pc>0953-c<k1>vIKA<k2>vIKA
{#vIKA#}¦ {%vīkhā,%} f. walking, (for {%vīṅkhā?%})
<LEND>

<L>44594<pc>0953-c<k1>vINK<k2>vINK
{#vINK#}¦ {%vīṅkh (vi-iṅkh),%} Caus. {%vīṅkhayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to toss to and fro (trans.).
<LEND>

<L>44595<pc>0953-c<k1>vINKA<k2>vINKA
{%Vīṅkhā,%}¦ f. going, moving, proceeding, progress,
locomotion; a particular mode of moving; dancing;
one of a horse's paces; cowach, Carpopogon Pruriens
{%(= śūka-śimbī); = sandhi%} (according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>44596<pc>0953-c<k1>vINg<k2>vINg
{#vINg#}¦ {%vīṅg (vi-iṅg),%} cl. 1. P. {%vīṅgati, vīṅ-%}
{%gitum,%} Ved. to move to and fro, oscillate.
<LEND>

<L>44597<pc>0953-c<k1>vINgita<k2>vINgita
{%Vīṅgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>44598<pc>0953-c<k1>vIcayana<k2>vIcayana
{#vIcayana#}¦ {%vī-cayana, am,%} n. (for {%vi-cayana,%}
see under 3. {%vi-ci,%} p. 914), research, inquiry.
<LEND>

<L>44599<pc>0953-c<k1>vIci<k2>vIci
{#vIci#}¦ {%vīci, is,%} m. f. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 72. fr. rt. {%ve%}), a wave, small wave, ripple; in-
constancy, thoughtlessness; pleasure, delight, happi-
ness; leisure, interval, rest; a ray of light; small,
little. {%—Vīci-kṣobha, as,%} m. agitation or roughness
of waves. {%—Vīci-mālin, ī,%} m. ‘wave-garlanded,’ the
ocean.
<LEND>

<L>44600<pc>0953-c<k1>vIcI<k2>vIcI
{%Vīcī,%}¦ f. {%= vīci%} above. {%—Vīcī-taraṅga-nyāya, as,%}
m. wave-undulation-method, (according to the Bhā-
ṣā-pariccheda 166 and Siddhānta-muktāvalī, p. 103,
the cause of the production of sound in the ear.)
<LEND>

<L>44601<pc>0953-c<k1>vIj<k2>vIj
{#vIj#}¦ {%vīj%} [cf. rt. 1. {%vij%}], cl. 1. A. {%vījate,%}
{%vījitum,%} to go; cl. 10. P. {%vījayati,%}
{%yitum%} (perhaps a Nom. fr. {%vyaja,%} q. v.), to fan,
cool by blowing upon or fanning: Pass. {%vījyate,%} to
be fanned; [cf. Lat. <nsi>vigeo.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page0954-a+ 80]

<L>44602<pc>0954-a<k1>vIjana<k2>vIjana
{%Vījana, am,%}¦ n. fanning, the being fanned; a fan
[cf. {%vyajana%}]; a thing, substance; ({%as%}), m. a sort
of pheasant; the ruddy goose.
<LEND>

<L>44603<pc>0954-a<k1>vIjita<k2>vIjita<h>1
1. {%vījita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fanned, cooled by fanning.
<LEND>

<L>44604<pc>0954-a<k1>vIjyamAna<k2>vIjyamAna
{%Vījyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being fanned, fanned.
<LEND>

<L>44605<pc>0954-a<k1>vIja<k2>vIja
{#vIja#}¦ {%vīja, am,%} n. (in the older language
frequently written {%bīja;%} perhaps fr. rt. {%jan%} with {%vi;%}
according to some connected with rt. 1. {%vī%}), seed
(of plants &c.), seed-corn, grain; semen virile;
(perhaps also) quicksilver; marrow; any germ, ele-
ment, beginning, cause, source, primary cause or
principle, origin; the germ or origin of any compo-
sition (as of a poem, of the plot of a drama, of a
magical formula, &c.); calculating primary causes,
analysis, algebra; truth, divine truth (as the seed or
cause of being); the mystical letter or syllable which
forms the essential part of the Mantra of any deity;
receptacle, place of deposit; a particular correction
in astronomy; ({%as%}), m. {%= vījaka,%} the citron tree.
{%—Vīja-kartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘producer of seed,’ epithet
of Śiva. {%—Vīja-kāṇḍa-prarohin, ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%vīja-%}
{%kāṇḍa-ruha, as, ā, am,%} springing from a seed or
from the (slip or portion taken from a) stalk. {%—Vīja-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} producing semen; ({%t%}), n. an aphro-
disiac. {%—Vīja-kośa%} or {%vīja-koṣa, as,%} m. a seed-
vessel, the pericarp of a flower; the seed-vessel of
the lotus; ({%ī%}), f. a pod, legume. {%—Vīja-kriyā,%} f.
the operation of analysis, elemental or algebraic
solution. {%—Vīja-gaṇita, am,%} n. calculation of pri-
mary causes, causal calculus, analysis, algebra; N. of a
treatise on algebra. {%—Vīja-garbha, as,%} m. the plant
Trichosanthes Diœca. {%—Vīja-gupti, is,%} f. ‘seed-
protection,’ a pod, legume. {%—Vīja-tas,%} ind. from seed,
according to the seed. {%—Vīja-tva, am,%} n. the being
an origin or cause, causality. {%—Vīja-darśaka, as,%}
m. ‘explainer of the germ or plot of a play,’ a play-
director, stage-manager. {%—Vīja-dhānī,%} f., N. of a
river. {%—Vīja-dhānya, am,%} n. coriander. {%—Vīja-%}
{%nyāsa, as,%} m. (in dramatic language) laying down
or making known the germ or plot of a play. {%—Vīja-%}
{%pādapa, as,%} m. the plant Semecarpus Anacardium
{%(= bhallātaka)%}. {%—Vīja-pura,%} incorrect for {%vīja-%}
{%pūra%}. {%—Vīja-puruṣa, as,%} m. the progenitor of
a tribe or family. {%—Vīja-puṣpa, am,%} n. common
citron; a thorny plant, Vangueria Spinosa {%(= ma-%}
{%ruvaka)%}. {%—Vīja-puṣpikā,%} f. a sort of grain, An-
dropogon Saccharatus. {%—Vīja-pūra%} or {%vīja-pūraka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘seed-filling,’ common citron; a variety of
citron, Citrus Medica; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of the
citron. {%—Vīja-pūrṇa, as,%} m. ‘seed-filled,’ epithet of
the common citron ({%= cholaṅga%}); Citrus Medica.
{%—Vīja-peśikā,%} f, ‘seed-sheath,’ the scrotum. {%—Vīja-%}
{%prada, as, ā, am,%} yielding seed, sowing seed, &c.;
generating; ({%as%}), m. a generator. {%—Vīja-prabodha,%}
{%as,%}  m., N. of a commentary on the Vīja-gaṇita.
{%—Vīja-praroha, as, ā, am,%} or {%vīja-prarohin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} growing from seed. {%—Vīja-phalaka, as,%} m.
the plant Citurs Medica; a citron or lemon. {%—Vīja-%}
{%mati, is,%} f. (in algebra) a mind capable of analysis,
penetration of causes or principles, causal sagacity.
{%—Vīja-mantra, am,%} n. epithet of a mystical syllable
with which a Mantra or magical formula commences.
{%—Vīja-mātṛkā,%} f. the pericarp or seed-vessel of
the lotus. {%—Vīja-mātra, am,%} n. only as much as
is required for seed, only what is required for the
procreation of offspring or for the preservation of a
family; epithet of the ninth Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-
veda. {%—Vīja-muktāvalī,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Vīja-%}
{%yajña, as,%} m. ‘seed-offering,’ N. of a particular
allegorical sacrifice or offering. {%—Vīja-ratna, as,%} m.
‘having gems of seeds,’ a kind of bean. {%—Vīja-ruha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} growing from seed; ({%as%}), m. grain,
corn. {%—Vīja-recana, am,%} n. Croton Jamalgota ({%=%}
{%jaya-pāla%}). {%—1. vīja-vat,%} ind. like seed. {%—2. vīja-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing seed, furnished or pro-
vided with seed; provided with grain. {%—Vīja-va-%}
{%pana, am,%} n. the act of sowing seed. {%—Vīja-vara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘best of grains,’ a kidney-bean, Phaseolus
Radiatus. {%—Vīja-vāpa, as,%} m. a sower of seed;
the act of sowing seed. {%—Vīja-vāpin, ī,%} m. ‘sowing
[Page0954-b+ 78]
seed,’ a sower. {%—Vīja-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘seed-bearer,’
N. of Śiva. {%—Vīja-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the plant Ter-
minalia Tomentosa. {%—Vīja-sañcaya, as,%} m. a heap
or collection of seed or grain. {%—Vīja-sū, ūs,%} f.
‘bringing forth seed,’ the earth. {%—Vīja-sektṛ, tā,%}
m. a sprinkler of seed, procreator, progenitor. {%—Vīja-%}
{%harā%} or {%vīja-hāriṇī,%} f. ‘taking away seed,’ epithet
of a witch (a daughter of Duḥsaha). {%—Vījā-kṛta,%}
see below. {%—Vījākṣara (˚ja-ak˚), am,%} n. the first
syllable of a magical formula, the syllable at the
commencement of a Mantra or form of prayer.
{%—Vījāṅkura (˚ja-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a sprout or first
shoot from a seed, seed-shoot, seed-lobe, cotyledon,
seedling; ({%au%}), m. du. seed and shoot, seed and
blade. {%—Vījāṅkura-vat,%} ind. (in phil.) like the
(continuous succession of) seed and shoot. {%—Vījā-%}
{%ḍhya (˚ja-āḍh˚), as, ā, am,%} abounding in seed; ({%as%}),
m. {%= vīja-pūra%}. {%—Vījādhyakṣa (˚ja-adh˚), as,%}
m. ‘presiding over seed,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Vījāpahā-%}
{%riṇī (˚ja-ap˚),%} f. {%= vīja-harā%}. {%—Vījābhidhāna%}
{%(˚ja-abh˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Vījāmla%}
{%(˚ja-am˚), am,%} n. {%= vṛkṣāmla%}. {%—Vījārṇava-%}
{%tantra (˚ja-ar˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work.
{%—Vījāśva (˚ja-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘seed-horse,’ an entire
horse, stallion. {%—Vījotkṛṣṭa (˚ja-ut˚), am,%} n.
good seed. {%—Vījodaka (˚ja-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘seed-
water, grain-like water,’ hail. {%—Vījopti (˚ja-up˚),%}
{%is,%} f. sowing seed. {%—Vījopti-cakra, am,%} n. a kind
of astrological diagram shaped like a serpent for
indicating good or bad luck following on the sowing
of seed. {%—Vījopti-vidhi, is,%} m. the manner of sow-
ing seed.
<LEND>

<L>44606<pc>0954-b<k1>vIjaka<k2>vIjaka
{%Vījaka, am,%}¦ n. seed; {%= vīja%} above (at the end of
comps.); ({%as%}), m. common citron, Citrus Medica
({%= mātulaṅga%}); a citron or lemon; Terminalia
Tomentosa ({%= pīta-śāla%}); the position of the arm
of a child at birth; N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>44607<pc>0954-b<k1>vIjala<k2>vIjala
{%Vījala, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with seed or grain,
seedy.
<LEND>

<L>44608<pc>0954-b<k1>vIjA<k2>vIjA
{%Vījā,%}¦ ind. by or with seed, sowing with seed.
{%—Vījā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to sow with seed,
sow; to harrow over after sowing. {%—Vījā-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} sown with seed, sown; harrowed or ploughed
over after sowing.
<LEND>

<L>44609<pc>0954-b<k1>vIjika<k2>vIjika
{%Vījika, as, ā, am,%}¦ seedy, abounding in seeds; see
Gaṇa Kumud-ādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80.
<LEND>

<L>44610<pc>0954-b<k1>vIjita<k2>vIjita<h>2
2. {%vījita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sown with seed, sown with,
having for seed.
<LEND>

<L>44611<pc>0954-b<k1>vIjin<k2>vIjin
{%Vījin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having or possessing seed, bearing
seed, seedy; being of the race or blood of (at the
end of a comp., cf. {%rāja-v˚%}); ({%ī%}), m. a real proge-
nitor (as opposed to {%kṣetrin,%} the nominal father or
merely the husband of a woman, Manu IX. 51 sq.);
a procreator, father (in general); the sun.
<LEND>

<L>44612<pc>0954-b<k1>vIjya<k2>vIjya
{%Vījya, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprung or produced from seed;
sprung from or belonging to any family; of a good
family (at the end of a comp.).
<LEND>

<L>44613<pc>0954-b<k1>vIwA<k2>vIwA
{#vIwA#}¦ {%vīṭā,%} f. a small piece of wood shaped
like a barley-corn and about a span long, (it was
struck with a stick or bat in a kind of game, like
hockey, played by boys; according to others the {%vīṭā%}
was a metal ball of some kind; see Mahā-bh. Ādi-p.
5050, Schol.)
<LEND>

<L>44614<pc>0954-b<k1>vIwi<k2>vIwi
{#vIwi#}¦ {%vīṭi, is,%} or {%vīṭikā%} or {%vīṭī,%} f. (said to
be fr. rt. {%iṭ%} with {%vi%}), the betel plant, Piper Betel ({%=%}
{%tāmbūla-vallikā%}); a preparation of the Areca nut
with spices and chunam enveloped in a leaf of the
betel plant, betel, Pān; a tie, fastening; [cf. {%vetra,%}
{%vetasa;%} cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">ἴ-τυ-ς, ἰ-τέα;</lang> Lat. <nsi>vi-tex, vitta,</nsi>
<nsi>vi-men, vi-ti-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wi-d, wi-da;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>widde.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>44615<pc>0954-b<k1>vIqu<k2>vIqu
{#vIqu#}¦ {%vīḍu, us, us, u,%} Ved. strong, firm, &c.,
see {%vīḷu%}. {%—Vīḍu-jambha,%} &c., see {%vīḷu-jambha.%}
{%—Vīḍv-aṅga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having strong limbs,
firm in body.
<LEND>

<L>44616<pc>0954-b<k1>vIqaya<k2>vIqaya
{%Vīḍaya = vīḷaya,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44617<pc>0954-b<k1>vIRA<k2>vIRA
{#vIRA#}¦ {%vīṇā,%} f. (in Uṇādi-s. III. 15. said to
be fr. rt. 1. {%vī%}), the Vīṇā or Indian lute, (an instru-
[Page0954-c+ 73]
ment of the guitar kind, supposed to have been
invented by Nārada, q. v., usually having seven wires
or strings raised upon nineteen frets or supports fixed
on a long rounded board, towards the ends of which
are two large gourds; its compass is said to be two
octaves, but it has many varieties according to the
number of strings, &c.); lightning. {%—Vīṇā-daṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘lute-stick,’ the neck or long rounded board
of a lute. {%—Vīṇānubandha (˚ṇā-an˚), as,%} m. the
tie of a lute or lower part of one of its ends where the
wires are fixed (sometimes called ‘the tail-piece’).
{%—Vīṇā-bhid, t,%} f. a kind of lute, ({%vīṇā-bhidāṃ%}
{%viveka,%} description of the different kinds of lutes.)
{%—Vīṇā-vāda%} or {%vīṇā-vādaka, as,%} m. a player on
the Vīṇā, a lutanist. {%—Vīṇāsya (˚ṇā-ās˚), as,%} m.
‘lute-faced,’ epithet of Nārada (the son of Brahmā
and inventor of the Vīṇā described above).
<LEND>

<L>44618<pc>0954-c<k1>vIRin<k2>vIRin
{%Vīṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ furnished with lutes, a player on
a lute.
<LEND>

<L>44619<pc>0954-c<k1>vIta<k2>vIta
{#vIta#}¦ {%vīta, vīti,%} &c. See p. 953, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>44620<pc>0954-c<k1>vItaMsa<k2>vItaMsa
{#vItaMsa#}¦ {%vī-taṃsa, as,%} m. (for {%vi-taṃsa,%} q. v.),
a cage, a chain or net for confining birds or beasts;
an enclosure for taming birds or animals, an aviary,
menagerie; a place for keeping or preserving game,
preserve.
<LEND>

<L>44621<pc>0954-c<k1>vItana<k2>vItana
{#vItana#}¦ {%vītana, au,%} m. du. (possibly con-
nected with {%vi-tan%}), the sides or cartilages of the
larynx or throat ({%= kṛka-pārśva-dvaya%}).
<LEND>

<L>44622<pc>0954-c<k1>vITi<k2>vITi
{#vITi#}¦ {%vīthi, is,%} or {%vīthī,%} f. (probably fr. rt.
1. {%vī%} or 3. {%vī%}), a row, line; a road; a terrace in front
of a house; a stall, shop; a sort of drama (or the
dramatic narration of an amatory intrigue, said to be
in one act and to be performed by one or two play-
ers); ({%is%}), f. a particular division of the planetary
sphere (comprising three asterisms). {%—Vīthy-aṅga,%}
{%am,%} n. a division or constituent part of the dramatic
entertainment called Vīthi, (it is described as a kind
of dialogue consisting in quibble, equivoque, jest,
abuse, and the like.)
<LEND>

<L>44623<pc>0954-c<k1>vITikA<k2>vITikA
{%Vīthikā,%}¦ f. {%= vīthi,%} a road, &c.; a hall.
<LEND>

<L>44624<pc>0954-c<k1>vIDra<k2>vIDra
{#vIDra#}¦ {%vīdhra, as, ā, am%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 26. fr. rt. {%indh%} with {%vi%}), clear, clean, pure; ({%am%}),
n. the sky, atmosphere; wind; fire; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">αἰθρία.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>44625<pc>0954-c<k1>vIn<k2>vIn
{#vIn#}¦ {%vīn (vi-in),%} cl. 8. P. {%vīnoti,%} &c., Ved.
to cause to go out, drive away, remove, scatter, dis-
perse, (Sāy. {%= vividhaṃ gamayati%}); to send forth
in various ways, (Sāy. {%= vividham prerayati%}); to
bestow.
<LEND>

<L>44626<pc>0954-c<k1>vInA<k2>vInA
{#vInA#}¦ {%vīnā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>44627<pc>0954-c<k1>vInAha<k2>vInAha
{#vInAha#}¦ {%vīnāha, as,%} m. {%= vi-nāha,%} the top
or cover of a well.
<LEND>

<L>44628<pc>0954-c<k1>vInv<k2>vInv
{#vInv#}¦ {%vīnv (vi-inv),%} cl. 1. P. {%vīnvati,%} &c.,
{%= vīn%} above.
<LEND>

<L>44629<pc>0954-c<k1>vIpA<k2>vIpA
{#vIpA#}¦ {%vīpā,%} f. lightning.
<LEND>

<L>44630<pc>0954-c<k1>vIpsA<k2>vIpsA
{#vIpsA#}¦ {%vīpsā,%} f. (fr. the Desid. of {%vy-āp,%}
q. v.), ‘the desire of pervading (with any property or
quality simultaneously or continuously),’ several or
successive order or series, the arrangement of things
or properties in regular succession or each by each,
repetition, the repetition of words to imply continu-
ous or successive action (e. g. {%vṛkṣaṃ vṛkṣaṃ%}
{%siñcati,%} he waters tree after tree; {%prabhur bhūtam%}
{%bhūtam abhi sarva-prāṇiṣv asti,%} the supreme
being is in all living beings creature after creature;
cf. Pāṇ. VIII. 1, 4).
<LEND>

<L>44631<pc>0954-c<k1>vIbukoSa<k2>vIbukoSa
{#vIbukoSa#}¦ {%vībukośa, as,%} m. (?), a cowri.
<LEND>

<L>44632<pc>0954-c<k1>vIB<k2>vIB
{#vIB#}¦ {%vībh%} (= rt. {%cībh%}), cl. 1. A. {%vībhate,%}
{%vībhitum,%} to boast.
<LEND>

<L>44633<pc>0954-c<k1>vIr<k2>vIr<h>1
{#vIr#} 1¦. {%vīr (vi-īr),%} Caus. {%vīrayati%} (Impf.
{%-airayat,%} Aor. Ved. {%-airat%}), {%-yitum,%} Ved. to scatter or
drive in various directions; to split into pieces, break,
divide asunder, break open, (Sāy. {%vy-airat = udghā-%}
{%ṭita-vat,%} Ṛg-veda II. 15, 8.)
<LEND>
[Page0955-a+ 81]

<L>44634<pc>0955-a<k1>vIr<k2>vIr<h>2
{#vIr#} 2¦. {%vīr,%} cl. 10. P. (perhaps to be re-
garded as a Nom. fr. {%vīra%} below), {%vīra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to be powerful or valiant; to make
heroic effort, display heroism, act like a hero.
<LEND>

<L>44635<pc>0955-a<k1>vIra<k2>vIra
{%Vīra, as, ā, am%}¦ (according to Uṇādi-s. II. 13. fr.
{%vī%} substituted for rt. {%aj;%} according to some perhaps
for an original {%vāra,%} fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), heroic, mighty,
powerful, strong, robust, excellent, eminent; ({%as%}),
m. a hero, brave man, warrior, champion, eminent
man; the last Jina or Jaina pontiff of the present
era; an actor; heroism (as one of the eight Rasas
which give to poetic and dramatic composition its
flavour or taste; the Rasa of heroism is said to be
displayed by munificence, clemency, and valour; the
Vīra-carita, q. v., exhibits an example of this Rasa);
the flower Nerium Odorum; fire; sacrificial fire [cf.
{%vīra-han%}]; ({%ā%}), f. the wife of a hero; a wife, mother,
matron; a sort of perfume (commonly called Murā);
a medicinal root ({%= kṣīra-kākolī%}); the plant Fla-
courtia Cataphracta; the drug Elabāluka; the plantain
tree; a sort of Asclepias, Asclepias Rosea; opposite-
leaved fig-tree; Convolvulus Paniculatus (the white
and dark kinds); the tree Gmelina Arborea; an aloe;
the plant called Atis; spirituous liquor or a particular
kind of it; N. of a river; ({%am%}), n. a reed, Arundo
Tibialis; the root of ginger (?); pepper; rice-gruel;
the root of Costus Speciosus; the root of Andropogon
Muricatus; [cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">ἥρω-ς, Ἥρα, Ἡρακλῆς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">εἰρήν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>vir;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vair;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wer;</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>vyra-s.</nsi>] {%—Vīra-karma, am,%} n., Ved. hero-
forming (seed). {%—Vīra-kīṭa, as,%} m. ‘worm of a
hero,’ a pitiful warrior. {%—Vīra-keśarin, ī,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Vīraṅ-karā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Vīra-%}
{%carita%} or {%vīra-caritra, am,%} n. ‘exploits of the hero,’
N. of a celebrated drama by Bhava-bhūti ({%= mahā-%}
{%vīra-carita,%} q. v.). {%—Vīra-jayantikā,%} f. a kind of
dance performed by soldiers after a victory or on
going to battle, a war-dance; war, battle. {%—Vīra-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Vīra-tara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} bolder; ({%as%}), m. a great hero; an arrow;
a corpse (?); ({%am%}), n. {%= vīraṇa,%} Andropogon Muri-
catus. {%—Vīratarāsana (˚ra-ās˚), am,%} n. a particular
posture. {%—Vīra-taru, us,%} m. the tree Pentaptera
Arjuna; the shrub Barleria Longifolia. {%—Vīra-tā,%} f.
or {%vīra-tva, am,%} n. heroism. {%—Vīra-dhanvan, ā,%}
m. ‘having a powerful bow,’ epithet of Kāma-deva
(god of love). {%—Vīran-dhara, as,%} m. a peacock;
fighting with wild beasts; a leather cuirass or jacket;
N. of a river. {%—Vīra-paṭṭa, as,%} m. a kind of mili-
tary dress or war accoutrement. {%—Vīra-pattrā,%} f. a
kind of plant ({%= vi-jayā%}); N. of a river (Ved.). {%—Vī-%}
{%ra-patnī,%} f. the wife of a hero. {%—Vīra-parṇa, am,%}
n. a particular drug ({%= sura-parṇa%}). {%—Vīra-pāṇa%} or
{%vīra-pāna, am,%} n. the drink of warriors, (taken,
before or during a battle, for refreshment or to raise
the courage.) {%—Vīra-pāṇḍya, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Vīra-puṣpī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= sindūra-puṣ-%}
{%pī)%}. {%—Vīra-peśas, ās,%} m., Ved. a vigorous frame,
(according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 11, 3. the masc.
is used for the neut.) {%—Vīra-prajāyinī,%} f. the mo-
ther of a hero. {%—Vīra-prajāvatī,%} f. the mother of
a hero. {%—Vīra-prasavā,%} f. a woman who brings
forth heroes. {%—Vīra-bāhu, us,%} m. ‘strong-armed,’
N. of Viṣṇu; of a king. {%—Vīra-bhadra, as,%} m.
a distinguished hero; an Ava-tāra or son of Śiva, (in
the Vāyu-Purāṇa he is said to have been created from
Śiva's mouth in order to spoil the sacrifice of Dakṣa,
and is described as having a thousand heads, a thou-
sand eyes, a thousand feet, and wielding a thousand
clubs; his appearance is fierce and terrific, he is clothed
in a tiger's skin dripping with blood, and he bears a
blazing bow and battle-axe; in another Purāṇa he
is described as produced from a drop of Śiva's sweat;
this form of Śiva is said to be more especially wor-
shipped in the Marāṭha country); N. of one of the
Rudras; of an author; a horse fit for the Aśva-
medha sacrifice; a fragrant grass {%(= vīraṇa)%}. {%—Vīra-%}
{%bhadraka, am,%} n. the fragrant grass Andropogon
Muricatus. {%—Vīra-bhānu, us,%} m., N. of a king; of
a work. {%—Vīra-bhāryā,%} f. the wife of a hero.
{%—Vīra-bhukti,%} N. of a place, (probably for {%tīra- %}
[Page0955-b+ 81]
{%bhukti.%}) {%—Vīra-bhūpati, is,%} m., N. of the patron
of Cauṇḍapācārya. {%—Vīra-mātṛ, tā,%} f. the mother
of a hero. {%—Vīra-mukunda-deva, as,%} m., N. of a
king (the patron of Mārkaṇḍeya-kavīndra). {%—Vīra-%}
{%mudrikā,%} f. an ornament or ring worn on the middle
toe. {%—Vīra-rajas, as,%} n. red lead, minium {%(= sin-%}
{%dūra)%}. {%—Vīra-rasa, as,%} m. the Rasa of heroism,
(see {%rasa.%}) {%—Vīra-reṇu, us,%} m., N. of Bhīma-sena.
{%—Vīra-loka, as,%} m. ‘hero-world,’ region of warriors or
champions. {%—Vīra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding in heroes,
having a champion or hero; accompanied with heroes
or progeny; ({%atī%}), f. a woman whose husband is liv-
ing; a particular fragrant plant ({%= māṃsa-rohiṇī%});
N. of a river. {%—Vīra-vatsā,%} f. the mother of a hero.
{%—Vīra-vara, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vīra-vāmana,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Vīra-viplāvaka, as,%} m.
‘disturber of the sacrificial fire,’ a Brāhman who
performs oblations with money procured from the
lowest or Śūdra caste. {%—Vīra-viruda,%} N. of a kind
of artificial verse; [cf. {%śūra-śloka.%}] {%—Vīra-vṛkṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. the marking-nut plant, Semecarpus Anacardium;
the tree Pentaptera Arjuna; a sort of grain, Andro-
pogon or Holcus Sorghum. {%—Vīra-śayyā,%} f. a parti-
cular posture; [cf. {%vīra-sthāna.%}] {%—Vīra-śuṣma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having heroic or mighty strength,
very powerful or efficacious. {%—Vīra-śreṣṭha, as,%} m.
a matchless hero. {%—Vīra-samanvita, as, ā, am,%}
attended or accompanied by heroes. {%—Vīra-siṃha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king of Gūrjara; of the author of
the Durgā-bhakti-taraṅgiṇī. {%—Vīra-siṃha-deva, as,%}
m., N. of the patron of Mitra-miśra. {%—Vīra-sū, ūs,%}
f. ‘hero-bearing,’ the mother of a hero; the mother
of a male child. {%—Vīra-sena, as,%} m. ‘having an
army of heroes,’ N. of the father of Nala; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of a particular plant {%(= āruka)%}. {%—Vīrasena-ja%} or
{%vīrasena-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of Vīra-sena,’ epithet of
Nala (a celebrated prince, hero of several well-known
poems and episodes, as the Nalopākhyāna, Naiṣadha,
Nalodaya, &c.). {%—Vīra-sainya, am,%} n. garlic. {%—Vīra-%}
{%soma, as,%} m., N. of the author of the Hasti-vaidyaka.
{%—Vīra-skandha, as,%} m. ‘having powerful shoul-
ders,’ a buffalo. {%—Vīra-sthāna, am,%} n. a particular
posture (practised by ascetics; cf. {%vīrāsana%}). {%—Vīra-%}
{%haṇa, as, ī, am,%} hero-killing. {%—Vīra-hatyā,%} f. the
killing of a man, murder of a son, (Manu XI. 41.)
{%—Vīra-han, ā,%} m. ‘destroyer of the sacrificial fire,’
a Brāhman who has suffered the sacred domestic fire
to become extinct (either from carelessness, impiety,
or absence); N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Vīrāmla (˚ra-am˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of dock or sorrel {%(= amla-vetasa).%}
{%—Vīrāruka (˚ra-ār˚), am,%} n. a medicinal plant
{%(= āruka)%}. {%—Vīrāśaṃsana (˚ra-āś˚), am,%} n. ‘the
place wished for by heroes,’ the post of danger
in a battle; a forlorn hope; keeping watch. {%—Vīrā-%}
{%sana (˚ra-ās˚), am,%} n. ‘hero-sitting, hero-posture,’
kneeling on one knee; sleeping out in the open
air, the station of a guard or sentinel; a bivouac;
a particular posture in sitting practised by ascetics,
(sitting on the thighs, one leg being in the other, =
{%paryaṅka,%} q. v., see 1. {%āsana%}); a field of battle.
{%—Vīreśa (˚ra-īśa), as,%} m. ‘chief of heroes,’ N. of
Śiva or Vīra-bhadra. {%—Vīreśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%} m.
‘chief of heroes,’ epithet of Śiva or Vīra-bhadra, q. v.;
any great hero. {%—Vīreśvara-liṅga, am,%} n., N. of
a sacred Liṅga. {%—Vīrojjha (˚ra-uj˚), as,%} m. ‘sacri-
ficial-fire abandoning,’ a Brāhman who omits offering
burnt offerings or neglects his sacrificial fire. {%—Vīro-%}
{%pajīvika (˚ra-up˚), as,%} m. ‘subsisting by the sacri-
ficial fire,’ a Brāhman who claims alms or presents
for having preserved his sacrificial fire.
<LEND>

<L>44636<pc>0955-b<k1>vIraka<k2>vIraka
{%Vīraka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= vīra,%} a hero; the plant
{%kara-vīra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44637<pc>0955-b<k1>vIraRa<k2>vIraRa
{%Vīraṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a sage (father of Vīraṇī);
of the father of Asiknī; of a teacher of the Yajur-
veda; ({%ī%}), f. a side-glance, leer; a deep place; N.
of a daughter of Vīraṇa and mother of Cākṣuṣa;
({%am%}), n. a fragrant grass, Andropogon Muricatus;
[cf. {%viraṇa, vairiṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44638<pc>0955-b<k1>vIraRin<k2>vIraRin
{%Vīraṇin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>44639<pc>0955-b<k1>vIrayu<k2>vIrayu
{%Vīrayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. fond of heroes, desiring
heroes; (Sāy.) desiring to kill heroes.
<LEND>
[Page0955-c+ 74]

<L>44640<pc>0955-c<k1>vIrAya<k2>vIrAya
{%Vīrāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vīrāyate,%} &c., to act like a
hero, show heroism.
<LEND>

<L>44641<pc>0955-c<k1>vIrikA<k2>vIrikA
{%Vīrikā,%}¦ f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>44642<pc>0955-c<k1>vIriRI<k2>vIriRI
{%Vīriṇī,%}¦ f. the mother of a hero (Ved.); N. of a
river; of a wife of Dakṣa (daughter of Vīraṇa and
mother of a thousand sons, {%= asiknī%}).
<LEND>

<L>44643<pc>0955-c<k1>vIrya<k2>vIrya
{%Vīrya, am,%}¦ n. vigour, strength, power; heroism,
prowess, valour, fortitude, courage, firmness; virile
energy, virility; dignity, consequence; splendor, lustre;
semen virile; the seed of plants, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. vigour,
energy, virility. {%—Vīrya-ja, as,%} m. a son. {%—Vīrya-%}
{%dhara, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race. {%—Vīrya-pāra-%}
{%mitā,%} f. one of the six perfections (with Buddhists).
{%—Vīrya-prapāta, as,%} m. discharge of semen virile.
{%—Vīrya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing vigour, vigor-
ous, strong, stout, robust; efficacious, overcoming,
victorious. {%—Vīrya-virahita, as, ā, am,%} devoid of
prowess or vigour, &c. {%—Vīrya-viśiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
possessed of courage, vigour, &c. {%—Vīrya-vṛddhi-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} causing an increase of virile energy;
({%am%}), n. an aphrodisiac. {%—Vīrya-śālin, ī, inī, i,%}
possessing vigour or heroism, strong, heroic. {%—Vīrya-%}
{%śulka, as, ā, am,%} having prowess or heroism as
its price, to be purchased by valour. {%—Vīrya-hāni,%}
{%is,%} f. loss of vigour or virile energy; impotence.
{%—Vīrya-hīna, as, ā, am,%} deprived of strength;
cowardly; seedless. {%—Vīryā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
{%= vīrya-vat%}. {%—Vīryāvadāna (˚ya-av˚), am,%} n.
effecting anything by prowess; ({%āni%}), n. pl. valour
and achievements. {%—Vīryāvadhūta (˚ya-av˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} overcome or surpassed in prowess.
<LEND>

<L>44644<pc>0955-c<k1>vIrAnaka<k2>vIrAnaka
{#vIrAnaka#}¦ {%vīrānaka, am,%} n. (?), N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>44645<pc>0955-c<k1>vIruD<k2>vIruD
{#vIruD#}¦ {%vīrudh, t,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%rudh%} = rt. 1.
{%ruh%} with {%vi;%} cf. {%vi-sruh%}), a spreading creeper; a
branch, shoot; a plant which grows again after being
cut; a shrub, plant in general.
<LEND>

<L>44646<pc>0955-c<k1>vIruDA<k2>vIruDA
{%Vīrudhā,%}¦ f. {%= vīrudh%} above.
<LEND>

<L>44647<pc>0955-c<k1>vILu<k2>vILu
{#vILu#}¦ {%vīḷu%} or {%vīḍu, us, us, u,%} Ved. strong,
firm, (sometimes written {%vīlu%}); ({%u%}), n. anything
strong, a fortified place, stronghold; [cf. according to
some Gr. <lang n="greek">Ἴλιος</lang>] {%—Vīḷu-jambha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having strong jaws or teeth, (Sāy. {%= dṛḍha-danta.%})
{%—Vīḷu-dveṣas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. hating the strong
or violent (said of Brahmaṇas-pati). {%—Vīḷu-patman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} Ved. strong-going, moving with rapid
flight. {%—Vīḷu-pavi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having strong
tires (said of the chariot of the Maruts). {%—Vīḷu-%}
{%pāṇi, is, is, i,%} Ved. strong-handed, strong-hoofed.
{%—Vīḷu-harṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. having strong or
violent joy, exulting, fiercely passionate.
<LEND>

<L>44648<pc>0955-c<k1>vILaya<k2>vILaya
{%Vīḷaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vīḷayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to be
strong.
<LEND>

<L>44649<pc>0955-c<k1>vILita<k2>vILita
{%Vīḷita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. made strong, strengthened,
(Sāy. {%= dṛḍhī-kṛta,%} Ṛg-veda III. 53, 19.)
<LEND>

<L>44650<pc>0955-c<k1>vIvaDa<k2>vIvaDa
{#vIvaDa#}¦ {%vī-vadha, as,%} m. {%= vi-vadha,%} a yoke
or pole for carrying burdens; a burden; storing or
heaping corn; a road.
<LEND>

<L>44651<pc>0955-c<k1>vIvaDika<k2>vIvaDika
{%Vīvadhika, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. a man or woman who car-
ries a load by means of a yoke; a general dealer.
<LEND>

<L>44652<pc>0955-c<k1>vIviDa<k2>vIviDa
{#vIviDa#}¦ {%vīvidha%} for {%vi-vidha,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44653<pc>0955-c<k1>vIvfta<k2>vIvfta
{#vIvfta#}¦ {%vīvṛta, as, ā, am, = vi-vṛta,%} revealed,
published.
<LEND>

<L>44654<pc>0955-c<k1>vIz<k2>vIz<h>1
{#vIz#} 1¦. {%vīṣ (vi-īṣ),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%vīṣati,%}
{%-te, vīṣitum,%} Ved. to go in various directions, spread,
be extended.
<LEND>

<L>44655<pc>0955-c<k1>vIz<k2>vIz<h>2
{#vIz#} 2¦. {%vīṣ%} ({%vi-iṣ,%} see rt. 3. {%iṣ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%vīcchati,%} &c., Ved. to seek for.
<LEND>

<L>44656<pc>0955-c<k1>vIhAra<k2>vIhAra
{#vIhAra#}¦ {%vīhāra, as,%} m. (for {%vi-hāra,%} q. v.), a
temple, sanctuary, (especially) a Jaina or Buddhist
convent or temple.
<LEND>

<L>44657<pc>0955-c<k1>vuka<k2>vuka
{#vuka#}¦ {%vuka, as,%} m. a species of plant, (a va-
rious reading for {%vaka,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>44658<pc>0955-c<k1>vuNg<k2>vuNg
{#vuNg#}¦ {%vuṅg%} (= rt. {%buṅg%}), cl. 1. P. {%vuṅgati,%}
&c., to leave, abandon.
<LEND>
[Page0956-a+ 76]

<L>44659<pc>0956-a<k1>vuRw<k2>vuRw
{#vuRw#}¦ {%vuṇṭ%} (= rt. {%viṇṭ%}), cl. 10. P. {%vuṇṭa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to hurt, kill; to waste away,
decay, perish.
<LEND>

<L>44660<pc>0956-a<k1>vunD<k2>vunD
{#vunD#}¦ {%vundh, vus,%} &c. See rts. {%bundh,%}
{%bus,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>44661<pc>0956-a<k1>vUrRa<k2>vUrRa
{#vUrRa#}¦ {%vūrṇa.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>44662<pc>0956-a<k1>vUvaSarman<k2>vUvaSarman
{#vUvaSarman#}¦ {%vūva-śarman, ā,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>44663<pc>0956-a<k1>vf<k2>vf
{#vf#}¦ {%vṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%varati, varate,%} &c.; cl.
5. P. A. {%vṛṇoti, vṛṇute,%} &c.; or {%vṝ,%} cl. 9.
P. A. {%vṛṇāti, vṛṇīte,%} &c., Perf. {%vavāra%} (2nd sing.
{%vavaritha,%} Ved. {%vavartha,%} Ist du. {%vavṛva%} or ac-
cording to some {%vavariva,%} 3rd du. {%vavratus,%} 3rd
pl. {%vavrus%} or {%vavarus%}), {%vavre%} or {%vavare%} (2nd sing.
{%vavṛṣe%} or {%vavuriṣe,%} 1st pl. {%vavṛmahe%}), 2nd Fut.
{%variṣyati, -te,%} or {%varīṣyati, -te,%} Aor. {%avārīt%} (1st
sing. {%avāriṣam%}), {%avariṣṭa%} or {%avarīṣṭa%} or
{%avṛta%} or {%avūrṣṭa,%} (Ved. forms {%avar, āvar, var,%}
{%avran, vran, [apa] vam = vṛṇomi%} in Ṛg-veda X.
28, 7, {%avṛṇi, avri, avṛṣata, varṣathas, vurīta,%}
{%vṛddhi, vartam%}), {%varitum, varītum%} (ep. Inf. also
{%vartum%}), to screen, cover, cover over, conceal, hide,
encompass, surround, envelop; to restrain, keep
back, ward off; to prevent, impede, obstruct, hinder,
check, stop; resist, confine; to choose for one's self
(A.), choose, select, prefer, choose anything (acc.) in
preference to anything else (abl.); to love, adore
(generally A.); to woo, solicit, beg, ask for, desire
(generally A.); to solicit anything (acc.) from any
one (acc.); cl. 10. P. A. or Caus. {%varayati, -yate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to choose, select, ask or choose in marriage;
to make a request, ask for, beg, solicit (sometimes
with a double acc.): Pass. {%vriyate,%} Aor. {%avāri,%} to
be screened or covered; to be restrained or impeded,
be blocked up: Caus. {%vārayati, -yate, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%avīvarat, avīvarata%} (Ved. {%avāvarīt%}), to cover,
conceal, &c.; to prevent, impede, &c.; to keep off,
ward off; to avert from (with abl.); to restrain, hinder,
suppress, forbid, prohibit, withhold: Desid. {%vivari-%}
{%ṣati, -te,%} or {%vivarīṣati, -te,%} or {%vuvūrṣati, -te:%}
Intens. {%vevrīyate, vovūryate, varvarti;%} [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἐρύω, ἀρνέομαι, ὄρομαι, ὤρα, εὑρίσκω; ἀρά, ἀρείνω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἄριστος, ἦρα, βούλομαι, βουλή, βελτίων, βέλτιστος;</lang>
perhaps Lat. <nsi>aperio, operio,</nsi> probably <nsi>velum,</nsi>
<nsi>velare; verus, valeo, valor; velle:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>wara, wâr,</nsi> ‘true;’ <nsi>wari, werna, warnôn, weljan,</nsi>
‘to choose:’ Goth. <nsi>varjan, valjan:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>ware,</nsi>
‘heed;’ <nsi>wreon,</nsi> ‘to cover;’ <nsi>warian, werian,</nsi> ‘to ward
off;’ <nsi>wearne, warnian, wearnian, willan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>44664<pc>0956-a<k1>vara<k2>vara
{%Vara, varaṇa,%}¦ &c. See pp. 887, 888.
<LEND>

<L>44665<pc>0956-a<k1>varya<k2>varya
{%Varya.%}¦ See p. 893, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>44666<pc>0956-a<k1>vUrRa<k2>vUrRa
{%Vūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ chosen, selected.
<LEND>

<L>44667<pc>0956-a<k1>vfRAna<k2>vfRAna
{%Vṛṇāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ choosing, preferring; suppli-
cating, adoring.
<LEND>

<L>44668<pc>0956-a<k1>vfRvat<k2>vfRvat
{%Vṛṇvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ choosing, electing, preferring
(especially as a husband or wife).
<LEND>

<L>44669<pc>0956-a<k1>vfRvAna<k2>vfRvAna
{%Vṛṇvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ choosing, selecting, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44670<pc>0956-a<k1>vfta<k2>vfta
{%Vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, covered, screened,
defended; chosen, selected; hired; preferred; agreed,
assented to; served; affected by; vitiated, spoiled;
({%am%}), n., Ved. a treasure, wealth (according to
Naigh. II. 10). {%—Vṛta-pattrā,%} f. a kind of plant
({%= putra-dātrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>44671<pc>0956-a<k1>vfti<k2>vfti
{%Vṛti, is,%}¦ f. surrounding, encompassing; hiding,
secreting; an enclosure, hedge, fence, an enclosed
piece of ground or place enclosed for particular culti-
vation (especially that of the Piper Betel, which in
many parts of India is surrounded and screened by
mats); selecting, choosing, preferring, appointing;
a selection, choice, soliciting, asking, requesting; a
request. {%—Vṛtiṅ-kara, as, ī, am,%} making an en-
closure, surrounding, encompassing; ({%as%}), m. the
plant Flacourtia Sapida.
<LEND>

<L>44672<pc>0956-a<k1>vftya<k2>vftya<h>1
1. {%vṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see p. 958, col. 1),
to be surrounded or encompassed, &c.; to be chosen,
eligible, preferable, excellent.
<LEND>

<L>44673<pc>0956-a<k1>vftvA<k2>vftvA
{%Vṛtvā,%}¦ ind., Ved. having enveloped, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0956-b+ 78]

<L>44674<pc>0956-b<k1>vfMh<k2>vfMh
{#vfMh#}¦ {%vṛṃh%} (= rts. 2. {%vṛh, bṛṃh,%} 2. {%bṛh%}),
cl. 1. P. {%vṛṃhati, vṛṃhitum,%} to grow, in-
crease; to roar, bellow (frequently applied to the
noise made by elephants); cl. 1. and 10. P. {%vṛṃ-%}
{%hati, vṛṃhayati,%} to speak; to shine: Caus. {%vṛṃ-%}
{%hayati, -yitum,%} to cause to increase, to augment,
strengthen, fatten; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">βράχω, βράζω, βράγχος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">βρόγχος, βρόχθος, (probably also) βράσσω, βρυχάομαι;</lang>
<lang n="greek">ῥόχθος, ὀρεχθέω, ῥαχία, ῥέγχω, ῥόγχος.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>44675<pc>0956-b<k1>vfMhaRa<k2>vfMhaRa
{%Vṛṃhaṇa, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} causing to increase,
nourishing, fostering, fattening, nutritious; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of sweetmeat (made of sugar, milk, spices, &c.
fried in ghee, and powdered with coarse sugar, &c.);
({%am%}), n. the act of fattening, nourishing. {%—Vṛṃhaṇa-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the quality of strengthening.
<LEND>

<L>44676<pc>0956-b<k1>vfMhaRIya<k2>vfMhaRIya
{%Vṛṃhaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be increased; to be
nourished or fatted or strengthened.
<LEND>

<L>44677<pc>0956-b<k1>vfMhat<k2>vfMhat
{%Vṛṃhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ growing, increasing; roar-
ing, bellowing, making a cry.
<LEND>

<L>44678<pc>0956-b<k1>vfMhayitavya<k2>vfMhayitavya
{%Vṛṃhayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be increased, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44679<pc>0956-b<k1>vfMhita<k2>vfMhita
{%Vṛṃhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown, increased; cherished,
nourished; ({%am%}), n. the roar or noise made by ele-
phants; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending
on Skanda (also written {%vṛṃhilā%}).
<LEND>

<L>44680<pc>0956-b<k1>vfk<k2>vfk
{#vfk#}¦ {%vṛk,%} cl. 1. A. {%varkate, vavarke, var-%}
{%kitum,%} to take, accept, seize: Caus. {%var-%}
{%kayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avavarkat%} or {%avīvṛkat:%}
Desid. {%vivarkiṣate:%} Intens. {%varīvṛkyate, var-%}
{%varkti, variv˚, varīv˚, varvṛkīti, variv˚, varīv˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>44681<pc>0956-b<k1>vfka<k2>vfka
{%Vṛka, as, ā, am%}¦ (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 41.
fr. rt. {%vṛ;%} perhaps connected with rt. {%vraśc%}), seiz-
ing, rapacious, malignant, impious (Ved.); ({%as%}), m.
a wolf; a jackal; a hyena; a crow; a plough (as
tearing up the earth, Ved.; Sāy. {%= lāṅgala%}); {%= va-%}
{%jra%} (according to Naigh. II. 20); {%= stena%} (Naigh.
III. 24); an epithet of the moon (Ved.); the tree
Sesbana Grandiflora ({%= vaka-puṣpa%}); turpen-
tine; compounded perfume; N. of an Asura; of a
son of Pṛthu; of a son of Vijaya; of a son of
Kṛṣṇa; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people (see {%vār-%}
{%keṇya,%} cf. Pāṇ. V. 3, 115); ({%ā%}), f. the plant Cis-
sampelos Hexandra, {%= amba-ṣṭhā; (ī),%} f. a she-
wolf, (in Ṛg-veda I. 117, 18. the nom. case is
{%vṛkīs%}); a kind of plant, {%= pāṭhā;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">λύκό-ς;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>lupu-s;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vulf-s;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wulf;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>vluk-u;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>vilka-s.</nsi>] {%—Vṛka-karman, ā,%}
m., N. of a leader of the Daityas. {%—Vṛka-tāti, is,%}
f., Ved. wolfishness, rapacity (see Pāṇ. V. 4, 41);
wolf-like, rapacious; [cf. {%jyeṣṭha-tāti.%}] {%—Vṛka-%}
{%tejas, ās,%} m., N. of a son of Dhruva. {%—Vṛka-%}
{%daṃśa, as,%} m. ‘wolf-biting,’ a dog. {%—Vṛka-devā,%}
f., N. of a daughter of Devaka. {%—Vṛka-dhūpa,%}
{%as,%} m. compounded perfume; turpentine. {%—Vṛka-%}
{%dhūrta, as,%} m. ‘wolf-rogue,’ a jackal. {%—Vṛka-%}
{%prekṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having the eyes of a wolf, looking
at (anything) like a wolf. {%—Vṛkākṣī (˚ka-ak˚),%}
f. a kind of plant {%(= tri-vṛt)%}. {%—Vṛkārāti (˚ka-ar˚),%}
{%is,%} m. or {%vṛkāri (˚ka-ari), is,%} m. ‘wolf-enemy,’
a dog. {%—Vṛkāsura-vadha (˚ka-as˚), as,%} m. ‘kill-
ing of the Asura Vṛka,’ N. of the ninety-sixth chapter
of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%kodara (˚ka-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘wolf-bellied,’ a N. of
Brahmā; of Bhīma (the second son of Pāṇḍu, so
called from his enormous appetite).
<LEND>

<L>44682<pc>0956-b<k1>vfkati<k2>vfkati
{%Vṛkati, is,%}¦ f. (probably) wolfishness, rapacity.
<LEND>

<L>44683<pc>0956-b<k1>vfkala<k2>vfkala
{%Vṛkala, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Dhruva.
<LEND>

<L>44684<pc>0956-b<k1>vfkka<k2>vfkka
{#vfkka#}¦ {%vṛkka, as, ā,%} m. f. (according to some
also) {%am,%} n. the heart [cf. {%bukka%}]; a kidney, (in
this sense usually in the dual.)
<LEND>

<L>44685<pc>0956-b<k1>vfkkaka<k2>vfkkaka
{%Vṛkkaka, au,%}¦ m. du. the kidneys.
<LEND>

<L>44686<pc>0956-b<k1>vfkRa<k2>vfkRa
{#vfkRa#}¦ {%vṛkṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vraśc%}), cut,
divided; cut down; torn; broken. {%—Vṛkṇa-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} one who has cut or severed.
<LEND>

<L>44687<pc>0956-b<k1>vfkta<k2>vfkta
{#vfkta#}¦ {%vṛkta, vṛkti.%} See under rt. 1. {%vṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>44688<pc>0956-b<k1>vfkz<k2>vfkz
{#vfkz#}¦ {%vṛkṣ%} (perhaps connected with rt.
{%vṛ%}), cl. 1. A. {%vṛkṣate, vavṛkṣe, vṛ-%}
{%kṣitum,%} to select, take, accept; to cover; to keep
off.
<LEND>
[Page0956-c+ 78]

<L>44689<pc>0956-c<k1>vfkza<k2>vfkza
{#vfkza#}¦ {%vṛkṣa, as,%} m. (probably connected
with rt. 2. {%vṛh;%} in Uṇādi-s. III. 66. said to be fr. rt.
{%vraśc,%} or fr. rt. {%vṛkṣ,%} ‘to cover’), a tree, shrub.
{%—Vṛkṣa-kukkuṭa, as,%} m. ‘tree-cock,’ a wild cock.
{%—Vṛkṣa-khaṇḍa, am,%} n. ‘a party, i. e. number
of trees,’ a grove. {%—Vṛkṣa-gulmāvṛta (˚ma-āv˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} covered with trees and shrubs. {%—Vṛkṣa-%}
{%cara, as, ā, am,%} going or living in trees; ({%as%}), m.
‘tree-goer,’ a monkey. {%—Vṛkṣa-cchāyā,%} f. the
shade of a tree; ({%am%}), n. the shade of many trees,
a grove. {%—Vṛkṣa-jātīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to
the genus tree. {%—Vṛkṣa-tala, am,%} n. the foot of
a tree or the ground about it. {%—Vṛkṣa-dhūpa, as,%}
m. ‘tree-resin,’ turpentine. {%—Vṛkṣa-nātha, as,%} m.
‘lord of trees,’ the Indian fig-tree. {%—Vṛkṣa-niryāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. the exudation of trees, gum, resin. {%—Vṛkṣa-%}
{%nivāsa, as,%} m. dwelling or living in a tree. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%kṣa-pāka, as,%} m. the Indian fig-tree. {%—Vṛkṣa-%}
{%bhakṣā,%} f. a kind of parasitical plant {%(= vandāka).%}
{%—Vṛkṣa-bhavana, am,%} n. ‘tree-abode,’ the hol-
low of a tree. {%—Vṛkṣa-bhid, t,%} f. ‘tree-splitter,’
an axe. {%—Vṛkṣa-bhedin, ī,%} m. ‘tree-splitter,’ a
carpenter's chisel; a hatchet. {%—Vṛkṣa-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} abounding with trees, consisting of trees.
{%—Vṛkṣa-markaṭikā,%} f. ‘tree-monkey,’ a squirrel.
{%—Vṛkṣa-mūla, am,%} n. the root of a tree.
{%—Vṛkṣamūla-niketana, as, ā, am,%} dwelling at
the roots of trees (as a hermit). {%—Vṛkṣa-mṛd-%}
{%bhū, ūs,%} m. ‘tree-earth-born,’ a sort of cane or reed,
Calamus Fascicularis. {%—Vṛkṣa-yuddha, am,%} n. a
fight with trees (instead of clubs). {%—Vṛkṣa-ruha, as,%}
{%ā,%} m. f. ‘tree-grower,’ a parasitical plant which has its
roots attached to another plant (as Cymbidum Tessa-
loides). {%—Vṛkṣa-ropaka, as,%} m. a planter of trees.
{%—Vṛkṣa-ropaṇa, am,%} n. the planting of trees.
{%—Vṛkṣa-ropin, ī, iṇī, i,%} planting trees. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%kṣa-vāṭī%} or {%vṛkṣa-vāṭikā,%} f. a grove of trees or
garden near the residence of a minister of state, &c.
{%—Vṛkṣa-śa, as,%} m. ({%śa%} said to be fr. rt. {%śī,%} ‘to
sleep’), a lizard, a chameleon. {%—Vṛkṣa-śāyikā,%} f.
‘tree-sleeper,’ a squirrel. {%—Vṛkṣa-sarpī,%} f., Ved.
a female tree-serpent. {%—Vṛkṣa-secana, am,%} n.
the watering of trees. {%—Vṛkṣa-stha, as, ā, am,%}
or {%vṛkṣa-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%vṛkṣa-sthita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} staying in or on a tree. {%—Vṛkṣāgra (˚ṣa-%}
{%ag˚), am,%} n. the top of a tree. {%—Vṛkṣāṅghri%}
{%(˚ṣa-aṅ˚), is,%} m. the root of a tree. {%—Vṛkṣā-%}
{%dana (˚ṣa-ad˚), as,%} m. a carpenter's chisel or
adze; a hatchet, chopper; the Indian fig-tree; the
Piyāl tree, Buchanania Latifolia; ({%ī%}), f. a para-
sitical plant, Epidendron; the shrub Hedysarum
Gangeticum. {%—Vṛkṣādi-ruhaka%} or {%vṛkṣādi-%}
{%rūḍhaka, am,%} n. the embracing or entwining (of a
creeper) round a tree &c., embracing (in general).
{%—Vṛkṣādi-vidyā (˚ṣa-ād˚),%} f. the science of
tree &c., botany. {%—Vṛkṣāmla (˚ṣa-am˚), as,%}
m. the hog-plum, Spondias Mangifera; ({%am%}), n.
acid seasoning, the fruit of the tamarind so used.
{%—Vṛkṣāyur-veda (˚ṣa-āy˚), as,%} m., N. of a
short treatise by Sura-pāla on the planting and culti-
vation of trees. {%—Vṛkṣāropaka (˚ṣa-ār˚), as,%} m.
the planter of a tree. {%—Vṛkṣāropaṇa (˚ṣa-ār˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the act of planting trees. {%—Vṛkṣārhā (˚ṣa-%}
{%ar˚),%} f. {%= mahā-medā%}. {%—Vṛkṣālaya (˚ṣa-āl˚), as,%}
m. ‘having a tree for an abode,’ a bird. {%—Vṛkṣā-%}
{%vāsa (˚ṣa-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘living in trees, living in the
hollow of trees,’ an ascetic; a bird. {%—Vṛkṣāśrayin%}
{%(˚ṣa-āś˚), ī,%} m. ‘tree-dweller,’ a kind of small owl.
{%—Vṛkṣottha (˚ṣa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} growing on a
tree. {%—Vṛkṣotpala (˚ṣa-ut˚), as,%} m. the tree
Pterospermum Acerifolium ({%= karṇi-kāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>44690<pc>0956-c<k1>vfkzaka<k2>vfkzaka
{%Vṛkṣaka, as,%}¦ m. a small tree; the tree Wrightea
Antidysenterica ({%= kuṭaja%}); any tree.
<LEND>

<L>44691<pc>0956-c<k1>vfgala<k2>vfgala
{#vfgala#}¦ {%vṛgala, am,%} n., Ved. {%= vidala,%} a pea,
split peas, ({%ardha-vṛgala,%} half a pea.)
<LEND>

<L>44692<pc>0956-c<k1>vfc<k2>vfc
{#vfc#}¦ {%vṛc%} = rt. 1. {%vṛj,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44693<pc>0956-c<k1>vfcayA<k2>vfcayA
{#vfcayA#}¦ {%vṛcayā,%} f., Ved., N. of a woman
(said to have been given by Indra to Kakṣīvat).
<LEND>
[Page0957-a+ 78]

<L>44694<pc>0957-a<k1>vfcIvat<k2>vfcIvat
{#vfcIvat#}¦ {%vṛcīvat, ān,%} m., Ved., N. of the
oldest of the sons of the Asura Vara-śikha; ({%antas%}), m.
pl. the sons or family of Vara-śikha (slain by Indra).
<LEND>

<L>44695<pc>0957-a<k1>vfj<k2>vfj<h>1
{#vfj#} 1¦. {%vṛj,%} cl. 1. P. {%varjati,%} cl. 7. P.
(Ved. also A.) {%vṛṇakti, vṛṅkte%} (in this
class the rt. is sometimes written {%vṛc%}), cl. 2. A. {%vṛkte%}
(in this cl. the rt. is sometimes written {%vṛñj,%} to which
the 3rd sing. Pres. {%vṛṅkte%} may be referred), {%va-%}
{%varja, vavṛje,%} (according to some also) {%vavarca,%}
{%vavṛñje, varjiṣyati, -te%} (Ved. {%varkṣyati, -te%}),
{%avarjīt, avarjiṣṭa%} (Vedic forms {%avṛk, vark,%}
{%varktam;%} Perf. part. fem. {%vavarjuṣī%}), {%varjitum,%}
(according to some also) {%vṛñjitum%} (Ved. Inf. {%vṛ-%}
{%jadhyai, vṛñjase%}), to bend, turn (Ved.); to turn
away, avert, divert, alienate (Ved. A.); to apply to
one's own use, choose for one's self (A.); to exclude,
ward or keep off, remove, set aside; to abandon,
lose; to bestow (Ved.); to efface, atone for, purify,
purge, (in the above senses generally A.); to clear;
to pull up, dig up, or (according to Sāy.) cut or
strew (the sacred grass); to cut off, cut to pieces,
(Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VI. 26, 3. {%vark = cheditavān%}
{%asi%}); to injure, kill, (Ṛg-veda VI. 18, 8): Pass.
{%vṛjyate,%} to be bent, &c.; to be cut or injured, &c.,
(Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 84, 6. {%vṛjyate = chidyate%}):
Caus. or cl. 10. P. {%varjayati%} (sometimes also A.
{%varjayate%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%avavarjat,%} to cause to
bend or turn or turn away; to exclude, remove, set
aside, take away, deprive; to abandon, avoid, shun,
abstain from, renounce, give up, leave off, omit,
disclaim; to leave out, except, exempt, spare; to
dismiss; to discharge, give out: Pass. of Caus. {%var-%}
{%jyate,%} &c., to be excluded from or deprived of any-
thing (inst.), lose (see {%varjita%}): Desid. {%vivarji-%}
{%ṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%varīvṛjyate, varvarkti,%} &c.,
to turn aside, divert: Caus. of Intens. {%varīvarja-%}
{%yati,%} Ved. to turn or move in different directions;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">εἵργ-νυ-μι, εἴργ-ω, εἱργ-μό-ς, εἱρκ-τή,</lang>
<lang n="greek">Λυ-κόοργο-ς:</lang> Goth.
<nsi>vrik-a, vruggo:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>reccheo; wurgjan:</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>vring-an; wealc-an,</nsi> ‘to roll;’ (probably
also) <nsi>wrenc,</nsi> ‘deceit:’ Lith. <nsi>verz-iu:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>vrag-u.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>44696<pc>0957-a<k1>vfkta<k2>vfkta
{%Vṛkta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleared, cleaned; spread, strewn.
{%—Vṛkta-barhis, is, is, is,%} Ved. one who has
cleared the {%barhis%} (said of a sacrificial priest or
Ṛtv-ij); one who has spread or strewn the sacrificial
grass. (Sāy. {%= stīrṇa-barhis,%} Ṛg-veda III. 2, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>44697<pc>0957-a<k1>vfkti<k2>vfkti
{%Vṛkti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. texture.
<LEND>

<L>44698<pc>0957-a<k1>vfj<k2>vfj<h>2
2. {%vṛj,%}¦ in Naigh. II. 9. {%vṛk%} is enumerated among
the {%bala-nāmāni.%} (See {%vṛjana%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>44699<pc>0957-a<k1>vfjana<k2>vfjana
{%Vṛjana, as, ā, am,%}¦ crooked, curved (Ved.);
strong, vigorous, (Sāy. {%= bala-vat,%} Ṛg-veda V. 44,
1); moving, transient, any living being regarded as
transient, (Sāy. {%= gamana-śīla = jaṅgama = prāṇi-%}
{%jāta,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 48, 5); ({%as%}), m. curled hair, hair;
({%am%}), n. an enclosure, field cleared for pasture or
agriculture; a kind of camp or camping ground;
sky, atmosphere; anything crooked or to be avoided;
sin, wickedness, calamity; force, energy, strength
({%= bala,%} Naigh. II. 9); battle, conflict; oblation,
sacrifice (?).
<LEND>

<L>44700<pc>0957-a<k1>vfji<k2>vfji
{%Vṛji, is,%}¦ f., N. of a country, {%= Vraja%} (the modern
Braj, to the west of Delhi and Agra).
<LEND>

<L>44701<pc>0957-a<k1>vfjika<k2>vfjika
{%Vṛjika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the district of
Vraja or Braj; a native &c. of that country.
<LEND>

<L>44702<pc>0957-a<k1>vfjina<k2>vfjina
{%Vṛjina, as, ā, am,%}¦ crooked, bent, curved;
wicked; ({%as%}), m. curled hair, hair; ({%am%}), n. any-
thing crooked or to be avoided, wrong, sin, vice,
wickedness, (Sāy. {%= varjanīya, pāpa,%} Ṛg-veda
IV. 23, 8); distress, misery, affliction; red leather.
{%—Vṛjina-vartani, is, is, i,%} Ved. going on wrong
tracks or roads, following evil courses, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>44703<pc>0957-a<k1>vfjya<k2>vfjya
{%Vṛjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bent, to be turned away.
<LEND>

<L>44704<pc>0957-a<k1>vfYj<k2>vfYj
{#vfYj#}¦ {%vṛñj.%} See rt. 1. {%vṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>44705<pc>0957-a<k1>vfQa<k2>vfQa
{#vfQa#}¦ {%vṛḍha.%} See under rt. 1. {%vṛh.%}
<LEND>

<L>44706<pc>0957-a<k1>vfR<k2>vfR
{#vfR#}¦ {%vṛṇ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%vṛṇoti, vṛṇute,%}
to consume, eat; cl. 6. P. {%vṛṇati,%} to
please, gratify, exhilarate.
<LEND>
[Page0957-b+ 81]

<L>44707<pc>0957-b<k1>vft<k2>vft<h>1
{#vft#} 1¦. {%vṛt%} (for rt. 3. {%vṛt%} see p. 958,
col. 1), cl. 1. A. (in 2nd Fut., Aor., and
Cond. also P.; in Ved. and ep. P. also in other
forms) {%vartate%} (ep. {%vartati%}), Perf. {%vavṛte%} (Ved.
{%vāvṛte,%} P. {%vavarta%}), 2nd Fut. {%vartiṣyate%} and
{%vartsyati,%} Aor. {%avartiṣṭa%} and {%avṛtat,%} Cond.
{%avartiṣyata%} and {%avartsyat%} (Vedic forms {%[anu]-%}
{%vartti, [ā] varta, avart, [sam-ā] vavartti%}), {%var-%}
{%titum,%} to turn, turn one's self, turn round, revolve,
roll, move, go; to move on, pass on, go on in
regular course, proceed, run a course, follow on; to
be or be situated in any particular manner or circum-
stances, to be, exist, live, subsist, remain, dwell, be
fixed, abide, stay, ({%manasi%} or {%hṛdaye%} or {%hṛdi%}
{%vṛt,%} to dwell or be turned over or thought over in
the mind, &c.); to be present; to take place, hap-
pen, come to pass; to conduce, tend to (with dat.);
to depend upon (with loc.); to occupy one's self,
employ one's self, be occupied or engaged in (with
loc., {%upakāre vṛt,%} to give assistance); to behave,
demean one's self, act, practice, do, act towards
(with loc.), occupy one's self with (with inst.), act
in any particular manner (with inst., e. g. {%dharmeṇa%}
{%vṛt,%} to act justly; {%amāyayā vṛt,%} to act guilelessly;
{%vyājena vṛt,%} to act deceitfully); to enter upon a
particular course of conduct, act a part, (sometimes
with acc. {%vṛttim%} added, e. g. {%vartase vṛttim%}
{%akṣudrām,%} thou art acting no mean part; {%yāṃ%}
{%vṛttiṃ vartāmi pāṇḍaveṣu,%} whatever course I
enter upon towards the Pāṇḍavas): Pass. {%vṛtyate,%}
Aor. {%avarti,%} &c., to be turned, &c.: Caus. {%varta-%}
{%yati, -te,%} Aor. {%avīvṛtat, avavartat,%} to cause to
turn or revolve, cause to roll, cause to move or move
round, turn, move; to brandish (as a weapon); to
cause to move away, remove (Ved.); to shed (as
tears &c.); to cause to proceed, cause to be or exist,
make; to cause to take place, cause to pass (as
time), spend, pass, lead a life, live, (sometimes with
acc. {%vṛttim%} added, or sometimes with inst. {%vṛttyā%}
or {%vṛttena,%} or sometimes with inst. of other words,
e. g. {%bhaikṣeṇa vartayati,%} he lives by begging);
to perform, practice, do, exhibit; to maintain one's
self, subsist (A.); to relate, recount, declare; to
perceive, comprehend; to care for (with dat.);
to read, study [cf. {%vṛtta%}]; (according to some) to
speak; to shine: Desid. {%vivartiṣate%} and {%vivṛt-%}
{%sati,%} to wish to remain, desire to stay, &c.: Intens.
{%varīvṛtyate, varīvṛtīti, varvṛtīti, varivṛtīti,%}
{%varvartti, varivartti, varīvartti;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>vert-o,</nsi>
<nsi>versus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vairthan, ana-vairths, vaurs-tva;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>werde, ward;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>weordhan,</nsi>
<nsi>ward, weard, wyrd;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>wartau, werciu, war-</nsi>
<nsi>toju, wirs-tu;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>vrat-i-ti.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>44708<pc>0957-b<k1>vivftsat<k2>vivftsat
{%Vivṛtsat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), wishing
to be or exist.
<LEND>

<L>44709<pc>0957-b<k1>vivftsitf<k2>vivftsitf
{%Vivṛtsitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who wishes to be.
<LEND>

<L>44710<pc>0957-b<k1>vft<k2>vft<h>2
2. {%vṛt, t, t, t,%}¦ turning, turning round, moving,
existing; ({%t%}), f., Ved. a turn, action, act, deed; ({%t%}),
ind. ‘finished,’ a grammatical term signifying that a
series of roots acted on by a grammatical rule ends
with the word preceding {%vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>44711<pc>0957-b<k1>vftta<k2>vftta<h>1
1. {%vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned; round, rounded,
circular; been, existed, lived; happened, ({%kiṃ-%}
{%vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} ‘one who says to himself, What
has happened?’ one who allows himself to be taken
by surprise, incautious); occurred, past, gone, finished;
dead, deceased; done, performed, acted, engaged in,
undertaken; proceeded, proceeding from, derived
from; read through, studied; fixed, firm; unim-
paired; famous; ({%as%}), m. a tortoise; ({%ā%}), f. a kind
of tree or shrub {%(= jhiñjhiriṣṭā); (am),%} n. a
circle, circumference; (in astronomy) the epicycle
({%= paridhi%}); event, occurrence, news; procedure;
practice, profession, occupation, mode of life, means
of subsistence; act, action, behaviour, manner, de-
meanour, ({%ujjhita-dhairya-vṛttam,%} without regard
to dignity of manner); conduct; observance of any
enjoined practice, established rule or usage, actual
practice, law; ‘the turn of a line,’ final rhythm,
rhythm; verse, metre. {%—Vṛtta-karkaṭī,%} f. the
water-melon {%(= ṣaḍ-bhujā)%}. {%—Vṛtta-khaṇḍa, %}
[Page0957-c+ 81]
{%am,%} n. a portion or segment of a circle. {%—Vṛtta-%}
{%gandhi, is, is, i,%} having only the smell of verse or
rhythm; ({%i%}), n. epithet of a particular kind of
prose. {%—Vṛtta-guṇḍa, as,%} m. a kind of grass {%(=%}
{%dīrgha-nāla)%}. {%—Vṛtta-cūḍa%} or {%vṛtta-caula, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} whose tonsure has been performed, tonsured,
(this should be performed at the age of one or three
years, cf. Manu II. 35.) {%—Vṛtta-jña, as, ā, am,%}
knowing actions or established practices. {%—Vṛtta-%}
{%taṇḍula, as,%} m. a sort of grass {%(= yava-nāla).%}
{%—Vṛtta-tas,%} ind. according to the practice or ob-
servance of caste, according to usage or customary
procedure, ({%vṛttataḥ pāpam,%} a sin according to
caste.) {%—Vṛtta-niṣpāvikā,%} f. a kind of leguminous
plant {%(= nakha-niṣpāvī)%}. {%—Vṛtta-parṇī,%} f. a
kind of plant {%(= pāṭhā)%}. {%—Vṛtta-puṣpa, as,%} m. the
Śirīṣa tree; the Kadamba; {%= vānīra; = kubjaka;%}
{%= mudgara%}. {%—Vṛtta-pratyabhijña, as, ā, am,%}
well versed in sacred rites. {%—Vṛtta-phala, as,%} m.
the pomegranate ({%= dāḍima%}); the jujube; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of various plants, {%= vārtākī, = śaśāṇḍulī, =%}
{%āmalakī; (am),%} n. black pepper. {%—Vṛtta-bāhu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} round-armed, (see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 67.)
{%—Vṛtta-mallikā,%} f. a species of plant {%(= modinī,%}
{%= śvetārka)%}. {%—Vṛtta-yamaka, am,%} n. a kind of
verse containing a play on words, (see {%yamaka.%})
{%—Vṛtta-ratnākara (˚na-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘ocean of
metres,’ N. of a short metrical treatise on Post-vedic
metres by Kedāra. {%—Vṛtta-ratnākara-ṭīkā,%} f. and
{%vṛtta-ratnākara-setu, us,%} m., N. of two commen-
taries on the above-mentioned work. {%—Vṛtta-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} one who has performed the duties of
caste or calling, well-conducted. {%—Vṛtta-vīja, as,%}
m. a kind of plant, {%= bhiṇḍā; (ā),%} f. another plant,
{%= āḍhakī%}. {%—Vṛtta-vījakā,%} f. a kind of plant, {%=%}
{%pāṇḍura-phalī%}. {%—Vṛtta-śata, am,%} n., N. of a work
mentioned in the Śūdra-dharma-tattva. {%—Vṛtta-%}
{%śastra, as, ā, am,%} one who has studied (the
science of) arms or warfare ({%= adhīta-śastravidya,%}
Bhaṭṭi-k. IX. 19). {%—Vṛtta-sampanna, as, ā, am,%}
well behaved or conducted, behaving with propriety.
{%—Vṛtta-sādin, ī, inī, i,%} destroying established
usage, worthless, mean, vile. {%—Vṛtta-stha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} abiding in the duties of caste or calling. {%—Vṛt-%}
{%tādhyayanarddhi (˚ta-adh˚, ˚na-ṛd˚), is,%} f. in-
crease of moral conduct and study, holiness resulting
from observance of rules and study (of scripture).
{%—Vṛttānuvartin (˚ta-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} conforming
to rule, obedient. {%—Vṛttānusāra (˚ta-an˚), as,%}
m. conforming to prescribed practice; conformity
to metre; ({%āt%}), ind. according to the metre or
measure of a verse, for the sake of the metre.
{%—Vṛttānusārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} conforming to established
rule or practice, doing what is enjoined or proper.
{%—Vṛttānta (˚ta-an˚), as,%} m., (rarely) {%am,%} n. ‘the
end or result of a course of action,’ occurrence, inci-
dent, event; tidings, rumour, report, intelligence;
a tale, story, narrative, history, account; an ancient
story; topic, subject; sort, kind, difference; mode,
manner, state, condition; interval, rest, leisure, op-
portunity; property, nature; the whole, totality;
alone, solitary. {%—Vṛttānta-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} wit-
nessing or being a spectator of any action. {%—Vṛt-%}
{%tāntānveṣaka (˚ta-an˚), as, ikā, am,%} inquiring into
what takes place. {%—Vṛttervāru (˚ta-ir˚), us,%} m. a
water-melon {%(= ṣaḍ-bhujā)%}. {%—Vṛttoru (˚ta-ūru),%}
{%us,%} f. a round-thighed woman, (see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 69.)
{%—Vṛttaujas (˚ta-oj˚), ās, ās, as,%} having unim-
paired power, whose (creative) energy had free and
unobstructed course, (Manu 1. 6); of great energy,
mighty, irresistible.
<LEND>

<L>44712<pc>0957-c<k1>vfttaka<k2>vfttaka
{%Vṛttaka, am,%}¦ n. a particular kind of prose com-
position.
<LEND>

<L>44713<pc>0957-c<k1>vftti<k2>vftti
{%Vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. turning, turning round, revolving;
the circumference of a circle or wheel; being, ex-
istence, abiding (often at the end of comps., e. g.
{%tad-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} abiding in that), staying, re-
maining; state, condition; proceeding, career, course
of conduct, conduct, behaviour, action (often at the
end of comps., cf. {%vaka-v˚%}); operation, practice,
business, profession, function, office, employment
[Page0958-a+ 80]
(at the end of comps. translatable by ‘employed
about,’ ‘engaged in’), mode of life [cf. {%vāgurā-%}
{%v˚%}]; activity, cause or instrument of activity; treat-
ment, respectful treatment; livelihood, maintenance,
means of subsistence (often at the end of comps.,
cf. {%uñcha-v˚;%} the means of subsistence for a
Brāhman are said in Manu IV. 4. to be, 1. {%ṛta,%}
‘true,’ i. e. lawful gleaning; 2. {%a-mṛta,%} ‘not deadly,’
i. e. unsolicited alms; 3. {%mṛta,%} ‘deadly,’ i. e. soli-
cited alms; 4. {%pra-mṛta,%} ‘very deadly,’ i. e. agri-
culture; 5. {%satyānṛta,%} ‘true and false,’ i. e. trade,
traffic; 6. {%śva-vṛtti,%} ‘dog-maintenance,’ i. e. servi-
tude; this last should never be engaged in, the preced-
ing two, i. e. agriculture and trade, only in times of
distress); wages, hire; customary allowance, perquisite,
fee; mode of thinking, course of ideas; style, force,
character, style in composition (especially dramatic
style, said to be of four kinds, viz. 1. Kaiśikī,
2. Bhāratī, 3. Sātvatī, 4. Ārabhaṭī, q. q. v. v.; the
first three are described as suited to the Śṛṅgāra,
Vīra, and Raudra Rasas respectively, the last as com-
mon to all); comment, commentary, explanation,
exposition, gloss; general character or force of a
word; (in grammar) a complex formation which
requires resolution or explanation (as distinguished
from a simple or uncompounded form, e. g. any
word formed with Kṛt or Taddhita affixes, any com-
pound and even duals and plurals which are regarded
as Dvandva compounds, of which only one member
is left, and all derivative verbs such as desideratives
&c.); a measure of the voice in reciting or chanting,
(of which, according to the Prātiśākhyas, there are
three, viz. {%vi-lambitā, madhyamā,%} and {%drutā%});
N. of a commentary by Sa-nandana. {%—Vṛtti-kar-%}
{%ṣita, as, ā, am,%} distressed for (want of) a liveli-
hood (Manu VIII. 411; according to Kullūka {%=%}
{%bhṛty-abhāvena pīḍitaḥ)%}. {%—Vṛtti-ccheda, as,%} m.
taking away the means of subsistence, confiscation
of a patrimony, deprivation of an hereditary office.
{%—Vṛtti-tā,%} f. or {%vṛtti-tva, am,%} n. state of being
or residing or being contained in, state of existence,
state, condition [cf. {%anāyatta-v˚%}]; mode of sub-
sistence, profession. {%—Vṛtti-dāna, am,%} n. the giving
of maintenance. {%—Vṛtti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
means of subsistence; abiding; having a particular
way of thinking. {%—Vṛtti-lābha, as,%} m. discovery of
the concurrent (in phil.). {%—Vṛtti-vaikalya, am,%}
n. deficiency or lack of means of subsistence, want
of a livelihood. {%—Vṛtti-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in
any state or condition or employment; ({%as%}), m. a
chameleon {%(= saraṭa)%}. {%—Vṛtti-hetu, us,%} m. cause
or means of subsistence. {%—Vṛtty-anuprāsa, as,%}
m. alliteration suited to any style or expression.
{%—Vṛtty-artha-bodhaka, as, ikā, am,%} indicat-
ing the meaning of a complex formation, (see
under {%vṛtti%} above.) {%—Vṛtty-artham,%} ind. for the
sake of subsistence, in order to sustain life. {%—Vṛtty-%}
{%upāya, as,%} m. means of subsistence.
<LEND>

<L>44714<pc>0958-a<k1>vftya<k2>vftya<h>2
2. {%vṛtya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 956, col. 1),
to be abided or stayed or remained, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44715<pc>0958-a<k1>vft<k2>vft<h>3
{#vft#} 3¦. {%vṛt,%} cl. 4. A. {%vṛtyate%} (according
to others also cl. 1. {%vartate%}), to choose,
like, &c., generally used in an old Intens. form {%vā-%}
{%vṛtyate,%} (see {%vāvṛt,%} which is classed by native
grammarians among simple roots.)
<LEND>

<L>44716<pc>0958-a<k1>vftta<k2>vftta<h>2
2. {%vṛtta, as, ā, am%}¦ (perhaps incorrect for {%vṛta%}),
chosen, selected, appointed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44717<pc>0958-a<k1>vftra<k2>vftra
{#vftra#}¦ {%vṛtra, as,%} m. (probably fr. rt. {%vṛ;%}
according to Uṇādi-s. II. 13. fr. rt. 1. {%vṛt%}), ‘the
coverer, hider, obstructer (of rain),’ N. of the Vedic
personification of an imaginary malignant influence
or demon of darkness and drought (supposed to take
possession of the clouds, causing them to obstruct
the clearness of the sky and keep back the waters;
Indra is represented as battling with this evil influ-
ence, and the pent up clouds being poetically pictured
as mountains or castles are shattered by his thunder-
bolt and made to open their receptacles; as a Dānava
or demon, Vṛtra is the son of Danu, q. v., and is
often associated with other evil spirits, such as Ahi,
[Page0958-b+ 79]
Śuṣṇa, Namuci, Pipru, Śambara, Uraṇa, whose
malignant influences are generally exercised in pro-
ducing darkness or drought); a cloud (in general);
darkness; a mountain; an enemy; sound, noise;
a wheel; N. of Indra (?); ({%am%}), n. a wicked person,
an enemy. {%—Vṛtra-khāda, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘Vṛtra-
devouring,’ destroying Vṛtra; ({%as%}), m. a devourer
of enemies, epithet of Bṛhas-pati. {%—Vṛtra-ghnī,%} f.,
N. of a river. {%—Vṛtra-tara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. caus-
ing great darkness, (Sāy. {%= atiśayena lokānām āva-%}
{%rakaḥ%} or {%vṛtrair āvaraṇaiḥ śatrūn tarati yaḥ,%}
i. e. overcoming enemies with darkness, Ṛg-veda I.
32, 5.) {%—Vṛtra-tur, ūr,%} m., Ved. ‘Vṛtra-conquer-
ing,’ epithet of Indra, conquering enemies (in gene-
ral). {%—Vṛtra-tūrya, am,%} n., Ved. conquering
enemies, destruction of enemies; battle ({%= saṅgrā-%}
{%ma%} according to Naigh. II. 19). {%—Vṛtra-dviṣ, ṭ,%}
m. ‘enemy of Vṛtra,’ epithet of Indra. {%—Vṛtra-%}
{%bhojana, as,%} m. a kind of pot-herb (commonly
called Samaṭh, described by some as a sort of cucum-
ber, {%= gaṇḍīra%}). {%—Vṛtra-vadha, as,%} m. ‘the kill-
ing of Vṛtra,’ N. of the twenty-fifth and twenty-
sixth chapters of the Bhūmi-khaṇḍa of the Padma-
Purāṇa; of the seventy-ninth chapter of the Uttara-
kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Vṛtra-śatru, us,%} m.
‘enemy of Vṛtra,’ epithet of Indra. {%—Vṛtra-hatya,%}
{%am, ā,%} n. f., Ved. the slaying of Vṛtra, (Ṛg-veda VIII.
89, 5.) {%—Vṛtra-hatha, as,%} m., Ved. slaying Vṛtra,
slaying enemies. {%—Vṛtra-han, ā,%} m. ‘Vṛtra-killer,’
epithet of Indra; killer of enemies, victorious. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%trahan-tama, as,%} m., Ved. ‘most mighty slayer
of Vṛtra,’ epithet of Indra; a very victorious person.
{%—Vṛtrāri (˚ra-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of Vṛtra,’ Indra.
<LEND>

<L>44718<pc>0958-b<k1>vfTA<k2>vfTA
{#vfTA#}¦ {%vṛthā,%} ind. (said to be fr. rt. {%vṛ;%}
according to some for {%vara-thā%}), without trouble,
(in Ṛg-veda IX. 76, 1 {%= an-āyāsena%}); without
pain, without difficulty, with ease, easily (Ved.);
without necessity, unnecessarily, uselessly, fruitlessly,
in vain; unprofitably; foolishly, idly, wantonly,
falsely; wrongly, incorrectly; vain, purposeless, use-
less, fruitless; (if compounded with articles of food,
{%vṛthā%} is said to mean ‘hot’); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥεῖα, βρᾶ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ῥᾷ, ῥάῐστος, ῥᾴδιος,</lang> &c.] {%—Vṛthā-kathā,%} f. idle
talk, nonsense. {%—Vṛthākāra (˚thā-āk˚), as,%} m. a
false form, mere appearance, empty show. {%—Vṛthā-%}
{%kula-samācāra, as, ā, am,%} whose family and prac-
tices are low. {%—Vṛthāghāta (˚thā-āgh˚), as,%} m.
striking uselessly, killing unnecessarily. {%—Vṛthā-%}
{%janman, a,%} n. useless or unprofitable birth. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%thāṭyā (˚thā-aṭ˚),%} f. going or strolling about in an
idle manner, travelling for pleasure (regarded as a
vice in a king; Manu VII. 47). {%—Vṛthā-dāna,%}
{%am,%} n. useless or improper gift, a gift that may be
annulled (or if promised, not made good, as a gift
promised to courtezans, wrestlers, or money lost at
play, &c.; according to some there are sixteen kinds
of these gifts). {%—Vṛthā-paśu-ghna, as,%} m. the
slayer of an animal wrongly or unnecessarily (i. e. not
for sacrifice). {%—Vṛthā-pratijña, as, ā, am,%} one who
makes a promise rashly. {%—Vṛthā-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bha-%}
{%vati,%} &c., to be in vain, to be useless, to be frustrated.
{%—Vṛthā-bhoga, as, ā, am,%} enjoying in vain or
to no purpose. {%—Vṛthā-mati, is, is, i,%} foolish-
minded, wrong-minded. {%—Vṛthā-māṃsa, am,%} n.
‘useless flesh,’ i. e. flesh not destined for the gods or
Pitṛs, (the eater of such flesh is said to be born as a
goblin); ({%as%}), m. one who eats such flesh. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%thālambha (˚thā-āl˚), as,%} m. cutting or plucking
unnecessarily, (Manu XI. 144.) {%—Vṛthā-vādin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} speaking falsely. {%—Vṛthā-śrama, as,%} m.
vain exertion, useless labour. {%—Vṛthā-ṣāh, -ṣāṭ,%}
m., Ved. one who easily overcomes or conquers,
(Sāy. {%= anāyāsena śatrūṇām abhibhavitā,%} Ṛg-
veda 1. 63, 4.) {%—Vṛthā-saṅkara-jāta, as, ā, am,%} born
in vain by the mixture of different castes, one who
neglects to perform his duties. {%—Vṛthotpanna (˚thā-%}
{%ut˚), as, ā, am,%} born or produced in vain.
<LEND>

<L>44719<pc>0958-b<k1>vfdDa<k2>vfdDa
{#vfdDa#}¦ {%vṛddha.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>44720<pc>0958-b<k1>vfdDi<k2>vfdDi<h>1
{#vfdDi#} 1¦. {%vṛddhi, is,%} f. (fr. a form {%vṛdh%} for
[Page0958-c+ 80]
rt. {%vardh;%} for 2. {%vṛddhi%} see under rt. 1. {%vṛdh%}),
cutting off, abscission; (in law) forfeiture, deduction.
<LEND>

<L>44721<pc>0958-c<k1>vfD<k2>vfD<h>1
{#vfD#} 1¦. {%vṛdh%} (perhaps developed out of
{%vi-ṛdh%}), cl. 1. A. (in Fut., Aor., and
Cond. also P.; in Ved. and ep. P. also in other
forms; sometimes confounded in occasional forms
with rt. 1. {%vṛt%}), {%vardhate%} (Ved. P. {%vardhati, vṛ-%}
{%dhati%}), Perf. {%vavṛdhe%} (Ved. P. {%vavardha%}), 2nd
Fut. {%vardhiṣyate%} and {%vartsyati%} (identical with
2nd Fut. of rt. 1. {%vṛt%}), Aor. {%avardhiṣṭa%} and {%avṛ-%}
{%dhat,%} Cond. {%avardhiṣyata%} and {%avartsyat%} (iden-
tical with Cond. of rt. 1. {%vṛt%}), {%vardhitum%} (Ved.
Inf. {%vṛdhe, vṛdhase, vāvṛdhadhyai%}), to increase,
augment, cause to grow, make larger or stronger,
raise, prosper, make to prosper, (in these active
senses generally Ved. and always P.); to exhilarate,
make joyful, inspirit, animate (Ved. P.); to increase,
grow, become larger or stronger, prosper, be or be-
come prosperous, (in these neuter senses generally
A. except in the Vedic forms {%vṛdhati, vavardha,%}
&c., and except in Fut., Aor., and Cond., which may
be also P. in the classical language); to continue,
last; to rise, ascend; to become joyful, have cause
for congratulation: Caus. {%vardhayati, -te%} (also {%var-%}
{%dhāpayati%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%avīvṛdhat, avavar-%}
{%dhat,%} to cause to increase or grow, increase, augment,
amplify, enhance, make larger or stronger, cause to
prosper, make powerful, raise, exalt, to make joyful,
gladden; (according to some) to speak; to shine:
Desid. {%vivardhiṣate, vivṛtsati:%} Intens. {%varī-%}
{%vṛdhyate, varīvṛdhīti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>vared, vareda:</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">βάλσ-τη, βλασ-τό-ς, βλαστ-άν-ω, βλωθ-ρό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">βραδινός, ῥαδινός, ῥίζα; ἄλσος:</lang> (perhaps) Lat.
<nsi>grandis:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>valdan, vaur-ts,</nsi> ‘a root:’ Old
Germ. <nsi>uurza:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>waldan, vridian, weald:</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>vladun, vlas,</nsi> ‘hair:’ Hib. <nsi>folt,</nsi> ‘hair;’ <nsi>fridh,</nsi>
‘a forest;’ (perhaps) <nsi>for-bairt,</nsi> ‘increase, profit.’]
<LEND>

<L>44722<pc>0958-c<k1>vfdDa<k2>vfdDa
{%Vṛddha, as, ā, am%}¦ (compar. {%jyāyas%} or {%varṣī-%}
{%yas,%} superl. {%jyeṣṭha%} or {%varṣiṣṭha,%} q. q. v. v.),
increased, augmented; grown up, full grown, duly
expanded; old, aged, advanced in years, ancient,
mighty, great, large; accumulated, heaped; wise,
learned; ({%as%}), m. an old man or one past seventy;
a sage, saint; a respectable man; a male descendant
({%= gotra%}); a proper N.; {%= vṛddha-dāraka%} below;
({%ā%}), f. an old woman (either one past childbearing
or one with grey hair); a female descendant; ({%am%}),
n. (in grammar) a word having a Vṛddhi vowel in
the first syllable; benzoin. {%—Vṛddha-kāka, as,%} m.
‘large crow,’ a sort of crow or raven. {%—Vṛddha-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Vṛddha-krama, as,%}
m. rank due to age. {%—Vṛddha-gaṅgā,%} f., N. of
a river (commonly called the Buḍi Gaṅgā). {%—Vṛd-%}
{%dha-gautama,%} ‘the old Gautama,’ N. of an ancient
recension of Gautama's law-book. {%—Vṛddha-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} oldest, most venerable. {%—Vṛddha-tā,%} f.
or {%vṛddha-tva, am,%} n. old age, senility. {%—Vṛd-%}
{%dha-dāraka, as,%} m. or {%vṛddha-dāru,%} n. a kind
of convolvulus or climbing plant {%(= chagalā, ṛkṣa-%}
{%gandhā)%}. {%—Vṛddha-dvija-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} bear-
ing the form of an old Brāhman. {%—Vṛddha-nagara,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Vṛddha-nābhi, is, is, i,%}
‘large-naveled,’ having a prominent navel, pot-bellied,
corpulent. {%—Vṛddha-pradhāna, as,%} m. a paternal
great-grandfather. {%—Vṛddha-prapitāmaha, as,%}
m. a paternal great-grandfather; ({%ī%}), f. a paternal
great-grandmother. {%—Vṛddha-pramātāmaha, as,%}
m. a maternal great-grandfather; ({%ī%}), f. a maternal
great-grandmother. {%—Vṛddha-balā,%} f. a kind of
plant {%(= mahā-samaṅgā)%}. {%—Vṛddha-bhāva, as,%}
m. the state of being old, old age. {%—Vṛddha-%}
{%mata, am,%} n. an ancient precept, a precept of ancient
sages. {%—Vṛddha-manu, us,%} m. ‘the old Manu,’
an ancient recension of the Mānava-dharma-śāstra;
[cf. {%vṛhan-manu.%}] {%—Vṛddha-mahas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. having increased or mighty splendor, endowed
with great strength, very mighty. {%—Vṛddha-yājña-%}
{%valkya,%} a particular recension of Yājñavalkya's law-
book. {%—Vṛddha-rāja, as,%} m. a kind of dock or
sorrel {%(= amla-vetasa)%}. {%—Vṛddha-vasiṣṭha,%} ‘the
[Page0959-a+ 81]
old Vasiṣṭha,’ N. of an ancient recension of Va-
siṣṭha's law-book. {%—Vṛddha-vāhana, as,%} m. the
mango tree. {%—Vṛddha-vibhītaka, as,%} m. the hog-
plum, Spondias Mangifera {%(= āmrātaka)%}. {%—Vṛd-%}
{%dha-vṛhaspati, is,%} m. ‘the old Vṛhas-pati,’ N.
of an ancient recension of Vṛhas-pati's law-book.
{%—Vṛddha-śavas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having increased
or great force, very mighty, very rapid, (Sāy. {%= vṛd-%}
{%dha-vega, atiśayena vega-vat,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 25,
10.) {%—Vṛddha-śīlin, ī, inī, i,%} having the disposition
of an old man. {%—Vṛddha-śocis, is, is, is,%} Ved. in-
creased in lustre, very bright. {%—Vṛddha-śravas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} having great glory; endowed with much food;
({%ās%}), m. an epithet of Indra. {%—Vṛddha-saṅgha,%}
{%as,%} m. an assembly of old men, council or meeting
of elders. {%—Vṛddha-sūtraka, am,%} n. a flock of
cotton, flocculent seeds flying in the air. {%—Vṛddha-%}
{%sevā,%} f. reverence for the aged, the serving or honour-
ing of old persons. {%—Vṛddha-sevin, ī, inī, i,%} honour-
ing or reverencing old persons, serving one's elders.
{%—Vṛddhāṅguli (˚dha-aṅ˚), is,%} f. ‘the great
finger,’ the thumb; the great toe. {%—Vṛddhāṅ-%}
{%guṣṭha (˚dha-aṅ˚), as,%} m. the great toe; the
thumb. {%—Vṛddhācāra (˚dha-āc˚), as,%} m. the
practice of one's forefathers, ancient custom. {%—Vṛd-%}
{%dhāditya (˚dha-ād˚), as,%} m. a form of the sun.
{%—Vṛddhānuśāsana (˚dha-an˚), am,%} n. a seer's
precept, direction or ordinance of the aged, an old
man's advice. {%—Vṛddhāraṇya (˚dha-ar˚), as,%} m.
‘seer's grove,’ a place where the Purāṇas or other
sacred works are read and expounded. {%—Vṛddhā-%}
{%vasthā (˚dha-av˚),%} f. the condition or period of
old age, senility. {%—Vṛddhāśrama (˚dha-āś˚), as,%}
m. the order or mode of life of an aged (Brāhman),
roaming or wandering about as a religious mendicant;
[cf. {%āśrama.%}] {%—Vṛddhokṣa (˚dha-uk˚), as,%} m.
an old bull ({%= jarad-gava%}).
<LEND>

<L>44723<pc>0959-a<k1>vfdDi<k2>vfdDi<h>2
2. {%vṛddhi, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. {%vṛddhi%} see p. 958,
col. 2), increase, increment, augmentation, growth, rise,
rising, ascending; excess; a heap, quantity, assemblage,
multitude; increase in wealth or dignity; increase
of the digits of the sun or moon; progression of any
kind, prosperity, success, advancement, happiness,
pleasure; wealth, property; extension of power or
revenue (as one of the three conditions or objects
of regal power); profit, gain; paying back money
lent with increase or interest, returning the prin-
cipal with a proportionate increment; money-lending,
usury, interest; enlargement of the scrotum (either from
swelled testicle or hydrocele or other morbid affec-
tions); (in grammar) a peculiar increase or length-
ening to which vowels are subject under certain con-
ditions (e. g. {%ā%} is the Vṛddhi of {%a, ai%} of {%i, ī,%}
and {%e, au%} of {%u, ū,%} and {%o; kṛta-vṛddhi,%} a word
of which the first vowel has been subjected to the
above change); one of the eight principal drugs or
medicinal roots (described as mild, cooling, &c., and
as a remedy for phlegm, leprosy, and worms); a
particular period or division of time, the eleventh of
the astronomical Yogas (or the Yoga star of the
eleventh lunar mansion); ({%is%}), m., N. of a poet.
{%—Vṛddhi-kara, as, ī, am,%} yielding or causing
increase &c. {%—Vṛddhi-jīvana, am,%} n. or {%vṛddhi-%}
{%jīvikā,%} f. gaining a livelihood by money-lending,
subsistence by usury, the profession of usury. {%—Vṛd-%}
{%dhi-da, as, ā, am,%} giving increase, causing advance-
ment or prosperity; ({%as%}), m., N. of a plant {%(= jī-%}
{%vaka, = śūkara-kanda)%}. {%—Vṛddhi-pattra, am,%}
n. a kind of razor or lancet. {%—Vṛddhi-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having increase, augmented, increased, in-
creasing; prosperous; rich, wealthy. {%—Vṛddhi-%}
{%śrāddha, am,%} n. a Śrāddha or offering made to
progenitors on any prosperous occasion (as on the
birth of a son &c.). {%—Vṛddhy-ājīva, as,%} or {%vṛd-%}
{%dhy-ājīvin, ī,%} m. one who lives by money-lending
or usury; a money-lender, usurer; (various kinds of
interest are recognised by Hindū lawyers, viz. 1. {%kā-%}
{%yikā vṛddhi,%} ‘bodily interest,’ i. e. either the ad-
vantage arising from the body of an animal pledged
as security for a loan or interest paid repeatedly with-
out reducing the body or principal; 2. {%kālikā v˚,%}
[Page0959-b+ 77]
‘periodical interest,’ i. e. payable weekly, monthly,
annually, &c., but most usually computed by the
month; 3. {%cakra-v˚,%} ‘wheel-interest,’ i. e. interest
upon interest, compound interest; 4. {%kāritā v˚,%} ‘sti-
pulated interest,’ or interest at a rate higher than the
usual legal rate; 5. {%śikhā-v˚,%} ‘growing continually
like a lock of hair,’ i. e. interest at a usurious rate
payable daily; 6. {%bhoga-lābha,%} ‘advantage ac-
cruing to a creditor from the use' of any article
handed over to him as security, e. g. the usufruct of
lands, gardens, animals, &c.: ‘lawful interest’ is called
{%dharma-v˚,%} ‘usurious interest’ {%a-nyāya-v˚,%} ‘interest
at the highest legal rate' {%parama-v˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>44724<pc>0959-b<k1>vfdDikA<k2>vfdDikA
{%Vṛddhikā,%}¦ f. a sort of drug or medicinal plant
({%= ṛddhi,%} see under 2. {%vṛddhi%}).
<LEND>

<L>44725<pc>0959-b<k1>vfD<k2>vfD<h>2
2. {%vṛdh,%}¦ f. (only found in dat. {%vṛdhe%} used as a
Ved. infinitive), increase, prosperity; blessing.
<LEND>

<L>44726<pc>0959-b<k1>vfDa<k2>vfDa
{%Vṛdha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who increases or pro-
motes or prospers, a prosperer.
<LEND>

<L>44727<pc>0959-b<k1>vfDasAna<k2>vfDasAna
{%Vṛdhasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ growing, increasing, being
augmented or exalted (Ved.); ({%as%}), m. a man.
<LEND>

<L>44728<pc>0959-b<k1>vfDasAnu<k2>vfDasAnu
{%Vṛdhasānu, us,%}¦ m. a man; a leaf; an act, action.
<LEND>

<L>44729<pc>0959-b<k1>vfDAna<k2>vfDAna
{%Vṛdhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ increasing, augmenting.
<LEND>

<L>44730<pc>0959-b<k1>vfDu<k2>vfDu
{%Vṛdhu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a Takṣan or carpenter
(whose cows were taken by Bharad-vāja when suffer-
ing from hunger, see Manu X. 107).
<LEND>

<L>44731<pc>0959-b<k1>vfDya<k2>vfDya
{%Vṛdhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be increased or augmented.
<LEND>

<L>44732<pc>0959-b<k1>vfDna<k2>vfDna
{#vfDna#}¦ {%vṛdhna, as,%} m. a bubo in the groin.
<LEND>

<L>44733<pc>0959-b<k1>vfnta<k2>vfnta
{#vfnta#}¦ {%vṛnta, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. {%vṛ%}),
the footstalk of a leaf or fruit, a stalk; a nipple;
the stand of a water-jar.
<LEND>

<L>44734<pc>0959-b<k1>vfntAka<k2>vfntAka
{%Vṛntāka, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. the egg-plant, Solanum
Melongena {%(= vārtāka)%}. {%—Vṛntāka-vidhi, is,%} m.,
N. of a chapter of the Bhaviṣyottara-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>44735<pc>0959-b<k1>vfntikA<k2>vfntikA
{%Vṛntikā,%}¦ f. a small stalk.
<LEND>

<L>44736<pc>0959-b<k1>vfntitA<k2>vfntitA
{%Vṛntitā,%}¦ f. the medicinal plant Wrightea Anti-
dysenterica.
<LEND>

<L>44737<pc>0959-b<k1>vfnda<k2>vfnda
{#vfnda#}¦ {%vṛnda, as, ā, am%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 98. fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), numerous, many, much, all;
({%am%}), n. a heap, multitude, large number, quantity,
aggregation; a flock, drove; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the forest
in which Kṛṣṇa was educated; sacred basil, Ocy-
mum Sanctum, {%= tulasī; (as),%} m., N. of the author
of a work on medicine. {%—Vṛndā-vana, am,%} n. a
wood near the town Gokula in the district of Ma-
thurā on the left bank of the Jumnā (celebrated as
the place where Kṛṣṇa in the character of Go-pāla, or
cowherd, passed his youth, associating with the cow-
herds and milkmaids employed in tending the cattle
grazing in the forest); a raised platform or mound
of earth on which the worshippers of Kṛṣṇa plant
and preserve the Tulasī; ({%ī%}), f. holy basil {%(= tulasī).%}
{%—Vṛndāvana-varṇana, am,%} n. ‘description of
Vṛndā-vana,’ N. of a chapter of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa
of the Padma-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>44738<pc>0959-b<k1>vfndAra<k2>vfndAra
{%Vṛndāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ much, great; best, excel-
lent, eminent; beautiful, handsome, pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>44739<pc>0959-b<k1>vfndAraka<k2>vfndAraka
{%Vṛndāraka, as, akā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} much, great;
best, excellent, eminent, chief; respectable, venerable,
reputable; handsome, agreeable, beautiful, pleasing;
({%as%}), m. a deity, immortal; a chief, the head or
leader of a crowd or herd &c.
<LEND>

<L>44740<pc>0959-b<k1>vfndin<k2>vfndin
{%Vṛndin%}¦ in {%aśva-vṛndin, ī, inī, i,%} consisting of
a large number of horses.
<LEND>

<L>44741<pc>0959-b<k1>vfndizWa<k2>vfndizWa
{%Vṛndiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%vṛndāra%}),
very much or great; very excellent, very eminent or
venerable; most beautiful or charming.
<LEND>

<L>44742<pc>0959-b<k1>vfndIyas<k2>vfndIyas
{%Vṛndīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ very much or great; very
eminent or excellent.
<LEND>

<L>44743<pc>0959-b<k1>vfS<k2>vfS
{#vfS#}¦ {%vṛś,%} cl. 4. P. {%vṛśyati, vavarśa, var-%}
{%śitum,%} to choose, select.
<LEND>

<L>44744<pc>0959-b<k1>vfSa<k2>vfSa
{#vfSa#}¦ {%vṛśa, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 104. fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), a rat; the flower Justicia Gan-
derussa; N. of the author of Ṛg-veda V. 2 (having
the patronymic Jāra); ({%ā%}), f. a drug; ({%am%}), n.
ginger; [cf. {%vṛṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44745<pc>0959-b<k1>vfScat<k2>vfScat
{#vfScat#}¦ {%vṛścat,%} &c. See under rt. {%vraśc.%}
<LEND>
[Page0959-c+ 80]

<L>44746<pc>0959-c<k1>vfScika<k2>vfScika
{#vfScika#}¦ {%vṛścika, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vraśc%}), a
scorpion; the zodiacal sign Scorpio; the month when
the sun is in Scorpio; a hairy caterpillar; a crab; a sort
of beetle found in cow-dung; a centipede; a thorny
shrub, Vangueria Spinosa; ({%ā%}), f. the pot-herb Ba-
sella, (see the next.) {%—Vṛścika-priyā,%} f. ‘dear to
scorpions,’ the pot-herb Basella Rubra or Lucida.
{%—Vṛścikālī (˚ka-ālī),%} f. a line of scorpions; the
shrub Tragia Involucrata.
<LEND>

<L>44747<pc>0959-c<k1>vfz<k2>vfz
{#vfz#}¦ {%vṛṣ%} (perhaps developed fr. rt.
1. {%ṛṣ%} with prep. {%vi%}), cl. 1. P. {%varṣati%}
(ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%vavarṣa, varṣiṣyati, avarṣīt%}
(Ved. 2nd sing. Impv. A. {%vṛṣasva%}), {%varṣitum,%}
to rain (often used impersonally or with Parjanya,
Indra, the clouds, the sky, &c. in the nominative);
to fall as rain (e. g. Ṛg-veda V. 84, 3. {%varṣanti%}
{%vṛṣṭayaḥ,%} the showers fall, Sāy. {%varṣanti = pa-%}
{%tanti%}); to rain or shower down, pour down, pour
forth, effuse, shed (with acc., e. g. {%meghāḥ śoṇitaṃ%}
{%vavṛṣuḥ,%} the clouds rained blood); to sprinkle,
moisten; to engender, generate; to drink, ({%ā-vṛṣ%}
also appears to have this sense in the Veda as well
as the sense ‘to eat’); to strike, hurt, vex, weary;
to bestow, give; to have supreme power; cl. 10. A.
{%varṣayate,%} &c., to have the power of generation
(according to some); to be powerful: Caus. {%varṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avavarṣat, avīvṛṣat,%} to
cause to rain, &c.: Desid. {%vivarṣiṣati:%} Intens.
{%varīvṛṣyate, varīvarṣṭi,%} &c.; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔρσ-η</lang>
(Hom. <lang n="greek">ἐέρσ-η</lang>), <lang n="greek">ἕρσ-η, ἑρσή-ει-ς, βρέχ-ω.</lang>].
<LEND>

<L>44748<pc>0959-c<k1>vfza<k2>vfza
{%Vṛṣa, as,%}¦ m. a rainer, sprinkler, (Sāy. {%= secaka%});
a bull; the sign of the zodiac Taurus; the bull of
Śiva; a strong or athletic man; an amorous or lustful
man (one of the four classes into which men are
divided in erotic works); N. of Kāma (god of love);
a rat; the chief of a class or anything the best of
its kind (e. g. {%vṛṣo 'ṅgulīnām,%} the chief among
fingers, the thumb; often at the end of a comp. in
the sense ‘chief,’ ‘excellent,’ ‘pre-eminent,’ e. g.
{%kapi-vṛṣās,%} the chief monkeys); the principal or
chief die (in a game with dice); Justice or Virtue
personified as a bull or as the bull of Śiva; justice,
virtue, morality; an adversary, enemy; N. of Karṇa;
of Viṣṇu; of the Indra of the eleventh Manv-antara;
of a son of Vīti-hotra; a particular drug ({%= ṛṣa-%}
{%bha%}); the plant Justicia Ganderussa; a piece of
ground suitable for the foundation of a house; (ac-
cording to some) N. of the fifteenth year of the
Hindū cycle; ({%am%}), n. a peacock's plumage or tail;
({%ā%}), f. the plant Salvinia Cucullata ({%= mūṣika-%}
{%parṇī%}); cowach, Carpopogon Pruriens, {%= kapi-%}
{%kacchu; (ī),%} f., see s. v. {%—Vṛṣa-karṇī,%} f. a par-
ticular plant. {%—Vṛṣa-gandhā,%} f. a particular plant
{%(= vastāntrī)%}. {%—Vṛṣa-cakra, am,%} n. a particular
astrological diagram shaped like a bull and having
reference to agriculture. {%—1. vṛṣa-daṃśa%} or {%vṛ-%}
{%ṣa-daṃśaka, as,%} m. ‘rat-devourer,’ a cat. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%ṣa-darbha, as,%} m., N. of a son of Śiva. {%—Vṛṣa-%}
{%dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘having a bull for a sign,’ epithet
of Śiva; ‘having a rat for a symbol,’ epithet of
Gaṇeśa; ‘having virtue for a mark,’ a virtuous man.
{%—Vṛṣa-dhvāṅkṣī,%} f. a species of grass, Cyperus
{%(= nāgara-mustā)%}. {%—Vṛṣa-nāśana, as,%} m. the
medicinal plant Embelica Ribes ({%= viḍaṅga,%} com-
monly called Virang). {%—Vṛṣa-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord
of the bull,’ epithet of Śiva; a bull set at liberty;
[cf. {%vṛṣotsarga.%}] {%—Vṛṣa-pattrikā,%} f. a species
of plant {%(= vastāntrī)%}. {%—Vṛṣa-parṇī,%} f. the plant
Salvinia Cucullata {%(= ākhu-parṇī)%}. {%—Vṛṣa-par-%}
{%van, ā,%} m. ‘bull-jointed, strong-jointed,’ epithet of
Śiva; N. of a king of the Daityas or demons (father
of Śarmiṣṭhā); a wasp; a sort of grass, Scirpus
Kysoor {%(= kaśeru)%}. {%—Vṛṣa-bhānu, us,%} m. (some-
times written {%vṛṣa-bhāṇu%} and {%vṛṣa-bhāna%}), N.
of the son of Sūra-bhāna and father of Rādhā; [cf.
{%vārṣabhāṇavī.%}] {%—Vṛṣabhānu-sutā%} or {%vṛṣa-%}
{%bhāṇu-sutā%} or {%vṛṣa-bhāṇu-kanyā,%} f. ‘the daughter
of Vṛṣa-bhānu,’ epithet of Rādhā. {%—Vṛṣa-bhāsā,%}
f. the residence of Indra and of the immortals {%(=%}
{%amarāvatī)%}. {%—Vṛṣa-rāja-ketana, as,%} m. ‘having
[Page0960-a+ 81]
the king of bulls for a symbol,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Vṛṣa-locana, as,%} m. ‘having the eyes of a bull,’
a rat. {%—Vṛṣa-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘whose vehicle is a
bull,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Vṛṣa-śatru, us,%} m. ‘enemy
of Vṛṣa or Karṇa,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu.
{%—Vṛṣa-sena, as,%} m., N. of a son of Karṇa.
{%—Vṛṣa-skandha, as, ā, am,%} ‘bull-shouldered,’
having the shoulders of a bull. {%—Vṛṣākara (˚ṣa-%}
{%āk˚)%} or {%vṛṣā-kara, as,%} m. a kind of bean {%(=%}
{%māṣa)%}. {%—Vṛṣāṅka (˚ṣa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘bull-
marked,’ epithet of Śiva; a pious man (as marked by
virtue); the marking-nut plant; a eunuch, one em-
ployed in the women's apartments. {%—Vṛṣāṅka-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘Śiva-produced,’ a small drum (held in one
hand and played by means of a string attached to it,
{%= ḍamaru%}). {%—Vṛṣāñcana (˚ṣa-añ˚), as,%} m.
‘going on a bull,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Vṛṣādri%}
{%(˚ṣa-ad˚), is,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Vṛṣān-%}
{%taka (˚ṣa-an˚), as,%} m. ‘destroyer of Vṛṣa,’ epi-
thet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu; [cf. {%vṛṣa-śatru.%}]
{%—Vṛṣāhāra (˚ṣa-āh˚), as,%} m. ‘having rats for
food,’ a cat. {%—Vṛṣotsarga (˚ṣa-ut˚), as,%} m. let-
ting loose a bull or (according to some) a bull and
four heifers on the occasion of a Śrāddha or funeral
rite in honour of deceased ancestors; setting a bull
at liberty on the occasion of a sacrifice or as a religious
act generally; N. of a Pariśiṣṭa of the Sāma-veda.
{%—Vṛṣotsarga-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a part of the
Smṛti-tattva.
<LEND>

<L>44749<pc>0960-a<k1>vfzaka<k2>vfzaka
{%Vṛṣaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Subala.
<LEND>

<L>44750<pc>0960-a<k1>vfzaRa<k2>vfzaRa
{%Vṛṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ sprinkling, fertilizing; ({%as%}),
m. the scrotum or bag containing the testicles; N.
of a son of Kārtavīrya. {%—Vṛṣaṇa-kacchū, ūs,%} f.
ulceration of the scrotum.
<LEND>

<L>44751<pc>0960-a<k1>vfzadaYji<k2>vfzadaYji
{%Vṛṣad-añji, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. sprinkling Soma
libations, (Sāy. {%= varṣakeṇa somena siñcat,%} Ṛg-
veda VIII. 20, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>44752<pc>0960-a<k1>vfzan<k2>vfzan
{%Vṛṣan, ā, ā, a,%}¦ Ved. raining, pouring forth,
sprinkling; bounteous; generating, engendering,
male; strengthening, invigorating, manly, vigorous,
young, strong (applied to the horses of Indra and to
the car of the Aśvins); mighty, excellent [cf. {%var-%}
{%ṣiṣṭha%}]; ({%ā%}), m. a rain-cloud, rain (Ved.); ‘the
trickling beverage,’ i. e. Soma juice, a libation [cf.
{%vṛṣa-pāna%}]; a bull; the zodiacal sign Taurus; a
stallion, horse; epithet of Indra; of Agni; of Soma;
epithet of various other gods; of the hero Karṇa; a
kind of metre (Ved.); pain, sorrow; insensibility to
pain. {%—Vṛṣa-karman, ā,%} m., Ved. a maker or
sender of rain; a showerer of benefits or favours,
(Sāy. {%= abhimata-varṣaṇa-vyāpāra-vat.%}) {%—Vṛ-%}
{%ṣa-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having vigorous or
mighty strength, (Sāy. {%= varṣaṇa-karman,%} Ṛg-
veda V. 36, 5.) {%—Vṛṣa-khādi, is, is, i,%} Ved. (ac-
cording to some) having strong (ring-shaped) weapons
or ornaments, (applied to the Maruts who are said
to be armed or ornamented with rings on their arms,
shoulders, and feet; according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I.
64, 10. ‘whose weapon is Vṛṣan, i. e. Indra,’ or
‘whose food is Soma.’) {%—Vṛṣa-gaṇa, as,%} m., N.
of a descendant of Vasiṣṭha (author of Ṛg-veda IX.
97, 7-9); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of Vṛṣa-
gaṇa. {%—Vṛṣa-jūti, is, is, i,%} Ved. having the speed
or velocity of a bull, (Sāy. {%= vṛṣabhir ākṛṣṭa,%}
Ṛg-veda VIII. 33, 10.) {%—Vṛṣaṇ-aśva, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having strong horses, strong-horsed (said
of a chariot); ({%as%}), m. the horse of Indra; N. of
the father of Menā. {%—Vṛṣaṇ-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. producing or causing rain, shedding, pouring
forth. {%—Vṛṣaṇ-vasu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having rain
for treasure, affluent in showers, (Sāy. {%= varṣaṇa-%}
{%dhana,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 5, 36); ({%u%}), n. the treasure
of Indra. {%—Vṛṣa-tva, am,%} n., Ved. manliness,
vigour, strength. {%—Vṛṣa-tvā,%} ind., Ved. by strength,
in strength. {%—Vṛṣa-dhūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. crushed
by males, i. e. by stones (said of the Soma). {%—Vṛ-%}
{%ṣa-nābhi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having a strong nave,
strong-naved; (Sāy.) having wheels bestowing showers
{%(= varṣaka-nābhi-yukta)%}. {%—Vṛṣan-tama, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. most manly, very vigorous, most power-
ful; (Sāy.) most bountiful ({%= atiśayena kāmānāṃ %}
[Page0960-b+ 81]
{%varṣitṛ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 100, 2). {%—Vṛṣa-patnī,%} f.,
Ved. ‘having a rain-cloud or a bull for a husband,’
epithet of water. {%—Vṛṣa-pāṇa, am,%} n. (i. e. {%vṛ-%}
{%ṣan + pāna%}), Ved. the drinking of a libation, a
Soma draught. {%—Vṛṣa-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} Ved. strong-
hoofed, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 75, 7
{%= pāṃsūnāṃ varṣaka-khura,%} ‘having hoofs the
showerers of dust,’ i. e. raising the dust with their
hoofs.) {%—Vṛṣa-prabharman, ā,%} m., Ved. sending
the rain-cloud, (Sāy. {%= varṣaṇa-śīlasya meghasya%}
{%pra-hartṛ,%} Ṛg-veda V. 32, 4.) {%—Vṛṣa-prayāvan,%}
{%ā,%} &c., Ved. moving vigorously, swift-passing, (accord-
ing to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 20, 9. {%vṛṣa-prayāvṇe%}
{%= sektāraḥ prakṛṣṭaṃ gantāro maruto yas-%}
{%min tasmai.%}) {%—Vṛṣa-psu, us, us, u,%} Ved. strong-
shaped; rain-shedding, (Sāy. {%= varṣaka-rūpa-%}
{%yukta,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 20, 10.) {%—Vṛṣa-maṇas,%}
{%ās, ās, as%} (i. e. {%vṛṣan + manas%}), Ved. having the
courage of a bull; disposed to pour forth or bestow
benefits, benevolent-minded, (Sāy. {%= kāmānāṃ var-%}
{%ṣaṇa-para-manaska,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 22, 6.) {%—Vṛ-%}
{%ṣa-ratha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a strong or
mighty car; whose car showers down blessings.
{%—Vṛṣa-raśmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having shower-
yielding reins. {%—Vṛṣa-vrata, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
acting like a bull, engaged in sprinkling (said of
Soma). {%—Vṛṣa-vrāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
troops or companies of males, forming troops of
bulls; having abundance of rain, abounding in drops
of rain. {%—Vṛṣa-śipra, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%ṣa-śuṣma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. drying up or over-
powering the strong, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
IV. 36, 8 {%= sektṝṇām balavatām śoṣaka%}); ({%as%}),
m. (probably) ‘having manly strength,’ a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>44753<pc>0960-b<k1>vfzanDi<k2>vfzanDi
{%Vṛṣandhi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. a cloud ({%= megha%} ac-
cording to Naigh. I. 10; in Ṛg-veda IV. 22, 2.
Sāy. explains {%vṛṣandhim%} by {%megha-bhedana-%}
{%dvāreṇa varṣaṃ kurvantam,%} causing rain by di-
viding the clouds).
<LEND>

<L>44754<pc>0960-b<k1>vfzaBa<k2>vfzaBa
{%Vṛṣabha, as,%}¦ m. a showerer of bounties, bene-
factor (Ved., Sāy. {%= kāmānāṃ varṣayitṛ,%} Ṛg-
veda VI. 44, 20); a male animal; a bull, (some-
times used in the Veda as an adjective in the sense
of ‘manly,’ ‘vigorous,’ ‘strong,’ ‘powerful,’ e. g.
{%vṛṣabhaḥ śuṣmaḥ,%} manly strength); anything
good or excellent of its kind (often at the end of
comps. in the sense of ‘good,’ ‘excellent,’ ‘pre-
eminent,’ ‘chief’); the hollow or orifice of the ear
[cf. {%ṛṣabha%}]; an elephant's ear; a particular drug
({%= ṛṣabha;%} it is described as a root brought from
the Himālaya mountains, resembling the horn of a
bull, of cooling and tonic properties, and serviceable
in catarrh and consumption); the first of the Jaina
pontiffs of the present era; epithet of the twenty-
eighth Muhūrta; ({%ī%}), f. a widow; cowach; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a river. {%—Vṛṣabha-gati, is,%} m. ‘going on
a bull,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Vṛṣabha-dhvaja, as,%}
m. ‘having a bull for an emblem,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Vṛṣabha-ṣoḍaśa, as, ī, am,%} having a bull
as sixteenth, i. e. fifteen (cows) and a bull. {%—Vṛṣa-%}
{%bhākṣa (˚bha-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} having the eyes
of a bull; ({%ī%}), f. a species of plant {%(= indra-%}
{%vāruṇī)%}. {%—Vṛṣabhekṣaṇa (˚bha-īk˚), as,%} m.
‘having the eyes of a bull,’ N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Vṛṣa-%}
{%bhaikādaśa (˚bha-ek˚), as, ī, am,%} having a bull
as the eleventh, i. e. ten (cows) and a bull.
<LEND>

<L>44755<pc>0960-b<k1>vfzala<k2>vfzala
{%Vṛṣala, as,%}¦ m. (in Manu VIII. 16. fancifully
derived fr. {%vṛṣa,%} ‘justice,’ {%+ la%} for {%ala%} fr. {%alam,%}
implying ‘prevention;’ cf. {%alam,%} ‘away with’), a
Śūdra or man of the last or servile tribe; epithet
of king Candra-gupta; a man of one of the three
highest classes who by neglecting his religious duties
has lost his caste; a sinner, reprobate, wicked man;
a horse; garlic; ({%ī%}), f. a woman of low caste; an
unmarried girl twelve years old (in whom menstru-
ation has commenced); a woman during menstruation;
a barren woman; the mother of a still-born child.
{%—Vṛṣala-tā,%} f. or {%vṛṣala-tva, am,%} n. the con-
dition of a Śūdra, state of an outcast. {%—Vṛṣalāt-%}
{%maja (˚la-āt˚), as,%} m. the son of a Vṛṣala or of
a reprobate. {%—Vṛṣalī-pati, is,%} m. the husband of
[Page0960-c+ 81]
a Śūdrā or woman of low caste or a Brāhman
who owns such a woman as his mistress. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%ṣalī-phena-pīta, as, ā, am,%} one who has drunk
the moisture of a Śūdrā's (lips). {%—Vṛṣalī-sevana,%}
{%am,%} n. paying respect to a woman of low caste,
intercourse with a Śūdra female.
<LEND>

<L>44756<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzalaka<k2>vfzalaka
{%Vṛṣalaka, as,%}¦ m. a poor or contemptible Śūdra.
<LEND>

<L>44757<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzasya<k2>vfzasya
{%Vṛṣasya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vṛṣasyati, -yitum,%} to long
for a bull, long for sexual intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>44758<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzasyantI<k2>vfzasyantI
{%Vṛṣasyantī,%}¦ f. a lascivious woman; a cow in heat.
<LEND>

<L>44759<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzAkapAyI<k2>vfzAkapAyI
{%Vṛṣākapāyī,%}¦ f. ‘wife of Vṛṣākapi,’ epithet of
the Dawn (as the wife of the Sun); epithet of Lakṣmī;
of Gaurī; of Svāhā (wife of Agni); of Śacī (wife of
Indra); of the mother of Indra; Asparagus Race-
mosus; the plant Celtis Orientalis.
<LEND>

<L>44760<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzAkapi<k2>vfzAkapi
{%Vṛṣākapi, is,%}¦ m. (probably connected with {%vṛ-%}
{%ṣan,%} ‘sprinkler’ or ‘irrigator,’ and {%kapi%} meaning
‘ape’ or ‘tremulous’), an epithet of the sun (so
called as drawing up vapour and irrigating with
mist); N. of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu; of Śiva or Rudra;
of one of the eleven Rudras (according to the Bhā-
gavata-Purāṇa); of Agni or fire; N. of the author
of part of Ṛg-veda X. 86 (having the patronymic
Aindra); of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 86.
<LEND>

<L>44761<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzARaka<k2>vfzARaka
{%Vṛṣāṇaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of the author of Ṛg-
veda X. 136, 4 (having the patronymic Vātaraśana);
a N. or form of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>44762<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzAya<k2>vfzAya
{%Vṛṣāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vṛṣāyate, -yitum,%} Ved. to
act like a bull; to roar like one; to fertilize.
<LEND>

<L>44763<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzAyaRa<k2>vfzAyaRa
{%Vṛṣāyaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of Śiva; a sparrow ({%=%}
{%caṭaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>44764<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzAyamARa<k2>vfzAyamARa
{%Vṛṣāyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. acting like a
bull, eager as a bull.
<LEND>

<L>44765<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzin<k2>vfzin
{%Vṛṣin, ī,%}¦ m. a peacock (either as ‘fond of rain’
or as ‘having a particular plumage’).
<LEND>

<L>44766<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzwa<k2>vfzwa
{%Vṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rained; raining down, shower-
ing; raining; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Kukkura.
{%—Vṛṣṭa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has rained.
<LEND>

<L>44767<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzwi<k2>vfzwi
{%Vṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. rain, a shower; (in the Sāṅkhya
phil.) one of the four forms of internal acquiescence;
[cf. {%salila.%}] {%—Vṛṣṭi-kara, as, ī, am,%} producing
rain, sprinkling, raining. {%—Vṛṣṭi-kāla, as,%} m. the
rainy season. {%—Vṛṣṭi-ghnī,%} f. a kind of cardamoms
(as ‘preventing moisture?’). {%—Vṛṣṭi-jīvana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘living by rain,’ (land) nourished or watered
by rain {%(= deva-mātṛka)%}. {%—Vṛṣṭi-dyāvā,%} m.
du., Ved. causing a rainy sky; epithet of Mitra and
Varuṇa, (Ṛg-veda V. 68, 5.) {%—Vṛṣṭi-bhū, ūs,%}
{%ūs, u,%} born or produced in rain; ({%ūs%}), m. a frog.
{%—Vṛṣṭi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of rain, rain-
producing, full of rain, rainy; ({%ān%}), m. a cloud.
{%—Vṛṣṭi-vani, is,%} f., Ved. a request or prayer for
rain [cf. {%vasu-vani%}]; ({%is, is, i%}), desiring rain, seek-
ing or praying for rain. {%—Vṛṣṭi-sampāta, as,%} m.
a shower of rain. {%—Vṛṣṭi-havya, as,%} m., Ved. a
proper N.
<LEND>

<L>44768<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzwvI<k2>vfzwvI
{%Vṛṣṭvī,%}¦ ind. having been showered down, (in
Ṛg-veda V. 53, 14. according to Sāy. {%= vṛṣṭiṣu%}
{%preritāsu satīṣu,%} on rain being sent.)
<LEND>

<L>44769<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzRi<k2>vfzRi
{%Vṛṣṇi, is, is, i,%}¦ raining, showering blessings
(said of Indra; Sāy. {%= kāmānāṃ varṣitṛ,%} Ṛg-
veda 1. 10, 2); angry, passionate; heretical, hete-
rodox; ({%is%}), m. a ram; a ray of light; air, wind;
a heretic, sectary; N. of a descendant of Yadu and
ancestor of Kṛṣṇa; epithet of Kṛṣṇa [cf. {%vārṣ-%}
{%ṇeya%}]; of Indra; of Agni; ({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a
tribe or family (descendants of Vṛṣṇi and relations
of Kṛṣṇa); N. of a class of Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀρνός, ἀρνειός, ῥήν, ἕρσαι, ἔριφος.</lang>]. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%ṣṇi-garbha, as,%} m. ‘born in the family of Vṛṣṇi,’
epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Vṛṣṇi-mat, ān,%} m., N. of a
king.
<LEND>

<L>44770<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzRya<k2>vfzRya
{%Vṛṣṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. fecundating; ({%am%}),
n. a vigorous or manly act; strength, (Sāy. {%= vīrya.%})
{%—Vṛṣṇyā-vat, ān, atī, at%} (in the Pada text {%vṛ-%}
{%ṣṇya-vat%}), Ved. possessed of vigour or strength,
vigorous; ({%ān%}), m. ‘the vigorous god,’ epithet of
Parjanya; the causer of rain, (according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda V. 83, 2 {%= varṣa-karma-vat.%})
<LEND>

<L>44771<pc>0960-c<k1>vfzya<k2>vfzya
{%Vṛṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sprinkled or showered
down, to be rained; aphrodisiac, provocative of sexual
[Page0961-a+ 75]
vigour, stimulating; ({%as%}), m. a kind of kidney-bean,
Phaseolus Radiatus; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of drug {%(= ṛd-%}
{%dhi)%}. {%—Vṛṣya-kandā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%vidārī)%}. {%—Vṛṣya-gandhā,%} f. the pot-herb Con-
volvulus Argenteus. {%—Vṛṣya-vallikā,%} f. a kind of
plant ({%= vidārī%}).
<LEND>

<L>44772<pc>0961-a<k1>vfzadaMSa<k2>vfzadaMSa<h>2
{#vfzadaMSa#} 2¦. {%vṛṣad-aṃśa%} (for 1. {%vṛṣa-daṃśa%}
see under {%vṛṣa%}). See {%vārṣadaṃśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>44773<pc>0961-a<k1>vfzaya<k2>vfzaya
{#vfzaya#}¦ {%vṛṣaya, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. IV. 100.
said to be fr. rt. {%vṛ,%} ‘to screen’), refuge, shelter;
asylum, place of refuge.
<LEND>

<L>44774<pc>0961-a<k1>vfzasfkkI<k2>vfzasfkkI
{#vfzasfkkI#}¦ {%vṛṣasṛkkī,%} f. a wasp ({%= bhṛṅ-%}
{%garola.%})
<LEND>

<L>44775<pc>0961-a<k1>vfzAgir<k2>vfzAgir
{#vfzAgir#}¦ {%vṛṣāgir,%} N. of a king (father of
the five Vārṣāgiras, q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>44776<pc>0961-a<k1>vfzAyaRa<k2>vfzAyaRa
{#vfzAyaRa#}¦ {%vṛṣāyaṇa.%} See p. 960, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>44777<pc>0961-a<k1>vfzI<k2>vfzI
{#vfzI#}¦ {%vṛṣī,%} f. the seat of a religious stu-
dent, a kind of seat or cushion made of Kuśa grass
wound into a pad, the seat or cushion of an ascetic,
(said to be also written {%vṛsī, bṛṣī.%})
<LEND>

<L>44778<pc>0961-a<k1>vfzwa<k2>vfzwa
{#vfzwa#}¦ {%vṛṣṭa, vṛṣṭi,%} &c. See p. 960, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>44779<pc>0961-a<k1>vfsaya<k2>vfsaya
{#vfsaya#}¦ {%vṛsaya = bṛsaya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44780<pc>0961-a<k1>vfh<k2>vfh<h>1
{#vfh#} 1¦. {%vṛh%} (also written {%bṛh%}), cl. 6. P.
{%vṛhati, vavarha, varhiṣyati%} or {%varkṣ-%}
{%yati, avarhīt%} or {%avṛkṣat%} (in Ṛg-veda IV. 16,
12. {%[pra] vṛhatāt = prakarṣeṇa chinnavān asi%}),
{%varhitum%} or {%varḍhum,%} to pull up, tear up, eradicate,
root up; to make effort, raise, lift up, erect: Caus.
{%varhayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avavarhat%} or {%avīvṛhat:%}
Desid. {%vivarhiṣati, vivṛkṣati:%} Intens. {%varīvṛh-%}
{%yate, varīvarḍhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>44781<pc>0961-a<k1>varhitvA<k2>varhitvA
{%Varhitvā%}¦ or {%vṛḍhvā,%} ind. having rooted up;
having raised.
<LEND>

<L>44782<pc>0961-a<k1>vfQa<k2>vfQa
{%Vṛḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ pulled up, eradicated; lifted up.
<LEND>

<L>44783<pc>0961-a<k1>vfh<k2>vfh<h>2
{#vfh#} 2¦. {%vṛh%} (also written {%bṛh,%} cf. rts.
2. {%bṛh, vṛṃh,%} 1. {%vṛdh%}), cl. 1. P. {%var-%}
{%hati,%} cl. 6. P. {%vṛhati%} (usually referred to rt. 2. {%bṛh%}),
{%vavarha, varhitum,%} to grow, increase, expand; to
roar, bellow (= rt. {%vṛṃh%}).
<LEND>

<L>44784<pc>0961-a<k1>vfh<k2>vfh<h>3
3. {%vṛh,%}¦ f. increase &c. in {%vṛhas-pati,%} p. 962.
<LEND>

<L>44785<pc>0961-a<k1>vfhat<k2>vfhat
{%Vṛhat, an, atī, at%}¦ (originally a pres. part. of rt.
2. {%vṛh;%} in the earlier language written {%bṛhat,%}
q. v., some compounds beginning with {%vṛhat%} will
be found under {%bṛhat%}), ‘growing,’ ‘extending,’ great,
large, bulky, big, lofty, high; broad, wide, extended,
extensive, ample, abundant, much; dense, compact,
thick, close; mighty, powerful; high, clear, loud
(said of sounds &c.); ({%an%}), m., N. of one of the
Maruts; of a king (a son of Su-hotra and father of
Aja-mīḍha); ({%atī%}), f. a large lute, the lute of Nārada
({%= mahatī%}); Viśvā-vasu's lute; any metre contain-
ing thirty-six syllables [cf. {%bṛhatī%}]; a symbolical
expression for the number thirty-six; a part of the
body between the breast and backbone; a mantle,
wrapper [cf. {%vṛhatikā%}]; a place containing water,
reservoir; speech [cf. {%vṛhatī-pati%}]; a particular
plant, (see {%bṛhatī%}); N. of a commentary; of a wife
of Ripu; of a wife of Gada; of a wife of Devahotra;
({%at%}), n., scil. {%sāman,%} see {%bṛhat;%} Brahma; the
Veda; [cf. probably Goth. <nsi>bairgahei;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>beorh, beorg.</nsi>] {%—Vṛhac-cakṣus (vṛhat + c˚), us,%}
m. a kind of vegetable. {%—Vṛhac-cañcu (vṛhat-%}
{%cañcu), us,%} m. a kind of vegetable; [cf. {%mahā-%}
{%cañcū.%}] {%—Vṛhac-cāṇakya (vṛhat + c˚), am,%} n.
the large collection of precepts by Cāṇakya. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%hac-citta (vṛhat-c˚), as,%} m. the citron tree {%(=%}
{%phala-pūra)%}. {%—Vṛhac-chabdendu-śekhara (vṛ-%}
{%hat + śabdendu-ś˚),%} the large grammatical work by
Nāgeśa. {%—Vṛhac-charīra (vṛhat + ś˚), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} large-bodied, gigantic. {%—Vṛhac-chalka (vṛ-%}
{%hat + ś˚), as,%} m. ‘large-scaled,’ a kind of prawn.
{%—Vṛhac-chātātapa (vṛhac + ś˚), as,%} m. ‘the
larger Śātātapa,’ N. of a particular recension of Śā-
tātapa's law-book. {%—Vṛhac-chānti-stava (vṛhat%}
{%+ ś˚), as,%} m. the larger Śānti-stava. {%—Vṛhac-chāla %}
[Page0961-b+ 81]
{%(vṛhat + ś˚), as,%} m. a large or lofty Shorea Ro-
busta. {%—Vṛhac-chṛṅgāra-tilaka (vṛhat + ś˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the larger Śṛṅgāra-tilaka. {%—Vṛhac-chravas%}
{%(vṛhat + ś˚), ās, ās, as,%} Ved. loud-sounding;
loudly praised, far-famed. {%—Vṛhac-chrīkrama (vṛ-%}
{%hat + ś˚), as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Vṛhac-chloka%}
{%(vṛhat + ś˚), as, ā, am,%} loudly praised, far-famed;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Uru-krama by Kīrtti. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%haj-jaghana (vṛhat + j˚), as, ā, am,%} having large
hips, broad-hipped. {%—Vṛhaj-jana (vṛhat + j˚), as,%}
m. a great or illustrious man. {%—Vṛhaj-jātaka (vṛ-%}
{%hat + j˚), am,%} n., N. of Varāha-mihira's larger work
on nativities; [cf. {%svalpa-jātaka.%}] {%—Vṛhajjātaka-%}
{%śloka-vyākhyāna, am,%} n., N. of a metrical com-
mentary by Bhaṭṭotpala on the preceding work.
{%—Vṛhaj-jābālopaniṣad (vṛhat + j˚), t,%} f., N.
of an Upaniṣad on the divinity of Kālāgni-rudra.
{%—Vṛhaj-jīvantikā%} or {%vṛhaj-jīvantī%} or {%vṛhaj-%}
{%jīvā (vṛhat + j˚),%} f. a kind of large Jīvantikā plant
{%(= priyaṅ-karī)%}. {%—Vṛhaj-jyotis, is,%} m., N. of a
grandson of Brahmā; [cf. {%bṛhaj-jyotis.%}] {%—Vṛhaṭ-%}
{%ṭikka (vṛhat + ṭ˚), as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vṛhaṭ-%}
{%ṭīkā (vṛhat + ṭ˚),%} f. ‘the large commentary,’ N. of a
work by Kumārila. {%—Vṛhaḍ-ḍhakkā (vṛhat + ḍh˚),%}
f. a large drum. {%—Vṛhatī-pati, is,%} m., N. of Vṛhas-
pati or the planet Jupiter; [cf. {%vṛhas-pati.%}] {%—Vṛ-%}
{%hat-kathā,%} f. ‘the large or extended narrative,’ N.
of a collection of tales ascribed to Guṇāḍhya, (the
Kathā-sarit-sāgara of Soma-deva is said to have been
abridged from this work); N. of another work
ascribed to Kṣemendra. {%—Vṛhat-kanda, as,%} m. a
kind of bulbous root (either a species of large onion
or a sort of garlic). {%—Vṛhat-karman, ā,%} m. ‘doing
mighty acts,’ N. of several kings. {%—Vṛhat-kalpa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a Kalpa, the seventh day in the bright
half of the moon in Brahmā's month, (see {%kalpa%});
the last day in the dark half of the month. {%—Vṛhat-%}
{%kāya, as, ī, am,%} large-bodied, bulky, gigantic.
{%—Vṛhat-kāla-jñāna, am,%} n. ‘the large Kāla-jñāna
or knowledge of times,’ N. of a work. {%—Vṛhat-%}
{%kāla-śāka, as,%} m. a shrub, Cassia Purpurea or a large
variety of it. {%—Vṛhat-kāśa, as,%} m. a particular
kind of reed {%(= khaḍgaṭa)%}. {%—Vṛhat-kīrtti, is, is,%}
{%i,%} far-famed (said of Vṛhas-pati); ({%is%}), m., N. of a
grandson of Brahmā; of an Asura. {%—Vṛhat-kukṣi,%}
{%is, is%} or {%ī, i,%} having a large or prominent belly;
pot-bellied, corpulent. {%—Vṛhat-ketu, us, us, u,%} hav-
ing great clearness or brightness; ({%us%}), m. epithet
of Agni; N. of a king. {%—Vṛhat-kṣaṇa, as,%} m.,
N. of a king, (also read {%vṛhat-kṣaya, vṛhad-%}
{%raṇa.%}) {%—Vṛhat-kṣata, as,%} m., N. of a particular
mythical being. {%—Vṛhat-kṣatra, as,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Vṛhat-tapas, as,%} n. great mortification;
({%ās, ās, as%}), having great devotion, very devout;
({%as%}), n. a particular severe penance. {%—Vṛhat-tāla,%}
{%as,%} m. Phœnix Paludosa {%(= hintāla)%}. {%—Vṛhat-%}
{%tiktā,%} f. the plant Clypea Hernandifolia. {%—Vṛhat-%}
{%tuhina-śarkara, as, ā, am,%} full of great pieces of
ice. {%—Vṛhat-tṛṇa, am,%} n. strong grass, (opposed
to {%mṛdu-tṛṇa%}); the bamboo cane. {%—Vṛhat-te-%}
{%jas, ās, ās, as,%} having great energy. {%—Vṛhat-to-%}
{%ḍala-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%hat-tva, am,%} n. greatness, largeness, loftiness, large
extent. {%—Vṛhat-tvac, k,%} m. the plant Alstonia
Scholaris. {%—Vṛhat-pattra, as,%} m. ‘having large
leaves,’ a species of bulbous plant; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
plant {%(= tri-parṇikā)%}. {%—Vṛhat-parāśara, as,%} m.
‘the larger Parāśara,’ N. of a particular recension of
Parāśara's law-book. {%—Vṛhat-pāṭali, is,%} f. the
thorn-apple, Datura Metel. {%—Vṛhat-pāda, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} large-footed; ({%as%}), m. the Indian fig-tree.
{%—Vṛhat-pārevata, am,%} n. a kind of fruit tree
{%(= mahā-pārevata)%}. {%—Vṛhat-pālin, ī,%} m. wild
cumin. {%—Vṛhat-pīlu, us,%} m. a kind of Pilu tree
{%(= mahā-pīlu)%}. {%—Vṛhat-puṣpa, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing large flowers; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of Crotolaria {%(=%}
{%ghaṇṭā-ravā)%}. {%—Vṛhat-pṛṣṭha,%} see {%bṛhat-%}
{%pṛṣṭha%}. {%—Vṛhat-pracetas, ās,%} m. ‘the larger
Pracetas,’ N. of a particular recension of a law-book
by Pracetas. {%—Vṛhat-prayoga, as,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Vṛhat-phala, as, ā, am,%} having or bearing
[Page0961-c+ 81]
large fruit; bringing great profit or reward, great in
results; ({%as%}), m. a species of plant, {%= caceṇḍā;%}
{%(ās),%} m. pl., N. of a class of Buddhist gods; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of various plants {%(= kaṭu-tumbī; = mahen-%}
{%dra-vāruṇī; = kuṣmāṇḍī; = mahā-jambū).%}
{%—Vṛhat-saṃvarta, as,%} m. ‘the large Saṃvarta,’
N. of a legal work mentioned in the Mitākṣarā or
commentary on Yājña-valkya's code, (see {%saṃvarta.%})
{%—Vṛhat-saṃhitā,%} f. ‘the great composition,’ N. of
an astrological work by Varāha-mihira; of a philo-
sophical work. {%—Vṛhat-sāman,%} see {%bṛhat-sāman.%}
{%—Vṛhat-sūrya-siddhānta, as,%} m. the large Sūrya-
siddhānta. {%—Vṛhat-sena, as,%} m., N. of a king; of
a son of Sunakshatra; ({%ā%}), f., N. of Damayantī's
nurse. {%—Vṛhat-sphic, k, k, k%} (according to some
{%vṛhat-sphij%}), having large buttocks, large-hipped;
({%k%}), m. a proper N. {%—Vṛhad-agni, is,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Vṛhadagni-mukha, am,%} n., N. of a particular
powder. {%—Vṛhad-aṅga, as, ī, am,%} having large
limbs, large-bodied, bulky; having many parts; ({%as%}),
m. a large elephant (or one that is usually the
leader of a wild herd). {%—Vṛhad-aṅgiras, ās,%} m.
‘the great Aṅgiras,’ N. of a particular recension of
a law-book by Aṅgiras. {%—Vṛhad-atri, is,%} m. ‘the
large Atri,’ N. of a work on medicine. {%—Vṛhad-%}
{%abhidhāna-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m. the large or enlarged
Abhidhāna-cintāmaṇi by Hema-candra. {%—Vṛhad-%}
{%amara%} or {%vṛhad-amara-kośa, as,%} m. ‘the large
Amara-kośa,’ N. of a particular recension of the
Amara-kośa with interpolations. {%—Vṛhad-ambālikā,%}
f., N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda.
{%—Vṛhad-amla, as,%} m. the fruit tree Averrhoa
Carambola. {%—Vṛhad-aśva, as,%} m., N. of the Ṛṣi
who relates the story of Nala to Yudhi-ṣṭhira; of a
king; of a son of Śrāvastaka; of a son of Saha-
deva; of a Gandharva. {%—Vṛhad-asṛṅ-mati, is,%} m.
‘having a great inclination for blood,’ an evil spirit,
demon. {%—Vṛhad-ātreya, as,%} m. ‘the large Ātreya,’
N. of a work on medicine. {%—Vṛhad-āraṇyaka,%}
see {%bṛhad-āraṇyaka%}. {%—Vṛhadāraṇyaka-bhā-%}
{%ṣya, am,%} n., N. of a commentary to the Vṛhad-
āraṇyaka Upaniṣad by Śaṅkarācārya, and of another
by Śūreśvara. {%—Vṛhadāraṇyakabhāṣya-ṭīkā,%} f.,
N. of a commentary on the preceding work by
Ānanda-jñāna. {%—Vṛhadāraṇyakabhāṣya-vārt-%}
{%tika, am,%} n., N. of a metrical commentary on Śaṅ-
karācārya's Vṛhadāraṇyaka-bhāṣya by Sureśvara.
{%—Vṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad-vyākhyā (˚ka-up˚),%}
f., N. of a commentary on the Vṛhad-āraṇyaka
Upaniṣad by Dviveda-gaṅga. {%—Vṛhad-iṣu, us,%}
m., N. of a son of Ajamīḍha; of a son of Bāhyāśva
or Bharmyāśva or Hary-aśva. {%—Vṛhad-uktha, as,%}
m. ‘having loud praise,’ N. of a son of Deva-rāta;
of an Agni (a son of Tapas); [cf. {%bṛhad-uktha.%}]
{%—Vṛhad-ukthi, is,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi mentioned
in the Vāyu-Purāṇa; (perhaps wrongly for {%vṛhad-%}
{%uktha.%}) {%—Vṛhad-uttara-tāpinī,%} f., N. of an Upa-
niṣad. {%—Vṛhad-elā,%} f. large cardamoms. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%had-garbha,%} a wrong reading for {%vṛṣa-darbha.%}
{%—Vṛhad-guru, us,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vṛhad-%}
{%gṛha, as,%} m. ‘large-housed,’ N. of a country (=
{%kārūṣa,%} described as lying behind the Vindhya
mountains near the province of Malwa, and perhaps
comprising Bandelkhand or the adjoining district;
also read {%vṛhad-guha,%} and derived from {%guha,%}
‘a cave,’ the country being mountainous and the
people probably having been Troglodytes or dwellers
in caves); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people {%(= kārū-%}
{%ṣās)%}. {%—Vṛhad-gola, am,%} n. a water-melon.
{%—Vṛhad-gaurī-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a particular
religious observance. {%—Vṛhad-darbha, as,%} m., N.
of a king, (also read {%vṛhad-bhānu.%}) {%—Vṛhad-%}
{%dala, as,%} m. a species of Lodhra ({%= paṭṭikā-%}
{%lodhra%}); Phœnix Paludosa; [cf. {%vṛhat-tāla.%}]
{%—Vṛhad-durga, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Vṛhad-%}
{%dyuti, is,%} f. a great light, radiance, splendor. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%had-dyumna, as,%} m. and {%vṛhad-dhanus, us,%} m.
and {%vṛhad-dharman, ā,%} m., N. of kings. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%had-dharmaprakāśa, as,%} m. ‘the large Dharma-
prakāśa,’ N. of a work. {%—Vṛhad-dhala (vṛhat-%}
{%ha˚), am,%} n. a large plough {%(= hali)%}. {%—Vṛhad- %}
[Page0962-a+ 81]
{%dhārāvalī (vṛhat-hā˚),%} f. ‘the large Hārāvalī,’
N. of a dictionary. {%—Vṛhad-dhārīta (vṛhat-hā˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the large Hārīta. {%—Vṛhad-dhustūra, as,%} m.
a large thorn-apple. {%—Vṛhad-dhemādri (vṛhat-%}
{%he˚), is,%} m. the large Hemādri. {%—Vṛhad-dhvanī,%}
f. ‘loud-sounding,’ N. of a river. {%—Vṛhad-bala, as,%}
m. ‘having great strength,’ N. of a king of Kośala;
of another king (son of Deva-bhāga). {%—Vṛhad-%}
{%brahman, ā,%} m., N. of a grandson of Brahmā.
{%—Vṛhadbrahmottara-khaṇḍa (˚ma-ut˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a part of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Vṛhad-bhaṭ-%}
{%ṭārikā,%} f., N. of Durgā. {%—Vṛhad-bhaya, as,%} m.,
N. of one of the sons of the ninth Manu. {%—Vṛhad-%}
{%bhānu, us,%} m. ‘having great brightness,’ fire or the
god of fire, (see also {%bṛhad-bhānu%}); an epithet of
a particular Agni; N. of a son of Sattrāyaṇa and a
manifestation of Viṣṇu; of a son of Kṛṣṇa; N.
of a king. {%—Vṛhad-bhāsa, as, ā, am,%} having
great splendor, clear-shining; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
grandson of Brahmā; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter of the
god of the sun and wife of Agni Bhānu. {%—Vṛhad-%}
{%yama, as,%} m. ‘the large Yama,’ N. of a particular
recension of Yama's law-book. {%—Vṛhad-yājña-%}
{%valkya, as,%} m. ‘the large Yājñavalkya,’ N. of a par-
ticular recension of Yājñavalkya's law-book. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%had-yātrā,%} f., N. of a work by Varāha-mihira.
{%—Vṛhad-raṇa, as,%} m., N. of a king; [cf. {%vṛhat-%}
{%kṣaṇa.%}] {%—Vṛhad-ratha, as,%} m. (see also {%bṛhad-%}
{%ratha%}), ‘having a large chariot,’ epithet of Indra;
N. of a man (supposed to be the same as Vāsiṣṭha,
and mentioned together with Kaśyapa, Aṅgiras,
Varca, and Prāṇa); N. of a king of the Māgadhas;
of a son of Deva-rāta (king of the Videhas); of a son
of the Vasu Upari-cara; of a son of Tigma (or Timi
or Tigmātman); of a son of Bhadra-ratha; of the
successor of Śaśa-dharman and last of the Maurya
dynasty; a sacrificial vessel; a particular Mantra; a
part of the Sāma-veda; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%had-rāja, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Vṛhad-rāja-%}
{%mārtaṇḍa,%} N. of a work mentioned in Raghu-
nanda's Saṃskāra-tattva; [cf. {%rāja-mārtaṇḍa.%}] {%—Vṛ-%}
{%had-rāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%} crying loud; ({%ī%}), m. a species
of small owl. {%—Vṛhad-rūpa, as,%} m., N. of a Marut.
{%—Vṛhad-roma%} and {%vṛhadroma-paṭṭana,%} N. of
places mentioned in the Romaka-siddhānta. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%had-vatī,%} f., N. of a river; [cf. {%bṛhad-vat.%}] {%—Vṛ-%}
{%had-valka, as,%} m. a species of Lodhra {%(= paṭṭikā-%}
{%lodhra)%}. {%—Vṛhad-vasiṣṭha, as,%} m. the large Va-
siṣṭha. {%—Vṛhad-vasu, us,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Vṛhad-vāta, as,%} m. a kind of plant ({%= aśmarī-%}
{%hara%}); a kind of grain, Andropogon Sorghum.
{%—Vṛhad-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} loud-speaking, boasting,
a boaster. {%—Vṛhad-vāruṇī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%mahendra-vāruṇī)%}. {%—Vṛhad-vāsiṣṭha, am,%} n.
the large Vāsiṣṭha. {%—Vṛhad-vivāha-paṭala,%} N.
of a work by Varāha-mihira. {%—Vṛhad-viṣṇu, us,%}
m. ‘the large Viṣṇu,’ N. of a larger recension of
Viṣṇu's law-book. {%—Vṛhad-vīja, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing large seeds; abounding in seed; ({%as%}), m. the
plant Spondias Mangifera. {%—Vṛhad-vṛhaspati, is,%}
m., N. of a particular recension of Vṛhas-pati's law-
book. {%—Vṛhad-vyāsa, as,%} m. the large Vyāsa.
{%—Vṛhad-vrata, as, ā, am,%} observing the great
vow, observing the vow of chastity. {%—Vṛhan-nakhī,%}
f. a particular perfume {%(= gandha-sāraṇa)%}. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%han-naṭa, as,%} m. an epithet of Arjuna; [cf. {%vṛhan-%}
{%nala.%}] {%—Vṛhan-naḍa, as,%} m. reed-grass, Amphi-
donax Karka ({%= nala%}); an epithet of Arjuna; [cf.
{%vṛhan-nala.%}] {%—Vṛhan-nala, as,%} m. a kind of
large reed, Arundo Gigantea ({%= mahā-poṭagala%});
the arm; the name assumed by Arjuna when living
in the family of king Virāṭa as a eunuch in female
attire, (also fem., see the next.) {%—Vṛhan-nalā,%} f.
the assumed name of Arjuna at the court of Virāṭa,
(under this name Arjuna adopted a sort of woman's
dress, putting on bracelets and ear-rings, and under-
took as a kind of eunuch to teach dancing and music
to the daughter of king Virāṭa and the other women
of the palace.) {%—Vṛhan-nāradīya, am,%} n. or {%vṛ-%}
{%han-nāradīya-purāṇa, am,%} n. ‘the large Nāra-
dīya,’ N. of one of the eighteen Purāṇas. {%—Vṛhan- %}
[Page0962-b+ 79]
{%nāradīya-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a work mentioned
in the Śakti-ratnākara. {%—Vṛhan-nārāyaṇa%} or {%vṛ-%}
{%han-nārāyaṇī%} or {%vṛhan-nārāyaṇopaniṣad (˚ṇa-%}
{%up˚), t,%} f. the large Nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (treating
of Vedāntic theology and forming the last Prapā-
ṭhaka of the Taittirīya Āraṇyaka of the Black Yajur-
veda). {%—Vṛhan-nighaṇṭi,%} ‘the large glossary,’ N.
of a dictionary. {%—Vṛhan-nirvāṇa-tantra, am,%} n.
‘the large Nirvāṇa-tantra,’ N. of a work mentioned
in the Śakti-ratnākara. {%—Vṛhan-niveśa, as, ā, am,%}
having large dimensions, large, protuberant. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%han-nīlī,%} f., N. of a plant. {%—Vṛhan-netra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having large eyes, good-sighted, far-sighted.
{%—Vṛhan-naukā,%} f. epithet of a favourable position
in the game of Catur-aṅga; [cf. {%naukākṛṣṭa.%}]
{%—Vṛhan-manas, ās,%} m., N. of a grandson of
Brahmā; of a king. {%—Vṛhan-manu, us,%} m. ‘the
large Manu,’ N. of a law-book (probably the precursor
of the present version, mentioned by Mādhava and
other commentators). {%—Vṛhan-mantra, as,%} m., N.
of a grandson of Brahmā. {%—Vṛhal-lohita,%} N. of a
mythical tank or pond.
<LEND>

<L>44786<pc>0962-b<k1>vfhata<k2>vfhata
{%Vṛhata, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of the ninth Manu.
<LEND>

<L>44787<pc>0962-b<k1>vfhatikA<k2>vfhatikA
{%Vṛhatikā,%}¦ f. an upper garment, mantle, wrapper;
a small sort of egg-plant.
<LEND>

<L>44788<pc>0962-b<k1>vfhatIpati<k2>vfhatIpati
{%Vṛhatī-pati.%}¦ See under {%vṛhat.%}
<LEND>

<L>44789<pc>0962-b<k1>vfhatka<k2>vfhatka
{%Vṛhatka, as, ā, am, = vṛhat,%}¦ large, great; ({%as%}
or {%am%}), m. n., N. of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>44790<pc>0962-b<k1>vfhaspati<k2>vfhaspati
{%Vṛhas-pati, is,%}¦ m. (in the earlier language more
usually written {%bṛhas-pati,%} q. v.; fr. {%vṛhas,%} gen.
of 3. {%vṛh + pati%}), ‘lord of increase,’ N. of the
regent of the planet Jupiter and preceptor or Puro-
hita of the gods, (in astronomy identified with the
planet; he is regarded as the son of Aṅgiras and,
like Sarasvatī, presides over speech; Tārā, who is
fabled to have been carried off by Candra, is repre-
sented as his wife; he is sometimes identified with
Vyāsa; in the Veda his character and functions are
somewhat different, and his name is there usually
written Bṛhas-pati, q. v.); N. of a saint and law-
giver, (sometimes written {%vṛhasām-pati%}); N. of a
philosopher; of a king (a great-grandson of Aśoka);
of a king of Kaśmīra. {%—Vṛhaspati-cakra, am,%} n.
‘cycle of Vṛhas-pati,’ the Hindū cycle of sixty years;
a particular astrological diagram (shaped like a man and
used for foretelling good or bad fortune). {%—Vṛhaspati-%}
{%cāra,%} N. of the eighth Adhyāya of Varāha-mihira's
Vṛhat-saṃhitā. {%—Vṛhaspati-datta, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Vṛhaspati-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a commen-
tator on the Raghu-vaṃśa. {%—Vṛhaspati-vāra, as,%}
m. ‘Vṛhas-pati's day,’ Jupiter's day, Thursday. {%—Vṛ-%}
{%haspati-śānti, is,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Vṛhaspati-%}
{%saṃhitā,%} f., N. of a short law-book (ascribed to
Vṛhas-pati). {%—Vṛhaspati-sama, as, ā, am,%} equal
to Vṛhas-pati, like Vṛhas-pati. {%—Vṛhaspati-sava,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a particular festival or ceremony, (see
{%bṛhaspati-sava.%}) {%—Vṛhaspatisava-prayoga, as,%}
m., N. of a treatise on the performance of the Vṛhas-
pati-sava ceremony. {%—Vṛhaspati-suratā,%} f. a proper
N. {%—Vṛhaspati-smṛti, is,%} f. Vṛhas-pati's law-book
(said to be classed among the Tāmasa works).
<LEND>

<L>44791<pc>0962-b<k1>vfhaspatika<k2>vfhaspatika
{%Vṛhaspatika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vṛhaspati-datta%}), a
familiar diminutive, (Pāṇ. V. 3, 83, Vārtt. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>44792<pc>0962-b<k1>vfhaspatiya<k2>vfhaspatiya
{%Vṛhaspatiya%}¦ or {%vṛhaspatila, as,%} m. {%= vṛhas-%}
{%patika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>44793<pc>0962-b<k1>vF<k2>vF
{#vF#}¦ {%vṝ%} = rt. {%vṛ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44794<pc>0962-b<k1>ve<k2>ve
{#ve#}¦ {%ve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%vayati, -te, vavau%} or
{%uvāya%} (2nd sing. {%uvayitha, uvitha, uvātha,%}
3rd pl. {%vavus, ūvus, ūyus,%} Pāṇ. II. 4, 41), {%vave%} or
{%ūve%} or {%ūye, vāsyati%} (also {%vayiṣyati%}), {%-te, avāsīt,%}
{%avāsta,%} Prec. {%ūyāt, vāsīṣṭa, vātum;%} cl. 4. A. (=
rt. {%ūy,%} q. v.), {%ūyate, ūyāmāsa, ūyiṣyate, ūyiṣṭa,%}
{%ūyitum,%} to weave, interweave, braid, plait; to string
or join together artificially, make, compose (speeches,
hymns, &c.); to sew; to cover: Pass. {%ūyate,%} Aor.
{%avāyi:%} Caus. {%vāyayati%} (according to some {%vāpa-%}
{%yati%}), {%-te, (ūyayati):%} Desid. {%vivāsati, -te, (ūyi-%}
{%yiṣate):%} Intens. {%vāvāyate, vāvāti%} or {%vāveti;%} [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἤ-τριον, ὀθόνη,</lang> (probably also) <lang n="greek">ὀπέας, ἠπητής;</lang>
[Page0962-c+ 78]
<lang n="greek">ὑϕή, ὑϕαίνω</lang> Lat. <nsi>viere, vimen, vitta:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>wât, weban:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>wœd, wefan, wœfels,</nsi>
<nsi>weft, windan:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>u-dis,</nsi> ‘texture’ (= 2. <nsi>ūti</nsi>);
<nsi>au-dziu,</nsi> ‘I weave:’ Hib. <nsi>fighim,</nsi> ‘I weave;’ <nsi>figh-</nsi>
<nsi>te,</nsi> ‘woven;’ <nsi>fuaghaim,</nsi> ‘I sew.’]
<LEND>

<L>44795<pc>0962-c<k1>uta<k2>uta
{%Uta, as, ā, am,%}¦ woven. See s. v., p. 147.
<LEND>

<L>44796<pc>0962-c<k1>Uta<k2>Uta
{%Ūta, ūti.%}¦ See s. v., p. 177.
<LEND>

<L>44797<pc>0962-c<k1>vayat<k2>vayat
{%Vayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ weaving, sewing.
<LEND>

<L>44798<pc>0962-c<k1>vayizyat<k2>vayizyat
{%Vayiṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} Ved. about to
weave, weaving.
<LEND>

<L>44799<pc>0962-c<k1>vAna<k2>vAna
{%Vāna, vānīya.%}¦ See s. v., p. 903.
<LEND>

<L>44800<pc>0962-c<k1>vema<k2>vema
{%Vema, as,%}¦ m. a loom.
<LEND>

<L>44801<pc>0962-c<k1>veman<k2>veman
{%Veman, ā, a,%}¦ m. n. a loom.
<LEND>

<L>44802<pc>0962-c<k1>veya<k2>veya
{%Veya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be woven. {%—Veya-gāna, am,%}
n. a particular song-book or manual of singing giving
(with the Āraṇya-gāna) the various modifications of
intonation for the Ārcika division of the Sāma-veda,
(the Staubhika division also has two of these song-
books, viz. the Ūha-g˚ and Ūhya-g˚.) {%—Veya-cchalā,%}
f., Ved., N. of a chapter of the Sāmaveda-cchalā, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44803<pc>0962-c<k1>vekawa<k2>vekawa
{#vekawa#}¦ {%vekaṭa, as,%} m. a youth; (in the
drama) a buffoon ({%= vi-dūṣaka%}); a sort of fish
(commonly called Bhekṭī); a jeweller ({%= vaika-%}
{%ṭika%}).
<LEND>

<L>44804<pc>0962-c<k1>vekuri<k2>vekuri
{#vekuri#}¦ {%vekuri.%} See {%bekuri.%}
<LEND>

<L>44805<pc>0962-c<k1>vekz<k2>vekz
{#vekz#}¦ {%vekṣ%} (= rt. {%vlekṣ%}), cl. 10. P. {%ve-%}
{%kṣayati, -yitum,%} to see; [cf. {%avekṣ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44806<pc>0962-c<k1>vega<k2>vega
{#vega#}¦ {%vega, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%vij%}), agitation,
shaking, shock; impetus, impulse, momentum;
impetuosity, speed, rapidity, quickness, velocity, ({%ve-%}
{%gād vegaṃ gam,%} to go from speed to speed, increase
one's speed); haste, rashness, violence; onset;
stream, current; blast, breeze; the flight of an arrow;
any sudden impulse or transition of mind (as from
passion to apathy &c.); energy, activity, force,
power, strength, determination, promptitude; passion,
love; pleasure, delight; external indication of any
internal emotion or sensation (as convulsion, sweat,
&c.); expulsion of the feces, evacuation of the natural
excretions; semen virile; the fruit of a kind of
mango. {%—Vega-tas,%} ind. with speed, quickly, speedily,
hastily. {%—Vega-nāśana, am,%} n. ‘preventing speed
or activity,’ phlegm, the phlegmatic humor. {%—Vega-%}
{%rodha, as,%}  m. obstruction of speed or activity, re-
tardation, check; obstruction of the movement of the
bowels or of the natural excretions. {%—Vega-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} possessing velocity or activity, impetuous,
rapid; quick, expeditious; agitated; ({%ān%}), m., N.
of a king; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a river; a species of
metre (consisting of three anapests and a long syllable
in the first Pāda, three dactyls and a spondee in the
second Pāda). {%—Vegavat-tama, as, ā, am,%} speediest,
quickest, very quick or swift. {%—Vegavat-tara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} more speedy, quicker, swifter, very quick.
{%—Vegavat-tā,%} f. velocity, swiftness. {%—Vega-vāhin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} bearing swiftness, swift. {%—Vega-vidhāraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. retardation of velocity, obstruction of speed,
stopping, retarding; constipation, &c. {%—Vega-sara,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘going with speed,’ a mule; [cf. {%vesara.%}]
{%—Vegāghāta (˚ga-āgh˚), as,%} m. ‘speed-obstruc-
tion,’ the sudden arresting of impetus or velocity,
stop, check; obstruction of the natural excretions.
{%—Vegānila (˚ga-an˚), as,%} m. breeze or blast caused
by the velocity (of a moving object).
<LEND>

<L>44807<pc>0962-c<k1>vegita<k2>vegita
{%Vegita, as, ā, am,%}¦ impelled with speed or velocity,
quickened, expedited, swift.
<LEND>

<L>44808<pc>0962-c<k1>vegin<k2>vegin
{%Vegin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having velocity, swift, fleet, im-
petuous, rapid; ({%ī%}), m. a courier, express; a hawk;
({%inī%}), f. a river. {%—Vegi-tā,%} f. or {%vegi-tva, am,%} n.
impetus, velocity, quickness, speed. {%—Vegi-hariṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. an antelope ({%= śrī-kārī%}).
<LEND>

<L>44809<pc>0962-c<k1>vejita<k2>vejita
{%Vejita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, frightened, terrified.
<LEND>

<L>44810<pc>0962-c<k1>veNkawa<k2>veNkawa
{#veNkawa#}¦ {%veṅkaṭa,%} N. of a mountain; of the
son of Raghu-nātha-dīkṣita (author of the Viśva-
guṇādarśa); of a king of Vijaya-nagara; of the
author of the Śabdārtha-kalpa-taru lexicon, (his
father's name was also Veṅkaṭa.) {%—Veṅkaṭa-giri,%}
{%is,%} m. the mountain Veṅkaṭa. {%—Veṅkaṭa-nātha, %}
[Page0963-a+ 75]
{%as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Veṅkaṭācaleśa (˚ṭa-ac˚,%}
{%˚la-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of the Veṅkaṭa mountain,’
epithet of a deity.
<LEND>

<L>44811<pc>0963-a<k1>vecA<k2>vecA
{#vecA#}¦ {%vecā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%vic%}), hire,
wages.
<LEND>

<L>44812<pc>0963-a<k1>vejAnI<k2>vejAnI
{#vejAnI#}¦ {%vejānī,%} f. the medicinal plant Ser-
ratula Anthelmintica ({%= soma-rājī%}).
<LEND>

<L>44813<pc>0963-a<k1>vejita<k2>vejita
{#vejita#}¦ {%vejita.%} See under {%vega,%} p. 962.
<LEND>

<L>44814<pc>0963-a<k1>vewA<k2>vewA
{#vewA#}¦ {%veṭā,%} f. the abode of the Vaiśya tribe(?).
<LEND>

<L>44815<pc>0963-a<k1>veqa<k2>veqa
{#veqa#}¦ {%veḍa, am,%} n. (probably fr. rt. 1. {%viḍ%}),
a kind of coarse sandal; ({%ā%}), f. a boat.
<LEND>

<L>44816<pc>0963-a<k1>veQamikA<k2>veQamikA
{#veQamikA#}¦ {%veḍhamikā,%} f. a kind of bread or
cake.
<LEND>

<L>44817<pc>0963-a<k1>veR<k2>veR
{#veR#}¦ {%veṇ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%veṇati, -te,%} &c.,
to go, move, move about; to play on an
instrument, &c. (= rt. {%ven,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>44818<pc>0963-a<k1>veRa<k2>veRa
{%Veṇa, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps connected with {%vīṇā%} and
meaning ‘a lyre-player’), a musician (one by caste,
the son of a Vaideha by an Amba-ṣṭhī or Amba-
ṣṭha woman; see Manu X. 19, 49); N. of a Rā-
jarshi or royal Ṛṣi (father of Pṛthu, and said to
have perished through irreligious conduct and want
of submissiveness to the Brāhmans; he is represented
as having occasioned confusion of castes, see Manu
VII. 41, IX. 66, 67, and as founder of the race of
Niṣādas and Dhīvaras; according to the Viṣṇu-
Purāṇa, Veṇa was a son of Aṅga and a descendant of
the first Manu; a Veṇa Rāja-śravas is enumerated
among the Veda-vyāsas or arrangers of the Veda;
cf. {%vena%}); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>44819<pc>0963-a<k1>veRi<k2>veRi
{#veRi#}¦ {%veṇi, is,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV.
48. fr. rt. 1. {%vī,%} but rather fr. rt. {%ve%}), weaving, braid-
ing, braided hair, a braid of hair, hair twisted into
a single unornamented braid and allowed to fall on
the back (as worn by widows and women whose
husbands are absent, as a token of mourning; cf.
{%eka-veṇi%}); the conflux or meeting of two or more
rivers or streams in a common point of union (as at
Prayāga or Allahabad, where the Gaṅgā, Yamunā,
and Sarasvatī are supposed to unite; cf. {%tri-veṇī,%}
{%pra-yāga%}). {%—Veṇi-mādhava, as,%} m. a particular
square-shaped idol or stone image of a god at Pra-
yāga. {%—Veṇi-vedhanī,%} f. ‘hair-penetrating,’ a leech.
{%—Veṇi-vedhinī,%} f. ‘braid-piercer,’ a comb.
<LEND>

<L>44820<pc>0963-a<k1>veRikA<k2>veRikA
{%Veṇikā,%}¦ f. braided hair.
<LEND>

<L>44821<pc>0963-a<k1>veRI<k2>veRI
{%Veṇī,%}¦ f. braided hair, &c. {%= veṇi%} above; a stream,
current; N. of a river; a sort of grass, Andropogon
Serratum; a ewe. {%—Veṇī-dāsa, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Veṇī-bandha, as,%} m. the binding of the braid
of mourning. {%—Veṇī-mādhava,%} see {%veṇi-mādhava.%}
{%—Veṇī-mādhava-bandhu, us,%} m., N. of the father
of Raṅga-nātha. {%—Veṇī-saṃhāra, as,%} m. ‘braid-
seizing, hair-seizing,’ N. of a well-known drama by
Bhaṭṭa-nārāyaṇa (the subject of which is an incident
described in the Sabhā-parvan of the Mahā-bhārata,
2229-2235, where it is narrated that after Yudhi-
ṣṭhira had lost all his property, including Draupadī,
to Duryodhana in gambling with dice, she was treated
with great indignity by Duḥśāsana, who dragged her
by her braided hair into the public assembly; Bhīma,
who witnessed this insult, swore that in revenge he
would one day dash Duḥśāsana to pieces and drink
his blood — a threat which he fulfilled; this drama is
said to be also called {%Veṇī-saṃvaraṇa,%} perhaps for
{%˚-saṃharaṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>44822<pc>0963-a<k1>veRIra<k2>veRIra
{#veRIra#}¦ {%veṇīra, as,%} m. the soap-berry, Sa-
pindus Detergens ({%= ariṣṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>44823<pc>0963-a<k1>veRu<k2>veRu
{#veRu#}¦ {%veṇu, us,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 38. fr. {%vī%} substituted for rt. {%aj,%} but probably
connected with rt. {%ve%}), a bamboo; a reed; a flute,
fife, pipe; N. of a king of the Yādavas. {%—Veṇu-%}
{%karkara, as,%} m. a species of thorny plant ({%= karīra,%}
commonly called Karir or Karil). {%—Veṇu-ja, as,%} m.
bamboo seed or fruit. {%—Veṇu-datta, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Veṇu-dala, am,%} n. a small shoot of a cane.
[Page0963-b+ 77]
{%—Veṇu-dāri, is,%} m. a proper N. {%—Veṇu-dārin, ī,%}
m., N. of a demon. {%—Veṇu-dhma, as,%} m. a flute-
player, fifer, piper. {%—Veṇu-nisruti, is,%} m. the sugar-
cane. {%—Veṇu-pattrī,%} f. a species of plant {%(= vaṃśa-%}
{%pattrī, hiṅgu-parṇī)%}. {%—Veṇu-yava, as,%} m. bamboo
seed or fruit. {%—Veṇu-yaṣṭi, is,%} m. f. a bamboo staff.
{%—Veṇu-vāda%} or {%veṇu-vādaka, as,%} m. a flute-
player, piper. {%—Veṇu-vīja, am,%} n. bamboo seed.
{%—Veṇu-haya, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Veṇu-hotra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the father of king Bharga; of the
father of Gārgya (according to another account).
<LEND>

<L>44824<pc>0963-b<k1>veRuka<k2>veRuka
{%Veṇuka, as,%}¦ m. a goad with a bamboo handle
(used for driving an elephant).
<LEND>

<L>44825<pc>0963-b<k1>veRuna<k2>veRuna
{#veRuna#}¦ {%veṇuna, am,%} n. (also read {%veṇu-ja%}),
black pepper ({%= marica%}).
<LEND>

<L>44826<pc>0963-b<k1>veta<k2>veta
{#veta#}¦ {%veta, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. III. 118. said
to be fr. rt. {%ve%}), a cane, reed, (probably a corruption
of {%vetra.%})
<LEND>

<L>44827<pc>0963-b<k1>vetasa<k2>vetasa
{%Vetasa, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. the ratan, Calamus Rotang;
({%as%}), m. the citron (Citrus Medica); N. of Agni;
N. of a city; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἴ-τυ-ς, ἰ-τέα, οἶσος, οἶνος;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>vi-tex, vi-ti-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wida;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>widhig.</nsi>] {%—Vetasa-pattra, am,%} n. the leaf of the
ratan; a lancet.
<LEND>

<L>44828<pc>0963-b<k1>vetasinI<k2>vetasinI
{%Vetasinī,%}¦ f., N. of a river; [cf. {%vedasinī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44829<pc>0963-b<k1>vetasvat<k2>vetasvat
{%Vetas-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ reedy, abounding in reeds
or canes (as a place, soil, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>44830<pc>0963-b<k1>vetana<k2>vetana
{#vetana#}¦ {%vetana, am,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 150. fr. rt. 1. {%vī;%} perhaps a corrupted form of
{%vartana%}), hire, wages, stipend, salary; livelihood,
subsistence; silver. {%—Vetana-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%} sub-
sisting by hire or wages, stipendiary. {%—Vetana-dāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the paying of wages, hiring. {%—Vetanādāna%}
{%(˚na-ad˚), am,%} n. non-payment of wages.
<LEND>

<L>44831<pc>0963-b<k1>vetanin<k2>vetanin
{%Vetanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ receiving wages, stipendiary,
(sometimes at the end of a comp., e. g. {%kupya-%}
{%vetanin,%} receiving very small pay.)
<LEND>

<L>44832<pc>0963-b<k1>vetasu<k2>vetasu
{#vetasu#}¦ {%vetasu, us,%} m., Ved., N. of an Asura.
<LEND>

<L>44833<pc>0963-b<k1>vetAla<k2>vetAla
{#vetAla#}¦ {%vetāla, as,%} m. (according to some
for {%ava-ita + āla%} for {%ālaya;%} according to others
fr. {%ve,%} loc. c. of 2. {%va + tāla%}), a kind of ghost,
spirit, goblin, vampire, demon (especially one occu-
pying a dead body); a door-keeper, (in this sense pro-
bably for {%vetra + āla.%}) {%—Vetāla-pañcaviṃśati, is,%} or
{%vetāla-pañcaviṃśatikā,%} f. a collection of twenty-five
tales or fables told by a Vetāla to king Vikramāditya
(of which there are three recensions extant, two by
Śiva-dāsa and one by Jambhala-bhaṭṭa; versions of
these popular tales exist in Hindī and almost every
Hindū vernacular, as well as in Tamil and Telugu,
and translations in other languages are also current).
{%—Vetāla-pañcaviṃśati-kathā,%} f., N. of part of the
Vṛhat-kathā.
<LEND>

<L>44834<pc>0963-b<k1>vettf<k2>vettf<h>1
{#vettf#} 1¦. {%vettṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%} (fr. rt. 1. {%vid%}), one
who knows, knowing, understanding, acquainted
with; a knower, &c.; one who obtains or acquires,
obtaining; ({%tā%}), m. a sage, one who knows the
nature of the soul and god; one who obtains in
marriage, an espouser, husband. {%—Vettṛ-tva, am,%}
n. knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>44835<pc>0963-b<k1>vetra<k2>vetra
{#vetra#}¦ {%vetra, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 166. fr. rt. 1. {%vī;%} probably rather fr. rt. {%ve%}), a
reed, cane, the ratan; ({%am%}), n. a sort of creeper,
(in this sense apparently also {%as,%} m.); a stick, staff;
the rod or mace of an officer, staff of a door-keeper.
{%—Vetra-dhara, as,%} m. a staff-bearer, mace-bearer;
a door-keeper, warder. {%—Vetra-dhāraka, as,%} m. a
door-keeper, warder, porter; a mace-bearer. {%—Vetra-%}
{%pāṇi, is,%} m. ‘staff-handed,’ a mace-bearer. {%—Vetra-%}
{%yaṣṭi, is,%} m. f. a staff of reed or cane. {%—Vetra-latā,%}
f. ‘reed-branch,’ a staff or stick. {%—Vetra-vatī,%} f. ‘full
of reeds,’ the Betwa river (which, rising in the Vindhya
mountains and following a north-easterly direction
for about 340 miles, falls into the Jumnā below
Kalpī); a female door-keeper; a proper N. {%—Vetrā-%}
{%ghāta (˚ra-āgh˚), as,%} m. a blow with a cane, a
caning. {%—Vetrāsana (˚ra-ās˚), am,%} n. ‘cane-seat,’
[Page0963-c+ 79]
a small cot or oblong low couch of cane work, (when
furnished with bamboo sticks and a pole, it forms
the common dooly or litter.) {%—Vetrāsanāsīna (˚na-%}
{%ās˚), as, ā, am,%} seated on a seat of cane or reed.
<LEND>

<L>44836<pc>0963-c<k1>vetrakIya<k2>vetrakIya
{%Vetrakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ reedy, abounding with
reeds or canes.
<LEND>

<L>44837<pc>0963-c<k1>vetrin<k2>vetrin
{%Vetrin, ī,%}¦ m. a staff-bearer, mace-bearer, porter,
door-keeper.
<LEND>

<L>44838<pc>0963-c<k1>veT<k2>veT
{#veT#}¦ {%veth%} (= rts. {%vith,%} 1. {%vidh%}), cl. 1. A.
{%vethate, vivethe, vethiṣyate, avethiṣṭa,%}
{%vethitum,%} to ask, beg.
<LEND>

<L>44839<pc>0963-c<k1>veTileha<k2>veTileha
{#veTileha#}¦ {%vethileha,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>44840<pc>0963-c<k1>veda<k2>veda
{#veda#}¦ {%veda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%vid;%} cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">οἶδα</lang> fr. <lang n="greek">ιδ,</lang> Lat. <nsi>video</nsi> fr. {%vid,%} Goth. <nsi>vait,</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>weizd</nsi>), knowing, knowledge; ‘the true knowledge,
divine knowledge,’ N. of certain celebrated works
which constitute the basis of the first period of the
Hindū religion, (these works were originally three,
viz. 1. the Ṛg-veda, 2. the Yajur-veda [of which
there are, however, two divisions, see {%taittirīya-%}
{%saṃhitā, vājasaneyi-saṃhitā%}], 3. the Sāma-veda;
these three works are sometimes called collectively,
{%trayī,%} ‘the triple Vidyā’ or ‘threefold knowledge,’
but the Ṛg-veda is really the only original work
of the three, and much the most ancient, some of its
hymns being rather Indo-European than Hindū, and
representing the condition of the Āryans before their
final settlement in India; subsequently a fourth Veda
was added, called the Atharva-veda, which was pro-
bably not completely accepted till after Manu, as his
law-book often speaks of the three Vedas — calling
them {%trayam brahma sanātanam,%} ‘the triple
eternal Veda,’ and stating in I. 23. that the Creator
drew forth the Ṛg-veda from fire, the Yajur-veda
from air, and the Sāma-veda from the sun; and in
another place, IV. 124, stating that the Ṛg has the
gods for its deities, the Yajur has men, and the Sāma
has the Pitṛs, on which account the sound of this
latter is impure — but only once [XI. 33] mentions the
revelation made to Atharvan and Aṅgiras, without,
however, calling it by the later name of Atharva-
veda, the songs and incantations of the Atharvans
not being at that time recognised as a fourth Veda;
each of the four Vedas has two distinct parts, viz.
1. a Saṃhitā or collection of Mantras, i. e. of words
of prayer and adoration often addressed either to fire
or to some form of the sun or to some form of the
air, sky, wind, &c., and praying for health, wealth, long
life, cattle, offspring, victory, and even forgiveness of
sins, which words of prayer or praise form what is
usually called the Mantra portion of the Veda [see
{%mantra%}], and 2. a Brāhmaṇa portion consisting of
Vidhi and Artha-vāda, i. e. directions for the detail
of the ceremonies at which the Mantras were to be
used and explanations of the legends &c. connected
with the Mantras [see {%brāhmaṇa, vidhi%}], both
these portions being termed {%Śruti,%} revelation orally
communicated by the Deity, and heard but not com-
posed or written down by men; although both portions
are supposed by orthodox Hindūs to have existed
from eternity, and not to require {%pramāṇa,%} ‘proof,’
as they are themselves Pramāṇa, yet the oldest of
the Mantras are not likely to belong to a much earlier
date than the twelfth or thirteenth century B. C.;
and it is certain that both Mantras and Brāhmaṇas
were compositions spread over a considerable period,
much of the latter being comparatively modern: as
the Vedas are properly three, so the Mantras are
properly of three forms, 1. Ṛc, which are verses of
praise in metre, and intended for loud recitation;
2. Yajus, which are in prose, and intended for use
at sacrifices; 3. Sāman, which are in metre, and
intended for chanting at the Soma or Moon-plant
ceremonies, the Mantras of the Atharva-veda having
no special name; but it must be borne in mind that
the Yajur and Sāma-veda hymns, especially the latter,
besides their own Mantras, borrow largely from the
Ṛg-veda; the Yajur-veda and Sāma-veda being in
fact not so much collections of prayers and hymns as
[Page0964-a+ 81]
special prayer and hymn-books intended as liturgical
or sacrificial manuals for the Adhvaryu and Udgātṛ
priests respectively, the necessity for which grew out
of the vast and complicated ritual elaborated by the
Āryans after they had settled down in India [see
{%yajur-veda, sāma-veda%}]; the more modern Atharva-
veda-saṃhitā, on the other hand, is, like the Ṛg-
veda, a real collection of original hymns mixed up with
incantations, borrowing little from the Ṛg, having
no direct relation to mere ritual or sacrifices, but
supposed by mere recitation to produce long life, to
cure diseases [generally in connection with the use of
some plant or drug gifted with magical properties],
to obtain success in love or gaming, to effect the
ruin of enemies, and to secure the reciter's own pros-
perity; each of the four Vedas seems to have passed
through numerous Śākhās or schools, giving rise to
various recensions of the text, though the Ṛg-veda
is only preserved in the Śākala recension; as to
arrangement, the Mantras being made up in the first
instance of separate Padas or words are joined together
so as to form Sūktas or hymns; the hymns of the
Yajur-veda, with the exception of its last book, which
is thought to be mystical, are arranged according to
the sacrifices at which its Mantras were used, and
those of the Sāma-veda with reference especially to
the Moon-plant sacrifices, but those of the Ṛg-veda
Mantras having no direct reference to sacrificial acts
are arranged either according to their authors and
the objects addressed or according to mere bulk;
the former is the distribution into ten Maṇḍalas, the
first and last three Maṇḍalas including a variety of
authors or rather Ṛṣis [who are said to have seen
the Vedas and not composed them], and each of the
other Maṇḍalas belonging to one particular Ṛṣi;
the latter is the distribution into Aṣṭakas [see {%maṇ-%}
{%ḍala, varga%}]: a tradition makes Vyāsa the com-
piler and arranger of the Vedas in their present
form: they each have an Anukramaṇī or Index,
giving the first word of every hymn, the number of
verses, the name of the {%devatā%} or deified being
about which the Mantra is concerned [sometimes,
however, the {%devatā%} may be an inanimate object],
the names and families of the authors and the metre,
the principal work of this kind being the Sarvānu-
kramaṇī or general Index; out of the Brāhmaṇa
portion of the Veda grew two other departments of
Vedic literature, sometimes included under the general
name Veda, viz. the strings of aphoristic rules, called
Sūtras [though these are often said to be {%pauruṣeya,%}
i. e. human compositions], and the mystical treatises
on the nature of God and the relation of soul and
matter, called Upaniṣads, which were appended to
the Āraṇyakas, certain chapters of the Brāhmaṇas so
obscure and awe-inspiring in their allusions to the
Supreme Spirit of the Universe that they had to be
read in the solitude of forests; the most important
of the former are the Kalpa-sūtras or Śrauta-sūtras
as founded directly on Śruti; these strings of rules
being in fact guides to the rambling discursive Brāh-
maṇas and systematized directories for the due per-
formance of every part of the ceremonial, while the
Upaniṣads, on the other hand, taught the secret
doctrine [called {%rahasya%} in Manu II. 165. and {%ve-%}
{%dānta%} in VI. 83, 94] underlying the ceremonial, viz.
the existence of one Universal Spirit, called Brahma,
with which the whole creation and the human soul
itself was identified; as the Śrauta-sūtras were fol-
lowed by the Gṛhya and Sāmayācārika Sūtras or
‘rules for domestic ceremonies and conventional cus-
toms,’ which again became the forerunners of the
Dharma-śāstras and thus linked the Veda with the
code of Manu, so the Āraṇyakas were followed by
the Upaniṣads, which latter became the real Veda of
thinking Hindūs, leading to the Darśanas or systems
of philosophy, and linking them also with Vedic
literature: in modern writings the name of ‘fifth
Veda' is accorded to the Itihāsas or legendary epic
poems and the Purāṇas, and certain Upa-vedas or
secondary Vedas are enumerated, that of the Ṛg-
veda being the Āyur-veda or Veda on medicine, that
[Page0964-b+ 81]
of the Yajur being the Dhanur-veda or Veda on
archery, that of the Sāma being the Gāndharva-veda
or Veda on music, and that of the Atharva-veda
being either the Sthāpatya-veda or Artha-śāstra or
Śilpa-śāstra, q. q. v. v.; the Vedāṅgas or works serv-
ing as limbs [for preserving the integrity] of the
Veda, of which the Kalpa-sūtras form a part, are
explained under {%vedāṅga,%} col. 3: the only other
works included under the head of Veda being the
Pariśiṣṭas, which supply rules for the ritual omitted
in other works; in the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad
the Vedas and all the above literature are represented
as the breathings of Brahmā, while in some of the
Purāṇas the four Vedas are said to have been created
by the four-faced Brahmā from his several mouths,
and in the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa the Veda and Viṣṇu are
identified); reading the Veda, (Sāy. {%= vedādhya-%}
{%yana,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 19, 5); comment, explana-
tion; metre; epithet of Viṣṇu; obtaining, acqui-
sition, wealth, {%= dhana%} (Ved.); a bunch or bundle
of Kuśa grass ({%= kuśa-muṣṭi,%} Manu IV. 36; in
this sense probably connected with {%vedi,%} ‘an altar
made of grass’); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the Vedas, i. e. the
three principal Vedas; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Veda-%}
{%kuśala, as, ā, am,%} versed in or conversant with
the Vedas. {%—Veda-kauleyaka, as,%} m. ‘belonging
to the family of the Veda,’ an epithet of Śiva.
{%—Veda-garbha, as,%} m. ‘Veda-filled,’ epithet of
Brahmā; a Brāhman, man learned in the Veda.
{%—Veda-gāmbhīrya, am,%} n. the deep or recondite
sense of the Veda. {%—Veda-gupti, is,%} f. the preser-
vation of the Vedas (by the Brāhmanical caste).
{%—Veda-jña, as,%} m. ‘Veda-knower,’ a Brāhman
skilled in the Vedas. {%—Veda-tattva, am,%} n. ‘Veda-
truth,’ the true doctrine of the Vedas. {%—Veda-tāt-%}
{%parya, am,%} n. the real object or true meaning of
the Veda. {%—Veda-traya, am, ī,%} n. f. the three
Vedas. {%—Veda-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} ‘Veda-seeing,’ one
who discerns the sense of the Veda, (according to
Kullūka on Manu XI. 234 {%= vedārtha-jña.%}) {%—Veda-%}
{%dīpa, as,%} m. ‘lamp of knowledge,’ N. of Mahī-
dhara's commentary on the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā. {%—Ve-%}
{%da-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} approved of or sanctioned
by the Vedas or by Vedic ritual. {%—Veda-dhara,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= vedeśa%}. {%—Veda-dharma-vid, t, t, t,%} know-
ing the Veda and the law. {%—Veda-nāda, as,%} m.
‘Veda-sound,’ sound of chanting or repeating the
Veda. {%—Veda-nidhi, is,%} m. ‘Veda-treasure,’ N. of a
priest. {%—Veda-nindaka, as,%} m. ‘a Veda-reviler,’
atheist, any seceder from the belief of the divine
origin and character of the Vedas, unbeliever; a
Jaina or Buddhist. {%—Veda-nindā,%} f. reviling the
Vedas, heresy, unbelief, (Manu XI. 56.) {%—Veda-%}
{%pāraga, as,%} m. ‘one who has gone to the further
end of the Veda,’ a Brāhman skilled in the Veda.
{%—Veda-puṇya, am,%} n. the sanctity or holiness of
the Veda. {%—Veda-pradāna, am,%} n. imparting or
teaching the Veda, giving instruction in the Veda.
{%—Veda-pravāda, as,%} m. a statement or declaration
of the Vedas. {%—Veda-plāvin, ī,%} m. one who pro-
mulgates or publicly teaches the Veda. {%—Veda-bāhu,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of a son of Pulastya. {%—Veda-bhāṣya-%}
{%kāra, as,%} m. the author of a commentary on the
Veda (epithet of Sāyaṇa). {%—Veda-mātṛ, tā,%} f. ‘Veda-
mother,’ epithet of the most sacred verse of the
Veda called Gāyatrī or Sāvitrī (personified as the
mother or source of the Vedas, see {%gāyatrī%}). {%—Veda-%}
{%mitra, as,%} m. ‘friend of the Veda,’ N. of a teacher
of the Ṛg-veda. {%—Veda-mūrti, is,%} f. embodiment
of the Veda (sometimes used as an honourable title
before the names of learned Brāhmans). {%—Veda-%}
{%mūla, as, ā, am,%} ‘Veda-rooted,’ grounded on the
Veda. {%—Veda-rakṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘Veda-preserva-
tion,’ the preservation of the Vedas (as a duty of the
Brāhmanical class). {%—Veda-vacana, am,%} n. a text
of the Veda. {%—Veda-vatī,%} f., N. of a river, (also
written {%vedasinī, vetasinī%}); N. of a beautiful woman
(daughter of Kuśa-dhvaja, whose story is told in the
Rāmāyaṇa; she became an ascetic, and being in-
sulted by Rāvaṇa in the wood where she was per-
forming her penances, destroyed herself by entering
[Page0964-c+ 81]
fire, but was born again as Sītā). {%—Veda-vadana,%}
{%am,%} n. grammar {%(= vy-ākaraṇa)%}. {%—Veda-vākya,%}
{%am,%} n. a text of the Veda. {%—Veda-vāsa, as,%} m.
‘Veda-abode,’ a Brāhman. {%—Veda-vāhya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} external to the Veda, not founded on the Veda
({%= na veda-mūla%}); contrary to the Veda. {%—Ve-%}
{%da-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing the Veda, conversant with
the Veda; ({%t%}), m. a Brāhman versed in the Vedas;
epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Veda-vidvas, ān,%} m. one learned
in the Vedas. {%—Veda-vihita, as, ā, am,%} taught or
enjoined by the Vedas. {%—Veda-vṛtta, am,%} n. the
doctrine of the Vedas. {%—Veda-vṛddha, as,%} m., N.
of a Muni. {%—Veda-vedāṅga-pāraga, as,%} m. well
read in the Vedas and Vedāṅgas, (see {%pāra-ga.%})
{%—Veda-vyāsa, as,%} m. ‘Veda-arranger,’ epithet of
Vyāsa or Bādarāyaṇa; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the arrangers
of the Vedas. {%—Veda-śabda, as,%} m. a word or term
in the Vedas. {%—Veda-śāstra, am,%} n. ‘Veda-ordinance,’
the Veda or any Vedic composition. {%—Veda-śāstra-%}
{%sampanna, as, ā, am,%} versed in the Vedas and
Śāstras. {%—Veda-śiras, ās,%} m., N. of a son of Mār-
kaṇḍeya and Mūrdhanyā (regarded as the progenitor
of the Bhārgava Brāhmans); of a son of Prāṇa; of
a son of Kṛśāśva; ({%as%}), n. epithet of a weapon.
{%—Veda-śīrṣa, as,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Veda-%}
{%śravas, ās,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Veda-śruti, is,%} f.
the hearing of the Veda. {%—Veda-saṃhitā,%} f. the
Saṃhitā or collection of Mantras of the Veda. {%—Ve-%}
{%da-sannyāsa, as,%} m. giving up or discontinuing the
ritual of the Vedas. {%—Veda-sannyāsika, as,%} m. or
{%veda-sannyāsin, ī,%} m. a religious mendicant (be-
longing to the fourth {%āśrama%} or order) who dis-
continues the ritual of the Vedas. {%—Veda-sammata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} conformable to the Vedas. {%—Veda-sam-%}
{%mita, as, ā, am,%} of equal measure with or con-
formable to the Vedas. {%—Veda-stuti, is,%} f. ‘Veda-
praise,’ N. of a celebrated composition. {%—Vedastuti-%}
{%kārikā,%} f., N. of a metrical paraphrase of the pre-
ceding work by Vallabhācārya (inculcating the doc-
trine of faith as a means of salvation). {%—Veda-%}
{%sparśa, as,%} m., N. of a Muni. {%—Veda-smṛtā,%} f.,
N. of a river. {%—Veda-smṛti, is,%} f., N. of a river.
{%—Vedāgraṇī (˚da-ag˚), īs,%} f. ‘leader of the
Veda’ {%(= sarasvatī)%}. {%—Vedāṅga (˚da-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
‘a limb (for preserving the body) of the Veda,’ N.
of certain works or classes of works regarded as
auxiliary to and even in some sense as part of the
Veda, (their object was to secure the proper pro-
nunciation and correctness of the text and the right
employment of the Mantras at sacrifices as taught
in the Brāhmaṇas; six subjects are usually enume-
rated under which these works are comprised, and
six works are given as representatives of these subjects,
mostly written in the Sūtra or aphoristic style, but
whether all of these are the original representa-
tives of the various subjects is doubtful; 1. {%Śikṣā,%}
‘the science of proper articulation and pronunciation,’
comprising the knowledge of letters, accents, quantity,
the use of the organs of pronunciation, and phonetics
generally, but especially the laws of euphony peculiar
to the Veda; one short treatise consisting in one
recension of thirty-five and in another of fifty-nine
verses, and a chapter of the Taittirīya-āraṇyaka are
regarded as the representatives of this subject; but
the more modern Prātiśākhyas and other works
on Vedic phonetics may be included under it, [see
{%prātiśākhya%}]: 2. {%Chandas,%} ‘metre,’ represented
by a treatise ascribed to Piṅgala-nāga, which, how-
ever, treats of Prākṛt as well as Sanskrit metres,
and includes only a few of the leading Vedic metres:
3. {%Vy-ākaraṇa,%} ‘linguistic analysis or grammar,’
said to be represented by Pāṇini's celebrated Sūtras,
but as this great work only treats of Vedic grammar
exceptionally, this Vedāṅga is more properly identi-
fied with the lost grammatical Sūtras which preceded
Pāṇini: 4. {%Nir-ukta,%} ‘explanation of difficult Vedic
words,’ represented by the Nirukta of Yāska, which
consists of five chapters of mere lists of words, three
belonging to the Naighaṇṭuka section of synonyms,
one to the Naigama of separate words, and one
to the Daivata of divinities and the other objects
[Page0965-a+ 81]
addressed in the Mantras; after which come twelve
chapters of explanation with an introduction, to which
is also added a Pariśiṣṭa of two other chapters, [see
{%yāska%}]: 5. {%Jyotiṣa,%} ‘astronomy,’ or rather the
Vedic calendar, represented by a small tract in a
more modern style than the Sūtra works, the object
of which is to fix the most auspicious days for sacri-
fices: 6. {%Kalpa,%} ‘ceremonial,’ represented by a large
number of Sūtra works intended to systematize the
tedious and confused ritualistic precepts of the Brāh-
maṇas; each of the Vedas has its own Kalpa or
Śrauta Sūtras, [see {%sūtra%} and cf. {%veda,%} p. 963]:
the first and second of these Vedāṅgas is said to
be intended to secure the correct reading or recitation
of the Veda, the third and fourth the understanding
of it, and the fifth and sixth its proper employment
at sacrifices: the Vedāṅgas are alluded to by Manu,
who calls them, in III. 184, Pravacanas, ‘expo-
sitions,’ a term which is said to be also applied to
the Brāhmaṇas.) {%—Vedāṅgin, ī,%} m. one who studies
or teaches the Vedāṅgas. {%—Vedādi (˚da-ādi),%} n.
or {%vedādi-varṇa (˚da-ād˚), as,%} m. or {%vedādi-vīja%}
{%(˚da-ād˚), am,%} n. the first syllable of the Veda or
the mystical name of God, the sacred syllable {%Om.%}
{%—Vedādhigama (˚da-adh˚), as,%} m. the going over
or study of the Vedas. {%—Vedādhipa (˚da-adh˚), as,%}
or {%vedādhipati (˚da-adh˚), is,%} m. ‘one who presides
over the Veda,’ a term applied to certain of the
planets, (thus the Ṛg-veda is said to be presided
over by the planet Jupiter or Bṛhas-pati, the Yajur-
veda by Venus, the Sāma-veda by Mars, and the
Atharva-veda by Mercury.) {%—Vedādhyayana (˚da-%}
{%adh˚), am,%} n. the going over or study of the Vedas.
{%—Vedādhyayin%} or {%vedādhyāyin (˚da-adh˚), ī,%} m.
one who studies the Veda. {%—Vedādhyāpaka (˚da-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. one who causes to go over or study
the Veda, a teacher of the Vedas. {%—Vedādhyāpana%}
{%(˚da-adh˚), am,%} n. the causing to go over the Vedas,
teaching the Vedas. {%—Vedānta (˚da-an˚), as,%} m.
‘end of the Veda,’ N. of the second and most im-
portant part of the Mīmāṃsā or third of the three
great divisions of Hindū philosophy (so called either
as teaching the ultimate aim and scope of the Veda
or simply as founded on the Upaniṣads which come
at the end of the Veda; this system, although be-
longing to the Mīmāṃsā school [see {%mīmāṃsā%}] and
sometimes called Uttara-mīmāṃsā, ‘examination of
the later portion or {%jñāna-kāṇḍa%} of the Veda,’
i. e. of that portion contained in the Āraṇyakas and
Upaniṣads [which teach the knowledge of Brahma or
the Universal Spirit], stands out prominently by itself
as representing the popular pantheistic creed of the
Hindūs of the present day, which is really based on
the Upaniṣads and constitutes the true Veda of
the modern cultivated Brāhman, underlying also
all the polytheism and multiform mythology of
the people; it explains the universe synthetically
as a development from one principle, and so
differs from the analytical Nyāya which treats of
the various objects constituting the material world
as it finds them, without investigating their mutual
relation of effect and cause, and from the Sāṅkhya
which, although also synthetic, propounds a duality
of principles to account for the visible universe;
according to the Vedānta doctrine, Brahma [nom.
neut. of {%brahman%}] or the Supreme Soul, also called
Paramātman, is both the efficient and material cause
of the world; the Ātman or individual human soul,
as well as all the phenomena of nature, being really
identical with the Paramātman, and their existence
being only the result of Ajñāna or an assumed igno-
rance on the part of this Supreme Soul, who is
described as both Creator and Creation, Actor and
Act, Existence, Knowledge, Joy, and as devoid of
the three qualities, [see {%guṇa%}]; the liberation of the
human soul, its deliverance from transmigrations, and
re-union with the Paramātman, with which it is
really identified, is only to be effected by a removal
of that ignorance which prevents the consciousness
of this identity and by a proper understanding of the
truth of the Vedānta; this system is also sometimes
[Page0965-b+ 81]
called Brahma-mīmāṃsā and Śārīraka-mīmāṃsā, ‘in-
vestigation of the embodied soul:’ the founder of the
school is said to have been Vyāsa, also called Bādarā-
yaṇa, and its most eminent teacher was Śaṅkarā-
cārya); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the Upaniṣads (see Kullūka on
Manu VI. 83), works on the Vedānta philosophy.
{%—Vedānta-kalpataru, us,%} m., N. of a work by
Amalānanda Vyāsāśrama. {%—Vedānta-kalpalatikā,%}
f., N. of a work by Madhu-sūdana-sarasvatī. {%—Ve-%}
{%dānta-ga%} or {%vedānta-jña, as,%} m. a follower or
knower of the Vedānta. {%—Vedānta-pradīpa, as,%}
m., N. of a commentary by Rāmānuja on the Bā-
darāyaṇa-sūtra. {%—Vedānta-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of
a work by Vyāsa-tīrtha. {%—Vedānta-sāra, as,%} m.
‘essence or epitome of the Vedānta,’ N. of a treatise
on the Vedānta by Sadānanda; of a commentary on
the Vedānta-sūtra by Rāmānujācārya; [cf. {%vedānta-%}
{%pradīpa.%}] {%—Vedānta-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of the
aphorisms of the Vedānta philosophy ascribed to
Bādarāyaṇa or Vyāsa, (these aphorisms are also called
Brahma-sūtra and Śārīraka-sūtra.) {%—Vedāntācārya%}
{%(˚ta-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of the author of a commentary
on the Guṇa-ratna-kośa. {%—Vedāntābhihita (˚ta-%}
{%abh˚), as, ā, am,%} declared in the Upaniṣads or in
the Vedānta. {%—Vedāntin, ī,%} m. a follower of the
Vedānta philosophy. {%—Vedāntopagata (˚ta-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} derived from or produced by the Vedānta.
{%—Vedābhyāsa (˚da-abh˚), as,%} m. study of the
Veda; the repetition of the mystical syllable {%Om.%}
{%—Vedārtha (˚da-ar˚), as,%} m. the meaning or
sense of the Veda. {%—Vedārtha-jña, as, ā, am,%} one
who knows the meaning of the Veda. {%—Vedārtha-%}
{%prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of Sāyaṇa's commentary on
the Ṛg-veda; of a commentary on the Taittirīya-
saṃhitā by Mādhava. {%—Vedārtha-saṅgraha,%} N. of
a work by Rāmānuja. {%—Vedāvatāra (˚da-av˚), as,%}
m. descent of the Veda, revelation of the Veda,
handing down of the Veda. {%—Vedāśvā (˚da-aś˚),%}
f., N. of a river. {%—Vedeśa (˚da-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord
of the Veda,’ a proper N. {%—Vedeśa-bhikṣu, us,%} m.,
N. of the author of the Padārtha-kaumudī commen-
tary. {%—Vedokta (˚da-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} taught or
declared in the Vedas, scriptural. {%—Vedodaya (˚da-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. ‘origin of the Veda,’ epithet of Sūrya
or the Sun, (the Sāma-veda being said to have pro-
ceeded from the Sun, Manu 1. 23.) {%—Vedodita%}
{%(˚da-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} taught or declared in the
Vedas, scriptural. {%—Vedopakaraṇa (˚da-up˚), am,%}
n. ‘Veda-instrument,’ a subordinate science for aiding
or supporting the Veda ({%= vedāṅga,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>44841<pc>0965-b<k1>vedana<k2>vedana
{%Vedana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. perception, knowledge;
knowledge obtained by the senses, feeling, sensation;
obtaining, acquisition, property, wealth; presenting,
delivering; marrying, marriage; the marriage of a
Śūdra woman with a man of a higher caste, (see
Manu III. 44; cf. {%utkṛṣṭa-v˚%}); the ceremony
of holding the ends of a mantle (observed by a
Śūdra female on her marriage with a man of a
higher caste); ({%ī%}), f. the true skin or cutis; ({%ā%}), f.
pain, torment, smart, agony; Pain or Torture (per-
sonified as a daughter of An-ṛta). {%—Vedanā-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessed of pain, full of aches.
<LEND>

<L>44842<pc>0965-b<k1>vedanIya<k2>vedanIya
{%Vedanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be perceived, perceptible;
capable of being felt; to be known or understood;
to be made known.
<LEND>

<L>44843<pc>0965-b<k1>vedaya<k2>vedaya<h>1
1. {%vedaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ who or what knows, know-
ing; who or what obtains.
<LEND>

<L>44844<pc>0965-b<k1>vedayAna<k2>vedayAna
{%Vedayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to know, making
known, telling, ({%a-vedayāna,%} not informing.)
<LEND>

<L>44845<pc>0965-b<k1>vedas<k2>vedas
{%Vedas, ās,%}¦ m. the Vedas collectively; ({%as%}), n.
acquisition, wealth (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>44846<pc>0965-b<k1>vedasa<k2>vedasa
{%Vedasa%}¦ in {%sarva-vedasa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44847<pc>0965-b<k1>vedApaya<k2>vedApaya
{%Vedāpaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vedāpayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to know, impart knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>44848<pc>0965-b<k1>vedi<k2>vedi
{%Vedi, is,%}¦ or {%vedī,%} f. (in Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa I. 2,
5, 7. said to be fr. rt. 1. {%vid,%} ‘to acquire;’ but per-
haps connected with rt. {%ve,%} ‘to weave or bind to-
gether’), an altar or raised place made of Kuśa grass
or strewed with it and prepared for an oblation for
placing the vessels used at a sacrifice, a place or
ground prepared for sacrifice, (it is more or less
[Page0965-c+ 78]
raised and of various shapes); an altar (in general);
a quadrangular spot in the court-yard of a temple or
palace (usually furnished with a raised floor or seat
and covered with a roof supported by pillars, {%= vi-%}
{%tardi%}); a bench; a seal-ring; N. of Sarasvatī
(wife of Brahmā); ({%is%}), m. a teacher, Paṇḍit.
{%—Vedi-jā,%} f. ‘altar-born,’ epithet of Draupadī, wife
of the Pāṇḍu princes, (the fee which Droṇa required
for instructing the Pāṇḍu princes was that they should
conquer Drupada, king of Pañcāla, who had insulted
him; they therefore took him prisoner, and he,
burning with resentment, undertook a sacrifice to
procure a son who might avenge his defeat; two
children were then born to him from the midst of
the altar, out of the sacrificial fire, viz. a son Dhṛṣṭa-
dyumna, and a daughter Draupadī or Kṛṣṇā, after-
wards wife of the Pāṇḍavas.) {%—Vedi-pratiṣṭha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} erected on sacrificial ground. {%—Vedi-%}
{%mekhalā,%} f. the boundary cord of a sacrificial ground.
{%—Vedi-vat,%} ind. like the sacrificial altar. {%—Vedīśa%}
{%(˚di-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of the Vedi,’ epithet of Agni;
of Brahmā (as husband of Sarasvatī). {%—Vedy-anta,%}
{%as,%} m. the end of the Vedi.
<LEND>

<L>44849<pc>0965-c<k1>vedikA<k2>vedikA
{%Vedikā,%}¦ f. ground prepared for sacrificial cere-
monies, a kind of altar; a quadrangular open shed
in the middle of a court-yard (erected for various
purposes and furnished with a seat, {%= vi-tardi%}); an
arbour; a seat.
<LEND>

<L>44850<pc>0965-c<k1>vedita<k2>vedita
{%Vedita, as, ā, am,%}¦ make known, represented.
<LEND>

<L>44851<pc>0965-c<k1>veditavya<k2>veditavya
{%Veditavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be known or ascertained;
to be made known, to be explained or expounded.
<LEND>

<L>44852<pc>0965-c<k1>veditf<k2>veditf
{%Veditṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ knowing; a knower, &c.;
wise, learned.
<LEND>

<L>44853<pc>0965-c<k1>vedin<k2>vedin
{%Vedin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ knowing, acquainted with; es-
pousing, marrying (e. g. {%śūdrā-vedī,%} a man who
marries a Śūdra woman); ({%ī%}), m. a knower; a
teacher; a learned Brāhman; Brahmā; ({%i%}), n. a kind
of plant {%(= amba-ṣṭhā)%}. {%—Vedi-tā,%} f. or {%vedi-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. knowledge, wisdom, learning, experience.
<LEND>

<L>44854<pc>0965-c<k1>vedI<k2>vedI
{%Vedī,%}¦ f. {%= vedi,%} an altar, &c. (See col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>44855<pc>0965-c<k1>vedIyas<k2>vedIyas
{%Vedīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. one who is wiser or very
wise, (Sāy. {%= atiśayena vidvas,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 98, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>44856<pc>0965-c<k1>vedya<k2>vedya<h>1
1. {%vedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be known or ascertained;
to be made known; to be explained or taught; to
be espoused or married; bringing or causing wealth
(Ved., Sāy. {%= dhana-hita, lābha-hetu%}).
<LEND>

<L>44857<pc>0965-c<k1>vedya<k2>vedya<h>2
2. {%vedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or agreeable to the
Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>44858<pc>0965-c<k1>vedaRqa<k2>vedaRqa
{#vedaRqa#}¦ {%vedaṇḍa, as,%} m. (a doubtful word),
an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>44859<pc>0965-c<k1>vedamuKyA<k2>vedamuKyA
{#vedamuKyA#}¦ {%vedamukhyā,%} f. (a doubtful word,
cf. {%vedha-mukhya%}), a sort of insect, the winged bug.
<LEND>

<L>44860<pc>0965-c<k1>vedasinI<k2>vedasinI
{#vedasinI#}¦ {%vedasinī,%} f., N. of a river, (also
written {%veda-vatī, vetasinī.%})
<LEND>

<L>44861<pc>0965-c<k1>vedAra<k2>vedAra
{#vedAra#}¦ {%vedāra, as,%} m. a chameleon; a lizard.
<LEND>

<L>44862<pc>0965-c<k1>veDa<k2>veDa
{#veDa#}¦ {%vedha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vyadh%}), penetra-
tion, piercing, breaking through, perforation; punc-
turing, wounding, wound; hole, excavation; the
depth of any excavation, depth (in measurement); a
particular measure or division of time (= 100 Truṭis).
{%—Vedha-mukhya, as,%} m. a kind of Curcuma, =
{%karcūra; (ā),%} f. a kind of plant {%(= kastūrī)%}. {%—Ve-%}
{%dha-mukhyaka, as,%} m. zedoary, Curcuma Zerum-
bet ({%= haridrā, drāviḍaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>44863<pc>0965-c<k1>vedDf<k2>vedDf
{%Veddhṛ, dhā,%}¦ m. a piercer, perforator.
<LEND>

<L>44864<pc>0965-c<k1>veDaka<k2>veDaka
{%Vedhaka, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} piercing, perforating,
a piercer or perforator (of gems); sharp; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of one of the divisions of Naraka; camphor;
({%am%}), n. grain, rice in the ear.
<LEND>

<L>44865<pc>0965-c<k1>veDana<k2>veDana
{%Vedhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of piercing, perforation;
penetration, excavation; puncturing, pricking; wound-
ing; a thrust; depth (in measurement); ({%ī%}), f. an
instrument for piercing an elephant's ear; a small
gimblet (for perforating gems, shells, &c.); an auger,
gimblet, piercing instrument (in general).
<LEND>

<L>44866<pc>0965-c<k1>veDanikA<k2>veDanikA
{%Vedhanikā,%}¦ f. a sharp-pointed perforating instru-
ment (used especially for piercing jewels or shells),
an auger, awl, gimblet, &c.
<LEND>
[Page0966-a+ 78]

<L>44867<pc>0966-a<k1>veDanIya<k2>veDanIya
{%Vedhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ capable of being pierced,
penetrable, vulnerable.
<LEND>

<L>44868<pc>0966-a<k1>veDita<k2>veDita
{%Vedhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pierced, perforated, pene-
trated.
<LEND>

<L>44869<pc>0966-a<k1>veDin<k2>veDin
{%Vedhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ piercing, stabbing, perforating;
hitting (a mark); ({%inī%}), f. a leech. {%—Vedhi-tva, am,%}
n. capacity of piercing.
<LEND>

<L>44870<pc>0966-a<k1>veDya<k2>veDya
{%Vedhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pierced or perforated;
({%am%}), n. a mark for shooting at, butt, target.
<LEND>

<L>44871<pc>0966-a<k1>veDas<k2>veDas
{#veDas#}¦ {%vedhas, ās, ās, as%} (according to
Uṇādi-s. IV. 224. fr. {%vedh%} substituted for {%vi-dhā%}),
arranging, creating; wise, learned ({%= medhāvin,%}
Naigh. III. 15); ({%ās%}), m. an arranger, disposer,
creator, ({%ku-vedhas, ās,%} m. ‘evil creator,’ evil des-
tiny); N. of Brahmā; of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of the
Sun; of Soma; a wise or learned man; a priest; a
poet, Vedic Ṛṣi. {%—Vedhas-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
most wise, wisest, (Sāy. {%= atiśayena medhāvin.%})
<LEND>

<L>44872<pc>0966-a<k1>veDasa<k2>veDasa
{%Vedhasa, am,%}¦ n. the part of the hand under the
root of the thumb (considered as sacred to Brahmā,
see {%tīrtha%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi (said to
belong to the family of Aṅgiras).
<LEND>

<L>44873<pc>0966-a<k1>veDasyA<k2>veDasyA
{%Vedhasyā,%}¦ f., Ved. a desire of performing sacri-
fices, (Sāy. {%= yāga-vidhānecchā.%})
<LEND>

<L>44874<pc>0966-a<k1>ven<k2>ven
{#ven#}¦ {%ven%} (also written {%veṇ,%} q. v.), cl. 1.
P. A. {%venati, -te, vivena, vivene, veni-%}
{%tum,%} to go, move; to move about, circulate (Ved.,
cf. {%venas%}); to care for, be anxious for, wish, desire,
love, favour (Ved.); to praise, worship (Ved.); to
know, perceive, discern, recognise, reflect; to take;
to play on an instrument: Caus. {%venayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%avivenat:%} Desid. {%viveniṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%ve-%}
{%venyate, veventi;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">αἰνέω, αἴνη.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>44875<pc>0966-a<k1>vena<k2>vena
{%Vena, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a friend, lover, (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 63, 1 = {%kānta%}); a knower,
discerner, wise man; {%= yajña%} (Naigh. III. 17); a
priest; N. of the Sun; of Prajā-pati or Brahmā; of
a son of Aṅga, (also written {%veṇa,%} q. v.); of the
author of the hymns Ṛg-veda IX. 85, X. 123 (hav-
ing the patronymic Bhārgava); ({%ā%}), f. a loved one;
N. of the wife of Soma.
<LEND>

<L>44876<pc>0966-a<k1>venat<k2>venat
{%Venat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. wishing, desiring, de-
sirous; ({%an%}), m. a suppliant.
<LEND>

<L>44877<pc>0966-a<k1>venas<k2>venas
{%Venas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. circulation (of the vital airs).
<LEND>

<L>44878<pc>0966-a<k1>veni<k2>veni
{%Veni, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. loving, desiring, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 41, 3. {%venīḥ = kāmaya-%}
{%mānāḥ prajāḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>44879<pc>0966-a<k1>venya<k2>venya
{%Venya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be loved or adored,
adorable; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi; [cf. {%vainya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44880<pc>0966-a<k1>vennA<k2>vennA
{#vennA#}¦ {%vennā,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 8.
fr. rt. {%van%}), N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>44881<pc>0966-a<k1>vep<k2>vep
{#vep#}¦ {%vep%} (connected with the Caus. of
rt. 1. {%vī%}), cl. 1. A. {%vepate%} (ep. also P. {%ve-%}
{%pati%}), {%vivepe, vepiṣyate, vepitum,%} to tremble,
shake, move about, quiver: Caus. {%vepayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to tremble or move; [cf. Lat. <nsi>vibrare;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>weibon, weibjan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>44882<pc>0966-a<k1>vepaTu<k2>vepaTu
{%Vepathu, us,%}¦ m. trembling, tremor. {%—Vepathu-%}
{%parīta, as, ā, am,%} seized with or affected by tremor.
{%—Vepathu-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} possessing tremor, trem-
bling. {%—Vepathu-mat, an, atī, at,%} possessed of
tremor, trembling, quaking.
<LEND>

<L>44883<pc>0966-a<k1>vepana<k2>vepana
{%Vepana, am,%}¦ n. tremor, trembling; the discharg-
ing of a bow, (in this sense perhaps to be connected
with Caus. of rt. 1. {%vī.%})
<LEND>

<L>44884<pc>0966-a<k1>vepamAna<k2>vepamAna
{%Vepamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, shaking, quiver-
ing, quaking.
<LEND>

<L>44885<pc>0966-a<k1>vepayat<k2>vepayat
{%Vepayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to tremble or quake,
agitating; driving away, dispelling, (probably con-
nected with Caus. of rt. 1. {%vī;%} according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda VIII. 12, 2 {%= tamāṃsi varjayat.%})
<LEND>

<L>44886<pc>0966-a<k1>vepas<k2>vepas
{%Vepas, as,%}¦ n. trembling, tremor, (Sāy. {%= vepana%});
act, activity, energy (enumerated among the {%karma-%}
{%nāmāni%} in Naigh. II. 1); {%= anavadya%} (according
to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>44887<pc>0966-a<k1>vepI<k2>vepI
{%Vepī,%}¦ in Ṛg-veda VI. 22, 5. perhaps ‘accom-
panied with ceremonial acts,’ (Sāy. {%= vepas,%} i. e. {%yā-%}
{%gādi-lakṣaṇaṃ karma tad-vatī.%})
<LEND>
[Page0966-b+ 74]

<L>44888<pc>0966-b<k1>vema<k2>vema
{#vema#}¦ {%vema, veman, veya.%} See under rt. {%ve.%}
<LEND>

<L>44889<pc>0966-b<k1>vera<k2>vera
{#vera#}¦ {%vera, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%vī%}), the body; the egg-plant ({%= vārtāka%}); saffron.
<LEND>

<L>44890<pc>0966-b<k1>veraka<k2>veraka
{%Veraka, am,%}¦ n. camphor ({%= karpūra%}).
<LEND>

<L>44891<pc>0966-b<k1>verawa<k2>verawa
{#verawa#}¦ {%veraṭa, as,%} m. a low man, one of
a mixed or inferior caste; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of
the jujube.
<LEND>

<L>44892<pc>0966-b<k1>vel<k2>vel<h>1
{#vel#} 1¦. {%vel%} (rather to be regarded as a
Nom. fr. {%velā%} below), cl. 10. P. {%vela-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to count or declare the time.
<LEND>

<L>44893<pc>0966-b<k1>vel<k2>vel<h>2
{#vel#} 2¦. {%vel%} or {%vell%} (also written {%vehl%}),
cl. 1. P. {%velati%} or {%vellati,%} &c., to go,
move; to shake about, tremble, move about, move
round; to be wanton; [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">εἴλω, ελύω;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>volvo;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>wuoljan;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>valvjan;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>willian, wœltan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>44894<pc>0966-b<k1>vela<k2>vela
{%Vela, am,%}¦ n. a garden, grove; ({%ā%}), f. time, season,
({%velāyām,%} seasonably); opportunity, interval, leisure;
tide, flow, stream, current; the coast, sea-shore,
({%velāyām,%} on the sea-shore, coast-wise); boundary,
limit; speech; passion, emotion, feeling; easy or
painless death ({%= akliṣṭa-maraṇa%}); sickness, dis-
ease, (according to Śabda-k. {%= rāga-sthāne rogaḥ%});
the gums; the food of Śiva ({%= īśvarasya bhojanam%});
N. of a daughter of Meru and wife of Samudra; of
the wife of Budha. {%—Velākula (˚lā-āk˚), as, ā, am,%}
agitated by the tide. {%—Velā-kūla, am,%} n. ‘stream-
bank,’ N. of a district (the modern Tāmalipta or
Tumlook, see {%tāma-lipta;%} said to be in the district
of Midnapore or in the southern part of the present
Hūglī district, forming the west bank of the Hūglī
river at its union with the sea; a village called Beer-
cool, said to be derived from Velā-kūla, is still found
near the sea-shore). {%—Velā-mūla, am,%} n. the sea-
shore. {%—Velā-vana, am,%} n. a wood on a shore or
sea-coast. {%—Velāvalī (˚lā-āv˚),%} f., N. of a particular
scale in Hindū music. {%—Velā-vitta, as,%} m. (thought
to be) a kind of judicial office.
<LEND>

<L>44895<pc>0966-b<k1>vella<k2>vella
{%Vella, as,%}¦ m. going, moving; shaking; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. a particular plant (the seed of which is used as
a vermifuge {%(= viḍaṅga)%}. {%—Vella-ja, am,%} n. black
pepper, Piper Nigrum.
<LEND>

<L>44896<pc>0966-b<k1>vellana<k2>vellana
{%Vellana, am,%}¦ n. going, shaking; rolling on the
ground (as a horse &c.); a sort of rolling-pin with
which cakes &c. are prepared; ({%ī%}), f. a species of
Dūrvā grass ({%= mālā-dūrvā%}).
<LEND>

<L>44897<pc>0966-b<k1>vellantara<k2>vellantara
{%Vellantara, as,%}¦ m. a particular tree ({%= vīra-taru%}).
<LEND>

<L>44898<pc>0966-b<k1>vellahala<k2>vellahala
{%Vellahala, as,%}¦ m. a libertine ({%= keli-nāgara%}).
<LEND>

<L>44899<pc>0966-b<k1>velli<k2>velli
{%Velli, is,%}¦ f. a creeping plant; [cf. {%valli.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44900<pc>0966-b<k1>vellikA<k2>vellikA
{%Vellikā%}¦ or {%vellikākhyā (˚kā-ākh˚),%} f. a plant
(commonly called Bel Suṇṭh).
<LEND>

<L>44901<pc>0966-b<k1>vellita<k2>vellita
{%Vellita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken, trembling, tremulous;
crooked; ({%am%}), n. going, moving; shaking.
<LEND>

<L>44902<pc>0966-b<k1>veliBukpriya<k2>veliBukpriya
{#veliBukpriya#}¦ {%velibhuk-priya, as,%} m. a kind
of fragrant mango.
<LEND>

<L>44903<pc>0966-b<k1>vevijAna<k2>vevijAna
{#vevijAna#}¦ {%vevijāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. the Intens.
of rt. 1. {%vij%}), intimidating, terrifying, (Sāy. {%= bhī-%}
{%ṣayat,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 26, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>44904<pc>0966-b<k1>vevidAna<k2>vevidAna
{#vevidAna#}¦ {%vevidāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. the Intens.
of rt. 1. {%vid%}), Ved. knowing or finding out most
effectually; obtaining very much.
<LEND>

<L>44905<pc>0966-b<k1>vevizat<k2>vevizat
{#vevizat#}¦ {%veviṣat, at, atī, at%} (fr. rt. 2. {%viṣ%}),
Ved. engaged in sacred rites, (Sāy. {%veviṣataḥ =%}
{%karmāṇi prāpnuvantaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 21, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>44906<pc>0966-b<k1>vevizARa<k2>vevizARa
{%Veviṣāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. contending with, (Sāy.
{%= yuddhārthaṃ saṅgata,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 18, 15.)
<LEND>

<L>44907<pc>0966-b<k1>vevI<k2>vevI
{#vevI#}¦ {%vevī%} (perhaps to be regarded as
an Intens. of rt. 1. {%vī,%} q. v.), cl. 2. A.
{%vevīte%} (Ved. also P. {%veveti,%} 3rd pl. A. {%vevyate%}), &c.,
to go; to pervade, obtain; to conceive or become
pregnant; to wish, desire, love; to throw, cast, hurl;
to eat, consume.
<LEND>

<L>44908<pc>0966-b<k1>veS<k2>veS
{#veS#}¦ {%veś.%} See under rt. 1. {%ves,%} p. 967.
<LEND>

<L>44909<pc>0966-b<k1>veSa<k2>veSa
{#veSa#}¦ {%veśa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%viś%}), entrance,
[Page0966-c+ 76]
ingress, access; a house, dwelling, abode; a house of
prostitutes; a neighbour (Ved., Sāy. {%= prativeśya,%} Ṛg-
veda IV. 3, 13); dress, apparel; ornament, decora-
tion [cf. {%veṣa%}]; disguise, masquerade; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">οἶκο-ς, οἰκά-α;</lang> Lat. <nsi>vicu-s, vic-inu-s;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>veihs;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>wic.</nsi>] {%—Veśa-dāna, as,%} m. the sunflower
{%(= sūrya-śobhā)%}. {%—Veśa-dhārin, ī,%} m. ‘wearing a
disguise,’ a hypocrite, false devotee. {%—Veśa-bhṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} wearing dress or ornament, dressed, adorned;
disguised. {%—Veśa-vāṭa, am,%} n. house and court.
<LEND>

<L>44910<pc>0966-c<k1>veSaka<k2>veSaka
{%Veśaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} who or what enters, en-
tering; ({%as%}), m. a house; ({%ikā%}), f. entrance, ingress.
<LEND>

<L>44911<pc>0966-c<k1>veSana<k2>veSana
{%Veśana, am,%}¦ n. the act of entering; a house.
<LEND>

<L>44912<pc>0966-c<k1>veSanta<k2>veSanta
{%Veśanta, as,%}¦ m. a basin, pool, small pond; a kind
of ladle or basin for holding Soma (Ved., cf. {%vai-%}
{%śanta%}); fire.
<LEND>

<L>44913<pc>0966-c<k1>veSasa<k2>veSasa
{%Veśasa%}¦ in {%yajña-veśasa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44914<pc>0966-c<k1>veSi<k2>veSi
{%Veśi,%}¦ in astronomy = <lang n="greek">φάσις.</lang>
<LEND>

<L>44915<pc>0966-c<k1>veSin<k2>veSin
{%Veśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a dress, dressed, assuming
a particular dress or form; [cf. {%sarva-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44916<pc>0966-c<k1>veSman<k2>veSman
{%Veśman, a,%}¦ n. a house, dwelling, abode, mansion; a
palace; N. of the fourth astrological house. {%—Veśma-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. house-building. {%—Veśma-kaliṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘house-kaliṅga,’ a kind of sparrow {%(= ca-%}
{%ṭaka)%}. {%—Veśma-kūla, as,%} m. a kind of creeper {%(=%}
{%caceṇḍā)%}. {%—Veśma-nakula, as,%} m. the musk rat or
shrew. {%—Veśma-bhū, ūs,%} f. building-ground, ground
suitable for a house, the site of a habitation. {%—Veśma-%}
{%sthūṇā,%} f. the main post or column of a house.
<LEND>

<L>44917<pc>0966-c<k1>veSya<k2>veSya
{%Veśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be entered, to be occupied,
accessible; ({%am%}), n. a habitation, abode, (Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda VI. 61, 14 {%= praveśana%}); the habitation
of harlots; ({%ā%}), f. a courtezan, harlot, prostitute,
(sometimes written {%veṣyā%}); the plant Cissampelos
Hexandra; a particular metre. {%—Veśyā-gaṇa, as,%} m.
a company of harlots. {%—Veśyā-gamana, am,%} n.
going after prostitutes, debauchery. {%—Veśyā-gāmin,%}
{%ī,%} m. one who visits prostitutes, a whoremonger.
{%—Veśyā-gṛha, am,%} n. ‘harlot-house,’ a brothel.
{%—Veśyācārya (˚yā-āc˚), as,%} m. the master or
keeper of prostitutes or dancing girls, &c.; a pimp; a
catamite. {%—Veśyā-jana, as,%} m. a courtezan. {%—Veśyā-%}
{%jana-samāśraya, as,%} m. a habitation of courtezans,
brothel. {%—Veśyā-paṇa, as,%} m. reward or wages
given to a harlot. {%—Veśyā-pati, is,%} m. the husband
of a courtezan. {%—Veśyā-vāra, as,%} m. a number or
company of harlots. {%—Veśyāśraya (˚yā-āś˚), as,%}
m. a habitation of harlots, abode of courtezans.
<LEND>

<L>44918<pc>0966-c<k1>veSara<k2>veSara
{#veSara#}¦ {%veśara, as,%} m. (also written {%vesara,%}
q. v.), a mule.
<LEND>

<L>44919<pc>0966-c<k1>veSvara<k2>veSvara
{%Veśvara, as,%}¦ m. a mule.
<LEND>

<L>44920<pc>0966-c<k1>veSavAra<k2>veSavAra
{#veSavAra#}¦ {%veśavāra, as,%} m. {%= vesavāra,%} a kind
of condiment or seasoning.
<LEND>

<L>44921<pc>0966-c<k1>vezavAra<k2>vezavAra
{%Veṣavāra = veśavāra%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>44922<pc>0966-c<k1>veSIjAtA<k2>veSIjAtA
{#veSIjAtA#}¦ {%veśījātā,%} f. a kind of creeper
({%= putra-dātrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>44923<pc>0966-c<k1>veSvara<k2>veSvara
{#veSvara#}¦ {%veśvara, as,%} m. See {%veśara%} above.
<LEND>

<L>44924<pc>0966-c<k1>veza<k2>veza
{#veza#}¦ {%veṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%viṣ%}), dress, ap-
parel [cf. {%veśa%}]; ornament, decoration; (in Naigh.
II. 1. {%veṣaḥ,%} or according to another reading {%veśaḥ,%}
is enumerated among the {%karma-nāmāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>44925<pc>0966-c<k1>vezaRa<k2>vezaRa
{%Veṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m. the shrub Cassia Sophora, {%= kāsa-%}
{%marda; (ā),%} f. the plant Flacourtia Cataphracta, =
{%vitunna; (am),%} n. occupation, possession, entrance.
<LEND>

<L>44926<pc>0966-c<k1>vezya<k2>vezya
{%Veṣya, as,%}¦ m. water [cf. {%veṣpa%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a
courtezan, harlot, (for {%veśyā.%})
<LEND>

<L>44927<pc>0966-c<k1>vezka<k2>vezka
{#vezka#}¦ {%veṣka, as,%} m. (perhaps fr. rt. 2. {%viṣ%}),
Ved. a noose for strangling a sacrificial victim.
<LEND>

<L>44928<pc>0966-c<k1>vezw<k2>vezw
{#vezw#}¦ {%veṣṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%veṣṭate, viveṣṭe,%}
{%veṣṭiṣyate, veṣṭitum,%} to surround, en-
close, encompass, envelop, encircle, wind or twist round
or about, wrap round; to dress: Caus. {%veṣṭayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%aviveṣṭat%} and {%avaveṣṭat,%} to surround,
encompass; to twist about; to invest, blockade: De-
sid. {%viveṣṭiṣate:%} Intens. {%veveṣṭyate, veveṣṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>44929<pc>0966-c<k1>vezwa<k2>vezwa
{%Veṣṭa, as,%}¦ m. surrounding, enclosing; an enclosure,
[Page0967-a+ 75]
fence; a turban; a kind of knot (Ved.); exudation,
gum; resin in general; turpentine. {%—Veṣṭa-vaṃśa,%}
{%as,%} m. a sort of bamboo, Bambusa Spinosa. {%—Veṣṭa-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m. turpentine ({%= śrī-veṣṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>44930<pc>0967-a<k1>vezwaka<k2>vezwaka
{%Veṣṭaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounding, encompassing;
a surrounder; anything which encompasses or en-
closes or invests; ({%am%}), n. a turban; a wrapper;
exudation, resin, gum, &c.; turpentine; ({%as%}), m. an
enclosure, wall, fence; a pumpkin-gourd.
<LEND>

<L>44931<pc>0967-a<k1>vezwana<k2>vezwana
{%Veṣṭana, am,%}¦ n. the act of surrounding or en-
compassing or enclosing or encircling, ({%aṅguli-v˚,%}
that which invests or encircles the fingers, a finger
ring); grasping; anything that surrounds or encom-
passes; an envelope, wrapper; an enclosure, fence,
wall; a turban, garland, tiara, diadem; a girdle; a
bandage, band; a covering, case; the outer ear
(i. e. the meatus auditorius and concha); a particular
attitude in dancing, (either a disposition of the hands
or crossing of the feet); bdellium. {%—Veṣṭana-veṣ-%}
{%ṭaka, as,%} m. a particular attitude of the sexes in
coitus.
<LEND>

<L>44932<pc>0967-a<k1>vezwanaka<k2>vezwanaka
{%Veṣṭanaka, as,%}¦ m. a particular position in coitus.
<LEND>

<L>44933<pc>0967-a<k1>vezwanIya<k2>vezwanIya
{%Veṣṭanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be surrounded or en-
closed, to be wrapped or wound round.
<LEND>

<L>44934<pc>0967-a<k1>vezwayat<k2>vezwayat
{%Veṣṭayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ surrounding, encompassing.
<LEND>

<L>44935<pc>0967-a<k1>vezwayitvA<k2>vezwayitvA
{%Veṣṭayitvā,%}¦ ind. having bound round, having
encompassed.
<LEND>

<L>44936<pc>0967-a<k1>vezwita<k2>vezwita
{%Veṣṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ surrounded, encompassed,
enclosed, encircled, enveloped, bound or wound
round, wrapped up; dressed; invested; impeded,
stopped, blocked, secured from access; ({%am%}), n. en-
compassing, encircling; one of the gestures or atti-
tudes of dancing, (a particular motion of the fingers
or a crossing of the feet.)
<LEND>

<L>44937<pc>0967-a<k1>vezwitavya<k2>vezwitavya
{%Veṣṭitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be surrounded or
encompassed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>44938<pc>0967-a<k1>vezwya<k2>vezwya
{%Veṣṭya, as, ā, am, = veṣṭitavya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>44939<pc>0967-a<k1>vezpa<k2>vezpa
{#vezpa#}¦ {%veṣpa, as,%} m. water; [cf. {%vāṣpa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44940<pc>0967-a<k1>vezya<k2>vezya
{#vezya#}¦ {%veṣya.%} See under {%veṣa,%} p. 966.
<LEND>

<L>44941<pc>0967-a<k1>ves<k2>ves<h>1
{#ves#} 1¦. {%ves,%} cl. 1. P. {%vesati, vesitum,%} to go,
move; to desire, love, (Naigh. II. 6;
another reading has {%veśati.%})
<LEND>

<L>44942<pc>0967-a<k1>ves<k2>ves<h>2
2. {%ves,%}¦ Ved. in the phrase {%ver na,%} ‘like a bird;’
[cf. 2. {%vi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44943<pc>0967-a<k1>vesana<k2>vesana
{%Vesana, am,%}¦ n. a kind of flour made from a par-
ticular ground vegetable ({%= dvidala-cūrṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>44944<pc>0967-a<k1>vesara<k2>vesara
{#vesara#}¦ {%vesara, as,%} m. a mule, (also written
{%veśara.%})
<LEND>

<L>44945<pc>0967-a<k1>vesavAra<k2>vesavAra
{#vesavAra#}¦ {%vesavāra, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%vis%}), a particular condiment or kind of seasoning (con-
sisting of ground coriander, mustard, pepper, ginger,
spice, &c.; also written {%veśavāra, veṣavāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>44946<pc>0967-a<k1>veh<k2>veh
{#veh#}¦ {%veh%} (also written {%beh%}), cl. 1. A. {%ve-%}
{%hate, vivehe, vehitum,%} to strive, make
effort, endeavour diligently, resolve; cl. 1. P. {%ve-%}
{%hati,%} &c. {%= vehāyate%} (according to Vopa-deva).
<LEND>

<L>44947<pc>0967-a<k1>vehat<k2>vehat
{#vehat#}¦ {%vehat, t,%} f. (said to be connected with
{%vi-han%}), a cow miscarrying from taking the bull un-
seasonably, a barren cow.
<LEND>

<L>44948<pc>0967-a<k1>vehAya<k2>vehAya
{%Vehāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vehāyate, -yitum,%} to miscarry
(as a cow).
<LEND>

<L>44949<pc>0967-a<k1>vehAra<k2>vehAra
{#vehAra#}¦ {%vehāra, as,%} m., N. of a country
(Behār).
<LEND>

<L>44950<pc>0967-a<k1>vehl<k2>vehl
{#vehl#}¦ {%vehl,%} cl. 1. P. {%vehlati,%} &c. = rt.
{%vel,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>44951<pc>0967-a<k1>vE<k2>vE<h>1
{#vE#} 1¦. {%vai%} (= rt. 2. {%vā,%} cl. 4), cl. 1. P.
{%vāyati, vātum,%} to dry, to become dried or
withered; to be languid, be weary or faint, be ex-
hausted, sink down, be extinguished, (Sāy. {%= śuṣ-%}
{%yati, śrāmyate, śāmyati%}); to go, (according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda VIII. 31, 6. {%vāyataḥ = gacchataḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>44952<pc>0967-a<k1>vAta<k2>vAta<h>3
3. {%vāta, as, ā, am%}¦ (often identified with 1. {%vāta,%}
p. 899, col. 1), dried, withered.
<LEND>

<L>44953<pc>0967-a<k1>vAna<k2>vAna<h>5
5. {%vāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ dried, &c. See 1. and 2.
{%vāna,%} p. 900, col. 1.
<LEND>
[Page0967-b+ 73]

<L>44954<pc>0967-b<k1>vE<k2>vE<h>2
{#vE#} 2¦. {%vai,%} ind. a particle of affirmation,
generally translatable by ‘indeed,’ ‘truly,’ ‘certainly,’
‘verily,’ ‘in sooth;’ it may also mean ‘so,’ ‘just,’
‘although,’ ‘granted,’ ‘if,’ ({%tu vai,%} ‘but just;’ {%na%}
{%vai,%} ‘perhaps not’); it is also said to be a vocative
particle, and is often merely an expletive used for
filling out a verse.
<LEND>

<L>44955<pc>0967-b<k1>vEMSatika<k2>vEMSatika
{#vEMSatika#}¦ {%vaiṃśatika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%viṃśati%}),
purchased with twenty.
<LEND>

<L>44956<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkakza<k2>vEkakza
{#vEkakza#}¦ {%vaikakṣa, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-kakṣa%}), a
garland or string of flowers &c. worn over one
shoulder and under the other (like the sacrificial
thread); an upper garment, wrapper, mantle.
<LEND>

<L>44957<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkakzaka<k2>vEkakzaka
{%Vaikakṣaka%}¦ or {%vaikakṣika, am,%} n. a garland
or string of flowers (worn as a kind of scarf hanging
down below the hip, or like the sacrificial cord, over
the left shoulder and under the right arm).
<LEND>

<L>44958<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkaNka<k2>vEkaNka
{#vEkaNka#}¦ {%vaikaṅka,%} N. of a mythical moun-
tain.
<LEND>

<L>44959<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkaNkata<k2>vEkaNkata
{#vEkaNkata#}¦ {%vaikaṅkata, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-kaṅkata%}),
the plant Flacourtia Sapida ({%= vṛntiṅkara%}).
<LEND>

<L>44960<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkawika<k2>vEkawika
{#vEkawika#}¦ {%vaikaṭika, as,%} m. (fr. {%vekaṭa%}), a
jeweller.
<LEND>

<L>44961<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkarRa<k2>vEkarRa
{#vEkarRa#}¦ {%vaikarṇa, as,%} m. {%= vi-karṇa,%} epithet
of the wind (as fond of large or hollow ears?).
<LEND>

<L>44962<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkarta<k2>vEkarta
{#vEkarta#}¦ {%vaikarta, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-karta%}), Ved.
one who cuts up a sacrificial victim, a butcher; a
particular part of a slaughtered animal (cut off and
given to the priests at a sacrifice).
<LEND>

<L>44963<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkartana<k2>vEkartana
{%Vaikartana, as,%}¦ m. ‘son of Vi-kartana or the
Sun,’ N. of Karṇa.
<LEND>

<L>44964<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkarma<k2>vEkarma
{#vEkarma#}¦ {%vaikarma, as,%} m., N. of the Muni
Vātsya.
<LEND>

<L>44965<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkalpa<k2>vEkalpa
{#vEkalpa#}¦ {%vaikalpa, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-kalpa%}), du-
biousness, uncertainty, ambiguity, optionality, inde-
cision; [cf. {%artha-v˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>44966<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkalpika<k2>vEkalpika
{%Vaikalpika, as, ī, am,%}¦ doubtful, dubious, uncer-
tain, admitting of difference of opinion, indetermi-
nate, alternative, optional ({%= vi-kalpita%}).
<LEND>

<L>44967<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkalya<k2>vEkalya
{#vEkalya#}¦ {%vaikalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-kala%}), im-
perfection, incompleteness, impairedness, deficiency,
defect, mutilation, a defective or imperfect state of
any limb or organ, lameness; incompetency, insuf-
ficiency; agitation, flurry; non-existence.
<LEND>

<L>44968<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkArika<k2>vEkArika
{#vEkArika#}¦ {%vaikārika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-kāra%}),
modifying, a changer, modifier, (see {%vi-kāra%}); mo-
dified; ({%as%}), m. a class of deities. {%—Vaikārika-%}
{%bandha, as,%} m. (in the Sāṅkhya phil.) one of the
threefold forms of bondage, (see {%bandha, vi-kāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>44969<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkAla<k2>vEkAla
{#vEkAla#}¦ {%vaikāla, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-kāla%}), even-
ing, afternoon, ({%vaikāle,%} loc. c. in the evening.)
<LEND>

<L>44970<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkAlika<k2>vEkAlika
{%Vaikālika, as, ī, am,%}¦ occurring in or belonging
to the evening; ({%am%}), ind. in the afternoon.
<LEND>

<L>44971<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkAlIna<k2>vEkAlIna
{%Vaikālīna, as, ī, am, = vaikālika%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>44972<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkuRWa<k2>vEkuRWa
{#vEkuRWa#}¦ {%vaikuṇṭha, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-kuṇṭha%}),
N. of Viṣṇu; of Kṛṣṇa; of Indra, (Indra Vaikuṇṭha
is regarded as the author of the hymns Ṛg-veda X.
48-50); holy basil; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a particular
class of gods; ({%am%}), n. the paradise or heaven of
Vaikuṇṭha or Viṣṇu, (its site is variously described
as in the northern ocean or on the eastern peak of
mount Meru); talc. {%—Vaikuṇṭha-caturdaśī,%} f. the
fourteenth day of the light half of the month Kārt-
tika (sacred to Viṣṇu). {%—Vaikuṇṭha-purī,%} m., N.
of an author and commentator, (also called {%viṣṇu-%}
{%purī.%}) {%—Vaikuṇṭha-loka, as,%} m. the world of
Viṣṇu. {%—Vaikuṇṭha-varṇana, am,%} n. a descrip-
tion of Vaikuṇṭha.
<LEND>

<L>44973<pc>0967-b<k1>vEkfta<k2>vEkfta
{#vEkfta#}¦ {%vaikṛta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-kṛti%}), un-
dergoing change, changed (in mind or form); modi-
fied; ({%am%}), n. change, modification, alteration;
change of mind, aversion, disgust. {%—Vaikṛta-sarga,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind or form of creation, (opposed to {%prā- %}
[Page0967-c+ 73]
{%kṛta-sarga.%}) {%—Vaikṛtāpaha (˚ta-ap˚), as, ā, am,%}
removing or preventing change.
<LEND>

<L>44974<pc>0967-c<k1>vEkftika<k2>vEkftika
{%Vaikṛtika, as, ī, am,%}¦ changed, modified, inci-
dental; (in the Sāṅkhya phil.) belonging to a Vi-
kāra, i. e. to an evolute or evolved principle, (see
{%vi-kāra, pra-kṛti.%})
<LEND>

<L>44975<pc>0967-c<k1>vEkftya<k2>vEkftya
{%Vaikṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ changed (in form or mind);
({%am%}), n. change, alteration; aversion, disgust.
<LEND>

<L>44976<pc>0967-c<k1>vEkrAnta<k2>vEkrAnta
{#vEkrAnta#}¦ {%vaikrānta, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-krānta%}), a
kind of gem ({%= go-nāsa,%} said to resemble a diamond
or burnt diamond; according to others, the common
loadstone or magnet).
<LEND>

<L>44977<pc>0967-c<k1>vEklava<k2>vEklava
{#vEklava#}¦ {%vaiklava, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-klava%}), agi-
tation or distress of mind, bewilderment.
<LEND>

<L>44978<pc>0967-c<k1>vEklavya<k2>vEklavya
{%Vaiklavya, am,%}¦ n. confusion, agitation, distress,
affliction, despair, bewilderment, commotion, tumult.
<LEND>

<L>44979<pc>0967-c<k1>vEKarI<k2>vEKarI
{#vEKarI#}¦ {%vaikharī,%} f. speech in the fourth
of its four stages from the first stirring of the air or
breath, articulate utterance, that utterance of sounds
or words which is complete as consisting of full and
intelligible sentences, (according to Malli-nātha =
{%śabda-niṣpattiḥ,%} Kumāra-sambhava II. 17); the
faculty of speech or the divinity presiding over it.
<LEND>

<L>44980<pc>0967-c<k1>vEKAna<k2>vEKAna
{#vEKAna#}¦ {%vaikhāna, as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>44981<pc>0967-c<k1>vEKAnasa<k2>vEKAnasa
{#vEKAnasa#}¦ {%vaikhānasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-khā-%}
{%nasa%}), instituted by hermits, relating to hermits,
monastic; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman of the third religious
order, a Vānaprastha or hermit, anchorite; N. of a
sect of Vaiṣṇavas, (in Taittirīya-ār. 1. 23, 3. the
Vaikhānasas are represented as having sprung from
the nails of Prajā-pati); a patronymic of the Vedic
Ṛṣi Vamra, (Śataṃ Vaikhānasāḥ are regarded as
the authors of the hymn Ṛg-veda IX. 66); ({%ī%}), f.
a vessel used for frying the meal offered in sacrifice.
{%—Vaikhānasa-mata, am,%} n. the laws ordained for
hermits, (according to Kullūka {%= vaikhānasa-śās-%}
{%trokto dharmaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>44982<pc>0967-c<k1>vEguRya<k2>vEguRya
{#vEguRya#}¦ {%vaiguṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-guṇa%}), ab-
sence of or freedom from qualities, absence of attri-
butes; difference of qualities or properties, contra-
riety of properties, diversity, contrariety; inferiority,
baseness, badness, vileness; unskilfulness, awkward-
ness, clumsiness, waywardness; fault, defect.
<LEND>

<L>44983<pc>0967-c<k1>vEgrahika<k2>vEgrahika
{#vEgrahika#}¦ {%vaigrahika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-graha%}),
corporeal, bodily.
<LEND>

<L>44984<pc>0967-c<k1>vEcakzaRya<k2>vEcakzaRya
{#vEcakzaRya#}¦ {%vaicakṣaṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-cak-%}
{%ṣaṇa%}), proficiency, skill, cleverness.
<LEND>

<L>44985<pc>0967-c<k1>vEcittya<k2>vEcittya
{#vEcittya#}¦ {%vaicittya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-citti%}), con-
fusion of thought, distraction of mind, grief.
<LEND>

<L>44986<pc>0967-c<k1>vEcitrya<k2>vEcitrya
{#vEcitrya#}¦ {%vaicitrya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-citra%}),
variety, diversity; diversifiedness, manifoldness; sur-
prisingness, surprise; sorrow, despair.
<LEND>

<L>44987<pc>0967-c<k1>vEcyuta<k2>vEcyuta
{#vEcyuta#}¦ {%vaicyuta, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-cyuta%}), N. of
a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>44988<pc>0967-c<k1>vEjana<k2>vEjana
{#vEjana#}¦ {%vaijana, as,%} m., N. of the author of
the grammatical work called Prabodha-candrikā.
<LEND>

<L>44989<pc>0967-c<k1>vEjanana<k2>vEjanana
{#vEjanana#}¦ {%vaijanana, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-janana%}),
the last month of pregnancy ({%= prasava-māsa%}).
<LEND>

<L>44990<pc>0967-c<k1>vEjayanta<k2>vEjayanta
{#vEjayanta#}¦ {%vaijayanta, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-jayanta%}),
the banner or emblem of Indra; a banner, flag; the
palace of Indra; ({%ī%}), f. a flag, banner; an ensign;
a kind of garland; the necklace of Viṣṇu (com-
posed of five gems, viz. pearl, ruby, emerald, sap-
phire, and diamond); N. of the eighth night of the
civil month; the plant Sesbana Ægyptiaca; Premna
Spinosa; N. of a lexicon.
<LEND>

<L>44991<pc>0967-c<k1>vEjayantika<k2>vEjayantika
{%Vaijayantika, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} bearing a flag; ({%as%}),
m. a flag-bearer, standard-bearer; ({%ā%}), f. a flag,
banner; a kind of scarf or a string or necklace of
pearls; the plant Sesbana Ægyptiaca ({%= jayantī%});
another plant ({%= agni-mantha%}).
<LEND>

<L>44992<pc>0967-c<k1>vEjayi<k2>vEjayi
{#vEjayi#}¦ {%vaijayi, is,%} m. (fr. {%vi-jayā%}), the third
Jaina Cakra-vartin or emperor ({%= maghavan%}).
<LEND>
[Page0968-a+ 73]

<L>44993<pc>0968-a<k1>vEjayika<k2>vEjayika
{#vEjayika#}¦ {%vaijayika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-jaya%}),
relating to victory, victorious.
<LEND>

<L>44994<pc>0968-a<k1>vEjavApa<k2>vEjavApa
{#vEjavApa#}¦ {%vaijavāpa, as,%} m. (fr. {%vīja-vāpa%}),
N. of a Muni; of the author of a law-book.
<LEND>

<L>44995<pc>0968-a<k1>vEjavApi<k2>vEjavApi
{%Vaijavāpi, is, is, i%}¦ (fr. {%vīja-vāpin%}), see Gaṇa
Sutaṅgamādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 80; ({%is%}), m. a patro-
nymic from Vīja-vāpa or Vīja-vāpin; ({%ayas%}), m.
pl., N. of a warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>44996<pc>0968-a<k1>vEjavApIya<k2>vEjavApIya
{%Vaijavāpīya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%vaijavāpi%}), see
Gaṇa Raivatikādi to Pāṇ. IV. 3, 131; ({%as%}), m. a
prince of the Vaijavāpis.
<LEND>

<L>44997<pc>0968-a<k1>vEjAtya<k2>vEjAtya
{#vEjAtya#}¦ {%vaijātya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-jāti%}), differ-
ence of class or species or kind, difference of caste,
diversity of ordinary character or conduct, extraor-
dinariness, strangeness; exclusion from caste; loose-
ness, wantonness.
<LEND>

<L>44998<pc>0968-a<k1>vEjika<k2>vEjika
{#vEjika#}¦ {%vaijika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vīja%}), seminal,
relating to seed, belonging to any primary cause or
source or principle, original; relating to conception;
relating to sexual union; ({%as%}), m. a young shoot,
sprout, scion; ({%am%}), n. cause, source, origin, motive;
the spiritual cause of existence, soul, spirit; oil pre-
pared from the Śigru or Morunga.
<LEND>

<L>44999<pc>0968-a<k1>vEji<k2>vEji
{%Vaiji, is, is, i,%}¦ see Gaṇa Gahādi to Pāṇ. IV. 2,
138.
<LEND>

<L>45000<pc>0968-a<k1>vEjIya<k2>vEjIya
{%Vaijīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%vaiji%}), see Gaṇa Gahādi
to Pāṇ. IV. 2, 138.
<LEND>

<L>45001<pc>0968-a<k1>vEjeya<k2>vEjeya
{%Vaijeya, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Vīja.
<LEND>

<L>45002<pc>0968-a<k1>vEjYAnika<k2>vEjYAnika
{#vEjYAnika#}¦ {%vaijñānika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-%}
{%jñāna%}), conversant with, skilful, clever, proficient.
<LEND>

<L>45003<pc>0968-a<k1>vEqAla<k2>vEqAla
{#vEqAla#}¦ {%vaiḍāla, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%viḍāla%}), of or
belonging to a cat, peculiar to cats, feline. {%—Vaiḍāla-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n. ‘cat-like observance,’ putting on a
show of virtue or piety to conceal malice and evil
designs. {%—Vaiḍāla-vrati, is,%} m. one who leads a
chaste or continent life merely from the absence of
women or temptation. {%—Vaiḍālavratika, as, ī, am,%}
or {%vaiḍālavratin, ī, inī, i,%} acting like a cat, hypo-
critical; any hypocritical religious impostor or pre-
tended ascetic who, under an appearance of piety
and virtue, conceals covetous or malignant designs
({%= bhaṇḍa-tapasvin%}).
<LEND>

<L>45004<pc>0968-a<k1>vERa<k2>vERa
{#vERa#}¦ {%vaiṇa, as,%} m. (fr. {%veṇu%}), a cutter of
bamboos, a maker of bamboo-work; N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>45005<pc>0968-a<k1>vERava<k2>vERava
{%Vaiṇava, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to a bamboo,
produced from or made of bamboo; ({%as%}), m. a
student's staff cut from a bamboo, any bamboo staff;
a worker in bamboo or wicker-work; N. of a sacred
place of pilgrimage; ({%ī%}), f. bamboo manna; ({%am%}),
n. the fruit or seed of the bamboo.
<LEND>

<L>45006<pc>0968-a<k1>vERavika<k2>vERavika
{%Vaiṇavika, as,%}¦ m. a flutist, piper, flute-player.
<LEND>

<L>45007<pc>0968-a<k1>vERavin<k2>vERavin
{%Vaiṇavin, ī,%}¦ m. epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>45008<pc>0968-a<k1>vERahotra<k2>vERahotra
{%Vaiṇahotra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>45009<pc>0968-a<k1>vERuka<k2>vERuka
{%Vaiṇuka, am,%}¦ n. a goad or bamboo pike (pointed
with iron and used to drive an elephant); ({%as%}), m.
a piper, player on a pipe or flute.
<LEND>

<L>45010<pc>0968-a<k1>vERukeya<k2>vERukeya
{%Vaiṇukeya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
a bamboo, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45011<pc>0968-a<k1>vERika<k2>vERika
{#vERika#}¦ {%vaiṇika, as,%} m. (fr. {%vīṇā%}), a lutanist,
a player on the Vīṇā or Indian lute.
<LEND>

<L>45012<pc>0968-a<k1>vERya<k2>vERya
{#vERya#}¦ {%vaiṇya, as,%} m. (fr. {%veṇa%}), a patro-
nymic of Pṛthu son of Veṇa, (he was the fifth
sovereign of one branch of the solar race.)
<LEND>

<L>45013<pc>0968-a<k1>vEtaMsika<k2>vEtaMsika
{#vEtaMsika#}¦ {%vaitaṃsika, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-taṃsa%}), a
vender of flesh, seller of the meat of beasts or birds.
<LEND>

<L>45014<pc>0968-a<k1>vEtaRqika<k2>vEtaRqika
{#vEtaRqika#}¦ {%vaitaṇḍika, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-taṇḍā%}), a
disputatious or captious person, one fond of cavilling.
<LEND>

<L>45015<pc>0968-a<k1>vEtaRqya<k2>vEtaRqya
{%Vaitaṇḍya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of the Vasu Āpa.
<LEND>

<L>45016<pc>0968-a<k1>vEtaTya<k2>vEtaTya
{#vEtaTya#}¦ {%vaitathya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-tatha%}),
falseness.
<LEND>

<L>45017<pc>0968-a<k1>vEtanika<k2>vEtanika
{#vEtanika#}¦ {%vaitanika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vetana%}),
living on wages, subsisting on a stipend; ({%as%}), m. a
hireling, stipendiary; a labourer.
<LEND>
[Page0968-b+ 73]

<L>45018<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtaraRa<k2>vEtaraRa
{#vEtaraRa#}¦ {%vaitaraṇa, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-taraṇa%}),
N. of a physician.
<LEND>

<L>45019<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtaraRi<k2>vEtaraRi
{%Vaitaraṇi, is,%}¦ or {%vaitaraṇī,%} f., N. of the river
of Hell, i. e. of a river which must be crossed before
entering the infernal regions, (this river is described
as rushing with great impetuosity, hot, fetid in
odour, and filled with blood, hair, and bones; its
name is derived from {%vi-taraṇa%} in the sense either
of ‘crossing’ or ‘giving,’ liberality being supposed
to secure a passage); N. of a division of Naraka or
Hell; of a sacred river in the country of the Kaliṅgas;
N. of the mother of the Rākṣasas.
<LEND>

<L>45020<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtasa<k2>vEtasa
{#vEtasa#}¦ {%vaitasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vetasa%}), reed-
like; ({%as%}), m. a sort of cane, Calamus Fasciculatus;
{%= śepa%} (according to Naigh. III. 29).
<LEND>

<L>45021<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtahavya<k2>vEtahavya
{#vEtahavya#}¦ {%vaitahavya, as,%} m. (fr. {%vīta-havya%}),
a patronymic of the Vedic Ṛṣi Aruṇa.
<LEND>

<L>45022<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtAna<k2>vEtAna
{#vEtAna#}¦ {%vaitāna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-tāna%}), taken
from the sacred hearth, sacrificial, sacred (as fire);
({%am%}), n. an oblation with fire; a sacrificial rite.
{%—Vaitāna-kuśala, as, ā, am,%} skilled in or con-
versant with sacrificial rites. {%—Vaitānopāsanā (˚na-%}
{%up˚),%} f. the regular presentation of burnt-offerings
morning and evening.
<LEND>

<L>45023<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtAnika<k2>vEtAnika
{%Vaitānika, as, ī, am,%}¦ performed with the three
sacred fires (i. e. with the Gārhapatya, Dakṣiṇa,
and Āhavanīya fires); sacrificial, sacred (as fire);
({%am%}), n. a burnt-offering (especially of clarified
butter, as presented daily by the Brāhmans).
<LEND>

<L>45024<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtAlaki<k2>vEtAlaki
{#vEtAlaki#}¦ {%vaitālaki, is,%} m., N. of a teacher
of the Ṛg-veda.
<LEND>

<L>45025<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtAlika<k2>vEtAlika
{#vEtAlika#}¦ {%vaitālika, as,%} m. (fr. {%tāla%} with 1. {%vi%}
or fr. {%vetāla%}), a bard whose duty it is to awaken a
chief or prince at dawn with music and song; one
who sings out of tune (?); one who is possessed by
a Vetāla or demon, the servant of a Vetāla; the
worshipper of a Vetāla; a magician, conjurer.
<LEND>

<L>45026<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtAlIya<k2>vEtAlIya
{#vEtAlIya#}¦ {%vaitālīya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vetāla%}), a
kind of metre (the first and third Pāda containing
fourteen Mātrās or the time of fourteen short sylla-
bles, the second and fourth containing sixteen Mā-
trās; each Pāda closes with a cretic and iambus, i. e.
¯˘¯˘¯; but there are some varieties).
<LEND>

<L>45027<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtfzRya<k2>vEtfzRya
{#vEtfzRya#}¦ {%vaitṛṣṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-tṛṣṇa%}),
freedom from thirst, quenching the thirst.
<LEND>

<L>45028<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtraka<k2>vEtraka
{#vEtraka#}¦ {%vaitraka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vetra%}), cany,
reedy, relating to a cane or stick of any kind.
<LEND>

<L>45029<pc>0968-b<k1>vEtrakIya<k2>vEtrakIya
{%Vaitrakīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to a cane or
stick, reedy.
<LEND>

<L>45030<pc>0968-b<k1>vEda<k2>vEda
{#vEda#}¦ {%vaida, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vida%}), relating to
or connected with a wise man, learned, knowing;
({%as%}), m. a wise man; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of a wise
man, (Pāṇ. IV. 1, 73.)
<LEND>

<L>45031<pc>0968-b<k1>vEdagDa<k2>vEdagDa
{#vEdagDa#}¦ {%vaidagdha, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-dagdha%}),
cleverness, dexterity, skill, intelligence, acuteness,
sharpness, craft, cunning.
<LEND>

<L>45032<pc>0968-b<k1>vEdagDI<k2>vEdagDI
{%Vaidagdhī,%}¦ f. artifice, craft, trick ({%= bhaṅgi%}).
<LEND>

<L>45033<pc>0968-b<k1>vEdagDya<k2>vEdagDya
{%Vaidagdhya, am,%}¦ n. cleverness, dexterity, skill,
intelligence, knowingness, sharpness, acuteness, wit;
cunning, craft.
<LEND>

<L>45034<pc>0968-b<k1>vEdaTina<k2>vEdaTina
{#vEdaTina#}¦ {%vaidathina, as,%} m. (fr. {%vidathin%}),
Ved. a patronymic of Ṛjiśvan.
<LEND>

<L>45035<pc>0968-b<k1>vEdadaSvi<k2>vEdadaSvi
{#vEdadaSvi#}¦ {%vaidadaśvi, is,%} m. a patronymic,
the son of Vidad-aśva, Ṛg-veda V. 61, 10.
<LEND>

<L>45036<pc>0968-b<k1>vEdarBa<k2>vEdarBa
{#vEdarBa#}¦ {%vaidarbha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-darbha%} or
fr. {%dṛbha%} formed fr. rt. 1. {%dṛbh%} with {%vi%}), coming
from the country Vidarbha, produced in Vidarbha;
({%as%}), m. the sovereign of Vidarbha (father of Dama-
yantī and father-in-law of Nala); a gum-boil; ({%ī%}),
f. the law of the country Vidarbha (by which first
cousins were allowed to intermarry); epithet of the
wife of Agastya; of Damayantī (wife of Nala); of
Rukmiṇī (one of Kṛṣṇa's wives); a particular style
[Page0968-c+ 76]
of composition (see {%rīti%}); ({%am%}), n. crafty or indirect
speech. {%—Vaidarbha-rīti, is,%} f. the Vidarbha style
of composition (see {%rīti%}). {%—Vaidarbhī-jananī,%} f.
the mother of Damayantī.
<LEND>

<L>45037<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdarBaka<k2>vEdarBaka
{%Vaidarbhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ coming from Vidar-
bha, a native of Vidarbha.
<LEND>

<L>45038<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdala<k2>vEdala
{#vEdala#}¦ {%vaidala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-dala%}), made
of wicker or cane, wicker or basket-work; ({%as%}), m.
a flat unleavened cake (made of flour &c. with
cumin or coriander seeds and fried in ghee); any
leguminous vegetable or grain (as peas, beans, &c.);
({%am%}), n. the shallow cup or platter belonging to a
religious mendicant (made of clay and sometimes
of metal or wood or wicker); any seat or vessel of
basket or wicker-work.
<LEND>

<L>45039<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdArava<k2>vEdArava
{#vEdArava#}¦ {%vaidārava, vaidārva.%} See {%śvaita.%}
<LEND>

<L>45040<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdika<k2>vEdika
{#vEdika#}¦ {%vaidika, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%veda%}),
derived from or conformable to the Vedas, relating
to the Vedas, Vedic, prescribed by Vedic ritual,
knowing the Vedas, scriptural, sacred; ({%as%}), m. a
Brāhman versed in the Vedas. {%—Vaidika-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. an action enjoined by the Vedas. {%—Vaidika-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. conformity to the Vedas, the being
founded on or derived from the Vedas, sacredness.
{%—Vaidika-pāśa, as,%} m. a bad Veda-knower, one
imperfectly versed in the Veda, (Pāṇ. V. 3, 47.)
<LEND>

<L>45041<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdiSa<k2>vEdiSa
{#vEdiSa#}¦ {%vaidiśa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vidiśā%}), of or
belonging to the city of Vidiśā, near Vidiśā. {%—Vai-%}
{%diśa-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>45042<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdiSya<k2>vEdiSya
{%Vaidiśya, am,%}¦ n. a city not far from Vidiśā.
<LEND>

<L>45043<pc>0968-c<k1>vEduzya<k2>vEduzya
{#vEduzya#}¦ {%vaiduṣya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vidvas%}), wisdom,
learning, science, sapience.
<LEND>

<L>45044<pc>0968-c<k1>vEduzI<k2>vEduzI
{%Vaiduṣī,%}¦ f. {%= vaiduṣya.%}
<LEND>

<L>45045<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdUrya<k2>vEdUrya
{#vEdUrya#}¦ {%vaidūrya, as, ī,%} or {%rī, am%} (fr. {%vi-dūra%}),
brought from Vidūra; ({%am%}), n. a gem of a dark
colour, lapis lazuli or a kind of turkois; N. of a
mountain; of a mythical mountain. {%—Vaidūrya-ma-%}
{%ya, as, ī, am,%} made or consisting of lapis lazuli.
<LEND>

<L>45046<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdeSika<k2>vEdeSika
{#vEdeSika#}¦ {%vaideśika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-deśa%}),
belonging to another country, foreign, strange, a
foreigner.
<LEND>

<L>45047<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdeSya<k2>vEdeSya
{%Vaideśya, am,%}¦ n. the state of belonging to a
foreign country, foreignness.
<LEND>

<L>45048<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdeha<k2>vEdeha
{#vEdeha#}¦ {%vaideha, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-deha%}), the king
of Videha (father of Sītā); a dweller in Videha;
a trader by caste; the son of a Vaiśya by a Brāhman
woman (Manu X. 11); an attendant on the women's
apartments; ({%ās%}), m. pl. people of Videha; people
of mixed castes; ({%ī%}), f. Sītā (daughter of Janaka);
the wife of a merchant, woman of the Vaideha
caste; a sort of pigment ({%= rocanā%}); long pepper;
a cow. {%—Vaidehi-bandhu, us,%} m. (for {%vaidehī-b˚%}
by Pāṇ. VI. 3, 63), ‘husband of the lady of Videha,’ an
epithet of Rāma-candra, (Raghu-vaṃśa XIV. 33.)
<LEND>

<L>45049<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdehaka<k2>vEdehaka
{%Vaidehaka, as,%}¦ m. a merchant or trader by caste;
a man of a mixed caste (the offspring of a Vaiśya
father and Brāhman mother whose business is attend-
ance in the women's apartments).
<LEND>

<L>45050<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdehika<k2>vEdehika
{%Vaidehika, as,%}¦ m. a merchant ({%= vaidehaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>45051<pc>0968-c<k1>vEdya<k2>vEdya
{#vEdya#}¦ {%vaidya, as, -dī, am%} (fr. {%veda%}), relating
or belonging to the Vedas, conformable to the Vedas,
Vedic; medical, medicinal, practising or relating to
medicine [cf. {%āyur-veda%}]; ({%as%}), m. a learned man,
doctor, Paṇḍit, a follower of the Vedas or one well
versed in them; a medical man, doctor, physician;
a man of the medical caste (enumerated among the
mixed classes and originally the offspring of a Brāh-
man by a Vaiśya woman; he is also called Amba-
ṣṭha, Manu X. 8); a man of another and lower
mixed caste (said to be the descendant of a Śūdra
father and Vaiśya mother; cf. {%caṇḍāla, vrātya%});
the tree Justicia Ganderussa; ({%ā%}), f. a particular
drug or medicinal substance {%(= kākolī)%}. {%—Vaidya-%}
{%kriyā,%} f. the business of a physician. {%—Vaidya-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of physicians,’ epithet of Śiva;
of Dhanvantari; of a poet; of a country. {%—Vaidya- %}
[Page0969-a+ 71]
{%bandhu, us,%} m. the tree Cassia Fistula {%(= ārag-%}
{%badha)%}. {%—Vaidya-bhūṣaṇa,%} ‘ornament of phy-
sicians,’ N. of a work by Rāmānanda-svāmin.
{%—Vaidya-mātṛ, tā,%} f. the mother of a physician;
the tree Justicia Ganderussa (= 1. {%vāsaka%}). {%—Vaidya-%}
{%vallabha, as,%} m. ‘favourite with physicians,’ N. of a
medical work on the treatment of fever by Śārṅgha-
dhara. {%—Vaidya-siṃhī,%} f. the plant Justicia Gande-
russa (= 1. {%vāsaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>45052<pc>0969-a<k1>vEdyaka<k2>vEdyaka
{%Vaidyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ medical, relating to medi-
cine; ({%as%}), m. a doctor, physician, medical man;
({%am%}), n. the science of medicine, the Āyur-veda,
q. v. {%—Vaidyaka-śāstra, am,%} n. the science of medi-
cine. {%—Vaidyaka-sarva-sva, am,%} n., N. of a work
by Nakula.
<LEND>

<L>45053<pc>0969-a<k1>vEdyADara<k2>vEdyADara
{#vEdyADara#}¦ {%vaidyādhara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vidyā-%}
{%dhara%}), belonging to the Vidyā-dharas.
<LEND>

<L>45054<pc>0969-a<k1>vEdyADara<k2>vEdyADara
{#vEdyADara#}¦ {%vaidyādhara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vidyut%}),
coming or proceeding from lightning, belonging to
or connected with lightning, electric, electrical,
({%vaidyutaḥ kṛśānuḥ,%} the fire of lightning.)
<LEND>

<L>45055<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDa<k2>vEDa
{#vEDa#}¦ {%vaidha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vidhi%}), enjoined
by rule, conformable to rule, prescribed, appointed,
giving rules or directions, preceptive, ritual; legal.
<LEND>

<L>45056<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDika<k2>vEDika
{%Vaidhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ in accordance with rule,
giving precepts or commands, preceptive, ritual.
<LEND>

<L>45057<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDarmya<k2>vEDarmya
{#vEDarmya#}¦ {%vaidharmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-dharma%}),
unlawfulness, injustice, impropriety, irreligion, hete-
rodoxy; difference of duty or obligation; opposition
or contrariety of character, difference of characteristic
qualities, difference, heterogeneity.
<LEND>

<L>45058<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDava<k2>vEDava
{#vEDava#}¦ {%vaidhava, as,%} m. (fr. {%vidhu%}), the son
of the Moon, i. e. Budha.
<LEND>

<L>45059<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDavya<k2>vEDavya
{#vEDavya#}¦ {%vaidhavya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-dhavā%}),
widowhood.
<LEND>

<L>45060<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDaveya<k2>vEDaveya
{%Vaidhaveya, as,%}¦ m. the son of a widow.
<LEND>

<L>45061<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDAtra<k2>vEDAtra
{#vEDAtra#}¦ {%vaidhātra, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-dhātṛ%}), a
patronymic of Sanat-kumāra (as son of Brahmā and
eldest of the progenitors of mankind); ({%ī%}), f. =
{%brāhmī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>45062<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDurya<k2>vEDurya
{#vEDurya#}¦ {%vaidhurya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vidhura%}), agi-
tation, tremulousness.
<LEND>

<L>45063<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDUmAgnI<k2>vEDUmAgnI
{#vEDUmAgnI#}¦ {%vaidhūmāgnī,%} f., N. of a city in
the country of the Śālvas.
<LEND>

<L>45064<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDfta<k2>vEDfta
{#vEDfta#}¦ {%vaidhṛta, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-dhṛta%}), N.
of a particular position of the sun and moon when
they are on the same side of either solstice and of
equal declination but of opposite direction, (this is
considered a malignant aspect; cf. {%vy-atīpāta.%})
<LEND>

<L>45065<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDfti<k2>vEDfti
{%Vaidhṛti, is,%}¦ f. the Yoga star of the twenty-
seventh lunar mansion; {%= vaidhṛta%} above.
<LEND>

<L>45066<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDeya<k2>vEDeya<h>1
{#vEDeya#} 1¦. {%vaidheya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-dheya%}),
foolish, silly, weak, ignorant; ({%as%}), m. an idiot, fool.
<LEND>

<L>45067<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDeya<k2>vEDeya<h>2
2. {%vaidheya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%vidhi%}), relating to
rule or precept, prescribed, preceptive; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a teacher of the White Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>45068<pc>0969-a<k1>vEDyata<k2>vEDyata
{#vEDyata#}¦ {%vaidhyata, as,%} m., N. of Yama's
porter or door-keeper.
<LEND>

<L>45069<pc>0969-a<k1>vEnataka<k2>vEnataka
{#vEnataka#}¦ {%vainataka, am,%} n. a vessel for
holding or pouring out ghee (used at sacrifices).
<LEND>

<L>45070<pc>0969-a<k1>vEnateya<k2>vEnateya
{#vEnateya#}¦ {%vainateya, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-natā%}), N. of
Garuḍa (as son of Vinatā); of Aruṇa (elder brother
of Garuḍa).
<LEND>

<L>45071<pc>0969-a<k1>vEnayika<k2>vEnayika
{#vEnayika#}¦ {%vainayika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-naya%}),
relating to moral conduct or discipline; enforcing
proper behaviour; performed by the officers of
criminal justice, magisterial; ({%as%}), m. a chariot em-
ployed in military exercises, a war-carriage.
<LEND>

<L>45072<pc>0969-a<k1>vEnAyika<k2>vEnAyika
{#vEnAyika#}¦ {%vaināyika, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-nāyaka%}),
belonging or relating to Gaṇeśa, made by Gaṇeśa;
a follower of Buddha, a Buddhist.
<LEND>
[Page0969-b+ 69]

<L>45073<pc>0969-b<k1>vEnASika<k2>vEnASika
{#vEnASika#}¦ {%vaināśika, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-nāśa%}), a
dependant, subject, slave; a spider; an astrologer;
({%am%}), n. the twenty-third Nakṣatra or constellation
from that under which any one is born.
<LEND>

<L>45074<pc>0969-b<k1>vEnItaka<k2>vEnItaka
{#vEnItaka#}¦ {%vainītaka, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. {%vi-%}
{%nīta%}), an indirect means of conveyance (as a porter
carrying a litter or dooly, a palanquin-bearer, horse
dragging a carriage, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>45075<pc>0969-b<k1>vEndava<k2>vEndava
{#vEndava#}¦ {%vaindava, as,%} m. (fr. {%vindu%}), a pa-
tronymic from Vindu.
<LEND>

<L>45076<pc>0969-b<k1>vEndavi<k2>vEndavi
{%Vaindavi, ayas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a warrior-tribe.
<LEND>

<L>45077<pc>0969-b<k1>vEndavIya<k2>vEndavIya
{%Vaindavīya, as,%}¦ m. a prince of the Vaindavis.
<LEND>

<L>45078<pc>0969-b<k1>vEnya<k2>vEnya
{#vEnya#}¦ {%vainya, as,%} m. (fr. {%vena%}), a patronymic
of Pṛthī (Ved.); of Pṛthu (author of the hymn
Ṛg-veda X. 148, who is probably to be identified
with Pṛthī); of king Pṛthu [cf. {%vaiṇya%}]; N. of a
deity (?). {%—Vainya-datta, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>45079<pc>0969-b<k1>vEpaTaka<k2>vEpaTaka
{#vEpaTaka#}¦ {%vaipathaka, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-%}
{%patha%}), relating to a wrong path, going wrong,
devious.
<LEND>

<L>45080<pc>0969-b<k1>vEparItya<k2>vEparItya
{#vEparItya#}¦ {%vaiparītya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-parīta%}),
contrariety, opposition, adverseness, reverse; counter-
part. {%—Vaiparītya-lajjālu, us,%} m. f. a particular
species of sensitive plant or Mimosa Pudica (small
in size but bearing large seed or fruit). {%—Vaiparītya-%}
{%sambandha, as,%} m. the relation of contrariety or
contradictoriness.
<LEND>

<L>45081<pc>0969-b<k1>vEpulya<k2>vEpulya
{#vEpulya#}¦ {%vaipulya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-pula%}), large-
ness, spaciousness, abundance, plenty.
<LEND>

<L>45082<pc>0969-b<k1>vEPalya<k2>vEPalya
{#vEPalya#}¦ {%vaiphalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-phala%}), fruit-
lessness, uselessness, unproductiveness, abortiveness.
<LEND>

<L>45083<pc>0969-b<k1>vEboDika<k2>vEboDika
{#vEboDika#}¦ {%vaibodhika, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-bodha%}),
a watchman, one who announces the hours of the
night or awakes sleepers by calling out the time.
<LEND>

<L>45084<pc>0969-b<k1>vEBava<k2>vEBava
{#vEBava#}¦ {%vaibhava, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-bhava%}), su-
perhuman power or might; power, greatness, majesty,
grandeur, glory, magnificence, splendor, wealth.
<LEND>

<L>45085<pc>0969-b<k1>vEBAjitra<k2>vEBAjitra
{#vEBAjitra#}¦ {%vaibhājitra, am,%} n. (fr. {%vibhāja-%}
{%yitṛ%}), apportioning, dividing; apportionment.
<LEND>

<L>45086<pc>0969-b<k1>vEBAzika<k2>vEBAzika
{#vEBAzika#}¦ {%vaibhāṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-%}
{%bhāṣā%}), optional, alternative; epithet of one of the
four great schools or systems of Buddhism.
<LEND>

<L>45087<pc>0969-b<k1>vEBoja<k2>vEBoja
{#vEBoja#}¦ {%vaibhoja, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a tribe
(said to have been descended from Druhyu).
<LEND>

<L>45088<pc>0969-b<k1>vEBra<k2>vEBra
{#vEBra#}¦ {%vaibhra, am,%} n. (etymology doubtful;
said to be fr. {%vi-bhrāj%}), the heaven of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>45089<pc>0969-b<k1>vEBrAja<k2>vEBrAja
{#vEBrAja#}¦ {%vaibhrāja, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-bhrāj%}), the
garden of the gods, a celestial grove or garden; N.
of a forest (said to be situated on the west of Meru).
{%—Vaibhrāja-loka, as,%} m. the world or place inha-
bited by the Manes called Barhi-shads.
<LEND>

<L>45090<pc>0969-b<k1>vEmatya<k2>vEmatya
{#vEmatya#}¦ {%vaimatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-mati%}), differ-
ence of opinion, dissension; aversion, dislike; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a school of the White Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>45091<pc>0969-b<k1>vEmada<k2>vEmada
{#vEmada#}¦ {%vaimada, as, ī, am,%} of or belonging
to Vi-mada.
<LEND>

<L>45092<pc>0969-b<k1>vEmanasya<k2>vEmanasya
{#vEmanasya#}¦ {%vaimanasya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-manas%}),
distraction or agitation of mind, great sadness or sor-
row, distractedness, broken-heartedness; sickness.
<LEND>

<L>45093<pc>0969-b<k1>vEmalya<k2>vEmalya
{#vEmalya#}¦ {%vaimalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-mala%}), spot-
lessness, cleanliness, purity.
<LEND>

<L>45094<pc>0969-b<k1>vEmAtra<k2>vEmAtra
{#vEmAtra#}¦ {%vaimātra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-mātṛ%}),
born of a different mother, the offspring of a step-
mother; ({%as%}), m. a step-mother's son, half brother;
({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a step-mother's daughter.
<LEND>

<L>45095<pc>0969-b<k1>vEmAtreya<k2>vEmAtreya
{%Vaimātreya, as,%}¦ m. a step-mother's son; ({%ī%}), f. a
step-mother's daughter; a half sister, one by a dif-
ferent mother.
<LEND>

<L>45096<pc>0969-b<k1>vEmAnika<k2>vEmAnika
{#vEmAnika#}¦ {%vaimānika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-māna%}),
[Page0969-c+ 73]
relating to a heavenly car, borne in divine chariots;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a particular class of deities.
<LEND>

<L>45097<pc>0969-c<k1>vEmukta<k2>vEmukta
{#vEmukta#}¦ {%vaimukta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-mukta%}),
liberated, emancipated, being at liberty or loose;
({%am%}), n. liberation, emancipation.
<LEND>

<L>45098<pc>0969-c<k1>vEmuKya<k2>vEmuKya
{#vEmuKya#}¦ {%vaimukhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-mukha%}),
turning away the face, avertedness, flight, retreat.
<LEND>

<L>45099<pc>0969-c<k1>vEmUlya<k2>vEmUlya
{#vEmUlya#}¦ {%vaimūlya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-mūlya%}),
variety or difference of price, an unfair charge.
{%—Vaimūlya-tas,%} ind. at different or various prices,
at unfair prices.
<LEND>

<L>45100<pc>0969-c<k1>vEmeya<k2>vEmeya
{#vEmeya#}¦ {%vaimeya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%me%} with {%vi%}),
barter, exchange.
<LEND>

<L>45101<pc>0969-c<k1>vEmbaki<k2>vEmbaki
{#vEmbaki#}¦ {%vaimbaki, is,%} m. a patronymic from
Vimba.
<LEND>

<L>45102<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyagra<k2>vEyagra
{#vEyagra#}¦ {%vaiyagra, am,%} n. (fr. {%vy-agra%}), dis-
traction or agitation of mind, perplexity, bewilder-
ment; the being totally absorbed or wholly engaged
(in any occupation).
<LEND>

<L>45103<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyagrya<k2>vEyagrya
{%Vaiyagrya, am,%}¦ n. perplexity, &c., {%= vaiyagra%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>45104<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyarTya<k2>vEyarTya
{#vEyarTya#}¦ {%vaiyarthya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vy-artha%}),
unprofitableness, uselessness, inutility, unproductive-
ness, vainness.
<LEND>

<L>45105<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyalkasa<k2>vEyalkasa
{#vEyalkasa#}¦ {%vaiyalkasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vy-%}
{%alkasa%}), see Vopa-deva VII. 4, VII. 18.
<LEND>

<L>45106<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyaSva<k2>vEyaSva
{#vEyaSva#}¦ {%vaiyaśva, as,%} m. (fr. {%vy-aśva%}), a
patronymic of the Vedic Ṛṣi Viśva-manas.
<LEND>

<L>45107<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyaSvi<k2>vEyaSvi
{%Vaiyaśvi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Vy-aśva.
<LEND>

<L>45108<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyAkaraRa<k2>vEyAkaraRa
{#vEyAkaraRa#}¦ {%vaiyākaraṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vy-%}
{%ākaraṇa%}), relating to grammar, grammatical; ({%as%}),
m. a grammatical analyst, a grammarian; ({%ī%}), f. a
female grammarian. {%—Vaiyākaraṇa-pāśa, as,%} m.
a bad grammarian, (Pāṇ. V. 3, 47.) {%—Vaiyāka-%}
{%raṇa-bhārya, as,%} m. a man who has a female
grammarian for a wife. {%—Vaiyākaraṇa-bhūṣaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a work by Koṇḍa-bhaṭṭa. {%—Vaiyāka-%}
{%raṇa-siddhānta-mañjūṣā,%} f., N. of a work (=
{%mañjūṣā%}).
<LEND>

<L>45109<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyAGra<k2>vEyAGra
{#vEyAGra#}¦ {%vaiyāghra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vyāghra%}),
belonging to a tiger, tiger-like, consisting or made
of a tiger's skin, covered with a tiger's skin. {%—Vai-%}
{%yāghra-paricchada, as, ā, am,%} covered with a
tiger's skin.
<LEND>

<L>45110<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyAGrapadya<k2>vEyAGrapadya
{%Vaiyāghrapadya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vyāghra-pad%} or
{%˚pād%}), N. of a Muni, the founder of a family called
after him; ({%as, ā, am%}), composed by the gram-
marian Vyāghra-pād.
<LEND>

<L>45111<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyAGrya<k2>vEyAGrya
{%Vaiyāghrya, am,%}¦ n. the state or condition of a
tiger; a particular posture in sitting.
<LEND>

<L>45112<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyAtya<k2>vEyAtya
{#vEyAtya#}¦ {%vaiyātya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-yāta%}), lasci-
viousness, immodesty, boldness, impudence.
<LEND>

<L>45113<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyAsaki<k2>vEyAsaki
{#vEyAsaki#}¦ {%vaiyāsaki, is,%} m. (a patronymic
fr. {%vyāsa%}), a son or descendant of Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>45114<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyAsika<k2>vEyAsika
{%Vaiyāsika, as, ī, am,%}¦ composed by Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>45115<pc>0969-c<k1>vEyuzwa<k2>vEyuzwa
{#vEyuzwa#}¦ {%vaiyuṣṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vy-uṣṭa%}),
early, occurring at dawn, performed early in the
morning.
<LEND>

<L>45116<pc>0969-c<k1>vEra<k2>vEra
{#vEra#}¦ {%vaira, am,%} n. (fr. {%vīra%}), heroism, valour,
prowess; enmity, hostility, animosity, revenge, grudge,
malice, spite, hatred, vindictiveness, opposition, strife,
quarrel. {%—Vaira-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing hostility,
occasioning enmity, mischief-making. {%—Vaira-kāra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘enmity-causer,’ an enemy. {%—Vaira-kāraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a cause of hostility. {%—Vaira-kṛt, t,%} m.
‘causing enmity,’ an enemy. {%—Vaira-niryātana,%}
{%am,%} n. requital of enmity or of a grudge, revenge,
retaliation, requital of an injury. {%—Vaira-prati-%}
{%kriyā,%} f. requital of hostile acts, revenge. {%—Vaira-%}
{%pratimocana, am,%} n. deliverance or setting free
from enmity. {%—Vaira-pratiyātana, am,%} n. the
requital of enmity, taking vengeance. {%—Vaira-%}
{%yātanā,%} f. requital of a grudge, vengeance. {%—Vaira- %}
[Page0970-a+ 75]
{%rakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} guarding against or warding off hos-
tility. {%—Vaira-śuddhi, is,%} f. the removal or wiping
out of a grudge, revenge, retaliation. {%—Vairātaṅka%}
{%(˚ra-āt˚), as,%} m. the Arjuna tree. {%—Vairānuban-%}
{%dha (˚ra-an˚), as,%} m. beginning or commencement
of hostilities. {%—Vairānubandhin, ī, inī, i,%} com-
mencing hostilities, leading to or resulting in enmity
or hostility; ({%ī%}), m. the calorific or heating solar
ray; epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Vairāroha (˚ra-ār˚), as,%}
m. rise or advance of hostility, desperate combat.
{%—Vairī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become
hostile, be changed into enmity or hatred. {%—Vai-%}
{%roddhāra (˚ra-ud˚), am,%} n. removal or redemption
of a grudge, taking revenge, retaliation.
<LEND>

<L>45117<pc>0970-a<k1>vErAya<k2>vErAya
{%Vairāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vairāyate, -yitum,%} to become
hostile, behave inimically, act in a hostile manner,
fight.
<LEND>

<L>45118<pc>0970-a<k1>vErAyamARa<k2>vErAyamARa
{%Vairāyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming hostile or
inimical, being an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>45119<pc>0970-a<k1>vErin<k2>vErin
{%Vairin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ hostile, malicious, revengeful;
({%ī%}), m. a hero; an enemy. {%—Vairi-tā,%} f. or {%vairi-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. heroism; enmity, hostility, malice, hatred.
<LEND>

<L>45120<pc>0970-a<k1>vErakta<k2>vErakta
{#vErakta#}¦ {%vairakta, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-rakta%}), free-
dom from worldly affections and passions, absence of
affection or attachment, aversion, displeasure, dislike.
<LEND>

<L>45121<pc>0970-a<k1>vEraNgika<k2>vEraNgika
{#vEraNgika#}¦ {%vairaṅgika, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-raṅga%}),
one who has subdued all passions and desires, a
devotee, ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>45122<pc>0970-a<k1>vEralya<k2>vEralya
{#vEralya#}¦ {%vairalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-rala%}), loose-
ness or openness (of texture), fineness; rareness,
scarceness.
<LEND>

<L>45123<pc>0970-a<k1>vErAga<k2>vErAga
{#vErAga#}¦ {%vairāga, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-rāga%}), absence
of worldly passion, freedom from all desires.
<LEND>

<L>45124<pc>0970-a<k1>vErAgika<k2>vErAgika
{%Vairāgika, as,%}¦ m. an ascetic who has subdued
his passions and is free from desire.
<LEND>

<L>45125<pc>0970-a<k1>vErAgin<k2>vErAgin
{%Vairāgin, ī,%}¦ m. an ascetic or devotee who has
subdued all worldly desires; a particular class of reli-
gious mendicants.
<LEND>

<L>45126<pc>0970-a<k1>vErAgya<k2>vErAgya
{%Vairāgya, am,%}¦ n. freedom from passion, dispas-
sion, absence of all worldly desires and appetites,
asceticism, devotion. {%—Vairāgya-śataka, am,%} n., N.
of one hundred verses on asceticism by Bhartṛ-hari,
(these verses constitute the third Śataka in his work.)
<LEND>

<L>45127<pc>0970-a<k1>vErAja<k2>vErAja
{#vErAja#}¦ {%vairāja, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%vi-rāj%}),
consisting of the Virāj metre, composed in this
metre; consisting of ten syllables (as a Pāda); of
or belonging to the district called Virāj; epithet
of particular worlds; ({%as%}), m. a son or descendant
of Virāj, Manu Svāyambhuva; a patronymic of the
Vedic Ṛṣi Ṛṣabha; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a parti-
cular class of deities; of a class of Pitṛs; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of the Virāj metre; of a particular Sāman or
portion of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>45128<pc>0970-a<k1>vErAjaka<k2>vErAjaka
{%Vairājaka, as,%}¦ m. epithet of the nineteenth Kalpa.
<LEND>

<L>45129<pc>0970-a<k1>vErAwa<k2>vErAwa
{#vErAwa#}¦ {%vairāṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-rāṭa%}), relat-
ing or belonging to Virāṭa; ({%as%}), m. an earth-worm;
a particular insect {%(= indra-gopa)%}. {%—Vairāṭa-deśa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a country. {%—Vairāṭa-rāja, as,%} m., N.
of a king.
<LEND>

<L>45130<pc>0970-a<k1>vErAwyA<k2>vErAwyA
{%Vairāṭyā,%}¦ f., N. of one of the sixteen Vidyā-devīs
or goddesses of learning (with Jainas).
<LEND>

<L>45131<pc>0970-a<k1>vEriRa<k2>vEriRa
{#vEriRa#}¦ {%vairiṇa, as,%} m. (see {%vīraṇa%}), Ved. a
kind of Vīraṇa grass, (Sāy. {%= vīraṇa-prakāra,%} Ṛg-
veda 1. 191, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>45132<pc>0970-a<k1>vErin<k2>vErin
{#vErin#}¦ {%vairin.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>45133<pc>0970-a<k1>vErUpa<k2>vErUpa
{#vErUpa#}¦ {%vairūpa, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-rūpa%}), Ved.,
N. of a particular Sāman; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic
of the Vedic Ṛṣi Aṣṭā-daṃṣṭra; of Nabha-pra-
bhedana; of Śata-prabhedana; of Sadhri; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., N. of a race of Pitṛs (occupying the third or
highest heaven).
<LEND>

<L>45134<pc>0970-a<k1>vErUpya<k2>vErUpya
{%Vairūpya, am,%}¦ n. difference or diversity of form,
variety of shape; deformity, ugliness. {%—Vairūpya-%}
{%tā,%} f. deformity, malformation.
<LEND>

<L>45135<pc>0970-a<k1>vErocana<k2>vErocana
{#vErocana#}¦ {%vairocana, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-rocana%}),
[Page0970-b+ 73]
belonging to or coming from the Sun; descended
from Virocana, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a Buddha (the third
of the Dhyāni-buddhas); a patronymic of the cele-
brated Daitya Bali (sovereign of Mahābali-pura, see
{%bali%}); of the son of Agni; of the son of Sūrya
(the Sun); a Siddha, a sort of demigod or deified
mortal. {%—Vairocana-niketana, am,%} n. ‘abode of
Bali,’ Pātāla or that portion of the lower regions
over which Bali presides, (see {%bali.%})
<LEND>

<L>45136<pc>0970-b<k1>vErocani<k2>vErocani
{%Vairocani, is,%}¦ m. a Buddha; a patronymic of Bali,
(see above); of the son of Agni; of the son of Sūrya.
<LEND>

<L>45137<pc>0970-b<k1>vEroci<k2>vEroci
{#vEroci#}¦ {%vairoci, is,%} m., N. of the Daitya
Vāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>45138<pc>0970-b<k1>vEla<k2>vEla
{#vEla#}¦ {%vaila, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vila%}), relating or
belonging to a hole or pit. {%—Vaila-stha, am,%} n.,
Ved. a pit, burying-place, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda 1. 133, 3. {%mahā-vailasthe = sarvair gantavye%}
{%mahā-śmaśāne%} or {%nāga-loke.%}) {%—Vaila-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. a place like a hole, a pit; a burying-
place. {%—Vaila-sthānaka, am,%} n., Ved. a pit.
<LEND>

<L>45139<pc>0970-b<k1>vElakzaRya<k2>vElakzaRya
{#vElakzaRya#}¦ {%vailakṣaṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-%}
{%lakṣaṇa%}), contrariety, difference, disparity, oppo-
sition; {%pūrvokta-vailakṣaṇyena,%} in opposition to
what was before stated.
<LEND>

<L>45140<pc>0970-b<k1>vElakzya<k2>vElakzya
{#vElakzya#}¦ {%vailakṣya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-lakṣa%}),
absence of mark or characteristic; contrariety, re-
verse, inversion; the reverse of what is usual or
natural, unnaturalness, affectation; {%sa-vailakṣyam,%}
affectedly, in a forced manner, unnaturally.
<LEND>

<L>45141<pc>0970-b<k1>vElomya<k2>vElomya
{#vElomya#}¦ {%vailomya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-loma%}),
contrariety, reverseness, opposition, oppositeness.
<LEND>

<L>45142<pc>0970-b<k1>vElva<k2>vElva
{#vElva#}¦ {%vailva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vilva%}), relating
or belonging to the Vilva tree; made of Vilva
wood; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of the Vilva or Ægle
Marmelos. {%—Vailva-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or con-
sisting of the Vilva or of its wood, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45143<pc>0970-b<k1>vEvaDika<k2>vEvaDika
{#vEvaDika#}¦ {%vaivadhika, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-vadha%}),
a dealer, peddler, hawker, vender of various sub-
stances (as grain, oil, ghee, fruit, sweetmeats, &c.,
{%= vivadhika%}).
<LEND>

<L>45144<pc>0970-b<k1>vEvarRya<k2>vEvarRya
{#vEvarRya#}¦ {%vaivarṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-varṇa%}),
diversity of colour, change of colour or complexion;
deviation or secession from tribe or caste, &c.; hete-
rogeneousness, diversity, difference.
<LEND>

<L>45145<pc>0970-b<k1>vEvarta<k2>vEvarta
{#vEvarta#}¦ {%vaivarta, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-varta%}), revo-
lution, change or modification of existence; [cf.
{%brahma-vaivarta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45146<pc>0970-b<k1>vEvasvata<k2>vEvasvata
{#vEvasvata#}¦ {%vaivasvata, as,%} m. (a patronymic
fr. {%vivasvat%}), N. of Yama as son of Vivasvat, (see
Yama); the seventh Manu or Manu of the present
period (as son of Vivasvat and brother of Yama);
the planet Saturn; one of the Rudras; ({%am%}), n.,
scil. {%antara,%} epithet of the seventh or present Manv-
antara (as presided over by Manu Vaivasvata); ({%ī%}),
f. a patronymic of Yamī; the south, the southern
quarter. {%—Vaivasvata-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a cele-
brated shrine and Tīrtha. {%—Vaivasvata-manvan-%}
{%tara, am,%} n., N. of the seventh or present Manv-
antara, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>45147<pc>0970-b<k1>vEvAhika<k2>vEvAhika
{#vEvAhika#}¦ {%vaivāhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-vāha%}),
belonging or relating to marriage, matrimonial, nup-
tial; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a marriage, wedding; ({%as%}),
m. a son's father-in-law or a daughter's father-in-law,
i. e. the father of a son's wife or of a daughter's
husband.
<LEND>

<L>45148<pc>0970-b<k1>vEvAhya<k2>vEvAhya
{%Vaivāhya, as, -hī, am,%}¦ relating to marriage.
<LEND>

<L>45149<pc>0970-b<k1>vEvftta<k2>vEvftta
{#vEvftta#}¦ {%vaivṛtta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-vṛtti%}), of
or belonging to Vi-vṛtti; ({%as%}), m. a particular modi-
fication of Vedic accent.
<LEND>

<L>45150<pc>0970-b<k1>vESadya<k2>vESadya
{#vESadya#}¦ {%vaiśadya, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-śada%}), white-
ness; cleanness, purity, clearness, perspicuity.
<LEND>

<L>45151<pc>0970-b<k1>vESanta<k2>vESanta
{#vESanta#}¦ {%vaiśanta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%veśanta%}),
Ved. belonging to the Soma ladle or cup; ({%am%}), n.
[Page0970-c+ 75]
a cup of Soma juice, (according to modern scholars
Vaiśanta in Ṛg-veda VII. 33, 2. is probably the
name of a river.)
<LEND>

<L>45152<pc>0970-c<k1>vESampAyana<k2>vESampAyana
{#vESampAyana#}¦ {%vaiśampāyana, as,%} m., N. of a
celebrated sage (the original teacher of the Taittirīya-
saṃhitā or collection of hymns of the Black Yajur-
veda, see {%taittirīya-saṃhitā;%} he was also the nar-
rator of the Mahā-bhārata to Janam-ejaya); N. of the
author of a law-book.
<LEND>

<L>45153<pc>0970-c<k1>vESampAyanIya<k2>vESampAyanIya
{%Vaiśampāyanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ of or belonging to
Vaiśampāyana.
<LEND>

<L>45154<pc>0970-c<k1>vESalI<k2>vESalI
{#vESalI#}¦ {%vaiśalī,%} f. [cf. {%viśalā%}], N. of a town
to the north of Pāṭali-putra; [cf. {%vaiśālī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45155<pc>0970-c<k1>vESasa<k2>vESasa
{#vESasa#}¦ {%vaiśasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. a form {%vi-śasa,%}
derived fr. {%vi-śas;%} cf. {%vi-śasana%}), relating to
slaughter or destruction, destructive; ({%am%}), n.
rending in pieces; slaughter, destruction; distress,
pain, anguish, hindrance, impediment.
<LEND>

<L>45156<pc>0970-c<k1>vESastra<k2>vESastra<h>1
{#vESastra#} 1¦. {%vaiśastra, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-śastṛ%}),
government, sway, rule.
<LEND>

<L>45157<pc>0970-c<k1>vESastra<k2>vESastra<h>2
2. {%vaiśastra, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%vi-śastra%}), the state of
being unarmed, defencelessness.
<LEND>

<L>45158<pc>0970-c<k1>vESAKa<k2>vESAKa
{#vESAKa#}¦ {%vaiśākha, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-śākhā%}), the
first of the twelve months constituting the Hindū
solar year (answering to April-May); a churning-
stick; ({%am%}), n. a particular attitude in shooting
(standing with the feet a span apart); ({%ī%}), f. the day
of full moon in the month Vaiśākha ({%= rakta-pu-%}
{%narnavā%}); N. of a wife of Vasu-deva. {%—Vaiśākha-%}
{%vadi,%} ind. in the dark half of the month Vaiśākha.
<LEND>

<L>45159<pc>0970-c<k1>vESAKya<k2>vESAKya
{%Vaiśākhya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>45160<pc>0970-c<k1>vESAradya<k2>vESAradya
{#vESAradya#}¦ {%vaiśāradya, am,%} n. (fr. {%viśārada%}),
cleverness, expertness, skill.
<LEND>

<L>45161<pc>0970-c<k1>vESAla<k2>vESAla
{#vESAla#}¦ {%vaiśāla, as,%} m. (fr. {%viśāla%}), N. of a
Muni; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a town [cf. {%viśālā%}]; of a wife
of Vasu-deva.
<LEND>

<L>45162<pc>0970-c<k1>vESika<k2>vESika
{#vESika#}¦ {%vaiśika, as,%} m. (fr. {%veśyā%}), a parti-
cular kind of Nāyaka or lover (in erotic poetry), one
who associates with courtezans; ({%am%}), n. harlotry,
the allurements of harlots, arts of courtezans.
<LEND>

<L>45163<pc>0970-c<k1>vESizwa<k2>vESizwa
{#vESizwa#}¦ {%vaiśiṣṭa, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-śiṣṭa%}), dis-
tinction, difference ({%= vaiśiṣṭya%} below).
<LEND>

<L>45164<pc>0970-c<k1>vESizwya<k2>vESizwya
{%Vaiśiṣṭya, am,%}¦ n. endowment with some dis-
tinguishing property or attribute, endowment with,
possession of; distinction, peculiarity, difference, the
state of distinguishing or being distinguished, differ-
encing; excellence.
<LEND>

<L>45165<pc>0970-c<k1>vESezika<k2>vESezika
{#vESezika#}¦ {%vaiśeṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%viśeṣa%}),
characteristic; belonging to the Vaiśeṣika doctrine,
(in this sense fr. {%vaiśeṣika, am,%} n.); ({%as%}), m.
a follower of the Vaiśeṣika doctrine; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of one of the two great divisions of the
Nyāya school of philosophy founded by Kaṇāda,
(it was probably a later development of the other
great division or ‘Nyāya proper’ founded by Gau-
tama, with which it agrees in its analytical method
of treating the various subjects of inquiry, but from
which it differs in propounding only seven categories
or topics instead of sixteen; and more especially in
its doctrine of {%viśeṣa,%} ‘particularity or individual
essence,’ i. e. in its maintaining the eternally distinct
or <nsi>sui generis</nsi> nature of the nine substances, air, fire,
water, earth, mind, ether, time, space, and soul, of
which the first five, including mind, are held to be
atomic: the seven Padārthas or categories are,
1. Dravya, ‘substance,’ divided into nine, as above
stated; 2. Guṇa, ‘quality,’ of which there are twenty-
four [see {%guṇa%}]; 3. Karman, ‘action;’ 4. Sāmānya,
‘genus’ and ‘species;’ 5. Viśeṣa, ‘particularity,’
described above; 6. Samavāya, ‘co-inherence’ or
‘perpetual intimate connection;’ 7. A-bhāva, ‘non-
existence’ or ‘privation:’ Kaṇāda's system allows
only two of the Pramāṇas, i. e. instruments or means
of obtaining true knowledge, of the four admitted by
the Nyāya proper, viz. {%pratyakṣa%} or knowledge
[Page0971-a+ 76]
arising from contact of a sense with its object, and
{%anumāna,%} inference of three kinds [a priori, a pos-
teriori, and analogy], but the other Pramāṇas are
said by some to be contained in these two; the
system is taught in the form of Sūtras, and the
Vaiśeṣika-sūtras, like those of the Nyāya proper,
have been commented on by a triple set of com-
mentaries, and expounded in various works, of which
the best known are the Bhāṣā-pariccheda with its
commentary, called Siddhānta-muktāvalī, and the
Tarka-saṅgraha.) {%—Vaiśeṣika-sūtra, am,%} n. the
aphorisms of the Vaiśeṣika branch of the Nyāya
philosophy (attributed to Kaṇāda).
<LEND>

<L>45166<pc>0971-a<k1>vESezya<k2>vESezya
{%Vaiśeṣya, am,%}¦ n. specific or generic distinction;
difference, superiority, pre-eminence.
<LEND>

<L>45167<pc>0971-a<k1>vESya<k2>vESya
{#vESya#}¦ {%vaiśya, as,%} m. (fr. 2. {%viś%}), ‘a man
who occupies the soil,’ ‘a man of the people,’ a
Vaiśya or man of the third caste whose business was
agriculture and trade; ({%ā%}), f. a woman of the Vaiśya
caste. {%—Vaiśya-kanyā,%} f. a Vaiśya damsel, girl of the
agricultural class. {%—Vaiśya-karman, a,%} n. or {%vaiśya-%}
{%kriyā,%} f. the business of a Vaiśya, agriculture, trade.
{%—Vaiśya-tā,%} f. the state or condition of a Vaiśya,
({%vaiśyatāṃ gam,%} to become a Vaiśya.) {%—Vaiśya-%}
{%vṛtti, is,%} f. the mode of life or occupation of a
Vaiśya, agriculture, trade. {%—Vaiśyā-ja, as, ā, am,%}
born of a Vaiśya woman, the child of a Vaiśya mother.
{%—Vaiśyā-putra, as,%} m. the son of a Vaiśya mother.
<LEND>

<L>45168<pc>0971-a<k1>vESravaRa<k2>vESravaRa
{#vESravaRa#}¦ {%vaiśravaṇa, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-śravas%}),
‘son of Viśravas,’ epithet of Kuvera, the god of
wealth; of Rāvaṇa (younger brother of Kuvera);
N. of the fourteenth Muhūrta. {%—Vaiśravaṇānuja%}
{%(˚ṇa-an˚), as,%} m. the younger brother of Kuvera, i. e.
Rāvaṇa. {%—Vaiśravaṇālaya (˚ṇa-āl˚)%} or {%vaiśra-%}
{%vaṇāvāsa (˚ṇa-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘abode of Kuvera,’ the
Indian fig-tree {%(= vaṭa)%}. {%—Vaiśravaṇodaya (˚ṇa-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. ‘Kuvera's glory,’ the Indian fig-tree.
<LEND>

<L>45169<pc>0971-a<k1>vESvadeva<k2>vESvadeva
{#vESvadeva#}¦ {%vaiśvadeva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%viśva-%}
{%deva%}), belonging or dedicated to the Viśva-devas or
Viśve-devāḥ, ({%vaiśvadevo lokaḥ,%} the world of the
Viśva-devas, Manu IV. 183); offered to the Viśva-
devas; relating to all the divinities; ({%am%}), n. an
offering or sacrifice to the Viśva-devas; an offering
to all deities (said to be performed by casting a little
food into fire before a meal); ({%ī%}), f. the eighth
day of the second half of the month Māgha; a
species of the Paṅkti metre. {%—Vaiśvadeva-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. an oblation to the Viśva-devas; an offering to
the deities collectively. {%—Vaiśvadeva-homa, am,%}
n. oblation to the Viśva-devas.
<LEND>

<L>45170<pc>0971-a<k1>vESvAnara<k2>vESvAnara
{#vESvAnara#}¦ {%vaiśvānara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%viśvā-%}
{%nara%}), relating to or fit for all men, present with
all men, common to all mankind, benefiting all men;
({%as%}), m. ‘son of Viśvā-nara,’ epithet of Agni or Fire,
(Agni Vaiśvānara is regarded as the author of the
hymns Ṛg-veda X. 79, 80); the fire of digestion;
N. of a Dānava; (in the Vedānta phil.) ‘the Spirit
of Humanity,’ N. of Intellect located in the collective
aggregate of bodies, the general consciousness; ({%ī%}),
f. a particular sacrifice performed at the beginning of
every year; a particular division of the sun's path.
<LEND>

<L>45171<pc>0971-a<k1>vESvAnarIya<k2>vESvAnarIya
{%Vaiśvānarīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. relating to Vaiśvā-
nara; ({%am%}), n., scil. {%sūkta,%} a particular Vedic hymn.
<LEND>

<L>45172<pc>0971-a<k1>vESvAmitra<k2>vESvAmitra
{#vESvAmitra#}¦ {%vaiśvāmitra, as,%} m. (fr. {%viśvā-%}
{%mitra%}), a son or descendant of Viśvā-mitra, a patro-
nymic of several Vedic Ṛṣis; ({%ī%}), f. a female
descendant of Viśvā-mitra.
<LEND>

<L>45173<pc>0971-a<k1>vESvAsika<k2>vESvAsika
{#vESvAsika#}¦ {%vaiśvāsika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vi-%}
{%śvāsa%}), deserving confidence, trustworthy.
<LEND>

<L>45174<pc>0971-a<k1>vESvI<k2>vESvI
{#vESvI#}¦ {%vaiśvī,%} f. (fr. {%viśva%}), N. of the Nak-
ṣatra called Uttarā Aṣāḍhā or Uttarāṣāḍhā (so called
because the Viśva-devas preside over this asterism).
<LEND>

<L>45175<pc>0971-a<k1>vEzamya<k2>vEzamya
{#vEzamya#}¦ {%vaiṣamya, am,%} n. (fr. {%viṣama%}),
inequality, unevenness, oddness (opposed to evenness);
difficulty; calamity, misery, distress; injustice, harsh-
ness; solitariness, singleness.
<LEND>
[Page0971-b+ 78]

<L>45176<pc>0971-b<k1>vEzayika<k2>vEzayika
{#vEzayika#}¦ {%vaiṣayika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%viṣaya%}),
relating to an object, having for an object, (the
{%ādhāra%} of an action is called {%vaiṣayika%} when it
is the aim or object of the action); belonging or
relating to an object of sense, sensual, carnal; ({%as%}),
m. a sensualist, one addicted to the pleasures of sense,
one occupied with worldly objects or interests.
<LEND>

<L>45177<pc>0971-b<k1>vEzuvata<k2>vEzuvata
{#vEzuvata#}¦ {%vaiṣuvata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%viṣu-vat%}),
relating to the equinox, equinoctial.
<LEND>

<L>45178<pc>0971-b<k1>vEzwuta<k2>vEzwuta
{#vEzwuta#}¦ {%vaiṣṭuta, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-ṣṭuta%}), the
ashes of a burnt-offering.
<LEND>

<L>45179<pc>0971-b<k1>vEzwra<k2>vEzwra
{#vEzwra#}¦ {%vaiṣṭra, am,%} n. (in Uṇādi-s. IV. 159.
fr. rt. 1. {%viś%}), the world, a division of the universe,
{%= piṣṭapa; (as),%} m. (?), the sky (= 3. {%div%}); air,
wind ({%= vāyu%}); N. of Viṣṇu (according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>45180<pc>0971-b<k1>vEzRava<k2>vEzRava
{#vEzRava#}¦ {%vaiṣṇava, as, ī, am,%} relating or be-
longing to Viṣṇu; worshipping Viṣṇu; ({%as%}), m.
‘a worshipper or follower of Viṣṇu,’ N. of one of
the three great divisions of modern Hindū sects,
(the other two being the Śaivas and Śāktas; the
Vaiṣṇavas believe in the supremacy of Viṣṇu over
the other gods of the Tri-mūrti; they are divided
into six principal sects, as follow, 1. the Rāmānujas
or Śrī-sampradāyins, founded by the celebrated re-
former Rāmānuja, who flourished in the south of
India towards the latter part of the twelfth century;
the most striking peculiarity of this sect, who are
chiefly found in the south, is the scrupulous preparation
and privacy of their meals; they are distinguished by
two perpendicular white lines drawn from the root
of the hair to the commencement of each eyebrow,
and a connecting transverse streak across the root of
the nose; their chief authoritative works are the
Vedānta-sūtras and other Vedānta works, the Pañca-
rātra of Nārada, the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa and other Pu-
rāṇas: 2. the Rāmānandas, a sect founded by Rāmā-
nanda, disciple of Rāmānuja, and very numerous in
Gangetic India; they worship Viṣṇu under the form
of Rāma-candra and his consort Sītā; their favourite
work is the Bhakta-mālā: 3. the followers of Kabīr,
a celebrated disciple of Rāmānanda, principally found
in upper and central India; they do not observe all the
ceremonies of the Hindūs, but conform to the usages
of caste, and pay a sort of respect to Viṣṇu: 4. the
Vallabhācāryas or Rudra-sampradāyins, see {%valla-%}
{%bhācārya;%} this sect draws its doctrines from the
Bhāgavata-Purāṇa and works of Vallabha: 5. the
Mādhvas or Brahma-sampradāyins, founded by Ma-
dhvācārya, who is regarded by his followers as an
incarnation of Vāyu, the god of wind; they are
found especially in the south of India, and appear to
combine with their worship of Viṣṇu a friendly
leaning towards the god Śiva: 6. the Vaiṣṇavas of
Bengal, a sect founded by Caitanya, who is regarded
as an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa; their chief ritual con-
sists in constantly repeating the name of Kṛṣṇa);
scil. {%yajña,%} a particular sacrificial ceremony; epithet
of the asterism Śravaṇa; ({%ī%}), f. the personified Śakti
of Viṣṇu (regarded as one of the Mātṛs); N. of
Durgā; the plant Clitoria Ternatea ({%= a-parājitā%});
Asparagus Racemosus ({%= śatāvarī%}); sacred basil,
Ocymum Sanctum; ({%am%}), n. a particular kind of
prodigy or omen (belonging to or occurring in the
{%paraṃ divam%} or upper sky), the ashes of a burnt-
offering. {%—Vaiṣṇava-tva, am,%} n. belief in Viṣṇu,
the worship of Viṣṇu. {%—Vaiṣṇava-purāṇa, am,%}
n., N. of a Purāṇa. {%—Vaiṣṇava-śāstra, am,%}
n., N. of an astrological work by Nārāyaṇa-dāsa-
siddha {%(= praśnārṇava)%}. {%—Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work by Rāma-candra. {%—Vaiṣ-%}
{%ṇavākūta-candrikā (˚va-āk˚),%} f., N. of a com-
mentary on the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa by Ratna-garbha.
{%—Vaiṣṇavācamana (˚va-āc˚), am,%} n. sipping
water three times in the worship of Viṣṇu. {%—Vaiṣ-%}
{%ṇavācara (˚va-āc˚), as,%} m. the rites or practices of
the Vaiṣṇavas.
<LEND>

<L>45181<pc>0971-b<k1>vEsAriRa<k2>vEsAriRa
{#vEsAriRa#}¦ {%vaisāriṇa, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-sārin%}), a
fish.
<LEND>
[Page0971-c+ 68]

<L>45182<pc>0971-c<k1>vEsUcana<k2>vEsUcana
{#vEsUcana#}¦ {%vaisūcana, am,%} n. (fr. {%vi-sūcana%}),
assumption of female attire by a man (in the drama).
<LEND>

<L>45183<pc>0971-c<k1>vEhAyasa<k2>vEhAyasa
{#vEhAyasa#}¦ {%vaihāyasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vihāyas%}),
being in the air, aerial, suspended in the air; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a lake.
<LEND>

<L>45184<pc>0971-c<k1>vEhArya<k2>vEhArya
{#vEhArya#}¦ {%vaihārya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%vi-hāra%}), to
be played or sported with, to be conciliated by
pleasantry (applied to a wife's brother or brother-in-
law or other relations of a wife).
<LEND>

<L>45185<pc>0971-c<k1>vEhAsika<k2>vEhAsika
{#vEhAsika#}¦ {%vaihāsika, as,%} m. (fr. {%vi-hāsa%}), a
comic actor, buffoon; an actor (in general).
<LEND>

<L>45186<pc>0971-c<k1>voc<k2>voc
{#voc#}¦ {%voc.%} See under rt. {%vac,%} p. 877.
<LEND>

<L>45187<pc>0971-c<k1>vowA<k2>vowA
{#vowA#}¦ {%voṭā,%} f. (perhaps more correctly writ-
ten {%boṭā = poṭā,%} q. v.), a female servant or slave.
<LEND>

<L>45188<pc>0971-c<k1>voqra<k2>voqra
{#voqra#}¦ {%voḍra, as,%} m. (etymology doubtful),
a kind of large snake, the Bor or Boa Constrictor
({%= go-nasa%}); a sort of fish; ({%ī%}), f. the fourth part
of a Paṇa.
<LEND>

<L>45189<pc>0971-c<k1>voQavya<k2>voQavya
{#voQavya#}¦ {%voḍhavya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%vah%}),
to be borne or carried; able to be borne, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45190<pc>0971-c<k1>voQu<k2>voQu
{%Voḍhu, us,%}¦ m. the son of a woman living in her
father's house (whose husband is absent).
<LEND>

<L>45191<pc>0971-c<k1>voQf<k2>voQf
{%Voḍhṛ, ḍhā, ḍhrī, ḍhṛ,%}¦ one who carries or bears
or draws, carrying, bearing, drawing; ({%ḍhā%}), m. a
bearer, porter; a leader, guide; a charioteer; a
draught-horse; a bull; a bridegroom; [cf. Lat.
<nsi>vector.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>45192<pc>0971-c<k1>voRwa<k2>voRwa
{#voRwa#}¦ {%voṇṭa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vuṇṭ?%}), a stalk,
stem.
<LEND>

<L>45193<pc>0971-c<k1>voda<k2>voda
{#voda#}¦ {%voda, as, ā, am%} (etymology doubtful),
wet, moist, damp.
<LEND>

<L>45194<pc>0971-c<k1>vodAla<k2>vodAla
{#vodAla#}¦ {%vodāla, as,%} m. the sheat fish, Si-
lurus Boalis ({%= pāṭhīna%}).
<LEND>

<L>45195<pc>0971-c<k1>vopadeva<k2>vopadeva
{#vopadeva#}¦ {%vopa-deva, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Mugdha-bodha grammar, the Kavi-kalpa-
druma, and various other works (including, according
to some, the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa; he was a son of
Keśava and pupil of Dhaneśvara, and is said to have
flourished about the latter half of the thirteenth
century at the court of Hemādri, king of Deva-giri,
now Dowlatabad).
<LEND>

<L>45196<pc>0971-c<k1>vopAlita<k2>vopAlita
{#vopAlita#}¦ {%vopālita%} or {%vopālita-siṃha, as,%}
m., N. of a lexicographer.
<LEND>

<L>45197<pc>0971-c<k1>vora<k2>vora
{#vora#}¦ {%vora, as,%} m. (probably not a Sanskrit
word), a sort of pulse, Dolichos Catjang. {%—Vora-%}
{%paṭṭī,%} f. a sort of mat or mattress for sleeping on
(perhaps made of the straw of the Vora).
<LEND>

<L>45198<pc>0971-c<k1>voraka<k2>voraka
{#voraka#}¦ {%voraka, as,%}  m. ({%= volaka%}), a scribe,
writer.
<LEND>

<L>45199<pc>0971-c<k1>vorawa<k2>vorawa
{#vorawa#}¦ {%voraṭa, as,%} m. a sort of jasmine.
<LEND>

<L>45200<pc>0971-c<k1>vorava<k2>vorava
{#vorava#}¦ {%vorava, as,%} m. a kind of rice (perhaps
that called Boro, which is cut in March or April).
<LEND>

<L>45201<pc>0971-c<k1>voruKAna<k2>voruKAna
{#voruKAna#}¦ {%vorukhāna, as,%} m. a horse (de-
scribed as one of a white and red colour).
<LEND>

<L>45202<pc>0971-c<k1>vola<k2>vola
{#vola#}¦ {%vola, am,%} n. gum-myrrh ({%= raktā-%}
{%paha%}).
<LEND>

<L>45203<pc>0971-c<k1>volaka<k2>volaka
{#volaka#}¦ {%volaka, as,%} m. [cf. {%voraka%}], a
scribe, writer; ({%ikā%}), f. a sort of cake or pudding
made with flour and sugar.
<LEND>

<L>45204<pc>0971-c<k1>vollAsaka<k2>vollAsaka
{#vollAsaka#}¦ {%vollāsaka,%} N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>45205<pc>0971-c<k1>vollAha<k2>vollAha
{#vollAha#}¦ {%vollāha, as,%} m. a kind of horse
(with a light mane and tail).
<LEND>

<L>45206<pc>0971-c<k1>vo|f<k2>vo|f
{#vo|f#}¦ {%voḷhṛ, ḷhā,%} m., Ved. {%= voḍhṛ,%} a
bearer, carrier; an animal used for draught.
<LEND>

<L>45207<pc>0971-c<k1>vohitTa<k2>vohitTa
{#vohitTa#}¦ {%vohittha, am,%} n. a vessel, ship.
<LEND>

<L>45208<pc>0971-c<k1>vOdDa<k2>vOdDa
{#vOdDa#}¦ {%vauddha, am,%} n. (for {%bauddha%}), the
collective body of Buddhist writings, (applied also to
other infidel writings such as those of the Jainas.)
<LEND>
[Page0972-a+ 73]

<L>45209<pc>0972-a<k1>vOzaw<k2>vOzaw
{#vOzaw#}¦ {%vauṣaṭ,%} ind. (perhaps for a form
{%vokṣat%} fr. rt. 1. {%vah,%} and meaning ‘may he, i. e.
Agni, carry the offering to the gods;’ according to
others merely a lengthened form of {%vaṣaṭ,%} q. v.), an
exclamation or formula used on offering an oblation to
the gods or Manes with fire; [cf. Zend <nsi>vaoshaṭ.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>45210<pc>0972-a<k1>vya<k2>vya<h>1
{#vya#} 1¦. {%vya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vye%}), a coverer.
<LEND>

<L>45211<pc>0972-a<k1>vya<k2>vya<h>2
{#vya#} 2¦. {%vya%} (contracted fr. {%avyaya%}), a techni-
cal symbol for indeclinables such as {%ni, cit, svar,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>45212<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaMSa<k2>vyaMSa
{#vyaMSa#}¦ {%vy-aṃśa, as,%} m., N. of a son of Vi-
pracitti.
<LEND>

<L>45213<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaMSaka<k2>vyaMSaka
{%Vy-aṃśaka, as,%}¦ m. a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>45214<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaMSuka<k2>vyaMSuka
{#vyaMSuka#}¦ {%vy-aṃśuka, as, ā, am,%} without a
garment, undressed, naked.
<LEND>

<L>45215<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaMs<k2>vyaMs
{#vyaMs#}¦ {%vy-aṃs (vi-aṃs),%} cl. 10. P. {%-aṃsayati,%}
{%-yitum,%}  to divide asunder, divide; to render useless
or harmless, foil, ward off; to deceive.
<LEND>

<L>45216<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaMsaka<k2>vyaMsaka
{%Vy-aṃsaka, as,%}¦ m. a cheat, rogue, juggler.
<LEND>

<L>45217<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaMsana<k2>vyaMsana
{%Vy-aṃsana, am,%}¦ n. cheating, tricking, deceiving.
<LEND>

<L>45218<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaMsanIya<k2>vyaMsanIya
{%Vy-aṃsanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be deceived or cheated.
<LEND>

<L>45219<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaMsita<k2>vyaMsita
{%Vy-aṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ tricked, deceived, cheated;
disappointed in one's expectations.
<LEND>

<L>45220<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaMsa<k2>vyaMsa
{#vyaMsa#}¦ {%vy-aṃsa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. without a
shoulder, shoulderless, mutilated, (Sāy. {%= vigatāṃsa-%}
{%chinna-bāhu%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of a Rākṣasa.
<LEND>

<L>45221<pc>0972-a<k1>vyakta<k2>vyakta
{#vyakta#}¦ {%vy-akta, vy-akti.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>45222<pc>0972-a<k1>vyakz<k2>vyakz
{#vyakz#}¦ {%vy-akṣ (vi-akṣ),%} cl. 1. 5. P. {%-akṣati,%}
{%-akṣṇoti,%} &c. {%= vy-aś,%} to pervade, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45223<pc>0972-a<k1>vyakza<k2>vyakza
{#vyakza#}¦ {%vy-akṣa, as, ā, am,%} (in astronomy)
having no latitude; [cf. {%nir-akṣa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45224<pc>0972-a<k1>vyagra<k2>vyagra
{#vyagra#}¦ {%vy-agra, as, ā, am,%} bewildered, per-
plexed, distracted; agitated, alarmed, frightened;
zealous, eager, eagerly engaged in, occupied, zealously
occupied; ({%as%}), m., N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Vyagra-tā,%}
f. or {%vyagra-tva, am,%} n. perplexedness, perplexity,
confusion, anxiety; zealous occupation, zeal. {%—Vya-%}
{%gra-purandhri-varga, as, ā, am,%} having compa-
nies of matrons zealously occupied. {%—Vyagra-manas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} perplexed or bewildered in mind.
<LEND>

<L>45225<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaNga<k2>vyaNga
{#vyaNga#}¦ {%vy-aṅga, as, ā, am,%} limbless, de-
formed, mutilated; lamed, lame; bodiless; ill-
arranged; ({%as%}), m. a cripple; a frog; discoloration
of the face, dark spots on the cheek. {%—Vyaṅga-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. mutilation; the state of a cripple,
maimedness. {%—Vyaṅgārtha (˚ga-ar˚), as,%} m. (in
rhetoric) suggested sense or meaning.
<LEND>

<L>45226<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaNgaya<k2>vyaNgaya
{%Vyaṅgaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vyaṅgayati, -yitum,%} to
mutilate, maim, cripple.
<LEND>

<L>45227<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaNgAra<k2>vyaNgAra
{#vyaNgAra#}¦ {%vy-aṅgāra, as, ā, am,%} without char-
coal, having no fire, ({%vyaṅgāre,%} at the time when
the burning charcoal is extinguished.)
<LEND>

<L>45228<pc>0972-a<k1>vyaNgula<k2>vyaNgula
{#vyaNgula#}¦ {%vy-aṅgula, am,%} n. the sixtieth part
of an Aṅgula.
<LEND>

<L>45229<pc>0972-a<k1>vyac<k2>vyac<h>1
{#vyac#} 1¦. {%vyac%} (probably connected with
2. {%vy-ac%}), cl. 6. P. {%vicati, vivyāca, vya-%}
{%ciṣyati, avyacīt%} or {%avyācīt, vyacitum,%} to cheat,
trick, defraud, deceive; to encompass, embrace, sur-
round (Ved.); to pervade, contain (Ved.): Caus. {%vyā-%}
{%cayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avivyacat:%} Desid. {%vivyaci-%}
{%ṣati:%} Intens. {%vevicyate, vāvyacīti%} or {%vāvyakti.%}
<LEND>

<L>45230<pc>0972-a<k1>vyacas<k2>vyacas
{%Vyacas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. anything which is expanded
or spread, (Sāy. {%= vyāptam antarikṣam%}); expanse,
amplitude, vastness, (Sāy. {%= vyāpana.%}) {%—Vyacas-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. expansive, (Sāy. {%= vyāpti-%}
{%mat,%} Ṛg-veda II. 3, 5); (according to some) emu-
lous, (see Ṛg-veda VI. 25, 6, Nirukta VIII. 10.)
<LEND>

<L>45231<pc>0972-a<k1>vyacizWa<k2>vyacizWa
{%Vyaciṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. expanding every-
where, extending far and wide.
<LEND>

<L>45232<pc>0972-a<k1>vyac<k2>vyac<h>2
{#vyac#} 2¦. {%vy-ac%} or {%vy-añc (vi-ac),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-acati, -añcati, -te, -añcitum,%} Ved. to force or bend
asunder, sunder, separate; to make wide, extend.
<LEND>

<L>45233<pc>0972-a<k1>vyacyamAna<k2>vyacyamAna
{%Vy-acyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being widened, being
extended.
<LEND>
[Page0972-b+ 80]

<L>45234<pc>0972-b<k1>vyaj<k2>vyaj
{#vyaj#}¦ {%vy-aj (vi-aj),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ajati, -ajitum,%}
Ved. to throw in various directions, toss about, move
to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>45235<pc>0972-b<k1>vyaja<k2>vyaja
{%Vy-aja, as,%}¦ m. a fan ({%= vy-ajana%}).
<LEND>

<L>45236<pc>0972-b<k1>vyajana<k2>vyajana
{%Vy-ajana, am,%}¦ n. a palm-leaf or other substance
used as a fan, a fan (in general).
<LEND>

<L>45237<pc>0972-b<k1>vyaYj<k2>vyaYj
{#vyaYj#}¦ {%vy-añj (vi-añj),%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-anakti,%}
{%aṅkte, -aṅktum%} or {%-añjitum,%} to anoint thoroughly
(Ved.); to decorate, adorn, make beautiful or hand-
some (A., Ved.); to cause to appear, develop, mani-
fest; to discriminate, make clear: Pass. {%-ajyate,%} to
be manifested or developed; to be expressed: Caus.
{%-añjayati, -yitum,%} to cause to appear, make clearly
visible or manifest.
<LEND>

<L>45238<pc>0972-b<k1>vyakta<k2>vyakta
{%Vy-akta, as, ā, am,%}¦ adorned, decorated, hand-
some, beautiful (Ved.); caused to appear, manifested,
developed, manifest, apparent, evident, specifically
known or understood; specified, distinguished; spe-
cific, individual; wise, learned; ({%as%}), m. ‘the mani-
fested,’ epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n. ‘the discrete or
discernible,’ that which is developed as the product
of {%a-vyakta,%} q. v. (in the Sāṅkhya philosophy);
({%am%}), ind. manifestly, evidently, clearly, certainly.
{%—Vyakta-gaṇita, am,%} n. calculation with known
numbers, arithmetic. {%—Vyakta-tā,%} f. or {%vyakta-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. distinctness, manifestation. {%—Vyakta-tāraka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having clear stars. {%—Vyakta-dṛṣṭārtha%}
{%(˚ṭa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} perceiving or witnessing a
transaction with one's own eyes, any one present as
an eye-witness, a witness (in general). {%—Vyakta-%}
{%bhuj, k, k, k,%} consuming everything manifested or
all visible things (said of time). {%—Vyakta-rāśi, is,%}
f. (in arithmetic) known or absolute quantity. {%—Vyak-%}
{%ta-rūpa, as,%} m. ‘having a manifested form,’ epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Vyakta-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having a
discernible shape. {%—Vyakta-lakṣman, ā, ā, a,%}
having evident signs, having clear marks, clearly
characterised. {%—Vyakta-vikrama, as, ā, am,%} dis-
playing valour. {%—Vyaktī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of
making manifest or clear or distinct. {%—Vyaktī-kṛ,%}
cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to make
manifest, make clear or distinct. {%—Vyaktī-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} made clear or manifest, made distinct.
{%—Vyaktī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%} to
become clearly visible, be distinct or clear. {%—Vyaktī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become clearly visible, distinct,
clear. {%—Vyaktodita (˚ta-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} spoken
clearly or plainly.
<LEND>

<L>45239<pc>0972-b<k1>vyakti<k2>vyakti
{%Vy-akti, is,%}¦ f. visible appearance or manifestation,
making clear or evident, clearness, distinctness, dis-
cernibility, discrimination; specific appearance or
variation, individuality; a person, an individual (op-
posed to {%jāti%}), variety; gender (in gram.); case,
inflection, the proper form of any inflected word;
a vowel (?). {%—Vyakti-tā,%} f. or {%vyakti-tva, am,%} n.
distinctness, individuality, personality.
<LEND>

<L>45240<pc>0972-b<k1>vyaNgya<k2>vyaNgya
{%Vy-aṅgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be indicated correctly,
to be intimated by sarcastic allusions or insinuations
(applied to figurative or poetical speech, allusive lan-
guage or insinuation, sarcasm, covert expression of
suspicion or contempt, &c.). {%—Vyaṅgyokti (˚ya-%}
{%uk˚), is,%} f. covert language, sarcastic insinuation.
<LEND>

<L>45241<pc>0972-b<k1>vyaYjaka<k2>vyaYjaka
{%Vy-añjaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ making clear, clearly
showing, manifesting, indicating, denoting, declar-
ing; ({%as%}), m. external indication of passion or feel-
ing, gesture, dramatic action; feeling; a sign, mark,
symbol; figurative expression or insinuation. {%—Vyañ-%}
{%jaka-tva, am,%} n. the containing figurative or allusive
expressions, indication by covert insinuations or ellip-
tical language. {%—Vyañjakārtha (˚ka-ar˚), as,%} m.
(in rhetoric) a suggestive or significant sense.
<LEND>

<L>45242<pc>0972-b<k1>vyaYjana<k2>vyaYjana
{%Vy-añjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of making clear, mark-
ing, distinguishing, indicating; a consonant (as mark-
ing or distinguishing sound); a mark, spot, sign,
token; insignia, paraphernalia; a mark or sign of
puberty; the beard; mark of sex or gender, a privy
part (male or female); anything used in dressing or
preparing food, anything mixed with food, seasoning,
sauce, condiment; a limb, member ({%= ava-yava%});
day, {%= dina; (am, ā),%} n. f. figurative expression or
[Page0972-c+ 75]
insinuation; irony, sarcasm; ({%ā%}), f. the third power
of a word, suggestion. {%—Vyañjana-saṅgama, as,%}
m. a collection or group of consonants. {%—Vyañjana-%}
{%sandhi, is,%} m. the junction of consonants (in gram-
mar). {%—Vyañjana-sannipāta, as,%} m. the falling
together or conjunction of consonants. {%—Vyañjana-%}
{%sthāne,%} ind. in the place of condiment, as seasoning.
{%—Vyañjanā-vṛtti, is,%} f. figurative or elliptical
style. {%—Vyañjanodaya (˚na-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} fol-
lowed by a consonant. {%—Vyañjanopadha (˚na-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} preceded by a consonant.
<LEND>

<L>45243<pc>0972-c<k1>vyaYjayat<k2>vyaYjayat
{%Vy-añjayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making clearly visible
or manifest.
<LEND>

<L>45244<pc>0972-c<k1>vyaYjijizu<k2>vyaYjijizu
{%Vy-añjijiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to make clearly
visible, trying to make manifest, wishing to detect
or expose, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45245<pc>0972-c<k1>vyaYjita<k2>vyaYjita
{%Vy-añjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ clearly manifested or made
visible, distinguished, marked, characterised. {%—Vyañ-%}
{%jita-vṛtti-bheda, as, ā, am,%} having varying actions
manifested.
<LEND>

<L>45246<pc>0972-c<k1>vyaqambaka<k2>vyaqambaka
{#vyaqambaka#}¦ {%vyaḍambaka%} or {%vyaḍambana%} or
{%vyaḍambara, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%aḍ%} with
{%vi%}), the castor-oil plant, Ricinus Communis.
<LEND>

<L>45247<pc>0972-c<k1>vyat<k2>vyat
{#vyat#}¦ {%vyat.%} See under rt. 1. {%vī,%} p. 953.
<LEND>

<L>45248<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikf<k2>vyatikf
{#vyatikf#}¦ {%vy-ati-kṛ (vi-ati-),%} cl. 8. A. {%-ku-%}
{%rute,%} &c., to act mutually or reciprocally: Pass.
{%-kriyate,%} to be greatly changed or moved.
<LEND>

<L>45249<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikara<k2>vyatikara<h>1
1. {%vy-atikara, as, ā, am,%}¦ acting reciprocally, acting
on or with one another, reciprocal; pervading,
spreading through or over; contiguous to, in contact
with; ({%as%}), m. reciprocal action, reciprocity, mutual
relation, exchange, interchange; contact, contiguity,
union; alternation; action (in general); obstruction,
hindrance, reverse, misfortune, calamity; opportunity.
<LEND>

<L>45250<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikfta<k2>vyatikfta
{%Vy-atikṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ pervaded.
<LEND>

<L>45251<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikF<k2>vyatikF
{#vyatikF#}¦ {%vy-ati-kṝ (vi-ati-),%} Pass. {%-kīryate,%}
&c., to be scattered in different directions; to be
mixed together.
<LEND>

<L>45252<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikara<k2>vyatikara<h>2
2. {%vy-atikara, as,%}¦ m. a scattering in different
directions, mixing or blending together, mixture.
<LEND>

<L>45253<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikIrRa<k2>vyatikIrRa
{%Vy-atikīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ scattered about in dif-
ferent directions, mixed together.
<LEND>

<L>45254<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikram<k2>vyatikram
{#vyatikram#}¦ {%vy-ati-kram (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-krāmati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to go or pass by,
pass over or beyond; to elapse, be spent (said of
time); to step over, transgress, offend against; to
excel, surpass, conquer; to neglect, omit, violate,
forget; to apply one's self to anything (acc.) in a
wrong manner.
<LEND>

<L>45255<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikrama<k2>vyatikrama
{%Vy-atikrama, as,%}¦ m. passing over or beyond,
transgressing, deviating; violating, non-performance,
disregard, neglect, breach, ({%saṃvido vyatikramaḥ,%}
violation or breach of a contract); inverted order,
inversion, reverse, contrariety, opposition, the con-
trary of anything, the contrary of right, crime, vice,
fault, sin; the contrary of prosperity, adversity, mis-
fortune.
<LEND>

<L>45256<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikramin<k2>vyatikramin
{%Vy-atikramin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ passing over, deviating,
transgressing.
<LEND>

<L>45257<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikramya<k2>vyatikramya
{%Vy-atikramya,%}¦ ind. having passed over or beyond,
having transgressed or violated; having disregarded
or neglected.
<LEND>

<L>45258<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatikrAnta<k2>vyatikrAnta
{%Vy-atikrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ passed over; gone by,
elapsed; transgressed, violated, retracted; neglected,
disregarded; reversed, inverted.
<LEND>

<L>45259<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatigam<k2>vyatigam
{#vyatigam#}¦ {%vy-ati-gam (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-gac-%}
{%chati, -gantum,%} to go or pass by, to be spent (as
time).
<LEND>

<L>45260<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatigata<k2>vyatigata
{%Vy-atigata, as, ā, am,%}¦ passed by, elapsed.
<LEND>

<L>45261<pc>0972-c<k1>vyatigA<k2>vyatigA
{#vyatigA#}¦ {%vy-ati-gā (vi-ati-),%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti,%}
{%gātum,%} to pass by.
<LEND>

<L>45262<pc>0972-c<k1>vyaticar<k2>vyaticar
{#vyaticar#}¦ {%vy-ati-car (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P. (ep.
also A.) {%-carati (-te), -caritum,%} to transgress against,
commit an offence against, offend.
<LEND>

<L>45263<pc>0972-c<k1>vyaticumb<k2>vyaticumb
{#vyaticumb#}¦ {%vy-ati-cumb (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P.
[Page0973-a+ 74]
{%-cumbati, -cumbitum,%} to kiss or touch closely, be
in immediate contact with.
<LEND>

<L>45264<pc>0973-a<k1>vyaticumbita<k2>vyaticumbita
{%Vy-aticumbita, as, ā, am,%}¦ touching closely, in
immediate contact with.
<LEND>

<L>45265<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatijalp<k2>vyatijalp
{#vyatijalp#}¦ {%vy-ati-jalp (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-jalpati, -jalpitum,%} to chatter together, gossip, talk
with one another.
<LEND>

<L>45266<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatiji<k2>vyatiji
{#vyatiji#}¦ {%vy-ati-ji (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-jayati, -te, -jetum,%} to overcome, surpass, excel.
<LEND>

<L>45267<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatitan<k2>vyatitan
{#vyatitan#}¦ {%vy-ati-tan (vi-ati-),%} cl. 8. A. {%-ta-%}
{%nute, -tanitum,%} to extend mutually, vie with each
other in extending or spreading out.
<LEND>

<L>45268<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatitF<k2>vyatitF
{#vyatitF#}¦ {%vy-ati-tṝ (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati,%}
{%-taritum%} or {%-tarītum,%} to pass completely across, pass
over successfully, overcome.
<LEND>

<L>45269<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatinI<k2>vyatinI
{#vyatinI#}¦ {%vy-ati-nī (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-nayati,%}
&c., Ved. to allow to pass away.
<LEND>

<L>45270<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatiBA<k2>vyatiBA
{#vyatiBA#}¦ {%vy-ati-bhā (vi-ati-),%} cl. 2. A. {%-bhāte,%}
{%-babhe,%} to shine forth fully or brightly (used imper-
sonally).
<LEND>

<L>45271<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatiBU<k2>vyatiBU
{#vyatiBU#}¦ {%vy-ati-bhū (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-bha-%}
{%vate,%} &c., to vie with any one (acc.), contend for
precedence or superiority.
<LEND>

<L>45272<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatimarSa<k2>vyatimarSa
{#vyatimarSa#}¦ {%vy-atimarśa (vi-ati-), as,%} m. (in
Vedic ritual) a particular kind of {%vihāra,%} q. v., (it is
described as the mutual transposition of the several
Pādas or half verses or whole verses of the first and
second Vālakhilya hymns which are repeated in sets,
two being always taken together.)
<LEND>

<L>45273<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatimarSam<k2>vyatimarSam
{%Vy-atimarśam,%}¦ ind., Ved. having skipped or
passed over, having missed or taken alternately, alter-
nating.
<LEND>

<L>45274<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatimuh<k2>vyatimuh
{#vyatimuh#}¦ {%vy-ati-muh (vi-ati-),%} cl. 4. P. {%-muh-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to be excessively perplexed or embarrassed.
<LEND>

<L>45275<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatimUQa<k2>vyatimUQa
{%Vy-atimūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ excessively perplexed
or embarrassed, utterly distracted.
<LEND>

<L>45276<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatiyA<k2>vyatiyA
{#vyatiyA#}¦ {%vy-ati-yā (vi-ati-),%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti,%}
{%yātum,%} to go completely through, penetrate, per-
vade (with acc., Ved.); to pass by, flow on (as
time).
<LEND>

<L>45277<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatiyAta<k2>vyatiyAta
{%Vy-atiyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone by, passed, spent.
<LEND>

<L>45278<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatiyu<k2>vyatiyu
{#vyatiyu#}¦ {%vy-ati-yu (vi-ati-),%} cl. 2. P., 9. P. A.
{%-yauti, -yunāti, -yunīte, -yavitum,%} to join with
one another, unite mutually, mix together, inter-
mingle.
<LEND>

<L>45279<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatirA<k2>vyatirA
{#vyatirA#}¦ {%vy-ati-rā (vi-ati-),%} cl. 2. A. {%-rāte,%}
{%vy-aty-are,%} see Pāṇ. VI. 4, 64.
<LEND>

<L>45280<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatiric<k2>vyatiric
{#vyatiric#}¦ {%vy-ati-ric (vi-ati-),%} Pass. {%-ricyate,%}
to reach far beyond, leave behind, surpass, excel (with
abl. or acc.); to be separated from, differ from, deviate.
<LEND>

<L>45281<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatirikta<k2>vyatirikta
{%Vy-atirikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reaching beyond, passing
or projecting beyond, surpassing, excelling, excessive,
immoderate; separate, different from, distinct from:
excepted; withdrawn, withheld; ({%am%}), ind. with
the exception of, except, without (e. g. {%svara-v˚,%}
except the accent).
<LEND>

<L>45282<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatireka<k2>vyatireka
{%Vy-atireka, as,%}¦  m. reaching or passing beyond, ex-
celling, excellence; separation from, distinction, differ-
ence, separateness, deviation; exception, exclusion,
negation, interception; contrariety, contrast, dissimili-
tude, a particular figure in rhetoric or poetry (the con-
trasting of things compared in some respects with each
other); logical discontinuance (opposed to {%anvaya%}),
negative inference; ({%eṇa%}), ind. with exception of,
without; ({%e%}), ind. on the contrary supposition. {%—Vya-%}
{%tireka-vyāpti, is,%} f. ‘pervasion of difference or
dissimilitude,’ a comprehensive argument derived
from negation or non-existence of certain qualities.
{%—Vyatirekālaṅkāra (˚ka-al˚), as,%} m. the rheto-
rical figure called Vyatireka, (see above.)
<LEND>

<L>45283<pc>0973-a<k1>vyatirekin<k2>vyatirekin
{%Vy-atirekin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ passing beyond, excelling,
distinguishing, discriminating; excepting; different,
reverse. {%—Vyatireki-liṅga, am,%} n. an exclusive
mark, i. e. a negative property (which excludes its
[Page0973-b+ 74]
subject from the class possessing the corresponding
positive property). {%—Vyatireky-udāharaṇa, am,%} n.
illustration by contrast or negation (of certain pro-
perties).
<LEND>

<L>45284<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatiruh<k2>vyatiruh
{#vyatiruh#}¦ {%vy-ati-ruh (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ro-%}
{%hati, -roḍhum,%} to pass into various states of being,
attain to or obtain another (state): Caus. {%-ropayati%}
or {%-rohayati, -yitum,%} to eject, expel, remove, dis-
possess.
<LEND>

<L>45285<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatiropita<k2>vyatiropita
{%Vy-atiropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ejected, displaced, ex-
pelled, ousted, dispossessed, removed from rightful
possession.
<LEND>

<L>45286<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatilaNGin<k2>vyatilaNGin
{#vyatilaNGin#}¦ {%vy-atilaṅghin, ī, inī, i,%} passing
or falling away from, slipping away.
<LEND>

<L>45287<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatilU<k2>vyatilU
{#vyatilU#}¦ {%vy-ati-lū (vi-ati-),%} cl. 9. A. {%-lunīte%}
(also P. {%-lunāti%} if joined with {%itaretara, anyonya,%}
or {%paraspara,%} see Pāṇ. 1. 3, 16), {%-lavitum,%} to cut
or hurt one another, cut mutually.
<LEND>

<L>45288<pc>0973-b<k1>vyativah<k2>vyativah
{#vyativah#}¦ {%vy-ati-vah (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-va-%}
{%hate,%} &c., to bear mutually or reciprocally, (see
Vopa-deva XXIII. 55.)
<LEND>

<L>45289<pc>0973-b<k1>vyativft<k2>vyativft
{#vyativft#}¦ {%vy-ati-vṛt (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-var-%}
{%tate,%} &c. (in Fut., Cond., and Aor. also P., see rt.
1. {%vṛt%}), {%-vartitum,%} to go or pass over, pass through;
to escape, avoid; to glide or pass away, elapse; to
depart from (with abl.), leave, quit, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>45290<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatizaYj<k2>vyatizaYj
{#vyatizaYj#}¦ {%vy-ati-ṣañj (vi-ati-sañj),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-ṣajati%} (sometimes A. {%-ṣajate%}), {%-ṣaṅktum,%}
to connect mutually, mix together (P.); to change
(A.): Pass. {%-ṣajyate,%} to be mutually connected.
<LEND>

<L>45291<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatizakta<k2>vyatizakta
{%Vy-atiṣakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ mutually connected or
joined or related, &c.; intermarried, intermarrying.
<LEND>

<L>45292<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatizaNga<k2>vyatizaNga
{%Vy-atiṣaṅga, as,%}¦ m. mutual connection, reci-
procal junction or relation; fastening or tying to-
gether; absorption (in Vedic grammar). {%—Vyati-%}
{%ṣaṅga-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having mutual connection,
connected, united, mixed.
<LEND>

<L>45293<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatisandah<k2>vyatisandah
{#vyatisandah#}¦ {%vy-ati-san-dah (vi-ati-sam-),%} cl.
1. P. {%-dahati, -dagdhum,%} to burn up entirely.
<LEND>

<L>45294<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatisfp<k2>vyatisfp
{#vyatisfp#}¦ {%vy-ati-sṛp (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-sar-%}
{%pati, -sarptum%} or {%-sraptum,%} to move to and fro,
fly in every direction.
<LEND>

<L>45295<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatisarpat<k2>vyatisarpat
{%Vy-atisarpat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going or flying in all
directions.
<LEND>

<L>45296<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatihan<k2>vyatihan
{#vyatihan#}¦ {%vy-ati-han (vi-ati-),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-hanti, -hantum,%} to strike one another; to strike
again, strike in return.
<LEND>

<L>45297<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatiGnat<k2>vyatiGnat
{%Vy-atighnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ striking again or in
return.
<LEND>

<L>45298<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatihas<k2>vyatihas
{#vyatihas#}¦ {%vy-ati-has (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ha-%}
{%sati, -hasitum,%} to laugh at each other.
<LEND>

<L>45299<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatihf<k2>vyatihf
{#vyatihf#}¦ {%vy-ati-hṛ (vi-ati-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-harate,%}
&c., to take or receive mutually, take in exchange.
<LEND>

<L>45300<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatihAra<k2>vyatihAra
{%Vy-atihāra, as,%}¦ m. barter, exchange; reciprocity;
exchange of blows or abuse.
<LEND>

<L>45301<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatIhAra<k2>vyatIhAra
{%Vy-atīhāra, as,%}¦ m. {%= vy-atihāra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>45302<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatI<k2>vyatI<h>1
{#vyatI#} 1¦. {%vy-atī (vi-ati-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%vyaty-%}
{%eti, -etum,%} to pass away or over, pass by, elapse;
to go away, depart from, deviate or swerve from,
leave (with abl.), take an irregular course; to go
beyond, transgress, to pass a person or place (with
acc.); to pass or spend (a fixed time, &c.); to sur-
pass, excel, overcome, conquer; to disregard, neg-
lect, omit.
<LEND>

<L>45303<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatiyat<k2>vyatiyat
{%Vy-atiyat, an, atī, at,%}¦ passing away, passing by,
&c.; disregarding, paying no attention to (any-
thing).
<LEND>

<L>45304<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatIta<k2>vyatIta
{%Vy-atīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ passed away, passed by,
elapsed, passed over, gone; departed, dead; departed
from, left, abandoned; disregarded, omitted.
<LEND>

<L>45305<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatItya<k2>vyatItya
{%Vy-atītya,%}¦ ind. having passed by, having gone
through or passed over.
<LEND>

<L>45306<pc>0973-b<k1>vyatyaya<k2>vyatyaya
{%Vy-atyaya, as,%}¦ m. passing or going away, going
in a different direction, contrariety, opposition, oppo-
[Page0973-c+ 77]
sition to the usual rule, ({%vyatyayena,%} by an irregu-
larity, against the usual rule, in opposition to the usual
rule); reverse; inverted or reverse order; transposi-
tion, transmutation, interchange.
<LEND>

<L>45307<pc>0973-c<k1>vyatI<k2>vyatI<h>2
{#vyatI#} 2¦. {%vyatī%} (perhaps connected with rt.
1. {%vī%} or with {%vy-atī%}), Ved., according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda IV. 32, 17. {%vyatīnām = gamanavatām%}
{%aśvānām,%} of swift-going horses; on Ṛg-veda I.
155, 6. {%vyatīn = vividhān eva sva-bhāvān,%} various
states or revolutions.
<LEND>

<L>45308<pc>0973-c<k1>vyatIpAta<k2>vyatIpAta
{#vyatIpAta#}¦ {%vy-atīpāta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%pat%} with
{%vi%} and {%ati%}), falling entirely away, total departure,
deviation from (right), excessive sin, great or por-
tentous calamity, any portent or prodigy indicating
or occasioning calamity (as a comet, earthquake,
&c.); disrespect, contempt; the seventeenth of the
astronomical Yogas; the day of new moon (when it
falls on Ravi-vāra or Sunday, and when the moon
is in certain mansions, such as Śravaṇā, Dhaniṣṭhā,
&c.); a malignant aspect of the sun and moon
(when they are on opposite sides of either solstice
and their minutes of declination are the same; cf.
{%vaidhṛta%}).
<LEND>

<L>45309<pc>0973-c<k1>vyatIhAra<k2>vyatIhAra
{#vyatIhAra#}¦ {%vy-atīhāra.%} See {%vy-ati-hṛ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>45310<pc>0973-c<k1>vyatyas<k2>vyatyas<h>1
{#vyatyas#} 1¦. {%vy-aty-as (vi-ati-as),%} cl. 2. A.
{%vy-ati-ste%} (1st sing. {%-ati-he,%} 2nd sing. {%-ati-se,%} Pāṇ.
VII. 4, 50, 52), to be above, excel, surpass.
<LEND>

<L>45311<pc>0973-c<k1>vyatyas<k2>vyatyas<h>2
{#vyatyas#} 2¦. {%vy-aty-as (vi-ati-as),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-asyati, -asitum,%} to throw or place in an inverted
position, invert, place across.
<LEND>

<L>45312<pc>0973-c<k1>vyatyasta<k2>vyatyasta
{%Vy-atyasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or placed in an
inverted position, reversed, inverted, changed into
the opposite; contrary, opposite, placed across or
crosswise, crossed, ({%vyatyasta-pāṇinā,%} with crossed
hands.)
<LEND>

<L>45313<pc>0973-c<k1>vyatyAsa<k2>vyatyAsa
{%Vy-atyāsa, as,%}¦ m. inverted position, inverted or
reverse order; contrariety, oppositeness, opposition,
reverse.
<LEND>

<L>45314<pc>0973-c<k1>vyatyAsam<k2>vyatyAsam
{%Vy-atyāsam,%}¦ ind., Ved. having inverted, having
placed crosswise; alternating, alternately.
<LEND>

<L>45315<pc>0973-c<k1>vyatyUh<k2>vyatyUh
{#vyatyUh#}¦ {%vy-aty-ūh (vi-ati-ūh,%} see rt. 1. {%ūh%}),
cl. 1. P. {%-ūhati, -ūhitum,%} Ved. to place or arrange
differently; to be ever changing the order of any-
thing.
<LEND>

<L>45316<pc>0973-c<k1>vyaT<k2>vyaT
{#vyaT#}¦ {%vyath,%} cl. 1. A. {%vyathate%} (ep. also
P. {%-ti%}), {%vivyathe, vyathiṣyate, avya-%}
{%thiṣṭa%} (Ved. {%vyathiṣat%}), {%vyathitum%} (Ved. Inf.
{%vyathiṣyai%}), to tremble, be agitated or disquieted
or afflicted; to suffer pain, be sorrowful or unhappy
or vexed, fall into misfortune; to be afraid of, fear
(with abl.); to suffer; to dry, become dry: Pass.
{%vyathyate:%} Caus. {%vyathayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avivya-%}
{%that,%} to disquiet, pain, afflict, make uneasy; to destroy,
baffle; to frighten; to lead or turn away: Desid.
{%vivyathiṣate:%} Intens. {%vāvyathyate, vāvyatti;%} [cf.
Goth. <nsi>vithon;</nsi> (perhaps also) Gr. <lang n="greek">ὄθη, ὄθομαι, ὠθέω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐνοσί-χθων, ἔννοσις.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>45317<pc>0973-c<k1>vyaTaka<k2>vyaTaka
{%Vyathaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ inflicting pain, paining,
causing pain, torturing, painful; distressing, afflict-
ing, causing alarm.
<LEND>

<L>45318<pc>0973-c<k1>vyaTat<k2>vyaTat
{%Vyathat, an, antī, at,%}¦ trembling, sorrowing,
being in pain or trouble.
<LEND>

<L>45319<pc>0973-c<k1>vyaTana<k2>vyaTana
{%Vyathana, am,%}¦ n. the act of giving pain, paining;
(in Vedic grammar) change, alteration, variation.
<LEND>

<L>45320<pc>0973-c<k1>vyaTanIya<k2>vyaTanIya
{%Vyathanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pained or afflicted,
capable of being agitated or disturbed.
<LEND>

<L>45321<pc>0973-c<k1>vyaTamAna<k2>vyaTamAna
{%Vyathamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ quivering, trembling,
feeling pain.
<LEND>

<L>45322<pc>0973-c<k1>vyaTayat<k2>vyaTayat
{%Vyathayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ paining, distressing,
disquieting.
<LEND>

<L>45323<pc>0973-c<k1>vyaTA<k2>vyaTA
{%Vyathā,%}¦ f. disquietude, perturbation, agitation;
pain, agony; anguish, ache; distress; alarm, fear;
disease. {%—Vyathā-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing pain
(bodily or mental), painful, excruciating. {%—Vyathān-%}
{%vita (˚thā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} suffering pain, pained.
{%—Vyathā-rahita, as, ā, am,%} free from pain.
{%—Vyathā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} full of pain.
<LEND>
[Page0974-a+ 76]

<L>45324<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaTi<k2>vyaTi
{%Vyathi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. agitated, quivering, moving
about, troubled, distressed, (Sāy. {%= vyathita,%} Ṛg-veda
V. 59, 2; {%= calita,%} X. 86, 2); ({%is%}), m. a weapon,
(Sāy. {%= śastra,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 28, 3); a malevolent
or evil-disposed person, (Sāy. {%= bādhaka, rākṣasa,%}
Ṛg-veda IV. 4, 3; {%= hiṃsaka,%} VI. 62, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>45325<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaTita<k2>vyaTita
{%Vyathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, disquieted, per-
turbed, pained, tortured; distressed, afflicted; dis-
turbed, troubled; alarmed, frightened.
<LEND>

<L>45326<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaTitavya<k2>vyaTitavya
{%Vyathitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pained or distressed.
<LEND>

<L>45327<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaTis<k2>vyaTis
{%Vyathis, is,%}¦ n., Ved. perturbation, anger (accord-
ing to Naigh. II. 13; perhaps referrible to {%vyathi%}
above).
<LEND>

<L>45328<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaTya<k2>vyaTya
{%Vyathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pained or distressed,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>45329<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaTyamAna<k2>vyaTyamAna
{%Vyathyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being disquieted or
agitated, being pained or distressed.
<LEND>

<L>45330<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaTyayas<k2>vyaTyayas
{%Vyathyayas,%}¦ in Naigh. 1. 14. a various reading
for {%a-vyathayas,%} (see {%a-vyathi.%})
<LEND>

<L>45331<pc>0974-a<k1>vyad<k2>vyad
{#vyad#}¦ {%vy-ad (vi-ad),%} cl. 2. P. {%-atti, -attum,%}
to bite through or on all sides, gnaw, nibble, eat.
<LEND>

<L>45332<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaD<k2>vyaD
{#vyaD#}¦ {%vyadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%vidhyati, vivyādha,%}
{%vyatsyati, avyātsīt, vyaddhum%} (ep.
{%veddhum%}), to pierce, perforate; to strike, beat, smite,
stab; to pick; to tear, hurt, wound; to wave in
triumph: Pass. {%vidhyate,%} to be pierced: Caus. {%vyā-%}
{%dhayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avivyadhat:%} Desid. {%vivyat-%}
{%sati:%} Intens. {%vevidhyate, vāvyaddhi%} (?); [cf. per-
haps Gr. <lang n="greek">ϝεθ in ἄεθλος.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>45333<pc>0974-a<k1>vidDa<k2>vidDa
{%Viddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ pierced, perforated, wounded,
&c. See p. 920, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>45334<pc>0974-a<k1>vidDavA<k2>vidDavA
{%Viddhavā,%}¦ ind. having pierced, having struck.
<LEND>

<L>45335<pc>0974-a<k1>viDyat<k2>viDyat
{%Vidhyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ piercing, perforating;
stabbing, striking, wounding, killing.
<LEND>

<L>45336<pc>0974-a<k1>viDyamAna<k2>viDyamAna
{%Vidhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being pierced or struck
or wounded.
<LEND>

<L>45337<pc>0974-a<k1>veDa<k2>veDa
{%Vedha, vedhaka,%}¦ &c. See p. 965, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>45338<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaDa<k2>vyaDa
{%Vyadha, as,%}¦ m. piercing, perforating; striking,
smiting; a stroke, wound; ({%ā%}), f. bleeding.
<LEND>

<L>45339<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaDana<k2>vyaDana
{%Vyadhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of piercing, perforating.
<LEND>

<L>45340<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaDya<k2>vyaDya
{%Vyadhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pierced or wounded,
(in this sense also {%vyādhya%}); ({%as%}), m. an effigy or
mark for archers to shoot at, a butt, target, (accord-
ing to Śabda-k. {%= dhanur-guṇa ?%})
<LEND>

<L>45341<pc>0974-a<k1>vyADa<k2>vyADa
{%Vyādha, as,%}¦ m. ‘one who pierces or wounds,’ a
hunter, one who lives by killing deer, &c., (if re-
garded as a particular caste, supposed to be the son
of a Kṣatriya by a Sarvasvin mother); a low man,
wicked person. {%—Vyādha-tā,%} f. the state or busi-
ness of a hunter. {%—Vyādha-bhīta, as,%} m. ‘afraid of
hunters,’ a deer.
<LEND>

<L>45342<pc>0974-a<k1>vyADAya<k2>vyADAya
{%Vyādhāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vyādhāyate,%} &c., to become
a hunter.
<LEND>

<L>45343<pc>0974-a<k1>vyADin<k2>vyADin<h>1
1. {%vyādhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing hunters, frequented
by hunters.
<LEND>

<L>45344<pc>0974-a<k1>vyADin<k2>vyADin<h>2
2. {%vyādhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ piercing, wounding.
<LEND>

<L>45345<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaDikaraRa<k2>vyaDikaraRa
{#vyaDikaraRa#}¦ {%vy-adhikaraṇa, am,%} n. the sub-
sisting or inhering in different receptacles or subjects
or substrata (sometimes applied to a loose or am-
biguous argument; probably opposed to {%samānā-%}
{%dhikaraṇa,%} see {%viśeṣa-vyāpti%}).
<LEND>

<L>45346<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaDita<k2>vyaDita
{#vyaDita#}¦ {%vyadhita, as, ā, am%} (a doubtful
word), made, done (?).
<LEND>

<L>45347<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaDva<k2>vyaDva
{#vyaDva#}¦ {%vy-adhva, as,%} m. a bad road, wrong
road.
<LEND>

<L>45348<pc>0974-a<k1>vyaDvan<k2>vyaDvan
{%Vy-adhvan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘having various paths,’
epithet of Agni, (Sāy. {%= vividha-jvāla,%} Ṛg-veda 1.
141, 7.)
<LEND>

<L>45349<pc>0974-a<k1>vyan<k2>vyan
{#vyan#}¦ {%vy-an (vi-an),%} cl. 2. P. {%-aniti, -anitum,%}
Ved. to breathe through, breathe.
<LEND>

<L>45350<pc>0974-a<k1>vyanuDA<k2>vyanuDA
{#vyanuDA#}¦ {%vy-anu-dhā (vi-anu-),%} cl. 3. A.
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} Ved. to unfold, display, (accord-
ing to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 166, 10. {%vi-dhire =%}
{%vividhaṃ dhārayanti,%} apparently connecting {%dhire%}
with {%vi%} and not with {%vy-anu.%})
<LEND>

<L>45351<pc>0974-a<k1>vyanunad<k2>vyanunad
{#vyanunad#}¦ {%vy-anu-nad (vi-anu-),%} Caus. {%-nā- %}
[Page0974-b+ 75]
{%dayati, -yitum,%} to cause to resound or re-echo, fill
with noise or cries, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45352<pc>0974-b<k1>vyanunAda<k2>vyanunAda
{%Vy-anunāda, as,%}¦ m. reverberation, loud and ex-
tending sound or noise.
<LEND>

<L>45353<pc>0974-b<k1>vyanunAdayat<k2>vyanunAdayat
{%Vy-anunādayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to resound
or reverberate, filling with sound or noise.
<LEND>

<L>45354<pc>0974-b<k1>vyantara<k2>vyantara
{#vyantara#}¦ {%vy-antara, as,%} m. a kind of super-
natural being, (eight classes are enumerated, viz.
Piśāca, Bhūta, Yakṣa, Rākṣasa, Kinnara, Kim-
puruṣa, Mahoraga, and Gandharva.)
<LEND>

<L>45355<pc>0974-b<k1>vyanvAraB<k2>vyanvAraB
{#vyanvAraB#}¦ {%vy-anv-ā-rabh (vi-anu-ā-),%} cl. 1.
A. {%-rabhate,%} &c., Ved. to hold or touch on both
sides.
<LEND>

<L>45356<pc>0974-b<k1>vyap<k2>vyap
{#vyap#}¦ {%vyap,%} cl. 10. P. {%vyāpayati, -yitum,%}
to throw (= rt. 1. {%vip%}); to throw away,
diminish, waste; [cf. rt. {%vyay.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45357<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapakfz<k2>vyapakfz
{#vyapakfz#}¦ {%vy-apa-kṛṣ (vi-apa-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-karṣati, -karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to draw or drag
away or off; to lead astray, seduce; to take off (as
clothes), undress; to take away, remove, give up.
<LEND>

<L>45358<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapakarzat<k2>vyapakarzat
{%Vy-apakarṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ drawing off or away.
<LEND>

<L>45359<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapakfzwa<k2>vyapakfzwa
{%Vy-apakṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn or dragged off,
drawn aside, taken away, taken off, removed.
<LEND>

<L>45360<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapakram<k2>vyapakram
{#vyapakram#}¦ {%vy-apa-kram (vi-apa-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-krāmati, -kramitum,%} to go away, move off, retire,
depart.
<LEND>

<L>45361<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapagam<k2>vyapagam
{#vyapagam#}¦ {%vy-apa-gam (vi-apa-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to go away, retire, retreat,
escape, disappear; to move away from, be entirely
removed from.
<LEND>

<L>45362<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapagacCat<k2>vyapagacCat
{%Vy-apagacchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going away, leaving.
<LEND>

<L>45363<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapagata<k2>vyapagata
{%Vy-apagata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone away or off, gone;
departed from, fallen away from (with abl.); disap-
peared. {%—Vyapagata-śuc, k, k, k,%} one whose sor-
row has departed, free from grief.
<LEND>

<L>45364<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapagama<k2>vyapagama
{%Vy-apagama, as,%}¦ m. going away, departure.
<LEND>

<L>45365<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapatrap<k2>vyapatrap
{#vyapatrap#}¦ {%vy-apa-trap (vi-apa-),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-trapate%} (ep. also P. {%-ti%}), {%-trapitum, -traptum,%} to
turn away through shame or embarrassment; to be-
come shy, be ashamed.
<LEND>

<L>45366<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapatrapa<k2>vyapatrapa
{%Vy-apatrapa, as, ā, am,%}¦ shameless, (in this word
{%vi%} is privative.)
<LEND>

<L>45367<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapatrapat<k2>vyapatrapat
{%Vy-apatrapat, an, antī, at, = vy-apatrapamāṇa.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>45368<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapatrapamARa<k2>vyapatrapamARa
{%Vy-apatrapamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ turning away
through shame, being ashamed; shy.
<LEND>

<L>45369<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapadiS<k2>vyapadiS
{#vyapadiS#}¦ {%vy-apa-diś (vi-apa-),%} cl. 3. 6. P.
{%-dideṣṭi, -diśati, -deṣṭum,%} to point out, indicate,
represent, signify, mean, intend; to designate, name;
to represent falsely, feign, pretend, hold forth as a
pretext: Pass. {%-diśyate,%} to be represented or shown,
({%iti vy-apadiśyate,%} so it is represented, so it is said
or intended or signified, such a form of expression
is used): Caus. {%-deśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be
named after, call after.
<LEND>

<L>45370<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapadiSat<k2>vyapadiSat
{%Vy-apadiśat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} representing.
<LEND>

<L>45371<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapadiSya<k2>vyapadiSya
{%Vy-apadiśya,%}¦ ind. having represented or shown;
having represented falsely, having feigned or pre-
tended.
<LEND>

<L>45372<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapadizwa<k2>vyapadizwa
{%Vy-apadiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ represented, signified,
shown, informed, named; tricked; pleaded as a
pretext or in excuse.
<LEND>

<L>45373<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapadeSa<k2>vyapadeSa
{%Vy-apadeśa, as,%}¦ m. representation, information,
apprising, notice, hint; a particular form of speech;
designation by name or appellation; a name, title,
appellation; family, race; fame, renown; fraud,
craft; stratagem, device, pretext, excuse.
<LEND>

<L>45374<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapadezwf<k2>vyapadezwf
{%Vy-apadeṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ one who represents
or shows, one who designates or names; one who
represents falsely, one who pretends or makes pre-
texts, deceiving, a cheat, impostor.
<LEND>

<L>45375<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapadfS<k2>vyapadfS
{#vyapadfS#}¦ {%vy-apa-dṛś (vi-apa-),%} Pass. {%-dṛś-%}
{%yate,%} to be clearly seen, be distinctly visible.
<LEND>

<L>45376<pc>0974-b<k1>vyapanaS<k2>vyapanaS
{#vyapanaS#}¦ {%vy-apa-naś (vi-apa-),%} Caus. {%-nā-%}
{%śayati, -yitum,%} to cause to disappear entirely, cause
to perish, drive away, remove.
<LEND>
[Page0974-c+ 74]

<L>45377<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapanI<k2>vyapanI
{#vyapanI#}¦ {%vy-apa-nī (vi-apa-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-na-%}
{%yati, -netum%} (Ved. also {%-nayitum%}), to lead away,
take away; to carry away, remove, drive away,
banish; to take off, lay aside; to get rid of: Caus.
{%-nāyayati, -yitum,%} to cause to lead or carry away.
<LEND>

<L>45378<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapanayat<k2>vyapanayat
{%Vy-apanayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ leading or taking
away, driving away, removing.
<LEND>

<L>45379<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapanAyita<k2>vyapanAyita
{%Vy-apanāyita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), caused
to be led or taken away, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45380<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapanIta<k2>vyapanIta
{%Vy-apanīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ led off, taken away, taken
off, removed.
<LEND>

<L>45381<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapanIya<k2>vyapanIya
{%Vy-apanīya,%}¦ ind. having led or taken away, hav-
ing taken off or laid aside, having put away.
<LEND>

<L>45382<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapanud<k2>vyapanud
{#vyapanud#}¦ {%vy-apa-nud (vi-apa-),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-nudati, -te, -nottum,%} to drive away, remove.
<LEND>

<L>45383<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapamuc<k2>vyapamuc
{#vyapamuc#}¦ {%vy-apa-muc (vi-apa-),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-muñcati, -te,%} &c., to loosen, take off, remove, lay
aside.
<LEND>

<L>45384<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapamucya<k2>vyapamucya
{%Vy-apamucya,%}¦ ind. having loosed or taken off.
<LEND>

<L>45385<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapayA<k2>vyapayA
{#vyapayA#}¦ {%vy-apa-yā (vi-apa-),%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti%}
(ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%-yātum,%} to go away, retire from,
withdraw; to pass away, disappear.
<LEND>

<L>45386<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapayAta<k2>vyapayAta
{%Vy-apayāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone away, retired, with-
drawn.
<LEND>

<L>45387<pc>0974-c<k1>vyaparuD<k2>vyaparuD
{#vyaparuD#}¦ {%vy-apa-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ruṇad-%}
{%dhi, -runddhe,%} to exclude from sovereignty or
power, dethrone, dismiss, dispossess, (in Rāmāyaṇa
II. 58, 23. [Bombay ed.] the Intens. form {%vyapa-%}
{%rorudhaḥ%} occurs.)
<LEND>

<L>45388<pc>0974-c<k1>vyaparuh<k2>vyaparuh
{#vyaparuh#}¦ {%vy-apa-ruh (vi-apa-),%} Caus. {%-ropa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to root up, eradicate, extirpate; to lay
aside, remove, take off; to deprive of, expel from
(with inst. or abl.).
<LEND>

<L>45389<pc>0974-c<k1>vyaparopaRa<k2>vyaparopaRa
{%Vy-aparopaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of rooting up, extir-
pating; expelling, removing; cutting up, cutting off.
<LEND>

<L>45390<pc>0974-c<k1>vyaparopita<k2>vyaparopita
{%Vy-aparopita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rooted up, extirpated,
eradicated; expelled.
<LEND>

<L>45391<pc>0974-c<k1>vyaparopya<k2>vyaparopya
{%Vy-aparopya,%}¦ ind. having taken off.
<LEND>

<L>45392<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapavah<k2>vyapavah
{#vyapavah#}¦ {%vy-apa-vah (vi-apa-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-vahati, -te,%} &c., to drive away, remove, expel; to
manifest, display, exhibit.
<LEND>

<L>45393<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapoQa<k2>vyapoQa
{%Vy-apoḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven or frightened away,
expelled, removed; opposite, contrary, reverse; mani-
fested, displayed, exhibited. {%—Vyapoḍhābhra (˚ḍha-%}
{%abh˚), as, ā, am,%} having the clouds driven away.
<LEND>

<L>45394<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapohya<k2>vyapohya
{%Vy-apohya,%}¦ ind. having driven away, having re-
moved or got rid of; having passed through a place,
({%vy-apohya%} and {%vy-apoḍha%} may equally be referred
to {%vy-apoh,%} see rt. 1. {%ūh.%})
<LEND>

<L>45395<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapavfj<k2>vyapavfj
{#vyapavfj#}¦ {%vy-apa-vṛj (vi-apa-),%} Caus. {%-var-%}
{%jayati, -yitum,%} to leave off entirely, relinquish, give
up, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>45396<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapavarjita<k2>vyapavarjita
{%Vy-apavarjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely relinquished
or given up.
<LEND>

<L>45397<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapavft<k2>vyapavft
{#vyapavft#}¦ {%vy-apa-vṛt (vi-apa-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-var-%}
{%tate,%} &c. (see rt. 1. {%vṛt%}), to turn away from, leave;
to desist from (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>45398<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapavyaD<k2>vyapavyaD
{#vyapavyaD#}¦ {%vy-apa-vyadh (vi-apa-),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-vidhyati, -vyaddhum,%} to break to pieces, to throw
or cast away.
<LEND>

<L>45399<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapavidDa<k2>vyapavidDa
{%Vy-apaviddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken to pieces,
thrown about in confusion, cast away, rejected, dis-
carded. {%—Vyapaviddha-vṛṣī-maṭha, as, ā, am,%}
whose (ascetic) seats and cells were discarded or
abandoned.
<LEND>

<L>45400<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapasfj<k2>vyapasfj
{#vyapasfj#}¦ {%vy-apa-sṛj (vi-apa-),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-sṛjati, -sraṣṭum,%} to let go; to send away, dismiss,
throw away, relinquish, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>45401<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapasfp<k2>vyapasfp
{#vyapasfp#}¦ {%vy-apa-sṛp (vi-apa-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-sarpati, -sarptum, -sraptum,%} to go away, creep
away, run away, escape.
<LEND>

<L>45402<pc>0974-c<k1>vyapahf<k2>vyapahf
{#vyapahf#}¦ {%vy-apa-hṛ (vi-apa-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-harati, -te, -hartum,%} to take away, carry away,
remove; to cut off.
<LEND>
[Page0975-a+ 76]

<L>45403<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapAkfti<k2>vyapAkfti
{#vyapAkfti#}¦ {%vy-apākṛti, is,%} f. driving away,
repelling, denial.
<LEND>

<L>45404<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapAkfz<k2>vyapAkfz
{#vyapAkfz#}¦ {%vy-apā-kṛṣ (vi-apa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-karṣati, -karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to drag or draw
away, tear off, tear away from, take away, remove.
<LEND>

<L>45405<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapAnud<k2>vyapAnud
{#vyapAnud#}¦ {%vy-apā-nud (vi-apa-ā-),%} cl. 6. P.
A. {%-nudati, -te, -nottum,%} to drive away, remove.
<LEND>

<L>45406<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapASri<k2>vyapASri
{#vyapASri#}¦ {%vy-apā-śri (vi-apa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P.
A. {%-śrayati, -te, -śrayitum,%} to go to for refuge,
seek refuge with, have recourse to.
<LEND>

<L>45407<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapASraya<k2>vyapASraya
{%Vy-apāśraya, as,%}¦ m. going away, secession; hav-
ing recourse to, taking refuge with, relying upon,
reliance on, trusting to; expectation.
<LEND>

<L>45408<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapASrita<k2>vyapASrita
{%Vy-apāśrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has taken
refuge with, relying upon, trusting to.
<LEND>

<L>45409<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapASritya<k2>vyapASritya
{%Vy-apāśritya,%}¦ ind. having gone to for refuge,
having taken refuge with.
<LEND>

<L>45410<pc>0975-a<k1>vyape<k2>vyape
{#vyape#}¦ {%vy-ape (vi-apa-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-apaiti,%}
&c., {%-apaitum,%} to go apart, go asunder, be severed
or separated, separate; to go away, leave, depart,
leave off, cease, stop.
<LEND>

<L>45411<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapeta<k2>vyapeta
{%Vy-apeta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone apart or asunder,
severed, separated; gone off or away, passed away,
departed, got rid of; opposed to, contrary. {%—Vya-%}
{%peta-kalmaṣa, as, ā, am,%} having taint or guilt
removed. {%—Vyapeta-dhairya, as, ā, am,%} one who
has abandoned firmness. {%—Vyapeta-bhaya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%vyapeta-bhī, īs, īs, i,%} one whose fears are
gone, free from fear {%(= vīta-bhī)%}. {%—Vyapeta-har-%}
{%ṣa, as, ā, am,%} devoid of joy.
<LEND>

<L>45412<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapekz<k2>vyapekz
{#vyapekz#}¦ {%vy-apekṣ (vi-apa-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-apekṣate, -ekṣitum,%} to look about for, look for,
expect; to regard, mind, pay regard or attention to;
to look back.
<LEND>

<L>45413<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapekza<k2>vyapekza
{%Vy-apekṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking about for, ex-
pecting; expectant, waiting, attentive; regarding,
minding; ({%ā%}), f. looking for, expectation; regard,
consideration; mutual expectation or regard; mutual
connection or relation; application, use; (in gram-
mar) the mutual application of two rules.
<LEND>

<L>45414<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapekzaRa<k2>vyapekzaRa
{%Vy-apekṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of looking for,
expecting, expectation.
<LEND>

<L>45415<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapekzaRIya<k2>vyapekzaRIya
{%Vy-apekṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked for or
expected.
<LEND>

<L>45416<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapekzamARa<k2>vyapekzamARa
{%Vy-apekṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking about for,
looking round, expecting.
<LEND>

<L>45417<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapekzA<k2>vyapekzA
{%Vy-apekṣā,%}¦ f. See {%vy-apekṣa.%}
<LEND>

<L>45418<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapekzita<k2>vyapekzita
{%Vy-apekṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ looked for, expected;
mutually expected or looked to; mutually related;
employed, applied.
<LEND>

<L>45419<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapekzitavya<k2>vyapekzitavya
{%Vy-apekṣitavya%}¦ or {%vy-apekṣya, as, ā, am,%}
to be looked for or expected.
<LEND>

<L>45420<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapoQa<k2>vyapoQa
{#vyapoQa#}¦ {%vy-apoḍha, vy-apohya.%} See under
{%vy-apa-vah.%}
<LEND>

<L>45421<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapoh<k2>vyapoh
{#vyapoh#}¦ {%vy-apoh (vi-apa-ūh),%} cl. 1. P. {%-apo-%}
{%hati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%-apohitum,%} to drive away
from, keep off; to remove; to atone for, expiate,
destroy; to heal, cure (sickness).
<LEND>

<L>45422<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapoha<k2>vyapoha
{%Vy-apoha, as,%}¦ m. driving away, keeping off,
destroying. {%—Vyapoha-stava, as,%} m., N. of a
chapter of the Liṅga-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>45423<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapohamAna<k2>vyapohamAna
{%Vy-apohamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ taking away, remov-
ing; putting out, extinguishing.
<LEND>

<L>45424<pc>0975-a<k1>vyapohya<k2>vyapohya
{%Vy-apohya.%}¦ See under {%vy-apa-vah.%}
<LEND>

<L>45425<pc>0975-a<k1>vyaBicar<k2>vyaBicar
{#vyaBicar#}¦ {%vy-abhi-car,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.)
{%-carati (-te), -caritum,%} to act in an unfriendly way
towards (with acc. or gen.), commit an offence
against, offend, injure; to bewitch, practise sorcery;
to go away, depart or deviate from; to go astray;
to go wrong, fail, miscarry; to go beyond, trans-
gress, exceed, surpass (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>45426<pc>0975-a<k1>vyaBicAra<k2>vyaBicAra
{%Vy-abhicāra, as,%}¦ m. going or departing from,
wandering away, going astray, deviation, leaving or
abandoning (the right way), following improper
courses, doing what is prohibited or wicked; erring,
straying, error, trespass, transgression, crime, vice,
[Page0975-b+ 80]
sin, profligacy, adultery, infidelity of a wife, &c.;
wandering from an argument, erroneous or fallacious
reasoning, the presence of the {%hetu%} without the
{%sādhya;%} straying from a rule, exception to a rule,
irregularity, anomaly. {%—Vyabhicāra-tas,%} ind. in con-
sequence of straying or erring; (in phil.) from the Vya-
bhicāra involved in the other supposition. {%—Vyabhi-%}
{%cāra-tā,%} f. or {%vyabhicāra-tva, am,%} n. error.
<LEND>

<L>45427<pc>0975-b<k1>vyaBicArin<k2>vyaBicArin
{%Vy-abhicārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going astray, erring, tres-
passing, deviating from (virtue), following or doing
what is improper; profligate, wanton; untrue, false;
irregular, anomalous; (a word) having a non-primi-
tive or secondary meaning, having several meanings;
({%iṇī%}), f. a wanton woman, unchaste wife, adulteress;
({%i%}), n. anything transitory, a transitory feeling or
state, (opposed to {%sthāyi,%} ‘a lasting state,’ q. v., and
forming a particular condition of the mind or body
described in poetical compositions; these Vyabhicāri-
bhāvas are said to be thirty-four in number, viz.
1. {%nirveda,%} disgust, despondency; 2. {%glāni,%} ex-
haustion, emaciation; 3. {%śaṅkā,%} apprehension;
4. {%asūyā,%} envy; 5. {%mada,%} intoxication; 6. {%śrama,%}
fatigue; 7. {%ālasya,%} indolence, languor; 8. {%dainya,%}
indigence, distress; 9. {%cintā,%} anxious reflection or
thought; 10. {%moha,%} perplexity, distraction; 11.
{%smṛti,%} recollection, effort to remember; 12. {%dhṛti,%}
calm enjoyment, satisfaction of mind; 13. {%vrīḍā,%}
shame; 14. {%capalatā,%} unsteadiness, want of firm-
ness; 15. {%harṣa,%} joy, delight; 16. {%āvega,%} flurry;
17. {%jaḍatā,%} stupefaction, insensibility, apathy; 18.
{%garva,%} pride, arrogance; 19. {%viṣāda,%} depression,
despair; 20. {%autsukya,%} regret, eager longing; 21.
{%nidrā,%} drowsiness; 22. {%apasmāra,%} possession by
an evil spirit, epilepsy; 23. {%supta,%} sleep; 24. {%vi-%}
{%bodha,%} waking; 25. {%amarṣa,%} angry impatience;
26. {%avahitthā,%} dissimulation; 27. {%ugratā,%} cruelty,
rage; 28. {%mati,%} mental perception or conclusion;
29. {%upālambha,%} reviling, railing; 30. {%vyādhi,%} sick-
ness; 31. {%unmāda,%} madness, delirium; 32. {%maraṇa,%}
death; 33. {%trāsa,%} fear; 34. {%vitarka,%} doubt, delibera-
tion.) {%—Vyabhicāri-tā,%} f. or {%vyabhicāri-tva, am,%}
n. the state of going astray, error, doubt; (in gram-
mar) the having a secondary meaning, the having
several meanings. {%—Vyabhicāri-bhāva, as,%} m. a
transitory state (of mind or body; see above).
<LEND>

<L>45428<pc>0975-b<k1>vyaBra<k2>vyaBra
{#vyaBra#}¦ {%vy-abhra, as, ā, am,%} unclouded, cloud-
less.
<LEND>

<L>45429<pc>0975-b<k1>vyay<k2>vyay
{#vyay#}¦ {%vyay%} (probably formed fr. rt. {%ay%} for
5. {%i%} with {%vi%}), cl. 1. P. A. {%vyayati, -te, vavyā-%}
{%ya, vavyaye, vyayitum,%} and cl. 10. P. {%vyayayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to go, move; to expend, disburse, spend;
to waste, give away or squander money, &c., (in these
senses probably a Nom. fr. {%vyaya%} below); cl. 10. P.
{%vyāyayati%} or {%vyāpayati, vepayati%} (rather to be re-
ferred to rts. {%vyap,%} 1. {%vip%}), {%-yitum,%} to throw, cast.
<LEND>

<L>45430<pc>0975-b<k1>vyaya<k2>vyaya
{%Vyaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ mutable, liable to change or
decay [cf. {%a-v˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. disappearance, loss; perish-
ing, decaying, decay, destruction, change, downfall,
decline, misfortune; spending, expenditure, expense,
outlay, disbursement, (opposed to {%āya,%} income);
squandering, extravagance, waste, prodigality; N. of
Pradhāna; N. of the twentieth (or fifty-fourth) year
of Jupiter's cycle; ({%am%}), n. (in astrology) the twelfth
station or house from the Lagna {%(= lagnād dvā-%}
{%daśa-sthānam)%}. {%—Vyaya-parāṅmukha, as, ī, am,%}
averse from expenditure, parsimonious. {%—Vyaya-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing waste or decay, &c.;
changeful, imperfect, incomplete. {%—Vyaya-śīla, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} disposed to prodigality, wasteful, spendthrift.
{%—Vyayī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of expending or
disbursing, wasting. {%—Vyayī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} ex-
pended, spent, wasted, lavished. {%—Vyayī-bhūta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} spent, squandered, wasted.
<LEND>

<L>45431<pc>0975-b<k1>vyayana<k2>vyayana
{%Vyayana, am,%}¦ n. the act of expending, spending,
expenditure, wasting, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>45432<pc>0975-b<k1>vyayamAna<k2>vyayamAna
{%Vyayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ expending, spending,
wasting.
<LEND>

<L>45433<pc>0975-b<k1>vyayita<k2>vyayita
{%Vyayita, as, ā, am,%}¦ expended, spent, disbursed,
consumed, dissipated, dispersed; gone away, de-
clined, fallen into decay.
<LEND>
[Page0975-c+ 73]

<L>45434<pc>0975-c<k1>vyayin<k2>vyayin
{%Vyayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ expending, spending, expensive,
prodigal, lavish, extravagant; declining, falling into
calamity, wasting, changing, decaying, ({%udaya-%}
{%vyayin,%} rising and falling.) {%—Vyayi-tā,%} f. or {%vyayi-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. prodigality, wastefulness.
<LEND>

<L>45435<pc>0975-c<k1>vyarRa<k2>vyarRa<h>1
{#vyarRa#} 1¦. {%vy-arṇa, as, ā, am%} (for 2. see below),
without water, rainless, dry.
<LEND>

<L>45436<pc>0975-c<k1>vyarTa<k2>vyarTa
{#vyarTa#}¦ {%vy-artha, as, ā, am,%} useless, unprofit-
able, fruitless, ineffectual, vain; unmeaning. {%—Vyar-%}
{%tha-tā,%} f. or {%vyartha-tva, am,%} n. uselessness, un-
profitableness, ({%vyartha-tāṃ yā%} or {%gam,%} to become
useless); inoffensiveness; want of meaning, non-
sense. {%—Vyartha-yatna, as, ā, am,%} making useless
efforts.
<LEND>

<L>45437<pc>0975-c<k1>vyarTaka<k2>vyarTaka
{%Vyarthaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ useless, vain, &c., {%= vy-%}
{%artha%}. {%—Vyarthaka-tā,%} f. or {%vyarthaka-tva, am,%}
n. unprofitableness, uselessness.
<LEND>

<L>45438<pc>0975-c<k1>vyard<k2>vyard
{#vyard#}¦ {%vy-ard (vi-ard),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ardati, -ar-%}
{%ditum,%} Ved. to go or move away, to flow away; to
oppress, harass, pain: Caus. {%-ardayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to be scattered or dissolved, destroy, annihilate.
<LEND>

<L>45439<pc>0975-c<k1>vyarRa<k2>vyarRa<h>2
2. {%vy-arṇa%}¦ or {%vy-arṇṇa, as, ā, am%} (see Pāṇ. VII.
2, 24), gone away, gone; oppressed, pained, dis-
tressed; asked.
<LEND>

<L>45440<pc>0975-c<k1>vyalIka<k2>vyalIka
{#vyalIka#}¦ {%vy-alīka, as, ā, am%} [cf. {%alīka%}], dis-
agreeable, displeasing, painful, offensive, strange;
improper or unfit to be done; false; ({%am%}), n. any-
thing displeasing; any cause of pain or uneasiness or
disagreeableness, pain, grief, torture; any improper
act, fault, transgression ({%= kāmajāparādha%}); re-
verse, contrariety, inversion; cheating, tricking;
falsehood; ({%as%}), m. a libertine ({%= nāgara, kāma-%}
{%keli%}); a catamite. {%—Vyalīka-tā,%} f. or {%vyalīka-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. disagreeableness, painfulness; impropriety,
displeasure. {%—Vyalīka-niḥśvāsa, as,%} m. a sigh of
pain or grief.
<LEND>

<L>45441<pc>0975-c<k1>vyalkaSa<k2>vyalkaSa
{#vyalkaSa#}¦ {%vy-alkaśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
various branches, (Sāy. {%= vividha-śākha.%})
<LEND>

<L>45442<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavakalana<k2>vyavakalana
{#vyavakalana#}¦ {%vy-avakalana, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
3. {%kal%} with {%ava%} and {%vi%}), separation, subtraction,
deduction.
<LEND>

<L>45443<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavakalita<k2>vyavakalita
{%Vy-avakalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ separated, subtracted,
deducted; ({%am%}), n. subtraction.
<LEND>

<L>45444<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavakfz<k2>vyavakfz
{#vyavakfz#}¦ {%vy-ava-kṛṣ (vi-ava-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-karṣati, -karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to draw or drag
down or away from, tear away, alienate.
<LEND>

<L>45445<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavakF<k2>vyavakF
{#vyavakF#}¦ {%vy-ava-kṝ (vi-ava-),%} cl. 6. P. {%-ki-%}
{%rati, -karitum, -karītum,%} to scatter or pour down,
pour on, scatter about.
<LEND>

<L>45446<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavakroSana<k2>vyavakroSana
{#vyavakroSana#}¦ {%vy-avakrośana, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
{%kruś%} with {%ava%} and {%vi%}), mutual altercation, wrangling,
mutual abuse; abuse, reviling (in general).
<LEND>

<L>45447<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavagam<k2>vyavagam
{#vyavagam#}¦ {%vy-ava-gam,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gacchate,%}
{%-gantum,%} Ved. to go apart, part, separate, divide.
<LEND>

<L>45448<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavagAh<k2>vyavagAh
{#vyavagAh#}¦ {%vy-ava-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate, -gā-%}
{%hitum, -gāḍhum,%} to dive down into, plunge into; to
enter into, penetrate; to set in.
<LEND>

<L>45449<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavagAQa<k2>vyavagAQa
{%Vy-avagāḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ dived or plunged into,
immersed.
<LEND>

<L>45450<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavagAhya<k2>vyavagAhya
{%Vy-avagāhya,%}¦ ind. having plunged into.
<LEND>

<L>45451<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavagrah<k2>vyavagrah
{#vyavagrah#}¦ {%vy-ava-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti,%}
{%gṛhṇīte,%} &c., {%-grahītum,%} Ved. to bring down, to
bend or incline down.
<LEND>

<L>45452<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavagfhIta<k2>vyavagfhIta
{%Vy-avagṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. brought down,
bent down.
<LEND>

<L>45453<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavacCid<k2>vyavacCid
{#vyavacCid#}¦ {%vy-ava-cchid (vi-ava-chid),%} cl. 7.
P. A. {%-cchinatti, -cchinte, -cchettum,%} to cut off or in
pieces, separate, separate from; to tear asunder, open,
sever; to interrupt; to decide or resolve on (with
{%prati%}): Pass. {%-cchidyate,%} to be cut off or separated.
<LEND>

<L>45454<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavacCidya<k2>vyavacCidya
{%Vy-avacchidya,%}¦ ind. having cut off or separated;
having decided or resolved.
<LEND>

<L>45455<pc>0975-c<k1>vyavacCinna<k2>vyavacCinna
{%Vy-avacchinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off; torn or rent
[Page0976-a+ 76]
asunder; separated, divided; distinguished; particu-
larized, specified; distinct; interrupted, ({%a-vyavac-%}
{%chinna,%} uninterrupted.)
<LEND>

<L>45456<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavacCeda<k2>vyavacCeda
{%Vy-avaccheda, as,%}¦ m. cutting off or in pieces;
anatomy; dividing, separating; discrimination; par-
ticularizing, specification; distinction, contrast; deci-
sion, determination; a division, section; letting fly
an arrow, shooting, darting. {%—Vyavaccheda-vidyā,%}
f. the science of anatomy.
<LEND>

<L>45457<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavacCedaka<k2>vyavacCedaka
{%Vy-avacchedaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ cutting off, divid-
ing in two, discriminating, distinguishing, particular-
izing.
<LEND>

<L>45458<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavatizWamAna<k2>vyavatizWamAna
{#vyavatizWamAna#}¦ {%vy-avatiṣṭhamāna.%} See under
1. {%vy-ava-sthā,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>45459<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavadA<k2>vyavadA
{#vyavadA#}¦ {%vy-ava-dā%} (see rt. 3. {%dā%}), cl. 2. 4.
P. {%-dāti, -dyati, -dātum,%} to cut off, cut in two,
divide.
<LEND>

<L>45460<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavadAya<k2>vyavadAya
{%Vy-avadāya,%}¦ having cut in two or divided.
<LEND>

<L>45461<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavadF<k2>vyavadF
{#vyavadF#}¦ {%vy-ava-dṝ (vi-ava-),%} Pass. {%-dīryate,%}
to be torn asunder; to burst asunder, split in two.
<LEND>

<L>45462<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavadIrRa<k2>vyavadIrRa
{%Vy-avadīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ burst asunder, broken
to pieces, distracted.
<LEND>

<L>45463<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavadE<k2>vyavadE
{#vyavadE#}¦ {%vy-ava-dai (vi-ava-),%} Pass. {%-dāyate,%}
to be brightly diffused.
<LEND>

<L>45464<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavadAta<k2>vyavadAta
{%Vy-avadāta, as, ā,%}¦ (Ved. {%ī%}), {%am, = ava-dāta.%}
<LEND>

<L>45465<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavadAyamAna<k2>vyavadAyamAna
{%Vy-avadāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ brightly diffused
or spread about.
<LEND>

<L>45466<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDA<k2>vyavaDA<h>1
{#vyavaDA#} 1¦. {%vy-ava-dhā (vi-ava-),%} cl. 3. P. A.
{%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to place apart or asun-
der; to put or place between, interpose; to separate,
divide, interrupt, obstruct, cover, screen, conceal; to
lay aside, leave out, omit, pass over; to put down
here and there: Pass. {%-dhīyate,%} to be separated or
separated from.
<LEND>

<L>45467<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDA<k2>vyavaDA<h>2
2. {%vy-avadhā,%}¦ f. anything which intervenes or
conceals from sight; a screen, partition, covering,
the state of being covered, concealment, disappear-
ance.
<LEND>

<L>45468<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDAtf<k2>vyavaDAtf
{%Vy-avadhātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who separates or
interposes or screens.
<LEND>

<L>45469<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDAna<k2>vyavaDAna
{%Vy-avadhāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of placing apart
or between, intervening, intervention, interposition,
separation, break, gap; anything which intervenes
or screens; a screen, partition, intervening object;
intervening space, interval, space (in general); (in
grammar) the intervention of a syllable or letter;
covering, a cover; obstruction, the being covered or
concealed, concealment, disappearance.
<LEND>

<L>45470<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDAya<k2>vyavaDAya
{%Vy-avadhāya,%}¦ ind. having placed apart or be-
tween, having interposed.
<LEND>

<L>45471<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDAyaka<k2>vyavaDAyaka
{%Vy-avadhāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ intervening, screen-
ing, interposing, separating; covering, concealing,
hiding, obstructing; intermediate.
<LEND>

<L>45472<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDi<k2>vyavaDi
{%Vy-avadhi, is,%}¦ m. anything which intervenes or
screens, a covering; intervention, covering, conceal-
ing, &c., (see {%vy-avadhāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>45473<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDeya<k2>vyavaDeya
{%Vy-avadheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be put in between
or interposed.
<LEND>

<L>45474<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavahita<k2>vyavahita
{%Vy-avahita, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed apart, placed be-
tween; separated by anything intervening, separated,
interrupted; obstructed, stopped, impeded; screened
from view, concealed, covered; not contiguous, not
immediately connected, only relating to; placed
asunder, placed opposite, hostile, opposed; laid
aside, omitted, passed over, surpassed, excelled, put
to shame; done, acted, performed.
<LEND>

<L>45475<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDAv<k2>vyavaDAv
{#vyavaDAv#}¦ {%vy-ava-dhāv (vi-ava-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-dhāvati, -te, -dhāvitum,%} to run away from one
another, separate from; to run away from.
<LEND>

<L>45476<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDU<k2>vyavaDU
{#vyavaDU#}¦ {%vy-ava-dhū (vi-ava-),%} cl. 5. P. A.
{%-dhūnoti, -dhūnute%} (in the later language also
{%-dhunoti, -dhunute%}), {%-dhavitum, -dhotum,%} to
shake off, ward off, remove; to shake about, treat
roughly or rudely; to overthrow: Pass. {%-dhūyate,%}
to be shaken off, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45477<pc>0976-a<k1>vyavaDUta<k2>vyavaDUta
{%Vy-avadhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken off, one who
[Page0976-b+ 75]
has shaken off all worldly desires, indifferent in regard
of life, resigned.
<LEND>

<L>45478<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavaDUya<k2>vyavaDUya
{%Vy-avadhūya,%}¦ ind. having shaken off, having
removed or warded off.
<LEND>

<L>45479<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavaDUyamAna<k2>vyavaDUyamAna
{%Vy-avadhūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being shaken
about, being roughly treated.
<LEND>

<L>45480<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavanI<k2>vyavanI
{#vyavanI#}¦ {%vy-ava-nī (vi-ava-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-nayati, -te, -netum,%} Ved. to pour in separately,
pour in drop by drop.
<LEND>

<L>45481<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavanIya<k2>vyavanIya
{%Vy-avanīya,%}¦ ind., Ved. having poured in sepa-
rately.
<LEND>

<L>45482<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavapad<k2>vyavapad
{#vyavapad#}¦ {%vy-ava-pad (vi-ava-),%} cl. 4. A.
{%-padyate, -pattum,%} to fall down, fall asunder.
<LEND>

<L>45483<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavaBakz<k2>vyavaBakz
{#vyavaBakz#}¦ {%vy-ava-bhakṣ (vi-ava-),%} cl. 10. P.
{%-bhakṣayati, -yitum,%} Ved. to swallow down or eat
(in the interval of certain religious rites).
<LEND>

<L>45484<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavaBAs<k2>vyavaBAs
{#vyavaBAs#}¦ {%vy-ava-bhās (vi-ava-),%} Caus. {%-bhā-%}
{%sayati, -yitum,%} to cause to shine out brightly, to
illuminate beautifully.
<LEND>

<L>45485<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavaBAsita<k2>vyavaBAsita
{%Vy-avabhāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brightly illuminated.
<LEND>

<L>45486<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavamuc<k2>vyavamuc
{#vyavamuc#}¦ {%vy-ava-muc (vi-ava-),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-muñcati, -te, -moktum,%} to unloose, unfasten, take
off.
<LEND>

<L>45487<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavamucya<k2>vyavamucya
{%Vy-avamucya,%}¦ ind. having unloosed, having taken
off.
<LEND>

<L>45488<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavaruh<k2>vyavaruh
{#vyavaruh#}¦ {%vy-ava-ruh (vi-ava-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-rohati, -te, -roḍhum,%} to ascend, mount, get upon:
Caus. {%-ropayati, -yitum,%} to displace, remove; to
deprive of (with abl.): Pass. of Caus. {%-ropyate,%} to
be expelled from or deprived of (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>45489<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavaropita<k2>vyavaropita
{%Vy-avaropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ displaced, removed,
expelled; deprived of (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>45490<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavavad<k2>vyavavad
{#vyavavad#}¦ {%vy-ava-vad (vi-ava-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-vadati, -te, -vaditum,%} Ved. to speak ill of, decry;
to begin to speak, break silence.
<LEND>

<L>45491<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavasad<k2>vyavasad
{#vyavasad#}¦ {%vy-ava-sad (vi-ava-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-sī-%}
{%dati, -sattum,%} to sink or fall down, sit down; to
pine or waste away, perish.
<LEND>

<L>45492<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavasAya<k2>vyavasAya
{#vyavasAya#}¦ {%vy-avasāya.%} See under {%vy-ava-so.%}
<LEND>

<L>45493<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavasfj<k2>vyavasfj
{#vyavasfj#}¦ {%vy-ava-sṛj (vi-ava-),%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛ-%}
{%jati, -sraṣṭum,%} to throw, cast, hurl; to put down,
lay down.
<LEND>

<L>45494<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavaso<k2>vyavaso
{#vyavaso#}¦ {%vy-ava-so (vi-ava-),%} cl. 4. P. {%-syati%}
(ep. forms 1st sing. Pres. {%vy-avasāmi,%} Pot. {%vy-%}
{%avaseyam,%} 2nd Fut. {%vy-avasiṣyāmi%}), {%-sātum,%} to
settle, determine, resolve, decide, constitute, establish;
to be convinced or persuaded; to make strenuous
effort, strive, endeavour, act, be industrious; to strive
for, labour after; to make an attempt upon (with
acc.); to seek after, ask for, wish; to reflect: Caus.
{%-sāyayati, -yitum,%} to cause to resolve, cause to
make effort, excite, instigate, embolden, make
vigorous or strong.
<LEND>

<L>45495<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavasAya<k2>vyavasAya
{%Vy-avasāya, as,%}¦ m. settled determination, resolve,
obstinacy; strenuous effort or exertion, activity,
energy, industry, perseverance; action, performance;
conduct, behaviour; following any business or pro-
fession; a trade, business, livelihood; artifice, plan,
device, stratagem, trick; boasting; N. of Viṣṇu; of
Śiva; of a son of Dharma by Vapus (daughter of
Dakṣa). {%—Vyavasāyātmika (˚ya-āt˚), as, ā, am,%}
full of resolve or energy, relating to exertion, ener-
getic, laborious.
<LEND>

<L>45496<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavasAyin<k2>vyavasAyin
{%Vy-avasāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who acts resolutely or
energetically, resolute, energetic, active, enterprising,
persevering, painstaking, industrious, laborious, dili-
gent; acting, performing, undertaking (anything), one
who performs his duty; engaged in trade or busi-
ness; a tradesman, handicraftsman.
<LEND>

<L>45497<pc>0976-b<k1>vyavasita<k2>vyavasita
{%Vy-avasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ settled, decided, resolved,
determined, ascertained; endeavoured, undertaken,
performed; energetic, taking pains, making effort or
exertion, persevering, endeavouring; planned, de-
signed, schemed; deceived, tricked, cheated; ({%am%}),
n. certainty, ascertainment.
<LEND>
[Page0976-c+ 78]

<L>45498<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasya<k2>vyavasya
{%Vy-avasya,%}¦ ind. having settled or resolved, having
decided; having made effort, having acted with
resolution, having performed.
<LEND>

<L>45499<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasTA<k2>vyavasTA<h>1
{#vyavasTA#} 1¦. {%vy-ava-sthā,%} cl. 1. A. {%-tiṣṭhate,%}
{%-sthātum,%} to be placed or situated asunder; to be
arranged in due order, to be adjusted or settled;
Caus. {%-sthāpayati, -yitum,%} to place or set asunder;
to cause to be properly arranged or settled, decide,
establish; to lay down a law; to perform.
<LEND>

<L>45500<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavatizWamAna<k2>vyavatizWamAna
{%Vy-avatiṣṭhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed asunder,
situated apart; adjusted, arranged, placed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45501<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasTA<k2>vyavasTA<h>2
2. {%vy-avasthā,%}¦ f. arrangement, settlement, placing
apart, separating; placing in suitable order, adjusting,
arranging, arrangement; relative position or state;
placing or setting in or on, fixing on a firm basis,
settlement, decision, decree, statute, rule, law, written
declaration of the law, legal opinion (applied to the
written extracts from the codes of law or proper
adjustment of contradictory passages in different codes
made by decisions of officers attached to the courts
of justice), a decision (in general); engagement,
agreement, contract; course, state, condition, system
or order of things (in general). {%—Vyavasthāti-%}
{%krama (˚thā-at˚), as,%} m. or {%vyavasthātivartana%}
{%(˚thā-at˚), am,%} n. transgression or violation of the
law, disregard of settled rule; breaking an agreement
or contract. {%—Vyavasthātivartin (˚thā-at˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} transgressing the law, breaking an engagement or
contract, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45502<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasTAna<k2>vyavasTAna
{%Vy-avasthāna, as,%}¦ m., N. of Viṣṇu; ({%am%}), n.
regular arrangement or distribution; steadiness, set-
tlement, &c. ({%= vy-avasthiti%} below).
<LEND>

<L>45503<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasTApaka<k2>vyavasTApaka
{%Vy-avasthāpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ settling, adjusting,
arranging in an orderly manner, deciding, establish-
ing, any one who settles or legislates or gives a
legal opinion.
<LEND>

<L>45504<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasTApana<k2>vyavasTApana
{%Vy-avasthāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of placing apart;
placing in order, fixing, determining, appointing,
declaring, deciding, laying down a law; fixing or
placing (in general).
<LEND>

<L>45505<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasTApita<k2>vyavasTApita
{%Vy-avasthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be placed
or arranged in order; laid down (as a law, &c.),
established, fixed, declared, determined.
<LEND>

<L>45506<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasTApya<k2>vyavasTApya<h>1
1. {%vy-avasthāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be established
or declared or settled, to be fixed, &c.; ({%am%}), n.
the state of being established, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45507<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasTApya<k2>vyavasTApya<h>2
2. {%vy-avasthāpya,%}¦ ind. having set or placed in
proper order, having fixed or settled or determined.
<LEND>

<L>45508<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasTita<k2>vyavasTita
{%Vy-avasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing or situated
apart or at a distance, stood aside, separated; ex-
cerpted, extracted; going away; placed in order,
adjusted, harmoniously arranged; staying or standing
or remaining in or on, (with {%vākye,%} abiding in what
is said, obeying); depending on, fixed in or on,
resting on, based, fixed, settled; appointed, agreed,
declared, decided, decreed, constant, restricted. {%—Vya-%}
{%vasthita-vikalpa, as,%} m. an option fixed or de-
clared by law. {%—Vyavasthita-vibhāṣā,%} f. (in gram-
mar) a fixed option or one applicable throughout,
(the prescribed operation being in one case carried out
throughout and in the other omitted throughout.)
<LEND>

<L>45509<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavasTiti<k2>vyavasTiti
{%Vy-avasthiti, is,%}¦ f. the being situated or placed
apart, separation; extracting; arrangement in due
order, settlement, decision, determination, appoint-
ment; rule, statute; remaining firm, constancy,
perseverance; extracting.
<LEND>

<L>45510<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavahA<k2>vyavahA
{#vyavahA#}¦ {%vy-ava-hā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jahāti, -hātum,%}
to abandon, give up, relinquish.
<LEND>

<L>45511<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavahAya<k2>vyavahAya
{%Vy-avahāya,%}¦ ind. having abandoned or relin-
quished.
<LEND>

<L>45512<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavahAsa<k2>vyavahAsa
{#vyavahAsa#}¦ {%vy-avahāsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%has%}
with {%ava%} and {%vi%}), mutual laughter.
<LEND>

<L>45513<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavahita<k2>vyavahita
{#vyavahita#}¦ {%vy-avahita.%} See under {%vy-ava-%}
{%dhā,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>45514<pc>0976-c<k1>vyavahf<k2>vyavahf
{#vyavahf#}¦ {%vy-ava-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te,%}
{%-hartum,%} to act, behave; to manage, transact, deal
with, traffic with, carry on a business or trade; to stake
at play (with gen. of the thing staked, = rt. 2. {%paṇ,%}
[Page0977-a+ 81]
q. v.); to carry on legal proceedings, litigate, contend;
to recover, regain, obtain; to distinguish.
<LEND>

<L>45515<pc>0977-a<k1>vyavaharat<k2>vyavaharat
{%Vy-avaharat, an, antī, at,%}¦ acting, behaving, con-
ducting one's self.
<LEND>

<L>45516<pc>0977-a<k1>vyavahartavya<k2>vyavahartavya
{%Vy-avahartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be transacted or
done; to be litigated or decided judicially; to be
dealt with.
<LEND>

<L>45517<pc>0977-a<k1>vyavahartf<k2>vyavahartf
{%Vy-avahartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who acts or trans-
acts business, one engaged in any affair; observing
or following established usages; ({%tā%}), m. the manager
of any business, the conductor of any judicial pro-
cedure, a judge, umpire; one engaged in litigation,
a litigant, plaintiff, any one who institutes an action
at law; an associate, partaker.
<LEND>

<L>45518<pc>0977-a<k1>vyavahAra<k2>vyavahAra
{%Vy-avahāra, as,%}¦ m. doing, performing, conduct,
behaviour, practice, action; affair; occupation, work,
profession, business, any pecuniary transaction, usury;
dealing, traffic, commerce, trade; a contest at
law, legal dispute, lawsuit, litigation; legal prac-
tice, judicial procedure, administration of justice (as
the examination of evidence, &c.); a title of legal
procedure, occasion of litigation, any act cognizable
in a court of justice; usage, habit, custom, rule,
law, adherence to law; steadiness, propriety; a con-
tract; mathematical determination or ascertainment;
a sort of tree. {%—Vyavahāra-kāla, as,%} m. the period of
action, a mundane period. {%—Vyavahāra-jña, as,%} m.
a person who understands business, one acquainted with
practice or legal procedure, a young man of age, one
no longer a minor (i. e. one who has passed his
sixteenth year, at which period he can assert his own
rights in a court of law). {%—Vyavahāra-tattva, am,%}
n., N. of a treatise on civil law by Raghu-nandana
(being part of the Smṛti-tattva). {%—Vyavahāra-tas,%}
ind. according to established practice. {%—Vyavahāra-%}
{%darśana, am,%} n. judicial investigation, trial. {%—Vya-%}
{%vahāra-nirṇaya, as,%} m. ‘legal-decision,’ N. of a
work by Śrī-pati. {%—Vyavahāra-pada, am,%} n. a
title or head of legal procedure, occasion of litiga-
tion, (according to Śabda-k. {%= vādinā rājñi nive-%}
{%danam,%} see {%vyavahāra-viṣaya.%}) {%—Vyavahāra-%}
{%pāda, as,%} m. the fourth part or quarter of a legal
process, one of the four stages or divisions necessary
to conduct a regular suit, (these are, 1. {%pūrva-pak-%}
{%ṣa,%} the plaint; 2. {%uttara-pakṣa,%} the defence;
3. {%kriyā-pāda,%} the production of witnesses and
written documents; 4. {%nirṇaya-pāda,%} the decision or
verdict.) {%—Vyavahāra-prāpta, as,%} m. one who has
attained a knowledge of business or legal procedure,
a youth sixteen years of age. {%—Vyavahāra-ma-%}
{%yūkha, as,%} m., N. of a legal work forming part of
the Bhagavad-bhāskara. {%—Vyavahāra-mātṛkā,%} f.
the material or matter of ordinary judicature, legal
process in general, any act or subject relating to the
formation of legal courts or the administration of
justice (arranged under thirty heads in the beginning
of the second book or Vyavahārādhyāya of the
Mitākṣarā, viz. 1. {%vyavahāra-darśanam,%} 2. {%vya-%}
{%vahāra-lakṣaṇam,%} 3. {%sabhāsadaḥ,%} 4. {%prāḍvivā-%}
{%kādiḥ,%} 5. {%vyavahāra-viṣayaḥ,%} 6. {%rājñaḥ kāryā-%}
{%nutpādakatvam,%} 7. {%kāryārthini praśnaḥ,%} 8. {%āh-%}
{%vānānāhvāne,%} 9. {%āsedhaḥ,%} 10. {%pratyarthiny āgate%}
{%lekhyādi-kartavyatā,%} 11. {%pañca-vidho hīnaḥ,%}
12. {%kīdṛśaṃ lekhyam,%} 13. {%pakṣābhāsāḥ,%} 14.
{%anādeyāḥ,%} 15. {%ādeyaḥ,%} 16. {%niyukta-jaya-parā-%}
{%jaye vādi-jaya-parājayau,%} 17. {%śodhita-lekhya-%}
{%niveśanam,%} 18. {%uttarāvadhi-śodhanam,%} 19. {%śo-%}
{%dhite pattrārūḍhe uttara-kartavyam,%} 20. {%uttara-%}
{%lakṣaṇam,%} 21. {%satyottara-lakṣaṇam,%} 22. {%mith-%}
{%yottara-lakṣaṇam,%} 23. {%pratyavaskandanotta-%}
{%ram,%} 24. {%prān-nyāyottaram,%} 25. {%uttarābhāsaḥ,%}
26. {%saṅkarānuttaram,%} 27. {%pratyarthi-kriyā-nir-%}
{%deśaḥ,%} 28. {%uttare pattre 'bhiniveśite sādhana-%}
{%nirdeśaḥ,%} 29. {%tat-siddhau siddhiḥ,%} 30. {%catuṣ-%}
{%pād-vyavahāraḥ%}). {%—Vyavahāra-mārga, as,%} m.
course or title of legal procedure ({%= vyavahāra-%}
{%viṣaya,%} q. v.). {%—Vyavahāra-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. a
characteristic of judicial investigation. {%—Vyavahāra-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having occupation, occupied, work-
ing with. {%—Vyavahāra-vidhi, is,%} m. legal enact-
ment, rule of law, the precepts or code by which
[Page0977-b+ 79]
judicature is regulated, any code of law. {%—Vyava-%}
{%hāra-viṣaya, as,%} m. a subject or title of legal pro-
cedure, any act or matter which may become the
subject of legal proceedings, an actionable business,
(according to Manu VIII. 4-7. there are eighteen
principal heads, viz. 1. {%ṛṇādānam,%} contraction of
debt; 2. {%nikṣepaḥ,%} deposit; 3. {%asvāmi-vikrayaḥ,%}
sale without ownership; 4. {%sambhūya-samutthā-%}
{%nam,%} engaging in business after joining partner-
ship, concerns among partners; 5. {%dattasyānapa-%}
{%karma,%} non-delivery or resumption of what has
been given; 6. {%vetanādānam,%} non-payment of
wages; 7. {%saṃvid-vyatikramaḥ,%} violation of agree-
ment; 8. {%kraya-vikrayānuśayaḥ,%} repenting of
or rescinding either sale or purchase; 9. {%svāmi-%}
{%pālayor vivādaḥ,%} dispute between master and ser-
vant; 10. {%sīmā-vivādaḥ,%} dispute about boundaries;
11. {%vāk-pāruṣyam,%} violence in words, slander,
abuse; 12. {%daṇḍa-pāruṣyam,%} violence by actual
assault; 13. {%steyam,%} theft, larceny; 14. {%sāhasam,%}
robbery with violence; 15. {%strī-saṅgrahaṇam,%} im-
proper intercourse with women, adultery; 16. {%strī-%}
{%pun-dharmaḥ,%} law of man and wife; 17. {%vibhāgaḥ,%}
apportionment of property, inheritance; 18. {%dyūtam%}
and {%āhvayaḥ,%} gambling with dice and with fighting
animals, laying wagers, &c.) {%—Vyavahāra-samuccaya,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a work by Bhoja-deva. {%—Vyavahāra-%}
{%sthāna, am,%} n. a title or occasion of litigation ({%=%}
{%vyavahāra-viṣaya,%} q. v.). {%—Vyavahāra-sthiti, is,%}
f. judicial procedure. {%—Vyavahārāṃśa (˚ra-aṃ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. any part or division of legal procedure.
{%—Vyavahārāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), am,%} n. the body of
civil and criminal law. {%—Vyavahārābhiśasta (˚ra-%}
{%abh˚), as, ā, am,%} prosecuted, accused, proceeded
against legally. {%—Vyavahārāyogya (˚ra-ay˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} unfitted or unsuited for legal proceedings;
({%as%}), m. one incompetent to conduct business, a
minor, any one not yet of age.
<LEND>

<L>45519<pc>0977-b<k1>vyavahAraka<k2>vyavahAraka
{%Vyavahāraka, as,%}¦ m. a dealer, trader.
<LEND>

<L>45520<pc>0977-b<k1>vyavahArika<k2>vyavahArika
{%Vyavahārika, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} relating to practice
or business, transacting business, engaged in business,
practical; relating to an action at law or legal process;
litigant; one who is party to a suit; customary, usual;
({%ikā%}), f. practice, usage, custom; a brush, broom;
a plant ({%= iṅguda%}).
<LEND>

<L>45521<pc>0977-b<k1>vyavahArin<k2>vyavahArin
{%Vyavahārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ customary, usual; acting,
transacting, practising (any business or trade); litigant,
litigating, engaged in a lawsuit; relating to a legal
process or action.
<LEND>

<L>45522<pc>0977-b<k1>vyavahArya<k2>vyavahArya
{%Vy-avahārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be transacted or per-
formed, to be practised (as a duty, trade, business,
&c.); actionable, liable to a legal process; to be
employed or used; customary, usual.
<LEND>

<L>45523<pc>0977-b<k1>vyavahfta<k2>vyavahfta
{%Vy-avahṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ practised, employed, used.
<LEND>

<L>45524<pc>0977-b<k1>vyavahfti<k2>vyavahfti
{%Vy-avahṛti, is,%}¦ f. practice, performance, action,
process. {%—Vyavahṛti-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a part
of the Smṛti-tattva.
<LEND>

<L>45525<pc>0977-b<k1>vyave<k2>vyave
{#vyave#}¦ {%vy-ave (vi-ava-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-avaiti,%}
{%-avaitum,%} to go or pass between, separate; (in
Vedic grammar) to resolve or separate (by inserting
a letter, &c.); to dissolve, decompose.
<LEND>

<L>45526<pc>0977-b<k1>vyavAya<k2>vyavAya
{%Vy-avāya, as,%}¦ m. separation, resolution (into
separate parts), decomposition, dissolution, disap-
pearance; dissipation; loose habits; intervention, in-
terval, intervening space; an obstacle, impediment;
covering, concealment; sexual intercourse, copulation;
purity; ({%am%}), n. light, lustre.
<LEND>

<L>45527<pc>0977-b<k1>vyavAyin<k2>vyavAyin
{%Vyavāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ separating, resolving (into
separate parts), decomposing, pervading, diffusive;
lustful; ({%ī%}), m. a libertine; a drug, aphrodisiac, any
substance or liquid possessing stimulating or exciting
properties.
<LEND>

<L>45528<pc>0977-b<k1>vyaveta<k2>vyaveta
{%Vy-aveta, as, ā, am,%}¦ separated, resolved, decom-
posed (into separate parts), different.
<LEND>

<L>45529<pc>0977-b<k1>vyaS<k2>vyaS<h>1
{#vyaS#} 1¦. {%vy-aś%} ({%vi-aś,%} see rt. 1. {%aś%}), cl. 5.
A. {%-aśnute%} (Ved. also frequently P. {%-aśnoti%}), Perf.
{%vy-ānaśe%} (Vedic forms {%vy-ānaṭ = vyāpnotu,%} Ṛg-
veda VII. 28, 2; {%vy-aśyuḥ = vyāpnuvantu,%} Ṛg-
veda I. 73, 5), {%-aśitum, -aṣṭum,%} to reach, attain
[Page0977-c+ 78]
to, extend to; to obtain, take possession of, possess;
to pervade, interpenetrate, fill, occupy; to fall to
one's share.
<LEND>

<L>45530<pc>0977-c<k1>vyaSnuvAna<k2>vyaSnuvAna
{%Vy-aśnuvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ reaching, occupying,
pervading.
<LEND>

<L>45531<pc>0977-c<k1>vyazwi<k2>vyazwi
{%Vy-aṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. (according to some fr. {%vy-akṣ%}),
singleness, individuality; (in the Vedānta phil.) dis-
tributive pervasion, a distributive aggregate, an aggre-
gate or whole viewed as consisting of many separate
bodies (e. g. an object, such as man, viewed as a
separate part of a whole or constituting a part of the
Universal Soul, while he is himself composed of
parts or individuals; contra-distinguished from {%sam-%}
{%aṣṭi,%} q. v.); power; ({%is%}), m., N. of a preceptor.
{%—Vyaṣṭy-abhiprāya, as,%} m. regarding (a group
of objects) singly or individually.
<LEND>

<L>45532<pc>0977-c<k1>vyaS<k2>vyaS<h>2
{#vyaS#} 2¦. {%vy-aś%} ({%vi-aś,%} see rt. 2. {%aś%}), cl. 9.
P. (Ved. also A.) {%-aśnāti (-aśnīte), -aśitum,%} to eat
up, consume by eating.
<LEND>

<L>45533<pc>0977-c<k1>vyaSva<k2>vyaSva
{#vyaSva#}¦ {%vy-aśva, as, ā, am,%} without horses,
deprived of horses; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi
(father of Viśva-manas). {%—Vyaśva-vat,%} ind., Ved.
like Vy-aśva.
<LEND>

<L>45534<pc>0977-c<k1>vyazwi<k2>vyazwi
{#vyazwi#}¦ {%vy-aṣṭi.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>45535<pc>0977-c<k1>vyas<k2>vyas
{#vyas#}¦ {%vy-as%} ({%vi-as,%} see rt. 2. {%as%}), cl. 4. P.
{%-asyati%} (anomalous ep. Perf. {%vivyāsa%} as if fr. a rt.
{%vyas%}), {%-asitum,%} to throw asunder, cast in different
directions, divide, divide into pieces, separate, sever,
dispose, arrange; to throw about or in various direc-
tions, toss about, scatter, disperse, dispel; to cast aside
or away; to throw over, upset, expel, remove.
<LEND>

<L>45536<pc>0977-c<k1>vyasana<k2>vyasana
{%Vy-asana, am,%}¦ n. the act of throwing in different
directions, separating, separation; individuality; cast-
ing away or dispelling (happiness &c.), violation,
infraction; calamity, misfortune, ill-luck, evil destiny,
fate, fated consequence, destruction, loss, defeat, fall-
ing away, fall; setting (as of the sun or moon); sin,
fault, vice, crime, bad practice, evil habit (said to
arise either from love of pleasure or from anger; ten
vices are enumerated in Manu VII. 47, 48, under
the first head, viz. {%mṛgayā,%} hunting; {%dyūta%} or
{%akṣa,%} gambling; {%divā-svapna,%} sleeping in the
day; {%parivāda,%} calumny; {%striyaḥ,%} addiction to
women; {%mada,%} drinking spirits; {%taurya-trika,%}
dancing, singing, and instrumental music; {%vṛthāṭyā,%}
idle roaming: and eight are said to proceed from
anger, viz. {%paiśunya,%} tale-bearing; {%sāhasa,%} violence;
{%droha,%} insidious injury; {%īrṣyā,%} envy; {%asūyā,%}
detraction; {%artha-dūṣaṇa,%} unjust seizure of pro-
perty; {%vāk-pāruṣya,%} violence in words or abuse;
{%daṇḍa-pāruṣya,%} violence by actual assault: the
number and nature of these vices are variously given
in other books); punishment, execution (of cri-
minals); fruitless effort; incompetence, inability;
throwing one's self into any pursuit, intent applica-
tion or attachment to any object, inordinate addiction,
diligence; air, wind. {%—Vyasana-prasārita-kara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the hand stretched forth for (inflicting)
calamity. {%—Vyasana-prahārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} inflicting
calamity, giving trouble or pain. {%—Vyasana-rak-%}
{%ṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} preserving from calamity. {%—Vyasa-%}
{%nākrānta-tva (˚na-āk˚), am,%} n. distressful condition,
grievous distress. {%—Vyasanātibhāra (˚na-at˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} weighed down with misfortunes, overbur-
dened with calamities. {%—Vyasanānvita (˚na-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} involved in calamity. {%—Vyasanāpluta%}
{%(˚na-āp˚), as, ā, am,%} overwhelmed with calamity.
{%—Vyasanārta (˚na-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} afflicted by
calamity or misfortune, suffering pain. {%—Vyasano-%}
{%daya (˚na-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} followed by or resulting
in calamities.
<LEND>

<L>45537<pc>0977-c<k1>vyasanin<k2>vyasanin
{%Vyasanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ calamitous, unfortunate, un-
lucky; addicted to any kind of vice or evil practice
(as gaming, drinking, &c., see above); vicious, dis-
solute; attached intently to (any object). {%—Vyasani-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%vyasani-tva, am,%} n. calamitousness, calamity;
viciousness, wickedness, dissoluteness; intent attach-
ment.
<LEND>
[Page0978-a+ 81]

<L>45538<pc>0978-a<k1>vyasanIya<k2>vyasanIya
{%Vyasanīya, as,%}¦ m. a vicious person, profligate,
libertine.
<LEND>

<L>45539<pc>0978-a<k1>vyasta<k2>vyasta
{%Vy-asta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cast apart, thrown asunder,
separated, divided, separate, severed, distinct, un-
compounded, simple, broken asunder, broken to
pieces, shattered; different, manifold, various, changed,
altered; thrown or tossed about, scattered, dispersed;
agitated, disturbed, troubled, confused, confounded,
bewildered; cast aside or away, expelled, removed,
spread; thrown upside down, upset, reversed, in-
verted, disordered, disarranged, out of order, uneven,
reverse, inverse, opposite, opposed to, set or struck
against; penetrated, pervaded, inherent in or per-
vading all the several parts of anything, (opposed to
{%sam-asta,%} q. v.); ({%am%}), ind. severally, separately,
partially. {%—Vyasta-keśa, as, ī, am,%} having dishe-
velled hair. {%—Vyasta-tā,%} f. or {%vyasta-tva, am,%} n.
severalty, individuality; several inherence; agita-
tion, bewilderment. {%—Vyasta-trairāśika, am,%} n.
the rule of three inverted. {%—Vyasta-pada, am,%} n.
confused statement of a case (in a court of law),
confusion in accusation and defence (as when a man
is charged with debt his defence is that he has been
struck); a simple or uncompounded word (in gram.,
opposed to {%samasta-pada,%} q. v.). {%—Vyasta-rātrin-%}
{%diva, as, ā, am,%} dividing or separating night and
day. {%—Vyasta-vidhi, is,%} m. inverted rule, any rule for
inversion. {%—Vyasta-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} (a word) whose
proper force or meaning is changed or altered.
<LEND>

<L>45540<pc>0978-a<k1>vyastAra<k2>vyastAra
{%Vyastāra, am,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. {%vyasta + āra%} fr.
rt. 4. {%ṛ%}), the issue of the fluid from the temples of
an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>45541<pc>0978-a<k1>vyasya<k2>vyasya
{%Vy-asya,%}¦ ind. having thrown asunder, having
thrown or tossed about, having dispersed or scattered;
having arranged in order.
<LEND>

<L>45542<pc>0978-a<k1>vyAsa<k2>vyAsa
{%Vy-āsa, as,%}¦ m. distributing or disposing in dif-
ferent directions, distribution or separation into parts,
(in Atharva-veda Prātiśākhya III. 68. said to mean
‘the disjoined or Pada text’); severing; severalty,
distinction, detail; diffusing, extending; diffusion,
extension, width, breadth, the breadth or diameter
of a circle; a particular measure; a fault in pronun-
ciation, a kind of drawl [cf. {%pīḍana, vi-hāra%}]; dis-
posing in order, arranging, an arranger, compiler;
N. of a celebrated sage and author (often called Veda-
vyāsa and regarded as the original arranger of the
Vedas &c. and founder of the Vedānta philosophy
[see {%vedānta%}]; he was the son of the sage Parāśara
and Satyavatī, who afterwards, as the wife of Śāntanu,
gave birth to Vicitra-vīrya and Bhīṣma; he was
therefore half-brother of these latter; Parāśara met
Satyavatī, when quite a girl, as he was crossing the
river Jumnā; their child Vyāsa was called Kṛṣṇa
from his dark complexion, and Dvaipāyana because
he was brought forth by Satyavatī on a Dvīpa or
island in the Jumnā; when grown up he retired to
the wilderness to lead the life of a hermit, but at
his mother's request returned to become the husband
of Vicitra-vīrya's two childless widows, by whom he
was the father of the blind Dhṛta-rāṣṭra and of
Pāṇḍu; he was also the father of Vidura by a slave
girl [see {%vidura,%} p. 918] and of Śuka, the supposed
narrator of the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa: the Viṣṇu-Pu-
rāṇa III. 3. enumerates twenty-eight Vyāsas or
arrangers of the Vedas in the twenty-eight Dvāpara
ages of the Vaivasvata Manv-antara; the first Vyāsa
is said to have been Svayam-bhū or Brahmā himself,
and the twenty-eighth was Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana: the
name Vyāsa seems to have been given to any great
compiler or author, and this title is conferred not
only on the arranger of the Vedas and the Purāṇas,
but also on the compiler of the Mahā-bhārata, the
Brahma-sūtra of the Vedānta philosophy, a Dharma-
śāstra, the Yoga-sūtra-bhāṣya, the Vakra-tuṇḍa-
stotra, the Vakra-tuṇḍāṣṭaka hymns, and the Śiva-
dhanur-veda: the following are synonyms for Vyāsa,
Vādarāyaṇa or Bādarāyaṇa, Dvaipāyana, Kṛṣṇa-
dvaipāyana, Pārāśari, Māṭhara, Kānīna, Sātyavata,
Satya-bhārata, Satya-rata); a Brāhman who recites
or expounds the Purāṇas &c. in public {%(= pāṭhaka-%}
{%brāhmaṇa)%}. {%—Vyāsa-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place;
[Page0978-b+ 76]
({%as%}), m., N. of a commentator. {%—Vyāsa-tva, am,%} n.
the state or title of a compiler. {%—Vyāsa-dāsa, as,%}
m., N. of a chief of the Vaikhānasa sect. {%—Vyāsa-%}
{%deva, as,%} m. the divine sage Vyāsa. {%—Vyāsa-pūjā,%}
f. honour paid to an expounder of the Purāṇas.
{%—Vyāsa-bhāṣya-vyākhyā,%} f., N. of a commentary
by Vācas-pati. {%—Vyāsa-mātṛ, tā,%} f. ‘mother of
Vyāsa,’ epithet of Satyavatī. {%—Vyāsa-vana, am,%} n.,
N. of a sacred forest. {%—Vyāsa-śuka-saṃvāda, as,%}
m. ‘dialogue between Vyāsa and Śuka,’ N. of a
philosophical discourse on the vanity of everything
except religion (said to be extracted from the Mahā-
bhārata). {%—Vyāsa-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Vyāsa-smṛti, is,%} f., N. of a law-book. {%—Vyā-%}
{%sāṣṭaka (˚sa-aṣ˚),%} N. of a hymn. {%—Vyāsāsana%}
{%(˚sa-ās˚), am,%} n. the seat of an expounder of the
Purāṇas. {%—Vyāseśvara-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>45543<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAsIya<k2>vyAsIya
{%Vyāsīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>45544<pc>0978-b<k1>vyasu<k2>vyasu
{#vyasu#}¦ {%vy-asu, us, us, u,%} breathless, without
breath, inanimate, lifeless.
<LEND>

<L>45545<pc>0978-b<k1>vyah<k2>vyah
{#vyah#}¦ {%vy-ah (vi-ah),%} Perf. {%-āha%} (see rt. 3. {%ah%}),
to explain, assign a reason.
<LEND>

<L>45546<pc>0978-b<k1>vyahna<k2>vyahna
{#vyahna#}¦ {%vy-ahna, as, ā, am%} (according to Vopa-
deva III. 42. the loc. may be {%vy-ahne, vy-ahani,%}
or {%vy-ahni%}), done or happening on separate days;
(according to some) done or produced in two days.
<LEND>

<L>45547<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkaraRa<k2>vyAkaraRa
{#vyAkaraRa#}¦ {%vy-ākaraṇa.%} See under {%vy-ā-kṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>45548<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkIrRa<k2>vyAkIrRa
{#vyAkIrRa#}¦ {%vy-ākīrṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%kṝ%}
with {%ā%} and {%vi%}), scattered or tossed in every direction,
thrown about or away. {%—Vyākīrṇa-keśara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a disordered or rough mane. {%—Vyākīrṇa-%}
{%mālya-kavara, as, ā, am,%} variegated with inter-
spersed garlands. {%—Vyākīrṇārcis (˚ṇa-ar˚), is, is,%}
{%is,%} Ved. having scattered or divided flames.
<LEND>

<L>45549<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkuYcita<k2>vyAkuYcita
{#vyAkuYcita#}¦ {%vy-ākuñcita, as, ā, am,%} distorted,
crooked, contracted, curved.
<LEND>

<L>45550<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkula<k2>vyAkula
{#vyAkula#}¦ {%vy-ākula, as, ā, am,%} confounded,
confused, agitated, discomposed, bewildered, per-
plexed, troubled, dimmed, overcome with fear; busily
occupied about anything. {%—Vyākula-citta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} or {%vyākula-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%vyākula-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%vyākulātman (˚la-āt˚), ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} agitated or perplexed in mind, flurried, having
a mind distracted with grief. {%—Vyākula-tā,%} f. or
{%vyākula-tva, am,%} n. perturbation, agitation, per-
plexity, bewilderment, alarm. {%—Vyākulī-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to bewilder, render confused
or perplexed, trouble. {%—Vyākulī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bha-%}
{%vati,%} &c., to become perplexed. {%—Vyākulendriya%}
{%(˚la-in˚), as, ā, am,%} having the senses bewildered,
one who has lost his senses, discomposed, ruffled.
<LEND>

<L>45551<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkulaya<k2>vyAkulaya
{%Vyākulaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vyākulayati, -yitum,%} to
agitate, flurry, confuse, frighten.
<LEND>

<L>45552<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkulita<k2>vyAkulita
{%Vyākulita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, flurried, perplexed,
confounded, alarmed.
<LEND>

<L>45553<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkUti<k2>vyAkUti
{#vyAkUti#}¦ {%vy-ākūti, is,%} f. wrong or evil in-
tention, fraud, deception, disguise ({%= bhaṅgi%}).
<LEND>

<L>45554<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkf<k2>vyAkf
{#vyAkf#}¦ {%vy-ā-kṛ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kurute, -kartum,%} to undo, decompose, analyse,
separate, divide; to expound, explain, utter.
<LEND>

<L>45555<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkaraRa<k2>vyAkaraRa
{%Vy-ākaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. undoing, analysis, explaining,
expounding; grammatical analysis, grammar (regarded
as one of the Vedāṅgas, see {%vedāṅga,%} p. 964,
col. 3). {%—Vyākaraṇa-prakriyā,%} f. grammatical for-
mation of a word, etymology. {%—Vyākaraṇa-siddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} established by grammar, conformable to
grammar, grammatical. {%—Vyākaraṇāgama (˚ṇa-%}
{%āg˚), as,%} m. traditional rules of grammar.
<LEND>

<L>45556<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkAra<k2>vyAkAra
{%Vy-ākāra, as,%}¦ m. transformation, change of form,
distortion, deformity.
<LEND>

<L>45557<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkfta<k2>vyAkfta
{%Vy-ākṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ analysed, decomposed, sepa-
rated, expounded, explained, made clear; transformed,
disfigured, deformed, distorted, changed.
<LEND>

<L>45558<pc>0978-b<k1>vyAkfti<k2>vyAkfti
{%Vy-ākṛti, is,%}¦ f. analysing, explaining, making
clear; grammar; change of form, development.
<LEND>
[Page0978-c+ 76]

<L>45559<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkftya<k2>vyAkftya
{%Vy-ākṛtya,%}¦ ind. having separated.
<LEND>

<L>45560<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkfz<k2>vyAkfz
{#vyAkfz#}¦ {%vy-ā-kṛṣ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-kar-%}
{%ṣati, -karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to draw or drag in
different directions, draw apart, separate; to draw off
or away, take off, put off, throw off; to remove.
<LEND>

<L>45561<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkfzwa<k2>vyAkfzwa
{%Vy-ākṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn off, taken off,
thrown off.
<LEND>

<L>45562<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkoSa<k2>vyAkoSa
{#vyAkoSa#}¦ {%vy-ākośa, as, ā, am,%} expanded,
blossomed, blown (as a flower).
<LEND>

<L>45563<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkoza<k2>vyAkoza
{%Vy-ākoṣa, as, ā, am, = vy-ākośa%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>45564<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkruS<k2>vyAkruS
{#vyAkruS#}¦ {%vy-ā-kruś (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati,%}
{%-kroṣṭum,%} to cry out aloud, complain, lament.
<LEND>

<L>45565<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkroSat<k2>vyAkroSat
{%Vy-ākrośat, an, antī, at,%}¦ crying out aloud, mak-
ing loud lamentations.
<LEND>

<L>45566<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkzip<k2>vyAkzip
{#vyAkzip#}¦ {%vy-ā-kṣip (vi-ā-),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-kṣipati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw or toss about;
to carry away; to stretch out or forth, open; to
shoot off (as a bow).
<LEND>

<L>45567<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkzipta<k2>vyAkzipta
{%Vy-ākṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ tossed hither and thither,
tossed about; torn asunder, carried away, distracted,
stretched out, stretched forth. {%—Vyākṣipta-manas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} or {%vyākṣipta-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%}
having the mind or heart tossed about, distracted in
mind.
<LEND>

<L>45568<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkzepa<k2>vyAkzepa
{%Vy-ākṣepa, as,%}¦ m. throwing or tossing about;
obstruction, hinderance, delay, ({%a-vyākṣepa,%} absence
of delay.)
<LEND>

<L>45569<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAkzoBa<k2>vyAkzoBa
{#vyAkzoBa#}¦ {%vy-ā-kṣobha, as,%} m. commotion,
perturbation, agitation, disturbed state, disturbance.
<LEND>

<L>45570<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAKyA<k2>vyAKyA<h>1
{#vyAKyA#} 1¦. {%vy-ā-khyā (vi-ā-),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-khyāti, -khyātum,%} to explain in detail, expound,
interpret, illustrate; to speak at length, tell in full;
to relate, narrate, tell (a story); to communicate,
inform; to name, call: Pass. {%-khyāyate,%} to be ex-
plained: Desid. {%-cikhyāsati,%} to intend or wish to
explain, be about to expound.
<LEND>

<L>45571<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAKyA<k2>vyAKyA<h>2
2. {%vy-ākhyā,%}¦ f. explanation, exposition, interpreta-
tion, gloss, comment, paraphrase. {%—Vyākhyāgamya%}
{%(˚yā-āg˚), am,%} n. anything which can only be under-
stood by explanation, a kind of {%uttarābhāsa,%} q. v.;
indistinct assertion or declaration (said to proceed from
grammatical inaccuracy or faulty construction), any
obscure statement or passage. {%—Vyākhyā-sudhā,%} f.
‘nectar of exposition,’ N. of a commentary on the
Amara-koṣa by Bhānujī-dīkṣita.
<LEND>

<L>45572<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAKyAta<k2>vyAKyAta
{%Vy-ākhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ explained in detail, ex-
pounded, interpreted, illustrated; spoken in full,
related, narrated, told, spoken, said; conquered, over-
come (?).
<LEND>

<L>45573<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAKyAtavya<k2>vyAKyAtavya
{%Vy-ākhyātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ requiring to be ex-
pounded or commented upon.
<LEND>

<L>45574<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAKyAtf<k2>vyAKyAtf
{%Vy-ākhyātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. an explainer, commentator,
expounder.
<LEND>

<L>45575<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAKyAna<k2>vyAKyAna
{%Vy-ākhyāna, am,%}¦ n. explaining, expounding,
commenting; explanation, exposition; gloss, com-
ment, interpretation. {%—Vyākhyāna-yogya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} deserving exposition.
<LEND>

<L>45576<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAKyeya<k2>vyAKyeya
{%Vy-ākhyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be explained or ex-
pounded, to be described.
<LEND>

<L>45577<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAciKyAsitagranTa<k2>vyAciKyAsitagranTa
{%Vyācikhyāsita-grantha, as,%}¦ m. one who is about
to explain a book.
<LEND>

<L>45578<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAGawwana<k2>vyAGawwana
{#vyAGawwana#}¦ {%vy-āghaṭṭana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%ghaṭṭ%}
with {%ā%} and {%vi%}), rubbing together, friction; churning.
<LEND>

<L>45579<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAGawwita<k2>vyAGawwita
{%Vy-āghaṭṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed together, rubbed;
churned, stirred.
<LEND>

<L>45580<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAGAta<k2>vyAGAta
{#vyAGAta#}¦ {%vy-āghāta, as,%} m. (fr. {%vy-ā-han%}),
striking against, beating, wounding, destroying, de-
struction; a blow, stroke; obstacle, impediment, hin-
derance; the thirteenth of the astronomical Yogas;
the tree Cassia Fistula; a particular figure of rhetoric
(described as the production of two different effects
from a similar cause or by similar agency); contra-
diction, inconsistency of statement.
<LEND>

<L>45581<pc>0978-c<k1>vyAGAtaka<k2>vyAGAtaka
{%Vy-āghātaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} striking against,
opposing, thwarting, hindering, impeding, resisting;
one who opposes or resists, an obstructor.
<LEND>
[Page0979-a+ 76]

<L>45582<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGAtin<k2>vyAGAtin
{%Vy-āghātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ one who strikes against or
opposes or resists, an opposer; obstructing, opposing,
resisting.
<LEND>

<L>45583<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGuw<k2>vyAGuw
{#vyAGuw#}¦ {%vy-ā-ghuṭ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-ghoṭate,%}
cl. 6. P. {%-ghuṭati, -ghoṭitum,%} to turn back, return.
<LEND>

<L>45584<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGuwita<k2>vyAGuwita
{%Vy-āghuṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned back, returned.
<LEND>

<L>45585<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGuwya<k2>vyAGuwya
{%Vy-āghuṭya,%}¦ ind. having returned.
<LEND>

<L>45586<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGuz<k2>vyAGuz
{#vyAGuz#}¦ {%vy-ā-ghuṣ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-gho-%}
{%ṣati, -ghoṣitum,%} to sound aloud: Caus. {%-ghoṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to call out aloud, shout or proclaim
aloud.
<LEND>

<L>45587<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGuzwa<k2>vyAGuzwa
{%Vy-āghuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded aloud, loud-
sounding, resounding.
<LEND>

<L>45588<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGozayat<k2>vyAGozayat
{%Vy-āghoṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ proclaiming aloud.
<LEND>

<L>45589<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGUrR<k2>vyAGUrR
{#vyAGUrR#}¦ {%vy-ā-ghūrṇ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-ghūrṇati, -te, -ghūrṇitum,%} to whirl or wave about,
shake to and fro.
<LEND>

<L>45590<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGUrRamAna<k2>vyAGUrRamAna
{%Vy-āghūrṇamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ whirling or wav-
ing about.
<LEND>

<L>45591<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGUrRita<k2>vyAGUrRita
{%Vy-āghūrṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ whirled about, tossed
hither and thither, wheeled about, agitated, whirling
round, tottering, shaking about, waving.
<LEND>

<L>45592<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGf<k2>vyAGf
{#vyAGf#}¦ {%vy-ā-ghṛ (vi-ā-),%} Caus. {%-ghārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} Ved. to sprinkle round or over, besprinkle.
<LEND>

<L>45593<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGAraRa<k2>vyAGAraRa
{%Vy-āghāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>45594<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGArita<k2>vyAGArita
{%Vy-āghārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ besprinkled, sprinkled
with oil or ghee.
<LEND>

<L>45595<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGra<k2>vyAGra
{#vyAGra#}¦ {%vyāghra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%ghrā%} with {%ā%}
and {%vi%}), a tiger, ({%citra-vyāghra,%} ‘spotted tiger,’ a
hunting leopard; in the Vahni-Purāṇa tigers are
said to be the offspring of Kaśyapa's wife, Daṃṣṭrā);
any eminent person, best, pre-eminent (at the end
of a comp., cf. {%puruṣa-v˚%} and see {%ṛṣabha, siṃha,%}
which are also used as the last member of com-
pounds to express ‘eminence’); a red variety of the
castor-oil plant ({%= raktairaṇḍa%}); the tree Pon-
gamia Glabra or Galedupa Arborea ({%= karañja%});
N. of the author of a law-book; ({%ī%}), f. a female
tiger, tigress; a sort of prickly nightshade, Solanum
Jacquini {%(= kaṇṭakārī)%}. {%—Vyāghra-carman, a,%} n.
a tiger's skin. {%—Vyāghracarma-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made of a tiger's skin. {%—Vyāghra-tā,%} f. or {%vyāghra-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state or condition of a tiger. {%—Vyā-%}
{%ghra-dala, as,%} m. the castor-oil tree or a red variety
of it. {%—Vyāghra-nakha, as,%} m. a tiger's claw; a
particular plant ({%= snuhī%}); a kind of perfume;
({%am%}), n. a kind of medicinal herb with a fragrant
root, (in Hindī called {%baghnahā%}); a sort of per-
fume, (in this sense also {%ī,%} f.); a scratch, impres-
sion of a finger-nail. {%—Vyāghra-nakhaka, am,%} n.
‘tiger's claw,’ a scratch, the impression of a finger-
nail. {%—Vyāghra-nāyaka, as,%} m. ‘tiger-leader,’ a
jackal. {%—Vyāghra-pād, -pāt, -padī, -pāt,%} tiger-
footed; ({%pāt%}), m., N. of the author of Ṛg-veda
IX. 97, 16-18 (having the patronymic Vāsiṣṭha);
N. of a grammarian and author of a law-book. {%—Vyā-%}
{%ghra-pāda, as,%} m. ‘tiger-footed,’ N. of a lawgiver;
the plant Flacourtia Sapida {%(= vi-kaṅkata)%}. {%—Vyā-%}
{%ghra-puccha, as,%} m. a tiger's tail; the castor-oil
tree, Palma Christi or Ricinus Communis. {%—Vyā-%}
{%ghra-pura, am,%} n. ‘tiger's town,’ N. of a town.
{%—Vyāghra-bhūti, is,%} m., N. of a grammarian.
{%—Vyāghra-vadhū, ūs,%} f. the female of a tiger, a
tigress. {%—Vyāghra-śvan, ā,%} m. a tiger-like dog.
{%—Vyāghrāṭa (˚ra-aṭa), as,%} m. a skylark {%(=%}
{%bharad-vāja)%}. {%—Vyāghrādanī (˚ra-ad˚),%} f. a
particular plant {%(= tri-vṛtā)%}. {%—Vyāghrāsya (˚ra-%}
{%ās˚), am,%} n. the mouth or face of a tiger; ({%as%}), m.
‘tiger-faced,’ a cat.
<LEND>

<L>45596<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAGrI<k2>vyAGrI
{%Vyāghrī,%}¦ f. See under {%vyāghra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>45597<pc>0979-a<k1>vyANgi<k2>vyANgi
{#vyANgi#}¦ {%vyāṅgi, is,%} m. a patronymic from
Vy-aṅga.
<LEND>

<L>45598<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAcakz<k2>vyAcakz
{#vyAcakz#}¦ {%vy-ā-cakṣ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe,%}
{%-caṣṭum,%} to recite, rehearse (Ved.); to explain,
comment upon.
<LEND>

<L>45599<pc>0979-a<k1>vyAcakzARa<k2>vyAcakzARa
{%Vy-ācakṣāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ reciting; explaining.
<LEND>
[Page0979-b+ 75]

<L>45600<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAja<k2>vyAja
{#vyAja#}¦ {%vy-āja, as,%} m. (fr. {%vy-aj%}), deceit,
deception, fraud, craft, art, cunning; disguise (either
of purpose or of person); semblance, appearance,
pretext, pretence (sometimes at the end of comps.,
e. g. {%mṛgayā-vyājena,%} under the pretext of hunt-
ing); contrivance, means; wickedness. {%—Vyāja-%}
{%nindā,%} f. ‘artful censure,’ a particular figure of
rhetoric (praise veiled under apparent censure);
ironical praise. {%—Vyāja-bhānu-jit, t,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Vyāja-stuti, is,%} f. ‘artful praise,’ indirect
eulogy, praise or censure conveyed in language that
expresses the contrary (as when from blame praise
is expressed, and when from praise blame); ironical
commendation. {%—Vyājī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c.,
to hold out as a pretence or pretext. {%—Vyājī-kṛtya,%}
ind. having held out as a pretext, having pretended
{%(= apadiśya)%}. {%—Vyājokti (˚ja-uk˚), is,%} f. covert
allusion (intended to mislead), innuendo.
<LEND>

<L>45601<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAqa<k2>vyAqa
{#vyAqa#}¦ {%vyāḍa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%aḍ%}
with {%vi%}), a snake; a carnivorous animal, beast of
prey; N. of Indra; a villain, rogue; a proper N.;
[cf. {%vyāla.%}] {%—Vyāḍāyudha (˚ḍa-āy˚), am,%} n. a sort
of vegetable perfume ({%= vyāghra-nakha%}).
<LEND>

<L>45602<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAqi<k2>vyAqi
{%Vyāḍi, is,%}¦ m. (a patronymic fr. {%vyāḍa%}), N. of a
celebrated grammarian and lexicographer ({%= vin-%}
{%dhya-vāsin, nandinī-tanaya,%} q. q. v. v.).
<LEND>

<L>45603<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAqIya<k2>vyAqIya
{%Vyāḍīya, as,%}¦ m. a follower of Vyāḍi.
<LEND>

<L>45604<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAtan<k2>vyAtan
{#vyAtan#}¦ {%vy-ā-tan (vi-ā-),%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-ta-%}
{%noti, -tanute, -tanitum,%} to stretch out, extend; to
spread about or over, ({%vyātenire,%} they were spread
about, Kirāt. XV. 42); to display; to produce, cause.
<LEND>

<L>45605<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAtyukzI<k2>vyAtyukzI
{#vyAtyukzI#}¦ {%vy-āty-ukṣī,%} f. (probably fr. rt.
1. {%ukṣ%} with {%ati, ā,%} and {%vi,%} cf. {%vy-ābhy-ukṣī%}),
bathing together for amusement, mutual splashing
and sporting in water ({%= rasikānām anyonyaṃ%}
{%jala-krīḍanam%}).
<LEND>

<L>45606<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdA<k2>vyAdA
{#vyAdA#}¦ {%vy-ā-dā (vi-ā-),%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadāti,%}
{%-datte, -dātum,%} to open wide, open, separate; to
open the mouth, (also with {%mukham%} or similar
words added); to make large or broad.
<LEND>

<L>45607<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAtta<k2>vyAtta
{%Vy-ātta, as, ā, am,%}¦ opened, open, wide open,
spread, extended, expanded, vast; ({%am%}), n. the open
mouth. {%—Vyāttānana (˚ta-ān˚)%} or {%vyāttāsya (˚ta-%}
{%ās˚), as, ā, am,%} open-mouthed.
<LEND>

<L>45608<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdadAna<k2>vyAdadAna
{%Vy-ādadāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ opening (especially the
mouth).
<LEND>

<L>45609<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdAna<k2>vyAdAna
{%Vy-ādāna, am,%}¦ n. opening, setting open or ajar.
<LEND>

<L>45610<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdAya<k2>vyAdAya
{%Vy-ādāya,%}¦ ind. having opened; having opened
the mouth, having gaped (with wonder &c.); with
the mouth open.
<LEND>

<L>45611<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdita<k2>vyAdita
{%Vy-ādita, as, ā, am%}¦ (ep. for {%vy-ātta%}), opened
(applied especially to the mouth). {%—Vyāditāsya (˚ta-%}
{%ās˚), as, ā, am,%} open-mouthed.
<LEND>

<L>45612<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdiS<k2>vyAdiS
{#vyAdiS#}¦ {%vy-ā-diś (vi-ā-),%} cl. 3. 6. P. {%-di-%}
{%deṣṭi, -diśati, -deṣṭum,%} to point out separately,
divide among, distribute; to point out, show; to
explain, inform, teach; to prescribe, order, charge,
command (with acc. of the person); to assign, ap-
point (to any duty); to give an order or command;
to speak about any one (acc.); to declare, foretel.
<LEND>

<L>45613<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdiSa<k2>vyAdiSa
{%Vy-ādiśa, as,%}¦ m., N. of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>45614<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdiSya<k2>vyAdiSya
{%Vy-ādiśya,%}¦ ind. having pointed out, having pre-
scribed or ordered, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45615<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdizwa<k2>vyAdizwa
{%Vy-ādiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ assigned or divided sepa-
rately, distributed; pointed out, explained, instructed,
taught; prescribed, ordered, charged, commanded;
declared, indicated, foretold.
<LEND>

<L>45616<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdIrGa<k2>vyAdIrGa
{#vyAdIrGa#}¦ {%vy-ādīrgha, as, ā, am,%} very long
or extended.
<LEND>

<L>45617<pc>0979-b<k1>vyAdfS<k2>vyAdfS
{#vyAdfS#}¦ {%vy-ā-dṛś,%} Pass. {%-dṛśyate,%} to be
clearly seen or visible.
<LEND>

<L>45618<pc>0979-b<k1>vyADa<k2>vyADa
{#vyADa#}¦ {%vyādha.%} See under rt. {%vyadh,%} p. 974,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>45619<pc>0979-b<k1>vyADA<k2>vyADA
{#vyADA#}¦ {%vy-ā-dhā (vi-ā-),%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to separate, divide, dis-
[Page0979-c+ 75]
tract: Pass. {%-dhīyate,%} Ved. to be separated or
divided; to be out of health, feel unwell; [cf.
{%vyādhi%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>45620<pc>0979-c<k1>vyAhita<k2>vyAhita
{%Vy-āhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. diseased, unwell, ill,
sick.
<LEND>

<L>45621<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADAma<k2>vyADAma
{#vyADAma#}¦ {%vy-ādhāma, as,%} m. (said to be fr.
rt. {%dhmā%} with {%ā%} and {%vi,%} but perhaps fr. {%vy-ā-dhā,%}
cf. also {%vy-ādhāva%} below), Indra's thunderbolt ({%=%}
{%vajra%}).
<LEND>

<L>45622<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADAva<k2>vyADAva
{#vyADAva#}¦ {%vy-ādhāva.%} See under {%vy-ā-dhū.%}
<LEND>

<L>45623<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADi<k2>vyADi
{#vyADi#}¦ {%vyādhi, is,%} m. (probably to be con-
nected with {%vy-ā-dhā%} above, but also derived fr. rt.
{%vyadh,%} and perhaps connected with 2. {%ā-dhi%}), pain,
sickness, ailment, disease (in general); leprosy; N.
of a son of Mṛtyu or Death. {%—Vyādhi-kara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} causing sickness, unhealthy. {%—Vyādhi-grasta%}
or {%vyādhi-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%} seized or afflicted with
disease. {%—Vyādhi-ghāta, as,%} m. ‘illness-destroyer,’
the tree Cassia Fistula {%(= ārag-badha)%}. {%—Vyādhi-%}
{%ghna, as, ī, am,%} removing or destroying disease.
{%—Vyādhi-durbhikṣa-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%} afflicted
with sickness and famine. {%—Vyādhi-nigraha, as,%}
m. suppression of disease. {%—Vyādhi-nirjaya, as,%} m.
the subduing a disease. {%—Vyādhi-bahula, as, ā, am,%}
frequently visited with disease (as a village). {%—Vyā-%}
{%dhi-bhaya, am,%} n. fear of disease. {%—Vyādhi-yukta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} suffering from illness, diseased, sick.
{%—Vyādhi-rahita, as, ā, am,%} free from disease,
convalescent. {%—Vyādhi-hantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} destroy-
ing or removing disease; ({%tā%}), m. a kind of plant
{%(= vārāhī-kanda)%}. {%—Vyādhy-ārta, as, ā, am,%}
pained with or suffering from disease. {%—Vyādhy-%}
{%upaśama, as,%} m. allaying or curing diseases.
<LEND>

<L>45624<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADita<k2>vyADita
{%Vyādhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ diseased, sick, ill, ailing.
<LEND>

<L>45625<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADin<k2>vyADin<h>3
3. {%vyādhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ diseased, sick, ill.
<LEND>

<L>45626<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADU<k2>vyADU
{#vyADU#}¦ {%vy-ā-dhū (vi-ā-),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-dhū-%}
{%noti, -dhūnute%} (later also {%-dhunoti, -dhunute%}),
{%-dhavitum, -dhotum,%} to shake to and fro, move
or toss about.
<LEND>

<L>45627<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADAva<k2>vyADAva
{%Vy-ādhāva, as,%}¦ m. Indra's thunderbolt; [cf. {%vy-%}
{%ādhāma.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45628<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADuta<k2>vyADuta
{%Vy-ādhuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken about, tossed
hither and thither, shaking, trembling, tremulous.
<LEND>

<L>45629<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADunvat<k2>vyADunvat
{%Vy-ādhunvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ shaking or waving
about.
<LEND>

<L>45630<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADUta<k2>vyADUta
{%Vy-ādhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken about, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>45631<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADUya<k2>vyADUya
{%Vy-ādhūya,%}¦ ind. having shaken or waved about.
<LEND>

<L>45632<pc>0979-c<k1>vyADUyamAna<k2>vyADUyamAna
{%Vy-ādhūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being shaken or
tossed about, being moved hither and thither, being
fanned; flickering.
<LEND>

<L>45633<pc>0979-c<k1>vyAna<k2>vyAna
{#vyAna#}¦ {%vy-āna, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%an%} with {%ā%} and
{%vi%}), one of the five vital airs (that which circulates
or is diffused through the body, see {%prāṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>45634<pc>0979-c<k1>vyAnam<k2>vyAnam
{#vyAnam#}¦ {%vy-ā-nam (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-na-%}
{%mati, -te,%} &c., to bend or bow down.
<LEND>

<L>45635<pc>0979-c<k1>vyAnata<k2>vyAnata
{%Vy-ānata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent down, having the
face bent towards the ground; ({%am%}), n. a kind of
coitus. {%—Vyānata-karaṇa, am,%} n. the posture as-
sumed in the preceding kind of coitus.
<LEND>

<L>45636<pc>0979-c<k1>vyAnaSi<k2>vyAnaSi
{#vyAnaSi#}¦ {%vy-ānaśi, is, is, i%} (fr. {%vy-aś%}), Ved.
one who has pervaded, pervading, penetrating, (Sāy.
{%vy-ānaśiḥ = vyāpnuvat,%} Ṛg-veda III. 49, 3; in
Naigh. III. 1. {%vyānaśiḥ%} is enumerated among the
{%bahu-nāmāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>45637<pc>0979-c<k1>vyAnaSin<k2>vyAnaSin
{%Vy-ānaśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. pervading, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%vyāpana-śīla.%})
<LEND>

<L>45638<pc>0979-c<k1>vyAnah<k2>vyAnah
{#vyAnah#}¦ {%vy-ā-nah,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-nahyati, -te,%}
{%-naddhum,%} to connect mutually, intersperse, inter-
weave.
<LEND>

<L>45639<pc>0979-c<k1>vyAnadDa<k2>vyAnadDa
{%Vy-ānaddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected mutually,
interspersed.
<LEND>

<L>45640<pc>0979-c<k1>vyAnI<k2>vyAnI
{#vyAnI#}¦ {%vy-ā-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati, -te,%}
{%-netum,%} Ved. to pour in separately.
<LEND>

<L>45641<pc>0979-c<k1>vyAp<k2>vyAp
{#vyAp#}¦ {%vy-āp (vi-āp),%} cl. 5. P. {%-āpnoti%} (some-
times also A. {%-āpnute%}), {%-āptum,%} to reach through,
[Page0980-a+ 81]
spread through, go everywhere, overspread, pervade,
permeate, fill up, occupy, cover, fill; to reach as far
as, extend to: Pass. {%-āpyate,%} &c.: Caus. {%-āpayati,%}
&c.: Desid. {%vīpsati;%} [cf. {%vīpsā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45642<pc>0980-a<k1>vyApaka<k2>vyApaka
{%Vy-āpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ pervading, diffusive,
comprehensive, going everywhere, widely spreading,
extending over the whole of anything, extensive, in-
variably concomitant or inherent; (in law) compre-
hending all the points of an argument, pervading the
whole plea; ({%as%}), m. (in logic) ‘the pervader,’ a
pervading attribute, one invariably concomitant (i. e.
always found where some other is found); ({%ikā%}), f.
an impudent woman; ({%am%}), n. an invariably con-
comitant or inherent property or characteristic. {%—Vyā-%}
{%paka-tā,%} f. or {%vyāpaka-tva, am,%} n. pervasion,
diffusion, extensiveness, comprehensiveness; invari-
able concomitance or inherence. {%—Vyāpaka-nyāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. (in the Tantra system) a particular disposition
or arrangement of mystical texts over the whole per-
son, (according to Śabda-k. {%= śirastaḥ pādāntam%}
{%pādataḥ śiro 'ntam mūla-mantra-vinyāsaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>45643<pc>0980-a<k1>vyApana<k2>vyApana
{%Vy-āpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of spreading through or
throughout, pervading, penetrating, penetration, fill-
ing up; covering.
<LEND>

<L>45644<pc>0980-a<k1>vyApanIya<k2>vyApanIya
{%Vy-āpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit to be pervaded or
penetrated, permeable.
<LEND>

<L>45645<pc>0980-a<k1>vyApita<k2>vyApita
{%Vy-āpita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), filled up, filled.
<LEND>

<L>45646<pc>0980-a<k1>vyApin<k2>vyApin
{%Vyāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ reaching through, pervading,
extending over or to, covering; all-pervading, dif-
fusive, comprehensive, co-extensive, invariably in-
herent or concomitant; ({%ī%}), m. ‘the pervader,’ N.
of Viṣṇu; a pervading property or characteristic.
{%—Vyāpi-tva, am,%} n. the state of pervading, exten-
siveness, extent, pervasion, diffusedness.
<LEND>

<L>45647<pc>0980-a<k1>vyApta<k2>vyApta
{%Vy-āpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread through, pervaded,
pervading, extended, thoroughly occupied or pene-
trated by (as the universe by spirit, &c.); encom-
passed, surrounded; filled up, full; comprehended
or included (under a general notion); having inhe-
rent properties, invariably attended or accompanied
(e. g. smoke is invariably attended by fire or neces-
sarily includes or implies fire); obtained, possessed,
possessed of; celebrated, famous; placed, fixed; open,
outspread, expanded. {%—Vyāpta-tama, as, ā, am,%}
most diffused. {%—Vyāptāntara (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
having intervals or holes or recesses filled up.
<LEND>

<L>45648<pc>0980-a<k1>vyApti<k2>vyApti
{%Vy-āpti, is,%}¦ f. the act or state of pervading, per-
vasion, pervadedness, permeation, pervading inhe-
rence, the inherent and inseparable presence of any
one thing in another (as of oil in sesamum seed,
heat in fire, &c.), universal pervasion, inseparable in-
volvedness, invariable concomitance, invariable attend-
ance on an ascertained sign, universal distribution (in
logic), universal accompaniment of the middle term
by the major (e. g. smoke is always pervaded by
fire or fire is necessarily involved in smoke; it is this
idea of pervasion that constitutes the peculiarity of
the Hindū syllogism); universality, universal or
general rule or law without an exception; omni-
presence, ubiquity (as a divine attribute); fulness;
obtaining, gaining, acquiring. {%—Vyāpti-karman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} Ved. whose function is diffusion. {%—Vyāpti-%}
{%graha, as,%} m. apprehension of a general proposition or
of universal concomitance, induction. {%—Vyāpti-jñāna,%}
{%am,%} n. knowledge of pervading inherence or of the
presence of invariably concomitant properties. {%—Vy-%}
{%āpti-niścaya, as,%} m. (in logic) the ascertainment of
pervading inherence or universal concomitance. {%—Vy-%}
{%āpti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing pervasion, univer-
sally diffused, pervading; pervaded, attended by.
{%—Vyāpti-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. sign or proof of uni-
versal pervasion or of the invariable attendance of an
inherent property or characteristic.
<LEND>

<L>45649<pc>0980-a<k1>vyApnuvAna<k2>vyApnuvAna
{%Vy-āpnuvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ pervading, permeating,
penetrating.
<LEND>

<L>45650<pc>0980-a<k1>vyApya<k2>vyApya<h>1
1. {%vy-āpya,%}¦ ind. having pervaded, having pene-
trated, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45651<pc>0980-a<k1>vyApya<k2>vyApya<h>2
2. {%vy-āpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ permeable, penetrable;
capable of being attended by any inherent character-
istic or constantly pervaded or accompanied by it;
({%am%}), n. that which may be the site or locality of
[Page0980-b+ 79]
universal pervasion or of an invariably concomitant
cause or characteristic (e. g. smoke is invariably per-
vaded by fire); the sign or middle term of an infer-
ence, the proof, reason, cause ({%= sādhana, hetu%});
a particular medicinal plant, Costus Speciosus {%(=%}
{%kuṣṭha)%}. {%—Vyāpya-tā,%} f. or {%vyāpya-tva, am,%} n.
permeableness, the state or capacity of being invari-
ably pervaded or attended by; capacity of obtaining.
{%—Vyāpyatvāsiddhi (˚va-as˚), is,%} f. (in logic) im-
perfect conclusion (i. e. where the alleged invariable-
ness of concomitancy is not real).
<LEND>

<L>45652<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApyamAna<k2>vyApyamAna
{%Vy-āpyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being pervaded, being
permeated or penetrated.
<LEND>

<L>45653<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApad<k2>vyApad<h>1
{#vyApad#} 1¦. {%vy-ā-pad (vi-ā-),%} cl. 4. A. {%-pad-%}
{%yate, -pattum,%} to fall away, fall down, fall into
misfortune, perish; to disappear, be inaudible (as a
sound): Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to perish,
destroy, kill; to make worse, injure, hurt, spoil.
<LEND>

<L>45654<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApatti<k2>vyApatti
{%Vy-āpatti, is,%}¦ f. falling into misfortune, ruin;
change, substitution of one thing for another, ({%var-%}
{%ṇa-v˚,%} substitution of one letter for another; as the
change of Visarga into its corresponding sibilant.)
<LEND>

<L>45655<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApad<k2>vyApad<h>2
2. {%vy-āpad, t,%}¦ f. death, decease; ruin, disease,
calamity; derangement.
<LEND>

<L>45656<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApanna<k2>vyApanna
{%Vy-āpanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen into misfortune,
miscarried, failed; dead, deceased, expired, killed,
perished; diseased; deranged, disordered; hurt,
injured; changed, altered, substituted (as one letter
or symbol for another, especially applied to the
change of the Visarjanīya or Visarga to its corres-
ponding sibilants; when this symbol remains un-
changed it is called {%Vikrānta%}).
<LEND>

<L>45657<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApAda<k2>vyApAda
{%Vy-āpāda, as,%}¦ m. destroying, destruction, ruin,
injury, evil design, the wish or project to injure
another.
<LEND>

<L>45658<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApAdaka<k2>vyApAdaka
{%Vyāpādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ destructive, murderous.
<LEND>

<L>45659<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApAdana<k2>vyApAdana
{%Vy-āpādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of destroying, de-
struction, killing, slaying; malice.
<LEND>

<L>45660<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApAdanIya<k2>vyApAdanIya
{%Vy-āpādanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be killed, liable to
death, worthy of death or destruction. {%—Vyāpāda-%}
{%nīya-tā,%} f. the necessity of being killed.
<LEND>

<L>45661<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApAdayitavya<k2>vyApAdayitavya
{%Vy-āpādayitavya%}¦ or {%vy-āpādya, as, ā, am,%} to
be killed, to be put to death.
<LEND>

<L>45662<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApAdita<k2>vyApAdita
{%Vy-āpādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ destroyed, killed, slain;
hurt, injured. {%—Vyāpādita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one
who has killed or destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>45663<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApf<k2>vyApf
{#vyApf#}¦ {%vy-ā-pṛ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 6. A. {%-priyate,%}
{%-partum,%} to be occupied or engaged in (with loc.);
to be busy or occupied about anything (with {%artham%}
or {%hetoḥ%} at the end of a comp.), be employed or
placed in any office: Caus. {%-pārayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to be employed, set to work, set in motion or
action; to occupy with, engage upon (with loc.,
rarely with inst.); to employ, use, apply to any use
or purpose, entrust with, charge, commission, place
(in any office); to place, set, fix (e. g. {%vyāpārayā-%}
{%māsa karam,%} he placed his hand; {%vyāpārayāmāsa%}
{%vilocanāni,%} he fixed his eyes).
<LEND>

<L>45664<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApAra<k2>vyApAra
{%Vy-āpāra, as,%}¦ m. occupation, employment, busi-
ness, trade, profession; exercise, practice, exertion,
activity; work, affair, operation, action, act, trans-
action, doing, performance. {%—Vyāpārāveśa (˚ra-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m. the arising of a determination or resolve
(in phil.).
<LEND>

<L>45665<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApArayat<k2>vyApArayat
{%Vy-āpārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ setting to work, em-
ploying; busying, exercising; placing; moving.
<LEND>

<L>45666<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApArita<k2>vyApArita
{%Vy-āpārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to be busy, set to
work, engaged, occupied, employed.
<LEND>

<L>45667<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApArin<k2>vyApArin
{%Vyāpārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ occupied, busy; transacting
business; engaged in trade, a dealer, trader, agent;
exercising, practising; causing action or motion,
moving, motive.
<LEND>

<L>45668<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApfta<k2>vyApfta
{%Vy-āpṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ occupied, engaged or occu-
pied in (with loc.), engaged, employed, busy, ap-
pointed to any office; ({%as%}), m. a minister, employé,
chargé d'affaires ({%= karma-saciva%}).
<LEND>

<L>45669<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApriyamARa<k2>vyApriyamARa
{%Vy-āpriyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being occupied or
engaged in (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>45670<pc>0980-b<k1>vyApta<k2>vyApta
{#vyApta#}¦ {%vy-āpta, vy-āpti.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>
[Page0980-c+ 74]

<L>45671<pc>0980-c<k1>vyABaYj<k2>vyABaYj
{#vyABaYj#}¦ {%vy-ā-bhañj (vi-ā-),%} cl. 7. P. {%-bha-%}
{%nakti, -bhaṅktum,%} to break to pieces, shatter.
<LEND>

<L>45672<pc>0980-c<k1>vyABagna<k2>vyABagna
{%Vy-ābhagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken to pieces, ṣat-
tered.
<LEND>

<L>45673<pc>0980-c<k1>vyABAz<k2>vyABAz
{#vyABAz#}¦ {%vy-ā-bhāṣ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhā-%}
{%ṣate, -bhāṣitum,%} to speak to, address; to profess,
declare.
<LEND>

<L>45674<pc>0980-c<k1>vyABAzamARa<k2>vyABAzamARa
{%Vy-ābhāṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking to, ad-
dressing.
<LEND>

<L>45675<pc>0980-c<k1>vyABAzita<k2>vyABAzita
{%Vy-ābhāṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken to, addressed;
spoken, pronounced [cf. {%duḥkha-v˚%}]; ({%am%}), n. a
speech.
<LEND>

<L>45676<pc>0980-c<k1>vyABuj<k2>vyABuj
{#vyABuj#}¦ {%vy-ā-bhuj (vi-ā-),%} cl. 6. P. {%-bhujati,%}
{%-bhoktum,%} to bend.
<LEND>

<L>45677<pc>0980-c<k1>vyABugna<k2>vyABugna
{%Vy-ābhugna, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent.
<LEND>

<L>45678<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAByukzI<k2>vyAByukzI
{#vyAByukzI#}¦ {%vy-ābhy-ukṣī,%} f. (probably fr. rt.
1. {%ukṣ%} with {%abhi, ā,%} and {%vi,%} cf. {%vy-āty-ukṣī%}),
gamboling in water, bathing for pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>45679<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAma<k2>vyAma
{#vyAma#}¦ {%vyāma, as,%} m. (probably for {%vy-%}
{%āyāma,%} q. v.), a fathom or the space between the
tips of the fingers of either hand when the arms are
extended; disregard, disrespect (?); smoke (?).
<LEND>

<L>45680<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmana<k2>vyAmana
{%Vyāmana, am,%}¦ n. {%= vyāma%} above.
<LEND>

<L>45681<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmarza<k2>vyAmarza<h>1
{#vyAmarza#} 1¦. {%vy-āmarṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%mṛṣ%}
with {%ā%} and {%vi%}), impatience.
<LEND>

<L>45682<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmarza<k2>vyAmarza<h>2
{#vyAmarza#} 2¦. {%vy-āmarṣa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%mṛś%}
with {%ā%} and {%vi%}), rubbing out, erasure.
<LEND>

<L>45683<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmfzwa<k2>vyAmfzwa<h>1
1. {%vy-āmṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed out, effaced,
rubbed.
<LEND>

<L>45684<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmiSra<k2>vyAmiSra
{#vyAmiSra#}¦ {%vy-ā-miśra, as, ā, am,%} intermixed,
blended together, mingled, confused.
<LEND>

<L>45685<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmIlya<k2>vyAmIlya
{#vyAmIlya#}¦ {%vy-ā-mīlya,%} ind. (fr. rt. {%mīl%} with
{%ā%} and {%vi%}), having closed and opened, having twinkled,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>45686<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmuc<k2>vyAmuc
{#vyAmuc#}¦ {%vy-ā-muc (vi-ā-),%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñ-%}
{%cati, -te, -moktum,%} to emit, discharge.
<LEND>

<L>45687<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmoka<k2>vyAmoka
{%Vy-āmoka, as,%}¦ m. release or freeing from, getting
rid of.
<LEND>

<L>45688<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmuh<k2>vyAmuh
{#vyAmuh#}¦ {%vy-ā-muh (vi-ā-),%} cl. 4. P. {%-muhyati,%}
&c., to become stupified or bewildered, to be infatu-
ated: Caus. {%-mohayati, -yitum,%} to stupify, bewilder,
perplex, infatuate.
<LEND>

<L>45689<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmUQa<k2>vyAmUQa
{%Vy-āmūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely stupified, thoroughly
infatuated or bewildered, bewitched.
<LEND>

<L>45690<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmoha<k2>vyAmoha
{%Vy-āmoha, as,%}¦ m. bewilderment, embarrassment,
error, foolishness.
<LEND>

<L>45691<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmohita<k2>vyAmohita
{%Vy-āmohita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bewildered, infatuated.
<LEND>

<L>45692<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmfj<k2>vyAmfj
{#vyAmfj#}¦ {%vy-ā-mṛj (vi-ā-),%} cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi,%}
&c., to rub off.
<LEND>

<L>45693<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAmfzwa<k2>vyAmfzwa<h>2
2. {%vy-āmṛṣṭa,%}¦ rubbed off. {%—Vyāmṛṣṭa-ti-%}
{%laka, as, ā, am,%} one who has the Tilaka mark
rubbed off.
<LEND>

<L>45694<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAyam<k2>vyAyam
{#vyAyam#}¦ {%vy-ā-yam (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati%}
(Ved. and ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%-yantum, -yamitum,%} to
draw apart or asunder, stretch or draw out, extend;
to drag or tear off (P.); to struggle or contend about
(loc.), fight together (usually A.); to make efforts,
strive, endeavour; to sport, dally: Caus. {%-yamayati%} or
{%-yāmayati, -yitum,%} to cause to stretch out or struggle,
make great effort or exertion, take exercise.
<LEND>

<L>45695<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAyacCat<k2>vyAyacCat
{%Vy-āyacchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ struggling or contend-
ing about.
<LEND>

<L>45696<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAyacCamAna<k2>vyAyacCamAna
{%Vy-āyacchamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ struggling or con-
tending together; fighting, quarrelling.
<LEND>

<L>45697<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAyata<k2>vyAyata
{%Vy-āyata, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn asunder, separated,
drawn out, extended, long, tall; expanded, wide open;
exercised, disciplined; busy, engaged, occupied; hard,
firm; mighty, powerful, strong, intense, deep, much,
excessive; ({%am%}), ind. excessively. {%—Vyāyata-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. firmness. {%—Vyāyata-pāta, as,%} m. a strong
or intense blow, a deep stroke ({%= avagāḍha%}).
<LEND>

<L>45698<pc>0980-c<k1>vyAyAma<k2>vyAyAma
{%Vy-āyāma, as,%}¦ m. drawing or stretching out; a
particular measure of length (= a fathom measured
by the two extended arms, cf. {%vyāma%}); struggling,
[Page0981-a+ 75]
struggle, contention; fatigue, labour; exercise, exer-
tion, manliness, manly effort, athletic or gymnastic
exercise (e. g. playing with heavy clubs, drawing a
bow with a chain in place of a string, alternate rising
and falling at full length on the ground, &c.); busi-
ness, occupation; a difficult passage or impassable
defile, any difficulty. {%—Vyāyāma-śīla, as, ā, am,%}
accustomed to exertion or exercise, fond of taking
exercise, active, robust, athletic.
<LEND>

<L>45699<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAyAmika<k2>vyAyAmika
{%Vyāyāmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to exercise or
exertion, gymnastic, athletic.
<LEND>

<L>45700<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAyAmin<k2>vyAyAmin
{%Vyāyāmin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ taking exercise, undergoing
fatigue, active, athletic.
<LEND>

<L>45701<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAyAmya<k2>vyAyAmya
{%Vy-āyāmya,%}¦ ind. having made exertion or effort,
having taken exercise, having practised gymnastics,
having made to undergo exercise or exertion.
<LEND>

<L>45702<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAyuj<k2>vyAyuj
{#vyAyuj#}¦ {%vy-ā-yuj (vi-ā-),%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yu-%}
{%nakti, -yuṅkte, -yoktum,%} to disunite, separate, part,
become disunited.
<LEND>

<L>45703<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAyujya<k2>vyAyujya
{%Vy-āyujya,%}¦ ind. having disjoined or separated.
<LEND>

<L>45704<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAyoga<k2>vyAyoga
{%Vy-āyoga, as,%}¦ m. a kind of dramatic representa-
tion or composition in one act (belonging to the
Prakaraṇa class, and describing some military or heroic
exploit in which no part of the interest is derived
from female participation, the sentiment of love being
thereby excluded).
<LEND>

<L>45705<pc>0981-a<k1>vyArabDa<k2>vyArabDa
{#vyArabDa#}¦ {%vy-ā-rabdha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%rabh%}
with {%ā%} and {%vi%}), Ved. held on every side, upheld,
maintained, properly carried into effect.
<LEND>

<L>45706<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAla<k2>vyAla
{#vyAla#}¦ {%vyāla, as, ā, am%} (connected with
{%vyāḍa,%} q. v.), wicked, villainous, bad; cruel, fierce;
vicious; ({%as%}), m. a villain, cheat, rogue; a snake;
a beast of prey; a tiger; a hunting leopard; a
vicious elephant; a king; N. of Viṣṇu; a species
of the Daṇḍaka metre; ({%ī%}), f. a female snake;
[cf. Old Germ. and Angl. Sax. <nsi>al.</nsi>] {%—Vyāla-khaḍga,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= vyāla-nakha%} below. {%—Vyāla-gandhā,%} f.
the ichneumon plant {%(= nākulī)%}. {%—Vyāla-grāha,%}
{%as,%} m. a snake-catcher. {%—Vyāla-grāhin, ī,%} m. a
snake-catcher, one who lives by catching and exhi-
biting snakes. {%—Vyāla-jihvā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%mahā-samaṅgā)%}. {%—Vyāla-tama, as, ā, am,%} very
fierce or cruel. {%—Vyāla-daṃṣṭra, as,%} m. a kind
of plant {%(= go-kṣura)%}. {%—Vyāla-nakha, as,%} m.
a kind of medicinal herb with a fragrant root (in
Hindī called {%baghnahā = vyāghra-nakha%}). {%—Vyāla-%}
{%pattrā,%} f. a kind of cucumber {%(= ervāru)%}. {%—Vyāla-%}
{%pāṇi-ja, as,%} m. {%= vyāla-nakha%}. {%—Vyāla-bala, as,%}
m. {%= vyāla-nakha%}. {%—Vyāla-mṛga, as,%} m. a fierce
animal, wild stag; a hunting leopard. {%—Vyāla-rūpa,%}
{%as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Vyāla-vat,%} ind. like a
serpent; like a beast of prey. {%—Vyālāyudha (˚la-%}
{%āy˚), as, am,%} m. n. a sort of vegetable perfume ({%=%}
{%vyāla-nakha, nakhī, vyāḍāyudha%}).
<LEND>

<L>45707<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAlaka<k2>vyAlaka
{%Vyālaka, as,%}¦ m. a vicious elephant.
<LEND>

<L>45708<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAlamb<k2>vyAlamb
{#vyAlamb#}¦ {%vy-ā-lamb,%} cl. 1. A. {%-lambate, -lam-%}
{%bitum,%} to hang down; to stay behind, linger, delay.
<LEND>

<L>45709<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAlamba<k2>vyAlamba
{%Vy-ālamba, as,%}¦ m. the red Ricinus or castor-oil
plant.
<LEND>

<L>45710<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAliK<k2>vyAliK
{#vyAliK#}¦ {%vy-ā-likh (vi-ā-),%} cl. 6. P. {%-likhati,%}
{%-lekhitum,%} to scratch or scrape against, rub against,
touch, graze; to make an incision, scratch, draw
lines, write.
<LEND>

<L>45711<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAliKat<k2>vyAliKat
{%Vy-ālikhat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} scratching, scrap-
ing, piercing; touching, grazing, extending to; draw-
ing lines, delineating.
<LEND>

<L>45712<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAlIna<k2>vyAlIna
{#vyAlIna#}¦ {%vy-ālīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%lī%} with
{%ā%} and {%vi%}), clinging or sticking close together, cluster-
ing, dense, thick.
<LEND>

<L>45713<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAluq<k2>vyAluq
{#vyAluq#}¦ {%vy-ā-luḍ,%} Caus. {%-loḍayati, -yitum,%}
to stir about, agitate.
<LEND>

<L>45714<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAloqita<k2>vyAloqita
{%Vy-āloḍita, as, ā, am, = mathita,%}¦ stirred about,
agitated.
<LEND>

<L>45715<pc>0981-a<k1>vyAlup<k2>vyAlup
{#vyAlup#}¦ {%vy-ā-lup (vi-ā-),%} cl. 6. P. {%-lumpati,%}
{%-loptum,%} to take away, carry off, remove: Pass.
[Page0981-b+ 71]
{%-lupyate,%} to be broken asunder or destroyed, be
divided, be removed, to disappear.
<LEND>

<L>45716<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAlU<k2>vyAlU
{#vyAlU#}¦ {%vy-ā-lū (vi-ā-),%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-lunāti,%}
{%-lunīte, -lavitum,%} to cut off, cut away.
<LEND>

<L>45717<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAlUna<k2>vyAlUna
{%Vy-ālūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off. {%—Vyālūna-mūr-%}
{%dhaja, as, ā, am,%} one who has the hair cut off.
<LEND>

<L>45718<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAlola<k2>vyAlola
{#vyAlola#}¦ {%vy-ālola, as, ā, am,%} rolling about,
quivering, tremulous, shaking, waving. {%—Vyālola-%}
{%kuntala-kalāpa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having dishevelled
locks of hair.
<LEND>

<L>45719<pc>0981-b<k1>vyALi<k2>vyALi
{#vyALi#}¦ {%vyāḷi = vyāḍi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>45720<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvakalana<k2>vyAvakalana
{#vyAvakalana#}¦ {%vy-āvakalana, am,%} n. {%= vy-ava-%}
{%kalana,%} subtraction (in arithmetic).
<LEND>

<L>45721<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvakalita<k2>vyAvakalita
{%Vy-āvakalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ subtracted.
<LEND>

<L>45722<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvakroSI<k2>vyAvakroSI
{#vyAvakroSI#}¦ {%vy-āvakrośī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%kruś%} with
{%ava, ā,%} and {%vi%}), mutual abuse or imprecation.
<LEND>

<L>45723<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvap<k2>vyAvap
{#vyAvap#}¦ {%vy-ā-vap (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-va-%}
{%pati, -te, -vaptum,%} to sow, scatter, strew, (according
to some the Ved. {%vyāvapāti,%} Pāṇ. III. 1, 34, is for
{%vyāvayāti.%})
<LEND>

<L>45724<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvaBAzI<k2>vyAvaBAzI
{#vyAvaBAzI#}¦ {%vy-āvabhāṣī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%bhāṣ%}
with {%ava, ā,%} and {%vi%}), mutual abuse or imprecation;
[cf. {%vy-āvakrośī%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>45725<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvarR<k2>vyAvarR
{#vyAvarR#}¦ {%vy-ā-varṇ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 10. P. {%-var-%}
{%ṇayati, -yitum,%} to enumerate, describe, narrate.
<LEND>

<L>45726<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvarRya<k2>vyAvarRya
{%Vy-āvarṇya,%}¦ ind. having narrated in detail.
<LEND>

<L>45727<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvarta<k2>vyAvarta
{#vyAvarta#}¦ {%vy-āvarta.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>45728<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvalg<k2>vyAvalg
{#vyAvalg#}¦ {%vy-ā-valg (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-val-%}
{%gati,%} &c., to jump, skip, leap; to gallop; to move
quickly about, quiver, throb, be agitated.
<LEND>

<L>45729<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvalgat<k2>vyAvalgat
{%Vy-āvalgat, an, antī, at,%}¦ jumping, leaping, &c.;
throbbing, being agitated.
<LEND>

<L>45730<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvalgita<k2>vyAvalgita
{%Vy-āvalgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ jumped, moved, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>45731<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvahArika<k2>vyAvahArika
{#vyAvahArika#}¦ {%vyāvahārika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%vy-%}
{%avahāra%}), relating to business or practice or action,
practical, active; belonging to judicial procedure,
judicial, legal; what has to be dealt with or is practised
or intended for use, practicable, customary, usual, cur-
rent; ({%as%}), m. a counsellor, minister; ({%am%}), n. use.
{%—Vyāvahārika-tva, am,%} n. practicalness; the state
of belonging to the period of action.
<LEND>

<L>45732<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvahArI<k2>vyAvahArI
{#vyAvahArI#}¦ {%vy-āvahārī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%hṛ%} with
{%ava, ā,%} and {%vi%}), mutual seizing or taking (Vopa-deva
XXVI. 177).
<LEND>

<L>45733<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvahAsI<k2>vyAvahAsI
{#vyAvahAsI#}¦ {%vy-āvahāsī,%} f. (fr. rt. {%has%} with
{%ava, ā,%} and {%vi%}), mutual derision, reciprocal laughter.
<LEND>

<L>45734<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAviDa<k2>vyAviDa
{#vyAviDa#}¦ {%vy-ā-vidha, as, ā, am%} (see 2. {%vi-%}
{%dha%}), of various kinds, multifarious, omnigenous.
<LEND>

<L>45735<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvf<k2>vyAvf
{#vyAvf#}¦ {%vy-ā-vṛ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 5. 9. 1. P. A.
{%-vṛṇoti, -vṛṇute, -vṛṇāti, -vṛṇīte, -varati, -te,%}
{%-varitum, -varītum,%} to cover over, conceal; to obstruct,
stop; to choose, select; to open, (but forms like {%vy-%}
{%āvar%} in Ved. are referred to {%vi-vṛ,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>45736<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvfRvAna<k2>vyAvfRvAna
{%Vy-āvṛṇvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ concealing or hiding
one's self.
<LEND>

<L>45737<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvfta<k2>vyAvfta
{%Vy-āvṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered over, screened;
obstructed; excluded, excepted, (perhaps for {%vy-%}
{%āvṛtta%}); uncovered, opened, (in this sense {%vi%} is
rather privative.)
<LEND>

<L>45738<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvfti<k2>vyAvfti
{%Vy-āvṛti, is,%}¦ f. covering, screening; exclusion;
[cf. {%vy-āvṛtti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45739<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvftya<k2>vyAvftya<h>1
1. {%vy-āvṛtya,%}¦ ind. having covered over; having
obstructed or stopped.
<LEND>

<L>45740<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvfj<k2>vyAvfj
{#vyAvfj#}¦ {%vy-ā-vṛj (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-varjati,%}
&c., {%-varjitum,%} to exclude from; to divide or sepa-
rate into parts.
<LEND>

<L>45741<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvfjya<k2>vyAvfjya
{%Vy-āvṛjya,%}¦ ind. having separated or divided.
<LEND>

<L>45742<pc>0981-b<k1>vyAvft<k2>vyAvft
{#vyAvft#}¦ {%vy-ā-vṛt (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. A. (in cer-
tain tenses also P., see rt. 1. {%vṛt%}), {%-vartate, -varti-%}
{%tum,%} to become separated or singled out from (with
inst.); to become separate or distinct, keep apart;
[Page0981-c+ 79]
to be split asunder or opened; to turn away from,
become averted, go away, depart; to roll or turn
back, return; to turn round, go round, revolve; to
go down, set (said of the sun); to come to an end,
cease, perish: Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to separate
from (with inst. or abl.); to turn away, turn out, set
aside, exclude, put aside, lay down, remove, take
away, destroy, overrule, annul; to throw down, throw
about, strew; to turn about or round, cause to revolve;
to retract; to exchange, substitute one for another,
to contrive (?) : Pass. of Caus. {%-vartyate,%} to be excluded,
&c.: Desid. {%-vṛtsate,%} to wish to separate from, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45743<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvarta<k2>vyAvarta
{%Vy-āvarta, as,%}¦ m. separating from, selecting, revo-
lution, going round; encompassing, surrounding, en-
closing; ruptured navel, umbilical hernia ({%= nābhi-%}
{%kaṇṭaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>45744<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvartaka<k2>vyAvartaka
{%Vy-āvartaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ separating from, ex-
cluding, excepting; turning away from; turning
round; encircling, encompassing. {%—Vyāvartaka-tā,%}
f. state of excluding, exclusion.
<LEND>

<L>45745<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvartana<k2>vyAvartana
{%Vy-āvartana, am,%}¦ n. the act of turning round or
away, rolling round, revolving; a volute, fold, band;
encompassing, surrounding.
<LEND>

<L>45746<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvartamAna<k2>vyAvartamAna
{%Vy-āvartamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming separated
from, keeping apart from; turning away; desisting,
ceasing; turning back.
<LEND>

<L>45747<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvartita<k2>vyAvartita
{%Vy-āvartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to turn away,
made to desist, made to revolve; exchanged.
<LEND>

<L>45748<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvartya<k2>vyAvartya
{%Vy-āvartya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be excluded or excepted.
<LEND>

<L>45749<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvftta<k2>vyAvftta
{%Vy-āvṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ separated or singled out
from; excluded, excepted, free from (with inst.);
opened, split asunder; turned away from, turned back,
returned, desisted, desisting, ceased; turned round, re-
volved; encompassed, surrounded; fenced, screened,
(probably for {%vy-āvṛta%}); praised, hymned (?). {%—Vyā-%}
{%vṛtta-gati, is, is, i,%} turned back from a course,
desisting from any course of action. {%—Vyāvṛtta-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the being separated or excluded from,
&c.; the being non-extensive, (defined to be
{%alpa-deśa-vṛttitvam,%} the existing in few places,
i. e. comprising but few individuals, said of a species
in relation to its genus; opposed to {%adhika-deśa-%}
{%vṛttitvam,%} the characteristic of a genus viewed in
relation to the species it contains.) {%—Vyāvṛtta-deha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the body severed or split asunder.
{%—Vyāvṛtta-buddhi, is,%} f. ‘limited conception,’ the
conception of a class denoting few individuals, i. e. of
a class contained in a higher class. {%—Vyāvṛtta-śiras,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} having the head turned round.
<LEND>

<L>45750<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvftti<k2>vyAvftti
{%Vy-āvṛtti, is,%}¦ f. separation from, selecting, selec-
tion, choice, (perhaps for {%vy-āvṛti%}); exception, ex-
clusion, rejection; turning away; rolling back; roll-
ing round, surrounding; screening, (perhaps for {%vy-%}
{%āvṛti%}); praise, eulogium.
<LEND>

<L>45751<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvftya<k2>vyAvftya<h>2
2. {%vy-āvṛtya,%}¦ ind. having separated from, having
parted with (with inst.), having turned or rolled
away, having turned back.
<LEND>

<L>45752<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvyaD<k2>vyAvyaD
{#vyAvyaD#}¦ {%vy-ā-vyadh (vi-ā-),%} cl. 4. P. {%-vidh-%}
{%yati, -vyaddhum,%} to throw about; to brandish, wave
about.
<LEND>

<L>45753<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAvidDa<k2>vyAvidDa
{%Vy-āviddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or tossed about,
dishevelled; glancing or darting in all directions;
interlaced.
<LEND>

<L>45754<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAviDya<k2>vyAviDya
{%Vy-āvidhya,%}¦ ind. having brandished or waved about.
<LEND>

<L>45755<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAsa<k2>vyAsa
{#vyAsa#}¦ {%vy-āsa, vyāsa-tīrtha,%} &c. See p. 978.
<LEND>

<L>45756<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAsaYj<k2>vyAsaYj
{#vyAsaYj#}¦ {%vy-ā-sañj (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-sajati,%}
{%-saṅktum,%} to attach firmly to, fasten on; to adhere
separately or severally.
<LEND>

<L>45757<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAsakta<k2>vyAsakta
{%Vy-āsakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ firmly attached to or con-
nected with, adhering closely to (any one or any-
thing), devoted to, intent on, occupied with; inher-
ing separately; detached, disjoined, (in this sense {%vi%}
is privative); bewildered, confused.
<LEND>

<L>45758<pc>0981-c<k1>vyAsaNga<k2>vyAsaNga
{%Vy-āsaṅga, as,%}¦ m. excessive attachment, close
adherence, devotion or addiction to, resting or sitting
on; close attachment (of the thoughts), attention,
assiduous application, diligent study; addition; de-
tachment, separation, (in this sense {%vi%} is privative);
perplexity, confusion.
<LEND>
[Page0982-a+ 74]

<L>45759<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAsaNgin<k2>vyAsaNgin
{%Vyāsaṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ attaching one's self or apply-
ing closely to (anything).
<LEND>

<L>45760<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAsajya<k2>vyAsajya
{%Vy-āsajya,%}¦ ind. having firmly attached or fastened
on, having adhered or inhered separately or severally.
{%—Vyāsajya-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} inhering in more sub-
jects than one (as a quality &c.).
<LEND>

<L>45761<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAsidDa<k2>vyAsidDa
{#vyAsidDa#}¦ {%vy-āsiddha, as, ā, am%} (see 2. {%ā-sid-%}
{%dha%}), prohibited, forbidden, restrained; contraband
(i. e. not allowed to be sold except to particular
persons or in certain places).
<LEND>

<L>45762<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAseDa<k2>vyAseDa
{%Vy-āsedha, as,%}¦ m. prohibition, hindrance, restraint.
<LEND>

<L>45763<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAsuki<k2>vyAsuki
{#vyAsuki#}¦ {%vyāsuki, is,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>45764<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhan<k2>vyAhan
{#vyAhan#}¦ {%vy-ā-han (vi-ā-),%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti,%}
{%-hantum,%} to strike at excessively, strike back, repel,
repulse; to foil, disappoint; to impede, obstruct,
delay; to vex: Caus. {%-ghātayati, -yitum,%} to repel,
obstruct.
<LEND>

<L>45765<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhata<k2>vyAhata
{%Vy-āhata, as, ā, am,%}¦ excessively struck at, struck
or hit back; repelled, repulsed; obstructed, impeded;
foiled, disappointed, expelled; confused, alarmed.
<LEND>

<L>45766<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhanyamAna<k2>vyAhanyamAna
{%Vy-āhanyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being excessively
struck back or repelled, being obstructed.
<LEND>

<L>45767<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhf<k2>vyAhf
{#vyAhf#}¦ {%vy-ā-hṛ (vi-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati,%}
{%-te, -hartum,%} to utter or pronounce a sound, speak,
say, tell, declare, narrate, report; to explain; to
answer; to cry, scream.
<LEND>

<L>45768<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAharaRa<k2>vyAharaRa
{%Vy-āharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of uttering or pro-
nouncing, utterance, pronunciation; speech, narra-
tion, explanation.
<LEND>

<L>45769<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAharat<k2>vyAharat
{%Vy-āharat, an, antī, at,%}¦ uttering, pronouncing,
speaking; uttering a cry (as an animal).
<LEND>

<L>45770<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhartavya<k2>vyAhartavya
{%Vy-āhartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be told or declared
or mentioned.
<LEND>

<L>45771<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhAra<k2>vyAhAra
{%Vy-āhāra, as,%}¦ m. utterance, speech, voice; a
word, articulate sound, language; jest, joke, humorous
speech, facetious allusion (a particular Alaṅkāra or
figure in rhetoric).
<LEND>

<L>45772<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhArin<k2>vyAhArin
{%Vy-āhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ speaking, saying.
<LEND>

<L>45773<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhfta<k2>vyAhfta
{%Vy-āhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken, uttered, pronounced,
said, declared. {%—Vyāhṛta-sandeśa, as, ā, am,%} one
who tells news or communicates information.
<LEND>

<L>45774<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhfti<k2>vyAhfti
{%Vy-āhṛti, is,%}¦ f. utterance, speech, voice; an utter-
ance, articulate sound, word; a mystical word pro-
nounced after {%om%} by every Brāhman in commencing
his daily prayers, (cf. Manu II. 76; {%bhūr, bhuvaḥ,%}
{%svar%} are the three great Vyāhṛtis, and {%mahar,%} q. v.,
is said to be a fourth mystical word, cf. {%mahā-%}
{%vyāhṛti.%}) {%—Vyāhṛti-traya, am,%} n. the three Vyā-
hṛtis or mystical words (described above). {%—Vyāhṛti-%}
{%pūrvaka, as, ikā, am,%} preceded by the three mystical
words {%bhūr, bhuvaḥ, svar.%}
<LEND>

<L>45775<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhftya<k2>vyAhftya
{%Vy-āhṛtya,%}¦ ind. having uttered, having spoken.
<LEND>

<L>45776<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhve<k2>vyAhve
{#vyAhve#}¦ {%vy-ā-hve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-hvayati, -te,%}
&c., to call separately or distinctly.
<LEND>

<L>45777<pc>0982-a<k1>vyAhAva<k2>vyAhAva
{%Vy-āhāva, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a separate or distinct call.
<LEND>

<L>45778<pc>0982-a<k1>vyu<k2>vyu
{#vyu#}¦ {%vy-u (vi-u),%} cl. 5. P. {%-unoti,%} Ved. to
urge on, drive forward; to incite, animate, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%prerayati,%} Ṛg-veda V. 31, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>45779<pc>0982-a<k1>vyukz<k2>vyukz
{#vyukz#}¦ {%vy-ukṣ%} ({%vi-ukṣ,%} see rt. 1. {%ukṣ%}), cl.
6. P. A. {%-ukṣati, -te, -ukṣitum,%} Ved. to sprinkle
or pour out; to drip or flow or trickle over (A.).
<LEND>

<L>45780<pc>0982-a<k1>vyuccar<k2>vyuccar
{#vyuccar#}¦ {%vy-uc-car (vi-ud-car),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-carati, -te, -caritum,%} to go forth in different direc-
tions; to go out of the right path; to transgress or
offend against, be faithless or disloyal towards (with
acc.); to commit adultery with (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>45781<pc>0982-a<k1>vyuccarat<k2>vyuccarat
{%Vy-uccarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ offending against, being
faithless towards (with acc.); committing adultery.
<LEND>

<L>45782<pc>0982-a<k1>vyuccaramARa<k2>vyuccaramARa
{%Vy-uccaramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ offending against,
being faithless towards (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>45783<pc>0982-a<k1>vyucCat<k2>vyucCat
{#vyucCat#}¦ {%vy-ucchat.%} See 2. {%vy-uṣ,%} 3. {%vi-vas.%}
<LEND>

<L>45784<pc>0982-a<k1>vyucCid<k2>vyucCid
{#vyucCid#}¦ {%vy-uc-chid (vi-ud-chid),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-chinatti, -chintte, -chettum,%} to cut entirely off,
extirpate, cut up, destroy: Pass. {%-chidyate%} (ep. also
[Page0982-b+ 79]
P. {%-chidyati%}), to be entirely cut off, be extirpated;
to be interrupted, come to an end, become extinct,
cease, fail.
<LEND>

<L>45785<pc>0982-b<k1>vyucCitti<k2>vyucCitti
{%Vy-ucchitti, is,%}¦ f. cutting off, cutting away, cutting
short, destruction, rooting up, extirpation.
<LEND>

<L>45786<pc>0982-b<k1>vyucCinna<k2>vyucCinna
{%Vy-ucchinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off, extirpated, com-
pletely destroyed, interrupted, come to an end, ceased.
<LEND>

<L>45787<pc>0982-b<k1>vyucCettf<k2>vyucCettf
{%Vy-ucchettṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what cuts off or
destroys, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>45788<pc>0982-b<k1>vyucCeda<k2>vyucCeda
{%Vy-uccheda, as,%}¦ m. cutting off, cutting short, de-
struction.
<LEND>

<L>45789<pc>0982-b<k1>vyuta<k2>vyuta
{#vyuta#}¦ {%vy-uta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%vi-ve%}), inter-
woven, woven, sewn; separated, (Sāy. {%= vivikta%});
stretched out, expanded, (according to Sāy. in this
sense fr. rt. {%vye.%})
<LEND>

<L>45790<pc>0982-b<k1>vyuti<k2>vyuti
{%Vy-uti, is,%}¦ f. interweaving, weaving, sewing.
<LEND>

<L>45791<pc>0982-b<k1>vyUta<k2>vyUta
{%Vy-ūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ interwoven, &c. {%= vy-uta%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>45792<pc>0982-b<k1>vyUti<k2>vyUti
{%Vy-ūti, is,%}¦ f. {%= vy-uti%} above.
<LEND>

<L>45793<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutkram<k2>vyutkram
{#vyutkram#}¦ {%vy-ut-kram (vi-ud-kram),%} cl. 1. P.
A. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to go apart
or in different directions, go in a wrong direction,
go astray; to go or pass by, go beyond, overstep,
deviate, go out of the right way, transgress; to dis-
regard, neglect; to go away, depart, leave.
<LEND>

<L>45794<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutkrama<k2>vyutkrama
{%Vy-utkrama, as,%}¦ m. going astray or out of the
right course, going or passing beyond, transgression,
inverted order, reverse or irregular arrangement, de-
rangement, disorder, confusion, contrariety.
<LEND>

<L>45795<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutkramya<k2>vyutkramya
{%Vy-utkramya,%}¦ ind. having gone forth, having
left; having passed by or gone beyond.
<LEND>

<L>45796<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutkrAnta<k2>vyutkrAnta
{%Vy-utkrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone asunder, gone
forth, departed, left; passed by, gone beyond, over-
stepped, transgressed, disregarded, neglected; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of riddle or enigma. {%—Vyutkrānta-dharma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has overstepped his duty, neg-
lectful of duty. {%—Vyutkrānta-rajas, ās, ās, as,%} one
whose impurity has gone away, free from passion.
{%—Vyutkrānta-vartman, ā, ā, a,%} one who has gone
beyond the right path.
<LEND>

<L>45797<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutkrAmat<k2>vyutkrAmat
{%Vy-utkrāmat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going asunder, going
forth.
<LEND>

<L>45798<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutTA<k2>vyutTA
{#vyutTA#}¦ {%vy-ut-thā (vi-ud-sthā),%} Caus. {%-thā-%}
{%payati, -yitum,%} to cause to rise up, stir up, excite
greatly, rouse, instigate, incite, irritate.
<LEND>

<L>45799<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutTAna<k2>vyutTAna
{%Vy-utthāna, am,%}¦ n. ‘excessive rising up,’ great
activity; a kind of dancing or gesticulation; rising
up against, opposition, contradiction, doing anything
prohibited, obstruction, hindering; separate or indi-
vidual exertion, independent action, following one's
own inclination; the completion of a religious act or
vow (as of contemplation or abstraction).
<LEND>

<L>45800<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutTApita<k2>vyutTApita
{%Vy-utthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to rise up, roused,
brought up.
<LEND>

<L>45801<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutpad<k2>vyutpad
{#vyutpad#}¦ {%vy-ut-pad (vi-ud-pad),%} cl. 4. A.
{%-padyate, -pattum,%} to arise or originate clearly or
in any well ascertained manner, to be produced from
or out of; to originate; (in grammar) to be derived
(from a root &c.); to have an etymology; to be
an accomplished scholar, become perfectly proficient
in or conversant with: Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to issue out of, produce, cause; (in gram-
mar) to derive, trace back to a root &c.
<LEND>

<L>45802<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutpatti<k2>vyutpatti
{%Vy-utpatti, is,%}¦ f. production, origin, derivation
(especially of words from roots &c.), etymology; per-
fection, completion, perfect conversancy with or pro-
ficiency in (literature or science); scholarship, learn-
ing. {%—Vyutpatti-pakṣe,%} ind. on the side of deri-
vation or etymology (an expression used by Vedic
commentators when the accentuation is settled by
the affixes and not according to the meaning of
the words).
<LEND>

<L>45803<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutpanna<k2>vyutpanna
{%Vy-utpanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced, generated,
begotten; derived (from a root &c.; {%a-vyutpan-%}
{%nam,%} an underived or primitive word); formed (as a
derivative word); completed, perfected, finished, ac-
complished; quite conversant with or proficient in
(literature &c.); learned.
<LEND>

<L>45804<pc>0982-b<k1>vyutpAdaka<k2>vyutpAdaka
{%Vy-utpādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ giving rise to, pro-
[Page0982-c+ 73]
ducing, originating, productive; tracing or forming
(words).
<LEND>

<L>45805<pc>0982-c<k1>vyutpAdya<k2>vyutpAdya
{%Vy-utpādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ derivable, deducible,
capable of being formed &c.
<LEND>

<L>45806<pc>0982-c<k1>vyutpitsu<k2>vyutpitsu
{%Vy-utpitsu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid.), desirous of
making proficiency (in any science).
<LEND>

<L>45807<pc>0982-c<k1>vyutsad<k2>vyutsad
{#vyutsad#}¦ {%vy-ut-sad (vi-ud-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-sīdati,%}
{%-sattum,%} to be unsettled; to be upset or overthrown.
<LEND>

<L>45808<pc>0982-c<k1>vyud<k2>vyud
{#vyud#}¦ {%vy-ud%} or {%vy-und%} ({%vi-ud,%} &c.), cl. 7. P.
{%-unatti, -unditum,%} Ved. to spring or gush forth; to
wet or sprinkle thoroughly, water, drench.
<LEND>

<L>45809<pc>0982-c<k1>vyutta<k2>vyutta
{%Vy-utta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well sprinkled or wetted,
drenched.
<LEND>

<L>45810<pc>0982-c<k1>vyundat<k2>vyundat
{%Vy-undat, an, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. wetting thoroughly,
sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>45811<pc>0982-c<k1>vyundana<k2>vyundana
{%Vy-undana, am,%}¦ n. the act of well moistening or
wetting.
<LEND>

<L>45812<pc>0982-c<k1>vyudas<k2>vyudas
{#vyudas#}¦ {%vy-ud-as (vi-ud-),%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati,%}
{%-asitum,%} to throw or scatter about, cast in every
direction; to throw off, cast off, reject, lay aside,
give up, abandon, exclude.
<LEND>

<L>45813<pc>0982-c<k1>vyudasta<k2>vyudasta
{%Vy-udasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or scattered about,
cast off, put off, thrown aside.
<LEND>

<L>45814<pc>0982-c<k1>vyudasya<k2>vyudasya
{%Vy-udasya,%}¦ ind. having thrown or scattered in all
directions, having thrown off or put away, having
thrown aside or abandoned.
<LEND>

<L>45815<pc>0982-c<k1>vyudAsa<k2>vyudAsa
{%Vy-udāsa, as,%}¦ m. throwing or scattering in dif-
ferent directions, throwing away or aside, rejection,
exclusion (in grammar); prohibition; disregard for,
indifference to.
<LEND>

<L>45816<pc>0982-c<k1>vyudita<k2>vyudita
{#vyudita#}¦ {%vy-udita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%vad%} with
{%vi%}), disputed, debated, discussed, contested.
<LEND>

<L>45817<pc>0982-c<k1>vyudUh<k2>vyudUh
{#vyudUh#}¦ {%vy-ud-ūh (vi-ud-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ūhati,%}
{%-ūhitum,%} Ved. to push apart or asunder, move away,
move out, remove; to sweep out or away.
<LEND>

<L>45818<pc>0982-c<k1>vyudUhya<k2>vyudUhya
{%Vy-udūhya,%}¦ ind. having moved or placed asunder,
having removed.
<LEND>

<L>45819<pc>0982-c<k1>vyupadeSa<k2>vyupadeSa
{#vyupadeSa#}¦ {%vy-upadeśa, as,%} m. pretext, pre-
tence, plausible but false plea, deception.
<LEND>

<L>45820<pc>0982-c<k1>vyupanI<k2>vyupanI
{#vyupanI#}¦ {%vy-upa-nī (vi-upa-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-nayati, -te, -netum,%} Ved. to lead or bring sepa-
rately or one by one.
<LEND>

<L>45821<pc>0982-c<k1>vyupayuj<k2>vyupayuj
{#vyupayuj#}¦ {%vy-upa-yuj (vi-upa-),%} cl. 7. A.
{%-yuṅkte, -yoktum,%} to become closely attached, be
concerned about.
<LEND>

<L>45822<pc>0982-c<k1>vyuparam<k2>vyuparam
{#vyuparam#}¦ {%vy-upa-ram (vi-upa-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-ra-%}
{%mate%} (ep. also P. {%-ti%}), {%-rantum,%} to leave off or
pause variously; to be at rest, be tranquil, have
repose; to cease, desist from (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>45823<pc>0982-c<k1>vyuparata<k2>vyuparata
{%Vy-uparata, as, ā, am,%}¦ paused, rested, stopped,
interrupted, ceased, desisted; calmed, tranquillized,
tranquil.
<LEND>

<L>45824<pc>0982-c<k1>vyuparama<k2>vyuparama
{%Vy-uparama, as,%}¦ m. pause, cessation, interruption.
<LEND>

<L>45825<pc>0982-c<k1>vyuparamam<k2>vyuparamam
{%Vy-uparamam,%}¦ ind., Ved. leaving off or pausing
variously.
<LEND>

<L>45826<pc>0982-c<k1>vyuparamya<k2>vyuparamya
{%Vy-uparamya,%}¦ ind. having ceased or desisted
from (with abl.), having stopped.
<LEND>

<L>45827<pc>0982-c<k1>vyupaSama<k2>vyupaSama
{#vyupaSama#}¦ {%vy-upaśama, as,%} m. non-cessation,
not ceasing or desisting; inquietude.
<LEND>

<L>45828<pc>0982-c<k1>vyupAram<k2>vyupAram
{#vyupAram#}¦ {%vy-upā-ram (vi-upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-ramate%} (ep. P. {%-ti%}), {%-rantum,%} to desist from, leave
off, cease.
<LEND>

<L>45829<pc>0982-c<k1>vyupAs<k2>vyupAs
{#vyupAs#}¦ {%vy-upās (vi-upa-as),%} cl. 4. P. {%-upās-%}
{%yati, -upāsitum,%} to throw about, distribute.
<LEND>

<L>45830<pc>0982-c<k1>vyupta<k2>vyupta
{#vyupta#}¦ {%vy-upta, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%vi-vap%}), scat-
tered about, disordered, dishevelled. {%—Vyupta-keśa,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having dishevelled hair; ({%as%}), m. epi-
thet of Rudra and Fire (as identified with Rudra).
<LEND>

<L>45831<pc>0982-c<k1>vyubj<k2>vyubj
{#vyubj#}¦ {%vy-ubj (vi-ubj),%} cl. 6. P. {%-ubjati,%}
{%-ubjitum,%} Ved. to uncover, open, display.
<LEND>

<L>45832<pc>0982-c<k1>vyuz<k2>vyuz<h>1
{#vyuz#} 1¦. {%vyuṣ%} (also read {%pyuṣ%}), cl. 4.
P. {%vyuṣyati,%} &c., to burn, (in this sense
perhaps for rt. 1. {%uṣ%} with {%vi%}); to divide, distribute,
[Page0983-a+ 76]
(in this sense also written {%pyus, puṣ, byus, bus%});
cl. 10. P. {%vyoṣayati, -yitum,%} to reject, discharge,
emit, (in this sense also written {%pus.%})
<LEND>

<L>45833<pc>0983-a<k1>vyuzwa<k2>vyuzwa<h>1
1. {%vyuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ burnt, (perhaps to be
written {%vy-uṣṭa,%} see above.)
<LEND>

<L>45834<pc>0983-a<k1>vyuz<k2>vyuz<h>2
{#vyuz#} 2¦. {%vy-uṣ%} (for 1. {%vi-vas,%} q. v., cf.
2. {%uṣ%}), cl. 6. P. {%-ucchati,%} &c., Ved. to shine forth,
shine, dawn, arise.
<LEND>

<L>45835<pc>0983-a<k1>vyucCat<k2>vyucCat
{%Vy-ucchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. shining forth,
dawning, (according to Sāy. {%vyucchantī = tamo%}
{%varjayantī,%} Ṛg-veda I. 49, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>45836<pc>0983-a<k1>vyucCana<k2>vyucCana
{%Vy-ucchana, am,%}¦ n. shining forth, opening, mani-
festation.
<LEND>

<L>45837<pc>0983-a<k1>vyuz<k2>vyuz<h>3
3. {%vy-uṣ,%}¦ f., Ved. shining forth, dawning, (ac-
cording to Sāy. {%vyuṣi = vyucchane sati,%} Ṛg-veda
V. 45, 8, {%= vivāsane%} or {%prakāśane sati,%} Ṛg-veda
VII. 81, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>45838<pc>0983-a<k1>vyuzita<k2>vyuzita<h>1
1. {%vy-uṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. = 2. {%vy-uṣṭa%} below.
<LEND>

<L>45839<pc>0983-a<k1>vyuzwa<k2>vyuzwa<h>2
2. {%vy-uṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ dawned, become day-light
or dawn; become bright or clear; ({%am%}), n. dawn,
day-break (personified as a son of Kalpa, in which
case to be regarded as masc.), day; fruit, result,
consequence.
<LEND>

<L>45840<pc>0983-a<k1>vyuzwi<k2>vyuzwi
{%Vy-uṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. the rising or breaking of
dawn, dawn; increase, prosperity, felicity; fruit,
consequence; a hymn, praise.
<LEND>

<L>45841<pc>0983-a<k1>vyuzita<k2>vyuzita<h>2
{#vyuzita#} 2¦. {%vy-uṣita, as, ā, am%} (fr. 3. {%vi-%}
{%vas%}), lived away, dwelling abroad; dwelt, lodged,
passed (e. g. {%vy-uṣito rātrim,%} he lodged for a
night, i. e. he passed or spent a night). {%—Vyuṣi-%}
{%tāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a king descended
from Daśa-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>45842<pc>0983-a<k1>vyuzwa<k2>vyuzwa<h>3
3. {%vy-uṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ dwelt, lodged; passed;
one who has passed a night or lodged for a night.
<LEND>

<L>45843<pc>0983-a<k1>vyuzya<k2>vyuzya
{%Vy-uṣya,%}¦ ind. having dwelt, having lodged, hav-
ing passed or spent (e. g. {%rātriṃ vy-uṣya,%} having
spent a night).
<LEND>

<L>45844<pc>0983-a<k1>vyus<k2>vyus
{#vyus#}¦ {%vyus.%} See rt. {%byus.%}
<LEND>

<L>45845<pc>0983-a<k1>vyUQa<k2>vyUQa<h>1
{#vyUQa#} 1¦. {%vy-ūḍha, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%vi-vah%}),
married. (For 2. {%vy-ūḍha%} see under {%vy-ūh.%})
<LEND>

<L>45846<pc>0983-a<k1>vyUta<k2>vyUta
{#vyUta#}¦ {%vy-ūta, vy-ūti.%} See under {%vy-uta.%}
<LEND>

<L>45847<pc>0983-a<k1>vyUrRu<k2>vyUrRu
{#vyUrRu#}¦ {%vy-ūrṇu (vi-ūrṇu),%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-ūrṇoti%}
or {%-ūrṇauti, -ūrṇute, -ūrṇavitum%} or {%-ūrṇuvitum,%}
Ved. to uncover, open out, open; to display.
<LEND>

<L>45848<pc>0983-a<k1>vyUrRvat<k2>vyUrRvat
{%Vy-ūrṇvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. uncovering, dis-
playing, revealing.
<LEND>

<L>45849<pc>0983-a<k1>vyUh<k2>vyUh
{#vyUh#}¦ {%vy-ūh%} ({%vi-ūh,%} see rt. 1. {%ūh%}), cl. 1. P.
{%-ūhati, -ūhitum,%} to push or move apart, place
asunder, separate, divide, distribute; to separate,
resolve (vowels, syllables, &c. in Vedic grammar);
to dispose, arrange, place in order; to array, to place
in battle-array, arrange in order of battle; to move
from the proper place, change the position, trans-
pose, alter, disarrange.
<LEND>

<L>45850<pc>0983-a<k1>vyUQa<k2>vyUQa<h>2
2. {%vy-ūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed or moved apart,
widely separated, expanded, developed, wide, broad;
large, great, firm, compact; placed in order or array,
arrayed, marshalled, arranged; placed out of order,
disarranged, transposed, altered. {%—Vyūḍha-kaṅkaṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has arranged or put on armour,
equipped in mail, accoutred, mailed, armed. {%—Vyū-%}
{%ḍha-chandas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having the metres
disarranged or out of order. {%—Vyūḍhoras, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} or {%vyūḍhoraska (˚ḍha-ur˚), as, ā, am,%} having
an expanded chest, broad-chested, ({%vyūḍha = vipula,%}
comm.)
<LEND>

<L>45851<pc>0983-a<k1>vyUQi<k2>vyUQi
{%Vy-ūḍhi, is,%}¦ f. orderly arrangement or disposition,
distribution in various positions, array.
<LEND>

<L>45852<pc>0983-a<k1>vyUha<k2>vyUha
{%Vy-ūha, as,%}¦ m. placing apart, separation, distribu-
tion; separation or resolution (of vowels, syllables,
&c. in Vedic grammar); orderly arrangement, dis-
position, array (e. g. {%caraṇa-vyūha,%} array of Vedic
schools), military array, (various forms of array are
enumerated in Manu VII. 187 and elsewhere, e. g.
{%daṇḍa,%} that like ‘a staff;’ {%śakaṭa,%} ‘a cart;’ {%va-%}
{%rāha,%} ‘a boar;’ {%makara,%} ‘a sea-monster;’ {%sūci,%}
[Page0983-b+ 75]
‘a needle;’ {%garuḍa,%} ‘the bird of Viṣṇu;’ {%vajra,%}
‘a thunderbolt;’ {%bhoga,%} ‘a snake,’ i. e. in column;
{%maṇḍala,%} ‘a circle;’ {%asaṃhata,%} ‘mixed order;’
{%patāka,%} ‘a flag,’ &c.); an army, host, squadron; a
flock, multitude; (in phil.) arrangement or peculiar
distribution (of the senses); formation, structure, manu-
facture; the body; reasoning, logic, (in this sense
rather to be derived fr. rt. 2. {%ūh%} with {%vi%}); breathing
(according to the Nyāya-sūtras III. 31). {%—Vyūha-%}
{%pārṣṇi, is,%} m. the rear of an army {%(= praty-%}
{%āsāra)%}. {%—Vyūha-bhaṅga%} or {%vyūha-bheda, as,%} m.
breaking an array, throwing into disorder. {%—Vyūha-%}
{%racanā,%} f. arrangement of troops. {%—Vyūha-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. the chief or best form of military array.
{%—Vyūhāntara (˚ha-an˚), as,%} m. a different ar-
rangement or position.
<LEND>

<L>45853<pc>0983-b<k1>vyUhat<k2>vyUhat
{%Vy-ūhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ separating, dividing; dis-
posing, arranging, putting in military array.
<LEND>

<L>45854<pc>0983-b<k1>vyUhana<k2>vyUhana
{%Vy-ūhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of disposing in order,
arrangement, arraying, array (of an army); dispo-
sition or structure of the members of the body.
<LEND>

<L>45855<pc>0983-b<k1>vyUhya<k2>vyUhya
{%Vy-ūhya,%}¦ ind. having disposed in order, having
arranged or arrayed, having placed in battle-array.
<LEND>

<L>45856<pc>0983-b<k1>vyf<k2>vyf
{#vyf#}¦ {%vy-ṛ (vi-ṛ),%} cl. 5. 3. P. {%-ṛṇoti%} or {%-ṛṇ-%}
{%vati, -iyarti,%} &c. (see rt. 4. {%ṛ%}), Ved. to go apart or
asunder, open out, be divided; to open, throw open,
spread abroad, display.
<LEND>

<L>45857<pc>0983-b<k1>vyfC<k2>vyfC
{#vyfC#}¦ {%vy-ṛch (vi-ṛch),%} cl. 6. P. {%-ṛcchati,%}
{%-arcchitum,%} Ved. to go apart or asunder.
<LEND>

<L>45858<pc>0983-b<k1>vyfD<k2>vyfD
{#vyfD#}¦ {%vy-ṛdh (vi-ṛdh),%} Pass. {%-ṛdhyate,%}
Ved. to be unfortunate or unsuccessful; to be ex-
cluded or deprived of (with inst.): Caus. {%-ardha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to exclude from, deprive of (with
inst.): Pass. of Caus. {%-ardhyate,%} to be excluded
from or deprived of: Desid. {%vīrtsati%} (Part. {%vīrtsat%}),
to wish to nullify or render vain.
<LEND>

<L>45859<pc>0983-b<k1>vyfdDa<k2>vyfdDa
{%Vy-ṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ deprived of prosperity,
deprived of, separated or excluded from; nullified;
imperfect, defective, unfit.
<LEND>

<L>45860<pc>0983-b<k1>vyfdDi<k2>vyfdDi
{%Vy-ṛddhi, is,%}¦ f. (probably fr. {%vi%} privative {%+ ṛd-%}
{%dhi%}), non-prosperity, absence or loss of prosperity,
misfortune, ill luck.
<LEND>

<L>45861<pc>0983-b<k1>vyfz<k2>vyfz<h>1
{#vyfz#} 1¦. {%vy-ṛṣ (vi-ṛṣ),%} cl. 1. P. {%-arṣati,%}
{%-arṣitum,%} Ved. to flow through.
<LEND>

<L>45862<pc>0983-b<k1>vyfz<k2>vyfz<h>2
{#vyfz#} 2¦. {%vy-ṛṣ (vi-ṛṣ),%} cl. 6. P. {%-ṛṣati,%}
{%-arṣitum,%} to pierce, penetrate.
<LEND>

<L>45863<pc>0983-b<k1>vye<k2>vye
{#vye#}¦ {%vye%} (perhaps formed out of {%vi-i,%} see
3. {%vī%}), cl. 1. P. A. {%vyayati, -te, vivyāya%} (2nd
sing. {%vivyayitha,%} Pāṇ. VII. 2, 66), {%vivye, vyāsyati, -te,%}
{%avyāsīt, avyāsta, vyātum,%} to cover, conceal, clothe:
Caus. {%vyāyayati:%} Desid. {%vivyāsati, -te:%} Intens. {%ve-%}
{%vīyate, vāvyeti%} or {%vāvyāti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἱ in ἱμάτιον.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>45864<pc>0983-b<k1>vIta<k2>vIta<h>3
3. {%vīta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. and 2. {%vīta%} see p. 953,
col. 2), covered, clothed, put on, worn. {%—Vīta-sū-%}
{%tra, am,%} n. the sacred thread or cord; [cf. {%ni-vīta,%}
{%upa-vīta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45865<pc>0983-b<k1>vyeta<k2>vyeta
{#vyeta#}¦ {%vy-eta, as, -enī, am,%} Ved. very bright,
very white, (Sāy. {%vyenī = viśeṣeṇa śvetā,%} Ṛg-veda
V. 80, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>45866<pc>0983-b<k1>vyenas<k2>vyenas
{#vyenas#}¦ {%vy-enas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. exempt
from sin, free from misfortune.
<LEND>

<L>45867<pc>0983-b<k1>vyokAra<k2>vyokAra
{#vyokAra#}¦ {%vyo-kāra, as,%} m. (probably onoma-
topoetic), ‘making the sound {%vyo,%}’ a blacksmith.
<LEND>

<L>45868<pc>0983-b<k1>vyoman<k2>vyoman
{#vyoman#}¦ {%vyoman, a,%} n. (according to Uṇā-
di-s. IV. 150. fr. rt. {%vye%} above; according to others
fr. {%o%} for {%av%} with {%vi,%} cf. {%oman,%} or connected
with rt. 2. {%div%}), sky, heaven, atmosphere, ether;
water; a temple sacred to the sun, a place where
the sun is especially worshipped; talc, mica; ({%ā%}),
m., N. of a king. {%—Vyoma-keśa, as,%} or {%vyoma-%}
{%keśin, ī,%} m. ‘sky-haired,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Vyo-%}
{%ma-gaṅgā,%} f. the heavenly Ganges. {%—Vyoma-cara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘sky-going,’ passing through the air.
{%—Vyoma-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} sky-going; ({%ī%}), m. ‘air-
goer,’ ‘sky-goer;’ a god; a bird; a saint; a
[Page0983-c+ 79]
Brāhman. {%—Vyomacāri-pura, am,%} n. ‘sky-floating
city,’ the city of Hari-ścandra (supposed to be sus-
pended between heaven and earth). {%—Vyoma-deva, as,%}
m., N. of Śiva {%—Vyoma-dhūma, as,%} m. ‘sky-smoke,’
a cloud. {%—Vyoma-nāsikā,%} f. a sort of quail. {%—Vyoma-%}
{%pañcaka, am,%} n. an aggregate of five Vyomans (?) .
{%—Vyoma-mañjara, am,%} n. ‘sky-cluster,’ a flag,
banner. {%—Vyoma-maṇḍala, am,%} n. ‘sky-circle,’ a
flag, banner. {%—Vyoma-madhye,%} ind. in the middle
of the sky, in mid-air. {%—Vyoma-māya, as, ā, am,%}
‘sky-measuring,’ reaching to the sky, high as the
heaven. {%—Vyoma-mudgara, as,%} m. ‘sky-hammer,’
a gust of wind. {%—Vyoma-yāna, am,%} n. ‘sky-vehicle,’
a celestial car, chariot of the gods. {%—Vyoma-vart-%}
{%man, a,%} n. the path of the sky, ({%vyoma-vartmanā,%}
inst. c. through the air or sky.) {%—Vyoma-vistṛta,%}
{%am,%} n. the expanse of heaven, the sky, firmament.
{%—Vyoma-sad, t,%} m. ‘sky-dweller,’ a deity, divinity;
a Gandharva; a spirit. {%—Vyoma-sthalī,%} f. ‘ground
or base of the sky,’ the earth. {%—Vyoma-spṛś, k, k,%}
{%k,%} ‘sky-touching,’ ‘sky-reaching,’ lofty. {%—Vyomābha%}
{%(˚ma-ābha), as,%} m. ‘heaven-like,’ a Buddha or a
Jaina deified saint. {%—Vyomodaka (˚ma-ud˚), am,%}
n. ‘sky-water,’ rain-water, dew ({%= divyodaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>45869<pc>0983-c<k1>vyomnika<k2>vyomnika
{%Vyomnika%}¦ in {%parama-vyomnika, as, ā, am,%}
relating to the highest ether.
<LEND>

<L>45870<pc>0983-c<k1>vyoza<k2>vyoza
{#vyoza#}¦ {%vyoṣa, am,%} n. (probably fr. rt. 1.
{%vyuṣ%} or fr. rt. 1. {%uṣ%} with {%vi%}), the aggregate of three
spices (black pepper, long pepper, and dry ginger).
<LEND>

<L>45871<pc>0983-c<k1>vraj<k2>vraj
{#vraj#}¦ {%vraj,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%-vra-%}
{%jati (-te), vavrāja, vrajiṣyati, avrājīt,%}
{%vrajitum,%} to go, proceed, travel; to go away, de-
part, retire, withdraw; to pass away (as time); to
go to, approach, visit, approach a woman (for adul-
tery); to undergo; to go to any state or condition,
attain to, become (with acc., especially with acc. of
abstract noun, e. g. {%vināśaṃ vraj,%} to go to destruc-
tion, become destroyed; {%chāttratāṃ vraj,%} to be-
come a pupil; {%nirvṛtiṃ vraj,%} to grow happy; cf.
rt. 1. {%yā%}); to obtain, gain, ({%vyāpāraṃ vraj,%} to
obtain possession of anything, loc.): Caus. or cl. 10.
P. {%vrājayati, -yitum,%} to cause to go, send; to go;
to prepare, decorate: Desid. {%vivrajiṣati:%} Intens.
{%vāvrajyate, vāvrakti,%} to go crookedly; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ϝέργον;</lang> Goth. <nsi>vrikan, vrakja, waurkjau;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>wrecan;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>rehhan, wreh.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>45872<pc>0983-c<k1>vraja<k2>vraja
{%Vraja, as,%}¦ m. a road; a flock, herd, multitude,
collection of anything; a station of cowherds, cow-
pen, cattle-shed, stall, stable; a resting-place, abode;
a cloud ({%= megha%} according to Naigh. I. 10); N.
of the district surrounding Agra and Mathurā (the
scene of Kṛṣṇa's juvenile adventures; it is com-
monly called Braj, cf. {%vṛji%}); N. of a son of Havir-
dhāna; ({%am%}), n. going, wandering, roaming; [cf.
perhaps Lat. <nsi>vulgus.</nsi>] {%—Vraja-kiśora, as,%} m. ‘youth
of Vraja,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Vraja-nātha, as,%}
m. ‘lord of Vraja,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Vraja-%}
{%bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} being or produced in Vraja; ({%ūs%}),
m. the tree Nauclea Cordifolia, {%= keli-kadamba;%}
{%(ūs),%} f. the district of Vraja. {%—Vraja-maṇḍala, am,%}
n. the district of Vraja. {%—Vraja-mohana, as,%} m.
‘the fascinator of Vraja,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Vra-%}
{%ja-lāla, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Vraja-vara, as,%}
m. ‘best in Vraja,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Vraja-val-%}
{%labha, as,%} m. ‘beloved in Vraja,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Vrajāṅganā (˚ja-aṅ˚),%} f. ‘woman of Vraja,’ a
Gopī, cowherdess, shepherdess. {%—Vrajājira (˚ja-%}
{%aj˚), am,%} n. a cow-yard, cattle-fold, cow-pen.
<LEND>

<L>45873<pc>0983-c<k1>vrajaka<k2>vrajaka
{%Vrajaka, as,%}¦ m. a religious ascetic who wanders
about (in quest of alms &c.).
<LEND>

<L>45874<pc>0983-c<k1>vrajat<k2>vrajat
{%Vrajat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going, proceeding, travel-
ling; roaming.
<LEND>

<L>45875<pc>0983-c<k1>vrajana<k2>vrajana
{%Vrajana, am,%}¦ n. the act of going or proceeding,
travelling, roaming; exile; a road, way, street (Ved.);
({%as%}), m., N. of a brother of Jahnu (considered as
one of the ancestors of the Kuśikas).
<LEND>

<L>45876<pc>0983-c<k1>vrajita<k2>vrajita
{%Vrajita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, proceeded; ({%am%}), n.
going, roaming.
<LEND>

<L>45877<pc>0983-c<k1>vrajin<k2>vrajin
{%Vrajin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. herded or grouped together,
[Page0984-a+ 79]
collected into a mass, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
V. 45, 1. {%vrajinīḥ = tamaḥ-puñjavatīḥ,%} clustered
gloom, i. e. nights.)
<LEND>

<L>45878<pc>0984-a<k1>vrajyA<k2>vrajyA
{%Vrajyā,%}¦ f. travelling or wandering about (either
as a religious act or in quest of alms); march,
attack, invasion; a flock, tribe, class; a theatre {%(=%}
{%raṅga)%}. {%—Vrajyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} wandering,
roaming; going gracefully.
<LEND>

<L>45879<pc>0984-a<k1>vraR<k2>vraR<h>1
{#vraR#} 1¦. {%vraṇ%} (also written {%braṇ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%vraṇati, vavrāṇa, vraṇitum,%} to sound.
<LEND>

<L>45880<pc>0984-a<k1>vraR<k2>vraR<h>2
{#vraR#} 2¦. {%vraṇ%} (perhaps rather to be re-
garded as a Nom. fr. {%vraṇa%} below), cl.
10. P. {%vraṇayati, -yitum,%} to wound.
<LEND>

<L>45881<pc>0984-a<k1>vraRa<k2>vraRa
{%Vraṇa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a wound, sore, ulcer, boil,
bruise, tumor; a fracture, scar, rent (see {%a-v˚,%} cf. Manu
II. 47); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">οὐλή</lang> (i. e. <lang n="greek">ϝολνη</lang>), <lang n="greek">ἄπ-ελος;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>vulnus.</nsi>] {%—Vraṇa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} making a sore,
wounding, ulcerating; corroding; ({%t%}), m. the mark-
ing-nut plant, Semecarpus Anacardium. {%—Vraṇa-%}
{%ketu-ghnī,%} f. a kind of small shrub {%(= dugdha-%}
{%phenī)%}. {%—Vraṇa-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} ‘hostile to sores,’
healing sores; ({%ṭ%}), m. the plant Siphonanthus Indica
{%(= brāhmaṇa-yaṣṭikā)%}. {%—Vraṇa-dhūpana, am,%}
n. fumigating a sore. {%—Vraṇa-vastu,%} n. a part liable
to ulcerate (as skin, flesh, &c.). {%—Vraṇa-vedanā,%} f.
the pain of a wound or sore. {%—Vraṇa-śodhana,%}
{%am,%} n. the cleansing or cicatrising of a sore. {%—Vra-%}
{%ṇa-ha, as,%} m. ‘destroying sores,’ the castor-oil tree;
({%ā%}), f. a sort of creeper or shrub {%(= guḍūcī)%}. {%—Vra-%}
{%ṇa-hṛt, t,%} m. ‘sore-removing,’ a particular plant {%(=%}
{%kali-kārī)%}. {%—Vraṇāri (˚ṇa-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy
of sores,’ the plant Sesbana Grandiflora ({%= agastya-%}
{%vṛkṣa%}); gum-myrrh ({%= vola%}).
<LEND>

<L>45882<pc>0984-a<k1>vraRita<k2>vraRita
{%Vraṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wounded, ulcerated, bruised,
scarred. {%—Vraṇita-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} heart-
stricken, bruised or wounded at heart.
<LEND>

<L>45883<pc>0984-a<k1>vraRin<k2>vraRin
{%Vraṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a sore or wound, afflicted
with boils or ulcers.
<LEND>

<L>45884<pc>0984-a<k1>vrata<k2>vrata
{#vrata#}¦ {%vrata, as, am,%} m. n. (probably an old
past pass. participle fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), anything enclosed, an
enclosed place, enclosure, realm, sphere, sway (Ved.);
anything fenced off or settled, a law, ordinance, com-
mand, rule, ({%anu-vratam,%} according to law or ordi-
nance); rite, observance, practice [cf. {%arka-v˚,%}
{%yama-v˚%}]; any religious act or obligation enjoined
by the gods; a sacrifice; a self-chosen or voluntary
act, any meritorious act of devotion or austerity,
fasting, continence, vowed observance, solemn pur-
pose, vow, ({%asi-dhārā-vrata%} or {%āsidhāraṃ vra-%}
{%tam,%} a vow to stand on the edge of a sword or a
vow as difficult as standing on the edge of a sword);
action, agency, doing, work, deed; a design, plan;
eating, in {%payo-vrata,%} q. v.; [cf. probably Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἑορτή.</lang>] {%—Vrata-kalpadruma, am,%} n., N. of a
work by Ratnākara. {%—Vrata-caryā,%} f. the practice of
religious vows; ({%as%}), m. a religious student. {%—Vrata-%}
{%cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. vow-performing, fulfilling or
performing vows. {%—Vrata-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a
part of the Smṛti-tattva. {%—Vrata-nimitta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} caused by a vow. {%—Vrata-pati, is,%} m., Ved.
‘lord of vows,’ epithet of Agni. {%—Vrata-pā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} Ved. upholding ordinances, protecting sacred
rites. {%—Vrata-pāraṇa, am, ā,%} n. f. conclusion of
a fast, eating or drinking after a fast. {%—Vrata-pra-%}
{%kāśa, as,%} m. ‘illustration of vows,’ N. of a work by
Viśva-nātha on the subject of vows (compiled from
the Purāṇas and other more ancient sources). {%—Vra-%}
{%ta-pratiṣṭhā,%} f. the performance of a religious act
voluntarily undertaken. {%—Vrata-bhaṅga, as,%} m. the
interruption of an act of devotion, breach of a vow.
{%—Vrata-bhikṣā,%} f. soliciting alms (as one of the
ceremonies accompanying investiture). {%—Vrata-bhṛt,%}
{%t,%} m., Ved. ‘bearer of sacrifices,’ epithet of Agni.
{%—Vrata-rāja, as,%} m. {%= vrata-prakāśa%} above.
{%—Vrata-lupta, as, ā, am,%} one who has broken a
vow (of fasting &c.). {%—Vrata-lopana, am,%} n. the
breaking of a vow (of fasting, chastity, &c.), violat-
ing any religious vow or obligation. {%—Vrata-vai-%}
{%kalya, am,%} n. imperfection or incompletion of a
[Page0984-b+ 76]
vow or religious observance. {%—Vrata-śeṣa, as,%} m.
the remainder of a religious vow. {%—Vrata-saṃra-%}
{%kṣaṇa, am,%} n. the keeping of a vow, observing
penance. {%—Vrata-saṅgraha, as,%} m. undertaking any
act of devotion, taking on one's self any voluntary
religious obligation {%(= dīkṣā)%}. {%—Vrata-stha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} engaged in religious austerities or in a vow
of any kind, performing penance. {%—Vrata-snātaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a Brāhman who has completed his term of
studentship, (see {%snātaka.%}) {%—Vratācaraṇa (˚ta-%}
{%āc˚), am,%} n. the act of observing a vow or religious
obligation (especially that of continence, as the duty
of a religious student; cf. {%brahma-carya%}). {%—Vra-%}
{%tādāna (˚ta-ād˚), am,%} n. undertaking the obliga-
tions of a devotee. {%—Vratādeśa (˚ta-ād˚), as,%} m.
investiture of a youth of one of the first three classes
with the sacred cord. {%—Vratopavāsa (˚ta-up˚), as,%}
m. fasting as a religious obligation, a fast. {%—Vratopā-%}
{%yana (˚ta-up˚), am,%} n. {%= vāyana,%} presents of cakes
&c. which may be eaten during a religious feast.
<LEND>

<L>45885<pc>0984-b<k1>vrataya<k2>vrataya
{%Vrataya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vratayati, -yitum,%} to observe
a vow; to fast or practise any abstinence in conse-
quence of a vow; to eat together.
<LEND>

<L>45886<pc>0984-b<k1>vratika<k2>vratika
{%Vratika%}¦ in {%vaka-vratika, vaiḍāla-v˚,%} &c.,
q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>45887<pc>0984-b<k1>vratin<k2>vratin
{%Vratin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ observing a vow (of continence,
fasting, &c.), relating to a vow, practising any penance
or religious observance, engaged in a sacrifice, devout,
pious; ({%ī%}), m. an ascetic, devotee; a religious student;
one who institutes a sacrifice and employs priests ({%=%}
{%yajamāna%}); N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>45888<pc>0984-b<k1>vrateyu<k2>vrateyu
{%Vrateyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>45889<pc>0984-b<k1>vratya<k2>vratya
{%Vratya, as, ā, am, = vratin%}¦ (Ṛg-v. VIII. 48, 8).
<LEND>

<L>45890<pc>0984-b<k1>vratati<k2>vratati
{#vratati#}¦ {%vratati, is,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%vṛt,%}
according to Yāska fr. rts. {%vṛ%} and 3. {%tan%}), expansion,
extension, spreading; a creeper. {%—Vratati-valaya,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a creeper winding round like a bracelet.
<LEND>

<L>45891<pc>0984-b<k1>vratatI<k2>vratatI
{%Vratatī,%}¦ f. {%= vratati%} above.
<LEND>

<L>45892<pc>0984-b<k1>vraDna<k2>vraDna
{#vraDna#}¦ {%vradhna, as,%} m. (also written {%bradhna,%}
q. v.), the sun; the root of a tree.
<LEND>

<L>45893<pc>0984-b<k1>vrand<k2>vrand
{#vrand#}¦ {%vrand%} or {%vrad%} (a Vedic root said
to be allied to rts. {%mrad%} and 1. {%mṛḍ,%}
‘to rub, press, crush,’ &c.), cl. 1. P. A. {%vrandati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., (probably) to soften; to become soft, ({%avra-%}
{%danta vīlitety api nigamo bhavati,%} Nirukta V.
16); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">βραδύ.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>45894<pc>0984-b<k1>vrandin<k2>vrandin
{%Vrandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. reduced to a state of
softness or mildness; tamed, subdued, (or according
to Sāy. connected with {%vṛnda,%} ‘a multitude;’ {%vran-%}
{%dinaḥ = mṛdu-bhāvaṃ prāptān%} or {%samūha-va-%}
{%taḥ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 54, 4; see Nirukta V. 15.)
<LEND>

<L>45895<pc>0984-b<k1>vrayas<k2>vrayas
{#vrayas#}¦ {%vrayas.%} See under rt. {%vrī,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>45896<pc>0984-b<k1>vraSc<k2>vraSc
{#vraSc#}¦ {%vraśc,%} cl. 6. P. {%vṛścati%} (Ved. {%vṛ-%}
{%ṇakti,%} Naigh. II. 19), {%vavraśca, vra-%}
{%ściṣyati%} or {%vrakṣyati, avraścīt%} or {%avrākṣīt,%}
{%vraścitum%} or {%vraṣṭum,%} to cut, cut up, cut asunder,
tear, lacerate, divide with an edged tool; to wound:
Caus. {%vraścayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avivraścat:%} Desid.
{%vivraściṣati%} and {%vivrakṣati:%} Intens. {%varīvṛ-%}
{%ścyate, varīvṛścīti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔλκος, ῥάκος, λακίς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">λακερός;</lang> Lat. <nsi>lacerare, ulcus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>45897<pc>0984-b<k1>vfkRa<k2>vfkRa
{%Vṛkṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut, torn, &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>45898<pc>0984-b<k1>vfScat<k2>vfScat
{%Vṛścat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} cutting, lacerating,
wounding. {%—Vṛścad-vana, as,%} m., Ved. ‘consumer
or destroyer of forests,’ epithet of Agni (Ṛg-v. VI. 6, 1).
<LEND>

<L>45899<pc>0984-b<k1>vraScana<k2>vraScana
{%Vraścana, as, ī, am,%}¦ who or what cuts, cutting;
({%as%}), m. a small saw or chisel; a fine file or saw
used by goldsmiths, &c.; the juice flowing from an
incision in a tree; ({%am%}), n. cutting, wounding; a
cut, incision. {%—Vraścana-prabhava, as, ā, am,%}
flowing from an incision (in a tree, as juices &c.).
<LEND>

<L>45900<pc>0984-b<k1>vrahman<k2>vrahman
{#vrahman#}¦ {%vrahman, a,%} n. {%= brahman,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>45901<pc>0984-b<k1>vrA<k2>vrA
{#vrA#}¦ {%vrā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%vṛ%}), Ved. night; dawn,
(Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 121, 2 {%= tamasā sarvam%}
{%ācchādayatīti vrā rātriḥ%} or {%prakāśena vṛṇotīti%}
{%vrā uṣāḥ%}); a multitude, troop, (see Nirukta V. 3.)
<LEND>
[Page0984-c+ 77]

<L>45902<pc>0984-c<k1>vrAcaqa<k2>vrAcaqa
{#vrAcaqa#}¦ {%vrācaḍa, as,%} m. a kind of corrupt
dialect.
<LEND>

<L>45903<pc>0984-c<k1>vrAja<k2>vrAja
{#vrAja#}¦ {%vrāja, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%vraj%}), going,
movement, motion; a troop, multitude (Ved.).
{%—Vrāja-bāhū,%} m. du., Ved. the spreading or out-
stretched arms of death.
<LEND>

<L>45904<pc>0984-c<k1>vrAji<k2>vrAji
{%Vrāji, is,%}¦ f. a gale of wind, whirlwind, wind.
<LEND>

<L>45905<pc>0984-c<k1>vrAta<k2>vrAta
{#vrAta#}¦ {%vrāta, as,%} m. (fr. {%vrata%} or connected
with rt. {%vṛ%}), a multitude, flock, assemblage, troop,
({%vrātaṃ-vrātam,%} in companies, in troops, Ṛg-veda
V. 53, 11); {%= manuṣya%} (according to Naigh. II.
3); the descendant of an outcast Brāhman, &c., (see
{%vrātya%}); the company or attendants at a marriage
feast; ({%am%}), n. manual or bodily labour; day labour,
casual employment. {%—Vrāta-jīvana, am,%} n. living
by manual or bodily labour.
<LEND>

<L>45906<pc>0984-c<k1>vrAtIna<k2>vrAtIna
{%Vrātīna, as,%}¦ m. one living by the profession of a
Vrāta, a hired labourer, porter, cooly; one having no
fixed employment; one living by violence.
<LEND>

<L>45907<pc>0984-c<k1>vrAtya<k2>vrAtya
{%Vrātya, as,%}¦ m. a Brāhman or man of one of the
first three classes who has lost caste through non-
observance of the ten principal Saṃskāras (especially
investiture with the thread; in the Atharva-veda XV.
8, 1, XV. 9, 1. the Rājanyas and even the Brāhmans
are said to have sprung from the Vrātya who is
even identified with the Supreme Being); an out-
cast; a man of a particular inferior class (regarded as
the descendant of a Śūdra father and Kṣatriya
mother; cf. {%vaidya%}); a low or vile person; ({%ā%}), f.
the daughter of an outcast, a female of a fallen
Brāhman, &c. {%—Vrātya-tā,%} f. or {%vrātya-tva, am,%}
n. the condition of one who has lost caste by neglect
of the Saṃskāras or sacred observances (such as investi-
ture with the thread, &c.). {%—Vrātya-bruva, as,%} m.
one who calls himself a Vrātya; [cf. {%brāhmaṇa-%}
{%bruva.%}] {%—Vrātya-bhāva, as,%} m. {%= vrātya-tā%}. {%—Vrā-%}
{%tya-yājaka, as,%} m. one who sacrifices for a Vrātya.
{%—Vrātya-stoma, as,%} m. a particular sacrifice per-
formed to recover the rights forfeited by a delay of
the Saṃskāras (especially of investiture).
<LEND>

<L>45908<pc>0984-c<k1>vrADat<k2>vrADat
{#vrADat#}¦ {%vrādhat, an, antī, at%} (probably a
kind of pres. part. connected with rt. 1. {%vṛdh%}), Ved.
great, mighty, (Sāy. {%= mahat,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 32, 3;
cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">βλωθ-ρός.</lang>) {%—Vrādhan-tama, as, ā, am,%}
greatest, most eminent, (Sāy. {%= pravṛddha-tama,%}
Ṛg-veda I. 150, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>45909<pc>0984-c<k1>vriS<k2>vriS
{#vriS#}¦ {%vriś, śas,%} f. pl., Ved. the fingers
(according to Naigh. II. 5; according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda I. 144, 5. {%vriśaḥ = viśaḥ = paraspara-%}
{%viśliṣṭāḥ,%} mutually separated).
<LEND>

<L>45910<pc>0984-c<k1>vrI<k2>vrI
{#vrI#}¦ {%vrī%} (connected with rts. {%vṛ, vlī%}),
cl. 9. P. {%vrīṇāti%} or {%vriṇāti, vivrāya,%}
{%vreṣyati, avraiṣīt, vretum,%} to choose, elect; cl.
4. A. {%vrīyate, vivriye, vreṣyate, avreṣṭa, vre-%}
{%tum,%} to choose (?); to be chosen or elected; to
cover, screen: Caus. {%vrāyayati%} (or according to
others {%vrepayati%}), {%-yitum:%} Desid. {%vivrīṣati, -te:%}
Intens. {%vevrīyate, vevrayīti, vevreti.%}
<LEND>

<L>45911<pc>0984-c<k1>vrayas<k2>vrayas
{%Vrayas,%}¦ Ved. abandoning, abandonment, (accord-
ing to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda II. 23, 16. {%vi vrayas =%}
{%viśeṣeṇa varjanam.%})
<LEND>

<L>45912<pc>0984-c<k1>vrIRa<k2>vrIRa
{%Vrīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ chosen, elected.
<LEND>

<L>45913<pc>0984-c<k1>vrIq<k2>vrIq
{#vrIq#}¦ {%vrīḍ,%} cl. 4. P. {%vrīḍyati%} (ep. cl. 1. A.
{%vrīḍate,%} see below), {%vivrīḍa, vrīḍiṣ-%}
{%yati, avrīḍīt, vrīḍitum,%} to be ashamed, feel shame,
to be modest or bashful; to throw, hurl, send; (ac-
cording to Nirukta V. 16. {%vrīḍayati = vīḍayati.%})
<LEND>

<L>45914<pc>0984-c<k1>vrIqa<k2>vrIqa
{%Vrīḍa, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. shame, modesty, bashfulness.
{%—Vrīḍānata (˚ḍā-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} bowed down
with shame, hanging down the head with shame,
ashamed. {%—Vrīḍānvita (˚ḍā-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
ashamed, bashful, modest. {%—Vrīḍā-yuj, k, k, k,%}
possessing shame, ashamed.
<LEND>

<L>45915<pc>0984-c<k1>vrIqana<k2>vrIqana
{%Vrīḍana, am,%}¦ n. shame, bashfulness, modesty;
lowering, depression ({%= nīcair-bhāva%}).
<LEND>

<L>45916<pc>0984-c<k1>vrIqamAna<k2>vrIqamAna
{%Vrīḍamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (an epic form), being
ashamed, blushing.
<LEND>
[Page0985-a+ 72]

<L>45917<pc>0985-a<k1>vrIqita<k2>vrIqita
{%Vrīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ashamed, abashed, modest;
({%am%}), n. shame.
<LEND>

<L>45918<pc>0985-a<k1>vrILana<k2>vrILana
{%Vrīḷana, am,%}¦ n., Ved. {%= vrīḍana.%}
<LEND>

<L>45919<pc>0985-a<k1>vrIs<k2>vrIs
{#vrIs#}¦ {%vrīs%} (= rt. {%vrūs%}), cl. 1. 10. P. {%vrī-%}
{%sati, vrīsayati,%} to hurt, injure; to kill,
wound.
<LEND>

<L>45920<pc>0985-a<k1>vrIhi<k2>vrIhi
{#vrIhi#}¦ {%vrīhi, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%vrī%}),
rice, (eight principal sorts are enumerated by native
authorities; rice is not mentioned in the Ṛg-veda,
but is named in the Atharva-veda together with
{%yava, māṣa,%} and {%tila%}); a grain of rice, ({%vrīhīn%}
{%prokṣati,%} he sprinkles or scatters grains of rice);
rice ripening in the rainy season; ({%ayas%}), m. pl.
grains of rice. {%—Vrīhi-kāñcana, as,%} m. a sort of
pulse, Ervum Lens or Hirsutum {%(= maśūra)%}. {%—Vrī-%}
{%hi-parṇī,%} f. a particular shrub {%(= śāla-parṇī).%}
{%—Vrīhi-bheda, as,%} m. a species of rice; a sort of
grain, Panicum Miliaceum {%(= aṇu)%}. {%—Vrīhi-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} made or consisting of rice; ({%as%}), m. a
rice-cake made with ghee (offered as an oblation).
{%—Vrīhi-rājika, as,%} m. panic seed, Panicum Itali-
cum ({%= kaṅgu%}); another species, Panicum Milia-
ceum. {%—Vrīhi-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. a kind of rice {%(=%}
{%śāli-dhānya)%}. {%—Vrīhy-agāra, am,%} n. ‘rice-house,’ a
shed where rice or other grain is stored, granary.
<LEND>

<L>45921<pc>0985-a<k1>vrIhika<k2>vrIhika
{%Vrīhika, as, ā, am,%}¦ having rice, bearing rice, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45922<pc>0985-a<k1>vrIhin<k2>vrIhin
{%Vrīhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having or bearing rice (a field &c.).
<LEND>

<L>45923<pc>0985-a<k1>vrEha<k2>vrEha
{%Vraiha, as, ī, am,%}¦ made of rice, composed of
rice.
<LEND>

<L>45924<pc>0985-a<k1>vrEheya<k2>vrEheya
{%Vraiheya, as, ī, am,%}¦ fit for rice, sown with rice
(as a field &c.), made or consisting of rice; ({%am%}),
n. a field of rice.
<LEND>

<L>45925<pc>0985-a<k1>vruq<k2>vruq
{#vruq#}¦ {%vruḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%vruḍati,%} to cover; to
heap; to sink.
<LEND>

<L>45926<pc>0985-a<k1>vrUs<k2>vrUs
{#vrUs#}¦ {%vrūs%} (also written {%vrūṣ%} or {%brūṣ;%}
cf. rts. {%vrīs, kaṣ%}), cl. 1. 10. P. {%vrūsati,%}
{%vrūsayati,%} &c., to hurt, injure, wound, kill.
<LEND>

<L>45927<pc>0985-a<k1>vlI<k2>vlI
{#vlI#}¦ {%vlī%} (also written {%blī;%} according to
some fr. {%vi-lī,%} but cf. rt. {%vrī%}), cl. 9. P. {%vli-%}
{%nāti%} (Ved. {%{{vliṇāti->vlīnāti||20161213|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 316-318|}}%}), {%vivlāya, vleṣyati, avlaiṣīt,%}
{%vletum,%} to go, move; to choose, select, (in this sense
for rts. {%vṛ, vrī%}); to hold, maintain, support: Caus.
{%vlepayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%avivlipat:%} Desid. {%vivlī-%}
{%ṣati:%} Intens. {%vevlīyate, vevlayīti%} or {%vevleti.%}
<LEND>

<L>45928<pc>0985-a<k1>vlIna<k2>vlIna
{%Vlīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone; held, supported.
<LEND>

<L>45929<pc>0985-a<k1>vlekz<k2>vlekz
{#vlekz#}¦ {%vlekṣ%} (also written {%vekṣ,%} q. v.),
cl. 10. P. {%vlekṣayati, vlekṣāpayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to see.
<LEND>
<H>{#Sa#}

<L>45930<pc>0985-a<k1>Sa<k2>Sa<h>1
{#Sa#} 1¦. {%śa,%} the thirtieth consonant of the
Nāgarī alphabet and first of the three sibilants; it
belongs to the palatal class, and in sound often cor-
responds to {%ṣ,%} though in some words pronounced
more like {%s%}. {%—Śa-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound
{%śa%}. {%—Śa-varga, as,%} m. the sibilating class of letters,
i. e. the three sibilants and the letter {%h.%}
<LEND>

<L>45931<pc>0985-a<k1>Sa<k2>Sa<h>2
{#Sa#} 2¦. {%śa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śo%}), a cutter, de-
stroyer (Kirāt. XV. 45); a weapon; N. of Śiva, (in
this sense probably connected with 2. {%śam%}); ({%am%}),
n. or ind. happiness, &c., see 2. {%śam,%} p. 993.
<LEND>

<L>45932<pc>0985-a<k1>SaMyu<k2>SaMyu
{#SaMyu#}¦ {%śaṃyu, śaṃyya,%} &c. See under 2. {%śam,%}
p. 993.
<LEND>

<L>45933<pc>0985-a<k1>SaMra<k2>SaMra
{%Śaṃra, śaṃ-stha,%}¦ &c. See p. 993, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>45934<pc>0985-a<k1>SaMvara<k2>SaMvara
{#SaMvara#}¦ {%śaṃvara, śaṃvala.%} See {%śambara,%}
{%śambala,%} p. 993.
<LEND>

<L>45935<pc>0985-a<k1>SaMs<k2>SaMs
{#SaMs#}¦ {%śaṃs%} [cf. rts. {%śaś,%} 1. {%śās%}], cl. 1. P.
{%śaṃsati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%śaśaṃsa, śaṃ-%}
{%siṣyati, aśaṃsīt,%} Prec. {%śasyāt, śaṃsitum,%} to recite,
repeat, (in Vedic ritual {%śoṃsāva, śoṃsāma,%} ‘let us
recite’); to relate, say, tell, report, declare, announce,
communicate to (with dat. or gen. of the person);
to praise, celebrate; to approve, wish, desire [cf.
[Page0985-b+ 80]
{%ā-śaṃs%}]; to wish well or ill to; to calumniate, revile;
to hurt, injure [cf. rt. 1. {%śas%}]; to be unhappy (?):
Pass. {%śasyate,%} to be recited or uttered; to be
praised or approved: Caus. {%śaṃsayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%aśaśaṃsat,%} to cause to repeat or recite: Desid.
{%śiśaṃsiṣati:%} Intens. {%śāśasyate, śāśaṃsti;%} [cf.
Lat. <nsi>censeo, cano, Cas-menœ, Ca-menœ, carmen,</nsi>
<nsi>con-cinn-us:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>sagen:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>sagan,</nsi>
<nsi>sœgan:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hazjan, hana:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>Hahn:</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>san-ti:</nsi> (perhaps also) Lith. <nsi>sakau:</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>sant,</nsi> ‘greediness, lust;’ <nsi>santaighim,</nsi> ‘I desire,
covet.’]
<LEND>

<L>45936<pc>0985-b<k1>SaMsa<k2>SaMsa
{%Śaṃsa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. recitation, invocation; praise,
prayer, (Sāy. {%= stuti%}); wishing well or ill to; a
spell (for good or evil); a blessing; a curse;
calumny; {%= narāśaṃsa%} (Ved.); ({%ā%}), f. speech;
praise, flattery, eulogium; wish, desire; ({%as, ā, am%}),
reciting; praising; wishing; [cf. {%duḥ-ś˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45937<pc>0985-b<k1>SaMsat<k2>SaMsat
{%Śaṃsat, an, antī, at,%}¦ reciting, relating; praising.
<LEND>

<L>45938<pc>0985-b<k1>SaMsana<k2>SaMsana
{%Śaṃsana, am,%}¦ n. the act of reciting or repeating,
recitation; praising.
<LEND>

<L>45939<pc>0985-b<k1>SaMsita<k2>SaMsita
{%Śaṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ said, told, declared; praised,
extolled, celebrated; wished, desired, longed for [cf.
{%ā-śaṃsita%}]; calumniated, falsely accused; ascertained,
established, effected, (in these senses for {%saṃ-śita%}
under {%saṃ-śo.%}) {%—Śaṃsita-vrata%} for {%saṃśita-vrata,%}
see {%saṃ-śo.%}
<LEND>

<L>45940<pc>0985-b<k1>SaMsitf<k2>SaMsitf
{%Śaṃsitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a reciter, reciting, relating;
a praiser; [cf. {%śaṃstṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45941<pc>0985-b<k1>SaMsin<k2>SaMsin
{%Śaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ saying, relating, announcing,
foretelling, indicating, showing; praising.
<LEND>

<L>45942<pc>0985-b<k1>SaMstavya<k2>SaMstavya
{%Śaṃstavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be repeated or recited.
<LEND>

<L>45943<pc>0985-b<k1>SaMstf<k2>SaMstf
{%Śaṃstṛ, tā,%}¦ m. a reciter of Śastras or hymns of
praise, one of the officiating priests at a sacrifice
(identified with the Pra-śāstṛ and mentioned along
with five others in Ṛg-veda 1. 162, 5; his sacrificial
duties correspond with those of the Maitrāvaruṇa of
the later ritual); a praiser, encomiast, panegyrist.
<LEND>

<L>45944<pc>0985-b<k1>SaMsya<k2>SaMsya
{%Śaṃsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, praiseworthy,
meritorious; to be wished, desirable.
<LEND>

<L>45945<pc>0985-b<k1>Sas<k2>Sas
{%Śas%}¦ in {%uktha-śas,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>45946<pc>0985-b<k1>Sasa<k2>Sasa
{%Śasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. reciting, repeating.
<LEND>

<L>45947<pc>0985-b<k1>SasitvA<k2>SasitvA
{%Śasitvā,%}¦ ind. having praised, &c. ({%= śastvā%}).
<LEND>

<L>45948<pc>0985-b<k1>Sasta<k2>Sasta<h>1
1. {%śasta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. {%śasta%} see under rt.
1. {%śas%}), recited, repeated; praised, eulogized; best,
excellent; auspicious, happy, well, right; ({%am%}), n.
happiness, excellence; the body. {%—Śasta-keśaka,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} having excellent hair.
<LEND>

<L>45949<pc>0985-b<k1>Sastavya<k2>Sastavya
{%Śastavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be recited or repeated;
to be praised, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45950<pc>0985-b<k1>Sasti<k2>Sasti
{%Śasti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. a hymn of praise.
<LEND>

<L>45951<pc>0985-b<k1>Sastra<k2>Sastra<h>1
1. {%śastra, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. {%śastra%} see under rt. 1. {%śas%}),
Ved. a hymn (recited either audibly or inaudibly, as
opposed to {%stoma,%} which is sung), a recitative, recita-
tion; a hymn of praise (generally).
<LEND>

<L>45952<pc>0985-b<k1>SastvA<k2>SastvA
{%Śastvā,%}¦ ind. having recited; having praised, &c.
<LEND>

<L>45953<pc>0985-b<k1>Sasman<k2>Sasman
{%Śasman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. praise, a hymn.
<LEND>

<L>45954<pc>0985-b<k1>Sasya<k2>Sasya<h>1
1. {%śasya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. {%śasya%} see under rt.
1. {%śas%}), {%= śaṃsya,%} to be praised, praiseworthy; to be
wished, desirable, excellent, best; ({%am%}), n. a good
quality, merit.
<LEND>

<L>45955<pc>0985-b<k1>SasyamAna<k2>SasyamAna
{%Śasyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being recited, (op-
posed to {%gīyamāna,%} being sung); being hymned
or praised.
<LEND>

<L>45956<pc>0985-b<k1>SaMst<k2>SaMst
{#SaMst#}¦ {%śaṃst,%} a Vedic root, = rt. 2. {%śas%} or
{%sas.%}
<LEND>

<L>45957<pc>0985-b<k1>Sak<k2>Sak<h>1
{#Sak#} 1¦. {%śak,%} cl. 5. P. {%śaknoti,%} cl. 4. P. A.
{%śakyati, -te%} (in the A. not to be dis-
tinguished from the Pass., see below; Ved. forms,
Impv. {%śagdhi,%} Pot. {%śakeyam, śakema%}), {%śaśāka,%}
{%śeke, śakṣyati, -te, aśakat%} (or if used in cl. 4. the
following are said by some to be substituted, 2nd
Fut. {%śakiṣyati, -te,%} Aor. {%aśakīt%} or {%asākīt, aśa-%}
{%kiṣṭa%}), {%śaktum%} ({%śakitum,%} Ved. {%śaktave%}), to be
able, to be able to effect, to be competent for
(with inf., e. g. {%vīkṣituṃ na śaknoti,%} he is not
able to look; {%martuṃ na śakyāmi,%} I am not able
to die; or even with part., e. g. {%pūrayan na śak-%}
{%noti,%} he is not able to fill); to be powerful; to
bear, endure; to give, present (Ved.); to aid (Ved.);
[Page0985-c+ 81]
to know (Ved.): Pass. {%śakyate,%} Aor. {%aśāki,%} to be
able, be capable, be possible, be practicable (giving
a passive sense to a following inf., e. g. {%tac chettuṃ%}
{%śakyate,%} that is able to be cut, that can be cut;
{%tat kartuṃ śakyate,%} that can be done; {%na śak-%}
{%yante tyaktum,%} they cannot be abandoned; some-
times used with a participle, e. g. {%na śakyate vār-%}
{%yamāṇaḥ,%} he cannot be restrained; or used imper-
sonally, e. g. {%yadi tvayā śakyate,%} if it can be done
by thee): Caus. {%śākayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśīśakat:%}
Intens. {%śāśakyate, śāśakīti%} or {%śāśakti:%} Desid.
{%śikṣati, -te%} [cf. {%śikṣ,%} s. v.], to wish to be able or
to be able to effect; to learn; to give, bestow, enrich
(Ved.); to aid, assist (Ved.); to instruct (Ved.):
Caus. of Desid. {%śikṣayati, -yitum,%} to teach, in-
struct (with two acc., e. g. {%taṃ raṇa-śikṣām aśi-%}
{%kṣayat,%} he instructed him in the art of war); [cf.
Lat. <nsi>queo</nsi> (for <nsi>quec-jo</nsi>), <nsi>ne-queo, conari:</nsi> Old Norse
<nsi>hagr,</nsi> ‘the right hand;’ <nsi>hagna,</nsi> ‘to be of service.’]
<LEND>

<L>45958<pc>0985-c<k1>Sak<k2>Sak<h>2
2. {%śak, k, k, k,%}¦ able, powerful (at the end of a
comp., e. g. {%sarva-śak,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>45959<pc>0985-c<k1>Saka<k2>Saka
{%Śaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king (especially applied to
Śāli-vāhana); an era, epoch (especially that of the
monarch Śāli-vāhana, commencing seventy-eight
years after the Christian; cf. {%śāka%}); N. of a country;
of a particular tribe or race of people, (usually {%ās,%} pl.;
in the legends which relate the contests between
Vasiṣṭha and Viśvā-mitra the Śakas are fabled to
have been produced by the Cow of Vasiṣṭha, from
her sweat, for the destruction of Viśvā-mitra's army;
in Manu X. 44. they are mentioned together with
the Pauṇḍrakas, Oḍras, Draviḍas, Kāmbojas, Javanas
or Yavanas, Pāradas, Pahlavas, Cīnas, Kirātas, Da-
radas, and Khaśas, who are all described by Kullūka
as degraded tribes of Kṣatriyas, called after the dis-
tricts in which they reside: according to the Viṣṇu-
Purāṇa IV. 3. the great king Sagara made an effort
to rid his kingdom of these tribes, who appear to
have overrun the western districts of India; the Śakas
who were not destroyed were deprived of their social
position and were compelled to shave the fore part
of their heads: they are sometimes regarded as the
followers of Śaka or Śāli-vāhana, and probably to be
identified with the Tartars or Scythians [Lat. <nsi>Sacœ</nsi>]
who overran India before the Āryans, and were
supposed to have been exterminated by the great
Vikramāditya, king of Oujein and rival of Śāli-
vāhana); ({%am%}), n., Ved. water ({%= udaka,%} Naigh. I.
12; cf. {%śaka-pūta, śaka-maya,%} under {%śakan%}).
{%—Śaka-kartṛ, tā,%} m. the founder or establisher of
an era. {%—Śaka-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a country.
{%—Śaka-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Śaka-%}
{%vṛddhi, is,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Śakādhipa-rāja-%}
{%dhānī (˚ka-adh˚),%} f. the capital of the king of the
Śakas, i. e. Ḍillī. {%—Śakāntaka (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m.
‘destroyer of the Śakas,’ epithet of king Vikramā-
ditya. {%—Śakābda (˚ka-ab˚), am,%} n. a year of the
Śaka era, (see above.) {%—Śakāri (˚ka-ari), is,%} m.
‘enemy of the Śakas,’ epithet of king Vikramāditya.
<LEND>

<L>45960<pc>0985-c<k1>Sakaca<k2>Sakaca
{%Śakaca,%}¦ perhaps for {%Śaka-ja,%} ‘Scythian-born,’ in
Rāja-taraṅgiṇī V. 176.
<LEND>

<L>45961<pc>0985-c<k1>Sakita<k2>Sakita
{%Śakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ able, capable, (giving a passive
sense to the inf., e. g. {%na śakitaṃ chettum,%} it
could not be cut.)
<LEND>

<L>45962<pc>0985-c<k1>Sakta<k2>Sakta
{%Śakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ able, capable, competent (with
inf. or with loc. in the sense of an inf., e. g. {%śaktaḥ%}
{%pari-rakṣitum%} or {%śaktaḥ pari-rakṣaṇe,%} able to
preserve); strong, mighty, powerful; one who has
the power of giving, opulent, rich (Manu XI. 9);
significant, expressive; speaking kindly or pleasantly
({%= priyaṃ-vada%}); clever, diligent, attentive, in-
tent. {%—Śakta-tā,%} f. or {%śakta-tva, am,%} n. ability,
power, capacity. {%—Śaktārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a potential sense.
<LEND>

<L>45963<pc>0985-c<k1>Sakti<k2>Sakti
{%Śakti, is,%}¦ f. ability, power, capacity, capability,
faculty, strength, energy, prowess; regal power (hav-
ing three parts or constituent elements, viz. 1. {%pra-%}
{%bhu-tva,%} the majesty or pre-eminence of the king
himself; 2. {%mantra,%} the power of good counsel;
3. {%utsāha,%} the force of energy); the energy or
active power of a deity personified as his wife and
[Page0986-a+ 81]
worshipped under various names, (sometimes only
eight Śakti goddesses are enumerated, as follow, In-
drāṇī, Vaiṣṇavī, Śāntā, Brahmāṇī, Kaumārī, Nāra-
siṃhī, Vārāhī, and Māheśvarī, but some substitute
Cāmuṇḍā and Caṇḍikā for the third and sixth of
these: according to another reckoning there are nine,
viz. Vaiṣṇavī, Brahmāṇī, Raudrī, Māheśvarī, Nāra-
siṃhī, Vārāhī, Indrāṇī, Kārttikī, and Pradhānā: others
reckon fifty different forms of the Śakti of Viṣṇu
besides Lakṣmī, some of these are Kīrtti, Kānti,
Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭā, Dhṛti, Śānti, Kriyā, Dayā, Medhā,
&c.; and fifty forms of the Śakti of Śiva or Rudra
besides Durgā or Gaurī, some of whom are Guṇo-
darī, Virajā, Śālmalī, Lolākṣī, Vartulākṣī, Dīrgha-
ghoṇā, Sudīrgha-mukhī, Go-mukhī, Dīrgha-jihvā,
Kuṇḍodarī, Ardha-keśī, Vikṛta-mukhī, Jvālā-mukhī,
Ulkā-mukhī, &c.; Sarasvatī is also named as a Śakti,
both of Viṣṇu and Rudra: according to the Vāyu-
Purāṇa the female nature of Rudra became twofold,
one half {%asita%} or white, and the other {%sita%} or black,
each of these again becoming manifold, those of the
white or mild nature included Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī,
Gaurī, Umā, &c.; those of the dark and fierce nature,
Durgā, Kālī, &c.); the female organ (as the counter-
part of the phallic representation of Śiva, and wor-
shipped either literally or figuratively by a sect of
Hindūs termed Śāktas, see {%śākta%}); the power or
signification (of a word), force or meaning of a term
(defined in the Nyāya as the relation of the term to
the thing designated {%padasya padārthe samban-%}
{%dhaḥ%}); an iron spear, lance, pike, dart [cf. {%śāk-%}
{%tīka%}]; a sword; a kind of implement or instrument
used in gambling; allaying or appeasing opposition;
({%is%}), m., N. of a Muni or sage (the eldest of Va-
siṣṭha's hundred sons; according to Viṣṇu-Purāṇa
I. 1. he was father of Parāśara, and was devoured by
king Kalmāṣa-pāda, when changed to a man-eating
Rākṣasa, in consequence of a curse pronounced upon
him by the sage; he is represented as having over-
come the power and speech of Viśvā-mitra at the
sacrifice of king Saudāsa, and is regarded as the Ṛṣi
of Ṛg-veda VII. 32, 26, IX. 97, 19 — 21, IX. 108,
3, 14 — 16; Śakti is also identified with one of the
Vyāsas, and elsewhere with the sage Jātūkarṇa).
{%—Śakti-kuṇṭhana, am,%} n. (in phil.) the deadening
of a capacity. {%—Śakti-kumāra, as,%} m., N. of a
poet. {%—Śakti-gaṇa, as,%} m. the company or assem-
blage of the Śaktis, (see under {%śakti%} above.) {%—Śakti-%}
{%graha, as, ā, am,%} taking hold of the force or mean-
ing (of a word or sentence); apprehending the
meaning (in any particular sense), acceptation (of a
word &c.); holding or bearing a spear or lance,
armed with a spear; ({%as%}), m. perception or appre-
hension of the force or sense (of a word); a spear-
man, lancer; epithet of Śiva; of Kārttikeya. {%—Śakti-%}
{%grāhaka, as, ikā, am,%} who or what causes to ap-
prehend the force or signification (of a word or
phrase), determining or establishing the meaning of
words (as a dictionary, grammar, &c.); taking hold
of the force (of a word &c.); holding a spear, &c.
{%—Śakti-ja, as, ā, am,%} born from Śakti; ({%as%}), m.
son of Śakti. {%—Śakti-tas,%} ind. according to power,
to the best of one's ability. {%—Śakti-tā,%} f. power,
capacity, faculty. {%—Śakti-traya, am,%} n. the three
constituents of regal power (viz. king, minister, and
energy; see {%śakti%}). {%—Śakti-dhara, as,%} m. a spear-
man, lancer; epithet of Kārttikeya. {%—Śakti-dhṛk%}
(see {%dhṛk,%} p. 459), bearing a spear. {%—Śakti-parṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. the tree Echites Scholaris {%(= sapta-parṇa).%}
{%—Śakti-pāṇi, is,%} m. ‘spear-handed,’ armed with a
spear or lance, a spearman; epithet of Kārttikeya.
{%—Śakti-pāta, as,%} m. prostration of strength. {%—Śak-%}
{%ti-pūjaka, as,%} m. a Śakti-worshipper, a Śākta, (see
{%śakti, śākta.%}) {%—Śakti-pūjā,%} f. Śakti-worship, (see
above.) {%—Śakti-pūrva, as,%} m. ‘having Śakti for a
forefather,’ epithet of Parāśara (as son of Śakti).
{%—Śakti-prakarṣa, as, ā, am,%} possessing superior
capacity or extraordinary power. {%—Śakti-bhṛt, t, t,%}
{%t,%} bearing a spear, armed with a spear; ({%t%}), m. a
spearman, lancer; epithet of Kārttikeya. {%—Śakti-%}
{%bheda, as,%} m. difference of power; a special capacity.
[Page0986-b+ 81]
{%—Śakti-bhairava-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra
work. {%—Śakti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of ability,
powerful, mighty, able; possessing a competence,
one who has gained a fortune. {%—Śakti-yāmala,%} N.
of a work. {%—Śakti-ratnākara (˚na-āk˚), as,%} m.
‘jewel-mine of Śakti,’ N. of a work on the mystical
worship of Śakti or Durgā, (it contains five chapters
compiled from the Tantras and Purāṇas.) {%—Śakti-%}
{%vāda%} or {%śakti-vicāra, as,%} m., N. of a philosophical
work by Gadādhara-bhaṭṭācārya. {%—Śakti-vādin, ī,%}
m. one who asserts or believes in Śakti-worship.
{%—Śakti-vaikalya, am,%} n. deficiency of power,
impairment of strength, incapacity, debility. {%—Śakti-%}
{%hīna, as, ā, am,%} powerless, impotent. {%—Śakti-he-%}
{%tika, as,%} m. one who has a spear for a weapon, a
spearman, lancer, soldier armed with a lance. {%—Śak-%}
{%ty-apekṣa, as, ā, am,%} having regard or reference
to ability, according to power or capacity. {%—Śakty-%}
{%ardha, as,%} m. perspiring and panting with exertion
or fatigue, (according to Śabda-k. {%= śrama-dvārā%}
{%kukṣi-lalāṭa-grīvāsūtpanno gharmo dīrgha-ni-%}
{%śvāsaś-ca.%}) {%—Śakty-avara, as, ā, am,%} junior to
Śakti.
<LEND>

<L>45964<pc>0986-b<k1>SaktI<k2>SaktI
{%Śaktī,%}¦ f. {%= śakti,%} see Vopa-deva IV. 27.
<LEND>

<L>45965<pc>0986-b<k1>Saktri<k2>Saktri
{%Śaktri, is,%}¦ m., N. of the eldest of the hundred
sons of Vasiṣṭha ({%= śakti%}).
<LEND>

<L>45966<pc>0986-b<k1>Saktrin<k2>Saktrin
{%Śaktrin, ī,%}¦ m. a proper N., {%= śaktri%} above.
<LEND>

<L>45967<pc>0986-b<k1>Sakna<k2>Sakna
{%Śakna, as, ā, am, = śaknu%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>45968<pc>0986-b<k1>Saknu<k2>Saknu
{%Śaknu, us, us, u,%}¦ speaking kindly or pleasingly;
[cf. rt. {%śac.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45969<pc>0986-b<k1>SaknuvAna<k2>SaknuvAna
{%Śaknuvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ having power, being able,
({%tat soḍhum a-śaknuvānaḥ,%} not being able to bear
that.)
<LEND>

<L>45970<pc>0986-b<k1>Sakman<k2>Sakman
{%Śakman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. power, strength; energy,
action; ({%ā%}), m., Ved., N. of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>45971<pc>0986-b<k1>Sakya<k2>Sakya
{%Śakya, as, ā, am,%}¦ able, possible, capable, prac-
ticable, able to be effected or done, easy to be ac-
complished (frequently with inf. in passive sense,
e. g. {%na sā śakyā netum balāt,%} she cannot be con-
ducted by force; {%tan mayā śakyam pratipattum,%}
that is able to be acquired by me); that may be
conveyed or expressed (as sense or meaning by any
particular word &c.). {%—Śakya-tama, as, ā, am,%}
most possible, very possible or practicable, ({%tan na%}
{%śakyatamaṃ kartuṃ,%} that is not at all possible to
be done.) {%—Śakya-tā,%} f. or {%śakya-tva, am,%} n.
possibility, practicability, capacity, capability. {%—Śak-%}
{%yatāvacchedaka (˚tā-av˚), am,%} n. (according to
Śabda-k.) {%= śakyāṃśe bhāsamāna-dharmaḥ%}. {%—Śak-%}
{%ya-pratīkāra, as,%} m. a possible remedy or counter-
agent; ({%as, ā, am%}), capable of being counteracted,
remediable. {%—Śakyārtha (˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m. admis-
sible meaning, the meaning conveyed by a word.
<LEND>

<L>45972<pc>0986-b<k1>Sakra<k2>Sakra
{%Śakra, as, ā, am,%}¦ strong, powerful, mighty (Ved.);
({%as%}), m. ‘the powerful one,’ N. of the god Indra,
(see {%indra%}); of one of the twelve Ādityas; of Śiva;
the plant Wrightia Antidysenterica (or Nerium Anti-
dysentericum); the tree Pentaptera Arjuna. {%—Śakra-%}
{%krīḍācala (˚ḍā-āc˚), as,%} m. ‘Indra's pleasure-moun-
tain,’ epithet of the mountain Meru. {%—Śakra-gopa,%}
{%as,%} m. a particular red insect, the coccinella or a
lady-bird of various species {%(= indra-gopa)%}. {%—Śa-%}
{%kra-ja%} or {%śakra-jāta, as, ā, am,%} Indra-born; ({%as%}),
m. a crow. {%—Śakra-jit, t,%} m. ‘conquerer of Indra,’
epithet of the son of Rāvaṇa, (his first name was
Megha-nāda, but after his victory over Indra, described
in the Rāmāyaṇa, Uttara-kāṇḍa XXXIV, his name
was changed by Brahmā to Indra-jit, q. v.; he was
killed by Lakṣmaṇa.) {%—Śakra-tejas, ās, ās, as,%}
glorious or vigorous as Indra. {%—Śakra-druma, as,%}
m. ‘Indra's tree,’ the Deva-dāru. {%—Śakra-dhanus,%}
{%us,%} n. ‘Indra's bow,’ the rainbow. {%—Śakra-dhvaja,%}
{%as,%} m. a standard or flag set up in honour of Indra.
{%—Śakra-dhvajotsava (˚ja-ut˚), as,%} m. {%= śakrot-%}
{%sava%} below. {%—Śakra-nandana, as,%} m. ‘Indra's
son,’ epithet of Arjuna. {%—Śakra-paryāya, as,%} m.
‘synonym of Indra,’ the medicinal shrub Wrightia
Antidysenterica {%(= kuṭa-ja)%}. {%—Śakra-pādapa, as,%}
m. ‘Indra's tree,’ a sort of pine, Pinus Devadāru;
Wrightia Antidysenterica. {%—Śakra-puṣpikā%} or
{%śakra-puṣpī,%} f. ‘having flowers like those of the
[Page0986-c+ 80]
Pentaptera Arjuna,’ a sort of pot-herb ({%= viśalyā%});
another plant {%(= agni-śikhā)%}. {%—Śakra-prastha,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. ‘presided over by Indra,’ N. of
ancient Delhi {%(= indra-prastha)%}. {%—Śakra-bha-%}
{%vana%} or {%śakra-bhuvana, am,%} n. ‘the abode or
heaven of Indra,’ Svarga, paradise, heaven, the sky.
{%—Śakra-bhid, t,%} m. ‘Indra-conqueror,’ epithet of
the son of Rāvaṇa, (see {%śakra-jit.%}) {%—Śakra-bhū-%}
{%bhavā,%} f. colocynth, Cucumis Coloquintida. {%—Śa-%}
{%kra-mātṛ, tā,%} f. the mother of Indra; a particular
plant {%(= bhārgī)%}. {%—Śakra-mātṛkā,%} f. a wooden
peg or post driven into the ground for supporting
Indra's banner. {%—Śakra-mūrdhan, ā,%} m. ‘Indra's
head,’ an ant-hill, hillock. {%—Śakra-yaśo-vidhvaṃ-%}
{%sana, am,%} N. of the 108th chapter of the Krīḍā-
khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Śakra-rūpa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the form of Indra. {%—Śakra-loka, as,%}
m. the world or sphere of Indra, paradise, Svarga.
{%—Śakraloka-bhāj, k, k, k,%} sharing the sphere of
Indra, having a portion in paradise. {%—Śakra-vallī,%}
f. colocynth {%(= indra-vāruṇī)%}. {%—Śakra-vāhana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘Indra's vehicle,’ a cloud. {%—Śakra-vīja, am,%}
n. ‘Indra-seed,’ the seed of Wrightia Antidysenterica.
{%—Śakra-śarāsana, am,%} n. ‘Indra's bow,’ the rain-
bow. {%—Śakra-śākhin, ī,%} m. ‘Indra's tree,’ Wrightia
Antidysenterica. {%—Śakra-śālā,%} f. ‘Indra's hall,’ a
place or room prepared for sacrifices. {%—Śakra-śiras,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘Indra's head,’ an ant-hill. {%—Śakra-sārathi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘the charioteer of Indra,’ epithet of Mātali.
{%—Śakra-suta, as,%} m. ‘Indra's son,’ epithet of Ar-
juna; of the monkey Bāli. {%—Śakra-sudhā,%} f. ‘Indra's
nectar,’ the resin of Boswellia Thurifera, gum oli-
banum {%(= pālaṅkī)%}. {%—Śakra-sṛṣṭā,%} f. ‘Indra-
created,’ yellow myrobalan, Terminalia Chebula (fabled
to have sprung from the ground on which Indra spilt
a drop of nectar). {%—Śakrākhya (˚ra-ākh˚), as,%} m.
‘Indra-named,’ an owl. {%—Śakrātmaja (˚ra-āt˚), as,%}
m. Indra's own son. {%—Śakrāśana (˚ra-aś˚), as,%} m.
‘Indra-food,’ the medicinal plant Wrightia Antidy-
senterica (fabled to have sprung from the drops of
Amṛta which fell on the ground from the bodies of
Rāma's monkeys restored to life by Indra); ({%am%}),
n. an intoxicating drink prepared from hemp {%(=%}
{%bhaṅgā)%}. {%—Śakrāsana (˚ra-ās˚), am,%} n. ‘Indra's
seat,’ a throne. {%—Śakrāhva (˚ra-āh˚), as,%} m.
‘Indra-named,’ the seed of Wrightia Antidysenterica.
{%—Śakrotthāna (˚ra-ut˚), am,%} n. ‘raising up of
[the banner of] Indra,’ {%= śakrotsava%} below; [cf.
{%dhvajotthāna.%}] {%—Śakrotsava (˚ra-ut˚), as,%} m.
‘Indra-festival,’ a festival in honour of Indra on the
twelfth day of the light half of the month Bhādra
(when a flag or banner was set up, {%= dhvajotthāna%}).
<LEND>

<L>45973<pc>0986-c<k1>SakrARI<k2>SakrARI
{%Śakrāṇī,%}¦ f., N. of Sacī (wife of Indra).
<LEND>

<L>45974<pc>0986-c<k1>Sakri<k2>Sakri
{%Śakri, is,%}¦ m. a cloud; a thunderbolt; an elephant;
a mountain.
<LEND>

<L>45975<pc>0986-c<k1>Sakla<k2>Sakla
{%Śakla, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking pleasingly or kindly,
affable; [cf. rt. {%śac.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45976<pc>0986-c<k1>Sakvan<k2>Sakvan
{%Śakvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. powerful, able, mighty;
({%ā%}), m. an elephant; ({%arī%}), f. a kind of river, &c.
See under {%śakvara%} below.
<LEND>

<L>45977<pc>0986-c<k1>Sakvara<k2>Sakvara
{%Śakvara, as,%}¦ m. a bull, an ox [cf. {%śakkara%}];
({%ī%}), f. a kind of river ({%= nadī-viśeṣa, nadī-bheda%});
a finger, (according to some, a finger-ring); a zone,
girdle; a particular metre, (a stanza of four Pādas of
fourteen syllables each, comprising at least twenty
varieties, of which one of the commonest is called
Vasanta-tilaka; cf. {%śakkarī, śarkarī%}); an arm
(Ved.); a cow; (the fem. {%śakvarī%} may equally be
referred to {%śakvan%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>45978<pc>0986-c<k1>Sagma<k2>Sagma
{%Śagma, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. able, powerful, mighty
[cf. {%tuvi-ś˚%}]; prosperous, happy, causing happiness
({%= sukha-kara%} or {%sukha,%} and according to Sāy. de-
rived fr. {%śam%} + rt. {%gam%}).
<LEND>

<L>45979<pc>0986-c<k1>Sagman<k2>Sagman
{%Śagman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. a various reading for {%śakman%}
in Naigh. II. 1.
<LEND>

<L>45980<pc>0986-c<k1>Sagmya<k2>Sagmya
{%Śagmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. powerful, mighty;
prosperous, happy; [cf. {%śagma.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45981<pc>0986-c<k1>Sikzita<k2>Sikzita
{%Śikṣita, śikṣu,%}¦ &c. See p. 1004, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>45982<pc>0986-c<k1>Sakawa<k2>Sakawa
{#Sakawa#}¦ {%śakaṭa, as, am,%} m. n. (according
to Uṇādi-s. IV. 81. fr. rt. 1. {%śak%}), a cart, waggon,
[Page0987-a+ 78]
(said to be also {%ī,%} f.); ({%as%}), m. the figure of a cart
formed by the five stars composing the lunar asterism
Rohiṇī; a form of military array resembling a wedge,
({%sūcy-ākārāgraḥ paścāt-pṛthulaḥ,%} Manu VII.
187); a cart-load (= 2000 Palas); an implement
for preparing grain; N. of a demon slain by the
infant Kṛṣṇa; a particular tree ({%= tiniśa%}); N. of
a place. {%—Śakaṭa-bheda, as,%} m. division of the Śa-
kaṭa asterism by the moon or a planet passing through
it. {%—Śakaṭa-vila, as,%} m. a kind of water-hen, gal-
linule. {%—Śakaṭa-han, hā,%} m. ‘destroyer of the
demon Śakaṭa,’ an epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Śakaṭākṣa%}
{%(˚ṭa-ak˚), as,%} m. the axle of a cart. {%—Śakaṭāri (˚ṭa-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of Śakaṭa,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
{%—Śakaṭāsura (˚ṭa-as˚), as,%} m. the demon Śakaṭa
(killed by the infant Kṛṣṇa). {%—Śakaṭāhvā (˚ṭa-%}
{%āh˚),%} f. ‘cart-named,’ the asterism Rohiṇī, (the five
stars of which are figured as a cart.) {%—Śakaṭoccā-%}
{%ṭana (˚ṭa-uc˚), am,%} n. the upsetting or overturning
of a cart.
<LEND>

<L>45983<pc>0987-a<k1>SakawAra<k2>SakawAra
{%Śakaṭāra, as,%}¦ m. a bird of prey, (perhaps a kind
of vulture); N. of a minister of king Nanda, (in
revenge for ill-treatment he conspired with the
Brāhman Cāṇakya to effect his master's death); N.
of an ape. {%—Śakaṭāropākhyāna (˚ra-up˚), am,%} n.
story of (the ape) Śakaṭāra.
<LEND>

<L>45984<pc>0987-a<k1>SakawAla<k2>SakawAla
{%Śakaṭāla, as,%}¦ m. {%= śakaṭāra,%} the minister of king
Nanda or (according to some) of Śūdraka.
<LEND>

<L>45985<pc>0987-a<k1>SakawikA<k2>SakawikA
{%Śakaṭikā,%}¦ f. a small cart, a child's cart, toy-cart;
[cf. {%mṛc-chakaṭikā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>45986<pc>0987-a<k1>Sakan<k2>Sakan
{#Sakan#}¦ {%śakan,%} n. a defective word option-
ally substituted for {%śakṛt%} in certain cases, see
col. 2. {%—Śaka-dhūma, as,%} m., Ved. the smoke of
burnt or burning (cow-) dung. {%—Śaka-pūta, as,%} m.
‘purified with cow-dung’ (or ‘purified with water;’
cf. {%śaka%}); N. of the author of Ṛg-veda X. 132
(having the patronymic Nārmedha). {%—Śaka-maya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} Ved. consisting of dung, arising from cow-
dung, (Sāy. {%= śuṣka-gomaya-sambhūta,%} Ṛg-veda
1. 164, 43.) {%—Śaka-loṭa%} (for {%śaka-loṣṭa%}), {%as,%} m.,
Ved. a lump or ball of cow-dung ({%= śakṛt-piṇḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>45987<pc>0987-a<k1>Sakala<k2>Sakala
{#Sakala#}¦ {%śakala, as, am,%} m. n. (according to
Uṇādi-s. I. 111. fr. rt. 1. {%śak;%} more probably con-
nected with {%śarkarā,%} q. v.; cf. {%śalka%}), a part, portion,
piece, fragment; a potsherd; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.;
({%am%}), n. skin, bark; the scales of a fish [cf. {%śalka, śal-%}
{%kala%}]; a kind of black pigment or die. {%—Śakalī-ka-%}
{%raṇa, am,%} n. the act of cutting or breaking in pieces.
{%—Śakalī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to break
in pieces, cut to pieces, reduce to fragments, divide,
bruise. {%—Śakalī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} cut in pieces,
reduced to fragments, broken to bits; divided, dis-
sected.
<LEND>

<L>45988<pc>0987-a<k1>Sakalita<k2>Sakalita
{%Śakalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reduced to fragments, mashed,
bruised.
<LEND>

<L>45989<pc>0987-a<k1>Sakalin<k2>Sakalin
{%Śakalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having scales, scaled; ({%ī%}), m.
a fish.
<LEND>

<L>45990<pc>0987-a<k1>Sakalyezin<k2>Sakalyezin
{%Śakalyeṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ in Atharva-veda I. 25, 2,
according to Atharva-veda Prātiśākhya III. 52. for
{%śakalya-eṣin,%} said to mean ‘desiring fragments of
wood’ (as a flame of fire).
<LEND>

<L>45991<pc>0987-a<k1>Sakava<k2>Sakava
{#Sakava#}¦ {%śakava, as,%} m. (doubtful), a goose.
<LEND>

<L>45992<pc>0987-a<k1>SakaSakAyat<k2>SakaSakAyat
{#SakaSakAyat#}¦ {%śakaśakāyat, an, antī, at%} (part.
of an onomatopoetic verb formed fr. the imitative
sound {%śaka%}), making a rustling noise, rustling (as
the leaves of a tree in the wind).
<LEND>

<L>45993<pc>0987-a<k1>SakAra<k2>SakAra
{#SakAra#}¦ {%śakāra, as,%} m. the brother of a
king's concubine, a king's brother-in-law by one of
his wives not regularly married (represented in the
drama as a foolish, frivolous, proud, low, and cruel
man).
<LEND>

<L>45994<pc>0987-a<k1>Sakuna<k2>Sakuna
{#Sakuna#}¦ {%śakuna, as,%} m. (according to Uṇā-
di-s. III. 49. fr. rt. 1. {%śak%}), a bird (in general); a
particular kind of bird, (perhaps {%= gṛdhra,%} a vulture,
or {%= cilla,%} the common kite, or perhaps the Pondi-
cherry eagle); a kind of Brāhman ({%= vipra-bheda%});
a sort of hymn or song (sung at festivals to secure
good fortune); ({%as, ā%} or {%ī?, am%}), indicating good
[Page0987-b+ 80]
luck, auspicious; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of bird ({%= śyāmā%});
a hen-sparrow; the form assumed by Pūtanā, (see
Hari-vaṃśa 3423); ({%am%}), n. any auspicious object
or lucky omen, a prognostic or omen (in general,
but rarely applied to anything inauspicious). {%—Śa-%}
{%kuna-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing omens; ({%ā%}), f. a
small house-lizard. {%—Śakuna-jñāna, am,%} n. ‘omen-
knowledge,’ N. of a chapter in the Śārṅga-dhara-
paddhati. {%—Śakuna-dīpikā,%} f. ‘omen-light,’ N. of a
work on good and evil omens by Gaṇeśa. {%—Śakuna-%}
{%śāstra, am,%} n. ‘omen-book,’ N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>45995<pc>0987-b<k1>Sakuni<k2>Sakuni
{%Śakuni, is,%}¦ m. a bird; a vulture, kite, eagle;
(according to some) a cock; N. of the brother of
queen Gāndhārī (and therefore the brother-in-law
of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra and the Mātula or maternal uncle
of the Kuru princes; as son of Su-bala, king of
Gāndhāra, he is called Saubala; he often acted as
counsellor of Duryodhana, and hence this name is
sometimes applied to an old officious relative whose
counsels tend to ruin); N. of one of the astronomical
periods called invariable Karaṇas; N. of a son of
Duḥ-saha; of a son of Vikukṣi; ({%ī%}), m. du., N. of
the Aśvins; ({%is%}), f., N. of a demon causing a particular
sickness of children; a demon slain by Kṛṣṇa; [cf.
Old Norse <nsi>haukr;</nsi> Danish <nsi>hog;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>habuh;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>hafoc.</nsi>] {%—Śakuni-prapā,%} f. a trough or
place for watering birds {%(= śrī-graha)%}. {%—Śakuni-%}
{%vāda, as,%} m. the cry or sound of a bird; the crow-
ing of a cock. {%—Śakunīśvara (˚ni-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord
of birds,’ epithet of Garuḍa.
<LEND>

<L>45996<pc>0987-b<k1>SakunI<k2>SakunI
{%Śakunī.%}¦ See under {%śakuna%} and {%śakuni.%}
<LEND>

<L>45997<pc>0987-b<k1>Sakunta<k2>Sakunta
{%Śakunta, as,%}¦ m. a bird (in general); a particular
kind of bird (probably the Indian vulture or perhaps
a sort of falcon described as of aquatic habits); the
blue jay; a sort of insect.
<LEND>

<L>45998<pc>0987-b<k1>Sakuntaka<k2>Sakuntaka
{%Śakuntaka, as,%}¦ m. a bird; (see also {%śakuntikā%}
below.)
<LEND>

<L>45999<pc>0987-b<k1>SakuntalA<k2>SakuntalA
{%Śakuntalā,%}¦ f. (said to be fr. {%śakunta%}), N. of a
daughter of the Apsaras Menakā by Viśvā-mitra, (she
was supposed to have been born and left in a solitary
forest, where she was protected by birds till found
by the sage Kaṇva, who took her to his hermitage
and reared her as his daughter; she was there seen
by king Dushyanta, when on a hunting expedition,
and married by him, and became the mother of
Bharata, sovereign of all India; the story of Dush-
yanta's accidental meeting with Śakuntalā, their
marriage, separation, his repudiation of her through
temporary loss of memory caused by a curse, his
subsequent recognition of her by means of a ring
he had once given her which she had lost but after-
wards recovered, forms the subject of Kālidāsa's
celebrated drama called Abhijñāna-śakuntala, q. v.)
{%—Śakuntalātmaja (˚lā-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘Śakuntalā's
son,’ epithet of Bharata, sovereign of India. {%—Śa-%}
{%kuntalopākhyāna (˚lā-up˚), am,%} n. ‘story of Śa-
kuntalā,’ N. of chapters 69-74 of the Ādi-parvan of
the Mahā-bhārata and of the first five chapters of the
Svarga-khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>46000<pc>0987-b<k1>Sakunti<k2>Sakunti
{%Śakunti, is,%}¦ m. a bird (in general); a kind of
bird, (see {%śakunta.%})
<LEND>

<L>46001<pc>0987-b<k1>SakuntikA<k2>SakuntikA
{%Śakuntikā,%}¦ f. a kind of bird, perhaps the Franco-
line partridge [cf. {%śakuntaka%}]; a locust, cricket.
<LEND>

<L>46002<pc>0987-b<k1>Sakula<k2>Sakula
{#Sakula#}¦ {%śakula, as,%} m. a kind of fish (per-
haps the gilt-head); ({%ī%}), f. another sort of fish
(commonly called Mṛgāl, Cyprinus Mrigala); [cf.
{%śakalin.%}] {%—Śakula-gaṇḍa, as,%} m. a kind of fish
(probably the gilt-head, {%= śāla%}). {%—Śakulākṣaka%}
{%(˚la-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘fish-eyed,’ white bent-grass, Pa-
nicum Dactylon, (the blossoms are white and com-
pared to the eye of a fish.) {%—Śakulākṣī (˚la-ak˚),%}
f. a kind of Dūrvā grass {%(= gaṇḍa-dūrvā)%}. {%—Śa-%}
{%kulādanī (˚la-ad˚),%} f. a medicinal plant (commonly
called Kaṭki, {%= cakrāṅgī%}); a kind of creeping plant;
N. of various other plants; a sort of drug (commonly
called Kāyaphal, {%= māṃsī%}); an earth-worm. {%—Śa-%}
{%kulārbhaka (˚la-ar˚), as,%} m. a sort of fish ({%= ga-%}
{%ḍaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>46003<pc>0987-b<k1>Sakft<k2>Sakft
{#Sakft#}¦ {%śakṛt, t,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 58. fr. rt. 1. {%śak;%} according to others connected
[Page0987-c+ 77]
with rt. 1. {%kṝ;%} sometimes written {%sakṛt;%} the base
of some cases is {%śakan,%} following the analogy of {%ya-%}
{%kṛt,%} q. v.), excrement, ordure, feces, dung, cow-
dung; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σκώρ</lang> (gen. <lang n="greek">σκατ-ός</lang>), <lang n="greek">σκωρ-ία,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σκέπ-βολος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>sterc-us, ster-qui-liniu-m;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>skearn;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>spai-skuldrs,</nsi> ‘spittle;’ Slav. <nsi>skvri-</nsi>
<nsi>na, skar-edovati.</nsi>] {%—Śakṛt-kara, as, ī, am,%} dung-
making; ({%ī%}), f. a calf. {%—Śakṛt-kari, is,%} m. f. ‘dung-
making,’ a calf. {%—Śakṛt-kāra, as, ā, am,%} making
ordure. {%—Śakṛt-piṇḍa, as,%} m. a lump or ball of
cow-dung. {%—Śakṛd-graha, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a bar-
barous race, (also read {%śakṛd-guha, śakṛd-vaha.%})
{%—Śakṛd-dvāra, am,%} n. ‘door of the feces,’ the
anus.
<LEND>

<L>46004<pc>0987-c<k1>Sakkara<k2>Sakkara
{#Sakkara#}¦ {%śakkara, as,%} m. ({%= śakvara%}), a bull;
({%ī%}), f. a river; a zone, girdle; a particular kind of
metre ({%= śakvarī,%} q. v.); a woman of impure caste.
<LEND>

<L>46005<pc>0987-c<k1>Sakkari<k2>Sakkari
{%Śakkari, is,%}¦ m. a bull; [cf. {%śakkara%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>46006<pc>0987-c<k1>SaktavaH<k2>SaktavaH
{#SaktavaH#}¦ {%śaktavaḥ,%} m. pl. See {%śaktu.%}
<LEND>

<L>46007<pc>0987-c<k1>Sakti<k2>Sakti
{#Sakti#}¦ {%śakti,%} &c. See p. 985, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>46008<pc>0987-c<k1>Saktu<k2>Saktu
{#Saktu#}¦ {%śaktu, us, u,%} m. n. (also written {%saktu,%}
q. v.; according to some properly used in masc. pl.
{%śaktavaḥ%} only), the flour or meal of barley or grain
of any kind (fried or parched before it is ground),
barley-meal. {%—Śaktu-phalā,%} or {%ī,%} f. the Śami tree,
Mimosa Suma, (also read {%saktu-phalā,%} q. v.) {%—Śak-%}
{%tu-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become flour, consisting of
flour. {%—Śaktu-śarāva, as,%} m. a pot full of barley-
meal.
<LEND>

<L>46009<pc>0987-c<k1>Saktuka<k2>Saktuka
{%Śaktuka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of poison or poisonous
substance.
<LEND>

<L>46010<pc>0987-c<k1>Sakvan<k2>Sakvan
{#Sakvan#}¦ {%śakvan,%} &c. See p. 986, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>46011<pc>0987-c<k1>Sagma<k2>Sagma
{#Sagma#}¦ {%śagma.%} See p. 986, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>46012<pc>0987-c<k1>SaNk<k2>SaNk
{#SaNk#}¦ {%śaṅk,%} cl. 1. A. {%śaṅkate%} (ep. also P.
{%-ti%}), {%śaśaṅke, śaṅkiṣyate, aśaṅkiṣṭa,%}
{%śaṅkitum,%} to doubt, be doubtful or uncertain, hesi-
tate; to distrust, fear, dread, be afraid; to suspect,
have a suspicion; to think probable, believe, imagine,
think, opine; (in argumentative works) to ponder
over or propound a doubt or objection: Pass. {%śaṅk-%}
{%yate,%} Aor. {%aśaṅki,%} to be doubted, &c.: Caus. {%śaṅka-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśaśaṅkat, -ta,%} to cause to
doubt; to frighten; [cf. Lat. <nsi>cunc-tari;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>hugjan, hugs;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>hugjan, hugu;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>hangian, hige, hyge, hogu, hygian, hyggan,</nsi>
<nsi>hicgan, hogian.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46013<pc>0987-c<k1>SaNka<k2>SaNka
{%Śaṅka, as,%}¦ m. a draught-ox; ({%ā%}), f. doubt, un-
certainty, hesitation, scruple, distrust, suspicion, mis-
giving, fear, apprehension; an objection started in
disputation; presumption; hope; error; a species
of the Daṇḍaka metre. {%—Śaṅkākula (˚kā-āk˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} bewildered by doubt, filled with fear or sus-
picion. {%—Śaṅkā-nivartaka, as, ikā, am,%} putting
an end to doubt. {%—Śaṅkānvita (˚kā-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} filled with doubt, apprehensive, doubtful, afraid.
{%—Śaṅkābhiyoga (˚kā-abh˚), as,%} m. accusation or
charge on suspicion. {%—Śaṅkā-maya, as, ī, am,%} full
of doubt or uncertainty, fearful, afraid. {%—Śaṅkā-%}
{%śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a hesitating or diffident dispo-
sition, prone to doubt. {%—Śaṅkāspada (˚kā-ās˚),%}
{%am,%} n. cause or matter of doubt, subject of appre-
hension, object of suspicion. {%—Śaṅkā-spṛṣṭa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} touched with fear, seized with alarm. {%—Śaṅkā-%}
{%hīna, as, ā, am,%} free from doubt or apprehension.
<LEND>

<L>46014<pc>0987-c<k1>SaNkana<k2>SaNkana
{%Śaṅkana, as,%}¦ m. ‘causing fear or awe,’ N. of a
king.
<LEND>

<L>46015<pc>0987-c<k1>SaNkanIya<k2>SaNkanIya
{%Śaṅkanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be doubted or ques-
tioned, questionable, doubtful; to be suspected or
apprehended; to be supposed or imagined.
<LEND>

<L>46016<pc>0987-c<k1>SaNkamAna<k2>SaNkamAna
{%Śaṅkamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ doubting, suspecting, fear-
ing, apprehending; being doubtful or uncertain.
<LEND>

<L>46017<pc>0987-c<k1>SaNkita<k2>SaNkita
{%Śaṅkita, as, ā, am,%}¦ doubted, apprehended, feared,
suspected, distrusted; doubtful, uncertain; alarmed,
frightened, apprehensive, fearful of (with gen. or
abl.); distrustful, suspicious, suspecting; weak, un-
steady. {%—Śaṅkita-manas, ās, ās, as,%} one whose
mind is doubtful or suspicious, faint-hearted, timid,
[Page0988-a+ 80]
apprehensive. {%—Śaṅkita-varṇaka, as,%} m. ‘whose
appearance or caste is doubted,’ a thief.
<LEND>

<L>46018<pc>0988-a<k1>SaNkitavya<k2>SaNkitavya
{%Śaṅkitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be doubted, doubtful,
questionable, &c. ({%= śaṅkanīya%}).
<LEND>

<L>46019<pc>0988-a<k1>SaNkin<k2>SaNkin
{%Śaṅkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ doubting, suspecting, fearing,
fearful of; full of danger.
<LEND>

<L>46020<pc>0988-a<k1>SaNkura<k2>SaNkura
{%Śaṅkura, as, ā, am,%}¦ fearful, formidable, frightful,
terrible.
<LEND>

<L>46021<pc>0988-a<k1>SaNkya<k2>SaNkya
{%Śaṅkya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be doubted, to be appre-
hended or feared.
<LEND>

<L>46022<pc>0988-a<k1>SaNkara<k2>SaNkara
{#SaNkara#}¦ {%śaṅ-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (i. e. 2. {%śa%}
or 2. {%śam%} + 1. {%kara%}), causing happiness, conferring
good fortune or prosperity, auspicious, propitious,
well-disposed; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; N. of a
celebrated teacher of the Vedānta philosophy, (see
{%śaṅkarācārya%} below); of a poet; of a com-
mentator on the Bengālī recension of Kālidāsa's
Śakuntalā; of an astronomer, (also called {%bhaṭṭa-%}
{%śaṅkara%}); of the author of a drama called Śāradā-
tilaka; of the author of the Dvaita-nirṇaya; of
the author of the Karma-vipāka and the Saṃskāra-
bhāskara; of the author of the Rasa-candrikā com-
mentary; of a Dānava; ({%ā%}), f. a particular Rāga or
musical mode; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of Śiva; Bengal
madder; the Śamī tree. {%—Śaṅkara-kiṅkara, as,%}
m. ‘Śaṅkara's servant,’ a proper N. {%—Śaṅkara-%}
{%kroḍa, as,%} m., N. of a Nyāya commentary. {%—Śaṅ-%}
{%kara-gītā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Śaṅkara-ceto-vilāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the play of Śaṅkara's wit,’ N. of an artificial
poem by Śaṅkara-dīkṣita (celebrating the glories of
Vārāṇasī, especially of its kings Yavanāri and Ceta-
siṃha or Cheyt Singh). {%—Śaṅkara-jī%} and {%śaṅkara-%}
{%jīka,%} m., N. of two scribes. {%—Śaṅkara-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Śaṅkara-%}
{%dig-vijaya, as,%} m. ‘Śaṅkara's victory over the
world,’ {%= śaṅkara-vijaya%} below; N. of another
similar work by Mādhava or Abhinava-kālidāsa pro-
fessing to be a short account of Śaṅkarācārya's con-
troversial exploits. {%—Śaṅkara-dīkṣita, as,%} m., N.
of a writer of the last century (author of the Gaṅ-
gāvatāraṇa-campū-prabandha, Pradyumna-vijaya, and
Śaṅkara-ceto-vilāsa). {%—Śaṅkara-priya, as,%} m.
‘dear to Śaṅkara,’ the Francoline partridge {%(= tit-%}
{%tiri)%}. {%—Śaṅkara-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Kuṇḍoddyotana-darśana. {%—Śaṅkara-var-%}
{%dhana, as,%} and {%śaṅkara-varman, ā,%} m., N. of
two persons. {%—Śaṅkara-vijaya, as,%} m. ‘Śaṅkara's
victory,’ N. of a biography of Śaṅkarācārya by
Ānanda-giri (recording his victories, as a Vedāntin,
over numerous heretics, and refuting the superstitions
prevalent in his day by a popular exposition of the
Vedānta philosophy). {%—Śaṅkara-saṃhitā,%} f., N.
of a part of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Śaṅkara-sena,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of a commentary on the
Nāḍī-prakāśa. {%—Śaṅkarācārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a celebrated teacher of the Vedānta philosophy,
(he is thought to have lived between A. D. 650 and
740, but according to tradition he flourished 200 B. C.,
and was a native of Kerala or Malabar; all accounts
describe him as having led an erratic controversial
life; his learning and sanctity were in such repute
that he was held to have worked various miracles
[amongst others, animating the dead body of a king
Amaru so as to be able to argue with the wife of
Mandana], and to have been an incarnation of the
god Śiva, whose worship he enjoined; he is said to
have died at the age of thirty-two, and, before his
death, to have resided in Cashmere, and afterwards
in the Himālaya; he had four principal disciples,
called Padma-pāda, Hastāmalaka, Sureśvara or Man-
dana, and Troṭaka, and another of his disciples,
Ānanda-giri, wrote a history of his controversial
exploits, called Śaṅkara-vijaya, q. v.; tradition
makes him the founder of one of the prin-
cipal Śaiva sects, the Daś-nāmī-Daṇḍins or ‘Ten-
named Mendicants,’ so called because divided into
ten classes, each distinguished by one or other of the
names of the ten pupils of the above-mentioned
four disciples of Śaṅkara [see {%śaiva%}]; he is the
reputed author of a large number of original works
[Page0988-b+ 79]
with the following titles, Ātma-bodha, Ānanda-laharī,
Ānanda-laharī-stotra, Jñāna-bodhinī, A-parokṣānu-
bhūti-sudhārṇava, Upadeśa-sahasrī, Vākya-sudhā,
Kādi-krama-stuti, Dhanya-stotra, Maṇi-ratna-mālā,
Ganeśa-bhujaṅga-prayāta-stotra, Caturdaśa-mata-
viveka, Tārā-pajjhaṭikā, Tripurī-prakaraṇa; and
commentaries on the following, Chāndogyopani-
shad, Bṛhad-āraṇyakopaniṣad, Praśnopaniṣad, Īśā-
vāsyopaniṣad, Kaṭha-vally-upaniṣad, Taittirīyopa-
niṣad, Aitareyopaniṣad, Kenopaniṣad, Māṇḍūkyo-
paniṣad, Muṇḍakopaniṣad, Brahma-mīmāṃsā or
Śārīraka-mīmāṃsā or Vedānta-sūtra, Bhagavad-gītā,
Mahā-bhārata, Viṣṇu-sahasra-nāman); a N. given
to the president of a Maṭha or college founded by
Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Śaṅkarācārya-vijaya-diṇḍima,%}
N. of a commentary by Dhana-pati on the Saṅkṣepa-
śaṅkara-jaya. {%—Śaṅkarānanda (˚ra-ān˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a commentary on the Muṇḍakopaniṣad.
{%—Śaṅkarābharaṇa (˚ra-ābh˚), as,%} m. a particular
Rāga or musical mode. {%—Śaṅkarāvāsa (˚ra-āv˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the abode of Śiva, Kailāsa; a kind of cam-
phor ({%= karpūra-bheda%}).
<LEND>

<L>46023<pc>0988-b<k1>SaNkavya<k2>SaNkavya
{#SaNkavya#}¦ {%śaṅkavya.%} See under {%śaṅku%} below.
<LEND>

<L>46024<pc>0988-b<k1>SaNku<k2>SaNku
{#SaNku#}¦ {%śaṅku, us,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. I. 37. said to
be fr. rt. {%śaṅk;%} in some senses connected with rt. 1. {%śak%}),
fear, apprehension; a stake, spike, pile, post, pale,
pin, nail, peg, pillar; the spoke of a wheel (Ved.);
a dart, javelin, spear, dagger, weapon (in general);
the trunk of a lopped tree; the style or pin of a
dial (usually twelve fingers long); the measure of
twelve fingers; (in astronomy) the sine of altitude;
a measuring-rod; a long thin column in front of a
pagoda; the penis; the fibres of a leaf; the tree
Shorea Robusta; the skate fish; the perfume called
Nakhī; a goose; an ant-hill; a very high number,
ten billions (as implied by an innumerable collection
of ants, but cf. {%śaṅkha%}); a demon; poison, sin;
N. of Śiva; of a Gandharva attendant on Śiva; of
a king; of Kāma; of a son of Ugra-sena; of a poet
(a son of Mayūra). {%—Śaṅku-karṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%}
having ears (pointed) like a spear, spike-eared,
pricking the ears; ({%as%}), m. an ass. {%—Śaṅku-jīvā,%}
f. (in astronomy) the gnomon-sine. {%—Śaṅku-taru,%}
{%us,%} or {%śaṅku-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the Sāl tree, Shorea
Robusta. {%—Śaṅku-mat, ān, atī, at,%} filled with
stakes or spikes; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a metre. {%—Śaṅku-%}
{%śiras, ās,%} m. ‘spear-headed,’ N. of a Dānava.
<LEND>

<L>46025<pc>0988-b<k1>SaNkavya<k2>SaNkavya
{%Śaṅkavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for a stake; ({%am%}), n.
anything fit for a stake (as wood &c.).
<LEND>

<L>46026<pc>0988-b<k1>SaNkuka<k2>SaNkuka
{%Śaṅkuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a poet (the author of
the Bhuvanābhyudaya); of a writer on rhetoric.
<LEND>

<L>46027<pc>0988-b<k1>SaNkuci<k2>SaNkuci
{%Śaṅkuci, is,%}¦ m. a skate fish.
<LEND>

<L>46028<pc>0988-b<k1>SaNkulA<k2>SaNkulA
{%Śaṅkulā,%}¦ f. a kind of lancet or knife; a pair of
nippers or scissors (used to cut the betel-nut into
small pieces; cf. {%danta-śaṅku%}). {%—Śaṅkulā-khaṇḍa,%}
{%am,%} n. a piece cut off with a pair of nippers.
<LEND>

<L>46029<pc>0988-b<k1>SaNkoca<k2>SaNkoca
{%Śaṅkoca, as,%}¦ or {%śaṅkoci, is,%} m. a skate fish.
<LEND>

<L>46030<pc>0988-b<k1>SaNKa<k2>SaNKa
{#SaNKa#}¦ {%śaṅkha, as, am,%} m. n. (in Uṇādi-s. I.
104. said to be fr. rt. 1. {%śam%}), a shell, the conch-
shell (used for offering libations or, when perforated
at one end, for blowing as a horn); a horn, trumpet,
(in the battle pieces of epic poetry each hero is
represented as provided with a conch-shell, which
serves as his horn, and often has a name; that of
Kṛṣṇa was called {%pāñcajanya,%} q. v.); ({%as%}), m.
the temporal bone, temple; the bone of the forehead
or frontal bone; an elephant's cheek or the part
between his tusks ({%= hasti-danta-madhya%}); a par-
ticular high number (said to equal a hundred bil-
lions or one hundred thousand Krores, {%= daśa-ni-%}
{%kharva;%} cf. {%śaṅku%}); one of Kuvera's treasures; a
particular perfume (commonly called Nakhī and ap-
parently a kind of dried shell-fish); a military drum
or other martial instrument; N. of a Daitya (who
conquered the gods, stole the Vedas, and carried
them off to the bottom of the sea, from whence
they were recovered by Viṣṇu in the form of a
fish); N. of one of the eight chiefs of the Nāgas or
serpents of Pātāla (described as of a yellow colour);
[Page0988-c+ 81]
N. of the author of a law-book; of a poet (one of
the nine gems at the court of king Vikramāditya);
of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 15 (having
the patronymic Yāmāyana); of one of the six minor
Dvīpas; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a Gotra; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κόγχος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κόγχη, κόλχος, κόχλος, κάλχη;</lang> Lat. <nsi>concha.</nsi>] {%—Śaṅ-%}
{%kha-karṇī,%} f. a kind of poison; [cf. {%mahā-pañca-%}
{%viṣa.%}] {%—Śaṅkha-kāra%} or {%śaṅkha-kāraka, as,%} m.
a worker in shells, shell-cutter (described as a kind
of mixed caste; cf. {%śāṅkhika%}). {%—Śaṅkha-kūṭa,%}
N. of a mountain. {%—Śaṅkha-kṣīra, am,%} n. ‘shell-
milk,’ any impossibility or absurdity. {%—Śaṅkha-%}
{%cakra-gadā-dhara, as,%} m. ‘holding a conch, a
discus, and a mace,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Śaṅkha-%}
{%carī%} or {%śaṅkha-carcī,%} f. a mark made with sandal
on the forehead. {%—Śaṅkha-cūrṇa, am,%} n. ‘shell-
powder, powder produced from shells. {%—Śaṅkha-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} shell-born, produced from shells;
({%as%}), m. a large pearl shaped like a pigeon's egg.
{%—Śaṅkha-drāva%} or {%-drāvaka, as,%} m. a solvent for
dissolving the conch or other shells (used in medi-
cine). {%—Śaṅkha-drāvin, ī,%} m. ‘shell-fuser,’ a kind
of sorrel {%(= amla-vetasa)%}. {%—Śaṅkha-dhara, as,%}
m., N. of an author; of a poet; ({%ā%}), f. a pot-herb
{%(= hila-mocikā)%}. {%—Śaṅkha-dhma, as,%} or {%śaṅ-%}
{%kha-dhmā, ās,%} m. a shell-blower, horn-blower, one
who plays on the conch or horn. {%—Śaṅkha-dhvani,%}
{%is,%} m. the sound of a conch or horn. {%—Śaṅkha-%}
{%nakha, as,%} m. a small shell, the shell of the Trochus
Perspectivus; the perfume called Nakhī (said to be a
kind of dried shell-fish, see {%nakhī%}); another kind
of perfume, {%= vṛhan-nakhī;%} ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. the per-
fume called Nakhī. {%—Śaṅkha-nābha, as,%} m., N.
of a king. {%—Śaṅkha-pād, t,%} or {%śaṅkha-pāda, as,%}
m., N. of a son of Kardama (said to have been made
regent of the south, Viṣṇu-Purāṇa I. 22). {%—Śaṅkha-%}
{%pāla, as,%} m. ‘shell-nourisher,’ epithet of the sun;
N. of a Nāga or serpent of Pātāla. {%—Śaṅkha-puṣ-%}
{%pī,%} f. a sort of plant {%(= kambu-puṣpī)%}. {%—Śaṅkha-%}
{%praṇāda, as,%} m. the sound of a conch or horn.
{%—Śaṅkha-pravara, as, am,%} m. n. an excellent
shell, the best shell. {%—Śaṅkha-prastha, as,%} m. a
mark or spot on the moon. {%—Śaṅkha-bhinna, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} see Vopa-deva IV. 20. {%—Śaṅkha-bhṛt, t, t, t,%}
carrying or bearing a conch-shell; ({%t%}), m. an epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Śaṅkha-muktā,%} f. mother of pearl;
({%ās%}), f. pl. shells and pearls. {%—Śaṅkha-mukha, as,%}
m. ‘shell-faced,’ an alligator. {%—Śaṅkha-mūla, am,%}
n. a particular esculent root {%(= mūlaka)%}. {%—Śaṅkha-%}
{%rāj, ṭ,%} m. the best of shells. {%—Śaṅkha-rāvita, am,%}
n. a sound of conches. {%—Śaṅkha-likhita, au,%} m. du.
the two Ṛṣis, Śaṅkha and Likhita (authors of a
law-book); ({%as%}), m. a king who practises justice,
a just king; {%Śaṅkhalikhitā vṛttiḥ,%} conduct re-
sembling that of Śaṅkha and Likhita. {%—Śaṅkha-%}
{%likhita-priya, as,%} m. beloved by Śaṅkha and
Likhita, a friend of strict justice. {%—Śaṅkha-smṛti,%}
{%is,%} f. the law-book of Śaṅkha. {%—Śaṅkha-svana, as,%}
m. the sound of a conch or trumpet. {%—Śaṅkhākhya%}
{%(˚kha-ākh˚), as,%} m. a kind of perfume {%(= vṛhan-%}
{%nakhī)%}. {%—Śaṅkhāntara-dyotin (˚kha-an˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} shining in the middle of the frontal bone.
{%—Śaṅkhāsura (˚kha-as˚), as,%} m. the Daitya
Śaṅkha. {%—Śaṅkhāhvā (˚kha-āh˚),%} f. a sort of
plant {%(= śaṅkha-puṣpī)%}. {%—Śaṅkhodaka (˚kha-%}
{%ud˚), am,%} n. the water poured into a conch-shell.
<LEND>

<L>46031<pc>0988-c<k1>SaNKaka<k2>SaNKaka
{%Śaṅkhaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the conch-shell; ({%as%}),
m. a disease of the head (described as a pain in the
forehead and heat with a puffiness in the temples);
the temporal bone or temple; ({%am%}), n. a bracelet
(often made of conch-shell).
<LEND>

<L>46032<pc>0988-c<k1>SaNKikA<k2>SaNKikA
{%Śaṅkhikā,%}¦ f. a kind of grass, Andropogon Acicu-
latum.
<LEND>

<L>46033<pc>0988-c<k1>SaNKin<k2>SaNKin
{%Śaṅkhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing shells, having or
holding a conch-shell; ({%ī%}), m. the ocean; a worker
in shells; a shell-blower; an epithet of Viṣṇu;
({%inī%}), f., N. of various plants, a sort of grass, Andro-
pogon Aciculatum; a particular plant, Cissampelos
Hexandra; another plant ({%= yava-tiktā%}); N. of one
of the four classes into which females are divided
(described as tall and handsome, with long eyes and
[Page0989-a+ 77]
hair, marked with three lines on the neck, amorous
and irascible, and neither stout nor thin); a particular
goddess or Śakti worshipped by Buddhists; a female
spirit, a kind of semi-divine being or fairy {%(= upa-%}
{%devatā-viśeṣa)%}. {%—Śaṅkhinī-phala, as,%} m. the
Śirīṣa tree. {%—Śaṅkhinī-phala, as,%} m. the
Śirīṣa tree. {%—Śaṅkhinī-vāsa, as,%} m. a small tree,
Trophis Aspera ({%= śākhoṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>46034<pc>0989-a<k1>Sac<k2>Sac
{#Sac#}¦ {%śac,%} cl. 1. A. {%śacate, śece, śacitum,%}
to speak, say, tell; to be strong, &c., (in
this sense for rt. 1. {%śak,%} see the derivatives below.)
<LEND>

<L>46035<pc>0989-a<k1>Saci<k2>Saci
{%Śaci, is,%}¦ f. {%= śacī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>46036<pc>0989-a<k1>SacizWa<k2>SacizWa
{%Śaciṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. strongest, most power-
ful, very powerful.
<LEND>

<L>46037<pc>0989-a<k1>SacI<k2>SacI
{%Śacī,%}¦ f. speech, power of speech, eloquence ({%= vāc,%}
Naigh. I. 11); activity, diligence, energy, skilfulness
({%= prajñā,%} Naigh. III. 9); power, strength, action,
exploit, (Sāy. and Naigh. II. 1 {%= karma%}); any holy
act, devotion; N. of the wife of Indra, (in the pre-
ceding senses chiefly Ved.); the plant Asparagus
Racemosus; the astronomical Karaṇa or period
named Viṣṭi; Śacī Paulomī is given as the authoress
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 159. {%—Śacī-nara, as,%}
m., N. of a king of Kaśmīra. {%—Śacī-pati, is,%} m.
‘lord of power,’ or ‘husband of Śacī,’ epithet of
Indra; ({%ī%}), m. du. ‘lords of pious acts,’ epithet of
the Aśvins (Ved.) {%—Śacī-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
possessing power, strong, (Sāy. {%= karma-vat%}); wise,
(Sāy. {%= prajñā-vat%}); ({%ān%}), m. epithet of Indra,
({%śacīvas,%} voc. c. ‘O powerful one.’) {%—Śacī-vasu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. rich or abounding in strength, en-
riched by holy rites.
<LEND>

<L>46038<pc>0989-a<k1>SaYc<k2>SaYc
{#SaYc#}¦ {%śañc%} (= rt. {%śvac,%} q. v.), cl. 1. A.
{%śañcate,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>46039<pc>0989-a<k1>Saw<k2>Saw
{#Saw#}¦ {%śaṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%śaṭati, śaṭitum,%} to be
sick or diseased; to divide, separate, pierce;
to be dissolved; to be weary or dejected; to go;
cl. 10. A. {%śāṭayate, -yitum,%} to praise, flatter (= rt.
1. {%śaṭh%}).
<LEND>

<L>46040<pc>0989-a<k1>Sawa<k2>Sawa
{%Śaṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (said to be fr. rt. {%śaṭ%} above),
sour, astringent, acid.
<LEND>

<L>46041<pc>0989-a<k1>Sawi<k2>Sawi
{%Śaṭi, is,%}¦ f. the plant called Zedoary or Curcuma
Amhaldi (otherwise Curcuma Zerumbet; there are
thirty-eight synonyms of this plant; cf. {%gandhā,%}
{%gandha-mūlī,%} &c.); a particular kind of ginger (the
fresh root of which is scented like a green mango).
<LEND>

<L>46042<pc>0989-a<k1>SawI<k2>SawI
{%Śaṭī,%}¦ f. {%= śaṭi%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46043<pc>0989-a<k1>SawA<k2>SawA
{#SawA#}¦ {%śaṭā,%} f. ({%= saṭā, jaṭā%}), an ascetic's
clotted hair.
<LEND>

<L>46044<pc>0989-a<k1>Sawwaka<k2>Sawwaka
{#Sawwaka#}¦ {%śaṭṭaka, am,%} n. flour of rice mixed
with water and ghee.
<LEND>

<L>46045<pc>0989-a<k1>SaW<k2>SaW<h>1
{#SaW#} 1¦. {%śaṭh%} [cf. rts. {%śaṭ, śal%}], cl. 10. A.
{%śāṭhayate, -yitum,%} to praise.
<LEND>

<L>46046<pc>0989-a<k1>SaW<k2>SaW<h>2
{#SaW#} 2¦. {%śaṭh%} (= rt. 1. {%śvaṭh%}), cl. 10. P.
{%śaṭhayati, -yitum,%} to speak ill; (according
to some) to speak correctly or well or elegantly; to
be true.
<LEND>

<L>46047<pc>0989-a<k1>SaW<k2>SaW<h>3
{#SaW#} 3¦. {%śaṭh%} (= rts. 2. {%śvaṭh, saṭh, svaṭh%}),
cl. 10. P. {%śāṭhayati, -yitum,%} to accom-
plish, finish, adorn; to leave unfinished or unorna-
mented; to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>46048<pc>0989-a<k1>SaW<k2>SaW<h>4
{#SaW#} 4¦. {%śaṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%śaṭhati, śaṭhitum,%}
to cheat, defraud, deceive; to hurt, kill;
to suffer pain; cl. 10. P. {%śāṭhayati, -yitum,%} to be
idle or lazy.
<LEND>

<L>46049<pc>0989-a<k1>SaWa<k2>SaWa
{%Śaṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (probably connected with {%śatru;%}
cf. {%śatera%}), wicked, depraved, perverse, dishonest,
perfidious, cunning, crafty, deceitful; ({%as%}), m. a
rogue, knave; a false husband or lover (who pretends
affection for one female while his heart is fixed on
another; one of the four classes into which husbands
are divided); a fool, blockhead; an idler; a medi-
ator, umpire, arbitrator; the thorn-apple, Datura
Metel; ({%am%}), n. a sort of plant or its root ({%= ta-%}
{%gara%}); saffron, iron; [cf. Hib. <nsi>sath,</nsi> ‘evil;’ <nsi>saith,</nsi>
‘vulgar, vile.’] {%—Śaṭha-tā,%} f. or {%śaṭha-tva, am,%} n.
wickedness, depravity, roguery, knavery. {%—Śaṭha- %}
[Page0989-b+ 77]
{%tācaraṇa (˚tā-āc˚), am,%} n. wicked or roguish con-
duct. {%—Śaṭhāmbā (˚ṭha-am˚),%} f. a particular plant
({%= amba-ṣṭhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46050<pc>0989-b<k1>SaR<k2>SaR
{#SaR#}¦ {%śaṇ,%} cl. 1. or 10. P. {%śaṇati, śaṇa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to give; to go (?).
<LEND>

<L>46051<pc>0989-b<k1>SaRa<k2>SaRa
{%Śaṇa, am,%}¦ n. hemp, Cannabis Sativa; ({%as%}), m. a
kind of hemp (commonly called Bengal Śaṇ; also
Crotolaria Juncea); an arrow, (in this sense perhaps
connected with {%śara%}); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κάνναβις;</lang> Lat. <nsi>can-</nsi>
<nsi>nabis;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>kanápe†;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>kanopla;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>ca-</nsi>
<nsi>naib;</nsi> Old Iceland. <nsi>hanp;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hœnep;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>hanaf;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>hanf.</nsi>] {%—Śaṇa-%}
{%ghaṇṭikā,%} f. {%= śaṇa-puṣpī%}. {%—Śaṇa-tantu, us,%} m.
thread or string made of the flax of the Crotolaria
Juncea. {%—Śaṇa-tāntava (?), as, ī, am,%} made of
hempen string. {%—Śaṇa-parṇī,%} f. the tree Pentaptera
Tomentosa. {%—Śaṇa-puṣpī%} or {%śaṇa-puṣpikā,%} f.
Crotolaria of various species. {%—Śaṇa-śakala, as,%} m. a
piece of hemp. {%—Śaṇa-sūtra, am,%} n. the fibre or flax
of Śaṇ or hemp, hempen cord or string; a net made
of hemp; the thread of the Crotolaria Juncea;
cordage, twine. {%—Śaṇasūtra-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of hempen threads or cord.
<LEND>

<L>46052<pc>0989-b<k1>SaRAlu<k2>SaRAlu
{%Śaṇālu, us,%}¦ or {%śaṇāluka, as,%} m. the tree Cassia
Fistula ({%= ārevata%}).
<LEND>

<L>46053<pc>0989-b<k1>SaRikA<k2>SaRikA
{%Śaṇikā,%}¦ f. {%= śaṇa-puṣpī%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46054<pc>0989-b<k1>SaRIra<k2>SaRIra
{#SaRIra#}¦ {%śaṇīra, am,%} n. a bank or alluvial
island in the middle of the river Śoṇa; an insular
spot enclosed by the branches of the river Surjoo at
the point where it falls into the Ganges above Chu-
pra, (this spot is also called Dardarī-taṭa, ‘Dardarī-
bank.’)
<LEND>

<L>46055<pc>0989-b<k1>SaRWa<k2>SaRWa
{#SaRWa#}¦ {%śaṇṭha, as,%} m. a eunuch ({%= śaṇḍha,%}
q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>46056<pc>0989-b<k1>SaRq<k2>SaRq
{#SaRq#}¦ {%śaṇḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%śaṇḍate, śaṇḍitum,%}
to hurt, wound, cause disease or sickness;
to collect, heap together.
<LEND>

<L>46057<pc>0989-b<k1>SaRqa<k2>SaRqa
{%Śaṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 113. fr.
rt. {%śaṇḍ%} above), a eunuch; an impotent man; a
bull; a bull at liberty; N. of an Asura priest (Ved.);
({%am%}), n. a multitude of lotus-flowers. {%—Śaṇḍa-tā,%}
f. impotence, emasculation; the state of a bull or of
a bull at liberty. {%—Śaṇḍāmarka (˚ḍa-am˚)%} or (ac-
cording to others) {%śaṇḍā-marka, au,%} m. du. Śaṇḍa
and Amarka or Marka, N. of two demons.
<LEND>

<L>46058<pc>0989-b<k1>SaRqika<k2>SaRqika
{%Śaṇḍika, ās,%}¦ m. pl., Ved. the descendants of Śaṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>46059<pc>0989-b<k1>SaRqila<k2>SaRqila
{%Śaṇḍila, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 55. fr.
rt. {%śaṇḍ%}), N. of an ancient sage (ancestor of a par-
ticular family of Brāhmans); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
Gotra or family.
<LEND>

<L>46060<pc>0989-b<k1>SaRQa<k2>SaRQa
{#SaRQa#}¦ {%śaṇḍha, as,%} m. (according to Uṇā-
di-s. I. 101. fr. rt. 1. {%śam%}), a eunuch; an attendant
in a harem or women's apartments; an impotent
man; a bull; a bull at liberty; a mad man, drunken
man; [cf. {%śaṇḍa, ṣaṇḍa, ṣaṇḍha,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>46061<pc>0989-b<k1>Sata<k2>Sata
{#Sata#}¦ {%śata, am,%} n. (thought by some to be
a corruption fr. {%daśata,%} cf. {%daśati%}), a hundred,
({%śatāt para,%} beyond a hundred, exceeding a hun-
dred: {%śata%} is used in the sing. with a plur. noun,
e. g. {%śatam pitaraḥ%} or {%śatam pitṝṇām,%} a hundred
ancestors; and used with other numerals thus, {%ekā-%}
{%dhikaṃ śatam%} or {%eka-śatam,%} a hundred + one, 101;
{%dvy-adhikaṃ śatam%} or {%dvi-śatam,%} a hundred +
two, 102; {%ekādaśādhikaṃ śatam%} or {%ekādaśaṃ%}
{%śatam%} or {%ekādaśa-śatam,%} a hundred + eleven or
a hundred having eleven, 111; {%viṃśaty-adhikaṃ%}
{%śatam%} or {%viṃśaṃ śatam,%} a hundred + twenty, 120);
any very large number (in comp., cf. {%śata-pattra%}
&c. below); ({%e%}), n. du. two hundred (e. g. {%śate%} or
{%dve śate%} or {%dvi-śatam,%} two hundred); ({%āni%}), n. pl.
hundreds (e. g. {%trīṇi śatāni%} or {%tri-śatāni,%} three
hundred; there occurs also rarely a form in {%ās,%} m.
pl., e. g. {%śataṃ śatāḥ,%} ‘one hundred hundred,’ i. e.
ten thousand; {%sapta śatāḥ,%} seven hundred); ({%am%}),
ind., Ved. a hundred (in Ṛg-veda I. 48, 7); ({%ī%}), f.
a hundred (used in comp., e. g. {%dvi-śatī,%} two hundred;
{%daśa-śatī,%} ten hundred); ({%as, ī, am%}), the hundredth
[Page0989-c+ 81]
(so used against Pāṇ. V. 2, 57); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἑ-κατόν</lang>
(fr. <lang n="greek">ἑ=ἕν,</lang> ‘one,’ and <lang n="greek">κατο</lang> {%= śata%}); Lat. <nsi>centum;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>hund;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hund;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>szimta-s;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>sto;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>céat:</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>cant;</nsi> Armor.
<nsi>kant.</nsi>] {%—Śata-kīrtti, is,%} m., N. of an Arhat of the
future Utsapiṇī. {%—Śata-kunda, as,%} m. a particular
plant {%(= kara-vīra)%}. {%—Śata-kumbha, am,%} n. gold;
({%as%}), m., N. of a mountain; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Phyalis
Flexuosa; N. of a river. {%—Śata-kṛtvas,%} ind. a hun-
dred times. {%—Śata-koṭi, is, is, i,%} having a hundred
edges; ({%is%}), m. Indra's thunderbolt; ({%is%}), f. a hun-
dred Krores {%(= abja)%}. {%—Śata-kratu, us,%} m. ‘having
or honoured by a hundred sacrifices,’ epithet of Indra
(a hundred Aśva-medhas elevating the sacrificer to the
rank of Indra; cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἑκατομβαῖος</lang>). {%—Śata-khaṇ-%}
{%ḍa, am,%} n. ‘hundred-pieced,’ gold. {%—Śatakhaṇḍa-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of a hundred pieces;
made of gold. {%—Śata-gu, us, us, u,%} possessed of a
hundred cows. {%—Śata-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} a hundred-
fold, a hundred times. {%—Śataguṇādhikam (˚ṇa-%}
{%adh˚),%} ind. more than a hundred times. {%—Śata-%}
{%guṇita, as, ā, am,%} repeated a hundred times. {%—Śa-%}
{%taguṇī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become a hundred times
(as strong). {%—Śata-guptā,%} f. Euphorbia Antiquorum
{%(= peṣaṇa)%}. {%—Śata-granthi, is,%} f. ‘having a hun-
dred knots,’ Dūrvā grass. {%—Śata-gva, as, ī, am,%}
hundred-fold; [cf. {%daśa-gva, nava-gva.%}] {%—Śata-%}
{%gvin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. hundred-fold [cf. {%daśa-gvin%}];
consisting of hundreds of flocks, (Sāy. {%= śata-saṅkh-%}
{%yāka-gavādi-viśiṣṭa,%} Ṛg-veda I. 159, 5.) {%—Śa-%}
{%ta-ghnī,%} f. ‘slaying hundreds,’ a kind of weapon
(used as a missile, supposed by some to be a sort of
fire-arms or rocket, but described by the commen-
tator on the Mahā-bhārata as a stone or cylindrical
piece of wood studded with iron spikes); a female
scorpion; a kind of plant ({%= karañja%}); a disease of
the throat (enlargement of the tonsils); epithet of Śiva
(masc.). {%—Śata-cchada, as,%} m. ‘having a hundred
feathers,’ a sort of wood-pecker {%(= kāṣṭha-kuṭṭa).%}
{%—Śata-jit, t,%} m. ‘vanquishing hundreds,’ N. of a
son of Raja; of a son of Sahasra-jit; of a son of Bhaja-
māna. {%—Śata-jihva, as,%} m. ‘hundred-tongued,’ epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Śata-tama, as, ī, am,%} the hundredth.
{%—Śata-tārā,%} f. ‘having a hundred stars,’ the con-
stellation Śata-bhiṣaj, q. v., (also written {%śata-tā-%}
{%rakā.%}) {%—Śata-tejas, ās,%} m., N. of a Muni. {%—Śata-%}
{%dat, an, atī, at,%} Ved. having a hundred teeth (said
of a comb, &c.). {%—Śata-dantikā,%} f. a particular
plant {%(= nāga-dantī)%}. {%—Śata-dalā,%} f. ‘having a
hundred leaves or petals,’ the Indian white rose.
{%—Śata-dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. giving or granting a
hundred. {%—Śata-dātu, us, us, u,%} Ved. hundred-
fold. {%—Śata-dāya, as, ā, am,%} giving a hundred;
having abundant wealth; a hundred-fold, (fr. 2. {%dāya,%}
q. v.) {%—Śata-dāvan, ā,%} &c., Ved. giving a hundred,
giving bountifully, liberal, munificent. {%—Śata-dura,%}
{%am,%} n. a place having a hundred doors, a place se-
cured by many gates, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
I. 51, 3. {%śata-dureṣu = śata-dvāreṣu yantre-%}
{%ṣu.%}) {%—Śata-dyumna, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Cākṣuṣa; of a son of Bhānu-mat. {%—Śata-dru,%}
{%us,%} f. ‘flowing in a hundred (branches),’ N. of a river
now called the Sutlej, (it is the most easterly of the five
rivers of the Pañjāb, and rises in the Mānasa Saro-
vara or Mānasa lake on the Himālaya mountains;
flowing in a south-westerly direction for 550 miles,
it unites with the Vipāśā or Beas south-east of
Amritsar, [see {%vipāś%}]; it afterwards joins the Chenāb
and falls into the Indus below Multan; it is also
called {%śutu-dri, śutu-dru, śita-dru,%} &c.); N. of
the Ganges. {%—Śatad-vasu, us, us, u%} (for {%śata-%}
{%vasu%}), Ved. having hundreds of treasures, containing
much wealth. {%—Śata-dvāra, am,%} n. a hundred doors
or gates; ({%as, ā, am%}), hundred-gated, having many
doors or outlets. {%—Śata-dhanu, us,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Śata-dhanvan, ā, ā, a,%} having a hundred
bows; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a person slain by Kṛṣṇa for
having killed Satrā-jit. {%—1. śata-dhā,%} f. Dūrvā grass,
Panicum Dactylon. {%—2. śata-dhā,%} ind. in a hundred
ways; into a hundred parts, in a hundred pieces;
a hundred-fold. {%—Śata-dhāman, ā,%} m. ‘having a
[Page0990-a+ 81]
hundred forms,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Śata-dhāra,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} flowing in a hundred streams; having a
hundred edges; ({%am%}), n. the thunderbolt. {%—Śata-%}
{%dhṛti, is,%} m. ‘having a hundred sacrifices,’ epithet
of Indra; of Brahmā; Svarga or heaven. {%—Śata-%}
{%pattra, as, ā, am,%} having a hundred wings, borne
by numerous conveyances (said of Bṛhas-pati); hav-
ing a hundred, i. e. numberless leaves; ({%am%}), n. a
lotus, Nelumbium Speciosum, &c.; ({%as%}), m. ‘having
a hundred feathers,’ a peacock; the Sārasa or Indian
crane; a wood-pecker; a parrot, the king parrot,
Psittacus Lory; ({%ā%}), f. a woman; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of
flower, the Indian, white rose, Rosa Glandulifera.
{%—Śatapattraka, as,%} m. a wood-pecker [cf. {%śata-%}
{%cchada%}]; ({%ikā%}), f. the Indian white rose. {%—Śata-%}
{%pattra-nivāsa, as, ā, am,%} abiding in a lotus; ({%as%}),
m. epithet of Brahmā. {%—Śatapattra-yoni, is,%} m.
‘lotus-born,’ epithet of Brahmā. {%—Śatapattrāya-%}
{%tekṣaṇa (˚ra-āy˚, ˚ta-īk˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose
eyes are long as a lotus. {%—Śata-patha-brāhmaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘the Brāhmaṇa with a hundred paths or
lectures,’ N. of a well-known Brāhmaṇa attached to
the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā or White Yajur-veda, (like
the Saṃhitā, this Brāhmaṇa is ascribed to the Ṛṣi
Yājñavalkya; it is perhaps the most modern of the
Brāhmaṇas, and is preserved in two Śākhās or
schools, Mādhyandina and Kāṇva; the version be-
longing to the former is best known, and is divided
into fourteen Kāṇḍas or books which contain one
hundred Adhyāyas or lectures [or according to another
arrangement into sixty-eight Prapāṭhakas]; the first
nine Kāṇḍas are said to follow the first eighteen books
of the Saṃhitā in quoting their verses and explaining
their use at sacrifices almost word for word, like a
running commentary; but the last five Kāṇḍas appear
to be a more independent work, referring only occa-
sionally to the Saṃhitā; the first of these five or
the tenth Kāṇḍa is called Agni-rahasya, ‘fire-
mystery;’ the eleventh Kāṇḍa, called Aṣṭādhyāyī,
explains more fully the sacrifices previously mentioned,
such as the Agny-ādhāna &c.; the twelfth, called
Sautrāmaṇī, treats of Prāyaścitta or penance, and the
thirteenth of the Aśva-medha; the fourteenth con-
tains the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka [q. v.] Upaniṣad; the
whole work is regarded as the most systematic and
interesting of all the Brāhmaṇas, and though intended
mainly for ritual and sacrificial purposes, is full of
curious mythological details and legends; cf. {%yajur-%}
{%veda, vājasaneyi-saṃhitā, brāhmaṇa.%}) {%—Śata-%}
{%pathika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śata-pathin%}), ‘having a
hundred roads,’ following numberless paths or doc-
trines. {%—Śata-pad%} or {%śata-pād, -pāt, -pāt%} or {%-padī,%}
{%pāt%} or {%-pat,%} having a hundred feet; having a hun-
dred wheels (Ved.); ({%-pāt%} or {%-padī%}), f. a centipede.
{%—Śatapada-cakra, am,%} n. an astronomical circle
or diagram with a hundred divisions for exhibiting
the various divisions of the Nakṣatras and Signs.
{%—Śata-padī,%} see under {%śata-pad%} above. {%—Śata-%}
{%padma, am,%} n. the white lotus. {%—Śata-parvan, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} having a hundred, i. e. numberless knots or
joints; ({%ā%}), m. a bamboo. {%—Śata-parvā,%} f. ‘hundred-
jointed,’ Dūrvā grass, Panicum Dactylon; orris root;
the wife of Bhārgava or Śukra; the day of full moon
in the month Āśvina, (see {%ko-jāgara%}); a kind of
plant {%(= kaṭukā)%}. {%—Śataparvikā,%} f. Dūrvā grass;
orris root; barley. {%—Śataparveśa (˚vā-īśa), as,%}
m. ‘lord or husband of Śata-parvā,’ the planet Venus
or its regent. {%—Śata-pavitra, as, ā, am,%} Ved., see
Nirukta V. 6. {%—Śata-pād,%} see {%śata-pad%}. {%—Śata-%}
{%pādikā,%} f. a medicinal root ({%= kākolī%}); a centipede
or a kind of ear-wig. {%—Śata-pādī,%} f. a centipede.
{%—Śata-putra, as, ā, am,%} having a hundred sons.
{%—Śataputra-tā,%} f. the possession of a hundred sons.
{%—Śata-puṣpa, as, ā, am,%} having a hundred flowers,
many-flowered; ({%as%}), m. epithet of the poet Bhāravi,
(author of the Kirātārjunīya); ({%ā%}), f. a sort of dill or
fennel, Anethum Sowa {%(= misi)%}. {%—Śatapuṣpikā,%}
f. the plant Anethum Sowa. {%—Śata-prabhedana,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X.
113 (having the patronymic Vairūpa). {%—Śata-pra-%}
{%sūnā,%} f. {%= śata-puṣpā%}. {%—Śata-prāsa, as,%} m.
[Page0990-b+ 81]
‘having a hundred spikes,’ a kind of oleander, Ne-
rium Odorum (the leaves of which are compared to
spears; {%= kara-vīra%}). {%—Śata-balā,%} f., N. of a river.
{%—Śata-balāka, as,%} m., N. of a Muni. {%—Śata-%}
{%bradhna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hundred-pointed, having
a hundred points (said of the arrow of Indra; Sāy.
{%= śatāgra%}). {%—Śata-bhiṣaj, k,%} or {%śata-bhiṣā,%} f.
‘requiring a hundred physicians,’ N. of one of the
Nakṣatras or lunar mansions containing 100 stars,
one of which is <lang n="greek">λ</lang> Aquarii, (this Nakṣatra is gene-
rally placed twenty-fifth on the list, and is said to
require innumerable physicians, because Dhanvantari
himself cannot cure a person affected with disease
whilst the moon is in this asterism.) {%—Śata-bhīru,%}
{%us,%} f. ‘fearful of a hundred (dangers),’ Arabian jas-
mine. {%—Śata-bhuji, is, is, i,%} Ved. hundred-fold,
vast, extensive, (Sāy. {%= atyantaṃ vistṛta, śata-%}
{%guṇa%}); having a hundred enclosures or fortifications;
having innumerable enjoyments, (Sāy. {%= a-saṅkh-%}
{%yāta-bhogavat,%} Ṛg-veda I. 166, 8.) {%—Śata-makha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having a hundred sacrifices,’ an epithet of
Indra; [cf. {%śata-kratu.%}] {%—Śata-manyu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. receiving a hundred sacrifices; very spirited,
very zealous; ({%us%}), m. epithet of Indra. {%—Śata-%}
{%māna, as, am,%} m. n. ‘hundred-measure,’ a Pala of
silver; an Āḍhaka, q. v.; ({%as, ī, am%}), a hundred-
fold. {%—Śata-mārin, ī,%} m. ‘hundred-killer,’ a man
who has killed a hundred others. {%—Śata-mārja, as,%}
m. ‘cleaner of a hundred, i. e. numberless weapons,’
an armourer, a cutler. {%—Śata-mukha, am,%} n. a
hundred mouths or openings; a hundred ways; ({%as,%}
{%ī, am%}), having a hundred mouths, having a hundred
outlets or openings; having a hundred issues or ways.
{%—Śatam-ūti, is, is, i,%} Ved. granting a hundred aids
or great protection; [cf. {%śatoti.%}] {%—Śata-mūla, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a hundred roots; ({%ā%}), f. Dūrvā grass; a
kind of orris root, {%= vacā; (ī),%} f. Asparagus Race-
mosus (of which forty-two synonyms are given).
{%—Śata-mūlikā,%} f. ‘having a hundred roots,’ the
plant Asparagus Racemosus; another plant {%(= dra-%}
{%vantī)%}. {%—Śata-yajvan, ā,%} m. ‘sacrificing with a
hundred,’ N. of Indra; [cf. {%śata-kratu.%}] {%—Śata-%}
{%yaṣṭika, as,%} m. a necklace of a hundred strings.
{%—Śata-yātu, us,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Śata-yā-%}
{%man, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having a hundred ways. {%—Śata-%}
{%yojana, am,%} n. a hundred Yojanas. {%—Śatayojana-%}
{%yāyin, ī, inī, i,%} going a hundred Yojanas. {%—Śata-%}
{%yojana-vat,%} ind. as large as a hundred Yojanas.
{%—Śata-rā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. giving a hundred,
bestowing hundreds, i. e. countless riches, (in Naigh.
II. 3. {%śata-rā%} is enumerated among the {%sukha-%}
{%nāmāni.%}) {%—Śata-rudriya, am,%} n. a celebrated
hymn and prayer of the Yajur-veda occurring in
Vājasaneyi-s. XVI. 1 — 66, (different etymologies are
given; in one place it is said to mean ‘that by
which the hundred-headed Rudra is appeased;’ in
another {%śata%} is derived from {%śam%} as {%gata%} from
{%gam,%} and the word is regarded as {%= śānta-rudriya%});
N. of an Upaniṣad; ({%as, ā, am%}), much celebrated
({%= bahu-mantraiḥ stuta%} according to Mahī-dhara).
{%—Śatarudriya-homa, as,%} m. epithet of the six-
teenth Adhyāya of the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā. {%—Śata-%}
{%rudrīya, as, ā, am,%} (according to Śabda-k.) having
a hundred Rudras as divinity. {%—Śata-rūpa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a hundred forms, having numberless
shapes; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the daughter and wife of Brahmā,
(from her incestuous intercourse with her father is
said to have sprung Manu Svāyambhuva, but some
Purāṇas make Śata-rūpā the wife not mother of the
first Manu; in Manu 1. 32. no mention of Śata-
rūpā is made; it is there simply said that Brahmā,
having divided his own body into two, became with
the half a man and with the other half a woman, and
in her begot Virāj, who then produced Manu Svā-
yambhuva.) {%—Śatarcin (˚ta-ṛc˚), inas,%} m. pl.
epithet of the poets of the first Maṇḍala of the Ṛg-
veda. {%—Śata-lakṣa, am,%} n. a hundred lacs, ten
millions. {%—Śata-lumpa%} or {%śata-lumpaka, as,%} m.,
N. of the poet Bhāravi (author of the Kirātārjunīya).
{%—Śata-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of a hundred,
amounting to hundreds. {%—Śata-vadha, as, ā, am,%}
[Page0990-c+ 81]
Ved. slaying hundreds. {%—Śata-vani, is,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Śata-varṣa, am,%} n. a hundred years, a cen-
tury; ({%as, ā, am%}), possessing or lasting a hundred
years, of a hundred years, a century old. {%—Śata-%}
{%valśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a hundred branches.
{%—Śata-vāja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. containing a hundred
forces, having excessive power or energy. {%—Śata-%}
{%vīryā,%} f. ‘containing a hundred seeds,’ white-flower-
ing Dūrvā or Panicum Dactylon; a kind of aspa-
ragus ({%= śatāvarī%}); a kind of vine {%(= kapila-%}
{%drākṣā)%}. {%—Śata-vṛṣabha, as,%} m. epithet of the
twenty-third Muhūrta. {%—Śata-vedhin, ī,%} m. ‘pierc-
ing a hundred,’ a sort of dock or sorrel, Oxalis
Monadelpha or Rumex Vesicarius. {%—Śata-śas,%} ind.
by hundreds, in hundreds, a hundred-fold. {%—Śata-%}
{%śākha, as, ā, am,%} having a hundred branches,
many-branching; multiform, various. {%—Śataśākha-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of having a hundred branches,
condition of being much increased. {%—Śata-śāra-%}
{%dāya,%} ind., Ved. for a hundred autumns or years
{%(= śata-saṃvatsarārtham)%}. {%—Śata-śṛṅga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘hundred-horned,’ having a hundred peaks;
epithet of part of the Himālaya range. {%—Śata-ślokī,%}
f., N. of a metrical version of the Brahma-sūtra
according to the views of Madhu by Uttama-śloka-
tīrtha. {%—Śata-ślokī-candra-kalā,%} f. ‘lunar digit of
a hundred Ślokas,’ N. of a work on medicine by
Vopa-deva. {%—Śata-saṅkhya, as, ā, am,%} numbering
a hundred; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of deities in
the tenth Manv-antara. {%—Śata-saṅgha-śas,%} ind. in
collections of a hundred, by hundreds. {%—Śata-sa-%}
{%hasra, am,%} n. a hundred thousand. {%—Śatasahasra-%}
{%yāna, am,%} n. a hundred thousand roads. {%—Śatasa-%}
{%hasra-śas,%} ind. by hundreds of thousands, by myriads.
{%—Śata-sā, ās, ās, am%} (see rt. {%san%}), Ved. granting
a hundred, bestowing hundreds, i. e. countless riches.
{%—Śatasāhasra, as, ī, am,%} having or containing
a hundred thousand, bought with or consisting of a
hundred thousand, a hundred thousand-fold. {%—Śata-%}
{%seya, am,%} n. (see rt. 1. {%so%}), Ved. the effecting or
obtaining of unbounded wealth, (Sāy. {%= aparimita-%}
{%dhana-paryavasāna.%}) {%—Śata-spṛh, k, k, k,%} Ved.
wished for by hundreds, excessively desired. {%—Śata-%}
{%svin, ī,%} m., Ved. the possessor of hundreds, possess-
ing great wealth. {%—Śata-hāyana, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
containing or lasting for a hundred years. {%—Śata-%}
{%hima, as, ā, am,%} Ved. lasting for a hundred winters,
i. e. for innumerable years, (Sāy. {%= aparimita-kāla.%})
{%—Śata-hradā,%} f. ‘containing a hundred rays of
light,’ lightning; the thunderbolt; N. of one of the
daughters of Dakṣa. {%—Śata-hrādā,%} f. ‘possessing a
hundred sounds,’ the thunderbolt. {%—Śatāṃśa (˚ta-%}
{%aṃ˚), as,%} m. a hundredth part. {%—Śatākṣa (˚ta-%}
{%ak˚), as, ī, am,%} hundred-eyed; ({%ī%}), f. night; a sort
of fennel, Anethum Sowa; the goddess Pārvatī.
{%—Śatāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} consisting of
a hundred or various members; (played upon) in a
hundred or numerous ways (as by the nails, fingers,
mouth, sticks, bows, &c., said of musical instru-
ments); a particular tree, {%= tiniśa; (am),%} n. a car,
chariot, carriage. {%—Śatātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%}
Ved. containing a hundred forms, having numerous
manifestations (said of Agni). {%—Śatādhika (˚ta-%}
{%adh˚), as, ā, am,%} exceeding a hundred, more than
a hundred. {%—Śatānaka (˚ta-ān˚), am,%} n. a place
where dead bodies are burnt or buried, a burial-
ground, cemetery. {%—Śatānanā (˚ta-ān˚),%} f. ‘hun-
dred-faced,’ epithet of a goddess. {%—Śatānanda (˚ta-%}
{%ān˚), as,%} m. ‘delighting hundreds,’ epithet of
Brahmā; of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu; of the sage Go-
tama or Gautama; of the eldest son of Gotama (the
Purohita or family priest of king Janaka); the car
of Viṣṇu. {%—Śatānīka (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} con-
taining or possessing a hundred hosts; ({%as%}), m. an
old man; N. of a sovereign, (according to some,
the second of the lunar dynasty in the fourth age;
he was son and successor of Janam-ejaya, and father
of Sahasrānīka); N. of the son of king Su-dāsa; of
a sage (the pupil of Vyāsa); of the son of Nakula
and Draupadī. {%—Śatābda (˚ta-ab˚), am,%} n. a hun-
dred years, century. {%—Śatā-magha, as, ā, am%}
[Page0991-a+ 75]
({%śatā%} for {%śata%}), Ved. possessing a hundred treasures
or resources; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Indra; [cf. {%magha-%}
{%van.%}] {%—Śatāyus (˚ta-āy˚), us, us, us,%} lasting for a
hundred years; ({%us%}), m. a man a hundred years old,
an old man; N. of a son of Purū-ravas. {%—Śatāra (˚ta-%}
{%āra), am,%} n. ‘hundred-angled,’ the thunderbolt. {%—Śa-%}
{%tāritra (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a hundred
oars, many-oared. {%—Śatārus (˚ta-ar˚), us, uṣī,%}
n. f. ‘having a hundred sores,’ a leprous disease of
the skin. {%—Śatārṇā (˚ta-ar˚),%} f. a particular plant,
Anethum Sowa. {%—Śatāvadhāna (˚ta-av˚), as,%} m.
epithet of Rāghavendra {%(= bhaṭṭācārya-ś˚)%}. {%—Śa-%}
{%tāvaya (˚ta-av˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. comprising or
numbering a hundred sheep, (Sāy. {%anekair avibhir%}
{%yukta,%} Ṛg-veda V. 61, 5.) {%—Śatāvara (˚ta-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a fine of a hundred (Paṇas &c.); ({%ī%}), f. the
shrub Asparagus Racemosus; a kind of plant,
zedoary ({%= śaṭī%}); N. of the wife of Indra. {%—Śatā-%}
{%varta (˚ta-āv˚), as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu, (see the
next.) {%—Śatāvartin (˚ta-āv˚), ī,%} m. ‘revolving in
a hundred ways,’ N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Śatāśri (˚ta-aś˚),%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. having a hundred angles or edges
(said of Indra's thunderbolt). {%—Śatāhvā (˚ta-āh˚),%}
f. a sort of dill or fennel, Anethum Sowa; another
plant {%(= śatāvarī)%}. {%—Śatendriyā (˚ta-in˚),%} f. ‘hav-
ing a hundred senses,’ a proper N. {%—Śateśa (˚ta-%}
{%īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of a hundred,’ the ruler or head
man of a hundred (villages). {%—Śateṣudhi (˚ta-iṣ˚),%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. hundred-quivered, having a hundred
quivers (said of Rudra). {%—Śatoti (˚ta-ūti), is, is, i,%}
Ved. protecting hundreds, granting great protection,
resorted to by hundreds, (Sāy. {%= bahu-rakṣaka%}
or {%bahu-gamana,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 63, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>46062<pc>0991-a<k1>Sataka<k2>Sataka
{%Śataka, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessing or containing a
hundred, a hundred; ({%am%}), n. a hundred (collec-
tively), any collection of a hundred; a century; a
cento, collection of one hundred stanzas, &c.; [cf.
{%vairāgya-ś˚, amaru-ś˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46063<pc>0991-a<k1>Satika<k2>Satika
{%Śatika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to a
hundred; doing or effecting anything with a hun-
dred; bearing tax or interest per hundred; bought
with a hundred; changed with or for a hundred;
indicative of a hundred, &c. (e. g. the throbbing of
the right eye is a {%śatikaṃ nimittam%} or omen indi-
cating the acquisition of a hundred pieces of money
or other property supposed to come from the favour
of Kuvera, lord of wealth).
<LEND>

<L>46064<pc>0991-a<k1>Satin<k2>Satin
{%Śatin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ consisting of hundreds, hundred-
fold, numerous, manifold; ({%ī%}), m. one who is pos-
sessed of a hundred, the owner of a hundred.
<LEND>

<L>46065<pc>0991-a<k1>Satya<k2>Satya
{%Śatya, as, ā, am,%}¦ bought with a hundred, &c.
See {%śatika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46066<pc>0991-a<k1>Satapona<k2>Satapona
{#Satapona#}¦ {%śatapona, as,%} m. a sieve.
<LEND>

<L>46067<pc>0991-a<k1>Sataponaka<k2>Sataponaka
{%Śataponaka, as,%}¦ m. fistula in ano with many
external openings.
<LEND>

<L>46068<pc>0991-a<k1>Sataporaka<k2>Sataporaka
{#Sataporaka#}¦ {%śataporaka, as,%} m. a kind of
sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>46069<pc>0991-a<k1>Satarudriya<k2>Satarudriya
{#Satarudriya#}¦ {%śata-rudriya.%} See p. 990, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>46070<pc>0991-a<k1>SatAkza<k2>SatAkza
{#SatAkza#}¦ {%śatākṣa, śatāṅga,%} &c. See p. 990.
<LEND>

<L>46071<pc>0991-a<k1>Satf<k2>Satf
{#Satf#}¦ {%śatṛ,%} a technical term for the Kṛt
affix {%at%} used in forming present participles of the
Parasmai-pada.
<LEND>

<L>46072<pc>0991-a<k1>Satera<k2>Satera
{#Satera#}¦ {%śatera, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
I. 61. fr. rt. {%śad;%} cf. {%śatru%}), an enemy; injury,
detriment, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>46073<pc>0991-a<k1>Satoti<k2>Satoti
{#Satoti#}¦ {%śatoti.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>46074<pc>0991-a<k1>Sattri<k2>Sattri
{#Sattri#}¦ {%śattri, is,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 67. fr. rt. {%śad;%} cf. {%śadri%}), an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>46075<pc>0991-a<k1>Satri<k2>Satri
{#Satri#}¦ {%śatri, is,%} m., Ved., N. of a Rājarṣi;
[cf. {%śattri.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46076<pc>0991-a<k1>Satru<k2>Satru
{#Satru#}¦ {%śatru, us,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 103. fr. rt. {%śad,%} and therefore perhaps more
correctly written {%śattru,%} cf. {%śātaka%}), one who
causes to fall or perish, a destroyer, overthrower,
conqueror; an enemy, foe, adversary; an antagonist,
[Page0991-b+ 80]
a political rival or hostile neighbouring king; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔχθος, ἐκθρός, ὀχθέω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>hod</nsi> in <nsi>odisse,</nsi>
<nsi>hostis;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hats;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hate, hete.</nsi>] {%—Śa-%}
{%truṃ-saha, as, ā, am,%} bearing or patient with an
enemy. {%—Śatru-karṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%} overpower-
ing enemies. {%—Śatru-ghāta, as, ā, am,%} killing an
enemy. {%—Śatru-ghna, as, ī, am,%} foe-killing, de-
stroying enemies; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of Rāma-
candra's brothers, (he was son of Su-mitrā and twin
brother of Lakṣmaṇa, and was the chosen com-
panion of Bharata, son of Kaikeyī, as Lakṣmaṇa
was of Rāma, son of Kauśalyā, these three being
the wives of Daśa-ratha.) {%—Śatrughna-jananī,%} f.
the mother of Śatru-ghna, i. e. Su-mitrā. {%—Śatru-%}
{%jit, t, t, t,%} foe-conquering; ({%t%}), m., N. of a king
(father of Ṛta-dhvaja or Kuvalayāśva). {%—Śatruñ-%}
{%jaya, as, ā, am,%} foe-conquering, subduing an
enemy; ({%as%}), m. an elephant; N. of the mountain
Vimala or Girnar in Gujarāt, (see {%vimalādri%}); a
proper N. {%—Śatru-tas,%} ind. from an enemy or
enemies. {%—Śatru-tā,%} f. or {%śatru-tva, am,%} n. hos-
tility, enmity. {%—Śatru-damana, as, ī, am,%} sub-
duing enemies. {%—Śatru-nikāya, as,%} m. a number
of foes, host of enemies. {%—Śatru-nibarhaṇa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} foe-destroying, destroying enemies (Rāmāyaṇa
I. 1, 11). {%—Śatru-nilaya, as,%} m. the dwelling of
a foe. {%—Śatrun-tapa, as, ā, am,%} foe-paining, sub-
duing or destroying enemies. {%—Śatru-pakṣa, as,%}
m. the side or part of an enemy, a disaffected person,
an antagonist, opponent, enemy. {%—Śatru-bādhaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} harassing or distressing an enemy.
{%—Śatru-mardana, as,%} m. ‘foe-crusher,’ epithet of
Śatru-ghna (brother of Rāma). {%—Śatru-lāva, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} cutting an enemy to pieces, killing foes.
{%—Śatru-vat,%} ind. like an enemy. {%—Śatru-vigraha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘foe-war,’ war of enemies, hostile invasion. {%—Śa-%}
{%tru-vināśana, as,%} m. ‘destroyer of foes,’ N. of Śiva.
{%—Śatru-sammukham,%} ind. facing the enemy, in
front of the enemy. {%—Śatru-saha%} or {%śatru-sāha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} sustaining the shock of a foe, enduring
an enemy. {%—Śatru-sevin, ī, inī, i,%} serving an
enemy, being in the service of a hostile prince
(Manu VII. 186). {%—Śatru-hatyā,%} f. foe-slaughter,
hosticide. {%—Śatru-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} foe-slaying, a
foe-slayer. {%—Śatrūpajāpa (˚ra-up˚), as,%} m. the
treacherous whisperings of an enemy. {%—Śatrūpa-%}
{%jāpa-dūṣita, as, ā, am,%} corrupted or demoralized
by an enemy's treachery.
<LEND>

<L>46077<pc>0991-b<k1>Satruya<k2>Satruya
{%Śatruya,%}¦ Nom. P., Ved. {%śatruyati, -yitum,%} to
be an enemy, be hostile.
<LEND>

<L>46078<pc>0991-b<k1>SatrUyat<k2>SatrUyat
{%Śatrūyat, an, antī, at%}¦ (Ved. for {%śatruyat%}), one
who is hostile or an enemy.
<LEND>

<L>46079<pc>0991-b<k1>SatvarI<k2>SatvarI
{#SatvarI#}¦ {%śatvarī,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%śad;%} ac-
cording to others fr. rt. 1. {%śam;%} cf. {%śamanī%}), night.
<LEND>

<L>46080<pc>0991-b<k1>Sad<k2>Sad
{#Sad#}¦ {%śad,%} cl. 1. or 6. A. (and P. in non-
conjugational tenses, see Pāṇ. I. 3, 60),
{%śīyate, śaśāda%} (in Ṛg-veda I. 141, 9. there is a
form {%śāśadre = śātayati%} or {%tīkṣṇī-kriyante;%}
other forms {%śāśadmahe, śāśaduḥ%}), {%śatsyati, aśa-%}
{%dat,%} Cond. {%aśatsyat, śattum,%} to fall, perish, perish
gradually, wither, decay; to go: Caus. {%śātayati,%}
{%-yitum%} (perhaps a kind of Nom., connected with
{%śāta%} fr. rt. {%śo%}), to cause to fall, fell, throw down,
overthrow, destroy, slay, kill; {%śādayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to go, impel, drive on: Desid. {%śiśatsati:%}
Intens. {%śāśadyate, śāśatti,%} to slay, kill, injure, hurt;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>cad-o.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46081<pc>0991-b<k1>Sada<k2>Sada
{%Śada, as,%}¦ m. any edible vegetable product (as
fruit, a root, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>46082<pc>0991-b<k1>Sadri<k2>Sadri
{%Śadri, is,%}¦ m. a cloud; an elephant; an epithet of
Arjuna; ({%is%}), f. lightning; clayed or candied sugar.
<LEND>

<L>46083<pc>0991-b<k1>Sadru<k2>Sadru
{%Śadru, us, us, u,%}¦ falling, perishing, wasting, de-
caying; going, moving.
<LEND>

<L>46084<pc>0991-b<k1>Sanna<k2>Sanna
{%Śanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen, decayed, withered; (this
appears to be the regular past pass. part. fr. rt. {%śad,%}
but some authorities do not give it.)
<LEND>

<L>46085<pc>0991-b<k1>SASadAna<k2>SASadAna
{%Śāśadāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. doing injury, injuring,
(Sāy. {%= hiṃsat,%} but in Ṛg-veda I. 123, 10. {%śāśadānā%}
{%= śāśādyamānā = spaṣṭatāṃ gacchantī,%} going
to manifestation, being manifested.)
<LEND>
[Page0991-c+ 75]

<L>46086<pc>0991-c<k1>SIyamAna<k2>SIyamAna
{%Śīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ perishing, decaying, wither-
ing, fading away, departing.
<LEND>

<L>46087<pc>0991-c<k1>SanakAvali<k2>SanakAvali
{#SanakAvali#}¦ {%śanakāvali, is,%} m. a particular
shrub ({%= gaja-pippalī;%} according to some {%śana-%}
{%kāvalī,%} f.).
<LEND>

<L>46088<pc>0991-c<k1>SanakEs<k2>SanakEs
{#SanakEs#}¦ {%śanakais,%} ind. See under {%śanais.%}
<LEND>

<L>46089<pc>0991-c<k1>SanaparRI<k2>SanaparRI
{#SanaparRI#}¦ {%śana-parṇī,%} f. (for {%śaṇa-parṇī?%}),
the medicinal plant Wrightia Antidysenterica ({%= ka-%}
{%ṭukī%}).
<LEND>

<L>46090<pc>0991-c<k1>Sani<k2>Sani
{#Sani#}¦ {%śani, is,%} m. (probably connected with
{%śanais%} below), ‘slow-moving’ [cf. {%manda%}], the planet
Saturn or its regent (fabled as the offspring of the
Sun; he is represented as of a black colour or dressed
in dark-coloured clothes; cf. {%nīla-vāsas%}); N. of Śiva;
of a son of Atri (according to the Vāyu-Purāṇa). {%—Śani-%}
{%cakra, am,%} n. an astrological diagram in the form
of a man used to foretell good or bad fortune, (it is
marked with twenty-seven compartments to repre-
sent the Nakṣatras passed through by the planet
Saturn.) {%—Śani-ja, am,%} n. ‘Saturn-produced,’ black
pepper. {%—Śani-pradoṣa, as,%} m. a term for the
worship performed to Śiva on the thirteenth day of
the waxing or waning moon when it falls on a
Saturday. {%—Śani-prasū, ūs,%} f. ‘mother of Saturn,’
epithet of Chāyā, wife of the Sun. {%—Śani-priya,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘dear to Saturn,’ a dark-coloured stone, the
emerald or sapphire {%(= nīla-maṇi)%}. {%—Śani-vāra%}
or {%śani-vāsara, as,%} m. Saturn's day, Saturday.
<LEND>

<L>46091<pc>0991-c<k1>SanEs<k2>SanEs
{#SanEs#}¦ {%śanais,%} ind. (according to some per-
haps for {%śamnais,%} inst. pl. of an old part. of rt.
1. {%śam%}), quietly, slowly, tardily, sluggishly, stealthily;
softly, mildly; gradually, by degrees, successively,
little by little, step by step; independantly, ({%śanaiḥ%}
{%śanaiḥ,%} very quietly, little by little, very slowly or
softly or gently, step by step.) {%—Śanaiś-cara, as,%}
m. ‘slow-going,’ the planet Saturn or its regent, (a
hymn of praise to Saturn, called the {%śanaiścarasya%}
{%stotram,%} is said to have been composed by Vyāsa.)
{%—Śanaiścara-saṃvatsara, as,%} m. the year of
Saturn (during which this planet completes his course
through the twenty-eight Nakṣatras; in modern
astronomy = thirty of our years).
<LEND>

<L>46092<pc>0991-c<k1>SanakEs<k2>SanakEs
{%Śanakais,%}¦ ind. quietly, softly, gently, mildly,
slowly, gradually, by degress, step by step, in every
case that arises, with alternations, alternately. {%—Śa-%}
{%nakaiś-cara, as,%} m. {%= śanaiś-cara%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46093<pc>0991-c<k1>Santa<k2>Santa
{#Santa#}¦ {%śanta, śanti,%} &c. See under rt. 1. {%śam.%}
<LEND>

<L>46094<pc>0991-c<k1>Santanu<k2>Santanu
{#Santanu#}¦ {%śantanu, us,%} m., N. of the younger
brother of Devāpi (said to have usurped the sovereignty
whilst his elder brother became a hermit); N. of a
commentator; [cf. {%śāntanavī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46095<pc>0991-c<k1>Sanna<k2>Sanna
{#Sanna#}¦ {%śanna.%} See under rt. {%śad,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>46096<pc>0991-c<k1>Sap<k2>Sap<h>1
{#Sap#} 1¦. {%śap,%} a technical term, used by Pā-
ṇini for the Vi-karaṇa {%a,%} inserted between the root
and terminations of the conjugational tenses in the
1st class, &c. See {%vi-karaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>46097<pc>0991-c<k1>Sap<k2>Sap<h>2
{#Sap#} 2¦. {%śap,%} ind. a particle and prefix im-
plying assent or acceptance, as in {%śap-karoti,%} he
admits or accepts.
<LEND>

<L>46098<pc>0991-c<k1>Sap<k2>Sap<h>3
{#Sap#} 3¦. {%śap,%} cl. 1. 4. P. A. {%śapati, -te,%}
{%śapyati, -te, śaśāpa, śepe, śapsyati, -te,%}
{%aśāpsīt, aśapta, śaptum%} (according to some per-
haps originally ‘to cry aloud’), to curse, imprecate
evil, execrate; to revile, scold, blame (with dat.);
to take an oath, swear, promise or asseverate by
oath: Caus. {%śāpayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśīśapat,%} to
cause or order to swear (with inst. of object by which
one is sworn); to conjure: Desid. {%śiśapsati, -te:%} In-
tens. {%śāśapyate%} (according to Vopa-deva XX. 8. also
{%śaṃśapyate%}), {%śāśapti;%} [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">κόμπος.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>46099<pc>0991-c<k1>Sapa<k2>Sapa
{%Śapa, as,%}¦ m. an imprecation, curse, cursing; an
oath; a corpse, (for {%śava,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>46100<pc>0991-c<k1>Sapat<k2>Sapat
{%Śapat, an, antī, at,%}¦ cursing, reviling, swearing.
<LEND>

<L>46101<pc>0991-c<k1>SapaTa<k2>SapaTa
{%Śapatha, as,%}¦ m. cursing, imprecating; an impre-
cation, curse, anathema; an oath, administering an
[Page0992-a+ 79]
oath, swearing, asseveration by oath or ordeal; con-
juration. {%—Śapatha-pattra, am,%} n. written testi-
mony on oath, an affidavit.
<LEND>

<L>46102<pc>0992-a<k1>Sapana<k2>Sapana
{%Śapana, am,%}¦ n. the act of imprecation, cursing,
malediction; reviling, abuse; an oath, asseveration by
oath or ordeal.
<LEND>

<L>46103<pc>0992-a<k1>SapamAna<k2>SapamAna
{%Śapamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cursing, reviling, impre-
cating, swearing.
<LEND>

<L>46104<pc>0992-a<k1>Sapta<k2>Sapta
{%Śapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cursed, reviled, abused, anathe-
matized; sworn, taken as an oath; ({%as%}), m. a sort
of grass, Saccharum Cylindricum.
<LEND>

<L>46105<pc>0992-a<k1>SaptvA<k2>SaptvA
{%Śaptvā,%}¦ ind. having cursed or reviled, having sworn.
<LEND>

<L>46106<pc>0992-a<k1>SaPa<k2>SaPa
{#SaPa#}¦ {%śapha, as, am,%} m. n. (etymology doubt-
ful), a hoof (in general); the hoof of a horse; the
root of a tree; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>huof;</nsi> Old Norse
and Angl. Sax. <nsi>hôf;</nsi> Germ. <nsi>hûf;</nsi> Engl. <nsi>hoof.</nsi>]
{%—Śapha-cyuta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. fallen from the
hoofs. {%—1. śapha-vat,%} ind. like a hoof. {%—2. śapha-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of hoofs; ({%at%}), n.
any hoofed animal. {%—Śaphā-ruj, k, k, k,%} Ved.
breaking or destroying with the hoof; epithet of
a kind of demon. {%—Śaphoru (˚pha-ūru), ūs,%} f. a
woman whose thighs resemble the two divisions of
a cow's hoof, (see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 70.)
<LEND>

<L>46107<pc>0992-a<k1>SaPara<k2>SaPara
{%Śaphara, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. (also written {%saphara%}), a
kind of carp; a kind of small glittering fish, Cyprius
Sophore. {%—Śapharādhipa (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m.
‘lord of Śaphara fish,’ the Ilisha or Hilsa fish, Ilisha
Clupanodon ({%= ilīśa%}).
<LEND>

<L>46108<pc>0992-a<k1>Sabara<k2>Sabara
{#Sabara#}¦ {%śabara, as,%} m. {%= śavara,%} q. v., N.
of a wild mountaineer tribe; N. of the author of
the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 169 (having the patronymic
Kākṣīvata); epithet of a Buddhist. {%—Śabara-%}
{%bhāṣya, am,%} n. Śabara's commentary on the Mī-
māṃsā-sūtra. {%—Śabara-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a king
(mentioned in the Kathārṇava). {%—Śabara-svāmin,%}
{%ī,%} m., N. of the author of a Bhāṣya or commentary
on the Mīmāṃsā-sūtras of Jaimini, (this Bhāṣya
has been critically annotated by the great Mīmāṃsā
authority Kumārila.) {%—Śabarālaya (˚ra-āl˚), as,%}
m. the abode of savage tribes.
<LEND>

<L>46109<pc>0992-a<k1>Sabala<k2>Sabala
{#Sabala#}¦ {%śabala, as, ā, am%} (see {%śavala%}), varie-
gated, brindled; ({%ī%}), f. a spotted cow; Kāma-
dhenu the cow of plenty (identified with the varying
powers of nature). {%—Śabalī-homa, as,%} m. an offering
to the cow Śabalī.
<LEND>

<L>46110<pc>0992-a<k1>Sabd<k2>Sabd
{#Sabd#}¦ {%śabd,%} cl. 10. P. (more properly to
be regarded as a Nom. fr. {%śabda%} below),
{%śabdayati%} (sometimes also A. {%śabdāyate,%} Pāṇ. III.
1, 17, but see {%śabdāya, śabdāyamāna%}), {%-yitum,%}
to sound, make any noise or sound; to utter any
sound or cry, call out, call, speak; {%śabdāpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to address, speak to: Pass. {%śabdyate,%} to be
sounded, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46111<pc>0992-a<k1>Sabda<k2>Sabda
{%Śabda, as,%}¦ m. (in the Upaniṣads also {%am,%} n.;
thought by some to be connected with rt. 3. {%śap%} +
2. {%da%}), sound, noise; a sound; a word, significant
word; (in gram.) a declinable word (as a noun,
pronoun, &c.); grammar; verbal communication,
oral evidence, verbal authority (as one of the Pra-
māṇas, see {%pra-māṇa%}). {%—Śabda-kāra, as, ī, am,%}
making noise or sound, sounding, sonorous. {%—Śabda-%}
{%koṣa, as,%} m. ‘word-repository,’ a dictionary, voca-
bulary. {%—Śabda-kaustubha,%} ‘word-jewel,’ N. of
a commentary by Bhaṭṭoji on the Mahā-bhāṣya.
{%—Śabda-gata, as, ā, am,%} being or residing in a
word (as a poetical or metaphorical meaning).
{%—Śabda-guṇa, as,%} m. the quality of sound; a
particular quality or style of speech. {%—Śabda-graha,%}
{%as,%} m. perceiving or catching sound; the ear; a
fabulous arrow. {%—Śabda-grāma, as,%} m. the compass
or range of sound. {%—Śabda-candrikā,%} f. ‘elucidation
of words,’ N. of a lexicon by Cakra-pāṇi-datta.
{%—Śabda-cāturya, am,%} n. skill in words, cleverness
of diction, eloquence. {%—Śabda-citra, as, ā, am,%}
various or fanciful in sound (as poetry). {%—Śabda-%}
{%cora, as,%} m. ‘word-thief,’ a plagiarist. {%—Śabda-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} arising from sound, produced by words,
by verbal communication. {%—Śabda-tanmātra, am,%}
[Page0992-b+ 81]
n. the subtile element of sound. {%—Śabda-nityatva,%}
{%am,%} n. the eternity of sound. {%—Śabda-nirṇaya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘word-investigation,’ N. of a work by Vāca-
spati-miśra. {%—Śabda-pati, is,%} m. ‘word-lord,’ a
mere nominal sovereign, (according to Malli-nātha
{%śabdata eva patir na tv arthataḥ,%} Raghu-v. VIII.
51.) {%—Śabda-pātin, ī, inī, i,%} flying with a sound,
making a noise in flight (said of an arrow); falling
with a sound. {%—Śabda-pramāṇa, am,%} n. verbal
testimony or proof, oral evidence. {%—Śabda-prāch,%}
{%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} enquiring after (the meaning of) a word.
{%—Śabda-bodha, as,%} m. (in phil.) knowledge (de-
rived) from verbal testimony. {%—Śabda-brahman, a,%}
n. ‘word-spirit,’ i. e. the Veda considered as a revealed
word or sound and identified with Brahman, the
Supreme Spirit. {%—Śabda-bheda, as,%} m. difference
or distinction of sound. {%—Śabda-bheda-prakāśa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of an appendix to the Viśva-prakāśa (con-
taining a list of words similar in sound but different
in meaning). {%—Śabda-bhedin, ī,%} m. ‘sound-piercer,’
epithet of Arjuna [cf. {%śabda-vedhin%}]; the anus; a
particular fabulous arrow (which pierces an object
the sound of which only is heard). {%—Śabda-mātra,%}
{%am,%} n. sound only, a mere sound. {%—Śabda-mālā,%} f.
‘a collection of words,’ N. of a lexicon by Rāme-
śvara-śarman. {%—Śabda-yoni, is,%} f. ‘word-source,’
the source or origin of a word, a radical word, root.
{%—Śabda-ratna, am,%} n. ‘word-jewel,’ N. of a
lexicon. {%—Śabda-ratnākara (˚na-āk˚), as,%} m.
‘mine of word-gems,’ N. of a dictionary of syno-
nyms by Mahīpa. {%—Śabda-ratnāvalī (˚na-āv˚),%} f.
‘word-necklace,’ N. of a lexicon of synonyms by
Mathureśa. {%—Śabda-liṅgārtha-candrikā (˚ga-%}
{%ar˚),%} f. ‘elucidation of the gender and meaning of
words,’ N. of a lexicon. {%—Śabda-virodha, as,%} m.
opposition of words in a sentence. {%—Śabda-viśeṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. difference or variety of sound; ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the varieties of sound, (these the Sāṅkhya arranges
according to the accents {%udātta, an-udātta, sva-%}
{%rita,%} and the notes of the gamut, as {%ṣaḍja,%}
{%ṛṣabha, gāndhāra, madhyama, pañcama,%}
{%dhaivata, niṣāda,%} &c., q. q. v. v.) {%—Śabda-viśe-%}
{%ṣaṇa, am,%} n. (in grammar) the attribute of a word,
an adjective. {%—Śabda-vṛtti, is,%} f. (in rhetoric) the
function of a word. {%—Śabdavedhi-tva, am,%} n. capa-
bility of piercing (an invisible object) the sound (of
which only is heard). {%—Śabda-vedhin, ī, inī, i,%}
sound-piercing, piercing or terrifying enemies by
mere shouts; ({%ī%}), m. an archer who can pierce an
invisible object the sound of which only is heard; a
warrior who pierces his enemies by mere shouts;
epithet of Arjuna; of king Daśa-ratha. {%—Śabda-%}
{%vailakṣaṇya, am,%} n. difference in word, verbal
difference (as opposed to {%artha-vailakṣaṇya%} or
real difference). {%—Śabda-śakti, is,%} f. the force or
signification of a word. {%—Śabda-śabdārtha-mañ-%}
{%jūṣā (˚da-ar˚),%} f. ‘a collection of words and their
meanings,’ N. of a lexicon. {%—Śabda-śāsana, am,%} n.
a rule or law of grammar. {%—Śabda-śāstra, am,%}
n. ‘science of words,’ rules of grammar, any gram-
matical treatise, grammar, philology. {%—Śabda-śud-%}
{%dhi, is,%} f. purity or accuracy of language, correct use
of words. {%—Śabda-śleṣa, as,%} m. play upon words,
verbal equivoque, a rhetorical ornament by which
the same words are used in different senses, punning.
{%—Śabda-saṅgraha, as,%} m. a collection of words,
vocabulary, lexicon. {%—Śabda-siddhi, is,%} f. ‘the
complete use of words,’ a section of the Kāvya-kalpa-
latā-vṛtti-parimala. {%—Śabdāḍambara (˚da-āḍ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. high-sounding words, verbosity, confusion of
words, bombast. {%—Śabdātīta (˚da-at˚), as, ā, am,%}
beyond the reach of sound (used as an epithet of
the deity). {%—Śabdādi (˚da-ādi), is,%} m., scil. {%vi-%}
{%ṣaya,%} the objects of sense beginning with sound,
(these are {%śabda,%} sound; {%sparśa,%} tangibility; {%rūpa,%}
form; {%rasa,%} savour; {%gandha,%} odour; see {%viṣaya.%})
{%—Śabdādi-dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having the quality
of sound, &c., (see {%viṣaya.%}) {%—Śabdādhiṣṭhāna%}
{%(˚da-adh˚), am,%} n. ‘receptacle of sound,’ the ear.
{%—Śabdādhyāhāra (˚da-adh˚), as,%} m. the supply-
ing of a word (to complete an ellipsis). {%—Śabdānu- %}
[Page0992-c+ 79]
{%rūpa (˚da-an˚), am,%} n. conformity to sound, imita-
tion of sound. {%—Śabdānuśāsana (˚da-an˚), am,%}
n. ‘word-instruction, word explanation,’ the giving
rules for words (used as a title of Pāṇini's grammar);
N. of a grammatical work by Abhinava-śākaṭāyana;
of a work on grammar by Hema-candra. {%—Śabdāb-%}
{%dhi (˚da-ab˚), is,%} m. ‘ocean of words,’ N. of a
lexicon (compiled by order of Prāṇa-kṛṣṇa). {%—Śab-%}
{%dārṇava (˚da-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘ocean of words,’ N. of
a lexicon. {%—Śabdārtha (˚da-ar˚), as,%} m. the sense
or meaning of a word; ({%au%}), m. du. a word and
its sense. {%—Śabdārtha-kalpataru, us,%} m. ‘Kalpa-
tree of the meaning of words,’ N. of a lexicon by
Veṅkaṭa. {%—Śabdālaṅkāra (˚da-al˚), as,%} m. verbal
ornament, rhetorical use of words (as alliteration
&c.). {%—Śabdāloka-rahasya%} and {%śabdāloka-viveka%}
{%(˚da-āl˚),%} N. of two philosophical commentaries.
{%—Śabdendu-śekhara (˚da-in˚), as,%} m., N. of a
work by Nāgeśa-bhaṭṭa.
<LEND>

<L>46112<pc>0992-c<k1>Sabdana<k2>Sabdana
{%Śabdana, am,%}¦ n. the act of making a sound,
uttering sounds, making a noise; a sound, noise;
({%as, ā, am%}), sounding, sonorous.
<LEND>

<L>46113<pc>0992-c<k1>Sabdayat<k2>Sabdayat
{%Śabdayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making a sound, sound-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>46114<pc>0992-c<k1>SabdAya<k2>SabdAya
{%Śabdāya%}¦ [cf. rt. {%śabd%} above], Nom. A. {%śabdā-%}
{%yate, -yitum,%} to make a noise, sound, cry; to bray:
Caus. {%śabdāyayati, -yitum,%} to cause to sound.
<LEND>

<L>46115<pc>0992-c<k1>SabdAyamAna<k2>SabdAyamAna
{%Śabdāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounding, making a
noise, crying out.
<LEND>

<L>46116<pc>0992-c<k1>Sabdita<k2>Sabdita
{%Śabdita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, made to give out
a sound (as a musical instrument &c.); uttered,
articulated; called; explained; made public or
manifest; converted into a noun; ({%am%}), n. noise,
cry, the braying (of an ass).
<LEND>

<L>46117<pc>0992-c<k1>Sam<k2>Sam<h>1
{#Sam#} 1¦. {%śam,%} cl. 4. P. {%śāmyati, śaśāma,%}
{%śamiṣyati, aśamat,%} (the form {%śaśa-%}
{%mate = śāmyati%} or {%stauti,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 2, 4),
{%śamitum%} (originally ‘to become tired’), to be ap-
peased, grow calm, become pacified, be satisfied,
become quiet or tranquil, be undisturbed or quies-
cent; to cease, stop, leave off, desist; to pacify,
cause to cease, put an end to, destroy, kill, sacrifice,
(in these transitive senses also cl. 9. P. {%śamnāti,%}
according to Naigh. II. 19, and probably in some
cases the forms used are referrible to Caus.); cl. 10.
A. {%śāmayate, -yitum,%} to look at, inspect; to show,
display: Pass. {%śāmyate, śamyate%} (referrible also to
Caus.), Aor. {%aśami%} or {%aśāmi,%} to be appeased or
quieted, &c.: Caus. {%śamayati%} or {%śāmayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Aor. {%asīśamat,%} to appease, allay, pacify, calm,
tranquillize, soothe, settle; to console; to cause to
cease, stop, suppress, extinguish, destroy; to remove,
avert; to tame, subdue, defeat, conquer; to leave off,
desist, ({%śamayām-babhūvuḥ,%} they desisted): Desid.
{%śiśamiṣati:%} Intens. {%śaṃśamyate, śaṃśanti,%} to be
entirely appeased, become tranquil; to cease; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">κάμνω, αιδηρο-κμής, κημός:</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>chamo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46118<pc>0992-c<k1>Santa<k2>Santa
{%Śanta(= śānta?),%}¦ see Vopa-deva VII. 31.
<LEND>

<L>46119<pc>0992-c<k1>Santi<k2>Santi
{%Śanti(= śānti?),%}¦ see Vopa-deva VII. 31.
<LEND>

<L>46120<pc>0992-c<k1>Santu<k2>Santu
{%Śantu,%}¦ see Vopa-deva VII. 31.
<LEND>

<L>46121<pc>0992-c<k1>Sama<k2>Sama
{%Śama, as,%}¦ m. quiet, tranquillity, rest, calm, peace;
quietude, quietism, quiet of mind, restraint of the
organs of sense, indifference to objects of sense,
absence of passion (especially as a characteristic of
the Vedāntin), abstract meditation on Brahma,
stoicism; final happiness, emancipation from all the
illusions of existence ({%= vikṣepa-karmoparama%});
Quietism or Tranquillity (personified as a son of
Dharma); allayment (of pain), alleviation or cure
(of disease), {{convalesence->convalescence||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}; the hand; imprecation,
malediction (for {%śapa ?%}). {%—Śama-para, as, ā, am,%}
devoted to quiet, calm, tranquil. {%—Śama-stha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} engaged in quietism. {%—Śamāṅga (˚ma-%}
{%aṅ˚),%} N. of a particular Agra-hāra or royal grant of
land for Brāhmans. {%—Śamāntaka (˚ma-an˚), as,%}
m. ‘destroyer of tranquillity,’ epithet of Kāma (god
of love).
<LEND>

<L>46122<pc>0992-c<k1>Samaka<k2>Samaka
{%Śamaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} pacifying, tranquillizing,
consolatory; a pacifier, tranquillizer, pacificator.
<LEND>
[Page0993-a+ 80]

<L>46123<pc>0993-a<k1>SamaTa<k2>SamaTa
{%Śamatha, as,%}¦ m. quiet, tranquillity, calmness of
mind, absence of passion; a counsellor, minister.
<LEND>

<L>46124<pc>0993-a<k1>Samana<k2>Samana
{%Śamana, am,%}¦ n. the act of appeasing, allaying,
tranquillizing, soothing, consoling, calming, suppress-
ing, &c.; tranquillity, calmness, indifference; cessa-
tion, termination, end, destruction, ({%śamanaṃ yā,%}
to go to annihilation, be destroyed); hurting, injur-
ing, injury; killing (animals for sacrifice), immola-
tion; a mode of rinsing the mouth; swallowing,
chewing; malediction, reviling, (for {%śapana ?%}); ({%as%}),
m. ‘the settler or destroyer,’ epithet of Yama; an
antelope; ({%ī%}), f. night. {%—Śamana-svasṛ, sā,%} f.
‘Yama's sister,’ the river Yamunā or Jumnā. {%—Śa-%}
{%manī-ṣada, as,%} m. ‘night-goer,’ a Rākṣasa, evil
spirit, demon.
<LEND>

<L>46125<pc>0993-a<k1>SamanIya<k2>SamanIya
{%Śamanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be appeased or tran-
quillized, consolable.
<LEND>

<L>46126<pc>0993-a<k1>Samayat<k2>Samayat
{%Śamayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ appeasing, allaying;
terminating, stopping.
<LEND>

<L>46127<pc>0993-a<k1>Samala<k2>Samala
{%Śamala, am,%}¦ n. (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 111.
fr. rt. 1. {%śam%} above), feculent matter, sediment,
feces, ordure; impurity; sin; calamity.
<LEND>

<L>46128<pc>0993-a<k1>Sami<k2>Sami<h>1
1. {%śami, is,%}¦ f. a legume, pod; the Śamī tree [cf.
{%śamī%}]. {%—Śami-roha, as,%} m. ‘ascending the Śamī
tree,’ an epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>46129<pc>0993-a<k1>Samita<k2>Samita
{%Śamita, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%śānta%}], appeased, al-
layed, calmed, stilled, tranquillized, pacified, calm,
quiet, tranquil, sedate; alleviated, relieved, cured;
tempered, moderated; relaxed, intermitted. {%—Śa-%}
{%mita-ruci, is, is, i,%} whose lustre is moderated or
dimmed. {%—Śamitāyāma (˚ta-āy˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the length diminished.
<LEND>

<L>46130<pc>0993-a<k1>Samitavya<k2>Samitavya
{%Śamitavya, as, ā, am, = śamanīya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>46131<pc>0993-a<k1>Samitf<k2>Samitf
{%Śamitṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘a settler, silencer,’ a killer,
slaughterer (of a sacrificial victim).
<LEND>

<L>46132<pc>0993-a<k1>SamitvA<k2>SamitvA
{%Śamitvā,%}¦ ind. having become tranquillized or
calmed.
<LEND>

<L>46133<pc>0993-a<k1>Samin<k2>Samin
{%Śamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ calm, tranquil, appeased, tran-
quillized, pacific; ({%ī%}), m., N. of a son of Śūra.
<LEND>

<L>46134<pc>0993-a<k1>Samira<k2>Samira
{%Śamira, as,%}¦ m. a small variety of the Śamī tree.
<LEND>

<L>46135<pc>0993-a<k1>Samizyat<k2>Samizyat
{%Śamiṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to appease
or tranquillize.
<LEND>

<L>46136<pc>0993-a<k1>SamI<k2>SamI
{%Śamī,%}¦ f. (sometimes shortened into {%śami,%} q. v.),
a rite, sacrificial rite (Ved., according to Naigh. II.
1. and Sāy. {%= karma%}); a legume, pod; the Śamī
tree, Acacia Suma (possessing a very tough and hard
wood supposed to contain fire, [cf. Manu VIII. 247,
Raghu-vaṃśa III. 9]; it was employed to kindle
the sacred fire by rubbing two dried pieces together,
and a legend relates that Purū-ravas generated pri-
meval fire by the friction of two branches of the Śamī
and Aśvattha trees); the shrub Serratula Anthel-
mintica {%(= vāgujī)%}. {%—Śamī-garbha, as,%} m. ‘having
the Śamī tree as its place of origin, produced from
the Śamī tree,’ epithet of Agni or fire; a Brāhman
or man of the sacerdotal class. {%—Śamī-dhānya, am,%}
n. ‘pod-grain’ any pulse or grain growing in pods.
{%—Śamī-pattrī,%} f. ‘having Śamī leaves,’ a kind of
sensitive plant, Mimosa Pudica. {%—Śamī-mandāra-%}
{%māhātmya, am,%} n. ‘glorification of the Śamī and
Mandāra trees,’ N. of the thirty-seventh chapter of
the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>46137<pc>0993-a<k1>SamIka<k2>SamIka
{%Śamīka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni (son of Śūra and
brother of Vasu-deva).
<LEND>

<L>46138<pc>0993-a<k1>SamIra<k2>SamIra
{%Śamīra, as,%}¦ m. {%= śamira%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46139<pc>0993-a<k1>Samya<k2>Samya
{%Śamya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be appeased, to be kept
quiet, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. a wooden stick or post (as quiet-
ing or making firm); a staff; the pin of a yoke;
a kind of cymbal or other musical instrument held
in the right hand ({%= tāla-viśeṣa%}); a sacrificial
vessel. {%—Śamyā-pāta, as,%} m. the cast of a stick, i. e.
the distance that a stick can be thrown. {%—Śamyā-%}
{%mātra, as, ī, am,%} Ved. having the measure of a
Śamyā, as large as the pin of a yoke.
<LEND>

<L>46140<pc>0993-a<k1>SAnta<k2>SAnta
{%Śānta, śāntvā,%}¦ &c. See s. v., p. 1000.
<LEND>

<L>46141<pc>0993-a<k1>SAmyat<k2>SAmyat
{%Śāmyat,%}¦ &c. See under {%śāma,%} p. 1001.
<LEND>

<L>46142<pc>0993-a<k1>Sam<k2>Sam<h>2
{#Sam#} 2¦. {%śam,%} ind. (perhaps to be connected
with rt. 1. {%śam,%} but also referrible to 2. {%śa%}), happi-
ness, welfare, prosperity, blessing, beatitude, health,
hail, (according to Pāṇ. II. 3, 73. with dat. or
[Page0993-b+ 78]
gen., e. g. {%śaṃ devadattāya%} or {%śaṃ devadattasya,%}
hail to Devadatta); happy, auspicious, pleasant, sweet,
kind, agreeable; happily, auspiciously, well; (used in
the Veda as a subst., adj., and adv.; frequently found
in the phrase {%śaṃ yos%} or {%śaṃ ca yoś ca,%} ‘prosperity
and succour,’ or ‘blessing and protection,’ Ṛg-veda
I. 114, 2, II. 33, 13, &c., cf. {%yos;%} sometimes
joined with the verbs {%bhū, as, kṛ, yā,%} &c., and
sometimes occurring without any verb, e. g. {%śaṃ no%}
{%bhavatv Aryamā,%} may Aryaman be kind or pro-
pitious to us; {%Somaḥ śam astu te hṛde,%} may the
Soma be agreeable to thy heart; {%śaṃ naḥ karato%}
{%Aśvinā,%} may the two Aśvins do us good; {%śaṃ yāti,%}
he attains happiness or becomes prosperous; {%śaṃ%}
{%tad asmai,%} that is pleasant to him.) {%—Śaṃ-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} containing the word {%śam%}. {%—Śaṃ-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} or {%śaṃ-sthā, ās, ās, am,%} being in pros-
perity, happy, prosperous, faring well. {%—Śaṃ-kara,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} causing happiness, &c. {%= śaṅ-%}
{%kara,%} p. 988, col. 1. {%—Śaṃ-gaya, as, ā%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having a pleasant house, happily domiciled,
(in Ṛg-veda IX. 97, 17. the fem. {%śaṃ-gayīm%} occurs.)
{%—Śaṃ-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most happy, very
fortunate, most pleasant or auspicious. {%—Śaṃ-tāti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. causing happiness, auspicious, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%śānti-kara,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 18, 7); ({%is%}), f., Ved.
happiness, prosperity. {%—Śam-pāka, as,%} m. a kind
of Cassia, Cassia Fistula ({%= ārag-badha%}); lac, the
red dye ({%= yāvaka%}); bringing to maturity or ripe-
ness, cooking, maturing, (probably for {%sam-pāka.%})
{%—Śam-pāta, as,%} m. Cassia Fistula. {%—Śam-bhavi-%}
{%ṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being greatly for happiness
or welfare, granting much happiness or beatitude.
{%—Śam-bhu, us, us, u,%} being for happiness or wel-
fare, granting or causing happiness; ({%us%}), m., N. of
a Vedic deity, (Sāy. {%= sukhasya bhāvayitā,%} Ṛg-
veda VII. 35, 10); N. of Śiva; of Brahmā; a sage,
venerable man; a Jina or Jaina sanctified teacher;
a particular semi-divine being ({%= siddha%}); N. of
one of the eleven Rudras (according to the Viṣṇu-
Purāṇa); N. of an author; ({%us%}), f., N. of a wife of
Dhruva. {%—Śambhu-tanaya%} or {%śambhu-nandana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘son of Śiva,’ an epithet of Kārttikeya; of
Gaṇeśa. {%—Śambhu-nātha, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Śambhu-priyā,%} f. ‘dear to Śiva,’ an epithet of
Durgā; Emblic Myrobalan. {%—Śambhu-rahasya, am,%}
n., N. of a work. {%—Śambhu-vallabha, as, ā, am,%}
beloved by Śiva; ({%am%}), n. the white lotus. {%—Śam-%}
{%bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} auspicious (Ved.); ({%ūs%}), m. a proper
N. {%—Śambhū-nātha, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Kāla-jñāna and of the Vaidyaka-sāra-saṅgraha.
<LEND>

<L>46143<pc>0993-b<k1>SaMyu<k2>SaMyu
{%Śaṃyu, us, us, u,%}¦ happy, prosperous, fortunate
({%= sukhayu,%} Nirukta IV. 2); ({%us%}), m. a sort of
snake; N. of the author of the hymns Ṛg-veda VI.
44-46, 48 (his patronymic is Bārhaspatya). {%—Śaṃ-%}
{%yu-vāka,%} a particular sacrificial ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>46144<pc>0993-b<k1>SaMyya<k2>SaMyya
{%Śaṃyya%}¦ or {%śaṃya, as, ā, am,%} happy, fortunate;
({%ā%}), f. knowledge, understanding.
<LEND>

<L>46145<pc>0993-b<k1>SaMva<k2>SaMva
{%Śaṃva, as, ā, am,%}¦ fortunate, prosperous; happy;
({%as%}), m. the thunderbolt of Indra; the iron head of
a pestle; [cf. {%śamba.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46146<pc>0993-b<k1>SaMvara<k2>SaMvara
{%Śaṃvara, am,%}¦ n. water, &c. {%= śambara,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46147<pc>0993-b<k1>SampA<k2>SampA
{#SampA#}¦ {%śampā,%} f. lightning.
<LEND>

<L>46148<pc>0993-b<k1>Samb<k2>Samb
{#Samb#}¦ {%śamb,%} cl. 1. P. {%śambati, śambitum,%}
to go (in this sense = rt. {%śarb%}), cl. 10. P.
{%śambayati, -yitum,%} to accumulate, collect, heap
together (in this sense = rts. {%samb, sāmb%}).
<LEND>

<L>46149<pc>0993-b<k1>Samba<k2>Samba
{#Samba#}¦ {%śamba, as, ā, am%} (either fr. rt. 1. {%śam%}
or 2. {%śam%} or rt. {%śamb%}), happy, fortunate [cf. {%śaṃva%}
above]; poor (according to Śabda-k.); ({%as%}), m.
Indra's thunderbolt (Sāy. {%= vajra%}); the iron head
of a pestle; an iron chain worn round the loins;
ploughing in the regular direction; the second plough-
ing of a field. {%—Śambā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} (a field
&c.) twice ploughed ({%= dvi-halya, dvi-sītya%}).
<LEND>

<L>46150<pc>0993-b<k1>Sambara<k2>Sambara
{#Sambara#}¦ {%śambara, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%śamb%} or fr. 2. {%śam%} with rt. {%vṛ;%} cf. {%śaṃvara,%}
{%sambara, saṃvara%}), N. of a demon of drought
[Page0993-c+ 76]
(represented in the Ṛg-veda as an enemy of Indra);
a cloud ({%= megha,%} Naigh. I. 10); a mountain (in
general) or a particular mountain; a sort of deer;
a kind of fish; war; N. of a Daitya [cf. {%śambara-%}
{%sūdana%}]; best, excellent; a Jina; N. of various
plants or trees {%(= citraka; = lodhra; = arjuna);%}
{%(ī),%} f. a kind of drug or medicinal plant, Anthericum
Tuberosum ({%= ākhu-parṇī%}); a female juggler; illu-
sion; ({%am%}), n. water, (in Naigh. I. 12. enumerated
among the {%udaka-nāmāni,%} and in Naigh. II. 9.
among the {%bala-nāmāni%}); a cloud, (Sāy. {%śamba-%}
{%rāṇi = meghān,%} Ṛg-veda II. 24, 2); wealth; a
religious observance; a particular religious vow (with
Buddhists); {%= citram%} (according to Śabda-k.). {%—Śam-%}
{%bara-kanda, as,%} m. a kind of bulbous plant {%(= vā-%}
{%rāhī-kanda)%}. {%—Śambara-candana, am,%} n. a
variety of sandal {%(= bahala-gandha)%}. {%—Śambara-%}
{%sūdana, as,%} m. ‘destroyer of the Daitya Śambara,’
epithet of Kāma-deva (god of love). {%—Śambara-%}
{%hatya, am, ā,%} n. f. the killing of Śambara. {%—Śam-%}
{%barāri (˚ra-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of (the Daitya)
Śambara,’ epithet of Kāma-deva. {%—Śambarāsura%}
{%(˚ra-as˚), as,%} m. the Asura or Daitya Śambara.
{%—Śambarāsura-vadhopakhyāna (˚dha-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the story of the killing of the Daitya Śambara
(told in the fifty-fifth chapter of the tenth book of
the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa).
<LEND>

<L>46151<pc>0993-c<k1>Sambala<k2>Sambala
{#Sambala#}¦ {%śambala, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be
fr. rt. {%śamb,%} also written {%śaṃvala,%} cf. {%sambala,%}
{%saṃvala%}), provender or provisions for a journey,
stock for travelling; a bank, shore; envy, jealousy,
impatience of another's success; ({%ī%}), f. a procuress,
bawd.
<LEND>

<L>46152<pc>0993-c<k1>Sambu<k2>Sambu
{#Sambu#}¦ {%śambu, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%śam%}), a bivalve shell. {%—Śambu-vardhana, as,%} m.
a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46153<pc>0993-c<k1>Sambuka<k2>Sambuka
{%Śambuka, as,%}¦ m. (also written {%śāmbuka,%} q. v.),
a bivalve shell.
<LEND>

<L>46154<pc>0993-c<k1>Sambukka<k2>Sambukka
{%Śambukka, as,%}¦ m. a bivalve shell.
<LEND>

<L>46155<pc>0993-c<k1>SambUka<k2>SambUka
{%Śambūka, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a bivalve shell; ({%as%}), m.
a small conch-shell; a snail; N. of a Śūdra (who
had become a devotee and was slain by Rāma-
candra); the edge of the frontal protuberance of an
elephant; N. of a Daitya; a proper N.; {%= ghoṅga%}
(according to Śabda-k.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σαμβύκη.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>46156<pc>0993-c<k1>SambUputra<k2>SambUputra
{%Śambū-putra, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46157<pc>0993-c<k1>SamBa<k2>SamBa
{#SamBa#}¦ {%śambha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. 2. {%śam%}
with rt. 1. {%bhā%}), a happy man [cf. {%śam-bhu%}]; Indra's
thunderbolt; the iron-bound head of a pestle; [cf.
{%śaṃva, śamba.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46158<pc>0993-c<k1>SamBala<k2>SamBala
{#SamBala#}¦ {%śambhala%} (perhaps connected with
2. {%śam%}), N. of a town situated between the Ratha-
prā and Ganges (identified by some with Sumbhul
in Moradabad; the town or district of Śambhala is
fabled to be the place where Kalkī, the last incar-
nation of Viṣṇu, is to appear in the family of a
Brāhman named Viṣṇu-yaśas); ({%ī%}), f. a procuress,
bawd. {%—Śambhala-grāma-māhātmya%} or {%śambha-%}
{%la-māhātmya, am,%} n. ‘the glory of the town Śam-
bhala,’ N. of a part of the Skanda-Purāṇa (consisting
of twenty-four chapters). {%—Śambhaleśvara-liṅga%}
{%(˚la-īś˚),%} N. of a Liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>46159<pc>0993-c<k1>SamBu<k2>SamBu
{#SamBu#}¦ {%śam-bhu, śam-bhaviṣṭha,%} &c. See
under 2. {%śam.%}
<LEND>

<L>46160<pc>0993-c<k1>Saya<k2>Saya
{#Saya#}¦ {%śaya, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}), ly-
ing down, asleep, sleeping; ({%as%}), m. sleep, sleeping;
a bed, couch; a hand; a snake, the boa constrictor;
abuse, imprecation; (according to Śabda-k.) {%= paṇa;%}
{%(ā),%} f., Ved. a place of rest or repose, [cf. {%sayyā;%}
cf. also Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀρέσ-κοιος.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>46161<pc>0993-c<k1>SayaRqa<k2>SayaRqa
{%Śayaṇḍa, as, ī, am,%}¦ sleeping, asleep, sleepy;
({%as%}), m., N. of a place. {%—Śayaṇḍa-bhakta, as,%}
m., N. of a district, the district of Śayaṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>46162<pc>0993-c<k1>SayaTa<k2>SayaTa
{%Śayatha, as, ā, am,%}¦ sleepy, asleep, sleeping; ({%as%}),
m. death, dying; a sort of snake, the boa constric-
tor; a boar; a fish.
<LEND>
[Page0994-a+ 80]

<L>46163<pc>0994-a<k1>Sayana<k2>Sayana
{%Śayana, am,%}¦ n. lying down, sleeping, reposing,
sleep; a bed, couch; copulation. {%—Śayana-gṛha,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘sleeping-house,’ a bed-chamber. {%—Śayana-%}
{%sakhī,%} f. a bed-fellow. {%—Śayana-stha, as, ā, am,%}
being or reclining on a couch. {%—Śayana-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. a sleeping-place, sleeping-apartment. {%—Śaya-%}
{%nāgāra (˚na-āg˚), as,%} m. a sleeping-room, bed-
chamber. {%—Śayanaikādaśī (˚na-ek˚),%} f. the eleventh
day of the light half of month Āṣāḍha (on which
Viṣṇu's sleep commences).
<LEND>

<L>46164<pc>0994-a<k1>SayanIya<k2>SayanIya
{%Śayanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be slept, to be lain on,
fit or suitable for sleep; ({%am%}), n. a bed, couch.
<LEND>

<L>46165<pc>0994-a<k1>SayanIyaka<k2>SayanIyaka
{%Śayanīyaka, am,%}¦ n. a bed, couch.
<LEND>

<L>46166<pc>0994-a<k1>SayAna<k2>SayAna
{%Śayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ lying down, reclining, resting,
sleeping, slumbering, asleep.
<LEND>

<L>46167<pc>0994-a<k1>SayAnaka<k2>SayAnaka
{%Śayānaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of snake, the boa con-
strictor; a chameleon, lizard.
<LEND>

<L>46168<pc>0994-a<k1>SayAlu<k2>SayAlu
{%Śayālu, us, us, u,%}¦ sleepy, slothful, sluggish; ({%us%}),
m. the boa snake; a dog; a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>46169<pc>0994-a<k1>Sayita<k2>Sayita
{%Śayita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reposed, lying, sleeping,
asleep; ({%as%}), m. the plant Cordia Myxa; ({%am%}), n.
sleep, sleeping. {%—Śayita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who
has lain down, gone to sleep, sleeping, asleep.
<LEND>

<L>46170<pc>0994-a<k1>Sayitavya<k2>Sayitavya
{%Śayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be lain or slept.
<LEND>

<L>46171<pc>0994-a<k1>SayitvA<k2>SayitvA
{%Śayitvā,%}¦ ind. having lain down, having slept.
<LEND>

<L>46172<pc>0994-a<k1>Sayin<k2>Sayin
{%Śayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ lying, resting, reposing.
<LEND>

<L>46173<pc>0994-a<k1>Sayu<k2>Sayu
{%Śayu, us, us, u,%}¦ lying down, reclining, sleeping;
({%us%}), m. a large snake, the boa constrictor; N. of
a person protected by the Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>46174<pc>0994-a<k1>SayutrA<k2>SayutrA
{%Śayutrā,%}¦ ind., Ved. on or to a couch, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%śayane,%} Ṛg-veda X. 40, 2); in or to a dwelling-
place, (Sāy. {%= śayane, nivāsa-sthāne,%} Ṛg-veda I.
117, 12.)
<LEND>

<L>46175<pc>0994-a<k1>Sayuna<k2>Sayuna
{%Śayuna, as,%}¦ m. a large snake, the boa constrictor.
<LEND>

<L>46176<pc>0994-a<k1>SayyamBava<k2>SayyamBava
{%Śayyam-bhava, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of the six
Śruta-kevalins (with Jainas).
<LEND>

<L>46177<pc>0994-a<k1>SayyA<k2>SayyA
{%Śayyā,%}¦ f. a bed, couch, sofa; tying, stringing to-
gether, winding. {%—Śayyā-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone to
bed, lying in bed or on a couch, confined to bed.
{%—Śayyācchādana (˚yā-āc˚), am,%} n. a bed-cover-
ing, counterpane, sheet. {%—Śayyādhyakṣa (˚yā-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. {%= śayyā-pāla%}. {%—Śayyā-patita, as, ā,%}
{%am, = śayyā-gata%}. {%—Śayyā-pāla, as,%} m. the super-
intendent of beds or sleeping apartments at the court
of a Hindū prince, guardian of a king's bed-chamber.
{%—Śayyāpāla-tva, am,%} n. the office of guarding a
king's bed-chamber. {%—Śayyotsaṅga (˚yā-ut˚), as,%}
m. the side or edge of a bed; (according to some)
the middle of a bed.
<LEND>

<L>46178<pc>0994-a<k1>Sara<k2>Sara
{#Sara#}¦ {%śara, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), injury, hurt,
mischief, a wound; a sort of reed or grass, Saccharum
Sara; an arrow, shaft; a symbolical term for the
number five (from the five arrows of Kāma-deva);
the upper part or cream of slightly curdled milk,
cream [cf. {%sara%}]; N. of a son of Ṛcatka (Ved.);
epithet of Śiva; ({%am%}), n. (in astronomy) the
versed sine of an arc; water. {%—Śara-kāṇḍa, as,%}
m. the stem of the Saccharum Sara, a reed-stalk;
the shaft of an arrow. {%—Śara-ghāta, as,%} m. {%= śarā-%}
{%ghāta%}. {%—Śara-ja, am,%} n. ‘produced from cream,’
fresh butter, butter made from new milk or from
milk one day old. {%—Śara-janman, ā,%} m. ‘reed-
born,’ N. of Kārttikeya (fabled to have been born
in a thicket of reeds). {%—Śara-jāla, am,%} n. ‘net-work
of arrows,’ a dense mass or multitude of arrows.
{%—Śara-dhi, is,%} m. ‘arrow-holder,’ a quiver. {%—Śara-%}
{%parṇikā%} or {%śara-parṇī,%} f. ‘arrow-leaved,’ a kind
of plant {%(= varaka)%}. {%—Śara-pāta, as,%} m. an arrow's
fall or flight. {%—Śarapāta-sthāna, am,%} n. the place
of an arrow's fall, an arrow's flight or range, a bow-
shot. {%—Śara-puṅkhā,%} f. the feathered end of an
arrow or that part which includes the feathers and
shaft, (in this sense {%as,%} m. according to some); a
particular plant, a kind of Nīlī or indigo. {%—Śara-%}
{%pravega, as,%} m. the rush or rapid flight of an arrow,
a swift arrow. {%—Śara-phala, am,%} n. the blade or barb
of an arrow. {%—Śara-bhaṅga, as,%} m., N. of a hermit
(in the Rāmāyaṇa). {%—Śara-bhū, ūs,%} m. ‘reed-born,’
epithet of Kārttikeya ({%= śara-janman,%} q. v.). {%—Śa-%}
{%ra-bhṛṣṭi, is,%} f. the point of an arrow. {%—Śara- %}
[Page0994-b+ 80]
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} made of Śara grass, consisting of
reeds. {%—Śara-malla, as,%} m. ‘arrow-fighter,’ an
archer, bowman; a small bird (considered as a va-
riety of the Maina or Turdus Gosalica; in this sense
also read {%śara-manda.%}) {%—Śara-loman, ā,%} m., N.
of a Muni. {%—Śara-vana, am,%} n. a thicket of reeds.
{%—Śaravana-bhava%} or {%śaravanodbhava (˚na-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘born in a thicket of reeds,’ epithet of Kārt-
tikeya. {%—Śara-varṣa, as,%} m. a flight or shower
of arrows. {%—Śara-varṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} raining or
showering down arrows. {%—Śara-vāṇi, is,%} m. the
head of an arrow; a foot soldier; an archer; a
maker of arrows. {%—Śara-viddha, as, ā, am,%} pierced
with arrows. {%—Śara-vṛṣṭi, is,%} f. a shower or heavy
fall of arrows. {%—Śara-vrāta, as,%} m. a mass of ar-
rows. {%—Śara-sambādha, as, ā, am,%} covered with
arrows. {%—Śara-stamba, as,%} m. a clump of reeds.
{%—Śarākṣepa (˚ra-āk˚), as,%} m. flight of arrows.
{%—Śarāgrya (˚ra-ag˚), as,%} m. an excellent arrow.
{%—Śarāghāta (˚ra-āgh˚), as,%} m. shooting with ar-
rows, archery. {%—Śarābhyāsa (˚ra-abh˚), as,%} m.
practice with bow and arrow, archery. {%—Śarāropa%}
{%(˚ra-ār˚), as,%} m. ‘that on which arrows are fixed,’
a bow. {%—Śarā-vatī,%} f. ‘full of reeds,’ N. of a river.
{%—Śarāvāpa (˚ra-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘casting arrows,’ a
bow. {%—Śarāśraya (˚ra-āś˚), as,%} m. ‘arrow-recep-
tacle,’ a quiver. {%—Śarāsana (˚ra-as˚), am,%} n. shoot-
ing arrows, an arrow-shooter, bow; ({%as%}), m. a proper
N. {%—Śarāsana-jyā,%} f. a bow-string. {%—Śarāsya%}
{%(˚ra-ās˚), am,%} n. a bow {%(= śarāsana)%}. {%—Śarāhata%}
{%(˚ra-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} struck or wounded by an
arrow. {%—Śareṣīkā (˚ra-iṣ˚),%} f. ‘arrow-reed,’ an
arrow. {%—Śareṣṭa (˚ra-iṣ˚), as,%} m. ‘desired by ar-
rows,’ the mango tree, (the mango being one of the
trees the blossoms of which tip the arrows of Kāma-
deva.) {%—Śarottama (˚ra-ut˚), am,%} n. best of arrows,
a very good arrow. {%—Śaraugha (˚ra-ogha),%} a
multitude of arrows.
<LEND>

<L>46179<pc>0994-b<k1>SaraRa<k2>SaraRa<h>1
1. {%śaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. injuring, killing, slaying; who
or what slays or injures.
<LEND>

<L>46180<pc>0994-b<k1>SaraRi<k2>SaraRi<h>1
1. {%śaraṇi, is,%}¦ f. injury, offence, crime (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>46181<pc>0994-b<k1>SaraRya<k2>SaraRya<h>1
1. {%śaraṇya, am,%}¦ n. injury, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>46182<pc>0994-b<k1>Saravya<k2>Saravya
{%Śaravya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%śaru%} below), Ved. capable
of wounding or injuring, (Sāy. {%= hiṃsā-kuśala%}); ({%ā%}),
f. an arrow, missile, shaft, the arrow personified as a
deity (Ved.); ({%am%}), n. a butt or mark for arrows;
aim.
<LEND>

<L>46183<pc>0994-b<k1>SarAru<k2>SarAru
{%Śarāru, us, us, u,%}¦ hurtful, injurious, noxious,
mischievous; ({%us%}), m. a mischievous creature (Ṛg-
veda X. 86, 9).
<LEND>

<L>46184<pc>0994-b<k1>Sari<k2>Sari
{%Śari, is, is, i,%}¦ hurting, hurtful, injurious.
<LEND>

<L>46185<pc>0994-b<k1>SarI<k2>SarI
{%Śarī,%}¦ f. a sort of grass ({%= erakā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46186<pc>0994-b<k1>Saru<k2>Saru
{%Śaru, us,%}¦ m. (according to others f.), an arrow,
dart; any weapon; the thunderbolt of Indra [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">κεραυνός</lang>]; the weapon of the Maruts; anger,
passion; N. of a son of Vasu-deva; a proper N.
(Ved.); [cf. Goth. <nsi>hairus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46187<pc>0994-b<k1>Sarya<k2>Sarya
{%Śarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ hostile, injurious, hurtful
(Ved.); ({%as%}), m. an enemy, foe, warrior (Ved.,
Sāy. {%= yoddhṛ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 119, 10); ({%ā%}), f.
night; an arrow (either from its causing injury or
from being made of reed, according to Sāy. on Ṛg-
veda I. 148, 4; see also Nirukta V. 4, X. 29); a
finger, (the fingers being compared to arrows in Ṛg-
veda IX. 110, 5); a porcupine (according to some;
cf. {%śalya%}). {%—Śarya-han, ā,%} m., Ved. killing ene-
mies, a warrior; killing with arrows, an archer, (Sāy.
{%= vāṇaiḥ śatrūṇāṃ hantā,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 16, 39.)
<LEND>

<L>46188<pc>0994-b<k1>Sarawa<k2>Sarawa
{#Sarawa#}¦ {%śaraṭa, as,%} m. (probably connected
with rt. {%śṝ%}), a lizard, chameleon; a safflower ({%= ku-%}
{%sumbha%}).
<LEND>

<L>46189<pc>0994-b<k1>SaraRa<k2>SaraRa<h>2
{#SaraRa#} 2¦. {%śaraṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (said to be
fr. rt. {%śṝ,%} but evidently connected with rt. {%śri%}), pro-
tecting, preserving (Ved., Sāy. {%= rakṣaka,%} Ṛg-veda
VI. 47, 8); one who protects or preserves, a protector,
preserver, defender; ({%ā%}), f. a particular plant, {%= pra-%}
{%sāraṇī; (ī),%} f. a road, path, (see 2. {%śaraṇi,%} col. 3);
the plant Celtis Orientalis; another plant, {%= prasā-%}
{%raṇī; = jayantī; (am),%} n. protection, preservation,
help, defence; a refuge, place of refuge, sanctuary,
[Page0994-c+ 77]
asylum, (sometimes applied to a person); a private
apartment, closet; a house, habitation, abode; lair,
resting-place (of an animal). {%—Śaraṇaṅ-gata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} gone for refuge, taken refuge. {%—Śaraṇāgata%}
{%(˚ṇa-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} come for protection, one who
comes for refuge or protection, a refugee, fugitive.
{%—Śaraṇāpanna (˚ṇa-āp˚), as, ā, am,%} gone to for
protection, taken refuge. {%—Śaraṇārtham (˚ṇa-ar˚),%}
ind. for the sake of protection. {%—Śaraṇārthin (˚ṇa-%}
{%ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} soliciting an asylum, seeking refuge,
asking for protection, dependant on others for protec-
tion or aid; unfortunate, wretched, involved in cala-
mity or ruin. {%—Śaraṇārpaka (˚ṇa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘requiring protection to be given,’ unfortunate, cala-
mitous, distressed, ruined. {%—Śaraṇaiṣin (˚ṇa-eṣ˚),%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} seeking for an asylum or protection, wishing
for shelter.
<LEND>

<L>46190<pc>0994-c<k1>SaraRi<k2>SaraRi<h>2
2. {%śaraṇi, is,%}¦ f. a road, path, way, (probably for
{%saraṇi%}); a row, line [cf. {%śreṇi%}]; the earth (ac-
cording to some).
<LEND>

<L>46191<pc>0994-c<k1>SaraRI<k2>SaraRI
{%Śaraṇī,%}¦ f. a road, path, &c.; (probably for {%saraṇī.%})
<LEND>

<L>46192<pc>0994-c<k1>SaraRya<k2>SaraRya<h>2
2. {%śaraṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit or good for refuge, to
be protected or aided, needing protection, poor,
miserable, helpless; yielding protection, helping;
({%am%}), n. a place of refuge, asylum, house, refuge;
protection, defence; a protection, a protector, who
or what affords refuge and defence; ({%as%}), m. epithet
of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f., N. of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>46193<pc>0994-c<k1>SaraRyu<k2>SaraRyu
{%Śaraṇyu, us,%}¦ m. a protector, defender ({%= bha-%}
{%raṇyu%}); wind, air; a cloud; [cf. {%saraṇyu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46194<pc>0994-c<k1>SaraRqa<k2>SaraRqa
{#SaraRqa#}¦ {%śaraṇḍa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%śṝ,%} probably for {%saraṇḍa,%} q. v.), a bird (in general);
a lizard, chameleon; a kind of ornament; a rogue,
cheat; a libertine, lecher.
<LEND>

<L>46195<pc>0994-c<k1>Sarad<k2>Sarad
{#Sarad#}¦ {%śarad, t,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-s. I.
129. fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), autumn, the season of autumn, (the
sultry season of two months succeeding the rains; in
some parts of India comprising the months Bhādra and
Āśvina, in other places Āśvina and Kārttika; fluctuat-
ing thus from August to November); a year; ({%das%}),
f. pl. the seasons; ({%t%}), m., N. of an Asura (Ved.). {%—Śa-%}
{%rac-candra, as,%} m. the autumnal moon. {%—Śarat-%}
{%kāmin, ī,%} m. ‘desirous of autumn,’ a dog. {%—Śarat-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. the autumnal season. {%—Śaratkālīna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} belonging to the autumnal season, autumnal.
{%—Śarat-triyāmā,%} f. an autumnal night. {%—Śarat-%}
{%padma, as, am,%} m. n. an autumnal lotus, the white
lotus. {%—Śarat-parvan, a,%} n. a festival on the full
moon of Āśvina {%(= kojāgara)%}. {%—Śarat-puṣpa,%}
{%am,%} n. a particular shrub {%(= āhulya)%}. {%—Śarat-%}
{%pratīkṣam,%} ind. having expected the autumn.
{%—Śarad-anta, as,%} m. the end of autumn, winter.
{%—Śarad-ambudhara, as,%} m. an autumnal cloud.
{%—Śaradi-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced in autumn, au-
tumnal. {%—Śarad-udāśaya (˚da-āś˚), am,%} n. an
autumnal lake or pond. {%—Śarad-ghana, as,%} m. an
autumnal cloud. {%—Śarad-vat, ān,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi
(belonging to the family of Aṅgiras); of the father
of Kṛpa (also called Gautama). {%—Śaran-mukha,%}
{%am,%} n. the commencement of autumn. {%—Śaran-%}
{%megha, as,%} m. an autumnal cloud. {%—Śaranmegha-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like an autumnal cloud.
<LEND>

<L>46196<pc>0994-c<k1>Sarada<k2>Sarada
{%Śarada%}¦ at the end of a comp. {%= śarad.%}
<LEND>

<L>46197<pc>0994-c<k1>SaradA<k2>SaradA
{%Śaradā,%}¦ f. autumn, the sultry season; a year.
<LEND>

<L>46198<pc>0994-c<k1>Saradakza<k2>Saradakza
{#Saradakza#}¦ {%śaradakṣa, as,%} m., N. of the au-
thor of a law-book.
<LEND>

<L>46199<pc>0994-c<k1>SaraDi<k2>SaraDi
{#SaraDi#}¦ {%śara-dhi.%} See under {%śara,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>46200<pc>0994-c<k1>SaraBa<k2>SaraBa
{#SaraBa#}¦ {%śarabha, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 122. fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), a fabulous animal (supposed to
have eight legs and to inhabit the snowy moun-
tains; it is represented as stronger than a lion, cf.
{%aṣṭa-pād, mahā-skandhin%}); a young elephant;
N. of a monkey in Rāma's army; a camel; a grass-
hopper [cf. {%śalabha%}]; a locust; [cf. perhaps Gr.
<lang n="greek">κάραβος;</lang> Angl. Sax. <nsi>crabba.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46201<pc>0994-c<k1>Sarayu<k2>Sarayu
{#Sarayu#}¦ {%śarayu, us,%} or {%śarayū, ūs,%} f. (more cor-
rectly written {%sarayu,%} q. v.), the Saryu or Saryū river.
<LEND>
[Page0995-a+ 74]

<L>46202<pc>0995-a<k1>Sarala<k2>Sarala
{#Sarala#}¦ {%śarala, as, ā, am%} (probably for
{%sarala%}), upright, honest, pure-minded; crooked,
fraudulent, {%= vi-gīta%} (according to Śabda-k.); ({%as%}),
m. a tree, a sort of pine ({%= sarala,%} q. v.). {%—Śarala-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%śarala-tva, am,%} n. uprightness, sincerity.
<LEND>

<L>46203<pc>0995-a<k1>Saralaka<k2>Saralaka
{%Śaralaka, am,%}¦ n. water.
<LEND>

<L>46204<pc>0995-a<k1>Sarava<k2>Sarava
{#Sarava#}¦ {%śarava, as,%} m. (for {%śarāva,%} q. v.), a
lid, cover; N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>46205<pc>0995-a<k1>Saravya<k2>Saravya
{#Saravya#}¦ {%śaravya.%} See p. 994, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>46206<pc>0995-a<k1>SarAka<k2>SarAka
{#SarAka#}¦ {%śarāka, as,%} m., (apparently) N. of a
mixed caste.
<LEND>

<L>46207<pc>0995-a<k1>SarAwi<k2>SarAwi
{#SarAwi#}¦ {%śarāṭi, is,%} f. (said to be fr. {%śara%}
and rt. {%aṭ%}), a sort of bird, Turdus Ginginianus ({%=%}
{%āṭi%} and commonly called Śarāli).
<LEND>

<L>46208<pc>0995-a<k1>SarAqi<k2>SarAqi
{%Śarāḍi, is,%}¦ f. {%= śarāṭi%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46209<pc>0995-a<k1>SarAti<k2>SarAti
{%Śarāti, is,%}¦ f. {%= śarāṭi.%}
<LEND>

<L>46210<pc>0995-a<k1>SarAri<k2>SarAri
{%Śarāri, is,%}¦ f. the Śarāli bird {%(= śarāṭi)%}. {%—Śa-%}
{%rārī-mukhī,%} f. a kind of scissors or an instrument
pointed like the beak of the Śarāli.
<LEND>

<L>46211<pc>0995-a<k1>SarAli<k2>SarAli
{%Śarāli, is,%}¦ or {%śarālikā,%} f. {%= śarāṭi%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46212<pc>0995-a<k1>SarAru<k2>SarAru
{#SarAru#}¦ {%śarāru.%} See p. 994, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>46213<pc>0995-a<k1>SarAva<k2>SarAva
{#SarAva#}¦ {%śarāva, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr.
{%śara,%} ‘mischief,’ and rt. {%av,%} ‘to protect’), a lid,
cover; a shallow cup, dish, platter, plate, earthenware
vessel; a tray; a measure equal to two Kuḍavas.
{%—Śarāva-sampāta, as,%} m. the removal of dishes
(after a meal). {%—Śarāvārdha (˚va-ar˚), am,%} n. a
measure equal to one Kuḍava.
<LEND>

<L>46214<pc>0995-a<k1>SarAvatI<k2>SarAvatI
{#SarAvatI#}¦ {%śarā-vatī,%} f. See under {%śara.%}
<LEND>

<L>46215<pc>0995-a<k1>Sari<k2>Sari
{#Sari#}¦ {%śari, śarī,%} &c. See p. 994, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>46216<pc>0995-a<k1>Sariman<k2>Sariman
{#Sariman#}¦ {%śariman%} or {%śarīman, ā,%} m. (said to
be fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), bearing, bringing forth.
<LEND>

<L>46217<pc>0995-a<k1>SarItos<k2>SarItos
{#SarItos#}¦ {%śarītos,%} in Ṛg-veda III. 53, 17.
from decay, (Sāy. {%= viśāraṇāt prāk,%} ‘before decay-
ing.’ See rt. {%śṝ.%})
<LEND>

<L>46218<pc>0995-a<k1>SarIra<k2>SarIra
{#SarIra#}¦ {%śarīra, am,%} n. (according to Uṇā-
di-s. fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), ‘that which easily moulders or is
dissolved,’ the body; bodily strength; a dead body.
{%—Śarīra-kartṛ, tā,%} m. ‘body-maker,’ a father.
{%—Śarīra-karṣaṇa, am,%} n. emaciating the body.
{%—Śarīra-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by or in the body;
({%as%}), m. sickness, disease; the god of love (or
Kāma); lust, passion; a son. {%—Śarīra-janman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} born or produced of or from the body. {%—Śa-%}
{%rīra-tulya, as, ā, am,%} equal to the body, dear as
one's own person. {%—Śarīra-daṇḍa, as,%} m. corporal
punishment, mortification of body. {%—Śarīra-dhṛk%}
(see {%dhṛk,%} p. 459), bearing a body. {%—Śarīra-%}
{%patana, am,%} n. or {%śarīra-pāta, as,%} m. ‘fall of the
body,’ death. {%—Śarīra-pāka, as,%} m. ‘ripening or
maturity of the body,’ decline of bodily strength,
decay, emaciation. {%—Śarīra-pradhānatā,%} f. the
character or nature of the body; ({%tayā%}), ind. in
virtue of the body. {%—Śarīra-baddha, as, ā, am,%} en-
dowed or invested with a body. {%—Śarīra-bandhaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘personal pledge,’ a hostage. {%—Śarīra-bhāj,%}
{%k, k, k,%} having a body, embodied, corporeal. {%—Śa-%}
{%rīra-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become a body, being a
body. {%—Śarīra-bheda, as,%} m. separation or dis-
union of the body, death. {%—Śarīra-mātra, am,%} n.
the mere person, the body only. {%—Śarīra-yaṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} f. a body like a stick, i. e. a slender or slim figure.
{%—Śarīra-yātrā,%} f. means of bodily subsistence, sub-
sistence, support. {%—Śarīra-yoga, as,%} m. union of
the body, bodily union. {%—Śarīra-rakṣā,%} f. defence
of the body, protection of the person. {%—Śarīra-%}
{%vimokṣaṇa, am,%} n. liberation from the body,
release of the soul from the body. {%—Śarīra-vai-%}
{%kalya, am,%} n. imperfection or indisposition of the
body, bodily ailment, disease. {%—Śarīra-śuśrūṣā,%}
f. ‘bodily obedience,’ personal attendance. {%—Śarīra-%}
{%śoṣaṇa, am,%} n. drying up or withering of the body,
emaciation of the body. {%—Śarīra-saṃskāra, as,%}
m. purification of the body (by various ceremonies
[Page0995-b+ 78]
at conception, birth, initiation, and death); ({%am%}),
n. decoration or adorning the person. {%—Śarīra-%}
{%sampatti, is,%} f. health or prosperity of body. {%—Śa-%}
{%rīra-sambandha, as,%} m. ‘bodily connection,’ rela-
tion by marriage. {%—Śarīra-sāda, as,%} m. exhaustion
or weariness of body. {%—Śarīrāntakara (˚ra-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the destroyer of bodies. {%—Śarīrāntara (˚ra-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. another body. {%—Śarīrāntara-cārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} acting in another body. {%—Śarīrāvaraṇa%}
{%(˚ra-āv˚), am,%} n. ‘body-covering,’ ‘body-envelope,’
the skin.
<LEND>

<L>46219<pc>0995-b<k1>SarIraka<k2>SarIraka
{%Śarīraka, am,%}¦ n. a small or inferior body; the
body.
<LEND>

<L>46220<pc>0995-b<k1>SarIrin<k2>SarIrin
{%Śarīrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having a body, embodied, cor-
poreal; living; ({%ī%}), m. an animal or sentient being;
a man; an embodied spirit; the soul whilst clad
with the body; ({%i%}), n. the incorporate soul.
<LEND>

<L>46221<pc>0995-b<k1>SarkarA<k2>SarkarA
{#SarkarA#}¦ {%śarkarā,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 3. fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), a fragment or piece of broken
earthenware, potsherd; any fragment, part, piece,
bit; any hard particle or nodule, ({%jala-śarkarā,%}
hail); a small stone, pebble, gravel, grit [cf. {%kar-%}
{%kara%}]; gravelly mould; a soil abounding in stony
or gritty fragments; granulated or candied sugar,
brown sugar; gravel (the disease); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κρόκη,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κροκάλη, κάχληξ, χάλιξ, σάκχαρ, σάκχαρον;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>calx, calculus, saccharum.</nsi>] {%—Śarkara-jā,%} f. ({%śar-%}
{%kara%} for {%śarkarā%}), clayed or candied sugar. {%—Śar-%}
{%karākṣa (˚rā-ak˚), as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Śarka-%}
{%rācala (˚rā-ac˚), as,%} m. ‘sugar-mountain,’ a kind
of artificial mountain made of sugar. {%—Śarkarā-%}
{%cala-dāna (˚rā-ac˚), am,%} n. the gift of a mountain
of sugar. {%—Śarkarā-dhenu, us,%} f. a gift of sugar in
the form of a cow, (see {%dhenu.%}) {%—Śarkarā-prabhā,%}
f. ‘gravel-appearance,’ N. of the second of the Jaina
hells, the hell of gravel. {%—Śarkarā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
full of stony particles, gritty, gravelly. {%—Śarkarā-%}
{%saptamī,%} f. a particular religious observance on the
seventh day of the light half of the month Vaiśākha.
{%—Śarkarodaka (˚rā-ud˚), am,%} n. sugar-water,
water sweetened with sugar, lemonade.
<LEND>

<L>46222<pc>0995-b<k1>Sarkaraka<k2>Sarkaraka
{%Śarkaraka, as,%}¦ m. a species of citron or lime
({%= madhura-jambīra%}).
<LEND>

<L>46223<pc>0995-b<k1>Sarkarika<k2>Sarkarika
{%Śarkarika, as, ī, am,%}¦ stony, gravelly, gritty.
<LEND>

<L>46224<pc>0995-b<k1>Sarkarila<k2>Sarkarila
{%Śarkarila, as, ā, am,%}¦ abounding in stony or
gravelly particles, gritty, gravelly.
<LEND>

<L>46225<pc>0995-b<k1>SarkarI<k2>SarkarI
{%Śarkarī,%}¦ f. a kind of metre ({%= śakvarī, sakkarī%});
a river; a girdle; (according to Śabda-k.) {%= lekhanī.%}
<LEND>

<L>46226<pc>0995-b<k1>Sarku<k2>Sarku
{%Śarku, us,%}¦ m., Ved. (perhaps) a potsherd, (see
Atharva-veda VIII. 6, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>46227<pc>0995-b<k1>SarDa<k2>SarDa
{#SarDa#}¦ {%śardha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śṛdh%}), a troop,
multitude; strength, power; breaking wind, flatu-
lence ({%= apānotsarga,%} cf. {%śṛdhu%}). {%—Śardhañ-%}
{%jaha, as, ā, am%} ({%jaha%} for {%jahat%}), causing flatu-
lence; ({%as%}), m. beans or any leguminous grain,
pulse. {%—Śardha-nīti, is, is, i,%} Ved. one whose
deeds are mighty, acting powerfully.
<LEND>

<L>46228<pc>0995-b<k1>SarDat<k2>SarDat
{%Śardhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. making effort or
exertion, striving, vehement, (Sāy. {%= utsahamāna,%}
Ṛg-veda VII. 18, 5); daring, presumptuous.
<LEND>

<L>46229<pc>0995-b<k1>SarDana<k2>SarDana
{%Śardhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of breaking wind.
<LEND>

<L>46230<pc>0995-b<k1>SarDas<k2>SarDas
{%Śardhas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. a troop, multitude, com-
pany, host, (in the Ṛg-veda frequently applied to
the hosts of the Maruts); strength, power. {%—Śar-%}
{%dhas-tara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. more powerful.
<LEND>

<L>46231<pc>0995-b<k1>SarDitvA<k2>SarDitvA
{%Śardhitvā,%}¦ ind. having broken wind, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46232<pc>0995-b<k1>Sarb<k2>Sarb
{#Sarb#}¦ {%śarb,%} cl. 1. P. {%śarbati,%} &c., to hurt,
injure, kill (= rts. {%śarv, sarv%}); to go (=
rts. {%sarb, śamb, samb%}).
<LEND>

<L>46233<pc>0995-b<k1>Sarman<k2>Sarman
{#Sarman#}¦ {%śarman, ā, ā, a%} (according to Uṇā-
di-s. IV. 144. fr. rt. {%śṝ,%} but probably connected
with rt. {%śri;%} cf. 2. {%śaraṇa%}), happy, prosperous,
(Śarman is frequently found at the end of names
of Brāhmans just as Varman is added to the names
of Kṣatriyas and Gupta to those of Vaiśyas);
({%a%}), n. a blessing; happiness, delight, pleasure;
refuge, protection; a house, receptacle, (in Naigh.
III. 4. enumerated among the {%gṛha-nāmāni,%} in
[Page0995-c+ 75]
Aitareya-Br. II. 40. Śarman is identified with {%vāc,%}
speech.) {%—Śarma-da, as, ā, am,%} conferring happi-
ness, making prosperous, propitious. {%—Śarma-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessed of happiness, lucky, auspicious.
<LEND>

<L>46234<pc>0995-c<k1>Sarmaya<k2>Sarmaya
{%Śarmaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%śarmayati, -yitum,%} Ved.
to grant happiness, confer prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>46235<pc>0995-c<k1>Sarmayat<k2>Sarmayat
{%Śarmayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. conferring happi-
ness.
<LEND>

<L>46236<pc>0995-c<k1>Sarmara<k2>Sarmara
{%Śarmara, as,%}¦ m. a sort of garment or cloth;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of Curcuma, Curcuma Xanthorrhiza
({%= dāru-haridrā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46237<pc>0995-c<k1>SarmizWA<k2>SarmizWA
{%Śarmiṣṭhā,%}¦ f. ‘most fortunate,’ N. of one of
the wives of Yayāti, (she was daughter of Vṛṣa-
parvan and mother of Puru.) {%—Śarmiṣṭhā-yayāti,%}
N. of a drama.
<LEND>

<L>46238<pc>0995-c<k1>Sarya<k2>Sarya
{#Sarya#}¦ {%śarya.%} See p. 994, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>46239<pc>0995-c<k1>SaryaRA<k2>SaryaRA
{#SaryaRA#}¦ {%śaryaṇā,%} f., N. of the country of
Kuru-kṣetra. {%—Śaryaṇā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
sweet as honey (according to some); N. of a lake in
the neighbourhood of Kuru-kṣetra.
<LEND>

<L>46240<pc>0995-c<k1>SaryAta<k2>SaryAta
{#SaryAta#}¦ {%śaryāta, as,%} m., Ved., N. of one of
the sons of Manu.
<LEND>

<L>46241<pc>0995-c<k1>SaryAti<k2>SaryAti
{%Śaryāti, is,%}¦ m., N. of one of the sons of Manu
Vaivasvata (and father of Ānarta).
<LEND>

<L>46242<pc>0995-c<k1>Sarv<k2>Sarv
{#Sarv#}¦ {%śarv,%} cl. 1. P. {%śarvati,%} &c., to hurt,
injure, kill; [cf. rts. {%śarb, sarv.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46243<pc>0995-c<k1>SarvalA<k2>SarvalA
{%Śarvalā%}¦ or {%śarvalī,%} f. an iron crow ({%= sarvalā,%}
q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>46244<pc>0995-c<k1>Sarva<k2>Sarva
{#Sarva#}¦ {%śarva, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%śṝ%}),
N. of a Vedic deity (often mentioned together with
Bhava); of Śiva (in the form Kṣiti-mūrti); of
Viṣṇu; [cf. {%sarva.%}] {%—Śarva-datta, as,%} m. ‘given
by Śarva,’ a proper N. {%—Śarva-varman, ā,%} m., N.
of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>46245<pc>0995-c<k1>Sarvaka<k2>Sarvaka
{%Śarvaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>46246<pc>0995-c<k1>SarvARI<k2>SarvARI
{%Śarvāṇī,%}¦ f., N. of Pārvatī (wife of Śiva).
<LEND>

<L>46247<pc>0995-c<k1>Sarvawa<k2>Sarvawa
{#Sarvawa#}¦ {%śarvaṭa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46248<pc>0995-c<k1>Sarvara<k2>Sarvara
{#Sarvara#}¦ {%śarvara, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), dark-
ness; love, {%= kandarpa; (ī),%} f. night ({%= rātri,%}
according to Naigh. 1. 7. and Sāy. on Ṛg-veda V.
52, 3); evening; turmeric; a dark cow (according
to some modern scholars); a woman; epithet of
the eighth year of Jupiter's cycle; [cf. probably Gr.
<lang n="greek">Κέρβερος.</lang>.] {%—Śarvarī-dīpaka, as,%} m. ‘lamp of
night,’ epithet of the moon.
<LEND>

<L>46249<pc>0995-c<k1>SarvarA<k2>SarvarA
{%Śarvarā,%}¦ f., Ved. {%= śarvarī%} (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>46250<pc>0995-c<k1>SarvarIka<k2>SarvarIka
{#SarvarIka#}¦ {%śarvarīka, as, ā, am%} (probably incor-
rect for {%śarśarīka%} below), hurtful, mischievous, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46251<pc>0995-c<k1>SarSarIka<k2>SarSarIka
{#SarSarIka#}¦ {%śarśarīka, as, ā, am%} (according to
Uṇādi-s. IV. 19. fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), hurtful, mischievous,
cruel; ({%as%}), m. a mischievous man, a vile man,
wretch, rogue.
<LEND>

<L>46252<pc>0995-c<k1>SarzIkA<k2>SarzIkA
{#SarzIkA#}¦ {%śarṣīkā,%} f. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>46253<pc>0995-c<k1>Sal<k2>Sal
{#Sal#}¦ {%śal%} [cf. rt. {%cal%}], cl. 1. A. {%śalate,%}
{%śele, śalitum,%} to shake, tremble; to
cover; cl. 1. P. {%śalati, śaśāla,%} &c., to go, move,
flow, run [cf. {%uc-chal, proc-chal,%} rts. {%śval,%} 3. {%śaṭh%}];
cl. 10. A. {%śālayate, -yitum,%} to praise, (in this
sense also written {%śaṭh.%})
<LEND>

<L>46254<pc>0995-c<k1>Sala<k2>Sala
{%Śala, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (said to be fr. rt. {%śal,%} but
probably connected with rt. {%śṝ%}), the quill of a por-
cupine; ({%as%}), m. a dart, spear; a stake; a kind of
field; N. of Bhṛṅgi (one of Śiva's attendants); of
Brahmā; of a son of Soma-datta; of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra; ({%ī%}), f. a small porcupine or hedgehog.
<LEND>

<L>46255<pc>0995-c<k1>Salaka<k2>Salaka
{%Śalaka, as,%}¦ m. a spider.
<LEND>

<L>46256<pc>0995-c<k1>Salala<k2>Salala
{%Śalala, am,%}¦ n. the quill of a porcupine.
<LEND>

<L>46257<pc>0995-c<k1>SalalI<k2>SalalI
{%Śalalī,%}¦ f. the quill of a porcupine; a small porcu-
pine.
<LEND>

<L>46258<pc>0995-c<k1>SalAkA<k2>SalAkA
{%Śalākā,%}¦ f. a javelin, dart; an arrow; a rib (of an
umbrella &c.); a thin bar (as of a cage &c.), any
small stake, stick, rod, peg, pin; a round pointed
piece of wood or bamboo serving for various pur-
poses; a ruler; a brimstone match; any pointed
surgical instrument, a tent or probe (used in the
[Page0996-a+ 80]
treatment of external organic affections and some-
times taken as the N. of this branch of surgery; cf.
{%śālākya%}); a bone; an oblong quadrangular piece
of ivory or bone (used in playing a particular game),
a domino; a fibrous stick used as a brush, &c.; a
tooth-brush; a tooth-pick; a pencil; a sprout, sprig,
shoot of any kind [cf. {%ratna-śalākā%}]; a porcupine;
a particular thorny shrub, Vangueria Spinosa; the
Sārikā bird, Turdus Salica. {%—Śalāka-dhūrta, as,%}
m. (for {%śalākā-dh˚%}), cheating with dominoes, a
sharper. {%—Śalākā-pari,%} ind. an unlucky throw or
movement of one of the pieces at the game of
Śalākā, (see {%pari.%}) {%—Śalākā-puruṣa, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of sixty-three divine personages according to the
Jainas (viz. the twenty-four Jainas, twelve Cakra-
vartins, nine Vāsudevas, nine Bala-devas, and nine
Prati-vāsudevas).
<LEND>

<L>46259<pc>0996-a<k1>Salya<k2>Salya
{%Śalya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a dart, javelin, spear tipped
with iron, ({%upa-śalya,%} a short spear); a pike; an
arrow, shaft; any stake or rod, spike, splinter, thorn,
(in these senses usually {%am,%} n.); a pin, peg; ({%as%}),
m. a porcupine, hedgehog; extraction of splinters
or extraneous substances in surgery (as a branch of
medicine or Āyur-veda, q. v.); the thorny shrub,
Vangueria Spinosa ({%= madana%}); another tree ({%=%}
{%vilva%}); a fence, boundary; a kind of fish; N. of
the king of Madra (maternal uncle of the sons of
Pāṇḍu and especially of Nakula and Sahadeva, Madrī
the wife of Pāṇḍu being sister to Śalya); ({%am%}), n.,
N. of a son of Vipracitti; ({%am%}), n. an iron crow-
bar; any extraneous substance lodged in the body
(as an arrow, thorn, splinter); a bone; sin, crime;
poison; difficulty, embarrassment, distress; abuse,
defamation; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κῆλα;</lang> Hib. <nsi>cail,</nsi> ‘a spear.’]
{%—Śalya-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. ‘quill-throated,’ a porcu-
pine. {%—Śalya-kriyā,%} f. the extraction of thorns or
other extraneous substances lodged in the body.
{%—Śalya-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a section of the
Aṣṭāṅga-hṛdaya-saṃhitā (comprising chapters 25 — 
34 of the Uttara-tantra or sixth book, and treating
of the cure of external wounds). {%—Śalya-parvan,%}
{%a,%} n., N. of the ninth book of the Mahā-bhārata,
(this book describes how, on the death of Karṇa,
Śalya, king of Madra, was appointed to the command
of the Kuru army, and how a combat with maces
took place between Śalya and Bhīma, and another
great battle between Śalya and Yudhi-ṣṭhira, in
which the former was eventually killed.) {%—Śalya-%}
{%prota, as, ā, am,%} pierced or transfixed by an arrow.
{%—Śalya-loman, a,%} n. a porcupine's quill. {%—Śalya-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing an arrow, owning shafts;
shooting arrows, one who has shot an arrow; set
with stakes, hampered or harassed with difficulties.
{%—Śalya-vāraṅga, am,%} n. ‘arrow-handle,’ the part
by which an arrow or other foreign substance lodged
in the body is laid hold of during the operation of
extraction. {%—Śalya-śāstra, am,%} n. ‘splinter-(extrac-
tion)-science,’ that part of surgery which treats of
the removal of extraneous substances lodged in the
body; [cf. {%āyur-veda.%}] {%—Śalya-hartṛ, tā,%} m. a
remover of thorns, weeder. {%—Śalyāri (˚ya-ari), is,%}
m. ‘enemy of Śalya,’ an epithet of Yudhi-ṣṭhira.
{%—Śalyāharaṇa-vidhi (˚ya-āh˚), is,%} m. ‘method
of extracting splinters or other foreign substances,’
N. of the twenty-eighth chapter of the Sūtra-sthāna
or first book of the Aṣṭāṅga-hṛdaya-saṃhita. {%—Śa-%}
{%lyoddhāra (˚ya-ud˚), as,%} m. extraction of arrows or
thorns or other pointed substances from the body;
weeding; the ceremony of cleansing or purifying a
new house.
<LEND>

<L>46260<pc>0996-a<k1>Salyaka<k2>Salyaka
{%Śalyaka, as,%}¦ m. a dart, javelin, spear, pike; a
stake, thorn; a porcupine; a hedgehog; the thorny
shrub Vangueria Spinosa.
<LEND>

<L>46261<pc>0996-a<k1>SalaNga<k2>SalaNga
{#SalaNga#}¦ {%śalaṅga, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%śal%}), a king, sovereign ({%= loka-pāla%}), a kind of
salt.
<LEND>

<L>46262<pc>0996-a<k1>SalaBa<k2>SalaBa
{#SalaBa#}¦ {%śalabha, as,%} m. (according to Uṇā-
di-s. III. 122. fr. rt. {%śal,%} but cf. {%śarabha%}), a grass-
hopper; a locust; a moth; N. of an Asura. {%—Śa-%}
{%labha-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition of a grass-
[Page0996-b+ 70]
hopper. {%—Śalabhāsura (˚bha-as˚), as,%} m. the
Asura Śalabha.
<LEND>

<L>46263<pc>0996-b<k1>SalAkA<k2>SalAkA
{#SalAkA#}¦ {%śalākā.%} See p. 995, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>46264<pc>0996-b<k1>SalAwa<k2>SalAwa
{#SalAwa#}¦ {%śalāṭa, as,%} m. (etymology doubt-
ful), a cartload (= 20 times 100 Palas).
<LEND>

<L>46265<pc>0996-b<k1>SalAwu<k2>SalAwu
{#SalAwu#}¦ {%śalāṭu, us, us, u%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%śal%}), unripe (as fruit); ({%us%}), m. a kind of root.
<LEND>

<L>46266<pc>0996-b<k1>SalAtura<k2>SalAtura
{#SalAtura#}¦ {%śalātura,%} N. of the abode of the
ancestors of Pāṇini; [cf. {%śālāturīya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46267<pc>0996-b<k1>SalABoli<k2>SalABoli
{#SalABoli#}¦ {%śalābholi, is,%} m. (etymology
doubtful), a camel.
<LEND>

<L>46268<pc>0996-b<k1>SalAlu<k2>SalAlu
{#SalAlu#}¦ {%śalālu,%} n. a sort of perfume or
fragrant substance.
<LEND>

<L>46269<pc>0996-b<k1>SalAluka<k2>SalAluka
{%Śalāluka, as, ī, am,%}¦ purchased with or exchanged
for the substance termed Śalālu; [cf. {%śālāluka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46270<pc>0996-b<k1>Salka<k2>Salka
{#Salka#}¦ {%śalka, am,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 43. fr. rt. {%śal,%} but probably connected with {%śala%}
and rt. {%śṝ%}), a part, portion, piece; bark (of a tree),
rind; the scale of a fish; [cf. {%valka.%}] {%—Śalka-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} scaly, flaky.
<LEND>

<L>46271<pc>0996-b<k1>Salkala<k2>Salkala
{%Śalkala, am,%}¦ n. a part, portion; bark, rind; the
scale of a fish.
<LEND>

<L>46272<pc>0996-b<k1>Salkalin<k2>Salkalin
{%Śalkalin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘having scales,’ a fish.
<LEND>

<L>46273<pc>0996-b<k1>Salkin<k2>Salkin
{%Śalkin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘having scales,’ a fish.
<LEND>

<L>46274<pc>0996-b<k1>SalpadA<k2>SalpadA
{#SalpadA#}¦ {%śalpadā,%} f., N. of a plant or root
({%= medā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46275<pc>0996-b<k1>SalpaparRikA<k2>SalpaparRikA
{#SalpaparRikA#}¦ {%śalpa-parṇikā = śalpadā.%}
<LEND>

<L>46276<pc>0996-b<k1>SalB<k2>SalB
{#SalB#}¦ {%śalbh,%} cl. 1. A. {%śalbhate, śaśalbhe,%}
{%śalbhitum,%} to praise; to boast.
<LEND>

<L>46277<pc>0996-b<k1>Salmali<k2>Salmali
{#Salmali#}¦ {%śalmali, is,%} m. the silk-cotton
tree; [cf. {%śālmali.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46278<pc>0996-b<k1>SalmalI<k2>SalmalI
{%Śalmalī,%}¦ f. {%= śalmali%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46279<pc>0996-b<k1>Salya<k2>Salya
{#Salya#}¦ {%śalya,%} &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>46280<pc>0996-b<k1>Sall<k2>Sall
{#Sall#}¦ {%śall,%} a Sautra root meaning ‘to
go.’
<LEND>

<L>46281<pc>0996-b<k1>Salla<k2>Salla
{%Śalla, as,%}¦ m. a frog; ({%am%}), n. bark, rind; [cf.
{%śalka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46282<pc>0996-b<k1>Sallaka<k2>Sallaka
{%Śallaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Bignonia Indica, {%=%}
{%śoṇa; (am),%} n. bark, rind; ({%ī%}), f. a porcupine;
the gum olibanum tree, Boswellia Thurifera {%(=%}
{%gaja-bhakṣā, surabhi)%}. {%—Śallakī-drava, as,%} m.
‘Śallakī-essence,’ incense, olibanum ({%= sihla%}).
<LEND>

<L>46283<pc>0996-b<k1>Salva<k2>Salva
{#Salva#}¦ {%śalva, as,%} m., N. of a country, (more
usually written {%śālva,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>46284<pc>0996-b<k1>Sav<k2>Sav
{#Sav#}¦ {%śav%} (perhaps originally {%śu,%} and con-
nected with rt. {%śvi,%} ‘to swell, increase,’
in the same way as rt. {%hu%} with rt. {%hve%}), cl. 1. P.
{%śavati,%} &c., to go, approach, ({%śavati%} is enumerated
among the {%gati-karmāṇaḥ%} in Naigh. II. 14. and
among the {%paricaraṇa-karmāṇaḥ%} according to
some readings in Naigh. III. 5); to alter, change,
transform, corrupt, cause to decay.
<LEND>

<L>46285<pc>0996-b<k1>Sava<k2>Sava
{%Śava, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a dead body, corpse; ({%am%}),
n. water. {%—Śava-kāmya, as,%} m. ‘desirous of dead
bodies,’ a dog. {%—Śava-dāha, as,%} m. burning a
corpse, cremation of a dead body. {%—Śava-dāhaka,%}
{%as,%} or {%śava-dāhin, ī,%} m. a corpse-burner. {%—Śava-%}
{%bhasman, a,%} n. the ashes of a corpse. {%—Śava-bhūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} become a corpse or like a corpse. {%—Śava-%}
{%yāna, am,%} n. or {%śava-ratha, as,%} m. ‘corpse-vehicle,’
a bier, hearse, litter for carrying a dead body. {%—Śava-%}
{%vāhaka, as,%} m. a corpse-carrier. {%—Śava-sādhana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘corpse-rite,’ a magical and superstitious
ceremony performed with a dead body. {%—Śava-%}
{%sparśa, as,%} m. touching a corpse. {%—Śava-spṛś, k,%}
{%k, k,%} one who has touched a corpse (and is conse-
quently defiled). {%—Śavācchādana (˚va-āc˚), am,%}
{%ī,%} n. f. the covering of a corpse, a shroud.
<LEND>

<L>46286<pc>0996-b<k1>Savara<k2>Savara
{%Śavara, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. {%śava,%} cf. {%śabara%}), a
barbarian, savage, mountaineer, a Kirāta, (especially
[Page0996-c+ 80]
one wearing peacocks’ feathers as a decoration); water;
the hand; N. of Śiva; a particular Śāstra or sacred
treatise; ({%ī%}), f. a Śavara female. {%—Śavara-lodhra,%}
{%as,%} m. the white Lodhra or Lodh tree. {%—Śavara-%}
{%svāmin,%} see {%śabara-s˚%}. {%—Śavarāla%} ({%˚ra-āla%} for
{%ālaya?%}), {%as,%} m. a sort of Lodhra or Lodh tree.
{%—Śavarālaya (˚ra-āl˚)%} or {%śavarāvāsa (˚ra-āv˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the abode of outcasts or of wild barbarous
tribes.
<LEND>

<L>46287<pc>0996-c<k1>Savala<k2>Savala
{%Śavala, as, ā, am%}¦ (also written {%śabala%}), varie-
gated, of a variegated colour, brindled, mottled (with
various hues, as with brown or yellow, &c.),
spotted (applied in Ṛg-veda X. 14, 10. to the
two four-eyed watch-dogs of Yama; the word {%śa-%}
{%bala%} being thought by some to be a corruption
of {%śarvara%} or {%śarbara%} = <lang n="greek">Κέρβερος</lang>); diversified,
varied, divided into various parts; articulate, imi-
tative; ({%as%}), m. a variegated colour; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a
brindled or spotted cow; the cow of plenty, Kāma-
dhenu [cf. {%śabalī%}]; ({%am%}), n. water; a religious
observance peculiar to the Bauddhas. {%—Śavala-gu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} having mottled cows. {%—Śavala-tā,%} f. or
{%śavala-tva, am,%} n. variegation, variety of colour;
variation, alternation. {%—Śavalī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
made of a variegated colour, variegated.
<LEND>

<L>46288<pc>0996-c<k1>Savas<k2>Savas
{%Śavas, as,%}¦ n. power, strength, vigour (Ved.);
water ({%= udaka,%} Naigh. 1. 12); a corpse; ({%ās%}), m.
a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46289<pc>0996-c<k1>SavasAna<k2>SavasAna
{%Śavasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. powerful, very mighty,
(Sāy. {%= bala-vat, ati-bala%}); ({%as%}), m. a traveller;
a road; ({%am%}), n. a cemetery.
<LEND>

<L>46290<pc>0996-c<k1>SavasAvat<k2>SavasAvat
{%Śavasā-vat, ān,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘powerful,’ epithet of
Indra.
<LEND>

<L>46291<pc>0996-c<k1>Savasin<k2>Savasin
{%Śavasin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ powerful, mighty, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%bala-vat.%})
<LEND>

<L>46292<pc>0996-c<k1>SavizWa<k2>SavizWa
{%Śaviṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. strongest, most
powerful.
<LEND>

<L>46293<pc>0996-c<k1>SaS<k2>SaS
{#SaS#}¦ {%śaś,%} cl. 1. P. {%śaśati, śaśāśa, śaśi-%}
{%tum,%} to jump, leap, spring, bound, dance;
A., Ved. to praise, laud, celebrate, (this sense ap-
pears to be doubtful and to result from a confusion
with {%śas%} for rt. {%śaṃs%}); [cf. Lith. <nsi>szókti;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>skakati,</nsi> ‘to dance.’]
<LEND>

<L>46294<pc>0996-c<k1>SaSa<k2>SaSa
{%Śaśa, as,%}¦ m. a hare, rabbit, (its flesh is said to be
greatly valued and is offered at Śrāddhas); a spot or
spots on the moon (supposed to resemble those on
a hare); a man of mild and virtuous character but
uxorious and easily led, (one of the four classes into
which men are divided by erotic writers; he is
described as gentle in speech and temper, with soft
limbs and fine hair); the Lodh tree, Symplocos Race-
mosa ({%= lodhra%}); gum-myrrh; N. of a part of
Jambu-dvīpa; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>haso;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>hara;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>kiszkis, zuikis;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>zœz.</nsi>] {%—Śaśa-%}
{%karṇa, as,%} m. ‘rabbit-eared,’ N. of the author of
the hymn Ṛg-veda VIII. 9 (having the patronymic
Kāṇva). {%—Śaśa-dhara, as,%} m. ‘having (marks
like) a hare,’ the moon; camphor; N. of a com-
mentator. {%—Śaśadhara-mauli, is,%} m. ‘moon-
crested,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Śaśa-dharīya,%} N. of
Śaśa-dhara's philosophical treatise on the nature of
atoms, &c. {%—Śaśa-dharman, ā,%} m., N. of a king
of the Maurya dynasty (a descendant of Candra-
gupta). {%—Śaśa-plutaka, am,%} n. a mark or scratch
with a finger-nail. {%—Śaśa-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘hare-(mark)-
possessing,’ the moon. {%—Śaśabhṛd-bhṛt, t,%} or
(according to Śabda-k.) {%śaśabhṛd-bhṛta, as,%} m.
‘moon-bearer,’ epithet of Śiva (as bearing the moon
on his brow). {%—Śaśa-mātra, as, ī, am,%} ‘having
the measure of a hare,’ as large as a hare. {%—Śaśa-%}
{%rajas, as,%} n. ‘a speck of dust or dirt on a hare,’
a particular measure. {%—Śaśa-lakṣmaṇa, as,%} m.
‘hare-marked,’ epithet of the moon. {%—Śaśa-lāñ-%}
{%chana, as,%} m. ‘hare-marked,’ the moon. {%—Śaśa-%}
{%lupta, am,%} n., see Pāṇ. VI. 2, 145. {%—Śaśa-loman,%}
{%a,%} n. the hair of a hare or rabbit, hare-skin, rabbit-
skin. {%—Śaśa-vindu, us,%} m. ‘hare-spotted,’ the moon;
N. of a king (son of Citra-ratha); an epithet of
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Śaśa-viṣāṇa, am,%} n. ‘rab-
bit's-horn,’ anything impossible or extraordinary, an
[Page0997-a+ 81]
impossibility. {%—Śaśa-śimbikā,%} f. a particular plant
{%(= jīvantī)%}. {%—Śaśa-sthalī,%} f. the Doab or country
between the Ganges and Jumnā rivers {%(= antar-%}
{%vedī)%}. {%—Śaśāṅka (˚śa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘hare-marked,’
the moon; camphor. {%—Śaśāṅka-kiraṇa-prakhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} resembling a ray of the moon, like a
moon-beam. {%—Śaśāṅka-bhās, ās, ās, ās,%} shining
like the moon. {%—Śaśāṅka-mūrti, is,%} m. ‘having
a form marked like a hare,’ epithet of the moon.
{%—Śaśāṅka-lekhā,%} f. ‘moon-streak,’ a digit of the
moon, the lunar crescent. {%—Śaśāṅka-vatī,%} f., N. of
the twelfth book of the Kathā-sarit-sāgara. {%—Śa-%}
{%śāṅka-śṛṅga, am,%} n. a horn or point of the moon's
crescent (?). {%—Śaśāṅkārdha-mukha (˚ka-ar˚), as,%}
{%ī, am,%} crescent-headed (said of an arrow). {%—Śaśāda%}
{%(˚śa-ada), as,%} m. ‘hare-eater,’ a hawk, falcon; N.
of a son of Ikṣvāku. {%—Śaśādana (˚śa-ad˚), as,%} m.
‘hare-eater,’ a hawk, falcon. {%—Śaśorṇa (˚śa-ūr˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the hair of a hare or rabbit, hare-skin.
<LEND>

<L>46295<pc>0997-a<k1>SaSaka<k2>SaSaka
{%Śaśaka, as,%}¦ m. a hare, rabbit. {%—Śaśaka-viṣā-%}
{%ṇa, am,%} n. {%= śaśa-viṣāṇa%}. {%—Śaśakādhama (˚ka-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. a miserable little rabbit.
<LEND>

<L>46296<pc>0997-a<k1>SaSat<k2>SaSat
{%Śaśat, an, antī, at,%}¦ leaping, jumping, going by
leaps.
<LEND>

<L>46297<pc>0997-a<k1>SaSamAna<k2>SaSamAna<h>1
1. {%śaśamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (perhaps to be connected
with rt. 1. {%śam,%} see 2. {%śaśamāna%}), Ved. praising,
celebrating, offering praise.
<LEND>

<L>46298<pc>0997-a<k1>SaSANka<k2>SaSANka
{%Śaśāṅka.%}¦ See under {%śaśa.%}
<LEND>

<L>46299<pc>0997-a<k1>SaSARquli<k2>SaSARquli
{%Śaśāṇḍuli, is,%}¦ or {%śaśāṇḍulī,%} f. a kind of gourd
or cucumber.
<LEND>

<L>46300<pc>0997-a<k1>SaSika<k2>SaSika
{%Śaśika, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>46301<pc>0997-a<k1>SaSin<k2>SaSin
{%Śaśin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘hare-marked,’ the moon, (see {%śaśa-%}
{%dhara%}); the emblem of a particular Arhat or Jina;
({%inī%}), f. epithet of one of the sixteen digits of the
moon. {%—Śaśi-kara, as,%} m. a moon-beam. {%—Śaśi-%}
{%kalā,%} f. a digit of the moon (of which there are
sixteen, see {%kalā%}); a species of Atiśakvarī metre
(consisting of fifteen syllables to the Pāda); N. of
a daughter of king Vīra-siṃha, (also called Candra-
lekhā); of a daughter of Su-bandhu. {%—Śaśikalā-%}
{%bharaṇa (˚lā-ābh˚), as,%} m. ‘ornamented with a
digit of the moon,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Śaśi-kānta,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘moon-loved,’ the moon-gem or moon-stone,
see {%candra-kānta; (am),%} n. a lotus. {%—Śaśi-kiraṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. a ray or beam of the moon. {%—Śaśi-koṭi,%}
{%is,%} f. a horn of the moon. {%—Śaśi-graha, as,%} m.
‘moon-seizure,’ an eclipse of the moon. {%—Śaśi-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘moon-born,’ ‘son of the moon,’ epithet of
Budha or Mercury. {%—Śaśi-deva, as,%} m., N. of a
king, (also called Ranti-deva.) {%—Śaśi-dhāman, a,%} n.
the splendor or lustre of the moon. {%—Śaśi-dhvaja,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the king of Bhallāṭa-nagara, q. v.
{%—Śaśi-pāda, as,%} m. a moon-beam. {%—Śaśi-pra-%}
{%bhā,%} f. the lustre or radiance of the moon, moon-
light; ({%as, ā, am%}), having the lustre of the moon,
radiant as the moon; ({%ā%}), f. a proper N.; ({%am%}), n.
the white esculent water-lily; {%= muktā%} (according to
Śabda-k.). {%—Śaśi-bhās, ās,%} f. a moon-beam. {%—Śa-%}
{%śi-bhūṣaṇa, as,%} m. ‘moon-decorated,’ epithet of
Śiva; [cf. {%śaśi-śekhara.%}] {%—Śaśi-mayūkha, as,%}
m. a ray of the moon, moon-beam. {%—Śaśi-mukha,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} ‘moon-faced,’ having a beautiful face.
{%—Śaśi-mauli, is,%} m. ‘moon-crested,’ epithet of
Śiva. {%—Śaśi-raśmi, is,%} m. a moon-beam. {%—Śaśi-%}
{%lekhā,%} f. ‘moon-streak,’ a digit of the moon; the
plant Menispermum Glabrum or another plant ({%=%}
{%guḍūcī%}); N. of an Apsaras; a kind of metre (either
a variety of the Atijagatī or of the Atiśakvarī; cf.
{%śaśi-kalā%}). {%—Śaśi-vadanā,%} f. ‘moon-faced,’ a
woman with a beautiful face; a species of the Gā-
yatrī metre. {%—Śaśi-vardhana, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
{%—Śaśi-vāṭikā,%} f. a particular plant {%(= punar-ṇavā).%}
{%—Śaśi-śekhara, as,%} m. ‘moon-crested,’ epithet of
Śiva (as represented with a crescent of the moon on
his brow); of one of the Jaina pontiffs. {%—Śaśīśa%}
{%(˚śi-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of the moon,’ Śiva. {%—Śa-%}
{%śīśa-śiśu-śī, īs,%} m. wounding the child of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>46302<pc>0997-a<k1>SaSIyas<k2>SaSIyas
{%Śaśīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. springing, leaping,
assailing, (Sāy. {%= utplavamāna,%} leaping up, Ṛg-
veda IV. 32, 3); ({%asī%}), f., N. of the queen of king
Taranta (Ṛg-veda V. 61, 6).
<LEND>
[Page0997-b+ 76]

<L>46303<pc>0997-b<k1>SaSamAna<k2>SaSamAna<h>2
{#SaSamAna#} 2¦. {%śaśamāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
1. {%śam;%} for 1. {%śaśamāna%} see col. 1), Ved. one
who has pacified, &c.; being pacified, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46304<pc>0997-b<k1>SaSaya<k2>SaSaya
{#SaSaya#}¦ {%śaśaya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}), Ved.
lying, reposing, being, (Sāy. {%= śayāna, vartamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>46305<pc>0997-b<k1>SaSayAna<k2>SaSayAna
{%Śaśayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. lying, reposing, sleep-
ing, (Sāy. {%= śiśyāna,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 103, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>46306<pc>0997-b<k1>SaSramARa<k2>SaSramARa
{#SaSramARa#}¦ {%śaśramāṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%śram%}), Ved. toiling, struggling, serving laboriously
or diligently.
<LEND>

<L>46307<pc>0997-b<k1>SaSvacE<k2>SaSvacE
{#SaSvacE#}¦ {%śaśvacai%} (fr. rt. {%śvac%}), Ved., accord-
ing to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 33, 10 {%= pariṣvaja-%}
{%nāya,%} connecting it with rt. {%śvaj%} or {%svañj.%}
<LEND>

<L>46308<pc>0997-b<k1>SaSvat<k2>SaSvat
{#SaSvat#}¦ {%śaśvat%} (probably a reduplicated form
fr. rt. {%śvi,%} cf. {%viśva;%} the form of the nom. masc.
appears to be doubtful, but {%atī, at%} are found for the
nom. fem. and neut., the latter being used adverbi-
ally), ‘continually increasing,’ lasting, perpetual, con-
tinuous (Ved.); many, numerous, (Sāy. and Naigh.
III. 1 {%= bahu%}); ({%at%}), ind. perpetually, externally,
continually, repeatedly, frequently, always, again and
again, ({%śaśvac-chaśvat,%} again and again, constantly);
({%atī%}), f., N. of a woman belonging to the family of
Aṅgiras (authoress of Ṛg-veda VIII. 1, 34); [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">πᾶς</lang> for <lang n="greek">ἅπας.</lang>] {%—Śaśvac-chānti, is,%} f. (for
{%śaśvat-śānti%}), everlasting peace or tranquillity,
eternal rest. {%—Śaśvat-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most
constant, very regular or frequent.
<LEND>

<L>46309<pc>0997-b<k1>SaSva<k2>SaSva
{%Śaśva,%}¦ Nom. P. {%śaśvati = śaśvāyate%} (Vopa-deva
XXI. 8).
<LEND>

<L>46310<pc>0997-b<k1>SaSvaDA<k2>SaSvaDA
{%Śaśvadhā,%}¦ ind., Ved. constantly, continually.
<LEND>

<L>46311<pc>0997-b<k1>SaSvAya<k2>SaSvAya
{%Śaśvāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%śaśvāyate,%} &c., to be or
become eternal.
<LEND>

<L>46312<pc>0997-b<k1>Saz<k2>Saz
{#Saz#}¦ {%śaṣ%} [cf. rt. 1. {%śas%}], cl. 1. P. {%śaṣati,%}
{%śaśāṣa, śaṣitum,%} to hurt, injure, strike,
wound, kill.
<LEND>

<L>46313<pc>0997-b<k1>Sazkula<k2>Sazkula
{#Sazkula#}¦ {%śaṣkula, as,%} m. a particular plant
or tree, {%= chitti, karañja; (ī),%} f. the orifice of the
ear, auditory passage; rice-gruel or barley-water
(mixed with rice, sesamum, and other grain); a sort
of fish (called Saurī in Hindī); a kind of baked cake
or pie ({%= śaskulī%}).
<LEND>

<L>46314<pc>0997-b<k1>Sazpa<k2>Sazpa
{#Sazpa#}¦ {%śaṣpa.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>46315<pc>0997-b<k1>Sas<k2>Sas<h>1
{#Sas#} 1¦. {%śas%} (said to be connected with
rt. 1. {%śam,%} cf. rt. {%śaṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%śasati,%}
{%śaśāsa%} (3rd pl. {%śaśasuḥ%}), {%śasitum,%} to cut, wound,
hurt, injure, strike, kill, destroy; [cf. Lat. <nsi>hostia;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>hunsl;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>husel.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46316<pc>0997-b<k1>Sazpa<k2>Sazpa
{%Śaṣpa, am,%}¦ n. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 28.
fr. rt. 1. {%śas%} above), young grass [cf. 2. {%śasya%}]; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. loss of intellect or of confidence ({%= pra-%}
{%tibhā-kṣaya,%} in this sense only masc. according
to some); [cf. Lat. <nsi>cœspes.</nsi>] {%—Śaṣpa-bhuj, k, k,%}
{%k,%} eating grass, any animal feeding on grass. {%—Śaṣ-%}
{%pa-vṛṣī,%} f. a seat of Kuśa grass.
<LEND>

<L>46317<pc>0997-b<k1>Sasana<k2>Sasana
{%Śasana, am,%}¦ n. the act of wounding, killing,
immolation, slaughtering an animal in sacrifice; [cf.
{%śamana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46318<pc>0997-b<k1>Sasita<k2>Sasita
{%Śasita%}¦ in {%vi-śasita,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46319<pc>0997-b<k1>Sasitf<k2>Sasitf
{%Śasitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a cutter, wounder. See {%vi-%}
{%śasitṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>46320<pc>0997-b<k1>SasitvA<k2>SasitvA
{%Śasitvā,%}¦ ind. having wounded or hurt.
<LEND>

<L>46321<pc>0997-b<k1>Sasta<k2>Sasta<h>2
2. {%śasta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. {%śasta%} see p. 985,
col. 2), wounded, injured; struck, killed, ({%pra-%}
{%śasta,%} destroyed.)
<LEND>

<L>46322<pc>0997-b<k1>Sastaka<k2>Sastaka
{%Śastaka, am,%}¦ n. (probably to be connected with
rt. 1. {%śas,%} by some referred to 1. {%śasta%}), a defence
for the finger of an archer.
<LEND>

<L>46323<pc>0997-b<k1>Sastf<k2>Sastf
{%Śastṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a cutter &c., in {%vi-śastṛ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46324<pc>0997-b<k1>Sastra<k2>Sastra<h>2
2. {%śastra, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. {%śastra%} see p. 985, col. 2),
an instrument for cutting or wounding, a cutting
weapon, a weapon or arms (in general); an instru-
ment or tool; iron; steel; ({%as%}), m. a sword, scymitar;
({%ī%}), f. a knife. {%—Śastra-kāra, as,%} m. ‘weapon-
maker,’ an armourer. {%—Śastra-kuśala, as, ā, am,%}
skilled or expert in arms. {%—Śastra-kośa, as,%} m.
[Page0997-c+ 81]
the sheath of a weapon. {%—Śastrakośa-taru, us,%} m.
a particular tree {%(= piṇḍī-taru)%}. {%—Śastra-kṣata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} killed by weapons. {%—Śastra-graha,%}
{%as,%} m. taking arms. {%—Śastra-grāhin, ī,%} m.
‘weapon-taker,’ ‘weapon-holder,’ an armed man.
{%—Śastra-ghuṣṭa-kara, as, ī, am,%} making a noise
with iron weapons, &c. {%—Śastra-jāla, am,%} n. a
quantity of weapons. {%—Śastra-jīvin, ī,%} m. ‘living
by weapons,’ a soldier by profession. {%—Śastra-tyā-%}
{%ga, as,%} m. abandoning or throwing away a weapon.
{%—Śastra-devatā,%} f. ‘weapon-deity,’ a deified
weapon (represented as the offspring of Kṛśāśva,
and according to some accounts one hundred in
number). {%—Śastra-dhara, as,%} m. ‘bearing weapons,’
an armed man or soldier, a warrior. {%—Śastra-dhā-%}
{%raṇa, am,%} n. the act of carrying arms. {%—Śastra-%}
{%dhāraṇa-jīvaka, as, ikā, am,%} one who lives by
carrying arms; ({%as%}), m. a soldier. {%—Śastra-dhā-%}
{%rin, ī, iṇī, i,%} bearing arms. {%—Śastra-nitya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who is continually under arms. {%—Śastra-%}
{%nyāsa, as,%} m. the laying down of arms. {%—Śastra-%}
{%pāṇi, is, is, i,%} ‘weapon-handed,’ bearing arms or
weapons, armed; ({%is%}), m. an armed warrior. {%—Śas-%}
{%tra-pāṇin, ī, inī, i, = śastra-pāṇi%}. {%—Śastra-pāta,%}
{%as,%} m. the fall or stroke of a weapon. {%—Śastra-%}
{%pūta, as, ā, am,%} purified by arms, absolved from
guilt by dying in the field of battle. {%—Śastra-pra-%}
{%haraṇa, as, ā, am,%} striking or wounding with
weapons, using arms. {%—Śastra-prahāra, as,%} m. a
wound inflicted with a weapon. {%—Śastra-bhṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} bearing weapons; ({%t%}), m. an armed man; a
soldier, warrior. {%—Śastra-mārja, as,%} m. a weapon-
cleaner, furbisher, armourer. {%—Śastra-vidyā,%} f. the
science of arms. {%—Śastra-vidvas, ān, uṣī, at,%}
skilled in arms. {%—Śastra-vṛtti, is,%} m. ‘making a
livelihood by arms,’ a soldier, a man at arms. {%—Śas-%}
{%tra-śāstra, am,%} n. the science of arms, military
science. {%—Śastra-śikhin, ī, inī, i,%} proud of (the
practice of) weapons. {%—Śastra-saṃhati, is,%} f. or
{%śastra-samūha, as,%} m. a quantity or collection of
weapons; an arsenal, armoury. {%—Śastra-sampāta,%}
{%as,%} m. descent or sudden fall of a number of weapons.
{%—Śastra-hata, as, ā, am,%} struck or killed by a
weapon. {%—Śastra-hasta, as,%} m. ‘weapon-handed,’
an armed man. {%—Śastrājīva (˚ra-āj˚), as, ā%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} living by arms; ({%as%}), m. a soldier; ({%ī%}), f.
(with Śāktas) one of the eight Akulas. {%—Śastrā-%}
{%bhyāsa (˚ra-abh˚), as,%} m. the practice of arms,
military exercise {%(= astra-śikṣā, khuralī)%}. {%—Śas-%}
{%trāyasa (˚ra-ay˚), am,%} n. iron; steel. {%—Śastrārcis%}
{%(˚ra-ar˚), is, is, is,%} blazing with weapons, one
whose flame is a weapon. {%—Śastrāstra (˚ra-as˚),%}
{%am,%} n. weapons both for striking and throwing,
arms and missile weapons, arms or weapons (gene-
rally). {%—Śastrāstra-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘bearing arms and
missile weapons,’ a soldier, warrior. {%—Śastrāstra-%}
{%bhṛt-tva, am,%} n. bearing arms for striking and
throwing, the use of arms. {%—Śastrotthāpana (˚ra-%}
{%ut˚), am,%} n. the act of raising a weapon (so as to
strike). {%—Śastrodyama (˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m. lifting
up a weapon. {%—Śastropakaraṇa (˚ra-up˚), am,%}
n. arms and instruments of warfare, military appa-
ratus. {%—Śastropajīvin (˚ra-up˚), ī,%} m. ‘living by
arms,’ a soldier, a man at arms.
<LEND>

<L>46325<pc>0997-c<k1>Sastraka<k2>Sastraka
{%Śastraka, am,%}¦ n. iron, steel; = 2. {%śastra,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>46326<pc>0997-c<k1>Sastrika<k2>Sastrika
{%Śastrika, as, ā, am%}¦ (at the end of comps.), having
a knife; ({%ā%}), f. a knife, blade.
<LEND>

<L>46327<pc>0997-c<k1>Sastrin<k2>Sastrin
{%Śastrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having weapons, bearing arms,
armed, armed with a sword, accoutred.
<LEND>

<L>46328<pc>0997-c<k1>SastrI<k2>SastrI
{%Śastrī,%}¦ f. a knife. See under 2. {%śastra,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>46329<pc>0997-c<k1>SastvA<k2>SastvA
{%Śastvā,%}¦ ind. having wounded, having hurt, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46330<pc>0997-c<k1>Saspa<k2>Saspa
{%Śaspa, am,%}¦ n. [cf. {%śaṣpa%}], young grass; loss of
confidence or of understanding.
<LEND>

<L>46331<pc>0997-c<k1>Sasya<k2>Sasya<h>2
2. {%śasya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. {%śasya%} see under rt.
{%śaṃs,%} p. 985), to be cut, to be wounded or injured;
({%am%}), n. corn or grain (in general); the fruit or
produce of any plant or tree. {%—Śasya-kṣetra, am,%}
n. a corn-field. {%—Śasya-dhvaṃsin, ī, inī, i,%} destroy-
ing corn; ({%ī%}), m. the tree Cedrela Tunna ({%= tunna,%}
and commonly called Toon). {%—Śasya-bhakṣaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} corn-eating, granivorous; an eater of
[Page0998-a+ 76]
corn. {%—Śasya-bhakṣaṇa, am,%} n. the act of feed-
ing upon grain. {%—Śasya-mañjarī,%} f. an ear or spike
of corn; a fruit-stalk. {%—Śasya-mālin, ī, inī, i,%}
garlanded with fruits, crowned with harvests (as the
earth). {%—Śasya-rakṣaka, as,%} m. ‘corn-guardian,’
a watchman set to guard a field of corn. {%—Śasya-%}
{%śālin, ī, inī, i,%} abounding with corn. {%—Śasya-śūka,%}
{%am,%} n. an awn or beard of corn. {%—Śasya-sampad,%}
{%t,%} f. abundance of corn. {%—Śasya-sambara, as,%} m.
the Śāl tree, Shorea Robusta. {%—Śasyād (˚ya-ad),%}
{%t, t, t,%} eating grain. {%—Śasyāru (˚ya-āru?), us,%} m.
a small variety of the Śamī tree.
<LEND>

<L>46332<pc>0998-a<k1>Sas<k2>Sas<h>2
{#Sas#} 2¦. {%śas,%} cl. 2. P. {%śasti,%} &c., to sleep,
{%= sas,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46333<pc>0998-a<k1>Sas<k2>Sas<h>3
{#Sas#} 3¦. {%śas,%} the technical case-termination
of the accusative plural; the Taddhita affix {%śas%} (form-
ing adverbs from nouns, especially from numerals
and words expressive of quantity, see {%śata-śas,%}
{%bahu-śas,%} &c.).
<LEND>

<L>46334<pc>0998-a<k1>SaskulI<k2>SaskulI
{#SaskulI#}¦ {%śaskulī,%} f. a kind of baked cake
or pie, (also written {%śaṣkulī.%})
<LEND>

<L>46335<pc>0998-a<k1>Sasti<k2>Sasti
{#Sasti#}¦ {%śasti,%} &c. See under rt. {%śaṃs,%} p. 985.
<LEND>

<L>46336<pc>0998-a<k1>Sasman<k2>Sasman
{#Sasman#}¦ {%śasman, śasyamāna,%} &c. See under
rt. {%śaṃs,%} p. 985.
<LEND>

<L>46337<pc>0998-a<k1>Sasya<k2>Sasya<h>1
{#Sasya#} 1¦. and 2. {%śasya.%} See under rts.
{%śaṃs%} and 1. {%śas.%}
<LEND>

<L>46338<pc>0998-a<k1>SAMSapa<k2>SAMSapa
{#SAMSapa#}¦ {%śāṃśapa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śiṃśapā%} with
substitution of {%ā%} for {%i%}), made of Śiṃśapā wood, &c.;
({%as%}), m. a kind of cup or ladle made of Śiṃśapā wood;
a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46339<pc>0998-a<k1>SAMSapAyana<k2>SAMSapAyana
{%Śāṃśapāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Su-śar-
man; N. of a Muni, teacher of the Purāṇas.
<LEND>

<L>46340<pc>0998-a<k1>SAMSapAyani<k2>SAMSapAyani
{%Śāṃśapāyani, is,%}¦ m., N. of the author of a
Saṃhitā.
<LEND>

<L>46341<pc>0998-a<k1>SAMSapAyanikA<k2>SAMSapAyanikA
{%Śāṃśapāyanikā,%}¦ f., scil. {%saṃ-hitā,%} the Saṃhitā
of Śāṃśapāyani.
<LEND>

<L>46342<pc>0998-a<k1>SAka<k2>SAka
{#SAka#}¦ {%śāka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%śak%}), Ved.
strong, mighty, powerful; ({%am, as%}), n. m. any herb
‘able to be eaten,’ a vegetable, herb, pot-herb, greens,
any edible leaf or fruit or root &c. used as a vege-
table; ({%as%}), m. power, strength, energy, force; the
Śirīṣa tree, Acacia Sirīsa; the Teak tree ({%= khara-%}
{%pattra%}); N. of the sixth of the seven Dvīpas
(surrounded by the sea of milk or white sea,
and inhabited by the Ṛta-vratas, Satya-vratas,
Dāna-vratas, and Anu-vratas); N. of a people
(the Śākas or Scythians); of a king; an era,
period (usually commencing with some celebrated
prince, as Yudhi-ṣṭhira, Vikramāditya, Śāli-vāhana,
who are hence denominated Śākeśvarās; but applied
especially to the era of Śāli-vāhana, commencing
from the birth of that king, seventy-eight years after
Christ); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a plant {%(= harītakī)%}. {%—Śāka-%}
{%cukrikā,%} f. the tamarind {%(= ciñcā)%}. {%—Śāka-taru,%}
{%us,%} m. the Teak tree; the plant Capparis Trifoliata.
{%—Śāka-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a teacher of the Sāma-
veda. {%—Śāka-dvīpa, as,%} m., N. of a Dvīpa, (see
above.) {%—Śākadvīpīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to
Śāka-dvīpa. {%—Śāka-paṇa, as,%} m. a handful of vege-
tables, &c. [cf. {%paṇa%}], a measure equal to a hand-
ful. {%—Śāka-pattra, as,%} m. a particular plant or tree
{%(= śigru)%}. {%—Śāka-pātra, am,%} n. a vessel for vege-
tables, vegetable dish. {%—Śāka-pārthiva, as,%} m. the
king of the period or era; [cf. {%madhyama-pada-%}
{%lopa.%}] {%—Śāka-prati,%} ind. a little cowage. {%—Śāka-%}
{%bāleya, as,%} m. a particular plant {%(= brahma-yaṣṭi,%}
{%bāleya-śāka)%}. {%—Śākam-bharī,%} f. ‘herb-nourishing,’
epithet of Durgā; of a city (supposed to be the
modern Sāmbhar); observances in honour of Durgā
(according to some). {%—Śākambharīya, am,%} n. a
kind of fossil salt from a lake in the vicinity of the
town Śāmbhara or Sāmbhar in Ajmere. {%—Śāka-%}
{%yogya, as,%} m. coriander {%(= dhānyaka)%}. {%—Śāka-%}
{%racita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. composed of vegetables, &c.
{%—Śāka-rāja, as,%} m. a particular pot-herb {%(= vās-%}
{%tūka)%}. {%—Śāka-vilva%} or {%śāka-vilvaka, as,%} m. the
[Page0998-b+ 78]
egg-plant, Solanum Melongena. {%—Śāka-vīra, as,%}
m. a particular herb, Chenopodium Album. {%—Śāka-%}
{%vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the Teak tree. {%—Śāka-vrata, am,%}
n. a particular vow, abstinence from vegetables, &c.
{%—Śāka-śākaṭa%} or {%śāka-śākina, am,%} n. a field
cultivated for esculent plants, a field of vegetables,
kitchen garden. {%—Śāka-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. ‘best of
herbs,’ a kind of vegetable, Chenopodium Album;
({%ā%}), f. a particular plant ({%= jīvantī%}); a kind of
shrub ({%= ḍoḍī%}); the egg-plant. {%—Śākākhya (˚ka-%}
{%ākh˚), as,%} m. the Teak tree; ({%am%}), n. a vegetable,
pot-herb, esculent plant. {%—Śākāṅga (˚ka-aṅ˚), am,%}
n. pepper (as an accessory to vegetables). {%—Śākāmla%}
{%(˚ka-am˚), am,%} n. the hog-plum {%(= vṛkṣāmla).%}
{%—Śākāmla-bhedana, am,%} n. sorrel {%(= cukra).%}
{%—Śākālābu (˚ka-al˚), us,%} m. a species of gourd or
cucumber {%(= rājālābu)%}. {%—Śākāṣṭakā (˚ka-aṣ˚),%}
f. a festival on the eighth day of the second half of
the month Māgha. {%—Śākāhāra (˚ka-āh˚), as, ā, am,%}
eating vegetables, living on herbs, a vegetarian.
<LEND>

<L>46343<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkin<k2>SAkin
{%Śākin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessed of power, powerful,
mighty (Ved.); having vegetables or herbs; ({%inī%}), f.,
scil. {%bhūmi,%} land planted with vegetables or pot-
herbs, a field of vegetables; a kind of female demon
or fairy attendant on Durgā; [cf. {%ḍākinī, yoginī,%}
{%khe-carī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46344<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkina<k2>SAkina
{%Śākina, am,%}¦ n. a field (at the end of a comp.,
e. g. {%ikṣu-ś˚,%} a field of sugar-canes; cf. {%śāka-ś˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>46345<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkawa<k2>SAkawa
{#SAkawa#}¦ {%śākaṭa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śakaṭa%}), be-
longing or relating to a cart (as a load, horse, &c.),
going in a cart, drawing a cart; ({%as%}), m. any yoked
animal, a draught-ox; a kind of tree {%(= śleṣmān-%}
{%taka); (am),%} n. a field (at the end of a comp., e. g.
{%ikṣu-ś˚,%} a field of sugar-canes; cf. {%śāka-ś˚%}). {%—Śā-%}
{%kaṭākhya (˚ṭa-ākh˚), as,%} m. a particular tree (=
1. {%dhava%}).
<LEND>

<L>46346<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkawAyana<k2>SAkawAyana
{%Śākaṭāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a philologist and
grammarian (generally mentioned with Pāṇinī,
Amara, Jainendra, Kāśa-kṛtsna, Jayanta, Candra,
&c.); of the author of a law-book.
<LEND>

<L>46347<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkawAyani<k2>SAkawAyani
{%Śākaṭāyani, is,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46348<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkawika<k2>SAkawika
{%Śākaṭika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to a cart, &c.,
going in or on a cart.
<LEND>

<L>46349<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkawIna<k2>SAkawIna
{%Śākaṭīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
cart; ({%as%}), m. a cart-load, a measure of weight or
value equal to a cart-load (= 20 Tulās).
<LEND>

<L>46350<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkapURi<k2>SAkapURi
{#SAkapURi#}¦ {%śākapūṇi, is,%} m. (sometimes writ-
ten {%śākapūrṇi%}), N. of an ancient interpreter of the
Veda (quoted as an authority in the Nirukta).
<LEND>

<L>46351<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkarI<k2>SAkarI
{#SAkarI#}¦ {%śākarī,%} f. (probably for {%śākārī%}),
scil. {%vi-bhāṣā,%} one of the Vibhaṣās or corrupt
dialects (that spoken by the Śakāra, q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>46352<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkala<k2>SAkala
{#SAkala#}¦ {%śākala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śakala,%} but in
some senses fr. {%śākalya%}), relating to a piece or por-
tion; ({%as%}), m. a school of the Ṛg-veda (whose
founder is thought to have been the elder Śākalya,
see below); a kind of sacrifice or sacrificial ceremony
(one performed according to the rites of the Śākala
school); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a tribe inhabiting Bhā-
rata-varṣa; the followers of the Śākala school of
the Veda; ({%am%}), n. a fragment, splinter (Ved. {%= śa-%}
{%kala%}); N. of the Ṛg-veda Prātiśākhya, (see below);
N. of a town, (also read Sākala.) {%—Śākala-prāti-%}
{%śākhya, am,%} n., N. of the Ṛg-veda Prātiśākhya
ascribed to Śaunaka and preserved by his pupils for
the use of the Śākalas or their school, (this is the
only one of the numerous Ṛg-veda Prātiśākhyas
that has come down to us; it is written in verse,
the metres consisting of a mixture of the Śloka with
other more ancient kinds.) {%—Śākala-śākhā,%} f. ‘the
Śākala branch,’ i. e. the recension or traditional text
of the Ṛg-veda preserved by the Śākalas (the only
extant recension). {%—Śākala-saṃhitā,%} f. the Saṃhitā
of Śākala. {%—Śākala-homa, as,%} m. a particular kind of
sacrifice. {%—Śākalahomīya, as, ā, am,%} relating or
belonging to the Śākala-homa (Manu XI. 256).
<LEND>

<L>46353<pc>0998-b<k1>SAkalaka<k2>SAkalaka
{%Śākalaka, as,%}¦ m. a follower of Śakala (?) or of
Śākalya.
<LEND>
[Page0998-c+ 75]

<L>46354<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkalika<k2>SAkalika
{%Śākalika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to Śa-
kala, belonging to a piece or part, having a piece or
portion, fragmentary.
<LEND>

<L>46355<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkalya<k2>SAkalya
{%Śākalya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a poet; of an ancient
grammarian (who preceded Pāṇini and is referred
to four times in his grammar; he is supposed to
have arranged the Pada text of the Ṛg-veda; there
appear, however, to have been two Śākalyas, an
elder called {%Śākalya-pitṛ,%} ‘the father of Śākalya’
or Sthavira, and a younger whose opinions differed
from those of his father). {%—Śākalya-pitṛ, tā,%} m.
the father of Śākalya. {%—Śākalya-saṃhitā-pari-%}
{%śiṣṭa, am,%} n. a sequel or supplement to the Saṃ-
hitā of Śākalya.
<LEND>

<L>46356<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkAra<k2>SAkAra
{#SAkAra#}¦ {%śākāra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śakāra%}), act-
ing or speaking like a Śakāra, i. e. in a low man-
ner; ({%ī%}), f. the corrupt dialect spoken by the Śakāra,
(see {%śakāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>46357<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkuRa<k2>SAkuRa
{#SAkuRa#}¦ {%śākuṇa, as, ī, am,%} repentant, regret-
ting, (according to Śabda-k. {%= parottāpin.%})
<LEND>

<L>46358<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkuna<k2>SAkuna
{#SAkuna#}¦ {%śākuna, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śakuna%}), belong-
ing or relating to birds; relating to omens, ominous,
portentous. {%—Śākuna-sāroddhāra (˚ra-ud˚), as,%}
m., N. of a treatise on omens.
<LEND>

<L>46359<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkunika<k2>SAkunika
{%Śākunika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to birds, belonging
to omens, ominous; ({%as%}), m. a fowler, bird-catcher;
({%am%}), n. interpretation of omens or dreams, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46360<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkuneya<k2>SAkuneya
{%Śākuneya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to birds or omens;
({%as%}), m. a small owl ({%= ḍuṇḍula%}); N. of a Muni,
({%Śākuneyā dharmāḥ,%} the laws of Śākuneya.)
<LEND>

<L>46361<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkuntala<k2>SAkuntala
{#SAkuntala#}¦ {%śākuntala, as,%} m. (fr. {%śakuntalā%}),
a metronymic of Bharata (sovereign of India as son
of Śakuntalā and Dushyanta); ({%am%}), n. the drama
commonly called Śakuntalā or Abhijñāna-śakuntala.
{%—Śākuntalopakhyāna (˚la-up˚), am,%} n., N. of an
episode of the Mahā-bhārata (Ādi-parvan 2815-
3125, giving an account of the love of Śakuntalā
and Dushyanta, and of the origin of the family of
the Bharatas; Kalidāsa derived the materials for his
drama called Śakuntalā from this source).
<LEND>

<L>46362<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkuntaleya<k2>SAkuntaleya
{%Śākuntaleya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic of Bharata
({%= śākuntala%} above).
<LEND>

<L>46363<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkulika<k2>SAkulika
{#SAkulika#}¦ {%śākulika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śakula%}),
belonging to fish; ({%as%}), m. a fisherman.
<LEND>

<L>46364<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkkara<k2>SAkkara
{#SAkkara#}¦ {%śākkara, as,%} m. (fr. {%śakkara%}), an ox;
({%am%}), n. a particular kind of metre; [cf. {%śakkarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46365<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkkI<k2>SAkkI
{#SAkkI#}¦ {%śākkī,%} f., N. of one of the five Vi-
bhāṣās or corrupt dialects.
<LEND>

<L>46366<pc>0998-c<k1>SAkta<k2>SAkta
{#SAkta#}¦ {%śākta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śakti%}), relating
to power or energy, relating to Śakti or the divine
energy under its female personification; ({%as%}), m. a
worshipper of the divine power under its female
representation, (this power or energy which was at
first regarded as the mere will of the Supreme Being
willing to create the universe was afterwards thought
of as a separate deity, and identified with the wives
of the Triad, Sarasvatī being the Śakti or Energy of
Brahman, Lakṣmī of Viṣṇu, and Durgā of Śiva,
but the latter being the Destroyer, his Energy became
the personification of everything terrible, and his
wife Durgā, representing this terrific power, became
a favourite object of propitiation and worship; hence
the Śāktas are generally worshippers of Durgā, and
form one of the three principal sects of the Hindūs;
the tenets of this sect are contained in the Tantras
[see {%tantra%}], and the ritual enjoined is of two
kinds, the impurer being called {%vāmācāra,%} q. v.,
the purer {%dakṣiṇācāra,%} q. v., which has led to a
division of the sect into Vāmācārins and Dakṣiṇā-
cārins); a teacher, preceptor (Ved., Sāy. {%= śakti-%}
{%mat, śikṣaka%}). {%—Śākta-tantra, am,%} n., N. of
a Tantra work. {%—Śākta-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a
work by Abhinava-gupta. {%—Śāktānanda-taraṅgiṇī%}
{%(˚ta-ān˚),%} f., N. of a work compiled for the use of
the Śāktas from the Tantras and Purāṇas.
<LEND>

<L>46367<pc>0998-c<k1>SAktika<k2>SAktika
{%Śāktika, as,%}¦ m. a worshipper of the Śakti or
[Page0999-a+ 78]
female personification of the divine energy, a Śākta,
(see above); a spearman, (see {%śāktīka%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>46368<pc>0999-a<k1>SAktIka<k2>SAktIka
{%Śāktīka, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
spear, spearing, speared; ({%as%}), m. a spearman,
lancer.
<LEND>

<L>46369<pc>0999-a<k1>SAkteya<k2>SAkteya
{%Śākteya, as,%}¦ m. a worshipper of the Śakti, a
Śākta, q. v.; the son of Śakti, i. e. Parāśara.
<LEND>

<L>46370<pc>0999-a<k1>SAktya<k2>SAktya
{%Śāktya, as,%}¦ m. a worshipper of the female prin-
ciple or Śakti; a patronymic of the Vedic Ṛṣi
Gauri-vīti; of Parāśara.
<LEND>

<L>46371<pc>0999-a<k1>SAkman<k2>SAkman
{#SAkman#}¦ {%śākman, a,%} n. {%= śakman,%} Ved.
power, strength.
<LEND>

<L>46372<pc>0999-a<k1>SAkya<k2>SAkya
{#SAkya#}¦ {%śākya, as,%} m. (fr. {%śāka%} or fr. rt.
1. {%śak%}), N. of the family of the Buddha par excel-
lence (founder of the Buddhist religion); N. of
Buddha himself, (see {%buddha%}); N. of a son of
Sañjaya. {%—Śākya-bhikṣuka, as,%} m. a Buddhist
ascetic or kind of religious mendicant; ({%ī%}), f. a
Buddhist nun. {%—Śākya-muni, is,%} m. ‘the Śākya
saint,’ epithet of Buddha. {%—Śākya-vaṃśa, as,%} m.
the Śākya family. {%—Śākyavaṃśāvatīrṇa (˚śa-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. ‘incarnate in the family of the Śākyas,’
epithet of Buddha. {%—Śākya-siṃha, as,%} m. ‘the
Śākya lion,’ epithet of Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>46373<pc>0999-a<k1>SAkra<k2>SAkra
{#SAkra#}¦ {%śākra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śakra%}), relating
to Śakra or Indra; ({%ī%}), f. the wife of Indra; N. of
Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>46374<pc>0999-a<k1>SAkvara<k2>SAkvara
{#SAkvara#}¦ {%śākvara, as,%} m. an ox; a bull, (see
{%śākkara%}); a patronymic of the Vedic Ṛṣi Ṛṣa-
bha; ({%am%}), n., N. of a Sāman (identified with the
Rathantara-sāman in Aitareya-Br. IV. 13).
<LEND>

<L>46375<pc>0999-a<k1>SAK<k2>SAK
{#SAK#}¦ {%śākh%} (= rt. {%ślākh%}), cl. 1. P. {%śākhati,%}
{%śākhitum,%} to embrace, pervade.
<LEND>

<L>46376<pc>0999-a<k1>SAKa<k2>SAKa
{%Śākha, as,%}¦ m. (said to be fr. rt. {%śākh,%} but accord-
ing to others fr. rt. 1. {%śak%}), a particular plant ({%= chitti%});
N. of Kumāra or Kārttikeya; of a son of Kumāra;
of a place; ({%ā%}), f. the branch of a tree &c., a branch
(in general); any part or division of an animal; an
arm; a finger (Ved., the fingers being compared to
branches); a sect, faction, party; a subdivision, sec-
tion (of any work); a branch or school or traditional
recension of the Vedas, (i. e. the Saṃhitā or collection
of Mantras and the Brāhmaṇas in each Veda as re-
ceived in conflicting schools, modified more or less
both in variations of the actual text and in difference
of arrangement, and even of interpretation; the
work {%śākhā%} or branch is sometimes used to dis-
tinguish the three original Vedas from each other,
as when it is said that ‘Sāma hymns ought not to
be recited in the neighbourhood of another Śākhā,’
i. e. of the other two Vedas; but it properly
applies to the various recensions or editions of any
of the original Vedas handed down by different
Caraṇas, i. e. by different schools or sects, each ad-
hering to its own traditional text and interpretation:
in the Caraṇa-vyūha, a work by Śaunaka treating of
these various schools, five Śākhās are enumerated of
the Ṛg-veda, viz. those of the Śākalas, Bāṣkalas,
Āśvalāyanas, Śānkhāyanas, and Māṇḍukāyanas; forty-
two or forty-four out of eighty-six are mentioned of
the Yajur-veda, fifteen of which belong to the Vāja-
saneyins, including those of the Kāṇvas and Mādh-
yandinas; twelve out of a thousand said to have once
existed of the Sāma-veda and nine of the Atharva-
veda; of all these, however, the Ṛg-veda is said to
be now extant in one only, viz. the Śākala-śākhā,
the Yajur-veda in three and partially in four, the
Sāma-veda in one or perhaps two, and the Atharva-
veda in one: although the words {%caraṇa%} and {%śākhā%}
are sometimes used synonymously, yet {%caraṇa%} pro-
perly applies to the sect or collection of persons united
in one school, and {%śākhā%} to the traditional text
followed, as in the phrase {%śākhām adhīte,%} he reads
a particular recension of the Veda); any part of an
animal devoid of sensibility (as a horn &c.); {%= an-%}
{%tika%} (according to Śabda-k.); [cf. Lith. <nsi>szakā;</nsi>
Russ. <nsi>suk;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>geag.</nsi>] {%—Śākhā-kaṇṭha, as,%} m.
a particular tree {%(= snuhī)%}. {%—Śākhā-caṅkramaṇa, %}
[Page0999-b+ 77]
{%am,%} n. skipping from branch to branch, desultory
study. {%—Śākhā-candra-nyāya, as,%} m. ‘the rule of
the moon on a bough,’ a phrase adduced as an illus-
tration when an object seen or matter debated has
its position or relation assigned to it merely from
the appearance of contiguity or connection. {%—Śākhā-%}
{%dhyetṛ (˚khā-adh˚), tā,%} m. the reader of a Śākhā,
follower of any particular text of the Veda. {%—Śākhā-%}
{%nagara%} or {%śākhā-pura, am,%} n. ‘branch-town,’ a
suburb. {%—Śākhāntarīya-karman, a,%} n. the (rule
of) action belonging to another school or sect. {%—Śā-%}
{%khā-pitta, as,%} m. inflammation of the extremities,
(i. e. of the hands, feet, shoulders, &c.) {%—Śākhā-%}
{%prakṛti, ayas,%} f. pl. the eight remoter princes to
be considered in time of war; [cf. {%pra-kṛti.%}] {%—Śā-%}
{%khā-bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘branch-bearer,’ a tree. {%—Śākhā-%}
{%bheda, as,%} m. difference of school, (see {%śākhā.%})
{%—Śākhā-mṛga, as,%} m. ‘branch-animal,’ a monkey,
ape; a squirrel. {%—Śākhāmṛga-gaṇāyuta (˚ṇa-āy),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} filled with or possessed of troops of
monkeys. {%—Śākhāmṛgānīka-pati (˚ga-an˚), is,%}
m. ‘lord of troops of monkeys,’ epithet of Sugrīva.
{%—Śākhāmlā (˚khā-am˚),%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%vṛkṣāmla)%}. {%—Śākhā-raṇḍa, as,%} m. a man who
is faithless or a traitor to his Śākhā, i. e. a Brāhman
who has changed his peculiar school of the Vedas.
{%—Śākhā-rathyā,%} f. a branch road (properly sixteen
cubits in width). {%—Śākhā-vilīna, as, ā, am,%} settled
or sitting on branches (said of birds). {%—Śākhā-śiphā,%}
f. ‘branch-root,’ a root growing from a branch (as
in the Indian fig, the branches of which shoot
downwards to the ground and take fresh root there,
{%= ava-roha%}); a creeper growing upwards from the
root of a tree towards the top (according to some).
{%—Śākhāśraya (˚khā-āś˚), as,%} m. recourse to a
Śākhā, following a particular school. {%—Śākhāsthi%}
{%(˚khā-as˚),%} n. the bone of the arm.
<LEND>

<L>46377<pc>0999-b<k1>SAKAla<k2>SAKAla
{%Śākhāla, as,%}¦ m. a sort of cane ({%= vānīra%}).
<LEND>

<L>46378<pc>0999-b<k1>SAKin<k2>SAKin
{%Śākhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having branches (literally or
figuratively), branched, branching, ramifying; be-
longing to any branch or school or sect, &c.; ({%ī%}),
m. a tree; a Veda (as having various branches or
schools); the follower of any school or sect, (often
at the end of a comp., e. g. {%Mādhyandina-śākhin,%}
a follower of the Mādhyandina school of the Vāja-
saneyins, cf. {%kāṇva-ś˚%}); an inhabitant of the northern
districts bordering on India, a Turk, Tartar ({%= tu-%}
{%ruṣka%}); N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>46379<pc>0999-b<k1>SAKya<k2>SAKya
{%Śākhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the branch of a
tree, branching, ramifying (literally or figuratively).
<LEND>

<L>46380<pc>0999-b<k1>SAKowa<k2>SAKowa
{#SAKowa#}¦ {%śākhoṭa%} or {%śākhoṭaka, as,%} m. the
small tree Trophis Aspera ({%= piśāca-dru%}).
<LEND>

<L>46381<pc>0999-b<k1>SANkara<k2>SANkara
{#SANkara#}¦ {%śāṅkara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śaṅkara%}), be-
longing to or composed by Śaṅkara; ({%as%}), m. a
bull; ({%am%}), n. a form of metre; [cf. {%śākkara,%}
{%śārkara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46382<pc>0999-b<k1>SANkari<k2>SANkari
{%Śāṅkari, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of Kārttikeya; of
Gaṇeśa; fire; N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>46383<pc>0999-b<k1>SANkucI<k2>SANkucI
{#SANkucI#}¦ {%śāṅkucī,%} f. the skate fish ({%= śaṅ-%}
{%kucī, śaṅkoca%}).
<LEND>

<L>46384<pc>0999-b<k1>SANKa<k2>SANKa
{#SANKa#}¦ {%śāṅkha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śaṅkha%}), relat-
ing to the conch-shell, belonging to shells; ({%am%}),
n. the sound of a conch-shell.
<LEND>

<L>46385<pc>0999-b<k1>SANKamitri<k2>SANKamitri
{%Śāṅkhamitri, is,%}¦ m., N. of a Vedic grammarian,
(also written {%śāṅkhamitra.%})
<LEND>

<L>46386<pc>0999-b<k1>SANKAyana<k2>SANKAyana
{%Śāṅkhāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of the author of the
Śāṅkhāyana-Brāhmaṇa and of certain Śrauta-sūtras.
{%—Śāṅkhāyana-caraṇa,%} N. of a Caraṇa of the Ṛg-
veda. {%—Śāṅkhāyana-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a
Brāhmaṇa (belonging to the Ṛg-veda; see {%brāh-%}
{%maṇa.%}) {%—Śāṅkhāyana-sūtra, am,%} n. the Śrauta-
sūtras attributed to Śāṅkhāyana.
<LEND>

<L>46387<pc>0999-b<k1>SANKAyanin<k2>SANKAyanin
{%Śāṅkhāyanin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils of Śāṅ-
khāyana.
<LEND>

<L>46388<pc>0999-b<k1>SANKika<k2>SANKika
{%Śāṅkhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ made from the Śaṅkha,
relating or belonging to the conch-shell or to any
shell, shelly; ({%as%}), m. a shell-cutter, worker or dealer
[Page0999-c+ 74]
in shells (constituting a particular caste called Śāṅ-
khāri); a player on the Śaṅkha, shell-blower ({%=%}
{%śaṅkha-dhmā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46389<pc>0999-c<k1>SANguzWA<k2>SANguzWA
{#SANguzWA#}¦ {%śāṅguṣṭhā,%} f. the shrub Abrus
Precatorius ({%= guñjā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46390<pc>0999-c<k1>SANgozWA<k2>SANgozWA
{%Śāṅgoṣṭhā,%}¦ f. another reading for {%śārṅgaṣṭhā,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46391<pc>0999-c<k1>SAci<k2>SAci
{#SAci#}¦ {%śāci, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. {%śac,%} cf. {%śaci%}),
distinguished, renowned; strong. {%—Śāci-gu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} Ved. having strong or renowned cattle; having
powerful or clearly manifested rays. {%—Śāci-pūjana,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. vehement or earnest worship; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), Ved. having strong or earnest worship.
<LEND>

<L>46392<pc>0999-c<k1>SAwa<k2>SAwa
{#SAwa#}¦ {%śāṭa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śaṭ%}), a petticoat;
a particular clean or white garment, gown; cloth.
<LEND>

<L>46393<pc>0999-c<k1>SAwaka<k2>SAwaka
{%Śāṭaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a petticoat, garment, cloth; a
kind of play ({%= nāṭaka,%} according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>46394<pc>0999-c<k1>SAwikA<k2>SAwikA
{%Śāṭikā,%}¦ f. a particular plant, the Zedoary ({%= śaṭī%}).
<LEND>

<L>46395<pc>0999-c<k1>SAwI<k2>SAwI
{%Śāṭī,%}¦ f. {%= śāṭa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46396<pc>0999-c<k1>SAwyAyana<k2>SAwyAyana
{#SAwyAyana#}¦ {%śāṭyāyana, as,%} m., N. of a Muni;
({%am%}), n., N. of a Brāhmaṇa; a particular oblation
for remedying anything wrong in the performance
of an act or rite; ({%as, ī, am%}), of or belonging to
Śāṭyāyana or to the Śāṭyāyana-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Śāṭyā-%}
{%yana-homa, as,%} m. the above oblation.
<LEND>

<L>46397<pc>0999-c<k1>SAwyAyanaka<k2>SAwyAyanaka
{%Śāṭyāyanaka, am,%}¦ n. a passage from the Śāṭyā-
yana-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>46398<pc>0999-c<k1>SAwyAyani<k2>SAwyAyani
{%Śāṭyāyani, is,%}¦ m., N. of the author of a law-
book.
<LEND>

<L>46399<pc>0999-c<k1>SAwyAyanin<k2>SAwyAyanin
{%Śāṭyāyanin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the followers of the
Śāṭyāyana-Brāhmaṇa; N. of a Śākhā belonging to
the Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>46400<pc>0999-c<k1>SAWya<k2>SAWya
{#SAWya#}¦ {%śāṭhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%śaṭha%}), wicked-
ness, villainy, dishonesty, perfidy, deceit, roguery,
knavery, hatred.
<LEND>

<L>46401<pc>0999-c<k1>SAWyAyanIya<k2>SAWyAyanIya
{%Śāṭhyāyanīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a Śākhā or
school.
<LEND>

<L>46402<pc>0999-c<k1>SAq<k2>SAq
{#SAq#}¦ {%śāḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%śāḍate, śāḍitum,%} = rt.
{%śāl,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46403<pc>0999-c<k1>SAqvala<k2>SAqvala
{#SAqvala#}¦ {%śāḍvala, as, ā, am (= śādvala),%}
abounding in fresh grass, green, verdant.
<LEND>

<L>46404<pc>0999-c<k1>SARa<k2>SARa<h>1
{#SARa#} 1¦. {%śāṇa, as, ī,%} m. f. (fr. rt. {%śo%}), a
whetstone, grindstone; touchstone [cf. {%śāna%}]; a saw;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κῶνο-ς, κωνίο-ν, κωνί-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>cuneu-s;</nsi> Engl.
<nsi>hone;</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>hein;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hœnan.</nsi>] {%—Śāṇā-%}
{%jīva (˚ṇa-āj˚), as,%} m. ‘living by a whetstone,’ an
armourer. {%—Śāṇāśma-gharṣaṇa (˚ṇa-aś˚), am,%} n.
rubbing (anything) on a touchstone or whetstone.
<LEND>

<L>46405<pc>0999-c<k1>SARita<k2>SARita
{%Śāṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sharpened on a grindstone,
whetted, ground.
<LEND>

<L>46406<pc>0999-c<k1>SARa<k2>SARa<h>2
{#SARa#} 2¦. {%śāṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śaṇa%}), made of
hemp or Bengal flax, hempen, flaxen; ({%as, ī%}), m. f.
a weight of four Māṣas; ({%am%}), n. cloth made of
hemp, coarse cloth, sack-cloth, canvas; a hempen
garment; ({%ī%}), f. a hempen cloth or garment; a new
unseamed and single breadth of cloth (given to a
student at his investiture for his upper garment),
ragged or torn raiment; coarse or tattered clothes
given to a Jaina ascetic at his initiation; a small
tent or screen (especially one used as a retiring-room
for actors, tumblers, &c.); gesture, gesticulation,
making signs with the hands or eyes.
<LEND>

<L>46407<pc>0999-c<k1>SARi<k2>SARi
{%Śāṇi, is,%}¦ m. a plant from the fibres of which a
coarse cloth or cordage is prepared, Corchorus Oli-
torius ({%= paṭṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>46408<pc>0999-c<k1>SARIra<k2>SARIra
{#SARIra#}¦ {%śāṇīra, am,%} n. (according to Śabda-
k.) a bank in the Śoṇa river (or, according to some,
in the river Dardarī).
<LEND>

<L>46409<pc>0999-c<k1>SARqa<k2>SARqa
{#SARqa#}¦ {%śāṇḍa, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>46410<pc>0999-c<k1>SARqila<k2>SARqila
{#SARqila#}¦ {%śāṇḍila, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śaṇḍila%}),
descended from Śaṇḍila, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46411<pc>0999-c<k1>SARqilIputra<k2>SARqilIputra
{%Śāṇḍilī-putra, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>46412<pc>0999-c<k1>SARqilImAtf<k2>SARqilImAtf
{%Śāṇḍilī-mātṛ, tā,%}¦ f. a matron descended from
Śaṇḍila.
<LEND>
[Page1000-a+ 76]

<L>46413<pc>1000-a<k1>SARqileya<k2>SARqileya
{%Śāṇḍileya, as,%}¦ m. a descendant of Śaṇḍila or of
Śāṇḍilya.
<LEND>

<L>46414<pc>1000-a<k1>SARqilya<k2>SARqilya
{%Śāṇḍilya, as, -lī, am,%}¦ descended from Śaṇḍila;
coming from Śāṇḍilya, composed by Śāṇḍilya; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a Muni or sage (from whom one of the
three principal families of the Kanouj or Kānyakubja
Brāhmans is said to be descended; he is the author
of a law-book and of the Bhakti-sūtras); a form of
Agni or fire; a kind of tree, Ægle Marmelos {%(=%}
{%vilva)%}. {%—Śāṇḍilya-gotra, am,%} n. the family of
Śāṇḍilya. {%—Śāṇḍilya-vidyā,%} f. the doctrine of Śāṇ-
ḍilya (in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad). {%—Śāṇḍilya-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} n. the aphorisms of Śāṇḍilya on faith
and devotion ({%= bhakti-sūtra%}).
<LEND>

<L>46415<pc>1000-a<k1>SARqilyAyana<k2>SARqilyAyana
{%Śāṇḍilyāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>46416<pc>1000-a<k1>SAta<k2>SAta
{#SAta#}¦ {%śāta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śo,%} cf. {%śita;%} or
in some senses perhaps to be regarded as an anom.
past pass. part. of rt. {%śad%}), sharpened, sharp, whetted;
thin, slender, emaciated; weak, feeble; beautiful,
handsome; happy, prosperous; ({%am%}), n. joy, plea-
sure, happiness; the thorn-apple. {%—Śāta-śikha, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} sharp-pointed (as the nails &c.). {%—Śātodarī%}
{%(˚ta-ud˚),%} f. a thin-waisted woman.
<LEND>

<L>46417<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtana<k2>SAtana<h>1
1. {%śātana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sharpening, whetting;
sharpness, thinness.
<LEND>

<L>46418<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtakarRi<k2>SAtakarRi
{#SAtakarRi#}¦ {%śātakarṇi, is,%} m. (fr. {%śata-karṇa%}
or {%śāta-karṇa?%}), N. of several Āndhra kings.
<LEND>

<L>46419<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtakumBa<k2>SAtakumBa
{%Śātakumbha, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%śata-kumbha%}), gold;
the thorn-apple; ({%as%}), m. the plant Nerium Odorum
{%(= karavīra)%}. {%—Śātakumbha-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made or consisting of gold, golden.
<LEND>

<L>46420<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtakOmBa<k2>SAtakOmBa
{%Śātakaumbha, am,%}¦ n. gold.
<LEND>

<L>46421<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtapattraka<k2>SAtapattraka
{%Śātapattraka, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. (fr. {%śata-pattra%}),
moonlight.
<LEND>

<L>46422<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtaBiza<k2>SAtaBiza
{%Śātabhiṣa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%śata-bhiṣā%}), one who
is born during the lunar mansion called {%Śata-bhiṣā%}
or {%Śata-bhiṣaj.%}
<LEND>

<L>46423<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtaBizaja<k2>SAtaBizaja
{%Śātabhiṣaja, as,%}¦ m. {%= śātabhiṣa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46424<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtaBIru<k2>SAtaBIru
{%Śātabhīru, us,%}¦ m. (fr. {%śata-bhīru%}), a kind of
Mallikā or Arabian jasmine.
<LEND>

<L>46425<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtamanyava<k2>SAtamanyava
{%Śātamanyava, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%śata-manyu%}), re-
lating or belonging to Indra, worthy of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>46426<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtamAna<k2>SAtamAna
{%Śātamāna, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%śata-māna%}), bought
with the measure of one hundred.
<LEND>

<L>46427<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtavaneya<k2>SAtavaneya
{%Śātavaneya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%śata-vani%}), Ved. a son
of Śata-vani.
<LEND>

<L>46428<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtavAhana<k2>SAtavAhana
{%Śātavāhana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%śata-vāhana%}), a proper
N.
<LEND>

<L>46429<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtana<k2>SAtana<h>1
{#SAtana#} 1¦. {%śātana.%} See under {%śāta%} above.
<LEND>

<L>46430<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtapantA<k2>SAtapantA
{#SAtapantA#}¦ {%śātapantā,%} m. du., Ved., accord-
ing to Say. on Ṛg-veda X. 106, 5 {%= sukhavantau,%}
‘possessors of happiness’ or ‘diminishers of unhappi-
ness,’ (connected with rt. {%śo, tanū-karaṇe;%} in Naigh.
III. 6. mentioned together with {%śimbātā%} and {%śata-rā%}
among the {%sukha-nāmāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>46431<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtaya<k2>SAtaya
{#SAtaya#}¦ {%śātaya.%} See under rt. {%śad,%} p. 991.
{%Śātaka, as, ā, am,%} one who destroys.
<LEND>

<L>46432<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtana<k2>SAtana<h>2
2. {%śātana, am,%}¦ n. causing to fall or perish, causing
to wither or decay; cutting off, withering, decaying;
becoming thin or small, (in this sense perhaps con-
nected with rt. {%śo,%} see {%śāta.%})
<LEND>

<L>46433<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtita<k2>SAtita
{%Śātita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to fall or perish, over-
thrown; cut off, (perhaps connected with rt. {%śo.%})
<LEND>

<L>46434<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtin<k2>SAtin
{%Śātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ cutting off, (at the end of a comp.)
<LEND>

<L>46435<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtalA<k2>SAtalA
{#SAtalA#}¦ {%śātalā,%} f. a particular plant or
shrub ({%= sātalā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46436<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtAtapa<k2>SAtAtapa
{#SAtAtapa#}¦ {%śātātapa, as,%} m., N. of the author
of a law-book; [cf. {%vṛhac-chātātapa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46437<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtAtapIya<k2>SAtAtapIya
{%Śātātapīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ composed by Śātātapa.
<LEND>

<L>46438<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtrava<k2>SAtrava
{#SAtrava#}¦ {%śātrava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śatru%}), be-
longing to an enemy, hostile; ({%as%}), m. an enemy;
({%am%}), n. enmity, hostility; a multitude of enemies.
{%—Śātraveṅgita (˚va-iṅ˚), am,%} n. an enemy's in-
tention.
<LEND>

<L>46439<pc>1000-a<k1>SAtravIya<k2>SAtravIya
{%Śātravīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to an enemy,
hostile, inimical.
<LEND>
[Page1000-b+ 78]

<L>46440<pc>1000-b<k1>SAtvala<k2>SAtvala
{#SAtvala#}¦ {%śātvala, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a Śākhā
or school.
<LEND>

<L>46441<pc>1000-b<k1>SAda<k2>SAda
{#SAda#}¦ {%śāda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śad%}), falling,
dropping (Ved.); young or fresh grass; mud, (in these
latter senses, according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 97, fr. rt.
{%śo%}); [cf. Lith. <nsi>szuda-s:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>caidhe,</nsi> ‘dirt, a blemish;’
<nsi>caidheach,</nsi> ‘polluted.’] {%—Śāda-harita, as, ā, am,%}
green or fresh with young grass.
<LEND>

<L>46442<pc>1000-b<k1>SAdvala<k2>SAdvala
{%Śādvala, as, ā, am,%}¦ abounding in fresh or green
grass; grassy; verdant, green; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a
place abounding in young grass, a grassy spot; [cf.
{%śaḍvala.%}] {%—Śādvala-sthalī,%} f. a grassy spot.
<LEND>

<L>46443<pc>1000-b<k1>SAn<k2>SAn
{#SAn#}¦ {%śān%} (properly a Nom. fr. {%śāna%} be-
low), used only in Desid. P. A. {%śīśāṃ-%}
{%sati, -te,%} to whet, sharpen.
<LEND>

<L>46444<pc>1000-b<k1>SAna<k2>SAna
{%Śāna, as,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. {%śo,%} cf. {%śāṇa%}), a touchstone;
a whetstone, grindstone; ({%ī%}), f. a sort of cucumber
or colocynth ({%= indra-vāruṇī%}); [cf. Angl. Sax.
<nsi>hœnan.</nsi>] {%—Śāna-pāda, as,%} m., N. of the Pāripātra
mountain; a stone for grinding sandal.
<LEND>

<L>46445<pc>1000-b<k1>SAnac<k2>SAnac
{#SAnac#}¦ {%śānac,%} (in grammar) a technical
term for the Kṛt affix {%āna%} or {%amāna,%} used in
forming present participles Ātmane-pada, or for {%āna%}
substituted for {%hi,%} the affix of the 2nd sing. Impv.
<LEND>

<L>46446<pc>1000-b<k1>SAnEScara<k2>SAnEScara
{#SAnEScara#}¦ {%śānaiścara%} (fr. {%śanaiś-cara%}), {%as, ī,%}
{%am,%} relating to Saturn; falling on a Saturday.
<LEND>

<L>46447<pc>1000-b<k1>SAnta<k2>SAnta
{#SAnta#}¦ {%śānta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%śam%}), ap-
peased, allayed, calmed, alleviated, pacified, stilled,
hushed, tranquil, calm, free from passions, contented,
satisfied, undisturbed; put a stop to, put an end to,
destroyed, annihilated, killed, deceased, dead, ceased,
abated, subsided, extinguished; shaded, on the shady
or auspicious side, auspicious (in augury, opposed to
{%dīpta,%} q. v.); meek, humble; purified, cleansed;
({%as%}), m. an ascetic whose passions are subdued, one
absorbed in meditation on the deity; tranquillity,
tranquil devotion, quietism (as one of the Rasas, see
{%rasa%}); indifference to all objects of pleasure and
pain; ({%ā%}), f. a proper N.; N. of a Śakti; of the
daughter of king Loma-pāda (wife of Ṛṣya-śṛṅga);
({%am%}), n. appeasing, pacifying, alleviation; ({%am%}), ind.
enough, no more! hush! fie! for shame! heaven
forbid! not so! {%—Śānta-krodha, as, ā, am,%} one
whose anger is appeased. {%—Śānta-cetas, ās, ās, as,%}
tranquil-minded; composed in mind, calm, unanxious.
{%—Śānta-jvara, as, ā, am,%} one whose fever is
alleviated. {%—Śānta-tā,%} f. or {%śānta-tva, am,%} n.
quietness, calmness, quietism, meekness. {%—Śānta-%}
{%toya, as, ā, am,%} having calm or still waters, gently
flowing. {%—Śānta-devatya, as, ā, am,%} who or what
appeases a god, that by which a divinity is appeased.
{%—Śānta-mala, as, ā, am,%} having all defilement re-
moved. {%—Śānta-moha, am,%} n., scil. {%sthāna,%} ‘having
delusion dispelled,’ one of the steps towards supreme
happiness, (fourteen such Sthānas are enumerated in
the Jaina system.) {%—Śānta-raya, as, ā, am,%} slack-
ened in speed. {%—Śānta-rasa, as,%} m. the sentiment
of quietism or tranquillity (said to be illustrated in
the Mahā-bhārata). {%—Śāntarasa-nāṭaka, am,%} n., N.
of a drama. {%—Śānta-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} calm, tran-
quil. {%—Śānta-vivāda, as, ā, am,%} having disputes
allayed, reconciled, appeased. {%—Śāntātman (˚ta-āt˚),%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} of resigned or composed spirit, calm-minded,
composed. {%—Śāntārcis (˚ta-ar˚), is, is, is,%} whose
flame is extinguished or abated, gone out (as fire).
<LEND>

<L>46448<pc>1000-b<k1>SAnti<k2>SAnti
{%Śānti, is,%}¦ f. quiet, quietness, tranquillity, calmness,
peace, ease, quietism, absence of passion, indifference
to objects of pleasure or pain; rest, repose, remission;
appeasing, pacification, allayment, alleviation, conso-
lation, solace, satisfaction, reconciliation, settlement
of differences; appeasing the stomach, satisfying
hunger; any expiatory or propitiatory rite for avert-
ing evil or calamity; Expiation (personified as a
daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Dharma); ceasing,
cessation; causing to cease; good fortune, auspicious-
ness, felicity; preservation; ({%is%}), m., N. of the Indra
of the tenth Manv-antara; of a pupil of Aṅgiras;
of a king; the sixteenth Jina or Jaina deified sage
[Page1000-c+ 79]
of the present era; one of the Jaina emperors of the
universe. {%—Śānti-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing tran-
quillity, calming, appeasing, soothing, consolatory.
{%—Śānti-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} causing tranquillity,
calming, allaying; ({%tā%}), m. any divinity who averts
evil. {%—Śānti-karman, a,%} n. any action leading to
tranquillity or for averting evil. {%—Śānti-kāma, as,%}
m. desire of tranquillity; ({%as, ā, am%}), desirous of
tranquillity. {%—Śānti-gṛha, am,%} n. a room for rest
or retirement near the place of sacrifice. {%—Śānti-%}
{%candrikā,%} f., N. of a poem by Kavi-candra. {%—Śān-%}
{%ti-jala, am,%} n. {%= śānty-uda%}. {%—Śānti-da, as, ā, am,%}
giving tranquillity, tranquillizing. {%—Śānti-devā,%} f.,
N. of a daughter of Devaka. {%—Śānti-parvan, a,%} n.
‘Tranquillizing-section,’ N. of the twelfth book of
the Mahā-bhārata, (the longest in the whole poem
and consisting chiefly of stories, discourses, and epi-
sodes narrated for the tranquillizing of the troubled
spirit of Yudhi-ṣṭhira after the termination of the
war and the slaughter of his many relatives.) {%—Śānti-%}
{%purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Jaina work by Aśaga.
{%—Śānti-ratna, am,%} n. ‘jewel of tranquillity,’ N.
of a work. {%—Śānti-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a particular
religious observance (kept on the fifth day of the
light half of the month Kārttika). {%—Śānti-śataka,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘a hundred verses on tranquillity,’ N. of a
short poem by Śrī-śihlana. {%—Śānti-śīla, as,%} m.
‘quiet-tempered,’ a proper N. {%—Śānti-sarvasva,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘essence of quietism,’ N. of a work. {%—Śānti-%}
{%sūkta, am,%} n., N. of a hymn on quietism. {%—Śānti-%}
{%sūri, is,%} m., N. of the author of a Jaina work.
{%—Śānti-homa, as,%} m. a propitiatory oblation, a
burnt offering to avert or remedy evil. {%—Śānty-%}
{%uda%} or {%śānty-udaka, am,%} n. propitiatory water,
water offered at sacrifices for propitiation, lustral
water. {%—Śāntyuda-kumbha, as,%} m. a vessel holding
propitiatory water.
<LEND>

<L>46449<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntika<k2>SAntika
{%Śāntika, as, ī, am,%}¦ propitiatory, expiatory; pro-
ducing ease or quiet; relating to quiet, &c.; ({%am%}),
n. observances or ceremonies for the removal of
calamities. {%—Śāntika-karman, a,%} n. a magic rite
performed for removing obstacles; [cf. {%śānti-kar-%}
{%man.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46450<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntvA<k2>SAntvA
{%Śāntvā,%}¦ ind. {%= śamitvā,%} having been tranquil.
<LEND>

<L>46451<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntanu<k2>SAntanu
{#SAntanu#}¦ {%śāntanu, us,%} m. (fr. {%śantanu?%}), the
twenty-first sovereign of the lunar dynasty in the
Dvāpara or third age, (he was son of Pratīpa and
was father of Bhīṣma by Gaṅgā before he became
the father of Vicitra-vīrya by his wife Satya-vatī.)
<LEND>

<L>46452<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntanava<k2>SAntanava
{%Śāntanava, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%śāntanu%} above), a patro-
nymic of Bhīṣma (as son of king Śāntanu, the re-
puted great-uncle of the Pāṇḍavas); N. of the author
of the Phiṭ-sūtras on accentuation; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%ṭīkā,%}
the commentary composed by Śantanu. {%—Śāntana-%}
{%vācārya (˚va-āc˚), as,%} m. the author of the Phiṭ-
sūtras.
<LEND>

<L>46453<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntv<k2>SAntv
{#SAntv#}¦ {%śāntv%} (probably connected with
rt. 1. {%śam;%} by some regarded as a Nom.
fr. {%śāntva%} below; frequently, but less correctly, written
{%sāntv%}), cl. 10. P. A. {%śāntvayati, -te, aśaśāntvat,%}
{%śāntvayitum,%} to console, comfort, soothe, coax,
pacify, conciliate; to address gently or kindly.
<LEND>

<L>46454<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntva<k2>SAntva
{%Śāntva, am,%}¦ n. (less correctly written {%sāntva%}), con-
solation, consoling, comforting; conciliation; mild-
ness; mild speech; gentle or peaceable means.
{%—Śāntva-pūrvam,%} ind. in a conciliatory manner,
coaxingly, (see {%pūrva.%}) {%—Śāntva-vāda, as, ā, am,%}
speaking in a kindly and affectionate manner.
<LEND>

<L>46455<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntvana<k2>SAntvana
{%Śāntvana, am,%}¦ n. (less correctly written {%sāntvana%}),
the act of appeasing or reconciling, conciliation,
reconcilement; mildness; (at the end of an adj.
comp.) appeasing; ({%ā, am%}), f. n. speaking kindly
and in a conciliatory manner; friendly salutation and
inquiry; ({%āni%}), n. pl. kind or flattering words.
<LEND>

<L>46456<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntvayat<k2>SAntvayat
{%Śāntvayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ consoling, appeasing.
<LEND>

<L>46457<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntvayitvA<k2>SAntvayitvA
{%Śāntvayitvā,%}¦ ind. having consoled or comforted.
<LEND>

<L>46458<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntvita<k2>SAntvita
{%Śāntvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ consoled, comforted.
<LEND>

<L>46459<pc>1000-c<k1>SAntvya<k2>SAntvya
{%Śāntvya%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having consoled or
comforted.
<LEND>
[Page1001-a+ 76]

<L>46460<pc>1001-a<k1>SAntvati<k2>SAntvati
{#SAntvati#}¦ {%śāntvati, is,%} f. a kind of plant or
shrub ({%= brāhmaṇa-yaṣṭikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46461<pc>1001-a<k1>SApa<k2>SApa
{#SApa#}¦ {%śāpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%śap%}), curse, ana-
thema, execration, cursing, reviling; abuse; oath,
imprecation, affirmation by oath or ordeal; ban,
interdiction. {%—Śāpa-grasta, as, ā, am,%} seized by a
curse, suffering under a curse. {%—Śāpa-ja, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} arising from a curse. {%—Śāpa-nāśana, as,%} m.,
N. of a Muni. {%—Śāpa-prada, as, ā, am,%} ‘curse-
giving,’ uttering imprecations. {%—Śāpa-bhīta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} dreading a curse. {%—Śāpa-mukta, as, ā, am,%}
released from a curse. {%—Śāpa-mukti, is,%} f. or {%śāpa-%}
{%mokṣa, as,%} m. deliverance from a curse. {%—Śāpa-yan-%}
{%trita, as, ā, am,%} restrained by a curse. {%—Śāpānta%}
{%(˚pa-an˚)%} or {%śāpāvasāna (˚pa-av˚), as,%} m. the
end of a curse or of the period during which an im-
precation takes effect. {%—Śāpāstra (˚pa-as˚), as,%} m.
‘having curses for weapons,’ a Muni, saint, (a curse
pronounced by a Muni being formidable even to the
deities.) {%—Śāpotsarga (˚pa-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘pouring
out a curse,’ the uttering of an imprecation. {%—Śā-%}
{%poddhāra (˚pa-ud˚), as,%} m. deliverance from a
curse.
<LEND>

<L>46462<pc>1001-a<k1>SApita<k2>SApita
{%Śāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to take an oath, one
to whom an oath has been administered, sworn,
adjured, proved by ordeal.
<LEND>

<L>46463<pc>1001-a<k1>SApeya<k2>SApeya
{%Śāpeya,%}¦ see Gaṇa Śaunakādi to Pāṇ. IV. 3, 106.
<LEND>

<L>46464<pc>1001-a<k1>SApeyin<k2>SApeyin
{%Śāpeyin, ī,%}¦ m. a proper N.; ({%inas%}), m. pl., N.
of a school of the White Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>46465<pc>1001-a<k1>SApaWika<k2>SApaWika
{#SApaWika#}¦ {%śāpaṭhika, as,%} m. a peacock.
<LEND>

<L>46466<pc>1001-a<k1>SAParika<k2>SAParika
{#SAParika#}¦ {%śāpharika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śaphara%}),
relating to the Śaphara fish; ({%as%}), m. a fisherman.
<LEND>

<L>46467<pc>1001-a<k1>SAPeya<k2>SAPeya
{#SAPeya#}¦ {%śāpheya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a Śākhā
of the Yajur-veda; [cf. {%śāpeya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46468<pc>1001-a<k1>SAbara<k2>SAbara
{#SAbara#}¦ {%śābara, as,%} m., N. of the commen-
tary written by Śabara-svāmin; of a work by Prāṇa-
kṛṣṇa; of a Tantra work ascribed to Śiva. {%—Śābara-%}
{%bhāṣya, am,%} n. the commentary written by Śabara-
svāmin.
<LEND>

<L>46469<pc>1001-a<k1>SAbda<k2>SAbda
{#SAbda#}¦ {%śābda, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śabda%}), sonorous,
sounding; relating to sound, (opposed to {%ārtha,%}
q. v.); relating to or derived from words; verbal,
oral; nominal (as inflection); ({%as%}), m. a philologist,
grammarian; ({%ī%}), f. Sarasvatī (as goddess of speech
and eloquence). {%—Śābda-bodha, as,%} m. ‘verbal
knowledge,’ apprehension of the meaning of words,
perception of the verbal or literal sense (of a sen-
tence, &c.). {%—Śābda-vyañjanā,%} f. (in rhetoric)
suggestion or insinuation founded on words (as op-
posed to {%ārtha-vyañjanā%} or suggestion dependent
upon the meaning of words).
<LEND>

<L>46470<pc>1001-a<k1>SAbdika<k2>SAbdika
{%Śābdika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to sounds or words;
making a noise, sounding; verbal; ({%as%}), m. one
skilled in words, a philologist, grammarian. {%—Śāb-%}
{%dika-narasiṃha, as,%} m., N. of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>46471<pc>1001-a<k1>SAma<k2>SAma
{#SAma#}¦ {%śāma, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. 1. {%śam%}), Ved.
appeasing, curing, having curative properties.
<LEND>

<L>46472<pc>1001-a<k1>SAman<k2>SAman
{%Śāman, a,%}¦ n. [cf. {%sāman%}], appeasing, reconciling,
reconciliation, conciliation.
<LEND>

<L>46473<pc>1001-a<k1>SAmana<k2>SAmana
{%Śāmana, as,%}¦ m. one who ‘settles’ or destroys,
N. of Yama {%(= śamana); (am),%} n. conciliation;
tranquillity, peace; settling, killing, slaughter; end,
({%śāmanaṃ yā,%} to go to an end, be destroyed);
({%ī%}), f. the southern quarter.
<LEND>

<L>46474<pc>1001-a<k1>SAmaladAsa<k2>SAmaladAsa
{%Śāmala-dāsa%}¦ or {%śāmala-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of
a modern poet.
<LEND>

<L>46475<pc>1001-a<k1>SAmitra<k2>SAmitra
{%Śāmitra, am,%}¦ n. a sacrificial vessel; a hearth or
place (for cooking a sacrificial animal); a deadly
blow; sacrificing; tying up cattle for sacrifice, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46476<pc>1001-a<k1>SAmIla<k2>SAmIla
{%Śāmīla, am,%}¦ n. ashes (Pāṇ. IV. 3, 142).
<LEND>

<L>46477<pc>1001-a<k1>SAmIlI<k2>SAmIlI
{%Śāmīlī,%}¦ f. a chaplet, garland.
<LEND>

<L>46478<pc>1001-a<k1>SAmulya<k2>SAmulya
{%Śāmulya, am,%}¦ n. (probably connected with {%śa-%}
{%mala%}), Ved. (perhaps) anything requiring cleansing
or expiation (as a dirty or defiled garment; according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda X. 85, 29 {%= śamalaṃ śārīraṃ%}
{%śarīra-chinnasya malasya dhārakaṃ vastram%}).
<LEND>
[Page1001-b+ 75]

<L>46479<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmUla<k2>SAmUla
{%Śāmūla, am,%}¦ n., Ved. (according to some) an
old woollen garment.
<LEND>

<L>46480<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmyat<k2>SAmyat
{%Śāmyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ becoming calm or tranquil,
being appeased; one who is placid or quiet.
<LEND>

<L>46481<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmba<k2>SAmba
{#SAmba#}¦ {%śāmba, as,%} m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa
and Jāmbavatī (frequently mentioned in the Purāṇas
and in the Mausala-parvan of the Mahā-bhārata,
where it is related that in consequence of the curse
of some holy sages who had been deceived by a
female disguise he had assumed, he was condemned
to produce offspring in the shape of a terrific iron
club for the destruction of the race of Vṛṣṇi and
Andhaka; he is said to have been instructed by
Nārada in the proper worship of the sun, and by
Vyāsa in the ritual observances of the Magi; he is
regarded as the author of the Sūrya-stotra hymn).
{%—Śāmba-pura, am,%} n. or {%śāmba-purī,%} f., N. of
a city founded by Śāmba (said to be situated on the
banks of the Candra-bhāgā). {%—Śāmba-purāṇa,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa. {%—Śāmbāditya (˚ba-ād˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a particular form of the sun. {%—Śāmbopa-%}
{%purāṇa (˚ba-up˚), am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>46482<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmbarika<k2>SAmbarika
{#SAmbarika#}¦ {%śāmbarika, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46483<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmbarI<k2>SAmbarI
{#SAmbarI#}¦ {%śāmbarī,%} f. (fr. {%śambara%}), jugglery,
sorcery, illusion (as practised by the Daitya Śambara);
a sorceress.
<LEND>

<L>46484<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmbavika<k2>SAmbavika
{#SAmbavika#}¦ {%śāmbavika, as,%} m. (fr. {%śambu%}), a
worker or dealer in shells.
<LEND>

<L>46485<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmbuka<k2>SAmbuka
{%Śāmbuka, as,%}¦ m. a bivalve shell; [cf. {%śambuka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46486<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmbuvi<k2>SAmbuvi
{%Śāmbuvi, ayas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a Śākhā or school.
<LEND>

<L>46487<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmbUka<k2>SAmbUka
{%Śāmbūka, as,%}¦ m. a bivalve shell.
<LEND>

<L>46488<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmBara<k2>SAmBara
{#SAmBara#}¦ {%śāmbhara,%} N. of a city in Ajmere
(commonly called Sāmbhar or Sāmbher, where a par-
ticular kind of fossil salt is found). {%—Śāmbhara-%}
{%nagara, am,%} n. the city of Śāmbhara.
<LEND>

<L>46489<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmBarAyaRI<k2>SAmBarAyaRI
{%Śāmbharāyaṇī,%}¦ f., N. of a woman, (also written
{%sāmbharāyaṇī.%})
<LEND>

<L>46490<pc>1001-b<k1>SAmBava<k2>SAmBava
{#SAmBava#}¦ {%śāmbhava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śambhu%}),
belonging to Śiva; ({%as%}), m. a worshipper of Śiva;
the son of Śambhu; camphor; a sort of poison; a
kind of plant ({%= śiva-mallī%}); bdellium {%(= gug-%}
{%gulu); (ī),%} f., N. of Pārvatī; a kind of plant ({%=%}
{%nīla-dūrvā%}); the aperture through which the soul
is said to escape {%(= mudrā-mārga); (am),%} n. the
Deva-dāru. {%—Śāmbhava-deva, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>46491<pc>1001-b<k1>SAya<k2>SAya
{#SAya#}¦ {%śāya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}), lying,
sleeping.
<LEND>

<L>46492<pc>1001-b<k1>SAyaka<k2>SAyaka<h>1
1. {%śāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ lying, sleeping, reposing;
({%ikā%}), f. sleeping, repose, sleep.
<LEND>

<L>46493<pc>1001-b<k1>SAyin<k2>SAyin
{%Śāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ lying down, reclining, sleeping,
resting, abiding, ({%adhaḥ-śāyin,%} sleeping on the
ground; {%eka-śāyin,%} sleeping alone.)
<LEND>

<L>46494<pc>1001-b<k1>SAyaka<k2>SAyaka<h>2
{#SAyaka#} 2¦. {%śāyaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śo%}), an
arrow; a sword; [cf. {%sāyaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46495<pc>1001-b<k1>SAr<k2>SAr
{#SAr#}¦ {%śār%} (also written {%sār%}), cl. 10. P.
{%śārayati, -yitum,%} to be weak or feeble;
to weaken; [cf. rt. {%śṝ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46496<pc>1001-b<k1>SAra<k2>SAra
{#SAra#}¦ {%śāra, as, ī, am,%} (in some senses fr. rt.
{%śṝ;%} in others fr. {%śṛ%} substituted for rt. {%sṛ%}), varie-
gated (in colour), of different colours (as dark hair
mixed with grey); mottled, spotted; yellow; ({%as%}), m.
hurting, injuring; variegating; a variegated colour;
a mixture of blue and yellow, green; air, wind,
(perhaps for {%sāra%}); a chess-man, piece used at chess
or at a kind of backgammon, (for {%sāra,%} q. v.); ({%ī%}),
f., Ved. an arrow; Kuśa grass; ({%am%}), n. a variegated
colour. {%—Śāra-tā,%} f. or {%śāra-tva, am,%} n. variety of
colour, yellowness.
<LEND>

<L>46497<pc>1001-b<k1>SAraNga<k2>SAraNga
{%Śāraṅga, as, ī, am%}¦ [cf. {%sāraṅga%}], of a variegated
colour, spotted, dappled; ({%as%}), m. the Cātaka bird,
Cuculus Melanoleucus; a peacock; a bee; a deer;
an elephant; ({%ī%}), f. a particular musical instrument,
a stringed instrument played with a bow, a sort of
fiddle; N. of the wife of Manda-pāla.
<LEND>

<L>46498<pc>1001-b<k1>SAri<k2>SAri
{%Śāri, is,%}¦ m. a chess-man, piece at chess (or at a
[Page1001-c+ 79]
kind of draughts); a little round ball ({%= guṭikā%});
a kind of die; ({%is%}), f. a kind of bird, (see {%śārikā%});
an elephant's housings or armour; fraud, trick. {%—Śāri-%}
{%paṭṭa, as,%} m. or {%śāri-phala, am,%} n. or {%śāri-pha-%}
{%laka, as, am,%} m. n. a chequered cloth or table for
playing draughts, &c. {%—Śāri-putra, as,%} m., N. of a
disciple of Buddha. {%—Śāri-śṛṅkhalā,%} f. a sort of
die for playing at draughts, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46499<pc>1001-c<k1>SArikA<k2>SArikA
{%Śārikā,%}¦ f. a kind of bird (commonly called
Maina, either the Gracula Religiosa or the Turdus
Salica, cf. {%sārikā%}); a bow or stick used for playing
the Vīṇā or any stringed instrument; chess-playing;
a piece or man at chess or backgammon (according
to some); N. of the tutelary goddess of Śārīṭaka.
<LEND>

<L>46500<pc>1001-c<k1>SArita<k2>SArita
{%Śārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ variegated, coloured.
<LEND>

<L>46501<pc>1001-c<k1>SArivA<k2>SArivA
{%Śārivā,%}¦ f. a particular plant (the root of which is
used medicinally as a substitute for sarsaparilla, =
{%śyāmā, ananta-mūla, utpala-śārivā,%} cf. {%sārivā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46502<pc>1001-c<k1>SArI<k2>SArI
{%Śārī,%}¦ f. a kind of bird {%(= śārikā); = kuśā%} (ac-
cording to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>46503<pc>1001-c<k1>SAruka<k2>SAruka
{%Śāruka, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who injures or destroys
(with acc.); mischievous, noxious, injurious.
<LEND>

<L>46504<pc>1001-c<k1>SArada<k2>SArada
{#SArada#}¦ {%śārada, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śarad%}), autumnal,
produced or growing in autumn; annual, lasting for
a year or from year to year, perennial (said of the
cities of the Asuras); new, recent [cf. {%rajju-śā-%}
{%rada%}]; modest, diffident; belonging to the Asura
Śarad (according to Sāy.); ({%as%}), m. autumnal sick-
ness; autumnal sunshine; a year; a sort of kidney-
bean (yellow Mūng and another kind, {%= pīta-mudga,%}
{%harin-mudga%}); a kind of plant ({%= kāsa%}); the
Vakula tree; ({%au%}), m. du., scil. {%māsau,%} the two
months of autumn (Ved.); ({%ā%}), f., N. of Sarasvatī;
of Durgā; of a daughter of Deva-ratha; a kind of
musical instrument, a sort of Vīṇā or lute; N. of
certain plants {%(= brāhmī, sārivā); = śāradā-tilaka%}
below; ({%ī%}), f. the plant Jussiæa Repens; the Sapta-
parṇa tree; the day of full moon in the month
Kārttika or (according to some) Āśvina, {%= kojāgara-%}
{%pūrṇimā; (am),%} n. corn, grain, fruit (as ripening in
the autumn); the white lotus. {%—Śāradā-tilaka,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a mystical poem by Lakṣmaṇa; of
a drama by Śaṅkara. {%—Śāradā-tilaka-tantra, am,%}
n. the Tantra called Śāradā-tilaka. {%—Śāradāmbā%}
{%(˚dā-am˚),%} f. the goddess Śāradā, i. e. Sarasvatī.
<LEND>

<L>46505<pc>1001-c<k1>SAradika<k2>SAradika
{%Śāradika, am,%}¦ n. a particular funeral ceremony,
an annual or autumnal Śrāddha; ({%as%}), m. autumnal
sickness; heat or sunshine in autumn.
<LEND>

<L>46506<pc>1001-c<k1>SAradin<k2>SAradin
{%Śāradin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ autumnal, belonging to autumn.
<LEND>

<L>46507<pc>1001-c<k1>SAradIya<k2>SAradIya
{%Śāradīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ autumnal. {%—Śāradīya-ma-%}
{%hāpūjā,%} f. the autumnal great worship (of Durgā).
<LEND>

<L>46508<pc>1001-c<k1>SAradvata<k2>SAradvata
{%Śāradvata, as, ī, am,%}¦ of or belonging to Śarad-
vat, descended from Śarad-vat; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.
{%—Śāradvatī-putra, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46509<pc>1001-c<k1>SAradvatAyana<k2>SAradvatAyana
{%Śāradvatāyana, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>46510<pc>1001-c<k1>SArAva<k2>SArAva
{#SArAva#}¦ {%śārāva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śarāva%}), placed
on a shallow dish (as rice &c.).
<LEND>

<L>46511<pc>1001-c<k1>SArIwaka<k2>SArIwaka
{#SArIwaka#}¦ {%śārīṭaka,%} N. of a town of Kaśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>46512<pc>1001-c<k1>SArIra<k2>SArIra
{#SArIra#}¦ {%śārīra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śarīra%}), cor-
poreal, bodily, relating to the body (of animals);
belonging to or produced from the body; connected
with the body, incorporate; ({%am%}), n. the incor-
porate soul or spirit; a particular drug ({%= vṛṣa,%}
which may mean ‘a bull,’ ‘a kind of drug,’ &c.); ex-
crement, excretion; ({%as%}), m. corporal punishment (?).
{%—Śārīra-vraṇa, as,%} m. a bodily ulcer or tumour.
<LEND>

<L>46513<pc>1001-c<k1>SArIraka<k2>SArIraka
{%Śārīraka, as, ī, am,%}¦ corporeal, relating to the
body; incorporate; ({%am%}), n. the soul or embodied
spirit or the doctrine inquiring into the nature of
the embodied spirit; N. of Śaṅkarācārya's commen-
tary on the Vedānta or Brahma-sūtras. {%—Śārīraka-%}
{%ṭīkā,%} f., N. of a work by Vācas-pati. {%—Śārīraka-%}
{%mīmāṃsā,%} f. an inquiry into the embodied spirit
({%= brahma-mīmāṃsā, uttara-mīmāṃsā, vedānta,%}
q. q. v. v.). {%—Śārīraka-mīmāṃsā-bhāṣya, am,%} n.,
N. of a commentary by Rāmānuja on the Brahma-
sūtras; of another by Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Śārīraka-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} n. the aphorisms of the Vedānta philo-
sophy ({%= brahma-sūtra,%} q. v.).
<LEND>
[Page1002-a+ 75]

<L>46514<pc>1002-a<k1>SArIrakIya<k2>SArIrakIya
{%Śārīrakīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ corporeal, {{pyschological->psychological||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}
(as a book treating of the incorporate soul).
<LEND>

<L>46515<pc>1002-a<k1>SArIrika<k2>SArIrika
{%Śārīrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the body, cor-
poreal, personal, material, contained in the body,
incorporate, psychological.
<LEND>

<L>46516<pc>1002-a<k1>SAruka<k2>SAruka
{#SAruka#}¦ {%śāruka.%} See p. 1001, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>46517<pc>1002-a<k1>SArka<k2>SArka
{#SArka#}¦ {%śārka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%śṝ,%} con-
nected with {%śarkarā,%} q. v.), clayed or candied sugar.
<LEND>

<L>46518<pc>1002-a<k1>SArkaka<k2>SArkaka
{%Śārkaka, as,%}¦ m. clayed or candied sugar; a lump
of sugar; a lump or ball of meat; the froth of
milk, syllabub; cream.
<LEND>

<L>46519<pc>1002-a<k1>SArkara<k2>SArkara
{%Śārkara, as, ī, am,%}¦ (fr. {%śarkarā%}), gravelly, stony;
made of sugar, sugary; ({%as%}), m. a stony or gravelly
place; the froth or skim of milk; cream [cf. {%śār-%}
{%kaka%}]; ({%am%}), n. a kind of metre ({%= śākkara%}).
<LEND>

<L>46520<pc>1002-a<k1>SArkaraka<k2>SArkaraka
{%Śārkaraka%}¦ or {%śārkarika, as, ī, am,%} gravelly,
stony, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a place abounding in stones or
gravel.
<LEND>

<L>46521<pc>1002-a<k1>SArkarAkza<k2>SArkarAkza
{%Śārkarākṣa, as,%}¦ m. (probably fr. {%śarkarākṣa%}),
a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>46522<pc>1002-a<k1>SArkarAkzi<k2>SArkarAkzi
{%Śārkarākṣi, ayas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a Gotra.
<LEND>

<L>46523<pc>1002-a<k1>SArkarIya<k2>SArkarIya
{%Śārkarīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ stony, gravelly, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46524<pc>1002-a<k1>SArgAla<k2>SArgAla
{#SArgAla#}¦ {%śārgāla, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śṛgāla%}), of
or belonging to a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>46525<pc>1002-a<k1>SArNga<k2>SArNga
{#SArNga#}¦ {%śārṅga, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śṛṅga%}), made
of horn, horny, corneous; ({%as%}), m. a bow, (accord-
ing to some {%am,%} n.); N. of the bow of Viṣṇu;
N. of a bird; a patronymic of several Vedic Ṛṣis;
({%am%}), n. ginger {%(= ārdraka)%}. {%—Śārṅga-deva,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of the Saṅgīta-ratnākara.
{%—Śārṅga-dhanvan, ā,%} m. epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Śārṅga-dhara, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Vaidya-vallabha; of the author of the works mentioned
below. {%—Śārṅgadhara-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of an
anthology of didactic verses. {%—Śārṅgadhara-saṃ-%}
{%hitā,%} f., N. of a medical work. {%—Śārṅga-pāṇi, is,%}
m. ‘bow-handed,’ N. of Viṣṇu; of the father of
Viṣṇu; of a chief of the Vaiṣṇava sect. {%—Śārṅga-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘carrying the bow Śārṅga,’ epithet of
Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>46526<pc>1002-a<k1>SArNgikA<k2>SArNgikA
{%Śārṅgikā,%}¦ f. a kind of bird; [cf. {%lapitā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46527<pc>1002-a<k1>SArNgin<k2>SArNgin
{%Śārṅgin, ī,%}¦ m. a bowman, an archer; epithet of
Viṣṇu; of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>46528<pc>1002-a<k1>SArNgarava<k2>SArNgarava
{#SArNgarava#}¦ {%śārṅgarava, as,%} m. (fr. {%śṛṅga-%}
{%rava?%}), a Śārṅgarava man, see Pāṇ. IV. 1, 73;
({%ī%}), f. a Śāṅgarava woman.
<LEND>

<L>46529<pc>1002-a<k1>SArNgazWA<k2>SArNgazWA
{#SArNgazWA#}¦ {%śārṅgaṣṭhā,%} f. a kind of tree ({%=%}
{%mahā-karañja;%} also written {%śāṅgoṣṭhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46530<pc>1002-a<k1>SArdUla<k2>SArdUla
{#SArdUla#}¦ {%śārdūla, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%śṝ%}), a tiger; a panther or leopard ({%= citraka%}); any
eminent person, best, excellent, pre-eminent (at the
end of comps., see {%vyāghra%}); another kind of
animal ({%= śarabha%}); a Rākṣasa; a sort of bird;
a variety of the Dhṛti metre, (see below); a species
of the Atidhṛti metre, (see below); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a Śākhā or school of the Sāma-veda; [cf. perhaps
Gr. <lang n="greek">πάρδος</lang> (for <lang n="greek">κάρδος</lang>), <lang n="greek">πάρδαλις;</lang> Lat. <nsi>pardus,</nsi>
<nsi>pardalis;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pardas.</nsi>] {%—Śārdūla-carman, a,%}
n. a tiger's skin. {%—Śārdūla-mṛga-sevita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} frequented by tigers and deer. {%—Śārdūla-la-%}
{%lita, am,%} n. ‘tiger's sport,’ a variety of the Dhṛti
metre (consisting of four Pādas of eighteen syllables
each). {%—Śārdūla-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘riding on a
tiger,’ N. of one of the twenty-five Pūrva-jinas.
{%—Śārdūla-vikrīḍita, am,%} n. ‘tiger's play,’ a
species of the Atidhṛti metre (having four Pādas of
nineteen syllables each). {%—Śārdūla-sama-vikrama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having prowess equal to a tiger, as bold
as a tiger.
<LEND>

<L>46531<pc>1002-a<k1>SAryAta<k2>SAryAta
{#SAryAta#}¦ {%śāryāta, as,%} m. (fr. {%śaryāti%}), N. of
a Vedic Ṛṣi (author of Ṛg-veda X. 92, and having
the patronymic Mānava); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the sons of
Śaryāta, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46532<pc>1002-a<k1>SArva<k2>SArva
{#SArva#}¦ {%śārva, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%śarva%}), belonging
to Śarva or Śiva.
<LEND>
[Page1002-b+ 80]

<L>46533<pc>1002-b<k1>SArvara<k2>SArvara
{#SArvara#}¦ {%śārvara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śarvarī%}), be-
longing to night, nocturnal; murderous, mischievous,
pernicious; ({%am%}), n. darkness, gloom; ({%ī%}), f. night.
<LEND>

<L>46534<pc>1002-b<k1>SArvarin<k2>SArvarin
{%Śārvarin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of the thirty-fourth year of
Jupiter's cycle of sixty years.
<LEND>

<L>46535<pc>1002-b<k1>SAl<k2>SAl
{#SAl#}¦ {%śāl%} [cf. rt. {%śāḍ%}], cl. 1. A. {%śālate,%}
{%śālitum,%} to flatter, praise, coax; to
boast; to shine or be endowed with [see Malli-
nātha's commentary to Kirāt. V. 44].
<LEND>

<L>46536<pc>1002-b<k1>SAla<k2>SAla
{#SAla#}¦ {%śāla, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%śal%} or
rt. {%śāl%} or rt. {%śo;%} in some senses also written {%sāla,%}
q. v.), a particular tree, the Shorea Robusta or Valeria
Robusta (said to be one of the most valuable Indian
timber trees, {%= sarja,%} cf. {%sāla%}); a tree (in general);
an enclosure, court, fence ({%= prākāra%}); a kind of
fish, Ophiocephalus Wrahl; N. of a river; of king
Śāli-vāhana; ({%ā%}), f. a large branch, the upper or
main branch of a tree; a hall, saloon, large room,
apartment, room; a house; a stable; [cf. Angl. Sax.
<nsi>heal,</nsi> ‘a hall;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>Saal, Halle.</nsi>] {%—Śāla-%}
{%grāma, as,%} m., N. of a sacred place or district; a par-
ticular sacred stone worshipped by the Vaiṣṇavas, (it
is said to be a kind of black ammonite, and its various
circular formations are supposed to have a mystical
significance and to be typical of Viṣṇu; these stones
are chiefly found in or near the river Gaṇḍakī, and
the circles or spirals they contain are thought by
some to be formed by the Vajra-kīṭa or other in-
sects; cf. {%sāla-grāma.%}) {%—Śālagrāma-giri, is,%} m.,
N. of a mountain producing the Śāla-grāma. {%—Śā-%}
{%lagrāma-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Śāla-%}
{%grāma-śilā,%} f. the Śāla-grāma stone. {%—Śāla-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of fish, (see above.) {%—Śāla-niryāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. resin, the resinous exudation of the Śāl tree
or Shorea Robusta. {%—Śāla-parṇī,%} f. ‘having Śāl
leaves,’ the shrub Hedysarum Gangeticum, (also
written {%sāla-parṇī.%}) {%—Śāla-pota, as,%} m. a young
Śāl tree. {%—Śāla-bhañjikā,%} f. a doll, wooden puppet;
a courtezan, harlot; a kind of game played in the
east of India; [cf. {%sāla-bhañjikā.%}] {%—Śālabhañ-%}
{%jikā-prakhya, as, ā, am,%} resembling the game
called Śāla-bhañjikā. {%—Śāla-bhañjī,%} f. a doll, wooden
puppet (as made of Śāl wood). {%—Śāla-veṣṭa, as,%}
m. the resin of the Śāl tree (used as incense &c.),
resin (in general). {%—Śāla-sāra, as,%} m. a tree;
Asa Fetida, (also written {%sāla-sāra.%}) {%—Śālāṅkī%}
{%(˚lā-aṅ˚?),%} f. a doll, puppet. {%—Śālājira (˚lā-aj˚?),%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a hollow earthen cup or saucer.
{%—Śālā-dvāra, am,%} n. the door or entrance of a
hall. {%—Śālādvārya, as,%} m., scil. {%agni,%} a kind of
sacred or sacrificial fire. {%—Śālā-mṛga, as,%} m. ‘house-
animal,’ a jackal (as prowling near houses?). {%—Śālā-%}
{%vatī,%} f., N. of one of the wives of Viśvā-mitra and
mother of Hiraṇyākṣa. {%—Śālāvatya, ās,%} m. pl., N.
of a family descended from Viśvā-mitra. {%—Śālā-vṛka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘house-wolf,’ a dog; a cat; a jackal; a wolf; a
deer; a monkey; a particular class of evil or malicious
beings, (Mahā-bhārata, Śānti-parvan 1188.) {%—Śālā-%}
{%vṛkeya, as,%} m. the offering of a Śālā-vṛka.
<LEND>

<L>46537<pc>1002-b<k1>SAlaka<k2>SAlaka
{%Śālaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a man (perhaps a jester in
a play).
<LEND>

<L>46538<pc>1002-b<k1>SAlAkza<k2>SAlAkza
{%Śālākṣa, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a family or Gotra.
<LEND>

<L>46539<pc>1002-b<k1>SAlAnI<k2>SAlAnI
{%Śālānī,%}¦ f. the shrub Hedysarum Gangeticum.
<LEND>

<L>46540<pc>1002-b<k1>SAlAra<k2>SAlAra
{%Śālāra, am,%}¦ n. a ladder, flight of stairs or steps;
a bird-cage; the claw of an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>46541<pc>1002-b<k1>SAlika<k2>SAlika
{%Śālika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to the
Śāl tree; belonging to a hall, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a
weaver; a village of artificers; a toll, tax; ({%ā%}), f. the
shrub Hedysarum Gangeticum; N. of a Mīmāṃsā
work by Śālikā-nātha {%(= prakaraṇa-pañcikā).%}
{%—Śālikā-nātha, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
Śālikā and of the Praśasta-pāda-bhāṣya-vyākhyāna
commentary.
<LEND>

<L>46542<pc>1002-b<k1>SAlin<k2>SAlin
{%Śālin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ belonging to a house, domestic,
&c.; endowed with, possessed of, possessing, having;
shining or resplendent with (generally at the end of
comps., cf. {%vīrya-ś˚;%} in this sense apparently con-
nected with rt. {%śāl%}); ({%inī%}), f. a mistress of a house,
housekeeper; a kind of metre, four times ¯¯¯¯¯
˘¯¯˘¯¯; a proper N. {%—1. śāli-tā,%} f. or {%śāli- %}
[Page1002-c+ 77]
{%tva, am,%} n. the being endowed with, possession;
confidence in.
<LEND>

<L>46543<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlina<k2>SAlina
{%Śālina, as, ā, am,%}¦ for {%śālīna%} below. {%—Śālinī-%}
{%karaṇa,%} see {%śālīnī-karaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>46544<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlI<k2>SAlI
{%Śālī,%}¦ f. a kind of plant ({%= kṛṣṇa-jīraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>46545<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlIna<k2>SAlIna
{%Śālīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached to the house or to
one's own room, domestic, bashful, humble, retiring,
ashamed; like, resembling; ({%as%}), m. a householder,
one who devotes himself to household or worldly af-
fairs; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of fennel {%(= miśreyā)%}. {%—Śālīna-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%śālīna-tva, am,%} n. bashfulness, modesty. {%—Śā-%}
{%līnatva-vivarjita, as, ā, am,%} devoid of modesty,
immodest. {%—Śālīna-śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a bashful dis-
position or retiring nature. {%—Śālīnaśīla-tā,%} f. bash-
fulness. {%—Śālīnī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the making hum-
ble, humbling; abuse, reproach. {%—Śālīnī-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make humble, humiliate.
<LEND>

<L>46546<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlIya<k2>SAlIya
{%Śālīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ of or belonging to a hall;
({%as%}), m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>46547<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlaNkawaNkawa<k2>SAlaNkawaNkawa
{#SAlaNkawaNkawa#}¦ {%śālaṅkaṭaṅkaṭa, as,%} m., N. of
a Rākṣasa (son of Śālaṅkaṭaṅkaṭā, wife of Vidyut-
keśin; the N. is also written Śāla-kaṭaṅkaṭa).
<LEND>

<L>46548<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlaNkAyana<k2>SAlaNkAyana
{#SAlaNkAyana#}¦ {%śālaṅkāyana, as,%} m., N. of a
Muni; of Śiva's attendant Nandin; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of a family (descendants of Viśvā-mitra). {%—Śālaṅkā-%}
{%yana-gotra, am,%} n. the family of the Śālaṅkāyanas.
{%—Śālaṅkāyana-jīvasū, ūs,%} f. epithet of the mother
of Vyāsa. {%—Śālaṅkāyanī-putra, as,%} m., Ved., N.
of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>46549<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlaNkAyanin<k2>SAlaNkAyanin
{%Śālaṅkāyanin, inas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>46550<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlaNki<k2>SAlaNki
{%Śālaṅki, is,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>46551<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlaYca<k2>SAlaYca
{#SAlaYca#}¦ {%śālañca, as,%} m. {%= śālāñci%} below.
<LEND>

<L>46552<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlAka<k2>SAlAka
{#SAlAka#}¦ {%śālāka%} (fr. {%śalākā%}), Ved. a frag-
ment or splinter of wood, a chip.
<LEND>

<L>46553<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlAkin<k2>SAlAkin
{%Śālākin, ī,%}¦ m. a spearman, one armed with a
javelin or dart; a surgeon; a barber.
<LEND>

<L>46554<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlAkya<k2>SAlAkya
{%Śālākya, am,%}¦ n. a branch of surgery or medicine
(comprising the inquiry into diseases of the head
and its organs; cf. {%āyur-veda%}). {%—Śālākya-tantra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of the fourth part of the Aṣṭāṅga-
hṛdaya-saṃhitā (treating of diseases of the head).
<LEND>

<L>46555<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlAYci<k2>SAlAYci
{#SAlAYci#}¦ {%śālāñci, is,%} f. {%= śāliñca,%} p. 1003.
<LEND>

<L>46556<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlAturIya<k2>SAlAturIya
{#SAlAturIya#}¦ {%śālāturīya, as,%} m. (fr. {%śalātura%}),
epithet of Pāṇini.
<LEND>

<L>46557<pc>1002-c<k1>SAlAluka<k2>SAlAluka
{#SAlAluka#}¦ {%śālāluka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śalālu%}),
purchased with the perfume called Śalālu.
<LEND>

<L>46558<pc>1002-c<k1>SAli<k2>SAli
{#SAli#}¦ {%śāli, is,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%śāl%} or
fr. rt. {%śṝ,%} cf. Uṇādi-s. IV. 127), rice (of which there
are said to be ten varieties; but especially two kinds,
one white, growing in deep water, and the other red,
requiring only a moist soil); the civet-cat, pole-cat;
N. of a Yakṣa transformed into a lion, (see {%śāli-%}
{%vāhana%}); ({%ayas%}), m. pl. grains of rice, rice. {%—Śāli-%}
{%kaṇa, am,%} n. a grain of rice. {%—Śāli-cūrṇa, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. rice-flower, ground rice. {%—2. śāli-tā,%} f.
or {%śāli-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition of rice.
{%—Śāli-parṇī,%} f. a kind of leguminous shrub {%(=%}
{%māṣa-parṇī)%}. {%—Śāli-piṣṭa, am,%} n. ‘flour of
rice,’ crystal. {%—Śāli-bhavana, am,%} n. a rice field.
{%—Śāli-vāh, vāṭ, -lyūhī, vāṭ,%} see Vopa-deva IV.
12. {%—Śāli-vāha, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Śāli-vā-%}
{%hana, as,%} m., N. of a celebrated sovereign of India
(said to be so called either from having in his infancy
ridden on a Yakṣa called Śāli, or from Śāli for Śāla,
the Śāl tree, Śāli-vāhana being represented as borne
on a cross made of that or other wood; he was the
enemy of Vikramāditya and institutor of the era
now called Śāka, commencing from his birth, seventy-
eight years after Christ; his capital was Prati-ṣṭhāna
on the Godāvarī). {%—Śāli-śūka, as,%} m., N. of a
king of the Maurya dynasty (a descendant of Candra-
gupta). {%—Śāli-hotra, as,%} m. ‘receiving oblations of
rice or corn,’ a horse; N. of a writer on veterinary
subjects. {%—Śālihotra-jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing (the
precepts of) Śāli-hotra, skilled in veterinary surgery.
{%—Śāli-hotrin, ī,%} m. a horse. {%—Śāly-odana, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. rice-gruel.
<LEND>
[Page1003-a+ 76]

<L>46559<pc>1003-a<k1>SAleya<k2>SAleya
{%Śāleya, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} fit for rice (as a field
&c.); sown with rice; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a sort of fennel,
Anethum Panmori or Sowa, {%= miśreyā; (am),%} n. a
field of rice.
<LEND>

<L>46560<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlika<k2>SAlika
{#SAlika#}¦ {%śālika.%} See under {%śāla,%} p. 1002.
<LEND>

<L>46561<pc>1003-a<k1>SAliYca<k2>SAliYca
{#SAliYca#}¦ {%śāliñca, as,%} m. the creeper Achy-
ranthes Triandra (the leaves of which are used as a
vegetable).
<LEND>

<L>46562<pc>1003-a<k1>SAliYcI<k2>SAliYcI
{%Śāliñcī,%}¦ f. a kind of vegetable ({%= śaulpha,%} appa-
rently somewhat different from the above).
<LEND>

<L>46563<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlIna<k2>SAlIna
{#SAlIna#}¦ {%śālīna.%} See p. 1002, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>46564<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlu<k2>SAlu
{#SAlu#}¦ {%śālu, us,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
1. 5. fr. rt. {%śṝ,%} but in some senses connected with
rt. {%śal%}), a kind of astringent substance; a sort of
perfume (commonly called Chor); a frog [cf. {%śā-%}
{%lura%}]; ({%u%}), n. the root of the water-lily.
<LEND>

<L>46565<pc>1003-a<k1>SAluka<k2>SAluka
{%Śāluka, am,%}¦ n. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 42.
fr. rt. {%śal%}), the esculent root of the different kinds
of Nymphæa or water-lily.
<LEND>

<L>46566<pc>1003-a<k1>SAluqa<k2>SAluqa
{%Śāluḍa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a frog.
<LEND>

<L>46567<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlura<k2>SAlura
{%Śālura, as,%}¦ m. a frog.
<LEND>

<L>46568<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlUka<k2>SAlUka
{%Śālūka, as,%}¦ m. a frog; the root of the water-lily
(generally neut.); ({%am%}), n. the root of the water-lily,
(see above); the nutmeg ({%= jātī-phala%}).
<LEND>

<L>46569<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlUra<k2>SAlUra
{%Śālūra, as,%}¦ m. a frog.
<LEND>

<L>46570<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlottarIya<k2>SAlottarIya
{#SAlottarIya#}¦ {%śālottarīya, as,%} m. (for {%śālā-%}
{%turīya,%} q. v.?), N. of the grammarian Pāṇini, (this
word is given by Śabda-k. on the authority of the
Trikāṇḍa-śeṣa; it is said to be derived from {%śālā%}
{%+ uttarīya,%} and to account for this derivation a
legend is told that Pāṇini was expelled from the
house of his preceptor for his stupidity, and acquired
his subsequent scholarship by propitiating Śiva.)
<LEND>

<L>46571<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlmala<k2>SAlmala
{#SAlmala#}¦ {%śālmala, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%śal%} or {%śāl%}), the silk-cotton tree; the gum or resin
of the cotton tree ({%= moca-rasa%}); one of the Dvīpas
or divisions of the continent ({%= śālmali%} below).
{%—Śālamala-dvīpa, as,%} m. the Śālmala-dvīpa.
<LEND>

<L>46572<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlmali<k2>SAlmali
{%Śālmali, is,%}¦ m. f. the Seemul or silk-cotton tree,
Bombax Heptaphyllum, ({%kūṭa-śālmali,%} a fabulous
thorny rod of the cotton tree for torturing the wicked
in hell); one of the seven Dvīpas or great divisions
of the known continent (so called from the above
tree said to grow there; it is surrounded by the sea
of ghee or clarified butter); a kind of hell in which
the wicked are tormented with the thorns or prickles
of the Śālmali. {%—Śālmali-dvīpa, as,%} m. the Śāl-
mali-dvīpa. {%—Śālmali-pattraka, as,%} m. the Sapta-
cchada tree. {%—Śālmali-stha, as,%} m. ‘Śālmali-abid-
ing,’ epithet of Garuḍa.
<LEND>

<L>46573<pc>1003-a<k1>SAmalika<k2>SAmalika
{%Śāmalika, as,%}¦ m. the tree Andersonia Rohitaka;
({%am%}), n. an inferior kind of Śālmali tree.
<LEND>

<L>46574<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlmalin<k2>SAlmalin
{%Śālmalin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of Garuḍa, the bird and
vehicle of Viṣṇu; ({%inī%}), f. the silk-cotton tree.
<LEND>

<L>46575<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlmalI<k2>SAlmalI
{%Śālmalī,%}¦ f. {%= śālmali%} above; N. of a river in the
infernal regions (Manu IV. 90); of a hell, (see {%śāl-%}
{%mali%}); of one of the Śaktis of Viṣṇu. {%—Śālmalī-%}
{%kanda, as,%} m. the root of the Śālmali tree. {%—Śāl-%}
{%malī-phala, as,%} m. a particular plant or tree {%(=%}
{%tejaḥ-phala)%}. {%—Śālmalī-phalaka, am,%} n. a smooth
board of Śālmalī wood (used to wash clothes upon).
{%—Śālmalī-veṣṭa%} or {%śālmalī-veṣṭaka, as,%} m. the
gum or resin of the silk-cotton tree.
<LEND>

<L>46576<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlva<k2>SAlva
{#SAlva#}¦ {%śālva, as,%} m., N. of a country, (also
written {%sālva,%} q. v.); a king of the Śālvas; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a tribe (inhabiting Bhārata-varṣa).
{%—Śālva-pati, is,%} or {%śālva-rāja, as,%} or {%śālva-%}
{%rājan, ā,%} m. the king of the Śālvas.
<LEND>

<L>46577<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlvaRa<k2>SAlvaRa
{%Śālvaṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a class of herbs (used
medicinally for expelling wind).
<LEND>

<L>46578<pc>1003-a<k1>SAlveya<k2>SAlveya
{%Śālveya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the inhabitants of Śalva.
<LEND>

<L>46579<pc>1003-a<k1>SAva<k2>SAva
{#SAva#}¦ {%śāva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śava%}), cadaverous,
relating to a dead body, produced by or belonging
to a corpse; dead; of a cadaverous or dark yellowish
colour, tawny; relating to purification from the de-
filement caused by contact with a corpse or the death
[Page1003-b+ 77]
of a relation; ({%as%}), m. a dark yellowish or tawny
colour; the young of any animal, (in this sense pro-
bably connected with rt. {%śvi,%} cf. {%śiśu.%}) {%—Śāvāśauca%}
{%(˚va-aś˚), am,%} n. impurity caused by contact with
a dead body or by the death of a relation.
<LEND>

<L>46580<pc>1003-b<k1>SAvaka<k2>SAvaka
{%Śāvaka, as,%}¦ m. the young of any animal.
<LEND>

<L>46581<pc>1003-b<k1>SAvasAyana<k2>SAvasAyana
{%Śāvasāyana, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46582<pc>1003-b<k1>SAvara<k2>SAvara
{#SAvara#}¦ {%śāvara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śavara%}), relat-
ing to a savage or barbarian, barbarous; low, vile;
({%as%}), m. fault, offence; sin, wickedness; the Lodh
tree, {%= lodhra; (ī),%} f. cowach, Carpopogon Pruriens;
a sort of Prākṛt, (one of the five Vibhāṣās, said
to be that spoken by the Śavaras.) {%—Śāvara-%}
{%bhāṣya,%} see {%śābara-bh˚%}. {%—Śāvara-bhedākhya%}
{%(˚da-ākh˚), am,%} n. copper. {%—Śāvarotsava (˚ra-%}
{%ut˚), as,%} m. a festival observed by savage or bar-
barous tribes.
<LEND>

<L>46583<pc>1003-b<k1>SASadAna<k2>SASadAna
{#SASadAna#}¦ {%śāśadāna.%} See under rt. {%śad.%}
<LEND>

<L>46584<pc>1003-b<k1>SASvata<k2>SASvata
{#SASvata#}¦ {%śāśvata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śaśvat%}),
eternal, constant, perpetual; all; about to happen,
future; ({%as%}), m., N. of Vyāsa; of Śiva; of a king;
of the author of the Nānārtha-koṣa; the sun; ({%ī%}),
f. the earth; ({%am%}), n. heaven, ether; ({%am%}), ind.
constantly, perpetually, eternally.
<LEND>

<L>46585<pc>1003-b<k1>SASvatika<k2>SASvatika
{%Śāśvatika, as, ī, am,%}¦ eternal, constant, per-
petual, permanent.
<LEND>

<L>46586<pc>1003-b<k1>SASvasat<k2>SASvasat
{#SASvasat#}¦ {%śāśvasat, at, atī, at%} (fr. Intens.
of rt. {%śvas%}), Ved. breathing repeatedly, panting, con-
stantly snorting (said of the horses of Indra).
<LEND>

<L>46587<pc>1003-b<k1>SAzkula<k2>SAzkula
{#SAzkula#}¦ {%śāṣkula, as, ī, am%} (said to be an
anom. form for {%śauṣkala%} fr. {%śuṣkala%}), eating
flesh or fish.
<LEND>

<L>46588<pc>1003-b<k1>SAzkulika<k2>SAzkulika
{#SAzkulika#}¦ {%śāṣkulika, am,%} n. (fr. {%śaṣ-%}
{%kulī%}), a quantity of baked cakes or pastry.
<LEND>

<L>46589<pc>1003-b<k1>SAs<k2>SAs<h>1
{#SAs#} 1¦. {%śās%} (connected with rt. {%śaṃs%}),
cl. 2. P. {%śāsti%} (Ved. and ep. also A.
{%śāste;%} ep. also cl. 1. P. {%śāsati;%} in some forms {%śās%} is
changed to {%śis%} and this again to {%śiṣ,%} e. g. Pres. P. 1st
du. {%śiṣvas,%} 2nd du. {%śiṣṭhas,%} 3rd pl. {%śāsati,%} Impf.
2nd and 3rd sing. {%aśāt,%} Impv. 2nd sing. {%śādhi,%}
Ved. {%śiśādhi%}), {%śaśāsa, śāsiṣyati, aśiṣat,%} (Ved.
form {%śāstana,%} Ṛg-veda X. 52, 1), {%śāsitum,%} to rule,
govern, command, order, direct, control; to enact,
decree; to train, instruct, inform, teach (with two
acc.); to report, proclaim [cf. rt. {%śaṃs%}]; to correct,
punish, chide; (Ved. A.) to implore, wish, desire
[cf. {%ā-śās, ā-śaṃs%}]; Pass. {%śiṣyate,%} to be taught;
to learn [cf. {%śiṣyate%} under rt. 2. {%śiṣ%}]: Caus.
{%śāsayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśaśāsat,%} to correct, punish:
Desid. {%śiśāsiṣati:%} Intens. {%śeśiṣyate, śāśāsti.%}
<LEND>

<L>46590<pc>1003-b<k1>SAs<k2>SAs<h>2
2. {%śās, ās,%}¦ m. (connected with rt. {%śaṃs%}), Ved.
one who recites, a reciter, repeater [cf. {%uktha-śās%}];
a worshipper.
<LEND>

<L>46591<pc>1003-b<k1>SAsa<k2>SAsa
{%Śāsa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. order, command, (Sāy. {%= śā-%}
{%sana,%} Ṛg-veda I. 68, 5); praise, hymn of praise,
(Sāy. {%= stuti;%} in this sense connected with rt. {%śaṃs%});
N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi (having the patronymic Bhāra-
dhvāja, and author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 152);
epithet of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 152.
<LEND>

<L>46592<pc>1003-b<k1>SAsaka<k2>SAsaka
{%Śāsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ a ruler, governor; a chastiser.
<LEND>

<L>46593<pc>1003-b<k1>SAsat<k2>SAsat
{%Śāsat, at, atī, at%}¦ (the nom. m. follows the rule for
cl. 3), ruling, regulating, governing, commanding.
<LEND>

<L>46594<pc>1003-b<k1>SAsana<k2>SAsana
{%Śāsana, as, ī, am,%}¦ one who instructs, instructing,
directing, &c.; ({%ī%}), f., Ved. an instructress; ({%am%}),
n. the act of governing, ruling, government; an
order, edict, enactment, decree, command, direction;
the act of instructing, instruction, discipline; a pre-
cept; a royal grant, charter (usually a grant of land
or of particular privileges, and frequently inscribed on
stone or copper); a writing, deed, written contract or
agreement; any written book or work of authority,
scripture; the control or government of the passions,
self-control, devotion. {%—Śāsana-dūṣaka, as, ikā,%}
{%am,%} disobeying the command of a king. {%—Śāsana-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. ‘edict-plate,’ a plate of copper or of
stone on which an edict or grant is inscribed; a sheet
of paper on which an order is written. {%—Śāsana- %}
[Page1003-c+ 81]
{%hara, as,%} m. a command-bearer, one bearing an
edict, a royal messenger. {%—Śāsana-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
bearing commands; ({%ī%}), m. a messenger, envoy.
{%—Śāsanātivṛtti (˚na-at˚), is,%} f. the transgression
of a command.
<LEND>

<L>46595<pc>1003-c<k1>SAsanIya<k2>SAsanIya
{%Śāsanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be governed or directed;
to be corrected, deserving punishment, punishable.
<LEND>

<L>46596<pc>1003-c<k1>SAsita<k2>SAsita
{%Śāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ governed, ruled, directed;
corrected, punished.
<LEND>

<L>46597<pc>1003-c<k1>SAsitavya<k2>SAsitavya
{%Śāsitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be governed; to be
ordered; to be corrected.
<LEND>

<L>46598<pc>1003-c<k1>SAsitf<k2>SAsitf
{%Śāsitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ ruling, governing; ordering,
commanding; one who rules or governs, a governor,
commander.
<LEND>

<L>46599<pc>1003-c<k1>SAsin<k2>SAsin
{%Śāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ ruling, directing, controlling;
correcting.
<LEND>

<L>46600<pc>1003-c<k1>SAsu<k2>SAsu
{%Śāsu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. a governor, ruler [cf. {%śāstṛ%}];
a command, (Sāy. {%= śāsanam.%})
<LEND>

<L>46601<pc>1003-c<k1>SAsti<k2>SAsti
{%Śāsti, is,%}¦ f. governing, ruling, ordering; a com-
mand, order; correction, punishment; a punishment
inflicted by royal command; a sceptre.
<LEND>

<L>46602<pc>1003-c<k1>SAstf<k2>SAstf
{%Śāstṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who rules or governs or
corrects; a ruler, governor, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda. I. 60, 2.
{%śāsuḥ = śāsituḥ,%} gen. c. ‘of a ruler’); teaching, in-
structing; ({%tā%}), m. a ruler, governor, king; a father;
a teacher, master, instructor; a Buddha or Jina or
the deified teacher of either of these sects. {%—Śāstṛ-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of a ruler, &c.; governing,
chastising.
<LEND>

<L>46603<pc>1003-c<k1>SAstra<k2>SAstra
{%Śāstra, am,%}¦ n. ‘an instrument of directing or
teaching,’ an order, command, rule, precept, institute;
religious or scientific treatise, any sacred book or
composition of divine or standard authority (applica-
ble even to the Veda, and said to be of fourteen or
even eighteen kinds, see under {%vidyā;%} the word
{%śāstra%} is often found at the end of a comp. after the
word denoting the subject of the book, or applied
collectively to whole departments of knowledge,
e. g. {%Vedānta-ś˚,%} a work on the Vedānta philosophy
or the whole body of teaching on that subject;
{%dharma-ś˚,%} a law-book or whole body of written
laws; {%kāvya-ś˚,%} a poetical work or poetry in general;
{%śilpi-ś˚,%} works on the mechanical arts; {%kāma-ś˚,%}
erotic compositions; {%alaṅkāra-ś˚,%} rhetoric, &c.);
a book, treatise, body of teaching (in general),
scripture, science. {%—Śāstra-kṛt, t,%} m. the author
of a Śāstra; a writer or author (in general); a
Ṛṣi or sage (as the author of sacred works). {%—Śās-%}
{%tra-kovida, as, ā, am,%} skilled in sacred works.
{%—Śāstra-gaṇḍa, as,%} m. a superficial reader of
books; a general reader {%(= praghaṭā-vid)%}. {%—Śās-%}
{%tra-cakṣus, us,%} n. ‘the eye of science,’ grammer.
{%—Śāstra-cāraṇa, as, ā, am,%} skilled in the Śāstras,
well-versed in sacred works or sciences. {%—Śāstra-%}
{%jña, as, ā, am,%} knowing sacred works, acquainted
with the Śāstras; knowing books; a mere theorist.
{%—Śāstrajña-tā,%} f. or {%śāstrajña-tva, am,%} n. know-
ledge of sacred works, acquaintance with the Śāstras.
{%—Śāstra-jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge of sacred works,
knowledge derived from the study of the Śāstras.
{%—Śāstra-tattva, am,%} n. the truth (taught) in sacred
works, the truth of the Śāstras. {%—Śāstratattva-jña,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} understanding the truth (as taught in)
sacred works; ({%as%}), m. an astronomer, astrologer.
{%—Śāstra-tas,%} ind. according to the Śāstras, accord-
ing to sacred precept or law. {%—Śāstra-darśin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} seeing or knowing the Śāstras, skilled in
sacred works or sciences. {%—Śāstra-dīpikā,%} f., N. of
a commentary on the Nyāya-sūtras by Pārtha-sārathi.
{%—Śāstra-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} seen in the Śāstras,
stated in sacred works or in books treating of any
science. {%—Śāstra-nindā,%} f. reviling or denying the
authority of sacred works. {%—Śāstra-prasaṅga, as,%}
m. the subject of the Śāstras; the discussion of
sacred works. {%—Śāstra-yoni, is,%} m. the source of the
Śāstras. {%—Śāstrayoni-tva, am,%} n. the state of
being the source of the Śāstras. {%—Śāstra-vaktṛ,%}
{%tā,%} m. one who expounds sacred books. {%—1. śāstra-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like the sacred writings, conformably or
according to written authority. {%—2. śāstra-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having or following sacred institutes, skilled
[Page1004-a+ 79]
in sacred writings. {%—Śāstra-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing
the Śāstras, understanding or conversant with the
scriptures, skilled in sacred sciences. {%—Śāstra-vi-%}
{%dhāna, am,%} n. or {%śāstra-vidhi, is,%} m. scripture-
precept, sacred ritual, ceremonial injunction. {%—Śās-%}
{%travidhānokta (˚na-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} prescribed by
scriptural precept or sacred injunction. {%—Śāstra-%}
{%vipratiṣiddha, as, ā, am,%} forbidden by the Śās-
tras, contrary to the scriptures, illegal. {%—Śāstra-vi-%}
{%pratiṣedha, as,%} m. opposition to the Śāstras, any
act contrary to sacred precept or scriptural injunction.
{%—Śāstra-vimukha, as, ī, am,%} disinclined to learn-
ing, averse from study. {%—Śāstra-viruddha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} opposed to the Śāstras, contrary to law or reli-
gious precept. {%—Śāstra-virodha, as,%} m. opposition
to sacred precept; mutual contradiction of books,
incompatibility of different works. {%—Śāstra-vyut-%}
{%patti, is,%} f. perfect conversancy with sacred writings.
{%—Śāstra-śilpin, ī,%} m. the country of Kaśmīra;
({%inas%}), m. pl. the people of Kaśmīra (commonly
called Cashmere). {%—Śāstra-siddha, as, ā, am,%}
established by the Śāstras, proved by sacred works.
{%—Śāstrācaraṇa (˚ra-āc˚), am,%} n. the study of
the Śāstras; ({%as%}), m. one versed in the scriptures or
well read in sacred works; a student of the Vedas
or one whose conduct is regulated by their precepts;
a Pandit. {%—Śāstrātikrama (˚ra-at˚), as,%} m. trans-
gressing the Śāstras, violation of sacred precepts.
{%—Śāstrānanuṣṭhāna (˚ra-an˚), am,%} n. non-
performance of sacred precept, disregard of the
authority of religious books. {%—Śāstrānuṣṭhāna%}
{%(˚ra-an˚), am,%} n. observance of the Śāstras, con-
forming to sacred law or ritual; applying one's self
to books. {%—Śāstrānuṣṭhita (˚ra-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
established or authorized by the Śāstras, obeying or
following sacred institutes. {%—Śāstrānusāra (˚ra-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. conformity to the Śāstras, following
sacred ordinances. {%—Śāstrābhijña (˚ra-abh˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} learned in sacred works, versed in the Śās-
tras. {%—Śāstrārtha (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. the object or
purport of a book, the meaning of a sacred precept,
a precept or direction of the Śāstras or of any parti-
cular Śāstra, a scriptural statement or dogma. {%—Śās-%}
{%trokta (˚ra-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} declared or enjoined
by the Śāstras, declared in works of sacred authority,
said in a book.
<LEND>

<L>46604<pc>1004-a<k1>SAstrita<k2>SAstrita
{%Śāstrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ treated according to the
Śāstras. {%—Śāstritārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as,%} m. a scien-
tifically treated subject.
<LEND>

<L>46605<pc>1004-a<k1>SAstrin<k2>SAstrin
{%Śāstrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having or following sacred
works, versed in the Śāstras, skilled in books; ({%ī%}),
m. a teacher of sacred science; a learned man, one
who has studied the Śāstras.
<LEND>

<L>46606<pc>1004-a<k1>SAstrIya<k2>SAstrIya
{%Śāstrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ scriptural, authorized by or
conformable to sacred precept, agreeable to sacred
institutes, legal.
<LEND>

<L>46607<pc>1004-a<k1>SAsya<k2>SAsya
{%Śāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be governed or regulated,
to be ordained or prescribed by law; to be corrected;
punishable, deserving chastisement or punishment,
corrigible.
<LEND>

<L>46608<pc>1004-a<k1>Sizwa<k2>Sizwa
{%Śiṣṭa, śiṣya,%}¦ &c. See under 2. {%śiṣṭa,%} p. 1009.
<LEND>

<L>46609<pc>1004-a<k1>SAsa<k2>SAsa
{#SAsa#}¦ {%śāsa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%śas%}), Ved.
‘destroyer,’ epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>46610<pc>1004-a<k1>SAha<k2>SAha
{#SAha#}¦ {%śāha,%} N. of a country (belonging to
Kaśmīra).
<LEND>

<L>46611<pc>1004-a<k1>SAhi<k2>SAhi
{%Śāhi, is,%}¦ m., N. of a dynasty.
<LEND>

<L>46612<pc>1004-a<k1>Si<k2>Si<h>1
{#Si#} 1¦. {%śi%} (closely connected with rt. {%śo%}),
cl. 5. P. A. {%śinoti, śinute%} (Ved. also cl. 3.
A. {%śiśīte%}), {%śiśāya, śiśye, śeṣyati, -te, aśaiṣīt,%}
{%aśeṣṭa, śetum,%} to sharpen, whet; to make sharp
or thin, attenuate; to excite; to be sharp; to be
attentive: Caus. {%śāyayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśīśayat:%}
Desid. {%śiśīṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%śeśīyate, śeśayīti,%}
{%śeśeti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κί-ω, κί-νυ-μαι, κἰνέ-ω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ci-o,</nsi>
<nsi>ci-e-o, ci-tu-s, excito, incito;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>koja.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46613<pc>1004-a<k1>Si<k2>Si<h>2
2. {%śi, is,%}¦ m. an epithet of Śiva; auspiciousness,
good fortune; peace, composure, calm.
<LEND>

<L>46614<pc>1004-a<k1>Sita<k2>Sita
{%Śita, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%śāta,%} fr. rt. {%śo%}], sharpened,
whetted; attenuated, thin, emaciated, wasted, de-
[Page1004-b+ 74]
clined; weak, feeble. {%—Śita-tā,%} f. or {%śita-tva, am,%}
n. sharpness. {%—Śita-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} sharp-edged.
{%—Śita-śara, as,%} m. a sharp arrow. {%—Śita-śarā-%}
{%bhīta (˚ra-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} surrounded or encom-
passed with sharp arrows. {%—Śita-sūka, as,%} m. ‘sharp-
bearded,’ barley; wheat. {%—Śitāgra (˚ta-ag˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} sharp-pointed; ({%as%}), m. a thorn. {%—Śitāstra-bhṛt%}
{%(˚ta-as˚), t,%} m. bearing sharp weapons. {%—Śiteṣu (˚ta-%}
{%iṣu), us,%} m. a sharp arrow. {%—Śitodā,%} f. {%= śītodā.%}
<LEND>

<L>46615<pc>1004-b<k1>SitvA<k2>SitvA
{%Śitvā,%}¦ ind. having sharpened, having whetted.
<LEND>

<L>46616<pc>1004-b<k1>SiSAna<k2>SiSAna
{%Śiśāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sharpening, making
sharp, (Sāy. {%= tīkṣṇī-kurvat.%})
<LEND>

<L>46617<pc>1004-b<k1>Si<k2>Si<h>3
{#Si#} 3¦. {%śi,%} (in grammar) a technical term
for the case-ending {%i,%} substituted for {%jas%} and {%śas%} in
neuters.
<LEND>

<L>46618<pc>1004-b<k1>SiMSapA<k2>SiMSapA
{#SiMSapA#}¦ {%śiṃśapā%} or (according to some)
{%śiṃśipā,%} f. the tree Dalbergia Sisu; the Aśoka tree.
<LEND>

<L>46619<pc>1004-b<k1>SiMSumAra<k2>SiMSumAra
{#SiMSumAra#}¦ {%śiṃśumāra, as,%} m., Ved. a por-
poise ({%= śiśu-māra%}).
<LEND>

<L>46620<pc>1004-b<k1>SiMh<k2>SiMh
{#SiMh#}¦ {%śiṃh%} = rt. {%śiṅgh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46621<pc>1004-b<k1>SiMhARa<k2>SiMhARa
{%Śiṃhāṇa, śiṃhāṇaka, = śiṅghāṇa,%}¦ &c.
<LEND>

<L>46622<pc>1004-b<k1>Sikku<k2>Sikku
{#Sikku#}¦ {%śikku, us, us, u,%} idle, lazy, following
no business or profession.
<LEND>

<L>46623<pc>1004-b<k1>SikTa<k2>SikTa
{#SikTa#}¦ {%śiktha%} or {%śikthaka, am,%} n. bee's
wax, (also written {%sikthaka,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>46624<pc>1004-b<k1>Sikya<k2>Sikya
{#Sikya#}¦ {%śikya, am, ā,%} n. f. (according to
Uṇādi-s. V. 16. fr. {%śi%} substituted for rt. {%sraṃs,%} cf.
{%śic%}), a kind of loop or swing made of rope and
suspended from either end of a pole or yoke to
receive a load; the burden or load so carried; a sort
of hanging-shelf suspended by strings; the strings of
a balance. {%—Śikyādhāra (˚yā-ādh˚), as,%} m. ‘loop-
holder,’ the hook or eye at each end of a pole or
beam for holding the above looped cord or for hold-
ing the strings of a balance.
<LEND>

<L>46625<pc>1004-b<k1>Sikyita<k2>Sikyita
{%Śikyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed or carried in the above
loop, suspended in a swing or loop made of cord, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46626<pc>1004-b<k1>Sikvan<k2>Sikvan
{#Sikvan#}¦ {%śikvan%} (perhaps connected with
{%śikya%} above), Ved. a rope, cord, (Sāy. {%śikvabhiḥ =%}
{%rajjubhiḥ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 141, 8.)
<LEND>

<L>46627<pc>1004-b<k1>Sikvas<k2>Sikvas
{#Sikvas#}¦ {%śikvas%} (connected with rt. 1. {%śak%}),
Ved. mighty, powerful, able, (Sāy. {%śikvasaḥ = śak-%}
{%tāḥ,%} Ṛg-veda V. 52, 16; {%śikvase = śaktāya,%} Ṛg-
veda X. 92, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>46628<pc>1004-b<k1>Sikz<k2>Sikz
{#Sikz#}¦ {%śikṣ%} (properly Desid. of rt. 1. {%śak,%}
q. v., but regarded by some as a separate rt.), cl. 1. A.
{%śikṣate,%} Aor. {%aśikṣiṣṭa, śikṣitum,%} to learn,
acquire knowledge; to teach (Ved.); to give (P.,
Ved., see rt. 1. {%śak%}): Pass. {%śikṣyate,%} Aor. {%aśikṣi:%}
Caus. {%śikṣayati, -te,%} Aor. {%aśiśikṣat, -ta,%} to teach,
&c., (see rt. 1. {%śak,%} p. 985.)
<LEND>

<L>46629<pc>1004-b<k1>Sikzaka<k2>Sikzaka
{%Śikṣaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} a learner; a teacher,
instructor, (in this sense fr. Caus.); one who knows
Śikṣā or the science of euphony, (see below.)
<LEND>

<L>46630<pc>1004-b<k1>SikzaRa<k2>SikzaRa
{%Śikṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of learning, acquiring
knowledge; teaching, instruction (fr. Caus.).
<LEND>

<L>46631<pc>1004-b<k1>SikzaRIya<k2>SikzaRIya
{%Śikṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be learnt; to be taught
(fr. Caus.).
<LEND>

<L>46632<pc>1004-b<k1>Sikzat<k2>Sikzat
{%Śikṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. teaching, instructing.
<LEND>

<L>46633<pc>1004-b<k1>SikzamARa<k2>SikzamARa
{%Śikṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. learning; ({%as%}),
m. a learner, pupil.
<LEND>

<L>46634<pc>1004-b<k1>Sikzayitf<k2>Sikzayitf
{%Śikṣayitṛ, tā,%}¦ m. (fr. Caus.), an instructor,
teacher.
<LEND>

<L>46635<pc>1004-b<k1>SikzayitvA<k2>SikzayitvA
{%Śikṣayitvā,%}¦ ind. having taught, having instructed.
<LEND>

<L>46636<pc>1004-b<k1>SikzA<k2>SikzA
{%Śikṣā,%}¦ f. desire of being able to effect anything,
wish to prevail (Kirāt. XV. 37); learning, study,
the acquisition of knowledge; teaching, instruction,
training, discipline; the science which teaches proper
pronunciation and especially the laws of euphony
peculiar to the Veda, (one of the six Vedāṅgas; see
{%vedāṅga%}); modesty, humility, diffidence; giving,
bestowing (Ved., see rt. 1. {%śak%}); the plant Bignonia
Indica. {%—Śikṣā-kara, as, ī, am,%} instruction-caus-
ing, instruction-giving; ({%as%}), m. a teacher, instructor;
[Page1004-c+ 78]
epithet of Vyāsa. {%—Śikṣā-guru, us,%} m. a religious
preceptor, teacher. {%—Śikṣā-nara, as,%} m., Ved. the
chief or foremost in liberality; epithet of Indra,
(Sāy. {%= dānasya netā.%}) {%—Śikṣā-śakti, is,%} f.
‘power of learning,’ dexterity, skill. {%—Śikṣā-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a section in the Kātantra treating of
the pronunciation of letters.
<LEND>

<L>46637<pc>1004-c<k1>SikzARa<k2>SikzARa
{%Śikṣāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ learning, acquiring knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>46638<pc>1004-c<k1>Sikzita<k2>Sikzita
{%Śikṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ learnt, studied; instructed,
taught (with acc., e. g. {%śikṣito nṛtyam,%} instructed
in dancing); disciplined, exercised, trained, tamed,
tame; docile; skilful, clever, conversant; modest, diffi-
dent. {%—Śikṣitākṣara (˚ta-ak˚), as,%} m. one who is
taught letters or literature, a pupil, scholar. {%—Śikṣi-%}
{%tāyudha (˚ta-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} skilled in weapons.
<LEND>

<L>46639<pc>1004-c<k1>Sikzitavya<k2>Sikzitavya
{%Śikṣitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be learnt; to be in-
structed or taught.
<LEND>

<L>46640<pc>1004-c<k1>SikzitvA<k2>SikzitvA
{%Śikṣitvā,%}¦ ind. having learnt; having instructed.
<LEND>

<L>46641<pc>1004-c<k1>Sikzin<k2>Sikzin
{%Śikṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ learning; instructing.
<LEND>

<L>46642<pc>1004-c<k1>Sikzu<k2>Sikzu
{%Śikṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of learning, one who
wishes to learn.
<LEND>

<L>46643<pc>1004-c<k1>Sikzya<k2>Sikzya
{%Śikṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be learnt; to be trained
or taught, teachable.
<LEND>

<L>46644<pc>1004-c<k1>SikzyamARa<k2>SikzyamARa
{%Śikṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being learnt; being
taught; ({%as%}), m. a pupil.
<LEND>

<L>46645<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKa<k2>SiKa
{#SiKa#}¦ {%śikha, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a serpent
priest; [cf. {%anu-śikha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46646<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKaka<k2>SiKaka
{%Śikhaka, as,%}¦ m. (according to Śabda-k. {%= lekha-%}
{%ka%}), a writer, scribe.
<LEND>

<L>46647<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKaRqa<k2>SiKaRqa
{#SiKaRqa#}¦ {%śikhaṇḍa, as,%} m. (connected with
{%śikhā,%} q. v.), a tuft or lock of hair left on the crown
or sides of the head at tonsure; any crest or plume
or tuft; the tail of a peacock.
<LEND>

<L>46648<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKaRqaka<k2>SiKaRqaka
{%Śikhaṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a tuft or lock of hair left
on the crown of the head at tonsure; three or five
locks left on the side of the head (especially in men
of the military class, {%= kāka-pakṣa%}); a curl or
ringlet; any crest or tuft; a peacock's tail, (in this
sense {%am,%} n. according to Śabda-k.)
<LEND>

<L>46649<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKaRqika<k2>SiKaRqika
{%Śikhaṇḍika, as,%}¦ m. a cock; ({%ā%}), f. a tuft or lock
of hair on the crown of the head.
<LEND>

<L>46650<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKaRqita<k2>SiKaRqita
{%Śikhaṇḍita, am,%}¦ n. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>46651<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKaRqin<k2>SiKaRqin
{%Śikhaṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crested, tufted; ({%ī%}), m. a pea-
cock; a peacock's tail; a cock; an arrow; a kind of
yellow jasmine; the plant Abrus Precatorius; N. of
Viṣṇu; of a Ṛṣi or Muni (one of the seven stars
of the Great Bear, cf. {%citra-śikhaṇḍin%}); N. of a son of
Drupada (enemy of Bhīṣma and born as a female);
of a mountain; ({%inī%}), f. a pea-hen; a kind of jasmine
({%= yūthikā%}); the shrub Abrus Precatorius; N. of the
daughter of Drupada (afterwards changed to a male, see
above); N. of two Apsarases (daughters of Kaśyapa and
regarded as the authoresses of Ṛg-veda IX. 104).
<LEND>

<L>46652<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKARqaka<k2>SiKARqaka
{%Śikhāṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a tuft or lock of hair on the
top or side of the head ({%= śikhaṇḍaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>46653<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKara<k2>SiKara
{#SiKara#}¦ {%śikhara.%} See p. 1005, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>46654<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKalohita<k2>SiKalohita
{#SiKalohita#}¦ {%śikhalohita, as,%} m. a plant
(commonly called {%kukura-muḍā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46655<pc>1004-c<k1>SiKA<k2>SiKA
{#SiKA#}¦ {%śikhā,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-s. V.
24. fr. rt. 1. {%śī;%} probably connected with rt. 1. {%śi%}),
a sharp end, point, spike, peak, pinnacle, projection,
top, summit, end or point (in general); the end or
point of a garment; a crest, top-knot, tuft, plume,
lock of hair on the crown of the head; a peacock's
crest or comb; a pointed flame, flame (in general);
the point or tip of the foot; a ray of light; a fibrous
root, root (in general); a branch which takes root,
any branch; the head or chief of anything, principal
thing, acme; a kind of metre; a particular plant
({%= lāṅgalikī%}); the fever or excitement of love;
[cf. Hib. <nsi>sigh,</nsi> ‘a hill.’] {%—Śikhā-kanda, am,%} n. a
kind of onion or turnip {%(= gṛñjana)%}. {%—Śikhā-jaṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who wears a lock of hair in a knot
on the top of the head. {%—Śikhā-taru, us,%} m.
‘flame-tree,’ a lamp-stand, candlestick. {%—Śikhā-%}
{%dāman, a,%} n. a garland at the top of the head.
{%—Śikhā-dhara, as, ā, am,%} having a sharp end or
point, pointed, crested, having a top-knot; ({%as%}), m.
[Page1005-a+ 81]
a peacock; epithet of a particular Jaina or Buddhist
deified saint {%(= mañju-ghoṣa)%}. {%—Śikhādhara-ja,%}
‘peacock-produced,’ a peacock's feather. {%—Śikhā-%}
{%dhāra, as,%} m. ‘crest-wearer,’ a peacock. {%—Śikhā-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. a crest-gem, jewel worn on the head.
{%—Śikhā-mūla, am,%} n. ‘tuft-root,’ any root having
a tuft of leaves; a carrot; a turnip. {%—1. śikhā-vat,%}
ind. like a crest. {%—2. śikhā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
a point, pointed, wearing a crest, crested; possessing
flame, flaming; ({%ān%}), m. epithet of fire; a lamp;
the personified descending node; a particular plant
or tree {%(= citraka); (atī),%} f. a kind of plant, cock's
comb; another plant {%(= mūrvā)%}. {%—Śikhā-vara,%}
{%as,%} m. the jack fruit tree, Artocarpus Integrifolia {%(=%}
{%panasa)%}. {%—Śikhā-vala, as, ā, am,%} having a point,
pointed, having a crest, crested; ({%as%}), m. a peacock;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant, cock's comb, Celosia Cristata.
{%—Śikhā-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. ‘flame-tree,’ a lamp-stand,
candlestick. {%—Śikhā-vṛddhi, is,%} f. ‘crest-interest,’
a kind of usurious interest increasing daily, (see
{%vṛddhy-ājīva.%}) {%—Śikhā-sūtra, am,%} n. the lock of
hair on the head and the sacred thread (regarded as the
distinguishing marks of the Brāhmanical caste).
<LEND>

<L>46656<pc>1005-a<k1>SiKara<k2>SiKara
{%Śikhara, as, am,%}¦ m. n. point, peak, top, summit,
end, pinnacle, spire, turret; the peak or summit of a
mountain; the top of a tree; the edge or point of
a sword; erection of the hair of the body, bristling
of the hair; the armpit; a particular position of
the fingers or hands; a ruby-like gem (of a bright
red colour said to resemble ripe pomegranate seed);
the bud of the Arabian jasmine; N. of a weapon;
({%ā%}), f. a plant from the fibres of which bow-strings
are made, Sanseviera Roxburghiana {%(= mūrvā).%}
{%—Śikhara-nicaya, as,%} m. a collection of mountain
peaks. {%—Śikhara-vāsinī,%} f. ‘dwelling on a peak (of
the Himālaya),’ epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>46657<pc>1005-a<k1>SiKarin<k2>SiKarin
{%Śikharin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ pointed, peaked, crested,
tufted; resembling the buds of the Arabian jasmine;
({%ī%}), m. a mountain; a hill-fort, stronghold; a tree;
the plant Achyranthes Aspera ({%= apāmārga%}); the
lapwing; ({%iṇī%}), f. an eminent or excellent woman,
a kind of Atyaṣṭi metre, four times ˘¯¯¯¯¯˘˘
˘˘˘¯¯˘˘˘¯; a line of hair extending across
the navel; a dish of curds and sugar with spices; a
kind of vine; the plant Sanseviera ({%= mūrvā%}); Arabian
jasmine; N. of various other plants {%(= vandāka; =%}
{%kunduruka; = yāvanāla)%}. {%—Śikhari-sama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} equal to a mountain, mountain-like.
<LEND>

<L>46658<pc>1005-a<k1>SiKAlu<k2>SiKAlu
{%Śikhālu, us,%}¦ m. a peacock's crest; cock's comb,
Celosia Cristata.
<LEND>

<L>46659<pc>1005-a<k1>SiKin<k2>SiKin
{%Śikhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ pointed, crested, peaked, having
a tuft or lock of hair on the top of the head; proud;
({%ī%}), m. a peacock; a cock; an arrow; a tree; fire; a
symbolical expression for the number three (from
the three fires); a lamp; a bull; a horse; a moun-
tain; a Brāhman; a religious mendicant; epithet
of Ketu, the personified descending node; a par-
ticular tree ({%= citraka%}); various other plants, {%=%}
{%aja-loman; = methikā; = sitāvara; (inī),%} f. a
pea-hen; cock's comb, Celosia Cristata. {%—Śikhi-%}
{%kaṇṭha%} or {%śikhi-grīva, am,%} n. blue vitriol or sul-
phate of copper (said to be so called because coloured
like a peacock's neck). {%—Śikhi-tīrtha, am,%} n., N.
of a Tīrtha. {%—Śikhi-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘fire-marked,’
smoke; ‘peacock-marked,’ epithet of Kārttikeya
[cf. {%śikhi-vāhana%}]. {%—Śikhidhvaja-tīrtha, am,%} n.,
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Śikhi-piccha%} or {%śikhi-puccha,%}
{%am,%} n. a peacock's tail. {%—Śikhi-priya, as,%} m. ‘pea-
cock-loved,’ a tree {%(= laghu-badara)%}. {%—Śikhi-maṇ-%}
{%ḍala, as,%} m. Cratæva Roxburghii {%(= varuṇa)%}. {%—Śi-%}
{%khi-modā,%} f. ‘peacock's joy,’ a plant {%(= aja-modā).%}
{%—Śikhi-yūpa, as,%} m. an antelope {%(= śrī-kārin).%}
{%—Śikhi-vardhaka, as,%} m. ‘peacock-nourisher,’ a
pumpkin, gourd. {%—Śikhi-vāsas,%} N. of a mythical
mountain, (Viṣṇu-Purāṇa II. 2.) {%—Śikhi-vāhana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having a peacock for his vehicle,’ epithet of
Kārttikeya, (this god being represented riding on
a peacock.) {%—Śikhi-vrata, am,%} n. a particular
religious observance. {%—Śikhi-śikhā,%} f. a peacock's
crest; ‘fire-peak,’ a flame. {%—Śikhi-śekhara, am,%} n. a
peacock's crest.
<LEND>
[Page1005-b+ 73]

<L>46660<pc>1005-b<k1>Sigru<k2>Sigru
{#Sigru#}¦ {%śigru, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%śi%}),
a kind of tree, Hyperanthera Moringa (the root of
which is used like horse-radish, see {%śobhāñjana%}); a
pot-herb in general; ({%avas%}), m. pl., N. of a people
(Ved.). {%—Śigru-ja, as, ā, am,%} growing on or pro-
duced by the Moringa; ({%am%}), n. the seed of the
Moringa. {%—Śigru-mūla, am,%} n. the pungent root
of the Moringa. {%—Śigru-vīja, am,%} n. the seed of
the Moringa.
<LEND>

<L>46661<pc>1005-b<k1>Sigruka<k2>Sigruka
{%Śigruka, as,%}¦ m. {%= śigru,%} a particular plant or
pot-herb, (Manu VI. 14.)
<LEND>

<L>46662<pc>1005-b<k1>SiNK<k2>SiNK
{#SiNK#}¦ {%śiṅkh,%} cl. 1. P. {%śiṅkhati,%} &c., to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>46663<pc>1005-b<k1>SiNgAmbikA<k2>SiNgAmbikA
{#SiNgAmbikA#}¦ {%śiṅgāmbikā,%} f. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46664<pc>1005-b<k1>SiNG<k2>SiNG
{#SiNG#}¦ {%śiṅgh%} (sometimes written {%śiṃh,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. P. {%śiṅghati, śiśiṅgha,%}
{%śiṅghitum,%} to perceive by the nose, smell; [cf. {%upa-%}
{%śiṅgh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46665<pc>1005-b<k1>SiNGARa<k2>SiNGARa
{%Śiṅghāṇa, as,%}¦ m. (also written {%śiṃhāṇa, siṃhāṇa%}),
froth, foam; phlegm; a kind of sauce or gruel ({%=%}
{%picchila?%}); the sperm of an alligator, {%= nakra-%}
{%retas; (am),%} n. the mucus of the nose; rust of
iron; a glass vessel ({%= kāca-pātra%}).
<LEND>

<L>46666<pc>1005-b<k1>SiNGARaka<k2>SiNGARaka
{%Śiṅghāṇaka, as,%}¦ m. phlegm; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
the mucus of the nose.
<LEND>

<L>46667<pc>1005-b<k1>SiNGita<k2>SiNGita
{%Śiṅghita, as, ā, am,%}¦ perceived by the nose,
smelled.
<LEND>

<L>46668<pc>1005-b<k1>SiNGin<k2>SiNGin
{%Śiṅghin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ smelling; [cf. {%siṅghinī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46669<pc>1005-b<k1>Sic<k2>Sic
{#Sic#}¦ {%śic, k,%} f. ({%= śikya,%} q. v.), the string
or cord of a pole or yoke for carrying burdens.
<LEND>

<L>46670<pc>1005-b<k1>SijAra<k2>SijAra
{#SijAra#}¦ {%śijāra, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46671<pc>1005-b<k1>SiYj<k2>SiYj
{#SiYj#}¦ {%śiñj,%} cl. 2. A. {%śiṅkte%} (according
to Vopa-deva also cl. 1. 10. A. {%śiñjate,%}
{%śiñjayate%}), {%śiśiñje, śiñjitum,%} to tinkle, rattle,
jingle; to snort, roar, bellow (Ved.); to whisper
(Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>46672<pc>1005-b<k1>SiYja<k2>SiYja
{%Śiñja, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. tinkle, jingle, a tinkling or
jingling sound, (especially) the tinkling sound of
silver ornaments on the ancles or wrist, rattle,
rattling sound; ({%ā%}), f. a bow-string.
<LEND>

<L>46673<pc>1005-b<k1>SiYjaYjikA<k2>SiYjaYjikA
{%Śiñjañjikā,%}¦ f. a chain worn round the loins.
<LEND>

<L>46674<pc>1005-b<k1>SiYjat<k2>SiYjat
{%Śiñjat, an, atī, at,%}¦ tinkling, jingling, sounding.
{%—Śiñjad-valaya-subhaga, as, ā, am,%} pleasant
with tinkling bracelets or zones.
<LEND>

<L>46675<pc>1005-b<k1>SiYjAna<k2>SiYjAna
{%Śiñjāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ tinkling.
<LEND>

<L>46676<pc>1005-b<k1>SiYjAra<k2>SiYjAra
{%Śiñjāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sounding, uttering
praise, (Sāy. {%= śabdayat, stuvat,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 5,
25.)
<LEND>

<L>46677<pc>1005-b<k1>SiYjita<k2>SiYjita
{%Śiñjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ tinkled, tinkling; ({%am%}), n.
tinkling, rattling; the tinkling of metallic ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>46678<pc>1005-b<k1>SiYjin<k2>SiYjin
{%Śiñjin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ tinkling, making a tinkling
sound; ({%inī%}), f. a bow-string; tinkling rings worn
round the toes or feet.
<LEND>

<L>46679<pc>1005-b<k1>Siw<k2>Siw
{#Siw#}¦ {%śiṭ%} (also written {%siṭ%}), cl. 1. P. {%śe-%}
{%ṭati,%} &c., to value little, disregard, despise,
treat with disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>46680<pc>1005-b<k1>SiRqAkI<k2>SiRqAkI
{#SiRqAkI#}¦ {%śiṇḍākī,%} f. a particular edible
substance made with rice and mustard and said to
possess stomachic properties.
<LEND>

<L>46681<pc>1005-b<k1>Sit<k2>Sit<h>2
{#Sit#} 2¦. {%śit, t, t, t,%} (in grammar) having {%ś%}
as an indicatory letter.
<LEND>

<L>46682<pc>1005-b<k1>Sita<k2>Sita
{#Sita#}¦ {%śita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%śi%} or rt. {%śo%}),
sharpened, &c. See under rt. 1. {%śi.%}
<LEND>

<L>46683<pc>1005-b<k1>Sitadru<k2>Sitadru
{#Sitadru#}¦ {%śita-dru, us,%} f. {%= śata-dru,%} the river
Sutlej.
<LEND>

<L>46684<pc>1005-b<k1>SitAman<k2>SitAman
{#SitAman#}¦ {%śitāman, a,%} n. (probably con-
nected with {%śita%} or {%śiti%} fr. rt. 1. {%śi%}), Ved. a parti-
cular part of a sacrificial victim, (according to Yāska,
the fore-foot; according to others, the shoulder-blade,
the liver, &c. See Nirukta IV. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>46685<pc>1005-b<k1>Siti<k2>Siti
{#Siti#}¦ {%śiti, is, ī, i%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 121. fr. rt. {%śat;%} according to others fr. rt. 1. {%śi%}),
white [cf. {%sita%}]; black, dark-blue; ({%is%}), m. the
[Page1005-c+ 77]
Bhojpattra or birch tree {%(= bhūrja)%}. {%—Śiti-kaṇṭha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a white throat; having a black
throat, dark-necked [cf. {%nīla-kaṇṭha%}]; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva ({%= śrī-kaṇṭha%}); a gallinule; a
peacock. {%—Śitikaṇṭha-dīkṣita, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%(= śrī-kaṇṭha-dīkṣita)%}. {%—Śiti-cāra, as,%} m. a
kind of pot-herb (apparently Marsilea Dentata). {%—Śiti-%}
{%cchada, as,%} m. ‘white-feathered,’ a goose; [cf.
{%sita-cchada.%}] {%—Śiti-pakṣa, as,%} m. ‘white-winged,’
a goose; [cf. {%sita-pakṣa.%}] {%—Śiti-pād, pāt, padī%}
or {%pāt, pat,%} Ved. having white feet, white-footed;
black-footed. {%—Śiti-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
white-backed, having a white back; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a serpent-priest (fabled to have acted as Maitrā-
varuṇa at a sacrifice). {%—Śiti-ratna, am,%} n. ‘blue-
gem,’ a sapphire. {%—Śiti-sāraka, as,%} m. ‘having
black essence,’ a sort of ebony ({%= tindu,%} q. v.; this
plant yields a strong black resin).
<LEND>

<L>46686<pc>1005-c<k1>SiTira<k2>SiTira
{#SiTira#}¦ {%śithira, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śrath%}),
Ved. {%= śithila,%} relaxed, loose, &c.; outstretched,
extended, (Sāy. {%= dānārtham prasārita,%} Ṛg-veda
VII. 45, 2); ({%am%}), n. anything relaxed or undone
(as a bond, fetter, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>46687<pc>1005-c<k1>SiTila<k2>SiTila
{%Śithila, as, ā, am%}¦ (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 54.
fr. {%ślath%} for rt. {%śrath%}), loose, loosened, slackened,
relaxed, untied, unfastened, undone, lax, flaccid,
flabby, not rigid or compact; dishevelled (as hair);
dissolved; decayed; languid, inert, weak, unnerved,
feeble; ineffective, unenergetic; not strict, not carefully
or strictly observed, loosely performed; loosely retained
or possessed, abandoned, shaken off; ({%am%}), n. a
loose fastening; looseness, laxity, slowness; a parti-
cular kind of separation or combination of the terms
or members of a logical series. {%—Śithila-tā,%} f. or
{%śithila-tva, am,%} n. looseness, laxity, relaxedness,
relaxation; the being unfastened, a state of disso-
lution, want of energy, languor. {%—Śithila-pra-%}
{%yatna, as, ā, am,%} (one) whose efforts are relaxed.
{%—Śithila-bala, as, ā, am,%} relaxed in strength,
weakened, relaxed. {%—Śithila-vasu, us, us, u,%} hav-
ing impaired wealth; shining with diminished rays.
{%—Śithila-śakti, is, is, i,%} impaired in strength or
power. {%—Śithilī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of loosen-
ing, unfastening; impairing, weakening, reducing,
{%—Śithilī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make loose, loosen, unfasten; to relax,
slacken; to make languid, weaken, enfeeble, impair;
to remit, dismiss, give up, abandon. {%—Śithilī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} made loose, loosened, unfastened, un-
bound, slackened; let loose; impaired, weakened,
reduced. {%—Śithilī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavi-%}
{%tum,%} to become loosened or slackened, be relaxed,
to slacken.
<LEND>

<L>46688<pc>1005-c<k1>SiTilaya<k2>SiTilaya
{%Śithilaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%śithilayati, -yitum,%} to
loosen, make loose, relax.
<LEND>

<L>46689<pc>1005-c<k1>SiTilita<k2>SiTilita
{%Śithilita, as, ā, am,%}¦ loosed, let go; relaxed,
loosened; dissolved, made soft.
<LEND>

<L>46690<pc>1005-c<k1>Sini<k2>Sini
{#Sini#}¦ {%śini, is,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 51. fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}), N. of a son of Sumitra; of a
descendant of Garga (a chief of the Kṣatriya tribe);
a man belonging to a particular class of Kṣatriyas;
({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a class of Kṣatriyas; [cf.
{%śainya.%}] {%—Śini-bāhu,%} N. of a river. {%—Śiner-%}
{%naptṛ, tā,%} m. ‘grandson of Śini,’ N. of Sātyaki
(one of the Pāṇḍu chiefs).
<LEND>

<L>46691<pc>1005-c<k1>Sipavizwa<k2>Sipavizwa
{#Sipavizwa#}¦ {%śipa-viṣṭa%} for {%śipi-viṣṭa%} below.
<LEND>

<L>46692<pc>1005-c<k1>SipAwaka<k2>SipAwaka
{#SipAwaka#}¦ {%śipāṭaka, as,%} m., N. of a minister.
<LEND>

<L>46693<pc>1005-c<k1>Sipi<k2>Sipi
{#Sipi#}¦ {%śipi, is,%} m. (perhaps connected with
rt. 1. {%śi%}), a ray of light; ({%is%}), f. skin, leather. {%—Śipi-%}
{%viṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} one whose rays are displayed,
pervaded by rays; bald-headed ({%= khalati%}); leprous;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; a bald man;
a man naturally without prepuce; a leper; [cf. {%śipa-%}
{%viṣṭa, śivipiṣṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46694<pc>1005-c<k1>Sipra<k2>Sipra
{#Sipra#}¦ {%śipra, as,%} m., N. of a lake on the
high land of the Himālaya; ({%am%}), n., Ved. a cheek,
jaw, ({%ayaḥ-śipra, as, ā, am,%} iron-jawed, having
[Page1006-a+ 75]
jaws of iron; having an iron visor); the chin; the
nose; a visor or helmet; ({%e%}), n. du. the two jaws;
({%ā%}), f. a helmet, head-dress, turban; a visor, (Sāy.
{%śiprā = uṣṇīṣa-mayī%}); N. of a river issuing from
the Śipra lake. {%—Śipra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having
large or handsome jaws, (Sāy. {%= śobhana-hanu,%}
Ṛg-veda VI. 17, 2); having a handsome chin,
handsome-chinned; [cf. {%su-śipra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46695<pc>1006-a<k1>Sipraka<k2>Sipraka
{%Śipraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of the first king of the
Āndhras.
<LEND>

<L>46696<pc>1006-a<k1>Siprin<k2>Siprin
{%Śiprin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. having a (beautiful) cheek
or nose, handsome; having a handsome chin (said
of Indra); ({%iṇī%}), f. {%= śipra;%} (according to modern
scholars) a draught imbibed by the mouth or jaws.
{%—Śipriṇī-vat, ān,%} m., Ved. epithet of Indra ({%=%}
{%śipra-vat%}).
<LEND>

<L>46697<pc>1006-a<k1>SiPa<k2>SiPa
{#SiPa#}¦ {%śipha, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}),
{%= śiphā%} below, which is the more usual form; ({%ā%}),
f. a fibrous root or root in general; the root of a
water-lily; a lash or stroke with a whip; spikenard
({%= māṃsikā%}); turmeric; a sort of dill or fennel ({%=%}
{%śata-puṣpā%}); a mother; a river; a particular
river (Ved.). {%—Śiphā-kanda, as, am,%} m. n. the
root of a water-lily. {%—Śiphā-dhara, as,%} m. ‘pos-
sessing a fibrous root,’ a branch. {%—Śiphā-ruha, as,%}
m. ‘root-growing,’ the Indian fig-tree; [cf. {%nyag-%}
{%rodha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46698<pc>1006-a<k1>SiPAka<k2>SiPAka
{%Śiphāka, as,%}¦ m. the root of a water-lily.
<LEND>

<L>46699<pc>1006-a<k1>Sibi<k2>Sibi
{#Sibi#}¦ {%śibi, is,%} m., N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi
(having the patronymic Auśīnara and author of Ṛg-
veda X. 179, 1; cf. {%śivi%}).
<LEND>

<L>46700<pc>1006-a<k1>Simika<k2>Simika
{#Simika#}¦ {%śimika,%} N. of a district in Kaśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>46701<pc>1006-a<k1>SimI<k2>SimI
{#SimI#}¦ {%śimī,%} f., Ved. power, strength, (Sāy.
{%= śakti,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 151, 1); a sacrificial rite,
ceremony ({%= karma,%} Naigh. II. 7). {%—Śimī-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of power, full of energy
or strength, strong, vigorous, energetic; granting
desires, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda 1. 155, 2.
{%śimīvatoḥ = iṣṭa-pradānādi-karmavatoḥ%} or {%pra-%}
{%haraṇādi-karmavatoḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>46702<pc>1006-a<k1>SimfqI<k2>SimfqI
{#SimfqI#}¦ {%śimṛḍī,%} f. a kind of shrub ({%=%}
{%balyā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46703<pc>1006-a<k1>Simba<k2>Simba
{#Simba#}¦ {%śimba, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%śi%}),
a sort of large shrub, {%= cakra-mardaka; (ā),%} f. a
pod, legume, (also written {%simbā.%})
<LEND>

<L>46704<pc>1006-a<k1>Simbala<k2>Simbala
{%Śimbala, am,%}¦ n., Ved. the flower of the Śalmalī
tree, (Sāy. {%= śalmalī-kusuma,%} Ṛg-veda III. 53, 22.)
<LEND>

<L>46705<pc>1006-a<k1>Simbi<k2>Simbi
{%Śimbi, is,%}¦ f. a pod, legume [cf. {%simbi%}]; a kind
of grass {%(= erakā)%}. {%—Śimbi-parṇī%} or {%śimbi-par-%}
{%ṇikā,%} f. a sort of kidney-bean, Phaseolus Trilobus
({%= mudga-parṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>46706<pc>1006-a<k1>Simbika<k2>Simbika
{%Śimbika, as,%}¦ m. a sort of pulse or kidney-bean,
{%= kṛṣṇa-mudga; (ā),%} f. a pod, legume.
<LEND>

<L>46707<pc>1006-a<k1>SimbI<k2>SimbI
{%Śimbī,%}¦ f. a pod, legume; a sort of kidney-bean;
a kind of plant ({%= kapi-kacchu%}).
<LEND>

<L>46708<pc>1006-a<k1>SimbAtA<k2>SimbAtA
{#SimbAtA#}¦ {%śimbātā,%} m. du., Ved. mentioned
in Naigh. III. 6. together with {%śata-rā%} and {%śāta-%}
{%pantā%} among the {%sukha-nāmāni,%} see Ṛg-veda X.
105, 5; [cf. {%śātapantā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46709<pc>1006-a<k1>Simyu<k2>Simyu
{#Simyu#}¦ {%śimyu, us, us, u,%} Ved. arousing, ex-
citing, (Sāy. {%= bodhamāna,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 18, 5);
({%us%}), m. an evil demon, Rākṣasa, (according to
Sāy. {%= śamayitṛ = badha-kārin,%} ‘a destroyer,’
Ṛg-veda I. 100, 18.)
<LEND>

<L>46710<pc>1006-a<k1>Sir<k2>Sir
{#Sir#}¦ {%śir, īr, īr, īr%} (fr. rt. {%śṝ,%} cf. {%gir%} fr. rt.
1. {%gṝ%}), hurting, injuring, wounding; [cf. {%śaśīśa-%}
{%śiśu-śīḥ,%} Kirāt. XV. 5.]
<LEND>

<L>46711<pc>1006-a<k1>Sira<k2>Sira
{#Sira#}¦ {%śira.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>46712<pc>1006-a<k1>Siras<k2>Siras
{#Siras#}¦ {%śiras, as,%} n. (originally {%śaras = ka-%}
{%ras;%} according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 193. fr. rt. {%śri%}), the
head; the skull; the top of a tree; the head or top
of anything, highest part, ({%jānu-śiras,%} the knee-
pan); highest point, pinnacle, acme; the fore part,
front; the van of an army; chief, principal; [cf.
Zend <nsi>śara, śāranh;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κάρα, κάρ, κάρη-νο-ν,</lang>
[Page1006-b+ 79]
<lang n="greek">κρανίο-ν, κέρας;</lang> Lat. <nsi>cere-bru-m, cere-bru-m, cer-vix, cra-</nsi>
<nsi>nium,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>calva;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hvair-n-ei, haurn;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>hirni, horn;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hœrnes;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>karczei, szerai;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>ceann.</nsi>] {%—Śiraḥ-kapālin,%}
{%ī,%} m. an ascetic or religious mendicant who carries
about a human skull (as a symbol of abandoning all
worldly desires). {%—Śiraḥ-pīḍā,%} f. ‘head-pain,’ head-
ache. {%—Śiraḥ-praṇāma, as,%} m. bowing or bending
the head. {%—Śiraḥ-prāvaraṇa, am,%} n. ‘head-cover-
ing,’ a head-dress, turban. {%—Śiraḥ-phala, as,%} m.
‘having fruit on the top,’ the cocoa-nut tree. {%—Śi-%}
{%raḥ-śūla, am,%} n. head-ache, sharp pain in the head.
{%—Śiraḥ-śreṇi, is,%} m. f. a line of heads, number of
heads. {%—Śiraḥ-stha, as, ā, am,%} being on the head.
{%—Śiraḥ-snāta, as, ā, am,%} one who has bathed his
head. {%—Śiraś-cheda, as,%} m. or {%śiraś-chedana, am,%}
n. cutting off the head, decapitation. {%—Śirasi-ja, as,%}
m. ‘head-produced,’ the hair of the head. {%—Śirasija-%}
{%pāśa, as,%} m. a tuft or quantity of hair. {%—Śirasi-ruh,%}
{%ṭ,%} or {%śirasi-ruha, as,%} m. ‘head-growing,’ the hair of
the head. {%—Śiras-tas,%} ind. from the head. {%—Śiras-%}
{%tāpin, ī,%} m. an elephant. {%—Śiras-tra%} or {%śiras-%}
{%trāṇa, am,%} n. ‘head-protector,’ a helmet; a cap,
turban, head-dress. {%—Śiras-stha, as, ā, am,%} being
on the head, being on the summit, at the top, &c.;
({%as%}), m. a chief, leader. {%—Śiro-gṛha, am,%} n. top
room, a room on the top of the house, upper cham-
ber, a turret. {%—Śiro-graha, as,%} m. ‘head-seizure,’
disease or affection of the head. {%—Śiro-grīva, am,%}
n. the head and neck. {%—Śiro-dharā,%} f. or {%śiro-dhi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘head-supporting,’ the neck. {%—Śiro-bhū-%}
{%ṣaṇa, am,%} n. an ornament for the head. {%—Śiro-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. ‘crest-jewel,’ a gem worn in a head-
ornament or any jewel worn on the head; a title of
respect conferred on Pandits; N. of the author of
the Dīdhiti commentary (so called after its author
Raghunātha-śiromaṇi-bhaṭṭācārya). {%—Śiro-mar-%}
{%man, ā,%} m. a hog. {%—Śiro-mālin, ī,%} m. ‘garlanded
with skulls,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Śiro-ratna, am,%} n.
‘crest-gem,’ a jewel worn on the head. {%—Śiro-rujā,%}
f. ‘head-pain,’ any pain or ache in the head; a kind
of tree ({%= sapta-parṇa,%} the leaves of which are
used as a remedy for head-ache). {%—Śiro-ruh, ṭ,%} or
{%śiro-ruha, as,%} m. ‘head-growing,’ the hair of the
head, hair. {%—Śiro-roga, as,%} m. ‘head-sickness,’ any
pain or disease of the head. {%—Śiro-'rti (˚ras-ar˚),%}
{%is,%} f. ‘head-pain,’ pain in the head, head-ache, &c.
{%—Śiro-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being at the head, being
on the top or summit; ({%ī%}), m. a chief, any one at
the head of affairs, the general of an army. {%—Śiro-%}
{%vallī,%} f. the crest or comb of a peacock, (said to be
also read {%śiro-vandi.%}) {%—Śiro-vṛtta, am,%} n. pepper.
{%—Śirovṛtta-phala, as,%} m. a kind of Achyranthes
Aspera {%(= raktāpāmārga)%}. {%—Śiro-veṣṭa, as,%} m.
or {%śiro-veṣṭana, am,%} n. ‘head-cincture,’ ‘head-
covering,’ a head-dress, turban, cap. {%—Śiro-'sthi%}
{%(˚ras-as˚), i,%} n. ‘head-bone,’ the skull. {%—Śiro-%}
{%hārin, ī,%} m. epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>46713<pc>1006-b<k1>Sira<k2>Sira
{%Śira, as,%}¦ m. the head, (according to some {%am,%} n.);
the root of the pepper plant, (according to some
{%am,%} n.); a bed, couch ({%= śayyā%}); a large serpent.
{%—Śira-ja, as,%} m. ‘head-produced,’ the hair of the
head.
<LEND>

<L>46714<pc>1006-b<k1>Siraska<k2>Siraska
{%Śiraska, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the head, being
on the head; ({%am%}), n. a helmet; a cap, turban,
&c.; ({%ā%}), f. a palanquin.
<LEND>

<L>46715<pc>1006-b<k1>Sirasya<k2>Sirasya
{%Śirasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the head, being
on the head; ({%as%}), m. clean or unentangled hair
({%= śīrṣaṇya%}).
<LEND>

<L>46716<pc>1006-b<k1>SirA<k2>SirA
{#SirA#}¦ {%śirā,%} f. (probably another form of
{%śilā,%} col. 3), any tubular vessel of the body, a nerve,
tendon, fibre, gut, vein, blood-vessel, artery {%(=%}
{%dhamani)%}. {%—Śirā-pattra, as,%} m. the elephant or
wood-apple, Feronia Elephantum ({%= kapittha%}); a
kind of tree {%(= hintāla)%}. {%—Śirā-vṛtta, am,%} n.
lead ({%= sīsaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>46717<pc>1006-b<k1>SirAla<k2>SirAla
{%Śirāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ veiny, tendinous, sinewy,
skinny, full of tendons or veins; ({%am%}), n. the acid
fruit of the Averrhoa Carambola ({%= karma-raṅga%}).
<LEND>
[Page1006-c+ 78]

<L>46718<pc>1006-c<k1>SirAlaka<k2>SirAlaka
{%Śirālaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Vitis Quadrangularis
({%= asthi-bhaṅga%}).
<LEND>

<L>46719<pc>1006-c<k1>Siri<k2>Siri
{#Siri#}¦ {%śiri, is,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 142. fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), a murderer, killer; a sword; an
arrow; a locust.
<LEND>

<L>46720<pc>1006-c<k1>SiriRA<k2>SiriRA
{%Śiriṇā,%}¦ f., Ved. night, (Sāy. {%śīryate 'syām bhu-%}
{%tānīti śiriṇā rātriḥ,%} Ṛg-veda II. 10, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>46721<pc>1006-c<k1>SirIza<k2>SirIza
{%Śirīṣa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of tree, Acacia Sirisa;
({%am%}), n. the flower of this tree. {%—Śirīṣa-pat-%}
{%trikā,%} f. a white kind of the plant Kiṇihī, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46722<pc>1006-c<k1>SirimbiWa<k2>SirimbiWa
{#SirimbiWa#}¦ {%śirimbiṭha, as,%} m., N. of a Vedic
Ṛṣi (having the patronymic Bhāradvāja and author
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 155).
<LEND>

<L>46723<pc>1006-c<k1>Sil<k2>Sil
{#Sil#}¦ {%śil%} (also written {%sil%}), cl. 6. P.
{%śilati,%} &c., to glean.
<LEND>

<L>46724<pc>1006-c<k1>Sila<k2>Sila
{%Śila, as, am,%}¦ m. n. gleaning, gathering stalks or
ears of corn, (according to Kullūka on Manu X.
112. {%śila = aneka-dhānyonnayana,%} i. e. gleaning
more than one ear of corn at a time, opposed to
{%uñcha = ekaika-dhānyādi-guḍakoccayana.%}) {%—Śi-%}
{%loñcha (˚la-uñ˚), as,%} m. gleaning ears of corn;
following irregular occupation. {%—Śiloñcha-vṛtti,%}
{%is,%} f. subsistence by gleaning; unusual or irregular
occupation.
<LEND>

<L>46725<pc>1006-c<k1>SilA<k2>SilA
{#SilA#}¦ {%śilā,%} f. (probably connected with
rt. 1. {%śi%} or rt. {%śo%}), a stone, rock; a grindstone or
any flat stone on which substances are ground; the
lower timber of a door; a beam or stone placed
across the top of a pillar, the top or capital of a
column; a vein, tendon, (for {%śirā,%} q. v.); red
arsenic; camphor; [cf. Lat. <nsi>silex;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>clach,</nsi>
<nsi>cloch.</nsi>] {%—Śila-garbha-ja, as,%} m. ({%śila%} for {%śilā%}), a
particular plant {%(= pāṣāṇa-bhedana)%}. {%—Śilā-%}
{%karṇī,%} f. the olibanum tree, Boswellia Thurifera.
{%—Śilā-kuṭṭaka, as,%} m. a stone-cutter's chisel or
hatchet. {%—Śilā-kusuma, am,%} n. benzoin or storax,
(see {%śilā-ja.%}) {%—Śilā-ghana, as, ā, am,%} firm or
hard as a stone or rock. {%—Śilā-ja, as, ā, am,%} ‘rock-
born,’ produced in a mountain or rock, fossil, mineral;
({%am%}), n. a kind of resin or bitumen; benzoin, storax
or styrax; petroleum; any fossil production; iron.
{%—Śilā-jatu, u,%} n. ‘stone-lac,’ bitumen; red chalk.
{%—Śilā-jit, t,%} f. ‘rock-conquering,’ bitumen. {%—Śi-%}
{%lāñjanī (˚lā-añ˚),%} f. a particular plant or shrub {%(=%}
{%kālāñjanī)%}. {%—Śilāṭaka (˚lā-aṭ˚), as,%} m. a room
on the top of a house ({%= aṭṭa%}); a hole; a fence,
enclosure. {%—Śilā-tala, am,%} n. the surface of a rock
or stone. {%—Śilātmaja (˚lā-āt˚), am,%} n. ‘rock-
born,’ iron. {%—Śilātmikā (˚lā-āt˚),%} f. a crucible.
{%—Śilā-tvac, k,%} f. {%= śilā-valkā%}. {%—Śilā-dadru, us,%}
m. ‘rock-eruption,’ bitumen. {%—Śilā-dhātu, us,%} m.
‘rock-mineral,’ chalk; red chalk; a white fossil
substance; an aluminous earth of a white or yellowish
colour (considered to be a sort of chalk). {%—Śilā-%}
{%paṭṭa, as,%} m. a flat stone for grinding condiments
&c.; a slab used as a seat, a rocky seat. {%—Śilā-%}
{%paṭṭaka, as,%} m. a rocky seat. {%—Śilā-putra%} or {%śilā-%}
{%putraka, as,%} m. ({%putra%} being used as a diminutive),
a roller for grinding condiments &c., a small flat
stone for pounding or grinding. {%—Śilā-puṣpa, am,%}
n. ‘rock-flower,’ storax or benzoin. {%—Śilā-peṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. grinding with a stone. {%—Śilā-pratikṛti, is,%}
f. an image or statue of stone. {%—Śilā-phalaka, am,%}
n. a layer or table of rock, a stone slab. {%—Śilā-%}
{%bhava, am,%} n. ‘rock-produced,’ storax or benzoin.
{%—Śilā-bheda, as,%} m. the plant Plectranthus Scu-
tellarioides ({%= pāṣāṇa-bheda%}); a stone-cutter's
chisel. {%—Śilā-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of stone,
rocky, stony. {%—Śilārambhā (˚lā-ār˚),%} f. the wild
plantain {%(= kāṣṭha-kadalī)%}. {%—Śilā-rasa, as,%} m.
‘rock-exudation,’ olibanum, benzoin, incense. {%—Śilā-%}
{%valkala, as, am,%} m. n. or {%śilā-valkā,%} f. ‘rock-
bark,’ a kind of moss or lichen (especially a kind
used as a medicinal substance and said to be of cool-
ing and lithonthriptic properties; it is commonly
called Śilābāk). {%—Śilā-vitāna, as, am,%} m. n. a
covering or expanse of stones, i. e. a shower of
stones. {%—Śilā-vṛṣṭi, is,%} f. ‘stone-rain,’ hail.
[Page1007-a+ 76]
{%—Śilā-veśman, a,%} n. ‘rock-abode,’ a cavern, grotto,
rocky recess. {%—Śilā-vyādhi, is,%} m. ‘rock-disease,’
bitumen. {%—Śilā-śita, as, ā, am,%} sharpened on a
grindstone. {%—Śilāsana%} ({%˚lā-as˚%} or {%-ās˚%}), {%am,%} n. a
stone bench or seat; benzoin or storax. {%—Śilā-sāra,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘rock-essence,’ iron. {%—Śilāhva (˚lā-āh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. ‘stone-named,’ bitumen, red chalk. {%—Śilī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} converted into a rock, made hard.
{%—Śiloccaya (˚lā-uc˚), as,%} m. ‘rock-accumulation,’
a mountain; a high mountain. {%—Śilottha (˚lā-ut˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} growing upon rocks, produced from rocks
or stone; ({%am%}), n. benzoin, storax. {%—Śilodbhava%}
{%(˚lā-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} produced from stone or on rock;
({%am%}), n. a superior sort of sandal-wood (either the
white or yellowish sort); benzoin. {%—Śiloraska%}
{%(˚lā-ur˚), as, ā, am,%} rock-chested, having a chest as
hard as a rock (said of the Himālaya mountain).
{%—Śilaukas (˚lā-ok˚), ās,%} m. ‘dwelling in rocks,’
an epithet of Garuḍa.
<LEND>

<L>46726<pc>1007-a<k1>Sili<k2>Sili
{%Śili, is,%}¦ f. the lower timber of a door; ({%is%}), m.
the birch tree ({%= bhūrja-pattra%}).
<LEND>

<L>46727<pc>1007-a<k1>SilI<k2>SilI
{%Śilī,%}¦ f. the lower timber of a door; the stone or
beam at the top of a pillar; a small earth-worm; a
spike, dart; an arrow. {%—Śilī-mukha, as,%} m. an
arrow; a bee; a fool, blockhead; war.
<LEND>

<L>46728<pc>1007-a<k1>Sileya<k2>Sileya
{%Śileya, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming from rock; like a
stone or rock, as hard as a rock, rocky, stony; ({%am%}),
n. benzoin; bitumen.
<LEND>

<L>46729<pc>1007-a<k1>SilAda<k2>SilAda
{#SilAda#}¦ {%śilāda, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46730<pc>1007-a<k1>SilAlin<k2>SilAlin
{#SilAlin#}¦ {%śilālin, ī,%} or {%śilāli, is,%} m., N. of
the supposed author of certain Naṭa-sūtras or rules
for actors.
<LEND>

<L>46731<pc>1007-a<k1>Silinda<k2>Silinda
{#Silinda#}¦ {%śilinda, as,%} m. a kind of fish;
[cf. {%śilīndhra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46732<pc>1007-a<k1>SilInDra<k2>SilInDra
{#SilInDra#}¦ {%śilīndhra, am,%} n. a mushroom,
fungus; the flower of the plantain tree; hail, {%= tri-%}
{%puṭa; (as),%} m. a sort of tree; a kind of fish, {%=%}
{%citra-phalaka; (ī),%} f. earth, clay; a small earth-
worm; a sort of bird.
<LEND>

<L>46733<pc>1007-a<k1>SilInDraka<k2>SilInDraka
{%Śilīndhraka, am,%}¦ n. a mushroom (especially one
growing out of cow-dung); a fungus.
<LEND>

<L>46734<pc>1007-a<k1>SilIpada<k2>SilIpada
{#SilIpada#}¦ {%śilīpada, as,%} m. ({%= ślīpada,%} q. v.),
enlarged or swelled leg, elephantiasis.
<LEND>

<L>46735<pc>1007-a<k1>SilUza<k2>SilUza
{#SilUza#}¦ {%śilūṣa, as,%} m. a proper N., (said
to have been an early teacher of the art of acting;
cf. {%śailūṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>46736<pc>1007-a<k1>SiloYCa<k2>SiloYCa
{#SiloYCa#}¦ {%śiloñcha.%} See under {%śila,%} p. 1006.
<LEND>

<L>46737<pc>1007-a<k1>Silgu<k2>Silgu
{#Silgu#}¦ {%śilgu, us,%} m. {%= sukha%} (Naigh. III. 6).
<LEND>

<L>46738<pc>1007-a<k1>Silpa<k2>Silpa
{#Silpa#}¦ {%śilpa, am,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 28. fr. rt. {%śīl%}), an art, any manual or mechanical
or fine art, (sixty-four such arts, sometimes called
{%vāhya-kalā,%} ‘external or practical arts,’ are enume-
rated, e. g. carpentering, architecture, jewellery, far-
riery, acting, dancing, music, medicine, poetry, &c.;
and sixty-four {%abhyantara-kalā,%} ‘secret arts,’ e. g.
kissing, embracing, and various other arts of coquetry);
skill in any art, ingenuity, contrivance, skill (in
general); any act, work (enumerated among the
{%karma-nāmāni%} in Naigh. II. 1); ceremonial act,
rite, ceremony, (in this sense apparently also {%as,%}
m.); form, shape (enumerated among the {%rūpa-%}
{%nāmāni%} in Naigh. III. 7, cf. {%su-śilpa%}); a particular
kind of Śastra or hymn (of a highly artificial cha-
racter); creation, procreation; a sort of spoon or
ladle used at sacrifices for throwing the clarified butter
into the fire; ({%as%}), m., N. of a teacher; ({%ī%}), f. a
female artisan or mechanic (regarded by Śāktas as
one of the eight Akulas). {%—Śilpa-kara = śilpa-%}
{%kāra%}. {%—Śilpa-karman, a,%} n. or {%śilpa-kriyā,%} f.
manual labour, handicraft. {%—Śilpa-kāra, as,%} or
{%śilpa-kārin, ī,%} m. an artisan, workman, mechanic.
{%—Śilpa-kāraka, as, ikā, am,%} practising any me-
chanical art, versed in an art; ({%as%}), m. an artisan.
{%—Śilpa-vidyā,%} f. the science of mechanics, me-
chanical knowledge, skill in art, mechanical or
manual skill. {%—Śilpa-śāla, am, ā,%} n. f. a work-
[Page1007-b+ 80]
shop, workroom, manufactory. {%—Śilpa-śāstra, am,%}
n. a book on any mechanical or fine art (as archi-
tecture &c.), a scientific treatise; the whole collection
of treatises on mechanical arts, mechanics.
<LEND>

<L>46739<pc>1007-b<k1>Silpaka<k2>Silpaka
{%Śilpaka, am,%}¦ n. a sort of drama, one exhibiting
magical and mystical rites.
<LEND>

<L>46740<pc>1007-b<k1>Silpika<k2>Silpika
{%Śilpika, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} manual, mechanical;
({%am%}), n. any handicraft or mechanical art; a sort of
drama, {%= śilpaka; (ā),%} f. {%= śilpinī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46741<pc>1007-b<k1>Silpin<k2>Silpin
{%Śilpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ belonging or relating to any
mechanical art, mechanical; ({%ī%}), m. an artificer,
artist, artisan; ({%inī%}), f. a kind of herb or grass
(called Lahānasipī in Hindī; it is used medicinally,
and described as sweet, cooling, and bearing seeds of
tonic and restorative properties; it is otherwise de-
scribed as a drug, {%= kola-dala%}). {%—Śilpi-śāla, am,%}
{%ā,%} n. f. a workshop, a manufactory. {%—Śilpi-śāstra%}
{%= śilpa-śāstra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46742<pc>1007-b<k1>Silhana<k2>Silhana
{#Silhana#}¦ {%śilhana.%} See {%śihlana.%}
<LEND>

<L>46743<pc>1007-b<k1>Siva<k2>Siva
{#Siva#}¦ {%śiva, as, ā, am%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
I. 153. fr. rt. 1. {%śī;%} more probably to be connected
with rt. {%śvi%} and {%śavas,%} see {%śiśvi%}), auspicious, pro-
pitious, prosperous, happy, fortunate, lucky, increas-
ing, thriving, right; ({%as%}), m., N. of the third god
of the Hindū Tri-mūrti, (in the later mythology
regarded as ‘the destroyer,’ and with Brahmā, ‘the
creator,’ and Viṣṇu, ‘the preserver,’ constituting
the well known Hindū triad of divine manifestations;
although the name Śiva is not found applied to any
god in the Veda, the worship of the destroying and
reproducing principle under this name was rapidly
developed in the Purāṇas and epic poems, and be-
came very general in later times, the worshippers of
Śiva or Śaivas assigning to him the first place in the
triad and by identifying him with the principles of
creation and reproduction as well as that of destruc-
tion, constituting him the one Supreme Being who
is supposed to comprehend all the powers and forces
of nature and whose formidable character makes him
the first object of propitiation and adoration; in the
Śiva-Purāṇa he is addressed as Brahmā, Viṣṇu,
Indra, Varuṇa, the Sun, Moon, Earth, Fire, Water,
Air, Ether, &c., while even in the Viṣṇu and other
Purāṇas not specially devoted to his praise, he is
mentioned with the greatest reverence and awe;
according to one view the name Śiva belonged
originally to the principal god of the aboriginal
tribes of India, and being subsequently adopted
together with the Liṅga or symbol of reproduction
into the Pantheon of the Āryans, was then identified
with their own deity Rudra, who occupies a con-
spicuous position in the Veda as god of storms; but
according to a more likely supposition the adjective
{%śiva,%} ‘auspicious,’ being at first only used as an
euphemistic epithet to propitiate the lord of tempests,
passed afterwards into his name, and was ultimately
adopted as the principal name of the god of destruc-
tion, [see {%rudra%}]; according to Viṣṇu-Purāṇa I. 8.
there are eight principal manifestations of Śiva, viz.
Rudra, Bhava, Śarva, Iśāna, Paśu-pati, Bhīma, Ugra,
Mahā-deva, which again are visibly represented under
eight Tanus or material forms, viz. the Sun, Water,
Earth, Air, Fire, Ether, the officiating Brahman,
and the Moon, Śiva being supposed to uphold the
universe by means of these forms; as presiding over
reproduction, which follows destruction, his symbol
is the Liṅga or Phallus, under which form he is
generally worshipped at the present day; as god of
justice or punishment, which character he shares with
the gods Yama and Varuṇa, he is represented as
riding on a white bull, the god Dharma, it is said,
having taken this form and requested Śiva to accept
him as his vehicle; his own colour is sometimes
depicted as black in his character of destroyer of the
world, when he is called Kāla or Time; again, one
of his representations is as Ardha-nārī, ‘half-female,’
the other half being male to symbolize the unity of
the generative principle, his name being then Ardha-
nārīśa, ‘the half-female lord;’ he has sometimes five
faces, whence his name Pāñcānana; he has also three
[Page1007-c+ 81]
eyes, one of which is in his forehead, and which are
thought to denote his view of the three divisions of
time, past, present, and future, while a moon's
crescent, round or above the central eye, marks the
measure of time by months, a serpent round his
neck the measure of time by years, and a second
necklace of skulls with numerous other serpents about
his person, the perpetual revolution of ages, and the
successive extinction and generation of the races of
mankind: his hair is thickly matted together, and
gathered above his forehead into a coil, so as to
project like a horn; on the top of it he bears the
Ganges, the rush of which river in its descent form
heaven he intercepted by his head that the earth
might not be crushed by the weight of the falling
stream; his throat is dark-blue from the stain of the
deadly poison which would have destroyed the world
had it not been swallowed by him on its production
at the churning of the ocean by the gods for the
nectar of immortality: he is sometimes represented
clothed in a deer-skin, sometimes in a tiger-skin, or
he appears sitting on a tiger-skin or holding a deer
in one of his hands; in explanation of this a legend
is told that Śiva, having once visited a forest in the
form of a religious mendicant, the wives of the
Ṛṣis residing there fell in love with his great
beauty, which the Ṛṣis perceiving resented; in
order, therefore, to overpower him, they first dug a
pit, and by magical arts caused a tiger to rush out of
it, which he slew, and taking its skin wore it as a
garment; they next caused a deer to spring out upon
him, which he took up in his left hand and ever
afterwards retained there; they then produced a red-
hot iron, but this too he took up and kept in his
hand as a weapon: sometimes, again, he appears
wearing an elephant's skin which belonged to an
Asura named Gaya, who acquired such power that
he conquered the gods and would have destroyed the
Munis had they not fled to Benares and taken
refuge in a temple of Śiva, who then destroyed the
Asura and, ripping up his body, stripped off the hide
which he afterwards cast over his shoulders for a
cloak: Śiva holds a {%triśūla%} or three-pronged trident
[also called Pināka] in his hand to denote, as some
think, his combination of the three attributes of
Creator, Destroyer, and Regenerator; his other
weapons are a bow called Ajakava or Ajagava, a
thunderbolt, an axe, a kind of staff with transverse
pieces surmounted by a skull called Khaṭvāṅga, and
another nondescript weapon called Khiṅkira; he also
carries a kind of rattle or drum, shaped like an hour-
glass, called Ḍamaru, and a Pāśa or noose for binding
incorrigible offenders: his attendants or servants are
called Pramatha; they are sometimes regarded as
demons or supernatural beings of various kinds, and
form a complete host; some of his more personal
attendants or chamberlains have special names, such
as Nandi or Nandin, Bhṛṅgin, Taṇḍu, the latter
being the original teacher of dancing &c., whence
Śiva is called Naṭeśvara, ‘the lord of dancers,’ and is
himself described as {%nāṭya-priya,%} fond of dancing:
his principal wife Durgā, otherwise called Pārvatī,
Umā, Gaurī, Bhavānī, Satī, &c., is the chief object
of worship with the Śāktas and Tāntrikas, see {%śakti,%}
{%śākta, tantra:%} his sons are Gaṇeśa and Kārttikeya:
he destroyed several Asuras or demons, such as Pura,
Tripura, Andhaka, Ruru; he also scorched the god
of love, Kāma-deva, to ashes by a glance from his
central eye, that deity having attempted to inflame
him with passion for Pārvatī whilst he was engaged
in severe penance; he is said to have cut off one of
the heads of the god Brahmā, that god having ori-
ginally possessed five heads, one of which is fabled
to have addressed Śiva on a particular occasion in a
disrespectful manner, cf. {%brahma-mūrdha-bhṛt;%}
he also decapitated Dakṣa and replaced his head by
that of a ram, because that sage, who was his father-
in-law, omitted to invite him and his wife Satī to a
great sacrifice at which all the other gods were
present, see {%dakṣādhvara-dhvaṃśa-kṛt;%} in the
exercise of his function of Universal Destroyer he
[Page1008-a+ 81]
destroys, at the end of every Kalpa, not only all
created beings, but even Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and the
other gods, whose bones and skulls he wears as gar-
lands; moreover, at the end of one of the early
Kalpas he is fabled to have burnt them up by a flash
from his central eye, and afterwards to have rubbed
their ashes upon his body, whence the use of ashes
is considered of great importance in his worship,
while the use of the Rudrākṣa berries or beads
originated, it is said, from the legend that Śiva, on
his way to destroy the three cities, called Tri-pura,
let fall some tears of rage which became converted
into these beads: his residence is Kailāsa, one of the
loftiest northern peaks of the Himālaya, which is
also the paradise of Kuvera: he has strictly no in-
carnations like those of Viṣṇu, though Vīra-bhadra
and the eight Bhairavas are sometimes regarded as
forms of him, sometimes as his sons, see {%vīra-bha-%}
{%dra, bhairava;%} he is especially worshipped at Be-
nares and has even more names than Viṣṇu, one
thousand and eight being specified in the sixty-ninth
chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa and in the seventeenth
chapter of the Anuśāsana-parvan of the Mahā-bhā-
rata, some of the most common being Mahā-deva,
Śambhu, Śaṅkara, Īśa, Īśvara, Maheśvara, Hara,
Rudra); the phallic emblem of Śiva, the male
genital organ, penis; a god ({%= deva,%} according to
Śabda-k.); an auspicious planetary conjunction; the
twentieth of the astronomical periods called Yogas,
(see {%yoga%}); epithet of a particular month; the
Veda; final emancipation ({%= mokṣa%}); a pillar or
post to which cattle are tied; a kind of drug and
perfume ({%= bāluka%} or {%vāluka%}); a particular plant
or drug ({%= puṇḍarīka%}); the black Dhustūra or
thorn-apple; bdellium; quicksilver; N. of a scribe;
({%au%}), m. du. Śiva and his wife; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a class of deities; ({%ā%}), f. the wife of Śiva (Durgā,
Pārvatī, &c.); final emancipation ({%= mukti%}); N.
of the wife of Aṅgiras; of the mother of the twenty-
second Jina; of a river; a jackal; the Śamī tree;
yellow Myrobalan ({%= harītakī%}); Emblic Myrobalan
({%= āmalakī%}); the tree Flacourtia Cataphracta ({%=%}
{%tāmalakī%}); Dūrvā grass; turmeric; a kind of yellow
pigment, {%= go-rocanā; (am),%} n. bliss, prosperity,
happiness, well-being, auspiciousness, pleasure; final
emancipation or beatitude; water; rock-salt; sea-salt;
white or refined borax. {%—Śiva-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing
happiness or prosperity, making happy, auspicious,
propitious; ({%as%}), m. (with Jainas) one of the twenty-
four Arhats of the past Ut-sarpiṇī. {%—Śiva-ka-%}
{%vaca, am,%} n. ‘Śiva's amulet,’ N. of a chapter in
the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Śiva-kāñcī,%} f., N. of a city
(said to have been founded by Śaṅkara; cf. {%viṣṇu-%}
{%kāñcī%}). {%—Śiva-kāntī-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Śiva-kāmadughā,%} f., N. of a river.
{%—Śiva-kāriṇī,%} f., N. of a goddess. {%—Śiva-kiṅ-%}
{%kara, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Śiva-kīrtana, as,%} m.
‘Śiva-praiser,’ epithet of Bhṛṅgi or Bhṛṅgarīṭa,
one of Śiva's attendants; N. of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu;
({%am%}), n. the act of praising or celebrating Śiva.
{%—Śiva-kuṇḍa,%} N. of a place. {%—Śiva-koṣa, as,%}
m., N. of a dictionary of synonyms of trees and
medicinal plants by Śiva-datta. {%—Śiva-gaṅgā-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Śiva-gaṇa, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Śivagaṇa-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Śiva-%}
{%gati, is, is, i,%}  having a prosperous course, pros-
perous, auspicious, happy; worshipping Śiva; ({%is%}),
m. one of the twenty-four Arhats of the past Ut-sar-
piṇī (with Jainas). {%—Śiva-gītā,%} f. ‘Śiva's song,’ N.
of a part of the Padma-Purāṇa (propounding the
doctrines of the Śaivas; it is regarded as a Vedānta
treatise, and attributed to Veda-vyāsa). {%—Śiva-guru,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of Śaṅkarācārya's father. {%—Śiva-gharma-%}
{%ja, as,%} m. ‘born from the perspiration of Śiva,’
epithet of the planet Mars. {%—Śivaṅ-kara, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} causing happiness or prosperity, auspicious, pro-
pitious. {%—Śiva-cakra, am,%} n. epithet of a particular
mystical circle. {%—Śiva-caturdaśī,%} f. the fourteenth
day of the dark half of the month Māgha kept as a
festival in honour of Śiva. {%—Śivacaturdaśī-vrata,%}
{%am,%} n. a particular religious observance kept on the
[Page1008-b+ 81]
above-mentioned day. {%—Śiva-jña, as, ā, am,%}
knowing what is fortunate or propitious, worshipping
Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. a female devotee of the Śaiva sect.
{%—Śiva-jñāna, am,%} n. knowledge of what is fortu-
nate or propitious; a book giving rules for ascertain-
ing auspicious moments or lucky and unlucky seasons.
{%—Śiva-tattva-viveka, as,%} m., N. of a work by
Apyaya-dīkṣita. {%—Śiva-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra work. {%—Śiva-tama, as, ā, am,%} most pros-
perous, very fortunate. {%—Śiva-tara, as, ā, am,%} more
auspicious or propitious, very prosperous or fortunate;
very complacent. {%—Śiva-tāti, is, is, i%} (Pāṇini IV.
4, 143, 144), causing good fortune, conferring hap-
piness, propitious; ({%is%}), f. propitiousness, benevo-
lence, auspiciousness. {%—Śiva-tātika, as, ā, am, =%}
{%śiva-tāti%} above. {%—Śiva-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Śiva-datta, as, ā, am,%} given by Śiva; pre-
sented to Śiva; ({%as%}), m., N. of the author of the Śiva-
koṣa; of a scribe; ({%am%}), n. the discus of Viṣṇu.
{%—Śiva-dāru, u,%} n. the tree Pinus Deodaru {%(=%}
{%deva-dāru)%}. {%—Śiva-dāsa, as,%} m. ‘Śiva's servant,’
N. of the author of the Jātaka-muktāvalī; of the
reputed author of the Kathārṇava. {%—Śiva-dāsa-%}
{%deva, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Śiva-dūtikā,%} f., N.
of one of the Mātṛs attending on Śiva. {%—Śiva-%}
{%dūtī,%} f. ‘Śiva's messenger,’ epithet of Durgā; of a
Yogiṇī. {%—Śiva-dūtī-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra
work. {%—Śiva-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f., N. of a work by So-
mānanda-nātha. {%—Śiva-druma, as,%} m. ‘Śiva's tree,’
the Vilva, (commonly called Bel.) {%—Śiva-dviṣṭā,%}
f. ‘hated by Śiva,’ the Ketaka tree, (see {%ketaka.%})
{%—Śiva-dhanur-veda, as,%} m., N. of a work ascribed
to Vyāsa. {%—Siva-dharama%} and {%śiva-dharmottara%}
{%(˚ma-ut˚),%} N. of two works. {%—Śiva-dharmopa-%}
{%purāṇa (˚ma-up˚), am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
{%—Śiva-dhātu, us,%} m. ‘Śiva's essence,’ quicksilver;
‘Śiva's mineral,’ milk-stone, opal or chalcedony,
(according to Śabda-k. {%= go-danta.%}) {%—Śiva-nābhi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘Śiva's navel,’ a particular form of Śiva-
liṅga, (see {%liṅga.%}) {%—Śiva-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m., N.
of a god; of a modern author. {%—Śiva-pura,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%śiva-purī,%} ‘Śiva's city,’ N. of the
city Benares (especially sacred to Śiva). {%—Śiva-pu-%}
{%rāṇa, am,%} n., N. of one of the eighteen Purāṇas
(devoted to the praise of Śiva; it is thought by some
to be identical with the Vāyu-Purāṇa). {%—Śiva-pūjā,%}
f. worship or adoration of Śiva. {%—Śiva-prādur-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. the manifestation of Śiva. {%—Śiva-%}
{%priya, as, ā, am,%} dear to or esteemed by Śiva;
({%as%}), m. the tree Sesbana Grandiflora ({%= vaka%});
the thorn-apple ({%= dhustūra%}); crystal; ({%ā%}), f. the
goddess Durgā; ({%am%}), n. the seeds of the Rudrākṣa
or Elæocarpus. {%—Śiva-bhakta, as,%} m. a worshipper
of Śiva, a Śaiva. {%—Śiva-bhakti-siddhi, is,%} f. ‘per-
formance of the worship of Śiva,’ N. of a devotional
work; [cf. {%śiva-śakti-siddhi.%}] {%—Śiva-bhaṭṭa, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Śiva-mallaka, as,%} m. the Arjuna
tree; ({%ikā%}), f. the tree Sesbana Grandiflora ({%= va-%}
{%suka%}). {%—Śiva-mallī,%} f. the Sesbana Grandiflora.
{%—Śiva-māhātmya-khaṇḍa, as,%} m., N. of a book
of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Śiva-rasa, as,%} m. the
water of boiled rice or pulse three days old (under-
going spontaneous fermentation). {%—Śiva-rahasya,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘secret doctrine of Śiva,’ N. of a part of the
Skanda-Purāṇa; of a compilation from the Tantras
on the divinity and worship of Śiva. {%—Śiva-rāja-%}
{%dhānī,%} f. ‘Śiva's capital,’ N. of the city Kāśī or
Benares (especially sacred to Śiva). {%—Śiva-rātri, is,%}
f. ‘Śiva's night,’ N. of a celebrated and very popular
festival in honour of Śiva (kept on the fourteenth
of the dark half of the month Māgha or January-
February; a rigorous fast and extraordinary cere-
monies are observed during the day and night,
and Śiva is worshipped under the type of the
Liṅga; cf. {%śiva-caturdaśī%}). {%—Śivarātri-māhāt-%}
{%mya, am,%} n. the greatness or glory of the Śiva-rātri
festival. {%—Śiva-rāma, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor;
of the author of the Kṛtya-cintāmaṇi, the Śrāddha-
cintāmaṇi, the Su-bodhinī, and a commentary on
the Karma-pradīpa. {%—Śiva-rāma-gira, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Śiva-rūpa, am,%} n. the form or image
[Page1008-c+ 81]
of Śiva; ({%as, ā, am%}), having the form of Śiva.
{%—Śiva-liṅga, am,%} n. Śiva's genital organ or Śiva
worshipped in the form of a phallus; a temple or
spot dedicated to the worship of the Liṅga, (see
{%liṅga.%}) {%—Śiva-liṅgin, ī,%} m. a worshipper of the
Liṅga or one who carries this symbol on his person.
{%—Śiva-loka, as,%} m. the world or paradise of Śiva,
Kailāsa. {%—Śiva-vallabha, as, ā, am,%} loved or
esteemed by Śiva; ({%as%}), m. the mango tree;
gigantic swallow-wort; ({%ā%}), f. the goddess Pārvatī;
the Indian white rose {%(= śata-pattrī)%}. {%—Śiva-val-%}
{%likā,%} f. a particular plant {%(= liṅginī)%}. {%—Śiva-vallī,%}
f. a particular plant ({%= liṅginī%}); a particular thorny
tree {%(= śrī-vallī)%}. {%—Śiva-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘Śiva's
vehicle,’ a bull. {%—Śiva-vīja, am,%} n. ‘Śiva's semen,’
quicksilver. {%—Śiva-śakti, is,%} f. attachment or de-
votion to Śiva; ({%is%}), m. a proper N. {%—Śiva-śakti-%}
{%siddhi, is,%} f., N. of a work by Harṣa, (also called
{%śiva-bhakti-siddhi.%}) {%—Śiva-śarman, ā,%} m., N.
of a priest. {%—Śiva-śāsana, am,%} n. ‘Śiva's ordi-
nance,’ N. of a law-book. {%—Śiva-śekhara, as,%} m.
Śiva's crest; Śiva's head; the plant Sesbana Grandi-
flora; the thorn-apple; the moon. {%—Śiva-saṃhitā,%}
f., N. of a short treatise on the duties of a Yogin.
{%—Śiva-saṅkalpa, as,%} m. ‘having an auspicious
resolve,’ N. of a hymn (forming part of the thirty-
fourth book of the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā; cf. Manu
XI. 250). {%—Śiva-saṅkalpopaniṣad (˚pa-up˚),%}
{%t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Śiva-sarvasva, am,%} n.,
N. of a work. {%—Śiva-sahasra-nāman, a,%} n., N. of
a description of one thousand epithets illustrating the
attributes of Śiva. {%—Śiva-sāyujya, am,%} n. absorp-
tion into or identification with Śiva, final emanci-
pation. {%—Śiva-sundarī,%} f. epithet of Durgā. {%—Śiva-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} n., N. of the aphorisms of the Śaiva
philosophy (attributed to the god Śiva); N. of the
fourteen Sūtras with which Pāṇini opens his gram-
mar (said to have been communicated to him by
Śiva). {%—Śivasūtra-vimarśinī,%} f., N. of a com-
mentary on the philosophical Śiva-sūtras, (also called
{%śiva-sūtra-vivṛti%}); of a commentary on the four-
teen grammatical aphorisms of Śiva (treated as sym-
bolizing the dogmas of the Vedānta). {%—Śiva-skan-%}
{%dha, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Śiva-sva, am,%} n.
‘Śiva's property,’ anything that has been offered to
Śiva. {%—Śiva-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a poet; of an
author. {%—Śivākṣa (˚va-ak˚), am,%} n. the seed of
the Elæocarpus, (see {%rudrākṣa.%}) {%—Śivākhya (˚va-%}
{%ākh˚), as, ā, am,%} called happy, termed lucky. {%—Śi-%}
{%vāṭikā (˚va-aṭ˚?),%} f. a kind of grass {%(= vaṃśa-pat-%}
{%trī)%}. {%—Śivātmaka (˚va-āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} consist-
ing of the essence of Śiva; ({%am%}), n. rock-salt.
{%—Śivādeśaka (˚va-ād˚), as,%} m. a fortune-teller.
{%—Śivānanda (˚va-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘Śiva's joy,’ N. of
a scribe. {%—Śivāpīḍa%} ({%˚va%} or {%˚vā-āp˚%}), {%as,%} m. the
chaplet of Śiva or Durgā; Sesbana Grandiflora ({%=%}
{%vaka%}). {%—1. śivāpriya%} ({%˚va-ap˚%} or {%˚vā-ap˚%}), {%as, ā,%}
{%am,%} disliked by Śiva or by Durgā. {%—2. śivā-priya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} beloved by Durgā; ({%as%}), m. a goat. {%—Śi-%}
{%vā-phalā,%} f. the Śamī tree. {%—Śivā-bali, is,%} m. an
offering to Durgā made at night and consisting chiefly
of flesh. {%—Śivārāti%} ({%˚va%} or {%˚vā-ar˚%}), {%is,%} m. an
enemy of Śiva or Durgā; ‘jackal's enemy,’ a dog.
{%—Śivā-ruta, am,%} n. the howling of a jackal. {%—Śi-%}
{%vārcana-candrikā (˚va-ar˚),%} f., N. of a work.
{%—Śivālaya (˚va-āl˚), as,%} m. the residence of Śiva,
Śiva's abode; red Tulasī or basil; ({%am%}), n. any
temple or shrine dedicated to Śiva (generally con-
taining a Liṅga); a cemetery, place where dead
bodies are burnt or buried; N. of a place. {%—Śivā-%}
{%smṛti, is,%} f. ‘Durgā-memorial,’ the plant Sesbana
Ægyptiaca {%(= jayantī)%}. {%—Śivāhlāda (˚va-āh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘Śiva's joy,’ the tree Sesbana Grandiflora.
{%—Śivāhva (˚va-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} called or named
after Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. a species of creeper {%(= rudra-%}
{%jaṭā)%}. {%—Śivetara (˚va-it˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘other than
auspicious,’ inauspicious, unhappy, unlucky. {%—Śi-%}
{%veṣṭa (˚va-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} loved by Śiva; ({%as%}),
m. Sesbana Grandiflora; ({%ā%}), f. Dūrvā grass. {%—Śivo-%}
{%paniṣad (˚va-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad (sup-
posed to have been the work on which the Śiva-
[Page1009-a+ 76]
sūtras were founded). {%—Śivopapurāṇa (˚va-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>46744<pc>1009-a<k1>Sivaka<k2>Sivaka
{%Śivaka, as,%}¦ m. a pillar or post to which cattle are
tethered or to which cows are tied (when milked);
a scratching-post (for cattle to rub against).
<LEND>

<L>46745<pc>1009-a<k1>SivAnI<k2>SivAnI
{%Śivānī,%}¦ f. the wife of Śiva (i. e. Durgā); the
plant Sesbana Ægyptiaca ({%= jayantī;%} or, according
to others, Celtis Orientalis).
<LEND>

<L>46746<pc>1009-a<k1>SivAlu<k2>SivAlu
{%Śivālu, us,%}¦ m. a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>46747<pc>1009-a<k1>Siviya<k2>Siviya
{%Śiviya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%śivīyati, -yitum,%} to treat any
one (acc.) like Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>46748<pc>1009-a<k1>Sivi<k2>Sivi
{#Sivi#}¦ {%śivi, is,%} m. a beast of prey, noxious
animal; the birch tree ({%= bhūrja%}); N. of a king
(son of Uśīnara; the story of his rescuing Agni in
the form of a pigeon from Indra in the form of a
hawk by the offering of an equal portion of his own
flesh, weighed in a balance, is told in the Vahni-
Purāṇa and Mahā-bhārata, see below); N. of a
country; ({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a people or race.
{%—Śivi-carita%} or {%śivi-caritra, am,%} n. ‘the story
of Śivi,’ N. of an episode of the Mahā-bhārata; see
Vana-parvan 13275-13300; the same story of the
hawk and the pigeon is told of Uśīnara in Vana-
parvan 10560-10596.
<LEND>

<L>46749<pc>1009-a<k1>SivikA<k2>SivikA
{#SivikA#}¦ {%śivikā,%} f. a palanquin, palkee,
litter; a bier; a stage erected for exhibitions; a
proper N. {%—Śivikā-dāna, am,%} n. the gift of a
litter, &c.; N. of a chapter of the Vahni-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>46750<pc>1009-a<k1>SivIraTa<k2>SivIraTa
{%Śivī-ratha, as,%}¦ m. a palanquin, litter.
<LEND>

<L>46751<pc>1009-a<k1>Sivipizwa<k2>Sivipizwa
{#Sivipizwa#}¦ {%śivipiṣṭa%} for {%śipi-viṣṭa, as,%} m.
epithet of Śiva, &c. See {%śipi,%} p. 1005.
<LEND>

<L>46752<pc>1009-a<k1>Sivira<k2>Sivira
{#Sivira#}¦ {%śivira, am,%} n. (said in Uṇādi-s. I.
54. to be fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}), a camp; a royal camp, royal
residence; an intrenchment for the protection of an
army; a sort of grain; ({%as%}), m., N. of a tribe (?).
<LEND>

<L>46753<pc>1009-a<k1>SiSayizA<k2>SiSayizA
{#SiSayizA#}¦ {%śiśayiṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt.
1. {%śī%}), desire to lie down, wish to sleep, drowsiness,
sleepiness.
<LEND>

<L>46754<pc>1009-a<k1>SiSayizu<k2>SiSayizu
{%Śiśayiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to lie down, sleepy,
drowsy.
<LEND>

<L>46755<pc>1009-a<k1>SiSAna<k2>SiSAna
{#SiSAna#}¦ {%śiśāna.%} See under rt. 1. {%śi,%} p. 1004.
<LEND>

<L>46756<pc>1009-a<k1>SiSira<k2>SiSira
{#SiSira#}¦ {%śiśira, as, ā, am%} (according to
Uṇādi-s. I. 54. fr. rt. {%śaś;%} probably connected with
rt. {%śṝ%} or rt. {%śo%}), cool, chilly, cold, frigid, freezing;
({%as%}), m., N. of the seventh month of the year (ac-
cording to one reckoning); N. of a mountain; of a
teacher of the Ṛg-veda (a pupil or descendant of Śā-
kalya Veda-mitra); ({%as, am%}), m. n. hoar frost, dew,
coolness, cold; the cool or dewy season (comprising
two months, Māgha and Phālguna, or from about
the middle of January to that of March, see {%ṛtu%}).
{%—Śiśira-kāla, as,%} m. the dewy season. {%—Śi-%}
{%śira-ghna, as, ī, am,%} destroying frost; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of Agni or fire. {%—Śiśira-tara, as, ā, am,%}
more cool, very refreshing. {%—Śiśira-mathita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} pinched by cold. {%—Śiśirartu (˚ra-ṛtu),%}
{%us,%} m. the dewy season. {%—Śiśirāṃśu (˚ra-aṃ˚), us,%}
m. ‘having cold rays,’ the moon. {%—Śiśirāṃśu-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. the state of having cold rays. {%—Śiśirī-bhū,%}
cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become cool. {%—Śiśiro-%}
{%ṣṇa-varṣa (˚ra-uṣ˚), ās,%} f. pl. the dewy, hot,
and rainy seasons.
<LEND>

<L>46757<pc>1009-a<k1>SiSu<k2>SiSu
{#SiSu#}¦ {%śiśu, us,%} m. (a reduplicated form of
1. {%śu%} for rt. {%śvi;%} according to Uṇādi-s. I. 21. fr. rt.
{%śo;%} Ved. {%śiśvaḥ = śiśavaḥ, śiśvā = śiśunā%}), a
child, infant; the young of any animal (as a calf,
puppy, &c.); a boy under eight years of age; a lad
under sixteen; a pupil, scholar; N. of a descendant
of Aṅgiras (author of Ṛg-veda IX. 112). {%—Śiśu-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. childhood. {%—Śiśu-kranda, as,%} m. or
{%śiśu-krandana, am,%} n. the weeping of a child
or infant. {%—Śiśu-krandīya, as,%} m., scil. {%grantha,%}
a book treating of infantile complaints or (perhaps) a
book suitable for naughty children, (Pān. IV. 3, 88.)
{%—Śiśu-gandhā,%} f. double jasmine. {%—Śiśu-cāndrā-%}
{%yaṇa, am,%} n. the lunar penance of children, (eating
[Page1009-b+ 79]
four mouthfuls at sunrise and four mouthfuls at sun-
set for a month, Manu XI. 219.) {%—Śiśu-tva, am,%}
n. or {%śiśu-tā,%} f. childhood, boyhood, the period up
to eight years of age; pupilage, the period before
sixteen. {%—Śiśu-deśya, as, ā, am,%} being in the
place of a child, not far from or almost a child.
{%—Śiśu-nāga, as,%} m. a young elephant; a kind of
Rākṣasa or demon; N. of a king of Magadhā (the
founder of a dynasty). {%—Śiśu-pāla, as,%} m. ‘child-
cherisher,’ N. of the king of the Cedis inhabiting a
country in central India, probably the same as Bun-
delkhand, (see {%cedi;%} he was son of Dama-ghoṣa,
and is also called Su-nītha; his impiety in opposing
the worship of Kṛṣṇa is described in the Sabhā-
parvan of the Mahā-bhārata; when Yudhi-ṣṭhira
was about to perform a Rājasūya sacrifice, numerous
princes attended, and Bhīṣma proposed that especial
honour should be paid to Kṛṣṇa, who was also
present, but Śiśu-pāla objected, and after denouncing
Kṛṣṇa as a contemptible person challenged him to
fight, whereupon Kṛṣṇa struck off his head with
his discus; the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa identifies this impious
monarch with the demons Hiraṇya-kaśipu and Rā-
vaṇa; his death forms the subject of Māgha's cele-
brated poem called Śiśupāla-vadha.) {%—Śiśupālaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} protecting or cherishing children; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a king ({%= śiśu-pāla%}); the plant Nauclea
Cordifolia. {%—Śiśupāla-badha%} or {%śiśupāla-vadha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the slaying of Śiśu-pāla,’ N. of a part of
the Mahā-bhārata (see below) and of an epic poem
by Māgha on the subject of Śiśu-pāla's death by the
hand of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Śiśupāla-badha-parvan, a,%}
n., N. of a section of the Mahā-bhārata (contained
in the Sabhā-parvan 1418 — 1627, see above). {%—Śi-%}
{%śupāla-han, ā,%} m. ‘destroyer of Śiśu-pāla,’ an epi-
thet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Śiśu-bhāva, as,%} m. the state of
childhood, infancy. {%—Śiśu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
infantine, childish, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
I. 140, 10. {%śiśumatīr = śaiśavavatīr jvālāḥ.%})
{%—Śiśu-māra, as,%} m. ‘child-killing,’ the Gangetic
porpoise, Delphinus Gangeticus; ‘the heavenly por-
poise,’ a form of Viṣṇu (described as a collection
of the stars and planets); N. or a form of Viṣṇu.
{%—Śiśumāra-śiras, as,%} n. the dolphin's head, a
part of the heavens studded with stars, the north-
east point. {%—Śiśu-vāhaka%} or {%śiśu-vāhyaka, as,%}
m. ‘child-carrier,’ a wild goat. {%—Śiśu-hatyā,%} f.
child-murder.
<LEND>

<L>46758<pc>1009-b<k1>SiSuka<k2>SiSuka
{%Śiśuka, as,%}¦ m. a child; the young of any animal;
a porpoise; a fish resembling a porpoise; a tree.
<LEND>

<L>46759<pc>1009-b<k1>SiSUla<k2>SiSUla
{%Śiśūla, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a child or a young animal,
(Sāy. {%= śiśu.%})
<LEND>

<L>46760<pc>1009-b<k1>SiSvan<k2>SiSvan
{%Śiśvan%}¦ in {%saṃ-śiśvan,%} q. v.; (according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda I. 65, 5. {%śiśvā%} may either {%= tanū-%}
{%kṛtaḥ,%} ‘attenuated,’ as if fr. rt. {%śo,%} or {%= śiśunā,%}
inst. c. of {%śiśu.%})
<LEND>

<L>46761<pc>1009-b<k1>SiSvAyE<k2>SiSvAyE
{%Śiśvāyai%}¦ in Ṛg-veda X. 95, 13 {%= śive,%} i. e. {%kal-%}
{%yāṇe samupasthite sati%} (according to Sāy.).
<LEND>

<L>46762<pc>1009-b<k1>SiSvi<k2>SiSvi
{%Śiśvi, is, is, i,%}¦ swelling, increasing, thriving, &c.,
in {%su-śiśvi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46763<pc>1009-b<k1>SiSna<k2>SiSna
{#SiSna#}¦ {%śiśna, as,%} m. (according to Yāska
fr. rt. {%śnath;%} according to others fr. rt. {%śaś%}), the
male generative organ, (also {%am,%} n. in Ved.); ({%am%}),
n., Ved. a tail; thread steeped in rice-water, (said
by Sāy. to be fr. rt. {%snā,%} Ṛg-veda I. 105, 8.)
{%—Śiśna-deva, as,%} m. ‘having the generative organ
for a god’ or ‘sporting with that organ,’ a lustful or
unchaste man, (Sāy. {%śiśnena dīvyanti krīḍanti%}
{%iti śiśna-devāḥ abrahmacaryāḥ ity arthaḥ%}); a
tailed or priapic demon. {%—Śiśnodara-parāyaṇa%}
{%(˚na-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} addicted to lust and gluttony.
<LEND>

<L>46764<pc>1009-b<k1>SiSriyARa<k2>SiSriyARa
{#SiSriyARa#}¦ {%śiśriyāṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śri%}),
Ved. seeking refuge, taking refuge.
<LEND>

<L>46765<pc>1009-b<k1>SiSvidAna<k2>SiSvidAna
{#SiSvidAna#}¦ {%śiśvidāna, as, ā, am%} (according
to Uṇādi-s. II. 93. fr. rt. {%śvit,%} ‘to be white,’ with
substitution of {%d%} for {%t%} and elision of the desiderative
affix {%s%}), ‘being pure,’ innocent, virtuous ({%= śukla-%}
{%karman%}); guilty, sinful, wicked ({%= kṛṣṇa-kar-%}
{%man%} according to some).
<LEND>
[Page1009-c+ 78]

<L>46766<pc>1009-c<k1>Siz<k2>Siz<h>1
{#Siz#} 1¦. {%śiṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%śeṣati, śiśeṣa,%}
{%śekṣyati, aśikṣat, śeṣṭum,%} to hurt,
injure, kill.
<LEND>

<L>46767<pc>1009-c<k1>Siz<k2>Siz<h>2
{#Siz#} 2¦. {%śiṣ,%} cl. 7. P. {%śinaṣṭi, śiśeṣa,%}
{%śekṣyati, aśiṣat, śeṣṭum,%} to leave,
leave remaining; to distinguish from others, indi-
vidualize; (according to some also) cl. 1. P. {%śeṣati,%}
&c., to leave a residue, allow to remain, spare:
Pass. {%śiṣyate,%} (for {%śiṣyate,%} Pass. of rt. 1. {%śās,%} see
p. 1003), to be left remaining, remain; Caus. (or cl.
10) {%śeṣayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśīśiṣat,%} to cause to
remain, leave, allow to remain, spare: Desid. {%śi-%}
{%kṣati:%} Intens. {%śeśiṣyate, śeśeṣṭi;%} [cf. Lat.
<nsi>quœso, quœro, quœstor,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>cura;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>qvis-</nsi>
<nsi>teins, qvistjan, fra-qvisteins, fra-qvistjan, fra-</nsi>
<nsi>qvistnan, us-qvistjan</nsi> (based on a noun <nsi>qvist</nsi> = {%śiṣṭi,%}
in the sense of ‘leaving, abandoning’), <nsi>us-haista.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46768<pc>1009-c<k1>Sizwa<k2>Sizwa<h>1
1. {%śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, remaining, residual,
anything that remains or is left. {%—1. śiṣṭa-tā,%} f. or
{%śiṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. the being left, the being residual.
<LEND>

<L>46769<pc>1009-c<k1>Sizwa<k2>Sizwa<h>2
{#Sizwa#} 2¦. {%śiṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%śās%}),
ordered, commanded; disciplined, well regulated,
educated, trained; tamed, obedient, docile; orderly,
correct, learned, wise, good; select, (perhaps refer-
rible to 1. {%śiṣṭa%}); eminent, excellent, superior, prin-
cipal, chief; ({%as%}), m. a chief; a courtier, counsellor.
 — 2. {%śiṣṭa-tā,%} f. or {%śiṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. docility;
good behaviour, urbanity, civility. {%—Śiṣṭa-sabhā,%}
f. an assembly of chiefs, council of state. {%—Śiṣṭa-%}
{%sabhācāra (˚bhā-āc˚), as,%} m. history or tradition of
eminent persons. {%—Śiṣṭa-sammata, as, ā, am,%}
approved or loved by the learned, (Manu III. 39.)
{%—Śiṣṭācaraṇa (˚ṭa-āc˚), am,%} n. the conduct or
procedure of the virtuous, practice of the good, gen-
tlemanly behaviour. {%—Śiṣṭācāra (˚ṭa-āc˚), as,%} m.
the practice or traditional usages of the virtuous; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), well-behaved; the approved conduct of the
wise and good, good manners, gentlemanly conduct,
proper behaviour. {%—Śiṣṭācāra-viruddha, as, ā, am,%}
opposed to the practice of the virtuous. {%—Śiṣṭā-%}
{%cārāviruddha (˚ra-av˚), as, ā, am,%} not opposed
to the practice of the virtuous.
<LEND>

<L>46770<pc>1009-c<k1>Sizwi<k2>Sizwi
{%Śiṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. ruling, governing, commanding; an
order, command; correction, punishment, chastise-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>46771<pc>1009-c<k1>SizwvA<k2>SizwvA
{%Śiṣṭvā,%}¦ ind. having governed or regulated or
trained; having ordered or decreed.
<LEND>

<L>46772<pc>1009-c<k1>Sizya<k2>Sizya
{%Śiṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taught, docile [cf. {%a-ś˚%}];
({%as%}), m. a scholar, pupil, disciple, ({%ku-śiṣya,%} a bad
or wicked pupil); passion, anger; violence. {%—Śiṣya-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%śiṣya-tva, am,%} n. the state or character
of a pupil, pupilage, instruction. {%—Śiṣya-param-%}
{%parā,%} f. a series or succession of pupils or disciples.
{%—Śiṣya-putra, as,%} m. a pupil equal to a son.
{%—Śiṣya-pradeya, as, ā, am,%} to be delivered or
imparted to pupils. {%—Śiṣya-śiṣṭi, is,%} f. chastise-
ment or correction of a pupil.
<LEND>

<L>46773<pc>1009-c<k1>SizyamARa<k2>SizyamARa
{%Śiṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being ruled or controlled;
being instructed or trained.
<LEND>

<L>46774<pc>1009-c<k1>Sihla<k2>Sihla
{#Sihla#}¦ {%śihla%} or {%śihlaka, as,%} m. (also written
{%sihla,%} q. v.), olibanum, benzoin, Indian incense ({%=%}
{%śilā-rasa%}).
<LEND>

<L>46775<pc>1009-c<k1>Sihlana<k2>Sihlana
{%Śihlana, as,%}¦ m., N. of the author of the Śānti-
śataka, (sometimes written {%śilhana.%})
<LEND>

<L>46776<pc>1009-c<k1>SI<k2>SI<h>1
{#SI#} 1¦. {%śī%} (perhaps connected with rt.
{%śad%}), cl. 2. A. {%śete%} (1st du. {%śevahe,%} 3rd du.
{%śayāte,%} 1st pl. {%śemahe,%} 3rd pl. {%śerate,%} Ved. cl. 1.
{%śayate,%} but {%śaye = śete,%} Ṛg-veda III. 55, 4, cf. Pāṇ.
VII. 1, 41; Ved. and ep. also P. in some tenses),
Impf. {%aśeta%} (P. {%aśayat,%} Ved. 2nd du. P. {%aśāyatam,%}
3rd du. A. {%aśayātām,%} 3rd pl. {%aśerata%}), Pot. {%śa-%}
{%yīta%} (ep. {%śayet%}), Impv. {%śetām%} (2nd sing. {%śeṣva,%}
1st du. {%śayāvahai,%} 3rd pl. {%śeratām%}), {%śiśye, śa-%}
{%yiṣyate%} (ep. {%śeṣyati%}), {%aśayiṣṭa, śayitum%} (Ved.
Inf. {%śayadhyai%}), to lie, lie down, lie on the ground,
recline; to rest, repose; to sleep: Pass. {%śayyate,%}
Aor. {%aśāyi:%} Caus. {%śāyayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
lie down, put down, throw down; to throw, put;
[Page1010-a+ 79]
to allow to rest: Desid. {%śiśayiṣate:%} Intens. {%śā-%}
{%śayyate, śeśayīti, śeśeti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κεῖ-μαι</lang> (<lang n="greek">κεῖσαι</lang>
{%= śeṣe,%} <lang n="greek">κεῖται</lang> {%= śete%}); <lang n="greek">κοί-τη, κοι-μά-ω, κῶ-μο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κῶμα, κώ-μη:</lang> Lat. <nsi>qui-e-s, qui-e-sc-o, civi-s:</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>hai-m-s, he-thyô, haithi, heiwa,</nsi> ‘house,’ in
comp. <nsi>heiva-franja:</nsi> Old Island. <nsi>hei-mr,</nsi> ‘house:’
Old Germ. <nsi>haim, heim, hī-wī, hi-wo,</nsi> ‘husband;’
<nsi>hiwa,</nsi> ‘wife;’ <nsi>hijan, hiwjan,</nsi> ‘to marry;’ <nsi>hīrāt:</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>Heirath:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>ham, hœman:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>sze†tra,</nsi> ‘a tent;’ <nsi>kie†ma,</nsi> ‘a village.’]
<LEND>

<L>46777<pc>1010-a<k1>SayanIya<k2>SayanIya
{%Śayanīya, śayita,%}¦ &c. See p. 994, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>46778<pc>1010-a<k1>SAyaka<k2>SAyaka
{%Śāyaka.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>46779<pc>1010-a<k1>SiSyAna<k2>SiSyAna
{%Śiśyāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ lying, reclining.
<LEND>

<L>46780<pc>1010-a<k1>SI<k2>SI<h>2
2. {%śī, īs,%}¦ f. sleep, repose; tranquillity, devotion,
complete absorption in religious worship.
<LEND>

<L>46781<pc>1010-a<k1>SIk<k2>SIk
{#SIk#}¦ {%śīk%} (also written {%sīk,%} and per-
haps connected with rt. 1. {%sic%}), cl. 1.
A. {%śīkate, śiśīke, śīkiṣyate, aśīkiṣṭa, śīkitum,%}
to sprinkle, wet, moisten; to go gently, move; cl.
1. 10. P. {%śikati, śīkayati,%} to bear ill or impatiently,
be angry; to bear patiently, be patient; to touch
(= rt. {%cīk%}); to speak (cl. 10); to shine (cl. 10).
<LEND>

<L>46782<pc>1010-a<k1>SIkara<k2>SIkara
{%Śīkara, as,%}¦ m. thin or drizzling rain, drizzle,
spray, mist, rain driven by wind; a drop of rain or
water, (also written {%sīkara%}); ({%am%}), n. the resin of
the Sarala pine or the tree itself. {%—Śīkaraugha%}
{%(˚ra-ogha), as, ā, am,%} abounding with mist, having
much spray or thin rain.
<LEND>

<L>46783<pc>1010-a<k1>Sikarin<k2>Sikarin
{%Śikarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ sprinkling, drizzling.
<LEND>

<L>46784<pc>1010-a<k1>SIGra<k2>SIGra
{#SIGra#}¦ {%śīghra, as, ā, am%} (etymology doubt-
ful), quick, speedy; ({%as%}), m. (in astronomy) con-
junction; (according to others) parallax; N. of a
king; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; a particular plant, {%=%}
{%dantī; (am),%} ind. quickly, rapidly, swiftly; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">κιχάνω;</lang> Angl. Sax. <nsi>higian.</nsi>] {%—Śighra-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. (in astronomy) the calculation of the conjunc-
tion (of a planet). {%—Śighra-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} acting
speedily or expeditiously. {%—Śighra-kṛtya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} to be done quickly, what must be done quickly.
{%—Śighra-kendra, am,%} n. (in astronomy) the dis-
tance from the conjunction (of a planet), commuta-
tion. {%—Śighra-kopin, ī, inī, i,%} quickly angry, irri-
table. {%—Śīghra-ga, as, ā, am,%} going quickly; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a king. {%—Śighra-gantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} or
{%śīghra-gamana, as, ā, am,%} going quickly. {%—Śī-%}
{%ghra-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going or moving quickly,
swift, expeditious. {%—Śīghra-cetana, as, ā, am,%}
having quick intellect, very sagacious; ({%as%}), m. a
dog. {%—Śīghra-janman, ā,%} m. ‘having quick birth,’
the plant Cæsalpinia Bonducella; another plant {%(=%}
{%karañja)%}. {%—Śīghra-tara, as, ā, am,%} more quick,
very swift; ({%am%}), ind. as swiftly as possible. {%—Śī-%}
{%ghra-tā,%} f. or {%śīghra-tva, am,%} n. quickness, speed,
rapidity. {%—Śīghra-paridhi, is,%} m. (in astronomy)
the epicycle of a conjunction. {%—Śīghra-puṣpa, as,%}
m. ‘quick-flowering,’ a kind of plant {%(= agastya).%}
{%—Śīghra-phala, am,%} n. (in astronomy) the equation
of a conjunction. {%—Śīghra-buddhi, is, is, i,%} quick-
witted, having quick apprehension, acute, sharp. {%—Śī-%}
{%ghra-yāna, am,%} n. rapid motion. {%—Śighra-laṅ-%}
{%ghana, as, ā, am,%} springing or jumping quickly,
moving rapidly. {%—Śighra-vega, as, ā, am,%} having
a rapid course, impetuous. {%—Śīghra-vedhin, ī,%} m.
‘quickly piercing (the mark),’ a good archer. {%—Śī-%}
{%ghra-śrotas, ās, ās, as,%} having a rapid current (said
of a river) {%—Śīghrocca (˚ra-uc˚), as,%} m. ‘the apex of
the swiftest motion,’ a conjunction (in astronomy).
<LEND>

<L>46785<pc>1010-a<k1>SiGrAya<k2>SiGrAya
{%Śighrāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%śīghrāyate, -yitum,%} to be-
come quick or rapid; to hasten.
<LEND>

<L>46786<pc>1010-a<k1>SIGrAyamARa<k2>SIGrAyamARa
{%Śīghrāyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ becoming quick,
going rapidly, hastening.
<LEND>

<L>46787<pc>1010-a<k1>SIGrin<k2>SIGrin
{%Śīghrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ speedy, one who is quick or
expeditious.
<LEND>

<L>46788<pc>1010-a<k1>SIGriya<k2>SIGriya
{%Śīghriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ quick, fleet; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva; of Viṣṇu; the fighting of cats.
<LEND>

<L>46789<pc>1010-a<k1>SIGrIya<k2>SIGrIya
{%Śīghrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ quick, speedy, rapid, swift.
<LEND>

<L>46790<pc>1010-a<k1>SIGrya<k2>SIGrya
{%Śīghrya, am,%}¦ n. quickness, speed, rapidity.
<LEND>

<L>46791<pc>1010-a<k1>SIt<k2>SIt
{#SIt#}¦ {%śīt,%} ind. [cf. {%sīt%}], a sound made by
drawing in the breath to express any sudden thrill of
[Page1010-b+ 80]
pleasure or pain (but especially pleasurable sensations
during sexual enjoyments, {%= rati-kāla-dhvani%}).
{%—Śīt-kāra, as,%} m. making the above sound {%śīt;%}
a frown. {%—Śit-kṛta, am,%} n. the sound {%śīt,%} a sound
made by drawing in the breath to express pleasurable
sensations.
<LEND>

<L>46792<pc>1010-b<k1>SIta<k2>SIta
{#SIta#}¦ {%śīta, as, ā, am%} (according to some fr.
rt. {%śyai%} or fr. rt. 1. {%śī;%} according to others an
old pass. part. fr. rt. {%śo%}), cold, chilly, frigid; dull, apa-
thetic, stupid, sluggish, sleepy, (in this sense connected
with rt. 1. {%śī%}); idle, lazy, stupid; decocted, boiled;
({%am%}), n. cold, coldness; cold weather, the cold
season; water; bark or cinnamon, {%= tvaca; (as),%}
m. a small tree, Cordia Myxa; a kind of ratan,
Calamus Fasciculatus; the plant Marsilea Quadrifolia;
the Nimb tree; another plant ({%= parpaṭa%}); cam-
phor; ({%ā%}), f. a furrow; N. of the wife of Rāma,
(in these last two tenses more usually written {%sītā,%}
q. v.; but derived according to Uṇādi-s. III. 90. fr.
rt. 1. {%śī.%}) {%—Śīta-kāla, as,%} m. the cold season,
winter. {%—Śītakālīna, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the
cold season, produced in winter, wintry. {%—Śīta-%}
{%kumbha, as,%} m. the fragrant oleander, {%= kara-%}
{%vīra; (ī),%} f. an aquatic plant; [cf. {%śītalā.%}] {%—Śīta-%}
{%kṛcchra, as,%} m. a particular religious penance (con-
sisting in drinking cold water for three days, cold
milk for three days, cold ghee for three days, and
eating air or fasting for three days). {%—Śīta-kṣāra,%}
{%am,%} n. refined borax. {%—Śīta-gandha, am,%} n. ‘hav-
ing cool fragrance,’ white sandal. {%—Śīta-gu, us,%} m.
‘having cold rays,’ the moon. {%—Śita-campaka, as,%}
m. a lamp; a mirror; pleasing, satisfying (?). {%—Śita-%}
{%jvara, as,%} m. a cold fever, ague. {%—Śīta-tā,%} f. or
{%śīta-tva, am,%} n. coldness, cold. {%—Śīta-dīdhiti, is,%}
m. ‘cold-rayed,’ the moon. {%—Śita-parṇī,%} f. ‘cool-
leaved,’ the plant Cleome Pentaphylla; another plant
{%(= arka)%}. {%—Śīta-pallava, as,%} m. ‘cool-blossomed,’
a kind of plant, Ardisea Solanacea; ({%ā%}), f. another
plant {%(= bhūmi-jambu)%}. {%—Śīta-pākinī,%} f. a kind
of medicinal root ({%= kākolī%}); another plant {%(=%}
{%mahā-samaṅgā)%}. {%—Śita-pākī,%} f. a medicinal root
({%= kākolī%}); the plant Sida Cordifolia; another plant
{%(= guñjā)%}. {%—Śīta-pitta, am,%} n. increase of bile or
phlegm caused by cold. {%—Śita-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘cool-
flowered,’ the Śirīṣa tree; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant, {%=%}
{%ati-balā; (am),%} n. a fragrant grass, Cyperus Ro-
tundus. {%—Śīta-puṣpaka, as,%} m. a kind of plant,
{%= arka; (am),%} n. storax or benzoin. {%—Śīta-pū-%}
{%tanā,%} f. epithet of a particular Graha or disease of
children, (see {%graha, pūtanā.%}) {%—Śita-prabha, as,%}
m. ‘having cool radiance,’ camphor. {%—Śita-priya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘fond of cold,’ a plant {%(= parpaṭa)%}. {%—Śīta-%}
{%phala, as,%} m. ‘having cool fruit,’ the tree Ficus Glo-
merata; another tree {%(= śelu)%}. {%—Śīta-balā,%} f. a kind
of plant {%(= mahā-samaṅgā)%}. {%—Śīta-bhānu, us,%} m.
‘cool-rayed,’ the moon. {%—Śīta-bhīru, us, us, u,%}
afraid of cold; ({%us%}), m. Arabian jasmine, Jasminum
Zambac. {%—Śita-bhojin, ī, inī, i,%} eating cold viands.
{%—Śīta-mañjarī,%} f. a particular plant {%(= śephālī).%}
{%—Śīta-mayūkha, as,%} or {%śīta-marīci, is,%} m. ‘cool-
rayed,’ the moon; camphor. {%—Śita-mūlaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a cool root; ({%am%}), n. the root of the
Uśīra. {%—Śīta-ramya, as, ā, am,%} pleasant in cold
weather; ({%as%}), m. a lamp. {%—Śīta-raśmi, is,%} m.
‘cool-rayed,’ the moon; camphor. {%—Śīta-ruc, k,%} or
{%śīta-ruci, is,%} m. ‘having cool light,’ the moon.
{%—Śīta-valka, as, ā, am,%} having cool bark; ({%as%}),
m. the Udumbara tree. {%—Śīta-vīryaka, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing cold seed,’ the fig-tree {%(= plakṣa)%}. {%—Śīta-%}
{%śiva, as, ā,%} m. f. a kind of fennel ({%= madhurikā,%}
{%miśreyā%}); the Śamī tree; ({%am%}), n. a sort of resin,
storax or benzoin; rock-salt. {%—Śita-śūka, as,%} m.
‘having cold awns or beards,’ barley. {%—Śīta-śparśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} cool to the touch or feeling, cooling, re-
freshing, pleasant. {%—Śīta-saha, as, ā, am,%} bearing
or enduring cold; ({%as%}), m. the Pīlu tree (growing in
the Himālaya mountains); ({%ā%}), f. a small tree. Vitex
Negundo; another plant {%(= vāsantī)%}. {%—Śīta-hara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} removing cold. {%—Śītāṃśu (˚ta-aṃ˚), us,%} m.
‘cool-rayed,’ the moon; camphor. {%—Śitāṃśu-tā,%} f.
[Page1010-c+ 79]
coldness of ray, chilliness. {%—Śītāṃśu-taila, am,%} n.
camphor oil, camphor {{linament->liniment||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}. {%—Śitākula (˚ta-%}
{%āk˚), as, ā, am,%} benumbed with cold, frozen. {%—Śī-%}
{%tāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} cold-bodied, having
cold limbs; ({%as%}), m. a kind of fever (supposed to
arise from a vitiated state of one of the humors of
the body); ({%ī%}), f. a particular plant {%(= haṃsa-padī).%}
{%—Śītāda (˚ta-ada), as,%} m. scorbutic affection or
otherwise diseased state of the gums. {%—Śītādri (˚ta-%}
{%ad˚), is,%} m. the snowy mountains, the Himālayas.
{%—Śītābalā (˚tā-ab˚),%} a kind of plant {%(= mahā-%}
{%samaṅgā)%}. {%—Śītārta (˚ta-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} pained
or pinched with cold, suffering from cold, chilled,
shivering, cold. {%—Śītāśman (˚ta-aś˚), ā,%} m. a cold
stone; the moon-gem, crystal. {%—Śītī-bhāva, as,%} m.
cold state, coldness, cold, coolness; composure; final
emancipation. {%—Śītī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c.,
to be or become cold. {%—Śītottama (˚ta-ut˚), am,%}
n. ‘the best of cold things,’ water. {%—Śītoda (˚ta-%}
{%uda),%} ‘having cool water,’ N. of a lake; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a river.
<LEND>

<L>46793<pc>1010-c<k1>SItaka<k2>SItaka
{%Śītaka, as,%}¦ m. cold weather, the cold season,
winter; a lazy or dilatory man, a dull person; a
happy or contented man, one without cares or
anxieties ({%= su-sthita%}); the plant Marsilea Den-
tata; a scorpion.
<LEND>

<L>46794<pc>1010-c<k1>SItala<k2>SItala
{%Śītala, as, ā, am,%}¦ cool, cold, frigid, chilly; ({%as%}),
m. the moon; the plant Marsilea Quadrifolia; a
particular Jina or Arhat, (the tenth of the twenty-
four Tīrthakāras); a religious ceremony observed
upon the sun's entering Aries; the small tree Cordia
Myxa; the Campaka tree; a sort of camphor; tur-
pentine or the resin of Shorea Robusta; ({%ā%}), f.
small-pox ({%= masūrikā%}); the goddess presiding
over or inflicting small-pox; a kind of aquatic plant
(perhaps the Phrynium Dichotymum, from the split
stems of which a cool mat is made; {%= śīta-kumbhī,%}
{%śukla-puṣpā%}); other plants, {%= kuṭumbinī; = ārā-%}
{%ma-śītalā; = bālukā; (ī),%} f. a kind of aquatic
plant, see above; small-pox; ({%am%}), n. cold, cold-
ness, coolness, cold weather; the cold season; green
sulphate of iron ({%= puṣpa-kāsīsa%}); benzoin or
storax; sandal, white sandal; a lotus; a pearl; the
root of the Andropogon Muricatus. {%—Śītala-cchada,%}
{%as,%} m. a white leaf; ({%as, ā, am%}), having white
leaves; ({%as%}), m. the Campaka tree. {%—Śitala-jala,%}
{%am,%} n. cold water; a lotus. {%—Śītala-tara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} more cool, colder. {%—Śītala-tā,%} f. or {%śītala-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. coldness, coolness, frigidity, chilliness; in-
sensibility, apathy {%(= jaḍa-tā)%}. {%—Śītala-prada,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} giving or producing coolness; ({%as%}), m.
sandal. {%—Śītala-prasāda, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Śī-%}
{%tala-vāta, as,%} m. a cool breeze, cold wind. {%—Śītala-%}
{%vātaka, as, ā, am,%} having cool breezes; ({%as%}), m.
the plant Marsilea Quadrifolia {%(= aśana-parṇī).%}
{%—Śītala-ṣaṣṭhī,%} f. or {%śītalā-ṣaṣṭhī,%} the sixth
of the light half of the month Māgha (when only
cold food is eaten). {%—Śītalā-pūjā,%} f. worship of the
goddess Śītalā (a festival on the eighth day of the
second half of the month Phālguna).
<LEND>

<L>46795<pc>1010-c<k1>SItalaka<k2>SItalaka
{%Śītalaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of plant, {%= maruvaka;%}
{%(am),%} n. a white lotus ({%= sitotpala%}).
<LEND>

<L>46796<pc>1010-c<k1>SItAlu<k2>SItAlu
{%Śītālu, us, us, u,%}¦ suffering from cold, shivering
with cold, chilled, cold.
<LEND>

<L>46797<pc>1010-c<k1>SItikA<k2>SItikA
{%Śītikā,%}¦ f., Ved. coldness, cold. {%—Śītikā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. possessing coldness.
<LEND>

<L>46798<pc>1010-c<k1>SItya<k2>SItya
{%Śītya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cooled or chilled;
ploughed, tilled, (in this sense more usually {%sītya.%})
<LEND>

<L>46799<pc>1010-c<k1>SItkAra<k2>SItkAra
{#SItkAra#}¦ {%śīt-kāra, śit-kṛta.%} See {%śīt,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>46800<pc>1010-c<k1>SIDu<k2>SIDu
{#SIDu#}¦ {%śīdhu, us, u,%} m. n. (according to
Uṇādi-s. IV. 38. fr. rt. 1. {%śī,%} but also written {%sīdhu%}),
a spirit distilled from molasses, any intoxicating
liquor, rum; wine. {%—Śīdhu-gandha, as,%} m. ‘smell-
ing of spirits,’ the Vakula tree, Mimusops Elengi.
{%—Śīdhu-pa, as, ī, am,%} drinking spirits, a drinker
of spirits, dram-drinker.
<LEND>

<L>46801<pc>1010-c<k1>SIna<k2>SIna
{#SIna#}¦ {%śīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śyai,%} cf. {%śīta%}),
congealed, thick (as oil or butter); ({%as%}), m. a fool,
blockhead; a large snake.
<LEND>
[Page1011-a+ 73]

<L>46802<pc>1011-a<k1>SIpAla<k2>SIpAla
{#SIpAla#}¦ {%śīpāla, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of plant,
(Sāy. {%= śaivāla,%} Ṛg-veda X. 68, 5; cf. {%śepāla.%})
<LEND>

<L>46803<pc>1011-a<k1>SIPAlikA<k2>SIPAlikA
{#SIPAlikA#}¦ {%śīphālikā,%} f. the plant Nyctan-
thes Tristis, (also written {%śephāli, śephālikā.%})
<LEND>

<L>46804<pc>1011-a<k1>SIB<k2>SIB
{#SIB#}¦ {%śībh,%} cl. 1. A. {%śībhate, śiśībhe, śī-%}
{%bhitum,%} to boast: Caus. {%śībhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Aor. {%aśiśībhat.%}
<LEND>

<L>46805<pc>1011-a<k1>SiBya<k2>SiBya
{%Śibhya, as,%}¦ m. an epithet of Śiva; a bull.
<LEND>

<L>46806<pc>1011-a<k1>SIBam<k2>SIBam
{#SIBam#}¦ {%śībham,%} ind., Ved. quickly, speedily
({%= kṣipram,%} Naigh. II. 15).
<LEND>

<L>46807<pc>1011-a<k1>SIBava<k2>SIBava
{#SIBava#}¦ {%śībhava, as,%} m. thin rain ({%= śīkara%}).
<LEND>

<L>46808<pc>1011-a<k1>SIma<k2>SIma
{#SIma#}¦ {%śīma%} in {%su-śīma,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46809<pc>1011-a<k1>SIyamAna<k2>SIyamAna
{#SIyamAna#}¦ {%śīyamāna.%} See rt. {%śad,%} p. 991.
<LEND>

<L>46810<pc>1011-a<k1>SIr<k2>SIr
{#SIr#}¦ {%śīr.%} See {%śir.%}
<LEND>

<L>46811<pc>1011-a<k1>SIra<k2>SIra<h>1
{#SIra#} 1¦. {%śīra, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 13. fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}), a large snake, the boa constrictor.
<LEND>

<L>46812<pc>1011-a<k1>SIrin<k2>SIrin
{%Śīrin, ī,%}¦ m. a kind of plant ({%= harid-garbha%}).
<LEND>

<L>46813<pc>1011-a<k1>SIra<k2>SIra<h>2
{#SIra#} 2¦. {%śīra, as, ā, am%} (according to some
fr. rt. 1. {%śi%} or fr. rt. 2. {%śrī,%} ‘to cook’), Ved. piercing,
burning; an epithet of Agni, (according to Nirukta
IV. 14. fr. rt. 1. {%śī,%} and explained by {%anuśayin%} or
{%vāsin,%} which Sāy. interprets to mean ‘sleeping or
lying in the sacrifices.’) {%—Śīra-śocis, is, is, is,%} Ved.
having burning or piercing splendor, gleaming like
lightning, (Sāy. {%= śayana-svabhāva-rociṣka,%} ‘he
whose brilliance has the character of lying or sleep-
ing,’ or {%aśana-śīla-jvāla,%} ‘he whose flame has the
character of pervading.’)
<LEND>

<L>46814<pc>1011-a<k1>SIrRa<k2>SIrRa
{#SIrRa#}¦ {%śīrṇa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), withered,
shriveled, shrunk, dry, sere, decayed, rotten; thin,
wasted, emaciated, small, slender, broken off, shivered,
shattered, injured; ({%am%}), n. a sort of perfume {%(=%}
{%sthauṇeyaka)%}. {%—Śīrṇa-tā,%} f. ‘having a shriveled
or slender stem,’ or {%śīrṇa-tva, am,%} n. the state of
being withered or decayed, a withered condition,
emaciation. {%—Śīrṇa-nālā,%} f. the plant Hemionites
Cordifolia {%(= śīrṇa-mālā)%}. {%—Śīrṇa-pattra, am,%} n.
a withered leaf; ({%as, ā, am%}), having withered or
shriveled leaves; ({%as%}), m. the tree Pterospermum
Acerifolium; a kind of Lodhra ({%= paṭṭikā-lodhra%});
the Nimb tree. {%—Śīrṇa-parṇa, am,%} n. a withered
leaf; ({%as, ā, am%}), having withered or shriveled
leaves; ({%as%}), m. the Nimb tree. {%—Śīrṇa-pāda,%}
{%as,%} m. a thin foot; ‘having shriveled feet,’ epithet
of Yama (said to have become so in consequence of
his mother's curse). {%—Śīrṇa-puṣpikā,%} f. a kind
of fennel, Anethum Sowa. {%—Śīrṇa-māla, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a withered garland; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
plant {%(= śīrṇa-nālā)%}. {%—Śīrṇa-mūla, as, ā, am,%}
having withered roots, withered at the root. {%—Śīrṇa-%}
{%vṛnta, am,%} n. ‘slender-stalked,’ a water-melon.
{%—Śīrṇāṅghri (˚ṇa-aṅ˚), is,%} m. ‘having shriveled
feet,’ epithet of Yama.
<LEND>

<L>46815<pc>1011-a<k1>SIryamARa<k2>SIryamARa
{%Śīryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being broken or shattered.
<LEND>

<L>46816<pc>1011-a<k1>SIrta<k2>SIrta
{#SIrta#}¦ {%śīrta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śri%}), Ved.
served.
<LEND>

<L>46817<pc>1011-a<k1>SIrvi<k2>SIrvi
{#SIrvi#}¦ {%śīrvi, is, is, i%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 54. fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), destructive, hurtful, injurious,
mischievous, malignant; savage.
<LEND>

<L>46818<pc>1011-a<k1>SIrza<k2>SIrza
{#SIrza#}¦ {%śīrṣa, am,%} n. (an abbreviated form
of {%śīrṣan,%} col. 2), the head, skull; black Agallochum
or aloe wood ({%= kṛṣṇāguru%}); [cf. probably Lat.
<nsi>collum;</nsi> Old Germ. and Angl. Sax. <nsi>hals.</nsi>] {%—Śīr-%}
{%ṣa-ghātin, ī, inī, i,%} striking the head; beheading,
decapitating. {%—Śīrṣa-ccheda, as,%} m. or {%śīrṣa-%}
{%cchedana, am,%} n. the act of cutting off the head,
decapitating, decapitation. {%—Śīrṣacchedika, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} deserving decapitation. {%—Śīrṣa-cchedin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} cutting off the head, decapitating. {%—Śīrṣa-%}
{%cchedya, as, ā, am,%} to be beheaded, meriting death
by decapitation. {%—Śīrṣa-rakṣa, am,%} n. ‘head-
protector,’ a helmet. {%—Śīrṣa-śoka, as,%} m. pain in
the head. {%—Śīrṣāmaya (˚ṣa-ām˚), as,%} m. disease
[Page1011-b+ 80]
or morbid affection of the head. {%—Śīrṣāvaśeṣī-%}
{%kṛ (˚ṣa-av˚),%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to leave
only the head undestroyed. {%—Śīrṣodaya (˚ṣa-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. ‘head-rising’ or ‘rising in front,’ epi-
thet of the zodiacal signs Gemini, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpio, Aquarius, and Pisces.
<LEND>

<L>46819<pc>1011-b<k1>SIrzaka<k2>SIrzaka
{%Śīrṣaka, am,%}¦ n. the head, skull; a helmet; a
cap, hat; judgment, award, verdict, sentence, result
of judicial investigation; ({%as%}), m., N. of Rāhu (the
personified ascending node). {%—Śīrṣaka-stha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} being in or on the head, staying on the
head; abiding by an award or verdict, submitting
to the penalty imposed.
<LEND>

<L>46820<pc>1011-b<k1>SIrzakti<k2>SIrzakti
{%Śīrṣakti, is,%}¦ f. (probably fr. {%śīr = śīrṣa + sakti%}),
Ved. a pain or affection in the head.
<LEND>

<L>46821<pc>1011-b<k1>SIrzaRya<k2>SIrzaRya
{%Śīrṣaṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the head
(Ved.); ({%am%}), n. a helmet; a cap; a rope fastened
to a horse's head, head-rope, halter (Ved.); ({%as%}), m.
clean and unentangled hair; [cf. {%śirasya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46822<pc>1011-b<k1>SIrzan<k2>SIrzan
{%Śīrṣan, a,%}¦ n. (connected with {%śiras,%} but not
declined in the later language except in acc. pl. and
remaining cases, where it may be optionally substi-
tuted for {%śiras;%} it is also used in some comps., e. g.
{%sahasra-ś˚%}), the head; any eminent or illustrious
person (Ved., e. g. {%śīrṣṇe-śīrṣṇe = śreṣṭhāya%}
{%śreṣṭhāya,%} to every eminent person, Ṛg-veda VII.
18, 24).
<LEND>

<L>46823<pc>1011-b<k1>SIl<k2>SIl
{#SIl#}¦ {%śīl%} (perhaps to be regarded as a
Nom. fr. {%śīla%} below), cl. 1. P. {%śīlati,%}
{%śiśīla, śīliṣyati, śīlitum,%} to meditate, contem-
plate, intend; to serve, worship, honour; to act, do,
practise, make; cl. 10. P. or Caus. {%śīlayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%aśiśīlat,%} to honour, worship; to do, make,
practise repeatedly, exercise, engage in; to act or
practise excessively, exceed; to put on, wear, pos-
sess; to visit, frequent.
<LEND>

<L>46824<pc>1011-b<k1>SIla<k2>SIla
{%Śīla, am,%}¦ n. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 38. fr. rt.
1. {%śī;%} according to others fr. rt. 2. {%śiṣ%}), disposition,
inclination, character, nature, natural disposition,
quality, tendency, custom, habit, usage, (in all these
senses said to be also {%as,%} m.); practice, behaviour,
conduct, (said to be also {%as,%} m.); good disposition
or character, good nature, amiability, good conduct,
moral practice, piety; virtue, morality, steadiness;
form, shape, beauty; (in all the preceding senses
often used at the end of adj. comps., e. g. {%dāna-%}
{%śīla, as, ā, am,%} disposed to give, cf. {%abhivādana-%}
{%ś˚, guṇa-ś˚, māṃsa-ś˚, puṇya-ś˚, mṛgayā-ś˚,%}
{%ku-ś˚, su-ś˚, vi-ś˚%}); ({%as%}), m. a large snake, (in this
sense fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}); ({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of the
Muni Kauṇḍinya; [cf. Slav. <nsi>sila,</nsi> ‘strength, power.’]
{%—Śīla-jñāna-nidhi, is,%} m. a treasury of virtue and
knowledge. {%—Śīla-taṭa, as, ā, am,%} having virtue
for a bank or shore (said figuratively of a river).
{%—Śīla-tas,%} ind. according to character, by natural
disposition; in regard to the character. {%—Śīla-tā,%} f.
or {%śīla-tva, am,%} n. disposition, inclination; quality;
conversancy, practice. {%—Śīla-dhārin, ī,%} m. ‘virtue-
holder,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Śīla-nidhi, is,%} m. a
treasure of virtue. {%—Śīla-pāramitā,%} f. one of the
six perfections (with Buddhists). {%—Śīla-bhaṭṭārikā,%}
f., N. of a female poet. {%—Śīla-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessed of good qualities, of a good or amiable
disposition, well-conducted. {%—Śīla-vṛtta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} well-conducted, moral, steady, uniformly, well-
behaved. {%—Śīla-vṛtti, is,%} f. practice of virtue,
good behaviour, virtue. {%—Śīla-sampanna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} endowed with good nature or conduct, well-
disposed, of proper conduct or disposition, well-con-
ducted. {%—Śīlāditya (˚la-ād˚), as,%} m., N. of a son
of Vikramāditya ({%= pratāpa-śīla%}).
<LEND>

<L>46825<pc>1011-b<k1>SIlana<k2>SIlana
{%Śīlana, am,%}¦ n. repeated practice, habitual per-
formance, constant study (of the Śāstras &c.), ex-
cessive performance or exercise; wearing, putting on,
possessing; serving, honouring.
<LEND>

<L>46826<pc>1011-b<k1>SIlayat<k2>SIlayat
{%Śīlayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ worshipping, honouring;
practising.
<LEND>

<L>46827<pc>1011-b<k1>SIlita<k2>SIlita
{%Śīlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ practised, exercised, skilled in,
conversant with; endowed with, possessed of; visited,
frequented; ({%am%}), n. practice, conduct.
<LEND>
[Page1011-c+ 76]

<L>46828<pc>1011-c<k1>SIvan<k2>SIvan
{#SIvan#}¦ {%śīvan, ā,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 113. fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}), a large snake, the boa con-
strictor; ({%arī%}), f. an iguana ({%= godhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46829<pc>1011-c<k1>SIvala<k2>SIvala
{#SIvala#}¦ {%śīvala, am,%} n. the aquatic plant
Vallisneria Octandra [cf. {%śevala, śaivala%}]; benzoin
or storax.
<LEND>

<L>46830<pc>1011-c<k1>SIhara<k2>SIhara
{#SIhara#}¦ {%śīhara, as,%} m., N. of a scribe.
<LEND>

<L>46831<pc>1011-c<k1>Su<k2>Su<h>1
{#Su#} 1¦. {%śu,%} a form assumed by rt. {%śvi,%} cf.
rt. {%śav.%}
<LEND>

<L>46832<pc>1011-c<k1>Su<k2>Su<h>2
{#Su#} 2¦. {%śu,%} ind. (perhaps connected with {%su%} or
with {%āśu%}), well, right, brilliantly, elegantly; quickly
({%= kṣipram,%} Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 33, 1).
<LEND>

<L>46833<pc>1011-c<k1>Sukam<k2>Sukam
{%Śukam,%}¦ ind. quickly, swiftly (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>46834<pc>1011-c<k1>SuMSumAra<k2>SuMSumAra
{#SuMSumAra#}¦ {%śuṃśumāra, as,%} m. a porpoise,
(more usually written {%śiśu-māra,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>46835<pc>1011-c<k1>Suk<k2>Suk
{#Suk#}¦ {%śuk,%} cl. 1. P. {%śokati, śokitum,%} to go,
move.
<LEND>

<L>46836<pc>1011-c<k1>Suka<k2>Suka
{#Suka#}¦ {%śuka, as,%} m. (said in Uṇādi-s. III.
42. to be fr. rt. 1. {%śubh,%} the final of the root being
rejected), a parrot; the Śirīṣa tree; a plant (com-
monly called Śeyālkāṃṭā); N. of a son of Vyāsa
(narrator of the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa to king Parīkṣit,
see {%bhāgavata-purāṇa%}); N. of the minister of
Rāvaṇa; ({%ī%}), f. a female parrot; N. of a daughter
or, as some say, wife of Kaśyapa (represented as the
mother of parrots, Viṣṇu-Purāṇa I. 21); ({%am%}), n.
cloth, clothes; the end or hem of a garment; a
helmet, turban; a particular drug and perfume ({%=%}
{%granthi-parṇa,%} commonly called Gāṃṭhiālā); the
plant Bignonia Indica. {%—Śuka-karṇī,%} see Pāṇini
IV. 1, 64. {%—Śuka-cchada, am,%} n. ‘resembling a
parrot's wing,’ a fragrant root and perfume {%(= gran-%}
{%thi-parṇa)%}. {%—Śuka-jihvā,%} f. a parrot's tongue; a
plant (commonly called Śuyā-ṭhoṃṭī or parrot's beak).
{%—Śuka-taru, us,%} m. the Śirīṣa tree, Acacia Si-
rīṣa. {%—Śuka-tuṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘parrot's beak,’ a par-
ticular position of the hands. {%—Śuka-deva, as,%} m.,
N. of the son of Vyāsa, (see {%śuka%} above.) {%—Śuka-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. the Śirīṣa tree. {%—Śuka-nāmā,%} f.
‘parrot-named,’ a kind of plant {%(= śuka-jihvā).%}
{%—Śuka-nāśana, as,%} m. ‘parrot-destroying,’ a par-
ticular plant {%(= dadru-ghna)%}. {%—Śuka-nāsa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a nose like a parrot's beak, having an
aquiline nose; ({%as%}), m. the tree Bignonia Indica;
another tree, Sesbana Grandiflora. {%—Śuka-nāsikā,%} f.
a parrot's nose; a nose like that of a parrot; an
aquiline nose. {%—Śuka-piṇḍi, is,%} f., see {%śūka-piṇḍi.%}
{%—Śuka-pitāmaha, as,%} m. ‘the grandfather of
Śuka,’ epithet of the sage Parāśara (father of Vyāsa).
{%—Śuka-puccha, as,%} m. a parrot's tail; ‘coloured
like a parrot's tail,’ sulphur. {%—Śuka-pucchaka, am,%}
n. ‘parrot-tailed,’ a particular perfume, (see {%śuka%}
above.) {%—Śuka-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘parrot-flowered,’
the Śirīṣa tree; ({%am%}), n. a kind of perfume, (see
above.) {%—Śuka-priya, as, ā, am,%} dear to parrots;
({%as%}), m. the Śirīṣa tree; ({%ā%}), f. the rose-apple,
Eugenia Jambu. {%—Śuka-vat,%} ind. like a parrot.
{%—Śuka-varha, am,%} n. a sort of perfume, (see
{%śuka.%}) {%—Śuka-vallabha, as, ā, am,%} beloved by
parrots; ({%as%}), m. the pomegranate. {%—Śuka-vāha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘parrot-borne,’ epithet of Kāma-deva (whose
vehicle is a parrot). {%—Śuka-śārika, am,%} n. a parrot
and a Maina bird. {%—Śuka-śimbā%} or {%śuka-śimbi,%} see
{%śūka-śimbā%}. {%—Śuka-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of a particular
Tantra composition. {%—Śuka-saptati, is,%} f., N. of
seventy stories related by a parrot. {%—Śukākhyā (˚ka-%}
{%ākh˚),%} f. ‘parrot-named,’ a kind of plant {%(= śuka-%}
{%nāmā)%}. {%—Śukādana (˚ka-ad˚), am,%} n. parrot's
food; ({%as%}), m. the pomegranate. {%—Śukānanā (˚ka-%}
{%ān˚),%} f. ‘parrot-beaked,’ a kind of plant {%(= śuka-%}
{%nāmā)%}. {%—Śukānuśāsana (˚ka-an˚), am,%} n., N. of
an episode extracted from the Śānti-parvan of the
Mahā-bhārata, 1. 12046 &c. {%—Śukāṣṭaka (˚ka-%}
{%aṣ˚), am,%} n., N. of eight stanzas on the Vedānta
doctrine (attributed to Śuka, the son of Vyāsa).
{%—Śukotpatti (˚ka-ut˚), is,%} f. ‘the birth of Śuka,’
[Page1012-a+ 79]
N. of part of the Śānti-parvan of the Mahā-bhārata
(beginning chapter 325, I. 12158; the story is also
related in a chapter of the Vahni-Purāṇa, called Pra-
jāpati-sarga). {%—Śukodara (˚ka-ud˚), am,%} n. the
belly of a parrot; a kind of tree ({%= tālīśa%}).
<LEND>

<L>46837<pc>1012-a<k1>SukI<k2>SukI
{%Śukī,%}¦ f. See under {%śuka.%}
<LEND>

<L>46838<pc>1012-a<k1>Sukta<k2>Sukta
{#Sukta#}¦ {%śukta, as, ā, am%} (in some senses fr.
rt. 3. {%śuc,%} in others perhaps fr. rt. 1. {%śuc%}), bright,
pure, clean; harsh, hard; sour, acid, (perhaps con-
nected with rt. {%śucy%}); united, joined ({%= śliṣṭa%});
lonely, deserted, {%= nir-jana; (am),%} n. flesh; sour
gruel ({%= kāñjika%}); vinegar or a kind of acid liquid
(prepared from roots and fruits by first steeping them
in oil and salt, then drying them, and afterwards
leaving them in water to undergo acetous fermenta-
tion; in this sense probably connected with rt. {%śucy%}),
any sour sauce; crabbed or harsh speech; ({%ā%}), f. a
sort of sorrel ({%= cukrikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46839<pc>1012-a<k1>Suktaka<k2>Suktaka
{%Śuktaka, am,%}¦ n. sour eructation.
<LEND>

<L>46840<pc>1012-a<k1>Sukti<k2>Sukti
{%Śukti, is,%}¦ f. a pearl-oyster or oyster-shell, (eight
different sources of pearls are enumerated by Malli-
nātha, viz. clouds, elephants, fish, serpents, bamboos,
conch-shells, boars, and oyster-shells, Kirāt. XII. 40);
a small shell, muscle, cockle; a conch-shell; a por-
tion of the skull (used as a cup &c.); a sort of per-
fume (in appearance like dried shell-fish, {%= nakhī%});
a curl or feather on a horse's neck or breast; a weight
of two Karṣas or four Tolas ({%= aṣṭamikā%}); he-
morrhoids ({%= arśo-roga%}); a disease of the cornea
{%(= śukla)%}. {%—Śukti-ja, am,%} n. ‘oyster-born,’ a
pearl. {%—Śukti-puṭa, am,%} n. a pearl-oyster shell.
{%—Śukti-peśī,%} f. ‘pearl-envelope,’ a pearl-oyster
shell. {%—Śukti-mat, ān,%} m. one of the seven prin-
cipal mountains or mountainous ranges of India, (see
{%kulācala,%} p. 240, col. 3); ({%atī%}), f., N. of a river.
{%—Śukti-vadhū, ūs,%} f. mother of pearl or the pearl-
oyster (which produces the pearl). {%—Śukti-vīja, am,%}
n. ‘oyster-seed,’ a pearl. {%—Śukti-sparśa, as,%} m.
dusky spots on a pearl (diminishing its value).
{%—Śukty-udbhava, as, ā, am,%} ‘sprung from or
produced in a pearl-oyster,’ epithet of a pearl.
<LEND>

<L>46841<pc>1012-a<k1>SuktikA<k2>SuktikA
{%Śuktikā,%}¦ f. a pearl-oyster; a sort of sorrel ({%=%}
{%cukrikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46842<pc>1012-a<k1>Sukra<k2>Sukra
{#Sukra#}¦ {%śukra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%śuc;%} con-
nected with {%śukla%}), bright, resplendent (Ved.); white,
pure (Ved.); ({%as%}), m. the planet Venus or its regent
(regarded as the son of Bhṛgu and preceptor of the
Daityas); the month Jyeṣṭha (May-June); N. of
Agni or fire; of a son of Vasiṣṭha; a kind of {%graha%}
or Soma cup; a kind of mystical formula, ({%bhūr,%}
{%bhuvaḥ, svar%} are said to be the three Śukras); a
kind of plant, {%= citraka; (am),%} n. semen virile,
seed of animals, sperm; male and female energy;
the essence of anything; water (Ved. {%= udaka%} ac-
cording to Naigh. I. 12); a morbid affection of the
iris (change of colour &c. accompanied by imperfect
vision, {%= śukla%}); a particular Vedic metre. {%—Śukra-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} causing or producing semen, sper-
matic; ({%as%}), m. the marrow of the bones. {%—Śukra-%}
{%cāra, as,%} m. the course of the planet Venus. {%—Śu-%}
{%kra-piś,%} Ved. having a bright or pure form ({%=%}
{%śukra-peśas,%} Nirukta VIII. 11; cf. {%viśva-piś%}).
{%—Śukra-pūta-pā, ās,%} m., Ved. one who drinks
bright and purified Soma. {%—Śukra-bhuj, k,%} m.
‘seed-eater,’ a peacock. {%—Śukra-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%}
semen-produced; ({%ūs%}), m. ‘semen-site,’ the marrow
of the bones. {%—Śukra-varcas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. hav-
ing bright lustre or colour. {%—Śukra-varṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. bright-coloured, resplendent. {%—Śukra-%}
{%vāra, as,%} m. ‘Venus' day,’ Friday. {%—Śukra-vāsas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having a bright or white robe,
clad in white, (Sāy. {%= śveta-vasana%} or {%nirmala-%}
{%dīpti,%} Ṛg-veda I. 113, 7.) {%—Śukra-śiṣya, as,%} m.
‘pupil of Śukra,’ a demon, Asura, Daitya, enemy of
the gods, (see above.) {%—Śukra-śoca, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. brightly shining, (Sāy. {%= jvala-dīpta.%}) {%—Śu-%}
{%kra-śocis, is, is, is,%} Ved. having bright colour, having
resplendent lustre or majesty. {%—Śukrāṅga (˚ra-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘having a brilliant body,’ a peacock;
[Page1012-b+ 80]
[cf. {%śuklāṅga.%}] {%—Śukrācārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m.
the regent of the planet Venus and preceptor of
the Daityas. {%—Śukreśvara (˚ra-īś˚),%} N. of a
Liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>46843<pc>1012-b<k1>Sukrala<k2>Sukrala
{%Śukrala, as, ā, am,%}¦ spermatic, seminal, augment-
ing the seminal secretion; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of fragrant
grass ({%= uccaṭā;%} considered by some to be a sort
of Cyperus, by others Zedoary).
<LEND>

<L>46844<pc>1012-b<k1>Sukriya<k2>Sukriya
{%Śukriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to Śukra, sacred
to Śukra; seminal, spermatic; ({%am%}), n. epithet of a
part of the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā (chapters 36-40).
<LEND>

<L>46845<pc>1012-b<k1>Sukla<k2>Sukla
{#Sukla#}¦ {%śukla, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. 3. {%śuc;%} connected
with {%śukra%}), light, bright, white, of a white colour,
pure, unsullied; ({%as%}), m. a white colour; the twenty-
fourth of the astronomical Yogas; epithet of the thirty-
seventh (or third) year of Jupiter's cycle of sixty years;
the light half of a month from new to full moon or
any lunar day in it; epithet of Śiva; ({%am%}), n. silver;
a disease of the cornea or white part of the eye
(opacity, albugo); fresh butter; sour gruel; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of Sarasvatī; clayed or candied sugar; a kind of
root ({%= kākolī%}); a kind of plant ({%= vidarī%}); another
plant {%(= snuhī)%}. {%—Śukla-kaṇṭhaka, as, ā, am,%}
having a white throat; ({%as%}), m. a kind of gallinule
or water-hen. {%—Śukla-kanda, as,%} m. a white bulb;
a kind of plant, {%= mahiṣa-kanda; (ā),%} f. the
plant Aconitum Ferox. {%—Śukla-karman, ā, ā, a,%}
pure in action or conduct, guileless, innocent, virtuous.
{%—Śukla-kuṣṭha, am,%} n. white skin-disease, leprosy.
{%—Śukla-keśa, as, ā, am,%} white-haired, gray-haired.
{%—Śukla-kṣīra, as, ā, am,%} having white milk or
juice; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of root {%(= kākolī)%}. {%—Śukla-%}
{%kṣetra, am,%} n., N. of a place. {%—Śukla-tā,%} f. or
{%śukla-tva, am,%} n. whiteness. {%—Śukla-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Śukla-daśana, as, ā, am,%}
having white teeth, white-toothed. {%—Śukla-dugdha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having white milk or juice,’ a kind of
aquatic plant {%(= śṛṅgāṭaka)%}. {%—Śukla-dhātu, us,%}
m. a white mineral, chalk. {%—Śukla-pakṣa, as,%} m.
the light half of a month, the fifteen days of the
moon's increase, the period from new to full moon;
the innocent side of the two contending sides or
parties. {%—Śuklapakṣīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to
the light half of the month. {%—Śukla-puṣpa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having white flowers; ({%as%}), m., N. of various
plants, a white variety of amaranth; a species of
jasmine, Jasminum Pubescens; other plants, {%= chat-%}
{%traka; = maruvaka; (ā),%} f. a kind of aquatic
plant ({%= śīta-kumbhī%}); a species of Nāga-dantī or
sunflower; ({%ī%}), f. a species of sunflower. {%—Śukla-%}
{%pṛṣṭhaka, as,%} m. ‘white-backed,’ a small tree,
Vitex Nigundo. {%—Śukla-bala, as,%} m. a white Bala
or Bala-deva (according to the Jainas; nine of these
personages are enumerated, corresponding to the nine
Kṛṣṇas or black Vāsudevas, see {%bala, bala-deva%}).
{%—Śukla-maṇḍala, am,%} n. a white circle or globe;
the cornea or white of the eye. {%—Śukla-mālyānu-%}
{%lepana (˚ya-an˚), as, ā, am,%} having a white gar-
land and unguents (i. e. wearing a white garland and
anointed with unguents). {%—Śukla-rohita, as,%} m. a
kind of white Rohita tree; a kind of bright-looking
Rohita fish. {%—Śukla-varga, as,%} m. a class of white
objects (as the conch-shell, pearl-oyster, and cowrie).
{%—Śukla-vastra, as, ā, am,%} wearing a white robe,
dressed in white. {%—Śukla-vāyasa, as,%} m. a white
crow; a crane {%—Śukla-vṛtti, is,%} f. pure employ-
ment or subsistence; maintenance derived by a
Brāhman from other Brāhmans only. {%—Śuklāṅga%}
{%(˚la-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having a white or brilliant
body or limbs; ({%as%}), m. a peacock; ({%ī%}), f. a particular
plant {%(= śephālikā)%}. {%—Śuklāpāṅga (˚la-ap˚), as,%}
m. ‘having white eye-corners,’ a peacock. {%—Śuklā-%}
{%bhijātīya (˚la-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} of a pure race.
{%—Śuklāmbara-dhara (˚la-am˚), as, ā, am,%} wear-
ing or arrayed in white garments. {%—Śuklāmla (˚la-%}
{%am˚), am,%} n. a sort of sorrel {%(= amla-śāka)%}. {%—Śu-%}
{%klārman (˚la-ar˚), a,%} n. a particular disease of
the eyes. {%—Śuklī-karaṇa, am,%} n. making white,
whitening. {%—Śuklī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to
make white, whiten. {%—Śuklī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made
[Page1012-c+ 79]
white, whitened. {%—Śuklopala (˚la-up˚), as,%} m. a
white stone; ({%ā%}), f. clayed or candied sugar.
<LEND>

<L>46846<pc>1012-c<k1>Suklaka<k2>Suklaka
{%Śuklaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ of a white colour, white;
({%as%}), m. a white colour; the light fortnight or time
from new moon to full moon.
<LEND>

<L>46847<pc>1012-c<k1>Suklala<k2>Suklala
{%Śuklala, as, ā, am,%}¦ (according to Śabda-k.) white,
whitening; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of fragrant grass ({%= uc-%}
{%caṭā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46848<pc>1012-c<k1>SuklAyana<k2>SuklAyana
{%Śuklāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>46849<pc>1012-c<k1>Sukliman<k2>Sukliman
{%Śukliman, ā,%}¦ m. whiteness, brightness.
<LEND>

<L>46850<pc>1012-c<k1>Sukvan<k2>Sukvan
{#Sukvan#}¦ {%śukvan%} (fr. rt. 3. {%śuc%}) in {%su-śukvan,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46851<pc>1012-c<k1>Sukzi<k2>Sukzi
{#Sukzi#}¦ {%śukṣi, is,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 155. fr. rt. {%śuṣ%}), air, wind; fire, light, lustre
{%(= tejas); = citram%} (according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>46852<pc>1012-c<k1>SuNga<k2>SuNga
{#SuNga#}¦ {%śuṅga, as,%} m. (etymology doubtful),
the Indian fig-tree ({%= vaṭa%}); the hog-plum ({%=%}
{%āmrātaka%}); the awn of corn; N. of a dynasty of
kings; ({%ā%}), f. the sheath or calyx of a young bud;
the waved-leaf fig; the awn of barley &c., a bristle.
{%—Śuṅgā-karman, a,%} n. a form of the Saṃskāra or
rite called Puṃ-savana, (see under 2. {%puṃs.%})
<LEND>

<L>46853<pc>1012-c<k1>SuNgin<k2>SuNgin
{%Śuṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a sheath or calyx; awned,
furnished with an awn; ({%ī%}), m. the Indian fig-tree
({%= vaṭa%}); the waved-leaf fig-tree ({%= plakṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>46854<pc>1012-c<k1>Suc<k2>Suc<h>1
{#Suc#} 1¦. {%śuc,%} cl. 1. P. {%śocati%} (ep. also A.
{%-te%}), {%śuśoca, śociṣyati, aśocīt, śocitum%}
(or {%śoktum,%} Vopa-deva VIII. 79, 80), to be grieved
or sorrowful, be afflicted; to bewail, grieve for (with
acc.); to regret, repent; to be absorbed in deep
meditation: Caus. {%śocayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśūśu-%}
{%cat,%} to afflict, grieve, make sorrowful; to be sor-
rowful; to bewail: Desid. {%śuśuciṣati, śuśoci-%}
{%ṣati:%} Intens. {%śośucyate, śośokti;%} [cf. Goth.
<nsi>hiufan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>heaf, heofian;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>huvo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46855<pc>1012-c<k1>Suc<k2>Suc<h>2
2. {%śuc, k,%}¦ f. sorrow, grief, distress, regret; calamity,
affliction.
<LEND>

<L>46856<pc>1012-c<k1>SucA<k2>SucA
{%Śucā,%}¦ f. sorrow, grief, distress; affliction.
<LEND>

<L>46857<pc>1012-c<k1>Sucita<k2>Sucita<h>1
1. {%śucita, as, ā, am,%}¦ grieved, sad, lamenting.
<LEND>

<L>46858<pc>1012-c<k1>Soka<k2>Soka
{%Śoka, as,%}¦ m. sorrow, grief, sadness, anguish, afflic-
tion, distress, mourning, lamentation; ({%ī%}), f., Ved.
night ({%= rātri,%} Naigh. I. 7). {%—Śoka-karṣita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} harassed by sorrow, agonized with grief.
{%—Śoka-carcā,%} f. ‘sorrow-repetition,’ indulgence in
grief. {%—Śoka-cchid, t, t, t,%} sorrow-removing, allaying
grief, consoling. {%—Śoka-ja, as, ā, am,%} sorrow-born,
produced by sorrow. {%—Śoka-duḥkha-samanvita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} affected by sorrow and pain. {%—Śoka-%}
{%nāśa, as,%} m. ‘sorrow-destroying,’ the Aśoka tree.
{%—Śoka-nāśana, as, ī, am,%} sorrow-destroying, a
remover of grief. {%—Śoka-nihata, as, ā, am,%} struck
down or overcome with grief, afflicted. {%—Śoka-%}
{%paṅka, as, am,%} m. n. a slough of sorrow (i. e. grief
compared to a quagmire). {%—Śoka-parāyaṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} wholly given up to grief. {%—Śoka-paripluta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} overwhelmed with sorrow. {%—Śoka-%}
{%bhaṅga, as,%} m. ‘sorrow-break,’ dissipation or re-
moval of sorrow. {%—Śoka-bhāra, as,%} m. a weight or
burden of sorrow. {%—Śoka-mūrchita, as, ā, am,%}
stupified with sorrow, swooning with grief. {%—Śoka-%}
{%rugṇa, as, ā, am,%} broken down with sorrow, in
great distress, care-worn. {%—Śoka-lālasa, as, ā, am,%}
entirely given up to sorrow, abandoned to grief.
{%—Śoka-vat, ān, atī, at,%} full of grief, sorrowful.
{%—Śoka-vināśin, ī, inī, i,%} destroying or removing
sorrow. {%—Śoka-vivardhana, as, ī, am,%} increasing
sorrow. {%—Śoka-saṃvigna-mānasa, as, ā, am,%}
having the heart distracted with grief. {%—Śoka-san-%}
{%tapta, as, ā, am,%} inflamed or consumed by sorrow.
{%—Śoka-santapta-mānasa, as, ā, am,%} one whose
mind is consumed by sorrow. {%—Śoka-sāgara, as,%}
m. a sea of trouble, ocean of grief. {%—Śoka-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. any circumstance or occasion of sorrow.
{%—Śoka-hārī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= vana-varva-%}
{%rikā)%}. {%—Śokākula (˚ka-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} over-
whelmed or overcome with sorrow. {%—Śokāgni (˚ka-%}
{%ag˚), is,%} or {%śokānala (˚ka-an˚), as,%} m. the fire
of sorrow, torment of grief, deep distress, violent
[Page1013-a+ 80]
grief. {%—Śokāgni-santapta, as, ā, am,%} inflamed or
consumed by the fire of sorrow, tormented with
violent grief. {%—Śokātisāra (˚ka-at˚), as,%} m. dysen-
tery or diarrhœa produced by grief. {%—Śokānvita%}
{%(˚ka-an˚), as, ā, am,%} filled with grief. {%—Śokāpa-%}
{%nuda (˚ka-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} removing or alleviating
sorrow, consoling. {%—Śokāpanoda (˚ka-ap˚), as,%} m.
removal of sorrow, dispelling grief; a teacher of holy
wisdom. {%—Śokāpaha (˚ka-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} de-
stroying or removing sorrow. {%—Śokāpahartṛ (˚ka-%}
{%ap˚), tā, trī, tṛ,%} taking away or removing sorrow,
allaying or dissipating grief. {%—Śokārāti-bhaya-trāṇa%}
{%(˚ka-ar˚), am,%} n. protection or a protector from
danger, enemies, and sorrow. {%—Śokāri (˚ka-ari),%}
{%is,%} m. ‘grief-enemy,’ the Kadamba tree, Nauclea
Kadamba. {%—Śokārta (˚ka-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} afflicted
with sorrow, sorrow-stricken. {%—Śokāviṣṭa (˚ka-%}
{%āv˚), as, ā, am,%} filled with grief, full of sorrow.
{%—Śokaikamaya (˚ka-ek˚), as, ī, am,%} consisting
of sorrow only. {%—Śokotpādana (˚ka-ut˚), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} causing sorrow, producing grief, afflicting. {%—Śo-%}
{%kodbhava (˚ka-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} arising from sor-
row, caused by grief. {%—Śokonmathita-cittātman%}
{%(˚ka-un˚, ˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having the thoughts and
mind agitated by sorrow.
<LEND>

<L>46859<pc>1013-a<k1>Sokin<k2>Sokin
{%Śokin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sorrowful, full of grief, sad.
<LEND>

<L>46860<pc>1013-a<k1>Socaka<k2>Socaka
{%Śocaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ afflictive, distressing.
<LEND>

<L>46861<pc>1013-a<k1>Socat<k2>Socat
{%Śocat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sorrowing, grieving, lament-
ing, bewailing.
<LEND>

<L>46862<pc>1013-a<k1>Socana<k2>Socana
{%Śocana, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} sorrowing, lamenting, sor-
rowful; causing or producing sorrow, afflicting, griev-
ing; ({%am%}), n. sorrow, grief, grieving, mourning.
<LEND>

<L>46863<pc>1013-a<k1>SocanIya<k2>SocanIya
{%Śocanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be grieved or lamented;
lamentable, deplorable, mournful. {%—Śocanīya-tā,%} f.
the state of being condoled with or grieved for;
lamentableness, deplorableness, mournfulness.
<LEND>

<L>46864<pc>1013-a<k1>SocamAna<k2>SocamAna
{%Śocamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ grieving, sorrowing, mourning.
<LEND>

<L>46865<pc>1013-a<k1>Socayat<k2>Socayat<h>1
1. {%śocayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing grief or sorrow,
distressing, afflicting, grieving.
<LEND>

<L>46866<pc>1013-a<k1>Socita<k2>Socita
{%Śocita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to grieve, made sad,
saddened; afflicted; sorrowful.
<LEND>

<L>46867<pc>1013-a<k1>Socitavya<k2>Socitavya
{%Śocitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be grieved or mourned,
lamentable, deplorable.
<LEND>

<L>46868<pc>1013-a<k1>SocitvA<k2>SocitvA
{%Śocitvā,%}¦ ind. having grieved or mourned.
<LEND>

<L>46869<pc>1013-a<k1>Socya<k2>Socya<h>1
1. {%śocya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. {%śocya%} see col. 2), to
be lamented or bewailed, to be mourned.
<LEND>

<L>46870<pc>1013-a<k1>Suc<k2>Suc<h>3
{#Suc#} 3¦. {%śuc,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%śucyati, -te%} (Ved.
also cl. 1. {%śocati, -te,%} and in some forms
apparently cl. 6. {%śucati%}), {%śuśoca, śuśuce, śociṣyati,%}
{%-te, aśucat%} or {%aśocīt, aśociṣṭa, śocitum%} (Ved. Inf.
{%śucadhyai,%} other Vedic forms {%śocā = śocasva, śu-%}
{%śugdhi = prakāśaya, śuśucita = dīpyatām,%} Ṛg-
veda II. 2, 10), to shine, be bright or radiant; to brighten,
illuminate; to burn, consume; to become clean or
pure, be pure; to yield moisture, be wet; to decay,
become fetid, stink: Caus. {%śocayati, -yitum,%} to
brighten, illuminate; to make pure, purify: Desid.
{%śuśuciṣati, -te,%} or {%śuśociṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%śośuc-%}
{%yate, śośokti.%}
<LEND>

<L>46871<pc>1013-a<k1>Sukta<k2>Sukta
{%Śukta, as, ā, am.%}¦ See p. 1012, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>46872<pc>1013-a<k1>Suc<k2>Suc<h>4
4. {%śuc, k,%}¦ f., Ved. brightness, lustre, radiance, ({%śucā-%}
{%śucā,%} with reiterated lustre, Ṛg-veda III. 4, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>46873<pc>1013-a<k1>Sucat<k2>Sucat
{%Śucat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. shining, pure. {%—Śu-%}
{%cad-ratha, as,%} m., Ved. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>46874<pc>1013-a<k1>Sucanti<k2>Sucanti
{%Śucanti, is,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a person under the
especial protection of the Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>46875<pc>1013-a<k1>SucamAna<k2>SucamAna
{%Śucamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ (according to modern
scholars) observed, seen of men; shining, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 23, 8, and Nirukta X. 41
{%= dīpyamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>46876<pc>1013-a<k1>Suci<k2>Suci
{%Śuci, is, is, i,%}¦ bright, resplendent, clear, clean,
cleansed, purified, pure; white; virtuous, holy, in-
nocent, unsullied, undefiled, pious; correct, honest,
upright, true, trusty, faithful, correct, accurate, free
from fault or error, guileless, gentle; ({%is%}), m. white
(the colour); purity, purification (by ablution &c.);
innocence, virtue, goodness; correctness, accuracy;
acquittal; a pure man; a Brāhman; a faithful
minister, true friend; N. of fire or of a particular
fire (described as son of Antardhāna and brother of
[Page1013-b+ 80]
the fires called Pavamāna and Pāvaka); N. of a son
of Agni; oblation to fire at the first feeding of an
infant; the sun; the moon; the planet Venus or its
regent [cf. {%śukra%}]; the hot season (i. e. the months
Jyeṣṭha and Āṣāḍha); love, passion ({%= śṛṅgāra-%}
{%rasa%}); the condition of a religious student; a par-
ticular plant ({%= citraka%}); N. of Śiva; of a son of
Bhṛgu; of a son of Śata-dyumna; of a son of
Andhaka; of a son of Vipra; of the Indra of the
fourteenth Manv-antara; ({%is%}), f., N. of a daughter
of Tāmrā, wife of Kaśyapa (regarded as the parent
of water-fowl). {%—Śuci-janman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. hav-
ing a pure birth, pure-born. {%—Śuci-tā,%} f. or {%śuci-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. purity, brightness, cleanness, virtue,
holiness, innocence. {%—Śuci-dat, an, atī, at,%} Ved.
having bright teeth. {%—Śuci-dravya, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Śuci-druma, as,%} m. ‘pure-tree,’ the sacred
fig-tree {%(= aśvattha)%}. {%—Śuci-praṇī, īs,%} f. ‘leading
to purity,’ sipping water, rinsing the mouth, &c.
{%—Śuci-bandhu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having a brilliant
relation (said of Soma as being related to fire).
{%—Śuci-bhrājas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having a bright
radiance, shining brightly. {%—Śuci-maṇi, is,%} m.
‘pure-jewel,’ crystal; a jewel worn on the head.
{%—Śuci-mallikā,%} f. Arabian jasmine {%(= nava-mal-%}
{%likā)%}. {%—Śuci-mukhī,%} f. the plant Sanseviera Zeyla-
nica. {%—Śuci-rocis, is, is, is,%} having pure or white
light; ({%is%}), m. the moon. {%—Śuci-varcas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} having pure splendor. {%—Śuci-varcāya,%} Nom. A.
{%-varcāyate, -yitum,%} to have pure splendor. {%—Śuci-%}
{%vāhya, as, ā, am,%} externally pure. {%—Śuci-vrata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} whose acts are pure or holy, pious,
virtuous; having pure sacrifices. {%—Śuci-śravas, ās,%}
m. ‘having bright renown,’ N. of a Prajā-pati.
{%—Śuci-smita, as, ā, am,%} ‘smiling with white
(teeth),’ smiling pleasantly, accompanied with a
sweet smile. {%—Śucī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c.,
to become pure, to purify one's self. {%—Śucy-upa-%}
{%cāra, as, ā, am,%} performing holy actions.
<LEND>

<L>46877<pc>1013-b<k1>Sucita<k2>Sucita<h>2
2. {%śucita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleansed, purified, pure, clean.
<LEND>

<L>46878<pc>1013-b<k1>Sucis<k2>Sucis
{%Śucis, is,%}¦ n. {%= śocis,%} light, lustre, radiance, &c.
{%—Śuciṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} bright, radiant; ({%ān%}),
m., N. of a son of Kardama; epithet of Agni, ({%śu-%}
{%ciṣmaḥ,%} voc. c. in Ṛg-veda VI. 6, 4 {%= dīptiman,%}
‘O resplendent being,’ i. e. Agni); ({%atī%}), f., N. of the
mother of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>46879<pc>1013-b<k1>SucIya<k2>SucIya
{%Śucīya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%śucīyate, -yitum,%} to become
pure or white.
<LEND>

<L>46880<pc>1013-b<k1>SuSukvana<k2>SuSukvana
{%Śuśukvana, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. shining excessively,
very brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>46881<pc>1013-b<k1>SuSukvani<k2>SuSukvani
{%Śuśukvani, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. resplendent, shining,
(Sāy. {%= dīpana-śīla,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 23, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>46882<pc>1013-b<k1>SuSukvas<k2>SuSukvas
{%Śuśukvas, vān,%}¦ m., Ved. one who has purified or
brightened, an illuminator, (Sāy. {%= śocayitā, sar-%}
{%vasya prakāśayitā.%})
<LEND>

<L>46883<pc>1013-b<k1>SuSucAna<k2>SuSucAna
{%Śuśucāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. shining, bright, bril-
liant, (Sāy. {%= dīpyamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>46884<pc>1013-b<k1>Soca<k2>Soca
{%Śoca,%}¦ shining &c., in {%śukra-śoca,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46885<pc>1013-b<k1>Socayat<k2>Socayat<h>2
2. {%śocayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to shine, bright-
ening, illuminating.
<LEND>

<L>46886<pc>1013-b<k1>SocizWa<k2>SocizWa
{%Śociṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. shining very much,
most brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>46887<pc>1013-b<k1>Socis<k2>Socis
{%Śocis, is,%}¦ n. light, lustre, radiance; a flame, blast
of fire. {%—Śociṣ-keśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having (rays
of) light for hair, having flaming locks; epithet of
the sun; of Agni; ({%as%}), m. fire or its deity. {%—Śo-%}
{%ciṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessed of lustre,
effulgent, radiant.
<LEND>

<L>46888<pc>1013-b<k1>Socya<k2>Socya<h>2
2. {%śocya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. {%śocya%} see col. 1), to
be cleansed; requiring purification, wicked.
<LEND>

<L>46889<pc>1013-b<k1>Socyaka<k2>Socyaka
{%Śocyaka, as,%}¦ m. one who requires purifying, a
low man, vile or base person.
<LEND>

<L>46890<pc>1013-b<k1>Sucy<k2>Sucy
{#Sucy#}¦ {%śucy%} (also written {%cucy%}), cl. 1. P.
{%śucyati, śuśucya, śucyitum,%} to express
or squeeze out juice, distil; to perform ablution (in
the sense {%abhiṣava,%} which some interpret to mean
‘religious bathing’).
<LEND>

<L>46891<pc>1013-b<k1>SuwIra<k2>SuwIra
{#SuwIra#}¦ {%śuṭīra%} (apparently not in use), a
hero; [cf. {%śauṭīra.%}] {%—Śuṭīra-tā,%} f. or {%śuṭīra-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. heroism.
<LEND>
[Page1013-c+ 77]

<L>46892<pc>1013-c<k1>SuwIrya<k2>SuwIrya
{%Śuṭīrya, am,%}¦ n. valour, heroism; [cf. {%śauṭīrya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46893<pc>1013-c<k1>SuW<k2>SuW
{#SuW#}¦ {%śuṭh%} [cf. rts. {%śuṇṭh,%} 4. {%śaṭh%}], cl. 1. P.
{%śoṭhati, śoṭhitum,%} to limp, be lame, go
lame; to be impeded or obstructed; to resist; cl.
10. P. {%śoṭhayati, -yitum,%} to be lazy or idle; to
be dull or slow; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κωλός.</lang>.]
<LEND>

<L>46894<pc>1013-c<k1>SoWa<k2>SoWa
{%Śoṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ foolish; idle, lazy; wicked,
low; ({%as%}), m. a fool, blockhead; a sluggard, idler;
a rogue, cheat, villain, criminal, sinner; a low man,
one of a degraded tribe or occupation.
<LEND>

<L>46895<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRW<k2>SuRW
{#SuRW#}¦ {%śuṇṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%śuṇṭhati, śuṇṭhitum,%}
to limp, be lame [cf. rt. {%śuṭh%} above]; to
dry, grow dry, be or become dry; cl. 10. P. {%śuṇṭha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to dry, become dry.
<LEND>

<L>46896<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRWAcArya<k2>SuRWAcArya
{%Śuṇṭhācārya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a chief priest of Śiva
(in the Dhūrta-nartaka).
<LEND>

<L>46897<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRWi<k2>SuRWi
{%Śuṇṭhi, is,%}¦ or {%śuṇṭhī,%} f. dry ginger.
<LEND>

<L>46898<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRWya<k2>SuRWya
{%Śuṇṭhya, am,%}¦ n. dry ginger.
<LEND>

<L>46899<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRq<k2>SuRq
{#SuRq#}¦ {%śuṇḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%śuṇḍati,%} &c., to
break; to disturb, harass, vex, torment.
<LEND>

<L>46900<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRqa<k2>SuRqa
{%Śuṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. (probably connected with the pre-
ceding rt.), the juice exuding from the temples of an
elephant in rut; an elephant's trunk; ({%ā%}), f. spirituous
liquor; a place where spirituous liquor is sold, a
tavern; an elephant's proboscis or trunk; the stalk
of the lotus; a harlot, prostitute, bawd; a particular
animal (perhaps a water-elephant or hippopotamus).
{%—Śuṇḍa-roha, as,%} m. a kind of grass {%(= bhū-%}
{%tṛṇa)%}. {%—Śuṇḍā-pāna, am,%} n. a place where spirits
are drunk or sold, a tavern, dram-shop. {%—Śuṇḍā-%}
{%rocanī,%} f. a species of plant ({%= rocanikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>46901<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRqaka<k2>SuRqaka
{%Śuṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a distiller or seller of spirituous
liquors; a military flute or fife ({%= yuddha-veṇu%}).
<LEND>

<L>46902<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRqAra<k2>SuRqAra
{%Śuṇḍāra, as,%}¦ m. a distiller, vintner; an elephant's
trunk.
<LEND>

<L>46903<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRqAla<k2>SuRqAla
{%Śuṇḍāla, as,%}¦ m. ‘possessing a proboscis or trunk,’
an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>46904<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRqikA<k2>SuRqikA
{%Śuṇḍikā,%}¦ f. spirituous liquor, &c. ({%= śuṇḍā%} above);
the uvula or soft palate; a swelling or enlargement
of any gland; [cf. {%gala-ś˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46905<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRqin<k2>SuRqin
{%Śuṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing spirituous liquor;
having a proboscis; ({%ī%}), m. a distiller, preparer and
seller of spirituous liquors; an elephant. {%—Śuṇḍi-%}
{%mūṣikā,%} f. the musk-rat or shrew.
<LEND>

<L>46906<pc>1013-c<k1>SuRqI<k2>SuRqI
{%Śuṇḍī,%}¦ f. a swelling or enlargement of any gland
[cf. {%kaṇṭha-ś˚, gala-ś˚%}]; the plant Heliotropium
Indicum ({%= hasti-śuṇḍī%}).
<LEND>

<L>46907<pc>1013-c<k1>Sutudri<k2>Sutudri
{#Sutudri#}¦ {%śutu-dri, is,%} f. (according to Sāy.
fr. {%śu = kṣipram + tu = tunnā%} with rt. {%dru%}), the
Śatadru or Sutlej river. See {%śata-dru.%}
<LEND>

<L>46908<pc>1013-c<k1>SutudrI<k2>SutudrI
{%Śutu-drī,%}¦ f., Ved. {%= śutu-dri.%}
<LEND>

<L>46909<pc>1013-c<k1>Sutudru<k2>Sutudru
{%Śutu-dru, us,%}¦ or {%śutu-drū, ūs,%} f. {%= śutu-dri.%}
<LEND>

<L>46910<pc>1013-c<k1>SuD<k2>SuD
{#SuD#}¦ {%śudh%} (thought by some to be for
an original {%śvadh%}), cl. 4. P. (ep. also A.)
{%śudhyati (-te), śuśodha, śotsyati, aśudhat, śod-%}
{%dhum,%} to be or become pure, be purified, be cleared,
be cleansed or washed, be made clear: Pass. {%śudh-%}
{%yate,%} Aor. {%aśodhi:%} Caus. {%śodhayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%aśūśudhat,%} to make pure, purify, wash or clear off,
cleanse, purge, refine, filter; to correct; to acquit;
to make clear, explain; to examine, investigate:
Desid. {%śuśutsati:%} Intens. {%śośudhyate, śośoddhi;%}
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">καθ-αρό-ς, καθαίρ-ω, κάθαρσις, Κασταλία;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>cas-tu-s</nsi> for <nsi>cad-tu-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>heitar;</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>cistu;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>cuidh,</nsi> ‘clean, pure.’]
<LEND>

<L>46911<pc>1013-c<k1>SudDa<k2>SudDa
{%Śuddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ pure, clean, purified, cleansed;
white, bright; stainless, innocent, guileless, simple,
genuine, true, fair, honest; correct, faultless, blame-
less; cleared, acquitted; simple, mere, only, alone;
simple, unmixed (said of a note or sound in music);
(in phil.) very, unequalled ({%= dvitīya-rahita%}); non-
nasal (said of letters); whetted, sharp (as an arrow);
authorised, admitted; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; ({%am%}),
n. anything pure; pure spirit; rock-salt; black
pepper. {%—Śuddha-karman, ā, ā, a,%} of pure prac-
tices, acting virtuously, holy. {%—Śuddha-koṭi, is,%} f.
‘upright side,’ one of the sides of a right-angled
[Page1014-a+ 81]
triangle. {%—Śuddha-caitanya, am,%} n. pure intelli-
gence (the basis of the divine and individual intelli-
gence according to the Vedānta). {%—Śuddha-jaṅgha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having clean legs or thighs,’ an ass. {%—Śud-%}
{%dha-tā,%} f. or {%śuddha-tva, am,%} n. purity, cleanness,
correctness, faultlessness, &c. {%—Śuddha-dat, an,%}
{%atī, at,%} white-toothed, having handsome teeth.
{%—Śuddha-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} pure-minded, having a
pure understanding. {%—Śuddha-badha, as,%} m. simple
putting to death, killing in any ordinary way; (ac-
cording to Rāghavānanda on Manu IX. 279 {%=%}
{%śiraś-cheda,%} beheading.) {%—Śuddha-bhāva, as,%} m.
a state of purity, being pure; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a
pure mind or disposition, pure-minded. {%—Śuddha-%}
{%mati, is, is, i,%} pure-minded, free from guile, sincere,
honest; intelligent; ({%is%}), m. one of the twenty-four
Jinas of the past age. {%—Śuddha-māṃsa, am,%} n. a
kind of condiment or strong seasoning made with
pieces of meat, Asa Fetida, turmeric, &c. {%—Śud-%}
{%dha-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} pure-coloured, of a good
caste, &c.; having pure or non-nasal letters. {%—Śud-%}
{%dha-vallikā,%} f. a kind of plant, Menispermum Gla-
brum; another plant {%(= guḍūcī)%}. {%—Śuddha-vāsas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} dressed in clean garments, having pure
vesture. {%—Śuddhātman (˚dha-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} pure-
minded; ({%ā%}), m. the pure soul or spirit; epithet of
Śiva. {%—Śuddhānanda (˚dha-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘pure-
joy,’ N. of a preceptor. {%—Śuddhānumāna (˚dha-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. ‘correct inference,’ a figure of rhetoric.
{%—Śuddhānta (˚dha-an˚), as,%} m. ‘pure or sacred
interior,’ the private or women's apartments (espe-
cially in the palace of a king), a harem, seraglio; a
king's wife or concubine; ({%ā%}), f. a king's wife, queen.
{%—Śuddhānta-cārin, ī,%} m. an attendant or servant of
the private apartments. {%—Śuddhānta-pālaka, as,%} m.
‘seraglio-guardian,’ a guard of the private or women's
apartments, attendant on women, eunuch. {%—Śud-%}
{%dhānta-yuj, k,%} f. (?), change of mode or key in
music. {%—Śuddhāpahnuti (˚dha-ap˚), is,%} f. ‘pure
denial or turning off,’ a particular figure of rhetoric,
(denial of any quality or property for the sake of
applying some other, e. g. this is not the moon, it
is a lotus of the heavenly Ganges.) {%—Śuddhodana%}
{%(˚dha-od˚), as,%} m. ‘pure-food,’ N. of a king of Kapila-
vastu (said to have belonged to the race of Ikṣvāku;
he was father of the great Buddha Śākya-muni, see
{%buddha%}). {%—Śuddhodana-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of Śud-
dhodana,’ epithet of Śākya (the great Buddha or
founder of the Buddhist religion).
<LEND>

<L>46912<pc>1014-a<k1>SudDi<k2>SudDi
{%Śuddhi, is,%}¦ f. purity, cleanness, holiness, freedom
from defilement; purification, expiation, cleansing;
a particular expiatory and purificatory rite (described
as a kind of Śrāddha performed at the cost of a
person who needs purification from some defilement,
when a stated number of Brāhmans are fed); clear-
ing, clearance, innocence (established by ordeal or
trial), acquittal; clearing (of expences), paying off
arrears; quittance; retaliation; rectification, correc-
tion, correctness, accuracy, truth, certainty; subtrac-
tion; N. of Durgā; of one of the Śaktis of Viṣṇu;
of Dākṣāyaṇī as worshipped at Kapāla-mocana.
{%—Śuddhi-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing purity, purify-
ing, correcting. {%—Śuddhi-kaumudī,%} f., N. of a work
on purificatory rites by Govindānanda. {%—Śuddhi-%}
{%candrikā,%} f., N. of a treatise on the observances of
mourning and the purificatory rites thereto belong-
ing. {%—Śuddhi-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Śuddhi-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a work on purifi-
cation (being part of Raghu-nandana's Smṛti-tattva.
{%—Śuddhi-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work by Śrī-nivāsa
on the position of stars considered favourable for
marriages, journeys, &c. {%—Śuddhi-nirūpaṇa, am,%}
n., N. of the seventh chapter of the Yoga-vāsiṣṭha-
sāra. {%—Śuddhi-pattra, am,%} n. a sheet or paper of
corrections, errata list; a certificate of purification by
penance. {%—Śuddhi-pradīpa%} and {%śuddhi-mayū-%}
{%kha, as,%} m., N. of two works. {%—Śuddhi-bhṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} possessing purity, free from soil, clean, clear;
pure, virtuous. {%—Śuddhi-ratnākara(˚na-āk˚), as,%}
m., N. of a work. {%—Śuddhi-viveka, as,%} m., N. of
a work by Rudra-dhara.
<LEND>
[Page1014-b+ 78]

<L>46913<pc>1014-b<k1>SudDvA<k2>SudDvA
{%Śuddhvā,%}¦ ind. having purified, having cleared, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46914<pc>1014-b<k1>Sotsyat<k2>Sotsyat
{%Śotsyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to cleanse or
purify.
<LEND>

<L>46915<pc>1014-b<k1>SodDavya<k2>SodDavya
{%Śoddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cleansed or purified;
to be corrected, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46916<pc>1014-b<k1>SoDa<k2>SoDa
{%Śodha, as,%}¦ m. purification, cleansing; correction;
payment; retaliation. {%—Śodha-pattra, am,%} n. a
sheet or paper of corrections; [cf. {%śuddhi-p˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46917<pc>1014-b<k1>SoDaka<k2>SoDaka
{%Śodhaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} purificatory, cleans-
ing, cleaning, purgative; corrective; ({%as%}), m. a
purifier, refiner; a corrector (in arithmetic or algebra),
the subtrahend, the quantity to be subtracted from a
number to render it capable of yielding an exact
square root; ({%am%}), n. a particular kind of earth ({%=%}
{%kaṅkuṣṭha%}).
<LEND>

<L>46918<pc>1014-b<k1>SoDana<k2>SoDana
{%Śodhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ cleaning, purifying, cleansing,
refining, purgative; ({%am%}), n. the act of cleaning,
cleansing, purifying, refining; clearance, correction,
freeing from faults, clearing away errors, removing
or eradicating anything prejudicial or erroneous;
precise determination; the cleansing of a sore or
wound; the refining of metals, a sort of refining
practised for chemical or medicinal purposes, (exposing
metals to heat and then sprinkling them with the
urine of cows, &c.); payment, clearance or discharge
of a debt, quittance, paying off arrears, acquittance;
expiation; retaliation, punishment; (in arithmetic)
subtraction; excrement, feces, ordure; green vitriol;
({%as%}), m. the lime ({%= nimbūka%}); a kind of {%gaṇḍūṣa,%}
q. v. (swallowing or rinsing the mouth ?); ({%ī%}), f. a
broom, brush; a kind of plant ({%= tāmra-vallī%});
another plant {%(= nīlī)%}. {%—Śodhanī-vīja, am,%} n. a
kind of plant ({%= jaya-pāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>46919<pc>1014-b<k1>SoDanaka<k2>SoDanaka
{%Śodhanaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of an officer in an assize
court, (Mṛc-chakaṭikā, Act 9.)
<LEND>

<L>46920<pc>1014-b<k1>SoDanIya<k2>SoDanIya
{%Śodhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be cleansed or purified;
to be corrected; to be refined; to be cleared off or
discharged; to be paid off or liquidated (as a debt);
payable, due; to be subtracted.
<LEND>

<L>46921<pc>1014-b<k1>SoDayat<k2>SoDayat
{%Śodhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making clean, purifying,
cleansing, purging.
<LEND>

<L>46922<pc>1014-b<k1>SoDayitvA<k2>SoDayitvA
{%Śodhayitvā,%}¦ ind. having cleared or purified, &c.;
having paid or discharged.
<LEND>

<L>46923<pc>1014-b<k1>SoDita<k2>SoDita
{%Śodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cleaned, cleansed; purified,
purged; refined; strained, filtered; corrected; ex-
cused; cleared off, discharged, paid off, liquidated;
acquitted, absolved.
<LEND>

<L>46924<pc>1014-b<k1>SoDin<k2>SoDin
{%Śodhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ purifying, clearing; requiting,
settling.
<LEND>

<L>46925<pc>1014-b<k1>SoDya<k2>SoDya
{%Śodhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be purified or cleansed, to
be cleaned or refined; to be cleared off or discharged;
payable; due; to be subtracted; ({%as%}), m. an accused
person, one to be cleared or tried; ({%am%}), n. a con-
stant number to be subtracted in some astronomical
computations.
<LEND>

<L>46926<pc>1014-b<k1>Sun<k2>Sun
{#Sun#}¦ {%śun,%} cl. 6. P. {%śunati,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>46927<pc>1014-b<k1>Suna<k2>Suna
{#Suna#}¦ {%śuna, as, ā, am%} (probably fr. rt. {%śvi%}),
white, pure, bright (Ved.; cf. {%śveta%}); causing pros-
perity or happiness, auspicious (Ved.); ({%am%}), ind.
happily, auspiciously (Ved.; Sāy. {%= sukham%}); ({%as%}),
m., N. of Vāyu (Ved.); a dog, (fr. {%śvan.%}) {%—Śuna-%}
{%hotra, as,%} m., N. of the author of the hymns Ṛg-
veda VI. 33, 34 (having the patronymic Bhārad-
vāja). {%—Śunāsīrīya%} or {%śunāsīrya, am,%} n. a par-
ticular sacrificial oblation (said to be offered in the
thirteenth month or Mala-māsa, and probably in
honour of Śuna and Sīra). {%—Śunā-sīrau,%} m. du.,
Ved. Śuna and Sīra, N. of two Vedic gods (addressed
in Ṛg-veda IV. 57, and identified by Yāska with
Vāyu and Āditya; according to other authorities
Indra and Vāyu or Indra and Sūrya are meant; but
according to another view Sīra may perhaps denote
‘a ploughshare,’ and Śuna some part of a plough).
{%—Śuneṣita (˚nā-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. (probably)
borne along or carried by dogs.
<LEND>

<L>46928<pc>1014-b<k1>SunaHpucCa<k2>SunaHpucCa
{%Śunaḥ-puccha, as,%}¦ m. (properly fr. {%śunaḥ,%} gen.
c. of {%śvan + puccha%}), ‘dog-tailed,’ N. of one of the
three sons of Ṛcīka (or according to the Aitareya-
[Page1014-c+ 78]
Brāhmaṇa the eldest of the three sons of Ajīgarta);
N. of the author of a law-book.
<LEND>

<L>46929<pc>1014-c<k1>SunaHSepa<k2>SunaHSepa
{%Śunaḥ-śepa%}¦ or {%śunaḥ-śepha, as,%} m. ({%śunaḥ,%}
gen. c. of {%śvan%}), ‘dog-tailed,’ N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi
(having the patronymic Ājigarti, as son of Ajigarta
or Ajīgarta, and regarded as the author of the hymns
Ṛg-veda I. 24-30, IX. 3; according to a legend
told in the Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa VII. 13-18, king
Hariścandra, whose priest was Viśvā-mitra, being
childless, made a vow that on obtaining a son he
would sacrifice him to the god Varuṇa; a son was
then born to him named Rohita, but Hariścandra
put off on various pretexts the fulfilment of his vow,
and when he at length consented to perform it, his
son declined being sacrificed, and retiring to the
forest passed six years there until he met a poor
Brāhman Ṛṣi named Ajīgarta, who had three sons,
the second of whom, Śunaḥ-śepha, was purchased by
Rohita for a hundred cows to serve as a substitute
for himself; Varuṇa having accepted him as a ransom,
he was about to be sacrificed, Viśvā-mitra being Hotṛ
priest, when he saved himself by reciting verses in
praise of various deities, and was received into the
family of Viśvā-mitra as one of his sons under the
name of Deva-rāta, q. v.: the legend is different in
the Rāmāyaṇa, which makes Ambarīṣa, king of
Ayodhyā, perform a sacrifice, the victim of which is
stolen by Indra; this king is described as wandering
over the earth in search of either the real victim or
a substitute until he meets with a Brāhman named
Ṛcīka, from whom he purchases his middle son,
Śunaḥ-śepha, who is about to be sacrificed, when
Viśvā-mitra saves him by teaching him a prayer to
Agni and two hymns to Indra and Viṣṇu; see
Rāmāyaṇa I. 61, 62); ({%am%}), n. the genital organ
of a dog.
<LEND>

<L>46930<pc>1014-c<k1>Sunaka<k2>Sunaka
{%Śunaka, as,%}¦ m. a young dog; a dog; N. of a
descendant of Bhṛgu; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a family;
[cf. {%śaunaka.%}] {%—Śunaka-cañcukā,%} f. a kind of
plant {%(= kṣudra-cañcu)%}. {%—Śunaka-cillī,%} f. a kind
of pot-herb {%(= śvāna-cillikā)%}. {%—Śunaka-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. the son of Śunaka, i. e. Śaunaka, (also applied
to Gṛtsamada, who is elsewhere described as the
father of Śunaka.)
<LEND>

<L>46931<pc>1014-c<k1>SunASIra<k2>SunASIra
{%Śunāśīra%}¦ or {%śunāsīra, as,%} m., N. of Indra, (also
written {%sunāsīra,%} q. v., cf. {%śunā-sīrau%} under {%śuna.%})
<LEND>

<L>46932<pc>1014-c<k1>Suni<k2>Suni
{%Śuni, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%śvan%}), a dog.
<LEND>

<L>46933<pc>1014-c<k1>SunI<k2>SunI
{%Śunī,%}¦ f. a female dog, bitch, (see under {%śvan%});
a kind of gourd {%(= kuṣmāṇḍī)%}. {%—Śunin-dhama,%}
see Vopa-deva XXVI. 54. {%—Śunin-dhaya, as, ī,%}
{%am%} ({%śuni%} for {%śunī%}), sucking a bitch, suckled by a
bitch.
<LEND>

<L>46934<pc>1014-c<k1>SunIra<k2>SunIra
{%Śunīra, as,%}¦ m. a number of female dogs.
<LEND>

<L>46935<pc>1014-c<k1>SunolANgUla<k2>SunolANgUla
{%Śuno-lāṅgūla, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%śunaḥ,%} gen. c. of
{%śvan + lāṅgūla%}), N. of the youngest of the three
sons of Ṛcīka (or of the three sons of Ajīgarta,
according to the Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa; cf. {%śunaḥ-%}
{%puccha%}).
<LEND>

<L>46936<pc>1014-c<k1>Sunya<k2>Sunya<h>1
1. {%śunya, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. {%śunya%} see below), a
number of dogs or female dogs.
<LEND>

<L>46937<pc>1014-c<k1>SunD<k2>SunD
{#SunD#}¦ {%śundh%} (connected with rt. {%śudh%});
cl. 1. P. A. {%śundhati, -te, śuśundha,%}
{%śuśundhe, śundhitum,%} to purify, make clean or pure,
cleanse (P., according to some also A.); to be or be-
come pure, be purified, be cleansed (A.); cl. 10. P.
(according to some also A.) {%śundhayati (-te), -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to purify, cleanse.
<LEND>

<L>46938<pc>1014-c<k1>SunDAvat<k2>SunDAvat
{%Śundhā-vat, ān, atī, at%}¦ (thought by some to be
fr. a lost Nom. {%śundhya,%} meaning ‘to desire purifi-
cation’), Ved. ‘possessed of desire for purification,’
sacred, holy, pure.
<LEND>

<L>46939<pc>1014-c<k1>SunDyu<k2>SunDyu
{%Śundhyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. ‘desirous of purifica-
tion,’ purifying; pure, bright; ({%us%}), m., N. of Agni
or fire, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 124, 4, an
Āditya or a kind of water-fowl); ({%us%}), f. a mare,
(the chariot of the Sun is said to be drawn by seven
mares); [cf. perhaps Lat. <nsi>castus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46940<pc>1014-c<k1>Sunya<k2>Sunya<h>2
{#Sunya#} 2¦. {%śunya, as, ā, am%} (more usually
[Page1015-a+ 79]
written {%śūnya,%} q. v.; for 1. {%śunya%} see p. 1014,
col. 3), empty, void; ({%am%}), n. a cypher.
<LEND>

<L>46941<pc>1015-a<k1>Sup<k2>Sup
{#Sup#}¦ {%śup,%} (in grammar) a technical term
for the affix {%u,%} the characteristic sign of the eighth
class of verbs.
<LEND>

<L>46942<pc>1015-a<k1>SuPAhila<k2>SuPAhila
{#SuPAhila#}¦ {%śuphāhila,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>46943<pc>1015-a<k1>SuB<k2>SuB<h>1
{#SuB#} 1¦. {%śubh%} (perhaps for an original
{%śvabh,%} cf. rts. {%śudh, śumbh%}), cl. 1. A.
{%śobhate%} (rarely cl. 6. P. {%śubhati%} or cl. 1. P. {%śo-%}
{%bhati,%} but this latter is referred to rt. 3. {%śubh%}), {%śu-%}
{%śobha, śuśubhe, śobhiṣyati, -te, aśubhat, aśo-%}
{%bhiṣṭa, śobhitum%} (Ved. Inf. {%śobhase, śubham,%}
{%śubhe,%} see 2. {%śubh%}), to shine, be splendid; to be
beautiful, look beautiful or handsome, appear to ad-
vantage; to be gay or happy; to be victorious,
triumph over: Caus. {%śobhayati, -te%} (Ved. also {%śu-%}
{%bhayati%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%aśūśubhat,%} to cause to
shine, ornament, decorate: to adorn one's self (A.);
to shine (?): Desid. {%śuśobhiṣate, -ti,%} or {%śuśubhi-%}
{%ṣate, -ti:%} Intens. {%śośubhyate, śośobdhi,%} to shine
intensely; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κομψός, κομ-μός, κομέω;</lang> Old
Germ. <nsi>sūbar,</nsi> ‘pure;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>sauber;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>źibbu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46944<pc>1015-a<k1>SuB<k2>SuB<h>2
2. {%śubh, p,%}¦ f., Ved. splendor, beauty, brilliancy,
glory; happiness; victory, triumph, ({%śubhe,%} for
victory or conquest); an ornament; an auspicious
offering; a brilliant place of sacrifice, (Sāy. {%= śo-%}
{%bhana deva-yajana,%} Ṛg-veda I. 23, 11); water
or a brilliant chariot ({%= udaka%} or {%ratha,%} Ṛg-veda
I. 167, 6, &c.). {%—Śubhaṃ-yā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
causing happiness, bestowing blessings, benevolent
(said of the wind; Sāy. on Ṛg-veda IV. 3, 6. ex-
plains {%śubhaṃ-ye%} by {%śubhasya prāpayitre,%} con-
necting {%yā%} with rt. 1. {%yā%} in the sense of {%prāpaṇe%}).
{%—Śubhaṃ-yāvan, ā,%} &c., Ved. going to splendor
or happiness (said of the Maruts, Sāy. {%= śobhana-%}
{%gati, śobhanaṃ gantā;%} cf. {%ṛṇa-yāvan%}). {%—Śu-%}
{%bhas-pati, is,%} m. lord or preserver of splendor,
(Sāy. {%= śobhanasya karmaṇaḥ pālakaḥ%}); ({%ī%}), m.
du., Ved. epithet of the two Aśvins.
<LEND>

<L>46945<pc>1015-a<k1>SuBa<k2>SuBa
{%Śubha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bright, shining, splendid, hand-
some, beautiful; auspicious, fortunate, lucky, happy,
well, right, good, virtuous, eminent, distinguished;
learned, versed in the Vedas; ({%as%}), m. the twenty-
third of the astronomical Yogas; a city in the sky,
(see {%vyomacāri-pura;%} said to be also fem. and
neut.); ({%ā%}), f. light, lustre; beauty; desire; N. of
a female friend and companion of the goddess Umā;
an assembly of the gods; bamboo-manna; white
Dūrvā grass; the Śamī tree; the yellow pigment
{%go-rocanā;%} a particular plant, {%= priyaṅgu; (am),%}
n. anything bright or beautiful, auspiciousness; hap-
piness, hail, welfare, good fortune, good; an orna-
ment; water, rain, (Sāy. {%= alaṅkāra%} or {%udaka,%}
Ṛg-veda VII. 82, 5); a fragrant wood ({%= padma-%}
{%kāṣṭha%}); [cf. Pers. <lang n="arabic">خوب</lang> <nsi>khūb.</nsi>] {%—Śubha-kara,%}
{%as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} causing welfare, producing good,
propitious, &c. {%—Śubha-karman, a,%} n. a good or
virtuous act, auspicious action; reputable occupation
or employment. {%—Śubha-kṛt, t,%} m. epithet of the
thirty-sixth or tenth year of Jupiter's cycle of sixty
years. {%—Śubha-kṣaṇa, as, am,%} m. n. an auspicious
or lucky moment. {%—Śubha-ga, as, ā, am,%} going
well or beautifully, graceful, elegant; propitious, for-
tunate. {%—Śubha-gandhaka, as, ā, am,%} good-
scented; ({%am%}), n. gum-myrrh. {%—Śubha-graha, as,%}
m. an auspicious planet, lucky star (such as Jupiter,
Venus, Mercury, and the moon when more than half
full). {%—Śubhagrahodaya (˚ha-ud˚), as,%} m. the
rising of an auspicious planet. {%—Śubhaṅ-kara, as,%}
{%ā%} or {%ī, am,%} conferring happiness or fortune; auspicious,
propitious; ({%ī%}), f. Pārvatī. {%—Śubha-jāni, is, is, i,%}
having a beautiful wife. {%—Śubha-da, as, ā, am,%}
granting happiness, propitious, auspicious; ({%as%}), m.
the sacred fig-tree {%(= aśvattha)%}. {%—Śubha-dantī,%} f.
a woman with good teeth; the female elephant of
Puṣpa-danta or of the north-west quarter, (also read
{%śubhra-dantī.%}) {%—Śubha-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. an auspicious
look or aspect. {%—Śubha-dhara, as,%} m. a proper N.
[Page1015-b+ 81]
{%—Śubha-nāmā,%} f. epithet of the fifth lunar night.
{%—Śubha-pattrikā,%} f. ‘having auspicious leaves,’ a
kind of shrub {%(= śāla-parṇī)%}. {%—Śubha-phala, am,%}
n. auspicious result, good or happy consequence.
{%—Śubham-bhāvuka, as, ā, am,%} ‘disposed to be
bright,’ resplendent, decorated, ornamented. {%—Śubha-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. a particular astronomical Yoga, (see
{%śubha.%}) {%—Śubha-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} having
an auspicious sign or symptom; marked or charac-
terized by felicity. {%—Śubha-lagna, as, am,%} m. n. the
rising of an auspicious constellation, a lucky moment.
{%—Śubha-vārttā,%} f. good news. {%—Śubha-vāsana,%}
{%as,%} m. auspicious perfuming; perfume for the mouth.
{%—Śubha-vrata, am,%} n., N. of a particular religious
observance (kept on the twelfth day in one of the
halves of the month Kārttika). {%—Śubha-śaṃsin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} indicative of good luck. {%—Śubha-śīla, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} well-disposed, having a good disposition. {%—Śu-%}
{%bha-saṃyuta, as, ā, am,%} endowed with prosperity
or happiness, blissful. {%—Śubha-saptamī-vrata, am,%}
n., N. of a particular religious observance. {%—Śubha-%}
{%sūcanī,%} f. ‘indicating good,’ N. of a female deity
worshipped by women in times of calamity, (she is
also called Su-vacanī.) {%—Śubha-sthalī,%} f. any
auspicious place, a room or hall in which sacrifices are
offered. {%—Śubhākṣa (˚bha-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘auspicious-
eyed,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Śubhāgama (˚bha-āg˚),%}
{%am,%} n. epithet of certain Tantra works regarded as
especially orthodox. {%—Śubhāṅga (˚bha-aṅ˚), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} handsome-limbed, beautifully formed, handsome,
elegant; ({%as%}), m., N. of a lexicographer; of another
person; ({%ī%}), f. a handsome woman; N. of Rati
(wife of the god of love); of the wife of Kuvera
(god of wealth). {%—Śubhācāra (˚bha-āc˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} pure in practices or observances, virtuous; ({%ā%}),
f. epithet of a female attendant on Umā; [cf. {%śu-%}
{%bhā.%}] {%—Śubhāñjana (˚bha-añ˚), as,%} m. the tree
Hyperanthera Moringa, (see {%śobhāñjana.%}) {%—Śu-%}
{%bhānana (˚bha-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} handsome-faced,
good-looking; ({%ā%}), f. a handsome woman. {%—Śu-%}
{%bhānandā (˚bha-ān˚),%} f., N. of a goddess. {%—Śu-%}
{%bhānvita (˚bha-an˚), as, ā, am,%} endowed with
prosperity or good fortune, happy, prosperous. {%—Śu-%}
{%bhāpāṅgā (˚bha-ap˚),%} f. ‘a woman who has beauti-
ful eye-corners,’ a beautiful woman. {%—Śubhāśubha%}
{%(˚bha-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} prosperous and unfortunate,
good and evil; ({%am%}), n. good and evil, good and
bad fortune, weal and woe. {%—Śubhāśubha-lak-%}
{%ṣaṇa, am,%} n. a mark or sign of good or bad
fortune, a good or evil omen. {%—Śubhetara (˚bha-%}
{%it˚), as, ā, am,%} other than auspicious, unlucky, in-
auspicious; evil, bad. {%—Śubhodarka (˚bha-ud˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having prosperous results or happy con-
sequences; causing happiness.
<LEND>

<L>46946<pc>1015-b<k1>SuBaMyA<k2>SuBaMyA
{%Śubhaṃ-yā, śubhaṃ-yāvan.%}¦ See under 2. {%śubh.%}
<LEND>

<L>46947<pc>1015-b<k1>SuBaMyu<k2>SuBaMyu
{%Śubhaṃyu, us, us, u,%}¦ happy, fortunate, pros-
perous, auspicious.
<LEND>

<L>46948<pc>1015-b<k1>SuBAna<k2>SuBAna
{%Śubhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining bright, brilliant;
({%ās%}), m. pl. (according to some) epithet of the
Maruts, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 165, 3.
{%śubhānaiḥ = śobhamānair vacanaiḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>46949<pc>1015-b<k1>SuBikA<k2>SuBikA
{%Śubhikā,%}¦ f., Ved. a garland formed of flowers.
<LEND>

<L>46950<pc>1015-b<k1>SuBra<k2>SuBra
{%Śubhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, radiant, bright;
white; ({%as%}), m. white (the colour); sandal; ({%am%}),
n. silver; talc; green vitriol; rock or fossil salt;
({%ā%}), f. the Ganges; crystal; bamboo-manna; [cf.
Old Germ. <nsi>sūbar;</nsi> Mod Germ. <nsi>sauber,</nsi> ‘clean;’
Angl. Sax. <nsi>syfr.</nsi>] {%—Śubhra-kṛt, t,%} m. the thirty-
sixth year of Jupiter's cycle; [cf. {%śubha-kṛt.%}]
{%—Śubhra-khādi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having shining
rings, having bright weapons (said of the Maruts;
Sāy. {%= śobhanāyudha%} or {%śobhana-haviṣka,%} Ṛg-
veda VIII. 20, 4). {%—Śubhra-tā,%} f. or {%śubhra-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. whiteness. {%—Śubhra-dantī,%} f. the female
elephant of Puṣpa-danta, the elephant of the north-
west quarter, (see {%śubha-dantī.%}) {%—Śubhra-raśmi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘white-rayed,’ the moon. {%—Śubhra-śastama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. shining very much, (according to
some either for {%śubhra-śasta-tama%} or for {%śubhra-%}
{%śas-tama.%}) {%—Śubhrāṃśu (˚ra-aṃ˚), us,%} m. ‘white-
rayed,’ the moon; camphor. {%—Śubhrālu (˚ra-ālu), %}
[Page1015-c+ 78]
{%us,%} m. a white esculent root; a particular plant
with a tuberous root {%(= mahiṣa-kanda)%}. {%—Śu-%}
{%bhrā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessing radiance,
shining.
<LEND>

<L>46951<pc>1015-c<k1>SuBri<k2>SuBri
{%Śubhri, is, is, i,%}¦ shining bright (Ved., Sāy. {%= śo-%}
{%bhana%}); ({%is%}), m. an epithet of Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>46952<pc>1015-c<k1>SuBrikA<k2>SuBrikA
{%Śubhrikā,%}¦ f., see Vopa-deva IV. 8.
<LEND>

<L>46953<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBa<k2>SoBa
{%Śobha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bright, brilliant, handsome;
({%ā%}), f. light, lustre, radiance, splendor, sheen, bril-
liancy; beauty, elegance, grace, comeliness; dis-
tinguished merit; turmeric; the yellow pigment
{%go-rocanā;%} a species of the Kṛti metre. {%—Śobha-%}
{%kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing lustre, beautifying; ({%t%}), m. the
thirty-seventh (or sixth) year of Jupiter's cycle of
sixty years [cf. {%śubha-kṛt%}]; the marking-nut
plant. {%—Śobhā-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing lustre,
beautifying. {%—Śobhāñjana (˚bhā-añ˚), as,%} m. the
tree Hyperanthera Moringa (commonly called Śa-
jinā; it is much valued for its various properties;
the legumes, blossoms, and leaves are esculent;
the root of the young tree is used as a substitute for
horse-radish as well as a stimulant in medicine, and
the expressed oil of the seeds is said to relieve
arthritic pains; it has a great many synonyms; cf.
{%śigru, nīla-śigru, kākṣīvaka, jana-priya, ca-%}
{%kṣuṣya,%} &c.). {%—Śobhā-maya, as, ī, am,%} full of
lustre or beauty; beautiful. {%—Śobhā-vatī,%} f., N. of
a town.
<LEND>

<L>46954<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBaTa<k2>SoBaTa
{%Śobhatha,%}¦ Ved. splendor, (used only in the inst.
c. {%śobhathā.%})
<LEND>

<L>46955<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBana<k2>SoBana
{%Śobhana, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} adorning, causing to
look beautiful, shining, splendid; beautiful, hand-
some, (sometimes used ironically); richly dressed or
ornamented; propitious, auspicious; virtuous, de-
corous, good, moral; ({%as%}), m. a burnt offering for
auspicious results; epithet of Śiva; epithet of the
eleventh year of Jupiter's cycle; a planet; the fifth
of the astronomical Yogas; ({%ā%}), f. turmeric; the
yellow pigment {%go-rocanā; (am),%} n. the act of
adorning or causing to look beautiful; the being
bright or handsome, brilliance, sheen; a lotus.
{%—Śobhana-vāha, as, ā, am,%} having splendid car-
riers or horses. {%—Śobhanācarita (˚na-āc˚), am,%} n.
virtuous practice.
<LEND>

<L>46956<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBanaka<k2>SoBanaka
{%Śobhanaka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Hyperanthera Mo-
ringa ({%= śobhāñjana%} above).
<LEND>

<L>46957<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBanIya<k2>SoBanIya
{%Śobhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be beautified or adorned.
<LEND>

<L>46958<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBamAna<k2>SoBamAna
{%Śobhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining, looking beauti-
ful or handsome, splendid, fair.
<LEND>

<L>46959<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBayat<k2>SoBayat
{%Śobhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to shine, orna-
menting, decorating.
<LEND>

<L>46960<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBas<k2>SoBas
{%Śobhas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. splendor, beauty, (the dat.
c. {%śobhase%} is used as a Ved. Inf.; Sāy. {%= śobhanār-%}
{%tham.%})
<LEND>

<L>46961<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBita<k2>SoBita
{%Śobhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ beautiful, adorned, decorated,
trimmed, made splendid.
<LEND>

<L>46962<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBin<k2>SoBin
{%Śobhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ shining, brilliant, beautiful,
handsome, distinguished, exceeding.
<LEND>

<L>46963<pc>1015-c<k1>SoBizWa<k2>SoBizWa
{%Śobhiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. most brilliant, very
handsome or beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>46964<pc>1015-c<k1>SuB<k2>SuB<h>3
{#SuB#} 3¦. {%śubh%} (sometimes written {%śunbh%}
or {%śumbh%} = rts. {%subh, sunbh, sumbh%}),
cl. 1. P. {%śobhati, śunbhati,%} &c., to shine [cf. rt.
1. {%śubh%}]; to speak; to strike, injure, kill.
<LEND>

<L>46965<pc>1015-c<k1>SumB<k2>SumB
{#SumB#}¦ {%śumbh,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%śumbhati,%}
{%-te, śuśumbha, śumbhiṣyati, śum-%}
{%bhitum,%} Ved. to shine, be brilliant; to decorate;
cl. 1. P. {%śumbhati,%} &c., to shine; to speak; to
strike, injure, kill, (in these senses = rts. 3. {%śubh,%}
{%subh, sumbh%}): Caus. A., Ved. {%śubhayate, -yitum,%}
to decorate one's self, to shine; [cf. probably Gr.
<lang n="greek">κομψός.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>46966<pc>1015-c<k1>SumBana<k2>SumBana
{%Śumbhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. shining, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>46967<pc>1015-c<k1>SumBamAna<k2>SumBamAna
{%Śumbhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. decorating, adorn-
ing; handsome, beautiful, (Sāy. {%= śobhamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>46968<pc>1015-c<k1>SumBAna<k2>SumBAna
{%Śumbhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. decorating, illumi-
nating, (Sāy. {%= śobhayat.%})
<LEND>

<L>46969<pc>1015-c<k1>SumBita<k2>SumBita
{%Śumbhita.%}¦ See {%brahma-śumbhita.%}
<LEND>
[Page1016-a+ 73]

<L>46970<pc>1016-a<k1>SumBa<k2>SumBa
{#SumBa#}¦ {%śumbha, as,%} m., N. of an Asura or
demon slain by Durgā, (he was son of Gaveṣṭhin
and grandson of Prahlāda.) {%—Śumbha-ghātinī%} or
{%śumbha-mardinī,%} f. ‘Śumbha-killing,’ an epithet
of Durgā. {%—Śumbha-pura, am, ī,%} n. f. ‘the city
of the Asura Śumbha,’ a town and district, (the
modern Sambhalpūr in the district of Gondwāna;
it is also called Eka-cakra and Hari-gṛha.) {%—Śum-%}
{%bha-badha%} or {%śumbha-vadha, as,%} m. ‘killing of
Śumbha,’ N. of the tenth chapter of the Devī-
māhātmya of the Mārkaṇḍeya-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>46971<pc>1016-a<k1>Sura<k2>Sura
{#Sura#}¦ {%śura, as,%} m. (for {%śūra,%} q. v.), a hero;
a lion, &c.
<LEND>

<L>46972<pc>1016-a<k1>SuruD<k2>SuruD
{#SuruD#}¦ {%śurudh, dhas,%} f. pl., Ved. gifts,
treasures, riches; waters, water, (Sāy. {%= āpaḥ,%} Ṛg-
veda IV. 23, 8); preventers or alleviators of pain or
sorrow, (Sāy. {%= śucer duḥkhasya pratiroddhāraḥ%}
or {%śokasya rodhayitṛ%}); herbs or other remedies
used to allay pain; exhilarating drinks (according to
some).
<LEND>

<L>46973<pc>1016-a<k1>Sulk<k2>Sulk
{#Sulk#}¦ {%śulk,%} cl. 10. P. {%śulkayati, -yitum,%}
to pay, give; to gain, acquire; to
abandon, leave, forsake; to create ({%sarjane%}); to
narrate, tell; [cf. rt. {%śvalk.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46974<pc>1016-a<k1>Sulka<k2>Sulka
{%Śulka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. toll, tax, duty, customs
(especially money levied at ferries, passes, and roads);
a sum of money, price, (Sāy. {%= mūlya%}); property,
wealth, (Sāy. {%= dhana%}); gain, profit; money ad-
vanced to ratify a bargain; money given to the
parents of the bride (originally as purchase-price); a
present made by a bridegroom to his bride; nuptial
present; a marriage-settlement or dower; a wife's
perquisites or private property (such as the profits of
household labour, domestic utensils, milch cattle,
ornaments, servants, &c.). {%—Śulka-khaṇḍana, am,%}
n. defrauding the revenue. {%—Śulka-grāhaka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} or {%śulka-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%} receiving a
toll or duty. {%—Śulka-da, as,%} m. the giver of a
nuptial present, an affianced suitor. {%—Śulka-mo-%}
{%ṣaṇa, am,%} n. stealing or defrauding the revenue.
{%—Śulka-śālā,%} f. a custom-house; [cf. {%śaulka-%}
{%śālika.%}] {%—Śulka-sañjña, as, ā, am,%} having (merely)
the name of a nuptial gratuity. {%—Śulka-sthāna, am,%}
n. a toll-office, custom-house (Manu VIII. 400);
any object of taxation or duty. {%—Śulka-hāni, is,%}
f. loss or forfeiture of wages or dower, &c. {%—Śulkā-%}
{%bhidhāna (˚ka-abh˚), as, ā, am, = śulka-sañjña.%}
{%—Śulkāvāpta (˚ka-av˚), as, ā, am,%} obtained as a
dowry.
<LEND>

<L>46975<pc>1016-a<k1>Sulkika<k2>Sulkika
{#Sulkika#}¦ {%śulkika, as,%} m., N. of a country
or district; [cf. {%śaulkikeya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>46976<pc>1016-a<k1>Sulla<k2>Sulla
{#Sulla#}¦ {%śulla, am,%} n. (for {%śulva%}), a cord, rope,
string; copper ({%= tāmra;%} cf. {%śulva%}).
<LEND>

<L>46977<pc>1016-a<k1>Sulv<k2>Sulv
{#Sulv#}¦ {%śulv%} (also written {%śulb%}), cl. 10. P.
{%śulvayati, -yitum,%} to send away, dis-
miss; to measure; to create.
<LEND>

<L>46978<pc>1016-a<k1>Sulva<k2>Sulva
{%Śulva%}¦ or {%śulba, am,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 95. fr. rt. 1. {%śuc%}), a rope, cord, string, (said to
be also {%as,%} m., {%ā%} or {%ī,%} f.); copper, a copper vessel;
a sacrificial observance; institute, law, custom; a
quantity of water; ({%āni%}), n. pl., N. of a Pariśiṣṭa
of the Yajur-veda; [cf. {%śulvika.%}] {%—Śulva-ja, am,%}
n. brass. {%—Śulva-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Śulva-%}
{%pariśiṣṭa%} and {%śulva-vārttika%} and {%śulva-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of works. {%—Śulvāri (˚va-ari), is,%} m.
‘enemy of copper,’ sulphur.
<LEND>

<L>46979<pc>1016-a<k1>Sulvika<k2>Sulvika
{%Śulvika, āni,%}¦ n. pl., N. of a Pariśiṣṭa of the
Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>46980<pc>1016-a<k1>SuSukvas<k2>SuSukvas
{#SuSukvas#}¦ {%śuśukvas.%} See under rt. 3. {%śuc.%}
<LEND>

<L>46981<pc>1016-a<k1>SuSukzaRi<k2>SuSukzaRi
{#SuSukzaRi#}¦ {%śuśukṣaṇi%} in {%ā-śuśukṣaṇi,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>46982<pc>1016-a<k1>SuSumA<k2>SuSumA
{#SuSumA#}¦ {%śuśumā,%} f., N. of the wife of Śukra.
<LEND>

<L>46983<pc>1016-a<k1>SuSulUkayAtu<k2>SuSulUkayAtu
{#SuSulUkayAtu#}¦ {%śuśulūka-yātu, us,%} m., Ved. a
demon in the shape of an owlet, (according to Sāy.
[Page1016-b+ 79]
on Ṛg-veda VII. 104, 22. {%śuśūlūka = śiśūlūka,%}
a small owl; cf. {%ulūka-yātu.%})
<LEND>

<L>46984<pc>1016-b<k1>SuSruvas<k2>SuSruvas
{#SuSruvas#}¦ {%śuśruvas.%} See under rt. 1. {%śru.%}
<LEND>

<L>46985<pc>1016-b<k1>SuSrU<k2>SuSrU
{#SuSrU#}¦ {%śuśrū, ūs,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. 1. {%śru%}),
‘one who waits on a child,’ a mother.
<LEND>

<L>46986<pc>1016-b<k1>SuSrUzaka<k2>SuSrUzaka
{%Śuśrūṣaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ desirous of hearing,
attentive, obedient, attending or waiting on; ({%as%}),
m. an attendant, servant (comprehending five de-
scriptions of persons, viz. a pupil, a religious pupil, a
hired servant, an officer, and a slave).
<LEND>

<L>46987<pc>1016-b<k1>SuSrUzaRa<k2>SuSrUzaRa
{%Śuśrūṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. obedience; dutiful homage,
close and assiduous attendance, service, serving.
<LEND>

<L>46988<pc>1016-b<k1>SuSrUzA<k2>SuSrUzA
{%Śuśrūṣā,%}¦ f. desire or wish to hear, desire to
obey, obedience; service (said to be of five kinds,
see {%śuśrūṣaka%}); obsequiousness, reverence; say-
ing, speaking, telling. {%—Śuśrūṣā-para, as, ā, am,%}
diligent or attentive in service.
<LEND>

<L>46989<pc>1016-b<k1>SuSrUzitvA<k2>SuSrUzitvA
{%Śuśrūṣitvā,%}¦ ind. having attended or waited upon
(as a slave upon his master, Manu XI. 110).
<LEND>

<L>46990<pc>1016-b<k1>SuSrUzu<k2>SuSrUzu
{%Śuśrūṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of hearing or obey-
ing, obedient, attentive, serving, attending.
<LEND>

<L>46991<pc>1016-b<k1>Suz<k2>Suz
{#Suz#}¦ {%śuṣ%} (thought to be for {%suṣ,%} which
again was probably for an original {%sus%}),
cl. 4. P. {%śuṣyati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%śuśoṣa, śokṣ-%}
{%yati, aśuṣat, śoṣṭum,%} to dry, become dry, dry
up; to wither, become withered; to languish, be-
come emaciated; to be afflicted: Caus. {%śoṣayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśūśuṣat,%} to make dry, dry up,
wither, parch; to emaciate; to destroy; to extinguish:
Desid. {%śuśukṣati:%} Intens. {%śośuṣyate, śośoṣṭi;%}
[cf. Zend <nsi>hushka:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">σαυαρός, σαυσαρισμός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σαυκός</lang> ({%= śuṣka%}), <lang n="greek">σαυχμός, αὐχμός, σαχνός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">αὔω, αὖος, αὐστηρός:</lang> Lat. <nsi>siccus:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>siuk,</nsi>
<nsi>sauht:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>siuh, siuchi, siuhjan, suht:</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>seoc, seac, sioc, sic, suht:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>such,</nsi>
‘dry:’ Lith. <nsi>sausa-s:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>seacadh,</nsi> ‘parched,
frozen;’ <nsi>sioc,</nsi> ‘frost;’ <nsi>sican.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46992<pc>1016-b<k1>Suza<k2>Suza
{%Śuṣa, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. drying, drying up; a hole in
the ground.
<LEND>

<L>46993<pc>1016-b<k1>Suzat<k2>Suzat
{%Śuṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. drying up, absorbing
(moisture).
<LEND>

<L>46994<pc>1016-b<k1>Suzi<k2>Suzi
{%Śuṣi, is,%}¦ f. drying; a hole, chasm; the hollow
or groove in the fang of a snake; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κυσό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κυσ-θό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>cun-nu-s;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>kuszy-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>46995<pc>1016-b<k1>Suzira<k2>Suzira
{%Śuṣira, as, ā, am,%}¦ full of holes or crevices
(caused by drying), perforated, bored, pierced, full
of interstices or spaces; ({%am%}), n. a hole, vacuity,
chasm; the atmosphere; a wind-instrument; ({%as%}),
m. fire; a rat, mouse; ({%ā%}), f. a river; a sort of per-
fume (commonly called Nalī).
<LEND>

<L>46996<pc>1016-b<k1>Suzila<k2>Suzila
{%Śuṣila, as,%}¦ m. ‘the dryer,’ air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>46997<pc>1016-b<k1>Suzka<k2>Suzka
{%Śuṣka, as, ā, am,%}¦ dried, dried up, dry; shriveled,
withered, emaciated, shrunk up; groundless, cause-
less; unproductive, fruitless, unprofitable; offensive;
({%am%}), n., Ved. anything dry, dry wood (for lighting
fire by attrition). {%—Śuṣka-kalaha, as,%} m. vain or
useless wrangling, a quarrel about trifles. {%—Śuṣka-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%śuṣka-tva, am,%} n. dryness. {%—Śuṣka-%}
{%pattra, am,%} n. a dry or withered leaf; a dried pot-
herb. {%—Śuṣka-parṇa, am,%} n. a dry or withered
leaf. {%—Śuṣka-phala, am,%} n. dry fruit. {%—Śuṣka-%}
{%matsya, as,%} m. a dried fish. {%—Śuṣka-māṃsa,%}
{%am,%} n. dry flesh, dry meat. {%—Śuṣka-revatī,%} f.
epithet of a particular Mātrikā or goddess presiding
over a kind of disease; [cf. {%revatī, pūtanā.%}]
{%—Śuṣka-vat, ān, atī, at,%} dried up. {%—Śuṣka-%}
{%vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a dry tree; a particular plant or
shrub {%(= dhava)%}. {%—Śuṣka-vaira, am,%} n. ground-
less enmity. {%—Śuṣka-vraṇa, as,%} m. a dried up
wound, cicatrized sore, scar. {%—Śuṣka-srota, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the stream dried up. {%—Śuṣkāṅga (˚ka-%}
{%aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having shriveled limbs, emaciated,
withered; ({%as%}), m. a particular plant or shrub, {%=%}
{%dhava; (ī),%} f. a lizard, chameleon. {%—Śuṣkānna%}
{%(˚ka-an˚), am,%} n. ‘dry food,’ rice in the husk.
{%—Śuṣkārdra (˚ka-ār˚), am,%} n. dry ginger.
<LEND>

<L>46998<pc>1016-b<k1>Suzkala<k2>Suzkala
{%Śuṣkala, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} m. f. n. dry flesh;
flesh; one who eats flesh.
<LEND>

<L>46999<pc>1016-b<k1>SuzRa<k2>SuzRa
{%Śuṣṇa, as,%}¦ m. the sun; fire; N. of a demon of
[Page1016-c+ 78]
drought (represented in the Ṛg-veda as being over-
come by Indra); ({%am%}), n., Ved. strength, (enume-
rated among the {%bala-nāmāni%} in Naigh. II. 9.)
{%—Śuṣṇa-hatya, am,%} n., Ved. the slaughter of
Śuṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>47000<pc>1016-c<k1>Suzma<k2>Suzma
{%Śuṣma, as, ā, am,%}¦ strong, powerful (Ved.);
({%as%}), m. power, strength, vigour (Ved.); the sun;
fire, flame, light; air, wind; a bird; ({%am%}), n.
strength, prowess ({%= bala,%} Naigh. II. 9); light,
lustre.
<LEND>

<L>47001<pc>1016-c<k1>Suzman<k2>Suzman
{%Śuṣman, ā,%}¦ m. fire; a particular plant, {%= ci-%}
{%traka; (a),%} n. light, lustre; strength, prowess.
<LEND>

<L>47002<pc>1016-c<k1>SuzmiRa<k2>SuzmiRa
{%Śuṣmiṇa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king of the Śivis.
<LEND>

<L>47003<pc>1016-c<k1>Suzmin<k2>Suzmin
{%Śuṣmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ powerful, strong; fiery, mettle-
some; ({%iṇas%}), m. pl., N. of a caste living in Kuśa-
dvīpa (corresponding to the Kṣatriyas). {%—Śuṣ-%}
{%min-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most powerful, very
mighty.
<LEND>

<L>47004<pc>1016-c<k1>Suzyat<k2>Suzyat
{%Śuṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ becoming dry, drying up.
<LEND>

<L>47005<pc>1016-c<k1>SuzyamARa<k2>SuzyamARa
{%Śuṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being dry or dried up,
languishing, thirsty.
<LEND>

<L>47006<pc>1016-c<k1>Soza<k2>Soza
{%Śoṣa, as,%}¦ m. drying up, exsiccation, dryness;
pulmonary consumption; emaciation; intumescence,
(for {%śotha.%}) {%—Śoṣa-sambhava, am,%} n. the root
of long pepper. {%—Śoṣāpahā (˚ṣa-ap˚),%} f. ‘re-
moving consumption,’ a kind of plant ({%= klīta-%}
{%naka%}).
<LEND>

<L>47007<pc>1016-c<k1>Sozaka<k2>Sozaka
{%Śoṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ drying up, exsiccating,
absorbing, absorbent.
<LEND>

<L>47008<pc>1016-c<k1>SozaRa<k2>SozaRa
{%Śoṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ drying up, draining; causing
to fade; ({%as%}), m. one of the arrows of Kāma-deva
(god of love); the plant Bignonia Indica; ({%am%}), n.
the act of drying up; absorption; exhaustion; suck-
ing up, suction; dry ginger.
<LEND>

<L>47009<pc>1016-c<k1>SozaRIya<k2>SozaRIya
{%Śoṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be dried up or absorbed.
<LEND>

<L>47010<pc>1016-c<k1>Sozayitavya<k2>Sozayitavya
{%Śoṣayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be dried up, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47011<pc>1016-c<k1>SozayitvA<k2>SozayitvA
{%Śoṣayitvā,%}¦ ind. having dried up.
<LEND>

<L>47012<pc>1016-c<k1>Sozita<k2>Sozita
{%Śoṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dried, dried up, desiccated,
absorbed, sucked up, exhausted, drained, emptied.
<LEND>

<L>47013<pc>1016-c<k1>Sozin<k2>Sozin
{%Śoṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ drying up (often at the end of
comps.); ({%iṇī%}), f. ether, one of the five Dhāraṇās.
<LEND>

<L>47014<pc>1016-c<k1>SUka<k2>SUka
{#SUka#}¦ {%śūka, as, am,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt. {%śo%}),
the awn of barley, &c.; a bristle, spicule; the bristle
or sharp hair of insects, &c.; compassion, clemency,
tenderness; a kind of venomous insect or lizard
(produced in stagnant water); a sort of water-leech (?);
a kind of moss or weed growing on stagnant water
({%= jala-ś˚%}); a particular remedy in which the Śūka
is used; ({%ā%}), f. cowach. {%—Śūka-kīṭa%} or {%śūka-%}
{%kīṭaka, as,%} m. a kind of caterpillar covered with
bristles or hairs. {%—Śūka-tṛṇa, am,%} n. a kind of
grass. {%—Śūka-dhānya, am,%} n. any awned or bearded
grain (as barley &c.). {%—Śūka-piṇḍi, is,%} or {%śūka-%}
{%piṇḍī,%} f. cowach {%(= kapi-kacchu)%}. {%—Śūka-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} awned, bearded; ({%atī%}), f. cowach.
{%—Śūka-śimbā,%} f. or {%śuka-śimbi, is,%} or {%śūka-%}
{%śimbikā%} or {%śūka-śimbī,%} f. cowach, (also spelt
{%śuka-śimbā,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>47015<pc>1016-c<k1>SUkaka<k2>SUkaka
{%Śūkaka, as,%}¦ m. barley or a bearded kind of wheat
resembling barley; the sentiment of compassion or
tenderness.
<LEND>

<L>47016<pc>1016-c<k1>SUkin<k2>SUkin
{%Śūkin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ awned, bearded (as corn, grain,
&c.).
<LEND>

<L>47017<pc>1016-c<k1>SUkara<k2>SUkara
{#SUkara#}¦ {%śūkara, as,%} m. (said to be connected
with {%śūka,%} or fr. {%śū,%} an imitative sound, {%+ kara;%} cf.
{%sūkara%}), a hog, pig; N. of a Naraka; ({%ī%}), f. a
sow; a kind of moss, Lycopodium Imbricatum; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">αῦς, ὗς;</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>sū;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>sau.</nsi>]
{%—Śūkara-kanda, as,%} m. ‘hog's root,’ a kind of
bulbous plant {%(= vārāhī-kanda)%}. {%—Śūkara-daṃṣ-%}
{%ṭra, as,%} m. a hog's tusk; N. of a kind of disease,
(prolapsus ani.) {%—Śūkara-pādikā,%} f. a kind of plant
{%(= kola-śimbī)%}. {%—Śūkarākrāntā (˚ra-āk˚),%} f. a
kind of moss {%(= varāha-krāntā)%}. {%—Śūkareṣṭa%}
{%(˚ra-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} liked by hogs or swine; ({%as%}),
m. a kind of grass ({%= kaseru%}).
<LEND>

<L>47018<pc>1016-c<k1>SUkala<k2>SUkala
{#SUkala#}¦ {%śūkala, as,%} m. a restive horse; [cf.
{%śūlaka.%}]
<LEND>
[Page1017-a+ 77]

<L>47019<pc>1017-a<k1>SUkApuwwa<k2>SUkApuwwa
{#SUkApuwwa#}¦ {%śūkāpuṭṭa%} or (according to Śabda-
k.) {%śūkāpūṭṭa, as,%} m. a particular gem, (perhaps)
a kind of amber ({%= tṛṇa-maṇi%}).
<LEND>

<L>47020<pc>1017-a<k1>SUkula<k2>SUkula
{#SUkula#}¦ {%śūkula, as,%} m. (?), a fish in general;
a kind of fish; a fragrant grass, Cyperus.
<LEND>

<L>47021<pc>1017-a<k1>SUkfta<k2>SUkfta
{#SUkfta#}¦ {%śū-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. making
the sound {%śū%} or {%śūt,%} snorting (said of a horse).
<LEND>

<L>47022<pc>1017-a<k1>SUkzma<k2>SUkzma
{#SUkzma#}¦ {%śūkṣma,%} incorrect for {%sūkṣma,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>47023<pc>1017-a<k1>SUGana<k2>SUGana
{#SUGana#}¦ {%śūghana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. going
quickly, (Sāy. {%śūghanāsaḥ = āśu-gantryaḥ,%} Ṛg-
veda IV. 58, 7.)
<LEND>

<L>47024<pc>1017-a<k1>SUtiparRa<k2>SUtiparRa
{#SUtiparRa#}¦ {%śūti-parṇa, as,%} m. (the meaning
of {%śūti%} is doubtful), a kind of tree ({%= ārag-badha%}).
<LEND>

<L>47025<pc>1017-a<k1>SUdra<k2>SUdra
{#SUdra#}¦ {%śūdra, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 19. fr. rt. 1. {%śuc,%} to be afflicted, &c.), a man of
the fourth or servile tribe (whose only business, ac-
cording to Manu I. 91, was to serve the three higher
castes; in Ṛg-veda X. 90, 12. the Śūdra is said to
have been born from the feet of Puruṣa; in Manu
I. 87. he is fabled to have sprung from the same
part of the body of Brahmā; {%kevala-śūdra,%} a pure
Śūdra); ({%ā%}), f. a woman of the Śūdra tribe; ({%ī%}), f.
the wife of a Śūdra. {%—Śūdra-kanyā,%} f. a Śūdra
girl. {%—Śūdra-kṛtya, as, ā, am,%} to be done by a
Śūdra, proper for a Śūdra; ({%am%}), n. the duty of
a Śūdra. {%—Śūdrakṛtya-vicāra-tattva, am,%} n., N.
of a part of Raghu-nandana's Smṛti-tattva (illustrat-
ing the duties of Śūdras at the anniversaries of the
death of parents and at other ceremonies). {%—Śūdra-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%śūdra-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition
of a Śūdra or slave; servility. {%—Śūdra-dharma,%}
{%as,%} m. the duty of a Śūdra (i. e. the service of the
three higher castes). {%—Śūdradharma-tattva, am,%}
n. ‘the nature of a Śūdra's duties,’ N. of a work by
Kamalākara. {%—Śūdra-priya, as, ā, am,%} dear to a
Śūdra, liked by Śūdras; ({%as%}), m. an onion {%(= pa-%}
{%lāṇḍu)%}. {%—Śūdra-preṣya, as,%} m. a man of one of
the three superior castes who has become a servant
to a Śūdra; ({%am%}), n. the being servant to a Śūdra.
{%—Śūdra-bhikṣita, as, ā, am,%} (anything) begged
or received as alms from a Śūdra. {%—Śūdra-bhū-%}
{%yiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} inhabited mostly by Śūdras,
abounding with Śūdras. {%—Śūdra-yājaka, as,%} m.
one who sacrifices for a Śūdra, the conductor of a
sacrifice for a Śūdra. {%—Śūdrayājaka-prāyaścitta,%}
{%am,%} n. the penance incurred by sacrificing for a
Śūdra. {%—Śūdra-yoni-ja, as, ā, am,%} born of a ser-
vile womb, of plebeian origin. {%—Śūdra-rājya, am,%}
n. a country of which a Śūdra is king. {%—Śūdra-%}
{%varga, as,%} m. the Śūdra or servile class. {%—Śūdra-%}
{%varjam,%} ind. except Śūdras. {%—Śūdra-vṛtti, is,%} f.
the occupation or mode of life of a Śūdra (i. e. ser-
vitude to the higher castes). {%—Śūdra-śāsana, am,%}
n. an edict or grant addressed to Śūdras. {%—Śūdra-%}
{%saṃskāra, as,%} m. any purificatory rite relating to
Śūdras. {%—Śūdra-sevana, am,%} n. attendance on a
Śūdra master, the being in the service of a man of
the servile class, (Manu XI. 70.) {%—Śūdra-hatyā,%} f.
the killing of a Śūdra. {%—Śūdra-han, ā,%} m. one
who kills a Śūdra, the slayer of a Śūdra. {%—Śū-%}
{%drānna (˚ra-an˚), am,%} n. food belonging to a
Śūdra; [cf. {%śūdrodaka%} below.] {%—Śūdrā-pariṇa-%}
{%yana, am,%} n. the marrying a Śūdra female. {%—Śū-%}
{%drā-putra, as,%} m. the son of a Śūdra woman, (the
father being either a Śūdra or a man of a different
caste.) {%—Śūdrā-bhārya, as,%} m. one who has a
Śūdra woman for his wife, the husband of a Śūdra
woman. {%—Śūdrārtā (˚ra-ār˚),%} f. a kind of plant
{%(= priyaṅgu)%}. {%—Śūdrā-vedana, am,%} n. the mar-
rying a Śūdra woman. {%—Śūdrā-vedin, ī,%} m. marry-
ing a Śūdra woman, a man of one of the three
higher classes who has married a Śūdra wife. {%—Śū-%}
{%drāśauca (˚ra-aś˚), am,%} n. the impurity of a
Śūdra. {%—Śūdrā-suta, as,%} m. {%= śūdrā-putra%}. {%—Śū-%}
{%drāhnika (˚ra-āh˚), am,%} n. the daily ceremonies
of a Śūdra. {%—Śūdrī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c.,
to become a Śūdra. {%—Śūdrodaka (˚ra-ud˚), am,%}
[Page1017-b+ 77]
n. water that has been polluted by the touch of a
Śūdra. {%—Śūdrodaka-pāna-prāyaścitta, am,%} n. a
penance for drinking water given by a Śūdra.
<LEND>

<L>47026<pc>1017-b<k1>SUdraka<k2>SUdraka
{%Śūdraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of the first Āndhra king,
(variously written Sindhuka, Śiśuka, and Śūraka);
of a king (the author of the drama called Mṛc-
chakaṭikā).
<LEND>

<L>47027<pc>1017-b<k1>SUdrARI<k2>SUdrARI
{%Śūdrāṇī,%}¦ f. the wife of a Śūdra.
<LEND>

<L>47028<pc>1017-b<k1>SUna<k2>SUna
{#SUna#}¦ {%śūna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śvi,%} q. v.),
swelled, swollen, increased, grown, prospered; mor-
bidly swollen; empty, vacant (Ved., Sāy. {%= śūnya%});
({%am%}), n., Ved. swelling, increase, (Sāy. {%= sam-ṛd-%}
{%dhi,%} Ṛg-veda III. 33, 13); emptiness, poverty, (Sāy.
{%= śūnya, dāridrya,%} Ṛg-veda II. 27, 17); an in-
correct pronunciation (in Vedic phonetics).
<LEND>

<L>47029<pc>1017-b<k1>SUnavat<k2>SUnavat
{%Śūna-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has increased.
<LEND>

<L>47030<pc>1017-b<k1>SUnA<k2>SUnA
{#SUnA#}¦ {%śūnā,%} f. ({%= sūnā,%} q. v.), the uvula
or soft palate; a slaughter-house, any place where
animals are killed or are liable to be destroyed, (five
of these are enumerated, viz. a fire-place, a grind-
stone, a broom, a mortar, and a water-pot; cf.
{%pañca-sūnā.%}) {%—Śūnā-cakra-dhvaja-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} one who keeps a slaughter-house, one who has
an oil-press, and one who exhibits a vintner's sign,
(Manu IV. 84.) {%—Śūnā-doṣa,%} see {%sūnā-doṣa.%}
{%—Śūnā-vat, ān,%} m. one who keeps a slaughter-
house, a butcher. {%—Śūnā-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in
or brought from a slaughter-house or any place where
animals are destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>47031<pc>1017-b<k1>SUnya<k2>SUnya
{#SUnya#}¦ {%śūnya, as, ā, am%} (probably connected
with {%śūna%} above, fr. rt. {%śvi%}), empty, void, hollow;
vacant, barren, non-existent; utterly destitute or de-
prived of, without (with inst.); ruined; nonsensical, un-
meaning; guileless, unsuspicious; indifferent; lonely,
private, desert, desolate, ({%śūnye%} or {%śūnyam,%} ind. in
a lonely place, secretly); bare, naked; ({%am%}), n. a
void, vacuum, blank; space, heaven, ether, the sky,
atmosphere; a dot, spot; a cypher; naught, vacuity,
nonentity, (one of the principles of Bauddha meta-
physics); N. of Brahma; ({%ā%}), f. a hollow reed; a
barren woman; the prickly pear; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κενός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κενεός;</lang> Æol. <lang n="greek">κέννος.</lang>] {%—Śūnya-geha, am,%} n. an
empty house. {%—Śūnya-tā,%} f. or {%śūnya-tva, am,%}
n. emptiness, voidness, vacuity, non-existence, un-
reality, the false or illusory nature of all existence.
{%—Śūnya-padavī,%} f. ‘empty path,’ the road or
passage of the soul, (see {%mahā-patha, mudrā-%}
{%mārga.%}) {%—Śūnya-madhya, as, ā, am,%} having a
hollow centre, empty inside; ({%as%}), m. a hollow reed.
{%—Śūnya-vat,%} ind. like a cypher, annihilated or vanished
as it were. {%—Śūnya-vāda, as,%} m. the doctrine of the
non-existence of anything. {%—Śūnya-vādin, ī,%} m.
‘affirmer of non-existence,’ an atheist; a Buddhist.
{%—Śūnya-sthāna, am,%} n. an empty place. {%—Śūnya-%}
{%hasta, as, ā, am,%} empty-handed. {%—Śūnya-hṛ-%}
{%daya, as, ā, am,%} ‘empty-hearted,’ unsuspecting,
unsuspicious; absent in mind. {%—Śūnyākṛti (˚ya-%}
{%āk˚), is, is, i,%} ‘empty-formed,’ having a vacant
appearance or aspect. {%—Śūnyāgāra-kṛtālaya (˚ya-%}
{%āg˚, ˚ta-āl˚), as, ā, am,%} making an abode in de-
serted houses. {%—Śūnyālaya (˚ya-āl˚), as,%} m. an
empty or deserted house, (sleeping in such a house
is forbidden.) {%—Śūnyī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make empty, leave.
<LEND>

<L>47032<pc>1017-b<k1>SUpakAra<k2>SUpakAra
{#SUpakAra#}¦ {%śūpa-kāra, as,%} m. (for {%sūpa-kāra,%}
q. v.), one who lives by cooking for Śūdras ({%= śūdra-%}
{%pākopajīvin%}).
<LEND>

<L>47033<pc>1017-b<k1>SUyamAna<k2>SUyamAna
{#SUyamAna#}¦ {%śūyamāna.%} See under rt. {%śvi.%}
<LEND>

<L>47034<pc>1017-b<k1>SUr<k2>SUr
{#SUr#}¦ {%śūr%} (also written {%sūr,%} q. v.), cl. 4. A.
{%śūryate, śuśūre, śūritum,%} to hurt, in-
jure, kill; to be firm or motionless, stand fast, be
fixed; to make firm or immovable; to be senseless;
cl. 10. A. {%śūrayate, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśuśūrat,%} to be
valiant or powerful, act the hero; to make great
effort or exertion, (in these senses rather a Nom. fr.
{%śūra%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>47035<pc>1017-b<k1>SUra<k2>SUra
{%Śūra, as,%}¦ m. (probably connected with {%śavas%}),
[Page1017-c+ 80]
a hero, warrior, champion, valiant man, great or
mighty man; a lion; a boar; the sun; N. of
Yādava, the grandfather of Kṛṣṇa; the Śāl tree,
Shorea Robusta; N. of certain other plants or trees,
{%= citraka; = lakuca; = masūra; (ās),%} m. pl.,
N. of a tribe inhabiting Bhārata-varṣa; [cf. Zend
<nsi>śūra;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κῦρ-ος, κυρό-ω, κύριος, κοίρανος, κοῦρος</lang>
<lang n="greek">κόρος.</lang>] {%—Śūra-kīṭa, as,%} m. ‘warrior-insect,’ an in-
ferior hero. {%—Śūra-grāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
a multitude of heroes. {%—Śūra-tara, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. more heroic, very valiant. {%—Śūra-tā,%} f. or
{%śūra-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition of a hero,
heroism, prowess, valour, bravery. {%—Śūra-deva, as,%}
m., N. of the second of the twenty-four Arhats of
the future Utsarpiṇī. {%—Śūra-putra, as, ā, am,%}
having heroes as sons; ({%ā%}), f., Ved. epithet of Aditi.
{%—Śūra-pura, am,%} n. ‘hero-town,’ N. of a town.
{%—Śūra-maṭha, as, am,%} m. n. the college or
monastery of Śūra. {%—Śūra-māna, am,%} n. thinking
one's self a hero, arrogance, vaunting. {%—Śūra-mā-%}
{%nin, ī,%} m. one who thinks himself a hero, a boaster,
braggart. {%—Śūram-manya, as,%} m. one who thinks
himself a hero, a boaster. {%—Śūra-varman, ā,%}
m., N. of several kings. {%—Śūra-vīra, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Śūra-śloka, as,%} m. a kind of arti-
ficial verse; [cf. {%vīra-viruda.%}] {%—Śūra-sāti, is,%}
f., Ved. conflict of heroes, battle, war, (accord-
ing to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 31, 6. {%śūra-sātā =%}
{%śūraiḥ sambhajanīye yuddhe.%}) {%—Śūra-sena, as,%}
m., N. of the country about Mathurā; of a king (of
Mathurā and ruler of the Yadus); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N.
of the people inhabiting the above country. {%—Śūra-%}
{%senaka, ās,%} m. pl., N. of the people and country
about Mathurā. {%—Śūrasena-ja, as,%} m. one born in
Śūra-sena, an inhabitant of Śūra-sena. {%—Śūrārtha%}
{%(˚ra-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} useful for or suited to heroes,
for the sake of warriors. {%—Śūreśvara (˚ra-īś˚), as,%}
m. ‘lord of Śūra,’ the tutelary deity of Śūra (or the
statue of a deity); a temple built by Śūra.
<LEND>

<L>47036<pc>1017-c<k1>SUraka<k2>SUraka
{%Śūraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king ({%= śūdraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>47037<pc>1017-c<k1>SUraRa<k2>SUraRa
{%Śūraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ high-spirited (Ved., said of
horses; Sāy. {%= vikrama-śīla,%} Ṛg-veda I. 163, 10);
({%as%}), m. a kind of esculent root, Arum Campanu-
latum; the plant Bignonia Indica. {%—Śūraṇodbhuja%}
{%(˚ṇa-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘feeding on Arum Campanu-
latum,’ a kind of yellow bird ({%= haridrāṅga%}).
<LEND>

<L>47038<pc>1017-c<k1>SUrRa<k2>SUrRa
{%Śūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed, firm.
<LEND>

<L>47039<pc>1017-c<k1>SUrta<k2>SUrta
{#SUrta#}¦ {%śūrta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (probably)
eager, quick, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 174,
6. {%śūrtāḥ = kṣiprāḥ%} or {%= kṣiptāḥ, varjitāḥ;%} in
Naigh. II. 15. {%śūrtāḥ%} is enumerated among the
{%kṣipra-nāmāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>47040<pc>1017-c<k1>SUrp<k2>SUrp
{#SUrp#}¦ {%śūrp%} (perhaps rather a Nom. fr.
{%śūrpa%} below), cl. 10. P. {%śūrpayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to measure, mete out.
<LEND>

<L>47041<pc>1017-c<k1>SUrpa<k2>SUrpa
{%Śūrpa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (according to Uṇādi-s. III.
26. fr. rt. {%śṝ;%} also written {%sūrpa%}), a winnowing
basket or a kind of wicker receptacle which, when
shaken about, serves as a fan for winnowing corn;
({%as%}), m. a measure of two Droṇas; ({%ī%}), f. a small
winnowing basket or fan; a toy for children; N. of
the sister of Rāvaṇa, (see {%śūrpa-ṇakhā.%}) {%—Śūrpa-%}
{%karṇa, as,%} m. ‘having ears like winnowing fans,’
an elephant. {%—Śūrpa-ṇakhā,%} f. or {%śūrpa-ṇakhī,%} f.
‘having finger-nails like winnowing fans,’ N. of the
sister of the Daitya Rāvaṇa, (she fell in love with
Rāma and, being rejected by him, attacked Sītā, but
was beaten off and mutilated by Lakṣmaṇa; in
revenge she incited her brother to carry off Sītā.)
{%—Śūrpa-niṣpāva, as,%} m. a basket-full of win-
nowed corn. {%—Śūrpa-parṇī,%} f. a sort of bean,
Phaseolus Trilobus. {%—Śūrpa-vāta, as,%} m. the wind
raised by shaking a winnowing basket. {%—Śūrpa-%}
{%śruti, is,%} m. ‘having ears like winnowing fans,’
an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>47042<pc>1017-c<k1>SUrpaka<k2>SUrpaka
{%Śūrpaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a demon (an enemy of
Kāma-deva). {%—Śūrpakārāti%} or {%śūrpakāri (˚ka-%}
{%ar˚), is,%} m. ‘enemy of Śūrpaka,’ epithet of Kāma
(god of love).
<LEND>

<L>47043<pc>1017-c<k1>SUrpI<k2>SUrpI
{%Śūrpī,%}¦ f. See above under {%śūrpa.%}
<LEND>
[Page1018-a+ 79]

<L>47044<pc>1018-a<k1>SUrpAraka<k2>SUrpAraka
{#SUrpAraka#}¦ {%śūrpāraka,%} N. of a mythical
country.
<LEND>

<L>47045<pc>1018-a<k1>SUrma<k2>SUrma
{#SUrma#}¦ {%śūrma, as,%} m. an iron image; an anvil.
<LEND>

<L>47046<pc>1018-a<k1>SUrmi<k2>SUrmi
{%Śūrmi, is,%}¦ m. f. or {%śūrmikā%} or {%śūrmī,%} f. {%=%}
{%śūrma%} above; [cf. {%sūrmi, syurmi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47047<pc>1018-a<k1>SUl<k2>SUl
{#SUl#}¦ {%śūl%} (rather a Nom. fr. {%śūla%} below),
cl. 1. P. {%śūlati, śuśūla, śūlitum,%} to be
ill; to disorder, make sick, disease; to pierce, transfix,
impale; to cry, make a loud noise; to collect (?).
<LEND>

<L>47048<pc>1018-a<k1>SUla<k2>SUla
{%Śūla, as, am,%}¦ m. n. any sharp or acute pain;
pain in the stomach, colic; rheumatism, gout; any
sharp or pointed weapon, a pike, dart, spear, lance,
spike; the trident of Śiva; a sharp iron pin or spit
(on which meat is roasted); a stake for impaling
criminals; a banner, ensign; the ninth astronomical
Yoga; death, dying; ({%ā%}), f. a stake for impaling
criminals; a harlot, prostitute; [cf. Slav. <nsi>sūliza.</nsi>]
{%—Śūla-gava,%} a kind of animal sacrifice. {%—Śūla-%}
{%granthi, is,%} f. ‘having sharp knots,’ a kind of Dūrvā
grass {%(= mālā-dūrvā)%}. {%—Śūla-ghātana, am,%} n.
‘pain-destroying,’ iron rust or filings. {%—Śūla-ghna,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} removing or allaying sharp pain, sedative,
anodyne; ({%as%}), m. a kind of plant {%(= tumburu).%}
{%—Śūla-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. ‘enemy to colic,’ Asa Fetida.
{%—Śūla-dhanvan, ā,%} m. ‘having a trident for a
bow,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Śūla-dhara, as,%} m. ‘spear-
holder, trident-holder,’ epithet of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f.
epithet of Durgā. {%—Śūla-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} spear-
holding, lance-bearing, trident-holding; ({%iṇī%}), f.
epithet of Durgā. {%—Śūla-dhṛk,%} m. (see {%dhṛk,%}
p. 459), ‘trident-bearing,’ epithet of Śiva; ({%k%}), f.
epithet of Durgā. {%—Śūla-nāśana, am,%} n. ‘remov-
ing pain in the stomach,’ white sochal salt. {%—Śūla-%}
{%pattrī,%} f. a kind of grass {%(= śūlī)%}. {%—Śūla-pāṇi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘trident-handed,’ epithet of Śiva (regarded
as the king of the Bhūtas); N. of the author of the
Prāyaścitta-viveka and of the Tithi-dvaidha-prakaraṇa
and of the Yājñavalkya-ṭīkā. {%—Śūla-pāṇin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} holding or bearing a lance or spear. {%—Śūla-bhṛt,%}
{%t,%} m. ‘spear-holder,’ an epithet of Śiva. {%—Śūla-%}
{%bheda, as,%} m., N. of a place. {%—Śūla-mudgara-%}
{%hasta, as, ā, am,%} having a lance and mace in hand,
armed with a lance and club. {%—Śūla-vedanā,%} f.
sharp or acute pain. {%—Śūla-śatru, us,%} m. ‘hostile
to colic,’ the castor-oil plant, Ricinus Communis.
{%—Śūla-stha, as, ā, am,%} fixed on a stake, impaled.
{%—Śūla-hantrī,%} f. ‘colic-removing,’ a kind of barley
{%(= yavānī)%}. {%—Śūla-hasta, as,%} m. ‘lance-handed,’
a man armed with a lance, lancer, pikeman. {%—Śūla-%}
{%hṛt, t,%} m. ‘removing colic,’ Asa Fetida. {%—Śūlā-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to roast on a spit.
{%—Śūlākṛta (˚la-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} roasted on a
spit, &c.; ({%am%}), n. roasted meat. {%—Śūlāgra (˚la-%}
{%ag˚), am,%} n. the point of a pike or stake, &c.
{%—Śūleśvarī-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Śū-%}
{%lotkhā (˚la-ut˚),%} f. the medicinal plant Serratula
Anthelmintica. {%—Śūlodyata-kara (˚la-ud˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} with uplifted spear in hand.
<LEND>

<L>47049<pc>1018-a<k1>SUlaka<k2>SUlaka
{%Śūlaka, as,%}¦ m. a restive or unbroken horse;
[cf. {%śūkala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47050<pc>1018-a<k1>SUlika<k2>SUlika
{%Śūlika, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a spear or any sharp
instrument; roasted on a spit; ({%as%}), m. a hare;
({%am%}), n. roast meat.
<LEND>

<L>47051<pc>1018-a<k1>SUlin<k2>SUlin
{%Śūlin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ suffering sharp pain, suffering
from colic; armed with a spear or pike, carrying a
lance or stake; ({%ī%}), m. a spearman, pikeman, lancer;
epithet of Śiva (as holding a trident); a hare; N.
of a Muni; ({%inī%}), f. epithet of Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>47052<pc>1018-a<k1>SUlina<k2>SUlina
{%Śūlina, as,%}¦ m. the Indian fig-tree ({%= bhāṇḍīra%}).
<LEND>

<L>47053<pc>1018-a<k1>SUlI<k2>SUlI
{%Śūlī,%}¦ f. a kind of grass ({%= madhu-latā%}).
<LEND>

<L>47054<pc>1018-a<k1>SUlya<k2>SUlya
{%Śūlya, as, ā, am,%}¦ roasted on a spit; deserving
impalement; ({%am%}), n. roasted meat. {%—Śūlya-pāka,%}
{%as,%} m. any meat or other substance roasted on a spit.
{%—Śūlya-māṃsa, am,%} n. roast meat, meat cooked
on a spit.
<LEND>

<L>47055<pc>1018-a<k1>SUSujAna<k2>SUSujAna
{#SUSujAna#}¦ {%śūśujāna, as, ā, am%} (according to
Sāy. {%= śośucāna, dīpyamāna,%} Ṛg-veda X. 34, 6;
cf. {%śuśucāna,%} p. 1013), Ved. glowing, resplen-
dent.
<LEND>
[Page1018-b+ 77]

<L>47056<pc>1018-b<k1>SUSuvas<k2>SUSuvas
{#SUSuvas#}¦ {%śūśuvas, vān,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śvi%}), Ved.
one who has increased, increasing; large.
<LEND>

<L>47057<pc>1018-b<k1>SUSuvAna<k2>SUSuvAna
{%Śūśuvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. growing in size, in-
creasing in strength.
<LEND>

<L>47058<pc>1018-b<k1>SUz<k2>SUz
{#SUz#}¦ {%śūṣ%} (also written {%sūṣ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%śūṣati, śuśūṣa, śūṣitum,%} to bring
forth; to beget, propagate.
<LEND>

<L>47059<pc>1018-b<k1>SUza<k2>SUza
{#SUza#}¦ {%śūṣa, am,%} n. (perhaps connected
with rt. {%śvi%}), Ved. strength, (according to Naigh. II.
9, Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 154, 3 {%= bala;%} cf. {%śuṣma;%}
in Naigh. III. 6 {%= sukha%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of a pre-
ceptor.
<LEND>

<L>47060<pc>1018-b<k1>SUzaRi<k2>SUzaRi
{%Śūṣaṇi,%}¦ in Ṛg-veda X. 93, 1. probably fr. a
base {%śūṣan;%} regarded by some as a kind of Ved.
Inf. fr. rt. {%śvi.%}
<LEND>

<L>47061<pc>1018-b<k1>SfkAla<k2>SfkAla
{#SfkAla#}¦ {%śṛkāla, as,%} m. (for {%śṛgāla%} below),
a jackal.
<LEND>

<L>47062<pc>1018-b<k1>SfgAla<k2>SfgAla
{#SfgAla#}¦ {%śṛgāla, as,%} m. (etymology doubt-
ful, but cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κραγέτης;</lang> perhaps connected with
rt. {%śṝ;%} sometimes written {%sṛgāla%}), a jackal; a
rogue, cheat; a coward, poltroon; an ill-natured or
harsh-speaking man; N. of a demon; epithet of
Kṛṣṇa; ({%ī%}), f. a female jackal; a fox; flight, re-
treat; a kind of plant ({%= kokilākṣa%}); another
plant {%(= vidārī)%}. {%—Śṛgāla-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m.
‘jackal's thorn,’ a kind of plant, Zizyphus Scandens.
{%—Śṛgāla-koli, is,%} m. a sort of jujube. {%—Śṛgāla-%}
{%ghaṇṭī,%} f. a particular plant {%(= kokilākṣa)%}. {%—Śṛ-%}
{%gāla-jambu, us,%} or {%śṛgāla-jambū, ūs,%} f. a kind
of cucumber, Cucumis Madraspatanus; the fruit of
the jujube. {%—Śṛgāla-jāti, is,%} f. birth (in a future
life) as a jackal. {%—Śṛgāla-yoni, is,%} m. f. the womb
of a jackal; the being born in a future birth as a
jackal. {%—Śṛgāla-rūpa, as,%} m. ‘jackal-formed,’ epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Śṛgāla-vinnā,%} f. a kind of plant
({%= pṛśni-parṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>47063<pc>1018-b<k1>SfgAlikA<k2>SfgAlikA
{%Śṛgālikā,%}¦ f. a female jackal; a fox; running
away, flight, retreat; a kind of plant ({%= bhūmi-%}
{%kuṣmāṇḍa%}); a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47064<pc>1018-b<k1>SfNKala<k2>SfNKala
{#SfNKala#}¦ {%śṛṅkhala, as, ā, am,%} m. f. n. (ety-
mology doubtful; perhaps connected with {%śiñjā,%} ‘a
tinkling sound’), an iron chain; any chain or fetter;
a belt or chain worn round the waist for ornament,
&c.; an iron chain for confining the feet of an
elephant; a measuring chain. {%—Śṛṅkhala-tā,%} f. or
{%śṛṅkhala-tva, am,%} n. the being chained together;
restraint; concatenation, connection, order; a series.
{%—Śṛṅkhalā-bandha%} or {%śṛṅkhalā-bandhana,%}
{%am,%} n. confining by chains or fetters.
<LEND>

<L>47065<pc>1018-b<k1>SfNKalaka<k2>SfNKalaka
{%Śṛṅkhalaka, as,%}¦ m. a chain; a young camel or
other young animal with wooden rings or clogs on
his feet (to prevent his straying); any camel.
<LEND>

<L>47066<pc>1018-b<k1>SfNKalita<k2>SfNKalita
{%Śṛṅkhalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ chained, fettered, bound,
confined.
<LEND>

<L>47067<pc>1018-b<k1>SfNKalI<k2>SfNKalI
{%Śṛṅkhalī,%}¦ f. a kind of plant ({%= kokilākṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>47068<pc>1018-b<k1>SfNga<k2>SfNga
{#SfNga#}¦ {%śṛṅga, am,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
I. 125. fr. rt. {%śṝ%} with affix {%ga,%} a nasal being inserted;
according to some perhaps contracted fr. {%śiraṅ-ga,%}
‘head-going’), a horn; the top or summit of a
mountain, a peak, crag; the summit of a building,
pinnacle, turret; any peak or point or projection or
lofty object; a cusp or horn of the moon; height,
elevation, dignity, lordship, mastership, supremacy,
sovereignty; the rising or bursting forth of desire,
excess of love or passion; anything sharp or fine-
pointed; a fountain or artificial spout of water; any
horn-like vessel or instrument; a buffalo's horn or
other horn used for blowing; a lotus; a mark, token,
sign; ({%as%}), m. a medicinal plant and root ({%= jī-%}
{%vaka%}); N. of a Ṛṣi or Muni (of whom, in some
parts of India, on occasions of drought, earthen
images are said to be made and supplicated for rain);
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κέρας;</lang> Lat. <nsi>cornu;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>haurn;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>horn.</nsi>] {%—Śṛṅga-kanda, as,%} m. a kind of
plant {%(= śṛṅgāṭaka)%}. {%—Śṛṅga-giri, is,%} m., N.
of a mountain. {%—Śṛṅga-grāhikā,%} f. (in logic) dis-
tribution, taking singly and severally all the parti-
[Page1018-c+ 81]
culars included under a general term or all the indi-
viduals composing a body. {%—Śṛṅga-ja, as, ā, am,%}
horn-produced, made from horn; produced on
mountain-peaks; ({%as%}), m. an arrow, shaft; ({%am%}), n.
the aloe wood or tree {%(= a-guru)%}. {%—Śṛṅga-pura,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Śṛṅga-prahārin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} horn-striking, butting or fighting with the horns.
{%—Śṛṅga-priya, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Śṛṅga-%}
{%mūla, as,%} m. a kind of plant {%(= śṛṅgāṭaka).%}
{%—Śṛṅga-mohin, ī,%} m. the Campaka tree.
{%—Śṛṅga-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having peaks, peaked;
({%ān%}), m. a mountain; epithet of a mythical moun-
tain forming one of the boundaries of the earth.
{%—Śṛṅga-vṛṣ, ṭ,%} m., Ved. epithet of the Sun;
N. of a Ṛṣi (said to have been the father of Indra;
{%Śṛṅga-vṛṣo napāt,%} the offspring of Śṛṅga-vṛṣ,
i. e. Indra). {%—Śṛṅga-vera, am,%} n. ginger (undried
or dry); N. of a town {%(= guha-caṇḍāla-pura).%}
{%—Śṛṅga-veraka, am,%} n. ginger. {%—Śṛṅgaverā-%}
{%bha-mūlaka (˚ra-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘having a root
like that of ginger,’ a kind of grass {%(= erakā).%}
{%—Śṛṅga-śata, am,%} n. a hundred peaks. {%—Śṛṅ-%}
{%gāgra-praharaṇābhimukha (˚ga-ag˚, ˚ṇa-abh˚),%}
{%as, ī, am,%} advancing towards or making a charge
with the weapons of the points of the horns; ready
to strike with the points of the horns. {%—Śṛṅgān-%}
{%tara (˚ga-an˚), am,%} n. the space or interval be-
tween the horns (of a cow &c.). {%—Śṛṅgīśvara-%}
{%tīrtha (˚gī-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Śṛṅgoc-%}
{%chrāya (˚ga-uc˚), as,%} m. a lofty peak. {%—Śṛṅgon-%}
{%nati (˚ga-un˚), is,%} f. elevation of a horn, the rising
(of the moon?; cf. {%śīrṣodaya%}).
<LEND>

<L>47069<pc>1018-c<k1>SfNgaka<k2>SfNgaka
{%Śṛṅgaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a horn; anything
pointed; a cusp or horn of the moon; ({%as%}), m. a
medicinal root, (commonly called Jīvaka.)
<LEND>

<L>47070<pc>1018-c<k1>SfNgalA<k2>SfNgalA
{%Śṛṅgalā,%}¦ f. a particular plant ({%= aja-śṛṅgī,%}
‘goat's horn’).
<LEND>

<L>47071<pc>1018-c<k1>SfNgAwa<k2>SfNgAwa
{%Śṛṅgāṭa, am,%}¦ n. a place where four roads meet;
({%as%}), m. the aquatic plant Trapa Bispinosa; the
shrub Ruellia or Barleria Longifolia.
<LEND>

<L>47072<pc>1018-c<k1>SfNgAwaka<k2>SfNgAwaka
{%Śṛṅgāṭaka, am,%}¦ n. a place where four roads
meet; a kind of pastry or dish of minced meat, &c.
(called Samūsā in Hindī); a door; ({%as%}), m. the
aquatic plant Trapa Bispinosa; a mountain having
three peaks.
<LEND>

<L>47073<pc>1018-c<k1>SfNgAra<k2>SfNgAra
{%Śṛṅgāra, as,%}¦ m. (probably connected with {%śṛṅga%}
in the sense of ‘rising of desire;’ according to
Uṇādi-s. III. 136. fr. rt. {%śṝ%} with affix {%āra,%} a nasal
and {%g%} being inserted), love, sexual passion, erotic sen-
timent; sexual union, coition; a dress suitable for
amorous purposes, an elegant dress; a mark or marks
with red-lead on an elephant's head and trunk by
way of ornament; any mark; N. of the father of
Jaya-ratha; ({%am%}), n. cloves; red-lead; fragrant
powder for the dress or person; undried ginger;
Agallochum. {%—Śṛṅgāra-ceṣṭā,%} f. love-gesture, any
outward action indicating love. {%—Śṛṅgāra-tilaka,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of an erotic poem by Rudra-bhaṭṭa.
{%—Śṛṅgāra-bhāṣita, am,%} n. a love story. {%—Śṛṅ-%}
{%gāra-bhūṣaṇa, am,%} n. red-lead. {%—Śṛṅgāra-%}
{%maṇḍapa,%} N. of a temple. {%—Śṛṅgāra-yoni, is,%}
m. ‘love-source,’ epithet of Kāma, god of love.
{%—Śṛṅgāra-rasa, as,%} m. the erotic sentiment.
{%—Śṛṅgārarasāṣṭaka (˚sa-aṣ˚), am,%} n., N. of
eight stanzas by Kālidāsa on the erotic sentiment.
{%—Śṛṅgāra-vatī,%} f., N. of a town; of a queen.
{%—Śṛṅgāra-vidhi, is,%} m. a dress suitable for
amorous interviews. {%—Śṛṅgāra-veśa, as, ā, am,%}
dressed suitably for amorous enterprises. {%—Śṛṅgāra-%}
{%śata%} or {%śṛṅgāra-śataka, am,%} n. ‘a hundred verses
on love,’ N. of the second book of Bhartṛ-hari's
poem. {%—Śṛṅgāra-sahāya, as,%} m. an assistant in
affairs of love, confidant of a dramatic hero. {%—Śṛṅ-%}
{%gāraika-rasa (˚ra-ek˚), as, ā, am,%} whose sole
feeling is love.
<LEND>

<L>47074<pc>1018-c<k1>SfNgAraka<k2>SfNgAraka
{%Śṛṅgāraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ horned, having a horn
or crest; ({%as%}), m. love, &c. {%= śṛṅgāra; (am),%} n.
red-lead.
<LEND>

<L>47075<pc>1018-c<k1>SfNgArita<k2>SfNgArita
{%Śṛṅgārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ affected by love, impas-
sioned; stained with red-lead, reddened; adorned,
decorated, embellished.
<LEND>
[Page1019-a+ 78]

<L>47076<pc>1019-a<k1>SfNgArin<k2>SfNgArin
{%Śṛṅgārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ feeling love or amorous pas-
sion; full of love, amorous, enamoured, impassioned;
relating to love; stained with red-lead; ({%ī%}), m. an
impassioned lover; an elephant; dress, decoration;
the Areca or betel-nut tree; a ruby ({%= māṇikya%}).
<LEND>

<L>47077<pc>1019-a<k1>SfNgi<k2>SfNgi
{%Śṛṅgi, is,%}¦ f. a species of Silurus or sheat-fish;
({%is%}), m. gold for ornaments, (said to be also {%śṛṅgi,%}
n.; cf. {%śṛṅgī.%}) {%—Śṛṅgi-kanaka, am,%} n. gold used
for ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>47078<pc>1019-a<k1>SfNgika<k2>SfNgika
{%Śṛṅgika, am,%}¦ n. a sort of poison; ({%ā%}), f. a kind
of Betula or birch tree ({%= prati-viṣā%}).
<LEND>

<L>47079<pc>1019-a<k1>SfNgiRa<k2>SfNgiRa
{%Śṛṅgiṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ horned; ({%as%}), m. a ram.
<LEND>

<L>47080<pc>1019-a<k1>SfNgin<k2>SfNgin
{%Śṛṅgin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ horned; crested, peaked; ({%ī%}),
m. a mountain; N. of a mythical mountain forming
one of the boundaries of the earth, (Viṣṇu-Purāṇa
II. 2); an elephant; a tree; N. of a son of Gautama;
epithet of Śiva; ({%iṇī%}), f. a cow; Arabian jasmine or
another species; heart-pea; the plant Kaṭukī.
<LEND>

<L>47081<pc>1019-a<k1>SfNgI<k2>SfNgI
{%Śṛṅgī,%}¦ f. a kind of gold used for making orna-
ments; a sort of Silurus or sheat-fish; a particular
medicinal root shaped like a bull's horn ({%= ṛṣa-%}
{%bha%}); a kind of poison; a kind of Betula; N. of
various other plants and trees {%(= ati-viṣā; = kar-%}
{%kaṭa-śṛṅgī; = plakṣa; = vaṭa)%}. {%—Śṛṅgī-ka-%}
{%naka, am,%} n. a kind of gold used for ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>47082<pc>1019-a<k1>SfNgeripura<k2>SfNgeripura
{%Śṛṅgeri-pura, am,%}¦ n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>47083<pc>1019-a<k1>SfNgerImaWa<k2>SfNgerImaWa
{%Śṛṅgerī-maṭha,%}¦ N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>47084<pc>1019-a<k1>SfRi<k2>SfRi
{#SfRi#}¦ {%śṛṇi, is,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. {%śṝ%}), the
hook for goading an elephant, (also written {%sṛṇi.%})
<LEND>

<L>47085<pc>1019-a<k1>SfRvat<k2>SfRvat
{#SfRvat#}¦ {%śṛṇvat.%} See under rt. 1. {%śru.%}
<LEND>

<L>47086<pc>1019-a<k1>Sfta<k2>Sfta
{#Sfta#}¦ {%śṛta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śrā%}), boiled,
(used especially with reference to water, milk, and
ghee); cooked, dressed; [cf. {%śrāṇa, śrapita.%}]
{%—Śṛta-pā, ās, ās, am%} (see 2. and 4. {%pā%}), Ved. a
drinker or appropriator of an oblation, (Sāy. {%= kṣī-%}
{%rāder haviṣaḥ pātṛ,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 18, 16.)
{%—Śṛta-pāka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a well-
performed cooking, cooked or dressed fit for the
gods, (Sāy. {%= deva-yogya-pākopeta,%} Ṛg-veda I.
162, 10.)
<LEND>

<L>47087<pc>1019-a<k1>SfD<k2>SfD
{#SfD#}¦ {%śṛdh,%} cl. 1. A. (also P. in Fut.,
Aor., Cond.) {%śardhate, śaśṛdhe, śar-%}
{%dhiṣyate%} (and {%śartsyati%}), {%aśṛdhat,%} &c., {%śardhi-%}
{%tum,%} to break wind downwards; cl. 1. P. A. {%śar-%}
{%dhati, -te,%} to moisten, become moist or wet; cl.
10. P. {%śardhayati,%} to insult (by breaking wind
against or by voiding excrement), mock at, ridicule;
to strive, make effort, (in this sense also cl. 1. P.
according to some): Caus. {%śardhayati, -yitum:%}
Desid. {%śiśardhiṣate, śiśṛtsati:%} Intens. {%śarīśṛ-%}
{%dhyate, śarīśarddhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>47088<pc>1019-a<k1>SarDa<k2>SarDa
{%Śardha, śardhana.%}¦ See p. 995, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47089<pc>1019-a<k1>SfdDa<k2>SfdDa
{%Śṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ expelled from the body (as
wind); moistened.
<LEND>

<L>47090<pc>1019-a<k1>SfdDvA<k2>SfdDvA
{%Śṛddhvā,%}¦ ind. having expelled wind from the
body.
<LEND>

<L>47091<pc>1019-a<k1>SfDu<k2>SfDu
{%Śṛdhu, us,%}¦ m. f. (according to Śabda-k. only
m.), the anus; {%= buddhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>47092<pc>1019-a<k1>SfDU<k2>SfDU
{%Śṛdhū, ūs,%}¦ m. f. (according to Śabda-k. only
m.), the anus; {%= kutsita.%}
<LEND>

<L>47093<pc>1019-a<k1>SfDyA<k2>SfDyA
{%Śṛdhyā,%}¦ f., Ved. effort, success, (Sāy. {%= utsāha-%}
{%nīyaṃ karma,%} Ṛg-veda II. 12, 10.)
<LEND>

<L>47094<pc>1019-a<k1>SF<k2>SF
{#SF#}¦ {%śṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%śṛṇāti, śaśāra%} (3rd pl.
{%śaśaruḥ%} and {%śaśruḥ,%} Pāṇ. VII. 4, 12),
{%śariṣyati%} or {%śarīṣyati, aśārīt, śaritum, śarī-%}
{%tum%} (Ved. Inf. {%śarītos%}), to injure, hurt, wound, kill,
destroy; to tear or split in pieces, break, tear asunder:
Pass. {%śīryate%} (ep. also {%-ti%}), to be injured; to be
broken or torn or shattered, be split to pieces; to
wither, moulder, decay, waste away: Caus. {%śāra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśīśarat:%} Desid. {%śiśariṣati%}
or {%śiśarīṣati%} or {%śiśīrṣati:%} Intens. {%śeśīryate,%}
{%śāśarti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>śūra:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κείρω, κορ-μός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κέρμα, κουρά, κουρεύ-ς, κεραΐζω, κέρασ, κεραός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κλάω, κλῆρος, κολαβός,</lang> (probably) <lang n="greek">κορύνη:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>cur-tu-s</nsi> (Sabin. <nsi>curi-s</nsi>); <nsi>cornu, cervus; clava,</nsi>
<nsi>quiris,</nsi> (probably) <nsi>in-columis:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hair-u-s,</nsi> ‘a
sword;’ <nsi>haurn:</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>hior:</nsi> Old Sax. <nsi>her-u:</nsi>
[Page1019-b+ 73]
Angl. Sax. <nsi>hyrt; horn; heorot, heort:</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>kor-a.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>47095<pc>1019-b<k1>SIrRa<k2>SIrRa
{%Śīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ withered, &c. See s. v.,
p. 1011, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>47096<pc>1019-b<k1>SfRAna<k2>SfRAna
{%Śṛṇāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. hurting, injuring.
<LEND>

<L>47097<pc>1019-b<k1>SeKara<k2>SeKara
{#SeKara#}¦ {%śekhara, as,%} m. (fr. {%śikhara;%} the
more usual form would be {%śaikhara%}), a crest, chap-
let, diadem, crown, tuft, garland of flowers worn on
the top of the head; a peak, summit; the chief or
head of anything (generally at the end of comps.);
a particular Dhruva or recurring stanza of a song,
(another kind is called {%laghu-śekhara%}); a proper
N.; ({%am%}), n. cloves; the root of the Hyperanthera
Moringa.
<LEND>

<L>47098<pc>1019-b<k1>SeKarita<k2>SeKarita
{%Śekharita, as, ā, am,%}¦ crested, tufted, topped,
peaked.
<LEND>

<L>47099<pc>1019-b<k1>SeKarI<k2>SeKarI
{%Śekharī,%}¦ f. a particular parasitical plant ({%= vandā%}).
<LEND>

<L>47100<pc>1019-b<k1>SeRavI<k2>SeRavI
{#SeRavI#}¦ {%śeṇavī%} or {%śeṇā,%} f. (doubtful), under-
standing, mind, intellect.
<LEND>

<L>47101<pc>1019-b<k1>Sepa<k2>Sepa
{#Sepa#}¦ {%śepa, as,%} m. or {%śepas, as,%} n. (perhaps
connected with rt. 3. {%śap,%} see Nirukta III. 21; ac-
cording to Uṇādi-s. IV. 200. fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}), the penis
or male organ; a testicle; a tail. {%—Śepa-harṣaṇa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} exciting the male organ, see Atharva-veda
Prātiśākhya II. 56.
<LEND>

<L>47102<pc>1019-b<k1>SePa<k2>SePa
{%Śepha, as,%}¦ m. (also written {%sepha%}), or {%śephas,%}
{%as,%} n. the male organ, penis; a testicle; a tail.
<LEND>

<L>47103<pc>1019-b<k1>SepAna<k2>SepAna
{#SepAna#}¦ {%śepāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 3. {%śap%}),
Ved. one who has sworn, bound by oath.
<LEND>

<L>47104<pc>1019-b<k1>SepAla<k2>SepAla
{#SepAla#}¦ {%śepāla, as,%} m. the aquatic plant
Vallisneria ({%= śevāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>47105<pc>1019-b<k1>SePAli<k2>SePAli
{#SePAli#}¦ {%śephāli, is,%} f. a kind of plant,
Nyctanthes Arbor Tristis; another plant ({%= nir-%}
{%guṇṭī%}).
<LEND>

<L>47106<pc>1019-b<k1>SePAlikA<k2>SePAlikA
{%Śephālikā%}¦ or {%śephālī,%} f. {%= śephāli%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47107<pc>1019-b<k1>SemuzI<k2>SemuzI
{#SemuzI#}¦ {%śemuṣī,%} f. (probably fem. of the
perf. part. of rt. 1. {%śam%}), understanding, intellect.
<LEND>

<L>47108<pc>1019-b<k1>Sel<k2>Sel
{#Sel#}¦ {%śel%} (also written {%sel%}), cl. 1. P. {%śe-%}
{%lati,%} Caus. Aor. {%aśiśelat,%} to go, move
about; to shake, tremble.
<LEND>

<L>47109<pc>1019-b<k1>SelAya<k2>SelAya
{%Śelāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%śelāyati, -yitum,%} (meaning
doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>47110<pc>1019-b<k1>Selu<k2>Selu
{#Selu#}¦ {%śelu, us,%} m. a kind of plant or small
tree, Cordia Myxa; a kind of fruit.
<LEND>

<L>47111<pc>1019-b<k1>Sev<k2>Sev
{#Sev#}¦ {%śev%} (another form of rt. {%sev%}), cl. 1.
A. {%śevate,%} &c., to worship, serve.
<LEND>

<L>47112<pc>1019-b<k1>Seva<k2>Seva
{#Seva#}¦ {%śeva, as, ā, am%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
I. 152, 154. fr. rt. 1. {%śī,%} but more probably con-
nected with rt. {%śvi%} and {%śavas,%} cf. {%śiva%}), causing
happiness, propitious, affectionate (Ved., Sāy. {%= su-%}
{%kha-kara%}); ({%as%}), m. a snake; height, elevation;
happiness; treasure, wealth; an epithet of Agni (as
being the source of happiness, Sāy. {%= sukha-kara%});
of Soma; the male organ, {%= śepa; (am),%} n. happi-
ness; ({%am%}), ind. hail, homage, an exclamation or
salutation addressed to the deities; ({%am, ā%}), n. f.
the male organ, penis {%(= śepa)%}. {%—Śeva-dhi, is,%} m.
(also written {%seva-dhi%}), ‘wealth-receptacle,’ one of
the nine treasures of Kuvera, divine treasure, any
valuable treasure; [cf. {%ni-dhi.%}] {%—Śevadhi-pā, ās,%}
m., Ved. a lord of treasures.
<LEND>

<L>47113<pc>1019-b<k1>SevfD<k2>SevfD
{%Śe-vṛdh, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. conferring happiness, (Sāy.
{%śe-vṛdhaḥ = śevasya, sukhasya vardhayitāraḥ,%}
Ṛg-veda V. 87, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>47114<pc>1019-b<k1>SevfDa<k2>SevfDa
{%Śe-vṛdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. increasing or con-
tributing to felicity, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 16, 2.
appears to derive {%śe-vṛdha%} fr. 2. {%śam%} and rt.
{%vṛdh%}); ({%am%}), n. happiness (enumerated among the
{%sukha-nāmāni%} in Naigh. III. 6).
<LEND>

<L>47115<pc>1019-b<k1>Sevya<k2>Sevya
{%Śevya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a giver of happiness, (Sāy.
{%= sādhuḥ sukha-kartā,%} Ṛg-veda I. 156, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>47116<pc>1019-b<k1>Sevala<k2>Sevala
{#Sevala#}¦ {%śevala, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%śī,%} cf. {%śaivala%}), the aquatic plant Vallisneria
[Page1019-c+ 79]
Octandra [cf. {%śepāla%}]; the green moss-like sub-
stance growing on the surface of stagnant water,
duck-weed, (said to be also {%as,%} m.)
<LEND>

<L>47117<pc>1019-c<k1>SevalinI<k2>SevalinI
{%Śevalinī,%}¦ f. ‘having Śevala,’ a river; [cf. {%śaivalin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47118<pc>1019-c<k1>SevAla<k2>SevAla
{%Śevāla, am,%}¦ n. {%= śevala%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47119<pc>1019-c<k1>SevAlI<k2>SevAlI
{%Śevālī,%}¦ f. a kind of plant ({%= ākāśa-māṃsī%}).
<LEND>

<L>47120<pc>1019-c<k1>SevfD<k2>SevfD
{#SevfD#}¦ {%śe-vṛdh, śe-vṛdha.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47121<pc>1019-c<k1>SeSyita<k2>SeSyita
{#SeSyita#}¦ {%śeśyita, as, ā, am%} (fr. Intens. of
rt. 1. {%śī,%} Pāṇ. I. 2, 19), fast asleep, sleeping much.
{%—Śeśyita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has slept
soundly, sleeping much or soundly.
<LEND>

<L>47122<pc>1019-c<k1>SeSvIyamAna<k2>SeSvIyamAna
{#SeSvIyamAna#}¦ {%śeśvīyamāna.%} See under rt. {%śvi.%}
<LEND>

<L>47123<pc>1019-c<k1>Seza<k2>Seza
{#Seza#}¦ {%śeṣa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%śiṣ%}), re-
maining, other, all the other; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
remainder, leavings, rest, residue, surplus, balance;
the being spared or left, escape, salvation, reprieve,
respite; anything rejected, anything left or left out
or omitted or left to be supplied; anything left out
or omitted to be said, ({%iti śeṣaḥ,%} ‘so it was intended
to be said,’ a phrase used by commentators in sup-
plying any word or words necessary to elucidate the
text); ({%as%}), m. result, issue, effect, conclusion, end,
termination; finish, destruction, death, killing; N.
of a celebrated mythological thousand-headed serpent
regarded as the emblem of eternity (whence he is
also called An-anta, ‘the infinite;’ in the Viṣṇu-
Purāṇa he and the serpents Vāsuki and Takṣaka
are described as sons of Kadru, but in one place
Śeṣa alone is called king of the Nāgas or snakes
inhabiting Pātāla, while elsewhere Vāsuki also is
described as king of the Nāgas and Takṣaka of the
serpents; the thousand-headed Śeṣa is sometimes
represented as forming the couch and canopy of
Viṣṇu whilst sleeping during the intervals of creation,
sometimes as bearing the entire world on one of his
heads, sometimes as supporting the seven Pātālas;
he is said to have taught astronomy to Garga; ac-
cording to some legends he became incarnate in
Bala-rāma, see {%bala-rāma%}); N. of Bala-rāma, (see
above); N. of one of the Prajā-patis; of a Muni;
({%am%}), n. the remnants of food; remains of an
offering, &c.; ({%ā%}), f. the remains of flowers or other
offerings made to an idol and afterwards distributed
amongst the worshippers and attendants; ({%e%}), ind.
in the end, at last, finally, lastly; in other cases, in
the case of a less amount. {%—Śeṣa-karaṇa, am,%} n.
the doing what remains to be done. {%—Śeṣa-kāla,%}
{%as,%} m. the time of end or death. {%—Śeṣa-kṛṣṇa, as,%}
m., N. of the author of the drama called Kaṃsa-vadha.
{%—Śeṣa-jāti, is,%} f. assimilation of residue; reduc-
tion of fractions of residues or successive fractional
remainders. {%—Śeṣa-tva, am,%} n. the state of being
a remainder, ({%śeṣatvena,%} by the remainder, in
every other case); all that is left, residue; aid,
succouring others, regard or consideration for others
{%(= upakāritva, pārārthya)%}. {%—Śeṣa-nāga, as,%}
m. the serpent Śeṣa, (see above); N. of the
mythical author of the Paramārtha-sāra. {%—Śe-%}
{%ṣa-bhāga, as,%} m. the last or remaining part.
{%—Śeṣa-bhuj, k, k, k,%} one who eats leavings.
{%—Śeṣa-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being the remainder,
being left. {%—Śeṣa-bhojana, am,%} n. the eating of
leavings, eating the rest of food after feeding the
family guests, &c. {%—Śeṣa-rakṣaṇa, am,%} n. ‘end-
protection,’ taking care that an undertaking is brought
to a conclusion. {%—Śeṣa-rātri, is,%} f. the last watch
of the night. {%—Śeṣa-rāma-candra, as,%} m., N. of
a commentator on the Naiṣadīya-carita. {%—Śeṣa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} characterized by an effect or result,
(sometimes applied in logic to <nsi>a posteriori</nsi> reason-
ing.) {%—Śeṣa-śarīra, am,%} n. the remainder of the
body, i. e. all the other parts of the body. {%—Śe-%}
{%ṣānna (˚ṣa-an˚), am,%} n. leavings of a meal, &c.
{%—Śeṣāryā (˚ṣa-ār˚),%} f., N. of a metrical intro-
duction to the Vedānta by Śeṣa-nāga. {%—Śeṣā-%}
{%vacayana (˚ṣa-av˚), am,%} n. gathering up rem-
nants, collecting what remains. {%—Śeṣāvasthā (˚ṣa-%}
{%av˚),%} f. the last state or condition of life, old age.
{%—Śeṣāhi (˚ṣa-ahi), is,%} m. the serpent Śeṣa.
<LEND>
[Page1020-a+ 70]

<L>47124<pc>1020-a<k1>Sezas<k2>Sezas
{%Śeṣas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. offspring ({%= apatya,%} Naigh.
II. 2; cf. {%varuṇa-ś˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>47125<pc>1020-a<k1>SE<k2>SE
{#SE#}¦ {%śai,%} cl. 1. P. {%śāyati,%} &c. = rt. {%śrā,%} to
cook; (according to some also A. {%śāyate,%} in
the sense) to go; [cf. rt. {%śyai.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47126<pc>1020-a<k1>SEkya<k2>SEkya
{#SEkya#}¦ {%śaikya, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%śikya%}), sus-
pended in the loop or swing of a porter's yoke;
pointed, spiked, (for {%śaikhya.%})
<LEND>

<L>47127<pc>1020-a<k1>SEkza<k2>SEkza
{#SEkza#}¦ {%śaikṣa, as,%} m. (fr. {%śikṣā%}), a young
Brāhman studying with his preceptor, a youthful
student just commencing the study of the Vedas ({%=%}
{%prāthamakalpika%}).
<LEND>

<L>47128<pc>1020-a<k1>SEkzika<k2>SEkzika
{%Śaikṣika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
Śikṣā or the science of euphony; ({%as%}), m. one
skilled in the above science.
<LEND>

<L>47129<pc>1020-a<k1>SEkzya<k2>SEkzya
{%Śaikṣya, am,%}¦ n. learning, skill. {%—Śaikṣya-%}
{%guṇa-krama, as, ā, am,%} possessing skill, cleverness
and dexterity.
<LEND>

<L>47130<pc>1020-a<k1>SEKa<k2>SEKa
{#SEKa#}¦ {%śaikha, as,%} m. (doubtful), the off-
spring of an outcast Brāhman.
<LEND>

<L>47131<pc>1020-a<k1>SEKarika<k2>SEKarika
{#SEKarika#}¦ {%śaikharika, as,%} m. (fr. {%śekhara%}),
the plant Achyranthes Aspera.
<LEND>

<L>47132<pc>1020-a<k1>SEKareya<k2>SEKareya
{%Śaikhareya, as,%}¦ m. {%= śaikharika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47133<pc>1020-a<k1>SEKAvatya<k2>SEKAvatya
{#SEKAvatya#}¦ {%śaikhāvatya, as,%} m., N. of a
hermit.
<LEND>

<L>47134<pc>1020-a<k1>SEKya<k2>SEKya
{#SEKya#}¦ {%śaikhya, as,%} &c. (fr. {%śikhā%}), pointed,
spiked; [cf. {%śaikya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47135<pc>1020-a<k1>SEgrava<k2>SEgrava
{#SEgrava#}¦ {%śaigrava, as,%} m. (fr. {%śigru%}), a patro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>47136<pc>1020-a<k1>SEGra<k2>SEGra
{#SEGra#}¦ {%śaighra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śīghra%}), relating
to a conjunction (in astronomy).
<LEND>

<L>47137<pc>1020-a<k1>SEGrya<k2>SEGrya
{%Śaighrya, am,%}¦ n. quickness, rapidity; ({%as, ā%} or
{%-rī, am%}), relating to a conjunction (in astronomy).
<LEND>

<L>47138<pc>1020-a<k1>SEtya<k2>SEtya
{#SEtya#}¦ {%śaitya, am,%} n. (fr. {%śīta%}), coldness, fri-
gidity, cold.
<LEND>

<L>47139<pc>1020-a<k1>SEtyAyana<k2>SEtyAyana
{%Śaityāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Vedic grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>47140<pc>1020-a<k1>SETilya<k2>SETilya
{#SETilya#}¦ {%śaithilya, am,%} n. (fr. {%śithila%}),
looseness, laxity; flaccidity, slackness, remissness;
dilatoriness, inattention, weakness, cowardice, small-
ness; relaxation of rule or connection.
<LEND>

<L>47141<pc>1020-a<k1>SEneya<k2>SEneya
{#SEneya#}¦ {%śaineya, as,%} m. (fr. {%śini%}), N. of Sāt-
yaki, the charioteer of Kṛṣṇa (represented as having
destroyed a number of Dasyus, Mahā-bh. Droṇa-p.
4748); ({%ās%}), m. pl. the descendants of Śini (a
branch of the Yādavas).
<LEND>

<L>47142<pc>1020-a<k1>SEnya<k2>SEnya
{%Śainya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. the descendants of Śini (who be-
came Brāhmans, though originally of Kṣattriya race).
<LEND>

<L>47143<pc>1020-a<k1>SErika<k2>SErika
{#SErika#}¦ {%śairika, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47144<pc>1020-a<k1>SErIyaka<k2>SErIyaka
{#SErIyaka#}¦ {%śairīyaka, as,%} m. a kind of shrub,
blue Barleria.
<LEND>

<L>47145<pc>1020-a<k1>SEreyaka<k2>SEreyaka
{%Śaireyaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= śairīyaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47146<pc>1020-a<k1>SErIzi<k2>SErIzi
{#SErIzi#}¦ {%śairīṣi, is,%} m. a patronymic of
the Vedic Ṛṣi Su-vedas.
<LEND>

<L>47147<pc>1020-a<k1>SEla<k2>SEla
{#SEla#}¦ {%śaila, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śilā%}), craggy,
rocky, stony, mountainous; ({%as%}), m. a rock, crag,
mountain, hill; a dike; ({%am%}), n. benzoin or storax;
bitumen; a sort of collyrium, {%= rasāñjana, tār-%}
{%kṣya-śaila; (ī),%} f., see below. {%—Śaila-kaṭaka,%}
{%as,%} m. the brow of a hill, slope of a mountain.
{%—Śaila-kuñja, as,%} m. a mountain-thicket. {%—Śaila-%}
{%gandha, am,%} n. a kind of sandal {%(= śāvara-can-%}
{%dana)%}. {%—Śaila-garbhāhvā (˚bha-āh˚),%} f. a kind
of medicinal substance {%(= śilā-valkā)%}. {%—Śaila-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} produced in or on mountains or rocks,
&c.; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of Durgā; a kind of plant, {%=%}
{%siṃha-pippalī;%} another plant, {%= gaja-pippalī;%}
{%(am),%} n. a fragrant resinous substance, benzoin or
storax; bitumen. {%—Śaila-jana, as,%} m. one who
inhabits mountains, a mountaineer. {%—Śaila-tas,%} ind.
from a mountain; than a mountain. {%—Śaila-dhan- %}
[Page1020-b+ 78]
{%van, ā,%} m. ‘rock-bowed,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Śaila-%}
{%dhara, as,%} m. ‘mountain-holder,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa,
(see {%go-vardhana.%}) {%—Śaila-niryāsa, as,%} m. ‘rock-
exudation,’ storax, benzoin. {%—Śaila-pati, is,%} m.
‘mountain-lord,’ the Himālaya mountain. {%—Śaila-%}
{%pattra, as,%} m. the Vilva tree. {%—Śaila-putrī,%} f. a
proper N. {%—Śaila-bhitti, is,%} f. a stone-cutter's chisel
or axe, an instrument for dividing or cutting stones.
{%—Śaila-maya, as, ī, am,%} rocky, made of stone,
consisting of stones. {%—Śaila-randhra, am,%} n.
‘rocky hollow,’ a cavern, cave. {%—Śaila-rāja, as,%}
m. ‘king of mountains,’ epithet of the Himālaya;
of Indra-kīla. {%—Śailarāja-sutā,%} f. ‘daughter of
Himālaya,’ epithet of Durgā. {%—Śaila-rugṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} crushed by mountains. {%—Śaila-vanopapanna%}
{%(˚na-up˚), as, ā, am,%} possessed of mountains and
woods. {%—Śaila-valkalā,%} f. a kind of medicinal
substance {%(= śilā-valkā)%}. {%—Śaila-vāsa, as,%} m. a
mountain-habitation. {%—Śaila-vīja, as,%} m. ‘having
stony seeds,’ the marking-nut plant. {%—Śaila-śikha-%}
{%ra, am,%} n. the crest or peak of a mountain. {%—Śaila-%}
{%śikhā,%} f. ‘mountain-top,’ a kind of metre. {%—Śaila-%}
{%śivira, am,%} n. ‘rock-camp,’ the ocean. {%—Śaila-%}
{%śṛṅga, am,%} n. a mountain-peak. {%—Śaila-sāra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the strength of a mountain, as strong
as a mountain, hard, firm as a rock. {%—Śaila-sutā,%}
f. ‘daughter of the mountain,’ epithet of Umā or
Pārvatī, daughter of Himavat. {%—Śailasutā-caraṇa-%}
{%rāga-yoni, is, is, i,%} produced by the colour of
the feet of Pārvatī. {%—Śailāṃśa%} or {%śailāṃśa-%}
{%deśa (˚la-aṃ˚), as,%} m., N. of a country. {%—Śailā-%}
{%khya (˚la-ākh˚), am,%} n. a fragrant resinous sub-
stance; benzoin. {%—Śailāgra (˚la-ag˚), am,%} n. the
peak of a mountain. {%—Śailāṅga%} or {%śailāṅga-deśa%}
{%(˚la-aṅ˚), as,%} m., N. of a country. {%—Śailā-ja, am,%}
n. ({%śailā%} for {%śaila%}), {%= śaila-ja,%} q. v. {%—Śailāṭa (˚la-%}
{%aṭa), as,%} m. a mountaineer, savage, barbarian; a
lion; (an attendant on) an idol; crystal. {%—Śai-%}
{%lādhipa (˚la-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘king of mountains,’
epithet of the Himālaya. {%—Śailendra (˚la-in˚), as,%}
m. ‘prince of mountains,’ epithet of the Himālaya.
{%—Śailendra-stha, as,%} m. the Bhojpatra tree {%(=%}
{%bhūrja)%}. {%—Śaileśa-liṅga, am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga.
{%—Śailodā (˚la-ud˚),%} f., N. of a river. {%—Śailod-%}
{%bhavā (˚la-ud˚),%} f. a kind of plant, a small species
of {%pāṣāṇa-bhedin.%}
<LEND>

<L>47148<pc>1020-b<k1>SElaka<k2>SElaka
{%Śailaka, am,%}¦ n. benzoin or storax; bitumen.
<LEND>

<L>47149<pc>1020-b<k1>SElAdi<k2>SElAdi
{%Śailādi, is,%}¦ m., N. of Nandin (the attendant
of Śiva).
<LEND>

<L>47150<pc>1020-b<k1>SElAvatya<k2>SElAvatya
{%Śailāvatya, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47151<pc>1020-b<k1>SElI<k2>SElI
{%Śailī,%}¦ f. a short explanatory rule, concise explana-
tion of a grammatical aphorism; a special or parti-
cular interpretation.
<LEND>

<L>47152<pc>1020-b<k1>SEleya<k2>SEleya
{%Śaileya, as, ī, am,%}¦ produced in the mountains,
&c., mountainous; produced from rocks; rocky,
stony, mountain-like, hard; ({%am%}), n. a fragrant
resin; benzoin or storax; a vegetable perfume ({%=%}
{%murā%}); a kind of plant ({%= tāla-parṇī%}); rock-salt;
({%as%}), m. a lion; a bee; ({%ī%}), f., N. of Pārvatī.
{%—Śaileya-gandhi, is, is, i,%} fragrant with benzoin
or with the bituminous exudation of rocks.
<LEND>

<L>47153<pc>1020-b<k1>SEleyika<k2>SEleyika
{%Śaileyika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to benzoin or storax.
<LEND>

<L>47154<pc>1020-b<k1>SElya<k2>SElya
{%Śailya, as, -lī, am,%}¦ rocky, stony, hard; ({%am%}),
n. rockiness, stoniness, hardness.
<LEND>

<L>47155<pc>1020-b<k1>SElAda<k2>SElAda
{#SElAda#}¦ {%śailāda, as,%} m. (fr. {%śilāda%}), a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47156<pc>1020-b<k1>SElAla<k2>SElAla
{#SElAla#}¦ {%śailāla, am,%} n. (fr. {%śilāli,%} q. v.),
the principles of acting, (this word seems to have
been formed to account for the derivation of {%śailā-%}
{%lin%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>47157<pc>1020-b<k1>SElAli<k2>SElAli
{%Śailāli, is,%}¦ m. a proper N., (Śatapatha-Br. XIII.
5, 3, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>47158<pc>1020-b<k1>SElAlin<k2>SElAlin
{%Śailālin, ī,%}¦ m. an actor, dancer; ({%inas%}), m. pl.,
N. of a school. {%—Śailāli-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n., N.
of a Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>47159<pc>1020-b<k1>SElikya<k2>SElikya
{#SElikya#}¦ {%śailikya, as,%} m. (etymology doubt-
ful), an impostor, hypocrite, pretended devotee ({%=%}
{%sarvaliṅgin%}).
<LEND>

<L>47160<pc>1020-b<k1>SElUza<k2>SElUza
{#SElUza#}¦ {%śailūṣa, as,%} m. (said to be fr. {%śi- %}
[Page1020-c+ 79]
{%lūṣa,%} q. v.), an actor, public dancer, tumbler, &c.;
a band-master, leader of a band, one who beats time
at a concert ({%= tāla-dhāraka%}); a rogue, cheat; the
Vilva tree, Ægle Marmelos.
<LEND>

<L>47161<pc>1020-c<k1>SElUzaka<k2>SElUzaka
{%Śailūṣaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= śailūṣa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47162<pc>1020-c<k1>SElUzi<k2>SElUzi
{%Śailūṣi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic of the Vedic Ṛṣi
Kulmala-barhiṣa.
<LEND>

<L>47163<pc>1020-c<k1>SElUzika<k2>SElUzika
{%Śailūṣika, as,%}¦ m. one who follows the profession
of an actor, &c. ({%= naṭa-vṛtty-anveṣin%}).
<LEND>

<L>47164<pc>1020-c<k1>SElUzikI<k2>SElUzikI
{%Śailūṣikī,%}¦ f. a woman of the actor caste, an
actress.
<LEND>

<L>47165<pc>1020-c<k1>SEva<k2>SEva
{#SEva#}¦ {%śaiva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śiva%}), relating or
belonging to the god Śiva; ({%as%}), m. ‘a worshipper
or follower of Śiva,’ N. of one of the three great
divisions of modern Hindū sects, (the other two
being the Vaiṣṇavas and Śāktas, see {%vaiṣṇava,%}
{%śākta;%} the Śaivas believe in the superiority of Śiva
to the other gods of the Tri-mūrti, and identify him
with the Supreme Being as the destroying principle
as well as source and essence of the whole universe;
the temples dedicated to him in his popular symbol
of the Liṅga [see {%śiva%}] are very numerous every-
where, but the doctrines of the Śaivas as represented
by their great teachers, such as Śaṅkara, are too
philosophical for the majority of the people, who are
more attracted by Viṣṇu, especially in his forms
of Kṛṣṇa and Rāma: various divisions of Śaiva
sects have prevailed at different times, the earlier
divisions being those of the Raudras who have
the Tri-śūla or trident marked on their foreheads,
the Ugras who have the Ḍamaru or drum on their
arms, the Bhāktas who have the Liṅga on their
foreheads, the Jaṅgamas who have that symbol on
their heads, and the Pāśupatas who have it marked
on other parts of their bodies; the more modern
divisions being the Daṇḍins or mendicant staff-
bearers, including the Daś-nāmī-daṇḍins [cf. {%śaṅka-%}
{%rācārya%}], the Yogins who cultivate absorption into
Śiva by suppression of breathing, fixing of the eyes,
and eighty-four different attitudes, the Jaṅgamas or
Liṅgavats, the Parama-haṃsas, the Aghorins, the
Ūrdhva-bāhus, the Ākāśa-mukhins, and many others);
a particular religious rite in honour of Durgā (con-
sisting of devout meditation and prostration of the
body); the thorn-apple; another plant or tree, {%=%}
{%vasuka; (ī),%} f., N. of the goddess Manasā; ({%am%}),
n. the Śiva-Purāṇa; the aquatic plant Vallisneria
Octandra {%(= śaivāla)%}. {%—Śaiva-gava, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a Gotra or family. {%—Śaiva-tantra, am,%} n., N.
of a Tantra work. {%—Śaiva-tā,%} f. devotion to Śiva,
worship of or belief in Śiva. {%—Śaiva-purāṇa, am,%}
n., N. of a Purāṇa, (see {%śiva-purāṇa.%}) {%—Śaiva-%}
{%vāyavīya-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Purāṇa. {%—Śaiva-%}
{%sarvasva, am,%} n., N. of a work. {%—Śaiva-siddhānta-%}
{%śekhara, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Śaivāgama (˚va-%}
{%āg˚),%} N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>47166<pc>1020-c<k1>SEvya<k2>SEvya
{%Śaivya, as, -vī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
Śiva, &c.; of or belonging to the Śivis, (in this sense
fr. {%śivi%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the four horses of
Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa [cf. {%su-grīva%}]; of a king and cham-
pion in the Pāṇḍava army; a tribe of the Śivis, (in
this sense fr. {%śivi%}); ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river; of the wife
of Hariścandra; of the wife of Śata-dhanu.
<LEND>

<L>47167<pc>1020-c<k1>SEvala<k2>SEvala
{#SEvala#}¦ {%śaivala, as,%} m. (according to Uṇā-
di-s. IV. 38. fr. rt. 1. {%śī%}), a kind of aquatic plant,
Vallisneria (or Blyxa) Octandra; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people, (also written {%śaivāla%}); ({%am%}), n. a kind
of fragrant wood used in medicine ({%= padma-kāṣ-%}
{%ṭha%}); [cf. {%śevāla, śaivāla,%} &c.]
<LEND>

<L>47168<pc>1020-c<k1>SEvalin<k2>SEvalin
{%Śaivalin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing the plant Śaivala;
({%inī%}), f. a river.
<LEND>

<L>47169<pc>1020-c<k1>SEvAla<k2>SEvAla
{%Śaivāla, am,%}¦ n. the aquatic plant Vallisneria.
<LEND>

<L>47170<pc>1020-c<k1>SEvAlaka<k2>SEvAlaka
{%Śaivālaka, am,%}¦ n., at the end of a comp. {%= śai-%}
{%vāla.%}
<LEND>

<L>47171<pc>1020-c<k1>SESava<k2>SESava
{#SESava#}¦ {%śaiśava, am,%} n. (fr. {%śiśu%}), childhood,
infancy, pupilage, the period under age (i. e. under
sixteen); N. of a portion of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>47172<pc>1020-c<k1>SESunAga<k2>SESunAga
{%Śaiśunāga, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (fr. {%śiśu-nāga%}), N. of a
dynasty founded by Śiśu-nāga.
<LEND>
[Page1021-a+ 75]

<L>47173<pc>1021-a<k1>SESira<k2>SESira
{#SESira#}¦ {%śaiśira, as, ī, am,%} belonging to the
Śiśira or dewy season; composed by Śaiśira; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a mountain; of a founder of a supposed
separate Śākhā of the Ṛg-veda; of a dark kind of
Caṭaka bird. {%—Śaiśira-śākhā,%} f., N. of a Śākhā of
the Ṛg-veda (perhaps only a subdivision of the
Śākala).
<LEND>

<L>47174<pc>1021-a<k1>SESiri<k2>SESiri
{%Śaiśiri, is,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher of the White
Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>47175<pc>1021-a<k1>SESirIya<k2>SESirIya
{%Śaiśirīya,%}¦ N. of one of the seven Śākala texts.
{%—Śaiśirīya-śākhā,%} f. a subordinate branch of the
Śākala-śākhā.
<LEND>

<L>47176<pc>1021-a<k1>SESireya<k2>SESireya
{%Śaiśireya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher of the Ṛg-
veda.
<LEND>

<L>47177<pc>1021-a<k1>SEzika<k2>SEzika
{#SEzika#}¦ {%śaiṣika, as, ī, am,%} relating to a re-
mainder, belonging to the end or termination.
<LEND>

<L>47178<pc>1021-a<k1>SEzyopADyAyikA<k2>SEzyopADyAyikA
{#SEzyopADyAyikA#}¦ {%śaiṣyopādhyāyikā,%} f. (fr.
{%śiṣya + upādhyāya%}), instruction of youth, tuition.
<LEND>

<L>47179<pc>1021-a<k1>So<k2>So
{#So#}¦ {%śo%} (closely connected with rt. 1. {%śi,%}
q. v.; according to some the original form
was perhaps {%aś;%} cf. {%aśra, aśri, aśman,%} &c.), cl.
4. P. {%śyati, śaśau, śāsyati, aśāt%} or {%aśāsīt,%} (Ved.
also cl. 3. P. {%śiśāti%}), {%śātum,%} to sharpen, whet; to
pare, attenuate, make thin or small; Pass. {%śāyate:%}
Caus. {%śāyayati:%} Desid. {%śiśāsati:%} Intens. {%śāśāyate;%}
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀκή, ἀκμή, .ακρος, ἀκόνη, ἄκων, ἀκωκή,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀκρέμων, ἀκριβήςσ, ὄκρις, ἄκανος, ἄκανθα, ἄκορνα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὀξύς</lang> (i. e. <lang n="greek">ὀκ+τυ</lang>), <lang n="greek">ὄξος, ἄχωρ, ἄχορον, ἄχερδος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">αἰχμή, κῶνος:</lang> Lat. <nsi>acies, acus, acer, acidus,</nsi>
<nsi>aculeus, catus</nsi> (= {%śāta%}), <nsi>cos, cautes, citus</nsi> (= {%śita%}),
<nsi>cuneus, cacu-men,</nsi> (probably also) <nsi>cio, cieo:</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>aqvizi, ahana, hvotjan:</nsi> probably Old Germ. <nsi>hvez-</nsi>
<nsi>jan:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hvetan:</nsi> Iceland. <nsi>hvetia:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>as-trus, as-mu:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>os-tr:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>geur, gear,</nsi>
‘sharp;’ <nsi>geire,</nsi> ‘sharpness;’ <nsi>geirim,</nsi> ‘I whet, grease.’]
<LEND>

<L>47180<pc>1021-a<k1>SAta<k2>SAta
{%Śāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sharpened, &c. See s. v., p. 1000.
<LEND>

<L>47181<pc>1021-a<k1>Sita<k2>Sita
{%Śita, as, ā, am.%}¦ See under rt. 1. {%śi.%}
<LEND>

<L>47182<pc>1021-a<k1>Syat<k2>Syat
{%Śyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sharpening, whetting; paring,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>47183<pc>1021-a<k1>SoMs<k2>SoMs
{#SoMs#}¦ {%śoṃs,%} a form assumed by rt. {%śaṃs%} in
certain sacrificial formularies. See rt. {%śaṃs.%}
<LEND>

<L>47184<pc>1021-a<k1>Soka<k2>Soka
{#Soka#}¦ {%śoka, śocana,%} &c. See under rt. 1.
{%śuc.%}
<LEND>

<L>47185<pc>1021-a<k1>Soca<k2>Soca
{#Soca#}¦ {%śoca, śocis,%} &c. See under rt. 3. {%śuc.%}
<LEND>

<L>47186<pc>1021-a<k1>SowIrya<k2>SowIrya
{#SowIrya#}¦ {%śoṭīrya, am,%} n. valour, heroism;
[cf. {%śuṭīratā, śuṭīrya, śauṭīrya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47187<pc>1021-a<k1>SoWa<k2>SoWa
{#SoWa#}¦ {%śoṭha.%} See rt. {%śuṭh,%} p. 1013, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>47188<pc>1021-a<k1>SoR<k2>SoR
{#SoR#}¦ {%śoṇ%} (perhaps to be regarded as a
Nom. fr. {%śoṇa%} below), cl. 1. P. {%śoṇati,%}
{%śuśoṇa, śoṇitum,%} to be or become red; to go,
move, approach: Caus. {%śoṇayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%aśuśoṇat.%}
<LEND>

<L>47189<pc>1021-a<k1>SoRa<k2>SoRa
{%Śoṇa, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (thought by some to be fr.
{%sa-varṇa%}), coloured like the red lotus, red, crimson,
of a crimson or chesnut colour; red in the face (from
passion &c.); brown, bay; yellow; ({%as%}), m. the
colour of the red lotus, red, crimson (the colour);
fire or the god of fire; a sort of red sugar-cane; a
chesnut or bay horse; a particular ocean; the river
Śoṇa or Sone (sometimes written {%Śoṇā,%} f.; it rises
in Gondwana in the district of Nagpore, on the
table-land of Amara-kaṇṭaka, four or five miles east
of the source of the Narma-dā or Nerbudda, and
running first northerly and then easterly for five
hundred miles falls into the Ganges above Pāṭali-
putra or Patna); the plant Bignonia Indica; a proper
N.; ({%am%}), n. blood; red-lead, minium; [cf. Slav.
<nsi>sini.</nsi>] {%—Śoṇa-jhiṇṭikā,%} f. a kind of red Barleria.
{%—Śoṇa-jhiṇṭī,%} f., N. of two plants {%(= kuruvaka,%}
{%kaṇṭakinī)%}. {%—Śoṇa-nada,%} N. of a river. {%—Śoṇa-%}
{%pattra, as,%} m. ‘red-leaved,’ a red kind of hogweed.
{%—Śoṇa-padmaka, am,%} n. a red lotus. {%—Śoṇa-%}
{%puṣpaka, as,%} m. ‘red-flowered,’ the Kovidāra tree.
{%—Śoṇa-puṣpī,%} f. ‘red-flowered,’ a kind of plant
{%(= sindūra-puṣpī)%}. {%—Śoṇa-ratna, am,%} n. a red
[Page1021-b+ 74]
gem; a ruby. {%—Śoṇa-saṅgama, as,%} m. ‘Śoṇa-con-
fluence,’ N. of a place. {%—Śoṇāmbu (˚ṇa-am˚), us,%}
m. ‘having crimson waters or having waters of
blood,’ N. of one of the seven clouds at the destruc-
tion of the world. {%—Śoṇāśman (˚ṇa-aś˚), ā,%} m. a
red stone; a ruby. {%—Śoṇopala (˚ṇa-up˚), as,%} m.
a red stone; a ruby. {%—Śoṇollīḍha (˚ṇa-ul˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} sharpened or polished on a whetstone.
<LEND>

<L>47190<pc>1021-b<k1>SoRaka<k2>SoRaka
{%Śoṇaka, as,%}¦ m. the plant Bignonia or Calosanthes
Indica, (this plant has many synonyms; cf. {%kuṭan-%}
{%naṭa, naṭa, maṇḍūka-parṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>47191<pc>1021-b<k1>SoRAka<k2>SoRAka
{%Śoṇāka, as,%}¦ m. {%= śoṇaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47192<pc>1021-b<k1>SoRita<k2>SoRita
{%Śoṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ red, crimson, purple; ({%am%}),
n. blood; saffron. {%—Śoṇita-candana, am,%} n. red
sandal. {%—Śoṇita-pa, as, ā, am,%} drinking blood;
blood-sucking. {%—Śoṇita-pāraṇā,%} f. ‘breakfast of
blood,’ a meal of flesh-meat. {%—Śoṇita-pura, am,%}
n. the city of the Asura Vāṇa {%(= vāṇa-pura).%}
{%—Śoṇita-varṇana, am,%} n. description of the nature
and properties of blood. {%—Śoṇita-varṇanīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} treating of the above. {%—Śoṇita-vindu-varṣin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} showering drops of blood. {%—Śoṇita-snāta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} bathed in blood. {%—Śoṇitādigdha (˚ta-%}
{%ād˚), as, ā, am,%} blood-stained. {%—Śoṇitārśin (˚ta-%}
{%ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} suffering from piles attended with
excretions of blood. {%—Śoṇitāhvaya (˚ta-āh˚), am,%}
n. ‘blood-named,’ saffron. {%—Śoṇitokṣita (˚ta-uk˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} blood-stained, sprinkled with blood.
{%—Śoṇitotpala (˚ta-ut˚), am,%} n. a red lotus. {%—Śo-%}
{%ṇitopala (˚ta-up˚), as,%} m. ‘blood-stone,’ a ruby,
(according to some also {%am,%} n.) {%—Śoṇitaugha%}
{%(˚ta-ogha), as,%} m. a torrent or stream of blood.
<LEND>

<L>47193<pc>1021-b<k1>SoRiman<k2>SoRiman
{%Śoṇiman, ā,%}¦ m. redness, the quality of being red.
<LEND>

<L>47194<pc>1021-b<k1>SoTa<k2>SoTa
{#SoTa#}¦ {%śotha, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 4. fr. rt. {%śu,%} ‘to go;’ evidently connected with
rt. {%śvi%}), swelling, intumescence, tumefaction from
disease, dropsy. {%—Śotha-ghna, as, ī, am,%} destroying
or removing swellings, discutient; ({%ī%}), f. hogweed,
Boerhavia Diffusa; a kind of shrub {%(= śāla-parṇī).%}
{%—Śotha-jit, t, t, t,%} overcoming or removing swell-
ings, discutient; ({%t%}), f. hogweed; the marking-nut
plant. {%—Śotha-jihma, as,%} m. hogweed. {%—Śotha-%}
{%roga, as,%} m. ‘swelling disease,’ dropsy. {%—Śotha-%}
{%rogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} suffering from dropsy, dropsical.
{%—Śotha-hṛt, t, t, t,%} removing swellings, discutient;
({%t%}), m. the marking-nut plant.
<LEND>

<L>47195<pc>1021-b<k1>SoTaka<k2>SoTaka
{%Śothaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= śotha%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47196<pc>1021-b<k1>SoDa<k2>SoDa
{#SoDa#}¦ {%śodha, śodhaka, śodhana, śodhita,%}
&c. See under rt. {%śudh.%}
<LEND>

<L>47197<pc>1021-b<k1>SopArIpAka<k2>SopArIpAka
{#SopArIpAka#}¦ {%śopārī-pāka,%} a particular me-
dicinal decoction.
<LEND>

<L>47198<pc>1021-b<k1>SoPa<k2>SoPa
{#SoPa#}¦ {%śopha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śvi;%} cf. {%śotha%}),
intumescence, morbid swelling, tumefaction, bloated-
ness, flabbiness. {%—Śopha-ghnī,%} f. a kind of shrub
({%= śāla-parṇī%}); a kind of red hogweed. {%—Śopha-%}
{%nāśana, as, ī, am,%} removing swellings; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of tree {%(= nīla)%}. {%—Śopha-hṛt, t, t, t,%} re-
moving swellings; ({%t%}), m. the marking-nut plant.
<LEND>

<L>47199<pc>1021-b<k1>SoBa<k2>SoBa
{#SoBa#}¦ {%śobha, śobhana, śobhita,%} &c. See
under rt. 1. {%śubh.%}
<LEND>

<L>47200<pc>1021-b<k1>SolI<k2>SolI
{#SolI#}¦ {%śolī,%} f. wild turmeric.
<LEND>

<L>47201<pc>1021-b<k1>SoSucat<k2>SoSucat
{#SoSucat#}¦ {%śośucat, at, atī, at%} (fr. Intens.
of rt. 3. {%śuc%}), Ved. shining very brightly, very
splendid.
<LEND>

<L>47202<pc>1021-b<k1>SoSucAna<k2>SoSucAna
{%Śośucāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. shining very brightly,
very radiant, resplendent; [cf. {%śuśucāna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47203<pc>1021-b<k1>SoSucyamAna<k2>SoSucyamAna
{#SoSucyamAna#}¦ {%śośucyamāna, as, ā, am%} (fr.
Intens. of rt. 1. {%śuc%}), sorrowing intensely, grieving
deeply.
<LEND>

<L>47204<pc>1021-b<k1>SoSuByamAna<k2>SoSuByamAna
{#SoSuByamAna#}¦ {%śośubhyamāna, as, ā, am%} (fr.
Intens. of rt. 1. {%śubh%}), shining very much, very
brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>47205<pc>1021-b<k1>Soza<k2>Soza
{#Soza#}¦ {%śoṣa, śoṣana, śoṣita,%} &c. See
under rt. {%śuṣ.%}
<LEND>
[Page1021-c+ 71]

<L>47206<pc>1021-c<k1>Sos<k2>Sos
{#Sos#}¦ {%śos (?),%} ind. a particle of reproach
or contempt.
<LEND>

<L>47207<pc>1021-c<k1>SOka<k2>SOka
{#SOka#}¦ {%śauka, am,%} n. (fr. {%śuka%}), a flock of
parrots; (fr. {%śoka?%}), sorrowfulness, (according to
Śabda-k. {%= strīṇāṃ karaṇam,%} for {%karuṇam?%}).
<LEND>

<L>47208<pc>1021-c<k1>SOkara<k2>SOkara
{#SOkara#}¦ {%śaukara%} or {%śaukarava, am,%} n., N.
of a particular Tīrtha (described in a chapter of the
Vārāha-Purāṇa called Jambūkopākhyāna).
<LEND>

<L>47209<pc>1021-c<k1>SOkta<k2>SOkta
{#SOkta#}¦ {%śaukta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śukta%}), acid,
acetic, acetous.
<LEND>

<L>47210<pc>1021-c<k1>SOktika<k2>SOktika<h>1
1. {%śauktika, as, ī, am,%}¦ acid, acetic.
<LEND>

<L>47211<pc>1021-c<k1>SOktika<k2>SOktika<h>2
{#SOktika#} 2¦. {%śauktika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śukti%}),
relating to a pearl.
<LEND>

<L>47212<pc>1021-c<k1>SOktikeya<k2>SOktikeya
{%Śauktikeya, am,%}¦ n. a pearl.
<LEND>

<L>47213<pc>1021-c<k1>SOkteya<k2>SOkteya
{%Śaukteya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to a pearl; ({%am%}),
n. a pearl.
<LEND>

<L>47214<pc>1021-c<k1>SOkra<k2>SOkra
{#SOkra#}¦ {%śaukra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śukra%}), seminal,
relating to sperm, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47215<pc>1021-c<k1>SOklikeya<k2>SOklikeya
{#SOklikeya#}¦ {%śauklikeya, as,%} m. a sort of
poison, (probably for {%śaulkikeya,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>47216<pc>1021-c<k1>SOklya<k2>SOklya
{#SOklya#}¦ {%śauklya, am,%} n. (fr. {%śukla%}), white-
ness, clearness.
<LEND>

<L>47217<pc>1021-c<k1>SONga<k2>SONga
{#SONga#}¦ {%śauṅga, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a Gotra.
<LEND>

<L>47218<pc>1021-c<k1>SONgIputra<k2>SONgIputra
{%Śauṅgī-putra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher.
<LEND>

<L>47219<pc>1021-c<k1>SONgeya<k2>SONgeya
{#SONgeya#}¦ {%śauṅgeya, as,%} m. (doubtful), epi-
thet of Garuḍa or a black-winged enemy of birds.
<LEND>

<L>47220<pc>1021-c<k1>SOca<k2>SOca
{#SOca#}¦ {%śauca, am,%} n. (fr. {%śuci%}), purification
from personal defilement (especially from defilement
caused by the death of a relation &c.); evacuation of
excrement; freedom from defilement, purity, cleanness;
honesty; ({%as%}), m. a proper N. {%—Śauca-kalpa, as,%}
m. mode of purification, purificatory rite. {%—Śauca-%}
{%kūpa, as,%} m. ‘cleansing-pit,’ a privy. {%—Śauca-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. purity. {%—Śauca-vidhi, is,%} m. rule of purifi-
cation (after defilement by the death of a relation
&c.), directions for cleansing the person. {%—Śaucā-%}
{%cāra (˚ca-āc˚), as,%} m. a purificatory rite, rule of
purification established by immemorial custom, mode
of cleansing the person by ablution &c. (after voiding
excrement or contracting any defilement). {%—Śaucepsu%}
{%(˚ca-īp˚), us, us, u,%} wishing or intending to obtain
purification.
<LEND>

<L>47221<pc>1021-c<k1>SOcika<k2>SOcika
{%Śaucika, as,%}¦ m. a cleanser, cleaner; a particular
mixed caste (the son of a Śauṇḍika and a Kaivarta
woman).
<LEND>

<L>47222<pc>1021-c<k1>SOcivfkzi<k2>SOcivfkzi
{%Śaucivṛkṣi, is,%}¦ m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>47223<pc>1021-c<k1>SOceya<k2>SOceya
{%Śauceya, as,%}¦ m. a washerman; a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47224<pc>1021-c<k1>SOcadraTa<k2>SOcadraTa
{#SOcadraTa#}¦ {%śaucadratha, as,%} m., Ved. a patro-
nymic of a descendant of Śucad-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>47225<pc>1021-c<k1>SOw<k2>SOw
{#SOw#}¦ {%śauṭ%} (also written {%śauḍ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%śauṭati, śuśauṭa, śauṭitum,%} to be proud
or haughty: Caus. {%śauṭayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśu-%}
{%śauṭat.%}
<LEND>

<L>47226<pc>1021-c<k1>SOwIra<k2>SOwIra
{%Śauṭīra, as, ā, am,%}¦ proud, haughty; ({%as%}), m. a
hero; a proud or haughty man (but of low tribe or
occupation); an upstart; one who abandons the
world, an ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>47227<pc>1021-c<k1>SOwIrya<k2>SOwIrya
{%Śauṭīrya, am,%}¦ n. pride, arrogance; heroism,
prowess.
<LEND>

<L>47228<pc>1021-c<k1>SOq<k2>SOq
{#SOq#}¦ {%śauḍ%} (= rt. {%śauṭ%}), cl. 1. P. {%śauḍati,%}
&c., to be proud or haughty.
<LEND>

<L>47229<pc>1021-c<k1>SOqa<k2>SOqa
{%Śauḍa, as,%}¦ m., N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>47230<pc>1021-c<k1>SORqarya<k2>SORqarya
{%Śauṇḍarya, am,%}¦ n. pride, arrogance; [cf. {%śau-%}
{%ṭīrya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47231<pc>1021-c<k1>SORqIra<k2>SORqIra
{%Śauṇḍīra, as, ā, am,%}¦ proud, haughty; elevated,
looking upwards; (also written {%śauṇḍira, śauḍīra.%})
{%—Śauṇḍīra-tā,%} f. haughtiness, pride.
<LEND>

<L>47232<pc>1021-c<k1>SORqa<k2>SORqa
{#SORqa#}¦ {%śauṇḍa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śuṇḍā%}), fond of
spirituous liquor, addicted to drinking; drunk, in-
toxicated; ({%ī%}), f. long pepper; another sort ({%=%}
{%cavya%}).
<LEND>
[Page1022-a+ 74]

<L>47233<pc>1022-a<k1>SORqika<k2>SORqika
{%Śauṇḍika, as,%}¦ m. a distiller and vender of spirituous
liquors, vintner; a particular mixed caste (the son
of a Kaivarta and a Gāndhika woman); ({%ī%}), f. a
female vintner or keeper of a tavern or dram shop
(regarded as one of the eight Akulas according to
the Śāktas).
<LEND>

<L>47234<pc>1022-a<k1>SORqikeya<k2>SORqikeya
{%Śauṇḍikeya, as,%}¦ m. a demon.
<LEND>

<L>47235<pc>1022-a<k1>SORqin<k2>SORqin
{%Śauṇḍin, ī,%}¦ m. {%= śauṇḍika.%}
<LEND>

<L>47236<pc>1022-a<k1>SORqIka<k2>SORqIka
{%Śauṇḍīka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a tribe.
<LEND>

<L>47237<pc>1022-a<k1>SOdDAkzara<k2>SOdDAkzara
{#SOdDAkzara#}¦ {%śauddhākṣara, as,%} m., scil. {%san-%}
{%dhi,%} epithet of a particular Sandhi, (viz. the insertion
of {%ś%} before {%candra,%} e. g. {%puru-ś-candra;%} of {%ṣ%} be-
fore {%kṛ,%} e. g. {%pari-ṣ-kṛṇvan,%} &c.)
<LEND>

<L>47238<pc>1022-a<k1>SOdDodani<k2>SOdDodani
{#SOdDodani#}¦ {%śauddhodani, is,%} m. (fr. {%śuddho-%}
{%dana%}), ‘son of Śuddhodana,’ a patronymic of the
great Buddha (founder of the Buddhist religion, see
{%buddha%}).
<LEND>

<L>47239<pc>1022-a<k1>SOdra<k2>SOdra
{#SOdra#}¦ {%śaudra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śūdra%}), servile,
relating or belonging to the Śūdra or lowest tribe;
({%as%}), m. the son of a man of either of the first three
classes by a Śūdra woman, (the last of the twelve
kinds of sons acknowledged in the ancient Hindū
law.)
<LEND>

<L>47240<pc>1022-a<k1>SODikA<k2>SODikA
{#SODikA#}¦ {%śaudhikā,%} f. a variety of panic,
(Panicum Italicum, {%= rakta-kaṅgu.%})
<LEND>

<L>47241<pc>1022-a<k1>SOna<k2>SOna
{#SOna#}¦ {%śauna, am,%} n. (fr. {%śūnā%}), meat kept
at a slaughter-house.
<LEND>

<L>47242<pc>1022-a<k1>SOnika<k2>SOnika
{%Śaunika, as,%}¦ m. a butcher, poulterer, vender of
the flesh of beasts or birds; chase, hunting.
<LEND>

<L>47243<pc>1022-a<k1>SOnaka<k2>SOnaka
{#SOnaka#}¦ {%śaunaka, as,%} m., N. of the reputed
author of the Ṛg-veda Prātiśākhya and of certain
Kalpa-sūtras and various other Vedic compositions
and works on law, (he is described as the teacher of
Kātyāyana and especially of Āśvalāyana; he is said
to have united the Bāṣkala and Śākala Śākhās,
and is sometimes identified with the Vedic Ṛṣi
Gṛtsa-mada; but according to the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa,
Śaunaka was a son of Gṛtsa-mada, and originated
the system of four castes; the various legends about
him are very confused.) {%—Śaunaka-kalpa-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of certain Kalpa-sūtras (ascribed to
Śaunaka and supposed to have been destroyed by
the author). {%—Śaunaka-gṛhya-sūtra, am,%} n. the
Gṛhya-sūtras of the Ṛg-veda ascribed to Śaunaka.
{%—Śaunakānukramaṇī (˚ka-an˚),%} f. an Anukra-
maṇī or Vedic index ascribed to Śaunaka. {%—Śauna-%}
{%kāraṇyaka (˚ka-ār˚), am,%} n. an Āraṇyaka ascribed
to Śaunaka (probably identified with the Aitareyā-
raṇyaka). {%—Śaunakopaniṣad (˚ka-up˚), t,%} f., N. of
an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>

<L>47244<pc>1022-a<k1>SOnakin<k2>SOnakin
{%Śaunakin, inas,%}¦ m. pl. the pupils or followers of
Śaunaka.
<LEND>

<L>47245<pc>1022-a<k1>SOnakIputra<k2>SOnakIputra
{%Śaunakī-putra, as,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>47246<pc>1022-a<k1>SOnakIya<k2>SOnakIya
{%Śaunakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to or composed
by Śaunaka or the Śaunakīyas, ({%Śaunakīya-ca-%}
{%turādhyāyikā,%} ‘Śaunaka's treatise in four chapters,’
i. e. the Atharva-veda Prātiśākhya); ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the pupils or school of Śaunaka. {%—Śaunakīya-ca-%}
{%turādhyāyikā,%} f., N. of the above Prātiśākhya.
{%—Śaunakīya-caraṇa,%} N. of a Caraṇa (probably
founded by the author of the Śākala-prātiśākhya).
<LEND>

<L>47247<pc>1022-a<k1>SOnahotra<k2>SOnahotra
{#SOnahotra#}¦ {%śaunahotra, as,%} m. the son of
Śuna-hotra and grandson of Bharad-vāja; epithet of
the Vedic Ṛṣi Gṛtsa-mada.
<LEND>

<L>47248<pc>1022-a<k1>SOBa<k2>SOBa
{#SOBa#}¦ {%śaubha, as,%} m. (fr. {%śubha%}), a god, di-
vinity; the Areca or betel-nut tree {%(= guvāka);%}
{%(am),%} n. the city of Hariścandra (fabled to be sus-
pended in the air, see {%hari-ś-candra%}).
<LEND>

<L>47249<pc>1022-a<k1>SOBaneya<k2>SOBaneya
{#SOBaneya#}¦ {%śaubhaneya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śobhanā%}),
sprung from a handsome mother; relating to any-
thing handsome or brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>47250<pc>1022-a<k1>SOBAYjana<k2>SOBAYjana
{#SOBAYjana#}¦ {%śaubhāñjana, as,%} m. (fr. {%śobhāñ-%}
{%jana,%} q. v.), the tree Hyperanthera Moringa.
<LEND>

<L>47251<pc>1022-a<k1>SOBika<k2>SOBika
{#SOBika#}¦ {%śaubhika, as,%} m. (probably con-
[Page1022-b+ 73]
nected with {%śubha%}), a juggler, conjurer ({%= indra-%}
{%jālika%}).
<LEND>

<L>47252<pc>1022-b<k1>SOBreya<k2>SOBreya
{#SOBreya#}¦ {%śaubhreya, as, ī, am,%} relating or be-
longing to anything white or shining (e. g. to silver,
talc, sandal, &c.); ({%as%}), m. ‘son of Śubhrā,’ a patro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>47253<pc>1022-b<k1>SOra<k2>SOra
{#SOra#}¦ {%śaura, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śūra%}), relating to
a hero, heroic.
<LEND>

<L>47254<pc>1022-b<k1>SOradevyaH<k2>SOradevyaH
{%Śauradevyaḥ,%}¦ in Ṛg-veda VIII. 70, 15. appa-
rently acc. pl. of {%śauradevī,%} qualifying {%gāḥ,%} ‘cows,’
and explained by Sāy. thus, {%dīvyanti krīḍanta iti%}
{%devā yoddhāraḥ śūrāś-ca te devāś-ca śūra-devāḥ,%}
{%teṣāṃ hitaṃ śauradevaṃ yuddhaṃ tat-sam-%}
{%bandhinyo gāḥ.%}
<LEND>

<L>47255<pc>1022-b<k1>SOrasena<k2>SOrasena
{%Śaurasena, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%śūra-sena%}), the language
spoken by the people of Śūra-sena; ({%ī%}), f. a Prākṛt
dialect supposed to have been spoken at Mathurā.
<LEND>

<L>47256<pc>1022-b<k1>SOri<k2>SOri
{%Śauri, is,%}¦ m., N. of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa; of Bala-
rāma (as descended from Śūra); the planet Saturn.
<LEND>

<L>47257<pc>1022-b<k1>SOrya<k2>SOrya
{%Śaurya, am,%}¦ n. heroism, valour, prowess, might;
the heroic branch of the dramatic art, representation
of war and supernatural events on the stage {%(= āra-%}
{%bhaṭī)%}. {%—Śauryopārjita (˚ya-up˚), as, ā, am,%} ac-
quired by valour.
<LEND>

<L>47258<pc>1022-b<k1>SOrpa<k2>SOrpa
{#SOrpa#}¦ {%śaurpa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śūrpa%}), measured
by a winnowing basket &c., belonging to a winnow-
ing fan &c.
<LEND>

<L>47259<pc>1022-b<k1>SOrpaRAyya<k2>SOrpaRAyya
{%Śaurpaṇāyya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>47260<pc>1022-b<k1>SOrpika<k2>SOrpika
{%Śaurpika, as, ī, am, = śaurpa%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>47261<pc>1022-b<k1>SOlka<k2>SOlka
{#SOlka#}¦ {%śaulka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śulka%}), relating
to tolls or customs or taxes, levied (as a tax &c.); ({%as%}),
m. a superintendant of tolls or customs, a custom-
house officer.
<LEND>

<L>47262<pc>1022-b<k1>SOlkaSAlika<k2>SOlkaSAlika
{%Śaulkaśālika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%śulka-śālā%}), of or
belonging to a custom-house, derived from a custom-
house.
<LEND>

<L>47263<pc>1022-b<k1>SOlkAyani<k2>SOlkAyani
{%Śaulkāyani, is,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>47264<pc>1022-b<k1>SOlkika<k2>SOlkika
{%Śaulkika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to taxes or tolls;
({%as%}), m. a superintendant of tolls or customs.
<LEND>

<L>47265<pc>1022-b<k1>SOlkikeya<k2>SOlkikeya
{#SOlkikeya#}¦ {%śaulkikeya, as,%} m. (fr. {%śulkika%}),
a kind of poison (said to be produced in a country
called Śulkika; according to some the venom of a
kind of snake).
<LEND>

<L>47266<pc>1022-b<k1>SOlPa<k2>SOlPa
{#SOlPa#}¦ {%śaulpha, am,%} n. a kind of vegetable
(commonly called Śulphā).
<LEND>

<L>47267<pc>1022-b<k1>SOlvika<k2>SOlvika
{#SOlvika#}¦ {%śaulvika, as,%} m. (fr. {%śulva%}), a cop-
persmith.
<LEND>

<L>47268<pc>1022-b<k1>SOva<k2>SOva
{#SOva#}¦ {%śauva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śvan%}), relating
or belonging to dogs, canine; ({%as%}), m., N. of a par-
ticular Udgītha; ({%am%}), n. a pack or number of
dogs; the nature or state of a dog.
<LEND>

<L>47269<pc>1022-b<k1>SOvana<k2>SOvana
{%Śauvana, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to canine nature;
having the qualities of a dog; ({%am%}), n. the nature of
a dog; the progeny of a dog.
<LEND>

<L>47270<pc>1022-b<k1>SOvApada<k2>SOvApada
{%Śauvāpada, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%śvā-pada%}), relating to
a wild beast or beast of prey, ferocious, savage, wild.
<LEND>

<L>47271<pc>1022-b<k1>SOvastika<k2>SOvastika
{#SOvastika#}¦ {%śauvastika, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%śvas%}),
of or belonging to to-morrow, lasting till to-morrow,
ephemeral. {%—Śauvastika-tva, am,%} n. the lasting or
enduring till to-morrow, ephemeralness.
<LEND>

<L>47272<pc>1022-b<k1>SOzkala<k2>SOzkala
{#SOzkala#}¦ {%śauṣkala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śuṣkalī%}),
eating fish and flesh; ({%as%}), m. an habitual eater of
meat; a vender of flesh, dealer in flesh or dried
meat; ({%am%}), n. the price of dried meat.
<LEND>

<L>47273<pc>1022-b<k1>Scam<k2>Scam
{#Scam#}¦ {%ścam,%} for rt. {%cam,%} to consume, (ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 104, 2.
{%ścamnan = bhakṣayantu,%} but also referrible to rt.
1. {%śam.%})
<LEND>

<L>47274<pc>1022-b<k1>Scut<k2>Scut<h>1
{#Scut#} 1¦. {%ścut%} or 1. {%ścyut%} (perhaps fr. a
noun formed fr. an original rt. {%ścyu;%} cf.
rts. 1. {%cyu,%} 2. {%cyut%}), cl. 1. P. {%ścotati%} or {%ścyotati,%}
{%cuścota%} or {%cuścyota, aścutat, aścotīt,%} &c., {%ścotitum%}
or {%ścyotitum,%} to ooze, trickle, flow, exude, drop,
[Page1022-c+ 77]
distil; to sprinkle, scatter, diffuse, shed, pour out;
Pass. {%ścutyate,%} Aor. {%aścoti,%} &c.: Caus. {%ścotayati,%}
&c.; [cf. Goth. <nsi>skevjan, skura;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>scur.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>47275<pc>1022-c<k1>Scut<k2>Scut<h>2
2. {%ścut%}¦ or 2. {%ścyut, t, t, t,%} distilling, sprinkling,
shedding, (at the end of comps., e. g. {%jala-ś˚,%} shed-
ding or sprinkling water.)
<LEND>

<L>47276<pc>1022-c<k1>Scutita<k2>Scutita
{%Ścutita%}¦ or {%ścyutita, as, ā, am,%} oozed, exuded,
issued, sprinkled, shed; oozing, dropping, flowing.
<LEND>

<L>47277<pc>1022-c<k1>ScutitvA<k2>ScutitvA
{%Ścutitvā,%}¦ ind. having oozed, having exuded or
flowed.
<LEND>

<L>47278<pc>1022-c<k1>Scota<k2>Scota
{%Ścota%}¦ or {%ścyota, as,%} m. oozing, trickling out,
sprinkling, aspersion, pouring forth.
<LEND>

<L>47279<pc>1022-c<k1>Scotat<k2>Scotat
{%Ścotat%}¦ or {%ścyotat, an, antī, at,%} oozing, trickling,
flowing; shedding. {%—Ścyotan-mayūkha, as, ā, am,%}
diffusing light.
<LEND>

<L>47280<pc>1022-c<k1>Scotana<k2>Scotana
{%Ścotana, am,%}¦ n. the act of oozing, flowing; ex-
udation.
<LEND>

<L>47281<pc>1022-c<k1>SnaT<k2>SnaT
{#SnaT#}¦ {%śnath,%} cl. 1. P. {%śnathati%} (2nd sing.
Impv. Ved. {%śnathihi%}), {%śaśnātha, aśna-%}
{%thīt%} ({%śnathiṣṭam,%} ‘you two have destroyed,’ Ṛg-
veda VII. 99, 5), {%śnathitum,%} Ved. to strike, injure,
hurt, destroy, slay, kill: Caus. {%śnathayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%aśiśnathat%} ({%aśiśnat = hinasti,%} Ṛg-veda VII.
28, 3), to do violence, kill; Desid. {%śiśnathiṣati:%}
Intens. {%śāśnathyate, śāśnatti;%} [cf. Goth. <nsi>snithan,</nsi>
‘to cut;’ Old Germ. <nsi>snîdu;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>snidhan;</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>slethe,</nsi> ‘cutting, striking.’]
<LEND>

<L>47282<pc>1022-c<k1>SnaTayat<k2>SnaTayat
{%Śnathayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. injuring, destroy-
ing, destructive.
<LEND>

<L>47283<pc>1022-c<k1>SnaTita<k2>SnaTita
{%Śnathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. hurt, wounded.
<LEND>

<L>47284<pc>1022-c<k1>SnaTitf<k2>SnaTitf
{%Śnathitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who slays or
kills, a smiter; killing, destroying, destructive, deadly,
fatal.
<LEND>

<L>47285<pc>1022-c<k1>Snam<k2>Snam
{#Snam#}¦ {%śnam,%} (in grammar) a technical term
for the verbal affix {%na,%} the characteristic sign of the
seventh class of roots.
<LEND>

<L>47286<pc>1022-c<k1>SnA<k2>SnA
{#SnA#}¦ {%śnā,%} (in grammar) a technical term for
the affix {%nā,%} the characteristic sign of the ninth class
of roots.
<LEND>

<L>47287<pc>1022-c<k1>Snu<k2>Snu
{#Snu#}¦ {%śnu,%} (in grammar) a technical term for
the affix {%nu,%} the characteristic sign of the fifth class
of roots.
<LEND>

<L>47288<pc>1022-c<k1>Sman<k2>Sman
{#Sman#}¦ {%śman, a,%} n. (according to some ind.),
the face, mouth; the body (according to Nirukta
III. 5).
<LEND>

<L>47289<pc>1022-c<k1>SmaSA<k2>SmaSA
{#SmaSA#}¦ {%śmaśā,%} f., Ved. the channel of a
river, (Sāy. {%= kulyā%}); the brim or rim or edge of
(the Soma) vessel.
<LEND>

<L>47290<pc>1022-c<k1>SmaSAna<k2>SmaSAna
{#SmaSAna#}¦ {%śmaśāna, am,%} n. (according to Ni-
rukta III. 5. fr. {%śma%} for {%śman = śarīra + śāna =%}
{%śayana;%} or fr. {%śma = śarīram + śṛṇāti%} or {%śam-%}
{%nāti;%} according to others {%= aśma-śayana%}), ‘a place
of repose for bodies, place for destroying bodies,’ a
cemetery, sepulchre, burning or burial-ground, ({%pāre-%}
{%śmaśānam,%} beyond the cemetery); {%= brahma-ran-%}
{%dhra,%} q. v. {%—Śmaśāna-kālī,%} f., N. of a female evil
spirit or form of Durgā {%(= kālikā)%}. {%—Śmaśāna-%}
{%gocara, as, ā, am,%} frequenting burning-grounds,
employed in places for burning the dead, (Manu
XI. 39.) {%—Śmaśāna-nivāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling in
burial-grounds, a ghost, spectre. {%—Śmaśāna-bhāj,%}
{%k,%} m. ‘inhabiting burial-grounds,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Śmaśāna-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} abiding in burial-
grounds or cemeteries, a ghost, spectre. {%—Śmaśāna-%}
{%vāṭa, as,%} m. a cemetery-enclosure, burying-ground.
{%—Śmaśāna-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling in cemeteries,
a ghost, spectre; ({%ī%}), m. epithet of Śiva; ({%inī%}), f.
epithet of Kālī or Durgā. {%—Śmaśāna-veśman, ā,%}
m. ‘inhabiting cemeteries,’ epithet of Śiva or Mahā-
deva; a ghost. {%—Śmaśāna-vairāgya, am,%} n. mo-
mentary despondency or abandonment of worldly
desire at the sight of a cemetery. {%—Śmaśāna-śūla,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. an impaling stake in a cemetery.
{%—Śmaśāna-sādhana, am,%} n. magical rites per-
formed in a cemetery to obtain control over evil spirits.
{%—Śmaśānāgni (˚na-ag˚), is,%} m. the fire of a
burning-ground. {%—Śmaśānālaya (˚na-āl˚), as,%} m.
[Page1023-a+ 75]
‘cemetery-house,’ a cemetery. {%—Śmaśānālaya-%}
{%vāsinī (˚na-āl˚),%} f. ‘inhabiting cemeteries,’ epithet
of Kālī or Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>47291<pc>1023-a<k1>SmaSru<k2>SmaSru
{#SmaSru#}¦ {%śmaśru, u,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
V. 28. and Nirukta III. 5. fr. {%śman,%} ‘the face,’ +
rt. {%śri%}), ‘growing on the face,’ the beard. {%—Śma-%}
{%śru-jāta, as, ā, am,%} one whose beard has grown.
{%—Śmaśru-pravṛddhi, is,%} f. the growth of a beard.
{%—Śmaśru-mukhī,%} f. ‘beard-faced,’ a woman with
a beard {%(= pāli, pālī)%}. {%—Śmaśru-vardhaka, as,%}
m. ‘a beard-cutter,’ a barber.
<LEND>

<L>47292<pc>1023-a<k1>SmaSrula<k2>SmaSrula
{%Śmaśrula, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a beard, bearded,
one who lets his beard grow.
<LEND>

<L>47293<pc>1023-a<k1>SmaSrUyamARa<k2>SmaSrUyamARa
{%Śmaśrūyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being as if bearded,
having something like a beard.
<LEND>

<L>47294<pc>1023-a<k1>Smasi<k2>Smasi
{#Smasi#}¦ {%śmasi,%} Ved. for {%uśmasi,%} fr. rt. {%vaś,%}
q. v., (Sāy. {%= kāmayāmahe,%} we desire, Ṛg-veda II.
31, 6.)
<LEND>

<L>47295<pc>1023-a<k1>SmIl<k2>SmIl
{#SmIl#}¦ {%śmīl%} (also written {%smīl;%} cf. rt.
{%mīl%}), cl. 1. P. {%śmīlati, śmīlitum,%}
to wink, contract the eyelids; to twinkle.
<LEND>

<L>47296<pc>1023-a<k1>SmIlana<k2>SmIlana
{%Śmīlana, am,%}¦ n. winking; twinkling.
<LEND>

<L>47297<pc>1023-a<k1>SmIlita<k2>SmIlita
{%Śmīlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ winked, blinked; ({%am%}), n. a
wink, winking.
<LEND>

<L>47298<pc>1023-a<k1>Sme<k2>Sme
{#Sme#}¦ {%śme,%} ind. an abbreviation for {%pārthu-%}
{%raśme,%} (see {%pārthuraśma.%})
<LEND>

<L>47299<pc>1023-a<k1>Syat<k2>Syat
{#Syat#}¦ {%śyat.%} See under rt. {%śo.%}
<LEND>

<L>47300<pc>1023-a<k1>Syan<k2>Syan
{#Syan#}¦ {%śyan,%} (in grammar) a technical term
for the syllable {%ya%} or characteristic sign of the fourth
class of roots.
<LEND>

<L>47301<pc>1023-a<k1>SyAna<k2>SyAna
{#SyAna#}¦ {%śyāna,%} &c. See under rt. {%śyai,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>47302<pc>1023-a<k1>SyAparRa<k2>SyAparRa
{#SyAparRa#}¦ {%śyāparṇa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
family; ({%as, ā, am%}), belonging to the Śyāparṇa
family.
<LEND>

<L>47303<pc>1023-a<k1>SyAparRIya<k2>SyAparRIya
{%Śyāparṇīya, as,%}¦ m. a man belonging to the
Śyāparṇa race.
<LEND>

<L>47304<pc>1023-a<k1>SyAparReya<k2>SyAparReya
{%Śyāparṇeya,%}¦ see Gaṇa to Pāṇ. VI. 2, 37.
<LEND>

<L>47305<pc>1023-a<k1>SyAma<k2>SyAma
{#SyAma#}¦ {%śyāma, as, ā, am%} (said to be fr. rt.
{%śyai%} or connected with rt. {%śvi;%} cf. {%śyeta, śveta%}),
black or dark-coloured, dark-blue, dark-brown,
brown; dark-green, green; dark, shady, dusky;
({%as%}), m. black, brown, green (the colour); a cloud;
the Kokila or Indian cuckoo; a sacred fig-tree at
Prayāga or Allahabad; a kind of plant ({%= vṛd-%}
{%dha-dāraka%}); epithet of various other trees and
plants {%(= pīlu; = śyāmāka; = damanaka; = gan-%}
{%dha-tṛṇa); (ās),%} m. pl., N. of a Vedic Caraṇa, (a
{{subdivion->subdivision||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} of the Maitrāyaṇīyas); the thorn-apple,
Datura Metel; N. of a son of Śūra; ({%ā%}), f. night;
shade, shadow; a dark woman; a woman who has
not borne children; another kind of woman (de-
scribed as from eight to sixteen years of age, resem-
bling in complexion the blossom of the Priyaṅgu or
in shape its slender stalk); a form of Durgā (much
worshipped by the Tāntrikas); a cow; a small sing-
ing bird with black plumage (commonly called
Śāmā, Turdus Macrourus); the female of the Indian
cuckoo; a kind of plant ({%= priyaṅgu%}); turmeric;
the sacred basil; the climbing-plant Ichnocarpus or
Echites Frutescens ({%= śārivā%}); indigo ({%= nīlikā%});
a kind of dark creeper ({%= kṛṣṇa-śārivā%}); epithet
of various other plants and shrubs ({%= kṛṣṇā; =%}
{%vāgujī; = guḍūcī; = guggulu; = soma-latā; =%}
{%kṛṣṇa-trivṛtā; = gundrā; = kastūrī; = vaṭa-%}
{%pattrī; = vandā; = nīla-punarṇavā; = nīla-%}
{%dūrvā; = pippalī; = śiṃśapā; = śyāmāka%}); epi-
thet of the river Yamunā or Jumnā; the seed of
the lotus, {%= padma-vīja; (am),%} n. black pepper;
sea-salt; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κύανο-ς;</lang> Lith. <nsi>sze†mas;</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>ciar,</nsi> ‘dark-brown, black.’] {%—Śyāma-kaṇṭha, as,%}
m. ‘black-throated, blue-throated,’ a peacock; a
kind of small bird; an epithet of Śiva; [cf. {%nīla-%}
{%kaṇṭha.%}] {%—Śyāma-kandā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%ati-viṣā)%}. {%—Śyāma-karṇa, as, ā, am,%} black-
eared; ({%as%}), m. a horse suitable for a horse-sacrifice.
[Page1023-b+ 79]
{%—Śyāma-kāṇḍā,%} f. a kind of Dūrvā grass {%(=%}
{%gaṇḍa-dūrvā)%}. {%—Śyāma-granthi, is,%} f. {%= śyāma-%}
{%kāṇḍā%}. {%—Śyāma-tā,%} f. or {%śyāma-tva, am,%} n.
blackness, brownness, darkness. {%—Śyāma-deva, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Śyāma-pattra, as,%} m. ‘black-
leaved,’ the Tamāla tree. {%—Śyāma-bhās, ās, ās,%}
{%ās,%} of a brilliant black, glossy black. {%—Śyāma-latā,%}
f. the climbing-plant Ichnocarpus or Echites Fru-
tescens. {%—Śyāma-śavala, au,%} m. du. Yama's two
watch-dogs, (see {%śavala.%}) {%—Śyāma-sundara, as,%}
m. ‘dark and beautiful,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Śyā-%}
{%māṅga (˚ma-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} black-bodied, dark-
bodied, black; ({%as%}), m. the planet Mercury or its
regent. {%—Śyāmā-pūjā,%} f. the worship of Śyāmā or
Durgā (on the new moon of the month Kārttika).
{%—Śyāmāmlī (˚ma-am˚),%} f. a kind of shrub {%(= nī-%}
{%lāmlī)%}. {%—Śyāmā-rahasya, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Śyāmī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make black
or dark-coloured. {%—Śyāmī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
&c., to become black or dark-blue.
<LEND>

<L>47306<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAmaka<k2>SyAmaka
{%Śyāmaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of edible grain, (Panicum
Frumentaceum or Colonum); a gramineous plant;
({%am%}), n. a kind of grass ({%= rohiṣa-tṛṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>47307<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAmala<k2>SyAmala
{%Śyāmala, as, ā, am,%}¦ blackish, black, dark-blue,
brownish, dusky; ({%as%}), m. black (the colour); black
pepper; the sacred fig-tree; a large bee; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of Durgā or Pārvatī; epithet of various plants
{%(= aśva-gandhā; = kaṭa-bhī; = jambu; = kas-%}
{%tūrī)%}. {%—Śyāmala-cūḍā,%} f. a kind of shrub {%(=%}
{%guñjā)%}. {%—Śyāmalekṣu (˚la-ik˚), us,%} m. a sort of
dark sugar-cane.
<LEND>

<L>47308<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAmalikA<k2>SyAmalikA
{%Śyāmalikā,%}¦ f. the indigo plant ({%= nīlī%}).
<LEND>

<L>47309<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAmAka<k2>SyAmAka
{%Śyāmāka, as,%}¦ m. {%= śyāmaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47310<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAmAya<k2>SyAmAya
{%Śyāmāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%śyāmāyate, -yitum,%} to be-
come black or dark-blue or green, to prove impure
(as gold).
<LEND>

<L>47311<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAmAyani<k2>SyAmAyani
{%Śyāmāyani, is,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher of the Yajur-
veda.
<LEND>

<L>47312<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAmAyanIya<k2>SyAmAyanIya
{%Śyāmāyanīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a Vedic Caraṇa.
<LEND>

<L>47313<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAmAyamAna<k2>SyAmAyamAna
{%Śyāmāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ growing dark or
dusk, becoming dusky.
<LEND>

<L>47314<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAmikA<k2>SyAmikA
{%Śyāmikā,%}¦ f. blackness, impurity, alloy (of metals
&c.).
<LEND>

<L>47315<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAmita<k2>SyAmita
{%Śyāmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ blackened, turned or be-
come black; darkened, discoloured.
<LEND>

<L>47316<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAva<k2>SyAva
{%Śyāva, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (connected with {%śyāma%}),
brown, bay, of a brown or dark-brown colour, dark,
dusky, livid; drawn by bay horses (said of chariots,
Ved.); ({%as%}), m. brown (the colour); a proper N.;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the horses of the Sun; ({%ī%}), f., Ved.
night ({%= rātri,%} Naigh. I. 7); [cf. Russ. <nsi>sivyĭ,</nsi>
‘dark-grey.’] {%—Śyāva-taila, as,%} m. ‘having dark-
brown oil,’ the mango tree. {%—Śyāva-dat, an, atī,%}
{%at,%} or {%śyāva-danta%} or {%śyāva-dantaka, as, ā, am,%}
one who has naturally brown or discoloured teeth,
brown-toothed, black-toothed; (according to some
the latter two words may mean ‘having a little tooth
growing between or over the two front teeth.’)
{%—Śyāvāśva (˚va-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘having brown or
bay horses,’ N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi, (an Ātreya and
author of several hymns in the fifth, eighth, and
ninth Maṇḍalas of the Ṛg-veda.) {%—Śyāvāśvi, is,%}
m. a patronymic of the Vedic Ṛṣi Andhīgu.
<LEND>

<L>47317<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAvaka<k2>SyAvaka
{%Śyāvaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ brown, bay; ({%as%}), m., Ved.,
N. of a person under the especial protection of Indra;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the horses of the Sun.
<LEND>

<L>47318<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAla<k2>SyAla
{#SyAla#}¦ {%śyāla, as,%} m. (also written {%syāla%}),
a wife's brother, brother-in-law; a proper N.; ({%ī%}),
f. a wife's sister; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀέλιοι, εἰλιόνες.</lang>] {%—Śyāla-%}
{%nāman, ā,%} &c., called after the name of a brother-
in-law.
<LEND>

<L>47319<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAlaka<k2>SyAlaka
{%Śyālaka, as,%}¦ m. a wife's brother; a poor or
miserable brother-in-law; ({%akī%}), f. a wife's sister;
sister-in-law.
<LEND>

<L>47320<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAlikA<k2>SyAlikA
{%Śyālikā,%}¦ f. a wife's sister.
<LEND>

<L>47321<pc>1023-b<k1>SyAva<k2>SyAva
{#SyAva#}¦ {%śyāva.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>47322<pc>1023-b<k1>Syeta<k2>Syeta
{#Syeta#}¦ {%śyeta, as, tā%} or {%śyenī, am%} (probably
connected with {%śveta%}), white, of a white colour;
({%as%}), m. white (the colour). {%—Śyeta-kolaka, as,%}
[Page1023-c+ 77]
m. the Saphara fish, Cyprinus Saphore (commonly
called Puṃṭī).
<LEND>

<L>47323<pc>1023-c<k1>Syena<k2>Syena
{%Śyena, as,%}¦ m. white (the colour); whiteness,
paleness; a hawk, falcon, bird of prey; ‘hawk-like
conduct,’ violence; a horse (Ved.); a particular sacri-
ficial ceremony or imprecatory rite; N. of a Vedic
Ṛṣi (author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 188); ({%ī%}),
f. white, (see above under {%śyeta%}); a female hawk;
N. of a daughter of Kaśyapa (regarded as the mother
of hawks); a woman (described as resembling a
lily-leaf); a species of the Tṛṣṭubh metre. {%—Śyena-%}
{%kapotīya, am,%} n. the story of the hawk and
pigeon; [cf. {%śivi.%}] {%—Śyena-karaṇa, am,%} n. or
{%śyena-karaṇikā,%} f. acting like a hawk (i. e. rashly
or desperately); burning on a separate funeral pile.
{%—Śyena-ghaṇṭā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= dantī).%}
{%—Śyena-cit, t,%} m. a hawk-feeder, hawk-keeper,
falconer; a receptacle shaped like a hawk (for sacri-
ficial fire &c.) {%—Śyena-jit, t,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Śyenajid-ākhyāna, am,%} n., N. of an episode in
the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Śyena-jīvin, ī,%} m. one who
lives by selling or training hawks, a falconer. {%—Śye-%}
{%na-patvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. going like a hawk or
going as fast as a horse. {%—Śyenopadeśa (˚na-up˚),%}
{%as,%} m. recommendation or injunction to women to
burn on a separate funeral pile.
<LEND>

<L>47324<pc>1023-c<k1>SyenikA<k2>SyenikA
{%Śyenikā,%}¦ f. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>47325<pc>1023-c<k1>SyEta<k2>SyEta
{%Śyaita, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a family; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a Sāman.
<LEND>

<L>47326<pc>1023-c<k1>SyEnampAtA<k2>SyEnampAtA
{%Śyainampātā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%śyena + pāta%}), hawking,
hunting, the chase.
<LEND>

<L>47327<pc>1023-c<k1>SyE<k2>SyE
{#SyE#}¦ {%śyai,%} cl. 1. A. {%śyāyate, śaśye, śyās-%}
{%yate, aśyāsta, śyātum,%} to go, move; to
coagulate, be congealed, freeze; to dry up, wither:
Pass. {%śyāyate:%} Caus. {%śyāpayati, -yitum:%} Desid.
{%śiśyāsate:%} Intens. {%śāśyāyate, śāśyeti, śāśyāti.%}
<LEND>

<L>47328<pc>1023-c<k1>SIta<k2>SIta
{%Śīta, as, ā, am.%}¦ See p. 1010, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47329<pc>1023-c<k1>SIna<k2>SIna
{%Śīna, as, ā, am.%}¦ See p. 1010, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>47330<pc>1023-c<k1>SyAna<k2>SyAna
{%Śyāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone; coagulated, congealed;
viscous, thick, sticky, adhesive (as clarified butter);
shrunk up, shrunk; ({%am%}), n. smoke. {%—Śyāna-%}
{%pulina, as, ā, am,%} having shrunk or dry sand-
banks (as a river in the hot season).
<LEND>

<L>47331<pc>1023-c<k1>SyoRAka<k2>SyoRAka
{#SyoRAka#}¦ {%śyoṇāka%} or {%śyonāka, as,%} m. (said
to be fr. rt. {%śyai%}), the plant Bignonia or Calosanthes
Indica, (see {%śoṇaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>47332<pc>1023-c<k1>SraNk<k2>SraNk
{#SraNk#}¦ {%śraṅk%} (also written {%ślaṅk, sraṅk%}),
cl. 1. A. {%śraṅkate, śaśraṅke, śraṅki-%}
{%tum,%} to go, move, creep.
<LEND>

<L>47333<pc>1023-c<k1>SraNg<k2>SraNg
{#SraNg#}¦ {%śraṅg%} (also written {%ślaṅg, śvaṅg,%}
{%svaṅg%}), cl. 1. P. {%śraṅgati,%} &c., to go,
move; to shake (?).
<LEND>

<L>47334<pc>1023-c<k1>SraR<k2>SraR
{#SraR#}¦ {%śraṇ,%} cl. 1. P. {%śraṇati,%} &c., cl. 10.
P. (or Caus.) {%śrāṇayati, śraṇayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%aśiśraṇat%} and {%aśaśrāṇat,%} to give,
grant, present.
<LEND>

<L>47335<pc>1023-c<k1>Srat<k2>Srat
{#Srat#}¦ {%śrat,%} ind. (a kind of prefix combined
or compounded with rt. 1. {%dhā,%} and in the Veda
with rt. 1. {%kṛ,%} and generally implying) faith, trust,
belief, (enumerated among the {%satya-nāmāni%} in
Naigh. III. 10; Sāy. {%śrat = satyāni,%} Ṛg-veda VIII.
75, 2; cf. Lat. <nsi>cred</nsi> in <nsi>cred-o.</nsi>)
<LEND>

<L>47336<pc>1023-c<k1>SraddaDat<k2>SraddaDat
{%Śrad-dadhat, at, atī, at,%}¦ having faith; trusting,
believing; respecting, venerating.
<LEND>

<L>47337<pc>1023-c<k1>SraddaDAna<k2>SraddaDAna
{%Śrad-dadhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ having faith, &c. ({%=%}
{%śrad-dadhat%}); a believer. {%—Śraddadhāna-tā,%} f.
faith, (Manu VII. 86.)
<LEND>

<L>47338<pc>1023-c<k1>SradDa<k2>SradDa
{%Śrad-dha, as, ā, am,%}¦ having faith, believing in,
trusting; ({%ā%}), f. faith, belief, trust, confidence, (said
to be also {%am,%} n.); belief in the Śāstras or divine
revelation; calmness or composure of mind; inti-
macy; respect, reverence; hope, wish, vehement
desire, the longing of a pregnant woman; purity,
(the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 151. is attributed to Śraddhā
Kāmāyanī.) {%—Śraddhā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done
with faith. {%—Śraddhā-jāḍya, am,%} n. blind or obsti-
nate adherence to one's faith. {%—Śraddhā-deva, as,%}
[Page1024-a+ 78]
m., Ved. epithet of Manu; [cf. {%śrāddha-deva.%}]
{%—Śraddhānvita (˚dhā-an˚), as, ā, am,%} endowed
with faith, faithful, believing. {%—Śraddhā-manas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having a faithful mind, faithful-
hearted. {%—Śraddhā-maya, as, ī, am,%} full of faith,
believing. {%—Śraddhā-yukta, as, ā, am,%} having
faith, believing. {%—Śraddhā-rahita, as, ā, am,%} de-
prived of faith, distrusting, disbelieving. {%—Śraddhā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having faith, trusting, believing.
{%—Śraddhā-virahita, as, ā, am,%} void of faith,
destitute of belief. {%—Śraddhā-samanvita, as, ā,%}
{%am, = śraddhānvita%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47339<pc>1024-a<k1>SradDA<k2>SradDA
{%Śrad-dhā%}¦ (cf. perhaps <nsi>cred-o</nsi> for <nsi>cred-do</nsi>), cl. 3.
P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to place con-
fidence in, have faith in, trust, believe, ({%śraddhātum%}
{%arhaḥ,%} worthy to be believed, trustworthy); to
respect.
<LEND>

<L>47340<pc>1024-a<k1>SradDAtf<k2>SradDAtf
{%Śrad-dhātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who believes, a
believer.
<LEND>

<L>47341<pc>1024-a<k1>SradDAlu<k2>SradDAlu
{%Śraddhālu, us, us, u,%}¦ disposed to trust, faithful,
believing; desirous, wishing; ({%us%}), f. a pregnant
woman longing for anything.
<LEND>

<L>47342<pc>1024-a<k1>SradDeya<k2>SradDeya
{%Śrad-dheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be trusted, reliable,
worthy of confidence. {%—Śraddheya-tā,%} f. trust-
worthiness.
<LEND>

<L>47343<pc>1024-a<k1>SraT<k2>SraT
{#SraT#}¦ {%śrath%} or {%śranth%} (connected with
rt. {%ślath,%} of which it appears to be an
older form; cf. also rt. {%grath%}), cl. 1. 9. 10. P. {%śra-%}
{%thati, śranthati, śrathnāti%} (Ved. also A. {%śrath-%}
{%nīte%}), {%śrāthayati, śranthayati, śaśrantha%} (or {%śa-%}
{%śrātha,%} 3rd pl. {%śaśranthuḥ%} or {%śrethuḥ,%} Pāṇ. I. 2, 6),
{%śranthiṣyati, aśranthīt%} (Ved. forms {%śiśrathat,%}
{%śiśrathas, śiśrathantu, śrathnās%}), {%śrathitum,%}
{%śranthitum, śrāthayitum,%} to untie, loosen, let loose,
discharge, liberate, set free, release, remove; to
hurt, injure, destroy, kill, (usually cl. 9. or {%śra-%}
{%thati%} for {%śnathati,%} cf. rt. {%śnath%}); to bind, tie,
connect, arrange [cf. rt. {%grath%}]; to strive eagerly,
endeavour, use exertion, (in this sense only cl.
10); to delight repeatedly, amuse; cl. 1. 9. A.
{%śranthate, śrathnīte%} (in neut. sense or Pass. refl.),
to be loosened or dissolved or untied, to be loose;
to be weak; to be shallow; cl. 10. P. A. {%śratha-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} to loosen, release (Ved.); to
relax efforts; to be loose or relaxed, be weak
or infirm: Caus. {%śranthayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%aśaśranthat, -ta,%} to cause to loosen, release, &c.;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κλώθω, κάλαθος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>crates, rete, res-tis</nsi>
(for <nsi>ret-tis</nsi>); Goth. <nsi>af-hlathan;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>hla-</nsi>
<nsi>dan, hlast;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hladan, hlœst.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>47344<pc>1024-a<k1>SraTana<k2>SraTana
{%Śrathana, am,%}¦ n. the act of untying, loosening;
destroying, killing; tying, stringing, binding, con-
necting; making effort, exertion; delighting repeat-
edly.
<LEND>

<L>47345<pc>1024-a<k1>SraTitvA<k2>SraTitvA
{%Śrathitvā,%}¦ ind. having loosened, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47346<pc>1024-a<k1>SraTnAna<k2>SraTnAna
{%Śrathnāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. loosening, untying.
<LEND>

<L>47347<pc>1024-a<k1>SranTa<k2>SranTa
{%Śrantha, as,%}¦ m. loosening, liberating; looseness,
flaccidity; tying, binding, stringing together; N. of
Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>47348<pc>1024-a<k1>SranTana<k2>SranTana
{%Śranthana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of loosening,
untying; tying, binding, stringing together (flowers
&c.); killing, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>47349<pc>1024-a<k1>SranTita<k2>SranTita
{%Śranthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ loosed, let loose; strung,
connected, bound together; hurt, injured, killed;
overcome, overpowered; delighted.
<LEND>

<L>47350<pc>1024-a<k1>SranTitvA<k2>SranTitvA
{%Śranthitvā,%}¦ ind. having loosened, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47351<pc>1024-a<k1>SradDa<k2>SradDa
{#SradDa#}¦ {%śrad-dha, śrad-dhā,%} &c. See under
{%śrat.%}
<LEND>

<L>47352<pc>1024-a<k1>SrapaRa<k2>SrapaRa
{#SrapaRa#}¦ {%śrapaṇa, śrapita,%} &c. See cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>47353<pc>1024-a<k1>Sram<k2>Sram
{#Sram#}¦ {%śram,%} cl. 4. P. {%śrāmyati%} (sometimes
also A. {%-te%}), {%śaśrāma, aśramat%} or
{%aśramīt, śramitum,%} to make effort, exert one's
self, take pains; to perform acts of penance or
austerity, mortify the body; to be wearied or fatigued;
to be distressed or pained: Pass. {%śramyate,%} Aor.
{%aśrami:%} Caus. {%śramayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśiśra-%}
{%mat;%} [cf. perhaps Angl. Sax. <nsi>hearm;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>ramen, ramjan.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page1024-b+ 78]

<L>47354<pc>1024-b<k1>Srama<k2>Srama
{%Śrama, as,%}¦ m. exertion, labour, toil, taking pains;
penance, austerity, mortification of the body; hard
study, ({%śramaṃ kṛ,%} to make exertion, study);
exercise, military exercise, drill; weariness, fatigue;
distress, pain. {%—Śrama-karṣita, as, ā, am,%} worn
out by toil; weighed down with fatigue. {%—Śrama-%}
{%jala, am,%} n. ‘toil-water,’ perspiration. {%—Śrama-%}
{%mohita, as, ā, am,%} bewildered by exertion, para-
lysed or stupefied by fatigue. {%—Śrama-sādhya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} to be accomplished by labour. {%—Śrama-%}
{%siddha, as, ā, am,%} accomplished by labour or exer-
tion. {%—Śrama-sthāna, am,%} n. ‘labour-place,’ a place
for work or exercise, workshop, drilling-place. {%—Śra-%}
{%māmbu (˚ma-am˚), u,%} n. ‘toil-water,’ perspiration;
[cf. {%śrama-jala.%}] {%—Śramārta (˚ma-ār˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} overcome with fatigue, wearied.
<LEND>

<L>47355<pc>1024-b<k1>SramaRa<k2>SramaRa
{%Śramaṇa, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} making effort or exertion,
toiling, labouring; following a low or menial busi-
ness; base, vile, bad; ({%as%}), m. one who performs
acts of penance and austerity, an ascetic, devotee,
one who restrains his passions and mortifies his body;
a religious mendicant; a Buddhist ascetic; a beggar;
({%ā, ī%}), f. a woman of low caste or business; a female
mendicant, ({%kumāra-śramaṇā,%} a female mendicant
even in girlhood); a handsome woman; Bengal
madder ({%= mañjiṣṭhā%}); another plant ({%= muṇ-%}
{%ḍīrī%}); Indian spikenard ({%= jaṭā-māṃsī%}).
<LEND>

<L>47356<pc>1024-b<k1>SramaRAya<k2>SramaRAya
{%Śramaṇāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%śramaṇāyate, -yitum,%} to
become a Śramaṇa, become a beggar, be reduced to
beggary.
<LEND>

<L>47357<pc>1024-b<k1>Sramayu<k2>Sramayu
{%Śramayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. weary, overcome with
fatigue.
<LEND>

<L>47358<pc>1024-b<k1>Sramin<k2>Sramin
{%Śramin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ making great efforts, laborious,
diligent; undergoing fatigue or weariness; wearying,
tiring.
<LEND>

<L>47359<pc>1024-b<k1>SrAnta<k2>SrAnta
{%Śrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ wearied, fatigued, tired, ex-
hausted, distressed; calmed, tranquil; ({%as%}), m. one
whose passions are subdued, an ascetic. {%—Śrānta-%}
{%saṃvāhana, as, ā, am,%} soothing a weary person
(by rubbing or shampooing his limbs); relieving
or tending the wearied (by offering a seat &c.).
<LEND>

<L>47360<pc>1024-b<k1>SrAnti<k2>SrAnti
{%Śrānti, is,%}¦ f. fatigue, weariness, exhaustion.
<LEND>

<L>47361<pc>1024-b<k1>SrAma<k2>SrAma
{%Śrāma, as,%}¦ m. a temporary shed ({%= maṇḍapa%});
a month; time.
<LEND>

<L>47362<pc>1024-b<k1>SramB<k2>SramB
{#SramB#}¦ {%śrambh%} (also written {%srambh;%} ge-
nerally found with the prefix {%vi,%} see {%vi-%}
{%śrambh,%} p. 943), cl. 1. A. {%śrambhate, śaśrambhe,%}
{%śrambhiṣyate, śrambhitum,%} to be careless or inat-
tentive, be negligent, neglect; to err, do wrong.
<LEND>

<L>47363<pc>1024-b<k1>Sraya<k2>Sraya
{#Sraya#}¦ {%śraya, śrayaṇa,%} &c. See p. 1025, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47364<pc>1024-b<k1>Srava<k2>Srava
{#Srava#}¦ {%śrava, śravaka, śravaṇa,%} &c. See
p. 1027, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>47365<pc>1024-b<k1>SrA<k2>SrA
{#SrA#}¦ {%śrā%} or {%śrai%} (also written {%srai,%} cf. {%śai;%}
connected with rt. 2. {%śrī%}), cl. 2. 4. P. {%śrāti,%}
{%śrāyati%} (or cl. 1. if fr. the form {%śrai%}), {%śaśrau,%}
{%śrāsyati, aśrāsīt, śrātum,%} to boil, seethe, cook,
dress, mature, ripen; to sweat: Pass. {%śrāyate,%} Aor.
{%aśrāyi:%} Caus. {%śrapayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśi-%}
{%śrapat,%} to cause to boil or cook, to boil; to render
mature or ripe; {%śrāpayati, -yitum,%} to make hot,
heat; to cause to sweat, (according to Vopa-deva
XXI. 16. {%śrāpayati = praśasyam ācaṣṭe%}): Pass.
of Caus. {%śrapyate%} or {%śrāpyate,%} Aor. {%aśrāpi%} or
{%aśrapi:%} Desid. {%śiśrāsati:%} Intens. {%śāśrāyate, śā-%}
{%śrāti, śāśreti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κρίβανος, κρίβανον,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κλίβανος, κριβάνη, κράμβος, καρπός, κάρψω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κάρδοπος ,</lang> (probably) <lang n="greek">κραῦρος,</lang> (perhaps also) <lang n="greek">κέραμος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κέρνον,</lang> (according to some also perhaps) <lang n="greek">ἄρτος</lang> for
<lang n="greek">κάρτος</lang> or <lang n="greek">κράτος, κάγχρυς</lang> for <lang n="greek">κάρχρυς; περκάζω:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>cremare, carbo,</nsi> (probably) <nsi>calere, cinis; cu-</nsi>
<nsi>līna:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hauri, hlaif-s:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>rifi</nsi> (=
Mod. Germ. <nsi>reif</nsi>), <nsi>herpist:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>heordh,</nsi>
<nsi>hlaf, hœrefœst, hœrfest, ripe:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>is-sirpstu:</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>cramhaim,</nsi> ‘I concoct, digest.’]
<LEND>

<L>47366<pc>1024-b<k1>Sfta<k2>Sfta
{%Śṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ boiled, &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>47367<pc>1024-b<k1>SrapaRa<k2>SrapaRa
{%Śrapaṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of causing to boil
or boiling.
<LEND>

<L>47368<pc>1024-b<k1>SrapaRIya<k2>SrapaRIya
{%Śrapaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be boiled.
<LEND>
[Page1024-c+ 80]

<L>47369<pc>1024-c<k1>Srapayat<k2>Srapayat
{%Śrapayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to boil, boiling,
cooking.
<LEND>

<L>47370<pc>1024-c<k1>Srapayitavya<k2>Srapayitavya
{%Śrapayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be boiled.
<LEND>

<L>47371<pc>1024-c<k1>SrapayitvA<k2>SrapayitvA
{%Śrapayitvā,%}¦ ind. having caused to be boiled or
dressed.
<LEND>

<L>47372<pc>1024-c<k1>Srapita<k2>Srapita
{%Śrapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be boiled; boiled
(said to be applied to anything except water, milk,
or ghee, cf. {%śṛta%}); seethed, sodden; ({%ā%}), f. rice-
gruel; ({%am%}), n. boiled meat, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47373<pc>1024-c<k1>SrARa<k2>SrARa
{%Śrāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ boiled (said to be applied to
anything except water, milk, or ghee), stewed, cooked,
prepared, dressed [cf. {%śṛta,%} 2. {%śrita%}]; moist, wet;
({%ā%}), f. rice-gruel; ({%am%}), n. boiled meat, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47374<pc>1024-c<k1>SrAta<k2>SrAta
{%Śrāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= śrāṇa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47375<pc>1024-c<k1>SrAdDa<k2>SrAdDa
{#SrAdDa#}¦ {%śrāddha, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%śrad-dhā,%}
see {%śrad-dha%}), faithful, believing; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a kind of funeral rite or ceremony in honour of
the departed spirits of dead relatives observed with
great, strictness at various fixed periods and on oc-
casions of rejoicing as well as mourning, (these cere-
monies are of three principal kinds, 1. Nitya, i. e.
general and constant, in honour of the Pitṛs or
deceased ancestors and progenitors collectively [also
called {%pārvaṇa, aṣṭaka,%} q. q. v. v.], when three
Piṇḍas or balls of meal [see {%piṇḍa%}] and water are
offered to three paternal ancestors and three maternal
forefathers [see {%pitṛ%}]: 2. Naimittika, i. e. occasional
and special, as, for instance, in behalf of a parent or
some one relative recently deceased [called also
{%ekoddiṣṭa,%} q. v.]; the object being twofold, viz.
first, the re-embodying of his soul in some kind of
form after burning his corpse; secondly, the raising
him from the regions of the atmosphere, where he
would otherwise roam among demons and evil
spirits, to a particular heaven above, where he is, as
it were, deified among the shades of departed kins-
men; the offering of the funeral Piṇḍa or ball of
meal is in this case the office of the nearest male
kinsman, and confers the title to any property that
may be inherited: 3. Kāmya, i. e. voluntary and
performed apparently by way of supererogation for
the greater benefit of deceased ancestors or for ob-
taining increase of religious merit, &c.: other Śrād-
dha ceremonies and oblations appear to have more
reference to the living than the dead, and to be
performed either for the sake of {%puṣṭi%} and {%vṛddhi,%}
‘increase of prosperity,’ &c., or as thank-offerings on
various joyful occasions, such as the birth of a son,
when gifts and food are offered to the living relations
and assisting Brāhmans present: there is also an
important Śrāddha, called Daiva, in honour of the
Viśva-devas or Viśve Devāḥ, ‘deities collectively’
[see {%viśva%}]: the Śrāddha to a recently deceased
relative should be offered on the day after mourning
expires, and at intervals during twelve successive
months, and afterwards on all anniversaries of his
death; that to the Pitṛs collectively should take
place on the dark fortnight of a lunation as well as
at various other seasons, different names being given
to the various Śrāddhas according to the times and
objects of their performance, see {%aṣṭaka, ekādaśī,%}
{%māsika, anv-āhārya, daśa-piṇḍa-śrāddha, preta-%}
{%śrāddha, sapiṇḍana, mahālaya, vṛddhi-śrād-%}
{%dha, śuddhi, nāndī-mukha%}); gifts or offerings at
a Śrāddha. {%—Śrāddha-kara, as, ī, am,%} or {%śrād-%}
{%dha-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} one who performs a Śrād-
dha, the offerer of an obsequial oblation. {%—Śrāddha-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. a Śrāddha rite, a funeral ceremony.
{%—Śrāddha-kalpa, as,%} m., N. of a Pariśiṣṭa of the
Yajur-veda (ascribed to Kātyāyana). {%—Śrāddha-%}
{%kalpa-bhāṣya, am,%} n. a commentary on the
Śrāddha-kalpa (ascribed to Gobhila). {%—Śrāddha-%}
{%kalpa-latā,%} f., N. of a work by Nanda-paṇḍita.
{%—Śrāddha-kṛt, t,%} m. the performer of a funeral
rite. {%—Śrāddha-kriyā,%} f. a Śrāddha ceremony,
funeral rite. {%—Śrāddha-candrikā,%} f. ‘Śrāddha-
elucidation,’ N. of a work. {%—Śrāddha-cintāmaṇi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘Śrāddha-gem,’ N. of a work by Śiva-rāma on
funeral rites. {%—Śrāddha-tattva, am,%} n. ‘Śrāddha-
truth,’ N. of two portions of Raghu-nandana's Smṛti-
[Page1025-a+ 75]
tattva (called respectively the Chandoga-śrāddha-
tattva and the Yajurvedi-śrāddha-tattva). {%—Śrāddha-%}
{%tattva-ṭīkā,%} f., N. of a commentary by Kāśi-rāma
on the Chandoga-śrāddha-tattva. {%—Śrāddha-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. faithfulness; the being a Śrāddha. {%—Śrād-%}
{%dha-da, as,%} m. the offerer of a Śrāddha. {%—Śrād-%}
{%dha-dina, as, am,%} m. n. the day of a Śrāddha, the
anniversary of the death of a near relative. {%—Śrād-%}
{%dha-dīpa-kalikā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Śrāddha-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f. ‘Śrāddha-elucidation,’ N. of a work.
{%—Śrāddha-deva, as,%} m. any god presiding over
funeral rites; a Viśva-deva; Yama (lord of the
dead); Manu Vaivasvata (brother of Yama; in a
former mundane age he was Manu Satya-vrata).
{%—Śrāddha-devatā,%} f. any deity presiding over
obsequial rites; a Viśva-deva; a Pitṛ or progenitor;
Yama. {%—Śrāddha-paṅkti, is,%} f., N. of a work.
{%—Śrāddha-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a work by Nīla-
kaṇṭha. {%—Śrāddha-pradīpa, as,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Śrāddha-bhuj, k, k, k,%} or {%śrāddha-bhoktṛ, tā,%}
{%trī, tṛ,%} eating food prepared at a Śrāddha, a de-
ceased ancestor. {%—Śrāddha-mayūkha, as,%} m.
‘Śrāddha-light,’ N. of a part of Nīla-kaṇṭha's Bha-
gavad-bhāskara. {%—Śrāddha-viveka, as,%} m. ‘Śrād-
dha-investigation,’ N. of a work. {%—Śrāddha-śāka,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of pot-herb {%(= kāla-śāka)%}. {%—Śrād-%}
{%dha-śiṣṭa, am,%} n. what remains at a Śrāddha, food
that has been presented to the Pitṛs. {%—Śrāddha-%}
{%saṅgraha, as,%} m. ‘Śrāddha-compilation,’ N. of a
work. {%—Śrāddha-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of certain
aphorisms by Kātyāyana on the rites to be per-
formed at anniversaries of the death of near relatives.
{%—Śrāddha-stavaka, as,%} m. a chapter on Śrāddhas.
{%—Śrāddhopayogin (˚dha-up˚), ī, inī, i,%} service-
able or appropriate for Śrāddhas.
<LEND>

<L>47376<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAdDika<k2>SrAdDika
{%Śrāddhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to a Śrāddha or
obsequial rite; the recipient of an obsequial obla-
tion; ({%am%}), n. a present given at a Śrāddha.
<LEND>

<L>47377<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAdDin<k2>SrAdDin
{%Śrāddhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a Śrāddha, any object
or receiver of a funeral oblation.
<LEND>

<L>47378<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAdDIya<k2>SrAdDIya
{%Śrāddhīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to a
funeral ceremony.
<LEND>

<L>47379<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAnta<k2>SrAnta
{#SrAnta#}¦ {%śrānta, śrāma,%} &c. See under rt.
{%śram.%}
<LEND>

<L>47380<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAm<k2>SrAm
{#SrAm#}¦ {%śrām%} (also written {%grām,%} see {%grā-%}
{%maya;%} perhaps rather a Nom.), cl. 10. P.
{%śrāmayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśaśrāmat,%} to call, sum-
mon, invite; to counsel, consult in private, advise.
<LEND>

<L>47381<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAmaRera<k2>SrAmaRera
{#SrAmaRera#}¦ {%śrāmaṇera, as,%} m. (fr. {%śramaṇa%}),
a follower or disciple of a Jaina or Buddhist mendi-
cant, a novice, lay-brother.
<LEND>

<L>47382<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAya<k2>SrAya
{#SrAya#}¦ {%śrāya,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47383<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAyasa<k2>SrAyasa
{#SrAyasa#}¦ {%śrāyasa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%śreyas%}), pro-
duced in or on the best, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47384<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAva<k2>SrAva
{#SrAva#}¦ {%śrāva, śrāvaka, śrāvaṇa,%} &c. See
p. 1027, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47385<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAvantI<k2>SrAvantI
{#SrAvantI#}¦ {%śrāvantī.%} See {%śrāvastī%} below.
<LEND>

<L>47386<pc>1025-a<k1>SrAvasta<k2>SrAvasta
{#SrAvasta#}¦ {%śrāvasta, as,%} m. (fr. {%śravas%}), N. of
a king, (also written {%śrāvastaka%} and {%śāvasta%}); ({%ī%}),
f., N. of a city situated north of the Ganges and
founded by king Śrāvasta, (it was the capital of
Kośala, and said to have been the place where the
merchant Anātha-piṇḍāda gave Buddha a building
for his residence and the delivery of his lectures; it
is less correctly written {%śrāvantī,%} and is identified
with Dharma-pattana, q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>47387<pc>1025-a<k1>Sri<k2>Sri
{#Sri#}¦ {%śri%} (some of the forms of this rt.,
such as the Perf., Caus., &c., are identical with
those of rt. 1. {%śrī%}), cl. 1. P. A. {%śrayati, -te, śiśrāya%}
(3rd du. {%śiśriyatus,%} 3rd pl. {%śiśriyus%}), {%śiśriye%} (3rd
du. {%śiśriyāte%}), {%śrayiṣyati, -te, aśiśriyat, -ta%}
(Ved. forms {%aśret, aśiśret%}), {%śrayitum%} (Ved. Inf.
{%śriyase%}), to go to, approach, go near to, resort or
have recourse to, fly to (for refuge), approach for
protection, seek; to go into, enter; to cling to, lean
[Page1025-b+ 76]
on, depend on, rest on; to honour, serve, worship,
devote or addict one's self to, be devoted; to serve,
help, assist; to use, employ, make use of; to obtain,
possess, receive, (Sāy. {%śrīṇīṣe = śrayasi%} or {%pacasi,%}
Ṛg-veda V. 6, 9; cf. rt. {%śrī%}); to undergo; to
abide or dwell in (with loc.): Pass. {%śrīyate,%} Aor.
{%aśrāyi:%} Caus. {%śrāyayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśiśrayat:%}
Desid. {%śiśrayiṣati, -te,%} and {%śiśrīṣati, -te:%} Intens.
{%śeśrīyate, śeśrayīti, śeśreti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κλίνω, κλιτύς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κλισία:</lang> Lat. <nsi>clî-no, in-clino, clīvus,</nsi> (perhaps)
<nsi>clemens:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>hlei-tara,</nsi> ‘a ladder;’ <nsi>hlinian,</nsi>
<nsi>hlinôn, hlinen,</nsi> ‘to lean upon;’ <nsi>obahlinên,</nsi> ‘to
excel;’ <nsi>fora-hlinên; hlîta,</nsi> ‘a declivity;’ <nsi>scrîtan,</nsi>
‘to step;’ <nsi>ga-scrîtan, scrit:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hlynian,</nsi>
<nsi>hlidh, hlœ-dre, hlœ-der, hold, hal:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hlains,</nsi>
<nsi>hlei-thra, hlija, hulth,</nsi> (perhaps) <nsi>hail:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>kle†-</nsi>
<nsi>tis,</nsi> a room in the uppermost part of a house; <nsi>kle-</nsi>
<nsi>joyu,</nsi> ‘to roam through;’ <nsi>klystu</nsi> fr. <nsi>klydtu, kly-</nsi>
<nsi>deju:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>klje-tj:</nsi> Old Island. <nsi>scrid,</nsi> ‘a step.’]
<LEND>

<L>47388<pc>1025-b<k1>SiSrivas<k2>SiSrivas
{%Śiśrivas, vān, yuṣī, vat,%}¦ one who has gone to
or approached, &c., (Pāṇ. VII. 2, 67.)
<LEND>

<L>47389<pc>1025-b<k1>Sraya<k2>Sraya
{%Śraya, as,%}¦ m. approaching for protection, asylum,
refuge, protection; [cf. {%uc-chraya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47390<pc>1025-b<k1>SrayaRa<k2>SrayaRa
{%Śrayaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of going to or approach-
ing (especially for protection), asylum, refuge, pro-
tection, shelter.
<LEND>

<L>47391<pc>1025-b<k1>SrayaRIya<k2>SrayaRIya
{%Śrayaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be had recourse to, to
be depended on; to be sheltered or protected.
<LEND>

<L>47392<pc>1025-b<k1>SrayamARa<k2>SrayamARa
{%Śrayamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ going to, entering;
having recourse to, &c.; being near.
<LEND>

<L>47393<pc>1025-b<k1>Srayitavya<k2>Srayitavya
{%Śrayitavya, as, ā, am, = śrayaṇīya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>47394<pc>1025-b<k1>SrayitvA<k2>SrayitvA
{%Śrayitvā,%}¦ ind. having gone to or approached (for
refuge &c.).
<LEND>

<L>47395<pc>1025-b<k1>Srayin<k2>Srayin
{%Śrayin%}¦ in {%saṃ-śrayin,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>47396<pc>1025-b<k1>SrAya<k2>SrAya
{%Śrāya, as,%}¦ m. taking refuge, refuge, reliance,
shelter, protection; [cf. {%uc-chrāya%}]; ({%as, ī, am%}),
sacred or belonging to the goddess Śrī, (in this sense
fr. 2. {%śrī.%})
<LEND>

<L>47397<pc>1025-b<k1>SrAyat<k2>SrAyat
{%Śrāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ having recourse, taking
refuge, &c., ({%śrāyantaḥ = sam-āśritāḥ,%} Nirukta
VI. 8.)
<LEND>

<L>47398<pc>1025-b<k1>Srit<k2>Srit
{%Śrit, t, t, t%}¦ (at the end of comps.), going to, ap-
proaching (especially for protection), having recourse
to, clinging to; reaching to, rising to.
<LEND>

<L>47399<pc>1025-b<k1>Srita<k2>Srita<h>1
1. {%śrita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see col. 3), gone to, ap-
proached, had recourse to, fled for refuge, approached
for protection, entered, clung to, rested on, founded
on, placed on; resting or sitting on, attached or con-
tiguous to, connected with, joined with; subservient,
subordinate, auxiliary; protected; served, honoured,
cherished, worshipped, sustained, covered with, over-
spread; contained; obtained, having, possessing, as-
sembled, collected. {%—Śrita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one
who has had recourse to or taken refuge with; one
who has served, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47400<pc>1025-b<k1>Sriti<k2>Sriti
{%Śriti, is,%}¦ f. going to, approach, recourse, enter-
ing; [cf. {%uc-chriti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47401<pc>1025-b<k1>SrIyamARa<k2>SrIyamARa
{%Śrīyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being resorted to, being
approached for protection, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47402<pc>1025-b<k1>Sriyaputra<k2>Sriyaputra
{#Sriyaputra#}¦ {%śriya-putra, as,%} m. a kind of bird,
(incorrect for {%priya-putra.%})
<LEND>

<L>47403<pc>1025-b<k1>Sriyas<k2>Sriyas
{#Sriyas#}¦ {%śriyas, śriyā.%} See p. 1026, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>47404<pc>1025-b<k1>Sriz<k2>Sriz<h>1
{#Sriz#} 1¦. {%śriṣ%} (= rt. 1. {%śliṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%śre-%}
{%ṣati, śiśreṣa, śreṣitum,%} to burn.
<LEND>

<L>47405<pc>1025-b<k1>Sriz<k2>Sriz<h>2
{#Sriz#} 2¦. {%śriṣ%} (probably an older form
of rt. 2. {%śliṣ%}), cl. 1. P. {%śreṣati,%} &c.,
to join, fix, infix, impress, (Sāy. {%śreṣāma = śleṣa-%}
{%yema%} or {%śrāyayema,%} ‘may we infix,’ Ṛg-veda IV.
43, 1; {%mā śreṣat = āśliṣṭam mā bhūt,%} ‘let it
not be left on the ground,’ I. 162, 11.)
<LEND>

<L>47406<pc>1025-b<k1>SrI<k2>SrI<h>1
{#SrI#} 1¦. {%śrī%} (connected with rt. {%śrā%}), cl. 9.
P. A. {%śrīṇāti, śrīṇīte, śiśrāya, śiśriye,%}
{%śreṣyati, -te, aśraiṣīt, aśreṣṭa, śretum,%} to cook,
dress, mature, prepare, (Sāy. {%śrīṇīṣe = śrayasi%} or {%pa-%}
{%casi,%} Ṛg-veda V. 6, 9; cf. rt. {%śri%}); to mix, mingle:
Caus. {%śrāyayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśiśrayat:%} Desid. {%śi- %}
[Page1025-c+ 80]
{%śrīṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%śeśrīyate, śeśrayīti, śeśreti;%}
[cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">κίρνημι, κεράω, κεράννυμι, κικράω;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>pin-cerna.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>47407<pc>1025-c<k1>Srita<k2>Srita<h>2
2. {%śrita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see col. 2), Ved. {%= śrīta%}
below or {%śrāṇa%} under rt. {%śrā;%} [cf. {%śṛta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47408<pc>1025-c<k1>SrIRat<k2>SrIRat
{%Śrīṇat, an, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. mixing.
<LEND>

<L>47409<pc>1025-c<k1>SrIRA<k2>SrIRA
{%Śrīṇā,%}¦ f., Ved. night, (a various reading for {%śiriṇā%}
in Naigh. I. 7.)
<LEND>

<L>47410<pc>1025-c<k1>SrIta<k2>SrIta
{%Śrīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cooked; dressed, prepared,
mixed (said of the Soma juice, Sāy. {%= paya-ādibhiḥ%}
{%śrayaṇa-dravyair miśritaḥ%} or {%saṃskṛtaḥ,%} Ṛg-
veda VIII. 2, 28).
<LEND>

<L>47411<pc>1025-c<k1>SrI<k2>SrI<h>2
{#SrI#} 2¦. {%śrī, īs,%} f. (thought to be either fr.
rt. {%śri%} or to be connected with rts. 1. {%śrī, śrai, śrā,%}
‘to mature,’ cf. Lat. <nsi>Ceres</nsi>), prosperity, well-being,
wealth, happiness, good fortune, success, thriving or
flourishing condition, riches, plenty; high rank,
dignity, elevation, sacredness, majesty, royalty, glory,
fame, renown; state, the insignia of royalty; beauty,
grace, loveliness, splendor, light, lustre; the twelfth
digit of the moon; Prosperity or Fortune or Beauty
personified; N. of Lakṣmī as goddess of prosperity
or beauty (wife of Viṣṇu, see {%lakṣmī%}); N. of
Sarasvatī, goddess of speech and learning (wife of
Brahmā, cf. {%śrī-pañcamī%}); any virtue or excel-
lence; decoration, ornament, dress; intellect, under-
standing; superhuman power; the three objects of
life collectively, (viz. virtue, pleasure, and wealth, cf.
{%tri-varga%}); N. of the mother of the Arhat Kunthu
(according to the Jainas); the Sarala tree, Pinus
Longifolia; the Vilva tree; a lotus; cloves, {%= la-%}
{%vaṅga;%} a kind of drug, {%= vṛddhi; (īs),%} m., N. of
one of the six Rāgas or musical modes (according
to some the fifth, according to others the third or
first in order). The word Śrī is frequently used as
an honorific prefix to the names of deities [e. g.
Śrī-Durgā, Śrī-Rāma], and may be repeated twice,
thrice, or even four and five times to express excessive
veneration [e. g. Śrī-śrī-śrī-Durgā]; it is also used
as a respectful prefix to the names of eminent persons
[e. g. Śrī-Jayadeva] as well as of celebrated works
[e. g. Śrī-Bhāgavata] and sacred objects, and is often
placed at the beginning or back of letters, manu-
scripts, important documents, &c. {%—Śriyam-manya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fancying one's self Śrī; confiding in one's
beauty or wealth; arrogant, conceited, proud, (also
written {%śri-manya%} according to some.) {%—Śriyā-%}
{%ditya, as,%} m. ({%śriyā%} for {%śrī + ād˚%}), a proper N.
{%—Śriyānakula,%} N. of a place. {%—Śriyā-vāsin, ī,%}
m. ‘dwelling with Śrī,’ epithet of Śiva, (according
to the commentator {%śriyā saha vasatīti.%}) {%—Śri-%}
{%kaṇṭha, as,%} m. ‘holy or eloquent throat,’ epithet
of Śiva; of Bhava-bhūti (the author of the Mālatī-
Mādhava, &c.); N. of a medical author; of an arid
district north-west of Dehli; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a treatise
on the Śaiva doctrines (also called Śrī-kaṇṭhīya-saṃ-
hitā). {%—Śrīkaṇṭha-dīkṣita, as,%} m., N. of a com-
mentator. {%—Śrīkaṇṭha-pada-lāñchana, as,%} m.
‘marked by the name Śrī-kaṇṭha,’ epithet of the
poet Bhava-bhūti. {%—Śrīkaṇṭha-śiva, as,%} m. epithet
of Śambhū-nātha. {%—Śrīkaṇṭha-sakha, as,%} m.
‘friend of Śiva,’ epithet of Kuvera. {%—Śrīkaṇṭha-%}
{%stava, as,%} m. ‘praise of the district of Śrī-kaṇṭha,’
N. of a poem. {%—Śrī-kandā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%bandhyā-karkoṭakī)%}. {%—Śrī-kara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%}
causing prosperity, giving good fortune; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of Viṣṇu; of the author of a law-book; of
another person; ({%am%}), n. the red lotus. {%—Śrī-ka-%}
{%raṇa, as,%} m. ‘making the word Śrī,’ a pen. {%—Śrī-%}
{%karācārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m., N. of a philosophical
writer. {%—Śrī-kānta, as,%} m. ‘beloved by Śrī,’ epithet
of Viṣṇu; N. of the preceptor of Hari-nātha.
{%—Śrī-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desiring prosperity or
happiness. {%—Śrī-kāra, as,%} m. the word Śrī written
at the top of a book or letter, &c. {%—Śrī-kārin, ī,%} m.
‘causing increase,’ a kind of antelope ({%= kuraṅga;%}
the flesh of this animal is considered highly nutritious;
some make the word {%śrī-kārī,%} f.). {%—Śrī-kula,%} N. of
a work. {%—Śrī-krama,%} N. of a work. {%—Śrī-khaṇḍa,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. sandal-wood. {%—Śrī-gaṇeśa, as,%} m.
[Page1026-a+ 81]
the divine Gaṇeśa. {%—Śrī-gadita, am,%} n. a kind of
Upa-rūpaka or minor drama (described as a compo-
sition in one act, dedicated chiefly to the goddess
Śrī). {%—Śrī-garbha, as,%} m. ‘Fortune-womb,’ epithet
of Viṣṇu; a sword. {%—Śrī-graha, as,%} m. a trough
or place for watering birds {%(= śakunī-prapā).%}
{%—Śrī-grāma, as,%} m. ‘village of Fortune,’ N. of a
place. {%—Śrī-grāmara, as,%} m. epithet of Nārāyaṇa.
{%—Śrī-ghana, am,%} n. coagulated milk, sour curds;
({%as%}), m. a Buddha, Bauddha saint. {%—Śrī-cakra,%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of magical circle used in the worship
of Tripura-sundarī ({%= tripura-sundaryāḥ pūjā-%}
{%yantra-viśeṣaḥ%}); an astrological division of the
body (said to represent the uterine or pubic
region); a wheel of Indra's car; the circle of the
earth, globe. {%—Śrī-ja, as,%} m. ‘born from Śrī,’
epithet of Kāma (god of love). {%—Śrī-tāla, as,%} m.
a kind of palm tree {%(= lakṣmī-tāla, = mṛdu-%}
{%cchada)%}. {%—Śrī-da, as, ā, am,%} bestowing wealth or
prosperity, &c.; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Kuvera (god of
riches). {%—Śrī-datta, as,%} m. ‘Fortune-given,’ N. of
the author of the Ācārādarśa and the Samaya-pra-
dīpa. {%—Śrī-dayita, as,%} m. ‘husband of Śrī,’ epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Śrī-dhara, as,%} m. a kind of Śāla-
grāma, q. v.; epithet of Viṣṇu; of an Arhat of
the past Utsarpiṇī (according to the Jainas); N. of
a commentator on the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa [cf. {%śrī-%}
{%dhara-svāmin%}]; of an astronomer; of a poet.
{%—Śrīdhara-mālava, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Śrī-%}
{%dhara-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of the author of the
Smṛty-artha-sāra and the following commentaries,
the Ātma-prakāśa, the Bhāgavata-bhāvārtha-dīpikā,
and the Subodhinī. {%—Śrīdharācārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Śrī-dharola,%} N. of a town. {%—Śrī-%}
{%nagara, am,%} n. ‘city of Fortune,’ N. of two towns
(one situated in the district of Caunpore, the other
in Bundelcund). {%—Śrī-nandana, as,%} m. ‘son of
Śrī,’ epithet of Kāma-deva (god of love). {%—Śrī-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Śrīnātha-śarman, ā,%}
m., N. of the author of the Ācāra-candrikā, a com-
mentary on the Tithi-dvaidha-prakaraṇa, and the
Sāra-mañjarī commentary. {%—Śrī-niketana, as,%} m.
‘dwelling with Śrī,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Śrī-nivāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘dwelling with Śrī,’ epithet of Viṣṇu; N.
of the author of the Śuddhi-dīpikā. {%—Śrī-pañ-%}
{%camī,%} f. the fifth of the light half of Māgha, (a
festival in honour of Sarasvatī, goddess of learning,
when books and implements of writing are wor-
shipped.) {%—Śrīpañcamī-vrata, am,%} n. the above
religious observance. {%—Śrī-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of
fortune,’ a king, prince; epithet of Viṣṇu (as
husband of Śrī); N. of the author of the Jyotiṣa-
ratna-mālā and of the Vyavahāra-nirṇaya. {%—Śrīpati-%}
{%datta, as,%} m., N. of the author of the Kā-tantra-
pariśiṣṭa. {%—Śrīpati-samuccaya, as,%} m., N. of a
work. {%—Śrī-pattana, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Śrī-%}
{%patha, as,%} m. a royal road, highway. {%—Śrī-parṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. a lotus; the tree Premna Spinosa (the wood
of which produces fire by attrition); ({%ī%}), f. the Premna
Spinosa; the shrub Gmelina Arborea; the medicinal
plant Kaṭphala; the silk-cotton tree; the aquatic
plant Pistia Stratiotes. {%—Śrī-parṇikā,%} f. a kind of
medicinal shrub ({%= kaṭ-phala,%} commonly called
Kāyaphal). {%—Śrī-parvata, as,%} m., N. of a moun-
tain or range of mountains; of a Liṅga. {%—Śrī-pā,%}
{%ās, ās, am,%} preserving fortune. {%—Śrī-piṣṭa, as,%}
m. the resin of the pine tree, turpentine (prepared
by pounding the wood of the Śrī or Sarala tree),
{%—Śrī-puṭa, as,%} m. a kind of metre. {%—Śrī-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘son of Śrī,’ epithet of Kāma (god of love);
a horse; [cf. {%śrī-bhrātṛ.%}] {%—Śrī-pura, am,%} n., N.
of a town. {%—Śrī-puṣpa, am,%} n. cloves; a parti-
cular fragrant wood {%(= padma-kāṣṭha)%}. {%—Śrī-%}
{%phala, am,%} n. the Vilva tree or fruit; another tree
{%(= rājādanī); (ā),%} f. the indigo plant; (another
plant {%(= kṣudra-kāravellī); (ī),%} f. the indigo
plant, Emblic Myrobalan. {%—Śrī-phalikā,%} f. a kind
of plant ({%= kṣudra-kāravellī%}); another plant {%(=%}
{%mahā-nīlī)%}. {%—Śrī-bali,%} N. of a village. {%—Śrī-bha-%}
{%ḍa, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Śrī-bhadra, as,%} m. the
fragrant grass Cyperus Rotundus. {%—Śrī-bhāgavata, %}
[Page1026-b+ 81]
{%am,%} n. ‘the sacred Bhāgavata,’ epithet of the cele-
brated Bhāgavata-Puraṇa (said to contain 18,000
verses, see {%bhāgavata%}). {%—Śrī-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N.
of a commentary by Rāmānuja on the Brahma-sūtra.
{%—Śrī-bhrātṛ, tā,%} m. ‘brother of Lakṣmī,’ the
moon; a horse, (the moon and the horse Uccaiḥ-
śravas, q. v., being recovered with Lakṣmī at the
churning of the ocean.) {%—Śrī-maṅgala, am,%} n., N.
of a Tīrtha. {%—Śrī-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of
fortune, fortunate, prosperous, thriving; wealthy,
opulent; beautiful, pleasing; famous, illustrious;
({%ān%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu (as husband of Śrī); of
Kuvera (the god of wealth); of Śiva; a title applied
to any exalted or venerable person; a kind of tree
(commonly called Tila or Tilaka); the Aśvattha
fig-tree; ({%atī%}), f. a title applied to women; N. of
the mother of Mādhavācārya. {%—Śrī-mati, is,%} f., N.
of Rādhā. {%—Śrīmat-tā,%} f. prosperity, thriving con-
dition, beauty. {%—Śrī-mada, as,%} m. the intoxication
produced by prosperity. {%—Śrīmad-dattopaniṣad%}
{%(˚ta-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad; [cf. {%dattopa-%}
{%niṣad.%}] {%—Śrī-malāpahā (˚la-ap˚),%} f. a kind of
shrub {%(= dhūmra-pattrā)%}. {%—Śrī-mastaka, as,%} m.
Lakṣmī's head; garlic. {%—Śrī-māla,%} N. of a dis-
trict; of a town (said to have been built by Viśva-
karman). {%—Śrīmāla-khaṇḍa,%} N. of a book of
the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—{{Śrīmāla-māhātyma->Śrīmāla-māhātmya||20161213|SergeA|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/322, batch 316-318|}}, am,%} n.
‘greatness of Śrī-māla,’ N. of a part of the Skanda-
Purāṇa (containing fifty-four chapters descriptive of
the origin, sanctity, and Tīrthas of Śrī-māla). {%—Śrī-%}
{%mukha, am,%} n. a beautiful face; ({%as%}), m. epithet
of the seventh (or forty-first) year of Jupiter's cycle
of sixty years; the word Śrī written on the back of
a letter. {%—Śrī-mudrā,%} f. a particular mark made
on the forehead &c. by the worshippers of Viṣṇu.
{%—Śrī-muṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} stealing beauty. {%—Śrī-mūrti,%}
{%is,%} f. ‘sacred or divine image,’ an image of Viṣṇu;
any idol. {%—Śrī-yukta%} or {%śrī-yuta, as, ā, am,%} ‘en-
dowed with Śrī,’ happy, fortunate; wealthy, opulent;
famous, illustrious, (prefixed as an honorific title to
the names of men, and in the common language
written {%śrī-yut.%}) {%—Śrī-raṅga, as,%} m. ‘holy Raṅga,’
N. of Viṣṇu; (according to some) of Śiva; (ac-
cording to others) of an ancient king who founded
the city of Seringapatam. {%—Śrīraṅga-pattana, am,%}
n. ‘Viṣṇu's city,’ the city of Seringapatam (situated
in Mysore on an island in the channel of the Kā-
verī, said to have been founded by an ancient king
who called it after himself or by a devotee who
dedicated it to Viṣṇu). {%—Śrī-rasa, as,%} m. ‘juice
of the Śarala tree,’ turpentine; resin. {%—Śrī-rāga,%}
{%as,%} m. the fifth (or according to some, third or first)
of the Rāgas or personified musical modes, (see {%śrī.%})
{%—Śrī-rāma, as,%} m. the divine Rāma, i. e. Rāma-
candra (whose name in this form is used as a saluta-
tion by those who worship Viṣṇu in this Avatāra).
{%—Śrīrāma-navamī,%} f. the ninth of the light
half of the month Caitra, observed as a festival in
honour of the birthday of Rāma-candra (when cere-
monies are said to be performed with the Śāla-grāma
and Tulasī leaves). {%—Śrīrāma-paddhati, is,%} f., N.
of a work on the proper mode of worshipping Rāma
(attributed to Rāmānuja). {%—Śrī-lakṣmaṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} characterized by Śrī. {%—Śrī-latā,%} f. a kind of
plant {%(= mahā-jyotiṣmatī)%}. {%—Śrī-vatsa, as,%} m.
‘the favourite of the goddess of fortune,’ epithet of
Viṣṇu; a particular mark or curl of hair on the
breast of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa (said to be white and
represented in pictures by a symbol resembling a
cruciform flower); the emblem of the tenth Jina
(or Viṣṇu's mark so used); a hole made through
a wall by a housebreaker; epithet of the eighth
astronomical Yoga. {%—Śrīvatsakin, ī,%} m. a horse
having a curl of hair on his breast (resembling that
of Viṣṇu). {%—Śrīvatsa-dhārin, ī,%} m. or {%śrīvatsa-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘wearing the Śrī-vatsa mark,’ epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Śrīvatsa-lakṣman, ā,%} or {%śrīvatsa-%}
{%lāñchana%} or {%śrīvatsāṅka (˚sa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘having
the Śrī-vatsa mark,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Śrī-vara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of the Jaina-taraṅgiṇī
(which is said to be a continuation of the Rāja-
[Page1026-c+ 79]
taraṅgiṇī up to the year A. D. 1477). {%—Śrī-varāha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘the divine boar,’ epithet of Viṣṇu (in his
boar-incarnation). {%—Śrī-vardhana, as,%} m. epithet
of Śiva. {%—Śrī-vallabha, as,%} m. a favourite of for-
tune. {%—Śrī-vallī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= kaṇṭa-vallī).%}
{%—Śrī-vāṭī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= nāga-vallī).%}
{%—Śrī-vāraka, as,%} m. a kind of pot-herb {%(= sitā-%}
{%vara)%}. {%—Śrī-vāsa, as,%} m. ‘dwelling with Śrī,’
epithet of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; a lotus; turpentine.
{%—Śrī-vāsas, ās,%} m. {%= śrī-vāsa,%} turpentine. {%—Śrī-%}
{%vijaya-praśasti, is,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Śrī-vidyā,%}
f. exalted science; a form of Durgā ({%= mahā-vi-%}
{%dyā-viśeṣaḥ%} or {%tripura-sundarī%}). {%—Śrī-viśāla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} abounding in good fortune. {%—Śrī-vṛk-%}
{%ṣa, as,%} m. the sacred fig-tree, Ficus Religiosa; the
Vilva tree; a ring or curl of hair on the chest and
forehead of a horse; [cf. {%śrīvatsakin.%}] {%—Śrī-vṛk-%}
{%ṣaka, as,%} m. a curl or lock of hair on the chest of
a horse, (perhaps for {%śrī-vatsaka.%}) {%—Śrīvṛkṣa-%}
{%navamī-vrata, am,%} n. epithet of a particular re-
ligious observance. {%—Śrī-veṣṭa, as,%} m. ‘Śarala-
exudation,’ turpentine; resin. {%—Śrī-vaiṣṇava, as,%}
m. a member of the Vaiṣṇava sect (especially a
follower of Rāmānuja). {%—Śrīśa (śrī-īśa), as,%} m.
‘husband of Śrī,’ epithet of Viṣṇu; of Rāma-
candra, (his wife Sītā being regarded as an incarna-
tion of Śrī or Lakṣmī.) {%—Śrī-śalmalī-bhāṇḍa-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Śrī-śuka-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Śrī-śaila, as,%} m. ‘Śrī's
mountain,’ N. of a mountain. {%—Śrī-sañjña, am,%} n.
‘called after Śrī,’ cloves (the various names of Śrī are
applied to this spice). {%—Śrī-sarasvatī, tyau,%} f. du.
Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī. {%—Śrī-sahodara, as,%} m.
‘brother of Śrī,’ the moon (so called from having
been produced with Śrī and other objects at the
churning of the ocean). {%—Śrī-sūkta, am,%} n., N. of
a Vedic hymn. {%—Śrī-sraja, am,%} n., see Vopa-deva
VI. 7. {%—Śrī-hari, is,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu, ({%Śrī-harer%}
{%utthānam,%} N. of a festival on the fourteenth day of
the month Kārttika.) {%—Śrī-hastinī,%} f. the sunflower,
Heliotropium Indicum (so called as held in the hand
of Śrī or Lakṣmī). {%—Śry-āhva, am,%} n. ‘having
the name of Śrī,’ a lotus, (the goddess Śrī or Lak-
ṣmī is said to have appeared first from within this
flower and thence derives many of her names.)
<LEND>

<L>47412<pc>1026-c<k1>Sriyas<k2>Sriyas
{%Śriyas,%}¦ Ved. happiness, prosperity; ornament, deco-
ration, (Sāy. {%śriyase = śriye,%} Ṛg-veda V. 59, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>47413<pc>1026-c<k1>SriyA<k2>SriyA
{%Śriyā,%}¦ f., Ved. (for 2. {%śrī%}), the wife of Viṣṇu,
(thought by some to be a doubtful form.)
<LEND>

<L>47414<pc>1026-c<k1>SrIka<k2>SrIka
{%Śrīka%}¦ = 2. {%śrī%} (at the end of adj. comps., e. g.
{%puṇya-śrīka,%} possessing pure majesty; cf. {%niḥśrīka,%}
{%vigata-ś˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>47415<pc>1026-c<k1>SrIla<k2>SrIla
{%Śrīla, as, ā, am,%}¦ prosperous, fortunate; rich,
wealthy; famous, celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>47416<pc>1026-c<k1>SrIta<k2>SrIta
{#SrIta#}¦ {%śrīta.%} See p. 1025, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>47417<pc>1026-c<k1>SrIzavAyaRa<k2>SrIzavAyaRa
{#SrIzavAyaRa#}¦ {%śrīṣavāyaṇa,%} N. of a part of
the Romaka-siddhānta.
<LEND>

<L>47418<pc>1026-c<k1>Sru<k2>Sru<h>1
{#Sru#} 1¦. {%śru%} (regarded by native gram-
marians as an irregular rt. of cl. 1), cl. 5. P.
{%śṛṇoti%} (ep. also A. {%śṛṇute,%} 1st du. P. {%śṛṇuvas%}
or {%śṛṇvas%}), Impv. {%śriṇotu%} (2nd sing. {%śṛṇu%} Ved.,
{%śṛṇuhi, śṛṇudhī,%} Pāṇ. VI. 4, 102, and {%śrudhi,%}
as if cl. 2), {%śuśrāva%} (2nd sing. {%śuśrotha,%} 1st du.
{%śuśruva,%} 1st pl. {%śuśruma%}), {%aśrauṣīt,%} (Ved. forms
{%śroṣan = śṛṇvanti, śroṣantu = śṛṇvantu,%}
{%śṛṇviṣe, śṛṇotu, śṛṇavat, śravat, śuśravat%}),
{%śrotum,%} to hear, listen to (with acc.), give ear
to (with acc. or gen.); to be attentive, be obedient,
obey; to go (according to Vopa-deva): Pass. {%śrū-%}
{%yate%} ({%śṛṇve = śrūyate,%} Ṛg-veda I. 74, 7; {%śṛṇ-%}
{%vire = śrūyante,%} Ṛg-veda I. 15, 8), Aor. {%aśrāvi,%} to
be heard; to be celebrated or renowned (Ved.);
to be called (Ved.): Caus. {%śrāvayati, -te, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%aśiśravat, -ta,%} or {%aśuśravat, -ta,%} to cause
any one to hear anything (with two acc.), tell, nar-
rate, relate: Pass. of Caus. {%śrāvyate:%} Desid. of
Caus. {%śiśrāvayiṣati, -te,%} or (according to some)
{%śuśrāvayiṣati, -te:%} Desid. {%śuśrūṣate,%} to desire to
hear or listen to; to attend to, obey, be obedient to
[Page1027-a+ 81]
(with acc.); to wait upon, tend, serve: Intens.
{%śośrūyate, śośravīti, śośroti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κλύ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κλῦ-θι</lang> ({%= śrudhi%}), <lang n="greek">κλυ-τό-ς</lang> ({%= śruta%}), <lang n="greek">κλέ-ος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κλε-ί-ω, κλέ-ο-μαι, κλε-ιν-ό-ς, κλει-τό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀ-κρο-ά-ομαι,</lang> (perhaps also) <lang n="greek">κλαίω, κλαύσω, καλέω</lang> for
<lang n="greek">κλαϝέω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>clu-o, clu-e-o, cli-ens, in-clu-tu-s,</nsi>
<nsi>clamo,</nsi> (probably also) <nsi>aus-cul-to, laudo</nsi> for
<nsi>claus-do:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hliu-ma, hrotheigs,</nsi> (perhaps)
<nsi>hausja</nsi> for <nsi>hlausja:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>hlū-t</nsi> ({%= śruta%}
= Mod. Germ. <nsi>Laut</nsi>); <nsi>hlūti,</nsi> ‘a sound;’ <nsi>hlūtian,</nsi>
‘to sound;’ <nsi>hliu-munt</nsi> (= Mod. Germ. <nsi>Leumund</nsi>),
<nsi>hlio-tar; hlo-s-en, hloson, hlosian, losen,</nsi> ‘to
hear;’ <nsi>hōrin; hlamon:</nsi> Old Sax. <nsi>hlus-t; hlāmon,</nsi>
‘to sound:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>hlud, hlyd, hlowan, hlyn,</nsi>
<nsi>hlyrian (?), hliosa, hlyst, hlystan:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>listen:</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>slu-ti, slov-o,</nsi> ‘a word;’ <nsi>slava,</nsi> ‘fame:’ Lith.
<nsi>szlove,</nsi> ‘honour;’ <nsi>klau-s-au,</nsi> ‘I hear;’ <nsi>slowiju,</nsi> ‘I
praise, celebrate;’ perhaps <nsi>klabu,</nsi> ‘to speak:’ Russ.
<nsi>slusaju,</nsi> ‘I listen;’ <nsi>slav-i-tj,</nsi> ‘to celebrate;’ <nsi>slovo,</nsi>
‘a word, speech:’ Hib. <nsi>cluinim,</nsi> ‘I hear;’ <nsi>cluas,</nsi>
‘ear;’ <nsi>clos,</nsi> ‘hearing, report;’ <nsi>cloisim, cluisim,</nsi>
‘I hear.’]
<LEND>

<L>47419<pc>1027-a<k1>SuSruvas<k2>SuSruvas
{%Śuśruvas, ān, uṣī, at,%}¦ one who has heard, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47420<pc>1027-a<k1>SfRvat<k2>SfRvat
{%Śṛṇvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ hearing, listening to, hearken-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>47421<pc>1027-a<k1>Srava<k2>Srava<h>1
1. {%śrava, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. {%śrava%} see p. 1028, col. 2),
the ear; the hypothenuse of a triangle.
<LEND>

<L>47422<pc>1027-a<k1>Sravaka<k2>Sravaka
{%Śravaka, as,%}¦ m. one who hears, a hearer.
<LEND>

<L>47423<pc>1027-a<k1>SravaRa<k2>SravaRa<h>1
1. {%śravaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of hearing; that which
is heard, i. e. Śruti or the Veda, ({%iti śravaṇāt,%} since
it is so said in the Veda, because of or according to
such a Vedic text); studying; (according to the
Vedānta-sāra) the determining by means of the six
Liṅgas the import of the whole Vedānta in regard
to the Real and only existing Being; fame, glory;
wealth; ({%as, am%}), m. n. the ear; the hypothenuse
of a triangle; ({%as, ā%}), m. f., N. of one of the lunar
asterisms (placed either twenty-second or twenty-third
in the common list, and presided over by Viṣṇu,
whence it is represented by three footsteps contain-
ing three stars, {%a,%} <lang n="greek">α, β,</lang> and <lang n="greek">γ</lang> Aquilæ; cf. {%tri-vikrama%});
({%as%}), m. a sort of disease, {%= śroṇa; (ā),%} f. a species
of plant, {%= muṇḍīrikā; (as, ā, am),%} produced in
or under Śravaṇā. {%—Śravaṇa-datta, as,%} m., N. of
a preceptor. {%—Śravaṇa-dvādaśī,%} f. a particular
Tithi or lunar day (when certain religious ceremonies
of great efficacy are observed; it is said to fall on
the twelfth of the light half of Bhādra, when that
month is connected with the asterism Śravaṇā). {%—Śra-%}
{%vaṇa-patha, as,%} m. ‘hearing-path,’ the ear. {%—Śra-%}
{%vaṇa-paruṣa, as, ā, am,%} hard or cruel to the ear,
hard to be listened to. {%—Śravaṇa-pāli, is,%} f. the
tip of the ear. {%—Śravaṇa-vidhi, is,%} m. a method or
rule of hearing or studying. {%—Śravaṇa-vidhi-vicāra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a treatise on the study of the Upani-
shads. {%—Śravaṇa-viṣaya-prāpin,%} reaching the
range of the ear. {%—Śravaṇa-śīrṣikā,%} f. a kind of
plant {%(= śrāvaṇī)%}. {%—Śravaṇādhikārin (˚ṇa-%}
{%adh˚), ī,%} m. ‘one who rules or influences the ears
(of others),’ a speaker, addresser. {%—Śravaṇendriya%}
{%(˚ṇa-in˚), am,%} n. the organ of hearing, the ear.
{%—Śravaṇotpala (˚ṇa-ut˚), am,%} n. ‘ear-lotus,’ a
lotus fastened in the ear (as an ornament). {%—Śra-%}
{%vaṇodara (˚ṇa-ud˚), am,%} n. the hollow of the
outer ear.
<LEND>

<L>47424<pc>1027-a<k1>SravaRasya<k2>SravaRasya
{%Śravaṇasya, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47425<pc>1027-a<k1>SravaRikAvrata<k2>SravaRikAvrata
{%Śravaṇikā-vrata, am,%}¦ n. epithet of a particular
religious observance.
<LEND>

<L>47426<pc>1027-a<k1>SravaRIya<k2>SravaRIya
{%Śravaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be heard, &c.; to be
celebrated, praiseworthy.
<LEND>

<L>47427<pc>1027-a<k1>Sravayat<k2>Sravayat
{%Śravayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. making famous or
celebrated, celebrating.
<LEND>

<L>47428<pc>1027-a<k1>Sravas<k2>Sravas
{%Śravas, as,%}¦ n. the ear; fame, renown, glory [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">κλέος</lang>]; wealth; a hymn, eulogy; anything
deserving praise, a praiseworthy action, (in the latter
senses chiefly Ved.); food, (Sāy. {%= anna.%})
<LEND>

<L>47429<pc>1027-a<k1>Sravasya<k2>Sravasya<h>1
1. {%śravasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. worthy of praise,
praiseworthy, to be celebrated, (Sāy. {%= śravaṇīya%});
({%am%}), n. anything praiseworthy, fame, glory, renown.
<LEND>

<L>47430<pc>1027-a<k1>Sravasya<k2>Sravasya<h>2
2. {%śravasya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%śravasyati,%} &c., to desire
fame or glory; to desire a sacrifice or oblation.
<LEND>
[Page1027-b+ 81]

<L>47431<pc>1027-b<k1>SravasyA<k2>SravasyA
{%Śravasyā,%}¦ f., Ved. desire of fame or glory; desire
of food.
<LEND>

<L>47432<pc>1027-b<k1>Sravasyu<k2>Sravasyu
{%Śravasyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desirous of fame or
that which deserves praise, eager for glory, desiring
wealth or treasures; desirous of food or of an obla-
tion.
<LEND>

<L>47433<pc>1027-b<k1>SravApya<k2>SravApya
{%Śravāpya, as,%}¦ m. an animal fit for sacrifice, sacri-
ficial animal.
<LEND>

<L>47434<pc>1027-b<k1>SravAyya<k2>SravAyya
{%Śravāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be praised, noto-
rious, well-known, (Sāy. {%= śravaṇīya%}); ({%as%}), m. an
animal fit for sacrifice; [cf. {%śravāpya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47435<pc>1027-b<k1>SravizWa<k2>SravizWa
{%Śraviṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ most famous; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a lunar asterism (placed twenty-fourth in the com-
mon list; it is also called Dhaniṣṭhā, q. v., and
corresponds to the four principal stars in the head of
the Dolphin); ({%as, ā, am%}), produced in or under
Śraviṣṭhā. {%—Śraviṣṭhā-ja, as, ā, am,%} born under
Śraviṣṭhā; ({%as%}), m. the planet Mercury.
<LEND>

<L>47436<pc>1027-b<k1>SravizWaka<k2>SravizWaka
{%Śraviṣṭhaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni, (see {%śra-%}
{%viṣṭha.%})
<LEND>

<L>47437<pc>1027-b<k1>Sravya<k2>Sravya
{%Śravya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be heard, worthy of being
listened to.
<LEND>

<L>47438<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAva<k2>SrAva<h>1
1. {%śrāva, as,%}¦ m. hearing, listening.
<LEND>

<L>47439<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvaka<k2>SrAvaka
{%Śrāvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ hearing, a hearer; ({%as%}),
m. a pupil, disciple; a particular class of Buddhist
saints or ascetics, (properly one who by adhering to
the teaching of the Buddha and practising the four
great truths becomes eventually qualified to be ranked
as an Arhat and to be addressed as Āyuṣ-mat;
eighty of the disciples of the great Buddha are called
Mahā-śrāvakas or Great Śrāvakas); a Bauddha or
Buddhist votary (in general); a heretic; a crow.
{%—Śrāvaka-vrata,%} N. of a Jaina treatise.
<LEND>

<L>47440<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvaRa<k2>SrAvaRa
{%Śrāvaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the ear or hearing,
audible; belonging to or produced under the asterism
Śravaṇā; ({%as%}), m. the month Śrāvaṇa (July-August);
a heretic, impostor [cf. {%śrāvaka%}]; N. of a Muni;
({%am%}), n. the act of causing to be heard; knowledge
derived from hearing; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant (com-
monly called Kaṭukī); ({%ī%}), f. the day of full moon
in the month Śrāvaṇa; N. of one of the domestic
sacrifices; a species of plant {%(= bhikṣu)%}. {%—Śrā-%}
{%vaṇa-kṛṣṇa-caturthī,%} f. the fourth day in the
dark half of the month Śrāvaṇa. {%—Śrāvaṇa-dvā-%}
{%daśī,%} f. the twelfth day of Śrāvaṇa. {%—Śrāvaṇadvā-%}
{%daśī-vrata, am,%} n. a religious observance on the
above day. {%—Śrāvaṇa-vidhi, is,%} m., N. of a Pari-
śiṣṭa of the Sāma-veda. {%—Śrāvaṇa-śukla-caturthī,%}
f. the fourth day in the light half of the month
Śrāvaṇa. {%—Śrāvaṇa-śukla-tṛtīyā,%} the third day in
the light half of the month Śrāvaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>47441<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvaRika<k2>SrAvaRika
{%Śrāvaṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to or produced in
the month Śrāvaṇa; ({%as%}), m. the month Śrāvaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>47442<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvaRIya<k2>SrAvaRIya
{%Śrāvaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to be heard,
to be declared or pronounced.
<LEND>

<L>47443<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvayat<k2>SrAvayat
{%Śrāvayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to be heard,
making famous, conferring honour. {%—Śrāvayat-%}
{%pati, is, is, i,%} Ved. causing the mighty to hear, i. e.
gaining the ear of the mighty gods; (Sāy.) conferring
honour on fathers, making ancestors celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>47444<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvayitavya<k2>SrAvayitavya
{%Śrāvayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made to be heard,
to be declared or made known.
<LEND>

<L>47445<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvayitvA<k2>SrAvayitvA
{%Śrāvayitvā,%}¦ ind. having caused to hear, having
made to be heard.
<LEND>

<L>47446<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvazWIya<k2>SrAvazWIya
{%Śrāvaṣṭhīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging
to the asterism Śravaṇā or (according to some) to
Śraviṣṭhā, produced in or under this asterism.
<LEND>

<L>47447<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvita<k2>SrAvita
{%Śrāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be heard, spoken,
told, related, narrated, read.
<LEND>

<L>47448<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvin<k2>SrAvin
{%Śrāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ hearing, a hearer.
<LEND>

<L>47449<pc>1027-b<k1>SrAvya<k2>SrAvya
{%Śrāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to be heard, to
be told or related or read; to be heard.
<LEND>

<L>47450<pc>1027-b<k1>Sruta<k2>Sruta
{%Śruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ heard, listened to; reported,
heard of; ascertained, understood; called; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of an enemy of Indra (Ved.); of a son of Dharma;
of a son of Bhagīratha; of a son of Upagu; of a
son of Kṛṣṇa; ({%am%}), n. the object of hearing;
that which was heard from the beginning, the Veda,
revelation, sacred knowledge, holy writ, &c. {%—Śruta-%}
{%ṛṣi, is, is, i,%} Ved. one by whom the Ṛṣis have
been heard, (Sāy. {%= śrutā ṛṣayo yena;%} cf. {%śru- %}
[Page1027-c+ 81]
{%tarṣi.%}) {%—Śruta-kakṣa, as,%} m., N. of a Vedic
Ṛṣi (author of the hymn Ṛg-veda VIII. 81).
{%—Śruta-karman, ā,%} m., N. of a son of Saha-deva.
{%—Śruta-kīrtti, is,%} f. ‘Veda-renown,’ fame of divine
science; ({%is, is, i%}), having renowned fame, cele-
brated, famous; ({%is%}), m. epithet of various persons;
a divine sage; a generous man, benefactor, donor;
({%is%}), f. a river; N. of the wife of Śatru-ghna; of
other women. {%—Śruta-kevalin, inas,%} m. pl. epithet
of a class of Jaina Arhats (of whom six are enume-
rated). {%—Śrutañ-jaya, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Śru-%}
{%ta-devā,%} f., N. of a daughter of Śūra and wife of
Vṛddha-śarman. {%—Śruta-devī,%} f. ‘goddess of learn-
ing,’ epithet of Sarasvatī. {%—Śruta-dhara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} recollecting or remembering what has been
heard, having or observing the Vedas; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a poet; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people (inhabiting
a division of Plaksha-dvīpa). {%—Śruta-prakāsa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} renowned for knowledge of the Vedas.
{%—Śruta-bandhu, us,%} m., N. of the author of
several hymns in the Ṛg-veda. {%—Śruta-bodha, as,%}
m., N. of a treatise on the most common Sanskrit
metres by a certain Kālidāsa. {%—Śrutarṣi (˚ta-%}
{%ṛṣi), is,%} m. a kind of secondary Ṛṣi, one by
whom the Vedic Ṛṣis have been heard; the son of
a Ṛṣi; a Ṛṣi of a particular order (as the author
of the Su-śruta). {%—1. śruta-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one
who has heard, hearing. {%—2. śruta-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessing or knowing the Veda, instructed in sacred
learning, pious; ({%ān%}), m., N. of a king. {%—Śruta-%}
{%vid, t,%} m. ‘knowing sacred revelation,’ N. of an
Ātreya (author of the hymn Ṛg-veda V. 62).
{%—Śruta-śīla, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Śruta-śravas,%}
{%ās,%} m., N. of a king; ({%ās%}), f., N. of a daughter of
Śūra. {%—Śrutaśravo-'nuja (˚vas-an˚), as,%} m. ‘born
after Śruta-śravas,’ the planet Saturn (said to be one
of the sons of Sūrya). {%—Śruta-śroṇī,%} f. a kind of
plant {%(= dravantī)%}. {%—Śruta-sena, as,%} m., N. of a
son of Parīkṣit. {%—Śruta-soma, as,%} m., N. of a
son of Bhīma. {%—Śrutādāna (˚ta-ād˚), am,%} n.
‘Veda-acceptation,’ citing the Vedas. {%—Śrutādhya-%}
{%yana-sampanna (˚ta-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} well read
in sacred science, conversant with the Vedas. {%—Śru-%}
{%tānvita (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} acquainted with or
conforming to the Vedas. {%—Śrutā-magha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having renowned treasures. {%—Śrutāyu%} or
{%śrutāyus (˚ta-āy˚), us,%} m., N. of a king of the
solar race descended from Kuśa, son of Rāma; of a
son of Purū-ravas; of another king: {%—Śrutārtha%}
{%(˚ta-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘heard-matter,’ any matter ascer-
tained by hearing, a fact verbally or orally communi-
cated.
<LEND>

<L>47451<pc>1027-c<k1>Srutarya<k2>Srutarya
{%Śrutarya, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of a man (protected
by the Aśvins).
<LEND>

<L>47452<pc>1027-c<k1>Srutarvan<k2>Srutarvan
{%Śrutarvan, ā,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47453<pc>1027-c<k1>Sruti<k2>Sruti
{%Śruti, is,%}¦ f. ‘audition,’ hearing; an ear; anything
heard, sound, oral account, report, rumour, intelli-
gence, news; that which was heard or revealed from
the beginning, revelation, the Veda (i. e. sound
eternally heard and so differing from {%smṛti%} or what
is only remembered and handed down by human
authors, see Manu II. 10; properly applied to works
considered to have been revealed by a deity, and
therefore only to the Mantra and Brāhmaṇa portion
of the Vedas, but often applied also to the Upaniṣads
and other Vedic works); any Vedic or sacred text,
({%iti śruteḥ,%} according to or because of such a {%śruti%}
or Vedic text); the hearing of a sound, a sound;
the diagonal of a tetragon or hypothenuse of a
triangle; (in music) a particular division of the
octave, a quarter tone or interval, (twenty-two of
these are enumerated, four constituting a major tone,
three a minor, and two a semitone; they are said
to be personified as nymphs); the constellation Śra-
vaṇā. {%—Śruti-kaṭa, as,%} m. penance, expiation; a
snake; (according to Śabda-k.) {%= prāñcalloha.%}
{%—Śruti-kaṭu, us, us, u,%} harsh to the ear, unme-
lodious; ({%us%}), m. a harsh or unmelodious sound,
cacophony (a fault in rhetoric). {%—Śruti-kathita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} mentioned in the Veda, taught or prescribed
by the Vedas. {%—Śruti-kīrtti, is,%} f., N. of a work.
[Page1028-a+ 80]
{%—Śruti-codana, am,%} n. ‘Veda-precept,’ holy pre-
cept or injunction, the doctrine of the Vedas. {%—Śruti-%}
{%jīvikā,%} f. a law-book or code of laws. {%—Śruti-tat-%}
{%para, as, ā, am,%} intent on hearing; intent on
studying the Veda. {%—Śruti-dvaidha, am,%} n. dis-
agreement or contradiction of any two passages in
the Vedas or of two Vedas. {%—Śruti-dhara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ascertaining or perceiving by the ear, hearing;
holding or observing the Vedas; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
poet; [cf. {%śruta-dhara.%}] {%—Śruti-nidarśana, am,%}
n. the evidence of revelation, testimony of the Veda.
{%—Śruti-prasādana, as, ī, am,%} gratifying the ear,
grateful to the ear. {%—Śruti-prāmāṇyatas,%} ind. on
the authority of the Veda, with the sanction of the
Veda. {%—Śruti-maṇḍala, am,%} n. ‘ear-circle,’ the
outer ear. {%—Śruti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of ears,
capable of hearing. {%—Śruti-mūla, am,%} n. the root of
the ear; the text of the Vedas. {%—Śruti-mūlaka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} founded on the Veda, springing from the
Veda. {%—Śruti-mṛgya, as, ā, am,%} to be sought by
hearing or by the Vedas (not by sight). {%—Śruti-var-%}
{%jita, as, ā, am,%} devoid of hearing, deaf; ignorant
or unread in the Vedas. {%—Śruti-vipratipanna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} dissenting from revelation, disregarding the
doctrine of the Veda. {%—Śruti-viṣaya, as,%} m. the
object of hearing (i. e. sound, see {%viṣaya%}); subject-
matter or doctrine of the Veda, any sacred matter or
ordinance; ({%as, ā, am%}), conversant with sacred
matters, familiar with the Veda. {%—Śruti-viṣaya-%}
{%guṇa, as, ā, am,%} ‘having the quality [sound] which
is the object of hearing or which is perceptible by
the ear,’ epithet of ether. {%—Śruti-vedha, as,%} m. the
piercing or boring of the ear. {%—Śruti-sphoṭā,%} f. a
kind of creeper {%(= karṇa-sphoṭā)%}. {%—Śruti-smṛti,%}
{%ī,%} f. du. the Veda and legal tradition, the Veda
and institutes of law. {%—Śruti-smṛti-viruddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} opposed to the Vedas and to tra-
dition or law. {%—Śruti-smṛti-vihita, as, ā, am,%}
enjoined by the Vedas and the law. {%—Śruti-smṛty-%}
{%udita, as, ā, am,%} declared or enjoined by the Veda
and law. {%—Śruty-anuprāsa, as,%} m. repetition of
sound, alliteration. {%—Śruty-ukta%} or {%śruty-udita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} said or enjoined by the Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>47454<pc>1028-a<k1>Srutin<k2>Srutin
{%Śrutin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hearing; obeying, observing;
having or possessing the Veda, following the Veda.
<LEND>

<L>47455<pc>1028-a<k1>SrutI<k2>SrutI
{%Śrutī,%}¦ f. {%= śruti.%}
<LEND>

<L>47456<pc>1028-a<k1>SrutkarRa<k2>SrutkarRa
{%Śrut-karṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. one who has hearing
ears, quick-hearing.
<LEND>

<L>47457<pc>1028-a<k1>Srutya<k2>Srutya
{%Śrutya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be heard, famous,
glorious.
<LEND>

<L>47458<pc>1028-a<k1>SrutvA<k2>SrutvA
{%Śrutvā,%}¦ ind. having heard or listened to, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47459<pc>1028-a<k1>SruSrutavat<k2>SruSrutavat
{%Śruśrutavat, ān, atī, at%}¦ (doubtful; said to be a
reduplicated form), one who has heard.
<LEND>

<L>47460<pc>1028-a<k1>Sruzwa<k2>Sruzwa
{%Śruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. (according to some)
heard, handed down, ({%śruṣṭe,%} according to tradition
or ordinance.)
<LEND>

<L>47461<pc>1028-a<k1>Sruzwi<k2>Sruzwi
{%Śruṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., Ved. hearing, listening to, audience;
help, assistance; a boon; prosperity, happiness,
abundance, (Sāy. {%= yajña-phala-rūpaṃ sukham,%}
Ṛg-veda I. 69, 4.) {%—Śruṣṭi-gu, us,%} m., N. of the
author of one of the Vālakhilya hymns. {%—Śruṣṭi-%}
{%mat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessing happiness, pros-
perous, happy, (Sāy. {%= sukha-vat.%})
<LEND>

<L>47462<pc>1028-a<k1>SruzwI<k2>SruzwI
{%Śruṣṭī,%}¦ ind. (according to some an old inst. or
dat. for {%śruṣṭyai%}), Ved. having heard, having
listened to, (Sāy. {%= śrutvā,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 23, 14);
‘as soon as heard,’ readily, quickly, in a moment,
(Sāy. {%= kṣipram;%} in Ṛg-veda II. 3, 9. {%śruṣṭī%} is
regarded as a nom. c. masc. and explained by {%kṣi-%}
{%pra-guṇaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>47463<pc>1028-a<k1>SruzwIvan<k2>SruzwIvan
{%Śruṣṭī-van, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. possessing happiness,
granting prosperity, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 45, 2. ex-
plains {%śruṣṭīvānaḥ%} by {%śruṣṭiḥ phalasya dānaṃ%}
{%tad-bhājaḥ;%} in Ṛg-veda I. 119, 1. {%śruṣṭīvānam%}
{%= kṣipraṃ sambhajamānam%} or {%sukhavantam;%}
{%śruṣṭīvarīḥ = sukhavatyaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda X. 30, 11);
listening to, helping (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>47464<pc>1028-a<k1>SrUyamARa<k2>SrUyamARa
{%Śrūyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being heard, heard.
{%—Śrūyamāṇa-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition
of being heard.
<LEND>
[Page1028-b+ 80]

<L>47465<pc>1028-b<k1>Srotavya<k2>Srotavya
{%Śrotavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be heard or listened to.
<LEND>

<L>47466<pc>1028-b<k1>Srotas<k2>Srotas<h>1
1. {%śrotas, as,%}¦ n. the ear; an organ of sense; the
trunk of an elephant (as his special organ). {%—Śrota-%}
{%āpanna, as,%} m., N. of one of the four orders of
Buddhist Āryas. {%—Śroto-randhra, am,%} n. an aper-
ture of the proboscis, a nostril.
<LEND>

<L>47467<pc>1028-b<k1>Srotu<k2>Srotu
{%Śrotu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. hearing, a hearer; re-
nowned. {%—Śrotu-rāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. having re-
nowned wealth or gifts.
<LEND>

<L>47468<pc>1028-b<k1>Srotf<k2>Srotf
{%Śrotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who hears, hearing, a
hearer; ({%tā%}), m. a pupil.
<LEND>

<L>47469<pc>1028-b<k1>Srotra<k2>Srotra
{%Śrotra, am,%}¦ n. the organ of hearing, ear; con-
versancy with the Veda or sacred revelation; the
Veda; [cf. Angl. Sax. <nsi>hleodhor.</nsi>] {%—Śrotra-padā-%}
{%nuga, as, ā, am,%} agreeable to the ear. {%—Śrotra-%}
{%peya, as, ā, am,%} to be imbibed by the ear, i. e. to
be heard respectfully. {%—Śrotra-bhid, t, t, t,%} splitting
the ears. {%—Śrotra-mūla, am,%} n. the root of the
ear. {%—Śrotra-sukha, as, ā, am,%} sounding agreeably,
melodious, musical. {%—Śrotrādi (˚ra-ādi), i,%} n.
‘the ear and the other senses,’ i. e. the five senses,
(see {%indriya.%})
<LEND>

<L>47470<pc>1028-b<k1>Srotriya<k2>Srotriya
{%Śrotriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ learned in the Veda, con-
versant with sacred revelation, teachable, docile, well-
behaved; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman versed in the study
of the Vedas, a theologian, divine; a Brāhman fol-
lowing a particular branch or school of the Vedas.
{%—Śrotriya-tā,%} f. conversancy with the Vedas, the
being a learned Brāhman. {%—Śrotriya-sva, am,%} n.
the property of a learned Brāhman, (Manu VIII.
149.)
<LEND>

<L>47471<pc>1028-b<k1>Sromata<k2>Sromata
{%Śromata%}¦ (according to Sāy. to be connected with
rt. 1. {%śru%}), Ved. fame, renown, (Sāy. {%śromatāya =%}
{%kīrttimattvāya,%} Ṛg-veda I. 182, 7; {%śromatebhiḥ%}
{%= śrotavyair yaśobhiḥ,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 19, 10; {%śro-%}
{%matena = śravaṇīyena puṃstvena,%} Ṛg-veda VIII.
66, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>47472<pc>1028-b<k1>SrozamARa<k2>SrozamARa
{%Śroṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. hearing, listening.
<LEND>

<L>47473<pc>1028-b<k1>SrOta<k2>SrOta
{%Śrauta, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to the ear or hearing;
relating or belonging to the Veda, prescribed by the
Vedas, founded on the Vedas; sacrificial; ({%am%}), n.
any observance ordained by the Vedas; preservation
of the sacred fire; the three sacred fires collectively,
(viz. {%gārhapatya, āhavanīya,%} and {%dakṣiṇa%}); ({%ī%}),
f. comparison expressed by a particle (?). {%—Śrauta-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. a Vedic rite. {%—Śrauta-paddhati, is,%}
f., N. of a work, (probably belonging to the Sāma-
veda.) {%—Śrauta-prāyaścitta, am,%} n., N. of a Pari-
śiṣṭa of the Sāma-veda. {%—Śrauta-śrava, as,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Śrauta-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of certain
Sūtras or Sūtra works based on Śruti or the Veda,
see {%sūtra,%} (ascribed to various authors, such as Āśva-
lāyana, Kātyāyana, Śāṅkhāyana, &c.) {%—Śrauta-%}
{%smārta-kriyā,%} f. any act conformable to law and
the Veda. {%—Śrauta-smārta-dharma, as,%} m. a duty
enjoined by law and the Veda. {%—Śrauta-homa-pa-%}
{%riśiṣṭa, am,%} n. a Pari-śiṣṭa of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>47474<pc>1028-b<k1>SrOtarza<k2>SrOtarza
{%Śrautarṣa, as,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Śrutarṣi,
a son of Śrutarṣi.
<LEND>

<L>47475<pc>1028-b<k1>SrOtra<k2>SrOtra
{%Śrautra, am,%}¦ n. the ear; that which relates to
the ear or hearing; conversancy with the Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>47476<pc>1028-b<k1>SrOzaw<k2>SrOzaw
{%Śrauṣaṭ,%}¦ ind. ‘may he, i. e. the god, hear us!’
an exclamation used in making an offering with fire
to the gods or departed spirits; [cf. {%vauṣaṭ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47477<pc>1028-b<k1>Sru<k2>Sru<h>2
{#Sru#} 2¦. {%śru%} (a less correct reading for rt.
{%sru,%} q. v.), cl. 1. P. {%śravati,%} &c., to flow,
go, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47478<pc>1028-b<k1>Srava<k2>Srava<h>2
2. {%śrava, as,%}¦ m. (for {%srava,%} q. v.), flowing,
oozing, dripping.
<LEND>

<L>47479<pc>1028-b<k1>SravaRa<k2>SravaRa<h>2
2. {%śravaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (for {%sravaṇa,%} q. v.), the act
of flowing, dripping, oozing.
<LEND>

<L>47480<pc>1028-b<k1>SrAva<k2>SrAva<h>2
2. {%śrāva, as,%}¦ m. (for {%srāva,%} q. v.), flowing, oozing,
dropping.
<LEND>

<L>47481<pc>1028-b<k1>Sruva<k2>Sruva
{%Śruva, as,%}¦ m. (for {%sruva,%} q. v.), a sacrificial ladle,
(according to some {%am,%} n.); a sacrifice, oblation;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of creeper or shrub {%(= mūrvā).%}
{%—Śruvā-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the Vikaṅkata tree.
<LEND>

<L>47482<pc>1028-b<k1>Srotas<k2>Srotas<h>2
2. {%śrotas, as,%}¦ n. (for {%srotas,%} q. v.), the current of
a stream. {%—Śroto-'ñjana, am,%} n. antimony, (for
{%sroto-'ñjana,%} q. v.)
<LEND>
[Page1028-c+ 75]

<L>47483<pc>1028-c<k1>SrugvAru<k2>SrugvAru
{#SrugvAru#}¦ {%śrugvāru, us,%} m. the plant Fla-
courtia Sapida ({%= vikaṅkata%}).
<LEND>

<L>47484<pc>1028-c<k1>SruGnikA<k2>SruGnikA
{#SruGnikA#}¦ {%śrughnikā,%} f. impure carbonate of
soda, natron, alkali.
<LEND>

<L>47485<pc>1028-c<k1>Sruz<k2>Sruz
{#Sruz#}¦ {%śruṣ,%} a form in Ved. assumed by rt.
1. {%śru%} (q. v.) in certain tenses and derivatives.
<LEND>

<L>47486<pc>1028-c<k1>Sruzwa<k2>Sruzwa
{%Śruṣṭa, śruṣṭi, śruṣṭī,%}¦ &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>47487<pc>1028-c<k1>SrU<k2>SrU
{#SrU#}¦ {%śrū, ūs,%} according to Vopa-deva XXVI.
75. connected with a rt. {%śriv%} for {%sriv.%}
<LEND>

<L>47488<pc>1028-c<k1>Srek<k2>Srek
{#Srek#}¦ {%śrek,%} another form of rt. {%srek,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>47489<pc>1028-c<k1>SrewI<k2>SrewI
{#SrewI#}¦ {%śreṭī,%} f. (perhaps connected with
{%śreṇī,%} cf. {%średhī%}), a particular numerical notation or
progression of figures in arithmetic.
<LEND>

<L>47490<pc>1028-c<k1>SreRi<k2>SreRi
{#SreRi#}¦ {%śreṇi, is,%} m. f. or {%śreṇī,%} f. (according
to Uṇādi-s. IV. 51. fr. rt. {%śri%}), a line, row, range;
a troop, multitude, number, quantity; a corporation
or company of artisans following the same business,
a guild or company of traders dealing in the same
articles; a bucket, baling vessel. {%—Śreṇi-dat (?) , an,%}
m. according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda X. 20, 3. {%śreṇi-%}
{%dan = abhīṣṭa-phala-samūha-pradaḥ%} or {%śatru-%}
{%bhyo jvāla-paṅkti-pradaḥ%}. {%—Śreṇi-mat, ān,%} m.
the commander or master of a company, chief of a
corporate body or guild. {%—Śreṇi-śas,%} ind. in rows
or lines; in troops or flocks. {%—Śreṇī-dharma, ās,%}
m. pl. the customs of trades or guilds, (Manu VIII.
41.) {%—Śreṇī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati, -bhavitum,%}
to arrange in line or in regular order, to be or be-
come a heap. {%—Śreṇī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} arranged in
rows, formed in lines; become or made a heap.
<LEND>

<L>47491<pc>1028-c<k1>SreRika<k2>SreRika
{%Śreṇika, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of the kings of Ma-
gadhā (said to have been contemporary with and
patron of Śākya-siṃha); ({%ā%}), f. a tent.
<LEND>

<L>47492<pc>1028-c<k1>SreDI<k2>SreDI
{#SreDI#}¦ {%średhī,%} f. [cf. {%śreṭī, śreṇī%}], any set or
succession of distinct things; (in arithmetic) pro-
gression; sequence. {%—Średhī-phala, am,%} n. the
sum of a progression. {%—Średhī-vyavahāra, as,%} m.
the ascertainment or determination of progressions.
<LEND>

<L>47493<pc>1028-c<k1>Sreyas<k2>Sreyas
{#Sreyas#}¦ {%śreyas, ān, asī, as%} (considered as
compar. of either {%śrī-mat%} or {%praśasya%}), better,
more excellent, superior, preferable; best, excellent,
most excellent; more fortunate, very fortunate, more
prosperous, very prosperous; most beloved; ({%as%}), ind.
well, most excellent, rather, ({%śreyas — na,%} rather — 
than); ({%as%}), n. virtue, moral merit; an act leading
to the chief temporal good; good fortune, auspicious-
ness, prosperity, bliss, final happiness or beatitude;
({%ān%}), m., N. of the eleventh Arhat, (see below);
epithet of the second Muhūrta; N. of the third
month (according to a particular reckoning); ({%asī%}),
f. a plant resembling pepper, Pothos Officinalis; the
shrub Cissampelos Hexandra; yellow myrobalan;
other plants {%(= pāṭhā; = rāsnā)%}. {%—Śreyaḥ-pari-%}
{%śrāma, as, ā, am,%} toiling after final emancipation.
{%—Śreyas-kara, as, ī, am,%} making better or su-
perior; effecting happiness, ensuring felicity, con-
ferring future felicity; auspicious, propitious. {%—Śre-%}
{%yas-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desiring final felicity, &c.
{%—Śreyas-tara, as, ā, am,%} very much better.
{%—Śreyas-tva, am,%} n. betterness, superiority; final
felicity, &c. {%—Śreyo-'rthin (˚yas-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%}
desirous of the good (of others), wishing well; seek-
ing happiness, desirous of felicity, seeking merit in
the performance of religious rites &c., ambitious.
<LEND>

<L>47494<pc>1028-c<k1>Sreyasa<k2>Sreyasa
{%Śreyasa%}¦ at the end of a comp., e. g. {%niḥ-śreyasa,%}
{%śvaḥ-śreyasa,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>47495<pc>1028-c<k1>SreyasitarA<k2>SreyasitarA
{%Śreyasitarā%}¦ or {%śreyasītarā,%} f. a more excellent
woman, (Pāṇ. VI. 3, 45.)
<LEND>

<L>47496<pc>1028-c<k1>SreyAMSa<k2>SreyAMSa
{%Śreyāṃśa, as,%}¦ m., N. of the eleventh Arhat of
the present Avasarpiṇī, (also written {%śreyāṃsa.%})
<LEND>

<L>47497<pc>1028-c<k1>SrezWa<k2>SrezWa
{%Śreṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ best (with gen. or loc., e. g.
{%teṣām%} or {%teṣu śreṣṭhaḥ,%} best of them), excel-
lent, most excellent, very eminent or illustrious, pre-
eminent, highest in rank, higher in rank; most
prosperous; oldest, senior; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman; a
[Page1029-a+ 73]
king; an epithet of Viṣṇu; of Kuvera; ({%ā%}), f. an
excellent woman; a kind of shrub ({%= sthala-pad-%}
{%minī%}); a root, {%= medā; (am),%} n. cow's milk.
{%—Śreṣṭha-kāṣṭha, am,%} n. the main pillar of
a house. {%—Śreṣṭha-tama, as, ā, am,%} the very
best, most excellent. {%—Śreṣṭha-tā,%} f. or {%śreṣ-%}
{%ṭha-tva, am,%} n. betterness, superiority, eminence,
excellence. {%—Śreṣṭha-bhāj, k, k, k,%} possessing the
best. {%—Śreṣṭha-vāc, k, k, k,%} pre-eminent in
speech, eloquent. {%—Śreṣṭha-śocis, is, is, is,%} Ved.
having the best splendor. {%—Śreṣṭhāmla (˚ṭha-%}
{%am˚), am,%} n. the fruit of the tamarind. {%—Śreṣṭhā-%}
{%śrama (˚ṭha-āś˚), as,%} m. ‘best order,’ one who
is in the best order, a householder (considered to
belong to the best of the four orders as supporting
the other three).
<LEND>

<L>47498<pc>1029-a<k1>SrezWin<k2>SrezWin
{%Śreṣṭhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ best, chief; ({%ī%}), m. an artist
eminent by birth, the head or chief of a company
following the same trade, a president or foreman of
a guild or corporation.
<LEND>

<L>47499<pc>1029-a<k1>SrEzWya<k2>SrEzWya
{%Śraiṣṭhya, am,%}¦ n. superiority, preference, super-
excellence, pre-eminence, superlativeness. {%—Śraiṣ-%}
{%ṭhya-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desiring superiority.
<LEND>

<L>47500<pc>1029-a<k1>SrE<k2>SrE
{#SrE#}¦ {%śrai,%} another form of rt. {%śrā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>47501<pc>1029-a<k1>SroR<k2>SroR
{#SroR#}¦ {%śroṇ%} (also written {%śloṇ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%śroṇati, śroṇitum,%} to collect, accumu-
late, heap together; to go, move (according to Yāska).
<LEND>

<L>47502<pc>1029-a<k1>SroRa<k2>SroRa
{#SroRa#}¦ {%śroṇa, as, ā, am%} (according to Uṇā-
di-s. III. 6. apparently fr. rt. 1. or 2. {%śru%}), lame, a
cripple; dressed, cooked, matured, (in this sense
probably for {%śrāṇa%}); ({%as%}), m. a kind of disease
[cf. 1. {%śravaṇa%}]; ({%ā%}), f. rice-gruel [cf. {%śrāṇa%}]; the
constellation Śravaṇā, (contracted fr. {%śravaṇā.%})
<LEND>

<L>47503<pc>1029-a<k1>SroRi<k2>SroRi
{%Śroṇi, is,%}¦ f. m. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 51. fr.
rt. 1. or 2. {%śru%}), the hip and loins, buttocks; a
road, way; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κλόνι-ς, κλόνιο-ν, κλονιστήρ,</lang>
Lat. <nsi>clûnis, clunaclum;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>szlauni-s;</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>slias,</nsi> ‘the thigh, the loins.’] {%—Śroṇi-taṭa, as,%} m.
the slope of the hips, (see {%taṭa.%}) {%—Śroṇi-phala%} or
{%śroṇi-phalaka, am,%} n. the hip and loins or the
hip only; the hip-bone (os ilium). {%—Śroṇi-varjam,%}
ind. except the hips. {%—Śroṇi-vimba, am,%} n. a
waist-band. {%—Śroṇi-sūtra, am,%} n. a string worn
round the loins; a sword-belt.
<LEND>

<L>47504<pc>1029-a<k1>SroRI<k2>SroRI
{%Śroṇī,%}¦ f. {%= śroṇi%} above; N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>47505<pc>1029-a<k1>SrotoYjana<k2>SrotoYjana
{#SrotoYjana#}¦ {%śroto-'ñjana.%} See under 2. {%śro-%}
{%tas,%} p. 1028.
<LEND>

<L>47506<pc>1029-a<k1>Srotra<k2>Srotra
{#Srotra#}¦ {%śrotra, śrauta,%} &c. See p. 1028.
<LEND>

<L>47507<pc>1029-a<k1>Sromata<k2>Sromata
{#Sromata#}¦ {%śromata, śroṣamāṇa,%} &c. See
p. 1028, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47508<pc>1029-a<k1>SrOzaw<k2>SrOzaw
{#SrOzaw#}¦ {%śrauṣaṭ.%} See p. 1028, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47509<pc>1029-a<k1>SrOzwin<k2>SrOzwin
{#SrOzwin#}¦ {%śrauṣṭin, ī,%} m. (fr. {%śruṣṭī = kṣi-%}
{%pra%}), Ved. having speed, quick, rapid, (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 48, 2. {%śrauṣṭī = kṣi-%}
{%pra-gāmy aśvaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>47510<pc>1029-a<k1>SryAhva<k2>SryAhva
{#SryAhva#}¦ {%śry-āhva.%} See under 2. {%śrī.%}
<LEND>

<L>47511<pc>1029-a<k1>SlakzRa<k2>SlakzRa
{#SlakzRa#}¦ {%ślakṣṇa as, ā, am%} (according to
Uṇādi-s. III. 19. fr. rt. {%śliṣ%}), small, fine, thin,
minute, slender, delicate; smooth, even, plain,
polished; beautiful, pleasing, charming, soft, gentle,
mild, amiable; honest, sincere, candid. {%—Ślakṣṇa-%}
{%tvac, k,%} m. smooth bark; ({%k%}), m. ‘having a smooth
bark,’ a kind of plant ({%= aśmantaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>47512<pc>1029-a<k1>SlakzRaka<k2>SlakzRaka
{%Ślakṣṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ smooth, even; beautiful,
pleasing; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of the Areca Catechu,
the Areca nut.
<LEND>

<L>47513<pc>1029-a<k1>SlakzRaya<k2>SlakzRaya
{%Ślakṣṇaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%ślakṣṇayati, -yitum,%} to
make thin or small.
<LEND>

<L>47514<pc>1029-a<k1>SlaNk<k2>SlaNk
{#SlaNk#}¦ {%ślaṅk%} (= rt. {%śraṅk,%} q. v.), cl. 1. A.
{%ślaṅkate, śaślaṅke, ślaṅkitum,%} to go,
move.
<LEND>

<L>47515<pc>1029-a<k1>SlaNg<k2>SlaNg
{#SlaNg#}¦ {%ślaṅg%} (= rt. {%śraṅg%}), cl. 1. P. {%ślaṅ-%}
{%gati,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>
[Page1029-b+ 76]

<L>47516<pc>1029-b<k1>SlaT<k2>SlaT
{#SlaT#}¦ {%ślath%} (apparently a later form of
rt. {%śrath,%} q. v.), cl. 1. 10. P. {%ślathati,%}
&c., {%ślathayati, -yitum,%} to be loose or relaxed or
flaccid, be unfastened; to be weak; to hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>47517<pc>1029-b<k1>SlaTa<k2>SlaTa
{%Ślatha, as, ā, am,%}¦ relaxed, loose, flaccid; untied,
unfastened; dishevelled (as hair). {%—Ślatha-ban-%}
{%dhana, as, ī, am,%} having the muscles relaxed.
{%—Ślatha-lambin, ī, inī, i,%} hanging loosely. {%—Śla-%}
{%thodyama (˚tha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} relaxing one's
efforts.
<LEND>

<L>47518<pc>1029-b<k1>SlaTat<k2>SlaTat
{%Ślathat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being loose or relaxed.
<LEND>

<L>47519<pc>1029-b<k1>SlavaRa<k2>SlavaRa
{#SlavaRa#}¦ {%ślavaṇa, as,%} m. {%= śravaṇa;%} [cf.
{%śloṇa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47520<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAK<k2>SlAK
{#SlAK#}¦ {%ślākh%} (= rt. {%śākh%}), cl. 1. P. {%ślā-%}
{%khati, ślākhitum,%} to pervade, pene-
trate, embrace.
<LEND>

<L>47521<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAG<k2>SlAG
{#SlAG#}¦ {%ślāgh,%} cl. 1. A. {%ślāghate%} (ep. also
P. {%-ti%}), {%śaślāghe, aślāghiṣṭa, ślāghi-%}
{%tum,%} to flatter, coax, wheedle (with dat.); to praise,
commend, applaud, celebrate, eulogise; to be proud
of, boast of (with inst.): Pass. {%ślāghyate,%} Aor.
{%aślāghi,%} to be praised or celebrated or magnified:
Caus. {%ślāghayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśaślāghat,%} to
approve, praise, celebrate, congratulate; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κρή-</lang>
<lang n="greek">γυον,</lang> probably <lang n="greek">κόλαξ:</lang> Hib. <nsi>sleigh,</nsi> ‘adoration;’
<nsi>sleachd,</nsi> ‘adoration;’ <nsi>sleachdaim,</nsi> ‘I adore.’]
<LEND>

<L>47522<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAGana<k2>SlAGana
{%Ślāghana, am,%}¦ n. the act of flattering, praising, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47523<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAGanIya<k2>SlAGanIya
{%Ślāghanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, praise-
worthy, laudable, commendable.
<LEND>

<L>47524<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAGamAna<k2>SlAGamAna
{%Ślāghamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ flattering, praising; con-
gratulating one's self, rejoicing.
<LEND>

<L>47525<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAGayitvA<k2>SlAGayitvA
{%Ślāghayitvā,%}¦ ind. having praised or applauded.
<LEND>

<L>47526<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAGA<k2>SlAGA
{%Ślāghā,%}¦ f. flattery, praise, commendation, pane-
gyric, eulogium; boasting; service, obedience; wish,
desire. {%—Ślāghā-vaha, as, ā, am,%} meriting praise.
<LEND>

<L>47527<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAGita<k2>SlAGita
{%Ślāghita, as, ā, am,%}¦ flattered, praised, commended.
<LEND>

<L>47528<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAGitvA<k2>SlAGitvA
{%Ślāghitvā,%}¦ ind. having flattered, having praised, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47529<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAGin<k2>SlAGin
{%Ślāghin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ flattering, praising, commend-
ing; desiring.
<LEND>

<L>47530<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAGya<k2>SlAGya
{%Ślāghya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised or commended,
praiseworthy, entitled to praise or veneration, venera-
ble, respectable, honourable.
<LEND>

<L>47531<pc>1029-b<k1>SlAGyamAna<k2>SlAGyamAna
{%Ślāghyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being praised, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47532<pc>1029-b<k1>Sliku<k2>Sliku
{#Sliku#}¦ {%śliku, us,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
I. 33. fr. rt. 2. {%śliṣ%}), a servant, slave, dependant;
a profligate or low person, libertine, debauchee; ({%u%}),
n. astronomy, astrology.
<LEND>

<L>47533<pc>1029-b<k1>Sliz<k2>Sliz<h>1
{#Sliz#} 1¦. {%śliṣ%} (= rt. 1. {%śriṣ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%śleṣati, śiśleṣa, śleṣitum,%} to burn,
consume by fire.
<LEND>

<L>47534<pc>1029-b<k1>Sleza<k2>Sleza<h>1
1. {%śleṣa, as,%}¦ m. burning.
<LEND>

<L>47535<pc>1029-b<k1>Sliz<k2>Sliz<h>2
{#Sliz#} 2¦. {%śliṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%śliṣyati%} (ep.
also A. {%-te%}), {%śiśleṣa, ślekṣyati,%}
{%aślikṣat%} (in the sense of ‘to embrace’), {%aśli-%}
{%ṣat%} (and according to some also {%aślaikṣīt%} in
other senses), {%śleṣṭum,%} to adhere, cling to, be
united or connected with; to embrace; to unite,
tie, join, connect: Pass. {%śliṣyate,%} Aor. {%aśleṣi,%} to
be joined or connected; to be implied or intimated;
cl. 10. P. or Caus. {%śleṣayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśi-%}
{%śliṣat,%} to cause to embrace; to embrace, connect:
Desid. {%śiślikṣati:%} Intens. {%śeśliṣyate, śeśleṣṭi;%}
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κλη-ΐς, κλείς, κλει-δός, κλεί-ω:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>clāvi-s, clau-d-o:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>sliuz-u:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>klju-</nsi>
<nsi>ci,</nsi> ‘a key;’ <nsi>kljucati se,</nsi> ‘to agree:’ Hib. <nsi>crios,</nsi> ‘a
belt, girdle.’]
<LEND>

<L>47536<pc>1029-b<k1>SlizA<k2>SlizA
{%Śliṣā,%}¦ f. clinging, embracing, an embrace.
<LEND>

<L>47537<pc>1029-b<k1>Slizwa<k2>Slizwa
{%Śliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ clung to, adhered to; touched
by; leaning on; embraced; connected so as to be sus-
ceptible of a double interpretation, (applied to a figure
of speech by which two objects are closely connected
and epithets applied to both in common), implied.
<LEND>

<L>47538<pc>1029-b<k1>Slizwi<k2>Slizwi
{%Śliṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. adherence, connection; embrace;
({%is%}), m., N. of a son of Dhruva.
<LEND>

<L>47539<pc>1029-b<k1>SlizwvA<k2>SlizwvA
{%Śliṣṭvā,%}¦ ind. having clung or adhered, having
embraced.
<LEND>
[Page1029-c+ 78]

<L>47540<pc>1029-c<k1>Slizyat<k2>Slizyat
{%Śliṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ clinging to, adhering to,
being in close contact with; embracing.
<LEND>

<L>47541<pc>1029-c<k1>SlizyamARa<k2>SlizyamARa
{%Śliṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being embraced, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47542<pc>1029-c<k1>Sleza<k2>Sleza<h>2
2. {%śleṣa, as,%}¦ m. adhering or clinging to; em-
bracing, an embrace; union, junction, contact, prox-
imity; association, society, presence; a figure of
rhetoric, connection of words so as to admit of a
double meaning, verbal equivocation, paronomasia,
pun, irony, implied meaning. {%—Śleṣa-bhittika, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} resting on or adhering to a wall, (said to mean
simply ‘resting on.’) {%—Śleṣārtha (˚ṣa-ar˚), as,%}
m. a meaning other than the literal one, a second
sense hidden in the obvious one, implied meaning.
<LEND>

<L>47543<pc>1029-c<k1>SlezaRa<k2>SlezaRa
{%Śleṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of adhering, embracing,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>47544<pc>1029-c<k1>SlezaRIya<k2>SlezaRIya
{%Śleṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be embraced, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47545<pc>1029-c<k1>Slezin<k2>Slezin
{%Śleṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ adhering, clinging to, embracing.
<LEND>

<L>47546<pc>1029-c<k1>Slezmaka<k2>Slezmaka
{%Śleṣmaka, as,%}¦ m. phlegm, the watery or phleg-
matic humor.
<LEND>

<L>47547<pc>1029-c<k1>SlezmaRa<k2>SlezmaRa
{%Śleṣmaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ phlegmatic; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of plant ({%= tarpaṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>47548<pc>1029-c<k1>Slezman<k2>Slezman
{%Śleṣman, ā,%}¦ m. phlegm, rheum, the phlegmatic
humor, (one of the three humors of the body; see
{%dhātu.%}) {%—Śleṣma-ghna, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} removing
phlegm; ({%ā%}), f. Arabian jasmine; a kind of tree
{%(= ketaka); (ī),%} f. Arabian jasmine; hogweed;
another plant ({%= jyotiṣmatī%}); the three spices {%(=%}
{%tri-kaṭu)%}. {%—Śleṣma-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced or
proceeding from phlegm. {%—Śleṣma-dhātu, us,%} m.
the phlegmatic humor. {%—Śleṣma-ha, as, ā, am,%}
removing phlegm; ({%as%}), m. a medicinal plant {%(=%}
{%kaṭ-phala)%}. {%—Śleṣmātisāra (˚ma-at˚), as,%} m.
dysentery or diarrhœa produced by vitiated phlegm.
{%—Śleṣmāntaka (˚ma-an˚), as,%} m. ‘destroying
phlegm,’ a kind of plant {%(= picchila, bahu-vāra).%}
{%—Śleṣmāśru (˚ma-aś˚), u,%} n. a tear consisting
of phlegmatic humor. {%—Śleṣmaujas (˚ma-oj˚),%}
{%as,%} n. the phlegmatic humor.
<LEND>

<L>47549<pc>1029-c<k1>Slezmala<k2>Slezmala
{%Śleṣmala, as, ā, am,%}¦ phlegmatic, abounding or
affected with phlegm, &c.; ({%as%}), m. the plant Cordia
Myxa or Latifolia.
<LEND>

<L>47550<pc>1029-c<k1>SlezmAta<k2>SlezmAta
{%Śleṣmāta, as,%}¦ m. a kind of tree, {%= śleṣmātaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>47551<pc>1029-c<k1>SlezmAtaka<k2>SlezmAtaka
{%Śleṣmātaka, as,%}¦ m. the tree Cordia Myxa. {%—Śle-%}
{%ṣmātaka-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of Cordia Myxa.
{%—Śleṣmātaka-vana, am,%} n. ‘forest of Śleṣmā-
taka trees,’ N. of a forest about Go-karṇa (where
Śiva is said to have been concealed in the form of a
stag).
<LEND>

<L>47552<pc>1029-c<k1>SlEzmika<k2>SlEzmika
{%Ślaiṣmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
phlegm, phlegmatic; producing phlegm.
<LEND>

<L>47553<pc>1029-c<k1>SlIpada<k2>SlIpada
{#SlIpada#}¦ {%ślīpada, am,%} n. (thought by some
to be fr. rt. 2. {%śliṣ + pada%}), morbid enlargement
of the leg, swelled leg, elephantiasis. {%—Ślīpada-pra-%}
{%bhava, as,%} m. ‘source of elephantiasis,’ the Mango
tree. {%—Ślīpadāpaha (˚da-ap˚), as,%} m. ‘removing or
curing elephantiasis,’ a kind of tree ({%= putra-jīva%}).
<LEND>

<L>47554<pc>1029-c<k1>SlIpadin<k2>SlIpadin
{%Ślīpadin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a swelled leg, club-
footed; ({%ī%}), m. a club-footed man.
<LEND>

<L>47555<pc>1029-c<k1>SlIla<k2>SlIla
{#SlIla#}¦ {%ślīla, as, ā, am%} (for {%śrīla%}), prosperous,
fortunate, affluent, happy.
<LEND>

<L>47556<pc>1029-c<k1>Slu<k2>Slu
{#Slu#}¦ {%ślu,%} one of the three technical terms for
grammatical elision classed with {%luk,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>47557<pc>1029-c<k1>Slok<k2>Slok
{#Slok#}¦ {%ślok%} (probably rather a Nom. fr.
{%śloka%} below), cl. 1. A. {%ślokate, śloki-%}
{%tum,%} to versify, compose or make verses, hymn or
praise in verse; to be put together or composed; to
acquire; to relinquish, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>47558<pc>1029-c<k1>Sloka<k2>Sloka
{%Śloka, as,%}¦ m. (probably connected with rt. 1.
{%śru;%} according to Rāmāyaṇa I. 2, 33. fr. {%śoka,%}
‘sorrow,’ the first Śloka having resulted from the
involuntary expression of Vālmīki's grief at be-
holding a bird killed by a fowler), praising or
hymning in verse, a hymn of praise; an object of
praise; celebrity, renown, fame, reputation; a par-
ticular kind of common epic metre (also called Anu-
ṣṭubh, consisting of four Pādas or quarter verses of
eight syllables each, or two lines of sixteen syllables
each; the following is the usual scheme applicable
[Page1030-a+ 74]
to both lines ....˘˘˘. | ....˘¯˘. , the
mark. denoting either long or short, and the sixth
syllable being either short or long, but if short, then
requiring the seventh to be short also, and if long,
then long); any verse or stanza; a proverb, saying;
{%= vāc%} (Naigh. I. 11). {%—Śloka-tā,%} f. or {%śloka-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. versification; celebrity in verse. {%—Śloka-%}
{%dvaya, am,%} n. a couple of Ślokas, two verses.
{%—Śloka-baddha, as, ā, am,%} composed in Ślokas.
{%—Śloka-mātra, am,%} n. a single Śloka.
<LEND>

<L>47559<pc>1030-a<k1>Slokaya<k2>Slokaya
{%Ślokaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%ślokayati, -yitum,%} to celebrate
in song.
<LEND>

<L>47560<pc>1030-a<k1>Slokin<k2>Slokin
{%Ślokin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. having hymns of praise,
receiving praise, praised, lauded.
<LEND>

<L>47561<pc>1030-a<k1>Slokya<k2>Slokya
{%Ślokya, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in hymns of praise, be-
longing to Ślokas.
<LEND>

<L>47562<pc>1030-a<k1>SloR<k2>SloR
{#SloR#}¦ {%śloṇ%} (also written {%śroṇ%}), cl. 1. P.
{%śloṇati, śloṇitum,%} to accumulate, col-
lect, assemble, heap together: Caus. {%śloṇayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Aor. {%aśuśloṇat.%}
<LEND>

<L>47563<pc>1030-a<k1>SloRa<k2>SloRa
{#SloRa#}¦ {%śloṇa, as,%} m. ({%= śroṇa;%} cf. {%a-śloṇa%}),
a lame man, cripple.
<LEND>

<L>47564<pc>1030-a<k1>SvaGnin<k2>SvaGnin
{#SvaGnin#}¦ {%śvaghnin.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47565<pc>1030-a<k1>SvaNk<k2>SvaNk
{#SvaNk#}¦ {%śvaṅk%} (also written {%svaṅk%}), cl. 1.
A. {%śvaṅkate, śaśvaṅke, śvaṅkitum,%} to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>47566<pc>1030-a<k1>SvaNg<k2>SvaNg
{#SvaNg#}¦ {%śvaṅg%} (also written {%śraṅg, svaṅg,%}
&c.; cf. rt. {%śvaṅk%}), cl. 1. P. {%śvaṅgati,%}
{%śvaṅgitum,%} to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>47567<pc>1030-a<k1>Svac<k2>Svac
{#Svac#}¦ {%śvac%} or {%śvañc%} (= rts. {%śañc, śvaj%}),
cl. 1. A. {%śvacate, śvañcate,%} &c., (Ved.
form {%śvañcayaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda X. 138, 2; {%śaśvacai,%}
see s. v.), to go, move; to gape, open, be opened,
be split.
<LEND>

<L>47568<pc>1030-a<k1>Svaj<k2>Svaj
{#Svaj#}¦ {%śvaj%} or {%śvañj%} (= rts. {%śvac, śañc%}), cl. 1.
A. {%śvajate, śvañjate,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>47569<pc>1030-a<k1>SvaYc<k2>SvaYc
{#SvaYc#}¦ {%śvañc.%} See above under rt. {%śvac.%}
<LEND>

<L>47570<pc>1030-a<k1>SvaW<k2>SvaW<h>1
{#SvaW#} 1¦. {%śvaṭh%} (= rt. 2. {%śaṭh%}), cl. 10. P.
{%śvaṭhayati, -yitum,%} to speak ill; (ac-
cording to some) to speak well or correctly; to be
accurate or true.
<LEND>

<L>47571<pc>1030-a<k1>SvaW<k2>SvaW<h>2
{#SvaW#} 2¦. {%śvaṭh%} or {%śvaṇṭh%} (= rts. 3. {%śaṭh,%}
{%svaṭh, saṭh%}), cl. 10. P. {%śvāṭhayati, śvaṇ-%}
{%ṭhayati,%} &c., {%-yitum,%} to finish, accomplish, adorn;
to leave unfinished or unornamented; to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>47572<pc>1030-a<k1>Svan<k2>Svan
{#Svan#}¦ {%śvan, ā,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s. I.
158. fr. rt. {%śvi,%} perhaps fr. a participial base {%śvant;%}
Nom. sing. du. pl. {%śvā, śvānau, śvānas;%} Acc. {%śvā-%}
{%nam, śvānau, śunas;%} Inst. {%śunā, śvabhyām,%} &c.,
Gram. 155. <nsi>a</nsi>), a dog, hound, cur; ({%śunī%}), f. a female
dog, bitch. {%Śvan%} becomes {%śvā%} for {%śva%} in some com-
pounds, see below; [cf. Zend <nsi>śpâ;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">κύ-ων,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κυνός</lang> ({%= śunas%}), <lang n="greek">ἁλ-κυών;</lang> Lat. <nsi>can-i-s</nsi> (for <nsi>cvan-</nsi>
<nsi>i-s</nsi>), <nsi>catulus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hun-d-s;</nsi> Lith. nom. <nsi>szu§,</nsi>
gen. <nsi>szuns;</nsi> Hib. nom. <nsi>cu,</nsi> gen. and pl. <nsi>coin;</nsi> Russ.
<nsi>sobaka</nsi> (for <nsi>shaka</nsi>); Pers. <nsi>sag.</nsi>] {%—Śva-kiṣkin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} Ved. (according to some) having the tail of
a dog, (Sāy. connects {%kiṣkin%} with {%kiṣku,%} ‘a staff,
thunderbolt,’ Atharva-veda VIII. 6, 6.) {%—Śva-krī-%}
{%ḍin, ī,%} m. one who sports with dogs, a dog-feeder
or trainer, a breeder of sporting dogs. {%—Śva-gaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. a pack or collection of dogs. {%—Śvagaṇika,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘one who has to do with packs of dogs,’ a
hunter; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. a dog-feeder; one who is drawn
by dogs. {%—Śva-gaṇin, ī, inī, i,%} having packs of
hounds. {%—Śva-graha, as,%} m. ‘dog-seizure,’ epithet
of a particular disease or the deity presiding over
it. {%—Śva-ghnī,%} see under {%śva-han%}. {%—Śva-cāṇ-%}
{%ḍāla, am,%} n. a dog and an outcast. {%—Śva-cillī,%} f.
a kind of pot-herb {%(= śunaka-cillī)%}. {%—Śva-jā-%}
{%ghanī,%} f. a dog's thigh, the haunch of a dog, (Manu
X. 108.) {%—Śva-daṃṣṭraka, as,%} m. a kind of
plant {%(= go-kṣura)%}. {%—Śva-daṃṣṭrā,%} f. a dog's
tooth; a kind of plant {%(= go-kṣura)%}. {%—Śva-dhūr- %}
[Page1030-b+ 80]
{%ta, as,%} m. ‘dog-rogue,’ a jackal. {%—Śva-nara, as,%}
m. a dog-like fellow, low fellow, currish or snappish
fellow. {%—Śva-niśa, am, ā,%} n. f. ‘dog-night,’ a night
on which dogs bark and howl. {%—Śva-pac, k,%} or {%śva-%}
{%paca, as, ā,%} m. f. ‘dog-cooking,’ a man or woman
of a low and degraded caste, (see {%śva-pāka%}); a
public executioner; a dog-feeder, dog-keeper; ({%ī%}), f.
a form of one of the Śaktis of Śiva. {%—Śva-pada,%}
{%am,%} n. a dog's foot; a mark like a dog's foot to be
branded on the forehead of a thief. {%—Śva-pāka, as,%}
m. ‘dog-cooking,’ a man of a degraded and outcast
tribe (described as son of an Ugra woman by a
Kṣatriya, and classed with the Caṇḍāla, q. v.; he
is required to live outside towns, to eat his food in
broken vessels, to wear the clothes of the dead, and
to be excluded from all intercourse with other tribes;
he can possess no other property than asses and dogs,
and his only office is to act as public executioner or
to carry out the bodies of those who die without
kindred); ({%ī%}), f. a woman of the above low or out-
cast tribe. {%—Śva-phala, am,%} n. the lime or common
citron. {%—Śva-phalka, as,%} m., N. of the son of
Pṛśni (or according to others of Vṛṣṇi; he was
husband of Gāndinī, by whom he had a son named
Akrūra). {%—Śva-bhīru, us,%} m. ‘dog-fearing,’ a jackal.
{%—Śva-bhojana, as,%} m. ‘having dogs for food,’ N.
of a Naraka. {%—Śva-yātu, us,%} m., Ved. a demon in
the shape of a dog. {%—Śva-yūthya, am,%} n. a number or
pack of dogs. {%—Śva-rūpa-dhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} wearing
or having the form of a dog. {%—1. śva-vat, ān,%} m.
possessing or keeping a dog, a dog-feeder, dog-
trainer. {%—2. śva-vat,%} ind. like a dog, cur-like.
{%—Śva-vṛtti, is,%} f. the life of a dog; condition of
a dog; service, servitude (which a Brāhman ought
not to engage in). {%—Śva-vyāghra, as,%} m. a beast
of prey, a tiger; the hunting leopard or Chīta.
{%—Śva-suta, as,%} m. the plant Conyza Aspera. {%—Śva-%}
{%spṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} touched by a dog, defiled.
{%—Śva-hata, as, ā, am,%} killed by a dog, killed by
dogs. {%—Śva-han, ā, ghnī, a,%} Ved. one who kills
with dogs; ({%ā%}), m. a hunter; ({%ghnī%}), f. the wife
of a hunter. {%—Śvā-karṇa, as,%} m. a dog's ear.
{%—Śvā-danta, as,%} m. ({%śvā%} for {%śva%}), a dog's tooth.
{%—Śvā-pada, as,%} m. a beast of prey, wild beast; a
tiger; ({%as, ī, am%}), relating or belonging to a wild
beast, ferocious, savage, (in this sense properly an
adj. fr. {%śvā-pada,%} and therefore to be written
without a hyphen.) {%—Śvāpada-sevita, as, ā, am,%}
frequented or infested by wild beasts. {%—Śvāpadā-%}
{%carita (˚da-āc˚), as, ā, am,%} overrun or infested by
wild beasts. {%—Śvāpadānusaraṇa (˚da-an˚), am,%}
n. the pursuit or chase after a wild animal. {%—Śvā-%}
{%puccha, as, am,%} m. n. a dog's tail. {%—Śvāvic-%}
{%charaṇa, am,%} n. (i. e. {%śvā-vidh,%} see below, {%+ śara-%}
{%ṇa%}), the lair or resting-place of a porcupine, (a
porcupine's hole has always two or more entrances.)
{%—Śvā-vidh, t,%} m. ({%śvā%} for {%śva%}), a porcupine, hedge-
hog. {%—Śvāśva (śva-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘having a dog
for a horse,’ epithet of Bhairava (or Śiva in a ter-
rific form, sometimes represented as mounted on
a dog).
<LEND>

<L>47573<pc>1030-b<k1>Sva<k2>Sva
{%Śva%}¦ at the end of comps. {%= śvan%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47574<pc>1030-b<k1>SvaGnin<k2>SvaGnin
{%Śvaghnin, ī,%}¦ m. (according to some {%śva%} is for
{%sva,%} and the word is thought to mean ‘one who
destroys his own,’ others connect it with {%śva-han%}),
Ved. a gamester, (Sāy. {%= devana-śīla.%})
<LEND>

<L>47575<pc>1030-b<k1>SvAgaRika<k2>SvAgaRika
{%Śvāgaṇika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%śva-gaṇa%}), one who has
to do with packs of dogs, a hunter; ({%as, ī%}), m. f.
one who lives by feeding or keeping dogs, a dog-
keeper; one who is drawn by dogs.
<LEND>

<L>47576<pc>1030-b<k1>SvAna<k2>SvAna
{%Śvāna, as,%}¦ m. a dog; the wind, (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 161, 13. {%śvānam = antarikṣe%}
{%śvasantaṃ vāyum%}); ({%ī%}), f. a female dog, bitch.
{%—Śvāna-cillikā,%} f. a kind of pot-herb. {%—Śvāna-%}
{%nidrā,%} f. a dog's sleep; light slumber. {%—Śvāna-%}
{%vaikharī,%} f. ‘dog's speech,’ a term for angry snarling
on trifling occasions. {%—Śvānocchiṣṭa (˚na-uc˚),%}
{%am,%} n. anything left by a dog.
<LEND>

<L>47577<pc>1030-b<k1>SvaBr<k2>SvaBr
{#SvaBr#}¦ {%śvabhr%} [cf. rt. {%śvart%}], cl. 10. P. {%śva-%}
{%bhrayati, -yitum,%} to go, move; to live
[Page1030-c+ 75]
in misery (in a hole?); to break, pierce, bore, make
a hole.
<LEND>

<L>47578<pc>1030-c<k1>SvaBra<k2>SvaBra
{%Śvabhra, am,%}¦ n. a hole, gap, chasm; a den.
<LEND>

<L>47579<pc>1030-c<k1>SvayaTu<k2>SvayaTu
{#SvayaTu#}¦ {%śvayathu, śvayīci.%} See under rt.
{%śvi.%}
<LEND>

<L>47580<pc>1030-c<k1>Svart<k2>Svart
{#Svart#}¦ {%śvart%} (also written {%svart;%} cf. rt.
{%śvabhr%}), cl. 10. P. {%śvartayati,%} &c., {%-yi-%}
{%tum,%} to go, move; to live in misery or distress.
<LEND>

<L>47581<pc>1030-c<k1>Sval<k2>Sval
{#Sval#}¦ {%śval%} or {%śvall,%} cl. 1. P. {%śvalati%} or
{%śvallati, śaśvāla%} or {%śaśvalla, śvalitum%}
or {%śvallitum,%} to go quickly, run.
<LEND>

<L>47582<pc>1030-c<k1>Svalk<k2>Svalk
{#Svalk#}¦ {%śvalk%} [cf. rt. {%śulk%}], cl. 10. P. {%śval-%}
{%kayati, -yitum,%} to tell, narrate.
<LEND>

<L>47583<pc>1030-c<k1>Svall<k2>Svall
{#Svall#}¦ {%śvall%} = rt. {%śval%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47584<pc>1030-c<k1>SvaSura<k2>SvaSura
{#SvaSura#}¦ {%śvaśura, as,%} m. (perhaps for original
{%sva-śura,%} see {%śura;%} in Uṇādi-s. I. 45. said to be
fr. rt. 1. {%aś%} with {%śu%} for {%āśu%} prefixed), a father-in-
law, a wife's or husband's father; one to be treated
as a father-in-law, a venerable man; a proper N.;
({%au%}), m. du. a father and mother-in-law; [cf. Zend
<nsi>qaśura;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἑκυρό-ς</lang> for <lang n="greek">σϝεκυρό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>socer</nsi>
for <nsi>svecer;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>svaihra;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>svehur;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>sweger, sweor;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>svekru;</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>szeszura-s;</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>cwegrwn.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>47585<pc>1030-c<k1>SvaSuraka<k2>SvaSuraka
{%Śvaśuraka, as,%}¦ m. a father-in-law.
<LEND>

<L>47586<pc>1030-c<k1>SvaSurya<k2>SvaSurya
{%Śvaśurya, as,%}¦ m. a brother-in-law, wife's brother,
husband's brother; a husband's younger brother.
<LEND>

<L>47587<pc>1030-c<k1>SvaSrU<k2>SvaSrU
{%Śvaśrū, ūs,%}¦ f. a mother-in-law; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔκυρα;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>socrus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>svaihrô;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>suigar;</nsi>
Cambro-Brit. <nsi>çwegyr;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>svekruvi</nsi> or <nsi>svekry;</nsi>
perhaps Lith. <nsi>u§szwe†.</nsi>] {%—Śvaśrū-śvaśura, au,%} m.
du. mother and father-in-law.
<LEND>

<L>47588<pc>1030-c<k1>Svas<k2>Svas<h>1
{#Svas#} 1¦. {%śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%śvasiti,%} (also ap-
parently cl. 1. P. A. {%śvasati, -te,%} in certain
forms and according to a various reading in Naigh.
II. 19), Impf. {%aśvasīt%} or {%aśvasat%} (Pāṇ. VII. 3, 98,
99, cf. rt. 1. {%rud%}), Pot. {%śvaset%} (cl. 1), Impv. {%śva-%}
{%situ%} (or {%śvasatu,%} 2nd pl. A. {%śvasadhvam%}), {%śa-%}
{%śvāsa, śvasiṣyati, aśvasīt, śvasitum,%} to breathe,
respire, draw breath, live, pant, puff, sigh; to hiss,
snort; to strike, kill, (enumerated among the {%vadha-%}
{%karmāṇaḥ%} in Naigh. II. 19): Caus. {%śvāsayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%aśiśvasat,%} to cause to breathe easily,
to refresh: Desid. {%śiśvasiṣati:%} Intens. {%śāśvasyate,%}
{%śāśvasti,%} to breathe frequently, pant; [cf. Lat. <nsi>queri,</nsi>
<nsi>ques-tus;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hweosan,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>hysian,</nsi>
<nsi>hyst, gist.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>47589<pc>1030-c<k1>Svasat<k2>Svasat
{%Śvasat, an, atī%}¦ (ep. also {%antī%}), {%at,%} breathing,
sighing.
<LEND>

<L>47590<pc>1030-c<k1>SvasaTa<k2>SvasaTa
{%Śvasatha,%}¦ Ved. breathing; hissing; snorting.
<LEND>

<L>47591<pc>1030-c<k1>Svasana<k2>Svasana
{%Śvasana, as,%}¦ m. air, wind; epithet of a demon
of drought vanquished by Indra [cf. {%śuṣṇa%}]; the
thorny plant Vangueria Spinosa; ({%am%}), n. breathing,
respiration, breath; sighing. {%—Śvasanāsana (˚na-%}
{%as˚), as,%} m. ‘air-eater, breath-eater,’ a snake, serpent.
{%—Śvasaneśvara (˚na-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘breath-lord,’
the tree Pentaptera Arjuna. {%—Śvasanotsuka (˚na-%}
{%ut˚), as,%} m. ‘eager for air’ or ‘fond of hissing,’ a
snake. {%—Śvasanormi (˚na-ūr˚), is,%} m. f. a wave
or gust of wind.
<LEND>

<L>47592<pc>1030-c<k1>SvasamAna<k2>SvasamAna
{%Śvasamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ breathing; panting,
snorting, hissing.
<LEND>

<L>47593<pc>1030-c<k1>Svasita<k2>Svasita
{%Śvasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ breathed, sighed; breathing,
sighing; ({%am%}), n. breathing, breath, respiration,
sighing, a sigh.
<LEND>

<L>47594<pc>1030-c<k1>SvasIvat<k2>SvasIvat
{%Śvasī-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. possessed of breath,
vivifying, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 140, 10.
{%śvasīvān = śvasana-vān jvālābhiś ceṣṭā-vān%}
{%prāṇana-vān vā.%})
<LEND>

<L>47595<pc>1030-c<k1>Svasuna<k2>Svasuna
{%Śvasuna, as,%}¦ m. a kind of plant ({%= kṣata-%}
{%ghna%}).
<LEND>

<L>47596<pc>1030-c<k1>SvAsa<k2>SvAsa
{%Śvāsa, as,%}¦ m. breathing, breath, inspiration, re-
spiration; sighing, a sigh; air, wind; affection of
the breath, hard breathing, asthma. {%—Śvāsa-kāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘breath-cough,’ asthma. {%—Śvāsa-kuṭhāra, as,%}
[Page1031-a+ 75]
m. a particular drug used as a remedy for asthma.
{%—Śvāsa-tā,%} f. breathing, respiration, aspiration.
{%—Śvāsa-praśvāsa-dhāraṇa, am,%} n. suppression or
suspension of inspiration and expiration ({%= prāṇā-%}
{%yāma,%} q. v.). {%—Śvāsa-rodha, as,%} m. an obstruction
of the breath. {%—Śvāsa-hikkā,%} f. a kind of hiccough.
{%—Śvāsa-heti, is,%} f. ‘cure for hard breathing,’ sleepi-
ness, sleep. {%—Śvāsāri (˚sa-ari), is,%} m. ‘breath-
enemy,’ a kind of plant {%(= puṣkara-mūla)%}. {%—Śvā-%}
{%socchvāsa (˚sa-uc˚), au,%} m. du. inspiration and ex-
piration, respiration.
<LEND>

<L>47597<pc>1031-a<k1>SvAsita<k2>SvAsita
{%Śvāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to breathe, refreshed,
invigorated.
<LEND>

<L>47598<pc>1031-a<k1>SvAsin<k2>SvAsin
{%Śvāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ breathing, respiring; ({%ī%}), m.
air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>47599<pc>1031-a<k1>Svas<k2>Svas<h>2
{#Svas#} 2¦. {%śvas,%} ind. (according to some con-
nected with a lost rt. {%śvi%} in {%śvit,%} ‘to be white,’
and originally denoting ‘the morrow's dawn’), to-
morrow; future, (at the beginning of a comp.);
future happiness or fortune, (apparently used in this
sense at the beginning of certain comps.); a particle
implying auspiciousness; [cf. Lat. <nsi>cras.</nsi>] {%—Śvaḥ-%}
{%śreyasa, as, ā, am,%} ‘happy in the future,’ happy,
prosperous; ({%am%}), n. happiness, prosperity; Brahma,
the Supreme Spirit; ({%am%}), ind. happy, well, right.
{%—Śvaḥ-sutyā,%} f., Ved. to-morrow's preparation of
the Soma. {%—Śvo-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being to-morrow;
({%e%}), ind. on its being to-morrow. {%—Śvo-vasīya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘happy for all future time,’ auspicious, fortunate;
({%am%}), n. happiness. {%—Śvo-vasīyas, ān, asī, as,%}
fortunate, prosperous, auspicious. {%—Śvo-vasīyasa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fortunate, auspicious; ({%am%}), n. auspicious-
ness, good fortune. {%—Śvo-vasyasa, am,%} n., Ved.,
N. of Brahma.
<LEND>

<L>47600<pc>1031-a<k1>Svastana<k2>Svastana
{%Śvastana, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the morrow,
what will be to-morrow, future; ({%am%}), n. the future
[cf. Lat. <nsi>crastinus</nsi>]; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%vibhakti,%} a gram-
matical term for the personal terminations of the first
future.
<LEND>

<L>47601<pc>1031-a<k1>Svastya<k2>Svastya
{%Śvastya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the morrow,
what will be to-morrow, future.
<LEND>

<L>47602<pc>1031-a<k1>SvAgaRika<k2>SvAgaRika
{#SvAgaRika#}¦ {%śvāgaṇika.%} See p. 1030, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47603<pc>1031-a<k1>SvAtra<k2>SvAtra<h>1
{#SvAtra#} 1¦. {%śvātra, as, ā, am%} (probably fr. rt.
{%śvi;%} cf. {%śavas, śiva%}), Ved. increasing, powerful,
strong, flourishing, blooming (according to some);
quick, swift, (Sāy. {%= kṣipra-dharmaka,%} Ṛg-veda
X. 46, 7); ({%am%}), ind. quickly, (Sāy. {%= kṣipram%});
({%am%}), n. prosperity, riches, wealth. {%—Śvātra-bhāj, k,%}
{%k, k,%} Ved. wealth-associated, endowed with riches.
<LEND>

<L>47604<pc>1031-a<k1>SvAtra<k2>SvAtra<h>2
2. {%śvātra,%}¦ Nom. P. {%śvātrati,%} &c., Ved. to go,
hasten, (enumerated among the {%gati-karmāṇaḥ%} in
Naigh. II. 14.)
<LEND>

<L>47605<pc>1031-a<k1>SvAtrya<k2>SvAtrya
{%Śvātrya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. causing prosperity or
happiness, (Sāy. {%= sukhāvaha%}); going quickly, (Sāy.
{%= kṣipra-gamanārha.%})
<LEND>

<L>47606<pc>1031-a<k1>SvAna<k2>SvAna
{#SvAna#}¦ {%śvāna,%} &c. See p. 1030, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47607<pc>1031-a<k1>SvAnta<k2>SvAnta
{#SvAnta#}¦ {%śvānta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. wearied;
placid, (Sāy. {%= śrānta%} or {%śānta,%} Ṛg-veda I. 145,
4.)
<LEND>

<L>47608<pc>1031-a<k1>SvApada<k2>SvApada
{#SvApada#}¦ {%śvā-pada, śvā-vidh,%} &c. See under
{%śvan.%}
<LEND>

<L>47609<pc>1031-a<k1>SvASuri<k2>SvASuri
{#SvASuri#}¦ {%śvāśuri, is,%} m. (fr. {%śvaśura%}), a
patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>47610<pc>1031-a<k1>Svi<k2>Svi
{#Svi#}¦ {%śvi%} (this rt. assumes the form {%śu,%}
q. v., in some of its tenses and derivatives;
cf. rt. {%śav%}), cl. 1. P. {%śvayati, śuśāva%} or {%śiśvāya%}
(2nd sing. {%śuśavitha%} or {%śiśvayitha,%} 3rd du. {%śuśu-%}
{%vatus%} or {%śiśviyatus%}), {%śvayiṣyati, aśvayīt%} or
{%aśvat%} or {%aśiśviyat,%} Prec. {%śūyāt, śvayitum,%} to
swell, increase, grow; to thrive; to appear (Ved.,
see {%vi-śvi,%} referred by some to rt. {%śvit%}); to go, ap-
proach: Pass. {%śūyate,%} Aor. {%aśvāyi:%} Caus. {%śvāya-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aśūśavat%} or {%aśiśvayat,%} (accord-
ing to others also {%aśīśavat%}): Desid. of Caus. {%śuśā-%}
{%vayiṣati%} or {%śiśvāyayiṣati,%} to cause to swell or
[Page1031-b+ 79]
grow or be prosperous: Desid. {%śiśvayiṣati:%} Intens.
{%śeśvīyate, śośūyate, śeśvayīti, śeśveti,%} to swell
much; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κυ-έ-ω, κύ-ος, κῦ-μα, κύ-η-μα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κύ-αρ, κύ-τ-ος, κοῖ-λο-ς, κοιλ-ία, καυλό-ς, κύ-λο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐγ-κισσάω, κίσσα, κύαμος, κύαθος, κῶνος, κηκίς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κίκυς,</lang> (probably also) <lang n="greek">κίων, κίω, κινέω,</lang> perhaps also
<lang n="greek">κό-μη</lang> (for <lang n="greek">κύ-μη</lang>): Lat. <nsi>in-ci-ens, cu-mu-lu-s,</nsi>
<nsi>cavu-s, cau-li-s, cau-lœ, cœlu-m, ciliu-m, super-</nsi>
<nsi>cili-um, cuneus, crescere; coma:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>us-hul-</nsi>
<nsi>on, hul-undi:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>hol,</nsi> (according to some)
<nsi>wī-t,</nsi> ‘wide’ ({%= śvita%}): Angl. Sax. <nsi>hol:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>cin-</nsi>
<nsi>neas, cinneachdin,</nsi> ‘growth, increase.’]
<LEND>

<L>47611<pc>1031-b<k1>SUti<k2>SUti
{%Śūti, is,%}¦ f. swelling, increasing.
<LEND>

<L>47612<pc>1031-b<k1>SUna<k2>SUna
{%Śūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ swollen, &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>47613<pc>1031-b<k1>SUyamana<k2>SUyamana
{%Śūyamana, as, ā, am,%}¦ being swollen, swelling,
enlarging, expanding.
<LEND>

<L>47614<pc>1031-b<k1>SeSvIyamAna<k2>SeSvIyamAna
{%Śeśvīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. swelling or in-
creasing excessively, enlarging, expanding.
<LEND>

<L>47615<pc>1031-b<k1>Svaya<k2>Svaya
{%Śvaya, as,%}¦ m. swelling, increase.
<LEND>

<L>47616<pc>1031-b<k1>SvayaTu<k2>SvayaTu
{%Śvayathu, us,%}¦ m. swelling, intumescence. {%—Śvaya-%}
{%thu-cikitsā,%} f. the cure or treatment of swellings, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47617<pc>1031-b<k1>Svayana<k2>Svayana
{%Śvayana, am,%}¦ n. swelling, intumescence.
<LEND>

<L>47618<pc>1031-b<k1>SvayitvA<k2>SvayitvA
{%Śvayitvā,%}¦ ind. having swelled or increased.
<LEND>

<L>47619<pc>1031-b<k1>SvayIci<k2>SvayIci
{%Śvayīci, is,%}¦ f. sickness, disease.
<LEND>

<L>47620<pc>1031-b<k1>Svikna<k2>Svikna
{#Svikna#}¦ {%śvikna, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a race; [cf.
{%śvaikna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47621<pc>1031-b<k1>Svit<k2>Svit
{#Svit#}¦ {%śvit%} (perhaps a kind of Nom.
based on a lost rt. {%śvi,%} cf. Zend <nsi>śpi-</nsi>
{%tama,%} &c.), cl. 1. A. {%śvetate%} (Ved. also P. {%-ti%}),
{%śiśvite, śvetiṣyate, aśvetiṣṭa, aśvitat, śvetitum,%}
to be or become white, (according to Vopa-deva
XXI. 15. {%śvetayati = śvetāśvam ācaṣṭe%}); [cf.
Lith. <nsi>swe†ciu</nsi> for <nsi>swetiu,</nsi> ‘I shine;’ Inf. <nsi>swe†sti</nsi> for
<nsi>swe†t-ti,</nsi> (perhaps also) <nsi>swe†ta-s,</nsi> ‘the world;’ <nsi>kaiciu</nsi>
for <nsi>kaitiu, kaitinu,</nsi> ‘I make hot;’ <nsi>kais-tu</nsi> for
<nsi>kait-tu,</nsi> ‘I become warm;’ <nsi>kaitau:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>svit-a-ti,</nsi>
‘to become light;’ <nsi>swjet,</nsi> ‘light, the world.’]
<LEND>

<L>47622<pc>1031-b<k1>Svita<k2>Svita
{%Śvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ white; ({%am%}), n. whiteness
(according to Sāy.).
<LEND>

<L>47623<pc>1031-b<k1>SvitAna<k2>SvitAna
{%Śvitāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being white, white-
coloured, (Sāy. {%= śvetamāna, śveta-varṇa,%} Ṛg-
veda VI. 6, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>47624<pc>1031-b<k1>Sviti<k2>Sviti
{%Śviti,%}¦ whiteness, a white colour (according to
Sāy.). {%—Śvity-añc, aṅ, -tīcī, ak,%} Ved. going to
whiteness, becoming white, white-coloured, fair-com-
plexioned, white, (Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 83, 8.
{%śvityañcaḥ = śvitaṃ śvaityaṃ nairmalyam añ-%}
{%canto gacchantaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>47625<pc>1031-b<k1>Svitta<k2>Svitta
{%Śvitta, as, ā, am,%}¦ see Pāṇ. VII. 2, 16, 17.
<LEND>

<L>47626<pc>1031-b<k1>Svitna<k2>Svitna
{%Śvitna,%}¦ white (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I.
100, 18).
<LEND>

<L>47627<pc>1031-b<k1>Svitnya<k2>Svitnya
{%Śvitnya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. white, white-coloured,
fair-complexioned (said of the winds or Maruts ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 100, 18; but accord-
ing to some more probably referring to the fair-
coloured worshippers of Indra as opposed to the
darker aborigines of India).
<LEND>

<L>47628<pc>1031-b<k1>Svitya<k2>Svitya
{%Śvitya, as, ā, am,%}¦ white, white-coloured.
<LEND>

<L>47629<pc>1031-b<k1>Svitra<k2>Svitra
{%Śvitra, am,%}¦ n. morbid whiteness of the skin,
white leprosy, vitiligo; {%= antarikṣa%} (Ved., cf.
{%śvaitreya%}); ({%ā%}), f. a proper N. {%—Śvitra-ghnī,%} f.
‘removing whiteness of the skin,’ the plant Tragia
Involucrata ({%= pīta-parṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>47630<pc>1031-b<k1>Svitrin<k2>Svitrin
{%Śvitrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ affected with whiteness of the
skin or leprosy, leprous; ({%ī%}), m. a leper.
<LEND>

<L>47631<pc>1031-b<k1>Svitrya<k2>Svitrya
{%Śvitrya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a son of Śvitrā.
<LEND>

<L>47632<pc>1031-b<k1>Sveta<k2>Sveta
{%Śveta, as, ā%}¦ or {%śvenī, am,%} white, dressed in
white; ({%as%}), m. white (the colour); the planet Venus
or its regent Śukra; the sixth range of mountains
dividing the known continent, the white mountains
separating the Varṣas of Hiraṇmaya and Ramyaka;
one of the minor Dvīpas or divisions of the world,
(see {%śveta-dvīpa%}); a white cloud; cumin seed; a
conch-shell; N. of a particular Avatāra of Śiva; of
a manifestation of Viṣṇu in his Varāha incarnation
(worshipped in a particular part of India); N. of one
of Śiva's pupils; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. a small white shell,
cowri; ({%ā%}), f. one of the tongues of Fire; a kind of
grass, Andropogon Aciculatum; a kind of plant ({%= %}
[Page1031-c+ 81]
{%kāṣṭha-pāṭalā%}); Aconitum Ferox; various other
plants ({%= aparājitā; = śveta-vṛhatī; = śveta-%}
{%kaṇṭakārī; = pāṣāṇa-bhedin; = śilā-valkalā;%}
{%= chūrikā-pattrī%}); hogweed; white Dūrvā grass;
bamboo-manna; crystal; clayed or candied sugar;
a mystical term for the letter {%s; (am),%} n. silver;
({%śveta vaidārva%} or {%vaidārvya%} or {%vaidarvya%} is
according to some ‘a serpent demon,’ others give
{%śvaita-vaidārava%} as signifying ‘a particular deity
connected with the sun’); [cf. Goth. <nsi>hveit-s,</nsi> ‘white;’
(perhaps) <nsi>hvaitei,</nsi> ‘wheat:’ Old Germ. <nsi>huiz, wīz:</nsi>
Old Sax., Angl. Sax., Old Norse <nsi>hvīt:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>kwe†ty-s,</nsi> ‘wheat.’] {%—Śveta-kaṇṭakārī,%} f. a species
of plant {%(= priyaṅ-karī)%}. {%—Śveta-kandā,%} f. ‘hav-
ing a white bulb,’ the plant Aconitum Ferox. {%—Śveta-%}
{%kamala, am,%} n. a white lotus. {%—Śveta-kākīya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} belonging or relating to a white crow.
{%—Śveta-kiṇihī,%} f. a species of Kiṇihī with white
blossoms. {%—Śveta-kuñjara, as,%} m. ‘white elephant,’
Indra's elephant Airāvata. {%—Śveta-kuśa, as,%} m.
white Kuśa grass {%(= puṇya-tṛṇa)%}. {%—Śveta-kuṣ-%}
{%ṭha, am,%} n. white leprosy. {%—Śveta-ketu, us,%} m. a
Bauddha or Jaina saint; epithet of the descending
node; N. of a Brāhman; of a sage (son of Uddā-
laka). {%—Śveta-keśa, as,%} m. white hair; a variety of
the Hyperanthera Moringa. {%—Śveta-kola, as,%} m.
‘having a white or glittering breast,’ the Śaphara
fish. {%—Śveta-khadira, as,%} m. a white variety of the
Khadira tree. {%—Śveta-gaṅgā,%} f. ‘the white Ganges,’
N. of a river. {%—Śveta-gaja, as,%} m. a white elephant;
the elephant of Indra. {%—Śveta-garut, t,%} or {%śveta-ga-%}
{%ruta, as,%} m. ‘white-winged,’ a goose. {%—Śveta-guñjā,%} f.
a kind of plant {%(= bhiriṇṭikā)%}. {%—Śveta-ghoṣā,%}
f. a white Ghoṣā plant. {%—Śveta-candana, am,%}
n. white sandal. {%—Śveta-cillikā%} or {%śveta-cillī,%} f.
a kind of pot-herb. {%—Śveta-cchattra, am,%} n. a
white umbrella; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a white um-
brella. {%—Śveta-cchada, as,%} m. ‘white-winged’ or
‘white-leaved,’ a goose; a kind of basil, Ocymum
Album. {%—Śveta-jīraka, as,%} m. white cumin. {%—Śve-%}
{%ta-ṭaṅkaka%} or {%-ṭaṅkaṇa, am,%} n. white or refined
borax. {%—Śveta-tā,%} f. whiteness. {%—Śveta-dūrvā,%} f.
white Dūrvā grass. {%—Śveta-dvipa, as,%} m. a white
elephant; Indra's elephant. {%—Śveta-dvīpa, as,%} m.
‘the white island,’ N. of one of the eighteen minor
Dvīpas or divisions of the known continent, (also
termed Candra-dvīpa, see {%candra;%} identified by
some with Vaikuṇṭha, q. v., and by others supposed
to be Britain); N. of a place near Kāśi. {%—Śveta-%}
{%dhātu, us,%} m. a white mineral; chalk; the milk-
stone, opal or chalcedony. {%—Śveta-dhāman, ā,%} m.
‘having white lustre,’ the moon; camphor; cuttle-
fish bone. {%—Śveta-nīla, as, ā, am,%} white and black,
({%as%}), m. a cloud. {%—Śveta-pattra, am,%} n. a white
feather; ({%as%}), m. ‘white-feathered,’ a goose. {%—Śve-%}
{%tapattra-ratha, as,%} m. ‘whose vehicle is a goose,’
epithet of Brahmā. {%—Śveta-padma, am,%} n. the
white lotus. {%—Śveta-parṇā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%vāri-parṇī)%}. {%—Śveta-parṇāsa, as,%} m. white basil.
{%—Śveta-parvata, as,%} m. ‘white-mountain,’ N. of
a mountain. {%—Śveta-pāṭalā,%} f. the white trumpet-
flower, Bignonia Suaveolens. {%—Śveta-piṅga, as,%} m.
‘white and tawny,’ a lion. {%—Śveta-piṅgala, as,%} m.
‘white and tawny,’ a lion; epithet of Śiva. {%—Śveta-%}
{%piṅgalaka, as,%} m. a lion. {%—Śveta-piṇḍītaka, as,%}
m. a kind of plant {%(= mahā-piṇḍītaru)%}. {%—Śveta-%}
{%punarnavā,%} f. the white-flowered hogweed. {%—Śveta-%}
{%puṣpa, am,%} n. a white flower; ({%as%}), m. ‘having
white flowers,’ the plant Vitex Trifolia, {%= sindhu-%}
{%vāra; (ā),%} f. a Ghoṣā with white flowers; another
plant ({%= nāga-dantī%}); colocynth. {%—Śveta-puṣ-%}
{%paka, as, ikā, am,%} having white flowers; ({%as%}), m.
the plant Nerium Odorum (the white variety);
({%ikā%}), f. a kind of plant ({%= putra-dātrī%}); another
plant {%(= mahā-śaṇapuṣpikā)%}. {%—Śveta-prasū-%}
{%naka, as, ā, am,%} having white flowers; ({%as%}), m.
the tree Tapia Cratæva. {%—Śveta-balā,%} f. the white
Balā, a kind of plant. {%—Śveta-bhaṇḍā,%} f. the plant
Clitoria Ternatea. {%—Śveta-bhikṣu, us,%} m. a kind of
mendicant. {%—Śveta-mandāraka, as,%} m. a kind
of tree {%(= pṛthvī-kuravaka)%}. {%—Śveta-marica, %}
[Page1032-a+ 81]
{%am,%} n. white pepper; the seed of the Hyperanthera
Moriṅga. {%—Śveta-mādhava-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Śveta-māla, as,%} m. ‘having white wreaths,’
a cloud; smoke. {%—Śveta-yāvarī,%} f., Ved. ‘clear-
flowing,’ N. of a river. {%—Śveta-rakta, as,%} m.
‘whitish-red,’ pale-red, rosy, pink (the colour).
{%—Śveta-rañjana, am,%} n. ‘white-coloured,’ lead.
{%—Śveta-ratha, as,%} m. a white chariot; ‘having a
white car,’ the planet Venus. {%—Śveta-rājī,%} f. a kind
of creeper {%(= caceṇḍā)%}. {%—Śveta-rāsnā,%} f. the white
Rāsnā plant. {%—Śveta-rocis, is,%} m. ‘having white
light,’ the moon. {%—Śveta-roman, a,%} n. white hair.
{%—Śveta-romāṅka (˚ma-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a spot of
white hair. {%—Śveta-rohita, as,%} m. ‘white and red,’
an epithet of Garuḍa; a kind of tree {%(= lakṣmī-%}
{%vat)%}. {%—Śveta-lodhra, as,%} m. a white Lodhra tree.
{%—Śveta-lohita, as,%} m., N. of a Muni (a pupil of
Śiva). {%—Śveta-vacā,%} f. white orris root {%(= ati-%}
{%viṣā)%}. {%—Śveta-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} white-coloured.
{%—Śveta-valkala, as,%} m. white bark; ‘white-
barked,’ the glomerous fig-tree, Ficus Glomerata.
{%—Śveta-vājin, ī,%} m. a white horse; ‘having white
horses,’ the moon; epithet of Arjuna. {%—Śveta-vā-%}
{%sas, ās, ās, as,%} having white clothes; ({%ās%}), m.
‘clad in white,’ an ascetic wearing white garments.
{%—Śveta-vāh, vāṭ, śvetauhī%} or {%-vāhī, vāṭ,%} borne
on white horses; ({%ṭ%}), m. epithet of Indra; ({%-tauhī%}
or {%-vāhī%}), f. the wife of Indra. {%—Śveta-vāha, as,%}
m. ‘having white horses,’ epithet of Arjuna; of
Indra. {%—Śveta-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘having white
horses,’ epithet of the moon; of Arjuna; N. of a
king, (see {%bhadrāśva%}); a marine monster {%(= ma-%}
{%kara)%}. {%—Śveta-vāhin, ī,%} m. ‘borne by white horses,’
epithet of Arjuna. {%—Śveta-vuhnā,%} f. a kind of
plant {%(= vana-tiktā)%}. {%—Śveta-vṛkṣa, as,%} m.
‘white tree,’ the Varuṇa tree. {%—Śveta-vṛhatī,%} f. a
kind of white Vārtāki or egg-plant. {%—Śveta-śara-%}
{%puṅkhā,%} f. a kind of shrub. {%—Śveta-śiṃśapā,%} f.
the white Śiṃśapā tree. {%—Śveta-śikha, as,%} m., N.
of a Muni. {%—Śveta-śigru, us,%} m. the white Śigru
tree. {%—Śveta-śuṅga, as, ā, am,%} having white awns;
({%as%}), m. barley. {%—Śveta-śūraṇa, as,%} m. a kind of
plant {%(= vana-śūraṇa)%}. {%—Śveta-śṛṅga, as,%} m.
‘having white awns,’ barley. {%—Śveta-sarpa, as,%}
m. a white snake; the tree Tapia Cratæva. {%—Śveta-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m. the tree Mimosa Catechu. {%—Śveta-%}
{%surasā,%} f. a white variety of the Nyctanthes Arbor
Tristis. {%—Śveta-spandā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%aparājitā)%}. {%—Śveta-haya, as,%} m. a white horse;
the horse of Indra; ‘having white horses,’ epithet
of Arjuna. {%—Śveta-hastin, ī,%} m. a white elephant;
Airāvata (the elephant of Indra). {%—Śvetā-trivṛt, t,%}
f. the white Trivṛt plant. {%—Śvetātreya (˚ta-āt˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Śvetānukāśa (˚ta-an˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. possessing a white light; white and
shining. {%—Śvetāmbara (˚ta-am˚), as,%} m. ‘having
white garments,’ an order of ascetics among the
Jainas. {%—Śvetāmli (˚ta-am˚), is,%} f. a kind of shrub
{%(= amlikā)%}. {%—Śvetāraṇya-tīrtha (˚ta-ar˚), am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Śvetāvara (˚ta-av˚), as,%} m. a
kind of vegetable {%(= sitāvara)%}. {%—Śvetāśvatara%}
{%(˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Śvetāśvatara-%}
{%śākhā,%} f., N. of a Śākhā of the Yajur-veda. {%—Śve-%}
{%tāśvatara-śākhin, inas,%} m. pl. the followers of
the Śvetāśvatara-śākhā. {%—Śvetāśvataropaniṣad%}
{%(˚ra-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Śvetāsya%}
{%(˚ta-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘white-faced,’ N. of a Muni. {%—Śve-%}
{%tāhvā (˚ta-āh˚),%} f. a kind of plant {%(= śukla-pāṭalā).%}
{%—Śvetekṣu (˚ta-ik˚), us,%} m. ‘white sugar-cane,’
a species of sugar-cane {%(= pāṇḍurekṣu)%}. {%—Śveto-%}
{%dara (˚ta-ud˚), as,%} m. a white belly; ‘white-
bellied,’ epithet of Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>47633<pc>1032-a<k1>Svetaka<k2>Svetaka
{%Śvetaka, as,%}¦ m. a cowri; ({%am%}), n. silver.
<LEND>

<L>47634<pc>1032-a<k1>SvetanA<k2>SvetanA
{%Śvetanā,%}¦ f., Ved. ‘the whitener,’ epithet of Uṣas
or dawn.
<LEND>

<L>47635<pc>1032-a<k1>Svetayat<k2>Svetayat
{%Śvetayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making white, whitening.
<LEND>

<L>47636<pc>1032-a<k1>Svetita<k2>Svetita
{%Śvetita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (probably) whitened, see Pāṇ.
VII. 2, 16, 17.
<LEND>

<L>47637<pc>1032-a<k1>SvetI<k2>SvetI
{%Śvetī,%}¦ f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>47638<pc>1032-a<k1>SvetOhI<k2>SvetOhI
{%Śvetauhī,%}¦ f. the wife of Indra; [cf. {%śveta-vāh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47639<pc>1032-a<k1>SvetyA<k2>SvetyA
{%Śvetyā,%}¦ f., Ved. the dawn.
<LEND>
[Page1032-b+ 72]

<L>47640<pc>1032-b<k1>Svetra<k2>Svetra
{%Śvetra, am,%}¦ n. white leprosy ({%= śvitra%}).
<LEND>

<L>47641<pc>1032-b<k1>SvEtavEdArava<k2>SvEtavEdArava
{%Śvaita-vaidārava.%}¦ See under {%śveta.%}
<LEND>

<L>47642<pc>1032-b<k1>SvEtya<k2>SvEtya
{%Śvaitya, am,%}¦ n. whiteness; white leprosy; viti-
ligo; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47643<pc>1032-b<k1>SvEtra<k2>SvEtra
{%Śvaitra, am,%}¦ n. white leprosy; vitiligo.
<LEND>

<L>47644<pc>1032-b<k1>SvEtreya<k2>SvEtreya
{%Śvaitreya, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. produced in the
atmosphere; ({%as%}), m. {%= śvitrya.%}
<LEND>

<L>47645<pc>1032-b<k1>SvEtrya<k2>SvEtrya
{%Śvaitrya, am,%}¦ n. leprosy, whiteness of the skin.
<LEND>

<L>47646<pc>1032-b<k1>Svind<k2>Svind
{#Svind#}¦ {%śvind%} (connected with rt. {%śvit%}),
cl. 1. A. {%śvindate, śiśvinde, śvindiṣ-%}
{%yate, śvinditum,%} to be white, become white; to be
cold (according to some); [cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">κυδνός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κυδρός, κῦδος;</lang> Goth. <nsi>hveits, hvaitei;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>hwiz, hwaizi, hiza, haiz;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hvit, hvœte.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>47647<pc>1032-b<k1>SvenI<k2>SvenI
{#SvenI#}¦ {%śvenī,%} fem. of {%śveta,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>47648<pc>1032-b<k1>SvEkna<k2>SvEkna
{#SvEkna#}¦ {%śvaikna, as,%} m. (fr. {%śvikna%}), a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47649<pc>1032-b<k1>SvoBUta<k2>SvoBUta
{#SvoBUta#}¦ {%śvo-bhūta, śvo-vasīyasa.%} See under
2. {%śvas.%}
<LEND>
<H>{#za#}

<L>47650<pc>1032-b<k1>za<k2>za<h>1
{#za#} 1¦. {%ṣa,%} the thirty-first consonant of the
Nāgarī alphabet and second of the three sibilants; it
belongs to the cerebral class, and in sound corresponds
to <nsi>sh</nsi> in the English word <nsi>shun.</nsi> (Many roots which
begin with the dental {%s%} are written in native gram-
mars and in the Dhātu-pāṭha with {%ṣ,%} to show that
the dental {%s%} is liable to be cerebralized after certain
prepositions.) {%—Ṣa-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or sound
{%ṣa%}. {%—Ṣa-tva, am,%} n. the state of the letter {%ṣa,%}
the cerebral sibilant, the substitution of {%ṣ%} for {%s.%}
{%—Ṣatva-ṇatva, am,%} n. the substitution of {%ṣ%} for
{%s%} and of {%ṇ%} for {%n%} in grammatical derivatives.
<LEND>

<L>47651<pc>1032-b<k1>za<k2>za<h>2
{#za#} 2¦. {%ṣa, as, ā, am,%} best, excellent; wise,
learned; ({%as%}), m. loss, destruction; loss of know-
ledge; end, term; rest, remainder; eternal happi-
ness, final emancipation, (in some of the preceding
senses said to be fr. rt. {%so%}); heaven, paradise; sleep;
a learned man, teacher; a nipple; (according to
Śabda-k.) {%= kaca; = mānava; = sarva; = garbha-%}
{%vimocana%} [cf. {%ṣū%}]; ({%am%}), n. the embryo; patience,
endurance (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>47652<pc>1032-b<k1>zag<k2>zag
{#zag#}¦ {%ṣag, ṣagh, ṣac,%} &c. See {%sag,%}
&c.
<LEND>

<L>47653<pc>1032-b<k1>zaw<k2>zaw
{#zaw#}¦ {%ṣaṭ, ṣaḍ,%} for {%ṣaṣ,%} at the beginning
of comps. See {%ṣaṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>47654<pc>1032-b<k1>zaRqa<k2>zaRqa
{#zaRqa#}¦ {%ṣaṇḍa, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
I. 113. fr. rt. 1. {%san;%} cf. {%śaṇḍa, śaṇḍha%}), a bull; a
eunuch, (fourteen or even twenty classes are enume-
rated by some writers); a multitude, collection,
quantity, group, heap; a wood, thicket; N. of one
of Viṣṇu's guards or attendants, (also written {%śaṇḍa,%}
q. v.); ({%as, am%}), m. n. a flock (of goats &c.); a
quantity of lotuses.
<LEND>

<L>47655<pc>1032-b<k1>zaRqaka<k2>zaRqaka
{%Ṣaṇḍaka, as,%}¦ m. a eunuch.
<LEND>

<L>47656<pc>1032-b<k1>zaRqAlI<k2>zaRqAlI
{%Ṣaṇḍālī,%}¦ f. a wanton woman; a pond, pool; a
particular measure of oil (commonly called Chatāk).
<LEND>

<L>47657<pc>1032-b<k1>zaRqika<k2>zaRqika
{%Ṣaṇḍika, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>47658<pc>1032-b<k1>zaRQa<k2>zaRQa
{%Ṣaṇḍha, as,%}¦ m. a eunuch. {%—Ṣaṇḍha-tila, as,%}
m. barren sesamum. {%—Ṣaṇḍha-tva, am,%} n. the
being a eunuch.
<LEND>

<L>47659<pc>1032-b<k1>zarAjima<k2>zarAjima
{#zarAjima#}¦ {%ṣarājima%} and {%ṣarāñjima%} and
{%ṣarija,%} N. of places.
<LEND>

<L>47660<pc>1032-b<k1>zarjUra<k2>zarjUra
{#zarjUra#}¦ {%ṣarjūra,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>47661<pc>1032-b<k1>zalAgru<k2>zalAgru
{#zalAgru#}¦ {%ṣalāgru,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>47662<pc>1032-b<k1>zaz<k2>zaz
{#zaz#}¦ {%ṣaṣ, ṣaṭ,%} m. f. n. pl. (thought by some
to be for an original {%svakṣ,%} by others for {%kṣaṣ; ṣaṣ%}
becomes {%ṣaṭ%} before hard letters, {%ṣaḍ%} before soft, {%ṣo%}
before {%ḍ,%} and {%ṣaṇ%} before nasals), six, (the following
words are used as symbolical expressions for the number
six, {%aṅga, darśana, tarka, guṇa, rasa, ṛtu, vajra-%}
{%koṇa, kārttikeya-mukha%}); [cf. Zend <nsi>kṣvas;</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἕξ, ϝέξ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>sex;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>seox, sex, six;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>sehs</nsi> for <nsi>sihs;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>saihs</nsi> for <nsi>sihs;</nsi>
[Page1032-c+ 81]
Lith. <nsi>szeszi,</nsi> f. <nsi>szezios;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>sesti, sesty;</nsi> Cambro-
Brit. <nsi>chwech;</nsi> Armor. <nsi>chuech;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>se,</nsi> ‘six.’]
{%—Ṣaṭ-karṇa, as, ā, am,%} six-eared; heard by six
ears (i. e. by a third, instead of by the speaker and
person addressed only), told to more than one listener;
({%as%}), m. a sort of lute. {%—Ṣaṭ-karman, a,%} n. the
six acts or duties enjoined on Brāhmans collectively,
(viz. teaching the Vedas, holy study, offering sacri-
fices, conducting them for others, giving and accept-
ing gifts); six acts allowable to a Brāhman for sub-
sistence, (viz. gleaning, accepting gifts, asking alms,
agriculture, trade, tending cattle, or, according to
some, lending money at interest); six acts belonging
to the practice of Yoga, (viz., according to Śabda-k.,
{%dhauti, vasti, neti, naulikī, trāṭaka, kapāla-%}
{%bhāti,%} these consist of suppressions of the breath
and self-mortifications of various kinds; other
authorities write the words with different termi-
nations, e. g. {%dhautī, vastī, naulika,%} &c.); six
acts that may be performed by means of magical
texts, (viz. killing, infatuating, enthralling, expelling,
exciting animosity, and the stopping or privation of
any faculty; these are taught in the Tantras); ({%ā%}),
m. a Brāhman skilled in the above six acts; an
adept in the Tantra magical rites. {%—Ṣaṭ-kāraka-%}
{%praticchandaka, as,%} m., N. of a grammatical work
on the use of the six cases. {%—Ṣaṭ-kūṭā,%} f. a form of
Bhairavī. {%—Ṣaṭ-koṇa, am,%} n. a six-angled figure,
hexagon; the thunderbolt of Indra; ({%as, ā, am%}),
hexangular. {%—Ṣaṭ-kheṭaka,%} N. of a town. {%—Ṣaṭ-%}
{%cakra, am,%} n. the six mystical circles of the
body, (see {%cakra.%}) {%—Ṣaṭcatvāriṃśa, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} 46th. {%—Ṣaṭ-catvāriṃśat, t,%} f., 46. {%—Ṣaṭ-%}
{%caraṇa, as, ā, am,%} six-footed, having six feet;
({%as%}), m. a bee; a louse; a locust. {%—Ṣaṭ-tila-%}
{%dāna, am,%} n. a particular ceremony on the twelfth
day of the month Māgha. {%—Ṣaṭtilin, ī, inī, i,%}
one who on certain festivals performs six acts
with Tila or sesamum, (so called, according to
Śabda-k., when he is {%tilodvartin, tila-snāyin,%}
{%tila-homin, tila-prada, tila-bhuj, tila-vāpin.%})
{%—Ṣaṭtriṃśa, as, ī, am,%} 36th. {%—Ṣaṭ-triṃśat,%}
{%t,%} f., 36; N. of a work on law. {%—Ṣaṭtriṃśad-%}
{%ābdika, as, ī, am,%} lasting 36 years. {%—Ṣaṭtriṃ-%}
{%śad-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Ṣaṭtriṃśan-%}
{%mata,%} a collection of the opinions of 36 Munis (held
to be authors of as many law-books, viz. Manu,
Viṣṇu, Yama, Dakṣa, Aṅgiras, Atri, Vṛhaspati,
Āpastamba, Uśanas, Kātyāyana, Parāśara, Vasiṣṭha,
Vyāsa, Saṃvarta, Hārīta, Gotama, Pracetas, Śaṅkha,
Likhita, Yājñavalkya, Kāśyapa, Śātātapa, Lomaśa,
Jamad-agni, Prajāpati, Viśvā-mitra, Paiṭhīnasi, Bau-
dhāyana, Pitāmaha, Chāgaleya, Jābāla, Marīci, Cya-
vana, Bhṛgu, Ṛṣya-śṛṅga, Nārada.) {%—Ṣaṭpañ-%}
{%cāśa, as, ī, am,%} 56th. {%—Ṣaṭ-pañcāśat, t,%} f.,
56. {%—Ṣaṭpañcāśat-tama, as, ī, am,%} 56th.
{%—Ṣaṭ-pañcāśikā,%} N. of a work by Pṛthu-
yaśas. {%—Ṣaṭ-pada, as, ā, am,%} six-footed, contain-
ing six Padas or divisions; ({%as%}), m. a bee; a verse
consisting of six Padas or divisions; ({%as, ī%}), m. f.
a louse; ({%ī%}), f. a female bee. {%—Ṣaṭpada-jya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘having bees for a string,’ epithet of Kāma-
deva's bow (the string of which is supposed to con-
sist of bees). {%—Ṣaṭpada-priya, as,%} m. ‘beloved
by bees,’ a kind of tree {%(= nāga-keśara)%}. {%—Ṣaṭ-%}
{%padātithi (˚da-at˚), is,%} m. ‘having bees as guests,’
the Mango tree; the Campaka tree. {%—Ṣaṭpadā-%}
{%nanda-vardhana (˚da-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘increasing
the joy of bees,’ the Kiṅkirāta tree. {%—Ṣaṭpadālī%}
{%(˚da-ālī),%} f. a line of bees. {%—Ṣaṭ-padikā,%} f. a
kind of metre. {%—Ṣaṭ-prajña, as,%} m. ‘six-knower,’
one who is wise on six subjects, a sage (i. e. one
acquainted with the four objects of human existence,
viz. virtue, wealth, pleasure, and final emancipation,
and with the nature of the world, and of divine
truth); a dissolute or lustful man. {%—Ṣaṭ-praśno-%}
{%paniṣad, t,%} f. {%= praśnopaniṣad,%} q. v. {%—Ṣaṭ-%}
{%śata, am,%} n., 106; 600. {%—Ṣaṭ-śāstrin, ī,%}
m. one who has studied the six Śāstras or six
systems of philosophy. {%—Ṣaṭṣaṣṭa, as, ī, am,%}
66th. {%—Ṣaṭ-ṣaṣṭi, is,%} f., 66. {%—Ṣaṭsaptata, %}
[Page1033-a+ 81]
{%as, ī, am,%} 76th. {%—Ṣaṭ-saptati, is,%} f., 76.
{%—Ṣaḍ-akṣara, as, ā, am,%} consisting of six
syllables. {%—Ṣaḍ-akṣīṇa, as,%} m. ‘six-eyed,’ a
fish. {%—Ṣaḍ-aṅga, am,%} n. six parts of the body
collectively, (viz. the two arms, two legs, head, and
waist); the six limbs or works auxiliary to the Veda,
(see {%vedāṅga%}); any set of six articles; ({%as%}), m. a
small kind of Go-kṣura plant; ({%as, ā, am%}), six-
limbed; having six parts or ingredients. {%—Ṣaḍ-%}
{%aṅga-jit, t, t, t,%} subduing the six members; ({%t%}), m.
epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Ṣaḍaṅga-pānīya, am,%} n. an
infusion or decoction of six drugs. {%—Ṣaḍ-aṅghri,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘having six feet,’ a bee. {%—Ṣaḍ-adhika,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} exceeded by six. {%—Ṣaḍadhika-da-%}
{%śan, a,%} m. f. n. pl. ten + six, i. e. sixteen. {%—Ṣaḍ-%}
{%adhikadaśa-nāḍī-cakra, am,%} n. the circle of the
16 tubular vessels, (the heart.) {%—Ṣaḍ-abhijña, as,%}
m. ‘knowing six sciences,’ a Buddha or Buddhist
deified sage. {%—Ṣaḍaśīta, as, ī, am,%} 86th. {%—Ṣaḍ-%}
{%aśīti, is,%} f., 86; N. of a work; the sun's en-
trance into the four signs, Pisces, Gemini, Virgo,
and Sagittarius. {%—Ṣaḍaśīti-cakra, am,%} n. a
mystical circle shaped like a man for telling good
or bad luck when the sun is in the above signs.
{%—Ṣaḍ-aṣṭaka, am,%} n. (in astronomy) a parti-
cular Yoga, q. v. {%—Ṣaḍ-aha, as,%} m. a period of
six days. {%—Ṣaḍ-ānana, as,%} m. ‘six-faced,’ epithet
of Kārttikeya. {%—Ṣaḍ-āmnāya, as,%} m. the sixfold
Tantra (fabled to have proceeded from the mouth of
Śiva directed towards six quarters, east, south, west,
north, up and down). {%—Ṣaḍ-āyatana, am,%} n. the
seats of the six organs (or senses). {%—Ṣaḍ-āvali, is,%} f.
any row of six objects, (applied to a set of six Śatakas
in verse, of which the Sūrya-śataka is one.) {%—Ṣaḍ-%}
{%ūṣaṇa, am,%} n. six spices collectively, or long pepper,
black pepper, dried ginger, the root of long pepper,
plumbago, and Cavi; [cf. {%pañca-kola.%}] {%—Ṣaḍ-%}
{%ṛtu, avas,%} m. pl. the six seasons, (see {%ṛtu.%})
{%—Ṣaḍ-gata, as, ā, am,%} arrived at the sixth, (a
term applied to the sixth power of numbers.) {%—Ṣaḍ-%}
{%gayā,%} f. the sixfold Gayā, (thus explained in the
Vāyu-Purāṇa quoted by Śabda-k., {%gayā gajo gayā-%}
{%dityo gāyatrī ca gadādharaḥ gayā gayāsuraś%}
{%caiva ṣaḍ-gayā mukti-dāyikā.%}) {%—Ṣaḍ-gava,%}
{%am,%} n. a yoke of six oxen, (sometimes compounded
with the names of other animals to denote a yoke of
six, e. g. {%aśva-ṣaḍgavam,%} six horses; cf. {%hasti-%}
{%ṣ˚.%}) {%—Ṣaḍ-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} sixfold, six times;
({%am%}), n. an assemblage of six qualities or properties;
the six acts or measures to be practised by a king in
his military capacity, (viz. {%sandhi,%} peace; {%vigraha,%}
war; {%yāna,%} marching; {%āsana,%} sitting encamped;
{%dvaidhī-bhāva,%} dividing his forces; {%saṃśraya,%}
seeking the protection of a more powerful king.)
{%—Ṣaḍ-guru-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Ṣaḍ-guru-śiṣya, as,%} m., N. of the author of
the Sarvānukramaṇī-vṛtti. {%—Ṣaḍ-grantha, as,%} m.
a variety of the Cæsalpinia Bonducella; ({%ā%}), f. orris
root ({%= vacā%}); white orris root; other plants, {%=%}
{%śaṭī; = mahā-karañja; (ī),%} f. orris root. {%—Ṣaḍ-%}
{%granthi, is, is, i,%} six-knotted, having six joints;
({%i%}), n. the root of long pepper. {%—Ṣaḍgranthikā,%}
f. zedoary, Curcuma Zerumbet. {%—Ṣaḍ-ja, as,%} m.
‘six-born, produced from six,’ epithet of the first or,
according to some, of the fourth of the seven Svaras
or primary notes of music, (so called because it is
supposed to be produced by six organs, viz. tongue,
teeth, palate, nose, throat, and chest; the other six
Svaras are Ṛṣabha, Gāndhāra, Madhyama, Pañ-
cama, Dhaivata, and Niṣāda, of which Niṣāda and
Gāndhāra are referred to the Udātta, Ṛṣabha and
Dhaivata to the An-udātta, while Ṣaḍ-ja and the
other two are referred to the Svarita accent; the
sound of the Ṣaḍ-ja is said to resemble the note of
peacocks.) {%—Ṣaḍ-darśana, as,%} m. a man who is
versed in the six systems of philosophy, (see {%dar-%}
{%śana.%}) {%—Ṣaḍ-daśana, as, ā, am,%} having six teeth.
{%—Ṣaḍ-durga, am,%} n. a collection of six forts
(i. e. six kinds of forts, as follow, {%dhanva-durga,%}
{%mahī-d˚, giri-d˚, manuṣya-d˚, mṛd-d˚, vana-%}
{%d˚%}). {%—Ṣaḍ-dhā,%} ind. in six ways; [cf. {%ṣo-ḍhā.%}]
[Page1033-b+ 81]
{%—Ṣaḍ-bhāga, as,%} m. a sixth part, a sixth. {%—Ṣaḍ-%}
{%bhāga-bhāj, k, k, k,%} possessing or entitled to a sixth
part. {%—Ṣaḍ-bhuja, as, ā, am,%} six-armed, six-sided;
({%as%}), m. a hexagon; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of Durgā; the
water-melon. {%—Ṣaḍ-rasa, ās,%} m. pl. the six
flavours or tastes, (see {%rasa%}); ({%as, ā, am%}), having
the six Rasas or flavours. {%—Ṣaḍ-rātra, am,%} n. ‘six
nights,’ a period of six days. {%—Ṣaḍ-rekhā,%} f. ‘hav-
ing six lines,’ a water-melon. {%—Ṣaḍ-lavaṇa, am,%}
n. six kinds of salt; [cf. {%pañca-lavaṇa.%}] {%—Ṣaḍ-%}
{%vaktra, as,%} m. ‘six-faced,’ epithet of Kārttikeya.
{%—Ṣaḍ-varga, as,%} m. a class or aggregate of
six things (e. g. of the six faults, desire, wrath,
covetousness, bewilderment, pride, and envy).
{%—Ṣaḍvarga-vaśya, as, ā, am,%} subject to the
above six faults. {%—Ṣaḍviṃśa, as, ī, am,%} 26th.
{%—Ṣaḍ-viṃśati, is,%} f., 26. {%—Ṣaḍviṃśa-brāh-%}
{%maṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Brāhmaṇa belonging to
the Sāma-veda. {%—Ṣaḍ-vidha, as, ā, am,%} sixfold,
of six sorts or kinds. {%—Ṣaḍ-vindu, us,%} m. ‘having
six spots,’ epithet of Viṣṇu; a kind of insect; a
sort of medicinal oil. {%—Ṣaṇṇavata, as, ī, am,%}
96th. {%—Ṣaṇ-ṇavati, is,%} f., 96. {%—Ṣaṇ-ṇāḍī-%}
{%cakra, am,%} n. (in astrology) a particular circular
diagram (composed of six Nakṣatras, under which
a birthday or other great event may take place).
{%—Ṣaṇ-ṇābhi, is, is, i,%} having six navels; six-
naved, (a wheel) having six naves or centres.
{%—Ṣaṇ-mātra, as, ī, am,%} containing six Mātras.
{%—Ṣaṇ-māsa, as,%} m. a period of six months, half
a year. {%—Ṣaṇmāsa-nicaya, as,%} m. a collection (of
food sufficient) for six months. {%—Ṣaṇmāsābhyan-%}
{%tare (˚sa-abh˚),%} ind. within the space of six months.
{%—Ṣaṇmāsika, as, ā, am,%} happening every six
months, half yearly. {%—Ṣaṇmāsya,%} six months old,
of six months standing; [cf. {%ṣāṇmāsya.%}] {%—Ṣaṇ-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} having six faces; ({%as%}), m. epi-
thet of Kārttikeya; ({%ā%}), f. a water-melon. {%—Ṣaḷ-%}
{%akṣara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= ṣaḍ-akṣara%}. {%—Ṣaḷ-%}
{%ara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having six spokes. {%—Ṣo-ḍat,%}
{%an,%} m. a young ox with six teeth. {%—Ṣo-ḍanta, as,%}
m. one who has six teeth. {%—Ṣoḍaśa, as, ī, am,%}
16th, the 16th; ({%ī%}), f. one of the twelve forms of
Durgā called Mahā-vidyā. {%—Ṣoḍaśaka, as, ā%} or
{%ī%} (?) or {%ikā, am,%} 16, consisting of 16, of 16 kinds,
({%ṣoḍaśakaḥ kaccha-puṭaḥ,%} a box with 16 com-
partments.) {%—Ṣoḍaśa-kala, as, ā, am,%} having 16
parts, sixteenfold (e. g. {%ṣoḍaśa-kalaḥ puruṣaḥ,%}
the sixteenfold spirit); ({%ās%}), f. pl. the 16 digits of
the moon (named thus, 1. A-mṛtā; 2. Māna-dā;
3. Pūṣā: 4. Tuṣṭi; 5. Puṣṭi; 6. Rati; 7. Dhṛti;
8. Śaśinī; 9. Candrikā; 10. Kānti; 11. Jyotsnā;
12. Śrī; 13. Prīti; 14. Aṅga-dā; 15. Pūrṇā;
16. Pūrṇāmṛtā). {%—Ṣoḍaśakala-vidyā,%} f. the
science of the sixteenfold (spirit or soul). {%—Ṣoḍaśa-%}
{%dala, as, ā, am,%} having 16 petals (as a lotus).
{%—Ṣoḍaśa-dāna, am,%} n. the aggregate of 16 kinds
of gifts to be given at a Śrāddha, &c., (these are
said to be ‘room, a seat, water, clothes, a lamp, food,
betel, a parasol, perfumes, a garland, fruit, a bed,
shoes, cows, gold, and silver.’) {%—Ṣoḍaśa-dhā,%} ind.
in 16 ways, in 16 parts or divisions. {%—Ṣo-ḍaśan,%}
{%a,%} m. f. n. pl., 16. {%—Ṣoḍaśa-pakṣa-śāyin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} lying torpid during 16 half months of the year
(said of a frog). {%—Ṣoḍaśa-bhujā,%} f. ‘the sixteen-
armed,’ epithet of a form of Durgā (represented
with 16 hands). {%—Ṣoḍaśa-mātṛkā, ās,%} f. pl. the
16 divine mothers, (see {%mātṛ.%}) {%—Ṣoḍaśa-rājika,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} treating of or relating to 16 kings.
{%—Ṣoḍaśartu-niśā (˚śa-ṛt˚),%} f. any night out of
16 from the commencement of menstruation. {%—Ṣo-%}
{%ḍaśartvik-kratu (˚śa-ṛt˚), us,%} m. a grand sacrifice
to be performed by 16 priests, (see {%ṛtv-ij.%}) {%—Ṣo-%}
{%ḍaśāṃśa (˚śa-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a 16th part. {%—Ṣoḍaśāṃśu%}
{%(˚śa-aṃ˚), us, us, u,%} having 16 rays; ({%us%}), m.
sixteen-rayed, the planet Venus. {%—Ṣoḍaśākṣara%}
{%(˚śa-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} having 16 letters or syllables.
{%—Ṣoḍaśāṅga (˚śa-aṅ˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having
16 parts or ingredients; ({%as%}), m. a particular per-
fume (said to be composed of {%guggulu, sarala,%}
{%dāru, pattra, malaya-ja, hrīvera, aguru, kuṣ- %}
[Page1033-c+ 81]
{%ṭha, guḍa, sarja-rasa, ghana, harītakī, nakhī,%}
{%lākṣā, jaṭāmāṃsī, śaila-ja,%} q. q. v. v.). {%—Ṣoḍa-%}
{%śāṅgulaka (˚śa-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} of 16 fingers'
breadth. {%—Ṣoḍaśāṅghri (˚śa-aṅ˚), is, is, i,%} hav-
ing 16 feet; ({%is%}), m. a crab. {%—Ṣoḍaśāra (˚śa-ara),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having 16 spokes or radii; having 16
petals; ({%am%}), n. a kind of lotus; [cf. {%ṣoḍaśa-%}
{%dala.%}] {%—Ṣoḍaśārcis (˚śa-ar˚), is, is, is,%} having
16 rays, sixteen-rayed; ({%is%}), m. the planet Venus.
{%—Ṣoḍaśāvarta (˚śa-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} having 16
twists; ({%as%}), m. a conch-shell. {%—Ṣoḍaśikāmra%}
{%(˚kā-ām˚?), am,%} n. (according to Śabda-k.) a kind
of measure {%(= pala-parimāṇa)%}. {%—Ṣoḍaśi-graha,%}
{%as,%} m. a libation made at the Ṣoḍaśin ceremony.
{%—Ṣoḍaśin, ī,%} m. one of the modifications of the
Agni-ṣṭoma or Soma ceremony, (others being called
Ukthya, Ati-rātra, Vāja-peya, &c.); a particular
kind of Soma vessel. {%—Ṣoḍaśi-mat, ān, atī, at,%}
having the above ceremony. {%—Ṣoḍaśi-śastra, am,%}
n. a hymn or liturgical formula recited during the
above ceremony. {%—Ṣoḍaśopacāra (˚śa-up˚), as,%}
m. 16 ways of doing homage, (thus enumerated,
{%āsana, svāgata, pādya, argha, ācamanīya, ma-%}
{%dhuparka, ācamana, snāna, vasana, ābharaṇa,%}
{%sugandhi, sumanas, dhūpa, dīpa, naivedya,%}
{%vandana,%} q. q. v. v.) {%—Ṣo-ḷaśan,%} Ved. {%= ṣo-ḍa-%}
{%śan%}. {%—Ṣoḷaśākṣara,%} Ved. {%= ṣoḍaśākṣara.%}
<LEND>

<L>47663<pc>1033-c<k1>za<k2>za<h>3
3. {%ṣa%}¦ at the end of a comp. {%= ṣaṣ%} (e. g. {%pañca-%}
{%ṣa,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>47664<pc>1033-c<k1>zawka<k2>zawka
{%Ṣaṭka, as, ā, am,%}¦ having six, sixfold, six; ({%am%}),
n. an aggregate of six.
<LEND>

<L>47665<pc>1033-c<k1>zazwa<k2>zazwa
{%Ṣaṣṭa, as, ī, am,%}¦ 60th, (but only in comps.
after another numeral, e. g. {%eka-ṣaṣṭa,%} one and
sixtieth or sixty-first; cf. {%dvi-ṣ˚, dvā-ṣ˚, tri-ṣ˚,%}
&c.)
<LEND>

<L>47666<pc>1033-c<k1>zazwi<k2>zazwi
{%Ṣaṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., 60. {%—Ṣaṣṭi-tama, as, ī, am,%}
60th, (this is the only form of this ordinal allowed
except in comps. after another numeral, cf. {%ṣaṣṭa%}
above.) {%—Ṣaṣṭi-dhā,%} ind. in 60 ways. {%—Ṣaṣṭi-%}
{%patha,%} 60 paths, (thought by some to apply to
the first 60 Adhyāyas of the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa.)
{%—Ṣaṣṭi-bhāga, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Ṣaṣṭi-%}
{%matta, as,%} m. an elephant who has reached the age
of 60 years (or is in rut at that period; this is
supposed to end the first half of his life, cf. {%ṣaṣṭi-%}
{%hāyana%}). {%—Ṣaṣṭi-yojanī,%} f. a journey or extent
of 60 Yojanas. {%—Ṣaṣṭi-latā,%} f. a kind of plant
{%(= bhramara-mārī)%}. {%—Ṣaṣṭi-varṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
having 60 years, 60 years old. {%—Ṣaṣṭi-saṃvat-%}
{%sara, as,%} m. a period of 60 years or the 60th year
(from birth &c.). {%—Ṣaṣṭi-hāyana, as,%} m. a period
of 60 years or the 60th year (from birth &c.); ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), 60 years old; ({%as%}), m. an elephant; a kind
of rice, (see {%ṣaṣṭika.%}) {%—Ṣaṣṭy-adhika, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} exceeded by 60. {%—Ṣaṣṭy-adhika-śata, am,%}
n., 160.
<LEND>

<L>47667<pc>1033-c<k1>zazwika<k2>zazwika
{%Ṣaṣṭika, as, ā, am,%}¦ bought with 60; ({%as, ā%}),
m. f. a kind of rice of quick growth (ripening in
about 60 days).
<LEND>

<L>47668<pc>1033-c<k1>zazwikya<k2>zazwikya
{%Ṣaṣṭikya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (a field &c.) fit for sowing
with the above rice; ({%am%}), n. a field sown with this
rice.
<LEND>

<L>47669<pc>1033-c<k1>zazWa<k2>zazWa
{%Ṣaṣṭha, as, ī, am,%}¦ sixth, the sixth; ({%as%}), m.,
scil. {%akṣara,%} the sixth letter, i. e. the vowel {%ī%} (in
the Ṛg-veda Prātiśākhya); ({%ī%}), f. the sixth day of a
lunar fortnight; a particular Tithi when rites are per-
formed to the sixth lunar digit; the sixth or genitive
case; an epithet of Durgā in the form Kātyāyanī or
of one of the 16 divine mothers; [cf. Zend <nsi>kṣtva</nsi>
for <nsi>kṣvasta;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἕκτος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>sextus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>sach-</nsi>
<nsi>sta(n);</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>sixta;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>szeszta-s;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>ses-ty;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>seiseadh.</nsi>] {%—Ṣaṣṭhādi (˚ṭha-ādi),%}
{%is, is, i,%} beginning with the sixth letter, i. e. with the
vowel {%ī%} (in Vedic grammar). {%—Ṣaṣṭhānna (˚ṭha-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. the sixth meal. {%—Ṣaṣṭhānna-kāla%}
or {%ṣaṣṭhānna-kālaka, am,%} n. taking food at
the sixth period, i. e. once in three days as an
act of penance, (also written {%ṣaṣṭhālu-kālaka.%})
{%—Ṣaṣṭhānnakāla-tā,%} f. eating only at the time
of the sixth meal, i. e. once in three days or on
the evening of every third day. {%—Ṣaṣṭhī-jāya, %}
[Page1034-a+ 68]
{%as,%} m. one who has a sixth wife. {%—Ṣaṣṭhī-tatpu-%}
{%ruṣa%} or {%ṣaṣṭhī-samāsa, as,%} m. a Tat-puruṣa
compound of which the first member is a genitive
case. {%—Ṣaṣṭhī-pūjana, am,%} n. or {%ṣaṣṭhī-pūjā,%}
f. worship of the goddess Ṣaṣṭhī (especially per-
formed by a woman on the sixth day after delivery).
{%—Ṣaṣṭhī-vrata, am,%} n. a religious observance
kept on the sixth day of one of the halves of a
month. {%—Ṣaṣṭhy-ādi-kalpa-bodhana, am,%} n. a
festival in honour of Durgā on the sixth day of the
month Āśvina (when she is supposed to be awakened).
<LEND>

<L>47670<pc>1034-a<k1>zazWaka<k2>zazWaka
{%Ṣaṣṭhaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī%} (?) or {%ikā, am,%} sixth, the
sixth; ({%ikā%}), f., N. of one of the divine mothers,
(see {%ṣaṣṭhī.%})
<LEND>

<L>47671<pc>1034-a<k1>zazWin<k2>zazWin
{%Ṣaṣṭhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a sixth, having or
being the sixth (year &c.).
<LEND>

<L>47672<pc>1034-a<k1>zoQA<k2>zoQA
{%Ṣo-ḍhā,%}¦ ind. in six ways, sixfold. {%—Ṣoḍhā-%}
{%nyāsa, as,%} m. 16 ways of disposing magical texts
on the body (as practised by the Tāntrikas).
<LEND>

<L>47673<pc>1034-a<k1>zah<k2>zah
{#zah#}¦ {%ṣah%} = rt. 1. {%sah.%}
<LEND>

<L>47674<pc>1034-a<k1>zahasAna<k2>zahasAna
{%Ṣahasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ patient; ({%as%}), m. a pea-
cock; sacrifice ({%= sahasāna,%} q. v.; according to
Śabda-k. written {%ṣahasānu%}).
<LEND>

<L>47675<pc>1034-a<k1>zAc<k2>zAc
{#zAc#}¦ {%ṣāc%} for {%sāc,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>47676<pc>1034-a<k1>zAw<k2>zAw
{#zAw#}¦ {%ṣāṭ,%} ind. a vocative particle or inter-
jection of calling (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>47677<pc>1034-a<k1>zAwkOSika<k2>zAwkOSika
{#zAwkOSika#}¦ {%ṣāṭkauśika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ṣaṭ-%}
{%kośa%}), enveloped in six sheathes.
<LEND>

<L>47678<pc>1034-a<k1>zAwpOruzika<k2>zAwpOruzika
{#zAwpOruzika#}¦ {%ṣāṭpauruṣika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%ṣaṣ + puruṣa%}), relating or belonging to six
generations.
<LEND>

<L>47679<pc>1034-a<k1>zAqava<k2>zAqava
{#zAqava#}¦ {%ṣāḍava, am,%} n. (fr. {%ṣaṣ%}), senti-
ment, passion; singing, music; a particular kind of
Rāga; [cf. {%ṣaḍ-ja.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47680<pc>1034-a<k1>zAqguRya<k2>zAqguRya
{#zAqguRya#}¦ {%ṣāḍguṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%ṣaḍ-guṇa%}),
the aggregate of six qualities; six properties; six
measures or acts of royal policy, (see {%ṣaḍ-guṇa%});
six articles (of any kind); multiplication of anything
by six. {%—Ṣāḍguṇya-prayoga, as,%} m. the applica-
tion or practice of the above six measures. {%—Ṣāḍ-%}
{%guṇya-saṃyuta, as, ā, am,%} connected or accom-
panied with the six qualities or measures, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47681<pc>1034-a<k1>zARmAtura<k2>zARmAtura
{#zARmAtura#}¦ {%ṣāṇmātura, as,%} m. (fr. {%ṣaṣ + mā-%}
{%tṛ%}), ‘having six mothers,’ epithet of Kārttikeya, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>47682<pc>1034-a<k1>zARmAsika<k2>zARmAsika
{#zARmAsika#}¦ {%ṣāṇmāsika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%ṣaṇ-%}
{%māsa%}), six-monthly, half-yearly, six months old, of
six months standing, lasting six months.
<LEND>

<L>47683<pc>1034-a<k1>zARmAsya<k2>zARmAsya
{%Ṣāṇmāsya,%}¦ &c. {%= ṣāṇmāsika;%} [cf. {%ṣaṇmā-%}
{%sya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47684<pc>1034-a<k1>zAtvaRatvika<k2>zAtvaRatvika
{#zAtvaRatvika#}¦ {%ṣātvaṇatvika, as, ī, am,%} (fr.
{%ṣatva-ṇatva%}), relating to the substitution of {%ṣ%}
for {%s%} and {%ṇ%} for {%n.%}
<LEND>

<L>47685<pc>1034-a<k1>zAmila<k2>zAmila
{#zAmila#}¦ {%ṣāmila,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>47686<pc>1034-a<k1>zAzWa<k2>zAzWa
{#zAzWa#}¦ {%ṣāṣṭha, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%ṣaṣṭha%}),
sixth, the sixth.
<LEND>

<L>47687<pc>1034-a<k1>zAzWika<k2>zAzWika
{%Ṣāṣṭhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the sixth,
taught or explained in the sixth book of Pāṇini,
(similarly {%āṣṭamika,%} taught in the eighth book.)
<LEND>

<L>47688<pc>1034-a<k1>ziw<k2>ziw
{#ziw#}¦ {%ṣiṭ%} = rt. {%siṭ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>47689<pc>1034-a<k1>ziqga<k2>ziqga
{%Ṣiḍga, as,%}¦ m. a profligate man, libertine, lecher;
an inconstant lover, gallant.
<LEND>

<L>47690<pc>1034-a<k1>zu<k2>zu<h>1
{#zu#} 1¦. {%ṣu%} = rt. 4. {%su.%}
<LEND>

<L>47691<pc>1034-a<k1>zu<k2>zu<h>2
2. {%ṣu, us,%}¦ m. child-bearing, parturition, delivery.
<LEND>

<L>47692<pc>1034-a<k1>zU<k2>zU
{%Ṣū, ūs,%}¦ f. (= 4. {%sū,%} q. v.), child-bearing, delivery,
birth.
<LEND>

<L>47693<pc>1034-a<k1>zukk<k2>zukk
{#zukk#}¦ {%ṣukk%} = rt. {%ṣvask.%}
<LEND>

<L>47694<pc>1034-a<k1>zurAjima<k2>zurAjima
{#zurAjima#}¦ {%ṣurājima,%} N. of a place; [cf.
{%ṣarājima.%}]
<LEND>
[Page1034-b+ 66]

<L>47695<pc>1034-b<k1>zurASARa<k2>zurASARa
{%Ṣurāśāṇa,%}¦ N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>47696<pc>1034-b<k1>zoqaSan<k2>zoqaSan
{#zoqaSan#}¦ {%ṣo-ḍaśan,%} &c. See p. 1033, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>47697<pc>1034-b<k1>zoQA<k2>zoQA
{%Ṣo-ḍhā.%}¦ See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>47698<pc>1034-b<k1>zoLaSan<k2>zoLaSan
{#zoLaSan#}¦ {%ṣo-ḷaśan.%} See p. 1033, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>47699<pc>1034-b<k1>zwamB<k2>zwamB
{#zwamB#}¦ {%ṣṭambh.%} See rt. {%stambh.%}
<LEND>

<L>47700<pc>1034-b<k1>zwyuma<k2>zwyuma
{#zwyuma#}¦ {%ṣṭyuma, as,%} m. (according to some)
the moon; light.
<LEND>

<L>47701<pc>1034-b<k1>zwyE<k2>zwyE
{#zwyE#}¦ {%ṣṭyai.%} See rt. {%styai.%}
<LEND>

<L>47702<pc>1034-b<k1>zWA<k2>zWA
{#zWA#}¦ {%ṣṭhā.%} See rt. {%sthā.%}
<LEND>

<L>47703<pc>1034-b<k1>zWiv<k2>zWiv
{#zWiv#}¦ {%ṣṭhiv%} or {%ṣṭhīv,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%ṣṭhī-%}
{%vati%} or {%ṣṭhīvyati, ṭiṣṭheva%} or {%tiṣ-%}
{%ṭheva, ṣṭheviṣyati, aṣṭhevīt, ṣṭhevitum,%} to
spit, spit out, eject saliva from the mouth; to sputter:
Pass. {%ṣṭhīvyate,%} Aor. {%aṣṭhevi:%} Caus. {%ṣṭheva-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aṭiṣṭhivat%} or {%atiṣṭhivat:%}
Desid. {%ṭiṣṭheviṣati%} or {%tiṣṭheviṣati, ṭuṣṭhyū-%}
{%ṣati%} or {%tuṣṭhyūṣati:%} Intens. {%ṭeṣṭhīvyate%} or
{%teṣṭhīvyate;%} [cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">σίαλον, σίαλος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στυγέω, στύξ, σπῖλος, σπιλόω, ψύττω, πτύω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐπιφθύζω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>spuo;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>speivan;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>spiwan;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>spīchilla.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>47704<pc>1034-b<k1>zWIvana<k2>zWIvana
{%Ṣṭhīvana, am,%}¦ n. the act of spitting, ejecting
saliva; saliva, spittle.
<LEND>

<L>47705<pc>1034-b<k1>zWIvyamAna<k2>zWIvyamAna
{%Ṣṭhīvyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being spit.
<LEND>

<L>47706<pc>1034-b<k1>zWeva<k2>zWeva
{%Ṣṭheva, as,%}¦ m. spitting, sputtering.
<LEND>

<L>47707<pc>1034-b<k1>zWevana<k2>zWevana
{%Ṣṭhevana, am,%}¦ n. {%= ṣṭhīvana.%}
<LEND>

<L>47708<pc>1034-b<k1>zWevitavya<k2>zWevitavya
{%Ṣṭhevitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spit or spit out.
<LEND>

<L>47709<pc>1034-b<k1>zWevitf<k2>zWevitf
{%Ṣṭhevitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who spits, spitting.
<LEND>

<L>47710<pc>1034-b<k1>zWevitvA<k2>zWevitvA
{%Ṣṭhevitvā,%}¦ ind. having spit, having ejected saliva.
<LEND>

<L>47711<pc>1034-b<k1>zWevin<k2>zWevin
{%Ṣṭhevin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ spitting, ejecting from the
mouth.
<LEND>

<L>47712<pc>1034-b<k1>zWevya<k2>zWevya
{%Ṣṭhevya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spit, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47713<pc>1034-b<k1>zWyUta<k2>zWyUta
{%Ṣṭhyūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spit, ejected (as saliva).
<LEND>

<L>47714<pc>1034-b<k1>zWyUti<k2>zWyUti
{%Ṣṭhyūti, is,%}¦ f. spitting, sputtering out.
<LEND>

<L>47715<pc>1034-b<k1>zWyUtvA<k2>zWyUtvA
{%Ṣṭhyūtvā,%}¦ ind. having spit or spit out.
<LEND>

<L>47716<pc>1034-b<k1>zvakk<k2>zvakk
{#zvakk#}¦ {%ṣvakk%} = rt. {%ṣvask.%}
<LEND>

<L>47717<pc>1034-b<k1>zvask<k2>zvask
{#zvask#}¦ {%ṣvask%} or {%ṣvaṣk%} (also written
{%ṣvakk, ṣukk, svask%}), cl. 1. A. {%ṣva-%}
{%skate, ṣvaṣkate,%} &c., to go, (in Naigh. II. 14.
{%ṣvaḥkati,%} or according to another reading {%ṣvaṣ-%}
{%kati,%} and {%ṣaṣkati%} are enumerated among the
{%gati-karmāṇaḥ.%})
<LEND>
<H>{#sa#}

<L>47718<pc>1034-b<k1>sa<k2>sa<h>1
{#sa#} 1¦. {%sa,%} the thirty-second consonant of
the Nāgarī alphabet and last of the three sibilants;
it belongs to the dental class and in sound corres-
ponds to {%s%} in {%sin%}. {%—Sa-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or
sound {%s.%}
<LEND>

<L>47719<pc>1034-b<k1>sa<k2>sa<h>2
{#sa#} 2¦. {%sa,%} (in prosody) an anapest or foot
consisting of two short syllables followed by a long
one.
<LEND>

<L>47720<pc>1034-b<k1>sa<k2>sa<h>3
{#sa#} 3¦. {%sa, as,%} m. a snake; air, wind; a
bird; an abbreviated term for the musical note
{%ṣaḍ-ja;%} Śiva; Viṣṇu; ({%ā%}), f. the goddess Lak-
ṣmī; ({%am%}), n. knowledge; meditation; a carriage
road; a fence.
<LEND>

<L>47721<pc>1034-b<k1>sa<k2>sa<h>4
{#sa#} 4¦. {%sa,%} the actual base for the nom. case
masc. of the third personal pronoun {%tad,%} q. v., (Ved.
loc. {%sasmin.%})
<LEND>

<L>47722<pc>1034-b<k1>sa<k2>sa<h>5
{#sa#} 5¦. {%sa,%} ind. a prefix substituted for {%saha%}
or {%sam%} or {%sama,%} and when combined with nouns to
form compound adjectives and adverbs yielding the
senses ‘with,’ ‘together with,’ ‘along with,’ ‘having,’
‘accompanied by,’ ‘possessing,’ ‘same,’ ‘similar,’ or
translateable by the English adverbial affix ‘ly’
(e. g. {%sa-kopa,%} having anger, angry; {%sa-kopam,%}
[Page1034-c+ 77]
with anger, angrily; {%sa-bhārya,%} accompanied by a
wife; {%sāgni,%} along with fire; {%sopadhi,%} fraudu-
lently; {%sa-dharman,%} having similar duties); [cf.
Lith. <nsi>sa</nsi> in <nsi>sa-darbininkas,</nsi> ‘a fellow-worker;’ <nsi>sa-</nsi>
<nsi>karawis,</nsi> ‘a fellow-soldier:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">σα</lang> in <lang n="greek">σαφής</lang> (cf.
<lang n="greek">φάος, φῶς</lang>); <lang n="greek">ἀ</lang> in some compounds, as in <lang n="greek">ἄλοχος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἄκοιτις, ἀκοίτης, ἀδελφός</lang> ({%= sodara%}).]
<LEND>

<L>47723<pc>1034-c<k1>saM<k2>saM
{#saM#}¦ {%saṃ,%} ind. See {%sam.%}
<LEND>

<L>47724<pc>1034-c<k1>saMya<k2>saMya
{#saMya#}¦ {%saṃ-ya.%} See under {%saṃ-yam%} below.
<LEND>

<L>47725<pc>1034-c<k1>saMyaj<k2>saMyaj
{#saMyaj#}¦ {%saṃ-yaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-yajati, -te,%}
{%-yaṣṭum,%} to worship together, offer sacrifices at
the same time; to sacrifice, worship, adore, honour;
to consecrate, dedicate: Caus. {%-yājayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to sacrifice together; (in Vedic ritual) to
perform the Patnī-saṃyājas, repeat the Saṃ-yāja
Mantras; to perform a sacrifice for another, act as
sacrificing priest for any one (acc.).
<LEND>

<L>47726<pc>1034-c<k1>saMyAja<k2>saMyAja
{%Saṃ-yāja, as,%}¦ m. a sacrifice, (see {%patnī-s˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>47727<pc>1034-c<k1>saMyAjya<k2>saMyAjya
{%Saṃ-yājya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be made or allowed to
sacrifice, &c., ({%a-saṃyājya,%} one with whom nobody
is allowed to sacrifice); ({%am%}), n. sacrificing [cf.
{%ayājya-s˚%}]; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the Yājyā and Anu-
vākyā Mantras (as required in the Sviṣṭa-kṛt
ceremony).
<LEND>

<L>47728<pc>1034-c<k1>samizwa<k2>samizwa
{%Sam-iṣṭa.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>47729<pc>1034-c<k1>saMyat<k2>saMyat<h>1
{#saMyat#} 1¦. {%saṃ-yat,%} cl. 1. A. (Ved. also P.)
{%-yatate (-ti),%} to unite, join (P. Ved., but according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VI. 67, 3. {%saṃyatathas =%}
{%saṃyacchathas%}); to form or be formed in rows; to
unite, meet together, agree, coincide, coalesce, join
with; to encounter, quarrel, dispute, contend (e. g.
{%devāsurāḥ samayatanta,%} the gods and Asuras con-
tended).
<LEND>

<L>47730<pc>1034-c<k1>saMyatta<k2>saMyatta
{%Saṃ-yatta, as, ā, am,%}¦ prepared, ready, entirely
devoted to, taking great care, being on guard.
<LEND>

<L>47731<pc>1034-c<k1>saMyantrita<k2>saMyantrita
{#saMyantrita#}¦ {%saṃ-yantrita, as, ā, am,%} fastened
with bands, held in, stopped.
<LEND>

<L>47732<pc>1034-c<k1>saMyam<k2>saMyam
{#saMyam#}¦ {%saṃ-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati%} (some-
times also A. {%-te%}), &c., {%-yantum,%} to hold together,
hold in, hold fast; to restrain thoroughly or com-
pletely, check, guide, control, govern, have power
over; to guide or drive horses; to keep down,
suppress (passions, feelings, &c.), subdue; to bind or
fasten together, tie up; to put together, heap up;
to shut up, close; to keep or maintain in order;
to constrain; to make a present, present with, give
to (A. with inst. of person when the action is illicit;
P. with dat. when the action is usual, see Pāṇ. I.
3, 55): Pass. {%-yamyate,%} to be restrained or kept
in check, &c.: Caus. {%-yamayati,%} &c., to cause to
restrain, &c.; to subdue, overcome; to fasten to-
gether, bind up.
<LEND>

<L>47733<pc>1034-c<k1>saMya<k2>saMya
{%Saṃ-ya, as,%}¦ m. a skeleton.
<LEND>

<L>47734<pc>1034-c<k1>saMyat<k2>saMyat<h>2
2. {%saṃ-yat, t, t, t%}¦ (also to be connected with rt.
2. {%yat%}), Ved. making efforts, zealous, eager; strong,
plentiful, abundant; ({%t%}), m. f. contest, conflict, war,
battle ({%= saṅgrāma,%} Naigh. II. 17). {%—Saṃyad-%}
{%vara, as,%} m. ‘chief in battle,’ a king, prince, chief;
[cf. {%sampadvara.%}] {%—Saṃyad-vīra, as, ā, am,%} ex-
plained by Sāy. on Ṛg-veda II. 4, 8. {%saṃyato vīrā%}
{%yasmin tādṛśa,%} perhaps an epithet of ‘food’ as
‘supporting strong heroes.’
<LEND>

<L>47735<pc>1034-c<k1>saMyata<k2>saMyata
{%Saṃ-yata, as, ā, am,%}¦ held together, held in;
well or completely restrained, checked, controlled,
fettered, confined, governed, guided, driven; kept
down, suppressed, subdued; bound together, bound;
fastened up, tied up; imprisoned; restricted, limited,
kept in order, arranged; {%= udyata,%} prepared, ready
(with inf.); ({%as%}), m. one who restrains or controls
himself, an ascetic; epithet of Śiva. {%—Saṃyata-%}
{%cetas, ās, ās, as,%} one whose mind is restrained,
controlled in mind. {%—Saṃyata-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%}
one whose breath is suppressed or whose organs are
restrained. {%—Śaṃyata-mānasa, as, ā, am,%} having
the mind completely controlled. {%—Saṃyata-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} one who has restrained or controlled (his
passions, feelings, &c.). {%—Saṃyata-vastra, as, ā, %}
[Page1035-a+ 78]
{%am,%} one whose dress is fastened. {%—Saṃyata-vāc,%}
{%k, k, k,%} restrained in speech, taciturn, silent. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%yatākṣa (˚ta-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} one whose eyes are
restrained or closed. {%—Saṃyatāñjali (˚ta-añ˚), is,%}
{%is, i,%} one whose hands are joined together (for en-
treaty or salutation, {%= baddhāñjali%}). {%—Saṃyatāt-%}
{%man (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} one whose mind is restrained
or subdued, having a well regulated spirit, self-con-
trolled. {%—Saṃyatāhāra (˚ta-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} one
whose food is restrained, temperate in eating. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%yatendriya (˚ta-in˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose senses
or passions are restrained, controlled in feelings.
{%—Saṃyatopaskara (˚ta-up˚), as, ā, am,%} one
whose house-furniture is kept in order, having a
well regulated house.
<LEND>

<L>47736<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyatvara<k2>saMyatvara
{%Saṃyatvara, as,%}¦ m. (according to Śabda-k.) {%=%}
{%vāg-yata; = jantu-samūha.%}
<LEND>

<L>47737<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyantf<k2>saMyantf
{%Saṃ-yantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who restrains or keeps
in check, restraining, controlling, &c., a restrainer.
<LEND>

<L>47738<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyama<k2>saMyama
{%Saṃ-yama, as,%}¦ m. restraint, check, control, for-
bearance, abstinence; N. of the last three stages of
the Yoga system; a religious vow; any religious act
on the day preceding a vow or course of penance;
avoiding infliction of pain on others, humanity, com-
passionateness. {%—Saṃyama-puṇya-tīrtha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having restraint for a holy place of pilgrimage.
<LEND>

<L>47739<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyamaka<k2>saMyamaka
{%Saṃ-yamaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} restraining,
checking, curbing; who or what restrains, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47740<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyamat<k2>saMyamat
{%Saṃ-yamat, an, antī, at,%}¦ restraining, subduing,
curbing, who or what restrains, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47741<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyamana<k2>saMyamana
{%Saṃ-yamana, as,%}¦ m. one who restrains, a ruler;
({%am%}), n. the act of restraining, checking; binding,
confinement; drawing in; holding, detaining; for-
bearance, self-denial, control; a religious vow or
obligation; a cluster or square of four houses; ({%ī%}),
f., N. of the city or residence of Yama.
<LEND>

<L>47742<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyamita<k2>saMyamita
{%Saṃ-yamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ restrained, checked,
controlled, regulated; bound, confined, fettered,
held, detained; assembled, collected.
<LEND>

<L>47743<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyamin<k2>saMyamin
{%Saṃ-yamin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ who or what restrains or
subdues, restraining, checking, curbing, abstaining;
({%ī%}), m. one who subdues or controls his passions, an
ascetic, saint, sage, hermit.
<LEND>

<L>47744<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyamya<k2>saMyamya
{%Saṃ-yamya,%}¦ ind. having restrained or controlled;
having bound together or fastened up; having
fastened or closed.
<LEND>

<L>47745<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyamyamAna<k2>saMyamyamAna
{%Saṃ-yamyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being held to-
gether or restrained.
<LEND>

<L>47746<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyAma<k2>saMyAma
{%Saṃ-yāma, as,%}¦ m. restraint, check, control, for-
bearance; abstaining from giving pain to others,
humanity. {%—Saṃyāma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed
of restraint, forbearing.
<LEND>

<L>47747<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyas<k2>saMyas
{#saMyas#}¦ {%saṃ-yas,%} cl. 4. 1. P. {%-yasyati, -ya-%}
{%sati,%} &c., to make effort, &c., (see rt. {%yas.%})
<LEND>

<L>47748<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyAsa<k2>saMyAsa
{%Saṃ-yāsa, as,%}¦ m. making effort, exertion, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47749<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyA<k2>saMyA
{#saMyA#}¦ {%saṃ-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%} to go
or proceed together, go, wander, travel; to come
together, assemble, meet; to meet together (hos-
tilely), come to blows, fight; to go to, enter, pene-
trate; to go to any state or condition (e. g. {%ekatāṃ%}
{%saṃyā,%} ‘to go to oneness, become one’); to go
towards, be directed towards, aim at; to come.
<LEND>

<L>47750<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyAta<k2>saMyAta
{%Saṃ-yāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone or proceeded to-
gether, travelled.
<LEND>

<L>47751<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyAtrA<k2>saMyAtrA
{%Saṃ-yātrā,%}¦ f. travelling, voyaging by sea (to
another country).
<LEND>

<L>47752<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyAna<k2>saMyAna
{%Saṃ-yāna, as,%}¦ m. a mould; ({%am%}), n. going toge-
ther, going along with, accompanying; proceeding, tra-
velling, departure; the carrying out of a dead body.
<LEND>

<L>47753<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyAc<k2>saMyAc
{#saMyAc#}¦ {%saṃ-yāc,%} cl. 1. A. {%-yācate, -yācitum,%}
to ask, beg, request, implore, solicit.
<LEND>

<L>47754<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyAma<k2>saMyAma
{#saMyAma#}¦ {%saṃ-yāma.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>47755<pc>1035-a<k1>saMyu<k2>saMyu
{#saMyu#}¦ {%saṃ-yu,%} cl. 2. P., 9. P. A. {%-yauti, -yu-%}
{%nāti, -yunīte,%} (for Ved. forms see under rt. 2. {%yu%}),
{%-yavitum,%} to attach to one's self, lay hold of, attack,
consume (Ved.); to attach to, share with, bestow
on (Ved.); to join or connect together, mix, mingle,
combine, unite.
<LEND>
[Page1035-b+ 78]

<L>47756<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyavana<k2>saMyavana
{%Saṃ-yavana, am,%}¦ n. {%= sañ-javana,%} a square of
four houses.
<LEND>

<L>47757<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyAva<k2>saMyAva
{%Saṃ-yāva, as,%}¦ m. a sort of cake (of wheaten
flour fried with ghee and milk and made up into
an oblong form with sugar and spices).
<LEND>

<L>47758<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyuta<k2>saMyuta
{%Saṃ-yuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined together, connected,
joined, attached, mixed with, blended, heaped to-
gether; endowed or furnished with; consisting of
(with inst.); relating to, implying, ({%praiṣya-s˚,%} [a
name] implying service.)
<LEND>

<L>47759<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyuyUzu<k2>saMyuyUzu
{%Saṃ-yuyūṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to join together,
wishing to unite, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47760<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyuj<k2>saMyuj<h>1
{#saMyuj#} 1¦. {%saṃ-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti,%}
{%-yuṅkte,%} &c., {%-yoktum,%} to join or attach together,
connect, combine, unite; to endow with; to form
an alliance, league together; to place in, fix in or
on, set in (with loc.), direct towards: Pass. {%-yuj-%}
{%yate,%} to be joined together, be united, &c.: Caus.
{%-yojayati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to join together;
to bring together, unite, connect, mix together; to
yoke, harness; to prepare, equip (an army); to
fasten or fix on, put on (with loc.), direct towards;
to shoot, discharge (a missile &c.); to use, employ;
to place in, appoint to (an office); to prepare, equip
(an army &c.); to furnish or supply with, endow
with, provide with, present with; to give over to,
entrust with (with acc. and gen.); to bring about, per-
form, accomplish; to be absorbed, meditate (A.).
<LEND>

<L>47761<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyukta<k2>saMyukta
{%Saṃ-yukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ conjoined, joined with,
connected, attached; mixed, blended; accompanied
or attended by; endowed or furnished with, pos-
sessed of.
<LEND>

<L>47762<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyuga<k2>saMyuga
{%Saṃ-yuga, as,%}¦ m. conjunction, union, mixture;
conflict, contest, war, battle, (in Naigh. II. 17. {%saṃ-%}
{%yuge%} [loc. c.] is enumerated among the {%saṅgrāma-%}
{%nāmāni.%}) {%—Saṃyuga-goṣpada, am,%} n. a contest
in a cow's footstep, i. e. an insignificant struggle.
<LEND>

<L>47763<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyuj<k2>saMyuj<h>2
2. {%saṃ-yuj, k, k, k,%}¦ joined together, united, con-
nected, associated with; possessed of or endowed
with good qualities.
<LEND>

<L>47764<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyujya<k2>saMyujya
{%Saṃ-yujya,%}¦ ind. having joined together, becom-
ing united.
<LEND>

<L>47765<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyoga<k2>saMyoga
{%Saṃ-yoga, as,%}¦ m. conjunction, connection, junc-
tion, adherence, intimate union, close connection,
association, living together; a kind of alliance or
peace made between two kings for a common object;
(in phil.) simple conjunction or connection; conjunc-
tion (as one of the twenty-four Guṇas of the Nyāya);
a particular relation, (see under {%sam-bandha%}); ad-
herence, possession; (in gram.) a conjunct conso-
nant; (in astron.) conjunction of two heavenly
bodies; endowment with; annexation, addition, ac-
cession; epithet of Śiva. {%—Saṃyoga-pṛthaktva,%}
{%am,%} n. (in phil.) separateness or severalty of con-
junction, (a term applied to express the distinction
between what is optional and non-optional in an
action.) {%—Saṃyoga-viruddha, am,%} n. any eatables
which cause disease by being mixed.
<LEND>

<L>47766<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyogita<k2>saMyogita
{%Saṃ-yogita, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined together, con-
nected, annexed.
<LEND>

<L>47767<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyogin<k2>saMyogin
{%Saṃ-yogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having union or connection,
conjoined, associated; joining, connecting.
<LEND>

<L>47768<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyojaka<k2>saMyojaka
{%Saṃ-yojaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ joining together, con-
necting, uniting.
<LEND>

<L>47769<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyojana<k2>saMyojana
{%Saṃ-yojana, am,%}¦ n. the act of joining or uniting
together, conjunction; copulation, coition; ({%prahi-%}
{%toḥ? saṃyojanam,%} N. of a Sāman.)
<LEND>

<L>47770<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyojita<k2>saMyojita
{%Saṃ-yojita, as, ā, am,%}¦ conjoined, attached, an-
nexed.
<LEND>

<L>47771<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyojya<k2>saMyojya
{%Saṃ-yojya,%}¦ ind. having joined together or united;
having enjoined or directed.
<LEND>

<L>47772<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyuD<k2>saMyuD
{#saMyuD#}¦ {%saṃ-yudh,%} cl. 4. A. {%-yudhyate, -yod-%}
{%dhum,%} to fight together, fight with, combat, oppose:
Caus. {%-yodhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to fight together,
bring into conflict or collision; to fight together,
encounter: Desid. {%-yuyutsati,%} to desire to fight, be
eager for battle.
<LEND>

<L>47773<pc>1035-b<k1>saMyup<k2>saMyup
{#saMyup#}¦ {%saṃ-yup,%} cl. 4. P. {%-yupyati,%} &c.,
[Page1035-c+ 77]
Ved. to efface: Caus. {%-yopayati, -yitum,%} to efface,
obliterate.
<LEND>

<L>47774<pc>1035-c<k1>saMyopayat<k2>saMyopayat
{%Saṃ-yopayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. obliterating,
effacing; smoothing.
<LEND>

<L>47775<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrakz<k2>saMrakz
{#saMrakz#}¦ {%saṃ-rakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rakṣati, -rak-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to guard, watch, take care of, protect, de-
fend, preserve, save; to keep off, ward off.
<LEND>

<L>47776<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrakza<k2>saMrakza
{%Saṃ-rakṣa, as,%}¦ m. protection, care, preservation,
ward.
<LEND>

<L>47777<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrakzaRa<k2>saMrakzaRa
{%Saṃ-rakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of protecting,
guarding, preserving, taking care of, charge, custody,
protection; saving.
<LEND>

<L>47778<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrakzita<k2>saMrakzita
{%Saṃ-rakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ protected, preserved,
taken care of.
<LEND>

<L>47779<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrakzitavya<k2>saMrakzitavya
{%Saṃ-rakṣitavya%}¦ or {%saṃ-rakṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}
to be preserved or guarded or taken care of.
<LEND>

<L>47780<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrakzya<k2>saMrakzya<h>1
1. {%saṃ-rakṣya, as, ā, am, = saṃ-rakṣitavya%}¦
above.
<LEND>

<L>47781<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrakzya<k2>saMrakzya<h>2
2. {%saṃ-rakṣya,%}¦ ind. having guarded or protected,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>47782<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrakzyamARa<k2>saMrakzyamARa
{%Saṃ-rakṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being protected
or preserved.
<LEND>

<L>47783<pc>1035-c<k1>saMraYj<k2>saMraYj
{#saMraYj#}¦ {%saṃ-rañj,%} cl. 1. 4. P. A. {%-rajati, -te,%}
{%-rajyati, -te, -raṅktum,%} to be dyed or coloured,
become red; to be affected with any passion: Caus.
{%-rañjayati, -te, -yitum,%} to colour, dye, redden; to
please, gratify, charm.
<LEND>

<L>47784<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrakta<k2>saMrakta
{%Saṃ-rakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ coloured, red; impas-
sioned; inflamed, angry, enamoured, charmed;
charming, beautiful. {%—Saṃrakta-locana, as, ā, am,%}
red-eyed, having the eyes reddened (with fury).
<LEND>

<L>47785<pc>1035-c<k1>saMraYjayat<k2>saMraYjayat
{%Saṃ-rañjayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ colouring, dyeing;
pleasing, gratifying.
<LEND>

<L>47786<pc>1035-c<k1>saMraYjita<k2>saMraYjita
{%Saṃ-rañjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ coloured, dyed, reddened.
<LEND>

<L>47787<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrAga<k2>saMrAga
{%Saṃ-rāga, as,%}¦ m. colouring; affection, passion;
anger.
<LEND>

<L>47788<pc>1035-c<k1>saMraB<k2>saMraB
{#saMraB#}¦ {%saṃ-rabh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rabhate, -rab-%}
{%dhum,%} to seize or take hold of together (Ved.),
take hold of mutually; to become possessed of, (Sāy.
{%saṃrabhemahi = saṅgacchemahi,%} Ṛg-veda I. 53,
4, 5); to become roused or incensed or angry.
<LEND>

<L>47789<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrabDa<k2>saMrabDa
{%Saṃ-rabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ seized, held, taken hold
of (Ved.); closely joined or connected, hand in hand;
excited, aroused, exasperated, inflamed, agitated;
incensed, enraged, furious, angry; increased, aug-
mented; swelled, swelling; overwhelmed. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%rabdha-netra, as, ā, am,%} having inflamed or angry
eyes.
<LEND>

<L>47790<pc>1035-c<k1>saMraBya<k2>saMraBya
{%Saṃ-rabhya,%}¦ ind. having become angry, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47791<pc>1035-c<k1>saMramBa<k2>saMramBa
{%Saṃ-rambha, as,%}¦ m. taking hold of, beginning
[cf. {%ā-rambha%}]; energy, zeal, impetuosity, impetu-
ous onset, turbulence; agitation, flurry, rage, wrath,
fury, anger; pride, arrogance; swelling with heat
and inflammation. {%—Saṃrambha-tāmra, as, ā, am,%}
red with fury. {%—Saṃrambha-paruṣa, as, ā, am,%}
harsh from rage, impetuously harsh or rough. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%rambha-rasa, as, ā, am,%} feeling great wrath or
resentment. {%—Saṃrambha-vega, as,%} m. the violence
or impetuosity of wrath.
<LEND>

<L>47792<pc>1035-c<k1>saMramBamARa<k2>saMramBamARa
{%Saṃ-rambhamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being aroused or
excited, being incensed.
<LEND>

<L>47793<pc>1035-c<k1>saMramBin<k2>saMramBin
{%Saṃrambhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ agitated, exasperated, flur-
ried; wrathful, furious, angry; proud. {%—Saṃram-%}
{%bhi-tā,%} f. or {%saṃrambhi-tva, am,%} n. agitation;
wrath, fury; pride.
<LEND>

<L>47794<pc>1035-c<k1>saMram<k2>saMram
{#saMram#}¦ {%saṃ-ram,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ramate, -rantum,%}
to be delighted, find pleasure in (with loc.), rejoice
greatly; to have carnal pleasure or sexual intercourse
with, dally with.
<LEND>

<L>47795<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrA<k2>saMrA
{#saMrA#}¦ {%saṃ-rā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-rāti,%} &c., Ved. to
give liberally, bestow, grant, confer.
<LEND>

<L>47796<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrarARa<k2>saMrarARa
{%Saṃ-rarāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. bestowing, grant-
ing, liberal, (Sāy. {%= saṃ-ramamāṇa%}); sharing, di-
viding.
<LEND>

<L>47797<pc>1035-c<k1>saMrAj<k2>saMrAj<h>1
{#saMrAj#} 1¦. {%saṃ-rāj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-rājati, -te,%}
{%rājitum,%} to reign universally, reign as a paramount
sovereign, reign over.
<LEND>
[Page1036-a+ 75]

<L>47798<pc>1036-a<k1>SaMrAj<k2>SaMrAj<h>2
2. {%śaṃ-rāj, ṭ,%}¦ m. (properly written with {%m%} by Pāṇ.
VIII. 3, 25). See {%sam-rāj%} s. v.
<LEND>

<L>47799<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrAjat<k2>saMrAjat
{%Saṃ-rājat, an, antī, at,%}¦ reigning universally;
({%an%}), m. a sovereign lord ({%= sam-rāj,%} and written
with {%m%} in Ṛg-veda I. 27, 1).
<LEND>

<L>47800<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrAD<k2>saMrAD
{#saMrAD#}¦ {%saṃ-rādh,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-rādhyati, -te,%}
&c. (see rt. {%rādh,%} p. 842), to be accomplished or
perfected; to be acquired or brought into possession:
Caus. {%-rādhayati, -yitum,%} to bring into harmony;
to agree together, agree about or upon (with loc.);
to conciliate, propitiate, appease, satisfy.
<LEND>

<L>47801<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrAdDa<k2>saMrAdDa
{%Saṃ-rāddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ accomplished, acquired,
participated in.
<LEND>

<L>47802<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrADana<k2>saMrADana
{%Saṃ-rādhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of propitiating or
appeasing, conciliation, propitiation, pleasing by wor-
ship; the act of accomplishing or perfecting; perfect
meditation.
<LEND>

<L>47803<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrADayat<k2>saMrADayat
{%Saṃ-rādhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bringing into har-
mony; agreeing with, being in unison with; con-
ciliating.
<LEND>

<L>47804<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrADita<k2>saMrADita
{%Saṃ-rādhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ propitiated, appeased,
pleased.
<LEND>

<L>47805<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrADya<k2>saMrADya
{%Saṃ-rādhya,%}¦ ind. having propitiated, having
gratified.
<LEND>

<L>47806<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrAva<k2>saMrAva
{#saMrAva#}¦ {%saṃ-rāva.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>47807<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrih<k2>saMrih
{#saMrih#}¦ {%saṃ-rih,%} a Vedic form of {%saṃ-lih,%}
q. v., (see also rt. {%rih,%} p. 847.)
<LEND>

<L>47808<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrihARa<k2>saMrihARa
{%Saṃ-rihāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ affectionately licking,
caressing (said of a cow licking its calf).
<LEND>

<L>47809<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrI<k2>saMrI
{#saMrI#}¦ {%saṃ-rī,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-riṇāti, -riṇīte,%}
&c. (see rts. 1. {%ri,%} 1. {%rī%}), Ved. to bring together,
restore, set free, liberate; to wash, purify.
<LEND>

<L>47810<pc>1036-a<k1>saMru<k2>saMru
{#saMru#}¦ {%saṃ-ru,%} cl. 2. P. {%-rauti, -ravīti,%} &c.,
to cry or clamour together, shout, roar.
<LEND>

<L>47811<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrAva<k2>saMrAva
{%Saṃ-rāva, as,%}¦ m. clamour, uproar, tumult, sound,
noise.
<LEND>

<L>47812<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrAvin<k2>saMrAvin
{%Saṃ-rāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ shouting together, making
an uproar, clamouring, roaring.
<LEND>

<L>47813<pc>1036-a<k1>saMruc<k2>saMruc
{#saMruc#}¦ {%saṃ-ruc,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rocate, -rocitum,%}
to shine together or at the same time, shine along
with, shine in rivalry; to shine, beam, glitter:
Caus. {%-rocayati, -yitum,%} to find or take pleasure in
(with acc.); to like, love, approve, choose, select.
<LEND>

<L>47814<pc>1036-a<k1>saMruj<k2>saMruj
{#saMruj#}¦ {%saṃ-ruj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-rujati,%} &c., to
break entirely, break to pieces, shatter.
<LEND>

<L>47815<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrugRa<k2>saMrugRa
{%Saṃ-rugṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken to pieces, shattered.
<LEND>

<L>47816<pc>1036-a<k1>saMruD<k2>saMruD
{#saMruD#}¦ {%saṃ-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ruṇaddhi,%}
{%-runddhe, -roddhum,%} to stop completely, check,
obstruct, hinder, keep back, restrain; to hold fast,
fetter; to stop up, block up, stuff up, stuff, fill; to
close up, shut up, besiege, invest, confine; to cover
over, cover up, conceal; to keep from, withhold, re-
frain, refuse: Caus. {%-rodhayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to stop, obstruct.
<LEND>

<L>47817<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrudDa<k2>saMrudDa
{%Saṃ-ruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely stopped,
checked, impeded, opposed, attacked; stopped up,
blocked up, stuffed, filled; shut up, confined, be-
sieged, invested; covered over, concealed, obscured;
stopped or blocked up, filled; withheld, refused.
<LEND>

<L>47818<pc>1036-a<k1>saMruDya<k2>saMruDya
{%Saṃ-rudhya,%}¦ ind. having completely obstructed,
having blocked up.
<LEND>

<L>47819<pc>1036-a<k1>saMroDa<k2>saMroDa
{%Saṃ-rodha, as,%}¦ m. complete obstruction or op-
position, impediment, hindrance, stop, prevention,
check, curb; bond, fetter; throwing, sending.
<LEND>

<L>47820<pc>1036-a<k1>saMroDya<k2>saMroDya
{%Saṃ-rodhya,%}¦ ind. having completely obstructed
or stopped.
<LEND>

<L>47821<pc>1036-a<k1>saMruz<k2>saMruz
{#saMruz#}¦ {%saṃ-ruṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-roṣati,%} &c., to
annoy, displease, make angry: Caus. {%-roṣayati,%}
&c., to enrage, irritate.
<LEND>

<L>47822<pc>1036-a<k1>saMruzita<k2>saMruzita
{%Saṃ-ruṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ enraged, angry, irritated.
<LEND>

<L>47823<pc>1036-a<k1>saMrozyamARa<k2>saMrozyamARa
{%Saṃ-roṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being enraged,
being irritated.
<LEND>

<L>47824<pc>1036-a<k1>saMruh<k2>saMruh
{#saMruh#}¦ {%saṃ-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati, -roḍhum,%}
to grow together; to grow over, be cicatrized, heal;
to grow up, grow, increase, break forth, appear:
[Page1036-b+ 75]
Caus. {%-ropayati, -yitum,%} to cause to grow together
or grow over or cicatrize; to heal; to cause to grow,
plant, set, sow.
<LEND>

<L>47825<pc>1036-b<k1>saMrUQa<k2>saMrUQa
{%Saṃ-rūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown together, grown
over, cicatrized, healed; grown, sprouted, budded,
blossomed; burst forth, appeared; growing fast or
firmly, taking firm root; confident, bold {%(= prau-%}
{%ḍha)%}. {%—Saṃrūḍha-vraṇa, as, ā, am,%} having a
healed or cicatrized wound.
<LEND>

<L>47826<pc>1036-b<k1>saMropita<k2>saMropita
{%Saṃ-ropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to grow, planted,
sown, impregnated.
<LEND>

<L>47827<pc>1036-b<k1>saMrohat<k2>saMrohat
{%Saṃ-rohat, an, antī, at,%}¦ growing up, breaking
or bursting forth, appearing.
<LEND>

<L>47828<pc>1036-b<k1>saMrUz<k2>saMrUz
{#saMrUz#}¦ {%saṃ-rūṣ,%} cl. 10. or Caus. {%-rūṣayati,%}
{%-roṣayati (?),%} &c., to spread over, smear, cover.
<LEND>

<L>47829<pc>1036-b<k1>saMrUzita<k2>saMrUzita
{%Saṃ-rūṣita%}¦ or {%saṃ-roṣita, as, ā, am,%} spread
over, covered, besmeared.
<LEND>

<L>47830<pc>1036-b<k1>saMrej<k2>saMrej
{#saMrej#}¦ {%saṃ-rej,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rejate,%} &c., Ved.
to shake, quake, tremble.
<LEND>

<L>47831<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlakz<k2>saMlakz
{#saMlakz#}¦ {%saṃ-lakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-lakṣayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to mark distinctly, distinguish, charac-
terize; to observe, see, perceive, feel; to hear, learn,
understand; to test, prove, try: Pass. {%-lakṣyate,%} to
be distinguished; to be observed, &c.; to appear,
seem; to be tested or proved.
<LEND>

<L>47832<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlakzaRa<k2>saMlakzaRa
{%Saṃ-lakṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of marking, dis-
tinguishing, characterizing.
<LEND>

<L>47833<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlakzita<k2>saMlakzita
{%Saṃ-lakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ distinctly marked,
distinguished, characterized; observed, recognised,
known.
<LEND>

<L>47834<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlakzya<k2>saMlakzya<h>1
1. {%saṃ-lakṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be marked, dis-
tinguishable, to be observed.
<LEND>

<L>47835<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlakzya<k2>saMlakzya<h>2
2. {%saṃ-lakṣya,%}¦ ind. having observed or per-
ceived, having heard.
<LEND>

<L>47836<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlag<k2>saMlag
{#saMlag#}¦ {%saṃ-lag,%} cl. 1. P. {%-lagati,%} &c., to
adhere or stick together: Caus. {%-lāgayati,%} &c., to
put or place firmly upon.
<LEND>

<L>47837<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlagna<k2>saMlagna
{%Saṃ-lagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ closely attached, stuck
together, joined together, united with, adhering,
adherent, sticking in, fallen into; come to close
contact, come to blows.
<LEND>

<L>47838<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlaNG<k2>saMlaNG
{#saMlaNG#}¦ {%saṃ-laṅgh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-laṅghati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to leap over or beyond, pass by.
<LEND>

<L>47839<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlaNGita<k2>saMlaNGita
{%Saṃ-laṅghita, as, ā, am,%}¦ passed by, gone by.
<LEND>

<L>47840<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlajj<k2>saMlajj
{#saMlajj#}¦ {%saṃ-lajj,%} cl. 6. A. {%-lajjate,%} &c., to
be ashamed, become embarrassed, blush.
<LEND>

<L>47841<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlajjamAna<k2>saMlajjamAna
{%Saṃ-lajjamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being ashamed or
embarrassed, blushing.
<LEND>

<L>47842<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlap<k2>saMlap
{#saMlap#}¦ {%saṃ-lap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-lapati,%} &c., to
talk together, chat, converse; to address, call, name:
Pass. {%-lapyate,%} to be spoken of, be called or named:
Caus. {%-lāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to converse, ad-
dress.
<LEND>

<L>47843<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlApa<k2>saMlApa
{%Saṃ-lāpa, as,%}¦ m. talking together, familiar or
friendly conversation, confabulation, chat, discourse;
(in the drama) a kind of dialogue (having an occult
meaning).
<LEND>

<L>47844<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlApaka<k2>saMlApaka
{%Saṃ-lāpaka, am,%}¦ n. a species of minor drama
(said to be of a controversial kind).
<LEND>

<L>47845<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlApita<k2>saMlApita
{%Saṃ-lāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to converse, ad-
dressed, spoken with, conversed; discoursing, con-
versing.
<LEND>

<L>47846<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlApin<k2>saMlApin
{%Saṃ-lāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ conversing together in a
friendly way, chatting; discoursing; one who con-
verses or discourses.
<LEND>

<L>47847<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlaB<k2>saMlaB
{#saMlaB#}¦ {%saṃ-labh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-labhate,%} &c.,
{%-labdhum,%} to seize one another, lay hold of mutu-
ally; to take, obtain, receive.
<LEND>

<L>47848<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlabDa<k2>saMlabDa
{%Saṃ-labdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken hold of; obtained,
received.
<LEND>

<L>47849<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlipsu<k2>saMlipsu
{%Saṃ-lipsu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of seizing or taking
hold of.
<LEND>

<L>47850<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlaya<k2>saMlaya
{#saMlaya#}¦ {%saṃ-laya.%} See {%saṃ-lī,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>47851<pc>1036-b<k1>saMlal<k2>saMlal
{#saMlal#}¦ {%saṃ-lal,%} Caus. {%-lālayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to sport or dally together; to caress, fondle.
<LEND>
[Page1036-c+ 74]

<L>47852<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlAlita<k2>saMlAlita
{%Saṃ-lālita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caressed, fondled.
<LEND>

<L>47853<pc>1036-c<k1>saMliK<k2>saMliK
{#saMliK#}¦ {%saṃ-likh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-likhati, -likhi-%}
{%tum%} or {%-lekhitum,%} to scratch, scarify, lance, make
an incision; to write, engrave, inscribe; to touch,
strike, play upon (a musical instrument).
<LEND>

<L>47854<pc>1036-c<k1>saMliKita<k2>saMliKita
{%Saṃ-likhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ scratched, &c., (used in
Atharva-veda VII. 50, 5. to express some action
practised in gambling.)
<LEND>

<L>47855<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlih<k2>saMlih
{#saMlih#}¦ {%saṃ-lih,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-leḍhi, -līḍhe,%}
{%-leḍhum,%} to lick up, lick; to devour, enjoy.
<LEND>

<L>47856<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlihat<k2>saMlihat
{%Saṃ-lihat, an, atī, at,%}¦ licking up, licking, de-
vouring.
<LEND>

<L>47857<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlihAna<k2>saMlihAna
{%Saṃ-lihāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ licking up, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47858<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlIQa<k2>saMlIQa
{%Saṃ-līḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ licked up, licked, enjoyed.
<LEND>

<L>47859<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlI<k2>saMlI
{#saMlI#}¦ {%saṃ-lī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate, -letum%} or
{%-lātum,%} to cling to, stick close to, cleave to; to
enter, go into; to lie down, cower, hide, be con-
cealed; to melt away.
<LEND>

<L>47860<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlaya<k2>saMlaya
{%Saṃ-laya, as,%}¦ m. lying down, sleep, sleepiness;
melting away, dissolution ({%= pra-laya%}).
<LEND>

<L>47861<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlayana<k2>saMlayana
{%Saṃ-layana, am,%}¦ n. the act of clinging or adher-
ing to; lying down, &c.; dissolution.
<LEND>

<L>47862<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlIna<k2>saMlIna
{%Saṃ-līna, as, ā, am,%}¦ stuck close to, clung to,
clinging to, staying in; joined together; hidden,
concealed, cowered, cowering down; contracted.
{%—Saṃlīna-karṇa, as, ā, am,%} having ears inclined
or hanging down. {%—Saṃlīna-mānasa, as, ā, am,%}
drooping or depressed in mind.
<LEND>

<L>47863<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlIya<k2>saMlIya
{%Saṃ-līya,%}¦ ind. having clung or stuck to.
<LEND>

<L>47864<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlIyamAna<k2>saMlIyamAna
{%Saṃ-līyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ lying or cowering
down.
<LEND>

<L>47865<pc>1036-c<k1>saMluq<k2>saMluq
{#saMluq#}¦ {%saṃ-luḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-loḍati,%} &c., to
agitate, stir about, disturb: Caus. {%-loḍayati, -yitum,%}
to stir about, move to and fro; to disarrange, con-
found, disturb, throw into disorder or confusion:
Pass. of Caus. {%-loḍyate,%} to be agitated, be thrown
into disorder; to be ruined.
<LEND>

<L>47866<pc>1036-c<k1>saMloqana<k2>saMloqana
{%Saṃ-loḍana, am,%}¦ n. the act of agitating, disturb-
ing, confusing; ({%as, ī, am%}), one who disturbs, &c.,
a disturber.
<LEND>

<L>47867<pc>1036-c<k1>saMloqita<k2>saMloqita
{%Saṃ-loḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, confounded, dis-
ordered, perplexed.
<LEND>

<L>47868<pc>1036-c<k1>saMloqyamAna<k2>saMloqyamAna
{%Saṃ-loḍyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being thrown into
disorder or confusion.
<LEND>

<L>47869<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlup<k2>saMlup
{#saMlup#}¦ {%saṃ-lup,%} cl. 6. P. A., 4. P. {%-lumpati,%}
{%-te, -lupyati,%} &c., {%-loptum,%} to break in pieces,
destroy; to drag, tear, tear away: Caus. {%-lopayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to perish, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>47870<pc>1036-c<k1>saMluB<k2>saMluB
{#saMluB#}¦ {%saṃ-lubh%} (in some senses apparently
connected with {%saṃ-lup%}), cl. 4. P. {%-lubhyati,%} &c.,
to be perplexed or disturbed, fall into confusion:
Caus. {%-lobhayati,%} &c., to allure, entice, seduce; to
disturb, disarrange, put in confusion (Ved.); to cause
to disappear, efface, obliterate (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>47871<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlul<k2>saMlul
{#saMlul#}¦ {%saṃ-lul,%} cl. 1. P. {%-lolati,%} &c., to
roll or stir about; to agitate, disturb.
<LEND>

<L>47872<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlulita<k2>saMlulita
{%Saṃ-lulita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, disordered, dis-
arranged; mixed up with; besmeared.
<LEND>

<L>47873<pc>1036-c<k1>saMlok<k2>saMlok
{#saMlok#}¦ {%saṃ-lok,%} cl. 1. A. {%-lokate,%} &c., to
look together, look at one another.
<LEND>

<L>47874<pc>1036-c<k1>saMvaMh<k2>saMvaMh
{#saMvaMh#}¦ {%saṃ-vaṃh.%} See {%sam-baṃh.%}
<LEND>

<L>47875<pc>1036-c<k1>saMvac<k2>saMvac
{#saMvac#}¦ {%saṃ-vac,%} cl. 2. P. (in the non-con-
jugational tenses also A., see rt. {%vac%}), {%-vakti,%} &c., to
proclaim, announce, publish, communicate; to speak,
say; to speak to, address; to remonstrate or expostu-
late with; to converse, talk with (A.).
<LEND>

<L>47876<pc>1036-c<k1>saMvAcya<k2>saMvAcya
{%Saṃ-vācya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be conversed with, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47877<pc>1036-c<k1>samukta<k2>samukta
{%Sam-ukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken to, addressed.
<LEND>

<L>47878<pc>1036-c<k1>saMvat<k2>saMvat
{#saMvat#}¦ {%saṃ-vat,%} f. (probably connected with
2. {%saṃ-vas%}), Ved. a region, (Sāy. {%= saṃvibhāga-%}
{%vat,%} i. e. {%diś,%} Ṛg-veda I. 191, 15); an assemblage
or host of people (come together for battle, &c.,
Sāy. {%saṃvataḥ = saṅgatāñ śatrūn,%} Ṛg-veda V.
15, 3; in Naigh. II. 17. {%saṃvataḥ%} is enumerated
[Page1037-a+ 77]
among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%}); ({%t%}), ind. (probably
a contraction of {%saṃ-vatsara%} below), a year; a
year of Vikramāditya's era (commencing B. C. 57,
as opposed to a year of the era of Śāli-vāhana, com-
monly called Śaka or Śāka, q. v.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔτος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐνιαυτός.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>47879<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvatsara<k2>saMvatsara
{%Saṃ-vatsara, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 72.
fr. 2. {%saṃ-vas,%} ‘to dwell with,’ because the seasons are
supposed to abide in the year; {%vas%} becomes {%vat%} before
affix {%sara,%} cf. rt. 6. {%vas%}), a full year, year, (in the
Purāṇas Saṃvatsara is personified as presiding over
the seasons); a year of Vikramāditya's era, (see
{%saṃ-vat%} above); the first year in a cycle of five
years; epithet of Śiva. {%—Saṃvatsara-kara, as,%} m.
‘year-causer,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Saṃvatsara-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} completing a full year, yearly; [cf.
{%māsa-tama.%}] {%—Saṃvatsara-nirodha, as,%} m. im-
prisonment for a year. {%—Saṃvatsara-pradīpa, as,%}
m., N. of a work. {%—Saṃvatsara-bhrami, is, is, i,%}
year-revolving, completing a revolution in a year
(said of the sun). {%—Saṃvatsara-raya, as,%} m. a
year's course.
<LEND>

<L>47880<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvad<k2>saMvad
{#saMvad#}¦ {%saṃ-vad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vadati, -te,%}
{%-vaditum,%} to speak together, speak with, converse
with (with inst.); to speak about, discourse upon
(with loc.); to speak, speak to, address; to speak
of as, designate, call, name; to sound together (said
of musical instruments; P., Ved.); to agree, accord,
consent: Caus. {%-vādayati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to
converse with, cause a conversation about (with loc.);
to cause to speak together, cause to agree; to agree
upon, accord; to state accurately, give a true account
of, declare; to invite or call upon to speak; to cause
to sound, play (a musical instrument).
<LEND>

<L>47881<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvadana<k2>saMvadana
{%Saṃ-vadana, am,%}¦ n. the act of speaking together,
conversing; communication of intelligence; con-
sideration, examination, {%= ālocana; (am, ā),%} n. f.
subduing by charms (such as mystical gems, drugs,
&c.), overpowering by magic, (probably for {%saṃ-%}
{%vanana,%} q. v.); a charm, amulet.
<LEND>

<L>47882<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvaditavya<k2>saMvaditavya
{%Saṃ-vaditavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spoken with,
to be addressed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47883<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvAda<k2>saMvAda
{%Saṃ-vāda, as,%}¦ m. speaking together, conversation,
colloquy, dialogue; discussing, discussion; commu-
nication of intelligence, report, information, news;
assent, concurrence; agreement, conformity, corres-
pondence, sameness.
<LEND>

<L>47884<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvAdana<k2>saMvAdana
{%Saṃ-vādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to con-
verse, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47885<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvAdayat<k2>saMvAdayat
{%Saṃ-vādayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to converse
or agree; agreeing.
<LEND>

<L>47886<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvAdita<k2>saMvAdita
{%Saṃ-vādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to speak with,
made to converse; agreed with or upon.
<LEND>

<L>47887<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvAdya<k2>saMvAdya
{%Saṃ-vādya,%}¦ ind. having declared truly, having
stated accurately.
<LEND>

<L>47888<pc>1037-a<k1>samudita<k2>samudita<h>1
1. {%sam-udita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see under {%sam-%}
{%ud-i%}), spoken with, conversed; spoken to, addressed,
accosted; agreed upon, ({%yathā-samuditam,%} accord-
ing to agreement); consented, settled, customary.
<LEND>

<L>47889<pc>1037-a<k1>samudya<k2>samudya
{%Sam-udya,%}¦ ind. having spoken together; having
concluded or agreed upon.
<LEND>

<L>47890<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvan<k2>saMvan
{#saMvan#}¦ {%saṃ-van,%} Caus. {%-vanayati,%} &c., (in
Atharva-veda VI. 9, 3. {%saṃ-vānayantu%} occurs),
Ved. to cause to like or love, make well-disposed.
<LEND>

<L>47891<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvanana<k2>saMvanana
{%Saṃ-vanana, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} subduing by charms,
adorable, (Sāy. {%= stotṛbhiḥ samyak sambhaja-%}
{%nīya%}); ({%am, ā%}), n. f. causing mutual fondness; sub-
duing by magical drugs or charms [cf. {%saṃ-vadana%}];
charming, fascination; means of securing love, a
charm; fondness, love; ({%as%}), m., N. of an Āṅgirasa
(author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 191).
<LEND>

<L>47892<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvand<k2>saMvand
{#saMvand#}¦ {%saṃ-vand,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vandate, -van-%}
{%ditum,%} to salute respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>47893<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvap<k2>saMvap
{#saMvap#}¦ {%saṃ-vap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vapati, -te,%}
{%-vaptum,%} to throw together, mix, pour in, put in;
to scatter, sow.
<LEND>

<L>47894<pc>1037-a<k1>saMvara<k2>saMvara
{#saMvara#}¦ {%saṃ-vara.%} See under {%saṃ-vṛ.%}
<LEND>
[Page1037-b+ 72]

<L>47895<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvarga<k2>saMvarga
{#saMvarga#}¦ {%saṃ-varga.%} See under 1. {%saṃ-vṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>47896<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvarR<k2>saMvarR
{#saMvarR#}¦ {%saṃ-varṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-varṇayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to communicate, relate, narrate, tell; to praise.
<LEND>

<L>47897<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvarta<k2>saMvarta
{#saMvarta#}¦ {%saṃ-varta,%} &c. See under {%saṃ-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>47898<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvarDaka<k2>saMvarDaka
{#saMvarDaka#}¦ {%saṃ-vardhaka,%} &c. See under {%saṃ-%}
{%vṛdh.%}
<LEND>

<L>47899<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvarmaya<k2>saMvarmaya
{#saMvarmaya#}¦ {%saṃvarmaya%} (fr. {%varman%} with {%sam%}),
Nom. P. A. {%saṃvarmayati, -te, -yitum,%} to put on
armour, arm one's self fully.
<LEND>

<L>47900<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvarmita<k2>saMvarmita
{%Saṃvarmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully armed, completely
mailed.
<LEND>

<L>47901<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvarzaRa<k2>saMvarzaRa
{#saMvarzaRa#}¦ {%saṃ-varṣaṇa.%} See under {%saṃ-%}
{%vṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>47902<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvala<k2>saMvala
{#saMvala#}¦ {%saṃvala.%} See {%sambala.%}
<LEND>

<L>47903<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvalita<k2>saMvalita
{#saMvalita#}¦ {%saṃ-valita, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%val%}
with {%sam%}), met together, mixed, mingled; con-
nected or associated with; united; encompassed,
surrounded; possessed of; broken, diversified ({%=%}
{%cūrṇita,%} Kirāt. VI. 4, Schol.).
<LEND>

<L>47904<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvalgita<k2>saMvalgita
{#saMvalgita#}¦ {%saṃ-valgita, as, ā, am,%} overrun.
<LEND>

<L>47905<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvavftvas<k2>saMvavftvas
{#saMvavftvas#}¦ {%saṃ-vavṛtvas, ān, uṣī, at%} (fr.
rt. 1. {%vṛt%} with {%sam,%} but apparently connected with
rt. {%vṛ%}), one who has enveloped, enveloping, (ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda V. 31, 3. {%saṃ-vavṛtvat%}
{%= saṃvaraṇa-śīlam.%})
<LEND>

<L>47906<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvas<k2>saMvas<h>1
{#saMvas#} 1¦. {%saṃ-vas%} (see rt. 5. {%vas%}), cl. 2. A.
{%-vaste, -vasitum,%} to wear (clothes), be clad in, be
dressed with.
<LEND>

<L>47907<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvastraya<k2>saMvastraya
{%Saṃ-vastraya%}¦ (fr. {%sam + vastra%}), Nom. P. {%-vas-%}
{%trayati, -yitum,%} to put on clothes, dress.
<LEND>

<L>47908<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvastrya<k2>saMvastrya
{%Saṃ-vastrya,%}¦ ind. having put on clothes, having
dressed in.
<LEND>

<L>47909<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvas<k2>saMvas<h>2
{#saMvas#} 2¦. {%saṃ-vas%} (see rt. 6. {%vas%}), cl. 1. P.
A. {%-vasati, -te, -vastum,%} to dwell together, live
with, to have intercourse or dealings with (some-
times with acc. of person); to cohabit with (with
acc.); to stay, abide, dwell; to spend, pass (time):
Caus. {%-vāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to dwell together,
bring together; to furnish with lodging, lodge.
<LEND>

<L>47910<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvasat<k2>saMvasat
{%Saṃ-vasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dwelling together, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47911<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvasaTa<k2>saMvasaTa
{%Saṃ-vasatha, as,%}¦ m. a place where people live
together, village, inhabited place.
<LEND>

<L>47912<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvasana<k2>saMvasana
{%Saṃ-vasana, am,%}¦ n. residing together, dwelling.
<LEND>

<L>47913<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvasAna<k2>saMvasAna
{%Saṃ-vasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ dwelling with, residing
amongst.
<LEND>

<L>47914<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvasu<k2>saMvasu
{%Saṃ-vasu, us,%}¦ m., Ved. one who dwells along
with, living with, (Sāy. {%saṃ-vasuḥ = saṃvasati,%}
Ṛg-veda VIII. 39, 7.)
<LEND>

<L>47915<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvAsa<k2>saMvAsa
{%Saṃ-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. dwelling along with, cohabita-
tion, domestic intercourse; a dwelling, residence,
house; an open space for meeting or recreation
(either within or without a town, {%= san-niveśa%});
association, company, society.
<LEND>

<L>47916<pc>1037-b<k1>samuzita<k2>samuzita
{%Sam-uṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dwelt or lived together,
stayed with; passed, spent (as time).
<LEND>

<L>47917<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvah<k2>saMvah
{#saMvah#}¦ {%saṃ-vah%} [cf. {%sam-ūh%}], cl. 1. P. A.
{%-vahati, -te, -voḍhum,%} to bear or carry together,
convey together; to carry or bear along, take along,
draw, drag, bear away; to convey; to bring near;
to take a wife, marry; to carry the hand along the
body, rub down, press together, shampoo, stroke,
soothe; to manifest, display, express: Pass. {%-uhyate,%}
to be carried by, ride on (with inst.): Caus. {%-vāha-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to be carried together;
to bring together, assemble, collect; to drive (a car-
riage &c.), guide, conduct, lead, lead or conduct to
(one's home), take a wife, marry; to carry the hand
along the body, stroke, shampoo: Pass. of Caus.
{%-vāhyate,%} to be carried away, be driven along, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47918<pc>1037-b<k1>saMvaha<k2>saMvaha
{%Saṃ-vaha, as,%}¦ m. bearing or carrying along; N.
of the wind of the third of the seven Mārgas or paths
of the sky, (viz. that which impels the moon; the
[Page1037-c+ 73]
other six are called {%ā-vaha, pra-v˚, ud-v˚, vi-v˚,%}
{%pari-v˚, ni-v˚,%} the Saṃ-vaha coming above the
Ud-vaha wind.)
<LEND>

<L>47919<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAha<k2>saMvAha
{%Saṃ-vāha, as,%}¦ m. bearing or carrying along,
pressing together; rubbing the body, shampooing;
an attendant employed to rub and shampoo the
body; N. of one of the winds, (see {%saṃ-vaha%}
above.)
<LEND>

<L>47920<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAhaka<k2>saMvAhaka
{%Saṃ-vāhaka, as,%}¦ m. an attendant who rubs and
shampooes the limbs, a shampooer.
<LEND>

<L>47921<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAhana<k2>saMvAhana
{%Saṃ-vāhana, am,%}¦ n. rubbing the person, sham-
pooing; bearing (a burden), carrying.
<LEND>

<L>47922<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAhya<k2>saMvAhya
{%Saṃ-vāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought together;
to be borne or carried along; to be rubbed, to be
shampooed; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%agni,%} a kind of sacrificial
fire; [cf. 1. {%sam-ūhya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47923<pc>1037-c<k1>samuhya<k2>samuhya
{%Sam-uhya,%}¦ ind. having brought together, having
arranged or put in order; [cf. 2. {%sam-ūhya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>47924<pc>1037-c<k1>samuhyamAna<k2>samuhyamAna
{%Sam-uhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being borne or
carried along; being carried by, riding on (with
inst.).
<LEND>

<L>47925<pc>1037-c<k1>samUQa<k2>samUQa<h>1
1. {%sam-ūḍha, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see under {%sam-%}
{%ūh%}), borne or conveyed together, carried or borne
along, borne away; led, conducted; married.
<LEND>

<L>47926<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvA<k2>saMvA
{#saMvA#}¦ {%saṃ-vā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vāti, -vātum,%} to
blow at the same time, blow.
<LEND>

<L>47927<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAt<k2>saMvAt
{%Saṃ-vāt, ān, ātī%}¦ or {%āntī, āt,%} blowing together,
blowing (as wind).
<LEND>

<L>47928<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAYC<k2>saMvAYC
{#saMvAYC#}¦ {%saṃ-vāñch,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vāñchati,%}
{%vāñchitum,%} to long for, wish, desire, be eager for.
<LEND>

<L>47929<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAwikA<k2>saMvAwikA
{#saMvAwikA#}¦ {%saṃvāṭikā,%} f. the aquatic plant
Trapa Bispinosa.
<LEND>

<L>47930<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAra<k2>saMvAra
{#saMvAra#}¦ {%saṃ-vāra.%} See p. 1038, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>47931<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAS<k2>saMvAS
{#saMvAS#}¦ {%saṃ-vāś,%} cl. 4. A. {%-vāśyate%} (Ved.
and ep. also P. {%-vāśyati,%} and cl. 1. P. A. {%-vāśati,%}
{%-te%}), {%-vāśitum,%} to roar or cry at the same time,
bellow or low together, bleat: Caus. {%-vāśayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to cry or low together.
<LEND>

<L>47932<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAvaSAna<k2>saMvAvaSAna
{%Saṃ-vāvaśāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. roaring at the
same time, bellowing together.
<LEND>

<L>47933<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAsita<k2>saMvAsita
{#saMvAsita#}¦ {%saṃ-vāsita, as, ā, am,%} made fra-
grant, perfumed; made fetid, having an offensive
smell (said of the breath).
<LEND>

<L>47934<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAh<k2>saMvAh
{#saMvAh#}¦ {%saṃ-vāh%} [cf. {%saṃ-vah,%} to which the
forms and senses given to this verb are perhaps
more properly referred], cl. 1. A. {%-vāhate,%} &c. (see
rt. 1. {%vāh%}), to rub together, shampoo, knead (the
limbs), stroke: Caus. {%-vāhayati,%} &c., to rub to-
gether, shampoo.
<LEND>

<L>47935<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvAha<k2>saMvAha
{%Saṃ-vāha, saṃ-vāhana.%}¦ See above.
<LEND>

<L>47936<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvic<k2>saMvic
{#saMvic#}¦ {%saṃ-vic,%} cl. 3. P. {%-vevekti,%} &c., Ved.
to keep entirely separate or distinct.
<LEND>

<L>47937<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvikta<k2>saMvikta
{%Saṃ-vikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely separated or dis-
tinct; ({%am%}), n. that which is separated or individual-
ized.
<LEND>

<L>47938<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvici<k2>saMvici
{#saMvici#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -cinute,%}
{%-cetum,%} to separate entirely, keep quite apart.
<LEND>

<L>47939<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvicetavya<k2>saMvicetavya
{%Saṃ-vicetavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be entirely sepa-
rated, to be kept quite apart; to be removed.
<LEND>

<L>47940<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvicint<k2>saMvicint
{#saMvicint#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cintayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to consider fully, meditate or reflect upon.
<LEND>

<L>47941<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvij<k2>saMvij
{#saMvij#}¦ {%saṃ-vij,%} cl. 7. P., 6. A. {%-vinakti,%}
{%-vijate,%} &c., {%-vijitum,%} to tremble violently, shake, be
agitated; to start with fear, start up, run away: Caus.
{%-vejayati, -yitum,%} to startle, frighten, terrify.
<LEND>

<L>47942<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvigna<k2>saMvigna
{%Saṃ-vigna, as, ā, am,%}¦ agitated, flurried, startled,
alarmed, frightened, terrified, distracted. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%vigna-mānasa, as, ā, am,%} agitated or distracted
in mind.
<LEND>

<L>47943<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvega<k2>saMvega
{%Saṃ-vega, as,%}¦ m. agitation, flurry; excessive im-
petus or impetuosity, vehemence, haste proceeding
from terror; hurry, haste, speed.
<LEND>

<L>47944<pc>1037-c<k1>saMvijYA<k2>saMvijYA
{#saMvijYA#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti, %}
[Page1038-a+ 78]
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to recommend, advise (with gen.
of person): Caus. {%-jñāpayati, -jñapayati, -yitum,%}
to make known; to recite, repeat.
<LEND>

<L>47945<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvijYAta<k2>saMvijYAta
{%Saṃ-vijñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ universally known or
recognised, generally allowed.
<LEND>

<L>47946<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvitark<k2>saMvitark
{#saMvitark#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-tark,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tarkayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to deliberate about, reflect upon.
<LEND>

<L>47947<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvid<k2>saMvid<h>1
{#saMvid#} 1¦. {%saṃ-vid,%} cl. 2. P. A. (see Vārtt.
to Pāṇ. I. 3, 29), {%-vetti, -vitte%} (3rd pl. {%-vidate%} or
{%-vidrate%}), &c., to know together, know thoroughly,
know, recognise; to investigate, explore, examine;
to perceive, feel, taste; to come to an understanding,
agree together; to admonish, advise, teach; to
meditate; cl. 6. P. A. {%-vindati, -te,%} &c., to find,
meet with, obtain, acquire, gain; to meet together
(with inst.): Pass. {%-vidyate,%} to be found or ob-
tained; to be, exist: Caus. {%-vedayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to know or perceive, &c.; to make known,
inform, announce, instruct; to know, perceive, ob-
serve, recognise: Pass. of Caus. {%-vedyate,%} to be
informed, &c.; to be perceived.
<LEND>

<L>47948<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvitti<k2>saMvitti
{%Saṃ-vitti, is,%}¦ f. perception, ascertainment, know-
ledge, consciousness, feeling; intellect, understanding;
recognition, recollection; mutual reconciliation, ac-
commodation of disputes, harmony.
<LEND>

<L>47949<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvid<k2>saMvid<h>2
2. {%saṃ-vid, t,%}¦ f. knowledge, intellect, understand-
ing; {%= mahat%} (in philosophy); a mutual understand-
ing, agreement, contract, covenant, engagement;
consent, assent, promise; prescribed custom, esta-
blished usage; an alliance, marriage (Ved.); a watch-
word, war-cry; war, battle; a name, appellation;
a sign, signal; participation, sympathy; pleasing,
delighting ({%= toṣaṇa%}); meditation ({%= samādhi%});
hemp. {%—Saṃvid-vyatikrama, as,%} m. breach of
promise, violation of contract.
<LEND>

<L>47950<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvidAna<k2>saMvidAna
{%Saṃ-vidāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being found with
or together with; connected, united; agreeing with,
harmonious.
<LEND>

<L>47951<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvidita<k2>saMvidita
{%Saṃ-vidita, as, ā, am,%}¦ known, recognised, under-
stood; well-known; explored; agreed upon, assented
to; admonished, advised; ({%am%}), n. agreement.
<LEND>

<L>47952<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvidvas<k2>saMvidvas
{%Saṃ-vidvas, ān,%}¦ m. one who has known or knows.
<LEND>

<L>47953<pc>1038-a<k1>saMveda<k2>saMveda
{%Saṃ-veda, as,%}¦ m. perception, consciousness, know-
ledge, understanding.
<LEND>

<L>47954<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvedana<k2>saMvedana
{%Saṃ-vedana, am,%}¦ n. the act of perceiving; per-
ception, sensation, feeling, suffering.
<LEND>

<L>47955<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvedita<k2>saMvedita
{%Saṃ-vedita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made known, informed,
instructed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47956<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvedya<k2>saMvedya
{%Saṃ-vedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be known or under-
stood; to be made known; ({%as%}), m. the junction of
two rivers.
<LEND>

<L>47957<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvevidAna<k2>saMvevidAna
{%Saṃ-vevidāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Intens.), Ved.
{%= saṃ-vidāna%} above.
<LEND>

<L>47958<pc>1038-a<k1>saMviDA<k2>saMviDA<h>1
{#saMviDA#} 1¦. {%saṃ-vi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to dispose, arrange, fix, settle;
to direct, order; to carry on, perform, accomplish,
conduct, manage, do, act, render, make, attend to,
mind; to use, employ; to set, lay, place, put, ({%mā-%}
{%nasaṃ saṃ-vidhā,%} to keep the mind fixed or
composed): Pass. {%-dhīyate,%} to be arranged or fixed;
to be performed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47959<pc>1038-a<k1>saMviDA<k2>saMviDA<h>2
2. {%saṃ-vidhā,%}¦ f. arrangement, plan, preparation;
mode of life.
<LEND>

<L>47960<pc>1038-a<k1>saMviDAtavya<k2>saMviDAtavya
{%Saṃ-vidhātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be disposed or
arranged, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47961<pc>1038-a<k1>saMviDAna<k2>saMviDAna
{%Saṃ-vidhāna, am,%}¦ n. disposition, arrangement;
performance; plan, mode, rite.
<LEND>

<L>47962<pc>1038-a<k1>saMviDAnaka<k2>saMviDAnaka
{%Saṃvidhānaka, am,%}¦ n. a strange act, unusual
occurrence.
<LEND>

<L>47963<pc>1038-a<k1>saMviDAya<k2>saMviDAya
{%Saṃ-vidhāya,%}¦ ind. having disposed or arranged, hav-
ing appointed or fixed; having directed or ordered;
having performed; having used or employed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>47964<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvihita<k2>saMvihita
{%Saṃ-vihita, as, ā, am,%}¦ arranged.
<LEND>

<L>47965<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvinI<k2>saMvinI
{#saMvinI#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati, -te,%}
{%-netum,%} to take entirely away, remove, suppress.
<LEND>

<L>47966<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvinIya<k2>saMvinIya
{%Saṃ-vinīya,%}¦ ind. having removed entirely, having
suppressed.
<LEND>

<L>47967<pc>1038-a<k1>saMvind<k2>saMvind
{#saMvind#}¦ {%saṃ-vind.%} See under 1. {%saṃ-vid.%}
<LEND>
[Page1038-b+ 73]

<L>47968<pc>1038-b<k1>saMviBaj<k2>saMviBaj
{#saMviBaj#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-bhaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bhajati,%}
{%-te, -bhaktum,%} to divide, separate; to share with;
to give a share to, distribute, apportion (with dat. or
gen.); to furnish or provide any one (acc.) with
anything (inst.), bestow upon, give to: Caus. {%-bhā-%}
{%jayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be divided.
<LEND>

<L>47969<pc>1038-b<k1>saMviBakta<k2>saMviBakta
{%Saṃ-vibhakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ divided, parted, sepa-
rated, shared with, conferred upon, bestowed, given.
<LEND>

<L>47970<pc>1038-b<k1>saMviBajya<k2>saMviBajya
{%Saṃ-vibhajya,%}¦ ind. having divided or distributed.
<LEND>

<L>47971<pc>1038-b<k1>saMviBAga<k2>saMviBAga
{%Saṃ-vibhāga, as,%}¦ m. a dividing together, distribut-
ing, apportioning, partition; part, portion, share.
<LEND>

<L>47972<pc>1038-b<k1>saMviBAgin<k2>saMviBAgin
{%Saṃ-vibhāgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sharing in; ({%ī%}), m. a
sharer, co-partner. {%—Saṃvibhāgi-tā,%} f. or {%saṃvi-%}
{%bhāgi-tva, am,%} n. participation, co-partnership.
<LEND>

<L>47973<pc>1038-b<k1>saMviBA<k2>saMviBA
{#saMviBA#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -bhā-%}
{%tum,%} to long for, be desirous of; to meditate on ({%=%}
{%saṅkalpayati%}).
<LEND>

<L>47974<pc>1038-b<k1>saMviBAz<k2>saMviBAz
{#saMviBAz#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate,%}
{%-bhāṣitum,%} to speak to, address.
<LEND>

<L>47975<pc>1038-b<k1>saMviBAzya<k2>saMviBAzya
{%Saṃ-vibhāṣya,%}¦ ind. having spoken to.
<LEND>

<L>47976<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvimfS<k2>saMvimfS
{#saMvimfS#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati,%} &c.,
to reflect upon, consider.
<LEND>

<L>47977<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvimfSya<k2>saMvimfSya
{%Saṃ-vimṛśya,%}¦ ind. having reflected or considered.
<LEND>

<L>47978<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvirAj<k2>saMvirAj
{#saMvirAj#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-rāj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-rājati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to shine forth, be very illustrious.
<LEND>

<L>47979<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvilaNG<k2>saMvilaNG
{#saMvilaNG#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-laṅgh,%} cl. 10. P. or Caus.
{%-laṅghayati, -yitum,%} to leap over, pass by, trans-
gress, neglect.
<LEND>

<L>47980<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvivfD<k2>saMvivfD
{#saMvivfD#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-vṛdh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vardhate,%}
{%-vardhitum,%} to grow, increase, prosper.
<LEND>

<L>47981<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvivyAna<k2>saMvivyAna
{#saMvivyAna#}¦ {%saṃ-vivyāna.%} See {%saṃ-vye.%}
<LEND>

<L>47982<pc>1038-b<k1>saMviS<k2>saMviS
{#saMviS#}¦ {%saṃ-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati%} (ep. also
A. {%-te%}), {%-veṣṭum,%} to enter together; to lie together;
to enter; to lie down, rest, repose; to lie or cohabit
with (with acc.); to sit down with; to engage in:
Caus. {%-veśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to enter, cause to
lie down, cause to rest on, place, lay.
<LEND>

<L>47983<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvizwa<k2>saMvizwa<h>1
1. {%saṃ-viṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ entered together; entered;
lying down, resting on, reposing; seated together.
<LEND>

<L>47984<pc>1038-b<k1>saMveSa<k2>saMveSa
{%Saṃ-veśa, as,%}¦ m. sleep, sleeping; lying together,
cohabitation, copulation; dreaming, a dream; a seat,
chair, stool.
<LEND>

<L>47985<pc>1038-b<k1>saMveSaka<k2>saMveSaka
{%Saṃ-veśaka%}¦ in {%gṛha-s˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>47986<pc>1038-b<k1>saMveSana<k2>saMveSana
{%Saṃ-veśana, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who enters; one who
introduces; ({%am%}), n. the act of causing to enter or
causing to lie down; sexual union, coition.
<LEND>

<L>47987<pc>1038-b<k1>saMveSayat<k2>saMveSayat
{%Saṃ-veśayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making to lie down.
<LEND>

<L>47988<pc>1038-b<k1>saMviz<k2>saMviz
{#saMviz#}¦ {%saṃ-viṣ,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-veveṣṭi, -ve-%}
{%viṣṭe,%} &c., to procure; to clothe, dress.
<LEND>

<L>47989<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvizwa<k2>saMvizwa<h>2
2. {%saṃ-viṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ clothed, dressed.
<LEND>

<L>47990<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvizA<k2>saMvizA
{#saMvizA#}¦ {%saṃ-viṣā,%} f. the plant Aconitum
Ferox ({%= ati-viṣā%}).
<LEND>

<L>47991<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvihas<k2>saMvihas
{#saMvihas#}¦ {%saṃ-vi-has,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hasati,%} &c.,
to laugh at, laugh.
<LEND>

<L>47992<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvIkz<k2>saMvIkz
{#saMvIkz#}¦ {%saṃ-vīkṣ (-vi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A. {%-vīk-%}
{%ṣate, -vīkṣitum,%} to look about; to look at atten-
tively, look into thoroughly; to perceive.
<LEND>

<L>47993<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvIkzaRa<k2>saMvIkzaRa
{%Saṃ-vīkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. looking about in all direc-
tions, looking for (anything lost), search, inquiry;
looking or gazing attentively.
<LEND>

<L>47994<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvIkzya<k2>saMvIkzya
{%Saṃ-vīkṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked at or into, hav-
ing searched for; having perceived.
<LEND>

<L>47995<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvIta<k2>saMvIta
{#saMvIta#}¦ {%saṃ-vīta.%} See under {%saṃ-vye.%}
<LEND>

<L>47996<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvf<k2>saMvf
{#saMvf#}¦ {%saṃ-vṛ%} or {%saṃ-vṝ,%} cl. 5. 9. 1. P. A.
{%-vṛṇoti, -vṛṇute, -vṛṇāti, -vṛṇīte, -varati, -te,%}
{%-varitum, -varītum%} (ep. also {%-vartum%}), to cover
over, cover, enclose, hide, conceal; to secure; to keep
together, close, shut up, compress, contract; to put
or place together, arrange, put in order; to keep or
ward off, avert, restrain, keep back, stop; to refuse,
reject; to select, choose: Caus. {%-vārayati, -yitum,%}
to cover; to restrain; to keep back, ward off, avert.
<LEND>

<L>47997<pc>1038-b<k1>saMvara<k2>saMvara
{%Saṃ-vara, as,%}¦ m. (sometimes written and con-
[Page1038-c+ 79]
founded with {%sambara%}), covering; comprehending,
comprehension, collection; closing, contraction, com-
pression; a causeway, dam, mound, bridge; a kind
of deer ({%= śambara%}); a sort of fish ({%= śambara%});
N. of a demon, {%= śambara; (am),%} n. covering, con-
cealment; restraint, self-control, forbearance; a parti-
cular religious observance (with Buddhists); water.
<LEND>

<L>47998<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvaraRa<k2>saMvaraRa
{%Saṃ-varaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of covering or
screening, concealing, enclosing, concealment; a
secret; a disguise, pretext; the act of closing, shut-
ting; an enclosure; a sanctuary, house, (in Ṛg-veda
IX. 107, 9. according to Sāy. {%saṃvaraṇāni = sam-%}
{%bhajanīyāni rasa-rūpāṇy annāni;%} according to
some, used as an epithet of rivers enclosed in beds);
({%as%}), m., N. of the author of the hymns Ṛg-veda
V. 33, 34 (having the patronymic Prājāpatya); N.
of a king mentioned in the Mahā-bhārata, (the
father of Kuru.)
<LEND>

<L>47999<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvAra<k2>saMvAra
{%Saṃ-vāra, as,%}¦ m. covering, concealing, closing
up; compression or contraction of the throat &c.
(in pronunciation), obtuse articulation (opposed to
{%vi-vāra%} or acute articulation, and regarded as one of
the Vāhya-prayatnas); diminution.
<LEND>

<L>48000<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvArya<k2>saMvArya<h>1
1. {%saṃ-vārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be covered or con-
cealed; to be secured, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48001<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvArya<k2>saMvArya<h>2
2. {%saṃ-vārya,%}¦ ind. having kept off, having warded
off or averted, having repelled.
<LEND>

<L>48002<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvuvUrzu<k2>saMvuvUrzu
{%Saṃ-vuvūrṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to cover or
conceal or disguise, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48003<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvfRvat<k2>saMvfRvat
{%Saṃ-vṛṇvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ hiding, concealing;
compressing.
<LEND>

<L>48004<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvfRvAna<k2>saMvfRvAna
{%Saṃ-vṛṇvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ concealing, hiding, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48005<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvfta<k2>saMvfta
{%Saṃ-vṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered up, covered, en-
closed, enveloped, surrounded; concealed, hidden,
kept secret, secured; retired, secluded; closed, shut,
shut up, secured, put away, kept in safety; contracted,
compressed (as the throat &c.); restrained, sup-
pressed; sequestered, confiscated; filled with, full of;
furnished or attended with, accompanied by; ({%am%}),
n. a secret place; (in grammar) a particular mode
of pronunciation, (one of the Ābhyantara-prayatnas.)
{%—Saṃvṛta-saṃvārya, as, ā, am,%} one who con-
ceals what ought to be concealed, securing what ought
to be secured. {%—Saṃvṛtākāra (˚ta-āk˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who conceals all signs of feeling.
<LEND>

<L>48006<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvfti<k2>saMvfti
{%Saṃ-vṛti, is,%}¦ f. covering up, concealment, com-
pression, suppression; secret purpose.
<LEND>

<L>48007<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvftya<k2>saMvftya
{%Saṃ-vṛtya,%}¦ ind. having concealed; having closed
or compressed.
<LEND>

<L>48008<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvfMh<k2>saMvfMh
{#saMvfMh#}¦ {%saṃ-vṛṃh%} (see rt. {%vṛṃh,%} also written
{%bṛṃh%}), cl. 1. P. {%-vṛṃhati, -vṛṃhitum,%} to join
firmly together (Ved.): Caus. {%-vṛṃhayati%} (Ved.
{%-varhayati%}), &c., to cause to be joined together, to
unite (Ved.); to make strong, strengthen, invigorate;
to incite, stimulate, encourage, animate, urge, (Sāy.
{%saṃ-varhaya = utsāhaya,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 31, 12.)
<LEND>

<L>48009<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvfj<k2>saMvfj<h>1
{#saMvfj#} 1¦. {%saṃ-vṛj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-vṛṇakti,%}
{%vṛṅkte, -varjitum,%} Ved. to bend or attract or
appropriate to one's self, carry off, despoil; to devour,
consume, (Sāy. {%= khādati%}): Desid. {%-vivṛkṣate,%} to
wish to appropriate.
<LEND>

<L>48010<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvarga<k2>saMvarga
{%Saṃ-varga, as,%}¦ m., Ved. plunder, spoils, (Sāy.
{%= samyag vṛṣṭer varjayitā,%} discharger of rain,
Ṛg-veda X. 43, 5); (perhaps) food, (Sāy. {%saṃvar-%}
{%gam = śatrubhyaḥ sahācchidyamānam,%} Ṛg-veda
VIII. 75, 12); epithet of Agni (‘the consumer’).
{%—Saṃvarga-jit, t,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>48011<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvargya<k2>saMvargya
{%Saṃ-vargya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a sage.
<LEND>

<L>48012<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvarjana<k2>saMvarjana
{%Saṃ-varjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of bending or appro-
priating to one's self; devouring, consuming.
<LEND>

<L>48013<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvfkta<k2>saMvfkta
{%Saṃ-vṛkta, as, ā, am,%}¦ consumed, devoured, de-
stroyed. {%—Saṃvṛkta-dhṛṣṇu, us, us, u,%} Ved. one
who has cut off or destroyed valiant (enemies; Sāy.
{%sañchinnā dharṣaṇa-śīlā śatravo yena%}).
<LEND>

<L>48014<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvfj<k2>saMvfj<h>2
2. {%saṃ-vṛj, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. one who carries off, a
spoiler; one who consumes or destroys.
<LEND>

<L>48015<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvfjya<k2>saMvfjya
{%Saṃ-vṛjya,%}¦ ind. {%= saṃ-hṛtya,%} having carried
off, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48016<pc>1038-c<k1>saMvft<k2>saMvft
{#saMvft#}¦ {%saṃ-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%} &c.,
[Page1039-a+ 79]
{%-vartitum,%} to turn towards, go towards, approach;
to go against, attack, assault (with acc.); to come
together, meet together, be united, meet in sexual
embrace; to come round, come to pass, happen,
take place, be produced, be fulfilled, be accomplished;
to fall to the lot (of any one); to be, become, exist:
Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to cause to turn or re-
volve, cause to proceed or go on; to cast, throw; to
carry on, accomplish, fulfil, roll together, roll up,
fold up, wrap up, envelop; to crumple up; to crush,
destroy, dash to pieces: Desid. P. {%-vivṛtsati,%} to wish
to be sexually united.
<LEND>

<L>48017<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvarta<k2>saMvarta
{%Saṃ-varta, as,%}¦ m. turning towards; coming to
pass, being, becoming; rolling up, crumpling up,
destruction; the periodical destruction or dissolution
of the universe; a cloud; a particular kind of cloud
(abounding in water and so distinct from the Ā-varta
which has no water, cf. {%droṇa, puṣkalāvartaka%});
N. of one of the seven clouds at the dissolution of the
universe [cf. {%bhīma-nāda%}]; a collection, multitude;
a year; the tree Terminalia Bellerica; N. of a Muni
and legislator [cf. {%vṛhat-s˚%}]; of an Āṅgirasa (author
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 172); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a family.
<LEND>

<L>48018<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvartaka<k2>saMvartaka
{%Saṃ-vartaka, as,%}¦ m. the fire that is to roll every-
thing together and destroy the world at the period of
universal dissolution; submarine fire; a kind of cloud,
(see above, cf. {%mātaṅga%}); N. of Bala-rāma, (other-
wise called Bala-deva, elder brother of Kṛṣṇa); the
plough of Bala-rāma. {%—Saṃvartakāgni (˚ka-ag˚),%}
{%is,%} m. the world-destroying fire.
<LEND>

<L>48019<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvartakin<k2>saMvartakin
{%Saṃvartakin, ī,%}¦ m., N. of Bala-rāma, (see above.)
<LEND>

<L>48020<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvartamAna<k2>saMvartamAna
{%Saṃ-vartamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ turning towards,
going towards, approaching; coming or meeting to-
gether, having sexual intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>48021<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvartayat<k2>saMvartayat
{%Saṃ-vartayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ crushing, destroying,
dashing to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>48022<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvartayitvA<k2>saMvartayitvA
{%Saṃ-vartayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having per-
formed, having fulfilled, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48023<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvarti<k2>saMvarti
{%Saṃ-varti, is,%}¦ f. {%= saṃvartikā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>48024<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvartikA<k2>saMvartikA
{%Saṃvartikā,%}¦ f. the new leaf of a water-lily, the
petal or leaf near the filament ({%= keśara-samī-%}
{%pastha-dala%}).
<LEND>

<L>48025<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvartita<k2>saMvartita
{%Saṃ-vartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rolled up, wrapped up,
enveloped.
<LEND>

<L>48026<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvftta<k2>saMvftta
{%Saṃ-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ become, arisen, happened,
taken place, fulfilled, accomplished, past, gone; fur-
nished with (for {%saṃ-vṛta%}); covered (for {%saṃ-%}
{%vṛta%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of Varuṇa.
<LEND>

<L>48027<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvftti<k2>saMvftti
{%Saṃ-vṛtti, is,%}¦ f. being, existing, becoming, hap-
pening, fulfilment, accomplishment; covering, con-
cealing (for {%saṃ-vṛti%}).
<LEND>

<L>48028<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvfD<k2>saMvfD
{#saMvfD#}¦ {%saṃ-vṛdh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vardhati, -te%}
(see rt. 1. {%vṛdh%}), {%-vardhitum,%} to grow to perfection
or completion, grow up, increase; to fulfil, satisfy,
grant (P.): Caus. {%-vardhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
grow or increase, augment, enlarge; to plant; to
bring up, rear, raise, cherish, foster, nourish, fatten,
feed, nurse; to cause to prosper, make prosperous or
happy; to present with (with inst.); to fulfil, satisfy,
grant.
<LEND>

<L>48029<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvarDaka<k2>saMvarDaka
{%Saṃ-vardhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing complete
growth or increase, augmenting, prospering; an in-
creaser.
<LEND>

<L>48030<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvarDana<k2>saMvarDana
{%Saṃ-vardhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of augmenting or
increasing, prospering, cherishing, encouraging; com-
plete growth, prospering, thriving.
<LEND>

<L>48031<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvarDanIya<k2>saMvarDanIya
{%Saṃ-vardhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be increased or
augmented, to be fostered or encouraged.
<LEND>

<L>48032<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvarDayat<k2>saMvarDayat
{%Saṃ-vardhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to grow
up or increase, enlarging, increasing, much increased,
magnifying.
<LEND>

<L>48033<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvarDita<k2>saMvarDita
{%Saṃ-vardhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought to complete
growth, brought up, reared, raised, cherished, pro-
tected, encouraged.
<LEND>

<L>48034<pc>1039-a<k1>saMvfdDa<k2>saMvfdDa
{%Saṃ-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ full grown, completely
grown, grown up, grown tall or high, increased,
augmented, enlarged, large, big; flourishing, bloom-
ing.
<LEND>
[Page1039-b+ 71]

<L>48035<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvfz<k2>saMvfz
{#saMvfz#}¦ {%saṃ-vṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-varṣati,%} &c.,
Ved. to rain upon, shower down.
<LEND>

<L>48036<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvarzaRa<k2>saMvarzaRa
{%Saṃ-varṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. raining, showering down.
<LEND>

<L>48037<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvfh<k2>saMvfh
{#saMvfh#}¦ {%saṃ-vṛh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-vṛhati,%} &c. (see
rt. 1. {%vṛh%}), {%-varhitum, -varḍhum,%} Ved. to draw
out or extract together.
<LEND>

<L>48038<pc>1039-b<k1>saMve<k2>saMve
{#saMve#}¦ {%saṃ-ve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vayati, -te, -vātum,%}
Ved. to weave together, interweave.
<LEND>

<L>48039<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvayat<k2>saMvayat
{%Saṃ-vayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ weaving together, in-
terweaving in concert.
<LEND>

<L>48040<pc>1039-b<k1>samuta<k2>samuta
{%Sam-uta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. woven or sewn to-
gether, ({%tardma-samuta,%} having the holes sewn
together or fastened together with pins.)
<LEND>

<L>48041<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvega<k2>saMvega
{#saMvega#}¦ {%saṃ-vega.%} See under {%saṃ-vij.%}
<LEND>

<L>48042<pc>1039-b<k1>saMveda<k2>saMveda
{#saMveda#}¦ {%saṃ-veda.%} See under 1. {%saṃ-vid.%}
<LEND>

<L>48043<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvep<k2>saMvep
{#saMvep#}¦ {%saṃ-vep,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vepate,%} &c., to
tremble, shake.
<LEND>

<L>48044<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvepamAna<k2>saMvepamAna
{%Saṃ-vepamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, shaking
(from cold &c.).
<LEND>

<L>48045<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvezw<k2>saMvezw
{#saMvezw#}¦ {%saṃ-veṣṭ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-veṣṭate,%} &c., to
be surrounded: Caus. {%-veṣṭayati, -yitum,%} to sur-
round, envelop, encompass.
<LEND>

<L>48046<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvezwamAna<k2>saMvezwamAna
{%Saṃ-veṣṭamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being surrounded
or enveloped.
<LEND>

<L>48047<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvyac<k2>saMvyac
{#saMvyac#}¦ {%saṃ-vyac,%} cl. 6. P. {%-vicati, -vyaci-%}
{%tum,%} Ved. to surround, encompass, envelop; to roll
together, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 63, 1.
{%sam-avivyak = saha vicati, saṃ-veṣṭayati%}); to
pervade.
<LEND>

<L>48048<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvyavaso<k2>saMvyavaso
{#saMvyavaso#}¦ {%saṃ-vy-ava-so (-vi-ava-),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-syati, -sātum,%} to decide upon, decree.
<LEND>

<L>48049<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvyavahAra<k2>saMvyavahAra
{#saMvyavahAra#}¦ {%saṃ-vyavahāra, as,%} m. dealing
together, mutual traffic or business, intercourse.
<LEND>

<L>48050<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvyUQa<k2>saMvyUQa
{#saMvyUQa#}¦ {%saṃ-vyūḍha, as, ā, am%} (see 2. {%vy-%}
{%ūḍha%}), combined together, mixed, united.
<LEND>

<L>48051<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvyUha<k2>saMvyUha
{%Saṃ-vyūha, as,%}¦ m. combination, mixture, union.
<LEND>

<L>48052<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvye<k2>saMvye
{#saMvye#}¦ {%saṃ-vye,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vyayati, -te,%}
{%-vyātum,%} to cover over, overlay, clothe, put on
clothes; to invest, surround, enclose.
<LEND>

<L>48053<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvivyAna<k2>saMvivyAna
{%Saṃ-vivyāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (perf. part. A.), Ved.
fully surrounded or invested with, endowed with.
<LEND>

<L>48054<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvIta<k2>saMvIta
{%Saṃ-vīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered over, coated over,
overlaid; clothed; adorned; invested, surrounded,
enclosed, encompassed, shut in; overwhelmed. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%vītāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having the body
covered, properly clothed, (according to Kullūka =
{%ācchādita-deha.%})
<LEND>

<L>48055<pc>1039-b<k1>saMvyAna<k2>saMvyAna
{%Saṃ-vyāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of covering over, a
covering; cloth, clothes, garment, vestment, vesture;
an upper garment.
<LEND>

<L>48056<pc>1039-b<k1>saMSakalA<k2>saMSakalA
{#saMSakalA#}¦ {%saṃśakalā,%} ind. (doubtful), kill-
ing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>48057<pc>1039-b<k1>saMSaNk<k2>saMSaNk
{#saMSaNk#}¦ {%saṃ-śaṅk,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śaṅkate, -śaṅki-%}
{%tum,%} to be very suspicious of, suspect.
<LEND>

<L>48058<pc>1039-b<k1>saMSad<k2>saMSad
{#saMSad#}¦ {%saṃ-śad,%} Caus. {%-śātayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to fall down, throw down, break to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>48059<pc>1039-b<k1>saMSaptaka<k2>saMSaptaka
{#saMSaptaka#}¦ {%saṃ-śaptaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%śap%}
with {%sam%}), a soldier sworn never to recede from a
fight and stationed to prevent the flight of others;
a picked warrior, a brother in arms; a conspirator
bound by an oath to kill another; N. of a kind of
soldier or guard belonging to Nārāyaṇī (mentioned
in the Mahā-bhārata).
<LEND>

<L>48060<pc>1039-b<k1>saMSabda<k2>saMSabda
{#saMSabda#}¦ {%saṃ-śabda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%śabd%} with
{%sam%}), mention.
<LEND>

<L>48061<pc>1039-b<k1>saMSabdana<k2>saMSabdana
{%Saṃ-śabdana, am,%}¦ n. making a sound, calling
out; praising, eulogizing.
<LEND>

<L>48062<pc>1039-b<k1>saMSabdya<k2>saMSabdya
{%Saṃ-śabdya,%}¦ ind. (see rt. {%śabd%}), having called
out, having said or spoken.
<LEND>

<L>48063<pc>1039-b<k1>saMSam<k2>saMSam
{#saMSam#}¦ {%saṃ-śam,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śāmyati, -śami-%}
{%tum,%} to become calm or pacified, be allayed, be
[Page1039-c+ 76]
extinguished: Caus. {%-śamayati, -yitum,%} to miti-
gate, calm, allay; to settle.
<LEND>

<L>48064<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSamana<k2>saMSamana
{%Saṃ-śamana%}¦ in {%pāpa-ś˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>48065<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSAnta<k2>saMSAnta
{%Saṃ-śānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ extinguished.
<LEND>

<L>48066<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSaya<k2>saMSaya
{#saMSaya#}¦ {%saṃ-śaya, saṃ-śayitṛ.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>48067<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSaraRa<k2>saMSaraRa
{#saMSaraRa#}¦ {%saṃ-śaraṇa, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%śṝ%} with
{%sam%}), commencement of a combat, charge, attack.
<LEND>

<L>48068<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSAs<k2>saMSAs
{#saMSAs#}¦ {%saṃ-śās,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śāsti, -śāsitum,%}
Ved. to sanctify, purify, make perfect, (Sāy. {%saṃ-%}
{%śiśādhi = saṃskuru,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 104, 19.)
<LEND>

<L>48069<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSi<k2>saMSi
{#saMSi#}¦ {%saṃ-śi%} (closely connected with {%saṃ-%}
{%śo%}), cl. 5. P. A. {%-śinoti, -śinute,%} (Ved. also cl. 3. A.)
{%-śiśīte, -śetum,%} to sharpen up or well, excite, incite.
<LEND>

<L>48070<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSita<k2>saMSita<h>1
1. {%saṃ-śita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see under {%saṃ-śo%}),
sharpened up, aroused, excited; [cf. {%yajña-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48071<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSiSAna<k2>saMSiSAna
{%Saṃ-śiśāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sharpening well or
thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>48072<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSiSrIzu<k2>saMSiSrIzu
{#saMSiSrIzu#}¦ {%saṃ-śiśrīṣu.%} See under {%saṃ-%}
{%śri.%}
<LEND>

<L>48073<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSiSvan<k2>saMSiSvan
{#saMSiSvan#}¦ {%saṃ-śiśvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. having
young ones, (Sāy. {%saṃ-śiśvarīḥ = saṃ-śiśvaryaḥ%}
{%saṅgacchamānā gāvaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 69, 11.)
<LEND>

<L>48074<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSI<k2>saMSI
{#saMSI#}¦ {%saṃ-śī,%} cl. 2. A. {%-śete, -śayitum,%} to
lie down for rest or repose, sleep, grow languid, be-
come feeble; to waver, be uncertain or irresolute or
doubtful.
<LEND>

<L>48075<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSaya<k2>saMSaya
{%Saṃ-śaya, as,%}¦ m. uncertainty, irresolution, doubt,
scruple, misgiving, suspicion, (frequently in the phrase
{%na saṃśayaḥ,%} there is no doubt, to be sure); diffi-
culty, danger, risk, peril; dispute, question; possibility.
{%—Saṃśaya-ccheda, as,%} m. the solution of doubt.
{%—Saṃśaya-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in uncertainty,
uncertain, doubtful, {%—Saṃśayātmaka (˚ya-āt˚), as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} consisting of doubt, made up of uncertainties.
{%—Saṃśayātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having a doubt-
ful or irresolute mind; ({%ā%}), m. a sceptic. {%—Saṃśayā-%}
{%panna (˚ya-āp˚), as, ā, am,%} beset with doubt, hesi-
tating, irresolute; doubtful, uncertain, dubious. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%śayāpanna-mānasa, as, ā, am,%} having the mind
beset with doubts, of an irresolute or hesitating dis-
position. {%—Saṃśayopeta (˚ya-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
possessed of uncertainty, subject to doubt, doubtful,
dubious, uncertain.
<LEND>

<L>48076<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSayAna<k2>saMSayAna
{%Saṃ-śayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ feeling uncertain or
irresolute, wavering, doubting, dubious, sceptical.
<LEND>

<L>48077<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSayAlu<k2>saMSayAlu
{%Saṃ-śayālu, us, us, u,%}¦ disposed to doubt, irreso-
lute, doubting, dubious.
<LEND>

<L>48078<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSayita<k2>saMSayita
{%Saṃ-śayita, as, ā, am,%}¦ uncertain, dubious,
doubtful.
<LEND>

<L>48079<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSayitf<k2>saMSayitf
{%Saṃ-śayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who hesitates or
wavers, a doubter, sceptic; dubious, doubtful.
<LEND>

<L>48080<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSayin<k2>saMSayin
{%Saṃ-śayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ doubtful, dubious, uncertain,
questionable.
<LEND>

<L>48081<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSayya<k2>saMSayya
{%Saṃ-śayya,%}¦ ind. having doubted or wavered, being
in doubt, deliberating.
<LEND>

<L>48082<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSuD<k2>saMSuD
{#saMSuD#}¦ {%saṃ-śudh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śudhyati, -śod-%}
{%dhum,%} to become completely pure or purified: Caus.
{%-śodhayati, -yitum,%} to purify or cleanse thoroughly,
clear; to clear (expenses), pay off; to correct, rectify;
to examine.
<LEND>

<L>48083<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSudDa<k2>saMSudDa
{%Saṃ-śuddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely purified or
cleansed, pure, clean; refined, polished; expiated;
acquitted (of crime or debt). {%—Saṃśuddha-kilvi-%}
{%ṣa, as, ā, am,%} one whose offences are expiated,
purified from sin.
<LEND>

<L>48084<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSudDi<k2>saMSudDi
{%Saṃ-śuddhi, is,%}¦ f. thorough purification; cleansing
or cleaning (the body); purity, cleanness; clearance;
acquittal, acquittance; correction, rectification.
<LEND>

<L>48085<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSoDana<k2>saMSoDana
{%Saṃ-śodhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of purifying
thoroughly, purification, cleaning, cleansing; refin-
ing, clearing; paying off, correcting.
<LEND>

<L>48086<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSoDita<k2>saMSoDita
{%Saṃ-śodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely cleansed or
purified.
<LEND>

<L>48087<pc>1039-c<k1>saMSoDya<k2>saMSoDya<h>1
1. {%saṃ-śodhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be purified, to be
cleared or acquitted; to be paid off; to be corrected
or rectified.
<LEND>
[Page1040-a+ 75]

<L>48088<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSoDya<k2>saMSoDya<h>2
2. {%saṃ-śodhya,%}¦ ind. having cleansed; having
cleared (a road).
<LEND>

<L>48089<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSuB<k2>saMSuB
{#saMSuB#}¦ {%saṃ-śubh,%} Caus. {%-śobhayati, -yitum,%}
to decorate, adorn.
<LEND>

<L>48090<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSuz<k2>saMSuz
{#saMSuz#}¦ {%saṃ-śuṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śuṣyati, -śoṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to be completely dried or dried up: Caus.
{%-śoṣayati, -yitum,%} to make dry, dry up.
<LEND>

<L>48091<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSuzka<k2>saMSuzka
{%Saṃ-śuṣka, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely dried, dry;
withered, sere.
<LEND>

<L>48092<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSozita<k2>saMSozita
{%Saṃ-śoṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made thoroughly dry,
dried up.
<LEND>

<L>48093<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSUna<k2>saMSUna
{#saMSUna#}¦ {%saṃ-śūna.%} See under {%saṃ-śvi.%}
<LEND>

<L>48094<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSo<k2>saMSo
{#saMSo#}¦ {%saṃ-śo%} (closely connected with {%saṃ-%}
{%śi%}), cl. 3. P. {%-śiśāti, -śātum,%} Ved. to sharpen
thoroughly, sharpen up, excite, raise, produce; to
finish off, effect, complete, supply, (Sāy. {%saṃ-śiśātu%}
{%= samyak tīkṣṇī-karotu = prayacchatu,%} Ṛg-veda
I. 111, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>48095<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSita<k2>saMSita<h>2
2. {%saṃ-śita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly finished
or completed, finished off, effected, accomplished;
established, decided, determined, certified, certain,
well-ascertained; completing, effecting, diligent in
accomplishing. {%—Saṃśita-vrata, as, ā, am,%} one
who has finished or accomplished a vow, faithful to
a vow or obligation. {%—Saṃśitātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} one whose mind or spirit is thoroughly matured
or disciplined.
<LEND>

<L>48096<pc>1040-a<k1>saMScat<k2>saMScat
{#saMScat#}¦ {%saṃś-cat, t,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 85. fr. rt. 1. {%ci%} with {%sam;%} more probably fr. rt.
{%cat;%} cf. {%sañcat, saṃ-śvat%}), deceit, trick, illusion,
juggling; ({%t%}), m. a juggler.
<LEND>

<L>48097<pc>1040-a<k1>saMScAya<k2>saMScAya
{%Saṃścāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%saṃścāyate, -yitum,%} to con-
jure, juggle; to be cheated or deceived.
<LEND>

<L>48098<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSyAna<k2>saMSyAna
{#saMSyAna#}¦ {%saṃ-śyāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%śyai%}
with {%sam%}), contracted, drawn together, shrunk up,
congealed, frozen; collapsed; rolled up, gathered up.
<LEND>

<L>48099<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSrAva<k2>saMSrAva
{#saMSrAva#}¦ {%saṃ-śrāva, as,%} m. (for {%saṃ-srāva%}),
flowing or pouring out, sprinkling, aspersion.
<LEND>

<L>48100<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSri<k2>saMSri
{#saMSri#}¦ {%saṃ-śri,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-śrayati, -te,%}
{%-śrayitum,%} to go towards or have recourse to, betake
one's self or flee for refuge or succour, seek protec-
tion with, seek; to lean on, rest on, depend on;
to attain, obtain; to unite with; to approach for
sexual intercourse; to serve.
<LEND>

<L>48101<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSiSrIzu<k2>saMSiSrIzu
{%Saṃ-śiśrīṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to have recourse
to, desiring to adhere to or depend upon; wishing
to serve, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48102<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSraya<k2>saMSraya
{%Saṃ-śraya, as,%}¦ m. the having recourse to, betak-
ing one's self to [cf. {%kali-ś˚%}], fleeing for refuge or
protection, seeking shelter or succour; refuge, shelter,
asylum, protection, patronage, favour; a resting-
place, dwelling-place; seeking alliance, leaguing to-
gether for mutual protection (one of the six Guṇas
of a military prince mentioned in Manu VII. 160),
league; an aim, object; N. of a Prajā-pati. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%śraya-kārita, as, ā, am,%} caused by alliance (Manu
VII. 176).
<LEND>

<L>48103<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSrayin<k2>saMSrayin
{%Saṃ-śrayin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having recourse to, seeking
refuge.
<LEND>

<L>48104<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSrita<k2>saMSrita
{%Saṃ-śrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone or fled to for refuge;
come for protection or an asylum; taken under
protection, sheltered, secured, protected, supported;
united, joined; ({%as%}), m. a dependant, servant, fol-
lower. {%—Saṃśritānurāga (˚ta-an˚), as,%} m. the
affection of dependants.
<LEND>

<L>48105<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSritya<k2>saMSritya
{%Saṃ-śritya,%}¦ ind. having fled to for refuge.
<LEND>

<L>48106<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSru<k2>saMSru
{#saMSru#}¦ {%saṃ-śru,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-śṛṇoti, -śṛ-%}
{%ṇute, -śrotum,%} to hear well (P.); to listen well or
attentively, be attentive (A. without acc. c. follow-
ing); to promise: Caus. {%-śrāvayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to hear, cause to be heard; to narrate, report,
recite, tell, proclaim.
<LEND>

<L>48107<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSrava<k2>saMSrava
{%Saṃ-śrava, as,%}¦ m. hearing or listening atten-
tively; promise, assent, agreement.
<LEND>

<L>48108<pc>1040-a<k1>saMSravaRa<k2>saMSravaRa
{%Saṃ-śravaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of hearing; the ear.
<LEND>
[Page1040-b+ 75]

<L>48109<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSruta<k2>saMSruta
{%Saṃ-śruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well heard; promised,
agreed, assented.
<LEND>

<L>48110<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSrutya<k2>saMSrutya
{%Saṃ-śrutya,%}¦ ind. having heard or listened atten-
tively, having promised.
<LEND>

<L>48111<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSliz<k2>saMSliz
{#saMSliz#}¦ {%saṃ-śliṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śliṣyati, -śleṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to clasp or press together, join together, em-
brace: Caus. {%-śleṣayati, -yitum,%} to join or connect
together, unite.
<LEND>

<L>48112<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSlizwa<k2>saMSlizwa
{%Saṃ-śliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ clasped or pressed toge-
ther, embraced, joined, united; adjoining, touching,
close together; endowed; possessed of.
<LEND>

<L>48113<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSlizya<k2>saMSlizya
{%Saṃ-śliṣya,%}¦ ind. having clasped or embraced,
having joined together.
<LEND>

<L>48114<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSleza<k2>saMSleza
{%Saṃ-śleṣa, as,%}¦ m. embrace, embracing; union,
connection, junction, association, contact. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%śleṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing union or contact,
joined, united.
<LEND>

<L>48115<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSlezaRa<k2>saMSlezaRa
{%Saṃ-śleṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of clasping or
pressing together; means of binding together.
<LEND>

<L>48116<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSlezita<k2>saMSlezita
{%Saṃ-śleṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined together, united,
attached.
<LEND>

<L>48117<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSlezin<k2>saMSlezin
{%Saṃ-śleṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ clasping, embracing, joining
together.
<LEND>

<L>48118<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSvat<k2>saMSvat
{#saMSvat#}¦ {%saṃ-śvat, t,%} n. {%= saṃś-cat,%} deceit,
illusion, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48119<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSvi<k2>saMSvi
{#saMSvi#}¦ {%saṃ-śvi,%} cl. 1. P. {%-śvayati, -śvayitum,%}
to swell up, swell greatly.
<LEND>

<L>48120<pc>1040-b<k1>saMSUna<k2>saMSUna
{%Saṃ-śūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ much swelled, swollen.
<LEND>

<L>48121<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsaYj<k2>saMsaYj
{#saMsaYj#}¦ {%saṃ-sañj,%} Pass. {%-sajyate, -sajjate%}
(see rt. 2. {%sañj%}), to adhere or cling together, stick
close, be attached or connected together, adhere or
cling to; to be entwined.
<LEND>

<L>48122<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsakta<k2>saMsakta
{%Saṃ-sakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ adhered or stuck together,
joined or attached or linked together, sticking close
to, adhering to, attached or tied to; fastened; re-
strained; closely connected; close, near, adjoining,
contiguous; intent on; possessing, endowed with,
affected by. {%—Saṃsakta-manas, ās, ās, as,%} having
the mind attached or fastened. {%—Saṃsakta-yuga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} attached to a yoke, harnessed, yoked.
{%—Saṃsakta-vadanāśvāsa (˚na-āś˚), as, ā, am,%}
with breath adhering to the mouth, with suppressed
breath.
<LEND>

<L>48123<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsakti<k2>saMsakti
{%Saṃ-sakti, is,%}¦ f. close adherence, sticking close
together, intimate union or junction; close connec-
tion or contact, proximity; tying or fastening toge-
ther; intercourse, intimacy, acquaintance; addiction
or devotion to.
<LEND>

<L>48124<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsajjamAna<k2>saMsajjamAna
{%Saṃ-sajjamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ adhering or sticking
close together; being prepared or ready.
<LEND>

<L>48125<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsad<k2>saMsad<h>1
{#saMsad#} 1¦. {%saṃ-sad,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%-sīdati%} (Ved.
and ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%-sattum,%} to sit down together,
sit along with, sit down; to sink down, be afflicted,
be in distress; to pine away.
<LEND>

<L>48126<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsad<k2>saMsad<h>2
2. {%saṃ-sad, t, t, t,%}¦ one who sits together, one
who sits at or takes part in a sacrifice; ({%t%}), f. an as-
sembly, meeting, congress, session; a court of justice.
<LEND>

<L>48127<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsAda<k2>saMsAda
{%Saṃ-sāda, as,%}¦ m. a sitting down together, meet-
ing, assembly.
<LEND>

<L>48128<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsIdat<k2>saMsIdat
{%Saṃ-sīdat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sitting down together,
sinking down.
<LEND>

<L>48129<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsaraRa<k2>saMsaraRa
{#saMsaraRa#}¦ {%saṃ-saraṇa.%} See under {%saṃ-sṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>48130<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsarga<k2>saMsarga
{#saMsarga#}¦ {%saṃ-sarga, saṃ-sarjana,%} &c. See
under 1. {%saṃ-sṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>48131<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsarpa<k2>saMsarpa
{#saMsarpa#}¦ {%saṃ-sarpa,%} &c. See under {%saṃ-%}
{%sṛp.%}
<LEND>

<L>48132<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsava<k2>saMsava
{#saMsava#}¦ {%saṃ-sava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%su%} with
{%sam%}), a confusion of libations, an irregular or sinful
sacrifice (so regarded when two Brāhmans perform
the Soma sacrifice on the same spot and at the same
time).
<LEND>

<L>48133<pc>1040-b<k1>saMsAD<k2>saMsAD
{#saMsAD#}¦ {%saṃ-sādh,%} Caus. {%-sādhayati, -te,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to be completely finished; to ac-
complish or perform thoroughly, complete; to finish
off; to settle; to destroy, kill, extinguish; to cause
[Page1040-c+ 77]
to be settled or paid; to regain; to obtain; to be
successful (A.): Pass. of Caus. {%-sādhyate,%} to be com-
pletely accomplished; to be thoroughly provided or
furnished with.
<LEND>

<L>48134<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsADayat<k2>saMsADayat
{%Saṃ-sādhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ accomplishing, &c.;
obtaining, receiving, taking.
<LEND>

<L>48135<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsADya<k2>saMsADya
{%Saṃ-sādhya,%}¦ ind. having accomplished or per-
formed thoroughly; having destroyed or killed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48136<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsAra<k2>saMsAra
{#saMsAra#}¦ {%saṃ-sāra,%} &c. See under {%saṃ-sṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>48137<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsic<k2>saMsic<h>1
{#saMsic#} 1¦. {%saṃ-sic,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-siñcati, -te,%}
{%-sektum,%} to sprinkle over, sprinkle thoroughly, water.
<LEND>

<L>48138<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsikta<k2>saMsikta
{%Saṃ-sikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well sprinkled or moistened,
watered. {%—Saṃsikta-reṇu, us, us, u,%} having the
dust laid or well watered.
<LEND>

<L>48139<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsic<k2>saMsic<h>2
2. {%saṃ-sic, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. one who sprinkles,
sprinkling.
<LEND>

<L>48140<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsicya<k2>saMsicya
{%Saṃ-sicya,%}¦ ind. having sprinkled.
<LEND>

<L>48141<pc>1040-c<k1>saMseka<k2>saMseka
{%Saṃ-seka, as,%}¦ m. sprinkling over, moistening,
watering.
<LEND>

<L>48142<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsiD<k2>saMsiD
{#saMsiD#}¦ {%saṃ-sidh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-sidhyati, -sed-%}
{%dhum,%} to be accomplished or performed thoroughly,
to be made perfect; to be made happy, attain
beatitude.
<LEND>

<L>48143<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsidDa<k2>saMsidDa
{%Saṃ-siddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully done or accom-
plished, made perfect, perfected; one who has at-
tained beatitude.
<LEND>

<L>48144<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsidDi<k2>saMsidDi
{%Saṃ-siddhi, is,%}¦ f. complete accomplishment, per-
fection, completion, complete attainment, beati-
tude, final emancipation; nature, natural disposition,
natural state or quality; a passionate or intoxicated
woman.
<LEND>

<L>48145<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsudA<k2>saMsudA
{#saMsudA#}¦ {%saṃ-sudā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. altogether
munificent, one who gives very liberally, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%samyak suṣṭhu dātṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>48146<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsupta<k2>saMsupta
{#saMsupta#}¦ {%saṃ-supta.%} See under {%saṃ-svap.%}
<LEND>

<L>48147<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsUc<k2>saMsUc
{#saMsUc#}¦ {%saṃ-sūc,%} cl. 10. P. {%-sūcayati, -yitum,%}
to indicate or show plainly, prove, imply, argue; to
inform, tell.
<LEND>

<L>48148<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsUcana<k2>saMsUcana
{%Saṃ-sūcana, am,%}¦ n. the act of indicating or show-
ing plainly, proving; telling, informing; reproving,
reproaching.
<LEND>

<L>48149<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsUcita<k2>saMsUcita
{%Saṃ-sūcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ plainly indicated; in-
formed, told, apprised; reproved.
<LEND>

<L>48150<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsf<k2>saMsf
{#saMsf#}¦ {%saṃ-sṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati, -sartum,%} to
go towards, approach, attain, obtain; to go round,
revolve, pass through a succession of states: Caus.
{%-sārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to go round or revolve
or pass through.
<LEND>

<L>48151<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsaraRa<k2>saMsaraRa
{%Saṃ-saraṇa, am,%}¦ n. going, proceeding, moving
or going round in a circuit, revolving, revolution,
passing through a succession of states, birth and re-
birth of living beings, the world; going well or
unobstructedly, the unresisted march of troops; the
commencement of war or battle; a highway, prin-
cipal road; a resting-place for passengers near the
gates of a city.
<LEND>

<L>48152<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsAra<k2>saMsAra
{%Saṃ-sāra, as,%}¦ m. course, passage, passing through
a succession of states, course or circuit of mundane
existence, transmigration, metempsychosis, the world,
secular life, worldly illusion. {%—Saṃsāra-gamana,%}
{%am,%} n. passing from one state of existence to another
or from one body to another, transmigration, metem-
psychosis. {%—Saṃsāra-guru, us,%} m. ‘the Guru of
the world,’ epithet of Kāma (god of love). {%—Saṃ-%}
{%sāra-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the circle of the world.
{%—Saṃsāra-mārga, as,%} m. the road of the world,
the course or stage of mundane affairs, the world;
the vulva. {%—Saṃsāra-mokṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%} libe-
rating or emancipating from worldly existence;
({%am%}), n. emancipation from the world. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%sāra-samudra%} or {%saṃsāra-sāgara, as,%} m. the
ocean-like world.
<LEND>

<L>48153<pc>1040-c<k1>saMsArin<k2>saMsArin
{%Saṃsārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ passing through (successive
existences), transmigratory, worldly, mundane, secu-
lar, mixing with society, engaged in worldly or secular
occupations; ({%ī%}), m. a living or sentient being,
human being, animal, creature, embodied spirit.
[Page1041-a+ 80]
{%—Saṃsāry-ātman, ā,%} m. (perhaps rather two separate
words), the transmigratory soul, the soul passing through
various mundane states, (opposed to {%paramātman.%})
<LEND>

<L>48154<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsfti<k2>saMsfti
{%Saṃ-sṛti, is,%}¦ f. course, current, flow, stream,
revolution; course of mundane existence, transmi-
gration; the world.
<LEND>

<L>48155<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsftya<k2>saMsftya
{%Saṃ-sṛtya,%}¦ ind. having gone to or approached,
having obtained; having passed onwards or through.
<LEND>

<L>48156<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsfj<k2>saMsfj<h>1
{#saMsfj#} 1¦. {%saṃ-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati, -sraṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to let loose together; to mix together, commin-
gle, conjoin, connect, unite; to endow with, bestow
upon; to cover with, anoint with (Ved.); to create:
Pass. {%-sṛjyate,%} to be commingled or mixed, come
together; to meet with (with inst.); to converse
with.
<LEND>

<L>48157<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsarga<k2>saMsarga
{%Saṃ-sarga, as,%}¦ m. mixture or union together,
commixture, conjunction, close or intimate union,
close contact, touch, proximity, approximation, asso-
ciation, society, ({%pāpiṣṭha-s˚,%} the society of very
low people); intercourse, sexual attachment or con-
nection, copulation, coition; acquaintance, familiarity;
intimate relation ({%= sam-avāya%}), co-existence.
{%—Saṃsarga-tas,%} ind. through union or connection,
in consequence of intercourse or familiarity. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%sarga-doṣa, as,%} m. the fault or evil consequences
of society (with bad people). {%—Saṃsarga-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at, = saṃ-sṛṣṭa,%} mixed, joined with. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%sargābhava (˚ga-abh˚), as,%} m. (in the Nyāya
phil.) a particular form of the category of non-
existence (said to be of three kinds, prior, incidental
and final, or absence of birth, destruction of present
being and necessary cessation of existence).
<LEND>

<L>48158<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsargin<k2>saMsargin
{%Saṃsargin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ commingling, commingled,
united or mixed with, in contact with, connected;
associated, keeping company, familiar, friendly, ac-
quainted, an acquaintance; ({%ī%}), m. an associate,
companion. {%—Saṃsargi-tā,%} f. or {%saṃsargi-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. association, combination, fellowship.
<LEND>

<L>48159<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsarjana<k2>saMsarjana
{%Saṃ-sarjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of letting loose
together, commingling; discharging, voiding, aban-
doning, leaving.
<LEND>

<L>48160<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsisfkzu<k2>saMsisfkzu
{%Saṃ-sisṛkṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to mix together
or unite.
<LEND>

<L>48161<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsfj<k2>saMsfj<h>2
2. {%saṃ-sṛj,%}¦ Ved. commingling, collision.
<LEND>

<L>48162<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsfjyamAna<k2>saMsfjyamAna
{%Saṃ-sṛjyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being joined or
united together.
<LEND>

<L>48163<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsfzwa<k2>saMsfzwa
{%Saṃ-sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ commingled, mixed to-
gether, connected, conjoined, united; composed;
associated or connected together (as partners &c.);
reunited, rejoined; involved in; clothed in clean
garments, cleanly dressed; created. {%—Saṃsṛṣṭa-%}
{%jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. conquering combatants. {%—Saṃsṛ-%}
{%ṣṭa-tva, am,%} n. commixture, union, association; re-
union; (in law) voluntary reunion or co-residence
of kinsmen (as of father and son or of brothers with
each other, after partition of property). {%—Saṃsṛṣṭa-%}
{%rūpa, as, ā, am,%} mixed in form or kind, adulterated.
<LEND>

<L>48164<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsfzwi<k2>saMsfzwi
{%Saṃ-sṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. union, combination, combin-
ing, uniting; association, intercourse, co-partnership;
living together in one family; collection, collecting,
assembling; (in rhetoric) the aggregation or combin-
ing of a number of metaphors in one passage.
<LEND>

<L>48165<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsfzwin<k2>saMsfzwin
{%Saṃsṛṣṭin, ī,%}¦ m. a reunited kinsman (applied
in Hindū law to persons of the same family who,
after having made a partition, again live together,
annulling the partition previously made); a co-
partner, co-parcener.
<LEND>

<L>48166<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsrazwf<k2>saMsrazwf
{%Saṃ-sraṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who mixes
together or commingles.
<LEND>

<L>48167<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsfp<k2>saMsfp
{#saMsfp#}¦ {%saṃ-sṛp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarpati,%} &c., to
creep together, creep along with; to flow; to glide,
move, wind.
<LEND>

<L>48168<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsarpa<k2>saMsarpa
{%Saṃ-sarpa, as,%}¦ m. creeping along, gliding, flow-
ing gently; any equable or gentle motion; the
intercalary month occurring in a year in which there
falls a Kṣaya-māsa.
<LEND>

<L>48169<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsarpaRa<k2>saMsarpaRa
{%Saṃ-sarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of creeping along,
sneaking; an unexpected attack, surprise.
<LEND>

<L>48170<pc>1041-a<k1>saMsarpat<k2>saMsarpat
{%Saṃ-sarpat, an, antī, at,%}¦ creeping or gliding
along, flowing.
<LEND>
[Page1041-b+ 79]

<L>48171<pc>1041-b<k1>saMsarpin<k2>saMsarpin
{%Saṃ-sarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ creeping along or over,
winding, gliding, flowing.
<LEND>

<L>48172<pc>1041-b<k1>saMseka<k2>saMseka
{#saMseka#}¦ {%saṃ-seka.%} See under 1. {%saṃ-sic.%}
<LEND>

<L>48173<pc>1041-b<k1>saMsev<k2>saMsev
{#saMsev#}¦ {%saṃ-sev,%} cl. 1. A. {%-sevate,%} &c., to
attend on, wait on, serve; to worship.
<LEND>

<L>48174<pc>1041-b<k1>saMsevana<k2>saMsevana
{%Saṃ-sevana, am,%}¦ n. waiting on, attending on,
serving.
<LEND>

<L>48175<pc>1041-b<k1>saMsevA<k2>saMsevA
{%Saṃ-sevā,%}¦ f. service, attendance, reverence, wor-
ship.
<LEND>

<L>48176<pc>1041-b<k1>saMsevita<k2>saMsevita
{%Saṃ-sevita, as, ā, am,%}¦ waited on, attended on,
served.
<LEND>

<L>48177<pc>1041-b<k1>saMskf<k2>saMskf
{#saMskf#}¦ {%saṃ-s-kṛ%} (for {%saṅ-kṛ, s%} being inserted
as in {%upa-s-kṛ, pari-ṣ-kṛ;%} cf. {%saṅ-kṛ%}), cl. 8.
P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute;%} Impv. {%saṃs-karotu%} (2nd sing.
{%saṃs-kuru%}); Perf. {%sañ-caskāra%} (2nd sing. {%sañ-ca-%}
{%skaritha,%} 1st pl. {%sañ-caskarima,%} 3rd pl. {%sañ-ca-%}
{%skaruḥ%}); Aor. A. {%sam-askṛta;%} Prec. P. {%saṃs-%}
{%kriyāt,%} A. {%saṃs-kṛṣīṣṭa, -kartum,%} to put to-
gether, construct, compose, form well or thoroughly,
make perfect, elaborate, refine, polish, educate; to
fabricate artificially; to form grammatically or accu-
rately; to make ready, prepare, arrange; to cook,
dress (food); to form or arrange according to sacred
precept, consecrate, sanctify, dedicate, hallow, devote
to sacred uses; to invest (with the sacrificial thread);
to purify, cleanse; to decorate, embellish, ornament;
to heap together, bring together, collect: Pass. {%-kri-%}
{%yate,%} to be well put together or prepared, &c.; to
be consecrated: Caus. {%-kārayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to form or construct well; to cause to prepare or
arrange; to make, render (with two acc.); to cause
to consecrate: Desid. {%sañ-ciṣkīrṣati:%} Intens.
{%sañ-ceṣkrīyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>48178<pc>1041-b<k1>saMskartf<k2>saMskartf
{%Saṃs-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who makes perfect
or polishes, one who prepares or dresses or cooks;
one who consecrates, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48179<pc>1041-b<k1>saMskAra<k2>saMskAra
{%Saṃs-kāra, as,%}¦ m. forming well or thoroughly,
making perfect, perfecting, completing, finishing,
polishing, refining, perfection, refinement, education,
accomplishment; forming in the mind, conception,
idea, notion; impression, form, mould; impression
on the mind or memory; the power of memory,
faculty of recollection, self-reproductive quality (one
of the twenty-four qualities enumerated in the Vai-
śeṣika branch of the Nyāya phil.); any faculty,
capacity, instinct; operation, influence; preparation,
making ready, preparation of food, &c., cooking,
dressing, compounding; decoration, embellishment,
ornament, elegance; making sacred, hallowing, con-
secration, dedication; consecration of a king, &c.;
making pure, purification, purity; a sanctifying or
purificatory rite or essential ceremony (enjoined on
all the first three or twice-born classes; the following
are the twelve purificatory rites given in Manu II. 27,
but of these ten only are enjoined according to some
authorities, the tenth and eleventh being omitted:
1. {%garbhādhāna,%} ‘embryo-reception,’ on the first
sigh of conception, sometimes on a woman's attain-
ing maturity: 2. {%puṃ-savana,%} ‘male-production,’
on the first signs of vitality in the embryo: 3. {%sī-%}
{%mantonnayana,%} ‘parting the hair’ of a pregnant
woman in the fourth, sixth, or eighth month of her
first pregnancy: 4. {%jāta-karman,%} ‘birth-ceremony,’
i. e. giving the infant butter out of a golden spoon
before cutting the navel-string: 5. {%nāma-karman%}
or {%nāma-karaṇa,%} ‘naming-rite’ on the tenth or
twelfth day after birth: 6. {%niṣkramaṇa,%} ‘taking
out’ the child when three months old to see the sun
or, according to some, to look at the moon: 7. {%an-%}
{%na-prāśana,%} ‘feeding with boiled rice’ in the sixth
month after birth: 8. {%cūḍā-karman%} or {%cūḍā-ka-%}
{%raṇa,%} ‘tonsure-rite,’ i. e. shaving the head all but
the {%cūḍā%} or one lock in the first or third year after
birth: 9. {%upa-naya%} or {%upa-nayana,%} ‘investiture’
with the sacrificial thread, see {%upa-naya;%} this is
the most important of all the Saṃskāras: 10. {%ke-%}
{%śānta,%} ‘cutting off the hair:’ 11. {%sam-āvartana,%}
‘returning,’ a rite performed on the student's return
home after completing his studies: 12. {%vivāha,%}
[Page1041-c+ 79]
‘marriage:’ other Saṃskāras are mentioned as peculiar
to various parts of India, e. g. {%an-avalobhana,%} per-
formed by a pregnant woman to prevent disappointment
or miscarriage; {%Viṣṇu-bali,%} an offering to Viṣṇu
on the seventh month of pregnancy; {%svargārohaṇa,%}
{%sūrya-vilokana, karṇa-vedha,%} q. q. v. v.); any
rite or ceremony; funeral obsequies; a polishing
stone. {%—Saṃskāra-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by
purificatory rites. {%—Saṃskāra-tattva, am,%} n., N. of
part of Raghu-nandana's Smṛti-tattva. {%—Saṃskāra-%}
{%pūta, as, ā, am,%} rendered pure by sacred rites,
purified by refinement. {%—Saṃskāra-bhāskara, as,%}
m., N. of a work on the Saṃskāras by Saṅkara.
{%—Saṃskāra-rahita%} or {%saṃskāra-varjita = saṃskā-%}
{%ra-hīna%} below. {%—Saṃskāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possess-
ing refinement, cultivated. {%—Saṃskāravat-tva, am,%}
n. the being possessed of refinement. {%—Saṃskāra-%}
{%vidhi, is,%} m. the rules of Saṃskāra, the law concern-
ing purificatory rites. {%—Saṃskāra-hīna, as, ā, am,%}
destitute of purificatory rites; ({%as%}), m. a man of
one of the three classes who has not been invested
with the sacred thread or received the other purifica-
tory ceremonies (in consequence of which neglect he
becomes a Vrātya or outcast). {%—Saṃskārādhikārin%}
{%(˚ra-adh˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} one who has a right to receive
or observe all the purificatory ceremonies.
<LEND>

<L>48180<pc>1041-c<k1>saMskAraka<k2>saMskAraka
{%Saṃskāraka, as, ā, am,%}¦ consecrating, purifying,
purificatory; serving as an article of cooking or for
preparing any article of food or for dressing it.
<LEND>

<L>48181<pc>1041-c<k1>saMskArya<k2>saMskArya
{%Saṃskārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be finished or perfected;
to be consecrated or initiated.
<LEND>

<L>48182<pc>1041-c<k1>saMskfta<k2>saMskfta
{%Saṃs-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ carefully or accurately
formed, artificially made or constructed or fabricated,
elaborated, highly wrought, artificial, refined, polished,
cultivated, perfected, completed, finished; made
ready, prepared, cooked, dressed, compounded; con-
secrated, sanctified, hallowed, initiated; married,
({%a-saṃskṛta, as, ā, am,%} unmarried); cleansed,
cleaned, purified; decorated, embellished, orna-
mented; excellent, best; ({%as%}), m. a word formed
according to accurate rules, a regular derivative; a
man of one of the three classes who has received
all the purificatory rites; a learned man; ({%am%}), n.
language formed by accurate grammatical rules, re-
fined or polished or highly wrought speech, the
Sanskrit language; an offering, oblation, sacrifice
(Ved.); a sacred usage or custom. {%—Saṃskṛtāt-%}
{%man (˚ta-āt˚), ā,%} m. one who has received the puri-
ficatory rites; a sage. {%—Saṃskṛtokti (˚ta-uk˚), is,%}
f. refined or polished language; a Sanskrit word or
expression.
<LEND>

<L>48183<pc>1041-c<k1>saMskftavat<k2>saMskftavat
{%Saṃskṛta-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has perfected
or elaborated or polished.
<LEND>

<L>48184<pc>1041-c<k1>saMskfti<k2>saMskfti
{%Saṃs-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. {%= saṃs-kāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>48185<pc>1041-c<k1>saMskftya<k2>saMskftya
{%Saṃs-kṛtya,%}¦ ind. having perfected, having polished
or adorned, &c.; having prepared or dressed, having
cooked.
<LEND>

<L>48186<pc>1041-c<k1>saMskftrima<k2>saMskftrima
{%Saṃs-kṛtrima, as, ā, am,%}¦ perfected, polished;
fabricated, made.
<LEND>

<L>48187<pc>1041-c<k1>saMskriyA<k2>saMskriyA
{%Saṃs-kriyā,%}¦ f. any purificatory rite ({%= saṃs-kāra%}
above); funeral ceremonies or obsequies (burning
the dead, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>48188<pc>1041-c<k1>saMst<k2>saMst
{#saMst#}¦ {%saṃst%} = rt. {%sas,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>48189<pc>1041-c<k1>saMstamB<k2>saMstamB
{#saMstamB#}¦ {%saṃ-stambh,%} cl. 5. 9. P. {%-stabh-%}
{%noti, -stabhnāti, -stabdhum,%} to support, prop up;
to confirm, establish, corroborate; to stop, restrain:
Caus. {%-stambhayati, -yitum,%} to prop up, stay, sup-
port; to confirm, strengthen, encourage; to stop;
to make immovable or rigid, stupefy, paralyze.
<LEND>

<L>48190<pc>1041-c<k1>saMstabDa<k2>saMstabDa
{%Saṃ-stabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ supported, confirmed,
corroborated; stopped, stayed, made firm or rigid,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>48191<pc>1041-c<k1>saMstaBya<k2>saMstaBya
{%Saṃ-stabhya,%}¦ ind. having supported, having con-
firmed or established; having made firm or stable
or rigid, &c.; having supported or composed the
mind firmly (in affliction).
<LEND>

<L>48192<pc>1041-c<k1>saMstamBa<k2>saMstamBa
{%Saṃ-stambha, as,%}¦ m. support, supporting, prop;
confirming, establishing, fixing, making firm; stop,
stay; paralysis, muscular rigidity.
<LEND>
[Page1042-a+ 77]

<L>48193<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstamBanIya<k2>saMstamBanIya
{%Saṃ-stambhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be propped; to
be made firm; to be stopped.
<LEND>

<L>48194<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstamBayitf<k2>saMstamBayitf
{%Saṃ-stambhayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who supports
or props up, a supporter; one who stops or restrains,
a restrainer.
<LEND>

<L>48195<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstamBayitvA<k2>saMstamBayitvA
{%Saṃ-stambhayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having
propped or confirmed or encouraged.
<LEND>

<L>48196<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstamBita<k2>saMstamBita
{%Saṃ-stambhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ propped, supported;
stopped; stupefied, paralyzed.
<LEND>

<L>48197<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstara<k2>saMstara
{#saMstara#}¦ {%saṃ-stara.%} See under {%saṃ-stṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>48198<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstu<k2>saMstu
{#saMstu#}¦ {%saṃ-stu,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-stauti, -stavīti,%}
{%-stute, -stuvīte, -stotum,%} to praise or hymn together,
praise in chorus; to praise properly or well; to
celebrate.
<LEND>

<L>48199<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstava<k2>saMstava
{%Saṃ-stava, as,%}¦ m. praise; association together,
agreeing together, acquaintance, intimacy {%(= pari-%}
{%caya)%}. {%—Saṃstava-sthira, as, ā, am,%} firm through
acquaintance.
<LEND>

<L>48200<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstavAna<k2>saMstavAna
{%Saṃ-stavāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ praising properly; talk-
ing fluently and well, eloquent; ({%as%}), m. a singer,
chanter ({%= ud-gātṛ%}); joy ({%= harṣa,%} according to
some).
<LEND>

<L>48201<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstAva<k2>saMstAva
{%Saṃ-stāva, as,%}¦ m. hymning in chorus, repetition
of hymns by a number of Brāhmans; the place
occupied at a sacrifice by the Brāhmans reciting
hymns and prayers; praise, celebration.
<LEND>

<L>48202<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstuta<k2>saMstuta
{%Saṃ-stuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised or hymned together;
praised well or properly; lauded, hymned, eulogized;
agreeing together, intimate, acquainted, known.
{%—Saṃstuta-prāya, as, ā, am,%} for the most part
lauded or hymned together, usually associated in
hymns.
<LEND>

<L>48203<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstuti<k2>saMstuti
{%Saṃ-stuti, is,%}¦ f. praise in chorus, hymning to-
gether; praise, celebration.
<LEND>

<L>48204<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstUyamAna<k2>saMstUyamAna
{%Saṃ-stūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being praised or
celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>48205<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstf<k2>saMstf
{#saMstf#}¦ {%saṃ-stṛ,%} cl. 5. 9. P. A. {%-stṛṇoti,%}
{%-stṛṇute, -stṛṇāti, -stṛṇīte, -startum, -staritum,%}
{%-starītum,%} to spread out, spread, extend; to strew
over, cover, cover over.
<LEND>

<L>48206<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstara<k2>saMstara
{%Saṃ-stara, as,%}¦ m. a bed, couch; a bed made of
leaves, &c.; a sacrifice (or perhaps rather the ritual
arrangements for a sacrifice).
<LEND>

<L>48207<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstaraRa<k2>saMstaraRa
{%Saṃ-staraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of strewing or
covering over.
<LEND>

<L>48208<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstAra<k2>saMstAra
{%Saṃ-stāra, as,%}¦ m. spreading out, extension. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%stāra-paṅkti, is,%} f. a particular metre, (the first and
fourth Pādas containing twelve syllables each, and
the second and third eight each; cf. {%viṣṭāra-p˚,%}
{%prastāra-p˚, āstāra-p˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>48209<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstira<k2>saMstira
{%Saṃ-stira, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. entirely covered,
hidden, concealed, (opposed to {%vi-ṣṭira,%} displayed,
Ṛg-veda I. 140, 7.)
<LEND>

<L>48210<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstIrRa<k2>saMstIrRa
{%Saṃ-stīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread over, covered.
<LEND>

<L>48211<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstIrya<k2>saMstIrya
{%Saṃ-stīrya,%}¦ ind. having spread; having covered.
<LEND>

<L>48212<pc>1042-a<k1>saMstyAya<k2>saMstyAya
{#saMstyAya#}¦ {%saṃ-styāya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%styai%}
with {%sam%}), assemblage, collection, heap, multitude,
number; spreading, expansion, diffusion; vicinity,
proximity; a habitation, house.
<LEND>

<L>48213<pc>1042-a<k1>saMsTA<k2>saMsTA
{#saMsTA#}¦ {%saṃ-sthā,%} cl. 1. A. {%-tiṣṭhate%} (ep.
also P. {%-tiṣṭhati%}), {%-sthātum,%} to stand or stay close
together, abide or remain or live together; to agree,
conform; to stand firmly; to stand or remain on;
to exist, live, be; to stand still, stop; to be com-
pleted; to die, perish: Caus. {%-sthāpayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to stand firmly, to settle, establish or fix
firmly; to place; to collect or compose (the mind);
to cause to stand still, stop, restrain; to cause to
cease or die, kill; to place in subjection, subject.
<LEND>

<L>48214<pc>1042-a<k1>saMsTa<k2>saMsTa
{%Saṃ-stha, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing or staying or being
together, living together, staying with, associated,
domesticated; staying, abiding, dwelling, living;
lasting; stopping still, stationary, fixed; ended,
perished, dead; ({%as%}), m. a dweller, resident, inha-
bitant; a fellow-countryman, neighbour; a spy,
secret emissary; ({%ā%}), f. an assembly, assemblage;
state or condition of being, situation, time of life,
[Page1042-b+ 78]
&c.; occupation, business, profession; continuance
in the right way, correct conduct; stop, stay; end,
completion; loss, destruction, destruction of the world
({%= pralaya,%} said to be of four kinds, viz. {%naimit-%}
{%tika, prākṛtika, nitya, ātyantika%}); death, dying;
manifestation, appearance; resemblance, likeness;
form; a form or kind of Soma sacrifice [cf. {%yajña-%}
{%s˚, pāka-s˚, havir-yajña-s˚, soma-s˚%}]; a royal ordi-
nance; ({%am%}), n., Ved. a battle.
<LEND>

<L>48215<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsTAna<k2>saMsTAna
{%Saṃ-sthāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing together; agree-
ing, resembling, like; ({%am%}), n. the act of standing
or being together; a collection, aggregation, heap,
quantity; the aggregation of primitive atoms, primary
formation; conformation, configuration; form, figure,
shape, construction; a common place of abode, vici-
nity, neighbourhood; a place where four roads meet;
any place, station; position, situation; a spot, mark,
sign; standing still, stopping, dying, death. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%sthāna-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} going in various forms (of
gods or demons); moving in various stations.
<LEND>

<L>48216<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsTApaka<k2>saMsTApaka
{%Saṃ-sthāpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ fixing firmly, settling,
establishing.
<LEND>

<L>48217<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsTApana<k2>saMsTApana
{%Saṃ-sthāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of placing together,
collecting; fixing firmly, placing, fixing; confirming,
establishing, establishment; restraining; a statute,
regulation.
<LEND>

<L>48218<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsTApanIya<k2>saMsTApanIya
{%Saṃ-sthāpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be established or
settled.
<LEND>

<L>48219<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsTApita<k2>saMsTApita
{%Saṃ-sthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to stand together,
heaped up, accumulated; established, fixed, placed,
deposited; stopped, restrained, controlled.
<LEND>

<L>48220<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsTApya<k2>saMsTApya
{%Saṃ-sthāpya,%}¦ ind. having made to stand firmly,
having fixed, having confirmed, having established.
<LEND>

<L>48221<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsTAsnu<k2>saMsTAsnu
{%Saṃ-sthāsnu, us, us, u,%}¦ firmly fixed, stationary,
immovable; lasting, durable.
<LEND>

<L>48222<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsTita<k2>saMsTita
{%Saṃ-sthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing or being together,
lying or situated close at hand, contiguous, near;
brought together, collected, heaped, covered; agree-
ing, like, resembling; standing firm, settled, fixed,
established; staying, abiding; residing, being in or
at; placed in or on; standing still, stationary; stopped,
concluded, completed, ended, finished; dead, deceased.
<LEND>

<L>48223<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsTiti<k2>saMsTiti
{%Saṃ-sthiti, is,%}¦ f. staying or abiding or being to-
gether; collection, accumulation, heap; standing or
staying with, residing or living with or near; con-
tiguity, nearness, connection; standing firm; duration,
continuance; being, abiding, abode, situation, station,
state, condition (of life); standing still or stationary,
stoppage; restraint; death, dying; destruction of
the world.
<LEND>

<L>48224<pc>1042-b<k1>saMspfS<k2>saMspfS<h>1
{#saMspfS#} 1¦. {%saṃ-spṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-spṛśati,%}
{%-sparṣṭum, -spraṣṭum,%} to come into close con-
tact, to touch, lay hold of; to reach; to perceive;
to sprinkle (with water &c.): Caus. {%-sparśayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to touch; to sprinkle over.
<LEND>

<L>48225<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsparSa<k2>saMsparSa
{%Saṃ-sparśa, as,%}¦ m. close or mutual contact, touch,
touching, conjunction, mixture, laying hold of; per-
ception, sense; the being touched, being affected;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of fragrant plant or perfume {%(= janī).%}
{%—Saṃsparśa-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by contact
or sensible perception.
<LEND>

<L>48226<pc>1042-b<k1>saMspfS<k2>saMspfS<h>2
2. {%saṃ-spṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ touching, coming into con-
tact.
<LEND>

<L>48227<pc>1042-b<k1>saMspfSat<k2>saMspfSat
{%Saṃ-spṛśat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} touching, laying
hold of; striking together.
<LEND>

<L>48228<pc>1042-b<k1>saMspfSya<k2>saMspfSya
{%Saṃ-spṛśya,%}¦ ind. having touched; having rubbed
or chafed; having reached; extending to.
<LEND>

<L>48229<pc>1042-b<k1>saMspfzwa<k2>saMspfzwa
{%Saṃ-spṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ touched, brought into
contact; mixed, combined.
<LEND>

<L>48230<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsPAla<k2>saMsPAla
{#saMsPAla#}¦ {%saṃ-sphāla, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sphal%}
with {%sam%}), a ram ({%= meṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>48231<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsPuwa<k2>saMsPuwa
{#saMsPuwa#}¦ {%saṃ-sphuṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%sphuṭ%}
with {%sam%}), bursting open, blossomed, blown.
<LEND>

<L>48232<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsPowa<k2>saMsPowa
{%Saṃ-sphoṭa, as,%}¦ m. war, battle.
<LEND>

<L>48233<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsPowi<k2>saMsPowi
{%Saṃ-sphoṭi, is,%}¦ m. {%= saṃ-sphoṭa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>48234<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsPewa<k2>saMsPewa
{#saMsPewa#}¦ {%saṃ-spheṭa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sphiṭ%} with
{%sam%}), war, battle.
<LEND>

<L>48235<pc>1042-b<k1>saMsmi<k2>saMsmi
{#saMsmi#}¦ {%saṃ-smi,%} cl. 1. A. {%-smayate, -smetum,%}
[Page1042-c+ 77]
to laugh at, deride: Desid. {%-sismayiṣate,%} to wish
to laugh at or deride.
<LEND>

<L>48236<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsismayizamARa<k2>saMsismayizamARa
{%Saṃ-sismayiṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to
ridicule, desirous of laughing at.
<LEND>

<L>48237<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsmf<k2>saMsmf
{#saMsmf#}¦ {%saṃ-smṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-smarati, -smartum,%}
to remember fully, recollect (with acc. or gen.);
Caus. {%-smārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to remember,
remind of.
<LEND>

<L>48238<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsmaraRa<k2>saMsmaraRa
{%Saṃ-smaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of remembering,
calling to mind, recollecting.
<LEND>

<L>48239<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsmarat<k2>saMsmarat
{%Saṃ-smarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ fully remembering,
recollecting well.
<LEND>

<L>48240<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsmartavya<k2>saMsmartavya
{%Saṃ-smartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be remembered;
to be thought upon.
<LEND>

<L>48241<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsmArya<k2>saMsmArya
{%Saṃ-smārya,%}¦ ind. having caused to remember,
having reminded of.
<LEND>

<L>48242<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsmfta<k2>saMsmfta
{%Saṃ-smṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ remembered, recollected,
called to mind.
<LEND>

<L>48243<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsmfti<k2>saMsmfti
{%Saṃ-smṛti, is,%}¦ f. remembering, remembrance,
recollection.
<LEND>

<L>48244<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsmftya<k2>saMsmftya
{%Saṃ-smṛtya,%}¦ ind. having remembered or called
to mind.
<LEND>

<L>48245<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsrava<k2>saMsrava
{#saMsrava#}¦ {%saṃ-srava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sru%} with
{%sam%}), flowing, oozing out; that which flows, a
stream; anything flowing off or remaining; the
droppings or remains of a libation; a kind of offer-
ing or libation.
<LEND>

<L>48246<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsrAva<k2>saMsrAva
{%Saṃ-srāva, as,%}¦ m. flowing, oozing out; a kind
of offering or libation.
<LEND>

<L>48247<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsrazwf<k2>saMsrazwf
{#saMsrazwf#}¦ {%saṃ-sraṣṭṛ.%} See under {%saṃ-sṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>48248<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsvap<k2>saMsvap
{#saMsvap#}¦ {%saṃ-svap,%} cl. 2. P. {%-svapiti,%} &c., to
sleep soundly, sleep.
<LEND>

<L>48249<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsupta<k2>saMsupta
{%Saṃ-supta, as, ā, am,%}¦ soundly asleep, fast asleep,
asleep, sleeping.
<LEND>

<L>48250<pc>1042-c<k1>saMsvf<k2>saMsvf
{#saMsvf#}¦ {%saṃ-svṛ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-svarate, -svartum,%}
{%-svaritum,%} to hymn, praise (Ved.); to pain, afflict,
torment, cause pain.
<LEND>

<L>48251<pc>1042-c<k1>saMhan<k2>saMhan
{#saMhan#}¦ {%saṃ-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -hantum,%}
to strike together, join or unite closely, put together,
close (the hands &c.), shut; to contract, diminish;
to bring together, heap, accumulate, collect; to fight
together, clash; to strike, kill, destroy completely:
Caus. {%-ghātayati, -yitum,%} to strike together, kill,
destroy utterly.
<LEND>

<L>48252<pc>1042-c<k1>saMha<k2>saMha
{%Saṃ-ha = saṃ-hata%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>48253<pc>1042-c<k1>saMhata<k2>saMhata
{%Saṃ-hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck together, closely
joined or united, closed, shut; well knit or com-
pacted together, firmly united, compact, close, firm,
solid; closely allied; combined, joined, connected,
acting or making effort together, keeping together;
collected, assembled, accumulated; struck, hurt,
wounded, killed. {%—Saṃhata-jānu, us, us, u,%} or
{%saṃhata-jānuka, as, ī, am,%} knock-kneed. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%hata-tala, as,%} m. the two hands joined with the
open palms brought together. {%—Saṃhata-tā,%} f. or
{%saṃhata-tva, am,%} n. compactness, close combina-
tion; close contact or approximation, conjunction;
union, agreement. {%—Saṃhata-bhrū, ūs, ūs, u,%}
knitting the brows. {%—Saṃhata-stanī,%} f. (a woman)
whose breasts are very close to each other. {%—Saṃ-%}
{%hatāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>48254<pc>1042-c<k1>saMhati<k2>saMhati
{%Saṃ-hati, is,%}¦ f. the state of being brought into
close contact, firm or close combination, firm union
or alliance, junction, joint effort, agreement, com-
pactness, firmness, solidity, bulk, mass, assemblage,
collection, heap, number, host, multitude.
<LEND>

<L>48255<pc>1042-c<k1>saMhatya<k2>saMhatya
{%Saṃ-hatya,%}¦ ind. having struck together, having
closed or joined.
<LEND>

<L>48256<pc>1042-c<k1>saMhanana<k2>saMhanana
{%Saṃ-hanana, as, ī, am,%}¦ striking together; kill-
ing, destroying, a destroyer, conqueror; ({%am%}), n.
the act of striking together, compactness, inflexi-
bility; strength, muscularity; rubbing the limbs;
the body (as having the limbs well compacted).
<LEND>

<L>48257<pc>1042-c<k1>saMhanu<k2>saMhanu
{%Saṃ-hanu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. destructive, deadly.
<LEND>

<L>48258<pc>1042-c<k1>saNGa<k2>saNGa
{%Saṅ-gha, as,%}¦ m. close contact or combination;
any collection or assemblage, heap, multitude, quantity,
crowd, host, band, number, group, flock, shoal; any
[Page1043-a+ 75]
number of people or inhabitants living together.
{%—Saṅgha-gupta, as,%} m. a proper N., (also read
{%siṃha-gupta.%}) {%—Saṅgha-cārin, ī,%} m. ‘going in
shoals,’ a fish. {%—Saṅgha-jīvin, ī,%} m. ‘living by
multitudes of people,’ a hired labourer, porter, cooly.
{%—Saṅgha-tala, as,%} m. the two hands joined with
the open palms brought together. {%—Saṅgha-puṣpī,%}
f. a particular plant {%(= dhātakī)%}. {%—Saṅgha-vṛtti,%}
{%is,%} f. a state of close combination. {%—Saṅghavṛtti-%}
{%tā,%} f. combined action. {%—Saṅgha-śas,%} ind. collec-
tively, all together; by troops, in flocks, in shoals,
in companies.
<LEND>

<L>48259<pc>1043-a<k1>saNGAta<k2>saNGAta
{%Saṅ-ghāta, as,%}¦ m. close combination, union,
association, connection, confederacy; a collection,
quantity, assemblage, multitude, heap, cluster, band;
a collection of mucus, phlegm [cf. {%saṅ-ghāṇaka%}];
composition of words, formation of compounds;
striking, killing, hurting; a particular gait or mode
of walking (in the drama); N. of a division of the
infernal regions; [cf. {%saṃ-hāta.%}] {%—Saṅghāta-ka-%}
{%ṭhina, as, ā, am,%} compactly or solidly hard, hard
from solidity or compactness. {%—Saṅghāta-pattrikā,%}
f. a sort of fennel {%(= śata-puṣpā)%}. {%—Saṅghāta-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having close union, possessing a heap
or multitude, closely compacted or combined.
<LEND>

<L>48260<pc>1043-a<k1>saMharaRa<k2>saMharaRa
{#saMharaRa#}¦ {%saṃ-haraṇa.%} See under {%saṃ-hṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>48261<pc>1043-a<k1>saMharza<k2>saMharza<h>1
{#saMharza#} 1¦. {%saṃ-harṣa, as,%} m. (for {%saṅ-ghar-%}
{%ṣa,%} q. v.; for 2. see under {%saṃ-hṛṣ%}), rubbing,
grinding, trituration; envy, emulation; air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>48262<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhavana<k2>saMhavana
{#saMhavana#}¦ {%saṃ-havana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%hu%} with
{%sam%}), the act of sacrificing or offering oblations toge-
ther; sacrificing in a proper manner; a quadrangle,
group of four houses; [cf. {%sañ-javana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48263<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhA<k2>saMhA
{#saMhA#}¦ {%saṃ-hā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-jihīte,%} &c., to go
together, proceed; to obtain.
<LEND>

<L>48264<pc>1043-a<k1>saYjihAna<k2>saYjihAna
{%Sañ-jihāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, moving.
<LEND>

<L>48265<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhAta<k2>saMhAta
{#saMhAta#}¦ {%saṃhāta, as,%} m. (probably for {%saṅ-%}
{%ghāta,%} q. v.), one of the twenty-one hells (mentioned
in Manu IV. 89).
<LEND>

<L>48266<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhAra<k2>saMhAra
{#saMhAra#}¦ {%saṃ-hāra.%} See under {%saṃ-hṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>48267<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhi<k2>saMhi
{#saMhi#}¦ {%saṃ-hi,%} cl. 5. P. {%-hinoti,%} &c., to send
forth, utter.
<LEND>

<L>48268<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhita<k2>saMhita
{#saMhita#}¦ {%saṃ-hita.%} See under {%san-dhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>48269<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhUti<k2>saMhUti
{#saMhUti#}¦ {%saṃ-hūti.%} See under {%saṃ-hve.%}
<LEND>

<L>48270<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhf<k2>saMhf
{#saMhf#}¦ {%saṃ-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te, -har-%}
{%tum,%} to bring or draw together; to contract, abridge,
compress; to close, clench (the fists &c.); to crush
together, crumple up, destroy, annihilate, (opposed
to {%sṛj%}); to bring together, collect, accumulate; to
draw together, unite, bind by obligations; to draw
aside (a curtain &c.), withdraw, withhold, hold back,
take back; to restrain, suppress, curb; to lay hold
of, seize, subtract, take: Pass. {%-hriyate,%} to be drawn
together, be contracted or abridged; to be destroyed;
to be finished or concluded; to be restrained, &c.:
Desid. {%-jihīrṣati,%} to wish to draw together or
destroy or annihilate.
<LEND>

<L>48271<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhara<k2>saMhara
{%Saṃ-hara, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawing together, bringing
together; contracting; destroying, &c. {%—Saṃha-%}
{%rākhya (˚ra-ākh˚), as,%} m. ‘called Saṃhara,’ the
fire Pāvaka.
<LEND>

<L>48272<pc>1043-a<k1>saMharaRa<k2>saMharaRa
{%Saṃ-haraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of drawing or bring-
ing together; contracting; crumpling together, de-
stroying, destruction, ruin; collecting, accumulating;
withdrawing; restraining, checking; seizing, taking.
<LEND>

<L>48273<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhartf<k2>saMhartf
{%Saṃ-hartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who draws together
or contracts, &c.; destroying, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>48274<pc>1043-a<k1>saMhAra<k2>saMhAra
{%Saṃ-hāra, as,%}¦ m. drawing together, contraction,
abridgement, comprehensive description, abbrevia-
tion, compression; a fault in pronunciation, (opposed
to {%vi-hāra%}); close, end, conclusion, ({%kāvya-saṃ-%}
{%hāra, as,%} m. ‘the close of a poem,’ epithet of the
benediction at the conclusion of a drama); destruc-
tion, loss; the periodical destruction of the universe
at the end of a Kalpa; collection, assemblage, accu-
[Page1043-b+ 75]
mulation; withdrawing, withholding, restraining,
suppressing; a charm or spell for restraining magical
weapons or bringing them back after discharging
them; seizing, laying hold of, taking [cf. {%veṇī-s˚%}];
a division of the infernal regions; practice, skill.
{%—Saṃhāra-bhairava, as,%} m. one of the eight
forms of Bhairava, q. v. {%—Saṃhāra-mudrā,%} f., N.
of a particular posture in the Tantra worship ({%=%}
{%visarjana-mudrā%}).
<LEND>

<L>48275<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhAraka<k2>saMhAraka
{%Saṃ-hāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ drawing together,
compressing, closing; destructive, ruinous; a de-
stroyer.
<LEND>

<L>48276<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhArya<k2>saMhArya
{%Saṃ-hārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be drawn together or
contracted, to be abridged; to be destroyed, &c.;
to be restrained or curbed or suppressed.
<LEND>

<L>48277<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhfta<k2>saMhfta
{%Saṃ-hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn together; contracted,
compressed, abridged; closed; destroyed, scattered;
collected, assembled; withdrawn, withheld; restrained,
curbed; seized, laid hold of.
<LEND>

<L>48278<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhfti<k2>saMhfti
{%Saṃ-hṛti, is,%}¦ f. contraction, compression, abridge-
ment; destruction, loss, disappearance; collection;
restraint; taking, seizure.
<LEND>

<L>48279<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhftya<k2>saMhftya
{%Saṃ-hṛtya,%}¦ ind. having drawn together or con-
tracted, having abridged; having closed or clenched
(the fist); having destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>48280<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhfz<k2>saMhfz
{#saMhfz#}¦ {%saṃ-hṛṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-hṛṣyati, -har-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to bristle, stand erect (as the hair of the
body from joy or fright); to thrill with delight, be
glad, rejoice.
<LEND>

<L>48281<pc>1043-b<k1>saMharza<k2>saMharza<h>2
2. {%saṃ-harṣa, as,%}¦ m. bristling or erection of the
hair of the body (either from rapture or terror),
thrill of delight, joy, pleasure; ardour, emulation,
(perhaps for {%saṅ-gharṣa%}); air, wind; trituration,
rubbing together, (for {%saṅ-gharṣa.%}) {%—Saṃharṣa-%}
{%yogin, ī, inī, i,%} possessing joy, enraptured.
<LEND>

<L>48282<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhfzwa<k2>saMhfzwa
{%Saṃ-hṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrilled, enraptured,
rejoiced, delighted, glad; bristling, shuddering; fired
with ardour or emulation. {%—Saṃhṛṣṭa-roman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} or {%saṃhṛṣṭa-romāṅga (˚ma-aṅ˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the hair of the body bristling (with joy
or fright), thrilling with joy.
<LEND>

<L>48283<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhotra<k2>saMhotra
{#saMhotra#}¦ {%saṃ-hotra,%} Ved. {%= samīcīna-yajña,%}
Ṛg-veda X. 86, 10.
<LEND>

<L>48284<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhrAda<k2>saMhrAda
{#saMhrAda#}¦ {%saṃ-hrāda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hrad%} with
{%sam%}), a loud noise, uproar, sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>48285<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhrAdin<k2>saMhrAdin
{%Saṃ-hrādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sounding together, making
a noise, tumultuous, noisy. {%—Saṃhrādi-kaṇṭha,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a sounding throat.
<LEND>

<L>48286<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhrI<k2>saMhrI
{#saMhrI#}¦ {%saṃ-hrī,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jihreti,%} &c., to be
quite ashamed.
<LEND>

<L>48287<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhrIRa<k2>saMhrIRa
{%Saṃ-hrīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ altogether ashamed; bash-
ful, modest.
<LEND>

<L>48288<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhlAda<k2>saMhlAda
{#saMhlAda#}¦ {%saṃ-hlāda, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Hiraṇya-kaśipu (and brother of Pra-hlāda, q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>48289<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhve<k2>saMhve
{#saMhve#}¦ {%saṃ-hve,%} cl. 1. A. {%-hvayate, -hvātum%}
(Ved. Inf. {%-hvayitavai%}), to call out loudly, shout
together; to call out, tell, relate, make known.
<LEND>

<L>48290<pc>1043-b<k1>saMhUti<k2>saMhUti
{%Saṃ-hūti, is,%}¦ f. shouting or calling out together,
general shout or clamour, exclamation, tumultuous
exultation.
<LEND>

<L>48291<pc>1043-b<k1>saka<k2>saka
{#saka#}¦ {%saka, as,%} m. (a diminutive fr. {%sa,%} the
base of nom. sing. of {%tad%}), he, that man; ({%ā%}), f.
she, (Ṛg-veda I. 191, 11.)
<LEND>

<L>48292<pc>1043-b<k1>sakawa<k2>sakawa
{#sakawa#}¦ {%sa-kaṭa, as, ā, am,%} bad, vile; ({%as%}),
m. the small tree Trophis Aspera {%(= śākhoṭa).%}
{%—Sakaṭānna (˚ṭa-an˚), am,%} n. impure food (ac-
cording to some).
<LEND>

<L>48293<pc>1043-b<k1>sakaRwaka<k2>sakaRwaka
{#sakaRwaka#}¦ {%sa-kaṇṭaka, as, ā, am,%} having
thorns, thorny, prickly; troublesome, perilous; ({%as%}),
m. the aquatic plant Vallisneria ({%= śaivāla%}); a kind
of Karañja.
<LEND>

<L>48294<pc>1043-b<k1>sakapawam<k2>sakapawam
{#sakapawam#}¦ {%sa-kapaṭam,%} ind. with fraud or
dissimulation, fraudulently.
<LEND>

<L>48295<pc>1043-b<k1>sakamala<k2>sakamala
{#sakamala#}¦ {%sa-kamala, as, ā, am,%} having
lotuses, abounding in lotuses.
<LEND>
[Page1043-c+ 70]

<L>48296<pc>1043-c<k1>sakampa<k2>sakampa
{#sakampa#}¦ {%sa-kampa, as, ā, am,%} having tremor,
tremulous.
<LEND>

<L>48297<pc>1043-c<k1>sakampana<k2>sakampana
{%Sa-kampana, as, ā, am,%}¦ having tremor, trem-
bling; accompanied with earthquakes; (according
to Nīla-kaṇṭha) {%= sa-vidyut.%}
<LEND>

<L>48298<pc>1043-c<k1>sakara<k2>sakara<h>1
{#sakara#} 1¦. {%sa-kara, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%kara%}),
having hands; possessing a trunk (as an elephant).
<LEND>

<L>48299<pc>1043-c<k1>sakara<k2>sakara<h>2
{#sakara#} 2¦. {%sa-kara, as, ā, am%} (see 2. {%kara%}),
having rays, full of rays; having or bearing tax,
bringing in toll, liable to pay taxes.
<LEND>

<L>48300<pc>1043-c<k1>sakaruRa<k2>sakaruRa
{#sakaruRa#}¦ {%sa-karuṇa, as, ā, am,%} having pity,
tender, compassionate; ({%am%}), ind. compassionately,
tenderly.
<LEND>

<L>48301<pc>1043-c<k1>sakarRa<k2>sakarRa
{#sakarRa#}¦ {%sa-karṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having
ears; hearing, listening; accompanied by Karṇa.
<LEND>

<L>48302<pc>1043-c<k1>sakartfka<k2>sakartfka
{#sakartfka#}¦ {%sa-kartṛka, as, ā, am,%} having an
agent.
<LEND>

<L>48303<pc>1043-c<k1>sakarmaka<k2>sakarmaka
{%Sa-karmaka, as,%}¦ m. having or performing any
act; (in grammar) ‘having an object,’ the transitive
or active verb.
<LEND>

<L>48304<pc>1043-c<k1>sakarman<k2>sakarman
{%Sa-karman, ā, ā, a,%}¦ performing any act or rite;
following similar business.
<LEND>

<L>48305<pc>1043-c<k1>sakAraRa<k2>sakAraRa
{%Sa-kāraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a cause, originating
from a cause.
<LEND>

<L>48306<pc>1043-c<k1>sakala<k2>sakala<h>1
{#sakala#} 1¦. {%sa-kala, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%sa%} and
{%kalā%}), together with parts or portions; all, whole,
entire; ({%am%}), n. everything; the whole; [cf. Lith.
<nsi>cźiela-s;</nsi> Russ. <nsi>zielyï;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>ziel;</nsi> Pol. <nsi>saly, salki;</nsi>
perhaps Goth. <nsi>hail-s;</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>heil;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>hal.</nsi>] {%—Sakala-siddhi-da, as, ā, am,%} giving all
perfection. {%—1. sakala-haṃsa-gaṇa, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing entire or unbroken flocks of geese. {%—Sakalār-%}
{%tha-śāstra-sāra (˚la-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} containing the
essence of precepts about all things. {%—Sakalendu%}
{%(˚la-in˚), us,%} m. the full moon. {%—Sakalendu-mukha,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} having a face like the full moon.
<LEND>

<L>48307<pc>1043-c<k1>sakala<k2>sakala<h>2
{#sakala#} 2¦. {%sa-kala, as, ā, am,%} having a soft
or low sound.
<LEND>

<L>48308<pc>1043-c<k1>sakalaNka<k2>sakalaNka
{#sakalaNka#}¦ {%sa-kalaṅka, as, ā, am,%} having
spots or stains, stained, contaminated.
<LEND>

<L>48309<pc>1043-c<k1>sakalatra<k2>sakalatra
{#sakalatra#}¦ {%sa-kalatra, as, ā, am,%} accompanied
by a wife.
<LEND>

<L>48310<pc>1043-c<k1>sakalaha<k2>sakalaha
{#sakalaha#}¦ {%sa-kalaha, as, ā, am,%} having quar-
rels, quarrelsome, quarrelling.
<LEND>

<L>48311<pc>1043-c<k1>sakalahaMsagaRa<k2>sakalahaMsagaRa<h>2
{#sakalahaMsagaRa#} 2¦. {%sa-kalahaṃsa-gaṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having flocks of Kala-haṃsas.
<LEND>

<L>48312<pc>1043-c<k1>sakalpa<k2>sakalpa
{#sakalpa#}¦ {%sa-kalpa, as, ā, am,%} having the
ritual or ceremonial part of the Veda, along with the
ritual, (Manu II. 140); having rites or ceremonies;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>48313<pc>1043-c<k1>sakavaca<k2>sakavaca
{#sakavaca#}¦ {%sa-kavaca, as, ā, am,%} having armour
or mail, clad in armour, mailed.
<LEND>

<L>48314<pc>1043-c<k1>sakAkola<k2>sakAkola
{#sakAkola#}¦ {%sa-kākola, as,%} m. one of the
twenty-one hells (mentioned in Manu IV. 89).
<LEND>

<L>48315<pc>1043-c<k1>sakAtara<k2>sakAtara
{#sakAtara#}¦ {%sa-kātara, as, ā, am,%} cowardly,
dastardly; ({%am%}), ind. with cowardice, in a cowardly
manner.
<LEND>

<L>48316<pc>1043-c<k1>sakAma<k2>sakAma
{#sakAma#}¦ {%sa-kāma, as, ā, am,%} having love or
affection, full of love, loving, a lover; one who has
obtained his wish, contented, satisfied, humoured,
gratified; ({%am%}), ind. with pleasure; contentedly,
assuredly, indeed. {%—Sakāmāri (˚ma-ari), is,%} m.
‘enemy of lovers,’ epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>48317<pc>1043-c<k1>sakAra<k2>sakAra
{#sakAra#}¦ {%sa-kāra.%} See under 1. {%sa.%}
<LEND>

<L>48318<pc>1043-c<k1>sakArmuka<k2>sakArmuka
{#sakArmuka#}¦ {%sa-kārmuka, as, ā, am,%} having a
bow, armed with a bow.
<LEND>

<L>48319<pc>1043-c<k1>sakAla<k2>sakAla
{#sakAla#}¦ {%sa-kāla, as, ā, am,%} seasonable; ({%am%}),
ind. seasonably, betimes, early in the morning.
<LEND>

<L>48320<pc>1043-c<k1>sakAlI<k2>sakAlI
{#sakAlI#}¦ {%sakālī,%} f., N. of a place. {%—Sakālī-%}
{%samudra,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>
[Page1044-a+ 71]

<L>48321<pc>1044-a<k1>sakASa<k2>sakASa
{#sakASa#}¦ {%sa-kāśa, as, ā, am,%} having appear-
ance or visibility, visible, present, near; ({%as%}), m.
presence, propinquity, vicinity, nearness; ({%am, e%}),
ind. in the presence of, near; ({%āt%}), ind. from the
presence of, from.
<LEND>

<L>48322<pc>1044-a<k1>sakirIwakOstuBa<k2>sakirIwakOstuBa
{#sakirIwakOstuBa#}¦ {%sa-kirīṭa-kaustubha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a diadem and breast-jewel.
<LEND>

<L>48323<pc>1044-a<k1>sakukzi<k2>sakukzi
{#sakukzi#}¦ {%sa-kukṣi, is, is, i,%} having the same
womb, born from the same mother (as a brother or
other relation of whole blood).
<LEND>

<L>48324<pc>1044-a<k1>sakuRqala<k2>sakuRqala
{#sakuRqala#}¦ {%sa-kuṇḍala, as, ā, am,%} having ear-
rings, decorated with ear-rings.
<LEND>

<L>48325<pc>1044-a<k1>sakuruRqa<k2>sakuruRqa
{#sakuruRqa#}¦ {%sakuruṇḍa, as,%} m. yellow Ama-
ranth or Barleria ({%= sākuruṇḍa, kuruṇṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>48326<pc>1044-a<k1>sakula<k2>sakula
{#sakula#}¦ {%sa-kula, as, ā, am,%} having a family;
belonging to a noble family, &c.; belonging to the
same family; ({%as%}), m. a kinsman; ({%as, ī%}), m. f.
a sort of fish ({%= śakula%}).
<LEND>

<L>48327<pc>1044-a<k1>sakulya<k2>sakulya
{%Sakulya, as,%}¦ m. one of the same family and
name ({%= sa-gotra%}); a distant relation, remote kins-
man (said to be one who shares a divided oblation,
e. g. the grandson's grandson or even other descendants
as far as three degrees or more from him; sometimes
extended to the tenth descendant).
<LEND>

<L>48328<pc>1044-a<k1>sakfcCra<k2>sakfcCra
{#sakfcCra#}¦ {%sa-kṛcchra, as, ā, am,%} having
trouble or distress, attended with pain, painful, dis-
tressing.
<LEND>

<L>48329<pc>1044-a<k1>sakft<k2>sakft<h>1
{#sakft#} 1¦. {%sa-kṛt,%} ind. (connected with rt.
1. {%kṛ%}), once, on one occasion only [cf. {%a-s˚%}]; at
one time; at once, together; together with, with;
always; [with the former part of this word cf. Lat.
<nsi>se, si, sim,</nsi> of the words <nsi>se-mel, si-mul, sim-plex,</nsi>
and Gr. <lang n="greek">ἁ</lang> of <lang n="greek">ἁ-πλοῦς;</lang> with the latter part cf. Lith.
<nsi>kartas.</nsi>] {%—Sakṛt-praja, as,%} m. ‘having offspring
once,’ a crow. {%—Sakṛt-prayogin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved.
being employed only once. {%—Sakṛt-prasūtikā,%} f.
one who has borne one child; (a cow) that has
calved once. {%—Sakṛt-phalā,%} f. ‘bearing fruit once,’
the plantain tree {%(= kadalī)%}. {%—Sakṛt-sū, ūs,%} f.,
Ved. one who bears a child only once. {%—Sakṛd-%}
{%āgāmin, ī,%} m., N. of one of the four orders of Bud-
dhist Āryas. {%—Sakṛd-garbha, as,%} m. ‘having only
one conception,’ a mule, {%= khesara; (ā),%} f. a woman
who is pregnant only once. {%—Sakṛd-vīra, as,%} m.
a kind of plant ({%= eka-vīra%}).
<LEND>

<L>48330<pc>1044-a<k1>sakft<k2>sakft<h>2
{#sakft#} 2¦. {%sakṛt, t,%} m. (more usually written
{%śakṛt,%} q. v.), excrement, feces, ordure.
<LEND>

<L>48331<pc>1044-a<k1>sakfpa<k2>sakfpa
{#sakfpa#}¦ {%sa-kṛpa, as, ā, am,%} having pity, com-
passionate; with Kṛpa, accompanied by Kṛpa.
<LEND>

<L>48332<pc>1044-a<k1>sakfpaRa<k2>sakfpaRa
{%Sa-kṛpaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pitiable, miserable,
wretched.
<LEND>

<L>48333<pc>1044-a<k1>sakeSa<k2>sakeSa
{#sakeSa#}¦ {%sa-keśa, as, ā, am,%} having hair,
hairy.
<LEND>

<L>48334<pc>1044-a<k1>sakEtava<k2>sakEtava
{#sakEtava#}¦ {%sa-kaitava, as, ā, am,%} having fraud,
fraudulent; ({%as%}), m. a deceiver, cheat, impostor;
({%am%}), ind. fraudulently.
<LEND>

<L>48335<pc>1044-a<k1>sakopa<k2>sakopa
{#sakopa#}¦ {%sa-kopa, as, ā, am,%} enraged, full of
anger, angry, displeased; ({%am%}), ind. with anger,
angrily.
<LEND>

<L>48336<pc>1044-a<k1>sakOtuka<k2>sakOtuka
{#sakOtuka#}¦ {%sa-kautuka, as, ā, am,%} full of ex-
pectation, eagerly expectant; ({%am%}), ind. expectantly.
<LEND>

<L>48337<pc>1044-a<k1>sakta<k2>sakta
{#sakta#}¦ {%sakta, sakti.%} See under rt. {%sañj.%}
<LEND>

<L>48338<pc>1044-a<k1>saktu<k2>saktu
{#saktu#}¦ {%saktu, us, u,%} m. n. (also written {%śaktu,%}
q. v.; according to Uṇādi-s. I. 70. fr. rt. {%sac;%} ac-
cording to some only masc. pl.), the flour of barley
(fried before ground); barley-meal. {%—Saktu-pras-%}
{%tha, as, am,%} m. n. a Prastha or particular measure
of flour. {%—Saktuprasthīya, am,%} n., N. of an episode
in the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Saktu-phalā%} or {%saktu-%}
{%phalī,%} f. ‘having fruit resembling flour,’ the Śamī
tree, Mimosa Suma.
<LEND>
[Page1044-b+ 72]

<L>48339<pc>1044-b<k1>saktuka<k2>saktuka
{%Saktuka, as,%}¦ m. {%= saktu%} above; a species of
poison.
<LEND>

<L>48340<pc>1044-b<k1>saktula<k2>saktula
{%Saktula, as, ā, am,%}¦ containing flour.
<LEND>

<L>48341<pc>1044-b<k1>sakTi<k2>sakTi
{#sakTi#}¦ {%sakthi, i,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 154. fr. rt. {%sañj,%} because the body ‘is attached
to’ or ‘rests on’ the thigh; according to Yāska fr.
rt. {%sac;%} the base of some cases is {%sakthan,%} see
below; in Ṛg-veda X. 86, 16. {%sakthyā = sakthinī,%}
n. du., occurs), the thigh; a bone; the pole or shafts
of a cart; a part of the frame of a cart.
<LEND>

<L>48342<pc>1044-b<k1>sakTa<k2>sakTa
{%Saktha%}¦ at the end of a comp. {%= sakthi.%}
<LEND>

<L>48343<pc>1044-b<k1>sakTan<k2>sakTan
{%Sakthan,%}¦ a form of base substituted for {%sakthi%}
above, in the weakest cases (e. g. inst. sing. {%sakthnā,%}
dat. {%sakthne,%} abl. gen. {%sakthnas,%} loc. {%sakthni%}
or {%sakthani,%} gen. pl. {%sakthnām,%} Ved. acc. pl. {%sak-%}
{%thāni%}).
<LEND>

<L>48344<pc>1044-b<k1>sakma<k2>sakma
{#sakma#}¦ {%sakma, sakmya.%} See under rt. {%sac.%}
<LEND>

<L>48345<pc>1044-b<k1>sakriya<k2>sakriya
{#sakriya#}¦ {%sa-kriya, as, ā, am,%} having action,
active, mutable, movable, migratory; one who ob-
serves his religious duties.
<LEND>

<L>48346<pc>1044-b<k1>sakroDa<k2>sakroDa
{#sakroDa#}¦ {%sa-krodha, as, ā, am,%} full of anger,
angry; ({%am%}), ind. with anger, angrily.
<LEND>

<L>48347<pc>1044-b<k1>sakz<k2>sakz
{#sakz#}¦ {%sakṣ.%} See rt. {%sac.%}
<LEND>

<L>48348<pc>1044-b<k1>sakzaRa<k2>sakzaRa
{#sakzaRa#}¦ {%sa-kṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} having a
leisure moment, being at leisure.
<LEND>

<L>48349<pc>1044-b<k1>sakzaRi<k2>sakzaRi
{#sakzaRi#}¦ {%sakṣaṇi, is, is, i%} (according to
some fr. rt. {%kṣan,%} perhaps fr. rt. 1. {%sah;%} according
to Sāy. fr. rt. {%sac%}), Ved. overpowering, destroying;
honouring, obeying; to be honoured; (Sāy. {%= sa-%}
{%camāna,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 70, 8; {%= sacanīya-śīla,%}
VIII. 22, 15.)
<LEND>

<L>48350<pc>1044-b<k1>sakzatram<k2>sakzatram
{#sakzatram#}¦ {%sa-kṣatram,%} ind. suitably to the
state of a Kṣatriya.
<LEND>

<L>48351<pc>1044-b<k1>sakzit<k2>sakzit
{#sakzit#}¦ {%sa-kṣit, t, t, t%} (see 2. {%kṣit%}), Ved.
dwelling along with, associated together, going to-
gether.
<LEND>

<L>48352<pc>1044-b<k1>saKaqga<k2>saKaqga
{#saKaqga#}¦ {%sa-khaḍga, as, ā, am,%} armed with a
sword, sword in hand.
<LEND>

<L>48353<pc>1044-b<k1>saKi<k2>saKi
{#saKi#}¦ {%sakhi, ā,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 136. fr. {%sa%} for {%samāna%} + rt. {%khyā;%} according
to others fr. 4. {%sa%} and rt. 2. {%kṣi,%} and meaning
‘living together’), a friend, ({%kiṃ-s˚,%} a bad friend);
an associate, companion; [cf. Lat. <nsi>socius.</nsi>] {%—Sakhi-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%sakhi-tva, am,%} n. friendship, intimacy.
{%—Sakhi-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} one who has been
formerly a friend; ({%am%}), n. the being formerly a
friend. {%—Sakhi-vat,%} ind. like a friend, as a friend.
{%—Sakhi-vigraha, as,%} m. war of friends, civil war.
<LEND>

<L>48354<pc>1044-b<k1>saKa<k2>saKa
{%Sakha, as,%}¦ m. a friend, (frequently used at the
end of comps. for {%sakhi%} above; cf. {%nara-s˚, va-%}
{%santa-s˚%}); the tree Mimosa Catechu.
<LEND>

<L>48355<pc>1044-b<k1>saKI<k2>saKI
{%Sakhī,%}¦ f. a female friend or companion, a woman's
confidante, ({%ku-sakhī,%} a bad female friend.) {%—Sa-%}
{%khī-kadambaka, am,%} n. a number of female friends.
{%—Sakhī-gaṇa, as,%} m. a number of female friends.
{%—Sakhīgaṇa-samāvṛta, as, ā, am,%} surrounded
by a company of female friends. {%—Sakhī-jana, as,%}
m. a female friend, confidante. {%—Sakhī-sahita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} attended by female friends.
<LEND>

<L>48356<pc>1044-b<k1>saKIya<k2>saKIya
{%Sakhīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%sakhīyati,%} &c., to wish for a
friend.
<LEND>

<L>48357<pc>1044-b<k1>saKIyat<k2>saKIyat
{%Sakhīyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. desiring friends,
desirous of friendship.
<LEND>

<L>48358<pc>1044-b<k1>saKya<k2>saKya
{%Sakhya, am,%}¦ n. friendship, intimacy; equality;
({%as%}), m. a friend.
<LEND>

<L>48359<pc>1044-b<k1>saKeda<k2>saKeda
{#saKeda#}¦ {%sa-kheda, as, ā, am,%} having grief or
sorrow; ({%am%}), ind. with grief, sorrowfully.
<LEND>

<L>48360<pc>1044-b<k1>saKelam<k2>saKelam
{#saKelam#}¦ {%sa-khelam,%} ind. with a gentle
motion, moving gently.
<LEND>

<L>48361<pc>1044-b<k1>sag<k2>sag
{#sag#}¦ {%sag,%} cl. 1. P. {%sagati, sasāga, asagīt,%}
{%sagitum,%} to cover: Caus. {%sagayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to cover.
<LEND>
[Page1044-c+ 72]

<L>48362<pc>1044-c<k1>sagajAroha<k2>sagajAroha
{#sagajAroha#}¦ {%sa-gajāroha, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied by an elephant-rider, attended by men riding
on elephants.
<LEND>

<L>48363<pc>1044-c<k1>sagaRa<k2>sagaRa
{#sagaRa#}¦ {%sa-gaṇa, as, ā, am,%} having troops or
flocks, accompanied by a troop, attended by a body
of followers; attended or accompanied by (with
inst.); ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>48364<pc>1044-c<k1>sagadgadam<k2>sagadgadam
{#sagadgadam#}¦ {%sa-gadgadam,%} ind. with stammer-
ing, in a faltering voice.
<LEND>

<L>48365<pc>1044-c<k1>saganDa<k2>saganDa
{#saganDa#}¦ {%sa-gandha, as, ā, am,%} having a
smell, odoriferous, fragrant, sweet-smelling; ({%as%}),
m. a relation, kinsman, co-heir.
<LEND>

<L>48366<pc>1044-c<k1>saganDarva<k2>saganDarva
{#saganDarva#}¦ {%sa-gandharva, as, ā, am,%} together
with the Gandharvas.
<LEND>

<L>48367<pc>1044-c<k1>sagara<k2>sagara
{#sagara#}¦ {%sa-gara, as, ā, am,%} having poison,
poisonous; ({%as%}), m. the ocean, sea (Ved., enumerated
among the {%antarikṣa-nāmāni%} in Naigh. I. 3;
also {%am,%} n.); N. of a king of the solar race,
sovereign of Ayodhyā (son of Bāhu; he is said to
have been called Sagara, as born together with a
poison given to his mother by the other wife of his
father; he was father of Asamañja by Keśinī and
of sixty thousand sons by Sumati; the latter were
turned into a heap of ashes by the sage Kapila, see
{%bhagīratha,%} and their funeral ceremonies could
only be performed by the waters of Gaṅgā to be
brought from heaven for the purpose of purifying
their remains; this was finally accomplished by the
devotion of Bhagīratha, q. v., who having led the
river to the sea, called it Sāgara in honour of his
ancestor: Sagara is described as having subdued the
Śakas, Yavanas, and other barbarous tribes, and de-
prived them of their social and religious position);
N. of a particular Arhat. {%—Sagaropākhyāna (˚ra-%}
{%up˚), am,%} n. ‘the story of Sagara,’ N. of the fifteenth
chapter of the Svarga-khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>48368<pc>1044-c<k1>sagarBa<k2>sagarBa
{#sagarBa#}¦ {%sa-garbha, as, ā, am,%} pregnant; ({%as%}),
m. ‘having the same womb,’ a brother by the same
father and mother, a brother of whole blood ({%= sa-%}
{%hodara;%} cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀδελφός</lang> ({%ā%}), f. a pregnant
woman.
<LEND>

<L>48369<pc>1044-c<k1>sagarBya<k2>sagarBya
{%Sagarbhya, as,%}¦ m. a brother of whole blood,
one by the same father and mother.
<LEND>

<L>48370<pc>1044-c<k1>sagarva<k2>sagarva
{#sagarva#}¦ {%sa-garva, as, ā, am,%} proud; joyful,
glad, elated; ({%am%}), ind. haughtily.
<LEND>

<L>48371<pc>1044-c<k1>saguqaSfNgaka<k2>saguqaSfNgaka
{#saguqaSfNgaka#}¦ {%sa-guḍaśṛṅgaka, as, ikā, am,%}
furnished with cupolas.
<LEND>

<L>48372<pc>1044-c<k1>saguRa<k2>saguRa
{#saguRa#}¦ {%sa-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} having properties
or qualities, &c.; possessing good qualities or attri-
butes, virtuous; worldly.
<LEND>

<L>48373<pc>1044-c<k1>sagUQam<k2>sagUQam
{#sagUQam#}¦ {%sa-gūḍham,%} ind. secretly, privately,
privily.
<LEND>

<L>48374<pc>1044-c<k1>sagotra<k2>sagotra
{#sagotra#}¦ {%sa-gotra, as, ā, am,%} being of the
same family or kin, related; ({%as%}), m. a kinsman of
the same family; one sprung from a common an-
cestor; one connected by funeral oblations of food
and water; a distant kinsman; ({%am%}), n. a family,
race, lineage.
<LEND>

<L>48375<pc>1044-c<k1>sagDi<k2>sagDi
{#sagDi#}¦ {%sa-gdhi, is,%} f. (contracted fr. {%saha-%}
{%jagdhi,%} see {%jagdhi%}), eating together; ({%is, is, i,%}),
Ved. eating together.
<LEND>

<L>48376<pc>1044-c<k1>sagman<k2>sagman
{#sagman#}¦ {%sagman,%} enumerated among the
{%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%} in Naigh. II. 17.
<LEND>

<L>48377<pc>1044-c<k1>saG<k2>saG
{#saG#}¦ {%sagh,%} cl. 5. P. {%saghnoti, sasāgha,%}
{%saghiṣyati, asaghīt%} or {%asāghīt, saghi-%}
{%tum,%} to strike, hurt, injure, kill; to receive, accept;
to support, bear [cf. rt. 1. {%sah%}]: Caus. {%sāghayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} Aor. {%asīṣaghat%} or {%asīsaghat:%} Desid.
{%sisaghiṣati:%} Intens. {%sāsaghyate, sāsagdhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>48378<pc>1044-c<k1>saGana<k2>saGana
{#saGana#}¦ {%sa-ghana, as, ā, am,%} having density
or solidity, dense, solid.
<LEND>

<L>48379<pc>1044-c<k1>saNka<k2>saNka
{#saNka#}¦ {%saṅ-ka, as, ā, am%} (according to Sāy.
[Page1045-a+ 75]
fr. rt. {%kai%} with {%sam;%} but according to Yāska, Nir.
IX. 14, either fr. rt. {%sac%} or fr. {%saṅ-kṝ%}), sounding
together, shouting; having assembled warriors; (in
Naigh. II. 17. {%saṅkāḥ%} is enumerated among the
{%saṅgrāma-nāmāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>48380<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkawa<k2>saNkawa
{#saNkawa#}¦ {%saṅ-kaṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%sam + kaṭa,%}
q. v.), ‘having the hips close together,’ contracted,
narrow, strait; impassable, impervious; crowded;
({%as%}), m. a proper N.; ({%ā%}), f. a particular goddess
worshipped at Benares; a particular Yoginī, (seven
others are named, viz. Maṅgalā, Piṅgalā, Dhanyā,
Bhrāmarī, Bhadrikā, Ulkā, Siddhi); ({%am%}), n. a
narrow passage, strait, defile, pass; a strait, difficulty,
trouble, ({%prāṇa-saṅkaṭa,%} risk of life.) {%—Saṅka-%}
{%ṭākṣa (˚ṭa-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} ‘having contracted
eyes,’ winking, leering; ({%as%}), m. the tree Grislea
Tomentosa {%(= dhava)%}. {%—Saṅkaṭāpanna (˚ṭa-%}
{%āp˚), as, ā, am,%} beset with difficulties.
<LEND>

<L>48381<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkaT<k2>saNkaT
{#saNkaT#}¦ {%saṅ-kath (sam-kath),%} cl. 10. P. {%-ka-%}
{%thayati, -yitum,%} to relate or narrate fully, tell, com-
municate, inform; to explain; to speak about or of
(with acc.); to converse.
<LEND>

<L>48382<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkaTana<k2>saNkaTana
{%Saṅ-kathana, am,%}¦ n. the act of narrating fully,
narration, relation.
<LEND>

<L>48383<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkaTA<k2>saNkaTA
{%Saṅ-kathā,%}¦ f. conversation, discourse, talking to-
gether.
<LEND>

<L>48384<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkaTita<k2>saNkaTita
{%Saṅ-kathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ related, narrated, com-
municated.
<LEND>

<L>48385<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkaTyamAna<k2>saNkaTyamAna
{%Saṅ-kathyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being told or related.
<LEND>

<L>48386<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkan<k2>saNkan
{#saNkan#}¦ {%saṅ-kan%} ({%sam-kan,%} cf. 2. {%kā,%} rt. {%kai%}),
cl. 1. P. {%-kanati,%} &c. (apparently only used in the
participle below), Ved. to be satisfied or pleased, &c.;
[cf. rt. {%cak.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48387<pc>1045-a<k1>saYcakAna<k2>saYcakAna
{%Sañ-cakāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. satisfied with,
pleased; praised, glorified, (Sāy. {%= stūyamāna,%} as if
fr. rt. {%kai%} with {%sam.%})
<LEND>

<L>48388<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkamp<k2>saNkamp
{#saNkamp#}¦ {%saṅ-kamp (sam-kamp),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-kampate, -kampitum,%} to shake about, quake,
tremble: Caus. {%-kampayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
shake or tremble.
<LEND>

<L>48389<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkara<k2>saNkara
{#saNkara#}¦ {%saṅ-kara.%} See under {%saṅ-kṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>48390<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkarzaRa<k2>saNkarzaRa
{#saNkarzaRa#}¦ {%saṅ-karṣaṇa.%} See under {%saṅ-%}
{%kṛṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>48391<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkal<k2>saNkal<h>1
{#saNkal#} 1¦. {%saṅ-kal%} ({%sam-kal,%} see rt. 2. {%kal%}),
cl. 10. P. {%-kālayati, -yitum,%} to drive together, drive
to; to drive away, put to flight.
<LEND>

<L>48392<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkalA<k2>saNkalA
{%Saṅ-kalā,%}¦ ind. (doubtful), killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>48393<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkal<k2>saNkal<h>2
{#saNkal#} 2¦. {%saṅ-kal%} ({%sam-kal,%} see rt. 3. {%kal%}),
cl. 10. P. {%-kalayati, -yitum,%} to heap together, pile
up, accumulate; to grasp, lay hold of; to consider,
deem, regard as.
<LEND>

<L>48394<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkala<k2>saNkala
{%Saṅ-kala, as,%}¦ m. collection, accumulation, quan-
tity; addition.
<LEND>

<L>48395<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkalana<k2>saNkalana
{%Saṅ-kalana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of heaping toge-
ther; contact, junction, collision, intermixture; blend-
ing, twining; ({%am%}), n. addition (in arithmetic).
<LEND>

<L>48396<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkalita<k2>saNkalita
{%Saṅ-kalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heaped together, piled up,
collected, brought together, blended, intermixed,
arranged; added; laid hold of, grasped; ({%ā%}), f. (in
arithmetical progression) the first sum; ({%am%}), n.
addition (in arithmetic). {%—Saṅ-kalitaikya (˚tā-%}
{%aik˚), am,%} n. the sum of the sums or terms (of an
arithmetical progression).
<LEND>

<L>48397<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkalpa<k2>saNkalpa
{#saNkalpa#}¦ {%saṅ-kalpa,%} &c. See under {%saṅ-%}
{%kḷp.%}
<LEND>

<L>48398<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkasuka<k2>saNkasuka
{#saNkasuka#}¦ {%saṅ-kasuka, as, ā, am%} (according
to Uṇādi-s. II. 29. fr. rt. {%kas%} with {%sam%}), going or
moving about unsteadily, unsteady, inconstant, fickle,
changeable; uncertain, doubtful; weak, feeble; bad,
wicked; ({%as%}), m., N. of the author of the hymn
Ṛg-veda X. 18 (having the patronymic Yāmāyana).
<LEND>

<L>48399<pc>1045-a<k1>saNkAS<k2>saNkAS
{#saNkAS#}¦ {%saṅ-kāś (sam-kāś),%} cl. 1. A. {%-kāśate,%}
{%kāśitum,%} to appear together, appear in sight, become
visible: Caus. {%-kāśayati, -yitum,%} to cause to ap-
pear; to look at, see, contemplate, behold.
<LEND>
[Page1045-b+ 74]

<L>48400<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkASa<k2>saNkASa
{%Saṅ-kāśa, as,%}¦ m. appearance; presence; vicinity,
({%gṛha-saṅkāśe,%} in the neighbourhood of the house,
near the house); ({%as, ā, am%}), like, similar (at the
end of comps., e. g. {%mṛtyu-saṅkāśa,%} death-like;
{%gaja-s˚,%} resembling elephants); near, close at hand.
<LEND>

<L>48401<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkASya<k2>saNkASya
{%Saṅ-kāśya,%}¦ N. of a kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>48402<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkila<k2>saNkila
{#saNkila#}¦ {%saṅkila, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
{%kil%} with {%sam%}), a burning torch, fire-brand.
<LEND>

<L>48403<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkIrRa<k2>saNkIrRa
{#saNkIrRa#}¦ {%saṅ-kīrṇa.%} See under {%saṅ-kṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>48404<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkIrtana<k2>saNkIrtana
{#saNkIrtana#}¦ {%saṅ-kīrtana.%} See under {%saṅ-kṝt.%}
<LEND>

<L>48405<pc>1045-b<k1>saNku<k2>saNku
{#saNku#}¦ {%saṅku, us,%} m. (doubtful), a hole.
<LEND>

<L>48406<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkuc<k2>saNkuc
{#saNkuc#}¦ {%saṅ-kuc (sam-kuc),%} cl. 6. 1. P. {%-ku-%}
{%cati, -kocati, -kocitum,%} to shrink, become con-
tracted, contract, shrivel up; to close, shut (as a flower);
to contract, compress: Pass. {%-kucyate,%} to be con-
tracted, be closed: Caus. {%-kocayati, -yitum,%} to con-
tract, narrow, make smaller, lessen; to close up.
<LEND>

<L>48407<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkucita<k2>saNkucita
{%Saṅ-kucita, as, ā, am,%}¦ contracted, narrowed,
shriveled up, shrunk, wrinkled, ({%a-saṅkucita,%} not
wrinkled); closed, shut, unblown (as a flower);
crouching, cowering.
<LEND>

<L>48408<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkoca<k2>saNkoca
{%Saṅ-koca, as,%}¦ m. contracting, shriveling up, con-
traction, shrinking; terror, fear; compression, abridge-
ment, narrowness, diminution; shutting up, closing;
binding, tying; a sort of skate fish; ({%am%}), n. saffron.
{%—Saṅkoca-piśuna, am,%} n. ‘manifesting contrac-
tion,’ saffron.
<LEND>

<L>48409<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkocana<k2>saNkocana
{%Saṅ-kocana, am,%}¦ n. the act of contracting or
shrinking, contraction, causing to shrink or close;
astringing; ({%as, ī, am%}), contracting, shrinking;
astringent; ({%ī%}), f. the sensitive plant ({%= lajjālu%}).
<LEND>

<L>48410<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkocayat<k2>saNkocayat
{%Saṅ-kocayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ contracting, causing
to shrink or close, narrowing.
<LEND>

<L>48411<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkocin<k2>saNkocin
{%Saṅ-kocin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ shrinking, contracting, shrivel-
ing up; closing; astringent.
<LEND>

<L>48412<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkocya<k2>saNkocya
{%Saṅ-kocya,%}¦ ind. having contracted or compressed,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>48413<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkup<k2>saNkup
{#saNkup#}¦ {%saṅ-kup (sam-kup),%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-kup-%}
{%yati, -te, -kopitum,%} to become angry or enraged;
to be agitated or excited: Caus. {%-kopayati, -yitum,%}
to make angry, enrage, provoke, excite; to become
agitated or excited.
<LEND>

<L>48414<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkupita<k2>saNkupita
{%Saṅ-kupita, as, ā, am,%}¦ enraged, aroused, excited.
<LEND>

<L>48415<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkopayat<k2>saNkopayat
{%Saṅ-kopayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making angry, en-
raging, exciting.
<LEND>

<L>48416<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkula<k2>saNkula
{#saNkula#}¦ {%saṅkula, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%kul%} with
{%sam;%} probably connected with {%saṅ-kara%} fr. {%saṅ-%}
{%kṝ%}), crowded together, thronged, mixed together,
commingled, confused, perplexed, disordered, incon-
sistent; filled with, full of; ({%as%}), m., N. of a poet;
({%am%}), n. a crowd, throng, mob; a flock, collection;
a confused fight, battle, war, mêlée; inconsistent or
contradictory speech.
<LEND>

<L>48417<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkUj<k2>saNkUj
{#saNkUj#}¦ {%saṅ-kūj (sam-kūj),%} cl. 1. P. {%-kūjati,%}
&c., to cry aloud, utter inarticulate sounds.
<LEND>

<L>48418<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkUjita<k2>saNkUjita
{%Saṅ-kūjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cried aloud; ({%am%}), n. the
cry of the Cakra-vāka.
<LEND>

<L>48419<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkf<k2>saNkf
{#saNkf#}¦ {%saṅ-kṛ (sam-kṛ),%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kurute, -kartum, = saṃ-s-kṛ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>48420<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkfti<k2>saNkfti
{%Saṅ-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. a kind of metre (consisting of four
lines of twenty-four syllables each); ({%is%}), m. a proper
N.; ({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a class of ancient Ṛṣis.
<LEND>

<L>48421<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkft<k2>saNkft
{#saNkft#}¦ {%saṅ-kṛt (sam-kṛt),%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛn-%}
{%tati, -kartitum,%} to cut to pieces, cut up; to cut
through, cut, pierce.
<LEND>

<L>48422<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkftta<k2>saNkftta
{%Saṅ-kṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut to pieces, cut through,
pierced.
<LEND>

<L>48423<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkftya<k2>saNkftya
{%Saṅ-kṛtya,%}¦ ind. having cut to pieces, having
cut up.
<LEND>

<L>48424<pc>1045-b<k1>saNkfz<k2>saNkfz
{#saNkfz#}¦ {%saṅ-kṛṣ (sam-kṛṣ),%} cl. 1. P. {%-kar-%}
{%ṣati, -karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to draw together,
contract; to lace together, tighten; to draw away,
withdraw; to drag away with, drag along, carry off,
take away.
<LEND>
[Page1045-c+ 79]

<L>48425<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkarzaRa<k2>saNkarzaRa
{%Saṅ-karṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of drawing together,
contracting; shortening; attracting, drawing; mak-
ing rows, ploughing, &c.; ({%as%}), m., N. of the first-
born offspring of Viṣṇu, (Mahā-bh. Śānti-p. 7527);
epithet of Bala-deva or Bala-rāma (elder brother of
Kṛṣṇa, and so called because withdrawn from the
womb of Devakī and transferred to that of Rohiṇī);
a proper N. {%—Saṅkarṣaṇa-kāṇḍa,%} N. of a work
ascribed to Jaimini. {%—Saṅkarṣaṇeśvara-tīrtha%}
{%(˚ṇa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>48426<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkarzat<k2>saNkarzat
{%Saṅ-karṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ drawing together,
contracting; drawing away.
<LEND>

<L>48427<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkarzin<k2>saNkarzin
{%Saṅ-karṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ drawing together, con-
tracting, shortening, ({%kāla-saṅkarṣin,%} shortening
the time; {%kālasaṅkarṣiṇī vidyā,%} epithet of a
particular magical incantation.)
<LEND>

<L>48428<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkfzwa<k2>saNkfzwa
{%Saṅ-kṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn together, con-
tracted (as two sounds), drawn near to one another.
<LEND>

<L>48429<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkF<k2>saNkF
{#saNkF#}¦ {%saṅ-kṝ (sam-kṝ),%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -ka-%}
{%ritum, -karītum,%} to pour together, mix together,
commingle; to confuse; to scatter about, diffuse; to
pour out, bestow liberally or abundantly (Ved.); to
make full, fill: Pass. {%-kīryate,%} to be poured toge-
ther, be intermingled or mixed; to be confused.
<LEND>

<L>48430<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkara<k2>saNkara
{%Saṅ-kara, as,%}¦ m. mixing together, intermixture,
blending, confusing, confounding, confusion, irregular
mixture, unlawful intermarriage, mixture of caste,
a mixed caste or race (proceeding from the union of
a man with a woman of a higher caste or from the
promiscuous intercourse of the four tribes, and again
from the indiscriminate cohabitation of their descend-
ants amongst each other; cf. {%yoni-saṅkara%}); the
union or mixing together of two figures in the same
passage (in rhetoric); dust, sweepings [cf. {%ava-kara,%}
p. 88]; the crackling of flame. {%—Saṅkara-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} born from a mixed marriage. {%—Saṅkarī-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of mixing together, con-
fusing; confusion; causing mixture or loss of caste.
{%—Saṅkarī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to mix together confusedly, cause confusion.
{%—Saṅkarī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} confused, blended or
mixed confusedly; outcast.
<LEND>

<L>48431<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkarin<k2>saNkarin
{%Saṅkarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ confusing, confused, inter-
mingled, produced by or resulting from illegal
mixture of castes.
<LEND>

<L>48432<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkAra<k2>saNkAra
{%Saṅ-kāra, as,%}¦ m. dust, sweepings; the crackling
of flame; ({%ī%}), f. a girl recently deflowered, a new
bride.
<LEND>

<L>48433<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkIrRa<k2>saNkIrRa
{%Saṅ-kīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ poured together, mixed
together, intermingled, confused, miscellaneous,
crowded, closely packed; indistinct; scattered, strewed,
spread, diffused; sprinkled (with exuding juice, as a
rutting elephant); of mixed caste, of impure origin,
born from a mixed marriage, impure, polluted, adul-
terated; contracted, narrow; ({%as%}), m. a man of
mixed caste, an outcast; a mixed note or mode (in
music); an elephant possessing certain characteristic
marks or one in rut; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of riddle or
enigma. {%—Saṅkīrṇa-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} wandering
about confusedly, going to various places. {%—Saṅ-%}
{%kīrṇa-jāti, is, is, i,%} or {%saṅkīrṇa-yoni, is, is, i,%}
of mixed birth or caste, impure through illegal
intermarriage, of a mongrel breed, mule. {%—Saṅ-%}
{%kīrṇa-yuddha, am,%} n. a mixed or confused fight,
mêlée.
<LEND>

<L>48434<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkft<k2>saNkft
{#saNkft#}¦ {%saṅ-kṛt (sam-kṝt),%} cl. 10. P. {%-kīrta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to mention or relate fully, recite; to
proclaim, announce; to celebrate or praise or com-
mend greatly.
<LEND>

<L>48435<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkIrtana<k2>saNkIrtana
{%Saṅ-kīrtana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of reciting or
proclaiming at full; greatly praising or celebrating,
extolling, lauding, honouring, glorification.
<LEND>

<L>48436<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkIrtayat<k2>saNkIrtayat
{%Saṅ-kīrtayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ mentioning or de-
scribing fully, proclaiming; celebrating or praising
greatly.
<LEND>

<L>48437<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkIrtita<k2>saNkIrtita
{%Saṅ-kīrtita, as, ā, am,%}¦ mentioned fully; cele-
brated, praised, renowned.
<LEND>

<L>48438<pc>1045-c<k1>saNkIrtti<k2>saNkIrtti
{%Saṅ-kīrtti, is,%}¦ m., N. of a Vaiśya (said to have
been the author of certain Vedic hymns).
<LEND>
[Page1046-a+ 79]

<L>48439<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkIrtya<k2>saNkIrtya
{%Saṅ-kīrtya,%}¦ ind. having mentioned, having cele-
brated, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48440<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkIrtyamAna<k2>saNkIrtyamAna
{%Saṅ-kīrtyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being proclaimed
or celebrated.
<LEND>

<L>48441<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkxp<k2>saNkxp
{#saNkxp#}¦ {%saṅ-kḷp (sam-kḷp),%} cl. 1. A. {%-kal-%}
{%pate, -kalpitum, -kalptum,%} to will, wish for, long
for, be desirous of: Caus. {%-kalpayati, -te, -yitum,%}
to form or arrange or connect together; to create,
make, effect, furnish, provide; to will, purpose, re-
solve, determine, wish for, desire, intend, aim at,
strive after; to appoint, settle, fix, allot, assign, des-
tine; to consecrate, dedicate; to perform obsequies;
to form an idea in the mind, imagine, fancy; to
think about, weigh, ponder.
<LEND>

<L>48442<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkalpa<k2>saNkalpa
{%Saṅ-kalpa, as,%}¦ m. will, volition, strength of will,
purpose, mental resolve or determination, resolution,
vow; power of will; wish, desire; idea formed in
the mind, thought, imagination, fancy, contrivance;
consideration, reflection; mind, soul, heart; idea or
expectation of advantage from any voluntary act;
a solemn vow to perform a ritual observance, decla-
ration of purpose; a declaration repeated by a widow
who burns herself with her deceased husband; N. of
a Prajā-pati; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter of Dakṣa and
wife of Dharma. {%—Saṅkalpa-kulmala, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having desire for its shaft (said of an arrow).
{%—Saṅkalpa-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced from self-
determined will or desire, proceeding from idea of
advantage; ({%as%}), m. ‘mind-born, heart-born,’ epi-
thet of Kāma (god of love). {%—Saṅkalpa-janman,%}
{%ā,%} or {%saṅkalpa-bhava, as,%} or {%saṅkalpa-yoni, is,%}
m. epithet of Kāma (god of love). {%—Saṅkalpa-%}
{%rūpa, as, ā, am,%} formed or consisting of will, of
the nature of mental resolve, conformable to the will
or purpose. {%—Saṅkalpa-sambhava, as, ā, am,%}
produced from will or desire, arising out of an idea
or desire of advantage; ({%as%}), m. ‘mind-born,’ epi-
thet of Kāma. {%—Saṅkalpa-siddha, as, ā, am,%}
perfected by mental resolve or will, having super-
natural powers by the exercise of a strong will.
{%—Saṅkalpātmaka (˚pa-āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} con-
sisting of will or volition, of the nature of mental
resolve; willing, resolving.
<LEND>

<L>48443<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkalpaka<k2>saNkalpaka
{%Saṅkalpaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} purposing, deter-
mining, reflecting, pondering.
<LEND>

<L>48444<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkalpanIya<k2>saNkalpanIya
{%Saṅ-kalpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be willed or wished
or desired; to be purposed or intended.
<LEND>

<L>48445<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkalpayat<k2>saNkalpayat
{%Saṅ-kalpayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing or striving
for; reflecting, considering, weighing.
<LEND>

<L>48446<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkalpita<k2>saNkalpita
{%Saṅ-kalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished for, desired,
aimed at, striven after, intended, purposed, deter-
mined, resolved on; conceived, imagined, thought,
fancied, contrived.
<LEND>

<L>48447<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkalpya<k2>saNkalpya
{%Saṅ-kalpya,%}¦ ind. having resolved on, having
wished for or desired; having consecrated, having
performed funeral rites.
<LEND>

<L>48448<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkxpta<k2>saNkxpta
{%Saṅkḷpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ desired, wished; con-
trived.
<LEND>

<L>48449<pc>1046-a<k1>saNkxpti<k2>saNkxpti
{%Saṅkḷpti, is,%}¦ f. will, resolve; fancy; contrivance.
<LEND>

<L>48450<pc>1046-a<k1>saNketa<k2>saNketa
{#saNketa#}¦ {%saṅ-keta, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kit%} = 4. {%cit%}
with {%sam%}), any indicatory sign or gesture, intimation,
hint, allusion, innuendo, sign, mark, token, symbol
(in general); gesticulation; a short explanatory rule
(teaching the application of grammatical Sūtras, {%=%}
{%śailī%}); agreement, convention; engagement, ap-
pointment, assignation (with a lover); condition,
provision. {%—Saṅketa-niketana, am,%} n. a house or
place appointed for meeting (a lover &c.), place of
assignation, rendezvous. {%—Saṅketa-paddhati, is,%} f.,
N. of a work. {%—Saṅketa-bhūmi, is,%} f. a place of
assignation. {%—Saṅketa-śikṣā,%} f., N. of a work.
{%—Saṅketa-stava, as,%} m., N. of a hymn. {%—Saṅ-%}
{%keta-sthāna, am,%} n. place of assignation, appointed
place; a sign, intimation.
<LEND>

<L>48451<pc>1046-a<k1>saNketaka<k2>saNketaka
{%Saṅketaka, as,%}¦ m. an agreement, convention,
appointment; a rendezvous.
<LEND>

<L>48452<pc>1046-a<k1>saNketana<k2>saNketana
{%Saṅketana, am,%}¦ n. the act of agreeing together,
appointment; a rendezvous.
<LEND>

<L>48453<pc>1046-a<k1>saNketaya<k2>saNketaya
{%Saṅketaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%saṅketayati, -yitum,%} to
[Page1046-b+ 79]
agree upon, appoint (a time &c.); to invite, call;
to counsel, advise.
<LEND>

<L>48454<pc>1046-b<k1>saNketita<k2>saNketita
{%Saṅketita, as, ā, am,%}¦ agreed upon; invited;
[cf. {%a-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48455<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrand<k2>saNkrand
{#saNkrand#}¦ {%saṅ-krand (sam-krand),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-krandati, -te, -kranditum,%} to cry or scream toge-
ther: Caus. {%-krandayati, -yitum,%} to cry out toge-
ther, call together.
<LEND>

<L>48456<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrandana<k2>saNkrandana
{%Saṅ-krandana, as,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘whose cries are
terrible,’ epithet of Indra, (Sāy. {%= para-bhaya-hetur%}
{%dhvanir yasya saḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>48457<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkram<k2>saNkram
{#saNkram#}¦ {%saṅ-kram (sam-kram),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-krāmati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to come together,
go along with, meet together, meet; to go near,
approach; to be present at, attend; to go or pass
through, traverse; to go or pass over, pass into (with
loc. or acc.); to enter a constellation (said of the
sun); to be transferred; to overstep, surmount:
Caus. {%-krāmayati, -kramayati, -te, -yitum,%} to
cause to go over or pass into, transfer, transport;
to lead or conduct through or towards, convey; to
consign, deliver over; to take possession of; to agree
to help one another.
<LEND>

<L>48458<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrama<k2>saNkrama
{%Saṅ-krama, as,%}¦ m. going or coming together,
concurrence; going or passing through, passage from
one point to another, traversing, transit, transition,
progress, transfer; the passage of a planetary body
through the zodiacal signs; going, moving, travelling;
({%as, am%}), m. n. difficult passage or progress, making
one's way over difficult ground (as over rocks or
torrents or inaccessible passes); the means of effecting
a difficult passage, a causeway, bridge; a means of
attaining any object. {%—Saṅkramī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-ka-%}
{%roti, -kartum,%} to use as a vehicle or means of transit
or means of attaining.
<LEND>

<L>48459<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkramaRa<k2>saNkramaRa
{%Saṅ-kramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of going along
with, concurrence; the act of going or passing
through, transition, proceeding, progress; passage;
the sun's passage from one sign of the zodiac to
another; the day on which the sun's progress to the
north of the equator or summer solstice begins;
(in algebra) concurrence, (said to be a general desig-
nation of a certain class of problems.)
<LEND>

<L>48460<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkramayya<k2>saNkramayya
{%Saṅ-kramayya,%}¦ ind. having transferred, having
made to pass or proceed.
<LEND>

<L>48461<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkramita<k2>saNkramita
{%Saṅ-kramita, as, ā, am,%}¦ conducted, led, trans-
ported, transferred.
<LEND>

<L>48462<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkramitf<k2>saNkramitf
{%Saṅ-kramitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what passes from
one place to another, passing, proceeding, going.
<LEND>

<L>48463<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrAnta<k2>saNkrAnta
{%Saṅ-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone or come together,
met together, passed through or into, entered into,
gone from one point to another, transferred; trans-
ferred to a picture, depicted, imaged; (in astronomy)
having a Saṅkrānti, ({%a-saṅkrānta,%} [a month] which
has no Saṅkrānti.)
<LEND>

<L>48464<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrAnti<k2>saNkrAnti
{%Saṅ-krānti, is,%}¦ f. going or meeting together,
union; going from one place to another, proceeding,
procession, passage, proceeding from one condition
of life to another; passage of the sun or planetary
bodies from one sign into another, ({%kūṭa-s˚,%} the
sun's entrance into another zodiacal sign after mid-
night); transferring to a picture, image, reflection.
{%—Saṅkrānti-cakra, am,%} n. an astrological diagram
marked with the Nakṣatras and used for foretelling
good or bad fortune.
<LEND>

<L>48465<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrAma<k2>saNkrAma
{%Saṅ-krāma, as,%}¦ m. difficult progress or passage;
a bridge ({%= saṅ-krama,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>48466<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrAmat<k2>saNkrAmat
{%Saṅ-krāmat, an, antī, at,%}¦ transporting, trans-
ferring.
<LEND>

<L>48467<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrAmita<k2>saNkrAmita
{%Saṅ-krāmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ transferred, transported,
handed over, delivered, communicated.
<LEND>

<L>48468<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrI<k2>saNkrI
{#saNkrI#}¦ {%saṅ-krī (sam-krī),%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-krīṇāti,%}
{%-krīṇīte, -kretum,%} to buy, purchase.
<LEND>

<L>48469<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrIq<k2>saNkrIq
{#saNkrIq#}¦ {%saṅ-krīḍ (sam-krīḍ),%} cl. 1. A. {%-krī-%}
{%ḍate%} (sometimes also P. {%-ti%}), {%-krīḍitum,%} to sport
or play together (only A., Pāṇ. I. 3, 21); to rattle
(as wheels, P.).
<LEND>

<L>48470<pc>1046-b<k1>saNkrIqana<k2>saNkrIqana
{%Saṅ-krīḍana, am,%}¦ n. the act of playing together,
sporting.
<LEND>
[Page1046-c+ 75]

<L>48471<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkrIqamAna<k2>saNkrIqamAna
{%Saṅ-krīḍamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ playing together,
sporting.
<LEND>

<L>48472<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkrIqita<k2>saNkrIqita
{%Saṅ-krīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ played, sported; rattled;
({%am%}), n. rattle (of chariots).
<LEND>

<L>48473<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkruD<k2>saNkruD
{#saNkruD#}¦ {%saṅ-krudh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-krudhyati, -krod-%}
{%dhum,%} to be angry with, be angry at (with acc. of
person, see Pāṇ. I. 4, 38); to be greatly enraged.
<LEND>

<L>48474<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkrudDa<k2>saNkrudDa
{%Saṅ-kruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly enraged, exas-
perated, incensed, wrathful, violent.
<LEND>

<L>48475<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkruS<k2>saNkruS
{#saNkruS#}¦ {%saṅ-kruś (sam-kruś),%} cl. 1. P. {%-kro-%}
{%śati, -kroṣṭum,%} to cry out together, shout together,
raise a clamour; to shout at angrily.
<LEND>

<L>48476<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkroSamAna<k2>saNkroSamAna
{%Saṅ-krośamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. clamouring or
murmuring together, raising a shout or clamour.
<LEND>

<L>48477<pc>1046-c<k1>saNklid<k2>saNklid
{#saNklid#}¦ {%saṅ-klid (sam-klid),%} cl. 4. P. {%-klid-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to become thoroughly wet.
<LEND>

<L>48478<pc>1046-c<k1>saNklinna<k2>saNklinna
{%Saṅ-klinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly wet, moist-
ened, softened.
<LEND>

<L>48479<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkleda<k2>saNkleda
{%Saṅ-kleda, as,%}¦ m. wet, wetness, moisture, damp;
the fluid secretion which is supposed to form upon
conception and become the rudiment of the fetus.
<LEND>

<L>48480<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkliS<k2>saNkliS
{#saNkliS#}¦ {%saṅ-kliś (sam-kliś),%} cl. 9. P. {%-kliś-%}
{%nāti, -kleśitum, -kleṣṭum,%} to press together; to
torment, pain, afflict, molest.
<LEND>

<L>48481<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkliSya<k2>saNkliSya
{%Saṅ-kliśya,%}¦ ind. having pressed together; having
pained or afflicted.
<LEND>

<L>48482<pc>1046-c<k1>saNklizwa<k2>saNklizwa
{%Saṅ-kliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressed together, squeezed,
bruised, pained, afflicted. {%—Saṅkliṣṭa-karman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} one who acts with trouble or difficulty; one
who gives pain in acting.
<LEND>

<L>48483<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkleSa<k2>saNkleSa
{%Saṅ-kleśa, as,%}¦ m. afflicting, affliction, torment,
anguish. {%—Saṅkleśa-nirvāṇa, am,%} n. cessation of
afflictions.
<LEND>

<L>48484<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzap<k2>saNkzap
{#saNkzap#}¦ {%saṅ-kṣap (sam-kṣap),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-kṣapati, -te, -kṣapitum,%} to emaciate the body
by fasting or abstinence, fast, do penance.
<LEND>

<L>48485<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzam<k2>saNkzam
{#saNkzam#}¦ {%saṅ-kṣam (sam-kṣam),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-kṣamate, -kṣantum,%} to have patience with, be
patient with, bear, put up with; to allow, indulge.
<LEND>

<L>48486<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzar<k2>saNkzar
{#saNkzar#}¦ {%saṅ-kṣar (sam-kṣar),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-kṣarati, -kṣaritum,%} to flow together, flow down,
trickle.
<LEND>

<L>48487<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzarita<k2>saNkzarita
{%Saṅ-kṣarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowing, trickling.
<LEND>

<L>48488<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzi<k2>saNkzi
{#saNkzi#}¦ {%saṅ-kṣi (sam-kṣi),%} cl. 9. 5. 1. P.
{%-kṣiṇāti, -kṣiṇoti, -kṣayati, -kṣetum,%} to de-
stroy completely, annihilate, efface, do away with:
Pass. {%-kṣīyate,%} to waste away, be exhausted, be
destroyed, disappear, perish: Caus. {%-kṣapayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to be annihilated, cause to disappear.
<LEND>

<L>48489<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzaya<k2>saNkzaya
{%Saṅ-kṣaya, as,%}¦ m. complete destruction or con-
sumption; loss, ruin, decline; destruction; the dis-
solution of all things, destruction of the world; end.
<LEND>

<L>48490<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzIyamARa<k2>saNkzIyamARa
{%Saṅ-kṣīyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being utterly de-
stroyed, perishing, wasting away.
<LEND>

<L>48491<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzip<k2>saNkzip
{#saNkzip#}¦ {%saṅ-kṣip (sam-kṣip),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-kṣipati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw together, heap
together, heap up; to dash together, destroy; to
force or press together, compress, contract, abridge,
shorten, abbreviate, diminish; to confine, shut in,
restrain; to constrain: Pass. {%-kṣipyate,%} to be thrown
together, be destroyed; to be compressed; to be
diminished or lessened.
<LEND>

<L>48492<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzipat<k2>saNkzipat
{%Saṅ-kṣipat, an, antī, at,%}¦ throwing or dashing
together, destroying; compressing.
<LEND>

<L>48493<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzipta<k2>saNkzipta
{%Saṅ-kṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown together, heaped
up; dashed together, destroyed; compressed, abridged,
abbreviated, diminished; concise, compact, small;
restrained; thrown, dispatched; seized. {%—Saṅ-%}
{%kṣipta-dairghya, as, ā, am,%} having the length
diminished. {%—Saṅkṣipta-sāra,%} N. of a gramma-
tical work by Kramadīśvara.
<LEND>

<L>48494<pc>1046-c<k1>saNkzipti<k2>saNkzipti
{%Saṅ-kṣipti, is,%}¦ f. throwing together; compres-
sion; abridgement, brevity; throwing, sending;
transition (from one feeling to another), replacement
of one dramatic character by another; ambuscade.
<LEND>
[Page1047-a+ 78]

<L>48495<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzipya<k2>saNkzipya
{%Saṅ-kṣipya,%}¦ ind. having thrown together, having
destroyed; having compressed.
<LEND>

<L>48496<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzepa<k2>saNkzepa
{%Saṅ-kṣepa, as,%}¦ m. throwing together; com-
pression, abridgement, abbreviation, rendering con-
cise, ({%saṅkṣepāt,%} ind. concisely, in short, briefly);
a brief or concise exposition, epitome, paraphrase;
throwing, sending; taking away; assisting in another's
duty. {%—Saṅkṣepa-tas,%} ind. concisely, in short,
shortly. {%—Saṅkṣepa-mātra, am,%} n. only an
abridgement. {%—Saṅkṣepa-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}
characterized by brevity, described briefly. {%—Saṅ-%}
{%kṣepa-śaṅkara-jaya, as,%} m., N. of Mādhava's
life of Śaṅkarācārya, (also called Śaṅkara-jaya and
Śaṅkara-vijaya; see {%śaṅkara-dig-vijaya.%}) {%—Saṅ-%}
{%kṣepa-śārīraka,%} N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>48497<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzepaRa<k2>saNkzepaRa
{%Saṅ-kṣepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of throwing or
heaping together; abridgement, brevity, abbreviation;
sending; taking away.
<LEND>

<L>48498<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzepaRIya<k2>saNkzepaRIya
{%Saṅ-kṣepaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thrown toge-
ther; to be abridged.
<LEND>

<L>48499<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzud<k2>saNkzud
{#saNkzud#}¦ {%saṅ-kṣud (sam-kṣud),%} cl. 1. P., 7.
P. A. {%-kṣodati, -kṣuṇatti, -kṣuntte, -kṣottum,%}
to crush together, crush or dash to pieces, pound,
bruise.
<LEND>

<L>48500<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzuB<k2>saNkzuB
{#saNkzuB#}¦ {%saṅ-kṣubh (sam-kṣubh),%} cl. 1. A.,
4. 9. P. {%-kṣobhate, -kṣubhyati, -kṣubhnāti,%}
{%-kṣobhitum,%} to be violently shaken about or agi-
tated, to be moved or excited: Caus. {%-kṣobhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to shake about violently, agitate, toss, excite.
<LEND>

<L>48501<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzubDa<k2>saNkzubDa
{%Saṅ-kṣubdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ violently shaken or
agitated.
<LEND>

<L>48502<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzuBita<k2>saNkzuBita
{%Saṅ-kṣubhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ tossed together, tossed
about, violently shaken or agitated.
<LEND>

<L>48503<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzoBa<k2>saNkzoBa
{%Saṅ-kṣobha, as,%}¦ m. shaking about, trembling,
agitation; disturbance; overturning, upsetting; pride,
arrogance.
<LEND>

<L>48504<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzoBita<k2>saNkzoBita
{%Saṅkṣobhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken or tossed about.
<LEND>

<L>48505<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzRu<k2>saNkzRu
{#saNkzRu#}¦ {%saṅ-kṣṇu (sam-kṣṇu),%} cl. 2. A.
(according to Pāṇ. I. 3, 65. only A.) {%-kṣṇute,%}
{%-kṣṇavitum,%} to sharpen well or thoroughly, sharpen;
to excite, intensify.
<LEND>

<L>48506<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzRutya<k2>saNkzRutya
{%Saṅ-kṣṇutya,%}¦ ind. having sharpened; having
excited.
<LEND>

<L>48507<pc>1047-a<k1>saNkzRuvAna<k2>saNkzRuvAna
{%Saṅ-kṣṇuvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sharpening well,
exciting, intensifying.
<LEND>

<L>48508<pc>1047-a<k1>saNKAd<k2>saNKAd
{#saNKAd#}¦ {%saṅ-khād (sam-khād),%} cl. 1. P. {%-khā-%}
{%dati, -khāditum,%} to chew thoroughly, chew, mas-
ticate, eat up, devour, consume.
<LEND>

<L>48509<pc>1047-a<k1>saNKAdat<k2>saNKAdat
{%Saṅ-khādat, an, antī, at,%}¦ chewing well, masti-
cating; devouring.
<LEND>

<L>48510<pc>1047-a<k1>saNKid<k2>saNKid
{#saNKid#}¦ {%saṅ-khid (sam-khid),%} cl. 6. P. {%-khi-%}
{%dati, -khettum,%} Ved. to press or force together,
drag away, tear away.
<LEND>

<L>48511<pc>1047-a<k1>saNKyA<k2>saNKyA
{#saNKyA#}¦ {%saṅ-khyā (sam-khyā),%} cl. 2. P. (in
some tenses also A., see rt. {%khyā,%} p. 277), {%-khyāti,%}
{%-khyātum,%} to appear along with, be connected with
(Ved.); to reckon or count up, sum up, enumerate,
calculate; Caus. {%-khyāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
be looked at or observed (Ved.); to cause to reckon
up, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48512<pc>1047-a<k1>saNKya<k2>saNKya
{%Saṅ-khya, am,%}¦ n. conflict, battle, war, (in Naigh.
II. 17. enumerated among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%});
({%as%}), m. a proper N.; ({%ā%}), f. reckoning up, num-
bering, numeration, calculation; an account, sum; a
number, numeral; deliberation, reasoning, reflection;
reason, intellect, understanding; manner; {%(as, ā,%}
{%am), = saṅkhyeya,%} to be reckoned up or counted.
{%—Saṅkhya-tā,%} f. or {%saṅkhya-tva, am,%} n. nume-
rableness, numeration. {%—Saṅkhyā-tas,%} ind. from a
number. {%—Saṅkhyātiga (˚yā-at˚), as, ā, am,%}
‘going beyond numeration,’ innumerable. {%—Saṅ-%}
{%khyā-mātra, am,%} n. the amount of; mere nume-
ration. {%—Saṅkhyā-yoga,%} see under {%yoga.%} — 1. {%saṅ-%}
{%khyā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having number, possessed of
number, numbered; possessing reason or intellect,
intelligent, discriminating; ({%ān%}), m. a learned
Brāhman, Paṇḍit, teacher. {%—2. saṅkhyā-vat,%} ind.
like number. {%—Saṅkhyā-vācaka, as, ikā, am,%}
[Page1047-b+ 79]
expressive of number; ({%as%}), m. a numeral. {%—Saṅ-%}
{%khyā-samāpana, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>48513<pc>1047-b<k1>saNKyaka<k2>saNKyaka
{%Saṅkhyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ numbering, amounting
to, composed of a certain number, (at the end of
comps., e. g. {%sahasra-saṅkhyaka, as, ā, am,%}
amounting to a thousand.)
<LEND>

<L>48514<pc>1047-b<k1>saNKyAta<k2>saNKyAta
{%Saṅ-khyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reckoned up, enumerated,
calculated; numbered, counted; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
riddle or enigma; ({%am%}), n. number.
<LEND>

<L>48515<pc>1047-b<k1>saNKyAna<k2>saNKyAna
{%Saṅ-khyāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of reckoning up,
numbering, numeration, calculation.
<LEND>

<L>48516<pc>1047-b<k1>saNKyAya<k2>saNKyAya
{%Saṅ-khyāya,%}¦ ind. having reckoned up, having
counted or numbered.
<LEND>

<L>48517<pc>1047-b<k1>saNKyeya<k2>saNKyeya
{%Saṅ-khyeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be reckoned or
counted up, numerable, calculable.
<LEND>

<L>48518<pc>1047-b<k1>saNga<k2>saNga
{#saNga#}¦ {%saṅ-ga, saṅ-gatha,%} &c. See below
and under rt. 1. {%sañj.%}
<LEND>

<L>48519<pc>1047-b<k1>saNgaRikA<k2>saNgaRikA
{#saNgaRikA#}¦ {%saṅgaṇikā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%gaṇ%} with
{%sam%}), incomparable or unequalled discourse ({%=%}
{%apratirūpa-kathā%}).
<LEND>

<L>48520<pc>1047-b<k1>saNgam<k2>saNgam
{#saNgam#}¦ {%saṅ-gam (sam-gam),%} cl. 1. A. {%-gac-%}
{%chate%} (Pāṇ. I. 3, 29; but with an object P. {%-gacchati;%}
in Hari-vaṃśa 14, 787. {%sama-gacchatu%} occurs for
{%saṅ-gacchatu,%} Perf. {%-jagme;%} Ved. forms &c.
{%-gamemahi, -gamāmahai, -ajagmiran, -agata,%}
{%-aganmahi, -agasmahi%} or {%-agaṃsmahi, -gmi-%}
{%ṣīya, -gasīṣṭa%} or {%-gaṃsīṣṭa, -gaṃsyate,%} &c.,
see rt. 1. {%gam,%} cf. Pāṇ. I. 2, 13, VII. 2. 58), {%-gan-%}
{%tum,%} to go together, come together, assemble, meet,
encounter (either in a friendly or hostile manner),
come into collision; to meet with, to ally or connect
one's self with; to have sexual intercourse with; to
meet harmoniously, harmonize, agree, be suitable or
fit, correspond; to become contracted, shrink up; to
go away, depart, die; to go to, attain (with acc.);
to go to, visit (P.): Caus. {%-gamayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to go together, bring together, connect or unite
with, endow or present with (with inst. of person and
acc. of thing); to connect, combine; to lead any one
to anything (with two acc.); to deliver or hand over
to another (with loc.), transfer, bestow, give.
<LEND>

<L>48521<pc>1047-b<k1>saNga<k2>saNga<h>1
1. {%saṅ-ga, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. {%saṅga%} see under rt.
1. {%sañj%}), coming together, concurrence, meeting,
encountering, conflict, war, battle, (in Naigh. II. 17.
{%saṅge%} is enumerated among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmā-%}
{%ni%}); uniting, union, association, contact, touch, co-
herence; intercourse, keeping company, intimacy,
friendship, love; the confluence of rivers. {%—1. saṅga-%}
{%vicyuti, is,%} f. dissolution of union, disunion.
<LEND>

<L>48522<pc>1047-b<k1>saNgat<k2>saNgat
{%Saṅ-gat,%}¦ see Vopa-deva XXVI. 78.
<LEND>

<L>48523<pc>1047-b<k1>saNgata<k2>saNgata
{%Saṅ-gata, as, ā, am,%}¦ come together, convened,
met, encountered; joined, conjoined, united, associ-
ated; united in wedlock; sexually united; assembled,
collected, accumulated, mixed; fitted together, ap-
posite, proper, seasonable, appropriate, applicable,
adapted to, fitted for; in conjunction (as planets);
contracted, shrunk up; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king
(belonging to the Maurya dynasty); ({%am%}), n. com-
ing together, union, meeting; alliance, association,
intercourse, connection; friendship, acquaintance.
{%—Saṅgata-gātra, as, ā, am,%} having contracted
or shriveled limbs. {%—Saṅgata-sandhi, is,%} m. a
peace concluded after friendship.
<LEND>

<L>48524<pc>1047-b<k1>saNgati<k2>saNgati
{%Saṅ-gati, is,%}¦ f. coming together, meeting, inter-
view, union, junction, conjunction, mixture; associa-
tion, intercourse, society; sexual intercourse; adapta-
tion, fitness, appropriateness, applicability; going to,
visiting, frequenting; meeting or coming to pass
accidentally, chance, accident, ({%saṅgatyā,%} by chance,
haply); going to, visiting, frequenting; becoming
acquainted, knowledge, questioning for further in-
formation.
<LEND>

<L>48525<pc>1047-b<k1>saNgatya<k2>saNgatya
{%Saṅ-gatya,%}¦ ind. {%= saṅ-gamya,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>48526<pc>1047-b<k1>saNgatvA<k2>saNgatvA
{%Saṅ-gatvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having come toge-
ther, having met, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48527<pc>1047-b<k1>saNgaTa<k2>saNgaTa
{%Saṅ-gatha,%}¦ Ved. coming together, encountering,
conflict, (in Naigh. II. 17. enumerated among the
{%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%}); flowing together, confluence,
(Sāy. {%= saṅ-gamana%}); ({%ā%}), f. confluence.
<LEND>
[Page1047-c+ 75]

<L>48528<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgama<k2>saNgama
{%Saṅ-gama, as,%}¦ m. coming together, meeting, en-
counter, conflict, (in Naigh. II. 17. enumerated
among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%}); union, congress,
junction, conjunction, contact, touch; association,
society, company; sexual intercourse; flowing toge-
ther, confluence (of rivers); fitness, adaptation; mix-
ture; meeting with, acquiring, &c.; (in astronomy)
planetary conjunction. {%—Saṅgameśvara (˚ma-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of Viśva-nātha; ({%am%}), n., N. of a
Liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>48529<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgamana<k2>saNgamana
{%Saṅ-gamana, am,%}¦ n. the act of coming together,
meeting; going with; intercourse, union; ({%as, ī,%}
{%am%}), uniting, bestowing; any person or thing form-
ing a point of union; ({%as%}), m., N. of Yama.
<LEND>

<L>48530<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgamanIya<k2>saNgamanIya
{%Saṅgamanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be met or brought
together, relating to union or congress, causing re-
union.
<LEND>

<L>48531<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgamayya<k2>saNgamayya
{%Saṅ-gamayya,%}¦ ind. having united, having joined,
having delivered over.
<LEND>

<L>48532<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgamita<k2>saNgamita
{%Saṅ-gamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought together, con-
nected, united, delivered over. {%—Saṅgamita-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} one who has brought together or united.
<LEND>

<L>48533<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgamya<k2>saNgamya
{%Saṅ-gamya,%}¦ ind. having met, having come toge-
ther, having become united, having had sexual inter-
course with.
<LEND>

<L>48534<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgin<k2>saNgin<h>1
1. {%saṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ going with or to, uniting
with, meeting.
<LEND>

<L>48535<pc>1047-c<k1>saYjagmAna<k2>saYjagmAna
{%Sañ-jagmāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has come
together, going alone with, uniting, having inter-
course with.
<LEND>

<L>48536<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgamanera<k2>saNgamanera
{#saNgamanera#}¦ {%saṅgamanera,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>48537<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgara<k2>saNgara
{#saNgara#}¦ {%saṅ-gara.%} See under 1. and 2. {%saṅ-%}
{%gṝ,%} p. 1048, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>48538<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgarj<k2>saNgarj
{#saNgarj#}¦ {%saṅ-garj (sam-garj),%} cl. 1. P. {%-gar-%}
{%jati, -garjitum,%} to roar together, roar at, shout out
against, cry out defiantly.
<LEND>

<L>48539<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgava<k2>saNgava
{#saNgava#}¦ {%saṅ-gava,%} Ved. the time when cows
are collected for milking, i. e. early morning or at the
end of night, (Sāy. {%saṅgave = rātry-aparakāle,%} see
Ṛg-veda V. 76, 3, where {%saṅgava%} is enumerated
among the five divisions of the day; according to
some, it is the second of these divisions coming
three Muhūrtas after Prātastana or the first dawn,
cf. {%prātastana;%} the other three are {%madhyāhna,%}
{%parāhṇa,%} and {%sāyāhna.%}) {%—Saṅgava-kāla, as,%} m.
the time when cows are brought together for milking.
<LEND>

<L>48540<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgA<k2>saNgA
{#saNgA#}¦ {%saṅ-gā (sam-gā),%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gā-%}
{%tum,%} to come together; to go to, approach.
<LEND>

<L>48541<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgAda<k2>saNgAda
{#saNgAda#}¦ {%saṅ-gāda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%gad%} with
{%sam%}), conversation.
<LEND>

<L>48542<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgAh<k2>saNgAh
{#saNgAh#}¦ {%saṅ-gāh (sam-gāh),%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate,%}
{%gāhitum, -gāḍhum,%} to plunge into, enter, go into.
<LEND>

<L>48543<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgir<k2>saNgir
{#saNgir#}¦ {%saṅ-gir.%} See under 1. {%saṅ-gṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>48544<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgIta<k2>saNgIta
{#saNgIta#}¦ {%saṅ-gīta,%} &c. See under {%saṅ-gai.%}
<LEND>

<L>48545<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgup<k2>saNgup
{#saNgup#}¦ {%saṅ-gup (sam-gup).%} See rt. 2. {%gup,%}
p. 292.
<LEND>

<L>48546<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgupta<k2>saNgupta
{%Saṅ-gupta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well guarded or protected,
preserved; well hidden, concealed, covered over, kept
secret; ({%as%}), m. a particular Buddha or Buddhist
saint. {%—Saṅguptārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as,%} m. a secret
matter, hidden meaning; ({%as, ā, am%}), having a
secret or hidden meaning.
<LEND>

<L>48547<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgopana<k2>saNgopana
{%Saṅ-gopana, am,%}¦ n. the act of hiding or conceal-
ing well, complete concealment.
<LEND>

<L>48548<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgopanIya<k2>saNgopanIya
{%Saṅ-gopanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be completely
hidden or concealed.
<LEND>

<L>48549<pc>1047-c<k1>saNguh<k2>saNguh
{#saNguh#}¦ {%saṅ-guh (sam-guh),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-gū-%}
{%hati, -te,%} &c. (see rt. 1. {%guh%}), to cover or conceal
completely.
<LEND>

<L>48550<pc>1047-c<k1>saNgUQa<k2>saNgUQa
{%Saṅ-gūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely concealed or
hidden from view; contracted, abridged; brought
into contact, united, joined, heaped together, piled,
arranged.
<LEND>

<L>48551<pc>1047-c<k1>saYjuGukzA<k2>saYjuGukzA
{%Sañ-jughukṣā,%}¦ f. the wish to conceal or cover,
desire of hiding.
<LEND>
[Page1048-a+ 76]

<L>48552<pc>1048-a<k1>saYjuGukzu<k2>saYjuGukzu
{%Sañ-jughukṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to conceal,
desirous of hiding.
<LEND>

<L>48553<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgfBita<k2>saNgfBita
{#saNgfBita#}¦ {%saṅ-gṛbhita, saṅ-gṛhīta,%} &c.
See under {%saṅ-grah.%}
<LEND>

<L>48554<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgF<k2>saNgF<h>1
{#{{saNgf->saNgF||20170912|Dr. Dhaval Patel|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/CORRECTIONS/issues/410|}}#} 1¦. {%saṅ-gṝ%} ({%sam-gṝ,%} see rt. 1. {%gṝ%}), cl.
9. P. A., 6. A. {%-gṛṇāti, -gṛṇīte, -girate,%} &c., to
speak about or praise together; to agree together,
agree with (with inst.), assent, promise; to recognise,
acknowledge; to agree in calling or naming (A.).
<LEND>

<L>48555<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgara<k2>saNgara<h>1
1. {%saṅ-gara, as,%}¦ m. agreeing together, agree-
ment, assent; promise; a bargain, transaction of sale;
knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>48556<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgir<k2>saNgir
{%Saṅ-gir, īr,%}¦ f., Ved. a song of praise, hymn.
<LEND>

<L>48557<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgiramARa<k2>saNgiramARa
{%Saṅ-giramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ agreeing, assenting
to; promising.
<LEND>

<L>48558<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgIrRa<k2>saNgIrRa
{%Saṅ-gīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ agreed, assented to, pro-
mised.
<LEND>

<L>48559<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgf<k2>saNgf<h>2
{#saNgf#} 2¦. {%saṅ-gṝ,%} ({%sam-gṝ,%} see rt. 2. {%gṝ%}), cl.
6. 9. P. {%-girati, -gṛṇāti,%} &c., to swallow up, de-
vour.
<LEND>

<L>48560<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgara<k2>saNgara<h>2
2. {%saṅ-gara, as,%}¦ m. swallowing up, devouring,
misfortune, calamity; conflict, war, battle; poison;
({%am%}), n. the fruit of the Śamī tree.
<LEND>

<L>48561<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgIrya<k2>saNgIrya
{%Saṅ-gīrya,%}¦ ind. having swallowed up or devoured.
<LEND>

<L>48562<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgE<k2>saNgE
{#saNgE#}¦ {%saṅ-gai (sam-gai),%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati,%}
{%gātum,%} to sing together, sing in chorus, chant; to
celebrate by singing together.
<LEND>

<L>48563<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgIta<k2>saNgIta
{%Saṅ-gīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sung together, sung in
chorus or harmony; ({%am%}), n. a song sung by many
voices, chorus; singing accompanied by music and
dancing, symphony; a concert; the art of singing
with music and dancing. {%—Saṅgīta-kaumudī,%} f.,
N. of a work on harmony. {%—Saṅgīta-gīti, is, is, i,%}
one who sings a song, a singer. {%—Saṅgīta-darpaṇa,%}
‘mirror of harmony,’ N. of a work on music by
Dāmodara. {%—Saṅgīta-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
work on symphony by Nārāyaṇa. {%—Saṅgīta-ratna-%}
{%mālā,%} f., N. of a work on harmony by Mammaṭa.
{%—Saṅgīta-ratnākara (˚na-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘jewel-
mine of singing,’ N. of a musical work by Śārṅga-
deva. {%—Saṅgītaratnākara-kalā-nidhi, is,%} m., N.
of a commentary on the Saṅgīta-ratnākara. {%—Saṅ-%}
{%gīta-vyāpṛta, as, ā, am,%} engaged in singing and
music. {%—Saṅgīta-śāstra, am,%} n. the science of singing
combined with music and dancing; any work on the
above subject. {%—Saṅgīta-sāra%} and {%saṅgītārṇava%}
{%(˚ta-ar˚), as,%} m., N. of two works. {%—Saṅgītārtha%}
{%(˚ta-ar˚), as,%} m. the apparatus or materials for a
concert; the subject of a musical performance. {%—Saṅ-%}
{%gītāvasāna (˚ta-av˚), am,%} n. the close of a concert.
<LEND>

<L>48564<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgItaka<k2>saNgItaka
{%Saṅgītaka, am,%}¦ n. a concert, symphony, public
entertainment consisting of songs combined with
dancing and music.
<LEND>

<L>48565<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgIti<k2>saNgIti
{%Saṅ-gīti, is,%}¦ f. singing together, a concert, sym-
phony, harmony, the art of singing combined with
music and dancing; conversation, discourse; a species
of metre.
<LEND>

<L>48566<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgIyamAna<k2>saNgIyamAna
{%Saṅ-gīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being sung together,
being chanted.
<LEND>

<L>48567<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgopana<k2>saNgopana
{#saNgopana#}¦ {%saṅ-gopana.%} See under {%saṅ-gup.%}
<LEND>

<L>48568<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgraT<k2>saNgraT
{#saNgraT#}¦ {%saṅ-grath (sam-grath).%} See rt.
1. {%grath.%}
<LEND>

<L>48569<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgraTita<k2>saNgraTita
{%Saṅ-grathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. strung or tied
together, knotted together.
<LEND>

<L>48570<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgras<k2>saNgras
{#saNgras#}¦ {%saṅ-gras (sam-gras),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-grasati, -te, -grasitum,%} to swallow up, devour,
consume: Pass. {%-grasyate,%} &c., to be devoured,
consumed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48571<pc>1048-a<k1>saNgrah<k2>saNgrah
{#saNgrah#}¦ {%saṅ-grah%} or {%saṅ-grabh%} ({%sam-g˚,%} see
rt. {%grah,%} p. 302), cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti, -gṛhṇīte%}
(Ved. generally {%-gṛbhṇāti, -gṛbhṇīte%}), {%-grahītum,%}
to seize or hold together, grasp, gripe, clench, take
or lay hold of, snatch; to apprehend, conceive, un-
derstand; to take, receive, accept, receive kindly or
hospitably, attend to, listen to, encourage, support,
favour, protect; to carry off; to seize on, attack (as
[Page1048-b+ 78]
an illness); to gather together, assemble, collect,
compile; to include, comprehend, contain; to draw
together, contract, make narrow or smaller, abridge;
to draw together a bow (in order to unstring it); to
hold in, restrain, check, govern; to keep together,
close, shut (as the mouth); to concentrate (the
mind); to constrain, force; to take in marriage,
marry; to mention, name: Caus. {%-grāhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to take hold of or receive, cause any
one to accept (with two acc.): Desid. {%-jighṛkṣati,%}
to wish to take hold of, &c., to desire to collect; to
wish to take in marriage, desire to marry.
<LEND>

<L>48572<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgfBita<k2>saNgfBita
{%Saṅ-gṛbhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ grasped, griped, con-
centrated.
<LEND>

<L>48573<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgfByA<k2>saNgfByA
{%Saṅ-gṛbhyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. (for {%saṅ-gṛbhya%}) {%=%}
{%saṅ-gṛhya%} below.
<LEND>

<L>48574<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgfhIta<k2>saNgfhIta
{%Saṅ-gṛhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ grasped, seized, caught;
taken, received, accepted, admitted, received kindly;
collected, gathered, comprised, contracted, abridged;
held in, restrained, governed. {%—Saṅgṛhīta-rāṣṭra,%}
{%as,%} m. (a king) who has a well governed kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>48575<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgfhRat<k2>saNgfhRat
{%Saṅ-gṛhṇat, an, atī, at,%}¦ seizing, laying hold of.
<LEND>

<L>48576<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgfhya<k2>saNgfhya
{%Saṅ-gṛhya,%}¦ ind. having seized, having carried off,
having restrained; having constrained.
<LEND>

<L>48577<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgraha<k2>saNgraha
{%Saṅ-graha, as,%}¦ m. seizing, grasping, clench-
ing (the fist), grasp, grip, taking hold of, taking;
reception, admission, assent; guarding, protecting,
protection, favouring, supporting, encouraging, pro-
pitiating, receiving kindly, entertaining, entertain-
ment; bringing together, conjunction, collection,
conglomeration, compilation; agglomeration (a par-
ticular kind of {%saṃyoga%} or conjunction in phil.);
comprehension; sum, amount, totality; abridge-
ment, epitome, summary; a catalogue, list; restrain-
ing, confining, controlling, governing; effort, exertion;
a store-room, place where anything is kept; mention,
mentioning; greatness, elevation, loftiness; velocity;
epithet of Śiva; N. of several works; [cf. {%dhanañ-%}
{%jaya-s˚, smṛti-s˚.%}] {%—Saṅgraha-kāra, as,%} m. the
composer or author of the Saṅgraha. {%—Saṅgraha-%}
{%śloka, as,%} m. a verse recapitulating what has been
explained before (in prose intermixed with Sūtras).
<LEND>

<L>48578<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgrahaRa<k2>saNgrahaRa
{%Saṅ-grahaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of taking hold of,
seizing, grasping, accepting, receiving, admitting,
supporting, encouraging, hoping; embracing car-
nally, intercourse with a female, (see {%strī-s˚%});
adultery; bringing or gathering together, compiling,
collecting, mixing, blending; inlaying, enchasing;
({%ī%}), f. diarrhœa, dysentery.
<LEND>

<L>48579<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgrahaRIya<k2>saNgrahaRIya
{%Saṅ-grahaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be seized, &c.;
to be collected; to be drawn together or contracted;
to be restrained, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48580<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgrahItf<k2>saNgrahItf
{%Saṅ-grahītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who restrains, &c.;
({%tā%}), m. a driver, charioteer.
<LEND>

<L>48581<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgrAha<k2>saNgrAha
{%Saṅ-grāha, as,%}¦ m. forcible seizure or grasp, laying
hold of; clenching the fist; the fist; the handle of
a shield.
<LEND>

<L>48582<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgrAhaka<k2>saNgrAhaka
{%Saṅ-grāhaka, as,%}¦ m. a gatherer, collector, com-
piler.
<LEND>

<L>48583<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgrAhita<k2>saNgrAhita
{%Saṅ-grāhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be taken hold
of or received, imparted, bestowed.
<LEND>

<L>48584<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgrAhin<k2>saNgrAhin
{%Saṅ-grāhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ seizing, grasping, holding;
collecting, contracting, &c.; ({%ī%}), m. the Kuṭa-ja tree.
<LEND>

<L>48585<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgrAhya<k2>saNgrAhya
{%Saṅ-grāhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be laid hold of or
seized; to be collected; to be received.
<LEND>

<L>48586<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgrAm<k2>saNgrAm
{#saNgrAm#}¦ {%saṅgrām%} (rather to be regarded
as a Nom. fr. {%saṅgrāma%} below), cl.
10. A. {%saṅgrāmayate%} (also P. {%-ti%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor.
{%asasaṅgrāmata,%} to make war, fight.
<LEND>

<L>48587<pc>1048-b<k1>saNgrAma<k2>saNgrAma
{%Saṅgrāma, as,%}¦ m. war, battle, fighting; a proper
N. {%—Saṅgrāma-jit, t, t, t,%} conquering in battle;
({%t%}), m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Saṅgrāma-pa-%}
{%ṭaha, as,%} m. a large military drum.
<LEND>

<L>48588<pc>1048-b<k1>saNGa<k2>saNGa
{#saNGa#}¦ {%saṅ-gha.%} See under {%saṃ-han.%}
<LEND>

<L>48589<pc>1048-b<k1>saNGaw<k2>saNGaw
{#saNGaw#}¦ {%saṅ-ghaṭ (sam-ghaṭ),%} cl. 1. A. {%-gha-%}
{%ṭate, -ghaṭitum,%} to assemble together, meet: Caus.
{%-ghaṭayati, -ghāṭayati, -yitum,%} to cause to assem-
ble, collect; to join together, fasten together; to strike
[Page1048-c+ 76]
(a musical instrument), sound [cf. {%saṅ-ghaṭṭ%}]: In-
tens. {%-jāghaṭīti,%} to be well fitted or adapted for
anything.
<LEND>

<L>48590<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGawita<k2>saNGawita
{%Saṅ-ghaṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ collected, assembled;
struck, sounded.
<LEND>

<L>48591<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGawya<k2>saNGawya
{%Saṅ-ghaṭya,%}¦ ind. having joined or united toge-
ther, having assembled.
<LEND>

<L>48592<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGAwikA<k2>saNGAwikA
{%Saṅghāṭikā,%}¦ f. a pair, couple; a bawd, procuress;
the aquatic plant Trapa Bispinosa ({%= jala-kaṇṭaka%});
smell ({%= ghrāṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>48593<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGAwI<k2>saNGAwI
{%Saṅghāṭī,%}¦ f. in {%bhikṣu-saṅghāṭī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>48594<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGaww<k2>saNGaww
{#saNGaww#}¦ {%saṅ-ghaṭṭ (sam-ghaṭṭ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-ghaṭṭate, -ghaṭṭitum,%} to rub together, crush to
pieces, bruise: Caus. {%-ghaṭṭayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to rub against (with inst.); to strike against, touch;
to bring together, collect, assemble.
<LEND>

<L>48595<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGawwa<k2>saNGawwa
{%Saṅ-ghaṭṭa, as,%}¦ m. rubbing together, friction;
clashing together, collision, shock, clash, encounter,
conflict; meeting, joining together, cohesion, rivalry,
({%a-saṅghaṭṭa-sukham,%} without any rival to one's
happiness, Raghu-v. XIV. 86); embracing; ({%ā%}), f. a
large creeper {%(= latā)%}. {%—Saṅghaṭṭa-cakra, am,%} n.
a particular astrological diagram intended as a guide
for determining the proper season for war.
<LEND>

<L>48596<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGawwana<k2>saNGawwana
{%Saṅ-ghaṭṭana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. rubbing together,
friction; collision; close contact, cleaving or adhering
to; the intertwining of wrestlers; the embrace of
lovers; contact, cohesion, union, junction; collecting,
meeting, encountering, occurrence.
<LEND>

<L>48597<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGawwayat<k2>saNGawwayat
{%Saṅ-ghaṭṭayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to rub
against, rubbing together.
<LEND>

<L>48598<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGawwayya<k2>saNGawwayya
{%Saṅ-ghaṭṭayya,%}¦ ind. having brought together,
having collected.
<LEND>

<L>48599<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGawwita<k2>saNGawwita
{%Saṅ-ghaṭṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck against, touched;
assembled, collected.
<LEND>

<L>48600<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGARaka<k2>saNGARaka
{#saNGARaka#}¦ {%saṅghāṇaka, as, am,%} m. n. {%= siṃ-%}
{%hāṇaka,%} the mucus of the nose; [cf. {%saṅ-ghāta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48601<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGAta<k2>saNGAta
{#saNGAta#}¦ {%saṅ-ghāta.%} See under {%saṃ-han.%}
<LEND>

<L>48602<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGAtya<k2>saNGAtya
{%Saṅghātya,%}¦ a kind of dramatic performance.
<LEND>

<L>48603<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGuz<k2>saNGuz
{#saNGuz#}¦ {%saṅ-ghuṣ (sam-ghuṣ),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-ghoṣati, -ghoṣitum,%} to sound together, resound,
sound; to proclaim aloud, cry (in offering for sale);
to fill with cries, make resonant.
<LEND>

<L>48604<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGuzita<k2>saNGuzita
{%Saṅ-ghuṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, proclaimed
aloud; resonant, resounding.
<LEND>

<L>48605<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGuzwa<k2>saNGuzwa
{%Saṅ-ghuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, proclaimed;
resonant, resounding; offered for sale; ({%as%}), m.
sound, noise, cry.
<LEND>

<L>48606<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGfz<k2>saNGfz
{#saNGfz#}¦ {%saṅ-ghṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gharṣati,%}
{%-gharṣitum,%} to rub together, grind together, tritu-
rate; to rub against another (with {%saha%} and inst.),
contend with, vie with: Pass. {%-ghṛṣyate%} (ep. also
P. {%-ti%}), to rub against each other (sometimes with
{%parasparam%}), come into collision, contend for
superiority, vie with each other.
<LEND>

<L>48607<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGarza<k2>saNGarza
{%Saṅ-gharṣa, as,%}¦ m. rubbing together, grinding,
trituration, friction; collision, mutual attrition, rivalry,
emulation, vying or contending for superiority ({%=%}
{%paraspara-spardhā%}); envy; going gently, gliding,
flowing ({%= saṃ-sarpa%}).
<LEND>

<L>48608<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGarzin<k2>saNGarzin
{%Saṅ-gharṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ rubbing together, vying
with one another, emulating.
<LEND>

<L>48609<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGfzwa<k2>saNGfzwa
{%Saṅ-ghṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed with, rubbed
together.
<LEND>

<L>48610<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGfzyat<k2>saNGfzyat
{%Saṅ-ghṛṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ rubbing together,
coming into collision.
<LEND>

<L>48611<pc>1048-c<k1>saNGrA<k2>saNGrA
{#saNGrA#}¦ {%saṅ-ghrā (sam-ghrā),%} cl. 1. P. A.
Ved. {%-jighrati, -te, -ghrātum,%} Ved. to smell at one
another (as animals), be on intimate or familiar
terms, be closely connected: Caus. {%-ghrāpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to bring into close connection or intimacy,
make intimate.
<LEND>

<L>48612<pc>1048-c<k1>sac<k2>sac
{#sac#}¦ {%sac%} (closely connected and by some
identified with rt. {%saśc,%} q. v., cf. rt. {%sap%}),
cl. 1. A., 3. P. {%sacate%} (sometimes also P. {%sacati%}),
{%siṣakti%} (Ved., Pot. 1st pl. {%sakṣīmahi = saṅgac- %}
[Page1049-a+ 79]
{%chemahi,%} Impv. 2nd sing. {%sakṣvā%} for {%sakṣva%}),
{%saktum%} (Ved. Inf. {%sacadhyai%}), Ved. to follow,
pursue, seek after, attend on, become attached to
(sometimes with inst.); to love, like; to celebrate,
honour, worship, serve, obey, be obedient to (with acc.
or gen.); to favour, assist, aid; to be associated with,
({%tvaṃ sacase purandhyā,%} thou art associated with
devotion, Ṛg-veda II. 1, 3); to go towards, go to,
(in Naigh. II. 14. {%sacati%} and {%sakṣati%} are enume-
rated among the {%gati-karmāṇaḥ%}); to attain, obtain,
acquire, gain, accomplish; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἕπ-ω, ἕ-σπ-ο-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἕπ-ο-μαι, ἑ-σπ-ό-μην, ἑπ-έ-της, ὅπ-λο-ν, ὁπλότερος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἑκάς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>sequ-o-r, sec-u-ndu-s, ad-sec-la,</nsi>
<nsi>sec-to-r, pedis-sequa, soc-iu-s, sec-us, sacer:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>sek-u,</nsi> ‘I follow:’ Hib. <nsi>seichim,</nsi> ‘I follow, pursue;’
<nsi>seicin,</nsi> ‘pursuit.’]
<LEND>

<L>48613<pc>1049-a<k1>sakma<k2>sakma
{%Sakma, as,%}¦ m. {%= sacana.%}
<LEND>

<L>48614<pc>1049-a<k1>sakmya<k2>sakmya
{%Sakmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be followed; to be
liked, agreeable; to be honoured, (Sāy. {%= sambha-%}
{%janārha%}); ({%am%}), n. (according to some) the agree-
able produce (of the cow, i. e. milk).
<LEND>

<L>48615<pc>1049-a<k1>sacaTa<k2>sacaTa
{%Sacatha,%}¦ Ved. companionship, assistance, (Sāy.
{%sacathāya = sacanāya,%} i. e. {%yāga-sahāya-kara-%}
{%ṇāya,%} for giving assistance at the sacrifice.)
<LEND>

<L>48616<pc>1049-a<k1>sacaTya<k2>sacaTya
{%Sacathya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= sacanīya,%} to be fol-
lowed or served, to be honoured, worthy of honour,
(Sāy. {%= sevārha;%} in Ṛg-veda V. 50, 2. {%sacathya%}
is made a substantive and interpreted by {%kāma,%} i. e.
any desirable thing.)
<LEND>

<L>48617<pc>1049-a<k1>sacana<k2>sacana
{%Sacana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f., Ved. the act of honouring,
favouring, assisting; honour, service; ({%as, ā, am%}),
to be honoured or served {%(= sevya)%}. {%—Sacanas-%}
{%tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. to be excessively followed or
honoured. {%—Sacanā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
honour, honoured.
<LEND>

<L>48618<pc>1049-a<k1>sacanasyamAna<k2>sacanasyamAna
{%Sacanasyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. desiring attach-
ment or union, (Sāy. {%= samparkam icchat,%} Ṛg-
veda X. 4, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>48619<pc>1049-a<k1>sacanIya<k2>sacanIya
{%Sacanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be followed, to be
honoured or served.
<LEND>

<L>48620<pc>1049-a<k1>sacamAna<k2>sacamAna
{%Sacamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. following, pursuing,
seeking after, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48621<pc>1049-a<k1>sacA<k2>sacA
{%Sacā%}¦ (thought by some to be fr. {%sāñc,%} i. e. {%sa +%}
{%añc,%} ‘going with,’ cf. {%sāci;%} but more probably an
inst. of a form {%sac%}), ind., Ved. along with, at the same
time with, together with, with (= 2. {%saha,%} but some-
times used with loc. and even with gen. and dat.; Sāy.
often interprets this word by {%sahāya,%} ‘an associate,
helper,’ evidently connecting it with rt. {%sac%}); with
the assistance of. {%—Sacā-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved. being
along with, united with, associated with, an associate,
(Sāy. {%= saha vartamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>48622<pc>1049-a<k1>sacAna<k2>sacAna
{%Sacāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. following, pursuing, &c.;
being associated with.
<LEND>

<L>48623<pc>1049-a<k1>saci<k2>saci
{%Saci, is,%}¦ m. an associate, friend [cf. {%sakhi%}]; con-
nection, intimacy, friendship; ({%is%}), f. the wife of
Indra, (also written {%śaci.%}) {%—Saci-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved.
knowing or appreciating friendship.
<LEND>

<L>48624<pc>1049-a<k1>saciva<k2>saciva
{%Saciva, as,%}¦ m. an associate, companion, friend;
a counsellor, minister; the dark thorn-apple; ({%ā%}),
f., see Vopa-deva VI. 13. {%—Saciva-tā,%} f. the position
or rank of a minister. {%—Sacivāmaya (˚va-ām˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the disease Vi-sarpa.
<LEND>

<L>48625<pc>1049-a<k1>sacI<k2>sacI
{%Sacī,%}¦ f. the wife of Indra, (also written {%śacī,%}
q. v.) {%—Sacī-nandana, as,%} m. ‘Sacī's delight,’ epi-
thet of Jayanta (son of Sacī and Indra).
<LEND>

<L>48626<pc>1049-a<k1>sacakita<k2>sacakita
{#sacakita#}¦ {%sa-cakita, as, ā, am,%} trembling,
timorous, timid, startled; ({%am%}), ind. tremblingly, with
alarm, timidly, timorously, in a startled manner.
<LEND>

<L>48627<pc>1049-a<k1>sacakra<k2>sacakra
{#sacakra#}¦ {%sa-cakra, as, ā, am,%} having a circle
or discus; ({%am%}), ind. together with a wheel or
discus.
<LEND>

<L>48628<pc>1049-a<k1>sacakzus<k2>sacakzus
{#sacakzus#}¦ {%sa-cakṣus, us, us, us,%} having eyes,
seeing.
<LEND>

<L>48629<pc>1049-a<k1>sacakzuza<k2>sacakzuza
{%Sa-cakṣuṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having eyes, seeing.
<LEND>

<L>48630<pc>1049-a<k1>sacanas<k2>sacanas
{#sacanas#}¦ {%sa-canas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having
the same food, (Sāy. {%= samānānna,%} Ṛg-veda I.
127, 11); (according to some) being in company
with, accompanied by; [cf. {%sacana.%}]
<LEND>
[Page1049-b+ 68]

<L>48631<pc>1049-b<k1>sacaraRalAkzArAga<k2>sacaraRalAkzArAga
{#sacaraRalAkzArAga#}¦ {%sa-caraṇa-lākṣā-rāga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the colour of feet-lac, i. e. lac used
for (dyeing) the feet.
<LEND>

<L>48632<pc>1049-b<k1>sacarAcara<k2>sacarAcara
{#sacarAcara#}¦ {%sa-carācara (˚ra-ac˚), as, ā, am,%}
comprehending all moving and motionless creatures,
comprising animate and inanimate, having all things,
universal; ({%am%}), n. the universe.
<LEND>

<L>48633<pc>1049-b<k1>sacala<k2>sacala
{#sacala#}¦ {%sa-cala, as, ā, am,%} having moving
things; moving.
<LEND>

<L>48634<pc>1049-b<k1>sacAru<k2>sacAru
{#sacAru#}¦ {%sa-cāru, us, -rvī, u,%} very beautiful.
<LEND>

<L>48635<pc>1049-b<k1>sacitra<k2>sacitra
{#sacitra#}¦ {%sa-citra, as, ā, am,%} having pictures,
painted, variegated.
<LEND>

<L>48636<pc>1049-b<k1>sacillaka<k2>sacillaka
{#sacillaka#}¦ {%sa-cillaka, as, ā, am,%} having sore
eyes, blear-eyed.
<LEND>

<L>48637<pc>1049-b<k1>sacetana<k2>sacetana
{#sacetana#}¦ {%sa-cetana, as, ā, am,%} having con-
sciousness, conscious, sentient, sensible, animate,
rational; having feeling; recovering sense or con-
sciousness.
<LEND>

<L>48638<pc>1049-b<k1>sacetas<k2>sacetas
{%Sa-cetas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ conscious, reflective, intelli-
gent; having the same mind, unanimous.
<LEND>

<L>48639<pc>1049-b<k1>sacela<k2>sacela
{#sacela#}¦ {%sa-cela, as, ā, am,%} having clothes,
clothed, dressed.
<LEND>

<L>48640<pc>1049-b<k1>sacezwa<k2>sacezwa
{#sacezwa#}¦ {%sa-ceṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} making effort
or exertion, active; ({%as%}), m. the mango tree, Man-
gifera Indica.
<LEND>

<L>48641<pc>1049-b<k1>saccarita<k2>saccarita
{#saccarita#}¦ {%sac-carita.%} See under {%sat.%}
<LEND>

<L>48642<pc>1049-b<k1>saccArA<k2>saccArA
{#saccArA#}¦ {%saccārā,%} f. turmeric.
<LEND>

<L>48643<pc>1049-b<k1>saccidaMSa<k2>saccidaMSa
{#saccidaMSa#}¦ {%sac-cid-aṃśa, sac-cid-ānanda,%} &c.
See under {%sat,%} p. 1052.
<LEND>

<L>48644<pc>1049-b<k1>sacCidra<k2>sacCidra
{#sacCidra#}¦ {%sa-cchidra (sa-ch˚), as, ā, am,%}
having defects, faulty.
<LEND>

<L>48645<pc>1049-b<k1>sacCUdra<k2>sacCUdra
{#sacCUdra#}¦ {%sac-chūdra.%} See under {%sat.%}
<LEND>

<L>48646<pc>1049-b<k1>sacCeda<k2>sacCeda
{#sacCeda#}¦ {%sa-ccheda (sa-ch˚), as, ā, am,%} having
cuttings or divisions, having interruptions, interrupted.
<LEND>

<L>48647<pc>1049-b<k1>sajana<k2>sajana
{#sajana#}¦ {%sa-jana, as, ā, am,%} having men or
living beings; ({%as%}), m. a man of the same family,
kinsman.
<LEND>

<L>48648<pc>1049-b<k1>sajanapada<k2>sajanapada
{%Sa-janapada, as, ā, am,%}¦ having the same
country; a fellow-countryman.
<LEND>

<L>48649<pc>1049-b<k1>sajanAmAtya<k2>sajanAmAtya
{%Sa-janāmātya (˚na-am˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ accompa-
nied by men and ministers.
<LEND>

<L>48650<pc>1049-b<k1>sajanIya<k2>sajanIya
{%Sajanīya, am,%}¦ n., N. of an ancient hymn.
<LEND>

<L>48651<pc>1049-b<k1>sajanya<k2>sajanya
{%Sajanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to kinsmen
or relations.
<LEND>

<L>48652<pc>1049-b<k1>sajambAla<k2>sajambAla
{#sajambAla#}¦ {%sa-jambāla, as, ā, am,%} having
mud, muddy, clayey.
<LEND>

<L>48653<pc>1049-b<k1>sajala<k2>sajala
{#sajala#}¦ {%sa-jala, as, ā, am,%} possessing or
containing water, watery, wet, humid. {%—Sajala-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. wateriness. {%—Sajala-nayana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} watery-eyed.
<LEND>

<L>48654<pc>1049-b<k1>sajAta<k2>sajAta
{#sajAta#}¦ {%sa-jāta, as, ā, am,%} born together,
born at the same time; ({%as%}), m., Ved. a brother.
{%—Sajāta-vani, is, is, i,%} Ved. loving one's brethren,
attached to relations or kindred.
<LEND>

<L>48655<pc>1049-b<k1>sajAti<k2>sajAti
{%Sa-jāti, is, is, i,%}¦ of the same sort or kind or
species, of the same class or tribe or caste; ({%is%}), m.
the son of a man and woman of the same caste.
<LEND>

<L>48656<pc>1049-b<k1>sajAtIya<k2>sajAtIya
{%Sa-jātīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ of the same kind or species;
like, similar; of the same class or tribe, descended
from parents of the same caste.
<LEND>

<L>48657<pc>1049-b<k1>sajAtya<k2>sajAtya
{%Sajātya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being of the same race
or family, a kinsman, relation; ({%am%}), n., Ved.
brotherhood, relationship; kinsfolk.
<LEND>

<L>48658<pc>1049-b<k1>sajAra<k2>sajAra
{#sajAra#}¦ {%sa-jāra, as, ā, am,%} accompanied by
a lover, together with a paramour.
<LEND>

<L>48659<pc>1049-b<k1>sajitvan<k2>sajitvan
{#sajitvan#}¦ {%sa-jitvan, ā,%} &c., Ved. conquer-
ing common enemies (Sāy. {%= samāna-śatru-jaya-%}
{%śīla, samāna-jetṛ%}), conquering together, victorious.
<LEND>
[Page1049-c+ 74]

<L>48660<pc>1049-c<k1>sajizRu<k2>sajizRu
{#sajizRu#}¦ {%sa-jiṣṇu, us, us, u,%} accompanied
by Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>48661<pc>1049-c<k1>sajIva<k2>sajIva
{#sajIva#}¦ {%sa-jīva, as, ā, am,%} having life, alive.
<LEND>

<L>48662<pc>1049-c<k1>sajuz<k2>sajuz
{#sajuz#}¦ {%sa-juṣ%} or {%sa-jus, ūs, ūs, ūs%} (fr. rt.
1. {%juṣ%} with {%sa%}), having fondness or friendship,
loving, serving, attached to; associated together;
an associate, companion; ({%ūs%}), ind. (thought by
some to be for an original {%sajūḥṣu,%} Visarga being
dropped), with, together with (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>48663<pc>1049-c<k1>sajoza<k2>sajoza
{%Sa-joṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. rejoicing together, pleased
together, associated through fondness, united.
<LEND>

<L>48664<pc>1049-c<k1>sajozas<k2>sajozas
{%Sa-joṣas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ Ved. associated together,
united with (with inst.), united in love or as com-
panions, loving.
<LEND>

<L>48665<pc>1049-c<k1>sajj<k2>sajj<h>1
{#sajj#} 1¦. {%sajj%} (also written {%sañc, sañj%}),
cl. 1. P. A. {%sajjati, -te,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>48666<pc>1049-c<k1>sajj<k2>sajj<h>2
{#sajj#} 2¦. {%sajj%} or {%saj,%} cl. 1. P. {%sajjati, sa-%}
{%jati,%} &c. = rt. 2. {%sañj,%} to cling, adhere;
to fasten.
<LEND>

<L>48667<pc>1049-c<k1>sajja<k2>sajja
{%Sajja, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, clothed, dressed;
accoutred, trimmed; ornamented, decorated, pre-
pared, made ready; armed, fortified; ({%ā%}), f. dress;
decoration; apparatus, equipment, equipage, harness,
armour, mail. {%—Sajja-karman, a,%} n. the work of
fitting or fastening on, making ready, dressing, pre-
paration. {%—Sajja-tā,%} f. the being prepared or made
ready, readiness. {%—Sajjī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of
equipping, arraying, preparing, decorating, arming.
{%—Sajjī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%}
to equip, make ready, prepare, array; to decorate,
arm. {%—Sajjī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} arrayed; prepared;
decorated, armed. {%—Sajjī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
{%-bhavitum,%} to become equipped or accoutred or
decorated; to be prepared or made ready. {%—Sajjī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} equipped; prepared, made ready;
decorated. {%—Sajjī-bhūya,%} ind. having become pre-
pared or decorated, in full decoration.
<LEND>

<L>48668<pc>1049-c<k1>sajjana<k2>sajjana<h>1
1. {%sajjana, as, ā, am,%}¦ fastening on clothes, dress-
ing, preparing, putting on armour, arming; ({%am%}),
n. the act of preparing or making ready; a guard,
sentry, picket; a ferry, Ghāt; ({%ā%}), f. the act of
dressing; dress, decoration, equipment, accoutre-
ment, caparisoning an elephant, arming.
<LEND>

<L>48669<pc>1049-c<k1>sajjamAna<k2>sajjamAna
{%Sajjamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ dressing, making ready,
preparing, arming; hesitating (in speech).
<LEND>

<L>48670<pc>1049-c<k1>sajjita<k2>sajjita
{%Sajjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ dressed; decorated, orna-
mented; made ready, equipped, accoutred, armed.
<LEND>

<L>48671<pc>1049-c<k1>sajjana<k2>sajjana<h>2
{#sajjana#} 2¦. {%saj-jana.%} See under {%sat,%} p. 1052.
<LEND>

<L>48672<pc>1049-c<k1>sajya<k2>sajya
{#sajya#}¦ {%sa-jya, as, ā, am,%} having a bow-string,
strung (as a bow). {%—Sajya-sāyaka, as, ā, am,%}
having arrows on the string (said of a bow).
<LEND>

<L>48673<pc>1049-c<k1>sajyotis<k2>sajyotis
{#sajyotis#}¦ {%sa-jyotis, is, is, is,%} having the
same light, having a common light; ({%is%}), n. the
time during which the sun or the stars give light.
<LEND>

<L>48674<pc>1049-c<k1>sajyotsnA<k2>sajyotsnA
{%Sa-jyotsnā,%}¦ f. ‘having moonlight,’ scil. {%rātri,%} a
moonlight night.
<LEND>

<L>48675<pc>1049-c<k1>saYc<k2>saYc
{#saYc#}¦ {%sañc,%} cl. 1. P. {%sañcati,%} &c. = rts.
1. {%sañj,%} 1. {%sajj,%} to go, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48676<pc>1049-c<k1>saYca<k2>saYca
{#saYca#}¦ {%sañca, as,%} m. (perhaps fr. {%sañ-caya%}),
a collection of leaves for writing, (according to Śab-
da-k. {%pustaka-lekhanārtha-pattra-caya = sāñc%} in
Bengālī.)
<LEND>

<L>48677<pc>1049-c<k1>saYcak<k2>saYcak
{#saYcak#}¦ {%sañ-cak (sam-cak).%} See rt. {%cak.%}
<LEND>

<L>48678<pc>1049-c<k1>saYcakita<k2>saYcakita
{%Sañ-cakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly startled, trembling,
fearful, afraid; [cf. {%pra-cakita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48679<pc>1049-c<k1>saYcaka<k2>saYcaka
{#saYcaka#}¦ {%sañcaka%} (?), a stamp; a disc.
<LEND>

<L>48680<pc>1049-c<k1>saYcakAna<k2>saYcakAna
{#saYcakAna#}¦ {%sañ-cakāna.%} See under {%saṅ-kaṅ.%}
<LEND>

<L>48681<pc>1049-c<k1>saYcakz<k2>saYcakz<h>1
{#saYcakz#} 1¦. {%sañ-cakṣ%} ({%sam-c˚;%} cf. rt. {%khyā%}),
cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe, -caṣṭum,%} to look at, observe,
notice, consider, contemplate, survey, examine, re-
flect upon; to enumerate; to report or relate fully;
to avoid, shun.
<LEND>

<L>48682<pc>1049-c<k1>saYcakz<k2>saYcakz<h>2
2. {%sañ-cakṣ,%}¦ f., Ved. appearance, sight, (Sāy. {%sañ-%}
{%cakṣi = sandarśane sati,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 14, 4.)
<LEND>
[Page1050-a+ 79]

<L>48683<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcakzARa<k2>saYcakzARa
{%Sañ-cakṣāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ beholding at the same
time, observing, surveying, examining.
<LEND>

<L>48684<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcakzya<k2>saYcakzya
{%Sañ-cakṣya,%}¦ ind. having observed, having re-
flected on, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48685<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcat<k2>saYcat
{#saYcat#}¦ {%sañ-cat, t,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. II. 85.
said to be fr. rt. 1. {%ci,%} the final of the rt. being
dropped, and {%s%} being generally inserted after {%sam,%}
see {%sañś-cat%}), cheating, deceit, juggling; a cheat.
<LEND>

<L>48686<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcaya<k2>saYcaya
{#saYcaya#}¦ {%sañ-caya,%} &c. See under 1. {%sañ-ci.%}
<LEND>

<L>48687<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcar<k2>saYcar
{#saYcar#}¦ {%sañ-car%} ({%sam-c˚;%} cf. {%saṅ-kram%}), cl.
1. P. A. {%-carati, -te, -caritum,%} to go or come toge-
ther, meet, join; to go or walk about, move about,
roam, wander, graze; to go through, pass through,
pervade, roam through; to go towards, come to,
arrive at, reach, attain; to go over to, pass over to,
enter; to stay, remain, live in the practice of (with
loc.); to practise (with acc.): Caus. {%-cārayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to come together, make to meet,
bring into contact; to cause to go or put in motion,
move, lead about; to cause to pass through; to cause
to go towards, convey, deliver over to, transmit,
communicate; to turn out to graze.
<LEND>

<L>48688<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcara<k2>saYcara
{%Sañ-cara, as,%}¦ m. [cf. {%saṅ-krama%}], going or
passing through, passage, transit; a way, road, route,
course, entrance, gate, doorway; difficult passage or
progress, travelling by inaccessible routes, any narrow
road or difficult pass, a defile, a bridge over a torrent,
&c.; emanation, development (in phil.); the body;
killing.
<LEND>

<L>48689<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcaraRa<k2>saYcaraRa
{%Sañ-caraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ going together, meeting,
converging; ({%am%}), n. the act of going together;
passing through, travelling, going, motion, setting
in motion, use.
<LEND>

<L>48690<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcarat<k2>saYcarat
{%Sañ-carat, an, antī, at,%}¦ walking or wandering
about; passing through.
<LEND>

<L>48691<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcaramARa<k2>saYcaramARa
{%Sañ-caramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ going about, roaming;
passing.
<LEND>

<L>48692<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcareRya<k2>saYcareRya
{%Sañ-careṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. moving, movable,
unsteady, changeable; ({%am%}), n. fickleness.
<LEND>

<L>48693<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcAra<k2>saYcAra
{%Sañ-cāra, as,%}¦ m. passing through, passage, pro-
gress, transition, course, a passage, way, road, door-
way, entrance; the passage or entrance of the sun
into a new sign; difficult progress; difficulty, distress;
setting in motion; impelling, inciting, conveying,
leading, guiding; transmission, communication of
disease, contagion; a gem supposed to be in the
head of a serpent. {%—Sañcāra-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%} living
with difficulty or by going to others for aid, distressed,
calamitous, indigent. {%—Sañcāra-pūta, as, ā, am,%}
purified by the course or passage (of anything).
<LEND>

<L>48694<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcAraka<k2>saYcAraka
{%Sañ-cāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ conveying, transmitting,
communicating, leading; ({%as%}), m. a leader, guide,
messenger; an instigator; an orator; ({%ikā%}), f. a
female messenger, go-between; a procuress; a pair,
brace; odour, smell.
<LEND>

<L>48695<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcAraRa<k2>saYcAraRa
{%Sañ-cāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of setting in motion,
moving; impelling, instigating; conveying, leading,
guiding, transmission.
<LEND>

<L>48696<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcArikA<k2>saYcArikA
{%Sañ-cārikā,%}¦ f. See {%sañ-cāraka.%}
<LEND>

<L>48697<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcArita<k2>saYcArita
{%Sañ-cārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to come together,
made to meet, brought into contact; caused to go,
set in motion, moved, impelled, driven, worked;
led, conducted, conveyed, guided; transmitted, com-
municated (as disease).
<LEND>

<L>48698<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcArin<k2>saYcArin
{%Sañ-cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going together, meeting;
moving about, going, moving, roaming, wandering,
passing through, passing; changeable, fickle, unsteady,
not permanent, transitory ({%= vy-abhicārin%} and ap-
plied to a class of Bhāvas which are the reverse of
{%sthāyin%}); passing with difficulty; difficult to be
passed, inaccessible; setting in motion, impelling;
acting on, influencing; transmitted, hereditary (as
disease); contagious; ({%ī%}), m. a particular Bhāva,
(see above); air, wind; incense, perfume; ({%iṇī%}),
f. a kind of scandent shrub {%(= haṃsa-padī)%}. {%—Sañ-%}
{%cāri-bhāva, as,%} m. a transitory Bhāva or feeling
({%= vyabhicāri-bhāva%}); a concomitant feeling.
<LEND>

<L>48699<pc>1050-a<k1>saYcArya<k2>saYcArya
{%Sañ-cārya,%}¦ ind. having caused to go or move,
having conducted or conveyed or led.
<LEND>
[Page1050-b+ 76]

<L>48700<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcal<k2>saYcal
{#saYcal#}¦ {%sañ-cal (sam-c˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-calati,%}
{%-calitum,%} to move about, shake, move to and fro,
waver, oscillate, quiver, tremble; to move away,
move off, move on, depart; to start or jump up:
Caus. {%-cālayati, -yitum,%} to cause to move about
or tremble, put in motion, agitate; to push away,
move or drive away, remove, expel.
<LEND>

<L>48701<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcala<k2>saYcala
{%Sañ-cala, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving about, trembling,
quivering. {%—Sañcala-nāḍi, is,%} f. ‘quivering tube,’
an artery, vein, pulse.
<LEND>

<L>48702<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcalana<k2>saYcalana
{%Sañ-calana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. moving about, agitation,
trembling, shaking.
<LEND>

<L>48703<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcAlana<k2>saYcAlana
{%Sañcālana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to move
about, shaking, agitation.
<LEND>

<L>48704<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcAlayat<k2>saYcAlayat
{%Sañ-cālayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to shake,
agitating.
<LEND>

<L>48705<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcAlI<k2>saYcAlI
{%Sañ-cālī,%}¦ f. the shrub Guñjā.
<LEND>

<L>48706<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcAlya<k2>saYcAlya
{%Sañ-cālya,%}¦ ind. having moved or thrust away,
having ejected.
<LEND>

<L>48707<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcAna<k2>saYcAna
{#saYcAna#}¦ {%sañcāna, as,%} m. (according to some)
a kind of bird, species of hawk.
<LEND>

<L>48708<pc>1050-b<k1>saYci<k2>saYci<h>1
{#saYci#} 1¦. {%sañ-ci%} ({%sam-ci;%} see rt. 1. {%ci%}), cl. 5.
P. A. {%-cinoti, -cinute, -cetum,%} to pile together, pile
up, heap up, accumulate, collect, gather together,
assemble; to arrange in order.
<LEND>

<L>48709<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcaya<k2>saYcaya
{%Sañ-caya, as,%}¦ m. collection, gathering, heaping
up, accumulation, construction, heap, hoard, store,
multitude, number, quantity.
<LEND>

<L>48710<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcayana<k2>saYcayana
{%Sañ-cayana, am,%}¦ n. the act of piling together,
heaping up, putting together, collecting, gathering;
collecting the ashes or bones of a body lately burnt.
<LEND>

<L>48711<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcayanIya<k2>saYcayanIya
{%Sañ-cayanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gathered or col-
lected.
<LEND>

<L>48712<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcayika<k2>saYcayika
{%Sañ-cayika%}¦ in {%māsa-s,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>48713<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcayitvA<k2>saYcayitvA
{%Sañ-cayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having collected
or accumulated.
<LEND>

<L>48714<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcayin<k2>saYcayin
{%Sañ-cayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ who or what collects, col-
lecting, accumulating, gathering.
<LEND>

<L>48715<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcAyya<k2>saYcAyya
{%Sañ-cāyya, as,%}¦ m. a particular sacrifice at which
the juice of the acid Asclepias is drank.
<LEND>

<L>48716<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcita<k2>saYcita
{%Sañ-cita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heaped up, accumulated,
collected, gathered, saved, assembled, reckoned up,
enumerated; filled with, furnished or provided with,
full of; impeded, obstructed; dense, thick (as a
wood).
<LEND>

<L>48717<pc>1050-b<k1>saYciti<k2>saYciti
{%Sañ-citi, is,%}¦ f. a collection; N. of the ninth book
of the Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>48718<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcinvat<k2>saYcinvat
{%Sañ-cinvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ or {%sañcinvāna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} accumulating, collecting, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48719<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcetavya<k2>saYcetavya
{%Sañ-cetavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accumulated or
collected.
<LEND>

<L>48720<pc>1050-b<k1>saYceya<k2>saYceya
{%Sañ-ceya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accumulated; to be
collected or gathered.
<LEND>

<L>48721<pc>1050-b<k1>saYci<k2>saYci<h>2
{#saYci#} 2¦. {%sañ-ci (sam-ci).%} See rt. 2. {%ci.%}
<LEND>

<L>48722<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcitya<k2>saYcitya
{%Sañ-citya,%}¦ ind. having reflected, (perhaps for {%sañ-%}
{%cintya.%})
<LEND>

<L>48723<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcit<k2>saYcit
{#saYcit#}¦ {%sañ-cit%} ({%sam-c˚;%} see rt. 4. {%cit%}), cl.
1. 3. P. {%-cetati, -ciketti, -cetitum,%} Ved. to observe
together, survey, view, notice; to be of the same
mind or opinion, agree together, be unanimous:
Caus. {%-cetayati, -yitum,%} to observe, be aware of,
perceive.
<LEND>

<L>48724<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcikitvas<k2>saYcikitvas
{%Sañ-cikitvas, ān, uṣī, at,%}¦ one who has observed,
one who knows thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>48725<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcetayamAna<k2>saYcetayamAna
{%Sañ-cetayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ observing, being
aware of, perceiving.
<LEND>

<L>48726<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcitrA<k2>saYcitrA
{#saYcitrA#}¦ {%sañ-citrā (sam-c˚),%} f. the plant
Salvinia Cucullata ({%= mūṣā-karṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>48727<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcint<k2>saYcint
{#saYcint#}¦ {%sañ-cint (sam-c˚),%} cl. 10. P. {%-cinta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to think about, meditate on, think
over, think of, reflect about (with acc.); to reflect,
consider; to design, intend, destine.
<LEND>

<L>48728<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcintana<k2>saYcintana
{%Sañ-cintana, am,%}¦ n. the act of thinking about,
considering, reflecting.
<LEND>

<L>48729<pc>1050-b<k1>saYcintayat<k2>saYcintayat
{%Sañ-cintayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ thinking of, medi-
tating upon.
<LEND>
[Page1050-c+ 75]

<L>48730<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcintayitvA<k2>saYcintayitvA
{%Sañ-cintayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), ind. having
reflected, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48731<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcintita<k2>saYcintita
{%Sañ-cintita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thought about, delibe-
rated, weighed; designed, intended (for an office);
appointed.
<LEND>

<L>48732<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcintitavat<k2>saYcintitavat
{%Sañcintita-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has reflected,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>48733<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcintya<k2>saYcintya
{%Sañ-cintya,%}¦ ind. having reflected or considered,
being thoughtful, musing, pondering.
<LEND>

<L>48734<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcIvaraya<k2>saYcIvaraya
{#saYcIvaraya#}¦ {%sañ-cīvaraya,%} Nom. {%-cīvarayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to assume the dress of an ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>48735<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcud<k2>saYcud
{#saYcud#}¦ {%sañ-cud (sam-c˚),%} Caus. {%-codayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to impel, push on, incite, drive, shoot off;
to excite, inflame, arouse, animate, instigate, further;
to brandish, wield; to summon, challenge; to pro-
cure quickly, assist to obtain (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>48736<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcodita<k2>saYcodita
{%Sañ-codita, as, ā, am,%}¦ impelled, urged on, incited,
driven; ordered, commanded.
<LEND>

<L>48737<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcUrRaya<k2>saYcUrRaya
{#saYcUrRaya#}¦ {%sañ-cūrṇaya (sam-c˚),%} Nom. P.
{%-cūrṇayati, -yitum,%} to grind to powder, commi-
nute, pulverize.
<LEND>

<L>48738<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcUrRana<k2>saYcUrRana
{%Sañ-cūrṇana, am,%}¦ n. the act of grinding to pow-
der, comminution, crushing or breaking to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>48739<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcUrRita<k2>saYcUrRita
{%Sañ-cūrṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely pulverized,
comminuted; cut or broken to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>48740<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcUz<k2>saYcUz
{#saYcUz#}¦ {%sañ-cūṣ (sam-c˚),%} Pass. {%-cūṣyate,%}
to be in a state of great heat, boil up.
<LEND>

<L>48741<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcezw<k2>saYcezw
{#saYcezw#}¦ {%sañ-ceṣṭ (sam-c˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-ceṣṭate,%}
{%-ceṣṭitum,%} to be restless or disturbed; to exert one's
self, make effort, strive, act.
<LEND>

<L>48742<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcezwamAna<k2>saYcezwamAna
{%Sañ-ceṣṭamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being restless or
disturbed; making effort, striving.
<LEND>

<L>48743<pc>1050-c<k1>saYcyu<k2>saYcyu
{#saYcyu#}¦ {%sañ-cyu (sam-c˚),%} Caus. {%-cyāvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to fall off, strike off, knock off,
remove.
<LEND>

<L>48744<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCad<k2>saYCad<h>1
{#saYCad#} 1¦. {%sañ-chad%} ({%sam-ch˚;%} see rt. 1. {%chad%}),
cl. 10. P. {%-chādayati, -yitum,%} to cover over, en-
velop, conceal, hide, obscure; to put on (as a gar-
ment).
<LEND>

<L>48745<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCanna<k2>saYCanna
{%Sañ-channa, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely covered or en-
veloped, concealed, hidden, obscure; surrounded;
invested, clothed.
<LEND>

<L>48746<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCAdana<k2>saYCAdana
{%Sañ-chādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of covering or con-
cealing, obscuring.
<LEND>

<L>48747<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCAdya<k2>saYCAdya
{%Sañ-chādya,%}¦ ind. having covered over or enve-
loped, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48748<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCAdyamAna<k2>saYCAdyamAna
{%Sañ-chādyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being entirely
covered over or concealed.
<LEND>

<L>48749<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCad<k2>saYCad<h>2
{#saYCad#} 2¦. {%sañ-chad%} or {%sañ-chand%} ({%sam-ch˚;%}
see rt. 3. {%chad%}), Caus. {%-chadayati, -chandayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to gratify with anything (inst.), present, offer.
<LEND>

<L>48750<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCandyamAna<k2>saYCandyamAna
{%Sañ-chandyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being presented
or offered.
<LEND>

<L>48751<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCid<k2>saYCid
{#saYCid#}¦ {%sañ-chid (sam-ch˚),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-chinatti, -chintte, -chettum,%} to cut to pieces; to
cut off, hack off, chop off; to cut through, penetrate,
pierce, split; to cut away, destroy, remove, resolve
(a doubt &c.); to decide, settle, answer (a question
&c.): Pass. {%-chidyate,%} to be cut to pieces; to be
cut off, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48752<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCidya<k2>saYCidya
{%Sañ-chidya,%}¦ ind. having cut to pieces; having
cut away, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48753<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCidyat<k2>saYCidyat
{%Sañ-chidyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ mutually cutting off
or cutting to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>48754<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCidyamAna<k2>saYCidyamAna
{%Sañ-chidyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being cut to pieces,
being hacked.
<LEND>

<L>48755<pc>1050-c<k1>saYCinna<k2>saYCinna
{%Sañ-chinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut to pieces, cut off;
dissipated, removed.
<LEND>

<L>48756<pc>1050-c<k1>saYj<k2>saYj<h>1
{#saYj#} 1¦. {%sañj%} (= rts. {%sañc,%} 1. {%sajj%}), cl. 1.
P. {%sañjati,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>48757<pc>1050-c<k1>saYj<k2>saYj<h>2
{#saYj#} 2¦. {%sañj%} (sometimes written {%sajj,%}
which appears to be a form of the rt.
developed out of {%sajjate,%} ep. for Pass. {%sajyate%}), cl.
1. P. {%sajati%} (ep. also {%sajjati%}), {%sasañja%} (ep. also
{%sasajja%}), {%saṅkṣyati, asāṅkṣīt, saṅktum,%} to
[Page1051-a+ 76]
cling or adhere to, stick; to fasten: Pass. {%sajyate%}
(ep. also {%sajjate%}), to be attached, become attached
or connected, adhere, cling, stick: Caus. {%sañjayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%asasañjat,%} to cause to stick or cling
to; to cause to be connected or have intercourse
with: Desid. {%sisaṅkṣati:%} Intens. {%sāsajyate, sā-%}
{%saṅkti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σάττω, σαγή, σάγμα, σακτός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σάκτωρ,</lang> (probably) <lang n="greek">σάκκος, σάκτας.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>48758<pc>1051-a<k1>sakta<k2>sakta
{%Sakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ clung, stuck or attached to,
joined or connected with, in contact with, near at
hand, impending; addicted or devoted to, fond of,
intent on; diligent, attentive; belonging or related
to, concerning; hindered, impeded, ({%a-saktam,%} ind.
uninterruptedly.) {%—Sakta-vaira, as, ā, am,%} con-
stant in enmity.
<LEND>

<L>48759<pc>1051-a<k1>sakti<k2>sakti
{%Sakti, is,%}¦ f. clinging to, attachment, contact,
union, junction, cohesion, addiction to, devotion.
{%—Sakti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having attachment,
attached or addicted to, fond of.
<LEND>

<L>48760<pc>1051-a<k1>saNga<k2>saNga<h>2
2. {%saṅga, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. {%saṅ-ga%} see under {%saṅ-%}
{%gam%}), clinging to, adhering to, attachment, addiction
or devotion to, fondness, propensity for, worldly or
selfish attachment, affection, desire, wish, cupidity.
{%—Saṅga-rahita, as, ā, am,%} free from attachment,
indifferent, unworldly, stoical. {%—Saṅga-varjita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} free from worldly attachments or affections,
unwordly. {%—2. saṅga-vicyuti, is,%} f. separation from
wordly affection, dissolution of wordly attachments.
<LEND>

<L>48761<pc>1051-a<k1>saNgin<k2>saNgin<h>2
2. {%saṅgin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (for 1. see under {%saṅ-gam%}),
full of attachment or devotion, attached, devoted,
addicted to, fond of, intent on, connected with; full
of affection or desire, desirous; libidinous, lustful;
continuous, uninterrupted, (Kirāt. XIV. 59.)
<LEND>

<L>48762<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjana<k2>saYjana
{%Sañjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of clinging, adhering,
sticking.
<LEND>

<L>48763<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjatara<k2>saYjatara
{#saYjatara#}¦ {%sañjatara, am,%} n., N. of a city.
<LEND>

<L>48764<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjan<k2>saYjan
{#saYjan#}¦ {%sañ-jan (sam-j˚),%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate,%}
{%-janitum,%} to be born or produced together with;
to be born, arise, grow, be produced, come into
existence, take place, appear, happen; to become,
be; to elapse, pass (as time); to bring forth: Caus.
{%-janayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be born, bring forth,
generate, beget, produce, create, cause, form, make.
<LEND>

<L>48765<pc>1051-a<k1>saYja<k2>saYja
{%Sañ-ja, as,%}¦ m. ‘universal producer,’ epithet of
Brahmā; of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. a she-goat.
<LEND>

<L>48766<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjanana<k2>saYjanana
{%Sañ-janana, am,%}¦ n. the act of begetting, causing,
producing.
<LEND>

<L>48767<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjanayat<k2>saYjanayat
{%Sañ-janayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ begetting, producing,
causing.
<LEND>

<L>48768<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjanita<k2>saYjanita
{%Sañ-janita, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced, caused, created.
<LEND>

<L>48769<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjAta<k2>saYjAta
{%Sañ-jāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ born, produced, grown, ap-
peared, arisen, become, aroused (often at the begin-
ning of comps. in the sense ‘becoming,’ ‘growing,’
‘grown’); elapsed, passed (as time). {%—Sañjāta-%}
{%kopa, as, ā, am,%} growing angry, becoming enraged.
{%—Sañjāta-kautuka, as, ā, am,%} having the curiosity
roused, becoming curious. {%—Sañjāta-nirveda, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} grown despondent. {%—Sañjāta-viśrambha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having confidence excited, becoming confi-
dent. {%—Sañjāterṣya (˚ta-īr˚), as, ā, am,%} becom-
ing envious.
<LEND>

<L>48770<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjap<k2>saYjap
{#saYjap#}¦ {%sañ-jap (sam-j˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-japati,%}
{%-japitum,%} to whisper or talk about, speak about, tell
of, report, communicate.
<LEND>

<L>48771<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjaya<k2>saYjaya
{#saYjaya#}¦ {%sañ-jaya.%} See under {%sañ-ji,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>48772<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjarBurARa<k2>saYjarBurARa
{#saYjarBurARa#}¦ {%sañ-jarbhurāṇa.%} See under {%sam-%}
{%bhur.%}
<LEND>

<L>48773<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjalp<k2>saYjalp
{#saYjalp#}¦ {%sañ-jalp (sam-j˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-jalpati,%}
{%-jalpitum,%} to speak or talk together, converse, speak,
chatter, chat.
<LEND>

<L>48774<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjalpa<k2>saYjalpa
{%Sañ-jalpa, as,%}¦ m. talking together, conversation;
confused discourse, chattering, uproar, confusion.
<LEND>

<L>48775<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjalpat<k2>saYjalpat
{%Sañ-jalpat, an, antī, at,%}¦ conversing, speaking;
chattering, babbling; talking boldly.
<LEND>

<L>48776<pc>1051-a<k1>saYjalpamAna<k2>saYjalpamAna
{%Sañ-jalpamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking together,
conversing.
<LEND>
[Page1051-b+ 74]

<L>48777<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjalpita<k2>saYjalpita
{%Sañ-jalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken together, spoken,
uttered; ({%am%}), n. spoken words, talk.
<LEND>

<L>48778<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjavana<k2>saYjavana
{#saYjavana#}¦ {%sañ-javana, am,%} n. (said to be fr.
rt. {%ju%} with {%sam;%} probably for {%saṃ-yavana,%} fr. rt.
2. {%yu%}), a group of four houses, a quadrangle; [cf.
{%saṃ-yamana, sañ-jīvana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48779<pc>1051-b<k1>saYji<k2>saYji
{#saYji#}¦ {%sañ-ji (sam-ji),%} cl. 1. P. {%-jayati, -je-%}
{%tum,%} to conquer together; to gain or acquire (by
conquest &c.), conquer entirely; to obtain or acquire
together, win.
<LEND>

<L>48780<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjaya<k2>saYjaya
{%Sañ-jaya, as,%}¦ m., N. of the charioteer of king
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of Su-pārśva; of a son of
Prati-kṣatra; of a son of Ranañ-jaya.
<LEND>

<L>48781<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjayat<k2>saYjayat
{%Sañ-jayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ conquering, victorious.
<LEND>

<L>48782<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjigIvas<k2>saYjigIvas
{%Sañ-jigīvas, ān,%}¦ m., Ved. one who has com-
pletely conquered, victorious.
<LEND>

<L>48783<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjit<k2>saYjit
{%Sañ-jit, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. completely conquering, win-
ning.
<LEND>

<L>48784<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjita<k2>saYjita
{%Sañ-jita, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely conquered, com-
pletely overcome, vanquished.
<LEND>

<L>48785<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjiti<k2>saYjiti
{%Sañ-jiti, is,%}¦ f. complete victory.
<LEND>

<L>48786<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjihAna<k2>saYjihAna
{#saYjihAna#}¦ {%sañ-jihāna.%} See under {%saṃ-hā.%}
<LEND>

<L>48787<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjIv<k2>saYjIv
{#saYjIv#}¦ {%sañ-jīv (sam-j˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-jīvati%}
(ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%-jīvitum,%} to live with or together;
to live, exist, live by any business or occupation
(with inst.); to revive, be restored to life: Caus.
{%-jīvayati, -yitum,%} to cause to live, make alive,
vivify, bring to life, revive, re-animate, animate,
enliven; to maintain, nourish.
<LEND>

<L>48788<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjijIvayizu<k2>saYjijIvayizu
{%Sañ-jijīvayiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to bring to
life or enliven.
<LEND>

<L>48789<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjIva<k2>saYjIva
{%Sañ-jīva, as, ā, am,%}¦ living together, living.
<LEND>

<L>48790<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjIvaka<k2>saYjIvaka
{%Sañ-jīvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ living together; animat-
ing; ({%as%}), m., N. of a bull (in the Hitopadeśa).
<LEND>

<L>48791<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjIvat<k2>saYjIvat
{%Sañ-jīvat, an, antī, at,%}¦ living together, living.
<LEND>

<L>48792<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjIvana<k2>saYjIvana
{%Sañ-jīvana, am,%}¦ n. the act of living together;
bringing to life, animating, re-animating, life-restor-
ing; a cluster of four houses, a quadrangle [cf. {%sañ-%}
{%javana%}]; a particular hell, (one of the twenty-one
kinds mentioned in Manu IV. 89); ({%ī%}), f. making
alive, causing life; epithet of food; a kind of elixir;
N. of Malli-nātha's commentaries on the Kumāra-
sambhava, Megha-dūta, and Raghu-vaṃśa.
<LEND>

<L>48793<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjIvamAna<k2>saYjIvamAna
{%Sañ-jīvamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ coming to life, recover-
ing, reviving.
<LEND>

<L>48794<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjIvayat<k2>saYjIvayat
{%Sañ-jīvayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making alive, vivify-
ing, animating; restoring to life.
<LEND>

<L>48795<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjIvita<k2>saYjIvita
{%Sañjīvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ vivified, enlivened, animated.
<LEND>

<L>48796<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjIvin<k2>saYjIvin
{%Sañ-jīvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ rendering alive, enlivening,
re-animating.
<LEND>

<L>48797<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjIvya<k2>saYjIvya
{%Sañ-jīvya,%}¦ ind. having lived together; having lived.
<LEND>

<L>48798<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjuGukzA<k2>saYjuGukzA
{#saYjuGukzA#}¦ {%sañ-jughukṣā.%} See under {%saṅ-%}
{%guh.%}
<LEND>

<L>48799<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjuzwa<k2>saYjuzwa
{#saYjuzwa#}¦ {%sañ-juṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%juṣ%}
with {%sam%}), visited, frequented, inhabited, filled with.
<LEND>

<L>48800<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjUrv<k2>saYjUrv
{#saYjUrv#}¦ {%sañ-jūrv%} ({%sam-j˚;%} connected with
{%sañ-jvar%}), cl. 1. P. {%-jūrvati, -jūrvitum,%} Ved. to
burn up, consume (by fire).
<LEND>

<L>48801<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjfmB<k2>saYjfmB
{#saYjfmB#}¦ {%sañ-jṛmbh (sam-j˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-jṛm-%}
{%bhate, -jṛmbhitum,%} to gape open, be unfolded,
become displayed, appear.
<LEND>

<L>48802<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjF<k2>saYjF
{#saYjF#}¦ {%sañ-jṝ (sam-jṝ,%} see rt. 3. {%jṝ;%} cf. rt.
1. {%gṛ%}), cl. 1. A. {%-jarate,%} &c., Ved. to sound forth
praise, to extol, (Sāy. {%sañjareta = samvardhayatu,%}
Ṛg-veda IV. 3, 15; {%sañjaratām = stautu,%} Ṛg-
veda IV. 4, 8.)
<LEND>

<L>48803<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjYa<k2>saYjYa<h>1
{#saYjYa#} 1¦. {%sañ-jña, as, ā, um%} (see 1. {%jña;%} cf.
1. {%pra-jña%}), knock-kneed.
<LEND>

<L>48804<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjYu<k2>saYjYu
{%Sañ-jñu, us, us, u, = saṃhāta-jānu,%}¦ knock-
kneed.
<LEND>

<L>48805<pc>1051-b<k1>saYjYA<k2>saYjYA
{#saYjYA#}¦ {%sañ-jñā (sam-j˚),%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to be of the same mind, agree
together, come to a mutual understanding, live in
harmony with (with inst. or acc., Pāṇ. II. 3, 22),
[Page1051-c+ 81]
understand one another (A.); to be conscious, be
aware, know, understand, comprehend; to acknow-
ledge, recognise, own (generally A.); to acknowledge
or claim as one's own, take possession of (P.); to
direct, appoint, assign, intend (for any purpose),
destine (usually A.); to think of, recollect sorrow-
fully (P., with acc. or gen., Pāṇ. 1. 3, 46, cf. Pāṇ.
II. 3, 52); to watch for: Caus. {%-jñapayati, -jñā-%}
{%payati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to be of one mind or
agree together; to appease, gratify, console, satisfy;
to cause to acquiesce or agree in, pacify, quiet (espe-
cially any animal destined for sacrifice which ought
not to be led forcibly but made to resign itself); to
cause to be conscious, animate; to make intelligible,
cause to be understood or known, cause to under-
stand, apprise, cause to recognise; to make a sign
to any one, to communicate or make anything
known by signs; to command, enjoin, instruct.
<LEND>

<L>48806<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYa<k2>saYjYa<h>2
2. {%sañ-jña, as, ā, am,%}¦ named, called, designated
(fr. the fem. {%sañ-jñā%} below, used at the end of adj.
comps., cf. {%samāsa-s˚%}); being conscious; ({%ā%}), f.
sense, consciousness, becoming aware of anything,
knowledge, understanding, intellect, thought, mind,
right mind; sign, token, symbol, gesture, gesticula-
tion; name, appellation, title, designation, term;
(in grammar) the name of anything thought of as
standing by itself, any name or noun having a special
meaning, (the expression {%sañjñāyām%} therefore de-
notes the use of a word in some peculiar sense
rather than in its strictly etymological meaning; for
example, as a proper name; and a derived or com-
pounded word can only be called Sañjñā when the
idea it expresses is not clearly rendered by analysis);
the technical name of any affix, &c. (e. g. the tech-
nical expressions {%gha, ghu%}); N. of the Gāyatrī or
most sacred verse of the Veda, (see {%gāyatrī%}); N.
of a daughter of Viśva-karman and wife of the Sun;
({%am%}), n. a yellow fragrant wood, yellow sanders
{%(= pīta-kāṣṭha)%}. {%—Sañjñā-tantra, am,%} n., N. of
an astronomical work by Nīla-kaṇṭha. {%—Sañjñādhi-%}
{%kāra (˚ñā-adh˚), as,%} m. (in Pāṇini) a heading or
presiding rule which gives a particular name to the
rules which fall under it and influences them all.
{%—Sañjñā-prakaraṇa, am,%} n. explanation of the
grammatical Sañjñās. {%—Sañjñārtham (˚ñā-ar˚),%}
ind. for a sign. {%—Sañjñā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
consciousness, become sensible, revived, recovered;
having a name or denomination. {%—Sañjñā-viṣaya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having a name for subject,’ an epithet,
attributive. {%—Sañjñā-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of Sañjñā,’
Saturn.
<LEND>

<L>48807<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjAnAna<k2>saYjAnAna
{%Sañjānāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being of the same mind,
agreeing; knowing, observing, understanding, watch-
ing, waiting, who or what keeps watch.
<LEND>

<L>48808<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYaka<k2>saYjYaka
{%Sañ-jñaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ having a name, called,
named (often at the end of comps.; cf. {%ravi-s%}).
<LEND>

<L>48809<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYapat<k2>saYjYapat
{%Sañ-jñapat, an, antī, at%}¦ (ep. for {%sañjñapayat%}),
instructing, commanding.
<LEND>

<L>48810<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYapana<k2>saYjYapana
{%Sañ-jñapana, am,%}¦ n. the act of killing, sacrificing
(an animal &c.).
<LEND>

<L>48811<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYapita<k2>saYjYapita
{%Sañ-jñapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sacrificed, killed.
<LEND>

<L>48812<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYapta<k2>saYjYapta
{%Sañ-jñapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ apprised; killed, suffocated,
sacrificed.
<LEND>

<L>48813<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYapti<k2>saYjYapti
{%Sañ-jñapti, is,%}¦ f. apprising, informing; killing,
slaying.
<LEND>

<L>48814<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYA<k2>saYjYA
{%Sañ-jñā,%}¦ f. See above under 2. {%sañ-jña.%}
<LEND>

<L>48815<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYAta<k2>saYjYAta
{%Sañ-jñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ known, understood, des-
tined or intended for.
<LEND>

<L>48816<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYAna<k2>saYjYAna
{%Sañ-jñāna, am,%}¦ n. knowing, understanding,
knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>48817<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYApana<k2>saYjYApana
{%Sañ-jñāpana, am,%}¦ n. apprising, informing; teach-
ing; killing, slaughter.
<LEND>

<L>48818<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYApita<k2>saYjYApita
{%Sañ-jñāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ killed, suffocated (as a
victim).
<LEND>

<L>48819<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYApya<k2>saYjYApya
{%Sañ-jñāpya,%}¦ ind. having made known by signs;
having killed.
<LEND>

<L>48820<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYita<k2>saYjYita
{%Sañjñita, as, ā, am,%}¦ named, called, designated,
denominated, termed.
<LEND>

<L>48821<pc>1051-c<k1>saYjYin<k2>saYjYin
{%Sañjñin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a name, named, termed,
that which receives a name or has a term given to
it in grammar.
<LEND>
[Page1052-a+ 70]

<L>48822<pc>1052-a<k1>saYjYu<k2>saYjYu
{#saYjYu#}¦ {%sañ-jñu.%} See 1. {%sañ-jña,%} p. 1051,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>48823<pc>1052-a<k1>saYjvar<k2>saYjvar
{#saYjvar#}¦ {%sañ-jvar%} ({%sam-j˚;%} cf. {%sañ-jūrv, sañ-%}
{%jval%}), cl. 1. P. {%-jvarati, -jvaritum,%} to be in great
fever or heat, be greatly depressed or grieved, be
afflicted or sorrowful, grieve.
<LEND>

<L>48824<pc>1052-a<k1>saYjvara<k2>saYjvara
{%Sañ-jvara, as,%}¦ m. great heat or fever; heat, the
heat of fire, burning, scorching, a burn; the heat of
anger, indignation. {%—Sañjvara-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
full of heat or fever, hot. {%—Sañjvarātura (˚ra-āt˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} afflicted or affected with fever, fevered.
<LEND>

<L>48825<pc>1052-a<k1>saYjvArin<k2>saYjvArin
{%Sañ-jvārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ fevered, diseased, feverish.
<LEND>

<L>48826<pc>1052-a<k1>saYjval<k2>saYjval
{#saYjval#}¦ {%sañ-jval (sam-j˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-jvalati,%}
{%-jvalitum,%} to blaze up, burn brightly, flame: Caus.
{%-jvālayati, -yitum,%} to cause to blaze up or flame,
light up, illuminate, kindle, light; to inflame.
<LEND>

<L>48827<pc>1052-a<k1>saYjvalat<k2>saYjvalat
{%Sañ-jvalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ blazing, flaming, burning.
<LEND>

<L>48828<pc>1052-a<k1>saYjvAlya<k2>saYjvAlya
{%Sañ-jvālya,%}¦ ind. having lighted, having kindled
(a fire &c.).
<LEND>

<L>48829<pc>1052-a<k1>saw<k2>saw
{#saw#}¦ {%saṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%saṭati, sasāṭa, saṭitum,%}
to be a part or portion; cl. 10. P. {%sāṭa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} (not to be distinguished fr. rt. {%sāṭ%}),
to manifest, show.
<LEND>

<L>48830<pc>1052-a<k1>sawa<k2>sawa
{#sawa#}¦ {%saṭa, am, ā,%} n. f. ({%= jaṭā, śaṭā;%} ac-
cording to some also {%as,%} m.), an ascetic's matted or
clotted hair, the hair collected into a loose braid and
twisted forwards upon the forehead, a braid of hair
(in general); the mane (of a lion &c.); the bristles
(of a boar); a crest, (in these last three senses usually
{%ā,%} f.) {%—Saṭāṅka (˚ṭā-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘mane-marked,’
a lion. {%—Saṭā-pāṭala, as,%} m. the red mane (of a
lion).
<LEND>

<L>48831<pc>1052-a<k1>sawaNkAra<k2>sawaNkAra
{#sawaNkAra#}¦ {%sa-ṭaṅkāra, as, ā, am,%} having
notoriety or fame, famous.
<LEND>

<L>48832<pc>1052-a<k1>sawi<k2>sawi
{#sawi#}¦ {%saṭi, is,%} f. ({%= śaṭi%}), the plant called
zedoary or a kind of Curcuma.
<LEND>

<L>48833<pc>1052-a<k1>sawikA<k2>sawikA
{%Saṭikā,%}¦ f. {%= saṭi, saṭī.%}
<LEND>

<L>48834<pc>1052-a<k1>sawI<k2>sawI
{%Saṭī,%}¦ f. {%= saṭi%} above; a kind of perfume.
<LEND>

<L>48835<pc>1052-a<k1>sawIka<k2>sawIka
{#sawIka#}¦ {%sa-ṭīka, as, ā, am,%} accompanied by a
comment or exposition, explained by a commentary.
<LEND>

<L>48836<pc>1052-a<k1>saww<k2>saww
{#saww#}¦ {%saṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%saṭṭayati, -yitum,%} to
hurt, injure, kill; to be strong or powerful;
to give; to take; to dwell, inhabit.
<LEND>

<L>48837<pc>1052-a<k1>sawwaka<k2>sawwaka
{#sawwaka#}¦ {%saṭṭaka, am,%} n. a sort of minor
drama (in Prākṛt).
<LEND>

<L>48838<pc>1052-a<k1>sawvA<k2>sawvA
{#sawvA#}¦ {%saṭvā,%} f. a kind of bird; a musical
instrument ({%= vādya%}).
<LEND>

<L>48839<pc>1052-a<k1>saW<k2>saW
{#saW#}¦ {%saṭh%} (= rts. {%svaṭh,%} 3. {%śaṭh, śvaṭh%}),
cl. 10. P. {%sāṭhayati, -yitum,%} to finish,
complete, adorn; to leave unfinished; to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>48840<pc>1052-a<k1>saWI<k2>saWI
{#saWI#}¦ {%saṭhī,%} f. the plant zedoary; [cf. {%saṭī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48841<pc>1052-a<k1>saRasUtra<k2>saRasUtra
{#saRasUtra#}¦ {%saṇa-sūtra, am,%} n. (for {%śaṇa-sūtra%}),
hempen cord or thread, packthread.
<LEND>

<L>48842<pc>1052-a<k1>saRahAza<k2>saRahAza
{#saRahAza#}¦ {%saṇahāṣa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>48843<pc>1052-a<k1>saRqa<k2>saRqa
{#saRqa#}¦ {%saṇḍa, as,%} m. ({%= śaṇḍa, ṣaṇḍa%}), a
eunuch.
<LEND>

<L>48844<pc>1052-a<k1>saRqiSa<k2>saRqiSa
{#saRqiSa#}¦ {%saṇḍiśa, as,%} m. ({%= san-daṃśa%}), a
pair of tongs or nippers.
<LEND>

<L>48845<pc>1052-a<k1>saRqI<k2>saRqI
{#saRqI#}¦ {%saṇ-ḍī (sam-ḍī),%} cl. 1. 4. A. {%-ḍayate,%}
{%-ḍīyate, -ḍayitum,%} to fly together.
<LEND>

<L>48846<pc>1052-a<k1>saRqIna<k2>saRqIna
{%Saṇ-ḍīna, am,%}¦ n. flying together, one of the
modes of flight attributed to birds; alighting from a
flight, perching (as a bird).
<LEND>

<L>48847<pc>1052-a<k1>sat<k2>sat
{#sat#}¦ {%sat, an, atī, at%} (Pres. part. of rt. 1. {%as%}),
being, existing; real, essential, true; good, virtuous;
right, proper; excellent, best; handsome, beautiful;
venerable, respectable; wise, learned; firm, steady;
({%ī%}), f. a virtuous wife, &c., (see p. 1053); ({%sat%}), n.
that which really is, entity or existence, essence, the
true being, the really existent, the self-existent or
[Page1052-b+ 81]
Universal Spirit, Brahma; that which is good or real
or true, reality, truth; water, (in Naigh. 1. 12. {%sat%}
is enumerated among the {%udaka-nāmāni;%} cf. {%sa-%}
{%tīna%}); ({%sat%}), ind. well, rightly, fitly; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὤν</lang>
(Ion. <lang n="greek">ἐών</lang> for <lang n="greek">ἐσών</lang>); Lat. <nsi>sens, sent-is,</nsi> in <nsi>prœ-sens,</nsi>
<nsi>ab-sens;</nsi> Lith. Nom. m. <nsi>esañs,</nsi> f. <nsi>esanti.</nsi>] {%—Sac-%}
{%carita%} or {%sac-caritra, am,%} n. good conduct, good
behaviour; ({%as, ā, am%}), well-conducted, well-behaved,
virtuous, honest, upright. {%—Saccarita-mīmāṃsā,%} f.,
N. of a work by Vidyā-nivāsa-bhaṭṭācārya. {%—Sac-%}
{%cit, t,%} n. ‘existence and thought,’ epithet of Brahma
or the Supreme Spirit. {%—Sac-cid-aṃśa, as,%} m. a
portion of existence and thought. {%—Sac-cid-ātman,%}
{%ā,%} m. the soul which consists of entity (or essence)
and thought. {%—Sac-cid-ānanda, am,%} n. ‘existence
(or entity), thought (or knowledge), and joy,’ epithet
of Brahma or the Supreme Spirit; of Viṣṇu. {%—Sac-%}
{%cid-ānanda-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of existence,
thought, and joy. {%—Saccidānanda-stotra, am,%} n.,
N. of a hymn addressed to Gaṇeśa (extracted from the
Sanatkumāra-saṃhitā). {%—Sac-chīla (sat-śī˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} of a virtuous disposition, benevolent. {%—Sac-%}
{%chūdra (sat-śū˚), as,%} m. a good Śūdra, a Śūdra
who has gone through the ceremonies customary in
some places even for men of the lower caste. {%—2. saj-%}
{%jana, as, ā, am%} (for 1. {%sajjana%} see under rt. 2. {%sajj,%}
p. 1049), well-born, of good family, respectable,
reputable, virtuous, good; ({%as%}), m. a good man,
virtuous man; a proper N. {%—Sajjana-garhita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} despised by the virtuous. {%—Sajjana-val-%}
{%labha,%} ‘friend of the good,’ N. of a work. {%—Saj-%}
{%janeṣṭa (˚na-iṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} desired or chosen
by the good. {%—Sajjanaikavasati (˚na-ek˚), is, is,%}
{%i,%} residing only in the good. {%—Satī-tā,%} &c., see
under {%satī,%} p. 1055. {%—Sat-kadamba, as,%} m. ‘good
Kadamba,’ a species of Kadamba, (Nauclea Cordi-
folia.) {%—Sat-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} acting well; treat-
ing well or kindly; ({%tā%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Sat-karman, a,%} n. a good or virtuous act, pious
deed; virtue, piety; hospitality; funeral obsequies;
expiation. {%—Sat-kavi-miśra, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
{%—Sat-kāñcanāra, as,%} m. ‘good mountain ebony,’
a sort of ebony {%(= rakta-kāñcana)%}. {%—Sat-kāṇḍa,%}
{%as,%} m. a hawk, kite. {%—Sat-kāra, as,%} m. kind action,
kind treatment, hospitable treatment or reception,
hospitality; reverence, respect; care, attention; a
meal; a festival, religious observance. {%—Satkārārha%}
{%(˚ra-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy of hospitable treatment.
{%—Sat-kula, am,%} n. a good family, noble family.
{%—Sat-kulīna, as, ā, am,%} belonging to a good
family, born of a noble family, well-born, nobly
descended. {%—Satkulodbhava (˚la-ud˚), as, ā, am,%}
sprung from a noble family. {%—Sat-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A.
{%-karoti, -kurute,%} &c., to do well or rightly, treat
well or kindly, treat with respect, receive hospitably,
welcome; to honour, worship; to adorn: Caus.
{%-kārayati,%} &c., {%-yitum,%} to cause to be treated with
respect or reverence, show reverence, pay respect.
{%—Sat-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done well, acted rightly or
properly; treated with respect or hospitality; respected,
revered, honoured; worshipped, adored, welcomed,
saluted; entertained; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva;
({%am%}), n. virtue; respect; hospitality. {%—Sat-kṛti,%}
{%is,%} f. doing good, acting properly, virtue, morality;
treating with respect, hospitality. {%—Sat-kṛtya,%} ind.
having treated with respect, &c., having hospitably
entertained. {%—Sat-kriyā,%} f. a good action, virtuous
action, doing good, charity, virtue; respectful treat-
ment, salutation, welcome, courtesy, worship, homage,
hospitality; any purificatory ceremony; funeral or
obsequial ceremonies. {%—Sat-tama, as, ā, am,%} very
good or right; most virtuous; excellent, best; very
venerable or respectable. {%—Sat-tā,%} f. existence, entity,
being, reality; a particular Jāti (in phil.); goodness,
excellence, see {%sat-tva%} below. {%—Sattā-mātra, am,%}
n. mere entity or existence. {%—Sattā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
endowed with existence, possessing reality. {%—Sattā-%}
{%vāpya (˚tā-av˚), as, ā, am,%} included in (the notion
of) existence. {%—Sat-tva, am,%} n. being, existence,
({%īśvara-sattva,%} the existence of a Supreme Being),
entity, essence, nature, true essence, life, the principle
[Page1052-c+ 81]
of being, breath, spirit, mind, sense, consciousness;
an embryo; substance, thing, wealth; elementary
substance (as earth, air, fire, &c.); anything of which
a property may be predicated; any living or sentient
being, animal, beast, evil being, demon, spirit, ghost,
goblin, monster, (in these senses also {%as,%} m.); a
substantive, noun; goodness, virtue, excellence; truth,
certainty, reality; strength, energy, vigour, power,
courage, self-command, sound sense, good sense,
wisdom; the quality of purity or goodness (regarded
in philosophy as the highest of the three Guṇas
which are supposed to constitute the external world,
the other two being {%rajas%} and {%tamas,%} see {%guṇa;%}
the quality of {%sattva%} renders a person in whom it
predominates chaste, true, honest, wise, &c., and a
thing pure, clean, &c.); any natural property, quality,
characteristic, disposition; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Sattva-kaṣāya, as,%} m. one of the
signs of decay (with Buddhists, see {%kaṣāya%}). {%—Sat-%}
{%tva-guṇa, as,%} m. the quality of purity or goodness,
(see above.) {%—Sattvaguṇin, ī, inī, i,%} having the
above quality predominant. {%—Sattva-tā,%} f. purity,
goodness, the existence of the Sattva-guṇa. {%—Sattva-%}
{%pradhāna, as, ā, am,%} having the quality of good-
ness predominant. {%—Sattvam-ejaya, as, ā, am,%} ter-
rifying living beings, making animals tremble. {%—Sat-%}
{%tva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} endowed with life, living,
existent, a living being; endowed with or possessed
of the true essence; endowed with strength, mag-
nanimous, endowed with the quality of goodness,
pure, virtuous. {%—Sattva-viplava, as,%} m. loss of con-
sciousness. {%—Sattva-vihita, as, ā, am,%} effected or
caused by nature, natural; caused by goodness;
virtuous, upright. {%—Sattva-vṛtti, is,%} f. the con-
dition or quality of goodness, &c. {%—Sattva-śīla, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of a virtuous disposition, disposed to what is
right and good. {%—Sattva-saṃśuddhi, is,%} f. purity
of nature or disposition. {%—Sattva-samāviṣṭa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} filled or thoroughly penetrated by the
quality of goodness. {%—Sattva-sampanna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} endowed with the quality of goodness, good,
excellent; equable, even-minded. {%—Sattva-sam-%}
{%plava, as,%} m. universal destruction of beings; loss
of vigour. {%—Sattva-sāra, as,%} m. essence of strength;
a most powerful person. {%—Sattva-stha, as, ā, am,%}
being in the nature (of anything); inherent in
animals; animate; being in the quality of good-
ness, excellent, holy, pure. {%—Sattvānurūpa (˚va-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} according to nature, in conformity
with natural character. {%—Sattvotsāha (˚va-ut˚), as,%}
m. natural energy; ({%au%}), m. du. courage and energy.
{%—Sattvotsāha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} endowed with
courage and energy. {%—Sattvodrikta (˚va-ud˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one in whom the quality of goodness pre-
dominates. {%—Sattvodreka (˚va-ud˚), as,%} m. excess
or predominance of the quality of goodness, super-
abundance of energy or wisdom. {%—Sat-pati, is,%} m.,
Ved. a good lord; the lord of the good, lord of real
men, lord of heroes; epithet of Indra. {%—Sat-pattra,%}
{%am,%} n. the new leaf of a water-lily. {%—Sat-patha,%}
{%as,%} m. a good road; good course of life, correct or
virtuous conduct; orthodox doctrine. {%—Sat-pari-%}
{%graha, as,%} m. acceptance (of gifts) from a proper
person. {%—Sat-paśu, us,%} m. a good or suitable animal,
a victim fit for a sacrifice. {%—Sat-pātra, am,%} n. a
proper object of presents or honours, a worthy or
virtuous person. {%—Satpātra-varṣa, as,%} m. raining
down or bestowing favours on worthy objects, judi-
cious liberality. {%—Satpātra-varṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} bounti-
ful to worthy objects. {%—Sat-putra, as,%} m. a virtuous
son; a son who performs all the prescribed rites in
honour of his ancestors. {%—Sat-puruṣa, as,%} m. a
good or virtuous man, worthy man. {%—Sat-puṣpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having good flowers. {%—Sat-pratipakṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. (in logic) a counterbalanced reason or one
along with which there exists another equally good
on the opposite side (as sound is eternal because it
is audible, sound is non-eternal because it is a pro-
duct); contrariety of argument, existence of oppo-
site premises proving the existence or non-existence
of a thing. {%—Satpratipakṣi-tā,%} f. the condition of
[Page1053-a+ 81]
containing two opposite sets of premises. {%—Satpra-%}
{%tipakṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} containing opposite reasons or
arguments. {%—Sat-phala, as, ā, am,%} having good
fruit; ({%as%}), m. the pomegranate or any tree produc-
ing good fruit. {%—Sat-phalin, ī, inī, i,%} producing
good fruits. {%—Sat-saṃsarga, as,%} m. association
with the good, the society of the good. {%—Sat-saṅga,%}
{%as,%} m. association with the good. {%—Sat-sannidhāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the proximity of the good, association or in-
tercourse with the good or wise. {%—Sat-samāgama,%}
{%as,%} m. association with the good. {%—Sat-sampra-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. right application. {%—Sat-sahāya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having good or virtuous friends. {%—Sat-sāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having good sap or essence; ({%as%}), m. a
kind of tree; a painter; a poet. {%—Sat-sukhānu-%}
{%bhava (˚kha-an˚), as,%} m. fruition of real happiness;
N. of a short treatise on Vedānta subjects by Icchā-
rāma-svāmin. {%—Sad-añjana, am,%} n. good colly-
rium; calx of brass. {%—Sad-aśva, as,%} m. a good
horse; ‘having a good horse,’ N. of a son of Sa-
mara. {%—Sad-aśva-vat,%} ind. like a good horse.
{%—Sad-asat, an, atī, at,%} being and not being,
existent and non-existent, real and unreal, true and
false, perceptible and non-perceptible; good and bad,
virtuous and wicked; ({%atī%}), n. du. existence and
non-existence, entity and non-entity, truth and false-
hood, good and evil. {%—Sad-asad-ātmaka, as, ī,%}
{%am,%} having the nature of entity and non-entity,
consisting of existent and non-existent, real and un-
real, existing everywhere essentially though not ob-
viously. {%—Sad-asad-viveka, as,%} m. discrimination
between true and false or between good and bad.
{%—Sad-asad-vyakti-hetu, us,%} m. the cause of the
discrimination between good and bad or between
true and false. {%—Sad-asthi-mālā,%} f. ‘good necklace
of bones,’ N. of a commentary by Vaidya-nātha on
the Laghu-śabdendu-śekhara. {%—Sad-ācāra, as,%} m.
moral or virtuous conduct, good manners, approved
usage, traditionary observance, immemorial custom
(especially as preserved in the land lying between
the Sarasvatī and Dṛṣadvatī rivers, Manu II. 18).
{%—Sadācāra-candrodaya (˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘moon-
rise of good manners,’ N. of a work. {%—Sadācāra-%}
{%prakaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a short treatise on the
duties of ascetics by Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Sadācāra-vat,%}
{%ān,%} m. one who has or observes approved usages.
{%—Sad-ātman, ā, ā, a,%} being of a good essence or
nature, good, virtuous. {%—1. sad-āśrita, as, ā, am,%}
(for 2. {%sadāśrita%} see under {%sadā%}), having recourse
or attaching one's self to the virtuous, belonging to the
good, virtuous. {%—Sad-uttara, am,%} n. a proper answer,
good reply. {%—Sad-gati, is,%} f. good or happy state,
felicity, fortune, good conduct. {%—Sad-guṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having good qualities, good, pure, virtuous,
excellent, eminent. {%—Sad-dhana, am,%} n. good
wealth, property. {%—Saddhetu, us,%} m. (i. e. {%sat-he˚%}),
the existence of cause and effect. {%—Sad-bhāva, as,%}
m. the quality of being, actual existence, reality,
being, entity; the quality of goodness; good nature
or disposition; goodness, amiability, kindly feeling.
{%—Sadbhāva-śrī, īs,%} f., N. of a goddess. {%—Sad-bhūta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being good, who or what is real or true.
{%—Sad-yuvatī,%} f. a good young woman, virtuous
maiden. {%—Sad-vaṃśa, as, ā, am,%} of a good family
or race, of high birth. {%—Sad-vacas, as,%} n. agree-
able speech. {%—Sad-vatī,%} f., N. of a daughter of
Pulastya and wife of Agni. {%—Sad-vasatha, as,%} m.
a village. {%—Sad-vastu, u,%} n. an excellent work.
{%—Sad-vādita, as, ā, am,%} well-spoken. {%—Sad-%}
{%vigarhita, as, ā, am,%} censured by the good,
blamed by the benevolent. {%—Sad-vidyā,%} f. good
learning. {%—Sad-viyoga, as,%} m. separation from the
good. {%—Sad-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} well-behaved, well-
conducted, amiable; virtuous, moral; well-rounded,
beautifully circular; ({%am%}), n. good conduct, virtuous
conduct, amiable character or disposition. {%—Sad-%}
{%vṛttānta, as, ā, am,%} having good or beautiful
stories. {%—Sad-vṛtti, is,%} f. good course of conduct,
good state. {%—Sadvṛtti-bhāj, k, k, k%} or {%sadvṛtti-%}
{%viśiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} possessing good habits, having
a good character. {%—San-nimitta, am,%} n. a good
[Page1053-b+ 81]
cause; the cause of the good, ({%san-nimitte,%} in a
good cause; for the sake of the good.) {%—San-ni-%}
{%sarga, as,%} m. good nature, kindness. {%—San-mā-%}
{%tura, as,%} m. ‘having a good mother,’ the son of a
virtuous mother. {%—San-mātra, as,%} m. ‘consisting
of mere existence,’ epithet of Ātman. {%—San-māna,%}
{%am,%} n. respect for the good; the respect or esteem
of the good. {%—San-mārga, as,%} m. a virtuous
way, good or virtuous conduct. {%—Sanmārgālokana%}
{%(˚ga-āl˚), am,%} n. the seeing or following of good
paths (of morality &c.). {%—San-mitra, am,%} n. a
good friend, real or faithful friend.
<LEND>

<L>48848<pc>1053-b<k1>satI<k2>satI
{%Satī,%}¦ f. (fem. of {%sat%}), a virtuous wife (especially
applied in later use to the Suttee or faithful wife who
burns herself with her husband's corpse); a female
ascetic; N. of the goddess Durgā or Umā (some-
times described as Truth personified or as daughter
of Dakṣa and wife of Bhava [Śiva], and sometimes
represented as putting an end to herself by Yoga, or
at a later period destroying herself on the funeral
pyre of her husband; also represented as one of
the wives of Aṅgiras); N. of the mother of Nāgeśa;
a fragrant earth (commonly called Surāt earth); a
species of the Prati-ṣṭhā metre. {%—Satī-tā,%} f. or
{%satī-tva, am,%} n. virtuousness, purity, chastity, fidelity
(especially as evinced by ascending the husband's
funeral pile). {%—Satī-deha-tyāga, as,%} m. ‘Satī's aban-
donment of the body,’ N. of the forty-third chapter of
the Gaṇeśa-khaṇḍa of the Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa.
{%—Satī-putra, as,%} m. the son of a virtuous woman.
{%—Satīśvara-liṅga (˚tī-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Liṅga.
{%—Satī-saras, as,%} n., N. of a lake in Kaśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>48849<pc>1053-b<k1>satIka<k2>satIka
{%Satīka, am,%}¦ n., Ved. water ({%= udaka,%} Naigh. I. 12).
<LEND>

<L>48850<pc>1053-b<k1>satIna<k2>satIna
{%Satīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. real, essential, mighty,
powerful; ({%as%}), m. a bamboo; pease, pulse or a
particular kind of it, (see {%satīla%}); ({%am%}), n., Ved.
water ({%= udaka,%} Naigh. 1. 12; Sāy. {%satīna =%}
{%vṛṣṭy-udaka,%} cf. {%sat%}). {%—Satīna-kaṅkata, as,%}
m., Ved. a kind of venomous aquatic animal. {%—Sa-%}
{%tīna-manyu, us, us, u,%} Ved., (Sāy.) eager to (shed)
rain-water. {%—Satīna-satvan, ā,%} m., Ved. ‘having
real or mighty power,’ epithet of Indra; (Sāy.) a
sender of water ({%= udakasya sādayitṛ, gama-%}
{%yitṛ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 100, 1).
<LEND>

<L>48851<pc>1053-b<k1>satInaka<k2>satInaka
{%Satīnaka, as,%}¦ m. pease or pulse, (see above.)
<LEND>

<L>48852<pc>1053-b<k1>satIla<k2>satIla
{%Satīla, as,%}¦ m. a bamboo; air, wind; ({%as, ā%}), m.
f. pease, pulse or a particular kind (called Teorā).
<LEND>

<L>48853<pc>1053-b<k1>satIlaka<k2>satIlaka
{%Satīlaka, as,%}¦ m. pease; [cf. {%sātīlaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48854<pc>1053-b<k1>satya<k2>satya
{%Satya, as, ā, am,%}¦ true, real, genuine, sincere,
honest, truthful, faithful, pure, virtuous, good, ({%sat-%}
{%yaṃ kṛ,%} to make true, make good, ratify, fulfil);
fulfilled, realized; ({%as%}), m. the uppermost of the
seven Lokas or worlds (the abode of Brahmā and
heaven of truth, see {%loka%}); the Aśvattha tree; epithet
of Rāma-candra; of Viṣṇu; of a deity presiding
over the Nāndī-mukha Śrāddha; N. of the author
of the Horā-śāstra; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of
deities; ({%ā%}), f. truth, sincerity, veracity; epithet of
Sītā (wife of Rāma); of Satya-vatī (mother of
Vyāsa); {%= satya-bhāmā,%} col. 3; N. of the goddess
Durgā; ({%am%}), n. truth; sincerity, reality, goodness,
the quality of goodness or purity, knowledge; demon-
strated truth or conclusion, dogma; a solemn asseve-
ration, promise, oath; water ({%= udaka,%} Naigh. 1.
12); the first of the four Yugas or ages (i. e. the
best or golden age as the age of general virtue and
purity, comprising 1,728,000 years of men; it is
also called {%kṛta,%} q. v.); ({%am%}), ind. truly, indeed,
verily, necessarily, (Sāy. {%= avaśyam%}); yes; a par-
ticle of asseveration and interrogation; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἐτεός.</lang>] {%—Satya-karman, ā,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Satya-kāma, as,%} m. a lover of truth; a proper
N. {%—Satya-kāruṇya-vedin, ī, inī, i,%} possessing
truth and tenderness and the Veda. {%—Satya-ketu, us,%}
m., N. of a king. {%—Satyaṅ-kāra, as,%} m. making
true or good, ratification of a contract or bargain;
something given in advance as an earnest or security
for the performance of a contract, earnest-money,
pledge. {%—Satyaṅkāra-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} given or
deposited in order to ratify a bargain. {%—Satya-jit,%}
{%t,%} m. ‘truth-conqueror’ or ‘truly conquering,’ N. of
[Page1053-c+ 81]
a king. {%—Satya-tapas, ās,%} m. ‘practising true
penance,’ N. of a Muni (who was once a hunter,
but after performing severe austerities obtained as a
boon from Durvāsas that he should become a great
sage and saint). {%—Satya-tama, as, ā, am,%} most
true, quite true. {%—Satya-tara, as, ā, am,%} more
true, very true. {%—Satya-tā,%} f. or {%satya-tva, am,%}
n. trueness, truth, sincerity, veracity. {%—Satya-dar-%}
{%śin, ī, inī, i,%} truth-seeing, foreseeing truth, truth-
discerning. {%—Satya-deva, as, ā, am,%} shining through
truth. {%—Satya-dhana, as, ā, am,%} rich in truth,
virtuous, sincere. {%—Satya-dharma, as,%} m. a proper
N. {%—Satya-dharman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. practising the
duty of truth; ruling by fixed ordinances. {%—Satya-%}
{%dharma-parāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%} devoted to truth
and virtue. {%—Satya-dhṛta, as,%} m., N. of a son of
Puṣpa-vat. {%—Satya-dhṛti, is, is, i,%} holding fast to
truth, strictly truthful; ({%is%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi (author
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 185; he has the patro-
nymic Vāruṇi); of a son of Śatānanda; of several
other persons. {%—Satya-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘truth-ban-
nered,’ N. of a king. {%—Satya-dhvṛt, t, t, t,%} destroy-
ing or perverting truth. {%—Satya-nāman, ā, ā, a,%}
having a true name. {%—Satya-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m., N.
of a particular divinity (called {%Satya-pīr%} in Bengālī).
{%—Satya-netra, as,%} m. ‘true-eyed,’ N. of a son of
Atri. {%—Satya-parākrama, as, ā, am,%} having real
valour, truly brave. {%—Satya-pura, am,%} n. the world
of Viṣṇu. {%—Satya-pūta, as, ā, am,%} purified by
truth (as a speech &c.). {%—Satya-pratijña%} or {%satya-%}
{%pratiśrava, as, ā, am,%} true or faithful to a promise.
{%—Satya-pratiṣṭhāna, as, ā, am,%} having truth
for a foundation, grounded in truth. {%—Satya-phala,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having good fruit,’ the Vilva tree. {%—Satya-%}
{%bandha, as, ā, am,%} bound by truth, adhering to the
truth, truthful. {%—Satya-bhāmā,%} f. ‘having true
lustre,’ N. of the daughter of Satrā-jit and one of
the eight wives of Kṛṣṇa, (she is described as
having promoted the quarrels of the Yādavas.)
{%—Satya-bhārata, as,%} m., N. of the poet Vyāsa.
{%—Satya-bhedin, ī, inī, i,%} a truth-breaker, breaking
a promise. {%—Satya-mantra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
or repeating true prayers, praying effectually. {%—Sat-%}
{%yam-ugra, as, ā, am,%} having very invigorating or
exciting qualities, (Ṛg-veda IX. 113, 5.) {%—Satya-yaj,%}
{%ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} sincerely worshipping, sacrificing in truth.
{%—Satya-yajña, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Satya-%}
{%yuga, am,%} n. the first of the four Yugas or ages.
{%—Satya-yugādyā (˚ga-ād˚),%} f. the third day of
the light half of Vaiśākha (on which the commence-
ment of the Kṛta-yuga is celebrated). {%—Satya-yau-%}
{%vana, as,%} m., N. of a particular Vidyā-dhara. {%—Sat-%}
{%ya-rata, as, ā, am,%} devoted to truth, honest, sincere;
({%as%}), m., N. of a prince (son of Satya-vrata); epithet
of Vyāsa. {%—Satya-ratha, as,%} m., N. of a king of
Vidarbha. {%—Satya-rathi, is,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Satya-rādhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. one who grants
real or true gifts. {%—Satya-loka, as,%} m., N. of one of
the seven worlds, (see {%satya%} above.) {%—Satya-vaktṛ,%}
{%tā, trī, tṛ,%} a speaker of truth. {%—Satya-vacana,%}
{%am,%} n. truth-speaking, veracity, admitting the truth.
{%—Satyavacanārtham (˚na-ar˚),%} ind. for the sake
of speaking the truth. {%—Satya-vacas, ās, ās, as,%}
truth-speaking, veracious; ({%ās%}), m. a Ṛṣi, saint,
seer; ({%as%}), n. veracity, truth. {%—Satya-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
possessing or practising truth, veracious, true; con-
taining the word {%satya%} (said of a hymn); ({%ān%}), m.,
N. of a king (husband of Sāvitrī); ({%atī%}), f., N. of
the wife of Parāśara and mother of Vyāsa; of a
daughter of Gādhi and wife of Ṛcīka (fabled to have
become the Kauśikī river); N. of the wife of Nā-
rada; epithet of Acchodā. {%—Satyavatī-suta, as,%}
m. ‘son of Satyavatī,’ epithet of the poet Vyāsa.
{%—Satya-vadya, as, ā, am,%} true-speaking, veracious;
({%am%}), n. truth. {%—Satya-vākya, am,%} n. true-speak-
ing, veracity, truth. {%—Satya-vāc, k, k, k,%} truth-
speaking, veracious, sincere; ({%k%}), m. a Ṛṣi, saint;
N. of a son of Cākṣuṣa; a crow. {%—Satyavādi-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. veracity, truthfulness. {%—Satya-vādin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} speaking truth, veracious; ({%inī%}), f., N. of
a goddess. {%—Satya-vāha, as,%} m., N. of a descendant
[Page1054-a+ 79]
of Bharad-vāja. {%—Satya-vikrama, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing real valour, truly valiant. {%—Satya-vṛtta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} practising truth, honest or upright in conduct.
{%—Satya-vrata, as, ā, am,%} true to a vow or promise,
adhering to truth, veracious, honest, sincere; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a king, (the twenty-fifth of the solar
dynasty in the second age); N. of Manu Vaivasvata;
of the author of a Dharma-śāstra; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a race inhabiting Śāka-dvīpa. {%—Satya-vrata-%}
{%parāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%} devoted to truth and religious
observances. {%—Satya-śavas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having
real strength, possessing true vigour, truly vigorous.
{%—Satya-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of the author of the
hymns Ṛg-veda V. 79, 80 (having the patronymic
Ātreya); of a teacher of the Ṛg-veda; of a son of
Mārkaṇḍeya. {%—Satya-śravasī,%} f., Ved. ‘possessed
of real wealth or renown,’ epithet of Uṣas. {%—Satya-%}
{%śrāvaṇa, am,%} n. the speaking or taking of an oath.
{%—Satya-śrī, īs,%} m., N. of a teacher of the Ṛg-veda.
{%—Satya-saṅkāśa, as, ā, am,%} like the truth, likely,
probable, plausible. {%—Satya-saṅgara, as, ā, am,%}
true to an agreement or promise, veracious, faithful;
({%as%}), m., N. of Kuvera (god of wealth). {%—Satya-%}
{%sandha, as, ā, am,%} true to an agreement or com-
pact, faithful to an engagement; faithful, veracious;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Bharata (younger brother of
Rāma); of Rāma-candra; of king Janam-ejaya;
({%ā%}), f. epithet of Draupadī (wife of the Pāṇḍu
princes). {%—Satya-sannibha, as, ā, am,%} like the
truth, likely, probable, plausible. {%—Satya-sava, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. really generating; possessing true energy
(epithet of Savitṛ); observing truth, (Sāy. {%= satyā-%}
{%nujña,%} Ṛg-veda V. 82, 7.) {%—Satya-sākṣin, ī,%} m.
a genuine or trustworthy witness. {%—Satya-hita, as,%}
m., N. of a teacher of the Ṛg-veda. {%—Satyā-kṛti,%}
{%is,%} f. ratification of a bargain. {%—Satyāgni (˚ya-%}
{%ag˚), is,%} m., N. of the Muni Agastya. {%—Satyāṅga%}
{%(˚ya-aṅ˚), ās,%} m. pl., N. of a mythical race inha-
biting Plaksha-dvīpa. {%—Satyātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} having a true soul, true-hearted, true; ({%ā%}), m. a
virtuous and upright man. {%—Satyānurakta (˚ya-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} attached to truth, upright, true.
{%—Satyānṛta (˚ya-an˚), as, ā, am,%} true and false,
containing truth and falsehood; ({%am%}), n. practice
of truth and falsehood, commerce, trade, traffic.
{%—Satyābhidhāna (˚ya-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} truth-
speaking. {%—Satyābhidhyāyin (˚ya-abh˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} truth-meditating, meditating upon truth. {%—Satyā-%}
{%bhisandha%} or {%satyābhisandhāna, as, ā, am,%} or
{%satyābhisandhin (˚ya-abh˚), ī, inī, i,%} faithful to
a promise or agreement. {%—Satyotkarṣa (˚ya-ut˚),%}
{%as,%} m. eminence or excellence in truth; true excel-
lence. {%—Satyodaka (˚ya-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} having
truth for water, flowing with truth. {%—Satyodya (˚ya-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} speaking the truth. {%—Satyopayā-%}
{%cana (˚ya-up˚), as, ā, am,%} true to a request,
granting or fulfilling a prayer or petition.
<LEND>

<L>48855<pc>1054-a<k1>satyaka<k2>satyaka
{%Satyaka, as, ā, am, = satya,%}¦ true, real, veracious,
&c.; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Śini; ({%am%}), n. rati-
fication (of a contract or bargain &c.).
<LEND>

<L>48856<pc>1054-a<k1>satyApana<k2>satyApana
{%Satyāpana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. (fr. {%satyāpaya%} below),
speaking or observing the truth; ratification (of a
bargain &c.).
<LEND>

<L>48857<pc>1054-a<k1>satyApaya<k2>satyApaya
{%Satyāpaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%satyāpayati, -yitum,%} to
speak the truth; to ratify (a bargain or contract).
<LEND>

<L>48858<pc>1054-a<k1>satvan<k2>satvan
{%Satvan, ā,%}¦ m. (according to Sāy. to be connected
in some senses with rts. {%sad, san%}), Ved. {%= sat-tva,%}
entity, existence, being; a living being; reality,
power, strength; a strong or valiant man, hero,
warrior, (Sāy. {%= śatrūṇaṃ sādayitṛ dhanānāṃ%}
{%vā sanitṛ,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 45, 22); ({%ānas%}), m. pl. a
class of spirits attendant on Parameśvara, (Sāy. =
{%parameśvarasya bhūta-gaṇā atiśayena bala-%}
{%parākramāḥ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 64, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>48859<pc>1054-a<k1>sata<k2>sata
{#sata#}¦ {%sata,%} a kind of sacrificial vessel.
<LEND>

<L>48860<pc>1054-a<k1>sataHpaNkti<k2>sataHpaNkti
{#sataHpaNkti#}¦ {%sataḥ-paṅkti.%} See {%satas,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>48861<pc>1054-a<k1>satata<k2>satata
{#satata#}¦ {%sa-tata, as, ā, am%} ({%= san-tata,%} see
{%san-tan%}), constant, lasting, incessant, perpetual,
eternal, continual, uninterrupted; ({%am%}), n. incessantly,
[Page1054-b+ 68]
eternally, perpetually, uninterruptedly, continually,
always. {%—Satata-ga, as,%} m. or {%satata-gati, is,%} m.
‘continually moving,’ the wind. {%—Satata-jvara, as,%}
m. a constant fever, one not intermitting. {%—Sa-%}
{%tata-yāyin, ī, inī, i,%} continually moving or going,
always tending to decay, (Manu I. 50.)
<LEND>

<L>48862<pc>1054-b<k1>satattva<k2>satattva
{#satattva#}¦ {%sa-tattva, am,%} n. natural property,
nature; ({%as, ā, am%}), having or knowing the real
truth; containing the words {%tad,%} ‘this,’ and {%tva,%}
‘thou.’
<LEND>

<L>48863<pc>1054-b<k1>satarka<k2>satarka
{#satarka#}¦ {%sa-tarka, as, ā, am,%} having argument
or reasoning, skilled in speculation; cautious, con-
siderate.
<LEND>

<L>48864<pc>1054-b<k1>satarza<k2>satarza
{#satarza#}¦ {%sa-tarṣa, as, ā, am,%} having thirst,
thirsty; ({%am%}), ind. with thirst, thirstily.
<LEND>

<L>48865<pc>1054-b<k1>satala<k2>satala
{#satala#}¦ {%sa-tala, as, ā, am,%} having a bottom;
[cf. {%a-tala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48866<pc>1054-b<k1>satalatra<k2>satalatra
{#satalatra#}¦ {%sa-talatra, as, ā, am,%} having leather
guards (used in archery).
<LEND>

<L>48867<pc>1054-b<k1>satas<k2>satas
{#satas#}¦ {%satas,%} ind. (according to some fr.
{%sat;%} according to others fr. {%sa = saha, sama;%} usually
occurring at the beginning of comps.), {%= tiras%} (ac-
cording to Naigh. III. 29; cf. Nirukta III. 20).
{%—Sataḥ-paṅkti, is,%} f. a kind of metre consisting
of two Pādas of eight syllables and two Pādas of
twelve syllables. {%—Sato-bṛhatī,%} f. a kind of metre
the even Pādas of which consist of eight syllables and
the uneven of twelve. {%—Sato-mahat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. truly great, greater than everything that exists,
(Sāy. {%sato-mahāntaḥ = sarvasmād vidyamānāt%}
{%pṛthivyām api ye mahāntas,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 30,
1.) {%—Sato-vīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. thoroughly brave or
valiant, (Sāy. {%= prāpta-vīrya,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 75, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>48868<pc>1054-b<k1>satAnanda<k2>satAnanda
{#satAnanda#}¦ {%satānanda, as,%} m. (for {%śatānanda,%}
p. 990, col. 3), N. of the sage Gautama; of the
son of Gautama.
<LEND>

<L>48869<pc>1054-b<k1>satAha<k2>satAha
{#satAha#}¦ {%satāha,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>48870<pc>1054-b<k1>sati<k2>sati<h>1
{#sati#} 1¦. {%sati, is,%} f. (fr. rt. {%so;%} for 2. {%sati%} see
under rt. {%san%}), end, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>48871<pc>1054-b<k1>satI<k2>satI
{#satI#}¦ {%satī, satī-tva.%} See p. 1053, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>48872<pc>1054-b<k1>satIna<k2>satIna
{#satIna#}¦ {%satīna.%} See p. 1053, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>48873<pc>1054-b<k1>satIrTa<k2>satIrTa
{#satIrTa#}¦ {%sa-tīrtha, as, ā, am,%} having sacred
bathing-places; having the same bathing-place;
({%as%}), m. a pupil of the same spiritual preceptor,
fellow religious student.
<LEND>

<L>48874<pc>1054-b<k1>satIrTya<k2>satIrTya
{%Satīrthya, as,%}¦ m. a fellow religious student, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48875<pc>1054-b<k1>satuza<k2>satuza
{#satuza#}¦ {%sa-tuṣa, as, ā, am,%} having husk or
chaff; ({%am%}), n. grain with the husk remaining on it.
<LEND>

<L>48876<pc>1054-b<k1>satfRam<k2>satfRam
{#satfRam#}¦ {%sa-tṛṇam,%} ind. with grass, grass
and all.
<LEND>

<L>48877<pc>1054-b<k1>satfz<k2>satfz
{#satfz#}¦ {%sa-tṛṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} or {%sa-tṛṣa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having thirst, thirsty, desirous, greedy, longing
after, cupidinous.
<LEND>

<L>48878<pc>1054-b<k1>satfzRa<k2>satfzRa
{%Sa-tṛṣṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ thirsty; ({%am%}), ind. with
thirst, thirstily; with desire.
<LEND>

<L>48879<pc>1054-b<k1>satera<k2>satera
{#satera#}¦ {%satera, as,%} m. husk, chaff ({%= tuṣa%}).
<LEND>

<L>48880<pc>1054-b<k1>satr<k2>satr
{#satr#}¦ {%satr,%} cl. 10. A. {%satrayate, satrāpa-%}
{%yate, -yitum,%} to fulfil, accomplish; (ac-
cording to others) to extend; to connect, fasten
together.
<LEND>

<L>48881<pc>1054-b<k1>satra<k2>satra
{#satra#}¦ {%satra%} or {%sattra.%} See under rt. 1. {%sad.%}
<LEND>

<L>48882<pc>1054-b<k1>satrapa<k2>satrapa
{#satrapa#}¦ {%sa-trapa, as, ā, am,%} having shame
or modesty, ashamed, modest.
<LEND>

<L>48883<pc>1054-b<k1>satrA<k2>satrA
{#satrA#}¦ {%satrā,%} ind. (fr. {%sa + trā;%} cf. 2. {%sa-%}
{%dhri%}), with, together with, (Sāy. {%= saha%}); all toge-
ther, all at once; always, ever, continually, (Sāy. =
{%santatam, sarvadā%}); truly, (in Naigh. III. 10.
{%satrā%} is enumerated among the {%satya-nāmāni%});
[Page1054-c+ 76]
great, many, abundant, (Sāy. {%= mahat, bahu, pra-%}
{%bhūtam.%}) {%—Satrā-jit, t, t, t,%} Ved. always conquer-
ing; conqueror of the great; ({%t%}), m., N. of a son of
Nighna and father of Satya-bhāmā, (he was father-in-
law of Kṛṣṇa and was killed by Śata-dhanvan);
N. of Pratardana. {%—Satrāñc (˚rā-añc), āṅ, ācī, āk%}
[cf. {%sadhry-añc%}], going with, associated, united;
perfect. {%—Satrā-dāvan, ā,%} m., Ved. always granting,
giving all at once, (Sāy. {%= saha pradātṛ%}); epithet
of Indra. {%—Satrā-sah%} or {%satrā-sāh, sāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved.
always overcoming or conquering; conquering the
great; conquering many. {%—Satrā-han, ā,%} m. always
destroying, destroyer of mighty foes, (Sāy. {%= maha-%}
{%tāṃ śatrūṇām hantṛ%}); epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>48884<pc>1054-c<k1>satram<k2>satram
{%Satram,%}¦ ind. with, together with.
<LEND>

<L>48885<pc>1054-c<k1>satrAsam<k2>satrAsam
{#satrAsam#}¦ {%sa-trāsam,%} ind. with terror or fear,
in a fright.
<LEND>

<L>48886<pc>1054-c<k1>satrijAtaka<k2>satrijAtaka
{#satrijAtaka#}¦ {%sa-tri-jātaka, am,%} n. a kind of
dish consisting of meat fried with three sorts of
spices, (it is then soaked and dried and again dressed
with ghee and condiments.)
<LEND>

<L>48887<pc>1054-c<k1>satva<k2>satva
{#satva#}¦ {%satva, am,%} n. See {%sat-tva%} under {%sat.%}
<LEND>

<L>48888<pc>1054-c<k1>satvaca<k2>satvaca
{#satvaca#}¦ {%sa-tvaca, as, ā, am,%} having skin or
bark.
<LEND>

<L>48889<pc>1054-c<k1>satvat<k2>satvat
{#satvat#}¦ {%satvat,%} N. of a people inhabiting
the south of India; [cf. {%sātvata.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48890<pc>1054-c<k1>satvan<k2>satvan
{#satvan#}¦ {%satvan.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>48891<pc>1054-c<k1>satvara<k2>satvara
{#satvara#}¦ {%sa-tvara, as, ā, am,%} having haste or
speed, expeditious, quick; ({%am%}), ind. quickly, swiftly,
hastily, suddenly. {%—Satvara-tā,%} f. or {%satvara-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. quickness, hastiness, speed.
<LEND>

<L>48892<pc>1054-c<k1>saTUtkAra<k2>saTUtkAra
{#saTUtkAra#}¦ {%sa-thūt-kāra, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied with the sound {%thūt%} or the sound made in
spitting or sputtering, sputtered; ({%am%}), n. sputtering
(in speech), speech accompanied with sputtering;
[cf. {%ambū-kṛta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48893<pc>1054-c<k1>sad<k2>sad<h>1
{#sad#} 1¦. {%sad%} [cf. rt. {%śad%}], cl. 1. P. (or ac-
cording to some cl. 6. P.) {%sīdati%} (ep. also
A. {%-te%}), {%sasāda%} (2nd sing. {%seditha%} or {%sasattha,%}
3rd pl. {%sedus%}), {%satsyati, asadat%} (Vedic forms, cl. 2.
{%satsi,%} cl. 1. {%sadatu, sadatām%}), {%sattum%} (Ved. Inf.
{%sade%}), to sink down, lie down, lie, recline; to sit,
sit down, settle down, rest, settle; to be seated,
reside, remain, live, be; to sink into despondency,
be dejected or low-spirited; to become wearied,
faint away, pine away; to sink into distress; to waste
away, perish, decay, be destroyed; to be impeded;
to go: Pass. {%sadyate,%} Aor. {%asādi:%} Caus. {%sādayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%asīṣadat,%} to cause to sink or sit
down, throw down, cast down, place down, place, put;
to weary out, wear out, exhaust, harass, afflict; to cause
to perish, destroy: Desid. {%siṣatsati:%} Intens. {%sā-%}
{%sadyate, sāsatti,%} to sit or lie down in an indecent
posture; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὁδός, οὐδός, ἔδεθλον, ἕδ-ος, ἕζομαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἱδρόω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>solum, sedeo, sido,</nsi> probably also <nsi>de-</nsi>
<nsi>sidero, sella</nsi> (for <nsi>sed-la</nsi>): Goth. <nsi>sat,</nsi> ‘to sit;’ <nsi>satja,</nsi>
‘to place;’ <nsi>sinths, sitan, sitls:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>saz,</nsi>
‘to sit;’ <nsi>sezin,</nsi> ‘to place;’ <nsi>senal, satul:</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>in-sidhian, on-settan, sittan, sadl, sadel:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>se†d-mi,</nsi> ‘to place;’ <nsi>sodiun,</nsi> ‘to plant:’ Slav. <nsi>sjadū,</nsi>
<nsi>sad-i-ti:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>suidhim, suidhinghaim,</nsi> ‘I set, I
plant;’ <nsi>saidhe, saidhiste,</nsi> ‘a seat.’]
<LEND>

<L>48894<pc>1054-c<k1>satta<k2>satta
{%Satta, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= sanna, (ni-ṣatta = ni-%}
{%ṣaṇṇa,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 68, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>48895<pc>1054-c<k1>satti<k2>satti
{%Satti, is,%}¦ f. sitting down, sitting; [cf. {%ni-ṣatti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48896<pc>1054-c<k1>sattf<k2>sattf
{%Sattṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ sitting down, sitting; one who
sits or resides.
<LEND>

<L>48897<pc>1054-c<k1>sattra<k2>sattra
{%Sattra, am,%}¦ n. a long sacrifice or sacrificial session
(lasting, according to some, from 13 to 100 days);
a sacrifice (in general); an oblation, offering, gift;
giving alms or charity, liberality, munificence; wealth;
a residence, house; a place of refuge, asylum, hiding-
place, covert; covering, clothing, concealing; fraud,
roguery, cheating; a wood, forest; a tank, pond.
{%—Sattra-pariveṣaṇa, am,%} n. a distribution of
food or other gifts at a sacrifice. {%—Sattra-vardhana, %}
[Page1055-a+ 80]
{%as, ī, am,%} increasing or promoting sacrifice. {%—Sat-%}
{%tra-śālā,%} f. a large hall or room where food and
alms are given away to Brāhmans or mendicants,
&c., an alms-house. {%—Sattrāpaśraya (˚ra-ap˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a place of refuge, asylum. {%—Sattrāyaṇa%}
{%(˚ra-ay˚), am,%} n. a long course of sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>48898<pc>1055-a<k1>sattrAya<k2>sattrAya
{%Sattrāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%sattrāyate,%} &c., to perform
a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>48899<pc>1055-a<k1>sattri<k2>sattri
{%Sattri, is, is, i,%}¦ conquering, a conqueror; ({%is%}),
m. a cloud; an elephant; [cf. {%śadri.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48900<pc>1055-a<k1>sattrin<k2>sattrin
{%Sattrin, ī,%}¦ m. a liberal householder who constantly
performs sacrifices and distributes gifts or alms; a
priest superintending or performing a sacrifice; an
ambassador or agent residing in a foreign country.
<LEND>

<L>48901<pc>1055-a<k1>sattvA<k2>sattvA
{%Sattvā,%}¦ ind. having sunk down, sitting, resting,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>48902<pc>1055-a<k1>satra<k2>satra
{%Satra = sattra,%}¦ p. 1054, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>48903<pc>1055-a<k1>sad<k2>sad<h>2
2. {%sad, t, t, t,%}¦ one who sits or settles down,
sitting, dwelling, residing (often at the end of comps.,
see {%nāka-s˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>48904<pc>1055-a<k1>sada<k2>sada
{%Sada, as,%}¦ m. [cf. {%śada%}], the fruit of trees; N.
of one of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra's sons.
<LEND>

<L>48905<pc>1055-a<k1>sadana<k2>sadana
{%Sadana, am,%}¦ n. sinking or settling down, sitting,
a seat; a dwelling, residence, house, palace; the
abode of sacrifice, sacrificial hall; the abode of Yama;
perishing, decaying; exhaustion; water ({%= udaka,%}
Naigh. 1. 12). {%—Sadanā-sad, t, t, t,%} Ved. sitting
on a seat.
<LEND>

<L>48906<pc>1055-a<k1>sadanya<k2>sadanya
{%Sadanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ of or belonging to a house,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>48907<pc>1055-a<k1>sadas<k2>sadas
{%Sadas, as,%}¦ n. a seat, residence, abode, dwelling;
an assembly, meeting, (also {%ās,%} f. according to some,
and {%ās,%} m. according to others; {%sadasaḥ patiḥ,%}
‘lord of the assembly,’ epithet of Agni); ({%asī%}), n.
du, Ved. heaven and earth ({%= dyāvā-pṛthivī,%}
Naigh. III. 30); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἕδος.</lang>] {%—Sadas-patī,%} m.
du., Ved. ‘lords of the assembly,’ epithet of Indra
and Agni. {%—Sado-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone to the
assembly, being in the assembly. {%—Sado-gṛha, am,%}
n. ‘assembly-house,’ the court of a prince.
<LEND>

<L>48908<pc>1055-a<k1>sadasya<k2>sadasya
{%Sadasya, as,%}¦ m. any person present at or belong-
ing to an assembly, an assessor, spectator, member
of an assembly, councillor; any one present or assist-
ing at a sacrifice, a superintending priest or Ṛtvij,
(his duties, according to the Kauṣītakins, are to
superintend the whole sacrifice and correct mistakes;
cf. {%vidhi-darśin.%})
<LEND>

<L>48909<pc>1055-a<k1>sadman<k2>sadman
{%Sadman, ā,%}¦ m. an abode, dwelling (Ved.); ({%a%}),
n. a seat; a house, dwelling, palace; a temple; an
altar; a place, station; conflict, (in Naigh. II. 17.
enumerated among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%}); water
({%= udaka,%} Naigh. I. 12); ({%anī%}), n. du., Ved. heaven
and earth ({%= dyāvā-pṛthivī,%} Naigh. III. 30); ({%ā,%}
{%ā, a%}), Ved. sitting, seated, (in Ṛg-veda I. 173, 1.
according to Sāy. {%sadmānam = sīdantam.%}) {%—Sad-%}
{%ma-citi, is,%} f. a collection of houses. {%—Sadma-bar-%}
{%his, is, is, is,%} Ved. having sacred grass for its abode
or place of sprinkling. {%—Sadma-makhas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. (according to Sāy. {%makhas = mahas%}), hav-
ing light for a seat or abode, radiant, (Sāy. {%= prāpta-%}
{%tejaska,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 18, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>48910<pc>1055-a<k1>sadru<k2>sadru
{%Sadru, us, us, u%}¦ [cf. {%śadru%}], resting, staying;
going, moving; [cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">ἱδρυ</lang> in <lang n="greek">ἱδρύνω.</lang>.]
<LEND>

<L>48911<pc>1055-a<k1>sanna<k2>sanna
{%Sanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sunk down; lying down;
seated, resting; settled down; still, motionless;
sunk, low (in tone, accent, &c.); depressed, low (in
spirits), desponding, dispirited, spiritless, weak, feeble,
diminished; wasted away, exhausted, decayed, perished,
destroyed, spoiled, lost; stunted, shrunk, contracted;
oppressed; lying near, adjacent; gone, departed;
({%as%}), m. the Piyāla tree; ({%am%}), n. little, a small
quantity. {%—Sanna-kaṇṭha, as, ā, am,%} having a
contracted throat, having a feeble or broken utter-
ance, with a choking voice, scarcely able to articulate,
choking, choked. {%—Sanna-tara, as, ā, am,%} more
depressed, very weak or feeble; (in grammar)
lower (in tone or accent), more depressed than the
ordinary accentless tone {%(= anudātta-tara)%}. {%—San-%}
{%na-musala, am,%} n. a motionless pestle; ({%e%}), ind. at
the time when the pestle lies motionless, (Manu VI.
[Page1055-b+ 76]
56.) {%—Sanna-harṣa, as, ā, am,%} one whose joy
has departed, depressed in spirits, desponding.
<LEND>

<L>48912<pc>1055-b<k1>sannaka<k2>sannaka
{%Sannaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ low, dwarfish; ({%as%}), m. the
Piyāla tree. {%—Sannaka-dru, us,%} m. the Piyāla tree.
<LEND>

<L>48913<pc>1055-b<k1>sAda<k2>sAda
{%Sāda, as,%}¦ m. sinking or settling down, sinking,
exhaustion, weariness, lassitude; perishing, decay;
suffering, pain; purity, clearness, cleanness [cf. {%pra-%}
{%sanna, pra-sāda%}]; going, motion.
<LEND>

<L>48914<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdaka<k2>sAdaka
{%Sādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ exhausting, wearying, de-
stroying.
<LEND>

<L>48915<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdat<k2>sAdat
{%Sādat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. sitting down {%(= sīdat).%}
{%—Sādad-yoni, is, is, i,%} Ved. sitting in the interior,
sitting on the hearth.
<LEND>

<L>48916<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdana<k2>sAdana
{%Sādana, am,%}¦ n. causing to sink, wearying, ex-
hausting; destroying, dispelling; sinking, sitting,
settling; a seat, house, dwelling, palace; ({%ī%}), f. the
plant Helleborus Niger; exhaustion, decay. {%—Sā-%}
{%dana-spṛś = gṛhādi-prada,%} Ṛg-veda IX. 72, 8.
<LEND>

<L>48917<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdanya<k2>sAdanya
{%Sādanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= sadanya,%} belonging
to a house, &c., skilful in domestic affairs, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%gṛha-kārya-kuśala,%} Ṛg-veda I. 91, 20.)
<LEND>

<L>48918<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdayat<k2>sAdayat
{%Sādayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to sink down,
wearying, wearing out, exhausting; destroying;
expelling, removing; extracting.
<LEND>

<L>48919<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdayitavya<k2>sAdayitavya
{%Sādayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be destroyed, de-
structible.
<LEND>

<L>48920<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdayitvA<k2>sAdayitvA
{%Sādayitvā,%}¦ ind. having caused to sink or sit down;
having put or placed down; having destroyed; hav-
ing removed.
<LEND>

<L>48921<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdayizyat<k2>sAdayizyat
{%Sādayiṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to destroy.
<LEND>

<L>48922<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdi<k2>sAdi
{%Sādi, is,%}¦ m. a charioteer; a warrior; a dispirited
or melancholy person; air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>48923<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdita<k2>sAdita
{%Sādita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), made to sink
down, depressed, exhausted, harassed; dispirited,
wearied, distressed; wasted, decayed; destroyed, ex-
terminated; broken; made to go, drawn, dragged.
<LEND>

<L>48924<pc>1055-b<k1>sAdin<k2>sAdin
{%Sādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sitting down, settling down; (fr.
the Caus.) exhausting, wearying, destroying; ({%ī%}), m.
a horseman, cavalier; any one seated or riding on an
elephant; any one seated or mounted on a car or
chariot; a charioteer.
<LEND>

<L>48925<pc>1055-b<k1>sAsadyamAna<k2>sAsadyamAna
{%Sāsadyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sitting or lying down
in an indecent posture.
<LEND>

<L>48926<pc>1055-b<k1>sIdat<k2>sIdat
{%Sīdat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sinking, desponding, pining,
grieving, sorrowing; decaying, perishing; distressed,
pained; going.
<LEND>

<L>48927<pc>1055-b<k1>sIdamAna<k2>sIdamAna
{%Sīdamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sinking down, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48928<pc>1055-b<k1>sedivas<k2>sedivas
{%Sedivas, vān, -duṣī, vat,%}¦ one who has sat down
or sunk down.
<LEND>

<L>48929<pc>1055-b<k1>sadaMSaka<k2>sadaMSaka
{#sadaMSaka#}¦ {%sa-daṃśaka, as, ā, am,%} having teeth;
having a sharp sting; ({%as%}), m. ‘having nippers,’ a crab.
<LEND>

<L>48930<pc>1055-b<k1>sadaMSavadana<k2>sadaMSavadana
{%Sa-daṃśa-vadana, as,%}¦ m. ‘having a face with a
sharp bill,’ a heron.
<LEND>

<L>48931<pc>1055-b<k1>sadakziRa<k2>sadakziRa
{#sadakziRa#}¦ {%sa-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} having
presents, accompanied by gifts.
<LEND>

<L>48932<pc>1055-b<k1>sadandi<k2>sadandi
{#sadandi#}¦ {%sadandi, is,%} m., Ved. (perhaps)
‘continuous, uninterrupted,’ epithet of a kind of
Takman or fever, (Atharva-veda V. 22, 13, XIX.
39, 10.)
<LEND>

<L>48933<pc>1055-b<k1>sadam<k2>sadam
{#sadam#}¦ {%sadam.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>48934<pc>1055-b<k1>sadaya<k2>sadaya
{#sadaya#}¦ {%sa-daya, as, ā, am,%} merciful, com-
passionate, benevolent; ({%am%}), ind. kindly; gently,
softly. {%—Sadaya-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} having a
compassionate heart, tender-hearted.
<LEND>

<L>48935<pc>1055-b<k1>sadara<k2>sadara
{#sadara#}¦ {%sa-dara, as, ā, am,%} fearful, afraid,
timorous.
<LEND>

<L>48936<pc>1055-b<k1>sadarpa<k2>sadarpa
{#sadarpa#}¦ {%sa-darpa, as, ā, am,%} having pride;
haughty; ({%am%}), ind. haughtily, arrogantly, proudly.
<LEND>

<L>48937<pc>1055-b<k1>sadaSa<k2>sadaSa
{#sadaSa#}¦ {%sa-daśa, as, ā, am%} (see {%daśā%}), having
a fringe, fringed.
<LEND>

<L>48938<pc>1055-b<k1>sadA<k2>sadA
{#sadA#}¦ {%sadā,%} ind. (fr. 5. {%sa + dā%}), always, at
all times, continually, perpetually, ever. {%—Sadā-kala-%}
{%vaha, as, ā, am,%} flowing at all seasons, (opposed to
{%prāvṛṭ-kāla-vaha%}). {%—Sadā-kāntā,%} f., N. of a
river; [cf. {%sadā-nīrā.%}] {%—Sadā-gati, is,%} m. ‘ever-
going,’ air, wind; the Universal Spirit; the sun;
[Page1055-c+ 76]
everlasting happiness, final emancipation. {%—Sadā-%}
{%toyā,%} f. ‘always (wanting) water,’ the plant Mimosa
Octandra; the Karatoyā river ({%= sadā-nīrā%}). {%—1. sa-%}
{%dā-dāna, am,%} n. ‘always giving,’ liberality, munifi-
cence. {%—2. sadā-dāna, as,%} m. (see 2. {%dāna%}),
‘always exuding ichor,’ epithet of Airāvata (the
elephant of Indra); of Gaṇeśa; an elephant in rut.
{%—Sadānanda (˚dā-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} always happy;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; N. of the author of the
Vedānta-sāra. {%—Sadā-narta, as, ā, am,%} always
dancing; ({%as%}), m. a kind of bird, the wagtail.
{%—Sadā-nīra-vahā%} or {%sadā-nīrā,%} f. ‘always bear-
ing or possessing water,’ epithet of the Karatoyā
river, (see {%kara-toyā.%}) {%—Sadā-nva, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. always crying out, (Sāy. {%= sadā nonuva,%}
{%sarvadākrośa-kārin,%} Ṛg-veda X. 155, 1, see
Nirukta VI. 30.) {%—Sadā-puṣpa, as, ā, am,%}
always in flower, ever-flowering; ({%as%}), m. the cocoa-
nut; ({%ī%}), f. a variety of the gigantic swallow-wort
{%(= raktārka)%}. {%—Sadā-pṛṇa, as,%} m. ‘always mu-
nificent,’ N. of a Ṛṣi (having the patronymic
Ātreya and author of the hymn Ṛg-veda V. 45).
{%—Sadā-prasūna, as,%} m. ‘always in flower,’ N. of
various plants (= {%rohitaka%}; = {%arka%}; = {%kunda%}).
{%—Sadā-phala, as, ā, am,%} always bearing fruit;
({%as%}), m. the cocoa-nut tree; the glomerous fig-tree;
the jack, Artocarpus Integrifolia; the Vilva tree;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of mallow; a kind of egg-plant.
{%—Sadā-bhadrā,%} f. ‘always auspicious,’ a kind of
shrub, Gmelina Arborea. {%—Sadā-bhavya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} always present; attentive. {%—Sadā-mada, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ever-furious. {%—Sadāmarṣa (˚dā-am˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} always impatient, very impatient, petulant.
{%—Sadā-yogin, ī,%} m. ‘always practising abstract
contemplation,’ epithet of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Sa-%}
{%dā-vṛdha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. always increasing or
prospering, ever-growing. {%—Sadā-śiva, as, ā, am,%}
always happy or prosperous; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Śiva; a proper N. {%—Sadāśiva-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of
part of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—2. sadāśrita (˚dā-%}
{%āś˚), as, ā, am%} (for 1. {%sad-āśrita%} see under {%sat%}),
always resorting to; always dependant on. {%—Sadā-%}
{%sa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (see rt. 1. {%san%}), always honour-
ing or giving, (Sāy. {%= sarvadā bhajamāna%} or {%an-%}
{%nasya dātṛ,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 16, 21.) {%—Sadā-sah%} or
{%sadā-sāh, sāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. always conquering. {%—Sa-%}
{%dotsava (˚dā-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} ever-festive.
<LEND>

<L>48939<pc>1055-c<k1>sadam<k2>sadam
{%Sadam,%}¦ ind., Ved. always, &c.
<LEND>

<L>48940<pc>1055-c<k1>sadAtana<k2>sadAtana
{%Sadātana, as, ī, am,%}¦ incessant, continual, per-
petual, eternal; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Sa-%}
{%dātana-tva, am,%} n. eternity.
<LEND>

<L>48941<pc>1055-c<k1>sadAcAra<k2>sadAcAra
{#sadAcAra#}¦ {%sad-ācāra.%} See under {%sat.%}
<LEND>

<L>48942<pc>1055-c<k1>sadAna<k2>sadAna<h>1
{#sadAna#} 1¦. {%sa-dāna, as, ā, am,%} having gifts,
with gifts.
<LEND>

<L>48943<pc>1055-c<k1>sadAna<k2>sadAna<h>2
{#sadAna#} 2¦. {%sa-dāna, as, ā, am,%} having ichor
(exuding from the temples), being in rut (as an
elephant).
<LEND>

<L>48944<pc>1055-c<k1>sadAra<k2>sadAra
{#sadAra#}¦ {%sa-dāra, as, ā, am,%} accompanied by
a wife, together with a wife. {%—Sadāra-putra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} accompanied by wife and son.
<LEND>

<L>48945<pc>1055-c<k1>sadiS<k2>sadiS
{#sadiS#}¦ {%sa-diś, k, k, k,%} together with the
quarters (of the sky).
<LEND>

<L>48946<pc>1055-c<k1>sadInam<k2>sadInam
{#sadInam#}¦ {%sa-dīnam,%} ind. lamentably, misera-
bly.
<LEND>

<L>48947<pc>1055-c<k1>sadfS<k2>sadfS
{#sadfS#}¦ {%sa-dṛś, k, k, k%} (see 2. {%dṛś,%} p. 428,
col. 3), having the same look or appearance, like,
similar, same; fit, proper.
<LEND>

<L>48948<pc>1055-c<k1>sadfkza<k2>sadfkza
{%Sa-dṛkṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ like, resembling, similar.
<LEND>

<L>48949<pc>1055-c<k1>sadfSa<k2>sadfSa
{%Sa-dṛśa, as, ī, am,%}¦ like, resembling, same, similar,
of the same rank; conformable, fit, proper, right,
suitable; worthy. {%—Sadṛśa-tā,%} f. or {%sadṛśa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. likeness, similarity, sameness. {%—Sadṛśa-%}
{%spandana, am,%} n. any regular or even throbbing
motion ({%= ni-spanda%}).
<LEND>

<L>48950<pc>1055-c<k1>sadfzwikzepam<k2>sadfzwikzepam
{#sadfzwikzepam#}¦ {%sa-dṛṣṭi-kṣepam,%} ind. with
a glance of the eye, with a sidelong glance.
<LEND>
[Page1056-a+ 72]

<L>48951<pc>1056-a<k1>sadevAsurarAkzasa<k2>sadevAsurarAkzasa
{#sadevAsurarAkzasa#}¦ {%sa-devāsura-rākṣasa (˚va-%}
{%as˚), as, ā, am,%} accompanied by gods, Asuras, and
Rākṣasas.
<LEND>

<L>48952<pc>1056-a<k1>sadevIka<k2>sadevIka
{#sadevIka#}¦ {%sa-devīka, as, ā, am,%} along with
or accompanied by a queen.
<LEND>

<L>48953<pc>1056-a<k1>sadeSa<k2>sadeSa
{#sadeSa#}¦ {%sa-deśa, as, ā, am,%} possessing a
country; of the same country or place; neighbour-
ing, proximate, near.
<LEND>

<L>48954<pc>1056-a<k1>sadoza<k2>sadoza
{#sadoza#}¦ {%sa-doṣa, as, ā, am,%} having faults,
faulty, defective; improper, wrong; liable to objec-
tions, objectionable. {%—Sadoṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
containing anything defective. {%—Sadoṣa-vikāśa,%}
{%as,%} m. a defective exhibition.
<LEND>

<L>48955<pc>1056-a<k1>sadBAva<k2>sadBAva
{#sadBAva#}¦ {%sad-bhāva.%} See under {%sat.%}
<LEND>

<L>48956<pc>1056-a<k1>sadman<k2>sadman
{#sadman#}¦ {%sadman.%} See p. 1055, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>48957<pc>1056-a<k1>sadyas<k2>sadyas
{#sadyas#}¦ {%sa-dyas,%} ind. (fr. 4. {%sa + dyas%} for {%di-%}
{%vas,%} fr. 3. {%div,%} q. v.), to-day, this very day, now,
instantly, at the moment, in an instant, momenta-
rily; presently, forthwith, immediately, on a sudden;
quickly, promptly; recently. {%—Sadya-ūti, is, is, i,%}
Ved. quickly aiding or assisting; quickly going, (Sāy.
{%= sadyo-gamana.%}) {%—Sadyaḥ-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
done at the moment, done promptly or quickly; ({%am%}),
n. a name, appellation. {%—Sadyaḥ-pātin, ī, inī, i,%}
quickly falling or dropping, frail. {%—Sadyaḥ-prakṣā-%}
{%laka, as,%} m. one who cleans corn immediately for
use (without storing it). {%—Sadyaḥ-prāṇakara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} quickly inspiriting or invigorating. {%—Sadyaḥ-%}
{%prāṇahara, as, ā, am,%} quickly destroying vigour,
debilitating. {%—Sadyaḥ-śuddhi, is,%} f. {%= sadyaḥ-%}
{%śauca%}. {%—Sadyaḥ-śothā,%} f. ‘quickly swelling,’
cowach, Carpopogon Pruriens. {%—Sadyaḥ-śauca,%}
{%am,%} n. present or immediate purity or purification.
{%—Sadyas-kāla, as,%} m. present time. {%—Sadyas-%}
{%kālīna, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the present time,
recent, modern, new. {%—Sadyas-tapta, as, ā, am,%}
just heated. {%—Sadyo-artha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. quickly
going, swift-moving. {%—Sadyo-jāta, as, ā, am,%}
newly born, born in a moment; ({%as%}), m. a calf;
epithet of Śiva. {%—Sadyo-bhāvin, ī, inī, i,%} existing
or becoming born in a moment, newly born; ({%ī%}),
m. a calf.
<LEND>

<L>48958<pc>1056-a<k1>sadyaska<k2>sadyaska
{%Sadyaska, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the present day,
immediate, present, quick, prompt; new, recent.
<LEND>

<L>48959<pc>1056-a<k1>sadru<k2>sadru
{#sadru#}¦ {%sadru.%} See p. 1055, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>48960<pc>1056-a<k1>sadvandva<k2>sadvandva
{#sadvandva#}¦ {%sa-dvandva, as, ā, am,%} quarrelsome,
strifeful, contentious, fond of strife or litigation, dis-
agreeing.
<LEND>

<L>48961<pc>1056-a<k1>sadvasaTa<k2>sadvasaTa
{#sadvasaTa#}¦ {%sad-vasatha.%} See p. 1053, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>48962<pc>1056-a<k1>saDa<k2>saDa
{#saDa#}¦ {%sa-dha,%} ind. (probably for {%sa-dhā%}),
Ved. = 2. {%saha,%} with, together with, (Pāṇ. VI. 3,
96.)
<LEND>

<L>48963<pc>1056-a<k1>saDamA<k2>saDamA
{%Sadha-mā, ās,%}¦ m., Ved. a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>48964<pc>1056-a<k1>saDamAda<k2>saDamAda
{%Sadha-māda, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. having intoxi-
cation or joy together, exulting or rejoicing toge-
ther; intoxicating together; ({%as%}), m. a companion,
friend; a feast, festival ({%= saha-madana%}); a sacri-
fice; ({%am%}), ind. so as to exult or become intoxicated
together.
<LEND>

<L>48965<pc>1056-a<k1>saDamAdya<k2>saDamAdya
{%Sadha-mādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. intoxicating or
rendering glad together.
<LEND>

<L>48966<pc>1056-a<k1>saDastuti<k2>saDastuti
{%Sadha-stuti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. united praise; ({%i%}), ind.
along with praise, (Sāy. {%= stutyā sahitam,%} Ṛg-veda
V. 18, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>48967<pc>1056-a<k1>saDastutya<k2>saDastutya
{%Sadha-stutya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be praised
together; ({%am%}), n. praising together.
<LEND>

<L>48968<pc>1056-a<k1>saDasTa<k2>saDasTa
{%Sadha-stha, am,%}¦ n., Ved. a place where persons
stand together, place of meeting, a spot, place; a
seat; an abode, region, world, sphere, firmament.
<LEND>

<L>48969<pc>1056-a<k1>saDana<k2>saDana
{#saDana#}¦ {%sa-dhana, as, ā, am,%} possessing
riches, wealthy, rich, opulent.
<LEND>

<L>48970<pc>1056-a<k1>saDanu<k2>saDanu
{#saDanu#}¦ {%sa-dhanu, us, us, u,%} or {%sa-dhanus, us, %}
[Page1056-b+ 74]
{%us, us,%} having a bow, armed with a bow, with bow
(in hand).
<LEND>

<L>48971<pc>1056-b<k1>saDarman<k2>saDarman
{#saDarman#}¦ {%sa-dharman, ā, ā, a,%} or {%sa-dharma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having similar duties, having the same
or similar properties; of the same sect or caste;
performing like duties; resembling, equal, like.
{%—Sa-dharmacāriṇī,%} f. a wife who assists (her
husband) in the performance of religious duties, a
virtuous wife, one wedded with the proper rites.
<LEND>

<L>48972<pc>1056-b<k1>saDarmin<k2>saDarmin
{%Sadharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ observing the same customs
or laws; ({%iṇī%}), f. a wife wedded according to the
proper ritual; a legal or virtuous wife.
<LEND>

<L>48973<pc>1056-b<k1>saDavA<k2>saDavA
{#saDavA#}¦ {%sa-dhavā,%} f. a woman having a
husband, a wife whose husband is living; [cf. {%vi-%}
{%dhavā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48974<pc>1056-b<k1>saDi<k2>saDi
{#saDi#}¦ {%sa-dhi, is,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%dhā%} with {%sa%}),
N. of Agni or fire.
<LEND>

<L>48975<pc>1056-b<k1>saDis<k2>saDis
{#saDis#}¦ {%sadhis, is,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 114. fr. rt. 1. {%sah%}), an ox, bull.
<LEND>

<L>48976<pc>1056-b<k1>saDUmra<k2>saDUmra
{#saDUmra#}¦ {%sa-dhūmra, as, ā, am,%} dusky, dark.
<LEND>

<L>48977<pc>1056-b<k1>saDe<k2>saDe
{#saDe#}¦ {%sa-dhe,%} a various reading for {%svadhe,%}
enumerated among the {%dyāvā-pṛthivī-nāmadhe-%}
{%yāni%} in Naigh. III. 30.
<LEND>

<L>48978<pc>1056-b<k1>saDEryam<k2>saDEryam
{#saDEryam#}¦ {%sa-dhairyam,%} ind. with firmness,
with gravity; firmly, gravely.
<LEND>

<L>48979<pc>1056-b<k1>saDri<k2>saDri<h>1
{#saDri#} 1¦. {%sadhri, is,%} m., N. of the author
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 114 (having the patro-
nymic Vairūpa).
<LEND>

<L>48980<pc>1056-b<k1>saDri<k2>saDri<h>2
{#saDri#} 2¦. {%sadhri%} [cf. {%sa-trā%}], a form sub-
stituted for 2. {%saha,%} with, together with, (Pāṇ. VI.
3, 95.)
<LEND>

<L>48981<pc>1056-b<k1>saDrI<k2>saDrI
{%Sadhrī,%}¦ scil. {%nadyaḥ,%} Ved. the rivers going or flow-
ing together, (Sāy. {%= sadhrīcīnāḥ,%} Ṛg-veda II. 13,
2, the {%añc%} of {%sadhry-añc%} being dropped.)
<LEND>

<L>48982<pc>1056-b<k1>saDrIcIna<k2>saDrIcIna
{%Sadhrīcīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ going or coming with,
accompanying, associated; [cf. {%pratīcīna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>48983<pc>1056-b<k1>saDryaYc<k2>saDryaYc
{%Sadhry-añc, aṅ, -rīcī, ak%}¦ [cf. {%satrāñc%}], going
with, accompanying, associated; a companion; ({%īcī%}),
f. a woman's companion or female friend, a confi-
dante; ({%ak%}), ind. together with.
<LEND>

<L>48984<pc>1056-b<k1>saDvaMsa<k2>saDvaMsa
{#saDvaMsa#}¦ {%sa-dhvaṃsa, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the hymn Ṛg-veda VIII. 8 (having the patro-
nymic Kāṇva).
<LEND>

<L>48985<pc>1056-b<k1>saDvaja<k2>saDvaja
{#saDvaja#}¦ {%sa-dhvaja, as, ā, am,%} having a
banner, bannered, with a flag.
<LEND>

<L>48986<pc>1056-b<k1>san<k2>san<h>1
{#san#} 1¦. {%san,%} cl. 1. P., 8. P. A. {%sanati,%}
{%sanoti, sanute%} (Ved. {%saniṣṇata = sam-%}
{%bhajante,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 131, 5), {%sasāna, sanitum,%}
to love, like, worship, honour; to obtain through
love or worship, obtain, acquire, gain; to receive
graciously; to honour with gifts, give, bestow, dis-
pense, distribute: Pass. {%sanyate%} or {%sāyate%} (Pāṇ. VI.
4, 43), to be loved, &c.: Caus. {%sānayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%asīṣaṇat:%} Desid. {%sisaniṣati, siṣāsati,%} to
be eager to worship or honour; to wish to obtain,
desire, strive for; to wish to bestow or give: Intens.
{%saṃsanyate, sāsāyate, saṃsanti.%}
<LEND>

<L>48987<pc>1056-b<k1>sa<k2>sa<h>5
5. {%sa, as, ā, am,%}¦ giving, bestowing, &c. (at the
end of comps., cf. {%sadā-sa%}).
<LEND>

<L>48988<pc>1056-b<k1>sati<k2>sati<h>2
2. {%sati, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. {%sati%} see s. v.), giving, a gift.
<LEND>

<L>48989<pc>1056-b<k1>sana<k2>sana<h>1
1. {%sana, as,%}¦ m. the flapping of an elephant's ears;
the plant Ghaṇṭā-pāṭali; the tree Pentaptera To-
mentosa; ({%am%}), n., Ved. food, (Sāy. {%sanāni = an-%}
{%nāni,%} Ṛg-veda I. 95, 10.) {%—Sana-parṇī,%} f. the
plant Marsilea Quadrifolia, (also written {%asana-%}
{%parṇī.%})
<LEND>

<L>48990<pc>1056-b<k1>sanat<k2>sanat<h>1
1. {%sanat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. bestowing, granting.
{%—Sanat-kumāra,%} see under 2. {%sanat%}. {%—Sanad-%}
{%rayi, is, is, i,%} Ved. granting wealth. {%—Sanad-vāja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. granting food.
<LEND>

<L>48991<pc>1056-b<k1>sanas<k2>sanas<h>1
1. {%sanas, as,%}¦ n. (doubtful), excrement, ordure;
Śiva's trident (?); crystal (?).
<LEND>

<L>48992<pc>1056-b<k1>sani<k2>sani
{%Sani, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. giving, a giver, (Sāy. {%sani%}
{%= dhanasya dātṛ;%} cf. {%sahasra-s˚%}); ({%is%}), m.,
[Page1056-c+ 80]
Ved. obtaining, acquisition, pursuit; giving, dona-
tion; service, worship; ({%is%}), m. f. request, solicitation,
respectful entreaty (addressed to a spiritual preceptor,
&c.); quarter, region, point of the compass.
<LEND>

<L>48993<pc>1056-c<k1>sanita<k2>sanita
{%Sanita, as, ā, am,%}¦ granted; gained, obtained.
<LEND>

<L>48994<pc>1056-c<k1>sanitf<k2>sanitf
{%Sanitṛ, tā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who grants anything
(with acc. or gen.; Sāy. {%= sambhajana-śīla%}); a
benefactor; a husband, (Sāy. {%= bhartṛ,%} Ṛg-veda
III. 31, 2; see Nirukta III. 6.)
<LEND>

<L>48995<pc>1056-c<k1>sanitra<k2>sanitra
{%Sanitra, am,%}¦ n., Ved. an instrument or means
of honouring, (Ṛg-veda IX. 97, 29.)
<LEND>

<L>48996<pc>1056-c<k1>sanitva<k2>sanitva
{%Sanitva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be honoured or loved,
(Sāy. {%= sambhajanīya,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 81, 8.)
<LEND>

<L>48997<pc>1056-c<k1>sanizWa<k2>sanizWa
{%Saniṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. most liberal or boun-
tiful, very munificent.
<LEND>

<L>48998<pc>1056-c<k1>sanizya<k2>sanizya
{%Saniṣya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%saniṣyati,%} Ved. to wish to
give; to wish for or desire gifts.
<LEND>

<L>48999<pc>1056-c<k1>sanizyat<k2>sanizyat
{%Saniṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. desiring to bestow;
wishing for riches, desirous of wealth, (Sāy. {%= dhanam%}
{%icchat%} or {%lapsyamāna,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 100, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>49000<pc>1056-c<k1>sanizyu<k2>sanizyu
{%Saniṣyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. wishing to give, de-
sirous of giving; desirous to honour.
<LEND>

<L>49001<pc>1056-c<k1>sanI<k2>sanI
{%Sanī,%}¦ f. a respectful request ({%= sani%} above); a
quarter or point of the compass; the flapping of an
elephant's ears (= 1. {%sana%}); light, lustre; epithet
of Gaurī.
<LEND>

<L>49002<pc>1056-c<k1>sanutrI<k2>sanutrI
{%Sanutrī,%}¦ f. (probably fem. of a form {%sanutṛ%}),
Ved. a giver or dispenser (of light to the whole
world), epithet of Uṣas, (Sāy. {%sanutrī = sarvaṃ%}
{%jagat sambhajantī%} or {%dātrī prakāśasya,%} Ṛg-veda
1. 123, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>49003<pc>1056-c<k1>saneru<k2>saneru
{%Saneru, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. honouring, worshipping,
&c., (Sāy. {%= sambhaktṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>49004<pc>1056-c<k1>santi<k2>santi<h>1
1. {%santi, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. {%santi%} see s. v.), giving, a gift.
<LEND>

<L>49005<pc>1056-c<k1>santya<k2>santya
{%Santya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be honoured or wor-
shipped, adorable; to be possessed, (Sāy. {%= bhajana-%}
{%śīla, sambhajanīya%}); giving, a giver, a giver of
rewards, (Sāy. {%= phalasya dātṛ,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 45,
9); ({%as%}), m. epithet of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>49006<pc>1056-c<k1>sanyas<k2>sanyas
{%Sanyas,%}¦ apparently only used in dat. c. {%sanyase%}
{%= sambhajanāya,%} ‘for the honouring,’ (according
to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 31, 19. fr. rts. 1. {%san%} and
{%yas,%} perhaps a kind of Ved. Inf.)
<LEND>

<L>49007<pc>1056-c<k1>sizAsat<k2>sizAsat
{%Siṣāsat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. desirous of giving,
eager to bestow benefits, (Sāy. {%= sambhaktum ic-%}
{%chat,%} Ṛg-veda I. 123, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>49008<pc>1056-c<k1>san<k2>san<h>2
{#san#} 2¦. {%san,%} (in grammar) a technical term
for the syllable {%sa%} or sign of the desiderative.
<LEND>

<L>49009<pc>1056-c<k1>sana<k2>sana<h>2
{#sana#} 2¦. {%sana,%} a Vedic word meaning ‘old,’
‘ancient,’ occurring in the form {%sanā,%} neut. pl. =
{%sanāni = sanātanāni, sadātanāni,%} Ṛg-veda III.
1, 20, 1. 174, 8; see also {%sanā, sanāt,%} &c.; ({%as%}),
m., N. of one of the seven sons of Brahmā; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>senex;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>sins, sineigs.</nsi>] {%—Sana-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} or {%sana-jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. born or pro-
duced of old, ancient. {%—Sana-vitta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
long since obtained. {%—Sana-śruta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. famous of old; always celebrated; ({%as%}), m. a
proper N.
<LEND>

<L>49010<pc>1056-c<k1>sanaka<k2>sanaka
{%Sanaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of the four sons of
Brahmā (described as one of the councillors or com-
panions of Viṣṇu and as inhabiting the Janar-loka;
some accounts assign to Brahmā seven mind-born
sons); N. of an inspired legislator; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
Ved. epithet of the Asuras (represented in the Ṛg-
veda as slain by Indra). {%—Sanaka-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of
a Tantra work, (one of the Śubhāgamas.)
<LEND>

<L>49011<pc>1056-c<k1>sanat<k2>sanat<h>2
2. {%sanat, t,%}¦ m. (according to some properly neut.
of 2. {%sana%} above), N. of Brahmā; ({%t%}), ind. always,
ever, perpetually. {%—Sanat-kumāra, as,%} m. ‘son of
Brahmā,’ or, according to some, ‘always a youth,’
N. of one of the four sons of Brahmā and oldest of
the progenitors of mankind ({%= vaidhātra;%} other
lists give seven sons); N. of one of the twelve Sār-
vabhaumas or emperors of India according to the
Jainas; N. for any sanctified person who retains
throughout life the purity of youth. {%—Sanatku-%}
{%māra-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Sa-%}
{%natkumāra-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of a part of the Skanda-
Purāṇa; of a Tantra work (regarded as one of the
[Page1057-a+ 74]
Śubhāgamas). {%—Sanatkumarīya,%} N. of a Tantra
work. {%—Sanatkumāropapurāṇa (˚ra-up˚), am,%}
n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa. {%—Sanat-sujāta, as,%} m.,
N. of the second of the seven mind-born sons of
Brahmā. {%—Sanatsujātīya, as, ā, am,%} relating to
Sanat-sujāta.
<LEND>

<L>49012<pc>1057-a<k1>sanaya<k2>sanaya
{%Sanaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. old, ancient ({%= pu-%}
{%rāṇa,%} Nirukta IV. 19).
<LEND>

<L>49013<pc>1057-a<k1>sanas<k2>sanas<h>2
2. {%sanas%}¦ = 2. {%sana,%} p. 1056. {%—Sano-jā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} Ved. {%= sana-ja,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>49014<pc>1057-a<k1>sanA<k2>sanA
{%Sanā,%}¦ ind. (properly an old inst. fr. 2. {%sana,%}
p. 1056), always, eternally, perpetually; [cf. Angl.
Sax. <nsi>sin,</nsi> especially at the beginning of comps.; Old
Germ. <nsi>sin;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>sin</nsi> in <nsi>sin-teins.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>49015<pc>1057-a<k1>sanAt<k2>sanAt
{%Sanāt,%}¦ ind. (properly abl. fr. 2. {%sana%}), Ved.
‘from ancient times,’ of old, always, eternally, per-
petually, ever, ({%na sanāt,%} never.)
<LEND>

<L>49016<pc>1057-a<k1>sanAtana<k2>sanAtana
{%Sanātana, as, ī, am,%}¦ eternal, continual, perpetual;
firm, fixed, permanent; primeval, ancient; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of Brahmā; of one of
Brahmā's sons; of one of Rudra's sons; of a teacher
of the Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa; a guest of the Manes,
one who must always be fed whenever he attends
Śrāddhas or obsequial ceremonies; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
the goddess Lakṣmī; of Durgā; of Sarasvatī; [cf.
Goth. <nsi>sinteins, sinteino.</nsi>] {%—Sanātana-tama, as,%}
m. ‘the most eternal, most ancient,’ epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Sanātana-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of an author
of a commentary on the Megha-dūta.
<LEND>

<L>49017<pc>1057-a<k1>sanAya<k2>sanAya
{%Sanāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%sanāyate,%} Ved. to act like an
immortal being, be eternal.
<LEND>

<L>49018<pc>1057-a<k1>sanaga<k2>sanaga
{#sanaga#}¦ {%sanaga, as,%} m., N. of a teacher of
the Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>49019<pc>1057-a<k1>sananda<k2>sananda
{#sananda#}¦ {%sa-nanda, as,%} m. ‘joy-possessing,’
N. of one of the four sons of Brahmā (inhabiting
Janar-loka; see {%loka%}); one of the sons of Rudra.
<LEND>

<L>49020<pc>1057-a<k1>sanandana<k2>sanandana
{%Sa-nandana, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of the mind-
engendered sons of Brahmā (said to have preceded
Kapila in teaching the Sāṅkhya phil.); of a pupil
of Śaṅkarācārya and author of the Pañca-pādikā;
of a commentator. {%—Sanandana-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of
a Tantra work, (one of the Śubhāgamas.)
<LEND>

<L>49021<pc>1057-a<k1>sanaradvipa<k2>sanaradvipa
{#sanaradvipa#}¦ {%sa-nara-dvipa, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied by men and elephants.
<LEND>

<L>49022<pc>1057-a<k1>sanaladAnalada<k2>sanaladAnalada
{#sanaladAnalada#}¦ {%sa-naladānala-da (˚da-an˚,%}
cf. 3. {%da%}), {%as, ā, am,%} having the Nalada (i. e. An-
dropogon Muricatus or Uśīra plant) and appeasing
heat, (Kirāt. V. 25.)
<LEND>

<L>49023<pc>1057-a<k1>sanasUtra<k2>sanasUtra
{#sanasUtra#}¦ {%sana-sūtra, am,%} n. ({%= śaṇa-sūtra%}),
hempen cord or string, packthread; a net made of
hemp.
<LEND>

<L>49024<pc>1057-a<k1>sanAkavanita<k2>sanAkavanita
{#sanAkavanita#}¦ {%sa-nāka-vanita, as, ā, am,%}
having celestial women or Apsarases.
<LEND>

<L>49025<pc>1057-a<k1>sanATa<k2>sanATa
{#sanATa#}¦ {%sa-nātha, as, ā, am,%} having a master
or protector; having a lord or husband; occupied
by, possessed by; endowed with, possessed of, pos-
sessing, having; ({%ā%}), f. a woman whose husband is
living. {%—Sanātha-tā,%} f. the state of having a pro-
tector or husband. {%—Sanāthī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kartum,%} to make to possess a master or protector.
<LEND>

<L>49026<pc>1057-a<k1>sanABi<k2>sanABi
{#sanABi#}¦ {%sa-nābhi, is, is, i,%} connected by
the same navel or womb, uterine, nearly related,
kindred; like, resembling; affectionate; having
even or evenly formed naves (Ved.); ({%is%}), m. a
near kinsman, uterine brother, one of the same
family name; a relation or kinsman as far as the
seventh degree ({%= sa-piṇḍa,%} q. v.); ({%ayas%}), f. pl.
‘the sisters,’ epithet of the fingers, (enumerated
among the {%aṅguli-nāmāni%} in Naigh. II. 5.)
<LEND>

<L>49027<pc>1057-a<k1>sanABya<k2>sanABya
{%Sa-nābhya, as,%}¦ m. a relation as far as the seventh
degree.
<LEND>

<L>49028<pc>1057-a<k1>sanAmaka<k2>sanAmaka
{#sanAmaka#}¦ {%sa-nāmaka, as, ikā, am,%} having
the same name; ({%as%}), m. the tree Hyperanthera
Moringa.
<LEND>
[Page1057-b+ 72]

<L>49029<pc>1057-b<k1>sanAman<k2>sanAman
{%Sa-nāman, ā, ā,%}¦ or {%-mnī, a,%} having the same
name.
<LEND>

<L>49030<pc>1057-b<k1>sanAru<k2>sanAru
{#sanAru#}¦ {%sanāru, us,%} m., N. of a teacher of
the Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>49031<pc>1057-b<k1>saniHSvAsam<k2>saniHSvAsam
{#saniHSvAsam#}¦ {%sa-niḥśvāsam,%} ind. with a sigh.
<LEND>

<L>49032<pc>1057-b<k1>saniyama<k2>saniyama
{#saniyama#}¦ {%sa-niyama, as, ā, am,%} performing
or observing religious ceremonies, engaged in religious
observances.
<LEND>

<L>49033<pc>1057-b<k1>sanirGAta<k2>sanirGAta
{#sanirGAta#}¦ {%sa-nirghāta, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied by a hurricane or whirlwind.
<LEND>

<L>49034<pc>1057-b<k1>sanirGfRa<k2>sanirGfRa
{#sanirGfRa#}¦ {%sa-nirghṛṇa, as, ā, am,%} merciless,
cruel.
<LEND>

<L>49035<pc>1057-b<k1>sanirvedam<k2>sanirvedam
{#sanirvedam#}¦ {%sa-nirvedam,%} ind. in a modest
manner, with humility, humbly; despairingly; with
indifference.
<LEND>

<L>49036<pc>1057-b<k1>sanizWIva<k2>sanizWIva
{#sanizWIva#}¦ {%sa-niṣṭhīva, am,%} n. sputtered
speech, speech accompanied with sputtering or emis-
sion of saliva.
<LEND>

<L>49037<pc>1057-b<k1>sanizWeva<k2>sanizWeva
{%Sa-niṣṭheva, am,%}¦ n. {%= sa-niṣṭhīva%} above.
<LEND>

<L>49038<pc>1057-b<k1>sanIqa<k2>sanIqa
{#sanIqa#}¦ {%sa-nīḍa, as, ā, am,%} having a nest or
abode; having or occupying the same nest or abode,
dwelling together; near, proximate.
<LEND>

<L>49039<pc>1057-b<k1>sanILa<k2>sanILa
{%Sa-nīḷa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= sa-nīḍa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>49040<pc>1057-b<k1>sanIya<k2>sanIya
{#sanIya#}¦ {%sanīya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>49041<pc>1057-b<k1>sanutar<k2>sanutar
{#sanutar#}¦ {%sanutar,%} ind. (thought by some to
be fr. {%sānu + taḥ%}), Ved. from behind, behind the
back, in concealment, secretly, clandestinely, (enume-
rated in Naigh. III. 25. among the {%nirṇītāntar-%}
{%hita-nāmadheyāni%}); far away, far off.
<LEND>

<L>49042<pc>1057-b<k1>sanutya<k2>sanutya
{%Sanutya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who lies in ambush
(as a thief; Sāy. {%antarhite deśe bhavaś coraḥ%}).
<LEND>

<L>49043<pc>1057-b<k1>sanemi<k2>sanemi
{#sanemi#}¦ {%sa-nemi, is, is, i,%} Ved. ‘having the
halves,’ complete, entire, whole, (see {%nema%}); having
equal or even fellies, i. e. revolving with even
motion, (Sāy. {%samāna-nemy ekaprakāra-vahir-%}
{%valayam akṣīṇa-nemi,%} Ṛg-veda I. 164, 14);
({%i%}), ind. wholly, entirely; enumerated among the
{%purāṇa-nāmāni%} in Naigh. III. 27; {%= kṣipram,%}
(Nirukta XII. 44.)
<LEND>

<L>49044<pc>1057-b<k1>sanojA<k2>sanojA
{#sanojA#}¦ {%sano-jā.%} See under 2. {%sanas,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>49045<pc>1057-b<k1>santa<k2>santa
{#santa#}¦ {%santa, as,%} m. the two hands opened
and the palms joined ({%= saṃhata-tala%}).
<LEND>

<L>49046<pc>1057-b<k1>santakz<k2>santakz
{#santakz#}¦ {%san-takṣ (sam-t˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tak-%}
{%ṣati, -takṣitum, -taṣṭum,%} to cut out, form,
fashion by cutting; to construct, compose (hymns
&c., Ved.); to cut through, cut to pieces, wound;
to hurt by words.
<LEND>

<L>49047<pc>1057-b<k1>santakzaRa<k2>santakzaRa
{%San-takṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. cutting language, sarcasm,
scoff, reproach.
<LEND>

<L>49048<pc>1057-b<k1>santakzya<k2>santakzya
{%San-takṣya,%}¦ ind. having cut out, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49049<pc>1057-b<k1>santazwa<k2>santazwa
{%San-taṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut out, formed, cut
through, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49050<pc>1057-b<k1>santaq<k2>santaq
{#santaq#}¦ {%san-taḍ (sam-t˚),%} cl. 10. P. {%-tāḍa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to strike effectually, strike or hit hard,
hit (with an arrow &c.); to beat or play a musical
instrument.
<LEND>

<L>49051<pc>1057-b<k1>santAqya<k2>santAqya
{%San-tāḍya,%}¦ ind. having struck or hit.
<LEND>

<L>49052<pc>1057-b<k1>santan<k2>santan
{#santan#}¦ {%san-tan (sam-t˚),%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-tanoti,%}
{%-tanute, -tanitum,%} to stretch or extend along,
stretch over, cover with, cover over; to join or
connect together, make continuous; to effect, accom-
plish; to exhibit, display, evince; to be connected
or combined with (Ved.); Caus. {%-tānayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to extend, cause to accomplish, cause to be
finished.
<LEND>

<L>49053<pc>1057-b<k1>santata<k2>santata
{%San-tata, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%sa-tata%}], stretched
along, extended along, stretched or spread over,
covered over, connected together, sewn or woven
together, extended; continued, continuous, uninter-
rupted, regular, continual, lasting, eternal; much,
many; ({%am%}), ind. constantly, continually, eternally,
always. {%—Santata-jvara, as,%} m. continuous fever.
[Page1057-c+ 80]
{%—Santata-varṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} raining continuously.
{%—Santata-vepathu, us, us, u,%} trembling all over.
{%—Santatāpad (˚ta-āp˚), t, t, t,%} one whose mis-
fortunes are continuous. {%—Santatābhyāsa (˚ta-%}
{%abh˚), as,%} m. habitual practice, regular study or
repetition (of the Vedas &c.).
<LEND>

<L>49054<pc>1057-c<k1>santati<k2>santati
{%San-tati, is,%}¦ f. stretching or extending along,
stretching or spreading over, extent, expanse, con-
tinuity; a continuous line, row, range; uninterrupted
succession, descent; lineage, race, progeny, offspring;
a son; a daughter; a number of people, multitude;
({%is%}), m., N. of a son of Alarka.
<LEND>

<L>49055<pc>1057-c<k1>santateyu<k2>santateyu
{%Santateyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Raudrāśva.
<LEND>

<L>49056<pc>1057-c<k1>santani<k2>santani
{%San-tani, is,%}¦ m., Ved. extension; continuous stream.
<LEND>

<L>49057<pc>1057-c<k1>santanvat<k2>santanvat
{%San-tanvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ extending along, covering
over, covering with.
<LEND>

<L>49058<pc>1057-c<k1>santAna<k2>santAna
{%San-tāna, as, am,%}¦ m. n. extending, extension,
expansion, spreading; the being spread or increased,
continuance, continuous succession, lineage, race,
family; progeny, offspring; a son or daughter; one
of the five trees of Indra's paradise. {%—Santāna-%}
{%sandhi, is,%} m. peace cemented by family alliance
(by giving a daughter in marriage, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>49059<pc>1057-c<k1>santAnaka<k2>santAnaka
{%Santānaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ stretching, spreading,
who or what spreads; ({%as%}), m. one of the trees of
Indra's heaven, the Kalpa tree or its flower; ({%ikā%}),
f. froth, foam; cream, coagulated milk, custard; a cob-
web; the blade of a knife or sword. {%—Santānakā-%}
{%kīrṇa (˚ka-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} strewn with celestial
flowers, &c. (from the Kalpa tree).
<LEND>

<L>49060<pc>1057-c<k1>santap<k2>santap
{#santap#}¦ {%san-tap (sam-tap),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tapati,%}
{%-taptum,%} to heat thoroughly, make red hot, cause
to glow, inflame; to scorch, parch, dry up; to pain
by heat, torture: Pass. {%-tapyate%} (ep. P. {%-ti%}), to be
well heated, to become hot, suffer great pain or
torment; to undergo penance; to be penitent,
repent: Caus. {%-tāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be
heated, to make very hot, heat, scorch, burn, inflame,
set on fire; to foment; to burn up, consume; to
pain by heat, torment, torture, distress, harass; (with
{%ātmānam%}) to torture or torment one's self, harass
the body by penance: Pass. of Caus. {%-tāpyate,%} to
be made very hot, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49061<pc>1057-c<k1>santapana<k2>santapana
{%San-tapana, am,%}¦ n. the act of inflaming or tor-
menting.
<LEND>

<L>49062<pc>1057-c<k1>santapta<k2>santapta
{%San-tapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly heated or inflamed,
red hot, glowing; melted, burnt up, scorched, dried
up, inflamed with passion, &c.; suffering great pain
or anguish, tormented, distressed, afflicted, wearied,
fatigued. {%—Santapta-cāmīkara, am,%} n. glowing or
molten gold. {%—Santapta-rajata, am,%} n. molten
silver. {%—Santapta-vakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} oppressed
in the chest or breathing, short-breathed. {%—San-%}
{%tapta-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} feeling great anguish of
heart. {%—Santaptāyas (˚ta-ay˚), as,%} n. heated iron,
red hot iron.
<LEND>

<L>49063<pc>1057-c<k1>santapya<k2>santapya
{%San-tapya,%}¦ ind. having undergone penance.
<LEND>

<L>49064<pc>1057-c<k1>santapyamAna<k2>santapyamAna
{%San-tapyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being inflamed, being
tormented or distressed. {%—Santapyamāna-manas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} one whose mind is in a state of torture.
<LEND>

<L>49065<pc>1057-c<k1>santApa<k2>santApa
{%San-tāpa, as,%}¦ m. great heat, burning heat; in-
flammation, fire; affliction, pain, anguish, distress;
passion; remorse, resentment, penance, penitence,
repentance. {%—Santāpa-hara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} re-
moving heat, cooling; consolatory, consoling.
<LEND>

<L>49066<pc>1057-c<k1>santApana<k2>santApana
{%San-tāpana, as, ī, am,%}¦ burning up, scorching,
inflaming; ({%am%}), n. the act of burning, scorching;
paining, affliction; exciting passion; ({%as%}), m., N.
of one of the arrows of Kāma-deva.
<LEND>

<L>49067<pc>1057-c<k1>santApayitvA<k2>santApayitvA
{%San-tāpayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having burnt
up or inflamed.
<LEND>

<L>49068<pc>1057-c<k1>santApita<k2>santApita
{%San-tāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made very hot, burnt up,
scorched; inflamed, consumed; tormented, pained,
harassed, distressed, afflicted, wearied.
<LEND>

<L>49069<pc>1057-c<k1>santApya<k2>santApya
{%San-tāpya,%}¦ ind. having caused to be heated.
<LEND>

<L>49070<pc>1057-c<k1>santam<k2>santam
{#santam#}¦ {%san-tam (sam-t˚),%} cl. 4. P. {%-tām-%}
{%yati, -tamitum,%} to be distressed, pine away, become
exhausted.
<LEND>

<L>49071<pc>1057-c<k1>santamaka<k2>santamaka
{%San-tamaka, as,%}¦ m. oppression or distress (in
breathing &c.).
<LEND>
[Page1058-a+ 75]

<L>49072<pc>1058-a<k1>santamas<k2>santamas
{%San-tamas, as,%}¦ n. great darkness, universal dark-
ness or obscurity.
<LEND>

<L>49073<pc>1058-a<k1>santamasa<k2>santamasa
{%San-tamasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ darkened, clouded;
({%am%}), n. overspreading or universal darkness; great
darkness or delusion of mind.
<LEND>

<L>49074<pc>1058-a<k1>santark<k2>santark
{#santark#}¦ {%san-tark (sam-t˚),%} cl. 10. P. {%-tarka-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to consider as, regard.
<LEND>

<L>49075<pc>1058-a<k1>santarj<k2>santarj
{#santarj#}¦ {%san-tarj (sam-t˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarjati,%}
{%-tarjitum,%} to threaten, menace, revile, abuse, scold,
blame.
<LEND>

<L>49076<pc>1058-a<k1>santarjana<k2>santarjana
{%San-tarjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of threatening,
reviling, abusing, reproving.
<LEND>

<L>49077<pc>1058-a<k1>santarjita<k2>santarjita
{%San-tarjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ threatened, abused,
scolded, reproved.
<LEND>

<L>49078<pc>1058-a<k1>santarjya<k2>santarjya
{%Santarjya,%}¦ ind. having threatened, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49079<pc>1058-a<k1>santarpaRa<k2>santarpaRa
{#santarpaRa#}¦ {%san-tarpaṇa,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>49080<pc>1058-a<k1>santavItvat<k2>santavItvat
{#santavItvat#}¦ {%san-tavītvat.%} See under {%san-tu.%}
<LEND>

<L>49081<pc>1058-a<k1>santi<k2>santi<h>2
{#santi#} 2¦. {%santi, is,%} f. (probably connected
with rt. {%so;%} for 1. {%santi%} see under rt. 1. {%san%}), end,
destruction; [cf. 1. {%sati,%} 2. {%sāti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>49082<pc>1058-a<k1>santij<k2>santij
{#santij#}¦ {%san-tij (sam-tij),%} Caus. {%-tejayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to stir up, excite, incite.
<LEND>

<L>49083<pc>1058-a<k1>santejayat<k2>santejayat
{%San-tejayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ stirring up, arousing,
exciting.
<LEND>

<L>49084<pc>1058-a<k1>santu<k2>santu
{#santu#}¦ {%san-tu (sam-tu).%} See rt. 2. {%tu,%} p. 377.
<LEND>

<L>49085<pc>1058-a<k1>santavItvat<k2>santavItvat
{%San-tavītvat, at, atī, at%}¦ (fr. the Intens.), Ved.
increasing in power or vigour, (Sāy. {%= pravṛddha-%}
{%balavān san,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 40, 4; see Nirukta II.
28); having great power to effect or accomplish.
<LEND>

<L>49086<pc>1058-a<k1>santud<k2>santud
{#santud#}¦ {%san-tud (sam-tud),%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-tudati,%}
{%-te, -tottum,%} to strike at, goad, sting; to attack (as
a disease).
<LEND>

<L>49087<pc>1058-a<k1>santudyamAna<k2>santudyamAna
{%San-tudyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being goaded or stung.
<LEND>

<L>49088<pc>1058-a<k1>santul<k2>santul
{#santul#}¦ {%san-tul (sam-tul),%} cl. 10. P. {%-tolayati,%}
{%-tulayati, -yitum,%} to weigh one thing against
another, balance together, compare by measure; to
weigh or balance in the mind.
<LEND>

<L>49089<pc>1058-a<k1>santuz<k2>santuz
{#santuz#}¦ {%san-tuṣ (sam-t˚),%} cl. 4. P. {%-tuṣyati,%}
{%-toṣṭum,%} to feel quite satisfied or contented, be
calmed or pacified, be pleased or delighted; to have
great pleasure in: Caus. {%-toṣayati, -yitum,%} to
make well satisfied or contented, satisfy, propitiate,
please, rejoice, gratify; to comfort; to present with.
<LEND>

<L>49090<pc>1058-a<k1>santuzwa<k2>santuzwa
{%San-tuṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ quite satisfied, contented,
well pleased, delighted.
<LEND>

<L>49091<pc>1058-a<k1>santuzwi<k2>santuzwi
{%San-tuṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. complete satisfaction, content-
ment, gratification.
<LEND>

<L>49092<pc>1058-a<k1>santuzya<k2>santuzya
{%San-tuṣya,%}¦ ind. feeling quite satisfied or con-
tented; feeling great pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>49093<pc>1058-a<k1>santuzyat<k2>santuzyat
{%San-tuṣyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being satisfied or
pleased.
<LEND>

<L>49094<pc>1058-a<k1>santoza<k2>santoza
{%San-toṣa, as,%}¦ m. satisfaction, contentedness, ({%san-%}
{%toṣaṃ kṛ,%} to be satisfied or contented); happiness,
delight, joy, pleasure; Content (personified as a son
of Dharma and Tuṣṭi); the thumb and fore-finger;
({%ā%}), f. a proper N. {%—Santoṣa-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
contented, joyful, pleased.
<LEND>

<L>49095<pc>1058-a<k1>santozaka<k2>santozaka
{%San-toṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ satisfactory, gratifying,
pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>49096<pc>1058-a<k1>santozaRa<k2>santozaRa
{%San-toṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of satisfying, pleas-
ing, propitiating, comforting.
<LEND>

<L>49097<pc>1058-a<k1>santozaRIya<k2>santozaRIya
{%San-toṣaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gratified or
propitiated.
<LEND>

<L>49098<pc>1058-a<k1>santozita<k2>santozita
{%San-toṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfied, gratified, con-
soled, comforted.
<LEND>

<L>49099<pc>1058-a<k1>santozwavya<k2>santozwavya
{%San-toṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be satisfied, to be
gratified or pleased, consolable.
<LEND>

<L>49100<pc>1058-a<k1>santozya<k2>santozya
{%San-toṣya,%}¦ ind. having gratified or pleased, hav-
ing propitiated.
<LEND>

<L>49101<pc>1058-a<k1>santfd<k2>santfd
{#santfd#}¦ {%san-tṛd (sam-t˚),%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-tṛ-%}
{%ṇatti, -tṛntte,%} &c., Ved. to connect together, fasten
together; to hollow out, perforate.
<LEND>

<L>49102<pc>1058-a<k1>santardana<k2>santardana
{%San-tardana, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>49103<pc>1058-a<k1>santfRRa<k2>santfRRa
{%San-tṛṇṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. connected or fastened
together.
<LEND>
[Page1058-b+ 77]

<L>49104<pc>1058-b<k1>santfdya<k2>santfdya
{%San-tṛdya,%}¦ ind., Ved. having fastened or con-
nected together.
<LEND>

<L>49105<pc>1058-b<k1>santfp<k2>santfp
{#santfp#}¦ {%san-tṛp (sam-t˚),%} cl. 4. 5. P. {%-tṛp-%}
{%yati, -tṛpnoti%} (Ved. {%-tṛpṇoti%}), &c., to satiate
one's self with, refresh one's self with (with gen.);
to become satisfied or refreshed: Caus. {%-tarpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to satiate, satisfy, invigorate, gladden, gratify.
<LEND>

<L>49106<pc>1058-b<k1>santarpaRa<k2>santarpaRa
{%San-tarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of satisfying, satiat-
ing; gratifying, delighting; a particular luscious
dish (consisting of a mixture of grapes, pomegranates,
dates, plantains, sugar, flour, and ghee).
<LEND>

<L>49107<pc>1058-b<k1>santarpita<k2>santarpita
{%San-tarpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ satisfied, satiated.
<LEND>

<L>49108<pc>1058-b<k1>santarpya<k2>santarpya
{%San-tarpya,%}¦ ind. having satisfied or satiated one's
self.
<LEND>

<L>49109<pc>1058-b<k1>santF<k2>santF
{#santF#}¦ {%san-tṝ (sam-t˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati%} (ep.
also A. {%-te,%} Ved. also cl. 6. {%-tirati%}), {%-taritum, -tarī-%}
{%tum,%} to cross over, pass over, travel over; pass through,
swim through; to pass or cross over towards, reach,
attain; to surpass, overcome; to escape from (with
abl.), be saved; to bring safely over, save, rescue:
Caus. {%-tārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to pass over, bring
over, bring safely over, rescue, save: Pass. of Caus.
{%-tāryate,%} to be brought over, to be rescued or saved.
<LEND>

<L>49110<pc>1058-b<k1>santaraRa<k2>santaraRa
{%San-taraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of crossing over,
swimming over or through.
<LEND>

<L>49111<pc>1058-b<k1>santarat<k2>santarat
{%San-tarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ crossing over, passing
over, swimming over or through.
<LEND>

<L>49112<pc>1058-b<k1>santaramARa<k2>santaramARa
{%San-taramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ passing over, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49113<pc>1058-b<k1>santarutra<k2>santarutra
{%San-tarutra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. carrying or con-
veying safely across, rescuing, (Sāy. {%= sarveṣām%}
{%upadravāṇāṃ santāraka,%} Ṛg-veda III. 1, 19.)
<LEND>

<L>49114<pc>1058-b<k1>santAra<k2>santAra
{%San-tāra, as,%}¦ m. crossing or passing over, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49115<pc>1058-b<k1>santArita<k2>santArita
{%San-tārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to pass over, saved,
rescued, delivered.
<LEND>

<L>49116<pc>1058-b<k1>santIrRa<k2>santIrRa
{%San-tīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crossed, passed through;
rescued, saved.
<LEND>

<L>49117<pc>1058-b<k1>santIrya<k2>santIrya
{%San-tīrya,%}¦ ind. having crossed over, having passed
through.
<LEND>

<L>49118<pc>1058-b<k1>santya<k2>santya
{#santya#}¦ {%santya.%} See p. 1056, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>49119<pc>1058-b<k1>santyaj<k2>santyaj
{#santyaj#}¦ {%san-tyaj (sam-tyaj),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tya-%}
{%jati, -tyaktum,%} to relinquish altogether, abandon,
leave, desert; to leave (a place), depart from, avoid,
shun; to give up, resign, renounce, deliver up; to
leave alone, take no notice of, disregard, omit:
Caus. {%-tyājayati, -yitum,%} to cause to abandon; to
deprive or rob a person of anything (with two acc.);
to cause a person (acc.) to be delivered up by any
one (inst.), rescue.
<LEND>

<L>49120<pc>1058-b<k1>santyakta<k2>santyakta
{%San-tyakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely deserted, left,
abandoned, renounced, resigned, robbed, deprived of.
<LEND>

<L>49121<pc>1058-b<k1>santyajat<k2>santyajat
{%San-tyajat, an, antī, at,%}¦ relinquishing, abandon-
ing, deserting.
<LEND>

<L>49122<pc>1058-b<k1>santyajana<k2>santyajana
{%San-tyajana, am,%}¦ n. the act of deserting, leaving,
abandoning.
<LEND>

<L>49123<pc>1058-b<k1>santyajya<k2>santyajya
{%San-tyajya,%}¦ ind. having abandoned or given up
entirely, having discarded or renounced; having
avoided; having left alone, having taken no notice of.
<LEND>

<L>49124<pc>1058-b<k1>santras<k2>santras
{#santras#}¦ {%san-tras (sam-tras),%} cl. 1. 4. P.
{%-trasati, -trasyati, -trasitum,%} to tremble all over,
start with fear, be afraid, be terrified or frightened:
Caus. {%-trāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to tremble,
frighten, terrify.
<LEND>

<L>49125<pc>1058-b<k1>santrasta<k2>santrasta
{%San-trasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling with fear,
afraid, scared, frightened, alarmed.
<LEND>

<L>49126<pc>1058-b<k1>santrAsa<k2>santrAsa
{%San-trāsa, as,%}¦ m. great trembling, terror, fear,
alarm.
<LEND>

<L>49127<pc>1058-b<k1>santrAsita<k2>santrAsita
{%San-trāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to tremble, terri-
fied, frightened.
<LEND>

<L>49128<pc>1058-b<k1>santrE<k2>santrE
{#santrE#}¦ {%san-trai (sam-t˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-trāyate,%}
{%-trātum,%} to protect well or effectually, preserve,
defend.
<LEND>

<L>49129<pc>1058-b<k1>santvar<k2>santvar
{#santvar#}¦ {%san-tvar (sam-t˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-tvarate,%}
{%-tvaritum,%} to hurry, make great haste, hasten: Caus.
{%-tvarayati, -yitum,%} to cause to hurry, cause to
hasten, urge on.
<LEND>

<L>49130<pc>1058-b<k1>santvaramARa<k2>santvaramARa
{%San-tvaramāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ hurrying, making
great haste.
<LEND>
[Page1058-c+ 74]

<L>49131<pc>1058-c<k1>santvarayat<k2>santvarayat
{%San-tvarayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to hurry,
hastening, urging on.
<LEND>

<L>49132<pc>1058-c<k1>santvarita<k2>santvarita
{%San-tvarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ hurried, hastening; ({%am%}),
ind. in a hurry, in great haste, quickly.
<LEND>

<L>49133<pc>1058-c<k1>sandaMS<k2>sandaMS
{#sandaMS#}¦ {%san-daṃś (sam-d˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-daśati,%}
{%-daṃṣṭum,%} to bite together, bite, seize with the
teeth; to press together, compress, press closely on
anything, indent by pressure.
<LEND>

<L>49134<pc>1058-c<k1>sandaMSa<k2>sandaMSa
{%San-daṃśa, as,%}¦ m. a pair of tongs or nippers; too
great compression of the teeth in the pronunciation
of vowels; a particular position or movement of the
hands; N. of a particular Naraka; of a section of
the Ṣaḍviṃśa-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>49135<pc>1058-c<k1>sandaMSaka<k2>sandaMSaka
{%San-daṃśaka, am,%}¦ n. a pair of tongs, a kind of
forceps or pincers; ({%ikā%}), f. a pair of pincers or
nippers, small shears or tongs; a vice.
<LEND>

<L>49136<pc>1058-c<k1>sandaSat<k2>sandaSat
{%San-daśat, an, antī, at,%}¦ biting together, biting,
pressing.
<LEND>

<L>49137<pc>1058-c<k1>sandaSya<k2>sandaSya
{%San-daśya,%}¦ ind. having bitten; having pressed
together.
<LEND>

<L>49138<pc>1058-c<k1>sandazwa<k2>sandazwa
{%San-daṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ bitten, compressed, pressed
closely together, nipped, pinched; ({%am%}), n. a parti-
cular fault in pronunciation (arising from keeping the
teeth too close together). {%—Sandaṣṭa-kusuma-%}
{%śayana, as, ā, am,%} indenting (by pressure of the
limbs) a couch of flowers. {%—Sandaṣṭa-tā,%} f. a
particular incorrect pronunciation of nasalized vowels,
(see {%san-daṣṭa.%}) {%—Sandaṣṭa-dantacchada, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} biting the lips. {%—Sandaṣṭauṣṭha (˚ṭa-%}
{%oṣ˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} biting or compressing the lips.
<LEND>

<L>49139<pc>1058-c<k1>sandad<k2>sandad
{#sandad#}¦ {%san-dad (sam-dad), t, t, t,%} Ved. giving
abundantly, bestowing liberally, (Sāy. {%= samyak%}
{%prayacchat.%})
<LEND>

<L>49140<pc>1058-c<k1>sandadasvas<k2>sandadasvas
{#sandadasvas#}¦ {%san-dadasvas.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>49141<pc>1058-c<k1>sandaDAna<k2>sandaDAna
{#sandaDAna#}¦ {%san-dadhāna.%} See under {%san-dhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>49142<pc>1058-c<k1>sandarBa<k2>sandarBa
{#sandarBa#}¦ {%san-darbha.%} See under {%san-dṛbh.%}
<LEND>

<L>49143<pc>1058-c<k1>sandarSana<k2>sandarSana
{#sandarSana#}¦ {%san-darśana,%} &c. See under {%san-%}
{%dṛś.%}
<LEND>

<L>49144<pc>1058-c<k1>sandal<k2>sandal
{#sandal#}¦ {%san-dal (sam-dal),%} cl. 1. P. {%-dalati,%}
{%-dalitum,%} to pierce through, pierce.
<LEND>

<L>49145<pc>1058-c<k1>sandalita<k2>sandalita
{%San-dalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pierced through, pierced.
<LEND>

<L>49146<pc>1058-c<k1>sandaSasya<k2>sandaSasya
{#sandaSasya#}¦ {%san-daśasya (sam-d˚),%} Nom. P.
{%-daśasyati,%} &c., Ved. to remit, pardon (a sin); to
destroy, consume, (Sāy. {%= saṅ-kṣapayati.%})
<LEND>

<L>49147<pc>1058-c<k1>sandas<k2>sandas
{#sandas#}¦ {%san-das (sam-das),%} cl. 4. P. {%-dasyati,%}
{%-dasitum,%} Ved. (perhaps) to go out or be extinguished
(as fire).
<LEND>

<L>49148<pc>1058-c<k1>sandadasvas<k2>sandadasvas
{%San-dadasvas, ān,%}¦ m., Ved. becoming extinguished
(according to some); giving liberally, (Sāy. {%= sam-%}
{%yak prayacchat,%} Ṛg-veda II. 2, 6; cf. {%san-dad.%})
<LEND>

<L>49149<pc>1058-c<k1>sandah<k2>sandah
{#sandah#}¦ {%san-dah (sam-dah),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%hati, -te, -dagdhum,%} to burn together, burn up,
consume by fire, destroy; to be burnt up, be con-
sumed (A.): Pass. {%-dahyate,%} to be burnt up; to
burn, glow; to be distressed, pine away, grieve:
Caus. {%-dāhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to burn.
<LEND>

<L>49150<pc>1058-c<k1>sandagDa<k2>sandagDa
{%San-dagdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ burnt up, consumed.
<LEND>

<L>49151<pc>1058-c<k1>sandahat<k2>sandahat
{%San-dahat, an, antī, at,%}¦ burning up, consuming.
<LEND>

<L>49152<pc>1058-c<k1>sandahyamAna<k2>sandahyamAna
{%San-dahyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being burnt, burn-
ing, glowing.
<LEND>

<L>49153<pc>1058-c<k1>sandAha<k2>sandAha
{%San-dāha, as,%}¦ m. burning up, consuming; in-
flammation of the mouth and lips.
<LEND>

<L>49154<pc>1058-c<k1>sandA<k2>sandA<h>1
{#sandA#} 1¦. {%san-dā%} ({%sam-dā,%} see rt. 1. {%dā%}), cl.
3. P. A. {%-dadāti, -datte, -dātum,%} to give together,
present; to hold or keep together; (according to
some) to meet together, (Sāy. {%san-dade = sam-%}
{%badhnāti,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 44, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>49155<pc>1058-c<k1>sandA<k2>sandA<h>2
{#sandA#} 2¦. {%san-dā%} ({%sam-dā,%} see rt. 3. {%dā%}), cl.
2. 4. P. {%-dāti, -dyati, -dātum,%} to cut together; to
cut, divide, clip, cut off, pare; to reap, gather toge-
ther.
<LEND>

<L>49156<pc>1058-c<k1>sandAna<k2>sandAna<h>1
1. {%san-dāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of cutting or divid-
ing; ({%as%}), m. that part of an elephant's temples whence
the fluid called Mada issues; [cf. 2. {%dāna.%}]
<LEND>
[Page1059-a+ 76]

<L>49157<pc>1059-a<k1>sandita<k2>sandita<h>1
1. {%san-dita, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off, cut; tired, weary,
(Sāy. {%= samyak khaṇḍita, dūra-gamanena śrān-%}
{%ta,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 25, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>49158<pc>1059-a<k1>sandA<k2>sandA<h>3
{#sandA#} 3¦. {%san-dā%} ({%sam-dā,%} see rt. 4. {%dā%}), cl.
4. P. {%-dyati, -dātum,%} Ved. to bind together, fasten
together, tie.
<LEND>

<L>49159<pc>1059-a<k1>sandAna<k2>sandAna<h>2
2. {%san-dāna, am,%}¦ n. a rope, cord (especially for
tying cattle); a head-rope, halter, (Sāy. {%= śiro-ban-%}
{%dhana,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 162, 16.)
<LEND>

<L>49160<pc>1059-a<k1>sandAnikA<k2>sandAnikA
{%San-dānikā,%}¦ f. a kind of tree ({%= ari-khadira%}).
<LEND>

<L>49161<pc>1059-a<k1>sandAnita<k2>sandAnita
{%Sandānita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound together, tied.
<LEND>

<L>49162<pc>1059-a<k1>sandAninI<k2>sandAninI
{%Sandāninī,%}¦ f. a cow-house; [cf. {%san-dhāninī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>49163<pc>1059-a<k1>sandAya<k2>sandAya
{%San-dāya,%}¦ ind. having bound together, having tied.
<LEND>

<L>49164<pc>1059-a<k1>sandita<k2>sandita<h>2
2. {%san-dita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound or fastened toge-
ther, bound, tied; detained, caught.
<LEND>

<L>49165<pc>1059-a<k1>sandAmitaka<k2>sandAmitaka
{#sandAmitaka#}¦ {%sandāmitaka, am,%} n. (doubtful),
a poem of three stanzas.
<LEND>

<L>49166<pc>1059-a<k1>sandAva<k2>sandAva
{#sandAva#}¦ {%san-dāva, as,%} m. (probably for {%san-%}
{%drāva%}), flight, retreat, running away.
<LEND>

<L>49167<pc>1059-a<k1>sandita<k2>sandita<h>1
{#sandita#} 1¦. and 2. {%san-dita.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>49168<pc>1059-a<k1>sandiS<k2>sandiS
{#sandiS#}¦ {%san-diś (sam-diś),%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to point out, appoint; to assign, destine
for; to commission, depute, direct, give an order or
message to any one (sometimes with two acc.); to
pronounce, state, communicate intelligence, report,
send any one (acc.) with a message to another
(dat.); to order, command, declare: Caus. {%-deśa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to point out or declare or
communicate; to invite or ask to speak about.
<LEND>

<L>49169<pc>1059-a<k1>sandiSat<k2>sandiSat
{%San-diśat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} pointing out,
assigning; informing, telling, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49170<pc>1059-a<k1>sandiSya<k2>sandiSya
{%San-diśya,%}¦ ind. having pointed out, having as-
signed, having instructed or directed.
<LEND>

<L>49171<pc>1059-a<k1>sandizwa<k2>sandizwa
{%San-diṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ pointed out, assigned,
indicated, directed; communicated, told, related (as
tidings or a message); promised, engaged, agreed;
({%am%}), n. news, tidings, information. {%—Sandiṣṭār-%}
{%tha (˚ṭa-ar˚), as,%} m. one who communicates infor-
mation or news, a messenger, royal messenger,
herald, pursuivant.
<LEND>

<L>49172<pc>1059-a<k1>sandeSa<k2>sandeSa
{%San-deśa, as,%}¦ m. communication of intelligence,
information, tidings, news; a message, commission,
command, direction; a particular kind of sweetmeat
or savoury mixture. {%—Sandeśa-vāc, k,%} f. communi-
cation of intelligence, news, tidings. {%—Sandeśa-hara%}
or {%sandeśa-hāraka, as,%} m. a news-bringer, message-
bearer, messenger, courier; an envoy, ambassador.
<LEND>

<L>49173<pc>1059-a<k1>sandeSaka<k2>sandeSaka
{%San-deśaka, am,%}¦ n. information, news, tidings.
<LEND>

<L>49174<pc>1059-a<k1>sandeSita<k2>sandeSita
{%San-deśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to point out, made
to declare, asked to speak about.
<LEND>

<L>49175<pc>1059-a<k1>sandezwavya<k2>sandezwavya
{%San-deṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pointed out or
indicated, to be enjoined; to be communicated;
({%am%}), n. an injunction, direction, order.
<LEND>

<L>49176<pc>1059-a<k1>sandih<k2>sandih<h>1
{#sandih#} 1¦. {%san-dih (sam-dih),%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-deg-%}
{%dhi, -digdhe, -degdhum,%} to smear over, besmear,
anoint, plaster over, cover over, obliterate; to heap
together: Pass. {%-dihyate,%} to be plastered or smeared
over; to become indistinct or doubtful; to be uncertain
or dubious: Caus. {%-dehayati, -te, -yitum,%} to make
indistinct or uncertain, confuse, perplex; to be doubt-
ful or uncertain (A.).
<LEND>

<L>49177<pc>1059-a<k1>sandigDa<k2>sandigDa
{%San-digdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ besmeared, smeared
over, covered, confused, indistinct, obscure, unintel-
ligible; doubted, questioned, dubious, doubtful; en-
tertaining doubt, unsettled, despairing; uncertain,
unsafe, dangerous riskful. {%—Sandigdha-tā,%} f. or
{%sandigdha-tva, am,%} n. uncertainty, hesitation, in-
distinctness. {%—Sandigdha-niścaya, as, ā, am,%} one
who hesitates to hold a firm opinion; one who is
confident in a doubtful matter. {%—Sandigdha-buddhi%}
or {%sandigdha-mati, is, is, i,%} having a doubtful
mind, sceptical, doubtful about the use of religious
observances. {%—Sandigdha-lekhya, am,%} n. a writing
or document of doubtful meaning or authority.
{%—Sandigdhākṣara (˚dha-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing indistinct utterance. {%—Sandigdhārtha (˚dha- %}
[Page1059-b+ 76]
{%ar˚), as,%} m. doubtful meaning, dubious interpreta-
tion; a disputed debt; ({%as, ā, am%}), having doubtful
meaning, dubious in sense.
<LEND>

<L>49178<pc>1059-b<k1>sandih<k2>sandih<h>2
2. {%san-dih, dhik,%}¦ f., Ved. smearing over, covering
over; a heap, accumulation.
<LEND>

<L>49179<pc>1059-b<k1>sandihAna<k2>sandihAna
{%San-dihāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ doubtful, dubious, un-
certain.
<LEND>

<L>49180<pc>1059-b<k1>sandihya<k2>sandihya
{%San-dihya,%}¦ ind. having smeared over, being in
doubt, being subject to doubt.
<LEND>

<L>49181<pc>1059-b<k1>sandihyamAna<k2>sandihyamAna
{%San-dihyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being or becoming
doubtful, uncertain, obscure.
<LEND>

<L>49182<pc>1059-b<k1>sandeGa<k2>sandeGa
{%San-degha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= san-deha%} below.
<LEND>

<L>49183<pc>1059-b<k1>sandeha<k2>sandeha
{%San-deha, as,%}¦ m. doubt, uncertainty, suspense;
risk, danger. {%—Sandeha-gandha, as,%} m. the
(slightest) shade of a doubt. {%—Sandeha-dolā-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being in the swing or perplexity of
doubt.
<LEND>

<L>49184<pc>1059-b<k1>sandehaya<k2>sandehaya
{%San-dehaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%-dehayati,%} &c., to render
doubtful or uncertain, make dubious.
<LEND>

<L>49185<pc>1059-b<k1>sandehayAna<k2>sandehayAna
{%San-dehayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being in doubt or
uncertainty.
<LEND>

<L>49186<pc>1059-b<k1>sandehin<k2>sandehin
{%Sandehin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ doubtful, dubious; doubting.
<LEND>

<L>49187<pc>1059-b<k1>sandI<k2>sandI<h>1
{#sandI#} 1¦. {%san-dī%} ({%sam-dī,%} see rt. 2. {%dī%}), cl.
3. P. (Ved. Impv. 2nd sing. {%-dīdihi%} or {%-didīhi%}), to
shine together; to make very bright or manifest,
(Sāy. {%= samyak prakāśayati.%})
<LEND>

<L>49188<pc>1059-b<k1>sandI<k2>sandI<h>2
{#sandI#} 2¦. {%san-dī%} f. (perhaps connected with
3. {%san-dā%}), a small bedstead or cot ({%= khaṭṭā%}).
<LEND>

<L>49189<pc>1059-b<k1>sandIkz<k2>sandIkz
{#sandIkz#}¦ {%san-dīkṣ (sam-d˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-dīk-%}
{%ṣate, -dīkṣitum,%} to consecrate one's self together
or along with, be initiated with others.
<LEND>

<L>49190<pc>1059-b<k1>sandIkzita<k2>sandIkzita
{%San-dīkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ consecrated together,
initiated along with others.
<LEND>

<L>49191<pc>1059-b<k1>sandIp<k2>sandIp
{#sandIp#}¦ {%san-dīp (sam-dīp),%} cl. 4. A. (ep. also
P.) {%-dīpyate (-ti), -dīpitum,%} to blaze up, flame;
burn or shine very brightly, glow: Caus. {%-dīpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to set on fire, light up, kindle, inflame,
illumine; to inflame with anger; to fire, animate,
excite, inspirit, encourage.
<LEND>

<L>49192<pc>1059-b<k1>sandIpana<k2>sandIpana
{%San-dīpana, as, ī, am,%}¦ lighting up, kindling,
inflaming, inspiriting, encouraging, ({%kāmāgni-s˚,%}
kindling the fire of love, exciting sexual desire);
({%am%}), n. the act of lighting up, inflaming, inflam-
mation, kindling (of wrath &c.), encouragement;
({%as%}), m., N. of one of the arrows of Kāma-deva
(god of love).
<LEND>

<L>49193<pc>1059-b<k1>sandIpita<k2>sandIpita
{%San-dīpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lighted up, kindled, in-
flamed, excited.
<LEND>

<L>49194<pc>1059-b<k1>sandIpta<k2>sandIpta
{%San-dīpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ inflamed, flaming, burning,
being on fire. {%—Sandīpta-locana, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing inflamed or flashing eyes.
<LEND>

<L>49195<pc>1059-b<k1>sandIpya<k2>sandIpya
{%San-dīpya, as,%}¦ m. the plant Celosia Cristata (=
{%mayūra-śikhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>49196<pc>1059-b<k1>sandIpyat<k2>sandIpyat
{%San-dīpyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flaming up, burning,
shining.
<LEND>

<L>49197<pc>1059-b<k1>sanduz<k2>sanduz
{#sanduz#}¦ {%san-duṣ (sam-d˚),%} cl. 4. P. {%-duṣ-%}
{%yati, -doṣṭum,%} to be or become utterly corrupt,
be defiled or polluted, become unclean: Caus. {%-dū-%}
{%ṣayati, -yitum,%} to corrupt, defile, pollute, stain,
spoil; to revile, abuse, censure, libel, expose to shame
or infamy.
<LEND>

<L>49198<pc>1059-b<k1>sanduzwa<k2>sanduzwa
{%San-duṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ polluted, defiled, unclean;
very depraved, wicked, bad; ill-disposed, ill-affected
towards (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>49199<pc>1059-b<k1>sandUzaRa<k2>sandUzaRa
{%San-dūṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of vitiating or cor-
rupting, defiling, any vice which causes infamy.
<LEND>

<L>49200<pc>1059-b<k1>sandUzita<k2>sandUzita
{%San-dūṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ utterly corrupted, vitiated,
defiled, stained, made unclean; made or grown
worse (as a disease); exposed to shame, reviled,
abused.
<LEND>

<L>49201<pc>1059-b<k1>sandUzya<k2>sandUzya
{%San-dūṣya,%}¦ ind. having entirely spoiled or cor-
rupted, having vitiated.
<LEND>

<L>49202<pc>1059-b<k1>sanduh<k2>sanduh
{#sanduh#}¦ {%san-duh (sam-duh),%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-dog-%}
{%dhi, -dugdhe,%} &c. (see rt. 2. {%duh%}), to milk at the
same time, milk together; to milk out, suck: Caus.
{%-dohayati, -yitum,%} to cause to milk, &c.
<LEND>
[Page1059-c+ 76]

<L>49203<pc>1059-c<k1>sandugDa<k2>sandugDa
{%San-dugdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ milked at the same
time, milked together.
<LEND>

<L>49204<pc>1059-c<k1>sandoha<k2>sandoha
{%San-doha, as,%}¦ m. ‘the whole of a quantity of
drawn milk,’ any quantity, multitude, mass, assem-
blage.
<LEND>

<L>49205<pc>1059-c<k1>sandohya<k2>sandohya
{%San-dohya,%}¦ ind. having caused to milk.
<LEND>

<L>49206<pc>1059-c<k1>sandfB<k2>sandfB
{#sandfB#}¦ {%san-dṛbh (sam-d˚),%} cl. 6. P. {%-dṛ-%}
{%bhati, -darbhitum,%} to string or bind together; to
connect, arrange, compose; to collect or bind into
a bunch or tuft, weave into a garland, interweave.
<LEND>

<L>49207<pc>1059-c<k1>sandarBa<k2>sandarBa
{%San-darbha, as,%}¦ m. stringing or connecting toge-
ther (especially into a wreath or chaplet), weaving,
interweaving, arranging; collecting, uniting, mixture;
regular connection, coherence, continuity, composi-
tion; construction. {%—Sandarbha-viruddha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} contrary to order or consistency, incoherent,
unconnected. {%—Sandarbha-śuddha, as, ā, am,%}
clearly arranged, coherent, connected. {%—Sandarbha-%}
{%śuddhi, is,%} f. clearness of connection or arrange-
ment (as of the parts of a composition or narrative),
regular coherence.
<LEND>

<L>49208<pc>1059-c<k1>sandfbDa<k2>sandfbDa
{%San-dṛbdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ strung together, inter-
woven, bound or collected into a tuft or bunch;
arranged, composed.
<LEND>

<L>49209<pc>1059-c<k1>sandfS<k2>sandfS<h>1
{#sandfS#} 1¦. {%san-dṛś (sam-d˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%sampaś-%}
{%yati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%sandraṣṭum,%} to see together
or at the same time; to look at steadfastly, see well,
gaze at, see, behold, view, perceive, become aware
of, recognise; to review; to regard, consider, reflect
upon; to calculate, enumerate; to overlook, wink
at, allow to happen; to look about (A. if without
an object, Pāṇ. 1. 3, 29, Vārtt. 2): Pass. {%-dṛśyate,%}
to be seen at the same time, appear together; to
look like, resemble, be similar, be equal; to be
observed, become visible, appear: Caus. {%-darśayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to see well, make manifest, show,
display; to represent; to show one's self to any one
(acc.).
<LEND>

<L>49210<pc>1059-c<k1>sandarSana<k2>sandarSana
{%San-darśana, am,%}¦ n. the act of looking stead-
fastly, gazing, looking, viewing, beholding, seeing,
sight, vision, seeing one another, meeting, appear-
ance, presence; regard, consideration, reflection;
the act of causing to see, showing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49211<pc>1059-c<k1>sandarSayat<k2>sandarSayat
{%San-darśayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to see, show-
ing, pointing out.
<LEND>

<L>49212<pc>1059-c<k1>sandarSita<k2>sandarSita
{%San-darśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shown, pointed out;
displayed, manifested.
<LEND>

<L>49213<pc>1059-c<k1>sandarSya<k2>sandarSya
{%San-darśya,%}¦ ind. having made to appear, having
shown, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49214<pc>1059-c<k1>sandidarSayizu<k2>sandidarSayizu
{%San-didarśayiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to show,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>49215<pc>1059-c<k1>sandfS<k2>sandfS<h>2
2. {%san-dṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ Ved. one who sees well or
thoroughly, (Sāy. {%samyak paśyati yaḥ%}); ({%k%}), f.
sight, vision; a glance, look.
<LEND>

<L>49216<pc>1059-c<k1>sandfSya<k2>sandfSya
{%San-dṛśya,%}¦ ind. having looked at, having beheld,
&c.; having considered.
<LEND>

<L>49217<pc>1059-c<k1>sandfSyamAna<k2>sandfSyamAna
{%San-dṛśyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being seen well or
thoroughly, being looked at, being foreseen.
<LEND>

<L>49218<pc>1059-c<k1>sandfzwa<k2>sandfzwa
{%San-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seen, beheld, ({%pāpa-%}
{%sandṛṣṭa,%} having an evil aspect); foreseen, antici-
pated.
<LEND>

<L>49219<pc>1059-c<k1>sandfzwi<k2>sandfzwi
{%San-dṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. complete sight, full view; a
sight, glance, look, aspect.
<LEND>

<L>49220<pc>1059-c<k1>sampaSyat<k2>sampaSyat
{%Sam-paśyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ looking at.
<LEND>

<L>49221<pc>1059-c<k1>sampaSyamAna<k2>sampaSyamAna
{%Sam-paśyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ beholding.
<LEND>

<L>49222<pc>1059-c<k1>sandeha<k2>sandeha
{#sandeha#}¦ {%san-deha.%} See under 1. {%san-dih.%}
<LEND>

<L>49223<pc>1059-c<k1>sando<k2>sando
{#sando#}¦ {%san-do (sam-do)%} = 2. {%san-dā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>49224<pc>1059-c<k1>sandoha<k2>sandoha
{#sandoha#}¦ {%san-doha.%} See under {%san-duh.%}
<LEND>

<L>49225<pc>1059-c<k1>sandyut<k2>sandyut
{#sandyut#}¦ {%san-dyut (sam-d˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-dyotate,%}
{%-dyotitum,%} to shine together with, shine along with,
rival in shining; to shine forth.
<LEND>

<L>49226<pc>1059-c<k1>sandru<k2>sandru
{#sandru#}¦ {%san-dru (sam-dru),%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati,%}
{%-drotum,%} to run together; to run away.
<LEND>

<L>49227<pc>1059-c<k1>sandrAva<k2>sandrAva
{%San-drāva, as,%}¦ m. running together, running
away, flight, retreat.
<LEND>

<L>49228<pc>1059-c<k1>sanDanv<k2>sanDanv
{#sanDanv#}¦ {%san-dhanv (sam-dh˚),%} cl. 1. A.
[Page1060-a+ 80]
{%-dhanvate,%} &c., to flow towards, be directed towards,
(in Ṛg-veda III. 31, 1. according to Sāy. {%san-da-%}
{%dhanve = ātmānaṃ sandhatte.%})
<LEND>

<L>49229<pc>1060-a<k1>sanDA<k2>sanDA
{#sanDA#}¦ {%san-dhā (sam-dhā),%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte%} (ep. {%-dadhāmahe = -dadhmahe%}),
{%-dhātum%} (ep. {%-dhitum%}), to place or hold together,
join together, unite, combine, connect, fasten toge-
ther; to repair, restore, mend, heal; to make good,
atone for, redress; to put together, compose, com-
pound, make, construct, prepare, mix; to draw toge-
ther, contract, close up, close; to bring together,
collect; to bring together or unite in friendship,
reconcile; to make a compact or agreement, con-
clude a league or alliance, come to terms, make
peace with (with inst. or sometimes with acc.); to be
associated or allied with (A.); to come near, approach;
to fix or compose the mind or thoughts, (see under
rt. 1. {%dhā%}); to put or lay down by the side of, put
or lay on, fix on (e. g. {%śaraṃ dhanuṣi san-%}
{%dadhāti%} or {%san-dhatte,%} he fixes an arrow on a
bow; sometimes {%dhanur śareṇa san-dhā,%} to con-
nect a bow with an arrow); to aim at, direct towards;
to take hold of, grasp, support, sustain; to render
aid, assist; to take hold of with the mind, compre-
hend, conceive; to hold, possess, have; to perform,
do; to grant, yield; to inflict; to be a match for,
hold out against (A.); to employ, make use of
(with inst.): Pass. {%-dhīyate,%} to be joined together,
be connected, unite one's self with, become recon-
ciled, &c.; to become possessed of (with inst.):
Desid. {%-dhitsati,%} to wish to place or join together,
desire to unite or repair.
<LEND>

<L>49230<pc>1060-a<k1>saMhita<k2>saMhita
{%Saṃ-hita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. rt. 1. {%dhā%} with {%sam%}),
put together, placed together, conjoined, combined,
joined, connected, united, attached, agreed, agreeing
with, conformable to, in accordance with, ({%dharma-%}
{%s˚,%} in accordance with justice); referring to, relating
to; collected, assembled; compiled; placed, fixed;
endowed with, provided, furnished, equipped, pos-
sessed of, accompanied by, abounding in; caused by;
({%ā%}), f. conjunction, combination, connection, union;
a collection, compilation, compendium; any metho-
dical or arranged collection of texts or verses; the
real continuous hymnical text of the Veda as formed
out of the Padas or separate words (see {%pada%}) by
proper phonetic changes according to various schools,
(the Prātiśākhyas teaching how these Padas must
change in order to become the Saṃhitā; hence the
term Saṃhitā is applied to that portion of the Veda
which contains the collection of Mantras or hymns
thus formed, collected, and arranged according to
particular Śākhās or schools [cf. {%śākhā%}]; the number
of Vedas being four, and the Yajur-veda having two
branches, it follows that there must be at least five
Saṃhitās of the Veda, viz. the Ṛk-s˚, Taittirīya-s˚,
Vājasaneyi-s˚, Sāma-s˚, Atharva-s˚; for the division
of the Saṃhitā of the Śākala school of the Ṛg-veda,
which is the only Śākhā of this Veda preserved, see
{%maṇḍala;%} Vyāsa is said to have compiled a Saṃ-
hitā of the Purāṇas, the substance of which is sup-
posed to be represented by the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa); a
compilation or compendium of laws, code, digest;
(in grammar) the junction or combination of letters
according to euphonic rules ({%= sandhi,%} but some-
times considered rather as the state preparatory to
the actual junction than the junction itself); the
Being who holds together and supports the universe,
(a term applied to the Supreme Being, according to
some); N. of an astrological work; [cf. {%vṛhat-s˚.%}]
{%—Saṃhita-puṣpikā,%} f. a particular plant {%(= mi-%}
{%śreyā)%}. {%—Saṃhitā-pāṭha, as,%} m. the continuous
text of the Veda (as formed out of the Pada-pāṭha).
{%—Saṃhitā-pradīpa, as,%} m. ‘light of the Saṃhitā,’
N. of a work. {%—Saṃhitā-vat,%} ind. as in the Saṃ-
hitā text. {%—Saṃhiteṣu (˚ta-iṣu), us, us, u,%} one
who has fitted or placed an arrow on a bow-string.
{%—Saṃhitopaniṣada (˚tā-up˚)%} or {%saṃhitopani-%}
{%ṣad-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n., N. of a Brāhmaṇa (of
the Sāma-veda). {%—Saṃhitoru (˚ta-ūru), us, us%} or
{%ūs, u,%} having the thighs joined (through obesity).
<LEND>
[Page1060-b+ 81]

<L>49231<pc>1060-b<k1>sandaDAna<k2>sandaDAna
{%San-dadhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ placing or holding
together; being at peace with, making peace, being
reconciled; fixing in or on; holding, possessing, having.
<LEND>

<L>49232<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDa<k2>sanDa
{%San-dha, as, ā, am,%}¦ holding together; joined,
united, closely blended; placing in or on; possessing;
({%ā%}), f. junction, intimate union, association, identi-
fication; alliance, compact, stipulation, agreement,
assent, promise; twilight (as joining night and
morning or day and evening; cf. {%sandhyā%}); fixation,
steadiness, fixedness; steady continuance in any state;
state, condition; a boundary, limit.
<LEND>

<L>49233<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDaya<k2>sanDaya
{%Sandhaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%-dhayati, -yitum,%} to join
together, reconcile; to fasten on, (see {%san-dhita.%})
<LEND>

<L>49234<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDAtavya<k2>sanDAtavya
{%San-dhātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be placed or held
together, to be united or connected, to be allied
with, to be reconciled.
<LEND>

<L>49235<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDAtf<k2>sanDAtf
{%San-dhātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who puts together
or joins, a joiner, uniter.
<LEND>

<L>49236<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDAna<k2>sanDAna<h>1
1. {%san-dhāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of placing or holding
together, joining, junction, uniting, tying or binding
together, intimate union, combining, combination,
repairing, restoration; composing, compounding,
mixing, preparation; drawing together, contraction
(as of the skin by astringents &c.); bringing toge-
ther, alliance, league, association, companionship,
peace; the act of fixing an arrow on a bow-string;
directing, taking aim; direction; advertence, atten-
tion; sustaining, supporting, reception, receiving;
spirituous liquor; a preparation of pickles &c. (made
from the Vilva and other fruits); mixed or bell-
metal ({%= saurāṣṭra%}); a kind of relish eaten to
excite thirst; sour rice-gruel; ({%am, ī%}), n. f. distil-
lation, distilling; the manufacture of fermented or
spirituous liquors; ({%ī%}), f. a braziery, foundery, place
where metals are wrought or stored. {%—Sandhāna-%}
{%karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} causing union or combination,
who or what re-unites or heals or reconciles; uniting,
connecting; ({%am%}), n. the act of combining or unit-
ing; healing; allying, making peace. {%—Sandhāna-%}
{%kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ, = sandhāna-karaṇa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>49237<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDAna<k2>sanDAna<h>2
2. {%san-dhāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (ep. for {%san-dadhāna%}),
placing together, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49238<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDAnikA<k2>sanDAnikA
{%Sandhānikā,%}¦ f. a kind of pickle or sauce.
<LEND>

<L>49239<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDAnita<k2>sanDAnita
{%Sandhānita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. 1. {%san-dhāna%}), joined,
united, strung together; bound, tied.
<LEND>

<L>49240<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDAnin<k2>sanDAnin
{%Sandhānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ tying or binding together;
clever in taking aim, shrewd; ({%inī%}), f. a cow-house
({%= go-gṛha%}).
<LEND>

<L>49241<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDAnI<k2>sanDAnI
{%San-dhānī,%}¦ f. See under 1. {%san-dhāna%} above.
<LEND>

<L>49242<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDAya<k2>sanDAya
{%San-dhāya,%}¦ ind. having placed together, having
joined or united; having repaired; having formed
an alliance or made peace; having fixed an arrow
on a bow-string, having taken aim, shooting at.
<LEND>

<L>49243<pc>1060-b<k1>sanDi<k2>sanDi
{%San-dhi, is,%}¦ m. placing or holding together, con-
junction, junction, connection, combination, union,
contact; composition, construction, structure; distil-
lation; compact, agreement, alliance, league, reconcili-
ation, peace, making a treaty of peace, negotiating alli-
ances, (one of the six Guṇas or courses of action
recommended to kings, see {%guṇa;%} many kinds of
treaty are enumerated, e. g. {%adṛṣṭa-puruṣaḥ%}
{%sandhiḥ,%} an alliance concluded without the inter-
vention of an agent; {%ucchinnaḥ sandhiḥ,%} a treaty
purchased by the cession of fertile territories; {%kāñ-%}
{%canaḥ sandhiḥ,%} ‘golden alliance,’ an alliance which
lasts throughout the lifetime of the parties, each of
whom pursues the same object, see also {%kapāla-s˚,%}
{%santāna-s˚%}); euphonic junction of final and initial
letters in grammar, (every sentence in Sanskrit being
regarded as a euphonic chain, the links being syl-
lables rather than words, and a break in the chain
denoting the end of a sentence, commonly called
‘a Virāma or stop;’ this Sandhi or euphonic coa-
lition is applied both to the final and initial letters
of separate Padas or finished words in a sentence
and to the final letters of Dhātus or roots, and Prāti-
padikas or nominal bases when combined with ter-
minations and affixes to form such words); a con-
necting link (as of a perpendicular in mensuration);
a joint, articulation (of the body &c.); juncture,
critical juncture, opportune moment; division, sepa-
[Page1060-c+ 81]
ration; breaking, dividing; a breach, chasm, mine,
hole, opening or cavity made in a wall or underneath
a building by a housebreaker or enemy &c.; the
vagina or vulva (in anatomy); a division in a
drama (e. g. critical junctures, changes of situa-
tion &c. considered as breaks though contributing
to the connection of the whole); a fold; an interval,
pause, rest; a period at the expiration of each Yuga
or age (equivalent to one sixth of its duration and
intervening before the commencement of the next;
occurring also at the end of each Manv-antara and
Kalpa). {%—Sandhi-kuśala, as, ā, am,%} skilled in the
art of making treaties or forming alliances. {%—San-%}
{%dhi-granthi, is,%} m. ‘joint-knot,’ a synovial gland
connecting and lubricating a joint. {%—Sandhi-caura,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘hole-thief,’ one who enters a house by
undermining it, a housebreaker. {%—Sandhi-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} produced by Sandhi; ({%am%}), n. spirituous
liquor. {%—Sandhi-jīvaka, as,%} m. one who lives by
dishonest means (especially by making matches or
as a go-between). {%—Sandhi-tas,%} ind. from an alli-
ance. {%—Sandhi-dūṣaṇa, am,%} n. the violation of
a treaty or alliance. {%—Sandhi-pūjā,%} f., N. of the
third period in the great autumnal Durgā-pūjā.
{%—Sandhi-prabandhana, am,%} n. (in anatomy) the
ligament of a joint. {%—Sandhi-bandha, as,%} m. the
plant Kæmpferia Rotunda. {%—Sandhi-bandhana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘joint-binding,’ a ligament, tendon, nerve.
{%—Sandhi-bhaṅga, as,%} m. joint-fracture, dislocation
of a joint. {%—Sandhi-mati, is,%} m., N. of the minister
of Jayendra, king of Kaśmīra. {%—Sandhi-mukta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘joint-loosened,’ dislocated. {%—Sandhi-mukti,%}
{%is,%} f. ‘joint-loosening,’ dislocation of a joint. {%—San-%}
{%dhi-randhrakā,%} f. a hole or breach in a wall.
{%—Sandhi-vigraha, au,%} m. du. peace and war.
{%—Sandhi-vigrahaka, as,%} m. one who has the
charge of peace and war, a chief minister. {%—Sandhi-%}
{%vigrahādhikāra (˚ha-adh˚), as,%} m. superintend-
ence of peace and war, war-ministry. {%—Sandhi-%}
{%vigrahādhikārin, ī,%} m. superintendent of peace and
war, a chief political minister. {%—Sandhi-vicakṣaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. one skilled in peace-making, an able nego-
tiator of treaties. {%—Sandhi-vid, t, t, t,%} skilled in
alliances; ({%t%}), m. a negotiator of treaties, a minister.
{%—Sandhi-velā,%} f. ‘a connecting period, time of
junction,’ any period or time which connects parts
of the day or night or fortnight (e. g. morning,
noon, evening, new moon, the first or thirteenth day
of the fortnight, full moon, &c.). {%—Sandhi-sitāsita-%}
{%roga (˚ta-as˚), as,%} m. a kind of disease. {%—Sandhi-%}
{%stotra, am,%} n., N. of a particular hymn. {%—Sandhi-%}
{%hāraka, as,%} m. a housebreaker, (see {%sandhi-%}
{%caura.%}) {%—Sandhy-akṣara, am,%} n. a compound
vowel, diphthong, N. of the diphthongs {%e, ai, o,%}
{%au;%} [cf. {%samānākṣara.%}] {%—Sandhy-adhyāya, as,%}
m. an Adhyāya or chapter on Sandhi.
<LEND>

<L>49244<pc>1060-c<k1>sanDika<k2>sanDika
{%Sandhika, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fever (said to be
caused by a vitiated state of the three humors of
the body); ({%ā%}), f. distillation.
<LEND>

<L>49245<pc>1060-c<k1>sanDiga<k2>sanDiga
{%Sandhiga,%}¦ a kind of disease, (probably for {%san-%}
{%dhika.%}) {%—Sandhiga-cikitsā,%} f. the treatment or
cure of Sandhiga.
<LEND>

<L>49246<pc>1060-c<k1>sanDita<k2>sanDita
{%Sandhita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%sandhaya%}), joined or
fastened together, united, strung, bound, tied; recon-
ciled, allied; fixed, fitted, prepared, mixed together;
pickled; ({%am%}), n. pickles, acid preparations, spirituous
liquor. {%—Sandhiteṣu (˚ta-iṣu), us, us, u,%} having an
arrow fitted on a bow-string; [cf. {%saṃhiteṣu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>49247<pc>1060-c<k1>sanDitavya<k2>sanDitavya
{%Sandhitavya, as, ā, am, = san-dheya%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>49248<pc>1060-c<k1>sanDitsu<k2>sanDitsu
{%San-dhitsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to make peace or
form an alliance with.
<LEND>

<L>49249<pc>1060-c<k1>sanDinI<k2>sanDinI
{%Sandhinī,%}¦ f. a cow with calf, one which has just
taken the bull; a cow milked unseasonably. {%—San-%}
{%dhinī-kṣīra, am,%} n. the milk of a cow in heat,
(prohibited as an article of food.)
<LEND>

<L>49250<pc>1060-c<k1>sanDilA<k2>sanDilA
{%Sandhilā,%}¦ f. a breach or hole made in a wall; a
chasm, mine, pit; spirituous liquor; a river.
<LEND>

<L>49251<pc>1060-c<k1>sanDIyamAna<k2>sanDIyamAna
{%San-dhīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being joined toge-
ther by the rules of Sandhi, (as words in the Saṃhitā
text of the Vedas, &c.)
<LEND>

<L>49252<pc>1060-c<k1>sanDeya<k2>sanDeya
{%San-dheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be joined or united, &c.;
[Page1061-a+ 78]
to be connected or allied, &c.; to be reconciled; to
be made peace with; to be aimed at.
<LEND>

<L>49253<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDya<k2>sanDya
{%Sandhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ of or belonging to Sandhi,
relating to euphonic conjunction, joined together by
Sandhi.
<LEND>

<L>49254<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDyA<k2>sanDyA<h>1
1. {%sandhyā,%}¦ f. (for 2. see under {%san-dhyai%}), hold-
ing or joining together, union, conjunction, connec-
tion; joint, division; boundary, limit; twilight (a
period consisting of two Daṇḍas connecting day and
night), morning or evening twilight, evening, dusk;
early morning, day-break; Twilight personified as
daughter of Brahmā and wife of Śiva; the period
which precedes a Yuga or age of the world (see {%yuga%});
any one of the three divisions of the day, (forenoon,
noon, and afternoon); morning or evening or mid-
day prayer (or any religious exercise, such as abstrac-
tion, meditation, repetition of Mantras, sipping
water, &c., performed at the three divisions of the
day); promise, agreement, assent; a kind of jasmine
(according to some); N. of a river. {%—Sandhyāṃśa%}
{%(˚yā-aṃ˚), as,%} m. ‘portion of twilight,’ the period
at the end of each Yuga, (see {%yuga.%}) {%—Sandhyāṃśu%}
{%(˚yā-aṃ˚), us,%} m. ‘twilight-ray,’ twilight. {%—Sandhyā-%}
{%kāla, as,%} m. twilight-period, (a term applied to the
intervals of a Yuga, see {%yuga%}); evening. {%—Sandhyā-%}
{%cala (˚yā-ac˚), as,%} m. ‘twilight-mountain,’ N. of a
mountain. {%—Sandhyā-traya, am,%} n. the three
divisions or periods of the day (i. e. forenoon, noon,
and afternoon). {%—Sandhyā-tva, am,%} n. the state of
twilight; the time of twilight (period for devotional
exercises). {%—Sandhyā-nāṭin, ī,%} m. ‘dancing at
evening twilight,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sandhyā-pā-%}
{%tra, am,%} n. a vessel used for pouring out water in
performing the Sandhyā ceremonies. {%—Sandhyā-%}
{%puṣpī,%} f. a kind of jasmine; nutmeg ({%= jāti%} or
{%jātī%}). {%—Sandhyā-bala, as,%} m. ‘strong in twilight,’
a demon, imp, Rākṣasa. {%—Sandhyā-bali, is,%} m.
‘receiving twilight-oblations,’ a clay or stone image
of the bull of Śiva (usually standing in the temples
of that deity). {%—Sandhyābhra (˚yā-abh˚), am,%} n.
an evening cloud; a sort of red chalk {%(= suvarṇa-%}
{%gairika)%}. {%—Sandhyā-maṅgala, am,%} n. an evening
solemnity or religious service. {%—Sandhyā-rāga, am,%}
n. ‘having the colour of twilight,’ red-lead. {%—San-%}
{%dhyārāma (˚yā-ār˚), as,%} m. ‘delighting in San-
dhyā,’ epithet of Brahmā. {%—Sandhyā-vandana,%}
{%am,%} n. morning and evening adoration or prayer.
{%—Sandhyā-vidhi, is,%} m. a Sandhyā rite, (see
above.) {%—Sandhyā-śaṅkha, as,%} m. the evening
conch, the conch which sounds the evening hour.
{%—Sandhyā-samaya, as,%} m. twilight-period, even-
ing; a portion of each Yuga, (see {%yuga.%}) {%—San-%}
{%dhyopaniṣad (˚ya-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad
belonging to the Atharva-veda. {%—Sandhyopāsana%}
{%(˚yā-up˚), am,%} n. worship performed at the Sandhyās,
(see above.)
<LEND>

<L>49255<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDAraRa<k2>sanDAraRa
{#sanDAraRa#}¦ {%san-dhāraṇa,%} &c. See under
{%san-dhṛ,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>49256<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDAv<k2>sanDAv<h>1
{#sanDAv#} 1¦. {%san-dhāv (sam-dh˚),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-dhāvati, -te, -dhāvitum,%} to run together; to run
up to violently, assail, attack; to run to.
<LEND>

<L>49257<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDAv<k2>sanDAv<h>2
{#sanDAv#} 2¦. {%san-dhāv (sam-dh˚),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-dhāvate, -dhāvitum,%} Ved. to rub one's self, wash
one's self.
<LEND>

<L>49258<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDAvya<k2>sanDAvya
{%San-dhāvya,%}¦ ind. having washed one's self.
<LEND>

<L>49259<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDukz<k2>sanDukz
{#sanDukz#}¦ {%san-dhukṣ (sam-dh˚),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-dhukṣate, -dhukṣitum,%} to kindle; to animate,
revive: Caus. {%-dhukṣayati, -yitum,%} to set on fire,
light up, inflame, animate.
<LEND>

<L>49260<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDukzaRa<k2>sanDukzaRa
{%San-dhukṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. kindling, inflaming, in-
flammation.
<LEND>

<L>49261<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDukzayat<k2>sanDukzayat
{%San-dhukṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ setting on fire,
kindling.
<LEND>

<L>49262<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDukzita<k2>sanDukzita
{%San-dhukṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ kindled, inflamed,
lighted.
<LEND>

<L>49263<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDukzyamARa<k2>sanDukzyamARa
{%San-dhukṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being kindled
or lighted up; being increased.
<LEND>

<L>49264<pc>1061-a<k1>sanDU<k2>sanDU
{#sanDU#}¦ {%san-dhū (sam-dhū),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-dhū- %}
[Page1061-b+ 76]
{%noti, -dhūnute%} (also {%-dhunoti, -dhunute,%} see rt.
1. {%dhū%}), {%-dhotum, -dhavitum,%} to scatter or distri-
bute liberally, bestow; to seize or carry off.
<LEND>

<L>49265<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDf<k2>sanDf
{#sanDf#}¦ {%san-dhṛ (sam-dhṛ),%} cl. 10. P. A.
{%-dhārayati, -te%} (Impf. ep. {%sam-adhāram = -adhā-%}
{%rayam%}), {%-yitum,%} to hold together; to hold up,
support, sustain, preserve, maintain; to hold back,
restrain; to hold, have, possess; to hold, bear, carry;
to hold, observe, keep; to hold or fix the mind
({%manas%}) on anything (loc.); to keep in the mind
or memory, remember; to bear, suffer, endure, to
hold out, remain alive, survive, exist: Pass. {%-dhār-%}
{%yate,%} to be held together or supported, be held up,
&c.; to be maintained or governed.
<LEND>

<L>49266<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDAraRa<k2>sanDAraRa
{%San-dhāraṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. holding together,
holding in, restraining, observing, practising.
<LEND>

<L>49267<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDArayat<k2>sanDArayat
{%San-dhārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ holding or possessing
completely; keeping in mind, remembering.
<LEND>

<L>49268<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDArayamARa<k2>sanDArayamARa
{%San-dhārayamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ holding together,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>49269<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDArayARa<k2>sanDArayARa
{%San-dhārayāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ holding together,
supporting, &c.; keeping back, restraining, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49270<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDArya<k2>sanDArya
{%San-dhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be held or observed
or followed.
<LEND>

<L>49271<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDAryamARa<k2>sanDAryamARa
{%San-dhāryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being held toge-
ther, being held or maintained, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49272<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDfta<k2>sanDfta
{%San-dhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ held together, compacted;
closely connected.
<LEND>

<L>49273<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDfz<k2>sanDfz
{#sanDfz#}¦ {%san-dhṛṣ (sam-dh˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhar-%}
{%ṣati,%} &c., to injure greatly, destroy: Caus. {%-dharṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to violate, ravish; to disgrace.
<LEND>

<L>49274<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDarzita<k2>sanDarzita
{%San-dharṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly injured, violated,
disgraced.
<LEND>

<L>49275<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDmA<k2>sanDmA
{#sanDmA#}¦ {%san-dhmā (sam-dh˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-dha-%}
{%mati, -dhmātum,%} to blow together; to melt toge-
ther; to proclaim aloud.
<LEND>

<L>49276<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDyE<k2>sanDyE
{#sanDyE#}¦ {%san-dhyai (sam-dh˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyā-%}
{%yati, -dhyātum,%} to reflect on, think about.
<LEND>

<L>49277<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDyA<k2>sanDyA<h>2
2. {%san-dhyā,%}¦ f. (for 1. see col. 1), reflection, medi-
tation.
<LEND>

<L>49278<pc>1061-b<k1>sanDyAtf<k2>sanDyAtf
{%San-dhyātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who reflects or
thinks about; one who binds, (Manu VIII. 342;
probably for {%san-dātṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>49279<pc>1061-b<k1>sanna<k2>sanna
{#sanna#}¦ {%sanna, sannaka.%} See under rt. 1. {%sad.%}
<LEND>

<L>49280<pc>1061-b<k1>sannad<k2>sannad
{#sannad#}¦ {%san-nad (sam-nad),%} cl. 1. P. {%-nadati,%}
{%-naditum,%} to cry aloud, roar: Caus. {%-nādayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to resound, fill with noise or cries;
to cry aloud.
<LEND>

<L>49281<pc>1061-b<k1>sannAda<k2>sannAda
{%San-nāda, as,%}¦ m. shouting together, a confused
or tumultuous noise, uproar, din, clamour; a voice,
sound.
<LEND>

<L>49282<pc>1061-b<k1>sannAdayat<k2>sannAdayat
{%San-nādayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making to sound,
causing a clamour or uproar, making to resound or
ring with.
<LEND>

<L>49283<pc>1061-b<k1>sannAdita<k2>sannAdita
{%San-nādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to resound, filled
with noise or cries.
<LEND>

<L>49284<pc>1061-b<k1>sannadDa<k2>sannadDa
{#sannadDa#}¦ {%san-naddha.%} See under {%san-nah.%}
<LEND>

<L>49285<pc>1061-b<k1>sannam<k2>sannam
{#sannam#}¦ {%san-nam (sam-nam),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-na-%}
{%mati, -te, -nantum,%} to bend together, bend down,
bow down before, bow to; to bow down in sub-
mission, submit to, comply with, obey, be obedient
(A.); to bend in the right direction, make straight,
bring into order, direct, make ready, accomplish; to
be accomplished: Caus. {%-nāmayati, -namayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to bend, cause to bow or curve, cause to
sink; to make crooked, bend together, contract;
to bend in a particular direction, make right, make
ready, prepare for a particular object.
<LEND>

<L>49286<pc>1061-b<k1>sannata<k2>sannata
{%San-nata, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent together, bowed down,
bent, curved, stooping; bent down through sorrow,
dispirited, downcast; deepened; contracted. {%—San-%}
{%nata-tara, as, ā, am,%} more deepened, deeper.
{%—Sannata-bhrū, ūs, ūs, u,%} bending or contracting
the brow, frowning. {%—Sannatāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%}
{%ī, am,%} having the body bent, stooping.
<LEND>

<L>49287<pc>1061-b<k1>sannati<k2>sannati
{%San-nati, is,%}¦ f. bowing down, reverential salutation,
[Page1061-c+ 75]
obeisance; reverence, humility; Humility (personified
as daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Dharma); sound,
noise. {%—Sannati-mat, ān,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>49288<pc>1061-c<k1>sannamat<k2>sannamat
{%San-namat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bending down, bowing.
<LEND>

<L>49289<pc>1061-c<k1>sannamamAna<k2>sannamamAna
{%San-namamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ bending together,
bending in the right direction.
<LEND>

<L>49290<pc>1061-c<k1>sannamita<k2>sannamita
{%San-namita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent together, bent.
{%—Sannamitobhayāṃsa (˚ta-ubhaya-aṃ˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having both shoulders bent.
<LEND>

<L>49291<pc>1061-c<k1>sannamya<k2>sannamya
{%San-namya,%}¦ ind. having bent together, having
bowed down.
<LEND>

<L>49292<pc>1061-c<k1>sannAma<k2>sannAma
{%San-nāma, as,%}¦ m. bowing down before any one,
worship.
<LEND>

<L>49293<pc>1061-c<k1>sannamasya<k2>sannamasya
{#sannamasya#}¦ {%san-namasya (sam-n˚),%} Nom. P.
{%-namasyati, -yitum,%} to show respect or honour, to
worship.
<LEND>

<L>49294<pc>1061-c<k1>sannaya<k2>sannaya
{#sannaya#}¦ {%san-naya.%} See under {%san-nī.%}
<LEND>

<L>49295<pc>1061-c<k1>sannard<k2>sannard
{#sannard#}¦ {%san-nard (sam-n˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-nardati%}
(ep. also A. {%-te%}), &c., to roar aloud, bellow.
<LEND>

<L>49296<pc>1061-c<k1>sannardamAna<k2>sannardamAna
{%San-nardamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ roaring aloud, bel-
lowing.
<LEND>

<L>49297<pc>1061-c<k1>sannaS<k2>sannaS<h>1
{#sannaS#} 1¦. {%san-naś%} ({%sam-naś,%} see rt. 1. {%naś%}),
cl. 1. P. A. {%-naśati, -te,%} &c. (according to some
Ved. Inf. {%san-naśe%}), Ved. to reach, attain, (Sāy. {%na%}
{%san-naśe = na samyag-āpanīyaḥ,%} i. e. {%parair%}
{%a-pradhṛṣyaḥ,%} not to be overcome by others,
Ṛg-veda VIII. 3, 10.)
<LEND>

<L>49298<pc>1061-c<k1>sannaS<k2>sannaS<h>2
{#sannaS#} 2¦. {%san-naś (sam-naś),%} cl. 4. P. {%-naś-%}
{%yati, -naśitum, -naṃṣṭum,%} to disappear entirely,
perish.
<LEND>

<L>49299<pc>1061-c<k1>sannazwa<k2>sannazwa
{%San-naṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely disappeared,
utterly perished, ruined.
<LEND>

<L>49300<pc>1061-c<k1>sannas<k2>sannas
{#sannas#}¦ {%san-nas (sam-nas),%} cl. 1. A. {%-nasate,%}
&c., Ved. to come together, meet together, assemble,
approach, be united, (in Ṛg-veda II. 16, 8. accord-
ing to Sāy. {%nasīmahi = vyāpyemahi.%})
<LEND>

<L>49301<pc>1061-c<k1>sannah<k2>sannah
{#sannah#}¦ {%san-nah (sam-nah),%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-nah-%}
{%yati, -te, -naddhum,%} to bind or tie together, bind
over, bind or fasten on, to put or gird on, clothe
with, furnish with; to put anything on one's self,
accoutre one's self, dress or arm one's self with (A.
with acc.; {%sannahyadhvam cārūṇi daṃśanāni,%}
put ye on your beautiful armour); to prepare for
doing anything (with inf.): Pass. {%-nahyate,%} to be
fastened on, &c.; to be harnessed: Caus. {%-nāhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to gird or bind on, cause to clothe
or dress one's self in.
<LEND>

<L>49302<pc>1061-c<k1>sannadDa<k2>sannadDa
{%San-naddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound or fastened or
tied together, bound round, girded round, girded on,
fastened on, girt, bound (in general), dressed or clad
in, armed, mailed, accoutred; harnessed; arranged,
arrayed, prepared, provided, ready for battle, pre-
pared or ready (in general); provided with destruc-
tive weapons, murderous, felonious; provided with
charms, &c.; well provided or furnished with any-
thing; closely attached or connected, in close con-
tact with, contiguous, bordering, near. {%—Sannaddha-%}
{%kavaca, as, ā, am,%} one who has girded on his
armour, clad in mail or accoutred.
<LEND>

<L>49303<pc>1061-c<k1>sannahana<k2>sannahana
{%San-nahana, am,%}¦ n. the act of arming, preparing,
making one's self ready, preparation.
<LEND>

<L>49304<pc>1061-c<k1>sannahya<k2>sannahya
{%San-nahya,%}¦ ind. having girded on, having bound
or fastened on.
<LEND>

<L>49305<pc>1061-c<k1>sannahyat<k2>sannahyat
{%San-nahyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ binding, fastening,
girding on.
<LEND>

<L>49306<pc>1061-c<k1>sannahyamAna<k2>sannahyamAna
{%San-nahyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being girt with,
being clothed in; being accoutred or harnessed.
<LEND>

<L>49307<pc>1061-c<k1>sannAha<k2>sannAha
{%San-nāha, as,%}¦ m. girding on armour, arming for
battle; accoutrements, armour, mail, a coat of mail
(made of iron or thick quilted cotton).
<LEND>

<L>49308<pc>1061-c<k1>sannAhya<k2>sannAhya
{%Sannāhya, as,%}¦ m. a war elephant.
<LEND>

<L>49309<pc>1061-c<k1>sannikAS<k2>sannikAS
{#sannikAS#}¦ {%san-ni-kāś (sam-),%} Caus. {%-kāśa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to make quite clear, manifest, reveal;
to make known, announce.
<LEND>

<L>49310<pc>1061-c<k1>sannikIrRa<k2>sannikIrRa
{#sannikIrRa#}¦ {%san-nikīrṇa.%} See {%san-ni-kṝ.%}
<LEND>
[Page1062-a+ 74]

<L>49311<pc>1062-a<k1>sannikfz<k2>sannikfz
{#sannikfz#}¦ {%san-ni-kṛṣ (sam-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-karṣati,%} &c., to draw together, draw near, attract,
contract.
<LEND>

<L>49312<pc>1062-a<k1>sannikarza<k2>sannikarza
{%San-nikarṣa, as,%}¦ m. bringing or drawing near,
nearness, proximity, vicinity, presence; connection,
relation; connection of an Indriya or organ of sense
with its Viṣaya or object, (this is the source of
Jñāna according to the Nyāya phil., and is of two
kinds, 1. Laukika, which is sixfold, and 2. A-laukika,
which is threefold.)
<LEND>

<L>49313<pc>1062-a<k1>sannikarzaRa<k2>sannikarzaRa
{%San-nikarṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of drawing toge-
ther, bringing near, approaching near, approximating,
approximation, proximity, vicinity.
<LEND>

<L>49314<pc>1062-a<k1>sannikfzwa<k2>sannikfzwa
{%San-nikṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn together, drawn
near, brought near, contiguous, proximate, approxi-
mate, near, adjacent, close; ({%am%}), ind. near, close
to; ({%am%}), n. proximity, vicinity, neighbourhood.
<LEND>

<L>49315<pc>1062-a<k1>sannikF<k2>sannikF
{#sannikF#}¦ {%san-ni-kṝ (sam-),%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati,%}
&c., to scatter along, strew about; to stretch out.
<LEND>

<L>49316<pc>1062-a<k1>sannikIrRa<k2>sannikIrRa
{%San-nikīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ scattered along; stretched
out at full length, lying; flung, thrown.
<LEND>

<L>49317<pc>1062-a<k1>sannikzAra<k2>sannikzAra
{#sannikzAra#}¦ {%san-nikṣāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%kṣar%}
with {%ni%} and {%sam%}), the Piyāla tree.
<LEND>

<L>49318<pc>1062-a<k1>sannikzip<k2>sannikzip
{#sannikzip#}¦ {%san-ni-kṣip (sam-),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-kṣipati, -kṣeptum,%} to throw down, put or lay
down.
<LEND>

<L>49319<pc>1062-a<k1>sannigam<k2>sannigam
{#sannigam#}¦ {%san-ni-gam (sam-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-gac-%}
{%chati, -gantum,%} to go or come together with, unite
with any one (inst.).
<LEND>

<L>49320<pc>1062-a<k1>sannigrah<k2>sannigrah
{#sannigrah#}¦ {%san-ni-grah (sam-),%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛhṇāti, -gṛhṇīte,%} &c., {%-grahītum,%} to hold or
keep down, keep under, overpower, subdue; to hold
or keep back, keep in, restrain, suppress, obstruct;
to lay hold of, seize.
<LEND>

<L>49321<pc>1062-a<k1>sannigfhya<k2>sannigfhya
{%San-nigṛhya,%}¦ ind. having held or kept in, sup-
pressing; overpowering, vanquishing, discomfiting.
<LEND>

<L>49322<pc>1062-a<k1>sanniGfz<k2>sanniGfz
{#sanniGfz#}¦ {%san-ni-ghṛṣ (sam-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-gharṣati, -gharṣitum,%} to rub or pound down
together, mix together.
<LEND>

<L>49323<pc>1062-a<k1>sannici<k2>sannici
{#sannici#}¦ {%san-ni-ci (sam-),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti,%}
{%-cinute, -cetum,%} to pile or heap up together.
<LEND>

<L>49324<pc>1062-a<k1>sannicaya<k2>sannicaya
{%San-nicaya, as,%}¦ m. piling or heaping together, a
collection; ({%as, ā, am%}), heaped together.
<LEND>

<L>49325<pc>1062-a<k1>sannicita<k2>sannicita
{%San-nicita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heaped together, collected;
congested, constipated, stagnated.
<LEND>

<L>49326<pc>1062-a<k1>sannidfS<k2>sannidfS
{#sannidfS#}¦ {%san-ni-dṛś (sam-),%} Caus. {%-darśa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to be observed, bring into
view, show, display.
<LEND>

<L>49327<pc>1062-a<k1>sannidarSita<k2>sannidarSita
{%San-nidarśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought into view,
shown, pointed out.
<LEND>

<L>49328<pc>1062-a<k1>sanniDA<k2>sanniDA
{#sanniDA#}¦ {%san-ni-dhā (sam-),%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-da-%}
{%dhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put or place down near
together, put in the same place, to place or put down
near; to deposit; to put into; to place or fix upon,
direct towards, ({%dṛṣṭim sannidhā,%} to fix the eyes
upon; {%manaḥ%} or {%hṛdayaṃ sannidhā,%} to fix or
direct the mind or thoughts, see rt. 1. {%dhā%}); to
place together, collect, pile up; to deliver over,
assign; to look at closely, inspect, observe: Pass.
{%-dhīyate,%} to be put together in the same place, to
be placed near, to be near, to be present: Caus.
{%-dhāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be put down near
or close at hand, to bring near: Pass. of Caus. {%-dhāp-%}
{%yate,%} to appear or become manifested in the presence
of (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>49329<pc>1062-a<k1>sanniDa<k2>sanniDa
{%San-nidha, am,%}¦ n. juxta-position, proximity, vici-
nity.
<LEND>

<L>49330<pc>1062-a<k1>sanniDAtf<k2>sanniDAtf
{%San-nidhātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what places
near, one who brings near or introduces; depositing,
placing in deposit; receiving in charge; ({%tā%}), m. a
receiver of stolen goods; an officer who introduces
people at court.
<LEND>

<L>49331<pc>1062-a<k1>sanniDAna<k2>sanniDAna
{%San-nidhāna, am,%}¦ n. placing down together,
juxta-position, proximity, nearness, vicinity, neigh-
[Page1062-b+ 77]
bourhood, presence, appearance, perceptibility; plac-
ing down, depositing; a receptacle; receiving, taking
charge of; ({%e%}), ind. in the vicinity or presence of,
near.
<LEND>

<L>49332<pc>1062-b<k1>sanniDApya<k2>sanniDApya
{%San-nidhāpya,%}¦ ind. having caused to be placed
near, having brought near.
<LEND>

<L>49333<pc>1062-b<k1>sanniDAya<k2>sanniDAya
{%San-nidhāya,%}¦ ind. having placed near together,
having placed near at hand; having piled up or col-
lected.
<LEND>

<L>49334<pc>1062-b<k1>sanniDi<k2>sanniDi
{%San-nidhi, is,%}¦ m. placing near; juxta-position,
proximity, approximation, nearness, vicinity, presence,
appearance, visibility, perceptibility; receiving, taking
charge of. {%—Sannidhi-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being near,
neighbouring.
<LEND>

<L>49335<pc>1062-b<k1>sannihita<k2>sannihita
{%San-nihita, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed near together,
near, contiguous, proximate; close at hand, present;
deposited, fixed, laid up [cf. {%hṛdaya-s˚%}]; prepared,
ready; staying, being. {%—Sannihitāpāya (˚ta-ap˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having loss or destruction near at hand,
transient, transitory, fleeting.
<LEND>

<L>49336<pc>1062-b<k1>sanninI<k2>sanninI
{#sanninI#}¦ {%san-ni-nī (sam-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-na-%}
{%yati, -te, -netum,%} Ved. to bring together, pour toge-
ther, mix.
<LEND>

<L>49337<pc>1062-b<k1>sanninIya<k2>sanninIya
{%San-ninīya,%}¦ ind. having poured together, having
mixed.
<LEND>

<L>49338<pc>1062-b<k1>sannipat<k2>sannipat
{#sannipat#}¦ {%san-ni-pat (sam-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-pa-%}
{%tati, -patitum,%} to fly down, alight, descend, fall
down; to perish, be destroyed; to fall together,
come together, meet; to present one's self, arrive,
appear: Caus. {%-pātayati, -yitum,%} to cause to fall
down, throw down, shoot down or off, discharge;
to cause to come together, convoke, bring together,
collect, unite.
<LEND>

<L>49339<pc>1062-b<k1>sannipatita<k2>sannipatita
{%San-nipatita, as, ā, am,%}¦ flown down, descended,
alighted; fallen together, met together, come toge-
ther; assembled, collected, mixed, blended; arrived,
come near.
<LEND>

<L>49340<pc>1062-b<k1>sannipatya<k2>sannipatya
{%San-nipatya,%}¦ ind. having flown down, alighting,
descending; having flocked together, having come
together, having met; having come near.
<LEND>

<L>49341<pc>1062-b<k1>sannipAta<k2>sannipAta
{%San-nipāta, as,%}¦ m. flying down, alighting, de-
scending, falling down; a kind of musical time or
measure ({%= tāla-bheda%}); falling together, meeting;
contact, union, junction, collision, collection, assem-
blage, multitude; mixture, miscellaneous collection;
coming near, arrival; combined derangement of the
three humors producing fever and dangerous illness.
{%—Sannipāta-kalikā,%} f., N. of a treatise on the
cure of fevers arising from a vitiated state of the
three humors. {%—Sannipāta-jvara, as,%} m. a dan-
gerous fever resulting from morbid condition of the
three humors, (one of the eight kinds of fevers.)
{%—Sannipāta-nud, t,%} m. ‘removing the above
fever,’ N. of a kind of tree ({%= nepāla-nimba%}).
<LEND>

<L>49342<pc>1062-b<k1>sannipAtaka<k2>sannipAtaka
{%Sannipātaka, as,%}¦ m. combined disorder of the
three humors (wind, bile, and phlegm) or a dangerous
fever resulting from such disorder.
<LEND>

<L>49343<pc>1062-b<k1>sannipAtita<k2>sannipAtita
{%Sannipātita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or shot down,
shot off, discharged; brought together, assembled,
called together.
<LEND>

<L>49344<pc>1062-b<k1>sannipAtya<k2>sannipAtya
{%San-nipātya,%}¦ ind. having caused to come together,
having collected or brought together.
<LEND>

<L>49345<pc>1062-b<k1>sannibanD<k2>sannibanD
{#sannibanD#}¦ {%san-ni-bandh (sam-).%} See rt.
{%bandh.%}
<LEND>

<L>49346<pc>1062-b<k1>sannibadDa<k2>sannibadDa
{%San-nibaddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ firmly bound on, firmly
tied, fettered, closely connected with or attached to,
engrossed in; planted or covered with.
<LEND>

<L>49347<pc>1062-b<k1>sannibanDa<k2>sannibanDa
{%San-nibandha, as,%}¦ m. binding firmly, tying;
attachment, connection, consequence; effectiveness.
<LEND>

<L>49348<pc>1062-b<k1>sannibanDana<k2>sannibanDana
{%San-nibandhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of binding or
tying firmly, binding fast.
<LEND>

<L>49349<pc>1062-b<k1>sannibuD<k2>sannibuD
{#sannibuD#}¦ {%san-ni-budh (sam-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-bodhati, -te,%} &c., to perceive thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>49350<pc>1062-b<k1>sanniBa<k2>sanniBa
{#sanniBa#}¦ {%san-nibha, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 1. {%bhā%}
with {%ni%} and {%sam%}), like, similar, resembling, (at the
end of comps., e. g. {%megha-s˚,%} resembling a cloud.)
<LEND>

<L>49351<pc>1062-b<k1>sanniBf<k2>sanniBf
{#sanniBf#}¦ {%san-ni-bhṛ (sam-).%} See rt. {%bhṛ.%}
<LEND>
[Page1062-c+ 72]

<L>49352<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniBfta<k2>sanniBfta
{%San-nibhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ kept secret, concealed,
hidden; discreet, prudent, modest, unassuming.
<LEND>

<L>49353<pc>1062-c<k1>sannimajj<k2>sannimajj
{#sannimajj#}¦ {%san-ni-majj (sam-),%} cl. 6. P. {%-maj-%}
{%jati,%} &c., to sink quite under, sink down, be im-
mersed.
<LEND>

<L>49354<pc>1062-c<k1>sannimagna<k2>sannimagna
{%San-nimagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sunk under, submerged,
immersed; sleeping, asleep.
<LEND>

<L>49355<pc>1062-c<k1>sannimajjat<k2>sannimajjat
{%San-nimajjat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} sinking down
into, sinking under.
<LEND>

<L>49356<pc>1062-c<k1>sannimantr<k2>sannimantr
{#sannimantr#}¦ {%san-ni-mantr (sam-),%} cl. 10. P. A.
{%-mantrayati, -te, -yitum,%} to invite.
<LEND>

<L>49357<pc>1062-c<k1>sannimitta<k2>sannimitta
{#sannimitta#}¦ {%san-nimitta.%} See under {%sat.%}
<LEND>

<L>49358<pc>1062-c<k1>sannimIl<k2>sannimIl
{#sannimIl#}¦ {%san-ni-mīl,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mīlati,%} &c.,
to close completely, shut (the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>49359<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniyam<k2>sanniyam
{#sanniyam#}¦ {%san-ni-yam (sam-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-yac-%}
{%chati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%-yantum,%} to hold together,
hold tight, keep back, restrain, keep in check, subdue,
suppress; to annihilate, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>49360<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniyata<k2>sanniyata
{%San-niyata, as, ā, am,%}¦ restrained, controlled.
<LEND>

<L>49361<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniyantf<k2>sanniyantf
{%San-niyantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a restrainer, suppress-
ing, one who chastises, chastising, a chastiser.
<LEND>

<L>49362<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniyamya<k2>sanniyamya
{%San-niyamya,%}¦ ind. having restrained or controlled.
<LEND>

<L>49363<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniyuj<k2>sanniyuj
{#sanniyuj#}¦ {%san-ni-yuj (sam-),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-yunakti, -yuṅkte, -yoktum,%} to connect with, attach
to, place in or on; to appoint, commission, employ,
depute; to enjoin, order: Caus. {%-yojayati, -yitum,%}
to place in or on, appoint to (with acc.), entrust
with; to enjoin.
<LEND>

<L>49364<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniyukta<k2>sanniyukta
{%San-niyukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached to, connected
with; appointed, employed.
<LEND>

<L>49365<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniyoga<k2>sanniyoga
{%San-niyoga, as,%}¦ m. connection or union with,
attachment, application to (any pursuit &c.); appoint-
ment, employment (in any office), commission.
<LEND>

<L>49366<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniyojita<k2>sanniyojita
{%San-niyojita, as, ā, am,%}¦ appointed, entrusted
with, commissioned.
<LEND>

<L>49367<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniruD<k2>sanniruD
{#sanniruD#}¦ {%san-ni-rudh (sam-),%} cl. 7. P. A.
{%-ruṇaddhi, -runddhe, -roddhum,%} to keep back,
hold firm, keep in, suppress, restrain, hinder, check,
stop; to shut in, confine; to shut, close, lock up;
to block up, crowd, fill: Pass. {%-rudhyate,%} to be
kept back or restrained, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49368<pc>1062-c<k1>sannirudDa<k2>sannirudDa
{%San-niruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ obstructed, hindered,
checked, stopped, blocked up, choked, shut, closed,
crowded, filled, covered over. {%—Sanniruddha-%}
{%guda, as, ā, am,%} having an obstruction of the
lower intestine.
<LEND>

<L>49369<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniruDya<k2>sanniruDya
{%San-nirudhya,%}¦ ind. having suppressed or re-
strained.
<LEND>

<L>49370<pc>1062-c<k1>sanniroDa<k2>sanniroDa
{%San-nirodha, as,%}¦ m. obstruction, hindrance, check,
suppression.
<LEND>

<L>49371<pc>1062-c<k1>sannirgam<k2>sannirgam
{#sannirgam#}¦ {%san-nir-gam (sam-),%} cl. 1. P. {%-gac-%}
{%chati, -gantum,%} to go out together, go away, depart.
<LEND>

<L>49372<pc>1062-c<k1>sannirmaT<k2>sannirmaT
{#sannirmaT#}¦ {%san-nir-math%} or {%san-nir-manth%}
{%(sam-),%} cl. 1. 9. P. {%-mathati, -manthati, -math-%}
{%nāti,%} &c., to churn out, stir or shake about together,
crush together.
<LEND>

<L>49373<pc>1062-c<k1>sannirmA<k2>sannirmA
{#sannirmA#}¦ {%san-nir-mā (sam-),%} cl. 2. P. {%-māti,%}
&c. (see rt. 3. {%mā%}), Ved. to construct, compose.
<LEND>

<L>49374<pc>1062-c<k1>sannirmita<k2>sannirmita
{%San-nirmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. constructed, com-
posed.
<LEND>

<L>49375<pc>1062-c<k1>sannirvap<k2>sannirvap
{#sannirvap#}¦ {%san-nir-vap (sam-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-va-%}
{%pati, -te,%} &c., to scatter about, distribute, dispense.
<LEND>

<L>49376<pc>1062-c<k1>sannilI<k2>sannilI
{#sannilI#}¦ {%san-ni-lī (sam-),%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate,%}
{%-letum, -lātum,%} to settle down, alight, settle; to
cower down, hide or conceal one's self, disappear.
<LEND>

<L>49377<pc>1062-c<k1>sannivap<k2>sannivap
{#sannivap#}¦ {%san-ni-vap (sam-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-vapati, -te,%} &c., to throw together, heap together,
heap up.
<LEND>

<L>49378<pc>1062-c<k1>sannivas<k2>sannivas<h>1
{#sannivas#} 1¦. {%san-ni-vas%} ({%sam-,%} see rt. 5. {%vas%}),
cl. 2. A. {%-vaste,%} &c., to clothe with, put on (clothes
&c.).
<LEND>

<L>49379<pc>1062-c<k1>sannivas<k2>sannivas<h>2
{#sannivas#} 2¦. {%san-ni-vas%} ({%sam-,%} see rt. 6. {%vas%}),
[Page1063-a+ 76]
cl. 1. P. {%-vasati,%} &c., to dwell together, live with;
to live in, inhabit.
<LEND>

<L>49380<pc>1063-a<k1>sannivid<k2>sannivid
{#sannivid#}¦ {%san-ni-vid (sam-),%} Caus. {%-veda-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to know, make known,
announce, inform, tell; to offer, present.
<LEND>

<L>49381<pc>1063-a<k1>sanniviS<k2>sanniviS
{#sanniviS#}¦ {%san-ni-viś (sam-),%} cl. 6. A. (also
P.) {%-viśate (-ti), -veṣṭum,%} to enter into together;
to enter into deeply; to sit down together; to have
intercourse or intimate connection with; to enter;
to sit down, encamp: Caus. {%-veśayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to enter or sit down together; to unite, join,
collect; to cause to enter, introduce, insert, install;
to fix or fasten in; to cause to sit or lie or settle
down, put or place down, cause to encamp, pitch a
camp; to found (a town &c.); to put on, place on,
impose, consign, commit; to fix the thoughts or
mind on anything; to contemplate.
<LEND>

<L>49382<pc>1063-a<k1>sannivizwa<k2>sannivizwa
{%San-niviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ entered together, met
together, assembled, collected; entered deeply into;
absorbed or engrossed in; stationed in, abiding in,
resting in; inserted in, sticking in, depending on;
stationed near, contiguous, neighbouring, near, pre-
sent, at hand; seated, encamped.
<LEND>

<L>49383<pc>1063-a<k1>sanniveSa<k2>sanniveSa
{%San-niveśa, as,%}¦ m. entering together, thorough
or deep entrance into (any pursuit &c.), ardent
attachment to; assembling, assemblage, collection,
multitude; union, junction, contact; proximity, vici-
nity, neighbourhood; station, seat, encampment,
place, situation, position, posture; an open space
near a town (where people assemble for recreation),
a sort of play-ground in or near a town; causing to
enter together, putting together, construction, fabrica-
tion, preparation; form, figure; the collective form of
an asterism; causing to enter, putting in, insertion.
<LEND>

<L>49384<pc>1063-a<k1>sanniveSita<k2>sanniveSita
{%San-niveśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to enter in, intro-
duced, inserted; made to settle, located, lodged,
stationed, encamped; put down; consigned, com-
mitted.
<LEND>

<L>49385<pc>1063-a<k1>sanniveSya<k2>sanniveSya
{%San-niveśya,%}¦ ind. having caused to enter or per-
vade, having introduced, having made to encamp, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49386<pc>1063-a<k1>sannivf<k2>sannivf
{#sannivf#}¦ {%san-ni-vṛ (sam-),%} Caus. {%-vārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to keep off, keep back, restrain.
<LEND>

<L>49387<pc>1063-a<k1>sannivft<k2>sannivft
{#sannivft#}¦ {%san-ni-vṛt (sam-),%} cl. 1. A. {%-var-%}
{%tate%} (in some tenses also P., see rt. 1. {%vṛt%}), {%-varti-%}
{%tum,%} to turn back, turn round, return together,
return, retire; to desist from (with abl.), leave off,
cease, stop; to pass away: Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to return or turn back, send back; to divert,
avert, keep off, hinder, preclude; to cause to cease,
suppress, stop.
<LEND>

<L>49388<pc>1063-a<k1>sannivartita<k2>sannivartita
{%San-nivartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to return, sent
back, sent away.
<LEND>

<L>49389<pc>1063-a<k1>sannivartya<k2>sannivartya
{%San-nivartya,%}¦ ind. having caused to turn back,
having diverted, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49390<pc>1063-a<k1>sannivftta<k2>sannivftta
{%San-nivṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ turned back, come back,
returned, coming back; desisted, stopped, ceased;
ceasing, forbearing; withdrawing. shrinking from.
<LEND>

<L>49391<pc>1063-a<k1>sannivftti<k2>sannivftti
{%San-nivṛtti, is,%}¦ f. turning back, returning, com-
ing back; desisting from, forsaking, avoiding; for-
bearance, restraint, complete abstinence.
<LEND>

<L>49392<pc>1063-a<k1>sanniSam<k2>sanniSam
{#sanniSam#}¦ {%san-ni-śam (sam-),%} cl. 4. P. {%-śām-%}
{%yati, -śamitum,%} to hear, perceive: Caus. {%-śāmayati,%}
&c., to cause to hear, summon.
<LEND>

<L>49393<pc>1063-a<k1>sanniSamya<k2>sanniSamya
{%San-niśamya,%}¦ ind. having heard or perceived.
<LEND>

<L>49394<pc>1063-a<k1>sannizad<k2>sannizad
{#sannizad#}¦ {%san-ni-ṣad (sam-ni-sad),%} cl. 1. 6.
P. {%-ṣīdati, -ṣattum,%} to sink down; to sit down.
<LEND>

<L>49395<pc>1063-a<k1>sannizaRRa<k2>sannizaRRa
{%San-niṣaṇṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seated down, settled
down, seated; halted, stationary.
<LEND>

<L>49396<pc>1063-a<k1>sannisUd<k2>sannisUd
{#sannisUd#}¦ {%san-ni-sūd (sam-),%} Caus. {%-sūdayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to kill or destroy utterly.
<LEND>

<L>49397<pc>1063-a<k1>sannisfj<k2>sannisfj
{#sannisfj#}¦ {%san-ni-sṛj (sam-),%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛ-%}
{%jati, -sraṣṭum,%} to deliver up, deliver over, entrust,
commit.
<LEND>

<L>49398<pc>1063-a<k1>sannisfzwa<k2>sannisfzwa
{%San-nisṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ delivered up or over,
entrusted, committed, handed over.
<LEND>

<L>49399<pc>1063-a<k1>sannI<k2>sannI
{#sannI#}¦ {%san-nī (sam-),%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati, %}
[Page1063-b+ 77]
{%te, -netum,%} to lead together, bring together, collect;
to connect, unite; to mix together, mingle, mix; to
arrange; to lead or direct towards, lead, bring; to
guide, direct, govern; to obtain, procure; to bring
back, return, restore, give back, pay; to endow with
(with inst., Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>49400<pc>1063-b<k1>sannaya<k2>sannaya
{%San-naya, as,%}¦ m. a collection, multitude, number,
quantity; the rear of an army, rear-guard; ({%as, ā, am%}),
Ved. bringing together, collecting, aggregating.
<LEND>

<L>49401<pc>1063-b<k1>sannayat<k2>sannayat
{%San-nayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bringing together;
leading to, directing towards.
<LEND>

<L>49402<pc>1063-b<k1>sannAyya<k2>sannAyya
{%San-nāyya, am,%}¦ n. (for {%sānnāyya,%} q. v.), any
substance to be mixed with clarified butter &c. and
offered as a burnt offering.
<LEND>

<L>49403<pc>1063-b<k1>sannIya<k2>sannIya
{%San-nīya,%}¦ ind. having led or brought together;
having mixed together.
<LEND>

<L>49404<pc>1063-b<k1>sannu<k2>sannu
{#sannu#}¦ {%san-nu (sam-),%} cl. 2. P. {%-nauti,%} &c.
(Ved. cl. 1. A. {%-navate,%} &c.), to roar or sound toge-
ther, bellow, bleat.
<LEND>

<L>49405<pc>1063-b<k1>sannud<k2>sannud
{#sannud#}¦ {%san-nud (sam-),%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-nudati,%}
{%-te, -nottum,%} to impel or bring together: Caus.
{%-nodayati, -yitum,%} to impel or bring together, col-
lect, bring near; to procure, find; to push or urge
on, impel.
<LEND>

<L>49406<pc>1063-b<k1>sannft<k2>sannft
{#sannft#}¦ {%san-nṛt (sam-),%} cl. 4. P. {%-nṛtyati,%}
{%-nartitum,%} Ved. to dance together.
<LEND>

<L>49407<pc>1063-b<k1>sannyas<k2>sannyas
{#sannyas#}¦ {%san-ny-as (sam-ni-as),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-asyati%} (sometimes also cl. 1. P. {%-asati%}), {%-asitum,%}
to throw down together, place or put together, lay
together; to put or lay upon; to put down, lay
down, deposit; to give over to, consign, entrust,
deliver over; to lay aside, give up, resign; to resign
the world, become an ascetic or Sannyāsin.
<LEND>

<L>49408<pc>1063-b<k1>sannyasana<k2>sannyasana
{%San-nyasana, am,%}¦ n. the act of placing or laying
down, depositing, delivering over, entrusting to;
resigning, resignation, relinquishment, abandonment
of the world, renunciation of temporal concerns,
abdication.
<LEND>

<L>49409<pc>1063-b<k1>sannyasta<k2>sannyasta
{%San-nyasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown down, laid down,
placed down; encamped; deposited, entrusted, de-
livered over, consigned; laid aside; relinquished,
discarded, abandoned, deserted. {%—Sannyasta-deha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has given up his body. {%—San-%}
{%nyasta-śastra, as, ā, am,%} one who has laid aside
his weapons.
<LEND>

<L>49410<pc>1063-b<k1>sannyasya<k2>sannyasya
{%San-nyasya,%}¦ ind. having put down or deposited,
having consigned or delivered; having put off, having
laid aside; having given up or resigned, having left
or abandoned, having abandoned the world, having
become an ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>49411<pc>1063-b<k1>sannyAsa<k2>sannyAsa
{%San-nyāsa, as,%}¦ m. deposit, trust; stake, wager;
relinquishment, resignation, abandonment, profession
of asceticism, abandonment of the world; giving up
the body, sudden death; Indian spikenard. {%—San-%}
{%nyāsa-grahaṇa, am,%} n. assuming or practising
asceticism. {%—Sannyāsa-grahaṇa-paddhati, is,%} f.,
N. of a short treatise on the duties of ascetics by
Śaṅkarācārya. {%—Sannyāsa-dharma, as,%} m. the
duty of giving up worldly concerns, asceticism.
{%—Sannyāsa-dharma-saṅgraha, as,%} m., N. of a
short treatise on the duties of ascetics. {%—Sannyāso-%}
{%paniṣad (˚sa-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad
belonging to the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>49412<pc>1063-b<k1>sannyAsika<k2>sannyAsika
{%San-nyāsika%}¦ in {%veda-s˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>49413<pc>1063-b<k1>sannyAsin<k2>sannyAsin
{%Sannyāsin, ī,%}¦ m. one who lays down or deposits;
one who abandons or resigns, an ascetic, devotee
(especially one who retires from worldly concerns
and is no longer bound to read the Mantras and
perform sacrifices, but only to read the Āraṇyakas or
Upaniṣads); a Brāhman of the fourth order or
Āśrama, religious mendicant. {%—Sannyāsi-tā,%} f. or
{%sannyāsi-tva, am,%} n. abandonment of worldly con-
cerns, retirement from the world. {%—Sannyāsi-dar-%}
{%śana, am,%} n., N. of the forty-ninth chapter of the
Pātāla-khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>49414<pc>1063-b<k1>sanmAtura<k2>sanmAtura
{#sanmAtura#}¦ {%san-mātura, san-māna.%} See under
{%sat,%} p. 1053, col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page1063-c+ 75]

<L>49415<pc>1063-c<k1>sanmArga<k2>sanmArga
{#sanmArga#}¦ {%san-mārga, san-mitra,%} &c. See
under {%sat,%} p. 1053, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>49416<pc>1063-c<k1>sap<k2>sap
{#sap#}¦ {%sap%} (probably connected with rt.
{%sac%} and {%saparya%}), cl. 1. P. {%sapati, sa-%}
{%sāpa, sapitum,%} Ved. to worship, honour, serve,
follow, (in Naigh. III. 5. {%sapati%} is placed among
the {%paricaraṇa-karmāṇaḥ,%} and in Naigh. III. 14.
among the {%arcati-karmāṇaḥ%}); to conform to; to
join or unite together, connect ({%= samavāye%}); to
obtain, (Sāy. {%= prāp%}); to touch, sip, (Sāy. {%sapanta%}
{%= spṛśanti,%} Ṛg-veda V. 3, 4); to perform, do,
(Sāy. {%= kṛ%}): Caus. {%sapayati, -yitum,%} to follow,
worship, (Ved. {%sīṣapanta = paricaraṇaṃ kur-%}
{%vantu%}); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σέβομαι, σέβας, σεμνός, ἔπομαι;</lang>
Goth. <nsi>siponeis,</nsi> ‘a pupil.]
<LEND>

<L>49417<pc>1063-c<k1>sapat<k2>sapat
{%Sapat, an, antī, at,%}¦ honouring, worshipping, fol-
lowing; obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>49418<pc>1063-c<k1>saparya<k2>saparya
{%Saparya%}¦ (probably fr. a lost noun {%sapas = %} Gr. <lang n="greek">σέβας,</lang>
cf. {%sabas%}), Nom. P. {%saparyati, -yitum,%} Ved.
to worship, adore, honour, serve, (in Naigh. III. 5.
{%saparyati%} is enumerated among the {%paricaraṇa-%}
{%karmāṇaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>49419<pc>1063-c<k1>saparyat<k2>saparyat
{%Saparyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. worshipping, serving.
<LEND>

<L>49420<pc>1063-c<k1>saparyA<k2>saparyA
{%Saparyā,%}¦ f. worship, adoration, reverence.
<LEND>

<L>49421<pc>1063-c<k1>saparyu<k2>saparyu
{%Saparyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. serving, honouring,
adoring.
<LEND>

<L>49422<pc>1063-c<k1>sapa<k2>sapa
{#sapa#}¦ {%sapa, as,%} m., Ved. (probably) the
organ of generation; [cf. {%śepa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>49423<pc>1063-c<k1>sapakza<k2>sapakza
{#sapakza#}¦ {%sa-pakṣa, as, ā, am,%} having wings,
winged; having a side or party; being on the same
side, belonging to the same party; containing the
major term or subject; ({%as%}), m. a partisan, follower,
adherent; (in logic) an instance on the same side
(e. g. the common illustration of ‘the culinary
hearth’), a similar instance or one in which the
major term is found.
<LEND>

<L>49424<pc>1063-c<k1>sapatAka<k2>sapatAka
{#sapatAka#}¦ {%sa-patāka, as, ā, am,%} having a
banner, with a banner.
<LEND>

<L>49425<pc>1063-c<k1>sapattana<k2>sapattana
{#sapattana#}¦ {%sa-pattana, as, ā, am,%} possessing
towns or cities.
<LEND>

<L>49426<pc>1063-c<k1>sapattraleKa<k2>sapattraleKa
{#sapattraleKa#}¦ {%sa-pattralekha, as, ā, am,%} having
fragrant pigments.
<LEND>

<L>49427<pc>1063-c<k1>sapattrAkf<k2>sapattrAkf
{#sapattrAkf#}¦ {%sa-pattrā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kartum,%} to wound with an arrow or other feathered
weapon in such a way that the feathers enter the
body.
<LEND>

<L>49428<pc>1063-c<k1>sapattrAkaraRa<k2>sapattrAkaraRa
{%Sapattrā-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. wounding so that the
feathered part of an arrow enters the body, causing
excessive pain, worrying any one to death.
<LEND>

<L>49429<pc>1063-c<k1>sapattrAkfta<k2>sapattrAkfta
{%Sapattrā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ (according to some
also {%sapattra-kṛta%}), severely wounded or pained,
excessively afflicted; ({%as%}), m. a deer or other animal
severely wounded.
<LEND>

<L>49430<pc>1063-c<k1>sapattrAkfti<k2>sapattrAkfti
{%Sapattrā-kṛti, is,%}¦ f. great agony or affliction;
excessive pain or distress.
<LEND>

<L>49431<pc>1063-c<k1>sapatna<k2>sapatna
{#sapatna#}¦ {%sa-patna, as, ā, am,%} (said by some
to be fr. {%sa-patnī%} below, but regarded by others as
a separate word and connected with rt. {%sap%} above, in
the sense of ‘following,’ ‘persecuting’), hostile; ({%as%}),
m. an enemy, adversary, rival. {%—Sapatna-tā,%} f.
enmity, rivalry. {%—Sapatna-han, ā, -ghnī, a,%} Ved.
killing enemies, destroying rivals. {%—Sapatnāri (˚na-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. a sort of bamboo, Bambusa Spinosa.
<LEND>

<L>49432<pc>1063-c<k1>sapatnI<k2>sapatnI
{%Sa-patnī,%}¦ f. a woman who has the same husband
with another woman (Pāṇ. IV. 1, 35) or whose
husband has other wives, a fellow wife, rival wife,
cotemporary wife, rival mistress. {%—Sapatnī-tas,%}
ind. from a rival wife. {%—Sapatnī-tva, am,%} n. the
state of a woman whose husband has other wives.
{%—Sapatnī-duhitṛ, tā,%} f. the daughter of a rival
wife. {%—Sapatnī-putra, as,%} m. the son of a rival
wife.
<LEND>

<L>49433<pc>1063-c<k1>sapatnIka<k2>sapatnIka
{%Sa-patnīka, as,%}¦ m. accompanied with a wife,
along with a wife.
<LEND>

<L>49434<pc>1063-c<k1>sapadi<k2>sapadi
{#sapadi#}¦ {%sa-padi,%} ind. at the same instant,
[Page1064-a+ 68]
instantly, in a moment, at the moment, immediately;
quickly, swiftly.
<LEND>

<L>49435<pc>1064-a<k1>sapadma<k2>sapadma
{#sapadma#}¦ {%sa-padma, as, ā, am,%} furnished with
lotuses, having lotuses.
<LEND>

<L>49436<pc>1064-a<k1>sapannaga<k2>sapannaga
{#sapannaga#}¦ {%sa-pannaga, as, ā, am,%} furnished
with serpents.
<LEND>

<L>49437<pc>1064-a<k1>saparAkrama<k2>saparAkrama
{#saparAkrama#}¦ {%sa-parākrama, as, ā, am,%} having
valour, valiant, brave, bold.
<LEND>

<L>49438<pc>1064-a<k1>saparikara<k2>saparikara
{#saparikara#}¦ {%sa-parikara, as, ā, am,%} attended
by a retinue.
<LEND>

<L>49439<pc>1064-a<k1>saparicCada<k2>saparicCada
{#saparicCada#}¦ {%sa-paricchada, as, ā, am,%} attended
by a train, provided with necessaries.
<LEND>

<L>49440<pc>1064-a<k1>saparijana<k2>saparijana
{#saparijana#}¦ {%sa-parijana, as, ā, am,%} having
attendants, accompanied by followers.
<LEND>

<L>49441<pc>1064-a<k1>saparitoza<k2>saparitoza
{#saparitoza#}¦ {%sa-paritoṣa, as, ā, am,%} feeling
satisfaction, much pleased.
<LEND>

<L>49442<pc>1064-a<k1>saparivAra<k2>saparivAra
{#saparivAra#}¦ {%sa-parivāra, as, ā, am,%} attended
by a retinue, having a multitude of dependants.
<LEND>

<L>49443<pc>1064-a<k1>saparivAha<k2>saparivAha
{#saparivAha#}¦ {%sa-parivāha, as, ā, am,%} having
an overflow, overflowing, brimful.
<LEND>

<L>49444<pc>1064-a<k1>sapariSeza<k2>sapariSeza
{#sapariSeza#}¦ {%sa-pariśeṣa, as, ā, am,%} having
a remainder, with the remainder, with the rest.
<LEND>

<L>49445<pc>1064-a<k1>saparizatka<k2>saparizatka
{#saparizatka#}¦ {%sa-pariṣatka, as,%} m. a teacher
surrounded by a college of his own disciples.
<LEND>

<L>49446<pc>1064-a<k1>saparya<k2>saparya
{#saparya#}¦ {%saparya.%} See under rt. {%sap.%}
<LEND>

<L>49447<pc>1064-a<k1>saparvatavanadruma<k2>saparvatavanadruma
{#saparvatavanadruma#}¦ {%sa-parvata-vana-druma, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} with mountains, forests, and trees. {%—Sa-%}
{%parvata-vanārṇava (˚na-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessing mountains, forests, and seas (said of the
earth).
<LEND>

<L>49448<pc>1064-a<k1>sapalASa<k2>sapalASa
{#sapalASa#}¦ {%sa-palāśa, as, ā, am,%} together
with a Palāśa tree.
<LEND>

<L>49449<pc>1064-a<k1>sapallava<k2>sapallava
{#sapallava#}¦ {%sa-pallava, as, ā, am,%} together
with shoots, having branches.
<LEND>

<L>49450<pc>1064-a<k1>sapavitraka<k2>sapavitraka
{#sapavitraka#}¦ {%sa-pavitraka, as, ā, am,%} con-
taining sacrificial grass.
<LEND>

<L>49451<pc>1064-a<k1>sapAda<k2>sapAda
{#sapAda#}¦ {%sa-pāda, as, ā, am,%} having feet;
having a fourth part, with a quarter, increased by
one fourth.
<LEND>

<L>49452<pc>1064-a<k1>sapAdapIWa<k2>sapAdapIWa
{%Sa-pādapīṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with a foot-
stool.
<LEND>

<L>49453<pc>1064-a<k1>sapAduka<k2>sapAduka
{#sapAduka#}¦ {%sa-pāduka, as, ā, am,%} wearing
shoes, wearing sandals; with shoes or sandals.
<LEND>

<L>49454<pc>1064-a<k1>sapiRqa<k2>sapiRqa
{#sapiRqa#}¦ {%sa-piṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘having the same
Piṇḍa,’ a kinsman connected by the offering of the
funeral cake to the Manes of certain relations (viz.
father, grandfather, great-grandfather, &c., including
the direct descendants of four persons, or, according to
others, seven persons in an ascending and descending
line: the following are therefore called Sapiṇḍas — 
son, son's son, and son's grandson; widow, daughter,
and daughter's son; father, mother, brother, brother's
son, brother's grandson; father's daughter's son;
father's brother's son and grandson; paternal grand-
father's daughter's son; paternal grandfather; paternal
grandmother, paternal grandfather's brother, brother's
son and grandson; great grandfather's daughter's
son). {%—Sapiṇḍa-tā,%} f. the condition of being a Sa-
piṇḍa. {%—Sapiṇḍī-karaṇa, am,%} n. investing a person
with the rights of a Sapiṇḍa or kinsman (as described
above); performing the Śrāddha to deceased relatives
called Sapiṇḍas (at the end of a full year after the
death of a relative). {%—Sapiṇḍī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
invested with the relationship of Sapiṇḍa.
<LEND>

<L>49455<pc>1064-a<k1>sapiRqana<k2>sapiRqana
{%Sapiṇḍana, am,%}¦ n. {%= sapiṇḍī-karaṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>49456<pc>1064-a<k1>sapitva<k2>sapitva
{#sapitva#}¦ {%sa-pitva,%} according to Sāy. {%sapitvam%}
{%= saha-prāptavyaṃ sthānam,%} ‘a place to be ob-
tained together,’ (Ṛg-veda 1. 109, 7.)
<LEND>
[Page1064-b+ 75]

<L>49457<pc>1064-b<k1>sapiSAca<k2>sapiSAca
{#sapiSAca#}¦ {%sa-piśāca, as, ā, am,%} together
with or accompanied by the Piśācas.
<LEND>

<L>49458<pc>1064-b<k1>sapIqa<k2>sapIqa
{#sapIqa#}¦ {%sa-pīḍa, as, ā, am,%} suffering pain or
anguish, painful.
<LEND>

<L>49459<pc>1064-b<k1>sapItaka<k2>sapItaka
{#sapItaka#}¦ {%sa-pītaka, as,%} m. a kind of plant
({%= rāja-koṣātakī%}).
<LEND>

<L>49460<pc>1064-b<k1>sapItikA<k2>sapItikA
{%Sa-pītikā,%}¦ f. a kind of creeper ({%= hasti-ghoṣā%}).
<LEND>

<L>49461<pc>1064-b<k1>sapIti<k2>sapIti
{#sapIti#}¦ {%sa-pīti, is,%} f. compotation, drinking
together, drinking in company; ({%is, is, i%}), Ved. one
who drinks together, a boon-companion.
<LEND>

<L>49462<pc>1064-b<k1>saputra<k2>saputra
{#saputra#}¦ {%sa-putra%} or {%sa-putraka, as, ā, am,%}
having a son, accompanied by a son. {%—Sa-putra-%}
{%dāra, as, ā, am,%} with son and wife, accompanied
by son and wife.
<LEND>

<L>49463<pc>1064-b<k1>saputrin<k2>saputrin
{%Sa-putrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ together with sons, accom-
panied by sons.
<LEND>

<L>49464<pc>1064-b<k1>sapurohita<k2>sapurohita
{#sapurohita#}¦ {%sa-purohita, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied by a family priest.
<LEND>

<L>49465<pc>1064-b<k1>sapuzpa<k2>sapuzpa
{#sapuzpa#}¦ {%sa-puṣpa, as, ā, am,%} having flowers,
blooming.
<LEND>

<L>49466<pc>1064-b<k1>sapuzpabali<k2>sapuzpabali
{%Sa-puṣpa-bali, is, is, i,%}¦ filled with offerings of
flowers.
<LEND>

<L>49467<pc>1064-b<k1>sapOra<k2>sapOra
{#sapOra#}¦ {%sa-paura, as, ā, am,%} accompanied
by citizens.
<LEND>

<L>49468<pc>1064-b<k1>saptan<k2>saptan
{#saptan#}¦ {%saptan, a,%} m. f. n. pl. (in Uṇādi-s. 1.
156. said to be fr. rt. {%sap,%} ‘to connect, join’),
seven, (a favourite number with the Hindūs, and
regarded as a sacred number; hence mention is
made of seven Mātṛs, seven streams, seven oceans,
seven cities [Ṛg-veda 1. 63, 7], seven divisions of
the world, seven Ṛṣis, seven Vipras [Ṛg-veda 1.
62, 4], seven Ādityas, seven Dānavas, seven horses
of the Sun, seven flames or tongues of fire, seven
Yonīs of fire, seven Samidhs, seven tones, seven
sacrificial rites, seven Maryādās, thrice seven Padāni
or mystical steps by which heaven is obtained [Ṛg-
veda 1. 72, 6], thrice seven cows, &c.); [cf. Zend
{%hapta;%} Gr. <lang n="greek">ἑπτά;</lang> Lat. <nsi>septem;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>sibun;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>seofon;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>septyni, septynios;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>sedmij;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>seacht;</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>saith;</nsi> Armor.
<nsi>seiz.</nsi>] {%—Sapta-ṛṣi, ayas,%} m. pl. ‘the seven Ṛṣis,’
epithet of the authors of the hymn Ṛg-veda IX. 107.
{%—Sapta-koṇa, as, ā, am,%} septangular, heptagonal.
{%—Sapta-gaṅgam,%} ind. the place of the seven streams
of the Gaṅgā, (Pāṇ. II. 1, 20; cf. {%pañca-nada.%})
{%—Sapta-gu, us,%} m., N. of an Āṅgirasa (author of
the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 47). {%—Sapta-godāvaram,%}
ind. the place of the seven streams of the Godā-
varī. {%—Sapta-grahī,%} f. the meeting of the seven
planets under one sign. {%—Sapta-cakra, as, ā, am,%}
having seven wheels, (according to Śaṅkara {%= sar-%}
{%paṇa-cakra.%}) {%—Saptacatvāriṃśa, as, ī, am,%} the
47th. {%—Sapta-catvāriṃśat, t,%} f., 47. {%—Sapta-%}
{%cchada, as,%} m. ‘having seven leaves,’ a kind of tree
[cf. {%sapta-parṇa%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a species of plant {%(=%}
{%mada-gandha)%}. {%—Sapta-jāni%} or {%sapta-jāmi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. (probably) having seven brothers or
sisters. {%—Sapta-jihva, as,%} m. ‘seven-tongued,’ epi-
thet of Agni or fire, (the seven tongues of fire have
all names, e. g. {%kālī, karālī, mano-javā, su-lohitā,%}
{%su-dhūmra-varṇā, ugrā%} or {%sphuliṅginī, pra-%}
{%dīptā,%} and these names vary according to the parti-
cular rite in which fire is used, see {%hiraṇyā, su-%}
{%varṇā, su-prabhā,%} &c.) {%—Sapta-jvāla, as,%} m.
‘seven-flamed,’ epithet of Agni or fire. {%—Sapta-%}
{%tantu, us,%} m. ‘having seven performers,’ a sacrifice,
offering, oblation, (Sāy. {%= sapta tanitāraḥ,%} i. e.
{%karmaṇāṃ vistārayitāro yasya.%}) {%—Saptatriṃśa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the 37th. {%—Sapta-triṃśat, t,%} f., 37.
{%—Saptadaśa, as, ī, am,%} the 17th; having 17
properties or attributes (said of a {%kula%} or family);
({%as%}), m., scil. {%stoma,%} epithet of a particular Stoma;
N. of a collection of hymns (said to have been
created from Brahmā's western mouth). {%—Sapta-%}
{%daśan, a,%} m. f. n. pl., 17. {%—Sapta-dīdhiti, is,%} m.
[Page1064-c+ 81]
‘having seven rays of light,’ epithet of Agni.
{%—Sapta-dvārāvakīrṇa (˚ra-av˚), as, ā, am,%} con-
fined within seven gates (i. e. according to Kullūka,
confined to the five organs of sense, the mind and
the intellect, or restricted to this world and the three
above and the three below it, Manu VI. 48).
{%—Sapta-dvīpa, ās,%} m. pl. the seven divisions of
the terrestrial world, see {%dvīpa; (ā),%} f. ‘having or
consisting of seven Dvīpas,’ epithet of the earth.
{%—Saptadvīpa-pati, is,%} m. the lord of the seven
Dvīpas. {%—Sapta-dvīpa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} containing
or consisting of seven Dvīpas. {%—Sapta-dhātu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} consisting of seven elements, sevenfold, con-
taining seven; ({%avas%}), m. pl. the seven constituent
elements of the body (viz. chyle, blood, flesh, fat,
bone, marrow, and semen). {%—Sapta-dhātuka, as,%}
{%ā, am, = sapta-dhātu%}. {%—Sapta-dhārā-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a place. {%—Saptanavata, as, ī, am,%} the 97th.
{%—Sapta-navati, is,%} f., 97. {%—Saptanavati-tama,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the 97th. {%—Sapta-nāḍī-cakra, am,%} n.
an astrological diagram supposed to foretell rain, (it
consists of seven serpentine lines marked with the
names of the Nakṣatras and planets.) {%—Sapta-nā-%}
{%man, ā, ā, a,%} having seven names. {%—Sapta-nāmā,%}
f. a kind of plant {%(= āditya-bhaktā)%}. {%—Saptapañ-%}
{%cāśa, as, ī, am,%} the 57th. {%—Sapta-pañcāśat, t,%} f.,
57. {%—Sapta-pattra, as,%} m. ‘seven-leaved,’ a kind
of plant {%(-mudgara)%}. {%—Sapta-pada, as, ā,%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} having seven steps, containing seven Padas; ({%ī%}),
f. the seven steps at marriage. {%—Sapta-padārthī,%} f., N.
of a treatise on Kaṇāda's seven Vaiśeṣika categories.
{%—Saptapadī-gamana, am,%} n. the walking together
round the nuptial fire in seven steps, (see {%sāpta-%}
{%padīna.%}) {%—Sapta-parṇa, as, ī, am,%} seven-leaved;
({%as%}), m. the tree Alstonia or Echites Scholaris; ({%ī%}),
f. the sensitive plant; ({%am%}), n. a sort of sweetmeat
(made of grapes, pomegranates, dates, with sugar,
spices, honey, and ghee). {%—Sapta-pātāla, am,%} n.
the seven Pātālas or regions under the earth, (see
{%pātāla,%} the names Ni-tala and Gabhasti-mat are
sometimes substituted for Rasā-tala and Talātala.)
{%—Sapta-putra, as, ā, am,%} having seven sons, hav-
ing seven children. {%—Sapta-putra-sū, ūs,%} f. the
mother of seven sons or children. {%—Sapta-prakṛti,%}
{%ayas,%} f. pl. the seven constituent parts of a kingdom
(viz. the king, his ministers, ally, territory, fortress,
army, and treasury, see {%prakṛti%}). {%—Sapta-buddha-%}
{%stotra, am,%} n., N. of a Buddhist work. {%—Sapta-%}
{%budhna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having seven bottoms or
foundations. {%—Sapta-bhadra, as,%} m. the Śirīṣa
tree. {%—Sapta-bhūmika%} or {%sapta-bhauma, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having seven stories, seven stories high. {%—Sapta-%}
{%mṛttikā, ās,%} f. pl. seven earths collected from seven
places and used in certain solemn rites. {%—Sapta-%}
{%yojanī,%} f. a distance or extent of seven Yojanas.
{%—Sapta-rakta, am,%} n. the seven red-coloured
parts of the body (viz. the palms of the hands, soles
of the feet, nails, corners of the eyes, tongue, palate,
and lips). {%—Sapta-raśmi, is, is, i,%} Ved. seven-
rayed, having seven rays; ({%is%}), m. epithet of Agni.
{%—Sapta-rātra, am,%} n. a period of seven nights.
{%—Sapta-rātrika, as, ā, am,%} lasting seven nights.
{%—Sapta-rāśika, am,%} n. the rule of proportion
with seven terms. {%—Saptarṣi (˚ta-ṛṣi), ayas,%}
m. pl. ‘the seven Ṛṣis,’ the constellation Ursa
Major, (the seven stars of which are supposed to be
the seven great Ṛṣis, viz. Marīci, Atri, Aṅgiras,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Vasiṣṭha.) {%—Saptar-%}
{%ṣi-mata, am,%} n., N. of a work on law. {%—Sapta-%}
{%vadhri, is,%} m., N. of an Ātreya (author of the
hymns Ṛg-veda V. 78, &c.). {%—Sapta-varūtha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having seven protecting ledges (said of a
carriage, see {%varūtha%}). {%—Saptaviṃśa, as, ī, am,%}
the 27th; consisting of or containing 27. {%—Sapta-%}
{%viṃśaka, as, ī, am,%} the 27th. {%—Sapta-viṃśati, is,%} f.,
27. {%—Sapta-vidāru,%} a particular kind of tree, (not
ascertained.) {%—Sapta-vidha, as, ā, am,%} sevenfold.
{%—Sapta-śata, am,%} n., 700; 107; ({%ī%}), f. the aggre-
gate of 700; a collection of 700 verses. {%—Sapta-%}
{%śatikā,%} f. the aggregate of 700. {%—Sapta-śalāka,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of astrological diagram marked with
[Page1065-a+ 81]
twice seven lines crossing each other at right angles,
(it is used for indicating auspicious days for mar-
riages.) {%—Sapta-śiva, ās,%} f. pl., Ved. ‘being seven
auspicious ones,’ epithet of the seven Mātṛs; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of plant {%(= nāga-vallī)%}. {%—Sapta-ṣaṣṭa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} the 67th. {%—Sapta-ṣaṣṭi, is,%} f., 67.
{%—Saptaṣaṣṭi-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 67th. {%—Sap-%}
{%ta-saṅkhyāka, as, ā, am,%} seven in number, amount-
ing to seven. {%—Sapta-saptaka, am,%} n. ‘seven times
seven,’ forty-nine. {%—Saptasaptaka-vettṛ, tā,%} m.
one who knows seven times seven sciences. {%—Sapta-%}
{%saptata, as, ī, am,%} the 77th. {%—Sapta-saptati, is,%}
f., 77. {%—Saptasaptati-tama, as, ī, am,%} the 77th.
{%—Sapta-sapti, is,%} m. ‘having seven horses,’ epi-
thet of the Sun. {%—Sapta-sāgara%} or {%sapta-sāgaraka,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of very valuable gift (compared to
seven oceans). {%—Saptasāgara-prādānikā,%} f., N.
of a chapter of the Matsya-Purāṇa. {%—Sapta-sū, ūs,%}
f. the mother of seven children {%(= suta-vaskarā).%}
{%—Sapta-svasṛ, sā, sā, sṛ,%} Ved. having seven
sisters. {%—Sapta-hasta, as, ā, am,%} having seven
hands; measuring seven cubits. {%—Sapta-hotṛ, tā,%}
&c., (probably) having seven Hotṛs; [cf. {%catur-%}
{%hotṛ, daśa-hotṛ.%}] {%—Sapta-hautra,%} N. of a treatise
on ritual. {%—Saptāṃśu (˚ta-aṃ˚), us, us, u,%} having
seven rays. {%—Saptāṃśu-puṅgava, as,%} m. ‘eminent
with seven rays of light,’ the planet Saturn. {%—Sap-%}
{%tākṣara (˚ta-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} containing seven
syllables; ({%as%}), m. a word or a Pāda which contains
seven syllables. {%—Saptāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā%} or {%ī,%}
{%am,%} consisting of seven members or parts or con-
stituent elements, (epithet of a kingdom, see {%sapta-%}
{%prakṛti.%}) {%—Saptātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā,%} m. ‘having
seven forms or essences,’ epithet of Brahmā. {%—Sap-%}
{%tārcis (˚ta-ar˚), is, is, is,%} seven-flamed, having
seven flames or tongues; of inauspicious aspect, evil-
eyed; ({%is%}), m. epithet of Agni or fire; of the planet
Saturn; a particular plant {%(= citraka)%}. {%—Saptāśīta%}
{%(˚ta-aś˚), as, ī, am,%} the 87th. {%—Saptāśīti (˚ta-%}
{%aś˚), is,%} f., 87. {%—Saptāśīti-tama, as, ī, am,%} the
87th. {%—Saptāśra (˚ta-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} septangular;
({%as, am%}), m. n. a heptagon, (also spelt {%saptāsra,%}
see 1. {%aśra.%}) {%—Saptāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘having
seven horses,’ epithet of the Sun, (the seven horses
are supposed to symbolize the seven days of the week.)
{%—Saptāśva-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘borne by seven horses,’
epithet of the Sun. {%—Saptāsya (˚ta-ās˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. seven-mouthed, having seven mouths.
{%—Saptāha (˚ta-aha), am,%} n. seven days, a week.
{%—Saptottara (˚ta-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} having a sur-
plus or excess of seven (e. g. {%saptottaraṃ śatam,%}
a hundred + seven or 107.)
<LEND>

<L>49469<pc>1065-a<k1>sapta<k2>sapta
{%Sapta, as, ī, am,%}¦ (according to Śabda-k.) {%= sap-%}
{%tama,%} the seventh.
<LEND>

<L>49470<pc>1065-a<k1>saptaka<k2>saptaka
{%Saptaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} containing seven, seven;
the seventh; ({%am%}), n. a collection of seven (as of seven
stanzas or verses); ({%ī%}), f. a woman's girdle, zone.
<LEND>

<L>49471<pc>1065-a<k1>saptata<k2>saptata
{%Saptata, as, ī, am,%}¦ the 70th (only used when
other numerals precede, see {%eka-s˚, dvā-s˚, tri-s˚,%}
&c., cf. Pāṇ. V. 2, 58.)
<LEND>

<L>49472<pc>1065-a<k1>saptati<k2>saptati
{%Saptati, is,%}¦ f., 70; N. of a work, {%= sāṅkhya-%}
{%kārikā; (ī),%} f. du. two seventies; ({%-ayas%}), f. pl.
many seventies. {%—Saptati-tama, as, ī, am,%} the
70th; [cf. {%eka-s˚.%}] {%—Saptati-sambandha, as,%} m.
a collection of 70 tales.
<LEND>

<L>49473<pc>1065-a<k1>saptaTa<k2>saptaTa
{%Saptatha, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. the seventh.
<LEND>

<L>49474<pc>1065-a<k1>saptaDA<k2>saptaDA
{%Saptadhā,%}¦ ind. in seven ways, sevenfold; in seven
parts or pieces.
<LEND>

<L>49475<pc>1065-a<k1>saptama<k2>saptama
{%Saptama, as, ī, am,%}¦ the seventh; ({%ī%}), f. the
seventh case, i. e. the locative; the seventh Tithi or
lunar day of the fortnight, (in the light fortnight
there is a festival in honour of the seventh digit of
the moon on this day; it often occurs at the end
of comps., e. g. {%Gaṅgā-saptamī,%} the seventh day in
the light half of the month Vaiśākha; {%Jayantī-%}
{%saptamī,%} the seventh day in the light half of the
month Māgha); [cf. Zend <nsi>haptatha;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἕβδομος;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>septimus;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>sekma-s</nsi> for <nsi>sepma-s;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>sedmyĭ;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>sibunto(n);</nsi> Hib. <nsi>seachtmad.</nsi>]
{%—Saptama-kalā,%} f. the seventh digit of the moon.
{%—Saptamī-pratirūpaka, as, ikā, am,%} resembling
[Page1065-b+ 69]
in form a locative case. {%—Saptamī-vrata, am,%} n. a
religious observance to be performed on the seventh
day of a month. {%—Saptamī-samāsa, as,%} m. a Tat-
puruṣa compound of which the first member is sup-
posed to be a locative case. {%—Saptamī-snapana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘bathing on the seventh day,’ a particular
religious observance.
<LEND>

<L>49476<pc>1065-b<k1>saptalA<k2>saptalA
{%Saptalā,%}¦ f., N. of several plants, double jasmine
({%= nava-mālikā%}); other plants ({%= carma-kaśā;%}
{%= guñjā; = pāṭalā%}).
<LEND>

<L>49477<pc>1065-b<k1>saptin<k2>saptin
{%Saptin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having or containing seven (syl-
lables &c.).
<LEND>

<L>49478<pc>1065-b<k1>sapti<k2>sapti
{#sapti#}¦ {%sapti, is,%} m. (probably fr. rt. {%sap,%} ‘to
join’), a yoke (of horses); a horse; a yoke-fellow;
N. of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 79 (hav-
ing the patronymic Vājambhara). {%—Saptī-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at%} (Ved. for {%sapti-vat%}), possessed of horses,
having splendid horses, (Sāy. {%= praśastāśva.%})
<LEND>

<L>49479<pc>1065-b<k1>saptya<k2>saptya
{#saptya#}¦ {%saptya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 41, 4 {%= sarpaṇīya.%}
<LEND>

<L>49480<pc>1065-b<k1>sapraRaya<k2>sapraRaya
{#sapraRaya#}¦ {%sa-praṇaya, as, ā, am,%} having
affection, affectionate, friendly; ({%am%}), ind. affection-
ately, kindly; confidently.
<LEND>

<L>49481<pc>1065-b<k1>sapraRava<k2>sapraRava
{#sapraRava#}¦ {%sa-praṇava, as, ā, am,%} together
with the Praṇava or sacred syllable {%Om.%}
<LEND>

<L>49482<pc>1065-b<k1>sapraRAmam<k2>sapraRAmam
{#sapraRAmam#}¦ {%sa-praṇāmam,%} ind. with a bow.
<LEND>

<L>49483<pc>1065-b<k1>sapratibanDa<k2>sapratibanDa
{#sapratibanDa#}¦ {%sa-pratibandha, as, ā, am,%} at-
tended with obstacles.
<LEND>

<L>49484<pc>1065-b<k1>sapratyaya<k2>sapratyaya
{#sapratyaya#}¦ {%sa-pratyaya, as, ā, am,%} having
confidence, reposing confidence in (with loc.); cer-
tain, secure, sure, ({%sapratyayā vṛttiḥ,%} sure means
of subsistence); having an affix.
<LEND>

<L>49485<pc>1065-b<k1>sapratyASam<k2>sapratyASam
{#sapratyASam#}¦ {%sa-pratyāśam,%} ind. hopefully,
expectantly.
<LEND>

<L>49486<pc>1065-b<k1>sapraTa<k2>sapraTa
{#sapraTa#}¦ {%sa-pratha, as,%} m., N. of the author of
Ṛg-veda X. 181, 2 (with patronymic Bhāradvāja).
<LEND>

<L>49487<pc>1065-b<k1>sapraTas<k2>sapraTas
{#sapraTas#}¦ {%sa-prathas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having
breadth, broadly diffused, extensive, far-famed,
glorious, mighty; ({%ās%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Sa-%}
{%prathas-tama, as, ā, am,%} very extensive, very large.
<LEND>

<L>49488<pc>1065-b<k1>sapraBa<k2>sapraBa
{#sapraBa#}¦ {%sa-prabha, as, ā, am,%} possessing
splendor, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>49489<pc>1065-b<k1>sapramARa<k2>sapramARa
{#sapramARa#}¦ {%sa-pramāṇa, as, ā, am,%} having
proof or evidence, authentic.
<LEND>

<L>49490<pc>1065-b<k1>saprayoganivartana<k2>saprayoganivartana
{#saprayoganivartana#}¦ {%sa-prayoga-nivartana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} along with the (secret for) using and restrain-
ing; (see the next.)
<LEND>

<L>49491<pc>1065-b<k1>saprayogarahasya<k2>saprayogarahasya
{%Sa-prayoga-rahasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessing
secret spells for (their) use (said of magical weapons
which are not wielded manually but invoked or
meditated upon, and are useless to one unacquainted
with the mode of invoking them).
<LEND>

<L>49492<pc>1065-b<k1>sapraSrayam<k2>sapraSrayam
{#sapraSrayam#}¦ {%sa-praśrayam,%} ind. with affection
or courtesy, affectionately, respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>49493<pc>1065-b<k1>saprasAda<k2>saprasAda
{#saprasAda#}¦ {%sa-prasāda, as, ā, am,%} accompanied
with favour or kindness, propitious.
<LEND>

<L>49494<pc>1065-b<k1>saprasveda<k2>saprasveda
{#saprasveda#}¦ {%sa-prasveda, as, ā, am,%} having
perspiration, perspiring, sweating.
<LEND>

<L>49495<pc>1065-b<k1>saprARa<k2>saprARa
{#saprARa#}¦ {%sa-prāṇa, as, ā, am,%} having breath
or life.
<LEND>

<L>49496<pc>1065-b<k1>saprema<k2>saprema
{#saprema#}¦ {%sa-prema, as, ā, am,%} having love,
full of love or affection, loving, affectionate.
<LEND>

<L>49497<pc>1065-b<k1>saprezya<k2>saprezya
{#saprezya#}¦ {%sa-preṣya, as, ā, am,%} attended by
servants.
<LEND>

<L>49498<pc>1065-b<k1>sapsaras<k2>sapsaras
{#sapsaras#}¦ {%sa-psaras, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having
the same form or beauty, (Sāy. {%= samāna-rūpa%} or
{%hiṃsaka,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 168, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>49499<pc>1065-b<k1>saPara<k2>saPara
{#saPara#}¦ {%saphara, as,%} m. (also written {%śa-%}
{%phara,%} q. v.), a small glistening fish (Cyprinus
[Page1065-c+ 70]
Sophore, said to be a sort of carp and commonly
called Puṃṭī); ({%ī%}), f. the above fish.
<LEND>

<L>49500<pc>1065-c<k1>saPala<k2>saPala
{#saPala#}¦ {%sa-phala, as, ā, am,%} bearing fruit,
fruitful, productive, profitable, yielding profit; ful-
filled, rewarded, blessed. {%—Saphala-prārthana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has attained his desire. {%—Saphalo-%}
{%daya (˚la-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘auspicious-rising,’ epithet
of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>49501<pc>1065-c<k1>sabaDUka<k2>sabaDUka
{#sabaDUka#}¦ {%sa-badhūka.%} See {%sa-vadhūka.%}
<LEND>

<L>49502<pc>1065-c<k1>sabanDu<k2>sabanDu
{#sabanDu#}¦ {%sa-bandhu, us, us, u,%} possessed of
a friend, befriended; being of the same family;
closely connected or united; ({%us%}), m. a kinsman,
relation.
<LEND>

<L>49503<pc>1065-c<k1>sabarduGa<k2>sabarduGa
{#sabarduGa#}¦ {%sabar-dugha, sabar-dhu.%} See under
{%sabas.%}
<LEND>

<L>49504<pc>1065-c<k1>sabala<k2>sabala
{#sabala#}¦ {%sa-bala, as, ā, am,%} powerful, strong;
accompanied by a force or army. {%—Sa-balānuga%}
{%(˚la-an˚), as, ā, am,%} with an army and followers.
<LEND>

<L>49505<pc>1065-c<k1>sabali<k2>sabali
{#sabali#}¦ {%sa-bali, is, is, i,%} endowed with
royal revenue; accompanied by the Bali offering;
({%is%}), m. evening twilight (this being the proper
hour for offering food to spirits, &c.; see {%bali%}).
<LEND>

<L>49506<pc>1065-c<k1>sabas<k2>sabas
{#sabas#}¦ {%sabas%} (changeable into {%sabar%} before
soft consonants; cf. {%sapas%} under rt. {%sap%}), Ved.
water, heavenly food, nectar, (Sāy. {%= udaka, payas,%}
{%amṛta;%} cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σέβας,</lang> ‘worship’ or ‘the object of
worship.’) {%—Sabar-dugha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. yielding
or granting heavenly food or water, dispensing water.
{%—Sabar-duh, -dhuk, k, k,%} Ved. yielding nectar.
{%—Sabar-dhu,%} Ved. {%= sabar-duh%} above.
<LEND>

<L>49507<pc>1065-c<k1>sabahumAnam<k2>sabahumAnam
{#sabahumAnam#}¦ {%sa-bahumānam,%} ind. with great
honour or reverence, very respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>49508<pc>1065-c<k1>sabAD<k2>sabAD
{#sabAD#}¦ {%sa-bādh, t,%} m., Ved. an oppressor,
destroyer, one who is oppressed; a sacrificer who is
disturbed by enemies, (Sāy. {%= śatrubhir bādhito%}
{%yajamānaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 64, 8; {%= bādhā-sahita,%}
Ṛg-veda IV. 17, 18); a priest, (in Naigh. III. 18.
{%sabādhaḥ%} is enumerated among the {%ṛtviṅ-nā-%}
{%māni.%})
<LEND>

<L>49509<pc>1065-c<k1>sabADa<k2>sabADa
{%Sa-bādha, as, ā, am,%}¦ painful, hurtful; extor-
tionate, oppressive.
<LEND>

<L>49510<pc>1065-c<k1>sabADas<k2>sabADas
{%Sa-bādhas,%}¦ Ved. according to Sāy. {%sa-bādhasas%}
{%= dāridra-nimitta-bādha-sahitasya,%} having the
suffering caused by poverty, Ṛg-veda V. 10, 6.
<LEND>

<L>49511<pc>1065-c<k1>sabAnDava<k2>sabAnDava
{#sabAnDava#}¦ {%sa-bāndhava, as, ā, am,%} having
kindred, connected, related.
<LEND>

<L>49512<pc>1065-c<k1>sabAlavfdDa<k2>sabAlavfdDa
{#sabAlavfdDa#}¦ {%sa-bāla-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%} with
children and old men.
<LEND>

<L>49513<pc>1065-c<k1>sabIBatsam<k2>sabIBatsam
{#sabIBatsam#}¦ {%sa-bībhatsam,%} ind. with abhor-
rence.
<LEND>

<L>49514<pc>1065-c<k1>sabrahmaka<k2>sabrahmaka
{#sabrahmaka#}¦ {%sa-brahmaka, as, ā, am,%} together
with Brahmā, together with (the world of) Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>49515<pc>1065-c<k1>sabrahmacarya<k2>sabrahmacarya
{#sabrahmacarya#}¦ {%sa-brahmacarya, am,%} n. fellow-
studentship, studying together or being disciples of
the same teacher.
<LEND>

<L>49516<pc>1065-c<k1>sabrahmacArin<k2>sabrahmacArin
{%Sa-brahmacārin, ī,%}¦ m. a fellow-student, one
engaged in the same studies and observing the same
austerities.
<LEND>

<L>49517<pc>1065-c<k1>saBaktikam<k2>saBaktikam
{#saBaktikam#}¦ {%sa-bhaktikam,%} ind. respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>49518<pc>1065-c<k1>saBadramusta<k2>saBadramusta
{#saBadramusta#}¦ {%sa-bhadramusta, as, ā, am,%} full
of Cyperus Rotundus, (also read {%su-bh˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>49519<pc>1065-c<k1>saBaya<k2>saBaya
{#saBaya#}¦ {%sa-bhaya, as, ā, am,%} fearful, appre-
hensive; ({%am%}), ind. with fear, timidly.
<LEND>

<L>49520<pc>1065-c<k1>saBaras<k2>saBaras
{#saBaras#}¦ {%sa-bharas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. bearing
together.
<LEND>

<L>49521<pc>1065-c<k1>saBartfkA<k2>saBartfkA
{#saBartfkA#}¦ {%sa-bhartṛkā,%} f. ‘having a hus-
band,’ a woman whose husband is alive.
<LEND>

<L>49522<pc>1065-c<k1>saBA<k2>saBA
{#saBA#}¦ {%sabhā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%bhā%}
with {%sa,%} because people, {%saha bhānti,%} ‘appear
together’ at a place of meeting), an assembly, con-
[Page1066-a+ 77]
gregation, meeting, company, society, good society;
Society (personified as a daughter of Prajā-pati); a
council, council-chamber, hall; a court of justice;
a court, palace [cf. {%rāja-s˚%}]; a public audience,
levee; a gaming room, gambling house; any
house or large room or frequented place. {%—Sabhā-%}
{%cāturya, am,%} n. politeness in society. {%—Sabhācāra%}
{%(˚bhā-āc˚), as,%} m. the customs or usages of society,
court-manners. {%—Sabhā-dhairya, am,%} n. boldness in
company. {%—Sabhā-nara, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Sa-%}
{%bhā-nāyaka, as,%} or {%sabhā-pati, is,%} m. the president
of an assembly, chairman; the keeper of a gaming
house. {%—Sabhā-parvan, a,%} n., N. of the second book
of the Mahā-bhārata (which describes the holding of
a great assembly at Hastināpura and the gambling
between Yudhi-ṣṭhira and Śakuni, in which the
former staked and lost all his possessions, including
his territory and his wife Draupadī). {%—Sabhā-pūjā,%}
f. respect or reverence paid to the audience (in the
prelude of a drama). {%—Sabhā-maṇḍana, am,%} n. the
adorning or arranging of an assembly-room. {%—Sabhā-%}
{%vaśakara, as, ī, am,%} controlling or influencing an
assembly. {%—Sabhā-sad, t,%} m. one who sits at an
assembly, a member of any society or company,
an assistant at an assembly or meeting; (in law) an
assessor, one who sits in a court of justice, a judge.
{%—Sabhā-saha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one who restrains
or rules an assembly. {%—Sabhā-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of
a king. {%—Sabhāstāra (˚bhā-ās˚), as,%} m. an assistant
at an assembly, one of a society or company. {%—Sabhā-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} being at an assembly or court; ({%as%}),
m. one who sits in an assembly; a courtier. {%—Sa-%}
{%bhocita (˚bhā-uc˚), as, ā, am,%} fit for an assembly,
fit for good society; ({%as%}), m. a learned Brāhman,
any learned or educated person. {%—Sabhoddeśa (˚bhā-%}
{%ud˚),%} the neighbourhood of any place of meeting;
the precincts of a house, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49523<pc>1066-a<k1>saBika<k2>saBika
{%Sabhika, as,%}¦ m. the keeper of a gaming house.
<LEND>

<L>49524<pc>1066-a<k1>saBIka<k2>saBIka
{%Sabhīka, as,%}¦ m. {%= sabhika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>49525<pc>1066-a<k1>saBeya<k2>saBeya
{%Sabheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. relating to an assembly,
skilled in council, shining in society.
<LEND>

<L>49526<pc>1066-a<k1>saBya<k2>saBya
{%Sabhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to an
assembly, fit for an assembly; suitable to good
society; fit for a court; polite; refined, civilized,
({%a-sabhya, as, ā, am,%} not met with in good society,
not used in the best society, unrefined, indecorous);
trusted, confidential, faithful; ({%as%}), m. an assistant
at an assembly; an assessor; a person of honourable
parentage; N. of one of the five sacred fires; the
keeper of a gaming house; the servant of a keeper
of a gaming house; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>sibba, sibbi,</nsi>
<nsi>sibbo, ga-sibbo, ga-sibbot;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>trasti-sibja,</nsi>
<nsi>ga-sibjon, un-sibja;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>sib, sibbe, ge-sib.</nsi>]
{%—Sabhya-tama, as, ā, am,%} most worthy of an
assembly, very senatorial or oratorical, very polite or
refined; ({%as%}), m. a very polite or refined person, an
ornament of society. {%—Sabhya-tā,%} f. or {%sabhya-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. politeness, refinement, good breeding. {%—Sa-%}
{%bhyetara (˚ya-it˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘contrary to good
society,’ vulgar.
<LEND>

<L>49527<pc>1066-a<k1>saBAj<k2>saBAj
{#saBAj#}¦ {%sabhāj,%} cl. 10. P. {%sabhājayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%asasabhājat,%} to serve,
honour, worship; to salute; to please, gratify, satisfy,
exhilarate; to beautify; to show.
<LEND>

<L>49528<pc>1066-a<k1>saBAjana<k2>saBAjana
{%Sabhājana, am,%}¦ n. service, honour, courtesy,
politeness, civility in receiving or taking leave of a
friend.
<LEND>

<L>49529<pc>1066-a<k1>saBAjita<k2>saBAjita
{%Sabhājita, as, ā, am,%}¦ served, honoured, treated
with courtesy, gratified, pleased.
<LEND>

<L>49530<pc>1066-a<k1>saBArya<k2>saBArya
{#saBArya#}¦ {%sa-bhārya%} or {%sa-bhāryaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} with a wife, having a wife.
<LEND>

<L>49531<pc>1066-a<k1>saBAvana<k2>saBAvana
{#saBAvana#}¦ {%sa-bhāvana, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>49532<pc>1066-a<k1>saBAsad<k2>saBAsad
{#saBAsad#}¦ {%sabhā-sad.%} See under {%sabhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>49533<pc>1066-a<k1>saBIti<k2>saBIti
{#saBIti#}¦ {%sa-bhīti, is, is, i,%} having fear, fear-
ful, timid.
<LEND>

<L>49534<pc>1066-a<k1>saBIma<k2>saBIma
{#saBIma#}¦ {%sa-bhīma, as, ā, am,%} together with
Bhīma.
<LEND>
[Page1066-b+ 77]

<L>49535<pc>1066-b<k1>saBfkuwImuKa<k2>saBfkuwImuKa
{#saBfkuwImuKa#}¦ {%sa-bhṛkuṭī-mukha, as, ā, am,%}
having a frowning face, frowning.
<LEND>

<L>49536<pc>1066-b<k1>saBftya<k2>saBftya
{#saBftya#}¦ {%sa-bhṛtya, as, ā, am,%} attended by
servants, with (the assistance of) servants.
<LEND>

<L>49537<pc>1066-b<k1>saBrAtf<k2>saBrAtf
{#saBrAtf#}¦ {%sa-bhrātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} with a brother,
attended by brethren.
<LEND>

<L>49538<pc>1066-b<k1>saBrAtfka<k2>saBrAtfka
{%Sa-bhrātṛka, as, ā, am, = sa-bhrātṛ.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>49539<pc>1066-b<k1>saBrUBaNga<k2>saBrUBaNga
{#saBrUBaNga#}¦ {%sa-bhrūbhaṅga, as, ā, am,%} with a
frown, frowning, knitting the brows; ({%am%}), ind.
frowningly.
<LEND>

<L>49540<pc>1066-b<k1>sam<k2>sam<h>1
{#sam#} 1¦. {%sam%} (= rt. {%stam%}), cl. 1. P. {%sa-%}
{%mati, sasāma, samitum,%} to be confused
or agitated or disturbed; (according to some) to be
undisturbed, not to be agitated [cf. rt. 1. {%śam%}]; cl.
10. P. {%samayati, -yitum,%} to be agitated or dis-
turbed.
<LEND>

<L>49541<pc>1066-b<k1>sam<k2>sam<h>2
{#sam#} 2¦. {%sam%} [cf. 5. {%sa, sama;%} by some con-
nected with 4. {%sa%}], ind. (as a preposition or prefix
to verbs and verbal derivatives opposed to 1. {%vi,%}
q. v., and like Gr. <lang n="greek">σύν,</lang> Lat. <nsi>con,</nsi> expressing) with,
together with, along with, together (e. g. {%saṃ-yuj,%}
to join together; {%sañ-ci,%} to gather together; {%san-%}
{%dhā,%} to place together; {%san-dhi,%} placing together);
when prefixed to some roots and verbal derivatives
{%sam%} intensifies the idea contained in the simple rt.,
and may often be translated by ‘much,’ ‘greatly,’
‘thoroughly,’ ‘quite,’ ‘very,’ ‘well,’ (see {%san-tap,%}
{%san-tuṣ,%} &c.); it may also express ‘completeness,’
‘perfection,’ ‘beauty,’ &c., (see {%sam-uccheda, san-%}
{%tamas,%} &c.); it is not unfrequently prefixed to
nouns in the sense of {%sama,%} ‘same,’ ‘like,’ ‘similar,’
(see {%sama,%} cf. {%sam-artha%}); in the Veda it may be
used as a separable preposition with inst. (e. g. {%asṛ-%}
{%jad madhunā sam madhūni,%} Ṛg-veda X. 54, 6);
[cf. according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">σύν, ξύν;</lang> perhaps Lat.
<nsi>cum;</nsi> Old Russ. <nsi>sen;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>sū, su.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>49542<pc>1066-b<k1>sama<k2>sama<h>1
{#sama#} 1¦. {%sama, as, ā, am%} (probably connected
with 5. {%sa%} and 2. {%sam;%} declined like the prono-
minal {%sarva%} except in meanings like ‘even,’ ‘equal,’
&c., e. g. {%samasmai,%} to all, to every one, Ṛg-veda
VI. 51, 6), even, level, flat, plain; same, equal,
({%samaṃ kṛ,%} to make equal, balance; to pay);
like, similar, like to (with inst., e. g. {%mayā sama,%}
like to me); a match for, acting in the same way or
with equal justice towards every one; indifferent,
impartial, fair; free from emotion, unaffected by
passion, unmoved; straight; upright, honest, just,
temperate, good, virtuous; fit, convenient, suitable;
not eminent, ordinary, common, low, mean, equally
distant from extremes; all, every one ({%= sarva%}
and so declined, see above); full, complete; whole,
entire; ({%as%}), m., N. of certain zodiacal signs (espe-
cially Vṛṣa, Karkaṭa, Kanyā, Vṛścika, Makara,
Mīna); a mode of measuring time in music (de-
scribed as a simultaneous movement of the hands
or feet of a singer with the time of the music);
a kind of straight line placed over a numerical figure
to mark the process of extracting the square root;
({%ā%}), f. a year; see p. 1067, col. 1; ({%am%}), n. anything
even or level, a level plain; (in rhetoric) a particular
figure, sameness of objects compared to one another;
(in geometry) a mean proportional segment (de-
scribed as a fourth proportional to the two perpen-
diculars and the link or segment, and used for solving
certain problems in a trapezium); ({%am%}), ind. equally;
similarly; like; ceteris paribus; on a level with, in
the same way; conformably to; entirely; with,
along with, together with (used as a preposition
governing the inst.); sometimes used for the pre-
position {%sam,%} cf. {%sama-codita, sama-rañjita,%} and
{%sama-gacchatu%} under {%saṅ-gam%}); [cf. Zend <nsi>hama:</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἅμα, ὁμό-ς, ὁμοῦ, ὁμό-θεν, ὁμό-σε, ὁμο-ῖο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὁμοί-ι-ος, ὁμαλό-ς, μία, μέν:</lang> Lat. <nsi>sim-ia (?), si-</nsi>
<nsi>mili-s, simul, simul-tas, simul-ā-re, semel, sem-</nsi>
<nsi>per, singuli:</nsi> Old Lat. <nsi>simītu:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>sama, sama-</nsi>
<nsi>frathjis, sam-ana, samath, sums, sum:</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>sama, saman, zi-samane</nsi> (= Mod. Germ.
[Page1066-c+ 81]
<nsi>zusammen</nsi>), <nsi>samet:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>same</nsi> (<nsi>sam</nsi> in
comp.), <nsi>somne, samne, sum:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>samu:</nsi> Hib.
<nsi>samhuil,</nsi> ‘like;’ <nsi>samhladh,</nsi> ‘resemblance;’ <nsi>sam-</nsi>
<nsi>hlain,</nsi> ‘I compare, resemble.’] {%—Sama-kanyā,%} f. a
suitable maiden, a girl fit to be married. {%—Sama-%}
{%karṇa, as, am,%} m. n. an equi-diagonal tetragon.
{%—Sama-kāla, as,%} m. the same time, the same
moment; ({%am%}), ind. simultaneously. {%—Sama-kola,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having an even breast,’ a serpent, snake.
{%—Sama-koṣṭha-miti, is,%} f. the measure of like
compartments, area or superficial contents of any
figure. {%—Sama-kṣetra, am,%} n. (in astronomy)
‘having an even or complete figure,’ epithet of a
particular division or arrangement of the Nakṣatras.
{%—Sama-khāta, as,%} m. (in geometry) an equal
excavation or cavity, a cavity having the figure of a
regular solid with equal sides, a parallelopipedon,
cylinder. {%—Sama-gandhaka, as,%} m. any com-
pounded perfume, incense, olibanum. {%—Sama-gan-%}
{%dhika, as, ā, am,%} having equal or similar fragrance;
({%am%}), n. the fragrant root of the Uśīra. {%—Sama-%}
{%caturaśra, as, ā, am,%} equally quadrangular, square;
({%as, am%}), m. n. an equilateral tetragon. {%—Sama-%}
{%caturbhuja, as, ā, am,%} equally four-sided; ({%as,%}
{%am%}), m. n. an equilateral tetragon or rhombus.
{%—Sama-citta, as, ā, am,%} even-minded, even-tem-
pered, equanimous, equable; indifferent; having the
thoughts directed to the same subject. {%—Samacitta-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%samacitta-tva, am,%} n. even-mindedness,
equanimity, indifference. {%—Sama-codita, as, ā, am,%}
{%= sañ-codita,%} driven, impelled, shot off. {%—Sama-%}
{%cchedana, as, ā, am,%} having like divisions or deno-
minators. {%—Sama-jāti, is, is, i,%} equal in kind,
homogeneous. {%—Sama-jñā,%} f. fame, reputation; [cf.
{%sam-ajyā.%}] {%—Sama-tā,%} f. or {%sama-tva, am,%} n.
evenness, sameness, equality, similarity; identity;
equanimity; fairness, impartiality, justness, upright-
ness, perfectness, commonness. {%—Sama-traya, am,%} n.
an equal triad, equal quantity of three ingredients, (ac-
cording to Śabda-k. {%harītakī-nāgara-guḍam.%}) {%—Sa-%}
{%ma-tribhuja, as, ā, am,%} having three sides equal;
({%as, am%}), m. n. a tetragon containing three sides equal;
an equilateral triangle. {%—Sama-tviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} equally
bright or lovely. {%—Sama-danta, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%}
having even teeth. {%—Sama-darśana, as, ā, am, =%}
{%tulya-darśana,%} regarding with equal or indifferent
eyes. {%—Sama-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} viewing or regarding
equally, looking at both sides impartially, impartial.
{%—Sama-duḥkha, as, ā, am,%} sympathising with,
feeling for another's woe. {%—Sama-duḥkha-sukha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having the same grief and joy, sympathis-
ing in sorrow and joy. {%—Sama-dṛś, k, k, k,%} looking
on all alike, regarding all alike, impartial; equable.
{%—Sama-dṛṣṭi, is,%} f. the act of looking at equally
or impartially; ({%is, is, i%}), looking on all equally,
regarding all alike. {%—Sama-dyuti, is, is, i,%} equal
in radiance. {%—Sama-dvādaśāśra, as, am,%} m. n. an
equilateral dodecagon or dodecahedron. {%—Sama-%}
{%dvi-dvibhuja, as, am,%} m. n. a rhomboid consisting
of two pairs of equal sides. {%—Sama-dvibhuja, as,%}
{%am,%} m. n. a rhomboid having tow sides equal.
{%—Sama-dhṛta, as, ā, am,%} equal or equivalent to.
{%—Sama-pada, as,%} m. ‘holding the feet even,’ a
particular posture in sexual intercourse; ({%am%}), n. an
attitude in shooting. {%—Sama-pāda, am,%} n. standing
with feet even, a particular posture with archers.
{%—Sama-prabha, as, ā, am,%} having equal splendor.
{%—Sama-buddhi, is, is, i,%} looking on all things
alike, calm, indifferent, philosophical, stoical; ({%is%}),
m., N. of a Muni. {%—Sama-bhāga, as,%} m. an equal
share. {%—Sama-bhāva, as, ī, am,%} of like nature or
property; ({%as%}), m. sameness, equability. {%—Sama-%}
{%bhūmi, is,%} f. even or level ground. {%—Sama-maṇ-%}
{%ḍala, am,%} n. ‘even-circle,’ the prime vertical line
(in astronomy). {%—Sama-maya, as, ī, am,%} of like
origin, proceeding from the same cause. {%—Sama-%}
{%mātra, as, ī, am,%} of the same size or measure.
{%—Sama-miti, is,%} f. mean measure. {%—Sama-raṃhas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} having equal impetuosity or speed. {%—Sa-%}
{%ma-rajju, us,%} f. mean rope or line, mean soundings.
{%—Sama-rañjita, as, ā, am, = saṃ-rañjita,%} tinged,
[Page1067-a+ 81]
coloured, dyed. {%—Sama-rabha, as,%} m. ‘equal-
clasping,’ a kind of coitus. {%—Sama-rūpa, as, ā, am,%}
of the same form. {%—Sama-rūpya, as, ā, am,%} for-
merly in the possession of an honest man, (see
{%rūpya.%}) {%—Sama-rekha, as, ā, am,%} straight-lined,
straight. {%—Sama-lamba, as, ā, am,%} having equal
perpendiculars; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a trapezoid. {%—Sa-%}
{%ma-loṣṭa-kāñcana, as, ā, am,%} one to whom a
clod and piece of gold are all the same. {%—Sama-va-%}
{%yaska, as, ā, am,%} of equal age. {%—Sama-varṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of the same colour or caste, &c.; ({%as%}),
m. community of caste, &c. {%—Sama-vartin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} being equal, being of a fair or impartial dispo-
sition; ({%ī%}), m. Yama, the ruler of Tartarus. {%—Sama-%}
{%vibhāga, as,%} m. a division of property amongst sons
in equal shares. {%—Sama-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} equal in
strength. {%—Sama-vṛtta, am,%} n. {%= sama-maṇḍala%}
above. {%—Sama-vṛtti, is,%} f. even state or temper,
equanimity; ({%is, is, i%}), of an equal or even temper,
equable, fair, moderate. {%—Sama-vedha, as,%} m.
mean depth. {%—Sama-śodhana, am,%} n. equal sub-
traction; subtraction of the same quantity on both
sides of an equation. {%—Sama-saṅkhyāta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} equal in number. {%—Sama-sandhi, is,%} m. equal
alliance, peace on equal terms. {%—Sama-sandhita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} allied on equal terms, bound or con-
nected equally. {%—Sama-supti, is,%} f. universal sleep
(i. e. the end of a Kalpa and destruction of the
universe). {%—Sama-sūtra-ga%} or {%sama-sūtra-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} (in astronomy) situated on the same
diameter. {%—Sama-stha, as, ā, am,%} being level or
even, equal, level, uniform; like, similar. {%—Sama-%}
{%sthala, am, ī,%} n. f. even or level ground; ({%ī%}), f. the
Doab or country between the Ganges and Jumnā
rivers {%(= antar-vedi)%}. {%—Samasthalī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} made into level ground, levelled, filled up (as a
marsh or river). {%—Sama-sparśa, as, ā, am,%} having
the same contact, equal in touch, having the same
effect of contact, equally defiling. {%—Sama-svara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the same or a similar sound. {%—Sa-%}
{%māṃśa (˚ma-aṃ˚), as,%} m. an equal portion or share;
({%as, ā, am%}), entitled to an equal portion or share.
{%—Samāṃśa-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} taking an equal por-
tion, sharing equally, a co-heir. {%—Samāṃśika, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} or {%samāṃśin (˚ma-aṃ˚), ī, inī, i,%} entitled
to an equal share, a co-heir. {%—Samākāra (˚ma-āk˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of like form, like in appearance, similar,
like. {%—Samākṣara-pada-krama (˚ma-ak˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} containing a succession of Padas or metrical
feet of the same number of syllables. {%—1. samācāra%}
{%(˚ma-āc˚), as,%} m. (for 2. {%sam-ācāra%} see p. 1072,
col. 2), equal or similar conduct; upright or virtuous
conduct, proper practice; ({%as, ā, am%}), equal or
similar in practice or in virtuous conduct. {%—Samār-%}
{%thin (˚ma-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} seeking or desiring
equality; seeking peace. {%—Samī-karaṇa, am,%} n.
the act of making even or equal, equalising, levelling;
assimilation, digestion; (in arithmetic) the reducing
of fractions to a common denominator, equation.
{%—Samī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute,%} &c., to
make even or equal, equalise. {%—Samī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} equalised; levelled, equipoised, balanced; done
in the same manner, imitated; summed up, added.
{%—Samī-kriyā,%} f. the act of equalising; (in arith-
metic) equation. {%—Samī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
&c., to be or become equal, be equalised. {%—Samī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} equalised, equipoised; identified.
{%—Samodaka (˚ma-ud˚), am,%} n. a mixture of half
buttermilk and half water. {%—Samopamā (˚ma-up˚),%}
f. (in rhetoric) comparison expressed by the adjective
{%sama%} in composition with the substantive to which
the object of the comparison is likened.
<LEND>

<L>49543<pc>1067-a<k1>samayA<k2>samayA
{%Samayā,%}¦ ind. See under {%sam-i.%}
<LEND>

<L>49544<pc>1067-a<k1>samA<k2>samA<h>1
1. {%samā,%}¦ f. (sometimes {%ās,%} pl.; for 2. {%samā%} see
s. v.), a year; a day (according to some). {%—Samāṃ-%}
{%samīnā,%} f. a cow bearing a calf every year. {%—Samā-%}
{%nicaya, as, ā, am,%} one who has a store (of pro-
visions) sufficient for a year. {%—Samānta (˚mā-an˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the end of a year.
<LEND>

<L>49545<pc>1067-a<k1>samIya<k2>samIya<h>1
1. {%samīya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%samīyate,%} &c., to be treated
equally or in the same manner as (with inst.).
<LEND>
[Page1067-b+ 73]

<L>49546<pc>1067-b<k1>samIya<k2>samIya<h>2
2. {%samīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ similar, like, of like
origin.
<LEND>

<L>49547<pc>1067-b<k1>samIyamAna<k2>samIyamAna<h>1
1. {%samīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being treated in the
same manner as. (For 2. see under 1. {%sam-i.%})
<LEND>

<L>49548<pc>1067-b<k1>sama<k2>sama<h>2
{#sama#} 2¦. {%sa-ma, as, ā, am%} (i. e. {%sa + mā%}),
‘together with Lakṣmī,’ happy, prosperous.
<LEND>

<L>49549<pc>1067-b<k1>samakta<k2>samakta
{#samakta#}¦ {%samakta.%} See under {%sam-añj.%}
<LEND>

<L>49550<pc>1067-b<k1>samakna<k2>samakna
{#samakna#}¦ {%samakna.%} See under {%sam-añc.%}
<LEND>

<L>49551<pc>1067-b<k1>samakza<k2>samakza
{#samakza#}¦ {%sam-akṣa, as, ī, am,%} being before
the eyes or in sight, visible, being in presence of;
({%am%}), ind. before the eyes, in sight of, visibly, in
presence of. {%—Samakṣa-tā,%} f. visibility. {%—Sam-%}
{%akṣa-darśana, am,%} n. the act of seeing with the
eyes, ocular evidence.
<LEND>

<L>49552<pc>1067-b<k1>samagra<k2>samagra
{#samagra#}¦ {%sam-agra, as, ā, am,%} all, entire, whole,
full, complete. {%—Samagra-dhana, as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessing the whole of one's property. {%—Samagra-%}
{%sampad, t, t, t,%} having complete happiness, blessed
with every happiness. {%—Samagrendu (˚ra-in˚), us,%}
m. the full moon. {%—Samagrendu-nibhānana (˚bha-%}
{%ān˚), as, ā, am,%} having a face like the full moon.
<LEND>

<L>49553<pc>1067-b<k1>samaNga<k2>samaNga
{#samaNga#}¦ {%sam-aṅga, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>49554<pc>1067-b<k1>samaNgala<k2>samaNgala
{#samaNgala#}¦ {%sa-maṅgala, as, ā, am,%} endowed
with happiness, auspicious.
<LEND>

<L>49555<pc>1067-b<k1>samaNgA<k2>samaNgA
{#samaNgA#}¦ {%sam-aṅgā,%} f. Bengal madder ({%=%}
{%mañjiṣṭhā%}); a sort of fern, Lycopodium Imbri-
catum; the sensitive plant ({%= lajjālu%}); other plants
({%= varāha-krāntā; = bālā%}).
<LEND>

<L>49556<pc>1067-b<k1>samac<k2>samac
{#samac#}¦ {%sam-ac%} or {%sam-añc%} (see rts. {%ac,%} 1. {%añc,%}
cf. {%sam-añj%} below), cl. 1. P. A. {%-acati, -añcati,%}
{%-te, -añcitum,%} to bend together; to go together:
Pass. {%-acyate,%} to be combined or united.
<LEND>

<L>49557<pc>1067-b<k1>samakna<k2>samakna
{%Sam-akna, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%sam-añc%}), bent toge-
ther; going or moving together or simultaneously,
going, moving.
<LEND>

<L>49558<pc>1067-b<k1>samacya<k2>samacya
{%Sam-acya,%}¦ ind. having bent together.
<LEND>

<L>49559<pc>1067-b<k1>samaj<k2>samaj
{#samaj#}¦ {%sam-aj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ajati, -ajitum,%} to
bring or collect together, (Sāy. {%= saṃ-yojayati%}); to
bring into conflict; to meet (for battle; Sāy. {%= saṅ-%}
{%gacchate,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 100, 11); to subdue, over-
come; to animate, incite, (Sāy. {%= sam-prerayati.%})
<LEND>

<L>49560<pc>1067-b<k1>samaja<k2>samaja
{%Samaja, as,%}¦ m. a multitude of beasts or animals;
a number of fools; ({%am%}), n. a forest, wood.
<LEND>

<L>49561<pc>1067-b<k1>samajyA<k2>samajyA
{%Sam-ajyā,%}¦ f. a meeting, assembly; fame, celebrity.
<LEND>

<L>49562<pc>1067-b<k1>samAja<k2>samAja
{%Sam-āja, as,%}¦ m. a meeting [cf. {%dyūta-s˚, prek-%}
{%ṣā-s˚%}], assembly, congregation, congress; a society,
company, association, club; a convivial meeting,
party; a collection, quantity, multitude, number
(applied to any collection of articles except of beasts);
an elephant. {%—Samāja-sanniveśa, as,%} m. a building
or place suitable for an assembly, assembly-room,
meeting-house.
<LEND>

<L>49563<pc>1067-b<k1>samAjika<k2>samAjika
{%Samājika, as,%}¦ m. a member of an assembly or
congregation; a spectator.
<LEND>

<L>49564<pc>1067-b<k1>samaYj<k2>samaYj
{#samaYj#}¦ {%sam-añj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-anakti, -aṅkte,%}
{%añjitum%} or {%-aṅktum,%} to smear over, anoint, be-
sprinkle; to beautify, decorate, adorn (Ved.); to
honour (Ved.); to join together (Sāy. {%= ekī-kṛ%}),
connect, unite; to put together, compose; to utter
forth, (Sāy. {%= samyag vyaktaṃ kṛ%}); to consume,
devour (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>49565<pc>1067-b<k1>samakta<k2>samakta
{%Sam-akta, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined together; put toge-
ther, composed, combined, (also referrible to {%sam-ac%}
above.)
<LEND>

<L>49566<pc>1067-b<k1>samaYjasa<k2>samaYjasa
{%Sam-añjasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ proper, right, fit; correct,
accurate, true, consistent; virtuous, just, good; sound,
healthy; exercised, practised, experienced; ({%am%}), n.
propriety, fitness, truth, accuracy, consistency, correct
evidence.
<LEND>

<L>49567<pc>1067-b<k1>samaRWa<k2>samaRWa
{#samaRWa#}¦ {%samaṇṭha, as,%} m. a kind of pot-herb
(described as a sort of cucumber, {%= gaṇḍīra%}).
<LEND>

<L>49568<pc>1067-b<k1>samat<k2>samat
{#samat#}¦ {%sam-at,%} cl. 1. P. {%-atati, -atitum,%} to
resort to, approach, visit.
<LEND>
[Page1067-c+ 72]

<L>49569<pc>1067-c<k1>samatikram<k2>samatikram
{#samatikram#}¦ {%sam-ati-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krā-%}
{%mati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to go or pass by en-
tirely, go completely beyond, go or pass completely
through, cross over, step over, step out of; to trans-
gress, neglect, disregard, lose; to surpass, excel, exceed;
to pass by, elapse (as time); to let pass by.
<LEND>

<L>49570<pc>1067-c<k1>samatikrama<k2>samatikrama
{%Sam-atikrama, as,%}¦ m. going entirely over or
beyond; deviating from, transgressing, omission.
<LEND>

<L>49571<pc>1067-c<k1>samatikramya<k2>samatikramya
{%Sam-atikramya,%}¦ ind. having entirely gone by,
having wholly passed over, ({%dvau māsau samati-%}
{%kramya,%} having allowed two months to elapse, after
two months); having neglected or omitted.
<LEND>

<L>49572<pc>1067-c<k1>samatikrAnta<k2>samatikrAnta
{%Sam-atikrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone entirely over or
beyond; transgressed; surpassed, exceeded; passed
by, elapsed.
<LEND>

<L>49573<pc>1067-c<k1>samatiyA<k2>samatiyA
{#samatiyA#}¦ {%sam-ati-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to go completely beyond, pass by or away, elapse.
<LEND>

<L>49574<pc>1067-c<k1>samatirikta<k2>samatirikta
{#samatirikta#}¦ {%sam-atirikta, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt.
{%ric%} with {%ati%} and {%sam%}), excessively redundant or
abundant, exceeding, excessive, much.
<LEND>

<L>49575<pc>1067-c<k1>samativah<k2>samativah
{#samativah#}¦ {%sam-ati-vah,%} Caus. {%-vāhayati,%}
&c., to cause to be spent, to pass, spend.
<LEND>

<L>49576<pc>1067-c<k1>samativft<k2>samativft
{#samativft#}¦ {%sam-ati-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%} &c.
(see rt. 1. {%vṛt%}), to pass by; to escape from, avoid.
<LEND>

<L>49577<pc>1067-c<k1>samatI<k2>samatI
{#samatI#}¦ {%sam-atī (-ati-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-atyeti,%}
&c., to go or pass by entirely, pass completely be-
yond; to go through, cross over; to go by, avoid;
to surpass, excel.
<LEND>

<L>49578<pc>1067-c<k1>samatIta<k2>samatIta
{%Sam-atīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone or passed by.
<LEND>

<L>49579<pc>1067-c<k1>samatItya<k2>samatItya
{%Sam-atītya,%}¦ ind. having completely gone or passed
by, having passed through; having avoided.
<LEND>

<L>49580<pc>1067-c<k1>samatsara<k2>samatsara
{#samatsara#}¦ {%sa-matsara, as, ā, am,%} having envy
or jealousy, envious, jealous.
<LEND>

<L>49581<pc>1067-c<k1>samad<k2>samad<h>1
{#samad#} 1¦. {%sam-ad,%} cl. 2. P. {%-atti, -attum,%} to
eat completely up, entirely devour.
<LEND>

<L>49582<pc>1067-c<k1>samad<k2>samad<h>2
{#samad#} 2¦. {%samad, t,%} f. (in the Pada {%sa-mad;%}
according to Yāska either fr. 1. {%sam-ad%} above or
{%sam-mad%}), Ved. a battle, contest, fight, (in Naigh.
II. 17. {%samatsu%} is enumerated among the {%saṅ-%}
{%grāma-nāmāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>49583<pc>1067-c<k1>samada<k2>samada
{#samada#}¦ {%sa-mada, as, ā, am,%} intoxicated; ex-
hilarated, delighted; furious, mad with rut.
<LEND>

<L>49584<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDika<k2>samaDika
{#samaDika#}¦ {%sam-adhika, as, ā, am,%} exceedingly
abundant, very abundant, exceeding, excessive, plen-
tiful; ({%am%}), ind. exceedingly, excessively. {%—Sam-%}
{%adhika-tara, as, ā, am,%} more abundant, exceed-
ing, excessive.
<LEND>

<L>49585<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDikft<k2>samaDikft
{#samaDikft#}¦ {%sam-adhi-kṛt,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kṛntati,%}
{%-kartitum,%} to cut up in addition, cut up completely.
<LEND>

<L>49586<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDikftya<k2>samaDikftya
{%Sam-adhikṛtya,%}¦ ind. having completely cut up,
having cut in pieces, having cut off.
<LEND>

<L>49587<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDigam<k2>samaDigam
{#samaDigam#}¦ {%sam-adhi-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go towards together, go well up to,
come quite near, approach; to come into possession
of, acquire, obtain; to go completely over, surpass;
to go over, study, read.
<LEND>

<L>49588<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDigata<k2>samaDigata
{%Sam-adhigata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone quite near to,
approached.
<LEND>

<L>49589<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDigamana<k2>samaDigamana
{%Sam-adhigamana, am,%}¦ n. the act of going quite
near to; surpassing, overcoming.
<LEND>

<L>49590<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDigamya<k2>samaDigamya
{%Sam-adhigamya,%}¦ ind. having completely attained
to; having obtained.
<LEND>

<L>49591<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDiruh<k2>samaDiruh
{#samaDiruh#}¦ {%sam-adhi-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati,%}
&c., to rise up, mount, ascend; to rise up to, be
convinced of.
<LEND>

<L>49592<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDiSri<k2>samaDiSri
{#samaDiSri#}¦ {%sam-adhi-śri,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-śra-%}
{%yati, -te, -śrayitum,%} to proceed or advance towards,
approach, go up to; to attack.
<LEND>

<L>49593<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDiSritya<k2>samaDiSritya
{%Sam-adhiśritya,%}¦ ind. having proceeded or ad-
vanced towards; having approached.
<LEND>

<L>49594<pc>1067-c<k1>samaDizWA<k2>samaDizWA
{#samaDizWA#}¦ {%sam-adhi-ṣṭhā (-sthā),%} cl. 1. P.
A. {%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -ṣṭhātum,%} to stand over, preside
[Page1068-a+ 72]
over, superintend, administer, protect; to mount
upon, ascend.
<LEND>

<L>49595<pc>1068-a<k1>samaDizWAya<k2>samaDizWAya
{%Sam-adhiṣṭhāya,%}¦ ind. having presided over;
having mounted upon.
<LEND>

<L>49596<pc>1068-a<k1>samaDI<k2>samaDI
{#samaDI#}¦ {%sam-adhī (-adhi-i),%} cl. 2. A. {%-adhīte,%}
to go over, read through, study thoroughly, peruse,
investigate.
<LEND>

<L>49597<pc>1068-a<k1>samaDIta<k2>samaDIta
{%Sam-adhīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone over, read through,
studied.
<LEND>

<L>49598<pc>1068-a<k1>samaDyAs<k2>samaDyAs
{#samaDyAs#}¦ {%sam-adhy-ās (-adhi-ās),%} cl. 2. A.
{%-āste, -āsitum,%} to sit on together, occupy (a seat)
along with; to dwell in, inhabit: Desid. {%-āsisiṣate,%}
to wish to occupy.
<LEND>

<L>49599<pc>1068-a<k1>samaDva<k2>samaDva
{#samaDva#}¦ {%sam-adhva, as, ā, am,%} being on the
same road, travelling in company.
<LEND>

<L>49600<pc>1068-a<k1>saman<k2>saman
{#saman#}¦ {%sam-an,%} cl. 2. P. {%-aniti, -anitum,%}
Ved. to breathe again, come to life.
<LEND>

<L>49601<pc>1068-a<k1>samAna<k2>samAna<h>1
1. {%sam-āna%}¦ (for 2. {%samāna%} see s. v.), one of the
five vital airs (that which circulates about the navel
and is considered essential to digestion).
<LEND>

<L>49602<pc>1068-a<k1>samana<k2>samana
{#samana#}¦ {%samana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. 1. {%sam%} or
connected with 2. {%sam%}), Ved. a battle, fighting, (in
Naigh. II. 17. enumerated among the {%saṅgrāma-%}
{%nāmāni,%} cf. {%sam-ara%}), rivalry; coming or going
together, meeting, union, collection; a marriage,
marriage ceremony; a sacrifice, (Sāy. {%= yajña%}); ({%as%}),
m. zeal; a diligent man (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>49603<pc>1068-a<k1>samanA<k2>samanA
{%Samanā,%}¦ ind. Ved. in battle, (Sāy. {%= samane%});
(according to others {%samanā%} is an old inst. {%= sam-%}
{%ānayā%} fr. 2. {%samāna,%} see Nirukta X. 5. and Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda VIII. 41, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>49604<pc>1068-a<k1>samanya<k2>samanya
{%Samanya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. warlike, martial,
military.
<LEND>

<L>49605<pc>1068-a<k1>samanantaram<k2>samanantaram
{#samanantaram#}¦ {%sam-anantaram,%} ind. immedi-
ately after.
<LEND>

<L>49606<pc>1068-a<k1>samanas<k2>samanas
{#samanas#}¦ {%sa-manas, ās, ās, as,%} of the same
mind, unanimous.
<LEND>

<L>49607<pc>1068-a<k1>samanIka<k2>samanIka
{#samanIka#}¦ {%sam-anīka, am,%} n., Ved. war, battle.
<LEND>

<L>49608<pc>1068-a<k1>samanukamp<k2>samanukamp
{#samanukamp#}¦ {%sam-anu-kamp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kam-%}
{%pate, -kampitum,%} to sympathise with, have pity on,
pity.
<LEND>

<L>49609<pc>1068-a<k1>samanukampya<k2>samanukampya
{%Sam-anukampya,%}¦ ind. having sympathised with,
having pitied.
<LEND>

<L>49610<pc>1068-a<k1>samanukxp<k2>samanukxp
{#samanukxp#}¦ {%sam-anu-kḷp,%} Caus. {%-kalpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to make any one (acc.) attain any state or
condition (loc.), convert into, cause to become.
<LEND>

<L>49611<pc>1068-a<k1>samanukram<k2>samanukram
{#samanukram#}¦ {%sam-anu-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krā-%}
{%mati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to go or pass through
completely, to go through.
<LEND>

<L>49612<pc>1068-a<k1>samanukramya<k2>samanukramya
{%Sam-anukramya,%}¦ ind. having passed or gone
through.
<LEND>

<L>49613<pc>1068-a<k1>samanugam<k2>samanugam
{#samanugam#}¦ {%sam-anu-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go after, follow, pursue; to penetrate,
pervade.
<LEND>

<L>49614<pc>1068-a<k1>samanugata<k2>samanugata
{%Sam-anugata, as, ā, am,%}¦ followed, pursued;
penetrated, pervaded.
<LEND>

<L>49615<pc>1068-a<k1>samanugA<k2>samanugA
{#samanugA#}¦ {%sam-anu-gā,%} cl. 3. P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%}
to go after together; to go well after, follow quite
closely, follow.
<LEND>

<L>49616<pc>1068-a<k1>samanugrah<k2>samanugrah
{#samanugrah#}¦ {%sam-anu-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛh-%}
{%ṇāti, -gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} to collect or gather
together, arrange or put in order.
<LEND>

<L>49617<pc>1068-a<k1>samanugfhya<k2>samanugfhya
{%Sam-anugṛhya,%}¦ ind. having arranged in order.
<LEND>

<L>49618<pc>1068-a<k1>samanucint<k2>samanucint
{#samanucint#}¦ {%sam-anu-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cinta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to reflect deeply about, meditate on,
think upon, remember.
<LEND>

<L>49619<pc>1068-a<k1>samanujan<k2>samanujan
{#samanujan#}¦ {%sam-anu-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate,%}
{%-janitum,%} to be born similar to or resembling (with
acc.).
<LEND>

<L>49620<pc>1068-a<k1>samanujYA<k2>samanujYA
{#samanujYA#}¦ {%sam-anu-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to permit or allow or consent to
fully, wholly acquiesce in; to approve, admit, grant,
[Page1068-b+ 70]
authorize, empower; to pardon, forgive, excuse; to
grant leave of absence, allow to go away, dismiss;
to favour: Caus. {%-jñāpayati, -yitum,%} to ask leave,
beg permission; to ask for, request; to take leave
of (with acc.), bid adieu; to greet, salute.
<LEND>

<L>49621<pc>1068-b<k1>samanujYAta<k2>samanujYAta
{%Sam-anujñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely assented or
agreed to, permitted, allowed; authorized; allowed
to go away, dismissed; favoured.
<LEND>

<L>49622<pc>1068-b<k1>samanujYAna<k2>samanujYAna
{%Sam-anujñāna, am,%}¦ n. entire assent, concurrence,
permission; ({%as, ā, am%}), entirely acquiesced in,
permitted, allowed.
<LEND>

<L>49623<pc>1068-b<k1>samanujYApya<k2>samanujYApya
{%Sam-anujñāpya,%}¦ ind. having granted full permis-
sion, having fully allowed, having asked leave, having
requested permission; having taken leave of; having
saluted respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>49624<pc>1068-b<k1>samanujYAya<k2>samanujYAya
{%Sam-anujñāya,%}¦ ind. having entirely approved or
consented to; having acquiesced in.
<LEND>

<L>49625<pc>1068-b<k1>samanutap<k2>samanutap
{#samanutap#}¦ {%sam-anu-tap,%} Pass. {%-tapyate,%} to
suffer great subsequent pain, be very penitent, repent.
<LEND>

<L>49626<pc>1068-b<k1>samanudiS<k2>samanudiS
{#samanudiS#}¦ {%sam-anu-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to assign, apportion.
<LEND>

<L>49627<pc>1068-b<k1>samanudfS<k2>samanudfS
{#samanudfS#}¦ {%sam-anu-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati,%}
{%-draṣṭum,%} to look well after; to look on, regard
as, consider, observe.
<LEND>

<L>49628<pc>1068-b<k1>samanudru<k2>samanudru
{#samanudru#}¦ {%sam-anu-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati%} (ep.
also A. {%-te%}), {%-drotum,%} to run after together; to run
well after, follow, pursue.
<LEND>

<L>49629<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuDAv<k2>samanuDAv
{#samanuDAv#}¦ {%sam-anu-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhā-%}
{%vati, -te, -dhāvitum,%} to run after together; to run
well after, pursue.
<LEND>

<L>49630<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuDyE<k2>samanuDyE
{#samanuDyE#}¦ {%sam-anu-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyā-%}
{%yati, -dhyātum,%} to reflect upon, think of.
<LEND>

<L>49631<pc>1068-b<k1>samanupad<k2>samanupad
{#samanupad#}¦ {%sam-anu-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to enter into, enter upon, attain to.
<LEND>

<L>49632<pc>1068-b<k1>samanupraC<k2>samanupraC
{#samanupraC#}¦ {%sam-anu-prach,%} cl. 6. P. {%-pṛc-%}
{%chati, -praṣṭum,%} to ask about, ask after, inquire
about.
<LEND>

<L>49633<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuprAp<k2>samanuprAp
{#samanuprAp#}¦ {%sam-anu-prāp (-pra-āp),%} cl. 5. P.
{%-prāpnoti, -prāptum,%} to attain, reach, arrive at; to
obtain.
<LEND>

<L>49634<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuprApta<k2>samanuprApta
{%Sam-anuprāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ arrived at, reached,
attained; obtained, assumed; entirely covered or
overspread.
<LEND>

<L>49635<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuprApya<k2>samanuprApya
{%Sam-anuprāpya,%}¦ ind. having reached or arrived at.
<LEND>

<L>49636<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuBU<k2>samanuBU
{#samanuBU#}¦ {%sam-anu-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
&c., to enjoy together, feel, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>49637<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuman<k2>samanuman
{#samanuman#}¦ {%sam-anu-man,%} cl. 4. A. {%-manyate,%}
&c., to assent, allow, consent; to recognise as.
<LEND>

<L>49638<pc>1068-b<k1>samanumata<k2>samanumata
{%Sam-anumata, as, ā, am,%}¦ assented to, agreed
upon; ({%am%}), n. consent.
<LEND>

<L>49639<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuyA<k2>samanuyA
{#samanuyA#}¦ {%sam-anu-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to go after, follow.
<LEND>

<L>49640<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuyAta<k2>samanuyAta
{%Sam-anuyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone after, followed.
<LEND>

<L>49641<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuyuj<k2>samanuyuj
{#samanuyuj#}¦ {%sam-anu-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti,%}
{%-yuṅkte, -yoktum,%} to inquire after, ask about; to
appoint, order, enjoin.
<LEND>

<L>49642<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuyujya<k2>samanuyujya
{%Sam-anuyujya,%}¦ ind. inquiring about.
<LEND>

<L>49643<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuvarR<k2>samanuvarR
{#samanuvarR#}¦ {%sam-anu-varṇ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-varṇa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to depict, describe.
<LEND>

<L>49644<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuvarRita<k2>samanuvarRita
{%Sam-anuvarṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ described, delineated.
<LEND>

<L>49645<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuvas<k2>samanuvas
{#samanuvas#}¦ {%sam-anu-vas%} (see rt. 6. {%vas%}), cl. 1.
P. {%-vasati, -vastum,%} to abide by, follow, conform to.
<LEND>

<L>49646<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuvid<k2>samanuvid
{#samanuvid#}¦ {%sam-anu-vid,%} Caus. {%-vedayati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to cause to know or remember, remind.
<LEND>

<L>49647<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuvft<k2>samanuvft
{#samanuvft#}¦ {%sam-anu-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
&c., to follow after, pursue; to obey; to ensue:
Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to cause to take place or
happen.
<LEND>

<L>49648<pc>1068-b<k1>samanuvraj<k2>samanuvraj
{#samanuvraj#}¦ {%sam-anu-vraj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vrajati,%}
{%-vrajitum,%} to go after, follow, pursue.
<LEND>
[Page1068-c+ 72]

<L>49649<pc>1068-c<k1>samanuvrata<k2>samanuvrata
{#samanuvrata#}¦ {%sam-anuvrata, as, ā, am,%} entirely
devoted to, ardently attached to.
<LEND>

<L>49650<pc>1068-c<k1>samanuSAs<k2>samanuSAs
{#samanuSAs#}¦ {%sam-anu-śās,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śāsti,%}
{%-śāsitum,%} to rule or regulate well, govern, direct.
<LEND>

<L>49651<pc>1068-c<k1>samanta<k2>samanta
{#samanta#}¦ {%sam-anta, as, ā, am,%} being on every
side or part, universal, complete, whole, entire, all;
({%as%}), m. limit, boundary, term, end; ({%am%}), ind. to
the very end, on all sides, wholly, altogether; ({%āt%}),
ind. from every side, on every side, from every part,
all round, completely. {%—Samanta-tas,%} ind. all round,
on every side, altogether, wholly. {%—Samanta-dug-%}
{%dhā,%} f. the milk hedge-plant {%(= snuhī)%}. {%—Samanta-%}
{%pañcaka, am,%} n. the district Kuru-kṣetra, q. v. (said
to have been once bordered by five lakes filled by
Paraśu-rāma with the blood of the slaughtered Kṣatri-
yas). {%—Samanta-bhadra, as,%} m. ‘wholly auspicious,’
a Buddha or Jina. {%—Samanta-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘all-
devouring,’ epithet of Agni or fire.
<LEND>

<L>49652<pc>1068-c<k1>samantraka<k2>samantraka
{#samantraka#}¦ {%sa-mantraka, as, ā, am,%} possessing
charms or spells.
<LEND>

<L>49653<pc>1068-c<k1>samantrika<k2>samantrika
{#samantrika#}¦ {%sa-mantrika, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%man-%}
{%trin%} with 5. {%sa,%} q. v.), together with or accompanied
by counsellors (said of a king).
<LEND>

<L>49654<pc>1068-c<k1>samantritva<k2>samantritva
{%Samantri-tva, am,%}¦ n. counsel on the same side,
assent.
<LEND>

<L>49655<pc>1068-c<k1>samanDakAra<k2>samanDakAra
{#samanDakAra#}¦ {%sam-andhakāra, as, am,%} m. n.
great or universal darkness; [cf. {%san-tamas.%}]
<LEND>

<L>49656<pc>1068-c<k1>samanDakArIkfta<k2>samanDakArIkfta
{%Samandhakārī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made dark on
all sides, (Kirāt. XIV. 39.)
<LEND>

<L>49657<pc>1068-c<k1>samanmaTa<k2>samanmaTa
{#samanmaTa#}¦ {%sa-manmatha, as, ā, am,%} having
love, filled with love.
<LEND>

<L>49658<pc>1068-c<k1>samanya<k2>samanya
{#samanya#}¦ {%samanya.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>49659<pc>1068-c<k1>samanyu<k2>samanyu
{#samanyu#}¦ {%sa-manyu, us, us, u,%} having the
same splendor (Ved.); feeling the same energy or
anger, (Sāy. {%= samāna-vayaska%} or {%samāna-krodha,%}
Ṛg-veda II. 34, 3); feeling anger or resentment,
angry, fierce, enraged; filled with sorrow, sorrowful;
({%us%}), m. epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>49660<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvAgam<k2>samanvAgam
{#samanvAgam#}¦ {%sam-anv-ā-gam (-anu-ā-),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to go together after, follow.
<LEND>

<L>49661<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvAgata<k2>samanvAgata
{%Sam-anvāgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ attended by, accom-
panied by, furnished with.
<LEND>

<L>49662<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvAraB<k2>samanvAraB
{#samanvAraB#}¦ {%sam-anv-ā-rabh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-ra-%}
{%bhate,%} &c., to take hold of or clasp together.
<LEND>

<L>49663<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvArabDa<k2>samanvArabDa
{%Sam-anvārabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken hold of
together, grasping together.
<LEND>

<L>49664<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvAruh<k2>samanvAruh
{#samanvAruh#}¦ {%sam-anv-ā-ruh (-anu-ā-),%} cl. 1.
P. {%-rohati, -roḍhum,%} to ascend after (as a wife
ascends the funeral pile after her husband).
<LEND>

<L>49665<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvi<k2>samanvi
{#samanvi#}¦ {%sam-anv-i (-anu-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti,%}
{%-etum,%} to go together after, follow; to infer or ensue
as a consequence.
<LEND>

<L>49666<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvaya<k2>samanvaya
{%Sam-anvaya, as,%}¦ m. regular succession or order,
connected sequence or consequence, conjunction,
mutual connection; [cf. {%anv-aya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>49667<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvita<k2>samanvita
{%Sam-anvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ connected or associated
with; completely possessed of, fully endowed with,
possessing, full of, affected by; [cf. {%anv-ita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>49668<pc>1068-c<k1>samanviz<k2>samanviz
{#samanviz#}¦ {%sam-anv-iṣ (-anu-iṣ),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-icchati,%} &c., to search through, seek about every-
where.
<LEND>

<L>49669<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvizya<k2>samanvizya
{%Sam-anviṣya,%}¦ ind. having searched through, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49670<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvIkz<k2>samanvIkz
{#samanvIkz#}¦ {%sam-anv-īkṣ (-anu-īkṣ),%} cl. 1.
A. {%-īkṣate, -īkṣitum,%} to look towards, look or
gaze after; to keep looking at, keep in view.
<LEND>

<L>49671<pc>1068-c<k1>samanvIkzya<k2>samanvIkzya
{%Sam-anvīkṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked towards or
kept in view.
<LEND>

<L>49672<pc>1068-c<k1>samapaDyE<k2>samapaDyE
{#samapaDyE#}¦ {%sam-apa-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati,%}
{%-dhyātum,%} to think ill or badly of, meditate evil or
injury against, injure.
<LEND>

<L>49673<pc>1068-c<k1>samapavfj<k2>samapavfj
{#samapavfj#}¦ {%sam-apa-vṛj,%} Caus. {%-varjayati,%}
&c., to deliver over, present with.
<LEND>
[Page1069-a+ 70]

<L>49674<pc>1069-a<k1>samapavarjita<k2>samapavarjita
{%Sam-apavarjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ given up; delivered
over, given, presented.
<LEND>

<L>49675<pc>1069-a<k1>samapavft<k2>samapavft
{#samapavft#}¦ {%sam-apa-vṛt,%} Caus. {%-vartayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to roll away, drive away.
<LEND>

<L>49676<pc>1069-a<k1>samapiDA<k2>samapiDA
{#samapiDA#}¦ {%sam-api-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to cover completely.
<LEND>

<L>49677<pc>1069-a<k1>samapiDAya<k2>samapiDAya
{%Sam-apidhāya,%}¦ ind. having completely covered.
<LEND>

<L>49678<pc>1069-a<k1>samapiruh<k2>samapiruh
{#samapiruh#}¦ {%sam-api-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati,%}
&c., to grow together, grow over.
<LEND>

<L>49679<pc>1069-a<k1>samapoh<k2>samapoh
{#samapoh#}¦ {%sam-apoh (-apa-ūh,%} see rt. 1. {%ūh%}),
cl. 1. P. {%-apohati, -apohitum,%} to dispel completely,
entirely exclude.
<LEND>

<L>49680<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBikFt<k2>samaBikFt
{#samaBikFt#}¦ {%sam-abhi-kṝt,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kīrta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to relate, tell, narrate.
<LEND>

<L>49681<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBikIrtya<k2>samaBikIrtya
{%Sam-abhikīrtya,%}¦ ind. having related, having nar-
rated.
<LEND>

<L>49682<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBikram<k2>samaBikram
{#samaBikram#}¦ {%sam-abhi-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krā-%}
{%mati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to go near to, approach.
<LEND>

<L>49683<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBikramya<k2>samaBikramya
{%Sam-abhikramya,%}¦ ind. having approached.
<LEND>

<L>49684<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBikrudDa<k2>samaBikrudDa
{#samaBikrudDa#}¦ {%sam-abhikruddha, as, ā, am,%}
greatly enraged, angry.
<LEND>

<L>49685<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBigam<k2>samaBigam
{#samaBigam#}¦ {%sam-abhi-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go towards together, go up to, approach.
<LEND>

<L>49686<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBigacCat<k2>samaBigacCat
{%Sam-abhigacchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going up to
together, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>49687<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBigarj<k2>samaBigarj
{#samaBigarj#}¦ {%sam-abhi-garj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-garjati,%}
{%-garjitum,%} to shout or cry at defiantly, roar at, chal-
lenge with a shout.
<LEND>

<L>49688<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBiguh<k2>samaBiguh
{#samaBiguh#}¦ {%sam-abhi-guh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gūhate,%}
{%gūhitum, -goḍhum,%} to crouch down, cower.
<LEND>

<L>49689<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBicCad<k2>samaBicCad
{#samaBicCad#}¦ {%sam-abhi-cchad (-chad),%} cl. 10.
P. {%-cchādayati, -yitum,%} to cover all over, com-
pletely envelop.
<LEND>

<L>49690<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBicCanna<k2>samaBicCanna
{%Sam-abhicchanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely covered
over.
<LEND>

<L>49691<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBijan<k2>samaBijan
{#samaBijan#}¦ {%sam-abhi-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate,%}
{%-janitum,%} to be produced or spring up together,
spring up, arise.
<LEND>

<L>49692<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBijYA<k2>samaBijYA
{#samaBijYA#}¦ {%sam-abhi-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to recognise fully, entirely acknow-
ledge or perceive.
<LEND>

<L>49693<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBijYAya<k2>samaBijYAya
{%Sam-abhijñāya,%}¦ ind. having fully recognised or
acknowledged.
<LEND>

<L>49694<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBitarj<k2>samaBitarj
{#samaBitarj#}¦ {%sam-abhi-tarj,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%-tar-%}
{%jati, -tarjayati,%} &c., to threaten or menace greatly,
abuse, blame, scold.
<LEND>

<L>49695<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBityaj<k2>samaBityaj
{#samaBityaj#}¦ {%sam-abhi-tyaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tyajati,%}
{%-tyaktum,%} to give up entirely, abandon or renounce
completely, wholly resign.
<LEND>

<L>49696<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBityakta<k2>samaBityakta
{%Sam-abhityakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ wholly given up,
completely abandoned, renounced; risked. {%—Sam-%}
{%abhityakta-jīvita, as, ā, am,%} one who has quite
renounced his life.
<LEND>

<L>49697<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBidru<k2>samaBidru
{#samaBidru#}¦ {%sam-abhi-dru,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also
A.) {%-dravati (-te), -drotum,%} to run or hasten toge-
ther towards, to run hastily up to or towards (with
acc.), rush full upon, assail, attack; to infest.
<LEND>

<L>49698<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBidruta<k2>samaBidruta
{%Sam-abhidruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ rushed upon, attacked,
resorted to, infested; ({%am%}), ind. hurriedly, quickly.
<LEND>

<L>49699<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBidrutya<k2>samaBidrutya
{%Sam-abhidrutya,%}¦ ind. having hastened towards,
having rushed full upon, having assailed.
<LEND>

<L>49700<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBiDA<k2>samaBiDA
{#samaBiDA#}¦ {%sam-abhi-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to speak to (with acc.), to address;
to direct all one's thoughts to; to proclaim, announce,
(Kirāt. VII. 1.)
<LEND>

<L>49701<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBihita<k2>samaBihita
{%Sam-abhihita, as, ā, am,%}¦ addressed, spoken to.
<LEND>

<L>49702<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBiDAv<k2>samaBiDAv
{#samaBiDAv#}¦ {%sam-abhi-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhā-%}
{%vati, -te, -dhāvitum,%} to run hastily up to or towards,
rush full upon; assail; to fly towards, dart at.
<LEND>

<L>49703<pc>1069-a<k1>samaBiDyE<k2>samaBiDyE
{#samaBiDyE#}¦ {%sam-abhi-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyā- %}
[Page1069-b+ 70]
{%yati, -dhyātum,%} to reflect deeply on, meditate on;
to direct all the thoughts upon, long for.
<LEND>

<L>49704<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBinand<k2>samaBinand
{#samaBinand#}¦ {%sam-abhi-nand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nan-%}
{%dati, -nanditum,%} to rejoice together with, congra-
tulate; to greet, salute.
<LEND>

<L>49705<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBinandita<k2>samaBinandita
{%Sam-abhinandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rejoiced with, con-
gratulated.
<LEND>

<L>49706<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBipat<k2>samaBipat
{#samaBipat#}¦ {%sam-abhi-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati,%}
{%-patitum,%} to fall full upon, assail, attack (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>49707<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBipad<k2>samaBipad
{#samaBipad#}¦ {%sam-abhi-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to come to, arrive at, attain; to come on;
to reply to, answer.
<LEND>

<L>49708<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBipF<k2>samaBipF
{#samaBipF#}¦ {%sam-abhi-pṝ,%} Caus. {%-pūrayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to fill up, fill.
<LEND>

<L>49709<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBiprekz<k2>samaBiprekz
{#samaBiprekz#}¦ {%sam-abhi-prekṣ (-pra-īkṣ),%} cl.
1. A. {%-prekṣate, -prekṣitum,%} to look at, perceive,
view.
<LEND>

<L>49710<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBiplu<k2>samaBiplu
{#samaBiplu#}¦ {%sam-abhi-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate,%}
{%-plotum,%} to inundate, flood over; to overwhelm,
cover.
<LEND>

<L>49711<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBipluta<k2>samaBipluta
{%Sam-abhipluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ inundated, flooded,
overwhelmed; eclipsed (as the moon).
<LEND>

<L>49712<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBiBAz<k2>samaBiBAz
{#samaBiBAz#}¦ {%sam-abhi-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhā-%}
{%ṣate, -bhāṣitum,%} to speak with, converse with;
to speak to, address.
<LEND>

<L>49713<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBiyA<k2>samaBiyA
{#samaBiyA#}¦ {%sam-abhi-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yā-%}
{%tum,%} to approach together (with acc.); to go towards
or near, advance.
<LEND>

<L>49714<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBiyAc<k2>samaBiyAc
{#samaBiyAc#}¦ {%sam-abhi-yāc,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-yā-%}
{%cati, -te,%} &c., to ask earnestly, implore.
<LEND>

<L>49715<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBiruh<k2>samaBiruh
{#samaBiruh#}¦ {%sam-abhi-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati,%}
&c., to grow up together, ascend: Caus. {%-rohayati,%}
&c., to cause to grow up, cause to ascend, place or
impose on (as a burden &c.): Pass. of Caus. {%-rop-%}
{%yate,%} to be placed or imposed on.
<LEND>

<L>49716<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBilaz<k2>samaBilaz
{#samaBilaz#}¦ {%sam-abhi-laṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-la-%}
{%ṣati, -te,%} &c., to long for, be eager for.
<LEND>

<L>49717<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBilazat<k2>samaBilazat
{%Sam-abhilaṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ longing for.
<LEND>

<L>49718<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivad<k2>samaBivad
{#samaBivad#}¦ {%sam-abhi-vad,%} Caus. {%-vādayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to address or salute respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>49719<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivAdya<k2>samaBivAdya
{%Sam-abhivādya,%}¦ ind. having saluted reverentially.
<LEND>

<L>49720<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivaD<k2>samaBivaD
{#samaBivaD#}¦ {%sam-abhi-vadh%} (defective, see rt.
{%vadh%}), to strike at.
<LEND>

<L>49721<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivAYC<k2>samaBivAYC
{#samaBivAYC#}¦ {%sam-abhi-vāñch,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vāñ-%}
{%chati,%} &c., to long for, be eager for.
<LEND>

<L>49722<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivIkz<k2>samaBivIkz
{#samaBivIkz#}¦ {%sam-abhi-vīkṣ (-vi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1.
A. {%-vīkṣate, -vīkṣitum,%} to perceive, become
aware of.
<LEND>

<L>49723<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivft<k2>samaBivft
{#samaBivft#}¦ {%sam-abhi-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
{%-vartitum,%} to go towards, approach, advance towards,
come on; to attack, assail; to turn back, return,
recur; to remain, continue; to pass by, pass away,
pass over; to depart.
<LEND>

<L>49724<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivfD<k2>samaBivfD
{#samaBivfD#}¦ {%sam-abhi-vṛdh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-var-%}
{%dhate,%} &c., to grow up, increase: Caus. {%-vardha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to make larger, enlarge, increase,
augment.
<LEND>

<L>49725<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivfz<k2>samaBivfz
{#samaBivfz#}¦ {%sam-abhi-vṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-varṣati,%}
&c., to rain down upon.
<LEND>

<L>49726<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivyAhf<k2>samaBivyAhf
{#samaBivyAhf#}¦ {%sam-abhi-vy-ā-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-harati, -te, -hartum,%} to mention together; to bring
together, associate together.
<LEND>

<L>49727<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivyAhAra<k2>samaBivyAhAra
{%Sam-abhivyāhāra, as,%}¦ m. (in rhetoric) mention-
ing together; proximity to or association with a
word whose meaning is well understood ({%= prasid-%}
{%dhārthakasya śabdasya sannidhiḥ%}); bringing to-
gether, association, company.
<LEND>

<L>49728<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivyAhArin<k2>samaBivyAhArin
{%Sam-abhivyāhārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ mentioning toge-
ther; accompanying.
<LEND>

<L>49729<pc>1069-b<k1>samaBivyAhfta<k2>samaBivyAhfta
{%Sam-abhivyāhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ mentioned or
[Page1069-c+ 71]
spoken of together; associated ({%= sahita%}), accom-
panied by.
<LEND>

<L>49730<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBizwu<k2>samaBizwu
{#samaBizwu#}¦ {%sam-abhi-ṣṭu (-abhi-stu),%} cl. 2. P.
A. {%-ṣṭauti, -ṣṭute,%} &c., to praise, extol.
<LEND>

<L>49731<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBizwutya<k2>samaBizwutya
{%Sam-abhiṣṭutya,%}¦ ind. having praised, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49732<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBisaMvf<k2>samaBisaMvf
{#samaBisaMvf#}¦ {%sam-abhi-saṃ-vṛ.%} See rt. {%vṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>49733<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBisaMvfta<k2>samaBisaMvfta
{%Sam-abhisaṃvṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely sur-
rounded, encompassed.
<LEND>

<L>49734<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBisanDA<k2>samaBisanDA
{#samaBisanDA#}¦ {%sam-abhi-san-dhā (-sam-dhā),%}
cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to place
or put into; to aim at, strive after, determine on.
<LEND>

<L>49735<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBisanDAya<k2>samaBisanDAya
{%Sam-abhisandhāya,%}¦ ind. having aimed at or
resolved on.
<LEND>

<L>49736<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBisf<k2>samaBisf
{#samaBisf#}¦ {%sam-abhi-sṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarati,%} &c.,
to go towards, approach.
<LEND>

<L>49737<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBisaraRa<k2>samaBisaraRa
{%Sam-abhisaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of going towards
or against, approaching, seeking, wishing or endeavour-
ing to gain.
<LEND>

<L>49738<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBisftya<k2>samaBisftya
{%Sam-abhi-sṛtya,%}¦ ind. having gone towards, hav-
ing advanced, having attacked.
<LEND>

<L>49739<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBihf<k2>samaBihf
{#samaBihf#}¦ {%sam-abhi-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to seize upon or take together; to seize,
take, take out.
<LEND>

<L>49740<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBiharaRa<k2>samaBiharaRa
{%Sam-abhiharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of seizing upon,
taking, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49741<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBihAra<k2>samaBihAra
{%Sam-abhihāra, as,%}¦ m. seizing or taking together;
repetition, reiteration, ({%kriyā-samabhihāreṇa,%} by a
repetition of acts, by repeated acts); excess, surplus.
<LEND>

<L>49742<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBihftya<k2>samaBihftya
{%Sam-abhihṛtya,%}¦ ind. having taken out, having
picked out or selected.
<LEND>

<L>49743<pc>1069-c<k1>samaBI<k2>samaBI
{#samaBI#}¦ {%sam-abhī (-abhi-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-abhyeti,%}
&c., to go towards, come near, approach; to follow,
attend, wait upon.
<LEND>

<L>49744<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByatikram<k2>samaByatikram
{#samaByatikram#}¦ {%sam-abhy-ati-kram,%} cl. 1. P.
{%-krāmati, -kramitum,%} to come upon.
<LEND>

<L>49745<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByarc<k2>samaByarc
{#samaByarc#}¦ {%sam-abhy-arc (-abhi-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-arcati,%} &c., to pay great honour to, worship,
greet, salute.
<LEND>

<L>49746<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByarcana<k2>samaByarcana
{%Sam-abhyarcana, am,%}¦ n. the act of paying great
honour to, worshipping, reverencing.
<LEND>

<L>49747<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByarcita<k2>samaByarcita
{%Sam-abhyarcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly honoured,
worshipped, saluted.
<LEND>

<L>49748<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByarcya<k2>samaByarcya
{%Sam-abhyarcya,%}¦ ind. having paid honour to, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49749<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByarT<k2>samaByarT
{#samaByarT#}¦ {%sam-abhy-arth,%} cl. 10. A. {%-artha-%}
{%yate,%} &c., to petition, solicit, request.
<LEND>

<L>49750<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByarTayitf<k2>samaByarTayitf
{%Sam-abhyarthayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a petitioner;
seeking, petitioning.
<LEND>

<L>49751<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByave<k2>samaByave
{#samaByave#}¦ {%sam-abhy-ave (-abhi-ava-i),%} cl. 2.
P. {%-avaiti,%} &c., to go together, meet, assemble; to
come to an agreement with (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>49752<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByAgam<k2>samaByAgam
{#samaByAgam#}¦ {%sam-abhy-ā-gam (-abhi-ā-),%} cl.
1. P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to come to, approach,
arrive; to return.
<LEND>

<L>49753<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByAgata<k2>samaByAgata
{%Sam-abhyāgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ come to, approached;
come back, returned.
<LEND>

<L>49754<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByAgA<k2>samaByAgA
{#samaByAgA#}¦ {%sam-abhy-ā-gā (-abhi-ā-),%} cl. 3.
P. {%-jigāti, -gātum,%} to come to, come near, approach;
to come upon, assail, attack.
<LEND>

<L>49755<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByAdA<k2>samaByAdA
{#samaByAdA#}¦ {%sam-abhy-ā-dā,%} cl. 3. A. {%-datte,%}
{%dātum,%} to comprehend, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>49756<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByAdadAna<k2>samaByAdadAna
{%Sam-abhyādadāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ comprehending,
perceiving.
<LEND>

<L>49757<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByAnI<k2>samaByAnI
{#samaByAnI#}¦ {%sam-abhy-ā-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-na-%}
{%yati, -te, -netum,%} to lead near to or towards; to
introduce.
<LEND>

<L>49758<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByAhAra<k2>samaByAhAra
{#samaByAhAra#}¦ {%sam-abhyāhāra, as,%} m. bringing
together, association, accompaniment.
<LEND>

<L>49759<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByunnam<k2>samaByunnam
{#samaByunnam#}¦ {%sam-abhy-un-nam (-abhi-ud-),%} cl.
1. P. {%-namati, -nantum,%} to ascend, rise up.
<LEND>

<L>49760<pc>1069-c<k1>samaByunnata<k2>samaByunnata
{%Sam-abhyunnata, as, ā, am,%}¦ ascended, risen,
rising up.
<LEND>
[Page1070-a+ 74]

<L>49761<pc>1070-a<k1>samaByupagamana<k2>samaByupagamana
{#samaByupagamana#}¦ {%sam-abhyupagamana, am,%} n.
the act of approaching or going near; following.
<LEND>

<L>49762<pc>1070-a<k1>samaByupe<k2>samaByupe
{#samaByupe#}¦ {%sam-abhy-upe (-upa-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-upaiti,%} &c., to go very near, approach.
<LEND>

<L>49763<pc>1070-a<k1>samaByupeya<k2>samaByupeya
{%Sam-abhyupeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone to or
approached; to be followed; ({%am%}), n. the being
followed by.
<LEND>

<L>49764<pc>1070-a<k1>samaBye<k2>samaBye
{#samaBye#}¦ {%sam-abhy-e (-abhi-ā-i),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-abhyaiti,%} &c., to come up to, approach, go near
to (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>49765<pc>1070-a<k1>samaByetya<k2>samaByetya
{%Sam-abhyetya,%}¦ ind. having come up, having
approached.
<LEND>

<L>49766<pc>1070-a<k1>samam<k2>samam<h>1
{#samam#} 1¦. {%samam,%} ind. with, together with.
(See under {%sama.%})
<LEND>

<L>49767<pc>1070-a<k1>samam<k2>samam<h>2
{#samam#} 2¦. {%sam-am,%} cl. 1. A. {%-amate,%} &c., Ved.
to go earnestly towards, solicit eagerly; to go together,
ally or connect one's self; to fix or settle firmly.
<LEND>

<L>49768<pc>1070-a<k1>samamamAna<k2>samamamAna
{%Sam-amamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ connecting or allying
one's self.
<LEND>

<L>49769<pc>1070-a<k1>samaya<k2>samaya
{#samaya#}¦ {%sam-aya, sam-āya,%} &c. See under
1. {%sam-i,%} p. 1076.
<LEND>

<L>49770<pc>1070-a<k1>samara<k2>samara
{#samara#}¦ {%sam-ara, sam-arāṇa,%} &c. See under
{%sam-ṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>49771<pc>1070-a<k1>samarc<k2>samarc
{#samarc#}¦ {%sam-arc%} [cf. {%sam-ṛc%}], cl. 1. P. or
Caus. {%-arcati,%} &c., or {%-arcayati,%} &c., to honour,
worship, adore; to adorn, decorate (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>49772<pc>1070-a<k1>samarcana<k2>samarcana
{%Sam-arcana, am,%}¦ n. the act of honouring, wor-
shipping, adoration.
<LEND>

<L>49773<pc>1070-a<k1>samarcita<k2>samarcita
{%Sam-arcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured, worshipped,
adored.
<LEND>

<L>49774<pc>1070-a<k1>samarRa<k2>samarRa
{#samarRa#}¦ {%sam-arṇa.%} See {%sam-ard.%}
<LEND>

<L>49775<pc>1070-a<k1>samarT<k2>samarT
{#samarT#}¦ {%sam-arth%} (in some senses to be re-
garded as a Nom. fr. {%sam-artha%} below), cl. 10. P.
A. {%-arthayati, -te%} (more usually A.), {%-yitum,%} to
make fit or ready, prepare; to make capable, main-
tain, enforce, exert (e. g. {%yatnaṃ samarthaya,%}
make great exertions, exert effort); to establish, sup-
port, provide, bestow (Ved., Sāy. {%samarthayasva%}
{%= saṅgamaya = dehi%}); to judge of the fitness or
propriety of anything, deliberate upon, take into
consideration, reflect or think upon, decide on, deter-
mine, resolve; to judge, consider, regard, think,
imagine, suppose, hold; to suppose, imply, suggest
(a possibility &c.); to approve; to expect.
<LEND>

<L>49776<pc>1070-a<k1>samarTa<k2>samarTa
{%Sam-artha, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a similar or suitable
aim or object, having proper aim or force, very forcible
or adequate, well adapted (to any purpose), well
suited, fit, suitable, proper, regular; capable, compe-
tent, adequate; very strong or powerful, able; having
the same sense or meaning, having one sense ({%=%}
{%tulyārtha, ekārtha%}); having the same construction,
being in apposition (said of words); having meaning
or significance, full of meaning, coherent, significant,
intelligible; made fit or proper, prepared, allowed;
({%as%}), m. a word which has force or meaning, signi-
ficant word; the construction or coherence of words
together in a significant sentence. {%—Samartha-tā,%}
f. or {%samartha-tva, am,%} n. forcibleness, adequacy,
capability, ability, strength, force, power; sameness
of meaning, oneness of meaning or sense, force or
signification (of words), sense, meaning.
<LEND>

<L>49777<pc>1070-a<k1>samarTaka<k2>samarTaka
{%Samarthaka, am,%}¦ n. aloe wood, Amyris Agallocha.
<LEND>

<L>49778<pc>1070-a<k1>samarTana<k2>samarTana
{%Sam-arthana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of making
capable, giving force or strength, establishing, main-
taining, supporting, corroborating, corroboration; de-
liberation, determination, determining or deciding
on the propriety of anything, judging, considering,
supposing, imagining, inferring; adequacy, capability,
energy, force, potency, efficacy, ability, perseverance;
attempting difficulties or impossibilities; reconciling
differences, reconciliation, allaying disputes; object-
ing, objection.
<LEND>

<L>49779<pc>1070-a<k1>samarTanIya<k2>samarTanIya
{%Sam-arthanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be maintained or
established; to be determined or considered.
<LEND>
[Page1070-b+ 70]

<L>49780<pc>1070-b<k1>samarTayat<k2>samarTayat
{%Sam-arthayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ maintaining, regard-
ing, considering, reflecting on.
<LEND>

<L>49781<pc>1070-b<k1>samarTita<k2>samarTita
{%Sam-arthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ maintained, established;
taken into consideration, considered, judged, regarded,
held; resolved, determined.
<LEND>

<L>49782<pc>1070-b<k1>samarTitavat<k2>samarTitavat
{%Samarthita-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has judged
or considered, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49783<pc>1070-b<k1>samarTya<k2>samarTya
{%Sam-arthya,%}¦ ind. having deliberated, having con-
sidered, having determined.
<LEND>

<L>49784<pc>1070-b<k1>samard<k2>samard
{#samard#}¦ {%sam-ard,%} Caus. P. {%-ardayati, -yitum,%}
to pain greatly, distress, wound.
<LEND>

<L>49785<pc>1070-b<k1>samarRa<k2>samarRa
{%Sam-arṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ asked, solicited; pained,
wounded, plagued.
<LEND>

<L>49786<pc>1070-b<k1>samarDaka<k2>samarDaka
{#samarDaka#}¦ {%sam-ardhaka.%} See under {%sam-ṛdh.%}
<LEND>

<L>49787<pc>1070-b<k1>samarpaRa<k2>samarpaRa
{#samarpaRa#}¦ {%sam-arpaṇa.%} See under {%sam-ṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>49788<pc>1070-b<k1>samarya<k2>samarya
{#samarya#}¦ {%samarya.%} See under {%sam-ṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>49789<pc>1070-b<k1>samaryAda<k2>samaryAda
{#samaryAda#}¦ {%sa-maryāda, as, ā, am,%} bounded,
limited; near, proximate; keeping within bounds or
in the right course, correct in conduct; respectful.
<LEND>

<L>49790<pc>1070-b<k1>samarh<k2>samarh
{#samarh#}¦ {%sam-arh,%} Caus. {%-arhayati, -yitum,%} to
show honour to, honour, pay respect to.
<LEND>

<L>49791<pc>1070-b<k1>samala<k2>samala
{#samala#}¦ {%sa-mala, as, ā, am,%} having dirt,
dirty, foul, filthy, muddy, impure; sinful; ({%am%}), n.
excrement, feculent matter, ordure.
<LEND>

<L>49792<pc>1070-b<k1>samalaNkfta<k2>samalaNkfta
{#samalaNkfta#}¦ {%sam-alaṅkṛta, as, ā, am,%} highly
decorated, well adorned.
<LEND>

<L>49793<pc>1070-b<k1>samalaNkftya<k2>samalaNkftya
{%Sam-alaṅkṛtya,%}¦ ind. having completely adorned.
<LEND>

<L>49794<pc>1070-b<k1>samav<k2>samav
{#samav#}¦ {%sam-av,%} cl. 1. P. {%-avati, -avitum,%} to
satisfy, satiate; to protect, maintain, (Sāy. {%sam-%}
{%āvatam = samyag arakṣatam,%} Ṛg-veda I. 112,
18.)
<LEND>

<L>49795<pc>1070-b<k1>samavakAra<k2>samavakAra
{#samavakAra#}¦ {%sam-avakāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%kṛ%}
with {%ava%} and {%sam%}), a species of Rūpaka or drama
(described as a representation of mutual combats and
heroic action in three acts).
<LEND>

<L>49796<pc>1070-b<k1>samavakF<k2>samavakF
{#samavakF#}¦ {%sam-ava-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -ka-%}
{%ritum, -karītum,%} to scatter completely over, cover
entirely, overwhelm with.
<LEND>

<L>49797<pc>1070-b<k1>samavakzip<k2>samavakzip
{#samavakzip#}¦ {%sam-ava-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-kṣipati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to cast or thrust away,
repel.
<LEND>

<L>49798<pc>1070-b<k1>samavagam<k2>samavagam
{#samavagam#}¦ {%sam-ava-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to perceive or understand thoroughly,
become thoroughly acquainted with.
<LEND>

<L>49799<pc>1070-b<k1>samavaguh<k2>samavaguh
{#samavaguh#}¦ {%sam-ava-guh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gūhate,%}
{%gūhitum, -goḍhum,%} to crouch down, cower; (ac-
cording to a Scholiast {%= dehaṃ saṅ-kuc.%})
<LEND>

<L>49800<pc>1070-b<k1>samavacCad<k2>samavacCad
{#samavacCad#}¦ {%sam-ava-cchad (-chad),%} cl. 10. P.
{%-cchādayati, -yitum,%} to cover completely over, con-
ceal, obscure: Pass. {%-cchādyate,%} to be covered over.
<LEND>

<L>49801<pc>1070-b<k1>samavacCanna<k2>samavacCanna
{%Sam-avacchanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered all over.
<LEND>

<L>49802<pc>1070-b<k1>samavacCAdya<k2>samavacCAdya
{%Sam-avacchādya,%}¦ ind. having covered completely
over.
<LEND>

<L>49803<pc>1070-b<k1>samavatF<k2>samavatF
{#samavatF#}¦ {%sam-ava-tṝ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati,%} &c.,
to descend: Caus. {%-tārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
descend.
<LEND>

<L>49804<pc>1070-b<k1>samavatAra<k2>samavatAra
{%Sam-avatāra, as,%}¦ m. descent; a descent into a
river or sacred bathing-place, a Tīrtha or place of
pilgrimage, (Kirāt. V. 7.)
<LEND>

<L>49805<pc>1070-b<k1>samavadA<k2>samavadA
{#samavadA#}¦ {%sam-ava-dā%} or {%sam-ava-do%} (see
rts. 3. {%dā, do%}), cl. 2. P. {%-dāti, -dātum,%} to cut up in
pieces, divide, distribute; to gather together, collect
the pieces, to put together piece by piece.
<LEND>

<L>49806<pc>1070-b<k1>samavatta<k2>samavatta
{%Sam-avatta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut up, divided into pieces.
<LEND>

<L>49807<pc>1070-b<k1>samavadAya<k2>samavadAya
{%Sam-avadāya,%}¦ ind. having cut up or distributed.
<LEND>

<L>49808<pc>1070-b<k1>samavadiS<k2>samavadiS
{#samavadiS#}¦ {%sam-ava-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to point or refer to, to explain with refer-
ence to (anything).
<LEND>

<L>49809<pc>1070-b<k1>samavadru<k2>samavadru
{#samavadru#}¦ {%sam-ava-dru,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dravati,%}
{%-te, -drotum,%} to run away together.
<LEND>
[Page1070-c+ 70]

<L>49810<pc>1070-c<k1>samavaDAna<k2>samavaDAna
{#samavaDAna#}¦ {%sam-avadhāna, am,%} n. great
attention; preparation.
<LEND>

<L>49811<pc>1070-c<k1>samavanata<k2>samavanata
{#samavanata#}¦ {%sam-avanata, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%nam%}
with {%ava%} and {%sam%}), completely bent down, bowed,
bending down, stooping (to drink water &c.).
<LEND>

<L>49812<pc>1070-c<k1>samavanI<k2>samavanI
{#samavanI#}¦ {%sam-ava-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati,%}
{%-te, -netum,%} to lead together, unite; to pour in
together.
<LEND>

<L>49813<pc>1070-c<k1>samavanIya<k2>samavanIya
{%Sam-avanīya,%}¦ ind. having poured together.
<LEND>

<L>49814<pc>1070-c<k1>samavaplu<k2>samavaplu
{#samavaplu#}¦ {%sam-ava-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate,%}
{%-plotum,%} to leap or jump down from.
<LEND>

<L>49815<pc>1070-c<k1>samavapluta<k2>samavapluta
{%Sam-avapluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ lept down, jumped off.
<LEND>

<L>49816<pc>1070-c<k1>samavabuD<k2>samavabuD
{#samavabuD#}¦ {%sam-ava-budh,%} cl. 4. A. {%-budhyate,%}
{%-bodhitum,%} to perceive clearly, understand fully,
know.
<LEND>

<L>49817<pc>1070-c<k1>samavamfS<k2>samavamfS
{#samavamfS#}¦ {%sam-ava-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛśati,%}
&c., to lay hold of.
<LEND>

<L>49818<pc>1070-c<k1>samavaruD<k2>samavaruD
{#samavaruD#}¦ {%sam-ava-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ru-%}
{%ṇaddhi, -runddhe,%} &c. (ep. also {%-rundhati,%} &c.),
{%-roddhum,%} to shut up, enclose, confine: Pass. {%-ru-%}
{%dhyate,%} to be enclosed or contained in; to be shut
out of, be deprived of.
<LEND>

<L>49819<pc>1070-c<k1>samavarudDa<k2>samavarudDa
{%Sam-avaruddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ shut up, enclosed;
obtained.
<LEND>

<L>49820<pc>1070-c<k1>samavalamb<k2>samavalamb
{#samavalamb#}¦ {%sam-ava-lamb,%} cl. 1. A. {%-lambate,%}
&c., to lay hold of; to support.
<LEND>

<L>49821<pc>1070-c<k1>samavalambya<k2>samavalambya
{%Sam-avalambya,%}¦ ind. having taken hold of, hav-
ing supported.
<LEND>

<L>49822<pc>1070-c<k1>samavalI<k2>samavalI
{#samavalI#}¦ {%sam-ava-lī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate,%} &c.,
to be dissolved.
<LEND>

<L>49823<pc>1070-c<k1>samavalok<k2>samavalok
{#samavalok#}¦ {%sam-ava-lok,%} cl. 10. P. {%-loka-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to look at, observe; to look into,
inspect; to look about; to behold, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>49824<pc>1070-c<k1>samavalokayat<k2>samavalokayat
{%Sam-avalokayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ looking at, in-
specting, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49825<pc>1070-c<k1>samavavft<k2>samavavft
{#samavavft#}¦ {%sam-ava-vṛt,%} Caus. {%-vartayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to turn towards.
<LEND>

<L>49826<pc>1070-c<k1>samavaSiz<k2>samavaSiz
{#samavaSiz#}¦ {%sam-ava-śiṣ,%} Pass. of Caus.
{%-śeṣyate,%} to be left, to remain.
<LEND>

<L>49827<pc>1070-c<k1>samavaSezita<k2>samavaSezita
{%Sam-avaśeṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, spared, remaining.
<LEND>

<L>49828<pc>1070-c<k1>samavaSyAna<k2>samavaSyAna
{#samavaSyAna#}¦ {%sam-avaśyāna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%śyai%} with {%ava%} and {%sam%}), gone away, wasted, de-
stroyed.
<LEND>

<L>49829<pc>1070-c<k1>samavasad<k2>samavasad
{#samavasad#}¦ {%sam-ava-sad,%} cl. 1. 6. P. {%-sīdati,%}
{%-sattum,%} to sink down, pine or waste away, perish.
<LEND>

<L>49830<pc>1070-c<k1>samavasanna<k2>samavasanna
{%Sam-avasanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sunk down, de-
pressed, dispirited, sorrowful.
<LEND>

<L>49831<pc>1070-c<k1>samavasfj<k2>samavasfj
{#samavasfj#}¦ {%sam-ava-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati,%}
{%-sraṣṭum,%} to let go, cast or hurl down upon; to
abandon.
<LEND>

<L>49832<pc>1070-c<k1>samavasargya<k2>samavasargya
{%Sam-avasargya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be let go, to be
abandoned, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49833<pc>1070-c<k1>samavaskand<k2>samavaskand
{#samavaskand#}¦ {%sam-ava-skand,%} Caus. {%-skanda-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to assail, attack.
<LEND>

<L>49834<pc>1070-c<k1>samavastamB<k2>samavastamB
{#samavastamB#}¦ {%sam-ava-stambh,%} cl. 5. 9. P.
{%-stabhnoti, -stabhnāti, -stambhitum,%} to support,
confirm, encourage.
<LEND>

<L>49835<pc>1070-c<k1>samavasTA<k2>samavasTA<h>1
{#samavasTA#} 1¦. {%sam-ava-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -sthātum,%} to stand firmly, stand still,
stand ready: Caus. {%-sthāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
stand firm or still, stop; to establish, found.
<LEND>

<L>49836<pc>1070-c<k1>samavasTA<k2>samavasTA<h>2
2. {%sam-avasthā,%}¦ f. firm or fixed state or condition;
similar condition or state; state or condition (in
general).
<LEND>

<L>49837<pc>1070-c<k1>samavasTApita<k2>samavasTApita
{%Sam-avasthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to stand
firmly, set up; fully established, founded.
<LEND>

<L>49838<pc>1070-c<k1>samavasTita<k2>samavasTita
{%Sam-avasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing or remaining
firm, remaining fixed; staunch, steady; standing
ready or prepared, ready; being in any place or
position.
<LEND>
[Page1071-a+ 77]

<L>49839<pc>1071-a<k1>samavahita<k2>samavahita
{#samavahita#}¦ {%sam-avahita, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt.
{%dhā%} with {%ava%} and {%sam%}), closely connected with.
<LEND>

<L>49840<pc>1071-a<k1>samavAkAra<k2>samavAkAra
{#samavAkAra#}¦ {%sam-avākāra, as,%} m. probably
incorrect for {%sam-avakāra,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>49841<pc>1071-a<k1>samavAp<k2>samavAp
{#samavAp#}¦ {%sam-avāp (-ava-āp),%} cl. 5. P. A.
{%-āpnoti, -āpnute,%} &c., to meet with, attain, reach,
gain, obtain, incur.
<LEND>

<L>49842<pc>1071-a<k1>samavApta<k2>samavApta
{%Sam-avāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ obtained, attained.
{%—Samavāpta-kāma, as, ā, am,%} one who has
obtained his desires.
<LEND>

<L>49843<pc>1071-a<k1>samavApti<k2>samavApti
{%Sam-avāpti, is,%}¦ f. attainment, obtaining, getting.
<LEND>

<L>49844<pc>1071-a<k1>samavApya<k2>samavApya
{%Sam-avāpya,%}¦ ind. having attained, having gained.
<LEND>

<L>49845<pc>1071-a<k1>samavArj<k2>samavArj
{#samavArj#}¦ {%sam-avārj (-ava-arj),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-avārjati,%} &c., Ved. to leave together.
<LEND>

<L>49846<pc>1071-a<k1>samave<k2>samave
{#samave#}¦ {%sam-ave (-ava-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-avaiti,%}
{%-avaitum,%} to come together, meet together, blend
or mix together, assemble together, be connected or
united.
<LEND>

<L>49847<pc>1071-a<k1>samavAya<k2>samavAya
{%Sam-avāya, as,%}¦ m. coming or meeting together,
conjunction, close combination or union, mixing
together, cohesion, connection; a collection, aggre-
gate, meeting, concourse, congress, assemblage, mul-
titude, quantity; complete or intimate union, con-
stant and inseparable connection or cohesion, inse-
parable existence or inherence of one thing in another,
intimate or material relation (e. g. the relation which
exists between a whole and its parts; between cloth
and the yarn composing it; between a genus or
species and its individuals; between an action or
quality and its subject; between particularity and the
eternal substances of ether, time, space, soul, &c.;
this is one of the seven categories or Padārthas of
the Vaiśeṣika system or school of Nyāya philosophy
founded by Kaṇāda). {%—Samavāya-tas,%} ind. in con-
sequence of constant and intimate connection or rela-
tion. {%—Samavāya-sambandha, as,%} m. intimate and
constant connection, inseparable relation (as described
above), connection by inseparable inherence or co-
hesion.
<LEND>

<L>49848<pc>1071-a<k1>samavAyin<k2>samavAyin
{%Samavāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ closely and intimately con-
nected or united, aggregated; multitudinous; ({%i%}), n.
intimate and inseparable cause (as clay of pottery,
thread of cloth, &c.). {%—Samavāyi-kāraṇa, am,%} n.
inseparable cause or connection, cause of constant
inherence or cohesion, material cause, substantial
cause, (in the Vedānta phil. {%upādāna-kāraṇa%} is
more commonly used.) {%—Samavāyi-tva, am,%} n.
intimate connection or relation.
<LEND>

<L>49849<pc>1071-a<k1>samaveta<k2>samaveta
{%Sam-aveta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come together, met toge-
ther, met, closely united, mixed, mingled, blended,
collected, assembled, intimately connected with or
related to, intimately united or inherent; con-
tained or comprised or included in a larger number,
contained or comprised in anything. {%—Samaveta-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of being intimately related or
connected. {%—Samavetārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
containing a meaning, significant, instructive.
<LEND>

<L>49850<pc>1071-a<k1>samavetya<k2>samavetya
{%Sam-avetya,%}¦ ind. having come together, having
assembled.
<LEND>

<L>49851<pc>1071-a<k1>samavekz<k2>samavekz
{#samavekz#}¦ {%sam-avekṣ (-ava-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-avekṣate,%} &c., to look at, behold, observe, view,
look about, look round; to perceive; to consider,
regard, notice; to concern one's self about; to reflect
or ponder on; to acknowledge: Caus. {%-avekṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to look at or consider.
<LEND>

<L>49852<pc>1071-a<k1>samavekzita<k2>samavekzita
{%Sam-avekṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ observed, considered.
<LEND>

<L>49853<pc>1071-a<k1>samavekzya<k2>samavekzya
{%Sam-avekṣya,%}¦ ind. having viewed, having con-
sidered, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49854<pc>1071-a<k1>samaS<k2>samaS<h>1
{#samaS#} 1¦. {%sam-aś%} (see rt. 1. {%aś%}), cl. 5. P. A.
{%-aśnoti, -aśnute,%} &c., to pervade or penetrate
thoroughly, extend through; to obtain, gain, attain;
to meet.
<LEND>

<L>49855<pc>1071-a<k1>samaSnuvAna<k2>samaSnuvAna
{%Sam-aśnuvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely pervading,
extending throughout, spreading over; obtaining,
experiencing.
<LEND>

<L>49856<pc>1071-a<k1>samazwi<k2>samazwi
{%Sam-aṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. (in the Vedānta phil.) collective
pervasion, a collective aggregate or one which is
[Page1071-b+ 78]
viewed as consisting of one thing or as constituted
of parts of which each is consubstantially the same
with the whole, totality; [cf. {%vy-aṣṭi.%}] {%—Sam-%}
{%aṣṭy-abhiprāya, as,%} m. the regarding a group of
objects collectively.
<LEND>

<L>49857<pc>1071-b<k1>samaS<k2>samaS<h>2
{#samaS#} 2¦. {%sam-aś,%} cl. 9. P. {%-aśnāti, -aśitum,%}
to eat together, consume; to taste, enjoy.
<LEND>

<L>49858<pc>1071-b<k1>samaSana<k2>samaSana
{%Sam-aśana, am,%}¦ n. the act of eating together.
<LEND>

<L>49859<pc>1071-b<k1>samaSanIya<k2>samaSanIya
{%Sam-aśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be eaten together.
<LEND>

<L>49860<pc>1071-b<k1>samazWila<k2>samazWila
{#samazWila#}¦ {%sam-aṣṭhila, as,%} m. (see {%aṣṭhi%}),
a kind of shrub ({%= kokāgra, āmra-gandhaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>49861<pc>1071-b<k1>samazWilA<k2>samazWilA
{%Sam-aṣṭhilā,%}¦ f. a kind of pot-herb or cucumber
({%= gaṇḍīra%}).
<LEND>

<L>49862<pc>1071-b<k1>samazWIlA<k2>samazWIlA
{%Sam-aṣṭhīlā,%}¦ f. {%= sam-aṣṭhilā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>49863<pc>1071-b<k1>samas<k2>samas<h>1
{#samas#} 1¦. {%sam-as,%} cl. 2. P. {%-asti,%} to be, exist.
<LEND>

<L>49864<pc>1071-b<k1>samas<k2>samas<h>2
{#samas#} 2¦. {%sam-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati, -asitum%}
(Ved. Inf. {%sam-āsam%}), to throw or bring together,
join together, combine, compound, mix, mingle,
connect: Pass. {%-asyate,%} to be thrown together or
combined, to be compounded; (in grammar) to be
compounded, form a compound.
<LEND>

<L>49865<pc>1071-b<k1>samasana<k2>samasana
{%Sam-asana, am,%}¦ n. the act of throwing together,
aggregation, combination, conjunction, compound-
ing, composition, formation of compound words;
contracting, contraction.
<LEND>

<L>49866<pc>1071-b<k1>samasta<k2>samasta
{%Sam-asta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown together, combined,
connected, united, compounded, compound; inherent
in or pervading the whole of anything; all, the
whole, entire, complete [cf. {%yāvat-s˚%}]; contracted,
abbreviated, condensed, concise, succinct, abridged.
{%—Samasta-bala, am,%} n. a whole army, entire force.
{%—Samasta-loka, as,%} m. the whole world.
<LEND>

<L>49867<pc>1071-b<k1>samasya<k2>samasya<h>1
1. {%sam-asya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be thrown or brought
together, to be collected together, to be compounded
or combined; to be made entire or complete; ({%ā%}),
f. part of a stanza given to another person to be
completed; the giving this to any one and requiring
him (as a proof of his skill) to complete it. {%—Sam-%}
{%asyā-pūraṇa, am,%} n. the filling up or completing
a Samasyā, (see above.) {%—Samasyārthā (˚ya-ar˚),%}
f. part of a stanza to be completed.
<LEND>

<L>49868<pc>1071-b<k1>samasya<k2>samasya<h>2
2. {%sam-asya,%}¦ ind. having thrown or put together,
having duly collected or arranged.
<LEND>

<L>49869<pc>1071-b<k1>samasyamAna<k2>samasyamAna
{%Sam-asyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being combined,
being compounded, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49870<pc>1071-b<k1>samAsa<k2>samAsa<h>1
1. {%sam-āsa, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see under 2. {%sam-ās%}),
throwing or bringing together, aggregation, collec-
tion, conjunction, combination, connection, union,
compounding, composition; composition of words,
a compound word (of which there are six kinds,
according to native grammarians, viz. Dvandva,
Bahu-vrīhi, Karma-dhāraya, Tat-puruṣa, Dvigu,
and Avyaya or Avyayī-bhava, an improper com-
pound is called {%asthāna-samāsa%}); euphonic combi-
nation ({%= sandhi%}); composition of differences, unit-
ing enemies, reconciliation; an aggregate, collection,
assemblage; a collection of parts, whole, totality,
summary; contraction, abbreviation, condensation,
abridgement; succinctness, conciseness; ({%ena%}), ind.
summarily, with conciseness, succinctly. {%—Samāsa-%}
{%tas,%} ind. in a summary manner, succinctly, concisely,
briefly. {%—Samāsa-pāda, as,%} m., N. of a section of
the Kātantra grammar on the subject of compound
words; of a section on the same subject in the
Saṅkṣipta-sāra. {%—Samāsa-prāya, as, ā, am,%} con-
sisting chiefly of compound words. {%—Samāsa-ba-%}
{%hula, as, ā, am,%} abounding in compounds (as a
poetical style). {%—Samāsa-bhāvanā,%} f. (in mathema-
tics) composition effected by addition or by the sum
of the products. {%—Samāsa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possess-
ing compounds, compounded; contracted, abridged;
({%ān%}), m. the Toon tree {%(= tunna)%}. {%—Samāsa-%}
{%sañjña, as, ā, am,%} called a compound. {%—Samā-%}
{%sāṅga (˚sa-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a member or part of a
compound word. {%—Samāsānta (˚sa-an˚), as,%} m.
(in grammar) a Taddhita affix added at the end of
a compound and belonging to the whole compound.
{%—Samāsādhyāhāra (˚sa-adh˚), as,%} m. the act of
[Page1071-c+ 72]
supplying an ellipsis in a compound, &c. {%—Samā-%}
{%sārtha (˚sa-ar˚), as,%} m. the sense of a compound;
({%ā%}), f. part of a stanza proposed as a trial of skill to
be completed {%(= samasyā)%}. {%—Samāsokti (˚sa-uk˚),%}
{%is,%} f. a compound metaphor, protracted metaphor
(in rhetoric).
<LEND>

<L>49871<pc>1071-c<k1>samAsita<k2>samAsita
{%Samāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ formed into a collection,
assembled, aggregated.
<LEND>

<L>49872<pc>1071-c<k1>samasTa<k2>samasTa
{#samasTa#}¦ {%sama-stha.%} See p. 1067, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>49873<pc>1071-c<k1>samah<k2>samah
{#samah#}¦ {%sam-ah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ahati,%} to join or
connect with, (but according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
VIII. 48, 5. {%sam-anāha = san-dadhate,%} as if fr.
{%san-nah.%})
<LEND>

<L>49874<pc>1071-c<k1>samaha<k2>samaha
{#samaha#}¦ {%sa-maha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. accompanied
with honour, honoured by all; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Indra, (Sāy. {%= samāna-pūja, sarvaiḥ pūjya.%})
<LEND>

<L>49875<pc>1071-c<k1>samahIDara<k2>samahIDara
{#samahIDara#}¦ {%sa-mahīdhara, as, ā, am,%} having
mountains, mountainous.
<LEND>

<L>49876<pc>1071-c<k1>samahyA<k2>samahyA
{#samahyA#}¦ {%samahyā,%} f. (perhaps for {%sama-jñā,%}
q. v.), fame, reputation; [cf. {%sam-ajyā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>49877<pc>1071-c<k1>samA<k2>samA<h>2
{#samA#} 2¦. {%samā%} (for 1. see p. 1067, col. 1),
ind. (apparently an old inst. and connected with
2. {%sam,%} see {%sami;%} cf. {%amā,%} p. 74, {%sacā,%} p. 1049),
with, together with.
<LEND>

<L>49878<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkarRaya<k2>samAkarRaya
{#samAkarRaya#}¦ {%sam-ā-karṇaya,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kar-%}
{%ṇayati, -yitum,%} to give ear to, listen to, hear.
<LEND>

<L>49879<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkarRya<k2>samAkarRya
{%Sam-ākarṇya,%}¦ ind. having listened to.
<LEND>

<L>49880<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkANkz<k2>samAkANkz
{#samAkANkz#}¦ {%sam-ā-kāṅkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-kāṅk-%}
{%ṣati,%} &c., to long for, hope for, desire, wish for.
<LEND>

<L>49881<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkula<k2>samAkula
{#samAkula#}¦ {%sam-ākula, as, ā, am,%} crowded
together, crowded, thronged, crammed, filled with;
greatly agitated or confounded, bewildered, troubled,
flurried, confused. {%—Samākula-tā,%} f. or {%samākula-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. great agitation or confusion, great bewil-
derment or trouble of mind.
<LEND>

<L>49882<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkf<k2>samAkf
{#samAkf#}¦ {%sam-ā-kṛ,%} cl. 5. 8. P. A. {%-kṛṇoti,%}
{%kṛṇute, -karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} Ved. to bring
together, unite; to collect together; to make ready,
prepare.
<LEND>

<L>49883<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkurvARa<k2>samAkurvARa
{%Sam-ākurvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ bringing together, mak-
ing ready.
<LEND>

<L>49884<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkfta<k2>samAkfta
{%Sam-ākṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought or collected toge-
ther.
<LEND>

<L>49885<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkfz<k2>samAkfz
{#samAkfz#}¦ {%sam-ā-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-karṣati,%}
{%-karṣṭum, -kraṣṭum,%} to draw together; to draw
towards, attract; to draw away or out, extract, take
out: Caus. {%-karṣayati, -yitum,%} to draw away,
carry off.
<LEND>

<L>49886<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkarzin<k2>samAkarzin
{%Sam-ākarṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ drawing together;
attracting; spreading or extending far, diffusing
fragrance; ({%ī%}), m. a scent spreading afar.
<LEND>

<L>49887<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkfzwa<k2>samAkfzwa
{%Sam-ākṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn together;
attracted; drawn out.
<LEND>

<L>49888<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkfzya<k2>samAkfzya
{%Sam-ākṛṣya,%}¦ ind. having drawn towards or
attracted; having drawn away.
<LEND>

<L>49889<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkF<k2>samAkF
{#samAkF#}¦ {%sam-ā-kṝ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati, -kari-%}
{%tum, -karītum,%} to scatter over, pour over, strew
over, cover or fill with anything.
<LEND>

<L>49890<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkIrRa<k2>samAkIrRa
{%Sam-ākīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ strewn over, bestrewed,
completely covered, overspread.
<LEND>

<L>49891<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkrand<k2>samAkrand
{#samAkrand#}¦ {%sam-ā-krand,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-kran-%}
{%dati, -te,%} &c., to cry out together, cry or lament
piteously.
<LEND>

<L>49892<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkram<k2>samAkram
{#samAkram#}¦ {%sam-ā-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krā-%}
{%mati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to tread upon, step
upon; to press or bear down upon (with acc.); to
overrun, attack, assail, invade, seize upon.
<LEND>

<L>49893<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkrAnta<k2>samAkrAnta
{%Sam-ākrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ trod upon; pressed or
borne down (by a burden &c.); attacked, assailed,
seized upon, possessed; overcome; overrun, per-
vaded, overspread; surmounted.
<LEND>

<L>49894<pc>1071-c<k1>samAkrIq<k2>samAkrIq
{#samAkrIq#}¦ {%sam-ā-krīḍ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krīḍati, %}
[Page1072-a+ 75]
{%te, -krīḍitum,%} to play or sport along with
(another).
<LEND>

<L>49895<pc>1072-a<k1>samAkruS<k2>samAkruS
{#samAkruS#}¦ {%sam-ā-kruś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-krośati,%}
{%-kroṣṭum,%} to join in reviling any one, call out
abusively at, scold at.
<LEND>

<L>49896<pc>1072-a<k1>samAkruzwa<k2>samAkruzwa
{%Sam-ākruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ reviled, abused.
<LEND>

<L>49897<pc>1072-a<k1>samAklid<k2>samAklid
{#samAklid#}¦ {%sam-ā-klid,%} cl. 4. P. {%-klidyati,%}
&c., to be well moistened.
<LEND>

<L>49898<pc>1072-a<k1>samAklinna<k2>samAklinna
{%Sam-āklinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ well moistened, well
wetted; suffused with tears, affected by pity or com-
passion.
<LEND>

<L>49899<pc>1072-a<k1>samAkzip<k2>samAkzip
{#samAkzip#}¦ {%sam-ā-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣi-%}
{%pati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw together, heap or
pile up; to thrust or throw away violently, hurl; to
drive way, expel, to throw down; to tear off; to
destroy; to insult, mock, ridicule.
<LEND>

<L>49900<pc>1072-a<k1>samAkzipta<k2>samAkzipta
{%Sam-ākṣipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thrown or heaped
together; thrown or cast off.
<LEND>

<L>49901<pc>1072-a<k1>samAkzipya<k2>samAkzipya
{%Sam-ākṣipya,%}¦ ind. having thrown or cast off;
having torn off.
<LEND>

<L>49902<pc>1072-a<k1>samAKyA<k2>samAKyA<h>1
{#samAKyA#} 1¦. {%sam-ā-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti,%}
{%-khyātum,%} to reckon up, count up, calculate, enu-
merate; to sum up, add together; to relate fully,
report, communicate, tell; to declare, proclaim.
<LEND>

<L>49903<pc>1072-a<k1>samAKyA<k2>samAKyA<h>2
2. {%sam-ākhyā,%}¦ f. report, fame, reputation, cele-
brity; name, appellation.
<LEND>

<L>49904<pc>1072-a<k1>samAKyAta<k2>samAKyAta
{%Sam-ākhyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ reckoned up, enume-
rated, summed up; completely or fully related; de-
clared, proclaimed; famed, celebrated, well known,
public, notorious.
<LEND>

<L>49905<pc>1072-a<k1>samAKyAya<k2>samAKyAya
{%Sam-ākhyāya,%}¦ ind. having related, having told,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>49906<pc>1072-a<k1>samAgam<k2>samAgam
{#samAgam#}¦ {%sam-ā-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to come together (either in a friendly or
hostile manner), meet, encounter; become united or
allied with (with inst. or with inst. and {%saha%}); to
enter into an alliance; to come together sexually,
have intercourse with; to come together (as heavenly
bodies in conjunction or occultation); to come to,
come near, approach, arrive; to come back, return;
to meet with, come upon, find: Caus. {%-gamayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to come together, bring together,
unite one thing or person (acc.) with another (inst.
or loc.).
<LEND>

<L>49907<pc>1072-a<k1>samAgata<k2>samAgata
{%Sam-āgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ come together, met,
encountered, joined in close conflict, united, joined;
met together, assembled; being in conjunction (as
the heavenly bodies); come to, approached, arrived;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of riddle or enigma.
<LEND>

<L>49908<pc>1072-a<k1>samAgati<k2>samAgati
{%Sam-āgati, is,%}¦ f. coming together; encountering,
meeting; union, joining; approach, arrival, similar
condition or progress.
<LEND>

<L>49909<pc>1072-a<k1>samAgatya<k2>samAgatya
{%Sam-āgatya,%}¦ ind. {%= sam-āgamya%} below.
<LEND>

<L>49910<pc>1072-a<k1>samAgama<k2>samAgama
{%Sam-āgama, as,%}¦ m. coming together, encounter,
meeting, union, junction, coalition, assembling; asso-
ciation, acquaintance, intercourse, society, company;
an assembly; (in astronomy) conjunction, the occul-
tation of a heavenly body by another; approach,
arrival. {%—Samāgama-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} causing union.
{%—Samāgama-prārthanā,%} f. the desire of associ-
ation. {%—Samāgama-manoratha, as,%} m. desire of
union. {%—Samāgamopāya (˚ma-up˚), as,%} m. means
of union.
<LEND>

<L>49911<pc>1072-a<k1>samAgamana<k2>samAgamana
{%Sam-āgamana, am,%}¦ n. the act of coming toge-
ther, approach.
<LEND>

<L>49912<pc>1072-a<k1>samAgamya<k2>samAgamya
{%Sam-āgamya,%}¦ ind. having come together, having
met, having joined in conflict, having gone to meet;
having coalesced; having approached.
<LEND>

<L>49913<pc>1072-a<k1>samAgal<k2>samAgal
{#samAgal#}¦ {%sam-ā-gal,%} cl. 1. P. {%-galati, -ga-%}
{%litum,%} to fall together, fall down.
<LEND>

<L>49914<pc>1072-a<k1>samAgalita<k2>samAgalita
{%Sam-āgalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen down, fallen.
<LEND>

<L>49915<pc>1072-a<k1>samAgrah<k2>samAgrah
{#samAgrah#}¦ {%sam-ā-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti,%}
{%gṛhṇīte%} (Ved. {%-gṛbhṇāti,%} &c.), {%-grahītum,%} to
seize together or at once, lay hold of.
<LEND>

<L>49916<pc>1072-a<k1>samAGAta<k2>samAGAta
{#samAGAta#}¦ {%sam-āghāta.%} See {%sam-ā-han.%}
<LEND>
[Page1072-b+ 74]

<L>49917<pc>1072-b<k1>samAGrA<k2>samAGrA
{#samAGrA#}¦ {%sam-ā-ghrā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jighrati,%}
{%-ghrātum,%} to smell at, smell; to kiss.
<LEND>

<L>49918<pc>1072-b<k1>samAGrAya<k2>samAGrAya
{%Sam-āghrāya,%}¦ ind. having smelt at; having kissed.
<LEND>

<L>49919<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcakz<k2>samAcakz
{#samAcakz#}¦ {%sam-ā-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe,%} &c.
(see rt. {%cakṣ%}), to relate fully, tell, report.
<LEND>

<L>49920<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcam<k2>samAcam
{#samAcam#}¦ {%sam-ā-cam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-camati%} (but
{%-cāmati%} with {%ā,%} see {%ā-cam,%} cf. Pāṇ. VII. 3, 75),
to sip water (as a religious act forming part of the
ceremony of ablution).
<LEND>

<L>49921<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcamya<k2>samAcamya
{%Sam-ācamya,%}¦ ind. having sipped water.
<LEND>

<L>49922<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcar<k2>samAcar
{#samAcar#}¦ {%sam-ā-car,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-carati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to proceed; to practise, perform thoroughly,
do, act, accomplish; to conduct one's self, behave;
to remove.
<LEND>

<L>49923<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcara<k2>samAcara
{%Sam-ācara, as, ī, am,%}¦ who or what proceeds or
practises; practising, observing.
<LEND>

<L>49924<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcaraRa<k2>samAcaraRa
{%Sam-ācaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of proceeding,
practising, performing, observing, behaving.
<LEND>

<L>49925<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcarat<k2>samAcarat
{%Sam-ācarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ proceeding, practising,
behaving, following.
<LEND>

<L>49926<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcarita<k2>samAcarita
{%Sam-ācarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ practised, performed,
done, committed.
<LEND>

<L>49927<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcAra<k2>samAcAra<h>2
2. {%sam-ācāra, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. {%samācāra%} see
p. 1067, col. 1), proceeding, going; performance,
practice, conduct, behaviour, usage, way; proper
practice or behaviour; doings, news, report, infor-
mation, intelligence, tradition.
<LEND>

<L>49928<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcIrRa<k2>samAcIrRa
{%Sam-ācīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ performed, done, prac-
tised, committed.
<LEND>

<L>49929<pc>1072-b<k1>samAci<k2>samAci
{#samAci#}¦ {%sam-ā-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti, -ci-%}
{%nute, -cetum,%} to heap up together, accumulate; to
load or cover with; to fill up (cavities in a road &c.).
<LEND>

<L>49930<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcayana<k2>samAcayana
{%Sam-ācayana, am,%}¦ n. the act of heaping up
together, accumulation, aggregation.
<LEND>

<L>49931<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcita<k2>samAcita
{%Sam-ācita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heaped together, covered
with, overspread.
<LEND>

<L>49932<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcIrRa<k2>samAcIrRa
{#samAcIrRa#}¦ {%sam-ācīrṇa.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>49933<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcCad<k2>samAcCad
{#samAcCad#}¦ {%sam-ā-cchad,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cchāda-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cover completely with, overspread,
conceal, veil, cloud; to stupefy.
<LEND>

<L>49934<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcCanna<k2>samAcCanna
{%Sam-ācchanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely covered
with, concealed; involved in.
<LEND>

<L>49935<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcCAdya<k2>samAcCAdya
{%Sam-ācchādya,%}¦ ind. having covered with, having
overspread, having clouded, having stupefied.
<LEND>

<L>49936<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcCid<k2>samAcCid
{#samAcCid#}¦ {%sam-ā-cchid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-cchi-%}
{%natti, -cchintte, -cchettum,%} to cut off; to tear
away, snatch away.
<LEND>

<L>49937<pc>1072-b<k1>samAcCidya<k2>samAcCidya
{%Sam-ācchidya,%}¦ ind. having cut off; having snatched
away.
<LEND>

<L>49938<pc>1072-b<k1>samAja<k2>samAja
{#samAja#}¦ {%samāja,%} &c. See under {%sam-aj.%}
<LEND>

<L>49939<pc>1072-b<k1>samAjuz<k2>samAjuz
{#samAjuz#}¦ {%sam-ā-juṣ,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-juṣati,%}
{%-te%} (Prec. {%-juṣyāt%}), &c., to have a liking for, be
inclined towards, resolve upon (with dat.).
<LEND>

<L>49940<pc>1072-b<k1>samAjuhUzamARa<k2>samAjuhUzamARa
{#samAjuhUzamARa#}¦ {%sam-ājuhūṣamāṇa.%} See
{%sam-ā-hve.%}
<LEND>

<L>49941<pc>1072-b<k1>samAjYA<k2>samAjYA<h>1
{#samAjYA#} 1¦. {%sam-ā-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to know or understand thoroughly,
become acquainted with, learn, ascertain, perceive,
observe; to acknowledge, recognise: Caus. {%-jñāpa-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} to order, command, direct.
<LEND>

<L>49942<pc>1072-b<k1>samAjYapta<k2>samAjYapta
{%Sam-ājñapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ ordered, commanded,
directed.
<LEND>

<L>49943<pc>1072-b<k1>samAjYA<k2>samAjYA<h>2
2. {%sam-ājñā,%}¦ f. reputation, fame.
<LEND>

<L>49944<pc>1072-b<k1>samAjYAta<k2>samAjYAta
{%Sam-ājñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ known, ascertained, ac-
knowledged.
<LEND>

<L>49945<pc>1072-b<k1>samAjYAya<k2>samAjYAya
{%Sam-ājñāya,%}¦ ind. having known, having learnt
or ascertained.
<LEND>

<L>49946<pc>1072-b<k1>samAtan<k2>samAtan
{#samAtan#}¦ {%sam-ā-tan,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-tanoti,%}
{%-tanute, -tanitum,%} to extend, spread; to effect,
cause, produce, procure.
<LEND>

<L>49947<pc>1072-b<k1>samAtata<k2>samAtata
{%Sam-ātata, as, ā, am,%}¦ extended, stretched, strung
(as a bow); excessive, uninterrupted.
<LEND>

<L>49948<pc>1072-b<k1>samAtanvat<k2>samAtanvat
{%Sam-ātanvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ extending; producing,
procuring.
<LEND>
[Page1072-c+ 77]

<L>49949<pc>1072-c<k1>samAtfcakravAla<k2>samAtfcakravAla
{#samAtfcakravAla#}¦ {%sa-mātṛ-cakravāla, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} attended by the whole circle of divine Mātṛs.
<LEND>

<L>49950<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdA<k2>samAdA
{#samAdA#}¦ {%sam-ā-dā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadāti,%}
{%-datte, -dātum,%} to give, bestow, present; to give
back, restore; to take or receive fully or entirely;
to take together, take away with, take away, take
off; to take hold of, seize; to take up; to appre-
hend, perceive, comprehend; to take, receive, ac-
cept; to collect; to undertake, begin, ({%vacanaṃ%}
{%sam-ādā,%} to begin a speech); to take to heart,
reflect on.
<LEND>

<L>49951<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdatta<k2>samAdatta
{%Sam-ādatta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken away, taken hold
of, seized, received.
<LEND>

<L>49952<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdadAna<k2>samAdadAna
{%Sam-ādadāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ taking away, taking
hold of, receiving, taking.
<LEND>

<L>49953<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdAna<k2>samAdAna
{%Sam-ādāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of taking or receiving
fully or entirely; receiving suitable donations; the
daily observances of the Jaina sect.
<LEND>

<L>49954<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdAya<k2>samAdAya
{%Sam-ādāya,%}¦ ind. having wholly taken, having taken
away, having taken or seized, having accepted.
<LEND>

<L>49955<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdeya<k2>samAdeya
{%Sam-ādeya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or received,
acceptable.
<LEND>

<L>49956<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdiS<k2>samAdiS
{#samAdiS#}¦ {%sam-ā-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati, -deṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to assign, allot; to point out, indicate, declare,
announce, communicate, inform; to foretell, fore-
show; to appoint, name, commission, charge, de-
pute, delegate; to direct, advise, order, command;
to determine: Caus. {%-deśayati, -yitum,%} to order,
command.
<LEND>

<L>49957<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdiSya<k2>samAdiSya
{%Sam-ādiśya,%}¦ ind. having assigned, having indi-
cated, having directed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49958<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdizwa<k2>samAdizwa
{%Sam-ādiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ assigned, indicated,
directed, commanded, enjoined.
<LEND>

<L>49959<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdeSa<k2>samAdeSa
{%Sam-ādeśa, as,%}¦ m. direction, advice, order, com-
mand.
<LEND>

<L>49960<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdf<k2>samAdf
{#samAdf#}¦ {%sam-ā-dṛ,%} cl. 6. A. {%-driyate,%} &c.,
to respect greatly; to be greatly respected or
honoured.
<LEND>

<L>49961<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdara<k2>samAdara
{%Sam-ādara, as,%}¦ m. great respect, veneration.
<LEND>

<L>49962<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdaraRIya<k2>samAdaraRIya
{%Sam-ādaraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be greatly re-
spected or venerated.
<LEND>

<L>49963<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdfta<k2>samAdfta
{%Sam-ādṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ very respectful, showing
great regard.
<LEND>

<L>49964<pc>1072-c<k1>samAdru<k2>samAdru
{#samAdru#}¦ {%sam-ā-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati%} (ep.
also A. {%-te%}), {%-drotum,%} to run towards together, run
towards; to rush against, rush at, attack (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>49965<pc>1072-c<k1>samADA<k2>samADA<h>1
{#samADA#} 1¦. {%sam-ā-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to place or put or hold together,
fix together, compose, collect, unite, join, reconcile,
compose differences; to adjust, set right, make right,
settle, solve a difficulty, reply to an objection (e. g.
{%samādhatte,%} he settles a question, he answers an
objection, he clears up a doubt or difficulty); to
dispose, put in order, arrange, repair, redress; to put
or place to, put or place on (e. g. {%idhmaṃ samā-%}
{%dhatte,%} he puts on fuel; {%vāsaḥ samādhatte,%} he
puts on a garment); to lay or place upon, apply,
impose; to deliver over, intrust, commit to, appoint
to; to impose a burden, load; to compose or collect
the thoughts, pay great attention, apply or fix in-
tently (e. g. {%dṛṣṭiṃ samādhā,%} to fix the sight;
{%cittam%} or {%cetaḥ%} or {%manaḥ%} or {%matiṃ samādhā,%}
to fix the mind upon, with loc.); to devote one's
self to, give one's self up to (generally A.); to
assume, take to one's self, take upon one's self;
to conceive (in the womb); to produce, effect,
cause, make, accomplish, complete; to put down as
settled (A.), establish, declare: Pass. {%-dhīyate,%} to be
placed together or adjusted or arranged; to be recon-
ciled, &c.: Desid. {%-dhitsati,%} to wish to put together,
desire to collect or compose.
<LEND>

<L>49966<pc>1072-c<k1>samADA<k2>samADA<h>2
2. {%sam-ādhā, ās,%}¦ m. putting together, adjusting,
settling, reconciling, clearing up difficulties, &c.;
completion, accomplishment.
<LEND>

<L>49967<pc>1072-c<k1>samADAna<k2>samADAna
{%Sam-ādhāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of putting together
or collecting or composing; fixing the mind in
abstract contemplation (as on the true nature of
[Page1073-a+ 79]
spirit), religious meditation, profound absorption or
contemplation (in general); intentness, attention,
eagerness; clearing up a doubt, answering an objec-
tion, replying to the Pūrva-pakṣa (in logic); agree-
ing, promising; declaring, declaration (in the drama),
a leading incident (described as one which unexpect-
edly gives rise to the whole plot). {%—Samādhāna-%}
{%mātra, am,%} n. mere contemplation, only religious
meditation.
<LEND>

<L>49968<pc>1073-a<k1>samADAya<k2>samADAya
{%Sam-ādhāya,%}¦ ind. having put together, having
steadily composed or collected or adjusted, &c.; hav-
ing fixed (the mind or thoughts) upon, being en-
gaged in religious meditation, being intent upon.
<LEND>

<L>49969<pc>1073-a<k1>samADi<k2>samADi
{%Sam-ādhi, is,%}¦ m. putting together; collecting or
composing the mind, fixing the thoughts, intentness,
attentiveness, intent contemplation, profound or ab-
stract meditation (especially on the true nature of
spirit &c.), perfect absorption of thought into the
one object of meditation (i. e. the Supreme Spirit;
this is the eighth and last stage of Yoga); intense
absorption or contemplation (in general); silence;
devotion; a religious vow or self-imposed restraint;
composing differences, making up quarrels, recon-
cilement; agreement, assent, promise, engagement;
making good; requital, retaliation; support, uphold-
ing; continuance; completion, accomplishment, con-
clusion, demonstrated conclusion; attempting impos-
sibilities; perseverance in extreme difficulties; col-
lecting or laying up grain in times of dearth; the
joint of the neck; a tomb, grave; a Jaina saint of
the future age; a particular figure of rhetoric (de-
scribed as the coincidence of two events accidentally
connected and expressed by a common verb, e. g.
{%sā jagāma astaṃ ca bhānumān,%} she went away
and the sun to its setting). {%—Samādhi-bhaṅga, as,%}
m. the breaking or interruption of meditation. {%—Sa-%}
{%mādhi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} engaged in meditation,
absorbed in contemplation; making a promise, an-
nouncing assent or permission. {%—Samādhi-yoga, as,%}
m. application or employment of religious medita-
tion, the efficacy of contemplation. {%—Samādhi-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} abiding in contemplation, absorbed in
devout meditation.
<LEND>

<L>49970<pc>1073-a<k1>samADin<k2>samADin
{%Samādhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ absorbed in contemplation,
meditating.
<LEND>

<L>49971<pc>1073-a<k1>samAhita<k2>samAhita
{%Sam-āhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed together, put or
fixed together, held together, composed, collected,
compiled, accumulated, assembled; comprehended;
united, joined, reconciled, adjusted, made up (as a
quarrel), set right, put in order, settled, disposed,
arranged, repaired; concluded, inferred, demonstrated;
agreed upon, assented to; promised; placed or put
on, imposed, applied; deposited, entrusted, delivered
over; composed or collected (as the thoughts), fixed
(in abstract meditation), intently absorbed, very
intent on or attentive, abstracted; steadfast, firm,
cool, calm; made, effected, accomplished, finished,
completed; ({%as%}), m. a pure or holy man; ({%am%}), n.
great attention or intentness, description of great
intentness (as a figure of rhetoric). {%—Samāhita-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} having the mind fixed in con-
templation, absorbed in mind.
<LEND>

<L>49972<pc>1073-a<k1>samADAv<k2>samADAv
{#samADAv#}¦ {%sam-ā-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhāvati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to run together towards, rush towards, run
near to.
<LEND>

<L>49973<pc>1073-a<k1>samADU<k2>samADU
{#samADU#}¦ {%sam-ā-dhū,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-dhūnoti,%}
{%-dhūnute, -dhunoti, -dhunute,%} &c., to shake off,
drive away, dispel, disperse.
<LEND>

<L>49974<pc>1073-a<k1>samADUta<k2>samADUta
{%Sam-ādhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven away, dispersed,
scattered.
<LEND>

<L>49975<pc>1073-a<k1>samADmA<k2>samADmA
{#samADmA#}¦ {%sam-ā-dhmā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhamati,%}
{%-dhmātum,%} to blow into (a horn &c.); to inflate; to
cause (musical instruments) to sound forth together.
<LEND>

<L>49976<pc>1073-a<k1>samADmAta<k2>samADmAta
{%Sam-ādhmāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ blown into; made to
sound forth together; swelled up, puffed up, swollen,
inflated.
<LEND>

<L>49977<pc>1073-a<k1>samADyE<k2>samADyE
{#samADyE#}¦ {%sam-ā-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati,%}
{%-dhyātum,%} to meditate deeply upon, reflect upon,
be lost in thought.
<LEND>
[Page1073-b+ 80]

<L>49978<pc>1073-b<k1>samAna<k2>samAna<h>2
{#samAna#} 2¦. {%samāna, as, ā%} (Ved. also {%ī%}), {%am%}
(according to some fr. {%sa + māna,%} as if the original
meaning were ‘having the same measure,’ according
to others connected with 1. {%sama;%} in Ṛg-veda
V. 87, 4. {%samānasmāt,%} abl. c. {%= samasmāt = sar-%}
{%veṣām sādhāraṇāt,%} see 1. {%sama;%} for 1. {%sam-āna%}
see under {%sam-an%}), same, alike, similar, equal (with
inst., e. g. {%tena samāna,%} equal to him), uniform, one;
common to all, common, general; good, virtuous;
honoured; ({%am%}), ind. equally with (with inst.); ({%as%}),
m. an equal, friend; any letter which corresponds to
another (e. g. a long to its short vowel, a hard guttural
to its soft), a letter having the same place or organ of
utterance; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of metre. {%—Samāna-kāla%}
or {%samāna-kālīna, as, ā, am,%} synchronous, occur-
ring or produced at the same time. {%—Samāna-gotra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being of the same family ({%= sa-gotra,%}
q. v.). {%—Samāna-jana, as,%} m. a person of the same
family or race. {%—Samāna-janman, ā, ā, a,%} having
a common birth or origin, of equal age. {%—Samāna-%}
{%jāti, is, is, i,%} or {%samāna-jātīya, as, ā, am,%} be-
longing to the same kind or species, of a common
tribe or caste, of the same sort. {%—Samāna-tā,%} f. or
{%samāna-tva, am,%} n. sameness, equality, likeness;
community of kind or quality. {%—Samāna-tejas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} of equal splendor, equal in glory. {%—Samāna-%}
{%duḥkha, as, ā, am,%} having the same griefs, sympa-
thising. {%—Samāna-bandhu, us, us, u,%} Ved. of the
same family. {%—Samāna-māna, as, ā, am,%} receiving
equal honour, equally respected. {%—Samāna-yama,%}
{%as,%} m. the same pitch of voice. {%—Samāna-yoga-%}
{%kṣema, as, ā, am,%} having the same value. {%—Sa-%}
{%māna-yojana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the same
yoking, harnessed for both alike (said of the chariot
of the Aśvins). {%—Samāna-ruci, is, is, i,%} having the
same tastes, taking pleasure in similar objects. {%—Sa-%}
{%mānaruci-tā,%} f. the having similar tastes. {%—Samāna-%}
{%rūpā,%} f. a kind of riddle or enigma. {%—Samāna-%}
{%vayas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%samāna-vayaska, as, ā, am,%}
of the same age. {%—Samāna-varcas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
of equal splendor. {%—Samāna-śabdā,%} f. a kind of
riddle or enigma. {%—Samāna-śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a
similar disposition or temper. {%—Samānākṣara%}
{%(˚na-ak˚),%} ‘a monophthong,’ N. of the vowels {%a, ā,%}
{%i, ī, u, ū, ṛ, ṝ, ḷ%} (as opposed to the {%sandhy-%}
{%akṣara%} or diphthongs). {%—Samānādhikaraṇa%}
{%(˚na-adh˚), am,%} n. common or same government;
same location, same predicament; a predicament
including several things or persons, common or
generic property, common substratum; ({%as, ā, am%}),
being in the same subject or category, being in the
same predicament, having the same location or
sphere; having a common substratum (in the Vaiśe-
shika phil.); agreeing together in the same case,
&c., being in the same government, (see {%adhi-%}
{%karaṇa.%}) {%—Samānādhikāra (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m.
similar office, like rule or government; generic
character. {%—Samānārtha%} or {%samānārthaka (˚na-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having the same meaning, syno-
nymous. {%—Samānārtha-prayojana (˚na-ar˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a common object and purpose,
caused by common interests. {%—Samānālaṅkāra%}
{%(˚na-al˚), as, ā, am,%} wearing the same ornaments.
{%—Samānodaka (˚na-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘having com-
mon water-oblations,’ a kinsman connected by the
offering of water to the departed spirits of common
ancestors, (this relationship is said to extend to the
fourteenth degree, the first seven being both Sapiṇḍas
and Samānodakas, while the remaining seven are
Samānodakas only.) {%—Samānodarya (˚na-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. born from the same womb, a brother of
whole blood.
<LEND>

<L>49979<pc>1073-b<k1>samAnaya<k2>samAnaya
{%Samānaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%samānayati, -yitum,%} to
make equal or similar, equalise.
<LEND>

<L>49980<pc>1073-b<k1>samAnayat<k2>samAnayat<h>1
1. {%samānayat, an, antī, at%}¦ (for 2. see col. 3),
equalising, making equal or like.
<LEND>

<L>49981<pc>1073-b<k1>samAnikA<k2>samAnikA
{%Samānikā,%}¦ f. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>49982<pc>1073-b<k1>samAnI<k2>samAnI
{#samAnI#}¦ {%sam-ā-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati, -te,%}
{%-netum,%} to lead or conduct together, unite, bring
together, join together, collect, assemble; to lead
[Page1073-c+ 78]
any one to another, unite one person (acc.) with
another (inst. or inst. with {%saha%}); to lead towards,
bring near; to bring on; to pour one liquid into
another; to bring or offer an oblation: Caus. {%-nā-%}
{%yayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be brought together,
cause to bring together, cause to be brought near,
call together, convoke, assemble.
<LEND>

<L>49983<pc>1073-c<k1>samAnayat<k2>samAnayat<h>2
2. {%sam-ānayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bringing together,
leading towards, bringing near, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49984<pc>1073-c<k1>samAnayana<k2>samAnayana
{%Sam-ānayana, am,%}¦ n. the act of bringing together,
collecting, leading towards, conducting, bringing.
<LEND>

<L>49985<pc>1073-c<k1>samAnAyya<k2>samAnAyya
{%Sam-ānāyya,%}¦ ind. (fr. the Caus.), having caused
to be brought together, having convoked or called
together.
<LEND>

<L>49986<pc>1073-c<k1>samAnIta<k2>samAnIta
{%Sam-ānīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought together, col-
lected, assembled, led towards or near, conducted,
conveyed, brought.
<LEND>

<L>49987<pc>1073-c<k1>samAnIya<k2>samAnIya
{%Sam-ānīya,%}¦ ind. having brought together, having
led near, having brought.
<LEND>

<L>49988<pc>1073-c<k1>samAnta<k2>samAnta
{#samAnta#}¦ {%samānta.%} See 1. {%samā,%} p. 1067.
<LEND>

<L>49989<pc>1073-c<k1>samAp<k2>samAp
{#samAp#}¦ {%sam-āp,%} cl. 5. P. {%-āpnoti, -āptum,%}
to obtain completely, gain; to accomplish, fulfil; to
reach: Caus. {%-āpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to gain or
obtain completely, cause to reach or attain entirely;
to cause to fulfil, accomplish, bring to an end, finish,
complete, conclude: Desid. of Caus. {%-āpipayiṣati,%}
to wish to cause to complete, try to accomplish:
Desid. {%-īpsati,%} to wish to obtain or reach, wish to
accomplish, wish for, desire.
<LEND>

<L>49990<pc>1073-c<k1>samApa<k2>samApa
{%Sam-āpa, as,%}¦ m. sacrificing, offering oblations to
the gods ({%= deva-yajana%}).
<LEND>

<L>49991<pc>1073-c<k1>samApaka<k2>samApaka
{%Sam-āpaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ accomplishing, com-
pleting, fulfilling, finishing; bringing to an end;
killing; ({%ikā%}), f. a verb or any part of speech used as
a verb to complete a sentence. {%—Samāpaka-kriyā,%}
f. a finishing act, finishing stroke.
<LEND>

<L>49992<pc>1073-c<k1>samApana<k2>samApana
{%Sam-āpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to obtain
or gain completely, accomplishing, conclusion, com-
pletion; acquisition, gain; killing, destroying; a
section, chapter, division; profound meditation;
({%as, ī, am%}), completing, concluding.
<LEND>

<L>49993<pc>1073-c<k1>samApanIya<k2>samApanIya
{%Sam-āpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accomplished or
completed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>49994<pc>1073-c<k1>samApita<k2>samApita
{%Sam-āpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ accomplished, finished,
concluded, done.
<LEND>

<L>49995<pc>1073-c<k1>samApipayizu<k2>samApipayizu
{%Sam-āpipayiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to cause to
complete, desirous of accomplishing.
<LEND>

<L>49996<pc>1073-c<k1>samApta<k2>samApta
{%Sam-āpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ concluded, completed,
finished, ended, done; clever. {%—Samāpta-prāya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} nearly finished. {%—Samāpta-bhūyiṣṭha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} nearly completed or ended, having the
greater part finished. {%—Samāpta-śikṣa, as, ā, am,%}
one who has completed his studies.
<LEND>

<L>49997<pc>1073-c<k1>samAptAla<k2>samAptAla
{%Samāptāla, as,%}¦ m. (doubtful), a lord, master,
(according to Śabda-k. {%= pati.%})
<LEND>

<L>49998<pc>1073-c<k1>samApti<k2>samApti
{%Sam-āpti, is,%}¦ f. complete acquisition, accomplish-
ment, completion, perfection, conclusion, finish, end;
reconciling differences, putting an end to disputes.
{%—Samāpti-sādhana, am,%} n. means of accom-
plishment or completion. {%—Samāpty-arthā,%} f. part
of a stanza given as a trial of skill to be completed;
[cf. {%samasyārthā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>49999<pc>1073-c<k1>samAptika<k2>samAptika
{%Samāptika, as, ī, am,%}¦ concluding, completing,
final, finite; one who has finished the whole; ({%as%}),
m. one who has completed a course of holy study;
a finisher, ender.
<LEND>

<L>50000<pc>1073-c<k1>samApya<k2>samApya<h>1
1. {%sam-āpya, as, ā, am, = sam-āpanīya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>50001<pc>1073-c<k1>samApya<k2>samApya<h>2
2. {%sam-āpya,%}¦ ind. having obtained completely,
having completed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50002<pc>1073-c<k1>samIpsita<k2>samIpsita
{%Sam-īpsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wished for, longed for,
desired.
<LEND>

<L>50003<pc>1073-c<k1>samApat<k2>samApat
{#samApat#}¦ {%sam-ā-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -pati-%}
{%tum,%} to fly together towards; to rush fully upon,
fall upon, assail, assault, attack; to come together,
be united sexually with (with inst.); to come to,
attain to, obtain.
<LEND>

<L>50004<pc>1073-c<k1>samApatat<k2>samApatat
{%Sam-āpatat, an, antī, at,%}¦ rushing upon, assailing.
<LEND>

<L>50005<pc>1073-c<k1>samApad<k2>samApad
{#samApad#}¦ {%sam-ā-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, %}
[Page1074-a+ 75]
{%pattum,%} to fall upon, assail, attack; to fall into any
state or condition, attain to, undergo; to begin; to
come together, come about, come to pass, occur,
take place, appear; to be finished or completed:
Caus. {%-pādayati,%} &c., to cause to come to pass; to
bring about, complete, accomplish; to restore.
<LEND>

<L>50006<pc>1074-a<k1>samApatti<k2>samApatti
{%Sam-āpatti, is,%}¦ f. coming together, meeting, en-
countering; restoration.
<LEND>

<L>50007<pc>1074-a<k1>samApanna<k2>samApanna
{%Sam-āpanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ attained, obtained,
gained; occurred, come, arrived, happened; finished,
completed, accomplished, concluded, done; perfect,
proficient (in any science &c.); furnished or endowed
with; distressed, afflicted; killed; [cf. {%vy-āpanna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>50008<pc>1074-a<k1>samApAdana<k2>samApAdana
{%Sam-āpādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of bringing about,
accomplishing, &c.; restoration.
<LEND>

<L>50009<pc>1074-a<k1>samApAdya<k2>samApAdya
{%Sam-āpādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought about, to
be restored; ({%am%}), n. the change of Visarga to {%s%} or
{%ṣ (= upā-carita);%} the change to {%ṣ%} (in Vedic
phonetics, {%= ṣa-tva%}).
<LEND>

<L>50010<pc>1074-a<k1>samApA<k2>samApA
{#samApA#}¦ {%sam-ā-pā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-pibati, -pivati,%}
{%pātum,%} to drink entirely up, drink up, absorb; to
drink in, imbibe, suck in; to suck out, drain, im-
poverish.
<LEND>

<L>50011<pc>1074-a<k1>samApibat<k2>samApibat
{%Sam-āpibat, an, antī, at,%}¦ drinking up, absorbing;
drinking in.
<LEND>

<L>50012<pc>1074-a<k1>samApU<k2>samApU
{#samApU#}¦ {%sam-ā-pū,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-punāti, -pu-%}
{%nīte,%} &c., to purify thoroughly, purge.
<LEND>

<L>50013<pc>1074-a<k1>samApF<k2>samApF
{#samApF#}¦ {%sam-ā-pṝ,%} Pass. {%-pūryate,%} to be-
come completely full, be quite filled: Caus. {%-pūra-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to make quite full; to fill out; to
draw or bend (a bow).
<LEND>

<L>50014<pc>1074-a<k1>samApUrRa<k2>samApUrRa
{%Sam-āpūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely full, well
filled; complete, entire.
<LEND>

<L>50015<pc>1074-a<k1>samApyE<k2>samApyE
{#samApyE#}¦ {%sam-ā-pyai,%} cl. 1. A. {%-pyāyate,%}
{%-pyātum, -pyāyitum,%} to grow, increase: Caus.
{%-pyāyayati, -te, -yitum,%} to cause to increase or
grow, nourish, invigorate; to refresh, reanimate,
animate, enliven.
<LEND>

<L>50016<pc>1074-a<k1>samApyAyita<k2>samApyAyita
{%Sam-āpyāyita, as, ā, am,%}¦ nourished, invigorated,
refreshed.
<LEND>

<L>50017<pc>1074-a<k1>samAplu<k2>samAplu
{#samAplu#}¦ {%sam-ā-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, -plo-%}
{%tum,%} to bathe or immerse together; to overflow,
inundate, overwhelm, overspread; to jump or spring
upon, rush upon; to come into violent collision with.
<LEND>

<L>50018<pc>1074-a<k1>samApluta<k2>samApluta
{%Sam-āpluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ bathed, bathing in;
drowned, well drenched, flooded, inundated, over-
whelmed; overflowing or suffused with moisture;
overflowing, filled.
<LEND>

<L>50019<pc>1074-a<k1>samAplutya<k2>samAplutya
{%Sam-āplutya,%}¦ ind. having bathed together; inun-
dating; rushing together, coming into collision.
<LEND>

<L>50020<pc>1074-a<k1>samAbanD<k2>samAbanD
{#samAbanD#}¦ {%sam-ā-bandh,%} cl. 9. P. {%-badhnāti,%}
{%-banddhum,%} to bind on, fasten on firmly.
<LEND>

<L>50021<pc>1074-a<k1>samAbaDya<k2>samAbaDya
{%Sam-ābadhya,%}¦ ind. having bound or fastened on
firmly.
<LEND>

<L>50022<pc>1074-a<k1>samABA<k2>samABA
{#samABA#}¦ {%sam-ā-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -bhātum,%}
to appear.
<LEND>

<L>50023<pc>1074-a<k1>samABAz<k2>samABAz
{#samABAz#}¦ {%sam-ā-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate,%}
{%-bhāṣitum,%} to talk together, converse with, converse
together, address, speak to; to speak about, com-
municate.
<LEND>

<L>50024<pc>1074-a<k1>samABAzaRa<k2>samABAzaRa
{%Sam-ābhāṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of conversing
with, speaking to or addressing.
<LEND>

<L>50025<pc>1074-a<k1>samABAzya<k2>samABAzya
{%Sam-ābhāṣya,%}¦ ind. having talked or conversed
together, having spoken to, having addressed.
<LEND>

<L>50026<pc>1074-a<k1>samABuj<k2>samABuj
{#samABuj#}¦ {%sam-ā-bhuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhunakti,%}
{%-bhuṅkte,%} to enjoy or possess entirely or completely;
to rule over.
<LEND>

<L>50027<pc>1074-a<k1>samABf<k2>samABf
{#samABf#}¦ {%sam-ā-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bharati,%}
{%-te, -bhartum,%} Ved. to bring together; to produce,
procure.
<LEND>

<L>50028<pc>1074-a<k1>samABfta<k2>samABfta
{%Sam-ābhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought together, pro-
cured.
<LEND>

<L>50029<pc>1074-a<k1>samAmantr<k2>samAmantr
{#samAmantr#}¦ {%sam-ā-mantr,%} cl. 10. A. {%-mantra-%}
{%yate, -yitum,%} to address, accost; to invoke, summon;
to bid farewell to any one.
<LEND>
[Page1074-b+ 75]

<L>50030<pc>1074-b<k1>samAmantraya<k2>samAmantraya
{%Sam-āmantraya,%}¦ ind. having addressed; having
bid farewell to.
<LEND>

<L>50031<pc>1074-b<k1>samAmnA<k2>samAmnA
{#samAmnA#}¦ {%sam-ā-mnā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-manati, -mnā-%}
{%tum,%} to repeat or mention together; to hand down;
to repeat memoriter or by tradition (especially to
repeat or hand down traditionally collections of words
or sacred texts); to enumerate; to prescribe: Pass.
{%-mnāyate,%} to be handed down, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50032<pc>1074-b<k1>samAmnAta<k2>samAmnAta
{%Sam-āmnāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ repeated or mentioned
together; repeated traditionally, handed down by
memory or tradition; recited, enumerated; pre-
scribed.
<LEND>

<L>50033<pc>1074-b<k1>samAmnAna<k2>samAmnAna
{%Sam-āmnāna, am,%}¦ n. repetition, mention, hand-
ing down or repeating traditionally; enumeration.
<LEND>

<L>50034<pc>1074-b<k1>samAmnAya<k2>samAmnAya
{%Sam-āmnāya, as,%}¦ m. repetition or mention toge-
ther, traditional repetition or mention (especially of
sacred texts &c.); a traditional collection (of words
&c.); tradition or repetition or mention (in general);
enumeration, reading, recitation ({%= paṭhana%}); tota-
lity, aggregate; epithet of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>50035<pc>1074-b<k1>samAya<k2>samAya
{#samAya#}¦ {%sam-āya.%} See under 1. {%sam-i.%}
<LEND>

<L>50036<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyat<k2>samAyat
{#samAyat#}¦ {%sam-ā-yat,%} cl. 1. A. {%-yatate, -ya-%}
{%titum,%} to attach one's self to, be devoted to.
<LEND>

<L>50037<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyatta<k2>samAyatta
{%Sam-ā-yatta, as, ā, am,%}¦ devoted to, resting or
depending on (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>50038<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyam<k2>samAyam
{#samAyam#}¦ {%sam-ā-yam,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-yacchati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to draw together, contract; to draw out,
extend; to draw, pull, stretch.
<LEND>

<L>50039<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyata<k2>samAyata
{%Sam-āyata, as, ā, am,%}¦ drawn out, lengthened,
extended, long (e. g. {%dvi-yojana-samāyata,%} two
Yojanas long).
<LEND>

<L>50040<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyasta<k2>samAyasta
{#samAyasta#}¦ {%sam-ā-yasta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%yas%}
with {%ā%} and {%sam%}), distressed, troubled, oppressed.
<LEND>

<L>50041<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyA<k2>samAyA
{#samAyA#}¦ {%sam-ā-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%} to
come together; to come to, approach, arrive at,
reach, attain, obtain, meet with; to go to any state
(with acc.; see rt. 1. {%yā%}); to pass away, elapse.
<LEND>

<L>50042<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyAt<k2>samAyAt
{%Sam-āyāt, ān, ātī%}¦ or {%āntī, āt,%} coming towards,
approaching, arriving.
<LEND>

<L>50043<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyAta<k2>samAyAta
{%Sam-āyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come together, come to,
arrived at, reached, attained, arrived, come.
<LEND>

<L>50044<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyuj<k2>samAyuj
{#samAyuj#}¦ {%sam-ā-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti,%}
{%-yuṅkte, -yoktum,%} to join or fasten together, unite
with; to join, connect, prepare, make ready; to
provide, furnish, supply; to meet together, encounter;
to enjoin, charge, entrust, appoint; to surround:
Caus. {%-yojayati, -yitum,%} to join together, connect,
fit together; to furnish or supply with.
<LEND>

<L>50045<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyukta<k2>samAyukta
{%Sam-āyukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined, connected, united;
attached; touched; intent on, devoted to; pre-
pared, made ready; well furnished or endowed with;
supplied, provided; enjoined, charged, appointed;
met together, encountered, brought into contact.
<LEND>

<L>50046<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyoga<k2>samAyoga
{%Sam-āyoga, as,%}¦ m. conjunction, connection, union,
junction, preparation, fitting (an arrow to a bow),
aiming; association; assemblage, multitude, heap;
cause, origin, motive, object.
<LEND>

<L>50047<pc>1074-b<k1>samAyuta<k2>samAyuta
{#samAyuta#}¦ {%sam-āyuta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. 2. {%yu%}
with {%ā%} and {%sam%}), joined together, connected or
united with, attached to; furnished or endowed
with, possessed of, adorned with; brought together,
collected.
<LEND>

<L>50048<pc>1074-b<k1>samArata<k2>samArata
{#samArata#}¦ {%sam-ārata, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%ram%}
with {%ā%} and {%sam%}), ceased from, left off, desisted.
<LEND>

<L>50049<pc>1074-b<k1>samAraB<k2>samAraB
{#samAraB#}¦ {%sam-ā-rabh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rabhate,%}
{%-rabdhum,%} to take in hand, undertake, begin, com-
mence, try; to try to propitiate: Pass. {%-rabhyate,%}
to be undertaken, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50050<pc>1074-b<k1>samArabDa<k2>samArabDa
{%Sam-ārabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken in hand, under-
taken, begun, commenced.
<LEND>

<L>50051<pc>1074-b<k1>samAraBya<k2>samAraBya
{%Sam-ārabhya,%}¦ ind. having undertaken; having
commenced.
<LEND>

<L>50052<pc>1074-b<k1>samAramBa<k2>samAramBa
{%Sam-ārambha, as,%}¦ m. undertaking, enterprise,
commencement, beginning; using; anointing the
body, an unguent ({%= sam-ālambha%}).
<LEND>
[Page1074-c+ 75]

<L>50053<pc>1074-c<k1>samAramBaRa<k2>samAramBaRa
{%Sam-ārambhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. taking in hand, under-
taking; anointing ({%= sam-ālambhana%}).
<LEND>

<L>50054<pc>1074-c<k1>samArARa<k2>samArARa
{#samArARa#}¦ {%sam-ārāṇa.%} See under {%sam-ṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>50055<pc>1074-c<k1>samArAD<k2>samArAD
{#samArAD#}¦ {%sam-ā-rādh,%} Caus. {%-rādhayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to conciliate, propitiate, make favour-
able, gratify, satisfy, serve; to win.
<LEND>

<L>50056<pc>1074-c<k1>samArADana<k2>samArADana
{%Sam-ārādhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of conciliating,
gratifying, conciliation, propitiation; winning.
<LEND>

<L>50057<pc>1074-c<k1>samAruj<k2>samAruj
{#samAruj#}¦ {%sam-ā-ruj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-rujati, -rok-%}
{%tum,%} to break to pieces, break down, break off.
<LEND>

<L>50058<pc>1074-c<k1>samArujya<k2>samArujya
{%Sam-ārujya,%}¦ ind. having broken off, having
broken to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>50059<pc>1074-c<k1>samAruD<k2>samAruD
{#samAruD#}¦ {%sam-ā-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ruṇaddhi,%}
{%-runddhe, -roddhum,%} to block up, obstruct, stop up.
<LEND>

<L>50060<pc>1074-c<k1>samAruDya<k2>samAruDya
{%Sam-ārudhya,%}¦ ind. having blocked up or ob-
structed.
<LEND>

<L>50061<pc>1074-c<k1>samAruh<k2>samAruh
{#samAruh#}¦ {%sam-ā-ruh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rohati, -ro-%}
{%ḍhum,%} to ascend or mount on, ride on; to ascend
or rise to (with acc. or sometimes loc.); to go to,
enter upon, undertake, begin, engage in, attain to:
Caus. {%-rohayati, -te, -ropayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to mount upon or ascend; to cause to rise up, lift
up, raise; to string (a bow); to put or place or
deposit upon or in (with loc. or acc.); to plant; to
deliver over to (with loc.), hand over; to ascribe,
attribute; to display, put forth, exhibit.
<LEND>

<L>50062<pc>1074-c<k1>samArurukzu<k2>samArurukzu
{%Sam-ārurukṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of ascending.
<LEND>

<L>50063<pc>1074-c<k1>samAruDya<k2>samAruDya
{%Sam-ārudhya,%}¦ ind. having ascended, having mounted
upon, having surmounted.
<LEND>

<L>50064<pc>1074-c<k1>samArUQa<k2>samArUQa
{%Sam-ārūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ ascended, mounted, gone
up; grown over, healed; agreed upon.
<LEND>

<L>50065<pc>1074-c<k1>samAropaRa<k2>samAropaRa
{%Sam-āropaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to ascend,
placing or fixing in or on, depositing, delivering over.
<LEND>

<L>50066<pc>1074-c<k1>samAropita<k2>samAropita
{%Sam-āropita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to mount or
ascend; strung (as a bow); placed in or on, de-
posited, planted, lodged; delivered over; put forth,
displayed. {%—Samāropita-kārmuka, as,%} m. a strung
bow; one who has strung a bow. {%—Samāropita-%}
{%bhāra, as, ā, am,%} one on whom a burden has been
placed.
<LEND>

<L>50067<pc>1074-c<k1>samAropya<k2>samAropya
{%Sam-āropya,%}¦ ind. having caused to ascend, having
raised; having placed or deposited in or on; having
delivered over.
<LEND>

<L>50068<pc>1074-c<k1>samAroha<k2>samAroha
{%Sam-āroha, as,%}¦ m. ascending, mounting, going
up; riding upon; agreeing upon.
<LEND>

<L>50069<pc>1074-c<k1>samArohaRa<k2>samArohaRa
{%Sam-ārohaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of mounting or
ascending, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50070<pc>1074-c<k1>samArohya<k2>samArohya
{%Sam-ārohya,%}¦ ind. having put or placed on or
deposited.
<LEND>

<L>50071<pc>1074-c<k1>samAlakz<k2>samAlakz
{#samAlakz#}¦ {%sam-ā-lakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-lak-%}
{%ṣayati, -te, -yitum,%} to look at attentively, behold,
see, perceive, view, observe, regard, consider, watch.
<LEND>

<L>50072<pc>1074-c<k1>samAlakzya<k2>samAlakzya
{%Sam-ālakṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked at or con-
sidered well, perceiving, regarding, contemplating,
watching for.
<LEND>

<L>50073<pc>1074-c<k1>samAlagna<k2>samAlagna
{#samAlagna#}¦ {%sam-ā-lagna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%lag%} with {%ā%} and {%sam%}), sticking or adhering together,
closely clasped or united together.
<LEND>

<L>50074<pc>1074-c<k1>samAlap<k2>samAlap
{#samAlap#}¦ {%sam-ā-lap,%} cl. 1. P. {%-lapati,%} &c.,
to converse together; to speak to, address.
<LEND>

<L>50075<pc>1074-c<k1>samAlaB<k2>samAlaB
{#samAlaB#}¦ {%sam-ā-labh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-labhate,%}
{%-labdhum,%} to take hold of, seize, grasp; to stroke,
handle; to touch, rub, anoint, smear over.
<LEND>

<L>50076<pc>1074-c<k1>samAlabDa<k2>samAlabDa
{%Sam-ālabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken hold of, grasped,
handled, touched; rubbed, anointed, smeared (with
unguents &c.).
<LEND>

<L>50077<pc>1074-c<k1>samAlamBa<k2>samAlamBa
{%Sam-ālambha, as,%}¦ m. taking hold of, seizing,
seizing a victim (for sacrifice); rubbing, smearing
the body with unguents or coloured perfumes (as
saffron &c.).
<LEND>

<L>50078<pc>1074-c<k1>samAlamBana<k2>samAlamBana
{%Sam-ālambhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of taking hold
of, seizing; anointing or smearing the body (with
perfumes &c.).
<LEND>

<L>50079<pc>1074-c<k1>samAlamb<k2>samAlamb
{#samAlamb#}¦ {%sam-ā-lamb,%} cl. 1. A. {%-lambate,%}
{%-lambitum,%} to hang on to (any one), hold on to,
[Page1075-a+ 73]
cling to, grasp, lay hold of, seize; to lean or rest
upon, be supported by, depend upon, trust to, devote
one's self to, give one's self up to; to assume, maintain;
to settle down or abide in: Caus. {%-lambayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to hang or rest or depend, suspend.
<LEND>

<L>50080<pc>1075-a<k1>samAlambana<k2>samAlambana
{%Sam-ālambana, am,%}¦ n. the act of clinging to,
laying hold of, leaning or resting on, support.
<LEND>

<L>50081<pc>1075-a<k1>samAlambita<k2>samAlambita
{%Sam-ālambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ suspended; clung to;
rested on, supported, upheld, maintained.
<LEND>

<L>50082<pc>1075-a<k1>samAlambin<k2>samAlambin
{%Sam-ālambin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ clinging to, laying hold,
&c.; ({%ī%}), m. a particular grass ({%= bhūtṛṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>50083<pc>1075-a<k1>samAlambya<k2>samAlambya
{%Sam-ālambya,%}¦ ind. having suspended; having
clung to; having maintained.
<LEND>

<L>50084<pc>1075-a<k1>samAliK<k2>samAliK
{#samAliK#}¦ {%sam-ā-likh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-likhati,%}
&c., to scratch down, mark down, mark out, write
down, delineate.
<LEND>

<L>50085<pc>1075-a<k1>samAliNg<k2>samAliNg
{#samAliNg#}¦ {%sam-ā-liṅg,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-liṅgati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to embrace closely, clasp or hold in a firm
embrace.
<LEND>

<L>50086<pc>1075-a<k1>samAliNgya<k2>samAliNgya
{%Sam-āliṅgya,%}¦ ind. having embraced closely; hav-
ing clasped firmly.
<LEND>

<L>50087<pc>1075-a<k1>samAlip<k2>samAlip
{#samAlip#}¦ {%sam-ā-lip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-limpati,%}
{%-te, -leptum,%} to anoint all over; to anoint one's self
(A.): Caus. {%-lepayati, -yitum,%} to anoint or smear
over, anoint well.
<LEND>

<L>50088<pc>1075-a<k1>samAlipta<k2>samAlipta
{%Sam-ālipta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well anointed or smeared.
<LEND>

<L>50089<pc>1075-a<k1>samAlI<k2>samAlI
{#samAlI#}¦ {%sa-mālī,%} f. (fr. 5. {%sa + mālā,%} q. v.),
a collection of flowers, nosegay.
<LEND>

<L>50090<pc>1075-a<k1>samAluq<k2>samAluq
{#samAluq#}¦ {%sam-ā-luḍ,%} Caus. {%-loḍayati,%} &c., to
stir or mix together, stir up, agitate, disturb, confuse;
to rummage, investigate.
<LEND>

<L>50091<pc>1075-a<k1>samAloqya<k2>samAloqya
{%Sam-āloḍya,%}¦ ind. having stirred or mixed toge-
ther; having rummaged.
<LEND>

<L>50092<pc>1075-a<k1>samAlok<k2>samAlok
{#samAlok#}¦ {%sam-ā-lok,%} cl. 1. A., 10. P. {%-lo-%}
{%kate, -lokayati,%} &c., to look at attentively, inspect,
view, observe, regard, perceive, consider; to look
about, look around; to acknowledge.
<LEND>

<L>50093<pc>1075-a<k1>samAloka<k2>samAloka
{%Sam-āloka, as,%}¦ m. looking at or considering well.
<LEND>

<L>50094<pc>1075-a<k1>samAlokya<k2>samAlokya
{%Sam-ālokya,%}¦ ind. having looked at or observed
thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>50095<pc>1075-a<k1>samAloc<k2>samAloc
{#samAloc#}¦ {%sam-ā-loc,%} cl. 1. A. {%-locate,%} &c.,
to look at attentively, consider well or thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>50096<pc>1075-a<k1>samAlocya<k2>samAlocya
{%Sam-ālocya,%}¦ ind. having looked at or considered
well.
<LEND>

<L>50097<pc>1075-a<k1>samAvad<k2>samAvad
{#samAvad#}¦ {%sam-ā-vad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vadati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to speak with certainty, tell fully; to speak
to, tell, say.
<LEND>

<L>50098<pc>1075-a<k1>samAvap<k2>samAvap
{#samAvap#}¦ {%sam-ā-vap,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vapati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to sow or scatter together, mix up together,
throw in together: Caus. {%-vāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to be sown or scattered in together or at once.
<LEND>

<L>50099<pc>1075-a<k1>samAvApya<k2>samAvApya
{%Sam-āvāpya,%}¦ ind. (fr. the Caus.), having caused
to be sown or scattered in together.
<LEND>

<L>50100<pc>1075-a<k1>samAvartana<k2>samAvartana
{#samAvartana#}¦ {%sam-āvartana.%} See {%sam-ā-vṛt.%}
<LEND>

<L>50101<pc>1075-a<k1>samAvalokya<k2>samAvalokya
{#samAvalokya#}¦ {%sam-āvalokya, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%lok%} with {%ava, ā,%} and {%sam%}), to be perceived or observed.
<LEND>

<L>50102<pc>1075-a<k1>samAvas<k2>samAvas
{#samAvas#}¦ {%sam-ā-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati, -vas-%}
{%tum,%} to dwell in, inhabit, settle in (with acc.); to
encamp, lodge, halt; to resort to: Caus. {%-vāsayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to dwell or settle or halt; to pitch
a camp, encamp.
<LEND>

<L>50103<pc>1075-a<k1>samAvAsa<k2>samAvAsa
{%Sam-āvāsa, as,%}¦ m. a dwelling-place, residence,
abode, halting-place, encampment.
<LEND>

<L>50104<pc>1075-a<k1>samAvAsita<k2>samAvAsita
{%Sam-āvāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to dwell or settle,
lodged, encamped; sojourned. {%—Samāvāsita-ka-%}
{%ṭaka, as, ā, am,%} one who has pitched a camp.
<LEND>

<L>50105<pc>1075-a<k1>samAvah<k2>samAvah
{#samAvah#}¦ {%sam-ā-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vahati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to bear or bring together, bring or convey
towards; to procure means of subsistence.
<LEND>

<L>50106<pc>1075-a<k1>samAvAya<k2>samAvAya
{#samAvAya#}¦ {%sam-āvāya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 5. {%i%} with
{%ava, ā,%} and {%sam%}), association; integral or inseparable
connection, (see {%sam-avāya%}); aggregation, totality;
a multitude, number, heap, quantity.
<LEND>
[Page1075-b+ 78]

<L>50107<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvigna<k2>samAvigna
{#samAvigna#}¦ {%sam-āvigna, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
1. {%vij%} with {%ā%} and {%sam%}), agitated, terrified, trembling
greatly.
<LEND>

<L>50108<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvid<k2>samAvid
{#samAvid#}¦ {%sam-ā-vid,%} Caus. {%-vedayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to know thoroughly, inform; to tell,
announce, report fully.
<LEND>

<L>50109<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvedya<k2>samAvedya<h>1
1. {%sam-āvedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be told or commu-
nicated fully.
<LEND>

<L>50110<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvedya<k2>samAvedya<h>2
2. {%sam-āvedya,%}¦ ind. having announced or reported
fully.
<LEND>

<L>50111<pc>1075-b<k1>samAviS<k2>samAviS
{#samAviS#}¦ {%sam-ā-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati, -veṣ-%}
{%ṭum,%} to enter together or at once, enter into, go
towards, approach, betake one's self to; to enter
thoroughly, take possession of, occupy, penetrate,
pervade, engross, fill; to overcome, seize upon; to
sit down, settle down, sit down in or on, take up an
abode; to go or fall into any state or condition; to
apply one's self to, undertake: Caus. {%-veśayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to enter together or thoroughly; to
cause to enter in, insert; to conduct, lead or bring
into; to contain; to place or fix in or on, direct
towards; to impose; to deliver over or consign to
(with acc. and loc.); to cause to sit down, cause to
settle down.
<LEND>

<L>50112<pc>1075-b<k1>samAviSya<k2>samAviSya
{%Sam-āviśya,%}¦ ind. having entered together, having
entered thoroughly or entirely, having penetrated, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50113<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvizwa<k2>samAvizwa
{%Sam-āviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ entered together, entered
entirely or thoroughly, completely occupied or pos-
sessed, penetrated, pervaded, filled, seized, overcome,
absorbed, engrossed (as by any feeling, passion, &c.);
possessed by (an evil spirit), possessed of, endowed
with, well instructed in; seated, settled.
<LEND>

<L>50114<pc>1075-b<k1>samAveSa<k2>samAveSa
{%Sam-āveśa, as,%}¦ m. entering together, coming
together, abiding together, meeting, association, co-
inherence; entrance, penetration, complete possession;
possession by evil spirits, &c.; affection, passion,
emotion; (in grammar) applying together, employ-
ing a term with a common applicability, common
applicability of a term.
<LEND>

<L>50115<pc>1075-b<k1>samAveSita<k2>samAveSita
{%Sam-āveśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to enter together,
brought together, caused to enter, inserted, made to
penetrate, brought in or into; placed, fixed, absorbed,
engrossed.
<LEND>

<L>50116<pc>1075-b<k1>samAveSya<k2>samAveSya
{%Sam-āveśya,%}¦ ind. having made to enter, having
fixed or placed (in any place), having made to settle.
<LEND>

<L>50117<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvf<k2>samAvf
{#samAvf#}¦ {%sam-ā-vṛ,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-vṛṇoti, -vṛ-%}
{%ṇute,%} &c., to cover all over, cover completely, en-
velop, encompass, enclose, surround; to conceal,
hide; to shut out, shut, close; to obstruct, impede,
hinder, stop.
<LEND>

<L>50118<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvfta<k2>samAvfta
{%Sam-āvṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered all over, com-
pletely covered, enveloped, encompassed, surrounded,
enclosed, beset, filled up; overspread; screened,
veiled, concealed, hidden; protected, guarded; shut
out, excluded, shut, closed, stopped.
<LEND>

<L>50119<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvftya<k2>samAvftya
{%Sam-āvṛtya,%}¦ ind. having completely covered
over, having enclosed or surrounded.
<LEND>

<L>50120<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvfj<k2>samAvfj
{#samAvfj#}¦ {%sam-ā-vṛj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-varjati,%} cl.
7. P. A. {%-vṛṇakti, -vṛṅkte,%} &c., to bend or turn
down; to bend or turn to one's own use, appropriate
(Ved., A.): Caus. {%-varjayati, -yitum,%} to bend down,
incline, lower.
<LEND>

<L>50121<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvarjita<k2>samAvarjita
{%Sam-āvarjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bent down, inclined,
turned down, lowered. {%—Samāvarjita-ketu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} one who has lowered his standard. {%—Samāvar-%}
{%jita-netra, as, ā, am,%} having the eyes bent down.
<LEND>

<L>50122<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvft<k2>samAvft
{#samAvft#}¦ {%sam-ā-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate, -var-%}
{%titum,%} to turn or advance towards, approach, come;
to come together, assemble; to turn back, come
back, return (said especially of a Brahma-cārin or
religious student who returns home after completing
his studies with a preceptor); to turn out well, suc-
ceed; to come to an end, be concluded or completed:
Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to cause to turn back,
cause to return home, dismiss; to put an end to,
annihilate, (Sāy. {%sam-āvartayanti = nāśayanti,%}
Ṛg-veda VII. 79, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>50123<pc>1075-b<k1>samAvartana<k2>samAvartana
{%Sam-āvartana, am,%}¦ n. the act of turning back,
[Page1075-c+ 75]
returning; a pupil's return home after finishing his
religious studies; the ceremony performed on the
above occasion, (see {%saṃs-kāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>50124<pc>1075-c<k1>samAvftta<k2>samAvftta
{%Sam-āvṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come together, assem-
bled, returned; completed, ended, concluded; ({%as%}),
m. a pupil who has returned home after completing
his studies. {%—Samāvṛtta-vrata, as, ā, am,%} one
who has completed a religious vow.
<LEND>

<L>50125<pc>1075-c<k1>samAvfttaka<k2>samAvfttaka
{%Sam-āvṛttaka, as,%}¦ m. a pupil who has returned
home.
<LEND>

<L>50126<pc>1075-c<k1>samAvftti<k2>samAvftti
{%Sam-āvṛtti, is,%}¦ f. turning back, returning, return;
completion.
<LEND>

<L>50127<pc>1075-c<k1>samAve<k2>samAve
{#samAve#}¦ {%sam-ā-ve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vayati, -te,%}
&c., Ved. to weave together, interweave; to string
together (Ved., A.)
<LEND>

<L>50128<pc>1075-c<k1>samAvyaD<k2>samAvyaD
{#samAvyaD#}¦ {%sam-ā-vyadh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-vidhyati,%}
{%-vyaddhum,%} to move or shake about, agitate.
<LEND>

<L>50129<pc>1075-c<k1>samAvidDa<k2>samAvidDa
{%Sam-āviddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken about, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>50130<pc>1075-c<k1>samASaMs<k2>samASaMs
{#samASaMs#}¦ {%sam-ā-śaṃs,%} cl. 1. A. {%-śaṃsate,%} &c.,
to wish for, long for, hope for, desire.
<LEND>

<L>50131<pc>1075-c<k1>samASaNkita<k2>samASaNkita
{#samASaNkita#}¦ {%sam-āśaṅkita, as, ā, am%} [cf.
{%ā-śaṅk%}], very fearful or apprehensive; doubted,
doubtful.
<LEND>

<L>50132<pc>1075-c<k1>samASri<k2>samASri
{#samASri#}¦ {%sam-ā-śri,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-śrayati,%}
{%-te, -śrayitum,%} to go to or have recourse to together
(especially for protection), fly to for refuge, seek
refuge with, resort to, approach, enter, occupy; to
attain to, obtain, assume; to seek, follow, practise;
to rest on, depend on, lean on, trust to, confide in.
<LEND>

<L>50133<pc>1075-c<k1>samASraya<k2>samASraya
{%Sam-āśraya, as,%}¦ m. going together to any one
for support or shelter, seeking protection; support,
protection; a refuge, place of refuge, place of resort
or shelter, resting-place, dwelling-place, asylum.
<LEND>

<L>50134<pc>1075-c<k1>samASrita<k2>samASrita
{%Sam-āśrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fled to for refuge, resorted
to, protected, defended, cherished; going to for
protection, resorting to; rested on; depending on,
supported by; assuming.
<LEND>

<L>50135<pc>1075-c<k1>samASritya<k2>samASritya
{%Sam-āśritya,%}¦ ind. having resorted to for protection
or support; having followed or practised or engaged
in; resting on, depending upon, trusting to.
<LEND>

<L>50136<pc>1075-c<k1>samASru<k2>samASru
{#samASru#}¦ {%sam-ā-śru,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-śṛṇoti,%}
{%-śṛṇute,%} &c., to promise.
<LEND>

<L>50137<pc>1075-c<k1>samASliz<k2>samASliz
{#samASliz#}¦ {%sam-ā-śliṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śliṣyati,%}
{%-śleṣṭum,%} to embrace closely or firmly, to join
together, bring near.
<LEND>

<L>50138<pc>1075-c<k1>samASlizwa<k2>samASlizwa
{%Sam-āśliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ closely embraced, closely
or firmly attached.
<LEND>

<L>50139<pc>1075-c<k1>samASlizya<k2>samASlizya
{%Sam-āśliṣya,%}¦ ind. having closely embraced, hav-
ing intwined together.
<LEND>

<L>50140<pc>1075-c<k1>samASleza<k2>samASleza
{%Sam-āśleṣa, as,%}¦ m. a close or firm embrace.
<LEND>

<L>50141<pc>1075-c<k1>samASvas<k2>samASvas
{#samASvas#}¦ {%sam-ā-śvas,%} cl. 2. P. {%-śvasiti%} (also
cl. 1. P. {%-śvasati,%} see rt. 1. {%śvas%}), &c., to breathe
again, take or recover breath, revive, recover, take
courage, ({%samāśvasihi,%} 2nd sing. Impv. take courage),
regain confidence; to trust or confide in (with loc.):
Caus. {%-śvāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause to revive, re-
animate, encourage, refresh, cheer, comfort, console,
calm, make confident.
<LEND>

<L>50142<pc>1075-c<k1>samASvasta<k2>samASvasta
{%Sam-āśvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ recovered, revived, re-
animated, encouraged, comforted, consoled; trusting,
confiding, full of confidence.
<LEND>

<L>50143<pc>1075-c<k1>samASvasya<k2>samASvasya
{%Sam-āśvasya,%}¦ ind. having taken confidence, gain-
ing courage.
<LEND>

<L>50144<pc>1075-c<k1>samASvAsa<k2>samASvAsa
{%Sam-āśvāsa, as,%}¦ m. recovering breath, relief,
comfort, consolation, encouragement; trust, belief,
confidence.
<LEND>

<L>50145<pc>1075-c<k1>samASvAsana<k2>samASvAsana
{%Sam-āśvāsana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to take
breath, encouraging, reviving, cheering, comforting,
consolation.
<LEND>

<L>50146<pc>1075-c<k1>samASvAsita<k2>samASvAsita
{%Sam-āśvāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reanimated, revived,
refreshed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50147<pc>1075-c<k1>samASvAsya<k2>samASvAsya
{%Sam-āśvāsya,%}¦ ind. having reanimated or encou-
raged or refreshed, having cheered or comforted.
<LEND>

<L>50148<pc>1075-c<k1>samAs<k2>samAs<h>1
{#samAs#} 1¦. {%samās,%} m. (doubtful, except as
nom. pl. of 1. {%samā,%} q. v.), a year.
<LEND>
[Page1076-a+ 77]

<L>50149<pc>1076-a<k1>samAs<k2>samAs<h>2
{#samAs#} 2¦. {%sam-ās,%} cl. 2. A. {%-āste,%} &c. (see
rt. 4. {%ās%}), to sit together; to sit along with, assemble
or meet around (with acc. or with inst.); to sit toge-
ther in council, hold a council; to be a match for,
cope with (with acc.); to sit down, be seated; to
join in adhering to or following; to adhere to,
observe.
<LEND>

<L>50150<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsa<k2>samAsa<h>2
2. {%sam-āsa, as,%}¦ m. (in the Nyāya phil.) proper abid-
ing or connection. (For 1. see under 2. {%sam-as.%})
<LEND>

<L>50151<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsIna<k2>samAsIna
{%Sam-āsīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sitting together, seated
together, sitting down.
<LEND>

<L>50152<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsyA<k2>samAsyA
{%Sam-āsyā,%}¦ f. (doubtful), sitting together, colloquy,
interview.
<LEND>

<L>50153<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsaYj<k2>samAsaYj
{#samAsaYj#}¦ {%sam-ā-sañj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sajati, -saj-%}
{%jati,%} &c. (see rt. 2. {%sañj%}), to fasten or stick toge-
ther, to join or attach or fix to; to fix or place on,
impose, place down on, resign or deliver over to
(with loc.): Pass. {%-sajyate, -sajjate,%} to cling or
adhere closely together, to cling or stick to, become
attached to.
<LEND>

<L>50154<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsakta<k2>samAsakta
{%Sam-āsakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fastened or joined toge-
ther, attached, united, combined, comprehended;
attached to, fixed on (with loc.); reached, attained;
affected by.
<LEND>

<L>50155<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsakti<k2>samAsakti
{%Sam-āsakti, is,%}¦ f. sticking or adhering closely
together, union; attachment, affection; compre-
hension, inclusion.
<LEND>

<L>50156<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsaNga<k2>samAsaNga
{%Sam-āsaṅga, as,%}¦ m. adhering together, attach-
ment, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50157<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsajat<k2>samAsajat
{%Sam-āsajat%}¦ or (according to some) {%sam-āsajjat,%}
{%an, antī, at,%} joining or connecting with; attaching,
adhering to.
<LEND>

<L>50158<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsajya<k2>samAsajya
{%Sam-āsajya,%}¦ ind. having attached together, having
fixed or placed on, having delivered over or con-
signed to (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>50159<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsaYjana<k2>samAsaYjana
{%Sam-āsañjana, am,%}¦ n. (according to some also
written {%sam-āsajjana%}), the act of attaching or unit-
ing together, joining, union; connection, combina-
tion, contact.
<LEND>

<L>50160<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsad<k2>samAsad
{#samAsad#}¦ {%sam-ā-sad,%} cl. 1. 10. P. {%-sīdati,%}
{%sādayati,%} &c. (see rt. 1. {%sad%}), to go to or approach
together, go towards; to go against, encounter, assail,
attack; to attain, obtain, meet with, find, recover.
<LEND>

<L>50161<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsanna<k2>samAsanna
{%Sam-āsanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached, attained,
obtained; met with, found; near, proximate.
<LEND>

<L>50162<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsAdana<k2>samAsAdana
{%Sam-āsādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of approaching,
meeting with, attaining, obtaining, finding; effecting,
accomplishing.
<LEND>

<L>50163<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsAdita<k2>samAsAdita
{%Sam-āsādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached; assailed,
encountered; met with, attained, obtained; accom-
plished, effected, finished, performed, done.
<LEND>

<L>50164<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsAdya<k2>samAsAdya<h>1
1. {%sam-āsādya, as, ā, am,%}¦ attainable, obtainable,
procurable, to be effected.
<LEND>

<L>50165<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsAdya<k2>samAsAdya<h>2
2. {%sam-āsādya,%}¦ ind. having encountered; having
met with or obtained.
<LEND>

<L>50166<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsfj<k2>samAsfj
{#samAsfj#}¦ {%sam-ā-sṛj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛjati,%}
{%-sraṣṭum,%} to let go or abandon completely, resign,
deliver over, consign; to place or put down upon.
<LEND>

<L>50167<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsarjana<k2>samAsarjana
{%Sam-āsarjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of resigning or
abandoning completely, delivering over, abandon-
ment, consignment.
<LEND>

<L>50168<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsfjya<k2>samAsfjya
{%Sam-āsṛjya,%}¦ ind. having resigned or consigned.
<LEND>

<L>50169<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsfzwa<k2>samAsfzwa
{%Sam-āsṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ abandoned, delivered
over, made over, consigned, given.
<LEND>

<L>50170<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsev<k2>samAsev
{#samAsev#}¦ {%sam-ā-sev,%} cl. 1. A. {%-sevate,%} &c.,
to practise or perform assiduously; to pursue, follow,
addict one's self to; to enjoy; to employ; to serve,
honour, gratify.
<LEND>

<L>50171<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsevana<k2>samAsevana
{%Sam-āsevana, am,%}¦ n. the act of practising, follow-
ing, addicting one's self to, employing, serving.
<LEND>

<L>50172<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsevita<k2>samAsevita
{%Sam-āsevita, as, ā, am,%}¦ practised, followed, em-
ployed, served.
<LEND>

<L>50173<pc>1076-a<k1>samAsevya<k2>samAsevya
{%Sam-āsevya,%}¦ ind. having practised, having em-
ployed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50174<pc>1076-a<k1>samAskand<k2>samAskand
{#samAskand#}¦ {%sam-ā-skand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-skandati,%}
{%-skantum,%} to assail, attack.
<LEND>

<L>50175<pc>1076-a<k1>samAstf<k2>samAstf
{#samAstf#}¦ {%sam-ā-stṛ,%} cl. 5. or {%sam-ā-stṝ,%} cl.
[Page1076-b+ 77]
9. P. A. {%-stṛṇoti, -stṛṇute, -stṛṇāti, -stṛṇīte,%} &c.,
to spread entirely over, cover over; to extinguish.
<LEND>

<L>50176<pc>1076-b<k1>samAsTA<k2>samAsTA
{#samAsTA#}¦ {%sam-ā-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-tiṣṭhati,%}
{%-te, -sthātum,%} to undergo, undertake, practise, per-
form, engage in; to employ, use, apply, exert:
Caus. {%-sthāpayati, -yitum,%} to cause to be performed
or practised.
<LEND>

<L>50177<pc>1076-b<k1>samAsTa<k2>samAsTa
{%Sam-āstha, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%sam + āsthā%}), being
in a prosperous condition.
<LEND>

<L>50178<pc>1076-b<k1>samAsTApya<k2>samAsTApya
{%Sam-āsthāpya,%}¦ ind. having caused to be performed;
having duly observed, paying proper regard to; having
placed one's self on a seat, having sat down.
<LEND>

<L>50179<pc>1076-b<k1>samAsTAya<k2>samAsTAya
{%Sam-āsthāya,%}¦ ind. having practised or engaged in.
<LEND>

<L>50180<pc>1076-b<k1>samAsTita<k2>samAsTita
{%Sam-āsthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ undergone, engaged in,
practised; having recourse to; seated together,
seated.
<LEND>

<L>50181<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhan<k2>samAhan
{#samAhan#}¦ {%sam-ā-han,%} cl. 2. P. {%-hanti, -han-%}
{%tum,%} to strike together; to unite, join; to strike
violently, strike down completely, strike, beat, slay,
kill.
<LEND>

<L>50182<pc>1076-b<k1>samAGAta<k2>samAGAta
{%Sam-āghāta, as,%}¦ m. striking together, uniting;
striking down, beating, killing; conflict, war, battle.
<LEND>

<L>50183<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhata<k2>samAhata
{%Sam-āhata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck together; com-
pletely struck down, well beaten, wounded, killed.
<LEND>

<L>50184<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhatya<k2>samAhatya
{%Sam-āhatya,%}¦ ind. having struck down; having
struck or killed.
<LEND>

<L>50185<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhita<k2>samAhita
{#samAhita#}¦ {%sam-āhita.%} See under {%sam-ā-dhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>50186<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhUta<k2>samAhUta
{#samAhUta#}¦ {%sam-āhūta, sam-āhūya.%} See below
under {%sam-ā-hve.%}
<LEND>

<L>50187<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhf<k2>samAhf
{#samAhf#}¦ {%sam-ā-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati, -te,%}
{%-hartum,%} to bring together, combine, collect, accu-
mulate, assemble, compile; to draw together, con-
tract, abridge; to crush together, destroy, annihilate;
to bring back, restore; to offer up, offer.
<LEND>

<L>50188<pc>1076-b<k1>samAharaRa<k2>samAharaRa
{%Sam-āharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of bringing toge-
ther, collecting, collection, accumulation, uniting,
combination, composition.
<LEND>

<L>50189<pc>1076-b<k1>samAharat<k2>samAharat
{%Sam-āharat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bringing together,
collecting, contracting, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50190<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhartf<k2>samAhartf
{%Sam-āhartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who collects toge-
ther or accumulates, a collector.
<LEND>

<L>50191<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhAra<k2>samAhAra
{%Sam-āhāra, as,%}¦ m. collection, accumulation, ag-
gregation, assemblage, union by association; con-
traction, abridgement; composition of words (in
grammar); conjunction of words or sentences (as by
the particle ‘and’); epithet of a particular subdivision
of Dvandva and Dvigu compounds, (applied to the
former when the last part of the compound is in
the neuter gender, e. g. {%ahi-nakulam,%} the snake
and the ichneumon; to the latter when the com-
pound expresses an aggregate, e. g. {%tri-lokī,%} the
aggregate of three worlds); a combination of two
letters of the alphabet into a syllable ({%= praty-%}
{%āhāra,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>50192<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhfta<k2>samAhfta
{%Sam-āhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought together, col-
lected, accumulated, assembled, combined, compiled;
abundant, much; contracted, abridged; accepted,
received, taken.
<LEND>

<L>50193<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhfti<k2>samAhfti
{%Sam-āhṛti, is,%}¦ f. collection, compilation, abridge-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>50194<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhve<k2>samAhve
{#samAhve#}¦ {%sam-ā-hve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-hvayati,%}
{%-te, -hvātum,%} to call together, convoke; to call
upon, invoke, summon, challenge, provoke to battle;
to invite; to call, name.
<LEND>

<L>50195<pc>1076-b<k1>samAjuhUzamARa<k2>samAjuhUzamARa
{%Sam-ājuhūṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ challenging
(e. g. {%samarāya,%} to battle).
<LEND>

<L>50196<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhUta<k2>samAhUta
{%Sam-āhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ collected together, con-
voked, invited.
<LEND>

<L>50197<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhUya<k2>samAhUya
{%Sam-āhūya,%}¦ ind. having called together, having
summoned.
<LEND>

<L>50198<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhva<k2>samAhva
{%Sam-āhva, as, ī,%}¦ m. f. calling out, mutual calling,
challenge; defiance; ({%ā%}), f. appellation, name; a
kind of plant ({%= go-jihvā%}).
<LEND>

<L>50199<pc>1076-b<k1>samAhvaya<k2>samAhvaya
{%Sam-āhvaya, as,%}¦ m. calling out, challenging;
single combat, war, battle; setting animals to fight
for sport, a match with fighting-cocks, &c., betting
or gambling with living creatures (as distinguished
[Page1076-c+ 80]
from gaming with dice or other inanimate objects,
see {%dyūta%}); an appellation, name.
<LEND>

<L>50200<pc>1076-c<k1>samAhvAna<k2>samAhvAna
{%Sam-āhvāna, am,%}¦ n. calling together, calling,
convoking, summoning, provocation, challenge.
<LEND>

<L>50201<pc>1076-c<k1>sami<k2>sami<h>1
{#sami#} 1¦. {%sam-i%} (see rt. 5. {%i%}), cl. 2. P. {%-eti,%}
{%-etum,%} to go or come together, meet together,
assemble; to meet or be united with (with acc. or
inst. or dat.); to meet any one (inst.) in hostile
encounter; to come together or be united sexually;
to be joined or united together (generally); to go
or come to, arrive at, approach, visit, enter, reach,
attain; to enter upon, commence; to lead to; to
agree with, harmonize with (with inst.): Pass. {%-īyate,%}
to be united; to be resorted to or frequented by; to
be agreed upon: Intens., Ved. {%-īyate,%} to go repeat-
edly, traverse frequently; to present one's self, be
manifested.
<LEND>

<L>50202<pc>1076-c<k1>samaya<k2>samaya
{%Sam-aya, as,%}¦ m. coming together, convention,
coming to a mutual understanding, agreement, com-
pact, covenant, treaty, contract, bargain, engage-
ment, appointment; stipulation, condition; oath;
concurrence of circumstances, juncture, fit or proper
time, right moment, opportunity, occasion, season, time,
emergency, exigency; leisure; conventional rule or
usage, established custom, law, rule, regulation, regu-
lar observance, religious obligation; order, direction,
precept, instruction, affirmation, declaration; sign,
hint, indication; coming to an end, conclusion, ter-
mination; limit, boundary; demonstrated conclusion;
end of trouble or distress; success, prosperity; poetī-
cal idiom or conventionality (in rhetoric); ({%ena%}),
ind. according to agreement, on condition, con-
ditionally. {%—Samaya-kāra, as,%} m. making an
agreement or appointment or engagement, fixing a
time. {%—Samaya-kriyā,%} f. making an agreement or
compact. {%—Samaya-parirakṣaṇa, am,%} n. the
observance of a compact or agreement. {%—Samaya-%}
{%prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Samaya-pra-%}
{%dīpa, as,%} m., N. of a work by Śrī-datta. {%—Samaya-%}
{%bheda, as,%} m. breaking an agreement. {%—Samaya-%}
{%bhedin, ī, inī, i,%} a promise-breaker, breaking an
agreement, violating an engagement. {%—Samaya-%}
{%vyabhicāra, as,%} m. transgression or violation of a
compact, breaking an agreement. {%—Samaya-vya-%}
{%bhicārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} transgressing a compact, violating
an engagement. {%—Samaya-setu-vārita, as, ā, am,%}
restrained by the barrier of the rules of decorum.
{%—Samayācāra (˚ya-āc˚), as,%} m. conventional
practice or usage; [cf. {%sāmayācārika.%}] {%—Samayā-%}
{%tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Samayā-%}
{%dhyuṣita (˚ya-adh˚), am,%} n. a time at which
neither stars nor sun are visible. {%—Samayānuvartin%}
{%(˚ya-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} following established rules, ob-
servant of duties. {%—Samayānusāreṇa (˚ya-an˚),%}
ind. according to the occasion, suitably to the time
or season. {%—Samayocita (˚ya-uc˚), as, ā, am,%}
suited to the occasion or time, suitable to an emer-
gency, seasonable, timely, opportune; ({%am%}), ind.
suitably to the occasion, as the occasion demands.
{%—Samayoddyota (˚ya-ud˚),%} N. of a work by
Hemādri. {%—Samayollaṅghita-tva (˚ya-ul˚), am,%}
n. the overleaping or violating of contracts or agree-
ments.
<LEND>

<L>50203<pc>1076-c<k1>samayA<k2>samayA
{%Samayā,%}¦ ind. at a fixed or appointed time; duly,
seasonably, in due time or season; (in the following
senses probably an old inst. of {%sama%}), within, in
the middle, in the midst, betwixt, between, within;
near (with acc.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὁμῇ, ὁμοῦ, ὁμῶς;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>simul.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>50204<pc>1076-c<k1>samAya<k2>samAya
{%Sam-āya, as,%}¦ m. coming towards, arriving at,
arrival, visiting, a visit.
<LEND>

<L>50205<pc>1076-c<k1>samit<k2>samit
{%Sam-it, t,%}¦ f. conflict, war, battle. {%—Samit-pāṇi,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a pupil of Śaṅkarācārya.
<LEND>

<L>50206<pc>1076-c<k1>samita<k2>samita
{%Sam-ita, as, ā, am,%}¦ come together, met; col-
lected, assembled; united with, conjoined, connected;
coming into contact, contiguous, parallel; promised,
agreed, assented to; finished, completed.
<LEND>

<L>50207<pc>1076-c<k1>samiti<k2>samiti<h>1
1. {%sam-iti, is,%}¦ f. coming together, meeting, assem-
bling, union, association; Association or Society (per-
sonified as a daughter of Prajā-pati); an assembly,
[Page1077-a+ 75]
company; encounter, hostile meeting, war, battle,
(enumerated among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%} in
Naigh. II. 17); sameness, likeness, equality, (in
this and the following sense probably to be con-
nected with 1. {%sama%}); moderation, ({%eṣaṇa-sa-%}
{%miti,%} moderation in desires); one of the five Jaina
rules of life, irreproachable conduct as an ascetic [cf.
{%bhāṣā-s˚%}]. {%—Samitiñ-jaya, as, ā, am,%} conquering
or eminent in an assembly. {%—Samiti-śobhana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} conspicuous in fight or battle.
<LEND>

<L>50208<pc>1077-a<k1>samiTa<k2>samiTa
{%Sam-itha, as, am,%}¦ m. n. war, battle ({%= saṅ-%}
{%grāma,%} Naigh. II. 17); fire; offering oblations
with fire.
<LEND>

<L>50209<pc>1077-a<k1>samIyamAna<k2>samIyamAna<h>2
2. {%sam-īyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being come together,
being united with; being treated equally, (in this
sense probably for 1. {%samīyamāna,%} see p. 1067.
<LEND>

<L>50210<pc>1077-a<k1>samIyivas<k2>samIyivas
{%Sam-īyivas, ān, -yuṣī, at,%}¦ one who has met or
encountered; one who has gone to or arrived at
or resorted to; one who has attained.
<LEND>

<L>50211<pc>1077-a<k1>sami<k2>sami<h>2
{#sami#} 2¦. {%sami,%} apparently an old loc. con-
nected with 2. {%sam.%} See {%samy-añc.%}
<LEND>

<L>50212<pc>1077-a<k1>samika<k2>samika
{#samika#}¦ {%samika, am,%} n. (see {%samīka%}), a pike,
javelin, dart.
<LEND>

<L>50213<pc>1077-a<k1>samiNg<k2>samiNg
{#samiNg#}¦ {%sam-iṅg,%} Caus. {%-iṅgayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to cause to move or throb, agitate, shake about.
<LEND>

<L>50214<pc>1077-a<k1>samitA<k2>samitA
{#samitA#}¦ {%samitā,%} f. [cf. {%samīda%}], wheat-flour;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σεμίδαλις;</lang> Lat. <nsi>simila, similago.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>50215<pc>1077-a<k1>samiti<k2>samiti<h>2
{#samiti#} 2¦. {%sam-iti,%} ind. a sacred verse be-
ginning with {%sam.%}
<LEND>

<L>50216<pc>1077-a<k1>samitra<k2>samitra
{#samitra#}¦ {%sa-mitra, as, ā, am,%} attended by a
friend, along with a friend.
<LEND>

<L>50217<pc>1077-a<k1>saminakz<k2>saminakz
{#saminakz#}¦ {%sam-inakṣ%} (see {%inakṣ%}), {%-inak-%}
{%ṣati,%} Ved. to wish to obtain, strive to reach, be
desirous of.
<LEND>

<L>50218<pc>1077-a<k1>saminD<k2>saminD
{#saminD#}¦ {%sam-indh,%} cl. 7. A. {%-inddhe%} or
{%-indhe,%} &c., to light up, kindle, ignite; to glorify;
to kindle (figuratively), inflame, excite; to take
fire: Pass. {%-idhyate,%} to be kindled, take fire, break
out into flame.
<LEND>

<L>50219<pc>1077-a<k1>samidDa<k2>samidDa
{%Sam-iddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ lighted up, kindled, ignited,
set alight, set on fire. {%—Samiddha-darpa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} inflamed with pride. {%—Samiddha-śaraṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} (a town &c.) which has its houses set on
fire. {%—Samiddha-homa, as, ā, am,%} having the
oblation kindled. {%—Samiddhārcis (˚dha-ar˚), is,%}
n. a blazing flame.
<LEND>

<L>50220<pc>1077-a<k1>samiD<k2>samiD
{%Sam-idh, t,%}¦ f. fuel, wood, a log of wood, fire-
wood, grass &c. employed as fuel, (seven Samidhs,
or sometimes three times seven, are mentioned, as
well as seven Yonis, seven flames, &c.); a division
of a stanza, (Ved., Sāy. {%= pāda.%}) {%—Samid-ādhāna,%}
{%am,%} n. the placing on of wood or fuel (for the obla-
tion to fire). {%—Samid-dhoma, as,%} m. (i. e. {%samidh-%}
{%homa%}), an oblation of fuel (to fire). {%—Samid-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having fuel, supplied with fuel.
<LEND>

<L>50221<pc>1077-a<k1>samiDa<k2>samiDa
{%Sam-idha, as,%}¦ m. fire.
<LEND>

<L>50222<pc>1077-a<k1>samiDAna<k2>samiDAna
{%Sam-idhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. kindled, lighted
({%= sam-idhyamāna%}).
<LEND>

<L>50223<pc>1077-a<k1>samiDya<k2>samiDya<h>1
1. {%sam-idhya,%}¦ ind. having kindled.
<LEND>

<L>50224<pc>1077-a<k1>samiDya<k2>samiDya<h>2
2. {%samidhya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%samidhyati,%} &c., to wish
for fuel.
<LEND>

<L>50225<pc>1077-a<k1>samiDyamAna<k2>samiDyamAna
{%Sam-idhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being kindled or
ignited.
<LEND>

<L>50226<pc>1077-a<k1>saminDana<k2>saminDana
{%Sam-indhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of kindling; fuel,
fire-wood; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>50227<pc>1077-a<k1>saminDAna<k2>saminDAna
{%Sam-indhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ kindling, inflaming;
augmenting, prospering.
<LEND>

<L>50228<pc>1077-a<k1>samedDf<k2>samedDf
{%Sam-eddhṛ, dhā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who kindles,
kindling.
<LEND>

<L>50229<pc>1077-a<k1>saminv<k2>saminv
{#saminv#}¦ {%sam-inv,%} cl. 6. P. {%-invati, -invitum,%}
Ved. to impart, bestow; to spread through, (Sāy.
{%saminvatu = vyāpnotu = prāpayatu,%} Ṛg-veda IV.
53, 7); to restore.
<LEND>

<L>50230<pc>1077-a<k1>samira<k2>samira
{#samira#}¦ {%sam-ira, as,%} m. {%= sam-īra,%} wind,
air, (see {%sam-īr.%})
<LEND>
[Page1077-b+ 74]

<L>50231<pc>1077-b<k1>samizwa<k2>samizwa
{#samizwa#}¦ {%sam-iṣṭa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%saṃ-yaj%}),
sacrificed together, sacrificed.
<LEND>

<L>50232<pc>1077-b<k1>samIka<k2>samIka
{#samIka#}¦ {%samīka, am,%} n. (perhaps connected
with {%samy-añc%}), war, battle, (in Naigh. II. 17. {%sa-%}
{%mīke%} is enumerated among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%});
a pike, dart; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>50233<pc>1077-b<k1>samIkaraRa<k2>samIkaraRa
{#samIkaraRa#}¦ {%samī-karaṇa, samī-kṛ,%} &c. See
p. 1067, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>50234<pc>1077-b<k1>samIkz<k2>samIkz
{#samIkz#}¦ {%sam-īkṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-īkṣate, -īkṣi-%}
{%tum,%} to look at or inspect thoroughly, investigate
closely, view, perceive, see; to look about for, look
around; search for; to look towards, look to; to
consider well, inquire into, investigate, examine,
contemplate, reflect upon: Caus. P. A. {%-īkṣayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to cause to look at or perceive.
<LEND>

<L>50235<pc>1077-b<k1>samIkza<k2>samIkza
{%Sam-īkṣa, am,%}¦ n. complete investigation; the
Sāṅkhya system of philosophy; ({%ā%}), f. thorough or
close inspection; looking well at, consideration, ({%a-%}
{%samīkṣam,%} inconsiderately); investigation, search;
the Mīmāṃsā system of philosophy or any work
examining Vedic ritual and explaining the modes of
sacrifice; understanding, intellect; effort; essential
nature or truth ({%= tattva,%} q. v.); any essential princi-
ple (according to the Sāṅkhya system of philosophy).
<LEND>

<L>50236<pc>1077-b<k1>samIkzaRa<k2>samIkzaRa
{%Sam-īkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of looking at or
inspecting thoroughly; looking about for, search,
close investigation.
<LEND>

<L>50237<pc>1077-b<k1>samIkzamARa<k2>samIkzamARa
{%Sam-īkṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking at or con-
sidering attentively.
<LEND>

<L>50238<pc>1077-b<k1>samIkzita<k2>samIkzita
{%Sam-īkṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ well looked at; per-
ceived, considered, investigated.
<LEND>

<L>50239<pc>1077-b<k1>samIkzya<k2>samIkzya<h>1
1. {%sam-īkṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be looked at or
considered; to be investigated (in phil.).
<LEND>

<L>50240<pc>1077-b<k1>samIkzya<k2>samIkzya<h>2
2. {%sam-īkṣya,%}¦ ind. having well looked at or
considered, having reflected. {%—Samīkṣya-kārin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} acting after due deliberation.
<LEND>

<L>50241<pc>1077-b<k1>samIkzyamARa<k2>samIkzyamARa
{%Sam-īkṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being looked at
or well considered.
<LEND>

<L>50242<pc>1077-b<k1>samIca<k2>samIca
{#samIca#}¦ {%samīca, as,%} m. (fr. {%samy-añc%}), the
ocean; ({%ī%}), f. a female deer, doe; praise, eulogium.
<LEND>

<L>50243<pc>1077-b<k1>samIcaka<k2>samIcaka
{%Samīcaka, as,%}¦ m. sexual union, copulation.
<LEND>

<L>50244<pc>1077-b<k1>samIcIna<k2>samIcIna
{%Samīcīna.%}¦ See under {%samy-añc.%}
<LEND>

<L>50245<pc>1077-b<k1>samIda<k2>samIda
{#samIda#}¦ {%samīda, as,%} m. fine wheat-flour;
[cf. {%samitā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>50246<pc>1077-b<k1>samIna<k2>samIna
{#samIna#}¦ {%samīna, as, ā, am%} (fr. 1. {%samā%}), yearly,
annual, relating to a year; hired for a year; after a
year, a year hence.
<LEND>

<L>50247<pc>1077-b<k1>samInikA<k2>samInikA
{%Samīnikā,%}¦ f. a cow calving every year.
<LEND>

<L>50248<pc>1077-b<k1>samIpa<k2>samIpa
{#samIpa#}¦ {%samīpa, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%sam-āp%}), near,
contiguous, proximate, adjacent, close by, at hand;
({%am%}), n. proximity, vicinity; ({%e%}), ind. in the
vicinity, in the presence of, towards. {%—Samīpa-ga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} going near. {%—Samīpa-ja, as, ā, am,%}
produced near, growing near. {%—Samīpa-tas,%} ind. in
the vicinity of, in the presence of, near, before.
{%—Samīpa-tā,%} f. or {%samīpa-tva, am,%} n. nearness,
contiguity, proximity. {%—Samīpa-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}
or {%samīpa-stha, as, ā, am,%} being or situated near,
living near, adjoining, neighbouring. {%—Samīpopa-%}
{%gata (˚pa-up˚), as, ā, am,%} approached near.
<LEND>

<L>50249<pc>1077-b<k1>samIBU<k2>samIBU
{#samIBU#}¦ {%samī-bhū,%} &c. See p. 1067, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>50250<pc>1077-b<k1>samIya<k2>samIya
{#samIya#}¦ {%samīya,%} &c. See p. 1067.
<LEND>

<L>50251<pc>1077-b<k1>samIyivas<k2>samIyivas
{#samIyivas#}¦ {%sam-īyivas.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>50252<pc>1077-b<k1>samIr<k2>samIr
{#samIr#}¦ {%sam-īr,%} Caus. P. A. {%-īrayati, -te,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to move about, agitate; to move,
stir up, excite, rouse; to lift up, raise up, revive; to
send forth, emit, utter (a sound &c.); to throw,
cast; to bring about, accomplish; to confer, bestow,
endow with.
<LEND>

<L>50253<pc>1077-b<k1>samIra<k2>samIra
{%Sam-īra, as,%}¦ m. air, wind; the Samī tree; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>50254<pc>1077-b<k1>samIraRa<k2>samIraRa
{%Sam-īraṇa, as,%}¦ m. breeze, wind, air; the breath;
a traveller; the plant Maruvaka; ({%am%}), n. the act
of sending forth or emitting, throwing. {%—Samīraṇa- %}
[Page1077-c+ 75]
{%sahāya, as, ā, am,%} accompanied by the wind,
fanned by the breeze (as a forest fire).
<LEND>

<L>50255<pc>1077-c<k1>samIrita<k2>samIrita
{%Sam-īrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stirred, moved, roused,
sent forth, emitted, uttered; cast, tossed, thrown.
<LEND>

<L>50256<pc>1077-c<k1>samIrRa<k2>samIrRa
{%Sam-īrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ moved about, moved, &c.;
[cf. {%sam-ṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>50257<pc>1077-c<k1>samIz<k2>samIz
{#samIz#}¦ {%sam-īṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-īṣate,%} Ved. to
become extended or lengthened out.
<LEND>

<L>50258<pc>1077-c<k1>samIzita<k2>samIzita
{%Sam-īṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ extended, stretched out,
lengthened.
<LEND>

<L>50259<pc>1077-c<k1>samIh<k2>samIh
{#samIh#}¦ {%sam-īh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-īhate, -īhitum,%} to
strive after (with acc.), endeavour to gain, long after,
desire to accomplish, wish for, desire, hope for.
<LEND>

<L>50260<pc>1077-c<k1>samIhA<k2>samIhA
{%Sam-īhā,%}¦ f. striving after, longing for, desire.
<LEND>

<L>50261<pc>1077-c<k1>samIhita<k2>samIhita
{%Sam-īhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ longed or wished for,
desired; undertaken; ({%am%}), n. great effort to obtain
anything, desire, longing, wish.
<LEND>

<L>50262<pc>1077-c<k1>samukz<k2>samukz<h>1
{#samukz#} 1¦. {%sam-ukṣ%} (see rt. 1. {%ukṣ%}), cl. 6. P.
{%-ukṣati, -ukṣitum,%} to sprinkle well or thoroughly,
wet; to besprinkle, strew, scatter or pour over, pour
out; to confer, endow.
<LEND>

<L>50263<pc>1077-c<k1>samukzaRa<k2>samukzaRa
{%Sam-ukṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of sprinkling or
pouring over, shedding, effusion.
<LEND>

<L>50264<pc>1077-c<k1>samukzita<k2>samukzita<h>1
1. {%sam-ukṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ besprinkled, scattered,
strewed, covered; poured out, effused.
<LEND>

<L>50265<pc>1077-c<k1>samukz<k2>samukz<h>2
{#samukz#} 2¦. {%sam-ukṣ.%} See rt. 2. {%ukṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>50266<pc>1077-c<k1>samukzita<k2>samukzita<h>1
1. {%sam-ukṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. strengthened,
augmented, exalted, (Sāy. {%= vardhita.%})
<LEND>

<L>50267<pc>1077-c<k1>samuKa<k2>samuKa
{#samuKa#}¦ {%sa-mukha, as, ā, am,%} talkative, lo-
quacious, eloquent.
<LEND>

<L>50268<pc>1077-c<k1>samuc<k2>samuc
{#samuc#}¦ {%sam-uc,%} cl. 4. P. {%-ucyati%} (Perf.
{%-uvoca%}), {%-ucitum,%} Ved. to delight in (with inst.);
to like to combine or blend with, (Sāy. {%= sam-ucyasi%}
{%= saṅgacchasi,%} Ṛg-veda V. 81, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>50269<pc>1077-c<k1>samucita<k2>samucita
{%Sam-ucita, as, ā, am,%}¦ liked; well suited, suit-
able, fit, right, proper; appropriate, worthy; accus-
tomed, used.
<LEND>

<L>50270<pc>1077-c<k1>samuccar<k2>samuccar
{#samuccar#}¦ {%sam-uc-car (-ud-car),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ca-%}
{%rati, -caritum,%} to go out together; to go up, be
borne upwards, ascend.
<LEND>

<L>50271<pc>1077-c<k1>samuccara<k2>samuccara
{%Sam-uccara, as, ā, am,%}¦ going or coming forth
together; going upwards, ascending, flying upwards;
traversing.
<LEND>

<L>50272<pc>1077-c<k1>samuccarat<k2>samuccarat
{%Sam-uccarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going or coming out
together; rising upwards together, ascending.
<LEND>

<L>50273<pc>1077-c<k1>samuccal<k2>samuccal
{#samuccal#}¦ {%sam-uc-cal (-ud-cal),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ca-%}
{%lati, -calitum,%} to set out together.
<LEND>

<L>50274<pc>1077-c<k1>samucci<k2>samucci
{#samucci#}¦ {%sam-uc-ci (-ud-ci),%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-ci-%}
{%noti, -cinute, -cetum,%} to heap up together, aggregate,
collect together, gather, collect; to arrange, array in
order.
<LEND>

<L>50275<pc>1077-c<k1>samuccaya<k2>samuccaya
{%Sam-uccaya, as,%}¦ m. collection, assemblage, ag-
gregation, accumulation, multitude, mass, aggregate;
conjunction of words or sentences (as by the particle
‘and,’ &c., see {%sam-āhāra%}); the gathering together
of two or more things independent of each other (but
associated in idea with reference to some common
action). {%—Samuccayālaṅkāra (˚ya-al˚), as,%} m. the
rhetorical ornament of conjunction, (see above.)
<LEND>

<L>50276<pc>1077-c<k1>samuccayitvA<k2>samuccayitvA
{%Sam-uccayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having col-
lected, having picked up and placed in a heap.
<LEND>

<L>50277<pc>1077-c<k1>samuccita<k2>samuccita
{%Sam-uccita, as, ā, am,%}¦ collected or aggregated
together, regularly arranged.
<LEND>

<L>50278<pc>1077-c<k1>samuccitya<k2>samuccitya
{%Sam-uccitya,%}¦ ind. having collected or gathered
together, having arranged.
<LEND>

<L>50279<pc>1077-c<k1>samuccIya<k2>samuccIya
{%Sam-uccīya%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having arranged.
<LEND>

<L>50280<pc>1077-c<k1>samuccIyamAna<k2>samuccIyamAna
{%Sam-uccīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being aggregated
or conjoined.
<LEND>

<L>50281<pc>1077-c<k1>samucCad<k2>samucCad
{#samucCad#}¦ {%sam-uc-chad (-ud-chad),%} cl. 10. P.
{%-chādayati, -yitum,%} to uncover (the body &c.),
put off (a garment), undress.
<LEND>

<L>50282<pc>1077-c<k1>samucCid<k2>samucCid
{#samucCid#}¦ {%sam-uc-chid (-ud-chid),%} cl. 7. P.
A. {%-chinatti, -chintte, -chettum,%} to cut up or cut off
completely, cut off, tear out, tear to pieces; to eradi-
cate, exterminate, destroy utterly.
<LEND>
[Page1078-a+ 74]

<L>50283<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCinna<k2>samucCinna
{%Sam-ucchinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely cut up or
eradicated, utterly destroyed, perished. {%—Samuc-%}
{%chinna-vāsana, as, ā, am,%} one whose dress is torn
off; one whose delusion is completely removed.
<LEND>

<L>50284<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCeda<k2>samucCeda
{%Sam-uccheda, as,%}¦ m. cutting off completely,
destroying, utter destruction or extermination.
<LEND>

<L>50285<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCuz<k2>samucCuz
{#samucCuz#}¦ {%sam-uc-chuṣ (-ud-śuṣ),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-chuṣyati, -choṣṭum,%} to be or become completely
dried up.
<LEND>

<L>50286<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCri<k2>samucCri
{#samucCri#}¦ {%sam-uc-chri (-ud-śri),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-chrayati, -te, -chrayitum,%} to raise well up, raise
up, to raise aloft, erect, elevate.
<LEND>

<L>50287<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCraya<k2>samucCraya
{%Sam-ucchraya, as,%}¦ m. raising aloft, elevation,
height; opposition, enmity.
<LEND>

<L>50288<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCrAya<k2>samucCrAya
{%Sam-ucchrāya, as,%}¦ m. raising up, rising upwards,
elevation, height.
<LEND>

<L>50289<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCrita<k2>samucCrita
{%Sam-ucchrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ well raised or elevated,
high, lofty.
<LEND>

<L>50290<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCvas<k2>samucCvas
{#samucCvas#}¦ {%sam-uc-chvas (-ud-śvas).%} See rt.
{%śvas.%}
<LEND>

<L>50291<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCvasita<k2>samucCvasita
{%Sam-ucchvasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sighing heavily or
deeply; ({%am%}), n. a heavy or deep sigh.
<LEND>

<L>50292<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCvAsa<k2>samucCvAsa
{%Sam-ucchvāsa, as,%}¦ m. sighing deeply, heavy
expiration.
<LEND>

<L>50293<pc>1078-a<k1>samucCvAsita<k2>samucCvAsita
{%Sam-ucchvāsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ loosened, unfastened;
separated, divided.
<LEND>

<L>50294<pc>1078-a<k1>samujjihIrzu<k2>samujjihIrzu
{#samujjihIrzu#}¦ {%sam-uj-jihīrṣu, us, us, u%} (fr.
the Desid. of rt. {%hṛ%} with {%ud%} and {%sam,%} see {%sam-%}
{%ud-dhṛ%}), desirous of raising up.
<LEND>

<L>50295<pc>1078-a<k1>samujjfmB<k2>samujjfmB
{#samujjfmB#}¦ {%sam-uj-jṛmbh (-ud-j˚),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-jṛmbhate,%} &c., to gape wide open; to be extended
out, spread out; to break into sight, burst forth,
become visible, arise; to begin or strive (to do any-
thing).
<LEND>

<L>50296<pc>1078-a<k1>samujjval<k2>samujjval
{#samujjval#}¦ {%sam-uj-jval (-ud-j˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-jvalati, -jvalitum,%} to blaze up with great intensity,
shine very brightly.
<LEND>

<L>50297<pc>1078-a<k1>samujjvalat<k2>samujjvalat
{%Sam-ujjvalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shining very brightly.
<LEND>

<L>50298<pc>1078-a<k1>samujJ<k2>samujJ
{#samujJ#}¦ {%sam-ujjh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-ujjhati, -ujjhi-%}
{%tum,%} to abandon or give up entirely, renounce; to
let go, discharge.
<LEND>

<L>50299<pc>1078-a<k1>samujJita<k2>samujJita
{%Sam-ujjhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ quite given up, entirely
left or abandoned, deserted, quitted, renounced, re-
signed; let go, discharged; free from; ({%am%}), n.
that which is left, a remnant, leavings.
<LEND>

<L>50300<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkaRWa<k2>samutkaRWa
{#samutkaRWa#}¦ {%sam-utkaṇṭha,%} Nom. A. {%-utkaṇ-%}
{%ṭhate,%} &c., to think of with regret, long after.
<LEND>

<L>50301<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkft<k2>samutkft
{#samutkft#}¦ {%sam-ut-kṛt (-ud-k˚),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-kṛntati, -kartitum,%} to cut off or cut away entirely,
cut in pieces.
<LEND>

<L>50302<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkftya<k2>samutkftya
{%Sam-utkṛtya,%}¦ ind. having completely cut off or
cut out.
<LEND>

<L>50303<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkfz<k2>samutkfz
{#samutkfz#}¦ {%sam-ut-kṛṣ (-ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-karṣati, -karṣṭum%} or {%-kraṣṭum,%} to draw or
raise well up, raise up, elevate.
<LEND>

<L>50304<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkarza<k2>samutkarza
{%Sam-utkarṣa, as,%}¦ m. exaltation; self-elevation,
setting one's self up (as belonging to a higher than
one's own tribe).
<LEND>

<L>50305<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkfzya<k2>samutkfzya
{%Sam-utkṛṣya,%}¦ ind. having drawn up.
<LEND>

<L>50306<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkF<k2>samutkF
{#samutkF#}¦ {%sam-ut-kṝ (-ud-k˚),%} cl. 6. P. {%-kirati,%}
&c., to pierce or perforate thoroughly, bore through.
<LEND>

<L>50307<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkIrRa<k2>samutkIrRa
{%Sam-utkīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely perforated
or pierced.
<LEND>

<L>50308<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkram<k2>samutkram
{#samutkram#}¦ {%sam-ut-kram (-ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-krāmati, -kramate,%} &c., to go upwards, ascend;
to overstep, pass over, transgress, violate, neglect,
omit.
<LEND>

<L>50309<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkrama<k2>samutkrama
{%Sam-utkrama, as,%}¦ m. going or rising upwards,
ascent; passing over; transgressing proper bounds.
<LEND>

<L>50310<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkramya<k2>samutkramya
{%Sam-utkramya,%}¦ ind. having passed or transgressed
proper bounds.
<LEND>

<L>50311<pc>1078-a<k1>samutkruS<k2>samutkruS
{#samutkruS#}¦ {%sam-ut-kruś (-ud-k˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-krośati, -kroṣṭum,%} to cry out loudly, cry aloud,
make a loud noise.
<LEND>
[Page1078-b+ 76]

<L>50312<pc>1078-b<k1>samutkruzwa<k2>samutkruzwa
{%Sam-utkruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ cried out, called out.
<LEND>

<L>50313<pc>1078-b<k1>samutkroSa<k2>samutkroSa
{%Sam-utkrośa, as,%}¦ m. crying out aloud; clamour;
an osprey.
<LEND>

<L>50314<pc>1078-b<k1>samutkliS<k2>samutkliS
{#samutkliS#}¦ {%sam-ut-kliś (-ud-k˚),%} cl. 9. P.
{%-kliśnāti,%} &c., to distress greatly, make very uneasy;
to suffer great uneasiness.
<LEND>

<L>50315<pc>1078-b<k1>samutklizwa<k2>samutklizwa
{%Sam-utkliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly distressed or
disturbed, very uneasy or uncomfortable.
<LEND>

<L>50316<pc>1078-b<k1>samutkzip<k2>samutkzip
{#samutkzip#}¦ {%sam-ut-kṣip (-ud-k˚),%} cl. 6. P.
A. {%-kṣipati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw up, toss up,
lift or raise up; to throw or toss about, scatter about;
to throw off, throw aside, loosen, liberate; to throw
or drive away, expel; to destroy.
<LEND>

<L>50317<pc>1078-b<k1>samutkzipya<k2>samutkzipya
{%Sam-utkṣipya,%}¦ ind. having thrown up, having
lifted or raised up, having hoisted; having thrown
or tossed up, having tossed or scattered about.
<LEND>

<L>50318<pc>1078-b<k1>samutKan<k2>samutKan
{#samutKan#}¦ {%sam-ut-khan (-ud-kh˚),%} cl. 1. P.
A. {%-khanati, -te,%} &c., to dig up by the roots, eradi-
cate, exterminate or destroy utterly.
<LEND>

<L>50319<pc>1078-b<k1>samutKAya<k2>samutKAya
{%Sam-utkhāya,%}¦ ind. having utterly eradicated.
<LEND>

<L>50320<pc>1078-b<k1>samuttij<k2>samuttij
{#samuttij#}¦ {%sam-ut-tij (-ud-tij).%} See rt. {%tij.%}
<LEND>

<L>50321<pc>1078-b<k1>samuttejana<k2>samuttejana
{%Sam-uttejana, am,%}¦ n. the act of exciting or in-
flaming greatly, inciting, irritating.
<LEND>

<L>50322<pc>1078-b<k1>samuttejita<k2>samuttejita
{%Sam-uttejita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly excited or in-
flamed, incited, excited, irritated.
<LEND>

<L>50323<pc>1078-b<k1>samuttF<k2>samuttF
{#samuttF#}¦ {%sam-ut-tṝ (-ud-tṝ),%} cl. 1. P. {%-tarati,%}
&c., to pass out of, come out of (with abl., e. g.
{%jalāt,%} out of the water); to rise or come forth from;
to pass safely out of, escape; to pass through, go
through, break through, pass over or beyond, cross
over, cross.
<LEND>

<L>50324<pc>1078-b<k1>samuttarat<k2>samuttarat
{%Sam-uttarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ passing out of, com-
ing forth from, passing over or beyond, crossing.
<LEND>

<L>50325<pc>1078-b<k1>samuttIrRa<k2>samuttIrRa
{%Sam-uttīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ come forth from;
escaped from; passed through, crossed, landed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50326<pc>1078-b<k1>samuttIrya<k2>samuttIrya
{%Sam-uttīrya,%}¦ ind. having passed out of or come
forth from, having passed through, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50327<pc>1078-b<k1>samuttras<k2>samuttras
{#samuttras#}¦ {%sam-ut-tras (-ud-tras).%} See rt.
2. {%tras.%}
<LEND>

<L>50328<pc>1078-b<k1>samuttrasta<k2>samuttrasta
{%Sam-uttrasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly frightened,
greatly alarmed or terrified.
<LEND>

<L>50329<pc>1078-b<k1>samutTA<k2>samutTA
{#samutTA#}¦ {%sam-ut-thā (-ud-sthā),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -thātum,%} to rise up together, rise
up, arise; to return to life: Caus. {%-thāpayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to raise up together, raise up, elevate, erect;
to re-animate, revive, restore to life.
<LEND>

<L>50330<pc>1078-b<k1>samutTa<k2>samutTa
{%Sam-uttha, as, ā, am,%}¦ rising up, risen; arising,
arisen or produced from; occurring, occasioned.
<LEND>

<L>50331<pc>1078-b<k1>samutTAna<k2>samutTAna
{%Sam-utthāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of rising up toge-
ther, rising up, rising; recovering from sickness or
injury, perfect cure, healing of a wound or sore;
increase, increment, advance, growth; performance
of work, active occupation, effort, industry, ({%sam-%}
{%bhūya samutthāna,%} the performance of work or
engaging in business after uniting with others,
co-operation, partnership); indication or symptom
of disease. {%—Samutthāna-vyaya, as,%} m. the ex-
pense of recovery or cure.
<LEND>

<L>50332<pc>1078-b<k1>samutTApya<k2>samutTApya
{%Sam-utthāpya,%}¦ ind. having raised up, having
made or helped to stand up.
<LEND>

<L>50333<pc>1078-b<k1>samutTAya<k2>samutTAya
{%Sam-utthāya,%}¦ ind. having risen up, having arisen.
<LEND>

<L>50334<pc>1078-b<k1>samutTita<k2>samutTita
{%Sam-utthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen up together, started
up, risen, raised; recovered, cured, healed; swollen
up; increased; arisen, produced; derived, obtained.
<LEND>

<L>50335<pc>1078-b<k1>samutpaw<k2>samutpaw
{#samutpaw#}¦ {%sam-ut-paṭ (-ud-p˚),%} cl. 10. P.
{%-pāṭayati, -yitum,%} to tear completely out, tear out
by the roots, root up, tear off; to draw out; to tear
away, detach, sever; to expel, dethrone.
<LEND>

<L>50336<pc>1078-b<k1>samutpAwa<k2>samutpAwa
{%Sam-utpāṭa, as,%}¦ m. tearing completely out or
away, rooting up, eradication; tearing away from,
severing, detaching.
<LEND>

<L>50337<pc>1078-b<k1>samutpAwita<k2>samutpAwita
{%Sam-utpāṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ torn up by the roots;
torn completely away, severed, detached.
<LEND>

<L>50338<pc>1078-b<k1>samutpAwya<k2>samutpAwya
{%Sam-utpāṭya,%}¦ ind. having torn completely out or
away.
<LEND>

<L>50339<pc>1078-b<k1>samutpat<k2>samutpat
{#samutpat#}¦ {%sam-ut-pat (-ud-p˚),%} cl. 1. P. {%-pa- %}
[Page1078-c+ 74]
{%tati, -patitum,%} to fly up together, fly upwards,
jump up, start up, spring up, rise, ascend, arise, be
produced; to rush out of, gush out; rush forth,
break forth; to fly away, depart, disappear; to rush
upon, attack, assail.
<LEND>

<L>50340<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpatat<k2>samutpatat
{%Sam-utpatat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flying up together,
flying upwards, ascending.
<LEND>

<L>50341<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpatana<k2>samutpatana
{%Sam-utpatana, am,%}¦ n. the act of flying up toge-
ther, flying upwards, going upwards, ascending;
making effort, energy, exertion.
<LEND>

<L>50342<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpatita<k2>samutpatita
{%Sam-utpatita, as, ā, am,%}¦ flown up together,
flown upwards, ascended, sprung up, springing up-
wards; flown away, gone, departed, disappeared;
exerted.
<LEND>

<L>50343<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpatya<k2>samutpatya
{%Sam-utpatya,%}¦ ind. having flown upwards; having
flown away; having gushed out.
<LEND>

<L>50344<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpipatizu<k2>samutpipatizu
{%Sam-utpipatiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid.),
about to start up or spring up.
<LEND>

<L>50345<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpad<k2>samutpad
{#samutpad#}¦ {%sam-ut-pad (-ud-p˚),%} cl. 4. A. {%-pad-%}
{%yate, -pattum,%} to spring up together; to spring up,
arise, come forth; to be brought forth or born or
produced, happen, come to pass, occur, take place;
to present one's self: Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to arise, produce, effect, cause.
<LEND>

<L>50346<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpatti<k2>samutpatti
{%Sam-utpatti, is,%}¦ f. arising together, arising, pro-
duction, birth, orgin; formation, occurrence, inci-
dence.
<LEND>

<L>50347<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpanna<k2>samutpanna
{%Sam-utpanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprung up together,
arisen, produced, born, effected, excited; occurred,
happened, occurring, taking place.
<LEND>

<L>50348<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpAdana<k2>samutpAdana
{%Sam-utpādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of bringing forth,
producing; effecting, fabricating.
<LEND>

<L>50349<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpAdita<k2>samutpAdita
{%Sam-utpādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought forth, pro-
duced, effected, caused, formed.
<LEND>

<L>50350<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpiYja<k2>samutpiYja
{#samutpiYja#}¦ {%sam-utpiñja, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt.
{%piñj%} with {%ud%} and {%sam%}), excessively confused or con-
founded, bewildered, disturbed, overcome; ({%as%}), m.
an army in great disorder; complete confusion.
<LEND>

<L>50351<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpiYjala<k2>samutpiYjala
{%Sam-utpiñjala = sam-utpiñja%}¦ above; [cf. {%piñ-%}
{%jala, utpiñjala.%}]
<LEND>

<L>50352<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpiYjalaka<k2>samutpiYjalaka
{%Sam-utpiñjalaka, as,%}¦ m. excessive confusion or
disorder.
<LEND>

<L>50353<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpipatizu<k2>samutpipatizu
{#samutpipatizu#}¦ {%sam-utpipatiṣu.%} See {%sam-%}
{%ut-pat.%}
<LEND>

<L>50354<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpiz<k2>samutpiz
{#samutpiz#}¦ {%sam-utpiṣ,%} cl. 7. P. {%-pinaṣṭi,%} &c.,
to crush or squeeze together; to grind to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>50355<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpizwa<k2>samutpizwa
{%Sam-utpiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushed or squeezed
together; greatly crushed.
<LEND>

<L>50356<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpIqana<k2>samutpIqana
{#samutpIqana#}¦ {%sam-utpīḍana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%pīḍ%}
with {%ud%} and {%sam%}), the act of pressing together, com-
pression, pressing; great pressure or distress.
<LEND>

<L>50357<pc>1078-c<k1>samutpF<k2>samutpF
{#samutpF#}¦ {%sam-ut-pṝ,%} Caus. {%-pārayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to spread out, stretch out, stretch forth.
<LEND>

<L>50358<pc>1078-c<k1>samutplu<k2>samutplu
{#samutplu#}¦ {%sam-ut-plu (-ud-p˚),%} cl. 1. A. {%-pla-%}
{%vate, -plotum,%} to jump or leap up together, spring up.
<LEND>

<L>50359<pc>1078-c<k1>samutplutya<k2>samutplutya
{%Sam-utplutya,%}¦ ind. having jumped or leaped up.
<LEND>

<L>50360<pc>1078-c<k1>samutsad<k2>samutsad
{#samutsad#}¦ {%sam-ut-sad,%} Caus. P. {%-sādayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to destroy utterly, overturn, overthrow.
<LEND>

<L>50361<pc>1078-c<k1>samutsava<k2>samutsava
{#samutsava#}¦ {%sam-utsava, as,%} m. a great festival
or festivity.
<LEND>

<L>50362<pc>1078-c<k1>samutsah<k2>samutsah
{#samutsah#}¦ {%sam-ut-sah,%} Caus. P. {%-sāhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to encourage or exhort together, animate,
incite.
<LEND>

<L>50363<pc>1078-c<k1>samutsAhya<k2>samutsAhya
{%Sam-utsāhya,%}¦ ind. having encouraged or exhorted.
<LEND>

<L>50364<pc>1078-c<k1>samutsuka<k2>samutsuka
{#samutsuka#}¦ {%sam-utsuka, as, ā, am,%} very un-
easy or anxious, very agitated, anxiously desirous,
longing for (an absent person), eager for, fond of,
attached to; regretting, missing, grieving for, sor-
rowful. {%—Samutsuka-tva, am,%} n. sorrow, regret,
longing desire.
<LEND>

<L>50365<pc>1078-c<k1>samutsukaya<k2>samutsukaya
{%Sam-utsukaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%-utsukayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to long for, cause to be fond of, make
attached to.
<LEND>

<L>50366<pc>1078-c<k1>samutsf<k2>samutsf
{#samutsf#}¦ {%sam-ut-sṛ (-ud-sṛ),%} Caus. P. {%-sāra- %}
[Page1079-a+ 79]
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to move away, drive away;
to give away.
<LEND>

<L>50367<pc>1079-a<k1>samutsAraRa<k2>samutsAraRa
{%Sam-utsāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of expelling or
driving to a distance, driving away; pursuing, hunt-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>50368<pc>1079-a<k1>samutsfj<k2>samutsfj
{#samutsfj#}¦ {%sam-ut-sṛj (-ud-s˚),%} cl. 6. P. {%-sṛ-%}
{%jati, -sraṣṭum,%} to pour out or shed forth together,
pour out, shed; to send forth, give forth, cast forth,
let go, let loose, dismiss; to leave or abandon or lay
aside completely; to put off; to lose; to place or
put down, throw forth or away.
<LEND>

<L>50369<pc>1079-a<k1>samutsarga<k2>samutsarga
{%Sam-utsarga, as,%}¦ m. pouring out or shedding
forth together, casting or giving forth, giving away;
leaving, abandoning; evacuation (of the bowels or
bladder), feculent discharge.
<LEND>

<L>50370<pc>1079-a<k1>samutsfjat<k2>samutsfjat
{%Sam-utsṛjat, an, antī, at,%}¦ letting loose, letting go.
<LEND>

<L>50371<pc>1079-a<k1>samutsfjya<k2>samutsfjya
{%Sam-utsṛjya,%}¦ ind. having wholly abandoned or
given up, having cast away.
<LEND>

<L>50372<pc>1079-a<k1>samutsfzwa<k2>samutsfzwa
{%Sam-utsṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ altogether poured or
shed forth, cast forth, given away; let loose, wholly
given up or abandoned.
<LEND>

<L>50373<pc>1079-a<k1>samutsfp<k2>samutsfp
{#samutsfp#}¦ {%sam-ut-sṛp (-ud-s˚),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-sarpati,%} &c., to glide or soar upwards together; to
go upwards, ascend, rise.
<LEND>

<L>50374<pc>1079-a<k1>samutseDa<k2>samutseDa
{#samutseDa#}¦ {%sam-utsedha, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%sidh%}
with {%ud%} and {%sam%}), elevation, height; swelling up,
intumescence, fatness, thickness.
<LEND>

<L>50375<pc>1079-a<k1>samud<k2>samud
{#samud#}¦ {%sam-ud%} or {%sam-und,%} cl. 7. P. {%-unatti,%}
{%-unditum,%} to moisten thoroughly, sprinkle all over,
water, wet.
<LEND>

<L>50376<pc>1079-a<k1>samudya<k2>samudya<h>2
2. {%sam-udya,%}¦ ind. (for 1. see p. 1037, col. 1),
having sprinkled all over, having moistened.
<LEND>

<L>50377<pc>1079-a<k1>samudra<k2>samudra<h>1
1. {%sam-udra, as,%}¦ m. [cf. {%udra, an-udra%}], the
waters above the firmament, the aerial ocean or sky
(Ved.; in Naigh. 1. 3. enumerated among the {%an-%}
{%tarikṣa-nāmāni%}); a collection of water, sea, ocean,
(seven seas are enumerated in Viṣṇu-Purāṇa II. 4,
viz. the sea of Lavaṇa, ‘salt-water;’ Ikṣu, ‘sugar-
cane juice or syrup;’ Surā, ‘wine;’ Ghṛta, ‘clarified
butter;’ Dadhi, ‘curds;’ Dugdha, ‘milk;’ Jala,
‘fresh water’); a symbolical expression for the num-
ber four (the number of oceans being only four,
according to one reckoning); the Ocean (personified
and represented as the king of rivers); epithet of
Śiva; a kind of metre; N. of a place; of a work;
({%as, ā, am%}), Ved. having a collection of water,
watery, flowing; ({%ā%}), f. the plant called zedoary
({%= saṭī%}); the Śamī tree. {%—Samudra-kapha, as,%}
m. ‘sea-foam,’ cuttle-fish bone. {%—Samudra-kāntā,%}
f. ‘sea-beloved,’ a river. {%—Samudra-kukṣi, is,%} f.
the shore of the ocean. {%—Samudra-ga, as, ā, am,%}
ocean-going, sea-faring; flowing towards the ocean;
({%as%}), m. a sea-farer, seaman; sea-trader; ({%ā%}), f. a
river. {%—Samudra-gamana, am,%} n. going or voyag-
ing by sea; sea-roving. {%—Samudra-gāmin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} sea-going, sea-faring. {%—Samudra-gupta, as,%} m.,
N. of a king of the Gupta dynasty. {%—Samudra-%}
{%gṛha, am,%} n. a sort of summer-house built in the
midst of water ({%= jala-yantra-gṛha,%} q. v.). {%—Sa-%}
{%mudra-culuka, as,%} m. ‘holding a mouthful of the
ocean,’ epithet of the sage Agastya (fabled to have
drunk up the ocean). {%—Samudra-ja, as, ā, am,%}
sea-born, produced in the sea. {%—Samudra-taṭa, am,%}
n. the sea-coast. {%—Samudra-tīra, am,%} n. the sea-
shore. {%—Samudra-dayitā,%} f. ‘sea-beloved,’ a river.
{%—Samudra-navanīta, am,%} n. ‘ocean-butter,’ nectar
or ambrosia ({%= a-mṛta%}); the moon (as produced
or recovered at the churning of the ocean). {%—Sa-%}
{%mudra-nemi, is, is, i,%} encircled or surrounded by
the ocean. {%—Samudra-phala, am,%} n. ‘sea-fruit,’ a
particular drug or medicament. {%—Samudra-phena,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘sea-foam,’ cuttle-fish bone; [cf. {%phena.%}]
{%—Samudra-bhava, as, ā, am,%} being in the ocean,
produced from or in the sea. {%—Samudra-mekhalā,%}
f. ‘sea-girdled,’ the earth. {%—Samudra-yātrā,%} f. a sea-
voyage. {%—Samudra-yāna, am,%} n. a sea-voyage; a
vessel, ship, boat. {%—Samudra-yāyin, ī,%} m. a sea-farer,
mariner, sailor, navigator, sea-trader. {%—Samudra-%}
{%yoṣit, t,%} f. ‘sea-wife,’ a river. {%—Samudra-raśanā%}
[Page1079-b+ 77]
or {%samudra-rasanā,%} f. ‘sea-girdled,’ the earth.
{%—Samudra-lavaṇa, am,%} n. sea-salt. {%—Samudra-%}
{%varṇana, am,%} n. ‘description of the ocean,’ N. of
the sixty-eighth chapter of the Sundara-kāṇḍa of the
Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Samudra-vasanā,%} f. ‘sea-clothed,’
the earth. {%—Samudra-vahni, is,%} m. submarine fire.
{%—Samudra-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. ‘sea-clothed,’
enveloped by the ocean, surrounded by the sea.
{%—Samudra-vijaya, as,%} m., N. of the father of
the twenty-second Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī.
{%—Samudra-velā,%} f. the ocean-tide; an ocean-wave,
wave of the sea. {%—Samudra-vyacas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. extensive or expanded as the ocean. {%—Samu-%}
{%dra-śoṣa, as,%} m. the creeping-plant Convolvulus
Argenteus. {%—Samudra-subhagā,%} f. ‘ocean-favourite,’
the Ganges. {%—Samudra-sena, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Samudra-snāna, am,%} n. ablution in the sea.
{%—Samudrānta (˚ra-an˚), am,%} n. the sea-shore;
nutmeg; ({%ā%}), f. the shrub Alhagi Maurorum ({%=%}
{%dur-ālabhā%}); the cotton plant; the plant Trigo-
nella Corniculata; another plant {%(= yavāsa)%}. {%—Sa-%}
{%mudrāmbarā (˚ra-am˚),%} f. ‘sea-clothed,’ the earth.
{%—Samudrāmbhas (˚ra-am˚), as,%} n. sea-water.
{%—Samudrāru (˚ra-aru%} or {%-āru%}), {%us,%} m. a croco-
dile, shark; a large fabulous fish ({%= timiṅ-gila%});
Rāma's bridge or the ridge of rocks between India
and Ceylon. {%—Samudrārtha (˚ra-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}
Ved. tending to the sea. {%—Samudropapluta (˚ra-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} inundated or submerged by the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>50378<pc>1079-b<k1>samudriya<k2>samudriya
{%Samudriya%}¦ or {%samudrīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging
to or generated in the firmament, aerial, (in Ṛg-veda
X. 65, 13. the form {%samudriyaḥ,%} acc. pl. fem., occurs);
marine, oceanic, maritime, living in the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>50379<pc>1079-b<k1>samudrya<k2>samudrya
{%Samudrya, as, ā, am, = samudriya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>50380<pc>1079-b<k1>samundana<k2>samundana
{%Sam-undana, am,%}¦ n. the act of thoroughly moist-
ening or sprinkling; moisture, damp, wetness.
<LEND>

<L>50381<pc>1079-b<k1>samunna<k2>samunna
{%Sam-unna, as, ā, am,%}¦ well moistened or sprin-
kled, thoroughly wetted or watered, very wet or
moist, moistened.
<LEND>

<L>50382<pc>1079-b<k1>samudakta<k2>samudakta
{#samudakta#}¦ {%sam-udakta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%añc%}
with {%ud%} and {%sam%}), lifted up, raised up, thrown up,
drawn up.
<LEND>

<L>50383<pc>1079-b<k1>samudAgam<k2>samudAgam
{#samudAgam#}¦ {%sam-ud-ā-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gac-%}
{%chati, -gantum,%} to arrive at full or complete know-
ledge, understand perfectly.
<LEND>

<L>50384<pc>1079-b<k1>samudAgata<k2>samudAgata
{%Sam-udāgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely known or
understood.
<LEND>

<L>50385<pc>1079-b<k1>samudAgama<k2>samudAgama
{%Sam-udāgama, as,%}¦ m. full or complete knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>50386<pc>1079-b<k1>samudAcar<k2>samudAcar
{#samudAcar#}¦ {%sam-ud-ā-car,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-ca-%}
{%rati, -te,%} &c., to move or travel about (e. g. {%rathena,%}
in a chariot); to practise, perform, accomplish, do;
to act towards, treat.
<LEND>

<L>50387<pc>1079-b<k1>samudAcarat<k2>samudAcarat
{%Sam-udācarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ practising; acting
towards, treating.
<LEND>

<L>50388<pc>1079-b<k1>samudAcAra<k2>samudAcAra
{%Sam-udācāra, as,%}¦ m. proper or right practice or
usage; intention, purpose, design, motive.
<LEND>

<L>50389<pc>1079-b<k1>samudAvah<k2>samudAvah
{#samudAvah#}¦ {%sam-ud-ā-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-va-%}
{%hati, -te,%} &c., to lead or conduct out, draw out,
carry out; to carry away, carry off; to conduct
home, marry.
<LEND>

<L>50390<pc>1079-b<k1>samudAhf<k2>samudAhf
{#samudAhf#}¦ {%sam-ud-ā-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to utter together; to pronounce, declare.
<LEND>

<L>50391<pc>1079-b<k1>samudAharaRa<k2>samudAharaRa
{%Sam-udāharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of uttering, de-
claring, pronouncing; illustrating, illustration.
<LEND>

<L>50392<pc>1079-b<k1>samudAhfta<k2>samudAhfta
{%Sam-udāhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ declared, uttered; pro-
nounced, said, spoken, mentioned, recorded; illus-
trated.
<LEND>

<L>50393<pc>1079-b<k1>samudi<k2>samudi
{#samudi#}¦ {%sam-ud-i,%} cl. 2. P. {%-eti, -etum,%} to go
upwards or rise together; to go up, ascend, rise; to
rise up together or prepare for battle; to come toge-
ther, collect together in great numbers; to come
into the possession (of any one).
<LEND>

<L>50394<pc>1079-b<k1>samudaya<k2>samudaya
{%Sam-udaya, as,%}¦ m. going upwards, rise, ascent,
rising (of the sun &c.); coming together, collection,
multitude, number, heap, quantity; totality, the
whole; revenue; combination, mixture, blending
together; effort, exertion, perseverance; war,
[Page1079-c+ 76]
battle; the rear or reserve of an army; a day;
({%am%}), n. the rising of a planet, &c.; an auspicious
moment ({%= lagna%}).
<LEND>

<L>50395<pc>1079-c<k1>samudAya<k2>samudAya
{%Sam-udāya, as,%}¦ m. rise, ascent; a collection, mul-
titude, quantity, number, heap, mass, aggregate,
whole, totality; a word of more than one syllable;
war, battle; the rear or reserve of an army.
<LEND>

<L>50396<pc>1079-c<k1>samudita<k2>samudita<h>2
2. {%sam-udita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see under {%saṃ-%}
{%vad%}), gone up, risen, ascended, rising upwards, lofty,
elevated; arisen, produced, occasioned, excited; come
together, collected, gathered together, aggregated,
united, assembled; possessed of, furnished with, en-
dowed.
<LEND>

<L>50397<pc>1079-c<k1>samudyat<k2>samudyat
{%Sam-udyat, an, atī, at,%}¦ ascending, rising.
<LEND>

<L>50398<pc>1079-c<k1>samudIkz<k2>samudIkz
{#samudIkz#}¦ {%sam-ud-īkṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-īkṣate,%}
{%-īkṣitum,%} to look up at; to look at attentively,
perceive, observe; to look well up to, confide in,
trust in; to respect, honour.
<LEND>

<L>50399<pc>1079-c<k1>samudIkzya<k2>samudIkzya
{%Sam-udīkṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked up at, having
looked at or observed.
<LEND>

<L>50400<pc>1079-c<k1>samudIr<k2>samudIr
{#samudIr#}¦ {%sam-ud-īr,%} cl. 2. A. {%īrte,%} &c., to
move upwards; to move about, be agitated, be
greatly moved or excited: Caus. {%-īrayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to move upwards, raise; to cause to move
about, agitate, excite, incite, stimulate; to throw;
to raise the voice, speak, utter, declare.
<LEND>

<L>50401<pc>1079-c<k1>samudIraRa<k2>samudIraRa
{%Sam-udīraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of raising the voice,
uttering, declaring, speaking, pronouncing; repeat-
ing, reciting.
<LEND>

<L>50402<pc>1079-c<k1>samudIrita<k2>samudIrita
{%Sam-udīrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set in motion, caused
to move, agitated, excited; uttered, said, spoken,
declared, recited.
<LEND>

<L>50403<pc>1079-c<k1>samudIrRa<k2>samudIrRa
{%Sam-udīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly moved or agi-
tated, excited. {%—Samudīrṇa-mānasa, as, ā, am,%}
agitated or excited in mind.
<LEND>

<L>50404<pc>1079-c<k1>samudIz<k2>samudIz
{#samudIz#}¦ {%sam-ud-īṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-īṣati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., Ved. to rise well upwards, mount quite
upwards.
<LEND>

<L>50405<pc>1079-c<k1>samudga<k2>samudga<h>1
{#samudga#} 1¦. {%sa-mudga, as, ā, am,%} having a
cover or lid; having beans, filled with beans; ({%as%}),
m. a covered box or casket.
<LEND>

<L>50406<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgaka<k2>samudgaka<h>1
1. {%sa-mudgaka, as,%}¦ m. a covered box, casket.
<LEND>

<L>50407<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgam<k2>samudgam
{#samudgam#}¦ {%sam-ud-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go up or rise together; to rise up,
ascend; to come forth, break forth, issue, exude.
<LEND>

<L>50408<pc>1079-c<k1>samudga<k2>samudga<h>2
2. {%sam-udga, as, ā, am,%}¦ going up or rising toge-
ther, rising, ascending; entirely pervading; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of artificial stanza, (see below.) {%—Samudga-%}
{%yamaka, am,%} n. (in rhetoric) artificially combining
words so as to make different parts of a stanza cor-
respond in sound but with different senses, (see
{%yamaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>50409<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgaka<k2>samudgaka<h>2
2. {%samudgaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of artificial stanza
(each half of which corresponds exactly in sound,
though the meanings of the words are different,
those of one half being respectively adjectives to those
of the other; an example occurs in Kirātārjunīya
XV. 16).
<LEND>

<L>50410<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgata<k2>samudgata
{%Sam-udgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen up together, risen,
ascended, arisen; rising; breaking forth, issuing,
exuding.
<LEND>

<L>50411<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgama<k2>samudgama
{%Sam-udgama, as,%}¦ m. rising, ascent, arising;
issuing; birth, production.
<LEND>

<L>50412<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgF<k2>samudgF
{#samudgF#}¦ {%sam-ud-gṝ.%} See rt. 2. {%gṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>50413<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgIrRa<k2>samudgIrRa
{%Sam-udgīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ vomited forth (as food
&c.), ejected; raised up, lifted up; raised (as the
voice), uttered, exclaimed, (in these senses perhaps
to be connected with rt. 1. {%gṝ.%})
<LEND>

<L>50414<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgE<k2>samudgE
{#samudgE#}¦ {%sam-ud-gai.%} See rt. {%gai.%}
<LEND>

<L>50415<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgIta<k2>samudgIta
{%Sam-udgīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sung out loud, chanted
loudly; ({%am%}), n. a loud song, chant.
<LEND>

<L>50416<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgranT<k2>samudgranT
{#samudgranT#}¦ {%sam-ud-granth,%} cl. 9. P. {%-grath-%}
{%nāti,%} &c., to bind up together; to tie or fasten up.
<LEND>

<L>50417<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgraTya<k2>samudgraTya
{%Sam-udgrathya,%}¦ ind. having bound up together,
having tied up (as the hair &c.).
<LEND>

<L>50418<pc>1079-c<k1>samudgrah<k2>samudgrah
{#samudgrah#}¦ {%sam-ud-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛhṇāti, %}
[Page1080-a+ 74]
{%-gṛhṇīte,%} &c., to raise up together; to raise or lift
up; to take hold of, lay hold of, seize on.
<LEND>

<L>50419<pc>1080-a<k1>samudgfhya<k2>samudgfhya
{%Sam-udgṛhya,%}¦ ind. having raised up, having
taken hold of.
<LEND>

<L>50420<pc>1080-a<k1>samuddiS<k2>samuddiS
{#samuddiS#}¦ {%sam-ud-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to point out or indicate fully, mention at
full, state, declare, communicate; to designate as,
name; to refer to, relate to.
<LEND>

<L>50421<pc>1080-a<k1>samuddiSya<k2>samuddiSya
{%Sam-uddiśya,%}¦ ind. having fully pointed out; re-
lating or referring to, with reference or regard to
(with acc.); aiming at, in behalf of, on account of,
in honour of, in remembrance of; for; against.
<LEND>

<L>50422<pc>1080-a<k1>samuddizwa<k2>samuddizwa
{%Sam-uddiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully pointed out or
declared or indicated, shown, explained; enumerated,
particularised.
<LEND>

<L>50423<pc>1080-a<k1>samuddeSa<k2>samuddeSa
{%Sam-uddeśa, as,%}¦ m. fully pointing out or indicat-
ing, accurate or complete description; explanation,
enumeration, particularising.
<LEND>

<L>50424<pc>1080-a<k1>samuddF<k2>samuddF
{#samuddF#}¦ {%sam-ud-dṝ,%} Pass. {%-dīryate,%} to be com-
pletely rent or torn in pieces, to burst asunder.
<LEND>

<L>50425<pc>1080-a<k1>samuddyut<k2>samuddyut
{#samuddyut#}¦ {%sam-ud-dyut,%} cl. 1. A. {%-dyotate,%}
&c., to blaze up, shine very brilliantly.
<LEND>

<L>50426<pc>1080-a<k1>samuddru<k2>samuddru
{#samuddru#}¦ {%sam-ud-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati, -dro-%}
{%tum,%} to run forth together, escape together.
<LEND>

<L>50427<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDan<k2>samudDan
{#samudDan#}¦ {%sam-ud-dhan (-ud-han).%} See rt.
{%han.%}
<LEND>

<L>50428<pc>1080-a<k1>samudData<k2>samudData
{%Sam-uddhata, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised well up, com-
pletely lifted up, upraised, uplifted, elevated, risen,
excited, drawn up, upheld; puffed up with pride,
proud, arrogant, overbearing; impudent, rude; ill-
mannered, ill-behaved. {%—Samuddhata-lāṅgūla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} (an animal) whose tail is raised or
cocked up.
<LEND>

<L>50429<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDasta<k2>samudDasta
{#samudDasta#}¦ {%sam-ud-dhasta (-ud-hasta), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} wiped off with the hand.
<LEND>

<L>50430<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDU<k2>samudDU
{#samudDU#}¦ {%sam-ud-dhū,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-dhūnoti,%}
{%-dhūnute,%} &c. (see rt. 1. {%dhū%}), to shake up, toss
up, rouse up, raise; to shake about, disturb, agitate,
move hither and thither.
<LEND>

<L>50431<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDUta<k2>samudDUta
{%Sam-uddhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken about, agitated,
driven hither and thither.
<LEND>

<L>50432<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDUya<k2>samudDUya
{%Sam-uddhūya,%}¦ ind. having shaken up, having
raised up.
<LEND>

<L>50433<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDf<k2>samudDf
{#samudDf#}¦ {%sam-ud-dhṛ (-ud-hṛ),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-uddharati, -te, -dhartum,%} to raise well up, lift
completely up, elevate, erect; to extol, honour; to
take or pick up; to take quite out, draw well out,
take out, extract; to extricate; to root out, extirpate,
exterminate, destroy utterly.
<LEND>

<L>50434<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDaraRa<k2>samudDaraRa
{%Sam-uddharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of raising well
up, drawing up, upraising, lifting; picking up;
drawing out, lifting out; complete extraction, extri-
cation, deliverance; eradication, pulling up by the
roots, extirpation; taking out from (as a part or
share); food thrown up (from the stomach), vomit.
<LEND>

<L>50435<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDarat<k2>samudDarat
{%Sam-uddharat, an, antī, at,%}¦ raising up; picking
up; drawing out, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50436<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDartf<k2>samudDartf
{%Sam-uddhartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who lifts up or
raises or extricates; ({%tā%}), m. a raiser up; deliverer,
redeemer.
<LEND>

<L>50437<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDfta<k2>samudDfta
{%Sam-uddhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well raised or drawn
up or uplifted; picked up; completely drawn out or
extracted; lifted out, extricated; thrown up, vomited;
taken away, removed; taken out from (as a share),
deducted; set apart, divided; seized, possessed of;
ill-behaved.
<LEND>

<L>50438<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDvaMs<k2>samudDvaMs
{#samudDvaMs#}¦ {%sam-ud-dhvaṃs.%} See rt. {%dhvaṃs.%}
<LEND>

<L>50439<pc>1080-a<k1>samudDvasta<k2>samudDvasta
{%Sam-uddhvasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely overspread,
sprinkled or covered with.
<LEND>

<L>50440<pc>1080-a<k1>samudbanD<k2>samudbanD
{#samudbanD#}¦ {%sam-ud-bandh,%} cl. 7. P. {%-badhnāti,%}
{%-banddhum,%} to bind up firmly.
<LEND>

<L>50441<pc>1080-a<k1>samudbaDya<k2>samudbaDya
{%Sam-udbadhya,%}¦ ind. having bound up firmly.
<LEND>

<L>50442<pc>1080-a<k1>samudbuD<k2>samudbuD
{#samudbuD#}¦ {%sam-ud-budh,%} Caus. {%-bodhayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to rouse up thoroughly, awaken, animate.
<LEND>
[Page1080-b+ 72]

<L>50443<pc>1080-b<k1>samudboDa<k2>samudboDa
{%Sam-udbodha, as,%}¦ m. thorough rousing up,
awakening, exciting.
<LEND>

<L>50444<pc>1080-b<k1>samudBU<k2>samudBU
{#samudBU#}¦ {%sam-ud-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c.,
to spring up from, arise, rise, be produced, exist; to
increase, augment.
<LEND>

<L>50445<pc>1080-b<k1>samudBava<k2>samudBava
{%Sam-udbhava, as,%}¦ m. existence, production, origin;
({%as, ā, am%}), sprung up, produced, born.
<LEND>

<L>50446<pc>1080-b<k1>samudBUta<k2>samudBUta
{%Sam-udbhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprung up, arisen, born,
produced, derived.
<LEND>

<L>50447<pc>1080-b<k1>samudBram<k2>samudBram
{#samudBram#}¦ {%sam-ud-bhram.%} See rt. {%bhram.%}
<LEND>

<L>50448<pc>1080-b<k1>samudBrAnta<k2>samudBrAnta
{%Sam-udbhrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ roused up, excited,
bewildered, rendered wild.
<LEND>

<L>50449<pc>1080-b<k1>samudya<k2>samudya
{#samudya#}¦ {%sam-udya.%} See under {%saṃ-vad,%}
p. 1037, and under {%sam-ud,%} p. 1079.
<LEND>

<L>50450<pc>1080-b<k1>samudyat<k2>samudyat
{#samudyat#}¦ {%sam-udyat.%} See under {%sam-ud-i.%}
<LEND>

<L>50451<pc>1080-b<k1>samudyam<k2>samudyam
{#samudyam#}¦ {%sam-ud-yam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-yacchati,%}
{%-yantum,%} to raise up, lift up, excite; to prepare for
action, make ready, strive, endeavour; to offer, pre-
sent; to rein in, curb, restrain, drive (horses &c.).
<LEND>

<L>50452<pc>1080-b<k1>samudyata<k2>samudyata
{%Sam-udyata, as, ā, am,%}¦ lifted up; ready or eager
for action, prepared for, ready for (with inf. or dat.
or loc. or with {%artham%} or {%prati%}); about to do
anything.
<LEND>

<L>50453<pc>1080-b<k1>samudyama<k2>samudyama
{%Sam-udyama, as,%}¦ m. lifting up; great effort or
exertion, undertaking, commencing, commencement,
onset.
<LEND>

<L>50454<pc>1080-b<k1>samudyamya<k2>samudyamya
{%Sam-udyamya,%}¦ ind. having lifted up, carrying
aloft; having restrained, having curbed.
<LEND>

<L>50455<pc>1080-b<k1>samudyA<k2>samudyA
{#samudyA#}¦ {%sam-ud-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to rise up against any one (with acc.), assail.
<LEND>

<L>50456<pc>1080-b<k1>samudyAta<k2>samudyAta
{%Sam-udyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen up against.
<LEND>

<L>50457<pc>1080-b<k1>samudyuj<k2>samudyuj
{#samudyuj#}¦ {%sam-ud-yuj,%} Caus. {%-yojayati,%} &c.,
to incite, excite, animate, stimulate to exertion.
<LEND>

<L>50458<pc>1080-b<k1>samudyoga<k2>samudyoga
{%Sam-udyoga, as,%}¦ m. active exertion, zeal, energy.
<LEND>

<L>50459<pc>1080-b<k1>samudra<k2>samudra<h>1
{#samudra#} 1¦. {%samudra, as,%} m. the ocean, &c.
See under {%sam-ud,%} p. 1079, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>50460<pc>1080-b<k1>samudriya<k2>samudriya
{%Samudriya,%}¦ &c. See p. 1079, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>50461<pc>1080-b<k1>samudra<k2>samudra<h>2
{#samudra#} 2¦. {%sa-mudra, as, ā, am,%} having a
stamp or seal, stamped, sealed; having marks.
<LEND>

<L>50462<pc>1080-b<k1>samudric<k2>samudric
{#samudric#}¦ {%sam-ud-ric.%} See rt. {%ric.%}
<LEND>

<L>50463<pc>1080-b<k1>samudrikta<k2>samudrikta
{%Sam-udrikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ abundantly furnished
with (with inst.), abounding in.
<LEND>

<L>50464<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvas<k2>samudvas
{#samudvas#}¦ {%sam-ud-vas,%} Caus. {%-vāsayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to be moved away, expel or remove
from.
<LEND>

<L>50465<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvah<k2>samudvah
{#samudvah#}¦ {%sam-ud-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vahati,%}
{%-te, -voḍhum,%} to bear up, raise or lift up; to bear
out, lift out, carry out, carry forth; to bear, carry,
possess; to display, exhibit; to lead away, marry.
<LEND>

<L>50466<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvaha<k2>samudvaha
{%Sam-udvaha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bearing up, lifting up,
who or what lifts up; moving up and down.
<LEND>

<L>50467<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvahat<k2>samudvahat
{%Sam-udvahat, an, antī, at,%}¦ lifting up, raising
up, raising or moving up and down.
<LEND>

<L>50468<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvAha<k2>samudvAha
{%Sam-udvāha, as,%}¦ m. bearing up; leading away,
marriage.
<LEND>

<L>50469<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvij<k2>samudvij
{#samudvij#}¦ {%sam-ud-vij,%} cl. 6. A. {%-vijate,%} &c., to
tremble greatly; to shrink or start back together.
<LEND>

<L>50470<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvigna<k2>samudvigna
{%Sam-udvigna, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly agitated or dis-
turbed, terrified, trembling with terror, frightened,
anxious.
<LEND>

<L>50471<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvega<k2>samudvega
{%Sam-udvega, as,%}¦ m. great agitation or perturba-
tion, trembling, terror, alarm, fear.
<LEND>

<L>50472<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvIkz<k2>samudvIkz
{#samudvIkz#}¦ {%sam-ud-vīkṣ (-vi-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-vīkṣate,%} &c., to look at together, look at, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>50473<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvIkzamARa<k2>samudvIkzamARa
{%Sam-udvīkṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking at toge-
ther.
<LEND>

<L>50474<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvIkzya<k2>samudvIkzya
{%Sam-udvīkṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked at or observed.
<LEND>

<L>50475<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvft<k2>samudvft
{#samudvft#}¦ {%sam-ud-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%} &c.,
to rise or swell upwards together, rise or swell greatly:
Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to cause to rise or swell.
<LEND>

<L>50476<pc>1080-b<k1>samudvartita<k2>samudvartita
{%Sam-udvartita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to rise or
swell, excited.
<LEND>
[Page1080-c+ 74]

<L>50477<pc>1080-c<k1>samudvftta<k2>samudvftta
{%Sam-udvṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen up, swollen.
<LEND>

<L>50478<pc>1080-c<k1>samudvfh<k2>samudvfh
{#samudvfh#}¦ {%sam-ud-vṛh,%} cl. 6. P. {%-vṛhati,%} &c.,
to draw out together, draw out, pull out.
<LEND>

<L>50479<pc>1080-c<k1>samund<k2>samund
{#samund#}¦ {%sam-und.%} See {%sam-ud,%} p. 1079.
<LEND>

<L>50480<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnad<k2>samunnad
{#samunnad#}¦ {%sam-un-nad (-ud-nad),%} cl. 1. P. {%-na-%}
{%dati,%} &c., to cry out together, shout out, roar out.
<LEND>

<L>50481<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnadat<k2>samunnadat
{%Sam-unnadat, an, antī, at,%}¦ crying or roaring out.
<LEND>

<L>50482<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnam<k2>samunnam
{#samunnam#}¦ {%sam-un-nam (-ud-nam),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-namati, -nantum,%} to rise up or ascend together,
rise aloft, ascend: Caus. {%-namayati, -nāmayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to raise well up, erect, lift completely up,
elevate.
<LEND>

<L>50483<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnata<k2>samunnata
{%Sam-unnata, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen up, raised aloft,
lifted up; elevated, exalted, erect, high, lofty; sub-
lime, arched, vaulted; sticking out, prominent, pro-
jecting; upright; puffed up, proud, arrogant, dig-
nified. {%—Samunnata-lāṅgula, as, ā, am,%} having
the tail erect.
<LEND>

<L>50484<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnati<k2>samunnati
{%Sam-unnati, is,%}¦ f. raising or lifting completely
up, excessive elevation or exaltation; height, lofti-
ness; rank, dignity, consequence, arrogance, pride;
increase, prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>50485<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnamya<k2>samunnamya
{%Sam-unnamya,%}¦ ind. having raised up or elevated.
<LEND>

<L>50486<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnAmya<k2>samunnAmya
{%Sam-unnāmya,%}¦ ind. having raised completely up,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>50487<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnah<k2>samunnah
{#samunnah#}¦ {%sam-un-nah (-ud-nah),%} cl. 4. P. A.
{%-nahyati, -te, -naddhum,%} to bind or tie up; to
raise up; to untie, unfasten, unfetter, loosen, set
free, liberate.
<LEND>

<L>50488<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnadDa<k2>samunnadDa
{%Sam-unnaddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ tied up, bound up;
raised up, elevated, exalted; swollen, pressed up or
out; full, excessive; puffed up (with pride), proud,
conceited, arrogant, overbearing; supreme; untied,
unfettered, liberated, loosened; produced, born.
<LEND>

<L>50489<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnI<k2>samunnI
{#samunnI#}¦ {%sam-un-nī (-ud-nī),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-nayati, -te, -netum,%} to lead or conduct upwards
together; to raise completely up, elevate; to lead
or conduct out, bring out, educe, deduce; to pay off
(a debt &c.).
<LEND>

<L>50490<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnaya<k2>samunnaya
{%Sam-unnaya, as,%}¦ m. gaining, obtaining; occur-
rence, event, advent.
<LEND>

<L>50491<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnayat<k2>samunnayat
{%Sam-unnayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ raising or lifting up,
causing to obtain eminence; attaining, gaining.
<LEND>

<L>50492<pc>1080-c<k1>samunnIta<k2>samunnIta
{%Sam-unnīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ led upwards, raised up,
elevated.
<LEND>

<L>50493<pc>1080-c<k1>samunneya<k2>samunneya
{%Sam-unneya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought out, to
be deduced.
<LEND>

<L>50494<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmajj<k2>samunmajj
{#samunmajj#}¦ {%sam-un-majj (-ud-majj),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-majjati,%} &c., to emerge out of the water; to dive
under, bathe.
<LEND>

<L>50495<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmajjya<k2>samunmajjya
{%Sam-unmajjya,%}¦ ind. having bathed.
<LEND>

<L>50496<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmiz<k2>samunmiz
{#samunmiz#}¦ {%sam-un-miṣ (-ud-miṣ),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-miṣati,%} &c., to rise up, spring up.
<LEND>

<L>50497<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmizat<k2>samunmizat
{%Sam-unmiṣat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} rising up,
springing up.
<LEND>

<L>50498<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmIl<k2>samunmIl
{#samunmIl#}¦ {%sam-un-mīl (-ud-mīl),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-mīlati,%} &c., to become fully expanded or unfolded,
become displayed; to open (as the eye &c.); to
spring up: Caus. {%-mīlayati, -yitum,%} to open, ex-
pand, unfold, display.
<LEND>

<L>50499<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmIlita<k2>samunmIlita
{%Sam-unmīlita, as, ā, am,%}¦ opened, expanded.
<LEND>

<L>50500<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmIlya<k2>samunmIlya
{%Sam-unmīlya,%}¦ ind. having opened or expanded.
<LEND>

<L>50501<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmUl<k2>samunmUl
{#samunmUl#}¦ {%sam-un-mūl (-ud-mūl),%} cl. 10. P.
{%-mūlayati, -yitum,%} to uproot or eradicate com-
pletely; to exterminate utterly.
<LEND>

<L>50502<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmUlana<k2>samunmUlana
{%Sam-unmūlana, am,%}¦ n. the act of uprooting or
eradicating completely, utter destruction, extermi-
nation.
<LEND>

<L>50503<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmUlya<k2>samunmUlya
{%Sam-unmūlya,%}¦ ind. having completely eradicated,
having utterly exterminated.
<LEND>

<L>50504<pc>1080-c<k1>samunmfj<k2>samunmfj
{#samunmfj#}¦ {%sam-un-mṛj (-ud-mṛj),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-mārṣṭi,%} &c., to rub completely off or out, wipe
out, efface.
<LEND>

<L>50505<pc>1080-c<k1>samupakfz<k2>samupakfz
{#samupakfz#}¦ {%sam-upa-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-kar- %}
[Page1081-a+ 74]
{%ṣati, -te,%} &c., to draw towards at one time or
together, bring near, draw near.
<LEND>

<L>50506<pc>1081-a<k1>samupakxp<k2>samupakxp
{#samupakxp#}¦ {%sam-upa-kḷp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kalpate,%}
&c., to be prepared or made ready together: Caus.
{%-kalpayati, -yitum,%} to make ready together, pre-
pare, make ready.
<LEND>

<L>50507<pc>1081-a<k1>samupakalpita<k2>samupakalpita
{%Sam-upakalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made ready, pre-
pared, arranged.
<LEND>

<L>50508<pc>1081-a<k1>samupakxpta<k2>samupakxpta
{%Sam-upakḷpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ prepared or made
ready together.
<LEND>

<L>50509<pc>1081-a<k1>samupakram<k2>samupakram
{#samupakram#}¦ {%sam-upa-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-krā-%}
{%mati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to go up to, proceed
towards, go near to, approach; to begin, commence
(with inf., e. g. {%vaktuṃ sam-upacakrame,%} he began
to speak).
<LEND>

<L>50510<pc>1081-a<k1>samupakrAnta<k2>samupakrAnta
{%Sam-upakrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone towards, ap-
proached.
<LEND>

<L>50511<pc>1081-a<k1>samupagam<k2>samupagam
{#samupagam#}¦ {%sam-upa-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati,%}
{%-gantum,%} to go or proceed together towards, go
near to, come near to, approach; to go to any state
or condition (see rt. {%gam%}), undergo.
<LEND>

<L>50512<pc>1081-a<k1>samupagata<k2>samupagata
{%Sam-upagata, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached, approxi-
mated; undergone.
<LEND>

<L>50513<pc>1081-a<k1>samupagama<k2>samupagama
{%Sam-upagama, as,%}¦ m. going near, approach,
approximation, contact.
<LEND>

<L>50514<pc>1081-a<k1>samupaguh<k2>samupaguh
{#samupaguh#}¦ {%sam-upa-guh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-gūhati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to embrace, surround.
<LEND>

<L>50515<pc>1081-a<k1>samupaguhya<k2>samupaguhya
{%Sam-upaguhya,%}¦ ind. having embraced or sur-
rounded.
<LEND>

<L>50516<pc>1081-a<k1>samupaGrA<k2>samupaGrA
{#samupaGrA#}¦ {%sam-upa-ghrā,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jighrati,%}
{%-ghrātum,%} to smell at; to kiss.
<LEND>

<L>50517<pc>1081-a<k1>samupajiGrat<k2>samupajiGrat
{%Sam-upajighrat, an, antī, at,%}¦ kissing.
<LEND>

<L>50518<pc>1081-a<k1>samupaci<k2>samupaci
{#samupaci#}¦ {%sam-upa-ci,%} Pass. {%-cīyate,%} to grow
up, increase; to become heaped together or accu-
mulated.
<LEND>

<L>50519<pc>1081-a<k1>samupacita<k2>samupacita
{%Sam-upacita, as, ā, am,%}¦ collected, heaped, accu-
mulated. {%—Samupacita-jala, as, ā, am,%} having
accumulated waters (as the ocean).
<LEND>

<L>50520<pc>1081-a<k1>samupajan<k2>samupajan
{#samupajan#}¦ {%sam-upa-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate,%}
{%-janitum,%} to arise, be born or produced, spring up,
take place, happen; to be born again: Caus. {%-jana-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to generate, engender, cause, pro-
duce.
<LEND>

<L>50521<pc>1081-a<k1>samupajanita<k2>samupajanita
{%Sam-upajanita, as, ā, am,%}¦ generated, produced,
caused.
<LEND>

<L>50522<pc>1081-a<k1>samupajAta<k2>samupajAta
{%Sam-upajāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ engendered, arisen,
produced, caused; aroused. {%—Samupajāta-kopa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one whose anger is roused, provoked or
moved to anger. {%—Samupajātābhiniveśam (˚ta-%}
{%abh˚),%} ind. after having formed a determined reso-
lution.
<LEND>

<L>50523<pc>1081-a<k1>samupajozam<k2>samupajozam
{#samupajozam#}¦ {%sam-upajoṣam%} or {%sam-upajo-%}
{%śam,%} ind. entirely according to wish or desire, quite
happily, fortunately.
<LEND>

<L>50524<pc>1081-a<k1>samupajYA<k2>samupajYA
{#samupajYA#}¦ {%sam-upa-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte, -jñātum,%} to ascertain fully, find out; to
perceive, learn.
<LEND>

<L>50525<pc>1081-a<k1>samupajAnat<k2>samupajAnat
{%Sam-upajānat, an, atī, at,%}¦ ascertaining, per-
ceiving.
<LEND>

<L>50526<pc>1081-a<k1>samupatap<k2>samupatap
{#samupatap#}¦ {%sam-upa-tap,%} Pass. {%-tapyate,%} to
be greatly distressed, feel pain.
<LEND>

<L>50527<pc>1081-a<k1>samupadiS<k2>samupadiS
{#samupadiS#}¦ {%sam-upa-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to point out or indicate fully, show; to
assign.
<LEND>

<L>50528<pc>1081-a<k1>samupadru<k2>samupadru
{#samupadru#}¦ {%sam-upa-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati%}
(ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%-drotum,%} to run together towards,
rush upon (with acc.); to run up to, assail, overrun,
attack.
<LEND>

<L>50529<pc>1081-a<k1>samupadruta<k2>samupadruta
{%Sam-upadruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ assailed, attacked,
overrun.
<LEND>

<L>50530<pc>1081-a<k1>samupaDA<k2>samupaDA
{#samupaDA#}¦ {%sam-upa-dhā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadhāti,%}
{%-dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put together, construct, create,
produce.
<LEND>

<L>50531<pc>1081-a<k1>samupadaDat<k2>samupadaDat
{%Sam-upadadhat, at, atī, at,%}¦ constructing, creating.
<LEND>
[Page1081-b+ 72]

<L>50532<pc>1081-b<k1>samupaDAv<k2>samupaDAv
{#samupaDAv#}¦ {%sam-upa-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhā-%}
{%vati, -te, -dhāvitum,%} to run up to together, run
near, rush towards.
<LEND>

<L>50533<pc>1081-b<k1>samupanI<k2>samupanI
{#samupanI#}¦ {%sam-upa-nī,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-nayati,%}
{%-te, -netum,%} to lead up to together, bring or draw
near to, lead to; to bring about, cause; to take
away, carry off or away.
<LEND>

<L>50534<pc>1081-b<k1>samupanayat<k2>samupanayat
{%Sam-upanayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ leading to, bring-
ing about, causing.
<LEND>

<L>50535<pc>1081-b<k1>samupanIta<k2>samupanIta
{%Sam-upanīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought to, led to.
<LEND>

<L>50536<pc>1081-b<k1>samupanyas<k2>samupanyas
{#samupanyas#}¦ {%sam-upa-ny-as,%} cl. 4. P. {%-asyati,%}
{%-asitum,%} to lay down or state at full length, describe
or prove fully.
<LEND>

<L>50537<pc>1081-b<k1>samupanyasta<k2>samupanyasta
{%Sam-upanyasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully stated or proved.
<LEND>

<L>50538<pc>1081-b<k1>samupapad<k2>samupapad
{#samupapad#}¦ {%sam-upa-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to come to pass, take place, be brought
about or accomplished, be produced: Caus. {%-pāda-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to bring about, make ready, prepare,
accomplish.
<LEND>

<L>50539<pc>1081-b<k1>samupapAdita<k2>samupapAdita
{%Sam-upapādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought about, made
ready, prepared.
<LEND>

<L>50540<pc>1081-b<k1>samupaplu<k2>samupaplu
{#samupaplu#}¦ {%sam-upa-plu.%} See rt. {%plu.%}
<LEND>

<L>50541<pc>1081-b<k1>samupapluta<k2>samupapluta
{%Sam-upapluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely over-
whelmed or beset, assailed.
<LEND>

<L>50542<pc>1081-b<k1>samupaBuj<k2>samupaBuj
{#samupaBuj#}¦ {%sam-upa-bhuj,%} cl. 7. A. {%-bhuṅkte,%}
{%-bhoktum,%} to enjoy sexually, have sexual union with
(with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>50543<pc>1081-b<k1>samupaBujya<k2>samupaBujya
{%Sam-upabhujya,%}¦ ind. having enjoyed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50544<pc>1081-b<k1>samupaBoga<k2>samupaBoga
{%Sam-upabhoga, as,%}¦ m. cohabitation, sexual union.
<LEND>

<L>50545<pc>1081-b<k1>samupayA<k2>samupayA
{#samupayA#}¦ {%sam-upa-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to go up to or approach together (with acc.); to
betake one's self to; to go to any state or condition,
(see rt. 1. {%yā.%})
<LEND>

<L>50546<pc>1081-b<k1>samupayAta<k2>samupayAta
{%Sam-upayāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone up to, approached,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>50547<pc>1081-b<k1>samupayuj<k2>samupayuj
{#samupayuj#}¦ {%sam-upa-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yu-%}
{%nakti, -yuṅkte, -yoktum,%} to appropriate entirely to
one's self, make complete use of, consume: Caus.
{%-yojayati,%} &c., to make complete use of, consume.
<LEND>

<L>50548<pc>1081-b<k1>samupayukta<k2>samupayukta
{%Sam-upayukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely used up
or consumed, eaten.
<LEND>

<L>50549<pc>1081-b<k1>samupayuktavat<k2>samupayuktavat
{%Sam-upayuktavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has
consumed.
<LEND>

<L>50550<pc>1081-b<k1>samupayozam<k2>samupayozam
{#samupayozam#}¦ {%sam-upayoṣam,%} ind. {%= sam-%}
{%upajoṣam,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>50551<pc>1081-b<k1>samuparuj<k2>samuparuj
{#samuparuj#}¦ {%sam-upa-ruj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-rujati,%}
&c., to break or cut up; to press hardly upon.
<LEND>

<L>50552<pc>1081-b<k1>samuparuD<k2>samuparuD
{#samuparuD#}¦ {%sam-upa-rudh,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-ru-%}
{%ṇaddhi, -runddhe,%} &c., to hinder greatly, disturb,
obstruct: Pass. {%-rudhyate,%} to be hindered or inter-
rupted.
<LEND>

<L>50553<pc>1081-b<k1>samupalakz<k2>samupalakz
{#samupalakz#}¦ {%sam-upa-lakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. A.
{%-lakṣayati, -te, -yitum,%} to look at attentively,
observe carefully; to see fully, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>50554<pc>1081-b<k1>samupalaB<k2>samupalaB
{#samupalaB#}¦ {%sam-upa-labh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-labhate%}
(ep. also P. {%-labhati%}), {%-labdhum,%} to take or receive
fully, obtain, acquire; to acquire by experience,
learn, perceive.
<LEND>

<L>50555<pc>1081-b<k1>samupavas<k2>samupavas
{#samupavas#}¦ {%sam-upa-vas,%} cl. 1. P. {%-vasati,%}
{%-vastum,%} to abide wholly in, engage in, devote one's
self to; to abide in a state of abstinence, fast.
<LEND>

<L>50556<pc>1081-b<k1>samupozita<k2>samupozita
{%Sam-upoṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ engaged in, devoted
to; fasting, abstaining.
<LEND>

<L>50557<pc>1081-b<k1>samupavah<k2>samupavah
{#samupavah#}¦ {%sam-upa-vah,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vahati,%}
{%-te, -voḍhum,%} to bear or carry along with; to flow
with, stream: Pass. {%-upohyate,%} to be borne near,
approach.
<LEND>

<L>50558<pc>1081-b<k1>samupoQa<k2>samupoQa<h>1
1. {%sam-upoḍha, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see under {%sam-%}
{%upoh%}), borne or carried along; borne upwards, gone
upwards, risen.
<LEND>

<L>50559<pc>1081-b<k1>samupaviS<k2>samupaviS
{#samupaviS#}¦ {%sam-upa-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati,%}
{%-veṣṭum,%} to sit down together, sit down on, take a
[Page1081-c+ 72]
seat; to sit down near; to lie down upon (with
acc.), rest upon; to encamp: Caus. {%-veśayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to cause to sit down, ask to be seated; to
cause to encamp.
<LEND>

<L>50560<pc>1081-c<k1>samupaviSya<k2>samupaviSya
{%Sam-upaviśya,%}¦ ind. having sat down together.
<LEND>

<L>50561<pc>1081-c<k1>samupavizwa<k2>samupavizwa
{%Sam-upaviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seated together,
seated, sat down.
<LEND>

<L>50562<pc>1081-c<k1>samupaveSa<k2>samupaveSa
{%Sam-upaveśa, as,%}¦ m. sitting down together;
asking to sit down or rest, entertaining.
<LEND>

<L>50563<pc>1081-c<k1>samupaveSana<k2>samupaveSana
{%Sam-upaveśana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to sit
down; a habitation, building.
<LEND>

<L>50564<pc>1081-c<k1>samupaveSita<k2>samupaveSita
{%Sam-upaveśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to sit down,
made to lie down, asked to sit down or rest, received
hospitably.
<LEND>

<L>50565<pc>1081-c<k1>samupavfMh<k2>samupavfMh
{#samupavfMh#}¦ {%sam-upa-vṛṃh,%} Caus. {%-vṛṃhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to increase, augment, strengthen;
to complete.
<LEND>

<L>50566<pc>1081-c<k1>samupavft<k2>samupavft
{#samupavft#}¦ {%sam-upa-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
&c., to go together towards, proceed together; to
behave.
<LEND>

<L>50567<pc>1081-c<k1>samupaSru<k2>samupaSru
{#samupaSru#}¦ {%sam-upa-śru,%} cl. 5. P. {%-śṛṇoti,%}
{%-śrotum,%} to listen to attentively, hear.
<LEND>

<L>50568<pc>1081-c<k1>samupasaMhf<k2>samupasaMhf
{#samupasaMhf#}¦ {%sam-upa-saṃ-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-harati, -te,%} &c., to withhold entirely, restrain, stop.
<LEND>

<L>50569<pc>1081-c<k1>samupasfp<k2>samupasfp
{#samupasfp#}¦ {%sam-upa-sṛp,%} cl. 1. P. {%-sarpati,%}
{%-sarptum, -sraptum,%} to creep up together towards,
creep up to, go to, go towards, approach; to attack.
<LEND>

<L>50570<pc>1081-c<k1>samupasarpat<k2>samupasarpat
{%Sam-upasarpat, an, antī, at,%}¦ creeping or crawl-
ing near, approaching.
<LEND>

<L>50571<pc>1081-c<k1>samupasev<k2>samupasev
{#samupasev#}¦ {%sam-upa-sev,%} cl. 1. A. {%-sevate,%}
{%-sevitum,%} to make use of together; to use, enjoy.
<LEND>

<L>50572<pc>1081-c<k1>samupasTA<k2>samupasTA<h>1
{#samupasTA#} 1¦. {%sam-upa-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -sthātum,%} to stand together in close
proximity, come near, go to or towards, approach,
attack (with acc.); to occur, arise, befall.
<LEND>

<L>50573<pc>1081-c<k1>samupasTA<k2>samupasTA<h>2
2. {%sam-upasthā,%}¦ f. standing near, approximation,
proximity; happening, befalling.
<LEND>

<L>50574<pc>1081-c<k1>samupasTAna<k2>samupasTAna
{%Sam-upasthāna, am,%}¦ n. approximation, approach;
nearness; happening, occurring.
<LEND>

<L>50575<pc>1081-c<k1>samupasTita<k2>samupasTita
{%Sam-upasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing near, brought
near to, approximated, impending; imminent; attained,
acquired.
<LEND>

<L>50576<pc>1081-c<k1>samupasTiti<k2>samupasTiti
{%Sam-upasthiti, is,%}¦ f. {%= sam-upasthāna%} above.
<LEND>

<L>50577<pc>1081-c<k1>samupaspfS<k2>samupaspfS
{#samupaspfS#}¦ {%sam-upa-spṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-spṛ-%}
{%śati,%} &c., to touch (water) for ablution, use for
ablution; to sip water; to bathe.
<LEND>

<L>50578<pc>1081-c<k1>samupahf<k2>samupahf
{#samupahf#}¦ {%sam-upa-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati,%}
{%-te, -hartum,%} to bring towards, offer; to perform
(a sacrifice).
<LEND>

<L>50579<pc>1081-c<k1>samupAkf<k2>samupAkf
{#samupAkf#}¦ {%sam-upā-kṛ (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 8. P. A.
{%-karoti, -kurute, -kartum,%} to satisfy, pay off.
<LEND>

<L>50580<pc>1081-c<k1>samupAkram<k2>samupAkram
{#samupAkram#}¦ {%sam-upā-kram (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 1.
P. A. {%-krāmati, -kramate, -kramitum,%} to go up
to together, to approach, attain to.
<LEND>

<L>50581<pc>1081-c<k1>samupAkrAnta<k2>samupAkrAnta
{%Sam-upākrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ approached, attained
to.
<LEND>

<L>50582<pc>1081-c<k1>samupAgam<k2>samupAgam
{#samupAgam#}¦ {%sam-upā-gam (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to go up to together, go near
to, go towards, approach, meet; to come upon,
incur; to occur, befall; to undergo, go to any state
or condition, (see rt. {%gam.%})
<LEND>

<L>50583<pc>1081-c<k1>samupAgata<k2>samupAgata
{%Sam-upāgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone near to, approached,
come together, assembled, met; come upon, incurred;
occurred, happening.
<LEND>

<L>50584<pc>1081-c<k1>samupAGrA<k2>samupAGrA
{#samupAGrA#}¦ {%sam-upā-ghrā (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-jighrati, -ghrātum,%} to smell at; to kiss.
<LEND>

<L>50585<pc>1081-c<k1>samupAGrAya<k2>samupAGrAya
{%Sam-upāghrāya,%}¦ ind. having kissed.
<LEND>

<L>50586<pc>1081-c<k1>samupAcar<k2>samupAcar
{#samupAcar#}¦ {%sam-upā-car (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-carati, -caritum,%} to attend, wait on, treat (medi-
cally); to practise; to be intent upon anything.
<LEND>

<L>50587<pc>1081-c<k1>samupAdA<k2>samupAdA
{#samupAdA#}¦ {%sam-upā-dā (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 3. P. A.
{%-dadāti, -datte, -dātum,%} to give or deliver over (P.);
[Page1082-a+ 73]
to gain, receive, acquire (A.); to take away from,
deprive of (A.); to collect, heap together (A.); to
assume, put on (A.).
<LEND>

<L>50588<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAtta<k2>samupAtta
{%Sam-upātta, as, ā, am,%}¦ acquired; taken away;
collected.
<LEND>

<L>50589<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAdAya<k2>samupAdAya
{%Sam-upādāya,%}¦ ind. having delivered over; having
acquired; having assumed.
<LEND>

<L>50590<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAnI<k2>samupAnI
{#samupAnI#}¦ {%sam-upā-nī (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-nayati, -te, -netum,%} to conduct or lead together
towards, bring together, gather together, assemble.
<LEND>

<L>50591<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAnIta<k2>samupAnIta
{%Sam-upānīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought together,
gathered together.
<LEND>

<L>50592<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAyA<k2>samupAyA
{#samupAyA#}¦ {%sam-upā-yā (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 2. P.
{%-yāti, -yātum,%} to go up to together, go towards,
come up to, approach, arrive at.
<LEND>

<L>50593<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAyAta<k2>samupAyAta
{%Sam-upāyāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come near, approached,
arrived.
<LEND>

<L>50594<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAyuj<k2>samupAyuj
{#samupAyuj#}¦ {%sam-upā-yuj (-upa-ā-),%} See rt.
1. {%yuj.%}
<LEND>

<L>50595<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAyukta<k2>samupAyukta
{%Sam-upāyukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with, pos-
sessed of, surrounded by, full of.
<LEND>

<L>50596<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAraB<k2>samupAraB
{#samupAraB#}¦ {%sam-upā-rabh (-upa-ā-,%} see {%ā-%}
{%rabh%}), cl. 1. A. {%-rabhate,%} &c., to begin together,
commence.
<LEND>

<L>50597<pc>1082-a<k1>samupArabDa<k2>samupArabDa
{%Sam-upārabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ begun, commenced,
undertaken.
<LEND>

<L>50598<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAruj<k2>samupAruj
{#samupAruj#}¦ {%sam-upā-ruj (-upa-ā-), = sam-%}
{%upa-ruj.%}
<LEND>

<L>50599<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAruh<k2>samupAruh
{#samupAruh#}¦ {%sam-upā-ruh (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-rohati,%} &c., to mount up, ascend.
<LEND>

<L>50600<pc>1082-a<k1>samupArUQa<k2>samupArUQa
{%Sam-upārūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ mounted upon,
ascended.
<LEND>

<L>50601<pc>1082-a<k1>samupArj<k2>samupArj
{#samupArj#}¦ {%sam-upārj (-upa-arj),%} cl. 1. 10. P.
{%-upārjati, -upārjayati,%} &c., to bring together,
cause to be brought together or prepared; to gain
or acquire together.
<LEND>

<L>50602<pc>1082-a<k1>samupArjana<k2>samupArjana
{%Sam-upārjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of gaining or
acquiring together, simultaneous acquisition.
<LEND>

<L>50603<pc>1082-a<k1>samupArjita<k2>samupArjita
{%Sam-upārjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought together,
prepared; acquired, gained; stored up.
<LEND>

<L>50604<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAviS<k2>samupAviS
{#samupAviS#}¦ {%sam-upā-viś (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-viśati, -veṣṭum,%} to enter upon together, under-
take, begin, commence.
<LEND>

<L>50605<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAS<k2>samupAS
{#samupAS#}¦ {%sam-upāś (-upa-aś),%} cl. 9. P.
{%-upāśnāti,%} &c., to taste fully or completely, enjoy.
<LEND>

<L>50606<pc>1082-a<k1>samupASri<k2>samupASri
{#samupASri#}¦ {%sam-upā-śri (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 1. P.
A. {%-śrayati, -te, -śrayitum,%} to have recourse to
together, resort to.
<LEND>

<L>50607<pc>1082-a<k1>samupASrita<k2>samupASrita
{%Sam-upāśrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ resorted to, having
recourse to.
<LEND>

<L>50608<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAs<k2>samupAs
{#samupAs#}¦ {%sam-upās (-upa-ās),%} cl. 2. A.
{%-upāste,%} &c., to sit near together or near each other;
to engage in or devote one's self to anything toge-
ther, practise in common; to serve or honour to-
gether.
<LEND>

<L>50609<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAsIna<k2>samupAsIna
{%Sam-upāsīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sitting near together.
<LEND>

<L>50610<pc>1082-a<k1>samupAsTA<k2>samupAsTA
{#samupAsTA#}¦ {%sam-upā-sthā (-upa-ā-),%} cl. 1.
P. A. {%-tiṣṭhati, -te,%} &c., to stand near to; to
practise, observe.
<LEND>

<L>50611<pc>1082-a<k1>samupe<k2>samupe
{#samupe#}¦ {%sam-upe (-upa-i,%} see rt. 5. {%i%}), cl. 2.
P. {%-upaiti,%} &c., to come together, assemble, meet;
to go towards, go near to, approach, assail, attack; to
reach; to fall to the share, come into the possession
of; to go to any state or condition, undergo.
<LEND>

<L>50612<pc>1082-a<k1>samupeta<k2>samupeta
{%Sam-upeta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come together, assembled,
gone near to, approached, resorted to, visited; arrived
at; furnished with, possessed of, endowed with; in-
habited by.
<LEND>

<L>50613<pc>1082-a<k1>samupetya<k2>samupetya
{%Sam-upetya,%}¦ ind. having gone near to, having
approached.
<LEND>

<L>50614<pc>1082-a<k1>samupeyivas<k2>samupeyivas
{%Sam-upeyivas, ān, -yuṣī, at,%}¦ one who has gone
near or approached; going, proceeding.
<LEND>

<L>50615<pc>1082-a<k1>samupekz<k2>samupekz
{#samupekz#}¦ {%sam-upekṣ (-upa-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
[Page1082-b+ 71]
{%-upekṣate%} (sometimes also P. {%-ti%}), {%-upekṣitum,%}
to look completely over or beyond, take no notice
of, overlook, disregard, neglect, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>50616<pc>1082-b<k1>samupopaviS<k2>samupopaviS
{#samupopaviS#}¦ {%sam-upopa-viś (-upa-upa-).%}
See rt. 1. {%viś.%}
<LEND>

<L>50617<pc>1082-b<k1>samupopavizwa<k2>samupopavizwa
{%Sam-upopaviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ seated together,
sitting down.
<LEND>

<L>50618<pc>1082-b<k1>samupoz<k2>samupoz
{#samupoz#}¦ {%sam-upoṣ (-upa-uṣ),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-upoṣati,%} &c., to burn together, consume together,
to burn up completely.
<LEND>

<L>50619<pc>1082-b<k1>samupoh<k2>samupoh
{#samupoh#}¦ {%sam-upoh (-upa-ūh,%} see rt. 1. {%ūh%}),
cl. 1. P. A. {%-upohati, -te,%} &c., to bring near to,
draw towards; to bring into contact with.
<LEND>

<L>50620<pc>1082-b<k1>samupoQa<k2>samupoQa<h>2
2. {%sam-upoḍha, as, ā, am%}¦ (equally referrible to
{%sam-upa-vah%}), brought near, presented, close at
hand; suppressed, restrained; begun.
<LEND>

<L>50621<pc>1082-b<k1>samubj<k2>samubj
{#samubj#}¦ {%sam-ubj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-ubjati, -ubjitum,%}
to cover over, close up; to press together.
<LEND>

<L>50622<pc>1082-b<k1>samubjita<k2>samubjita
{%Sam-ubjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered over, closed up.
<LEND>

<L>50623<pc>1082-b<k1>samuB<k2>samuB
{#samuB#}¦ {%sam-ubh,%} cl. 9. 7. P. {%-ubhnāti, -unapti%}
(Impf. {%-unap%}), &c., Ved. to confine, shut up, cover
up, close up; to strike down, injure, mutilate.
<LEND>

<L>50624<pc>1082-b<k1>samubDa<k2>samubDa
{%Sam-ubdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ confined, covered up;
injured; contracted, shrunk together, (Sāy. {%= saṅ-%}
{%kucita.%})
<LEND>

<L>50625<pc>1082-b<k1>samullaNG<k2>samullaNG
{#samullaNG#}¦ {%sam-ul-laṅgh,%} cl. 10. P. {%-laṅgha-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to leap beyond, violate, transgress,
neglect.
<LEND>

<L>50626<pc>1082-b<k1>samullamb<k2>samullamb
{#samullamb#}¦ {%sam-ul-lamb (-ud-lamb).%} See rt.
{%lamb.%}
<LEND>

<L>50627<pc>1082-b<k1>samullambita<k2>samullambita
{%Sam-ullambita, as, ā, am,%}¦ quite erect, upright;
(according to some) hanging.
<LEND>

<L>50628<pc>1082-b<k1>samullas<k2>samullas
{#samullas#}¦ {%sam-ul-las (-ud-las),%} cl. 1. P. {%-la-%}
{%sati, -lasitum,%} to shine forth brightly, gleam, glitter;
to break forth, appear; to jump or dance about,
sport, be wanton: Caus. {%-lāsayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to jump or sport, exhilarate, make glad.
<LEND>

<L>50629<pc>1082-b<k1>samullasat<k2>samullasat
{%Sam-ullasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shining very brightly,
brilliant; dancing about, sporting, playing, wan-
toning.
<LEND>

<L>50630<pc>1082-b<k1>samullasita<k2>samullasita
{%Sam-ullasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shining forth, gleaming,
brilliant, beautiful; sportive, sporting.
<LEND>

<L>50631<pc>1082-b<k1>samullAsa<k2>samullAsa
{%Sam-ullāsa, as,%}¦ m. excessive brilliance; sporting,
exhilaration.
<LEND>

<L>50632<pc>1082-b<k1>samulliK<k2>samulliK
{#samulliK#}¦ {%sam-ul-likh (-ud-likh),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-likhati,%} &c., to scratch up, tear up, dig up, furrow,
scarify; to rub against, graze; to write down.
<LEND>

<L>50633<pc>1082-b<k1>samulliKat<k2>samulliKat
{%Sam-ullikhat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} scratching up,
tearing up.
<LEND>

<L>50634<pc>1082-b<k1>samullup<k2>samullup
{#samullup#}¦ {%sam-ul-lup,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-lumpati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., Ved. to seize upon, lay hold of, pick up.
<LEND>

<L>50635<pc>1082-b<k1>samullupya<k2>samullupya
{%Sam-ullupya,%}¦ ind. having seized upon, having
caught hold of.
<LEND>

<L>50636<pc>1082-b<k1>samuz<k2>samuz
{#samuz#}¦ {%sam-uṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-oṣati,%} &c., to
burn up or consume by fire.
<LEND>

<L>50637<pc>1082-b<k1>samuhya<k2>samuhya
{#samuhya#}¦ {%sam-uhya, sam-uhyamāna.%} See under
{%saṃ-vah.%}
<LEND>

<L>50638<pc>1082-b<k1>samUQa<k2>samUQa<h>2
{#samUQa#} 2¦. {%sam-ūḍha.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>50639<pc>1082-b<k1>samUra<k2>samUra
{#samUra#}¦ {%samūra, as,%} m. a kind of deer, (see
below.)
<LEND>

<L>50640<pc>1082-b<k1>samUru<k2>samUru
{%Samūru, us,%}¦ m. a kind of deer (the skin of
which may be used as a student's seat, &c.; accord-
ing to some it has a white mane).
<LEND>

<L>50641<pc>1082-b<k1>samUruka<k2>samUruka
{%Samūruka, as,%}¦ m. {%= samūru%} above.
<LEND>

<L>50642<pc>1082-b<k1>samUla<k2>samUla
{#samUla#}¦ {%sa-mūla, as, ā, am,%} having a root,
along with the root; ({%am%}), ind. by the roots, with
the roots, completely. {%—Samūla-kāṣam,%} ind. strik-
ing or shaking (the ground) to its very foundations.
{%—Samūla-ghātam,%} ind. having destroyed by the
roots, having utterly exterminated.
<LEND>

<L>50643<pc>1082-b<k1>samUh<k2>samUh
{#samUh#}¦ {%sam-ūh%} (see rt. 1. {%ūh;%} cf. {%saṃ-vah%}),
[Page1082-c+ 79]
cl. 1. P. A. {%-ūhati, -te, -ūhitum,%} to bring together,
gather together, collect, unite; to bring or place
back in right order: Caus. {%-ūhayati, -yitum,%} to
cause to be brought together, bring together.
<LEND>

<L>50644<pc>1082-c<k1>samUQa<k2>samUQa<h>2
2. {%sam-ūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (in some senses equally
referrible to {%saṃ-vah,%} see 1. {%sam-ūḍha,%} p. 1037,
col. 3), brought together, collected; heaped up,
accumulated, assembled; associated, accompanying;
enveloped; produced quickly; crooked, bent; tamed,
tranquillised; purified, cleansed. {%—Samūḍha-cchan-%}
{%das, ās, ās, as,%} having the metres restored to their
proper order.
<LEND>

<L>50645<pc>1082-c<k1>samUha<k2>samUha
{%Sam-ūha, as,%}¦ m. a collection, assemblage, aggre-
gation, aggregate, accumulation, heap, number, mul-
titude, quantity. {%—Samūha-kārya, am,%} n. the
business or affairs of a community.
<LEND>

<L>50646<pc>1082-c<k1>samUhat<k2>samUhat
{%Sam-ūhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ bringing together, col-
lecting, gathering; contracting.
<LEND>

<L>50647<pc>1082-c<k1>samUhana<k2>samUhana
{%Sam-ūhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of bringing together,
collection; plenty; ({%ī%}), f. a broom.
<LEND>

<L>50648<pc>1082-c<k1>samUhya<k2>samUhya<h>1
1. {%sam-ūhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought together
or assembled or collected; ({%as%}), m., scil. {%agni,%} a
kind of sacrificial fire (to be brought or carried by
the priest); a place prepared for the reception of a
sacrificial fire.
<LEND>

<L>50649<pc>1082-c<k1>samUhya<k2>samUhya<h>2
2. {%sam-ūhya,%}¦ ind. having brought together or
collected or assembled.
<LEND>

<L>50650<pc>1082-c<k1>samf<k2>samf
{#samf#}¦ {%sam-ṛ%} or {%sam-ṝ,%} cl. 1. 9. P. {%-ṛcchati,%}
{%ṛṇāti%} (Ved. also cl. 3. 5. P. {%-iyarti, -ṛṇoti, -ṛṇ-%}
{%vati,%} in some forms also A.), &c., to go or come
together, meet together, meet, be united, run toge-
ther; to come into collision or conflict; to bring
together, construct: Caus. {%-arpayati, -te, -yitum,%}
to throw at, hurl at (with acc.), strike, hit; to fix or
place in or on, put on, put down, deposit; to deliver
completely over, hand over, consign, commit; to
place back, give back, restore.
<LEND>

<L>50651<pc>1082-c<k1>samara<k2>samara
{%Sam-ara, as, am,%}¦ m. n. coming together in a
hostile manner, conflict, combat, struggle, strife, war,
battle [cf. {%samarya%}]; ({%as%}), m. a proper N. {%—Sam-%}
{%ara-kanda,%} N. of a district. {%—Samarañ-jaya, as,%}
m. a proper N. {%—Samara-mardana, as,%} m. ‘de-
stroying in battle,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Samara-mūr-%}
{%dhan, ā,%} m. the front or van of battle. {%—Samara-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m. a proper N. {%—Samara-vijayin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} victorious in battle. {%—Samara-siṃha, as,%} m.
a proper N. {%—Samara-svāmin, ī,%} m. a particular
statue or idol erected by Samara-varman. {%—Sama-%}
{%rārṇava (˚ra-ar˚), as,%} m. the ocean of war. {%—Sa-%}
{%marocita (˚ra-uc˚), as, ā, am,%} fit for war. {%—Sa-%}
{%maroddeśa (˚ra-ud˚), as,%} m. a battle-field, place
of combat. {%—Samarodyata (˚ra-ud˚), as, ā, am,%}
prepared for conflict, ready for combat.
<LEND>

<L>50652<pc>1082-c<k1>samaraRa<k2>samaraRa
{%Sam-araṇa, am,%}¦ n., Ved. coming together, ap-
proach; conflict, fighting, combat; (in Naigh. II. 17.
enumerated among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>50653<pc>1082-c<k1>samarARa<k2>samarARa
{%Sam-arāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. coming together.
<LEND>

<L>50654<pc>1082-c<k1>samarpaRa<k2>samarpaRa
{%Sam-arpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), the act of
delivering or handing completely over, consigning,
presenting.
<LEND>

<L>50655<pc>1082-c<k1>samarpaRIya<k2>samarpaRIya
{%Sam-arpaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be delivered or
presented, to be made over.
<LEND>

<L>50656<pc>1082-c<k1>samarpayat<k2>samarpayat
{%Sam-arpayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ placing in or on;
depositing, delivering over, consigning.
<LEND>

<L>50657<pc>1082-c<k1>samarpayitavya<k2>samarpayitavya
{%Sam-arpayitavya, as, ā, am, = sam-arpaṇīya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>50658<pc>1082-c<k1>samarpita<k2>samarpita
{%Sam-arpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ placed or fixed in or on,
deposited, resting on, delivered, made over, con-
signed, committed; appointed; put together. {%—Sam-%}
{%arpita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} one who has consigned or
delivered over.
<LEND>

<L>50659<pc>1082-c<k1>samarpya<k2>samarpya
{%Sam-arpya, as, ā, am, = sam-arpaṇīya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>50660<pc>1082-c<k1>samarya<k2>samarya<h>1
1. {%samarya, as, am,%}¦ m. n. [cf. {%sam-ara;%} the
Pada text, however, divides into {%sa-marya%}], Ved.
conflict, battle, war, (in Naigh. II. 17. enumerated
among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%}); sacrifice, (Sāy. =
{%yajña,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 23, 1.) {%—Samarya-jit, t, t, t,%}
Ved. conquering in war, victorious in battle. {%—Sam-%}
{%arya-rājya, am,%} n. the dominion of fighting, war,
battle.
<LEND>
[Page1083-a+ 76]

<L>50661<pc>1083-a<k1>samarya<k2>samarya<h>2
2. {%samarya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%samaryati,%} &c., to desire
battle.
<LEND>

<L>50662<pc>1083-a<k1>samaryat<k2>samaryat
{%Samaryat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. desiring battle,
intent on conflict.
<LEND>

<L>50663<pc>1083-a<k1>samArARa<k2>samArARa
{%Sam-ārāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (perf. part. A.), having
come together, flowing together.
<LEND>

<L>50664<pc>1083-a<k1>samIrRa<k2>samIrRa
{%Sam-īrṇa,%}¦ referred to {%sam-ṝ%} by Scholiast on
Pāṇ. VII. 1, 102.
<LEND>

<L>50665<pc>1083-a<k1>samfta<k2>samfta
{%Sam-ṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come together, met; come
into collision, clashing together.
<LEND>

<L>50666<pc>1083-a<k1>samfti<k2>samfti
{%Sam-ṛti, is,%}¦ f., Ved. coming together, meeting to-
gether, contact, (Sāy. {%= saṅgama%}); conflict, fighting.
<LEND>

<L>50667<pc>1083-a<k1>samfc<k2>samfc
{#samfc#}¦ {%sam-ṛc%} [cf. {%sam-arc%}], cl. 6. P. {%-ṛ-%}
{%cati,%} &c., to praise, extol, adore, honour, ({%sam-%}
{%ānṛce,%} he has been lauded; but according to Sāy. {%=%}
{%samyak pūjitavān,%} he has well honoured, or {%sthā-%}
{%pitavān,%} he has established, Ṛg-veda 1. 160, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>50668<pc>1083-a<k1>samfYj<k2>samfYj
{#samfYj#}¦ {%sam-ṛñj,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-ṛñjati, -te,%}
&c., to strive together or unite together for any
object (with loc.); to promote well or together,
(Sāy. {%= samyak prasādhayati,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 6, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>50669<pc>1083-a<k1>samfD<k2>samfD<h>1
{#samfD#} 1¦. {%sam-ṛdh,%} cl. 4. 5. P. {%-ṛdhyati,%}
{%-ṛdhnoti,%} &c., to succeed well, be very successful,
prosper, flourish, increase or grow greatly: Pass.
{%-ṛdhyate,%} to be completely successful, be fulfilled or
accomplished, succeed, prosper; to share in abun-
dantly, be fully furnished with (with inst.): Caus.
{%-ardhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to succeed or prosper;
to cause to be fulfilled; to cause to be abundantly
furnished with.
<LEND>

<L>50670<pc>1083-a<k1>samarDaka<k2>samarDaka
{%Sam-ardhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to prosper,
&c., granting a blessing or boon.
<LEND>

<L>50671<pc>1083-a<k1>samfdDa<k2>samfdDa
{%Sam-ṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ very prosperous, thriv-
ing, flourishing, happy, fortunate; full-grown, in-
creased, grown, accelerated; fully furnished with,
abundantly endowed with, rich in, rich, wealthy;
completed, full, complete, entire. {%—Samṛddha-%}
{%yaśas, ās, ās, as,%} rich in fame, renowned, famous.
{%—Samṛddha-vega, as, ā, am,%} increasing in speed,
excessively swift. {%—Samṛddhārtha (˚dha-ar˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having increased substance or wealth, increas-
ing in resources. {%—Samṛddhī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-ka-%}
{%roti,%} &c., to make prosperous or wealthy.
<LEND>

<L>50672<pc>1083-a<k1>samfdDi<k2>samfdDi
{%Sam-ṛddhi, is,%}¦ f. great prosperity or success,
exuberance, profusion; thriving increase, gain, hap-
piness, good fortune, well-being, wealth; power,
supremacy, sway. {%—Samṛddhi-samaya, as,%} m. a
season of great prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>50673<pc>1083-a<k1>samfdDin<k2>samfdDin
{%Samṛddhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ prosperous, happy, blessed;
possessing abundance of (at the end of a comp.).
<LEND>

<L>50674<pc>1083-a<k1>samfD<k2>samfD<h>2
2. {%sam-ṛdh, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. very prosperous, (Sāy.
{%= sam-ṛddha,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 2, 10.)
<LEND>

<L>50675<pc>1083-a<k1>samfz<k2>samfz
{#samfz#}¦ {%sam-ṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-arṣati,%} &c. (see
rt. 1. {%ṛṣ%}), Ved. to come together, unite with.
<LEND>

<L>50676<pc>1083-a<k1>same<k2>same
{#same#}¦ {%sam-e%} ({%-ā-i,%} see rt. 5. {%i%}), cl. 2. P.
{%-aiti,%} &c., to come together, approach together,
meet or assemble together, unite together, meet at
or in (with acc. or loc.); to come together with
(with inst.); to go to, enter, go through, march
across (with acc.); to come into competition or
rivalry with, cope with; to join or lead together
(with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>50677<pc>1083-a<k1>sameta<k2>sameta
{%Sam-eta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come together, met together,
assembled, joined or united together, collected, asso-
ciated, agreed, covenanted; encountered, come to
close quarters, come into collision; conjoined, con-
comitant, connected or united with, furnished with,
possessed of, having; come near, approached, ap-
proximated, near. {%—Sameta-māya, as, ā, am,%} fur-
nished with or possessing illusions.
<LEND>

<L>50678<pc>1083-a<k1>sametya<k2>sametya
{%Sam-etya,%}¦ ind. having come together, having
assembled or met together, having held a meeting.
<LEND>

<L>50679<pc>1083-a<k1>sameyivas<k2>sameyivas
{%Sam-eyivas, ān, -yuṣī, at,%}¦ one who has come
together.
<LEND>

<L>50680<pc>1083-a<k1>sameGaleKa<k2>sameGaleKa
{#sameGaleKa#}¦ {%sa-megha-lekha, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing streaks of cloud.
<LEND>
[Page1083-b+ 72]

<L>50681<pc>1083-b<k1>samej<k2>samej
{#samej#}¦ {%sam-ej%} cl. 1. P. {%-ejati,%} &c., to rise
or move upwards.
<LEND>

<L>50682<pc>1083-b<k1>sameqI<k2>sameqI
{#sameqI#}¦ {%sameḍī,%} f., N. of one of the Mātṛs
attending on Skanda; [cf. {%bheḍi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>50683<pc>1083-b<k1>samedDf<k2>samedDf
{#samedDf#}¦ {%sam-eddhṛ.%} See under {%sam-indh.%}
<LEND>

<L>50684<pc>1083-b<k1>sameD<k2>sameD
{#sameD#}¦ {%sam-edh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-edhate, -edhitum,%}
to prosper greatly, thrive, increase: Caus. {%-edhayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to prosper or succeed, cause to
increase or swell; to strengthen, make happy or
{{fotunate->fortunate||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}.
<LEND>

<L>50685<pc>1083-b<k1>sameDita<k2>sameDita
{%Sam-edhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly increased or
augmented, made to prosper or thrive, strengthened,
strong; united.
<LEND>

<L>50686<pc>1083-b<k1>sameDa<k2>sameDa
{#sameDa#}¦ {%sa-medha, as, ā, am,%} along with the
sacrifice, having the essence of sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>50687<pc>1083-b<k1>samokas<k2>samokas
{#samokas#}¦ {%sam-okas, ās, ās, as,%} living or
dwelling together, furnished or surrounded with
(with inst., Sāy. {%= samāna-nivāsa%} or {%sam-aveta,%}
Ṛg-veda 1. 64, 10.)
<LEND>

<L>50688<pc>1083-b<k1>samodaka<k2>samodaka
{#samodaka#}¦ {%samodaka.%} See under {%sama.%}
<LEND>

<L>50689<pc>1083-b<k1>samope<k2>samope
{#samope#}¦ {%sam-ope (sam-ā-upa-i).%} See rt. 5. {%i.%}
<LEND>

<L>50690<pc>1083-b<k1>samopeta<k2>samopeta
{%Sam-opeta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully furnished or endowed
with, possessed of.
<LEND>

<L>50691<pc>1083-b<k1>samoha<k2>samoha
{#samoha#}¦ {%samoha%} [cf. {%sam-moha%} under {%sam-%}
{%muh%}], enumerated among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%}
in Naigh. II. 17.
<LEND>

<L>50692<pc>1083-b<k1>samOliratna<k2>samOliratna
{#samOliratna#}¦ {%sa-mauli-ratna, as, ā, am,%} with
a crown-jewel, having a crest-jewel.
<LEND>

<L>50693<pc>1083-b<k1>sampa<k2>sampa
{#sampa#}¦ {%sampa, as,%} m. (probably fr. {%sam-pat%}),
descending, falling, alighting; ({%ā%}), f. lightning;
[cf. {%śampā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>50694<pc>1083-b<k1>sampac<k2>sampac
{#sampac#}¦ {%sam-pac,%} Caus. {%-pācayati, -yitum,%}
to cook or mature together; to ripen thoroughly,
bake or cook thoroughly, burn.
<LEND>

<L>50695<pc>1083-b<k1>sampakva<k2>sampakva
{%Sam-pakva, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly matured or
ripened.
<LEND>

<L>50696<pc>1083-b<k1>sampAka<k2>sampAka
{%Sam-pāka, as,%}¦ m. cooking or ripening thoroughly,
maturing; the tree Cassia Fistula [cf. {%śam-pāka%}];
({%as, ā, am%}), reasoning well, a reasoner, logician;
subtle, cunning, impudent; lustful, lewd; small,
little, low.
<LEND>

<L>50697<pc>1083-b<k1>sampaW<k2>sampaW
{#sampaW#}¦ {%sam-paṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paṭhati,%} &c.,
to read through, peruse.
<LEND>

<L>50698<pc>1083-b<k1>sampAWya<k2>sampAWya
{%Sam-pāṭhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be caused to be read,
({%a-sampāṭhya,%} one with whom no one is allowed
to read.)
<LEND>

<L>50699<pc>1083-b<k1>sampat<k2>sampat
{#sampat#}¦ {%sam-pat,%} cl. 1. P. {%-patati, -patitum,%}
to fly together, run or rush together, meet or come
together, flow together; to meet at (with acc.);
to unite with (with inst.); to fall together, meet
together in hostile encounter; to fly to, hasten
towards, flock to, go to, attain; to rush towards,
assail, attack; to fall in with; to fly down, fall
down, alight on; to go or roam about; to come to
pass, happen: Caus. {%-pātayati, -yitum,%} to cause
to fly or fall, cause to fly down, throw down, hurl
down, cast, throw.
<LEND>

<L>50700<pc>1083-b<k1>sampatat<k2>sampatat
{%Sam-patat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flying together, hasten-
ing together; falling or flying down, alighting,
arriving; going backwards and forwards.
<LEND>

<L>50701<pc>1083-b<k1>sampatita<k2>sampatita
{%Sam-patita, as, ā, am,%}¦ flying or falling together,
coming to pass, happening, fallen or met together;
come to pass.
<LEND>

<L>50702<pc>1083-b<k1>sampAta<k2>sampAta
{%Sam-pāta, as,%}¦ m. falling together, concurrence,
falling against each other, meeting together, en-
countering; butting together; general fall; falling
down, descending, coming down, alighting (as a
bird); a peculiar mode of flight (of birds); the
flight of an arrow; that which falls or settles to
the bottom, the residue (of an offering); anything
thrown in or added as an ingredient; going, moving,
removing; N. of the son of Garuḍa; ({%au%}), m. du.,
[Page1083-c+ 77]
N. of two Vedic hymns. {%—Sampāta-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} containing ingredients.
<LEND>

<L>50703<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAti<k2>sampAti
{%Sam-pāti, is,%}¦ m., N. of a fabulous bird (the eldest
son of Garuḍa and elder brother of Jaṭāyu); a proper
N., (also written {%saṃ-yāti.%})
<LEND>

<L>50704<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAtika<k2>sampAtika
{%Sampātika, as,%}¦ m. a fabulous bird.
<LEND>

<L>50705<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAtin<k2>sampAtin
{%Sam-pātin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling together.
<LEND>

<L>50706<pc>1083-c<k1>sampatnI<k2>sampatnI
{#sampatnI#}¦ {%sam-patnī,%} f. (a woman) together
with her husband, (see {%patnī.%})
<LEND>

<L>50707<pc>1083-c<k1>sampad<k2>sampad<h>1
{#sampad#} 1¦. {%sam-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate, -pat-%}
{%tum,%} to fall or happen well, turn out well, succeed,
be prosperous, be accomplished; be completed or
fulfilled, to become full or complete (as a number),
amount to; to become (e. g. {%svedodbhedo vibhūṣā%}
{%sampede,%} the bursting out of drops of perspiration
became an ornament, Kirāt. VII. 5), be produced,
be born, be brought forth, arise; to fall together,
come together, meet with, unite with (with inst.);
to fall into any one's possession; to attain to, obtain,
acquire; to enter into, be absorbed in (with loc. or
acc.): Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to succeed,
cause to arise, cause to become, bring about, produce,
effect, accomplish complete, cause to procure, obtain,
make ready, prepare; to turn or transform into; to
furnish or provide with, endow with; to cause to
be occupied with; to attain, obtain; to be agreed,
agree upon (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>50708<pc>1083-c<k1>sampatti<k2>sampatti
{%Sam-patti, is,%}¦ f. prosperity, success, increase of
wealth, &c., completion, fulfilment, perfection, excel-
lence; a suitable state or condition; a sort of medi-
cinal root.
<LEND>

<L>50709<pc>1083-c<k1>sampad<k2>sampad<h>2
2. {%sam-pad, t,%}¦ f. success, prosperity, good fortune;
luck, fate; increase of wealth or happiness, advance-
ment of any kind, advantage, benefit, blessing; a
treasure; a necklace of pearls; decoration, adorn-
ment; accomplishment, perfection, completion; ex-
cellence; correctness, right method; excess, abun-
dance. {%—Sampad-vasu, us,%} m., N. of one of the
seven principal rays of the sun (supposed to supply
heat to the planet Mars). {%—Sampad-vinimaya, as,%}
m. an interchange of benefit or advantage.
<LEND>

<L>50710<pc>1083-c<k1>sampadyamAna<k2>sampadyamAna
{%Sam-padyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being accomplished,
being brought about.
<LEND>

<L>50711<pc>1083-c<k1>sampadvara<k2>sampadvara
{%Sampadvara, as,%}¦ m. a king, prince.
<LEND>

<L>50712<pc>1083-c<k1>sampanna<k2>sampanna
{%Sam-panna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen or turned out well,
successful, prosperous, fortunate, thriving, happy;
accomplished, effected, completed, finished, com-
plete, perfect; perfectly acquainted or conversant
with; full grown, mature; right, correct; procured,
acquired, obtained; possessed of, endowed with; of
perfect or correct flavour; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva;
({%am%}), n. a delicacy. {%—Sampanna-tama, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} most complete or perfect. {%—Sampanna-rūpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} complete, perfect; dainty, delicate.
<LEND>

<L>50713<pc>1083-c<k1>sampannaka<k2>sampannaka
{%Sampannaka, as, ā, am, = sam-panna%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>50714<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAda<k2>sampAda
{%Sam-pāda, as,%}¦ m. accomplishment, completion,
acquisition, obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>50715<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAdaka<k2>sampAdaka
{%Sam-pādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ bringing about, effect-
ing, effective of, accomplishing, fulfilling.
<LEND>

<L>50716<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAdana<k2>sampAdana
{%Sam-pādana, as, ī, am,%}¦ effective of, procuring,
gaining: ({%am%}), n. the act of bringing about, accom-
plishing, effecting, making; preparing, clearing
(ground &c.); gaining, acquiring, reaching, attaining.
<LEND>

<L>50717<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAdanIya<k2>sampAdanIya
{%Sam-pādanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be brought about
or effected.
<LEND>

<L>50718<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAdayat<k2>sampAdayat
{%Sam-pādayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ accomplishing, effect-
ing, perfecting.
<LEND>

<L>50719<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAdayitf<k2>sampAdayitf
{%Sam-pādayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who accom-
plishes or effects.
<LEND>

<L>50720<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAdita<k2>sampAdita
{%Sam-pādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought about, accom-
plished, effected; attained, obtained, gained, gotten.
<LEND>

<L>50721<pc>1083-c<k1>sampAdya<k2>sampAdya
{%Sam-pādya,%}¦ ind. having procured, effected, or
obtained.
<LEND>

<L>50722<pc>1083-c<k1>sampada<k2>sampada
{#sampada#}¦ {%sam-pada, am,%} n. standing with the
feet together or even ({%= samam pada-yugam%}).
<LEND>

<L>50723<pc>1083-c<k1>samparikFt<k2>samparikFt
{#samparikFt#}¦ {%sam-pari-kṝt,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kīrta-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to enumerate fully, particularise.
<LEND>
[Page1084-a+ 72]

<L>50724<pc>1084-a<k1>samparikIrtita<k2>samparikIrtita
{%Sam-parikīrtita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully enumerated,
related in detail.
<LEND>

<L>50725<pc>1084-a<k1>samparikram<k2>samparikram
{#samparikram#}¦ {%sam-pari-kram,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-krāmati, -kramate,%} &c., to go or walk round, to
visit in succession, go the round of.
<LEND>

<L>50726<pc>1084-a<k1>samparikramya<k2>samparikramya
{%Sam-parikramya,%}¦ ind. having walked round.
<LEND>

<L>50727<pc>1084-a<k1>sampariKyA<k2>sampariKyA
{#sampariKyA#}¦ {%sam-pari-khyā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-khyāti,%}
&c., to communicate completely, relate in full, de-
clare at length.
<LEND>

<L>50728<pc>1084-a<k1>samparigrah<k2>samparigrah
{#samparigrah#}¦ {%sam-pari-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛhṇāti, -gṛhṇīte,%} &c., to accept fully, receive;
to receive in a friendly manner; to embrace; to
accomplish, perform, complete; to take in or under-
stand thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>50729<pc>1084-a<k1>samparigfhya<k2>samparigfhya
{%Sam-parigṛhya,%}¦ ind. having accepted; having
completed, having thoroughly understood.
<LEND>

<L>50730<pc>1084-a<k1>samparicar<k2>samparicar
{#samparicar#}¦ {%sam-pari-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati,%}
{%-caritum,%} to wait upon, attend on, serve.
<LEND>

<L>50731<pc>1084-a<k1>samparicint<k2>samparicint
{#samparicint#}¦ {%sam-pari-cint,%} cl. 10. P. {%-cin-%}
{%tayati, -yitum,%} to think out, excogitate, invent.
<LEND>

<L>50732<pc>1084-a<k1>samparicintita<k2>samparicintita
{%Sam-paricintita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thought out, devised.
<LEND>

<L>50733<pc>1084-a<k1>samparituz<k2>samparituz
{#samparituz#}¦ {%sam-pari-tuṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-tuṣ-%}
{%yati, -toṣṭum,%} to feel quite satisfied or content:
Caus. {%-toṣayati, -yitum,%} to satisfy completely,
appease.
<LEND>

<L>50734<pc>1084-a<k1>samparitozita<k2>samparitozita
{%Sam-paritoṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully satisfied, quite
appeased.
<LEND>

<L>50735<pc>1084-a<k1>samparityaj<k2>samparityaj
{#samparityaj#}¦ {%sam-pari-tyaj,%} cl. 1. P. {%-tya-%}
{%jati, -tyaktum,%} to abandon completely, desert,
leave.
<LEND>

<L>50736<pc>1084-a<k1>samparityakta<k2>samparityakta
{%Sam-parityakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ abandoned, given up.
{%—Samparityakta-jīvita, as, ā, am,%} (a battle &c.)
in which life is risked.
<LEND>

<L>50737<pc>1084-a<k1>samparityajya<k2>samparityajya
{%Sam-parityajya,%}¦ ind. having completely aban-
doned, having abandoned everything.
<LEND>

<L>50738<pc>1084-a<k1>samparidah<k2>samparidah
{#samparidah#}¦ {%sam-pari-dah,%} Pass. {%-dahyate%}
(also P. {%-ti%}), to be entirely burnt or consumed by
fire, be consumed.
<LEND>

<L>50739<pc>1084-a<k1>samparipF<k2>samparipF
{#samparipF#}¦ {%sam-pari-pṝ.%} See rt. {%pṝ,%} p. 596.
<LEND>

<L>50740<pc>1084-a<k1>samparipUrRa<k2>samparipUrRa
{%Sam-paripūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ quite filled, fully
satisfied; completely accomplished, perfected. {%—Sam-%}
{%paripūrṇa-vidya, as, ā, am,%} well filled with
knowledge, perfect in knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>50741<pc>1084-a<k1>sampariplu<k2>sampariplu
{#sampariplu#}¦ {%sam-pari-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate,%}
&c., to flow quite over, overflow completely.
<LEND>

<L>50742<pc>1084-a<k1>samparipluta<k2>samparipluta
{%Sam-paripluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely overflowed,
deluged; overwhelmed (with misfortune &c.), greatly
distressed.
<LEND>

<L>50743<pc>1084-a<k1>sampariBU<k2>sampariBU
{#sampariBU#}¦ {%sam-pari-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%}
&c., to despise or contemn utterly: Pass. {%-bhūyate,%}
to be despised, &c.: Caus. {%-bhāvayati, -yitum,%} to
fix firmly, hold well together, control.
<LEND>

<L>50744<pc>1084-a<k1>sampariBraMS<k2>sampariBraMS
{#sampariBraMS#}¦ {%sam-pari-bhraṃś.%} See rt. {%bhraṃś.%}
<LEND>

<L>50745<pc>1084-a<k1>sampariBrazwa<k2>sampariBrazwa
{%Sam-paribhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen away from,
entirely deprived of (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>50746<pc>1084-a<k1>samparimud<k2>samparimud
{#samparimud#}¦ {%sam-pari-mud,%} cl. 1. A. {%-modate,%}
&c., to rejoice greatly, exult.
<LEND>

<L>50747<pc>1084-a<k1>samparirakz<k2>samparirakz
{#samparirakz#}¦ {%sam-pari-rakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-rak-%}
{%ṣati, -rakṣitum,%} to keep complete guard over,
protect, defend.
<LEND>

<L>50748<pc>1084-a<k1>sampariraB<k2>sampariraB
{#sampariraB#}¦ {%sam-pari-rabh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rabhate,%}
&c., to take well hold of; to clasp or embrace mutually.
<LEND>

<L>50749<pc>1084-a<k1>sampariraBya<k2>sampariraBya
{%Sam-parirabhya,%}¦ ind. having mutually embraced.
<LEND>

<L>50750<pc>1084-a<k1>samparivf<k2>samparivf
{#samparivf#}¦ {%sam-pari-vṛ,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-vṛṇoti,%}
{%vṛṇute,%} &c., to surround completely, encompass,
encircle: Caus. {%-vārayati,%} &c., to surround.
<LEND>

<L>50751<pc>1084-a<k1>samparivArita<k2>samparivArita
{%Sam-parivārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely surrounded
or encompassed.
<LEND>

<L>50752<pc>1084-a<k1>samparivArya<k2>samparivArya
{%Sam-parivārya,%}¦ ind. having encircled or encom-
passed.
<LEND>

<L>50753<pc>1084-a<k1>samparivfta<k2>samparivfta
{%Sam-parivṛta, as, ā, am%}¦ (Ved. also {%sam-parī-%}
{%vṛta%}), completely surrounded.
<LEND>
[Page1084-b+ 69]

<L>50754<pc>1084-b<k1>samparivfj<k2>samparivfj
{#samparivfj#}¦ {%sam-pari-vṛj,%} Caus. {%-varjayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to shun or avoid utterly, forsake, abandon.
<LEND>

<L>50755<pc>1084-b<k1>samparivft<k2>samparivft
{#samparivft#}¦ {%sam-pari-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
&c., to turn completely round, roll round, revolve;
to exist; to turn back, return; to turn back from,
desist from (with abl.): Caus. {%-vartayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to turn round, lead round, lead about.
<LEND>

<L>50756<pc>1084-b<k1>samparivartya<k2>samparivartya
{%Sam-parivartya,%}¦ ind. having made to turn round,
having led round.
<LEND>

<L>50757<pc>1084-b<k1>sampariSozaRa<k2>sampariSozaRa
{#sampariSozaRa#}¦ {%sam-pariśoṣaṇa, am,%} n. (fr.
rt. {%śuṣ%} with {%pari%} and {%sam%}), becoming completely
dried up, withering up, emaciation.
<LEND>

<L>50758<pc>1084-b<k1>samparizvaYj<k2>samparizvaYj
{#samparizvaYj#}¦ {%sam-pari-ṣvañj.%} See rt. {%svañj.%}
<LEND>

<L>50759<pc>1084-b<k1>samparizvakta<k2>samparizvakta
{%Sam-pariṣvakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ mutually embraced,
closely embraced.
<LEND>

<L>50760<pc>1084-b<k1>samparizvajya<k2>samparizvajya
{%Sam-pariṣvajya,%}¦ ind. having mutually embraced.
<LEND>

<L>50761<pc>1084-b<k1>samparihfz<k2>samparihfz
{#samparihfz#}¦ {%sam-pari-hṛṣ,%} Caus. {%-harṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to make completely happy, delight.
<LEND>

<L>50762<pc>1084-b<k1>sampare<k2>sampare
{#sampare#}¦ {%sam-pare (-parā-i,%} see rt. 5. {%i%}), cl.
2. P. {%-paraiti,%} &c., to come together (in conflict);
to go away, go beyond (especially to another world
or future state).
<LEND>

<L>50763<pc>1084-b<k1>samparAya<k2>samparAya
{%Sam-parāya, as,%}¦ m. meeting together in strife
or encounter, conflict, contention, war, battle;
calamity, adversity; the other world, a future state,
futurity, future time; a son.
<LEND>

<L>50764<pc>1084-b<k1>samparAyaka<k2>samparAyaka
{%Samparāyaka, am,%}¦ n. conflict, encounter, war,
battle.
<LEND>

<L>50765<pc>1084-b<k1>samparAyika<k2>samparAyika
{%Samparāyika, am,%}¦ n. {%= samparāyaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>50766<pc>1084-b<k1>samparka<k2>samparka
{#samparka#}¦ {%sam-parka.%} See under {%sam-pṛc.%}
<LEND>

<L>50767<pc>1084-b<k1>samparyAp<k2>samparyAp
{#samparyAp#}¦ {%sam-pary-āp (-pari-āp),%} cl. 5. P.
{%-āpnoti,%} &c., Ved. to take hold of together.
<LEND>

<L>50768<pc>1084-b<k1>samparyApya<k2>samparyApya
{%Sam-paryāpya,%}¦ ind. having taken hold of simul-
taneously.
<LEND>

<L>50769<pc>1084-b<k1>sampalAy<k2>sampalAy
{#sampalAy#}¦ {%sam-palāy%} (fr. rt. {%ay%} = rt. 5. {%i%}
with {%palā%} for {%parā%} and {%sam%}), cl. 1. A. {%-palāyate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to run away together, escape.
<LEND>

<L>50770<pc>1084-b<k1>sampaSyamAna<k2>sampaSyamAna
{#sampaSyamAna#}¦ {%sam-paśyamāna.%} See under
1. {%san-dṛś,%} p. 1059, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>50771<pc>1084-b<k1>sampA<k2>sampA
{#sampA#}¦ {%sam-pā,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-pibati, -te,%} &c.
(see rt. 1. {%pā%}), to drink together: Caus. {%-pāyayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to drink together, make to drink.
<LEND>

<L>50772<pc>1084-b<k1>sampAya<k2>sampAya
{%Sam-pāya,%}¦ ind. having drunk together.
<LEND>

<L>50773<pc>1084-b<k1>sampIti<k2>sampIti
{%Sam-pīti, is,%}¦ f. drinking in company, compo-
tation.
<LEND>

<L>50774<pc>1084-b<k1>sampAka<k2>sampAka
{#sampAka#}¦ {%sam-pāka.%} See {%sam-pac,%} p. 1083.
<LEND>

<L>50775<pc>1084-b<k1>sampAwa<k2>sampAwa
{#sampAwa#}¦ {%sam-pāṭa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%paṭ%} with
{%sam%}), a spindle; the intersection of the prolonged
side of a triangle by a perpendicular.
<LEND>

<L>50776<pc>1084-b<k1>sampAta<k2>sampAta
{#sampAta#}¦ {%sam-pāta, sam-pāti.%} See {%sam-pat.%}
<LEND>

<L>50777<pc>1084-b<k1>sampAda<k2>sampAda
{#sampAda#}¦ {%sam-pāda, sam-pādana,%} &c. See
p. 1083, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>50778<pc>1084-b<k1>sampAra<k2>sampAra
{#sampAra#}¦ {%sampāra, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>50779<pc>1084-b<k1>sampAraRa<k2>sampAraRa
{#sampAraRa#}¦ {%sam-pāraṇa.%} See {%sam-pṝ,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>50780<pc>1084-b<k1>sampiRq<k2>sampiRq
{#sampiRq#}¦ {%sam-piṇḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-piṇḍayati,%} &c.,
to heap together; to clench.
<LEND>

<L>50781<pc>1084-b<k1>sampiRqita<k2>sampiRqita
{%Sam-piṇḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ heaped together; con-
tracted. {%—Sampiṇḍitāṅguli (˚ta-aṅ˚), is, is, i,%}
having the fingers clenched or closed.
<LEND>

<L>50782<pc>1084-b<k1>sampiz<k2>sampiz
{#sampiz#}¦ {%sam-piṣ,%} cl. 7. P. {%-pinaṣṭi%} (Impf.
{%sam-apinaṭ,%} Ved. {%sam-piṇak%}), {%-peṣṭum,%} to grind
or rub together, pound or crush to pieces, bruise,
crush (Soma &c.); to shatter, destroy, kill.
<LEND>

<L>50783<pc>1084-b<k1>sampizwa<k2>sampizwa
{%Sam-piṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ crushed or broken to
pieces, pounded, bruised, shattered, destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>50784<pc>1084-b<k1>sampezaRa<k2>sampezaRa
{%Sam-peṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of grinding toge-
ther, pounding.
<LEND>

<L>50785<pc>1084-b<k1>sampIq<k2>sampIq
{#sampIq#}¦ {%sam-pīḍ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pīḍayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to compress, press or squeeze together, oppress,
[Page1084-c+ 75]
press, force; to pinch, pain, torture, vex, harass.
disturb; to obscure, eclipse; to reckon up, calculate
together, compute, sum up.
<LEND>

<L>50786<pc>1084-c<k1>sampIqa<k2>sampIqa
{%Sam-pīḍa, as,%}¦ m. pressing or squeezing together,
pain, torture; harassing, agitating, disturbing; send-
ing, directing; ({%ā%}), f. torment.
<LEND>

<L>50787<pc>1084-c<k1>sampIqana<k2>sampIqana
{%Sam-pīḍana, am,%}¦ n. compression, pressing toge-
ther, squeezing; pinching, paining, castigation, punish-
ment; stirring together, agitating; sending.
<LEND>

<L>50788<pc>1084-c<k1>sampIqayat<k2>sampIqayat
{%Sam-pīḍayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ compressing; squeez-
ing, tormenting, paining.
<LEND>

<L>50789<pc>1084-c<k1>sampIqita<k2>sampIqita
{%Sam-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressed together, squeezed;
pained, tortured, punished; agitated; sent.
<LEND>

<L>50790<pc>1084-c<k1>sampIqya<k2>sampIqya
{%Sam-pīḍya,%}¦ ind. having pressed together, having
tormented; having restrained.
<LEND>

<L>50791<pc>1084-c<k1>sampIti<k2>sampIti
{#sampIti#}¦ {%sam-pīti.%} See under {%sam-pā.%}
<LEND>

<L>50792<pc>1084-c<k1>sampuwa<k2>sampuwa
{#sampuwa#}¦ {%sam-puṭa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%puṭ%} with
{%sam%}), a covered box, casket; the Kuruvaka flower.
<LEND>

<L>50793<pc>1084-c<k1>sampuwaka<k2>sampuwaka
{%Sampuṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a box, casket; ({%ikā%}), f. a
box filled with ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>50794<pc>1084-c<k1>sampuz<k2>sampuz
{#sampuz#}¦ {%sam-puṣ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-puṣṇāti, -po-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to become thoroughly nourished, increase,
grow.
<LEND>

<L>50795<pc>1084-c<k1>sampozya<k2>sampozya
{%Sam-poṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be well nourished or
supported.
<LEND>

<L>50796<pc>1084-c<k1>sampU<k2>sampU
{#sampU#}¦ {%sam-pū,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-punāti, -punīte,%}
&c., to cleanse thoroughly, purify: Caus. {%-pāvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to make clean, cleanse, purify.
<LEND>

<L>50797<pc>1084-c<k1>sampUya<k2>sampUya
{%Sam-pūya,%}¦ ind. having cleansed, having purified.
<LEND>

<L>50798<pc>1084-c<k1>sampUj<k2>sampUj
{#sampUj#}¦ {%sam-pūj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pūjayati, -yitum,%}
to honour greatly, esteem or value highly.
<LEND>

<L>50799<pc>1084-c<k1>sampUjana<k2>sampUjana
{%Sam-pūjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of treating with great
respect, honouring, reverence, esteem.
<LEND>

<L>50800<pc>1084-c<k1>sampUjanIya<k2>sampUjanIya
{%Sam-pūjanīya%}¦ or {%sam-pūjayitavya, as, ā, am,%}
to be highly honoured or valued; to be respected.
<LEND>

<L>50801<pc>1084-c<k1>sampUjita<k2>sampUjita
{%Sam-pūjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly honoured, highly
respected or valued, revered.
<LEND>

<L>50802<pc>1084-c<k1>sampUjya<k2>sampUjya<h>1
1. {%sam-pūjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50803<pc>1084-c<k1>sampUjya<k2>sampUjya<h>2
2. {%sam-pūjya,%}¦ ind. having honoured, honouring,
worshipping, paying respect to.
<LEND>

<L>50804<pc>1084-c<k1>sampf<k2>sampf
{#sampf#}¦ {%sam-pṛ,%} Caus. {%-pārayati, -yitum,%}
Ved. to bring over to the further side, bring to an
end, accomplish, perform.
<LEND>

<L>50805<pc>1084-c<k1>sampfc<k2>sampfc
{#sampfc#}¦ {%sam-pṛc,%} cl. 7. P. {%-pṛṇakti%} (also
apparently cl. 3. in some Vedic forms, e. g. {%sam-%}
{%pipṛgdhi, -pipṛkta,%} &c.), cl. 2. A. {%-pṛkte%} or
{%-pṛṅkte,%} &c. (see rt. 1. {%pṛc%}), to mix together,
commingle, bring into contact, connect, unite; to
be mixed together, be united, be in contact, be
connected (A.); to fill up, fill, complete; to fill or
satiate with, present with; to be filled or satiated
with, be presented with (A.).
<LEND>

<L>50806<pc>1084-c<k1>samparka<k2>samparka
{%Sam-parka, as,%}¦ m. mixing together, mixture,
commingling, conjunction, union; contact, touch;
bodily contact, sexual union or connection.
<LEND>

<L>50807<pc>1084-c<k1>samparkin<k2>samparkin
{%Samparkin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ blended together, mixed;
united with, connected; in contact with, touching.
<LEND>

<L>50808<pc>1084-c<k1>samparkIya<k2>samparkIya
{%Samparkīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to contact or
connection; liable to come in contact.
<LEND>

<L>50809<pc>1084-c<k1>sampfkta<k2>sampfkta
{%Sam-pṛkta, as, ā, am,%}¦ mixed together, blended,
combined, conjoined, united, connected, related; in
contact with, touching, in close contact; interspersed,
inlaid.
<LEND>

<L>50810<pc>1084-c<k1>sampfYcAna<k2>sampfYcAna
{%Sam-pṛñcāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being mixed or
mingled with, associated with.
<LEND>

<L>50811<pc>1084-c<k1>sampF<k2>sampF
{#sampF#}¦ {%sam-pṝ,%} Pass. {%-pūryate,%} to be com-
pletely filled, become quite full: Caus. {%-pārayati,%}
{%pūrayati, -yitum,%} to make quite full, complete;
to fill with.
<LEND>

<L>50812<pc>1084-c<k1>sampAraRa<k2>sampAraRa
{%Sam-pāraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ Ved. (equally referrible
to {%sam-pṛ%} above), completing, filling, adequate,
(Sāy. {%= icchāyāḥ samyak pūraka,%} Ṛg-veda III.
45, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>50813<pc>1084-c<k1>sampUrayat<k2>sampUrayat
{%Sam-pūrayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to be full,
filling.
<LEND>
[Page1085-a+ 72]

<L>50814<pc>1085-a<k1>sampUrita<k2>sampUrita
{%Sam-pūrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ filled quite full, filled with.
<LEND>

<L>50815<pc>1085-a<k1>sampUrRa<k2>sampUrRa
{%Sam-pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely filled or full,
replete; full (as the moon); complete, finished;
whole, entire; ({%as%}), m. any mode of music in which
all the notes of the gamut are employed; ({%ā%}), f.
a particular {%ekādaśī,%} q. v.; ({%am%}), n. ether, the
etherial element or atmosphere. {%—Sampūrṇa-kāma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} filled with desire. {%—Sampūrṇa-tara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} more filled, very full. {%—Sampūrṇa-tā,%}
f. or {%sampūrṇa-tva, am,%} n. complete fulness, per-
fection, completeness. {%—Sampūrṇa-vidya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} replete with knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>50816<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakamp<k2>samprakamp
{#samprakamp#}¦ {%sam-pra-kamp,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kam-%}
{%pate, -kampitum,%} to tremble violently, shiver,
quake: Caus. {%-kampayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
tremble.
<LEND>

<L>50817<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakAS<k2>samprakAS
{#samprakAS#}¦ {%sam-pra-kāś,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kāśate,%}
&c., to become manifest, be visible, appear; to
shine, glitter: Caus. {%-kāśayati, -yitum,%} to illumi-
nate, make manifest, display, discover, disclose.
<LEND>

<L>50818<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakASita<k2>samprakASita
{%Sam-prakāśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made manifest, dis-
played, discovered.
<LEND>

<L>50819<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakf<k2>samprakf
{#samprakf#}¦ {%sam-pra-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti,%}
{%-kurute, -kartum,%} to perform, practise, do; to effect,
render, cause anything to become (with two acc.).
<LEND>

<L>50820<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakfz<k2>samprakfz
{#samprakfz#}¦ {%sam-pra-kṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-karṣati,%}
&c., to drag along with, carry off, tear away.
<LEND>

<L>50821<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakF<k2>samprakF
{#samprakF#}¦ {%sam-pra-kṝ,%} See rt. 1. {%kṝ.%}
<LEND>

<L>50822<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakIrRa<k2>samprakIrRa
{%Sam-prakīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly mixed or
mingled.
<LEND>

<L>50823<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakFt<k2>samprakFt
{#samprakFt#}¦ {%sam-pra-kṝt,%} cl. 10. P. {%-kīrtayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to mention fully, enumerate; to declare or
designate as, call, name, pronounce.
<LEND>

<L>50824<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakIrtita<k2>samprakIrtita
{%Sam-prakīrtita, as, ā, am,%}¦ mentioned fully, enu-
merated; called, named, designated.
<LEND>

<L>50825<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakxp<k2>samprakxp
{#samprakxp#}¦ {%sam-pra-kḷp,%} Caus. {%-kalpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to arrange or dispose properly, ordain,
regulate, appoint, fix, settle.
<LEND>

<L>50826<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakalpita<k2>samprakalpita
{%Sam-prakalpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly arranged
or prepared, disposed, ordained, appointed, fixed.
<LEND>

<L>50827<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakxpta<k2>samprakxpta
{%Sam-prakḷpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well prepared or
arranged; well provided or furnished with.
<LEND>

<L>50828<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakram<k2>samprakram
{#samprakram#}¦ {%sam-pra-kram,%} cl. 1. A. {%-kramate,%}
{%-kramitum,%} to proceed to do or set about anything,
to begin (with inf.).
<LEND>

<L>50829<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakzAlana<k2>samprakzAlana
{#samprakzAlana#}¦ {%sam-prakṣālana, am,%} n. the
act of washing entirely away, complete ablution, puri-
fication by water; bathing; inundation.
<LEND>

<L>50830<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakzip<k2>samprakzip
{#samprakzip#}¦ {%sam-pra-kṣip,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-kṣi-%}
{%pati, -te, -kṣeptum,%} to throw or hurl at, cast.
<LEND>

<L>50831<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakzuB<k2>samprakzuB
{#samprakzuB#}¦ {%sam-pra-kṣubh,%} cl. 1. A., 4. P.
{%-kṣobhate, -kṣubhyati,%} &c., to be greatly shaken
or tossed about or agitated; to become confused.
<LEND>

<L>50832<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakzuBita<k2>samprakzuBita
{%Sam-prakṣubhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly shaken
or tossed about. {%—Samprakṣubhita-mānasa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} agitated or confused in mind.
<LEND>

<L>50833<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakzE<k2>samprakzE
{#samprakzE#}¦ {%sam-pra-kṣai,%} Caus. {%-kṣāpayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} Ved. to cause to die away or be destroyed,
extinguish.
<LEND>

<L>50834<pc>1085-a<k1>samprakzApya<k2>samprakzApya
{%Sam-prakṣāpya,%}¦ ind. having extinguished.
<LEND>

<L>50835<pc>1085-a<k1>sampragAh<k2>sampragAh
{#sampragAh#}¦ {%sam-pra-gāh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-gāhate,%}
&c., to dive into, plunge into, enter.
<LEND>

<L>50836<pc>1085-a<k1>sampragF<k2>sampragF
{#sampragF#}¦ {%sam-pra-gṝ,%} cl. 9. P. {%-gṛṇāti,%} &c.,
to recite or celebrate together.
<LEND>

<L>50837<pc>1085-a<k1>sampragIrya<k2>sampragIrya
{%Sam-pragīrya,%}¦ ind. having recited together.
<LEND>

<L>50838<pc>1085-a<k1>sampragE<k2>sampragE
{#sampragE#}¦ {%sam-pra-gai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gāyati, -gā-%}
{%tum,%} to sing forth, chant, intone, sing; to begin to
sing.
<LEND>

<L>50839<pc>1085-a<k1>sampragrah<k2>sampragrah
{#sampragrah#}¦ {%sam-pra-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-gṛh-%}
{%ṇāti, -gṛhṇīte,%} &c., to hold forth together, stretch
forth (Ved.); to seize or take hold of together; to
take hold of; to accept or receive well or kindly.
<LEND>
[Page1085-b+ 71]

<L>50840<pc>1085-b<k1>sampragfhya<k2>sampragfhya
{%Sam-pragṛhya,%}¦ ind. having laid hold of or seized.
<LEND>

<L>50841<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraGfz<k2>sampraGfz
{#sampraGfz#}¦ {%sam-pra-ghṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-ghar-%}
{%ṣati,%} &c., to rub well into or on.
<LEND>

<L>50842<pc>1085-b<k1>sampracakz<k2>sampracakz
{#sampracakz#}¦ {%sam-pra-cakṣ,%} cl. 2. A. {%-caṣṭe,%}
{%-caṣṭum,%} to explain or expound particularly; to
suppose, assume.
<LEND>

<L>50843<pc>1085-b<k1>sampracar<k2>sampracar
{#sampracar#}¦ {%sam-pra-car,%} cl. 1. P. {%-carati,%}
{%-caritum,%} to come forth, advance, begin to move;
to go on, be carried on, take place.
<LEND>

<L>50844<pc>1085-b<k1>sampracarat<k2>sampracarat
{%Sam-pracarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ advancing, going on.
<LEND>

<L>50845<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraci<k2>sampraci
{#sampraci#}¦ {%sam-pra-ci,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%-cinoti,%}
{%-cinute,%} &c., to gather or collect completely.
<LEND>

<L>50846<pc>1085-b<k1>sampracud<k2>sampracud
{#sampracud#}¦ {%sam-pra-cud,%} Caus. {%-codayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} to urge on or impel quickly, set in rapid
motion, push on, incite, drive on; to promote,
encourage; to require.
<LEND>

<L>50847<pc>1085-b<k1>sampracodita<k2>sampracodita
{%Sam-pracodita, as, ā, am,%}¦ urged on, impelled,
incited.
<LEND>

<L>50848<pc>1085-b<k1>sampracCid<k2>sampracCid
{#sampracCid#}¦ {%sam-pra-cchid (-chid),%} cl. 7. P.
A. {%-cchinatti, -cchintte,%} &c., to cut to pieces, cut
through, split to pieces, shatter.
<LEND>

<L>50849<pc>1085-b<k1>sampracyu<k2>sampracyu
{#sampracyu#}¦ {%sam-pra-cyu,%} Caus. {%-cyāvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to proceed or come forth from
different directions; to bring together.
<LEND>

<L>50850<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraC<k2>sampraC
{#sampraC#}¦ {%sam-prach,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-pṛcchati,%}
{%pṛcchate, -praṣṭum,%} to ask fully, inquire about
(with two acc.); to make inquiries, consult about
(A.); to salute, greet (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>50851<pc>1085-b<k1>sampfzwa<k2>sampfzwa
{%Sam-pṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ asked or inquired about.
<LEND>

<L>50852<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraSna<k2>sampraSna
{%Sam-praśna, as,%}¦ m. asking or inquiring about,
full inquiry; courteous inquiry; any question or
inquiry; a refuge, asylum (Ved., Sāy. {%= parame-%}
{%śvara%}).
<LEND>

<L>50853<pc>1085-b<k1>samprajan<k2>samprajan
{#samprajan#}¦ {%sam-pra-jan,%} cl. 4. A. {%-jāyate,%} &c.,
to be produced, spring up, arise, come into existence;
to exist, be; to be born again.
<LEND>

<L>50854<pc>1085-b<k1>samprajAta<k2>samprajAta
{%Sam-prajāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced, arisen; ({%ā%}),
f. a cow which has calved; [cf. {%pra-jātā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>50855<pc>1085-b<k1>samprajYA<k2>samprajYA
{#samprajYA#}¦ {%sam-pra-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jānāti,%}
{%jānīte,%} &c., to distinguish, discern, recognise, know
accurately or perfectly.
<LEND>

<L>50856<pc>1085-b<k1>samprajYAta<k2>samprajYAta
{%Sam-prajñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ distinguished, dis-
cerned; known accurately.
<LEND>

<L>50857<pc>1085-b<k1>samprajval<k2>samprajval
{#samprajval#}¦ {%sam-pra-jval,%} cl. 1. P. {%-jvalati,%}
&c., to flame or blaze up, catch fire, burn: Caus.
{%-jvālayati, -yitum,%} to light up, kindle, ignite.
<LEND>

<L>50858<pc>1085-b<k1>samprajvalat<k2>samprajvalat
{%Sam-prajvalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flaming up, burning.
<LEND>

<L>50859<pc>1085-b<k1>samprajvalita<k2>samprajvalita
{%Sam-prajvalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ lighted, kindled.
<LEND>

<L>50860<pc>1085-b<k1>samprajvAlya<k2>samprajvAlya
{%Sam-prajvālya,%}¦ ind. having lighted or kindled.
<LEND>

<L>50861<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraRad<k2>sampraRad
{#sampraRad#}¦ {%sam-pra-ṇad (-nad),%} cl. 1. P. {%-ṇa-%}
{%dati,%} &c., to cry out, cry: Caus. {%-ṇādayati, -yitum,%}
to cause to resound, fill with clamour or noise.
<LEND>

<L>50862<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraRAdita<k2>sampraRAdita
{%Sam-praṇādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to resound.
<LEND>

<L>50863<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraRam<k2>sampraRam
{#sampraRam#}¦ {%sam-pra-ṇam (-nam),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-ṇamati, -ṇantum,%} to bow down or bend one's
self before (with acc.).
<LEND>

<L>50864<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraRamya<k2>sampraRamya
{%Sam-praṇamya,%}¦ ind. having bowed down before.
<LEND>

<L>50865<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraRard<k2>sampraRard
{#sampraRard#}¦ {%sam-pra-ṇard (-nard).%} See rt.
{%nard.%}
<LEND>

<L>50866<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraRardita<k2>sampraRardita
{%Sam-praṇardita, as, ā, am,%}¦ roared out, bel-
lowed.
<LEND>

<L>50867<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraRaS<k2>sampraRaS
{#sampraRaS#}¦ {%sam-pra-ṇaś (-naś),%} cl. 4. P.
{%-ṇaśyati,%} &c., to be entirely lost, vanish; to dis-
appear.
<LEND>

<L>50868<pc>1085-b<k1>sampranazwa<k2>sampranazwa
{%Sam-pranaṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ (incorrectly {%sam-%}
{%praṇaṣṭa%}), entirely vanished, disappeared.
<LEND>

<L>50869<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraRiDA<k2>sampraRiDA
{#sampraRiDA#}¦ {%sam-pra-ṇi-dhā (-ni-dhā),%} cl. 3.
P. A. {%-dadhāti, -dhatte, -dhātum,%} to put down on
one side, leave behind, leave unnoticed, disregard.
<LEND>

<L>50870<pc>1085-b<k1>sampraRiDAya<k2>sampraRiDAya
{%Sam-praṇidhāya,%}¦ ind. having put aside, having
disregarded.
<LEND>
[Page1085-c+ 75]

<L>50871<pc>1085-c<k1>sampraRI<k2>sampraRI
{#sampraRI#}¦ {%sam-pra-ṇī (-nī),%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%-ṇayati, -te, -ṇetum,%} to bring together, collect,
raise (taxes &c.); to put together, compose; (with
{%daṇḍam%}) to apply the rod, inflict punishment,
administer chastisement.
<LEND>

<L>50872<pc>1085-c<k1>sampraRIta<k2>sampraRIta
{%Sam-praṇīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought together,
brought, conveyed; composed (as poetry &c.), in-
flicted (as punishment).
<LEND>

<L>50873<pc>1085-c<k1>sampraRetf<k2>sampraRetf
{%Sam-praṇetṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who guides or leads,
guiding, leading, &c.; ({%tā%}), m. a ruler, judge.
<LEND>

<L>50874<pc>1085-c<k1>sampraRud<k2>sampraRud
{#sampraRud#}¦ {%sam-pra-ṇud (-nud),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-ṇudati, -te, -ṇottum,%} to drive or press forward,
urge on, to drive away from, remove or move away
from (with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>50875<pc>1085-c<k1>sampraRudita<k2>sampraRudita
{%Sam-praṇudita, as, ā, am,%}¦ driven or urged on.
<LEND>

<L>50876<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratap<k2>sampratap
{#sampratap#}¦ {%sam-pra-tap.%} See rt. 2. {%tap.%}
<LEND>

<L>50877<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratapta<k2>sampratapta
{%Sam-pratapta, as, ā, am,%}¦ excessively heated;
greatly pained, tortured; suffering pain.
<LEND>

<L>50878<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratApana<k2>sampratApana
{%Sam-pratāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of heating or
burning; inflicting great pain or torture, afflicting;
N. of one of the twenty-one hells, (Manu IV. 89.)
<LEND>

<L>50879<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratark<k2>sampratark
{#sampratark#}¦ {%sam-pra-tark,%} cl. 10. P. {%-tarka-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to form a clear conclusion or conjec-
ture; to consider as, think, regard.
<LEND>

<L>50880<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratarkya<k2>sampratarkya
{%Sam-pratarkya,%}¦ ind. having considered or re-
garded.
<LEND>

<L>50881<pc>1085-c<k1>samprati<k2>samprati<h>1
{#samprati#} 1¦. {%sam-prati,%} ind. now, at this
time, at present.
<LEND>

<L>50882<pc>1085-c<k1>samprati<k2>samprati<h>2
{#samprati#} 2¦. {%sam-prati, is,%} m., N. of a par-
ticular Arhat of the past Utsarpiṇī.
<LEND>

<L>50883<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratigrah<k2>sampratigrah
{#sampratigrah#}¦ {%sam-prati-grah,%} cl. 9. P. A.
{%-gṛhṇāti, -gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} to receive hos-
pitably, treat kindly, welcome.
<LEND>

<L>50884<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratijYA<k2>sampratijYA
{#sampratijYA#}¦ {%sam-prati-jñā,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%-jā-%}
{%nāti, -jānīte, -jñātum,%} to recognise fully, assent to,
promise.
<LEND>

<L>50885<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratijYAta<k2>sampratijYAta
{%Sam-pratijñāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully recognised or
assented to, promised.
<LEND>

<L>50886<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratinand<k2>sampratinand
{#sampratinand#}¦ {%sam-prati-nand,%} cl. 1. P. {%-nan-%}
{%dati,%} &c., to greet or welcome gladly.
<LEND>

<L>50887<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratinandita<k2>sampratinandita
{%Sam-pratinandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greeted joyfully,
welcomed.
<LEND>

<L>50888<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratipad<k2>sampratipad
{#sampratipad#}¦ {%sam-prati-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-pad-%}
{%yate, -pattum,%} to go towards together; to go near
to, approach, arrive at (with acc.); to addict one's
self to; to attain to, reach; obtain, receive; to
receive back, recover; to come to pass, arise; to be
fully agreed about, agree upon, assent to; to consider
as, regard; to bring about, perform, accomplish:
Caus. {%-pādayati, -yitum,%} to cause to go towards or
come to, cause to receive, bestow, grant, give over to.
<LEND>

<L>50889<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratipatti<k2>sampratipatti
{%Sam-pratipatti, is,%}¦ f. approach, arrival, presence,
attaining to, obtaining, acquirement, gain; going
against, assault; arising, occurring; agreement, con-
currence, acknowledgment, admission, confession,
assent, affirmation; co-operation; bringing about,
performing, effecting; (in law) a particular kind of
reply or defence, confession or admission of a fact
[cf. {%praty-avaskanda%}]; ({%is, is, i%}), agreed toge-
ther, consentient.
<LEND>

<L>50890<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratipadya<k2>sampratipadya
{%Sam-pratipadya,%}¦ ind. having gone towards or
approached, having attained to.
<LEND>

<L>50891<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratipanna<k2>sampratipanna
{%Sam-pratipanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone near, come
up to, approached, attained, reached, gained, arrived;
agreed, concurred; recognised, acknowledged, assented
to; brought about, performed.
<LEND>

<L>50892<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratipAdana<k2>sampratipAdana
{%Sam-pratipādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to
receive, delivering or giving over to, granting.
<LEND>

<L>50893<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratipAdita<k2>sampratipAdita
{%Sam-pratipādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ delivered over,
bestowed, given.
<LEND>

<L>50894<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratipUj<k2>sampratipUj
{#sampratipUj#}¦ {%sam-prati-pūj,%} cl. 10. P. {%-pūja-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to honour greatly, revere, respect.
<LEND>

<L>50895<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratipUjita<k2>sampratipUjita
{%Sam-pratipūjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly honoured,
much respected.
<LEND>

<L>50896<pc>1085-c<k1>sampratipUjya<k2>sampratipUjya
{%Sam-pratipūjya,%}¦ ind. having honoured greatly.
<LEND>
[Page1086-a+ 71]

<L>50897<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratibuD<k2>sampratibuD
{#sampratibuD#}¦ {%sam-prati-budh,%} Caus. {%-bodha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to rouse up or awaken thoroughly.
<LEND>

<L>50898<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratiBA<k2>sampratiBA
{#sampratiBA#}¦ {%sam-prati-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti,%}
&c., to shine out fully, be conspicuous, appear, seem;
to appear clearly, be fully understood.
<LEND>

<L>50899<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratiBAz<k2>sampratiBAz
{#sampratiBAz#}¦ {%sam-prati-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhā-%}
{%ṣate, -bhāṣitum,%} to speak to in return, answer.
<LEND>

<L>50900<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratimuc<k2>sampratimuc
{#sampratimuc#}¦ {%sam-prati-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-muñcati, -te,%} &c., to bind firmly, fetter, bind.
<LEND>

<L>50901<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratimukta<k2>sampratimukta
{%Sam-pratimukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ firmly or completely
bound, fastened, bound; [cf. {%prati-mukta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>50902<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratiroDaka<k2>sampratiroDaka
{#sampratiroDaka#}¦ {%sam-pratirodhaka, am,%} n. (fr.
rt. 2. {%rudh%} with {%prati%} and {%sam%}), complete restraint,
confinement, imprisonment, obstruction.
<LEND>

<L>50903<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratilakz<k2>sampratilakz
{#sampratilakz#}¦ {%sam-prati-lakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. A.
{%-lakṣayati, -te,%} to perceive fully, see clearly: Pass.
{%-lakṣyate,%} to be seen clearly.
<LEND>

<L>50904<pc>1086-a<k1>samprativid<k2>samprativid
{#samprativid#}¦ {%sam-prati-vid,%} Caus. {%-vedayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to be fully known, publish, pro-
claim, announce, report, tell, relate.
<LEND>

<L>50905<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratiSru<k2>sampratiSru
{#sampratiSru#}¦ {%sam-prati-śru,%} cl. 5. P. {%-śṛṇoti,%}
&c., to hear fully, listen attentively to, assent, promise:
Caus. {%-śrāvayati, -yitum,%} to make to promise or
repeat a promise, remind of a promise.
<LEND>

<L>50906<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratiSrAvya<k2>sampratiSrAvya
{%Sam-pratiśrāvya,%}¦ ind. having reminded of a
promise.
<LEND>

<L>50907<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratiSrutya<k2>sampratiSrutya
{%Sam-pratiśrutya,%}¦ ind. having promised or as-
sented, having agreed.
<LEND>

<L>50908<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratizWA<k2>sampratizWA
{#sampratizWA#}¦ {%sam-prati-ṣṭhā (-sthā),%} cl. 1. P.
A. {%-tiṣṭhati, -te, -ṣṭhātum,%} to stand firmly on (with
loc.), rest on.
<LEND>

<L>50909<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratizWita<k2>sampratizWita
{%Sam-pratiṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing firmly on,
resting, on, depending on; established, fixed, settled.
<LEND>

<L>50910<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratI<k2>sampratI
{#sampratI#}¦ {%sam-pratī (-prati-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-pra-%}
{%tyeti,%} &c., to go towards, arrive at, come to a firm
conviction, believe firmly in, trust in.
<LEND>

<L>50911<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratIta<k2>sampratIta
{%Sam-pratīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ come back again, re-
turned; firmly believed or believing; fully convinced;
proved, approved, admitted, thoroughly ascertained,
well known, renowned; respectful, compliant.
<LEND>

<L>50912<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratIti<k2>sampratIti
{%Sam-pratīti, is,%}¦ f. complete belief or trust, full
knowledge or ascertainment, notoriety, fame; respect,
compliance.
<LEND>

<L>50913<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratyaya<k2>sampratyaya
{%Sam-pratyaya, as,%}¦ m. firm conviction, perfect
faith or belief, entire conviction or trust; agreement,
appointment; [cf. {%yathā-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>50914<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratIkz<k2>sampratIkz
{#sampratIkz#}¦ {%sam-pratīkṣ (-prati-īkṣ),%} cl. 1.
A. {%-pratīkṣate,%} &c., to look out for, wait for,
await, expect.
<LEND>

<L>50915<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratIkzA<k2>sampratIkzA
{%Sam-pratīkṣā,%}¦ f. looking out for, waiting for,
expecting, awaiting.
<LEND>

<L>50916<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratIkzya<k2>sampratIkzya
{%Sam-pratīkṣya,%}¦ ind. having waited for, expecting.
<LEND>

<L>50917<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratIz<k2>sampratIz
{#sampratIz#}¦ {%sam-pratīṣ (-prati-iṣ),%} cl. 6. P.
{%-pratīcchati,%} &c., to wish together with, assent to,
agree, promise.
<LEND>

<L>50918<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratuz<k2>sampratuz
{#sampratuz#}¦ {%sam-pra-tuṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-tuṣyati,%}
&c., to be or become quite satisfied, be contented.
<LEND>

<L>50919<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratti<k2>sampratti
{#sampratti#}¦ {%sam-pratti.%} See under {%sam-pra-%}
{%dā.%}
<LEND>

<L>50920<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratyaya<k2>sampratyaya
{#sampratyaya#}¦ {%sam-pratyaya.%} See {%sam-pratī.%}
<LEND>

<L>50921<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratyAgam<k2>sampratyAgam
{#sampratyAgam#}¦ {%sam-praty-ā-gam (-prati-ā-),%}
cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%} to come back to,
return.
<LEND>

<L>50922<pc>1086-a<k1>sampratyAgata<k2>sampratyAgata
{%Sam-pratyāgata, as, ā, am,%}¦ come back, returned.
<LEND>

<L>50923<pc>1086-a<k1>sampradah<k2>sampradah
{#sampradah#}¦ {%sam-pra-dah,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dahati,%}
{%-dagdhum,%} to burn quite up, consume, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>50924<pc>1086-a<k1>sampradA<k2>sampradA
{#sampradA#}¦ {%sam-pra-dā,%} cl. 3. P. A. {%-dadāti,%}
{%-datte, -dātum,%} to give completely up or deliver
wholly over to (any one); to give, impart, grant;
to bequeath, transmit, hand down by tradition; to
give in marriage: Caus. {%-dāpayati, -yitum,%} to
[Page1086-b+ 76]
cause to give over or transmit: Desid. {%-ditsati,%}
to wish to give over to.
<LEND>

<L>50925<pc>1086-b<k1>sampratti<k2>sampratti
{%Sam-pratti, is,%}¦ f. (for {%sam-pradatti%}), giving
entirely up, delivering over.
<LEND>

<L>50926<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradatta<k2>sampradatta
{%Sam-pradatta, as, ā, am,%}¦ given over to, given
up to, imparted, communicated, transmitted, handed
down; given in marriage.
<LEND>

<L>50927<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradAtavya<k2>sampradAtavya
{%Sam-pradātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given or deli-
vered over or transmitted; to be handed down.
<LEND>

<L>50928<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradAtf<k2>sampradAtf
{%Sam-pradātṛ, tā,%}¦ m. one who gives or delivers
over or hands down, a giver.
<LEND>

<L>50929<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradAna<k2>sampradAna
{%Sam-pradāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of giving or handing
over completely; gift, donation, bestowal; bestowing
in marriage; (in grammar) one of the six Kārakas,
the idea expressed by the dative case, the recipient
to which the agent causes anything to be given,
(see {%kāraka.%})
<LEND>

<L>50930<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradAnIya<k2>sampradAnIya
{%Sam-pradānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be given or
delivered over; ({%am%}), n. a gift, donation.
<LEND>

<L>50931<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradAya<k2>sampradAya<h>1
1. {%sam-pradāya,%}¦ ind. having given up to; having
handed down, having transmitted (to posterity).
<LEND>

<L>50932<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradAya<k2>sampradAya<h>2
2. {%sam-pradāya, as,%}¦ m. tradition, established
doctrine transmitted from one teacher to another,
traditional belief or usage; any peculiar or schisma-
tical system of religious teaching, schism; custom,
usage. {%—Sampradāya-pradyotaka, as,%} m. a re-
vealer of the tradition of the Veda. {%—Sampradāya-%}
{%prāpta, as, ā, am,%} obtained through tradition.
{%—Sampradāya-vid, t,%} m. one versed in traditional
doctrines or usages.
<LEND>

<L>50933<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradAyin<k2>sampradAyin
{%Sampradāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ a holder of any tra-
ditional doctrine, a member of some sect, (e. g.
certain sects of the Vaiṣṇavas are called Śrī-sampra-
dāyins, Rudra-sampradāyins, Brahma-sampradāyins,
&c.)
<LEND>

<L>50934<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradiS<k2>sampradiS
{#sampradiS#}¦ {%sam-pra-diś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-diśati,%}
{%-deṣṭum,%} to point out or indicate fully, prescribe,
announce, appoint, designate; to instruct, teach;
Pass. {%-diśyate,%} to be indicated or designated.
<LEND>

<L>50935<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradizwa<k2>sampradizwa
{%Sam-pradiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ clearly or particularly
pointed out, prescribed, designated, particularized.
<LEND>

<L>50936<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradIp<k2>sampradIp
{#sampradIp#}¦ {%sam-pra-dīp,%} cl. 4. A. {%-dīpyate,%}
&c., to flame or blaze forth; to burst into flame,
shine very brightly: Caus. {%-dīpayati, -yitum,%} to
set fire to, inflame, ignite, kindle.
<LEND>

<L>50937<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradIpita<k2>sampradIpita
{%Sam-pradīpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set fire to, ignited,
inflamed.
<LEND>

<L>50938<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradIpta<k2>sampradIpta
{%Sam-pradīpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ flaming or blazing
up, shining very brightly, brilliant.
<LEND>

<L>50939<pc>1086-b<k1>sampraduz<k2>sampraduz
{#sampraduz#}¦ {%sam-pra-duṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-duṣyati,%}
&c., to become thoroughly bad, become quite cor-
rupt, deteriorate.
<LEND>

<L>50940<pc>1086-b<k1>sampraduzwa<k2>sampraduzwa
{%Sam-praduṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wholly corrupted,
quite defiled or polluted.
<LEND>

<L>50941<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradfS<k2>sampradfS
{#sampradfS#}¦ {%sam-pra-dṛś,%} cl. 1. P. {%-paśyati,%}
{%-draṣṭum,%} to look well at, observe, regard, con-
sider, perceive, know, judge: Pass. {%-dṛśyate,%} to be
clearly seen or observed, appear: Caus. {%-darśayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to see, show, indicate, exhibit,
manifest; to declare.
<LEND>

<L>50942<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradarSita<k2>sampradarSita
{%Sam-pradarśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shown, exhibited,
manifested.
<LEND>

<L>50943<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradarSya<k2>sampradarSya
{%Sam-pradarśya,%}¦ ind. having shown or exhibited.
<LEND>

<L>50944<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradru<k2>sampradru
{#sampradru#}¦ {%sam-pra-dru,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dravati,%}
&c., to run away together, run quite off, escape.
<LEND>

<L>50945<pc>1086-b<k1>sampradruta<k2>sampradruta
{%Sam-pradruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ run away, escaped.
<LEND>

<L>50946<pc>1086-b<k1>sampraDAna<k2>sampraDAna
{#sampraDAna#}¦ {%sam-pradhāna, am,%} n. (fr. rt.
1. {%dhā%} with {%pra%} and {%sam%}), consideration, ascertain-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>50947<pc>1086-b<k1>sampraDAv<k2>sampraDAv
{#sampraDAv#}¦ {%sam-pra-dhāv,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-dhā-%}
{%vati, -te, -dhāvitum,%} to run quite away, hurry off,
escape; to run up to, run towards, hasten towards.
<LEND>

<L>50948<pc>1086-b<k1>sampraDAvat<k2>sampraDAvat
{%Sam-pradhāvat, an, antī, at,%}¦ running away,
escaping.
<LEND>

<L>50949<pc>1086-b<k1>sampraDf<k2>sampraDf
{#sampraDf#}¦ {%sam-pra-dhṛ,%} Caus. or cl. 10. P.
{%-dhārayati, -yitum,%} to fix upon, direct towards;
[Page1086-c+ 72]
to deliver over to; to fix the mind or thoughts
steadily upon; to reflect, consider, deliberate or
think about, determine, resolve, settle: Pass. {%-dhār-%}
{%yate,%} to be fixed upon or determined.
<LEND>

<L>50950<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraDAraRa<k2>sampraDAraRa
{%Sam-pradhāraṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. determination,
deliberation, deciding on the propriety or impro-
priety of anything.
<LEND>

<L>50951<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraDArita<k2>sampraDArita
{%Sam-pradhārita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed or determined
upon, deliberated about.
<LEND>

<L>50952<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraDArya<k2>sampraDArya
{%Sam-pradhārya,%}¦ ind. having fixed or determined
or resolved; having delivered.
<LEND>

<L>50953<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraDfz<k2>sampraDfz
{#sampraDfz#}¦ {%sam-pra-dhṛṣ,%} Caus. {%-dharṣa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to offer violence to, outrage, insult,
violate, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>50954<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraDyE<k2>sampraDyE
{#sampraDyE#}¦ {%sam-pra-dhyai,%} cl. 1. P. {%-dhyāyati,%}
&c., to reflect or meditate deeply about, ponder or
think well over.
<LEND>

<L>50955<pc>1086-c<k1>sampranft<k2>sampranft
{#sampranft#}¦ {%sam-pra-nṛt,%} cl. 4. P. {%-nṛtyati,%}
&c., to begin to dance.
<LEND>

<L>50956<pc>1086-c<k1>sampranftta<k2>sampranftta
{%Sam-pranṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ beginning to dance
or move about.
<LEND>

<L>50957<pc>1086-c<k1>samprapac<k2>samprapac
{#samprapac#}¦ {%sam-pra-pac,%} Pass. {%-pacyate,%} to
become quite ripe or mature; to come to a head
(as a boil &c.).
<LEND>

<L>50958<pc>1086-c<k1>samprapad<k2>samprapad
{#samprapad#}¦ {%sam-pra-pad,%} cl. 4. A. {%-padyate,%}
{%-pattum,%} to go towards or enter together; to set
out (on a journey &c.); to come to, arrive at; to
betake one's self, have recourse to (especially for
help); to set about, begin; to succeed, be accom-
plished; to become.
<LEND>

<L>50959<pc>1086-c<k1>samprapada<k2>samprapada
{%Sam-prapada, am,%}¦ n. wandering about, roaming.
<LEND>

<L>50960<pc>1086-c<k1>samprapanna<k2>samprapanna
{%Sam-prapanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ entered, fallen into;
arrived at; endowed with, filled with.
<LEND>

<L>50961<pc>1086-c<k1>samprabAD<k2>samprabAD
{#samprabAD#}¦ {%sam-pra-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate,%}
{%bādhitum,%} to press back, drive back, repel, resist,
oppose; to oppress, pain, torment.
<LEND>

<L>50962<pc>1086-c<k1>samprabuD<k2>samprabuD
{#samprabuD#}¦ {%sam-pra-budh,%} cl. 4. A. {%-budhyate,%}
{%-bodhitum,%} to be roused up or awakened (from
magical influences &c.), recover consciousness: Caus.
{%-bodhayati, -yitum,%} to rouse up, awaken; to cause
to know, inform; to try to convince, persuade; to
consult about, deliberate about.
<LEND>

<L>50963<pc>1086-c<k1>samprabudDa<k2>samprabudDa
{%Sam-prabuddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ roused up, awak-
ened.
<LEND>

<L>50964<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraboDita<k2>sampraboDita
{%Sam-prabodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ roused up, awakened;
convinced, persuaded; consulted or deliberated about.
<LEND>

<L>50965<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraBaYj<k2>sampraBaYj
{#sampraBaYj#}¦ {%sam-pra-bhañj.%} See rt. 2. {%bhañj.%}
<LEND>

<L>50966<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraBagna<k2>sampraBagna
{%Sam-prabhagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ entirely broken to
pieces, broken up, dispersed, defeated.
<LEND>

<L>50967<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraBA<k2>sampraBA
{#sampraBA#}¦ {%sam-pra-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti,%} &c.,
to shine forth clearly, be conspicuous, appear.
<LEND>

<L>50968<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraBAz<k2>sampraBAz
{#sampraBAz#}¦ {%sam-pra-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate%}
(ep. also P. {%-ti%}), &c., to speak to, accost, address
(with acc.); to speak, say, proclaim, declare.
<LEND>

<L>50969<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraBAzat<k2>sampraBAzat
{%Sam-prabhāṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ speaking, talking.
<LEND>

<L>50970<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraBid<k2>sampraBid
{#sampraBid#}¦ {%sam-pra-bhid.%} See rt. 1. {%bhid.%}
<LEND>

<L>50971<pc>1086-c<k1>sampraBinna<k2>sampraBinna
{%Sam-prabhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken to pieces,
split quite asunder, split open, cleft; in rut (as an
elephant, whose temples are cleft during the exuding
of the fluid in the rutting season).
<LEND>

<L>50972<pc>1086-c<k1>sampramaT<k2>sampramaT
{#sampramaT#}¦ {%sam-pra-math%} or {%sam-pra-manth,%}
cl. 1. 9. P. {%-mathati, -manthati, -mathnāti,%} &c.,
to stir about or agitate violently; to confound; to
violate, outrage, oppress, treat with harshness or
cruelty; to tear out (the eyes).
<LEND>

<L>50973<pc>1086-c<k1>sampramaTya<k2>sampramaTya
{%Sam-pramathya,%}¦ ind. having agitated; having
violated; violently, by force.
<LEND>

<L>50974<pc>1086-c<k1>sampramad<k2>sampramad
{#sampramad#}¦ {%sam-pra-mad.%} See rt. 2. {%mad.%}
<LEND>

<L>50975<pc>1086-c<k1>sampramatta<k2>sampramatta
{%Sam-pramatta, as, ā, am,%}¦ very excited, rutting
(said of an elephant); very careless, thoughtless,
neglectful.
<LEND>

<L>50976<pc>1086-c<k1>sampramuc<k2>sampramuc
{#sampramuc#}¦ {%sam-pra-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati, %}
[Page1087-a+ 74]
{%te, -moktum,%} to loosen entirely, set quite free,
liberate.
<LEND>

<L>50977<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramucya<k2>sampramucya
{%Sam-pramucya,%}¦ ind. being quite free from;
having abandoned or quitted.
<LEND>

<L>50978<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramuz<k2>sampramuz
{#sampramuz#}¦ {%sam-pra-muṣ.%} See rt. 2. {%muṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>50979<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramuzita<k2>sampramuzita
{%Sam-pramuṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ carried quite away,
abstracted, distracted.
<LEND>

<L>50980<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramoza<k2>sampramoza
{%Sam-pramoṣa, as,%}¦ m. carrying off, abstraction,
loss ({%= nāśa%}).
<LEND>

<L>50981<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramuh<k2>sampramuh
{#sampramuh#}¦ {%sam-pra-muh,%} cl. 4. P. A. {%-muh-%}
{%yati, -te,%} &c., to become completely stupefied or
embarrassed, be perplexed or unconscious: Caus.
{%-mohayati, -yitum,%} to perplex completely, confuse,
embarrass.
<LEND>

<L>50982<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramUQa<k2>sampramUQa
{%Sam-pramūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ utterly bewildered,
confused, perplexed, embarrassed.
<LEND>

<L>50983<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramoha<k2>sampramoha
{%Sam-pramoha, as,%}¦ m. utter bewilderment, em-
barrassment, infatuation.
<LEND>

<L>50984<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramfd<k2>sampramfd
{#sampramfd#}¦ {%sam-pra-mṛd,%} cl. 9. P. {%-mṛdnāti,%}
&c., to trample or crush to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>50985<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramfdya<k2>sampramfdya
{%Sam-pramṛdya,%}¦ ind. having crushed or com-
pletely destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>50986<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramokz<k2>sampramokz
{#sampramokz#}¦ {%sam-pra-mokṣ,%} cl. 10. P. A.
{%-mokṣayati, -te, -yitum,%} to make free, clear away;
to clear a way for one's self (A.).
<LEND>

<L>50987<pc>1087-a<k1>sampramoda<k2>sampramoda
{#sampramoda#}¦ {%sam-pramoda, as,%} m. excessive
joy or delight.
<LEND>

<L>50988<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayat<k2>samprayat<h>1
{#samprayat#} 1¦. {%sam-pra-yat%} (for 2. {%sam-prayat%}
see under {%sam-pre%}), cl. 1. A. {%-yatate,%} &c., to
strive eagerly for, exert one's self about, be intent
upon (with dat.).
<LEND>

<L>50989<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayam<k2>samprayam
{#samprayam#}¦ {%sam-pra-yam,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-yac-%}
{%chati, -te,%} &c., to offer or present together or mu-
tually; to bestow, grant, give, yield up; to give in
marriage; to give back; [cf. {%pra-yam.%}]
<LEND>

<L>50990<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayA<k2>samprayA
{#samprayA#}¦ {%sam-pra-yā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-yāti, -yātum,%}
to proceed or set off together; to go forwards or
advance towards, move on; to go together to any
state or condition, (see rt. 1. {%yā%}); to make use of
(with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>50991<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayARa<k2>samprayARa
{%Sam-prayāṇa, am,%}¦ n. proceeding together to-
wards, setting out, departure.
<LEND>

<L>50992<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayAta<k2>samprayAta
{%Sam-prayāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forth together,
setting out in a company, gone forward, &c.
<LEND>

<L>50993<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayAc<k2>samprayAc
{#samprayAc#}¦ {%sam-pra-yāc,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-yācati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to ask for together, solicit, beg, request.
<LEND>

<L>50994<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayuj<k2>samprayuj
{#samprayuj#}¦ {%sam-pra-yuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-yunakti,%}
{%-yuṅkte, -yoktum,%} to yoke or join together, har-
ness; to attach, connect; to apply, employ, make
use of; to perform, execute; to instigate, incite,
induce: Caus. {%-yojayati, -yitum,%} to join together,
connect; to equip, prepare; to employ, use: Pass.
{%-yujyate,%} to be joined together or connected or
attached; to be united sexually; to be employed
about; to be implicated in.
<LEND>

<L>50995<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayukta<k2>samprayukta
{%Sam-prayukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ yoked or joined toge-
ther, joined or united or connected with; reached;
dependent on, resulting from; mixed, mingled,
holding intercourse with, mutually acquainted; sexu-
ally united; meeting or encountering one another
in a hostile manner; occupied with, engaged upon,
intent on, addicted to.
<LEND>

<L>50996<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayujya<k2>samprayujya
{%Sam-prayujya,%}¦ ind. having employed, having
instigated.
<LEND>

<L>50997<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayoga<k2>samprayoga
{%Sam-prayoga, as,%}¦ m. joining together, conjunc-
tion, union, connection, association, relation, depend-
ance; mutual intercourse; sexual union, coition;
mutual proportion, connected series or arrangement,
order; application, employment; magic.
<LEND>

<L>50998<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayogin<k2>samprayogin
{%Samprayogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ yoking or joining toge-
ther; addicted to sexual intercourse, wanton; ({%ī%}), m.
a joiner, uniter, any one who effects a union or
connection; a libertine; a conjuror.
<LEND>

<L>50999<pc>1087-a<k1>samprayojita<k2>samprayojita
{%Sam-prayojita, as, ā, am,%}¦ joined together, con-
[Page1087-b+ 73]
nected; well suited for anything, adapted, suitable;
employed, used; produced, brought forward.
<LEND>

<L>51000<pc>1087-b<k1>samprayuD<k2>samprayuD
{#samprayuD#}¦ {%sam-pra-yudh,%} cl. 4. A. {%-yudhyate,%}
&c., to begin to fight together, commence a war;
to fight, make war.
<LEND>

<L>51001<pc>1087-b<k1>samprayudDa<k2>samprayudDa
{%Sam-prayuddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ engaged in war,
fighting.
<LEND>

<L>51002<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraruc<k2>sampraruc
{#sampraruc#}¦ {%sam-pra-ruc,%} cl. 1. A. {%-rocate,%}
&c., to appear very bright or beautiful, appear good;
to please.
<LEND>

<L>51003<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraruD<k2>sampraruD
{#sampraruD#}¦ {%sam-pra-rudh,%} Pass. {%-rudhyate,%}
to be completely debarred from, be deprived of.
<LEND>

<L>51004<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraruz<k2>sampraruz
{#sampraruz#}¦ {%sam-pra-ruṣ.%} See rt. 1. {%ruṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>51005<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraruzwa<k2>sampraruzwa
{%Sam-praruṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly enraged or
irritated, furious.
<LEND>

<L>51006<pc>1087-b<k1>sampralI<k2>sampralI
{#sampralI#}¦ {%sam-pra-lī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-līyate,%} &c.,
to be completely dissolved in, become absorbed,
disappear, vanish, be destroyed, die away, perish.
<LEND>

<L>51007<pc>1087-b<k1>sampralIna<k2>sampralIna
{%Sam-pralīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ wholly dissolved or
melted away, absorbed in, disappeared, vanished.
<LEND>

<L>51008<pc>1087-b<k1>sampralup<k2>sampralup
{#sampralup#}¦ {%sam-pra-lup,%} Pass. {%-lupyate,%} to be
forcibly deprived of; to be violated or injured.
<LEND>

<L>51009<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraluB<k2>sampraluB
{#sampraluB#}¦ {%sam-pra-lubh,%} Caus. {%-lobhayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to allure or entice away, try to seduce
or deceive.
<LEND>

<L>51010<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraloBya<k2>sampraloBya
{%Sam-pralobhya,%}¦ ind. having allured away or
seduced.
<LEND>

<L>51011<pc>1087-b<k1>sampravac<k2>sampravac
{#sampravac#}¦ {%sam-pra-vac,%} cl. 2. P. {%-vakti,%} &c.,
to explain or declare together; to relate at full or
comprehensively, declare, communicate, announce.
<LEND>

<L>51012<pc>1087-b<k1>samprokta<k2>samprokta
{%Sam-prokta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken to, addressed;
declared.
<LEND>

<L>51013<pc>1087-b<k1>sampravad<k2>sampravad
{#sampravad#}¦ {%sam-pra-vad,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vadati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to speak forth together, speak out, pro-
nounce aloud; to utter cries together, sing together;
to talk or converse together (A.).
<LEND>

<L>51014<pc>1087-b<k1>sampravadana<k2>sampravadana
{%Sam-pravadana, am,%}¦ n. talking together, con-
versation.
<LEND>

<L>51015<pc>1087-b<k1>sampravadamAna<k2>sampravadamAna
{%Sam-pravadamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ talking or con-
versing together.
<LEND>

<L>51016<pc>1087-b<k1>sampravicar<k2>sampravicar
{#sampravicar#}¦ {%sam-pra-vi-car,%} Caus. {%-cārayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to examine or consider carefully.
<LEND>

<L>51017<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraviS<k2>sampraviS
{#sampraviS#}¦ {%sam-pra-viś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-viśati%} (ep.
also A. {%-te%}), &c., to enter into together; to enter
entirely or completely into; to have intercourse
with; to be sexually united with: Caus. {%-veśayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to enter, introduce, lead into.
<LEND>

<L>51018<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraviSya<k2>sampraviSya
{%Sam-praviśya,%}¦ ind. having entered together;
having completely entered.
<LEND>

<L>51019<pc>1087-b<k1>sampravizwa<k2>sampravizwa
{%Sam-praviṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ entered together;
completely entered; gone into.
<LEND>

<L>51020<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraveSa<k2>sampraveSa
{%Sam-praveśa, as,%}¦ m. entering into together;
complete entrance.
<LEND>

<L>51021<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraveSita<k2>sampraveSita
{%Sam-praveśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to enter, intro-
duced.
<LEND>

<L>51022<pc>1087-b<k1>sampraveSya<k2>sampraveSya
{%Sam-praveśya,%}¦ ind. having caused to enter, &c.
<LEND>

<L>51023<pc>1087-b<k1>sampravihftya<k2>sampravihftya
{#sampravihftya#}¦ {%sam-pravihṛtya,%} ind. (fr. rt.
{%hṛ%} with {%vi, pra,%} and {%sam%}), having roamed or
wandered all over.
<LEND>

<L>51024<pc>1087-b<k1>sampravft<k2>sampravft
{#sampravft#}¦ {%sam-pra-vṛt,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vartate,%}
&c., to go well forwards, set off, proceed; to come
forth, arise; to come to pass, take place, happen;
to enter upon, begin, set about, commence, be
occupied in (with inf. or dat. or loc.); to go against,
assail, attack; to be present or near at hand: Caus.
{%-vartayati, -yitum,%} to cause to proceed or go for-
ward, spread about; to set in motion or action; to
undertake, begin.
<LEND>

<L>51025<pc>1087-b<k1>sampravartana<k2>sampravartana
{%Sam-pravartana, am,%}¦ n. the act of setting in
motion or action, undertaking.
<LEND>

<L>51026<pc>1087-b<k1>sampravftta<k2>sampravftta
{%Sam-pravṛtta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone forwards, pro-
ceeded, set off; arisen, come to pass; begun, com-
menced; near at hand; passed by.
<LEND>
[Page1087-c+ 71]

<L>51027<pc>1087-c<k1>sampravftti<k2>sampravftti
{%Sam-pravṛtti, is,%}¦ f. proceeding, setting forward,
undertaking.
<LEND>

<L>51028<pc>1087-c<k1>sampravfD<k2>sampravfD
{#sampravfD#}¦ {%sam-pra-vṛdh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vardhate,%}
&c., to grow well up, attain full growth, grow, in-
crease: Caus. {%-vardhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
grow or increase.
<LEND>

<L>51029<pc>1087-c<k1>sampravfdDa<k2>sampravfdDa
{%Sam-pravṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ full grown, increased,
increasing, well advanced.
<LEND>

<L>51030<pc>1087-c<k1>sampravfz<k2>sampravfz
{#sampravfz#}¦ {%sam-pra-vṛṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-varṣati,%}
&c., to begin to rain; to rain.
<LEND>

<L>51031<pc>1087-c<k1>sampravfzwa<k2>sampravfzwa
{%Sam-pravṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ begun to rain;
({%am%}), n. that which has been completely rained, a
whole rain-fall.
<LEND>

<L>51032<pc>1087-c<k1>samprave<k2>samprave
{#samprave#}¦ {%sam-pra-ve,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-vayati,%}
{%-te,%} &c., to interweave, sew or string together; to
compose.
<LEND>

<L>51033<pc>1087-c<k1>sampravep<k2>sampravep
{#sampravep#}¦ {%sam-pra-vep,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vepate,%}
&c., to tremble violently.
<LEND>

<L>51034<pc>1087-c<k1>sampravyaT<k2>sampravyaT
{#sampravyaT#}¦ {%sam-pra-vyath,%} cl. 1. A. {%-vya-%}
{%thate,%} &c., to be greatly troubled or distressed; to
tremble violently.
<LEND>

<L>51035<pc>1087-c<k1>sampravyaTita<k2>sampravyaTita
{%Sam-pravyathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly troubled or
alarmed.
<LEND>

<L>51036<pc>1087-c<k1>sampraSna<k2>sampraSna
{#sampraSna#}¦ {%sam-praśna.%} See under {%sam-prach.%}
<LEND>

<L>51037<pc>1087-c<k1>sampraSrita<k2>sampraSrita
{#sampraSrita#}¦ {%sam-praśrita, as, ā, am,%} [cf. {%pra-%}
{%śrita%}], modest, humble, well-behaved.
<LEND>

<L>51038<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasad<k2>samprasad
{#samprasad#}¦ {%sam-pra-sad,%} cl. 1. or 6. P. {%-sīdati,%}
{%-sattum,%} to settle down quietly, become placid or
propitious, be soothed: Caus. {%-sādayati, -yitum,%}
to make propitious, propitiate, soothe.
<LEND>

<L>51039<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasAda<k2>samprasAda
{%Sam-prasāda, as,%}¦ m. propitiation, propitiousness,
favour, grace; serenity; the soul (in the Vedānta
phil.); trust, confidence.
<LEND>

<L>51040<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasAD<k2>samprasAD
{#samprasAD#}¦ {%sam-pra-sādh,%} Caus. P. {%-sādha-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to accomplish, effect, settle; to make
one's own, acquire.
<LEND>

<L>51041<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasADana<k2>samprasADana
{%Sam-prasādhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of effecting,
accomplishing, performing well or completely.
<LEND>

<L>51042<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasADya<k2>samprasADya
{%Sam-prasādhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accomplished
or effected.
<LEND>

<L>51043<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasAraRa<k2>samprasAraRa
{#samprasAraRa#}¦ {%sam-prasāraṇa, am,%} n. (see {%pra-%}
{%sāraṇa%}), mutual moving or changing about; the
mutual interchange or substitution of the vowels {%i, u,%}
{%ṛ, ḷ,%} and their corresponding semivowels {%y, v,%}
{%r, l.%}
<LEND>

<L>51044<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasu<k2>samprasu
{#samprasu#}¦ {%sam-pra-su%} (see 2. {%pra-su%}), cl. 1.
P., 2. 4. A. {%-savati, -sūte, -sūyate,%} &c., to bring
forth, beget, generate, engender, procreate; Pass.
{%-sūyate%} (ep. also {%-ti%}), to be born or produced, be
brought forth.
<LEND>

<L>51045<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasTA<k2>samprasTA
{#samprasTA#}¦ {%sam-pra-sthā,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-tiṣ-%}
{%ṭhati, -te, -sthātum,%} to set out together; to set.
out, depart; to proceed, advance.
<LEND>

<L>51046<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasTAna<k2>samprasTAna
{%Sam-prasthāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of setting out
together, setting out on a journey, departure.
<LEND>

<L>51047<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasTita<k2>samprasTita
{%Sam-prasthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set out together, set
out on a journey, departed; standing forward.
<LEND>

<L>51048<pc>1087-c<k1>sampraspfS<k2>sampraspfS
{#sampraspfS#}¦ {%sam-pra-spṛś,%} cl. 6. P. {%-spṛśati,%}
&c., to touch or sprinkle with water, wash, bathe.
<LEND>

<L>51049<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasvap<k2>samprasvap
{#samprasvap#}¦ {%sam-pra-svap,%} cl. 2. P. {%-svapiti,%}
&c., to sleep soundly.
<LEND>

<L>51050<pc>1087-c<k1>samprasupta<k2>samprasupta
{%Sam-prasupta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fast asleep, sound
asleep.
<LEND>

<L>51051<pc>1087-c<k1>samprahas<k2>samprahas
{#samprahas#}¦ {%sam-pra-has,%} cl. 1. P. {%-hasati,%} &c.,
to laugh together, smile.
<LEND>

<L>51052<pc>1087-c<k1>samprahasya<k2>samprahasya
{%Sam-prahasya,%}¦ ind. having laughed.
<LEND>

<L>51053<pc>1087-c<k1>samprahAsa<k2>samprahAsa
{%Sam-prahāsa, as,%}¦ m. laughter, joy.
<LEND>

<L>51054<pc>1087-c<k1>samprahf<k2>samprahf
{#samprahf#}¦ {%sam-pra-hṛ,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-harati,%}
{%-te, -hartum,%} to strike at mutually, come to blows,
fight together; to strike, wound.
<LEND>

<L>51055<pc>1087-c<k1>samprahAra<k2>samprahAra
{%Sam-prahāra, as,%}¦ m. mutual striking, wounding,
[Page1088-a+ 75]
killing; conflict, encounter, assault, war, battle;
going, motion.
<LEND>

<L>51056<pc>1088-a<k1>samprahfz<k2>samprahfz
{#samprahfz#}¦ {%sam-pra-hṛṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-hṛṣyati,%}
{%-harṣitum,%} to rejoice greatly, be glad, to think with
pleasure; Caus. {%-harṣayati, -yitum,%} to rejoice,
make glad.
<LEND>

<L>51057<pc>1088-a<k1>sampraharza<k2>sampraharza
{%Sam-praharṣa, as,%}¦ m. great joy, thrill of de-
light.
<LEND>

<L>51058<pc>1088-a<k1>sampraharzita<k2>sampraharzita
{%Sam-praharṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ much pleased,
greatly delighted; thrilled.
<LEND>

<L>51059<pc>1088-a<k1>samprahfzwa<k2>samprahfzwa
{%Sam-prahṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ excessively rejoiced,
rejoicing, joyful; erect, bristling (as the hair of the
body), thrilling. {%—Samprahṛṣṭa-tanūruha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having the hairs of the body bristling with
delight. {%—Samprahṛṣṭa-manas, ās, ās, as,%} over-
joyed in heart.
<LEND>

<L>51060<pc>1088-a<k1>samprAdru<k2>samprAdru
{#samprAdru#}¦ {%sam-prā-dru (-pra-ā-),%} cl. 1. P.
{%-dravati,%} &c., to run away together.
<LEND>

<L>51061<pc>1088-a<k1>samprAdravat<k2>samprAdravat
{%Sam-prādravat, an, antī, at,%}¦ running away
together.
<LEND>

<L>51062<pc>1088-a<k1>samprAp<k2>samprAp
{#samprAp#}¦ {%sam-prāp (-pra-āp),%} cl. 5. P. {%-prā-%}
{%pnoti, -prāptum,%} to reach or attain fully to, reach,
arrive at; to meet with, light upon, come to; to
obtain or acquire thoroughly, gain; Caus. {%-prāpa-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to attain or obtain.
<LEND>

<L>51063<pc>1088-a<k1>samprApta<k2>samprApta
{%Sam-prāpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well reached or attained,
arrived, found, met with; completely obtained, got,
caught hold of; effected, accomplished; become.
{%—Samprāpta-yauvana, as, ā, am,%} one who has
fully attained youth or manhood, come of age.
{%—Samprāpta-vidya, as, ā, am,%} one who has ac-
quired all knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>51064<pc>1088-a<k1>samprApti<k2>samprApti
{%Sam-prāpti, is,%}¦ f. attainment, obtaining, getting,
acquisition; gaining.
<LEND>

<L>51065<pc>1088-a<k1>samprApya<k2>samprApya<h>1
1. {%sam-prāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be fully attained
to, attainable, obtainable.
<LEND>

<L>51066<pc>1088-a<k1>samprApya<k2>samprApya<h>2
2. {%sam-prāpya,%}¦ ind. having attained to or ob-
tained.
<LEND>

<L>51067<pc>1088-a<k1>samprArT<k2>samprArT
{#samprArT#}¦ {%sam-prārth (-pra-arth),%} cl. 10. P. A.
{%-prārthayati, -te, -yitum,%} to ask for earnestly, pray
for, beg, request.
<LEND>

<L>51068<pc>1088-a<k1>samprArTita<k2>samprArTita
{%Sam-prārthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ asked for, begged,
requested.
<LEND>

<L>51069<pc>1088-a<k1>samprAv<k2>samprAv
{#samprAv#}¦ {%sam-prāv (-pra-av),%} cl. 1. P. {%-prā-%}
{%vati,%} &c., Ved. to assist together, join in assisting,
aid, help.
<LEND>

<L>51070<pc>1088-a<k1>samprI<k2>samprI
{#samprI#}¦ {%sam-prī,%} cl. 4. A. {%-prīyate,%} &c., to be
completely satisfied or contented, to be greatly
pleased with, delight in (with inst.): Caus. {%-prīṇayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to make completely happy or pleased.
<LEND>

<L>51071<pc>1088-a<k1>sampriya<k2>sampriya
{%Sam-priya, as, ā, am,%}¦ very dear or beloved;
mutually dear, loving each other. {%—Sampriya-tā,%}
f. dearness, the being very dear.
<LEND>

<L>51072<pc>1088-a<k1>samprIRita<k2>samprIRita
{%Sam-prīṇita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made completely happy,
thoroughly satisfied, well pleased.
<LEND>

<L>51073<pc>1088-a<k1>samprIta<k2>samprIta
{%Sam-prīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely satisfied or
pleased, delighted, well pleased. {%—Samprīta-mānasa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} delighted in mind.
<LEND>

<L>51074<pc>1088-a<k1>samprIti<k2>samprIti
{%Sam-prīti, is,%}¦ f. attachment, affection; friendly
assent; delight.
<LEND>

<L>51075<pc>1088-a<k1>samprIyamARa<k2>samprIyamARa
{%Samprīyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being greatly pleased,
rejoicing.
<LEND>

<L>51076<pc>1088-a<k1>sampre<k2>sampre
{#sampre#}¦ {%sam-pre (-pra-i),%} cl. 2. P. {%-praiti,%} &c.,
to go forth together, flow together.
<LEND>

<L>51077<pc>1088-a<k1>samprayat<k2>samprayat<h>2
2. {%sam-prayat, an, atī, at%}¦ (for 1. {%sam-pra-yat%} see
p. 1087, col. 1), flowing together.
<LEND>

<L>51078<pc>1088-a<k1>samprekz<k2>samprekz
{#samprekz#}¦ {%sam-prekṣ (-pra-īkṣ),%} cl. 1. A.
{%-prekṣate,%} &c., to look well at, observe carefully,
behold, become aware of, perceive; to look well
into, consider carefully, reflect on, examine.
<LEND>

<L>51079<pc>1088-a<k1>samprekzaRa<k2>samprekzaRa
{%Sam-prekṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of looking well
at, observing, viewing, beholding, seeing; looking
thoroughly into, deliberating about, considering, in-
vestigating.
<LEND>

<L>51080<pc>1088-a<k1>samprekzamARa<k2>samprekzamARa
{%Sam-prekṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully beholding.
<LEND>
[Page1088-b+ 74]

<L>51081<pc>1088-b<k1>samprekzita<k2>samprekzita
{%Sam-prekṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ well looked at or seen,
beheld; well looked into, considered, investigated.
<LEND>

<L>51082<pc>1088-b<k1>samprekzya<k2>samprekzya
{%Sam-prekṣya,%}¦ ind. having looked carefully at,
having observed or noticed; having looked well into,
having considered or examined.
<LEND>

<L>51083<pc>1088-b<k1>samprer<k2>samprer
{#samprer#}¦ {%sam-prer%} ({%-pra-īr,%} see rt. {%īr%}), cl. 2.
A. {%-prerte,%} &c., to come forth together, rise to-
gether; Caus. {%-prerayati, -yitum,%} to drive or push
forwards.
<LEND>

<L>51084<pc>1088-b<k1>samprerRa<k2>samprerRa
{%Sam-prerṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ risen up together.
<LEND>

<L>51085<pc>1088-b<k1>samprerya<k2>samprerya
{%Sam-prerya,%}¦ ind. having pushed forwards.
<LEND>

<L>51086<pc>1088-b<k1>samprez<k2>samprez
{#samprez#}¦ {%sam-preṣ%} ({%-pra-iṣ,%} see rt. 1. {%iṣ%}),
cl. 4. P. {%-preṣyati, -preṣitum,%} to throw, fling,
cast; (in Vedic ritual) to summon, invite [cf. 2.
{%preṣ%}]: Caus. {%-preṣayati, -yitum,%} to send forth
together, send away, dispatch, send, dismiss; to send
a message to.
<LEND>

<L>51087<pc>1088-b<k1>samprezaRa<k2>samprezaRa
{%Sam-preṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of sending forth
together, sending away, dispatching.
<LEND>

<L>51088<pc>1088-b<k1>samprezita<k2>samprezita
{%Sam-preṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sent forth, ordered;
dismissed, sent away.
<LEND>

<L>51089<pc>1088-b<k1>samprezya<k2>samprezya
{%Sam-preṣya,%}¦ ind. having sent away or dispatched.
<LEND>

<L>51090<pc>1088-b<k1>samprEza<k2>samprEza
{%Sam-praiṣa, as,%}¦ m. sending away, dismissing;
direction, order, command, precept.
<LEND>

<L>51091<pc>1088-b<k1>samprokta<k2>samprokta
{#samprokta#}¦ {%sam-prokta.%} See under {%sam-pra-%}
{%vac.%}
<LEND>

<L>51092<pc>1088-b<k1>samprokz<k2>samprokz
{#samprokz#}¦ {%sam-prokṣ (-pra-ukṣ),%} cl. 6. P. A.
{%-prokṣati, -te,%} &c., to sprinkle well over, sprinkle
on; to consecrate by sprinkling; to be sprinkled
over (A.).
<LEND>

<L>51093<pc>1088-b<k1>samprokzaRa<k2>samprokzaRa
{%Sam-prokṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of sprinkling well
over, consecration (of a temple &c.).
<LEND>

<L>51094<pc>1088-b<k1>samprokzita<k2>samprokzita
{%Sam-prokṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ well sprinkled or
wetted (especially with holy water), consecrated.
<LEND>

<L>51095<pc>1088-b<k1>samprokzya<k2>samprokzya
{%Sam-prokṣya,%}¦ ind. having besprinkled; having
sprinkled one's self well over.
<LEND>

<L>51096<pc>1088-b<k1>samprorRu<k2>samprorRu
{#samprorRu#}¦ {%sam-prorṇu (-pra-ūr˚),%} cl. 2. P. A.
{%-prorṇoti%} or {%-prorṇauti, -prorṇute,%} &c., to cover
all over, cover completely.
<LEND>

<L>51097<pc>1088-b<k1>samplu<k2>samplu
{#samplu#}¦ {%sam-plu,%} cl. 1. A. {%-plavate, -plotum,%}
to flow together; to float about; to fluctuate: Caus.
{%-plāvayati, -yitum,%} to inundate, flood over, sub-
merge, overwhelm; to cause to float about.
<LEND>

<L>51098<pc>1088-b<k1>samplava<k2>samplava
{%Sam-plava, as,%}¦ m. submersion, inundation; flood;
surging, surge; splashing or tumbling about in water;
falling into ruins, ruin; subversion.
<LEND>

<L>51099<pc>1088-b<k1>samplavamAna<k2>samplavamAna
{%Sam-plavamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowing together,
floating about, &c.
<LEND>

<L>51100<pc>1088-b<k1>sampluta<k2>sampluta
{%Sam-pluta, as, ā, am,%}¦ flooded, overspread, over-
cast. {%—Samplutodaka (˚ta-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} flooded
with water.
<LEND>

<L>51101<pc>1088-b<k1>samPala<k2>samPala
{#samPala#}¦ {%sam-phala, as, ā, am,%} see Vopa-
deva IV. 15.
<LEND>

<L>51102<pc>1088-b<k1>samPAla<k2>samPAla
{#samPAla#}¦ {%sam-phāla, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%phal%} or
rt. {%sphal%} with {%sam%}), a ram, sheep.
<LEND>

<L>51103<pc>1088-b<k1>samPulla<k2>samPulla
{#samPulla#}¦ {%sam-phulla, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. {%phal%}
with {%sam%}), full-blown, blossomed, fully opened (as
a flower).
<LEND>

<L>51104<pc>1088-b<k1>samPewa<k2>samPewa
{#samPewa#}¦ {%sampheṭa, as,%} m. (perhaps fr. {%pheṭ,%}
q. v., with {%sam%}), mutual encounter of persons en-
raged or agitated, angry and tumultuous conflict (as
a particular division of dramatic action; described in
the Sāhitya-darpaṇa, and illustrated by the encounter
of Mādhava and Aghora-ghaṇṭa in the Mālatī-
mādhava).
<LEND>

<L>51105<pc>1088-b<k1>samb<k2>samb
{#samb#}¦ {%samb%} [cf. rts. {%sarb, śamb, sāmb%}], cl.
1. P. {%sambati,%} &c., to go, creep; cl. 10.
P. {%sambayati, -yitum,%} to collect, accumulate, con-
nect, join together.
<LEND>

<L>51106<pc>1088-b<k1>samba<k2>samba
{%Samba, am,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. rt. {%samb%} above),
water [cf. {%sambara%}]; twice ploughing, the second
ploughing of a field [cf. {%śamba%}]. {%—Sambā-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to plough twice. {%—Sambā-kṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} twice ploughed [cf. {%śambā-kṛta%}].
<LEND>
[Page1088-c+ 78]

<L>51107<pc>1088-c<k1>sambaMh<k2>sambaMh
{#sambaMh#}¦ {%sam-baṃh,%} cl. 10. P. or Caus. (or Nom.
of {%bahula%}) {%-baṃhayati, -yitum,%} to make firm or
prosperous, establish firmly, increase.
<LEND>

<L>51108<pc>1088-c<k1>sambat<k2>sambat
{#sambat#}¦ {%sam-bat,%} ind. (according to Śabda-k.)
{%= saṃ-vat,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>51109<pc>1088-c<k1>sambanD<k2>sambanD
{#sambanD#}¦ {%sam-bandh,%} cl. 9. P. {%-badhnāti,%} &c.,
to bind together, fasten or tie together, bind or fix
on, attach, connect, to construct, form: Pass. {%-badh-%}
{%yate,%} to be bound together, to be attached or con-
nected, belong to; to be furnished or supplied with:
Caus. {%-bandhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to bind toge-
ther; to make to bind on or attach or connect.
<LEND>

<L>51110<pc>1088-c<k1>sambadDa<k2>sambadDa
{%Sam-baddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound or tied together,
connected; connected in sense, having meaning;
fastened together; closed, shut; bound on, fastened
or fixed on, attached; connected with, belonging to,
related, inherent, endowed with, possessing, possessed
of authority, empowered. {%—Sambaddha-darpa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having feelings of pride formed (in the heart).
{%—Sambaddha-sainyaugha (˚ya-ogh˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the main body of troops concentrated.
<LEND>

<L>51111<pc>1088-c<k1>sambaDnat<k2>sambaDnat
{%Sam-badhnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ binding together, at-
taching, forming (fruit as a plant &c.).
<LEND>

<L>51112<pc>1088-c<k1>sambaDyamAna<k2>sambaDyamAna
{%Sam-badhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being bound toge-
ther or connected.
<LEND>

<L>51113<pc>1088-c<k1>sambanDa<k2>sambanDa
{%Sam-bandha, as,%}¦ m. binding together, joining
together, union, association, connection (sometimes
at the end of comps. in the sense ‘connected,’ &c.,
cf. {%su-s˚%}); connection by marriage [cf. {%strī-s˚%}];
relationship, relation, (in phil. said to be of
three kinds, 1. {%samavāya,%} ‘intimate relation,’ as
between a whole and its parts; 2. {%saṃyoga,%} ‘con-
junction,’ as between a pot and the ground; 3.
{%svarūpa,%} ‘the nature of a thing,’ as between an
object and the knowledge of it, which last is also
called {%viṣayatā-sambandha%}), inherence; a rela-
tion, kinsman, relative, ({%ku-sambandha, as,%} m. a
wicked relation); binding, restraining, restraint; (in
grammar) the possessive case (but see {%kāraka%}); the
application of authority to prove a theological doc-
trine; fitness, propriety; prosperity, success; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), able, capable; fit, right, proper. {%—Sambandha-%}
{%tattva, am,%} n. and {%sambandha-viveka, as,%} m., N.
of two works.
<LEND>

<L>51114<pc>1088-c<k1>sambanDaka<k2>sambanDaka
{%Sambandhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to, concern-
ing; fit, suitable; ({%as%}), m. connection by birth or
marriage; a relation, friend; (scil. {%sandhi%}), a kind
of alliance proceeding from relationship.
<LEND>

<L>51115<pc>1088-c<k1>sambanDin<k2>sambanDin
{%Sambandhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ connected with, belong-
ing to, relating or related to, referring to, adjunct,
inherent; possessing good qualities; ({%ī%}), m. a rela-
tion or connection (by marriage), relative, kinsman.
{%—Sambandhi-bhinna, as, ā, am,%} divided or shared
by relatives.
<LEND>

<L>51116<pc>1088-c<k1>sambara<k2>sambara
{#sambara#}¦ {%sambara, as,%} m. (apparently mixed
up and confounded with the words {%saṃ-vara, śaṃ-%}
{%vara, śambara,%} but in some senses said to be fr. rt.
{%samb%}), a bridge, dam, causeway, (probably for {%saṃ-%}
{%vara%}); a kind of deer; a sort of fish; a particular
mountain; a kind of dramatic entertainment; N. of
a demon or Daitya, (see {%śambara%}); N. of a Jaina
Arhat of the future period; N. of a district and lake
in Rājputāna (where the salt called {%gaḍa-lavaṇa%} is
found; sometimes written {%saṃ-vara%}); ({%ī%}), f. the plant
Asparagus Racemosus ({%= śatā-varī%}); the aquatic
plant Salvinia Cucullata; ({%am%}), n. restraint, self-
control; a religious observance with Buddhists;
water, (in the preceding senses probably for {%saṃ-%}
{%vara,%} but cf. {%śambara.%}) {%—Sambarāri (˚ra-ari),%}
{%is,%} m. ‘enemy of Sambara,’ epithet of Kāma-deva.
{%—Sambarodbhava (˚ra-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘produced in
Sambara,’ a kind of salt ({%= gaḍa-lavaṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>51117<pc>1088-c<k1>sambarya<k2>sambarya
{%Sambarya%}¦ (said to be connected with {%sambara%}
above), Nom. P. {%sambaryati, -yitum,%} to bring
together [cf. rt. {%samb%}].
<LEND>

<L>51118<pc>1088-c<k1>sambala<k2>sambala
{%Sambala, as, am,%}¦ m. n. [cf. {%śambala%}], provender,
stock of provisions for a journey; ({%am%}), n. water.
<LEND>

<L>51119<pc>1088-c<k1>sambAkf<k2>sambAkf
{#sambAkf#}¦ {%sambā-kṛ.%} See {%samba,%} col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page1089-a+ 77]

<L>51120<pc>1089-a<k1>sambAD<k2>sambAD
{#sambAD#}¦ {%sam-bādh,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bādhate,%} &c., to
press together, compress, contract; to press heavily on;
to bind firmly together; to oppress, afflict, torment.
<LEND>

<L>51121<pc>1089-a<k1>sambADa<k2>sambADa
{%Sam-bādha, as,%}¦ m. pressing together, compres-
sion, contraction, pressing on, pressure, thronging,
blocking up, the being thronged; difficulty, obstruc-
tion, (sometimes at the end of comps. in the senses,
‘narrow,’ ‘contracted,’ ‘confined,’ ‘blocked up,’
‘crowded,’ ‘completely covered or strewn,’ ‘ob-
structed;’ cf. {%hasty-aśva-ratha-s˚, śara-s˚%}); the
female organ of generation; the road to Naraka or
hell; fear, dread.
<LEND>

<L>51122<pc>1089-a<k1>sambADaka<k2>sambADaka
{%Sam-bādhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ pressing together, com-
pressing, contracting; pressing upon, thronging,
crowding.
<LEND>

<L>51123<pc>1089-a<k1>sambADana<k2>sambADana
{%Sam-bādhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of pressing to-
gether or compressing; thronging, obstructing, op-
posing; a barrier, gate; the female organ, (according
to Śabda-k. {%= madanasya dvāra%}); a door-keeper;
the point of a stake or spit.
<LEND>

<L>51124<pc>1089-a<k1>sambuD<k2>sambuD
{#sambuD#}¦ {%sam-budh,%} cl. 1. P. A., 4. A. {%-bodhati,%}
{%-te, -budhyate%} (ep. also P. {%-ti%}), &c., to perceive or
understand thoroughly, have perfect knowledge of;
to perceive, notice, observe, know; to wake up:
Caus. {%-bodhayati, -yitum,%} to cause to know, inform,
instruct, advise; exhort, admonish; to explain; to
make attentive, cause to wake up, rouse; to call to;
to cause to agree.
<LEND>

<L>51125<pc>1089-a<k1>sambudDa<k2>sambudDa
{%Sam-buddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ well perceived, perfectly
known or understood; thoroughly awake; exces-
sively wise, prudent, clever; ({%as%}), m. a Buddha or
Jaina deified sage.
<LEND>

<L>51126<pc>1089-a<k1>sambudDi<k2>sambudDi
{%Sam-buddhi, is,%}¦ f. perfect knowledge or per-
ception; calling to; the vocative case ({%= sam-%}
{%bodhana%}); an epithet.
<LEND>

<L>51127<pc>1089-a<k1>sambuDya<k2>sambuDya
{%Sam-budhya,%}¦ ind. awaking, waking up.
<LEND>

<L>51128<pc>1089-a<k1>sambuDyamAna<k2>sambuDyamAna
{%Sam-budhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being quite aware.
<LEND>

<L>51129<pc>1089-a<k1>samboDa<k2>samboDa
{%Sam-bodha, as,%}¦ m. explaining, instructing, in-
forming; throwing, sending; loss, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>51130<pc>1089-a<k1>samboDana<k2>samboDana
{%Sam-bodhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to know
thoroughly, informing, instructing, explanation, call-
ing to, addressing; the vocative case (in gram.).
<LEND>

<L>51131<pc>1089-a<k1>samboDayitvA<k2>samboDayitvA
{%Sam-bodhayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having caused
to be informed, having instructed.
<LEND>

<L>51132<pc>1089-a<k1>samboDita<k2>samboDita
{%Sam-bodhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fully warned, duly apprised.
<LEND>

<L>51133<pc>1089-a<k1>samboDitavat<k2>samboDitavat
{%Sam-bodhitavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has duly
warned or apprised.
<LEND>

<L>51134<pc>1089-a<k1>samboDya<k2>samboDya
{%Sam-bodhya,%}¦ ind. having explained, having made
an excuse or apology.
<LEND>

<L>51135<pc>1089-a<k1>sambfh<k2>sambfh
{#sambfh#}¦ {%sam-bṛh%} or {%sam-bṛṃh.%} See {%saṃ-%}
{%vṛṃh,%} p. 1038.
<LEND>

<L>51136<pc>1089-a<k1>sambrU<k2>sambrU
{#sambrU#}¦ {%sam-brū,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%-bravīti, -brūte,%}
&c. (see rt. {%brū,%} p. 694), to speak with, converse
with; to talk together, agree; to say anything to
any one (with two acc.).
<LEND>

<L>51137<pc>1089-a<k1>samBakz<k2>samBakz
{#samBakz#}¦ {%sam-bhakṣ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-bhakṣayati,%}
&c., to eat together, eat up, devour, consume.
<LEND>

<L>51138<pc>1089-a<k1>samBakza<k2>samBakza
{%Sam-bhakṣa, as,%}¦ m. eating together, food in
common.
<LEND>

<L>51139<pc>1089-a<k1>samBakzya<k2>samBakzya
{%Sam-bhakṣya,%}¦ ind. having eaten up, having con-
sumed.
<LEND>

<L>51140<pc>1089-a<k1>samBakzyamARa<k2>samBakzyamARa
{%Sam-bhakṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being consumed.
<LEND>

<L>51141<pc>1089-a<k1>samBaj<k2>samBaj
{#samBaj#}¦ {%sam-bhaj,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bhajati, -te,%}
{%-bhaktum,%} to distribute completely, apportion, allot,
dispense, divide, share, cause to participate in; to
bestow, grant; to favour, serve, help; to share in,
possess, enjoy (A.).
<LEND>

<L>51142<pc>1089-a<k1>samBakta<k2>samBakta
{%Sam-bhakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ distributed, divided,
shared; participating or sharing in, enjoying, pos-
sessing; devoted to, faithful to, faithfully attached.
<LEND>

<L>51143<pc>1089-a<k1>samBakti<k2>samBakti
{%Sam-bhakti, is,%}¦ f. sharing in, possessing, enjoy-
ing; participating, causing to participate, distributing;
favouring, honouring.
<LEND>

<L>51144<pc>1089-a<k1>samBaktf<k2>samBaktf
{%Sam-bhaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who shares or par-
ticipates, one who enjoys or possesses, sharing in,
possessing, one who distributes or grants, one who
favours or honours or worships.
<LEND>
[Page1089-b+ 74]

<L>51145<pc>1089-b<k1>samBajana<k2>samBajana
{%Sam-bhajana, am,%}¦ n. causing to share in, dis-
tributing, favouring.
<LEND>

<L>51146<pc>1089-b<k1>samBajanIya<k2>samBajanIya
{%Sam-bhajanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be shared in or
enjoyed, to be liked; to be favoured or honoured.
<LEND>

<L>51147<pc>1089-b<k1>samBaYj<k2>samBaYj
{#samBaYj#}¦ {%sam-bhañj,%} cl. 7. P. {%-bhanakti,%} &c.,
to break to pieces, shatter, shiver.
<LEND>

<L>51148<pc>1089-b<k1>samBagna<k2>samBagna
{%Sam-bhagna, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken to pieces, ṣat-
tered; dispersed, scattered, defeated; ({%as%}), m., N. of
Śiva ({%= samyak-sevita,%} as if fr. {%sam-bhaj%}).
<LEND>

<L>51149<pc>1089-b<k1>samBara<k2>samBara
{#samBara#}¦ {%sam-bhara.%} See under {%sam-bhṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>51150<pc>1089-b<k1>samBarts<k2>samBarts
{#samBarts#}¦ {%sam-bharts,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-bhartsa-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} to censure greatly, abuse, reproach,
find fault with, blame.
<LEND>

<L>51151<pc>1089-b<k1>samBartsita<k2>samBartsita
{%Sam-bhartsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ much censured, abused,
reviled.
<LEND>

<L>51152<pc>1089-b<k1>samBal<k2>samBal
{#samBal#}¦ {%sam-bhal,%} cl. 10. P. A. {%-bhālayati,%}
{%-te, -yitum,%} to observe well, perceive, hear, see,
behold.
<LEND>

<L>51153<pc>1089-b<k1>samBala<k2>samBala
{#samBala#}¦ {%sambhala, as,%} m. (for {%sam-bhara%}),
Ved. one who brings together, one who arranges a
marriage, a match-maker; a suitor, wooer; a pro-
curer, pimp; ({%ī%}), f. a procuress, bawd, (also written
{%śambhalī.%})
<LEND>

<L>51154<pc>1089-b<k1>samBava<k2>samBava
{#samBava#}¦ {%sam-bhava,%} &c. See under {%sam-bhū.%}
<LEND>

<L>51155<pc>1089-b<k1>samBA<k2>samBA
{#samBA#}¦ {%sam-bhā,%} cl. 2. P. {%-bhāti, -babhau,%}
{%-bhātum,%} to shine fully or brightly, be very bright;
to shine forth, be visible, be conspicuous; to ap-
pear, seem.
<LEND>

<L>51156<pc>1089-b<k1>samBARqaya<k2>samBARqaya
{#samBARqaya#}¦ {%sam-bhāṇḍaya%} (fr. {%bhāṇḍa%} with
{%sam%}), Nom. A. {%-bhāṇḍayate, -yitum,%} to collect
vessels or utensils.
<LEND>

<L>51157<pc>1089-b<k1>samBARqya<k2>samBARqya
{%Sam-bhāṇḍya,%}¦ ind. having collected utensils.
<LEND>

<L>51158<pc>1089-b<k1>samBAvya<k2>samBAvya
{#samBAvya#}¦ {%sam-bhāvya.%} See p. 1090.
<LEND>

<L>51159<pc>1089-b<k1>samBAz<k2>samBAz
{#samBAz#}¦ {%sam-bhāṣ,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhāṣate,%} &c.,
to speak together, converse with; to address, speak
to (with acc.); to greet, salute; to agree together,
consent; to talk over, persuade (with acc.); to have
sexual intercourse with; to speak, say, recite; Caus.
{%-bhāṣayati, -yitum,%} to converse with (with inst.);
to address (with acc.); to persuade, prevail upon.
<LEND>

<L>51160<pc>1089-b<k1>samBAza<k2>samBAza
{%Sam-bhāṣa, as,%}¦ m. conversation [cf. {%sneha-s˚%}];
({%ā%}), f. conversation, discourse; greeting; criminal
connection; contract, agreement; war-cry, watch-
word.
<LEND>

<L>51161<pc>1089-b<k1>samBAzaRa<k2>samBAzaRa
{%Sam-bhāṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. conversation, discourse;
sexual intercourse; war-cry, watch-word.
<LEND>

<L>51162<pc>1089-b<k1>samBAzat<k2>samBAzat
{%Sam-bhāṣat, an, antī, at,%}¦ speaking together.
<LEND>

<L>51163<pc>1089-b<k1>samBAzamARa<k2>samBAzamARa
{%Sam-bhāṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ speaking or con-
versing together.
<LEND>

<L>51164<pc>1089-b<k1>samBAzita<k2>samBAzita
{%Sam-bhāṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spoken to, addressed;
said, spoken; ({%am%}), n. conversation.
<LEND>

<L>51165<pc>1089-b<k1>samBAzitvA<k2>samBAzitvA
{%Sam-bhāṣitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having con-
versed.
<LEND>

<L>51166<pc>1089-b<k1>samBAzya<k2>samBAzya<h>1
1. {%sambhāṣya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be conversed with,
fit to be talked in, ({%asambhāṣye deśe,%} in a place
unfit for conversation, Manu VIII. 55.)
<LEND>

<L>51167<pc>1089-b<k1>samBAzya<k2>samBAzya<h>2
2. {%sam-bhāṣya,%}¦ ind. having addressed in suitable
language; addressing, accosting; having recited.
<LEND>

<L>51168<pc>1089-b<k1>samBid<k2>samBid
{#samBid#}¦ {%sam-bhid,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhinatti,%}
{%-bhintte,%} &c., to break to pieces, split or break
completely asunder, pierce; to bring into contact,
combine, join, mingle, associate with.
<LEND>

<L>51169<pc>1089-b<k1>samBinna<k2>samBinna
{%Sam-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely broken or
divided; shaken, agitated; brought into contact or
collision, combined or united with; ({%as%}), m. an
epithet of Śiva. {%—Sambhinna-maryāda, as, ā, am,%}
one who has broken through barriers or bounds.
{%—Sambhinna-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} one who has
abandoned good conduct. {%—Sambhinna-sarvāṅga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has contracted or compressed
the whole body (as a tortoise).
<LEND>

<L>51170<pc>1089-b<k1>samBeda<k2>samBeda
{%Sam-bheda, as,%}¦ m. breaking to pieces, splitting,
bursting; union, junction, mixture; the confluence
of two rivers, the junction of a river with the sea.
<LEND>
[Page1089-c+ 78]

<L>51171<pc>1089-c<k1>samBedana<k2>samBedana
{%Sam-bhedana, am,%}¦ n. the act of breaking up;
bringing into contact or collision.
<LEND>

<L>51172<pc>1089-c<k1>samBIta<k2>samBIta
{#samBIta#}¦ {%sam-bhīta, as, ā, am,%} greatly alarmed,
afraid of (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>51173<pc>1089-c<k1>samBuj<k2>samBuj<h>1
{#samBuj#} 1¦. {%sam-bhuj.%} See rt. 1. {%bhuj.%}
<LEND>

<L>51174<pc>1089-c<k1>samBugna<k2>samBugna
{%Sam-bhugna, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely bent or curved.
<LEND>

<L>51175<pc>1089-c<k1>samBuj<k2>samBuj<h>2
{#samBuj#} 2¦. {%sam-bhuj,%} cl. 7. P. A. {%-bhunakti,%}
{%-bhuṅkte, -bhoktum,%} to enjoy together, eat together;
to enjoy thoroughly, eat; to enjoy carnally; to serve,
be of service to (Ved.): Pass. {%-bhujyate,%} to be en-
joyed together, to be enjoyed: Caus. {%-bhojayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to enjoy, cause to eat; to feed with
(with acc. and instr.).
<LEND>

<L>51176<pc>1089-c<k1>samBukta<k2>samBukta
{%Sam-bhukta, as, ā, am,%}¦ well enjoyed; eaten;
made use of.
<LEND>

<L>51177<pc>1089-c<k1>samBuja<k2>samBuja
{%Sam-bhuja, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. universally enjoyed,
(Sāy. {%= santata-bhuja%} or {%sam-bhujam = samyak%}
{%bhogāya,%} Ṛg-veda II. 1, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>51178<pc>1089-c<k1>samBuYjat<k2>samBuYjat
{%Sam-bhuñjat, an, atī, at,%}¦ enjoying, &c.; being
of service to (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>51179<pc>1089-c<k1>samBoga<k2>samBoga
{%Sam-bhoga, as,%}¦ m. complete enjoyment, pleasure,
delight; sensual enjoyment; carnal enjoyment, sexual
union; a particular subdivision of the Śṛṅgāra Rasa or
sentiment of love (described as successful love leading
to union); employment, use; a sensualist, libertine;
a Jaina or Buddhist edict {%(= śāsana)%}. {%—Sambhoga-%}
{%kṣama, as, ā, am,%} suitable for enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>51180<pc>1089-c<k1>samBogin<k2>samBogin
{%Sambhogin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ enjoying, addicted to sensual
enjoyment, sensual; employing, using; ({%ī%}), m. a
sensualist, libertine.
<LEND>

<L>51181<pc>1089-c<k1>samBojaka<k2>samBojaka
{%Sam-bhojaka, as,%}¦ m. an eater, taster.
<LEND>

<L>51182<pc>1089-c<k1>samBojana<k2>samBojana
{%Sam-bhojana, am,%}¦ n. the act of enjoying or eat-
ing; feeding; eating together, a meal taken in
company, a dinner party; ({%as, ī, am%}), eating to-
gether; [cf. {%saha-bhojana.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51183<pc>1089-c<k1>samBojya<k2>samBojya
{%Sam-bhojya,%}¦ ind. having caused to enjoy or eat;
having fed with.
<LEND>

<L>51184<pc>1089-c<k1>samBur<k2>samBur
{#samBur#}¦ {%sam-bhur.%} See rt. {%bhur.%}
<LEND>

<L>51185<pc>1089-c<k1>saYjarBurARa<k2>saYjarBurARa
{%Sañ-jarbhurāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. Intens.), moving
about rapidly; seizing, taking, (Sāy. {%= gṛhṇat,%} Ṛg-
veda V. 44, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>51186<pc>1089-c<k1>samBU<k2>samBU
{#samBU#}¦ {%sam-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%-bhavati, -te,%} &c.,
to be together, be united with, be joined with, have
intercourse with (with inst. or sometimes with acc.),
be united sexually with; to meet with; to be born
or produced, be engendered, be formed, arise, spring
up, proceed, ensue, accrue; to take place, happen,
take effect; to be, become, exist, be found, occur;
to be composed of, to be adequate for (with inf.), be
competent to (with inf.), be able; to be fitting or
compatible or consistent; to be possible; to be capable
of holding; to be capable of existing in, be contained
in; to be numbered among (Ved.): Caus. {%-bhāvayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to cause to be together, cause to be united
or meet together; to bring together; to cause to be
born or produced, cause to be or exist, produce, effect,
accomplish, make; to manifest, exhibit; to think
about, think, imagine, fancy, suppose, consider, be-
lieve; to imply, suggest a possibility, suppose anything
possible in any one (with loc. or gen.), believe any
one capable of; to think highly of, honour, esteem,
do honour to, pay one's respects to, salute, greet; to
receive or accept with honour or favour; to honour
or gratify with, present with (with inst.), bestow; to
regard or consider as (with two acc.); to expect:
Pass. of Caus. {%-bhāvyate,%} to be produced or effected;
to be possible; to be honoured or esteemed; to be
received with favour; to be supposed or imagined
or proved capable of, &c.; to be thought fitting or
consistent: Desid. {%-bubhūṣati,%} to wish to be pro-
duced, &c.
<LEND>

<L>51187<pc>1089-c<k1>samBava<k2>samBava
{%Sam-bhava, as,%}¦ m. birth, being, production, ex-
istence, arising, springing up; origin, cause, motive;
uniting together, combination, mixing, union; com-
patibility, consistency, appropriateness, adaptation,
adequacy; capacity, ability, possibility; agreement,
conformity (especially of the receptacle to the thing
received); equivalence (regarded as one of the
[Page1090-a+ 79]
Pramāṇas or means of certain knowledge in phil.,
it may be illustrated by the equivalence known to
exist between one shilling and twelve pence); ac-
quaintance, intimacy; loss, destruction; N. of the
third Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī, (also read
{%śam-bhava.%})
<LEND>

<L>51188<pc>1090-a<k1>samBavat<k2>samBavat
{%Sam-bhavat, an, antī, at,%}¦ being, existing, arising,
springing up.
<LEND>

<L>51189<pc>1090-a<k1>samBavya<k2>samBavya
{%Sam-bhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be produced together,
to be capable, &c.; ({%as%}), m. the wood-apple, Feronia
Elephantum ({%= kapittha%}).
<LEND>

<L>51190<pc>1090-a<k1>samBAvana<k2>samBAvana
{%Sam-bhāvana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. compatibility, fitness,
suitableness, adequacy, competency, ability; possi-
bility; (in logic) doubt; (in grammar) the sense of
the potential mood; considering, reflecting, supposi-
tion, idea, fancy, imagination, thought; regard,
esteem; worship, honour, affection, love; paying
honour, salutation, greeting; celebrity, fame; a par-
ticular Alaṅkāra or figure in rhetoric (described by
some as the use of the verb in the imperative or
potential mood).
<LEND>

<L>51191<pc>1090-a<k1>samBAvanIya<k2>samBAvanIya
{%Sam-bhāvanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured or
greeted.
<LEND>

<L>51192<pc>1090-a<k1>samBAvayitavya<k2>samBAvayitavya
{%Sam-bhāvayitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>51193<pc>1090-a<k1>samBAvita<k2>samBAvita
{%Sam-bhāvita, as, ā, am,%}¦ suited, fitted, adequate,
capable, suited to, fit for, possible; perceived, thought
about, thought of, considered, supposed, conjectured,
imagined, reflected; thought highly of, esteemed,
honoured, honourable; satisfied. {%—Sambhāvita-tara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} more honoured or esteemed, more con-
fided in. {%—Sambhāvitātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%}
noble-minded.
<LEND>

<L>51194<pc>1090-a<k1>samBAvya<k2>samBAvya<h>1
1. {%sam-bhāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be adapted, to be
made fit; suitable, capable; to be supposed capable,
to be supposed, supposable, imaginable, probable; to
be honoured, &c.; ({%am%}), n. adequacy, competency,
fitness.
<LEND>

<L>51195<pc>1090-a<k1>samBAvya<k2>samBAvya<h>2
2. {%sam-bhāvya,%}¦ ind. having honoured or done
honour to, having adorned.
<LEND>

<L>51196<pc>1090-a<k1>samBu<k2>samBu
{%Sam-bhu, us,%}¦ m. one who is born or produced
({%= sambhavati yaḥ%}); a parent, progenitor; a species
of the Ati-dhṛti metre.
<LEND>

<L>51197<pc>1090-a<k1>samBUta<k2>samBUta
{%Sam-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ being together, combined
with; become, born, produced, arisen, accrued, pro-
ceeded from, formed of, composed; capable, ade-
quate, equal; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king. {%—Sambhūta-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the being combined or united with
(e. g. {%pañcasu bhūteṣu,%} with the five elements).
{%—Sambhūta-vijaya, as,%} m. (according to some)
N. of a particular Jaina Arhat ({%= śruta-kevalin%}).
<LEND>

<L>51198<pc>1090-a<k1>samBUti<k2>samBUti
{%Sam-bhūti, is,%}¦ f. the being together, combina-
tion; suitability, fitness; Fitness (personified as a
daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Marīci); birth, ori-
gin, production; power. {%—Sambhūti-vijaya, as,%} m.,
N. of one of the six Śruta-kevalins (with Jainas).
<LEND>

<L>51199<pc>1090-a<k1>samBUya<k2>samBUya
{%Sam-bhūya,%}¦ ind. being together, being united or
combined with, ({%sambhūya samutthānam,%} en-
gaging in business after joining partnership, associa-
tion in trade, partnership; sometimes written as a
compound word.) {%—Sambhūya-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
acting in concert or in company, a coadjutor, co-
partner, colleague. {%—Sambhūya-gamana%} or {%sam-%}
{%bhūya-yāna, am,%} n. going in company.
<LEND>

<L>51200<pc>1090-a<k1>samBUyasya<k2>samBUyasya
{%Sambhūyasya%}¦ (said to be fr. a form {%sam-bhūyas%}),
Nom. P. {%sambhūyasyati,%} &c., to be born again.
<LEND>

<L>51201<pc>1090-a<k1>samBUz<k2>samBUz
{#samBUz#}¦ {%sam-bhūṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhūṣati,%} &c.,
Ved. to procure or provide anything (acc.) for any one
(loc.); to obtain, ({%bhūṣ%} being regarded by Sāy. as a
form of rt. 1. {%bhū%}); to adorn, (Sāy. {%= alaṅ-kṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>51202<pc>1090-a<k1>samBf<k2>samBf
{#samBf#}¦ {%sam-bhṛ,%} cl. 1. 3. P. A. {%-bharati, -te,%}
{%-bibharti, -bibhṛte,%} &c., to bring together, collect,
unite, concentrate, place together, compose; to pre-
pare, make ready, procure (materials or ingredients
of any kind, especially for a sacrifice); to offer, pre-
sent; to support or maintain well, nourish; to effect;
accomplish: Caus. {%-bhārayati, -yitum,%} to cause to
bring together or prepare.
<LEND>

<L>51203<pc>1090-a<k1>samBara<k2>samBara
{%Sam-bhara, as,%}¦ m., Ved. one who brings together,
[Page1090-b+ 76]
a supporter, bestower, (Sāy. {%= sambhartṛ, dhāraka,%}
Ṛg-veda IV. 17, 11.)
<LEND>

<L>51204<pc>1090-b<k1>samBAra<k2>samBAra
{%Sam-bhāra, as,%}¦ m. bringing together, collecting,
preparing, preparation, equipment, provision, ap-
paratus, materials, necessaries, constituent part, in-
gredient, requisite, assemblage of things required for
any purpose; multitude, number, quantity, heap, ful-
ness, completeness; wealth; maintaining or support-
ing well, maintenance, support, nourishment.
<LEND>

<L>51205<pc>1090-b<k1>samBArya<k2>samBArya
{%Sam-bhārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be maintained or
nourished, a dependant.
<LEND>

<L>51206<pc>1090-b<k1>samBfta<k2>samBfta
{%Sam-bhṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ brought together, col-
lected, assembled, accumulated, concentrated, com-
posed, prepared, got ready, equipped, fitted out,
provided, stored, laden, filled, covered, furnished,
endowed, possessed of; full, complete, compact;
brought, placed, deposited, offered (as an oblation);
acquired, obtained, gained; produced, caused; well
maintained or nourished; carried, borne. {%—Sam-%}
{%bhṛta-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved. one who has accom-
plished holy acts (said of Indra; Sāy. {%= sampādita-%}
{%karman%} or {%sampādita-prajña,%} Ṛg-veda 1. 52, 8).
{%—Sambhṛta-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} one whose beauty is
enhanced, richly stored. {%—Sambhṛta-sambhāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} one who has brought together all re-
quisite materials or provided all requisites. {%—Sam-%}
{%bhṛtārtha (˚ta-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has
accumulated wealth.
<LEND>

<L>51207<pc>1090-b<k1>samBfti<k2>samBfti
{%Sam-bhṛti, is,%}¦ f. collection; equipment, prepara-
tion, provision; plenitude, fulness; complete main-
tenance, support, nourishment.
<LEND>

<L>51208<pc>1090-b<k1>samBftya<k2>samBftya<h>1
1. {%sam-bhṛtya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be maintained or
nourished.
<LEND>

<L>51209<pc>1090-b<k1>samBftya<k2>samBftya<h>2
2. {%sam-bhṛtya,%}¦ ind. having brought together,
having nourished.
<LEND>

<L>51210<pc>1090-b<k1>samBriyamARa<k2>samBriyamARa
{%Sam-bhriyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being collected;
being nourished, &c.
<LEND>

<L>51211<pc>1090-b<k1>samBraMS<k2>samBraMS
{#samBraMS#}¦ {%sam-bhraṃś%} or {%sam-bhraś,%} cl. 4. P. A.
{%-bhraśyati, -te,%} &c., to fall quite away, glide off,
slip away.
<LEND>

<L>51212<pc>1090-b<k1>samBrajj<k2>samBrajj
{#samBrajj#}¦ {%sam-bhrajj.%} See rt. 1. {%bhrajj.%}
<LEND>

<L>51213<pc>1090-b<k1>samBfzwa<k2>samBfzwa
{%Sam-bhṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly parched,
dried, dry.
<LEND>

<L>51214<pc>1090-b<k1>samBram<k2>samBram
{#samBram#}¦ {%sam-bhram,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%-bhramati,%}
{%-bhrāmyati,%} &c., to roam or wander all about, go
quite astray; to whirl about, be greatly confused, be
perplexed or puzzled: Caus. {%-bhramayati, -bhrāma-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to lead astray, perplex, bewilder:
Pass. of Caus. {%-bhrāmyate,%} &c., to be led astray,
be bewildered, be at a loss, be perplexed about
(with abl.).
<LEND>

<L>51215<pc>1090-b<k1>samBrama<k2>samBrama
{%Sam-bhrama, as,%}¦ m. moving about, moving or
going round, turning round, whirling about, re-
volving, haste, hurry; flurry, confusion, agitation;
uproar, tumult; fear, terror, alarm; error, mistake,
ignorance; bustling activity, zeal; respect, reverence;
epithet of a class of beings attending on Śiva. {%—Sam-%}
{%bhrama-jvalita, as, ā, am,%} excited by flurry.
{%—Sambhrama-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} possessing bewilder-
ment, embarrassed, agitated.
<LEND>

<L>51216<pc>1090-b<k1>samBrAnta<k2>samBrAnta
{%Sam-bhrānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ whirled about; flurried,
confused, perplexed, troubled, bewildered, stirred up,
agitated, excited. {%—Sambhrānta-jana, as, ā, am,%}
one whose people are bewildered. {%—Sambhrānta-%}
{%manas, ās, ās, as,%} bewildered in mind.
<LEND>

<L>51217<pc>1090-b<k1>samBrAj<k2>samBrAj
{#samBrAj#}¦ {%sam-bhrāj,%} cl. 1. A. {%-bhrājate,%} &c.
(see rt. 1. {%bhrāj%}), to shine brightly, glitter, gleam,
sparkle.
<LEND>

<L>51218<pc>1090-b<k1>samBrAjat<k2>samBrAjat
{%Sam-bhrājat, an, antī, at,%}¦ shining brightly,
glittering, sparkling.
<LEND>

<L>51219<pc>1090-b<k1>sammajj<k2>sammajj
{#sammajj#}¦ {%sam-majj,%} cl. 6. P. {%-majjati,%} &c.,
to sink together, sink down, to be wholly submerged
or immersed.
<LEND>

<L>51220<pc>1090-b<k1>sammagna<k2>sammagna
{%Sam-magna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sunk down; immersed;
overwhelmed.
<LEND>

<L>51221<pc>1090-b<k1>sammaT<k2>sammaT
{#sammaT#}¦ {%sam-math%} or {%sam-manth,%} cl. 1. 9. P.
[Page1090-c+ 76]
{%-mathati, -manthati, -mathnāti,%} &c., to bruise
or pound together, crush to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>51222<pc>1090-c<k1>sammaTita<k2>sammaTita
{%Sam-mathita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bruised, pounded,
crushed to pieces, destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>51223<pc>1090-c<k1>sammad<k2>sammad
{#sammad#}¦ {%sam-mad,%} cl. 4. P. {%-mādyati%} (Ved.
also cl. 1. P. A. {%-madati, -mandati, -te%}), {%-maditum,%}
to be completely drunk or intoxicated; to be very
glad, be greatly pleased with, rejoice at, rejoice:
Caus. {%-mādayati, -te, -yitum,%} to make intoxicated;
to make cheerful, put in good spirits, exhilarate; to
be completely intoxicated (A.).
<LEND>

<L>51224<pc>1090-c<k1>sammatta<k2>sammatta
{%Sam-matta, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely intoxicated,
greatly exhilarated or excited, intoxicated with love,
enraptured; rutting, in rut.
<LEND>

<L>51225<pc>1090-c<k1>sammada<k2>sammada
{%Sam-mada, as, ā, am,%}¦ greatly exhilarated, happy,
glad; ({%as%}), m. exhilaration, happiness, joy, pleasure;
N. of the king of the fish (in Viṣṇu-Purāṇa IV. 2).
<LEND>

<L>51226<pc>1090-c<k1>sammAda<k2>sammAda
{%Sam-māda, as,%}¦ m. great exhilaration, intoxica-
tion, frenzy.
<LEND>

<L>51227<pc>1090-c<k1>samman<k2>samman
{#samman#}¦ {%sam-man,%} cl. 4. A. (ep. also P.)
{%-manyate (-ti), -mantum,%} to think together, be of
the same mind, agree, consent to, assent to, approve,
sanction, authorise, permit, allow, recognise; to
think highly of, esteem, value, honour; to think,
suppose, imagine; to consider or regard as, to have
in the mind, intend, contemplate, resolve: Caus.
{%-mānayati, -yitum,%} to honour, reverence, respect;
to consider, regard; to assure of; to instruct, teach,
(Pāṇ. 1. 3, 36.)
<LEND>

<L>51228<pc>1090-c<k1>sammata<k2>sammata
{%Sam-mata, as, ā, am,%}¦ agreed, consented or as-
sented to, concurred in, approved; conformable,
corresponding, like, resembling, attached, liked, be-
loved; thought highly of, esteemed, highly honoured,
valued; thought, supposed, considered, regarded;
({%am%}), n. assent, consent, approval, acquiescence, con-
currence; opinion, impression, ({%sammate sārtha-%}
{%vāhasya,%} under the impression of its being a com-
pany of travellers.)
<LEND>

<L>51229<pc>1090-c<k1>sammati<k2>sammati
{%Sam-mati, is,%}¦ f. sameness of opinion, agreement,
consent, assent, approval, approbation; wish, desire;
esteem, respect, homage; regard, affection, love;
self-knowledge; order, command.
<LEND>

<L>51230<pc>1090-c<k1>sammatIya<k2>sammatIya
{%Sammatīya,%}¦ N. of one of the four divisions of the
Vaibhāṣika system of Buddhism (whose founder is said
to have been Upāli, a disciple of the great Buddha).
<LEND>

<L>51231<pc>1090-c<k1>sammAna<k2>sammAna<h>1
1. {%sam-māna, as,%}¦ m. (according to some also
{%am,%} n.), honour, respect, homage.
<LEND>

<L>51232<pc>1090-c<k1>sammAnana<k2>sammAnana
{%Sam-mānana, am,%}¦ n. the act of honouring, wor-
ship, homage; instruction, teaching, (Pāṇ. 1. 3, 36.)
<LEND>

<L>51233<pc>1090-c<k1>sammAnita<k2>sammAnita
{%Sam-mānita, as, ā, am,%}¦ honoured, treated with
reverence or respect.
<LEND>

<L>51234<pc>1090-c<k1>sammAnya<k2>sammAnya
{%Sam-mānya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured, honour-
able, respectable.
<LEND>

<L>51235<pc>1090-c<k1>sammantr<k2>sammantr
{#sammantr#}¦ {%sam-mantr,%} cl. 10. A. {%-mantrayate,%}
{%-yitum,%} to consult together, take counsel with (with
inst.), hold a council, deliberate, advise, express an
opinion; to salute, greet, address.
<LEND>

<L>51236<pc>1090-c<k1>sammantraRIya<k2>sammantraRIya
{%Sam-mantraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be consulted.
<LEND>

<L>51237<pc>1090-c<k1>sammantrayitvA<k2>sammantrayitvA
{%Sam-mantrayitvā%}¦ (anom. ind. part.), having con-
sulted together.
<LEND>

<L>51238<pc>1090-c<k1>sammantrya<k2>sammantrya
{%Sam-mantrya,%}¦ ind. having consulted together;
having saluted.
<LEND>

<L>51239<pc>1090-c<k1>sammarda<k2>sammarda
{#sammarda#}¦ {%sam-marda, sam-mardin,%} &c. See
under {%sam-mṛd.%}
<LEND>

<L>51240<pc>1090-c<k1>sammarSin<k2>sammarSin
{#sammarSin#}¦ {%sam-marśin.%} See under {%sam-mṛś.%}
<LEND>

<L>51241<pc>1090-c<k1>sammA<k2>sammA<h>1
{#sammA#} 1¦. {%sam-mā%} (see rt. 3. {%mā%}), cl. 2. P.,
3. 4. A. {%-māti, -mimīte%} (2nd sing. Impv. P., Ved.
{%-mimīhi%}), {%-māyate, -mātum,%} to measure out, mea-
sure; to make of the same measure, make equal,
make to correspond, equalize (in size, number,
quantity, &c.); to compare; to mete out, appor-
tion, distribute, grant, bestow (Ved.); to be of the
same capacity with, be contained in (with loc.):
Pass. {%-mīyate,%} to be of the same measure; to be
contained in.
<LEND>

<L>51242<pc>1090-c<k1>sammA<k2>sammA<h>2
2. {%sam-mā,%}¦ f. a kind of Vedic metre.
<LEND>
[Page1091-a+ 74]

<L>51243<pc>1091-a<k1>sammAna<k2>sammAna<h>2
2. {%sam-māna, am,%}¦ n. the act of measuring out,
equalizing, comparing; measure.
<LEND>

<L>51244<pc>1091-a<k1>sammita<k2>sammita
{%Sam-mita, as, ā, am,%}¦ measured out, measured,
meted; of the same measure, of equal measure or
extent, commensurate, conformable, corresponding,
equal, same, like, resembling, similar, as large as, as
long as (e. g. {%tulayā s˚,%} equal in weight; {%samare s˚,%}
equal in battle; {%pāpa-s˚,%} equal in crime; {%nagara-s˚,%}
as large as a city; {%yojanāyuta-s˚,%} ten thousand
Yojanas long); reaching to (e. g. {%lalāṭa-s˚,%} reaching
to the forehead); equalized, adapted; furnished or
provided with.
<LEND>

<L>51245<pc>1091-a<k1>sammiti<k2>sammiti
{%Sam-miti, is,%}¦ f. measuring out, measuring, com-
paring.
<LEND>

<L>51246<pc>1091-a<k1>sammAtura<k2>sammAtura
{#sammAtura#}¦ {%sam-mātura, as,%} m. (for {%san-%}
{%mātura,%} q. v.), the son of a virtuous mother.
<LEND>

<L>51247<pc>1091-a<k1>sammAtf<k2>sammAtf
{#sammAtf#}¦ {%sam-mātṛ, tā,%} &c., having the
same mother, twin.
<LEND>

<L>51248<pc>1091-a<k1>sammAna<k2>sammAna<h>1
{#sammAna#} 1¦. and 2. {%sam-māna.%} See above
and p. 1090, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>51249<pc>1091-a<k1>sammArj<k2>sammArj
{#sammArj#}¦ {%sam-mārj.%} See {%sam-mṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>51250<pc>1091-a<k1>sammArjaka<k2>sammArjaka
{%Sam-mārjaka, sam-mārjana,%}¦ &c. See under
{%sam-mṛj.%}
<LEND>

<L>51251<pc>1091-a<k1>sammi<k2>sammi
{#sammi#}¦ {%sam-mi%} (see rt. 1. {%mi%}), cl. 5. P. A. {%-mi-%}
{%noti, -minute,%} &c., Ved. to fasten at the same time,
fasten together, fix, erect.
<LEND>

<L>51252<pc>1091-a<k1>sammikz<k2>sammikz
{#sammikz#}¦ {%sam-mikṣ%} or {%sam-mimikṣ%} (by
some regarded as a Desid. form of {%sam-mih,%} see
{%mikṣ,%} p. 777), {%-mimikṣati,%} &c., to mix together,
mingle.
<LEND>

<L>51253<pc>1091-a<k1>sammita<k2>sammita
{#sammita#}¦ {%sam-mita.%} See under 1. {%sam-mā.%}
<LEND>

<L>51254<pc>1091-a<k1>sammil<k2>sammil
{#sammil#}¦ {%sam-mil,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-milati, -te,%}
&c., to meet together, assemble together, be present,
associate with.
<LEND>

<L>51255<pc>1091-a<k1>sammilita<k2>sammilita
{%Sam-milita, as, ā, am,%}¦ met together, assembled,
collected.
<LEND>

<L>51256<pc>1091-a<k1>sammilya<k2>sammilya
{%Sam-milya,%}¦ ind. having assembled or met toge-
ther.
<LEND>

<L>51257<pc>1091-a<k1>sammelana<k2>sammelana
{%Sam-melana, am,%}¦ n. the act of meeting together,
assembling, union; mixing with, mixture, blending.
<LEND>

<L>51258<pc>1091-a<k1>sammiSr<k2>sammiSr
{#sammiSr#}¦ {%sam-miśr.%} See rt. {%miśr.%}
<LEND>

<L>51259<pc>1091-a<k1>sammiSra<k2>sammiSra
{%Sam-miśra, as, ā, am,%}¦ commingled, mixed
together, mixed, mingled, blended, joined, con-
nected, furnished or endowed with.
<LEND>

<L>51260<pc>1091-a<k1>sammiSraRa<k2>sammiSraRa
{%Sam-miśraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of commingling
or mixing together.
<LEND>

<L>51261<pc>1091-a<k1>sammiSrita<k2>sammiSrita
{%Sam-miśrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ mixed together, mingled,
intermixed with (with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>51262<pc>1091-a<k1>sammiSla<k2>sammiSla
{%Sam-miśla, as, ā, am, = sam-miśra%}¦ above; ({%as%}),
m. ‘universal mingler,’ epithet of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>51263<pc>1091-a<k1>sammih<k2>sammih
{#sammih#}¦ {%sam-mih,%} apparently cl. 3. A. (see
Ṛg-veda 1. 48, 16, where the form {%mimikṣva%}
occurs), Ved. to sprinkle with, shower down upon:
Desid. {%-mimikṣati,%} to wish to mix; to mingle,
unite one's self; [cf. {%sam-mikṣ%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>51264<pc>1091-a<k1>sammIl<k2>sammIl
{#sammIl#}¦ {%sam-mīl,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mīlati,%} &c., to
close up (as a flower &c.); to shut the eyes: Caus.
{%-mīlayati, -yitum,%} to cause to close up, close, shut;
to close the eyes; to make insensible.
<LEND>

<L>51265<pc>1091-a<k1>sammIlana<k2>sammIlana
{%Sam-mīlana, am,%}¦ n. the closing up (of a flower
&c.), covering up, enveloping.
<LEND>

<L>51266<pc>1091-a<k1>sammIlya<k2>sammIlya
{%Sam-mīlya,%}¦ ind., Ved. having closed up, having
covered over, having enveloped.
<LEND>

<L>51267<pc>1091-a<k1>sammuKa<k2>sammuKa
{#sammuKa#}¦ {%sam-mukha, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} facing,
fronting, being in front of, being face to face, oppo-
site; confronting, meeting, encountering; looking
towards, directed towards; propitious; ({%am%}), ind.
before the face, in front of. {%—Sammukha-vartin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} being before the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>51268<pc>1091-a<k1>sammuKin<k2>sammuKin
{%Sammukhin, ī,%}¦ m. a looking-glass, mirror.
<LEND>

<L>51269<pc>1091-a<k1>sammuKIna<k2>sammuKIna
{%Sammukhīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ facing, being in face
of, face to face, confronting, before, in front, op-
posite.
<LEND>

<L>51270<pc>1091-a<k1>sammuc<k2>sammuc
{#sammuc#}¦ {%sam-muc,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-muñcati, -te, %}
[Page1091-b+ 79]
{%moktum,%} to let loose together, pour out, discharge,
shed: Caus. {%-mocayati, -yitum,%} to release, free,
set free, liberate.
<LEND>

<L>51271<pc>1091-b<k1>sammocita<k2>sammocita
{%Sam-mocita, as, ā, am,%}¦ set free, liberated, released,
<LEND>

<L>51272<pc>1091-b<k1>sammurC<k2>sammurC
{#sammurC#}¦ {%sam-murch,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mūrchati,%} &c.,
to congeal into a fixed form, acquire density or con-
sistency, become dense, thicken, coagulate; to be-
come stupid or senseless, become stupefied or insen-
sible; to acquire firmness or strength, grow stronger
or more intense, increase, expand, become powerful:
Caus. {%-mūrchayati, -yitum,%} to cause to assume form
or consistency, form, fashion; to stupefy, cause to
faint.
<LEND>

<L>51273<pc>1091-b<k1>sammUrCa<k2>sammUrCa
{%Sam-mūrcha,%}¦ (perhaps) thickening, augmenting,
increase, expansion, spreading. {%—Sammūrcha-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. grass or any gramineous plant.
<LEND>

<L>51274<pc>1091-b<k1>sammUrCat<k2>sammUrCat
{%Sam-mūrchat, an, antī, at,%}¦ becoming more
intense, increasing, spreading, pervading.
<LEND>

<L>51275<pc>1091-b<k1>sammUrCana<k2>sammUrCana
{%Sam-mūrchana, am,%}¦ n. the act of congealing or
becoming dense; stupefaction, insensibility, fainting
away; increasing or spreading in all directions,
universal pervasion, entire permeation, expansion,
co-extension; height, elevation. {%—Sammūrchanod-%}
{%bhava (˚na-ud˚), as,%} m. a fish or other aquatic
animal.
<LEND>

<L>51276<pc>1091-b<k1>sammUrCita<k2>sammUrCita
{%Sam-mūrchita, as, ā, am,%}¦ coagulated, congealed,
thickened; stupefied, senseless, unconscious; inten-
sified, increased.
<LEND>

<L>51277<pc>1091-b<k1>sammuh<k2>sammuh
{#sammuh#}¦ {%sam-muh,%} cl. 4. P. {%-muhyati,%} &c.,
to become quite stupefied or unconscious; to be
bewildered or disturbed or confounded; to become
unconscious: Caus. {%-mohayati, -yitum,%} to stupefy,
make unconscious, confound, bewilder, perplex, in-
fatuate, lead astray.
<LEND>

<L>51278<pc>1091-b<k1>sammugDa<k2>sammugDa
{%Sam-mugdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ stupefied, astounded;
bewildered, fascinated; beautiful; ({%am%}), ind. in a
fascinating manner; furtively.
<LEND>

<L>51279<pc>1091-b<k1>sammUQa<k2>sammUQa
{%Sam-mūḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ completely stupefied,
astounded; unconscious, senseless; bewildered, be-
guiled; infatuated, foolish, ignorant; disordered,
deranged; heaped, accumulated; produced rapidly;
broken; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of riddle or enigma. {%—Sam-%}
{%mūḍha-cetas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%sammūḍha-hṛdaya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} bewildered or infatuated in mind.
<LEND>

<L>51280<pc>1091-b<k1>sammoha<k2>sammoha
{%Sam-moha, as,%}¦ m. stupefaction, bewilderment,
confusion, insensibility, fainting away, swoon; in-
fatuation, ignorance, folly, illusion of mind; fasci-
nation, beguilement; tumult, battle, (enumerated
among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%} in Naigh. II. 17;
cf. {%samoha.%})
<LEND>

<L>51281<pc>1091-b<k1>sammohana<k2>sammohana
{%Sam-mohana, as, ī, am,%}¦ stupefying, bewitching,
fascinating; ({%am%}), n. fascinating, fascination. {%—Sam-%}
{%mohana-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work.
<LEND>

<L>51282<pc>1091-b<k1>sammohayat<k2>sammohayat
{%Sam-mohayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ stupefying, infatuat-
ing, bewildering.
<LEND>

<L>51283<pc>1091-b<k1>sammohita<k2>sammohita
{%Sam-mohita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stupefied, bewildered,
infatuated, beguiled, fascinated; enraptured.
<LEND>

<L>51284<pc>1091-b<k1>sammohya<k2>sammohya
{%Sam-mohya,%}¦ ind. having fascinated or stupefied,
having bewildered.
<LEND>

<L>51285<pc>1091-b<k1>sammfj<k2>sammfj
{#sammfj#}¦ {%sam-mṛj%} or {%sam-mārj%} (see rts.
1. {%mṛj, mārj%}), cl. 2. P. {%-mārṣṭi%} (sometimes
cl. 1. {%-mārjati,%} also cl. 10. P. {%-mārjayati, -yitum%}),
&c., to sweep together; to sweep clean, scour; to
rub or wipe off, clean, cleanse, sweep, purify, wash,
strain, filter; to take away, remove; to stroke.
<LEND>

<L>51286<pc>1091-b<k1>sammArjaka<k2>sammArjaka
{%Sam-mārjaka, as,%}¦ m. a sweeper, purifier.
<LEND>

<L>51287<pc>1091-b<k1>sammArjat<k2>sammArjat
{%Sam-mārjat, an, atī,%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} sweeping,
cleansing, scouring.
<LEND>

<L>51288<pc>1091-b<k1>sammArjana<k2>sammArjana
{%Sam-mārjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sweeping or
cleansing thoroughly; cleaning, scouring, purifying,
brushing; the anointing (of images &c.); ({%ī%}), f. a
broom, brush.
<LEND>

<L>51289<pc>1091-b<k1>sammArjita<k2>sammArjita
{%Sam-mārjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ well swept or scoured.
<LEND>

<L>51290<pc>1091-b<k1>sammArjya<k2>sammArjya
{%Sam-mārjya,%}¦ ind. having swept clean, having
scoured, &c.
<LEND>

<L>51291<pc>1091-b<k1>sammfjyamAna<k2>sammfjyamAna
{%Sam-mṛjyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being swept or
cleansed.
<LEND>

<L>51292<pc>1091-b<k1>sammfzwa<k2>sammfzwa
{%Sam-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ well swept or scoured,
cleaned, cleansed; strained, filtered.
<LEND>
[Page1091-c+ 75]

<L>51293<pc>1091-c<k1>sammfR<k2>sammfR
{#sammfR#}¦ {%sam-mṛṇ,%} cl. 6. P. {%-mṛṇati,%} &c.,
Ved. to kill, slay, destroy.
<LEND>

<L>51294<pc>1091-c<k1>sammfta<k2>sammfta
{#sammfta#}¦ {%sam-mṛta, as, ā, am,%} quite dead,
deceased.
<LEND>

<L>51295<pc>1091-c<k1>sammfd<k2>sammfd
{#sammfd#}¦ {%sam-mṛd,%} cl. 9. 1. P. {%-mṛdnāti,%}
{%-mardati,%} &c., to press or squeeze together, rub or
grind to pieces, bruise, crush, trample upon, defeat:
Caus. {%-mardayati,%} &c., to cause to be rubbed toge-
ther, &c., crush, pound, bruise; to rub; to clean.
<LEND>

<L>51296<pc>1091-c<k1>sammarda<k2>sammarda
{%Sam-marda, as,%}¦ m. pressing or rubbing together,
friction; thronging, trampling or treading on; war,
battle.
<LEND>

<L>51297<pc>1091-c<k1>sammardayAna<k2>sammardayAna
{%Sam-mardayāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbing or dashing
to pieces, shattering.
<LEND>

<L>51298<pc>1091-c<k1>sammardita<k2>sammardita
{%Sam-mardita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thoroughly bruised,
crushed, pounded.
<LEND>

<L>51299<pc>1091-c<k1>sammardin<k2>sammardin
{%Sam-mardin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ pressing thoroughly,
rubbing, crushing, trampling upon.
<LEND>

<L>51300<pc>1091-c<k1>sammardya<k2>sammardya
{%Sam-mardya,%}¦ ind. having pounded or bruised;
having rubbed or cleaned.
<LEND>

<L>51301<pc>1091-c<k1>sammfS<k2>sammfS
{#sammfS#}¦ {%sam-mṛś,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%-mṛśati, -te,%}
&c., to take hold of, seize, touch.
<LEND>

<L>51302<pc>1091-c<k1>sammarSin<k2>sammarSin
{%Sam-marśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ inquiring into, deliberating
about, discriminating, judicious.
<LEND>

<L>51303<pc>1091-c<k1>sammelana<k2>sammelana
{#sammelana#}¦ {%sam-melana.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>51304<pc>1091-c<k1>sammokz<k2>sammokz
{#sammokz#}¦ {%sam-mokṣ,%} cl. 10. P. {%-mokṣayati,%}
{%-yitum,%} to set quite free, liberate, let loose, release.
<LEND>

<L>51305<pc>1091-c<k1>sammoda<k2>sammoda
{#sammoda#}¦ {%sam-moda, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 2. {%mud%}
with {%sam%}), great rejoicing, delight, pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>51306<pc>1091-c<k1>sammoha<k2>sammoha
{#sammoha#}¦ {%sam-moha.%} See under {%sam-muh.%}
<LEND>

<L>51307<pc>1091-c<k1>sammyakz<k2>sammyakz
{#sammyakz#}¦ {%sam-myakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-myakṣati,%}
&c. (see rt. {%myakṣ%}), Ved. to be held together or
united; to be joined with.
<LEND>

<L>51308<pc>1091-c<k1>sammrakz<k2>sammrakz
{#sammrakz#}¦ {%sam-mrakṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%-mrakṣati,%}
&c. (see rt. {%mrakṣ%}), to rub on or in, anoint, em-
brocate.
<LEND>

<L>51309<pc>1091-c<k1>sammrakzita<k2>sammrakzita
{%Sam-mrakṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rubbed in, anointed.
<LEND>

<L>51310<pc>1091-c<k1>samyaYc<k2>samyaYc
{#samyaYc#}¦ {%samy-añc%} or {%samy-ac, aṅ, īcī, ak%}
(fr. an old loc. 2. {%sami + añc,%} see {%sami;%} cf.
{%tiri%} fr. {%tiras%} in {%tiry-añc%}), going along with or
together, going with, accompanying; uniform, same,
identical; all, entire, whole, complete; correct, accu-
rate, proper, true, right; pleasant, agreeable; ({%ak%}),
ind. at the same time, with, together; wholly, com-
pletely, entirely, comprehensively, thoroughly, fully,
accurately, correctly, truly, properly, fitly, in right
manner, honourably; well, duly; distinctly, clearly.
{%—Samyak-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, -kurute, -kar-%}
{%tum,%} to make true, perform well. {%—Samyak-cāritra,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘correct conduct,’ one of the three excellent
things (according to the Jainas, see {%ratna-traya%}).
{%—Samyak-tva, am,%} n. completeness, correctness, ac-
curacy, propriety, ({%kṣāyika-s˚,%} that state of perfection
in which material existence is destroyed.) {%—Samyak-%}
{%pāṭha, as,%} m. correct recitation or pronunciation.
{%—Samyak-prayoga, as,%} m. fitting or proper use
or employment, due practice; ({%eṇa%}), ind. by the
use of proper means. {%—Samyak-pravṛtti, is,%} f.
the right or proper direction (of the organs). {%—Sam-%}
{%yag-ukta, as, ā, am,%} properly or accurately said, of
equal weight or authority. {%—Samyag-gamana, am,%}
n. the act of going with, accompanying. {%—Samyag-%}
{%goptṛ, tā,%} m. a true protector or guardian. {%—Sam-%}
{%yag-jñāna, am,%} n. ‘complete knowledge,’ one of
the three jewels or excellent things (according to
the Jainas, see {%ratna-traya%}). {%—Samyag-daṇḍana,%}
{%am,%} n. the act of punishing properly or justly;
punishing legally. {%—Samyag-darśana, am,%} n. ‘com-
plete vision, accurate perception,’ one of the three
jewels or excellent things (according to the Jainas,
see {%ratna-traya%}); (with {%avrata%}), epithet of the
fourth of the fourteen stages leading to final emanci-
pation (according to the belief of the Jainas). {%—Sam-%}
{%yag-vartamāna, as, ā, am,%} continuing in the proper
discharge of duty, &c. {%—Samyag-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%}
[Page1092-a+ 71]
properly conducted; wholly confiding in. {%—Samyag-%}
{%vṛtti, is,%} f. steady or complete practice, regular
discharge of prescribed duties.
<LEND>

<L>51311<pc>1092-a<k1>samIcIna<k2>samIcIna
{%Samīcīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ tending in a common
direction, going with or in company with, agreeing
with, concordant, consistent, convenient, fit, proper,
correct, true, just, right; ({%am%}), n. propriety, fitness,
truth.
<LEND>

<L>51312<pc>1092-a<k1>samrAj<k2>samrAj
{#samrAj#}¦ {%sam-rāj, ṭ,%} m. (fr. {%saṃ-rāj,%} Pāṇ.
VIII. 3, 25), a sovereign lord, paramount sovereign,
one who rules over other princes and has performed
the Rājasūya sacrifice; ({%ṭ%}), f. a kind of Vedic metre.
<LEND>

<L>51313<pc>1092-a<k1>samrAjat<k2>samrAjat
{%Sam-rājat, an,%}¦ m., Ved. {%= sam-rāj,%} (see {%saṃ-%}
{%rāj.%})
<LEND>

<L>51314<pc>1092-a<k1>samrAjYI<k2>samrAjYI
{%Samrājñī,%}¦ f., Ved. a woman who takes prece-
dence, a mistress, superior.
<LEND>

<L>51315<pc>1092-a<k1>say<k2>say
{#say#}¦ {%say,%} cl. 1. A. {%sayate,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>51316<pc>1092-a<k1>saya<k2>saya
{#saya#}¦ {%sa-ya, as, ā, am,%} with the letter {%ya.%}
<LEND>

<L>51317<pc>1092-a<k1>sayakzman<k2>sayakzman
{#sayakzman#}¦ {%sa-yakṣman, ā, ā, a,%} having or
subject to consumption, consumptive.
<LEND>

<L>51318<pc>1092-a<k1>sayatna<k2>sayatna
{#sayatna#}¦ {%sa-yatna, as, ā, am,%} making efforts,
taking pains, endeavouring, persevering; active, busy;
({%am%}), ind. with effort, vigorously, assiduously.
<LEND>

<L>51319<pc>1092-a<k1>sayana<k2>sayana
{#sayana#}¦ {%sayana, am,%} n. (fr. rt. {%si%}), the act
of binding, fastening; [cf. {%pra-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51320<pc>1092-a<k1>sayantra<k2>sayantra
{#sayantra#}¦ {%sa-yantra, as, ā, am,%} with machines.
{%—Sa-yantra-jala-śaila, as, ā, am,%} having engines
and water and a rock.
<LEND>

<L>51321<pc>1092-a<k1>sayAvaka<k2>sayAvaka
{#sayAvaka#}¦ {%sa-yāvaka, as, ā%} (according to
some {%ikā%}), {%am,%} dyed or coloured with lac.
<LEND>

<L>51322<pc>1092-a<k1>sayAvan<k2>sayAvan
{#sayAvan#}¦ {%sa-yāvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. going
along with, attendant, attending, associated with
(with inst.).
<LEND>

<L>51323<pc>1092-a<k1>sayuj<k2>sayuj
{#sayuj#}¦ {%sa-yuj, k,%} m., Ved. a companion.
<LEND>

<L>51324<pc>1092-a<k1>sayugvan<k2>sayugvan
{%Sa-yugvan, ā, ā%}¦ or {%arī, a,%} Ved. associated with,
attending on, attendant; ({%ā%}), m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>51325<pc>1092-a<k1>sayujya<k2>sayujya
{%Sa-yujya, as, ā, am,%}¦ closely united with. {%—Sa-%}
{%yujya-tā,%} f. intimate union or junction.
<LEND>

<L>51326<pc>1092-a<k1>sayuDizWira<k2>sayuDizWira
{#sayuDizWira#}¦ {%sa-yudhiṣṭhira, as, ā, am,%} with
or accompanied by Yudhiṣṭhira.
<LEND>

<L>51327<pc>1092-a<k1>sayUTya<k2>sayUTya
{#sayUTya#}¦ {%sa-yūthya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to
the same herd or tribe; ({%as%}), m. one of the same
tribe.
<LEND>

<L>51328<pc>1092-a<k1>sayoga<k2>sayoga
{#sayoga#}¦ {%sa-yoga, am,%} n. (scil. {%guṇa-sthāna%}),
epithet of the last but one of the fourteen stages
leading to final emancipation (according to the belief
of the Jainas).
<LEND>

<L>51329<pc>1092-a<k1>sayoni<k2>sayoni
{#sayoni#}¦ {%sa-yoni, is, is, i,%} having the same
womb, uterine; closely related to; closely united
with the womb; ({%is%}), m. ‘being from the same
womb,’ a brother; a pair of nippers for cutting
betel-nut; N. of Indra (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>51330<pc>1092-a<k1>sayozaRa<k2>sayozaRa
{#sayozaRa#}¦ {%sa-yoṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} attended
by women, along with the women.
<LEND>

<L>51331<pc>1092-a<k1>sara<k2>sara
{#sara#}¦ {%sara, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%sṛ,%} cf. {%sala%}
under rt. {%sal%}), going, moving, proceeding (often at
the end of comps., cf. {%puraḥ-s˚%}); cathartic, purga-
tive; ({%as%}), m. going, motion; an arrow [cf. {%śara%}];
the coagulum of curds or milk, cream, (in this sense
cf. according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">ὀρό-ς, ὀῤῤός, οὐρό-ς;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>seru-m;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>suri-s;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>syru</nsi>); salt (pro-
bably as coming from water, cf. {%sala, sarira, sa-%}
{%lila%}); a waterfall; ({%ā%}), f. going, motion, move-
ment; a cascade, waterfall; the plant Pæderia
Fetida; ({%ī%}), f. a cascade; ({%am%}), n. a lake, pool;
water. {%—Sara-ja, am,%} n. ‘produced from cream,’
fresh butter. {%—Sara-pattrikā,%} f. the new leaf of a
lotus. {%—Sara-vatī,%} f., N. of the river Vitastā. {%—Sa-%}
{%rotsava (˚ra-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘delighting in water,’ the
Indian crane.
<LEND>

<L>51332<pc>1092-a<k1>saraka<k2>saraka
{%Saraka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} going, moving, pro-
[Page1092-b+ 81]
ceeding; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a continuous line of road,
spirituous liquor (especially that distilled from sugar),
rum; drinking spirits; a drinking vessel, goblet;
distribution of spirituous liquor; ({%am%}), n. going; a
lake, pond, pool; heaven, sky.
<LEND>

<L>51333<pc>1092-b<k1>saraw<k2>saraw
{%Saraṭ, ṭ,%}¦ m. air, wind; a cloud; a bee; a lizard,
chameleon.
<LEND>

<L>51334<pc>1092-b<k1>sarawa<k2>sarawa
{%Saraṭa, as,%}¦ m. wind; a kind of lizard or cha-
meleon; [cf. {%śaraṭa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51335<pc>1092-b<k1>sarawi<k2>sarawi
{%Saraṭi, is,%}¦ m. air, wind; a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>51336<pc>1092-b<k1>sarawu<k2>sarawu
{%Saraṭu, us,%}¦ m. a lizard, chameleon.
<LEND>

<L>51337<pc>1092-b<k1>saraRa<k2>saraRa
{%Saraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, moving, proceeding,
flowing, who or what goes or moves; ({%am%}), n. the
act of going, flowing, proceeding; iron rust or filings;
({%ā%}), f. the creeping plant Pæderia Fetida; a sort of
convolvulus ({%= tri-vṛtā,%} commonly called Tëori).
<LEND>

<L>51338<pc>1092-b<k1>saraRi<k2>saraRi
{%Saraṇi, is,%}¦ f. a road, path, way [cf. 2. {%śaraṇi%}];
a straight or continuous line; the creeping plant
Pæderia Fetida; a disease of the throat.
<LEND>

<L>51339<pc>1092-b<k1>saraRI<k2>saraRI
{%Saraṇī,%}¦ f. {%= saraṇi%} above.
<LEND>

<L>51340<pc>1092-b<k1>saraRqa<k2>saraRqa
{%Saraṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. a bird; a lizard; a rogue, cheat;
a dissolute man; a sort of ornament; [cf. {%śaraṇḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51341<pc>1092-b<k1>saraRya<k2>saraRya
{%Saraṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be gone; [cf. 2. {%śaraṇya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51342<pc>1092-b<k1>saraRyat<k2>saraRyat
{%Saraṇyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ wishing to go; wishing
to go everywhere, all-pervading, (Sāy. {%= sarvatra%}
{%gamanam icchat.%})
<LEND>

<L>51343<pc>1092-b<k1>saraRyu<k2>saraRyu
{%Saraṇyu, us, us, u,%}¦ (probably) fleet, impetuous
(Ved.); ({%us%}), m., N. of Yama, (Sāy. {%= saraṇa-%}
{%śīla%}); of the son of Varuṇa, (in Ṛg-veda X. 61,
24. said to have the form of a horse; the
plural of this word is in other places applied to
certain beings called Saraṇyus, who seem to be iden-
tified in Ṛg-veda III. 32, 5. with the Maruts, and
in I. 62, 4. with the Aṅgirasas, who are described by
Sāy. as seven in number); air, wind; a cloud;
water; spring ({%= vasanta%}); fire ({%= Agni%}); [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἐριννύς.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>51344<pc>1092-b<k1>saraRyU<k2>saraRyU
{%Saraṇyū, ūs,%}¦ f., Ved. ‘the fleet-running one,’ N.
of a daughter of Tvaṣṭṛ, (in Ṛg-veda X. 17, 2.
represented as wife of Vivasvat or the Sun and
mother of the two Aśvins, and according to another
legend, mother of the twins Yama and Yamī; ac-
cording to Yāska XII. 10, Saraṇyū is a personifica-
tion of the Night, and the first twins she bore were
Madhyama and Mādhyamikā Vāc; she then made
Sa-varṇā, q. v., take her place as wife of the Sun,
and herself ran away in the form of a mare, but
being pursued and embraced by the Sun in the form
of a horse, then gave birth to the two Aśvins or
‘horsemen,’ her substitute Sa-varṇā giving birth to
Manu); epithet of the Dawn (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>51345<pc>1092-b<k1>sarat<k2>sarat<h>1
1. {%sarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going, flowing, proceeding.
<LEND>

<L>51346<pc>1092-b<k1>sarat<k2>sarat<h>2
2. {%sarat, t,%}¦ m. a thread; [cf. {%sarit.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51347<pc>1092-b<k1>sarapasas<k2>sarapasas
{%Sarapasas,%}¦ pl., Ved. (in the Pada-pāṭha sepa-
rated into {%sara apasaḥ%}), the flowing waters, (Sāy.
{%= saraṇam apaḥ karma yāsāṃ tāḥ,%} those waters
whose act is flowing, Ṛg-veda II. 13, 12.)
<LEND>

<L>51348<pc>1092-b<k1>saramA<k2>saramA
{%Saramā,%}¦ f. (probably fr. rt. {%sṛ%}), ‘the runner,’
N. of the dog of Indra (represented in Ṛg-veda X.
14, 10. as the mother of the four-eyed brindled dogs
of Yama, and called in Mahā-bhārata Ādi-p. 671.
{%deva-śunī;%} in the Ṛg-veda this dog is said to
have gone in search of and recovered the cows stolen
by the Paṇis; according to some modern scholars
Saramā may be one of the names of {%Uṣas,%} ‘Dawn,’
the cows representing the rays of the sun stolen by
the night; the name Saramā is also thought to cor-
respond with Helena; and Sārameya, q. v., is regarded
as connected with Hermes, Saramā being by some
identified with the Wind, as conductor of the souls
of the departed; Saramā Deva-śunī is said to be the
authoress of part of Ṛg-veda X. 108); a female
dog, bitch; N. of the wife of Vibhīṣaṇa (Rāvaṇa's
brother); of a daughter of Dakṣa and wife of
Kaśyapa.
<LEND>

<L>51349<pc>1092-b<k1>sarayu<k2>sarayu
{%Sarayu, us,%}¦ m. air, wind; ({%us%}), f., N. of a well-
known river (commonly called by the various names
Surjoo, Surju, Sirjoo, Seryu; it is a tributary of the
Ghogra [see {%gharghara%}] on which stands the
ancient city of Ayodhyā or Oude, cf. Rāmāyaṇa I.
5, 6; in Ṛg-veda X. 64, 9, X. 75, 5. it is men-
[Page1092-c+ 81]
tioned along with the other well-known rivers Saras-
vatī, Sindhu, Gaṅgā, Yamunā, and Śutu-dri). {%—Sa-%}
{%rayu-taṭa, as, am,%} m. n. the bank of the Sarayu;
N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>51350<pc>1092-c<k1>sarayU<k2>sarayU
{%Sarayū, ūs,%}¦ f., N. of a river ({%= sarayu%} above).
{%—Sarayū-vana, am,%} n. a forest on the river Sarayū.
<LEND>

<L>51351<pc>1092-c<k1>sarala<k2>sarala
{%Sarala, as, ā, am,%}¦ straight, not crooked, direct,
right, honest, sincere, candid, artless, simple, upright
[cf. {%śarala%}]; ({%as%}), m. a species of pine tree, Pinus
Longifolia; a kind of bird, Pavo Bicalcarata; a
Buddha; fire; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of convolvulus ({%= tri-%}
{%puṭā%}); N. of a river. {%—Sarala-kāṣṭha, am,%} n.
the wood of the pine. {%—Sarala-drava, as,%} m. the
exudation of the Sarala pine; a fragrant resin. {%—Sa-%}
{%rala-yāyin, ī, inī, i,%} going in a straight line;
upright, honest; ({%inī%}), f. a plant with an upright stem.
{%—Sarala-skandha-saṅghaṭṭa-janman, ā, ā, a,%}
originating in the friction of the trunks of pines.
{%—Saralāṅga (˚la-aṅ˚), as,%} m. the exudation of
the Sarala pine, resin, turpentine. {%—Saralā-bhāṣya,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Bhāṣya.
<LEND>

<L>51352<pc>1092-c<k1>saravya<k2>saravya
{%Saravya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%sara,%} an arrow), a mark for
shooting at, target, butt; [cf. {%śaravya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51353<pc>1092-c<k1>saras<k2>saras
{%Saras, as,%}¦ n. (originally perhaps ‘flowing water’),
water; a lake, large sheet of water, pond, pool; any
piece of water in which the lotus grows, (in Naigh.
1. 12. enumerated among the {%udaka-nāmāni,%} and
in 1. 11. among the {%vāṅ-nāmāni%}); [cf. Old Norse
<nsi>sir, sœr, sior;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>sirendœ.</nsi>] {%—Saraḥ-%}
{%kāka, as,%} m. ‘water-crow,’ a gander; ({%ī%}), f. a
goose. {%—Sarasi-ja, am,%} n. ‘pond-born,’ a lotus.
{%—Sarasi-ruha, am,%} n. ‘growing in a pond,’ a
lotus. {%—Sarasiruha-janman, ā,%} m. ‘born from
a lotus,’ epithet of Brahmā. {%—Sarasī-ruha, am,%} n.
‘pool-growing,’ a lotus. {%—Saras-tīra, am,%} n. the
bank of a lake or pond. {%—Saras-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
‘having water,’ watery, fluid, juicy, sapid; elegant;
sentimental; ({%ān%}), m. the ocean; a male river; N.
of a river-god, (in Ṛg-veda VII. 96, 4-6. assigned
as a consort to Sarasvatī, see below); N. of Vāyu,
(according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 95, 3 {%=%}
{%madhya-sthāno vayuḥ%}); a buffalo; ({%atī%}), f., N.
of the goddess of speech and learning, (in the later
mythology regarded as the wife or female energy of
the god Brahmā or first deity of the Hindū triad
[see {%brahman%}], and sometimes identified with Vāc,
q. v., and invoked as a kind of muse or patroness of
science and inventress of the Sanskrit language and
letters; in the earliest mythology she was probably
a river-deity, her name signifying ‘watery;’ according
to Yāska [Nirukta II. 23] she was regarded both as
a river and as a goddess; probably this river was to
the earlier Hindūs what the Ganges [said to be only
twice named in the Ṛg-veda] was to the later;
sacrifices were doubtless performed on its banks, and
its sanctity imparted a sacred character to the district
lying between its waters and those of the Dṛṣad-
vatī [see Manu II. 17]; hence the river Sarasvatī
was not only personified as a river-goddess, but her
assistance was invoked at the sacrifices performed
near her flowing waters and her influence held to
be necessary for inspiring the Ṛṣis who composed
the sacrificial hymns with eloquence and wisdom; in
Ṛg-veda II. 41, 16. she is called the best of mothers,
of rivers, and of goddesses; in other places she is
described as bestowing wealth, fertility, and offspring,
as moving along a golden path, as destroying Vṛtra,
as associated with the Aśvins, and even as the wife
of Indra; in Ṛg-veda VI. 61, 10-12, VII. 36, 6.
she is called the mother of rivers, and is said to be
sevenfold or to have seven sisters; in Mahā-bhārata,
Śalya-parvan 2189, seven Sarasvatīs are also men-
tioned, viz. Su-prabhā, Kāñcanākṣī, Viśālā, Mano-
ramā, Ogha-vatī, Su-reṇu, and Vimalodakā; in the
Śānti-parvan 12920, Sarasvatī is called the mother
of the Vedas, which is also elsewhere said of Vāc,
though Vāc in the earlier mythology is regarded as
a separate deity; according to later legends the
goddess Sarasvatī was persuaded to descend from
heaven and confer her invention of language and
letters on the human race by the sage Bharata,
[Page1093-a+ 81]
whence one of her names is Bhāratī; she is some-
times represented as assuming the form of a Haṃsa
or swan, and is also called Mahā-śvetā or Mahā-
śuklā from her extreme whiteness); N. of a cele-
brated river (held very sacred by the Hindūs and in
the earlier mythology mixed up with the goddess
[see above]; it corresponds with the modern Sur-
sooty, which rises in the mountains bounding the
north-east part of the province of Delhi, and running
in a south-westerly direction becomes lost in the
sands of the great desert; this river formerly marked
one of the boundaries of the region called Ārya-deśa,
and of a particularly sacred district called in Manu
II. 17. Brahmāvarta; in Ṛg-veda VII. 95, 2. it is
represented as flowing into the sea, although later
legends make it disappear underground and join the
Ganges and Jumnā at Allahabad, see {%tri-veṇī, pra-%}
{%yāga%}); a river (in general); speech, voice, eloquence,
literary composition; a cow ({%= go%}); N. of Durgā;
an excellent woman; N. of the wife of a Manu;
of the wife of Maṇḍana (see {%maṇḍana-miśra%}); a
female divinity peculiar to the Buddhists or Jainas;
the moon-plant Asclepias Acida ({%= soma-latā, brāh-%}
{%mī%}); N. of another plant ({%= jyotiṣ-matī%}); N.
of a celebrated grammarian, (in this and the follow-
ing senses masc.); N. of various learned men.
{%—Sarasvatī-kaṇṭhābharaṇa (˚ṭha-ābh˚),%} N. of
a work on the art of poetry by Bhoja-deva. {%—Sa-%}
{%rasvatī-kuṭumba, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Sarasvatī-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Sarasvatī-pū-%}
{%jana, am,%} n. or {%sarasvatī-pūjā,%} f. the worship of
Sarasvatī (observed on the fifth of the light half
of the month Māgha, on which day books and im-
plements are held sacred and not allowed to be used).
{%—Sarasvatī-prayoga, as,%} m. a kind of mystical
rite peculiar to the Tāntrikas. {%—Sarasvatī-mantra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a hymn to Sarasvatī. {%—Sarasvatī-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n., N. of a particular religious observance.
{%—Sarasvatī-saras, as,%} n., N. of a sacred lake.
{%—Sarasvatī-sūkta, am,%} n., N. of a particular
hymn. {%—Sarasvatī-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of particular
grammatical aphorisms. {%—Sarasvatī-stava, as,%} m.
or {%sarasvatī-stotra, am,%} n., N. of a hymn. {%—Saro-%}
{%ja, am,%} n. ‘lake-born,’ a lotus; ({%as%}), m. a prosodial
foot containing six long syllables (according to some).
{%—Saro-janman, a,%} n. ‘lake-born,’ a lotus. {%—Saro-%}
{%jala, am,%} n. the water of a pond or lake. {%—Sarojin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} having lotuses; ({%ī%}), m. epithet of Brahmā;
({%inī%}), f. a pond abounding in lotuses; a multitude
of lotuses; a lotus. {%—Saro-rakṣa, as,%} m. the
guardian of a pool. {%—Saro-ruh, ṭ,%} or {%saro-ruha,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘pond-growing,’ a lotus. {%—Saroruhāsana%}
{%(˚ha-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘sitting on a lotus,’ epithet of
Brahmā (as having appeared first from the interior
of a lotus springing from the navel of Viṣṇu in
order to create the world). {%—Saro-ruhiṇī,%} f. ‘pond-
growing,’ a lotus. {%—Saro-vara, as,%} m. a lake, large
pond, any piece of water deep enough for the lotus
to grow.
<LEND>

<L>51354<pc>1093-a<k1>sarasa<k2>sarasa<h>1
1. {%sarasa, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see col. 2), a tank,
pond, lake, (also a substitute for {%saras%} at the end of a
comp.); alchemy; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of white convolvulus
{%(= śveta-trivṛtā)%}. {%—Sarasa-vāṇī,%} f. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>51355<pc>1093-a<k1>sarasika<k2>sarasika
{%Sarasika%}¦ or {%sarasīka, as,%} m. the Indian crane.
<LEND>

<L>51356<pc>1093-a<k1>sarasI<k2>sarasI
{%Sarasī,%}¦ f. a lake, large pond or sheet of water;
N. of a species of metre. {%—Sarasī-ruha, am,%} n.
‘pond-growing,’ a lotus.
<LEND>

<L>51357<pc>1093-a<k1>sari<k2>sari
{%Sari, is,%}¦ m. a cascade, waterfall; [cf. {%sara, sarī.%}]
{%—Sari-putra, as,%} m., N. of a Bodhi-sattva.
<LEND>

<L>51358<pc>1093-a<k1>sarikA<k2>sarikA
{%Sarikā,%}¦ f. the act of going or proceeding; a
woman going or moving [cf. {%saraka%}]; a particular
drug ({%= hiṅgu-pattrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>51359<pc>1093-a<k1>sarit<k2>sarit
{%Sarit, t,%}¦ f. a stream, river; a thread, string; a
particular species of metre. {%—Saritāṃ-varā,%} f. ‘best
of rivers,’ the Ganges. {%—Saritān-nātha, as,%} or
{%saritām-pati%} or {%sarit-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of rivers,’
the ocean. {%—Sarit-vat, ān,%} m. ‘possessed of rivers,’
the ocean. {%—Sarit-suta, as,%} m. ‘river-son,’ epithet
of Bhīṣma (son of Gaṅgā). {%—Sarid-bhartṛ, tā,%} m.
‘river-lord,’ the ocean; a symbolical term for the
number four, (see 1. {%sam-udra,%} p. 1079). {%—Sarid- %}
[Page1093-b+ 70]
{%vadhū, ūs,%} f. ‘river-woman,’ a woman-like river.
{%—Sarid-varā,%} f. ‘best of rivers,’ the Ganges.
{%—Sarin-nātha, as,%} m. ‘river-lord,’ the ocean.
{%—Sarin-maru-vanāśraya (˚na-āś˚), as, ā, am,%}
protected by a wood, desert, and river. {%—Sarin-%}
{%mukha, am,%} n. the source of a river.
<LEND>

<L>51360<pc>1093-b<k1>sarin<k2>sarin
{%Sarin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. going, moving, one who goes.
<LEND>

<L>51361<pc>1093-b<k1>sariman<k2>sariman
{%Sariman%}¦ or {%sarīman, ā,%} m. going, moving, pro-
ceeding; air, wind.
<LEND>

<L>51362<pc>1093-b<k1>sarira<k2>sarira
{%Sarira, am,%}¦ n., Ved. {%= salila,%} water, the ocean,
(enumerated among the {%bahu-nāmāni%} in Naigh.
III. 1); the universe ({%= loka, loka-traya,%} according
to Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi-s. XV. 52, XVII. 87).
<LEND>

<L>51363<pc>1093-b<k1>sarita<k2>sarita
{%Sarita, am,%}¦ n. {%= salila,%} water.
<LEND>

<L>51364<pc>1093-b<k1>sarma<k2>sarma
{%Sarma, as,%}¦ m. going, running; sky; heaven;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὁρμή.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>51365<pc>1093-b<k1>saraktagOra<k2>saraktagOra
{#saraktagOra#}¦ {%sa-rakta-gaura, as, ā, am,%} being
of a red and whitish colour.
<LEND>

<L>51366<pc>1093-b<k1>saraGA<k2>saraGA
{#saraGA#}¦ {%saraghā,%} f. (said to be fr. {%sara,%} ‘a
goer,’ and rt. {%han%}), a bee, (apparently also {%am,%} n.)
<LEND>

<L>51367<pc>1093-b<k1>saraNga<k2>saraNga
{#saraNga#}¦ {%sa-raṅga, as, ā, am,%} having colour;
having a nasal sound; ({%as%}), m. a quadruped; a bird;
[cf. {%sāraṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51368<pc>1093-b<k1>saraNgaka<k2>saraNgaka
{#saraNgaka#}¦ {%saraṅgaka,%} a species of the Atiśak-
varī metre.
<LEND>

<L>51369<pc>1093-b<k1>sarajat<k2>sarajat
{#sarajat#}¦ {%sa-rajat, an, antī, at%} (fr. rt. {%rañj%}
with {%sa%} for {%saha%}), Ved. colouring or tinging at the
same time, (Sāy. {%= saha-rajat,%} Ṛg-veda X. 115, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>51370<pc>1093-b<k1>sarajas<k2>sarajas
{#sarajas#}¦ {%sa-rajas, ās, ās, as,%} having dust or
dirt or impurity; ({%ās%}), f. a woman during menstru-
ation.
<LEND>

<L>51371<pc>1093-b<k1>sarajasa<k2>sarajasa
{%Sa-rajasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ having dirt or impurity of
any kind; ({%am%}), ind., see Vopa-deva VI. 60. {%—Sa-%}
{%rajasa-tā,%} f. dirtiness, dustiness.
<LEND>

<L>51372<pc>1093-b<k1>sarajaska<k2>sarajaska
{%Sa-rajaska, as, ā, am, = sa-rajasa%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>51373<pc>1093-b<k1>sarawaka<k2>sarawaka
{#sarawaka#}¦ {%saraṭaka, as,%} m., N. of a mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>51374<pc>1093-b<k1>saraRa<k2>saraRa
{#saraRa#}¦ {%saraṇa,%} &c. See p. 1092, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>51375<pc>1093-b<k1>saraRyu<k2>saraRyu
{%Saraṇyu,%}¦ &c. See p. 1092, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>51376<pc>1093-b<k1>saratni<k2>saratni
{#saratni#}¦ {%saratni, is,%} m. f. a kind of cubit mea-
sure ({%= ratni%}); a short cubit (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>51377<pc>1093-b<k1>saraTa<k2>saraTa
{#saraTa#}¦ {%sa-ratha, as, ā, am,%} having a car or
chariot, possessing a carriage; riding in the same
car; ({%as%}), m. a warrior or Kṣatriya (as riding in
a chariot). {%—Sa-ratha-pādāta, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied by or along with chariots and infantry.
<LEND>

<L>51378<pc>1093-b<k1>saradvat<k2>saradvat
{#saradvat#}¦ {%sarad-vat = śarad-vat,%} p. 994.
<LEND>

<L>51379<pc>1093-b<k1>saraBa<k2>saraBa
{#saraBa#}¦ {%sarabha,%} a species of the Atiśakvarī
metre.
<LEND>

<L>51380<pc>1093-b<k1>saraBaka<k2>saraBaka
{%Sarabhaka,%}¦ (probably) a kind of animal or insect;
[cf. {%śarabha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51381<pc>1093-b<k1>saraBasa<k2>saraBasa
{#saraBasa#}¦ {%sa-rabhasa, as, ā, am,%} possessing
speed or impetuosity, impetuous, speedy, quick;
agitated, passionate; delighted; ({%am%}), ind. im-
petuously, with great speed, hurriedly, hastily, pas-
sionately, delightedly.
<LEND>

<L>51382<pc>1093-b<k1>saramA<k2>saramA
{#saramA#}¦ {%saramā.%} See p. 1092, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>51383<pc>1093-b<k1>saraSana<k2>saraSana
{#saraSana#}¦ {%sa-raśana, as, ā, am,%} having a
girdle, girdled.
<LEND>

<L>51384<pc>1093-b<k1>sarazawwa<k2>sarazawwa
{#sarazawwa#}¦ {%saraṣaṭṭa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>51385<pc>1093-b<k1>sarasa<k2>sarasa<h>2
{#sarasa#} 2¦. {%sa-rasa, as, ā, am%} (for 1. see
col. 1), tasty, juicy, succulent, sapid; fresh, new;
beautiful, charming, excellent; agreeable; expressive
of poetical sentiment, (see {%rasa%}); impassioned, enrap-
tured; ({%am%}), ind. with rapture. {%—Sarasāṅgayaṣṭi%}
{%(˚sa-aṅ˚), is, is, i,%} one whose delicate body is wet
with perspiration, (see under 2. {%yaṣṭi.%})
<LEND>

<L>51386<pc>1093-b<k1>sarasamprata<k2>sarasamprata
{#sarasamprata#}¦ {%sarasamprata, am,%} n. a sort of
Euphorbia ({%= tri-kaṇṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>51387<pc>1093-b<k1>sarahasya<k2>sarahasya
{#sarahasya#}¦ {%sa-rahasya, as, ā, am,%} possessing
anything secret or mystical, magical, mystical; having
[Page1093-c+ 67]
the secret or mystical doctrine (of the Upaniṣads,
see Manu. II. 140); along with the Upaniṣads or
esoteric part of Vedic teaching. {%—Sa-rahasya-vrata,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessing mystical spells.
<LEND>

<L>51388<pc>1093-c<k1>sarAga<k2>sarAga
{#sarAga#}¦ {%sa-rāga, as, ā, am,%} having colour,
coloured, tinted; having passion, passionate, impas-
sioned. {%—Sarāga-tā,%} f. the being coloured with red.
{%—Sarāga-netra, as, ā, am,%} red-eyed.
<LEND>

<L>51389<pc>1093-c<k1>sarAjaka<k2>sarAjaka
{#sarAjaka#}¦ {%sa-rājaka, as, ā, am,%} possessing
a king; along with the king.
<LEND>

<L>51390<pc>1093-c<k1>sarAwa<k2>sarAwa
{#sarAwa#}¦ {%sarāṭa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>51391<pc>1093-c<k1>sarAti<k2>sarAti
{#sarAti#}¦ {%sa-rāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. accompanied
with presents or wealth.
<LEND>

<L>51392<pc>1093-c<k1>sarAva<k2>sarAva
{#sarAva#}¦ {%sarāva, as,%} m. (for {%śarāva,%} q. v.),
a lid, cover; a shallow cup, saucer, &c.
<LEND>

<L>51393<pc>1093-c<k1>sarAzwra<k2>sarAzwra
{#sarAzwra#}¦ {%sa-rāṣṭra, as, ā, am,%} possessing a
kingdom; along with the kingdom.
<LEND>

<L>51394<pc>1093-c<k1>sarAzwraka<k2>sarAzwraka
{%Sa-rāṣṭraka, as, ā, am, = sa-rāṣṭra%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>51395<pc>1093-c<k1>sarAhu<k2>sarAhu
{#sarAhu#}¦ {%sa-rāhu, us, us, u,%} possessed or held
by Rāhu, q. v.; eclipsed.
<LEND>

<L>51396<pc>1093-c<k1>sari<k2>sari
{#sari#}¦ {%sari, sarit,%} &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>51397<pc>1093-c<k1>sarira<k2>sarira
{#sarira#}¦ {%sarira, sarila.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>51398<pc>1093-c<k1>sarizapa<k2>sarizapa
{#sarizapa#}¦ {%sariṣapa, as,%} m. {%= sarṣapa,%} mus-
tard, Sinapis Dichotoma.
<LEND>

<L>51399<pc>1093-c<k1>sarIsfpa<k2>sarIsfpa
{#sarIsfpa#}¦ {%sarīsṛpa, as, ā, am%} (fr. the Intens.
of rt. {%sṛp%}), crawling, creeping; ({%as%}), m. a snake.
<LEND>

<L>51400<pc>1093-c<k1>saru<k2>saru
{#saru#}¦ {%saru, us, us, u%} (probably to be con-
nected with rt. {%sṛ,%} cf. rt. {%tsar%}), minute, thin, fine,
small; ({%us%}), m. {%= tsaru,%} the hilt or handle of a sword.
<LEND>

<L>51401<pc>1093-c<k1>saruj<k2>saruj
{#saruj#}¦ {%sa-ruj, k, k, k,%} or {%sa-ruja, as, ā, am,%}
suffering pain or sickness, sick, ill, diseased; [cf. per-
haps Goth. <nsi>saurga.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>51402<pc>1093-c<k1>saroga<k2>saroga
{%Sa-roga, as, ā, am,%}¦ affected with disease, sick,
diseased. {%—Saroga-tā,%} f. or {%saroga-tva, am,%} n.
sickliness.
<LEND>

<L>51403<pc>1093-c<k1>sarogin<k2>sarogin
{%Sarogin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ diseased, sick. {%—Sarogi-tā,%} f.
sickliness, sickness, disease.
<LEND>

<L>51404<pc>1093-c<k1>saruz<k2>saruz
{#saruz#}¦ {%sa-ruṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} feeling anger, angry.
<LEND>

<L>51405<pc>1093-c<k1>sarUpa<k2>sarUpa
{#sarUpa#}¦ {%sa-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} of the same
shape, like, similar, resembling, having shape, shaped,
formed. {%—Sarūpa-tā,%} f. or {%sarūpa-tva, am,%} n.
identity of form, likeness, resemblance, assimilation
to the deity, (one of the four states into which
{%mukti,%} q. v., is distinguished.)
<LEND>

<L>51406<pc>1093-c<k1>sarePa<k2>sarePa
{#sarePa#}¦ {%sa-repha, as, ā, am,%} together with
the letter {%r.%}
<LEND>

<L>51407<pc>1093-c<k1>saroga<k2>saroga
{#saroga#}¦ {%saroga,%} &c. See above.
<LEND>

<L>51408<pc>1093-c<k1>saroja<k2>saroja
{#saroja#}¦ {%saro-ja, sarojin,%} &c. See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>51409<pc>1093-c<k1>sarotsava<k2>sarotsava
{#sarotsava#}¦ {%sarotsava.%} See under {%sara.%}
<LEND>

<L>51410<pc>1093-c<k1>saroDa<k2>saroDa
{#saroDa#}¦ {%sa-rodha, as, ā, am,%} having hin-
drance or obstruction or opposition; having destruc-
tion or loss; ({%as%}), m. obstruction, opposition (ac-
cording to some).
<LEND>

<L>51411<pc>1093-c<k1>saroma<k2>saroma
{#saroma#}¦ {%sa-roma, as, ā, am,%} having hair,
hairy. {%—Sa-roma-kaṇṭaka, as, ā, am,%} having hair
bristling with ecstasy. {%—Sa-roma-vikriya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} thrilling with ecstasy.
<LEND>

<L>51412<pc>1093-c<k1>saroza<k2>saroza
{#saroza#}¦ {%sa-roṣa, as, ā, am,%} full of anger,
angry, wrathful; ({%am%}), ind. with anger, angrily.
{%—Saroṣa-rāgopahata (˚ga-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
suffused with a flush of anger.
<LEND>

<L>51413<pc>1093-c<k1>sarka<k2>sarka
{#sarka#}¦ {%sarka, as,%} m. (according to Śabda-k.),
wind, air, (probably fr. rt. {%sṛ%}); the mind; N. of
Prajā-pati, (perhaps for {%sarga%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>51414<pc>1093-c<k1>sarga<k2>sarga
{#sarga#}¦ {%sarga, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%sṛj%}), letting
go, relinquishment, abandonment; loss of conscious-
ness, fainting ({%= moha%}); voiding (as excrement
[Page1094-a+ 80]
&c.); letting loose; creation, the creation of the
world, (in Bhāgavata-Purāṇa III. 10, 13, &c. nine
different creations are enumerated, viz. 1. Mahat or
intellect; 2. Aham or personality; 3. Tan-mātra,
the subtile, with the five grosser elements [see {%tan-%}
{%mātra%}]; 4. Indriya or organs; 5. Vaikārika or
Deva-sarga, which also comprises Manas or mind;
6. Tamas or darkness; 7. Tasthuṣāṃ Sarga or
creation of stationary creatures, such as tress, plants,
&c., which are said to be {%ut-srotas,%} having the flow
or current of life upwards, cf. {%ūrdhva-srotas;%}
8. Tiraścāṃ Sarga or creation of animals, cf. {%tiryak-%}
{%srotas;%} 9. Nṛṇāṃ Sarga or creation of men, which
is said to be {%arvāk-srotas,%} q. v.); nature, the
universe; natural property, disposition, tendency;
onset, advance, motion, rush; a troop of horses let
loose (Ved.); a horse, (Sāy. {%= aśva%}); effort, reso-
lution, determination, resolve, will, perseverance;
a chapter, book, section, canto; assent, agreement;
ascertainment, certainty; epithet of Śiva; ({%ās%}), m.
pl., Ved. a stream of water ({%= udaka,%} Naigh. I.
12). {%—Sarga-krama, as,%} m. the order of creation.
{%—Sarga-takta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. set in motion,
(Sāy. {%= gamane pravṛtta.%}) {%—Sarga-pratakta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. urged on to impetuous motion, (Sāy.
{%= visarjanena pragamita.%}) {%—Sarga-bandha, as,%}
m. ‘chapter-composition,’ a Mahā-kāvya or great
poem; any work or book comprising several sections
or chapters.
<LEND>

<L>51415<pc>1094-a<k1>sarja<k2>sarja
{%Sarja, as,%}¦ m. the Śāl tree, Shorea Robusta ({%=%}
{%śāla%}); another tree ({%= pīta-śāla%}); the resinous
exudation of the Śāl tree. {%—Sarja-gandhā,%} f. a
particular plant {%(= rāsnā)%}. {%—Sarja-niryāsaka, as,%}
or {%sarja-maṇi, is,%} or {%sarja-rasa, as,%} m. the resi-
nous exudation of the Śāl tree; resin (in general).
<LEND>

<L>51416<pc>1094-a<k1>sarjaka<k2>sarjaka
{%Sarjaka, as,%}¦ m. the Śāl tree; another tree ({%=%}
{%pīta-śāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>51417<pc>1094-a<k1>sarjana<k2>sarjana
{%Sarjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of letting go or letting
loose, abandonment, quitting; voiding (excrement
&c.); the reserve or rear of an army; the act of
creating, creation.
<LEND>

<L>51418<pc>1094-a<k1>sarji<k2>sarji
{%Sarji, is,%}¦ f. natron, (see below.) {%—Sarji-kṣāra,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= sarji,%} (also written {%svarji-kṣāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>51419<pc>1094-a<k1>sarjikA<k2>sarjikA
{%Sarjikā,%}¦ f. natron, impure alkali or carbonate of
soda (used in India instead of soap for cleaning linen
&c.). {%—Sarjikā-kṣāra, as,%} m. natron, (also written
{%svarjikā-kṣāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>51420<pc>1094-a<k1>sarjI<k2>sarjI
{%Sarjī,%}¦ f. {%= sarji%} above.
<LEND>

<L>51421<pc>1094-a<k1>sarj<k2>sarj
{#sarj#}¦ {%sarj%} [cf. rt. 1. {%arj%}], cl. 1. P. {%sarjati,%}
{%sarjitum,%} to earn by labour, acquire, gain.
<LEND>

<L>51422<pc>1094-a<k1>sarjU<k2>sarjU
{%Sarjū, ūs,%}¦ m. (in Uṇādi-s. I. 82. said to be fr. rt.
{%sarj%} above, but probably to be connected with rt.
1. {%sṛj,%} cf. {%sarja%} above), a merchant, trader; ({%ūs%}),
f. lightning; a necklace; going, following.
<LEND>

<L>51423<pc>1094-a<k1>sarpa<k2>sarpa
{#sarpa#}¦ {%sarpa, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sṛp%}), a creeping
or serpentine or tortuous motion, creeping, moving
gently, gliding, sliding, twining; going, flowing; a
snake, serpent; a particular tree ({%= nāga-keśara%});
a particular tribe of Mlecchas or barbarians who
were formerly Kṣatriyas (mentioned in the twenty-
fourth chapter of the Hari-vaṃśa, and described as
wearing beards); N. of a particular Rudra; ({%ī%}), f. a
female snake; N. of the wife of a Rudra; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἑρπ-ετό-ν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>serpens.</nsi>] {%—Sarpa-ṛṣi, is,%} m.
‘serpent-Ṛṣi,’ epithet of Arbuda Kādraveya. {%—Sar-%}
{%pa-kaṅkālikā%} or {%sarpa-kaṅkālī,%} f. ‘serpent's ske-
leton,’ N. of a particular medicinal plant and antidote
{%(= viṣa-nāśinī)%}. {%—Sarpa-gandhā,%} f. a particular
plant (species not known). {%—Sarpa-ghātinī,%} f. a
variety of the Sarpa-kaṅkālī plant. {%—Sarpa-cīra-%}
{%nivāsana, as,%} m. ‘clothed in a serpent's skin,’
epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarpa-cchattra, am,%} n. ‘serpent-
umbrella,’ a mushroom. {%—Sarpa-tṛṇa, as,%} m. a
mungoose or ichneumon. {%—Sarpa-tva, am,%} n. the
state of a snake. {%—Sarpatva-sambhāvanā,%} f.
imagination of being a snake, mistaking for a snake.
{%—Sarpa-daṃṣṭra, as,%} m. a snake's fang; a kind
of plant, {%= dantī; (ā),%} f. the shrub Tragia Involu-
crata. {%—Sarpa-daṃṣṭrikā,%} f. a kind of shrub {%(=%}
{%aja-śṛṅgī)%}. {%—Sarpa-daṇḍā,%} f. a kind of plant,
[Page1094-b+ 81]
{%= saiṃhalī; (ī),%} f. another plant {%(= go-rakṣī).%}
{%—Sarpa-dantī,%} f. a species of sunflower {%(= nāga-%}
{%dantī)%}. {%—Sarpa-damanī,%} f. a kind of medicinal
plant {%(= bandhyā-karkoṭakī)%}. {%—Sarpa-dhāraka,%}
{%as,%} m. a snake-catcher, snake-charmer. {%—Sarpa-%}
{%nāmā,%} f. a variety of the Sarpa-kaṅkālī plant.
{%—Sarpa-puṣpī,%} f. a species of sunflower {%(= nāga-%}
{%dantī)%}. {%—Sarpa-phaṇa-ja, as,%} m. ‘produced in a
snake's hood,’ the snake-stone (a gem or pearl said
to be found in a snake's head and to resemble the
berry of the Abrus Precatorius). {%—Sarpa-bali, is,%}
m. an offering of rice to serpents. {%—Sarpa-bhuj, k,%}
m. ‘snake-eater,’ a peacock; a crane; a large snake.
{%—Sarpa-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘snake-gem,’ the snake-
stone, a kind of carbuncle (said to be found in a
snake's head and to have the power of expelling
poison). {%—Sarpa-mālā,%} f. a variety of the Sarpa-
kaṅkālī plant. {%—Sarpa-rāja, as,%} m. ‘serpent-king,’
epithet of Vāsuki (sovereign of the serpent-race in-
habiting Pātāla). {%—Sarpa-latā,%} f. {%= nāga-vallī.%}
{%—Sarpa-vid, t,%} m. one who understands serpents,
a serpent-charmer. {%—Sarpa-vidyā,%} f. serpent-science,
a particular Veda; the charming of serpents. {%—Sar-%}
{%pa-viṣa-pratiṣedha, as,%} m. the keeping off or
expelling of snake-poison. {%—Sarpa-veda,%} N. of a
work on serpents or their influence. {%—Sarpa-vyāpā-%}
{%dana, am,%} n. the killing of serpents; being killed by
a snake. {%—Sarpa-śiras, ās,%} m. (scil. {%hasta%}), ‘ser-
pent-headed,’ epithet of a particular position of the
hands. {%—Sarpa-sattra, am,%} n. ‘serpent-sacrifice,’ a
particular sacrifice for the destruction of serpents.
{%—Sarpa-sattrin, ī,%} m. ‘performer of a snake-
sacrifice,’ epithet of king Janam-ejaya (son of Parī-
kṣit; a legend relates that in order to revenge the
death of his father, who was killed by the bite of a
snake, he compelled, by means of Mantras, the whole
serpent-race to be present at a sacrifice, where they
were all destroyed except a few of the chiefs).
{%—Sarpa-sahā,%} f. a variety of the plant Sarpa-
kaṅkālī. {%—Sarpa-sāt,%} ind. to a snake or serpent.
{%—Sarpa-han, ā,%} m. ‘snake-killer,’ an ichneumon,
mungoose. {%—Sarpākṣa (˚pa-ak˚), am,%} n. ‘ser-
pent-eye,’ the seed of the Elæocarpus; ({%ī%}), f. the
plant Sarpa-kaṅkālī; another plant ({%= gandha-%}
{%nākulī%}); another plant {%(= nāḍī-kalāpaka)%}. {%—Sar-%}
{%pākhya (˚pa-ākh˚), as,%} m. ‘serpent-named,’ a kind
of Mahiṣa-kanda, q. v.; the plant Mesua Ferrea
{%(= nāga-keśara)%}. {%—Sarpāṅgī (˚pa-aṅ˚),%} f. ‘ser-
pent-limbed,’ a variety of the plant Sarpa-kaṅkālī;
another plant. {%—Sarpādanī (˚pa-ad˚),%} f. a parti-
cular plant {%(= nākulī)%}. {%—Sarpārāti (˚pa-ar˚)%} or
{%sarpāri (˚pa-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of snakes,’ an
ichneumon; a peacock; the bird Garuḍa. {%—Sarpā-%}
{%vali (˚pa-āv˚), is,%} f. a row of serpents. {%—Sarpā-%}
{%vāsa (˚pa-āv˚), as,%} m. the abode of a serpent;
({%am%}), n. the Sandal tree or wood. {%—Sarpāśana%}
{%(˚pa-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘snake-eater,’ a peacock. {%—Sar-%}
{%pīṣṭa (˚pī-iṣ˚), am,%} n. ‘liked by female snakes,’
the Sandal tree or wood. {%—Sarpeśvara (˚pa-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘lord of serpents,’ epithet of Vāsuki (sovereign
of the serpent-race). {%—Sarpeśvara-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Sarpeṣṭa (˚pa-iṣ˚), am,%}
n. ‘serpent-loved,’ the Sandal tree or wood.
<LEND>

<L>51424<pc>1094-b<k1>sarpaRa<k2>sarpaRa
{%Sarpaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of creeping or gliding;
going tortuously; the flight of an arrow nearly
parallel with the ground.
<LEND>

<L>51425<pc>1094-b<k1>sarpat<k2>sarpat
{%Sarpat, an, antī, at,%}¦ gliding, creeping, sliding,
slipping, going.
<LEND>

<L>51426<pc>1094-b<k1>sarpin<k2>sarpin
{%Sarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going gently or tortuously,
creeping, gliding, winding, sliding, slipping, twin-
ing, moving; ({%iṇī%}), f. a female serpent; a small
medicinal shrub ({%= bhuja-gī%}).
<LEND>

<L>51427<pc>1094-b<k1>sarpis<k2>sarpis
{%Sarpis, is,%}¦ n. clarified butter, ghee, (in Naigh. I.
12. enumerated among the {%udaka-nāmāni.%}) {%—Sar-%}
{%pir-āsuti, is, is, i,%} Ved. sacrificed or worshipped
with butter; ({%is%}), m. epithet of Agni. {%—Sarpiṣ-%}
{%kuṇḍikā,%} f. a butter-jar. {%—Sarpiṣ-ṭara,%} more com-
pletely clarified butter, more or most excellent ghee.
{%—Sarpiṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of ghee,
seasoned with clarified butter. {%—Sarpiṣ-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} containing ghee, dressed with butter. {%—Sar- %}
[Page1094-c+ 78]
{%pis-samudra, as,%} m. the sea of clarified butter (one
of the seven seas, see 1. {%sam-udra%}).
<LEND>

<L>51428<pc>1094-c<k1>sarb<k2>sarb
{#sarb#}¦ {%sarb%} (also written {%samb%}), cl. 1. P.
{%sarbati,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>51429<pc>1094-c<k1>sarma<k2>sarma
{#sarma#}¦ {%sarma.%} See under {%sara.%}
<LEND>

<L>51430<pc>1094-c<k1>sarv<k2>sarv
{#sarv#}¦ {%sarv%} (= rt. {%śarv%}), cl. 1. P. {%sarvati,%}
&c., to hurt, injure, kill.
<LEND>

<L>51431<pc>1094-c<k1>sarva<k2>sarva
{#sarva#}¦ {%sarva, as, ā, am%} (in Uṇādi-s. 1. 153.
said to be fr. rt. {%sṛ,%} ‘to go,’ ‘pervade,’ this rt.
having also, according to some, the meaning ‘to be
strong or whole,’ cf. {%sāra;%} according to others fr.
{%satra%} for {%satrā,%} q. v., {%va%} being affixed; dat. sing.
{%sarvasmai,%} nom. pl. {%sarve,%} &c., this declension
being the model for a whole series of pronominals,
see Gram. 237), all, every; whole, entire, universal,
complete; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Śiva; of Viṣṇu;
of a Muni, ({%sarvam%} is enumerated among the
{%udaka-nāmāni%} in Naigh. 1. 12); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὅλ-ο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὁλο-ό-ς, οὖλ-ο-ς:</lang> Osk. <nsi>sol-lu-s</nsi> (for <nsi>sol-vu-s</nsi>),
‘whole, sound:’ Lat. <nsi>sar-c-ire, sal-vu-s, sal-u-s,</nsi>
<nsi>sal-u-ber, sol-u-m, sol-i-du-s, sol-ari, sol-amen,</nsi>
<nsi>soll-ennis,</nsi> ‘yearly;’ <nsi>soll-ers:</nsi> (perhaps also) Goth.
<nsi>alls:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>uile,</nsi> ‘all, every, whole.’] {%—Sarvaṃ-%}
{%saha, as, ā, am,%} all-sustaining, all-bearing; patient,
enduring; ({%ā%}), f. the earth. {%—Sarva-kara, as,%} m.
‘maker of all,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-kartṛ, tā,%}
m. ‘maker or creator of all,’ epithet of Brahmā.
{%—Sarva-karman, a,%} n. every act; ({%ā%}), m. one
who performs all acts; epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-%}
{%karmīṇa, as, ā, am,%} performing every act; per-
vading every action, &c. {%—Sarva-kāma, as,%} m.
every wish; epithet of Śiva; N. of a king. {%—Sarva-%}
{%kāma-da, as,%} m. ‘granting all desires,’ epithet of
Śiva. {%—Sarva-kāma-vara, as,%} m. ‘best of all ob-
jects of desire,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-kāma-%}
{%samṛddha, as, ā, am,%} amply stocked with all
desired objects, fulfilling every desire. {%—Sarva-kā-%}
{%min, ī, inī, i,%} having every pleasure, having all
desired objects, fulfilling all wishes. {%—Sarva-kāmya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} to be wished for by every one, having
everything one can wish. {%—Sarva-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}
making or doing all things; ({%ī%}), m. the maker of
all things. {%—Sarva-kāla, am,%} ind. for all seasons, at
all times. {%—Sarva-kāla-prasāda, as,%} m. ‘pro-
pitious at all seasons,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-%}
{%kālīna, as, ā, am,%} belonging to all times or seasons,
perpetual. {%—Sarva-keśin, ī,%} m. a dancer, actor, (per-
haps for {%sarva-veśin,%} q. v.) {%—Sarva-kṣatriya-%}
{%mardana, as,%} m. the destroyer of all the Kṣatriyas
or men of the military tribe. {%—Sarva-kṣāra, as,%}
m. ‘universal alkali,’ impure carbonate of soda or
potash, natron (used as a soap for cleaning clothes;
{%= mahā-kṣāra%}). {%—Sarva-ga, as, ā, am,%} going
everywhere, all-pervading, ubiquitous; ({%as%}), m.
spirit, soul; epithet of Śiva; of Brahmā; N. of a
son of Paurṇamāsa; of a son of Bhīma; ({%am%}), n.
water; ({%ā%}), f. the Priyaṅgu plant. {%—Sarva-gaṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having all kinds or classes, of every
kind. {%—Sarva-gata, as, ā, am,%} going everywhere,
universally diffused, all-pervading, omnipresent. {%—Sar-%}
{%vagata-tva, am,%} n. the condition of going every-
where, omnipresence. {%—Sarva-gandha, as,%} m.
‘having all perfumes,’ a class of four aromatic sub-
stances (viz. Kakkola, Lavaṅga or cloves, Aguru or
agallochum, and Sihlaka or olibanum); any perfume.
{%—Sarva-gandha-vaha, as, ā, am,%} conveying all
perfumes or scents. {%—Sarva-guṇa-sampanna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} endued with every excellence, gifted with
every good quality. {%—Sarva-guṇopeta (˚ṇa-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} endowed with every good quality.
{%—Sarva-guhya-maya, as, ī, am,%} made up of all
mysteries. {%—Sarva-granthi, is,%} m. or {%sarva-gran-%}
{%thika, am,%} n. ‘all-knotted,’ the root of long pepper.
{%—Sarva-grāsa, as, ā, am,%} swallowing or engulfing
all. {%—Sarvaṅ-kaṣa, as, ā, am,%} ‘all-grazing,’ all-
pervading, everywhere diffused or extended; ({%as%}),
m. ‘all-injuring,’ a rogue, wicked man; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of a commentary by Malli-nātha on the Śiśupāla-
[Page1095-a+ 81]
vadha. {%—Sarva-carmīṇa, as, ā, am,%} made of every
kind of skin or leather. {%—Sarva-cārin, ī,%} m. ‘all-
pervading,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-jagat, t,%} f. the
whole world, the universe. {%—Sarva-janīna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} belonging or relating to all men, fit for all.
{%—Sarva-jayā,%} f. ‘all-conquering,’ a particular reli-
gious observance performed by women in the month
Mārga-śīrṣa; a particular plant. {%—Sarva-jit, t, t, t,%}
all-conquering, all-subduing, irresistible; all-surpass-
ing, excellent, incomparable; ({%t%}), m. a proper N.;
epithet of the twenty-first (or fifty-fifth) year of
Jupiter's cycle of sixty years. {%—Sarva-jña, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} all-knowing, omniscient, all-wise; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of Śiva; N. of a Muni; a Jina or Buddha
deified sage; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of Durgā. {%—Sarvajña-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%sarvajña-tva, am,%} n. omniscience. {%—Sar-%}
{%vajña-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Sar-%}
{%vajña-vāsudeva, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Sarva-%}
{%jñātṛ-tva, am,%} n. the condition of one who is
omniscient. {%—Sarva-jñāna, am,%} n. all-knowledge.
{%—Sarvajñāna-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work.
{%—Sarva-jñāna-maya, as, ī, am,%} made up of or
containing all knowledge. {%—Sarva-jñāna-vid, t, t, t,%}
acquainted with all knowledge. {%—Sarva-tanū, ūs,%}
m., Ved. one who is born again with his whole body.
{%—Sarva-tantra, as,%} m. one who has studied all the
Tantras; ({%as, ā, am%}), universally acknowledged,
admitted by all schools (as a philosophical principle).
{%—Sarvatantra-siddhānta, as,%} m. a dogma admitted
by all schools, (opposed to {%pratitantra-siddhānta,%}
a dogma peculiar to some school or a controverted
dogma, such as the Mīmāṃsaka doctrine of the eternity
of sound.) {%—Sarva-tas,%} see p. 1096, col. 3. {%—Sarva-%}
{%tātā,%} ind., Ved. everywhere, (Sāy. {%= sarvatra%}); at
the sacrifice, (Sāy. {%= sarva-tātau = yajñe,%} Ṛg-veda
IV. 26, 3; see the next.) {%—Sarva-tāti, is,%} f. (see
Pāṇ. IV. 4, 142), Ved. all prosperity, complete hap-
piness or health; soundness, wholeness; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ὁλό-της;</lang> in some passages {%tāti%} is connected by Sāy.
with 2. {%tati,%} p. 361, and is said to mean either
‘the extension of all enjoyments’ or simply ‘sacri-
fice.’] {%—Sarva-tāpana, as, ī, am,%} all-inflaming;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Kāma (god of love). {%—Sarva-%}
{%tiktā,%} f. a particular plant {%(= kāka-mācī)%}. {%—Sarva-%}
{%tūrya-ninādin, ī,%} m. ‘playing all instruments,’
Śiva. {%—Sarva-tejas, as,%} n. all splendor. {%—Sarvatejo-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of all splendor; con-
taining all power. {%—Sarva-da, as,%} m. ‘all-giving,’
epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-damana, as, ī, am,%} all-
subduing, all-taming, irresistible; ({%as%}), m. epithet
of Bharata (son of Śakuntalā). {%—Sarva-darśana-%}
{%saṅgraha, as,%} m. ‘compendium of all the Darśanas,’
N. of a treatise on the various systems of philosophy
(not including the Vedānta) by Mādhavācārya and
his brother Sāyaṇa. {%—Sarva-darśin, ī, inī, i,%} all-
seeing; ({%ī%}), m. a Buddha. {%—Sarva-dāna, am,%} n.
the gift of everything. {%—Sarva-dānādhika (˚na-%}
{%adh˚), as, ā, am,%} better than every gift. {%—Sarva-%}
{%dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Sarva-dig-vijaya,%}
{%as,%} m. conquest of all regions, universal conquest.
{%—Sarva-duḥkha-kṣaya, as,%} m. destruction of all
pain, final emancipation from all existence, beatitude.
{%—Sarva-devata, as, ā, am,%} relating to all the
deities. {%—Sarva-deva-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of all
deities, comprising all the gods; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Śiva. {%—Sarva-deva-mukha, as,%} m. ‘mouth of all
the gods,’ epithet of Agni or fire (Agni being the
medium of oblations to the gods). {%—Sarva-deśya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being in all places. {%—Sarva-daivatya%}
{%= sārvadaivatya%}. {%—Sarva-dhana, am,%} n. all one's
wealth or property; (in arithmetic) a sum total, sum
of a series, total of a sum in progression. {%—Sarva-%}
{%dhara,%} ‘all-containing,’ N. of a work on medicine
by Karatha. {%—Sarva-dharma-prakāśa, as,%} m.,
N. of a work on law by Śaṅkara-bhaṭṭa. {%—Sarva-%}
{%dharma-vid, t, t, t,%} knowing all duties, one who
knows the duties of all tribes and castes. {%—Sarva-%}
{%dhā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. all-containing, all-yielding.
{%—Sarva-dhārin, ī,%} m. ‘all-holder,’ epithet of Śiva;
epithet of the twenty-second (or according to others
fifty-sixth) year of Jupiter's cycle of sixty years.
[Page1095-b+ 81]
{%—Sarva-dhārī,%} f. the twenty-second year of the
cycle (according to some; cf. {%sarva-dhārin%}).
{%—Sarva-dhurāvaha (˚ra-āv˚), as,%} m. an ox fit
for any sort of draught or carriage. {%—Sarva-dhu-%}
{%rīṇa, as,%} m. an ox or other animal fit for any kind
of carriage or draught. {%—Sarvanāma-tā,%} f. the
being a pronoun or pronominal. {%—Sarva-nāman,%}
{%a,%} n. (in grammar) N. of a class of words beginning
with {%sarva,%} (these comprise the real pronouns and
a series of pronominal adjectives, such as {%ubhaya,%}
{%viśva, ekatara,%} &c.) {%—Sarvanāma-sthāna, am,%}
n. (in Pāṇini's grammar) a N. for the Aṅga cases
collectively (i. e. the nom. sing. du. pl., acc. sing. du.
of masc. and fem. nouns, and the nom. acc. pl. of
neuters; these are called by some ‘the strong cases;’
see Pāṇ. 1. 1, 42, 43; the voc. as following the nom.
may be included under this name). {%—Sarva-nāśa,%}
{%as,%} m. total destruction, destruction of all. {%—Sarva-%}
{%nāśin, ī, inī, i,%} all-destroying. {%—Sarvan-dama,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘all-subduing,’ N. of Bharata. {%—Sarva-pa-%}
{%tha, as,%} m. every road or way, every direction.
{%—Sarva-pathīna, as, ā, am,%} belonging to every
road or way, going in every direction. {%—Sarva-%}
{%paśu, us,%} m. a proper N. {%—1. sarva-pā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} drinking everything; ({%ās%}), f. the wife of the
Daitya Bali. {%—2. sarva-pā, ās, ās, am,%} all-preserv-
ing. {%—Sarva-pāpa-hara, as, ā, am,%} removing all
sin. {%—Sarva-pārśva-mukha, as,%} m. ‘having a
face on all sides,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-pāvana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘all-purifying,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-%}
{%pūjita, as,%} m. ‘worshipped by all,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Sarva-pūrṇa, as, ā, am,%} full of everything.
{%—Sarva-pūrṇa-tva, am,%} n. entire fulness or com-
pleteness, complete preparation or provision. {%—Sar-%}
{%va-priya, as, ā, am,%} dear to all, universally beloved;
generally friendly, loving all. {%—Sarva-bandha-vi-%}
{%mocana, as,%} m. ‘delivering from every bond,’ epithet
of Śiva. {%—Sarva-bhakṣa, as, ā, am,%} eating all
kinds of food, omnivorous; ({%ā%}), f. a female goat.
{%—Sarva-bhakṣya, as, ā, am,%} all-devouring (as
fire); eating all thing; all-devouring, omnivorous.
{%—Sarva-bhāj, k, k, k,%} sharing in everything.
{%—Sarva-bhāva, as,%} m. whole being or nature,
({%sarva-bhāvena,%} with one's whole being, with all
one's thoughts.) {%—Sarva-bhāva-kara, as,%} m. ‘causer
of all being,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-bhāvana, as,%}
m. ‘all-creating,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-bhūta,%}
{%āni,%} n. pl. all beings, all created things, all the
elements. {%—Sarvabhūta-kṛt, t,%} m. n. the maker of
all things; the cause of all elements or beings.
{%—Sarvabhūta-maya, as, ī, am,%} containing all
living beings or existences, comprising or compre-
hending all elementary matter; ({%as%}), m. the supreme
pervading spirit. {%—Sarva-bhūta-stha%} or {%sarva-%}
{%bhūta-sthita, as, ā, am,%} present in all elements or
beings. {%—Sarva-bhūta-hara, as,%} m. epithet of
Śiva. {%—Sarva-bhūta-hita, am,%} n. the welfare of
all created beings; ({%as, ā, am%}), serviceable to all
creatures. {%—Sarvabhūtātman (˚ta-āt˚), ā,%} m.
‘soul of all beings,’ epithet of the universal or all-
pervading spirit; epithet of Śiva; ({%ā, ā, a%}), having
the nature of all beings, containing all beings.
{%—Sarvabhūtātma-medhas, ās, ās, as,%} having a
knowledge of the essence or nature of all creatures.
{%—Sarvabhūtepsita (˚ta-īp˚), as, ā, am,%} desired
by all beings. {%—Sarva-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} all-sustaining,
cherishing or supporting all. {%—Sarva-bhogin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} enjoying all. {%—Sarva-bhogīṇa, as, ā, am,%} good
or beneficial for all, to be enjoyed or possessed by
all. {%—Sarva-maṅgalā,%} f. ‘all-auspicious,’ an epithet
of the goddess Durgā; N. of a work. {%—Sarva-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} made or consisting of all, all-
containing, general, universal, comprehensive of all.
{%—Sarva-mahī,%} f. the whole earth. {%—Sarva-mātrā,%}
f. epithet of a kind of metre. {%—Sarva-mūlya, am,%}
n. ‘price of all things,’ a cowry; any small coin.
{%—Sarva-mūṣaka, as,%} m. ‘all-stealing,’ time.
{%—Sarva-medha, as,%} m. a universal sacrifice, sacri-
fice for universal success. {%—Sarva-medhya-tva, am,%}
n. perfect purity. {%—Sarva-yamaka, am,%} n. a kind
of Yamaka, q. v. {%—Sarva-yogin, ī,%} m. epithet of
[Page1095-c+ 81]
Śiva. {%—Sarva-rakṣaṇa-kavaca, am,%} n. an all-
preserving amulet or charm. {%—Sarva-rakṣin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} all-protecting; preserving from all (harm).
{%—Sarva-ratna, as,%} m. ‘having all gems,’ N. of a
minister of king Yudhi-ṣṭhira; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of
the female personifications of musical tones or modes.
{%—Sarva-ratna-maya, as, ī, am,%} made up of all
kinds of jewels. {%—Sarva-ratna-samanvita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} possessing all gems or precious things. {%—Sarva-%}
{%rasa, as,%} m. the resinous exudation of the Śāl tree,
resin; saltness, salt, saline flavour or taste; a sort
of musical instrument, a kind of lute; a scholar,
learned man. {%—Sarvarasottama (˚sa-ut˚), as,%} m.
‘the best of all flavours,’ the saline flavour, saltness,
salt. {%—Sarva-rātra, as,%} m. the whole night. {%—Sar-%}
{%va-rūpa-bhāj, k, k, k,%} assuming all forms.
{%—Sarvartu (˚va-ṛtu), us,%} m. every season. {%—Sar-%}
{%vartuka (˚va-ṛt˚), as, ā, am,%} adapted to every
season, habitable in every season. {%—Sarvartu-%}
{%parivarta, as,%} m. ‘revolution of all the sea-
sons,’ a year. {%—Sarvartu-phala, am,%} n. the fruit
of all the seasons. {%—Sarva-lakṣaṇa-lakṣita, as,%}
m. ‘characterized by all marks,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Sarva-lālasa, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-%}
{%liṅgin, ī,%} m. ‘having all the external marks,’ a
heretic, impostor (especially one who, not belonging
to the orthodox faith, wears the dress and assumes
the character of an ascetic). {%—Sarva-loka, as,%} m. the
universe. {%—Sarva-loka-kṛt, t,%} m. ‘Universe-maker,’
epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-loka-pitāmaha, as,%} m. ‘the
great forefather of all creatures,’ epithet of Brahmā.
{%—Sarvaloka-prajāpati, is,%} m. ‘father of the Uni-
verse,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarvaloka-bhayaṅkara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} formidable to the whole world. {%—Sarva-%}
{%loka-vid, t, t, t,%} acquainted with all worlds. {%—Sarva-%}
{%loha, as,%} m. an iron arrow. {%—Sarva-varṇikā,%} f. or
(according to some) {%sarva-vartikā,%} f. the tree Gme-
lina Arborea. {%—Sarva-varman, ā,%} m., N. of the
author of the Kā-tantra Sūtras. {%—Sarva-vallabha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} dear to all; ({%ā%}), f. an unchaste woman.
{%—Sarva-vāta-saha, as, ā, am,%} able to bear every
wind (said of a ship). {%—Sarva-vādi-sammata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} approved by all disputants, universally ad-
mitted. {%—Sarva-vāsa, as,%} or {%sarva-vāsin, ī,%} m.
‘all-abiding,’ Śiva. {%—Sarva-vikhyāta, as,%} m. ‘cele-
brated by all,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-vigraha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘all-shaped,’ Śiva. {%—Sarva-vid, t, t, t,%} all-
knowing, omniscient, all-wise; ({%t%}), m. the Supreme
Being. {%—Sarva-vibhūti, is,%} f. dominion over all.
{%—Sarva-vīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. all-heroic, contain-
ing all heroes; possessing numerous male descendants.
{%—Sarva-veda, as, ā, am,%} having all knowledge;
({%as%}), m. a Brāhman who has read the four Vedas.
{%—Sarva-vedas, ās,%} m. a man who gives away all
his acquisitions or property to the priests employed
by him at particular sacrifices. {%—Sarva-vedin, ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} all-knowing, omniscient. {%—Sarva-veśin, ī,%} m.
‘having all dresses or disguises,’ an actor, dancer.
{%—Sarva-vaināśika, as,%} m. ‘all-annihilating,’ epi-
thet of a class of Buddhists who argue total an-
nihilation. {%—Sarva-vyāpi-tva, am,%} n. universality.
{%—Sarva-vyāpin, ī, inī, i,%} all-pervading, universal,
ubiquitous; embracing all particulars; ({%ī%}), m. epi-
thet of Rudra. {%—Sarva-śak, k, k, k,%} all-powerful,
omnipotent. {%—Sarva-śaṅkā,%} f. suspicion of every-
body. {%—Sarvaśas,%} see p. 1096, col. 3. {%—Sarva-%}
{%śānti-kṛt, t, t, t,%} ‘causing universal peace or tranquil-
lity,’ epithet of Bharata (sovereign of all India and son
of Śakuntalā). {%—Sarva-śāstra, as, ā, am,%} knowing
every science. {%—Sarva-śāstra-pravetṛ, tā,%} m. ‘cha-
rioteer of all the sciences,’ one who is well acquainted
with all the sciences. {%—Sarva-śāstra-vid, t, t, t,%} or
{%sarva-śāstra-viśārada, as, ā, am,%} skilled in all the
sciences. {%—Sarva-śubhaṅ-kara, as,%} m. ‘beautifying
everything,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarva-śūnya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} empty of everything, completely empty.
{%—Sarva-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%} anything remaining out
of a whole. {%—Sarva-śoka-vināśin, ī, inī, i,%} re-
moving all sorrow or griefs. {%—Sarva-śrāvya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} audible to all. {%—Sarva-saṃsarga-lavaṇa, am,%}
n. a particular kind of salt or salt soil (mixing with
[Page1096-a+ 81]
everything). {%—Sarva-saṅgata, as, ā, am,%} united
with all, met with universally; ({%as%}), m. a sort of
quick-growing rice {%(= ṣaṣṭikā)%}. {%—Sarva-saṅga-%}
{%parityāga, as,%} m. abandonment of all wordly
affections or connections. {%—Sarva-saṅgā,%} f. ‘all-
uniting,’ N. of a river. {%—Sarva-saṅgraha, as,%} m.
a general or universal collection; any collection.
{%—Sarva-sannahana, am,%} n. or {%sarva-sannaha-%}
{%nārthaka (˚na-ar˚), as,%} m. a complete armament;
the arming or assembling of a complete army (con-
sisting of elephants, chariots, horse and foot), a
complete armament. {%—Sarva-sannāha, as,%} m. a
complete armament (see above); the universally-per-
vading spirit. {%—Sarva-sama-tā,%} f. sameness or
identity with all things; equality towards all, equal
regard for all, equanimity. {%—Sarva-sasya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} bearing all kinds of corn, (also written {%sarva-%}
{%śasya.%}) {%—Sarva-saha, as, ā, am,%} all-enduring, all-
bearing, very patient; ({%as%}), m. bdellium; ({%ā%}), f.
the earth. {%—Sarva-sākṣin, ī,%} m. ‘all-witnessing,’
epithet of the Supreme Being; of Wind; of Fire.
{%—Sarva-sādhana, as,%} m. ‘all-accomplishing,’ Śiva.
{%—Sarva-sādhāraṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} common to
all. {%—Sarva-sādhu,%} ind. in all respects good or
well. {%—Sarva-sādhu-niṣevita, as,%} m. ‘honoured
by all good people,’ Śiva. {%—Sarva-sāmānya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} common to all. {%—Sarva-sāropaniṣad%}
{%(˚ra-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Sarva-%}
{%siddhārtha (˚dha-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having every
object attained, having every wish gratified, quite
happy. {%—Sarva-siddhi, is,%} f. accomplishment of
every object, universal success; ({%is%}), m. the Vilva
tree. {%—Sarva-sena, as,%} m., Ved. the lord of the
whole host. {%—Sarva-sva, am,%} n. the whole of a
person's property or possessions; whole substance or
essence of anything. {%—Sarva-sva-daṇḍa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} fined in all possessions; ({%am%}), n. confiscation
of the whole of a property. {%—Sarvasva-haraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%sarvasva-hāra, as,%} m. the seizure or
confiscation of the whole of any one's property.
{%—Sarva-svāmi-guṇopeta (˚ṇa-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
endowed with all the excellences of a master.
{%—Sarva-svāmin, ī,%} m. the owner or master of all;
a universal monarch. {%—Sarvasvin, ī,%} m. a kind of
mixed caste (the result of intermarriage between
a woman of the Gopa or cowherd caste with a
Nāpita or barber). {%—Sarva-hara, as, ā, am,%} ‘seizing
all,’ an epithet of death. {%—Sarva-haraṇa, am,%} n.
or {%sarva-hāra, as,%} m. seizing of the whole, total
confiscation. {%—Sarva-hari, is,%} m., N. of the author
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 96, (having the patronymic
Aindra.) {%—Sarva-hāyas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having all
strength or vigour. {%—Sarva-hita, as, ā, am,%} useful
or beneficial to all; ({%am%}), n. black pepper. {%—Sarva-%}
{%hut, t, t, t,%} Ved. (perhaps) all-sacrificing or sacrificing
all at once. {%—Sarvāgamopaniṣad (˚va-āgama-%}
{%up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Sarvāṅga (˚va-%}
{%aṅ˚), am,%} n. the whole body (from head to foot);
all the Aṅgas or Vedāṅgas (see {%vedāṅga%}) collec-
tively; ({%as, ā, am%}), having all members, perfect in
limb; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarvāṅga-rūpa,%}
{%as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarvāṅga-sundara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} beautiful in every member, completely beau-
tiful. {%—Sarvāṅga-sundara-rasa, as,%} m. ‘whose
essence is good for all the limbs,’ epithet of a par-
ticular drug or medicament. {%—Sarvāṅgīṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} spread over all the limbs, thrilling through the
whole body or throughout the body, generally dif-
fusive, pervading; relating or belonging to the
Aṅgas or Vedāṅgas collectively, (see {%vedāṅga.%})
{%—Sarvātithi-vrata (˚va-at˚), as, ā, am,%} devoted
to all guests, hospitable. {%—Sarvātodya-parigraha%}
{%(˚va-āt˚), as,%} m. ‘comprehending every musical in-
strument,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarvātmaka (˚va-āt˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} all-containing, all-pervading. {%—Sarvāt-%}
{%matva-darśana, am,%} n. the doctrine of the one-
ness of everything with Spirit. {%—Sarvātman (˚va-%}
{%āt˚), ā,%} m. the universal soul, the Supreme Spirit;
epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarvātma-bhūti, is,%} f. all beings
collectively. {%—Sarvā-dṛśa, as, ī, am,%} like to
all. {%—Sarvādhikaraṇa (˚va-adh˚), āṇi,%} n. pl. all
[Page1096-b+ 81]
occasions; ({%eṣu%}), ind. on all occasions. {%—Sarvā-%}
{%dhikāra (˚va-adh˚), as,%} m. general superintendence.
{%—Sarvādhikārin, ī,%} or {%sarvādhyakṣa (˚va-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a general superintendent. {%—Sarvādhikya%}
{%(˚va-ādh˚), am,%} n. superiority to all. {%—Sarvā-%}
{%navadyāṅga (˚va-anavadya-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%}
having altogether blameless or faultless limbs.
{%—Sarvānukārin (˚va-an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} all-imitating;
({%iṇī%}), f. a kind of shrub {%(= śāla-parṇī)%}. {%—Sarvā-%}
{%nukrama (˚va-an˚), as,%} m. a general index (show-
ing the successive contents of any book); {%= sarvā-%}
{%nukramaṇī%} below. {%—Sarvānukramaṇikā (˚va-%}
{%an˚),%} f., N. of Kātyāyana's index to the Ṛg-veda;
of an index to the Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā by the same
author. {%—Sarvānukramaṇī (˚va-an˚),%} f., N. of a
general index to the Veda by Kātyāyana (a pupil of
Śaunaka). {%—Sarvānukramaṇī-vṛtti, is,%} f. a com-
mentary by Ṣaḍ-guru-śiṣya on the above. {%—Sar-%}
{%vānubhūti (˚va-an˚), is,%} f. universal experience;
‘all-perceiving,’ epithet of one of the twenty-four
Arhats of the past Ut-sarpiṇī; also of one of the future
Ut-sarpiṇī; a white variety of the Tri-vṛt plant.
{%—Sarvānumati (˚va-an˚), is,%} f. the consent of
all. {%—Sarvāntaryāmin (˚va-an˚), ī,%} m. ‘ruling or
pervading all hearts,’ epithet of the Supreme Spirit.
{%—Sarvānna-bhakṣaka (˚va-an˚), as, ā, am,%} or
{%sarvānna-bhojin, ī, inī, i,%} or {%sarvānnīna, as, ā, am,%}
eating all sorts of food (whether clean or otherwise).
{%—Sarvābharaṇa-bhūṣita (˚va-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%}
adorned with all ornaments. {%—Sarvābhisandhin%}
{%(˚va-abh˚), ī%} m. ‘all-censuring,’ a cynic, calum-
niator, reviler. {%—Sarvābhisāra (˚va-abh˚), as,%} m.
an attack with a complete army (of elephants, chariots,
horse and foot), assembling a complete armament.
{%—Sarvāyasa (˚va-ay˚), as, ī, am,%} entirely made
of iron. {%—Sarvāyudha (˚va-āy˚), as,%} m. ‘armed
with every weapon,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarvāyudho-%}
{%peta (˚va-āyudha-up˚), as, ā, am,%} possessing all
weapons, stored with all sorts of arms. {%—Sarvārtha%}
{%(˚va-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having all objects or aims;
({%as%}), m. epithet of the twenty-ninth Muhūrta; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. all matters, ({%sarvārtheṣu,%} in all matters, in
all the subjects contained in any particular work);
all objects; ({%am%}), ind. for the sake of all. {%—Sar-%}
{%vārtha-kuśala, as, ā, am,%} skilful in all matters.
{%—Sarvārtha-cintaka, as, ā, am,%} a superintendent
or manager of all affairs, (according to Kullūka =
{%kārya-draṣṭā nagarādhipatiḥ.%}) {%—Sarvārtha-tā,%}
f. the state of possessing all objects. {%—Sarvārtha-%}
{%sādhikā,%} f. ‘effecting all objects,’ epithet of Durgā.
{%—Sarvārtha-siddha, as,%} m. ‘one by whom all
objects are effected,’ epithet of the great Buddha (or
Śākya-muni, the founder of the Buddhist religion;
according to some he was so called because his
parents' wishes were all fulfilled by his birth).
{%—Sarvārthānusādhinī (˚tha-an˚),%} f. ‘effecting all
objects,’ epithet of Durgā. {%—Sarvāvasara (˚va-av˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘universal leisure,’ midnight. {%—Sarvāvasthā%}
{%(˚va-av˚),%} f. every condition, ({%sarvāvasthāsu,%} at all
periods.) {%—Sarvāśaya (˚va-āś˚), as,%} m. ‘refuge of
all,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarvāśin (˚va-aś˚), ī, inī, i,%}
eating all things. {%—Sarvāśramin (˚va-āś˚), ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} belonging to every order of life. {%—Sarvāśraya%}
{%(˚va-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} giving shelter or protection
to all; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Sarvāsti-vāda%}
{%(˚va-as˚), as,%} m. or {%sarvāsti-vādin (˚va-as˚), ī,%}
m. ‘one who asserts the reality of all existence,’
epithet of one of the four divisions of the Vaibhā-
shika system of Buddhism (said to have been founded
by Rāhula, son of the great Buddha). {%—Sarvāstra%}
{%(˚va-as˚), as, ā, am,%} having all weapons; ({%ā%}), f.
epithet of one of the sixteen Jaina Vidyā-devīs or
goddesses of learning. {%—Sarvāstra-mahājvālā,%} one
of the Vidyā-devīs described above. {%—Sarvāstra-%}
{%vid, t, t, t,%} knowing or skilled in all weapons. {%—Sar-%}
{%vāhna (˚va-ah˚), as,%} m. the whole day, (also spelt {%sar-%}
{%vāhṇa.%}) {%—Sarvendriya-sambhava (˚va-in˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} arising from every sense. {%—Sarveśa (˚va-īśa),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘lord of all,’ the Supreme Being; a universal
monarch. {%—Sarveśvara (˚va-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘lord of
all,’ a universal monarch, paramount lord; epithet
[Page1096-c+ 81]
of Śiva; a proper N. {%—Sarvottama (˚va-ut˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} best of all, supremely good. {%—Sarvopakārin%}
{%(˚va-up˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} assisting all; ({%iṇī%}), f., N. of a
commentary on the Tattvas of the Sāṅkhya phil.
{%—Sarvopadha (˚va-up˚), as, ā, am,%} having any
penultimate letter. {%—Sarvopaniṣad (˚va-up˚), t,%}
f., N. of an Upaniṣad. {%—Sarvopādhi (˚va-up˚), is,%}
m. a general attribute. {%—Sarvaugha (˚va-ogha),%}
{%as,%} m. great speed or impetuosity; the assembling
of a complete army (consisting of elephants, chariots,
horse and foot). {%—Sarvauṣadhi (˚va-oṣ˚), is,%}
m. or {%sarvauṣadhi-gaṇa%} or {%sarvauṣadhi-%}
{%varga, as,%} m. a class of certain medicinal herbs
or drugs (such as Murā, Campaka, Jaṭā-māṃsī,
Haridrā or turmeric, Vacā or orris root, Śaileya or
benzoin, Śaṭī or zedoary, Kuṣṭha or Costus Spe-
ciosus, Karpūra or camphor, Candana or sandal,
Musta or Cyperus, &c.). {%—Sarvauṣadhi-rasa, as,%}
m. the juice or infusion of all the above herbs
(especially of those used at a royal inauguration).
<LEND>

<L>51432<pc>1096-c<k1>sarvaka<k2>sarvaka
{%Sarvaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ all, every, whole, entire,
universal; ({%e%}), ind. everywhere, universally.
<LEND>

<L>51433<pc>1096-c<k1>sarvatas<k2>sarvatas
{%Sarva-tas,%}¦ ind. from every quarter, from every
side, from all parts, from everybody; in every di-
rection; on all sides, every way, all round, every-
where; wholly, entirely. {%—Sarvataḥ-śubhā,%} f.
‘wholly auspicious,’ the plant Priyaṅgu. {%—Sarvato-%}
{%dikka, as, ā, am%} (see 2. {%diś%}), diffused over all
quarters, extending in every direction. {%—Sarvato-%}
{%diśam%} or {%sarvato-diśas,%} ind. to every quarter (of
the world), in every direction. {%—Sarvato-bhadra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} everywhere or on every side good, in
every direction or towards every quarter auspicious;
({%as, am%}), m. n. a temple or palace of a square form
and having an entrance opposite to every point of
the compass; ({%as%}), m. the car of Viṣṇu; a bam-
boo; a form of military array; a square mystical
diagram (painted on a cloth with various colours, and
used on particular occasions to cover a sort of altar
erected to Viṣṇu); a kind of charade in which the
same word answers several questions; a particular
kind of artificial verse (so contrived that the same
meanings and syllables occur, whether the line be
read backwards or forwards, or in various other direc-
tions; an example occurs in Kirāt. XV. 25); the
Nimba tree; N. of a forest; ({%ā%}), f. the tree Gmelina
Arborea ({%= gambhārī%}); an actress, the wife of an
actor or dancer; a sort of yam, Dioscorea; ({%am%}), n.
a mystical diagram of a square shape but enclosing
a circle (this diagram is regarded as sacred, and em-
ployed on the occasion of the letting loose of a bull,
the completion of a vow or other religious observ-
ance; it may perhaps be identical with that de-
scribed above); another square diagram employed
for astrological purposes or to foretel good and bad
fortune. {%—Sarvato-mukha, as, ī, am,%} facing every
quarter (of the compass), turned everywhere, going
everywhere; complete, unrestrained, unlimited, bound-
less; ({%as%}), m. soul, spirit; epithet of Śiva (as repre-
sented with five faces); of Brahmā (as represented with
four faces); of Agni or Fire; a Brāhman; the heaven
of Indra or Svarga; ({%am%}), n. water; sky, heaven.
<LEND>

<L>51434<pc>1096-c<k1>sarvatra<k2>sarvatra
{%Sarvatra,%}¦ ind. everywhere, in all places; always,
at all times. {%—Sarvatra-ga, as, ā, am,%} going every-
where, all-pervading; ({%as%}), m. air, wind. {%—Sarvatra-%}
{%gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going everywhere; ({%ī%}), m. air,
wind. {%—Sarvatrāpratigha (˚ra-ap˚), as, ā, am,%}
not kept back from (penetrating) everywhere.
<LEND>

<L>51435<pc>1096-c<k1>sarvaTA<k2>sarvaTA
{%Sarvathā,%}¦ ind. in all ways, by all means; at all,
({%na sarvathā,%} not at all), altogether, entirely, wholly,
completely, mostly, assuredly, certainly; exceed-
ingly; at all times.
<LEND>

<L>51436<pc>1096-c<k1>sarvadA<k2>sarvadA
{%Sarvadā,%}¦ ind. always, at all times, at every time.
<LEND>

<L>51437<pc>1096-c<k1>sarvadryaYc<k2>sarvadryaYc
{%Sarvadryañc, aṅ, -drīcī, ak%}¦ (fr. {%sarva%} with {%adri%}
substituted for the final + rt. {%añc%}), honouring all
({%= sarvasya pūjaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>51438<pc>1096-c<k1>sarvaSas<k2>sarvaSas
{%Sarvaśas,%}¦ ind. wholly, altogether, completely,
entirely, universally; everywhere; on all sides.
<LEND>

<L>51439<pc>1096-c<k1>sarvARI<k2>sarvARI
{%Sarvāṇī,%}¦ f., N. of Durgā (wife of Śiva).
<LEND>

<L>51440<pc>1096-c<k1>sarvikA<k2>sarvikA
{%Sarvikā,%}¦ f. according to Vopa-deva IV. 6. a dimi-
nutive of {%sarvā.%}
<LEND>
[Page1097-a+ 72]

<L>51441<pc>1097-a<k1>sarvIya<k2>sarvIya
{%Sarvīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to all,
suitable or fit for all.
<LEND>

<L>51442<pc>1097-a<k1>sarvarI<k2>sarvarI
{#sarvarI#}¦ {%sarvarī,%} f. (for {%śarvarī%}), night.
{%—Sarvarī-kara, as,%} m. ‘night-maker,’ the moon.
<LEND>

<L>51443<pc>1097-a<k1>sarvalA<k2>sarvalA
{#sarvalA#}¦ {%sarvalā,%} f. (for {%śarvalā,%} p. 995,
col. 3), an iron club or crow.
<LEND>

<L>51444<pc>1097-a<k1>sarvalI<k2>sarvalI
{%Sarvalī,%}¦ f. {%= sarvalā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>51445<pc>1097-a<k1>sarzapa<k2>sarzapa
{#sarzapa#}¦ {%sarṣapa, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. III.
141. said to be fr. rt. {%sṛ%}), mustard or mustard-seed,
Sinapis Dichotoma; a kind of poison; a small
measure of weight or a mustard-seed so considered;
({%ī%}), f. a kind of small bird (said to be a species of
wagtail, {%= khañjanikā%}). {%—Sarṣapa-taila, am,%} n.
mustard-oil.
<LEND>

<L>51446<pc>1097-a<k1>sarzigaRa<k2>sarzigaRa
{#sarzigaRa#}¦ {%sarṣi-gaṇa (sa-ṛṣi-), as, ā, am,%}
having or attended by a host of Ṛṣis.
<LEND>

<L>51447<pc>1097-a<k1>sarzimarudgaRa<k2>sarzimarudgaRa
{%Sarṣi-marud-gaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ with a host of
Ṛṣis and Maruts.
<LEND>

<L>51448<pc>1097-a<k1>sarzIkA<k2>sarzIkA
{#sarzIkA#}¦ {%sarṣīkā,%} f. a particular kind of
metre.
<LEND>

<L>51449<pc>1097-a<k1>sal<k2>sal
{#sal#}¦ {%sal%} (connected with rt. {%sṛ%}), cl. 1.
P. {%salati, sasāla, salitum,%} to go, move;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἅλλ-ο-μαι, ἅλμα;</lang> Lat. <nsi>salio;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>selu,</nsi>
‘to creep;’ Slav. <nsi>sl-a-ti,</nsi> ‘to send;’ Hib. <nsi>silim,</nsi> ‘I
drop, distil, spit.’]
<LEND>

<L>51450<pc>1097-a<k1>sala<k2>sala
{%Sala, am,%}¦ n. [cf. {%sara%}], water.
<LEND>

<L>51451<pc>1097-a<k1>salila<k2>salila
{%Salila, am,%}¦ n. [cf. the older form {%sarira,%} p. 1093,
col. 2], water; (in the Sāṅkhya phil.) a technical
term for one of the four kinds of {%adhyātmikā tuṣṭi%}
or internal acquiescence, (the other three being
{%ambhas, ogha,%} and {%vṛṣṭi;%} cf. {%su-pārā%}); a kind
of metre; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σάλος, ἅλς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>salum, sal,</nsi>
<nsi>saliva;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>sol,</nsi> ‘salt.’] {%—Salila-karman, a,%} n.
a particular funeral rite {%(= salila-kriyā)%}. {%—Salila-%}
{%kuntala, as,%} m. ‘water-hair,’ the aquatic plant Val-
lisneria Octandra. {%—Salila-kriyā,%} f. ‘water-rite,’ the
funeral rite of washing a corpse. {%—Salila-ja, am,%}
n. ‘water-born,’ a lotus. {%—Salila-nidhi, is,%} m.
‘water-receptacle,’ the ocean. {%—Salila-pūra-vat,%}
ind. like a large quantity of water. {%—Salila-raya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘water-flow,’ a current, stream. {%—Salila-%}
{%rāśi, is,%} m. ‘water-heap,’ any piece of water.
{%—Salila-sthala-cara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} frequenting
water and land, amphibious. {%—Salilārthin (˚la-ar˚),%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} wishing for water, thirsty. {%—Salilāśaya%}
{%(˚la-āś˚), as,%} m. a receptacle or reservoir of water,
tank, lake. {%—Salilile-cara, as, ā, am,%} moving about
in the water. {%—Salilendhana (˚la-in˚), as,%} m.
‘water-kindling,’ submarine fire. {%—Salile-śaya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} resting or lying in water. {%—Saliloccaya%}
{%(˚la-uc˚), as, ā, am,%} having a mass or collection of
water. {%—Salilopaplava (˚la-up˚), as,%} m. a flood
of water, inundation.
<LEND>

<L>51452<pc>1097-a<k1>salakza<k2>salakza
{#salakza#}¦ {%sa-lakṣa, as, ā, am,%} having a lac
or a hundred thousand.
<LEND>

<L>51453<pc>1097-a<k1>salakzaRa<k2>salakzaRa
{#salakzaRa#}¦ {%sa-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} having the
same marks, of the same species.
<LEND>

<L>51454<pc>1097-a<k1>salakzman<k2>salakzman
{#salakzman#}¦ {%sa-lakṣman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having
the same marks or characteristics, related, a relation.
<LEND>

<L>51455<pc>1097-a<k1>salajja<k2>salajja
{#salajja#}¦ {%sa-lajja, as, ā, am,%} feeling shame
or modesty, bashful, modest, ashamed; ({%am%}), ind.
bashfully, modestly.
<LEND>

<L>51456<pc>1097-a<k1>salalitam<k2>salalitam
{#salalitam#}¦ {%sa-lalitam,%} ind. with sport,
wantonly.
<LEND>

<L>51457<pc>1097-a<k1>salalUka<k2>salalUka
{#salalUka#}¦ {%salalūka, as,%} m. (probably fr. rt.
{%sal;%} according to Sāy. for {%sararūka,%} fr. rt. {%sṛ%}),
Ved. (probably) an unstable or wavering person;
a wicked person, sinner, (Sāy. {%= saraṇa-śīla%} or
{%saṃlubdha%} or {%pāpaka;%} see Nirukta VI. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>51458<pc>1097-a<k1>salavaka<k2>salavaka
{#salavaka#}¦ {%sa-lavaka.%} See {%lavaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>51459<pc>1097-a<k1>salAjakusuma<k2>salAjakusuma
{#salAjakusuma#}¦ {%sa-lāja-kusuma, as, ā, am,%} ac-
companied with sprinkled grain and flowers.
<LEND>
[Page1097-b+ 76]

<L>51460<pc>1097-b<k1>salIla<k2>salIla
{#salIla#}¦ {%sa-līla, as, ā, am,%} playful, wanton,
sportive; ({%am%}), ind. playfully, sportingly; affec-
tionately.
<LEND>

<L>51461<pc>1097-b<k1>saleSa<k2>saleSa
{#saleSa#}¦ {%sa-leśa, as, ā, am,%} having parts or
portions, with every part, entire; ({%am%}), ind. with
every particle, entirely, wholly (= 1. {%sa-kalam%}).
<LEND>

<L>51462<pc>1097-b<k1>saloka<k2>saloka
{#saloka#}¦ {%sa-loka, as, ā, am,%} being in the
same world. {%—Saloka-tā,%} f. the being in the same
world or sphere, residence in the same heaven with
any particular deity (one of the four states into
which Mukti or final beatitude is distinguished).
<LEND>

<L>51463<pc>1097-b<k1>sallakI<k2>sallakI
{#sallakI#}¦ {%sallakī,%} f. ({%= śallakī%}), the gum
olibanum tree, Boswellia Thurifera.
<LEND>

<L>51464<pc>1097-b<k1>salva<k2>salva
{#salva#}¦ {%salva, ās,%} m. pl., Ved., N. of a peo-
ple; [cf. {%śalva.%}] {%—Salva-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a
country.
<LEND>

<L>51465<pc>1097-b<k1>sava<k2>sava<h>1
{#sava#} 1¦. {%sava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 3. {%su%}), pressing
out or extracting the Soma juice; a libation, obla-
tion, sacrifice; N. of the fifth book of the Śata-
patha-Brāhmaṇa; ({%am%}), n. sprinkling or pouring
out the juice of the Soma plant; making libations;
water; the juice or honey of flowers.
<LEND>

<L>51466<pc>1097-b<k1>savana<k2>savana<h>1
1. {%savana, am,%}¦ n. the act of extracting or pouring
out the juice of the Soma plant; a libation; a sacri-
fice or oblation (in general); drinking the Soma
juice; bathing (as a religious exercise or as prepara-
tory to a sacrifice; generally performed three times
a day, viz. morning, mid-day, and evening; cf. {%tri-%}
{%ṣavaṇa%}); any purificatory ablution; ({%as%}), m., N.
of a son of Vasiṣṭha. {%—Savana-karman, a,%} n.
a sacrificial rite.
<LEND>

<L>51467<pc>1097-b<k1>savanIya<k2>savanIya
{%Savanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to the Savana (see
above); to be offered or poured out; to be distilled;
sacrificial.
<LEND>

<L>51468<pc>1097-b<k1>sava<k2>sava<h>2
{#sava#} 2¦. {%sava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 4. {%su%}), a gene-
rator; the sun; the moon; offspring, progeny.
<LEND>

<L>51469<pc>1097-b<k1>savana<k2>savana<h>2
2. {%savana, am,%}¦ n. the act of bearing children,
bringing forth young, generation.
<LEND>

<L>51470<pc>1097-b<k1>savitf<k2>savitf
{%Savitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ generating, vivifying, pro-
ducing, causing, effecting; ({%tā%}), m. a generator,
vivifier; the sun, (in the Veda sometimes identified
with and sometimes distinguished from Sūrya, q. v.;
according to Sāy. the sun before rising is called
Savitṛ, and after rising till its setting Sūrya; many
hymns of the Ṛg-veda are devoted to the praise of
Savitṛ, e. g. 1. 35, II. 38, III. 62, 10-12, IV. 53,
54, V. 81, 82, &c.; he is described as ‘golden-
eyed,’ ‘golden-handed,’ ‘golden-armed,’ ‘golden-
tongued,’ ‘yellow-haired,’ &c., the waters and the
winds are said to obey him, and the other gods are
described as following his lead and bowing to his
authority; he is also, like Agni, called Apāṃ napāt,
‘son of the waters,’ and is even worshipped as a
‘lord of all creatures,’ supporting the world and de-
livering his votaries from sin; the celebrated verse
called {%gāyatrī%} and {%sāvitrī,%} q. q. v. v., is addressed to
him); epithet of Indra; of Śiva; N. of one of the
twenty-eight Vyāsas; a particular plant or tree
{%(= arka); (trī),%} f. a mother; a cow. {%—Savitṛ-%}
{%daivata, as,%} m. ‘having the sun for a deity,’ the
constellation Hastā or the thirteenth of the lunar
asterisms (so called because the sun is the ruling
deity of this asterism).
<LEND>

<L>51471<pc>1097-b<k1>savitfla<k2>savitfla
{%Savitṛla, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
the sun, solar.
<LEND>

<L>51472<pc>1097-b<k1>savitra<k2>savitra
{%Savitra, am,%}¦ n. a cause of generation, instrument
of production.
<LEND>

<L>51473<pc>1097-b<k1>savitriya<k2>savitriya
{%Savitriya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
the sun, solar.
<LEND>

<L>51474<pc>1097-b<k1>savitrI<k2>savitrI
{%Savitrī,%}¦ f., see under {%savitṛ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>51475<pc>1097-b<k1>savIman<k2>savIman
{%Savīman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. production, generation,
vivifying power, favouring aid.
<LEND>

<L>51476<pc>1097-b<k1>savajrasaNGAta<k2>savajrasaNGAta
{#savajrasaNGAta#}¦ {%sa-vajra-saṅghāta, as, ā, am,%}
with the stroke of a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>51477<pc>1097-b<k1>savatsa<k2>savatsa
{#savatsa#}¦ {%sa-vatsa, as, ā, am,%} together with
a calf, having a calf; having descendants.
<LEND>
[Page1097-c+ 68]

<L>51478<pc>1097-c<k1>savaDUka<k2>savaDUka
{#savaDUka#}¦ {%sa-vadhūka, as,%} m. along with a
wife, a man with his wife.
<LEND>

<L>51479<pc>1097-c<k1>savapuza<k2>savapuza
{#savapuza#}¦ {%sa-vapuṣa, as, ī, am,%} having a body
or form, embodied.
<LEND>

<L>51480<pc>1097-c<k1>savayas<k2>savayas
{#savayas#}¦ {%sa-vayas, ās, ās, as,%} being of the
same age, coeval, cotemporary; ({%ās%}), m. a coeval,
cotemporary, friend of the same age; ({%ās%}), f. a
woman's female friend or confidante.
<LEND>

<L>51481<pc>1097-c<k1>savara<k2>savara
{#savara#}¦ {%savara, as,%} m. ({%= śavara%}), water;
N. of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>51482<pc>1097-c<k1>savarUTa<k2>savarUTa
{#savarUTa#}¦ {%sa-varūtha, as, ā, am,%} having a
protecting ledge, (see {%varūtha.%})
<LEND>

<L>51483<pc>1097-c<k1>savarRa<k2>savarRa
{#savarRa#}¦ {%sa-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} being of the
same colour; being of like appearance, like, resem-
bling; of the same tribe or class; belonging to the
same class of letters (i. e. uttered by the same organs
of speech); of the same kind, homogeneous; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of the woman substituted by Saraṇyū for
herself as a wife of the Sun, (she is said to have
given birth to Manu, and is called in later legends
Chāyā; see {%saraṇyū%}); N. of a daughter of the
Ocean, and wife of Prācīna-varhis. {%—Savarṇāsa-%}
{%varṇa-vivāha (˚ṇa-as˚), as,%} m. the marriage of
people of the same and of different castes. {%—Savar-%}
{%ṇopāyin (˚ṇā-up˚), ī,%} m. one who approaches a
woman of the same caste.
<LEND>

<L>51484<pc>1097-c<k1>savarRiliNgin<k2>savarRiliNgin
{%Sa-varṇi-liṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ wearing the marks of
a religious student, disguised as a Brahma-cārin, (see
{%varṇin.%})
<LEND>

<L>51485<pc>1097-c<k1>savarman<k2>savarman
{#savarman#}¦ {%sa-varman, ā, ā, a,%} having armour,
along with armour.
<LEND>

<L>51486<pc>1097-c<k1>savala<k2>savala
{#savala#}¦ {%savala, as,%} m., N. of a king of
Puṣkara (son of Priya-vrata; also written {%savana%}).
{%—Savalāśva (˚la-aś˚), ās,%} m. pl. (perhaps for {%śa-%}
{%valāśva%}), epithet of the thousand sons of Dakṣa.
<LEND>

<L>51487<pc>1097-c<k1>savahA<k2>savahA
{#savahA#}¦ {%sa-vahā,%} f. the plant Tri-vṛt; [cf.
{%su-vahā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51488<pc>1097-c<k1>savAcas<k2>savAcas
{#savAcas#}¦ {%sa-vācas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%sa-vācasa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having words or conversation, conversing
with.
<LEND>

<L>51489<pc>1097-c<k1>savARaDi<k2>savARaDi
{#savARaDi#}¦ {%sa-vāṇadhi, is, is, i,%} together with
a quiver, bearing a quiver.
<LEND>

<L>51490<pc>1097-c<k1>savAlaKilya<k2>savAlaKilya
{#savAlaKilya#}¦ {%sa-vālakhilya, as, ā, am,%} to-
gether with the Vālakhilya hymns.
<LEND>

<L>51491<pc>1097-c<k1>savAzpastamBam<k2>savAzpastamBam
{#savAzpastamBam#}¦ {%sa-vāṣpa-stambham,%} ind.
with suppression of tears.
<LEND>

<L>51492<pc>1097-c<k1>savAsa<k2>savAsa<h>1
{#savAsa#} 1¦. {%sa-vāsa, as, ā, am%} (see 1. {%vāsa%}),
scented, perfumed.
<LEND>

<L>51493<pc>1097-c<k1>savAsa<k2>savAsa<h>2
{#savAsa#} 2¦. {%sa-vāsa, as, ā, am%} (see 2. {%vāsa%}),
having a dwelling.
<LEND>

<L>51494<pc>1097-c<k1>savAsas<k2>savAsas
{#savAsas#}¦ {%sa-vāsas, ās, ās, as%} [cf. 3. {%vāsa%}],
clothed, dressed.
<LEND>

<L>51495<pc>1097-c<k1>savikalpa<k2>savikalpa
{#savikalpa#}¦ {%sa-vikalpa, as, ā, am,%} admitting
of an alternative or option, optional; admitting of
ambiguity or doubt, doubtful; having distinction,
distinguishing.
<LEND>

<L>51496<pc>1097-c<k1>savikalpaka<k2>savikalpaka
{%Sa-vikalpaka, as, ā, am, = sa-vikalpa%}¦ above;
recognising distinctions (e. g. those of subject and
object in the Vedānta phil; opposed to {%nir-vi-%}
{%kalpaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>51497<pc>1097-c<k1>savikASa<k2>savikASa
{#savikASa#}¦ {%sa-vikāśa, as, ā, am,%} possessing
expansion, expanded, extended, extensive.
<LEND>

<L>51498<pc>1097-c<k1>savigraha<k2>savigraha
{#savigraha#}¦ {%sa-vigraha, as, ā, am,%} having body
or form, embodied; having meaning or import,
meaning, importing.
<LEND>

<L>51499<pc>1097-c<k1>savitarkam<k2>savitarkam
{#savitarkam#}¦ {%sa-vitarkam,%} ind. with reasoning
or thought, thoughtfully.
<LEND>

<L>51500<pc>1097-c<k1>savitf<k2>savitf
{#savitf#}¦ {%savitṛ.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page1098-a+ 67]

<L>51501<pc>1098-a<k1>savidiS<k2>savidiS
{#savidiS#}¦ {%sa-vidiś, k, k, k,%} along with the
intermediate quarters.
<LEND>

<L>51502<pc>1098-a<k1>savidya<k2>savidya
{#savidya#}¦ {%sa-vidya, as, ā, am,%} having learn-
ing, learned, wise, versed in science.
<LEND>

<L>51503<pc>1098-a<k1>savidyutstanita<k2>savidyutstanita
{#savidyutstanita#}¦ {%sa-vidyut-stanita, as, ā, am,%}
accompanied with lightning and thunder.
<LEND>

<L>51504<pc>1098-a<k1>saviDa<k2>saviDa
{#saviDa#}¦ {%sa-vidha, as, ā, am,%} of the same
kind or sort; near, proximate.
<LEND>

<L>51505<pc>1098-a<k1>savinaya<k2>savinaya
{#savinaya#}¦ {%sa-vinaya, as, ā, am,%} having good
behaviour or propriety, well-conducted, well-behaved,
modest; ({%am%}), n. modestly, humbly, respectfully,
graciously.
<LEND>

<L>51506<pc>1098-a<k1>saviBAsa<k2>saviBAsa
{#saviBAsa#}¦ {%sa-vibhāsa, as,%} m. ‘having great
lustre,’ epithet of one of the seven suns.
<LEND>

<L>51507<pc>1098-a<k1>saviBrama<k2>saviBrama
{#saviBrama#}¦ {%sa-vibhrama, as, ā, am,%} employing
amorous or coquettish glances, coquettish, wanton;
({%am%}), ind. coquettishly, playfully, with amorous
action.
<LEND>

<L>51508<pc>1098-a<k1>savimarSam<k2>savimarSam
{#savimarSam#}¦ {%sa-vimarśam,%} ind. thoughtfully,
with consideration or deliberation.
<LEND>

<L>51509<pc>1098-a<k1>savilAsa<k2>savilAsa
{#savilAsa#}¦ {%sa-vilāsa, as, ā, am,%} acting co-
quettishly, sportive, playful, wanton, amorous; ({%am%}),
ind. playfully, coquettishly, with expressive looks.
<LEND>

<L>51510<pc>1098-a<k1>saviSeza<k2>saviSeza
{#saviSeza#}¦ {%sa-viśeṣa, as, ā, am,%} possessing
distinguishing or characteristic qualities; peculiar,
singular, extraordinary; excellent, superior; having
discrimination, discriminating; ({%am%}), ind. in a special
or peculiar manner, especially, singularly.
<LEND>

<L>51511<pc>1098-a<k1>saviSezaka<k2>saviSezaka
{%Sa-viśeṣaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ having distinguishing
properties or peculiar qualities; discriminated; ({%am%}),
n. any distinguishing peculiarity or characteristic.
<LEND>

<L>51512<pc>1098-a<k1>saviSezaRa<k2>saviSezaRa
{%Sa-viśeṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessing distinctions
or peculiarities; distinguished, marked, characterized,
individualized by peculiar marks or properties.
<LEND>

<L>51513<pc>1098-a<k1>saviSezatas<k2>saviSezatas
{%Saviśeṣatas,%}¦ ind. especially, particularly, singu-
larly, excellently.
<LEND>

<L>51514<pc>1098-a<k1>saviSramBam<k2>saviSramBam
{#saviSramBam#}¦ {%sa-viśrambham,%} ind. with con-
fidence, confidently.
<LEND>

<L>51515<pc>1098-a<k1>savizARa<k2>savizARa
{#savizARa#}¦ {%sa-viṣāṇa, as, ā, am,%} possessing
horns or tusks, along with tusks.
<LEND>

<L>51516<pc>1098-a<k1>savizAdam<k2>savizAdam
{#savizAdam#}¦ {%sa-viṣādam,%} ind. despondingly,
with despair.
<LEND>

<L>51517<pc>1098-a<k1>savistara<k2>savistara
{#savistara#}¦ {%sa-vistara, as, ā, am,%} having dif-
fuseness, diffuse, detailed, complete; ({%am%}), ind. with
all details, in detail, in extenso.
<LEND>

<L>51518<pc>1098-a<k1>savismaya<k2>savismaya
{#savismaya#}¦ {%sa-vismaya, as, ā, am,%} astonished,
surprised; doubtful; ({%am%}), ind. with surprise; with
respect, respectfully.
<LEND>

<L>51519<pc>1098-a<k1>savihaNga<k2>savihaNga
{#savihaNga#}¦ {%sa-vihaṅga, as, ā, am,%} possessing
birds, with birds.
<LEND>

<L>51520<pc>1098-a<k1>savIman<k2>savIman
{#savIman#}¦ {%savīman.%} See under 2. {%sava.%}
<LEND>

<L>51521<pc>1098-a<k1>savfkzakzupalata<k2>savfkzakzupalata
{#savfkzakzupalata#}¦ {%sa-vṛkṣa-kṣupa-lata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having trees, bushes, and creepers.
<LEND>

<L>51522<pc>1098-a<k1>savfdDika<k2>savfdDika
{#savfdDika#}¦ {%sa-vṛddhika, as, ā, am,%} bearing
interest.
<LEND>

<L>51523<pc>1098-a<k1>savfD<k2>savfD
{#savfD#}¦ {%sa-vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. increasing to-
gether, (Sāy. {%= saha-vardhayitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>51524<pc>1098-a<k1>savegam<k2>savegam
{#savegam#}¦ {%sa-vegam,%} ind. with impetuosity,
with great haste, hastily.
<LEND>

<L>51525<pc>1098-a<k1>saveRuvIRApaRavAnunAda<k2>saveRuvIRApaRavAnunAda
{#saveRuvIRApaRavAnunAda#}¦ {%sa-veṇu-vīṇā-paṇa-%}
{%vānunāda (˚va-an˚), as, ā, am,%} resounding with
flutes, lutes, and tabours.
<LEND>

<L>51526<pc>1098-a<k1>saveSa<k2>saveSa
{#saveSa#}¦ {%sa-veśa%} or {%sa-veṣa, as, ā, am,%} ap-
pareled, dressed, ornamented, decorated; near, prox-
imate.
<LEND>

<L>51527<pc>1098-a<k1>savEklavyam<k2>savEklavyam
{#savEklavyam#}¦ {%sa-vaiklavyam,%} ind. with bewil-
derment; with despair, despairingly.
<LEND>
[Page1098-b+ 70]

<L>51528<pc>1098-b<k1>savElakzya<k2>savElakzya
{#savElakzya#}¦ {%sa-vailakṣya, as, ā, am,%} having
contrary marks or characteristics, unnatural; abashed,
embarrassed, pretended, forced; ({%am%}), ind. affectedly.
{%—Savailakṣya-smitam,%} ind. with a forced smile.
<LEND>

<L>51529<pc>1098-b<k1>savya<k2>savya
{#savya#}¦ {%savya, as, ā, am%} (according to Uṇā-
di-s. IV. 109. fr. rt. {%sū;%} perhaps for an original
{%skavya%}), left, left hand; south, southern; reverse,
contrary, backward; ({%as%}), m., N. of an Āṅgirasa
(author of the hymns Ṛg-veda 1. 51-57); an epi-
thet of Viṣṇu; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σκαιό-ςμ σκαιό-τη-ς, σκαιο-</lang>
<lang n="greek">σύνη</lang> (probably also <lang n="greek">σκαῦρο-ς</lang>); Lat. <nsi>scœvu-s, scœ-</nsi>
<nsi>vitas, scœvola</nsi> (perhaps also <nsi>scauru-s, sinister</nsi>);
Slav. <nsi>sui.</nsi>] {%—Savya-tas,%} ind. from the left side; on
the left side, on the left hand; in a reverse way.
{%—Savya-ṣṭhṛ, ṭhā,%} m. {%= savye-ṣṭhṛ%}. {%—Savya-%}
{%sācin, ī,%} m. (see {%sācin%}), ‘drawing a bow with the
left hand as well as the right,’ epithet of Arjuna;
any person who can use both hands alike. {%—Savyā-%}
{%pasavya (˚ya-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} left and right, re-
verse and direct, wrong and right. {%—Savyetara%}
{%(˚ya-it˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘other than left,’ right. {%—Savye-%}
{%ṣṭha, as,%} or {%savye-ṣṭhṛ, ṭhā,%} m. ‘standing on
the left,’ a charioteer.
<LEND>

<L>51530<pc>1098-b<k1>savyaTa<k2>savyaTa
{#savyaTa#}¦ {%sa-vyatha, as, ā, am,%} feeling pain
or anguish, suffering pain.
<LEND>

<L>51531<pc>1098-b<k1>savyaDa<k2>savyaDa
{#savyaDa#}¦ {%sa-vyadha, as, ā, am,%} having blows,
having wounds.
<LEND>

<L>51532<pc>1098-b<k1>savyapekza<k2>savyapekza
{#savyapekza#}¦ {%sa-vyapekṣa, as, ā, am,%} having
connection, connected.
<LEND>

<L>51533<pc>1098-b<k1>savyaBicAra<k2>savyaBicAra
{#savyaBicAra#}¦ {%sa-vyabhicāra, as,%} m. an alleged
reason which goes astray, i. e. a reason or argument
that is incompatible with the conclusion drawn from
it; an allegation that proves too much (one of the
Hetv-ābhāsas, q. v.), a too general middle term (as
‘fire’ to prove smoke).
<LEND>

<L>51534<pc>1098-b<k1>savyAja<k2>savyAja
{#savyAja#}¦ {%sa-vyāja, as, ā, am,%} artful, fraudu-
lent; cunning, plausible, pretending; ({%am%}), ind.
under a pretext or pretence, artfully, cunningly.
<LEND>

<L>51535<pc>1098-b<k1>savyApAra<k2>savyApAra
{#savyApAra#}¦ {%sa-vyāpāra, as, ā, am,%} having
employment, employed, occupied, busily engaged.
<LEND>

<L>51536<pc>1098-b<k1>savyAhftipraRavaka<k2>savyAhftipraRavaka
{#savyAhftipraRavaka#}¦ {%sa-vyāhṛti-praṇavaka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} accompanied with the (three) Vyāhṛtis and
the syllable Om, (see {%vy-āhṛti, pra-ṇava.%})
<LEND>

<L>51537<pc>1098-b<k1>savrIqa<k2>savrIqa
{#savrIqa#}¦ {%sa-vrīḍa, as, ā, am,%} feeling shame,
modest, ashamed, bashful; ({%am%}), ind. with shame,
bashfully.
<LEND>

<L>51538<pc>1098-b<k1>saSaNka<k2>saSaNka
{#saSaNka#}¦ {%sa-śaṅka, as, ā, am,%} fearful, doubt-
ful, suspicious.
<LEND>

<L>51539<pc>1098-b<k1>saSaNKa<k2>saSaNKa
{#saSaNKa#}¦ {%sa-śaṅkha, as, ā, am,%} having a
conch-shell. {%—Sa-śaṅkha-ghoṣa, as, ā, am,%} re-
sounding with conch-shells, accompanied by the sound
of conch-shells.
<LEND>

<L>51540<pc>1098-b<k1>saSabda<k2>saSabda
{#saSabda#}¦ {%sa-śabda, as, ā, am,%} having sound
or noise, full of cries, sounding; proclaimed; ({%am%}),
ind. with noise, noisily.
<LEND>

<L>51541<pc>1098-b<k1>saSara<k2>saSara
{#saSara#}¦ {%sa-śara, as, ā, am,%} furnished with an
arrow, armed with arrows. {%—Sa-śarāsana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} furnished with a bow.
<LEND>

<L>51542<pc>1098-b<k1>saSarIra<k2>saSarIra
{#saSarIra#}¦ {%sa-śarīra, as, ā, am,%} having a body,
embodied; together with the body.
<LEND>

<L>51543<pc>1098-b<k1>saSalka<k2>saSalka
{#saSalka#}¦ {%sa-śalka, as, ā, am,%} possessing
scales, scaly (as a fish &c.).
<LEND>

<L>51544<pc>1098-b<k1>saSalya<k2>saSalya
{#saSalya#}¦ {%sa-śalya, as, ā, am,%} pierced by a
thorn or dart, pierced; having thorns, thorny; trou-
blesome, difficult.
<LEND>

<L>51545<pc>1098-b<k1>saSastra<k2>saSastra
{#saSastra#}¦ {%sa-śastra, as, ā, am,%} having arms,
armed.
<LEND>

<L>51546<pc>1098-b<k1>saSasya<k2>saSasya
{#saSasya#}¦ {%sa-śasya, as, ā, am,%} having corn or
grain, yielding corn; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of sunflower
({%= nāga-dantī%}).
<LEND>
[Page1098-c+ 69]

<L>51547<pc>1098-c<k1>saSAlmala<k2>saSAlmala
{#saSAlmala#}¦ {%sa-śālmala, as, ā, am,%} possessing
silk-cotton tress.
<LEND>

<L>51548<pc>1098-c<k1>saSiKaRqin<k2>saSiKaRqin
{#saSiKaRqin#}¦ {%sa-śikhaṇḍin, ī, inī, i,%} accom-
panied by Śikhaṇḍin.
<LEND>

<L>51549<pc>1098-c<k1>saSiraska<k2>saSiraska
{#saSiraska#}¦ {%sa-śiraska, as, ā, am,%} along with
the head.
<LEND>

<L>51550<pc>1098-c<k1>saSizya<k2>saSizya
{#saSizya#}¦ {%sa-śiṣya, as, ā, am,%} attended by
pupils.
<LEND>

<L>51551<pc>1098-c<k1>saSItkAram<k2>saSItkAram
{#saSItkAram#}¦ {%sa-śītkāram,%} ind. with a mur-
muring sound; with a sigh.
<LEND>

<L>51552<pc>1098-c<k1>saSUka<k2>saSUka
{#saSUka#}¦ {%saśūka, as,%} m. (according to some)
a believer, one who believes in the existence of God
({%= āstika%}).
<LEND>

<L>51553<pc>1098-c<k1>saSElavanakAnana<k2>saSElavanakAnana
{#saSElavanakAnana#}¦ {%sa-śaila-vana-kānana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having mountains, woods, and groves.
<LEND>

<L>51554<pc>1098-c<k1>saSoka<k2>saSoka
{#saSoka#}¦ {%sa-śoka, as, ā, am,%} sorrowful, sad;
({%am%}), ind. sorrowfully.
<LEND>

<L>51555<pc>1098-c<k1>saSc<k2>saSc
{#saSc#}¦ {%saśc%} (closely connected with rt. {%sac%}
and probably also with rt. 2. {%sañj%}), cl. 1.
P. A. {%saścati, -te, saścitum,%} Ved. to cling to, stick
to, cleave to, follow, pursue, attend on; to serve,
honour, revere, worship, celebrate, love; to favour,
aid, protect; to go, proceed, pervade; to go to, at-
tain, obtain; to cause to flow, (Sāy. {%asaścatam =%}
{%agamayatam,%} Ṛg-veda I. 112, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>51556<pc>1098-c<k1>saScat<k2>saScat
{%Saścat, an, antī, at%}¦ (in Ved. the masc. is some-
times used for fem.), clinging to, sticking to, cleaving
to, sticking together, closed up, stopping; becoming
dried up; going against, persecuting; coming to-
gether, uniting, (in Ṛg-veda 1. 42, 7, III. 9, 4.
connected by Sāy. with rt. {%sasj%} = rt. {%sañj.%})
<LEND>

<L>51557<pc>1098-c<k1>saScivas<k2>saScivas
{%Saścivas, uṣī,%}¦ f. in {%a-saścuṣī = a-pratibandhā%}
(Ṛg-veda IX. 86, 18; see {%a-saścivas%}).
<LEND>

<L>51558<pc>1098-c<k1>saSmaSru<k2>saSmaSru
{#saSmaSru#}¦ {%sa-śmaśru, us, us, u,%} having a beard,
bearded; ({%us%}), f. a woman with a beard.
<LEND>

<L>51559<pc>1098-c<k1>saSrama<k2>saSrama
{#saSrama#}¦ {%sa-śrama, as, ā, am,%} feeling fatigue,
wearied.
<LEND>

<L>51560<pc>1098-c<k1>saSrIka<k2>saSrIka
{#saSrIka#}¦ {%sa-śrīka, as, ā, am,%} having pros-
perity, prosperous, fortunate.
<LEND>

<L>51561<pc>1098-c<k1>saSlAGam<k2>saSlAGam
{#saSlAGam#}¦ {%sa-ślāgham,%} ind. with praise, eu-
logistically.
<LEND>

<L>51562<pc>1098-c<k1>sas<k2>sas
{#sas#}¦ {%sas%} (= rts. 2. {%śas, śaṃst, saṃst%}), cl. 2.
P. {%sasti%} (apparently also cl. 3. P. {%sasasti%}),
{%sasāsa, sasiṣyati, asasīt%} or {%asāsīt, sasitum,%} to
sleep: Caus. {%sāsayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asīṣasat:%}
Desid. {%sisasiṣati:%} Intens. {%sāsayate, sāsasti.%}
<LEND>

<L>51563<pc>1098-c<k1>sasat<k2>sasat
{%Sasat, an, atī, at,%}¦ sleeping.
<LEND>

<L>51564<pc>1098-c<k1>sasa<k2>sasa
{#sasa#}¦ {%sasa, am,%} n. food ({%= anna,%} Naigh. II.
7); ({%as%}), m., N. of an Ātreya, (author of the hymn
Ṛg-veda V. 21.) {%—Sasa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved.
possessed of food, feeding on sacrificial food, (accord-
ing to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VII. 87, 2. {%sasavān%} either
{%= annavān%} or as if fr. rt. 1. {%san = sambhaktavān.%})
<LEND>

<L>51565<pc>1098-c<k1>sasaMSaya<k2>sasaMSaya
{#sasaMSaya#}¦ {%sa-saṃśaya, as, ā, am,%} doubtful,
uncertain.
<LEND>

<L>51566<pc>1098-c<k1>sasaMhAra<k2>sasaMhAra
{#sasaMhAra#}¦ {%sa-saṃhāra, as, ā, am,%} possessing
means of restraint, (said of magical weapons which
can only be restrained by repeating certain Mantras.)
<LEND>

<L>51567<pc>1098-c<k1>sasaKi<k2>sasaKi
{#sasaKi#}¦ {%sa-sakhi,%} ind. similar to a friend,
(Pāṇ. II. 1, 6.)
<LEND>

<L>51568<pc>1098-c<k1>sasaciva<k2>sasaciva
{#sasaciva#}¦ {%sa-saciva, as, ā, am,%} accompanied
or attended by ministers.
<LEND>

<L>51569<pc>1098-c<k1>sasaYjYa<k2>sasaYjYa
{#sasaYjYa#}¦ {%sa-sañjña, as, ā, am,%} having sense,
sensible, conscious.
<LEND>

<L>51570<pc>1098-c<k1>sasattva<k2>sasattva
{#sasattva#}¦ {%sa-sattva, as, ā, am,%} possessing
energy or vigour; ({%ā%}), f. containing an embryo, a
pregnant woman.
<LEND>

<L>51571<pc>1098-c<k1>sasana<k2>sasana
{#sasana#}¦ {%sasana, am,%} n. ({%= śasana, śamana%}),
immolation, slaughtering a victim.
<LEND>
[Page1099-a+ 66]

<L>51572<pc>1099-a<k1>sasandeha<k2>sasandeha
{#sasandeha#}¦ {%sa-sandeha, as, ā, am,%} having
doubt or hesitation, (applied to a kind of indirect
praise in rhetoric.)
<LEND>

<L>51573<pc>1099-a<k1>sasanDya<k2>sasanDya
{#sasanDya#}¦ {%sa-sandhya, as, ā, am,%} having the
period called Sandhyā, (see {%yuga%}); relating to
evening, vespertine. {%—Sa-sandhyāṃśa (˚yā-aṃ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} with the period called Sandhyāṃśa, (see
{%yuga.%})
<LEND>

<L>51574<pc>1099-a<k1>sasampada<k2>sasampada
{#sasampada#}¦ {%sa-sampada, as, ā, am,%} possessing
happiness or prosperity, happy.
<LEND>

<L>51575<pc>1099-a<k1>sasamBrama<k2>sasamBrama
{#sasamBrama#}¦ {%sa-sambhrama, as, ā, am,%} filled
with confusion or bewilderment, bewildered, flurried,
agitated; ({%am%}), ind. with confusion or perplexity,
hurriedly, hastily; in fear.
<LEND>

<L>51576<pc>1099-a<k1>sasarpa<k2>sasarpa
{#sasarpa#}¦ {%sa-sarpa, as, ā, am,%} having serpents,
infested by serpents.
<LEND>

<L>51577<pc>1099-a<k1>sasarparI<k2>sasarparI
{#sasarparI#}¦ {%sasarparī, īs,%} f. (fr. rt. {%sṛp%}), Ved.
gliding everywhere (said of Vāc, the daughter of
Sūrya).
<LEND>

<L>51578<pc>1099-a<k1>sasavas<k2>sasavas
{#sasavas#}¦ {%sasavas, ān,%} m., Ved. one who
possesses, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda III. 34, 8.
fr. rt. 1. {%san.%})
<LEND>

<L>51579<pc>1099-a<k1>sasahAya<k2>sasahAya
{#sasahAya#}¦ {%sa-sahāya, as, ā, am,%} along with
associates, having companions.
<LEND>

<L>51580<pc>1099-a<k1>sasADvasa<k2>sasADvasa
{#sasADvasa#}¦ {%sa-sādhvasa, as, ā, am,%} filled with
terror, terrified, frightened, alarmed; timid; ({%am%}),
ind. in fear, timidly.
<LEND>

<L>51581<pc>1099-a<k1>sasAra<k2>sasAra
{#sasAra#}¦ {%sa-sāra, as, ā, am,%} possessing
strength or energy.
<LEND>

<L>51582<pc>1099-a<k1>sasAravARa<k2>sasAravARa
{%Sa-sāra-vāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessing both strength
and sound.
<LEND>

<L>51583<pc>1099-a<k1>sasIman<k2>sasIman
{#sasIman#}¦ {%sa-sīman, ā, ā, a,%} having the
same boundary, conterminous, near.
<LEND>

<L>51584<pc>1099-a<k1>sasuta<k2>sasuta
{#sasuta#}¦ {%sa-suta, as, ā, am,%} having a son,
with sons, with children.
<LEND>

<L>51585<pc>1099-a<k1>sasutvan<k2>sasutvan
{#sasutvan#}¦ {%sa-sutvan, ā,%} &c., accompanied
by Soma-offering priests.
<LEND>

<L>51586<pc>1099-a<k1>sasuracApam<k2>sasuracApam
{#sasuracApam#}¦ {%sa-suracāpam,%} ind. with Indra's
bow.
<LEND>

<L>51587<pc>1099-a<k1>sasuhfjjana<k2>sasuhfjjana
{#sasuhfjjana#}¦ {%sa-suhṛjjana, as, ā, am,%} attended
by friendly people, along with kinsfolk.
<LEND>

<L>51588<pc>1099-a<k1>sasUta<k2>sasUta
{#sasUta#}¦ {%sa-sūta, as, ā, am,%} attended by a
charioteer.
<LEND>

<L>51589<pc>1099-a<k1>sasena<k2>sasena
{#sasena#}¦ {%sa-sena, as, ā, am,%} having an army,
commanding an army.
<LEND>

<L>51590<pc>1099-a<k1>sasEnya<k2>sasEnya
{#sasEnya#}¦ {%sa-sainya, as, ā, am,%} having an
army, along with an army, attended by guards.
{%—Sa-sainya-bala-vāhana, as, ā, am,%} with guards,
armies, and equipages.
<LEND>

<L>51591<pc>1099-a<k1>sasOzWava<k2>sasOzWava
{#sasOzWava#}¦ {%sa-sauṣṭhava, as, ā, am,%} having
excellence, excellent; with lightness or fleetness,
quick, fleet.
<LEND>

<L>51592<pc>1099-a<k1>sasj<k2>sasj
{#sasj#}¦ {%sasj%} = rt. 2. {%sañj,%} p. 1050.
<LEND>

<L>51593<pc>1099-a<k1>sastara<k2>sastara
{#sastara#}¦ {%sa-stara, as,%} m. ‘having a strewing,’
a bed of leaves.
<LEND>

<L>51594<pc>1099-a<k1>sastrIka<k2>sastrIka
{#sastrIka#}¦ {%sa-strīka, as, ā, am,%} attended by
a wife.
<LEND>

<L>51595<pc>1099-a<k1>sasTARujaNgama<k2>sasTARujaNgama
{#sasTARujaNgama#}¦ {%sa-sthāṇu-jaṅgama, as, ā, am,%}
along with immovables and movables.
<LEND>

<L>51596<pc>1099-a<k1>sasTAna<k2>sasTAna
{#sasTAna#}¦ {%sa-sthāna, as, ā, am,%} ({%= samāna-%}
{%sthāna,%} Vopa-deva VI. 98), having the same position,
having the same class, corresponding.
<LEND>

<L>51597<pc>1099-a<k1>sasTAvan<k2>sasTAvan
{#sasTAvan#}¦ {%sa-sthāvan, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. stand-
ing or fixed together.
<LEND>

<L>51598<pc>1099-a<k1>sasni<k2>sasni
{#sasni#}¦ {%sasni, is, is, i%} (fr. rt. 1. {%san;%} accord-
ing to Sāy. fr. rt. {%snā%} with 5. {%sa%}), Ved. granting,
[Page1099-b+ 73]
offering, generous; eager to gain or win or acquire;
pure, holy, (Sāy. {%= śuddha,%} Ṛg-veda II. 18, 1);
becoming lulled, (according to Sāy. {%= sanniruddha,%}
and in this sense said to be fr. rt. {%sas,%} Ṛg-veda III.
15, 5; according to Nirukta V. 1. {%sasni = saṃ-%}
{%snāta = megha.%})
<LEND>

<L>51599<pc>1099-b<k1>sasneha<k2>sasneha
{#sasneha#}¦ {%sa-sneha, as, ā, am,%} possessing affec-
tion, affectionate; ({%am%}), ind. affectionately.
<LEND>

<L>51600<pc>1099-b<k1>saspfha<k2>saspfha
{#saspfha#}¦ {%sa-spṛha, as, ā, am,%} filled with
desire or longing, wishing for, desirous; ({%am%}), ind.
wistfully, with passionate longing.
<LEND>

<L>51601<pc>1099-b<k1>sasmita<k2>sasmita
{#sasmita#}¦ {%sa-smita, as, ā, am,%} accompanied
with smiles, smiling, laughing; ({%am%}), ind. with a
smile, smilingly.
<LEND>

<L>51602<pc>1099-b<k1>sasya<k2>sasya<h>1
{#sasya#} 1¦. {%sasya, am,%} n. (for 1. {%śasya,%} q. v.;
in Uṇādi-s. IV. 109. said to be fr. rt. {%sas%}), a good
quality, excellence, merit.
<LEND>

<L>51603<pc>1099-b<k1>sasyaka<k2>sasyaka<h>1
1. {%sasyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessed of good qualities;
({%as%}), m. a sort of precious stone (coloured like the
inner fruit of a cocoa-nut; perhaps an opal).
<LEND>

<L>51604<pc>1099-b<k1>sasya<k2>sasya<h>2
{#sasya#} 2¦. {%sasya, am,%} n. (for 2. {%śasya,%} q. v.;
said to be fr. rt. {%sas%}), corn, grain; fruit; a weapon;
[cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">εἴα, ἤϊον.</lang>] {%—Sasya-kreṇī,%} f. buying
grain. {%—Sasya-prada, as, ā, am,%} yielding corn,
fertile. {%—Sasya-pravṛddhi, is,%} f. the growth of
corn. {%—Sasya-mārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} corn-destroying,
destructive of grain; ({%ī%}), m. a kind of rat or large
mouse. {%—Sasya-saṃvara, as,%} m. the Śāl tree,
Shorea Robusta. {%—Sasya-saṃvaraṇa, as,%} m. the
Aśva-karṇa tree. {%—Sasyād (˚ya-ad), t, t, t,%} eating
grain or fruit, granivorous. {%—Sasyeṣṭi (˚ya-iṣ˚),%}
{%is,%} f. sacrifice offered on the ripening of new grain.
<LEND>

<L>51605<pc>1099-b<k1>sasyaka<k2>sasyaka<h>2
2. {%sasyaka, as,%}¦ m. a weapon, sword.
<LEND>

<L>51606<pc>1099-b<k1>sasyad<k2>sasyad
{#sasyad#}¦ {%sa-syad, t, t, t,%} Ved. flowing toge-
ther, (Sāy. {%= saha-syandamāna,%} as an epithet of
‘the waters,’ Ṛg-veda X. 113, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>51607<pc>1099-b<k1>sasra<k2>sasra
{#sasra#}¦ {%sasra, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%sṛ%}), Ved.
going, flowing, rapid, swift (said of rivers).
<LEND>

<L>51608<pc>1099-b<k1>sasfvas<k2>sasfvas
{%Sasṛvas, vān, -ruṣī, vat,%}¦ Ved. one who has
gone, flowing.
<LEND>

<L>51609<pc>1099-b<k1>sasri<k2>sasri
{%Sasri, is, is, i,%}¦ going, who or what goes.
<LEND>

<L>51610<pc>1099-b<k1>sasrut<k2>sasrut
{#sasrut#}¦ {%sasrut, t, t, t%} (fr. rt. {%sru%} with 5. {%sa%}
or a reduplicated form), Ved. flowing or going toge-
ther; flowing, (Sāy. {%= saha pravartamāna%} and
{%saraṇa-śīla%}); ({%t%}), f. a flowing stream, river ({%=%}
{%nadī,%} Naigh. I. 13).
<LEND>

<L>51611<pc>1099-b<k1>sasvaDa<k2>sasvaDa
{#sasvaDa#}¦ {%sa-svadha, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%svadhā%}
with {%sa%}), having the Sva-dhā or food offered to
deceased ancestors; epithet of a particular class of
Pitṛs.
<LEND>

<L>51612<pc>1099-b<k1>sasvar<k2>sasvar
{#sasvar#}¦ {%sasvar,%} ind. secretly; secret, (Sāy.
{%= antarhita;%} in Naigh. III. 25. enumerated among
the {%nirṇītāntarhita-nāmadheyāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>51613<pc>1099-b<k1>sasveda<k2>sasveda
{#sasveda#}¦ {%sa-sveda, as, ā, am,%} moist with
sweat; perspiring, exuding; ({%ā%}), f. a girl who has
been recently deflowered.
<LEND>

<L>51614<pc>1099-b<k1>sah<k2>sah<h>1
{#sah#} 1¦. {%sah%} (perhaps for {%sa-vah,%} cf. {%soḍha%}
for {%sa-ūḍha%}), cl. 1. A. {%sahate%} (sometimes
also P. {%-ti%}), {%sehe, sasāha, sahiṣyate, asahiṣṭa,%}
{%sahitum%} or {%soḍhum%} (Ved. {%sāhyāma%} for {%sahyāma,%}
Atharva-veda IV. 32, 1; {%sāsahaḥ = sasahaḥ = abhi-%}
{%bhavasi,%} Vājasaneyi-s. XV. 40), to bear, bear patiently,
suffer, endure, be patient; to allow; to be strong or
able to bear up against or resist, overpower, over-
come, conquer, defeat; to stop, keep back, suppress;
to be able (with inf.); cl. 10. or Caus. {%sāhayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to cause to bear, make bearable, Aor. {%asī-%}
{%sahat:%} Desid. of Caus. {%sisāhayiṣati%} (Pāṇ. VIII.
3, 62): Desid. {%sisahiṣate,%} to wish to bear: Intens.
{%sāsahyate, sāsoḍhi,%} to resist, defeat; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔχ-ω</lang>
<lang n="greek">for ἕχ-ω (i.e. (σ)έχ-ω), ἕξω, ἑχείης, ἐξῆς, ἔχ-ο-μαι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἔ-σχο-ν, σχή-σω, ἔ-σχη-κα, σχέ-σι-ς, σχή-μα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σχο-λή, σχε-δόν, ἴσχ-ω</lang> (probably for <lang n="greek">σι-σεχ-ω</lang>),
[Page1099-c+ 81]
<lang n="greek">ἰσχανάω, ἐχ-υρό-ς, ὀχ-υρό-ς;</lang> according to some
also Lat. <nsi>sag-ax, sagus, sagio.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>51615<pc>1099-c<k1>sah<k2>sah<h>2
2. {%sah, sāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ bearing, enduring, &c. (frequently
at the end of comps., cf. {%vane-ṣah, satrā-sah%}).
<LEND>

<L>51616<pc>1099-c<k1>saha<k2>saha<h>1
1. {%saha, as, ā, am,%}¦ patient, enduring, suffering,
bearing; able; ({%as%}), m. the month Mārga-śīrṣa,
(see {%sahas%}); epithet of Śiva; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
strength, power; ({%ā%}), f. the earth; N. of a division
of the world (according to the Buddhists); the aloe
plant or flower; a sort of bean ({%= mudga-parṇī%});
the perfume or drug Nakha; the plant Daṇḍot-
pala; a sort of white Barleria; the ichneumon plant
({%= rāsnā%}); a kind of medicinal moon-plant; other
plants, {%= sarpa-kaṅkālī; = taraṇī; (am),%} n. the
salt called Pāṃśava. {%—1. saha-tva, am,%} n. or {%saha-%}
{%tā,%} f. sufferance, endurance, capacity for enduring.
{%—Saha-rakṣa, as,%} m. ‘preserving strength,’ epi-
thet of the son of the Fire called Pavamāna. {%—Sahā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. possessing strength, strong,
powerful. {%—Sahā-van,%} Ved. {%= sahā-vat,%} (Ṛg-veda
X. 178, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>51617<pc>1099-c<k1>sahaka<k2>sahaka
{%Sahaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ enduring, bearing, patient.
<LEND>

<L>51618<pc>1099-c<k1>sahana<k2>sahana
{%Sahana, as, ā, am,%}¦ patient, enduring; ({%am%}), n.
patience, endurance, forbearance, bearing, enduring.
{%—Sahana-śīla, as, ā, am,%} of a patient disposition.
<LEND>

<L>51619<pc>1099-c<k1>sahanIya<k2>sahanIya
{%Sahanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be borne or endured,
tolerable, endurable.
<LEND>

<L>51620<pc>1099-c<k1>sahantya<k2>sahantya
{%Sahantya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. capable of overcom-
ing or conquering (said of Agni).
<LEND>

<L>51621<pc>1099-c<k1>sahamAna<k2>sahamAna<h>1
1. {%sahamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. {%saha-māna%} see
p. 1100, col. 2), bearing, enduring; overpowering,
conquering, victorious.
<LEND>

<L>51622<pc>1099-c<k1>sahas<k2>sahas
{%Sahas, as,%}¦ n. strength, force, power ({%= bala,%}
Naigh. II. 9); overpowering, overcoming, conquer-
ing, victory; light; water ({%= udaka,%} Naigh. I. 12);
({%ās%}), m. the month Mārga-śīrṣa or Agrahāyaṇa
(November-December); the winter season; ({%sa-%}
{%hasā%}), ind. with great force or precipitation, pre-
cipitately, quickly, inconsiderately, on a sudden, at
once; along with ({%= saha%}); [cf. Goth. <nsi>sigis;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>sigor, sige.</nsi>] {%—Sahasas-putra, as,%} m., Ved.
‘son of strength,’ epithet of Agni; of Brahmaṇas-
pati. {%—Sahasā-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} suddenly beheld,
seen quickly; ({%as%}), m. an adopted son. {%—Sahasā-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. powerful, mighty, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%bala-vat.%}) {%—Sahas-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. pro-
duced by strength or force; made strong or powerful,
strengthened; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Agni; of Indra.
{%—Sahas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing power, power-
ful; ({%at%}), ind. powerfully, mightily (Ved.). {%—Saho-%}
{%jā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. produced by power. {%—Saho-dā,%}
{%ās, ās, am,%} Ved. strength-bestowing. {%—Saho-bala,%}
{%am,%} n. great force or violence, cruelty. {%—Saho-%}
{%bhari, is, is, i,%} Ved. strength-supporting, strength-
nourishing. {%—Saho-van,%} Ved. {%= sahas-vat%}. {%—Saho-%}
{%vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. increasing strength.
<LEND>

<L>51623<pc>1099-c<k1>sahasAna<k2>sahasAna
{%Sahasāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ patient, enduring; over-
powering; ({%as%}), m. a peacock; sacrifice, oblation.
<LEND>

<L>51624<pc>1099-c<k1>sahasin<k2>sahasin
{%Sahasin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. powerful, strong, mighty.
<LEND>

<L>51625<pc>1099-c<k1>sahasya<k2>sahasya
{%Sahasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to strength, strong,
vigorous (Ved.); coming from strength, being the
offspring of might (Ved.); ({%as%}), m. the month
Pauṣa (December-January). {%—Sahasya-candra,%}
{%as,%} m. the wintry moon.
<LEND>

<L>51626<pc>1099-c<k1>sahA<k2>sahA
{%Sahā, sahā-vat.%}¦ See under 1. {%saha%} above.
<LEND>

<L>51627<pc>1099-c<k1>sahita<k2>sahita<h>1
1. {%sahita, as, ā, am,%}¦ borne, endured, supported.
<LEND>

<L>51628<pc>1099-c<k1>sahitf<k2>sahitf
{%Sahitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a bearer, bearing, enduring.
<LEND>

<L>51629<pc>1099-c<k1>sahitra<k2>sahitra
{%Sahitra, am,%}¦ n. patience, endurance, forbearance.
<LEND>

<L>51630<pc>1099-c<k1>sahizRu<k2>sahizRu
{%Sahiṣṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ able to support, capable of
enduring, disposed to bear, patient, enduring, re-
signed; ({%us%}), m., N. of a Muni. {%—Sahiṣṇu-tā,%}
f. or {%sahiṣṇu-tva, am,%} n. ability to bear or sup-
port; patience, resignation, forbearance.
<LEND>

<L>51631<pc>1099-c<k1>sahIyas<k2>sahIyas
{%Sahīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. fr. {%soḍhṛ%}), Ved.
stronger, very strong.
<LEND>

<L>51632<pc>1099-c<k1>sahuri<k2>sahuri
{%Sahuri, is, is, i,%}¦ patient, enduring (Ved.); con-
quering, victorious (Ved.); ({%is%}), m. epithet of Agni
(Ved.); the sun; ({%is%}), f. the earth.
<LEND>

<L>51633<pc>1099-c<k1>sahora<k2>sahora
{%Sahora, as, ā, am,%}¦ good, excellent; ({%as%}), m. a
saint, a pure or pious man.
<LEND>

<L>51634<pc>1099-c<k1>sahya<k2>sahya
{%Sahya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be borne or endured,
[Page1100-a+ 80]
endurable, sufferable, tolerable; able to bear, adequate
to, equal to; powerful, strong; sweet, agreeable;
({%as%}), m., N. of one of the seven principal ranges of
mountains in India, (see {%kulācala%}); of the moun-
tainous district on the north-west side of the Penin-
sula (near Poonah; the Go-dāvarī river rises in this
district); ({%am%}), n. health, convalescence; adequacy;
assistance; [cf. according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">σάο-ς, σα-ώ-τερο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σῶο-ς, σῶς, σω-τήρ, σῶ-κο-ς, σώ-ζ-ω;</lang> per-
haps Lat. <nsi>sa-nu-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>ga-sunt;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>sund.</nsi>] {%—Sahya-parvata, as,%} or {%sahya-mahībhṛt,%}
{%t,%} or {%sahyādri, is,%} m. the Sahya range of moun-
tains. {%—Sahyādri-khaṇḍa,%} N. of a section of the
Skanda-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>51635<pc>1100-a<k1>sahyas<k2>sahyas
{%Sahyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. {%= sahīyas.%}
<LEND>

<L>51636<pc>1100-a<k1>sahyu<k2>sahyu
{%Sahyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. conquering, victorious.
<LEND>

<L>51637<pc>1100-a<k1>sAQa<k2>sAQa
{%Sāḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. overcome, conquered;
[cf. {%a-ṣāḍha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51638<pc>1100-a<k1>sA|f<k2>sA|f
{%Sāḷhṛ, ḷhā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who overcomes or
conquers, a conqueror.
<LEND>

<L>51639<pc>1100-a<k1>sAsahAna<k2>sAsahAna
{%Sāsahāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (for {%sasahāna%}), Ved. over-
coming, conquering, oppressing.
<LEND>

<L>51640<pc>1100-a<k1>sAsahi<k2>sAsahi
{%Sāsahi, is, is, i%}¦ (fr. the Intens.), able to bear much;
overpowering, conquering, victorious (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>51641<pc>1100-a<k1>sAsahvas<k2>sAsahvas
{%Sāsahvas, ān,%}¦ &c. (for {%sasahvas%}), Ved. one who
has overcome, overcoming, conquering, victorious.
<LEND>

<L>51642<pc>1100-a<k1>sAhana<k2>sAhana
{%Sāhana, sāhaya, sāhasa,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>51643<pc>1100-a<k1>sAhvas<k2>sAhvas
{%Sāhvas, ān,%}¦ m. (in the Pada text {%sahvas%}), Ved. one
who overcomes or subdues, mighty, (Sāy. {%= śatrūn%}
{%abhibhāvukaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>51644<pc>1100-a<k1>sIkzat<k2>sIkzat
{%Sīkṣat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. a Vedic Desid.), Ved.
desiring to overcome, anxious to conquer, (Sāy. =
{%soḍhum,%} i. e. {%abhibhavitum icchat,%} Ṛg-veda VI.
14, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>51645<pc>1100-a<k1>soQa<k2>soQa
{%Soḍha, soḍhṛ,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>51646<pc>1100-a<k1>sah<k2>sah<h>3
{#sah#} 3¦. {%sah%} (connected with rt. {%suh%}), cl.
4. P. {%sahyati, sasāha,%} &c., to satisfy, de-
light; to be pleased; to bear, endure; [cf. rt.
1. {%sah.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51647<pc>1100-a<k1>saha<k2>saha<h>2
{#saha#} 2¦. {%saha,%} ind. (perhaps fr. 4. {%sa%} or
5. {%sa + dhā,%} which in Ved. may become {%dha,%} see
{%sa-dha%}), with, along with, together, together with
(often used as a preposition governing the inst. case,
but generally placed <nsi>after</nsi> the governed word; fre-
quently also as a prefix in comp.; according to
native lexicographers the following words express the
senses which 2. {%saha%} may convey, {%sākalyam, vid-%}
{%yamānam, sādṛśyam, yaugapadyam, samṛd-%}
{%dhiḥ, sambandhaḥ, sāmarthyam%}); [cf. probably
Lat. <nsi>soda-lis.</nsi>] — 1. {%saha-kāra, as,%} m. (for 2. {%sa-%}
{%hakāra%} see p. 1101), acting with, co-operation; a
sort of fragrant Mango tree. {%—Sahakāra-bhañjikā,%}
f. a sort of game. {%—Sahakāri-tā,%} f. or {%sahakāri-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. co-operation, assistance. {%—Saha-kārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%saha-kṛt, t, t, t,%} one who acts toge-
ther or co-operates with another, an assistant, coad-
jutor, associate, co-operating, working together, assist-
ing. {%—Saha-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} co-operated with,
assisted, aided. {%—Saha-kṛtvan, ā, arī, a,%} co-
operating, assisting; a coadjutor. {%—Saha-gata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} gone with, accompanied, associated, going
with. {%—Saha-gam,%} cl. 1. P. {%-gacchati, -gantum,%}
to go with, accompany. {%—Saha-gamana, am,%} n. the
act of going with or accompanying; a woman's
going with her deceased husband (i. e. burning her-
self with his dead body). {%—Saha-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%}
going with, accompanying; ({%inī%}), f. a woman who
goes with her deceased husband (i. e. burns herself
with his body). {%—Saha-gopās, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
accompanied by a protector. {%—Saha-grah,%} cl. 9. P.
A. {%-gṛhṇāti, -gṛhṇīte, -grahītum,%} to take along
with, carry off with. {%—Saha-cara, as, ī, am,%} going
with, accompanying, associating with; ({%as%}), m. a
companion, follower; a friend; a surety; the shrub
Barleria Cristata, yellow and blue Barleria; ({%ī%}), f.
a female companion, female friend, confidante; a
wife; yellow Barleria. {%—Saha-carat, an, antī, at,%}
going with, accompanying, attending. {%—Saha-ca-%}
{%rita, as, ā, am,%} gone with; going with, accom-
panying, attending, associating with. {%—Saha-cāra, %}
[Page1100-b+ 81]
{%as,%} m. going together; harmony, agreement; the
accompanyment of the middle term by the major;
right course, (opposed to {%vy-abhicāra.%}) {%—Saha-%}
{%cārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} going along with, a companion,
friend, attendant. {%—Saha-cchandas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. along with metre. {%—Saha-ja, as, ā, am,%} born
or produced together, born from the same mother,
connate, congenital, innate, inherent, naturally be-
longing to, natural, co-existent; ({%as%}), m, a brother
of whole blood; the natural state or disposition;
epithet of the third astrological mansion; a proper
N. {%—Saha-jagdhi, is,%} f. eating together. {%—Saha-%}
{%janman, ā, ā, a, = saha-ja%} above; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
an Aspsaras. {%—Saha-janyā,%} f., N. of an Apsaras.
{%—Sahaja-mitra, as,%} m. a natural friend, one
friendly by birth (as a sister's son, cousin, &c.).
{%—Sahaja-vatsala, as, ā, am,%} having innate fond-
ness, naturally fond. {%—Sahaja-śatru, us,%} m. {%= sa-%}
{%hajāri%}. {%—Saha-jāta, as, ā, am,%} born together,
born from the same mother, twin-born. {%—Sahajā-%}
{%dhinātha (˚ja-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Sa-%}
{%hajāri (˚ja-ari), is,%} m. a natural enemy, one hostile
by birth (as the son of the same father by another
mother, the son of a paternal uncle, &c.). {%—Saha-%}
{%jetara (˚ja-it˚), as, ā, am,%} other than natural, not
innate, not inherent, not congenital, accidental.
{%—Sahajendra (˚ja-in˚), as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Sahajodāsīna (˚ja-ud˚), as,%} m. a born neutral,
one who is naturally neither an enemy nor a friend,
a common acquaintance, a friend unconnected by
birth. {%—2. saha-tā,%} f. or {%saha-tva, am,%} n. associ-
ation, connection, union. {%—Saha-dāra, as, ā, am,%}
along with a wife, married. {%—Saha-deva, as,%} m.,
N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi (having the patronymic Vār-
ṣāgira, q. v.); of the youngest of the five Pāṇḍava
princes (son of Mādrī and reputed son of Pāṇḍu,
but really of the Aśvins, and twin-brother of Nakula,
see {%mādrī%}); of a person renowned as a swordsman;
of a son of Sṛñjaya; of a son of Harṣa-vardhana;
of a son of Su-dāsa; of a son of Jarā-sandha; of a
son of Divākara; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of Balā plant; the
twining shrub Echites Frutescens; the plant Daṇ-
ḍotpala; another plant ({%= śarivā%}); the mother of
an Arhat; N. of a daughter of Devaka; ({%ī%}), f. the
wife of Saha-deva; a sort of Balā plant; a yellow
Daṇḍotpala; the shrub Priyaṅgu; another plant
{%(= sarpākṣī)%}. {%—Sahadevī-gaṇa, as,%} m. a collec-
tion of herbs used in certain rites of ablution at the
consecration of an idol, &c. {%—Saha-droṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} along with Droṇa, accompanied by Droṇa.
{%—Saha-dharma, as,%} m. community of duty or
law, common usage or characteristic. {%—Saha-dhar-%}
{%ma-cara, as, ā, am,%} one following the same law
or duties. {%—Saha-dharmacārin, ī,%} m. a helper in
the fulfilment of duties, a husband; ({%iṇī%}), f. a
woman who aids in fulfilling duties, helpmate, legiti-
mate wife. {%—Saha-dharmin, ī, iṇī, i,%} following
the same duties or customs; possessing similar pro-
perties; ({%iṇī%}), f. a lawful or legitimate wife. {%—Sa-%}
{%ha-nartana, am,%} n. the act of dancing together.
{%—Saha-patnī,%} f., Ved. (a woman) along with her
husband. {%—Saha-pathin, -panthās, -pathī,%} m. f.
going by the same road, a companion on a journey,
fellow-traveller. {%—Saha-pāṃśu-kila, as,%} m. ‘one
who has played with another in the sand,’ a friend
from childhood, cotemporary. {%—Saha-pāna%} or {%saha-%}
{%pānaka, am,%} n. drinking together. {%—Saha-piṇḍa, as,%}
m. a kinsman, (see {%sa-piṇḍa.%}) {%—Saha-putra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} along with a son, accompanied by a son. {%—Saha-%}
{%pūrvāhṇam,%} ind. like the forenoon, (Vopa-deva VI.
61.) {%—Saha-bhārya, as, ā, am,%} along with a wife,
accompanied by a wife. {%—Saha-bhāvin, ī,%} m. being
together, a friend, companion, adherent, partisan.
{%—Saha-bhojana, am,%} n. eating together, eating in
company; joint possession. {%—Saha-bhrātṛ, tā, trī,%}
{%tṛ,%} along with a brother, accompanied by a brother
or brothers. {%—Saha-maraṇa, am,%} n. dying toge-
ther, concremation, a widow's burning herself with
the corpse of her husband. {%—2. saha-māna, as, ā,%}
{%am%} (for 1. see under rt. 1. {%sah%}), possessing pride,
full of arrogance. {%—Saha-mārīca, as, ā, am,%} ac-
[Page1100-c+ 81]
companied by Mārīca. {%—1. saha-mūra, as, ā, am%}
{%(mūra = mūḍha),%} Ved. infatuated, bewildered, con-
fused. {%—2. saha-mūra, as, ā, am,%} along with the
root, (Sāy. {%= mūlena sahita,%} Ṛg-veda X. 87, 19.)
{%—Saha-mṛtā,%} f. a woman who has burnt herself
on the funeral pile of her husband. {%—Saha-yāyin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} going along with, going together, accom-
panying. {%—Saha-yudhvan, ā,%} &c., fighting together,
fighting in company, a brother-in-arms. {%—Saha-%}
{%rakṣas,%} one of the three kinds of sacrificial fire
(viz. that which receives the offerings to the Rāk-
ṣasas). {%—Saha-rasā,%} f. a sort of bean {%(= mudga-%}
{%parṇī)%}. {%—Saha-lakṣmaṇa, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied by Lakṣmaṇa. {%—Saha-vartin, ī, inī, i,%}
being together, keeping company. {%—Saha-vasati,%}
{%is,%} f. dwelling together. {%—Saha-vasu, us,%} m., Ved.
‘having wealth,’ N. of an Asura (an enemy of
Indra). {%—Saha-vah%} or {%saha-vāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. draw-
ing together (said of horses). {%—Saha-vāsa, as,%} m.
one who lives with another, a fellow-lodger; dwell-
ing together. {%—Saha-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} living together.
{%—Saha-vāhana, as, ā, am,%} accompanied by an
army; with vehicles. {%—Saha-vīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
accompanied with heroes, together with sons or
progeny. {%—Saha-śeyya, am,%} n., Ved. the lying
together with. {%—Saha-stoma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. along
with hymns. {%—Sahā-cara, as,%} m. (for {%saha-cara%}),
yellow Barleria. {%—Sahādhyayana (˚ha-adh˚), am,%}
n. a reading together, fellowship in study. {%—Sahā-%}
{%dhyāyin (˚ha-adh˚), ī,%} m. a fellow student, fellow
disciple, condisciple. {%—Sahānuja (˚ha-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} along with a younger brother. {%—Sahāpatya%}
{%(˚ha-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} along with offspring. {%—Sahā-%}
{%pavāda (˚ha-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} containing contradic-
tions, disagreeing. {%—Sahāmātya (˚ha-am˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having councillors, attended by ministers. {%—Sa-%}
{%hāya, sahāyaka,%} &c., see below. {%—Sahārogya%}
{%(˚ha-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} possessing freedom from
disease, healthful. {%—Sahārtha (˚ha-ar˚), as,%} m. a
common object; ({%as, ā, am%}), having the same
object, having the same meaning, synonymous.
{%—Sahārtha-nāśa, as, ā, am,%} one who is the
same in profit and loss. {%—Sahāsana (˚ha-ās˚), am,%}
n. sitting on the same seat. {%—Saheti (˚ha-iti), is,%}
{%is, i,%} along with the particle {%iti,%} followed by {%iti.%}
{%—Sahetikaraṇa%} or {%sahetikāra, am,%} n., scil. {%pada,%}
a word followed by the particle {%iti;%} [cf. {%setika-%}
{%raṇa.%}] {%—Sahokti (˚ha-uk˚), is,%} f. speaking at the
same time; a figure of rhetoric (either employing
a word in a double meaning, or connecting different
ideas by using the word {%saha%}). {%—Sahoṭaja (˚ha-%}
{%uṭ˚), as,%} m. a cabin or hut made of leaves, (sometimes
erected on the funeral pile of an ascetic and burnt
with the body). {%—1. sahoḍha (˚ha-ūḍha), as,%} m.
(for 2. {%sa-hoḍha%} see p. 1102), the son of a woman
pregnant at marriage. {%—Sahoḍha-ja, as,%} m. the son
of a woman pregnant at marriage. {%—Sahodaya%}
{%(˚ha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} together with the following
(words, letters, &c.). {%—Sahodara (˚ha-ud˚), as,%} m.
‘co-uterine,’ a brother of whole blood; [cf. {%sodara.%}]
{%—Sahodita (˚ha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} said together,
declared comprehensively or collectively. {%—Sahopa-%}
{%dha (˚ha-up˚), as, ā, am,%} along with a penultimate
letter. {%—Sahopamā (˚ha-up˚),%} f. ‘comparison by
the word {%saha%},’ a particular figure of speech which
by coupling two objects implies their similarity.
{%—Sahoru (˚ha-ūru), us, ūs, u,%} along with thighs,
having thighs. {%—Sahoṣita (˚ha-uṣ˚), as, ā, am,%}
dwelling or abiding together.
<LEND>

<L>51648<pc>1100-c<k1>sahAya<k2>sahAya
{%Sahāya, as,%}¦ m. (i. e. {%saha-aya%}), one who goes
along with (another), a companion, follower, adhe-
rent, ally; a helper, patron; epithet of Śiva; the
ruddy goose; a sort of drug or perfume {%(= ghaṇṭā-%}
{%pāṭalī)%}. {%—Sahāya-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of ren-
dering assistance, aiding. {%—Sahāya-tā,%} f. or {%sahāya-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. companionship, union, association,
friendship, assistance, help; a number of companions,
company of associates or followers. {%—Sahāya-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having a companion, accompanied, be-
friended, assisted. {%—Sahāyārthin (˚ya-ar˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} seeking a companion, desirous of an ally.
<LEND>
[Page1101-a+ 75]

<L>51649<pc>1101-a<k1>sahAyaka<k2>sahAyaka
{%Sahāyaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ accompanied by (at the
end of an adj. comp., e. g. {%nārāyaṇa-s˚,%} accompa-
nied by Nārāyaṇa).
<LEND>

<L>51650<pc>1101-a<k1>sahAvat<k2>sahAvat
{%Sahā-vat.%}¦ See under 1. {%saha.%}
<LEND>

<L>51651<pc>1101-a<k1>sahita<k2>sahita<h>2
2. {%sahita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 3. see col. 3), accompa-
nied or attended by, associated or connected with, in
company with, with (with inst. or at the end of
comps.), possessed of; ({%am%}), ind. with, along with,
together with. {%—Sahita-kumbhaka, as,%} m. epithet
of a particular mode of suppressing the breath, (see
{%prāṇāyāma.%})
<LEND>

<L>51652<pc>1101-a<k1>sahaMsapAta<k2>sahaMsapAta
{#sahaMsapAta#}¦ {%sa-haṃsa-pāta, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied with flights of swans.
<LEND>

<L>51653<pc>1101-a<k1>sahakAra<k2>sahakAra<h>2
{#sahakAra#} 2¦. {%sa-hakāra, as, ā, am,%} (for 1. {%saha-%}
{%kāra%} see under 2. {%saha%}), having the sound {%ha,%} i. e.
the sound used in calling.
<LEND>

<L>51654<pc>1101-a<k1>sahaRquka<k2>sahaRquka
{#sahaRquka#}¦ {%sahaṇḍuka, am,%} n. a particular
kind of condiment prepared with meat &c.
<LEND>

<L>51655<pc>1101-a<k1>sahama<k2>sahama
{#sahama#}¦ {%sahama, am,%} n. (fr. Arabic {%sahm%}),
good or evil luck arising from the influence of the
stars.
<LEND>

<L>51656<pc>1101-a<k1>sahaya<k2>sahaya
{#sahaya#}¦ {%sa-haya, as, ā, am,%} having horses,
along with horses.
<LEND>

<L>51657<pc>1101-a<k1>sahari<k2>sahari
{#sahari#}¦ {%sa-hari,%} ind. resembling Hari or
Viṣṇu; ({%is%}), m. the sun; a bull (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>51658<pc>1101-a<k1>saharza<k2>saharza
{#saharza#}¦ {%sa-harṣa, as,%} m. joyfulness, envy,
emulation; pleasure, delight; ({%am%}), ind. joyfully,
cheerfully.
<LEND>

<L>51659<pc>1101-a<k1>sahalanIya<k2>sahalanIya
{#sahalanIya#}¦ {%sa-halanīya, as,%} m. (probably)
a plough-mate.
<LEND>

<L>51660<pc>1101-a<k1>sahasta<k2>sahasta
{#sahasta#}¦ {%sa-hasta, as, ā, am,%} dexterous or
skilled in handling weapons.
<LEND>

<L>51661<pc>1101-a<k1>sahasra<k2>sahasra
{#sahasra#}¦ {%sahasra, am,%} n. (perhaps connected
with {%sahas;%} cf. Pers. <nsi>hazār</nsi>), a thousand (used in
the sing. with a plur. noun, e. g. {%sahasram pitaraḥ%}
or {%sahasram pitṝṇām,%} a thousand ancestors; and
used with other numerals thus, {%ekādhikaṃ sahasram%}
or {%eka-sahasram,%} a thousand + one, 1001; {%dvy-%}
{%adhikaṃ sahasram,%} a thousand + two, 1002;
{%ekādaśādhikaṃ sahasram%} or {%ekādaśaṃ saha-%}
{%sram%} or {%ekādaśa-sahasram,%} a thousand + eleven
or a thousand having eleven, 1011; {%vinśaty-adhi-%}
{%kaṃ sahasram%} or {%vinśaṃ sahasram,%} a thousand
+ twenty, 1020); any very large number (enume-
rated among the {%bahu-nāmāni%} in Naigh. III. 1;
cf. {%sahasra-kiraṇa%} &c. below); ({%e%}), n. du. two
thousand {%(= dve sahasre, dvi-sahasram); (āṇi),%}
n. pl. thousands (e. g. {%trīṇi sahasrāṇi%} or {%tri-%}
{%sahasrāṇi,%} three thousand); ({%as, ī, am%}), thousandth,
(but {%sahasra-tama%} is the better form, cf. Pāṇ. V.
2, 57.) {%—Sahasra-kāṇḍā,%} f. ‘many-jointed,’ white
Dūrvā grass. {%—Sahasra-kiraṇa, as,%} m. ‘thousand-
rayed,’ the sun. {%—Sahasra-kṛtvas,%} ind. a thousand
times, many times. {%—Sahasra-ketu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. thousand-bannered, having many banners.
{%—Sahasra-gu, us, us, u,%} possessing a thousand
cows. {%—Sahasra-guṇa, as, ā, am,%} a thousandfold.
{%—Sahasra-ghni,%} Ved. smiting thousands, (Atharva-
veda XI. 2, 12.) {%—Sahasra-caraṇa, as, ā, am,%}
thousand-footed. {%—Sahasra-jit, t, t, t,%} conquering
a thousand (Ved.); ({%t%}), m., N. of a son of Yadu;
of a son of Bhajamāna. {%—Sahasra-tama, as, ī, am,%}
thousandth, the thousandth. {%—Sahasra-da, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} giving thousands, liberal; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Śiva. {%—Sahasra-daṃṣṭra, as,%} or {%sahasra-daṃṣ-%}
{%ṭrin, ī,%} m. ‘thousand-toothed,’ a sort of sheat fish,
Silurus Pelorius. {%—Sahasra-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%}
having a thousand rewards. {%—Sahasra-dā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} Ved. giving a thousand, very liberal. {%—Sahasra-%}
{%dātu, us, us, u,%} Ved. thousandfold. {%—Sahasra-%}
{%dāvan, ā,%} m., Ved. a giver of thousands. {%—Sahasra-%}
{%dṛś, k,%} m. ‘thousand-eyed,’ an epithet of Indra.
{%—Sahasra-dos, s,%} m. ‘having a thousand arms,’
epithet of Arjuna Kārtavīrya. {%—Sahasra-dvāra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} thousand-gated. {%—Sahasra-dhā,%} ind. in a
[Page1101-b+ 81]
thousand ways, thousandfold, in a thousand parts or
portions. {%—Sahasra-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. ‘thou-
sand-streamed,’ flowing in a thousand streams; hav-
ing a thousand edges; ({%as%}), m. the discus of Viṣṇu;
({%ā%}), f. a stream of water for the ablution of an idol
conveyed through a vessel pierced with a multitude
of little holes like a shower-bath. {%—Sahasra-na-%}
{%yana, as,%} m. ‘thousand-eyed,’ an epithet of Indra;
[cf. {%sahasrākṣa.%}] {%—Sahasra-nāman, a,%} n. the
thousand names (of Viṣṇu, Śiva, or any deity);
({%ā,%} &c.), thousand-named, having a thousand names.
{%—Sahasranāma-stotra, am,%} n. ‘hymn of a thou-
sand names,’ N. of a Tantra hymn. {%—Sahasra-%}
{%nirṇij, k, k, k,%} Ved. having a thousand ornaments
(said of the car of the Aśvins). {%—Sahasra-nītha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. praised in a thousand hymns;
skilled in a thousand sciences. {%—Sahasra-netra, as,%}
m. ‘thousand-eyed,’ epithet of Indra. {%—Sahasra-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. lord of a thousand towns, governor of
a district. {%—Sahasra-pattra, am,%} n. ‘having a thou-
sand leaves,’ a lotus. {%—Sahasrapattrābharaṇa%}
{%(˚ra-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} having lotus ornaments,
decorated with lotuses. {%—Sahasra-pājas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. having infinite splendor or might, glittering a
thousandfold. {%—Sahasra-pād, -pāt, -padī, -pāt,%}
thousand-footed, milliped; ({%t%}), m. epithet of Pu-
rusha (as described in the Puruṣa-sūkta, q. v.); of
Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of Brahmā. {%—Sahasra-pāda, as,%}
m. ‘thousand-footed’ or ‘thousand-rayed,’ the sun;
Viṣṇu; a sort of duck {%(= kāraṇḍava)%}. {%—Sahasra-%}
{%poṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} Ved. nourishing a thousand. {%—Sa-%}
{%hasra-pradhana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one who has
experienced a thousand battles. {%—Sahasra-bala, as,%}
m., N. of a king. {%—Sahasra-bāhu, us, us, u,%} having
a thousand arms; ({%us%}), m. epithet of Śiva; of the
Asura Vāṇa. {%—Sahasra-bharṇas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. a
thousandfold; having unlimited food; [cf. {%bharṇas.%}]
{%—Sahasra-bhuja, as,%} m. ‘having a thousand arms,’
epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of Durgā. {%—Sa-%}
{%hasra-bhṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} Ved. having a thousand
points, thousand-edged. {%—Sahasra-manyu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} Ved. filled with unbounded passion, filled with
infinite splendor. {%—Sahasra-marīci, is,%} m. ‘thou-
sand-rayed,’ epithet of the sun. {%—Sahasra-mīḍha%}
or {%sahasra-mīḷha, as, ā, am%} (see {%mīḍha,%} p. 780,
col. 1), Ved. possessing or yielding a thousand trea-
sures; ({%am%}), n. a battle. {%—Sahasra-muṣka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having a thousand testicles (said of Indra,
Ṛg-veda VI. 46, 3); having many flames (said of
Agni; Sāy. {%= bahu-tejaska,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 19, 32).
{%—Sahasra-mūrdha, as,%} m. ‘thousand-headed,’
epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Sahasra-mūrdhan, ā,%} m.
‘thousand-headed,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sahasra-%}
{%mūlī,%} f. ‘having a thousand roots,’ a kind of plant
{%(= dravantī)%}. {%—Sahasra-mauli, is,%} m. ‘thousand-
crested,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Sahasra-yajña-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Sahasra-yāj, ṭ,%} m. one
who sacrifices a thousand victims. {%—Sahasra-yuga,%}
{%am,%} n. a period of a thousand ages. {%—Sahasra-%}
{%raśmi, is,%} m. ‘thousand-rayed,’ the sun. {%—Sahasra-%}
{%retas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. containing inexhaustible seed.
{%—Sahasra-roman, a,%} n. ‘having a thousand hairs,’
a blanket. {%—Sahasra-vadana, as,%} m. ‘thousand-
faced,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Sahasra-varcas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. having infinite splendor or power. {%—Sa-%}
{%hasra-vartani, is, is, i,%} Ved. having a thousand
paths. {%—Sahasra-vartanin, ī, inī, i,%} having a thou-
sand wheels. {%—Sahasra-valśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having a thousand branches, thousand-branched.
{%—Sahasra-vāja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. possessing infinite
strength. {%—Sahasra-vīryā,%} f. a kind of Dūrvā or
bent grass, Panicum Dactylon; another plant {%(=%}
{%mahā-śatāvarī)%}. {%—Sahasra-vedha, am,%} n. sorrel;
a kind of sour gruel. {%—Sahasra-vedhin, ī,%} m.
‘thousand-piercer,’ a sort of cane, Calamus Fascicu-
latus, {%= kastūrī; (i),%} n. Asa Fœtida. {%—Sahasra-%}
{%śata-dakṣiṇa, as, ā, am,%} accompanied by hundreds
of thousands of sacrificial fees. {%—Sahasra-śas,%} ind. by
thousands, in a thousand ways, thousandfold. {%—Sa-%}
{%hasra-śikhara, as,%} m. ‘thousand-peaked,’ the
Vindhya mountain. {%—Sahasra-śīrṣa, as, ā, am,%}
[Page1101-c+ 78]
or {%sahasra-śīrṣan, ā, ā, a,%} thousand-headed, hav-
ing a thousand heads. {%—Sahasra-śṛṅga, as, ā, am,%}
thousand-horned, having a thousand horns. {%—Sa-%}
{%hasra-śravaṇa, as,%} m. ‘having a thousand ears,’
epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Sahasra-saṅkhyā,%} f. the sum of
a thousand. {%—Sahasra-sani, is, is, i,%} Ved. giving or
bestowing a thousand. {%—Sahasra-sammita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} measuring or numbering a thousand, a thousand
in number. {%—Sahasra-sava, as, ā, am,%} having a
thousand libations. {%—Sahasra-sā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
granting a thousand, bringing a thousand (treasures).
{%—Sahasra-sātama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. giving thou-
sands. {%—Sahasra-stuka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a
thousand tufts or curls of hair. {%—Sahasra-sthūṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. supported by a thousand columns.
{%—Sahasra-hary-aśva, as,%} m. ‘having a thousand
bay horses,’ the car of Indra. {%—Sahasra-hasta, as,%}
m. ‘thousand-handed,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Saha-%}
{%srāṃśu (˚ra-aṃ˚), us,%} m. ‘thousand-rayed,’ the
sun. {%—Sahasrāṃśu-ja, as,%} m. ‘sun-born,’ epithet of
Saturn. {%—Sahasrākṣa (˚ra-ak˚), as, ī, am,%} ‘thou-
sand-eyed,’ all-perceiving, all-inspecting, vigilant, all-
powerful; ({%as%}), m. an epithet of Indra (so called,
according to one legend, in consequence of the curse
of the sage Gautama, who, detecting him in the
desire to seduce his wife Ahalyā, covered him with
a thousand marks resembling the female organ, which
he afterwards changed to eyes; a different legend is
related in Rāmāyaṇa 1. 48); epithet of Puruṣa (in
the Puruṣa-sūkta, q. v.); of Viṣṇu; epithet of Fire
and Rudra (as identified with Fire in the Upani-
shads); of Śiva; N. of a place; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
goddess. {%—Sahasrācāra (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m. a sort of
yellow Barleria, Barleria Prionitis; [cf. {%saha-cara.%}]
{%—Sahasrādhipati (˚ra-adh˚), is,%} m. the governor
of a thousand villages, chief of a district. {%—Sahasrā-%}
{%nana (˚ra-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘thousand-faced,’ epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Sahasrānīka (˚ra-an˚)%} or {%sahasrāṇīka,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king (son of Śatānīka, q. v.). {%—Sa-%}
{%hasrāpasas (˚ra-ap˚), ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having a
thousand forms or shapes. {%—Sahasrā-magha, as,%}
{%ā, am%} (for {%sahasra-magha%}), Ved. having thousands
of gifts, giving thousands, (Sāy. {%= bahu-dhana.%})
{%—Sahasrāra (˚ra-ara), as, am,%} m. n. ‘having a
thousand lines or divisions,’ a kind of receptacle said
to be found in the top of the head and to resemble
a lotus reversed, (it is fabled to be the seat of the
soul.) {%—Sahasrārgha (˚ra-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. equi-
valent to a thousand. {%—Sahasrārcis (˚ra-ar˚), is,%}
m. ‘thousand-rayed,’ the sun. {%—Sahasrāvara (˚ra-%}
{%av˚), as,%} m. a fine below a thousand or from five
hundred to a thousand Paṇas. {%—Sahasrāvartaka-%}
{%tīrtha (˚ra-āv˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Saha-%}
{%srāśva (˚ra-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘having a thousand
horses,’ N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>51662<pc>1101-c<k1>sahasrataya<k2>sahasrataya
{%Sahasrataya, as, ī, am,%}¦ a thousandfold; ({%am%}),
n. a thousand.
<LEND>

<L>51663<pc>1101-c<k1>sahasrA<k2>sahasrA
{%Sahasrā,%}¦ f. a kind of plant ({%= amba-ṣṭhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>51664<pc>1101-c<k1>sahasrin<k2>sahasrin
{%Sahasrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having a thousand; consisting
of thousands; amounting to a thousand (as a fine);
({%ī%}), m. a body of a thousand men, &c.; the com-
mander or prefect of a thousand.
<LEND>

<L>51665<pc>1101-c<k1>sahAya<k2>sahAya
{#sahAya#}¦ {%sahāya.%} See p. 1100, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>51666<pc>1101-c<k1>sahAra<k2>sahAra
{#sahAra#}¦ {%sahāra, as,%} m. the Mango tree,
(probably for {%saha-kāra%}); universal dissolution ({%=%}
{%mahā-pralaya%}).
<LEND>

<L>51667<pc>1101-c<k1>sahArda<k2>sahArda
{#sahArda#}¦ {%sa-hārda, as, ā, am,%} full of affection
or love, affectionate.
<LEND>

<L>51668<pc>1101-c<k1>sahAva<k2>sahAva
{#sahAva#}¦ {%sa-hāva, as, ā, am,%} employing co-
quettish gestures, wanton; ({%am%}), ind. with blandish-
ments.
<LEND>

<L>51669<pc>1101-c<k1>sahAsa<k2>sahAsa
{#sahAsa#}¦ {%sa-hāsa, as, ā, am,%} with laughter or
derision, laughing, smiling; ({%am%}), ind. derisively,
scornfully.
<LEND>

<L>51670<pc>1101-c<k1>sahita<k2>sahita<h>3
{#sahita#} 3¦. {%sahita, as, ā, am,%} (for 1. see
p. 1099, col. 3; for 2. see col. 1), {%= saṃ-hita%} under
{%san-dhā%}. {%—Sahitorū (˚ta-ūrū), ūs,%} f. {%= saṃhi-%}
{%torū.%}
<LEND>
[Page1102-a+ 67]

<L>51671<pc>1102-a<k1>sahizRu<k2>sahizRu
{#sahizRu#}¦ {%sahiṣṇu, sahīyas,%} &c. See p. 1099,
col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>51672<pc>1102-a<k1>sahuqa<k2>sahuqa
{#sahuqa#}¦ {%sa-huḍa, as, ā, am,%} having a ram,
with rams.
<LEND>

<L>51673<pc>1102-a<k1>sahuri<k2>sahuri
{#sahuri#}¦ {%sahuri.%} See p. 1099, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>51674<pc>1102-a<k1>sahUtI<k2>sahUtI
{#sahUtI#}¦ {%sa-hūtī,%} ind., Ved. by common in-
vocation, (Sāy. {%= sahūtyā = sahāhvānena,%} Ṛg-
veda II. 33, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>51675<pc>1102-a<k1>sahfdaya<k2>sahfdaya
{#sahfdaya#}¦ {%sa-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} possessing a
heart, good-hearted, compassionate, intelligent; with
the heart, sincere; ({%as%}), m. a learned man.
<LEND>

<L>51676<pc>1102-a<k1>sahflleKa<k2>sahflleKa
{#sahflleKa#}¦ {%sa-hṛllekha, as, ā, am,%} doubted
about, questionable; ({%am%}), n. questionable food.
<LEND>

<L>51677<pc>1102-a<k1>sahetuka<k2>sahetuka
{#sahetuka#}¦ {%sa-hetuka, as, ā, am,%} having a cause
or reason, produced by a cause, together with a
reason.
<LEND>

<L>51678<pc>1102-a<k1>sahemakakzya<k2>sahemakakzya
{#sahemakakzya#}¦ {%sa-hema-kakṣya, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing golden girths.
<LEND>

<L>51679<pc>1102-a<k1>sahela<k2>sahela
{#sahela#}¦ {%sa-hela, as, ā, am,%} full of play or
wanton endearment, playful, sportive, playing.
<LEND>

<L>51680<pc>1102-a<k1>sahowaja<k2>sahowaja
{#sahowaja#}¦ {%sahoṭaja.%} See p. 1100, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>51681<pc>1102-a<k1>sahoQa<k2>sahoQa<h>2
{#sahoQa#} 2¦. {%sa-hoḍha, as,%} m. (for 1. {%sahoḍha%}
see p. 1100, col. 3), ‘having stolen goods,’ a thief
caught with stolen property upon him.
<LEND>

<L>51682<pc>1102-a<k1>sahodara<k2>sahodara
{#sahodara#}¦ {%sahodara.%} See p. 1100, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>51683<pc>1102-a<k1>sahora<k2>sahora
{#sahora#}¦ {%sahora.%} See p. 1099, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>51684<pc>1102-a<k1>sA<k2>sA<h>1
{#sA#} 1¦. {%sā,%} f. (nom. fem. of the pronoun
{%tad,%} see 4. {%sa%}), she; N. of Lakṣmī; of Gaurī.
<LEND>

<L>51685<pc>1102-a<k1>sA<k2>sA<h>2
{#sA#} 2¦. {%sā, ās, ās, am,%} (fr. rt. 1. {%san%}), Ved.
giving, bestowing, granting (at the end of a comp.,
e. g. {%sahasra-sā,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>51686<pc>1102-a<k1>sAta<k2>sAta<h>1
1. {%sāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ given, bestowed; ({%am%}), n.,
Ved. a gift, present, wealth, riches, (Sāy. {%sātāni =%}
{%dhanāni,%} Ṛg-veda II. 24, 10.)
<LEND>

<L>51687<pc>1102-a<k1>sAti<k2>sAti<h>1
1. {%sāti, is,%}¦ f. gaining, obtaining, acquisition, (Sāy.
{%sātaye = lābhāya%}); gift, giving, dispensing; honour-
ing, helping, help; wealth [cf. 2. {%sati,%} 1. {%santi%}];
({%is%}), m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>51688<pc>1102-a<k1>sAnasi<k2>sAnasi
{%Sānasi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. granting, giving; enjoyable,
full of enjoyment, (Sāy. {%= sambhajanīya%}); ({%is%}), m.
gold.
<LEND>

<L>51689<pc>1102-a<k1>sA<k2>sA<h>3
{#sA#} 3¦. {%sā%} = rt. {%so,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>51690<pc>1102-a<k1>sAta<k2>sAta<h>2
2. {%sāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ (regarded as an irregular part.
fr. rt. {%so%}), destroyed. (For 3. {%sāta%} see p. 1104,
col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>51691<pc>1102-a<k1>sAti<k2>sAti<h>2
2. {%sāti, is,%}¦ f. end, conclusion; cessation; destruc-
tion; sharp pain.
<LEND>

<L>51692<pc>1102-a<k1>sAMyamana<k2>sAMyamana
{#sAMyamana#}¦ {%sāṃyamana, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%yamana%}), relating to restraint.
<LEND>

<L>51693<pc>1102-a<k1>sAMyAtrika<k2>sAMyAtrika
{#sAMyAtrika#}¦ {%sāṃyātrika, as,%} m. (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%yātrā%}), a voyaging merchant, one who trades by
sea, &c.
<LEND>

<L>51694<pc>1102-a<k1>sAMyugIna<k2>sAMyugIna
{#sAMyugIna#}¦ {%sāṃyugīna, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%yuga%}), relating to war or battle; warlike, martial,
skilled in war; ({%as%}), m. a soldier skilled in war,
great warrior.
<LEND>

<L>51695<pc>1102-a<k1>sAMrAviRa<k2>sAMrAviRa
{#sAMrAviRa#}¦ {%sāṃrāviṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%saṃ-rāva%} or
{%saṃ-rāvin%}), general acclamation or calling out of a
number of people together, a general shout, crying
or complaining aloud.
<LEND>

<L>51696<pc>1102-a<k1>sAMvatsara<k2>sAMvatsara
{#sAMvatsara#}¦ {%sāṃvatsara, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%vatsara%}), yearly, annual, perennial, lasting or occupy-
ing a year; ({%as%}), m. an astrologer; an almanac-
maker. {%—Sāṃvatsara-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of a chapter
of Bhaṭṭotpala's commentary on the Bṛhat-saṃhitā.
<LEND>

<L>51697<pc>1102-a<k1>sAMvatsaraka<k2>sAMvatsaraka
{%Sāṃvatsaraka%}¦ or {%sāṃvatsarika, as, ī, am,%}
yearly, annual, relating to a year, produced in a year,
[Page1102-b+ 70]
&c.; ({%as%}), m. an astrologer. {%—Sāṃvatsarika-%}
{%śrāddha, am,%} n. an annual funeral ceremony in
honour of deceased ancestors.
<LEND>

<L>51698<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMvatsarIya<k2>sAMvatsarIya
{%Sāṃvatsarīya, as, ī, am, = sāṃvatsara%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>51699<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMvaraRa<k2>sAMvaraRa
{#sAMvaraRa#}¦ {%sāṃvaraṇa, as,%} m. ‘son of Saṃ-
varaṇa,’ a patronymic of the Vedic Ṛṣi Manu.
<LEND>

<L>51700<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMvAdika<k2>sAMvAdika
{#sAMvAdika#}¦ {%sāṃvādika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%vāda%}), colloquial, controversial, causing discussion;
({%as%}), m. a disputant, controversialist, logician.
<LEND>

<L>51701<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMvfttika<k2>sAMvfttika
{#sAMvfttika#}¦ {%sāṃvṛttika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%vṛtti%}), phenomenal, illusory.
<LEND>

<L>51702<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMSayika<k2>sAMSayika
{#sAMSayika#}¦ {%sāṃśayika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%śaya%}), dubious, doubtful; in doubt, uncertain, ir-
resolute.
<LEND>

<L>51703<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMsArika<k2>sAMsArika
{#sAMsArika#}¦ {%sāṃsārika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%sāra%}), worldly, belonging to the world, mundane.
<LEND>

<L>51704<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMsidDika<k2>sAMsidDika
{#sAMsidDika#}¦ {%sāṃsiddhika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%siddhi%}), effected naturally, belonging to nature,
natural, native, innate; absolute, existing absolutely;
effected by supernatural means (as spells). {%—Sāṃ-%}
{%siddhika-drava, as,%} m. natural (as opposed to
generated) fluidity, (it belongs to water only.)
<LEND>

<L>51705<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMsTAnika<k2>sAMsTAnika
{#sAMsTAnika#}¦ {%sāṃsthānika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%sthāna%}), relating or belonging to a common place
of abode; ({%as%}), m. an inhabitant or native of the
same place; fellow-countryman.
<LEND>

<L>51706<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMsrAviRa<k2>sAMsrAviRa
{#sAMsrAviRa#}¦ {%sāṃsrāviṇa, am,%} n. (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%srāva%} or {%saṃ-srāvin%}), a general stream or flow (of
water &c.).
<LEND>

<L>51707<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMhananika<k2>sAMhananika
{#sAMhananika#}¦ {%sāṃhananika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saṃ-%}
{%hanana%}), relating to the body, bodily, corporeal.
<LEND>

<L>51708<pc>1102-b<k1>sAMhita<k2>sAMhita
{#sAMhita#}¦ {%sāṃhita, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saṃhitā%}), re-
lating to the Saṃhitā, found in the Saṃhitā text;
({%ī%}), f., N. of an Upaniṣad ({%= taittirīyopaniṣad%}).
<LEND>

<L>51709<pc>1102-b<k1>sAka<k2>sAka
{#sAka#}¦ {%sāka, am,%} n. (for {%śāka,%} q. v.), a vege-
table, herb, pot-herb. {%—Sāka-medha, ās,%} m. pl., Ved.
the Sāka sacrifice (observed on the full moon of
Kārttika and following day).
<LEND>

<L>51710<pc>1102-b<k1>sAkac<k2>sAkac
{#sAkac#}¦ {%sākac (sa-ak˚),%} having the Taddhita
affix {%akac%} (in grammar).
<LEND>

<L>51711<pc>1102-b<k1>sAkam<k2>sAkam
{#sAkam#}¦ {%sākam,%} ind. (probably fr. {%sa%} + rt. 1.
{%añc,%} see {%sāci%}), with, together with (with inst.), at
the same time. {%—Sākaṃ-ja, as, ā, am,%} Ved. being
born together. {%—Sākaṃ-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. joined
together. {%—Sākaṃ-vṛdh, t, t, t,%} Ved. increasing
along with or at the same time. {%—Sākam-ukṣ,%}
Ved. sprinkling at the same time. {%—Sākam-pra-%}
{%sthāyya,%} a particular kind of sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>51712<pc>1102-b<k1>sAkala<k2>sAkala
{#sAkala#}¦ {%sākala, am,%} n., N. of a town in the
Pañjāb (also read {%śākala%}).
<LEND>

<L>51713<pc>1102-b<k1>sAkalya<k2>sAkalya
{#sAkalya#}¦ {%sākalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sakala%}), to-
tality, entireness, completeness, the whole, entire,
all; ({%ena%}), ind. completely. {%—Sākalya-vacana, am,%}
n. a complete perusal.
<LEND>

<L>51714<pc>1102-b<k1>sAkANkza<k2>sAkANkza
{#sAkANkza#}¦ {%sākāṅkṣa (sa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a wish or desire, wishing, desirous; having
significance; ({%am%}), ind. with longing desire, wish-
fully.
<LEND>

<L>51715<pc>1102-b<k1>sAkAra<k2>sAkAra
{#sAkAra#}¦ {%sākāra (sa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} having
form, having any shape or definite figure. {%—Sākāra-%}
{%siddhi, is,%} f., N. of a work.
<LEND>

<L>51716<pc>1102-b<k1>sAkuruRqa<k2>sAkuruRqa
{#sAkuruRqa#}¦ {%sākuruṇḍa, as,%} m. yellow Ama-
ranth or Barleria ({%= kuruṇḍa, sakuruṇḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>51717<pc>1102-b<k1>sAkula<k2>sAkula
{#sAkula#}¦ {%sākula (sa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} per-
plexed, bewildered.
<LEND>

<L>51718<pc>1102-b<k1>sAkUta<k2>sAkUta
{#sAkUta#}¦ {%sākūta (sa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} having
significance or meaning, intentional; significant;
amorous, wanton; ({%am%}), ind. intentionally, signi-
ficantly, impressively; attentively. {%—Sākūta-smita,%}
{%am,%} n. a meaning smile, amorous smile.
<LEND>
[Page1102-c+ 75]

<L>51719<pc>1102-c<k1>sAketa<k2>sAketa
{#sAketa#}¦ {%sāketa, am,%} n., N. of the city Ayo-
dhyā or ancient Oude; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants
of Sāketa or Ayodhyā.
<LEND>

<L>51720<pc>1102-c<k1>sAketaka<k2>sAketaka
{%Sāketaka, as,%}¦ m. an inhabitant of Sāketa; ({%am%}),
n. {%= sāketa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>51721<pc>1102-c<k1>sAktuka<k2>sAktuka
{#sAktuka#}¦ {%sāktuka, as,%} m. (fr. {%saktu%}), barley;
({%am%}), n. a quantity of fried barley or barley-meal.
<LEND>

<L>51722<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkza<k2>sAkza<h>1
{#sAkza#} 1¦. {%sākṣa (sa-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} (see 2.
{%akṣa%}) , having the seeds of which rosaries are made,
having a rosary.
<LEND>

<L>51723<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkza<k2>sAkza<h>2
{#sAkza#} 2¦. {%sākṣa (sa-ak˚),%} having eyes, (see
4. {%akṣa.%})
<LEND>

<L>51724<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkzAt<k2>sAkzAt
{%Sākṣāt,%}¦ ind. (properly abl. c. of the above), be-
fore the eyes, in sight of, in presence of, before;
eye to eye, visibly, evidently, openly, manifestly;
visibly present, visibly manifested as, like; with one's
own eyes. {%—Sākṣāt-karaṇa, am,%} n. or {%sākṣāt-%}
{%kāra, as,%} m. causing to be visibly present; making
evident to the senses; intuitive perception, actual feel-
ing. {%—Sākṣāt-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make
evident to the senses, place clearly before the mind.
{%—Sākṣātkṛta-dharman, ā,%} m. one who has a
real or intuitive perception of duty. {%—Sākṣād-%}
{%dharma, as,%} m. the personified incarnation of law
or justice; Justice himself.
<LEND>

<L>51725<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkzika<k2>sAkzika
{%Sākṣika,%}¦ in {%a-s˚, loka-s˚,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>51726<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkzin<k2>sAkzin
{%Sākṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ observing, witnessing, seeing;
attesting, testifying, giving evidence; ({%ī%}), m. an
observer; an eye-witness; any witness (in law).
{%—Sākṣi-tā,%} f. or {%sākṣi-tva, am,%} n. the office of
a witness, evidence, testimony, attestation. {%—Sākṣi-%}
{%dvaidha, am,%} n. discrepancy between witnesses,
contradictory evidence. {%—Sākṣi-parīkṣā,%} f. or
{%sākṣi-parīkṣaṇa, am,%} n. examination of a wit-
ness. {%—Sākṣi-pratyaya, as,%} m. the evidence or
testimony of witnesses. {%—Sākṣi-praśna, as,%} m.
interrogating witnesses, examination of witnesses.
{%—Sākṣipraśna-vidhāna, am,%} n. the rule or law
about examining witnessess. {%—Sākṣi-bhāvita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} proved by an eye-witness, established by testi-
mony. {%—Sākṣi-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having or re-
quiring evidence. {%—Sākṣi-lakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}
defined or proved by testimony. {%—Sākṣi-vat,%} ind.
like a witness. {%—Sākṣy-abhāva, as,%} m. absence or
want of witnesses, absence of testimony.
<LEND>

<L>51727<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkzIkf<k2>sAkzIkf
{%Sākṣī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to call to
witness, cause to attest.
<LEND>

<L>51728<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkzIkftya<k2>sAkzIkftya
{%Sākṣī-kṛtya,%}¦ ind. having called to witness.
<LEND>

<L>51729<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkzya<k2>sAkzya
{%Sākṣya, am,%}¦ n. testimony, evidence, attestation.
<LEND>

<L>51730<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkzata<k2>sAkzata
{#sAkzata#}¦ {%sākṣata (sa-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} un-
interrupted; possessing grain; ({%am%}), ind. uninter-
ruptedly. {%—Sākṣata-pātra-hasta, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing a cup of grain in the hand, holding a vessel full
of parched grain.
<LEND>

<L>51731<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkzara<k2>sAkzara
{#sAkzara#}¦ {%sākṣara (sa-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} having
syllables or letters; containing syllables, &c.
<LEND>

<L>51732<pc>1102-c<k1>sAkzepa<k2>sAkzepa
{#sAkzepa#}¦ {%sākṣepa (sa-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} con-
veying reproach or irony, taunting; ({%am%}), ind. with
contumely, reproachfully, reproachingly.
<LEND>

<L>51733<pc>1102-c<k1>sAKidatteya<k2>sAKidatteya
{#sAKidatteya#}¦ {%sākhidatteya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sakhi-%}
{%datta,%} ‘friend-given’), belonging to a friend's gift.
<LEND>

<L>51734<pc>1102-c<k1>sAKeya<k2>sAKeya
{#sAKeya#}¦ {%sākheya, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sakhi%}), relat-
ing to a friend, friendly, amicable.
<LEND>

<L>51735<pc>1102-c<k1>sAKya<k2>sAKya
{%Sākhya, am,%}¦ n. friendship, affection.
<LEND>

<L>51736<pc>1102-c<k1>sAKowa<k2>sAKowa
{#sAKowa#}¦ {%sākhoṭa%} for {%śākhoṭa,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>51737<pc>1102-c<k1>sAgara<k2>sAgara
{#sAgara#}¦ {%sāgara, as,%} m. (fr. {%sagara%}), the
ocean (said to have been named Sāgara by Bha-
gīratha after his ancestor king Sagara, see the
legend under {%sa-gara;%} another legend asserts that
the bed of the ocean was dug by the sons of Sagara;
according to various authorities three or four or seven
oceans are enumerated, see 1. {%sam-udra%}); a symboli-
cal term for the number four; a sort of deer; N. of
a place; of an author; of a work. {%—Sāgara-ga, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} going to the ocean; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of the
[Page1103-a+ 74]
Ganges; a river, stream. {%—Sāgara-gāminī,%} f. ‘ocean-
going,’ a river. {%—Sāgaragā-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of
the Ganges,’ epithet of Bhīṣma. {%—Sāgaraṅ-gama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} flowing to the ocean. {%—Sāgara-datta,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘Ocean-given,’ a proper N. {%—Sāgara-dhīra-%}
{%cetas, ās, ās, as,%} whose mind is as firm or as deep
as the ocean. {%—Sāgara-nemi, is,%} f. ‘ocean-encircled,’
the earth. {%—Sāgara-paryanta, as, ā, am,%} bounded
by the sea. {%—Sāgara-plavana, am,%} n. navigat-
ing the ocean, leaping across the sea. {%—Sāgara-me-%}
{%khala, as, ā, am,%} girdled by the ocean, sea-girt;
({%ā%}), f. the earth. {%—Sāgara-vat,%} ind. like the ocean.
{%—Sāgarānukūla (˚ra-an˚), as, ā, am,%} situated on
the sea-coast. {%—Sāgarānta (˚ra-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
ending at the sea, bounded by the ocean, sea-girt.
{%—Sāgarāmbarā (˚ra-am˚),%} f. ‘ocean-clothed,’ the
earth. {%—Sāgarālaya (˚ra-āl˚), as,%} m. ‘ocean-dwell-
ing,’ epithet of Varuṇa. {%—Sāgareśvara-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Sāgarottha (˚ra-ut˚), am,%} n.
‘produced in the sea,’ sea-salt. {%—Sāgarodgāra (˚ra-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. the swelling or heaving of the sea.
{%—Sāgaroddhūta-niḥsvana (˚ra-ud˚), as, ā, am,%}
raising a sound like the ocean.
<LEND>

<L>51738<pc>1103-a<k1>sAgni<k2>sAgni
{#sAgni#}¦ {%sāgni (sa-ag˚), is, is, i,%} having fire;
taking the sacred fire; ({%ī%}), ind. along with fire.
<LEND>

<L>51739<pc>1103-a<k1>sAgnika<k2>sAgnika
{%Sāgnika, as, ā, am,%}¦ possessing or maintaining a
fire; associated with Agni; ({%as%}), m. a householder
who maintains a sacred fire.
<LEND>

<L>51740<pc>1103-a<k1>sAgra<k2>sAgra
{#sAgra#}¦ {%sāgra (sa-ag˚), as, ā, am,%} with a sur-
plus, more than; ({%am%}), ind., Ved. for a longer
period, for a whole life.
<LEND>

<L>51741<pc>1103-a<k1>sANkarya<k2>sANkarya
{#sANkarya#}¦ {%sāṅkarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%saṅ-kara%}),
mixing or blending together confusedly, confusion,
mixture. {%—Sāṅkarya-vāda, as,%} m., N. of a short
Nyāya treatise.
<LEND>

<L>51742<pc>1103-a<k1>sANkala<k2>sANkala
{#sANkala#}¦ {%sāṅkala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%saṅ-kala%}),
effected or produced by addition, accumulated, &c.
<LEND>

<L>51743<pc>1103-a<k1>sANkASya<k2>sANkASya
{#sANkASya#}¦ {%sāṅkāśya,%} N. of the country of
king Kuśa-dhvaja (brother of Janaka); ({%ā%}), f., N.
of Kuśa-dhvaja's capital, (Rāmāyaṇa 1. 70, 3.)
{%—Sāṅkāśya-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of Sāṅkāśya,’
epithet of Kuśa-dhvaja, (see {%sītā.%})
<LEND>

<L>51744<pc>1103-a<k1>sANkura<k2>sANkura
{#sANkura#}¦ {%sāṅkura (sa-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessing shoots or buds, budding, in bud.
<LEND>

<L>51745<pc>1103-a<k1>sANkfti<k2>sANkfti
{#sANkfti#}¦ {%sāṅkṛti, is,%} m., N. of a sage (son
of Viśvā-mitra, and founder of the Vaiyāghrapadya
family).
<LEND>

<L>51746<pc>1103-a<k1>sANkftya<k2>sANkftya
{%Sāṅkṛtya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Muni; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a family or race.
<LEND>

<L>51747<pc>1103-a<k1>sANketika<k2>sANketika
{#sANketika#}¦ {%sāṅketika%} (fr. {%saṅketa%}), {%as, ī, am,%}
conventional; indicatory, symbolical, expressed by
signs or tokens or marks, consisting of signs, &c.
<LEND>

<L>51748<pc>1103-a<k1>sANkzepika<k2>sANkzepika
{#sANkzepika#}¦ {%sāṅkṣepika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%saṅ-%}
{%kṣepa%}), throwing together, abridging; abridged,
contracted, concise, summary, short.
<LEND>

<L>51749<pc>1103-a<k1>sANKya<k2>sANKya
{#sANKya#}¦ {%sāṅkhya, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%saṅ-khyā%}),
relating to number or calculation, reckoning up, cal-
culating, enumerating, deliberating, reasoning; ra-
tional, discriminative; ({%as, am%}), m. n., N. of one
of the three great divisions of Hindū philosophy,
(ascribed to the sage Kapila, q. v., and so called as
‘reckoning up’ or ‘enumerating’ twenty-five Tat-
tvas or true principles, its object being to effect the
final liberation of the twenty-fifth Tattva [Puruṣa,
the Soul] from the fetters of the phenomenal crea-
tion by conveying the correct knowledge of the
twenty-four other Tattvas, and rightly discriminating
the Soul from them; these twenty-four principles
are divided into eight Prakṛtis or Producers and six-
teen Vikāras or Productions; the eight Producers
start from a Mūla-prakṛti or original Producer
[variously called Pradhāna, ‘chief one;’ A-vyakta,
‘unevolved;’ Brahman, ‘supreme;’ Māyā, ‘power
of illusion;’ Bahu-dhānaka, ‘much-containing’],
[Page1103-b+ 81]
which is emphatically <nsi>the</nsi> Prakṛti, ‘First-producer,’ or
‘Originant,’ being a kind of primordial germ whence
all the twenty-three remaining Tattvas are evolved;
its first production is the 2nd Tattva, viz. Buddhi,
Intellect [sometimes called {%Mahat%} from its being
the great source of the two other internal organs
or instruments, Ahaṅkāra and Manas, which are
both modifications of it]; 3rd in order comes Ahaṅ-
kāra, ‘the I-making’ principle or sense of indi-
viduality; 4th come the five Tan-mātras or subtile
elementary particles out of which the five grosser
elements are evolved; the preceding eight principles
constitute the Producers, [all but the first being of
course in one sense also Productions]; then follow,
as proceeding from the Tan-mātras, the five Sthūla-
bhūtas or grosser elements [also called Mahā-bhūta],
viz. a. {%ākāśa,%} space or ether, having the Guṇa or
property of sound [{%śabda%}], which is the Viṣaya
or object of apprehension for the corresponding
Indriya or organ, the Ear; b. {%vāyu,%} air, having the
Guṇa or property of tangibility or touch [{%sparśa%}],
which is the Viṣaya for the Skin; c. {%tejas%} or
{%jyotis,%} fire or light, having the property of form or
colour [{%rūpa%}], which is the Viṣaya for the Eye;
d. {%āpas,%} water, having the property of savour or
taste [{%rasa%}], which is the Viṣaya for the Tongue;
e. {%pṛthivī%} or {%bhūmi,%} earth, having the property of
odour or smell [{%gandha%}], which is the Viṣaya for
the Nose, [see {%guṇa%}]; each of these elements after
the first having also the Guṇa or Guṇas of the pre-
ceding besides its own, and these Guṇas being some-
times identified with the Tan-mātras; then follow
the eleven organs, produced like the Tan-mātras from
the 3rd Tattva Ahaṅkāra, forming with them a
class of sixteen [{%ṣoḍaśakaḥ%}]; these eleven organs
are the five above-named Buddhīndriyāṇi or organs
of sense, viz. ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose; the five
Karmendriyāṇi or organs of action, viz. larynx, hand,
foot, arms, and organ of generation; and an eleventh
organ called Manas, commonly translated ‘mind,’
which stands between both sets of Indriyas as an in-
ternal organ of perception and action, or of cogni-
tion and volition, [see {%manas%}]: the twenty-fifth
Tattva, Puruṣa or Soul, is to be wholly distinguished
from the twenty-four just enumerated; it is neither
a Producer nor Production; it is altogether passive,
and simply a looker-on, having nothing whatever to
do with the acts of creation, which it only contem-
plates, uniting itself with unintelligent Prakṛti, as
a lame man mounted on a blind man's shoulders,
for the sake of observing and enjoying the acts of
this Prakṛti, who herself cannot see or observe any-
thing; without that union no creation can take
place any more than can the birth of a child without
the union of male and female; this view of creation
implies the eternal existence of innumerable separate
individual souls, each soul by its junction with Pra-
kṛti causing the creation of its own phenomenal
world, which world, however, has an existence of
its own independent of all connection with the par-
ticular Puruṣa to which it is joined; moreover, each
soul is invested in the first place with a subtile body
[{%liṅga-śarīra%} or {%sūkṣma-śarīra%}] composed of
Buddhi, Ahaṅkāra, the five Tan-mātras, and the
eleven organs, and afterwards with a grosser body
formed of the five elements; the former accompany-
ing the soul through all its transmigrations, while the
latter perishes; this system also teaches that Prakṛti
and its products may be regarded as made up of
three ingredients in a state of equipoise, viz. Sattva,
Rajas, and Tamas, Goodness, Passion, and Darkness,
commonly called Guṇas, but rather substances than
qualities, and more correctly translated ‘fetters,’ be-
cause they are like a triple-stranded rope [see
{%guṇa%}] which binds and confines the soul: the Sāṅ-
khya system agrees with the Vedānta in being
synthetical, and so differing from the Analytical
Nyāya; its great point of divergence from the
Vedānta is in maintaining two principles which the
Vedānta denies, [see {%vedānta%}]; it is said to be
atheistical as ignoring all notice of a Supreme Soul,
[Page1103-c+ 80]
whose existence is, however, established by the Yoga
branch of the Sāṅkhya proper, [see {%yoga%}]: the
vague outlines of the system before its crystallization
into a distinct school of dualism are propounded in
the first Book of Manu: its more fully developed
doctrines are contained in the Sāṅkhya-sūtras ascribed
to Kapila, in the Tattva-samāsa, or Summary of
Principles, ascribed to the same author, in the
Sāṅkhya-kārikā [see below], and the numerous
commentaries on these works, some of which are
enumerated below: the Buddhist system and that
of bishop Berkeley in Europe have many points of
connection with the Sāṅkhya, but the modern phi-
losophers of India pay far more attention to the
Nyāya and Vedānta); a follower of the Sāṅkhya
system of philosophy; a patronymic of the Vedic
Ṛṣi Atri; epithet of Śiva. {%—Sāṅkhya-kārikā,%} f.,
N. of a collection of memorial verses or stanzas by
Īśvara-kṛṣṇa in which a summary of the Sāṅkhya
system is given. {%—Sāṅkhya-kārikā-bhāṣya, am,%}
n., N. of a commentary by Gauḍa-pāda on the
Sāṅkhya-kārikā. {%—Sāṅkhya-kaumudī,%} f. {%= sāṅ-%}
{%khya-tattva-kaumudī;%} N. of another commentary
by Rāma-kṛṣṇa-bhaṭṭācārya on the Sāṅkhya-
kārikā. {%—Sāṅkhya-krama-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a com-
mentary on the Tattva-samāsa. {%—Sāṅkhya-can-%}
{%drikā,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Sāṅkhya-
kārikā by Nārāyaṇa-tīrtha. {%—Sāṅkhya-tattva-kau-%}
{%mudī,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Sāṅkhya-
kārikā by Vācaspati-miśra. {%—Sāṅkhya-tattva-pra-%}
{%dīpa, as,%} m., N. of a brief exposition of the Sāṅkhya
system by Kavi-rāja-yati. {%—Sāṅkhya-tattva-vilāsa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a commentary by Raghunātha-tarka-
vāgīśa-bhaṭṭācārya on the Sāṅkhya-tattva-kaumudī.
{%—Sāṅkhya-pravacana, am,%} n. ‘exposition or in-
terpretation of the Sāṅkhya system,’ N. given by
the commentator Vijñāna-bhikṣu to the six books
containing the Sūtras of the Sāṅkhya system of
philosophy ascribed to Kapila; N. of the Yoga-sūtras
(ascribed to Patañjali, see {%yoga-sūtra;%} the title
Sāṅkhya-pravacana appears to be more properly ap-
plied to this division of the Sāṅkhya). {%—Sāṅkhya-%}
{%pravacana-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a commentary
on the Sāṅkhya-sūtra by Vijñāna-bhikṣu. {%—Sāṅ-%}
{%khya-prasāda, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Sāṅkhya-%}
{%bhāṣya, am,%} n. {%= sāṅkhya-pravacana-bhāṣya.%}
{%—Sāṅkhya-bhikṣu, us,%} m. a particular kind of
mendicant. {%—Sāṅkhya-mukhya, as,%} m. epithet of
Śiva. {%—Sāṅkhya-yoga, as,%} m. ‘application of the
Sāṅkhya doctrine to the knowledge of spirit,’ N. of
the second chapter of the Bhagavad-gītā, (perhaps so
named as setting forth both the Sāṅkhya and Yoga
doctrines in regard to the soul; according to Śabda-
k. {%= jñāna-yoga%} or {%brahma-vidyā.%}) {%—Sāṅkhya-%}
{%yoga-pravartin, ī,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Sāṅkhya-%}
{%vṛtti-prakāśa, as,%} m. {%= sāṅkhya-tattva-vilāsa.%}
{%—Sāṅkhya-vṛtti-sāra, as,%} m., N. of a commen-
tary on the Sāṅkhya-sūtra by Mahā-deva Sarasvatī.
{%—Sāṅkhya-śāstra, am,%} n. the Sāṅkhya doctrine
or system of philosophy; any treatise upon it.
{%—Sāṅkhya-sāra%} or {%sāṅkhya-sāra-viveka, as,%} m.,
N. of a work by Vijñāna-bhikṣu. {%—Sāṅkhya-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} N. of six books of aphorisms of the
Sāṅkhya philosophy ascribed to Kapila, (the number
of aphorisms is said to be 526.) {%—Sāṅkhya-sūtra-%}
{%vivaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a commentary on the Tat-
tva-samāsa. {%—Sāṅkhyārtha-tattva-pradīpikā (˚ya-%}
{%ar˚),%} f., N. of a brief exposition of the Sāṅkhya
system by Bhaṭṭa-keśava. {%—Sāṅkhyārtha-saṅkhyā-%}
{%yika (˚ya-ar˚) = sāṅkhya-tattva-vilāsa%}. {%—Sāṅ-%}
{%khyālaṅkāra (˚ya-al˚), as,%} m. {%= sāṅkhya-krama-%}
{%dīpikā.%}
<LEND>

<L>51750<pc>1103-c<k1>sANKyAyana<k2>sANKyAyana
{%Sāṅkhyāyana, as,%}¦ m. (probably for {%śāṅkhyā-%}
{%yana%}), N. of a Muni; of the author of certain
Gṛhya-sūtras, &c. {%—Sāṅkhyāyana-sūtra, am,%} n.
the Sūtras of Sāṅkhyāyana.
<LEND>

<L>51751<pc>1103-c<k1>sANga<k2>sANga
{#sANga#}¦ {%sāṅga (sa-aṅ˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having
members or subdivisions; comprising every sub-
ordinate part, complete in every part, finished; to-
gether with the Aṅgas of the Veda, (see {%vedāṅga.%})
<LEND>
[Page1104-a+ 69]

<L>51752<pc>1104-a<k1>sANgopANga<k2>sANgopANga
{%Sāṅgopāṅga (˚ga-up˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ along with the
Aṅgas and Upāṅgas, (see {%vedāṅga, upāṅga.%})
<LEND>

<L>51753<pc>1104-a<k1>sANgaja<k2>sANgaja
{#sANgaja#}¦ {%sāṅgaja (sa-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} toge-
ther with hair, covered with hair.
<LEND>

<L>51754<pc>1104-a<k1>sANgatika<k2>sANgatika
{#sANgatika#}¦ {%sāṅgatika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saṅ-%}
{%gati%}), relating or belonging to union or association,
relating to society, social, associating; ({%as%}), m. a
visitor, guest, new comer; one who comes to transact
business.
<LEND>

<L>51755<pc>1104-a<k1>sANgama<k2>sANgama
{#sANgama#}¦ {%sāṅgama, as,%} m. (fr. {%saṅ-gama%}),
coming together, union, meeting, encounter.
<LEND>

<L>51756<pc>1104-a<k1>sANgamana<k2>sANgamana
{%Sāṅgamana, as,%}¦ m. See under {%an-aśnat.%}
<LEND>

<L>51757<pc>1104-a<k1>sANgAraka<k2>sANgAraka
{#sANgAraka#}¦ {%sāṅgāraka (sa-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%}
attended by the planet Mars.
<LEND>

<L>51758<pc>1104-a<k1>sANguzWam<k2>sANguzWam
{#sANguzWam#}¦ {%sāṅguṣṭham (sa-aṅ˚),%} ind. toge-
ther with the thumb.
<LEND>

<L>51759<pc>1104-a<k1>sANgrAmika<k2>sANgrAmika
{#sANgrAmika#}¦ {%sāṅgrāmika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%saṅgrā-%}
{%ma%}), relating to war; warlike, martial; ({%as%}), m. a
commander, general.
<LEND>

<L>51760<pc>1104-a<k1>sANGAtika<k2>sANGAtika
{#sANGAtika#}¦ {%sāṅghātika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%saṅ-%}
{%ghāta%}), utterly destructive, causing complete destruc-
tion, very deadly, killing.
<LEND>

<L>51761<pc>1104-a<k1>sANmuKI<k2>sANmuKI
{#sANmuKI#}¦ {%sāṅmukhī,%} f. (according to Śab-
da-k.), N. of a particular Tithi, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>51762<pc>1104-a<k1>sAc<k2>sAc
{#sAc#}¦ {%sāc%} (fr. rt. {%sac%}), Ved. in {%apatya-sāc,%}
{%nṛ-ṣāc.%}
<LEND>

<L>51763<pc>1104-a<k1>sAcin<k2>sAcin
{%Sācin%}¦ in {%savya-s˚,%} q. v. (perhaps connected with
{%sāci%} below).
<LEND>

<L>51764<pc>1104-a<k1>sAci<k2>sAci
{#sAci#}¦ {%sāci,%} ind. (probably loc. c. of a word
formed fr. {%sa%} + rt. 1. {%añc,%} see 2. {%añc%}), crookedly,
awry, in a sidelong manner, obliquely, bent on one
side. {%—Sāci-vāṭikā,%} f. the white-flowered hogweed.
{%—Sāci-vilokita, am,%} n. a side-long glance. {%—Sāci-%}
{%sthita, as, ā, am,%} standing or placed unevenly;
standing across. {%—Sācī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c.,
to make crooked, bend or turn aside. {%—Sācī-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} made crooked; bent, inclined, seen
crookedly or tortuously, distorted, misrepresented;
({%am%}), n. distortion or perversion of mind, prejudice.
{%—Sācī-guṇa,%} N. of a place or district.
<LEND>

<L>51765<pc>1104-a<k1>sAcivya<k2>sAcivya
{#sAcivya#}¦ {%sācivya, am,%} n. (fr. {%saciva%}), com-
panionship, friendship, fellowship; the office of a
counsellor, ministership, ministry, administration.
<LEND>

<L>51766<pc>1104-a<k1>sAcIvit<k2>sAcIvit
{#sAcIvit#}¦ {%sācīvit,%} ind. (in Naigh. II. 15.
enumerated among the {%kṣipra-nāmāni%}).
<LEND>

<L>51767<pc>1104-a<k1>sAjAtya<k2>sAjAtya
{#sAjAtya#}¦ {%sājātya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sa-jāti%}), com-
munity of genus, homogeneousness, sameness of class
or caste or tribe, equality of kind.
<LEND>

<L>51768<pc>1104-a<k1>sAYcArika<k2>sAYcArika
{#sAYcArika#}¦ {%sāñcārika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sañ-%}
{%cāra%}), moving about, setting in motion.
<LEND>

<L>51769<pc>1104-a<k1>sAYci<k2>sAYci
{#sAYci#}¦ {%sāñci%} (incorrect for {%sañ-citi%}), N. of
the ninth book of the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>51770<pc>1104-a<k1>sAYjana<k2>sAYjana
{#sAYjana#}¦ {%sāñjana (sa-añj˚), as, ā, am,%} having
pigment; ({%as%}), m. a lizard, chameleon.
<LEND>

<L>51771<pc>1104-a<k1>sAw<k2>sAw
{#sAw#}¦ {%sāṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%sāṭayati, -yitum,%} to
make visible or manifest, show.
<LEND>

<L>51772<pc>1104-a<k1>sAwopa<k2>sAwopa
{#sAwopa#}¦ {%sāṭopa (sa-āṭ˚), as, ā, am,%} having a
swelling, swollen, puffed up; puffed up with pride,
proud, haughty, consequential; ({%am%}), ind. arrogantly,
proudly, consequentially.
<LEND>

<L>51773<pc>1104-a<k1>sAwwahAsa<k2>sAwwahAsa
{#sAwwahAsa#}¦ {%sāṭṭahāsa (sa-aṭ˚), am,%} ind. with
loud laughter, with a horse-laugh.
<LEND>

<L>51774<pc>1104-a<k1>sAqBUta<k2>sAqBUta
{#sAqBUta#}¦ {%sāḍ-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} taking the
form {%sāṭ%} or {%sāḍ,%} (said of 2. {%sah.%})
<LEND>

<L>51775<pc>1104-a<k1>sAQa<k2>sAQa
{#sAQa#}¦ {%sāḍha.%} See under rt. 1. {%sah.%}
<LEND>

<L>51776<pc>1104-a<k1>sAt<k2>sAt<h>1
{#sAt#} 1¦. {%sāt,%} a Taddhita affix which when
put after a word denotes a total change of anything
into the thing expressed by that word, (see {%bhasma-%}
{%sāt.%})
<LEND>
[Page1104-b+ 72]

<L>51777<pc>1104-b<k1>sAt<k2>sAt<h>2
{#sAt#} 2¦. {%sāt,%} a Sautra rt. meaning ‘to give
pleasure.’
<LEND>

<L>51778<pc>1104-b<k1>sAt<k2>sAt<h>3
3. {%sāt, t,%}¦ n. (according to some), N. of Brahma.
<LEND>

<L>51779<pc>1104-b<k1>sAta<k2>sAta<h>3
3. {%sāta, am,%}¦ n. pleasure, delight.
<LEND>

<L>51780<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtaya<k2>sAtaya
{%Sātaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing or affording pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>51781<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtalA<k2>sAtalA
{%Sātalā,%}¦ f., N. of a plant ({%= carma-kaṣā%}).
<LEND>

<L>51782<pc>1104-b<k1>sAta<k2>sAta<h>1
{#sAta#} 1¦. and 2. {%sāta,%} &c. See p. 1102, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>51783<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtatya<k2>sAtatya
{#sAtatya#}¦ {%sātatya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sa-tata%}), con-
tinuity, constancy; ({%ena%}), ind. with continuity, eter-
nally, perpetually.
<LEND>

<L>51784<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtavAhana<k2>sAtavAhana
{#sAtavAhana#}¦ {%sāta-vāhana, as,%} m., N. of king
Śāli-vāhana, (fabled to have been discovered, when
a child, riding on a Gandharva called Sāta, who,
according to one legend, was changed into a lion;
but see {%śāli-vāhana.%})
<LEND>

<L>51785<pc>1104-b<k1>sAti<k2>sAti<h>1
{#sAti#} 1¦. and 2. {%sāti.%} See p. 1102, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>51786<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtireka<k2>sAtireka
{#sAtireka#}¦ {%sātireka (sa-at˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing excess, increased, more extended.
<LEND>

<L>51787<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtiSaya<k2>sAtiSaya
{#sAtiSaya#}¦ {%sātiśaya (sa-at˚), as, ā, am,%} ex-
cessive.
<LEND>

<L>51788<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtisAra<k2>sAtisAra
{#sAtisAra#}¦ {%sātisāra (sa-at˚), as, ā, am,%} af-
flicted with dysentery, dysenteric.
<LEND>

<L>51789<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtIna<k2>sAtIna
{#sAtIna#}¦ {%sātīna, as,%} m. (fr. {%satīna,%} q. v.),
pease, pulse, Pisum Sativum.
<LEND>

<L>51790<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtIlaka<k2>sAtIlaka
{%Sātīlaka, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%satīlaka%}), pease.
<LEND>

<L>51791<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtobArhata<k2>sAtobArhata
{#sAtobArhata#}¦ {%sātobārhata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sato-%}
{%bṛhatī%}), relating or belonging to the Sato-bṛhatī
metre.
<LEND>

<L>51792<pc>1104-b<k1>sAttrika<k2>sAttrika
{#sAttrika#}¦ {%sāttrika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sattra%}), be-
longing to a sacrifice, sacrificial.
<LEND>

<L>51793<pc>1104-b<k1>sAttvika<k2>sAttvika
{#sAttvika#}¦ {%sāttvika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sat-tva%}),
real, substantial, essential, natural, genuine, true,
honest, sincere, good, virtuous, excellent, amiable,
vigorous, energetic, pure (without the least admixture
of passion); internal, pertaining to the internal feel-
ings; endowed with the Sattva Guṇa, (i. e. purity or
goodness, see {%guṇa, sat-tva%}); belonging to or pro-
ceeding from this Guṇa; ({%as%}), m. natural indication
of feeling or emotion, (constituting a class of Bhāvas
which hold a middle place between the Sthāyi-
bhāvas and Vyabhicāri-bhāvas in poetry and the
drama; they are described as eight particular states
of body and mind, viz. {%stambha,%} inability to move;
{%sveda,%} perspiration; {%romāñca,%} horripilation; {%svara-%}
{%vikāra,%} change of voice; {%vepathu,%} tremor; {%varṇa-%}
{%vikāra,%} change of colour; {%aśru,%} tears; and {%pralaya,%}
mental absorption); a Brāhman; epithet of Brahmā;
of the eighth creation by Prajā-pati; ({%ī%}), f., N. of
Durgā; a particular kind of {%Pūjā%} practised by the
worshippers of Durgā; scil. {%tuṣṭi,%} epithet of one of
the five kinds of external acquiescence (in the Sāṅ-
khya phil.; cf. {%su-pārā%}).
<LEND>

<L>51794<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtman<k2>sAtman
{#sAtman#}¦ {%sātman (sa-āt˚), ā, ā, a,%} having a
soul; united to the Supreme Soul. {%—Sātma-tā,%} f.
absorption into the essence (of Brahman).
<LEND>

<L>51795<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtmya<k2>sAtmya
{%Sātmya, as, ā, am,%}¦ agreeable to the nature or
natural constitution, wholesome.
<LEND>

<L>51796<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtyaki<k2>sAtyaki
{#sAtyaki#}¦ {%sātyaki, is,%} m. (fr. {%satyaka%}), pa-
tronymic of a warrior in the Pāṇḍu army who acted
as the charioteer of Kṛṣṇa (he was son of Satyaka
and belonged to the Vṛṣṇi family).
<LEND>

<L>51797<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtyamugri<k2>sAtyamugri
{#sAtyamugri#}¦ {%sātyamugri, is,%} m., N. of a teacher
of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>51798<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtyamugrya<k2>sAtyamugrya
{%Sātyamugrya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school or Śākhā
of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>51799<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtyayajYi<k2>sAtyayajYi
{#sAtyayajYi#}¦ {%sātyayajñi, is,%} m. (fr. {%satya-%}
{%yajña%}), a patronymic of Soma-śuṣma.
<LEND>

<L>51800<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtyavata<k2>sAtyavata
{#sAtyavata#}¦ {%sātyavata, as,%} m. (fr. {%satya-vatī,%}
q. v.), a metronymic of the sage Vyāsa, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>51801<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtyavateya<k2>sAtyavateya
{%Sātyavateya, as,%}¦ m. {%= sātyavata%} above.
<LEND>

<L>51802<pc>1104-b<k1>sAtyahavya<k2>sAtyahavya
{#sAtyahavya#}¦ {%sātyahavya, as,%} m. ‘son of Satya-
havya,’ N. of a descendant of Vasiṣṭha.
<LEND>
[Page1104-c+ 74]

<L>51803<pc>1104-c<k1>sAtrAjita<k2>sAtrAjita
{#sAtrAjita#}¦ {%sātrājita, as,%} m. (fr. {%satrā-jit%}),
a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>51804<pc>1104-c<k1>sAtrAsaha<k2>sAtrAsaha
{#sAtrAsaha#}¦ {%sātrāsaha, as,%} m. (fr. {%satrā-sah%}),
a patronymic of Śona (a king of the Pāñcālas).
<LEND>

<L>51805<pc>1104-c<k1>sAtrAsAha<k2>sAtrAsAha
{%Sātrāsāha%}¦ for {%sātrāsaha%} in Atharva-veda V. 13, 6.
<LEND>

<L>51806<pc>1104-c<k1>sAtvat<k2>sAtvat
{#sAtvat#}¦ {%sātvat, ān,%} m. [cf. {%satvat%}], a man of
the Yādava tribe, (see Bhāgavata-Purāṇa VIII. 5,
13); a follower, worshipper (of Kṛṣṇa, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>51807<pc>1104-c<k1>sAtvata<k2>sAtvata
{#sAtvata#}¦ {%sātvata, as,%} m. (probably fr. {%sātvat%}
or fr. {%satvat%}), N. of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa; of Bala-deva;
the son of an outcaste Vaiśya; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people inhabiting a district in central India (said to be
the descendants of outcaste Vaiśyas; cf. {%satvat%}); ({%ī%}),
f., scil. {%vṛtti,%} one of the four great divisions of dra-
matic style or action (described as abounding in dis-
plays of bravery, generosity, honesty, and cheerful-
ness, containing little love, and characterized by the
marvellous; four kinds of Sātvatī are enumerated,
viz. Utthāpaka, Saṅghātya, Saṃlāpa, and Parivar-
taka); N. of the mother of Śiśu-pāla.
<LEND>

<L>51808<pc>1104-c<k1>sAtvika<k2>sAtvika
{#sAtvika#}¦ {%sātvika.%} See {%sāttvika.%}
<LEND>

<L>51809<pc>1104-c<k1>sAda<k2>sAda
{#sAda#}¦ {%sāda, sādana, sādayat,%} &c. See under
rt. 1. {%sad,%} p. 1055, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>51810<pc>1104-c<k1>sAdara<k2>sAdara
{#sAdara#}¦ {%sādara (sa-ād˚), as, ā, am,%} having
or paying respect, respectful; impassioned; ({%am%}),
ind. respectfully, considerately.
<LEND>

<L>51811<pc>1104-c<k1>sAdi<k2>sAdi
{#sAdi#}¦ {%sādi, sādita, sādin,%} &c. See p. 1055,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>51812<pc>1104-c<k1>sAdfSya<k2>sAdfSya
{#sAdfSya#}¦ {%sādṛśya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sa-dṛśa%}), like-
ness, resemblance, similarity; a likeness, portrait.
{%—Sādṛśya-vāda, as,%} m. ‘disputation about Sādṛ-
śya,’ N. of a philosophical treatise by Mahā-deva.
<LEND>

<L>51813<pc>1104-c<k1>sAdyanta<k2>sAdyanta
{#sAdyanta#}¦ {%sādy-anta (sa-ād˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing beginning and end, complete, entire; ({%am%}), ind.
from beginning to end.
<LEND>

<L>51814<pc>1104-c<k1>sAdyazkra<k2>sAdyazkra
{#sAdyazkra#}¦ {%sādyaṣkra, as,%} m., Ved. N. of a
particular Kratu or sacrificial {{ceremonv->ceremony||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}}.
<LEND>

<L>51815<pc>1104-c<k1>sAdyaHkra<k2>sAdyaHkra
{%Sādyaḥkra, as,%}¦ m. Ved. {%= sādyaṣkra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>51816<pc>1104-c<k1>sAdyaska<k2>sAdyaska
{#sAdyaska#}¦ {%sādyaska, as, ī, am%} (probably for
{%sadyaska,%} q. v.), quick, instantaneous.
<LEND>

<L>51817<pc>1104-c<k1>sAD<k2>sAD
{#sAD#}¦ {%sādh%} (connected with rt. 3. {%sidh%}),
cl. 5. P. {%sādhnoti%} (Ved. also cl. 1. {%sā-%}
{%dhati%}), {%sasādha, sātsyati, asātsīt, sāddhum%} (also
{%sādhitum%}), to complete, finish, accomplish; to con-
quer; cl. 4. P. {%sādhyati,%} &c., to be completed or
accomplished: Caus. (identical with the Caus. of rt.
3. {%sidh%}), {%sādhayati, -yitum:%} Aor. {%asīṣadhat%}
(Ved. {%[pra-] sīṣadhāti = prasādhayatu,%} Ṛg-veda
VI. 49, 8); to accomplish, effect, perform, do, com-
plete, conclude, perfect, make perfect, bring to per-
fection, bring to an end or conclusion, settle, secure;
to substantiate, prove; to enforce settlement, recover
(a debt); to obtain; to subdue, overcome, conquer;
to destroy, kill; to learn, understand; to set out,
depart, go away, proceed, go, (used for rt. {%gam%} in
dramatic language, according to the Sāhitya-darpaṇa);
to fly, flee: Desid. of Caus. {%siṣādhayiṣati,%} to
desire to accomplish: Desid. {%siṣātsati:%} Intens. {%sā-%}
{%sādhyate, sāsāddhi;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔθ-ος, ἦθ-ος, ἠθεῖο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">εἴ-ωθ-α, ἐθ-ίζ-ω:</lang> Goth. <nsi>sid-u-s,</nsi> ‘a habit;’ <nsi>sidôn,</nsi>
‘to contrive, perform;’ probably <nsi>sandjan, sêlis,</nsi>
‘good;’ <nsi>un-sêlis:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>sendan:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>sit-u,</nsi> ‘a habit;’ <nsi>sâlig,</nsi> ‘happy;’ <nsi>sâlida.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>51818<pc>1104-c<k1>sADaka<k2>sADaka
{%Sādhaka, as, akā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} effective, accom-
plishing, fulfilling, completing, perfecting, finishing;
effecting by magic, magical; an efficient or skilful
person, adept; aiding, helping, an assistant; ({%akā%}),
f. epithet of Durgā; ({%ikā%}), f. a skilful or efficient
woman; [cf. {%sādhikā,%} s. v.]
<LEND>

<L>51819<pc>1104-c<k1>sADat<k2>sADat
{%Sādhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ accomplishing, completing,
effecting. {%—Sādhad-iṣṭi, is, is, i,%} Ved. fulfilling
the objects of sacrifices (said of Agni).
<LEND>

<L>51820<pc>1104-c<k1>sADana<k2>sADana
{%Sādhana, as, ī, am,%}¦ effecting; a perfecter; ({%as%}),
m., N. of the author of Ṛg-veda X. 157; ({%am%}), n. the
[Page1105-a+ 81]
act of accomplishing, effecting, performing; settling;
accomplishment, completion, complete attainment of
any object; a means of accomplishing or effecting,
means of obtaining, means or expedient (in general);
efficient cause, source, cause (in general); an instru-
ment, agent; the instrumental case (in grammar);
a bodily organ; the penis; an udder; an implement,
utensil, apparatus; matter, materials, ingredient, sub-
stance; a medicinal preparation, drug, medicine; a
component part of an army, any military apparatus,
force, army; aid, assistance, an assistant; substanti-
ation, proof, establishment of the truth, demonstra-
tion; a reason or premise leading to a conclusion,
middle term or Hetu in a syllogism ({%= vyāpya,%}
q. v.); accomplishing anything by magic or incanta-
tions, magic; enforcement of payment or settlement
(of a debt), compelling the delivery of anything,
infliction of a fine (in law); good works, penance,
self-mortification, the observance of moral and cere-
monial duties, attainment of beatitude; wealth;
advantage, profit; friendship; the act of subduing,
overcoming; subduing by charms, stupefying, fasci-
nating; conciliating, propitiating, worshipping; kill-
ing, destroying; killing metals, depriving them by
oxydation &c. of their metallic properties (especially
said of mercury); burning on the funeral pile, ob-
sequies; setting out, proceeding, going; going
quickly; going after, following. {%—Sādhana-kriyā,%} f.
(in Pāṇini) an action connected with a Kāraka; a finite
verb; a Kṛd-anta affix. {%—Sādhana-catuṣṭaya,%}
{%am,%} n. four kinds of proof (in phil.). {%—Sādhana-%}
{%tā,%} f. or {%sādhana-tva, am,%} n. being a means of
attaining (e. g. {%dharmasya tattva-jñānādi-sādha-%}
{%natve kim mānam,%} what proof is there of merit
being the means of attaining to the knowledge of
the truth?); the state of perfection. {%—Sādhana-%}
{%nirdeśa, as,%} m. the production of proof (in law);
the indication of premises leading to a conclusion.
{%—Sādhana-pañcaka, am,%} n., N. of five stanzas
giving rules for the attainment of Pra-śānti or qui-
escence. {%—Sādhana-pattra, am,%} n. any written
document used as evidence or proof. {%—Sādhana-%}
{%rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having the form of an instrument,
having the form or character of a means or expe-
dient. {%—Sādhanārha (˚na-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy
of being accomplished. {%—Sādhanāvyāpaka (˚na-%}
{%av˚), as, ā, am,%} (in logic) not invariably attending
on the proof. {%—Sādhanāvyāpaka-tā,%} f. or {%sā-%}
{%dhanāvyāpaka-tva, am,%} n. non-invariable attend-
ance on the proof or on what is brought forward
in proof.
<LEND>

<L>51821<pc>1105-a<k1>sADanA<k2>sADanA
{%Sādhanā,%}¦ f. accomplishment, completion; pro-
pitiation, worship, adoration.
<LEND>

<L>51822<pc>1105-a<k1>sADanIya<k2>sADanIya
{%Sādhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accomplished or
effected; to be proved.
<LEND>

<L>51823<pc>1105-a<k1>sADanta<k2>sADanta
{%Sādhanta, as,%}¦ m. a beggar, mendicant.
<LEND>

<L>51824<pc>1105-a<k1>sADayat<k2>sADayat
{%Sādhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ accomplishing, effecting;
perfecting, purifying; substantiating, proving; en-
forcing payment, recovering (a debt &c.), subduing;
conciliating; waiting upon, serving.
<LEND>

<L>51825<pc>1105-a<k1>sADita<k2>sADita
{%Sādhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ effected, completed, finished,
achieved, accomplished, succeeded; settled, fulfilled;
substantiated, proved; made good, settled (as a
debt), discharged, recovered; obtained; fined;
amerced, punished by fine, made to pay; awarded
(as a punishment or fine); subdued, mastered;
enabled to effect or obtain.
<LEND>

<L>51826<pc>1105-a<k1>sADiman<k2>sADiman
{%Sādhiman, ā,%}¦ m. perfection, goodness, excellence.
<LEND>

<L>51827<pc>1105-a<k1>sADizWa<k2>sADizWa
{%Sādhiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (superl. of {%sādhu%}), best,
most excellent; very fit, most proper or right;
hardest, very hard or firm, (in these senses regarded
as an irregular superl. of {%vāḍha,%} cf. {%sādhaya.%})
<LEND>

<L>51828<pc>1105-a<k1>sADIyas<k2>sADIyas
{%Sādhīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%sādhu%}), better,
more excellent; more right, more proper; very right
or proper; very handsome; harder, firmer, very hard
or firm, (in these last senses regarded as a compar.
of {%vāḍha.%})
<LEND>

<L>51829<pc>1105-a<k1>sADu<k2>sADu
{%Sādhu, us, us%}¦ or {%-vī, u,%} perfect, excellent, good,
eminent; virtuous, honourable, pious, righteous,
faithful, pure; correct, pure, classical (as a language
&c.); fit, proper, right; kind, beautiful, pleasing;
[Page1105-b+ 81]
well-born, noble, of honourable or respectable descent;
({%us%}), m. a good or honest man, a saint, sage; a
Jina or deified Jaina saint; a merchant; a money-
lender, usurer; (according to some) a derivative or
inflected noun; ({%vī%}), f. a chaste or virtuous woman;
a saintly woman; a faithful wife; a particular root,
{%= medā; (u),%} ind. well; well done! good! indeed;
enough, away with! (with inst.) {%—Sādhu-karman, ā,%}
{%ā, a,%} Ved. doing kind actions, beneficent. {%—Sādhu-%}
{%kīrtti, is,%} m. ‘having a good reputation,’ a proper N.
{%—Sādhu-gata, as, ā, am,%} resorted to by the good,
respectable, virtuous. {%—Sādhu-ja, as, ā, am,%} well-
born, of noble family or descent. {%—Sādhu-jana, as,%}
m. a good person, good people. {%—Sādhu-tas,%} ind. from
a good man. {%—Sādhu-tā,%} f. or {%sādhu-tva, am,%} n.
goodness, excellence, correctness. {%—Sādhu-devin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} Ved. skilfully playing. {%—Sādhu-dvitīya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a merchant as second, accompanied
by a merchant. {%—Sādhu-dhī, īs,%} f. a good under-
standing; good disposition; ({%īs, īs, i%}), having a
good understanding, wise, well-disposed; ({%īs%}), f. a
wife's mother, husband's mother, mother-in-law.
{%—Sādhu-puṣpa, am,%} n. a beautiful flower; the
shrub Hibiscus Mutabilis. {%—Sādhu-bhāva, as,%} m.
good nature, goodness, kindness. {%—Sādhu-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} good. {%—Sādhu-mata, as, ā, am,%} well
thought of, highly prized, praised. {%—Sādhum-%}
{%manya, as, ā, am,%} thinking one's self good or
virtuous. {%—Sādhu-ratna-sūri, is,%} m., N. of the
author of a commentary on the Nava-tattva. {%—Sā-%}
{%dhu-vat,%} ind. as if good, as if correct. {%—Sādhu-%}
{%vāda, as,%} m. a cry of ‘good!’ {%—Sādhu-vāha, as,%} m.
a good horse, well-trained horse. {%—Sādhu-vāhin, ī,%}
m. ‘carrying well,’ a good horse, well-trained horse;
({%ī, inī, i%}), having good horses. {%—Sādhu-vṛkṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. a good tree; the Kadamba tree; another
tree {%(= varuṇa)%}. {%—Sādhu-vṛtta, am,%} n. good
conduct, virtue, piety; ({%as, ā, am%}), well-conducted,
upright; ({%as%}), m. a well-conducted person, a virtuous
or honest man. {%—Sādhu-vṛtti, is,%} f. good pro-
fession or means of living; good exposition, excel-
lent commentary; good or excellent practice, the
moral and ritual observances of the Hindūs; ({%is, is,%}
{%i%}), well-conducted, well-behaved, virtuous. {%—Sādhu-%}
{%śabda, as,%} m. a cry of ‘good!’ {%—Sādhu-śīla, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} well-disposed, virtuously inclined; virtuous
righteous. {%—Sādhuśīla-tva, am,%} n. good disposition,
virtuous inclination. {%—Sādhu-saṃsarga, as,%} m.
association with the good. {%—Sādhu-samācāra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} well-behaved. {%—Sādhu-sammata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} approved by the good. {%—Sādhūkta (˚dhu-uk˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} said or declared by the good. {%—Sādhv-%}
{%anindita, as, ā, am,%} unblamed or unreproached by
the good, of irreproachable character. {%—Sādhv-%}
{%alaṅkṛta, as, ā, am,%} beautifully adorned. {%—Sādhv-%}
{%ācāra, as, ā, am,%} well-conducted, of virtuous con-
duct.
<LEND>

<L>51830<pc>1105-b<k1>sADuka<k2>sADuka
{%Sādhuka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a low or degraded tribe.
<LEND>

<L>51831<pc>1105-b<k1>sADuyA<k2>sADuyA
{%Sādhuyā,%}¦ ind., Ved. kindly, properly, amicably.
<LEND>

<L>51832<pc>1105-b<k1>sADya<k2>sADya
{%Sādhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be accomplished or effected;
to be formed; practicable, feasible, attainable; to
be proved or demonstrated; to be substantiated or
made good; to be inferred or concluded (in logic);
to be subdued or mastered, subduable, to be con-
quered, conquerable; to be killed or destroyed; to
be cured, curable; ({%as%}), m. a particular celestial
being, (see below); a deity (in general); the twenty-
second astronomical Yoga; a particular Mantra; N.
of a Muni; ({%ās%}), m. pl. ‘the perfect or pure ones,’
N. of a class of celestial beings belonging to the
{%Gaṇa-devatā,%} q. v., sometimes mentioned in the
Veda, (see Ṛg-veda X. 90, 16; in the Śatapatha-
Brāhmaṇa their world is said to be situated above
the sphere of the gods; according to Yāska [Nirukta
XII. 41] they are the gods whose locality is the
sky, i. e. the Bhuvar-loka or middle region between
the earth and sun; in Manu 1. 22. the Sādhyas are
described as created after the gods with natures
exquisitely refined, and in III. 195. they are said to
be children of the Soma-sads, who are described as
sons of Virāj; in the Purāṇas they are regarded as
[Page1105-c+ 79]
sons of Sādhyā, and their number is variously given
as twelve or seventeen; but in the later mythology
the Sādhyas seem rather to be superseded by the
Siddhas, see {%siddha;%} their names are sometimes
given as follows, Manas, Mantṛ, Prāṇa, Nara, Pāna,
Vinirbhaya, Naya, Daṃsa, Nārāyaṇa, Vṛṣa, Prabhu);
({%ā%}), f., N. of a daughter of Dakṣa and wife of
Dharma (regarded as the mother of the Sādhyas);
({%am%}), n. accomplishment, perfection; an object to
be accomplished (in law), the thing to be proved or
established by proof, the matter in debate; (in
logic) the major term in a syllogism, the subject of
a proposition. {%—Sādhya-tā,%} f. the state of being
able to be accomplished or effected, practicableness,
feasibility; conquerableness; curableness. {%—Sādhya-%}
{%tāvacchedaka (˚tā-av˚), am,%} n. the characteristic
or distinguishing property of the thing to be proved
or of the major term. {%—Sādhya-pakṣa, as,%} m.
the side of the thing to be proved, the plaint in a
lawsuit. {%—Sādhyarṣi (˚ya-ṛṣi), is,%} m. epithet
of Śiva. {%—Sādhya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} comprehending
the point to be proved; ({%ān%}), m. the party on whom
the burden of proof in a lawsuit rests; ({%at%}), n.
that which contains the Sādhya or major term (i. e.
the {%pakṣa%} and its {%sapakṣa%}). {%—Sādhya-vyāpaka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} (in logic) invariably attending on what
is to be proved. {%—Sādhyavyāpaka-tā,%} f. invariable
attendance on what is to be proved or the property
to be established. {%—Sādhya-samatva, am,%} n. same-
ness with the point to be proved, ({%sādhya-sama-%}
{%tvāt,%} because it is in the same condition with what
is to be proved.) {%—Sādhya-sādhana, am,%} n. the
means of establishing what is to be established (e. g.
a Hetu or reason), effecting what may be or is to be
done, &c. {%—Sādhya-siddhi, is,%} f. the effecting
of what has to be done; the establishing of what
has to be established or proved; the success of an
undertaking, accomplishment, completion, fulfilment;
proof, conclusion. {%—Sādhyasiddhi-pāda, as,%} m.
the fourth stage or division of a suit at law, judg-
ment, decision. {%—Sādhyābhāva (˚ya-abh˚), as,%} m.
absence of the thing to be proved; absence of the
subject of a proposition; impossibility of cure.
<LEND>

<L>51833<pc>1105-c<k1>sADyamAna<k2>sADyamAna
{%Sādhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being effected, being
in course of accomplishment; being subjected to,
capable of proof, in course of proof; being proceeded
against (at law).
<LEND>

<L>51834<pc>1105-c<k1>sADvI<k2>sADvI
{%Sādhvī,%}¦ f. See under {%sādhu.%}
<LEND>

<L>51835<pc>1105-c<k1>sADaya<k2>sADaya
{#sADaya#}¦ {%sādhaya%} (according to Vopa-deva
XXI. 16. fr. {%vāḍha%}), Nom. P. {%sādhayati, -yitum,%}
to make hard or firm; [cf. {%sādhiṣṭha, sādhīyas,%}
col. 1.]
<LEND>

<L>51836<pc>1105-c<k1>sADarmya<k2>sADarmya
{#sADarmya#}¦ {%sādharmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sa-dharma%}),
community or equality of duty or office; community
of properties, sameness of nature, common character,
likeness; the being of the same religion.
<LEND>

<L>51837<pc>1105-c<k1>sADAraRa<k2>sADAraRa
{#sADAraRa#}¦ {%sādhāraṇa, as, ā%} or {%ī%} (generally {%ī%}),
{%am%} (fr. {%sa-dhāraṇa%}), belonging or applicable to
many, common to many, general, universal, com-
mon, joint; spreading everywhere (applied to ‘the
atmosphere’ or ‘sky’ or ‘ether’ according to Śab-
da-k. on Naigh. 1. 4); (in logic) belonging to more
than the one instance alleged; equal, like, similar;
generic; ({%as%}), m., N. of the forty-fourth (or eigh-
teenth) year of Jupiter's cycle of sixty years; ({%am%}),
n. a common rule or precept or one generally appli-
cable; a generic property, a character common to
all the individuals of a species or to all the species
of a genus, &c.; ({%ī%}), f. a twig of bamboo (perhaps
used as a bolt); a key ({%= kuñcikā,%} Śabda-k.). {%—Sā-%}
{%dhāraṇa-tva, am,%} n. commonness, community,
universality, common right, joint interest, general
law. {%—Sādhāraṇa-deśa, as,%} m. common land; a
wild marshy country. {%—Sādhāraṇa-dhana, am,%} n.
joint or common property. {%—Sādhāraṇa-dharma,%}
{%as,%} m. common or universal duty, conduct or duty
binding on all castes and orders alike (as humanity
&c.). {%—Sādhāraṇa-pakṣa, as,%} n. common side or
party, middle side, the mean (between two extremes).
[Page1106-a+ 69]
{%—Sādhāraṇa-strī,%} f. a common woman, prostitute,
harlot.
<LEND>

<L>51838<pc>1106-a<k1>sADAraRya<k2>sADAraRya
{%Sādhāraṇya, am,%}¦ n. commonness, universality;
{%= kuñcikā%} [cf. {%sādhāraṇī%}].
<LEND>

<L>51839<pc>1106-a<k1>sADikA<k2>sADikA
{#sADikA#}¦ {%sādhikā,%} f. ({%sa-adh˚%}), very deep
or profound sleep ({%= su-ṣupti;%} by some referred
to {%sādhaka,%} p. 1104, col. 3).
<LEND>

<L>51840<pc>1106-a<k1>sADikzepa<k2>sADikzepa
{#sADikzepa#}¦ {%sādhikṣepa (sa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
having or showing contempt, taunting, ironical.
<LEND>

<L>51841<pc>1106-a<k1>sADidEva<k2>sADidEva
{#sADidEva#}¦ {%sādhidaiva (sa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
(united or identified) with supreme divinity.
<LEND>

<L>51842<pc>1106-a<k1>sADiBUta<k2>sADiBUta
{#sADiBUta#}¦ {%sādhibhūta (sa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
(identified or one) with the Being who enters into
all material objects.
<LEND>

<L>51843<pc>1106-a<k1>sADiyajYa<k2>sADiyajYa
{#sADiyajYa#}¦ {%sādhiyajña (sa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
one with the Being who presides over sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>51844<pc>1106-a<k1>sADizWa<k2>sADizWa
{#sADizWa#}¦ {%sādhiṣṭha, sādhīyas.%} See p. 1105.
<LEND>

<L>51845<pc>1106-a<k1>sADizWAna<k2>sADizWAna
{#sADizWAna#}¦ {%sādhiṣṭhāna (sa-adh˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a solid basis, possessing a firm foundation.
<LEND>

<L>51846<pc>1106-a<k1>sADu<k2>sADu
{#sADu#}¦ {%sādhu,%} &c. See under rt. {%sādh.%}
<LEND>

<L>51847<pc>1106-a<k1>sADfta<k2>sADfta
{#sADfta#}¦ {%sādhṛta (sa-ādh˚), am,%} n. ‘what is
held together,’ a stall, shop; an umbrella, parasol; a
flock of peacocks.
<LEND>

<L>51848<pc>1106-a<k1>sADya<k2>sADya
{#sADya#}¦ {%sādhya.%} See p. 1105, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>51849<pc>1106-a<k1>sADvasa<k2>sADvasa
{#sADvasa#}¦ {%sādhvasa, am,%} n. (probably fr. {%sa%}
{%+ dhvaṇsa%}), fear, terror; perturbation; torpor;
[cf. {%sa-s˚.%}] {%—Sādhvasa-vipluta, as, ā, am,%} over-
whelmed with consternation.
<LEND>

<L>51850<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnatkumAra<k2>sAnatkumAra
{#sAnatkumAra#}¦ {%sānatkumāra, am,%} n. (fr. {%sanat-%}
{%kumāra%}), N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>51851<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnanda<k2>sAnanda
{#sAnanda#}¦ {%sānanda (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessed of joy, happy, delighted, enjoying happiness,
endowed with happiness; ({%am%}), ind. joyfully.
<LEND>

<L>51852<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnandUra<k2>sAnandUra
{#sAnandUra#}¦ {%sānandūra, as,%} m., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Sānandūra-māhātmya, am,%} n. ‘the glory of
{%S˚,%}’ N. of a chapter in the Vārāha-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>51853<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnala<k2>sAnala
{#sAnala#}¦ {%sānala (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} con-
taining fire; ({%as%}), m. the resinous exudation of the
Śāl tree.
<LEND>

<L>51854<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnasi<k2>sAnasi
{#sAnasi#}¦ {%sānasi.%} See under 2. {%sā,%} p. 1102.
<LEND>

<L>51855<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnikA<k2>sAnikA
{#sAnikA#}¦ {%sānikā,%} f. (probably fr. rt. 1. {%san%}),
a flute, pipe.
<LEND>

<L>51856<pc>1106-a<k1>sAneyikA<k2>sAneyikA
{%Sāneyikā,%}¦ f. a flute, pipe.
<LEND>

<L>51857<pc>1106-a<k1>sAneyI<k2>sAneyI
{%Sāneyī,%}¦ f. a flute, pipe.
<LEND>

<L>51858<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnu<k2>sAnu
{#sAnu#}¦ {%sānu, us, u,%} m. n. (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%san,%} Uṇādi-s. I. 3; all the cases except the Nom.
Voc. sing. du. pl., Acc. sing. du. are optionally formed
fr. a base {%snu;%} in Ṛg-veda IV. 45, 1. {%sānair =%}
{%sānau%}), level ground on the top or edge of a moun-
tain, table-land; a summit, ridge, ({%antaḥ-sānu,%} ind.
among the summits or ridges, Kirāt. V. 36); an
elevation, elevated spot, (Sāy. {%= samucchrita-pra-%}
{%deśa%}); any surface, point, end, top; a precipice; a
shoot, sprout; a forest, wood; a road; a gale of
wind; a sage, learned man; the sun. {%—1. sānu-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘produced on table-land,’ the plant Prapauṇ-
ḍarīka; ({%am%}), n. a kind of tree or plant {%(= tum-%}
{%buru)%}. {%—Sānu-mat, ān,%} m. ‘having table-land or
a summit,’ a mountain; ({%atī%}), f., N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>51859<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnuka<k2>sAnuka
{%Sānuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. elevated, lofty; arrogant,
(Sāy. {%= sam-ucchrita,%} Ṛg-veda II. 23, 7.)
<LEND>

<L>51860<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnukampa<k2>sAnukampa
{#sAnukampa#}¦ {%sānukampa (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
full of pity, sympathising, kind; ({%am%}), ind. kindly.
<LEND>

<L>51861<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnukroSa<k2>sAnukroSa
{#sAnukroSa#}¦ {%sānukrośa (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
full of compassion, compassionate, tender, kind;
({%am%}), ind. compassionately, affectionately.
<LEND>

<L>51862<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnuga<k2>sAnuga
{#sAnuga#}¦ {%sānuga (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} having
attendants or followers, with attendants.
<LEND>

<L>51863<pc>1106-a<k1>sAnuja<k2>sAnuja<h>2
{#sAnuja#} 2¦. {%sānuja (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} (for
[Page1106-b+ 70]
1. {%sānu-ja%} see under {%sānu%}), accompanied by a
younger brother, along with a younger brother.
<LEND>

<L>51864<pc>1106-b<k1>sAnunaya<k2>sAnunaya
{#sAnunaya#}¦ {%sānunaya (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing courtesy, courteous, civil, kind, willing; ({%am%}),
ind. courteously, civilly, kindly.
<LEND>

<L>51865<pc>1106-b<k1>sAnunAsyam<k2>sAnunAsyam
{#sAnunAsyam#}¦ {%sānunāsyam (sa-an˚),%} ind. with
a nasal sound, in a nasal tone.
<LEND>

<L>51866<pc>1106-b<k1>sAnuplava<k2>sAnuplava
{#sAnuplava#}¦ {%sānuplava (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} ac-
companied by followers or attendants.
<LEND>

<L>51867<pc>1106-b<k1>sAnubanDa<k2>sAnubanDa
{#sAnubanDa#}¦ {%sānubandha (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
possessing connection or continuity, uninterrupted,
continuous ({%= a-vicchinna%}).
<LEND>

<L>51868<pc>1106-b<k1>sAnumAna<k2>sAnumAna
{#sAnumAna#}¦ {%sānumāna (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} (in
phil.) dependent on or associated with inference,
(opposed to {%nir-anumāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>51869<pc>1106-b<k1>sAnuyAtra<k2>sAnuyAtra
{#sAnuyAtra#}¦ {%sānuyātra (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
attended by followers, with a retinue.
<LEND>

<L>51870<pc>1106-b<k1>sAnurAga<k2>sAnurAga
{#sAnurAga#}¦ {%sānurāga (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
attached, passionate, impassioned.
<LEND>

<L>51871<pc>1106-b<k1>sAnuSaya<k2>sAnuSaya
{#sAnuSaya#}¦ {%sānuśaya (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} filled
with remorse.
<LEND>

<L>51872<pc>1106-b<k1>sAnusvAra<k2>sAnusvAra
{#sAnusvAra#}¦ {%sānusvāra (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the nasal mark Anu-svāra.
<LEND>

<L>51873<pc>1106-b<k1>sAneyI<k2>sAneyI
{#sAneyI#}¦ {%sāneyī, sāneyikā.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>51874<pc>1106-b<k1>sAntaHsTa<k2>sAntaHsTa
{#sAntaHsTa#}¦ {%sāntaḥstha (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
having semivowels, along with semivowels.
<LEND>

<L>51875<pc>1106-b<k1>sAntapana<k2>sAntapana
{#sAntapana#}¦ {%sāntapana, am,%} n. (fr. {%san-ta-%}
{%pana%}), ‘tormenting,’ a sort of severe penance
(mentioned in Manu XI. 124. and described in XI.
212, see the description under {%mahā-s˚,%} p. 761).
<LEND>

<L>51876<pc>1106-b<k1>sAntara<k2>sAntara
{#sAntara#}¦ {%sāntara (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessing intervals or interstices; not close or compact,
open in texture.
<LEND>

<L>51877<pc>1106-b<k1>sAntarAla<k2>sAntarAla
{%Sāntarāla (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ having an in-
terval, separated by intervals, distinct from, apart;
together with the intermediate or mixed (castes;
see Manu II. 18).
<LEND>

<L>51878<pc>1106-b<k1>sAntarhAsam<k2>sAntarhAsam
{#sAntarhAsam#}¦ {%sāntarhāsam (sa-an˚),%} ind. with
an inward or suppressed laugh, smilingly.
<LEND>

<L>51879<pc>1106-b<k1>sAntAnika<k2>sAntAnika
{#sAntAnika#}¦ {%sāntānika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%san-%}
{%tāna%}), stretching, extending, spreading (as a tree);
relating to offspring or descendants, &c.; belonging
or relating to the heavenly tree Santāna, made of
Santāna flowers; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman intending to
marry for the sake of issue.
<LEND>

<L>51880<pc>1106-b<k1>sAntv<k2>sAntv
{#sAntv#}¦ {%sāntv.%} See rt. {%śāntv,%} p. 1000.
<LEND>

<L>51881<pc>1106-b<k1>sAntva<k2>sAntva
{%Sāntva, sāntvana, sāntvita,%}¦ &c. See under rt.
{%śāntv.%}
<LEND>

<L>51882<pc>1106-b<k1>sAndIpani<k2>sAndIpani
{#sAndIpani#}¦ {%sāndīpani, is,%} m. (fr. {%san-dī-%}
{%pana%}), N. of a Muni, (according to Viṣṇu-Purāṇa
V. 21. he was the tutor of Kṛṣṇa and Bala-rāma,
and requested as his preceptor's fee that his son, sup-
posed to be drowned in the sea but kept under the
waters by the demon Pañca-jana, should be restored
to him; Kṛṣṇa plunged into the sea, killed the
demon, and brought back the boy to his father;
see {%pañca-jana.%})
<LEND>

<L>51883<pc>1106-b<k1>sAndfzwika<k2>sAndfzwika
{#sAndfzwika#}¦ {%sāndṛṣṭika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%san-%}
{%dṛṣṭi%}), visible or perceptible at the same time,
relating to present perception; ({%am%}), n. present
perception of a result, immediate consequence.
<LEND>

<L>51884<pc>1106-b<k1>sAndra<k2>sAndra
{#sAndra#}¦ {%sāndra, as, ā, am,%} (said to be fr. 5. {%sa%}
+ rt. {%and,%} ‘to bind’), thick, close, compact (but
having interstices); clustered together, collected;
coarse, gross; strong, stout, robust; much, abundant;
excessive, vehement, intense; unctuous, oily; viscid;
smooth, soft, bland; pleasing, agreeable; ({%as%}), m. a
thicket, wood; a heap, cluster; [cf. probably Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἁδρός.</lang>] {%—Sāndra-kutūhala, as, ā, am,%} having in-
tense curiosity, excited deeply by curiosity. {%—Sān- %}
[Page1106-c+ 70]
{%dra-tara, as, ā, am,%} more vehement, increased.
{%—Sāndra-tā,%} f. or {%sāndra-tva, am,%} n. thickness,
coarseness; viscidity. {%—Sāndra-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing thick clustering flowers,’ a kind of tree {%(= vibhī-%}
{%taka)%}. {%—Sāndra-snigdha, as, ā, am,%} thick and
unctuous.
<LEND>

<L>51885<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnDika<k2>sAnDika
{#sAnDika#}¦ {%sāndhika, as,%} m. (fr. {%san-dhā%} or
{%sandhikā%}), a distiller.
<LEND>

<L>51886<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnDivigrahika<k2>sAnDivigrahika
{#sAnDivigrahika#}¦ {%sāndhivigrahika, as,%} m. (fr.
{%sandhi-vigraha%}), one who has to do with peace and
war, a minister who decides upon peace and war.
<LEND>

<L>51887<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnDivela<k2>sAnDivela
{#sAnDivela#}¦ {%sāndhivela, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sandhi-%}
{%velā%}), belonging to or occurring at a Sandhi-velā, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>51888<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnDya<k2>sAnDya
{#sAnDya#}¦ {%sāndhya, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sandhyā%}),
relating to the evening twilight; relating to the
morning twilight or dawn. {%—Sāndhya-kusumā,%} f. a
kind of plant ({%= tri-sandhi%}).
<LEND>

<L>51889<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnnahanika<k2>sAnnahanika
{#sAnnahanika#}¦ {%sānnahanika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%san-%}
{%nahana%}), bearing or putting on armour; calling to
arms, sounding (as an alarm); ({%as%}), m. an armour-
bearer, shield-bearer.
<LEND>

<L>51890<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnnAyya<k2>sAnnAyya
{#sAnnAyya#}¦ {%sānnāyya, am,%} n. (fr. {%san-nī,%} q. v.,
cf. {%san-nāya%}), any substance mixed with clarified
butter &c., and offered as a burnt offering or obla-
tion; a particular offering of the Agni-hotṛs (said
to consist of milk drawn on the evening of the new
moon, then mixed on the next day with other milk
and offered with clarified butter). {%—Sānnāyya-prā-%}
{%yaścitta, am,%} n. a particular penance.
<LEND>

<L>51891<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnniDya<k2>sAnniDya
{#sAnniDya#}¦ {%sānnidhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%san-nidha%}),
nearness, vicinity, proximity; presence, attendance.
{%—Sānnidhya-tas,%} ind. from the proximity.
<LEND>

<L>51892<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnnipAtika<k2>sAnnipAtika
{#sAnnipAtika#}¦ {%sānnipātika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%san-%}
{%nipāta%}), miscellaneous, promiscuous, complicated;
having a combined or complicated state of derange-
ment of the three humors (applied to dangerous
illness).
<LEND>

<L>51893<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnnyAsika<k2>sAnnyAsika
{#sAnnyAsika#}¦ {%sānnyāsika, as,%} m. (fr. {%san-%}
{%nyāsa%}), a Brāhman of the fourth or mendicant
order, a beggar.
<LEND>

<L>51894<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnyaputra<k2>sAnyaputra
{#sAnyaputra#}¦ {%sānya-putra, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>51895<pc>1106-c<k1>sAnvaya<k2>sAnvaya
{#sAnvaya#}¦ {%sānvaya (sa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} along
with family or descendants; with all the race or family;
in regular order or succession; related to, of kin to.
<LEND>

<L>51896<pc>1106-c<k1>sApagama<k2>sApagama
{#sApagama#}¦ {%sāpagama (sa-ap˚), as, ā, am,%}
attended with departures.
<LEND>

<L>51897<pc>1106-c<k1>sApatna<k2>sApatna
{#sApatna#}¦ {%sāpatna, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sa-patnī%}),
born from a rival wife, belonging to fellow-wives;
({%ās%}), m. pl. the children of different wives of the
same husband.
<LEND>

<L>51898<pc>1106-c<k1>sApatnya<k2>sApatnya
{%Sāpatnya, as,%}¦ m. the son of a rival wife; an
enemy, adversary, rival; ({%am%}), n. the state or con-
dition of a rival wife or fellow-wife; enmity, rivalry,
ambition, (in these senses to be connected with {%sa-%}
{%patna.%})
<LEND>

<L>51899<pc>1106-c<k1>sApatya<k2>sApatya
{#sApatya#}¦ {%sāpatya (sa-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessing offspring, having progeny; attended by one's
children.
<LEND>

<L>51900<pc>1106-c<k1>sApadeSam<k2>sApadeSam
{#sApadeSam#}¦ {%sāpadeśam (sa-ap˚),%} ind. under
a pretext or pretence; intentionally.
<LEND>

<L>51901<pc>1106-c<k1>sApamAna<k2>sApamAna
{#sApamAna#}¦ {%sāpamāna (sa-ap˚), as, ā, am,%}
with contempt, contemptuous; ({%am%}), ind. contemp-
tuously.
<LEND>

<L>51902<pc>1106-c<k1>sAparADa<k2>sAparADa
{#sAparADa#}¦ {%sāparādha (sa-ap˚), as, ā, am,%}
having faults, faulty, offending, criminal, guilty.
<LEND>

<L>51903<pc>1106-c<k1>sApiRqya<k2>sApiRqya
{#sApiRqya#}¦ {%sāpiṇḍya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sa-piṇḍa%}),
connection by presenting obsequial offerings to the
same Manes, consanguinity, kindred, kin. {%—Sā-%}
{%piṇḍya-dīpikā%} and {%sāpiṇḍya-mīmāṃsā,%} f., N. of
two works.
<LEND>
[Page1107-a+ 69]

<L>51904<pc>1107-a<k1>sApekza<k2>sApekza
{#sApekza#}¦ {%sāpekṣa (sa-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} having
regard or respect to, dependent on. {%—Sāpekṣa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. dependence on; need, necessity.
<LEND>

<L>51905<pc>1107-a<k1>sAptapada<k2>sAptapada
{#sAptapada#}¦ {%sāptapada, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sapta-%}
{%pada%}), belonging to seven steps, produced by or
depending on seven steps; ({%am%}), n. {%= sāptapadīna%}
below.
<LEND>

<L>51906<pc>1107-a<k1>sAptapadIna<k2>sAptapadIna
{%Sāptapadīna, am,%}¦ n. the state of seven steps,
circumambulation of the nuptial fire by the bride
and bridegroom in seven steps, or advance of the
bride to meet the bridegroom in seven steps; friend-
ship easily contracted (i. e. formed with any one
with whom seven paces are walked, or, according to
others, contracted after the utterance of only seven
words), intimacy.
<LEND>

<L>51907<pc>1107-a<k1>sAptapOruza<k2>sAptapOruza
{#sAptapOruza#}¦ {%sāptapauruṣa, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%sapta-puruṣa%}), extending to or comprising seven
generations.
<LEND>

<L>51908<pc>1107-a<k1>sAptamika<k2>sAptamika
{#sAptamika#}¦ {%sāptamika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%saptamī%}),
belonging or relating to the seventh case.
<LEND>

<L>51909<pc>1107-a<k1>sAptika<k2>sAptika
{#sAptika#}¦ {%sāptika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saptan%}), re-
lating to seven.
<LEND>

<L>51910<pc>1107-a<k1>sApya<k2>sApya
{#sApya#}¦ {%sāpya, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>51911<pc>1107-a<k1>sApsarogaRa<k2>sApsarogaRa
{#sApsarogaRa#}¦ {%sāpsaro-gaṇa (sa-ap˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} attended by a number of Apsarases.
<LEND>

<L>51912<pc>1107-a<k1>sAPalya<k2>sAPalya
{#sAPalya#}¦ {%sāphalya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sa-phala%}), pro-
ductiveness, fruitfulness; profit, advantage; success.
<LEND>

<L>51913<pc>1107-a<k1>sAbdI<k2>sAbdI
{#sAbdI#}¦ {%sābdī,%} f. a sort of grape.
<LEND>

<L>51914<pc>1107-a<k1>sABikAma<k2>sABikAma
{#sABikAma#}¦ {%sābhikāma (sa-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
possessing love or affection, loving, affectionate.
<LEND>

<L>51915<pc>1107-a<k1>sABiprAya<k2>sABiprAya
{#sABiprAya#}¦ {%sābhiprāya (sa-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
having an aim or purpose, persevering, resolute.
<LEND>

<L>51916<pc>1107-a<k1>sABimAna<k2>sABimAna
{#sABimAna#}¦ {%sābhimāna (sa-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
full of pride, haughty, proud.
<LEND>

<L>51917<pc>1107-a<k1>sABilAza<k2>sABilAza
{#sABilAza#}¦ {%sābhilāṣa (sa-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
full of desire, eager; ({%am%}), ind. wishfully, eagerly,
passionately.
<LEND>

<L>51918<pc>1107-a<k1>sAByasUya<k2>sAByasUya
{#sAByasUya#}¦ {%sābhyasūya (sa-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
full of envy, envious, malicious.
<LEND>

<L>51919<pc>1107-a<k1>sABra<k2>sABra
{#sABra#}¦ {%sābhra (sa-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} having
clouds, covered with clouds, overcast, cloudy.
<LEND>

<L>51920<pc>1107-a<k1>sABramatI<k2>sABramatI
{#sABramatI#}¦ {%sābhramatī,%} f., N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>51921<pc>1107-a<k1>sAm<k2>sAm
{#sAm#}¦ {%sām%} (perhaps rather a Nominal
verb fr. {%sāman,%} col. 2; cf. rts. {%śam,%}
{%śantv,%} with which {%sām%} is doubtless connected), cl. 10.
P. {%sāmayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asasāmat%} and {%asīṣa-%}
{%mat,%} to conciliate, appease, pacify, tranquillize.
<LEND>

<L>51922<pc>1107-a<k1>sAmaka<k2>sAmaka<h>1
{#sAmaka#} 1¦. {%sāmaka, am,%} n. (fr. 1. {%sama%}), the
principal of a debt.
<LEND>

<L>51923<pc>1107-a<k1>sAmaka<k2>sAmaka<h>2
{#sAmaka#} 2¦. {%sāmaka, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt.
1. {%so,%} perhaps for {%śāmaka,%} fr. rt. {%śo%}), a whetstone
(especially one for sharpening spindles &c.).
<LEND>

<L>51924<pc>1107-a<k1>sAmaga<k2>sAmaga
{#sAmaga#}¦ {%sāma-ga, sāma-ja,%} &c. See under
{%sāman,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>51925<pc>1107-a<k1>sAmagrI<k2>sAmagrI
{#sAmagrI#}¦ {%sāmagrī,%}  f. (fr. {%sam-agra%}), a collec-
tion or assemblage of implements or materials, ap-
paratus, baggage, goods and chattels, furniture, effects.
{%—Sāmagrī-vāda, as,%} m., N. of a treatise by Hari-
rāma; of a short treatise on the Nyāya philosophy
by Raghu-deva-bhaṭṭācārya. {%—Sāmagrī-vicāra, as,%}
m., N. of two short treatises on the Nyāya phi-
losophy.
<LEND>

<L>51926<pc>1107-a<k1>sAmagrya<k2>sAmagrya
{%Sāmagrya, am,%}¦ n. entireness, wholeness, totality,
the whole, completeness, perfection; train, retinue;
collection or assemblage of implements, instruments,
utensils, apparatus; stock, effects.
<LEND>

<L>51927<pc>1107-a<k1>sAmaYjasya<k2>sAmaYjasya
{#sAmaYjasya#}¦ {%sāmañjasya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sam-%}
{%añjasa%}), fitness, propriety, consistency, accordance,
correctness, accuracy.
<LEND>
[Page1107-b+ 81]

<L>51928<pc>1107-b<k1>sAman<k2>sAman
{#sAman#}¦ {%sāman, a,%} n. (probably to be con-
nected with rt. {%śam,%} see {%śāman,%} cf. rt. {%sām,%} col. 1;
in Uṇādi-s. IV. 152. said to be fr. rt. 1. {%so,%} as ‘destroy-
ing sin,’ and in this agreeing with Sāyaṇa's derivation
of {%chandas,%} fr. rt. 1. {%chad,%} as ‘covering sin;’ by
some connected with 2. {%sam%} and 1. {%sama,%} and sup-
posed to mean originally ‘composition,’ ‘stringing
together in metrical song;’ by Yāska, Nirukta VII.
12, apparently connected with {%sammita%}), calming,
tranquillizing, soothing; reconciling, conciliating, ap-
peasing; conciliation, speaking kindly, kindness;
gentleness, mildness; negotiation (one of the four
Upāyas or means of success against an enemy, the
other three being {%dāna, bheda,%} and {%daṇḍa,%} q. q. v. v.);
peaceable or conciliatory behaviour; a particular kind
of sacred text or verse (intended to be chanted,
and forming with {%ṛc, yajus, chandas,%} one of the
four different kinds of Vedic composition mentioned
first in the Puruṣa-sūkta, Ṛg-veda X. 90, 9; see
{%mantra, veda%}); a metrical hymn or song of praise,
(Sāy. {%= stotra%}); N. of one of the three principal
Vedas, (see {%sāma-veda%} below); ({%mnā%}), ind. in a
conciliatory manner, willingly, voluntarily; ({%mnī%}), f.,
see p. 1108, col. 1. {%—Sāma-ga, as,%} m. a Brāhman
who chants or recites the Sāma-veda; ({%ī%}), f. the wife
of a Sāma-veda Brāhman; [cf. Vopa-deva XXVI. 46.]
{%—Sāma-garbha, as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu. {%—Sāma-%}
{%ga-vṛṣotsarga-tattva, am,%} n., N. of a part of
the Smṛti-tattva. {%—Sāma-gā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. a
chanter of Sāman verses. {%—Sāma-gāyaka, as,%} m.
a chanter of the Sāma-veda. {%—Sāma-gāyana, as,%}
m. a chanter of the Sāma-veda; an epithet of
Viṣṇu. {%—Sāma-ja%} or {%sāma-jāta, as, ā, am,%} arising
from conciliation, produced by gentleness of conduct
or kindness; produced by the Sāma-veda; ({%as%}), m.
an elephant. {%—Sāma-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Sāma-dhvani, is,%} m. the sound of the chanting
of the Sāma-veda, (see Manu IV. 123.) {%—Sāma-%}
{%pariśiṣṭa, am,%} n. a Pariśiṣṭa belonging to the
Sāma-veda. {%—Sāma-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n. a Brāh-
maṇa of the Sāma-veda. {%—Sāma-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved.
one who brings or offers Sāman verses, (Sāy. {%= udgā-%}
{%tṛ,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 33, 14.) {%—Sāma-yoni, is, is, i,%}
born from the Sāma-veda; ({%is%}), m. Brahmā (as source
of the Veda); an elephant [cf. {%sāma-ja%}]. {%—Sāma-%}
{%rathantara, am,%} n., N. of a Sāman, (said to have
been created from Brahmā's first mouth.) {%—Sāma-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m., N. of the author of the Dāma-carita
and Dhūrta-nartaka. {%—Sāma-vat, ān,%} m., N. of a
son of Sārasvata (afterwards changed into a female).
{%—Sāma-vāda, as,%} m. a kind word, conciliatory
speech. {%—Sāma-vidhāna-brāhmaṇa, am,%} n., N. of
a Brāhmaṇa belonging to the Sāma-veda. {%—Sāma-%}
{%vidhi, is,%} m. {%= sāma-vidhāna-brāhmaṇa%}. {%—Sāma-%}
{%vipra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. skilled in Sāmans or hymns.
{%—Sāma-veda, as,%} m., N. of one of the three prin-
cipal Vedas (see {%veda%}), or of the collective body of
sacred Mantras which constitute this Veda, (although
the word {%sāman%} is thought to be connected with rt.
{%śam,%} and {%soma%} is fr. another rt. [3. {%su%}], yet there
is a clear connection between this Veda and the
Soma ritual or moon-plant ceremonies; the princi-
pal part of its Mantras being specially arranged for
chanting by the Udgātṛ priests at such ceremonies,
[e. g. the Jyotiṣṭoma and its various stages of
Agniṣṭoma, Ukthya, &c.]; nevertheless it is really
a mere reproduction of parts of the Ṛg-veda trans-
posed and scattered about piecemeal, only 78 verses
in the whole Sāma-veda being, it is said, untraceable
to the present recension of the Ṛk: the Saṃhitā of
the Sāma-veda consists of two parts; the first, called
Ārcika [or Pūrvārcika or Chando-grantha], contains
585 verses disjoined from their proper sequence in
the Ṛg-veda and arranged in 59 Daśatis or decades,
which again are subdivided into Prapāṭhakas and
Ardha-prapāṭhakas; the second, called Staubhika [or
Uttarārcika or Uttarā-grantha], contains 1225 verses,
also chiefly from the Ṛk-saṃhitā, but less disjointed
than in the first part, and arranged in nine Prapāṭhakas
with Ardha-prapāṭhakas, mostly, however, grouped
in triplets, the first verse of which is also in the
[Page1107-c+ 81]
Ārcika, and thus appears twice in the Saṃhitā; this
verse is called the Yoni or womb, being, as it were,
a kind of parent of the two following verses, called
Uttarā, which are required to adapt themselves to
all the modulations and modifications observed in
the intoning of this leading verse; directions for
these modulations being carefully laid down in the
Gānas or manuals for chanting, two of which, viz.
the Veya-gāna and Āraṇya-gāna, are a directory for
the Ārcika portion, and two, viz. the Ūha-gāna and
Ūhya-gāna, for the Staubhika, the supposed efficacy
of the hymns depending greatly on the right appli-
cation of these directions for their utterance; it has
been calculated that out of the aggregate of 1549
distinct verses remaining in the two divisions of the
Sāma-veda Saṃhitā after subtracting the repeated
verses, 190 are from the 1st Maṇḍala of the Ṛk,
9 from the 2nd, 40 from the 3rd, 23 from the 4th,
53 from the 5th, 77 from the 6th, 75 from the 7th,
355 from the 8th, 9 from the Vālakhilyas, 545
from the 9th, 95 from the 10th; there being also
12 verses from the Atharva-veda, and 4 from the
Vājasaneyi-saṃhitā or white Yajur-veda; it will be
observed that more verses are taken from the ninth
than from any other Maṇḍala of the Ṛk, the whole
of the 114 hymns of this ninth Maṇḍala being
especially devoted to the praise of the Soma plant,
and thence called Pāvamānyaḥ or ‘purificational,’
this plant being there not only personified as a
deity but described as primeval, immortal, all-pervad-
ing, all-powerful, lord of gods, and indeed the Su-
preme Being himself; it is remarkable that although
in Manu I. 23. the Sāma-veda is described as drawn
forth from the sun, yet in IV. 123, 124. its sound
is said to possess a kind of impurity, which, however,
Kullūka explains to be merely a semblance of im-
purity, the reason given for this defect being that
whereas the Ṛg-veda has the gods for its objects
and the Yajur-has men, the Sāma- has special refer-
ence to the Pitṛs or deceased ancestors [this relation-
ship implying, perhaps, a connection between the
Soma plant and the moon, as this plant was collected
by moonlight, and in the later mythology was
sometimes identified with the moon, the supposed
residence of the Pitṛs]; this Veda is said to possess
eight Brāhmaṇas, viz. the Prauḍha or large Brāh-
maṇa [= Pañca-viṃśa], the Ṣaḍviṃśa, the Sāma-
vidhi or Sāma-vidhāna, the Ārṣeya, the Devatā-
dhyāya, the Vaṃśa, the Saṃhitopaniṣad, and the
Upaniṣad [<nsi>sic</nsi>], which last is probably the same as
the Chāndogyopaniṣad of the Sāma-veda regarded
as a Brāhmaṇa, see {%chandoga-brāhmaṇa, brāh-%}
{%maṇa.%}) {%—Sāmaveda-cchalā,%} f., N. of a short work
(giving certain musical directions in the form of
modulations and intonations of letters or syllables for
the chanting of the Sāma-veda; the work contains
seven chapters, viz. {%veya-cchalā, āraṇā-c˚, ūha-c˚,%}
{%ūhya-c˚, gāna-c˚, uttarotara-pada-c˚,%} and {%sto-%}
{%bha-c˚%}). {%—Sāmaveda-saṃhitā,%} f. the Saṃhitā of
the Sāma-veda. {%—Sāmavedārtha-prakāśa (˚da-%}
{%ar˚), as,%} m., N. of Sāyaṇa's commentary on the
Tāṇḍya-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Sāma-vedin, ī,%} m. a Brāhman
who studies the Sāma-veda. {%—Sāma-vedīya, as,%} m.
one having to do with the Sāma-veda, a Chandoga
priest. {%—Sāma-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of a pupil of
Yājñavalkya. {%—Sāma-śrāddha-tattva, am,%} n., N.
of a part of the Smṛti-tattva. {%—Sāma-saṃhitā,%} f.
the collection of texts constituting the Sāma-veda.
{%—Sāma-saṅkhyā,%} f., N. of a Pariśiṣṭa connected
with the Sāma-veda. {%—Sāma-saṅgāyaka, as,%} m. a
chanter of the Sāma-veda. {%—Sāma-siddhi, is,%} f. the
art of accomplishing something in a peaceable way.
{%—Sāma-sūtra, am,%} n. a Sūtra work belonging to
the Sāma-veda, (ten such works are enumerated.)
{%—Sāmaṅga (˚ma-aṅ˚), am,%} n. an Aṅga or the Sāma-
veda. {%—Sāmodbhava (˚ma-ud˚), as,%} m. an elephant;
[cf. {%sāma-ja.%}] {%—Sāmonmukha (˚ma-un˚), as, ī,%}
{%am,%} eager for conciliation, wishing to conciliate.
{%—Sāmopacāra%} or {%sāmopāya (˚ma-up˚), as,%} m. a
mild remedy, moderate measure, gentle means.
<LEND>

<L>51929<pc>1107-c<k1>sAma<k2>sAma
{%Sāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ in {%prati-sāma,%} q. v.
<LEND>
[Page1108-a+ 73]

<L>51930<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmaka<k2>sAmaka
{%Sāmaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ belonging to the Sāma-
veda.
<LEND>

<L>51931<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmana<k2>sAmana<h>1
1. {%sāmana, as, ī, am,%}¦ conciliatory, peaceable, con-
tented, (in Ṛg-veda X. 85, 11. {%sāmanau = sāmā-%}
{%nau%}); ({%ī%}), f. a rope for tying cattle (according to
Śabda-k.; cf. {%sāmnī%}).
<LEND>

<L>51932<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmanya<k2>sAmanya
{%Sāmanya, as,%}¦ m. a Brāhman conversant with the
Sāma-veda; one skilful in chanting the verses of that
Veda, (Sāy. {%= sāma-gāna-kuśala,%} Ṛg-veda IX. 96,
22.)
<LEND>

<L>51933<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmnI<k2>sAmnI
{%Sāmnī,%}¦ f. a sort of metre (one of the classes occur-
ring in the Sāma-veda); a rope for tying cattle.
<LEND>

<L>51934<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmana<k2>sAmana<h>2
{#sAmana#} 2¦. {%sāmana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= samāna,%}
level, even.
<LEND>

<L>51935<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmanta<k2>sAmanta
{#sAmanta#}¦ {%sāmanta, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sam-anta%}),
bordering, bounding, limiting, neighbouring; uni-
versal; ({%as%}), m. a neighbour; a neighbouring king;
a feudatory or tributary prince, the chief of a dis-
trict (paying tribute to a lord paramount); a leader,
general, captain, champion; ({%am%}), n. a neighbour-
hood. {%—Sāmanta-cakra, am,%} n. a circle of neigh-
bouring princes. {%—Sāmanta-pratyaya, as,%} m. the
evidence or testimony of near neighbours. {%—Sāmanta-%}
{%vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling on the borders, bordering,
neighbouring, a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>51936<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmaya<k2>sAmaya
{#sAmaya#}¦ {%sāmaya (sa-ām˚), as, ā, am,%} suffer-
ing from sickness, sick, diseased.
<LEND>

<L>51937<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmayAcArika<k2>sAmayAcArika
{#sAmayAcArika#}¦ {%sāmayācārika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%samayācāra%}), relating to conventional practice or
usage. {%—Sāmayācārika-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of certain
Sūtras, sometimes called Dharma-sūtras, which treat
of customs and rites sanctioned by the common
agreement and practice of virtuous men, and which
afterwards, with the Gṛhya-sūtras, grew into the
Dharma-śāstras or law-books, (see {%sūtra.%})
<LEND>

<L>51938<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmayika<k2>sAmayika
{#sAmayika#}¦ {%sāmayika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sam-aya%}),
conventional, customary, conformable to agreement,
agreed upon, stipulated, precise, exact; periodical;
seasonable, punctual, observing time or season; tem-
porary. {%—Sāmayikābhāva (˚ka-abh˚), as,%} m.
temporary non-existence (as that of a water-pot which
has been removed from its place to be again restored
to it).
<LEND>

<L>51939<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmara<k2>sAmara
{#sAmara#}¦ {%sāmara (sa-am˚), as, ā, am,%} being
with the immortals, accompanied by the gods.
<LEND>

<L>51940<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmarADipa<k2>sAmarADipa
{%Sāmarādhipa (sa-am˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ together with
the lord of the gods.
<LEND>

<L>51941<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmarika<k2>sAmarika
{#sAmarika#}¦ {%sāmarika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sam-ara%}),
belonging to war or battle, martial, warlike.
<LEND>

<L>51942<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmarTya<k2>sAmarTya
{#sAmarTya#}¦ {%sāmarthya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sam-artha%}),
sameness of aim or object, sameness or oneness of
meaning or signification; adequacy, fitness, the being
adequate, capacity, the being entitled; force, power,
ability, energy, fortitude, strength; wealth; interest,
advantage; sense or force of words, signification,
mutual relation of words; ({%āt%}), ind. through the
power of, on the strength of, by reason of, on ac-
count of. {%—Sāmarthya-bandhana, as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing power as the bond of union, cemented by or
contingent on power or fitness. {%—Sāmarthya-hīna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} destitute of strength, strengthless, weak,
feeble.
<LEND>

<L>51943<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmarza<k2>sAmarza
{#sAmarza#}¦ {%sāmarṣa (sa-am˚), as, ā, am,%} full of
impatience or anger, enraged, wrathful; ({%am%}), ind.
angrily. {%—Sāmarṣa-tā,%} f. angry impatience, wrath.
{%—Sāmarṣa-hāsam,%} ind. with an ironical smile.
<LEND>

<L>51944<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmavaSa<k2>sAmavaSa
{#sAmavaSa#}¦ {%sāma-vaśa, as,%} m. (in Vedic gram-
mar) a kind of irregular lengthening of certain short
vowels before consonants (when required by the
metre).
<LEND>

<L>51945<pc>1108-a<k1>sAmavAyika<k2>sAmavAyika
{#sAmavAyika#}¦ {%sāmavāyika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sam-%}
{%avāya%}), belonging to an assembly or association,
collective; relating to close or intimate connection;
[Page1108-b+ 76]
({%as%}), m. a minister or counsellor; the chief of a
company or corporation.
<LEND>

<L>51946<pc>1108-b<k1>sAmAjika<k2>sAmAjika
{#sAmAjika#}¦ {%sāmājika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%samāja%}),
relating or belonging to an assembly or multitude;
({%as%}), m. an assistant or spectator at an assembly or
meeting, member of an assembly.
<LEND>

<L>51947<pc>1108-b<k1>sAmAtya<k2>sAmAtya
{#sAmAtya#}¦ {%sāmātya (sa-am˚), as, ā, am,%} ac-
companied by ministers or counsellors. {%—Sāmātya-%}
{%pramukha, as, ā, am,%} with the chief ministers.
<LEND>

<L>51948<pc>1108-b<k1>sAmAnADikaraRya<k2>sAmAnADikaraRya
{#sAmAnADikaraRya#}¦ {%sāmānādhikaraṇya, am,%}
n. (fr. {%samānādhikaraṇa%}), the being in {%samānā-%}
{%dhikaraṇa,%} q. v.; the being in the same predica-
ment; common office or function or government,
common agreement or relationship (see {%adhi-ka-%}
{%raṇa%}), the condition of relating to the same object
or residing in the same subject, the being a receptacle
or substratum of common properties.
<LEND>

<L>51949<pc>1108-b<k1>sAmAnya<k2>sAmAnya
{#sAmAnya#}¦ {%sāmānya, as, ā, am,%} (fr. 2. {%samāna%}),
common, general, universal, generic, equal; entire,
whole; vulgar, ordinary, common-place, insignifi-
cant, low; ({%am%}), n. community, generality, uni-
versality; totality, entireness; common or generic
property, specific property; kind, sort; public affairs
or business; equanimity; identity; (in rhetoric) the
connection of different objects by common proper-
ties; ({%ā%}), f. a common female, courtezan, harlot.
{%—Sāmānya-jñāna, am,%} n. the perception of com-
mon or generic property. {%—Sāmānya-tara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} more common; very common-place or insigni-
ficant. {%—Sāmānya-tas,%} ind. generally, commonly,
ordinarily, usually. {%—Sāmānyato-dṛṣṭa, am,%} n.
(in logic) a particular kind of inference, that of which
the ground is neither the relation of cause to effect
nor of effect to cause, (according to the Sāṅkhya and
Nyāya systems it furnishes evidence of things trans-
cending the senses [{%atīndriya-viṣaya%}], such as
the paths of the heavenly bodies [{%sūryādi-gati%}], the
existence of air, ether, soul, space, time, and the
internal organ.) {%—Sāmānya-pakṣa, as,%} m. the
general side, the middle part, mean (between two
extremes). {%—Sāmānya-padārtha (˚da-ar˚), as,%} m.
the category Generality. {%—Sāmānya-pratipatti-%}
{%pūrvam,%} ind. after an equal elevation, after elevating
to a common rank. {%—Sāmānya-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n.
a generic definition or sign, a definition comprising
many individuals, a specific characteristic; ({%ā%}), f.
one of the three A-laukika or transcendental percep-
tions or Sannikarṣas (in the Nyāya phil., described as
{%āśraya-jñāpaka-sāmānya-jñāna;%} see {%san-nikar-%}
{%ṣa%}). {%—Sāmānya-vanitā,%} f. a common woman,
prostitute. {%—Sāmānya-śāsana, am,%} n. a general
edict or enactment. {%—Sāmānya-śāstra, am,%} n. a
general rule (in grammar {%= ut-sarga%}).
<LEND>

<L>51950<pc>1108-b<k1>sAmAsika<k2>sAmAsika
{#sAmAsika#}¦ {%sāmāsika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. 1. {%sam-%}
{%āsa%}), belonging or relating to a Samāsa or com-
pound word, &c., (see 1. {%sam-āsa%}); compounded,
composite; comprehensive, collective, comprising the
whole; condensed, concise, succinct, brief.
<LEND>

<L>51951<pc>1108-b<k1>sAmi<k2>sAmi
{#sAmi#}¦ {%sāmi,%} ind. (said to be a form of the
old inst. {%sāmyā%} of {%sāmya;%} cf. {%ādi%} for {%ādya%}), half
(often used in comp. like the English {%semi-;%} cf.
{%a-sāmi%}); blamably; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἡμι-, ἥμι-συ-ς;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>semi-, semi-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>sâmi-</nsi> in <nsi>sâmi-quek,</nsi>
‘half-alive;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>sâm-</nsi> in <nsi>sâm-boren,</nsi> ‘half-
born, abortive,’ <nsi>sâm-worht;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>semi-.</nsi>] {%—Sāmi-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made half, halved, divided. {%—Sā-%}
{%mi-pīta, as, ā, am,%} half-drunk. {%—Sāmi-bhukta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} half-eaten, semi-devoured.
<LEND>

<L>51952<pc>1108-b<k1>sAmiDenya<k2>sAmiDenya
{#sAmiDenya#}¦ {%sāmidhenya, as,%} m. (fr. {%sam-indh%}
or {%sam-idh%}), a particular Mantra or mystical prayer.
<LEND>

<L>51953<pc>1108-b<k1>sAmiDenI<k2>sAmiDenI
{%Sāmidhenī,%}¦ f. a particular prayer or verse recited
whilst the sacrificial fire is being kindled or on add-
ing fuel to it ({%= dhāyyā%}); fuel.
<LEND>

<L>51954<pc>1108-b<k1>sAmIcI<k2>sAmIcI
{#sAmIcI#}¦ {%sāmīcī,%} f. praise, panegyric.
<LEND>

<L>51955<pc>1108-b<k1>sAmIpya<k2>sAmIpya
{#sAmIpya#}¦ {%sāmīpya, am,%} n. (fr. {%samīpa%}), near-
ness, vicinity, proximity, contiguity, nearness to the
[Page1108-c+ 73]
deity (as one of the four or five states or grades of
beatitude); ({%as%}), m. a neighbour.
<LEND>

<L>51956<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmudAyika<k2>sAmudAyika
{#sAmudAyika#}¦ {%sāmudāyika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sam-%}
{%udāya%}), belonging to a multitude or assemblage,
collective.
<LEND>

<L>51957<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmudra<k2>sAmudra<h>1
{#sAmudra#} 1¦. {%sāmudra, am,%} n. (fr. 1. {%sa-mudra%}),
an impression or mark on the body, spot.
<LEND>

<L>51958<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmudraka<k2>sAmudraka<h>1
1. {%sāmudraka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a work describing
the various marks on the bodies of men and women,
(so called, according to one account, because com-
posed by Samudra; see 2. {%sāmudra%} below.) {%—Sāmu-%}
{%draka-vidyā,%} f. the art of interpreting the marks
of the body, palmistry.
<LEND>

<L>51959<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmudrika<k2>sAmudrika<h>1
1. {%sāmudrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to marks on the
body, ({%sāmudrikā gunāḥ,%} qualities denoted by
marks on the body); connected with good or bad
fortune supposed to be indicated by marks or spots
on the body; ({%as%}), m. an interpreter or describer of
marks or spots on the body; a fortune-teller; ({%am%}),
n. palmistry, N. of a work on this subject; [cf.
1. {%sāmudraka%} above.] {%—Sāmudrikācārya (˚ka-%}
{%āc˚), as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>51960<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmudra<k2>sAmudra<h>2
{#sAmudra#} 2¦. {%sāmudra, as, ī, am,%} (fr. 2. {%sam-%}
{%udra%}), oceanic, marine, sea-born; declared or re-
lated by Samudra; ({%as%}), m. a mariner, voyager,
sailor; ({%ī%}), f., N. of the daughter of Samudra and
wife of Prācīna-barhis; ({%am%}), n. sea-salt; a cuttle-
fish bone.
<LEND>

<L>51961<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmudraka<k2>sAmudraka<h>2
2. {%sāmudraka, am,%}¦ n. sea-salt.
<LEND>

<L>51962<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmudri<k2>sAmudri
{%Sāmudri, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>51963<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmudrika<k2>sAmudrika<h>2
2. {%sāmudrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the sea or
ocean, oceanic.
<LEND>

<L>51964<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmoda<k2>sAmoda
{#sAmoda#}¦ {%sāmoda, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%sa-ām˚%}), joy-
ful, pleased; possessing fragrance, fragrant, odori-
ferous.
<LEND>

<L>51965<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmodBava<k2>sAmodBava
{#sAmodBava#}¦ {%sāmodbhava,%} &c. See under {%sā-%}
{%man,%} p. 1107.
<LEND>

<L>51966<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmnI<k2>sAmnI
{#sAmnI#}¦ {%sāmnī.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>51967<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmparAya<k2>sAmparAya
{#sAmparAya#}¦ {%sāmparāya, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sam-%}
{%parāya%}), relating to war or battle, warlike; relating
to the other world or a future state, belonging to the
future; ({%as, am%}), m. n. contention, conflict; the
future, future life; means of attaining a future world;
inquiry into the future; investigation (in general);
uncertainty.
<LEND>

<L>51968<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmparAyika<k2>sAmparAyika
{%Sāmparāyika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to war, military,
strategic; warlike; calamitous; relating to the other
world or a future state, belonging to future time,
future; ({%as%}), m. a war-chariot; ({%am%}), n. war, battle.
{%—Sāmparāyika-kalpa, as,%} m. military form, strategic
array.
<LEND>

<L>51969<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmpaSya<k2>sAmpaSya
{#sAmpaSya#}¦ {%sāmpaśya, as,%} &c. (fr. rt. 1. {%paś%}
with {%sam%}), Ved. causing mutual looks (of love),
forcing mutual glances (of affection; said of a herb
used in charms or philters).
<LEND>

<L>51970<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmpratam<k2>sAmpratam
{#sAmpratam#}¦ {%sāmpratam,%} ind. (fr. {%sam-prati%}),
now, at this time; seasonably, fitly, properly; [cf. {%a-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>51971<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmpratika<k2>sAmpratika
{%Sāmpratika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the present
time, present (not future), suitable to the present
occasion, suitable.
<LEND>

<L>51972<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmpradAyika<k2>sAmpradAyika
{#sAmpradAyika#}¦ {%sāmpradāyika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%sam-pradāya%}), traditional, belonging to traditional
doctrine, handed down by tradition.
<LEND>

<L>51973<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmprayogika<k2>sAmprayogika
{#sAmprayogika#}¦ {%sāmprayogika, as, ī, am,%} (fr.
{%sam-prayoga%}), relating to sexual union.
<LEND>

<L>51974<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmb<k2>sAmb
{#sAmb#}¦ {%sāmb%} (= rt. {%samb%}), cl. 10. P. {%sām-%}
{%bayati, -yitum,%} to accumulate, collect.
<LEND>

<L>51975<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmba<k2>sAmba
{#sAmba#}¦ {%sāmba (sa-am˚), as,%} m. attended by
Ambā (said of Śiva). {%—Sāṃba-śiva, as,%} m. Śiva
along with Ambā.
<LEND>

<L>51976<pc>1108-c<k1>sAmbanDika<k2>sAmbanDika
{#sAmbanDika#}¦ {%sāmbandhika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sam-%}
{%bandha%}), belonging to or proceeding from relation-
ship; ({%am%}), n. (probably) alliance.
<LEND>
[Page1109-a+ 74]

<L>51977<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmbara<k2>sAmbara<h>1
{#sAmbara#} 1¦. {%sāmbara, am,%} n. (fr. {%sambara,%}
q. v.), a kind of salt ({%= gaḍa-lavaṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>51978<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmbara<k2>sAmbara<h>2
{#sAmbara#} 2¦. {%sāmbara (sa-am˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing clothes, clothed.
<LEND>

<L>51979<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmbarI<k2>sAmbarI
{#sAmbarI#}¦ {%sāmbarī,%} f. (also written {%śāmbarī,%}
q. v.), a female juggler, sorceress.
<LEND>

<L>51980<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmbavatI<k2>sAmbavatI
{#sAmbavatI#}¦ {%sāmbavatī,%} f., N. of a woman.
<LEND>

<L>51981<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmbeSvara<k2>sAmbeSvara
{%Sāmbeśvara (˚ba-īś˚), as,%}¦ m., N. of a particular
idol or of a temple built by Sāmbavatī.
<LEND>

<L>51982<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmBavI<k2>sAmBavI
{#sAmBavI#}¦ {%sāmbhavī,%} f. (fr. {%sam-bhava%}), pos-
sibility, probability; the red Lodhra tree.
<LEND>

<L>51983<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmBas<k2>sAmBas
{#sAmBas#}¦ {%sāmbhas (sa-am˚), ās, ās, as,%} hav-
ing water, containing water, watery.
<LEND>

<L>51984<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmmada<k2>sAmmada
{#sAmmada#}¦ {%sāmmada, as,%} m. (fr. {%sam-mada%}), a
patronymic of the Vedic Ṛṣi Matsya (the author
of a hymn in the Ṛg-veda, according to some).
<LEND>

<L>51985<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmmAtura<k2>sAmmAtura
{#sAmmAtura#}¦ {%sāmmātura, as,%} m. (fr. {%sam-%}
{%mātṛ%}), a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>51986<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmmuKya<k2>sAmmuKya
{#sAmmuKya#}¦ {%sāmmukhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sam-mukha%}),
the state of being present face to face or in front,
presence, favour, countenance.
<LEND>

<L>51987<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmya<k2>sAmya
{#sAmya#}¦ {%sāmya, am,%} n. (fr. 1. {%sama%}), even-
ness, equality, parity, sameness, equipoise; likeness,
similarity; harmony; equability; impartiality, indif-
ference. {%—Sāmya-tā,%} f. or {%sāmya-tva, am,%} n.
equality, sameness. {%—Sāmya-bodhaka, as, ikā, am,%}
expressive of similarity. {%—Sāmyāvasthā (˚ya-av˚),%}
f. equal state, equipoise.
<LEND>

<L>51988<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmrAjya<k2>sAmrAjya
{#sAmrAjya#}¦ {%sāmrājya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sam-rāj%}),
complete or universal sovereignty, empire, dominion;
({%as%}), m. the descendant of a king or Kṣatriya.
{%—Sāmrājya-kṛt, t, t, t,%} one who exercises im-
perial sway, obtaining complete sovereignty. {%—Sā-%}
{%mrājya-dīkṣita, as, ā, am,%} consecrated to universal
empire.
<LEND>

<L>51989<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmrARikardama<k2>sAmrARikardama
{#sAmrARikardama#}¦ {%sāmrāṇi-kardama, am,%} n. (ac-
cording to Śabda-k.) a kind of perfume or mixture
of fragrant substances ({%= javādi-nāmaka-gandha-%}
{%dravya%}).
<LEND>

<L>51990<pc>1109-a<k1>sAmrARija<k2>sAmrARija
{%Sāmrāṇi-ja, am,%}¦ n. a kind of tree ({%= mahā-%}
{%pārevata%}).
<LEND>

<L>51991<pc>1109-a<k1>sAya<k2>sAya
{#sAya#}¦ {%sāya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%so,%} cf. {%ava-so,%}
1. {%ava-sāya, divasāvasāna%}), end, close, termina-
tion; the close of day, evening; an arrow; ({%am%}),
ind. the evening; Evening personified as a son of
Puṣpārṇa and Prabhā [cf. {%prātar, madhyan-%}
{%dina%}]; in the evening; ({%e%}), ind. in the evening,
at the close of day; [cf. according to some, Lat.
<nsi>serus,</nsi> but recent authorities refer <nsi>serus</nsi> to rt. {%sṛ.%}]
{%—Sāyaṃ-sandhyā,%} f. the evening twilight; the
goddess to be worshipped at the evening twilight
or the time at which she is worshipped. {%—Sāyaṃ-%}
{%sandhyā-devatā,%} f. ‘the deity of the evening twi-
light,’ epithet of Sarasvatī. {%—Sāyaṅ-kāla, as,%} m.
evening, eventide. {%—Sāyaṅkālīna, as, ā, am,%} be-
longing to evening, vespertine. {%—Sāyaṅ-gṛha, as,%}
m., N. of a Muni. {%—Sāyan-dhṛti, is,%} f. the even-
ing Homa or oblation. {%—Sāyan-nivāsa, as,%} m.
evening abode, evening resting-place. {%—Sāya-maṇ-%}
{%ḍana, am,%} n. ‘evening-ornament,’ sunset. {%—Sāyam-%}
{%adhivāsa, as,%} m. ‘evening-decoration,’ N. of the
ceremony of decorating an image of Durgā on the
fifth day of the month Āśvina. {%—Sāyāhna (˚ya-%}
{%ah˚), as,%} m. the evening, eventide.
<LEND>

<L>51992<pc>1109-a<k1>sAyaka<k2>sAyaka
{%Sāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ Ved. destroying; ({%as%}), m.
an arrow [cf. 2. {%śāyaka%}]; a sword, any weapon, a
thunderbolt, (enumerated among the {%vajra-nāmāni%}
in Naigh. II. 20); ({%ikā%}), f. the being or standing
in regular order, {%= krama-sthiti; (am),%} n., Ved.
an arrow. {%—Sāyaka-puṅkhā,%} f. the feathered end
of an arrow. {%—Sāyaka-praṇutta, as, ā, am,%} driven
away by arrows, put to flight by arrows. {%—Sāyaka-%}
{%maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of arrows.
<LEND>

<L>51993<pc>1109-a<k1>sAyakAyana<k2>sAyakAyana
{%Sāyakāyana, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>
[Page1109-b+ 76]

<L>51994<pc>1109-b<k1>sAyantana<k2>sAyantana
{%Sāyantana, as, ī, am%}¦ [cf. {%cirantana%}], belonging
to evening, vespertine.
<LEND>

<L>51995<pc>1109-b<k1>sAyamprAtika<k2>sAyamprAtika
{%Sāyamprātika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sāyam-prātar;%}
cf. {%paunaḥpunika%}), belonging to evening and
morning.
<LEND>

<L>51996<pc>1109-b<k1>sAyaRa<k2>sAyaRa
{#sAyaRa#}¦ {%sāyaṇa%} or {%sāyaṇācārya (˚ṇa-āc˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a learned Brāhman (thought to have
flourished about A. D. 1370, and celebrated as a
well-known commentator on the Ṛg-veda, Śata-
patha-Brāhmaṇa, Tāṇḍya-Brāhmaṇa, and other
works; he was associated in many of his writings
with his elder brother Mādhava, also called Vidyā-
raṇya, who became prime minister to two kings,
Bukka-rāya and Harihara, after having aided them
to found a new capital, called Vijaya-nagara, in the
native kingdom of Karnāṭa about A. D. 1344).
<LEND>

<L>51997<pc>1109-b<k1>sAyaRIya<k2>sAyaRIya
{%Sāyaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or composed
by Sāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>51998<pc>1109-b<k1>sAyana<k2>sAyana
{#sAyana#}¦ {%sāyana (sa-ay˚), am,%} n. the longi-
tude of a planet reckoned from the vernal equi-
noctial point.
<LEND>

<L>51999<pc>1109-b<k1>sAyavasa<k2>sAyavasa
{#sAyavasa#}¦ {%sāyavasa, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>52000<pc>1109-b<k1>sAyin<k2>sAyin
{#sAyin#}¦ {%sāyin, ī,%} m. (according to some)
a horseman ({%= aśvāroha;%} cf. {%sādin%}).
<LEND>

<L>52001<pc>1109-b<k1>sAyujya<k2>sAyujya
{#sAyujya#}¦ {%sāyujya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sa-yuj%}), inti-
mate union, identification, absorption (especially into
the divine essence; this is one of the four or five
grades or states into which Mukti is distinguished;
cf. {%brahma-s˚%}); similarity, likeness; [cf. {%rāja-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52002<pc>1109-b<k1>sAyuDa<k2>sAyuDa
{#sAyuDa#}¦ {%sāyudha (sa-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} having
weapons, armed. {%—Sāyudha-pragraha, as, ā, am,%}
holding weapons in the hand.
<LEND>

<L>52003<pc>1109-b<k1>sAr<k2>sAr
{#sAr#}¦ {%sār%} = rt. {%śār,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52004<pc>1109-b<k1>sAra<k2>sAra
{#sAra#}¦ {%sāra, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%sṛ,%} ‘to go,
pervade,’ apparently involving in some of its deriva-
tives a meaning ‘to be strong, to be whole or
entire,’ cf. {%sarva%}), essence, substance; the substantial
or essential part of anything; the best or choicest
part; the quintessence; the heart; the matter (of a
book, speech, &c.; also {%am,%} n., according to some);
real meaning, main point, real truth, (also {%am,%} n.);
marrow; pith; the sap of trees and plants, (also
{%am,%} n.); cream, curds; nectar; the matter formed
in a boil or ulcer, pus; strength, power, vigour,
force, courage, prowess, valour, heroism; firmness,
hardness; worth, excellence, highest degree of per-
fection; wealth, goods, riches; a compendium, sum-
mary, epitome; impure carbonate of soda; sickness,
disease [cf. {%sāraṇa%} ]; air, wind; ({%as, ī%}), m. f. a
chess-man, piece at chess or backgammon [cf. {%śāra,%}
{%śāri%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant ({%= kṛṣṇa-trivṛtā%});
Dūrvā grass; Kuśa grass; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of bird ({%=%}
{%sārikā%}); a kind of plant, {%= saptalā; (am),%} n.
pith; sap; water; fresh butter; wealth; propriety,
fitness; steel; a wood, thicket, {%= vipina;%} (in rhe-
toric) a climax; ({%as, ā, am%}), essential, substantial;
vigorous, strong, hard; excellent; good, sound,
best; real, true, genuine; sound (as an argument),
thoroughly proved; [cf. Lat. <nsi>serum.</nsi>] {%—Sāra-khadi-%}
{%ra, as,%} m. ‘hard Khadira,’ a kind of Acacia Catechu
{%(= duṣ-khadira)%}. {%—Sāra-gandha, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing the perfection of scent,’ sandal-wood. {%—Sāra-%}
{%gītā,%} f., N. of a short work on Yoga. {%—Sāra-grā-%}
{%hin, ī, iṇī, i,%} extracting the essence or best part of
anything. {%—Sāra-grīva, as,%} m. ‘strong-necked,’ epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Sāra-ja, am,%} n. ‘produced from
cream,’ fresh butter; [cf. {%sara-ja.%}] {%—Sāra-taru,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘pith tree, sap tree,’ the plantain tree ({%=%}
{%kadala,%} q. v.; so called as containing no hard wood
in the stem). {%—Sāra-tas,%} ind. essentially, from
strength, by or with vigour, vigorously, according
to wealth, with regard to riches. {%—Sāra-tā,%} f. or
{%sāra-tva, am,%} n. essence, substance; strength;
highest degree. {%—Sāra-dā,%} f. ‘force-giver,’ epithet
of Sarasvatī (goddess of speech); of Durgā. {%—Sāra-%}
{%druma, as,%} m. ‘hard. tree,’ the Khadira tree.
[Page1109-c+ 80]
{%—Sāra-pādapa, as,%} m. a particular plant or tree,
(probably {%= dhāmanī.%}) {%—Sāra-phalgutva, am,%} n.
substance and emptiness, importance and insignifi-
cance. {%—Sāra-bhaṅga, as, am,%} m. n. destruction or
loss of vigour; ({%as, ā, am%}), deprived of substance
or strength. {%—Sāra-bhaṭṭāraka, as,%} m., N. of an
author. {%—Sāra-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. a natural vessel (as
the bag or skin containing the musk of the musk-
deer); a bale of goods; implements. {%—Sāra-bhuj,%}
{%k, k, k,%} eating the essence or best part of anything.
{%—Sāra-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a commentary by Śrī-
nātha-śarman on the Pariśiṣṭa-prakāśa. {%—Sāra-%}
{%miti, is,%} m. ‘truth-measuring, truth-determining,’
the Veda. {%—Sāra-mūṣikā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%deva-dālī)%}. {%—Sāra-yoga, as,%} m. possession of the
essence or substance of anything. {%—Sāra-laharī,%} f.,
N. of a grammatical work by Kavi-candra. {%—Sāra-%}
{%loha, am,%} n. ‘the essence of iron,’ steel. {%—Sāra-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having substance, substantial; hav-
ing pith or sap; fertile. {%—Sāravat-tā,%} f. substanti-
ality, hardness, force, strength. {%—Sāra-varjita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ‘devoid of substance,’ pithless, sapless. {%—Sāra-%}
{%saṅgraha, as,%} m. concentration of essence; N. of a
philosophical work by Varada-rāja; of a work on
the proper seasons for performing ceremonies or for
commencing other undertakings. {%—Sāra-samuc-%}
{%caya, as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Sāra-siddhānta-%}
{%kaumudī,%} f., N. of a work by Varada-rāja-bhaṭṭa.
{%—Sārāparādha-tas (˚ra-ap˚),%} ind. in accordance
with proved offences or crimes. {%—Sārāvalī (˚ra-%}
{%āv˚),%} f., N. of a work [cf. {%smṛti-s˚%}]; of a work
on astronomy. {%—Sārāsāra (˚ra-as˚), as, ā, am,%}
substantial and unsubstantial, valuable and worthless,
real and vain; ({%am%}), n. substance and emptiness;
strength and weakness; worth and worthlessness.
{%—Sārāsāra-tā,%} f. the state of being substantial and
unsubstantial or of having strong or weak points, &c.
{%—Sārāsāra-vicāra, as,%} m. the considering or
weighing of strong and weak points. {%—Sārī-kṛ,%} cl.
8. P. {%-karoti, -kartum,%} to make hard. {%—Sārod-%}
{%dhāra (˚ra-ud˚),%} N. of a work on music.
<LEND>

<L>52005<pc>1109-c<k1>sAraka<k2>sAraka
{%Sāraka, as, ikā, am%}¦ (fr. Caus. of rt. {%sṛ%}), causing
to go; cathartic, laxative; ({%as%}), m. a particular
plant ({%= jaya-pāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>52006<pc>1109-c<k1>sAraRa<k2>sAraRa
{%Sāraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ (fr. Caus. of rt. {%sṛ%}), caus-
ing to go or flow; ({%as%}), m. dysentery, diarrhœa
[cf. {%ati-sāra%}]; the hog-plum, Spondias Mangifera;
another plant ({%= bhadra-balā%}); N. of one of Rā-
vaṇa's ministers (sent as ambassador to Rāma);
({%am%}), n. a kind of perfume.
<LEND>

<L>52007<pc>1109-c<k1>sAraRA<k2>sAraRA
{%Sāraṇā,%}¦ f. a particular process to which mineral
substances (especially quicksilver) are subjected, (two
others are given, called {%ṛtu-s˚%} and {%prati-s˚.%}) {%—Sā-%}
{%raṇā-traya, am,%} n. the three Sāraṇā processes.
<LEND>

<L>52008<pc>1109-c<k1>sAraRi<k2>sAraRi
{%Sāraṇi, is,%}¦ f. a canal, drain, channel, water-pipe;
a small river; the plant Pæderia Fetida; [cf. {%sā-%}
{%raṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52009<pc>1109-c<k1>sAraRika<k2>sAraRika
{%Sāraṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%saraṇi%}), travelling,
wayfaring, journeying; ({%as%}), m. a traveller, way-
farer. {%—Sāraṇika-ghna, as,%} m. ‘killing travellers,’
a robber, highwayman, murderer.
<LEND>

<L>52010<pc>1109-c<k1>sAraRikA<k2>sAraRikA
{%Sāraṇikā,%}¦ f., N. of a short treatise on astrology.
<LEND>

<L>52011<pc>1109-c<k1>sAraRI<k2>sAraRI
{%Sāraṇī,%}¦ f. {%= sāraṇi%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52012<pc>1109-c<k1>sAri<k2>sAri
{%Sāri, is,%}¦ f. a chess-man, &c. {%(= sāra, sārī)%}. {%—Sāri-%}
{%phalaka, as,%} m. a chess-board, draught-board; a
table for playing chess or backgammon; [cf. {%śāri-%}
{%ph˚.%}] {%—Sārim-ejaya, as,%} m., N. of a chieftain.
<LEND>

<L>52013<pc>1109-c<k1>sArikA<k2>sArikA
{%Sārikā,%}¦ f. a kind of bird ({%= śārikā, śyāmā%});
N. of a Rākṣasī.
<LEND>

<L>52014<pc>1109-c<k1>sArin<k2>sArin
{%Sārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going, resorting to, &c. (gene-
rally at the end of a comp., e. g. {%okaḥ-sārin,%} going
home); having the essence or substance of; ({%iṇī%}), f.,
N. of various plants ({%= saha-devī; = kārpāsī; =%}
{%dur-ālabhā; = kapila-śiṃśapā; = pra-sāriṇī; =%}
{%rakta-punarnavā%}).
<LEND>

<L>52015<pc>1109-c<k1>sArivA<k2>sArivA
{%Sārivā,%}¦ f. a kind of plant ({%= śārivā%}).
<LEND>

<L>52016<pc>1109-c<k1>sArI<k2>sArI
{%Sārī,%}¦ f. See under {%sāra,%} col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52017<pc>1109-c<k1>sAraGa<k2>sAraGa
{#sAraGa#}¦ {%sāragha, am,%} n. (fr. {%saraghā%}), honey.
<LEND>

<L>52018<pc>1109-c<k1>sAraNga<k2>sAraNga
{#sAraNga#}¦ {%sāraṅga, as, ī, am,%} (probably fr.
{%a-raṅga,%} ‘having colour, &c.;’ but cf. {%śāra, %}
[Page1110-a+ 74]
{%śāraṅga;%} according to Uṇādi-s. I. 121. fr. rt. {%sṛ%}),
of a variegated colour, variegated, spotted [cf. {%kṛṣ-%}
{%ṇa-s˚, lohita-s˚%}]; ({%as%}), m. a variegated colour;
the spotted antelope; a deer; a lion; an elephant;
the Cātaka bird, Cuculus Melanoleucus; the Indian
cuckoo; a kind of large crane, Ardea Sarunga; a
peacock; the Rāja-haṃsa; a large bee; a cloud;
a tree; an umbrella, parasol; a garment, cloth,
cloths; hair; a lotus; a flower; a conch-shell; a
sort of musical instrument; an ornament, jewel;
gold; a bow; epithet of Śiva; of Kāma-deva;
sandal; camphor; the earth; night; light; ({%ī%}), f.
a kind of spotted doe or antelope; a sort of violin.
{%—Sāraṅga-deva, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Sāraṅga-%}
{%raṅga-dā,%} f., N. of a commentary on the Kṛṣṇa-
karṇāmṛta.
<LEND>

<L>52019<pc>1110-a<k1>sAraNgika<k2>sAraNgika
{%Sāraṅgika, as,%}¦ m. a bird-catcher, fowler, hunter,
deer-catcher, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52020<pc>1110-a<k1>sAraRa<k2>sAraRa
{#sAraRa#}¦ {%sāraṇa,%} &c. See under {%sāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>52021<pc>1110-a<k1>sAraRqa<k2>sAraRqa
{#sAraRqa#}¦ {%sāraṇḍa, as,%} m. {%= sarpāṇḍa,%} a
snake's egg.
<LEND>

<L>52022<pc>1110-a<k1>sAraRyaka<k2>sAraRyaka
{#sAraRyaka#}¦ {%sāraṇyaka (sa-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing the Āraṇyakas, together with the Āraṇyakas.
<LEND>

<L>52023<pc>1110-a<k1>sAraTi<k2>sAraTi
{#sAraTi#}¦ {%sārathi, is,%} m. (fr. {%sa-ratha%}), the
son of a Sa-ratha (see {%sa-ratha%}); a charioteer, driver
of a car, coachman, (forming a mixed caste, com-
monly called Sārthī, and supposed to have sprung
from a Kṣatriya father and Brāhman mother); the
ocean (= 1. {%sam-udra.%})
<LEND>

<L>52024<pc>1110-a<k1>sAraTin<k2>sAraTin
{%Sārathin, ī,%}¦ m., Ved. a charioteer, (Atharva-veda
XV. 2, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>52025<pc>1110-a<k1>sAraTya<k2>sAraTya
{%Sārathya, am,%}¦ n. the office of a charioteer, coach-
manship, charioteering, driving; conveyance.
<LEND>

<L>52026<pc>1110-a<k1>sArameya<k2>sArameya
{#sArameya#}¦ {%sārameya, as,%} m. (fr. {%sarama,%}
q. v.), a dog; ({%au%}), m. du. the two children of
Saramā, i. e. the two four-eyed brindled watch-dogs
of Yama (conjectured by some to have been origin-
ally Indra and Agni); ({%ī%}), f. a female dog, bitch;
[cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">Ἑρμείας.</lang>] {%—Sārameya-vākya,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘Sārameya's speech,’ N. of the fifty-sixth
chapter of the Uttara-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>52027<pc>1110-a<k1>sArayat<k2>sArayat
{#sArayat#}¦ {%sārayat,%} &c. See under rt. {%sṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>52028<pc>1110-a<k1>sAralya<k2>sAralya
{#sAralya#}¦ {%sāralya, am,%} n. straightness, recti-
tude, sincerity, uprightness, honesty, artlessness.
<LEND>

<L>52029<pc>1110-a<k1>sArava<k2>sArava
{#sArava#}¦ {%sārava, as, ī, am,%} (anomalously fr.
{%sarayu%}), being on or belonging to the Sarayu river.
<LEND>

<L>52030<pc>1110-a<k1>sAraSana<k2>sAraSana
{#sAraSana#}¦ {%sāraśana, am,%} n. (fr. {%sa-raśana%}),
a woman's zone or girdle (said to be formed of
twenty-five strings); a military belt or girdle.
<LEND>

<L>52031<pc>1110-a<k1>sArasana<k2>sArasana
{%Sārasana = sāraśana%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>52032<pc>1110-a<k1>sArasa<k2>sArasa
{#sArasa#}¦ {%sārasa, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%saras%}), relating
or belonging to a lake or pond, coming from a
lake; ({%as%}), m. the Indian or Siberian crane, Ardea
Sibirica; a bird in general [cf. {%rāja-s˚%}]; the moon;
({%am%}), n. a lotus; a woman's zone or girdle; [cf.
{%sāraśana.%}] {%—Sārasa-dvitīya, as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied by a Sārasa or Indian crane.
<LEND>

<L>52033<pc>1110-a<k1>sArasI<k2>sArasI
{%Sārasī,%}¦ f. a female Indian crane.
<LEND>

<L>52034<pc>1110-a<k1>sArasvata<k2>sArasvata
{#sArasvata#}¦ {%sārasvata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%saras-%}
{%vatī%}), relating or belonging to the river Sarasvatī;
relating to the goddess Sarasvatī; being in the form
of Sarasvatī; eloquent, learned; belonging to the
Sārasvata country; ({%as%}), m., N. of the country
about the Sarasvatī river (i. e. the north-west part
of the province of Delhi including part of the
Pañjāb); N. of a Muni or saint (fabled to have
sprung from the personified Sarasvatī river); N. of
a particular tribe of Brāhmans (so called as coming
from the above country or as supposed to be de-
scended from the above Muni; they are said to be
subdivided into ten classes, and to be often cultivators
of literature); a staff of the Vilva tree; a particular
ceremonial used in the worship of Sarasvatī; {%= sāras-%}
{%vata-prakriyā%} below; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the people of the
[Page1110-b+ 72]
Sārasvata country; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%prakriyā = sāras-%}
{%vata-prakriyā%}. {%—Sārasvata-kalpa, as,%} m. the
ceremonial used in the worship of Sarasvatī. {%—Sā-%}
{%rasvata-koṣa%} and {%sārasvata-tantra,%} N. of two
works. {%—Sārasvata-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Sārasvata-prakriyā,%} f., N. of a grammatical
work by Anubhūti-svarūpācārya. {%—Sārasvata-vrata,%}
{%as, am,%} m. n. a particular religious observance in
honour of Sarasvatī. {%—Sārasvatālaṅkāra (˚ta-al˚),%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a work. {%—Sārasvatotsava (˚ta-ut˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the festival in honour of Sarasvatī.
<LEND>

<L>52035<pc>1110-b<k1>sArasvatya<k2>sArasvatya
{%Sārasvatya, as,%}¦ &c., belonging to the Sārasvata
family or tribe, ({%sārasvatyo gaṇaḥ,%} the descendants
or family of Sārasvata.)
<LEND>

<L>52036<pc>1110-b<k1>sArAla<k2>sArAla
{#sArAla#}¦ {%sārāla, as,%} m. sesamum ({%= tila%}).
<LEND>

<L>52037<pc>1110-b<k1>sAri<k2>sAri
{#sAri#}¦ {%sāri, sārin,%} &c. See p. 1109, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>52038<pc>1110-b<k1>sArisfkta<k2>sArisfkta
{#sArisfkta#}¦ {%sārisṛkta, as,%} m. (probably ano-
mal. fr. the Intens. of rt. 1. {%sṛj%}), N. of the author
of Ṛg-veda X. 142, 5, 6 (having the patronymic
Śāṅga).
<LEND>

<L>52039<pc>1110-b<k1>sAru<k2>sAru
{#sAru#}¦ {%sāru%} (doubtful), a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>52040<pc>1110-b<k1>sArunDatIka<k2>sArunDatIka
{#sArunDatIka#}¦ {%sārundhatīka (sa-ar˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} together with Arundhatī, accompanied by Arun-
dhatī.
<LEND>

<L>52041<pc>1110-b<k1>sArUpya<k2>sArUpya
{#sArUpya#}¦ {%sārūpya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sa-rūpa%}), same-
ness or similarity of form, conformity, resemblance;
assimilation to or conformity with the deity (one of
the states or grades of Mukti, {%= sarūpa-tā,%} q. v.);
(in the drama) surprise at seeing an object or its
likeness previously seen elsewhere. {%—Sārūpya-tas,%}
ind. in consequence of similarity of form.
<LEND>

<L>52042<pc>1110-b<k1>sAropa<k2>sAropa
{#sAropa#}¦ {%sāropa (sa-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} super-
imponent.
<LEND>

<L>52043<pc>1110-b<k1>sArozwrika<k2>sArozwrika
{#sArozwrika#}¦ {%sāroṣṭrika, as,%} m. (corrupted
fr. {%saurāṣṭrika,%} q. v.), a kind of poison.
<LEND>

<L>52044<pc>1110-b<k1>sAroha<k2>sAroha
{#sAroha#}¦ {%sāroha (sa-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} having
elevation, rising.
<LEND>

<L>52045<pc>1110-b<k1>sArka<k2>sArka
{#sArka#}¦ {%sārka (sa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} with the
sun, sunny.
<LEND>

<L>52046<pc>1110-b<k1>sArgala<k2>sArgala
{#sArgala#}¦ {%sārgala (sa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having
a bar or obstacle, barred, impeded, prevented,
(Raghu-v. I. 79.)
<LEND>

<L>52047<pc>1110-b<k1>sArYjaya<k2>sArYjaya
{#sArYjaya#}¦ {%sārñjaya, as,%} m. (fr. {%sṛñjaya%}), Ved.
the son of Sṛñjaya.
<LEND>

<L>52048<pc>1110-b<k1>sArTa<k2>sArTa
{#sArTa#}¦ {%sārtha (sa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having an
object; having meaning, full of meaning or purport,
significant, important; serving a purpose, useful, ser-
viceable; of like meaning or purport; having pro-
perty, opulent, wealthy; ({%as%}), m. a wealthy man; a
company of traders, caravan; a multitude of similar
animals; a troop; a collection or multitude (in
general); one of a company of pilgrims. {%—Sārtha-%}
{%ja, as, ā, am,%} born or reared in a caravan. {%—Sār-%}
{%tha-bhraṃśa-samudbhava, as, ā, am,%} arising from
the loss of a caravan. {%—Sārtha-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the
circle or collected body of a caravan. {%—Sārtha-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having a meaning or purpose, signifi-
cant, intending; having a numerous company. {%—Sār-%}
{%tha-vāha,%} the leader or conductor of a caravan, a
merchant, trader. {%—Sārthavāha-vacas, as,%} n. the
speech or proclamation of the captain of a caravan.
{%—Sārtha-han, hā, ghnī, ha,%} ‘caravan-destroyer,’
a robber who attacks a caravan.
<LEND>

<L>52049<pc>1110-b<k1>sArTaka<k2>sArTaka
{%Sārthaka (sa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ having meaning,
full of meaning, important; serviceable, useful, ad-
vantageous. {%—Sārthaka-tā,%} f. the being adapted to
any purpose, serviceableness.
<LEND>

<L>52050<pc>1110-b<k1>sArTika<k2>sArTika
{%Sārthika, as,%}¦ m. a merchant, trader.
<LEND>

<L>52051<pc>1110-b<k1>sArdra<k2>sArdra
{#sArdra#}¦ {%sārdra (sa-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} wet, moist,
damp.
<LEND>

<L>52052<pc>1110-b<k1>sArDa<k2>sArDa
{#sArDa#}¦ {%sārdha (sa-ar˚), as, ī, am,%} joined with
a half, plus one half, increased by one half, having a
[Page1110-c+ 78]
half over (e. g. {%dve śate sārdhe,%} two hundred toge-
ther with a half, i. e. two hundred and fifty, Manu
VIII. 138; used chiefly in comps., see below);
({%am%}), ind. with, along with, together with (with
inst.). {%—Sāradha-śata, am,%} n. ‘a hundred + a half,’
150. {%—Sārdha-saṃvatsara, as,%} m. a year and a
half.
<LEND>

<L>52053<pc>1110-c<k1>sArDamAtra<k2>sArDamAtra
{%Sārdhamātra (sa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ having a
half Mātrā.
<LEND>

<L>52054<pc>1110-c<k1>sArpa<k2>sArpa
{#sArpa#}¦ {%sārpa, as, ī, am,%} relating to snakes or
serpents; ({%as%}), m., N. of the Nakṣatra Āśleṣā.
<LEND>

<L>52055<pc>1110-c<k1>sArparAjYI<k2>sArparAjYI
{%Sārparājñī,%}¦ f., N. of the authoress of the hymn
Ṛg-veda X. 189.
<LEND>

<L>52056<pc>1110-c<k1>sArpya<k2>sArpya
{%Sārpya, as, -pī, am,%}¦ relating to a snake; ({%as,%}
{%pī%}), m. f., N. of the Nakṣatra Āśleṣā (over which
the serpents are said to preside).
<LEND>

<L>52057<pc>1110-c<k1>sArpiza<k2>sArpiza
{#sArpiza#}¦ {%sārpiṣa, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sarpis%}), con-
taining clarified butter, cooked with ghee, dressed
with clarified butter.
<LEND>

<L>52058<pc>1110-c<k1>sArpizka<k2>sArpizka
{%Sārpiṣka, as, ī, am, = sārpiṣa%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>52059<pc>1110-c<k1>sArva<k2>sArva
{#sArva#}¦ {%sārva, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sarva%}), relating
to all, general, universal; fit for all; ({%as%}), m. a
Buddha; a Jina or Jaina deified saint.
<LEND>

<L>52060<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvakAmika<k2>sArvakAmika
{%Sārvakāmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-kāma%}), ful-
filling all desires, gratifying every wish.
<LEND>

<L>52061<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvakAla<k2>sArvakAla
{%Sārvakāla, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-kāla%}), taking
place at all times, suitable for all seasons.
<LEND>

<L>52062<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvakAlika<k2>sArvakAlika
{%Sārvakālika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-kāla%}), belong-
ing to all times, suited to all seasons, everlasting.
<LEND>

<L>52063<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvaguRika<k2>sArvaguRika
{%Sārvaguṇika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-guṇa%}), endued
with every good quality or excellence.
<LEND>

<L>52064<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvajanika<k2>sArvajanika
{%Sārvajanika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-jana%}), relating
or belonging or suited to all men, universal, public.
<LEND>

<L>52065<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvajanIna<k2>sArvajanIna
{%Sārvajanīna, as, ī, am, = sārvajanika%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>52066<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvajYya<k2>sArvajYya
{%Sārvajñya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%sarva-jña%}), omniscience.
<LEND>

<L>52067<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvatrika<k2>sArvatrika
{%Sārvatrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ (fr. {%sarvatra%}), belonging
to every place, general, suited to all places or cir-
cumstances.
<LEND>

<L>52068<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvadEvatya<k2>sArvadEvatya
{%Sārvadaivatya, as, ī, am,%}¦ (fr. {%sarva + devatā%}),
presided over by or sacred to all the gods.
<LEND>

<L>52069<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvaDAtuka<k2>sArvaDAtuka
{%Sārvadhātuka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-dhātu%}),
applicable to the whole of a radical term or to the
complete form of the verbal base after the conju-
gational characteristics or Vikaraṇas are affixed, i. e.
to the four conjugational or special tenses, &c. (see
below; cf. {%ārdhadhātuka%}); ({%am%}), n., N. of the
verbal terminations of the four conjugational or
special tenses (present, imperfect, potential, and
imperative) and of all the root affixes (such as {%śānac%}
and {%śatṛ%}) which have a servile or indicatory {%ś.%}
<LEND>

<L>52070<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvaBOtika<k2>sArvaBOtika
{%Sārvabhautika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-bhūta%}),
belonging or relating to all elements or beings, &c.;
comprising all animated beings.
<LEND>

<L>52071<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvaBOma<k2>sArvaBOma
{%Sārvabhauma, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-bhūmi%}),
relating to or consisting of the whole earth, com-
prising the whole world, known throughout the
world; ({%as%}), m. an emperor, universal monarch;
N. of the elephant of Kuvera (regent of the north);
N. of a king; of a poet. {%—Sārvabhauma-bhaṭṭā-%}
{%cārya, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>52072<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvalOkika<k2>sArvalOkika
{%Sārvalaukika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-loka%}), pre-
vailing throughout the whole world, common to all
the world, known by every one, universal.
<LEND>

<L>52073<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvavarRika<k2>sArvavarRika
{%Sārvavarṇika, as, ī, am,%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-varṇa%}), of
every kind or sort; belonging or relating to every
tribe.
<LEND>

<L>52074<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvavarmika<k2>sArvavarmika
{%Sārvavarmika, as, ī, am,%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-varman%}),
composed or written by Sarva-varman; ({%am%}), n. any
thing written by Sarva-varman.
<LEND>

<L>52075<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvaviBaktika<k2>sArvaviBaktika
{%Sārvavibhaktika, as, ī, am,%}¦ (fr. {%sarva-vibhakti%}),
applicable or belonging to all the cases of a noun, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52076<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvavedasa<k2>sArvavedasa
{%Sārvavedasa, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%sarva-vedas,%} q. v.), one
who gives away all his wealth at a sacred rite.
<LEND>

<L>52077<pc>1110-c<k1>sArvavedya<k2>sArvavedya
{%Sārvavedya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%sarva-veda%}), a Brāhman
conversant with all the Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>52078<pc>1110-c<k1>sArzapa<k2>sArzapa
{#sArzapa#}¦ {%sārṣapa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sarṣapa%}),
made of mustard; ({%am%}), n. mustard oil.
<LEND>

<L>52079<pc>1110-c<k1>sArzwi<k2>sArzwi
{#sArzwi#}¦ {%sārṣṭi, is, is, i%} (perhaps fr. {%sa + ā %}
[Page1111-a+ 73]
{%+ ṛṣṭi;%} cf. {%ṛṣva%}), possessing the same rank or
condition or station, having the same power or sub-
limity; ({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a Gotra.
<LEND>

<L>52080<pc>1111-a<k1>sArzwitA<k2>sArzwitA
{%Sārṣṭi-tā,%}¦ f. equality in rank or condition, equality
in power, &c. (according to Kullūka on Manu IV.
232 {%= samāna-gati-tā, tulya-tā;%} in a passage of
the Mahā-nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad, Sāy. explains {%sārṣṭi-%}
{%tā%} by {%samānaiśvarya-tva,%} which is said to mean
here equality with the Supreme Being in power and
all the divine attributes; it is regarded as the fourth
grade or division of Mukti or final beatitude).
<LEND>

<L>52081<pc>1111-a<k1>sArzwya<k2>sArzwya
{%Sārṣṭya, am,%}¦ n. the fourth state of Mukti, {%= sār-%}
{%ṣṭi-tā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52082<pc>1111-a<k1>sAla<k2>sAla
{#sAla#}¦ {%sāla, as,%} m. ({%= śāla,%} q. v.), the Śāl
tree or its resin; any tree; a fence or wall surround-
ing a building; any wall; a kind of fish, Ophio-
cephalus Wrahl; ({%ā%}), f. a house (more usually written
{%śālā%}). {%—Sāla-grāma, as,%} m., N. of a sacred place;
the Śāla-grāma stone, (see {%śāla-grāma.%}) {%—Sāla-%}
{%grāma-kṣetra, am,%} n., N. of a district. {%—Sāla-%}
{%jya, am,%} n., N. of a place. {%—Sāla-niryāsa,%} see
{%śāla-niryāsa%}. {%—Sāla-parṇī,%} see {%śāla-parṇī.%}
{%—Sāla-puṣpa, am,%} n. a flower of the Sāl tree;
the shrub Hibiscus Mutabilis. {%—Sāla-bhañjikā,%} see
{%śāla-bhañjikā%}. {%—Sāla-rasa, as,%} m. the resin of
the Sāl or Śāl tree. {%—Sāla-vāhana,%} incorrect for
{%śāli-vāhana%}. {%—Sāla-veṣṭa,%} see {%śāla-veṣṭa%}. {%—Sā-%}
{%la-śṛṅga, am,%} n. ‘wall-pinnacle,’ the coping of a
wall. {%—Sāla-sāra,%} see {%śāla-sāra%}. {%—Sālā-karī,%} f.
(according to some) ‘house-worker,’ a female cap-
tive (especially one won in battle). {%—Sālā-vṛka, as,%}
m. (see {%śālā-vṛka%}), a dog; a jackal; a hyena; a
wolf; a wolf-like or cruel man.
<LEND>

<L>52083<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlana<k2>sAlana
{%Sālana, as,%}¦ m. the resin of the Sāl or Śāl tree;
resin (in general).
<LEND>

<L>52084<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlAra<k2>sAlAra
{%Sālāra, am,%}¦ n. a pin or peg projecting from a
wall, a bracket, shelf.
<LEND>

<L>52085<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlaki<k2>sAlaki
{#sAlaki#}¦ {%sālaki, is,%} m., N. of a Muni.
<LEND>

<L>52086<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlaNga<k2>sAlaNga
{#sAlaNga#}¦ {%sālaṅga, as,%} m. a kind of Rāga or
musical mode.
<LEND>

<L>52087<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlamba<k2>sAlamba
{#sAlamba#}¦ {%sālamba (sa-āl˚), as, ā, am,%} having
a support or prop, supported.
<LEND>

<L>52088<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlambana<k2>sAlambana
{%Sālambana (sa-āl˚), as, ā, am, = sālamba%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>52089<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlasa<k2>sAlasa
{#sAlasa#}¦ {%sālasa (sa-al˚), as, ā, am,%} having
languor, languid, languishing.
<LEND>

<L>52090<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlAturIya<k2>sAlAturIya
{#sAlAturIya#}¦ {%sālāturīya, as,%} m. (for {%śālātu-%}
{%rīya,%} q. v.), N. of Pāṇini.
<LEND>

<L>52091<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlimaYjari<k2>sAlimaYjari
{#sAlimaYjari#}¦ {%sālimañjari, is,%} m., N. of a
Muni.
<LEND>

<L>52092<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlUra<k2>sAlUra
{#sAlUra#}¦ {%sālūra, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%sal%}),
a frog ({%= śālūra%}).
<LEND>

<L>52093<pc>1111-a<k1>sAleya<k2>sAleya
{#sAleya#}¦ {%sāleya, as,%} m. a sort of fennel or
dill ({%= śāleya%}).
<LEND>

<L>52094<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlokya<k2>sAlokya
{#sAlokya#}¦ {%sālokya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sa-loka%}), the
being in the same sphere or world (with another),
residence in the same heaven with any particular
deity ({%= saloka-tā,%} q. v.). {%—Sālokya-tā,%} f. {%= sālokya%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>52095<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlva<k2>sAlva
{#sAlva#}¦ {%sālva, as,%} m., N. of a demon-king
who was slain by Viṣṇu, (according to the Śabda-k.
he was king of the country of Saubha); N. of a
country (more usually written {%śālva%}); ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the inhabitants of Sālva; ({%as, ī, am%}), belonging to
the country Sālva. {%—Sālva-han, ā,%} m. ‘slayer of
Sālva,’ N. of Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>52096<pc>1111-a<k1>sAlvika<k2>sAlvika
{#sAlvika#}¦ {%sālvika, as,%} m. (probably a cor-
ruption of {%sārikā,%} q. v.), the Sārikā bird.
<LEND>

<L>52097<pc>1111-a<k1>sA|f<k2>sA|f
{#sA|f#}¦ {%sāḷhṛ.%} See under rt. 1. {%sah.%}
<LEND>

<L>52098<pc>1111-a<k1>sAva<k2>sAva
{#sAva#}¦ {%sāva, as,%} m. (fr. 1. {%sava%}), a libation,
in {%prātaḥ-sāva,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52099<pc>1111-a<k1>sAvana<k2>sAvana
{%Sāvana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. 1. {%savana%}), relating to or
comprising the three Savanas; ({%as%}), m. an institutor
of a sacrifice or employer of priests at a sacrifice
[Page1111-b+ 71]
({%= yajamāna%}); the conclusion of a sacrifice or the
ceremonies by which it is terminated; N. of Varuṇa;
a month of thirty solar days; a particular kind of
day; a natural or civil day from sunrise to sunset; a
particular kind of year (as distinguished from the
solar year); a particular ceremony performed during
the Sāvana month.
<LEND>

<L>52100<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvaka<k2>sAvaka
{#sAvaka#}¦ {%sāvaka, as, ikā, am%} (fr. the Caus.
of rt. 4. {%su%}), generative, productive, causing birth,
&c., obstetric, parturient; the young of any animal
(in this sense for {%śāvaka%}); ({%ikā%}), f. a midwife.
<LEND>

<L>52101<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvakASa<k2>sAvakASa
{#sAvakASa#}¦ {%sāvakāśa (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing leisure, at leisure; ({%am%}), ind. leisurely.
<LEND>

<L>52102<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvagraha<k2>sAvagraha
{#sAvagraha#}¦ {%sāvagraha (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing the grammatical mark called Ava-graha, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52103<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvajYa<k2>sAvajYa
{#sAvajYa#}¦ {%sāvajña (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%} feeling
contempt, despising, disdainful.
<LEND>

<L>52104<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvadya<k2>sAvadya
{#sAvadya#}¦ {%sāvadya (sa-av˚), am,%} n., scil. {%aiśvar-%}
{%ya,%} one of the three kinds of power attainable by
an ascetic, (the other two are called {%nir-avadya%} and
{%sūkṣma.%})
<LEND>

<L>52105<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvaDAna<k2>sAvaDAna
{#sAvaDAna#}¦ {%sāvadhāna (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%}
having or bestowing attention, attentive, heedful,
careful, cautious; diligent; ({%am%}), ind. cautiously.
{%—Sāvadhāna-tā,%} f. attention, carefulness.
<LEND>

<L>52106<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvaDAnIkf<k2>sAvaDAnIkf
{%Sāvadhānī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make
careful, caution, put on one's guard.
<LEND>

<L>52107<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvaDAnIkfta<k2>sAvaDAnIkfta
{%Sāvadhānī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ cautioned, apprized,
made aware.
<LEND>

<L>52108<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvaDAraRa<k2>sAvaDAraRa
{#sAvaDAraRa#}¦ {%sāvadhāraṇa (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%}
(in argumentative writings) having a limitation.
<LEND>

<L>52109<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvaDi<k2>sAvaDi
{#sAvaDi#}¦ {%sāvadhi (sa-av˚), is, is, i,%} together
with a limit or termination, having a bound or limit,
limited (in time), finite, defined, circumscribed.
<LEND>

<L>52110<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvantamiSra<k2>sAvantamiSra
{#sAvantamiSra#}¦ {%sāvanta-miśra, as,%} m. a pro-
per N.
<LEND>

<L>52111<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvayava<k2>sAvayava
{#sAvayava#}¦ {%sāvayava (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%} com-
posed of parts (in the Vaiśeṣika phil. said of all
things except the eternal substances).
<LEND>

<L>52112<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvara<k2>sAvara
{#sAvara#}¦ {%sāvara, as,%} m. ({%= śāvara%}), fault, of-
fence; sin, wickedness, crime; the Lodhra tree.
<LEND>

<L>52113<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvaraRa<k2>sAvaraRa
{#sAvaraRa#}¦ {%sāvaraṇa (sa-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing concealment or secrecy, clandestine.
<LEND>

<L>52114<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvarRa<k2>sAvarRa
{#sAvarRa#}¦ {%sāvarṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sa-varṇa%}), re-
lating or belonging to one of the same colour or
tribe or caste; ({%as%}), m. (fr. {%sa-varṇā%}), a metronymic
of the eighth Manu, (see below.) {%—Sāvarṇa-lak-%}
{%ṣya, am,%} n. ‘mark of sameness of colour or caste,’
the skin.
<LEND>

<L>52115<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvarRi<k2>sAvarRi
{%Sāvarṇi, is,%}¦ m. a metronymic of the eighth Manu
(son of the Sun by Sa-varṇā, q. v., and therefore
younger brother of the seventh Manu or Vaivasvata;
the succeeding Manus to the twelfth, or according
to other authorities to the fourteenth, inclusive are
also called Sāvarṇi; cf. {%dakṣa-s˚, brahma-s˚,%}
{%dharma-s˚%}); ({%ayas%}), m. pl., N. of a Gotra.
<LEND>

<L>52116<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvarRika<k2>sAvarRika
{%Sāvarṇika, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to Sāvarṇi, ar-
ranged by Sāvarṇi (said of a Saṃhitā).
<LEND>

<L>52117<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvarRya<k2>sAvarRya
{%Sāvarṇya, am,%}¦ n. sameness or similarity of colour;
identity of caste or class; the Manv-antara presided
over by the eighth Manu (in this sense fr. {%sāvarṇi%});
({%as%}), m., Ved. the eighth Manu ({%= sāvarṇi%}).
<LEND>

<L>52118<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvalamba<k2>sAvalamba
{#sAvalamba#}¦ {%sāvalamba (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%}
having a support or prop, supported, leaning for sup-
port (on the arm of another).
<LEND>

<L>52119<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvalepa<k2>sAvalepa
{#sAvalepa#}¦ {%sāvalepa (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%} full
of pride, proud; ({%am%}), ind. insolently, arrogantly,
haughtily.
<LEND>

<L>52120<pc>1111-b<k1>sAvaSeza<k2>sAvaSeza
{#sAvaSeza#}¦ {%sāvaśeṣa (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing a remainder, leaving a residue or remainder, re-
maining; imperfect, incomplete, unfinished. {%—Sā- %}
[Page1111-c+ 74]
{%vaśeṣa-bandhana, as, ā, am,%} having bonds still
remaining, still bound.
<LEND>

<L>52121<pc>1111-c<k1>sAvazwamBa<k2>sAvazwamBa
{#sAvazwamBa#}¦ {%sāvaṣṭambha (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%}
possessing self-dependence, full of self-confidence;
({%am%}), ind. resolutely, courageously.
<LEND>

<L>52122<pc>1111-c<k1>sAvahela<k2>sAvahela
{#sAvahela#}¦ {%sāvahela (sa-av˚), as, ā, am,%} dis-
dainful, disdaining, despising; ({%am%}), ind. disdain-
fully, contemptuously.
<LEND>

<L>52123<pc>1111-c<k1>sAvitra<k2>sAvitra
{#sAvitra#}¦ {%sāvitra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%savitṛ%}), re-
lating or belonging to the sun; descended from the
sun, belonging to the solar dynasty; accompanied by
the Gāyatrī (or sacred verse described below); ({%as%}),
m. the sun; an embryo or fetus; a Brāhman; N.
of Śiva; of Karṇa (as child of the Sun); of a Vasu,
q. v.; of the tenth Kalpa (according to the Vāyu-
Purāṇa); of one of the Nakṣatras or lunar aste-
risms; ({%ī%}), f. a beam or ray of light, a cluster of solar
rays; N. of a celebrated verse of the Ṛg-veda (III.
62, 10. regarded as the most sacred verse of the
Veda, and called Sāvitrī as addressed to the sun; it
is repeated by every Brāhman at his morning and
evening devotions, and is also called {%gāyatrī,%} see
under {%gāyatra,%} p. 288); N. of a wife of Brahmā
(sometimes regarded as the above verse or prayer
deified and represented as mystical mother of the
first three twice-born classes; sometimes identified
with the daughter of Savitṛ by his wife Pṛśni); the
ceremony of investiture with the sacred thread, (see
{%upa-naya,%} p. 164, col. 3); a kind of metre; epithet
of Sūryā (daughter of Savitṛ); of Umā (wife of
Śiva); of a daughter of Dakṣa (wife of Dharma);
of the wife of Kaśyapa; of the wife of Satya-vat
(king of Śālva; she was daughter of Aśva-pati, king
of Madra); ({%am%}), n. the sacred sacrificial thread
worn only by Brāhmans and members of the first
three classes, (see {%yajñopavīta;%} it was called Sā-
vitra because the repetition of the Gāyatrī forms
part of the ceremony of investiture.) {%—Sāvitrī-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Sāvitrī-patita%} or {%sāvitrī-%}
{%paribhraṣṭa, as,%} m. ‘fallen from the Sāvitrī,’ a
man of one of the first three classes not invested at
the proper time with the sacrificial cord. {%—Sāvitrī-%}
{%mahānāmya,%} (according to some) the ceremony of
investiture accompanied by repetition of the Gāyatrī.
{%—Sāvitrī-vrata, am,%} n. a particular fast (kept by
Hindū women on the fourteenth day of the second half
of the month Vaiśākha, or of the dark half of Jyaiṣṭha,
to preserve them from widowhood). {%—Sāvitrī-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n. the sacred cord or thread worn by men of
the three twice-born classes, (see above.) {%—Sāvitry-%}
{%avarajā,%} f. the younger daughter of Sāvitrī.
<LEND>

<L>52124<pc>1111-c<k1>sAvizkAra<k2>sAvizkAra
{#sAvizkAra#}¦ {%sāviṣkāra (sa-āv˚), as, ā, am,%}
having manifestation, manifest; showing off or
making an exhibition of any power or talent, proud,
haughty, arrogant ({%= sāhaṅkāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>52125<pc>1111-c<k1>sAvetasa<k2>sAvetasa
{#sAvetasa#}¦ {%sāvetasa, as,%} m., a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>52126<pc>1111-c<k1>sASaMsa<k2>sASaMsa
{#sASaMsa#}¦ {%sāśaṃsa (sa-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} full of
desire or strong passion, desirous, hopeful; ({%am%}),
ind. wishfully.
<LEND>

<L>52127<pc>1111-c<k1>sASaNka<k2>sASaNka
{#sASaNka#}¦ {%sāśaṅka (sa-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} feeling
fear, apprehensive, disheartened, afraid. {%—Sāśaṅka-tā,%}
f. the state of being afraid or apprehensive, fear, terror.
<LEND>

<L>52128<pc>1111-c<k1>sASana<k2>sASana
{#sASana#}¦ {%sāśana (sa-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} having
food, consisting of nourishment.
<LEND>

<L>52129<pc>1111-c<k1>sASanAra<k2>sASanAra
{#sASanAra#}¦ {%sāśanāra, as,%} m., N. of a parti-
cular Agra-hāra or royal grant to Brāhmans.
<LEND>

<L>52130<pc>1111-c<k1>sASayandaka<k2>sASayandaka
{#sASayandaka#}¦ {%sāśayandaka, as,%} m. a small
house-lizard ({%= jyeṣṭhī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52131<pc>1111-c<k1>sASUka<k2>sASUka
{#sASUka#}¦ {%sāśūka, as,%} m. a blanket ({%= kam-%}
{%bala%}).
<LEND>

<L>52132<pc>1111-c<k1>sAScarya<k2>sAScarya
{#sAScarya#}¦ {%sāścarya (sa-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} won-
derful, marvellous, astonishing; ({%am%}), ind. with
astonishment, with surprise. {%—Sāścarya-maya, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} wonderful, full of marvels.
<LEND>
[Page1112-a+ 68]

<L>52133<pc>1112-a<k1>sASra<k2>sASra<h>1
{#sASra#} 1¦. {%sāśra (sa-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} having
angles or corners, cornered, angular.
<LEND>

<L>52134<pc>1112-a<k1>sASra<k2>sASra<h>2
{#sASra#} 2¦. {%sāśra (sa-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} tearful,
weeping.
<LEND>

<L>52135<pc>1112-a<k1>sASru<k2>sASru
{%Sāśru (sa-aś˚), us, us, u,%}¦ accompanied by tears,
tearful, shedding tears. {%—Sāśru-nayana, as, ā, am,%}
having the eyes filled with tears.
<LEND>

<L>52136<pc>1112-a<k1>sASruDI<k2>sASruDI
{#sASruDI#}¦ {%sāśrudhī,%} f. a wife's or husband's
mother, a mother-in-law.
<LEND>

<L>52137<pc>1112-a<k1>sASva<k2>sASva
{#sASva#}¦ {%sāśva (sa-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} possessing
horses, with horses.
<LEND>

<L>52138<pc>1112-a<k1>sAzwANgam<k2>sAzwANgam
{#sAzwANgam#}¦ {%sāṣṭāṅgam (sa-aṣ˚),%} ind. with
eight limbs or members (viz. the hands, breast, fore-
head, knees, and feet); with humble prostration of
the body (i. e. touching the earth with the eight
members; cf. {%aṣṭāṅga%}).
<LEND>

<L>52139<pc>1112-a<k1>sAzwraka<k2>sAzwraka
{#sAzwraka#}¦ {%sāṣṭraka (sa-aṣ˚), as, ikā, am,%}
possessing goads, (see {%aṣṭrā.%})
<LEND>

<L>52140<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsa<k2>sAsa
{#sAsa#}¦ {%sāsa (sa-āsa), as, ā, am,%} having a bow.
<LEND>

<L>52141<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsadyamAna<k2>sAsadyamAna
{#sAsadyamAna#}¦ {%sāsadyamāna.%} See p. 1055,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52142<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsahi<k2>sAsahi
{#sAsahi#}¦ {%sāsahi, sāsahvas.%} See p. 1100,
col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52143<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsAra<k2>sAsAra
{#sAsAra#}¦ {%sāsāra (sa-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} having
showers, rainy.
<LEND>

<L>52144<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsi<k2>sAsi
{#sAsi#}¦ {%sāsi (sa-asi), is, is, i,%} having a
sword, armed with a sword.
<LEND>

<L>52145<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsusU<k2>sAsusU
{#sAsusU#}¦ {%sāsu-sū (sa-as˚), ūs, ūs, u,%} having
arrows, (see Kirāt. XV. 5, where, according to Malli-
nātha, {%asu-sū = vāṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>52146<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsUya<k2>sAsUya
{#sAsUya#}¦ {%sāsūya (sa-asūyā), as, ā, am,%} envious,
disdainful, scornful; ({%am%}), ind. disdainfully, scorn-
fully, angrily.
<LEND>

<L>52147<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsTitAmrArDa<k2>sAsTitAmrArDa
{#sAsTitAmrArDa#}¦ {%sāsthi-tāmrārdha, am,%} n. (fr.
{%sa + asthi + tāmra + ardha%}), a kind of amalgam of
zinc and copper, bell-metal ({%= kāṃsya%}).
<LEND>

<L>52148<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsnA<k2>sAsnA
{#sAsnA#}¦ {%sāsnā,%} f. (in Uṇādi-s. III. 15. said
to be fr. rt. {%sas%}), the dewlap of an ox ({%= go-gala-%}
{%kambala%}).
<LEND>

<L>52149<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsra<k2>sAsra<h>1
{#sAsra#} 1¦. {%sāsra (sa-as˚), as, ā, am%} (for
1. {%sāśra,%} q. v.), having angles or corners, cornered,
angular.
<LEND>

<L>52150<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsra<k2>sAsra<h>2
{#sAsra#} 2¦. {%sāsra (sa-as˚), as, ā, am%} (for
2. {%sāśra,%} q. v.), weeping, in tears.
<LEND>

<L>52151<pc>1112-a<k1>sAsvAdana<k2>sAsvAdana
{#sAsvAdana#}¦ {%sāsvādana (sa-ās˚), am,%} n., scil.
{%sthāna,%} one of the steps towards supreme happiness
(according to the Jainas).
<LEND>

<L>52152<pc>1112-a<k1>sAhaNkAra<k2>sAhaNkAra
{#sAhaNkAra#}¦ {%sāhaṅkāra (sa-ah˚), as, ā, am,%}
having egotism or arrogance, proud, arrogant.
<LEND>

<L>52153<pc>1112-a<k1>sAhacarya<k2>sAhacarya
{#sAhacarya#}¦ {%sāhacarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%saha-cara%}),
companionship, fellowship, company, association,
society.
<LEND>

<L>52154<pc>1112-a<k1>sAhaYji<k2>sAhaYji
{#sAhaYji#}¦ {%sāhañji, is,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>52155<pc>1112-a<k1>sAhadeva<k2>sAhadeva
{#sAhadeva#}¦ {%sāhadeva, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%saha-deva%}),
the descendants of Saha-deva.
<LEND>

<L>52156<pc>1112-a<k1>sAhadevya<k2>sAhadevya
{%Sāhadevya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a patronymic of Somaka.
<LEND>

<L>52157<pc>1112-a<k1>sAhana<k2>sAhana
{#sAhana#}¦ {%sāhana, am,%} n. (fr. the Caus. of rt.
1. {%sah%}), the act of causing or enabling to bear;
sufferance, endurance.
<LEND>

<L>52158<pc>1112-a<k1>sAhaya<k2>sAhaya
{%Sāhaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing or enabling to endure.
<LEND>

<L>52159<pc>1112-a<k1>sAhasa<k2>sAhasa
{#sAhasa#}¦ {%sāhasa, am,%} n. (in Manu VIII. 138.
also {%as,%} m.; fr. {%sahas%}), violence, force, rapine,
robbery, rape, felony, suicide; any act of aggression
or oppression or hatred; cruelty; punishment, chas-
tisement, fine (regarded as of three kinds, the
highest being called Uttama; half of that, Madh-
yama; and half of that, Adhama; see {%uttama-s˚,%}
{%madhyama-s˚%}); boldness, daring, courage, fool-
[Page1112-b+ 75]
hardiness, rashness, temerity, inconsiderate hastiness’
impetuosity; a particular sacred fire in which an
oblation is made (in this sense {%as,%} m.), or the obla-
tion itself (according to some). {%—Sāhasāṅka (˚sa-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘marked or characterized by daring,’
epithet of king Vikramāditya; of a poet; of a lexi-
cographer. {%—Sāhasādhyavasāyin (˚sa-adh˚), ī, inī,%}
{%i,%} acting with inconsiderate haste. {%—Sāhasaika-%}
{%rasika (˚sa-ek˚), as, ī, am,%} one whose only feeling
or passion is cruelty, wholly intent on violence,
brutal, ferocious. {%—Sāhasaikānta-rasānuvartin%}
{%(˚sa-ek˚, ˚sa-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} one who follows or
yields to the one passion of cruelty or rashness.
<LEND>

<L>52160<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhasika<k2>sAhasika
{%Sāhasika, as, ī, am,%}¦ using great force or violence,
violent, perpetrated with violence, cruel, brutal, fero-
cious, felonious, rapacious; bold, daring, impetuous,
rash; punitive, castigatory; ({%as%}), m. a robber, free-
booter. {%—Sāhasika-tā,%} f. cruelty, ferocity, impetu-
osity, temerity, boldness.
<LEND>

<L>52161<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhasin<k2>sAhasin
{%Sāhasin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ violent, ferocious; foolhardy,
bold, daring, impetuous, rash.
<LEND>

<L>52162<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhasra<k2>sAhasra
{#sAhasra#}¦ {%sāhasra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sahasra%}),
relating or belonging to a thousand; consisting of a
thousand; bought with a thousand; paid per thou-
sand (as interest, duty); a thousandfold, a thousand
times better; ({%as%}), m. an army or detachment con-
sisting of a thousand men; ({%am%}), n. the aggregate
of a thousand; an aggregate of many thousands.
<LEND>

<L>52163<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhAyaka<k2>sAhAyaka
{#sAhAyaka#}¦ {%sāhāyaka, am,%} n. (fr. {%sahāya%}),
assistance, fellowship, association; a number of asso-
ciates or companions; auxiliary troops.
<LEND>

<L>52164<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhAyya<k2>sAhAyya
{%Sāhāyya, am,%}¦ n. friendship, fellowship, alliance,
confederation; help, succour; helping another in
danger (regarded as a branch of dramatic action).
{%—Sāhāyyārtha (˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m. the use or ad-
vantage of assistance.
<LEND>

<L>52165<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhiqa<k2>sAhiqa
{#sAhiqa#}¦ {%sāhiḍa, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>52166<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhitI<k2>sAhitI
{#sAhitI#}¦ {%sāhitī,%} f. (fr. 2. {%sahita%}) {%= sāhitya%}
below.
<LEND>

<L>52167<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhitya<k2>sAhitya
{%Sāhitya, am,%}¦ n. association, connection, combi-
nation, union, society, fellowship; literary compo-
sition, rhetorical composition, rhetoric, poetry; (ac-
cording to some) a collection of materials or means
or rules for the production or performance of any-
thing. {%—Sāhitya-darpaṇa, am,%} n. ‘mirror of com-
position,’ N. of a treatise on rhetorical composition by
Viśva-nātha-kavi-rāja (a kind of Ars Poetica, giving
rules and canons of literary composition, especially
dramatic). {%—Sāhitya-mīmāṃsā,%} f., N. of a work on
rhetorical composition. {%—Sāhitya-śāstra, am,%} n. any
rhetorical treatise (i. e. any work explaining and
applying the figures of rhetoric, setting forth the
various passions and affections, and giving rules for
dramatic or poetical composition). {%—Sāhitya-sar-%}
{%vasva, am,%} n., N. of a commentary by Māheśvara
on the Kāvyālaṅkāra-vṛtti. {%—Sāhitya-sudhā-sa-%}
{%mudra, as,%} m., N. of a work on medicine.
<LEND>

<L>52168<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhya<k2>sAhya
{%Sāhya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. 2. {%saha%}), conjunction, union,
society, association, companionship. {%—Sāhya-kṛt,%}
{%t,%} m. a companion, associate.
<LEND>

<L>52169<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhideva<k2>sAhideva
{#sAhideva#}¦ {%sāhideva, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>52170<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhivIci<k2>sAhivIci
{#sAhivIci#}¦ {%sāhi-vīci (sa-ah˚), is, is, i,%} hav-
ing waves of serpents.
<LEND>

<L>52171<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhuqiyAna<k2>sAhuqiyAna
{#sAhuqiyAna#}¦ {%sāhuḍiyāna, as,%} m., N. of
the author Śūla-pāṇi.
<LEND>

<L>52172<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhvaya<k2>sAhvaya
{#sAhvaya#}¦ {%sāhvaya (sa-āh˚), as,%} m. gambling
with fighting animals, setting animals to fight for
sport, &c. ({%= sam-āhvaya%}).
<LEND>

<L>52173<pc>1112-b<k1>sAhvas<k2>sAhvas
{#sAhvas#}¦ {%sāhvas.%} See p. 1100, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52174<pc>1112-b<k1>si<k2>si
{#si#}¦ {%si,%} cl. 5. 9. P. A. {%sinoti, sinute, si-%}
{%nāti, sinīte, siṣāya, siṣye, seṣyati, -te,%}
{%asaiṣīt, aseṣṭa, setum,%} to bind, tie, fasten; to
ensnare: Caus. {%sāyayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asīṣayat:%}
Desid. {%sisīṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%seṣīyate, seṣayīti,%}
{%seṣeti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>hi-ta,</nsi> ‘bound:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">σει-ρά,</lang>
[Page1112-c+ 80]
<lang n="greek">ἱ-μά-ς, ἱ-μον-ιά, ἱμάσσ-ω, ἱμάσ-θλη:</lang> Old Germ.
<nsi>sei-l, sei-d,</nsi> ‘a noose;’ <nsi>sai-to:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>in-sailjan:</nsi>
Old Sax. <nsi>si-mo,</nsi> ‘a bond:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>sal, sœl,</nsi>
<nsi>sœlan, sieran, syrwan:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>si-lo, se-ti, si-tije:</nsi>
Lett. <nsi>see-t,</nsi> ‘to bind;’ <nsi>sai-te,</nsi> ‘a bond, rope.’]
<LEND>

<L>52175<pc>1112-c<k1>sita<k2>sita<h>1
1. {%sita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see p. 1113, col. 2; for
3. see under rt. 1. {%so%}), bound, tied, fastened; sur-
rounded.
<LEND>

<L>52176<pc>1112-c<k1>siti<k2>siti<h>1
1. {%siti, is,%}¦ f. binding, fastening; [cf. 1. {%pra-siti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52177<pc>1112-c<k1>setu<k2>setu
{%Setu, setṛ, setra,%}¦ &c. See under {%setu,%} p. 1134.
<LEND>

<L>52178<pc>1112-c<k1>siMsapA<k2>siMsapA
{#siMsapA#}¦ {%siṃsapā,%} f. {%= śiṃśapā,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52179<pc>1112-c<k1>siMha<k2>siMha
{#siMha#}¦ {%siṃha, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. V. 62. said
to be fr. rt. 1. {%sic,%} with {%ha%} substituted for the final and
a nasal inserted; according to others fr. {%sih,%} a weakened
form of rt. 1. {%sah,%} with insertion of nasal), a lion; the
sign of the zodiac Leo or the Lagna of that sign (see
{%lagna%}); a hero or any eminent person, (often used
at the end of comps. to express excellence or emi-
nence of any kind, cf. {%puruṣa-s˚, rāja-s˚%}); the
symbol or emblem of the twenty-fourth Arhat of
the present Ava-sarpiṇī; a particular plant ({%= rakta-%}
{%śigru%}); N. of a king (father of Sāhideva); ({%ā%}), f. a
particular grass or plant, {%= nāḍī; (ī),%} f. a lioness, &c.,
see p. 1113, col. 1. {%—Siṃha-kāraka, as,%} m. a creator
of lions. {%—Siṃha-keli, is,%} m., N. of a celebrated
Bodhi-sattva (= Mañju-ghoṣa). {%—Siṃha-keśara%} or
{%siṃha-kesara, as,%} m. a lion's mane; the plant
Mimusops Elengi; a kind of Modaka or sweetmeat.
{%—Siṃha-ga, as,%} m. ‘lion-going,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Siṃha-gupta, as,%} m. {%= saṅgha-gupta,%} q. v.
{%—Siṃha-grīva, as, ā, am,%} lion-necked. {%—Siṃha-%}
{%ghoṣa, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Siṃha-tala, as,%} m.
(probably for {%saṃha-tala,%} q. v.), the open hands
joined. {%—Siṃha-tuṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘lion-faced,’ a kind
of fish; a particular plant {%(= sehuṇḍa)%}. {%—Siṃha-%}
{%daṃṣṭra, as, ā, am,%} lion-tusked, having the teeth
of a lion; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Siṃha-datta,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘lion-given,’ N. of a poet. {%—Siṃha-darpa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a lion's pride, proud as a lion.
{%—Siṃha-dvāra, am,%} n. a principal gate, chief gate,
any gate or entrance. {%—Siṃha-dhvani, is,%} m. the
roar of a lion; a sound like the roar of a lion; a
war-cry. {%—Siṃha-nardin, ī, inī, i,%} roaring like a
lion. {%—Siṃha-nāda, as,%} m. a lion's roar; a war-cry,
war-whoop; a species of the Ati-jagatī metre ({%=%}
{%kala-haṃsa%}); ‘roaring like a lion,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Siṃha-nādaka, as,%} m. the roar of a lion; a war-
cry; ({%ikā%}), f. a particular prickly plant {%(= dur-%}
{%ālabhā)%}. {%—Siṃha-parṇī,%} f. ‘lion-leaved,’ the plant
Justicia Ganderussa {%(= vāsaka)%}. {%—Siṃha-pippalī,%}
f. a kind of plant {%(= saiṃhalī)%}. {%—Siṃha-pucchikā,%}
f. ‘lion-tailed,’ a particular plant {%(= citra-parṇikā).%}
{%—Siṃha-pucchī,%} f. the plant Citra-parṇikā; other
plants {%(= pṛśni-parṇī; = māṣa-parṇī)%}. {%—Siṃha-%}
{%puṣpī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= pṛśni-parṇī).%}
{%—Siṃha-pragarjana, as, ā, am,%} roaring like a
lion. {%—Siṃha-pragarjita, am,%} n. the roaring or
roar of a lion. {%—Siṃha-pradīpa, as,%} m., N. of a
work mentioned in the Kuṇḍa-kaumudī. {%—Siṃha-%}
{%bāhu, us,%} m., N. of the father of Vijaya (the founder
of the first Buddhist dynasty in Ceylon). {%—Siṃha-%}
{%mukhī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= vāsaka)%}. {%—Siṃha-%}
{%yānā,%} f. or {%siṃha-rathā,%} f. ‘having a lion as a
vehicle,’ N. of the goddess Durgā. {%—Siṃha-rava,%}
{%as,%} m. the cry or roar of a lion. {%—Siṃharṣabha%}
{%(˚ha-ṛṣ˚), as,%} m. a noble or fierce lion. {%—Siṃha-%}
{%lagna, am,%} n. the Lagna of the sign Leo, (see
{%lagna.%}) {%—Siṃha-lamba,%} N. of a place. {%—Siṃha-%}
{%līla, as,%} m. a particular kind of sexual union.
{%—Siṃha-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘having a lion for a
vehicle,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Siṃha-vāhinī,%} f. ‘borne
on a lion,’ epithet of Durgā. {%—Siṃha-vikrama, as,%}
m. {%= vikrama-siṃha%}. {%—Siṃha-vikrānta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} valiant as a lion; ({%as%}), m. a horse. {%—Siṃha-%}
{%vikrānta-gati, is, is, i,%} or {%siṃha-vikrānta-gāmin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} having a gait as bold as a lion's. {%—Siṃha-%}
{%vikrīḍita, am,%} n. ‘lion's play,’ a kind of metre.
{%—Siṃha-vinnā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= māṣa-parṇī).%}
{%—Siṃha-vyāghra-niṣevita, as, ā, am,%} inhabited
by lions and tigers. {%—Siṃha-śāva, as,%} or {%siṃha-śiśu, %}
[Page1113-a+ 77]
{%us,%} m. a lion's whelp or cub. {%—Siṃha-saṃhanana,%}
{%am,%} n. the killing or destroying of a lion; ({%as, ā,%}
{%am%}), lion-shaped, well-shaped, handsome; strong as a
lion. {%—Siṃha-skandha, as, ā, am,%} ‘lion-shouldered,’
having the shoulders of a lion. {%—Siṃha-stha, as,%} m.
‘being in the lion,’ epithet of the planet Jupiter
when in the constellation Leo. {%—Siṃhāḍhya (˚ha-%}
{%āḍh˚), as, ā, am,%} abounding in lions. {%—Siṃhāva-%}
{%lokana (˚ha-av˚), am,%} n. a lion's look (applied to
the habit of constantly pausing and looking back).
{%—Siṃhāsana (˚ha-ās˚), am,%} n. ‘lion-seat,’ a throne
(said to be so called as supported by golden lions);
({%as%}), m. a particular kind of sexual union. {%—Siṃhā-%}
{%sana-cakra, am,%} n., N. of three astrological dia-
grams shaped like a man and marked with the
twenty-seven Nakṣatras. {%—Siṃhāsana-dvātriṃśat,%}
{%t,%} or {%siṃhāsanadvātriṃśat-puttrikā-vārttā,%} f., N.
of a work consisting of thirty-two stories in praise of
Vikramāditya {%(= vikrama-carita)%}. {%—Siṃhāsana-%}
{%bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} fallen from a throne, dethroned.
{%—Siṃhāsana-raṇa, as, am,%} m. n. a strife or struggle
for the throne. {%—Siṃhāsana-stha, as, ā, am,%} sitting
on a throne. {%—Siṃhāsya (˚ha-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} lion-
faced; ({%as%}), m. a kind of plant ({%= vāsaka%}); a par-
ticular position of the hands. {%—Siṃhoddhatā (˚ha-%}
{%ud˚),%} f. a kind of metre. {%—Siṃhonnatā (˚ha-un˚),%}
f. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>52180<pc>1113-a<k1>siMhala<k2>siMhala
{%Siṃhala, am,%}¦ n. tin; brass; bark, rind; Cassia
bark; ({%am, ā%}), n. f. the island or country of Ceylon,
(perhaps so called as abounding in lions); ({%ās%}), m.
pl. the people of Ceylon. {%—Siṃhala-dvīpa, as,%} m. the
island of Ceylon. {%—Siṃhala-stha, as, ā, am,%} being
or dwelling in Ceylon; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%sarpa-daṇḍā, saiṃhalī)%}. {%—Siṃhalā-sthāna, as,%}
m. a kind of plam tree.
<LEND>

<L>52181<pc>1113-a<k1>siMhalaka<k2>siMhalaka
{%Siṃhalaka, am,%}¦ n. the island of Ceylon.
<LEND>

<L>52182<pc>1113-a<k1>siMhAya<k2>siMhAya
{%Siṃhāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%siṃhāyate, -yitum,%} to be or
become like a lion, act like a lion.
<LEND>

<L>52183<pc>1113-a<k1>siMhikA<k2>siMhikA
{%Siṃhikā,%}¦ f., N. of the mother of Rāhu, (she was
one of the thirteen daughters of Dakṣa and wife of
Kaśyapa); N. of a daughter of Kaśyapa (wife of
Vipracitti). {%—Siṃhikā-sūnu, us,%} m. ‘son of Siṃ-
hikā,’ epithet of Rāhu or the Ascending Node per-
sonified.
<LEND>

<L>52184<pc>1113-a<k1>siMhikeya<k2>siMhikeya
{%Siṃhikeya, as,%}¦ m. ‘son of Siṃhikā,’ epithet of
Rāhu.
<LEND>

<L>52185<pc>1113-a<k1>siMhI<k2>siMhI
{%Siṃhī,%}¦ f. a lioness; N. of the mother of Rāhu;
of various plants {%(= vārtākī; = kaṇṭakārī; = vā-%}
{%saka; = bṛhatī; = mudga-parṇī)%}. {%—Siṃhī-latā,%}
f. a kind of plant ({%= bṛhatī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52186<pc>1113-a<k1>siMhARa<k2>siMhARa
{#siMhARa#}¦ {%siṃhāṇa, am,%} n. (probably for
{%śiṅghāṇa;%} also written {%siṅghāṇa%}), rust of iron;
the mucus of the nose.
<LEND>

<L>52187<pc>1113-a<k1>siMhARaka<k2>siMhARaka
{%Siṃhāṇaka, as, am,%}¦ m. n. {%= siṃhāṇa%} above, (also
written {%siṅghāṇaka, śiṅghāṇaka, saṅghāṇaka.%})
<LEND>

<L>52188<pc>1113-a<k1>siMhAna<k2>siMhAna
{%Siṃhāna, am,%}¦ n. {%= siṃhāṇa%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52189<pc>1113-a<k1>sik<k2>sik
{#sik#}¦ {%sik,%} a Sautra rt. meaning ‘to
scatter about, sprinkle;’ [cf. rts. 1. {%sic,%}
{%sīk.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52190<pc>1113-a<k1>sikata<k2>sikata
{%Sikata, ās,%}¦ m. pl. (said to be fr. the Sautra rt.
above; probably fr. rt. 1. {%sic%}), sand; N. of certain
Ṛṣis, (part of the hymn Ṛg-veda IX. 86. is attri-
buted to Sikatāḥ); ({%ā%}), f. sandy soil; sand; gravel
or stone (the disease). {%—Sikatā-maya, as, ī, am,%}
consisting of sand, full of sand, sandy; ({%am%}), n. a
sand-bank; an island with sandy shores. {%—Sikatā-%}
{%reṇu, us,%} m. a grain of sand. {%—Sikatā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} possessed of sand, abounding in sand, sandy.
<LEND>

<L>52191<pc>1113-a<k1>sikatila<k2>sikatila
{%Sikatila, as, ā, am,%}¦ sandy (as a soil, country, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>52192<pc>1113-a<k1>sikta<k2>sikta
{#sikta#}¦ {%sikta, siktha,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52193<pc>1113-a<k1>sikzya<k2>sikzya
{#sikzya#}¦ {%sikṣya, as,%} m. crystal, glass.
<LEND>

<L>52194<pc>1113-a<k1>siNgApidi<k2>siNgApidi
{#siNgApidi#}¦ {%siṅgāpidi, is,%} m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>52195<pc>1113-a<k1>siNGaRa<k2>siNGaRa
{#siNGaRa#}¦ {%siṅghaṇa%} or {%siṅghāṇa, am,%} n. (pro-
bably for {%śiṅghaṇa, śiṅghāṇa,%} fr. rt. {%śiṅgh,%} q. v.;
also written {%siṃhāṇa;%} cf. {%saṅghāṇaka%}), the mucus
of the nose.
<LEND>

<L>52196<pc>1113-a<k1>siNGARaka<k2>siNGARaka
{%Siṅghāṇaka, am,%}¦ n. {%= siṅghāṇa%} above.
<LEND>
[Page1113-b+ 78]

<L>52197<pc>1113-b<k1>siNGiRI<k2>siNGiRI
{%Siṅghiṇī,%}¦ f. the nose, (see {%śiṅghin,%} p. 1005,
col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>52198<pc>1113-b<k1>sic<k2>sic<h>1
{#sic#} 1¦. {%sic,%} cl. 6. P. A. {%siñcati, -te,%}
{%siṣeca, siṣice, sekṣyati, -te, asicat,%}
{%asicata%} or {%asikta, sektum,%} to sprinkle, scatter in
small drops; to besprinkle, soak, moisten, water
(plants &c.); to pour out, discharge, emit, shed,
effuse; to pour in; to impregnate: Pass. {%sicyate,%}
Aor. {%aseci,%} to be sprinkled, &c.: Caus. {%secayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%asīṣicat%} or (according to some) {%asī-%}
{%sicat,%} to cause to sprinkle: Desid. {%sisikṣati, -te:%}
Intens. {%sesicyate, sesekti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἰκ-μά(δ)-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἰκμα-λέο-ς, ἰκμαίν-ω, ἰκμα-ῖο-ς, στίλη, σίκυς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>stilla</nsi>
(for <nsi>stic-la</nsi>): Old Germ. <nsi>sîh-u, seich,</nsi> ‘urine;’
<nsi>seihjan, seo, gi-sich:</nsi> Goth. (probably) <nsi>saivs:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>sunk-iu, séki-s, sek-ti.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>52199<pc>1113-b<k1>sikta<k2>sikta
{%Sikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled, besprinkled, bespat-
tered, watered; wetted, moistened, soaked, wet;
poured out, effused; impregnated, engendered.
<LEND>

<L>52200<pc>1113-b<k1>sikti<k2>sikti
{%Sikti, is,%}¦ f. sprinkling; effusion; emission.
<LEND>

<L>52201<pc>1113-b<k1>siktvA<k2>siktvA
{%Siktvā,%}¦ ind. having sprinkled, having poured out
or effused.
<LEND>

<L>52202<pc>1113-b<k1>sikTa<k2>sikTa
{%Siktha, as,%}¦ m. boiled rice; a lump of boiled rice
or a mouthful of boiled rice kneaded into a ball;
({%am%}), n. bee's-wax; indigo ({%= nīlī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52203<pc>1113-b<k1>sikTaka<k2>sikTaka
{%Sikthaka, am,%}¦ n. bee's-wax.
<LEND>

<L>52204<pc>1113-b<k1>sic<k2>sic<h>2
2. {%sic, k,%}¦ f. clothes; the skirt of a dress, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%vastra-prānta%}); ({%au%}), f. du., Ved. (according to
some) the two wings (of an army); heaven and
earth.
<LEND>

<L>52205<pc>1113-b<k1>sicaya<k2>sicaya
{%Sicaya, as,%}¦ m. a robe, raiment, cloth, clothes;
old or ragged raiment.
<LEND>

<L>52206<pc>1113-b<k1>sicyamAna<k2>sicyamAna
{%Sicyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being sprinkled; being
poured out.
<LEND>

<L>52207<pc>1113-b<k1>siYcat<k2>siYcat
{%Siñcat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} sprinkling, wetting,
scattering water.
<LEND>

<L>52208<pc>1113-b<k1>seka<k2>seka
{%Seka, as,%}¦ m. sprinkling, besprinkling, moistening,
watering (of plants &c.); aspersion; pouring out,
effusion, emission; seminal effusion, impregnation;
that which is poured out, a libation, offering; semi-
nal fluid; a drop of anything. {%—Seka-pātra, am,%} n.
a vessel for pouring out or holding water; a watering-
pot, baling-vessel, bucket. {%—Sekānta (˚ka-an˚), as,%}
m. the end or conclusion of the process of watering
(plants &c.).
<LEND>

<L>52209<pc>1113-b<k1>sekima<k2>sekima
{%Sekima, am,%}¦ n. a radish ({%= mūlaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>52210<pc>1113-b<k1>sektavya<k2>sektavya
{%Sektavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sprinkled or poured
out, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52211<pc>1113-b<k1>sektf<k2>sektf
{%Sektṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ sprinkling, who or what
sprinkles or impregnates; ({%tā%}), m. a sprinkler; a
water-carrier; a husband.
<LEND>

<L>52212<pc>1113-b<k1>sektra<k2>sektra
{%Sektra, am,%}¦ n. a vessel for holding or pouring
out water, a watering-pot, bucket, baling-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>52213<pc>1113-b<k1>secaka<k2>secaka
{%Secaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkling, a sprinkler; ({%as%}),
m. a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>52214<pc>1113-b<k1>secana<k2>secana
{%Secana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sprinkling or watering,
aspersion, effusion, pouring; dripping, oozing out;
({%am, ī%}), n. f. a bucket, baling-vessel.
<LEND>

<L>52215<pc>1113-b<k1>secanIya<k2>secanIya
{%Secanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sprinkled or watered,
to be poured out or effused.
<LEND>

<L>52216<pc>1113-b<k1>secya<k2>secya
{%Secya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sprinkled; to be moist-
ened, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52217<pc>1113-b<k1>siYcitA<k2>siYcitA
{#siYcitA#}¦ {%siñcitā,%} f. long pepper ({%= pippalī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52218<pc>1113-b<k1>siYjA<k2>siYjA
{#siYjA#}¦ {%siñjā,%} f. (for {%śiñjā,%} q. v.), the jingling
sound of metallic ornaments.
<LEND>

<L>52219<pc>1113-b<k1>siYjita<k2>siYjita
{%Siñjita, am,%}¦ n. tinkling ({%= śiñjita,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>52220<pc>1113-b<k1>siYjinI<k2>siYjinI
{%Siñjinī,%}¦ f. {%= śiñjinī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52221<pc>1113-b<k1>siw<k2>siw
{#siw#}¦ {%siṭ%} (= rts. {%śiṭ, ṣiṭ%}), cl. 1. P. {%seṭati,%}
&c., to disregard, despise.
<LEND>

<L>52222<pc>1113-b<k1>sita<k2>sita<h>2
{#sita#} 2¦. {%sita, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (thought by
some to be fr. 2. {%asita,%} q. v.; apparently connected
with {%śiti,%} p. 1005, cf. {%śvita, śveta,%} p. 1031, and
see {%sina;%} for 1. see under rt. {%si,%} for 3. see under
rt. 1. {%so%}), white; ({%as%}), m. the colour white; the
light half of the month from new to full moon; the
planet Venus or its regent, {%= śukra; (ā),%} f. candied
sugar, sugar; moonlight; a handsome woman;
spirituous liquor; white Dūrvā grass; Arabian jas-
[Page1113-c+ 81]
mine; a sort of Clitoria; a kind of Aparājitā plant
(growing on mountains); various other plants or
trees, {%= śveta-kaṇṭakārī; = vākucī; = vidārī; =%}
{%kuṭumbinī; = piṅgā; = trāyamāṇā; = tejanī;%}
{%(am),%} n. silver; sandal; a radish {%(= mūlaka).%}
{%—Sita-kaṇṭā%} or {%sita-kaṇṭārikā,%} f. a kind of plant
{%(= śveta-kaṇṭakārī)%}. {%—Sita-kaṇṭha, as, ā, am,%}
white-throated, having a white neck; ({%as%}), m. a
gallinule. {%—Sita-kara, as,%} m. ‘white-rayed,’ the
moon; camphor. {%—Sita-karṇī,%} f. a kind of plant
{%(= vāsaka)%}. {%—Sita-karman, ā, ā, a,%} pure in deeds
or actions. {%—Sita-kuñjara, as,%} m. a white elephant;
N. of Indra's elephant; ‘having a white elephant,’
epithet of Indra. {%—Sita-guñjā,%} f. a kind of plant
{%(= śveta-guñjā)%}. {%—Sita-cihna, as,%} m. ‘white-
marked,’ a sort of fish {%(= bālukā-gaḍa)%}. {%—Sita-%}
{%cchattra, am,%} n. a white umbrella (especially as one
of the emblems of royalty); ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. a sort of
fennel {%(= śata-puṣpā)%}. {%—Sita-cchatrita, as,%} m.
having a white umbrella, possessed of all the insignia
of royalty, (according to the Scholiast on Naiṣadha
I. 1. {%= śvetātapatrī-kṛta,%} made into a white um-
brella.) {%—Sita-cchada, as,%} m. ‘white-feathered,’
a goose; ({%ā%}), f. white Dūrvā grass. {%—Sita-turaga,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘white-horsed,’ epithet of Arjuna. {%—Sita-%}
{%darbha, as,%} m. white Kuśa grass. {%—Sita-dīdhiti,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘white-rayed,’ the moon. {%—Sita-dīpya, as,%}
m. white cumin. {%—Sita-dūrvā,%} f. white Dūrvā
grass. {%—Sita-dru, us,%} m. ‘white tree,’ a species of
Moraṭa plant. {%—Sita-dhātu, us,%} m. a white mineral;
chalk. {%—Sita-pakṣa, as,%} m. a white wing; the
light half of a lunar month; ‘white-winged,’ a
goose; [cf. {%dhavala-pakṣa.%}] {%—Sita-parṇī,%} f.
‘white-leafed,’ a kind of plant {%(= arka-puṣpikā).%}
{%—Sita-pāṭalikā,%} f. the white Pāṭalā tree. {%—Sita-%}
{%puṅkhā,%} f. the white Śara-puṅkhā plant. {%—Sita-%}
{%puṣpa, as,%} m. the Tagara tree; a kind of grass
({%= kāśa%}); a kind of tree, {%= śveta-rohita; (ā),%} f.
Arabian jasmine; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of white Aparājitā
plant; ({%am%}), n. a sort of grass, Cyperus Rotundus.
{%—Sita-maṇi, is,%} m. a white precious stone, a
crystal. {%—Sitamaṇi-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of
crystals or jewels, made of crystal. {%—Sita-marica,%}
{%am,%} n. white pepper. {%—Sita-māṣa, as,%} m. a sort
of bean {%(= rāja-māṣa)%}. {%—Sita-rakta, as, ā, am,%}
white and red. {%—Sita-rañjana, as,%} m. ‘white-
tinged,’ yellow (the colour). {%—Sita-raśmi, is,%} m.
‘white-rayed,’ the moon. {%—Sita-varṣābhū, ūs,%} m.
a kind of plant {%(= punar-ṇavā)%}. {%—Sita-vājin, ī,%}
m. ‘having white horses,’ epithet of Arjuna. {%—Sita-%}
{%śarkarā,%} f. candied sugar. {%—Sita-śāyakā,%} f. the
white Śara-puṅkhā plant. {%—Sita-śiṃśapā,%} f. the
white Śiṃśapā tree. {%—Sita-śimbika, as,%} m. ‘white-
awned,’ wheat, (also read {%śiti-śimbika.%}) {%—Sita-%}
{%śiva, am,%} n. rock-salt, (also read {%śita-śiva, sita-%}
{%siva, śīta-śiva, śīta-siva.%}) {%—Sita-śūka, as,%} m.
‘white-awned,’ barley; [cf. {%śita-śūka.%}] {%—Sita-śū-%}
{%raṇa, as,%} m. the plant Vana-śūraṇa. {%—Sita-śma-%}
{%śru, us, us, u,%} having a white beard, silvery-
bearded. {%—Sita-sapti, is,%} m. ‘having white horses,’
epithet of Arjuna. {%—Sita-sarṣapa, as,%} m. white
mustard. {%—Sita-sāra%} or {%sita-sāraka, as,%} m. ‘having
white pith,’ the Śāliñca plant. {%—Sita-siṃhī,%} f. the
white Kaṇṭakārī plant. {%—Sita-sindhu, us,%} f. ‘white
river,’ the Ganges. {%—Sita-siva,%} see {%sita-śiva%}. {%—Si-%}
{%tāṃśu (˚ta-aṃ˚), us,%} m. ‘white-rayed,’ the moon;
camphor. {%—Sitāṃśuka (˚ta-aṃ˚), as, ā, am,%} dressed
in a white mantle or garment. {%—Sitāṃśu-taila, am,%}
n. camphor oil or ointment. {%—Sitā-khaṇḍa, as,%}
m. a kind of clayed or refined sugar (said to be
prepared from honey). {%—Sitāgra (˚ta-ag˚), as,%} m.
{%= śitāgra,%} a thorn. {%—Sitāṅka (˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
‘white-marked,’ the Bālukā-gaḍa fish. {%—Sitāṅga%}
{%(˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m. the Śveta-rohita tree. {%—Sitāṅga-%}
{%rāga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as,%} m. a white cosmetic or deco-
ration for the limbs or body. {%—Sitājājī (˚ta-aj˚),%}
f. white cumin. {%—Sitātapa-vāraṇa (˚ta-āt˚), am,%}
n. a white umbrella (especially as a symbol of
royalty). {%—Sitādi (˚ta-ādi?), is,%} m. treacle, mo-
lasses {%(= guḍa)%}. {%—Sitānana (˚ta-ān˚), as, ī, am,%}
white-faced; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Sitā- %}
[Page1114-a+ 78]
{%pāṅga (˚ta-ap˚), as,%} m. ‘having white eye-corners,’
a peacock. {%—Sitābja (˚ta-ab˚), am,%} n. a white
lotus. {%—Sitābha (˚ta-ābh˚), as,%} m. ‘white-looking,’
camphor; ({%ā%}), f. {%= takrāhvā%} (according to Śabda-k.).
{%—Sitābhra (˚ta-abh˚), as, am,%} m. n. or {%sitā-%}
{%bhraka, am,%} n. (see {%abhra%}), camphor; (incorrectly
written {%śitābhra.%}) {%—Sitāmbara (˚ta-am˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} clothed in white garments; ({%as%}), m. an ascetic
wearing white garments. {%—Sitāmbuja (˚ta-am˚)%}
or {%sitāmbhoja (˚ta-am˚), am,%} n. a white lotus.
{%—Sitārjaka (˚ta-ar˚), as,%} m. white basil. {%—Sitā-%}
{%laka (˚ta-al˚), as,%} m. the white Mandāraka tree.
{%—Sitā-latā,%} f. white Dūrvā grass. {%—Sitāli (˚ta-āli),%}
{%is, is, i,%} having white lines. {%—Sitāli-kaṭabhī,%}
f. the white Kiṇihī tree. {%—Sitālikā (˚ta-āl˚),%} f.
‘white-lined,’ a cockle. {%—Sitāvara%} ({%˚ta-%} or {%˚tā-av˚%}),
{%as,%} m. a species of culinary plant (commonly called
Susunī, {%= medhā-kṛt%}); ({%ī%}), f. the plant Vākucī.
{%—Sitāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘having white horses,’
epithet of Arjuna. {%—Sitāsita (˚ta-as˚), as, ā, am,%}
white and black; ({%as%}), m., N. of Bala-rāma; ({%au%}),
m. du. Venus and Saturn. {%—Sitāhvaya (˚ta-āh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the white Śigru tree; the Śveta-rohita tree.
{%—Sitekṣu (˚ta-ik˚), us,%} m. white sugar-cane.
{%—Sitetara (˚ta-it˚), as, ā, am,%} other than white,
black; ({%as%}), m. a kind of dark-coloured rice; a
kind of pulse {%(= kulattha)%}. {%—Sitetara-gati, is,%} m.
‘having a black course,’ epithet of fire; [cf. {%kṛṣṇa-%}
{%vartman.%}] {%—Sitotpala (˚ta-ut˚), am,%} n. a white
water-lily. {%—Sitodara (˚ta-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘white-
bellied,’ epithet of the god Kuvera (who is described
as deformed and whitened by a leprous taint). {%—Si-%}
{%todbhava (˚ta-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} produced from
sugar; ({%am%}), n. white sandal. {%—Sitopala (˚ta-up˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘white stone,’ crystal; ({%ā%}), f. refined or
candied sugar; ({%am%}), n. chalk (or a similar substance
considered as a variety). {%—Sitoṣṇa-vāraṇa (˚ta-%}
{%uṣ˚), am,%} n. ‘white heat-repeller,’ a white um-
brella.
<LEND>

<L>52223<pc>1114-a<k1>siti<k2>siti<h>2
2. {%siti, is, is, i%}¦ (connected with {%śiti,%} p. 1005;
for 1. see p. 1112, col. 3; for 3. see under rt. 1. {%so%}),
white; black. {%—Siti-kaṇṭha, as, ā, am,%} having a
white throat; dark-necked; ({%as%}), m. Śiva; [cf.
{%śiti-kaṇṭha.%}] {%—Siti-vāra, as,%} m. a kind of culinary
plant {%(= su-niṣaṇṇaka)%}. {%—Siti-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%}
clad in black; ({%ās%}), m. epithet of Bala-rāma ({%=%}
{%nīlāmbara%}).
<LEND>

<L>52224<pc>1114-a<k1>sitiman<k2>sitiman
{%Sitiman, ā,%}¦ m. whiteness.
<LEND>

<L>52225<pc>1114-a<k1>sidDa<k2>sidDa
{#sidDa#}¦, {%siddha,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52226<pc>1114-a<k1>sidDilI<k2>sidDilI
{#sidDilI#}¦ {%siddhilī,%} f. (according to some)
a small ant.
<LEND>

<L>52227<pc>1114-a<k1>siD<k2>siD<h>1
{#siD#} 1¦. {%sidh%} (according to Vopa-deva
VIII. 41. the {%s%} of this rt. is not changed
to {%ṣ%} after prepositions; cf. {%pari-sidh%}), cl. 1. P.
{%sedhati, siṣedha, sedhiṣyati, asedhīt, sedhi-%}
{%tum,%} to go, (in Naigh. II. 14. {%sedhati%} is enume-
rated among the {%gati-karmāṇaḥ%}); to go towards,
reach, strike, hit (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>52228<pc>1114-a<k1>seDa<k2>seDa<h>1
1. {%sedha, as,%}¦ m. going, reaching [cf. {%ut-s˚%}]; a tail
(according to some; cf. {%go-ṣ˚%}); ({%ā%}), f. a porcupine.
<LEND>

<L>52229<pc>1114-a<k1>seDat<k2>seDat
{%Sedhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ going, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52230<pc>1114-a<k1>seDana<k2>seDana<h>1
1. {%sedhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of going.
<LEND>

<L>52231<pc>1114-a<k1>seDitvA<k2>seDitvA<h>1
1. {%sedhitvā,%}¦ ind. having gone.
<LEND>

<L>52232<pc>1114-a<k1>siD<k2>siD<h>2
{#siD#} 2¦. {%sidh%} (this rt. allows the change
of {%s%} to {%ṣ%} after prepositions, cf. {%prati-%}
{%ṣidh%}), cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%sedhati (-te), si-%}
{%ṣedha, setsyati%} or {%sedhiṣyati, asaitsīt%} or {%ase-%}
{%dhīt, seddhum%} or {%sedhitum,%} to drive off, ward off,
keep off, restrain, hinder; to interdict; to ordain,
instruct; to turn out well or auspiciously: Caus.
{%sedhayati, -yitum:%} Desid. of Caus. {%siṣedhayi-%}
{%ṣati:%} Desid. {%sisedhiṣati, sisidhiṣati, siṣit-%}
{%sati:%} Intens. {%seṣidhyate, seṣeddhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>52233<pc>1114-a<k1>sedDavya<k2>sedDavya
{%Seddhavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be kept off, to be pre-
vented, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52234<pc>1114-a<k1>seDa<k2>seDa<h>2
2. {%sedha, as,%}¦ m. restraint, restraining, hindering;
[cf. {%ni-ṣedha%} under {%ni-ṣidh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52235<pc>1114-a<k1>seDaka<k2>seDaka
{%Sedhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ driving off, preventing.
<LEND>
[Page1114-b+ 80]

<L>52236<pc>1114-b<k1>seDana<k2>seDana<h>2
2. {%sedhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of restraining or keep-
ing off.
<LEND>

<L>52237<pc>1114-b<k1>seDanIya<k2>seDanIya
{%Sedhanīya, as, ā, am, = seddhavya,%}¦ col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52238<pc>1114-b<k1>siD<k2>siD<h>3
{#siD#} 3¦. {%sidh%} (connected with rt. {%sādh%}),
cl. 4. P. {%sidhyati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%si-%}
{%ṣedha, setsyati, asidhat, seddhum,%} to be accom-
plished, be fulfilled, be effected; to be successful,
succeed; to be settled or established; to be valid;
to be proved or demonstrated; to be thoroughly
prepared or cooked; to attain an object, hit an aim,
fall true (with loc., e. g. {%iṣuḥ sidhyati lakṣye,%}
the arrow falls true on the mark): Pass. {%sidhyate,%}
Aor. {%asedhi,%} to be completed or concluded, &c.:
Caus. {%sedhayati,%} with reference to sacred things;
{%sādhayati, -yitum,%} with reference to secular things,
(Pāṇ. VI. 1, 49; see rt. {%sādh%}); to accomplish,
complete, effect, settle, perform: Desid. {%siṣitsati:%}
Intens. {%seṣidhyate, seṣeddhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>52239<pc>1114-b<k1>sidDa<k2>sidDa
{%Siddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ accomplished, effected, com-
pleted, finished, perfected, fulfilled, performed, ob-
tained, acquired, gained; succeeded, successful;
settled, established, substantiated, demonstrated,
proved; valid (as a rule of grammar or in law);
admitted to be true or right; adjudicated, decided,
terminated (as a lawsuit); paid, liquidated, settled
(as a debt); ready (as money); thoroughly pre-
pared, concocted, compounded (as drugs &c.);
cooked, dressed; matured, ripened, ripe; subjugated,
subdued, brought into subjection (by magical power);
thoroughly skilled or versed (in magical arts &c.);
perfected or sanctified (by penance, austerities, &c.);
emancipated, beatified; endowed with supernatural
powers or faculties, (of these eight are usually enu-
merated, see under {%siddhi%} below; but twenty-six
others are sometimes added, e. g. {%dūra-śravaṇa,%}
{%sarvajña-tva, manoyāyi-tva, vahni-stambha,%} &c.,
see under {%stambha%}); sacred, holy, pious, divine,
immortal, eternal; well-known, eminent, celebrated;
illustrious, shining, splendid; ({%as%}), m. a semi-divine
being supposed to be of great purity and holiness,
and said to be specially characterized by the eight
supernatural faculties (of which {%aṇiman%} is the first;
see under {%siddhi;%} according to some the Siddhas
inhabit, together with the Munis &c., the Bhuvar-
loka or middle region between the earth and the
sun; according to the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa eighty-eight
thousand of them occupy the regions of the sky
north of the sun and south of the seven Ṛṣis;
they are regarded as immortal, but only in the sense
of living to the end of a Kalpa; in the later mytho-
logy they appear to be sometimes confused with the
Sādhyas, whose place they seem occasionally to take,
see {%sādhya%}); an inspired sage or seer (as Vyāsa and
others); any holy or sanctified personage or great
saint (especially one who by austere practices has
attained some or all of the five states of beatitude,
see {%saloka-tā, sarūpa-tā, sāmīpya, sāyujya,%}
{%sārṣṭi-tā%}); an adept in magical or mystical arts,
one who by the performance of certain mystical rites
has acquired superhuman powers, (see above and
under {%siddhi%}); a lawsuit, judicial trial ({%= vyava-%}
{%hāra%}); a kind of dark Dhustūra or thorn-apple;
another plant or a sort of hard sugar ({%= guḍa%}); N.
of the twenty-first of the astronomical Yogas; ({%ās%}),
m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f. a medicinal plant or
root ({%= ṛddhi%}); N. of one of the eight Yoginīs,
(see under {%yogin%}); ({%am%}), n. sea-salt. {%—Siddha-%}
{%kāmeśvarī,%} f. one of the five forms of Kāmākhyā
or Durgā. {%—Siddha-kerala, am,%} n. ‘the perfect
Kerala,’ N. of a district. {%—Siddha-kṣetra, am,%} n.,
N. of a place. {%—Siddha-gaṅgā,%} f. the divine or
heavenly Ganges {%(= mandākinī)%}. {%—Siddha-graha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a particular kind of madness or seizure
(produced by supernatural agency). {%—Siddha-jala,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘cooked water,’ the fermented water of
boiled rice or sour rice-gruel. {%—Siddha-tā,%} f. or
{%siddha-tva, am,%} n. perfection, completion; the
establishment or validity of a rule or doctrine.
{%—Siddha-deva, as,%} m. ‘perfected deity,’ epithet
of Śiva. {%—Siddha-dhātu, us,%} m. ‘perfected mineral,’
[Page1114-c+ 81]
quicksilver. {%—Siddha-dhāman, a,%} n. the abode of
the Siddhas. {%—Siddha-pakṣa, as,%} m. the established
or logical side of an argument. {%—Siddha-pīṭha, as,%}
m. a most sacred station or shrine; a place sacred
to Durgā. {%—Siddha-pura, am,%} n., N. of a mythical
city said to be located in the southern or lower
regions of the earth. {%—Siddha-puruṣa, as,%} m. a
perfect or completely sanctified personage; a sage, seer;
an adept in mystical rites. {%—Siddha-puṣpa, as,%} m.
‘having perfect flowers,’ the Kara-vīra plant. {%—Sid-%}
{%dha-prayojana, as,%} m. white mustard. {%—Siddha-%}
{%prāya, as, ā, am,%} almost accomplished, nearly com-
pleted, almost finished. {%—Siddha-bhūmi, is,%} f. the
region inhabited by Siddhas. {%—Siddha-manorama,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the second day of the civil month
{%(karma-māsa)%}. {%—Siddha-mantra, as,%} m. a parti-
cular Mantra of great efficacy. {%—Siddha-modaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a particular kind of candied sugar prepared
from the Tavarāja plant. {%—Siddha-yātrika, as,%} m.
a pilgrim who seeks the region of the Siddhas.
{%—Siddha-yogin, ī,%} m. epithet of Śiva; ({%inī%}), f.,
N. of a particular Yoginī; of the goddess Manasā.
{%—Siddha-yogeśvara-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra work. {%—Siddha-rasa, as, ā, am,%} having
perfected metallic fluids, mineral, metallic; ({%as%}), m.
‘perfected mineral,’ quicksilver; skilled in the science
of metals, an alchemist. {%—Siddha-rudreśvara-tīrtha%}
{%(˚ra-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Siddha-vaṭa,%}
N. of a place. {%—Siddha-vaṭī,%} f., N. of a tutelary
goddess. {%—Siddha-vidyā,%} f. the worship of Durgā
under a particular form. {%—Siddha-saṅkalpa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who has accomplished his wishes. {%—Sid-%}
{%dha-saṅgha, as,%} m. a company of Siddhas, assem-
blage of saints. {%—Siddha-salila, am,%} n. ‘cooked
water,’ sour rice-gruel. {%—Siddha-sādhaka, as,%} m.
epithet of Śiva. {%—Siddha-sādhana, as,%} m. white
mustard; ({%am%}), n. the performance of magical or
mystical rites (for the acquisition of supernatural
powers, &c.); the materials employed in mystical
or chemical processes. {%—Siddha-sādhana-doṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. the error of labouring to establish what is
already proved. {%—Siddha-sādhya, as, ā, am,%} who
or what has effected what was to be done; effected,
accomplished, proved; ({%as%}), m. a particular Mantra;
({%am%}), n. demonstrated proof or conclusion. {%—Sid-%}
{%dha-sārasvata,%} N. of a work. {%—Siddhasārasvata-%}
{%dīpikā,%} f., N. of a commentary by Padmanābha on
the Bhuvaneśvarī-stotra. {%—Siddha-siddha, as,%} m. a
particular Mantra. {%—Siddha-sindhu, us,%} f. ‘divine
river,’ epithet of the Ganges. {%—Siddha-susiddha,%}
{%as,%} m. a particular Mantra. {%—Siddha-sena, as,%} m.
‘having a divine or perfect army,’ epithet of Kārtti-
keya (god of war); of an astronomer. {%—Siddha-%}
{%sena-divākara, as,%} m., N. of a son of Sarva-jña
and pupil of Vṛddha-vāda-sūri (said to have induced
Vikramāditya to tolerate the Jaina religion). {%—Sid-%}
{%dha-sevita, as, ā, am,%} honoured or worshipped
by Siddhas; ({%as%}), m. epithet of a form of Bhairava
or Śiva {%(= vaṭuka-bhairava)%}. {%—Siddha-sthālī,%}
f. the boiler or pot of a seer (fabled as a vessel
bestowed by a holy personage, and gifted with the
property of overflowing with any kind of food at
the wish of the possessor). {%—Siddhānta (˚dha-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. established end [cf. {%rāddhānta%}];
demonstrated conclusion of an argument, the esta-
blished line of reasoning or view of any question,
the true logical conclusion (following on the refuta-
tion of the {%pūrva-pakṣa%} or first objection), esta-
blished truth, proved fact, settled opinion or doc-
trine, dogma, axiom, received or admitted truth
(regarded as of four kinds, viz. {%sarva-tantra-s˚,%}
{%prati-tantra-s˚, adhikaraṇa-s˚, abhyupagama-%}
{%s˚,%} q. q. v. v.); any fixed or established text-book
resting on conclusive arguments, (often used at the
end of comps. to denote certain received treatises
by high authorities on astronomy, mathematics, and
other sciences; nine astronomical works being espe-
cially so designated, viz. the Brahma-s˚, Sūrya-s˚,
Soma-s˚, Vṛhaspati-s˚, Garaga-s˚, Nārada-s˚, Parā-
śara-s˚, Pulastya-s˚, Vasiṣṭha-s˚; five principal astro-
nomical Siddhāntas are enumerated by others, viz.
[Page1115-a+ 81]
Pauliśa-s˚, Romaka-s˚, Vāsiṣṭha-s˚, Śaura-s˚, and
Paitāmaha-s˚.) {%—Siddhānta-koṭi, is,%} f. the point in
an argument which is regarded as a logical conclu-
sion. {%—Siddhānta-kaumudī,%} f., N. of a celebrated
grammar by Bhaṭṭoji-dīkṣita (intended to furnish
a practical arrangement of Pāṇini's Sūtras with a
commentary). {%—Siddhānta-garbha, as,%} m., N. of
a work by Madana-pāla. {%—Siddhānta-candrikā,%}
f. a commentary on the Sarasvatī-sūtra by Rāma-
candrāśrama; another on the Śāstra-dīpikā by
Rāma-kṛṣṇa-bhaṭṭa; N. of Rāma-saṃyamin's Ve-
dānta precepts. {%—Siddhāntacandrikā-ṭīkā,%} f. a
commentary by Gaṅgādhara-yati on Rāma-saṃya-
min's work. {%—Siddhānta-candrodaya (˚ra-ud˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a commentary by Kṛṣṇa-dhūrjaṭi-dīkṣita
on the Tarka-saṅgraha. {%—Siddhānta-cintāmaṇi,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a work on astronomy. {%—Siddhānta-%}
{%tattva, am,%} n., N. of a work on the principles of
the Vaiśeṣika doctrines, (also called Padārtha-viveka.)
{%—Siddhāntatattva-bindu,%} a commentary by Ma-
dhu-sūdana-sarasvatī on Śaṅkarācārya's Daśa-ślokī.
{%—Siddhāntatattvabindu-sandīpana%} or {%bindu-%}
{%sandīpana, am,%} n. a commentary by Puruṣottama
Sarasvatī on the preceding. {%—Siddhāntatattva-sar-%}
{%vasva, am,%} n. a commentary on the Siddhānta-
tattva by Gopīnātha-maunin. {%—Siddhānta-dīpikā,%}
f. a commentary on the Siddhānta-muktāvalī by
Nānā-dīkṣita. {%—Siddhānta-pakṣa, as,%} m. the
logically correct side of an argument. {%—Siddhānta-%}
{%bindu = siddhāntatattva-bindu,%} q. v. {%—Siddhān-%}
{%tabindu-vyākhyā,%} f. a commentary by Nārāyaṇa-
yati on the preceding. {%—Siddhānta-muktāvalī,%} f.
‘string of pearls of dogmatic precepts,’ N. of a com-
mentary by Viśva-nātha Pañcānana Bhaṭṭācārya
Tarkālaṅkāra on the Bhāṣā-pariccheda (a text-
book of the Nyāya, also called {%muktāvalī%}); of a
metrical Vedānta treatise with a prose interpretation
by Prakāśānanda; of a metrical exposition of the
theory of Vallabhācārya. {%—Siddhāntamuktāvalī-%}
{%prakāśa, as,%} m., N. of a commentary on the Sid-
dhānta-muktāvalī. {%—Siddhānta-ratna,%} N. of a
summary of the Vedānta system by Nimbārka {%(=%}
{%daśa-ślokī)%}. {%—Siddhānta-rahasya, am,%} n., N. of
a work on astronomy. {%—Siddhānta-leśa, as,%} m.,
N. of a metrical work by Apya-dīkṣita on the
Vedānta and other systems of philosophy. {%—Sid-%}
{%dhānta-vāgīśa, as,%} m., N. of the preceptor of
Rāghavendra. {%—Siddhānta-śiromaṇi,%} N. of an
astronomical work by Bhāskara. {%—Siddhānta-saṅ-%}
{%graha, as,%} m., N. of an epitome of Vijñāneśvara's
Mitākṣarā. {%—Siddhānta-sandarbha, as,%} m., N.
of an astronomical work. {%—Siddhānta-sundara,%}
N. of a work on astronomy by Jñāna-rāja. {%—Sid-%}
{%dhānta-sūkti-mañjarī,%} f., N. of a metrical abridg-
ment of the Siddhānta-leśa by Gaṅgā-dhara-sarasvatī.
{%—Siddhāntācāra (˚ta-āc˚), as,%} m. a perfect rule
of action (with the Tāntrikas); one who practises
this rule (said to consist in purity, quietism, and
complete mental absorption in Durgā). {%—Siddhān-%}
{%tita, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%siddhānta%}), logically demon-
strated or proved, established as true. {%—Siddhāntin,%}
{%ī,%} m. one who establishes or proves his conclusions;
one learned in scientific text-books; a follower of
the Mīmāṃsā philosophy. {%—Siddhānna (˚dha-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. dressed food, cooked victuals. {%—Siddhāpagā%}
{%(˚dha-ap˚),%} f. ‘divine river,’ epithet of the Ganges.
{%—Siddhāri (˚dha-ari), is,%} m. a particular Mantra.
{%—Siddhārtha (˚dha-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has
accomplished an aim or object, successful, prosperous;
({%as%}), m. epithet of the great Buddha (or Śākya-
muni, founder of the Buddhist religion); N. of the
father of the last and most celebrated Arhat of the
present Ava-sarpiṇī; epithet of Śiva; white mustard;
({%ā%}), f., N. of the mother of the fourth of the
twenty-four Arhats. {%—Siddhārthaka, am,%} n. white
mustard. {%—Siddhārtha-kārin, ī,%} m. epithet of Śiva.
{%—Siddhārthin (˚dha-ar˚), ī,%} m., N. of the fifty-
third (or twenty-seventh) year of Jupiter's cycle of
sixty years. {%—Siddhāśrama (˚dha-āś˚),%} N. of a
hermitage in the Himālaya (where Viṣṇu performed
penance before his dwarf incarnation). {%—Siddhā- %}
[Page1115-b+ 81]
{%śrama-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Siddhā-%}
{%sana (˚dha-ās˚), am,%} n. a particular posture in
religious meditation (described as placing the left
heel under the body and the right heel in front of
it, fixing the sight between the eyebrows, and medi-
tating upon the syllable {%Om%}). {%—Siddheśvara-tantra%}
{%(˚dha-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tantra work. {%—Sid-%}
{%dheśvara-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Sid-%}
{%dheśvarī (˚dha-īś˚),%} f., N. of a particular goddess.
{%—Siddhaugha (˚dha-ogha), as,%} m., N. of a par-
ticular class of Gurus worshipped or revered by the
Tāntrikas, (their names are said to be Nārada,
Kāśyapa, Śambhu, Bhārgava, Kula-kauśika.)
<LEND>

<L>52240<pc>1115-b<k1>sidDaka<k2>sidDaka
{%Siddhaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of tree ({%= sindhu-%}
{%vāra%}); the Śāl tree; a species of metre.
<LEND>

<L>52241<pc>1115-b<k1>sidDA<k2>sidDA
{%Siddhā.%}¦ See under {%siddha,%} p. 1114, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52242<pc>1115-b<k1>sidDAyikA<k2>sidDAyikA
{%Siddhāyikā,%}¦ f., N. of one of the twenty-four
goddesses, called Śāsana-devatās, who execute the
commands of the twenty-four Arhats.
<LEND>

<L>52243<pc>1115-b<k1>sidDi<k2>sidDi
{%Siddhi, is,%}¦ f. accomplishment, fulfilment, com-
pletion, perfection, complete attainment (of any
object), performance; success, prosperity, well-being;
settlement, establishment, substantiation, demonstra-
tion, proof, indisputable conclusion; validity (of a
rule or law); certainty, truth, accuracy, correctness;
decision, adjudication, determination (of a lawsuit);
payment, liquidation (of a debt), acquittance; the
solution of a problem; preparation, cooking, matur-
ing, maturity; readiness; complete knowledge;
complete perfection or sanctification (by penance
&c.); final emancipation, supreme felicity, beati-
tude; the acquisition of supernatural powers by
magical means or the supernatural faculty so ac-
quired, (eight are usually enumerated, e. g. {%aṇiman,%}
{%mahiman, laghiman, gariman, prāpti, prā-%}
{%kāmya, īśi-tva, vaśi-tva,%} q. q. v. v., to which is
sometimes added {%kāmāvasāyi-tva%} and many others,
e. g. {%siddhiḥ khecarī,%} the magical power of flying
through the air; {%rasollāsa,%} q. v., {%vi-śokā,%} q. v., see
also under {%siddha,%} p. 1114); any marvellous skill or
capability; a magical shoe or slipper (supposed to
have the power of conveying the wearer wherever
he likes); good effect or result, use, advantage; un-
derstanding, intellect; concealment, vanishing, mak-
ing one's self invisible; a particular Yoga (either the
sixteenth of the astronomical periods or the nine-
teenth of the twenty-eight astrological Yogas); a
kind of medicinal root ({%= ṛddhi%}); Perfection (per-
sonified as a daughter of Dakṣa and wife of
Dharma); N. of a Yoginī; of Durgā; of Śiva, (in
this sense masc.) {%—Siddhi-kāraṇa, am,%} n. a cause
of beatitude, means of obtaining felicity. {%—Siddhi-%}
{%cāmuṇḍā-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Siddhi-%}
{%da, as, ā, am,%} conferring felicity or beatitude; ({%as%}),
m. epithet of a form of Bhairava or Śiva {%(= vaṭuka-%}
{%bhairava)%}. {%—Siddhi-dātrī,%} f. ‘giver of perfection,’
epithet of Durgā. {%—Siddhi-bhairava, am,%} n., N.
of a Tantra work. {%—Siddhi-yoga, as,%} m. a parti-
cular auspicious conjunction of the planets. {%—Sid-%}
{%dhi-yoginī,%} f. a kind of Yoginī. {%—Siddhi-lābha,%}
{%as,%} m. acquirement of success or perfection. {%—Sid-%}
{%dhi-sopāna,%} ‘ladder of success,’ N. of a work.
{%—Siddhi-sthāna, am,%} n. ‘place of felicity,’ N. of
any sacred spot where final beatitude is obtained by
religious worship (such as particular places on the
Ganges or Sarasvatī). {%—Siddhy-artham,%} ind. for
the sake of accomplishing or obtaining.
<LEND>

<L>52244<pc>1115-b<k1>sidDvA<k2>sidDvA
{%Siddhvā,%}¦ ind. having accomplished or effected,
having completed.
<LEND>

<L>52245<pc>1115-b<k1>siDitvA<k2>siDitvA
{%Sidhitvā,%}¦ ind. (according to some) {%= siddhvā%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>52246<pc>1115-b<k1>siDma<k2>siDma
{%Sidhma, am,%}¦ or {%sidhman, a,%} n. a blotch, pustule,
scab; pock-mark, leprous spot; leprosy or a kind of
leprosy (one of the seven kinds). {%—Sidhma-puṣ-%}
{%pikā,%} f. a particular kind of cutaneous disease or
leprosy. {%—Sidhma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} scabby, pock-
marked, covered with pustules or blotches; leprous,
tainted with leprosy.
<LEND>

<L>52247<pc>1115-b<k1>siDmala<k2>siDmala
{%Sidhmala, as, ā, am, = sidhma-vat; (ā),%}¦ f. a
scab, blotch, leprous spot; a sort of leprosy; dried
fish, salt fish ({%= matsya-vikṛti%}).
<LEND>
[Page1115-c+ 79]

<L>52248<pc>1115-c<k1>siDmA<k2>siDmA
{%Sidhmā,%}¦ f. a blotch, scab, leprous spot; leprosy.
<LEND>

<L>52249<pc>1115-c<k1>siDya<k2>siDya
{%Sidhya, as,%}¦ m. ‘auspicious,’ N. of the asterism
Puṣya.
<LEND>

<L>52250<pc>1115-c<k1>siDra<k2>siDra
{%Sidhra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. obtaining, effecting,
(Sāy. {%= sādhaka%}); perfect, good; protecting; ({%as%}),
m. a pious or virtuous man; a tree.
<LEND>

<L>52251<pc>1115-c<k1>siDrakA<k2>siDrakA
{%Sidhrakā,%}¦ f. a kind of plant or tree. {%—Sidhrakā-%}
{%vaṇa, am,%} n. ‘Sidhrakā-grove,’ N. of one of the
celestial gardens.
<LEND>

<L>52252<pc>1115-c<k1>seDitvA<k2>seDitvA<h>2
2. {%sedhitvā,%}¦ ind. (according to some) {%= siddhvā,%}
col. 2; [cf. 1. {%sedhitvā%} under rt. 1. {%sidh.%} ]
<LEND>

<L>52253<pc>1115-c<k1>sina<k2>sina
{#sina#}¦ {%sina, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 2. fr. rt. {%si,%} ‘to bind;’ see also Nirukta V. 5),
‘a quantity of anything bound or collected together,’
a lump of food, &c., mouthful; ({%am%}), n. the body;
food (Ved.; Sāy. {%= anna%}); ({%as, ī, am%}), white,
white-coloured (according to Śabda-k.); blind with
one eye, one-eyed, {%= kāṇa; (ī),%} f. white, (perhaps
an old fem. of 2. {%sita;%} cf. {%śyenī%} under {%śyena.%})
{%—Sina-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having food.
<LEND>

<L>52254<pc>1115-c<k1>sinIvAlI<k2>sinIvAlI
{%Sinīvālī,%}¦ f. (said to be connected with {%sinī,%}
‘white;’ but in Nirukta XI. 31. {%sinī%} is connected
with rt. {%si%} and {%vālī%} with rt. {%val,%} ‘to surround,’ or
with {%bāla,%} ‘young;’ the real meaning may be ‘a
white ring’), the day preceding that of new moon
or the day on which the moon rises with a thin
crescent of light scarcely visible; N. of a Vedic god-
dess; of the goddess Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>52255<pc>1115-c<k1>sinduka<k2>sinduka
{#sinduka#}¦ {%sinduka, as,%} m. (probably fr. rt.
{%syand,%} see below), the small tree or shrub Vitex
Negundo.
<LEND>

<L>52256<pc>1115-c<k1>sinduvAra<k2>sinduvAra
{%Sindu-vāra, as,%}¦ m. (probably for {%syanda-vāra,%}
the plant being used medicinally to prevent flow
of the humors and laxity), {%= sinduka%} above; [cf.
{%sindhu-vāra.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52257<pc>1115-c<k1>sindUra<k2>sindUra
{#sindUra#}¦ {%sindūra, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. I. 69.
said to be fr. rt. {%syand%}), a sort of tree; ({%ī%}), f., N.
of a plant ({%= rocanī%}); the plant Grislea Tomentosa
({%= dhātakī%}); the plant Lythrum Fruticosum; red
cloth or clothes; ({%am%}), n. red lead, minium, ver-
milion; {%= rāja-lekha%} (according to some). {%—Sin-%}
{%dūra-kāraṇa, am,%} n. ‘origin of minium,’ lead.
{%—Sindūra-tilaka, as,%} m. ‘marked with red lead,’
an elephant; ({%ā%}), f. a woman whose forehead is
marked with red lead (and therefore whose husband
is living). {%—Sindūra-nirgama, as,%} m., N. of the
137th chapter of the Krīḍā-khaṇḍa or second part
of the Gaṇeśa-Purāṇa. {%—Sindūra-puṣpī,%} f. a kind
of plant ({%= vīra-puṣpī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52258<pc>1115-c<k1>sindUrikA<k2>sindUrikA
{%Sindūrikā,%}¦ f. red lead, minium.
<LEND>

<L>52259<pc>1115-c<k1>sindUrita<k2>sindUrita
{%Sindūrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ reddened, made red.
<LEND>

<L>52260<pc>1115-c<k1>sinDu<k2>sinDu
{#sinDu#}¦ {%sindhu, us,%} m. (probably connected
with rt. {%syand,%} ‘to flow’), the ocean, sea, ({%kṛpā-%}
{%sindhu,%} ‘ocean of mercy,’ a term for an exceedingly
merciful person); N. of Varuṇa (as god of the
ocean); the river Indus; the Indus personified (as
one of the male rivers, cf. {%nada%}); the country
around the Indus (commonly called Sindh); the water
into which the Soma drops; water ejected from the
mouth or from an elephant's trunk ({%= vamathu%});
the juice that exudes from an elephant's temples; an
elephant; a particular Rāga or musical mode (re-
garded as son of the Rāga Mālakauśa); the tree
Vitex Negundo [cf. {%sinduka%}]; white or refined
borax, {%= śveta-ṭaṅkaṇa; (avas),%} m. pl. the in-
habitants of Sindh; ({%us%}), f. the river Sindhu, (Ni-
rukta IX. 26); a river or stream of water in general.
{%—Sindhu-kapha, as,%} m. ‘sea-foam,’ cuttle-fish
bone. {%—Sindhu-kara, am,%} n. a kind of white borax
{%(= śveta-ṭaṅkaṇa)%}. {%—Sindhu-kṣit, t,%} m., N. of
the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 75 (having the
patronymic Praiyamedha). {%—Sindhu-khela, as,%} m.
‘sported or flowed over by the Indus,’ the country
Sindh. {%—Sindhu-ja, as, ā, am,%} ocean-born, sea-
born, marine; river-born, aquatic; born or produced
in the country Sindh; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of the goddess
Lakṣmī (as produced at the churning of the ocean);
({%am%}), n. rock-salt. {%—Sindhu-janman, ā, ā, a,%}
ocean-born, sea-born; produced in Sindh; ({%ā%}), m.
[Page1116-a+ 76]
the moon; ({%a%}), n. rock-salt. {%—Sindhu-ḍā,%} f., N.
of the wife of the Rāga Mālava. {%—Sindhu-deśa, as,%}
m. the country of Sindh. {%—Sindhu-dvīpa, as,%} m.,
N. of a king; of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda
X. 9 (having the patronymic Āmbarīṣa). {%—Sindhu-%}
{%nada,%} N. of a river. {%—Sindhu-nandana, as,%} m. ‘son
of the ocean,’ the moon (fabled to have been one
of the fourteen precious things recovered at the churn-
ing of the ocean, see {%mandara,%} p. 746). {%—Sindhu-%}
{%nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of rivers,’ the ocean. {%—Sindhu-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘lord of Sindh,’ epithet of Jayad-ratha.
{%—Sindhu-pāra-ja, as, ā, am,%} born or produced
on the further bank of the Indus. {%—Sindhu-putra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘son of the ocean,’ the moon; a sort of
ebony. {%—Sindhu-pulinda, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a
people. {%—Sindhu-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘sea-flower,’ a
conch-shell. {%—Sindhu-madhya,%} N. of a district.
{%—Sindhu-mantha, as,%} m. the churning of the
ocean, (see {%mandara,%} p. 746); ‘ocean churning-
stick,’ a mountain (according to some). {%—Sindhu-%}
{%mantha-ja, am,%} n. rock-salt. {%—Sindhu-mātṛ, tā,%}
{%trī, tṛ,%} Ved. having the sea as mother (said of the
Soma, also of the Maruts and of the Aśvins); ({%tā%}), f.
‘mother of streams,’ epithet of the river Sarasvatī
(Ved.). {%—Sindhu-mukha, am,%} n. the mouth of a
river. {%—Sindhu-mukhāgata (˚kha-āg˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} arrived at the mouth of a river. {%—Sindhu-%}
{%rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of Sindh,’ epithet of Jayad-
ratha. {%—Sindhu-lavaṇa, am,%} n. ‘Sindh-salt,’ rock-
salt. {%—Sindhu-vāra, as,%} m. a good horse or one
of a particularly good breed (brought probably from
Sindh or the borders of Persia); the small tree Vitex
Negundo {%(= sindu-vāra)%}. {%—Sindhu-vāraka, as,%}
m. Vitex Negundo, (see above.) {%—Sindhu-vārita,%}
{%as,%} m. Vitex Negundo, (see above.) {%—Sindhu-vāsin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} living in Sindh, an inhabitant of Sindh.
{%—Sindhu-vāhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. bringing streams
of water. {%—Sindhu-veṣaṇa, as,%} m. the tree Gme-
lina Arborea. {%—Sindhu-śayana, as,%} m. ‘ocean-
reclining,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Sindhu-saṅgama,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘sea-confluence,’ the mouth of a river or its
point of junction with the sea. {%—Sindhu-samudra-%}
{%saṅgama, as,%} m., N. of a place. {%—Sindhu-sūnu,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘son of Sindhu,’ N. of the Asura Jalan-dhara.
{%—Sindhu-sauvīra, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people (the
people of Sindh and western Rājputāna, according
to some). {%—Sindhūttha (˚dhu-ut˚)%} or {%sindhūd-%}
{%bhava (˚dhu-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘Sindh-produced,’ rock-
salt {%(= saindhava)%}. {%—Sindhūpala (˚dhu-up˚),%}
{%am,%} n. ‘Sindh-stone,’ rock-salt.
<LEND>

<L>52261<pc>1116-a<k1>sinDuka<k2>sinDuka
{%Sindhuka, as, ā, am,%}¦ marine; born or produced
in Sindh; ({%as%}), m. the tree Vitex Negundo [cf. {%sin-%}
{%duka%}]; N. of a king ({%= śūdraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>52262<pc>1116-a<k1>sinDura<k2>sinDura
{%Sindhura, as,%}¦ m. an elephant; [cf. {%sindhu.%}]
{%—Sindhura-dveṣin, ī,%} m. ‘elephant-hater,’ a lion.
<LEND>

<L>52263<pc>1116-a<k1>sinDula<k2>sinDula
{%Sindhula, as,%}¦ m., N. of the father of Bhoja.
<LEND>

<L>52264<pc>1116-a<k1>sinv<k2>sinv
{#sinv#}¦ {%sinv%} = rt. {%ninv,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52265<pc>1116-a<k1>sipAhaRa<k2>sipAhaRa
{#sipAhaRa#}¦ {%sipāhaṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>52266<pc>1116-a<k1>sipra<k2>sipra
{#sipra#}¦ {%sipra, as,%} m. sweat, perspiration,
heat; the moon; ({%ā%}), f. a woman's zone; a female
buffalo; N. of a river near Ujjayinī [cf. {%śiprā%}];
({%am%}), n., N. of a lake [cf. {%śipra%}].
<LEND>

<L>52267<pc>1116-a<k1>siB<k2>siB
{#siB#}¦ {%sibh%} or {%simbh%} = rt. {%sṛbh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52268<pc>1116-a<k1>sim<k2>sim
{#sim#}¦ {%sim,%} ind. (in Vedic grammar) a tech-
nical term for the eight simple vowels (viz. {%a, ā, i,%}
{%ī, u, ū, ṛ, ṝ%}).
<LEND>

<L>52269<pc>1116-a<k1>sima<k2>sima
{#sima#}¦ {%sima, as, ā, am,%} (in Uṇādi-s. I. 143.
said to be fr. rt. {%si;%} probably connected with
1. {%sama; simasmāt,%} abl. c. {%= sarvasmāt,%} Ṛg-
veda I. 95, 7; {%simasmai,%} dat. c. everywhere, Ṛg-
veda 1. 115, 4), all, every, whole, entire; ({%as%}), m.,
Ved. ‘the best, most excellent,’ epithet of Indra,
(in Ṛg-veda VIII. 4, 1. {%simā,%} voc. c. {%= sima =%}
{%śreṣṭhendra%}); ({%ā%}), f., Ved. a cord, band, (accord-
ing to some {%as,%} m.; cf. {%sīmā.%}) {%—Simā-tva, am,%}
n., Ved. the state of a cord.
<LEND>
[Page1116-b+ 72]

<L>52270<pc>1116-b<k1>simisimAya<k2>simisimAya
{#simisimAya#}¦ {%simisimāya%} (fr. an imitative
sound), Nom. P. {%simisimāyati,%} &c., to tremble,
quiver, be convulsed.
<LEND>

<L>52271<pc>1116-b<k1>simbA<k2>simbA
{#simbA#}¦ {%simbā,%} f. (also written {%śimbā,%} q. v.),
a pod, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52272<pc>1116-b<k1>simbi<k2>simbi
{%Simbi, is,%}¦ f. a pod {%(= śimbi)%}. {%—Simbi-jā,%} f.
‘pod-born,’ any pulse or grain growing in pods.
<LEND>

<L>52273<pc>1116-b<k1>simbI<k2>simbI
{%Simbī,%}¦ f. {%= śimbī.%}
<LEND>

<L>52274<pc>1116-b<k1>simB<k2>simB
{#simB#}¦ {%simbh.%} See rt. {%sibh,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52275<pc>1116-b<k1>sira<k2>sira
{#sira#}¦ {%sira, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%si;%} but
cf. {%śira, śirā,%} p. 1006), the root of long pepper;
({%ā%}), f. any tubular vessel of the body, a nerve, vein,
artery, tendon, &c. (see {%śirā%}); a stream, water (Ved.,
Sāy. {%sirāsu = saraṇa-śīlāsv apsu,%} Ṛg-veda I.
121, 11; in Naigh. I. 12. {%sirā%} is enumerated among
the {%udaka-nāmāni;%} cf. {%sīrā%}); a bucket, a baling-
vessel. {%—Sirā-jāla, as,%} m. a network or plexus of
vessels or veins, an enlargement of the vessels of
the eye. {%—Sirā-mokṣa, as,%} m. ‘lossing the veins,’
venesection. {%—Sirā-vyadha, as,%} m. or {%sirā-vya-%}
{%dhana, am,%} n. ‘piercing the veins,’ venesection.
{%—Sirā-harṣa, as,%} m. thrill of the nerves; a flow of
discoloured tears (according to some). {%—Sirotpāta%}
{%(˚rā-ut˚), as,%} m. disease or morbid affection of the
veins, &c.; redness and inflammation of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>52276<pc>1116-b<k1>sil<k2>sil
{#sil#}¦ {%sil.%} See rt. {%śil.%}
<LEND>

<L>52277<pc>1116-b<k1>silaka<k2>silaka
{#silaka#}¦ {%silaka, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>52278<pc>1116-b<k1>silika<k2>silika
{#silika#}¦ {%silika, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according to
Sāy.) compact, symmetrical {%(= saṃsṛta, saṅgata).%}
{%—Silika-madhyama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having com-
pact or symmetrical waists ({%= saṃsṛta-madhyama%}
or {%śīrṣa-madhyama,%} Nirukta IV. 13).
<LEND>

<L>52279<pc>1116-b<k1>sillakI<k2>sillakI
{#sillakI#}¦ {%sillakī,%} f. ({%= sallakī, śallakī%}), the
gum olibanum tree, Boswellia Thurifera.
<LEND>

<L>52280<pc>1116-b<k1>siv<k2>siv
{#siv#}¦ {%siv%} [cf. rt. {%si%}], cl. 4. P. {%sīvyati%} (in
Ṛg-veda I. 25, 3. {%vi-sīmahi = viśe-%}
{%ṣeṇa badhnīmaḥ%} is referred by Sāy. either to rt.
{%siv%} with {%vi%} or to rt. {%si%} with {%vi%}), {%siṣeva, seviṣyati,%}
{%asevīt, sevitum,%} to sew, darn, stitch; to stitch toge-
ther, unite, join: Pass. {%sīvyate,%} Aor. {%asevi,%} to be
sewn: Caus. {%sevayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asīṣivat:%}
Desid. {%siseviṣati%} or {%sisyūṣati:%} Intens. {%seṣīv-%}
{%yate;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κασ-σύ-ω (κα-τύ-ω), κάσ-σῦ-μα</lang>
<lang n="greek">(κάτ-τυ-μα), καττύ-ς, probably ὑμήν and Ὑμήν:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>su-o, su-tu-s, su-tor, su-tura, su-tela, su-b-ula,</nsi>
<nsi>Con-sus, Con-sualia:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>siu-ja,</nsi> <lang n="greek">ἐπιῤῤάπτω:</lang>
Old Germ. <nsi>siud, sou-m,</nsi> ‘a hem;’ <nsi>sui-la:</nsi> Mod.
Germ. <nsi>seam:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>seam:</nsi> Engl. <nsi>seam:</nsi> Old
Norse <nsi>saumr:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>siv-a</nsi> (Inf. <nsi>si-ti</nsi>): Lith. <nsi>siuv-ù</nsi>
(Inf. <nsi>siú-ti</nsi>), <nsi>siú-ta-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>52281<pc>1116-b<k1>sIvana<k2>sIvana
{%Sīvana, am,%}¦ n. sewing, stitching; a seam, suture;
({%ī%}), f. a needle; the frenum of the prepuce.
<LEND>

<L>52282<pc>1116-b<k1>sIvyat<k2>sIvyat
{%Sīvyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sewing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52283<pc>1116-b<k1>sevana<k2>sevana
{%Sevana.%}¦ See under 2. {%sevaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>52284<pc>1116-b<k1>sevitvA<k2>sevitvA
{%Sevitvā,%}¦ ind. having sewn or stitched; having
joined.
<LEND>

<L>52285<pc>1116-b<k1>syUta<k2>syUta
{%Syūta, syūti, syūtvā,%}¦ &c. See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>52286<pc>1116-b<k1>sivara<k2>sivara
{#sivara#}¦ {%sivara, as,%} m. (according to some)
an elephant ({%= hastin%}).
<LEND>

<L>52287<pc>1116-b<k1>sisaNgrAmayizu<k2>sisaNgrAmayizu
{#sisaNgrAmayizu#}¦ {%sisaṅgrāmayiṣu, us, us, u%}
(fr. Desid. of rt. {%saṅgrām%}), wishing or intending to
make war, eager or desirous to fight.
<LEND>

<L>52288<pc>1116-b<k1>sizADayizA<k2>sizADayizA
{#sizADayizA#}¦ {%siṣādhayiṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid.
of Caus. of rt. {%sādh%} or rt. 3. {%sidh%}), wish to effect or
accomplish; desire to establish or prove.
<LEND>

<L>52289<pc>1116-b<k1>sizADayizu<k2>sizADayizu
{%Siṣādhayiṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous to accomplish
or effect; seeking to prove or demonstrate.
<LEND>

<L>52290<pc>1116-b<k1>sizAsat<k2>sizAsat
{#sizAsat#}¦ {%siṣāsat.%} See rt. 1. {%san,%} p. 1056.
<LEND>

<L>52291<pc>1116-b<k1>sizAsu<k2>sizAsu
{%Siṣāsu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desirous of obtaining,
eager for wealth.
<LEND>

<L>52292<pc>1116-b<k1>sizRu<k2>sizRu
{#sizRu#}¦ {%siṣṇu, us,%} m. (according to Sāy. fr.
an assumed Vedic rt. {%siṣ%} = rt. {%sic;%} according to
[Page1116-c+ 75]
others fr. rt. {%si%}), Ved. sprinkled (with Soma), receiv-
ing libations, (Sāy. {%= somenāsicyamāna,%} Ṛg-veda
VIII. 19, 31.)
<LEND>

<L>52293<pc>1116-c<k1>sizmiyARa<k2>sizmiyARa
{#sizmiyARa#}¦ {%siṣmiyāṇa, as, ā, am,%} (Perf.
part. A. of rt. {%smi%}), one who has smiled, smiling.
<LEND>

<L>52294<pc>1116-c<k1>sizvidAna<k2>sizvidAna
{#sizvidAna#}¦ {%siṣvidāna, as, ā, am,%} (Perf. part.
A. of rt. {%svid%}), Ved. one who has perspired, sweating.
<LEND>

<L>52295<pc>1116-c<k1>sisfkzA<k2>sisfkzA
{#sisfkzA#}¦ {%sisṛkṣā,%} f. (fr. Desid. of rt. 1. {%sṛj%}),
wish or purpose to create.
<LEND>

<L>52296<pc>1116-c<k1>sisfkzu<k2>sisfkzu
{%Sisṛkṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing or purposing to
create.
<LEND>

<L>52297<pc>1116-c<k1>sisrat<k2>sisrat
{#sisrat#}¦ {%sisrat.%} See under rt. {%sṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>52298<pc>1116-c<k1>sihuRqa<k2>sihuRqa
{#sihuRqa#}¦ {%sihuṇḍa, as,%} m. the milk-hedge
plant, Euphorbia Antiquorum ({%= snuhī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52299<pc>1116-c<k1>sihla<k2>sihla
{#sihla#}¦ {%sihla, as,%} m. ({%= śihla%}), olibanum,
benzoin, Indian incense. {%—Sihla-bhūmikā,%} f. the
olibanum tree, Boswellia Serrata or Thurifera.
<LEND>

<L>52300<pc>1116-c<k1>sihlaka<k2>sihlaka
{%Sihlaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= sihla; (ī),%} f. = the olibanum
tree.
<LEND>

<L>52301<pc>1116-c<k1>sIk<k2>sIk
{#sIk#}¦ {%sīk%} (also written {%śīk,%} q. v.), cl. 1.
A. {%sīkate,%} &c., to sprinkle, scatter in
drops, (in which sense the form {%sīk%} seems preferable
to {%śīk,%} cf. rts. {%sik,%} 1. {%sic%}); to go, move; cl. 1. 10.
P. {%sīkati, sīkayati,%} &c., to be impatient; to be
patient; to touch, &c. (see rt. {%śīk%}).
<LEND>

<L>52302<pc>1116-c<k1>sIkara<k2>sIkara
{%Sīkara, as,%}¦ m. drizzling rain, drizzle, mist, &c.;
(see {%śīkara,%} but the form {%sīkara%} seems preferable.)
<LEND>

<L>52303<pc>1116-c<k1>sIkzat<k2>sIkzat
{#sIkzat#}¦ {%sīkṣat.%} See p. 1100, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52304<pc>1116-c<k1>sIt<k2>sIt
{#sIt#}¦ {%sīt,%} ind. a sound made by drawing
in the breath (to express sighing, shivering with cold,
murmuring, sexual enjoyment, &c.; cf. {%śīt%}). {%—Sīt-%}
{%kāra, am,%} n. making or uttering the above sound
{%sīt%}. {%—Sīt-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make the
sound {%sīt%}. {%—Sīt-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made or uttered as
the above sound; ({%am%}), n. the inarticulate sound {%sīt.%}
<LEND>

<L>52305<pc>1116-c<k1>sItA<k2>sItA
{#sItA#}¦ {%sītā,%} f. (probably fr. rt. {%si,%} ‘to bind,’
cf. {%sīman,%} ‘a boundary’), a furrow, the track or
line of a ploughshare [cf. {%sīra%}]; agriculture; a
Furrow or Husbandry personified (and apparently
once worshipped as a kind of goddess resembling
Pomona; in Ṛg-veda IV. 57, 6, Sītā is invoked as
a deity presiding over agriculture or the fruits of the
earth, and appears to be associated with Indra, whence
some describe her as a wife of Indra; in Vājasaneyi-s.
XII. 69 — 72, Sītā the Furrow is again personified and
addressed, four furrows being required to be drawn
at the ceremony when these stanzas are recited); N.
of the wife of Rāma-candra (daughter of Janaka,
king of Mithilā, capital of Videha, who was other-
wise called Sīra-dhvaja; she was named Sītā because
fabled to have sprung from a furrow made by Janaka
while ploughing the ground to prepare it for a sacri-
fice instituted by him to obtain progeny, whence
her epithet A-yoni-jā, ‘not womb-born;’ her other
common names, Maithilī and Vaidehī, are from the
place of her birth; according to one legend she was
Veda-vatī, q. v., in the Kṛta age; according to others
she was an incarnation of Lakṣmī and of Umā;
the story of Rāma's bending the bow, which was to be
the condition of the gift of Sītā, is told in Rāmāyaṇa
I. 67; Sītā's younger sister Ūrmilā was at the same
time given to Lakṣmaṇa, and two nieces of Ja-
naka, daughters of his brother king Kuśa-dhvaja, to
Bharata and Śatru-ghna); N. of Lakṣmī; of Durgā
or Umā; of a female poet; of the eastern branch
of the four fabulous branches of the heavenly Ganges
(into which it is supposed to divide after falling on
mount Meru; this branch is fabled to flow into the
Varṣa or Dvīpa, called Bhadrāśva, q. v.); spirituous
liquor. {%—Sītā-dravya, āṇi,%} n. pl. implements of
husbandry. {%—Sītā-pati%} or {%sītāyāḥ-pati, is,%} m.
‘husband of Sītā,’ epithet of the hero Rāma-candra.
{%—Sītā-phala, as,%} m. ‘Sītā's fruit,’ the custard apple
tree, Annona Squamosa; ({%am%}), n. its fruit. {%—Sītā-%}
{%haraṇa, am,%} n. the carrying off of Sītā. {%—Sītāhāra %}
[Page1117-a+ 76]
{%(˚tā-āh˚), as,%} m. ‘Sītā's food,’ a kind of plant,
Lycopodium Phlegmaria. {%—Sītormile (˚tā-ūr˚),%} f.
du. Sītā and Ūrmilā.
<LEND>

<L>52306<pc>1117-a<k1>sItya<k2>sItya
{%Sītya, as, ā, am,%}¦ measured out by furrows,
ploughed, tilled [cf. {%śītya%}]; ({%am%}), n. rice, corn, grain;
[cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">σῖτος.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>52307<pc>1117-a<k1>sItInaka<k2>sItInaka
{#sItInaka#}¦ {%sītīnaka, as,%} m. {%= satīnaka,%} pease,
pulse.
<LEND>

<L>52308<pc>1117-a<k1>sItIlaka<k2>sItIlaka
{%Sītīlaka = sītīnaka%}¦ above; [cf. {%satīlaka.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52309<pc>1117-a<k1>sItkAra<k2>sItkAra
{#sItkAra#}¦ {%sīt-kāra, sīt-kṛta.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>52310<pc>1117-a<k1>sIdat<k2>sIdat
{#sIdat#}¦ {%sīdat, sīdamāna.%} See under rt.
1. {%sad,%} p. 1055, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52311<pc>1117-a<k1>sIdya<k2>sIdya
{%Sīdya, am,%}¦ n. slothfulness, idleness, indolence.
<LEND>

<L>52312<pc>1117-a<k1>sIDu<k2>sIDu
{#sIDu#}¦ {%sīdhu, us,%} m. {%= śīdhu%} (q. v.), spirit
distilled from molasses, rum (or any similar spirit).
{%—Sīdhu-gandha, as,%} m. ‘having the smell of
rum,’ the plant or tree Mimusops Elengi {%(= vakula).%}
{%—Sīdhu-pa, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%} drinking spirits.
{%—Sīdhu-puṣpa, as,%} m. the Kadamba tree; the
Vakula tree; ({%ī%}), f. the Dhātakī plant. {%—Sīdhu-%}
{%rasa, as,%} m. ‘having spirit-like juice,’ the Mango
tree. {%—Sīdhu-sañjña, as,%} m. the Vakula tree.
<LEND>

<L>52313<pc>1117-a<k1>sIDra<k2>sIDra
{#sIDra#}¦ {%sīdhra, am,%} n. (according to some)
the anus.
<LEND>

<L>52314<pc>1117-a<k1>sIpa<k2>sIpa
{#sIpa#}¦ {%sīpa, as,%} m. a sacrificial vessel in the
shape of a boat (for making libations).
<LEND>

<L>52315<pc>1117-a<k1>sIm<k2>sIm
{#sIm#}¦ {%sīm,%} ind., Ved. a particle laying stress
on a preceding word ({%= id%}); everywhere, on all
sides ({%= sarvatas,%} Ṛg-veda II. 28, 4, IV. 56, 1).
<LEND>

<L>52316<pc>1117-a<k1>sIman<k2>sIman
{#sIman#}¦ {%sīman, ā,%} f. (according to some also
m., but only f. according to Amara and Vopa-deva
IV. 3; according to others also n. in Ved.; in
Uṇādi-s. IV. 150. said to be fr. rt. {%si;%} in some
senses perhaps connected with rt. {%siv%}), a boundary,
border, bound, limit, margin, frontier; a mound or
ridge or anything serving to mark the boundary of
a field, village, &c.; a mark, landmark (in general);
a bank, shore, coast; the horizon; a suture (of the
skull &c.; cf. {%sīvana%}); the bounds of morality or
decorum, keeping within bounds, rectitude; a field;
the nape of the neck; the scrotum.
<LEND>

<L>52317<pc>1117-a<k1>sImatas<k2>sImatas
{%Sīmatas,%}¦ Ved. from a boundary or horizon, (ac-
cording to Nirukta I. 7. {%= sīmnas%} or {%sīmā-tas;%}
according to others an abl. c. fr. a base {%sīmat.%})
<LEND>

<L>52318<pc>1117-a<k1>sImanta<k2>sImanta
{%Sīmanta, as,%}¦ m. (for {%sīmānta,%} i. e. {%sīman%} or
{%sīmā + anta%}), a boundary-line, (see {%sīmānta%} under
{%sīmā%}); a separation or parting of the hair on
each side of the head so as to leave a line; a land-
mark; N. of a son of king Bhadra-sena; of a poet;
({%as, am%}), m. n. the head (according to some). {%—Sī-%}
{%manta-karaṇa, am,%} n. the act or ceremony of part-
ing the hair. {%—Sīmantonnayana (˚ta-un˚), am,%}
n. ‘arranging the parting of the hair,’ N. of one of
the twelve Saṃskāras or purificatory rites, (it is ob-
served by women in the fourth, sixth, or eighth
month of their pregnancy; see under {%saṃs-kāra,%}
p. 1041.)
<LEND>

<L>52319<pc>1117-a<k1>sImantaka<k2>sImantaka
{%Sīmantaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a particular kind of
infernal being or inhabitant of hell; ({%am%}), n. red
lead (with which a mark is sometimes made along
the division of the hair).
<LEND>

<L>52320<pc>1117-a<k1>sImantaya<k2>sImantaya
{%Sīmantaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%sīmantayati,%} &c., to mark
by a line, part (as hair &c.).
<LEND>

<L>52321<pc>1117-a<k1>sImantita<k2>sImantita
{%Sīmantita, as, ā, am,%}¦ marked by a line, parted
(as hair &c.).
<LEND>

<L>52322<pc>1117-a<k1>sImantinI<k2>sImantinI
{%Sīmantinī,%}¦ f. ‘having hair-parting,’ a woman;
N. of a daughter of king Citra-varman.
<LEND>

<L>52323<pc>1117-a<k1>sImantyamAna<k2>sImantyamAna
{%Sīmantyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being parted or
divided.
<LEND>

<L>52324<pc>1117-a<k1>sImA<k2>sImA
{%Sīmā,%}¦ f. a boundary, bound, border, limit, &c.
({%= sīman%} above). {%—Sīmājñāna (˚mā-aj˚), am,%} n.
ignorance of boundaries. {%—Sīmādhipa (˚mā-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a neighbouring king. {%—Sīmā-niścaya, as,%}
m. a legal decision with respect to landmarks and
boundaries. {%—Sīmānta (˚mā-an˚), as,%} m. a boun-
dary-line, frontier-line, border, boundary. {%—Sī- %}
[Page1117-b+ 73]
{%mānta-pūjana, am,%} n. the act of honouring a
village boundary, &c. {%—Sīmā-liṅga, am,%} n. a boun-
dary-mark, landmark. {%—Sīmā-vāda, as,%} m. a dispute
about boundaries. {%—Sīmā-vinirṇaya, as,%} m. the
(legal) decision of disputed questions about boun-
daries and landmarks. {%—Sīmā-vivāda, as,%} m. liti-
gation about boundaries. {%—Sīmā-vivāda-dharma,%}
{%as,%} m. the law respecting disputes about boundaries.
{%—Sīmā-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. ‘boundary-tree,’ a tree
serving as a boundary-mark. {%—Sīmā-sandhi, is,%} m.
‘boundary-junction,’ the meeting of two boundaries.
{%—Sīmā-setu-vinirṇaya, as,%} m. (legal) decision
about boundaries and barriers. {%—Sīmollaṅghana%}
{%(˚mā-ul˚), am,%} n. the leaping over or transgressing
boundaries, passing a frontier.
<LEND>

<L>52325<pc>1117-b<k1>sImika<k2>sImika
{#sImika#}¦ {%sīmika, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. II. 43.
said to be fr. rt. {%syam%}), a kind of tree; an ant-hill
({%= syamīka%}); an ant or similar small insect.
<LEND>

<L>52326<pc>1117-b<k1>sImIka<k2>sImIka
{%Sīmīka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of tree; [cf. {%sīmika%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>52327<pc>1117-b<k1>sIra<k2>sIra
{#sIra#}¦ {%sīra, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. II. 25. said
to be fr. rt. {%si;%} cf. {%sītā%}), a plough; the sun; N. of
a Vedic god, (see {%śunā-sīrau%}); the Arka plant;
({%am%}), n., Ved. a plough. {%—Sīra-deva, as,%} m., N.
of a grammarian. {%—Sīra-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘plough-
bannered,’ N. of Janaka (father of Sītā, q. v.). {%—Sīra-%}
{%pāṇi, is,%} m. ‘plough-handed,’ epithet of Bala-rāma
(as armed with a weapon like a plough-share). {%—Sīra-%}
{%bhṛt, t,%} m. ‘plough-bearer,’ Bala-rāma; [cf. {%hala-%}
{%bhṛt.%}] {%—Sīra-yoga, as,%} m. the yoking of cattle to
a plough or a team so yoked.
<LEND>

<L>52328<pc>1117-b<k1>sIraka<k2>sIraka
{%Sīraka, as,%}¦ m. a plough; the sun; a porpoise.
<LEND>

<L>52329<pc>1117-b<k1>sIrA<k2>sIrA
{%Sīrā, ās,%}¦ f. pl., Ved. streams, waters, rivers, (Sāy.
{%= nadīḥ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 174, 9; in Naigh. I. 13. enu-
merated among the {%nadī-nāmāni;%} cf. {%sirā.%})
<LEND>

<L>52330<pc>1117-b<k1>sIrin<k2>sIrin
{%Sīrin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘having or holding a plough,’ epithet
of Bala-rāma, (see above.)
<LEND>

<L>52331<pc>1117-b<k1>sIraja<k2>sIraja
{#sIraja#}¦ {%sīraja,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>52332<pc>1117-b<k1>sIlanDa<k2>sIlanDa
{#sIlanDa#}¦ {%sīlandha, as,%} m. a kind of fish
(commonly called Silindā).
<LEND>

<L>52333<pc>1117-b<k1>sIlamA<k2>sIlamA
{#sIlamA#}¦ {%sīlamā,%} f., Ved. (probably) a plant.
{%—Sīlamā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having plants,
abounding in plants (said of the river Sindhu).
<LEND>

<L>52334<pc>1117-b<k1>sIvana<k2>sIvana
{#sIvana#}¦ {%sīvana.%} See p. 1116, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52335<pc>1117-b<k1>sIzat<k2>sIzat
{#sIzat#}¦ {%sīṣat, an, atī, at%} (probably fr. rt.
1. {%san%}), Ved. giving, granting.
<LEND>

<L>52336<pc>1117-b<k1>sIsa<k2>sIsa
{#sIsa#}¦ {%sīsa, am,%} n. (etymology doubtful),
lead. {%—Sīsa-pattra%} or {%sīsa-pattraka, am,%} n. lead.
<LEND>

<L>52337<pc>1117-b<k1>sisaka<k2>sisaka
{%Sisaka, am,%}¦ n. lead.
<LEND>

<L>52338<pc>1117-b<k1>sIsatARa<k2>sIsatARa
{#sIsatARa#}¦ {%sīsatāṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>52339<pc>1117-b<k1>sIsara<k2>sIsara
{#sIsara#}¦ {%sīsara, as,%} m., N. of the husband
of Saramā (according to one legend).
<LEND>

<L>52340<pc>1117-b<k1>sIhuRqa<k2>sIhuRqa
{#sIhuRqa#}¦ {%sīhuṇḍa, as,%} m. {%= sehuṇḍa,%} the milk-
hedge plant, Euphorbia Antiquorum.
<LEND>

<L>52341<pc>1117-b<k1>su<k2>su<h>1
{#su#} 1¦. {%su,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%savati, savate,%} &c.,
to go.
<LEND>

<L>52342<pc>1117-b<k1>su<k2>su<h>2
{#su#} 2¦. {%su,%} cl. 1. 2. P. {%savati, sauti, suṣāva,%}
&c., to possess power or supremacy.
<LEND>

<L>52343<pc>1117-b<k1>su<k2>su<h>3
{#su#} 3¦. {%su,%} cl. 5. P. A. {%sunoti%} (1st du. {%su-%}
{%nuvas%} or {%sunvas,%} 1st pl. {%sunumas%} or {%sun-%}
{%mas%}), {%sunute, suṣāva, suṣuve, soṣyati, -te,%}
{%asāvīt%} or {%asauṣīt, asoṣṭa%} or {%asaviṣṭa, sotum%}
(Ved. Inf. {%sotave%}), to pour out, sprinkle, make a
libation (especially of the Soma juice); to press out
juice (especially from the Soma plant), to extract
or prepare the Soma juice or any other juice, to
distil (wine, spirits, &c.); to churn; to perform a
sacrifice (especially with the Soma); to bathe [cf.
1. {%savana, sūtyā%}]: Pass. {%sūyate,%} Aor. {%asāvi%} (Ved.
Pass. 3rd sing. {%sunve,%} 3rd pl. {%sunvire = sutā ba-%}
{%bhūvuḥ%}): Caus. {%sāvayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asūṣa-%}
{%vat%} (according to some {%asīṣavat%}): Desid. of Caus.
{%suṣāvayiṣati:%} Desid. {%susūṣati:%} Intens. {%soṣū-%}
{%yate;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὕ-ω, ὑ-ε-τό-ς;</lang> Umbr. <nsi>savitu.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page1117-c+ 80]

<L>52344<pc>1117-c<k1>sut<k2>sut<h>1
1. {%sut, t, t, t,%}¦ extracting juice, pouring out, sprinkling,
making libations, (see {%pra-sut, madhu-ṣut%}); ({%t%}),
m. {%= stotṛ,%} (Naigh. III. 16.)
<LEND>

<L>52345<pc>1117-c<k1>suta<k2>suta<h>1
1. {%suta, as, ā, am,%}¦ poured out; extracted or
expressed (as Soma juice); ({%as, am%}), m. n., Ved.
the expressed Soma juice, a Soma libation, (in Naigh.
II. 7. enumerated among the {%anna-nāmāni.%})
 — 1. {%suta-pa, as,%} m. (for 2. {%su-tapa%} see p. 1120,
col. 1), a drinker of the Soma juice; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of a class of deities. {%—Suta-pā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved.
a drinker of libations, (Sāy. {%= huta-śiṣṭa-soma-%}
{%pīta-yajamāna,%} Ṛg-veda I. 155, 2); drinking the
effused Soma juice (said of Indra). {%—Suta-pāvan, ā,%}
{%arī, a,%} Ved. drinking the effused Soma juice. {%—Su-%}
{%tam-bhara, as,%} m., N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi. {%—1. suta-%}
{%vat, ān,%} m. possessed of Soma juice, a drinker of
Soma juice; an offerer of a libation. {%—Suta-soma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. possessing effused Soma, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%abhiṣutena somenopetaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 2, 2.)
{%—Sutā-vat,%} Ved. = 1. {%suta-vat%} above. {%—Sute-kara,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. (Sāy.) one who makes a Soma libation.
{%—Sute-gṛbh, p, p, p,%} or {%sute-gṛbha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. received at the effusion (said of Soma; Sāy. {%=%}
{%abhiṣutena rasena gṛhītaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda V. 44, 5).
{%—Sute-manas, ās,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>52346<pc>1117-c<k1>suti<k2>suti
{%Suti, is,%}¦ f. extracting or pouring out the Soma
juice, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52347<pc>1117-c<k1>sutyA<k2>sutyA<h>1
1. {%sutyā,%}¦ f. Soma pressing, Soma preparation [cf.
{%adya-s˚, śvaḥ-s˚%}]; sacrificial ablution, (see {%sūtyā%}
below.)
<LEND>

<L>52348<pc>1117-c<k1>sutvan<k2>sutvan
{%Sutvan, ā,%}¦ m. an offerer of Soma juice; a drinker
of Soma; a student who has performed his ablutions
(subsequent or preparatory to a sacrifice); a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>52349<pc>1117-c<k1>sunvat<k2>sunvat
{%Sunvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ pouring out libations, offering
sacrifice, sacrificing; ({%an%}), m. an offerer.
<LEND>

<L>52350<pc>1117-c<k1>sunvAna<k2>sunvAna
{%Sunvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. offering libations;
({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Su-mantu.
<LEND>

<L>52351<pc>1117-c<k1>suzuvARa<k2>suzuvARa
{%Suṣuvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ one who has poured out
libations.
<LEND>

<L>52352<pc>1117-c<k1>suzvayat<k2>suzvayat
{%Suṣvayat, an, antī, at%}¦ (according to some
fr. a Nominal base {%suṣvaya,%} to which {%suṣva-%}
{%yanta,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 36, 6, may possibly also be
referred; but according to Sāy. derived fr. rt. {%ay%}
with a reduplicated form of {%su%} prefixed), Ved. pour-
ing out libations.
<LEND>

<L>52353<pc>1117-c<k1>suzvARa<k2>suzvARa
{%Suṣvāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. pouring out libations,
being poured forth, (Sāy. {%suṣvāṇebhis = sunvad-%}
{%bhir yajamānaiḥ,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 29, 2; {%= sūya-%}
{%māna,%} IX. 101, 11; {%suṣvāṇaḥ = yajamānebhyaḥ%}
{%kāmān prerayan,%} as if fr. rt. 1. {%sū,%} Ṛg-veda IX.
6, 8.)
<LEND>

<L>52354<pc>1117-c<k1>suzvi<k2>suzvi
{%Suṣvi, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. pouring out libations, offer-
ing sacrifices, (Sāy. {%suṣvim = somānām abhiṣo-%}
{%tāram,%} Ṛg-veda I. 61, 15; {%suṣvaye = somaṃ%}
{%sunvate,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 25, 7.) {%—Suṣvi-tara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. making more libations, one who offers
frequent sacrifices.
<LEND>

<L>52355<pc>1117-c<k1>susvAna<k2>susvAna
{%Susvāna, as, ā, am, = suṣvāṇa.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>52356<pc>1117-c<k1>sUti<k2>sUti<h>1
1. {%sūti, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. see p. 1118, col. 1), a place
where Soma juice is poured out or extracted ({%=%}
{%somābhiṣava-bhūmi,%} according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>52357<pc>1117-c<k1>sUtyA<k2>sUtyA
{%Sūtyā,%}¦ f. drinking the Soma juice at a sacrifice;
religious bathing, ablution preparatory or subsequent
to a sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>52358<pc>1117-c<k1>sUma<k2>sUma
{%Sūma, as,%}¦ m. milk; water; sky, heaven.
<LEND>

<L>52359<pc>1117-c<k1>sotavya<k2>sotavya
{%Sotavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be poured out, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52360<pc>1117-c<k1>sotf<k2>sotf<h>1
1. {%sotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (for 2. see p. 1118, col. 2),
Ved. one who presses out the Soma plant, one who
pours out libations.
<LEND>

<L>52361<pc>1117-c<k1>sotva<k2>sotva
{%Sotva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= sotavya,%} to be poured
out or offered, (Sāy. {%abhiṣotavya,%} Ṛg-veda X.
160, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>52362<pc>1117-c<k1>soma<k2>soma
{%Soma.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>52363<pc>1117-c<k1>su<k2>su<h>4
{#su#} 4¦. {%su%} (= rt. 3. {%sū,%} p. 1130, but by
some identified with rt. 3. {%su,%} col. 2, the
act of pouring out the Soma juice being compared
to that of generation); cl. 1. 2. P. {%savati, sauti,%}
{%suṣāva, soṣyati, asauṣīt%} or (according to some)
{%asāvīt,%} cl. 2. A. {%sūte%} (1st sing. {%suve%}), Impf. {%asūta%}
(1st sing. {%asuvi,%} 1st du. {%asūvahi%}), Pot. {%suvīta,%}
[Page1118-a+ 81]
Impv. {%sūtām%} (1st sing. {%suvai,%} 1st du. {%suvāvahai,%}
1st pl. {%suvāmahai%}), cl. 4. A. {%sūyate, suṣuve,%}
{%soṣyate%} or {%saviṣyate, asoṣṭa%} or {%asaviṣṭa,%} (in
Atharva-veda XIV. 1, 33. the form {%suvāti%} occurs,
which might also be referred to rt. 1. {%sū%}), Inf. {%sotum,%}
{%savitum,%} to beget, procreate, engender, generate; to
bring forth a child, give birth to, bear, produce, yield;
to confer, bestow (Ved.); to gain, acquire (Ved.); to ac-
cept, (Sāy. {%sāviṣat = anujānātu,%} Ṛg-veda I. 164,
26): Pass. {%sūyate,%} Aor. {%asāvi,%} to be begotten; to be
brought forth: Caus. {%sāvayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asū-%}
{%ṣavat,%} (according to some {%asīṣavat%}): Desid. of
Caus. {%suṣāvayiṣati:%} Desid. {%susūṣati, -te:%} In-
tens. {%soṣūyate, soṣavīti, soṣoti;%} [cf. Zend
<nsi>hunu,</nsi> ‘a son;’ Gr. <lang n="greek">υἱός, ὑατέρα</lang> = Lat. <nsi>uterus;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>su-nu-s;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>sy-nu;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>su-nu-s,</nsi> ‘a son.’]
<LEND>

<L>52364<pc>1118-a<k1>sut<k2>sut<h>2
2. {%sut, t, t, t,%}¦ begetting, generating, engendering.
<LEND>

<L>52365<pc>1118-a<k1>suta<k2>suta<h>2
2. {%suta, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 1. see p. 1117), begotten,
brought forth; ({%as%}), m. a son; a child, offspring;
a king; N. of the fifth sign or astrological house;
({%ā%}), f. a daughter; the plant Dur-ālabhā, q. v. {%—Su-%}
{%taṅ-gama, as,%} m. ‘son-obtaining,’ the father of a
son. {%—Suta-jīvaka, as,%} m. a kind of tree {%(= pu-%}
{%tra-jīva)%}. {%—Suta-nirviśeṣam,%} ind. exactly as a
child, not differently from a son. {%—Suta-pādikā,%} f.
a particular plant ({%= haṃsa-padī%}). {%—2. suta-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at%} (for 1. see p. 1117), having children;
({%ān%}), m. the father of a son. {%—Suta-vaskarā,%} f. the
mother of seven children. {%—Suta-śreṇī,%} f. the plant
Salvinia Cucullata. {%—Suta-sneha, as,%} m. ‘love for a
son,’ paternal affection. {%—Suta-hibuka-yoga, as,%} m.
junction of the fifth and fourth signs or astrological
houses (said to be suitable for marriages). {%—Sutātma-%}
{%ja%} ({%˚ta-āt˚%} or {%˚tā-āt˚%}), {%as,%} m. a grandson (either a
son's son or a daughter's son); ({%ā%}), f. a grand-
daughter (either a son's daughter or a daughter's
daughter). {%—Sutārthin (˚ta-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} desirous
of offspring. {%—Sutotpatti (˚ta-ut˚), is,%} f. birth of
a son.
<LEND>

<L>52366<pc>1118-a<k1>sutin<k2>sutin
{%Sutin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having or possessing a child, hav-
ing children; ({%ī%}), m. a father; ({%inī%}), f. a mother.
<LEND>

<L>52367<pc>1118-a<k1>sutI<k2>sutI
{%Sutī, īs,%}¦ m. f. (abl. gen. sing. {%sutyus%}), one who
wishes for a son; one who treats like a son.
<LEND>

<L>52368<pc>1118-a<k1>sutIya<k2>sutIya
{%Sutīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%sutīyati,%} &c., to desire a son;
to treat like a son (e. g. {%sutīyati śiṣyam,%} he treats
the pupil like a son); to wish for a daughter, (in this
case for {%sutā.%})
<LEND>

<L>52369<pc>1118-a<k1>sutyA<k2>sutyA<h>2
2. {%sutyā,%}¦ f. bringing forth a child, parturition.
<LEND>

<L>52370<pc>1118-a<k1>sU<k2>sU
{%Sū, ūs,%}¦ f. child-bearing, &c. See 4. {%sū,%} p. 1130,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52371<pc>1118-a<k1>sUta<k2>sUta<h>1
1. {%sūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see p. 1130, col. 2), born,
engendered, produced; the sun [cf. {%sūra%}]; ({%as, am%}),
m. n. quicksilver, mercury; ({%ā%}), f. a woman who has
given birth to a child or one recently delivered.
{%—Sūta-mahodadhi,%} N. of a work on medicine.
{%—Sūta-rāj, ṭ,%} m. quicksilver.
<LEND>

<L>52372<pc>1118-a<k1>sUtaka<k2>sUtaka
{%Sūtaka, am,%}¦ n. birth, production; impurity from
child-birth or miscarriage; ({%as, am%}), m. n. quick-
silver, mercury; ({%akā%}), f. a woman recently de-
livered; [cf. {%sūtikā%} below.] {%—Sūtakā-gṛha, am,%}
n. a part of a house appropriated to a woman in
child-birth; a lying-in chamber.
<LEND>

<L>52373<pc>1118-a<k1>sUti<k2>sUti<h>2
2. {%sūti, is,%}¦ f. (for 1. see p. 1117, col. 3; for 3. see
p. 1131), birth, production, delivery, child-bearing,
parturition, bringing forth; offspring, progeny. {%—Sūti-%}
{%gṛha, am,%} n. the lying-in chamber, (also written
{%sūtī-gṛha.%}) {%—Sūti-māsa%} or {%sūtī-māsa, as,%} m. the
month of delivery, the last month of gestation or
pregnancy {%(= vaijanana)%}. {%—Sūty-āśauca, am,%} n.
impurity caused by child-birth (continuing for ten
days in the case of regular parturition, and in the
case of a miscarriage for a period of days equal to
the number of months elapsed since conception).
<LEND>

<L>52374<pc>1118-a<k1>sUtikA<k2>sUtikA
{%Sūtikā,%}¦ f. a woman who has recently given birth
to a child, a lying-in woman. {%—Sūtikāgāra (˚kā-%}
{%āg˚)%} or {%sūtikā-gṛha%} or {%sūtikā-geha%} or {%sūtikā-%}
{%bhavana, am,%} n. or {%sūtikāvāsa (˚kā-āv˚), as,%} m.
a room or part of a house appropriated to a woman
at child-birth, a lying-in chamber. {%—Sūtikā-roga,%}
{%as,%} m. puerperal sickness, fever or sickness of any
kind supervening on child-birth. {%—Sūtikā-ṣaṣṭhī,%}
[Page1118-b+ 80]
f. a particular goddess worshipped on the sixth day
after child-birth. {%—Sūtikāṣaṣṭhī-pūjā,%} f. the wor-
ship of the above goddess.
<LEND>

<L>52375<pc>1118-b<k1>sUna<k2>sUna
{%Sūna, as, ā, am,%}¦ born, produced; blown, blos-
somed, budded (as a flower); empty, vacant, (in this
sense probably for {%śūna%} and {%śūnya%}); ({%ā%}), f. a
daughter, (for {%sūnā,%} a slaughter-house, &c., see s. v.);
({%am%}), n. bringing forth, parturition; a bud, blossom,
flower; [cf. {%pra-sūna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52376<pc>1118-b<k1>sUnavat<k2>sUnavat
{%Sūnavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has borne or pro-
duced; having budded or blossomed.
<LEND>

<L>52377<pc>1118-b<k1>sUnu<k2>sUnu
{%Sūnu, us,%}¦ m. a son; a child, offspring; a daughter's
son; a younger brother; the sun; N. of the author
of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 176 (having the patro-
nymic Ārbhava); ({%us, ūs%}), f. a daughter; [cf. Zend
<nsi>hunu;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">υἱός;</lang> Goth. <nsi>sunus,</nsi> ‘a son;’ Angl. Sax.
<nsi>sunu;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>sohn,</nsi> &c.; see col. 1.]
<LEND>

<L>52378<pc>1118-b<k1>sUvan<k2>sUvan
{%Sūvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. bearing children, generat-
ing, producing; [cf. {%bahu-sūvarī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52379<pc>1118-b<k1>sotf<k2>sotf<h>2
2. {%sotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%}¦ (for 1. see p. 1117, col. 3),
engendering, generating, bringing forth children.
<LEND>

<L>52380<pc>1118-b<k1>su<k2>su<h>5
{#su#} 5¦. {%su,%} ind. (thought by some to be a
shortened form of {%vasu,%} q. v.; opposed to
{%dus,%} q. v., and corresponding to Gr. <lang n="greek">εὖ;</lang> in the Veda
liable to become {%ṣu,%} see Ṛg-veda I. 36, 13, I. 112,
1, Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 107; and to lengthen a preceding
vowel, see Pāṇ. VI. 3, 134; also becoming {%sū%} in
Ṛg-veda I. 10, 11, &c.; cf. {%sukam%}), an enhancing
particle frequently used as a prefix implying ‘good,
well, excellent, excellently, beautiful, beautifully,
honourable, worthy of respect or reverence, excessive,
excessively, exceedingly, much, very; readily, easily,
willingly, quickly’ (Ved., Sāy. {%= suṣṭhu,%} and in
Ṛg-veda I. 112, 1, &c. used separately to qualify a
verb); according to native authorities this prefix may
also imply {%anu-mati,%} ‘assent;’ {%sam-ṛddhi,%} ‘pros-
perity;’ {%kṛcchra,%} ‘distress;’ [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">εὖ:</lang> Cambro-
Brit. <nsi>hu, hy, he:</nsi> Armor. <nsi>he:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>so, soailce,</nsi> ‘a
good fashion, good manners;’ <nsi>sucridh,</nsi> ‘easy,’ {%= su-%}
{%kṛta.%}] {%—Su-ūti, is,%} f., Ved. good protection, kind
assistance or favour. {%—Su-kakṣa, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the hymn Ṛg-veda VIII. 81, 82 (having
the patronymic Āṅgirasa). {%—Su-kaṇṭakā,%} f. ‘hav-
ing good thorns,’ the Aloe plant, Aloe Indica. {%—Su-%}
{%kaṇṭha, as,%} m., N. of a musician. {%—Su-kaṇḍu, us,%}
m. ‘much-scratching,’ the itch. {%—Su-kanda, as,%} m.
‘having a good bulb,’ an onion; a yam; the esculent
root Arum Campanulatum; a sort of grass, Scirpus
Kysoor; other bulbous plants {%(= vārāhī-kanda; =%}
{%dharaṇī-kanda)%}. {%—Su-kandaka, as,%} m. an onion.
{%—Su-kandin, ī,%} m. Arum Campanulatum. {%—Su-%}
{%kanyaka%} or {%su-kanyāka, as, ā, am,%} having a
beautiful maiden, (Vopa-deva VII. 23.) {%—Su-kanyā,%}
f. a beautiful girl; N. of a daughter of Śaryāti (and
wife of the Ṛṣi Cyavana). {%—Su-kaparda, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having beautiful braided hair. {%—Su-kara, as, ā,%}
or {%ī, am,%} easy to be done, practicable, feasible,
attainable; easy to be managed, doing well; ({%ā%}), f.
a tractable cow; ({%am%}), n. doing good, charity, be-
nevolence. {%—Sukara-sandhi, is, is, i,%} easily joined
or united. {%—Su-karṇaka, as, ikā, am,%} having
beautiful ears; ({%as%}), m. a particular tree, {%= hasti-%}
{%kanda; (ikā),%} f. the plant Salvinia Cucullata. {%—Su-%}
{%karṇī,%} f. the colocynth. {%—Su-karma, ās,%} m. pl.,
N. of a class of deities. {%—Su-karman, ā, ā, a,%} one
whose deeds are righteous or virtuous, performing
good works; doing what is right, acting virtuously,
virtuous, good; active, diligent; ({%ā%}), m. epithet of
Viśva-karman (the artist or architect of the gods);
the seventh of the twenty-seven astronomical Yogas,
(see {%yoga%}); N. of a teacher of the Sāma-veda;
({%āṇas%}), m. pl., N. of a class of deities. {%—Su-kala,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%kal,%} to sound forth),
one who has a great reputation for liberality both
in giving and using. {%—Su-kavi, is,%} m. a good or
excellent poet. {%—Sukavi-tā,%} f. the state of a good
poet, excellent poetical talent. {%—Su-kāṇḍa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a good stem or stalk; well-jointed;
({%as%}), m. the Kāravella plant. {%—Su-kāṇḍikā,%} f. the
Kāṇḍīra creeper. {%—Su-kāṇḍin,%} having good stems
[Page1118-c+ 81]
or stalks; beautifully jointed; ({%ī%}), m. a bee. {%—Su-%}
{%kānti, is,%} m., N. of a son of Pulaha. {%—Su-kāma,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having good desires; ({%ā%}), f. the Trāya-
māṇā plant. {%—Su-kālin, inas,%} m. pl., N. of a class
of Pitṛs (regarded as the sons of Vasiṣṭha and
the especial Pitṛs of Śūdras). {%—Su-kālukā,%} f. the
Ḍoḍī shrub. {%—Su-kāṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} having good
wood; ({%ā%}), f. the Kaṭvī plant, the Kāṣṭha-kadalī,
q. v. {%—Su-kāṣṭhaka, as, ā, am,%} having good
wood; ({%am%}), n. the Deva-dāru pine. {%—Su-kiṃ-%}
{%śuka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having beautiful Kiṃśuka
wood (said of a carriage either from being made of
this wood or from resembling in colour the flowers
of the Kiṃśuka tree, Ṛg-veda X. 85, 20; perhaps
to be translated ‘bright-coloured’). {%—Su-kīrtti, is,%}
f. good report, celebration; epithet of a particular
hymn; ({%is%}), m., N. of the author of Ṛg-veda X.
131 (having the patronymic Kākṣīvata). {%—Su-kuca,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} handsome-breasted, having beautiful breasts.
{%—Su-kundaka, as,%} m. an onion; [cf. {%su-kandaka.%}]
{%—Su-kundana, as,%} m. the Varvara plant. {%—Su-%}
{%kumāra, as,%} m. a beautiful youth; ({%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}),
beautifully young or youthful, very soft or tender,
delicate, smooth; ({%as%}), m. a variety of the sugar-
cane ({%= puṇḍra%}); the Śyāmāka grain; a sort of
mustard ({%= kṣava%}); the wild Campaka; N. of a
Daitya; of the father of Satya-ketu; ({%ā%}), f. double
jasmine; great-flowered jasmine; the plantain; another
plant ({%= pṛkkā%}); N. of a river; ({%ī%}), f. the Nava-
mālikā jasmine. {%—Su-kumāraka, as,%} m. a beautiful
youth; rice, {%= śāli; (am),%} n. the Tamāla-pattra,
q. v. {%—Sukumāra-tanu-tvac, k, k, k,%} having very
soft and delicate skin. {%—Sukumāra-tara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} much more delicate. {%—Sukumāra-nakha-tvac,%}
{%k, k, k,%} having very delicate nails and skin. {%—Suku-%}
{%mārāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} having very soft
limbs. {%—Su-kurīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a beau-
tiful head-dress. {%—Su-kula, am,%} n. a good or virtuous
family; ({%as, ā, am%}), of good family; well-born.
{%—Su-kula-strī, īs,%} f. a woman of good family, a
respectable woman. {%—Su-kṛt, t, t, t,%} doing good,
benevolent; virtuous, pious; wise, learned; fortunate,
well-fated; performing splendid sacrifices, making
good offerings; ({%t%}), m. a skilful worker, epithet of
Tvaṣṭṛ. {%—Su-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done well or pro-
perly; well made, well constructed; treated with
kindness, befriended, assisted; virtuous, pious; for-
tunate, auspicious; ({%am%}), n. any good or virtuous
act, kindness, bounty, friendliness, aid; virtue, moral
merit; fortune, auspiciousness; reward, recompense.
{%—Sukṛtāvāsa (˚ta-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} constituting a
well-made residence, well provided with accommoda-
tion. {%—Su-kṛti, is,%} f. well-doing; acting in a friendly
or kind manner, kindness; virtue; the practice of
religious austerities; ({%is%}), m., N. of a son of Pṛthu.
{%—Su-kṛtin, ī, inī, i,%} acting well or kindly; vir-
tuous, pious, good; benevolent; wise, learned;
fortunate, lucky. {%—Sukṛtocchraya (˚ta-uc˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} made very high, very lofty. {%—Sukṛtodīraṇa%}
{%(˚ta-ud˚), am,%} n. the proclaiming or blazoning
abroad of good actions. {%—Sukṛt-tara, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. more beneficent. {%—Su-kṛtyā,%} f., Ved. good
sacrificing, a splendid sacrificial offering. {%—Su-ketu,%}
{%us,%} m., N. of a son of Nandi-vardhana; of a son
of Su-nītha. {%—Su-keśa, as, ā,%} or {%ī%} (Pāṇ. IV. 1, 54),
{%am,%} having beautiful hair; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of
Vidyut-keśa; ({%ī%}), f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Su-keśan,%}
m. (apparently) a proper N. (in conjunction with
Bhāradvāja). {%—Su-keśara%} or {%su-kesara, as,%} m. the
citron; ({%am%}), n. a kind of metre. {%—Sukeśānta%}
{%(˚śa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} having beautiful locks of hair
or ringlets. {%—Su-keśi, is,%} m., N. of a son of Vidyut-
keśin. {%—Su-keśin, ī, inī, i, = su-keśa; (ī),%} m. {%=%}
{%su-keśi%}. {%—Su-kolī,%} f. a medicinal root {%(= kṣīra-%}
{%kākolī)%}. {%—Su-kośaka, as,%} m. the Kośāmra plant.
{%—Su-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved. well-sacrificing, doing
good acts or very wise, (Sāy. {%= śobhana-karman%} or
{%śobhana-prajña%}); ({%us%}), m. an epithet of Agni;
of Mitra and Varuṇa; of Savitṛ; of Soma; of
Indra. {%—Sukratūyayā,%} ind. from a desire to sacrifice
well or to do good, (Sāy. {%śobhana-karmecchayā,%}
[Page1119-a+ 81]
Ṛg-veda I. 160, 4.) {%—Su-kriyā,%} f. a good action,
good work, moral or religious observance. {%—Su-%}
{%kruddha, as, ā, am,%} very angry. {%—Su-kṣatra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a good dominion, mighty,
strong, powerful; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king. {%—Su-%}
{%kṣaya, as,%} m. a beautiful house, (Sāy. {%= śobhana%}
{%yajña-gṛha,%} Ṛg-veda X. 23, 4.) {%—Su-kṣiti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. having good dwellings, granting good
dwellings. {%—Su-kṣetra, am,%} n. an excellent field.
{%—Su-kṣetriyā,%} ind., Ved. desire for good fields or
with such desire, (Sāy. {%= sukṣetrecchā,%} Ṛg-veda
I. 97, 2; cf. {%su-gātuyā.%}) {%—Su-kṣeman, a,%} n.,
Ved. water, (in Naigh. I. 12. enumerated among
the {%udaka-nāmāni.%}) {%—Su-kha,%} &c., see {%sukha,%}
s. v. {%—Su-khādi, is, is, i,%} Ved. wearing beautiful
rings (said of the Maruts; cf. {%khādi-hasta%}). {%—Su-%}
{%khyāta, as, ā, am,%} very renowned, celebrated,
famous. {%—Su-khyāti, is,%} f. good report, fame, cele-
brity. {%—Su-ga, as, ā, am,%} going well or gracefully,
graceful, elegant; easy of access, easily passed, (op-
posed to {%dur-ga%}); easily understood, intelligible;
({%am%}), n. happiness; feces, ordure. {%—Su-gaṇ, ṇ, ṇ,%}
{%ṇ,%} counting well or easily, a ready reckoner; easily
calculated. {%—Su-gaṇita, as, ā, am,%} easily or accu-
rately calculated. {%—Su-gata, as, ā, am,%} well-gone,
going well, passed, gone; well-bestowed; ({%as%}), m.
the Buddha or a particular Buddha. {%—Su-gati, is,%} m.
a good or happy condition; N. of an Arhat. {%—Su-%}
{%gandha, as, ā, am,%} sweet-smelling, odoriferous,
fragrant; ({%as%}), m. fragrance, odour, perfume; sul-
phur; the red Śigru tree; {%= caṇaka; = bhū-tṛna;%}
a trader, dealer; ({%ā%}), f. the ichneumon plant ({%=%}
{%rāsnā%}); zedoary, Curcuma Zerumbet; a fragrant
grass; a sort of lime; sacred basil; various plants
and trees (including several kinds of jasmine, {%=%}
{%bandhyā-karkoṭakī; = rudra-jaṭā; = śata-puṣ-%}
{%pā; = nākulī; nava-mālikā; svarṇa-yūthikā;%}
{%pṛkkā; gaṅgā-pattrī; sallakī; mādhavī;%}
{%anantā; mātuluṅgā%}); N. of a goddess; of an
Apsaras; ({%am%}), n. small cumin seed; a fragrant
grass ({%= kat-tṛṇa,%} p. 199); the blue lotus; sandal;
the Granthi-parṇa plant. {%—Sugandhaka, as,%} m. the
red Tulasī; sulphur; the orange; a sort of gourd,
Momordica Mixta. {%—Sugandha-tā,%} f. fragrance,
perfume. {%—Sugandha-taila-niryāsa, am,%} n. a par-
ticular perfume made with roses, &c. {%—Sugandha-%}
{%pattrā,%} f. the plant Rudra-jaṭā. {%—Sugandha-bhū-%}
{%tṛṇa, am,%} n. a kind of fragrant grass. {%—Sugandha-%}
{%mūlā,%} f. ‘having a fragrant root,’ the ichneumon
plant {%(= sthala-padminī)%}. {%—Sugandhāditya (˚dha-%}
{%ād˚), as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Sugandhāmalaka%}
{%(˚dha-ām˚), am,%} n. a kind of mixture of various
herbs. {%—Su-gandhāra, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva.
{%—Su-gandhi, is, is, i,%} very sweet-smelling or
fragrant, redolent with perfumes; virtuous, pious;
({%is%}), m. a perfume, fragrance; the supreme Being
({%= paramātman%}); a sort of sweet-smelling Mango;
({%i%}), n. a drug and perfume ({%= elabāluka%}); the
root of long pepper; a kind of fragrant grass (both
Cyperus Rotundus and Scirpus Kysoor); coriander
seed {%(= gandha-tṛṇa; = pippalī-mūla)%}. {%—Su-%}
{%gandhika, as,%} m. ‘having a sweet or strong smell,’
incense; sulphur; a sort of large rice; ({%am%}), n. the
white lotus {%(= puṣkara-mūla; = gaura-suvarṇa;%}
{%= uśīra)%}. {%—Sugandhi-kusuma, am,%} n. a fragrant
flower; ({%as%}), m. a sort of yellow oleander; ({%ā%}), f.
the plant Trigonella Corniculata. {%—Sugandhi-tā,%}
f. fragrance, agreeable scent, perfume. {%—Sugandhi-%}
{%tejana,%} Ved. a kind of fragrant grass. {%—Sugandhi-%}
{%triphalā,%} f. nutmeg; areca nut; cloves. {%—Su-gan-%}
{%dhin, ī, inī, i,%} very fragrant or sweet-smelling;
({%inī%}), f. the fragrant plant Ārāma-śītalā. {%—Sugan-%}
{%dhi-mūla, am,%} n. the root of Uśīra; ({%ā%}), f. the
ichneumon plant. {%—Sugandhi-mūṣikā,%} f. the musk
rat or shrew. {%—Sugandheśa (˚dhā-īśa), as,%} m. a
statue of the tutelary deity of Su-gandhā. {%—Su-gan-%}
{%man,%} see Vopa-deva XXVI. 68. {%—Su-gabhasti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. beautiful-handed, skilful-handed (said of
Tvaṣṭṛ). {%—Su-gama, as, ā, am,%} easy to be tra-
versed or travelled over, easy of access or approach,
accessible; easy, practicable; plain, intelligible; [cf.
[Page1119-b+ 81]
{%dur-gama.%}] {%—Su-gamya, as, ā, am, = su-gama,%}
col. 1. {%—Su-gava%} or {%su-gavya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having fine cows, abounding in cattle. {%—Su-gahana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very thick or close, very impervious;
({%ā%}), f. an enclosure round a place of sacrifice to
exclude profane access {%(= kumbā)%}. {%—Sugahanā-%}
{%vṛti (˚na-āv˚), is,%} f. a sacred enclosure, (see above.)
{%—Su-gātuyā,%} ind., Ved. with a desire for good
roads, (Sāy. {%= śobhana-mārgecchayā,%} Ṛg-veda I.
97, 2.) {%—Su-gātra, am,%} n. a fine figure, graceful
person; ({%as, ā, am%}), handsome-limbed, having a
good figure, graceful. {%—Su-gādha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
easily fordable. {%—Su-gīti, is,%} f. good singing; a kind
of metre. {%—Su-gu, us, us, u,%} Ved. {%= su-gava%} above.
{%—Su-guṇin, ī, inī, i,%} very rich in virtues, very
virtuous or excellent. {%—Su-gupta, as, ā, am,%} well
hidden or concealed, very secret; ({%am%}), ind. very
secretly, privily. {%—Sugupta-lekha, as,%} m. a very
private letter or one written in cipher. {%—Su-gupti,%}
{%is,%} f. good protection, secrecy. {%—Suguptī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P.
{%-karoti, -kartum,%} to guard well. {%—Su-gulpha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having beautiful ancles, (Pāṇ. IV. 1, 54.) {%—Su-%}
{%gūḍha, as, ā, am,%} well concealed, very secret.
{%—Su-gṛha, as, ī, am,%} having a beautiful abode;
({%as%}), m. the taylor-bird, Sylvia Sutoria. {%—Su-gṛhīta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} held fast or firmly, seized, grasped; taken
or applied properly or auspiciously. {%—Sugṛhīta-nā-%}
{%man, ā,%} m. ‘one whose name is invoked auspiciously,’
epithet of Yudhiṣṭhira and of others who are in-
voked early in the morning to secure good luck.
{%—Sugṛhītābhidha (˚ta-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} having
an auspicious name. {%—Su-gopā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. hav-
ing good protectors, well protected. {%—Sugopā-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having the best guardians, protected
most effectually. {%—Su-gmya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. easy to
be obtained or acquired, (Sāy. {%= suṣṭhu gantavya%});
yielding happiness, (in Naigh. III. 6. {%sugmyam%}
is enumerated among the {%sukha-nāmāni.%}) {%—Su-%}
{%grathita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. well fastened. {%—Su-gran-%}
{%thi, is, is, i,%} well knotted; having beautiful joints;
({%is%}), m. a kind of plant {%(= coraka)%}. {%—Su-grāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. a dainty morsel, tidbit, bonne bouche. {%—Su-%}
{%grāhya, as, ā, am,%} easy to be taken, easily appre-
hensible, easy to be laid hold of, &c. {%—Su-grīva, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} handsome-necked, having a beautiful neck;
({%as%}), m. a swan or Rāja-haṃsa; a hero; a sort of
weapon; N. of a monkey-king (who, with his
army of monkeys headed by Hanumat, assisted
Rāma-candra in conquering Rāvaṇa and recovering
Sītā; he was fabled to be son of the Sun, and was
re-established by Rāma in the throne of Kiṣkindhya,
which had been usurped by his brother Bāli or Bālin,
see {%kiṣkindhya%}); N. of one of the four horses of
Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu [cf. {%megha-puṣpa, valāhaka,%}
{%śaivya%}]; N. of Śiva; of Indra; of a particular moun-
tain; of a particular Nāga or serpent of Pātāla; of
the father of the ninth Jina or Arhat of the present
age; of an Asura or demon; the countenance of a
friend (?); a piece of water (?); ({%ī%}), f., N. of a
daughter or (according to others) wife of Kaśyapa
(regarded as the parent of horses, camels, and asses;
she is usually held to be the daughter of Kaśyapa
and Tāmrā). {%—Sugrīveśa (˚va-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord
of the monkey-king Su-grīva,’ Rāma. {%—Su-gla, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} (rt. {%glai%}), very weary. {%—Su-ghaṭita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} well joined or united, well contrived or devised,
well arranged or managed. {%—Su-ghora, as, ā, am,%}
very fearful or terrible, terrific, hideous. {%—Su-ghoṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. a pleasant sound or cry. {%—Sughoṣa-grāma,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a place. {%—Su-cakra, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having beautiful wheels. {%—Su-cakṣus, us, us, us,%}
having good eyes, seeing well; ({%us%}), m. a dis-
cerning or wise man, a learned man; the glo-
merous fig-tree. {%—Su-cañcukā,%} f. a kind of vege-
table {%(= mahā-cañcu)%}. {%—Su-catura, as, ā, am,%} see
Vopa-deva VI. 29. {%—Su-candra, as,%} m., N. of a
king of Vaiśālī; of another person. {%—Su-carita,%}
{%am,%} n. good conduct; ({%as, ā, am%}), well conducted,
well behaved; well managed; ({%ā%}), f. a well conducted
or faithful wife. {%—Sucarita-vrata, as, ā, am,%} well
performing religious obligations. {%—Su-caritra, am,%}
[Page1119-c+ 81]
n. good conduct, a good or virtuous course of life;
({%as, ā, am%}), well conducted; ({%ā%}), f. a virtuous or
faithful wife. {%—Su-carman, ā, ā, a,%} having beautiful
skin or bark; ({%ā%}), m. the Bhūrja tree. {%—Su-cāru,%}
{%us, us%} or {%vī, u,%} very lovely or beautiful, pleasing,
delightful; ({%us%}), m., N. of a son of Kṛṣṇa. {%—Su-%}
{%cāru-svana, as, ā, am,%} having a delightful sound,
melodious, harmonious, mellifluous. {%—Su-citra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} very variegated or spotted; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a king; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of gourd {%(= cirbhiṭā).%}
{%—Su-citraka, as, ā, am,%} very variegated; ({%as%}),
m. a kingfisher; a kind of speckled snake {%(= citra-%}
{%sarpa)%}. {%—Sucitra-vījā,%} f. ‘having variegated seed,’
a kind of plant {%(= viḍaṅgā)%}. {%—Su-cintana, am,%}
n. the act of thinking well, deliberate consideration.
{%—Su-cintā,%} f. deep thought, due reflection or con-
sideration. {%—Su-cintita, as, ā, am,%} well thought
about, well considered or weighed, well imagined,
well pondered upon, well conceived. {%—Su-ciram,%}
ind. for a very long time, very long, a good while;
({%āya%}), ind. for a very long time. {%—Sucirāyus (˚ra-%}
{%ay˚), us,%} m. ‘having a very long life,’ a god, divinity.
{%—Su-cuṭī,%} f. ‘cutting well or easily,’ a pair of
nippers or tongs. {%—Su-cetī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made
good minded or well disposed. {%—Su-cetu,%} Ved. good
feeling, benevolence, kindness, favour, graciousness,
(generally in inst. c. {%su-cetunā,%} which may, how-
ever, be referred to {%su-cetuna%} below.) {%—Su-cetuna,%}
Ved. well disposed, favourable, gracious, auspicious,
(in Ṛg-veda IX. 65, 30. {%su-cetunam = su-jñānam,%}
according to Sāy.) {%—Su-celaka, as,%} m. fine cloth,
cloth. {%—Su-cchattra, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f.
the river Śata-dru or Sutlej. {%—Su-cchardiṣ-ṭama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a most delightful dwelling,
very blissful. {%—Su-cchardis, is, is, is,%} Ved. having
a beautiful abode. {%—Su-jaṅgha, as, ā, am,%} having a
beautiful leg. {%—Su-jana, as,%} m. a good or virtuous
man, benevolent man; a gentleman; ({%as, ā, am%}),
virtuous, good, respectable; kind, benevolent; N. of
Indra's charioteer. {%—Sujana-tā,%} f. goodness, virtue,
kindness, benevolence; bravery; a number of good
men or respectable persons. {%—Sujana-tva, am,%} n.
goodness, kindness. {%—Su-janiman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved.
having noble birth, of exalted birth. {%—Sujanetara-%}
{%maitrī (˚na-it˚),%} f. the friendship of a bad man.
{%—Su-janman, ā, ā, a,%} of noble or respectable birth;
lawfully begotten, legitimate. {%—Su-jambha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. handsome-jawed, (Sāy. {%= su-daṃṣṭra.%}) {%—Su-%}
{%jambhan, ā, ā, a,%} having good jaws. {%—Su-jala, am,%}
n. good water; a lotus; ({%as, ā, am%}), having good or
sweet water. {%—Su-jalpa, as,%} m. good speech; a
particular kind of discourse (described as sincere,
earnest, humble, full of meaning and vivacity). {%—Su-%}
{%javas, ās, ās, as,%} quick, swift. {%—Su-jāta, as, ā, am,%}
well born, of high birth; well grown, tall; well
produced, well made, beautiful; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
plant {%(= tuvarī)%}. {%—Sujāta-tā,%} f. the being well
born, nobility. {%—Sujātāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%}
having well-formed limbs. {%—Su-jāti, is, is, i,%} of a
good tribe or species; of a good race or caste; ({%is%}),
m., N. of a son of Vīti-hotra. {%—Sujātīya, as, ā,%}
{%am, = su-jāti%} above. {%—Su-jihva, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
beautiful-tongued, bright-tongued, having bright
flames (said of Agni). {%—Su-jīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} well
digested; decayed, worn out. {%—Su-jīva, as,%} m. good
or easy life. {%—Su-jīvantī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= svar-%}
{%ṇa-jīvantī)%}. {%—Su-jīvita, as, ā, am,%} lived well or
to some purpose; ({%am%}), n. a lucky or happy life.
{%—Su-juṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. well satisfied, fully
propitiated. {%—Su-jūrṇi, is, is, i,%} Ved. very quick or
active; very old, worn out, (Sāy. {%= śobhana-java,%}
{%suṣṭhu jīrṇa,%} i. e. {%purāṇa,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 6, 3);
glowing brightly [cf. rt. {%jūrv,%} and see Ṛg-veda
VI. 63, 4]. {%—Su-jñāta, as, ā, am,%} well known,
easily known. {%—Su-jyeṣṭha, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Su-jyaiṣṭhya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having much
pre-eminence, bringing much prosperity (said of a
son). {%—Su-jyotis, is, is, is,%} having a beautiful light,
well lighted. {%—Su-tanu, us,%} f. a beautiful body;
({%us, us%} or {%vī, u%}), having a beautiful body; very
thin, very slender or delicate; emaciated; ({%us%} or
[Page1120-a+ 81]
{%vī%}), f. a woman; N. of a daughter of Ugra-sena.
{%—Sutanu-tā,%} f. great thinness or delicacy. {%—Su-%}
{%tantrī, īs, īs, i,%} having good strings, well-stringed,
sounding well, melodious. {%—2. su-tapa, as, ā, am,%}
(for 1. {%suta-pa%} see under 1. {%suta%}), practising great
penance, very austere. {%—Su-tapas, as,%} n. severe
penance; ({%ās, ās, as%}), one who practises great or
severe penance; having great heat; ({%ās%}), m. an
ascetic, devotee, anchorite, hermit; the sun; N. of
the father of Bali; of the son of Pariplava; of a son
of Vasiṣṭha. {%—Su-tapta, as, ā, am,%} much heated,
very hot. {%—Su-tamām,%} ind. most excellently, best.
{%—Su-tara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. easy to be crossed.
{%—Su-tarām,%} ind. better, more excellently; more;
excessively; exceedingly; consequently; ({%na s˚,%} very
badly; {%mā s˚,%} in no way, by no means.) {%—Su-tar-%}
{%kārī,%} f. a kind of gourd {%(= deva-dālī)%}. {%—Su-tar-%}
{%dana, as,%} m. the Koïl or Indian cuckoo. {%—Su-tar-%}
{%man, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. easily carrying across (said of a
boat; Sāy. {%= suṣṭhu tārayitṛ,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 42,
3). {%—Su-tala, am,%} n. ‘immense depth,’ one of the
seven divisions of the lower regions or regions under
the earth peopled by the Nāgas, (according to
some the sixth in order, but see {%pātāla,%} p. 563);
the base or foundation of a large building. {%—Su-%}
{%taṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. well-fashioned. {%—Sutām-%}
{%roṣṭha (˚ra-oṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} very ruddy-lipped.
{%—Su-tāra, as,%} m. ‘well-crossing,’ ‘well-delivering,’
N. of a Muni; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%tuṣṭi,%} one of the nine
kinds of acquiescence (in the Sāṅkhya phil.; cf. {%su-%}
{%pārā%}); scil. {%siddhi,%} one of the eight kinds of
Perfection (in the Sāṅkhya phil.); N. of a daughter
of Śva-phalka. {%—Su-tāraka, as, ā, am,%} having
beautiful stars; ({%ā%}), f. ‘good-accomplisher,’ N. of
one of the twenty-four goddesses who execute
the commands of the twenty-four Arhats. {%—Su-%}
{%tikta, as, ā, am,%} very bitter or pungent; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of bitter medicinal plant, {%= parpaṭa; (ā),%}
f. a species of gourd {%(= koṣātakī)%}. {%—Su-tiktaka,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘very bitter,’ a kind of gentian, Gentiana
Cherayta; the coral tree. {%—Su-tīkṣṇa, as, ā, am,%}
very sharp; very pungent; acutely painful; ({%as%}), m.
the Śigru tree or a white species of it; N. of a
Muni. {%—Sutīkṣṇa-daśana, as,%} m. ‘very sharp-
toothed,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Sutīkṣṇāgra (˚ṇa-ag˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very sharp-pointed. {%—Su-tīrtha, as,%} m.
a good preceptor (opposed to {%ku-tīrtha%}); epithet of
Śiva. {%—Su-tuka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having good off-
spring. {%—Su-tuṅga, as, ā, am,%} very lofty or tall;
({%as%}), m. the cocoa-nut tree; a particular culmination
or high position (of the planets &c.). {%—Su-tuṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} easily satisfied. {%—Su-tus, ūs, ūs, ūs%} (inst.
pl. {%su-tūrbhis%}), well-sounding. {%—Su-tejana, as,%} m.
a particular tree {%(= dhanvan)%}. {%—Su-tejas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} very sharp or sharp-edged; very bright, splendid;
very mighty or potent; ({%ās%}), m., N. of one of the
Arhats of the past age; a worshipper of the sun.
{%—Su-tejita, as, ā, am,%} well-sharpened, very sharp.
{%—Su-tailā,%} f. the plant Mahā-jyotiṣmatī, q. v.
{%—Su-trātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} Ved. a good protector or
preserver, well protecting or saving. {%—Su-trāman, ā,%}
m. ‘good protector,’ N. of Indra [cf. {%sūtrāman%}];
({%ā%}), f. ‘excellent protectress,’ epithet of Pṛthivī.
{%—Su-daṃśita, as, ā, am,%} well bitten; well armed
[cf. {%pari-daṃśita%}]; pressed very close together,
crowded into close proximity. {%—Su-daṃsas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. accomplishing mighty or splendid actions,
energetic, active, powerful; [cf. {%puru-daṃsas.%}] {%—Su-%}
{%dakṣa, as, ā, am,%} very capable or clever; (Ved.)
having great energy, very strong. {%—Su-dakṣiṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very sincere or upright, very liberal in
sacrificial gifts; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king of Vidarbha;
({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of Dilīpa. {%—Su-dagdhikā,%} f.
a kind of plant {%(= dagdhā)%}. {%—Su-daṇḍa, as,%} m.
the ratan cane {%(= vetra)%}. {%—Su-daṇḍikā,%} f. the Go-
rakṣī plant. {%—Su-dat, an, atī, at,%} having hand-
some teeth. {%—Su-datta, as, ā, am,%} well or properly
given; [cf. {%sūtta,%} s. v.] {%—Su-datra, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
granting well or liberally ({%= kalyāṇa-dāna,%} Nir-
ukta VI. 14). {%—Su-danta, as,%} m. a good tooth;
({%as, ī, am%}), having good teeth; ({%as%}), m. an actor,
[Page1120-b+ 80]
dancer; ({%ī%}), f. the female elephant of the north-
west quarter. {%—Su-dama, as, ā, am,%} easy to be
subdued. {%—Su-dayita, as, ā, am,%} much beloved,
very dear. {%—Su-darbha, as, ā, am,%} having good
Darbha or Kuśa grass; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of grass or
sugar-cane {%(= ikṣu-darbhā)%}. {%—Su-darśa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} easily seen. {%—Su-darśana, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} good
looking, beautiful, handsome; easily seen; ({%as%}), m.
the discus of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa (in this sense also
{%am,%} n.); a vulture; epithet of Śiva; N. of Mount
Meru; of a son of Dadhīci; of a son of Dhruva-
sandhi; of the father of the eighteenth Arhat of the
present Avasarpiṇī; of one of the nine Jaina Śukla-
balas or Bala-devas [cf. {%śukla-bala%}]; of a poet; the
rose-apple, Eugenia Jambu; ({%ī, am%}), f. n., N. of
Indra's city Amarāvatī; ({%ā%}), f. a handsome woman;
a woman; an order, command; a particular drug or
medicinal plant; the plant Cocculus Cordifolius or
Menispermum Glabrum; ({%am%}), n., N. of Jambu-
dvīpa. {%—Sudarśana-cūrṇa, am,%} n. ‘beautiful
powder,’ a particular medicinal compound used in
fevers. {%—Sudarśana-dvīpa, am,%} n. Jambu-dvīpa.
{%—Sudarśana-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of a work (from
which the Hanūmat-paddhati and Hanūmat-kavaca
are chiefly extracted). {%—Su-dala, as,%} m. ‘having
good leaves;’ a kind of plant, {%= kṣīra-moraṭā;%}
{%(ā),%} f. other plants {%(= śāla-parṇī; = taruṇī)%}. {%—Su-%}
{%dā, ās, ās, am,%} very bountiful, munificent. {%—Su-%}
{%dānu, us, us, u,%} Ved. giving well or liberally, mak-
ing beautiful presents, bounteous, giving plentiful
rain; offering sacrifices. {%—Su-dānta, as, ā, am,%}
well-subdued, well-restrained, very self-controlled;
({%as%}), m. a follower of Śākya-muni (q. v.), a Buddhist.
{%—Sudānta-sena, as,%} m., N. of a medical author.
{%—Su-dāman, ā, ā, a,%} giving well, one who gives
liberally; ({%ā%}), m. a cloud; the sea; a mountain;
N. of Indra's elephant Airāvata; of a particular
Go-pa or cowherd; of a poor Brāhman (who came
to Dvārakā to ask Kṛṣṇa's aid, and was raised to
wealth by him); N. of a particular mountain [cf.
{%saudāmanī%}]; of a river. {%—Su-dāmā,%} f., N. of a
river in the north of India (mentioned in Rāmā-
yaṇa II. 71, 1). {%—Su-dāya, as,%} m. a good gift,
auspicious gift; a special gift given on particular
solemn occasions (e. g. a gift to a student at his in-
vestiture with the sacred thread or Yajñopavīta, a
nuptial present, &c.); one who makes the above
present (e. g. a mother, father, husband, &c.). {%—Su-%}
{%dāru, us,%} m. ‘having good timber,’ N. of a part of
the Vindhya mountains called Pāripātra, q. v.; [cf.
{%kulācala.%}] {%—Su-dāruṇa, as, ā, am,%} very cruel,
very dreadful or terrible. {%—Su-dāvan, ā,%} m., Ved. a
giver of good, a benefactor. {%—Su-dās, ās,%} m., Ved. a
liberal man, liberal sacrificer; N. of a king at whose
court both Vasiṣṭha and Viśvā-mitra appear to have
acted as family priests, (Sudās Paijavana is regarded
as the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 133.) {%—Su-%}
{%dāsa, as,%} m., N. of a king; [cf. {%su-dās.%}] {%—Su-%}
{%dās-tara, as, ā, am,%} more liberal, very liberal.
{%—Su-dina, am,%} n. a fine day, auspicious day,
happy day; fine weather. {%—Sudina-tva, am,%} n.,
Ved. state of fine weather, an auspicious time. {%—Su-%}
{%dināya,%} Nom. A. {%sudināyate,%} to be fine weather.
{%—Sudināha (˚na-aha), am,%} n. a day of fine wea-
ther, a fine day. {%—Su-div, -dyaus, -dyaus, -dyu,%}
Ved. having a good sky, having good days. {%—Su-%}
{%dīti, is, is, i,%} Ved. shining beautifully, {%= su-dīditi%}
below; ({%is%}), m., N. of an Āṅgirasa (author of a
hymn in the Ṛg-veda). {%—Su-dīditi, is, is, i,%} Ved.
shining beautifully. {%—Su-dīrgha, as, ā, am,%} very
long (in time or space), very extended; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of cucumber {%(= cīnākarkaṭī)%}. {%—Sudīrgha-%}
{%gharmā,%} f. the plant Marsilia Quadrifolia. {%—Su-%}
{%dīrgha-phalikā,%} f. ‘having very long fruit;’ a kind
of egg-plant. {%—Su-duḥkha, am,%} n. great pain;
({%as, ā, am%}), very painful; ({%am%}), ind. very sorrow-
fully. {%—Su-duḥkhita, as, ā, am,%} much grieved,
greatly afflicted. {%—Su-duḥsaha, as, ā, am,%} very
difficult to be borne or endured. {%—Su-dugha, as, ā,%}
{%cāra, as, ā, am,%} very ill-conducted, very badly be-
[Page1120-c+ 81]
haved or wicked; ({%as%}), m. a profligate. {%—Su-durā-%}
{%ruha, as, ā, am,%} very hard to be ascended, inacces-
sible. {%—Su-durāvarta, as, ā, am,%} very difficult to
be dissuaded. {%—Su-durgama, as, ā, am,%} very diffi-
cult to traverse or cross, very difficult to sail over.
{%—Su-durjaya, as, ā, am,%} very difficult to be over-
come or conquered. {%—Su-durdarśa, as, ā, am,%} very
difficult to be beheld or observed. {%—Su-durbuddhi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} very foolish. {%—Su-durlabha, as, ā, am,%}
very difficult to be attained, quite unattainable, very
scarce or rare. {%—Su-duścara, as, ā, am,%} very diffi-
cult to be performed or attained; very arduous or
painful. {%—Su-duṣkara, as, ī, am,%} very difficult to
be done, most arduous. {%—Su-duṣkha, as, ā, am,%}
very painful, very unpleasant; ({%am%}), ind. very pain-
fully, very sorrowfully. {%—Su-duṣkhita, as, ā, am,%}
much pained or grieved. {%—Su-duṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}
very bad, very wicked or depraved, much cor-
rupted or spoiled. {%—Su-dustara, as, ā, am,%} very
difficult to be passed or crossed; [cf. {%dus-tara.%}]
{%—Su-dustyaja, as, ā, am,%} very difficult to be
abandoned or quitted. {%—Su-dūra, as, ā, am,%} very
distant; ({%am%}), ind. for a very long distance; in a
very high degree; ({%āt%}), ind. from afar. {%—Sudūra-%}
{%parāhata, as, ā, am,%} driven back to a great dis-
tance. {%—Su-dṛḍha, as, ā, am,%} very firm or hard;
({%am%}), ind. very firmly. {%—Sudṛḍha-vrata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very rigid or strict in vows. {%—Su-dṛś, k, k, k,%}
having beautiful eyes, very beautiful; ({%k%}), f. a pretty
woman. {%—Su-dṛśa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. looking beauti-
fully, having a beautiful appearance (said of Uṣas).
{%—Su-dṛśīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. looking beautiful,
handsome. {%—Sudṛśīka-sandṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. hav-
ing a handsome or beautiful appearance; ({%k%}), f. epi-
thet of Uṣas. {%—Su-dṛśya, as, ā, am,%} clearly
visible. {%—Su-dṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} easily seen, easy to
be seen; looked at earnestly. {%—Su-deva, as,%} m. a
favourable or propitious deity; N. of a Brāhman;
({%ī%}), f. a proper N. {%—Su-deṣṇa, as,%} m., N. of a son
of Kṛṣṇa; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of the wife of Virāṭa; of the wife of Bali. {%—Su-%}
{%dohana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. easy to be milked. {%—Su-%}
{%dyut, t, t, t,%} Ved. shining brightly. {%—Su-dyumna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very bright; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king; of
a son of Manu Vaivasvata (supposed to have been
born a female, under the name of Iḍā, q. v., and
afterwards changed into a male through the favour
of Mitra and Varuṇa). {%—Su-draviṇas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. having splendid riches or treasures (said of
Agni). {%—Su-dru, us, us, u,%} Ved. having beautiful
wood. {%—Su-dvijānana (˚ja-ān˚), as, ā, am,%} hav-
ing a mouth containing beautiful teeth. {%—Su-dhana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very rich; ({%as%}), m. a proper N. {%—Su-%}
{%dhanus, us,%} m., N. of a son of Kuru. {%—Su-dhan-%}
{%van, ā, ā, a,%} having an excellent bow; ({%ā%}), m. a
good archer, bowman; N. of Viśva-karman, q. v.;
of a king; the son of an outcast Vaiśya (but see
below). {%—Sudhanvācārya, as,%} m. (by some sepa-
rated into two words, see {%su-dhanvan%} and {%cārya%}),
the son of an outcast Vaiśya by a woman of the
same class, (Manu X. 23.) {%—Su-dharma, as,%} m.,
N. of one of the ten disciples of the celebrated Jaina
teacher and Arhat Mahā-vīra, q. v., (the line of Jaina
ascetics is said to be traced up to him in regular suc-
cession, the other ten disciples of Mahā-vīra having
left no successors); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of
deities; ({%ā, ī%}), f. an assembly or council of the gods.
{%—Su-dharman, ā, ā, a,%} keeping well to duty, at-
tentive to duties; ({%ā%}), m. a council or assembly of
the gods; the hall or palace of Indra (given to Ugra-
sena by Kṛṣṇa); a man attentive to the proper
maintenance of his family; N. of a son of king
Bhadra-sena; of a Kṣatriya. {%—Su-dharṣa%} or {%su-%}
{%dharṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} (probably) easy to be laid
hold of, easy of attainment or approach; [cf. {%dur-%}
{%dharṣa.%}] {%—Su-dhā,%} see p. 1127. {%—Su-dhāma,%} N.
of a mountain; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of deities.
{%—Su-dhāman, ā,%} m., N. of a Muni; of a Loka-pāla.
{%—Su-dhāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. streaming beautifully.
{%—Su-dhita, as, ā, am,%} Ved. well or properly placed,
well-ordered, perfect, secure; well-disposed, kind,
[Page1121-a+ 81]
good, benevolent; prosperous, happy; well held, well
a ned, well thrown (said of weapons). {%—Su-dhiti,%}
{%is,%} m. f. an axe (more correctly written {%sva-dhiti,%}
q. v.). {%—Su-dhī, īs,%} f. a good understanding, good
sense, intelligence; ({%īs, īs, i%}), having a good under-
standing, wise, clever, sensible; ({%īs%}), m. a wise or
clever or intelligent man; a Pandit, teacher. {%—Su-%}
{%dhīra, as, ā, am,%} very firm or resolute; very con-
siderate or wise. {%—Su-dhura, as, ā, am,%} Ved. carry-
ing a burden well (said of a horse). {%—Su-dhūmya,%}
{%as,%} m. a particular fragrant substance {%(= svādu).%}
{%—Su-dhūmra, as, ā, am,%} very purple. {%—Sudhūmra-%}
{%varṇā,%} f. ‘of a deep purple colour,’ epithet of one
of the seven tongues of fire. {%—Su-dhṛti, is,%} m.,
N. of a king. {%—Sudhy-upāsya%} (written {%suddhy-%}
{%upāsya%}), {%as,%} m. ‘he who is to be worshipped by the
intelligent,’ epithet of the Deity; ({%as%}), m. a particu-
lar kind of royal palace (of which twelve sorts are
enumerated); a particular attendant on Kṛṣṇa;
({%ā%}), f. a woman; N. of the goddess Umā; of one
of Umā's female companions; the plant Aristolochia
Indica; a sort of pigment, {%= go-rocanā; (am),%} n.
the club of Bala-rāma. {%—Su-nakṣatra, as,%} m., N.
of a king; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the second night of the civil
month {%(karma-māsa)%}. {%—Su-nanda, as, ā, am,%} pleas-
ing well, delighting. {%—Sunandā-sahita, as, ā, am,%}
attended by Su-nandā. {%—Su-nandinī,%} f. a species of
the Ati-jagatī metre {%(= mañju-bhāṣiṇī)%}. {%—Su-%}
{%naya, as,%} m. good conduct; good policy [cf. {%dur-%}
{%naya%}]; N. of a son of Ṛta; of a son of Pariplava;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Su-nayana, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having beautiful eyes; ({%as%}), m. a deer; ({%ā%}), f.
a woman. {%—Su-nasa, as, ā, am,%} handsome-nosed;
({%ā%}), f., N. of a river. {%—Su-nābha, as, ā, am,%} having
a beautiful navel, having a good nave or centre;
({%as%}), m. a mountain; the mountain Maināka, q. v.;
N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of a son of Garuḍa.
{%—Su-nāma-dvādaśī,%} f. a particular religious ob-
servance performed on the twelfth day of the twelfth
month. {%—Su-nāman, ā, -mnī, a,%} well named; ({%ā%}),
m., N. of a son of Ugra-sena, of a chief of the Śūra-
senas (represented as destroyed in battle together
with his whole army by Kṛṣṇa). {%—Su-nālaka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} having a beautiful stalk or stem; ({%as%}), m.
a kind of tree {%(= vaka-puṣpa)%}. {%—Su-nāsā,%} f. a hand-
some nose. {%—Su-nāsākṣa-bhruva (˚sā-akṣ˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} endowed with handsome nose, eyes, and eye-
brows. {%—Su-nāsika, as, ā, am,%} having a handsome
nose; having a good point or projection; ({%ā%}), f. a
particular plant {%(= kāka-nāsā)%}. {%—Su-nāsīra,%} see s. v.
{%—Su-nigraha, as, ā, am,%} well controlled, easily
restrained. {%—Su-nidrā,%} f. sound sleep. {%—Su-nidhā%}
(inst. of {%su-nidha%} for {%su-nidhā%} according to Sāy.),
Ved. with careful putting down, with great care,
(Sāy. {%= śobhanena nidhānena,%} Ṛg-veda III. 29,
12.) {%—Su-ninada, as, ā, am,%} sounding agreeably
or pleasantly. {%—Su-nibhṛta, as, ā, am,%} very lonely
or private; ({%am%}), ind. very secretly or closely, very
narrowly, very privately. {%—Su-niraja, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. altogether easy to be attained, (Sāy. {%= sukhena%}
{%niḥśeṣam prāpya,%} Ṛg-veda I. 10, 7.) {%—Su-%}
{%nirūpita, as, ā, am,%} well observed or inspected,
well examined, well seen into. {%—Su-nirṇikta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} thoroughly cleansed, well washed off. {%—Su-%}
{%nirmathā%} (according to Sāy. inst. case fr. {%su-nir-%}
{%math%}), Ved. with auspicious attrition ({%= śobhanena%}
{%manthanena,%} Ṛg-veda III. 29, 12). {%—Su-niryāsā,%}
f. ‘having good exudation or resin,’ the plant Jiṅginī,
q. v. {%—Su-niśita, as, ā, am,%} very sharp. {%—Su-niś-%}
{%cala, as,%} m. ‘very unchangeable,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Su-niścita, as, ā, am,%} well ascertained or de-
termined, resolved; commended, approved; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a particular Buddha. {%—Su-niṣaṇṇa%} or
{%su-niṣaṇṇaka, am,%} n. the pot-herb Marsilea
Quadrifolia. {%—Su-niṣka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
beautiful ornaments. {%—Su-niṣṭapta, as, ā, am,%}
well heated or burnished. {%—Su-nīta, as, ā, am,%} well-
conducted, well-behaved; politic; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
king; ({%am%}), n. good conduct or behaviour; good
policy, prudence. {%—Su-nīti, is,%} f. good conduct or
behaviour, good manners, propriety, good policy; N.
[Page1121-b+ 81]
of the mother of Dhruva; ({%is, is, i%}), well-conducted.
{%—Su-nītha, as, ā, am,%} well-disposed, well-conducted,
righteous, virtuous, moral, good; ({%as%}), m. a good
leader (Ved.); a Brāhman; N. of a king; of Śiśu-
pāla, king of Cedi; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the first-born
daughter of Mṛtyu or death (wife of Aṅga). {%—Su-%}
{%nīla, as, ā, am,%} very black or blue, dark; ({%as%}), m.
the pomegranate tree; ({%am%}), n. the root of the
Andropogon Muricatus; ({%ā%}), f. common flax ({%=%}
{%alasī%}); other plants {%(= viṣṇu-krāntā; = jaratī-%}
{%tṛṇa)%}. {%—Su-nīlaka, as,%} m. ‘very blue,’ a kind of
blue Bhṛṅga-rāja bird; a blue gem (perhaps an
emerald or sapphire); a kind of tree {%(= nīlāsana).%}
{%—Su-nṛśaṃsa, as, ā, am,%} very mischievous or in-
jurious, very cruel. {%—Su-nṛśaṃsa-kṛt, t, t, t,%} doing
very malicious things, malicious. {%—Su-netra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} beautiful-eyed; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%tuṣṭi,%} one of the
nine kinds of acquiescence (according to the Sāṅkhya
phil.; cf. {%su-pāra%}). {%—Su-nau, aus, aus, u,%} having
good ships; ({%u%}), n. water (according to Śabda-k.).
{%—Su-pakva, as, ā, am,%} well cooked or matured,
thoroughly ripe; ({%as%}), m. a sort of fragrant Mango.
{%—Su-pattra, as, ā, am,%} having beautiful leaves;
({%as%}), m. a kind of plant ({%= āditya-pattra%}); a sort
of grass, {%= pallivāha; (ā),%} f. various plants, {%= ru-%}
{%dra-jaṭā; = śatāvarī; = pālakyā; = śamī; =%}
{%śāla-parṇī; (am),%} n. the leaf of the Laurus Cassia.
{%—Su-pattraka, as,%} m. the Śigru tree; ({%ikā%}), f.
{%= jatukā%}. {%—Su-pattrin, ī, iṇī, i,%} well feathered.
{%—Su-patnī,%} f. (a woman) having a good husband;
[cf. {%sa-patnī.%}] {%—Su-patha, as,%} m. a good road;
good course or way; good conduct; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having a good road, having beautiful paths; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a brother of Śaśi-kalā. {%—Su-pathin, -pan-%}
{%thās,%} m. a good road; ({%-panthās, -pathī, -pathi%}),
having good roads. {%—Supathin-tara, as,%} m., Ved. a
better road. {%—Su-pathya, as, ā, am,%} very whole-
some; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant {%(= śveta-cillī)%}. {%—Su-%}
{%padma, as, ā, am,%} having beautiful lotuses; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a grammar by Padma-nābha-datta; ({%ā%}), f.
orris root. {%—Su-paptanī,%} m. du. (in the Pada text
{%su-paptani%}), easily descending, quickly alighting,
(according to Sāy. {%su-paptani = śobhana-patanam%}
{%yathā bhavati%} or {%su-patanau,%} Ṛg-veda I. 182, 5.)
{%—Su-parikliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} sorely distressed,
grievously pained. {%—Su-paricchanna, as, ā, am,%}
well surrounded or furnished with requisites. {%—Su-%}
{%pariśrānta-vāha, as, ā, am,%} having very wearied
horses. {%—Su-parīkṣaṇa, am,%} n. the art of examin-
ing or trying well, thorough examination. {%—Su-pa-%}
{%rīkṣita, as, ā, am,%} well examined, well tried,
thoroughly investigated. {%—Su-parṇa, as, ā,%} or {%ī, am,%}
well-winged, having good or beautiful wings; having
beautiful leaves; ({%as%}), m. a ray of the sun, solar ray,
(in Naigh. I. 5. {%su-parṇāḥ%} is enumerated among the
{%raśmi-nāmāni,%} and in I. 14. among the {%aśva-nā-%}
{%māni%}); N. of Garuḍa, q. v.; a class of bird-like beings
of a semi-divine character; any supernatural bird; a
cock; the tree Cassia Fistula; N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi;
({%ā, ī%}), f. a number of lotuses or a pool abound-
ing with them; ({%ī%}), f. the mother of the bird Ga-
ruḍa; (Ved.) ‘the beautiful-winged one,’ the sky
({%= dyaus,%} sometimes identified with Vāc and re-
garded as the mother of metres; see {%sauparṇeya%}).
{%—Su-parṇaka, as, ikā, am,%} having good wings;
having beautiful leaves; ({%as%}), m. Garuḍa or any bird
of supernatural character; the tree Cassia Fistula;
the tree Echites Scholaris; ({%ikā%}), f. various plants,
&c. {%(= svarṇa-jīvantī; = palāśī; = śāla-parṇī;%}
{%= reṇukā; = vākucī)%}. {%—Suparṇa-ketu, us,%} m.
‘having Garuḍa for a symbol,’ epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Suparṇa-yātu, us,%} m., Ved. a demon in the
shape of a Su-parṇa. {%—Suparṇa-vāta, as,%} m. the wind
agitated by the wings of Garuḍa. {%—Suparṇākhya%}
{%(˚ṇa-ākh˚), as,%} m. the plant Nāga-keśara. {%—Supar-%}
{%ṇī-tanaya, as,%} m. ‘son of Su-parṇī,’ Garuḍa. {%—Su-%}
{%parṇeya, as,%} m. a son of Su-parṇī. {%—Su-paryava-%}
{%sita, as, ā, am,%} quite finished or concluded, well-
nigh accomplished. {%—Su-paryāpta, as, ā, am,%} very
extensive, very spacious or comprehensive; well filled
or fitted out (as a palace with various offices and
[Page1121-c+ 81]
buildings). {%—Su-parvan, ā, ā, a,%} well jointed, hav-
ing many joints or knots; ({%ā%}), m. a bamboo; an
arrow; a god, deity; a special lunar day (in which
religious ceremonies are performed, as the full and
new moon, and the eighth and fourteenth days of
each fortnight); smoke; ({%ā%}), f. white Dūrvā grass.
{%—Su-palāyita, as, ā, am,%} completely fled or run
away; well or skilfully retreated; ({%am%}), n. a total
rout or retreat; a good or skilful retreat. {%—Su-palāśa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having many leaves, abounding in
leaves, leafy. {%—Su-pākya, am,%} n. a particular medi-
cinal salt {%(= viḍ-lavaṇa)%}. {%—Su-pāñcālaka,%} see Vopa-
deva VII. 2, VII. 18. {%—Su-pāṇi, is, is, i,%} Ved. beau-
tiful-handed, skilful-handed, dexterous. {%—Su-pātra,%}
{%am,%} n. a good or suitable vessel, proper receptacle;
a fit or competent person, an able man, any one well
fitted for an office. {%—Su-pād, -pāt, -pāt%} or {%-padī,%}
{%pāt,%} having good or handsome feet. {%—Su-pāna, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} well or easily drunk, easy to be drunk. {%—Su-%}
{%pāra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. well crossing, easy to be
crossed; ({%ā%}), f., scil. {%tuṣṭi%} (in the Sāṅkhya phil.),
one of the nine kinds of acquiescence and five kinds
of <nsi>external</nsi> acquiescence (the other four being {%su-%}
{%tārā, su-netrā, su-marīcikā,%} and {%anuttamā%} or
{%sāttvikī;%} cf. {%salila%}). {%—Su-pārśva, as,%} m. the waved-
leaf fig-tree ({%= plakṣa%}); N. of a minister of Rā-
vaṇa; of a fabulous bird (son of Sampāti, mentioned
in Rāmāyaṇa IV. 59); of the seventh Arhat of the
present Ava-sarpiṇī; of a son of Śrutāyus; of a son
of Dṛḍha-nemi; of a place. {%—Supārśvaka, as,%} m.,
N. of the third Arhat of the future Utsarpiṇī; a kind
of veined-leaf fig {%(= gardabhāṇḍa)%}. {%—Supārśvoru%}
{%(˚va-ūru), us, us%} or {%ūs, u,%} having fine ribs and
thighs. {%—Su-piṅgalā,%} f. a kind of plant ({%= jīvantī%});
another plant {%(= jyotiṣmatī)%}. {%—Su-pippala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. having fine fruit, (Sāy. {%= su-phala,%} Ṛg-
veda VII. 101, 5.) {%—Su-piś,%} Ved. beautifully varie-
gated or decorated, having fine ornaments, well-
formed, having beautiful limbs, graceful; [cf. {%viśva-%}
{%piś.%}] {%—Su-pis, īs, īs, īs%} (inst. pl. {%su-pīrbhīs%}), well
going, well walking. {%—Su-pīḍana, am,%} n. the act of
pressing or pinching pleasantly, rubbing and knead-
ing the limbs. {%—Su-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%} well pressed.
{%—Su-pīta, as,%} m., N. of the fifth Muhūrta; ({%am%}), n.
a carrot ({%= garjara,%} see 2. {%pīta%}). {%—Su-pīna, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very stout or big. {%—Su-pīvan, ā,%} &c., drinking
well (according to Śabda-k.). {%—Su-puṃsī,%} f. (a woman)
having a good husband. {%—Su-puṭa, as,%} m. a sort
of bulbous plant ({%= kola-kanda%}); another plant
{%(= viṣṇu-kanda)%}. {%—Su-putra, as,%} m. an excellent
son. {%—Su-putrikā,%} f. {%= jatukā%} (according to Śab-
da-k.). {%—Su-puru-hūti, is, is, i,%} very much invoked.
{%—Su-puṣkarā,%} f. a particular plant {%(= sthala-%}
{%padminī)%}. {%—Su-puṣkala, as, ā, am,%} very copious.
{%—Su-puṣpa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having beautiful
flowers; ({%as%}), m. the coral tree; the Śirīṣa tree;
other plants, &c., {%= rakta-puṣpaka; = hari-dru;%}
{%= rāja-taruṇī; (ī),%} f. the plantain tree; a sort of
fennel ({%= miśreyā%}); the white Clitoria Ternatea
({%= a-parājitā%}); other plants, &c., {%= jīrṇa-phañjī;%}
{%= śata-puṣpī; = droṇa-puṣpī; (am),%} n. cloves;
various plants, &c. ({%= āhulya; = prapauṇḍarīka;%}
{%= tūla%}); the menstrual excretion. {%—Su-puṣpikā,%}
f. a kind of tree or plant {%(= pāṭalā)%}. {%—Su-puṣpita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} blooming beautifully, in full flower; hav-
ing the hair bristling or thrilling (with internal plea-
sure). {%—Su-pūjita, as, ā, am,%} much honoured.
{%—Su-pūta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. well purified. {%—Su-%}
{%pūra, as, ā, am,%} easy to be filled; well filling; a
sort of lime or citron {%(= vīja-pūra)%}. {%—Supāraka,%}
{%as,%} m. the Vaka-puṣpa tree. {%—Su-pūrṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} well filled. {%—Su-peśas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. beauti-
ful in form, handsome. {%—Su-prakāśa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. very visible, manifest, apparent; public. {%—Su-%}
{%praketa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very wise; beautifully
shining. {%—Su-pracchanna, as, ā, am,%} well con-
cealed, very secret or private. {%—Su-prajas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} having good offspring. {%—Su-praṇīti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. skilfully guiding, wisely directing. {%—Su-%}
{%pratara, as, ā, am,%} Ved. easily crossing over;
far-shooting. {%—Su-pratarka, as,%} m. a sound judg-
[Page1122-a+ 81]
ment, good understanding or intellect. {%—Su-pra-%}
{%ticakṣa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. beautiful to look at
or behold. {%—Su-praticchannam,%} ind. in a very
secret manner. {%—Su-pratibhā,%} f. spirituous liquor
{%(= madirā)%}. {%—Su-pratiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} stand-
ing well; very celebrated, very glorious, famous; ({%ā%}),
f. good position, good reputation, fame, celebrity;
the establishment or erection (of a temple, idol,
&c.); installation, consecration; a species of metre
containing four lines of five syllables each; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a month. {%—Su-pratiṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%} well
set up or established or fixed, well situated or placed;
consecrated; celebrated; ({%as%}), m. the Uḍumbara
tree. {%—Su-pratiṣṇāta, as, ā, am,%} well bathed;
thoroughly purified or cleared; well versed in; well
investigated, clearly ascertained. {%—Supratiṣṇāta-%}
{%sūtra, as,%} m. a Brāhman well versed in the Sūtras,
one who is well skilled in repeating or has clearly
ascertained the (meaning of the) Sūtras. {%—Su-pra-%}
{%tīka, as, ā, am,%} having a beautiful shape or form,
well made, handsome; handsome-faced (Ved.); hav-
ing a beautiful trunk, strong as an elephant's trunk;
({%as%}), m., N. of Kāma-deva; of Śiva; of the ele-
phant of the north-east quarter. {%—Su-pratīta, as,%}
m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Su-pratūrti, is, is, i,%} Ved.
easily overpowering; (Sāy.) inflicting much injury.
{%—Su-pradoha, as, ā, am,%} easily milked, easy to
be milked. {%—Su-pradhṛṣya, as, ā, am,%} easy to
be injured, easily overpowered. {%—Su-prapāṇa, am,%}
n., Ved. a pond &c. easy for drinking, a good
drinking place, a good tank. {%—Su-prabuddha, as,%}
m., N. of a king (father of Māyā-devī, mother of
Buddha). {%—Su-prabha, as, ā, am,%} very bright or
splendid, brilliant, glorious; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of
the nine Śukla-balas of the Jainas; of a king; ({%ā%}),
f. one of the seven tongues of Fire; N. of a river
(sometimes regarded as one of the seven Sarasvatīs);
the Vākucī plant. {%—Suprabha-pura, am,%} n., N. of
a town. {%—Su-prabhāta, as, ā, am,%} well dawned,
well shone forth, well illumined or enlightened; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a particular river; ({%am%}), n. an auspicious
dawn or day-break, beautiful morning; the earliest
dawn; ({%e%}), ind. at earliest break of day. {%—Su-pra-%}
{%yas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having much food or sacrifice,
abounding in oblations (said of Agni); food-bestow-
ing, (in Ṛg-veda VII. 39, 2. {%su-prayā barhis =%}
{%śobhanānnena yuktam barhis,%} according to Sāy.;
by others regarded as from a base {%su-prayā,%} see
Mahī-dhara on Vājasaneyi-s. XXXIII. 44.) {%—Su-%}
{%prayukta, as, ā, am,%} well joined or applied, well
attached; well managed; closely connected. {%—Su-%}
{%prayukta-śara, as,%} m. one who fits an arrow skil-
fully on a bow, a good marksman, skilful archer.
{%—Su-prayoga, as,%} m. good application, good ma-
nagement; dexterity, expertness; close contact; ({%ā%}),
f., N. of a river. {%—Suprayoga-viśikha, as,%} m.
{%= suprayukta-śara%} above. {%—Su-pralambha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} easy of attainment. {%—Su-pralāpa, as,%} m.
good speaking, discoursing well, eloquence. {%—Su-%}
{%pravācana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having much speech
or eloquence, worthy of much praise. {%—Su-pravṛd-%}
{%dha, as, ā, am,%} full-grown; a proper N. {%—Su-%}
{%prasanna, as, ā, am,%} well pleased, very gracious or
favourable; ({%as%}), m., N. of Kuvera. {%—Suprasan-%}
{%naka, as,%} m. a kind of plant {%(= kṛṣṇārjaka).%}
{%—Su-prasarā,%} f. a kind of creeper {%(= pra-sāriṇī).%}
{%—Su-prasāda, as,%} m. extreme graciousness or kind-
ness, great propitiousness; ({%as, ā, am%}), very gracious
or kind, auspicious; ({%as%}), m., N. of Śiva. {%—Supra-%}
{%sādaka, as, ā, am,%} (probably) easily propitiated,
very placable. {%—Su-prāñc, -prāṅ, -prācī, -prāk,%}
Ved. easily going in front, proceeding well or quietly.
{%—Su-prāta, as, ā, am,%} (probably for {%su-prabhāta,%}
q. v.), dawning finely. {%—Su-prātar,%} ind. fine dawn
or morning. {%—Su-prāpya, as, ā, am,%} easily obtain-
able. {%—Su-prāyaṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. to be ap-
proached easily, easily accessible. {%—Suprāyaṇa-ta-%}
{%ma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most accessible; very delicate
or tender (said of the {%barhis%} or sacred grass; Sāy.
{%= mṛdu-tama,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 63, 3). {%—Su-prāvī,%}
{%īs, īs, i,%} Ved. well protected; well protecting, a care-
[Page1122-b+ 81]
ful protector, (Sāy. {%= suṣṭhu prakarṣeṇa rak-%}
{%ṣitṛ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 60, 1.) {%—Su-prāvya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. to be well protected, especially worthy of pro-
tection, (Sāy. {%= suṣṭhu prakarṣeṇa rakṣaṇīya,%}
Ṛg-veda I. 34, 4.) {%—Su-priya, as, ā, am,%} very
dear, greatly beloved, much loved or liked, agreeable,
pleasant; ({%as%}), m. (in prosody) a foot of two short
syllables, a pyrrhic; ({%ā%}), f. a lovely or charming
woman, a favourite wife; N. of an Apsaras. {%—Su-%}
{%prīta, as, ā, am,%} well pleased, much delighted, very
happy, well cared for, favoured, cherished; very
kind, very gracious or friendly. {%—Su-praitṛ, tā,%}
{%trī, tṛ,%} Ved. one who goes well. {%—Su-psaras, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} Ved. handsome in form. {%—Supsaras-tama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. most handsome in form (said of
Vāyu). {%—Su-phala, as, ā, am,%} bearing good or
much fruit, very fruitful, very fertile, very profitable;
({%as%}), m. the wood-apple tree, Feronia Elephantum
({%= kapittha%}); the pomegranate; the jujube; a sort
of bean, Phaseolus Mungo; the Karṇikāra tree;
({%ā%}), f. colocynth; a pumpkin, gourd; the plantain;
a kind of brown grape; another plant {%(= kāśmarī).%}
{%—Su-phena, am,%} n. ‘good foam,’ a cuttle-fish
bone. {%—Su-bandha, as, ā, am,%} well bound or
secured, having a good binding; ({%as%}), m. sesamum.
{%—Su-bandhana-vimocana, as,%} m. ‘good deliverer
from bonds,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Su-bandhu, us, us,%}
{%u,%} having good connections or friends; ({%us%}), m. a
good friend; N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi having the patro-
nymic Gaupāyana or Laupāyana and author of
several hymns in the Ṛg-veda; N. of a merchant;
of the author of the Vāsava-dattā. {%—Su-bala,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘very powerful,’ epithet of Śiva; N. of
a king of Gāndhāra. {%—Subala-putra, as,%} m. ‘son
of Subala,’ epithet of Śakuni; [cf. {%saubala.%}] {%—Su-%}
{%bahu, us, vī, u,%} very much, very many, very nume-
rous. {%—Su-bahu-śruta, as, ā, am,%} one who is deeply
versed in the Veda, a very profound divine or theo-
logian. {%—Su-bāndhava, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva.
{%—Su-bālaka, as,%} m., N. of a son of Kauśika. {%—Su-%}
{%bāladhi, is, is, i,%} fine-tailed. {%—Su-bālā-grāma, as,%}
m., N. of a village. {%—Su-bāhu, us, us, u,%} handsome-
armed; having mighty arms, strong-armed; ({%us%}),
m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra and king of Cedi;
of a son of Śatru-ghna and king of Mathurā; ({%us%}),
f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Su-buddhi, is, is, i,%} of good
understanding, wise, clever, intelligent, shrewd. {%—Su-%}
{%bodha, as, ā, am,%} easy of apprehension; easily
understood, easily taught; ({%as%}), m. making well
known, good information or knowledge; awakening
or waking up well; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a commentary on
the Mugdha-bodha; of a commentary on the Megha-
dūta by Bharata-sena; of a commentary on the Śiśu-
pāla-vadha by Bharata-sena. {%—Su-bodhanī,%} f., N.
of a commentary on the Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta; of
another on the Bhagavad-gītā; of another on the
Śruta-bodha by Manohara-śarman. {%—Su-bodhinī,%} f.,
N. of a commentary on Vijñāneśvara's Mitākṣarā
by Viśveśvara; of another on the Bhagavad-gītā by
Śrī-dhara-svāmin; of a short treatise on ritual by
Śiva-rāma. {%—Su-brahmaṇya, as,%} m., N. of Kārtti-
keya; one of the sixteen priests employed at a solemn
sacrifice; N. of a district; ({%ā%}), f. a particular recita-
tion of certain Mantras. {%—Su-brahman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved.
having or receiving excellent prayers, receiving or
uttering beautiful hymns; very pious. {%—Subrahma-%}
{%vāsudeva, as,%} m. (according to Śabda-k.), epithet of
the son of Vasudeva in the form of Brahman (i. e. of
Kṛṣṇa identified with the Creator). {%—Su-bhaga,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessing good fortune, very fortunate
or prosperous, happy, blessed, auspicious, highly fa-
voured; beautiful, lovely, charming, pretty; beloved,
liked, amiable; illustrious; ({%as%}), m. borax; the Aśoka
tree; the Campaka tree; red Amaranth; ({%ā%}), f. a
woman beloved by her husband; a favourite wife;
an honoured or honourable mother; a kind of wild
jasmine; turmeric; holy basil; various other plants,
&c., {%= kaivartī; = śāla-parṇī; = nīla-dūrvā; =%}
{%priyaṅgu; = kastūrī; = suvarṇa-kadalī; (am),%}
n. good fortune. {%—Subhagaṅ-karaṇa, as, ī, am,%}
making prosperous. {%—Subhaga-tva, am,%} n. prosperity.
[Page1122-c+ 81]
{%—Subhaga-mānin, ī, inī, i,%} fancying or consider-
ing one's self fortunate or pleasing. {%—Subhagam-%}
{%bhaviṣṇu, us, us, u,%} or {%subhagam-bhāvuka, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} becoming happy or prosperous or pleasing.
{%—Subhagam-manya, as, ā, am,%} thinking one's self
fortunate or pleasing, fancying one's self a favourite;
vain, a self-flatterer. {%—Subhagammanya-bhāva, as,%}
m. the state of supposing one's self pleasing or a
favourite, self-conceit, vanity. {%—Subhagā-suta, as,%}
m. the son of a favourite or much-loved wife; the
son of an honoured or honourable mother. {%—Subha-%}
{%godaya (˚ga-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘rise of prosperity,’ N. of
a work. {%—Su-bhaṅga, as, ā, am,%} breaking easily;
({%as%}), m. the cocoa-nut tree. {%—Su-bhaṭa, as,%} m. a great
warrior, champion; N. of the author of the Dūtāṅ-
gada. {%—Su-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m. a very learned man; a
distinguished warrior (in this sense probably for {%su-%}
{%bhaṭa,%} q. v.). {%—Su-bhadra, as, ā, am,%} very pro-
pitious or auspicious, very happy or fortunate; ({%as%}),
m., N. of Viṣṇu; of a particular king; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of the sister of Kṛṣṇa and wife of Arjuna, (she was
forcibly seized and carried off by Arjuna from Dvā-
rakā after obtaining Kṛṣṇa's leave, as described in
Mahā-bh. Ādi-parvan, chap. 219, 220; her image
is carried in procession with those of Jagan-nātha and
Bala-rāma at the Ratha-yātrā); the creeper Echites
Frutescens; a particular plant ({%= ghṛta-maṇḍā%});
another plant {%(= kāśmarī)%}. {%—Subhadraka, as,%} m.
a car or vehicle of a god or for carrying the image of
a god in procession (also {%am,%} n. according to some);
the Vilva tree; a species of the Ati-śakkarī metre
(according to some). {%—Subhadrāṇī,%} f. a kind of
medicinal plant {%(= trāyamāṇā)%}. {%—Subhadrā-ha-%}
{%raṇa-parvan, a,%} n. ‘the section relating to the
seizure of Subhadrā,’ see above under {%su-bhadrā.%}
{%—Su-bhadrikā,%} f., Ved. the wicked Su-bhadrā; a
particular metre. {%—Subhadreśa (˚rā-īśa), as,%} m.
‘husband of Su-bhadrā,’ epithet of Arjuna. {%—Su-bhara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} bearing well, well burdened; easy to be
borne. {%—Su-bhasattarā,%} f., Ved. {%= atiśayena su-%}
{%bhagā,%} Sāy. on Ṛg-veda X. 86, 6. {%—Su-bhānu, us,%}
m., N. of the seventeenth (or fifty-first) year of
Jupiter's cycle of sixty years. {%—Su-bhāṣita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} spoken well or eloquently; speaking or dis-
coursing well, eloquent; ({%as%}), m. a particular Buddha
or Bauddha sage; ({%am%}), n. a fine speech, eloquence.
{%—Subhāṣita-rasāsvāda-jāta-romāñca-kañcuka%}
{%(˚sa-ās˚, ˚ma-añ˚), as, ā, am,%} having (as it were) a
coat of mail consisting of bristling hairs produced by
tasting the flavour of delightful words. {%—Su-bhāsa,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Su-bhikṣa, am,%} n. good
alms, successful begging; abundance of food (espe-
cially that given as alms), an abundant supply of
provisions, plenty [cf. {%dur-bhikṣa%}]; ({%as, ā, am%}),
having good food or an abundant supply of pro-
visions; ({%ā%}), f. the tree Grislea Tomentosa. {%—Su-%}
{%bhiṣak-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. healing best, curing
most effectually, a most excellent physician. {%—Su-%}
{%bhiṣaj, k, k, k,%} healing well, a good physician.
{%—Su-bhīraka, as,%} m. the Palāśa tree, Butea Fron-
dosa. {%—Su-bhū, ūs,%} f. a good or illustrious birth, (in
Ṛg-veda VI. 66, 3. {%su-bhve,%} ‘for an illustrious
birth,’ is explained by Sāy. to mean {%nṛṇāṃ samyak%}
{%bhavanāya,%} ‘entirely for the benefit of men’); ({%ūs,%}
{%ūs, u%}), Ved. ({%subhvaḥ,%} nom. pl. masc., Ṛg-veda
VII. 67, 8), being good or excellent; having an ex-
cellent birth; beautiful, excellent; ({%bhvas%}), pl. ({%=%}
{%nadyaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda I. 52, 4; {%= stotāraḥ,%} I. 52, 1).
{%—Su-bhūtika, as,%} m. the Vilva tree. {%—Su-bhūma,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of Kārtavīrya (as the eighth Jaina
Cakra-vartin or universal emperor). {%—Su-bhūmi,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a son of Ugra-sena. {%—Su-bhṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} well borne or maintained, well cherished
or protected. {%—Su-bhṛśa, as, ā, am,%} very much,
exceeding; ({%am%}), ind. very much, exceedingly.
{%—Su-bheṣaja, as,%} m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Su-bhai-%}
{%rava, as, ī, am,%} very fearful, terrific. {%—Su-bho-%}
{%gīna, as, ā, am,%} very fit to be enjoyed, very
desirable. {%—Su-bhrāj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} shining brightly.
{%—Su-bhrātṛ, tā,%} m. a good brother. {%—Su-bhru,%}
{%us, us, u, = su-bhrū%}. {%—Su-bhrū, ūs, ūs, u%} (acc. sing.
[Page1123-a+ 81]
{%-bhruvam,%} dat. {%-bhruve%} or {%-bhruvai,%} abl. {%-bhruvas%}
or {%-bhruvās,%} gen. pl. {%-bhruvām%} or {%-bhrūṇām,%} voc.
sing. {%-bhrūs%} or {%-bhru,%} the latter form of voc. occur-
ring once in the Bhaṭṭi-kāvya), lovely-browed, having
beautiful eyebrows; ({%ūs%}), f. a woman. {%—Su-bhrū-%}
{%nāsākṣi-keśānta (˚sā-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} having
handsome brows, nose, eyes, and hair. {%—Su-makha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} abounding in sacrifices; much adored;
(Sāy.) {%= śobhana-yajña,%} having worthy oblations or
sacrifices. {%—Su-maṅgala, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} very
auspicious, bringing good fortune; abounding in
sacrifices; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a river in the district of
Kāmākhyā; a kind of medicinal root ({%= kākolī%});
N. of one of the mothers of the twenty-four Arhats
(according to some); ({%ī%}), f., Ved. a woman who
brings good luck. {%—Su-mat, sumad-aṃśu,%} &c., see
p. 1128. {%—Su-mata, as, ā, am,%} well or kindly dis-
posed, friendly. {%—Su-mati, is,%} f. a good mind or dis-
position, benevolence, kindness, friendship; favour
of the gods, favour, blessing, gift; a hymn, prayer,
desire, wish; ({%is, is, i%}), very wise; ({%is%}), m., N. of a
son of Ranti-bhāra; of a son of Bharata; of a son
of Janam-ejaya; of a son of Sūta and teacher of the
Purāṇas; of several other persons; the fifth Arhat of
the present era; one of the Arhats of the past era;
({%is%}), f., N. of the wife of Sagara (mother of 60,000
sons); of the wife of Viṣṇu-yaśas and mother of
Kalki, q. v. {%—Sumatī-vṛdh, t, t, t%} (for {%sumati-%}
{%vṛdh%}), Ved. augmenting blessings, increasing favour.
{%—Su-mada, as, ā, am,%} very drunk, mad or impas-
sioned. {%—Su-madana, as,%} m. ‘greatly delighting,’
the Mango tree. {%—Sumadātmajā (˚da-āt˚),%} f.
‘daughter of intoxication or passion,’ an Apsaras or
courtezan of Indra's heaven. {%—Su-madram,%} ind.
excessive prosperity of the Madras, (Pāṇ. II. 1, 6.)
{%—Su-madhura, as, ā, am,%} very sweet or saccha-
rine, very sweet or pleasing, very gentle or soothing;
({%as%}), m. a kind of pot-herb, {%= jīva-śāka; (am),%} n.
very soothing or gentle speech, &c.; ({%am%}), ind.
very sweetly. {%—Su-madhya, as, ā, am,%} having a
beautiful waist, slender-waisted. {%—Su-madhyama,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} slender-waisted; ({%ā%}), f. a graceful woman.
{%—Su-mana, as, ā, am,%} very charming, beautiful,
handsome; ({%as%}), m. wheat; the thorn-apple; ({%ā%}),
f. great-flowered jasmine. {%—Sumanaḥ-pattrikā,%} f.
(probably) the outer skin of the nutmeg. {%—Suma-%}
{%naḥ-phala, as,%} m. elephant or wood-apple, Feronia
Elephantum; ({%am%}), n. nutmeg. {%—Su-manas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} good-minded, well-disposed, benevolent,
happy; well pleased, satisfied; ({%ās%}), m. a god,
divinity; a learned man or teacher; a student of the
Vedas, &c.; wheat; the Nimb tree; other plants
({%= pūti-karañja; = mahā-karañja%}); N. of a son
of Uru; of a son of Hary-aśva; ({%asas%}), m. pl., N.
of a class of deities; ({%ās, as%}), f. n. a flower; ({%asas%}),
f. pl. (with a singular meaning), a flower; ({%ās%}), f.
great-flowered jasmine; other plants {%(= mālatī; =%}
{%śata-pattrī)%}. {%—Su-manasyamāna, as, ā, am,%}
being in good spirits, cheerful, being of a cheerful
disposition; regarding with favour. {%—Su-manā,%} f. a
kind of plant {%(= jātī-puṣpa)%}. {%—Su-manāya,%} Nom.
A. {%-manāyate,%} &c., to become happy. {%—Sumanī-%}
{%kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make of good mind,
make well-disposed. {%—Sumanī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bha-%}
{%vati,%} &c., to be of good mind. {%—Sumano-bhara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessing or ornamented with flowers.
{%—Sumano-rajas, as,%} n. the pollen of a flower.
{%—Su-manohara, as, ā, am,%} or {%su-manoharaṇa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} very captivating or agreeable, very charm-
ing or pleasing, beautiful. {%—Su-mantu, us, us, u,%}
advising well; very faulty, very blamable; ({%us%}), m.
excellent praise (Ved.); a good adviser; N. of a
Muni (and lawyer, said to have been a pupil of
Veda-vyāsa and to have been taught by him the
Atharva-veda, originally handed down by tradition
from Brahmā); N. of a king; of a son of Jahnu (or,
according to some, of Purū-ravas). {%—Su-mantra, as,%}
m., N. of the elder brother of Kalki, q. v.; of the
charioteer and minister of king Daśa-ratha, (see
Rāmāyaṇa II. 14, 30); of a preceptor. {%—Su-man-%}
{%trajña, as, ā, am,%} well versed in sacred texts.
[Page1123-b+ 81]
{%—Su-mantrita, as, ā, am,%} well or wisely coun-
selled, well advised, wisely planned. {%—Su-mandadhī,%}
{%īs, īs, i,%} very dull of understanding. {%—Su-manda-%}
{%buddhi, is, is, i,%} very dull-witted; much disheart-
ened. {%—Su-mandabhāj, k, k, k,%} very unfortunate.
{%—Su-manman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having good under-
standing, very wise or intelligent. {%—Su-marīcikā,%} f.,
scil. {%tuṣṭi,%} epithet of one of the five kinds of
external acquiescence (in the Sāṅkhya phil.; cf.
{%su-pārā%}). {%—Su-marṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} easy to be
borne. {%—Su-mahat, ān, atī, at,%} very great, very
large or abundant; ({%at%}), ind. very greatly, mightily.
{%—Su-mahas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. beautifully shining.
{%—Su-mahā-kakṣa, as,%} m. a very great gate; a
large court-yard. {%—Su-mahā-tapas, ās, ās, as,%} one
who has practised very great religious austerities,
very pious. {%—Su-mahātman, ā, ā, a,%} most magna-
nimous. {%—Su-mahātyaya (˚hā-at˚), as, ā, am,%}
causing very great evil or destruction, very per-
nicious. {%—Su-mahā-bala, as, ā, am,%} of very
great strength, very strong or powerful. {%—Su-%}
{%mahā-bāhu, us, us, u,%} having very long arms, very
powerful. {%—Su-mahā-svana, as,%} m. ‘very loud-
sounding,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Su-māya, as, ā, am,%}
abounding in illusions, very wise. {%—Su-mārdava,%}
{%am,%} n. beautiful softness. {%—Su-māli, is, is, i,%} well-
garlanded. {%—Su-mālin, ī, inī, i,%} well-garlanded; ({%ī%}),
m., N. of a son of Veda-māli. {%—Su-mālya, as,%} m.,
N. of a son of Mahā-padma or Nanda. {%—Su-mitra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘good friend,’ N. of the father of the twentieth
Arhat of the present era; of the author of Ṛg-veda
X. 105 (having the patronymic Kautsa); of the
author of Ṛg-veda X. 69, 70 (having the patronymic
Vādhryaśva); N. of a son of Vṛṣṇi; of a descendant
of Vṛhad-bala (last of the race of Ikṣvāku); ({%ā%}),
f., N. of one of the wives of Daśa-ratha (mother of
Lakṣmaṇa and Śatru-ghna); of the mother of Mār-
kaṇḍeya. {%—Sumitra-bhū, ūs,%} m., N. of Sagara (as
one of the Jaina Cakra-vartins); of the twentieth
Arhat of the present era. {%—Sumitrā-bhū, ūs,%} or
{%sumitrā-tanaya, as,%} m., N. of Lakṣmaṇa. {%—Su-%}
{%mīḷha, as,%} m., Ved. a proper N. {%—Su-mukha, am,%}
n. a good or beautiful mouth; a handsome face;
({%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}), having a good or beautiful mouth,
(according to Vopa-deva the fem. is {%ā%} when used in
a metaphorical sense, e. g. {%sumukhā śālā,%} a hall with
a good entrance); handsome-faced, lovely; pleas-
ing, agreeable; ({%as%}), m. a learned man or teacher;
N. of a Muni; of Garuḍa; of the son of Garuḍa;
of Gaṇeśa; of Śiva; of one of the serpents of
Pātāla; a kind of pot-herb; other plants, {%= sitār-%}
{%jaka; = vana-varvarikā; = varvara; (ā, ī),%} f. a
handsome woman; a mirror; ({%ī%}), f. a species of the
Tri-ṣṭubh metre; ({%am%}), n. the mark or scratch of
a finger-nail. {%—Sumukha-sū, ūs,%} m. ‘the father of
Sumukha,’ epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Su-muṣṭi, is,%} m.
a kind of shrub {%(= viṣa-muṣṭi)%}. {%—Su-mū, ūs,%}
{%ūs, u,%} binding well. {%—Su-mūla, as, ā, am,%} having
a good root; ({%as%}), m. the white Śigru tree; ({%ā%}), f.
a kind of plant {%(= śāla-parṇī; = pṛśni-parṇī).%}
{%—Su-mūlaka, am,%} n. a carrot. {%—Su-mṛḍīka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. making very happy; very bountiful.
{%—Su-mṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} well rubbed or purified,
well brushed, very smooth or glossy, very fine. {%—Su-%}
{%mṛṣṭa-puṣpāḍhya (˚pa-āḍh˚), as, ā, am,%}
abounding in bright flowers. {%—Sumṛṣṭa-veṣa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} dressed in well-brushed clothes. {%—Su-%}
{%meka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (perhaps) well-formed, of
a beautiful shape, (Sāy. {%su-meka = su-rūpa,%} Ṛg-
veda III. 6, 10; {%= su-dīpta,%} shining beautifully,
Ṛg-veda IV. 6, 3; {%su-meke = śobhana-karmāṇau%}
or {%śobhana-mehane,%} well acting or well nourishing,
Ṛg-veda I. 146, 3.) {%—Su-mekhala, as, ā, am,%}
possessing a good girdle, well girdled; ({%as%}), m. the
Muñja grass (which forms the Brāhmanical girdle).
{%—Su-medhas, ās, ās, as,%} having a good under-
standing, sensible, intelligent; ({%ās%}), m. a wise man;
N. of a Muni; of a son of Veda-mitra; ({%ās%}), f.
heart-pea. {%—Su-meru, us,%} m. the sacred mountain
Meru, q. v.; N. of Śiva; ({%us, us, u%}), very exalted,
excellent. {%—Su-yata, as, ā, am,%} well restrained or
[Page1123-c+ 81]
governed. {%—Su-yantrita, as, ā, am,%} well curbed
or governed, well restrained or bound, well regu-
lated; one who governs his passions completely.
{%—Suyantrita-tva, am,%} n. the being well or firmly
restrained or bound. {%—Su-yabhyā,%} f., Ved. to be
well embraced (sexually). {%—Su-yama, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. well restraining; well traversing, (Sāy. {%= śo-%}
{%bhana-niyamana,%} i. e. {%sañcārin,%} Ṛg-veda I. 180,
1.) {%—Su-yavasa, am,%} n. beautiful grass, good pas-
turage; ({%as, ā, am%}), having good pasturage, abound-
ing in grass; ({%as%}), m. a proper N. {%—Su-yavasin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} having excellent grass, abounding in pasture.
{%—Su-yaśa, as, ā, am, = su-yaśas%} below; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a wife of Parīkṣit. {%—Su-yaśas, ās, ās, as,%}
very famous or renowned; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a king
(belonging to the Maurya dynasty). {%—Su-yāmuna,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of Viṣṇu; of a king of Kośāmbī, (also
called Vatsa); a palace; a mountain; a kind of
cloud. {%—Su-yāśu-tarā,%} f., Ved. (a female) who
has excessive sexual embraces, (Ṛg-veda X. 86, 6.)
{%—Su-yukta, as, ā, am,%} well joined, harmoniously
combined; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Su-yukti,%}
{%is,%} f. good appliance or contrivance. {%—Su-yuj, k, k,%}
{%k,%} Ved. well joined, well yoked. {%—Su-yuta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} well accompanied by, well furnished or provided
with. {%—Su-yuddha, am,%} n. a well-fought war or
battle. {%—Su-yoga, as,%} m. a favourable juncture, good
opportunity. {%—Su-yodhana, as,%} m. ‘fighting well,’
epithet of Dur-yodhana, q. v. {%—Su-rakta, as, ā, am,%}
well coloured, deeply dyed; deep red, crimson;
strongly affected or impassioned; well or kindly
affected. {%—Su-raktaka, as,%} m. a sort of red or
golden chalk; a kind of Mango tree (apparently one
bearing a small red fruit). {%—Su-rakṣa, as,%} m.
‘good-protector,’ N. of a Muni. {%—Su-rakṣaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. careful protection, protecting or preserving
well. {%—Su-rakṣita, as, ā, am,%} well preserved or
protected, carefully guarded. {%—Su-rakṣya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} easy to be preserved. {%—Su-raṅga, as,%} m. a
good colour, good dye; ‘bright-coloured,’ the orange;
a hole cut in a house; ({%ā%}), f. a hole cut in a
wall for the purpose of breaking into a house, &c.,
(probably for {%su-ruṅgā,%} q. v.); a kind of fragrant
grass; crystal; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant ({%= kāka-nāśā%});
a kind of red Śobhāñjana; ({%am%}), n. red sanders;
vermilion. {%—Suraṅga-da, am,%} n. ‘yielding a good
colour,’ red sanders. {%—Suraṅga-dhātu, us,%} m. red
chalk. {%—Suraṅga-yuj, k,%} m. a house-breaker, (see
{%su-raṅga.%}) {%—Su-raṅgikā,%} f. the Mūrvā plant. {%—Su-%}
{%rajaḥ-phala, as,%} m. the jack-fruit tree. {%—Su-%}
{%rajanī,%} f. night. {%—Su-rajas, ās, ās, as,%} very dusty.
{%—Su-rajāya,%} Nom. A. {%surajāyate,%} &c., to become
very dusty. {%—Su-rañjana, as,%} m. the betel-nut tree
Areca Faufel or Catechu. {%—Su-raṇa, am,%} n., Ved.
a pleasant sound, (Sāy. {%= śobhana-gītādi-dhvani,%}
the sound of pleasant hymns, or {%su-ramaṇīyam,%}
ind. very pleasantly); pleasure, enjoyment (according
to some); ({%as, ā, am%}), giving forth pleasant sounds
(said of Agni or fire). {%—Su-rata, as, ā, am,%} much
sported or dallied, playful; much enjoyed; com-
passionate, tender; ({%am%}), n. great delight or enjoy-
ment; amorous pleasure, the union of the sexes, sexual
intercourse, coition. {%—Surata-tālī,%} f. a female mes-
senger, go-between; a chaplet, garland for the head.
{%—Surata-prasaṅga, as,%} m. addiction to amorous
pleasures. {%—Surata-prasaṅgin, ī, inī, i,%} devoted or
addicted to amorous pleasures. {%—Surata-viśeṣa, as,%}
m. a kind of sexual intercourse. {%—Su-rati, is,%} f. great
enjoyment or delight. {%—Surati-miśra, as,%} m., N.
of the author of the Alaṅkāra-mālā. {%—Su-ratha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king of the lunar race; of a son of
Jahnu; of a son of Caitra; of a son of Adhiratha.
{%—Suratha-vijaya, as,%} m., N. of the seventy-ninth
chapter of the Pātāla-khaṇḍa of the Padma-Purāṇa.
{%—Su-rabhi, surabhita,%} &c., see p. 1129. {%—Su-%}
{%rasa, as, ā, am,%} well flavoured, juicy, sapid, savoury;
sweet; elegant (as a composition); ({%as%}), m. a kind
of plant ({%= sindhu-vāra%}); a particular resin, {%=%}
{%moca-rasa; (ā, am),%} f. n. sacred basil; ({%ā%}), f., N.
of Durgā; of the mother of the Nāgas; of a daughter
of Dakṣa and wife of Kaśyapa; of an Apsaras; a
[Page1124-a+ 81]
kind of plant ({%= rāsanā%}); other plants ({%= miśreyā;%}
{%= brāhmī; = mahā-śatāvarī%}); a species of the Ati-
dhṛti metre; N. of a river; ({%am%}), n. gum-myrrh,
Cassia bark; fragrant grass. {%—Surasāṣṭa (˚sa-aṣ˚),%}
{%as,%} m. a class of eight plants (viz. Nirguṇṭī, Tulasī,
Brāhmī, Vṛhatī, Kaṇṭa-kārikā, Punar-ṇavā, &c.).
{%—Su-rājaka, as,%} m. a kind of plant {%(= bhṛṅga-%}
{%rāja)%}. {%—Su-rājan, ā,%} m. a good king; a divinity.
{%—Su-rāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. rich in gifts, (Sāy. {%= su-%}
{%dāna.%}) {%—Su-rātri, is,%} f. a fine night. {%—Su-rādhas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having beautiful gifts; granting
good things, very rich; having great power; ({%ās%}),
m., N. of a Vedic Ṛṣi (having the patronymic
Vārṣāgira, q. v.). {%—Su-rāṣṭra, am,%} n. (sometimes
also {%ā,%} f.), ‘good country,’ N. of a country on the
western side of India, (commonly called Surat.) {%—Su-%}
{%rāṣṭra-ja, as, ā, am,%} born or produced in Surat;
({%as%}), m. a sort of pulse ({%= kṛṣṇa-mudga%}); a sort
of poison; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of fragrant earth; ({%am%}), n.
the fragrant earth Tuvarī. {%—Surāṣṭra-brahma, as,%}
m. a Brāhman of Su-rāṣṭra, (Pāṇ. V. 4, 104.)
{%—Su-rukma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. shining beautifully.
{%—Su-ruc, k, k, k,%} Ved. brightly shining. {%—Su-ruci,%}
{%is,%} m. a proper N. {%—Su-ruja, as, ā, am,%} very sick,
unwell. {%—Su-rūḍha, as, ā, am,%} standing well up or
out, very prominent or projecting. {%—Su-rūpa, as, ā,%}
or {%ī, am,%} well-formed, handsome; wise, learned;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class
of deities; ({%ā%}), f. the shrub Śāla-parṇī; ({%am%}), n. {%=%}
{%tūla%}. {%—Surūpa-kṛtnu, us, us, u,%} Ved. accomplish-
ing excellent actions. {%—Su-rūhaka, as,%} m. ‘easily
mounted,’ a horse resembling an ass {%(= gardabhā-%}
{%bhāśva)%}. {%—Su-rekṇas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having
beautiful property, rich in possessions. {%—Su-reṇu,%}
{%us,%} m. a sort of atom, (also {%u,%} n., according to some,
cf. {%trasa-reṇu, hema-reṇu%}); ({%us%}), f. ‘having beau-
tiful sand,’ N. of a river, (sometimes regarded as
one of the seven Sarasvatīs.) — 1. {%su-rebha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} (for 2. {%surebha%} see p. 1129, col. 2), fine-
sounding, fine-voiced, (Kirāt. XV. 16); ({%am%}), n.
tin. {%—Su-revaṭa, as,%} m. a species of small Areca
tree {%(= rāma-pūga)%}. {%—Su-rai, rās, rās, ri,%} very
rich; ({%rās%}), m. f. an opulent person. {%—Su-rocis, is,%}
m., N. of a son of Vasiṣṭha. {%—Su-lakṣaṇa, am,%}
n. the act of observing or examining carefully, looking
well into, ascertaining, determining; a good mark
or characteristic, auspicious mark; ({%as, ā, am%}), hav-
ing beautiful or auspicious marks, having an auspicious
name, fortunate; ({%ā%}), f., N. of one of Durgā's female
companions; epithet of one of Kṛṣṇa's wives. {%—Su-%}
{%lakṣita, as, ā, am,%} well examined, well determined
or ascertained. {%—Su-laṅghita, as, ā, am,%} one who
has been caused to fast properly, (see rt. {%laṅgh.%})
{%—Su-labha, as, ā, am,%} easy to be obtained or
effected, easy of acquisition or attainment, easy of
access, attainable, feasible, easy; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of
shrub ({%= māṣa-parṇī%}); N. of a female mendicant.
{%—Sulabhāvakāśa (˚bha-av˚), as, ā, am,%} easily
gaining room or admission. {%—Su-lalāṭa, as, ā, am,%}
having a beautiful forehead. {%—Su-lalita, as, ā, am,%}
sporting gracefully; greatly pleased or happy; very
delicate or dainty; ({%am%}), ind. very sportively or
wantonly, with delight, easily. {%—Su-lābhikā,%} f. {%=%}
{%śobhana-lābhā%} (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda X.
86, 7). {%—Su-lū, ūs, ūs, u,%} one who cuts well. {%—Su-%}
{%locana, as, ā, am,%} fine-eyed, having beautiful eyes;
({%as%}), m. a deer; epithet of Duryodhana (according
to some); N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; ({%ā%}), f. a
handsome woman; N. of the wife of king Mādhava.
{%—Su-loma, as, ā, am,%} fine-haired, having beautiful
hair or down; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant ({%= tāmra-%}
{%vallī%}); another plant {%(= māṃsa-cchadā)%}. {%—Su-%}
{%loman, ā, ā, a, = su-loma%}. {%—Su-lomaśa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having good hair or down, very hairy or downy;
({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant {%(= kāka-jaṅghā)%}. {%—Su-lo-%}
{%haka, am,%} n. ‘good metal,’ brass. {%—Su-lohita, as,%}
m. a beautiful red colour; ({%as, ā%} or {%-hinī, am%}),
very red; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of one of the seven tongues
of fire. {%—Su-vaktra, am,%} n. a good mouth or face;
correct utterance or intonation; ({%as, ā, am%}), hand-
some-mouthed; handsome-faced; ({%as%}), m. epithet
[Page1124-b+ 81]
of Śiva; a kind of plant {%(= vana-varvarī)%}. {%—Su-%}
{%vakṣas, ās, ās, as,%} having a handsome breast.
{%—Su-vacana, am,%} n. the act of speaking well,
good speech, eloquence; ({%ī%}), f., N. of a goddess.
{%—Su-vacas, ās, ās, as,%} speaking much or well,
discoursing eloquently. {%—Su-vacasyā,%} f., Ved. sweet
praise, an excellent hymn. {%—Su-vajra, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having an excellent thunderbolt. {%—Su-vadana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a beautiful face, beautiful; ({%ā%}), f.
a particular metre. {%—Su-vayas, ās,%} m. (probably)
N. of a plant. {%—Su-varatra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hav-
ing good thongs. {%—Su-varūtha, as, ā, am,%} having
a good protecting ledge (said of a chariot; see {%va-%}
{%rūtha%}). {%—1. su-varga, as,%} m., Ved. having good
society, (but see 2. {%suvar-ga, svarga.%}) {%—Su-var-%}
{%caka, as,%} m. natron, alkali; N. of an ancient sage.
{%—Su-varcala, as,%} m., N. of a country; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of a wife of the Sun; of a wife of Rudra;
linseed, Linum Usitatissimum; other plants {%(=%}
{%sūrya-mukhī; = āditya-bhaktā; = brāhmī.) — Su-%}
{%varcas, ās, ās, as,%} very bright, very glorious; ({%ās%}),
m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Su-varcasa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having great splendor; ({%as%}), m. epithet
of Śiva. {%—Su-varcasin, ī,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Su-%}
{%varcika, as, ā,%} m. f. natron, alkali. {%—Su-varcin, ī,%} m.
natron. {%—Su-varṇa,%} &c., see p. 1129. {%—Su-varman,%}
{%ā,%} m. ‘having good armour,’ N. of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra. {%—Su-valli, is,%} or {%su-vallī,%} f. the shrub
Serratula Anthelmintica {%(= soma-rājī)%}. {%—Su-vas,%}
{%as, as, as,%} covering or clothing well. {%—Su-vasana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. well dressed, elegantly attired.
{%—Su-vasanta, as,%} m. a beautiful vernal season;
the day of full moon in the month Caitra; a festival
in honour of Kāma-deva celebrated in that month.
{%—Su-vasantaka, as,%} m. a kind of large creeper,
Gærtnera Racemosa; a festival in honour of Kāma-
deva in the month Caitra. {%—Su-vaha, as, ā, am,%}
bearing well, conveying pleasantly; patient, enduring;
easy to be borne; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Nyctanthes
Tristis; the shrub Mimosa Octandra; the plant
Rāsnā; the shrub Cissus Pedata; the gum olibanum
tree, Boswellia Thurifera; the plant Tri-vṛt or Con-
volvulus Turpethum; other plants ({%= rudra-jaṭā;%}
{%= haṃsa-padī; = gandha-nākulī; = musalī; =%}
{%nīla-sindhuvāra%}); a Vīṇā or lute. {%—Su-vāc, k, k,%}
{%k,%} Ved. speaking well; sounding beautifully; making
a loud noise; ({%k%}), m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra.
{%—Su-vācya, as, ā, am,%} easy to be read. {%—Su-%}
{%vāmā,%} f., N. of a river. {%—Su-vār, r, r, r,%} having
beautiful water. {%—Su-vārttā,%} f. good news. {%—1. su-%}
{%vāsa, as,%} m. an agreeable perfume. {%—2. su-vāsa, as,%}
m. a pleasant dwelling. {%—3. su-vāsa, as, ā, am,%}
well clad; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Su-vāsas, ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} Ved. having beautiful garments, well dressed.
{%—Su-vāsita, as, ā, am,%} well scented or perfumed.
{%—Su-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} dwelling in a comfortable or
respectable abode; ({%inī%}), f. a woman married or single
who resides in her father's house; a term of courtesy
for a respectable woman whose husband is alive.
{%—Su-vāstu,%} N. of a river. {%—Su-vāhana, as,%} m.,
N. of a Muni. {%—Su-vikrama, as,%} m. prowess,
valour. {%—Su-vikrānta, as, ā, am,%} very valiant or
heroic, bold, chivalrous; ({%as%}), m. a hero; ({%am%}), n.
heroism. {%—Su-vicakṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%} very clever,
well discerning, sensible, proficient, skilful. {%—Su-%}
{%vicāra, as,%} m. good or deliberate consideration; a
proper N. {%—Su-vicārita, as, ā, am,%} well weighed,
deliberately considered. {%—Su-vicārya,%} ind. having
well deliberated, having carefully investigated or dis-
cussed. {%—Suvicārya-kārin, ī, iṇi, i,%} acting after
due deliberation, discreet. {%—Su-vijñāna, as, ā, am,%}
very wise. {%—Su-vijñeya, as,%} m. ‘easily discernible,’
epithet of Śiva. {%—Su-vitta, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Su-vitrasta, as, ā, am,%} greatly scared, terrified,
affrighted. {%—Su-vid, t,%} m. a learned man; ({%t%}), f. a
shrewd or clever woman. {%—Su-vida, as,%} m. an
attendant on the women's apartments; [cf. {%sau-%}
{%vida.%}] {%—Su-vidat, t,%} m. a king. {%—Su-vidatra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} well-disposed, gracious; having good pos-
sessions, (Sāy. {%= su-pratijña%} or {%su-dhana,%} Ṛg-
veda II. 9, 6; according to Yāska {%= kalyāṇa-vidya,%}
[Page1124-c+ 81]
cf. {%dur-vidatra%}); related, of kin, a kinsman, &c.;
({%am%}), n. wealth, riches, property, (Sāy. {%= dhana%});
a household, family. {%—Su-vidatriya, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. well-disposed, gracious, worthy of knowledge
or wealth, (Sāy. {%= jñānārha%} or {%dhanārha,%} Ṛg-
veda X. 17, 4.) {%—Su-vidalla, am,%} n. the women's
apartments; ({%ā%}), f. a married woman. {%—Su-vidita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} well known or understood. {%—Su-vidīrṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} much torn or split, greatly expanded.
{%—Su-vidyut, t,%} m., N. of an Asura. {%—Su-vidha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} of a good kind, in a good or easy way;
({%am%}), ind. easily. {%—Su-vidhi, is,%} m. a good rule or
ordinance; the ninth Arhat of the present age (with
Jainas). {%—Su-vinīta, as, ā, am,%} well trained, pro-
perly behaved, very modest; ({%ā%}), f. a tractable cow.
{%—Su-vipula, as, ā, am,%} very great, very spacious,
very ample or roomy; very loud. {%—Su-vibhakta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} well divided, well proportioned. {%—Su-%}
{%vibhakta-gātra, as, ī, am,%} having well divided or
symmetrical limbs. {%—Su-vibhāta, as, ā, am,%} shin-
ing splendidly, very bright. {%—Su-vibhīṣaṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} very frightful. {%—Su-vibhu, us,%} m., N. of a
king. {%—Su-vilaya, as, ā, am,%} easily fusible, lique-
fying. {%—Su-vivṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very extensive
or extended, everywhere abundant. {%—Su-viśrabdha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very confident. {%—Su-viśvasta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very confiding; very trusty, confidential. {%—Su-%}
{%viṣaṇṇa, as, ā, am,%} very sorrowful. {%—Su-vistaram,%}
ind. very diffusely or fully, at length. {%—Su-vistīrṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} well spread or laid out; very broad.
{%—Su-vismita, as, ā, am,%} very astonished. {%—Su-%}
{%vihita, as, ā, am,%} well placed or deposited; well
furnished or appointed, well provided, well arranged,
well supplied; well done, well performed. {%—Su-vīja,%}
{%am,%} n. good seed; ({%as, ā, am%}), having good seed;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; the poppy {%(= khaskhasa).%}
{%—Su-vīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having many heroes;
having excellent offspring; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of
Śiva; of a son of Kṣemya; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people. {%—Su-vīraka, am,%} n. a collyrium prepared
from the Amomum Anthorhizon {%(= sauvīrāñjana).%}
{%—Su-vīrāmla (˚ra-am˚), am,%} n. sour rice-gruel.
{%—Su-vīrya, am,%} n. great vigour, heroism; abun-
dance of heroes; ({%as, ā, am%}), having great vigour
or power; of heroic strength; having good essence
or seed; ({%ā%}), f. wild cotton; ({%am%}), n. the fruit of
the jujube. {%—Su-vṛkti, is, is, i,%} Ved. well trimmed,
having excellent purity; ({%is%}), f. a pure offering; a
hymn of praise, hymn. {%—Su-vṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. easy
rolling, well turning; well built (said of a chariot;
Sāy. {%= śobhana-vartana%} or {%su-cakra,%} Ṛg-veda I.
111, 1). {%—Su-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} virtuous, good;
well rounded, beautifully globular or round; a kind
of plant, {%= śūraṇa; (ā),%} f. a kind of plant ({%=%}
{%śata-pattrī%}); a sort of grape ({%= kākalī-drākṣā%});
a particular metre. {%—Su-vṛtti, is,%} f. a good way of
living. {%—Su-vṛddha, as, ā, am,%} full-grown; ({%as%}),
m. a proper N. {%—Su-vṛdh, t, t, t,%} or {%su-vṛdha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. well increasing, full-grown. {%—Su-vṛśc,%}
{%vṛṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} cutting well, (Vopa-deva III. 148.) {%—Su-%}
{%vṛṣṭa, am,%} n. beautiful rain. {%—Su-vegā,%} f. a kind
of plant {%(= mahā-jyotiṣmatī)%}. {%—Su-vedana, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. easy to be found. {%—Su-vedas, ās,%} m.,
N. of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 147
(having the patronymic Śairīṣi). {%—Su-vema, as,%} m.
a good loom. {%—Su-vela, as, ā, am,%} bowed or stoop-
ing greatly; humble, quiet; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
mountain {%(= tri-kūṭa)%}. {%—Su-veśa%} or {%su-veṣa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} well dressed, well clad; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
sugar-cane {%(= śvetekṣu)%}. {%—Su-veśin, ī, inī, i,%} well
dressed, well ornamented or decorated. {%—Su-vyakta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very plain, manifest; ({%am%}), ind. very
evidently or clearly, most distinctly. {%—Su-vyasta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} greatly dispersed, much scattered, strag-
gling (said of an army). {%—Su-vrata, as, ā, am,%}
strict in observing a religious vow or obligation,
strictly religious or virtuous; ({%as%}), m. a religious
student; N. of a king; of the twentieth Arhat of
the present Avasarpiṇī, (also called Muni-suvrata);
of the eleventh Arhat of the future Utsarpiṇī; ({%ā%}),
f. a virtuous wife; a cow easily milked or one of
[Page1125-a+ 81]
tractable disposition; N. of the mother of the
fifteenth Jina of the present age. {%—Su-śaṃsa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having praise, enjoying good report, well spoken
of, praiseworthy, glorious. {%—Su-śaka, as, ā, am,%}
capable of being easily done. {%—Su-śakti, is, is, i,%}
Ved. displaying great prowess. {%—Su-śamī,%} m., Ved.
one who does mighty deeds; sacrificing well; ({%ī%}),
ind. for the sake of an auspicious rite ({%= su-karma-%}
{%tvāya,%} Ṛg-veda V. 87, 9). {%—Su-śaraṇa, as, am,%}
m. n., Ved. a good protector, a noble refuge. {%—Su-%}
{%śarman, ā, ā, a,%} well destroying (enemies); pro-
tecting well, sheltering; enjoying great happiness or
prosperity, very happy; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a king; of a
wicked Brāhman. {%—Su-śalya, as,%} m. the Khadira
tree. {%—Su-śavī,%} f. the gourd Momordica Charantia;
a sort of black cumin, Nigella Indica {%(= kṛṣṇa-%}
{%jīraka)%}. {%—Su-śasti, is,%} f., Ved. a beautiful hymn,
hymn of praise. {%—Su-śāka, as,%} m. ‘good herb,’ epi-
thet of various plants, {%= cañcu; = bhiṇḍā; = taṇ-%}
{%ḍulīya; (am),%} n. undried ginger. {%—Su-śānta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} very placid; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of king
Śaśi-dhvaja. {%—Suśānta-toya, as, ā, am,%} having very
placid water. {%—Su-śānti, is,%} m., N. of the Indra of
the third Manv-antara; of a king. {%—Su-śārada, as,%}
m., N. of a preceptor; epithet of Śiva. {%—Su-śāsana,%}
{%am,%} n. good government. {%—Su-śāsita, as, ā, am,%}
well-governed or regulated, kept under good discipline.
{%—Su-śikṣita, as, ā, am,%} well trained or taught, dis-
ciplined. {%—Su-śikha, as, ā, am,%} having beautiful
points or crests; ({%as%}), m. ‘possessing beautiful flames,’
N. of Agni or fire; ({%ā%}), f. a peacock's crest; cock's
comb. {%—Su-śipra, as, ā, am,%} or {%su-śiprin, ī, iṇi,%}
{%i,%} Ved. having a handsome chin; having beautiful
cheeks. {%—Su-śiras, ās, ās, as,%} having a fine head.
{%—Su-śiśvi, is, is, i,%} Ved. much enlarged, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%suṣṭhu pravardhita,%} Ṛg-veda I. 65, 2.) {%—Su-%}
{%śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} governing well; ({%as%}), m. a faith-
ful minister or counsellor. {%—Su-śīta, as, ā, am,%}
very cold or cooling; ({%as%}), m. a kind of dwarf
Plaksha tree; ({%ā%}), f. a particular plant, {%= śata-pat-%}
{%trī; (am),%} n. great coldness; a kind of fragrant
yellow sandal-wood. {%—Su-śītala, as, ā, am,%} very
cold or cooling, frigid, freezing; ({%am%}), n. a sort of
fragrant grass {%(= gandha-tṛṇa)%}. {%—Su-śīma, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} easy to be attained, (according to a commentator
{%= su-prāpa;%} cf. {%duḥ-śīma%}); well-disposed (for {%su-%}
{%śīla,%} according to some); cold, frigid [cf. {%su-ṣīma%}];
({%as%}), m. cold, coldness. {%—Su-śīla, as, ā, am,%}
well-disposed, good tempered, having an amiable
disposition; well conducted, well made, well shaped;
({%as%}), m. epithet of king Cola; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of
Yama's wife; of one of Kṛṣṇa's eight wives; of a
daughter of Hari-svāmin. {%—Suśīla-tā,%} f. or {%suśīla-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. excellence of temper or disposition, good
morals, natural amiability. {%—Su-śīvikā,%} f. a kind of
bulbous root or plant {%(= vārāhī-kanda)%}. {%—Su-śuk-%}
{%van, ā, arī, a,%} Ved. shining brightly, brilliant.
{%—Su-śeva, as, ā, am,%} possessing good fortune,
blessed; granting prosperity, auspicious, propitious,
favourable. {%—Su-śoka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. shining
brightly, (said of Agni; Sāy. {%= śobhana-dīpti,%} Ṛg-
veda I. 70, 1.) {%—Su-ścandra, as, ā, am,%} (for {%su-%}
{%candra%}), beautifully shining. {%—Su-śravas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. abounding in glory, famous; prosperous;
having good oblations; ({%ās%}), m., N. of a Prajā-pati;
of a preceptor. {%—Su-śrāvya, as, ā, am,%} distinctly
audible; pleasing to the ear. {%—Su-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved.
abounding in good fortune or prosperity. {%—Su-śrīka,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessing good fortune or great pros-
perity, greatly blessed or happy; ({%ā%}), f. the gum
olibanum tree. {%—Su-śruṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very
famous, (Sāy. {%= su-prasiddha.%}) {%—Su-śrut, t, t, t,%}
Ved. hearing well; having a good reputation, (Sāy.
{%= su-śravas.%}) {%—Su-śruta, as, ā, am,%} well heard;
versed in the Vedas; ({%as%}), m., N. of a king; of an
author of a system of medicine (son of Viśvā-mitra
and descendant of Dhanvan-tari; his work with
that of Caraka, another older medical authority, is
held in great esteem, and consists of six books); ({%am%}),
n. ‘may it be well heard!’ an exclamation used at
a Śrāddha; [cf. {%śrauṣaṭ.%}] {%—Suśruta-saṃhitā,%} f.
[Page1125-b+ 81]
Su-śruta's system of medicine. {%—Su-śroṇi, is, is,%} or {%ī,%}
{%i,%} having beautiful hips, <lang n="greek">καλλίπυγος;</lang> ({%is%}), f., N.
of a goddess. {%—Su-śrotu, us, us, u,%} Ved. well or
altogether hearing, (Sāy. {%= saṃyak śrotṛ,%} Ṛg-veda
I. 122, 6.) {%—Su-ślakṣṇa, as, ā, am,%} very smooth.
{%—Su-śliṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} closely united or adhering.
{%—Su-śleṣa, as,%} m. close or intimate union; a
close embrace. {%—Su-ṣaṃsad, t, t, t,%} Ved. having
a good meeting; [cf. {%su-saṃsad.%}] {%—Su-ṣakhi, khā,%}
m., Ved. a good friend. {%—Su-ṣaṇa, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. easy to be acquired; to be liberally distributed.
{%—Su-ṣaṇana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having beautiful
gifts; liberally distributed. {%—Su-ṣadman, ā,%} m. a
proper N. {%—Su-ṣama, as, ā, am,%} very even, very
beautiful or handsome, very pleasing; same, all; ({%ā%}),
f. exquisite beauty; a particular Jaina division of
time, (the second Ara or spoke of a time-wheel con-
taining six such divisions; it is supposed to be a
period in which steady happiness is enjoyed by man-
kind; sometimes written {%su-khamā.%}) {%—Su-ṣamidh,%}
{%t,%} m., Ved. ‘lighting or igniting well,’ epithet of
Agni. {%—Su-ṣamiddha, as, ā, am,%} beautifully kin-
dled or lighted. {%—Su-ṣavī,%} f. a sort of gourd, Mo-
mordica Charantia (or a small species); black cumin,
Nigella Indica; cumin-seed; [cf. {%su-śavī.%}] {%—Su-%}
{%ṣaha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having excellent strength.
{%—Su-ṣāḍha, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Su-ṣāman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} having good conciliation, sweet or kindly
spoken; N. of a king, (Ṛg-veda VIII. 26, 2.)
{%—Su-ṣārathi, is,%} m., Ved. a good charioteer.
{%—Su-ṣīma, as, ā, am,%} cold, frigid; pleasant,
agreeable; ({%as%}), m. cold; a sort of snake; the Can-
dra-kānta or moon gem. {%—Su-ṣuta, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. beautifully pressed (said of Soma). {%—Su-ṣupta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fast asleep; ({%am%}), n. deep or profound
sleep. {%—Suṣupta-vat,%} ind. like one who is fast
asleep. {%—Su-ṣupti, is,%} f. deep sleep, profound re-
pose; (in phil.) entire insensibility (or spiritual
ignorance ({%= sattva-pradhānam ajñānam%} and,
according to Śabda-k., equivalent to {%kāraṇa-śarīra%}
and {%ānanda-maya-koṣa,%} q. q. v. v.). {%—Su-ṣumat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} Ved. very beautiful. {%—Su-ṣumṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. rich in pleasure or happiness, highly
blessed; ({%as%}), m., N. of one of the seven prin-
cipal rays of the sun (supposed to supply heat to
the moon); ({%ā%}), f. a particular artery or vessel
of the body lying between the vessels called {%iḍā%}
and {%piṅgalā,%} and supposed to be one of the pas-
sages for the breath or spirit, (see {%brahma-ran-%}
{%dhra.%}) {%—Su-ṣūtama, as, ā, am,%} (i. e. {%su-sūtama%}
{%= su-sutatama%}), {%= atiśayena su-suta,%} (Vājasa-
neyi-s. VI. 30.) {%—Su-ṣeṇa, as,%} m. (i. e. {%su + senā%}),
‘having beautiful clusters,’ the Kara-marda tree; a
cane or reed, the ratan; ‘having a good army,’ epi-
thet of Viṣṇu; N. of a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra; of
a son of Vasu-deva; of a son of Vṛṣṇi-mat; of a
son of Kṛṣṇa; of a monkey-chief, son of Varuṇa, (see
{%hanu-mat%}); ({%ī%}), f. the plant Convolvulus Turpe-
thum {%(= tri-vṛt)%}. {%—Su-ṣeṇikā,%} f. a kind of dark
Tri-vṛt or Convolvulus Turpethum. {%—Su-ṣomā,%} f.,
N. of a river. {%—Su-ṣṭuta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. well
praised. {%—Su-ṣṭuti, is,%} f. a beautiful hymn, excellent
praise; ({%is, is, i%}), having a beautiful hymn, {%—Su-%}
{%ṣṭubh, p, p, p,%} Ved. praising well, lauding, extol-
ling. {%—Su-saṃyata, as, ā, am,%} well restrained, well
composed. {%—Su-saṃrabdha, as, ā, am,%} very angry,
greatly enraged or agitated. {%—Su-saṃvīta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} well clothed or dressed. {%—Su-saṃvṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} well covered or veiled, well wrapped up. {%—Su-%}
{%saṃśita, as, ā, am,%} very sharp. {%—Su-saṃsad, t, t,%}
{%t,%} Ved. having a good company or assembly. {%—Su-%}
{%saṃskṛta, as, ā, am,%} well perfected or completed,
well polished, highly finished; highly seasoned, well-
cooked. {%—Susaṃskṛtopaskara (˚ta-up˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} one who carefully polishes or cleanses the house-
hold utensils. {%—Su-saṃsthita, as, ā, am,%} well situ-
ated; standing firmly, doing well; well brought
together, circumscribed. {%—Su-saṃhata, as, ā, am,%}
well compacted, well knit together. {%—Su-saṃhita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} well united. {%—Susaṃhita-pramāṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having well united principals or chiefs.
[Page1125-c+ 81]
{%—Su-saktha, su-sakthi,%} see Vopa-deva VI. 25.
{%—Su-saṅkāśa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a beautiful
appearance, fair, handsome. {%—Su-saṅkṣepa, as,%} m.
epithet of Śiva. {%—Su-saṅgṛhīta, as, ā, am,%} well
kept or preserved; well abridged. {%—Su-satkṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} well or hospitably received, highly honoured,
treated with great hospitality. {%—Su-satyā,%} f., N. of
the wife of king Janaka. {%—Su-sadṛśa, as, ī, am,%}
very like. {%—Su-sanitṛ, tā,%} m. a liberal giver,
generous benefactor. {%—Su-santrasta, as, ā, am,%}
greatly alarmed. {%—Su-sandṛś, k, k, k,%} having a
pleasing aspect, agreeable to look at. {%—Su-sandhi,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Su-sandhita, as, ā, am,%}
well reconciled. {%—Su-sannata, as, ā, am,%} well di-
rected (said of an arrow). {%—Su-samāhita, as, ā, am,%}
very intent or attentive, having the mind intently
fixed or absorbed on a subject or object. {%—Su-samid-%}
{%dha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. thoroughly well kindled, well
lighted (said of Agni). {%—Su-samubdha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. much contracted or shriveled up, much
shrunk. {%—Su-samṛddha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. very pros-
perous; quite perfect. {%—Su-sampad, t,%} f. good for-
tune, prosperity. {%—Su-sampiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} much
crushed or shattered. {%—Su-sambandha, as, ā, am,%} well
joined. {%—Su-sambhrama, as,%} m. great haste, confusion;
great respect or reverence. {%—Su-sambhrānta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} greatly bewildered. {%—Su-sammata, as, ā, am,%}
much honoured, highly approved. {%—Su-sammṛṣṭa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. well rubbed, well cleaned (said of
horses). {%—Su-saraṇa, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Su-%}
{%sartū, ūs,%} f., Ved., N. of a river. {%—Su-sarva, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. quite complete. {%—Su-savī,%} f. {%= su-ṣavī-%}
{%—Su-saha, as, ā, am,%} easy to be borne or suf-
fered; bearing or enduring well; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Śiva. {%—Su-sāman, a,%} n. good negotiation. {%—Su-%}
{%sāra, as,%} m. good essence, good sap, good sub-
stance; competence; ({%as, ā, am%}), having good es-
sence or sap; ({%as%}), m. the red-flowering Khadira,
Mimosa Catechu. {%—Su-sāra-vat, ān, atī, at,%} hav-
ing good essence or substance; ({%at%}), n. crystal.
{%—Su-sikatā,%} f. good sand; gravel; sugar. {%—Su-%}
{%siddhārtha (˚dha-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose
object is completely effected, completely supplied
with. {%—Su-sīmā,%} f. a good boundary; good con-
duct; N. of the mother of the sixth Arhat. {%—Su-%}
{%sukham,%} ind. very happily. {%—Su-sūkṣma, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} very subtle or minute, very small, very delicate.
{%—Su-sevita, as, ā, am,%} well served, much addicted
to. {%—Su-strī,%} f. a good wife. {%—Su-stha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} well situated, being well or in good condition,
in health, healthy, faring well, prosperous, well off,
in good circumstances, happy. {%—Sustha-tā,%} f. or
{%sustha-tva, am,%} n. the being well or well-established,
health, welfare, happiness, good or easy circum-
stances. {%—Susthaya,%} Nom. P. {%susthayati,%} &c., to
establish or settle well. {%—Susthayat, an, antī, at,%}
settling well, setting at rest, appeasing. {%—Susthā-%}
{%vatī,%} f., N. of a particular scale in music. {%—Su-sthita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} well-established, being well or in good
condition, in good health; living well or happily.
{%—Susthita-manas, ās, ās, as,%} being in a happy
frame of mind, contented. {%—Susthitam-manya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} fancying one's self prosperous or well off.
{%—Su-sthiti, is,%} f. a good condition, good circum-
stances or position, well-being, welfare; health, con-
valescence. {%—Su-sthira, as, ā, am,%} very firm or
steady, stable; resolute, cool. {%—Su-snā%} (perhaps more
properly written {%susnā%}), a kind of pulse, Lathyrus
Sativus. {%—Su-snāta, as, ā, am,%} well bathed (some-
times used as a benedictory term addressed to a per-
son about to bathe); one who has duly performed
his ablutions, a student who has performed his ablu-
tions in preparation for or after a sacrifice. {%—Su-%}
{%snigdha-gambhīra, as, ā, am,%} very soft and deep-
toned. {%—Su-smita, as, ā, am,%} pleasantly smiling;
({%ā%}), f. a woman with a pleasing or smiling counte-
nance. {%—Su-svapna, as,%} m. a good or lucky
dream; ‘having good dreams,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Su-svara, as, ā, am,%} well-sounding, harmonious,
melodious; having a loud voice, loud; ({%am%}), ind.
in a loud voice. {%—Su-svaru, us, us, u,%} Ved. going
[Page1126-a+ 81]
well; well praised, (Sāy. {%= śobhana-gamana%} or {%śo-%}
{%bhana-stutika,%} Ṛg-veda V. 44, 5.) {%—Su-svānta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a good or happy mind, well-dis-
posed. {%—Su-hana, as, ā, am,%} Ved. easy to be killed,
to be killed gloriously. {%—Su-hantu,%} Ved. ‘killing
easily,’ a thunderbolt, (Sāy. {%su-hantu = suhantunā%}
{%vajrena,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 19, 4.) {%—Su-hava, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. well or easily invoked, to be well invoked.
{%—Su-havis, is, is, is,%} Ved. having or offering beau-
tiful oblations, devout, pious. {%—Su-hasānana (˚sa-%}
{%ān˚), as, ā, am,%} having a cheerful smiling face.
{%—Su-hasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having beautiful or
skilful hands, skilful-handed, clever; ({%as%}), m., N. of
a son of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Su-hastin, ī,%} m. (also
written {%su-hasti%} according to some), one of the Jaina
saints called Daśa-pūrvins; [cf. {%mahā-giri, vajra.%}]
{%—Su-hastya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having beautiful
hands; skilful-handed, clever, skilful, (in Ṛg-veda I.
64, 1. {%su-hastya = kṛtāñjali,%} having folded hands);
({%as%}), m., N. of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X.
41 (having the patronymic Ghauṣeya). {%—Su-hārd,%}
m., Ved. {%= su-hṛd,%} a friend, (see Atharva-veda III. 28,
5, 6; VI. 120, 3.) {%—Su-hiṃs, hin, n, n,%} one who
strikes well. {%—Su-hita, as, ā, am,%} very fit or suit-
able; salutary, beneficial, good; very friendly, affec-
tionate; satiated, satisfied; ({%ā%}), f. one of the tongues
of Agni or fire. {%—Su-hiraṇya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hav-
ing beautiful gold, abounding in gold. {%—Suhṛc-%}
{%choka-vivardhana, as, ī, am,%} augmenting the grief
of a friend. {%—Suhṛj-jana, as,%} m. a friendly person,
friend. {%—Suhṛt-kula, am,%} n. a company or family
of friends. {%—Suhṛt-tama, as, ā, am,%} very friendly
or cordial, kind, affectionate. {%—Suhṛt-tā,%} f. or {%su-%}
{%hṛt-tva, am,%} n. friendship, friendliness, affection.
{%—Suhṛt-tyāga, as,%} m. the desertion of a friend.
{%—Su-hṛd, t, t, t,%} having a kind heart, cordial,
friendly, affectionate, loving; ({%t%}), m. a friend, ({%kiṃ-%}
{%suhṛd,%} a bad friend); an ally; N. of the fourth
Lagna, (see {%lagna.%}) {%—Su-hṛda,%} a friend, (see the
next.) {%—Suhṛda-druh, -dhruk%} or {%-dhruṭ,%} injuring
a friend, one who smites a friend secretly. {%—Su-%}
{%hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} good-hearted, well-disposed,
affectionate. {%—Suhṛd-bala, am,%} n. the army of an
ally. {%—Suhṛd-bheda, as,%} m. the separation of
friends; N. of the second book of the Hitopadeśa.
{%—Suhṛd-vadha, as,%} m. killing a friend, (Manu
XI. 56.) {%—Suhṛd-vākya, am,%} n. the speech of a
friend; a friend's advice. {%—Suhṛl-liṅgadhara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the mere appearance of a friend. {%—Su-%}
{%hotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} Ved. abounding in priests; ({%tā%}),
m., N. of one of the five sons of Vitatha. {%—Su-%}
{%hotra, as,%} m., N. of the author of the hymns Ṛg-
veda VI. 31, 32 (having the patronymic Bhārad-
vāja); N. of a son of king Vṛhad-ishu of the lunar
race; of a son of Kāñcana; of a son of Bhumanyu;
of several other persons; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a sect of
fire-worshippers. {%—Sūkta (su-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} well
spoken, well or properly said; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of bird,
the Śārikā, q. v.; ({%am%}), n. a Vedic metrical prayer
or hymn, (the Sūkta is properly a whole hymn as
distinguished from a Ṛc or single verse of a Vedic
hymn, the term Mantra, q. v., being still more com-
prehensive; but many other words are loosely used
for hymns of the Veda, e. g. {%arka, uktha, ṛc, gir,%}
{%dhī, nītha, ni-vid, mati, stotra, stoma, vāc, vacas,%}
&c.) {%—Sūktadarśi-tva, am,%} n. the seeing or com-
posing of Vedic hymns, the being a seer or Ṛṣi.
{%—Sūkta-darśin, ī,%} m. or {%sūkta-draṣṭṛ, ṭā,%} m.
a hymn-seer, the author of a Sūkta or Vedic hymn,
a Ṛṣi (to whom a Sūkta is revealed). {%—Sūkta-%}
{%bhāj, k, k, k,%} one who has a hymn or hymns (of
the Veda addressed to his honour). {%—Sūkta-vāka,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. praise-speaking, a hymn; a particular
ceremony. {%—Sūkta-vāc, k,%} f. a word of praise,
praise, hymn. {%—Sūktāsi (˚ta-asi), is,%} m. the
sword of pleasant speech. {%—Sūkti (su-uk˚), is,%} f.
good speech, friendly speech. {%—Sūkti-sahasra,%}
N. of a work. {%—Sūttara (su-ut˚), as, ā, am,%}
very superior; well towards the north, northern.
{%—Sūtthāna (su-ut˚), am,%} n. good effort or exer-
tion, active effort; ({%as, ā, am%}), making good effort,
[Page1126-b+ 81]
clever. {%—Sū-nṛta,%} see s. v. {%—Sūnmada%} or {%sūnmāda%}
{%(su-un˚), as, ā, am,%} quite mad. {%—Sūpatīrtha (su-%}
{%up˚), as, ā, am,%} having good steps for bathing.
{%—Sūpavañcana (su-up˚), as, ī, am,%} Ved. easily
deceiving. {%—Sūpasadana (su-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
easy to be approached. {%—Sūpaskara (su-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} furnished with good instruments. {%—Sū-%}
{%pastha (su-up˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. granting good
help, rich in help. {%—Sūpāyana (su-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having easy approach, easy of access. {%—Sū-%}
{%bharva,%} see s. v. {%—Sū-yavasa, am,%} n., Ved. {%= su-%}
{%yavasa,%} a good pasture; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of
Ajīgarta. {%—Sūyavasād (˚sa-ad), t, t, t,%} Ved. eat-
ing abundance of grass or fodder. {%—Sū-yavasin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} Ved. having good pasturage. {%—1. sūrmi (su-%}
{%ūr˚), is, is, i%} (for 2. {%sūrmi,%} see s. v.), Ved. having
mightly waves, billowy, surging. {%—Sv-akṣa, as, ā,%}
or {%ī, am,%} handsome-eyed; having good or keen
organs, acute; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people. {%—Sv-%}
{%agni, is, is, i,%} having a good fire. {%—Sv-aṅga, am,%}
n. a good or handsome limb; ({%as, ī, am%}), hand-
some-limbed, well-shaped, handsome. {%—Sv-aṅguri,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. handsome-fingered. {%—Sv-accha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} very transparent or clear, pellucid, crystalline;
white; pure, stainless; healthy, sound, convalescent;
({%as%}), m. crystal; ({%ā%}), f. white Dūrvā grass; ({%am%}),
n. a pearl; pure chalk, &c. {%(= vimaloparasa)%}. {%—Sv-%}
{%acchaka, as, ikā, am, = sv-accha%} above. {%—Svac-%}
{%cha-tā,%} f. or {%svaccha-tva, am,%} n. great transparency
or purity. {%—Svaccha-dravya, am,%} n. the crystalline
humour. {%—Svaccha-pattra, am,%} n. ‘transparent
leaf,’ talc. {%—Svaccha-bāluka, am,%} n. pure chalk, &c.
{%(= vimaloparasa)%}. {%—Svaccha-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘clear-
gem,’ crystal. {%—Sv-añc, aṅ,%} &c., Ved. going well,
gracefully moving, stepping well (said of horses),
swift, rapid, (in Nirukta V. 7. {%sv-añcāḥ%} occurs.) — 1. {%sv-%}
{%adita, as, ā, am,%} well eaten, (see 2. {%svadita.%}) {%—Sv-%}
{%adhiṣṭhāna, as, ā, am,%} having a solid foundation
or framework (said of a chariot &c.). {%—Sv-adhīta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} well read, well versed in or conversant
with. {%—Sv-adhvara, as, ā, am,%} quite uninjured;
having beautiful sacrifices, propitious for sacrifice
(Ved.). {%—Sv-anīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having beauti-
ful lustre, very radiant (said of Agni). {%—Sv-anugupta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} well guarded, well secured, well hidden.
{%—Sv-anurūpa, as, ā, am,%} well suited. {%—Sv-anu-%}
{%ṣṭhita, as, ā, am,%} well observed, duly practised or
performed. {%—Sv-anta, as, ā, am,%} having a good end,
terminating well. {%—1. sv-ap,%} see Vopa-deva III. 168, (for
rt. 2. {%svap%} see s. v.) {%—Sv-apatya, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having many descendants, prolific. {%—Sv-aparāddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} very faulty. {%—Sv-apas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. ac-
complishing excellent works, skilful, energetic. {%—Sva-%}
{%pas-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most skilful. {%—Sv-apasyā,%}
f., Ved. desire of performing a good work, wish to do
good. {%—Sv-apivāta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. easy to be gained
or obtained, (see rt. 2. {%vat.%}) {%—Sv-abhiṣṭi, is, is, i,%} Ved.
having good protection, (Sāy. {%= śobhanābhyeṣaṇa-%}
{%vat%} or {%śobhanābhigamana,%} Ṛg-veda I. 51, 2.)
{%—Sv-abhīśu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having beautiful reins
or bridles. {%—Sv-araṅkṛta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. well
ordered, well arranged. {%—Sv-aritra, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having good oars, well rowed. {%—Sv-arka, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. flashing beautifully; rich in praise, resounding
with beautiful songs. {%—Sv-alakṣita, as, ā, am,%} alto-
gether unseen, not thoroughly observed. {%—Sv-alaṅ-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} well adorned, highly decorated. {%—Sv-%}
{%alaṅkṛtya,%} ind. having well adorned. {%—Sv-alpa,%}
{%svalpaka,%} see s. v., p. 1161. {%—Sv-avas, as,%} n., Ved.
good protection; ({%ās, ās, as%}), well protecting, affording
favourable assistance. {%—Sv-avekṣa, as, ā, am,%} well
considered; well cared for. {%—Sv-aśva, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
possessing excellent horses; ({%as%}), m., Ved., N. of a
king (said to have been the father of Sūrya, Ṛg-veda
I. 61, 15). {%—Svaśvayu, us, us, u,%} Ved. desiring beau-
tiful horses, fond of good horses, (Sāy. {%= kalyāṇam%}
{%aśvam icchan,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 45, 7.) {%—Sv-aśvya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. consisting of beautiful horses. {%—Sv-%}
{%asitāyata-locana (˚ta-āy˚), as, ā, am,%} having very
black and long eyes. {%—Sv-asti, svastika,%} &c., see
s. v. {%—Sv-ākāra, as, ā, am,%} well formed, well
[Page1126-c+ 79]
shaped, handsome. {%—1. sv-āgata, am,%} n. (for 2.
{%svāgata%} see s. v.), welcome, salutation; ({%ā%}), f. a species
of the Triṣṭubh metre. {%—Svāgata-vacana, am,%} n.
the uttering of welcome, the word welcome. {%—Sv-%}
{%āgatī-kṛtya,%} ind. having made into a welcome,
giving (to a cry) the sound of ‘welcome.’ {%—Sv-%}
{%ācāra, as, ā, am,%} well-behaved. {%—Sv-ājīvya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} yielding an easy subsistence. {%—Sv-ādāna, am,%}
n. the act of taking anything justly or properly,
(Manu VIII. 172.) {%—Sv-ādhī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. well-
minded [cf. {%dur-ādhī%}]; thoughtful, contemplative,
meditating, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda X. 61, 7.
{%sv-ādhyaṇ = su-dhyānāḥ%} or {%su-karmāṇaḥ.%}) {%—Sv-%}
{%āpi, is,%} m., Ved. a good ally or relation, (perhaps for
{%sva-āpi.%}) {%—Sv-ābhāsa, as, ā, am,%} very illustrious or
splendid, (Kirāt. XV. 22.) {%—Sv-ābhū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved.
being well or beautifully present, being happily near
at hand. {%—Sv-āyasa, as, ī, am,%} Ved. made of good
iron. {%—Sv-āyuj,%} see s. v. {%—Sv-āyudha, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. having good weapons. {%—Sv-ārādhita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} well or easily propitiated, made very propitious.
{%—Sv-ārādhya, as, ā, am,%} easy to be propitiated.
{%—Sv-āśita, as, ā, am,%} well fed, well eaten. {%—Sv-%}
{%āśis, īs,%} &c., Ved. having beautiful prayers. {%—Sv-%}
{%ā-śliṣ,%} cl. 4. P. {%-śliṣyati,%} &c., to embrace firmly
or closely, (Manu XI. 103.) {%—Sv-āsīna, as, ā, am,%}
sitting at ease, comfortably seated. {%—Sv-āstīrṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} well spread. {%—Sv-āhāra, as,%} m. good food;
({%as, ā, am%}), easy to be brought or procured. {%—1. sv-%}
{%āhuta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. well honoured (by offerings
&c.). {%—2. sv-āhuta, as, ā, am,%} (see rt. {%hve%}), well or
properly invoked. {%—Sv-idhma, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
bright-faced, bright-edged (said of a hatchet; Sāy.
{%= su-dīptāsya%} or {%sūrya-kiraṇaiḥ su-dīpta,%} Ṛg-
veda I. 121, 7). {%—Sv-iṣu, us, us, u,%} having ex-
cellent arrows. {%—Sv-iṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} well or pro-
perly sacrificed, completely sacrificed. {%—Sviṣṭa-kṛt,%}
{%t,%} m. ‘causing good sacrifice,’ a form of Fire, (Manu
III. 86); epithet of particular sacred texts. {%—Sv-%}
{%aupaśa, as, ā, am (aupaśa = opaśa),%} Ved. having
beautiful locks of hair.
<LEND>

<L>52381<pc>1126-c<k1>sukam<k2>sukam
{%Sukam,%}¦ ind. = 5. {%su,%} (Naigh. III. 12.)
<LEND>

<L>52382<pc>1126-c<k1>suzWu<k2>suzWu
{%Suṣṭhu,%}¦ ind. (fr. {%su + sthu%} fr. rt. 1. {%sthā;%} accord-
ing to some {%ṣṭhu = stu%} is merely an affix), well, excel-
lently, beautifully; much, very, exceedingly; truly.
{%—Suṣṭhu-vah%} or {%suṣṭhu-vāh, -vāṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved.
carrying well, bearing along rapidly (said of horses).
<LEND>

<L>52383<pc>1126-c<k1>suK<k2>suK
{#suK#}¦ {%sukh%} (perhaps to be regarded as a
Nominal fr. {%sukha%} below), cl. 10. 4. P.
{%sukhayati, sukhyati,%} &c., to make happy, please,
delight, rejoice, comfort.
<LEND>

<L>52384<pc>1126-c<k1>suKa<k2>suKa
{%Sukha, am,%}¦ n. (said to be fr. 5. {%su%} + 3. {%kha,%} q. v.,
cf. {%duḥkha%}), happiness, pleasure, delight, joy, com-
fort; prosperity; ease, alleviation; easiness; heaven,
paradise; water (in Naigh. I. 12. enumerated among
the {%udaka-nāmāni%}); epithet of the fourth astro-
logical house; the drug or medicinal root called
Vṛddhi; ({%as, ā, am%}), happy, joyful, delighted;
agreeable, sweet; virtuous, pious; easy, practicable;
meet, suitable; ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Dharma;
({%ā%}), f. the capital of Varuṇa; ({%am%}), ind. happily,
joyfully; well, ({%sukham āstām bhavān,%} may your
honour be well! farewell!); placidly; willingly, rather
(followed by {%na punar%}); comfortably; easily;
({%ena%}), ind. with pleasure, pleasantly, joyfully; easily;
[cf. Hib. <nsi>sogh,</nsi> ‘prosperity, ease, pleasure.’] {%—Sukha-%}
{%kara, as, ī, am,%} causing happiness or pleasure;
doing anything easily, done easily. {%—Sukha-kāra =%}
{%sukha-kara%} above. {%—Sukha-ga, as, ā, am,%} or {%sukha-%}
{%gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going easily. {%—Sukha-grāhya, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} easy to be grasped; easy to be comprehended
or understood. {%—Sukhagrāhya-nibandhana, am,%}
n. a composition or construction easy to be compre-
hended, easily intelligible language. {%—Sukhaṅ-kara,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} causing happiness or pleasure; ({%ī%}), f. the
plant Jīvantī. {%—Sukha-cara, as, ī, am,%} going or
moving easily; ({%as%}), m. a particular Grāma. {%—Su-%}
{%kha-cāra, as,%} m. ‘going easily,’ a good horse.
{%—Sukha-cchedya, as, ā, am,%} easy to be cut; easily
destroyed. {%—Sukha-jāta, as, ā, am,%} born or pro-
[Page1127-a+ 81]
duced easily; conscious of pleasure, feeling pleasure,
happy. {%—Sukha-tama, as, ā, am,%} most happy, very
pleasant or agreeable. {%—Sukha-da, as, ā, am,%} giving
or affording pleasure, &c.; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Viṣṇu; a particular kind of musical time or measure;
({%ā%}), f. the river Ganges; a courtezan of Indra's
heaven ({%= svarga-veśyā%}); the Śamī tree; ({%am%}), n.
the seat of Viṣṇu. {%—Sukha-duḥkha, e,%} n. du.
pleasure and pain. {%—Sukhaduḥkhātmaka (˚kha-%}
{%āt˚), as, ikā, am,%} consisting of pleasure and pain.
{%—Sukha-dohyā,%} f. a cow easily milked; [cf.
{%sukha-sanduhyā.%}] {%—Sukha-puṇyāha-ghoṣa,%}
{%as,%} m. the proclamation of a happy holiday.
{%—Sukhapratibandhi-tā,%} f. the prevention or inter-
ruption of happiness. {%—Sukha-pratibandhin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} obstructing or interrupting happiness. {%—Su-%}
{%kha-pratīkṣa, as, ā, am,%} looking for or expecting
happiness, hoping for pleasure. {%—Sukha-prabo-%}
{%dhaka, as, ikā, am,%} easy to understand. {%—Sukha-%}
{%prāpta, as, ā, am,%} one who has attained happiness.
{%—Sukha-prāpya, as, ā, am,%} easily attainable.
{%—Sukha-bodha, as,%} m. perception or sensation of
pleasure; easy teaching, easy knowledge. {%—Sukha-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. a happy lot or portion, good fortune.
{%—Sukhabhāgin, ī, inī, i,%} having a happy lot or
portion, happy, prosperous. {%—Sukha-bhāj, k, k, k,%}
possessing or enjoying happiness; embracing a loved
object {%(= iṣṭa-pariṣvaṅga)%}. {%—Sukha-bhedya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} easily broken or disunited, fragile,
brittle. {%—Sukha-bhoga, as,%} m. the enjoyment of
pleasure. {%—Sukha-bhogin, ī, inī, i,%} enjoying pleasure.
{%—Sukha-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of happiness,
full of joy or pleasure. {%—Sukha-modā,%} f. the gum
olibanum tree. {%—Sukha-rāja, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Sukha-rātri, is,%} or {%sukha-rātrikā,%} f. a particular
night of new moon (when there is a festival in honour
of Lakṣmī, celebrated with lighted lamps); a night
when a wife may be legally approached; [cf.
Manu III. 47.] {%—Sukha-lakṣya, as, ā, am,%} easy
to be seen or known, easily recognised. {%—Sukha-%}
{%lipsā,%} f. desire of attaining pleasure or happiness.
{%—Sukha-leśa, as,%} m. a little pleasure, (see {%leśa.%})
{%—Sukha-varcaka, as,%} or {%sukha-varcas, ās,%} m.
‘having a pleasant lustre,’ natron, alkali. {%—Sukha-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m. a proper N. {%—Sukha-vāsa, as,%} m.
a water-melon. {%—Sukha-vāsana, as,%} m. ‘pleasantly-
perfuming,’ a perfume for the mouth. {%—Sukha-%}
{%vedana, am,%} n. the consciousness of pleasure. {%—Su-%}
{%kha-śayana, am,%} n. pleasant sleep, sleeping well.
{%—Sukha-śobhārtham,%} ind. for the sake of comfort
and honour. {%—Sukha-śrava, as, ā, am,%} having a
sweet sound, sweetly sounding. {%—Sukha-śruti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} agreeable or pleasant to the ear. {%—Sukha-saṃ-%}
{%vitti, is,%} f. consciousness of happiness, enjoyment
or experience of happiness. {%—Sukha-saṅga, as,%} m.
attachment to pleasure. {%—Sukha-saṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}
attached to pleasure. {%—Sukha-sañjñā,%} f. the term
‘ease.’ {%—Sukha-sanduhyā%} or {%sukha-sandohyā,%} f.
‘easily milked,’ a tractable and gentle cow; [cf.
{%sukha-dohyā, duḥkha-dohyā.%}] {%—Sukha-sāgara,%}
{%as,%} m. an ocean of pleasure. {%—Sukha-sādhana, am,%}
n. a means of obtaining pleasure. {%—Sukha-sādhya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} easy to be accomplished or attained; easy
to be cured; easy to be conquered or subdued.
{%—Sukha-supta, as, ā, am,%} sweetly sleeping, com-
fortably asleep. {%—Sukha-stha, as, ā, am,%} living
happily, happy. {%—Sukha-sparśa, as, ā, am,%} agree-
able to the touch, pleasant to the feelings, gratifying.
{%—Sukhā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make happy,
gladden, please. {%—Sukhājāta (˚kha-āj˚), as,%} m.
epithet of Śiva. {%—Sukhātmaka (˚kha-āt˚), as, ikā,%}
{%am,%} consisting of pleasure. {%—Sukhād-apeta%} or
{%sukhāpeta (˚kha-ap˚), as, ā, am,%} a little removed
from or deprived of pleasure, (see Pāṇ. II. 1, 38.)
{%—Sukhādhāra (˚kha-ādh˚), as,%} m. a receptacle
of pleasure or delight; ‘pleasure-location,’ Indra's
heaven, paradise. {%—Sukhānanda (˚kha-ān˚), as,%}
m. the joy of happiness. {%—Sukhānubhava (˚kha-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. ‘perception of pleasure,’ anticipation or
consciousness of pleasure. {%—Sukhānta (˚kha-an˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ending in happiness; friendly; subver-
[Page1127-b+ 81]
sive of happiness. {%—Sukhānvita (˚kha-an˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} attended with happiness, happy. {%—Sukhāpanna%}
{%(˚kha-āp˚), as, ā, am,%} one who has attained or
gained happiness. {%—Sukhāplava (˚kha-āp˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} convenient for bathing. {%—Sukhābhiyojya%}
{%(˚kha-abh˚), as, ā, am,%} easily assailable. {%—Sukhā-%}
{%bhilāṣa (˚kha-abh˚), as,%} m. longing for pleasure,
desire of pleasure. {%—Sukhāyata (˚kha-āy˚), as,%} m.
‘easily restrained or guided,’ a well-trained horse.
{%—Sukhāyana (˚kha-āy˚), as,%} m. ‘going easily or
pleasantly,’ a good horse. {%—Sukhārohaṇa (˚kha-%}
{%ār˚), as, ā, am,%} of easy ascent. {%—Sukhārohaṇa-%}
{%sopāna, as, ā, am,%} having stairs of easy ascent.
{%—Sukhārta (˚kha-ṛta), as, ā, am%} (see Gram. 38.
{%d%}), affected by joy. {%—Sukhārtham (˚kha-ar˚),%} ind.
for the sake of ease or happiness, &c. {%—Sukhārthin%}
{%(˚kha-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} seeking or wishing for happi-
ness. {%—Sukhārha (˚kha-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} deserving
of happiness. {%—Sukhāloka (˚kha-āl˚), as, ā, am,%}
pleasant-looking, charming. {%—Sukhāvagāha (˚kha-%}
{%av˚), as, ā, am,%} easy to penetrate, easily seen
through. {%—Sukhāvatī-deva, ās,%} m. pl., N. of par-
ticular deities. {%—Sukhāvatī-vyūha,%} N. of a Buddhist
work. {%—Sukhāvatīśvara (˚tī-īś˚), as,%} m. a parti-
cular Buddha. {%—Sukhāvaha (˚kha-āv˚), as, ā, am,%}
bringing or conferring pleasure, delighting, pleasing.
{%—Sukhāśa (˚kha-āśa), as,%} m. eating with pleasure;
pleasant food; N. of Varuṇa; a cucumber, Cucumis
Sativus. {%—Sukhāśaka (˚kha-āś˚), as,%} m. a cucum-
ber. {%—Sukhāśaya (˚kha-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} aiming
at or expecting pleasure; feeling happy. {%—Sukhā-%}
{%sakta (˚kha-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘devoted to happiness,’
epithet of Śiva. {%—Sukhāsīna (˚kha-ās˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} seated or sitting at ease, comfortably seated.
{%—Sukhāsparśa (˚kha-ās˚), as, ā, am, = sukha-%}
{%sparśa%}. {%—Sukhāsvāda (˚kha-ās˚), as, ā, am,%}
pleasantly flavoured; delightful, agreeable; ({%as%}),
m. pleasant flavour; enjoyment. {%—Sukhāhara%}
{%(˚kha-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} bringing or conferring
pleasure, agreeable, delightful. {%—Sukhāhāra (˚kha-%}
{%āh˚), am,%} n. ease and food. {%—Sukhecchā (˚kha-%}
{%ic˚),%} f. hope or desire of happiness. {%—Sukhetara%}
{%(˚kha-it˚), as, ā, am,%} other than happy, unhappy,
unfortunate. {%—Sukhepsu (˚kha-īp˚), us, us, u,%} de-
sirous of ease. {%—Sukhaikāyatana (˚kha-eka-āy˚),%}
{%am,%} n. sole abode of joy. {%—Sukhaiṣin (˚kha-%}
{%eṣ˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} one who seeks happiness, desiring
happiness; seeking another's happiness, wishing well
to. {%—Sukhocchedya (˚kha-uc˚), as, ā, am,%} to be
cut up or destroyed with ease, to be exterminated
easily. {%—Sukhotsava (˚kha-ut˚), as,%} m. a pleasure-
festival, merry-making, jubilee, occasion of joy; a
husband. {%—Sukhodaka (˚kha-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘pleasant
water,’ warm water. {%—Sukhodaya (˚kha-ud˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} following or resulting from pleasure; ({%as%}),
m. realization or occurrence of pleasure. {%—Sukho-%}
{%darka (˚kha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘having happiness
as a consequence,’ leading to or resulting in happi-
ness or pleasure, causing happiness. {%—Sukhodya%}
{%(˚kha-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} to be uttered easily or
agreeably. {%—Sukhopaviṣṭa (˚kha-up˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} seated comfortably or at ease. {%—Sukhopasarpya%}
{%(˚kha-up˚), as, ā, am,%} to be approached easily,
easy of access. {%—Sukhorjika (˚kha-ūr˚), as,%} m.
natron {%(= sarjikā-kṣāra)%}. {%—Sukhoṣita (˚kha-%}
{%uṣ˚), as, ā, am,%} pleasantly lodged. {%—Sukhoṣṇa%}
{%(˚kha-uṣ˚), am,%} n. warm water.
<LEND>

<L>52385<pc>1127-b<k1>suKAya<k2>suKAya
{%Sukhāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%sukhāyate,%} &c., to be happy
or pleased; to be glad; to rejoice.
<LEND>

<L>52386<pc>1127-b<k1>suKita<k2>suKita
{%Sukhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pleased, delighted, comforted,
happy; ({%am%}), n. happiness.
<LEND>

<L>52387<pc>1127-b<k1>suKin<k2>suKin
{%Sukhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ possessing happiness or pleasure,
happy, joyful, pleasant, comfortable, easy; ({%ī%}), m. a
religious ascetic. {%—Sukhi-tā,%} f. happiness. {%—Sukhi-%}
{%svabhāva, as,%} m. a happy or contented disposition.
<LEND>

<L>52388<pc>1127-b<k1>suKI<k2>suKI
{%Sukhī, īs,%}¦ m. f. one who loves pleasure, (see Vopa-
deva III. 61.)
<LEND>

<L>52389<pc>1127-b<k1>suKIbala<k2>suKIbala
{%Sukhībala%}¦ or {%sukhīvala, as,%} m., N. of a king,
(also read {%sukhīnala.%})
<LEND>

<L>52390<pc>1127-b<k1>suKya<k2>suKya<h>1
1. {%sukhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to pleasure,
pleasurable.
<LEND>
[Page1127-c+ 71]

<L>52391<pc>1127-c<k1>suKya<k2>suKya<h>2
2. {%sukhya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%sukhyati, -yitum,%} to render
happy.
<LEND>

<L>52392<pc>1127-c<k1>suKaNGuRa<k2>suKaNGuRa
{#suKaNGuRa#}¦ {%sukhaṅghuṇa, as,%} m. (perhaps fr.
{%sukham + ghuṇa,%} ‘easily brandished’), a kind of
staff with a skull at the top considered as a weapon
of Śiva ({%= khaṭvāṅga,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>52393<pc>1127-c<k1>suganDa<k2>suganDa
{#suganDa#}¦ {%su-gandha,%} &c. See p. 1119, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52394<pc>1127-c<k1>sugfha<k2>sugfha
{#sugfha#}¦ {%su-gṛha.%} See p. 1119, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52395<pc>1127-c<k1>sugmya<k2>sugmya
{#sugmya#}¦ {%su-gmya.%} See p. 1119, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52396<pc>1127-c<k1>sugla<k2>sugla
{#sugla#}¦ {%su-gla.%} See p. 1119, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52397<pc>1127-c<k1>sucCattra<k2>sucCattra
{#sucCattra#}¦ {%su-cchattra,%} &c. See p. 1119, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>52398<pc>1127-c<k1>suw<k2>suw
{#suw#}¦ {%suṭ,%} (in grammar) a Pratyāhāra used
as a technical expression for the first five inflections
(i. e. nom. sing. du. pl., acc. sing. du., also called {%sar-%}
{%vanāma-sthāna,%} q. v., for masc. and fem. nouns).
<LEND>

<L>52399<pc>1127-c<k1>suww<k2>suww
{#suww#}¦ {%suṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%suṭṭayati, asuṣuṭṭat,%}
to slight, disregard, despise; to be small,
to be low or shallow.
<LEND>

<L>52400<pc>1127-c<k1>suRahAsaPa<k2>suRahAsaPa
{#suRahAsaPa#}¦ {%suṇahāsapha,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>52401<pc>1127-c<k1>suta<k2>suta
{#suta#}¦ {%suta,%} &c. See p. 1117, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>52402<pc>1127-c<k1>sutapa<k2>sutapa
{#sutapa#}¦ {%su-tapa, su-tapas.%} See p. 1120, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52403<pc>1127-c<k1>sutAraka<k2>sutAraka
{#sutAraka#}¦ {%su-tāraka.%} See p. 1120, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52404<pc>1127-c<k1>sutI<k2>sutI
{#sutI#}¦ {%sutī.%} See p. 1118, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52405<pc>1127-c<k1>sutyA<k2>sutyA
{%Sutyā.%}¦ See p. 1118, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52406<pc>1127-c<k1>sutvan<k2>sutvan
{#sutvan#}¦ {%sutvan.%} See under rt. 3. {%su,%} p. 1117.
<LEND>

<L>52407<pc>1127-c<k1>sudAs<k2>sudAs
{#sudAs#}¦ {%su-dās.%} See p. 1120, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52408<pc>1127-c<k1>sudi<k2>sudi
{#sudi#}¦ {%sudi,%} ind. (probably a contraction for
{%su-dina%}), in the light fortnight or light half of the
lunar month; [cf. {%vadi.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52409<pc>1127-c<k1>suDA<k2>suDA
{#suDA#}¦ {%su-dhā,%} f. (in some senses fr. 5. {%su%}
with rt. 1. {%dhā,%} ‘to hold or sustain;’ in others pro-
bably fr. 5. {%su%} with rt. {%dhe,%} ‘to drink’), well-being,
welfare, happiness, ease, comfort (Ved.); the beve-
rage of the gods, nectar [cf. 2. {%dhātu,%} p. 453];
the nectar or honey of flowers; juice; water; N. of
the Ganges; whitewash, plaster, mortar; a brick;
lightning; the milk-hedge plant ({%= snuhī%}); the
plant Aletris Hyacinthoides; Emblica Myrobalan;
yellow Myrobalan; a particular metre. {%—Sudhāṃśu%}
{%(˚dhā-aṃ˚), us,%} m. ‘nectar-rayed,’ the moon (as the
supposed repository of nectar); camphor. {%—Su-%}
{%dhāṃśu-taila, am,%} n. camphorated oil. {%—Sudhāṃśu-%}
{%ratna, am,%} n. ‘moon-jewel,’ a pearl. {%—Sudhākara%}
{%(˚dhā-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘mine of nectar,’ the moon, (see
{%sudhāṃśu%}); N. of a grammarian. {%—Sudhāṅga%}
{%(˚dhā-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘whose body is nectar,’ the
moon. {%—Sudhā-jīvin, ī,%} m. ‘living by plaster,’ a
plasterer, bricklayer. {%—1. sudhā-drava, as,%} m. a
nectar-like fluid. {%—2. sudhādrava,%} Nom. P. {%-dra-%}
{%vati,%} to flow like nectar. {%—Sudhā-dhavalita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} whitewashed, plastered, stuccoed. {%—Sudhā-%}
{%dhāra (˚dhā-ādh˚), as,%} m. ‘nectar-receptacle,’ the
moon. {%—Sudhā-nidhi, is,%} m. {%= sudhādhāra%}. {%—Su-%}
{%dhā-pāṇi, is,%} m. ‘bearing nectar in his hands,’
epithet of Dhanvantari (physician of the gods, see
{%dhanvantari%}). {%—Sudhā-bhavana, am,%} n. a plas-
tered or stuccoed house. {%—Sudhā-bhitti, is,%} f. a
plastered wall; a brick wall; the fifth Muhūrta or
hour after noon, {%—Sudhā-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘nectar-
enjoying,’ a god, deity. {%—Sudhā-bhṛti, is,%} m.
‘nectar-bearing,’ the moon; sacrifice, oblation. {%—Su-%}
{%dhā-maya, as, ī, am,%} consisting of nectar; made
of plaster, &c.; ({%as%}), m. a brick or stone building;
a palace, mansion. {%—Sudhā-modaka, as,%} m. a kind
of sugar made from Yavāsa. {%—Sudhāmodaka-ja,%}
{%as,%} m. a sort of hard sugar prepared from the pre-
ceding. {%—Sudhā-varṣa, as,%} m. a shower of nectar.
{%—Sudhā-varṣin, ī,%} m. ‘raining nectar,’ epithet of
Brahmā; a particular Buddha. {%—Sudhāvāsa (˚dhā-%}
{%āv˚), as,%} m. ‘abode of nectar,’ the moon; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of cucumber {%(= trapuṣī)%}. {%—Sudhā-vṛṣṭi, %}
[Page1128-a+ 73]
{%is,%} f. a shower of nectar. {%—Sudhā-śravā,%} f. {%= su-%}
{%dhā-sravā,%} q. v. {%—Sudhā-sita, as, ā, am,%} white
as mortar; bright as nectar; bound by nectar, (Kirāt.
XV. 45.) {%—Sudhā-sindhu, us,%} m. the ocean of
nectar. {%—Sudhā-sūti, is,%} m. ‘producing nectar,’
the moon; sacrifice, oblation; a lotus. {%—Sudhā-%}
{%syanda, as, ī, am,%} shedding or distilling nectar.
{%—Sudhā-syandin, ī, inī, i,%} flowing with nectar.
{%—Sudhā-sravā,%} f. ‘water-distilling,’ the uvula or
soft palate; the shrub Rudantī. {%—Sudhā-hara, as,%}
m. ‘nectar-stealer,’ epithet of Garuḍa (fabled to have
stolen the moon's nectar for the serpent children of
Kadru, wife of Kaśyapa, in return for which his
mother Vinatā, also one of the wives of Kaśyapa,
was to be released from a state of subjection to
Kadru). {%—Sudhā-hṛt, t,%} m. {%= sudhā-hara%} above.
{%—Sudhodaya (˚dhā-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘nectar-production,’
N. of a work by Hari-vallabha {%—Sudhodbhava%}
{%(˚dhā-ud˚), as,%} m. ‘nectar-source,’ epithet of Dhan-
vantari, (see {%dhanvan-tari%}); ({%ā%}), f. {%= harītakī.%}
<LEND>

<L>52410<pc>1128-a<k1>suDeza<k2>suDeza
{#suDeza#}¦ {%sudheṣa,%} N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>52411<pc>1128-a<k1>sunanda<k2>sunanda
{#sunanda#}¦ {%su-nanda,%} &c. See p. 1121, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52412<pc>1128-a<k1>sunaPA<k2>sunaPA
{#sunaPA#}¦ {%sunaphā,%} f. (= Gr. <lang n="greek">συναφή;</lang> cf.
{%anaphā%}), a particular conjunction of the planets.
{%—Sunaphā-yoga, as,%} m. the above conjunction.
<LEND>

<L>52413<pc>1128-a<k1>sunAkfta<k2>sunAkfta
{#sunAkfta#}¦ {%sunākṛta, as,%} m. zedoary, Cur-
cuma Zerumbet ({%= karpūraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>52414<pc>1128-a<k1>sunABa<k2>sunABa
{#sunABa#}¦ {%su-nābha.%} See p. 1121, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52415<pc>1128-a<k1>sunAra<k2>sunAra
{#sunAra#}¦ {%sunāra, as,%} m. the udder of a bitch;
the egg of a snake; a sparrow.
<LEND>

<L>52416<pc>1128-a<k1>sunAlaka<k2>sunAlaka
{#sunAlaka#}¦ {%su-nālaka.%} See p. 1121, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52417<pc>1128-a<k1>sunASIra<k2>sunASIra
{#sunASIra#}¦ {%sunāśīra%} or {%sunāsīra, as,%} m., N.
of Indra; [cf. {%śunāsīrau.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52418<pc>1128-a<k1>sunu<k2>sunu
{#sunu#}¦ {%su-nu.%} See {%su-nau,%} p. 1121, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52419<pc>1128-a<k1>sund<k2>sund
{#sund#}¦ {%sund,%} a Sautra rt. meaning ‘to
shine, be bright.’
<LEND>

<L>52420<pc>1128-a<k1>sunda<k2>sunda
{%Sunda, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Daitya (son of Ni-sunda
and brother of Upa-sunda); N. of a Vānara or ape.
{%—Sundopasunda (˚da-up˚), au,%} m. du. the two
Daityas Sunda and Upa-sunda.
<LEND>

<L>52421<pc>1128-a<k1>sundara<k2>sundara
{%Sundara, as, ī, am%}¦ (said to be fr. 5. {%su%} with rt.
{%und%}), beautiful, handsome, lovely, charming, agree-
able; right; ({%as%}), m., N. of Kāma-deva; of a king;
of an author who lived in the beginning of the seven-
teenth century, (he composed the Abhirāma-maṇi
drama, the Dvādaśa-māsa-varṇana, and the Sundara-
śṛṅgāra); ({%ī%}), f. a beautiful woman; N. of a
daughter of Vaiśvānara; N. of a deity, ({%Tripura-%}
{%sundarī%} is apparently a form of Durgā); the tree
Heritiera Minor; turmeric; a kind of metre ({%= vi-%}
{%yoginī%}); a particular Yoginī. {%—Sundara-kāṇḍa,%}
N. of the fifth book of the Adhyātma-rāmāyaṇa;
of the fifth book of the Rāmāyaṇa. {%—Sundara-%}
{%taram,%} ind. very well. {%—Sundara-tva, am,%} n.
beauty. {%—Sundara-pura-māhātmya, am,%} n., N.
of a part of the Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa. {%—Sundaram-%}
{%manya, as, ā, am,%} thinking one's self handsome
or beautiful. {%—Sundara-śukla, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the Mauna-mantrāvabodha. {%—Sundara-%}
{%śṛṅgāra,%} N. of a work on rhetoric by Sundara.
{%—Sundarī-tāpinī,%} f., N. of an Upa-niṣad belong-
ing to the Atharva-veda {%—Sundarī-bhavana, am,%}
n., N. of a temple.
<LEND>

<L>52422<pc>1128-a<k1>sundaraka<k2>sundaraka
{%Sundaraka, as,%}¦ m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>52423<pc>1128-a<k1>sunvat<k2>sunvat
{#sunvat#}¦ {%sunvat.%} See under rt. 3. {%su.%}
<LEND>

<L>52424<pc>1128-a<k1>sup<k2>sup
{#sup#}¦ {%sup,%} (in grammar) the technical ex-
pression for the termination of the locative case
plural; a Pratyāhāra used as a technical expression
for all the twenty-one case-terminations; a term for
any one of these case-endings. {%—Sub-anta, am,%} n.
a technical expression for an inflected noun as ending
with a case-termination.
<LEND>

<L>52425<pc>1128-a<k1>supArSva<k2>supArSva
{#supArSva#}¦ {%su-pārśva.%} See p. 1121, col. 3.
<LEND>
[Page1128-b+ 70]

<L>52426<pc>1128-b<k1>supta<k2>supta
{#supta#}¦ {%supta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%svap%}), slept;
sleeping, asleep; paralyzed, numbed, insensible;
({%am%}), n. sleep, deep or sound sleep. {%—Supta-ghā-%}
{%taka, as, ī, am,%} ‘killing a sleeping person,’ mur-
derous. {%—Supta-jana, as,%} m. a sleeping person;
‘having every person asleep,’ midnight. {%—Supta-%}
{%jana-prāya, as, ā, am,%} having almost every person
asleep. {%—Supta-jñāna, am,%} n. ‘sleep-knowledge,’ a
dream, dreaming. {%—Supta-tvac, k, k, k,%} ‘having
the skin benumbed,’ paralytic. {%—Supta-vijñāna,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘sleep-knowledge,’ a dream, dreaming.
{%—Suptotthita (˚ta-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} arisen from
sleep, just arisen after sleep.
<LEND>

<L>52427<pc>1128-b<k1>supti<k2>supti
{%Supti, is,%}¦ f. sleep, sleepiness, drowsiness; numb-
ness, insensibility, paralysis; trust, confidence.
<LEND>

<L>52428<pc>1128-b<k1>suplan<k2>suplan
{#suplan#}¦ {%suplan,%} m., N. of a person (having
the patronymic Sārñjaya).
<LEND>

<L>52429<pc>1128-b<k1>suPAliha<k2>suPAliha
{#suPAliha#}¦ {%suphāliha%} or {%suphālīha,%} N. of a
place.
<LEND>

<L>52430<pc>1128-b<k1>suB<k2>suB
{#suB#}¦ {%subh%} or {%sunbh%} = rt. 3. {%śubh,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52431<pc>1128-b<k1>suBadra<k2>suBadra
{#suBadra#}¦ {%su-bhadra,%} &c. See p. 1122, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>52432<pc>1128-b<k1>suBAYjana<k2>suBAYjana
{#suBAYjana#}¦ {%subhāñjana, as,%} m. the tree Hy-
peranthera Morunga, (also read {%śubhāñjana.%})
<LEND>

<L>52433<pc>1128-b<k1>suma<k2>suma
{#suma#}¦ {%suma, as,%} m. (probably fr. 5. {%su%} +
4. {%ma,%} see rt. 3. {%mā%}), the moon; the sky, atmo-
sphere, {%= nabha; (am),%} n. a flower.
<LEND>

<L>52434<pc>1128-b<k1>sumaNgA<k2>sumaNgA
{#sumaNgA#}¦ {%sumaṅgā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>52435<pc>1128-b<k1>sumat<k2>sumat
{#sumat#}¦ {%su-mat,%} ind. (probably fr. 5. {%su,%} but
in some senses connected with {%sva%} and {%svayam%}),
Ved. ‘well,’ gladly, easily; naturally, of one's self, of
itself, (Sāy. {%= svayam,%} Ṛg-veda I. 162, 7, Nirukta
VI. 22; see also Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 142, 7.)
{%—Sumaj-jāni, is,%} m., Ved. ‘born by his own
power, self-born,’ or ‘having a very pleasing wife,’
epithet of Viṣṇu, (Ṛg-veda I. 156, 2.) {%—Sumad-%}
{%aṃśu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having natural height, naturally
high, (Sāy. {%= sva-taḥ prāṃśu,%} Ṛg-veda I. 100,
16.) {%—Sumad-ratha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a
beautiful carriage, (Sāy. {%= kalyāṇa-ratha,%} Ṛg-veda
VIII. 45, 39.)
<LEND>

<L>52436<pc>1128-b<k1>sumantu<k2>sumantu
{#sumantu#}¦ {%su-mantu.%} See p. 1123, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52437<pc>1128-b<k1>sumna<k2>sumna
{#sumna#}¦ {%sumna, am,%} n. (perhaps fr. 5. {%su + mna,%}
as {%ni-mna%} fr. {%ni,%} cf. rt. {%mnā%}), a hymn; joy, hap-
piness ({%= sukha,%} Naigh. III. 6); favour, protection;
sacrifice, (Ved. {%sumnayā = sumnāya.%})
<LEND>

<L>52438<pc>1128-b<k1>sumnayu<k2>sumnayu
{%Sumnayu, us, us, u,%}¦ one who desires (another's)
happiness (Ved.); ({%us%}), m. a chanter of hymns.
<LEND>

<L>52439<pc>1128-b<k1>sumnAya<k2>sumnAya
{%Sumnāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%sumnāyati,%} &c., to sing hymns.
<LEND>

<L>52440<pc>1128-b<k1>sumnAyat<k2>sumnAyat
{%Sumnāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. desiring happiness;
favouring.
<LEND>

<L>52441<pc>1128-b<k1>sumnAvarI<k2>sumnAvarI
{%Sumnāvarī,%}¦ f., Ved. ‘having or imparting joy,’
epithet of Uṣas.
<LEND>

<L>52442<pc>1128-b<k1>sumpaluRWa<k2>sumpaluRWa
{#sumpaluRWa#}¦ {%sumpaluṇṭha, as,%} m. zedoary,
Curcuma Zerumbet.
<LEND>

<L>52443<pc>1128-b<k1>sumB<k2>sumB
{#sumB#}¦ {%sumbh%} = rt. {%subh.%}
<LEND>

<L>52444<pc>1128-b<k1>sumBa<k2>sumBa
{#sumBa#}¦ {%sumbha, as,%} m., N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>52445<pc>1128-b<k1>suyya<k2>suyya
{#suyya#}¦ {%suyya, as,%} m. a proper N.; ({%ā%}), f. a
proper N. {%—Suyyā-kuṇḍala, am,%} n., N. of a
village. {%—Suyyābhidhāna (˚yā-abh˚), as, ā, am,%}
called Suyyā.
<LEND>

<L>52446<pc>1128-b<k1>sur<k2>sur
{#sur#}¦ {%sur%} (probably connected with {%sura%}
below), cl. 6. P. {%surati, suṣora%} (or {%su-%}
{%sora%}), {%asorīt, soritum,%} to rule, govern, possess
supreme or superhuman power; to shine; cl. 10. P.
{%surayati,%} &c., = rt. {%svar,%} to find fault, blame.
<LEND>

<L>52447<pc>1128-b<k1>sura<k2>sura
{#sura#}¦ {%sura, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 24. fr. rt. 3. {%su,%} ‘to pour out or extract
juice,’ but, according to some, in the masc. sense
formed fr. {%asura%} as {%sita%} fr. {%asita,%} see 2. {%asita,%}
p. 105, col. 3; according to others, more probably
[Page1128-c+ 81]
to be connected with 2. {%svar,%} heaven; cf. rt. {%sur,%}
col. 2), a god, divinity, deity; a symbolical expres-
sion for the number thirty-three, (see {%tri-daśa,%}
p. 389); a sage, learned man [cf. {%sūra%}]; the sun,
(in this sense fr. 2. {%svar%} or perhaps fr. rt. 4. {%su;%} cf.
{%sūra%}); ({%ā, ī%}), f. spirituous or vinous liquor, wine;
Wine or Spirituous Liquor (personified as a nymph
produced at the churning of the ocean); water, (in
Naigh. I. 12. {%surā%} is enumerated among the {%udaka-%}
{%nāmāni%}); a drinking vessel; a snake. {%—Sura-%}
{%karin, ī,%} m. an elephant of the gods. {%—Sura-%}
{%karīndra-darpāpahā,%} f. ‘taking away the pride of
the chief elephant of the gods,’ epithet of the Ganges.
{%—Sura-kāru, us,%} m. ‘the artificer of the gods,’
epithet of Viśva-karman. {%—Sura-kārmuka, am,%} n.
the bow of the gods, rainbow. {%—Sura-kṛtā,%} f. a
kind of shrub {%(= guḍūcī)%}. {%—Sura-khaṇḍanikā,%} f.
a kind of Vīṇā or lute, (also read {%sura-maṇḍa-%}
{%likā.%}) {%—Sura-gaja, as,%} m. an elephant of the gods;
Indra's elephant. {%—Sura-gaṇa, as,%} m. a class or
company of divinities, (see {%gaṇa-devatā%}); a host
of gods; epithet of Śiva. {%—Sura-gaṇḍa, as,%} m. a
kind of ailment (described as a boil on the stomach).
{%—Sura-garbha, as,%} m. the child of a god. {%—Su-%}
{%ragarbhābha (˚bha-ābh˚), as, ā, am,%} like the
sons of the gods. {%—Sura-guru, us,%} m. ‘preceptor
of the gods,’ epithet of Vṛhas-pati. {%—Sura-grā%}
{%maṇī, īs,%} m. ‘chief of the gods,’ epithet of Indra.
{%—Sura-jyeṣṭha, as,%} m. ‘oldest of the gods,’ epi-
thet of Brahmā. {%—Sura-taru, us,%} m. a tree of the
gods, tree of paradise. {%—Sura-tā,%} f. godhead, divi-
nity. {%—Sura-toṣaka, as,%} m. ‘god-pleasing,’ the
jewel Kaustubha (worn by Kṛṣṇa on his breast).
{%—Sura-dāru, u,%} n. the Deva-dāru pine, Pinus
Deodora. {%—Sura-dīrghikā,%} f. the celestial Ganges.
{%—Sura-dundubhī,%} f. sacred basil. {%—Sura-druma,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘tree of the gods,’ the Deva-dāru pine; a
kind of reed {%(= deva-nala)%}. {%—Sura-dvipa, as,%} m.
an elephant of the gods; an elephant of one of the
quarters of the sky, (see {%dik-karin%}); Indra's ele-
phant. {%—Sura-dviṣ, ṭ,%} m. a god-hater, enemy of
the gods; an Asura, demon. {%—Sura-dhanus, us,%}
n. the bow of the gods, rainbow. {%—Sura-dhūpa,%}
{%as,%} m. resin, turpentine {%(= rāla)%}. {%—Sura-nadī,%} f.
or {%sura-nimnagā,%} f. ‘river of the gods,’ the celestial
Ganges. {%—Sura-nandā,%} f. ‘joy of the gods,’ N. of
a particular river. {%—Sura-nāla, as,%} m. a kind of
reed {%(= deva-nala)%}. {%—Sura-pati, is,%} m. ‘lord
of the gods,’ epithet of Indra. {%—Surapati-tanaya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘Indra's son,’ epithet of Arjuna. {%—Sura-%}
{%patha, am,%} n. ‘path of the gods,’ the sky, heaven.
{%—Sura-parṇa, as,%} m. a kind of medicinal plant
({%= mācī-pattra,%} described as pungent, bitter, sto-
machic, and a remover of worms and phlegm).
{%—Sura-parṇika, as,%} m. a kind of Pun-nāga tree
{%(= sura-punnāga)%}. {%—Sura-parṇikā,%} f. the tree
Rottleria Tinctoria {%(= pun-nāga)%}. {%—Sura-parṇī,%}
f. a kind of plant {%(= palāśī)%}. {%—Sura-parvata, as,%}
m. ‘mountain of the gods,’ the mountain Meru.
{%—Sura-pādapa, as,%} m. a tree of the gods, the
Kalpa tree, (see {%kalpa-taru.%}) {%—Sura-pāla, as,%} m.,
N. of the author of the Vṛkṣāyur-veda. {%—Sura-%}
{%punnāga, as,%} m. a kind of Pun-nāga tree. {%—Sura-%}
{%purī,%} f. ‘city of the gods,’ the capital of Indra
{%(= amarā-vatī)%}. {%—Sura-priya, as, ā, am,%} loved
by the gods, dear to the gods; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Indra; of Vṛhas-pati; the Elæocarpus; another
plant, {%= agastya-puṣpa; (ā),%} f. a kind of jas-
mine ({%= jātī%}); another plant. {%—Sura-bhūya, am,%}
n. the becoming a deity, deification, apotheosis.
{%—Sura-bhūruha, as,%} m. the Deva-dāru tree.
{%—Sura-maṇḍalikā,%} f. {%= sura-khaṇḍanikā,%} q. v.
{%—Sura-mṛttikā,%} f. a sort of fragrant earth {%(= tu-%}
{%varī)%}. {%—Sura-medā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= mahā-%}
{%medā)%}. {%—Sura-yuvati, is,%} f. a youthful goddess,
celestial maiden. {%—Sura-rāja, as,%} m. ‘king of the
gods,’ epithet of Indra. {%—Sura-rājya, am,%} n. the
government or dominion over the gods. {%—Surarṣi%}
{%(˚ra-ṛṣi), is,%} m. a Devarṣi or Ṛṣi of the divine
order, a divine sage, (see {%ṛṣi, devarṣi.%}) {%—Sura-%}
{%latā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= mahā-jyotiṣmatī). %}
[Page1129-a+ 81]
{%—Sura-lāsikā,%} f. a flute, pipe, fife. {%—Sura-loka,%}
{%as,%} m. the world of the gods, heaven of Indra.
{%—Suraloka-sundarī,%} f. a celestial woman; N. of
Durgā. {%—Sura-vartman, a,%} n. ‘road of the gods;’
heaven, sky, ether, atmosphere. {%—Sura-vallabhā,%}
f. white Dūrvā grass. {%—Sura-vallī,%} f. sacred basil.
{%—Sura-vidviṣ, ṭ,%} m. a god-hater, enemy of the
gods, demon, Asura. {%—Sura-vilāsinī,%} f. a heavenly
nymph, Apsaras; a proper N. {%—Sura-vīthī,%} f. the
way of the gods. {%—Sura-vairin, ī,%} or {%sura-śatru,%}
{%us,%} m. an enemy of the gods, demon, Asura.
{%—Sura-śākhin, ī,%} m. a tree of the gods; the Kalpa
tree. {%—Sura-śreṣṭhā,%} f. a particular plant {%(=%}
{%brāhmī)%}. {%—Sura-saṅgha, as,%} m. a company or as-
semblage of gods. {%—Sura-sattama, as,%} m. the best
of the gods. {%—Sura-sadman, a,%} n. the abode of
the gods, heaven of Indra. {%—Sura-sama, as, ā, am,%}
equal to the gods. {%—Sura-samiti, is,%} f. an assem-
blage of gods. {%—Sura-sambhavā,%} f. a kind of plant
{%(= āditya-bhaktā)%}. {%—Sura-sarit, t,%} or {%sura-sin-%}
{%dhu, us,%} f. ‘river of the gods,’ the Ganges. {%—Sura-%}
{%sarṣapaka, as,%} m. a kind of mustard {%(= deva-%}
{%sarṣapa)%}. {%—Sura-suta, as,%} m. a son of a god;
({%ā%}), f. a daughter of a god. {%—Sura-sutopama (˚ta-%}
{%up˚), as, ā, am,%} similar to the children of the gods.
{%—Sura-sundarī,%} f. a woman of the gods, lovely
celestial female, Apsaras; N. of Durgā; a particular
Yoginī. {%—Sura-strī,%} f. a celestial nymph, Apsaras.
{%—Sura-sthāna, am,%} n. the place or abode of a god;
a temple. {%—1. surā-kara, as,%} m. ‘liquor-maker,’ the
cocoa-nut tree. {%—2. surākara (˚rā-āk˚), as,%} m. ‘mine
of spirituous liquor,’ a distillery. {%—Surā-graha, as,%}
m. a vessel for taking up or holding spirituous
liquor. {%—Surāṅganā (˚ra-aṅ˚),%} f. a celestial woman,
nymph, Apsaras. {%—Surācārya (˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m.
‘preceptor of the gods,’ epithet of Vṛhas-pati.
{%—Surājīva, as,%} or {%surājīvin (˚ra-āj˚), ī,%} m. ‘living
by spirituous liquor,’ a distiller. {%—Surādhipa (˚ra-%}
{%adh˚), as,%} m. ‘sovereign of the gods,’ Indra. {%—Su-%}
{%rādhyakṣa (˚ra-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘superintendent of
the gods,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Surā-dhvaja, as,%} m.
‘liquor-sign,’ a flag or sign hung outside a tavern or
public-house. {%—Surā-pa, as, ā%} (or according to
some {%ī%}), {%am,%} a spirit-drinker, dram-drinker (fr.
{%surā%} + 2. {%pa%}); wise, sage (perhaps fr. {%sura%} + 3. {%pa%}
with {%ā%}); pleasant, agreeable; a preserver of spiri-
tuous liquor (fr. {%surā%} + 3. {%pa%}). {%—Surāpagā (˚ra-ap˚),%}
f. ‘divine river,’ the Ganges. {%—Surā-pāṇa, am,%} n.
(also written {%surā-pāna%}), the drinking of wine or
spirituous liquor; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the inhabitants
of eastern India (so called from their drinking
spirituous liquors); eating anything to excite thirst
and promote drinking (in this sense written {%surā-%}
{%pāna%}). {%—Surāpāṇa-parikṣīva,%} drunk with wine-
drinking. {%—Surāpāṇa-prāyaścitta, am,%} n. a par-
ticular penance for drinking spirits. {%—Surāpin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} possessing wine-drinkers. {%—Surā-pīta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} drinking wine or spirituous liquor. {%—Surā-%}
{%bhāga, as,%} m. ‘a portion of spirituous liquor,’ yeast,
barm. {%—Surā-bhājana, am,%} n. a wine cup. {%—Surā-%}
{%maṇḍa, as,%} m. the scum or froth of vinous liquor
during fermentation, yeast, barm. {%—Surāri (˚ra-%}
{%ari), is,%} m. an enemy of the gods, demon, Asura;
the chirp of a cricket. {%—Surāri-sambhava, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} caused by an enemy of the gods. {%—Surāri-han,%}
{%hā,%} m. ‘destroyer of the enemies of the gods,’ epi-
thet of Śiva. {%—Surāri-hantṛ, tā,%} m. ‘demon-
killer,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Surārcana (˚ra-ar˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the act of worshipping the gods, worship.
{%—Surārha (˚ra-ar˚), am,%} n. ‘worthy of the gods;’
gold; saffron. {%—Surālaya%} ({%˚ra-āl˚%} and {%˚rā-āl˚%}),
{%as,%} m. ‘abode of the gods,’ epithet of the moun-
tain Meru, q. v.; heaven, paradise; a place for
selling spirituous liquor, a tavern. {%—Surā-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having wine, drinking wine. {%—Surā-śu, us,%}
{%us, u,%} Ved. (see 1. {%śu%}), swollen with wine, wine-
drinking, wine-swilling, (Sāy. {%surā-śvaḥ = surayā%}
{%vṛddhāḥ,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 21, 14); growing up in
drinking; ({%us%}), m. a drunkard; a heretic. {%—Surā-%}
{%saṃspṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} touched by spirituous
liquor, (Manu XI. 171.) {%—Surā-sandhāna, am,%} n.
[Page1129-b+ 79]
the distilling of spirituous liquor. {%—Surāsava (˚rā-%}
{%ās˚), am,%} n. spirituous liquor. {%—Surāsura (˚ra-%}
{%as˚), am,%} n., {%ās,%} m. pl. gods and demons. {%—Surā-%}
{%sura-vimarda, as,%} m. a conflict or war between the
gods and demons. {%—Surāhva (˚ra-āh˚), am,%} n.
‘called divine,’ the Deva-dāru pine tree; other plants
{%(= hari-dru; = maruvaka)%}. {%—Surejya (˚ra-ij˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘preceptor of the gods,’ epithet of Vṛhas-
pati; ({%ā%}), f. the sacred basil. {%—Surendra (˚ra-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘chief of gods,’ Indra; N. of a king of Kaś-
mīra. {%—Surendra-gopa, as,%} m. cochineal; [cf.
{%indra-gopa.%}] {%—Surendra-jit, t,%} m. ‘conqueror of
Indra,’ epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Surendra-loka, as,%} m.
Indra's heaven. {%—Surendra-vatī,%} f. a proper N.
 — 2. {%surebha (˚ra-ibha), as,%} m. a celestial elephant;
(for 1. {%su-rebha%} see p. 1124.) {%—Sureśvara (˚ra-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m. the lord of the gods; epithet of Indra;
of Śiva (as one of the eleven Rudras); N. of a
pupil of Śaṅkarācārya (the author of the Taittirīya-
bhāṣya-vārttika, the Pañcīkaraṇa-vārttika, and the
Vṛhadāraṇyaka-bhāṣya-vārttika); ({%ī%}), f. the celes-
tial Ganges; Durgā. {%—Sureśvara-vārttika-ṭīkā,%} f.,
N. of a commentary by Anantānanda-giri on the
Vṛhadāraṇyaka-bhāṣya-vārttika. {%—Sureśvarācārya%}
{%(˚ra-āc˚), as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Sureśvarī-kṣetra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a district. {%—Sureṣṭa (˚ra-iṣ˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} beloved or desired by the gods; ({%as%}), m.
the tree Sesbana Grandiflora; the Śāl tree ({%= śāla%});
another tree {%(= sura-punnāga); (ā),%} f. the moon-
plant Asclepias Acida. {%—Surottama (˚ra-ut˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} best or most excellent of the gods; ({%as%}),
m. the sun. {%—Surottara (˚ra-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘superior
to gods,’ sandal-wood. {%—Suroda (˚rā-uda), as,%} m.
the sea of spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>52448<pc>1129-b<k1>suralA<k2>suralA
{%Suralā,%}¦ f., N. of the Ganges; of another river.
<LEND>

<L>52449<pc>1129-b<k1>suraRa<k2>suraRa
{#suraRa#}¦ {%su-raṇa.%} See p. 1123, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>52450<pc>1129-b<k1>surandalA<k2>surandalA
{#surandalA#}¦ {%surandalā,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>52451<pc>1129-b<k1>suraBi<k2>suraBi
{#suraBi#}¦ {%su-rabhi, is, is,%} or {%ī, i,%} sweet-smell-
ing, fragrant; agreeable, charming, pleasing; hand-
some; beloved; friendly; celebrated, famous; wise,
learned; good, virtuous; ({%is%}), m. a fragrance, per-
fume, any sweet-smelling substance; nutmeg; the
resin of Shorea Robusta; the Campaka tree; the
Śamī tree; the Kadamba tree; a particular plant
({%= kaṇa-guggulu%}); a kind of fragrant grass ({%=%}
{%gandha-tṛṇa%}); other fragrant plants; the season
of spring; the month Caitra, q. v.; ({%is%}), f. the gum
olibanum tree ({%= śallakī%}); sacred basil; jasmine; a
kind of creeper ({%= rudra-jaṭā%}); other plants ({%=%}
{%vana-mālikā; = pācī%}); a sort of fragrant plant or
perfume ({%= murā%}); spirituous liquor ({%= surā%} which
some read for {%murā%} above); the earth; a cow; N.
of the fabulous cow of plenty; N. of one of the
Mātṛs, (see {%mātṛ%}); N. of a daughter of Dakṣa
and wife of Kaśyapa; ({%ī%}), f. gum olibanum; N. of
the cow of plenty; ({%i%}), n. a fragrant smell, fragrance;
sulphur; gold. {%—Surabhi-kandara, as,%} m., N. of
a mountain. {%—Surabhi-gandhi, is, is, i,%} sweet-
smelling, fragrant. {%—Surabhi-ghṛta, am,%} n. fra-
grant butter, well-seasoned ghee. {%—Surabhi-triphalā,%}
f. nutmeg; Areca nut; cloves. {%—Surabhi-tvac, k,%} n.
large cardamoms. {%—Surabhi-dāru, us,%} m. ‘having
fragrant wood,’ a kind of pine tree {%(= sarala).%}
{%—Surabhi-pattrā,%} f. {%= surabhī-pattrā%} below.
{%—Surabhi-mat, ān,%} m. epithet of Agni. {%—Sura-%}
{%bhi-māsa, as,%} m. the fragrant month, season of
sweet scents, spring. {%—Surabhi-mukha, am,%} n. the
opening or commencement of spring. {%—Surabhi-%}
{%valkala, am,%} n. the Laurus Cassia or its bark.
{%—Surabhi-vāṇa, as,%} m. ‘having fragrant arrows,’
epithet of Kāma (whose five arrows are tipped with
flowers). {%—Surabhi-srag-dhara, as, ā, am,%} wear-
ing fragrant garlands. {%—Surabhi-sravā,%} f. the gum
olibanum tree. {%—Surabhī-pattrā,%} f. ‘fragrant-
leaved,’ the rose-apple ({%= jambū%}); a kind of Jambū
{%(= rāja-jambū)%}. {%—Surabhī-rasā,%} f. the gum oli-
banum tree.
<LEND>

<L>52452<pc>1129-b<k1>suraBikA<k2>suraBikA
{%Surabhikā,%}¦ f. a sort of plantain ({%= svarṇa-ka-%}
{%dalī%}).
<LEND>
[Page1129-c+ 76]

<L>52453<pc>1129-c<k1>suraBita<k2>suraBita
{%Surabhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ rendered fragrant, per-
fumed, scented.
<LEND>

<L>52454<pc>1129-c<k1>suraBin<k2>suraBin
{%Surabhin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. fragrant.
<LEND>

<L>52455<pc>1129-c<k1>suralA<k2>suralA
{#suralA#}¦ {%suralā.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52456<pc>1129-c<k1>surIka<k2>surIka
{#surIka#}¦ {%surīka, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>52457<pc>1129-c<k1>suruNga<k2>suruNga
{#suruNga#}¦ {%suruṅga, as,%} m. a kind of tree, Hy-
peranthera Morunga; ({%ā%}), f. (probably from Gr. <lang n="greek">σύπιγξ</lang>
), a hole made underground for military pur-
poses, a hole dug through the walls of a building for
the purpose of house-breaking; a mine, excavation,
breach, subterraneous passage; [cf. {%su-raṅgā.%}] {%—Su-%}
{%ruṅgāhi (˚gā-ahi), is,%} m. a house-breaker.
<LEND>

<L>52458<pc>1129-c<k1>sullaRa<k2>sullaRa
{#sullaRa#}¦ {%sullaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a commen-
tator.
<LEND>

<L>52459<pc>1129-c<k1>sulhaRa<k2>sulhaRa
{#sulhaRa#}¦ {%sulhaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>52460<pc>1129-c<k1>suvana<k2>suvana
{#suvana#}¦ {%suvana, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. II. 80.
said to be fr. rt. 3. {%sū%} = rt. 4. {%su%}), the sun; fire; the
moon.
<LEND>

<L>52461<pc>1129-c<k1>suvar<k2>suvar
{#suvar#}¦ {%suvar,%} Ved. = 2. {%svar,%} heaven.
<LEND>

<L>52462<pc>1129-c<k1>suvarga<k2>suvarga<h>2
2. {%suvar-ga%}¦ (for {%svarga,%} q. v.; for 1. {%su-varga%}
see p. 1124, col. 2), Ved. heavenly, ({%suvarga loka%}
{%= svarga-loka,%} the world of heaven or the heavenly
world, Taittirīya-s. I. 7, 1, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>52463<pc>1129-c<k1>suvarRa<k2>suvarRa
{#suvarRa#}¦ {%su-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} of a good or
beautiful colour, brilliant in hue, bright, golden, yel-
low; of a good tribe or caste; ({%as%}), m. a good
colour; a good tribe or class; the tree Cassia Fistula;
the thorn-apple; a kind of plant ({%= kaṇa-guggulu%});
a sort of sacrifice; epithet of Śiva; N. of a king;
({%as, am%}), m. n. a particular weight of gold (= 1
Karṣa = 16 Māṣas, = 80 Raktikās, = about 175
grains troy); a gold coin; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of one of
the seven tongues of fire; black aloe wood; tur-
meric; colocynth or bitter gourd; the plant Svarṇa-
kṣīrī; the plant Sida Cordifolia; ({%ī%}), f. the plant
Salvinia Cucullata; ({%am%}), n. gold (of which fifty-
seven synonyms are given); money, wealth, property,
riches; a sort of yellow sandal-wood; a kind of red
chalk; a kind of tree with fragrant blossoms {%(=%}
{%nāga-keśara)%}. {%—Suvarṇa-kakṣya, as, ā, am,%}
having a golden girth or girdle. {%—Suvarṇa-kadalī,%}
f. ‘golden plantain,’ a kind of plantain with a bright
yellow fruit. {%—Suvarṇa-kartṛ, tā%} or {%suvarṇa-%}
{%kāra, as,%} or {%suvarṇa-kṛt, t,%} m. a gold-worker,
goldsmith. {%—Suvarṇa-karṣa, as,%} m. a Karṣa weight
of gold. {%—Suvarṇa-gaṇita, am,%} n. computation of
gold (of its weight and fineness); a particular method
of calculation in arithmetic (said to be the same as
medial alligation). {%—Suvarṇa-gairika, am,%} n. a
kind of red chalk or golden ochre. {%—Suvarṇa-%}
{%granthi, is,%} f. a knot made for keeping gold.
{%—Suvarṇa-caura, as,%} m. a stealer of gold. {%—Su-%}
{%varṇa-dāna, am,%} n. a gift of gold. {%—Suvarṇa-%}
{%dvīpa,%} ‘golden island,’ N. of a place. {%—Suvarṇa-%}
{%dhenu, us,%} f. an offering of gold (in the shape of a
cow). {%—Suvarṇa-nakulī,%} f. the plant Mahā-jyoti-
ṣmatī. {%—Suvarṇa-nābha, as,%} m., N. of the author
of the Sāmprayogikādhikaraṇa. {%—Suvarṇa-pura,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a city. {%—Suvarṇa-puṣpa, as,%} m.
‘golden-flowered,’ the globe-amaranth. {%—Suvarṇa-%}
{%puṣpita, as, ā, am,%} having gold instead of
flowers, abounding in gold. {%—Suvarṇa-pṛṣṭha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a golden surface, overlaid with
gold, gilded. {%—Suvarṇa-prasava, am,%} n. a parti-
cular drug, &c. {%(= elavāluka)%}. {%—Suvarṇa-baṇij,%}
{%k,%} m. ‘gold-merchant,’ a particular mixed caste, the
son of a Vaiśya woman by an Amba-ṣṭha. {%—Su-%}
{%varṇa-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of gold, golden.
{%—Suvarṇa-mākṣika, am,%} n. a mineral substance
of a bright yellow colour (thought to be the common
pyritic iron ore). {%—Suvarṇa-mālikā,%} f. ‘gold-gar-
landed,’ epithet of a goddess. {%—Suvarṇa-mukharī,%}
f., N. of a river. {%—Suvarṇa-yūthī,%} f. yellow jasmine.
{%—Suvarṇa-rūpyaka, as, ā, am,%} abounding in
gold and silver. {%—Suvarṇa-retas, ās,%} m. ‘having
golden semen,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Suvarṇa-roman, %}
[Page1130-a+ 69]
{%ā, ā, a,%} having golden wool; golden-haired, having
beautiful hair; ({%ā%}), m., N. of a king. {%—1. suvarṇa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} having gold, golden; beautiful,
handsome; ({%atī%}), f., N. of a city. {%—2. suvarṇa-%}
{%vat,%} ind. like gold. {%—Suvarṇa-varṇa, as, ā, am,%}
golden coloured; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Viṣṇu; ({%ā%}),
f. turmeric. {%—Suvarṇa-vastrādi (˚ra-ādi),%} n.
money, clothes, &c. {%—Suvarṇa-vindu, us,%} m. ‘gold-
spotted,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Suvarṇa-śīleśvara-%}
{%tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Suvarṇa-ṣṭhīvin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a proper N. {%—Suvarṇa-siddha, as,%} m. an
adept who has acquired gold by magical means.
{%—Suvarṇa-sūtra, am,%} n. a string of gold. {%—Su-%}
{%varṇa-steya, am,%} n. the stealing of gold (regarded
as one of the five Mahā-pātakas or great crimes;
see {%mahā-pātaka%}). {%—Suvarṇa-steyin, ī,%} m. a stealer
of gold (one of the five heinous offenders). {%—Su-%}
{%varṇākṣa (˚ṇa-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘golden-eyed,’ epithet
of Śiva. {%—Suvarṇākhya (˚ṇa-ākh˚), as,%} m. the tree
Nāga-keśara, q. v.; the thorn-apple. {%—Suvarṇābhi-%}
{%ṣeka (˚ṇa-abh˚), as,%} m. the sprinkling of the bride
and bridegroom with water into which a piece of
gold has been dropped. {%—Suvarṇī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P.
{%-bhavati,%} &c., to become gold, turn into gold.
<LEND>

<L>52464<pc>1130-a<k1>suvarRaka<k2>suvarRaka
{%Suvarṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ of a good or beautiful
colour; ({%as%}), m. the tree Cassia Fistula; ({%am%}), n.
brass, bell-metal ({%= pittala%}); lead (according to
some).
<LEND>

<L>52465<pc>1130-a<k1>suvita<k2>suvita
{#suvita#}¦ {%suvita, as, ā, am,%} (apparently re-
referred by some to rt. 4. {%su,%} perhaps connected with
5. {%su%}), Ved. prosperous, prospering, (Sāy. {%= sukha-%}
{%kara,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 55, 4); ({%am%}), n., Ved. welfare,
blessing; riches; sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>52466<pc>1130-a<k1>suvida<k2>suvida
{#suvida#}¦ {%su-vida,%} &c. See p. 1124, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52467<pc>1130-a<k1>suSIvikA<k2>suSIvikA
{#suSIvikA#}¦ {%suśīvikā,%} f. a sort of yam.
<LEND>

<L>52468<pc>1130-a<k1>suz<k2>suz
{#suz#}¦ {%suṣ%} = rt. {%śuṣ,%} p. 1016.
<LEND>

<L>52469<pc>1130-a<k1>suzi<k2>suzi
{%Suṣi, is,%}¦ f. (for {%śuṣi,%} q. v.), drying; a hole,
cavity; a tube, pipe; ({%is%}), m. an opening, aperture;
[cf. {%deva-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52470<pc>1130-a<k1>suzira<k2>suzira
{%Suṣira, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for {%śuṣira,%} q. v.), full of
holes, perforated, hollow, &c.; having spaces; slow
in articulation, {%= vilambita; (ā),%} f., Ved. an abyss;
({%am%}), n. a hole, cavity.
<LEND>

<L>52471<pc>1130-a<k1>suzilIkA<k2>suzilIkA
{#suzilIkA#}¦ {%suṣilīkā,%} f., Ved. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>52472<pc>1130-a<k1>suzupvas<k2>suzupvas
{#suzupvas#}¦ {%suṣupvas, suṣupsu.%} See under
rt. {%svap.%}
<LEND>

<L>52473<pc>1130-a<k1>suzumRa<k2>suzumRa
{#suzumRa#}¦ {%su-ṣumṇa.%} See p. 1125, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52474<pc>1130-a<k1>suzeRa<k2>suzeRa
{#suzeRa#}¦ {%su-ṣeṇa,%} &c. See p. 1125, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52475<pc>1130-a<k1>suzWu<k2>suzWu
{#suzWu#}¦ {%suṣṭhu.%} See p. 1126, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>52476<pc>1130-a<k1>suzma<k2>suzma
{#suzma#}¦ {%suṣma, am,%} n. a rope, cord.
<LEND>

<L>52477<pc>1130-a<k1>suzvi<k2>suzvi
{#suzvi#}¦ {%suṣvi.%} See under rt. 3. {%su.%}
<LEND>

<L>52478<pc>1130-a<k1>susnA<k2>susnA
{#susnA#}¦ {%susnā.%} See {%su-snā,%} p. 1125.
<LEND>

<L>52479<pc>1130-a<k1>susmUrzamARa<k2>susmUrzamARa
{#susmUrzamARa#}¦ {%susmūrṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%} (fr.
Desid. of rt. {%smṛ%}), wishing or trying to recollect.
<LEND>

<L>52480<pc>1130-a<k1>suh<k2>suh
{#suh#}¦ {%suh%} [cf. rts. 3. 1. {%sah%}], cl. 4. P. {%su-%}
{%hyati, suṣoha, sohitum,%} to satisfy, make
glad, gladden; to be glad, rejoice; to bear, endure,
sustain, support.
<LEND>

<L>52481<pc>1130-a<k1>suhaRamuKa<k2>suhaRamuKa
{#suhaRamuKa#}¦ {%suhaṇamukha,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>52482<pc>1130-a<k1>suhfd<k2>suhfd
{#suhfd#}¦ {%su-hṛd,%} &c. See p. 1126, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52483<pc>1130-a<k1>suhma<k2>suhma
{#suhma#}¦ {%suhma, as,%} m., N. of a son of Bali and
Su-deṣṇā; of a district in the west of Bengal;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>52484<pc>1130-a<k1>sU<k2>sU<h>1
{#sU#} 1¦. {%sū,%} cl. 6. P. {%suvati, suṣāva, savi-%}
{%ṣyati, asāvīt, savitum,%} to excite, incite,
impel, send, throw; to discharge; to remit (debts
&c.): Caus. {%sāvayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asūṣavat,%} to
excite, hasten on: Desid. {%susūṣati:%} Intens. {%so-%}
{%ṣūyate.%}
<LEND>
[Page1130-b+ 76]

<L>52485<pc>1130-b<k1>sU<k2>sU<h>2
2. {%sū, ūs,%}¦ f. impelling, sending, dispatching, throw-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>52486<pc>1130-b<k1>sUka<k2>sUka
{%Sūka, as,%}¦ m. an arrow; air, wind; a lotus.
<LEND>

<L>52487<pc>1130-b<k1>sUta<k2>sUta<h>2
2. {%sūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 1. see p. 1118), impelled,
sent, dispatched; gone, departed; drank (a doubtful
sense perhaps referrible to rt. 3. {%su%}); ({%as%}), m. a
charioteer, driver; a man of a mixed caste (the son
of a Kṣatriya father and Brāhman mother; his oc-
cupation is managing horses and driving cars); a
bard, encomiast; a carpenter [cf. {%sūtra-dhāra%}];
N. of a pupil of Vyāsa (to whose teaching the Iti-
hāsas and Purāṇas are said to have been entrusted
by his preceptor), a teacher of the Purāṇas; ({%ī%}), f.
the wife of a Sūta; a female bard. {%—Sūta-ja%} or
{%sūta-tanaya, as,%} m. the son of a charioteer; epi-
thet of Karṇa, q. v. {%—Sūta-tva, am,%} n. the business
of a charioteer. {%—Sūta-nandana, as,%} m. a charioteer's
joy; the son of a charioteer. {%—Sūta-putra%} or {%sūta-%}
{%putraka, as,%} m. a charioteer's son; epithet of
Karṇa, q. v. {%—Sūta-vyasanin, ī, inī, i,%} suffering
from the unskilfulness of a charioteer. {%—Sūta-saṃ-%}
{%hitā,%} f., N. of part of the Skanda-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>52488<pc>1130-b<k1>sUtI<k2>sUtI
{%Sūtī.%}¦ See under 2. {%sūta%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52489<pc>1130-b<k1>sU<k2>sU<h>3
{#sU#} 3¦. {%sū%} = rt. 4. {%su,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52490<pc>1130-b<k1>sU<k2>sU<h>4
4. {%sū, ūs,%}¦ f. child-bearing, parturition [cf. {%ṣū%}];
({%ūs, ūs, u%}), bringing forth, bearing, producing (often
in comps., cf. {%vīra-sū%}).
<LEND>

<L>52491<pc>1130-b<k1>sU<k2>sU<h>5
{#sU#} 5¦. {%sū,%} ind., Ved. = 5. {%su,%} well, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52492<pc>1130-b<k1>sUkara<k2>sUkara
{#sUkara#}¦ {%sūkara, as,%} m. (probably fr. {%sū +%}
{%kara,%} ‘making the noise {%sū;%}’ {%= śūkara,%} q. v.), a
hog, pig; a sort of deer (the hog-deer); a potter;
({%ī%}), f. a sow; a sort of moss, Lycopodium Imbrica-
tum; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σῦς, ὖς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>sus;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>suga;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>sū;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>sau.</nsi>] {%—Sūkara-%}
{%kanda, as,%} m., N. of a plant.
<LEND>

<L>52493<pc>1130-b<k1>sUkta<k2>sUkta
{#sUkta#}¦ {%sūkta.%} See p. 1126, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52494<pc>1130-b<k1>sUktaka<k2>sUktaka
{#sUktaka#}¦ {%sūktaka%} (incorrect for {%śuktaka,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>52495<pc>1130-b<k1>sUkzaRa<k2>sUkzaRa
{#sUkzaRa#}¦ {%sūkṣaṇa, am,%} n. (for {%sūrkṣaṇa,%}
q. v.), disregard, disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>52496<pc>1130-b<k1>sUkzma<k2>sUkzma
{#sUkzma#}¦ {%sūkṣma, as, ā, am,%} (according to
Uṇādi-s. IV. 176. fr. rt. {%sūc,%} cf. {%sūci,%} col. 3; thought
by some to be a contraction of 5. {%su + kṣāma%}),
subtile, minute, atomic; little, small; thin, fine, at-
tenuated, delicate, exquisite, refined; nice; sharp,
acute; subtle, crafty, artful, sly, ingenious; exact,
precise, accurate, correct; ({%as%}), m. an atom; the
Kataka or clearing-nut plant; epithet of Śiva; ({%ā%}),
f. a kind of jasmine, Jasminum Auriculatum; a par-
ticular perfume (described as a substance in small
grains, {%= elavālu%}); small cardamoms; {%= karuṇī; =%}
{%bālukā; (am),%} n. the subtile all-pervading spirit,
the Supreme Soul; subtlety, minuteness; one of the
three kinds of power attainable by an ascetic, (see
{%sāvadya%}); slyness, craft, ingenuity; fraud, cheat-
ing; fine thread, &c.; a particular figure of rhetoric
(described as the delicate or subtle expression of an
intended act). {%—Sūkṣma-kṛṣṇa-phalā,%} f. a par-
ticular plant {%(= madhyama-jambu-vṛkṣa)%}. {%—Sū-%}
{%kṣma-jātaka,%} N. of a work by Varāha-mihira {%(=%}
{%svalpa-jātaka)%}. {%—Sūkṣma-taṇḍula, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing small seeds,’ the poppy; ({%ā%}), f. long pepper; a
sort of grass, Andropogon Muricatus. {%—Sūkṣma-tā,%}
f. or {%sūkṣma-tva, am,%} n. minuteness, subtilty or
subtlety, fineness. {%—Sūkṣmadarśi-tā,%} f. quick-
sightedness, acuteness, wisdom. {%—Sūkṣma-darśin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} or {%sūkṣma-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} sharp-sighted,
eagle-eyed; of acute discernment; acute, quick, in-
telligent. {%—Sūkṣma-dāru, u,%} n. a thin plank of
wood, a board. {%—Sūkṣma-deha, as, am,%} m. n. {%=%}
{%sūkṣma-śarīra,%} q. v. {%—Sūkṣma-pattra, as,%} m.
‘small-leaved,’ coriander seed; a kind of wild cumin;
a sort of mustard ({%= deva-sarṣapa%}); a sort of red
sugar-cane; the gum-arabic tree, Mimosa Arabica;
other plants and trees (according to Śabda-k. {%=%}
{%laghu-badara; = sura-parṇa; = vana-varvarī;%}
{%= kukkuṭa-dru; = vāvala%}). {%—Sūkṣma-pattrikā,%}
[Page1130-c+ 80]
f. ‘small-leaved,’ epithet of various plants and trees
{%(= śata-puṣpā; = śatāvarī; = laghu-brāhmī; =%}
{%kṣudropodakī; = dur-ālabhā; = ākāśa-māṃsī).%}
{%—Sūkṣma-parṇa, as, ā, am,%} small-leaved, hav-
ing sharp leaves; ({%ā%}), f., N. of two plants, {%= jīrṇa-%}
{%phañjī; = ḍoḍī; (ī),%} f. a kind of basil {%(= rāma-%}
{%dūtī)%}. {%—Sūkṣma-pippalī,%} f. wild pepper. {%—Sū-%}
{%kṣma-puṣpa, as, ī, am,%} small-flowered, having
small blossoms; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant {%(= yava-%}
{%tiktā)%}. {%—Sūkṣma-phala, as, ā, am,%} having small
fruit; ({%as%}), m. the plant Cordia Myxa; ({%ā%}), f. the
plant Flacourtia Cataphracta. {%—Sūkṣma-badarī,%} f.
a kind of jujube {%(= bhū-badarī)%}. {%—Sūkṣma-bud-%}
{%dhi, is,%} f. sharp wit, acute intellect, mental acumen;
({%is, is, i%}), sharp-witted, acute, shrewd, intelligent.
{%—Sūkṣma-bhūta, āni,%} n. pl. the subtle elements
{%(= tan-mātra)%}. {%—Sūkṣma-makṣika, as, ā,%} m. f.
a small fly, musquito, gnat. {%—Sūkṣma-māna, am,%}
n. minute or exact measurement, precise computa-
tion. {%—Sūkṣma-mūla, as, ā, am,%} having a small
root; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant {%(= jayantī)%}. {%—Sūkṣma-%}
{%vallī,%} f. a medicinal plant {%(= tāmra-vallī)%}. {%—Sū-%}
{%kṣma-vastra%} or {%sūkṣma-vastraka, am,%} n. fine
cloth. {%—Sūkṣma-vīja, as,%} m. ‘having small seeds,’
the poppy. {%—Sūkṣma-śarīra, am,%} n. (in phil.) the
subtile body which is invested by and the archetype
or pattern of the grosser material frame, {%= liṅga-%}
{%śarīra,%} q. v.; ({%āṇi%}), n. pl. the six subtile principles
from which the grosser elements are evolved (viz.
Ahaṅkāra and the five Tan-mātras, see Manu I. 17;
according to other systems seventeen subtile princi-
ples exist of the five organs of sense, five organs of
action, five elements, Buddhi and Manas). {%—Sū-%}
{%kṣma-śarkarā,%} f. small gravel, sand. {%—Sūkṣma-%}
{%śākha, as,%} m. ‘having small branches,’ a kind of
plant {%(= jāla-varvūra)%}. {%—Sūkṣma-śāli, is,%} m. a
kind of fine rice. {%—Sūkṣma-ṣaṭcaraṇa, as,%} m.
‘small insect,’ a sort of tick or louse (said to breed
at the roots of the eye-lashes). {%—Sūkṣmātman%}
{%(˚ma-āt˚), ā,%} m. ‘subtile-soul,’ epithet of Śiva.
{%—Sūkṣmī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make thin
or fine, subtilize, refine. {%—Sūkṣmī-kṛta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} subtilized, made thin or minute. {%—Sūkṣmī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become subtile or fine, minute.
{%—Sūkṣmailā (˚ma-elā),%} f. small cardamoms.
<LEND>

<L>52497<pc>1130-c<k1>sUc<k2>sUc
{#sUc#}¦ {%sūc%} (thought by some to be pro-
perly a Nom. fr. {%sūci%}), cl. 10. P. {%sūca-%}
{%yati, asusūcat, sūcayitum,%} to pierce; to point out,
indicate, show, prove, make manifest; to betray, re-
veal, inform against, inform; to indicate by gesture,
gesticulate, communicate by signs, declare, relate,
tell; to trace out, ascertain, spy out, espy: Pass.
{%sūcyate,%} Aor. {%asūci:%} Intens. {%sosūcyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>52498<pc>1130-c<k1>sUca<k2>sUca
{%Sūca, as,%}¦ m. a pointed shoot or blade of Kuśa
grass [cf. {%sūkṣma%}]; ({%ā%}), f. piercing; making signs;
gesticulation; spying out, sight, seeing.
<LEND>

<L>52499<pc>1130-c<k1>sUcaka<k2>sUcaka
{%Sūcaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ indicative, indicating, prov-
ing, making manifest; betraying, informing; ({%as%}),
m. a piercer; a needle, any implement for perforat-
ing or sewing; a pointer out; an informer, tale-
bearer, traducer, spy; a narrator, teacher, instructor;
the manager or chief actor of a company; a Buddha;
a Siddha; a villain, scoundrel; a demon, imp; a
dog; a crow; a cat; a kind of fine rice. {%—Sūcaka-%}
{%vākya, am,%} n. the information given by an in-
former.
<LEND>

<L>52500<pc>1130-c<k1>sUcana<k2>sUcana
{%Sūcana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of piercing or per-
forating, perforation; pointing out, indicating, indi-
cation, intimation; informing against, traducing,
betraying; indicating by signs or gesture, gesticula-
tion; hinting, hint; information, informing; teach-
ing, showing, describing; spying out, espying, see-
ing; villainy, wickedness.
<LEND>

<L>52501<pc>1130-c<k1>sUcanIya<k2>sUcanIya
{%Sūcanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be pointed out or indi-
cated, to be made known or communicated, to be
informed.
<LEND>

<L>52502<pc>1130-c<k1>sUci<k2>sUci
{%Sūci, is,%}¦ or {%sūcī,%} f. piercing, perforating [cf. {%sū-%}
{%kṣma%}]; a needle; the point of a blade of grass,
point of a bud, sharp point of anything; a kind of
military array (according to Kullūka on Manu VII.
[Page1131-a+ 78]
187. placing the sharpest and most active soldiers in
front), a sharp file or column; a triangle formed by
the sides of a trapezium produced till they meet; a
cone, pyramid; indication by gesture, making signs,
gesticulation; a particular mode of gesticulating or
dancing; dramatic action; an index, table of con-
tents, catalogue, (see {%sūcī-pattra%}); (in astronomy)
the earth's disc in computing eclipses (or corrected
diameter of the earth). {%—Sūci-khāta, as,%} m. a sharp
pyramid or pyramidal excavation, an excavation of
a conical form, a pyramid, cone. {%—Sūci-tā,%} f. needle-
work. {%—Sūci-pattraka, as,%} m. ‘having pointed
leaves,’ the pot-herb Marsilea Quadrifolia {%(= sitā-%}
{%vara)%}. {%—Sūci-puṣpa, as,%} m. the Ketaka tree,
Pandanus Odoratissimus. {%—Sūci-bhinna, as, ā, am,%}
divided into needles, split or bursting open at the
points of the buds. {%—Sūci-roman, ā,%} m. ‘having
needle-like or sharp bristles,’ a hog. {%—Sūci-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} having a needle; having a pointed beak,
&c., pointed; ({%ān%}), m. epithet of Garuḍa. {%—Sūci-%}
{%vadana, as, ā, am,%} needle-faced; having a pointed
mouth or beak; ({%as%}), m. the mungoose; a mus-
quito. {%—Sūci-śāli, is,%} m. a kind of fine rice. {%—Sūcī-%}
{%kaṭāha-nyāya, as,%} m. the rule of the needle and
the boiler, (a phrase used to denote that when two
matters, one easy and the other more difficult and
important, require to be done at once, the more
simple should be despatched first.) {%—Sūcī-karman,%}
{%a,%} n. needle-work. {%—Sūcī-dala, as,%} m. a kind of
pot-herb {%(= sitāvara)%}. {%—Sūcī-pattra, am,%} n. ‘in-
dicatory-leaf,’ an index, table of contents, catalogue;
({%as, ā, am%}), having pointed leaves; ({%ā%}), f. a kind
of Dūrvā grass {%(= gaṇḍa-dūrvā)%}. {%—Sūcī-puṣpa,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= sūci-puṣpa%}. {%—Sūcī-bhedya, as, ā, am,%}
to be pierced or penetrated by a needle; gross,
thick, dense; palpable, tangible. {%—Sūcī-mukha, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} needle-mouthed, having a pointed beak or
proboscis, pointed; ({%as%}), m. a bird; white Kuśa
grass; a particular position of the hands; ({%ī%}), f. a
female bird; ({%am%}), n. a diamond. {%—Sūcī-roman,%}
{%ā,%} m. a hog. {%—Sūcy-agra, am,%} n. the point of a
needle; ({%as, ā, am%}), needle-pointed, having a
needle-like point, acuminated; pointed. {%—Sūcy-%}
{%agra-sthūlaka, as,%} m. a sort of grass, Saccharum
Cylindricum. {%—Sūcy-āsya, as, ā, am,%} needle-faced,
having a pointed beak or mouth; ({%as%}), m. a rat; a
particular position of the hands. {%—Sūcy-āhva, as,%}
m. a kind of pot-herb ({%= sitāvara%}).
<LEND>

<L>52503<pc>1131-a<k1>sUcika<k2>sUcika
{%Sūcika, as,%}¦ m. any one who lives by his needle,
a tailor, &c. [cf. {%saucika%}]; ({%ā%}), f. an elephant's
trunk or proboscis; a needle [cf. {%sūcaka,%} p. 1130].
{%—Sūcikā-dhara, as,%} m. ‘having a trunk,’ an ele-
phant. {%—Sūcikābharaṇa (˚kā-ābh˚?), am,%} n. a
particular drug or medicament, (apparently used as
a remedy for the bite of a serpent.) {%—Sūcikā-%}
{%mukha, as, ī, am,%} having a pointed mouth or head;
having a needle-shaped point or end; ({%am%}), n. a
shell, the conch shell.
<LEND>

<L>52504<pc>1131-a<k1>sUcita<k2>sUcita
{%Sūcita, as, ā, am,%}¦ pierced, perforated; pointed
out, indicated, intimated, hinted; made known, in-
dicated by signs or gestures, communicated, told,
revealed; ascertained, known.
<LEND>

<L>52505<pc>1131-a<k1>sUcitavya<k2>sUcitavya
{%Sūcitavya, as, ā, am, = sūcya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>52506<pc>1131-a<k1>sUcin<k2>sUcin
{%Sūcin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ piercing, perforating; pointing
out, indicating; informing against, informing; spying
out; ({%ī%}), m. a spy, informer; ({%inī%}), f. a needle;
night.
<LEND>

<L>52507<pc>1131-a<k1>sUcI<k2>sUcI
{%Sūcī,%}¦ f. a needle; an index, &c. See {%sūci%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52508<pc>1131-a<k1>sUcya<k2>sUcya
{%Sūcya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be indicated or pointed out,
to be made known, communicable.
<LEND>

<L>52509<pc>1131-a<k1>sUt<k2>sUt
{#sUt#}¦ {%sūt,%} ind. an imitative sound. {%—Sūt-%}
{%kāra, as, am,%} m. n. making the sound {%sūt%} or any
sound expressive of impatience or aversion; snorting,
snoring; roaring.
<LEND>

<L>52510<pc>1131-a<k1>sUta<k2>sUta
{#sUta#}¦ {%sūta,%} &c. See p. 1118, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52511<pc>1131-a<k1>sUti<k2>sUti<h>3
{#sUti#} 3¦. {%sūti, is,%} f. (for {%syūti,%} fr. rt. {%siv;%}
for 1. {%sūti%} see p. 1117, col. 3; for 2. see p. 1118),
sewing.
<LEND>
[Page1131-b+ 77]

<L>52512<pc>1131-b<k1>sUtta<k2>sUtta
{#sUtta#}¦ {%sūtta, as, ā, am,%} (contracted fr. {%su-%}
{%datta,%} q. v.), well given, entirely given.
<LEND>

<L>52513<pc>1131-b<k1>sUttara<k2>sUttara
{#sUttara#}¦ {%sūttara.%} See p. 1126, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52514<pc>1131-b<k1>sUtTAna<k2>sUtTAna
{#sUtTAna#}¦ {%sūtthāna.%} See p. 1126, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52515<pc>1131-b<k1>sUtpara<k2>sUtpara
{#sUtpara#}¦ {%sūtpara, am,%} n. the distilling of
spirituous liquor ({%= surā-sandhāna%}).
<LEND>

<L>52516<pc>1131-b<k1>sUtyA<k2>sUtyA
{#sUtyA#}¦ {%sūtyā.%} See under rt. 3. {%su,%} p. 1117.
<LEND>

<L>52517<pc>1131-b<k1>sUtr<k2>sUtr
{#sUtr#}¦ {%sūtr%} (probably to be regarded as a
Nom. fr. {%sūtra%} below; see {%sūtraya,%}
col. 3), cl. 10. P. {%sūtrayati, sūtrāpayati,%} &c., to
tie, bind, thread, string; to unbind, relax: Intens.
{%sosūtryate.%}
<LEND>

<L>52518<pc>1131-b<k1>sUtra<k2>sUtra
{%Sūtra, am,%}¦ n. (fr. rt. {%siv,%} ‘to sew;’ but said to
be connected with rt. {%sūtr%} above), a thread, string,
line, cord; fibre, wire; a collection of threads; the
sacred thread or cord worn by the first three classes,
(see {%yajñopavīta,%} p. 804); the string or wire of a
puppet or doll; a short rule or precept, axiom,
aphorism (in morals, religion, or science; {%iti sū-%}
{%treṇa,%} according to such an aphorism); a short and
technical sentence or metrical line used as a memorial
rule to aid in the acquirement of any system (and
hence generally expressed in brief and obscure and
sometimes symbolical language, intelligible only to
those who possess the key to its interpretation, this
key being sometimes given in separate Sūtras called
Paribhāṣās, and the right understanding of a whole
series or chain of rules depending on a knowledge of
the Adhikāra or heading-rule and its influence [{%anu-%}
{%vṛtti%}] on those that follow; these short sentences
and aphoristic rules, the use of which constitutes a
most curious feature in the literary history of the
Hindūs, appear to have been often mere aids to the
memory of teachers — mere hints to guide lecturers in
their oral explications; they were also especially
useful in this way to the priests who had the
management of a complicated ritual); any work or
manual consisting of strings or long lines of the
above aphoristic rules and sentences hanging toge-
ther like threads, (though the term {%sūtra%} may
possibly indicate not so much a line or series of
rules as rules written on leaves which were kept
together by strings; these Sūtra works form a sort
of groundwork or foundation of teaching, not only
in all religious ritual, but in philosophy, in grammar,
and in the collateral subjects of accent, euphony,
etymology, and prosody: thus in religion and ritual
there are first the Śrauta-sūtras, and among them
principally the Kalpa-sūtras, founded directly on
Śruti, q. v., and treating especially of ritual; they
form a kind of rubric or directory to Vedic cere-
monial, or in other words, a complete systema-
tized guide to the rambling discursive Brāhmaṇa as
distinct from the Mantra portion of the Veda [see
{%brāhmaṇa%}], giving concise rules for the perform-
ance of every kind of sacrifice; there are Sūtras of
this kind by Āśvalāyana and Śāṅkhāyana for the
Ṛg-veda; by Kātyāyana for the White Yajur-veda;
by Āpastamba, Baudhāyana, and the Mānavas for
the Black Yajur-veda; by Lāṭyāyana, Drāhyāyaṇa,
Maśaka, and Gobhila for the Sāma-veda; and by
Kuśika for the Atharva-veda; there are also two
other kinds of Sūtras connected with ceremonial,
viz. the Grihya-sūtras and Sāmayācārika or Dharma-
sūtras [often by the same authors, with special refer-
ence also to each separate Veda, and even placed by
some, like the Kalpa, under the head of Sūtras
founded on Śruti], which are really ‘rules for domestic
ceremonies and conventional customs,’ and are some-
times called collectively Smārta-sūtras [as founded
on {%smṛti%} or ‘tradition,’ see {%smārta%}]; these led to
the later Dharma-śāstras or ‘law-books’ attributed
to Manu, Yājñavalkya, Parāśara, &c., the names of
the authors of the Sūtras and of the law-books being
often identical; in philosophy each system has its
regular text-book of aphorisms written in Sūtras by
its supposed founder, see {%vedānta-sūtra, nyāya-s˚, %}
[Page1131-c+ 81]
{%sāṅkhya-s˚, mīmāṃsā-s˚, vaiśeṣika-s˚, yoga-s˚;%}
in Vyākaraṇa or grammar there are the celebrated
Sūtras of Pāṇini in eight books, which are the
groundwork of a vast grammatical literature, besides
the Uṇādi-sūtras on certain affixes; in Vedic accent
and phonetics there are the Prātiśākhyas [see {%prāti-%}
{%śākhya%}] and the Phiṭ-sūtras of Śāntanava; in
etymology there are strings of Vedic words, and
in prosody there are the Sūtras of Piṅgala-nāga on
Chandas, including both Vedic and non-Vedic
metres, and the Nidāna-sūtra on the metres of the
Sāma-veda and Vedic metres generally: it should be
borne in mind that the mixture of Ślokas in some
of the Prātiśākhyas and in some more recent Sūtra
works, though depriving them of the brevity strictly
necessary to constitute Sūtras, does not prevent their
being regarded as collections of aphoristic and me-
morial rules: with regard to grammatical Sūtras it is
necessary to remember that all connecting words
used as prepositions, however necessary to the sense,
are omitted; thus, a word in the genitive case re-
quires {%sthāne,%} ‘instead of,’ to be supplied; a word in
the ablative requires {%param,%} ‘after;’ a word in the
instrumental requires {%saha,%} ‘together with;’ a word
in the locative, though sometimes to be translated
in the ordinary way by prefixing ‘in,’ may often be
used as a locative absolute, and {%pare%} must then be
supplied, the sense being ‘on such an affix or word
coming after or following;’ the word {%vā%} is equivalent
to ‘optionally’ or ‘alternative’); any rule, law, canon,
decree (in law &c.). {%—Sūtra-kaṇṭha, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing Sūtras in the throat or mouth ready to be
repeated,’ a Brāhman; ‘having lines on the throat,’
a pigeon, dove; a wagtail. {%—Sūtra-karman, a,%} n.
‘rule-work,’ carpentry. {%—Sūtra-kāra, as,%} m. the
author or composer of Sūtras. {%—Sūtra-kṛt, t,%} m.
‘Sūtra-maker,’ the author of an aphorism or set of
aphorisms. {%—Sūtra-koṇa%} or {%sūtra-koṇaka, as,%} m.
a small drum shaped like an hour-glass and struck
by a string and button {%(= ḍamaru)%}. {%—Sūtra-%}
{%gaṇḍikā,%} f. a kind of stick used by weavers in
spinning threads. {%—Sūtra-graha, as, ā, am,%} hold-
ing a thread. {%—Sūtra-grāha, as, ī, am,%} taking a
thread. {%—Sūtra-caraṇa,%} N. of a class of Caraṇas or
Vedic schools who introduced various Sūtra works.
{%—Sūtra-tantu, us,%} m. a thread, string, line. {%—Sū-%}
{%tra-tarkuṭī,%} f. a distaff, spindle. {%—Sūtra-dhara,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= sūtra-dhāra%}. {%—Sūtra-dhāra, as,%} m. ‘rule-
holder, thread-holder,’ a stage-manager, a director or
principal actor who arranges the plot of a drama
and takes a leading part in the prelude; a carpenter;
the author of a set of rules or aphorisms; epithet of
Indra. {%—Sūtra-piṭaka, as,%} m., N. of one of the
three collections of Buddhist writings (viz. those
which prescribe rules for the laity, see {%tri-piṭaka%}).
{%—Sūtra-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘thread-flowered,’ the
cotton plant. {%—Sūtra-bhid, t,%} m. ‘thread-cutter,’ a
tailor. {%—Sūtra-bhṛt, t,%} m. {%= sūtra-dhāra%}. {%—Sū-%}
{%tra-madhya-bhū, ūs,%} f. ‘born amid threads or
fibres,’ the resin or Shorea Robusta; incense. {%—Sū-%}
{%tra-yantra, am,%} n. ‘thread-machine,’ a shuttle; a
weaver's loom. {%—Sūtra-vid, t,%} m. ‘a Sūtra-knower,’
one versed in Sūtras. {%—Sūtra-vīṇā,%} f. a kind of lute
{%(= lābukī)%}. {%—Sūtra-veṣṭana, am,%} n. a weaver's
shuttle; the act of weaving. {%—Sūtrātman (˚ra-āt˚),%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} having the nature of a string or thread;
({%ā%}), m. ‘soul-thread,’ intellect having for its site the
collective totality of subtile bodies; the soul. {%—Sū-%}
{%trālī (˚ra-ālī),%} f. a string of beads &c. worn round
the neck, necklace.
<LEND>

<L>52519<pc>1131-c<k1>sUtraRa<k2>sUtraRa
{%Sūtraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of stringing together, ar-
ranging, putting in order; arranging in aphorisms.
<LEND>

<L>52520<pc>1131-c<k1>sUtraya<k2>sUtraya
{%Sūtraya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%sūtrayati, sūtrayām-āsa,%}
{%sūtrayitum,%} to make a Sūtra or aphorism, arrange
in the form of an aphorism, prescribe or declare in
a Sūtra or aphorism, propound an aphorism.
<LEND>

<L>52521<pc>1131-c<k1>sUtralA<k2>sUtralA
{%Sūtralā,%}¦ f. a spindle, distaff.
<LEND>

<L>52522<pc>1131-c<k1>sUtrikA<k2>sUtrikA
{%Sūtrikā,%}¦ f. a kind of dish or cake.
<LEND>

<L>52523<pc>1131-c<k1>sUtrita<k2>sUtrita
{%Sūtrita, as, ā, am,%}¦ strung, arranged, methodized;
ruled, directed or declared in a Sūtra; prescribed or
enjoined in an aphorism, delivered in axioms.
<LEND>
[Page1132-a+ 77]

<L>52524<pc>1132-a<k1>sUtrin<k2>sUtrin
{%Sūtrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having threads or lines, having
rules; ({%ī%}), m. a crow.
<LEND>

<L>52525<pc>1132-a<k1>sUtrAman<k2>sUtrAman
{#sUtrAman#}¦ {%sūtrāman, ā,%} m. {%= su-trāman.%}
<LEND>

<L>52526<pc>1132-a<k1>sUd<k2>sUd<h>1
{#sUd#} 1¦. {%sūd,%} cl. 1. A. {%sūdate, suṣūde, sūdi-%}
{%tum,%} to strike, hurt, wound, kill, destroy;
to effuse, pour out; to distil, flow; to eject (accord-
ing to some); to deposit (according to some); cl.
10. or Caus. {%sūdayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asūṣudat,%} to
strike, wound, kill, massacre; to incite, excite, urge
on, animate, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda V. 5, 2.
{%suṣūdayati = suṣṭhu prerayati; sūdayantu =%}
{%karmasu prerayantu,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 40, 1); to
cook, dress, season, prepare, purify; to preserve,
(Sāy. {%sūdayantu = rakṣantu,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 39, 1);
to pour out, effuse; to eject; to assent, agree, pro-
mise: Desid. {%susūdiṣate:%} Intens. {%sosūdyate, so-%}
{%sūtti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">συδ in παν-συδίῃ, πασ-συδί;</lang> Lett.
<nsi>saudêt,</nsi> ‘to destroy.’]
<LEND>

<L>52527<pc>1132-a<k1>sUd<k2>sUd<h>2
2. {%sūd, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. flowing, distilling, pouring
forth, dropping, (in {%havya-sūd,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>52528<pc>1132-a<k1>sUda<k2>sUda
{%Sūda, as,%}¦  m. destroying, destruction, massacre; a
destructive weapon, (Sāy. {%= hiṃsakaṃ śastram,%}
Ṛg-veda X. 61, 2); pouring out, distilling, (Sāy.
{%= kṣārayitṛ,%} Ṛg-veda IX. 97, 44); a well, spring,
(in Naigh. III. 25. enumerated among the {%kūpa-%}
{%nāmāni%}); cooking, a cook [cf. {%sūpa%}]; sauce, soup,
seasoning; anything seasoned, a made dish; split
pease; mud, mire; sin, fault ({%= pāpa%}); the
Lodhra tree; {%= sārathya,%} q. v.; N. of a country in
Kaśmīra. {%—Sūda-karman, a,%} n. cook's work, cook-
ing. {%—Sūda-śālā,%} f. ‘cooking-room,’ a kitchen.
{%—Sūdādhyakṣa (˚da-adh˚), as,%} m. a superin-
tendent of cooking, overseer of the kitchen.
<LEND>

<L>52529<pc>1132-a<k1>sUdana<k2>sUdana
{%Sūdana, as, ī, am,%}¦ destroying, destructive, a
destroyer; dear, beloved; ({%am%}), n. the act of
destroying, destruction, killing; the act of assenting
to or promising ({%= aṅgī-karaṇa%}); the act of
ejecting or throwing away ({%= niḥkṣepaṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>52530<pc>1132-a<k1>sUdayitnu<k2>sUdayitnu
{%Sūdayitnu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. inciting, urging on,
animating, exciting, (Sāy. {%= prerayitṛ,%} Ṛg-veda
X. 64, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>52531<pc>1132-a<k1>sUdita<k2>sUdita
{%Sūdita, as, ā, am,%}¦ wounded, destroyed, killed.
<LEND>

<L>52532<pc>1132-a<k1>sUditf<k2>sUditf
{%Sūditṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ destroying, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>52533<pc>1132-a<k1>sUna<k2>sUna
{#sUna#}¦ {%sūna, sūnu.%} See p. 1118, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52534<pc>1132-a<k1>sUnara<k2>sUnara
{#sUnara#}¦ {%sūnara, as,%} m. (probably for {%su-%}
{%nara%}), Ved. a good or excellent man, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%śobhana-manuṣya,%} Ṛg-veda V. 34, 7); ‘a good
leader,’ epithet of Soma, (Sāy. {%= suṣṭhu rātrīṇāṃ%}
{%netā,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 29, 1); ({%ī%}), f., Ved. a good or
well-married or happy woman; epithet of the Dawn,
(Sāy. {%= janānāṃ suṣṭhu netrī,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 81,
1); ({%as, ī, am%}), well-disposed, friendly (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>52535<pc>1132-a<k1>sUnA<k2>sUnA
{#sUnA#}¦ {%sūnā,%} f. (in Uṇādi-s. III. 13. said to
be fr. rt. 3. {%su%}), any place where animals are killed
or sacrificed; any place or utensil in a house where
animals are liable to be accidentally destroyed, (of
five kinds, see {%śūnā, pañca-sūnā%}); a slaughter-
house; killing, hurting, injuring [cf. {%sūdana%}]; the
sale of flesh or meat; the uvula or soft palate, (in
this and the next sense perhaps connected with
{%śūna%}); inflammation of the glands of the neck
(commonly called mumps); a zone, girdle (according
to some); a ray (according to some); a river (ac-
cording to some). {%—Sūnā-doṣa, as,%} m. the guilt
incurred by destroying animals in any of the five
Sūnās, (see above; cf. Manu III. 71.)
<LEND>

<L>52536<pc>1132-a<k1>sUnin<k2>sUnin
{%Sūnin, ī,%}¦ m. one who keeps a slaughter-house, a
butcher, flesh-seller, one who causes the death of
animals, a hunter.
<LEND>

<L>52537<pc>1132-a<k1>sUnfta<k2>sUnfta
{#sUnfta#}¦ {%sūnṛta, as, ā, am,%} (thought to be
fr. 5. {%su%} and rt. 1. {%nṛt%}), Ved. movable, quick,
active, brisk, lively, cheerful, kind, agreeable,
pleasant and at the same time true, ({%sūnṛtā vāc%}
or {%gir,%} ‘cheerful words,’ or, according to some, ‘kind
yet sincere language,’ is one of the four things with
which even the poorest man is expected to greet a
guest, Manu III. 101; the sense ‘true’ may have
[Page1132-b+ 76]
arisen from some fancied connection with {%ṛta,%}
q. v.); fortunate, auspicious; dear, beloved; ({%ā%}), f.
true and agreeable speech, (Sāy. {%= priya-hita-vāc%});
the goddess of true speech ({%= vāg-devatā,%} Ṛg-veda
I. 40, 3, and invoked as a goddess in X. 141, 2);
excellent song; N. of Uṣas, (Naigh. I. 8); food
({%= anna,%} Naigh. II. 7); N. of a wife of Uttāna-
pāda; ({%am%}), n. true and agreeable speech, pleasant
discourse; auspiciousness. {%—Sūnṛta-vāc, k, k, k,%}
truth-speaking, speaking politely and truthfully. {%—Sū-%}
{%nṛtā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having a pleasant or
friendly voice, having excellent songs; ({%atī%}), f., N.
of Uṣas, (Naigh. I. 8.) {%—Sūnṛtā-van, ā, arī, a,%}
Ved. having a pleasant voice; ({%arī%}), f. epithet of
Uṣas.
<LEND>

<L>52538<pc>1132-b<k1>sUnmada<k2>sUnmada
{#sUnmada#}¦ {%sūnmada.%} See p. 1126, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52539<pc>1132-b<k1>sUpa<k2>sUpa
{#sUpa#}¦ {%sūpa, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. III. 26. said
to be fr. rt. 3. {%su,%} ‘to distil;’ cf. {%sūda%}), sauce, con-
diment; soup, broth; split pease; a cook; one who
lives by cooking for Śūdras ({%śūdra-pākopajīvin%});
a vessel, pot, pan; an arrow; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>suf,</nsi>
<nsi>sufan, saufjan;</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>sup;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>su-</nsi>
<nsi>pan.</nsi>] {%—Sūpa-kāra, as,%} m. ‘sauce-maker,’ a cook.
{%—Sūpa-dhūpana%} or {%sūpa-dhūpaka, am,%} n. ‘scent-
ing sauce,’ Asa Fetida. {%—Sūpa-parṇī,%} f. a sort of
bean {%(= mudga-parṇī)%}. {%—Sūpa-prati,%} ind. a little
sauce or soup, (Pāṇ. II. 1, 9.) {%—Sūpa-śreṣṭha,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘best of sauces,’ a sort of bean. {%—Sūpāṅga%}
{%(˚pa-aṅ˚), am,%} n. ‘sauce-ingredient,’ Asa Fetida.
<LEND>

<L>52540<pc>1132-b<k1>sUpaskara<k2>sUpaskara
{#sUpaskara#}¦ {%sūpaskara, sūpastha.%} See p. 1126,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52541<pc>1132-b<k1>sUBarva<k2>sUBarva
{#sUBarva#}¦ {%sū-bharva, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (for {%su-%}
{%bharva;%} see rt. {%bharv%}), well-fed, having good food
or pasturage, (Sāy. {%= śobhana-bhakṣa,%} Ṛg-veda X.
94, 3; {%= śobhana-caraṇa,%} Ṛg-veda X. 102, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>52542<pc>1132-b<k1>sUma<k2>sUma
{#sUma#}¦ {%sūma, as, am,%} m. n. (in Uṇādi-s. I.
144. said to be fr. rt. 4. {%su%} or 3. {%sū%}), the sky,
heaven; milk; water.
<LEND>

<L>52543<pc>1132-b<k1>sUmaya<k2>sUmaya
{#sUmaya#}¦ {%sū-maya, as, ī, am,%} (for {%su-maya%}),
Ved. abounding in happiness, very successful, (Sāy.
{%= su-sukha.%})
<LEND>

<L>52544<pc>1132-b<k1>sUyavasa<k2>sUyavasa
{#sUyavasa#}¦ {%sū-yavasa,%} &c. See p. 1126, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52545<pc>1132-b<k1>sUr<k2>sUr
{#sUr#}¦ {%sūr%} = rt. {%śūr,%} cl. 4. A. {%sūryate,%} &c.,
to hurt, kill; to be firm; to make firm,
&c., (see rt. {%śūr.%})
<LEND>

<L>52546<pc>1132-b<k1>sUraRa<k2>sUraRa
{%Sūraṇa, as,%}¦ m. {%= śūraṇa,%} the esculent root Arum
Campanulatum.
<LEND>

<L>52547<pc>1132-b<k1>sUrRa<k2>sUrRa
{%Sūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ hurt, injured.
<LEND>

<L>52548<pc>1132-b<k1>sUra<k2>sUra
{#sUra#}¦ {%sūra, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. II. 24. said
to be fr. rt. 4. {%su%} or 3. {%sū,%} but probably connected
with 2. {%svar,%} originally {%suvar,%} from which a form
{%sūr%} appears to have been derived, see Ṛg-veda VI.
49, 3), the sun; N. of the father of the seventeenth
Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī; the swallow-wort,
Calotropis Gigantea ({%= arka%}); the Soma; a wise or
learned man, teacher; a hero, king, (in these senses
probably for {%śūra,%} q. v.); ({%ī%}), f., N. of Kuntī (as
married to the Sun before her marriage with Pāṇḍu);
black mustard, {%= rāja-sarṣapa;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>sol;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>sunna,</nsi> ‘the sun;’ Lith. <nsi>saule.</nsi>] {%—Sūra-cakṣas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. sun-eyed; radiant as the sun.
{%—Sūra-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Sūra-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. ‘son of the Sun,’ N. of Saturn; [cf.
{%saurī.%}] {%—Sūra-sūta, as,%} m. ‘charioteer of the Sun,’
N. of Aruṇa (or the Dawn personified). {%—Sūrā-%}
{%pagā (˚ra-ap˚),%} f. ‘river of the gods,’ epithet of
the Ganges. {%—Sūrāsana-deśa (˚ra-ās˚), as,%} m.,
N. of a district.
<LEND>

<L>52549<pc>1132-b<k1>sUri<k2>sUri
{%Sūri, is,%}¦ m. the sun; a learned man, sage; a
priest; a worshipper, praiser, (Sāy. {%= stotṛ%}); a title
commonly given to Jaina teachers; N. of Kṛṣṇa;
a kind of plant ({%= bhujaṅga-ghātinī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52550<pc>1132-b<k1>sUrin<k2>sUrin
{%Sūrin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ wise, learned; ({%ī%}), m. a wise or
learned man, scholar.
<LEND>

<L>52551<pc>1132-b<k1>sUrI<k2>sUrI
{%Sūrī,%}¦ f., N. of the wife of Sūrya, (see under {%sūra%}
above.)
<LEND>
[Page1132-c+ 81]

<L>52552<pc>1132-c<k1>sUrya<k2>sUrya
{%Sūrya, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps originally {%suvar-ya,%} or
according to some, {%savar-ya, savar%} being for {%sa-%}
{%van,%} cf. the etymology of {%sūra,%} col. 2; according
to Vopa-deva fr. rt. {%sṛ%}), the Sun or its deity, (the
name Sūrya being generally distinguished in the
Veda from Savitṛ, q. v., and Āditya, q. v., as be-
longing to a distinct god; from some passages, how-
ever, it would appear that these names are intended
to be interchangeable as representing various forms
of one and the same divine personality; in the later
mythology Sūrya as Savitṛ is reckoned as one of the
twelve Ādityas or emblems of the Sun in the twelve
months of the year; by Yāska, Nirukta VII. 5, he
is regarded as one of the original Vedic triad, his
place being in the sky, while that of Agni is on the
earth, and that of Indra is in the atmosphere; many
hymns or parts of hymns in the Ṛg-veda are in
praise of Sūrya, e. g. I. 50, I. 115, IV. 13, VII. 60,
X. 37, X. 170; sometimes he is called son of
Dyaus, sometimes of Aditi; in one passage Uṣas,
the Dawn, is his wife, in another he is styled the
child of the Dawns; he moves through the sky in
a chariot drawn by seven ruddy horses or mares
[see {%saptāśva, harit, harid-aśva, śundhyu%}]; he
is described as the eye of Mitra and Varuṇa, and
sometimes of Agni; he is all-seeing, ever beholding
the good and bad deeds of mortals, the preserver of
all things stationary and moving; in other passages
he is represented as holding a somewhat secondary
position, being made to shine or have his path pre-
pared for him by Mitra and Varuṇa, by Aryaman,
by Indra, by the Dawns, and others; the long hymn,
Atharva-veda XIII. 2, is entirely in his praise;
there is another addressed to the Sun, called Bhānu,
in Mahā-bhārata, Vana-parvan 166, &c.; and in the
Yuddha-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa [VI. 106, Bombay
edit.], Rāma, when about to do battle with Rāvaṇa,
is told by Agastya to repeat a hymn, called Āditya-
hṛdaya, to the Sun, there called Vivasvat, and iden-
tified with Āditya, Savitṛ, Sūrya, Pūṣan, and in
fact with Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva, and all the other
gods; in the later mythology the seven-horsed
chariot of Sūrya is said to be driven by Aruṇa or the
Dawn as its charioteer, who is represented without
legs; the Sun, whether named Sūrya or Vivasvat,
has several wives, see {%sūryā%} below, and cf. {%sa-varṇā,%}
see also {%chāyā, sañ-jñā, aśvinī;%} by Sañjñā he had
two children, Yama and Yamunā, q. q. v. v.; by
Aśvinī, the two Aśvins; by Kuntī, before her mar-
riage with Pāṇḍu, he had Karṇa, q. v.; and he is
also supposed to be the father of Manu Vaivasvata,
and to be the progenitor of one of the two great
lines of Hindū kings [see {%sūrya-vaṃśa%} below];
seven Sūryas are sometimes mentioned, which are
probably the seven planets, the Sun being regarded
as a planet by Hindū astronomers; ninety-four
synonyms of Sūrya are commonly given, and his
epithets are almost innumerable; at the end of a
Kalpa he is called Kāla-sūrya); a symbolical expres-
sion for the number twelve (in allusion to the sun in
the twelve signs of the zodiac); the swallow-wort
(either Calotropis or Asclepias Gigantea, {%= arka%});
N. of the son of Bali; of a Dānava; of an astro-
nomer ({%= sūrya-dāsa%}); epithet of Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. the
wife of Sūrya or the Sun, (also called Sañjñā, q. v.);
the daughter of Sūrya or the Sun, (see Ṛg-veda I.
116, 17; also described as daughter of Savitṛ and
wife of the Aśvins, and in other places as married
to Soma; in Ṛg-veda I. 119, 2. she is called
Ūrjānī, and in VI. 55, 4, VI. 58, 4. the sister of
Pūṣan, q. v., who is described as loving her, and
receiving her as a gift from the gods; according to
some she represents a weak manifestation of the
Sun; Sūryā Sāvitrī is regarded as the authoress of
the Sūryā-sūkta, Ṛg-veda X. 85; in Naigh. I. 11.
Sūryā is enumerated among the {%vāṅ-nāmāni%}); the
hymn about the marriage of Sūryā ({%= sūryā-sūkta,%}
q. v.); a new bride; a drug; the colocynth or
bitter gourd; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἥλιος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>sol;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>sunna, sunno, sanil;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>sunna, sunne,</nsi>
<nsi>sun.</nsi>] {%—Sūrya-kamala, am,%} n. the sunflower,
[Page1133-a+ 81]
heliotrope. {%—Sūrya-kānta, as,%} m. ‘sun-loved,’ the
sun-stone, sun-gem, sun-crystal (a kind of crystal
cool to the touch and supposed to possess fabulous
properties because like a glass lens it gave out heat
when exposed to the rays of the sun; there is a
fellow-stone in connection with the moon called
{%candra-kānta,%} q. v.); crystal ({%= sphaṭika%}); the
flowering shrub Hibiscus Phœniceus. {%—Sūrya-kānti,%}
{%is,%} f. sun-light, sun-shine; a particular flower (pro-
bably the China rose); the flower of sesamum (ac-
cording to some). {%—Sūrya-kāla, as,%} m. ‘sun-time,’
day-time, day. {%—Sūrya-kālānala-cakra (˚la-an˚),%}
{%am,%} n. a kind of astrological diagram for indicating
good and bad fortune. {%—Sūrya-gaṅgā-tīrtha, am,%}
n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Sūrya-graha, as,%} m. ‘sun-
planet,’ the sun; ‘sun-seizure,’ an eclipse of the sun;
‘sun-seizer,’ epithet of Rāhu and Ketu, q. q. v. v.;
the bottom of a water-jar. {%—Sūrya-grahaṇa, am,%}
n. ‘sun-seizure,’ a solar eclipse. {%—Sūrya-ja, as,%} m.
‘sun-born,’ epithet of the monkey Sugriva; of the hero
Karṇa; of the planet Saturn; ({%ā%}), f. the river Yamunā
(also called Aṃśu-matī, q. v.). {%—Sūrya-tanaya, as,%}
m. ‘son of the Sun,’ epithet of the planet Saturn; of
Karṇa; of Sugrīva; ({%ā%}), f. ‘daughter of the Sun;’
the river Yamunā. {%—Sūrya-tejas, as,%} n. the radiance
or heat of the sun. {%—Sūrya-tvac, k, k, k,%} or {%sūrya-%}
{%tvaca, as, ā, am,%} having skin as bright or as clear
as the sun. {%—Sūrya-dāsa, as,%} m., N. of an astro-
nomer of the sixteenth century (author of the Rāma-
kṛṣṇa-kāvya); of a son of Śiva-dāsa. {%—Sūrya-%}
{%dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘sun-bannered,’ N. of a king. {%—Sūr-%}
{%ya-nakṣatra, am,%} n. ‘sun-asterism,’ that Nak-
ṣatra (of the twenty-seven) in which the sun hap-
pens to be. {%—Sūrya-nagara,%} ‘city of the Sun,’ N.
of the capital of Cashmere (commonly called Siri-
nagar or Seri-nagar). {%—Sūrya-nārāyaṇa, as,%} m. the
Sun personified; a proper N. {%—Sūrya-pattra, as,%}
m. the plant Calotropis Gigantea. {%—Sūrya-parvan,%}
{%a,%} n. a solar festival (on the days of the solstices,
equinoxes, eclipses, &c.). {%—Sūrya-putra, as,%} m.,
N. of Karṇa; of Sugrīva; of Varuṇa; of the planet
Saturn, (see {%śani%}); of Yama; ({%ī%}), f. ‘daughter of
the Sun,’ lightning; the river Yamunā. {%—Sūrya-%}
{%pura, am,%} n. ‘city of the Sun,’ N. of a city. {%—Sūrya-%}
{%prajñapti, is,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Sūrya-prabha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a king of Śākala (son of Candra-
prabha). {%—Sūrya-prabhava, as, ā, am,%} sprung from
the Sun. {%—Sūrya-phaṇi-cakra, am,%} n. a kind of
astrological diagram for indicating auspicious and in-
auspicious moments for doing anything. {%—Sūrya-%}
{%bhakta, as, ā, am,%} worshipping the sun, one who
worships the sun; ({%as%}), m. a particular tree {%(= ban-%}
{%dhūka-puṣpa)%}. {%—Sūrya-bhaktaka, as,%} m. a sun-
worshipper; the tree Bandhūka-puṣpa. {%—Sūrya-bhā,%}
{%ās,%} &c., bright as the sun. {%—Sūrya-maṇi, is,%} m. the
sun-stone, or sun-gem, (see {%sūrya-kānta%}); the shrub
Hibiscus Phœniceus. {%—Sūryamaṇi-vṛkṣa, as,%} m.
the flowering shrub Hibiscus Phœniceus {%(= puṣpa-%}
{%rakta)%}. {%—Sūrya-maṇḍala, am,%} n. the orb or disk
of the sun. {%—Sūrya-mukhī,%} f. the plant Helianthus
Annuus. {%—Sūrya-yantra, am,%} n. ‘sun-machine,’
a representation of the sun, instrument used in
worshipping the Sun (or in taking solar observa-
tions). {%—Sūrya-raśmi, is,%} m. a ray of the sun, sun-
beam; ({%is, is, i%}), having the rays of Sūrya; ({%is%}), m.
epithet of Savitṛ. {%—Sūrya-latā,%} f. the plant Cleome
Viscosa or another {%(= arka-bhaktā)%}. {%—Sūrya-loka,%}
{%as,%} m. the world or heaven of the sun (a region or
space supposed to exist round the sun, constituting
a heaven of which the sun is regent). {%—Sūrya-%}
{%vaṃśa, as,%} m. the family or race of the sun, the
solar race of kings (i. e. the royal dynasty of Rāma-
candra, king of Ayodhyā, hero of the Rāmāyaṇa,
who was descended from Ikṣvāku, son of Vaivas-
vata Manu, son of the Sun; many Rājput tribes still
claim to belong to this race; it is one of the two
great lines of kings, the other being called ‘lunar,’
see {%candra-vaṃśa%}). {%—Sūrya-vana, am,%} n., N. of
a forest in Kuru-kṣetra. {%—Sūrya-varcas, ās, ās, as,%}
resplendent as the sea; ({%ās%}), m. a proper N. {%—Sūr-%}
{%ya-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} sun-coloured, bright as the
[Page1133-b+ 78]
sun. {%—Sūrya-vallī,%} f. the plant Arka-puṣpikā (or,
according to some, Cleome Pentaphylla). {%—Sūrya-%}
{%vimba, as, am,%} m. n. the disk of the sun. {%—Sūrya-%}
{%vimba-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Sūrya-vi-%}
{%lokana, am,%} n. the ceremony of taking a child out
to see the sun when four months old. {%—Sūrya-śa-%}
{%taka, am,%} n., N. of a short poem by Mayūra {%(=%}
{%mayūra-śataka)%}. {%—Sūrya-śobhā,%} f. sun-shine. {%—Sūr-%}
{%ya-saṅkrama, as,%} m. the passage of the sun from
one sign to another. {%—Sūrya-saṅkrānti, is,%} f. the
sun's entrance into a new sign. {%—Sūrya-sañjña, am,%}
n. saffron. {%—Sūrya-sama, as, ā, am,%} equal to or
resembling the sun. {%—Sūrya-sārathi, is,%} m. the
charioteer of the Sun, i. e. Aruṇa (the Dawn per-
sonified). {%—Sūrya-siddhānta, as,%} m. a celebrated
astronomical text-book (said to be a direct revelation
from the Sun, and thought by some to be the same
as the Saura-s˚ or one of the five earlier works on
which was founded the Pañca-siddhāntikā of Varāha-
mihira, who lived about the beginning of the sixth
century of our era; the Sūrya-s˚ has been printed with
Raṅga-nātha's commentary, the Gūḍhārtha-prakā-
śaka). {%—Sūryasiddhānta-ṭīkā,%} f. a commentary on
the Sūrya-siddhānta. {%—Sūrya-stavana, am,%} n. ‘praise
of the Sun,’ N. of the 107th chapter of the Mārkaṇ-
ḍeya-Purāṇa. {%—Sūrya-stuti, is,%} f. a hymn to the sun.
{%—Sūrya-stotra, am,%} n. a hymn to the sun (attri-
buted to Śāmba). {%—Sūrya-hṛdaya, am,%} n. ‘heart
of the sun,’ a hymn to the sun of great efficacy (also
called Āditya-h˚, see under {%sūrya%}). {%—Sūryā-can-%}
{%dramasau,%} m. du. the sun and moon. {%—Sūryātapa%}
{%(˚ya-āt˚), as,%} m. the heat or glare of the sun, sun-
shine. {%—Sūryātapa-cchinna-dṛṣṭi, is, is, i,%} hav-
ing the sight dazzled by the sun's glare. {%—Sūryāta-%}
{%pa-parikṣipta, as, ā, am,%} darted upon or over-
spread by the rays of the sun. {%—Sūryā-māsā,%} m. du.,
Ved. the sun and moon. {%—Sūryārghya (˚ya-ar˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the presentation of an offering to the
sun. {%—Sūryāloka (˚ya-āl˚), as,%} m. sun-shine.
{%—Sūryāvarta (˚ya-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘turning to the
sun,’ the plant Cleome Viscosa; a kind of sun-
flower, Helianthus Indicus; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant
{%(= arka-bhaktā)%}. {%—Sūryā-vivāha, as,%} m. the
marriage of Sūryā (as described in Ṛg-veda X. 85).
{%—Sūryāvekṣaṇa (˚ya-av˚), am,%} n. the act of
looking at the sun. {%—Sūryāśman (˚ya-aś˚), ā,%} m.
the sun-stone or sun-gem, (see {%sūrya-kānta.%}) {%—Sūr-%}
{%yāśva (˚ya-aś˚), as,%} m. a horse of the sun ({%=%}
{%harit,%} q. v.). {%—Sūryā-sūkta, am,%} n. the hymn Ṛg-
veda X. 85 (giving an account of the marriage of
Sūryā; this hymn is also given with some variations
in Atharva-veda XIV. 1). {%—Sūryāsta (˚ya-as˚),%}
{%am,%} n. sun-set. {%—Sūryāhva (˚ya-āh˚), as, ā, am,%}
named after the sun; ({%as%}), m. gigantic swallow-wort;
({%am%}), n. copper. {%—Sūryendu-saṅgama (˚ya-in˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘conjunction of sun and moon,’ the day of
new moon {%(= amā-vāsyā)%}. {%—Sūryoḍha (˚ya-ūḍha),%}
{%as,%} m. an evening guest (one who arrives after sun-
set). {%—Sūryotthāna (˚ya-ut˚), am,%} n. sun-rise, the
rising of the sun. {%—Sūryodaya (˚ya-ud˚), as,%} m.
sun-rise. {%—Sūryopāsaka (˚ya-up˚), as,%} m. a sun-
worshipper. {%—Sūryopāsanā,%} f. the worship of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>52553<pc>1133-b<k1>sUryaka<k2>sUryaka
{%Sūryaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>52554<pc>1133-b<k1>sUryARI<k2>sUryARI
{%Sūryāṇī,%}¦ f. {%= sūryā,%} the wife of the god Sūrya.
<LEND>

<L>52555<pc>1133-b<k1>sUrata<k2>sUrata
{#sUrata#}¦ {%sūrata, as, ā, am,%} (for {%su-rata%}), well
disposed towards, compassionate, tender; tranquil,
calm; ({%ā%}), f. a tractable cow.
<LEND>

<L>52556<pc>1133-b<k1>sUrkz<k2>sUrkz
{#sUrkz#}¦ {%sūrkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%sūrkṣati, suṣūr-%}
{%kṣa%} (or {%susūrkṣa%} according to some),
{%sūrkṣitum,%} to respect, regard, treat with reverence;
to disregard, disrespect, slight, neglect.
<LEND>

<L>52557<pc>1133-b<k1>sUrkzaRa<k2>sUrkzaRa
{%Sūrkṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. disrespect, contumely.
<LEND>

<L>52558<pc>1133-b<k1>sUrkzya<k2>sUrkzya
{%Sūrkṣya, as,%}¦ m. a kind of bean, Phaseolus Ra-
diatus.
<LEND>

<L>52559<pc>1133-b<k1>sUrkzy<k2>sUrkzy
{#sUrkzy#}¦ {%sūrkṣy,%} cl. 1. P. {%sūrkṣyati, su-%}
{%sūrkṣya, sūrkṣyitum,%} to despise, dis-
respect; to envy.
<LEND>

<L>52560<pc>1133-b<k1>sUrta<k2>sUrta
{#sUrta#}¦ {%sūrta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= sṛta,%} moving,
[Page1133-c+ 78]
going, (Sāy. {%= saraṇa-sahita%}); near (said of Rajas
or ‘the atmosphere;’ cf. {%a-s˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>52561<pc>1133-c<k1>sUrpa<k2>sUrpa
{#sUrpa#}¦ {%sūrpa, as, am,%} m. n. {%= śūrpa,%} a win-
nowing-basket; a measure of two Droṇas; another
measure ({%= kumbha%}); [cf. probably Old Germ.
<nsi>swarb, swerban;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>svairban.</nsi>] {%—Sūrpa-nakhā,%}
f., see {%śūrpa-nakhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>52562<pc>1133-c<k1>sUrmi<k2>sUrmi<h>2
{#sUrmi#} 2¦. {%sūrmi, is,%} f. ({%= śūrmi,%} q. v.; for 1.
{%sūrmi%} see p. 1126, col. 2), an iron or metal image;
the pillar of a house; brightness, a flame (Ved.; in
this sense probably connected with {%sūra%} and {%sūrya%}).
<LEND>

<L>52563<pc>1133-c<k1>sUrmI<k2>sUrmI
{%Sūrmī,%}¦ f. = 2. {%sūrmi%} above; (Ved.) brightness, ra-
diance (in this sense probably connected with {%sūra%}
and {%sūrya; sūrmyā = jvālayā,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 1, 3;
according to Mahī-dhara on Vājasaneyi-s. XVII. 76.
{%sūrmī = samit-kāṣṭha,%} ‘kindled wood,’ or it may
mean ‘an iron post’ or ‘a burning post,’ and there-
fore figuratively ‘a flame’).
<LEND>

<L>52564<pc>1133-c<k1>sUrmya<k2>sUrmya
{%Sūrmya,%}¦ (probably) the fire that will consume
everything at the dissolution of the universe.
<LEND>

<L>52565<pc>1133-c<k1>sUrya<k2>sUrya
{#sUrya#}¦ {%sūrya.%} See p. 1132, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>52566<pc>1133-c<k1>sUz<k2>sUz
{#sUz#}¦ {%sūṣ%} (= rt. {%śūṣ,%} q. v.), cl. 1. P. {%sū-%}
{%ṣati,%} &c., to bring forth, bear; to beget.
<LEND>

<L>52567<pc>1133-c<k1>sUzaRA<k2>sUzaRA
{%Sūṣaṇā,%}¦ f. (perhaps fr. an old Desid. of rt. 3. {%sū,%}
without reduplication), ‘one desiring to bring forth,’
a mother.
<LEND>

<L>52568<pc>1133-c<k1>sUzA<k2>sUzA
{%Sūṣā,%}¦ f., Ved. {%= sūṣaṇā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52569<pc>1133-c<k1>sUzyantI<k2>sUzyantI
{%Sūṣyantī,%}¦ f. (a woman) desiring to bring forth,
one who is parturient.
<LEND>

<L>52570<pc>1133-c<k1>sf<k2>sf
{#sf#}¦ {%sṛ%} [cf. rt. {%sal%}], cl. 1. P. {%sarati%} (Ved.
also cl. 3. P. {%sisarti, sisarṣi = prāpaya,%}
Ṛg-veda III. 32, 5), {%sasāra%} (1st du. {%sasṛva,%} 1st
pl. {%sasṛma%}), {%sariṣyati, asārṣīt%} or {%asarat,%} Prec.
{%sriyāt, sartum%} (Ved. Inf. {%sartave, sartavai%}), to go,
move, proceed; to approach; to go fast, run; to flow;
to blow (as the wind): Pass. {%sriyate,%} Aor. {%asāri,%} to
be gone, &c.: Caus. {%sārayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asī-%}
{%sarat,%} to cause to go, move; to extend; to push,
strike, to push away, remove: Desid. {%sisīrṣati%} (ac-
cording to some {%susūrṣati%}): Intens. {%sesrīyate,%}
{%sarsarti,%} (Ved. {%sarsṛte%}); [cf. Zend <nsi>har;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">ὁρ-μή, ὁρμά-ω, ἀφ-ορμή, ὁρμη-τήριο-ν, σάλος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σάλα, σαλεύω,</lang> (according to some also) <lang n="greek">ἅρμα, ἁρμός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὅρμος, ἕρμα;</lang> Lat. <nsi>salio, salto</nsi> (probably also <nsi>serere</nsi>);
Angl. Sax. <nsi>saltian, serian.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>52571<pc>1133-c<k1>sara<k2>sara
{%Sara, saras,%}¦ &c., see p. 1092.
<LEND>

<L>52572<pc>1133-c<k1>sArayat<k2>sArayat
{%Sārayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to go, putting in
the proper place, fixing, adjusting, replacing; causing
to go away, removing.
<LEND>

<L>52573<pc>1133-c<k1>sArayitvA<k2>sArayitvA
{%Sārayitvā,%}¦ ind. having caused to move or vibrate.
<LEND>

<L>52574<pc>1133-c<k1>sisrat<k2>sisrat
{%Sisrat, at, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. going, rapid.
<LEND>

<L>52575<pc>1133-c<k1>sfka<k2>sfka
{%Sṛka, as,%}¦ m. air, wind; an arrow; a thunderbolt
({%= vajra,%} Naigh. II. 20); a lotus {%(= kairava,%}
{%padma)%}. {%—Sṛkā-vin, ī, inī, i,%} probably holding
an arrow. {%—Sṛkā-hasta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having an
arrow in the hand.
<LEND>

<L>52576<pc>1133-c<k1>sfga<k2>sfga
{%Sṛga, as,%}¦ m. a short javelin or arrow thrown with
the hand or shot through a tube ({%= bhindapāla%}).
<LEND>

<L>52577<pc>1133-c<k1>sfRi<k2>sfRi
{%Sṛṇi, is,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 104, IV.
49. fr. rt. {%sṛ%} above), an enemy; the moon; ({%is%}), f.
a hook used to drive an elephant (also written {%śṛṇi,%}
q. v.); a weapon (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>52578<pc>1133-c<k1>sfRikA<k2>sfRikA
{%Sṛṇikā,%}¦ f. saliva, spittle, slaver.
<LEND>

<L>52579<pc>1133-c<k1>sfRI<k2>sfRI
{%Sṛṇī,%}¦ f. {%= sṛṇi,%} a hook for driving an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>52580<pc>1133-c<k1>sfRIkA<k2>sfRIkA
{%Sṛṇīkā,%}¦ f. {%= sṛṇikā,%} saliva.
<LEND>

<L>52581<pc>1133-c<k1>sfRya<k2>sfRya
{%Sṛṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ skilful in weapons or arms,
(according to Sāy. {%= āyudha-kuśala,%} and connected
with {%sṛṇi%} above, Ṛg-veda IV. 20, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>52582<pc>1133-c<k1>sft<k2>sft
{%Sṛt, t, t, t,%}¦ going, running, &c.; [cf. {%sva-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52583<pc>1133-c<k1>sfta<k2>sfta
{%Sṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, proceeded, flowed.
<LEND>

<L>52584<pc>1133-c<k1>sfti<k2>sfti
{%Sṛti, is,%}¦ f. a road, path, way; gliding, going,
proceeding; (according to some) hurting, injuring
(perhaps to be connected with rt. {%sṝ%} = rt. {%śṝ%}).
<LEND>

<L>52585<pc>1133-c<k1>sftvan<k2>sftvan
{%Sṛtvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. one who goes or creeps
or moves, (Sāy. {%= saraṇa-śīla%}); ({%ā%}), m. epithet of
Prajā-pati; {%= visarpa; = vṛddhi,%} (these meanings
are made fem. by Śabda-k.); ({%arī%}), f. a stream,
river; a mother (according to Śabda-k, {%= mātā%}).
<LEND>
[Page1134-a+ 76]

<L>52586<pc>1134-a<k1>sftvara<k2>sftvara
{%Sṛtvara, as, ī, am,%}¦ going, moving, creeping,
proceeding, flowing.
<LEND>

<L>52587<pc>1134-a<k1>sftvA<k2>sftvA
{%Sṛtvā,%}¦ ind. having gone or proceeded, having ap-
proached.
<LEND>

<L>52588<pc>1134-a<k1>sfdara<k2>sfdara
{%Sṛdara, as,%}¦ m. a snake.
<LEND>

<L>52589<pc>1134-a<k1>sfdAku<k2>sfdAku
{%Sṛdāku, us,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. III. 78.
fr. rt. {%sṛ%} above); fire; air, wind; a deer ({%= mṛ-%}
{%ga%}); Indra's thunderbolt; the disk or orb of the
sun; ({%us%}), f. a river, stream.
<LEND>

<L>52590<pc>1134-a<k1>sfmara<k2>sfmara
{%Sṛmara, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, going well or quickly;
({%as%}), m. a kind of animal; (according to some) a
young deer.
<LEND>

<L>52591<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkaRqu<k2>sfkaRqu
{#sfkaRqu#}¦ {%sṛ-kaṇḍu, us,%} f. (see {%kaṇḍu%}), the
itch, itching.
<LEND>

<L>52592<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkAla<k2>sfkAla
{#sfkAla#}¦ {%sṛkāla, as,%} m. ({%= śṛkāla%}), a jackal;
[cf. {%sṛgāla.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52593<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkka<k2>sfkka
{#sfkka#}¦ {%sṛkka, am,%} n. (probably fr. rt. 1. {%sṛj%}
below; according to Sāy. {%phenasya sraṣṭṛ,%} ‘the
emitter of saliva’), the corner of the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>52594<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkkaRI<k2>sfkkaRI
{%Sṛkkaṇī,%}¦ f. (according to Śabda-k.) the corner of
the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>52595<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkkan<k2>sfkkan
{%Sṛkkan, a,%}¦ n. the corner of the mouth; ({%aṇī%}),
n. du. the two corners of the mouth.
<LEND>

<L>52596<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkkiRI<k2>sfkkiRI
{%Sṛkkiṇī,%}¦ f. {%= sṛkkaṇī%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52597<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkkin<k2>sfkkin
{%Sṛkkin, i,%}¦ n. the corner of the mouth; ({%iṇī%}), n.
du. the two corners of the mouth, (but according to
Śabda-k. the crude form is {%sṛkki.%})
<LEND>

<L>52598<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkva<k2>sfkva
{%Sṛkva, am,%}¦ n. {%= sṛkka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52599<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkvaRI<k2>sfkvaRI
{%Sṛkvaṇī,%}¦ f. (according to Śabda-k.) {%= sṛkkaṇī%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>52600<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkvan<k2>sfkvan
{%Sṛkvan, a,%}¦ n. {%= sṛkkan%} above, (in Ṛg-veda I.
164, 28. and Atharva-veda IX. 10, 6. the form {%sṛ-%}
{%kvāṇam,%} acc. masc., occurs; this is by some trans-
lated ‘the mouth,’ but according to Sāy. ‘the corner
of the mouth;’ according to Yāska, Nirukta XI. 42,
{%= saraṇa%}); ({%aṇī%}), n. du. the two corners of the
mouth.
<LEND>

<L>52601<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkviRI<k2>sfkviRI
{%Sṛkviṇī,%}¦ f. (according to Śabda-k.) {%= sṛkkaṇī%}
above.
<LEND>

<L>52602<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkvin<k2>sfkvin
{%Sṛkvin, i,%}¦ n. {%= sṛkkin%} above; ({%iṇī%}), n. du. the
two corners of the mouth (according to Śabda-k.
the crude form is {%sṛkvi%}).
<LEND>

<L>52603<pc>1134-a<k1>sfkkf<k2>sfkkf
{#sfkkf#}¦ {%sṛk-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make
the inarticulate sound {%sṛk.%}
<LEND>

<L>52604<pc>1134-a<k1>sfgAla<k2>sfgAla
{#sfgAla#}¦ {%sṛgāla, as,%} m. ({%= śṛgāla%}), a jackal;
a particular Daitya or demon.
<LEND>

<L>52605<pc>1134-a<k1>sfNkA<k2>sfNkA
{#sfNkA#}¦ {%sṛṅkā,%} f. a kind of garland made of
jewels.
<LEND>

<L>52606<pc>1134-a<k1>sfj<k2>sfj<h>1
{#sfj#} 1¦. {%sṛj%} (connected with rt. {%sṛ%}), cl. 6.
P. {%sṛjati%} (Ved. and ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%sa-%}
{%sarja%} (2nd sing. {%sasarjitha%} or {%sasraṣṭha,%} 1st pl.
A. Ved. {%sasṛjmahe%} or {%sasṛgmahe%}), {%srakṣyati,%}
{%asrākṣīt,%} cl. 4. A. {%sṛjyate, sasṛje,%} &c., (Ved.
forms {%asṛgram, asrigran%} or {%asṛgran, asasṛ-%}
{%gram,%} Ṛg-veda X. 31, 3), {%sraṣṭum,%} to let go, let
loose; to emit, send forth, let flow, pour out, shed,
effuse; to let off, throw, cast; to create, produce,
make; to procreate, beget; to put on, place on,
apply; to send away, abandon, leave, quit; to be let
loose or sent forth (cl. 4. A.): Pass. {%sṛjyate,%} Aor.
{%asarji,%} to be made or created; to be left or aban-
doned: Caus. {%sarjayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asasarjat%}
or {%asīsṛjat,%} to cause to let loose, let go, create, &c.:
Desid. {%sisṛkṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%sarīsṛjyate,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>52607<pc>1134-a<k1>sarga<k2>sarga
{%Sarga, sarja, sarjana,%}¦ &c., see pp. 1093, 1094.
<LEND>

<L>52608<pc>1134-a<k1>sasfjAna<k2>sasfjAna
{%Sasṛjāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being let loose, let go,
(Sāy. {%= sṛjyamāna,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 8, 2); created.
<LEND>

<L>52609<pc>1134-a<k1>sfj<k2>sfj<h>2
2. {%sṛj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ creating, a creator.
<LEND>

<L>52610<pc>1134-a<k1>sfjat<k2>sfjat
{%Sṛjat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} shedding.
<LEND>

<L>52611<pc>1134-a<k1>sfjamAna<k2>sfjamAna
{%Sṛjamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. creating, producing.
<LEND>

<L>52612<pc>1134-a<k1>sfjaya<k2>sfjaya
{%Sṛjaya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>52613<pc>1134-a<k1>sfjAna<k2>sfjAna
{%Sṛjāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ let go, poured out.
<LEND>

<L>52614<pc>1134-a<k1>sfjikAkzAra<k2>sfjikAkzAra
{%Sṛjikā-kṣāra, as,%}¦ m. {%= sarjikā-kṣāra,%} natron,
alkali.
<LEND>

<L>52615<pc>1134-a<k1>sfjya<k2>sfjya
{%Sṛjya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be let go or emitted; to
be created, &c.
<LEND>
[Page1134-b+ 75]

<L>52616<pc>1134-b<k1>sfjyamAna<k2>sfjyamAna
{%Sṛjyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being let go, being let
loose; being made or created.
<LEND>

<L>52617<pc>1134-b<k1>sfzwa<k2>sfzwa
{%Sṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ let go, let loose; poured out,
emitted; given away; created, made; ascertained;
sent away, abandoned, deserted, left; joined, at-
tached, connected; ornamented, adorned; abundant,
much, many.
<LEND>

<L>52618<pc>1134-b<k1>sfzwavat<k2>sfzwavat
{%Sṛṣṭavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has let go or
created or made.
<LEND>

<L>52619<pc>1134-b<k1>sfzwi<k2>sfzwi
{%Sṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. letting go, letting loose, emission;
giving away, gift; creation, procreation, creating;
the creation of the world, ({%manoratha-s˚,%} mental
creation, fiction of the imagination); nature, natural
property or disposition; the existence of properties
or qualities; the absence of properties. {%—Sṛṣṭi-%}
{%kartṛ, tā,%} m. a creator, maker. {%—Sṛṣṭi-khaṇḍa,%}
N. of the first book of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Sṛṣṭi-%}
{%pradā,%} f. ‘causing procreation,’ a particular shrub
({%= garbha-dātrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52620<pc>1134-b<k1>sfzwvA<k2>sfzwvA
{%Sṛṣṭvā,%}¦ ind. having let go; having created;
having abandoned.
<LEND>

<L>52621<pc>1134-b<k1>sfYjaya<k2>sfYjaya
{#sfYjaya#}¦ {%sṛñjaya, as,%} m., N. of a son of Deva-
vāta (Ved.); N. of several kings; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people (said to have been allies of the Pañcālas).
<LEND>

<L>52622<pc>1134-b<k1>sfYjarI<k2>sfYjarI
{#sfYjarI#}¦ {%sṛñjarī,%} f., N. of a wife of Bhaja-
māna.
<LEND>

<L>52623<pc>1134-b<k1>sfp<k2>sfp
{#sfp#}¦ {%sṛp%} (connected with rt. {%sṛ%}), cl. 1.
P. {%sarpati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%sasarpa%} (1st
du. {%sasṛpiva%}), {%sarpsyati%} or {%srapsyati, asṛpat,%}
{%asārpsīt%} or {%asrāpsīt, sarptum%} or {%sraptum,%} to
creep, crawl; to go, move: Pass. {%sṛpyate,%} Aor.
{%asarpi:%} Caus. {%sarpayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asīsṛpat%}
or {%asasarpat,%} to cause to creep, cause to go, &c.:
Desid. {%sisṛpsati:%} Intens. {%sarīsṛpyate, sarīsarpti;%}
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἕρπ-ω, ἑρπ-ύζ-ω, ἑρπ-ετό-ν, ἕρπ-η(τ)-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">Σαρπηδών,</lang> (according to some also) <lang n="greek">ῥέπ-ω,</lang> &c.: Lat.
<nsi>serp-o, serp-en(t)-s, serp-ula, Pro-serp-ina (?),</nsi>
<nsi>rep-o</nsi> (probably for <nsi>srep-o</nsi>): Old Germ. <nsi>slich,</nsi> ‘to
creep;’ (according to some also) <nsi>slif</nsi> for <nsi>silf,</nsi> ‘to
glide;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>schleife:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>slipan:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>slenkiu,</nsi> ‘to creep;’ <nsi>reptoju,</nsi> ‘to creep with
hands and feet:’ Hib. <nsi>sleagaim,</nsi> ‘to sneak.’]
<LEND>

<L>52624<pc>1134-b<k1>sarpa<k2>sarpa
{%Sarpa,%}¦ &c. See p. 1094.
<LEND>

<L>52625<pc>1134-b<k1>sfpta<k2>sfpta
{%Sṛpta, as, ā, am,%}¦ crept, crawled; gone, going.
<LEND>

<L>52626<pc>1134-b<k1>sfpti<k2>sfpti
{%Sṛpti, is,%}¦ f. creeping, crawling; going, moving.
<LEND>

<L>52627<pc>1134-b<k1>sfptvA<k2>sfptvA
{%Sṛptvā,%}¦ ind. having crept or crawled; having
gone.
<LEND>

<L>52628<pc>1134-b<k1>sfpra<k2>sfpra
{%Sṛpra, as, ā, am,%}¦ creeping, going, proceeding,
gliding, (Sāy. {%= sarpaṇa-śīla, prasṛta%}); ({%as%}), m.
the moon. {%—Sṛpra-karasna, as, ā, am,%} Ved. one
whose hands are extended or mighty, (Sāy. {%= pra-%}
{%sṛta-bāhu.%}) {%—Sṛpra-dānu, us, us, u,%} Ved. con-
stantly giving, (Sāy. {%= avicchedena dhanāni pra-%}
{%yacchat,%} Ṛg-veda I. 96, 3); (perhaps according to
some) possessed of flowing rain. {%—Sṛpra-bhojas,%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} Ved. conferring extended enjoyment.
{%—Sṛpra-vandhura, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according to
some) having a wide fore part.
<LEND>

<L>52629<pc>1134-b<k1>sfpAwa<k2>sfpAwa
{#sfpAwa#}¦ {%sṛpāṭa, as,%} m. a kind of measure.
<LEND>

<L>52630<pc>1134-b<k1>sfpAwikA<k2>sfpAwikA
{%Sṛpāṭikā,%}¦ f. the beak of a bird.
<LEND>

<L>52631<pc>1134-b<k1>sfpAwI<k2>sfpAwI
{%Sṛpāṭī,%}¦ f. a kind of measure; (according to
Śabda-k.) {%= rakta-dhārā.%}
<LEND>

<L>52632<pc>1134-b<k1>sfbinda<k2>sfbinda
{#sfbinda#}¦ {%sṛbinda, as,%} m., Ved., N. of a
demon (an enemy of Indra).
<LEND>

<L>52633<pc>1134-b<k1>sfB<k2>sfB
{#sfB#}¦ {%sṛbh%} or {%sṛmbh,%} cl. 1. P. {%sarbhati,%}
{%sṛmbhati,%} &c., to kill, slay, injure; [cf.
rt. {%sibh, sribh.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52634<pc>1134-b<k1>sF<k2>sF
{#sF#}¦ {%sṝ%} [cf. rts. {%śṝ, svṝ%}], cl. 9. P. {%sṛṇāti,%}
&c., to hurt, injure, kill.
<LEND>

<L>52635<pc>1134-b<k1>sIrRa<k2>sIrRa
{%Sīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (according to Śabda-k.) hurt,
injured.
<LEND>

<L>52636<pc>1134-b<k1>sIrRi<k2>sIrRi
{%Sīrṇi, is,%}¦ f. (according to Śabda-k.) injury, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>52637<pc>1134-b<k1>sek<k2>sek
{#sek#}¦ {%sek%} (= rt. {%srek%}), cl. 1. A. {%sekate,%} &c.,
to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>52638<pc>1134-b<k1>seka<k2>seka
{#seka#}¦ {%seka, sektṛ,%} &c. See p. 1113, col. 2.
<LEND>
[Page1134-c+ 75]

<L>52639<pc>1134-c<k1>secaka<k2>secaka
{#secaka#}¦ {%secaka, secana,%} &c. See p. 1113,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52640<pc>1134-c<k1>sewu<k2>sewu
{#sewu#}¦ {%seṭu, us,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%siṭ%}), a
water-melon; a kind of cucumber, Cucumis Ma-
draspatanus.
<LEND>

<L>52641<pc>1134-c<k1>setikaraRa<k2>setikaraRa
{#setikaraRa#}¦ {%seti-karaṇa (sa-it˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the word {%iti,%} followed by {%iti%} (as in the Pada
text of the Ṛg-veda; cf. {%sahetikaraṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>52642<pc>1134-c<k1>setikA<k2>setikA
{#setikA#}¦ {%setikā,%} f., N. of Ayodhyā.
<LEND>

<L>52643<pc>1134-c<k1>setu<k2>setu
{#setu#}¦ {%setu, us,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s. I.
70. fr. rt. {%si,%} ‘to bind’), a ridge of earth, mound, bank,
causeway, dike, dam, any raised piece of ground
separating fields (serving as a boundary or as a pas-
sage during inundations); a landmark; a bridge; a
pass, defile, mountain road or track; a boundary,
limit; a barrier or obstruction of any kind; an estab-
lished institution, fixed rule or law; epithet of the
Praṇava or sacred syllable Om (which is said to be
{%mantrāṇāṃ setuḥ%}); the tree Cratæva Roxburghii
or Tapia Cratæva ({%= varaṇa, varuṇa%}); N. of a
king; of a place. {%—Setu-khaṇḍa,%} N. of a book of
the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Setu-bandha, as,%} m. the
forming of a causeway or bridge; the ridge of rocks
extending from the south extremity of the Coro-
mandel coast towards the island of Ceylon (supposed
to have been formed by Hanumat as a bridge for
the passage of Rāma's forces against Rāvaṇa); any
causeway, bridge, dike, &c.; N. of a poem. {%—Setu-%}
{%bhedin, ī, inī, i,%} breaking down barriers; removing
obstructions; ({%ī%}), m. the medicinal plant Dantī, q. v.
{%—Setu-maṅgala-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tantra
work. {%—Setu-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the tree Cratæva Rox-
burghii.
<LEND>

<L>52644<pc>1134-c<k1>setavya<k2>setavya
{%Setavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be bound, to be fastened
together.
<LEND>

<L>52645<pc>1134-c<k1>setuka<k2>setuka
{%Setuka, as,%}¦ m. a bank, causeway, bridge, pass;
the tree Cratæva Roxburghii.
<LEND>

<L>52646<pc>1134-c<k1>setf<k2>setf
{%Setṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who binds, binding, fasten-
ing; that which binds, a bond, fetter.
<LEND>

<L>52647<pc>1134-c<k1>setra<k2>setra
{%Setra, am,%}¦ n. a bond, ligament, fetter.
<LEND>

<L>52648<pc>1134-c<k1>seru<k2>seru
{%Seru, us, us, u,%}¦ binding, tying, fastening.
<LEND>

<L>52649<pc>1134-c<k1>sedivas<k2>sedivas
{#sedivas#}¦ {%sedivas.%} See p. 1055, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52650<pc>1134-c<k1>seDa<k2>seDa
{#seDa#}¦ {%sedha,%} &c. See rt. 1. {%sidh.%}
<LEND>

<L>52651<pc>1134-c<k1>sena<k2>sena
{#sena#}¦ {%sena (sa-ina), as, ā, am,%} having a lord,
possessing a master or leader.
<LEND>

<L>52652<pc>1134-c<k1>senaka<k2>senaka
{#senaka#}¦ {%senaka, as,%} m., N. of a grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>52653<pc>1134-c<k1>senA<k2>senA
{#senA#}¦ {%senā,%} f. (in Uṇādi-s. III. 10. said to
be fr. rt. {%si,%} ‘to bind;’ according to some fr. {%sena%}
above), an army, armament, armed force; an Army
personified as the wife of Kārttikeya; N. of the
mother of the third Arhat of the present Avasarpiṇī.
{%—Sena-jit, t,%} m. (for {%senā-jit%}), a proper N. {%—Senā-%}
{%kalpa, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Senāgra (˚nā-ag˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the front or van of an army. {%—Senāgra-ga,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘going at the front of an army,’ the leader of
an army, general. {%—Senāṅga (˚nā-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a
component part of an army (supposed to be con-
stituted of four divisions, viz. elephants, chariots,
cavalry, and infantry). {%—Senā-cara, as, ī, am,%} going
with or accompanying an army; ({%as%}), m. a soldier;
a suttler, camp-follower. {%—Senā-jū, ūs, ūs, u,%} Ved.
inciting an army, outstripping a host. {%—Senā-ni-%}
{%veśa, as,%} m. the camp of an army. {%—Senā-nī, īs,%}
m. (acc. {%senānyam,%} loc. {%senānyām,%} see Gram. 126.
{%d%}), the leader of an army, commander, general; N.
of Kārttikeya (god of war); epithet of a die
(the head of a host of dice); N. of one of the
eleven Rudras (according to some); of a son of
Dhṛta-rāṣṭra. {%—Senā-pati, is,%} m. ‘army-chief,’
a general; N. of Kārttikeya; of Śiva. {%—Senā-%}
{%pati-tva, am,%} n. generalship. {%—Senā-paricchad, t,%}
{%t, t,%} surrounded by an army. {%—Senā-pura, am,%} n.,
N. of a city. {%—Senā-pṛṣṭha, am,%} n. the rear of an
army. {%—Senā-bhaṅga, as,%} m. the breaking of an
army, rout, disorderly flight. {%—Senā-mukha, am,%} n.
[Page1135-a+ 73]
a division or battalion of an army, a company con-
sisting of three Pattis (or three elephants, three
chariots, nine horse and fifteen foot; see {%patti%}); a
mound or covered way in front of a city gate. {%—Senā-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. the equipment of an army. {%—Senā-%}
{%rakṣa, as,%} m. ‘army-protector,’ a guard, sentinel.
{%—Senā-vindu, us,%} m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>52654<pc>1135-a<k1>senaya<k2>senaya
{%Senaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%senayati,%} &c. See {%abhi-ṣe-%}
{%ṇaya,%} p. 68, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52655<pc>1135-a<k1>senya<k2>senya
{%Senya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. belonging to an army, re-
sembling an army.
<LEND>

<L>52656<pc>1135-a<k1>sEnApatya<k2>sEnApatya
{%Saināpatya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%senā-pati%}), the office of
a general, command of an army, generalship.
<LEND>

<L>52657<pc>1135-a<k1>sEnika<k2>sEnika
{%Sainika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to an
army, military, martial, drawn up in martial array;
({%as%}), m. an army-man, soldier; a guard, sentinel;
a body of forces in array.
<LEND>

<L>52658<pc>1135-a<k1>sEnya<k2>sEnya
{%Sainya, as,%}¦ m. a soldier, one under arms, one
drawn up in martial array; a guard, sentinel; ({%am%}),
n. an army. {%—Sainya-pṛṣṭha, am,%} n. the rear of
an army. {%—Sainyādhipati (˚ya-adh˚), is,%} or {%sai-%}
{%nyādhyakṣa (˚ya-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘army-overseer,’
a general, commander.
<LEND>

<L>52659<pc>1135-a<k1>sendra<k2>sendra
{#sendra#}¦ {%sendra (sa-in˚), as, ā, am,%} accom-
panied by Indra, together with Indra.
<LEND>

<L>52660<pc>1135-a<k1>sendragaRa<k2>sendragaRa
{%Sendragaṇa (sa-in˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ together with
the troops of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>52661<pc>1135-a<k1>sendracApa<k2>sendracApa
{%Sendracāpa (sa-in˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ along with the
bow of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>52662<pc>1135-a<k1>sendrAyuDataqit<k2>sendrAyuDataqit
{%Sendrāyudha-taḍit (˚ra-āy˚), t, t, t,%}¦ with a rain-
bow and lightning.
<LEND>

<L>52663<pc>1135-a<k1>sendrAyuDapurogama<k2>sendrAyuDapurogama
{%Sendrāyudha-purogama, as, ā, am,%}¦ preceded
by the rainbow.
<LEND>

<L>52664<pc>1135-a<k1>sendriya<k2>sendriya
{#sendriya#}¦ {%sendriya (sa-in˚), as, ā, am,%} having
organs of sense, with the organs of sense.
<LEND>

<L>52665<pc>1135-a<k1>sePa<k2>sePa
{#sePa#}¦ {%sepha, as,%} m. ({%= śepha,%} q. v.), the penis.
<LEND>

<L>52666<pc>1135-a<k1>semantI<k2>semantI
{#semantI#}¦ {%semantī,%} f. the Indian white rose.
<LEND>

<L>52667<pc>1135-a<k1>semantikA<k2>semantikA
{%Semantikā,%}¦ f. {%= semantī%} (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>52668<pc>1135-a<k1>serAha<k2>serAha
{#serAha#}¦ {%serāha, as,%} m. a horse of a milk-
white colour ({%= pīyūṣa-varṇāśva%}).
<LEND>

<L>52669<pc>1135-a<k1>seru<k2>seru
{#seru#}¦ {%seru.%} See under {%setu,%} p. 1134, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>52670<pc>1135-a<k1>serzya<k2>serzya
{#serzya#}¦ {%serṣya (sa-īr˚), as, ā, am,%} full of envy
or jealousy; ({%am%}), ind. enviously, with jealousy.
<LEND>

<L>52671<pc>1135-a<k1>sel<k2>sel
{#sel#}¦ {%sel,%} cl. 1. P. {%selati,%} &c. = rt. {%śel,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52672<pc>1135-a<k1>selu<k2>selu
{#selu#}¦ {%selu, us,%} m. the tree Cordia Myxa
(see {%śelu%}); N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>52673<pc>1135-a<k1>selhAra<k2>selhAra
{#selhAra#}¦ {%selhāra, as,%} m., N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>52674<pc>1135-a<k1>sev<k2>sev
{#sev#}¦ {%sev%} (thought to be connected with
rt. {%sap%}), cl. 1. A. {%sevate%} (sometimes also
P. {%sevati%}), {%siṣeve, seviṣyate, aseviṣṭa, sevitum,%}
to follow, go after, seek, pursue; to wait upon, serve,
honour, obey, worship, gratify; to love, attend to,
devote or apply one's self to, cultivate, study, prac-
tise, perform, do; to use, enjoy; to enjoy (sexually);
to frequent, dwell in, inhabit; to watch over, protect,
guard: Pass. {%sevyate,%} to be followed or served, &c.:
Caus. {%sevayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asiṣevat,%} to serve,
honour, worship: Desid. {%siseviṣate, -ti:%} Intens.
{%seṣevyate;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σέβομαι;</lang> perhaps Goth. <nsi>sai-</nsi>
<nsi>vala,</nsi> ‘soul;’ Old Germ. <nsi>sela.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>52675<pc>1135-a<k1>sevaka<k2>sevaka<h>1
1. {%sevaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 2. see col. 2), serv-
ing, waiting or attending upon, worshipping; prac-
tising; servile, dependent; ({%as%}), m. a servant, at-
tendant; a worshipper, votary. {%—Sevakottama (˚ka-%}
{%ut˚), as, ā,%}  m. f. best of servants.
<LEND>

<L>52676<pc>1135-a<k1>sevana<k2>sevana<h>1
1. {%sevana, am,%}¦ n. (for 2. see col. 2), the act of
following, serving, service; devotion or addiction to,
being fond of, fondness for, using, practising, adopt-
ing, enjoying; carnal enjoyment; frequenting, dwell-
ing in.
<LEND>

<L>52677<pc>1135-a<k1>sevanIya<k2>sevanIya<h>1
1. {%sevanīya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see col. 2), to
be followed; to be practised; to be served or waited
on, to be honoured.
<LEND>
[Page1135-b+ 74]

<L>52678<pc>1135-b<k1>sevamAna<k2>sevamAna
{%Sevamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ following, pursuing, serv-
ing, attending on; practising, being addicted to, using,
employing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>52679<pc>1135-b<k1>sevA<k2>sevA
{%Sevā,%}¦ f. service, attendance, servitude; worship,
homage; devotion or addiction to; use, practice,
employment; resorting to, frequenting. {%—Sevā-kāku,%}
{%us,%} f. change of voice in service (i. e. sometimes
speaking loudly, sometimes softly, sometimes angrily,
sometimes sorrowfully). {%—Sevā-dharma, as,%} m. the
duty or rule of service; the functions or obligations
of service. {%—Sevā-bhṛt, t, t, t,%} maintaining service,
doing service, serving. {%—Sevāvalamba (˚vā-av˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} depending on the service of another.
{%—Sevā-vyavahāra, as,%} m. the practice of service.
<LEND>

<L>52680<pc>1135-b<k1>sevi<k2>sevi
{%Sevi,%}¦ n. (according to Śabda-k.) the jujube ({%=%}
{%badara%}); an apple (in this sense probably fr. Per-
sian {%seb%}).
<LEND>

<L>52681<pc>1135-b<k1>sevikA<k2>sevikA
{%Sevikā,%}¦ f. a kind of sweetmeat.
<LEND>

<L>52682<pc>1135-b<k1>sevita<k2>sevita
{%Sevita, as, ā, am,%}¦ followed, pursued; served, at-
tended on, obeyed, honoured, worshipped, adored;
protected, preserved; practised, used; infested or
frequented by; ({%am%}), n. the jujube ({%= badara%});
an apple {%(= sevi)%}. {%—Sevita-manmatha, as, ā, am,%}
addicted to love or amorous enjoyments.
<LEND>

<L>52683<pc>1135-b<k1>sevitavya<k2>sevitavya
{%Sevitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ = 1. {%sevanīya.%}
<LEND>

<L>52684<pc>1135-b<k1>sevitf<k2>sevitf
{%Sevitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ serving, worshipping; a ser-
vant, attendant, worshipper; addicted or devoted to.
<LEND>

<L>52685<pc>1135-b<k1>sevin<k2>sevin
{%Sevin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ following, pursuing, serving, obey-
ing, honouring; practising, using; dwelling in, fre-
quenting; ({%ī%}), m. a servant. {%—Sevi-tva, am,%} n.
service, obedience, devotion; the state of one who
dwells in or inhabits.
<LEND>

<L>52686<pc>1135-b<k1>sevya<k2>sevya
{%Sevya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be served or obeyed, to be
worshipped or honoured, honourable; to be prac-
tised, to be used or employed or enjoyed; to be
taken care of or guarded; ({%as%}), m. the Aśvattha tree;
the Hijjala plant; ({%ā%}), f. the parasitical plant Vandā;
({%am%}), n. the root of Andropogon Muricatus. {%—Se-%}
{%vya-tā,%} f. or {%sevya-tva, am,%} n. the condition of
being worthy of honour, honourableness, rank, emi-
nence, worth. {%—Sevya-sevaka, au,%} m. du. served
and server, master and servant.
<LEND>

<L>52687<pc>1135-b<k1>sevyamAna<k2>sevyamAna
{%Sevyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being served or waited
on, being attended on.
<LEND>

<L>52688<pc>1135-b<k1>sevaka<k2>sevaka<h>2
{#sevaka#} 2¦. {%sevaka, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%siv;%} for 1.
{%sevaka%} see col. 1), one that sews, a sewer; a sack.
<LEND>

<L>52689<pc>1135-b<k1>sevana<k2>sevana<h>2
2. {%sevana, am,%}¦ n. (for 1. see col. 1), the act of
sewing, darning, stitching ({%= sīvana%}); a sack; ({%ī%}),
f. a needle; a seam; (in anatomy) a suture or pecu-
liar seam-like union of parts (of which there are
seven in the body, viz. the five sutures of the cranium,
the frenum of the tongue, and that of the glans
penis).
<LEND>

<L>52690<pc>1135-b<k1>sevanIya<k2>sevanIya<h>2
2. {%sevanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 1. see col. 1), to be
sewn or stitched together.
<LEND>

<L>52691<pc>1135-b<k1>sevakAlu<k2>sevakAlu
{#sevakAlu#}¦ {%sevakālu, us,%} m. a kind of plant
({%= niśā-bhaṅgā,%} commonly called Dugdhapeyā).
<LEND>

<L>52692<pc>1135-b<k1>sevatI<k2>sevatI
{#sevatI#}¦ {%sevatī,%} f. the Indian white rose.
<LEND>

<L>52693<pc>1135-b<k1>sevaDi<k2>sevaDi
{#sevaDi#}¦ {%seva-dhi, is,%} m. (for {%śeva-dhi,%} q. v.),
one of the nine treasures of Kuvera, a divine trea-
sure; a treasure.
<LEND>

<L>52694<pc>1135-b<k1>sezmIyARa<k2>sezmIyARa
{#sezmIyARa#}¦ {%seṣmīyāṇa, as, ā, am,%} (fr. the
Intens. of rt. {%smi%}), Ved. (according to some) smiling
much, continuing to smile.
<LEND>

<L>52695<pc>1135-b<k1>seSvarasANKya<k2>seSvarasANKya
{#seSvarasANKya#}¦ {%seśvara-sāṅkhya (sa-iś˚), as,%}
m. the theistical branch of the Sāṅkhya school of
philosophy.
<LEND>

<L>52696<pc>1135-b<k1>sehAna<k2>sehAna
{#sehAna#}¦ {%sehāna, as, ā, am,%} (Perf. part. A. fr.
rt. 1. {%sah%}), one who has overcome, overcoming, con-
quering, (Sāy. {%= abhi-bhavat.%})
<LEND>

<L>52697<pc>1135-b<k1>sehuRqa<k2>sehuRqa
{#sehuRqa#}¦ {%sehuṇḍa, as,%} m. a kind of Euphorbia
({%= sīhuṇḍa%}).
<LEND>

<L>52698<pc>1135-b<k1>sE<k2>sE
{#sE#}¦ {%sai%} [cf. rts. 3. {%sā,%} 1. {%so%}], cl. 1. P. {%sāyati,%}
{%sasau, sātum,%} to waste away, decline.
<LEND>
[Page1135-c+ 72]

<L>52699<pc>1135-c<k1>sEMha<k2>sEMha
{#sEMha#}¦ {%saiṃha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%siṃha%}), belonging
to lions, leonine, lion-like.
<LEND>

<L>52700<pc>1135-c<k1>sEMhika<k2>sEMhika
{%Saiṃhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ lion-like, leonine; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of Rāhu or the personified ascending node ({%=%}
{%saiṃhikeya%} below).
<LEND>

<L>52701<pc>1135-c<k1>sEMhikeya<k2>sEMhikeya
{%Saiṃhikeya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%siṃhikā,%} q. v.), a metro-
nymic of Rāhu, q. v.; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a class of
Dānavas.
<LEND>

<L>52702<pc>1135-c<k1>sEMhala<k2>sEMhala
{#sEMhala#}¦ {%saiṃhala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%siṃhala%}), be-
longing to Ceylon; produced or growing in Ceylon;
({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant ({%= siṃha-pippalī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52703<pc>1135-c<k1>sEkata<k2>sEkata
{#sEkata#}¦ {%saikata, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sikatā%}), sandy,
gravelly, having sandy soil; ({%am%}), n. a sand-bank;
an island with sandy shores; any bank or shore.
{%—Saikata-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing sand-banks.
{%—Saikateṣṭa (˚ta-iṣ˚), am,%} n. ‘loved by sandy
soil,’ ginger.
<LEND>

<L>52704<pc>1135-c<k1>sEkatika<k2>sEkatika
{%Saikatika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
sand-banks; fluctuating, living in doubt and error,
{%= sandeha-jīvin; (as),%} m. a religious mendi-
cant; an ascetic; ({%am%}), n. a thread worn round the
wrist or neck to secure good fortune {%(= maṅgala-%}
{%sūtra); = mātṛ-yātrā%} (according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>52705<pc>1135-c<k1>sEtava<k2>sEtava
{#sEtava#}¦ {%saitava, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>52706<pc>1135-c<k1>sEtavAhinI<k2>sEtavAhinI
{#sEtavAhinI#}¦ {%saitavāhinī,%} f. (fr. {%sita + vā-%}
{%hinī%}), N. of the river Bāhu-dā, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52707<pc>1135-c<k1>sEdDAntika<k2>sEdDAntika
{#sEdDAntika#}¦ {%saiddhāntika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sid-%}
{%dhānta%}), belonging or relating to a dogma or estab-
lished truth; one who knows the real truth; relating
to an astronomical text-book or to any scientific text-
book.
<LEND>

<L>52708<pc>1135-c<k1>sEnApatya<k2>sEnApatya
{#sEnApatya#}¦ {%saināpatya, sainika.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52709<pc>1135-c<k1>sEnDava<k2>sEnDava
{#sEnDava#}¦ {%saindhava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sindhu%}), pro-
duced or born in Sindh or in the country near the
Indus; belonging to the Indus; river-born; belong-
ing to the sea, oceanic, marine, aquatic; ({%as%}), m. a
horse (particular one bred in Sindh); N. of a Muni;
of a family; of a country; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a kind
of rock-salt (found in the country near the Indus);
({%ī%}), f., N. of one of the Rāgiṇīs or personified
musical scales; ({%am%}), n. (in dramatic literature) a
kind of song in Prākṛt words accompanied with
music expressive of disappointment in the keeping
of an assignation; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the people inhabit-
ing Sindh or the country near the Indus. {%—Sain-%}
{%dhava-ghana, as,%} m. a lump of salt. {%—Saindhava-%}
{%śilā,%} f. ‘Sindh-rock,’ a kind of rock or fossil-salt.
{%—Saindhavāraṇya (˚va-ar˚), as, am,%} m. n. the
jungly district of Sindhu or the Indus.
<LEND>

<L>52710<pc>1135-c<k1>sEnDavaka<k2>sEnDavaka
{%Saindhavaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating
to the Saindhavas; ({%as%}), m. a miserable inhabitant
of Sindhu.
<LEND>

<L>52711<pc>1135-c<k1>sEnDavAyana<k2>sEnDavAyana
{%Saindhavāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of a teacher of the
Atharva-veda; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a family (supposed
to have been descended from Viśvā-mitra).
<LEND>

<L>52712<pc>1135-c<k1>sEnDI<k2>sEnDI
{#sEnDI#}¦ {%saindhī,%} f. (according to Śabda-k.)
spirituous liquor (especially that prepared from the
fermented juice of the palm).
<LEND>

<L>52713<pc>1135-c<k1>sEnya<k2>sEnya
{#sEnya#}¦ {%sainya.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52714<pc>1135-c<k1>sEmantika<k2>sEmantika
{#sEmantika#}¦ {%saimantika, am,%} n. (fr. {%sīmanta%}),
red-lead (so called because used to make a mark
along the parting of the hair).
<LEND>

<L>52715<pc>1135-c<k1>sEranDra<k2>sEranDra
{#sEranDra#}¦ {%sairan-dhra, as,%} m. (probably fr. an
unused word {%sīran-dhra,%} derived fr. {%sīra,%} ‘a plough,’
+ {%dhra%} for {%dhara,%} ‘holding,’ cf. {%mahī-dhra, aṃ-%}
{%sa-dhrī%}), a kind of menial or domestic servant (em-
ployed to dress his master, and, though not a slave,
required to perform various servile offices; he is
employed also in the chase, and constitutes a kind of
mixed tribe or caste, being originally the offspring
of a Dasyu and an Ayogava female; see Manu X.
32); any menial servant or attendant; ({%ī%}), f. a maid-
[Page1136-a+ 72]
servant or female attendant in the women's apart-
ments ({%= bhujiṣyā%}), a woman of the mixed tribe
described above; an independent female artizan
working in another person's house; epithet of Drau-
padī, wife of the Pāṇḍava princes, (when these five
princes entered the service of king Virāṭa in various
disguises, Draupadī became servant-maid and needle-
woman in the same king's household; see Mahā-bh.
Virāṭa-parvan 77.)
<LEND>

<L>52716<pc>1136-a<k1>sErinDra<k2>sErinDra
{%Sairindhra%}¦ for {%sairan-dhra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52717<pc>1136-a<k1>sErinDrI<k2>sErinDrI
{%Sairindhrī%}¦ for {%sairan-dhrī%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52718<pc>1136-a<k1>sErAvat<k2>sErAvat
{#sErAvat#}¦ {%sairā-vat, ān, atī, at%} (according to
Sāy. connected with {%irā,%} ‘food;’ according to others
perhaps connected with {%sīra%}), Ved. having plenty
of provisions (said of a ship).
<LEND>

<L>52719<pc>1136-a<k1>sErika<k2>sErika
{#sErika#}¦ {%sairika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sīra%}), relating
or belonging to a plough; having furrows; ({%as%}), m.
a plough-ox; a ploughman.
<LEND>

<L>52720<pc>1136-a<k1>sErIya<k2>sErIya
{%Sairīya%}¦ or {%sairīyaka, as,%} m. ‘turned up by the
plough,’ the plant Barleria Cristata.
<LEND>

<L>52721<pc>1136-a<k1>sEreya<k2>sEreya
{%Saireya%}¦ or {%saireyaka, as,%} m. {%= sairīya%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52722<pc>1136-a<k1>sErinDra<k2>sErinDra
{#sErinDra#}¦ {%sairindhra.%} See under {%sairandhra.%}
<LEND>

<L>52723<pc>1136-a<k1>sEriBa<k2>sEriBa
{#sEriBa#}¦ {%sairibha, as,%} m. (probably connected
with {%sīra%}), a buffalo; Indra's heaven, Svarga.
<LEND>

<L>52724<pc>1136-a<k1>sErya<k2>sErya
{#sErya#}¦ {%sairya, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of grass.
<LEND>

<L>52725<pc>1136-a<k1>sEvAla<k2>sEvAla
{#sEvAla#}¦ {%saivāla, am,%} n. ({%= śaivāla%}), the
aquatic plant Vallisneria.
<LEND>

<L>52726<pc>1136-a<k1>sEsaka<k2>sEsaka
{#sEsaka#}¦ {%saisaka, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sīsa%}), leaden, of
lead.
<LEND>

<L>52727<pc>1136-a<k1>so<k2>so<h>1
{#so#} 1¦. {%so%} (usually found with preposi-
tions, see {%ava-so, vy-ava-so, adhy-ava-so,%}
{%pary-ava-so,%} &c.), cl. 4. P. {%syati, sasau%} (2nd sing.
{%sasitha%} or {%sasātha,%} 1st du. {%sasiva%}), {%sāsyati, asāt%}
or {%asāsīt,%} Prec. {%seyāt, sātum,%} to destroy, kill; to
bring to an end, finish, complete: Pass. {%sīyate,%} Aor.
{%asāyi:%} Caus. {%sāyayati%} (or, according to some, {%sā-%}
{%payati%}), &c.: Desid. {%siṣāsati:%} Intens. {%seṣīyate,%}
{%sāsāti, sāseti.%}
<LEND>

<L>52728<pc>1136-a<k1>sAya<k2>sAya
{%Sāya, as,%}¦ m. end, close, &c. See p. 1109, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52729<pc>1136-a<k1>sita<k2>sita<h>3
3. {%sita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (for 1. see under rt. {%si;%} for 2.
see p. 1113, col. 2), destroyed, brought to an end,
finished, completed, concluded; ascertained, known;
({%as%}), m. an arrow (probably for {%śita,%} cf. {%sāyaka,%}
{%śāyaka%}). {%—Sitāgra (˚ta-ag˚), as,%} m. {%= śitāgra,%} a
thorn.
<LEND>

<L>52730<pc>1136-a<k1>siti<k2>siti<h>3
3. {%siti, is,%}¦ f. destruction; [cf. 2. {%pra-siti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52731<pc>1136-a<k1>seya<k2>seya
{%Seya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be destroyed; to be com-
pleted or effected; ({%am%}), n. completion, effecting;
[cf. {%śata-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52732<pc>1136-a<k1>so<k2>so<h>2
2. {%so, sos,%}¦ f., N. of Pārvatī.
<LEND>

<L>52733<pc>1136-a<k1>soQa<k2>soQa
{#soQa#}¦ {%soḍha, as, ā, am,%} (fr. rt. 1. {%sah%}), borne,
suffered, endured; patient, enduring; ({%as%}), m. a
proper N.
<LEND>

<L>52734<pc>1136-a<k1>soQavat<k2>soQavat
{%Soḍhavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has borne or en-
dured.
<LEND>

<L>52735<pc>1136-a<k1>soQAya<k2>soQAya
{%Soḍhāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%soḍhāyate,%} &c., to bear, en-
dure.
<LEND>

<L>52736<pc>1136-a<k1>soQf<k2>soQf
{%Soḍhṛ, ḍhā, ḍhrī, ḍhṛ,%}¦ a bearer, one who bears
or suffers, patient, enduring; able, powerful.
<LEND>

<L>52737<pc>1136-a<k1>sotf<k2>sotf
{#sotf#}¦ {%sotṛ.%} See p. 1117, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>52738<pc>1136-a<k1>sotkaRWa<k2>sotkaRWa
{#sotkaRWa#}¦ {%sotkaṇṭha (sa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} ar-
dently longing, impatiently eager; regretful; bewail-
ing, sorrowing; ({%am%}), ind. with ardent or eager
longing; regretfully, sorrowfully.
<LEND>

<L>52739<pc>1136-a<k1>sotkampa<k2>sotkampa
{#sotkampa#}¦ {%sotkampa (sa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} trem-
bling, tremulous.
<LEND>

<L>52740<pc>1136-a<k1>sotpala<k2>sotpala
{#sotpala#}¦ {%sotpala (sa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} pos-
sessing lotuses.
<LEND>

<L>52741<pc>1136-a<k1>sotpIqa<k2>sotpIqa
{#sotpIqa#}¦ {%sotpīḍa (sa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} covered
with foam or froth.
<LEND>

<L>52742<pc>1136-a<k1>sotprAsa<k2>sotprAsa
{#sotprAsa#}¦ {%sotprāsa (sa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} having
excess, excessive; exaggerated, exaggerating ironic-
[Page1136-b+ 68]
ally; ({%as%}), m. violent laughter; ({%as, am%}), m. n.
ironical exaggeration, sarcasm, flattering speech, sneer-
ing praise and covert censure. {%—Sotprāsa-hasita,%}
{%am,%} n. sarcastic laughter.
<LEND>

<L>52743<pc>1136-b<k1>sotva<k2>sotva
{#sotva#}¦ {%sotva.%} See p. 1117, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>52744<pc>1136-b<k1>sotsava<k2>sotsava
{#sotsava#}¦ {%sotsava (sa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} festive,
making merry, joyous.
<LEND>

<L>52745<pc>1136-b<k1>sotsAha<k2>sotsAha
{#sotsAha#}¦ {%sotsāha (sa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} making
effort, vigorous, energetic, persevering; ({%am%}), ind.
energetically, carefully. {%—Sotsāha-tā,%} f. activity,
energy.
<LEND>

<L>52746<pc>1136-b<k1>sotsuka<k2>sotsuka
{#sotsuka#}¦ {%sotsuka (sa-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} regret-
ful, repining, anxious, sorrowful, languid.
<LEND>

<L>52747<pc>1136-b<k1>sodaka<k2>sodaka
{#sodaka#}¦ {%sodaka (sa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} having
or containing water.
<LEND>

<L>52748<pc>1136-b<k1>sodaya<k2>sodaya
{#sodaya#}¦ {%sodaya (sa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} connected
with the rise (of the heavenly bodies &c.), having
an increase of profit, accumulated, augmented by
interest; having a succession, having something
coming after, followed by.
<LEND>

<L>52749<pc>1136-b<k1>sodara<k2>sodara
{#sodara#}¦ {%sodara (sa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} born from
the same womb, co-uterine; ({%as%}), m. a co-uterine
brother, brother of whole blood, own brother [cf.
{%sahodara%}]; ({%ā%}), f. a co-uterine sister, own sister.
<LEND>

<L>52750<pc>1136-b<k1>sodarya<k2>sodarya
{%Sodarya (sa-ud˚), as,%}¦ m. an own brother ({%=%}
{%samānodarya%}).
<LEND>

<L>52751<pc>1136-b<k1>sodarka<k2>sodarka
{#sodarka#}¦ {%sodarka (sa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} attended
with results or consequences; having elevations or
turrets.
<LEND>

<L>52752<pc>1136-b<k1>sodyoga<k2>sodyoga
{#sodyoga#}¦ {%sodyoga (sa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} mak-
ing active exertion, diligent, persevering, enterpris-
ing, energetic; violent (as a disease).
<LEND>

<L>52753<pc>1136-b<k1>sodvAzpam<k2>sodvAzpam
{#sodvAzpam#}¦ {%sodvāṣpam (sa-ud˚),%} ind. with
tears in the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>52754<pc>1136-b<k1>sodvega<k2>sodvega
{#sodvega#}¦ {%sodvega (sa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} mourn-
ful, sorrowful, anxious, fearful; ({%am%}), ind. anxiously,
eagerly.
<LEND>

<L>52755<pc>1136-b<k1>sonaha<k2>sonaha
{#sonaha#}¦ {%sonaha, as,%} m. garlic.
<LEND>

<L>52756<pc>1136-b<k1>sonmAda<k2>sonmAda
{#sonmAda#}¦ {%sonmāda (sa-un˚), as, ā, am,%} mad,
insane.
<LEND>

<L>52757<pc>1136-b<k1>sopakaraRa<k2>sopakaraRa
{#sopakaraRa#}¦ {%sopakaraṇa (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
provided with every requisite instrument or imple-
ment, properly equipped.
<LEND>

<L>52758<pc>1136-b<k1>sopakAra<k2>sopakAra
{%Sopakāra (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ furnished with
necessary means or implements, well equipped or
stocked; assisted, befriended.
<LEND>

<L>52759<pc>1136-b<k1>sopakAraka<k2>sopakAraka
{%Sopakāraka (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ properly equipped
or aided, assisted, benefited.
<LEND>

<L>52760<pc>1136-b<k1>sopacAra<k2>sopacAra
{#sopacAra#}¦ {%sopacāra (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%} act-
ing with politeness or civility, deferential; ({%am%}), n.
politely, deferentially.
<LEND>

<L>52761<pc>1136-b<k1>sopacArakam<k2>sopacArakam
{%Sopacārakam (sa-up˚),%}¦ ind. politely, deferen-
tially.
<LEND>

<L>52762<pc>1136-b<k1>sopadrava<k2>sopadrava
{#sopadrava#}¦ {%sopadrava (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
visited with great calamities or afflictions, dangerous.
<LEND>

<L>52763<pc>1136-b<k1>sopaDa<k2>sopaDa
{#sopaDa#}¦ {%sopadha (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%} full of
fraud or deceit, fraudulent, guileful.
<LEND>

<L>52764<pc>1136-b<k1>sopaDi<k2>sopaDi
{%Sopadhi, is, is, i,%}¦ fraudulent; ({%i%}), ind. deceitfully,
fraudulently.
<LEND>

<L>52765<pc>1136-b<k1>sopanizatka<k2>sopanizatka
{#sopanizatka#}¦ {%sopaniṣatka (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
along with the Upaniṣads, (Kullūka on Manu II.
165.)
<LEND>

<L>52766<pc>1136-b<k1>sopaplava<k2>sopaplava
{#sopaplava#}¦ {%sopaplava (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%} af-
flicted with any great calamity, overrun or attacked
by enemies; eclipsed (as the sun or moon).
<LEND>

<L>52767<pc>1136-b<k1>soparoDa<k2>soparoDa
{#soparoDa#}¦ {%soparodha (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%} ob-
structed, impeded; favoured; ({%am%}), ind. obligingly,
respectfully.
<LEND>
[Page1136-c+ 74]

<L>52768<pc>1136-c<k1>sopavAsa<k2>sopavAsa
{#sopavAsa#}¦ {%sopavāsa%} or {%sopavāsika (sa-up˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fasting, keeping a fast.
<LEND>

<L>52769<pc>1136-c<k1>sopasarga<k2>sopasarga
{#sopasarga#}¦ {%sopasarga (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%} af-
flicted with any great misfortune, visited by portents,
portentous; possessed by an evil spirit; having a
particle, preceded by a prepositional prefix (in gram-
mar).
<LEND>

<L>52770<pc>1136-c<k1>sopahAsa<k2>sopahAsa
{#sopahAsa#}¦ {%sopahāsa (sa-up˚), as, ā, am,%} ac-
companied with derisive laughter, sneering, jocular,
sarcastic; ({%am%}), ind. with a sneer, sneeringly. {%—Sopa-%}
{%hāsotprāsa (˚sa-ut˚), as,%} m. a jocular expression.
<LEND>

<L>52771<pc>1136-c<k1>sopAka<k2>sopAka
{#sopAka#}¦ {%sopāka, as,%} m. (probably another
form of {%śva-pāka%}), a man of a degraded caste (the
son of a Cāṇḍāla by a Pukkasī, and only to be em-
ployed as a public executioner, &c., see Manu X. 38).
<LEND>

<L>52772<pc>1136-c<k1>sopADi<k2>sopADi
{#sopADi#}¦ {%sopādhi, is, is, i,%} or {%sopādhika (sa-%}
{%up˚), as, ī, am,%} restricted by some condition or
limitation, limited, qualified by some particular cha-
racteristic (as liberality by the desire of receiving
something in return); having some peculiar attri-
bute or distinguishing title; special.
<LEND>

<L>52773<pc>1136-c<k1>sopAna<k2>sopAna
{#sopAna#}¦ {%sopāna, am,%} n. (perhaps contracted
from {%sa + upāyana%}), stairs, steps, a staircase, a
ladder. {%—Sopāna-tva, am,%} n. the state or condition
of stairs, the uses of a staircase. {%—Sopāna-param-%}
{%parā,%} f. a line of steps, flight of steps.
<LEND>

<L>52774<pc>1136-c<k1>sopAnatka<k2>sopAnatka
{#sopAnatka#}¦ {%sopānatka, as, ā, am%} (fr. {%sa +%}
{%upānah + ka,%} see {%upā-nah%}), with sandals, having
sandals or shoes, (Manu III. 238.)
<LEND>

<L>52775<pc>1136-c<k1>sopAsana<k2>sopAsana
{#sopAsana#}¦ {%sopāsana (sa-up˚), as,%} m. having
the sacred fire, (see 2. {%upāsana.%})
<LEND>

<L>52776<pc>1136-c<k1>soBa<k2>soBa
{#soBa#}¦ {%sobha, am,%} n., Ved., N. of the city of
the Gandharvas; [cf. {%sambha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52777<pc>1136-c<k1>soBya<k2>soBya
{%Sobhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in or belonging
to Sobha.
<LEND>

<L>52778<pc>1136-c<k1>soBari<k2>soBari
{#soBari#}¦ {%sobhari, is,%} m., N. of the author
of the hymns Ṛg-veda VIII. 19 — 22, &c. (having the
patronymic Kāṇva).
<LEND>

<L>52779<pc>1136-c<k1>soBAYjana<k2>soBAYjana
{#soBAYjana#}¦ {%sobhāñjana, as,%} m. ({%= śobhāñ-%}
{%jana%}), the tree Hyperanthera Moringa.
<LEND>

<L>52780<pc>1136-c<k1>soma<k2>soma
{#soma#}¦ {%soma, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
I. 139. fr. rt. 3. {%su,%} ‘to distil or extract or sprinkle,’
but connected by some with rt. 4. {%su,%} ‘to generate,’
the act of expressing the Soma juice being compared
to the act of begetting), a particular climbing plant,
Sarcostema Viminalis or Asclepias Acida (said to grow
abundantly on the mountains of India and Persia;
this celebrated plant, sometimes called ‘the moon-
plant’ and perhaps a kind of milk-weed, was for-
merly a most important ingredient in sacrificial offer-
ings, and is perpetually alluded to in Vedic literature
as well as in the Persian Avesta; it was collected by
moon-light on certain mountains [in Ṛg-veda X. 34,
1. the mountain Mūja-vat is mentioned], stripped of
its numerous leaves, and then carried to the place of
sacrifice; the stalks having been there crushed be-
tween stones by the priests were sprinkled with
water and placed on a sieve or strainer for purifica-
tion [see {%pāvamāna%}], whence, after further pressure,
the acid juice trickled into a vessel called Droṇa;
after which it was mixed with clarified butter, flour,
&c., made to ferment, and then offered in libations
to the gods or drunk by the Brāhmans, by both of
whom its exhilarating or intoxicating qualities were
supposed to be highly prized; it is sometimes de-
scribed as having been brought from the sky by a
Śyena or falcon, and guarded by the Gandharvas;
sometimes as having been brought by the Gāyatrī in
the form of a bird, or by the daughter of the Sun,
from a spot where it had been nourished by the
rain-god Parjanya, who is represented in Ṛg-veda
IX. 82, 3. as its father, the god Soma being else-
where described as rejoicing in the society of the
waters; all the 114 hymns of the ninth Maṇḍala of
[Page1137-a+ 81]
the Ṛg-veda, besides many others throughout this
Veda and the whole Sāma-veda, are devoted to the
praise of this plant, the use of which seems now to
be little known, though in some parts of India
Soma sacrifices are still offered; for the connection
between the Soma ceremonies and the Sāma-veda
see {%sāma-veda;%} this Veda distinguishes two kinds
of Soma, one said to be green and the other yellow,
but the golden-coloured is described as most cele-
brated; the more modern Su-śruta, q. v., on the
other hand, distinguishes twenty-four varieties of the
Soma plant); the intoxicating and invigorating juice
of the above plant (which, in the Vedic period, was
regarded as a kind of Amṛta or nectar, conferring
eternal life and vigour on the drinkers of it, whether
gods or men, and was offered to the gods to pro-
pitiate them and make them accede to the petitions
of their worshippers, see above); the above plant or
its juice personified (and constantly deified in the Veda,
and in its character of a god represented as primeval,
all-powerful, all-pervading, healing all diseases, lord of
all other gods, and identified with the very supreme
Being himself; this worship of Soma by the Hindūs
of the Vedic age is thought to possess great
community of character with that of Dionysus and
Bacchus by the Greeks and Romans; Soma is
regarded as the author of Ṛg-veda X. 124, 1, 5 — 9);
nectar, the beverage of the gods; water; the moon
or its deity (to whom the name Soma, which first
belonged to the plant only, came to be applied in
Post-vedic mythology, traces of this application being
also observable in Ṛg-veda X. 85, in Atharva-veda
XI. 6, 7, and in several passages of the Śatapatha-
Brāhmaṇa; in the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa I. 22, Brahmā is
said to have appointed Soma or the moon to be the
‘monarch of planets, of plants, of sacrifices, and
penances,’ and one of the names of the moon is
Oṣadhi-pati or Oṣadhīśa, ‘lord of herbs;’ again,
at the churning of the ocean, as described in the
Purāṇas, after all sorts of medicinal plants and heal-
ing herbs &c. are thrown in, three of the precious
things said to be produced are Soma, ‘the moon,’
Amṛta, ‘nectar,’ and Surā, ‘spirituous liquor,’ and
in other legends this nectar is said to be preserved in
the body of the moon; in Manu V. 96, Soma is
called one of the eight Loka-pālas or guardians of
the world); a ray of light ({%= dīdhiti,%} according
to Śabda-k.); air, wind; camphor; a particular
drug of supposed magical properties; a particular
mountain or mountainous range, (according to some)
the mountains of the moon; a particular class of
Pitṛs, (probably for {%soma-pā%}); N. of a monkey
chief; of Kuvera; of Yama; of one of the Vasus,
(see {%vasu%}); of Śiva; of the author of a law-book;
of the author of the Rāga-vibodha; ({%ā%}), f., N. of
an Apsaras; ({%am%}), n. rice-water, rice-gruel; heaven,
sky, ether. {%—Soma-kavi, is,%} m., N. of a poet.
{%—Soma-kānta, as, ā, am,%} moon-beloved; lovely
as the moon; ({%as%}), m. the moon-gem, moon-stone
({%= candra-kānta,%} q. v.); N. of a king of Saurāṣṭra.
{%—Soma-kāma, as, ā, am,%} Ved. delighting in Soma.
{%—Soma-kīrtti, is,%} m., N. of a son of Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra. {%—Soma-kṣaya, as,%} m. disappearance of
the moon, new moon. {%—Soma-garbha, as,%} m., N.
of Viṣṇu. {%—Soma-giri, is,%} m. ‘moon-mountain,’
N. of a mythical mountain. {%—Soma-gopā, ās, ās,%}
{%am,%} having Soma as protector. {%—Soma-graha, as,%}
m. a vessel for taking up the Soma. {%—Soma-ja,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} moon-produced, moon-born; ({%as%}), m.
epithet of the planet Mercury or Budha; ({%am%}), n.
milk. {%—Soma-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place of pil-
grimage in the west of India ({%= prabhāsa,%} q. v.).
{%—Soma-datta, as,%} m., N. of a king of Vaiśālī;
({%ā%}), f., N. of the wife of Yajña-soma. {%—Soma-%}
{%deva, as,%} m., N. of the author of the Kathā-sarit-
sāgara. {%—Soma-daivatya, as, ā, am,%} having Soma
as a deity, presided over by Soma. {%—Soma-dhāna,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. holding or containing Soma (as a
bowl). {%—Soma-dhārā,%} f. ‘Soma-holding,’ the sky,
heaven. {%—Soma-nandīśvara (˚di-īś˚),%} N. of a
Liṅga. {%—Soma-nātha, as,%} m. ‘Soma's lord, the
[Page1137-b+ 81]
divinity set up by Soma,’ N. of a celebrated Liṅga,
i. e. columnar emblem of Śiva or of the place or
temple where it was set up, (this temple was
established in the town described below, and was
one of the twelve celebrated Liṅga temples which
in various parts of India are held in especial venera-
tion; the legend relates that the god Soma or the
moon propitiated Śiva by performing great austerities
on the spot, whereupon Śiva granted him a boon,
and Soma in return set up a Liṅga on the place
where he had done penance; the temple built there
was so famed for its splendor and enormous wealth
that it attracted the celebrated Mahmūd of Ghaznī,
A. D. 1024, who, under pretext of destroying its
idols, carried off its treasures along with its renowned
gates); N. of several persons. {%—Somanātha-tīrtha,%}
N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Somanātha-pattana, am,%} n.,
N. of a town on the western coast of India (com-
monly called Somnath Pattan in the peninsula of
Kattywar and province of Guzerat; it was celebrated
for the temple of Śiva above described). {%—Soma-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. one who drinks the Soma juice (especially
at a sacrifice); a Soma sacrificer; a class of Pitṛs,
(see {%soma-pā.%}) {%—Soma-pati, is,%} m., Ved. ‘lord of
Soma,’ epithet of Indra. {%—Soma-pattra, as,%} m. a
sort of grass, Saccharum Cylindricum. {%—Soma-par-%}
{%van, a,%} n., Ved. the time for preparing the Soma.
{%—Soma-pā, ās,%} m. (acc. pl. {%soma-pas,%} dat. sing.
{%soma-pe,%} see Gram. 108. {%a%}), a drinker of Soma
juice (especially at a sacrifice); a Soma sacrificer;
the performer of a sacrifice; a Pitṛ of a particular
class (said to be especially the progenitors of the
Brāhmans). {%—Somapā-tama, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
drinking much Soma, very fond of Soma. {%—Soma-%}
{%pāna, am,%} n. the drinking of the Soma juice.
{%—Soma-pāla, as,%} m. a preserver of Soma, (pro-
bably) a provider or seller of the Soma plant; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. epithet of the Gandharvas (as keeping especial
guard over the Soma). {%—Soma-pāvan, ā,%} m., Ved.
a Soma drinker. {%—Soma-pīti, is,%} f. drinking Soma,
a draught of Soma; a Soma sacrifice. {%—Soma-pītin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a drinker of the Soma juice. {%—Soma-pītha,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. a draught of Soma; [cf. {%go-pītha.%}]
{%—Soma-pīthin, ī,%} m. a Soma drinker. {%—Soma-%}
{%pīvin, ī,%} m. (doubtful), a Soma drinker. {%—Soma-pu-%}
{%tra, as,%} m. ‘son of the moon,’ the planet Mercury.
{%—Soma-pṛṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} Ved. touching Soma,
sprinkling Soma, (Sāy. {%= soma-spraṣṭṛ, somābhi-%}
{%ṣava-kartṛ,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 63, 2.) {%—Soma-peya,%}
{%as,%} m., Ved. a sacrifice in which Soma is drunk,
a Soma libation. {%—Soma-pratīka, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
having Soma at the head. {%—Soma-prabhā,%} f., N. of
a female. {%—Soma-prayoga, as,%} m., N. of a treatise.
{%—Soma-pravāka, as,%} m. ‘Soma-sacrifice-an-
nouncer,’ a person commissioned to engage Śrotriyas
or sacrificial priests for a Soma sacrifice. {%—Soma-%}
{%bandhu, us,%} m. ‘friend of the moon,’ the white
esculent water-lily (as expanding at night). {%—Soma-%}
{%bhava, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Soma-bhū, ūs, ūs, u,%}
Soma-born, belonging to the family of the moon;
({%ūs%}), m. ‘son of Soma,’ epithet of Budha (regent of
the planet Mercury and supposed founder of the
lunar dynasty); one of the persons called Vāsudevas
by the Jainas. {%—Soma-yajña, as,%} m. a Soma sacri-
fice, an offering or libation of the juice of the acid
Asclepias. {%—Soma-yāga, as,%} m. a great triennial
sacrifice in which the Soma juice is drunk. {%—Soma-%}
{%yājin, ī,%} m. a Soma-yāga sacrificer (who also drinks
the Soma juice at the ceremony). {%—Soma-yogin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} being in conjunction with the moon. {%—Soma-%}
{%yoni, is,%} m. a sort of yellow and very fragrant
sandal. {%—Soma-rasa, as,%} m. the juice of the Soma
plant. {%—Soma-rājaki, ayas,%} m. pl., N. of a Gotra.
{%—Soma-rājan, ā, -jñī, a,%} having the Soma plant
as king, (Atharva-veda VIII. 1, 17); ({%ā%}), m., N. of
a Muni. {%—Soma-rājikā,%} f. {%= soma-rājin%} below.
{%—Soma-rājin, ī,%} m. the medicinal plant Serratula
or Vernonia Anthelmintica. {%—Soma-rājī,%} f. {%= soma-%}
{%rājin%} above; a particular metre consisting of six
syllables. {%—Soma-rāṣṭra, am,%} n., N. of a place.
{%—Soma-roga, as,%} m. a particular disease incident
[Page1137-c+ 81]
to women. {%—Soma-raudra, am,%} n., N. of a sacred
text; [cf. {%somā-raudra.%}] {%—Soma-latā,%} f. the
moon-plant Sarcostema Viminalis, (see {%soma,%} col. 1);
N. of the river Godāvarī. {%—Soma-latikā,%} f. a par-
ticular shrub {%(= guḍūcī)%}. {%—Soma-vaṃśa, as,%} m.
‘the family or race of the moon,’ the lunar dynasty
or line of kings supposed to be descended from
Soma, ‘the moon,’ and his son Budha, (in this line
came Puru, Yadu, Dushyanta, Kṛṣṇa, Bharata,
Kuru, Dhṛta-rāṣṭra, and Pāṇḍu, see {%candra-%}
{%vaṃśa;%} it was one of the two great lines of ancient
Hindū kings, the other being called Solar, see {%sūrya-%}
{%vaṃśa%}); N. of Yudhi-ṣṭhira (as belonging to this
line). {%—Soma-vaṃśin, ī,%} m. a prince or king of the
lunar dynasty. {%—1. soma-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
Soma (said of the Himālaya district), having Soma
juice; having the moon, lunar. {%—2. soma-vat,%} ind.
like the moon. {%—Soma-valka, as,%} m. a kind of
white Khadira, Mimosa Catechu; a medicinal plant
(commonly called Kāyaphal, {%= kaṭ-phala%}); the
plant Karañja; another kind {%(= rīṭhā-karañja).%}
{%—Soma-vallari, is,%} or {%soma-vallarī,%} f. the moon-
plant Sarcostema Viminalis; a kind of vegetable
{%(= brahmī)%}. {%—Soma-vallikā,%} f. the moon-plant;
the plant Vernonia Anthelmintica. {%—Soma-vallī,%}
f. the moon-plant, (see {%soma%} above); the shrub
Cocculus Cordifolius ({%= yajña-vallī%}); the medicinal
plant Vernonia Anthelmintica; other plants {%(=%}
{%brāhmī; = pātāla-garuḍī; = su-darśanā)%}. {%—So-%}
{%ma-vahni-prakāśa, as, ā, am,%} bright as the fire
of the moon. {%—Soma-vāmin, ī,%} m. ‘Soma-vomiter,’
a priest who has drunk so much Soma juice that he
is obliged to vomit it out of his mouth. {%—Soma-%}
{%vāra, as,%} m. ‘moon-day,’ Monday. {%—Somavāra-%}
{%vrata, am,%} n. a kind of religious observance per-
formed in the evening and consisting of the worship
of Śiva and Durgā preceded by fasting every Mon-
day. {%—Soma-vikrayin, ī,%} m. a vendor of Soma
juice. {%—Soma-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the medicinal plant
Kaṭ-phala; the white Khadira; Vernonia Anthel-
mintica. {%—Soma-śakalā,%} f. ‘resembling a portion
of the moon,’ a kind of cucumber {%(= śaśāṇḍulī).%}
{%—Soma-śambhu, us,%} m., N. of an author. {%—Soma-%}
{%śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a king (belonging to the
Maurya dynasty); of a Muni; of a merchant.
{%—Soma-śuṣma, as,%} m., N. of a Brāhman. {%—So-%}
{%ma-śravas, ās,%} m., N. of a merchant. {%—Soma-%}
{%saṃsthā,%} f., N. of the fifth division of the Jyo-
tiṣṭoma sacrifice, (seven Soma-saṃsthās are enume-
rated, viz. Agni-ṣṭoma, Aty-agniṣṭoma, Ukthya,
Ṣoḍaśin, Ati-rātra, Vāja-peya, and Aptor-yāma.)
{%—Soma-sañjña, am,%} n. ‘Soma-named,’ camphor.
{%—Soma-sad, t,%} m. a Pitṛ of a peculiar class (de-
scribed as progenitor of the celestial beings called
Sādhyas, Manu III. 195). {%—Soma-sāra, as,%} m.
the white Khadira tree. {%—Soma-siddhānta, as,%} m.
‘the Soma doctrine,’ N. of a particular astronomical
text-book; a particular Tantra doctrine or system of
philosophy followed by a sect of Śaivas and regarded
as unorthodox, (it is personified in the Third Act of
the Prabodha-candrodaya); one who holds the above
system of doctrines; a particular Buddha. {%—Soma-%}
{%siddhāntin, ī,%} m. one who knows the Soma-sid-
dhānta; a follower of the above sect of the Śaivas,
a rationalist of the above school. {%—Soma-sindhu,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘ocean of Soma,’ epithet of Viṣṇu. {%—Soma-%}
{%sut, t,%} m. a Soma-distiller, Soma-sprinkler, a priest
who offers the Soma juice at a sacrifice. {%—Soma-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. ‘son of the moon,’ epithet of Budha,
q. v.; ({%ā%}), f. ‘daughter of the moon,’ the river
Narma-dā or Nerbudda. {%—Somasut-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} possessing offerers of Soma juice (said of a her-
mitage, a sacrifice, &c.). {%—Soma-sutvan, ā,%} m., Ved.
one who offers Soma libations. {%—Soma-sundara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a commentator. {%—Soma-sūkta, am,%}
n. a hymn in honour of Soma. {%—Soma-sūtra, am,%}
n. a channel for conveying water from a Śiva-liṅga
or a kind of receptacle to receive the water with
which the idol has been bathed. {%—Somasūtra-pra-%}
{%dakṣiṇā,%} f. circumambulation around Śiva's idol
in such a way as that the Soma-sūtra shall not be
[Page1138-a+ 76]
crossed. {%—Soma-sūrya-prakāśa, as, ā, am,%} bright
as the sun and moon. {%—Soma-sena, as,%} m., N. of a
king of Campaka-pura. {%—Somākhya (˚ma-ākh˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the red lotus. {%—Somātipūta (˚ma-at˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} excessively purified by the Soma juice (which,
if drunk in excess, is supposed to pass through the
nose, ears, and other apertures of the body). {%—So-%}
{%mānanda (˚ma-ān˚), as,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
{%—Somānanda-nātha, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor.
{%—Somā-pūṣaṇā,%} m. du., Ved. Soma and Pūṣan.
{%—Somābha (˚ma-ābha), as, ā, am,%} like the moon;
({%ā%}), f. epithet of Candrāvalī, q. v. {%—Somābhiṣava%}
{%(˚ma-abh˚), as,%} m. the distilling or extracting of
Soma juice. {%—Somā-rudra-sūkta, am,%} n., N. of a
Vedic hymn, (see the next.) {%—Somā-raudra, am,%}
n., N. of the four Vedic texts beginning with or
containing the word Somā-rudrā, (these occur in
Ṛg-veda VI. 74, 1 — 4; cf. Atharva-veda VII. 42,
Manu XI. 254.) {%—Somārka-pratisaṅkāśa (˚ma-%}
{%ar˚), as, ā, am,%} resembling the sun and moon.
{%—Somāha (˚ma-ah˚), as,%} m. ‘moon-day,’ Monday.
{%—Somāhuti (˚ma-āh˚), is,%} m., N. of the author of
the hymns Ṛg-veda II. 4-7 (having the patronymic
Bhārgava). {%—Someśvara (˚ma-īś˚), as,%} m. ‘Soma's
lord, the divinity set up by Soma,’ N. of a celebrated
representation of Śiva (supposed to have been set
up by Soma at Benares) or of the place where it
was established, (see {%soma-nātha%}); of an author;
of a poet; of the author of a work on music; of the
author of the Nyāya-sudhā commentary; ({%am%}), n.,
N. of a Liṅga at Benares. {%—Somotpatti (˚ma-ut˚),%}
{%is,%} f. the production or origin of Soma; N. of a
Pariśiṣṭa of the Ṛg-veda. {%—Somodbhava (˚ma-%}
{%ud˚), as, ā, am,%} moon-produced, sprung from the
moon; ({%ā%}), f. the river Narma-dā or modern Ner-
budda (so called either as supposed to be descended
from the moon or as the source of celestial nectar).
<LEND>

<L>52781<pc>1138-a<k1>somaka<k2>somaka
{%Somaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a son of Saha-deva and
grandfather of Drupada; of a particular Bharaṭaka or
mendicant; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the family of Drupada.
<LEND>

<L>52782<pc>1138-a<k1>soman<k2>soman
{%Soman, ā,%}¦ m. the moon; a Soma sacrificer, an
offerer of libations (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>52783<pc>1138-a<k1>somAla<k2>somAla
{%Somāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ (according to some a Prākṛt
corruption for {%su-kumāra;%} cf. {%komala%}), resembling
the moon, soft, bland, placid.
<LEND>

<L>52784<pc>1138-a<k1>somin<k2>somin
{%Somin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ offering Soma, performing the
Soma sacrifice; ({%ī%}), m. a performer of a Soma sacri-
fice; ({%inī%}), f. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>52785<pc>1138-a<k1>somya<k2>somya
{%Somya, as, ā, am,%}¦ worthy of Soma; offering
Soma; shaped like Soma; resembling the moon,
soft, good, amiable, ({%somya,%} voc. c. ‘my good Sir,’
used in addressing; cf. {%saumya.%})
<LEND>

<L>52786<pc>1138-a<k1>sOmika<k2>sOmika
{%Saumika, saumya.%}¦ See s. v.
<LEND>

<L>52787<pc>1138-a<k1>somila<k2>somila
{#somila#}¦ {%somila, as,%} m., N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>52788<pc>1138-a<k1>somilaka<k2>somilaka
{#somilaka#}¦ {%somilaka, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>52789<pc>1138-a<k1>sorAzwrika<k2>sorAzwrika
{#sorAzwrika#}¦ {%sorāṣṭrika, as,%} m. {%= saurāṣ-%}
{%ṭrika.%}
<LEND>

<L>52790<pc>1138-a<k1>solaNka<k2>solaNka
{#solaNka#}¦ {%solaṅka, as,%} m., N. of a family.
<LEND>

<L>52791<pc>1138-a<k1>solkAlAtAvapoTika<k2>solkAlAtAvapoTika
{#solkAlAtAvapoTika#}¦ {%solkālātāvapothika%}
{%(sa-ulkā-alāta-av˚), as, ā, am,%} with machines
for hurling down fire-brands and lighted darts (on
an enemy; these machines appear to have been a
kind of catapult or ballista).
<LEND>

<L>52792<pc>1138-a<k1>solluRWa<k2>solluRWa
{#solluRWa#}¦ {%solluṇṭha (sa-ul˚), as,%} m. irony,
sarcasm, ridicule. {%—Solluṇṭha-vacana, am,%} n. or
{%solluṇṭhokti (˚ṭha-uk˚), is,%} f. an ironical expression.
<LEND>

<L>52793<pc>1138-a<k1>solluRWana<k2>solluRWana
{%Solluṇṭhana, am,%}¦ n. apparent praise and covert
censure, irony.
<LEND>

<L>52794<pc>1138-a<k1>sozman<k2>sozman
{#sozman#}¦ {%soṣman%} ({%sa-uṣ˚%} or {%sa-ūṣ˚%}), {%ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} having heat, warm; (in grammar) having aspi-
ration, aspirated (said of the aspirated letters {%kh, gh,%}
{%ch, jh, ṭh, ḍh, th, dh, ph, bh,%} also of the sibilants
and the letter {%h%}); ({%ā%}), m. an aspirated letter, aspi-
rate. {%—Soṣma-tā,%} f. the state or condition of being
aspirated, aspiration. {%—Soṣma-vat, ān,%} m. ‘having
an aspirate,’ an aspirated word or syllable.
<LEND>
[Page1138-b+ 70]

<L>52795<pc>1138-b<k1>soham<k2>soham
{#so'ham#}¦ {%so'ham,%} nom. sing. m. I myself,
(see {%tad,%} p. 360.)
<LEND>

<L>52796<pc>1138-b<k1>sohalagrAma<k2>sohalagrAma
{#sohalagrAma#}¦ {%sohala-grāma, as,%} m., N. of a
village.
<LEND>

<L>52797<pc>1138-b<k1>sOkara<k2>sOkara
{#sOkara#}¦ {%saukara, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sūkara%}), be-
longing or relating to a hog, hoggish, swinish; ({%as%}),
m., N. of a district. {%—Saukara-tīrtha, am,%} n., N.
of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>52798<pc>1138-b<k1>sOkarakatIrTa<k2>sOkarakatIrTa
{%Saukaraka-tīrtha, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>52799<pc>1138-b<k1>sOkarika<k2>sOkarika
{%Saukarika, as,%}¦ m. a hunter; N. of a district.
<LEND>

<L>52800<pc>1138-b<k1>sOkarya<k2>sOkarya<h>1
1. {%saukarya, am,%}¦ n. hoggishness, swinishness.
<LEND>

<L>52801<pc>1138-b<k1>sOkarAyaRa<k2>sOkarAyaRa
{#sOkarAyaRa#}¦ {%saukarāyaṇa, as,%} m., N. of a
teacher of the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>52802<pc>1138-b<k1>sOkarya<k2>sOkarya<h>2
{#sOkarya#} 2¦. {%saukarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-kara%}),
easiness of performance, practicability, feasibility,
facility; adroitness; easy and extempore preparation
of food or medicine.
<LEND>

<L>52803<pc>1138-b<k1>sOkumArya<k2>sOkumArya
{#sOkumArya#}¦ {%saukumārya, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-ku-%}
{%māra%}), youthfulness, tenderness, delicacy; softness,
fineness.
<LEND>

<L>52804<pc>1138-b<k1>sOkftya<k2>sOkftya
{#sOkftya#}¦ {%saukṛtya, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-kṛta%}),
strictness in performing religious acts, piety.
<LEND>

<L>52805<pc>1138-b<k1>sOkzmya<k2>sOkzmya
{#sOkzmya#}¦ {%saukṣmya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sūkṣma%}),
minuteness, fineness, subtilty.
<LEND>

<L>52806<pc>1138-b<k1>sOkzmaka<k2>sOkzmaka
{%Saukṣmaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of small animal or
insect, (perhaps) a grub or maggot.
<LEND>

<L>52807<pc>1138-b<k1>sOKaSAyanika<k2>sOKaSAyanika
{#sOKaSAyanika#}¦ {%saukhaśāyanika, as,%} m. (fr.
{%sukha-śayana%}), one who asks another whether he
has slept well; [cf. {%sausnātika.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52808<pc>1138-b<k1>sOKaSAyika<k2>sOKaSAyika
{%Saukhaśāyika, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%sukha-śāyin%}), = the
above.
<LEND>

<L>52809<pc>1138-b<k1>sOKasuptika<k2>sOKasuptika
{#sOKasuptika#}¦ {%saukhasuptika, as,%} m. (fr. {%sukha-%}
{%supti%}), one who asks another whether he has slept
well; a bard or minstrel whose duty is to waken
kings in the morning with music and song.
<LEND>

<L>52810<pc>1138-b<k1>sOKya<k2>sOKya
{#sOKya#}¦ {%saukhya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sukha%}), pleasure,
happiness, felicity, enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>52811<pc>1138-b<k1>sOKika<k2>sOKika
{%Saukhika, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to pleasure, pleasur-
able, sensual, pleasure-seeking.
<LEND>

<L>52812<pc>1138-b<k1>sOKIya<k2>sOKIya
{%Saukhīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to pleasure or
enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>52813<pc>1138-b<k1>sOgata<k2>sOgata
{#sOgata#}¦ {%saugata, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-gata%}), a fol-
lower of Su-gata, q. v.; a Buddhist, (the Buddhists
are said to be divided into four classes or schools,
viz. Mādhyamikas, Yogācāras, Sautrāntikas, and
Vaibhāṣikas); N. of a son of Daśa-ratha.
<LEND>

<L>52814<pc>1138-b<k1>sOgatika<k2>sOgatika
{%Saugatika, as,%}¦ m. a Buddhist; a Buddhist or
Brāhman mendicant; an atheist, heretic, unbeliever;
({%am%}), n. unbelief, scepticism.
<LEND>

<L>52815<pc>1138-b<k1>sOganDa<k2>sOganDa
{#sOganDa#}¦ {%saugandha, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%su-gan-%}
{%dha%}), possessing a fragrant odour, sweet-scented,
fragrant; ({%am%}), n. sweet-scentedness, fragrance; a
particular fragrant grass ({%= kat-tṛṇa%}).
<LEND>

<L>52816<pc>1138-b<k1>sOganDika<k2>sOganDika
{%Saugandhika, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} sweet-scented,
fragrant; ({%as%}), m. a dealer in perfumes; sulphur;
N. of a mountain; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of lotus; ({%am%}),
n. the white water-lily, the blue lotus; a kind of
fragrant grass ({%= kat-tṛṇa%}); a ruby.
<LEND>

<L>52817<pc>1138-b<k1>sOganDya<k2>sOganDya
{%Saugandhya, am,%}¦ n. sweetness of odour, fra-
grance, perfume.
<LEND>

<L>52818<pc>1138-b<k1>sOgamya<k2>sOgamya
{#sOgamya#}¦ {%saugamya, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-gama%}),
easiness of access, easiness of attainment, facility.
<LEND>

<L>52819<pc>1138-b<k1>sOci<k2>sOci
{#sOci#}¦ {%sauci, is,%} m. (fr. {%sūci;%} cf. {%sūcika%}),
one who lives by his needle, a tailor.
<LEND>

<L>52820<pc>1138-b<k1>sOcika<k2>sOcika
{%Saucika, as,%}¦ m. {%= sauci%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52821<pc>1138-b<k1>sOcIka<k2>sOcIka
{#sOcIka#}¦ {%saucīka, as,%} m. a patronymic of
the Vedic Ṛṣi Agni.
<LEND>

<L>52822<pc>1138-b<k1>sOjanya<k2>sOjanya
{#sOjanya#}¦ {%saujanya, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-jana%}),
goodness, generosity, kindness, compassion, bene-
volence, clemency; friendship.
<LEND>
[Page1138-c+ 71]

<L>52823<pc>1138-c<k1>sOjAta<k2>sOjAta
{#sOjAta#}¦ {%saujāta, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-jāta%}), N. of
a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>52824<pc>1138-c<k1>sORqI<k2>sORqI
{#sORqI#}¦ {%sauṇḍī,%} f. long pepper.
<LEND>

<L>52825<pc>1138-c<k1>sOti<k2>sOti
{#sOti#}¦ {%sauti, is,%} m. (fr. 2. {%sūta%}), N. of
Karṇa, (so called from having been brought up by
the charioteer [{%sūta%}] Adhi-ratha, see {%karṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>52826<pc>1138-c<k1>sOtya<k2>sOtya<h>1
1. {%sautya, am,%}¦ n. the office of a charioteer.
<LEND>

<L>52827<pc>1138-c<k1>sOtya<k2>sOtya<h>2
{#sOtya#} 2¦. {%sautya, as,%} &c. (fr. {%sutyā%}), relating
to Soma-pressing, sacrificial.
<LEND>

<L>52828<pc>1138-c<k1>sOtra<k2>sOtra
{#sOtra#}¦ {%sautra, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sūtra%}), belong-
ing to a thread or string, having a thread, &c.;
belonging to a Sūtra, mentioned or declared in
Sūtras, according to rule or precept, preceptive, for-
mulary; ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman; an artificial root
occurring in grammatical Sūtras only and not capable
of conversion into a verb, but used to form deriva-
tive nouns.
<LEND>

<L>52829<pc>1138-c<k1>sOtrAntika<k2>sOtrAntika
{%Sautrāntika, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of one of the four
great schools or systems of Buddhism, (see {%saugata;%}
they are said to admit the authority of the Buddhist
Sūtras but not of the Abhi-dharma.)
<LEND>

<L>52830<pc>1138-c<k1>sOtrAmaRI<k2>sOtrAmaRI
{#sOtrAmaRI#}¦ {%sautrāmaṇī,%} f. (probably fr. {%su-%}
{%trāman%}), a particular sacrifice (one of the seven
Havir-yajñas; it is described as a substitute for the
Soma sacrifice, spirituous liquors and milk being
taken instead of Soma, and both liquids placed in the
Soma vessels; animals are also immolated, one to
the Aśvins, one to Sarasvatī, one to Indra, and
one to Bṛhaspati; in Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa XII. 8,
3, 31. it is said that every one who is consecrated
by the Sautrāmaṇī enters among the gods and is
born in the next world [{%sarva-tanūḥ%}] with his
entire body).
<LEND>

<L>52831<pc>1138-c<k1>sOdarya<k2>sOdarya
{#sOdarya#}¦ {%saudarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sodara%}), bro-
therhood; ({%as, ā, am%}), having brotherhood with
(at the end of a comp.).
<LEND>

<L>52832<pc>1138-c<k1>sOdAmanI<k2>sOdAmanI
{#sOdAmanI#}¦ {%saudāmanī,%} f. (fr. {%su-dāman%}),
lightning or a particular kind of lightning; N. of
an Apsaras of Indra's heaven; of part of the Su-
dāman mountain (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>52833<pc>1138-c<k1>sOdAminI<k2>sOdAminI
{%Saudāminī,%}¦ f. a particular kind of lightning;
lightning (in general); N. of an Apsaras of Indra's
heaven; N. of a city or country.
<LEND>

<L>52834<pc>1138-c<k1>sOdAmnI<k2>sOdAmnI
{%Saudāmnī,%}¦ f. {%= saudāmanī%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52835<pc>1138-c<k1>sOdAyika<k2>sOdAyika
{#sOdAyika#}¦ {%saudāyika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%su-dāya%}),
that which is given to a woman at her marriage by
her father or mother or any relative and which there-
fore becomes her own property; relating to such a
present; ({%am%}), n. a nuptial gift or present (as de-
scribed above).
<LEND>

<L>52836<pc>1138-c<k1>sOdAsa<k2>sOdAsa
{#sOdAsa#}¦ {%saudāsa, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-dāsa%}), N. of
a king of the solar race (a descendant of Ikṣvāku
and Sagara in the thirteenth generation, son of king
Su-dāsa, and also called Mitra-saha and Kalmāṣa-
pāda).
<LEND>

<L>52837<pc>1138-c<k1>sODa<k2>sODa
{#sODa#}¦ {%saudha, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sudhā%}), relating
or belonging to nectar, having nectar; having plaster;
plastered, stuccoed; ({%as%}), m. a kind of plant, {%=%}
{%dugdha-pāṣāṇa; (am),%} n. a plastered or white-
washed mansion; any great mansion or house; a
palace, (also {%as,%} m. according to some); silver;
opal (according to some). {%—Saudha-kāra, as,%} m. a
plasterer, whitewasher; the builder or maker of a
palace. {%—Saudha-vāsa, as,%} m. a palatial dwelling.
<LEND>

<L>52838<pc>1138-c<k1>sODanya<k2>sODanya
{#sODanya#}¦ {%saudhanya, as,%} &c. (probably fr.
{%su-dhana%}), epithet of certain Dharmāḥ or laws.
<LEND>

<L>52839<pc>1138-c<k1>sODanvana<k2>sODanvana
{#sODanvana#}¦ {%saudhanvana, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-dhan-%}
{%van%}), a son or descendant of Su-dhanvan.
<LEND>

<L>52840<pc>1138-c<k1>sODAtaki<k2>sODAtaki
{#sODAtaki#}¦ {%saudhātaki, is,%} m. (fr. {%su-dhātṛ%}),
a patronymic, (Pāṇ. IV. 1, 97); N. of a hermit
(pupil of Vālmīki).
<LEND>
[Page1139-a+ 73]

<L>52841<pc>1139-a<k1>sODAra<k2>sODAra
{#sODAra#}¦ {%saudhāra, as,%} m. (according to
some) one of the fourteen parts or divisions of a
drama, (a doubtful word.)
<LEND>

<L>52842<pc>1139-a<k1>sODAla<k2>sODAla
{#sODAla#}¦ {%saudhāla, am,%} n. (probably to be
connected with {%saudha,%} p. 1138), a temple of Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>52843<pc>1139-a<k1>sOna<k2>sOna
{#sOna#}¦ {%sauna, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%sūnā%}), belonging
or relating to a slaughter-house or to butchery, &c.;
({%am%}), n. butcher's meat; [cf. {%śauna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52844<pc>1139-a<k1>sOnaDarmya<k2>sOnaDarmya
{%Saunadharmya, am,%}¦ n. ‘the law or rule of
butchery,’ a state of deadly hostility.
<LEND>

<L>52845<pc>1139-a<k1>sOnika<k2>sOnika
{%Saunika, as,%}¦ m. a butcher, vender of the flesh of
beasts or birds.
<LEND>

<L>52846<pc>1139-a<k1>sOnanda<k2>sOnanda
{#sOnanda#}¦ {%saunanda, am,%} n. the club of Bala-
rāma.
<LEND>

<L>52847<pc>1139-a<k1>sOnandin<k2>sOnandin
{%Saunandin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘having Saunanda,’ epithet of
Bala-rāma, (see p. 675.)
<LEND>

<L>52848<pc>1139-a<k1>sOndarya<k2>sOndarya
{#sOndarya#}¦ {%saundarya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sundara%}),
beauty, loveliness, handsomeness, gracefulness, ele-
gance. {%—Saundarya-laharī,%} f., N. of a mystical
poem ascribed to Śaṅkarācārya ({%= ānanda-laharī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52849<pc>1139-a<k1>sOpanTya<k2>sOpanTya
{#sOpanTya#}¦ {%saupanthya, as, ā, am,%} (fr. {%su-%}
{%patha,%} according to some), connected with a good
road.
<LEND>

<L>52850<pc>1139-a<k1>sOparRa<k2>sOparRa
{#sOparRa#}¦ {%sauparṇa, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%su-parṇa%} or
{%su-parṇī,%} q. v.), belonging or relating to Su-parṇa
or Su-parṇī; ({%am%}), n. dry ginger; the emerald; N. of
a Vedic story which relates the transformation of the
metres into birds that they might fetch the Soma from
heaven; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of creeper ({%= pātāla-garuḍī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52851<pc>1139-a<k1>sOparReya<k2>sOparReya
{%Sauparṇeya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic of Garuḍa; ({%ī%}),
f. a female descendant of Su-parṇa; ({%ās%}), pl. epithet
of the metres (regarded as children of Su-parṇī).
<LEND>

<L>52852<pc>1139-a<k1>sOptika<k2>sOptika
{#sOptika#}¦ {%sauptika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%supta%}), con-
nected with or relating to sleep, somnolent, som-
niferous, &c.; ({%am%}), n. a nocturnal combat; a night-
attack, attack on sleeping men. {%—Sauptika-parvan,%}
{%a,%} n., N. of the tenth book of the Mahā-bhārata
(in which is described how the three surviving Kuru
warriors, Aśvatthāman, Kṛta-varman, and Kṛpa,
after the destruction of their army, determined on
attacking the camp of the Pāṇḍavas by night and
murdering them while asleep; this they accordingly
did, Aśvatthāman entering the camp stealthily and,
with the assistance of the god Śiva, slaughtering
thousands, while the two others stood at the gate
and killed all who attempted to escape; the whole
Pāṇḍava army was thus destroyed, except the five
Pāṇḍu princes themselves, with Kṛṣṇa and Sātyaki,
who were stationed at some distance from the camp;
a messenger having escaped conveyed the news to
Yudhi-ṣṭhira, who, with his brothers and Draupadī,
then returned to the camp and bewailed their
slaughtered kindred).
<LEND>

<L>52853<pc>1139-a<k1>sObala<k2>sObala
{#sObala#}¦ {%saubala, as,%} m. a patronymic of
Śakuni (as son of Su-bala, king of Gāndhāra).
<LEND>

<L>52854<pc>1139-a<k1>sObalI<k2>sObalI
{%Saubalī,%}¦ f. a patronymic of Gāndhārī (daughter
of Su-bala and wife of Dhṛta-rāṣṭra).
<LEND>

<L>52855<pc>1139-a<k1>sObaleyI<k2>sObaleyI
{%Saubaleyī,%}¦ f., N. of Gāndhārī.
<LEND>

<L>52856<pc>1139-a<k1>sOBa<k2>sOBa
{#sOBa#}¦ {%saubha, am,%} n. (for {%śaubha%}), N. of
Hari-ścandra's city (suspended in mid-air); N. of a
town of the Śālvas; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people.
{%—Saubha-pati, is,%} or {%saubha-rāja, as,%} m. the king
of Saubha or of the Saubhas.
<LEND>

<L>52857<pc>1139-a<k1>sOBaki<k2>sOBaki
{#sOBaki#}¦ {%saubhaki, is,%} m., N. of Drupada.
<LEND>

<L>52858<pc>1139-a<k1>sOBaga<k2>sOBaga
{#sOBaga#}¦ {%saubhaga, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-bhaga%}),
good luck, happiness; prosperity, riches, wealth.
{%—Saubhaga-tva, am,%} n. a state of prosperity, hap-
piness.
<LEND>

<L>52859<pc>1139-a<k1>sOBAgya<k2>sOBAgya
{%Saubhāgya, am,%}¦ n. auspiciousness, good fortune,
fortunateness, good luck; blessedness; beauty, grace,
charm; the happy and auspicious state of wife-hood
(as opposed to widowhood); affection, favour; con-
gratulations, good wishes; the fourth of the astor-
[Page1139-b+ 71]
nomical Yogas; red lead; borax {%(ṭaṅkaṇa)%}. {%—Sau-%}
{%bhāgya-kāṇḍa,%} N. of part of the Atharva-veda.
{%—Saubhāgya-cintāmaṇi, is,%} m. a particular drug
or medicine compounded of various medicaments.
{%—Saubhāgya-cihna, am,%} n. any mark of good
fortune or blessedness; any sign or token of the
blessed state of wife-hood (e. g. red pigment on the
forehead, the marriage string, &c.). {%—Saubhāgya-%}
{%tantu, us,%} m. the marriage string (which is cast
round the neck of the bride by the bridegroom at
the wedding and worn till widowhood). {%—Sau-%}
{%bhāgya-tṛtīyā,%} f. the third day of the light half of
the month Bhādra. {%—Saubhāgya-devatā,%} f. an
auspicious or tutelary deity. {%—Saubhāgya-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} possessing good fortune or blessedness,
auspicious, fortunate; ({%atī%}), f. a married and un-
widowed woman. {%—Saubhāgyavat-tā,%} f. or {%sau-%}
{%bhāgyavat-tva, am,%} n. auspiciousness, prosperity.
{%—Saubhāgya-vāyana, am,%} n. auspicious offerings
of sweetmeats, &c. {%—Saubhāgya-sundarī-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>52860<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBadra<k2>sOBadra
{#sOBadra#}¦ {%saubhadra, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%su-bhadrā%}),
belonging or relating to Su-bhadrā, q. v.; ({%as%}), m.
‘son of Su-bhadrā,’ epithet of Abhimanyu; ({%am%}),
n., scil. {%yuddha,%} the war occasioned by the carrying
off of Su-bhadrā, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52861<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBadreya<k2>sOBadreya
{%Saubhadreya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic of Abhi-
manyu; Beleric Myrobalan ({%= vibhītaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>52862<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBara<k2>sOBara
{#sOBara#}¦ {%saubhara, as,%} m. a patronymic of
Kuśika (author of the hymn Ṛg-veda X. 127).
<LEND>

<L>52863<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBari<k2>sOBari
{#sOBari#}¦ {%saubhari, is,%} m., N. of a Muni
(married to the fifty daughters of Māndhātṛ and
father of 150 sons).
<LEND>

<L>52864<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBarI<k2>sOBarI
{#sOBarI#}¦ {%saubharī,%} f. (fr. {%sobhari%}), Ved. a
verse composed by Sobhari.
<LEND>

<L>52865<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBAgineya<k2>sOBAgineya<h>1
{#sOBAgineya#} 1¦. {%saubhāgineya, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-%}
{%bhagā%}), the son of a favourite wife or of an
honoured mother.
<LEND>

<L>52866<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBAgineya<k2>sOBAgineya<h>2
{#sOBAgineya#} 2¦. {%saubhāgineya, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%su-bhāgineya%}), belonging or relating to a good
sister's son.
<LEND>

<L>52867<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBAgya<k2>sOBAgya
{#sOBAgya#}¦ {%saubhāgya.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52868<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBAYjana<k2>sOBAYjana
{#sOBAYjana#}¦ {%saubhāñjana, as,%} m. {%= sobhāñ-%}
{%jana, śobhāñjana,%} the tree Hyperanthera Moringa.
<LEND>

<L>52869<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBika<k2>sOBika
{#sOBika#}¦ {%saubhika, as,%} m. (for {%śaubhika%}), a
juggler.
<LEND>

<L>52870<pc>1139-b<k1>sOBrAtra<k2>sOBrAtra
{#sOBrAtra#}¦ {%saubhrātra, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-bhrātṛ%}),
good brotherhood, fraternity.
<LEND>

<L>52871<pc>1139-b<k1>sOmadatti<k2>sOmadatti
{#sOmadatti#}¦ {%saumadatti, is,%} m. (fr. {%soma-%}
{%datta%}), a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>52872<pc>1139-b<k1>sOmanasa<k2>sOmanasa
{#sOmanasa#}¦ {%saumanasa, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%su-%}
{%manas%}), agreeable to the feelings, pleasing; relating
to flowers, floral, flowery; ({%as%}), m., N. of the eighth
day of the civil month {%(= karma-māsa); (ā),%} f. the
outer skin of the nutmeg, {%= jātī-pattrī; (ī),%} f., N.
of the fifth night of the civil month; ({%am%}), n.
benevolence, kindness; pleasure, satisfaction.
<LEND>

<L>52873<pc>1139-b<k1>sOmanasya<k2>sOmanasya
{%Saumanasya, am,%}¦ n. satisfaction of mind, agree-
ableness, enjoyment; a particular offering of flowers
with holy texts placed in the hands of the priest at
a Śrāddha.
<LEND>

<L>52874<pc>1139-b<k1>sOmanasyAyanI<k2>sOmanasyAyanI
{%Saumanasyāyanī,%}¦ f. the blossom of the Mālatī
or great-flowering jasmine.
<LEND>

<L>52875<pc>1139-b<k1>sOmAyana<k2>sOmAyana
{#sOmAyana#}¦ {%saumāyana, as,%} m. (fr. {%soma%}), a
patronymic of Budha; [cf. {%saumya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52876<pc>1139-b<k1>sOmika<k2>sOmika
{#sOmika#}¦ {%saumika, as, ī, am,%} (fr. {%soma%}), per-
formed with Soma juice (said of an oblation or
sacrifice), relating to the Soma juice; relating to
Soma or the moon, lunar; ({%ī%}), f. a particular sacrifice
performed on the day of full moon ({%= dīkṣaṇī-%}
{%yeṣṭi%}).
<LEND>
[Page1139-c+ 75]

<L>52877<pc>1139-c<k1>sOmitra<k2>sOmitra
{#sOmitra#}¦ {%saumitra, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-mitrā%}), a
metronymic of Lakṣmaṇa the younger brother of
Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>52878<pc>1139-c<k1>sOmitri<k2>sOmitri
{%Saumitri, is,%}¦ m. {%= saumitra%} above; N. of a
teacher of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>52879<pc>1139-c<k1>sOmilla<k2>sOmilla
{#sOmilla#}¦ {%saumilla, as,%} m., N. of a dramatic
writer (mentioned in the Mālavikāgnimitra).
<LEND>

<L>52880<pc>1139-c<k1>sOmecaka<k2>sOmecaka
{#sOmecaka#}¦ {%saumecaka, am,%} n. (probably fr.
{%su-mecaka%}), gold.
<LEND>

<L>52881<pc>1139-c<k1>sOmeDika<k2>sOmeDika
{#sOmeDika#}¦ {%saumedhika, as, ī, am%} (fr. 5. {%su +%}
{%medhā%}), possessing supernatural knowledge or wis-
dom; ({%as%}), m. a sage, seer.
<LEND>

<L>52882<pc>1139-c<k1>sOmeruka<k2>sOmeruka
{#sOmeruka#}¦ {%saumeruka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%su-meru%}),
belonging to or coming from Su-meru; ({%am%}), n. gold.
<LEND>

<L>52883<pc>1139-c<k1>sOmya<k2>sOmya
{#sOmya#}¦ {%saumya, as, ā%} or {%mī, am%} (fr. {%soma%}),
belonging or relating to Soma or to the moon,
sacred to Soma; having the nature or properties
of Soma; resembling the moon; handsome, pleas-
ing, good, mild, gentle, soft, benign, placid, ({%saumya,%}
voc. c. ‘O gentle Sir,’ ‘O good Sir,’ used in address-
ing another); auspicious; ({%as%}), m., N. of Budha or
the planet Mercury (son of Soma); N. of the Vedic
Ṛṣi Budha; a Brāhman (or the proper epithet by
which he should be addressed, see Manu II. 125);
N. of one of the nine Khaṇḍas or divisions of the earth
or of Bharata-varṣa; epithet of the forty-third (or
seventeenth) year of Jupiter's cycle of sixty years;
epithet of certain signs of the zodiac (viz. Taurus,
Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricornus); the Uḍumbara
fig-tree; the Saumya penance, (see {%saumya-kṛc-%}
{%chra%}); (in anatomy) the blood before it becomes
red, serum; the gastric juice; {%= bhāsvara%} (according
to Śabda-k.); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of the five stars in
Orion's head, (also called {%ilvala,%} q. v.); N. of a
class of Pitṛs, (Manu III. 199); ({%ā%}), f., N. of
Durgā; a particular metre; the moon-plant, (see
{%soma%}); various other plants, {%= mallikā; = śaṭī; =%}
{%śāla-parṇī; = guñjā; = mahiṣa-vallī; = mahā-%}
{%jyotiṣmatī; = rudra-jaṭā; = mahendra-vāruṇī;%}
{%(am),%} n., scil. {%adbhuta,%} a particular kind of omen
or prodigy (occurring in the Diva or sky). {%—Saumya-%}
{%kṛcchra, as, am,%} m. n. a kind of religious penance
(described as subsisting for five days, severally, on
sesamum, the water of boiled rice, butter-milk
mixed with water, water, and parched grain, and
fasting on the sixth day). {%—Saumya-gandhī,%} f. the
Indian white rose. {%—Saumya-graha, as,%} m. an
auspicious or benign planet (such as Mercury, Ju-
piter, Venus, and the full moon). {%—Saumya-tā,%} f.
or {%saumya-tva, am,%} n. gentleness, mildness, be-
nignity, placidity; benevolence; beauty. {%—Saumya-%}
{%dhātu, us,%} m. (according to Śabda-k. f.), the
phlegmatic humor, phlegm. {%—Saumya-nāman, ā,%}
{%mnī, a,%} having a soft or agreeable name (or one
easily pronounced; see Manu III. 10). {%—Saumya-%}
{%vapus, us, us, us,%} of an agreeable form. {%—Saumya-%}
{%vāra, as,%} m. ‘Mercury's day,’ Wednesday. {%—Saumyo-%}
{%pacāra (˚ya-up˚), as,%} m. a mild or gentle remedy,
mild measure or means of cure.
<LEND>

<L>52884<pc>1139-c<k1>sOyavasa<k2>sOyavasa
{#sOyavasa#}¦ {%sauyavasa, as,%} m. a son of Su-
yavasa.
<LEND>

<L>52885<pc>1139-c<k1>sOyavasi<k2>sOyavasi
{%Sauyavasi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>52886<pc>1139-c<k1>sOyAmi<k2>sOyAmi
{#sOyAmi#}¦ {%sauyāmi, is,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>52887<pc>1139-c<k1>sOra<k2>sOra
{#sOra#}¦ {%saura, as, ī, am%} (in some senses fr.
{%sūra,%} in others fr. {%sura%}), belonging or relating to
the sun, solar; sacred to Sūrya or the sun; celestial,
divine; relating to spirituous liquor; ({%as%}), m. a
worshipper of the sun; the planet Saturn [cf. {%sūra-%}
{%suta%}]; a solar month (consisting of thirty risings
and settings of the sun or the period during which
the sun is in one sign of the zodiac); a representation
of a solar zodiacal sign used at marriage ceremonies;
a solar day; N. of a Guru; the Tumburu plant;
({%ī%}), f. the wife of the sun; ({%am%}), n., N. of a col-
lection of hymns addressed to Sūrya (extracted from
[Page1140-a+ 76]
the Ṛg-veda). {%—Saura-ja, as,%} m. ‘sun-born,’ the
Tumburu plant. {%—Saura-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
chapter of the Śiva-Purāṇa. {%—Saura-divasa, as,%} m.
a solar day. {%—Saura-nakta, am,%} n. a particular reli-
gious observance (accompanied with ceremonial ablu-
tions, worship of the sun, &c.). {%—Saura-bhuvana,%}
{%am,%} n. {%= sūrya-loka,%} q. v. {%—Saura-māsa, as,%} m.
a solar month. {%—Saura-saṃvatsara, as,%} m. a solar
year. {%—Saura-saṃhitā,%} f., N. of part of the Skanda-
Purāṇa. {%—Saura-siddhānta, as,%} m., N. of one of
five ancient astronomical Siddhāntas or text-books,
(see {%siddhānta,%} cf. {%sūrya-s˚.%}) {%—Saura-sūkta, am,%}
n. a hymn addressed to Sūrya. {%—Sauropapurāṇa%}
{%(˚ra-up˚), am,%} n., N. of an Upa-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>52888<pc>1140-a<k1>sOraka<k2>sOraka
{%Sauraka,%}¦ N. of a town founded by Surendra.
<LEND>

<L>52889<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrasEnDava<k2>sOrasEnDava
{%Saurasaindhava, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sura-sindhu%}),
belonging to the river Ganges, Gangetic; related to
the Ganges (applicable as an epithet to Bhīṣma);
({%as%}), m. a horse of the Sun (in this sense com-
pounded of {%saura%} and {%saindhava,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>52890<pc>1140-a<k1>sOri<k2>sOri
{%Sauri, is,%}¦ m., N. of the planet Saturn (as son of
the Sun); the tree Asana (q. v.); the plant Āditya-
bhaktā (q. v.). {%—Sauri-ratna, am,%} n. a particular
gem (sapphire).
<LEND>

<L>52891<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrika<k2>sOrika
{%Saurika, as, ī, am,%}¦ celestial; spirituous, vinous; any-
thing (such as money) due for spirits; ({%as%}), m. Saturn;
heaven, paradise; a vender of spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>52892<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrI<k2>sOrI
{%Saurī,%}¦ f. See above under {%saura.%}
<LEND>

<L>52893<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrIya<k2>sOrIya
{%Saurīya, as, ī, am,%}¦ solar, belonging or suitable to
the sun ({%= sūryāya hita%}).
<LEND>

<L>52894<pc>1140-a<k1>sOreya<k2>sOreya
{%Saureya%}¦ or {%saureyaka, as,%} m. the white Barleria
(a shrub bearing white flowers).
<LEND>

<L>52895<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrya<k2>sOrya
{%Saurya, as, ī, am,%}¦ of or belonging to the sun,
solar; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic of several Vedic Ṛṣis
(authors of hymns in the Ṛg-veda).
<LEND>

<L>52896<pc>1140-a<k1>sOryAyaRi<k2>sOryAyaRi
{%Sauryāyaṇi, is,%}¦ or {%sauryāyaṇin, ī,%} m. a de-
scendant of Saurya.
<LEND>

<L>52897<pc>1140-a<k1>sOraTa<k2>sOraTa
{#sOraTa#}¦ {%sauratha, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-ratha%}), a hero.
<LEND>

<L>52898<pc>1140-a<k1>sOraBa<k2>sOraBa
{#sOraBa#}¦ {%saurabha, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%su-rabhi%}),
fragrant; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.; ({%ī%}), f. a cow; a
daughter of the cow Su-rabhi; ({%am%}), n. fragrance;
saffron; N. of a commentary.
<LEND>

<L>52899<pc>1140-a<k1>sOraBaka<k2>sOraBaka
{%Saurabhaka, am,%}¦ n. a particular metre.
<LEND>

<L>52900<pc>1140-a<k1>sOraBeya<k2>sOraBeya
{%Saurabheya, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
Su-rabhi; ({%as%}), m. an ox; ({%ī%}), f. a cow; the daughter
of Su-rabhi. {%—Saurabheya-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a
Tantra work.
<LEND>

<L>52901<pc>1140-a<k1>sOraBya<k2>sOraBya
{%Saurabhya, am,%}¦ n. fragrance, sweet-scentedness,
odour; pleasingness, agreeableness, beauty; good cha-
racter, good reputation, fame; ({%as%}), m., N. of Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>52902<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrasa<k2>sOrasa
{#sOrasa#}¦ {%saurasa, as,%} m., N. of a Vihāra
founded by king Surendra.
<LEND>

<L>52903<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrasena<k2>sOrasena
{#sOrasena#}¦ {%saurasena, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
or district; ({%ī%}), f., scil. {%bhāṣā,%} the language spoken
in the above district; [cf. {%śaurasenī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52904<pc>1140-a<k1>sOraseya<k2>sOraseya
{#sOraseya#}¦ {%sauraseya, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-rasā%}), ‘off-
spring of Su-rasā,’ epithet of Skanda.
<LEND>

<L>52905<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrasya<k2>sOrasya
{%Saurasya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%su-rasa%}), well-flavoured-
ness, tastiness, savoriness.
<LEND>

<L>52906<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrAjya<k2>sOrAjya
{#sOrAjya#}¦ {%saurājya, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-rāja%}), good
government.
<LEND>

<L>52907<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrAzwra<k2>sOrAzwra
{#sOrAzwra#}¦ {%saurāṣṭra, as, ā%} or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%su-%}
{%rāṣṭra%}), belonging or relating to the district of
Surāt; ({%as%}), m. the district of Surāt; the resin of
the plant Boswellia Thurifera; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
people inhabiting part of Bhārata-varṣa; ({%ā%}), f.
a sort of fragrant earth, {%= tuvarī; (ī),%} f. a sort of
fragrant earth found in Surāt; ({%am%}), n. a kind of
amalgam of zinc and copper, bell-metal, brass. {%—Sau-%}
{%rāṣṭra-deśa, as,%} m. the country of Surāt. {%—Sau-%}
{%rāṣṭra-mṛttikā,%} f. Surāt earth.
<LEND>

<L>52908<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrAzwraka<k2>sOrAzwraka
{%Saurāṣṭraka, am,%}¦ n. a sort of white or bell-
metal; a kind of amalgam of five metals ({%= pañca-%}
{%loha%}).
<LEND>

<L>52909<pc>1140-a<k1>sOrAzwrika<k2>sOrAzwrika
{%Saurāṣṭrika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to the dis-
trict of Surāt; ({%am%}), n. a sort of poison, (according
[Page1140-b+ 68]
to some, of a kind of snake; according to others, a
vegetable or mineral.)
<LEND>

<L>52910<pc>1140-b<k1>sOlaBa<k2>sOlaBa
{#sOlaBa#}¦ {%saulabha, āni,%} n. pl. (fr. {%su-labha%}),
N. of particular Brāhmaṇas.
<LEND>

<L>52911<pc>1140-b<k1>sOlaBya<k2>sOlaBya
{%Saulabhya, am,%}¦ n. easiness of acquisition or at-
tainment; feasibility, facility.
<LEND>

<L>52912<pc>1140-b<k1>sOlvika<k2>sOlvika
{#sOlvika#}¦ {%saulvika, as,%} m. (for {%śaulvika%}), a
copper-smith.
<LEND>

<L>52913<pc>1140-b<k1>sOva<k2>sOva<h>1
{#sOva#} 1¦. {%sauva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sva%}), relating
to self or to one's own property; ({%am%}), n. an order,
edict (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>52914<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvagrAmika<k2>sOvagrAmika
{%Sauvagrāmika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sva-grāma%}), be-
longing or relating to one's own village.
<LEND>

<L>52915<pc>1140-b<k1>sOva<k2>sOva<h>2
{#sOva#} 2¦. {%sauva, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%svar%}), belong-
ing to heaven, being in heaven.
<LEND>

<L>52916<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvara<k2>sOvara
{#sOvara#}¦ {%sauvara, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%svara%}), relat-
ing to sound or to a note in music, produced or
existing in a note; treating of accents.
<LEND>

<L>52917<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvarcala<k2>sOvarcala
{#sOvarcala#}¦ {%sauvarcala, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%su-var-%}
{%cala%} or {%su-varcalā%}), belonging to Su-varcala or Su-
varcalā, coming from the country called Su-varcala;
({%am%}), n. sochal salt (prepared by fusing fossil salt
with myrobalan); natron, alkali.
<LEND>

<L>52918<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvarRa<k2>sOvarRa
{#sOvarRa#}¦ {%sauvarṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%su-varṇa%}),
made or consisting of gold, golden; weighing a Su-
varṇa.
<LEND>

<L>52919<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvarRaBedinI<k2>sOvarRaBedinI
{%Sauvarṇabhedinī,%}¦ f. the plant Priyaṅgu.
<LEND>

<L>52920<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvarRika<k2>sOvarRika
{%Sauvarṇika,%}¦ weighing a Su-varṇa (at the end of
a comp., e. g. {%catuḥ-s˚,%} weighing four Su-varṇas).
<LEND>

<L>52921<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvalya<k2>sOvalya
{#sOvalya#}¦ {%sauvalya, ās,%} m. pl., N. of a people
(also read {%sauśalya, sauśulya%}).
<LEND>

<L>52922<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvaSva<k2>sOvaSva
{#sOvaSva#}¦ {%sauvaśva, as,%} m. (fr. {%sv-aśva%}), a
descendant of Sv-aśva.
<LEND>

<L>52923<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvaSvi<k2>sOvaSvi
{%Sauvaśvi, is,%}¦ m. a patronymic from Sv-aśva.
<LEND>

<L>52924<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvaSvya<k2>sOvaSvya
{%Sauvaśvya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. the son of Sv-aśva; [cf.
Pāṇ. IV. 1, 171.]
<LEND>

<L>52925<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvastika<k2>sOvastika
{#sOvastika#}¦ {%sauvastika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%svasti%}),
benedictive, salutatory; ({%as%}), m. a family Brāhman
or priest.
<LEND>

<L>52926<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvADyAyika<k2>sOvADyAyika
{#sOvADyAyika#}¦ {%sauvādhyāyika, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%svādhyāya%}), belonging or relating to sacred study.
<LEND>

<L>52927<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvAstava<k2>sOvAstava
{#sOvAstava#}¦ {%sauvāstava, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%su +%}
{%vāstu%}), having a good site, pleasantly situated.
<LEND>

<L>52928<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvida<k2>sOvida
{#sOvida#}¦ {%sauvida, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-vida%}), a guard
or attendant on the women's apartments.
<LEND>

<L>52929<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvidalla<k2>sOvidalla
{#sOvidalla#}¦ {%sauvidalla%} or {%sauvidallaka, as,%} m.
(fr. {%su-vidalla%}), {%= sauvida%} above.
<LEND>

<L>52930<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvizwakfta<k2>sOvizwakfta
{#sOvizwakfta#}¦ {%sauviṣṭakṛta, as, ī, am,%} dedi-
cated or relating to Agni Sviṣṭa-kṛt.
<LEND>

<L>52931<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvIra<k2>sOvIra
{#sOvIra#}¦ {%sauvīra, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-vīra%}), the
fruit of the jujube; antimony; sour gruel; ({%as%}), m.,
N. of a district of country in the west of India con-
nected with the country along the Indus (perhaps
the district now inhabited by the Suirs); ({%ās%}), m. pl.
the people of Su-vīra; N. of a people inhabiting
part of Bhārata-varṣa. {%—Sauvīra-rāja, as,%} m. a
king of Sauvīra. {%—Sauvīra-sāra, am,%} n. antimony.
{%—Sauvīrāñjana (˚ra-añ˚), am,%} n. a kind of anti-
mony or collyrium.
<LEND>

<L>52932<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvIraka<k2>sOvIraka
{%Sauvīraka, as, ī, am,%}¦ of or belonging to Sauvīra;
({%as%}), m. an inhabitant of Sauvīra; a miserable Sau-
vīra; N. of Jayad-ratha; the jujube tree; ({%am%}), n.
sour barley-gruel, sour wheat-gruel.
<LEND>

<L>52933<pc>1140-b<k1>sOvIrya<k2>sOvIrya
{%Sauvīrya, am,%}¦ n. great heroism or fortitude.
<LEND>

<L>52934<pc>1140-b<k1>sOSIlya<k2>sOSIlya
{#sOSIlya#}¦ {%sauśīlya, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-śīla%}), ex-
cellence of disposition, good morals.
<LEND>

<L>52935<pc>1140-b<k1>sOSravasa<k2>sOSravasa
{#sOSravasa#}¦ {%sauśravasa, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-śravas%}),
celebrity, renown; ({%as%}), m. a patronymic.
<LEND>
[Page1140-c+ 74]

<L>52936<pc>1140-c<k1>sOSruta<k2>sOSruta
{#sOSruta#}¦ {%sauśruta, ās,%} m. pl. (fr. {%su-śruta%}),
N. of a family descended from Viśvā-mitra.
<LEND>

<L>52937<pc>1140-c<k1>sOzadmana<k2>sOzadmana
{#sOzadmana#}¦ {%sauṣadmana, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-ṣad-%}
{%man%}), a patronymic.
<LEND>

<L>52938<pc>1140-c<k1>sOzWava<k2>sOzWava
{#sOzWava#}¦ {%sauṣṭhava, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-ṣṭhu%}), ex-
cellence, superior goodness or beauty, extreme skil-
fulness, cleverness; excess (of anything); lightness,
suppleness, fleetness, a particular division of dramatic
composition.
<LEND>

<L>52939<pc>1140-c<k1>sOsnAtika<k2>sOsnAtika
{#sOsnAtika#}¦ {%sausnātika, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-snāta%}),
one who asks whether an ablution has been success-
ful or auspicious.
<LEND>

<L>52940<pc>1140-c<k1>sOhArda<k2>sOhArda
{#sOhArda#}¦ {%sauhārda, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-hṛd%}), good-
heartedness, affection, friendship, friendliness; ({%as%}),
m. the son of a friend. {%—Sauhārda-nidhi, is,%} m.
‘treasury of friendship,’ epithet of Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>52941<pc>1140-c<k1>sOhArdya<k2>sOhArdya
{%Sauhārdya, am,%}¦ n. friendship, affection.
<LEND>

<L>52942<pc>1140-c<k1>sOhfda<k2>sOhfda
{%Sauhṛda, am,%}¦ n. friendship, ({%ku-sauhṛda, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who is a bad friend); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people.
<LEND>

<L>52943<pc>1140-c<k1>sOhfdaya<k2>sOhfdaya
{%Sauhṛdaya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%su-hṛdaya%}), cordial
affection; friendship.
<LEND>

<L>52944<pc>1140-c<k1>sOhfdya<k2>sOhfdya
{%Sauhṛdya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%su-hṛd%}), friendship.
<LEND>

<L>52945<pc>1140-c<k1>sOhitya<k2>sOhitya
{#sOhitya#}¦ {%sauhitya, am,%} n. (fr. {%su-hita%}), sa-
tiety, satisfaction; fulness, completion; kindness,
friendliness.
<LEND>

<L>52946<pc>1140-c<k1>sOhotra<k2>sOhotra
{#sOhotra#}¦ {%sauhotra, as,%} m. (fr. {%su-hotra%}), a
patronymic of the Vedic Ṛṣi Aja-mīḍha; of Puru-
mīḍha.
<LEND>

<L>52947<pc>1140-c<k1>skand<k2>skand<h>1
{#skand#} 1¦. {%skand%} = rt. {%skund,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>52948<pc>1140-c<k1>skand<k2>skand<h>2
{#skand#} 2¦. {%skand%} (also written {%skandh%}), cl.
10. P. {%skandayati, skandāyati,%} &c., to
collect.
<LEND>

<L>52949<pc>1140-c<k1>skand<k2>skand<h>3
{#skand#} 3¦. {%skand%} (connected with rt. {%skund,%}
q. v.), cl. 1. P. {%skandati%} (also A. {%-te%}),
{%caskanda%} (2nd sing. {%caskanditha%} or {%caskanttha%}),
{%skantsyati, askadat%} or {%askāntsīt, skanttum,%} to
leap, jump, spring; to jump or spring upwards, rise,
mount, ascend; to raise (A., but in this sense re-
garded as a form of rt. {%skund%}); to jump down-
wards, drop, fall; to leap out, shoot out, burst out,
drop out, be poured out, be spilled, ooze; to go,
move, approach; to fall away; to perish (A.); to
become dry: Pass. {%skadyate,%} Perf. {%caskade%} or {%ca-%}
{%skande,%} Aor. {%askandi:%} Caus. {%skandayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%acaskandat,%} to pour out, effuse, shed, spill,
emit (seminal fluid); to omit, neglect; Desid. {%ci-%}
{%skantsati:%} Intens. {%canīskadyate, canīskanti;%} [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">σκάνδ-αλο-ν, σκανδάλη-θρο-ν, σχαστήρ,</lang> per-
haps <lang n="greek">σκαίρω, σκάζω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>scand-o, de-scend-o,</nsi> (ac-
cording to some also) <nsi>scateo;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>skeinnead,</nsi>
‘eruption, gushing forth.’]
<LEND>

<L>52950<pc>1140-c<k1>skanttf<k2>skanttf
{%Skanttṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who leaps, &c.; [cf.
{%vi-ṣkanttṛ.%}]
<LEND>

<L>52951<pc>1140-c<k1>skanttvA<k2>skanttvA
{%Skanttvā,%}¦ ind. having jumped, &c.; having de-
scended or fallen.
<LEND>

<L>52952<pc>1140-c<k1>skanda<k2>skanda
{%Skanda, as,%}¦ m. leaping; flowing; quicksilver;
N. of Kārttikeya (son of Śiva and god of war, see
{%kārttikeya%}); epithet of Śiva; a king, prince; the
body; the bank of a river; a clever or learned man
[cf. {%skandha%}]; a kind of disease (attacking children).
{%—Skanda-gupta, as,%} m., N. of a king of the Gupta
dynasty. {%—Skanda-purāṇa, am,%} n., N. of one of
the eighteen Purāṇas, (see {%skānda-purāṇa.%}) {%—Skan-%}
{%da-mātṛ, tā,%} f. the mother of Skanda, i. e. Durgā.
{%—Skanda-ṣaṣṭhī,%} f. a festival in honour of
Kārttikeya on the sixth day of the month Caitra.
{%—Skanda-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a commentator
(mentioned by Mādhavācārya; cf. {%skānda-bhā-%}
{%ṣya%}). {%—Skandāṃśaka (˚da-aṃ˚), as,%} m. quick-
silver. {%—Skandeśvara-tīrtha (˚da-īś˚), am,%} n., N.
of a Tīrtha. {%—Skandopaniṣad (˚da-up˚), t,%} f., N.
of an Upaniṣad.
<LEND>
[Page1141-a+ 79]

<L>52953<pc>1141-a<k1>skandaka<k2>skandaka
{%Skandaka, as,%}¦ m. one who leaps or springs; a
soldier.
<LEND>

<L>52954<pc>1141-a<k1>skandana<k2>skandana
{%Skandana, am,%}¦ n. emission, effusion; purging,
looseness; going, moving; drying up; the suppres-
sion of bleeding by cold applications.
<LEND>

<L>52955<pc>1141-a<k1>skandanIya<k2>skandanIya
{%Skandanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be emitted, to be
poured out or effused.
<LEND>

<L>52956<pc>1141-a<k1>skandayat<k2>skandayat
{%Skandayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ emitting, effusing, pour-
ing out, shedding; neglecting.
<LEND>

<L>52957<pc>1141-a<k1>skandita<k2>skandita
{%Skandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ emitted, effused, shed;
going.
<LEND>

<L>52958<pc>1141-a<k1>skandin<k2>skandin
{%Skandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ leaping, jumping; bursting
out; effusing.
<LEND>

<L>52959<pc>1141-a<k1>skanna<k2>skanna
{%Skanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen, fallen down, descended;
oozed out, trickled down; emitted, sprinkled; gone;
dried up.
<LEND>

<L>52960<pc>1141-a<k1>skandilAcArya<k2>skandilAcArya
{#skandilAcArya#}¦ {%skandilācārya (˚la-āc˚), as,%}
m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>52961<pc>1141-a<k1>skanD<k2>skanD
{#skanD#}¦ {%skandh%} (= rt. 2. {%skand%}), cl. 10. P.
{%skandhayati,%}  &c., to collect.
<LEND>

<L>52962<pc>1141-a<k1>skanDa<k2>skanDa
{#skanDa#}¦ {%skandha, as,%} m. (according to Uṇā-
di-s. IV. 206. fr. rt. 3. {%skand,%} ‘to rise’), the shoulder,
upper part of the back or the region from the neck
to the shoulder-joint (in men and animals); the
body; the stem or trunk of a tree (especially that
part of the stem where the branches begin); a large
branch or bough; a branch or department of human
knowledge (five of which are enumerated); a sec-
tion, chapter, division of a book; a division of an
army, form of military array; war, battle; a body of
men &c., troop, multitude, quantity, (see {%kari-sk˚,%}
{%nara-sk˚, turaṅga-sk˚%}); the five objects of sense,
(see {%viṣaya%}); the elements of being or the five
forms of mundane consciousness (according to the
Buddhist philosophy); the regalia or other articles
used at the coronation of a king (as a jar filled with
holy water, a parasol, a chowri, &c.); a king, prince;
a sage, wise man, seer, teacher; equality of height
in the humps of a pair of draught oxen; a road,
path, way; an engagement, agreement; a sort of
metre; a heron; N. of a poet; {%= bhadrādi%} (accord-
ing to Śabda-k.); ({%ā%}), f. a branch; a creeper; [cf.
perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">σπάθη:</lang> Lat. <nsi>scapula:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>scul-</nsi>
<nsi>dor, sculder, scoldr:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>scultra, sculdra,</nsi>
<nsi>scultarra:</nsi> Armor. <nsi>skoaz:</nsi> Cambro-Brit. <nsi>ysgwyz;</nsi>
perhaps Hib. <nsi>guala</nsi> for <nsi>sguada</nsi> or <nsi>sguana.</nsi>] {%—Skan-%}
{%dha-cāpa, as,%} m. ‘shoulder-bow,’ a sort of yoke or
pole made of bamboo with a sling attached to either end
for carrying burdens {%(= śikya)%}. {%—Skandha-ja, as,%} m.
a tree growing from a principal stem (such as the gum
olibanum tree &c.). {%—Skandha-taru, as,%} m. the cocoa-
nut tree. {%—Skandha-deśa, as,%} m. ‘shoulder-region,’
the shoulder; the part about the shoulders or withers of
an elephant where the driver sits. {%—Skandha-pari-%}
{%nirvāṇa, am,%} n. the annihilation of the elements
of being (with Buddhists). {%—Skandha-phala, as,%}
m. ‘having fruit at the top,’ the cocoa-nut tree; the
Vilva; the glomerous fig-tree. {%—Skandha-bandha-%}
{%nā,%} f. a sort of fennel, Anethum Panmorium. {%—Skan-%}
{%dha-mallaka, as,%} m. a heron. {%—Skandha-ruha, as,%}
m. ‘branch-growing,’ the Indian fig-tree. {%—Skandha-%}
{%vāha%} or {%skandha-vāhaka, as,%} m. ‘carrying on the
shoulders,’ an ox trained to carry burdens, pack-bullock.
{%—Skandha-śākhā,%} f. a principal branch, the forked
branch which issues from the upper stem of a tree.
{%—Skandha-śṛṅga, as,%} m. ‘branch-horned,’ a buf-
falo. {%—Skandha-skandha, as,%} m. every shoulder.
{%—Skandhāgni (˚dha-ag˚), is,%} or {%skandhānala%}
{%(˚dha-an˚), as,%} m. ‘trunk-conflagration,’ the trunk
of a tree or any large piece of timber set on fire by
attrition &c. {%—Skandhāvāra (˚dha-āv˚), as,%} m.
an army or a division of it attached to the person of
a king; a royal capital, royal residence; a camp.
{%—Skandhopaneya (˚dha-up˚), as, ā, am,%} to be
carried on the shoulders; ({%as%}), m. a form of peace-
offering in which fruit or grain is presented as a
mark of submission.
<LEND>

<L>52963<pc>1141-a<k1>skanDaka<k2>skanDaka
{%Skandhaka, am,%}¦ n. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>52964<pc>1141-a<k1>skanDas<k2>skanDas
{%Skandhas, as,%}¦ n. the shoulder; the trunk of a
[Page1141-b+ 78]
tree. {%—Skandho-grīvī,%} f. a kind of metre (the first,
third, and fourth Pādas of which consist of eight
syllables each, and the second of twelve syllables, {%=%}
{%nyaṅku-sāriṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>52965<pc>1141-b<k1>skanDika<k2>skanDika
{%Skandhika, as,%}¦ m. an ox trained to carry burdens
({%= skandha-vāha%}).
<LEND>

<L>52966<pc>1141-b<k1>skanDin<k2>skanDin
{%Skandhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having shoulders, having
branches, having a branched stem; ({%ī%}), m. a tree.
<LEND>

<L>52967<pc>1141-b<k1>skanDya<k2>skanDya
{%Skandhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the shoulders.
<LEND>

<L>52968<pc>1141-b<k1>skanna<k2>skanna
{#skanna#}¦ {%skanna.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>52969<pc>1141-b<k1>skamB<k2>skamB
{#skamB#}¦ {%skambh%} or {%skabh%} (probably a mere
phonetic variety of rt. {%stambh,%} q. v.;
in native lists written {%skanbh%}), cl. 1. A. {%skambhate,%}
{%caskambhe,%} &c.; cl. 5. 9. P. {%skabhnoti, skabhnāti,%}
&c., {%skambhitum,%} to make firm, establish, to sup-
port, prop up (Ved.); to create; to stop, hinder,
impede, restrain, block, obstruct: Caus. {%skabhayati%}
or {%skambhayati%} (Ved. also {%skabhāyati%}), &c., to
establish, support; [cf. according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">σκῆπτρον,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σκήπτω, σκίμπτω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>scabellum, scam-</nsi>
<nsi>num;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ga-skapjan, ga-skafts;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>scapen, sceapan, sceaft;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>scafan, sca-</nsi>
<nsi>fon, scoppon,</nsi> ‘to stop.’]
<LEND>

<L>52970<pc>1141-b<k1>skabDa<k2>skabDa
{%Skabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ propped, supported; stopped.
<LEND>

<L>52971<pc>1141-b<k1>skaBita<k2>skaBita
{%Skabhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. supported, fixed, fast-
ened.
<LEND>

<L>52972<pc>1141-b<k1>skaBIyas<k2>skaBIyas
{%Skabhīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ Ved. supporting more,
supporting firmly.
<LEND>

<L>52973<pc>1141-b<k1>skamBa<k2>skamBa
{%Skambha, as,%}¦ m. support, prop, fulcrum; ‘the sup-
porter, propper,’ N. of a Vedic deity, (he is identified
in Atharva-veda X. 7. with the supreme Being him-
self, and is there represented, like Puruṣa, as co-
extensive with the universe, and comprehending
every existing thing in his members; the gods and
all other entities, and even such abstract conceptions
as faith, truth, &c., standing to him in the relation
of branches to a tree; in X. 8. he is described as a
sort of universal fulcrum as well as a universally dif-
fused essence, the sky and the earth being said to
be supported by him, and ‘all which has soul, which
breathes, which winks’ being identified with him;
he is even called {%jyeṣṭham brahma,%} which some
think may mean not only the highest divine essence,
but a kind of preæval Veda, of which the existing
Vedas are merely branches.) {%—Skambha-deṣṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. whose gifts are firm, stable in giving
(said of the Maruts).
<LEND>

<L>52974<pc>1141-b<k1>skamBana<k2>skamBana
{%Skambhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of supporting, a sup-
port, prop.
<LEND>

<L>52975<pc>1141-b<k1>skAnda<k2>skAnda
{#skAnda#}¦ {%skānda, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%skanda%}), relat-
ing to Skanda or Kārttikeya; relating to Śiva; ({%am%}),
n. the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Skānda-purāṇa, am,%} n.,
N. of one of the eighteen Purāṇas (also called
{%skanda-purāṇa;%} it is supposed to be lost or only
to exist in fragments, the most celebrated of which is
the Kāśī-khaṇḍa, which gives a description of the
temples or Liṅgas of Śiva near Benares, with direc-
tions for worshipping that god, and various legends
chiefly intended to glorify Kāśī and exalt the sanctity
of its shrines). {%—Skānda-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a
commentary.
<LEND>

<L>52976<pc>1141-b<k1>sku<k2>sku
{#sku#}¦ {%sku,%} cl. 5. 9. P. A. {%skunoti, skunāti,%}
{%skunute, skunīte, cuskāva, cuskuve, sko-%}
{%ṣyati, -te, askauṣīt, askoṣṭa, skotum,%} to go by
leaps, jump; to raise, lift; to cover, overspread; to
approach: Caus. {%skāvayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%acuska-%}
{%vat:%} Desid. {%cuskūṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%coskūyate%}
(Ved. {%coṣkūyate%}), {%coskoti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σκευ-ή, σκεῦ-ος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σκευά-ζ-ω, σκῦ-το-ς, κύ-τ-ος, ἐπι-σκύ-νιο-ν:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>ob-scu-ru-s, scu-tu-m, cu-ti-s, corium, cavere,</nsi>
<nsi>cautus, causa:</nsi> probably Angl. Sax. <nsi>scuva, scoh,</nsi>
<nsi>sceo, scunian, scawian, sceawian:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>skoh:</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>scur, skiuhan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>52977<pc>1141-b<k1>cozkUyamARa<k2>cozkUyamARa
{%Coṣkūyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. bestowing, giv-
ing, (Sāy. {%= prayacchat,%} Ṛg-veda I. 33, 3, {%= da-%}
{%dat,%} Nirukta VI. 22.)
<LEND>

<L>52978<pc>1141-b<k1>skund<k2>skund
{#skund#}¦ {%skund%} (connected with rt. 3. {%skand,%}
q. v.; cf. rt. {%sku%}), cl. 1. A. {%skundate, %}
[Page1141-c+ 76]
{%caskunde,%} &c., {%skunditum,%} to jump, go by leaps
or jumps; to raise, lift, (see rt. 3. {%skand.%})
<LEND>

<L>52979<pc>1141-c<k1>skumB<k2>skumB
{#skumB#}¦ {%skumbh%} ({{connectedwith->connected with||20210422|Dr. Sampada Savardekar|https://github.com/sanskrit-lexicon/csl-corrections/issues/60|}} rt. {%skambh;%}
in native lists regarded as a Sautra rt.
and written {%skunbh%}), cl. 5. 9. P. {%skubhnoti, skubh-%}
{%nāti,%} &c., to hold, stop, hinder.
<LEND>

<L>52980<pc>1141-c<k1>skowikA<k2>skowikA
{#skowikA#}¦ {%skoṭikā,%} f. a kind of bird (pro-
bably a sort of wagtail, {%= khañjanikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>52981<pc>1141-c<k1>sKad<k2>sKad
{#sKad#}¦ {%skhad%} [cf. rt. {%kṣad%}], cl. 1. A. {%skha-%}
{%date, caskhade, skhaditum,%} to cut, cut
or tear to pieces; to destroy; to hurt, injure, kill;
to rout, defeat; to harass, fatigue, exhaust; to make
firm; to be firm: Caus. {%skhadayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%aciskhadat.%}
<LEND>

<L>52982<pc>1141-c<k1>sKadana<k2>sKadana
{%Skhadana, am,%}¦ n. cutting or tearing to pieces;
the act of hurting or killing, injury; harassing, de-
feating, discomfiting; firmness.
<LEND>

<L>52983<pc>1141-c<k1>sKal<k2>sKal
{#sKal#}¦ {%skhal%} (connected with rts. {%chal,%}
{%sphal%}), cl. 1. P. {%skhalati, caskhāla,%}
{%skhaliṣyati, askhālīt, skhalitum,%} to stumble,
tumble, fall, fall down, trip, slip; to totter, waver;
to fall or deviate from the right course; to make
mistakes, blunder, err, fail; to make mistakes in
speaking, stammer, falter, stutter, hesitate; to drop,
drip, trickle; to go, move; disappear; to gather,
collect: Pass. {%skhalyate,%} Perf. {%caskhale%} (Kirāt.
XVIII. 6), Aor. {%askhāli:%} Caus. {%skhalayati%} or
{%skhālayati,%} &c., to cause to stumble, trip up; [cf.
Lat. <nsi>scelus, culpa;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>skula, skulan;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>sceal, sculan, scyld.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>52984<pc>1141-c<k1>sKalat<k2>sKalat
{%Skhalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ stumbling, tripping; blun-
dering; stuttering; dropping, trickling. {%—Skhalad-%}
{%vākya, as, ā, am,%} making mistakes in speaking,
stammering, faltering, blundering. {%—Skhalan-mati,%}
{%is, is, i,%} erring in judgment, weak-minded.
<LEND>

<L>52985<pc>1141-c<k1>sKalana<k2>sKalana
{%Skhalana, am,%}¦ n. the act of stumbling, slipping,
tripping, falling, tottering; falling or deviating from
the right course; blundering, an error, mistake,
blunder; blundering in speech or pronunciation;
dropping, dripping, trickling, effusion, emission;
dashing or clashing together, shock, collision; mutual
striking or rubbing together.
<LEND>

<L>52986<pc>1141-c<k1>sKalita<k2>sKalita
{%Skhalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stumbled, slipped, tripped,
fallen; dropped down; shaking, fluctuating, waver-
ing, tottering, unsteady; erring; stuttering, stammer-
ing, faltering, hesitating; intoxicated, drunk; agi-
tated, disturbed; dropped, effused, emitted; trickling
down; interrupted, stopped, obstructed; confounded;
gone; ({%am%}), n. tumbling, falling; deviation from
the right course; blunder, fault, error, sin; deceit,
treachery; circumvention, stratagem (in war). {%—Skha-%}
{%lita-subhagam,%} ind. slipping or tripping along plea-
santly, dashing or flowing along in a charming manner
(said of a stream).
<LEND>

<L>52987<pc>1141-c<k1>sKalitvA<k2>sKalitvA
{%Skhalitvā,%}¦ ind. having stumbled; having slipped
or tripped.
<LEND>

<L>52988<pc>1141-c<k1>sKuq<k2>sKuq
{#sKuq#}¦ {%skhuḍ%} (= rts. {%sthuḍ, thuḍ%}), cl. 6. P.
{%skhuḍati,%} to cover.
<LEND>

<L>52989<pc>1141-c<k1>stak<k2>stak
{#stak#}¦ {%stak,%} cl. 1. P. {%stakati, tastāka, sta-%}
{%kitum,%} to resist; to strike against, repel:
Caus. {%stakayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%atiṣṭakat.%}
<LEND>

<L>52990<pc>1141-c<k1>stan<k2>stan
{#stan#}¦ {%stan,%} cl. 1. P. {%stanati, tastāna, sta-%}
{%nitum,%} to sound, make a sound, resound,
reverberate; to groan, breathe hard, sigh; cl. 10. P.
{%stanayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%atastanat,%} to thunder:
Caus. {%stanayati%} (or {%stānayati%} according to some),
{%-yitum,%} Aor. {%atiṣṭanat%} (or {%atistanat%} according
to some), to cause to resound: Desid. {%tistaniṣati:%}
Intens, {%taṃstanyate, taṃstanti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">στέν-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στενάχ-ω, στόνο-ς, στένο-μαι, στείνομαι, στενό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στεινό-ς, στεῖνος, Στέν-τωρ:</lang> Lat. <nsi>tono, tonitru:</nsi>
Old Norse <nsi>stynija, styn:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>stunôd,</nsi> ‘a
sigh;’ <nsi>thonar, donar,</nsi> ‘thunder:’ Old Sax. <nsi>thunar:</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>thunor:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>sten-e-ti:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>sten-a-ti,</nsi>
‘to groan.’]
<LEND>

<L>52991<pc>1141-c<k1>stana<k2>stana
{%Stana, as,%}¦ m. the breast of a woman, (probably
[Page1142-a+ 79]
so called from the noise made in breathing); the
nipple of the breast; an udder or dug or breast of
any female animal, (at the end of an adj. comp. the
fem. may end in {%ā%} or {%ī,%} according to Vopa-deva IV.
17, but the more usual form is in {%ī.%}) {%—Stana-%}
{%kalaśa, as, am,%} m. n. ‘goblet-like breast,’ a
woman's breast. {%—Stana-kuṭmala, am,%} n. ‘breast-
bud,’ a woman's breast. {%—Stana-taṭa, as,%} m. the
slope of the breasts, (see {%taṭa.%}) {%—Stanan-dhama,%}
{%as, ā,%} m. f. {%= stanan-dhaya%} below. {%—Stanan-%}
{%dhaya, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} breast-sucking, sucking at
the breast; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. an infant; a suckling.
{%—Stana-pa, as, ā, am,%} or {%stana-pā, ās, ās, am,%}
or {%stana-pāyaka, as, ikā, am,%} or {%stana-pāyin, ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} breast-sucking, sucking the breast or udder;
an infant at the breast, suckling. {%—Stana-pāna, am,%}
n. the drinking or sucking of the breast. {%—Stana-%}
{%bhara, as,%} m. ‘breast-possessing,’ a man with a
breast like a woman's. {%—Stana-bhava, as, ā, am,%}
being on the breast; ({%as%}), m. a particular posture
in sexual union. {%—Stana-maṇḍala, am,%} n. ‘breast-
orb,’ a woman's breast. {%—Stana-madhya%} or {%stana-%}
{%mukha, as,%} m. ‘breast-point,’ a nipple. {%—Stana-%}
{%vṛnta, as,%} m. ‘breast-stalk,’ a nipple. {%—Stana-%}
{%śikhā,%} f. ‘breast-point,’ a nipple. {%—Stanāṃśuka%}
{%(˚na-aṃ˚), am,%} n. ‘breast-mantle,’ a cloth covering
the bosom. {%—Stanāgra (˚na-ag˚), as,%} m. ‘breast-
point,’ a nipple. {%—Stanāṅga-rāga (˚na-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
paint or pigment on the breasts (of women). {%—Sta-%}
{%nāntara (˚na-an˚), am,%} n. ‘breast-interval,’ the
heart (as situated under the centre bone of the
sternum); a mark on the breast (supposed to indi-
cate future widowhood). {%—Stanā-bhuja, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. feeding or nourishing with the udder (said of
cows). {%—Stanābhoga (˚na-ābh˚), as,%} m. fulness or
swelling of the breast, the expanding of the bosom
of a young woman; the circumference or orb of the
breast; a man with large breasts like those of a
woman.
<LEND>

<L>52992<pc>1142-a<k1>stanaTa<k2>stanaTa
{%Stanatha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. thunder.
<LEND>

<L>52993<pc>1142-a<k1>stanana<k2>stanana
{%Stanana, am,%}¦ n. sounding, sound, noise; the
rumbling of clouds; groaning; breathing hard.
<LEND>

<L>52994<pc>1142-a<k1>stanayat<k2>stanayat
{%Stanayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ thundering. {%—Stanayad-%}
{%amās,%} m. pl. (see {%amā,%} p. 74, col. 3), Ved. roaring
together, sounding in concert (said of the Maruts).
<LEND>

<L>52995<pc>1142-a<k1>stanayitnu<k2>stanayitnu
{%Stanayitnu, us,%}¦ m. thundering, thunder, the mut-
tering of clouds; a cloud; lightning; sickness;
death; a kind of grass {%(= mustaka)%}. {%—Stanayitnu-%}
{%ghoṣa, as, ā, am,%} loud as thunder.
<LEND>

<L>52996<pc>1142-a<k1>stanita<k2>stanita
{%Stanita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, sounding; thun-
dering; ({%am%}), n. the rattling of thunder, rumbling
of thunder-clouds; thunder, noise; the noise of
clapping the hands. {%—Stanita-phala, as,%} m. the
plant Vikaṇṭaka.
<LEND>

<L>52997<pc>1142-a<k1>stanya<k2>stanya
{%Stanya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%stana%}), ‘that which is to be
drawn from the breast,’ mother's milk, milk. {%—Sta-%}
{%nya-tyāga, as,%} m. leaving off the mother's milk,
weaning. {%—Stanya-tyāga-mātraka, as, ā, am,%}
only just weaned. {%—Stanya-pāyin, ī, inī, i,%} or
{%stanya-bhuj, k, k, k,%} sucking or feeding on milk,
sucking at the breast.
<LEND>

<L>52998<pc>1142-a<k1>stabDa<k2>stabDa
{#stabDa#}¦ {%stabdha,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>52999<pc>1142-a<k1>staBa<k2>staBa
{#staBa#}¦ {%stabha, as,%} m. a goat; a ram; [cf.
{%stubha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53000<pc>1142-a<k1>stam<k2>stam
{#stam#}¦ {%stam%} (= rt. 1. {%sam%}), cl. 1. P. {%stamati,%}
{%tastāma, stamitu,%} to be confused or
agitated; (according to some) not to be confused,
see rt. 1. {%sam;%} cl. 10. P. {%stamayati,%} to be agitated,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>53001<pc>1142-a<k1>stamba<k2>stamba
{#stamba#}¦ {%stamba, as,%} m. (in Uṇādi-s. IV. 96.
said to be fr. rt. 1. {%sthā;%} probably connected with
{%stambha,%} q. v.), a clump of grass, &c.; a sheaf of
corn; any clump or bunch or cluster; a bush,
thicket; a shrub or plant having no decided stem
(such as the Jhiṇṭī or Barleria); the post to which
an elephant is tied; any post or pillar, (in this and
the next sense probably for {%stambha,%} but said by
some to be neut.); stupefaction, insensibility; a
mountain; [cf. Angl. Sax. <nsi>stapel.</nsi>] {%—Stamba-kari, %}
[Page1142-b+ 80]
{%is,%} m. ‘forming clusters,’ corn, rice. {%—Stamba-kāra,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} making a clump, forming a cluster.
{%—Stamba-ghana, as,%} m. ‘clump-destroyer,’ a small
hoe for weeding or eradicating clumps of grass, &c.;
a sickle for cutting corn; a basket for holding the
heads of wild rice, &c. {%—Stamba-ghāta = stamba-%}
{%ghna%} below. {%—Stamba-ghna, as, ī, am,%} clump-
destroying, weed-destroying; ({%as%}), m. a hoe or
sickle. {%—Stamba-ja, as, ā, am,%} growing on a
clump or bush; growing on a post. {%—Stamba-pur,%}
{%ūr,%} f., N. of the city Tāmalipta, q. v. {%—Stamba-%}
{%mitra, as,%} m., N. of the author of Ṛg-veda X.
142, 7, 8 (having the patronymic Śārṅga). {%—Stam-%}
{%ba-han%} or {%stamba-hanana, am, ī,%} n. f. ‘clump-
destroyer,’ a hoe for eradicating weeds; a sickle for
cutting corn. {%—Stambe-rama, as,%} m. ‘delighting
in clumps of high grass,’ an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>53002<pc>1142-b<k1>stamB<k2>stamB
{#stamB#}¦ {%stambh%} or {%stabh%} (connected with
rt. {%skambh,%} q. v.; in native lists written
{%stanbh%}), cl. 5. 9. P. {%stabhnoti, stabhnāti,%} (2nd
sing. Impv. {%stabhāna%}), {%tastambha, astambhīt%} or
{%astabhat, stambhitum%} (originally perhaps ‘to
stamp’), to fix firmly, make firm, make stiff or im-
movable; to paralyze, stupefy; to prop, support, prop
up, sustain; to create (Ved.); to stop, arrest, suppress,
oppose, hinder; cl. 1. A. {%stambhate, tastambhe%} (ac-
cording to some also {%ṭaṣṭambhe, ṣṭambhate%}), &c.,
to become fixed or immovable, to become senseless
or insensible, become stiff or rigid: Pass. {%stabhyate,%}
Aor. {%astambhi:%} Caus. {%stambhayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%atastambhat,%} to fix, make firm or immovable, to
make stiff or rigid, stupefy, paralyze, stun; to prop,
support; stop, arrest, bring to a stand, suppress, re-
strain: Desid. {%tistambhiṣati:%} Intens. {%tāstabhyate;%}
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">στέμφ-υλο-ν, ἀ-στεμφ-ής, στέμβ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στεμβ-άζω, στοβέ-ω, στοβάζ-ω, στείβ-ω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>stupeo,</nsi>
<nsi>stipes;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>stamph, stamphon, stab;</nsi>
Mod. Germ. <nsi>stampfen;</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>stofn.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53003<pc>1142-b<k1>stabDa<k2>stabDa
{%Stabdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed, firm, stiff, rigid, hard,
immovable, motionless, numb, paralyzed, senseless,
stupid, dull, insensible, indifferent; stopped, brought
to a stand, blocked up; obstinate, stubborn, hard-
hearted; coarse; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>stīf;</nsi> Mod. Germ.
<nsi>steif;</nsi> Engl. <nsi>stiff.</nsi>] {%—Stabdha-karṇa, as, ī, am,%}
‘stiff-eared,’ having the ears fixed, pricking up the
ears. {%—Stabdha-tā,%} f. or {%stabdha-tva, am,%} n.
fixedness, rigidity, immobility, steadiness, stupor,
stubbornness. {%—Stabdha-roman, ā,%} m. ‘stiff-
bristled,’ a boar, hog. {%—Stabdha-locana, as, ā, am,%}
having fixed or unwinking eyes (applied as an epi-
thet to the gods who are supposed to be known by
this characteristic). {%—Stabdhī-karaṇa, am,%} n. the
act of making stiff, stiffening, making rigid, para-
lyzing. {%—Stabdhī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made stiff,
stiffened, rigid, paralyzed. {%—Stabdhī-kṛtya,%} ind.
having stiffened or made rigid. {%—Stabdhī-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. the becoming stiffened or rigid, torpidity.
<LEND>

<L>53004<pc>1142-b<k1>stabDi<k2>stabDi
{%Stabdhi, is,%}¦ f. fixedness, hardness, rigidity, firm-
ness, immobility, stupor, numbness, obstinacy.
<LEND>

<L>53005<pc>1142-b<k1>stabDvA<k2>stabDvA
{%Stabdhvā,%}¦ ind. {%= stambhitvā.%}
<LEND>

<L>53006<pc>1142-b<k1>staBita<k2>staBita
{%Stabhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= stabdha.%}
<LEND>

<L>53007<pc>1142-b<k1>staBu<k2>staBu
{%Stabhu,%}¦ n. {%= stambhana.%}
<LEND>

<L>53008<pc>1142-b<k1>staBUya<k2>staBUya
{%Stabhūya%}¦ (fr. {%stabhu%}), Nom. A. {%stabhūyate,%}
&c., Ved. to desire to support.
<LEND>

<L>53009<pc>1142-b<k1>staBUyamAna<k2>staBUyamAna
{%Stabhūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. desiring to
support, upholding.
<LEND>

<L>53010<pc>1142-b<k1>staByamAna<k2>staByamAna
{%Stabhyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being made firm.
<LEND>

<L>53011<pc>1142-b<k1>stamBa<k2>stamBa
{%Stambha, as,%}¦ m. fixedness, stiffness, rigidity;
immobility, a prop, support, fulcrum; a pillar,
column, post; a stem, stock, trunk; insensibility,
stupor, stupefaction (from fear, joy, grief, &c.);
numbness, paralysis, torpor; stupidity, coldness, want
of feeling or excitability; stoppage, obstruction, hin-
drance; suppression; a particular faculty acquired by
magical means, the supernatural suppression or ar-
resting of any feeling or force (as of hunger, thirst,
or the forces of fire, water, &c.; this is one of the
{%ṣaṭ-karman%} described as taught in the Tantras,
see p. 1032, col. 3; many varieties of Stambha are
enumerated, e. g. {%jala-st˚, vahni-st˚, vāyu-st˚, %}
[Page1142-c+ 75]
{%kṣut-st˚, pipāsā-st˚, nidrā-st˚,%} and in the case of
the first of these one effect of this faculty is to enable
a person to walk on the waters); N. of a Ṛṣi;
[cf. Angl. Sax. <nsi>steb.</nsi>] {%—Stambha-kara, as, ī, am,%}
causing obstruction; causing stiffness, paralyzing;
({%as%}), m. a fence, railing, &c. {%—Stambha-kāraṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. cause of obstruction or impediment. {%—Stam-%}
{%bha-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a place. {%—Stambha-pūjā,%}
f. worship of the posts of the temporary pavilions
erected for marriages or other festive occasions.
{%—Stambhī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become
a post. {%—Stambhotkīrṇa (˚bha-ut˚), as, ā, am,%}
carved out of a post of wood (as a statue).
<LEND>

<L>53012<pc>1142-c<k1>stamBaka<k2>stamBaka
{%Stambhaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ fixing, propping, stop-
ping, restraining.
<LEND>

<L>53013<pc>1142-c<k1>stamBakin<k2>stamBakin
{%Stambhakin, ī,%}¦ m. a kind of musical instrument
covered with leather.
<LEND>

<L>53014<pc>1142-c<k1>stamBana<k2>stamBana
{%Stambhana, am,%}¦ n. the act of fixing firmly,
making stiff or hard or rigid, making like a post,
({%rambhā-stambhana,%} the turning of the nymph
Rambhā into a pillar by the curse of Viśvā-mitra, see
Rāmāyaṇa I. 64); paralyzing, stupefying, stunning,
benumbing; propping or supporting, holding up-
right; stopping, making immovable, hindering,
arresting, bringing to a stand, suppression, obstruc-
tion; stopping of hemorrhage, staunching the flow
of blood; anything employed as a styptic or astrin-
gent; a particular magical act or faculty, suppression
of any of the bodily feelings or forces of nature by
supernatural means, (see under {%stambha; jala-%}
{%stambhana = jala-stambha%}); ({%as, ī, am%}), fixing
immovably, paralyzing, supporting, stopping; ({%as%}),
m. ‘the paralyzer,’ epithet of one of the five arrows
of Kāma-deva, (the names of the other four are
Unmādana, Śoṣaṇa, Tāpana, and Sammohana.)
<LEND>

<L>53015<pc>1142-c<k1>stamBanIya<k2>stamBanIya
{%Stambhanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be fixed firmly; to
be propped; to be stopped.
<LEND>

<L>53016<pc>1142-c<k1>stamBita<k2>stamBita
{%Stambhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed firmly; stiffened,
benumbed, paralyzed, stupefied, senseless; propped
up, supported; stopped, brought to a standstill, sup-
pressed; staunched; restrained, constrained. {%—Stam-%}
{%bhita-rambha, am,%} n., N. of a particular Troṭaka
or drama; [cf. {%rambhā-stambhana%} above.] {%—Stam-%}
{%bhita-vāṣpa-vṛtti, is, is, i,%} suppressing the flow
of tears. {%—Stambhitāśru (˚ta-aś˚), us, us, u,%} one
who has suppressed his tears.
<LEND>

<L>53017<pc>1142-c<k1>stamBitvA<k2>stamBitvA
{%Stambhitvā,%}¦ ind. having fixed, having stopped,
having suppressed.
<LEND>

<L>53018<pc>1142-c<k1>stamBin<k2>stamBin
{%Stambhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ supporting; stopping, re-
straining; ({%inī%}), f. one of the five Dhāraṇās or
elements (= earth, see {%bhramaṇī%}).
<LEND>

<L>53019<pc>1142-c<k1>stara<k2>stara
{#stara#}¦ {%stara, staraṇa, stariman,%} &c. See
p. 1144, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53020<pc>1142-c<k1>stava<k2>stava
{#stava#}¦ {%stava, stavaka,%} &c. See p. 1143.
<LEND>

<L>53021<pc>1142-c<k1>stavaraka<k2>stavaraka
{#stavaraka#}¦ {%stavaraka, as,%} m. (doubtful), a
fence, railing ({%= āvaraka%}).
<LEND>

<L>53022<pc>1142-c<k1>stAmu<k2>stAmu
{#stAmu#}¦ {%stāmu, us,%} m. ({%= stotṛ,%} Naigh. III.
16), Ved. a praiser, worshipper.
<LEND>

<L>53023<pc>1142-c<k1>stAva<k2>stAva
{#stAva#}¦ {%stāva.%} See p. 1143, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53024<pc>1142-c<k1>sti<k2>sti
{#sti#}¦ {%sti, sti-pā.%} See under rt. {%styai.%}
<LEND>

<L>53025<pc>1142-c<k1>stiG<k2>stiG
{#stiG#}¦ {%stigh,%} cl. 5. A. {%stighnute, tiṣ-%}
{%ṭighe, asteghiṣṭa, steghitum,%} to as-
cend; to assail: Caus. {%steghayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%atiṣṭighat:%} Desid. {%tistighiṣate%} or {%tisteghiṣate:%}
Intens. {%teṣṭighyate, teṣṭegdhi;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">στείχ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἔ-στιχ-ον, στίχο-ς, στοῖχο-ς, στιχάο-μαι:</lang> Goth.
<nsi>steig-a, staig-a,</nsi> ‘a path:’ Old Germ. <nsi>steg-a,</nsi> ‘an
ascent, path:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>steig-en,</nsi> ‘to rise:’ Slav.
<nsi>stiz-a,</nsi> ‘a path:’ Lith. <nsi>staig-ù-s,</nsi> ‘quick;’ <nsi>staigiō-s,</nsi>
‘to hasten:’ Hib. <nsi>staighre,</nsi> ‘a step, stair.’]
<LEND>

<L>53026<pc>1142-c<k1>stip<k2>stip
{#stip#}¦ {%stip%} (also written {%step%}), cl. 1. A.
{%stepate, tiṣṭipe,%} &c., to ooze, drip,
drop.
<LEND>

<L>53027<pc>1142-c<k1>stiBi<k2>stiBi
{#stiBi#}¦ {%stibhi, is,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 121. fr. rt. {%stambh%}), an obstacle, obstruction;
[Page1143-a+ 78]
the ocean; a cluster, clump, bunch ({%= phala-sta-%}
{%vaka;%} cf. {%stamba%}).
<LEND>

<L>53028<pc>1143-a<k1>stimBi<k2>stimBi
{%Stimbhi, is,%}¦ m. {%= stibhi%} above (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>53029<pc>1143-a<k1>stim<k2>stim
{#stim#}¦ {%stim%} or {%stīm%} (connected with rt.
{%tim%}), cl. 4. P. {%stimyati, stīmyati,%}
{%tiṣṭema, tiṣṭīma,%} &c., to be or become wet or
moist; to become fixed or immovable.
<LEND>

<L>53030<pc>1143-a<k1>stimita<k2>stimita
{%Stimita, as, ā, am,%}¦ [cf. {%timita%}], wet, moist;
still, motionless, unmoved, steady, fixed, rigid (as
the eye), immovable, benumbed; tender, soft;
gratified, pleased; ({%am%}), n. moisture. {%—Stimita-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. steadiness, fixedness, stillness, absence of
motion, absorption. {%—Stimita-vāyu, us,%} m. still air.
{%—Stimita-samādhi-śuci, is, is, i,%} pure with steady
meditation. {%—Stimitāyatākṣa (˚ta-āy˚, ˚ta-ak˚),%}
{%as, ī, am,%} one who keeps his large eyes fixed or
still.
<LEND>

<L>53031<pc>1143-a<k1>stema<k2>stema
{%Stema, as,%}¦ m. wetness, moisture.
<LEND>

<L>53032<pc>1143-a<k1>stIm<k2>stIm
{#stIm#}¦ {%stīm%} = rt. {%stim%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53033<pc>1143-a<k1>stIrvi<k2>stIrvi
{#stIrvi#}¦ {%stīrvi, is,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 54. fr. rt. 1. {%stṛ%}), an officiating priest at a sacri-
fice (especially an Adhvaryu versed in the Yajur-veda);
grass ({%= tṛṇa-jāti%}); sky, atmosphere ({%= nabhas%});
water ({%= payas%}); blood ({%= rudhira%}); Indra ({%=%}
{%śakra%}).
<LEND>

<L>53034<pc>1143-a<k1>stu<k2>stu
{#stu#}¦ {%stu,%} cl. 2. P. A. {%stauti%} or {%stavīti%} (1st
du. {%stuvas%} or {%stuvīvas,%} 3rd pl. {%stuvanti%}),
{%stute%} or {%stuvīte,%} Impf. {%astaut%} or {%astavīt%} (1st sing.
{%astavam%}), Impv. {%stautu%} or {%stavītu%} (2nd sing.
{%stuhi%} or {%stuvīhi%}), Perf. {%tuṣṭāva%} (2nd sing. {%tuṣ-%}
{%ṭotha,%} 1st du. {%tuṣṭuva,%} 1st pl. {%tuṣṭuma%}), {%tuṣ-%}
{%ṭuve, stoṣyati, -te, astāvīt, astoṣṭa, stotum%} or
(according to Vopa-deva also) {%stavitum%} (Ved. Inf.
{%stuṣe, stavadhyai%}), to praise, laud, eulogize, glorify,
extol, celebrate; to hymn, praise or celebrate in song,
worship by hymns; cl. 1. A. {%stavate%} (Ved. {%stave%}),
to be praised (Ved.): Pass. {%stūyate,%} &c., Aor.
{%astāvi,%} to be praised, &c.: Caus. {%stāvayati,%} Aor.
{%atuṣṭavat:%} Desid. {%tuṣṭūṣati, -te:%} Intens.
{%toṣṭūyate, toṣṭoti;%} [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">στό-μα,</lang>
Æol. <lang n="greek">στύ-μα:</lang> Goth. <nsi>staua,</nsi> ‘a judge;’ <nsi>stauja,</nsi>
‘to judge.’]
<LEND>

<L>53035<pc>1143-a<k1>stava<k2>stava
{%Stava, as,%}¦ m. praising, celebrating, hymning;
praise, eulogium, panegyric. {%—Stava-rāja, as,%} m.,
N. of a particular mystical prayer or incantation.
{%—Stavāvali, is,%} or {%stavāvalī (˚va-āv˚),%} f., N. of
a work by Kavi-candra.
<LEND>

<L>53036<pc>1143-a<k1>stavaka<k2>stavaka
{%Stavaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ praising, eulogising; ({%as%}),
m. a panegyrist, praiser; praise, eulogium; a cluster
of blossoms, bunch of flowers, nosegay, tuft, (in
these senses said to be fr. rt. 1. {%sthā%} according to
Uṇādi-s. IV. 96); N. of the chapters in the Kusu-
māñjali; a quantity, multitude; [cf. {%stoma.%}] {%—Sta-%}
{%vakācita (˚ka-āc˚), as, ā, am,%} covered with blos-
soms, in blossom.
<LEND>

<L>53037<pc>1143-a<k1>stavakita<k2>stavakita
{%Stavakita, as, ā, am,%}¦ full of blossoms.
<LEND>

<L>53038<pc>1143-a<k1>stavaTa<k2>stavaTa
{%Stavatha, as,%}¦ m., Ved. praise, (Sāy. {%= stotra.%})
<LEND>

<L>53039<pc>1143-a<k1>stavana<k2>stavana
{%Stavana, am,%}¦ n. praising, praise; a hymn.
<LEND>

<L>53040<pc>1143-a<k1>stavanIya<k2>stavanIya
{%Stavanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, praiseworthy,
laudable.
<LEND>

<L>53041<pc>1143-a<k1>stavamAna<k2>stavamAna
{%Stavamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ lauding, praising.
<LEND>

<L>53042<pc>1143-a<k1>stavAn<k2>stavAn
{%Stavān,%}¦ nom. c. masc., Ved. being praised or
lauded, (Sāy. {%= stūyamāna,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 24, 8.)
<LEND>

<L>53043<pc>1143-a<k1>stavAna<k2>stavAna
{%Stavāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being praised, being lauded
or glorified, (Sāy. {%= stūyamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>53044<pc>1143-a<k1>stavitavya<k2>stavitavya
{%Stavitavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53045<pc>1143-a<k1>stavitf<k2>stavitf
{%Stavitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a praiser, praising.
<LEND>

<L>53046<pc>1143-a<k1>staveyya<k2>staveyya
{%Staveyya%}¦ (according to some) {%= stuveyya.%}
<LEND>

<L>53047<pc>1143-a<k1>stAva<k2>stAva
{%Stāva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. praising, one who praises,
a praiser; ({%as%}), m. praise.
<LEND>

<L>53048<pc>1143-a<k1>stAvaka<k2>stAvaka
{%Stāvaka, as,%}¦ m. a praiser, panegyrist, eulogiser,
flatterer.
<LEND>

<L>53049<pc>1143-a<k1>stAvin<k2>stAvin
{%Stāvin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ praising, hymning.
<LEND>

<L>53050<pc>1143-a<k1>stAvya<k2>stAvya
{%Stāvya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be praised, praise-
worthy.
<LEND>

<L>53051<pc>1143-a<k1>stut<k2>stut
{%Stut, t, t, t%}¦ (at the end of comps.), praising, cele-
brating, (see {%deva-st˚, yathā-st˚, chandaḥ-st˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>53052<pc>1143-a<k1>stuta<k2>stuta
{%Stuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ praised, eulogised, hymned,
[Page1143-b+ 77]
glorified; flattered; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Stuta-%}
{%svāmi-kṣetra, am,%} n., N. of a sacred place.
<LEND>

<L>53053<pc>1143-b<k1>stuti<k2>stuti
{%Stuti, is,%}¦ f. praise, eulogy, commendation, adula-
tion, flattery; N. of Durgā. {%—Stuti-gīta, am,%} n. a
song of praise, panegyric. {%—Stuti-pada, am,%} n. an
object of praise. {%—Stuti-paryavasāyin, ī, inī, i,%}
concluding or ending in praise (said of ironical
{%nindā%} or censure). {%—Stuti-pāṭhaka, as,%} m. ‘praise-
reciter,’ a panegyrist, encomiast, bard, herald (espe-
cially one who accompanies a chief or an army, {%=%}
{%vandin,%} q. v.). {%—Stuti-priya, as, ā, am,%} fond of
praise or adulation. {%—Stuti-vāda, as,%} m. a laudatory
speech, panegyric. {%—Stuti-vrata, as,%} m. ‘one whose
duty is praise,’ a bard, &c., (see above.)
<LEND>

<L>53054<pc>1143-b<k1>stutya<k2>stutya
{%Stutya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, laudable, praise-
worthy.
<LEND>

<L>53055<pc>1143-b<k1>stutvA<k2>stutvA
{%Stutvā,%}¦ ind. having praised, having glorified.
<LEND>

<L>53056<pc>1143-b<k1>stuvat<k2>stuvat
{%Stuvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ praising, glorifying.
<LEND>

<L>53057<pc>1143-b<k1>stuvAna<k2>stuvAna
{%Stuvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ praising, glorifying; being
praised or celebrated, (Sāy. {%= stūyamāna,%} Ṛg-veda
VII. 96, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>53058<pc>1143-b<k1>stuveyya<k2>stuveyya
{%Stuveyya, as,%}¦ m., Ved., N. of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>53059<pc>1143-b<k1>stuzeyya<k2>stuzeyya
{%Stuṣeyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. excellent, praise-
worthy, (Sāy. {%= stotavya,%} Ṛg-veda X. 120, 6);
({%am%}), n. excellence.
<LEND>

<L>53060<pc>1143-b<k1>stUyamAna<k2>stUyamAna
{%Stūyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being praised or lauded.
<LEND>

<L>53061<pc>1143-b<k1>stotavya<k2>stotavya
{%Stotavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, deserving
praise, laudable.
<LEND>

<L>53062<pc>1143-b<k1>stotf<k2>stotf
{%Stotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ praising, a praiser, panegyrist,
flatterer.
<LEND>

<L>53063<pc>1143-b<k1>stotra<k2>stotra
{%Stotra, am,%}¦ n. praise, eulogium, a hymn of praise,
ode. {%—Stotrārha (˚ra-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} worthy of
praise.
<LEND>

<L>53064<pc>1143-b<k1>stotriya<k2>stotriya
{%Stotriya, as,%}¦ m. a kind of verse (used in parti-
cular ceremonies along with the {%anu-rūpa,%} q. v.);
({%ā%}), f. a kind of verse ({%= stotrīyā%} below).
<LEND>

<L>53065<pc>1143-b<k1>stotrIyA<k2>stotrIyA
{%Stotrīyā,%}¦ f. a particular kind of verse consisting
of eighty syllables.
<LEND>

<L>53066<pc>1143-b<k1>stoma<k2>stoma
{%Stoma, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 139. fr.
rt. {%stu%}), praise, eulogium, a hymn, (see {%sūkta%});
sacrifice, oblation; a Soma libation; a heap, collec-
tion, assemblage, number, multitude, quantity, mass
[cf. {%stavaka,%} col. 1]; ({%am%}), n. the head; riches;
wealth; grain, corn; an iron-pointed stick or staff
or one bound with iron; ({%as, ā, am%}), crooked,
bent (according to some). {%—Stoma-taṣṭa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. composed by poets, (Sāy. {%= stoma-kā-%}
{%ribhiḥ kṛta.%}) {%—Stoma-vāhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. per-
forming or offering hymns of praise.
<LEND>

<L>53067<pc>1143-b<k1>stomaya<k2>stomaya
{%Stomaya%}¦ (referred in native lists to a rt. {%stom,%}
but rather to be regarded as a Nom. fr. {%stoma%} above),
Nom. or cl. 10. P. {%stomayati, atustomat, stoma-%}
{%yitum,%} to praise, laud, hymn.
<LEND>

<L>53068<pc>1143-b<k1>stomya<k2>stomya
{%Stomya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be praised, praiseworthy,
laudable.
<LEND>

<L>53069<pc>1143-b<k1>stuka<k2>stuka
{#stuka#}¦ {%stuka, as,%} m. (probably another form
of {%stupa,%} but cf. {%stavaka%}), a collection of hair, knot
or braid of hair, (Sāy. {%= keśa-saṅghāta%}); ({%ā%}), f. a
knot or braid of hair ({%= keśa-veṇī;%} cf. {%pṛthu-%}
{%ṣṭhuka, sahasra-s˚%}); a curl of hair, bunch of curly
hair between the horns of a bull; (according to Sāy.
on Ṛg-veda IX. 97, 17. {%stukā = apatya;%} cf. {%toka%});
a hip, thigh, (according to some {%= jaghana.%})
{%—Stukā-vin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. possessing bunches of
hair, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 74, 13.
{%stukāvinaḥ = ūrṇāyavaḥ.%}) {%—Stukā-sargam,%} ind.
after the form of a curl or knot of hair ({%= stukā%}
{%yathā sṛjyate tathā%}).
<LEND>

<L>53070<pc>1143-b<k1>stuc<k2>stuc
{#stuc#}¦ {%stuc,%} cl. 1. A. {%stocate, tuṣṭuce,%}
{%stocitum,%} to be bright or pellucid; to
be propitious or pleased: Caus. {%stocayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%atuṣṭucat:%} Desid. {%tustuciṣate%} or {%tusto-%}
{%ciṣate:%} Intens. {%toṣṭucyate, toṣṭokti.%}
<LEND>

<L>53071<pc>1143-b<k1>stunaka<k2>stunaka
{#stunaka#}¦ {%stunaka, as,%} m. a goat ({%= chāga%}).
<LEND>

<L>53072<pc>1143-b<k1>stupa<k2>stupa
{#stupa#}¦ {%stupa, as,%} m. [cf. {%stūpa%}], Ved. a knot
of hair, top-knot; the collection of curly hair be-
tween the horns of a bull; the horns of a bull.
<LEND>
[Page1143-c+ 78]

<L>53073<pc>1143-c<k1>stuB<k2>stuB<h>1
{#stuB#} 1¦. {%stubh%} (connected in some senses
with rt. {%stambh,%} and in these senses also
identical with rt. {%stumbh%} below, and perhaps ori-
ginally ‘to stamp’), cl. 1. A. {%stobhate, tuṣṭubhe,%}
{%stobhitum,%} to stop, suppress; to paralyze, stupefy;
to be stupefied; cl. 1. P. {%stobhati,%} to praise, (in
this sense probably connected with and developed
out of rt. {%stu%}); to celebrate, worship (Ved., in
Naigh. III. 14. {%stobhati%} is enumerated among the
{%arcati-karmāṇaḥ%}): Caus. {%stobhayati,%} &c., to
praise (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>53074<pc>1143-c<k1>stuB<k2>stuB<h>2
2. {%stubh, p,%}¦ m., Ved. one who stops, (perhaps
the words {%tri-ṣṭubh%} and {%anu-ṣṭubh%} are to be
referred to this sense, the metre requiring regular
stoppages or pauses); one who praises, a worshipper
({%= stotṛ,%} Naigh. III. 16).
<LEND>

<L>53075<pc>1143-c<k1>stuBvan<k2>stuBvan
{%Stubhvan, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. one who praises, a praiser,
(Sāy. {%= stotṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>53076<pc>1143-c<k1>stoBa<k2>stoBa
{%Stobha, as,%}¦ m. stopping, obstructing; a stop,
pause; disrespect, contumely; hymn, praise; a
division of the Sāma-veda, (see {%sāma-veda,%} p. 1107);
an insertion, anything inserted. {%—Stobha-cchalā,%} f.,
N. of a chapter of the Sāma-veda-cchalā, q. v.
{%—Stobha-prakṛti, is,%} f., N. of part of the Sāma-
veda. {%—Stobhānusaṃhāra (˚bha-an˚), as,%} m., N.
of a short treatise on Śikṣā (one of the Pariśiṣṭas
of the Sāma-veda).
<LEND>

<L>53077<pc>1143-c<k1>stoBanasaMhAra<k2>stoBanasaMhAra
{%Stobhana-saṃhāra = stobhānusaṃhāra%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>53078<pc>1143-c<k1>stOBika<k2>stOBika
{%Staubhika, am,%}¦ n., N. of the second portion of
the Saṃhitā of the Sāma-veda, (see {%sāma-veda,%}
p. 1107.)
<LEND>

<L>53079<pc>1143-c<k1>stuBa<k2>stuBa
{#stuBa#}¦ {%stubha, as,%} m. a goat ({%= chāga%}).
<LEND>

<L>53080<pc>1143-c<k1>stumB<k2>stumB
{#stumB#}¦ {%stumbh%} (connected with rt. {%stambh,%}
and in some senses indentical with rt.
1. {%stubh%} above; in native lists written {%stunbh%}), cl.
5. 9. P. {%stubhnoti, stubhnāti,%} to stop; to stupefy; to
expel; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">στύφ-ω, στυφελός, στυμνός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στυφεδανός, τυφεδανός,</lang> probably also <lang n="greek">τυφός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τυφώδης;</lang> perhaps Old Germ. <nsi>stumph, stumbal;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>stypel, dumb;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>dumb.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53081<pc>1143-c<k1>stuveyya<k2>stuveyya
{#stuveyya#}¦ {%stuveyya, stuṣeyya.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53082<pc>1143-c<k1>stUp<k2>stUp
{#stUp#}¦ {%stūp%} (probably derived fr. {%stūpa%}
below), cl. 4. 10. P. {%stūpyati, stūpa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to heap up, pile, collect; to erect.
<LEND>

<L>53083<pc>1143-c<k1>stUpa<k2>stUpa
{%Stūpa, as,%}¦ m. (according to Sāy. fr. rt. {%styai;%}
according to Uṇādi-s. III. 25. fr. rt. {%stu%}), a heap or
pile of earth, any heap or pile or mound; a Buddhist
monument (commonly called Tope; it is a kind of
Tumulus erected over sacred relics of the great
Buddha or on spots consecrated as the scenes of
his acts); a funeral pile; a heap of rays, accumu-
lated rays (Ved., according to Sāy. {%stūpaiḥ = taptai%}
{%raśmibhiḥ,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 2, 1); (according to
Śabda-k.) {%= niṣprayojana; = bala.%}
<LEND>

<L>53084<pc>1143-c<k1>stOpika<k2>stOpika
{%Staupika, am,%}¦ n. a kind of small broom carried
by a Buddhist or Jaina ascetic.
<LEND>

<L>53085<pc>1143-c<k1>stf<k2>stf<h>1
{#stf#} 1¦. {%stṛ,%} cl. 5. or {%stṝ,%} cl. 9. P. A. {%stṛ-%}
{%ṇoti, stṛṇute, stṛṇāti, stṛṇīte, tastāra%}
(1st du. {%tastariva%}), {%tastare, stariṣyati%} or {%sta-%}
{%rīṣyati, -te%} (if in cl. 9), {%astārṣīt%} (according to
some also {%astārīt%}), {%astṛta, astariṣṭa%} or {%asta-%}
{%rīṣṭa, astīrṣṭa%} (if in cl. 9, Pāṇ. VII. 2, 42);
Prec. {%staryāt, stīryāt, stṛṣīṣṭa, stariṣīṣṭa%}
or {%starīṣīṣṭa, stīrṣīṣṭa%} (if in cl. 9, Pāṇ.
VII. 2, 42), {%startum%} or {%staritum%} or {%starītum%}
(Ved. Inf. {%startavai%}), to spread, spread out, expand,
diffuse; to spread about, strew, scatter; to spread on
or over; to cover, clothe; to kill, (in Naigh. II. 19.
{%stṛṇāti%} is enumerated among the {%vadha-karmā-%}
{%ṇaḥ%}): Pass. cl. 5. {%staryate,%} cl. 9. {%stīryate,%} Aor.
{%astāri,%} to be spread, &c.: Caus. {%stārayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%atastarat,%} to spread; to cover: Desid. {%tistīr-%}
{%ṣati, -te,%} or {%tistariṣati, -te,%} or {%tistarīṣati, -te:%}
Intens. {%tāstaryate, testīryate, tāstarti;%} [cf. Zend
<nsi>śtar, śtair-is:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">στόρ-νυ-μι, στορέννυ-μι,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στρώννυ-μι, στρῶ-μα, στρω-μνή, στρα-τό-ς:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>ster-n-o, stra-tu-s, stra-men, stra-mentu-m,</nsi>
<nsi>toru-s:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>strau-ja:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>strao, betti-</nsi>
[Page1144-a+ 73]
<nsi>strewi,</nsi> ‘lectisternium:’ Slav. <nsi>stre-ti,</nsi> ‘to extend;’
<nsi>po-stla-ti,</nsi> ‘to strew;’ <nsi>po-stel-ja,</nsi> ‘a bed:’ Lith.
<nsi>stra-je,</nsi> ‘a bed of straw.’]
<LEND>

<L>53086<pc>1144-a<k1>tistirARa<k2>tistirARa
{%Tistirāṇa, as, ā, am%}¦ (Perf. part. A.), Ved. one
who has spread, spreading.
<LEND>

<L>53087<pc>1144-a<k1>stara<k2>stara
{%Stara, as, ā, am,%}¦ spreading, extending, covering,
&c.; ({%as%}), m. anything spread, a layer, stratum; a
bed, couch.
<LEND>

<L>53088<pc>1144-a<k1>staraRa<k2>staraRa
{%Staraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of spreading, strewing,
scattering.
<LEND>

<L>53089<pc>1144-a<k1>staraRIya<k2>staraRIya
{%Staraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be spread; to be
strewn or scattered.
<LEND>

<L>53090<pc>1144-a<k1>stariman<k2>stariman
{%Stariman, ā,%}¦ m. ‘that which is spread,’ a bed, couch.
<LEND>

<L>53091<pc>1144-a<k1>starI<k2>starI
{%Starī, īs,%}¦ f. smoke, vapour; a heifer; a barren cow
(acc. c. {%staryam,%} Ṛg-veda I. 118, 20; in this sense
probably connected with {%sthira,%} q. v.); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">στεῖρα</lang>
(for <lang n="greek">στερια</lang>); Lat. <nsi>sterilis;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>stairo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53092<pc>1144-a<k1>starIman<k2>starIman
{%Starīman, ā,%}¦ m. {%= stariman%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53093<pc>1144-a<k1>stIrRa<k2>stIrRa
{%Stīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread, covered, strewn; pre-
pared; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">στέρ-νο-ν.</lang>] {%—Stīrṇa-barhis, is, is,%}
{%is,%} Ved. one who has spread Kuśa grass.
<LEND>

<L>53094<pc>1144-a<k1>stf<k2>stf<h>2
2. {%stṛ,%}¦ spreading, covering, clothing, (Sāy. {%= āc-%}
{%chādaka,%} Ṛg-veda I. 87, 1); a star, (Ṛg-veda II.
2, 5. {%stṛbhiḥ = nakṣatraiḥ,%} ‘a star;’ cf. {%tāra,%}
‘light-strewer, light-scatterer;’ in this sense thought
by some to be for {%astṛ,%} fr. rt. 2. {%as + tṛ;%} cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἀστήρ, τεῖρος,</lang> Æol. <lang n="greek">τέῤῤος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>stella;</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>stairno;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>steorra.</nsi>)
<LEND>

<L>53095<pc>1144-a<k1>stfRat<k2>stfRat
{%Stṛṇat, an, atī, at,%}¦ covering, strewing, spread-
ing over or upon.
<LEND>

<L>53096<pc>1144-a<k1>stfRAna<k2>stfRAna
{%Stṛṇāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. spreading, strewing.
<LEND>

<L>53097<pc>1144-a<k1>stfta<k2>stfta
{%Stṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread, spread out; [cf. {%vi-%}
{%stṛta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53098<pc>1144-a<k1>stfti<k2>stfti
{%Stṛti, is,%}¦ f. spreading, stretching out, expansion;
covering, clothing.
<LEND>

<L>53099<pc>1144-a<k1>stf<k2>stf<h>3
{#stf#} 3¦. {%stṛ%} (= rt. {%spṛ,%} q. v.), cl. 5. P. {%stṛ-%}
{%ṇoti,%} &c., to please, gratify, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53100<pc>1144-a<k1>stfkz<k2>stfkz
{#stfkz#}¦ {%stṛkṣ,%} cl. 1. P. {%stṛkṣati, tastṛ-%}
{%kṣa,%} &c., to go: Intens. {%tarīṣṭṛkṣ-%}
{%yate,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>53101<pc>1144-a<k1>stfh<k2>stfh
{#stfh#}¦ {%stṛh%} or {%stṝh%} (connected with rt.
{%tṛh,%} q. v.), cl. 6. P. {%stṛhati, stṝhati, ta-%}
{%starha, starhitum%} or {%starḍhum,%} to strike, hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>53102<pc>1144-a<k1>stF<k2>stF
{#stF#}¦ {%stṝ.%} See rt. 1. {%stṛ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53103<pc>1144-a<k1>stFh<k2>stFh
{#stFh#}¦ {%stṝh.%} See rt. {%stṛh.%}
<LEND>

<L>53104<pc>1144-a<k1>sten<k2>sten
{#sten#}¦ {%sten%} (more properly regarded as a
Nom. fr. {%stena%} below; cf. rt. {%stai%}), cl. 10.
P. {%stenayati, atistenat,%} &c., to steal, rob; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">στερέω;</lang> Goth. <nsi>stil-an,</nsi> ‘to steal;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>stelan,</nsi>
<nsi>stal, stalian, stalu.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53105<pc>1144-a<k1>stena<k2>stena
{%Stena, as,%}¦ m. (perhaps to be connected with a
form {%ste%} derived fr. {%sti%} for rt. {%stai;%} cf. {%styena%} fr.
rt. {%styai%}), a thief, robber; ({%am%}), n. thieving, steal-
ing. {%—Stena-nigraha, as,%} m. the restraining or
punishing of thieves; suppression of theft.
<LEND>

<L>53106<pc>1144-a<k1>steya<k2>steya
{%Steya, am,%}¦ n. [cf. rt. {%stai%}], theft, robbery; any-
thing stolen or liable to be stolen; anything clandes-
tine or private. {%—Steya-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. one who
commits a theft, a thief, robber.
<LEND>

<L>53107<pc>1144-a<k1>steyin<k2>steyin
{%Steyin, ī,%}¦ m. a thief, robber; a goldsmith.
<LEND>

<L>53108<pc>1144-a<k1>stEna<k2>stEna
{%Staina, am,%}¦ n. theft, robbery, thievery.
<LEND>

<L>53109<pc>1144-a<k1>stEnya<k2>stEnya
{%Stainya, am,%}¦ n. theft, thievery, robbery; ({%as%}),
m. a thief.
<LEND>

<L>53110<pc>1144-a<k1>stOna<k2>stOna
{%Stauna, as,%}¦ m., Ved. a thief, robber, (Sāy. {%= stena,%}
Ṛg-veda VI. 66, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>53111<pc>1144-a<k1>step<k2>step
{#step#}¦ {%step,%} cl. 1. A. {%stepate,%} &c., to ooze,
&c. (= rt. {%stip,%} q. v.); cl. 10. P. {%stepa-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to send, throw.
<LEND>

<L>53112<pc>1144-a<k1>stema<k2>stema
{#stema#}¦ {%stema.%} See under rt. {%stim.%}
<LEND>

<L>53113<pc>1144-a<k1>steya<k2>steya
{#steya#}¦ {%steya, staina.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>53114<pc>1144-a<k1>stE<k2>stE
{#stE#}¦ {%stai,%} cl. 1. P. {%stāyati,%} &c., to put on,
adorn (= rt. {%snai%}); (probably also) to steal,
do anything stealthily (Ved.).
<LEND>
[Page1144-b+ 72]

<L>53115<pc>1144-b<k1>stAyat<k2>stAyat
{%Stāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. stealing, acting stealthily,
(Atharva-veda IV. 16, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>53116<pc>1144-b<k1>stEmitya<k2>stEmitya
{#stEmitya#}¦ {%staimitya, am,%} n. (fr. {%stimita%}), fixed-
ness, rigidity, immobility, numbness.
<LEND>

<L>53117<pc>1144-b<k1>stoka<k2>stoka
{#stoka#}¦ {%stoka, as, ā, am,%} little, small, short;
few; low; ({%as%}), m. a small portion, drop (of water,
ghee, &c.); the Cātaka bird; ({%am%}), ind. a little;
less; [cf. Lith. <nsi>stokoju,</nsi> ‘I want.’] {%—Stoka-kāya,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} little-bodied, small, diminutive. {%—Stoka-%}
{%namra, as, ā, am,%} a little bent down, slightly de-
pressed. {%—Stoka-śas,%} ind. sparingly.
<LEND>

<L>53118<pc>1144-b<k1>stokaka<k2>stokaka
{%Stokaka, as,%}¦ m. the Cātaka bird.
<LEND>

<L>53119<pc>1144-b<k1>stotavya<k2>stotavya
{#stotavya#}¦ {%stotavya, stotṛ, stotra.%} See p. 1143.
<LEND>

<L>53120<pc>1144-b<k1>stoBa<k2>stoBa
{#stoBa#}¦ {%stobha,%} &c. See under rt. 1. {%stubh.%}
<LEND>

<L>53121<pc>1144-b<k1>stom<k2>stom
{#stom#}¦ {%stom.%} See {%stomaya,%} p. 1143,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53122<pc>1144-b<k1>stoma<k2>stoma
{#stoma#}¦ {%stoma.%} See p. 1143, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53123<pc>1144-b<k1>stOpika<k2>stOpika
{#stOpika#}¦ {%staupika.%} See {%stūpa,%} p. 1143.
<LEND>

<L>53124<pc>1144-b<k1>stOBika<k2>stOBika
{#stOBika#}¦ {%staubhika.%} See under rt. 1. {%stubh.%}
<LEND>

<L>53125<pc>1144-b<k1>stOla<k2>stOla
{#stOla#}¦ {%staula, as, ā, am,%} (for {%sthaula%} fr. {%sthū-%}
{%la%}), Ved. stout, robust, powerful, (Sāy. {%= sthūla,%}
{%pravṛddha,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 44, 7.)
<LEND>

<L>53126<pc>1144-b<k1>styAna<k2>styAna
{#styAna#}¦ {%styāna, styena.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>53127<pc>1144-b<k1>styE<k2>styE
{#styE#}¦ {%styai%} (also written {%ṣṭyai%}), cl. 1. P.
{%styāyati,%} &c., to be collected into a heap
or mass; to be spread about; to sound; [cf. accord-
ing to some, probably Gr. <lang n="greek">στενός;</lang> Lat. <nsi>stipare.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53128<pc>1144-b<k1>sti<k2>sti
{%Sti, is,%}¦ m. (according to Sāy. fr. rt. {%styai,%} but cf.
{%upa-sti%}), Ved. a house, dwelling, abode, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%gṛha,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 19, 11; perhaps also ‘those
who live in the house.’) {%—Sti-pā, ās, ās, am,%} house-
protecting, (see Ṛg-veda VII. 66, 3; Nirukta VI.
17.)
<LEND>

<L>53129<pc>1144-b<k1>stiyA<k2>stiyA
{%Stiyā,%}¦ f., Ved. a collected mass; a mass or quantity
of water, (Sāy. {%= āpaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 5, 2; see
Nirukta VI. 17.)
<LEND>

<L>53130<pc>1144-b<k1>styAna<k2>styAna
{%Styāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ collecting into a mass; thick,
bulky, gross; soft, bland, unctuous, smooth; sound-
ing; ({%am%}), n. thickness, grossness, massiveness;
unctuousness; nectar; idleness, sloth; echo, sound.
<LEND>

<L>53131<pc>1144-b<k1>styAya<k2>styAya
{%Styāya%}¦ in {%saṃ-styāya,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>53132<pc>1144-b<k1>styAyana<k2>styAyana
{%Styāyana, am,%}¦ n. collecting into a mass, aggrega-
tion, crowding together.
<LEND>

<L>53133<pc>1144-b<k1>styena<k2>styena
{%Styena, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. II. 46. fr.
rt. {%styai%} above), nectar ({%= a-mṛta%}); a thief (in
this sense probably for {%stena,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>53134<pc>1144-b<k1>strI<k2>strI
{#strI#}¦ {%strī,%} f. (probably a contraction of {%so-%}
{%trī,%} fem. of 2. {%sotṛ,%} ‘a bearer of children,’ see
p. 1118, col. 2; but according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 165.
fr. rt. {%styai%}), a woman, female; a wife; the female
of any animal (e. g. {%śākhāmṛga-strī,%} ‘a female
monkey’). {%—Strī-kāma, as,%} m. desire of intercourse
with women; fondness for women; desire of a wife;
({%as, ā, am%}), desirous of women, fond of women.
{%—Strī-kārya, am,%} n. the business of women; at-
tendance on women or the women's apartments.
{%—Strī-kumāra, am,%} n. a woman and child. {%—Strī-%}
{%kusuma, am,%} n. the menstrual excretion in women.
{%—Strī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} done by women. {%—Strī-%}
{%kṣīra, am,%} n. mother's milk. {%—Strī-gavī,%} f. a
milch cow. {%—Strī-guru, us,%} m. a female Guru or
priestess (who teaches initiatory Mantras). {%—Strī-%}
{%ghoṣa, as,%} m. ‘marked by the sound of women,’
dawn, day-break. {%—Strī-ghna, as,%} m. the murderer
of a woman. {%—Strī-caritra, am,%} n. the doings of
women. {%—Strī-citta-hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} captivating the
heart of women, pleasing to the female sex; ({%ī%}), m.
the tree Śobhāñjana. {%—Strī-cihna, am,%} n. any mark
or characteristic of the female sex; the female organ,
vulva or womb. {%—Strī-caura, as,%} m. ‘woman-thief,’
a seducer of women, libertine. {%—Strī-jananī,%} f.
‘bearing females,’ the mother of a daughter, a wo-
[Page1144-c+ 81]
man who brings forth only daughters. {%—Strī-jāti, is,%}
f. the female sex. {%—Strī-jita, as,%} m. ‘wife-subdued,’
a man ruled by his wife, a hen-pecked husband. {%—Strī-%}
{%tamā%} or {%stri-tamā,%} f. a thorough woman, (Pāṇ. VI.
3, 44.) {%—Strī-tarā%} or {%stri-tarā,%} f. more thoroughly
a woman, (Pāṇ. VI. 3, 44.) {%—Strī-tā,%} f. or {%strī-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. womanhood, wife-hood; feminineness,
effeminacy. {%—Strī-dhana, am,%} n. ‘woman's wealth,’
a wife's peculiar property or any property belonging
to a woman over which she has independent control
(said to be of six kinds, viz. {%adhy-agnika,%} a gift
upon or in presence of the nuptial fire by a member
of either family; {%adhy-āvāhanika,%} that which is
taken from the father's house at the time of the
bridal procession or when the bride is conducted to
her husband's home; {%ādhivedanika,%} a settlement on
a first wife when her husband contracts a second
marriage; {%prīti-datta,%} a gift of affection; {%śulka,%} a
kind of dower or money given to a woman to induce
her to go to her husband's house; {%anv-ādheya,%} a
gift from her own or husband's family after marriage:
according to others the six kinds are, {%bhartṛ-dāya,%}
{%pitṛ-datta, mātṛ-d˚, bhrātṛ-d˚,%} with the first two
enumerated above: other varieties of woman's pro-
perty are {%bandhu-datta,%} q. v., {%yautaka,%} q. v., {%sau-%}
{%dāyika,%} q. v., {%pāriṇāyya,%} q. v., {%lāvaṇyārjita,%} q. v.,
and {%pādavandanika,%} the last being a gift to a wife
from a husband in return for her {%pāda-vandana,%}
q. v., on her entering his house). {%—Strī-dharma, as,%}
m. the duty of a woman or wife; the laws concerning
women; menstruation. {%—Strīdharma-yoga, as,%} m.
the application of laws or customs relative to women.
{%—Strī-dharmiṇī,%} f. a woman during menstruation.
{%—Strī-dhava, as,%} m. a woman's husband; a man,
male. {%—Strī-dhvaja, as,%} m. ‘having the mark of a
female,’ the female of any species of animal. {%—Strī-%}
{%nātha, as, ā, am,%} having a woman as lord or pro-
tector, protected by a woman. {%—Strī-nāman, ā,%}
{%mnī, a,%} having a female name. {%—Strī-nibandhana,%}
{%am,%} n. a woman's peculiar province, domestic duty,
housewifery. {%—Strī-paṇyopajīvin (˚ya-up˚), ī,%} m.
one who makes a living by keeping women for
prostitution. {%—Strī-para, as,%} m. one who is devoted
to women, a woman-lover, libertine. {%—Strī-parvata-%}
{%deśa, as,%} m., N. of a district. {%—Strī-parvan, a,%} n.,
N. of the eleventh book of the Mahā-bhārata. {%—Strī-%}
{%piśācī,%} f. a fiend-like wife. {%—Strī-puṃs, mān,%} m.
a woman who has become a man. {%—Strī-puṃsa, au,%}
m. du. wife and husband, man and wife, the union
of man and wife. {%—Strī-puṃsa-lakṣaṇā,%} f. a wo-
man who has the characteristic marks of both male
and female, a hermaphrodite. {%—Strī-pun-dharma,%}
{%as,%} m. the law (which regulates the duties) of
man and wife, the mutual duties of husband and
wife or of man and woman. {%—Strī-pun-napuṃ-%}
{%saka,%} masculine, feminine, and neuter. {%—Strī-pūrva%}
or {%strī-pūrvaka%} or {%strī-pūrvika, as,%} m. or {%strī-%}
{%pūrvin, ī,%} m. one who has been a woman for-
merly or in a former birth, (according to Śabda-k.
{%strī-pūrva = strī-jita,%} ruled by a woman.) {%—Strī-%}
{%pratyaya, as,%} m. (in grammar) a feminine affix, an
affix used in forming feminines from Prātipadikas.
{%—Strī-pramāṇa, as, ā, am,%} having a wife for an
authority, one who is ruled by a wife. {%—Strī-pra-%}
{%saṅga, as,%} m. intercourse with women. {%—Strī-%}
{%prasū, ūs, ūs, u,%} bearing females, bringing forth
daughters only. {%—Strī-priya, as, ā, am,%} liked or
loved by women; ({%as%}), m. the Mango tree. {%—Strī-%}
{%bādhya, as,%} m. one who suffers himself to be dis-
tressed by a woman. {%—Strī-buddhi, is,%} f. the female
understanding. {%—Strī-bhṛtya, ās,%} m. pl. women and
servants. {%—Strī-bhoga, as,%} m. enjoyment of women,
sexual intercourse. {%—Strī-mat, ān,%} m. a wife-pos-
sessor, a married man. {%—Strī-mantra, as,%} m. a
woman's counsel, female stratagem. {%—Strī-mukha-%}
{%pa, as,%} m. ‘drinking the mouth of women,’ the
Aśoka tree {%(= dohalī)%}. {%—Strī-yantra, am,%} n. ‘wo-
man-vessel,’ woman regarded as a vessel or machine,
a woman who works like a machine. {%—Strī-yācita-%}
{%putra, as,%} m. a son obtained through a wife's solicita-
tions. {%—Strī-rañjana, am,%} n. ‘delighting women,’
[Page1145-a+ 79]
betel (which with the areca-nut is much chewed by
Hindū women). {%—Strī-ratna, am,%} n. a jewel or
gem of a woman, an excellent woman; N. of Lak-
ṣmī. {%—Strī-rājya, am,%} n. the kingdom of women
(a country placed by some in the region of Bhotan).
{%—Strī-roga, as,%} m. any disease incident to women.
{%—Strī-liṅga, am,%} n. the female organ; the feminine
gender. {%—Strīliṅga-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being in the
feminine gender, being a feminine. {%—Strī-vadha,%}
{%as,%} m. the slaying of a woman. {%—Strī-vaśa, am,%} n.
subjection to women, submissiveness to a wife. {%—Strī-%}
{%vākyāṅkuśa-prakṣuṇṇa (˚ya-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%}
driven or urged on by the goad of women's words.
{%—Strī-vidheya, as, ā, am,%} submissive to a wife,
governed by a wife, uxorious. {%—Strī-viyoga, as,%} m.
separation from a wife. {%—Strī-vivāha, as,%} m. ‘wo-
man-marriage,’ the act of contracting marriage with
a woman. {%—Strī-vṛta, as, ā, am,%} surrounded or at-
tended by women. {%—Strī-saṃsarga, as,%} m. inter-
course with women, female society. {%—Strī-saṃ-%}
{%sthāna, as, ā, am,%} having a female shape. {%—Strī-%}
{%saṅga, as,%} m. attachment or addiction to women;
intercourse with a woman. {%—Strī-saṅgrahaṇa, am,%}
n. the act of embracing a woman (improperly),
adultery, seduction. {%—Strī-sabha, am,%} n. an assembly
of women, collection of females. {%—Strī-sambandha,%}
{%as,%} m. matrimonial connection with a woman; con-
nection by marriage; relation or reference to women.
{%—Strī-sevā,%} f. ‘woman-service,’ addiction to wo-
men. {%—Strī-svabhāva, as,%} m. the nature or disposi-
tion of women; a guard of the women's apartments,
eunuch. {%—Strī-svarūpa, as, ā, am,%} or {%strī-svarūpa-%}
{%vat, ān, atī, at,%} or {%strī-svarūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having
a woman's shape or figure. {%—Strī-hatyā,%} f. the
murder of a woman. {%—Strī-hantṛ, tā,%} m. the mur-
derer of a woman. {%—Strī-haraṇa, am,%} n. the carry-
ing off or forcible abduction of a woman; rape.
{%—Strī-hārin, ī,%} m. the carrier off of a woman; one
who commits rape, a ravisher. {%—Stry-abhigamana,%}
{%am,%} n. the act of approaching a woman, sexual inter-
course. {%—Stry-ājīva, as,%} m. one who lives by his
wife; one who lives by keeping women for pros-
titution.
<LEND>

<L>53135<pc>1145-a<k1>strIka<k2>strIka
{%Strīka = strī%}¦ (at the end of an adj. comp., e. g.
{%sa-strīka,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>53136<pc>1145-a<k1>strERa<k2>strERa
{%Straiṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ female, feminine; suited or
belonging to women; being among women; ({%am%}),
n. womanhood, feminineness; the female sex; the
nature of woman; a multitude of women; sexual
enjoyment (Ved.). {%—Straiṇa-tā,%} f. or {%straiṇa-tva,%}
{%am,%} n. effeminacy.
<LEND>

<L>53137<pc>1145-a<k1>strErAjaka<k2>strErAjaka
{%Strairājaka, ās,%}¦ f. pl. (probably) the women of
Strī-rājya.
<LEND>

<L>53138<pc>1145-a<k1>strEzUya<k2>strEzUya
{%Straiṣūya.%}¦ See Atharva-veda VI. 11, 3.
<LEND>

<L>53139<pc>1145-a<k1>sTa<k2>sTa
{#sTa#}¦ {%stha.%} See under rt. 1. {%sthā,%} col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53140<pc>1145-a<k1>sTakara<k2>sTakara
{#sTakara#}¦ {%sthakara%} (connected with {%sthagara%}
below), a betel-nut (according to some; cf. {%sthagī%}).
<LEND>

<L>53141<pc>1145-a<k1>sTag<k2>sTag
{#sTag#}¦ {%sthag,%} cl. 1. P. {%sthagati, tasthāga,%}
{%asthagīt,%} &c., to cover, hide, conceal:
Caus. {%sthagayati,%} &c., to cover, veil, hide, make
invisible; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">στέγ-ω, στέγ-η, τέγη, στέγος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">τέγος, στεγ-ανό-ς, στεγ-νό-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>teg-o, tec-tu-m,</nsi>
<nsi>teg-i-men, teg-ula:</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>thek,</nsi> ‘a roof:’ Old
Germ. <nsi>dak-jan:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>theccan, thaca:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>steg-iu,</nsi> ‘I cover;’ <nsi>stoga-s,</nsi> ‘a roof.’]
<LEND>

<L>53142<pc>1145-a<k1>sTaga<k2>sTaga
{%Sthaga, as, ā, am,%}¦ fraudulent, dishonest, shame-
less, abandoned; ({%as%}), m. a rogue, cheat; ({%ī%}), f. a
betel box.
<LEND>

<L>53143<pc>1145-a<k1>sTagana<k2>sTagana
{%Sthagana, am,%}¦ n. the act of covering or conceal-
ing, concealment.
<LEND>

<L>53144<pc>1145-a<k1>sTagara<k2>sTagara
{%Sthagara,%}¦ a kind of plant ({%= putra-jīvaka%});
(perhaps) a betel-nut; [cf. {%sthagī%} above.]
<LEND>

<L>53145<pc>1145-a<k1>sTagikA<k2>sTagikA
{%Sthagikā,%}¦ f. a courtezan; the office of betel-
bearer.
<LEND>

<L>53146<pc>1145-a<k1>sTagita<k2>sTagita
{%Sthagita, as, ā, am,%}¦ covered, concealed, hidden.
<LEND>

<L>53147<pc>1145-a<k1>sTagu<k2>sTagu
{%Sthagu, us,%}¦ m. a hump, an excrescence or pro-
tuberance on the back.
<LEND>

<L>53148<pc>1145-a<k1>sTaRqila<k2>sTaRqila
{#sTaRqila#}¦ {%sthaṇḍila, am,%} n. (according to
some connected with rt. {%sthal%}), a piece of ground
[Page1145-b+ 79]
(levelled, squared, and prepared for a sacrifice); a
barren field; a heap of clods; a boundary, limit, land-
mark; ({%as%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi. {%—Sthaṇḍila-śāyin,%}
{%ī,%} m. a devotee who sleeps on the bare ground or on
the sacrificial Sthaṇḍila (on account of a religious
vow). {%—Sthaṇḍila-sitaka, am,%} n. an altar. {%—Sthaṇ-%}
{%ḍile-śaya, as,%} m. an ascetic who sleeps on the bare
ground or on the Sthaṇḍila; a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>53149<pc>1145-b<k1>sTaRqileyu<k2>sTaRqileyu
{%Sthaṇḍileyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>53150<pc>1145-b<k1>sTana<k2>sTana
{#sTana#}¦ {%sthana%} (fr. rt. 1. {%as%}), Ved. {%= bhavatha,%}
(Ṛg-veda VIII. 18, 15.)
<LEND>

<L>53151<pc>1145-b<k1>sTapati<k2>sTapati
{#sTapati#}¦ {%stha-pati.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53152<pc>1145-b<k1>sTapuwa<k2>sTapuwa
{#sTapuwa#}¦ {%sthapuṭa, as, ā, am,%} being in con-
tracted or difficult circumstances; unevenly raised,
elevated and depressed, bent down. {%—Sthapuṭa-%}
{%gata, as, ā, am,%} being in contracted and uneven
places, being on raised places and in hollows.
{%—Sthapuṭī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made uneven, raised
and depressed; (according to one commentator)
covered with grass, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53153<pc>1145-b<k1>sTal<k2>sTal
{#sTal#}¦ {%sthal%} (connected with rt. 1. {%sthā%}),
cl. 1. P. {%sthalati, tasthāla, sthaliṣ-%}
{%yati, asthālīt, sthalitum,%} to stand firm, be firm:
Caus. {%sthālayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%atiṣṭhalat,%} to
cause to stand firm, fix firmly: Desid. of Caus.
{%tisthālayiṣati:%} Desid. {%tisthaliṣati:%} Intens. {%tā-%}
{%sthalyate, tāsthalti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">στέλλ-ω, ἔσταλκα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐ-στάλη-ν, στόλο-ς, στάλ-ιξ, στελεό-ν;</lang>] Lat. <nsi>prœ-</nsi>
<nsi>stol-o-r, stul-tu-s, stol-i-du-s (?);</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>stil,</nsi>
<nsi>stallan, stellan;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>stelloju,</nsi> ‘I appoint.’]
<LEND>

<L>53154<pc>1145-b<k1>sTala<k2>sTala
{%Sthala, am, ī,%}¦ n. f. firm or dry ground, terra
firma, dry land (as opposed to ‘water’); shore,
strand, beach; ground or land (in general), soil;
place, spot, site; field, tract, district; station; ({%am,%}
{%ā%}), n. f. a spot of dry ground artificially raised and
drained; ({%ī%}), f. a deity of the soil, local or tutelary
divinity; ({%am%}), n. a piece of raised ground, mound,
terrace; a topic, case, subject (of a description &c.),
point under discussion; part (of a book); a tent,
house of cloth; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>stal,</nsi> ‘a place;’ <nsi>stul-</nsi>
<nsi>lan, stelza, stolv:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>ga-stalds:</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>stal, stœl, stillan, stille:</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>stall.</nsi>]
{%—Sthala-kanda, as,%} m. a kind of plant {%(= agrā-%}
{%mya-kanda)%}. {%—Sthala-kamala, am,%} n. or {%sthala-%}
{%kamalinī,%} f. the flowering shrub, Hibiscus Muta-
bilis. {%—Sthala-kumuda, as,%} m. the Kara-vīra plant.
{%—Sthala-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone or left on dry land.
{%—Sthala-cara, as, ī, am,%} land-going, living on dry
land, not aquatic (opposed to {%jala-cara%}). {%—Sthala-%}
{%cyuta, as, ā, am,%} fallen or removed from a place or
position. {%—Sthala-ja, as, ā, am,%} land-born, ter-
restrial, not aquatic. {%—Sthala-tas,%} ind. from dry
land, from terra firma. {%—Sthala-tā,%} f. the state of
being dry ground. {%—Sthala-devatā,%} f. a local or
rural deity, tutelary god presiding over some par-
ticular spot. {%—Sthala-nalinī,%} f. {%= sthala-padminī%}
below. {%—Sthala-padma, as,%} m. {%= mānaka; (am),%}
n. the shrub Hibiscus Mutabilis; another plant {%(=%}
{%chattra-pattra, tamālaka)%}. {%—Sthala-padminī,%} f.
the shrub Hibiscus Mutabilis. {%—Sthala-mañjarī,%} f.
the plant Achyranthes Aspera. {%—Sthala-mārga, as,%}
m. or {%sthala-vartman, a,%} n. a way or road by land,
({%sthala-vartmanā,%} inst. c. by land, as opposed to
{%jala-mārgeṇa,%} by water.) {%—Sthala-vigraha, as,%} m.
a battle on level ground. {%—Sthala-śuddhi, is,%} f.
purification or clearance of a place from impurity.
{%—Sthala-śṛṅgāṭa%} or {%sthala-śṛṅgāṭaka, as,%} m.
the plant Tribulus Lanuginosus {%(= go-kṣura).%}
{%—Sthala-sīman, ā,%} m. a land-mark, boundary.
{%—Sthala-stha, as, ā, am,%} standing or being on
dry ground, being on terra firma, being on shore.
{%—Sthalāntara (˚la-an˚), am,%} n. another place.
{%—Sthalārūḍha (˚la-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} alighted on
the ground. {%—Sthale-ruha, as, ā, am,%} growing on
dry ground; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant ({%= gṛha-ku-%}
{%mārī%}); another plant {%(= dagdhā)%}. {%—Sthale-śaya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} sleeping on dry ground; ({%as%}), m. any
amphibious animal (such as a tortoise, otter, &c.).
<LEND>

<L>53155<pc>1145-b<k1>sTalI<k2>sTalI
{%Sthalī,%}¦ f. dry ground, &c.; see under {%sthala%}
[Page1145-c+ 79]
above. {%—Sthalī-devatā,%} f. a local divinity, deity of
the soil or tutelary deity presiding over some par-
ticular spot (as a field, grove, village, &c.), a kind
of faun or dryad.
<LEND>

<L>53156<pc>1145-c<k1>sTalIya<k2>sTalIya
{%Sthalīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to dry
ground, terrestrial; belonging to a place, local.
<LEND>

<L>53157<pc>1145-c<k1>sTaleyu<k2>sTaleyu
{%Sthaleyu, us,%}¦ m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>53158<pc>1145-c<k1>sTavi<k2>sTavi
{#sTavi#}¦ {%sthavi, sthavira,%} &c. See p. 1146.
<LEND>

<L>53159<pc>1145-c<k1>sTavizWa<k2>sTavizWa
{#sTavizWa#}¦ {%sthaviṣṭha, as, ā, am,%} (superl. of
{%sthūla%}), largest, most bulky; very big, very fat or
corpulent.
<LEND>

<L>53160<pc>1145-c<k1>sTavIyas<k2>sTavIyas
{%Sthavīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%sthūla%}), larger,
bigger, more bulky, fatter, stronger; very fat, very
corpulent.
<LEND>

<L>53161<pc>1145-c<k1>sTA<k2>sTA<h>1
{#sTA#} 1¦. {%sthā,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. and in some
special significations also A.) {%tiṣṭhati, -te%}
({%sthāt = tiṣṭhatu,%} Ṛg-veda II. 3, 10), {%tasthau%}
(2nd sing, {%tasthitha%} or {%tasthātha,%} 1st du. {%tasthiva%}),
{%tasthe, sthāsyati, -te, asthāt%} (3rd pl. {%asthuḥ%}), {%as-%}
{%thita%} (3rd pl. {%asthiṣata%}), Prec. {%stheyāt, sthā-%}
{%sīṣṭa, sthātum,%} to stand (often with inst., e. g.
{%pādābhyāṃ sthā,%} to stand on the feet; {%jānubhyāṃ%}
{%sthā,%} to stand on the knees, i. e. to kneel); to stand
still, stand firmly; to stay, stop, abide, dwell, remain,
rest, wait; to stop, cease, desist; to rest on, depend
on (sometimes A.); to be in any situation or state
or position; to be, exist, live; to be at hand, be
near or at the side; to abide or continue or be en-
gaged in any act or course of action, practice, per-
form, behave, occupy one's self with, (sometimes with
loc., e. g. {%śāsane sthā,%} to abide in a command, i. e. to
be obedient; sometimes with inst., e. g. {%sāmādibhiḥ%}
{%sthā,%} to practice or continue practising conciliation,
&c.; {%mauna-vratena sthā,%} to continue observing
a vow of silence; sometimes with ind. part., especially
if a habit or continuous course of action is implied,
e. g. {%dharmam āśritya tiṣṭhati,%} he continues prac-
tising virtue); to stand as a prostitute, give one's
self up to sexual embrace, offer one's self to (A., e. g.
{%deva-dattāya tiṣṭhate,%} she offers herself to Deva-
datta, Pāṇ. 1. 4, 34): Pass. {%sthīyate,%} 2nd fut. {%sthā-%}
{%syate%} or {%sthāyiṣyate,%} Aor. {%asthāyi,%} to be stood;
to be stayed or remained or abided, to be fixed
or located, &c. (frequently used impersonally, e. g.
{%mayā sthīyatām,%} let it be abided by me, i. e.
I must abide): Caus. {%sthāpayati, -te%} (sometimes
regarded as a nominal fr. {%sthira%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor.
{%atiṣṭhipat, -ta,%} to cause to stand; to cause to
stand still or firmly; to fix, settle, establish, set
up, found, institute, erect, build; to place, put, lo-
cate, set, lay; to stop, arrest, restrain, hold in; to
cause to be in any state or position; to cause to
continue, make durable; to cause to live; to give in
marriage; to make (with two acc.); to instruct in
(with two acc.): Desid. {%tiṣṭhāsati, -te:%} Intens.
{%teṣṭhīyate, tāsthāti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>hi-stā-mi</nsi> = Sans.
{%ti-ṣṭhā-mi:%} Gr. <lang n="greek">ἵ-στη-μι, ἔ-στη-ν, στά-σι-ς, στα-μίν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στά-μνο-ς, ἰ-στό-ς, στή-μην, στή-λη, στα-τήρ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στα-θ-ερό-ς, στα-θ-μό-ς, στῆ-θ-ο-ς, στε-νό-ς;</lang> (with
the Caus. may be compared also, according to some)
<lang n="greek">στέφ-ω</lang> (for <lang n="greek">στεπ-ω</lang>), <lang n="greek">στέμ-μα, στέφ-ος, στέφ-ανο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στεφ-άνη, τόπ-ο-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>st-o, si-st-o, stă-ti-m,</nsi>
<nsi>stă-ti-o, Sta-tor, stă-tu-s, stă-tu-o, stă-tua, stā-</nsi>
<nsi>men, stă-bu-lu-m, stă-bi-li-s;</nsi> (also with the Caus.)
<nsi>stipa-re, stipatores, stipulāri, stapia;</nsi> (according
to some also) <nsi>stup-eo, stup-idu-s:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>stā-m,</nsi>
<nsi>stedi, standa, stat:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>stan-dan,</nsi> ‘to stand;’
<nsi>stath-s,</nsi> ‘a place;’ <nsi>stol-s,</nsi> ‘a stool, throne:’ Angl.
Sax. <nsi>stan-dan, stand, studu, stund:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>sta-ti,</nsi>
‘to stand:’ Lith. <nsi>stó-ti,</nsi> ‘to stand;’ <nsi>sta-tù-s,</nsi> ‘stand-
ing;’ <nsi>statý-ti,</nsi> ‘to place;’ <nsi>sto-na-s,</nsi> ‘a stand, sta-
tion;’ <nsi>stá-kle-s,</nsi> ‘a loom:’ Hib. <nsi>sta-d,</nsi> ‘stop, delay,
state, condition;’ <nsi>stadaim,</nsi> ‘I stand, stop.’]
<LEND>

<L>53162<pc>1145-c<k1>tasTivas<k2>tasTivas
{%Tasthivas, vān, -thuṣī, vat,%}¦ one who has stood.
<LEND>

<L>53163<pc>1145-c<k1>sTa<k2>sTa
{%Stha, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing, staying, abiding, being
situated, living, existing (generally found at the end
of comps., e. g. {%garbha-s˚, jala-s˚, dūra-s˚%}); a
place, spot, ground, {%= sthala%} (according to Śabda-k.).
{%—Stha-pati, is,%} m. (probably fr. {%stha + pati,%} but
[Page1146-a+ 81]
according to some from the Caus. of rt. 1. {%sthā%}),
‘ground-lord,’ a sovereign, chief, king (according to
Kātyāyana's Śrauta-sūtras XXII. 11, 11, &c. a Stha-
pati is a Vaiśya, or even a person of lower caste, who
has celebrated the Go-sava sacrifice after being chosen
king); an architect; a master carpenter or mason,
wheelwright; a charioteer; one who sacrifices to
Vṛhas-pati, a performer of the Vṛhas-pati sacrifice;
a guard or attendant of the women's apartments; N.
of Kuvera; ({%is, is, i%}), chief, best, principal.
<LEND>

<L>53164<pc>1146-a<k1>sTavi<k2>sTavi
{%Sthavi, is,%}¦ m. a weaver; heaven {%(= svarga); =%}
{%jaṅgama%} (according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>53165<pc>1146-a<k1>sTavira<k2>sTavira
{%Sthavira, as, ā, am,%}¦ fixed, firm, steady [cf. {%sthā-%}
{%vira%}]; old, aged, ancient, ({%saptatyā sthaviraḥ,%} one
who is seventy years old, see {%sthāvira%}); ({%as%}), m.
an old man; a beggar; epithet of Brahmā; ({%ā%}), f.
an old woman; a kind of plant, {%= mahā-śrāvaṇī;%}
{%(am),%} n. {%= śaileya.%}
<LEND>

<L>53166<pc>1146-a<k1>sTA<k2>sTA<h>2
2. {%sthā, ās, ās, am,%}¦ Ved. standing, stationary, (ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda X. 88, 4. {%sthāḥ = sthā-%}
{%varaṃ vṛkṣādi rūpam;%} see also Nirukta V. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>53167<pc>1146-a<k1>sTARu<k2>sTARu
{%Sthāṇu, us, us, u,%}¦ firm, fixed, steady, stable, im-
movable, motionless; ({%us%}), m., N. of Śiva; a stake,
post, pile; a peg, pin, pillar; the gnomon of a dial;
a spear, dart; a nest of white ants; the drug or per-
fume called Jīvaka, q. v.; ({%us, u%}), m. n. a branchless
trunk or stem, the trunk of a lopped tree or of any
tree, any bare stock or stem. {%—Sthāṇu-ccheda, as,%}
m. one who cuts down the trunks of trees, one who
clears away timber, (Manu IX. 44.) {%—Sthāṇu-tīr-%}
{%tha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Sthāṇu-bhrama, as,%}
m. mistaking anything for a post. {%—Sthāṇu-vat,%}
ind. like a post. {%—Sthāṇu-vanaukas (˚na-ok˚), ās,%}
{%ās, as,%} inhabiting Śiva's forest. {%—Sthāṇv-īśvara,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of a particular Śiva-liṅga.
<LEND>

<L>53168<pc>1146-a<k1>sTAtavya<k2>sTAtavya
{%Sthātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be stood; to be stayed
or remained; to be fixed.
<LEND>

<L>53169<pc>1146-a<k1>sTAtus<k2>sTAtus
{%Sthātus,%}¦ n. (according to some modern scholars
an old nom. sing. neut. for the later {%sthātṛ%}), Ved.
anything standing or stationary (opposed to {%caratha,%}
see Ṛg-veda I. 58, 5).
<LEND>

<L>53170<pc>1146-a<k1>sTAtf<k2>sTAtf
{%Sthātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what stands or stays
stationary, standing (frequently opposed to {%jagat%} in
the phrase {%sthātur jagataśca,%} e. g. {%viśvasya sthā-%}
{%tur jagataśca gopāḥ,%} the preserver of everything
that stands and moves, Ṛg-veda VII. 60, 2); [cf.
Lat. <nsi>stator.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53171<pc>1146-a<k1>sTAna<k2>sTAna
{%Sthāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of standing or staying,
stay, continuance, the being fixed or stationary;
state, condition; a stationary state or condition, (one
of the three aims or results of state policy; it is de-
scribed as a kind of neutral or middle state character-
ized by neither loss nor gain, failure nor success);
the act of standing firm so as to resist a charge, firm
or calm bearing of troops, (Manu VII. 190); halt;
the stamina of a kingdom, that which constitutes its
chief strength or by virtue of which it exists, (regarded
as consisting of four parts, viz. army, treasury, city,
and territory, Manu VII. 56); the place of standing
or staying, any place, spot, locality, site, situation,
position, posture, station, post; office, appointment,
rank, dignity, degree; proper or right place; the
place or organ of utterance of any letter (which, ac-
cording to Pāṇini, are eight, viz. {%kaṇṭha,%} the throat;
{%tālu,%} the palate; {%mūrdhan,%} the top of the palate;
{%danta,%} the teeth; {%oṣṭha,%} the lips; {%kaṇṭha-tālu,%}
the throat and palate; {%kaṇṭhoṣṭha,%} the throat and
lips; {%dantoṣṭha,%} the teeth and lips; to which may
be added {%nāsikā,%} which is the place of utterance for
the true Anusvāra, and {%uras,%} the chest, which is said
to be the place of Visarga); dwelling-place, abode,
house; country, region, district; a town, city; a par-
ticular place or sphere assigned after death to those
who do their duty or neglect it, (that of virtuous
Brāhmans is called Prājāpatya; of Kṣatriyas, Aindra;
of Vaiśyas, Māruta; of Śūdras, Gāndharva; similarly,
neglectors of duty have places of punishment assigned
to them); a holy place; an altar; an open place in
a town, green, plain, square; part or division of a
book, section, chapter; the part or character of an
actor; interval, opportunity, leisure; an object (e. g.
[Page1146-b+ 81]
{%śulka-sth˚,%} an object of toll, taxation; {%pūjā-sth˚,%}
object of honour; {%kopa-sth˚,%} object of anger); a
modulation of the voice, note, tone (of which, ac-
cording to the Ṛg-veda-Prātiśākhya, there are three;
see {%mandra%}); likeness, resemblance; intimation;
({%sthāne%}), loc. c. in the right or proper place, pro-
perly, suitably, appropriately, justly, fitly, truly; at
the right or appropriate moment, opportunely; some-
times; in the place of, in the room of, in lieu of,
instead of (with gen.; in Pāṇini's grammar, when
the gen. c. stands alone, the word {%sthāne%} has to be
supplied, thus {%hanter jaḥ%} means that {%ja%} is to be sub-
stituted ‘in place of’ {%han,%} see Pāṇ. I. 1, 49); on
account of, because of; like, resembling, similarly,
as; [cf. <lang n="greek">δύστηνος</lang> (i. e. <lang n="greek">δυσ-στηνος</lang>), <lang n="greek">ἄ-στηνος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀστήν, ἀσταίνω, δυσταίνω.</lang>] {%—Sthāna-cañcalā,%} f.
the plant Ocimum Pilosum {%(= varvarī)%}. {%—Sthāna-%}
{%cintaka, as,%} m. an officer who superintends places
of residence or official dwellings or provides quarters
for an army, a kind of quarter-master. {%—Sthāna-%}
{%cyuta, as, ā, am, = sthāna-bhraṣṭa%} below.
{%—Sthāna-tas,%} ind. according to place or station;
in regard to the place or organ of utterance. {%—Sthā-%}
{%na-tyāga, as,%} m. desertion of post, leaving one's
place. {%—Sthāna-pāla, as,%} m. ‘place-protector,
place-keeper,’ a watchman, sentinel, policeman.
{%—Sthāna-pracyuta, as, ā, am,%} ejected from a
station or post, removed from an office, &c. {%—Sthāna-%}
{%bhūmi, is,%} f. a dwelling-place, mansion. {%—Sthāna-%}
{%bhraṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} fallen or removed from any
place or station, ejected from an office, displaced, out
of place. {%—Sthāna-māhātmya, am,%} n. the greatness
or glory of any place, a kind of divine virtue sup-
posed to be inherent in a sacred spot, and to operate
upon those who visit it. {%—Sthāna-yoga, as,%} m. as-
signment of suitable places, proper mode or place for
preserving articles, (Manu IX. 332.) {%—Sthāna-rak-%}
{%ṣaka, as,%} m. {%= sthāna-pāla%}. {%—Sthāna-vibhāga,%}
{%as,%} m. subdivision of a number according to the
places of its figures. {%—Sthāna-stha, as, ā, am,%} abid-
ing in one place, staying at home. {%—Sthanādhya-%}
{%kṣa (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m. the superintendent of any
place or post; a local governor; a watchman, police-
officer. {%—Sthānāntara (˚na-an˚), am,%} n. another
place. {%—Sthānāntara-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone to
another place, gone away. {%—Sthānānya-tva (˚na-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. difference or diversity of place. {%—Sthā-%}
{%nābhāva (˚na-abh˚), as,%} m. the want of a place or
situation. {%—Sthānāsana (˚na-ās˚), e,%} n. du. stand-
ing and sitting down. {%—Sthānāsana-vihāra-vat,%}
{%ān,%} m. (a pupil) occupying the station and seat and
place of religious exercises (of his preceptor, Manu
II. 248). {%—Sthānāsedha (˚na-ās˚), as,%} m. confine-
ment to a place, imprisonment, arrest. {%—Sthāneśvara%}
{%(˚na-īś˚),%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>53172<pc>1146-b<k1>sTAnaka<k2>sTAnaka
{%Sthānaka, am,%}¦ n. a position, situation; a par-
ticular point or situation in dramatic action, ({%patākā-%}
{%sthānaka,%} a striking situation introduced as an episode
into the regular plot of a drama); a city, town; a
basin or trench dug for water at the root of a tree;
froth or a kind of scum on spirits or wine; a mode
of recitation; a division or section of the Taittirīya
branch of the Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>53173<pc>1146-b<k1>sTAnika<k2>sTAnika
{%Sthānika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to a place or site,
local; (in grammar) that which takes the place of
anything else or is substituted for it; ({%as%}), m. any one
holding an official post, a placeman, the governor of a
place, superintendent of a district, manager of a temple.
<LEND>

<L>53174<pc>1146-b<k1>sTAnin<k2>sTAnin
{%Sthānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a place, having fixedness,
placed, abiding, permanent; having a substitute; ({%ī%}),
m. (in Pāṇini's grammar) the original form or primitive
element (i. e. that form for which anything is substi-
tuted; the substituted form which takes its place being
called {%ādeśa%}); that which has a place, that which has
a place in a sentence or is actually expressed. {%—Sthā-%}
{%ni-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} being the original or primitive
form. {%—Sthāni-vat,%} ind. (in grammar) like the
original form or primitive element, (the {%ādeśa%} or
substituted form is said to be {%sthāni-vat%} when it is
liable to all the rules which hold good for the primi-
tive.) {%—Sthānivat-tva, am,%} n. the state of being
[Page1146-c+ 81]
like the original form or element. {%—Sthāny-āśraya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} depending on the primitive form (said of
a grammatical operation).
<LEND>

<L>53175<pc>1146-c<k1>sTAnIya<k2>sTAnIya
{%Sthānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or suitable to any
place, prevailing in any place, local; ({%am%}), n. a town, city.
<LEND>

<L>53176<pc>1146-c<k1>sTApaka<k2>sTApaka
{%Sthāpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), causing to
stand, placing, fixing, establishing, founding, order-
ing, regulating; ({%as%}), m. the establisher or director
of the stage-business, a kind of stage-manager; the
founder of a temple, erector of an image.
<LEND>

<L>53177<pc>1146-c<k1>sTApatya<k2>sTApatya
{%Sthāpatya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%stha-pati%}), a guard of the
women's apartments; ({%am%}), n. architecture, building,
erecting. {%—Sthāpatya-veda, as,%} m. ‘the science of
architecture,’ one of the four Upa-vedas, (see {%upa-%}
{%veda.%})
<LEND>

<L>53178<pc>1146-c<k1>sTApana<k2>sTApana
{%Sthāpana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), the act of caus-
ing to stand, placing, fixing, establishing, erecting,
founding, instituting, regulating, directing, appoint-
ing; fixing the thoughts, concentration of the mind,
abstraction; a dwelling, habitation; a ceremony per-
formed when a mother perceives the first signs of
living conception, {%= puṃ-savana; (ā),%} f. placing,
fixing, establishing, regulating, arranging (as a drama
&c.), stage-management; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of plant ({%=%}
{%pāṭhā%}).
<LEND>

<L>53179<pc>1146-c<k1>sTApanIya<k2>sTApanIya
{%Sthāpanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be placed or fixed or
established.
<LEND>

<L>53180<pc>1146-c<k1>sTApayat<k2>sTApayat
{%Sthāpayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to stand, fixing,
placing, establishing.
<LEND>

<L>53181<pc>1146-c<k1>sTApayitvA<k2>sTApayitvA
{%Sthāpayitvā,%}¦ ind. having placed or fixed, having
established or erected, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53182<pc>1146-c<k1>sTApita<k2>sTApita
{%Sthāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused or made to stand,
fixed, established, placed, located, deposited; set up,
erected; founded, instituted, endowed, set apart;
placed in any post or situation, appointed; ordered,
regulated, directed, enjoined, ordained, enacted; set-
tled, ascertained, certain; firm, steady.
<LEND>

<L>53183<pc>1146-c<k1>sTApitavat<k2>sTApitavat
{%Sthāpitavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has placed or
fixed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53184<pc>1146-c<k1>sTApya<k2>sTApya
{%Sthāpya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be placed or deposited;
to be fixed or established; ({%am%}), n. a deposit, pledge
{%(= nikṣepa)%}. {%—Sthāpyāpaharaṇa (˚ya-ap˚), am,%}
n. the stealing or embezzling of a deposit.
<LEND>

<L>53185<pc>1146-c<k1>sTAman<k2>sTAman
{%Sthāman, a,%}¦ n. strength, power, stamina; fixity,
stability.
<LEND>

<L>53186<pc>1146-c<k1>sTAyin<k2>sTAyin
{%Sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ standing, staying, being, situ-
ated (often at end of comps., cf. {%antara-sth˚%}); abid-
ing, stopping, fixed, stationary, enduring, continuing,
permanent, constant, lasting (as a feeling or state,
see {%sthāyi-bhāva%} below); steady, firm, unchange-
able, invariable; ({%i%}), n. anything lasting, a permanent
state or condition (opposed to {%vy-abhicārin,%} q. v.).
{%—Sthāyi-tā,%} f. or {%sthāyi-tva, am,%} n. permanency,
steadiness, fixedness, constancy, invariableness. {%—Sthā-%}
{%yi-bhāva, as,%} m. a particular fixed or permanent
condition of mind or body, lasting feeling (as form-
ing a class of feelings or conditions which are fa-
vourite subjects of description in poetical and dramatic
compositions; these Sthāyi-bhāvas are opposed to
the Vyabhicāri-bhāvas, and are said in the Sāhitya-
darpaṇa to be eight in number, viz. 1. {%rati,%} love or
desire; 2. {%hāsa,%} mirth; 3. {%śoka,%} sorrow; 4. {%kro-%}
{%dha,%} resentment; 5. {%utsāha,%} high-mindedness or
heroism; 6. {%bhaya,%} terror; 7. {%jugupsā,%} disgust or
aversion; 8. {%vismaya,%} surprise; to which is some-
times added a ninth, viz. {%śama,%} quietism).
<LEND>

<L>53187<pc>1146-c<k1>sTAyuka<k2>sTAyuka
{%Sthāyuka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} disposed to stay or last,
apt to endure, of a steady nature, abiding, stopping,
stationary, steady, firm; ({%as%}), m. the overseer of a
village.
<LEND>

<L>53188<pc>1146-c<k1>sTAla<k2>sTAla
{%Sthāla, am,%}¦ n. a plate or dish (generally made of
some metal and used in eating); a cooking-pot,
caldron or any culinary utensil. {%—Sthāla-rūpa, am,%}
n. the form or representation of a pot.
<LEND>

<L>53189<pc>1146-c<k1>sTAlI<k2>sTAlI
{%Sthālī,%}¦ f. an earthen pot or pan, cooking-pot,
caldron, kettle, boiler; a particular vessel used in the
preparation of Soma; the substitution of a cooked
offering of rice &c. for the offering of meat at the
Māṃsāṣṭakā, q. v.; the trumpet-flower, Bignonia
Suaveolens. {%—Sthālī-daraṇa, am,%} n. the breaking
of a pot. {%—Sthālī-pakva, as, ā, am,%} cooked or
[Page1147-a+ 81]
dressed in a pot, boiled. {%—Sthālī-pāka, as,%} m.,
Ved. a particular religious act performed by a house-
holder, a cooked offering of rice, &c.; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
scil. {%mantrāḥ,%} epithet of particular Vedic hymns.
{%—Sthālī-purīṣa, am,%} n. the sediment or dirt
sticking to a kettle or cooking-pot. {%—Sthālī-pu-%}
{%lāka, as,%} m. boiled rice in a cooking-pot; an illus-
tration derived from the rule of boiled rice in a pot
(by which all the grains are equally moistened by
the heated water). {%—Sthālī-vila, am,%} n. the interior
or hollow of a caldron or cooking-pot. {%—Sthālī-%}
{%vilīya%} or {%sthālī-vilya, as, ā, am,%} fit to be boiled
or cooked in a pot. {%—Sthālī-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. a kind
of plant or tree ({%= nandī-vṛkṣa, aśvattha-%}
{%bheda%}).
<LEND>

<L>53190<pc>1147-a<k1>sTAvan<k2>sTAvan
{%Sthāvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ standing, stable, stationary.
<LEND>

<L>53191<pc>1147-a<k1>sTAvara<k2>sTAvara
{%Sthāvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ standing still, not moving,
not having the power of motion, not locomotive,
fixed to one spot, fixed, stationary, firm, stable, immov-
able, (opposed to {%jaṅgama,%} q. v.); inert, inactive,
slow (said of poison); regular, established; ({%as%}), m.
a mountain; ({%am%}), n. any stationary or inanimate
object (as a plant, mineral, &c.; these stationary
objects constituted the seventh creation of Brahmā
or {%tasthuṣāṃ sarga,%} see under {%sarga;%} cf. Manu
I. 41); a bow-string; immovable property, real
estate (such as land or houses); a heir-loom, family
possession (such as jewels &c. which have been long
preserved in a family and ought not to be sold).
{%—Sthāvara-tā,%} f. fixedness, stability, the quality of
being stationary, immobility; the state of a vegetable
or mineral, (Manu XII. 9.) {%—Sthāvara-jaṅgama,%}
{%am,%} n. or {%āni,%} n. pl. things stationary and movable
or inanimate and animate, (Manu I. 41.) {%—Sthāva-%}
{%rādi (˚ra-ādi),%} n. the poison called Vatsa-nābha,
q. v. {%—Sthāvarāsthāvara (˚ra-as˚), am,%} n. things
stationary and movable, immovable and movable
property.
<LEND>

<L>53192<pc>1147-a<k1>sTAvira<k2>sTAvira
{%Sthāvira, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (fr. {%sthavira%}), thick, firm
(Ved.); ({%am%}), n. old age (described as commencing
after seventy in men and after fifty in women, and
ending at ninety, after which period a man is called
{%varṣīyas%}).
<LEND>

<L>53193<pc>1147-a<k1>sTAsaka<k2>sTAsaka
{%Sthāsaka, as,%}¦ m. perfuming or smearing the body
with fragrant unguents (of sandal &c.); a bubble of
water or any fluid.
<LEND>

<L>53194<pc>1147-a<k1>sTAsu<k2>sTAsu
{%Sthāsu, u,%}¦ n. bodily strength or stamina.
<LEND>

<L>53195<pc>1147-a<k1>sTAsnu<k2>sTAsnu
{%Sthāsnu, us, us, u,%}¦ disposed to stand, firm,
stationary, immovable, fixed, stable; durable, per-
manent, eternal; a tree or plant ({%= vṛkṣa;%} cf.
{%sthāvara%}). {%—Sthāsnu-tā,%} f. firmness, stability, dura-
bility.
<LEND>

<L>53196<pc>1147-a<k1>sTita<k2>sTita
{%Sthita, as, ā, am,%}¦ stood, stayed, remained,
stopped; standing; standing up, risen; staying,
resting, abiding, ({%uccāvaceṣu sthita,%} abiding in
all things high and low); being, situated, existing,
living; stood still, standing still, desisted, stopped;
fixed, permanent, settled, steady, firm, immovable;
steadfast, determined, resolved, decreed, established;
steady or steadfast in conduct; faithful to a promise
or agreement; upright, virtuous; agreed, engaged,
contracted, promised; being close at hand, ready;
({%am%}), n. (in Vedic grammar), scil. {%pada,%} a word
standing by itself (i. e. without the particle {%iti%} in
the Pada text; opposed to {%upa-sthita%}). {%—Sthita-%}
{%dhī, īs, īs, i,%} steady-minded, firm-minded, firm,
unmoved, calm. {%—Sthita-pāṭhya,%} (in the drama)
recitation in Prākṛt by a woman standing. {%—Sthita-%}
{%prajña, as, ā, am,%} firm in judgment or wisdom,
free from fancies or hallucinations, calm, contented.
{%—Sthita-preman, ā,%} m. ‘firm in affection,’ a firm
or faithful friend. {%—Sthitopasthita (˚ta-up˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} (a word) with and without the particle {%iti%}
(in the Pada text; see {%sthita%} above).
<LEND>

<L>53197<pc>1147-a<k1>sTitavat<k2>sTitavat
{%Sthitavat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ one who has stood or
stayed or abided.
<LEND>

<L>53198<pc>1147-a<k1>sTiti<k2>sTiti
{%Sthiti, is,%}¦ f. standing, staying, remaining, con-
tinuing, living, residing, abiding; stay, residence;
standing still, stopping, continuance in one state;
remaining stationary, stability, duration, fixedness,
fixity, a firm position; stop, cessation; pause; any
[Page1147-b+ 81]
situation, state, position; posture, condition, natural
state, state of a case; good condition, well-doing,
welfare; station, high station, rank, dignity; per-
manence; continuance or steadfastness in the path
of duty, steadiness, correctness of conduct, propriety,
good manners; consistency; establishment of good
order (in a government); settled rule, sure or fixed
decision, ordinance, decree, axiom, maxim; settled
determination; term, limit, boundary; (in philo-
sophy) inertia, resistance to motion; one of the
three states through which the system of created
things and every individual being passes, (these
three states are, 1. {%utpatti,%} arising into being;
2. {%sthiti,%} continuance in life; 3. {%laya,%} dissolution);
(in astronomy) duration of an eclipse; (in Vedic
grammar) the standing of a word by itself (i. e.
without the particle {%iti,%} see {%sthita%}). {%—Sthiti-mat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} possessing firmness or stability, firm,
stable; steady (in purpose or conduct), upright,
firm, virtuous. {%—Sthiti-sthāpaka, as, ā, am,%} fixing
in a (former or original) state or condition, capable
of placing in or restoring to a (previous) form or
position, having elastic properties; ({%as%}), m. (ac-
cording to some also {%am,%} n.), the capability of
placing in or recovering a (previous) position or
condition, elasticity.
<LEND>

<L>53199<pc>1147-b<k1>sTitvA<k2>sTitvA
{%Sthitvā,%}¦ ind. having stood or stayed or stopped,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>53200<pc>1147-b<k1>sTira<k2>sTira
{%Sthira, as, ā, am,%}¦ firm, fixed, steady, steadfast;
unfluctuating, permanent, enduring, durable, settled,
lasting; not moving, immovable, still, placid, calm,
quiescent, cool, composed, collected, free from pas-
sion; steadfast or steady in conduct; constant,
faithful, determined; certain, sure, convinced; firm,
hard, solid, strong; ({%as%}), m. a deity, immortal;
epithet of Śiva; of Kārttikeya; a mountain; a
tree; a bull; final emancipation from existence;
the planet Saturn; a particular plant (= 1. {%dhava%});
N. of a particular astronomical Yoga; of certain
zodiacal signs (viz. Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius;
so called because any work done under these signs
is supposed to be lasting); ({%ā%}), f. a strong-minded
woman; the earth; the shrub Śāla-parṇī; a medi-
cinal root ({%= kākolī%}); the silk-cotton tree; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">στερεό-ς, στεῤῤό-ς, στέρι-φο-ς, στερίφη, στεῖρα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">στήρ-ιγξ, στηρίζ-ω, στελεόν:</lang> Lat. <nsi>steri-li-s, stīr-</nsi>
<nsi>ia, stilla, stolidus, stultus:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>stairo:</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>staren, storren, stornen, ga-starken, starh-</nsi>
<nsi>jan,</nsi> &c.: Angl. Sax. <nsi>starian, starc:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>styr-u,</nsi>
‘to be stiff or benumbed;’ <nsi>ster-va,</nsi> ‘a carcass.’]
{%—Sthira-kuṭṭaka, as,%} m. (in algebra) a steady
pulverizer, constant multiplier, common divisor (ap-
plied to a particular kind of common divisor).
{%—Sthira-gandha, as, ā, am,%} having durable per-
fume, strong-scented; ({%as%}), m. the Campaka tree,
Michelia Champaca; ({%ā%}), f. Pandanus Odoratissimus
({%= ketakī%}); the trumpet-flower {%(= pāṭalā)%}. {%—Sthi-%}
{%ra-cakra, as,%} m. a particular Jina or Bodhi-sattva
{%(= mañju-śrī)%}. {%—Sthira-citta, as, ā, am,%} or {%sthira-%}
{%cetas, ās, ās, as,%} firm-minded, firm, resolute, constant,
steady. {%—Sthira-cchada, as,%} m. ‘firm-leafed,’ the
birch tree {%(= bhūrja-pattra)%}. {%—Sthira-cchāya, as,%}
m. ‘having deep shade,’ a tree which gives shelter to
travellers; any tree. {%—Sthira-jihva, as,%} m. ‘firm-
tongued,’ a fish. {%—Sthira-jīvitā,%} f. ‘firm-lived,’ the
silk-cotton tree. {%—Sthira-tara, as, ā, am,%} more
firm, fixed, stationary; very firm or permanent,
durable, eternal. {%—Sthira-tā,%} f. or {%sthira-tva, am,%}
n. firmness, stability, steadiness, steadfastness; moral
firmness, fortitude; fearlessness. {%—Sthira-daṃṣṭra,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘strong-toothed,’ a snake; N. of Viṣṇu in
the boar-Avatāra; {%= dhvani%} (according to Śabda-k.).
{%—Sthira-dhanvan, ā, ā, a,%} having or armed with
a strong bow (said of Rudra, Ṛg-veda VII. 46, 1).
{%—Sthira-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} firm-minded, resolute, per-
severing. {%—Sthira-pattra, as,%} m. ‘firm-leafed,’ the
marshy date tree. {%—Sthira-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘firm-
flowered,’ the Campaka tree; the Vakula tree.
{%—Sthira-puṣpin, ī,%} m. ‘strong-flowered,’ the
Tilaka tree. {%—Sthira-pratijña, as, ā, am,%} persist-
ing in an assertion, pertinacious; faithful to a promise.
[Page1147-c+ 81]
{%—Sthira-pratibandha, as, ā, am,%} firm in resist-
ance, pertinacious, obstinate. {%—Sthira-pratiṣṭhā,%}
f. a firm resting-place, fixed residence. {%—Sthira-%}
{%preman, ā, ā, a,%} firm or steady in affection, a firm
friend. {%—Sthira-psnu, us, us, u,%} Ved. having con-
stant food; [cf. {%viśva-psnya.%}] {%—Sthira-phalā,%} f.
‘having firm fruit,’ a kind of gourd {%(= kuṣ-%}
{%māṇḍī)%}. {%—Sthira-buddhi, is, is, i,%} steady-minded,
resolute, calm, dispassionate. {%—Sthira-mati, is,%} f. a
firm mind, fixed resolution; ({%is, is, i%}), firm-minded,
firm, steady, resolute. {%—Sthira-manas, ās, ās, as,%}
firm-minded, resolute, determined, faithful. {%—Sthira-%}
{%yoni, is,%} m. ‘having a firm receptacle,’ a large tree
which gives shade and shelter. {%—Sthira-yauvana,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} possessing constant youth, ever youthful;
({%as%}), m. a kind of good or evil genius, a fairy {%(=%}
{%vidyā-dhara)%}. {%—Sthira-raṅgā,%} f. ‘having a durable
colour,’ indigo; a sort of Curcuma. {%—Sthira-rāgā,%}
f. a kind of Curcuma {%(= dāru-haridrā)%}. {%—Sthira-%}
{%locana, as, ā, am,%} steady-eyed; (one) whose gaze
is fixed. {%—Sthira-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} having fixed or en-
during prosperity. {%—Sthira-saṅgara, as, ā, am,%}
faithful to an agreement or promise, true, veracious.
{%—Sthira-sādhanaka, as,%} m. the Sindu-vāra tree.
{%—Sthira-sāra, as,%} m. ‘having firm sap,’ a kind of
tree {%(= śāka)%}. {%—Sthira-sauhṛda, as, ā, am,%} firm
in friendship; ({%am%}), n. firmness in friendship.
{%—Sthira-sthāyin, ī, inī, i,%} remaining firm or
steady, keeping perfectly still (as in meditation).
{%—Sthirāṃhripa (˚ra-aṃ˚), as,%} m. ‘durable tree,’
the marshy date tree. {%—Sthirātman (˚ra-āt˚), ā, ā,%}
{%a,%} firm-minded, resolute, unmoved, stable, steady.
{%—Sthirānurāga (˚ra-an˚), as, ā, am,%} constant in
affection or love. {%—Sthirāyus (˚ra-āy˚), us, us, us,%}
long-lived, long-lasting; ({%us%}), m. the silk-cotton
tree, (also {%sthirāyu%} according to some.) {%—Sthirā-%}
{%rambha (˚ra-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} firm in undertakings,
persevering. {%—Sthirī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to
make firm, confirm, strengthen, corroborate; to
bring to a standstill, stop, make fast. {%—Sthirī-bhū,%}
cl. 1. P. {%-bhavati,%} &c., to become firm or steady;
to become calm.
<LEND>

<L>53201<pc>1147-c<k1>sTiraka<k2>sTiraka
{%Sthiraka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a preceptor.
<LEND>

<L>53202<pc>1147-c<k1>sTirAya<k2>sTirAya
{%Sthirāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%sthirāyati,%} &c., to remain
firm or constant.
<LEND>

<L>53203<pc>1147-c<k1>sTura<k2>sTura
{%Sthura%}¦ in {%apa-ṣṭh˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>53204<pc>1147-c<k1>sTurin<k2>sTurin
{%Sthurin, ī,%}¦ m. {%= sthūrin%} below.
<LEND>

<L>53205<pc>1147-c<k1>sTula<k2>sTula<h>1
1. {%sthula%}¦ in {%apa-ṣṭh˚, vi-saṃṣṭh˚,%} q. q. v. v.
<LEND>

<L>53206<pc>1147-c<k1>sTUra<k2>sTUra
{%Sthūra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. {%= sthūla, sthavira,%}
strong, firm; wide, extended, (Sāy. {%= vistṛta,%} Ṛg-
veda VI. 29, 2); ({%as%}), m. a bull (Ved.); a man.
<LEND>

<L>53207<pc>1147-c<k1>sTUrikA<k2>sTUrikA
{%Sthūrikā,%}¦ f. (probably) a barren cow, (according
to some this is the more correct reading for {%chūrikā%}
in Manu VIII. 325.)
<LEND>

<L>53208<pc>1147-c<k1>sTUrin<k2>sTUrin
{%Sthūrin, ī,%}¦ m. (also written {%sthurin,%} cf. {%sthau-%}
{%rin%}), a pack-horse, one carrying loads on his back;
a pack-bullock; ({%i%}), n., Ved. a cart drawn by one
bull or draught animal, (Sāy. {%= ekena dhuryeṇa%}
{%yuktam anaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda X. 131, 3); [cf. Zend
<nsi>staora,</nsi> ‘a beast of burden:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ταῦρο-ς:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>tauru-s:</nsi> Umbr. <nsi>turu:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>stiuri,</nsi> ‘strong;’
<nsi>stur,</nsi> ‘large:’ Goth. <nsi>stiur:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>steor, stor:</nsi>
Engl. <nsi>steer:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>turu,</nsi> ‘a bull:’ Lith. <nsi>taura-s,</nsi>
‘a wild ox.’]
<LEND>

<L>53209<pc>1147-c<k1>sTeman<k2>sTeman
{%Stheman, ā,%}¦ m. (according to some), firmness,
stability, fixedness.
<LEND>

<L>53210<pc>1147-c<k1>sTeya<k2>sTeya
{%Stheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be placed or fixed, to be
settled or determined; ({%as%}), m. a person chosen to
settle a dispute between two parties, an arbitrator,
umpire, judge; a domestic priest; ({%ās%}), f. pl., scil.
{%āpaḥ,%} standing water (i. e. water standing in a pot
used in certain nuptial ceremonies).
<LEND>

<L>53211<pc>1147-c<k1>sTeyas<k2>sTeyas
{%Stheyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%sthira%}), more
fixed or firm, firmer; very firm or stable; eternal,
permanent; very resolute.
<LEND>

<L>53212<pc>1147-c<k1>sTezWa<k2>sTezWa
{%Stheṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ (superl. of {%sthira%}), most
fixed, very firm or stable, durable.
<LEND>

<L>53213<pc>1147-c<k1>sTErya<k2>sTErya
{%Sthairya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%sthira%}), firmness, stability,
fixedness, steadiness; continuance; firmness of mind,
resolution, constancy, calmness; patience; hardness,
solidity.
<LEND>
[Page1148-a+ 70]

<L>53214<pc>1148-a<k1>sTorin<k2>sTorin
{%Sthorin, ī,%}¦ m. a pack-horse or animal carrying
burdens, (see {%sthaurin.%})
<LEND>

<L>53215<pc>1148-a<k1>sTOra<k2>sTOra
{%Sthaura, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%sthūra = sthūla%}), firmness,
strength, power; a sufficient load for a horse or ass;
({%as%}), m. a patronymic of the Vedic Ṛṣi Agni-
yuta or Agni-yūpa (author of the hymn Ṛg-veda
X. 116).
<LEND>

<L>53216<pc>1148-a<k1>sTOrin<k2>sTOrin
{%Sthaurin, ī,%}¦ m. (see {%sthūrin, sthorin, sthurin%}),
a horse carrying burdens on his back, a pack-horse;
a strong horse.
<LEND>

<L>53217<pc>1148-a<k1>sTAgara<k2>sTAgara
{#sTAgara#}¦ {%sthāgara,%} Ved. probably connected
with {%sthagara,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>53218<pc>1148-a<k1>sTARu<k2>sTARu
{#sTARu#}¦ {%sthāṇu.%} See p. 1146, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53219<pc>1148-a<k1>sTARqila<k2>sTARqila
{#sTARqila#}¦ {%sthāṇḍila, as,%} m. (fr. {%sthaṇḍila%}),
a devotee who sleeps on the bare ground or on
ground prepared for a sacrifice ({%= sthaṇḍila-śāyin%});
a mendicant, religious beggar.
<LEND>

<L>53220<pc>1148-a<k1>sTAna<k2>sTAna
{#sTAna#}¦ {%sthāna, sthānin,%} &c. See p. 1146.
<LEND>

<L>53221<pc>1148-a<k1>sTApana<k2>sTApana
{#sTApana#}¦ {%sthāpana, sthāyin,%} &c. See p. 1146.
<LEND>

<L>53222<pc>1148-a<k1>sTAla<k2>sTAla
{#sTAla#}¦ {%sthāla,%} &c. See p. 1146, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53223<pc>1148-a<k1>sTAvara<k2>sTAvara
{#sTAvara#}¦ {%sthāvara,%} &c. See p. 1147, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53224<pc>1148-a<k1>sTAsu<k2>sTAsu
{#sTAsu#}¦ {%sthāsu, sthāsnu,%} &c. See p. 1147.
<LEND>

<L>53225<pc>1148-a<k1>sTika<k2>sTika
{#sTika#}¦ {%sthika, as,%} m. (according to some
fr. rt. 1. {%sthā%}), the buttocks ({%= kaṭi-protha%}).
<LEND>

<L>53226<pc>1148-a<k1>sTita<k2>sTita
{#sTita#}¦ {%sthita, sthiti,%} &c. See p. 1147, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53227<pc>1148-a<k1>sTir<k2>sTir
{#sTir#}¦ {%sthir,%} cl. 1. P. {%sthirati,%} &c., (see
Nirukta IX. 11.)
<LEND>

<L>53228<pc>1148-a<k1>sTira<k2>sTira
{#sTira#}¦ {%sthira,%} &c. See p. 1147, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53229<pc>1148-a<k1>sTivi<k2>sTivi
{#sTivi#}¦ {%sthivi,%} see Ṛg-veda X. 68, 3, (ac-
cording to Sāy. {%sthivibhyaḥ%} apparently {%= kusīde-%}
{%bhyaḥ,%} but the MS. is doubtful.)
<LEND>

<L>53230<pc>1148-a<k1>sTuq<k2>sTuq
{#sTuq#}¦ {%sthuḍ%} = rt. {%thuḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%sthuḍati,%}
&c., to cover.
<LEND>

<L>53231<pc>1148-a<k1>sTula<k2>sTula<h>2
{#sTula#} 2¦. {%sthula, am,%} n. (perhaps for {%sthuḍa,%}
fr. rt. {%sthuḍ,%} but cf. 1. {%sthula%} at p. 1147, col. 3),
a sort of long tent.
<LEND>

<L>53232<pc>1148-a<k1>sTURA<k2>sTURA
{#sTURA#}¦ {%sthūṇā,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 15. fr. rt. 1. {%sthā%}), the post or pillar of a house;
any post or pillar; an iron image, statue; an anvil;
a disease (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>53233<pc>1148-a<k1>sTUma<k2>sTUma
{#sTUma#}¦ {%sthūma, as,%} m. (according to Śabda-k.)
light; the moon; [cf. {%syūma.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53234<pc>1148-a<k1>sTUra<k2>sTUra
{#sTUra#}¦ {%sthūra, sthūrin.%} See p. 1147.
<LEND>

<L>53235<pc>1148-a<k1>sTUl<k2>sTUl
{#sTUl#}¦ {%sthūl%} (rather a Nom. derived fr.
{%sthūla%} below), cl. 10. A. {%sthūlayate%}
(also P. {%sthūlayati%} according to some), {%atusthūlat,%}
{%ta,%} to become big or stout, to become bulky, in-
crease, grow fat.
<LEND>

<L>53236<pc>1148-a<k1>sTUla<k2>sTUla
{%Sthūla, as, ā, am,%}¦ (probably a later form of
{%sthūra%} for {%sthāvara,%} see p. 1147, col. 3), strong,
powerful; stout, bulky, big, huge; fat, corpulent;
great, large, thick; clumsy, coarse, gross, rough,
(opposed to {%sūkṣma%}); not exact; doltish, stolid,
thick-headed; stupid, dull, ignorant; ({%as%}), m. the
jack tree; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of pepper ({%= gaja-pippalī%});
a kind of gourd or cucumber ({%= ervāru%}); large
cardamoms; ({%am%}), n. a heap, quantity; {%= kūṭa%}
(according to Śabda-k.); a tent, (probably for
2. {%sthula.%}) {%—Sthūla-kaṅgu, us,%} m. a sort of wild
and coarse kidney-bean {%(= varaka)%}. {%—Sthūla-kaṇā,%}
f. the plant Nigella Indica. {%—Sthūla-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m.
‘large-thorned,’ a kind of plant, {%= jāla-varvūraka;%}
{%(ikā),%} f. the silk-cotton tree. {%—Sthūla-kaṇṭā,%} f. a
kind of plant {%(= bṛhatī)%}. {%—Sthūla-kanda, as,%} m.
‘having a large bulb,’ a kind of esculent root or
plant with such a root ({%= sūraṇa; = māṇaka; =%}
{%hasti-kanda%}); a kind of garlic {%(= rakta-laśuna).%}
{%—Sthūla-kāya, as, ā, am,%} large-bodied, corpulent.
{%—Sthūla-kāṣṭha-dah, -dhak,%} or {%sthūla-kāṣ-%}
{%ṭhāgni (˚ṭha-ag˚), is,%} m. the trunk of a tree or
[Page1148-b+ 81]
any thick piece of timber on fire. {%—Sthūla-kṣeḍa%}
or {%sthūla-kṣveḍa, as,%} m. (see {%kṣveḍa%}), an arrow.
{%—Sthūla-grīva, as, ā, am,%} thick-necked. {%—Sthū-%}
{%laṅ-karaṇa, as, ī, am,%} making big or large.
{%—Sthūla-cañcu, us,%} m. a kind of culinary plant
{%(= mahā-cañcu)%}. {%—Sthūla-cāpa, as,%} m. (for {%tūla-%}
{%cāpa%}), a large bow-like instrument used in cleaning
cotton. {%—Sthūla-jīraka, as,%} m. the plant Nigella
Indica (called Kaloñjī in Hindī). {%—Sthūla-tara, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} more bulky, bigger, stouter, very large,
larger. {%—Sthūla-tā,%} f. or {%sthūla-tva, am,%} n. big-
ness, stoutness, bulkiness, coarseness; dulness, stu-
pidity. {%—Sthūla-tāla, as,%} m. the marshy date tree
{%(= hintāla)%}. {%—Sthūla-tvacā,%} f. ‘thick-barked,’ a
kind of plant {%(= kāśmarī)%}. {%—Sthūla-daṇḍa, as,%}
m. a sort of large reed {%(= deva-nala)%}. {%—Sthūla-%}
{%darbha, as,%} m. a kind of grass, Saccharum Munja.
{%—Sthūla-dalā,%} f. the plant Aloe Perfoliata. {%—Sthū-%}
{%la-deha, as, am,%} m. n. {%= sthūla-śarīra%} below.
{%—Sthūla-dhī, īs, īs, i,%} dull-witted, stupid, ignorant.
{%—Sthūla-nāla, as,%} m. a kind of large reed {%(=%}
{%deva-nala)%}. {%—Sthūla-nāsa%} or {%sthūla-nāsika, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} large-nosed, thick-nosed; ({%as%}), m. a hog,
boar. {%—Sthūla-paṭa, as, am,%} m. n. coarse cloth;
({%as, ā, am%}), having coarse cloth or clothes. {%—Sthūla-%}
{%paṭṭa, as,%} m. cotton; ({%am%}), n. coarse cloth (accord-
ing to some). {%—Sthūla-paṭṭāka, as,%} m. coarse cloth.
{%—Sthūla-pāda, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} large-footed, club-
footed, having swelled legs; ({%as%}), m. an elephant;
a man with elephantiasis. {%—Sthūla-puṣpa, as,%} m.
‘large-flowered,’ the tree Æschynomene Grandiflora;
({%ā%}), f. a sort of mountain Clitorea; ({%ī%}), f. a kind
of plant {%(= yava-tiktā)%}. {%—Sthūla-phala, am,%} n.
the gross result of a calculation or measurement;
({%as%}), m. ‘having large fruit,’ the silk-cotton tree;
({%ā%}), f. the Crotolaria {%(= śaṇa-puṣpī)%}. {%—Sthūla-%}
{%bāhū, ūs,%} f., N. of a woman. {%—Sthūla-buddhi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} dull-witted, dull, stupid. {%—Sthūla-bhadra,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of one of the six Jaina Śruta-kevalins.
{%—Sthūla-bhūta, āni,%} n. pl. the five grosser ele-
ments (according to the Sāṅkhya phil., see {%sāṅkhya%}).
{%—Sthūla-marica, am,%} n. a particular fragrant berry
{%(= kakkola)%}. {%—Sthūla-māna, am,%} n. gross or
rough measure, rough computation. {%—Sthūla-mūla,%}
{%am,%} n. a large root; a kind of radish {%(= cāṇakya-%}
{%mūlaka)%}. {%—Sthūlam-bhaviṣṇu, us, us, u,%} or
{%sthūlam-bhāvuka, as, ā, am,%} becoming large or
stout. {%—Sthūla-lakṣa%} or {%sthūla-lakṣya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘having large aims or attributes,’ munificent,
liberal, generous; wise, learned; disposed to recol-
lect both benefits and injuries; taking careless aim.
{%—Sthūlalakṣya-tva, am,%} n. munificence, libe-
rality; aiming carelessly. {%—Sthūla-vartma-kṛt, t,%}
m. a kind of shrub {%(= brāhmaṇa-yaṣṭikā).%}
{%—Sthūla-valkala, as,%} m. ‘thick-barked,’ the red
Lodhra (or Lodh tree, the bark of which is used in
tanning, &c.). {%—Sthūla-vṛkṣa-phala, as,%} m. a
kind of plant or tree {%(= snigdha-piṇḍītaka).%}
{%—Sthūla-vaidehī,%} f. a particular plant {%(= gaja-%}
{%pippalī)%}. {%—Sthūla-śaṅkhā,%} f. a woman having a
large vulva. {%—Sthūla-śara, as,%} m. a kind of large
reed. {%—Sthūla-śarīra, am,%} n. the grosser or material
and perishable body with which a soul clad in its
subtile body is invested, (opposed to {%sūkṣma-%}
{%śarīra%} and {%liṅga-śarīra,%} q. q. v. v.); ({%as, ā, am%}),
large-bodied, huge. {%—Sthūla-śāṭaka, as, akā%} or
{%ikā,%} m. f. or {%sthūla-śāṭi, is,%} m. thick or coarse
cloth. {%—Sthūla-śāli, is,%} m. a kind of large rice.
{%—Sthūla-śiras, as,%} n. a large head or summit;
({%ās, ās, as%}), large-headed. {%—Sthūla-śīrṣaka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} large-headed; ({%ikā%}), f. a small ant having
a large head in proportion to its size. {%—Sthūla-ṣaṭ-%}
{%pada, as,%} m. a large bee; wasp. {%—Sthūla-ṣṭhīvi,%}
{%is,%} m., N. of the father of a grammarian. {%—Sthūla-%}
{%sūkṣma, as, ā, am,%} mighty and subtile (as God
who sustains the universe and an atom). {%—Sthūla-%}
{%skandha, as,%} m. ‘having a thick stem,’ the Lakuca
tree. {%—Sthūla-hasta, as,%} m. a large hand; the
thick trunk of an elephant; ({%am%}), n. an elephant's
trunk; ({%as, ā, am%}), having large hands. {%—Sthū-%}
{%lāṃśā (˚la-aṃ˚),%} f. a kind of Curcuma {%(= gandha- %}
[Page1148-c+ 75]
{%pattrā)%}. {%—Sthūlāntra (˚la-an˚), am,%} n. the larger
intestine near the anus. {%—Sthūlāmra (˚la-ām˚),%}
{%as,%} m. the large Mango tree {%(= mahārāja-cūta).%}
{%—Sthūlāsya (˚la-ās˚), as, ā, am,%} large-faced,
large-mouthed; ({%as%}), m. a snake. {%—Sthūlī-karaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. the act of making large or bulky, enlarging,
fattening. {%—Sthūlī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made large,
enlarged, fattened. {%—Sthūlī-bhūta, as, ā, am,%} be-
come large or thick, become bulky, fattened. {%—Sthū-%}
{%lairaṇḍa (˚la-er˚), as,%} m. the large castor-oil
plant. {%—Sthūlailā (˚la-elā),%} f. large cardamoms.
{%—Sthūloccaya (˚la-uc˚), as,%} m. ‘rough aggre-
gation,’ a large fragment of rock or crag fallen from
a mountain and forming an irregular mound or
hillock; incompleteness, deficiency, defect; the
middle pace of elephants (neither quick nor slow);
an eruption of pimples on the face; a hollow at the
root of an elephant's tusks.
<LEND>

<L>53237<pc>1148-c<k1>sTUlaka<k2>sTUlaka
{%Sthūlaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ large, bulky; ({%as%}), m. a
sort of grass or reed (Saccharum Cylindricum, com-
monly called Ulu).
<LEND>

<L>53238<pc>1148-c<k1>sTUlin<k2>sTUlin
{%Sthūlin, ī,%}¦ m. a camel; [cf. {%sthūrin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53239<pc>1148-c<k1>sTOla<k2>sTOla
{%Sthaula, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} stout, robust ({%= sthūla,%}
Ṛg-veda VI. 44, 7).
<LEND>

<L>53240<pc>1148-c<k1>sTOlalakzya<k2>sTOlalakzya
{%Sthaulalakṣya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%sthūla-lakṣa%}),
the having great aims, munificence, liberality, (Manu
VII. 211.)
<LEND>

<L>53241<pc>1148-c<k1>sTOlaSIrza<k2>sTOlaSIrza
{%Sthaulaśīrṣa, as, ī, am,%}¦ (fr. {%sthūla-śīrṣa%}),
having a large head or summit, large-headed.
<LEND>

<L>53242<pc>1148-c<k1>sTOlAzWIvi<k2>sTOlAzWIvi
{%Sthaulāṣṭhīvi, is,%}¦ m. (sometimes written {%sthau-%}
{%laṣṭhīvi%}), N. of an ancient grammarian.
<LEND>

<L>53243<pc>1148-c<k1>sTOlya<k2>sTOlya
{%Sthaulya, am,%}¦ n. stoutness, bigness, largeness,
bulk, size, thickness, coarseness, grossness, denseness,
(opposed to {%saukṣmya%}); doltishness, density of
intellect.
<LEND>

<L>53244<pc>1148-c<k1>sTeya<k2>sTeya
{#sTeya#}¦ {%stheya, stheyas, stheṣṭha.%} See p. 1147.
<LEND>

<L>53245<pc>1148-c<k1>sTErya<k2>sTErya
{#sTErya#}¦ {%sthairya.%} See p. 1147, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53246<pc>1148-c<k1>sTOReya<k2>sTOReya
{#sTOReya#}¦ {%sthauṇeya, am,%} n. (said to be fr.
{%sthūṇā%}), a sort of perfume ({%= granthi-parṇa;%}
commonly called Gāṇṭhiāla).
<LEND>

<L>53247<pc>1148-c<k1>sTOReyaka<k2>sTOReyaka
{%Sthauṇeyaka, am,%}¦ n. a kind of perfume.
<LEND>

<L>53248<pc>1148-c<k1>sTOra<k2>sTOra
{#sTOra#}¦ {%sthaura, sthaurin.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53249<pc>1148-c<k1>snapana<k2>snapana
{#snapana#}¦ {%snapana, snapita.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>53250<pc>1148-c<k1>snava<k2>snava
{#snava#}¦ {%snava.%} See under rt. 1. {%snu.%}
<LEND>

<L>53251<pc>1148-c<k1>snas<k2>snas
{#snas#}¦ {%snas,%} cl. 1. 4. P. {%snasati, snasyati,%}
{%sasnāsa,%} &c., (according to some) to
eject, eject from the mouth, reject ({%nirāse%}); to
inhabit ({%nivāse,%} according to others); to eat (?); [cf.
rt. {%snus%}]: Caus. {%snasayati%} or {%snāsayati,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>53252<pc>1148-c<k1>snasA<k2>snasA
{#snasA#}¦ {%snasā,%} f. a tendon, muscle, {%= snāva;%}
[cf. perhaps, according to some, Old Germ. <nsi>snor,</nsi>
<nsi>snuor.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53253<pc>1148-c<k1>snA<k2>snA
{#snA#}¦ {%snā%} (probably connected with rt.
1. {%snu%}), cl. 2. P. (ep. also A.) {%snāti (-te),%}
Pot. P. {%snāyāt%} (Manu IV. 82; A. anomalous, {%snā-%}
{%yīta,%} Mahā-bh. Vana-p. 7072), {%sasnau, snāsyati,%}
{%asnāsīt,%} Prec. {%snāyāt%} or {%sneyāt, snātum%} (perhaps
originally ‘to float or swim,’ cf. rt. 1. {%snu,%} 3. {%nau,%}
p. 518), to bathe, perform ablution; to perform the
ceremony of bathing when leaving the house of a
spiritual preceptor: Caus. {%snāpayati%} or {%snapa-%}
{%yati%} (with preps. the form {%snāpayati%} is more
correct), to cause to bathe, wash, cleanse, bathe,
wet; to bathe with tears, weep for (?): Desid. {%si-%}
{%snāsati:%} Intens. {%sāsnāyate, sāsnāti, sāsneti;%} [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">νά-ω, νᾶ-μα, να-ρό-ς, νη-ρό-ς, νῆ-αο-ς, νίπτω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νή-χ-ω</lang> for <lang n="greek">ανή-χ-ω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>nâ-re, nâ-s</nsi> (= Sans. {%snāsi%}),
<nsi>na-ta-re, na-su-s;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>nadr;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>nœd-</nsi>
<nsi>dre, nedre;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>nacho;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>snamhaim,</nsi>
‘I swim.’]
<LEND>

<L>53254<pc>1148-c<k1>snapana<k2>snapana
{%Snapana, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing to bathe; used for
bathing (as water &c.); ({%am%}), n. causing to bathe,
bathing, ablution; washing, sprinkling, wetting.
<LEND>

<L>53255<pc>1148-c<k1>snapita<k2>snapita
{%Snapita, as, ā, am,%}¦ bathed, washed, sprinkled,
wetted, moistened.
<LEND>
[Page1149-a+ 81]

<L>53256<pc>1149-a<k1>snAt<k2>snAt
{%Snāt, ān, ātī%}¦ or {%āntī, āt,%} bathing, performing
ablution.
<LEND>

<L>53257<pc>1149-a<k1>snAta<k2>snAta
{%Snāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ bathed, washed, purified by ab-
lution, pure; ({%as%}), m. one whose spiritual instruc-
tion is finished; an initiated householder. {%—Snātā-%}
{%nulipta (˚ta-an˚), as, ā, am,%} one who is both bathed
and anointed.
<LEND>

<L>53258<pc>1149-a<k1>snAtaka<k2>snAtaka
{%Snātaka, as,%}¦ m. a Brāhman who has performed
the ceremony of ablution (cf. {%ā-plava%}) required on
his finishing his first Āśrama or period of studentship
as a Brahma-cārin (and on becoming initiated into
the second Āśrama or order of a Gṛha-stha, q. v.);
a Brāhman just returned from the house of his pre-
ceptor and become a married man or initiated house-
holder, (three kinds of Snātakas are enumerated,
1. the Vidyā-snātaka or Brahma-cārin, who, at the
end of his period of studentship, has completed a
course of study of the Vedas only; 2. the Vrata-
snātaka, who has completed the prescribed Vratas or
vowed observances, such as fasting, continence, &c.,
without becoming perfect in the Vedas; 3. the Vidyā-
vrata-snātaka or Ubhaya-snātaka, who has com-
pleted both the Vedas and the Vratas; this last is of
course regarded as the highest kind, see Kullūka on
Manu III. 2); a Brāhman who is a Bhikṣu or
asker of alms for any religious object or legitimate
purpose, (nine kinds are enumerated in Manu XI. 1);
any man of the first three classes who is an initiated
householder.
<LEND>

<L>53259<pc>1149-a<k1>snAtf<k2>snAtf
{%Snātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who bathes or washes, a
bather.
<LEND>

<L>53260<pc>1149-a<k1>snAtva<k2>snAtva
{%Snātva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. fit for ablutions, capable
of being used for bathing, (Sāy. {%snātvāḥ = snānār-%}
{%hāḥ,%} Ṛg-veda X. 71, 7.)
<LEND>

<L>53261<pc>1149-a<k1>snAtvA<k2>snAtvA
{%Snātvā%}¦ (Ved. also {%snātvī%}), ind. having bathed or
washed, having performed ablutions.
<LEND>

<L>53262<pc>1149-a<k1>snAna<k2>snAna
{%Snāna, am,%}¦ n. bathing, washing, ablution, dipping
in water, wetting, purification by bathing, religious
or ceremonial ablution, bathing in sacred waters
(considered as a daily observance or as an essential
part of some ceremonial); the ceremony of bathing
or anointing an idol; anything used in ablution (e. g.
water, perfumed powder for the body, &c.). {%—Snā-%}
{%na-tṛṇa, am,%} n. ‘bathing-grass,’ Kuśa grass. {%—Snā-%}
{%na-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a commentary by Gopī-nātha
on the Snāna-sūtra. {%—Snāna-droṇī,%} f. a bathing-tub.
{%—Snāna-yātrā,%} f. ‘bathing procession,’ the festival
held on the day of full moon in the month Jyeṣṭha
(when images of Kṛṣṇa as Jagan-nātha are carried
out and bathed; in Orissa this festival is called
Ratha-yātrā). {%—Snānayātrika, as, ā, am,%} attend-
ing the above procession at the bathing of Jagan-
nātha. {%—Snāna-vastra, am,%} n. a cloth put on for
bathing, a bathing-dress, wet cloth. {%—Snāna-vidhi, is,%}
m. the rules of ablution, proper manner of bathing;
N. of a Pariśiṣṭa of the Sāma-veda. {%—Snāna-śīla,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} fond of bathing, observing or performing
ablution (especially in sacred waters). {%—Snāna-sūtra,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Sūtra work (ascribed to Kātyāyana).
{%—Snānasūtra-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a summary
of a commentary by Hari-jīvana-miśra on the Snāna-
sūtra. {%—Snānāgāra (˚na-āg˚), am,%} n. a bath-room.
{%—Snānottīrṇa (˚na-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} rising up from
a bath, one who has just completed his ablutions.
<LEND>

<L>53263<pc>1149-a<k1>snAnIya<k2>snAnIya
{%Snānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit for bathing or ablution,
suitable for bathing; ({%am%}), n. water or any article
(such as unguents, perfumed powders, &c.) proper
for bathing. {%—Snānīya-vastra, am,%} n. a cloth tied
round the waist for bathing, a bathing dress.
<LEND>

<L>53264<pc>1149-a<k1>snApaka<k2>snApaka
{%Snāpaka, as,%}¦ m. (fr. the Caus.), a servant who
bathes his master or attends him while bathing
(bringing water and pouring it over his person).
<LEND>

<L>53265<pc>1149-a<k1>snApana<k2>snApana
{%Snāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to bathe or
attending a person while bathing, (Manu II. 209.)
{%—Snāpanocchiṣṭa-bhojana (˚na-uc˚), e,%} n. du.
the act of bathing another person and eating his
leavings, (Manu II. 209.)
<LEND>

<L>53266<pc>1149-a<k1>snApita<k2>snApita
{%Snāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to bathe, attended on
while bathing, immersed.
<LEND>

<L>53267<pc>1149-a<k1>snAyin<k2>snAyin
{%Snāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ bathing; ({%ī%}), m. a bather, per-
former of ablutions.
<LEND>
[Page1149-b+ 78]

<L>53268<pc>1149-b<k1>snAsyat<k2>snAsyat
{%Snāsyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to bathe or
perform an initiatory ceremonial ablution; ({%an%}), m.
a religious student about to become a Snātaka, (Manu
II. 245.)
<LEND>

<L>53269<pc>1149-b<k1>snAyu<k2>snAyu
{#snAyu#}¦ {%snāyu, us,%} f. (according to some {%us,%}
m.; said in Uṇādi-s. I. 1. to be fr. rt. {%snā%}), a sinew,
tendon, muscle (described as {%vāyu-vāhinī-nāḍī,%} ‘a
tubular vessel conveying vital air’); the string of a
bow; [cf. probably Gr. <lang n="greek">νεῦρο-ν, νευρ-ά;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ner-</nsi>
<nsi>vu-s, nerviœ, nervosus;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>snar-a, snar-</nsi>
<nsi>ahha, snuor, narwa;</nsi> Old Sax. <nsi>naru;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>nar-</nsi>
<nsi>a-s, ner-u.</nsi>] {%—Snāyu-bandhana, am,%} n. a sinew-
string. {%—Snāyu-maya, as, ī, am,%} made of tendons.
{%—Snāyu-yuta, as, ā, am,%} possessed of tendons,
(Manu VI. 76.) {%—Snāyu-rajju, us, us, u,%} having
tendons for cords (said of the body). {%—Snāyv-arman,%}
{%a,%} n. a kind of disease of the eyes.
<LEND>

<L>53270<pc>1149-b<k1>snAyuka<k2>snAyuka
{%Snāyuka = snāyu%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>53271<pc>1149-b<k1>snAva<k2>snAva
{%Snāva, as,%}¦ m. (the form {%snāvāni,%} neut. pl., occurs),
a tendon, muscle; (according to some) the vascular
membrane investing the bones; [cf. probably Old
Germ. <nsi>senwa;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>sinu, sinw, senw.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53272<pc>1149-b<k1>snAvan<k2>snAvan
{%Snāvan, ā,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 112. fr.
rt. {%snā%}), a muscle, sinew (Ved.); {%= rasika,%} a
lover (?).
<LEND>

<L>53273<pc>1149-b<k1>snigDa<k2>snigDa
{#snigDa#}¦ {%snigdha.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>53274<pc>1149-b<k1>sniw<k2>sniw
{#sniw#}¦ {%sniṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%sneṭayati,%} to go; to
love, be in love; [cf. rt. 1. {%snih%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>53275<pc>1149-b<k1>snih<k2>snih<h>1
{#snih#} 1¦. {%snih,%} cl. 4. P. {%snihyati, siṣṇeha,%}
{%snehiṣyati%} or {%snekṣyati, asnihat,%}
{%snehitum%} or {%snegdhum%} or {%sneḍhum,%} (probably
originally) to be adhesive or sticky or viscid; to be
bland; to be easily attached; to have affection for,
love, regard; to be fond of (with gen.); to be kind
to or pleased with; cl. 10. P. {%snehayati,%} &c., to be
unctuous or greasy: Pass. {%snihyate,%} Aor. {%asnehi:%}
Caus. {%snehayati,%} &c., Aor. {%asiṣṇihat,%} to make
unctuous, anoint, lubricate; to cause to love, &c.; to
dissolve, destroy, kill, slay, (in Naigh. II. 19. {%sneha-%}
{%yati%} and [according to some readings] {%snehati%} are
enumerated amongst the {%vadha-karmāṇaḥ%}): Desid.
{%sisnehiṣati, sisnihiṣati, sisnikṣati:%} Intens.
{%seṣṇihyate, seṣṇegdhi%} or {%seṣṇeḍhi.%}
<LEND>

<L>53276<pc>1149-b<k1>snigDa<k2>snigDa
{%Snigdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ oily, oleaginous, unctuous,
greasy, fat, sticky, viscid, cohesive, adhesive; emol-
lient, smooth; glossy, shining, resplendent; moist,
wet; cooling; bland, kind, amiable; attached, lov-
ing, tender, affectionate, friendly, well affected; lovely,
agreeable; coarse, thick, dense; ({%as%}), m. a friend;
a sort of pine, (see {%snigdha-dāru%} below); the red
castor-oil plant; scil. {%gaṇḍūṣa,%} a particular mode
of rinsing the mouth; ({%ā%}), f. marrow, {%= medā;%}
{%(am),%} n. oil; bees'-wax; light, lustre; thickness,
coarseness. {%—Snigdha-jana, as,%} m. an affectionate
or friendly person, a friend. {%—Snigdha-taṇḍula, as,%}
m. a kind of rice of quick growth {%(= ṣaṣṭika).%}
{%—Snigdha-tā,%} f. or {%snigdha-tva, am,%} n. unctuous-
ness, oiliness; blandness; tenderness, kindness, affec-
tion, love. {%—Snigdha-dāru, u,%} n. a sort of pine,
Pinus Longifolia ({%= sarala%}); another kind, Pinus
Devadaru. {%—Snigdha-pattra, as, ā, am,%} having
smooth or glossy leaves; ({%as, ā%}), m. f. the jujube,
Zizyphus Jujuba; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant ({%= kāś-%}
{%marī%}); another kind {%(= pālakyā)%}. {%—Snigdha-%}
{%pattraka, as,%} m. ‘having smooth leaves,’ a kind of
grass; other plants {%(= ghṛta-karañja; = guccha-%}
{%karañja)%}. {%—Snigdha-piṇḍītaka, as,%} m. a kind of
Madana tree. {%—Snigdha-phala, as, ā, am,%} having
unctuous fruit, having glossy fruit; ({%ā%}), f. the ich-
neumon plant {%(= nākulī)%}. {%—Snigdha-varṇa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having a glossy or bright colour; having a
soft or agreeable complexion.
<LEND>

<L>53277<pc>1149-b<k1>snigDvA<k2>snigDvA
{%Snigdhvā%}¦ or {%snihitvā,%} ind. becoming unctuous,
becoming bland or affectionate.
<LEND>

<L>53278<pc>1149-b<k1>snih<k2>snih<h>2
2. {%snih, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ or {%k, k, k,%} loving, affectionate; one
who loves.
<LEND>

<L>53279<pc>1149-b<k1>snIQa<k2>snIQa
{%Snīḍha, as, ā, am,%}¦ attached, bland, tender, loving.
<LEND>

<L>53280<pc>1149-b<k1>snIQvA<k2>snIQvA
{%Snīḍhvā,%}¦ ind. {%= snigdhvā%} above.
<LEND>
[Page1149-c+ 80]

<L>53281<pc>1149-c<k1>snIhiti<k2>snIhiti
{%Snīhiti, is, is, i,%}¦ Ved. killing, slaying.
<LEND>

<L>53282<pc>1149-c<k1>snIhitI<k2>snIhitI
{%Snīhitī,%}¦ f., Ved. killing, slaying; malevolent, (Sāy.
{%= vadha-kāriṇī,%} Ṛg-veda I. 74, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>53283<pc>1149-c<k1>sneha<k2>sneha
{%Sneha, as,%}¦ m. oiliness, unctuousness, fattiness,
greasiness, lubricity, viscidity (as one of the twenty-
four Guṇas of the Vaiśeṣika branch of the Nyāya
phil.); moisture; blandness, tenderness, love, affec-
tion, kindness; filial love or affection; any unctuous
or oleaginous substance, oil, grease, fat, an unguent;
a fluid of the body; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a caste (cor-
responding to the Vaiśyas). {%—Sneha-guṇita, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} endowed with love or affection. {%—Sneha-ccheda,%}
{%as,%} m. interruption of friendship, cessation or loss of
regard. {%—Sneha-pakva, as, ā, am,%} cooked or
dressed with oil. {%—Sneha-pātra, am,%} n. a worthy
object of affection. {%—Sneha-pūrvam,%} ind. preceded
by affection, affectionately, tenderly, fondly. {%—Sneha-%}
{%pravṛtti, is,%} f. ‘course of friendship,’ affection,
love. {%—Sneha-priya, as, ā, am,%} fond of oil; ({%as%}),
m. a lamp. {%—Sneha-bhāṇḍa, am,%} n. an oil-vessel,
pot of oil. {%—Snehabhāṇḍa-jīvin, ī,%} m. living by
oil-vessels, an oilman. {%—Sneha-bhū, ūs,%} m. phlegm,
rheum, the phlegmatic humor. {%—Sneha-bhūmi, is,%}
f. ‘oil-ground, oil-source,’ any substance yielding oil
or grease; any object of affection, one worthy of
love. {%—Sneha-raṅga, as,%} m. ‘oil-coloured,’ se-
samum. {%—Sneha-vat, ān, atī, at,%} unctuous, oily;
possessed of affection, affectionate; ({%atī%}), f. {%= medā%}
(according to Śabda-k.). {%—Sneha-vasti, is,%} f. a
clyster or injection of oil, oily enema. {%—Sneha-vid-%}
{%dha, as,%} m. ‘pierced or impregnated with oil,’ a
sort of pine, Pinus Devadaru (according to Śabda-k.
{%am,%} n.). {%—Sneha-vimardita, as, ā, am,%} rubbed or
anointed with oil. {%—Sneha-vīja, as, ā, am,%} having
oily seeds, causing unctuousness, &c.; ({%as%}), m. the
Piyāla tree. {%—Sneha-vyakti, is,%} f. manifestation or
display of friendship. {%—Sneha-saṃyukta, as, ā, am,%}
mixed with oil, dressed with ghee, (Manu V. 24.)
{%—Sneha-sambhāṣa, as,%} m. kind conversation.
{%—Snehākta (˚ha-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} anointed with
oil, oiled, greased, lubricated. {%—Snehānuvṛtti (˚ha-%}
{%an˚), is,%} f. continuance of affection, affectionate or
friendly intercourse. {%—Snehāśa (˚ha-āśa), as,%} m.
‘oil-consumer,’ a lamp.
<LEND>

<L>53284<pc>1149-c<k1>snehan<k2>snehan
{%Snehan, ā,%}¦ m. a friend; the moon; a kind of
disease.
<LEND>

<L>53285<pc>1149-c<k1>snehana<k2>snehana
{%Snehana, as, ī, am,%}¦ anointing, lubricating; de-
stroying; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; ({%am%}), n. the act
of anointing, unction, lubrication, rubbing or smear-
ing with oil or unguents; unctuousness, being or
becoming oily, &c.; an emollient, unguent, lini-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>53286<pc>1149-c<k1>snehanIya<k2>snehanIya
{%Snehanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be anointed or lubri-
cated; to be loved.
<LEND>

<L>53287<pc>1149-c<k1>snehayat<k2>snehayat
{%Snehayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. destroying, killing,
murdering.
<LEND>

<L>53288<pc>1149-c<k1>snehita<k2>snehita
{%Snehita, as, ā, am,%}¦ anointed, smeared with oil;
loved, beloved; kind, affectionate; ({%as%}), m. a loved
one, friend.
<LEND>

<L>53289<pc>1149-c<k1>snehitavya<k2>snehitavya
{%Snehitavya, as, ā, am, = snehanīya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>53290<pc>1149-c<k1>snehitI<k2>snehitI
{%Snehitī,%}¦ f., Ved. destroying, killing; [cf. {%snīhitī%}
above.]
<LEND>

<L>53291<pc>1149-c<k1>snehitvA<k2>snehitvA
{%Snehitvā,%}¦ ind. {%= snigdhvā, snihitvā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53292<pc>1149-c<k1>snehin<k2>snehin
{%Snehin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ oily, unctuous, fat; attached, af-
fectionate, friendly; ({%ī%}), m. an anointer, smearer;
a painter; a friend.
<LEND>

<L>53293<pc>1149-c<k1>snehu<k2>snehu
{%Snehu, us,%}¦ m. the moon; a kind of disease; [cf.
{%snehan.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53294<pc>1149-c<k1>snEgDya<k2>snEgDya
{%Snaigdhya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%snigdha%}), unctuousness,
oiliness, smoothness, lubricity, blandness; tenderness,
fondness; affectionateness.
<LEND>

<L>53295<pc>1149-c<k1>snu<k2>snu<h>1
{#snu#} 1¦. {%snu%} (probably connected with rt.
{%snā%}), cl. 2. P. {%snauti, suṣṇāva, snaviṣ-%}
{%yati, asnāvīt, snavitum,%} to drip, trickle, distil, fall
in drops, drop, ooze, run out, leak; to flow, stream;
cl. 2. A. (Pass. reflex.) {%snute, asnoṣṭa%} or {%asnā-%}
{%viṣṭa:%} Pass. {%snūyate, snotā%} or {%snāvitā, snoṣ-%}
{%yate%} or {%snāviṣyate,%} Aor. {%asnāvi,%} to be distilled,
&c.: Caus. {%snāvayati,%} &c., Aor. {%asuṣṇavat:%}
Desid. of Caus. {%sisnāvayiṣati%} or {%susnāvayiṣati%}
[Page1150-a+ 73]
(according to Vopa-deva): Desid. {%susnūṣati:%} In-
tens. {%soṣṇūyate, soṣṇavīti, soṣṇoti;%} [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">νέ-ω (for σνεϝ-ω), νεύ-σω (for σνεύ-σω), νεῦ-σι-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νευ-σ-τήρ, νά-ω (for σναϝ-ω), ἀένα-ο-ς, νᾶ-μα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">νᾱ-ρό-ς, νη-ρό-ς, Νη-ρ-εύ-ς, Νη-ιά-(δ)-ς;</lang> (probably also
<lang n="greek">ναῦ-ς, ναύ-τη-ς,</lang> &c., see under 3. {%nau,%} p. 518):
Goth. <nsi>snu,</nsi> ‘to go;’ <nsi>sniva, snau, snivum</nsi> (for <nsi>snu-</nsi>
<nsi>um</nsi>), <nsi>snaivs,</nsi> ‘snow:’ Old Germ. <nsi>sniutan, sniumi,</nsi>
<nsi>sneo, snê:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>sniwan, snytan, sneome:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>snega-s</nsi> (<nsi>w</nsi> being changed to <nsi>g</nsi>): Slav. <nsi>snêg:</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>snuadhaim,</nsi> ‘I flow;’ <nsi>snuadh,</nsi> ‘blood;’
<nsi>sneachd,</nsi> ‘snow.’]
<LEND>

<L>53296<pc>1150-a<k1>snava<k2>snava
{%Snava, as,%}¦ m. oozing, drizzling, dripping, trickling.
<LEND>

<L>53297<pc>1150-a<k1>snavana<k2>snavana
{%Snavana, am,%}¦ n. the act of oozing, trickling;
distillation.
<LEND>

<L>53298<pc>1150-a<k1>snuta<k2>snuta
{%Snuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ trickled, distilled, dropped,
trickling, flowing, dropping, oozing.
<LEND>

<L>53299<pc>1150-a<k1>snuti<k2>snuti
{%Snuti, is,%}¦ f. trickling, distilling, oozing, stream,
flow.
<LEND>

<L>53300<pc>1150-a<k1>snutvA<k2>snutvA
{%Snutvā,%}¦ ind. having trickled or oozed or flowed.
<LEND>

<L>53301<pc>1150-a<k1>snu<k2>snu<h>2
{#snu#} 2¦. {%snu, us, u,%} m. n. (a defective word
optionally substituted for {%sānu,%} q. v., in certain cases;
according to some fr. rt. 1. {%so%}), the level summit or
edge of a mountain, table-land; any top, surface;
anything fixed or stationary (as the firmament; Sāy.
{%= sthita,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 28, 2).
<LEND>

<L>53302<pc>1150-a<k1>snu<k2>snu<h>3
{#snu#} 3¦. {%snu, us,%} f. {%= snāyu,%} a sinew, tendon,
muscle. {%—Snu-tas,%} ind. from the sinews or muscles.
<LEND>

<L>53303<pc>1150-a<k1>snu<k2>snu<h>4
{#snu#} 4¦. {%snu,%} a Kṛd-anta affix to roots form-
ing adjectives expressive of an aptitude to be what is
implied by the root; [cf. {%sthāsnu.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53304<pc>1150-a<k1>snuc<k2>snuc
{#snuc#}¦ {%snuc,%} cl. 1. A. {%snocate,%} &c., to be
bright or clear (probably for rt. {%stuc,%} but
according to Śabda-k., under {%ṣṇuc,%} the meaning is
{%secane%}).
<LEND>

<L>53305<pc>1150-a<k1>snuzA<k2>snuzA
{#snuzA#}¦ {%snuṣā,%} f. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%snu%}),
a daughter-in-law; the milk-hedge plant (= 2. {%snuh%});
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">νυό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>nuru-s</nsi> (for <nsi>snusu-s</nsi>); Old
Germ. <nsi>snur;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>snoru;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>snochâ.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53306<pc>1150-a<k1>snus<k2>snus
{#snus#}¦ {%snus,%} cl. 4. P. {%snusyati, susnoṣa,%}
{%snositum,%} to eat; to disappear or become
invisible; to take.
<LEND>

<L>53307<pc>1150-a<k1>snuh<k2>snuh<h>1
{#snuh#} 1¦. {%snuh,%} cl. 4. P. {%snuhyati, suṣṇoha,%}
{%snohitum%} or {%snogdhum%} or {%snoḍhum,%} to
vomit; = rt. 1. {%snih.%}
<LEND>

<L>53308<pc>1150-a<k1>snuh<k2>snuh<h>2
2. {%snuh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ or {%k, k, k,%} vomiting, one who
vomits; ({%k%}), f. the milk-hedge plant, Euphorbia
Antiquorum (its milky juice has various medicinal pro-
perties, and is used as an emetic; seventeen synonyms
of this plant are enumerated, cf. {%sīhuṇḍa%}). {%—Snuk-%}
{%chada, as,%} m. a kind of reed ({%= kṣīra-kañcukin%}).
<LEND>

<L>53309<pc>1150-a<k1>snuhA<k2>snuhA
{%Snuhā,%}¦ f. the milk-hedge plant.
<LEND>

<L>53310<pc>1150-a<k1>snuhi<k2>snuhi
{%Snuhi, is,%}¦ or {%snuhī,%} f. = 2. {%snuh%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53311<pc>1150-a<k1>sneha<k2>sneha
{#sneha#}¦ {%sneha, snehin.%} See p. 1149, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53312<pc>1150-a<k1>snE<k2>snE
{#snE#}¦ {%snai%} (also written {%stai,%} q. v.), cl. 1. P.
{%snāyati,%} &c., to dress, wrap round, envelope,
adorn.
<LEND>

<L>53313<pc>1150-a<k1>snEgDya<k2>snEgDya
{#snEgDya#}¦ {%snaigdhya.%} See p. 1149, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53314<pc>1150-a<k1>spand<k2>spand
{#spand#}¦ {%spand%} (sometimes incorrectly con-
founded with rt. {%syand%}), cl. 1. A. {%span-%}
{%date, paspande, aspandiṣṭa, spanditum,%} to
quiver, throb, tremble, quake, shake, palpitate, beat,
to go, move (= rt. {%syand%}): Pass. {%spadyate%} (accord-
ing to some), Aor. {%aspandi:%} Caus. {%spandayati,%}
Aor. {%apaspandat.%}
<LEND>

<L>53315<pc>1150-a<k1>spanda<k2>spanda
{%Spanda, as,%}¦ m. throbbing, throb, pulse, tremor,
vibration, motion; [cf. {%vi-ṣpanda.%}] {%—Spanda-%}
{%kārikā,%} f., N. of a metrical version of the Spanda-
sūtra. {%—Spanda-śāstra, am,%} n., N. of a work.
{%—Spanda-sūtra, am,%} n., N. of the aphorisms of
the Śaiva philosophy ({%= śiva-sūtra%}).
<LEND>

<L>53316<pc>1150-a<k1>spandana<k2>spandana
{%Spandana, am,%}¦ n. throbbing, pulsation, palpita-
tion, quivering, (throbbings and quiverings of the
[Page1150-b+ 74]
limbs and different parts of the body are supposed by
the Hindūs to indicate good or bad luck; they are
therefore minutely described in certain works);
tremor, vibration, agitation; the quickening of a
child in the womb; rapid motion, going; (according
to some) a car, chariot (Sāy. explains {%spandane%} by
{%rathasya gamane sati,%} Ṛg-veda III. 53, 19); ({%as%}),
m. a sort of tree.
<LEND>

<L>53317<pc>1150-b<k1>spandamAna<k2>spandamAna
{%Spandamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ throbbing, quivering,
palpitating, beating; going.
<LEND>

<L>53318<pc>1150-b<k1>spandita<k2>spandita
{%Spandita, as, ā, am,%}¦ throbbed, quivered, agitated,
throbbing, beating; gone; ({%am%}), n. a pulsation,
throb.
<LEND>

<L>53319<pc>1150-b<k1>spandin<k2>spandin
{%Spandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ quivering, throbbing, palpitat-
ing, beating, tremulous.
<LEND>

<L>53320<pc>1150-b<k1>sparitf<k2>sparitf
{#sparitf#}¦ {%sparitṛ.%} See {%sparṣṭṛ,%} p. 1151.
<LEND>

<L>53321<pc>1150-b<k1>spariSa<k2>spariSa
{#spariSa#}¦ {%spariśa.%} See p. 1151, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53322<pc>1150-b<k1>sparD<k2>sparD
{#sparD#}¦ {%spardh%} (connected with rt. {%spṛh,%}
q. v.; the older form seems to have been
{%spṛdh,%} q. v.), cl. 1. A. (ep. also P.) {%spardhate%}
{%(-ti), paspardhe, spardhiṣyate, aspardhiṣṭa,%}
{%spardhitum,%} to contend or compete with, contest,
vie with, emulate, rival, be equal with; to envy; to
challenge, defy, bid defiance to: Pass. {%spardhate,%}
Aor. {%aspardhi:%} Caus. {%spardhayati,%} Aor. {%apa-%}
{%spardhat,%} &c.: Desid. {%pispardhiṣate:%} Intens. {%pā-%}
{%spardhyate, pāsparddhi;%} [cf. Goth. <nsi>spauards;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>spurt;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>spyrd.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53323<pc>1150-b<k1>sparDa<k2>sparDa
{%Spardha, as, ā, am,%}¦ emulous, envious; ({%ā%}), f.
emulation, rivalry, competition, the successive eleva-
tion of rivals; envy, jealousy; defiance; equality
with. {%—Spardha-tā,%} f. rivalry, emulation, envious-
ness.
<LEND>

<L>53324<pc>1150-b<k1>sparDana<k2>sparDana
{%Spardhana, am,%}¦ n. competition, emulation; envy.
<LEND>

<L>53325<pc>1150-b<k1>sparDamAna<k2>sparDamAna
{%Spardhamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ vying, emulating, com-
peting, contending with, envying, challenging, de-
fying.
<LEND>

<L>53326<pc>1150-b<k1>sparDita<k2>sparDita
{%Spardhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ contended with, emulated,
envied; defied.
<LEND>

<L>53327<pc>1150-b<k1>sparDitvA<k2>sparDitvA
{%Spardhitvā,%}¦ ind. having contended or competed
or vied with.
<LEND>

<L>53328<pc>1150-b<k1>sparDin<k2>sparDin
{%Spardhin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ rivalling, emulating, compet-
ing; emulous, envious; proud, superb.
<LEND>

<L>53329<pc>1150-b<k1>sparDizyamARa<k2>sparDizyamARa
{%Spardhiṣyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ about to contend
or compete.
<LEND>

<L>53330<pc>1150-b<k1>spUrDas<k2>spUrDas
{%Spūrdhas%}¦ (probably to be connected with rt.
{%spardh%}), Ved. envy, (Sāy. {%spūrdhase = spardha-%}
{%nāya,%} Ṛg-veda V. 64, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>53331<pc>1150-b<k1>sparS<k2>sparS
{#sparS#}¦ {%sparś%} (also written {%spaś,%} see rt. 5.
{%spaś;%} cf. rt. 1. {%spṛś%}), cl. 10. A. {%spar-%}
{%śayate, apasparśata,%} &c., to take, take hold of,
touch (= rt. 1. {%spṛś%}); to unite, join, embrace.
<LEND>

<L>53332<pc>1150-b<k1>sparSa<k2>sparSa
{#sparSa#}¦ {%sparśa, sparśana,%} &c. See p. 1151.
<LEND>

<L>53333<pc>1150-b<k1>sparz<k2>sparz
{#sparz#}¦ {%sparṣ%} (= rt. {%parṣ,%} q. v.), cl. 1. A.
{%sparṣate,%} &c., to become wet or moist.
<LEND>

<L>53334<pc>1150-b<k1>spaS<k2>spaS<h>1
{#spaS#} 1¦. {%spaś%} (= rt. 1. {%paś,%} q. v.), cl. 1.
P. A. {%spaśati, -te, paspāśa, paspaśe,%}
{%spaśiṣyati, -te, aspāśīt, aspaśiṣṭa, spaśitum,%}
to see, behold, perceive clearly, spy out, espy: Caus.
{%spāśayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%apaspaśat,%} to destroy;
Desid. {%pispaśiṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%pāspaśyate, pā-%}
{%spaṣṭi;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>śpaś;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">σκέπ-τ-ο-μαι, σκοπ-ή,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σκοπιά, σκοπ-ό-ς, ἐπι-σκοπος, σκώψ;</lang> Lat. <nsi>spec-i-o,</nsi>
<nsi>con-spic-i-o, specula, speculum, spec-to;</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>speh-o-m, spāh-i,</nsi> ‘circumspect, prudent.’]
<LEND>

<L>53335<pc>1150-b<k1>spaS<k2>spaS<h>2
2. {%spaś, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ Ved. seeing, spying out, perceiving;
({%ṭ%}), m. one who espies, a spy, messenger, (in the Ṛg-
veda especially applied to the messengers (of Varuṇa);
a guardian, protector, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
V. 59, 1. {%spal%} or {%spaṭ = spraṣṭā = hotā,%} a priest;
in Ṛg-veda VIII. 61, 15. {%spaṭ = sarvasya jñātā,%}
‘omniscient,’ applied to Indra); a ray or rein, (ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VI. 67, 5. {%spaśaḥ =%}
{%raśmayaḥ%} or {%carāḥ.%})
<LEND>
[Page1150-c+ 75]

<L>53336<pc>1150-c<k1>spaSa<k2>spaSa
{%Spaśa, as,%}¦ m. a spy [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>spëhon,</nsi> ‘to
look;’ <nsi>spëhu,</nsi> ‘a spy’]; any secret messenger or
emissary; a fight, war, battle; a kind of gladiator
who fights with a savage animal for a reward.
<LEND>

<L>53337<pc>1150-c<k1>spazwa<k2>spazwa
{%Spaṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ clearly perceived or discerned,
distinctly visible, distinct, clear, evident, manifest,
plain, apparent, intelligible; true, real; one who sees
clearly; ({%am%}), ind. clearly, distinctly; openly, boldly,
({%na spaṣṭam udvīkṣate,%} he does not look [at
me] straight in the face.) {%—Spaṣṭa-garbhā,%} f. a
woman evidently pregnant. {%—Spaṣṭa-tāraka, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} (the sky) which has its stars distinctly seen
or clearly displayed. {%—Spaṣṭa-pratipatti, is,%} f.
clear perception or ascertainment. {%—Spaṣṭa-bhā-%}
{%ṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%spaṣṭa-vaktṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} speak-
ing clearly or distinctly, plain-spoken. {%—Spaṣṭār-%}
{%tha (˚ṭa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} clear in meaning, obvious,
perspicuous, intelligible. {%—Spaṣṭī-karaṇa, am,%} n.
the act of making distinct or clear, elucidation.
{%—Spaṣṭī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make dis-
tinct or clear. {%—Spaṣṭī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made
plain or clear, explained, expounded, elucidated, made
manifest, revealed, exposed. {%—Spaṣṭī-bhūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} become plain or evident. {%—Spaṣṭetara (˚ṭa-%}
{%it˚), as, ā, am,%} the reverse of clear, indistinct, un-
intelligible.
<LEND>

<L>53338<pc>1150-c<k1>spazwaya<k2>spazwaya
{%Spaṣṭaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%spaṣṭayati,%} &c., to make
clear, elucidate.
<LEND>

<L>53339<pc>1150-c<k1>spaS<k2>spaS<h>3
{#spaS#} 3¦. {%spaś,%}  = rt. 3. {%paś,%} ‘to bind,’
q. v. This rt. is said to have the follow-
ing additional meanings — to obstruct, oppose, hinder;
to string together; to touch, undertake, perform,
(Sāy. {%paspaśe = spṛṣṭavān = anutiṣṭhati,%} Ṛg-
veda I. 22, 19; {%aspaṣṭa = upakrāntavān,%} I. 10,
2.)
<LEND>

<L>53340<pc>1150-c<k1>spaS<k2>spaS<h>4
4. {%spaś, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ Ved. binding.
<LEND>

<L>53341<pc>1150-c<k1>spASita<k2>spASita
{%Spāśita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be stopped, hindered.
<LEND>

<L>53342<pc>1150-c<k1>spaS<k2>spaS<h>5
{#spaS#} 5¦. {%spaś%} (= rt. {%sparś%}), cl. 10. A.
{%spāśayate,%} &c., to take, &c. See rt.
{%sparś.%}
<LEND>

<L>53343<pc>1150-c<k1>spazwa<k2>spazwa
{#spazwa#}¦ {%spaṣṭa.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>53344<pc>1150-c<k1>spArha<k2>spArha
{#spArha#}¦ {%spārha.%} See rt. {%spṛh,%} p. 1151.
<LEND>

<L>53345<pc>1150-c<k1>spUrDas<k2>spUrDas
{#spUrDas#}¦ {%spūrdhas.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53346<pc>1150-c<k1>spf<k2>spf
{#spf#}¦ {%spṛ%} (= rts. 3. {%stṛ,%} 1. {%smṛ%}), cl. 5. P.
{%spṛṇoti, paspāra, spartum,%} &c., Ved. to
gratify, grant, confer; to extricate from, deliver from,
preserve from, defend, ({%spartam%} in {%niṣpartam =%}
{%nyapārayatam,%} ‘you rescued or extricated,’ Ṛg-
veda VII. 71, 5); to live; to fill or bestow abun-
dantly, (Sāy. {%spṛṇavāma = pūrayāma,%} Ṛg-veda
V. 44, 10); to live.
<LEND>

<L>53347<pc>1150-c<k1>spartf<k2>spartf
{%Spartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ delivering or protecting from,
a deliverer; [cf. {%ava-sp˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53348<pc>1150-c<k1>spft<k2>spft
{%Spṛt, t, t, t,%}¦ gratifying with, conferring; delivering
from, (in {%kilviṣa-s˚,%} delivering from guilt; {%loka-s˚,%}
[probably] conferring worlds; cf. {%dhana-s˚.%})
<LEND>

<L>53349<pc>1150-c<k1>spfkkA<k2>spfkkA
{#spfkkA#}¦ {%spṛkkā,%} f. the plant Trigonella Cor-
niculata ({%= pṛkkā%}).
<LEND>

<L>53350<pc>1150-c<k1>spfD<k2>spfD<h>1
{#spfD#} 1¦. {%spṛdh,%} a Vedic form of rt. {%spardh,%}
col. 2 (e. g. {%aspṛdhran,%} they strove toge-
ther, Ṛg-veda VII. 56, 3; {%paspṛdhre = paspṛ-%}
{%dhire; paspṛdhāte = mithaḥ spardhete,%} Ṛg-veda
VII. 104, 12).
<LEND>

<L>53351<pc>1150-c<k1>paspfDAna<k2>paspfDAna
{%Paspṛdhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. contending with,
rivaling, a rival, opponent, enemy (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>53352<pc>1150-c<k1>spfD<k2>spfD<h>2
2. {%spṛdh, t, t, t,%}¦ one who contends or fights; ({%t%}),
f. battle, fight (in Naigh. II. 17. {%spṛdhaḥ%} is enume-
rated among the {%saṅgrāma-nāmāni%}).
<LEND>

<L>53353<pc>1150-c<k1>spfDAna<k2>spfDAna
{%Spṛdhāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. contending, vying,
rivaling.
<LEND>

<L>53354<pc>1150-c<k1>spfDya<k2>spfDya
{%Spṛdhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. vying, emulous, &c.
(in {%mitha-s˚,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>53355<pc>1150-c<k1>spfS<k2>spfS<h>1
{#spfS#} 1¦. {%spṛś%} (cf. rt. {%sparś%}), cl. 6. P. (ep.
also A.) {%spṛśati (-te), pasparśa%} (3rd
pl. {%paspṛśuḥ;%} ep. 3rd sing. A. {%paspṛśe,%} 3rd pl.
[Page1151-a+ 81]
{%paspṛśire%}), {%sprakṣyati%} or {%sparkṣyati, asprā-%}
{%kṣīt%} or {%aspārkṣīt%} or {%aspṛkṣat,%} Prec. {%spṛśyāt,%}
{%spraṣṭum%} or {%sparṣṭum,%} to touch, graze; to
handle, take hold of, ({%anyonyaṃ hastau spṛśa-%}
{%taḥ,%} they mutually touch hands, i. e. they shake
hands with each other); to cleave to, cling to, come
in contact with; to act upon, affect; to take, re-
ceive, accept (a sacrificial offering &c.); to reach,
attain, obtain, undergo; to wash, sprinkle (e. g.
{%adbhis,%} with water, Manu II. 60): Pass. {%spṛśyate,%}
Aor. {%asparśi,%} to be touched; to be seized or affected
by: Caus. {%sparśayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%apaspar-%}
{%śat%} or {%apaspṛśat%} (according to some {%apispṛśat%}),
to cause to touch, make to touch (with two acc.); to
offer, present, give: Desid. {%pispṛkṣati:%} Intens.
{%parīspṛśyate, parīspraṣṭi, parīsparṣṭi,%} &c.;
[cf. Lat. <nsi>spargo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53356<pc>1151-a<k1>spariSa<k2>spariSa
{%Spariśa, as,%}¦ m. touch ({%= sparśa%} below; Śab-
da-k.).
<LEND>

<L>53357<pc>1151-a<k1>sparSa<k2>sparSa
{%Sparśa, as,%}¦ m. touching, touch, perception by
touch, handling, contact; sexual union; collision, con-
flict, encounter ({%= sam-parāya%}); the quality of tangi-
bility (which is the Viṣaya for the skin; see {%sāṅ-%}
{%khya%}); feeling, sensation; anything which touches
or comes in contact, (eleven such Sparśas are enume-
rated, viz. 1. {%uṣṇa,%} hot; 2. {%śīta,%} cold; 3. {%sukha,%}
pleasant; 4. {%duḥkha,%} painful; 5. {%snigdha,%} greasy;
6. {%viśada,%} clean; 7. {%khara,%} hard; 8. {%mṛdu,%} soft;
9. {%ślakṣṇa,%} smooth; 10. {%laghu,%} light; 11. {%guru,%}
heavy); who or what affects or acts upon or in-
fluences; affection, morbid affection or influence, any-
thing the contact or influence of which causes pain
or disease, disorder, sickness, fever; air, wind; a
consonant of any of the five classes of Gutturals,
Palatals, Cerebrals, Dentals, and Labials (so called be-
cause the first four are pronounced by the contact of
the tongue with the four places of utterance [see
{%sthāna, spṛṣṭa%}], throat, palate, top of palate, and
teeth; the fifth class or labials being formed by contact
of the lips); contact (in astron.); presentation, gift,
donation, offering, ({%kāka-sparśa,%} a particular cere-
mony on the tenth day after a death, putting out a lump
of rice as an offering for the crows); a spy (probably
for {%spaśa,%} q. v.); ({%ā%}), f. a wanton or unchaste wo-
man. {%—Sparśa-tanmātra, am,%} n. the subtile ele-
ment of tangibility, (see {%sāṅkhya.%}) {%—Sparśa-tā,%}
f. a state of contact, touching. {%—Sparśa-maṇi,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘touch-stone,’ a kind of stone (supposed to
turn everything it touches to gold), the philo-
sopher's stone. {%—Sparśamaṇi-prabhava, am,%} n.
‘touchstone-production,’ gold. {%—Sparśa-lajjā,%} f.
‘shrinking from touch,’ the sensitive plant, Mimosa
Pudica. {%—Sparśa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having tangi-
bility, palpable; agreeable to the touch, smooth,
soft. {%—Sparśa-varga, as,%} m. a class of consonants,
(see under {%sparśa%}). {%—Sparśa-vedya, as, ā, am,%} to
be known or apprehended by the sense of touch.
{%—Sparśa-śuddhā,%} f. ‘pure to the touch,’ the plant
Asparagus Racemosus. {%—Sparśa-sukha, am,%} n. the
pleasure of touch. {%—Sparśa-snāna, am,%} n. ablution
at the ingress of the sun or moon into an eclipse.
{%—Sparśa-syanda, as,%} m. a frog (also written
{%sparśa-spanda%}). {%—Sparśānandā (˚śa-ān˚),%} f.
‘touch-delighting,’ N. of an Apsaras. {%—Sparśodaya%}
{%(˚śa-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} having a consonant succeed-
ing, followed by a consonant.
<LEND>

<L>53358<pc>1151-a<k1>sparSaka<k2>sparSaka
{%Sparśaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ touching, who or what
touches or comes in contact with, a toucher.
<LEND>

<L>53359<pc>1151-a<k1>sparSana<k2>sparSana
{%Sparśana, as, ī, am,%}¦ touching, handling; affect-
ing, acting upon; ({%as%}), m. air, wind; ({%am%}), n. the
act of touching, touch, contact; sensation, sense of
touch, organ of sensation or feeling, sensitive nerve;
gift, donation.
<LEND>

<L>53360<pc>1151-a<k1>sparSanaka<k2>sparSanaka
{%Sparśanaka, am,%}¦ n. ‘that which touches,’ a term
for the skin (in the Sāṅkhya phil.).
<LEND>

<L>53361<pc>1151-a<k1>sparSanIya<k2>sparSanIya
{%Sparśanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be touched, percepti-
ble by touch, tangible, sensible, palpable, to be felt,
to be handled.
<LEND>

<L>53362<pc>1151-a<k1>sparSin<k2>sparSin
{%Sparśin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ touching, handling.
<LEND>

<L>53363<pc>1151-a<k1>sparzwavya<k2>sparzwavya
{%Sparṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ tangible, to be felt, to
be handled.
<LEND>
[Page1151-b+ 80]

<L>53364<pc>1151-b<k1>sparzwf<k2>sparzwf
{%Sparṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ who or what touches or
affects or acts upon; ({%ṭā%}), m. any agent or affection
causing bodily pain or sickness, morbid heat, (the
word {%sparitṛ%} given in Śabda-k. appears to be a
corrupt form of this word; cf. {%spariśa.%})
<LEND>

<L>53365<pc>1151-b<k1>spArSanapratyakza<k2>spArSanapratyakza
{%Spārśanapratyakṣa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%sparśana +%}
{%pratyakṣa%}), tactile perception, perception by touch
or feel.
<LEND>

<L>53366<pc>1151-b<k1>spfS<k2>spfS<h>2
2. {%spṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ a toucher, who or what touches,
touching, piercing (generally in comps.; cf. {%marma-%}
{%spṛś%}).
<LEND>

<L>53367<pc>1151-b<k1>spfSat<k2>spfSat
{%Spṛśat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} touching, handling,
&c.
<LEND>

<L>53368<pc>1151-b<k1>spfSA<k2>spfSA
{%Spṛśā,%}¦ f. a kind of plant ({%= bhujaṅga-ghātinī,%}
commonly called Kankālikā).
<LEND>

<L>53369<pc>1151-b<k1>spfSI<k2>spfSI
{%Spṛśī,%}¦ f. the prickly nightshade, Solanum Jacquini.
<LEND>

<L>53370<pc>1151-b<k1>spfSya<k2>spfSya
{%Spṛśya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be touched or felt, tangi-
ble, sensible.
<LEND>

<L>53371<pc>1151-b<k1>spfSyamAna<k2>spfSyamAna
{%Spṛśyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being touched, being
handled.
<LEND>

<L>53372<pc>1151-b<k1>spfzwa<k2>spfzwa
{%Spṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ touched, felt with the hand,
handled; formed by complete contact of the organs
of utterance (as the consonants of the five classes of
Gutturals, Palatals, Cerebrals, Dentals, and Labials,
except the semivowels which are called {%īṣat-spṛ-%}
{%ṣṭa,%} formed by slight contact, and the sibilants and
{%h%} which are called {%īṣad-vivṛta,%} formed by slight
opening); defiled. {%—Spṛṣṭa-mātra, as, ā, am,%}
merely touched. {%—Spṛṣṭa-maithuna, as, ā, am,%}
defiled by sexual intercourse. {%—Spṛṣṭā-spṛṣṭam%}
or {%spṛṣṭā-spṛṣṭi,%} ind. mutual touching, touching
one another.
<LEND>

<L>53373<pc>1151-b<k1>spfzwi<k2>spfzwi
{%Spṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. touch, touching, feeling, contact.
<LEND>

<L>53374<pc>1151-b<k1>spfzwin<k2>spfzwin
{%Spṛṣṭin, ī, inī, i (?) ,%}¦ one who has touched.
<LEND>

<L>53375<pc>1151-b<k1>spfzwvA<k2>spfzwvA
{%Spṛṣṭvā,%}¦ ind. having touched or felt or handled.
<LEND>

<L>53376<pc>1151-b<k1>sprazwavya<k2>sprazwavya
{%Spraṣṭavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be touched, tangible,
to be handled.
<LEND>

<L>53377<pc>1151-b<k1>sprazwf<k2>sprazwf
{%Spraṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ, = sparṣṭṛ%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>53378<pc>1151-b<k1>spfh<k2>spfh
{#spfh#}¦ {%spṛh%} (connected with rts. 1. {%spṛdh,%}
{%spardh%}), cl. 10. P. A. {%spṛhayati, -te,%}
{%spṛhayām-āsa, spṛhayām-babhūva, apaspṛhat,%}
{%spṛhayitum,%} to desire, wish for, long for (with dat.
or gen., e. g. {%rājyāya na spṛhaye,%} I do not desire
dominion); to envy (with dat. or gen., e. g. {%na%}
{%teṣāṃ spṛhayāmi,%} I do not envy them; {%kuverāya%}
{%spṛhayati,%} he envies Kuvera): Pass. {%spṛhyate,%} to
be desired, &c.; [cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">σκέρχομαι;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>spero;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>spulgen.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53379<pc>1151-b<k1>spArha<k2>spArha
{%Spārha, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%spṛhā%}), Ved. wished for,
desirable, agreeable, enviable; ({%am%}), n., Ved. any-
thing enviable or beautiful, (Sāy. {%spārhā = spṛha-%}
{%ṇīyāni tejāṃsi,%} Ṛg-veda I. 135, 2.) {%—Spārha-rā-%}
{%dhas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having or bestowing enviable
wealth, (Sāy. {%= spṛhaṇīya-dhana,%} Ṛg-veda IV.
16, 16.) {%—Spārha-vīra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having
enviable heroes or posterity.
<LEND>

<L>53380<pc>1151-b<k1>spfhaRa<k2>spfhaRa
{%Spṛhaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of desiring or wishing
for.
<LEND>

<L>53381<pc>1151-b<k1>spfhaRIya<k2>spfhaRIya
{%Spṛhaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be wished or longed
for, desirable, enviable. {%—Spṛhaṇīya-tā,%} f. or
{%spṛhaṇīya-tva, am,%} n. desirableness, enviableness.
{%—Spṛhaṇīya-śobha, as, ā, am,%} having desirable
beauty, of enviable beauty.
<LEND>

<L>53382<pc>1151-b<k1>spfhayat<k2>spfhayat
{%Spṛhayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ longing for, desiring,
envying. {%—Spṛhayad-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. en-
dowed with any form that may be desired, assuming all
shapes, (Sāy. {%= yādṛśaṃ varṇaṃ yajamānaḥ spṛ-%}
{%hayati tādṛśa-varṇopetaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda II. 10, 15.)
<LEND>

<L>53383<pc>1151-b<k1>spfhayamARa<k2>spfhayamARa
{%Spṛhayamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ desiring, wishing for,
envying.
<LEND>

<L>53384<pc>1151-b<k1>spfhayAyya<k2>spfhayAyya
{%Spṛhayāyya, as, ā, am,%}¦ desiring, desirable, en-
viable, (Sāy. {%= spṛhaṇīya%}); ({%as%}), m. epithet of a
particular Nakṣatra, (Uṇādi-s. III. 96.)
<LEND>

<L>53385<pc>1151-b<k1>spfhayAlu<k2>spfhayAlu
{%Spṛhayālu, us, us, u,%}¦ disposed to be desirous
or envious of, wishful, desirous, eager for, covetous,
cupidinous.
<LEND>

<L>53386<pc>1151-b<k1>spfhayitvA<k2>spfhayitvA
{%Spṛhayitvā,%}¦ ind. having desired or wished for.
<LEND>

<L>53387<pc>1151-b<k1>spfhA<k2>spfhA
{%Spṛhā,%}¦ f. desire, eager desire, longing, wish, envy,
covetousness.
<LEND>

<L>53388<pc>1151-b<k1>spfhAlu<k2>spfhAlu
{%Spṛhālu%}¦ (according to some) {%= spṛhayālu%} above.
<LEND>
[Page1151-c+ 76]

<L>53389<pc>1151-c<k1>spfhita<k2>spfhita
{%Spṛhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ desired, wished for, longed for.
<LEND>

<L>53390<pc>1151-c<k1>spfhya<k2>spfhya
{%Spṛhya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be wished for or desired,
desirable; ({%as%}), m. the wild citron tree ({%= mātu-%}
{%luṅgaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>53391<pc>1151-c<k1>spfhyamARa<k2>spfhyamARa
{%Spṛhyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being desired or longed
for.
<LEND>

<L>53392<pc>1151-c<k1>spF<k2>spF
{#spF#}¦ {%spṝ%} (also written {%svṝ, sṝ%}), cl. 9. P.
{%spṛṇāti,%} to hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>53393<pc>1151-c<k1>sprazwf<k2>sprazwf
{#sprazwf#}¦ {%spraṣṭṛ,%} &c. See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53394<pc>1151-c<k1>sPaw<k2>sPaw
{#sPaw#}¦ {%sphaṭ%} (thought to be for an original
{%spart;%} cf. Germ. <nsi>spalten;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>split</nsi>),
cl. 1. P. {%sphaṭati,%} &c., to burst, expand, &c. (= rt.
{%sphuṭ,%} q. v.): Caus. or cl. 10. P. {%sphāṭayati,%} &c.,
to split open, cleave; to kill (= rt. {%sphiṭ%}).
<LEND>

<L>53395<pc>1151-c<k1>sPawa<k2>sPawa
{%Sphaṭa, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. a snake's expanded hood;
({%ī%}), f. alum, (see {%sphaṭikāri%} below.)
<LEND>

<L>53396<pc>1151-c<k1>sPawika<k2>sPawika
{%Sphaṭika, as,%}¦ m. crystal, quartz; ({%ā%}), f. sulphate
of alumina or alum. {%—Sphaṭika-prabha, as, ā, am,%}
glittering like crystal, crystalline, transparent. {%—Spha-%}
{%ṭika-maṇi-gṛha, am,%} n. a house of crystalline gems,
crystal-abode. {%—Sphaṭika-maya, as, ī, am,%} made
or consisting of crystal, crystalline. {%—Sphaṭika-%}
{%skambha, as,%} m. a crystal pillar. {%—Sphaṭika-har-%}
{%mya, am,%} n. a crystal palace. {%—Sphaṭikācala (˚ka-%}
{%ac˚), as,%} m. ‘crystal-mountain,’ mount Meru.
{%—Sphaṭikātman (˚ka-āt˚), ā,%} m. crystal. {%—Spha-%}
{%ṭikādri (˚ka-ad˚), is,%} m. ‘crystal-mountain,’ the
mountain Kailāsa. {%—Sphaṭikādri-bhida, as,%} m.
‘penetrating Kailāsa,’ camphor. {%—Sphaṭikābhra (˚ka-%}
{%abh˚), as,%} m. ‘crystal-cloud,’ camphor. {%—Sphaṭi-%}
{%kāśman (˚ka-aś˚), ā,%} m. ‘crystal-stone,’ crystal.
<LEND>

<L>53397<pc>1151-c<k1>sPawikAri<k2>sPawikAri
{%Sphaṭikāri, is,%}¦ or {%sphaṭikārikā%} or {%sphaṭikārī,%}
f. sulphate of alumina or alum (commonly corrupted
into {%phaṭ-karī, phaṭ-kārī, phaṭ-kiri%}).
<LEND>

<L>53398<pc>1151-c<k1>sPawikI<k2>sPawikI
{%Sphaṭikī,%}¦ f. (according to some) alum.
<LEND>

<L>53399<pc>1151-c<k1>sPAwaka<k2>sPAwaka
{%Sphāṭaka, as,%}¦ m. a drop of water; ({%am%}), n.
crystal.
<LEND>

<L>53400<pc>1151-c<k1>sPAwika<k2>sPAwika
{%Sphāṭika, as, ī, am,%}¦ made of crystal, crystalline;
({%am%}), n. crystal. {%—Sphāṭikopala (˚ka-up˚), am,%} n.
‘crystal-stone,’ crystal.
<LEND>

<L>53401<pc>1151-c<k1>sPAwita<k2>sPAwita
{%Sphāṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ split open, expanded, made
to gape, cleft.
<LEND>

<L>53402<pc>1151-c<k1>sPAwIka<k2>sPAwIka
{%Sphāṭīka, am,%}¦ n. crystal, quartz.
<LEND>

<L>53403<pc>1151-c<k1>sPaRw<k2>sPaRw
{#sPaRw#}¦ {%sphaṇṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%sphaṇṭati,%} &c., to
burst, open, expand, &c. (= rt. {%sphuṭ,%}
q. v.), cl. 10. P. {%sphaṇṭayati,%} to jest or joke with
(= rt. {%sphaṇḍ%}).
<LEND>

<L>53404<pc>1151-c<k1>sPaRq<k2>sPaRq
{#sPaRq#}¦ {%sphaṇḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%sphaṇḍati,%} &c.,
cl. 10. P. {%sphaṇḍayati,%} to jest or joke
with, to laugh at.
<LEND>

<L>53405<pc>1151-c<k1>sPar<k2>sPar
{#sPar#}¦ {%sphar%} = rt. {%sphur,%} and serving as
the form of its Caus. {%sphārayati,%} &c.,
see {%sphur, vi-sphur.%}
<LEND>

<L>53406<pc>1151-c<k1>sParaRa<k2>sParaRa
{%Spharaṇa, am,%}¦ n. trembling, quivering, throbbing,
vibration.
<LEND>

<L>53407<pc>1151-c<k1>sPAra<k2>sPAra<h>1
1. {%sphāra, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see p. 1152), throbbing,
quivering, vibration; twanging (of a bow-string; cf.
{%vi-sphāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>53408<pc>1151-c<k1>sPAraRa<k2>sPAraRa
{%Sphāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of throbbing, shaking,
trembling; causing to throb or vibrate (fr. the Caus.).
<LEND>

<L>53409<pc>1151-c<k1>sPArita<k2>sPArita<h>1
1. {%sphārita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 1152), made
to quiver or vibrate [cf. {%vi-sphārita%}]; throbbing;
vibrating.
<LEND>

<L>53410<pc>1151-c<k1>sPal<k2>sPal
{#sPal#}¦ {%sphal,%} cl. 1. P. {%sphalati, pasphāla,%}
{%sphalitum,%} to tremble, quiver, throb,
palpitate, beat (= rt. {%sphul,%} q. v.): Caus. {%sphāla-%}
{%yati, -yitum,%} to cause to tremble or shake, &c.;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σφάλλ-ω, σφάλ-μα, ἀ-σφαλ-ής, σφαλ-ερός;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>fall-o, fal-sus, falla, fallax, fallac-ia;</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>fallan;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>pula, pulti,</nsi> ‘to fall.’]
<LEND>

<L>53411<pc>1151-c<k1>sPAla<k2>sPAla
{%Sphāla, as,%}¦ m. throbbing, quivering, palpitation,
beat, trembling, shaking.
<LEND>

<L>53412<pc>1151-c<k1>sPAlana<k2>sPAlana
{%Sphālana, am,%}¦ n. the act of palpitating, shaking,
quivering; causing to shake about or move; rubbing,
friction; stroking or patting (a horse &c.).
<LEND>

<L>53413<pc>1151-c<k1>sPAwaka<k2>sPAwaka
{#sPAwaka#}¦ {%sphāṭaka, sphāṭika.%} See above.
<LEND>
[Page1152-a+ 75]

<L>53414<pc>1152-a<k1>sPAy<k2>sPAy
{#sPAy#}¦ {%sphāy%} (thought by some to be
derived from a Pass. of a lost rt. {%span,%}
{%p%} becoming {%ph%} through the influence of initial {%s;%}
but apparently connected in some senses with rts.
{%sphar, sphur%}), cl. 1. A. {%sphāyate, pasphāye, sphā-%}
{%yitum,%} to grow large or fat, become bulky, swell,
expand, increase: Caus. {%sphāvayati%} (perhaps ori-
ginally {%sphāpayati%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%apisphavat%}
(Pāṇ. VII. 3, 11), to cause to grow large, enlarge,
augment, increase; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σπά-ω, σπά-σ-μα, σπα-σ-μό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἀ-σπάζομαι, ἀγαπάω</lang> (i. e. <lang n="greek">ἀγαν-σπαω</lang>);
Lat. <nsi>spa-ti-um, patere;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>spannan, spa-</nsi>
<nsi>nan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>spanan, spinnan;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>spin-</nsi>
<nsi>nan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53415<pc>1152-a<k1>sPAta<k2>sPAta
{%Sphāta, as, ā, am,%}¦ grown big, swollen, enlarged,
increased.
<LEND>

<L>53416<pc>1152-a<k1>sPAti<k2>sPAti
{%Sphāti, is,%}¦ f. swelling, intumescence, increase,
growth.
<LEND>

<L>53417<pc>1152-a<k1>sPAra<k2>sPAra<h>2
2. {%sphāra, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. II. 13.
fr. rt. {%sphāy%} above; perhaps also connected with rt.
{%sphar%} and 1. {%sphāra%}), swelling, increase, enlargement
({%= vṛddhi%}); a bubble (in gold &c.); a protuber-
ance [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">σφαῖρα</lang>] ({%as, ā, am%}), large, increased,
expanded, spreading, great; abundant; loud; ({%am%}),
n. much, abundance. {%—Sphārī-bhū,%} cl. 1. P. {%-bha-%}
{%vati,%} &c., to become large or swollen, swell out,
expand, spread out; to become manifest.
<LEND>

<L>53418<pc>1152-a<k1>sPArita<k2>sPArita<h>2
2. {%sphārita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. 2. {%sphāra%} above; but
perhaps also connected with rt. {%sphar%}), swollen out,
spread out, extended, large.
<LEND>

<L>53419<pc>1152-a<k1>sPAvayat<k2>sPAvayat
{%Sphāvayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ augmenting, increasing,
enlarging.
<LEND>

<L>53420<pc>1152-a<k1>sPira<k2>sPira
{%Sphira, as, ā, am,%}¦ abundant, much, many, large;
swollen, expanded; vast, capacious, (Sāy. {%= vṛd-%}
{%dha.%})
<LEND>

<L>53421<pc>1152-a<k1>sPIta<k2>sPIta
{%Sphīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ swollen, enlarged, bulky, fat,
big, large, thick; much, abundant, many, numerous;
successful, prosperous; affected by hereditary disease.
{%—Sphīta-tā,%} f. bulkiness, enlargement; prosperity,
successful progress. {%—Sphītī-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%}
&c., to enlarge, augment.
<LEND>

<L>53422<pc>1152-a<k1>sPIti<k2>sPIti
{%Sphīti, is,%}¦ f. increase, enlargement; prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>53423<pc>1152-a<k1>sPeyas<k2>sPeyas
{%Spheyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%sphira%}), more
abundant, very much or abundant.
<LEND>

<L>53424<pc>1152-a<k1>sPezWa<k2>sPezWa
{%Spheṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%sphira%}), most
abundant, very much or abundant.
<LEND>

<L>53425<pc>1152-a<k1>sPAra<k2>sPAra
{#sPAra#}¦ {%sphāra, sphāraṇa.%} See p. 1151,
col. 3, and above.
<LEND>

<L>53426<pc>1152-a<k1>sPAla<k2>sPAla
{#sPAla#}¦ {%sphāla, sphālana.%} See p. 1151.
<LEND>

<L>53427<pc>1152-a<k1>sPic<k2>sPic
{#sPic#}¦ {%sphic, k,%} f. (by some connected with
rt. {%sphāy,%} ‘to be fat’), a buttock, hip; ({%au%}), f. du.
the buttocks; [cf. Old Germ. <nsi>spech;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>spic.</nsi>] {%—Sphik-ghātanaka, as,%} m. a particular plant
or small tree much used in medicine ({%= kaṭ-phala,%}
p. 196, col. 1).
<LEND>

<L>53428<pc>1152-a<k1>sPigI<k2>sPigI
{%Sphigī,%}¦ f., Ved. the buttock, hip; (this form
{%sphigī%} seems necessary to account for {%sphigyā =%}
{%kaṭyā,%} Ṛg-veda III. 32, 11; {%sphigyam = kaṭi-%}
{%pradeśam,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 4, 8.)
<LEND>

<L>53429<pc>1152-a<k1>sPij<k2>sPij
{%Sphij, k,%}¦ f. {%= sphic%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53430<pc>1152-a<k1>sPiw<k2>sPiw
{#sPiw#}¦ {%sphiṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%spheṭayati,%} &c.,
to hurt, injure, kill (= rt. {%sphiṭṭ%}); to
despise; to love (according to some); to cover (ac-
cording to some).
<LEND>

<L>53431<pc>1152-a<k1>sPiww<k2>sPiww
{#sPiww#}¦ {%sphiṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%sphiṭṭayati,%} &c.,
to hurt, kill (= rts. {%sphiṭ, sphaṭ%}).
<LEND>

<L>53432<pc>1152-a<k1>sPira<k2>sPira
{#sPira#}¦ {%sphira.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>53433<pc>1152-a<k1>sPIta<k2>sPIta
{#sPIta#}¦ {%sphīta, sphīti.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>53434<pc>1152-a<k1>sPuw<k2>sPuw
{#sPuw#}¦ {%sphuṭ%} (connected with rts. {%sphur,%}
{%sphul%}), cl. 6. P. {%sphuṭati,%} cl. 1. P. A.
{%sphoṭati, -te, pusphoṭa, pusphuṭe, asphuṭat, as-%}
{%phuṭīt, asphoṭīt, sphuṭitum%} (cl. 1. {%sphoṭitum%}), to
burst or become suddenly rent asunder, burst open,
split open, part asunder, break forth, expand; to
blossom, blow (generally A.); to burst into view, be-
[Page1152-b+ 81]
come manifested or made public, to disperse, run
away; cl. 10. P. {%sphuṭayati,%} to burst, crack, break
open; to burst into view: Pass. {%sphuṭyate,%} Aor.
{%asphoṭi:%} Caus. {%sphoṭayati,%} to burst or rend sud-
denly, break, split, cleave, tear open, divide; to
disclose, make clear; to hurt, destroy, kill; to
winnow.
<LEND>

<L>53435<pc>1152-b<k1>sPuwa<k2>sPuwa
{%Sphuṭa, as, ā, am,%}¦ burst, split open, broken,
rent, torn, opened, expanded; open, blossomed,
blown; clearly displayed, clear; plain, distinct, mani-
fest, evident; well known or understood; bright;
white; loud; spread, diffused; (in astronomy) ap-
parent, true; corrected; ({%ā%}), f. the expanded hood
of a serpent; ({%am%}), ind. distinctly, manifestly, evi-
dently, certainly. {%—Sphuṭa-tā,%} f. openness, mani-
festation; perspicuity; blossoming. {%—Sphuṭa-tāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having stars clearly seen, bright with
stars. {%—Sphuṭa-pauruṣa, as, ā, am,%} one who has
displayed valour or energy. {%—Sphuṭa-phala, am,%}
n. (in geometry) clear or precise result (of any
calculation); distinct or precise area (of a triangle
&c.). {%—Sphuṭa-bandhanī,%} f. a kind of plant, heart-
pea {%(= pārāvata-padī)%}. {%—Sphuṭa-valkalī,%} f. the
plant heart-pea. {%—Sphuṭa-sāra, as,%} m. (probably)
the true latitude of a star or planet. {%—Sphuṭa-sūrya-%}
{%gati, is,%} f. apparent or true motion of the sun.
{%—Sphuṭārtha (˚ṭa-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} having a clear
meaning, intelligible, obvious, significant. {%—Sphuṭī-%}
{%karaṇa, am,%} n. the act of displaying clearly, making
distinct; making true or correct, correction.
<LEND>

<L>53436<pc>1152-b<k1>sPuwat<k2>sPuwat
{%Sphuṭat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} bursting open, part-
ing or bursting asunder, splitting in two; blowing,
blossoming; becoming manifest or clear; evolving.
<LEND>

<L>53437<pc>1152-b<k1>sPuwana<k2>sPuwana
{%Sphuṭana, am,%}¦ n. the act of breaking or rending
suddenly, bursting, tearing open, disruption, open-
ing, expanding, blossoming.
<LEND>

<L>53438<pc>1152-b<k1>sPuwanIya<k2>sPuwanIya
{%Sphuṭanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be broken open or
split.
<LEND>

<L>53439<pc>1152-b<k1>sPuwi<k2>sPuwi
{%Sphuṭi, is,%}¦ or {%sphuṭī,%} f. cracking or chapping of
the skin of the feet, sores or swelling of the feet;
the fruit of the Karkaṭī or a sort of melon, Cucumis
Momordica.
<LEND>

<L>53440<pc>1152-b<k1>sPuwikA<k2>sPuwikA
{%Sphuṭikā,%}¦ f. (probably) a small bit broken off,
little bit or piece.
<LEND>

<L>53441<pc>1152-b<k1>sPuwita<k2>sPuwita
{%Sphuṭita, as, ā, am,%}¦ burst, broken open, split,
cracked; budded, blown, expanded (as a flower);
made clear, manifested, spread out; torn, destroyed;
laughed at ({%= pari-hasita;%} cf. rt. {%sphuṇṭ%}). {%—Sphu-%}
{%ṭita-caraṇa, as, ā, am,%} having wide feet, splay-
footed.
<LEND>

<L>53442<pc>1152-b<k1>sPowa<k2>sPowa
{%Sphoṭa, as,%}¦ m. breaking, splitting open, bursting,
disclosure, ({%narma-sphoṭa%} in dramatic action is ex-
plained to mean {%bhāva-leśaiḥ sūcito 'lparasaḥ,%}
i. e. slight disclosures or glimpses of love); a swelling,
boil, tumor; the idea or disclosure which bursts out
or flashes on the mind when a sound is uttered; the
eternal sound in the Pūrva-mīmāṃsā; ({%ā%}), f. the
expanded hood of a snake. {%—Sphoṭa-vāda, as,%} m.
a dissertation on the above philosophical Sphoṭa.
{%—Sphoṭa-vījaka, as,%} m. ‘having bursting seeds,’
the marking-nut plant ({%= bhallātaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>53443<pc>1152-b<k1>sPowaka<k2>sPowaka
{%Sphoṭaka, as,%}¦ m. one who bursts or splits open;
a swelling, boil, tumor.
<LEND>

<L>53444<pc>1152-b<k1>sPowana<k2>sPowana
{%Sphoṭana, as, ī, am,%}¦ breaking or splitting asunder,
opening, making clear, disclosing, manifesting; ({%as%}),
m. (in Vedic grammar) {%= vyañjaka,%} separated utter-
ance of a close combination of consonants; ({%am%}), n.
the act of bursting or rending suddenly, splitting,
cracking; tearing; winnowing grain, &c.; cracking
the finger-joints, snapping the fingers; (in grammar)
the separation of the letters of a double consonant;
({%ī%}), f. an instrument for splitting or cleaving, a
gimlet, boring-tool, auger [cf. {%ā-sphoṭanī, lāspho-%}
{%ṭanī%}].
<LEND>

<L>53445<pc>1152-b<k1>sPowAyana<k2>sPowAyana
{%Sphoṭāyana, as,%}¦ m., N. of an ancient gram-
marian, (Pāṇ. VI. 1, 123; he is identified by some
with Kakṣīvat.)
<LEND>

<L>53446<pc>1152-b<k1>sPowikA<k2>sPowikA
{%Sphoṭikā,%}¦ f. a kind of bird, a wagtail ({%= hāpu-%}
{%trikā%}).
<LEND>

<L>53447<pc>1152-b<k1>sPowita<k2>sPowita
{%Sphoṭita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), made to
burst open, rent or torn asunder, disclosed.
<LEND>
[Page1152-c+ 77]

<L>53448<pc>1152-c<k1>sPuww<k2>sPuww
{#sPuww#}¦ {%sphuṭṭ,%} cl. 10. P. {%sphuṭṭayati,%} &c.,
to despise, disrespect.
<LEND>

<L>53449<pc>1152-c<k1>sPuq<k2>sPuq
{#sPuq#}¦ {%sphuḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%sphuḍati,%} &c., to
cover.
<LEND>

<L>53450<pc>1152-c<k1>sPuRw<k2>sPuRw
{#sPuRw#}¦ {%sphuṇṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%sphuṇṭati,%} &c.,
to open, expand, &c. (= rt. {%sphuṭ%});
cl. 10. P. {%sphuṇṭayati,%} &c., to jest, joke, laugh at
(= rt. {%sphaṇḍ%}).
<LEND>

<L>53451<pc>1152-c<k1>sPuRq<k2>sPuRq
{#sPuRq#}¦ {%sphuṇḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%sphuṇḍate,%} &c.,
to open, expand, &c. (= rt. {%sphuṭ%}); cl.
10. P. {%sphuṇḍayati,%} &c., to jest, &c. (= rt.
{%sphaṇḍ%}).
<LEND>

<L>53452<pc>1152-c<k1>sPut<k2>sPut
{#sPut#}¦ {%sphut,%} an imitative sound; [cf. {%phut.%}]
{%—Sphut-kara, as,%} m. ‘making a blowing or
crackling sound,’ fire. {%—Sphut-kāra, as,%} m. making
the noise {%sphut,%} crackling, burning.
<LEND>

<L>53453<pc>1152-c<k1>sPur<k2>sPur
{#sPur#}¦ {%sphur%} (= rt. {%sphar,%} which appears
in the Caus. and is probably the older
form, see {%sphar;%} the rt. {%sphur%} is evidently con-
nected with rts. {%sphuṭ, sphul%}), cl. 6. P. {%sphurati,%}
{%pusphora, sphuriṣyati, asphurīt,%} Prec. {%sphūr-%}
{%yāt, sphuritum,%} to tremble, palpitate, throb, vibrate,
thrill, quiver, twitch, become agitated, struggle; to
start, dart, spring, bound; to spring back, rebound;
to spring up, shoot out, break forth, burst out plainly
or visibly, start into view, be evident or manifest,
appear clearly, become displayed or expanded; to
flash, scintillate, twinkle, sparkle, shine, gleam,
glitter; to flash on the mind, rush into the memory;
to go tremulously; to bruise, destroy, (Sāy. {%sphurat%}
{%= sphuriṣyati = vādhiṣyati,%} Ṛg-veda I. 84, 8):
Pass. {%sphuryate,%} Aor. {%asphori:%} Caus. {%sphorayati,%}
{%sphārayati%} (see rt. {%sphar%}), {%-yitum,%} Aor. {%apu-%}
{%sphurat, apuspharat,%} to cause to vibrate; to make
to shine or glitter; to cast: Desid. {%pusphuriṣati:%}
Intens. {%posphuryate, posphorti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>śpar;</nsi>
Gr. <lang n="greek">σπαίρ-ω, ἀ-σπαίρ-ω,</lang> (probably also) <lang n="greek">σπείρω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σπέρμα, σποράς, σφυρόν;</lang> (probably) Lat. <nsi>sperno;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>spurnan, spura;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>spir-ti, spar-</nsi>
<nsi>dy-ti.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53454<pc>1152-c<k1>sPura<k2>sPura
{%Sphura, as,%}¦ m. trembling, throbbing; swelling;
coruscating; a shield.
<LEND>

<L>53455<pc>1152-c<k1>sPuraRa<k2>sPuraRa
{%Sphuraṇa, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of trembling,
throbbing, pulsation, vibration; quivering or throb-
bing of parts of the body (e. g. quivering of the
lips, twitching of the eyes, &c., as indicating good
or bad luck); springing or breaking forth, starting
into view, expansion; flashing, coruscation, scintilla-
tion, twinkling, glittering; flashing on the mind.
<LEND>

<L>53456<pc>1152-c<k1>sPurat<k2>sPurat
{%Sphurat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} trembling, shaking,
quivering, throbbing; starting, darting; springing
up, breaking forth, bursting out plainly or visibly,
becoming clear or manifest; flashing, glittering;
flashing vividly on the mind; swelling, expanding
[cf. {%sphuṭat%}]; going, moving; going tremulously.
{%—Sphurad-adharoṣṭha (˚ra-oṣ˚)%} or {%sphurad-%}
{%oṣṭha, as, ī, am,%} having quivering lips, ({%sphurad-%}
{%adharoṣṭham,%} ind. with quivering or pouting lips.)
{%—Sphurad-ulkā,%} f. a shooting meteor, aerolite.
{%—Sphuradulkākṛti (˚kā-āk˚), is, is, i,%} having
the form of a shooting meteor.
<LEND>

<L>53457<pc>1152-c<k1>sPurita<k2>sPurita
{%Sphurita, as, ā, am,%}¦ trembling, heaving, throb-
bing, thrilling, palpitating; shaken, agitated; flash-
ing, glittering, gleaming, playing, unsteady; swelled,
swollen; ({%am%}), n. a throb, throbbing, tremor,
quivering or twitching of the eyelids, &c., agitation
or emotion of mind. {%—Sphurita-śatahrada, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having flashing lightning (said of a cloud).
{%—Sphuritottarādhara (˚ta-ut˚, ˚ra-adh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having trembling upper and under lips.
<LEND>

<L>53458<pc>1152-c<k1>sPUrta<k2>sPUrta
{%Sphūrta, as, ā, am,%}¦ (according to some) throbbed,
throbbing; suddenly risen into remembrance.
<LEND>

<L>53459<pc>1152-c<k1>sPUrti<k2>sPUrti
{%Sphūrti, is,%}¦ f. throb, palpitation, tremor, trem-
bling, shaking, vibration; spring, bound, start;
breaking forth visibly, becoming evident or apparent,
manifestation, expansion; flashing on the mind or
memory. {%—Sphūrti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} throbbing,
[Page1153-a+ 75]
thrilling (with joy or excitement), tremulous, agi-
tated; tender-hearted; ({%ān%}), m. a follower or wor-
shipper of Śiva ({%= pāśupata%}).
<LEND>

<L>53460<pc>1153-a<k1>sPoraRa<k2>sPoraRa
{%Sphoraṇa, am,%}¦ n. throbbing, quivering, &c. {%=%}
{%sphāra%} (according to Vopa-deva).
<LEND>

<L>53461<pc>1153-a<k1>sPurC<k2>sPurC
{#sPurC#}¦ {%sphurch%} (also written {%svurch%}), cl.
1. P. {%sphūrchati, pusphūrcha, sphūr-%}
{%chitum,%} to spread, extend; to forget.
<LEND>

<L>53462<pc>1153-a<k1>sPUrCita<k2>sPUrCita
{%Sphūrchita, as, ā, am,%}¦ spread; forgotten.
<LEND>

<L>53463<pc>1153-a<k1>sPUrRa<k2>sPUrRa<h>1
1. {%sphūrṇa, as, ā, am, = sphūrchita%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>53464<pc>1153-a<k1>sPurj<k2>sPurj
{#sPurj#}¦ {%sphurj%} (probably connected with
rt. {%sphur%}), cl. 1. P. {%sphūrjati, pu-%}
{%sphūrja, sphūrjitum,%} to thunder, make a sound
like a thunder-clap, crash, explode: Pass. {%sphūrj-%}
{%yate:%} Caus. {%sphūrjayati:%} Desid. {%pusphūrjiṣati:%}
Intens. {%posphūrjyate, posphūrkti;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>spargo;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>sprecan, sprœncan, sprengan, sprin-</nsi>
<nsi>can, springan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53465<pc>1153-a<k1>sPurjaka<k2>sPurjaka
{%Sphurjaka = sphūrjaka%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>53466<pc>1153-a<k1>sPurjaTu<k2>sPurjaTu
{%Sphurjathu = sphūrjathu%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>53467<pc>1153-a<k1>sPUrja<k2>sPUrja
{%Sphūrja, as,%}¦ m. the crashing sound of a thunder-
clap, thunder; Indra's thunderbolt; sudden burst,
({%narma-sphūrja,%} sudden burst of love; in dramatic
action defined to mean {%sukhārambho bhayānto%}
{%nava-saṅgamaḥ,%} first union of lovers characterized
by joy in the beginning and some cause of fear in
the end.) {%—Sphūrjā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} thundering.
<LEND>

<L>53468<pc>1153-a<k1>sPUrjaka<k2>sPUrjaka
{%Sphūrjaka, as,%}¦ m. a sort of ebony tree, Diospyros
Glutinosa ({%= tinduka%}).
<LEND>

<L>53469<pc>1153-a<k1>sPUrjaTu<k2>sPUrjaTu
{%Sphūrjathu, us,%}¦ m. a clap of thunder, explosion.
<LEND>

<L>53470<pc>1153-a<k1>sPUrjana<k2>sPUrjana
{%Sphūrjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of thundering; an
explosion, crash.
<LEND>

<L>53471<pc>1153-a<k1>sPUrjayat<k2>sPUrjayat
{%Sphūrjayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. overwhelming,
crushing, (Sāy. {%= niṣpiṣat.%})
<LEND>

<L>53472<pc>1153-a<k1>sPUrjita<k2>sPUrjita
{%Sphūrjita, as, ā, am,%}¦ thundered; [cf. {%vi-sphūr-%}
{%jita.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53473<pc>1153-a<k1>sPUrRa<k2>sPUrRa<h>2
2. {%sphūrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ (according to some) thun-
dered.
<LEND>

<L>53474<pc>1153-a<k1>sPul<k2>sPul
{#sPul#}¦ {%sphul%} (connected with rts. {%sphur,%}
{%sphuṭ, sphal%}), cl. 6. P. {%sphulati, pu-%}
{%sphola,%} Aor. {%asphulīt, sphulitum,%} to tremble,
throb, vibrate; to dart forth, appear; to collect; to
slay, kill, (enumerated among the {%vadha-karmāṇaḥ%}
in Naigh. II. 19): Pass. {%sphulyate,%} Aor. {%aspholi:%}
Caus. {%spholayati,%} &c. (For comparisons see rt.
{%sphal.%})
<LEND>

<L>53475<pc>1153-a<k1>sPula<k2>sPula
{%Sphula, am,%}¦ n. a tent ({%= vastra-veśman%}).
<LEND>

<L>53476<pc>1153-a<k1>sPulana<k2>sPulana
{%Sphulana, am,%}¦ n. trembling, throbbing, vibration,
palpitation.
<LEND>

<L>53477<pc>1153-a<k1>sPuliNga<k2>sPuliNga
{%Sphuliṅga, as, ā, am,%}¦ m. f. n. (perhaps to be
connected with {%sphut,%} p. 1152), a spark of fire.
<LEND>

<L>53478<pc>1153-a<k1>sPuliNgin<k2>sPuliNgin
{%Sphuliṅgin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having sparks of fire,
sparkling; ({%inī%}), f., N. of one of the seven tongues
of Agni or fire.
<LEND>

<L>53479<pc>1153-a<k1>sPolana<k2>sPolana
{%Spholana, am,%}¦ n. {%= sphāla%} (according to Vopa-
deva).
<LEND>

<L>53480<pc>1153-a<k1>sPeyas<k2>sPeyas
{#sPeyas#}¦ {%spheyas, spheṣṭha.%} See p. 1152.
<LEND>

<L>53481<pc>1153-a<k1>sPowa<k2>sPowa
{#sPowa#}¦ {%sphoṭa, sphoṭita,%} &c. See p. 1152.
<LEND>

<L>53482<pc>1153-a<k1>sPya<k2>sPya
{#sPya#}¦ {%sphya, am,%} n. an implement used in
sacrifices (described as a piece of wood shaped like
a sword for stirring the boiled rice, or, according to
some, for trimming the mound used as an altar).
{%—Sphya-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made or marked out
by the {%sphya%}. {%—Sphya-vartani, is,%} m. the furrow
or line made by the {%sphya%} (in marking out the
sacrificial ground).
<LEND>

<L>53483<pc>1153-a<k1>sPEyakfta<k2>sPEyakfta
{%Sphaiyakṛta, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%sphya-kṛta%}), re-
lating to anything made by the {%sphya.%}
<LEND>

<L>53484<pc>1153-a<k1>sbF<k2>sbF
{#sbF#}¦ {%sbṝ%} = rt. {%svṝ,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>53485<pc>1153-a<k1>sma<k2>sma
{#sma#}¦ {%sma%} (probably for 2. {%samā,%} an old inst.
of 1. {%sama,%} and meaning ‘wholly, entirely’), ind. a
particle added to the present tense of verbs or to
present participles (generally giving them a past
signification, e. g. {%praviśanti sma purīm,%} they
entered the city); a pleonastic particle (often used
[Page1153-b+ 77]
after {%mā,%} see {%mā sma%} under 1. {%mā;%} also in the
Veda preceded by {%adha,%} q. v., and other particles).
<LEND>

<L>53486<pc>1153-b<k1>smat<k2>smat
{#smat#}¦ {%smat,%} ind. (probably connected with
{%sma;%} according to some an old neut. of 1. {%sama;%}
but according to Sāy. a contraction of {%sumat%}), Ved.
well, excellently, (Sāy. {%= su, sumat%}); with, together
with (= 2. {%saha;%} cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μετά;</lang> Mod. Germ. <nsi>mit</nsi>);
constantly, always, (Sāy. {%= nityam.%}) {%—Smat-puran-%}
{%dhi, is,%} m. {%= svarga-kuṭumbī%} (according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda VIII. 34, 6). {%—Smad-abhīśu, us, us, u,%}
Ved. having beautiful reins, (Sāy. {%= śobhana-rajju-%}
{%yukta%} or {%śobhana-śarīra-kānti,%} Ṛg-veda VIII.
25, 24.) {%—Smad-iṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (according
to Sāy.) going well or sent together ({%= praśasta-%}
{%gati%} or {%saha-preṣita,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 87, 3). {%—Smad-%}
{%ūdhnī,%} f. (see {%ūdhas%}), Ved. (a cow) always giving
milk, (Sāy. {%= nityam udhasā yuktā, sarvadā%}
{%payasaḥ pradātrī,%} Ṛg-veda I. 73, 6; cf. {%pī-%}
{%nodhnī.%}) {%—Smad-diṣṭi, is, is, i,%} Ved. auspiciously
speaking (said of Indra; Sāy. {%= bhadra-vākya,%}
Ṛg-veda III. 45, 5); handsome-looking, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%praśasta-darśana,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 63, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>53487<pc>1153-b<k1>smaya<k2>smaya
{#smaya#}¦ {%smaya, smayat,%} &c. See below.
<LEND>

<L>53488<pc>1153-b<k1>smara<k2>smara
{#smara#}¦ {%smara.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53489<pc>1153-b<k1>smArta<k2>smArta
{#smArta#}¦ {%smārta,%} &c. See p. 1154, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53490<pc>1153-b<k1>smi<k2>smi
{#smi#}¦ {%smi,%} cl. 1. A. {%smayate%} (ep. also P.
{%-ti%}), {%siṣmiye, smeṣyate, asmeṣṭa,%}
{%smetum,%} to smile, laugh; to expand, bloom (as a
flower): Pass. {%smīyate,%} Aor. {%asmāyi:%} Caus. {%smā-%}
{%yayati, -te%} (also {%smāpayate%} in {%vi-smi,%} q. v.), to
cause to laugh, provoke or excite laughter; (A.) to
laugh at, mock, despise: Desid. {%sismayiṣate:%}
Intens. {%seṣmīyate,%} (in Mālavikāgnimitra, Act IV,
the Prākṛt {%simisimā-anti%} [see s.v.] is incorrectly
referred to the Intens. of rt. {%smi%}), {%seṣmayīti, seṣ-%}
{%meti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μεῖ-δ-ος, μεί-δ-η-μα, μει-δ-ά-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μει-διάω,</lang> (perhaps also) <lang n="greek">σμοιός. μέμφομαι, μῶμος:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>mi-ru-s, ni-miru-m, mira-ri:</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>smie-l-en, smie-r-en:</nsi> Eng. <nsi>smile:</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>smœrc:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>sme-ja-ti, po-sme-chu:</nsi> Lett. <nsi>smee-t:</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>smigeadh, magadh,</nsi> ‘mocking;’ <nsi>magamhuil,</nsi>
‘jeering.’]
<LEND>

<L>53491<pc>1153-b<k1>smaya<k2>smaya
{%Smaya, as,%}¦ m. smiling at anything, wonder, sur-
prise, astonishment; Wonder (personified as a son
of Dharma); pride, conceit, arrogance. {%—Smaya-%}
{%nutti, is,%} f. the driving away or pulling down of
pride.
<LEND>

<L>53492<pc>1153-b<k1>smayat<k2>smayat
{%Smayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ smiling, laughing.
<LEND>

<L>53493<pc>1153-b<k1>smayana<k2>smayana
{%Smayana, am,%}¦ n. the act of smiling, a smile,
gentle laughter.
<LEND>

<L>53494<pc>1153-b<k1>smayanIya<k2>smayanIya
{%Smayanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be smiled (used im-
personally).
<LEND>

<L>53495<pc>1153-b<k1>smayamAna<k2>smayamAna
{%Smayamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ smiling, gently laugh-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>53496<pc>1153-b<k1>smayin<k2>smayin
{%Smayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ smiling, laughing.
<LEND>

<L>53497<pc>1153-b<k1>smita<k2>smita
{%Smita, as, ā, am,%}¦ smiled, smiling; expanded,
blown, blossomed; ({%am%}), n. a smile, gentle laugh.
{%—Smita-dṛś, k,%} f. ‘having a smiling look,’ a hand-
some woman. {%—Smita-pūrva, as, ā, am,%} preceded by
a smile; ({%am%}), ind. with a smile, smilingly. {%—Smita-%}
{%pūrvābhibhāṣin (˚va-abh˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} addressing
with a smile. {%—Smita-śālin, ī, inī, i,%} having smiles,
smiling, laughing. {%—Smita-śobhin, ī, inī, i,%} smiling
beautifully.
<LEND>

<L>53498<pc>1153-b<k1>smiti<k2>smiti
{%Smiti, is,%}¦ f. smiling, a smile, laughter.
<LEND>

<L>53499<pc>1153-b<k1>smitvA<k2>smitvA
{%Smitvā,%}¦ ind. having smiled or laughed.
<LEND>

<L>53500<pc>1153-b<k1>smetavya<k2>smetavya
{%Smetavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be smiled (used imper-
sonally).
<LEND>

<L>53501<pc>1153-b<k1>smera<k2>smera
{%Smera, as, ā, am,%}¦ smiling, laughing; blown,
blooming, opened, expanded (as a flower); proud;
evident, apparent; ({%as%}), m. (according to some) ap-
pearance, manifestation. {%—Smera-mukha, as, ī, am,%}
smiling-faced, having a smiling face. {%—Smera-viṣ-%}
{%kira, as,%} m. ‘proud bird,’ a peacock.
<LEND>

<L>53502<pc>1153-b<k1>smiw<k2>smiw
{#smiw#}¦ {%smiṭ%} (connected with rt. {%smi%}),
cl. 10. P. {%smeṭayati,%} &c., to slight,
despise; to love; to go.
<LEND>
[Page1153-c+ 79]

<L>53503<pc>1153-c<k1>smIl<k2>smIl
{#smIl#}¦ {%smīl%} (= rt. {%śmīl,%} p. 1023; cf. rt.
{%mīl%}), cl. 1. P. {%smīlati,%} &c., to wink,
blink.
<LEND>

<L>53504<pc>1153-c<k1>smf<k2>smf<h>1
{#smf#} 1¦. {%smṛ%} (= rt. {%spṛ,%} q. v.), cl. 5. P.
{%smṛṇoti,%} &c., to please, gratify; to protect,
defend; to live.
<LEND>

<L>53505<pc>1153-c<k1>smf<k2>smf<h>2
{#smf#} 2¦. {%smṛ,%} cl. 1. P. (ep. also A.) {%smarati%}
{%(-te), sasmāra%} (2nd sing. {%sasmartha,%} 1st
du. {%sasmariva,%} 3rd pl. {%sasmarus%}), {%smariṣyati,%}
{%asmārṣīt, smartum,%} to remember (with acc. or
gen., and when joined with 2nd Fut. of another rt.
giving it a past signification, e. g. {%amuṃ smarati ha-%}
{%niṣyati,%} he remembers having killed him, Pāṇ. III.
2, 112); to recollect, call to mind, bear in mind,
think of, think upon, be mindful of; to recite men-
tally or call upon the name (of a deity &c.); to re-
cord (in the Smṛti), declare (as Smṛti or law;
{%smaranti,%} they declare in the Smṛti); to desire, long
for (with gen.): Pass. {%smaryate,%} Aor. {%asmāri,%} Prec.
{%smṛṣīṣṭa%} and {%smariṣīṣṭa,%} to be remembered;
to be recorded; to be mentioned; to be declared (as
a law); to be mentioned in the Smṛti: Caus. {%smāra-%}
{%yati%} (or {%smarayati%}), {%-te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asasmarat,%}
{%ta,%} to cause to remember, call to mind, remind; to
give information; to cause to regret, cause to desire
or long for (in the latter sense only {%smarayati%}):
Desid. {%susmūrṣate,%} to wish to recollect: Intens.
{%sāsmaryate, sāsmarti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">μέρ-μηρ-α, μέρ-ι-μνα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μερ-μαίζω, μερμηρ-ίζω, μέρ-μερ-ος, μάρ-τυρ,</lang>
<lang n="greek">μάρ-τυρ-ο-ς, μάρ-τυ-ς, μαρ-τύρ-ιον, μαρτύρ-ο-μαι,</lang>
(perhaps also) <lang n="greek">μέλειν, μέλ-ε-σθαι, μελ-έ-τη,</lang> &c.:
Lat. <nsi>me-mor, memor-ia, memor-ā-re, mor-a, mos,</nsi>
<nsi>mor-is:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>mêr-j-an,</nsi> ‘to proclaim;’ <nsi>meritha,</nsi>
<nsi>maurnan:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>smer-zo,</nsi> m., <nsi>smer-za,</nsi> f.
‘pain;’ <nsi>smerzan, mâriu,</nsi> ‘to announce;’ <nsi>māri,</nsi>
‘memorable:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>Mährchen:</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>mœlan, mal, ge-mœred, mœrdh, mœrsian, mel-</nsi>
<nsi>dian, ameldian, murnan, smeortan,</nsi> ‘to smart:’
Lith. <nsi>uz-mirs-tu,</nsi> ‘to forget:’ Hib. <nsi>smuairean,</nsi>
‘dejection;’ (perhaps) <nsi>smalanach,</nsi> ‘sorrowful;’
<nsi>muirn,</nsi> ‘natural affection.’]
<LEND>

<L>53506<pc>1153-c<k1>susmUrzamARa<k2>susmUrzamARa
{%Susmūrṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to re-
member.
<LEND>

<L>53507<pc>1153-c<k1>smara<k2>smara
{%Smara, as,%}¦ m. remembrance, recollection; loving
recollection, love; Kāma-deva (god of love). {%—Smara-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. amorous action or conduct, any wanton
act, lasciviousness. {%—Smara-kūpaka, as,%} m. or {%smara-%}
{%kūpikā,%} f. ‘well of love,’ the female organ. {%—Smara-%}
{%guru, us,%} m. ‘love-preceptor,’ epithet of Viṣṇu.
{%—Smara-gṛha, am,%} n. ‘abode of love,’ the female
organ. {%—Smara-cakra, as,%} m. a particular kind of
sexual union. {%—Smara-cchatra, am,%} n. the clitoris.
{%—Smara-daśā,%} f. a state of love, state of the body
produced by being in love, (ten such states are enu-
merated, e. g. anxious thought, sleeplessness, emacia-
tion, loss of appetite, fainting, &c.) {%—Smara-dāyin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} causing or exciting love {%(= kāmoddīpaka).%}
{%—Smara-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Smara-dhva-%}
{%ja, as,%} m. ‘love-sign,’ ‘love-emblem,’ the male
organ; a fabulous fish (regarded as the emblem of
Kāma-deva; cf. {%makara-dhvaja%}); a musical in-
strument; ({%ā%}), f. a bright moonlight night (accord-
ing to some); ({%am%}), n. the female organ. {%—Smara-%}
{%priyā,%} f. ‘dear to Kāma,’ epithet of Rati (Kāma-
deva's wife). {%—Smara-bhāsita, as, ā, am,%} love-
illuminated, inflamed by love. {%—Smara-mandira,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘love-palace,’ the female organ. {%—Smara-%}
{%moha, as,%} m. infatuation of love, passion, love.
{%—Smara-mohita, as, ā, am,%} infatuated by love,
overcome by passion. {%—Smara-lekhanī,%} f. the
Śārikā bird. {%—Smara-vallabha, as,%} m. ‘love's fa-
vourite,’ epithet of A-niruddha. {%—Smara-vāṇa-%}
{%paṅkti, is,%} f. the five arrows of Kāma-deva collec-
tively (see {%pañca-vāṇa%}). {%—Smara-vīthikā,%} f. ‘love-
shop,’ a prostitute, harlot. {%—Smara-vṛddhi-sañ-%}
{%jña, as,%} m. a particular shrub {%(= kāma-vṛddhi).%}
{%—Smara-śavara, as,%} m. ‘love-barbarian,’ cruel
love. {%—Smara-śāsana, as,%} m. ‘chastiser of Kāma-
deva,’ epithet of Śiva (see {%an-aṅga%}). {%—Smara- %}
[Page1154-a+ 81]
{%sakha, as,%} m. ‘love's friend,’ the moon. {%—Smara-%}
{%stambha, as,%} m. ‘love-column,’ the male organ.
{%—Smara-smarya, as,%} m. a donkey, ass {%(= garda-%}
{%bha)%}. {%—Smara-hara, as,%} m. ‘love-destroyer,’ epi-
thet of Śiva (see {%an-aṅga%}). {%—Smarākula%} or {%sma-%}
{%rākulita (˚ra-āk˚), as, ā, am,%} agitated by love, love-
sick. {%—Smarāgāra (˚ra-āg˚), am,%} n. ‘love-abode,’
the female organ. {%—Smarāṅkuśa (˚ra-aṅ˚), as,%} m.
‘love-hook,’ a finger-nail; a lover, lascivious person.
{%—Smarātura (˚ra-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} love-sick, pining
with love. {%—Smarāndha (˚ra-an˚), as, ā, am,%}
love-blinded, infatuated with passion. {%—Smarāri%}
{%(˚ra-ari), is,%} m. ‘enemy of Kāma-deva,’ epithet of
Śiva. {%—Smarārta (˚ra-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} love-sick.
{%—Smarāsava (˚ra-ās˚), as,%} m. ‘love-liquid,’ saliva.
{%—Smarotsuka (˚ra-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} pining or
languishing with love, love-sick.
<LEND>

<L>53508<pc>1154-a<k1>smaraRa<k2>smaraRa
{%Smaraṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of remembering, re-
membrance, memory, recollecting, recollection, re-
miniscence; tradition, traditional precept, ({%iti smara-%}
{%ṇāt,%} ‘from its being so mentioned in the Smṛti,’ cf.
{%smṛti%}); mental recitation (of the name of a deity),
calling upon the name of a god; regretting, remem-
bering with regret; thinking upon, anxious thought.
{%—Smaraṇa-padavī,%} f. ‘road to mere memory,’
death. {%—Smaraṇānugraha (˚ṇa-an˚), as,%} m. the
favour of remembrance, kind remembrance. {%—Smara-%}
{%ṇāpatya-tarpaka (˚ṇa-ap˚), as,%} m. ‘satisfying
memory's offspring,’ a turtle, tortoise. {%—Smaraṇā-%}
{%yaugapadya (˚ṇa-ay˚), am,%} n. the non-simulta-
neousness of recollections.
<LEND>

<L>53509<pc>1154-a<k1>smaraRIya<k2>smaraRIya
{%Smaraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be remembered, memo-
rable, to be borne in mind.
<LEND>

<L>53510<pc>1154-a<k1>smarat<k2>smarat
{%Smarat, an, antī, at,%}¦ remembering, recollecting,
considering.
<LEND>

<L>53511<pc>1154-a<k1>smartavya<k2>smartavya
{%Smartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be remembered, memo-
rable.
<LEND>

<L>53512<pc>1154-a<k1>smartf<k2>smartf
{%Smartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who remembers or re-
collects. {%—Smartṛ-tva, am,%} n. remembrance, recol-
lection.
<LEND>

<L>53513<pc>1154-a<k1>smaryamARa<k2>smaryamARa
{%Smaryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being remembered,
being mentioned in the Smṛti.
<LEND>

<L>53514<pc>1154-a<k1>smAra<k2>smAra
{%Smāra, as,%}¦ m. memory, recollection.
<LEND>

<L>53515<pc>1154-a<k1>smAraka<k2>smAraka
{%Smāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ reminding, putting in
mind, instructing.
<LEND>

<L>53516<pc>1154-a<k1>smAraRa<k2>smAraRa
{%Smāraṇa, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus.), the act of caus-
ing to remember, reminding, calling to mind.
<LEND>

<L>53517<pc>1154-a<k1>smAram<k2>smAram
{%Smāram,%}¦ ind. having remembered.
<LEND>

<L>53518<pc>1154-a<k1>smArita<k2>smArita
{%Smārita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), reminded,
called to mind, recalled to recollection.
<LEND>

<L>53519<pc>1154-a<k1>smArin<k2>smArin
{%Smārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ remembering; reminding.
<LEND>

<L>53520<pc>1154-a<k1>smArta<k2>smArta
{%Smārta, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%smṛti%}), relating to memory,
memorial, remembered, coming within the range of
memory; recorded in the Smṛtis, prescribed in the
inspired codes of law, based on Smṛti, q. v.; sanc-
tioned by law, canonical, legal; following the doc-
trine of the law-books; domestic (applied to the
domestic fire which every Brāhman is bound to keep
up); ({%as%}), m. a Brāhman skilled in jurisprudence
or traditional law (especially one belonging to a sect
founded by Śaṅkarācārya, whose expositions of the
principle of unity, according to the Vedānta doc-
trine, they professedly follow, though holding Śiva
in especial honour; their chief establishment is at
Śṛṅga-giri, but they are said to be found throughout
the south of India); ({%am%}), n. any act or rite enjoined
by Smṛti or allowed by traditional usage, a legal act.
{%—Smārta-karman, a,%} n. a rite enjoined in the
Smṛtis, one of the less important domestic rites.
{%—Smārta-kāla, as,%} m. the period to which memory
may extend (i. e. a century, according to some
lawyers). {%—Smārta-sūtra, am,%} n. any Sūtra work
based on Smṛti (opposed to {%śrauta-sūtra%} or Sūtras
based on {%śruti,%} see {%sūtra%}). {%—Smārta-homa-pari-%}
{%śiṣṭa, am,%} n., N. of a Pariśiṣṭa of the Sāma-veda.
<LEND>

<L>53521<pc>1154-a<k1>smArya<k2>smArya
{%Smārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be remembered, memo-
rable.
<LEND>

<L>53522<pc>1154-a<k1>smfta<k2>smfta
{%Smṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ remembered, recollected, called
to mind; recorded, mentioned, said, declared, termed,
styled, named; enjoined by Smṛti or traditional
law, declared or propounded in the law-books.
[Page1154-b+ 81]
{%—Smṛta-mātra, as, ā, am,%} only remembered or
thought of.
<LEND>

<L>53523<pc>1154-b<k1>smfti<k2>smfti
{%Smṛti, is,%}¦ f. remembrance, memory, reminiscence,
recollection, thinking of or upon (any person or
thing), calling to mind; Memory (personified as a
daughter of Dakṣa and wife of Aṅgiras); what is
remembered, that which is borne in mind from the
beginning, tradition, law; the institutes or body of
traditional or memorial law (as handed down ori-
ginally by Manu, Yājñavalkya, and other great legis-
lators who were supposed to have been inspired, and
to have based their precepts on the Veda and divine
revelation, though the laws they promulgated were
called Smṛti, ‘what is remembered,’ in contradistinc-
tion to Śruti, ‘what is heard or revealed,’ and to
Ācāra, ‘established usage;’ the very essence of Smṛti
being that it was delivered memoriter by human
authors, and not directly revealed, as explained in
Manu II. 10, see {%śruti;%} in its widest acceptation
Smṛti is said to include the Vedāṅgas, the Sūtras or
aphorisms both {%śrauta%} and {%gṛhya,%} the institutes of
Manu and other inspired law-givers, the Itihāsas,
such as the Rāmāyaṇa and Mahā-bhārata, and the
Purāṇas, but the term Smṛti is more usually re-
stricted to the metrical codes of Manu, Yājñavalkya,
Parāśara, &c., see {%smṛti-śāstra%} below); any par-
ticular law-book or code of laws; any particular law
or rule of law, canon, legal text (e. g. {%anumitā%}
{%smṛtiḥ pratyakṣayā smṛtyā bādhyate,%} a Smṛti
which is only inferred is set aside by a visibly exist-
ing Smṛti; {%iti smṛteḥ,%} according to such a Smṛti
or legal text, according to such a traditional law);
a passage in a work treating of law; pensive or
loving recollection, desire, wish [cf. {%smara%}]; under-
standing. {%—Smṛti-kaumudī,%} f. ‘light of law,’ N.
of a legal work by Viśveśvara (composed under the
patronage of king Madana-pāla). {%—Smṛti-kaustu-%}
{%bha,%} ‘jewel of law,’ N. of a work by Ananta-deva.
{%—Smṛti-candrikā,%} f., N. of a legal work. {%—Smṛ-%}
{%ti-tattva, am,%} n. ‘digest of legal truth,’ N. of a
work by Raghu-nandana. {%—Smṛti-darpaṇa,%} ‘mirror
of law,’ N. of a work. {%—Smṛti-pratyavamarśa,%}
{%as,%} m. retentiveness of memory, accuracy of recollec-
tion. {%—Smṛti-prabandha, as,%} m. a Smṛti com-
position, legal work. {%—Smṛti-bhraṃśa, as,%} m. loss
or failure of memory. {%—Smṛti-mañjarī,%} f., N. of
a legal work. {%—Smṛti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having a
good memory, remembering, recollecting. {%—Smṛti-%}
{%mahārṇava (˚hā-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘ocean of law,’ N. of
a work. {%—Smṛti-ratnākara (˚na-āk˚), as,%} m.
‘jewel-mine of law,’ N. of a work by Caṇḍeśvara.
{%—Smṛtiratnāvalī (˚na-āv˚),%} f. ‘string of jewels of
law,’ N. of a work by Rāma-nātha. {%—Smṛti-rodha,%}
{%as,%} m. temporary interruption or obstruction of
memory, failure of memory. {%—Smṛti-vibhrama, as,%}
m. confusion of memory. {%—Smṛti-viruddha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} contrary to law, illegal, unjust. {%—Smṛti-%}
{%virodha, as,%} m. opposition to law, illegality, im-
propriety; disagreement between two or more codes
of law or legal texts. {%—Smṛti-śāstra, am,%} n. a law-
book, a code, digest; legal science, (the most cele-
brated law-books are those of Manu, Yājñavalkya
with its commentary the Mitākṣarā, Parāśara, Hā-
rīta, Vyāsa, Vasiṣṭha, Viṣṇu, Vṛhas-pati, Atri, Śaṅ-
kha, Likhita, Uśanas, Aṅgiras, Yama, Āpastamba,
Saṃvarta, Śātātapa, Kātyāyana, Dakṣa, Gautama;
these authors are sometimes classed in three divisions,
under the three heads of {%sāttvika, rājasa,%} and
{%tāmasa,%} according to the tendency of their writings.)
{%—Smṛti-śīla, e,%} n. du. traditions and moral prac-
tices. {%—Smṛti-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%} one of whom only
remembrance remains, a deceased or defunct person;
that of which nothing is left but remembrance.
{%—Smṛti-śaithilya, am,%} n. temporary failure or
loss of memory. {%—Smṛti-saṅgraha%} or {%smṛti-%}
{%samuccaya, as,%} m. ‘law-collection,’ N. of two legal
works. {%—Smṛti-sammata, as, ā, am,%} approved by
law. {%—Smṛti-sāgara%} and {%smṛti-sāgara-saṅ-%}
{%graha%} and {%smṛti-sāgara-sāra,%} N. of various
legal works. {%—Smṛti-sādhya, as, ā, am,%} capable
of being proved by law. {%—Smṛti-sāra, as,%} m.
[Page1154-c+ 77]
‘essence of law,’ N. of a work by Deva-yājñika; of
another work by Yādavendra; of another by Hari-
nātha. {%—Smṛti-sārāvalī (˚ra-āv˚),%} f. ‘line of es-
sence of law,’ N. of a work. {%—Smṛti-siddha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} established by law. {%—Smṛti-hārikā,%} f.
‘memory-seizer,’ N. of a daughter of Duḥsahana
(described in the fifty-first chapter of the Mārkaṇ-
ḍeya-Purāṇa as exercising an evil influence on the
memory). {%—Smṛti-hetu, us,%} m. a cause of recollec-
tion, any mental act stirring the memory, impression
on the mind, reflection, association of ideas, recollec-
tion. {%—Smṛty-antara, am,%} n. another law-book.
{%—Smṛty-apeta, as, ā, am,%} departed from memory,
forgotten; inconsistent with Smṛti; illegal, unjust.
{%—Smṛty-artha-sāgara, as,%} m., N. of a work by
Nṛ-siṃha. {%—Smṛty-artha-sāra, as,%} m. ‘essence of
the meaning of Smṛti,’ N. of a work on Hindū cere-
monies by Śrīdhara-svāmin. {%—Smṛty-ukta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} prescribed in the codes of law, enjoined by the
Smṛtis, canonical.
<LEND>

<L>53524<pc>1154-c<k1>smftIka<k2>smftIka
{%Smṛtīka, am,%}¦ n. water ({%= udaka,%} Naigh. I. 12).
<LEND>

<L>53525<pc>1154-c<k1>smera<k2>smera
{#smera#}¦ {%smera, smera-mukha.%} See p. 1153.
<LEND>

<L>53526<pc>1154-c<k1>sya<k2>sya
{#sya#}¦ {%sya, am,%} n., Ved. a winnowing basket
({%= śūrpa,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>53527<pc>1154-c<k1>syad<k2>syad
{#syad#}¦ {%syad, syada.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>53528<pc>1154-c<k1>syand<k2>syand
{#syand#}¦ {%syand,%} cl. 1. A. (in Fut., Aor., and
Condit. also P., Ved. also P. in other
tenses), {%syandate (-ti), sasyande%} (Ved. 3rd pl.
Perf. P. {%siṣyadus,%} Atharva-veda IX. 2, 20), {%syan-%}
{%diṣate, syantsyate (syantsyati), asyandiṣṭa,%}
{%asyanta (asyadat), syanditum, syanttum%} or
{%syantum%} (Ved. Inf. {%syandayadhyai%}), to trickle,
ooze, drip, drop, distil, flow, ooze out, flow out; to
flow with, pour forth, shed (with acc.); to run, flee
(P.); (according to Naigh. II. 14), to move, rush,
go: Pass. {%syadyate,%} Aor. {%asyandi:%} Caus. {%syanda-%}
{%yati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asisyandat, -ta:%} Desid.
{%sisyandiṣate, sisyantsate, sisyantsati.%}
<LEND>

<L>53529<pc>1154-c<k1>syad<k2>syad
{%Syad%}¦ in {%raghu-ṣyad,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>53530<pc>1154-c<k1>syada<k2>syada
{%Syada, as,%}¦ m. rapid motion, speed, velocity, rush.
<LEND>

<L>53531<pc>1154-c<k1>syantavya<k2>syantavya
{%Syantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be flowed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53532<pc>1154-c<k1>syanttvA<k2>syanttvA
{%Syanttvā%}¦ or {%syantvā,%} ind. having flowed; having
rushed on.
<LEND>

<L>53533<pc>1154-c<k1>syanda<k2>syanda
{%Syanda, as,%}¦ m. trickling; going, moving rapidly;
a car, chariot.
<LEND>

<L>53534<pc>1154-c<k1>syandat<k2>syandat
{%Syandat, an, antī, at,%}¦ moving on, rushing im-
petuously.
<LEND>

<L>53535<pc>1154-c<k1>syandana<k2>syandana
{%Syandana, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} flowing, going quickly;
quick, expeditious, swift; ({%as%}), m. a war-chariot,
chariot, car; air, wind; the tree Dalbergia Ougei-
nensis ({%= tiniśa%}); a particular Arhat of the past era;
({%ī%}), f. saliva; (according to some) the urinary pas-
sage; ({%am%}), n. the act of trickling, oozing, drop-
ping; rushing, going or flowing swiftly; water.
{%—Syandana-druma, as,%} m. the tree Dalbergia
Ougeinensis (said to be so called because its wood is
used to make chariot-wheels &c.). {%—Syandanārū-%}
{%ḍha (˚na-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} mounted on a chariot or
car. {%—Syandanāroha (˚na-ār˚), as,%} m. a warrior
who fights mounted on a war-chariot. {%—Syandanā-%}
{%loka-bhīta (˚na-āl˚), as, ā, am,%} terrified at the
sight of a chariot.
<LEND>

<L>53536<pc>1154-c<k1>syandani<k2>syandani
{%Syandani, is,%}¦ m. the tree Dalbergia Ougeinensis.
<LEND>

<L>53537<pc>1154-c<k1>syandanikA<k2>syandanikA
{%Syandanikā,%}¦ f. a drop of saliva.
<LEND>

<L>53538<pc>1154-c<k1>syandanIya<k2>syandanIya
{%Syandanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be flowed; to be run;
to be gone.
<LEND>

<L>53539<pc>1154-c<k1>syandamAna<k2>syandamAna
{%Syandamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ trickling, flowing, mov-
ing rapidly.
<LEND>

<L>53540<pc>1154-c<k1>syanditf<k2>syanditf
{%Syanditṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who runs or rushes
quickly.
<LEND>

<L>53541<pc>1154-c<k1>syanditvA<k2>syanditvA
{%Syanditvā,%}¦ ind. having flowed; having rushed.
<LEND>

<L>53542<pc>1154-c<k1>syandin<k2>syandin
{%Syandin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ trickling, oozing, dropping;
flowing, rushing; going, moving; ({%inī%}), f. saliva;
a cow bearing two calves at once.
<LEND>

<L>53543<pc>1154-c<k1>syandra<k2>syandra
{%Syandra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. rushing, impetuous; (in
Naigh. II. 9. {%syandrāsaḥ%} is enumerated among the
{%bala-nāmāni%}).
<LEND>
[Page1155-a+ 76]

<L>53544<pc>1155-a<k1>syanna<k2>syanna
{%Syanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowed, trickled, dropped;
dropping, trickling, flowing (as water &c.).
<LEND>

<L>53545<pc>1155-a<k1>syam<k2>syam
{#syam#}¦ {%syam,%} cl. 1. P. {%syamati, sasyāma%}
(3rd pl. {%sasyamus%} or {%syemus%}), {%sya-%}
{%miṣyati, asyamīt, syamitum,%} (according to Vopa-
deva also) cl. 10. P. {%syamayati,%} &c., to sound, cry
aloud, shout, vociferate; to go, (in Naigh. II. 14.
enumerated among the {%gati-karmāṇaḥ%}); cl. 10. A.
{%syāmayate%} (sometimes also P. {%-ti%}), to consider,
reflect, think: Caus. {%syamayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%asisyamat,%} to cause to sound: Desid. {%sisyamiṣati:%}
Intens. {%sesimyate%} (Pāṇ. VI. 1, 19), {%saṃsyanti.%}
<LEND>

<L>53546<pc>1155-a<k1>syamika<k2>syamika
{%Syamika = syamīka%}¦ below.
<LEND>

<L>53547<pc>1155-a<k1>syamitvA<k2>syamitvA
{%Syamitvā,%}¦ ind. having sounded; having gone, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53548<pc>1155-a<k1>syamIka<k2>syamIka
{%Syamīka, as,%}¦ m. a cloud; an ant-hill; a kind of
tree; time; ({%ā%}), f. indigo.
<LEND>

<L>53549<pc>1155-a<k1>syAnta<k2>syAnta
{%Syānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded; gone, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53550<pc>1155-a<k1>syAntvA<k2>syAntvA
{%Syāntvā,%}¦ ind. {%= syamitvā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53551<pc>1155-a<k1>syamantaka<k2>syamantaka
{#syamantaka#}¦ {%syamantaka, as,%} m. the jewel
worn by Kṛṣṇa (given to Satrā-jit by the Sun and
transferred by him to his brother Prasena, from
whom it was taken by Jāmbavat, and after much
fighting and contention appropriated by Kṛṣṇa;
the whole story is told in Viṣṇu-Purāṇa IV. 13;
the jewel is described as yielding daily eight loads of
gold and preserving from all dangers; it is said to
have been worn by Kṛṣṇa on his wrist, that on
his breast being called Kaustubha).
<LEND>

<L>53552<pc>1155-a<k1>syA<k2>syA
{#syA#}¦ {%syā,%} fem. of the pronoun {%tyad = tad,%}
‘he,’ ‘that,’ &c., (nom. c. masc. {%syas.%})
<LEND>

<L>53553<pc>1155-a<k1>syAt<k2>syAt
{#syAt#}¦ {%syāt,%} ind. (properly 3rd sing. Pot.
of rt. 1. {%as%}), it may be, perhaps, perchance, ({%syād%}
{%asti,%} it may be, perhaps it is; {%syān nāsti,%} it may
not be.) {%—Syād-vāda, as,%} m. (probably) assertion
of possibility (in phil.). {%—Syādvāda-mañjarī,%} f.,
N. of a philosophical work classed under the Ārhata-
darśana in the Sarva-darśana-saṅgraha. {%—Syādvāda-%}
{%vādin, ī,%} m., N. of an Arhat. {%—Syād-vādin, ī,%} m.
one who asserts possibility.
<LEND>

<L>53554<pc>1155-a<k1>syAla<k2>syAla
{#syAla#}¦ {%syāla, as,%} m. (according to Yāska
on Nirukta VI. 9. fr. {%sya,%} a winnowing basket, and
{%lā%} for {%lājā,%} fried grains, it being the custom for the
bride's brother to scatter fried grains at marriage
ceremonies), the brother of a bride, a wife's brother;
the favourite of a king; a proper N.; ({%ī%}), f. a wife's
sister, (also written {%śyāla%}); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀέλιοι.</lang>]
<LEND>

<L>53555<pc>1155-a<k1>syumna<k2>syumna
{#syumna#}¦ {%syumna, am,%} n. (a doubtful form,
but probably fr. rt. {%siv;%} cf. {%dyumna,%} fr. rt. 2. {%div,%}
and see {%syūma%} below), happiness, joy, delight.
<LEND>

<L>53556<pc>1155-a<k1>syUta<k2>syUta
{#syUta#}¦ {%syūta, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%siv%}), sewn
with a needle, stitched, woven; sewn or woven toge-
ther, joined, fabricated; pierced, penetrated; ({%as%}),
m. a bag, sack; coarse canvas bag.
<LEND>

<L>53557<pc>1155-a<k1>syUti<k2>syUti
{%Syūti, is,%}¦ f. sewing with a needle, stitching, join-
ing together, weaving; needle-work; a bag, sack;
lineage, family, offspring.
<LEND>

<L>53558<pc>1155-a<k1>syUtvA<k2>syUtvA
{%Syūtvā,%}¦ ind. having sewed or joined together.
<LEND>

<L>53559<pc>1155-a<k1>syUna<k2>syUna
{%Syūna, as,%}¦ m. a sack, bag of coarse cloth; a ray
of light; the sun.
<LEND>

<L>53560<pc>1155-a<k1>syota<k2>syota
{%Syota, as,%}¦ m. a bag, sack, bag of coarse canvas.
<LEND>

<L>53561<pc>1155-a<k1>syona<k2>syona
{%Syona, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%syūma%} below], beautiful,
pleasing, favourable, propitious, auspicious; ({%as%}),
m. a sack, coarse bag; a ray of light; the sun;
({%am%}), n. happiness, pleasure ({%= sukha,%} Naigh. III.
6). {%—Syona-kṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. one who causes hap-
piness (to guests), a hospitable person, (Sāy. {%= ati-%}
{%thīnāṃ sukha-kārin,%} Ṛg-veda I. 31, 15.) {%—Syona-%}
{%śī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. lying or resting in a happy or
pleasant place (i. e. in a sacrificial chamber; applied
in Ṛg-veda I. 73, 1. to Agni, and according to
Sāy. {%= gārhapatyāyatane śayānaḥ%}).
<LEND>

<L>53562<pc>1155-a<k1>syUma<k2>syUma
{#syUma#}¦ {%syūma, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
1. 143. fr. rt. {%siv%}), a ray of light; ({%am%}), n. a ray
of light; water (according to Śabda-k.); happiness,
pleasure (Ved., cf. {%sumna%}). {%—Syūma-gabhasti, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. having pleasing or happy rays, (Sāy. {%= %}
[Page1155-b+ 76]
{%sukha-raśmi%} or {%syūta-raśmi,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 71,
3.) {%—Syūma-raśmi, is, is, i,%} having happy rays;
({%is%}), m., N. of a Ṛṣi under the protection of the
Aśvins (author of the hymns Ṛg-veda X. 77, 78).
<LEND>

<L>53563<pc>1155-b<k1>syUmaka<k2>syUmaka
{%Syūmaka, am,%}¦ n., Ved. happiness, pleasure ({%=%}
{%sukha,%} Naigh. III. 6).
<LEND>

<L>53564<pc>1155-b<k1>syUman<k2>syUman
{%Syūman,%}¦ (according to some) anything woven
or connected, a web, (but according to Sāy. {%syūmanā%}
{%= syūmāni%} or {%anusyūtāni%} or {%santatāni,%} Ṛg-veda
I. 113, 17.)
<LEND>

<L>53565<pc>1155-b<k1>syUmanyu<k2>syUmanyu
{%Syūmanyu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. desiring happiness,
(Sāy. {%= sukham icchat%} or {%satata-gāmin,%} going
continuously, Ṛg-veda I. 174, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>53566<pc>1155-b<k1>sraMs<k2>sraMs<h>1
{#sraMs#} 1¦. {%sraṃs%} (sometimes written {%sraṃś%}),
cl. 1. A. {%sraṃsate, sasraṃse, sraṃsiṣ-%}
{%yate, asraṃsiṣṭa%} or {%asrasat%} (Pāṇ. I. 3, 91, III.
1, 55), {%sraṃsitum,%} to fall, fall down, drop, slip,
slip down or off, tumble; to fall asunder; to hang
down; to go (according to Naigh. II. 14): Pass.
{%srasyate,%} Aor. {%asraṃsi:%} Caus. {%sraṃsayati,%} &c.,
Aor. {%asasraṃsat,%} to cause to fall or slip down;
cause to move, loosen; to move, disturb: Desid.
{%sisraṃsiṣate:%} Intens. {%sanīsrasyate, sanīsraṃsti.%}
<LEND>

<L>53567<pc>1155-b<k1>sraMsa<k2>sraMsa
{%Sraṃsa, as,%}¦ m. falling, slipping, fracture; [cf.
{%paruḥ-s˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53568<pc>1155-b<k1>sraMsana<k2>sraMsana
{%Sraṃsana, am,%}¦ n. the act of falling or causing to
fall, bringing down.
<LEND>

<L>53569<pc>1155-b<k1>sraMsamAna<k2>sraMsamAna
{%Sraṃsamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ falling, dropping, falling
down, slipping off; fainting.
<LEND>

<L>53570<pc>1155-b<k1>sraMsita<k2>sraMsita
{%Sraṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to fall or slip down,
loosened.
<LEND>

<L>53571<pc>1155-b<k1>sraMsitvA<k2>sraMsitvA
{%Sraṃsitvā,%}¦ ind. having fallen, having slipped.
<LEND>

<L>53572<pc>1155-b<k1>sraMsin<k2>sraMsin
{%Sraṃsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ falling down, slipping down,
hanging down, depending, pendulous; being loos-
ened; ({%ī%}), m. the Pīlu tree. {%—Sraṃsinī-phala, as,%}
m. the Śirīṣa tree.
<LEND>

<L>53573<pc>1155-b<k1>sras<k2>sras
{%Sras, t, t, t,%}¦ falling, dropping (at the end of comps.;
see also {%vi-sras%}).
<LEND>

<L>53574<pc>1155-b<k1>srasta<k2>srasta
{%Srasta, as, ā, am,%}¦ fallen, dropped, fallen down,
slipped off, fallen from; hanging down; loosened;
let go, relaxed; separated. {%—Srasta-kara, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having trunks hanging down or dangling.
{%—Srasta-hasta, as, ā, am,%} relaxing the grasp,
letting go the hold. {%—Srastāṅga (˚ta-aṅ˚), as, ā%}
or {%ī, am,%} having the limbs relaxed; swooning,
fainting. {%—Srastottara-paṭa (˚ta-ut˚), as, ā, am,%}
having the upper garment slipped down or loose.
<LEND>

<L>53575<pc>1155-b<k1>srastara<k2>srastara
{%Srastara, am,%}¦ n. (probably fr. rt. 1. {%sraṃs%}), a
couch or sofa for reclining (placed on the top of a
house or terrace, see Manu II. 204, {%= śayanārthā-%}
{%sanādi%}).
<LEND>

<L>53576<pc>1155-b<k1>srasti<k2>srasti
{%Srasti, is,%}¦ f. falling, slipping; a slip; loosening.
<LEND>

<L>53577<pc>1155-b<k1>srastvA<k2>srastvA
{%Srastvā,%}¦ ind. having fallen, having slipped or
tumbled.
<LEND>

<L>53578<pc>1155-b<k1>sraMs<k2>sraMs<h>2
{#sraMs#} 2¦. {%sraṃs,%} a various reading for rt.
{%śrambh,%} q. v. (and said to be used {%pra-%}
{%māde%} or, according to another reading, {%prasāde%}).
<LEND>

<L>53579<pc>1155-b<k1>sraMh<k2>sraMh
{#sraMh#}¦ {%sraṃh%} [cf. rt. {%śrambh%}], cl. 1. A.
{%sraṃhate,%} &c., to confide, trust.
<LEND>

<L>53580<pc>1155-b<k1>srakva<k2>srakva
{#srakva#}¦ {%srakva%} ({%= sṛkvan,%} q. v.), Ved. the
corner of the mouth, the mouth, jaws; the flame of
fire, (Sāy. {%= jvālā,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 72, 15); ({%ā%}), f.
the part about the lips, (Sāy. {%= oṣṭha-deśa.%})
<LEND>

<L>53581<pc>1155-b<k1>srakti<k2>srakti
{%Srakti,%}¦ (according to some) a corner.
<LEND>

<L>53582<pc>1155-b<k1>sraNk<k2>sraNk
{#sraNk#}¦ {%sraṅk%} = rt. {%śraṅk,%} p. 1023, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53583<pc>1155-b<k1>sraj<k2>sraj
{#sraj#}¦ {%sraj, k,%} f. (fr. rt. 1. {%sṛj%}), a chaplet,
wreath of flowers, garland worn on the head; any
garland or string of flowers, ({%audakī srak,%} Ved. a
watery garland, i. e. one woven with water-flowers);
a species of the Ati-śakvarī metre. {%—Srag-dāman,%}
{%a,%} n. the fillet or tie of a garland. {%—Srag-dhara,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} wearing a garland; ({%ā%}), f. a species of
the Prakṛti metre (a stanza of four lines of twenty-
one syllables, each line being divided into three
portions of seven syllables each). {%—Srag-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} possessed of garlands, wearing a wreath.
[Page1155-c+ 73]
{%—Srag-vin, ī, iṇī, i,%} garlanded, wearing a garland,
bearing a chaplet; ({%iṇī%}), f., N. of a goddess; a
species of the Jagatī metre (consisting of four times
¯˘¯¯˘¯¯˘¯¯˘¯).
<LEND>

<L>53584<pc>1155-c<k1>srajaya<k2>srajaya
{%Srajaya%}¦ (fr. {%sragvin%}), Nom. P. {%srajayati,%}
{%yitum,%} to garland, i. e. furnish with a garland.
<LEND>

<L>53585<pc>1155-c<k1>srajizWa<k2>srajizWa
{%Srajiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. fr. {%sragvin%}),
completely covered with garlands, profusely deco-
rated.
<LEND>

<L>53586<pc>1155-c<k1>srajIyas<k2>srajIyas
{%Srajīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. fr. {%sragvin%}),
well covered with garlands.
<LEND>

<L>53587<pc>1155-c<k1>srajvA<k2>srajvA
{#srajvA#}¦ {%srajvā,%} f. (probably fr. rt. 1. {%sṛj%}),
a rope, cord, string (according to Śabda-k. {%= rajju,%}
q. v.); {%= tantu-paṭa-saṅghāta;%} N. of Prajā-pati, (in
this sense given as fem. by Śabda-k.; perhaps fr. a
form {%srajvan;%} cf. {%yajvan,%} fr. {%yaj.%})
<LEND>

<L>53588<pc>1155-c<k1>sradDU<k2>sradDU
{#sradDU#}¦ {%sraddhū, ūs,%} f. (better written {%śrad-%}
{%dhū%} and derived fr. rt. {%śṛdh,%} q. v.), breaking wind
downwards.
<LEND>

<L>53589<pc>1155-c<k1>sramB<k2>sramB
{#sramB#}¦ {%srambh%} = rt. {%śrambh,%} q. v.; [cf.
{%vi-srambh, visrabdha, vi-srambha.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53590<pc>1155-c<k1>srava<k2>srava
{#srava#}¦ {%srava, sravaṇa.%} See p. 1156, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53591<pc>1155-c<k1>srazwf<k2>srazwf
{#srazwf#}¦ {%sraṣṭṛ, ṭā,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%sṛj%}), a
creator; a maker, author; N. of Brahmā; of Śiva.
{%—Sraṣṭṛ-tā,%} f. or {%sraṣṭṛ-tva, am,%} n. creator-
ship.
<LEND>

<L>53592<pc>1155-c<k1>sras<k2>sras
{#sras#}¦ {%sras, srasta,%} &c. See under rt. 1. {%sraṃs.%}
<LEND>

<L>53593<pc>1155-c<k1>srAk<k2>srAk
{#srAk#}¦ {%srāk,%} ind. (probably fr. rt. {%sṛ + añc;%}
cf. {%drāk%}), quickly, speedily, instantly.
<LEND>

<L>53594<pc>1155-c<k1>srAma<k2>srAma
{#srAma#}¦ {%srāma, as,%} m. (according to some fr.
rt. {%sru%}), Ved. a sick man, (Sāy. {%= vyādhita%} or {%vi-%}
{%śliṣṭāṅga;%} cf. {%a-s˚%}), disease, sickness, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%vyādhi.%})
<LEND>

<L>53595<pc>1155-c<k1>srAva<k2>srAva
{#srAva#}¦ {%srāva, srāvaka.%} See p. 1156, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53596<pc>1155-c<k1>sriD<k2>sriD<h>1
{#sriD#} 1¦. {%sridh,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%sredhati, -te,%}
&c., Ved. to assail, injure, ruin, destroy;
to perish; cl. 6. P. A. {%sridhati, -te,%} &c., Ved. to
perish, be injured; [cf. Lat. <nsi>stlis, lis;</nsi> Old Germ.
<nsi>stritan, strit;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>stridh.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53597<pc>1155-c<k1>sriD<k2>sriD<h>2
2. {%sridh, t,%}¦ f., Ved. injury, distress, suffering, (Sāy.
{%= duḥkha%}); battle; ({%t%}), m. an enemy, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%śoṣayitṛ.%})
<LEND>

<L>53598<pc>1155-c<k1>sreDat<k2>sreDat
{%Sredhat, an, antī, at,%}¦ injuring, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>53599<pc>1155-c<k1>sriB<k2>sriB
{#sriB#}¦ {%sribh%} or {%srimbh,%} cl. 1. P. {%srebhati,%}
{%srimbhati,%} &c., to hurt, injure, kill (=
rt. {%sṛbh%}).
<LEND>

<L>53600<pc>1155-c<k1>srima<k2>srima
{#srima#}¦ {%srima, as,%} m., Ved. (probably) a kind
of evil spirit, (Atharva-veda VIII. 6, 10.)
<LEND>

<L>53601<pc>1155-c<k1>sriv<k2>sriv
{#sriv#}¦ {%sriv,%} cl. 4. P. {%srīvyati, sisreva,%}
{%srevitum,%} to go; to become dry: Caus.
{%srevayati, -yitum,%} to make dry, dry up: Desid.
{%sisreviṣati, susryūṣati:%} Intens. {%sesrīvyate.%}
<LEND>

<L>53602<pc>1155-c<k1>srUta<k2>srUta
{%Srūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone; dried, become dry,
(Pāṇ. VI. 4, 20.)
<LEND>

<L>53603<pc>1155-c<k1>srUtvA<k2>srUtvA
{%Srūtvā,%}¦ ind. {%= srevitvā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>53604<pc>1155-c<k1>srevayat<k2>srevayat
{%Srevayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. making dry, drying
up.
<LEND>

<L>53605<pc>1155-c<k1>srevitvA<k2>srevitvA
{%Srevitvā,%}¦ ind. having gone; having become dry.
<LEND>

<L>53606<pc>1155-c<k1>sru<k2>sru
{#sru#}¦ {%sru%} (incorrectly written {%śru,%} see rt.
2. {%śru%}), cl. 1. P. {%sravati%} (ep. rarely A. {%-te%}),
{%susrāva%} (1st du. {%susruva%}), {%sroṣyati, asusruvat,%}
{%srotum%} (Ved. Inf. {%sravitave, sravitavai%}), to flow,
stream, trickle, ooze, drip, drop, distil, exude; to
move, go; to let flow, shed (with acc.); to trickle
away, slip away, waste away, perish; to flow from
(with abl.); to be diffused or spread about, trans-
pire: Caus. {%srāvayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asusravat%} or
{%asisravat,%} to cause to flow, pour out, shed, effuse,
spill: Desid. of Caus. {%susrāvayiṣati%} or {%sisrāva-%}
{%yiṣati:%} Desid. {%susrūṣati:%} Intens. {%sosrūyate,%}
{%sosroti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ῥέ-ω (for σρεϝω), ῥεύ-σω, ἐ-ῤῤύη-ν,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ῥέ-ος, ῥό-ο-ς, ῥεῦ-μα, ῥο-ή, ῥύ-σι-ς, ῥεῦ-σι-ς, ῥυ-τό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ῥευσ-τό-ς, ῥέ-ε-θρο-ν, ῥύ-αξ, ῥύ-μη,</lang>
[Page1156-a+ 80]
<lang n="greek">ῥυ-θ-μό-ς, Στρύμων:</lang> Lat. <nsi>riv-u-s, Rumo, rumen, Ru-</nsi>
<nsi>mina:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>strou-m, sliu-mo,</nsi> ‘quickly;’
<nsi>sliumor,</nsi> ‘quicker:’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>schleunig:</nsi> Lith.
<nsi>srav-j-u,</nsi> ‘to flow;’ <nsi>srov-e:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>s-t-ru-ja, o-s-t-</nsi>
<nsi>rovu,</nsi> ‘an island:’ Hib. <nsi>sruth,</nsi> ‘stream.’]
<LEND>

<L>53607<pc>1156-a<k1>srava<k2>srava
{%Srava, as,%}¦ m. flowing, streaming, dropping,
trickling, oozing; a drop; a spring, fountain, torrent;
({%ā%}), f. the Mūrvā plant. {%—Srava-draṅga, as,%} m.
‘moving town,’ a fair, market, bazaar.
<LEND>

<L>53608<pc>1156-a<k1>sravaka<k2>sravaka
{%Sravaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} flowing, dropping, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53609<pc>1156-a<k1>sravaRa<k2>sravaRa
{%Sravaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of flowing, streaming,
trickling, oozing; sweat, perspiration; urine.
<LEND>

<L>53610<pc>1156-a<k1>sravat<k2>sravat
{%Sravat, an, antī, at,%}¦ flowing, streaming, oozing,
dripping, dropping, distilling; ({%an%}), m., Ved. a
stream; ({%antī%}), f. a stream, river, (in Naigh. I. 13.
{%sravantyaḥ%} is enumerated among the {%nadī-nā-%}
{%māni%}); the region of the spleen (sometimes called
the left hypochondriac region); a particular drug or
medicinal plant. {%—Sravat-svedajala, as, ā, am,%}
streaming with perspiration, perspiring profusely.
{%—Sravad-garbhā,%} f. a woman that miscarries; a
cow miscarrying by accident.
<LEND>

<L>53611<pc>1156-a<k1>sravanta<k2>sravanta
{%Sravanta, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowing, dropping.
<LEND>

<L>53612<pc>1156-a<k1>srAva<k2>srAva
{%Srāva, as,%}¦ m. flow, flowing, oozing, dripping.
<LEND>

<L>53613<pc>1156-a<k1>srAvaka<k2>srAvaka
{%Srāvaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to flow, letting
flow, pouring out, shedding, exuding; ({%am%}), n.
black pepper.
<LEND>

<L>53614<pc>1156-a<k1>srAvaRa<k2>srAvaRa
{%Srāvaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to flow, exuding;
({%ī%}), f. a kind of medicinal plant ({%= ṛddhi%}).
<LEND>

<L>53615<pc>1156-a<k1>srAvin<k2>srAvin
{%Srāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ flowing, streaming, fluid.
{%—Srāvi-tara, as, ā, am,%} very watery, marshy.
<LEND>

<L>53616<pc>1156-a<k1>srut<k2>srut
{%Srut, t, t, t,%}¦ flowing, &c. (at the end of comps.,
see {%pari-srut, amṛta-srut,%} &c.).
<LEND>

<L>53617<pc>1156-a<k1>sruta<k2>sruta
{%Sruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowed, trickled, flowing, drop-
ping, dripping, fluid; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of medicinal
plant ({%= hiṅgu-pattrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>53618<pc>1156-a<k1>sruti<k2>sruti
{%Sruti, is,%}¦ f. flow, flowing, streaming, oozing,
distilling; exudation, resin; a stream; (Ved.) a
path, by-way, course, road, (Sāy. {%= mārga;%} in Ṛg-
veda X. 88, 15. {%dve srutī aśṛṇavam pitrīṇāṃ%}
{%devānām uta%} is translated, ‘I have heard of two
paths, that of the fathers and that of the gods.’)
<LEND>

<L>53619<pc>1156-a<k1>sruva<k2>sruva
{%Sruva, as, ā,%}¦ m. f. [cf. {%sruc%}], a wooden ladle
(of a semicircular shape with a double extremity, or
two oval collateral excavations, used to pour ghee on
the sacrificial fire, = 2. {%juhū%}); a Soma ladle, Soma
spoon; ({%ā%}), f. the Mūrvā plant; the tree Boswellia
Thurifera. {%—Sruva-hasta, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva.
{%—Sruvā-vṛkṣa, as,%} m. the plant or tree Fla-
courtia Sapida.
<LEND>

<L>53620<pc>1156-a<k1>srU<k2>srU
{%Srū, ūs,%}¦ f. a sacrificial ladle ({%= sruva%} above);
a spring, fountain, cascade.
<LEND>

<L>53621<pc>1156-a<k1>srota<k2>srota
{%Srota, as,%}¦ m. {%= srotas%} below [cf. {%śuṣka-s˚%}];
({%am%}), n. a stream ({%= srotas%} below).
<LEND>

<L>53622<pc>1156-a<k1>srotas<k2>srotas
{%Srotas, as,%}¦ n. a natural stream of water, current,
flow or course of water; a rapid stream, torrent; a
stream or river or spring (in general); a wave;
water, (in Naigh. I. 12. enumerated among the
{%udaka-nāmāni%}); the course or current of nutriment
in the body, stream of life, (see {%ūrdhva-s˚, tir-%}
{%yak-s˚%}); an organ of sense; [cf. 1. {%śrotas.%}]
{%—Srota-īśa, as,%} m. ‘lord of streams,’ the ocean.
{%—Srotas-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing a stream or
current; ({%atī%}), f. a river. {%—Srotas-vin, ī, inī, i,%}
having a stream or current; ({%inī%}), f. a river. {%—Sroto-%}
{%java, as,%} m. rapidity of current. {%—Sroto-'ñjana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘stream-collyrium,’ antimony (especially as a
collyrium for the eyes, said to be produced in the
river Yamunā, cf. {%yāmuna%}). {%—Sroto-vah, vāṭ,%} f. a
river ({%= sroto-vahā%} below). {%—Sroto-vaha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} flowing like a stream or river; ({%ā%}), m. a river
in general.
<LEND>

<L>53623<pc>1156-a<k1>srotasya<k2>srotasya
{%Srotasya, as, ā, am,%}¦ produced in a stream (Ved.);
({%as%}), m., N. of Śiva; a thief.
<LEND>

<L>53624<pc>1156-a<k1>srotya<k2>srotya
{%Srotya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. produced in a stream;
({%ā%}), f., Ved. a stream, current, river, (in Naigh. I.
13. {%srotyāḥ%} is enumerated among the {%nadī-nā-%}
{%māni.%})
<LEND>

<L>53625<pc>1156-a<k1>sruGna<k2>sruGna
{#sruGna#}¦ {%srughna, as,%} m., N. of a country.
<LEND>

<L>53626<pc>1156-a<k1>sruGnI<k2>sruGnI
{%Srughnī,%}¦ f. natron, (see {%srug-ghnī%} under {%sruc.%})
<LEND>
[Page1156-b+ 78]

<L>53627<pc>1156-b<k1>srOGna<k2>srOGna
{%Sraughna, as, ī, am,%}¦ of or belonging to the
country of Srughna, coming from Srughna; suited
to Srughna; abounding in Srughna, abiding or staying
in Srughna; going or leading to Srughna, looking
toward Srughna (as a gate &c.); ({%as%}), m. an inha-
bitant of Srughna; ({%am%}), n. the gate leading to
Srughna, (Pāṇ. IV. 3, 86.)
<LEND>

<L>53628<pc>1156-b<k1>sruc<k2>sruc
{#sruc#}¦ {%sruc, k,%} f. (connected with rt. {%sru%} and
by some derived fr. {%sru + añc,%} cf. {%sruva, srū%}), a
sort of wooden ladle used for pouring clarified butter
on a sacrificial fire, (it ought to be made of Palāśa
or Khadira wood.) {%—Sruk-praṇālikā,%} f. the spout
of a ladle. {%—Srug-ghnī,%} f. (probably fr. {%sruc +%}
{%ghnī;%} but also spelt {%srughnī%}), natron, alkali. {%—Srug-%}
{%dāru, us,%} m. the tree Flacourtia Sapida. {%—Srug-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having a ladle.
<LEND>

<L>53629<pc>1156-b<k1>srucaya<k2>srucaya
{%Srucaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%srucayati = srugvantam%}
{%ācaṣṭe%} or {%karoti,%} (see Vopa-deva XXI. 14.)
<LEND>

<L>53630<pc>1156-b<k1>srucya<k2>srucya
{%Srucya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being in a sacrificial
ladle, contained in a ladle.
<LEND>

<L>53631<pc>1156-b<k1>srupa<k2>srupa
{#srupa#}¦ {%srupa.%} See {%stupa.%}
<LEND>

<L>53632<pc>1156-b<k1>srek<k2>srek
{#srek#}¦ {%srek%} (also written {%śrek, sek, svek%}),
cl. 1. A. {%srekate, sisreke, srekitum:%} Caus.
{%srekayati,%} Aor. {%asisrekat,%} to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>53633<pc>1156-b<k1>srE<k2>srE
{#srE#}¦ {%srai,%} cl. 4. P. {%srāyati,%} &c. = rts. {%śrai,%}
{%śrā, śai.%}
<LEND>

<L>53634<pc>1156-b<k1>sva<k2>sva<h>1
{#sva#} 1¦. {%sva, as, ā, am,%} own, one's own, my
own, thy own, his own, our own, &c. (according
to the context; and in these senses frequently used
at the beginning of comps.; when declined, {%sva%} is
generally treated as a pronominal, and follows {%sarva,%}
e. g. {%svasmai%} dat. c. sing., {%svasmāt%} abl. c. sing.,
{%svasmin%} loc. c. sing., but in abl. loc. sing. Nom.
pl. it optionally follows {%śiva,%} e. g. {%taṃ svayam-%}
{%bhūḥ svād āsyād asṛjat,%} him, the self-existent,
created from his own mouth, Manu I. 94; when,
however, {%sva%} is used as a substantive, meaning
‘kinsman’ and ‘property,’ it cannot be declined as
a pronominal, but must necessarily follow the de-
clension of {%śiva,%} e. g. {%svāḥ,%} one's own relations,
{%prabhūtāḥ svāḥ,%} great riches), innate, native, natural,
inherent, proper, peculiar, appropriate; belonging to
one's own family or tribe; ({%as%}), m. self, one's own
self, self-identity; the soul; N. of Viṣṇu; a kins-
man, relative, relation, (Manu II. 109); ({%as, am%}),
m. n. property, wealth, riches; (in algebra) plus or
affirmative quantity; [cf. Zend <nsi>hva, qa:</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">ἑ, ϝε</lang>
(for <lang n="greek">αϝε</lang>), <lang n="greek">σφέ (οὖ, οἴ, ἕ), ἑ-ό-ς, ὅ-ς, σφ-ό-ς, ἴ-διο-ς:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>se, suu-s:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>si-k,</nsi> ‘self;’ <nsi>sves,</nsi> ‘own;’
<nsi>svesa,</nsi> ‘property;’ <nsi>sei-na</nsi> (for <nsi>svei-na</nsi>), <nsi>sve, svi</nsi> in
<nsi>svi-kunths,</nsi> ‘manifest:’ Old Germ. <nsi>suâs,</nsi> ‘own:’
Angl. Sax. <nsi>sin, swa:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>saw, sawa-s, sawa:</nsi>
Slav. <nsi>sebje, sebe, svoi, svaja, svœ, svo-bodi,</nsi> ‘free;’
<nsi>svo-boda,</nsi> ‘liberty.’] {%—Sva-kampana, as,%} m. ‘self-
moving,’ air, wind. {%—Sva-karma-kṛt, t,%} m. doing
one's own business, an independent workman. {%—Sva-%}
{%karman, a,%} n. one's own work, own business, own
duty, peculiar or proper business. {%—Sva-karma-%}
{%vaśa, as, ā, am,%} subject to (the consequences of)
one's own acts. {%—Sva-karma-stha, as, ā, am,%}
minding one's own business or duty. {%—Sva-kāmin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} self-loving, selfish. {%—Sva-kārya, am,%} n.
one's own business or duty or function. {%—Sva-kārya-%}
{%saha, as, ā, am,%} able to do one's duty or effect
one's own business. {%—Sva-kuṭumba, am,%} n. one's
own household. {%—Sva-kula, am,%} n. one's own
family or race. {%—Sva-kula-kṣaya, as,%} m. ‘destroy-
ing its own family,’ a fish. {%—Sva-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
self-performed, done or made by one's self. {%—Sva-%}
{%kṣatra, as, ā, am,%} Ved. possessing innate strength,
self-powerful, innately strong. {%—Sva-gata, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} ‘gone to one's self,’ passing in one's own mind,
spoken to one's self, apart, aside; ({%am%}), n. to one's
self, aside (in theatrical language). {%—Sva-garbha,%}
{%as,%} m. own womb; own embryo. {%—Sva-guṇa-tas,%}
ind. from personal merit. {%—Sva-guṇa-prakāśaka,%}
{%as, ikā, am,%} proclaiming one's own merits, boast-
ful. {%—Sva-gupta, as, ā, am,%} self-defended, self-
[Page1156-c+ 81]
preserved; ({%ā%}), f. cowach; the sensitive plant ({%=%}
{%lajjālu%}). {%—Sva-gūrta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. sponta-
neously striving, (Sāy. {%= svayam-udyata,%} Ṛg-veda
VI. 68, 4); self-flowing, spontaneously going (said
of rivers; Sāy. {%= svayam eva gāmin,%} Ṛg-veda I.
140, 13). {%—Sva-gṛha, am,%} n. one's own house;
({%as%}), m. a kind of bird, Loxia Philippensis. {%—Sva-%}
{%grāma, as,%} m. one's own village. {%—Sva-caraṇa-%}
{%parṣad, t,%} f. a college or community of members
of one's own Caraṇa or sect. {%—Sva-cchanda, as,%} m.
one's own will, own choice, own fancy; independ-
ence; ({%as, ā, am%}), self-willed, independent, un-
controlled; spontaneous; uncultivated, wild; ({%am%}),
ind. according to one's own will or choice or fancy,
voluntarily, spontaneously, independently. {%—Sva-%}
{%cchandaka, as, ā, am, = sva-cchanda%} above.
{%—Svacchanda-cāriṇī,%} f. ‘going about at will,’ a
harlot. {%—Svacchanda-tas,%} ind. voluntarily. {%—Svac-%}
{%chanda-bhairava,%} N. of a work. {%—Svacchanda-%}
{%śāktāgama (˚ta-āg˚)%} and {%svacchanda-saṅgraha,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of two works. {%—Sva-ja, as, ā, am,%}
self-produced, self-born, produced in or by one's
self; ({%as%}), m. a son; sweat, perspiration; ({%ā%}), f.
a daughter; ({%am%}), n. blood. {%—Sva-jana, as,%} m.
one's own people, own kindred, own family or
household; a kinsman, connection. {%—Svajanāya,%}
Nom. A. {%svajanāyate, -yitum,%} to become a relation.
{%—Sva-janāvṛta (˚na-āv˚), as, ā, am,%} surrounded
or accompanied by one's own people. {%—Sva-jāti,%}
{%is,%} f. own cast or tribe, own kind or species. {%—Sva-%}
{%jātīya%} or {%sva-jātya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to one's
own tribe or species. {%—Sva-jñāti, is,%} f. one's own
kindred or kin; ({%is%}), m. a kinsman. {%—Svataḥ-%}
{%pramāṇa, as, ā, am,%} self-proved, self-evident.
{%—Svataḥ-siddha, as, ā, am,%} self-accomplished;
self-proved, self-demonstrated. {%—Sva-tantra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} self-dependent, self-reliant, independent, free,
self-willed, unrestrained, uncontrolled; no longer
subject to parents, of age, full grown; ({%am%}), n., N.
of a mystical work. {%—Svatantra-tā,%} f. self-depend-
ence, self-reliance, independence; wilfulness. {%—Sva-%}
{%tantra-vṛtti, is,%} f. acting self-reliantly, independent
action. {%—Svatantra-sāra, as,%} m., N. of a work.
{%—Sva-tavas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having power in
one's self, having innate or peculiar power, very
strong or powerful (said of the Maruts); having
wealth in one's self, (Sāy. {%sva-tavān,%} nom. c.
masc. {%= dhana-vān,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 2, 6; cf. Pāṇini
VIII. 3, 11, VII. 1, 83); firmly rooted (said of a
mountain). {%—Sva-tas,%} ind. by one's self, in one's
self, of one's self (applicable to any person, e. g.
by himself, in himself, &c., by itself, in itself, of
itself, &c.); own, peculiar. {%—Svatas-siddha,%} see
{%svataḥ-siddha%}. {%—Sva-tā,%} f. {%= sva-tva,%} q. v. {%—Sva-%}
{%tra, as, ā, am,%} self-preserving; ({%as%}), m. a blind
man. {%—Sva-tva, am,%} n. ‘selfness,’ self-existence,
independent being or condition; the state of relation
to one's self; own right or property, ownership,
proprietorship, proprietary right. {%—Svatva-nivṛtti,%}
{%is,%} f. cessation or loss of proprietary right. {%—Svatva-%}
{%bodhana, am,%} n. declaration or proof of ownership.
{%—Svatva-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having proprietary right;
({%ān%}), m. an owner. {%—Svatva-vyabhicāri-tva, am,%}
n. uncertainty of ownership. {%—Svatva-vyabhicārin,%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} departing or deviating from ownership.
{%—Svatva-hāni, is,%} f. loss of proprietary right, for-
feiture of title. {%—Svatva-hetu, us,%} m. ground or
cause of proprietary right. {%—Svatvābhāva (˚va-%}
{%abh˚), as,%} m. non-existence of proprietary right.
{%—Svatvāvagama (˚va-av˚), as,%} m. determination
or ascertainment of ownership. {%—Svatvāspada (˚va-%}
{%ās˚), am,%} n. site of ownership, that in which any
one has proprietorship. {%—Svatvāspadī-bhūta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} become the subject of proprietary right. {%—Sva-%}
{%tvotpatti (˚va-ut˚), is,%} f. the arising of proprietary
right, origin of ownership. {%—Sva-dāra, as,%} m. one's
own wife. {%—Svadāra-nirata, as, ā, am,%} attached
to one's wife, uxorious. {%—Sva-duhitṛ, tā,%} f. one's
own daughter. {%—Sva-deśa, as,%} m. own country,
native country, home; one's own place, proper
place. {%—Svadeśa-ja, as, ā, am,%} born in one's
[Page1157-a+ 81]
country, a fellow-countryman, compatriot. {%—Sva-%}
{%deśa-paridhi, is,%} m. circumference of a circle of
longitude in any place that has latitude. {%—Svadeśa-%}
{%madhya-paridhi, is,%} m. circumference of the ter-
restrial equator. {%—Sva-deha-dāna, am,%} n. the gift
of one's own body. {%—Sva-dharma, as, am,%} m. n.
own right, own duty, peculiar duty or occupation,
the duties of one's own class or caste (as defined
in Manu I. 88 — 91), peculiar property, peculiarity.
{%—Svadharma-cyuta, as, ā, am,%} deprived of one's
rights, fallen from or neglecting one's duty. {%—Sva-%}
{%dharma-tyāga, as,%} m. dereliction or neglect of
one's own duty; abandoning one's religion, apostasy.
{%—Svadharma-skhalana, am,%} n. falling from or
neglect of one's own duty. {%—Svadharma-stha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} abiding in one's peculiar duty. {%—Svadharmā-%}
{%caraṇa (˚ma-āc˚), am,%} n. the act of practising one's
own duties. {%—Svadharmānapaga (˚ma-an˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} not swerving from one's duties. {%—Svadhar-%}
{%mārtha-viniścaya, as,%} m. the knowing or ascer-
taining one's duty and interests. {%—Sva-dhā,%} see s.v.
{%—Sva-nagara, am,%} n. one's own town, native city.
{%—Sva-nāman, a,%} n. one's own name. {%—Svanā-%}
{%māṅka (˚ma-aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} marked with one's
own name, called after one's own name. {%—Sva-nāśa,%}
{%as,%} m. self-destruction. {%—Sva-pakṣa, as,%} m. one's
own side, own party; ‘being on one's own side,’ a
friend. {%—Sva-para-maṇḍala, am,%} n. one's own
and an enemy's country. {%—Sva-piṇḍā,%} f. a kind of
date tree {%(= piṇḍa-kharjūrī)%}. {%—Sva-pitṛ, tā,%} m.
one's own father; ({%taras%}), m. pl. one's ancestors.
{%—Sva-putra-vat,%} ind. like one's own children.
{%—Sva-pū,%} see s.v. {%—Sva-poṣam,%} ind. according
to the nurture or training practised by one's own
kindred. {%—Sva-prakāśa, as, ā, am,%} self-resplendent,
self-luminous, self-evident. {%—Sva-pradhāna-tā,%} f.
one's own nature or natural condition. {%—Sva-pra-%}
{%bhu-tā,%} f. own power or supremacy, ({%sva-prabhu-%}
{%tayā,%} inst. c. by one's own power, arbitrarily.) {%—Sva-%}
{%prayogāt,%} ind. through the application of one's own
efforts, by means of one's own exertions. {%—Sva-%}
{%prayojana-vaśa, as,%} m. the force of one's own ob-
ject or purpose. {%—Sva-balāśraya (˚la-āś˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} depending on one's own strength. {%—Sva-bān-%}
{%dhava, as,%} m. one's own relation. {%—Sva-bāhu, us,%}
m. one's own arm. {%—Svabāhu-bala, am,%} n. strength
of one's own arm. {%—Sva-brāhmaṇyā,%} f. the text
called Sva-brāhmaṇyā (used for invoking Indra in
the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice, Manu IX. 126). {%—Sva-%}
{%bhaṭa, as,%} m. one's own warrior, body-guard. {%—Sva-%}
{%bhājana, am,%} n. (probably for {%sabhājana,%} q. v.),
civility, polite greeting, welcome, adieu. {%—Sva-bhānu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} Ved. self-luminous, self-shining. {%—Sva-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. own state, essential or inherent pro-
perty, innate or peculiar disposition, natural state or
constitution, nature; peculiar purpose or aim. {%—Sva-%}
{%bhāva-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced by natural disposition,
innate, natural. {%—Svabhāva-tas,%} ind. from natural
disposition, by nature, naturally. {%—Svabhāva-daur-%}
{%janya, am,%} n. natural or innate wickedness. {%—Sva-%}
{%bhāva-dveṣa, as,%} m. natural hatred. {%—Svabhāva-%}
{%vāda, as,%} m. the doctrine that the universe was pro-
duced and is sustained by the natural and necessary
action of substances according to their inherent pro-
perties. {%—Svabhāva-vādin, ī,%} m. one who maintains
the above doctrine. {%—Svabhāva-śūra, as, ā, am,%}
possessing natural heroes. {%—Svabhāva-siddha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} accomplished by one's own nature, natural,
essential, spontaneous, not acquired. {%—Svabhāvokta%}
{%(˚va-uk˚), as, ā, am,%} uttered or said naturally, de-
clared spontaneously. {%—Svabhāvokti (˚va-uk˚), is,%}
f. spontaneous declaration, description of natural pe-
culiarities or properties. {%—Sva-bhū, ūs,%} m. ‘self-ex-
istent,’ N. of Viṣṇu; of Śiva; of Brahmā; ({%ūs%}), f.
one's own land, own country. {%—Svabhū-tyāga, as,%}
m. abandonment of one's country, abdication of one's
own territory. {%—Sva-bhūty-ojas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved.
whose energy is derived from inherent power. {%—Sva-%}
{%bhūmi, is,%} f. one's own land, own estate; native
country, fatherland. {%—Sva-māyā,%} f. own cunning,
own magical art or skill, own art. {%—Sva-yata, as, %}
[Page1157-b+ 81]
{%ā, am,%} Ved. self-guided. {%—Sva-yatna, as,%} m. one's
own exertion, own effort. {%—Sva-yaśas, ās, ās, as,%}
Ved. self-famous, deriving renown from one's self,
having peculiar fame. {%—Svayaśas-tara, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. more renowned, very famous. {%—Sva-yāvan, ā,%}
&c., Ved. self-moving, (in Ṛg-veda VIII. 25, 12.
the voc. c. {%sva-yāvan%} is applied to Sindhu or the
Ocean; according to Sāy. the nom. c. is {%sva-yāvān.%})
{%—Sva-yukti, is, is, i,%} Ved. self-yoked, self-har-
nessed. {%—Sva-yoni, is,%} m. f. own womb, one's own
place of birth; ({%is, is, i%}), nearly related, related on
the mother's side; ({%is%}), f. a sister or near female
relative. {%—Sva-rasa, as,%} m. natural or peculiar
flavour; proper taste or sentiment in composition; a
particular kind of astringent juice or decoction; the
sediment of oily substances ground on a stone.
{%—Sva-rāj, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. self-resplendent, self-lumi-
nous, shining of one's self (said of the Aśvins, Indra,
Mitra, and Varuṇa); ({%ṭ%}), m. the supreme Being
(Brahman); N. of one of the seven principal rays
of the sun (supposed to supply heat to the planet
Saturn); a kind of metre used in the Vedas (de-
scribed as a stanza of three lines, two containing
eight syllables each, and one ten); a variety of the
same metre containing four lines (probably fem. in
this sense). {%—Sva-rājya, am,%} n., Ved. independent
dominion or sovereignty. {%—Sva-rāṣṭra, am,%} n.
one's own country or kingdom; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a people (also read {%su-rāṣṭra%}). {%—Sva-ruci, is,%} f.
one's own taste or inclination, own wish; ({%is, is, i%}),
following one's own likings or desires, self-willed,
uncontrolled, wilful. {%—Sva-ruh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} self-growing,
self-increasing. {%—Sva-rūpa, am,%} n. one's own form
or shape, natural state or condition, essential pro-
perties; natural character or appearance, true consti-
tution or purpose; peculiar aim; nature; species,
kind, sort; a particular relation (in phil., see under
{%sam-bandha%}); ({%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}), having one's own
form or character, having a like nature or character;
similar, like, identical; pleasing, handsome; wise,
learned; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a place. {%—Svarūpa-gata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} endowed with one's own form or nature,
having a like character. {%—Svarūpa-tas,%} ind. accord-
ing to one's own form, analogously, similarly, iden-
tically. {%—Svarūpa-tā,%} f. or {%svarūpa-tva, am,%} n.
the having a natural form or state; identity of form
or nature; handsomeness. {%—Svarūpa-dhārin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} possessing a natural form or character, having
one's own form. {%—Svarūpa-sambodhana, am,%} n.,
N. of a work. {%—Svarūpāsiddhi (˚pa-as˚), is,%} f. a
form of A-siddhi or fallacious proof (where the nature
or property alleged is not really proved to belong to
the subject). {%—Sva-rūpin, ī, iṇī, i,%} having one's
own form or character; having essential properties;
identical. {%—Sva-rocas, ās, ās, as,%} or {%sva-rocis, is,%}
{%is, is,%} self-shining. {%—Sva-lakṣaṇa, am,%} n. peculiar
characteristic or property. {%—Sva-līna, as,%} m. (per-
haps for {%svar-līna%}), N. of a Dānava (mentioned in
the Vahni-Purāṇa). {%—Sva-vaṃśin, ī, inī, i,%} belong-
ing to one's own family. {%—Sva-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. possessing property, wealthy, opulent, (accord-
ing to some {%svavān%} is wrongly separated into {%sva-%}
{%vān,%} and is rather nom. case masc. of {%sv-avas,%} q. v.;
cf. Pāṇ. VII. 1, 83; cf. {%sva-tavas.%}) {%—Sva-vargya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} belonging to one's own tribe. {%—Sva-%}
{%vaśa, as, ā, am,%} subject to one's own will, self-sub-
dued, self-controlled; ruled by one's free will, in-
dependent. {%—Sva-vaśinī,%} f. a kind of metre (con-
sisting of thirty-eight syllables). {%—Sva-vahita, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} self-impelled, self-moved; alert, active. {%—Sva-%}
{%vāñchā,%} f. one's own desire, ({%sva-vāñchayā,%} accord-
ing to one's own wish.) {%—Sva-vārtta, am,%} n. one's
own condition or welfare. {%—Sva-vāsinī,%} f. a woman
whether married or unmarried who continues to
dwell after maturity in her father's house. {%—Sva-%}
{%vināśa, as,%} m. self-destruction, suicide. {%—Sva-viṣa-%}
{%ya, as,%} m. one's own country, own home. {%—Sva-%}
{%vīja, am,%} n. own seed, own cause; ({%as%}), m. the
soul. {%—Sva-vīrya-tas,%} ind. according to one's power.
{%—Sva-vṛkti, is, is, i,%} Ved. self-cleansing, having
cleansing properties; ({%is%}), f. a hymn. {%—Sva-vṛj, k, %}
[Page1157-c+ 81]
{%k, k,%} Ved. self-cutting, (Sāy. {%= svayaṃ chettṛ,%} Ṛg-
veda X. 38, 5.) {%—Sva-vṛtta, am,%} n. one's own
business or occupation. {%—Sva-vṛtti, is,%} f. one's own
peculiar occupation or means of subsistence; ({%is, is,%}
{%i%}), subsisting by one's own exertions. {%—Sva-vṛṣṭi,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. rain-appropriating, the appropriator of
rain. {%—Sva-śarīra, am,%} n. one's own body, own
person. {%—Sva-saṃvṛta, as, ā, am,%} self-concealed,
self-covered, self-guarded, self-secured. {%—Sva-saṃ-%}
{%sthā,%} f. self-abiding, self-staying, self-possession, ab-
sorption in one's own self. {%—Sva-sadṛśa, as, ī, am,%}
like one's self. {%—Sva-sara,%} see s.v. {%—Sva-sṛt, t,%}
{%t, t,%} moving or advancing by one's self, going or
moving at one's own will, moving freely or inde-
pendently. {%—Sva-sainya, am,%} n. one's own army.
{%—Sva-stha, as, ā, am,%} self-staying, self-abiding,
self-possessed, relying upon one's self, confident, re-
solute, firm, composed; self-sufficient, independent;
contented; well, healthy, comfortable, at ease, in
health; ({%am%}), ind. composedly. {%—Svastha-tā,%} f.
self-possession, well-being, health. {%—Sva-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. one's own place, own home. {%—Svasthāna-%}
{%stha, as, ā, am,%} standing in or occupying one's own
condition. {%—Sva-svadhās,%} m. pl., N. of a particular
class of Manes, (see {%sva-dhā.%}) {%—Sva-hasta, as,%} m.
one's own hand; own handwriting, autograph, signa-
ture. {%—Sva-hasta-gata, as, ā, am,%} fallen into one's
own hand. {%—Sva-hastikā,%} f. (probably) an axe (also
read {%su-hastikā%}). {%—Sva-hastollikhita (˚ta-ul˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} drawn or painted by one's own hand. {%—Sva-%}
{%hita, as, ā, am,%} good or advantageous for one's
self; ({%am%}), n. one's own advantage, own benefit,
own welfare. {%—Sva-hitaiṣin (˚ta-eṣ˚), ī, iṇī, i,%}
seeking one's own good or advantage. {%—Sva-hetu,%}
{%us,%} m. one's own cause, own sake, ({%sva-hetunā,%} for
one's own sake.) {%—Svākāra (sva-āk˚), as, ā, am,%}
or {%svākṛti (sva-āk˚), is, is, i,%} having one's own
form. {%—Svākṣa-pāda (sva-ak˚), as,%} m. a follower
of the Nyāya system of philosophy, a Naiyāyika.
{%—Svākṣara (sva-ak˚), as,%} m. (according to Śab-
da-k.) one's own handwriting or signature. {%—2. svā-%}
{%gata (sva-āg˚), as, ā, am,%} come of one's self; (for
1. {%sv-āgata%} see p. 1126.) {%—Svāṅga (sva-aṅ˚), am,%}
n. a limb of the body (Vopa-deva IV. 17); ({%as%}), m.
a proper N. {%—Svāṅgi,%} a patronymic from Svāṅga,
(Vopa-deva VII. 1, 4.) {%—Svādhikāra (sva-adh˚),%}
{%as,%} m. own office or function, peculiar station. {%—Svā-%}
{%dhipatya (sva-adh˚), am,%} n. own supremacy, su-
preme sway, royalty, sovereignty. {%—Svādiṣṭhāna%}
{%(sva-adh˚), am,%} n. one of the six Cakras or mys-
tical circles of the body, (see {%cakra.%}) {%—Svādhīna%}
{%(sva-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} self-subject, self-dependent;
independent, uncontrolled; in one's own power or
subjection, dependent on or belonging to one's own
side or party, one's own subject or dependent,
faithful. {%—Svādhīna-kuśala, as, ā, am,%} having
prosperity in one's own power. {%—Svādhīna-tā,%} f. or
{%svādhīna-tva, am,%} n. self-dependence, independ-
ence; subjection to one's self. {%—Svādhīna-patikā%}
or {%svādhīna-bhartṛkā,%} f. a woman who has a hus-
band subject to herself or dependent on herself, an
independent woman. {%—Svādhyāya (sva-adh˚), as,%}
m. ‘going over any subject to one's self,’ self-recit-
ing, self-reading, repeating or rehearsing to one's self,
inaudible reading or muttering of prayers, private
prayer, (especially) repetition or study of the Vedas,
sacred study; perusal of sacred books; the Veda; a
day on which the resumption of sacred study is com-
manded after a suspension of it. {%—Svādhyāya-brāh-%}
{%maṇa, am,%} n., N. of a chapter in the Taittirīyāra-
ṇyaka (ascribed to Kaṭha). {%—Svādhyāya-vat, ān,%}
m. a student of the Vedas. {%—Svādhyāyārthin (˚ya-%}
{%ar˚), ī,%} m. one who seeks a maintenance for him-
self during his studentship, (Manu XI. 1.) {%—Svā-%}
{%dhyāyin, ī,%} m. one who recites or repeats to himself,
(especially) a repeater or student of the Vedas; a
tradesman, dealer. {%—Svānubhava (sva-an˚), as,%}
m. one's own personal experience or observation.
{%—Svānubhūti (sva-an˚), is,%} f. one's own experi-
ence; self-enjoyment. {%—Svānubhūty-eka-sāra (sva-%}
{%an˚), as, ā, am,%} whose only essence consists in
[Page1158-a+ 81]
self-enjoyment. {%—Svānurūpa (sva-an˚), as, ī, am,%}
‘self-conformable,’ natural, innate. {%—1. svānta (sva-%}
{%an˚), am,%} n. (for 2. see s. v.), ‘having the end in itself,’
the mind ({%= manas%}); a cavern. {%—Svānyadīya-tva%}
{%(sva-an˚), am,%} n. the state of being one's own or
some one else's. {%—Svānyadīyatva-sandeha, as,%} m.
doubt about ‘meum’ and ‘tuum.’ {%—Svāyatta (sva-%}
{%āy˚), as, ā, am,%} subject to one's self; uncontrolled
by others, one's own master. {%—Svāyattī-kṛ,%} cl. 8.
P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make subject to one's self. {%—Svā-%}
{%ruh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. {%= sva-ruh%}. {%—Svārjita (sva-ar˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} self-acquired, acquired by one's own
efforts. {%—Svārtha (sva-ar˚), as,%} m. one's own ob-
ject or aim or wish, own advantage or interest, self-
interest; one's own property or substance; own
meaning, inherent or real meaning, true interpreta-
tion, similar meaning, a pleonasm; (according to
Śabda-k.) {%= liṅgārtha-viśeṣa; (as, ā, am),%} hav-
ing one's own object or aim; self-interested; having
or expressing [its] own inherent or true meaning,
having a natural or literal meaning, having a similar
meaning; pleonastic; ({%am%}), ind. on one's own ac-
count. {%—Svārtha-paṇḍita, as, ā, am,%} clever in one's
own affairs. {%—Svārtha-para%} or {%svārtha-parāyaṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} intent on one's own object or advantage,
self-interested, selfish. {%—Svārthapara-tā,%} f. selfish-
ness. {%—Svārtha-bhraṃśin, ī, inī, i,%} injurious to
one's own interests. {%—Svārtha-lipsu, us, us, u,%} de-
sirous of gaining one's own object, self-seeking.
{%—Svārtha-vighāta, as,%} m. the frustration of one's
object. {%—Svārtha-siddhi, is,%} f. accomplishment of
one's object, attainment of a wish or desire. {%—Svār-%}
{%thānumāna (˚tha-an˚), am,%} n. ‘inference for one's
self,’ (in logic) a particular process of induction.
{%—Svārthika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%svārtha%}), having one's
own object; having [its] own true and natural mean-
ing, having a literal meaning; done with one's own
wealth. {%—Svārthin, ī, inī, i,%} pursuing one's own
objects, self-seeking. {%—Svārthopapatti (˚tha-up˚),%}
{%is,%} f. the gaining or accomplishing of one's own ob-
ject. {%—Svāśrita (sva-āś˚), as, ā, am,%} dependent on
one's self. {%—Svī-karaṇa,%} &c., see col. 3. {%—Svec-%}
{%chā (sva-ic˚),%} f. one's own wish or will, own inclina-
tion, self-will, wilfulness. {%—Svecchācāra (˚chā-āc˚),%}
{%as,%} m. acting as one likes, doing what is right in
one's own eyes. {%—Svecchā-tas,%} ind. according to
one's own will or inclination. {%—Svecchādhīna (˚chā-%}
{%adh˚), as, ā, am,%} dependent on one's own will or
inclination. {%—Svecchā-mṛtyu, us,%} m. ‘dying at his
own will,’ epithet of Bhīṣma (who had received
from his father the power of fixing the time of his
own death; see Mahā-bhārata, Bhīṣma-parvan 5674).
{%—Svecchāhāra (˚chā-āh˚), as, ā, am,%} eating any-
thing at one's pleasure. {%—Svecchāhāra-vihāra, as,%}
m. feeding and roaming about according to one's in-
clination. {%—Svedu-havya (sva-id˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved.
probably {%= sva-samṛddha-haviṣka,%} (see Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda I. 121, 6, where the word {%idu%} is referred
either to rt. {%ind%} or rt. {%indh.%}) {%—Sveṣṭa (sva-iṣ˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} self-desired, wished for. {%—Svokta (sva-%}
{%uk˚), as, ā, am,%} spoken by one's self, ({%svoktam%}
{%ākṣipati,%} he corrects his own previous remark.)
{%—Svodaya (sva-ud˚), as,%} m. the rising of a sign
or any heavenly body at any particular place (de-
termined by adding to or deducting from the {%laṅko-%}
{%daya%} or time of rising at Ceylon). {%—Svopadhi (sva-%}
{%up˚), is,%} m. self-support; (probably) a fixed star.
{%—Svopārjita (sva-up˚), as, ā, am,%} self-gained,
self-acquired (as wealth &c.). {%—Svaujas (sva-oj˚),%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} having natural or peculiar energy; ({%ās%}),
m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>53635<pc>1158-a<k1>sva<k2>sva<h>2
2. {%sva,%}¦ Nom. P. {%svati,%} according to Vopa-deva
XXI. 7. {%= sva ivācarati,%} he acts like himself, he
acts like his kindred.
<LEND>

<L>53636<pc>1158-a<k1>svaka<k2>svaka
{%Svaka, as, ā,%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} own, one's own, proper,
peculiar.
<LEND>

<L>53637<pc>1158-a<k1>svakIya<k2>svakIya
{%Svakīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ own, one's own; belonging
to one's self, belonging to one's own family; ({%ā%}), f.
one's own wife; [cf. {%svīyā.%}] {%—Svakīya-tā,%} f. owner-
ship, one's own property.
<LEND>

<L>53638<pc>1158-a<k1>svayam<k2>svayam
{%Svayam,%}¦ ind. self, myself, himself, herself, itself,
[Page1158-b+ 81]
one's self, &c. (applicable to all persons and sometimes
used emphatically with other pronouns, e. g. {%ahaṃ%}
{%svayam,%} ‘I myself;’ sometimes used alone, e. g.
{%svayaṃ tat kṛtavān,%} I or thou or he did that him-
self; {%svayaṃ tat kṛtavatī,%} she did that herself;
{%svayaṃ tat kurvanti,%} they do that themselves);
by one's self, spontaneously, of one's own self, of
one's own accord; [cf. Hib. <nsi>feiñ,</nsi> ‘own, self;’ <nsi>sin,</nsi>
‘that, there;’ <nsi>siom,</nsi> ‘they, them:’ Cambro-Brit. <nsi>hun,</nsi>
‘he himself.’] {%—Svayaṃ-vara, as,%} m. ‘self-choice,’
the election of a husband by a princess or daughter
of a Kṣatriya at a public assembly of suitors held
for the purpose; ({%ā%}), f. a maiden who thus chooses
her own husband. {%—Svayaṃvara-kathā,%} f. the de-
claration of a Svayaṃ-vara. {%—Svayaṃvara-kṛta-%}
{%kṣaṇa, ā,%} f. a maiden who has fixed the moment
for a Svayaṃ-vara (see above). {%—Svayaṃ-vṛta, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} self-chosen, selected by one's self. {%—Svayaṃ-%}
{%śīrṇa, as, ā, am,%} self-fallen, dropped spontaneously.
{%—Svayaṃ-śreṣṭha, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Sva-%}
{%yaṃ-hārikā,%} f. ‘self-seizing,’ N. of a daughter of
Nir-mārṣṭi (who was wife of Duḥsaha; she is de-
scribed in the fifty-first chapter of the Mārkaṇḍeya-
Purāṇa as exercising an evil influence on certain sub-
stances, by abstracting, for example, the colour from
saffron and the thread from cotton). {%—Svayaṅ-kṛta,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} self-formed, self-made, natural, sponta-
neous; self-done, done by one's self; done to or under-
taken for one's self. {%—Svayaṅ-guptā,%} f. ‘self-pre-
served,’ cowach, Carpopogon Pruriens. {%—Svayaṅ-%}
{%graha, as,%} m. the taking for one's self (without leave).
{%—Svayaṅ-grāha, as, ā, am,%} self-choosing, volun-
tary. {%—Svayañ-jāta, as, ā, am,%} self-born. {%—Svayan-%}
{%datta, as, ā, am,%} self-given; a child who has given
himself to be adopted by adoptive parents (one of
the twelve kinds of children recognised in law-
books). {%—Svayam-arjita, as, ā, am,%} self-acquired,
gained by one's own efforts. {%—Svayam-āgata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} come of one's own accord. {%—Svayam-ukti,%}
{%is,%} f. voluntary declaration; (in law) information, de-
position. {%—Svayam-upasthita, as, ā, am,%} come
voluntarily or of one's own accord. {%—Svayam-upāga-%}
{%ta, as, ā, am,%} come of one's own accord; ({%as%}), m. a
child who comes and offers himself voluntarily to an
adoptive parent. {%—Svayam-prabha, as,%} m. ‘self-
shining,’ N. of the fourth Arhat of the future Utsarpiṇī;
({%ā%}), f., N. of an Apsaras. {%—Svayam-bhu, us,%} m. ‘self-
existent,’ Brahmā. {%—Svayam-bhuva, as,%} m. ‘self-ex-
isting,’ the first Manu; epithet of Brahmā; of Śiva; ({%ā%}),
f. a kind of shrub {%(= dhūmra-pattrā)%}. {%—Svayam-%}
{%bhū, ūs,%} m. ‘self-existing,’ the Self-existent, Brahmā;
Viṣṇu; Śiva; Kāla or time; Kāma-deva; a Jaina
deified sage; N. of the third of the nine black Vāsu-
devas; N. of certain plants {%(= māṣa-parṇī; =%}
{%liṅginī)%}. {%—Svayam-bhūta, as,%} m. ‘self-created,’
epithet of Śiva. {%—Svayam-bhoja, as,%} m., N. of a
Yādava chief. {%—Svayam-mūrta, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
self-curdled, coagulated (said of {%dadhi%}).
<LEND>

<L>53639<pc>1158-b<k1>svayu<k2>svayu
{%Svayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. possessed of opulence,
wealthy, (Sāy. {%= dhana-vat,%} Ṛg-veda III. 45, 5.)
<LEND>

<L>53640<pc>1158-b<k1>svApaya<k2>svApaya
{%Svāpaya%}¦ (fr. 1. {%sva%}), Nom. P. {%svāpayati,%} &c.,
(Vopa-deva XXI. 16.)
<LEND>

<L>53641<pc>1158-b<k1>svAmika<k2>svAmika
{%Svāmika = svāmin,%}¦ at the end of an adj. comp.
(e. g. {%pranaṣṭa-svāmika,%} whose master or owner
is lost or unknown, i. e. not known whether he be
alive or dead).
<LEND>

<L>53642<pc>1158-b<k1>svAmin<k2>svAmin
{%Svāmin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. 1. {%sva%} with affix {%min%}), possess-
ing proprietary rights, owning; ({%ī%}), m. a proprietor,
owner; a master, lord; a sovereign, king, monarch;
a husband, lover; a spiritual preceptor; a learned
Brāhman, an ascetic or religious man of the highest
order (used as a title at the end of names, e. g.
{%śrīdhara-svāmin%}); N. of Kārttikeya; of Viṣṇu;
of Śiva; of the Muni Vātsyāyana; of Garuḍa; of
an Arhat of the past era; of several other persons;
({%inī%}), f. a mistress, proprietress; ({%svāmin%} at the end
of a comp. has frequently the meaning of ‘a temple
or shrine built by,’ ‘a temple in honour of,’ e. g.
{%dharma-s˚, viṣṇu-s˚.%}) {%—Svāmi-kārttika, as,%} m.,
N. of the author of the Rāga-mālā. {%—Svāmi-kārtti-%}
{%keyānuprekṣā (˚ya-an˚),%} f., N. of a Jaina work by
[Page1158-c+ 80]
Jaya-candra. {%—Svāmi-kārya, am,%} n. the business of
a king or master. {%—Svāmi-kāryārthin (˚ya-ar˚), ī,%}
{%inī, i,%} desirous of or seeking a master's interests.
{%—Svāmi-jaṅghin, ī,%} m., N. of Paraśu-rāma.
{%—Svāmi-tā,%} f. or {%svāmi-tva, am,%} n. ownership,
mastership; lordship, sovereignty, &c. {%—Svāmi-pāla,%}
{%au,%} m. du. the owner and the tender (of cattle, Manu
VIII. 5). {%—Svāmi-pāla-vivāda, as,%} m. a dispute be-
tween a master and the servant who tends his cattle.
{%—Svāmi-bhāva, as,%} m. the state or relation of a
lord or owner. {%—Svāmi-mūla, as, ā, am,%} originat-
ing in or derived from a master or lord, depending
on a master or husband. {%—Svāmi-vātsalya, am,%} n.
affection for a lord or husband. {%—Svāmi-sad-bhāva,%}
{%as,%} m. existence of a master or owner; amiability of
a master or lord. {%—Svāmi-sevā,%} f. the service of a
master, respect for a master; reverence for or atten-
tion to a husband. {%—Svāmy-artham,%} ind. for a
master's sake. {%—Svāmy-asammata, as, ā, am,%} un-
permitted by a master; one who has not obtained
an owner's permission. {%—Svāmy-upakāraka, as,%}
m. ‘serviceable to an owner, benefiting a master,’
a horse.
<LEND>

<L>53643<pc>1158-c<k1>svAmya<k2>svAmya
{%Svāmya, am,%}¦ n. mastership, lordship, ownership;
right or title to property; rule, supremacy, dominion.
{%—Svāmya-kāraṇa, am,%} n. the cause of supremacy
or lordship.
<LEND>

<L>53644<pc>1158-c<k1>svAya<k2>svAya
{%Svāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%svāyate%} according to Vopa-deva
XXI. 7. {%= sva ivācarati,%} he acts like himself, he
acts like his own kindred.
<LEND>

<L>53645<pc>1158-c<k1>svikA<k2>svikA
{%Svikā,%}¦ f. See under {%svaka,%} col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53646<pc>1158-c<k1>svin<k2>svin
{%Svin%}¦ in {%śata-svin,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>53647<pc>1158-c<k1>svIkaraRa<k2>svIkaraRa
{%Svī-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. making one's own, appropria-
tion, adopting, taking, accepting, assenting, agreeing,
assent, promise. {%—Svīkaraṇa-karman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved.
whose function is to appropriate.
<LEND>

<L>53648<pc>1158-c<k1>svIkaraRIya<k2>svIkaraRIya
{%Svī-karaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be appropriated; to
be admitted or acknowledged or accepted; to be as-
sumed; to be assented or agreed to; to be pro-
mised.
<LEND>

<L>53649<pc>1158-c<k1>svIkartf<k2>svIkartf
{%Svī-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who appropriates or
accepts or admits, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53650<pc>1158-c<k1>svIkAra<k2>svIkAra
{%Svī-kāra, am,%}¦ n. making one's own, taking on
one's self, appropriation, adopting, assuming, assump-
tion, claiming, claim; assent, agreement, consent;
promise. {%—Svīkāra-rahita, as, ā, am,%} devoid of
assent, not agreed to. {%—Svīkārānta (˚ra-an˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} ended or concluded by assent; agreed to.
<LEND>

<L>53651<pc>1158-c<k1>svIkArya<k2>svIkArya
{%Svī-kārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be admitted, to be as-
sumed (in argument).
<LEND>

<L>53652<pc>1158-c<k1>svIkf<k2>svIkf
{%Svī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make one's own,
own, win, appropriate, claim; to take upon one's
self; to adopt, admit, assume (in argument); to as-
sent, agree to.
<LEND>

<L>53653<pc>1158-c<k1>svIkfta<k2>svIkfta
{%Svī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ appropriated, owned, ac-
cepted, admitted, acknowledged, adopted, claimed,
agreed, assented to, promised.
<LEND>

<L>53654<pc>1158-c<k1>svIkftya<k2>svIkftya
{%Svī-kṛtya,%}¦ ind. having agreed to or promised;
having satisfied.
<LEND>

<L>53655<pc>1158-c<k1>svIya<k2>svIya
{%Svīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ own, relating or belonging to
one's self, peculiar, characteristic; ({%ā%}), f. one's own
wife, a faithful wife, one solely attached to her own
husband; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἑός, αφέος, σφός.</lang>] {%—Svīyākṣara%}
{%(˚ya-ak˚), as,%} m. one's own handwriting or signa-
ture, autograph, (Śabda-k.)
<LEND>

<L>53656<pc>1158-c<k1>svEra<k2>svEra
{%Svaira, as, ī, am%}¦ (probably fr. {%sva + īra,%} going;
see rts. {%ir, īr%}), going where one likes, following
one's own fancy, self-willed, wilful, wanton, unre-
strained, refractory; slow, lazy; dependent on will,
voluntary, optional, unimportant; ({%am%}), n. wilful-
ness; ({%am%}), ind. with one's own will or assent; of
one's own accord. {%—Svaira-tā,%} f. wilfulness, inde-
pendence. {%—Svaira-vṛtta, as, ā, am,%} acting or liv-
ing as one likes, following one's own inclinations.
<LEND>

<L>53657<pc>1158-c<k1>svErin<k2>svErin
{%Svairin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ going where one likes, self-
willed, wanton, uncontrolled; ({%iṇī%}), f. a loose or
unchaste woman, an adultress, wanton woman.
{%—Svairi-tā,%} f. wilfulness.
<LEND>

<L>53658<pc>1158-c<k1>svakk<k2>svakk
{#svakk#}¦ {%svakk.%} See rt. {%ṣvakk,%} p. 1034,
and Vopa-deva VIII. 43.
<LEND>
[Page1159-a+ 75]

<L>53659<pc>1159-a<k1>svakza<k2>svakza
{#svakza#}¦ {%sv-akṣa, sv-agni, sv-aṅga.%} See
p. 1126, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53660<pc>1159-a<k1>svagAkf<k2>svagAkf
{#svagAkf#}¦ {%svagā-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. A. {%-karoti, ku-%}
{%rute,%} &c., (said to mean) to put in its place, arrange
(perhaps referrible to {%sva-ga%}).
<LEND>

<L>53661<pc>1159-a<k1>svaNk<k2>svaNk
{#svaNk#}¦ {%svaṅk%} (= rt. {%śvaṅk%}), cl. 1. A. {%svaṅ-%}
{%kate,%} &c., to go, move.
<LEND>

<L>53662<pc>1159-a<k1>svaNg<k2>svaNg
{#svaNg#}¦ {%svaṅg,%} cl. 1. P. {%svaṅgati,%} &c., to
go, move (= rt. {%śraṅg,%} p. 1023).
<LEND>

<L>53663<pc>1159-a<k1>svacCa<k2>svacCa
{#svacCa#}¦ {%sv-accha, svaccha-tā,%} &c. See p. 1126,
col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53664<pc>1159-a<k1>svacCanda<k2>svacCanda
{#svacCanda#}¦ {%sva-cchanda.%} See p. 1156, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53665<pc>1159-a<k1>svaYc<k2>svaYc
{#svaYc#}¦ {%sv-añc.%} See p. 1126, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53666<pc>1159-a<k1>svaYj<k2>svaYj
{#svaYj#}¦ {%svañj%} or {%svaj%} [cf. {%pari-ṣvañj%}], cl.
1. A. {%svajate, sasvaje, sasvañje, svaṅ-%}
{%kṣyate, asvaṅkta, svaṅktum,%} &c., to embrace,
clasp, encircle, twist round: Pass. {%svajyate,%} Aor.
{%asvañji:%} Caus. {%svañjayati,%} Aor. {%asiṣvañjat:%}
Desid. {%sisvaṅkṣate:%} Intens. {%sāsvajyate, sāsvaṅkti;%}
[cf. perhaps Germ. <nsi>Schlange,</nsi> ‘a snake.’]
<LEND>

<L>53667<pc>1159-a<k1>svakta<k2>svakta
{%Svakta, as, ā, am,%}¦ embraced; [cf. {%pari-ṣvakta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53668<pc>1159-a<k1>svaNga<k2>svaNga
{%Svaṅga, as,%}¦ m. embrace; [cf. {%pari-ṣvaṅga.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53669<pc>1159-a<k1>svajamAna<k2>svajamAna
{%Svajamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ embracing.
<LEND>

<L>53670<pc>1159-a<k1>svajitvA<k2>svajitvA
{%Svajitvā,%}¦ ind. having embraced.
<LEND>

<L>53671<pc>1159-a<k1>svajyamAna<k2>svajyamAna
{%Svajyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being embraced.
<LEND>

<L>53672<pc>1159-a<k1>svaYjana<k2>svaYjana
{%Svañjana, am,%}¦ n. the act of embracing.
<LEND>

<L>53673<pc>1159-a<k1>svaW<k2>svaW
{#svaW#}¦ {%svaṭh%} (= rt. 2. {%śvaṭh%}), cl. 10. P.
{%svāṭhayati,%} &c., to finish, &c.; to go.
<LEND>

<L>53674<pc>1159-a<k1>svad<k2>svad
{#svad#}¦ {%svad%} or {%svād%} (probably formed from
5. {%su%} + rt. {%ad%}), cl. 1. A. (in Ved. also P.)
{%svadate%} (Ved. {%svadati%}), {%svādate, sasvade, sas-%}
{%vāde, svaditum, svāditum,%} to taste, relish, eat; to
be sweet or pleasant to the taste, be liked; to please;
to sweeten, make sweet (Ved. P., Sāy. {%= svādū-%}
{%kṛ%}): Caus. and cl. 10. P. {%svādayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%asisvadat%} (Ved. {%siṣvadat = svadayatu, svādū-%}
{%karotu,%} Ṛg-veda I. 188, 10), to make to taste; to
taste; to sweeten, make sweet; (according to Vopa-
deva) to cut: Desid. of Caus. {%sisvādayiṣati;%} [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἁνο-άν-ω (ἕ-αδ-ο-ν, ἕ-ᾱδ-α), ἥδ-ο-μαι, ἧδ-ος,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἡδ-ονή, ἡδ-ύ-ς, ἥδυ-μο-σ, ἄσ-μενο-ς, ἑδ-ανό-ς;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>suâ-vi-s</nsi> (for <nsi>suâd-vi-s</nsi>), <nsi>suâd-e-o, suâd-u-s, su-</nsi>
<nsi>âd-a, suâd-êla;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>suti-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>suozi,</nsi>
‘sweet;’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>svête, swœsend,</nsi> ‘food;’ Lith.
<nsi>sald-u-s,</nsi> ‘sweet;’ Slav. <nsi>slad-i-ti, slad-u-ku,</nsi>
‘sweet.’]
<LEND>

<L>53675<pc>1159-a<k1>svadana<k2>svadana
{%Svadana, am,%}¦ n. the act of tasting, licking, eating.
<LEND>

<L>53676<pc>1159-a<k1>svadita<k2>svadita<h>2
2. {%svadita, as, ā, am,%}¦ tasted, eaten; ({%am%}), n.
‘may it be well tasted or eaten!’ an exclamation
used at a Śrāddha after presenting the oblation of
food to the Manes, (Manu III. 251, 254; in this
sense probably for {%sv-adita,%} see 1. {%sv-adita,%} p. 1126;
cf. {%su-śruta, sva-dhā.%})
<LEND>

<L>53677<pc>1159-a<k1>svAda<k2>svAda
{%Svāda, as,%}¦ m. taste, flavour, savour; tasting, eat-
ing, drinking; liking, relishing, enjoyment.
<LEND>

<L>53678<pc>1159-a<k1>svAdat<k2>svAdat
{%Svādat, an, antī, at,%}¦ tasting, eating.
<LEND>

<L>53679<pc>1159-a<k1>svAdana<k2>svAdana
{%Svādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of tasting, eating, drink-
ing; liking, relishing; sweetening, pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>53680<pc>1159-a<k1>svAdanIya<k2>svAdanIya
{%Svādanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be tasted; tasty, savory.
<LEND>

<L>53681<pc>1159-a<k1>svAdita<k2>svAdita
{%Svādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ tasted, relished, liked, en-
joyed; sweetened; pleased.
<LEND>

<L>53682<pc>1159-a<k1>svAdin<k2>svAdin
{%Svādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ tasting, drinking.
<LEND>

<L>53683<pc>1159-a<k1>svAdiman<k2>svAdiman
{%Svādiman, ā,%}¦ m. savoriness, sweetness.
<LEND>

<L>53684<pc>1159-a<k1>svAdizWa<k2>svAdizWa
{%Svādiṣṭha, as, ā, am,%}¦ sweetest, very sweet.
<LEND>

<L>53685<pc>1159-a<k1>svAdIyas<k2>svAdIyas
{%Svādīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ sweeter, very sweet.
<LEND>

<L>53686<pc>1159-a<k1>svAdu<k2>svAdu
{%Svādu, us, us,%}¦ or {%vī, u,%} sweet, pleasant to the
taste, savory, tasteful, dainty, delicate; pleasing, agree-
able, desired, lovely, charming, handsome; ({%u%}), ind.
sweetly; ({%us%}), m. a sweet taste or flavour, sweetness,
relish; treacle, molasses; a medicinal root commonly
called Jīvaka; a particular perfume or fragrant sub-
stance, {%= gandha-dhūma-ja, su-dhūmya;%} ({%us%} or
{%vī%}), f. {%= drākṣā,%} a grape; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἡδύς;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>suâvis</nsi> (for <nsi>suâdvis</nsi>); Goth. <nsi>suts, sutizo,</nsi> ‘sweeter;’
Old Germ. <nsi>suazi, suozi;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>süss;</nsi> Angl.
[Page1159-b+ 80]
Sax. <nsi>svet;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>sweet.</nsi>] {%—Svādu-kaṇṭaka, as,%} m.
‘sweet-thorn,’ the plant Flacourtia Sapida; the creeper
Tribulus Lanuginosus; other plants {%(= vi-kaṅkata;%}
{%= go-kṣuraka; = vi-kaṇṭaka)%}. {%—Svādu-kandā,%}
f. ‘having a sweet root,’ a kind of plant {%(= vi-dārī).%}
{%—Svādu-kāra, as, ī, am,%} causing relish, dainty.
{%—Svādu-kṣadman, ā, ā, a,%} Ved. having dainty
food, (Sāy. {%= svādv-anna,%} Ṛg-veda I. 31, 15), pro-
viding delicacies for guests, hospitable. {%—Svādu-%}
{%khaṇḍa, as,%} m. a piece of any sweet substance; raw
sugar, molasses. {%—Svādu-gandhā,%} f. a species of
creeper, the dark Convolvulus Paniculatus; other
plants {%(= bhūmi-kuṣmāṇḍa; = rakta-śobhāñja-%}
{%na)%}. {%—Svādu-dhanvan, ā,%} m. ‘having a sweet bow,’
epithet of Kāma-deva (whose bow is said to be made
of sugar-cane). {%—Svādu-parṇī,%} f. ‘sweet-leafed,’ a
kind of plant {%(= dugdhikā)%}. {%—Svādu-pākā,%} f. a
kind of plant {%(= kāka-mācī)%}. {%—Svādu-piṇḍā,%} f.
a kind of date tree. {%—Svādu-puṣpa, as,%} m. ‘hav-
ing pleasing flowers,’ a kind of plant {%(= kaṭa-bhī).%}
{%—Svādu-phala, am,%} n. ‘sweet fruit,’ the fruit of
the jujube; ({%ā%}), f. ‘having sweet fruit,’ the jujube
tree. {%—Svādu-majjan, ā,%} m. a sort of mountain
Pīlu tree. {%—Svādu-māṃsī,%} f. the root Kākolī, q. v.
{%—Svādu-mūla, am,%} n. ‘sweet-root,’ a carrot.
{%—Svādu-yogin, ī, inī, i,%} connected with or pos-
sessing sweetness, sweet. {%—Svādu-rasā,%} f. ‘having a
sweet flavour,’ the root Kākolī, q. v.; the fruit of the
hog-plum; the plant Śatāvarī; spirituous liquor; a
grape. {%—Svādu-rāti, is, is, i,%} Ved. having pleasant
gifts. {%—Svādu-latā,%} f. the plant Vidārī. {%—Svādu-%}
{%śīta, as, ā, am,%} sweet and cool. {%—Svādu-śuddha,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘sweet and pure,’ rock salt; marine salt.
{%—Svādū-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to make sweet,
sweeten. {%—Svādv-anna, am,%} n. sweet or choice
food, dainties, delicacies; ({%as, ā, am%}), having or
providing delicacies. {%—Svādv-amla, as,%} m. ‘sweet
and sour,’ the pomegranate tree.
<LEND>

<L>53687<pc>1159-b<k1>svAdman<k2>svAdman
{%Svādman, ā, a,%}¦ m. n., Ved. sweetness.
<LEND>

<L>53688<pc>1159-b<k1>svadeSa<k2>svadeSa
{#svadeSa#}¦ {%sva-deśa, sva-dharma,%} &c. See
pp. 1156, 1157.
<LEND>

<L>53689<pc>1159-b<k1>svaDA<k2>svaDA
{#svaDA#}¦ {%sva-dhā%} or {%svadhā,%} f. (fr. {%sva%} + rt. 1.
{%dhā;%} but in Uṇādi-s. IV. 174. connected with rt.
{%svad;%} cf. {%svadita%}), Ved. one's own condition or
nature, own peculiarity or individuality; innate or
inherent power or strength, ({%svadhayā,%} by one's
own power or strength; Sāy. {%= svakīyena balena,%}
by one's own nature or determination, spontaneously);
‘self-contained, self-sustained,’ N. of Māyā or Pra-
kṛti (as the source of the phenomenal world; in this
sense Svadhā is sometimes translated ‘Nature,’ as,
for example, in the celebrated hymn Ṛg-veda X.
129. {%ānīd avātaṃ svadhayā tad,%} ‘that one, i. e.
the supreme Being breathed calmly along with Na-
ture;’ and in Naigh. III. 30. {%svadhe,%} fem. du., is
enumerated among the {%dyāvā-pṛthivī-nāmadhe-%}
{%yāni%}); manner, habit, custom, usage, ({%anu svadhām,%}
according to one's wont or custom, as usual; ac-
cording to one's own determination, according to
pleasure); one's own portion or share; the sacrificial
offering due to each god; the food or oblation
offered to the Pitṛs or spirits of deceased ancestors
(in this sense especially in later Sanskrit); the Śrād-
dha or funeral ceremony itself; the Food or Obla-
tion to the Pitṛs &c. personified (as a daughter of
Dakṣa and wife of the Pitṛs; also represented as a
wife of Aṅgiras, of a Rudra, and of Agni); an ob-
lation or offering or food (in general, {%= anna,%} Naigh.
II. 7; {%= udaka,%} Naigh. I. 12); ({%svadhā%}), ind. an
exclamation or prayer used on presenting an oblation
to the gods or Manes of departed ancestors and pro-
genitors [cf. {%svāhā, śrauṣaṭ, vauṣaṭ, vaṣaṭ%}],
the highest form of blessing used at a Śrāddha, ({%sva-%}
{%dhāstu,%} ‘let there be Svadhā!’ this, according to
Manu III. 252, is the highest benison at a Śrāddha);
[cf. according to some Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔθ-ος, ἦθ-ος, ἠθεῖο-ς, εἴ-ωθ-α,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ἐθ-ίζ-ω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>suetus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>sidus;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>sidu, siodo.</nsi>] {%—Svadhā-kara, as, ī, am,%} offer-
ing oblations to deceased ancestors or deified pro-
genitors, performing funeral obsequies (Manu IX.
[Page1159-c+ 78]
127); ({%as%}), m. {%= svadhā-kāra%}. {%—Svadhā-kāra,%}
{%as,%} m. pronouncing the exclamation or blessing {%sva-%}
{%dhā;%} the formula {%svadhā%}. {%—Svadhā-ninayana,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘Svadhā-performing,’ a sacred text used in
making the oblation to the Pitṛs, (Manu II. 172.)
{%—Svadhā-pati, is,%} m., Ved. lord of the Svadhā.
{%—Svadhā-priya, as,%} m. ‘fond of the Svadhā,’
Agni or fire; black sesamum, ({%tila%} or sesamum being
offered to the Manes, Manu III. 267.) {%—Svadhā-%}
{%bhuj, k,%} m. ‘Svadhā-eating,’ a Pitṛ, deceased or
deified ancestor; a deity. {%—Svadhā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
having natural power, self-controlled, self-reliant, in-
dependent, powerful, (Sāy. {%svadhā-vān = bala-vān,%}
Ṛg-veda II. 20, 6; in Ṛg-veda VII. 88, 5. {%sva-%}
{%dhāvaḥ,%} voc. case masc. O self-sustaining one, O self-
dependent God, Sāy. {%= annavan%}); having the Sva-
dhā, rich in oblations; ({%ān%}), m. epithet of Viśva-
karman.
<LEND>

<L>53690<pc>1159-c<k1>svaDAvan<k2>svaDAvan
{%Svadhāvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ Ved. abounding in food,
(Sāy. {%svadhāvarī = annavatyau,%} Ṛg-veda VII.
31, 7); self-reliant, independent (perhaps in this
sense for {%sva-dhāvan;%} cf. {%svadhā-vat%} above).
<LEND>

<L>53691<pc>1159-c<k1>svaDiti<k2>svaDiti
{#svaDiti#}¦ {%svadhiti, is,%} m. f. (sometimes writ-
ten {%śvadhiti;%} fr. {%sva%} + rt. 1. {%dhā%}), an axe (in
Naigh. II. 20. {%svadhitiḥ%} is enumerated among the
{%vajra-nāmāni%}). {%—Svadhiti-hetika, as,%} m. ‘axe-
armed,’ a soldier armed with an axe.
<LEND>

<L>53692<pc>1159-c<k1>svaDitI<k2>svaDitI
{%Svadhitī,%}¦ f. an axe. {%—Svadhitī-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. possessing or holding an axe, having a weapon.
<LEND>

<L>53693<pc>1159-c<k1>svan<k2>svan
{#svan#}¦ {%svan,%} cl. 1. P. {%svanati, sasvāna%} (3rd
pl. {%sasvanus%} or {%svenus%}), {%svaniṣyati,%}
{%asvanīt%} or {%asvānīt, svanitum,%} to sound, make a
noise; to sing: Caus. {%svanayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asi-%}
{%svanat,%} to cause to sound, make to resound; to
sound; to adorn (in this sense also {%svānayati,%} &c.):
Desid. {%sisvaniṣati:%} Intens. {%saṃsvanyate, saṃ-%}
{%svanti;%} [cf. Lat. <nsi>son-o;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>zwanu,</nsi> ‘to sound;’
Hib. <nsi>sian,</nsi> ‘a voice, sound.’]
<LEND>

<L>53694<pc>1159-c<k1>svana<k2>svana
{%Svana, as,%}¦ m. sound, noise; voice, speech (in
Naigh. I. 11. enumerated among the {%vāṅ-nāmāni%}).
{%—Svana-cakra, as,%} m. a particular form of sexual
union. {%—Svana-duh,%} see Vopa-deva III. 165. {%—Sva-%}
{%na-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having sound, sounding, thun-
dering. {%—Svanotsāha (˚na-ut˚), as,%} m. a rhinoceros
({%= gaṇḍaka;%} also read {%śanotsāha%}).
<LEND>

<L>53695<pc>1159-c<k1>svanat<k2>svanat
{%Svanat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sounding, resounding.
<LEND>

<L>53696<pc>1159-c<k1>svani<k2>svani
{%Svani, is,%}¦ m. sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>53697<pc>1159-c<k1>svanika<k2>svanika
{%Svanika, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounding (at the end of a
comp., e. g. {%pāṇi-s˚,%} one who claps with the hands).
<LEND>

<L>53698<pc>1159-c<k1>svanita<k2>svanita
{%Svanita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded, sounding, making
a noise; ({%am%}), n. the noise of thunder, a thunder-
clap. {%—Svanitāhvaya (˚ta-āh˚), as,%} m. a kind of
pot-herb ({%= taṇḍulīya%}).
<LEND>

<L>53699<pc>1159-c<k1>svAna<k2>svAna
{%Svāna, as,%}¦ m. sound, noise.
<LEND>

<L>53700<pc>1159-c<k1>svAnin<k2>svAnin
{%Svānin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. noisy, turbulent.
<LEND>

<L>53701<pc>1159-c<k1>svAnta<k2>svAnta<h>2
2. {%svānta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. {%svānta%} see p. 1158,
col. 1), sounded, making a noise.
<LEND>

<L>53702<pc>1159-c<k1>svanaya<k2>svanaya
{#svanaya#}¦ {%svanaya, as,%} m., N. of a king (said
to have given his ten daughters in marriage to the
Ṛṣi Kakṣivat).
<LEND>

<L>53703<pc>1159-c<k1>svap<k2>svap<h>2
{#svap#} 2¦. {%svap%} (for 1. {%sv-ap%} see p. 1126),
cl. 2. P. {%svapiti%} (2nd sing. {%svapiṣi,%} 1st
sing. {%svapimi,%} ep. also A. and sometimes even cl.
1. P. A. {%svapati, -te%}); Impf. {%asvapīt%} or {%asva-%}
{%pat%} (1st du. {%asvapiva%}); Pot. {%svapyāt;%} Impv. {%sva-%}
{%pitu%} (2nd sing. {%svapihi,%} 1st sing. {%svapāni%}); Perf.
{%suṣvāpa%} (3rd pl. {%suṣupuḥ%}), {%svapsyati, asvāpsīt;%}
Prec. {%supyāt, svaptum,%} to sleep; to fall asleep; to
lie down to sleep, repose, go to bed; to lie down,
recline; to be dead: Pass. {%supyate,%} Aor. {%asvāpi:%}
Caus. {%svāpayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%asūṣupat%} (accord-
ing to some also {%asiṣvapat%}), to cause to sleep,
make sleep, lull to rest; to kill, (Ved. {%siṣvapaḥ =%}
{%asvāpayaḥ, pātitavān,%} thou didst hurl down, Ṛg-
veda I. 121, 11): Pass. of Caus. {%svāpyate:%} Desid.
of Caus. {%suṣvāpayiṣati:%} Desid. {%suṣupsati:%}
Intens. {%soṣupyate, sāsvapti,%} (according to Vopa-
deva also) {%sāsvapīti, soṣupīti, soṣopti;%} [cf.
[Page1160-a+ 77]
Zend <nsi>qap, qaf-na,</nsi> ‘sleep:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">ὕπ-νο-ς</lang> (for <lang n="greek">συπ-νο-ς</lang>
): Lat. <nsi>som-nu-s</nsi> (for <nsi>sop-nus</nsi>), <nsi>sop-or, sop-</nsi>
<nsi>i-o</nsi> (= Caus. {%svāpayati%}): Old Norse <nsi>svef-n,</nsi> ‘sleep:’
Old Germ. <nsi>svebjan:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>slêpan:</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>svefian, svefn, slápan:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>sŭnŭ,</nsi> ‘sleep;’ <nsi>sŭp-</nsi>
<nsi>a-ti,</nsi> ‘to sleep:’ Lith. <nsi>sap-na-s,</nsi> ‘a dream:’ Cam-
bro-Brit. <nsi>hephun:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>suain,</nsi> ‘sleep;’ <nsi>suaimh-</nsi>
<nsi>neach,</nsi> ‘quiet;’ <nsi>suaimhnighim,</nsi> ‘I rest.’]
<LEND>

<L>53704<pc>1160-a<k1>supta<k2>supta
{%Supta, supti.%}¦ See s. v., p. 1128.
<LEND>

<L>53705<pc>1160-a<k1>suptvA<k2>suptvA
{%Suptvā,%}¦ ind. having slept, having gone to sleep.
<LEND>

<L>53706<pc>1160-a<k1>suzupARa<k2>suzupARa
{%Suṣupāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. sleeping, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%supta.%})
<LEND>

<L>53707<pc>1160-a<k1>suzupvas<k2>suzupvas
{%Suṣupvas, ān, uṣī, at,%}¦ one who has slept or
sleeps.
<LEND>

<L>53708<pc>1160-a<k1>suzupsu<k2>suzupsu
{%Suṣupsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to sleep, sleepy,
drowsy.
<LEND>

<L>53709<pc>1160-a<k1>svapat<k2>svapat
{%Svapat, an, antī, at,%}¦ sleeping, asleep, reposing.
<LEND>

<L>53710<pc>1160-a<k1>svapana<k2>svapana
{%Svapana, am,%}¦ n. the act of sleeping, dreaming,
sleep.
<LEND>

<L>53711<pc>1160-a<k1>svapanIya<k2>svapanIya
{%Svapanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be slept, &c.
<LEND>

<L>53712<pc>1160-a<k1>svapitikarman<k2>svapitikarman
{%Svapiti-karman, ā,%}¦ m. one who lies down to
sleep ({%= śayana-kartṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>53713<pc>1160-a<k1>svaptavya<k2>svaptavya
{%Svaptavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be slept.
<LEND>

<L>53714<pc>1160-a<k1>svaptukAma<k2>svaptukAma
{%Svaptu-kāma, as, ā, am,%}¦ wishing to sleep.
<LEND>

<L>53715<pc>1160-a<k1>svaptf<k2>svaptf
{%Svaptṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ a sleeper, one who sleeps.
<LEND>

<L>53716<pc>1160-a<k1>svapna<k2>svapna
{%Svapna, as,%}¦ m. sleep, sleeping; a dream, dream-
ing; sleepiness, sloth, indolence; ({%ā%}), f. a dream,
({%jāgrat-svapnābhyām,%} inst. du. by alternately wak-
ing and sleeping.) {%—Svapna-kāma, as, ā, am,%} wish-
ing for sleep. {%—Svapna-kṛt, t, t, t,%} causing or
producing sleep, somniferous, soporific, narcotic;
({%t%}), n. the pot-herb Marsilea Quadrifolia. {%—Svapna-%}
{%gṛha, am,%} n. a sleeping apartment, bed-chamber.
{%—Svapna-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced in sleep.
{%—Svapna-doṣa, as,%} m. ‘sleep-fault,’ pollutio noc-
turna. {%—Svapna-dhī-gamya, as, ā, am,%} perceptible
by the intellect (only when) in a state of sleep-like
abstraction, (Manu XII. 122.) {%—Svapna-naṃśana,%}
{%as,%} m. sleep-destroying, (see Nirukta XII. 28.)
{%—Svapna-niketana, am,%} n. a sleeping-room, bed-
chamber. {%—Svapna-prapañca, as,%} m. the illusions
of sleep, the world as presented in a dream. {%—Svap-%}
{%na-bhāj, k, k, k,%} enjoying sleep. {%—Svapna-vat,%}
ind. like a dream. {%—Svapna-vicāra, as,%} m. inter-
pretation of dreams. {%—Svapna-vicārin, ī,%} m. an
interpreter of dreams. {%—Svapna-śīla, as, ā, am,%}
disposed to sleep, sleepy, drowsy. {%—Svapna-sṛṣṭi,%}
{%is,%} f. the creation of dreams or illusions in sleep.
{%—Svapnādhyāya (˚na-adh˚), as,%} m. ‘a chapter
on dreams,’ N. of a short work on the interpretation
of dreams, (said to be extracted from the Brahma-
vaivarta-Purāṇa.) {%—Svapnāvasthā (˚na-av˚),%} f.
state of dreaming, (applied to life as a state of
illusion.) {%—Svapneśvara (˚na-īś˚), as,%} m., N. of
the author of a commentary on the Śāṇḍilya-sūtra.
{%—Svapnopama (˚na-up˚), as, ā, am,%} having the
likeness of sleep, resembling a dream.
<LEND>

<L>53717<pc>1160-a<k1>svapnaj<k2>svapnaj
{%Svapnaj, k, k, k,%}¦ sleepy, drowsy, sleeping, asleep.
<LEND>

<L>53718<pc>1160-a<k1>svApa<k2>svApa
{%Svāpa, as,%}¦ m. sleep, sleeping; dreaming, a
dream; sleepiness, sloth; paralysis, palsy, loss of
sensation, ignorance; temporary or partial loss of
sensation from pressure on a nerve, numbness, the
sleep of a limb.
<LEND>

<L>53719<pc>1160-a<k1>svApin<k2>svApin
{%Svāpin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ causing sleep, lulling to sleep.
<LEND>

<L>53720<pc>1160-a<k1>svapivAta<k2>svapivAta
{#svapivAta#}¦ {%sv-apivāta.%} See p. 1126, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53721<pc>1160-a<k1>svapU<k2>svapU
{#svapU#}¦ {%svapū%} (thought by some to be fr. an
old rt. {%svap,%} ‘to tear, pull’), Ved. (according to
some) a beak, bill of a bird, (in Ṛg-veda VII. 56,
3, Sāy. explains {%sva-pūbhis%} by {%svakīyaiḥ pava-%}
{%naiḥ sañcaraṇaiḥ,%} by their own pure paths);
[cf. Old Germ. <nsi>snabul,</nsi> ‘beak;’ Mod. Germ.
<nsi>Schnepfe,</nsi> ‘a snipe;’ Old Norse <nsi>nef.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53722<pc>1160-a<k1>svabdin<k2>svabdin
{#svabdin#}¦ {%svabdin, ī, inī, i,%} Ved. (perhaps)
roaring, (Sāy. {%= śabdaṃ kurvat,%} Ṛg-veda VIII.
33, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>53723<pc>1160-a<k1>svameka<k2>svameka
{#svameka#}¦ {%svameka, as,%} m. (etymology doubt-
ful), a year ({%= saṃvatsara,%} according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>
[Page1160-b+ 79]

<L>53724<pc>1160-b<k1>svayam<k2>svayam
{#svayam#}¦ {%svayam, svayaṃ-vara, svayam-bhū,%}
&c. See p. 1158.
<LEND>

<L>53725<pc>1160-b<k1>svar<k2>svar<h>1
{#svar#} 1¦. {%svar,%} cl. 10. P. {%svarayati,%} &c.,
to find fault, blame, censure, reprove (=
rt. {%sur%}).
<LEND>

<L>53726<pc>1160-b<k1>svar<k2>svar<h>2
{#svar#} 2¦. {%svar,%} ind. (probably connected
with rt. 4. {%su%} or 3. {%sū,%} and apparently originally
written {%suvar,%} cf. {%sūra, sūrya;%} but according to
some fr. a lost rt. {%svar = sur,%} ‘to shine,’ cf. {%sura%}),
the sun (Ved.; according to Sāy. {%= svaraṇa-śīla%}
{%āditya,%} Ṛg-veda V. 45, 1); heaven, paradise, the
world of the gods, abode of the deities; the heaven
of Indra and temporary abode of the virtuous after
death; the sky, ether; the space above the sun or
between the sun and the polar star, the region of
the planets and constellations; a mystical word
pronounced after {%Om%} and before the Gāyatrī by
every Brāhman in commencing his daily prayers, (it
is the third of the three Vyāhṛtis, {%bhūr, bhuvaḥ,%}
{%svar,%} and denotes the space of the sky above de-
scribed as distinguished from the earth and atmo-
sphere, see Manu II. 76. and cf. {%bhuvas, vy-āhṛti;%}
the mystical word {%svar%} is represented as produced
from the Sāma-veda, just as {%bhūr%} and {%bhuvaḥ%} are
supposed to come from the Ṛg-veda and Yajur-veda
respectively); radiance, splendor; water, (in Naigh.
I. 12. enumerated among the {%udaka-nāmāni%}); epi-
thet of Śiva; [cf. Zend <nsi>hvare,</nsi> ‘the sun;’ <nsi>qaretha,</nsi>
<nsi>qarenanh,</nsi> ‘splendor:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">Σείρ-ιο-ς, Σείρ, σειρ-ιά-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">σειρ-ία-σι-ς, σείρ-ινο-ς, σέλ-ας, σελ-ήνη:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>ser-enu-s, sol:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>sauil,</nsi> ‘the sun:’ Old
Norse <nsi>sôl:</nsi> Lith. <nsi>saule:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>slŭ-nĭce,</nsi> ‘the sun:’
Hib. <nsi>speur,</nsi> ‘the sky;’ (perhaps) <nsi>soir,</nsi> ‘the east,
morning.’] {%—Svaḥ-kāmya,%} Nom. P. {%-kāmyati,%} &c.,
to wish for heaven. {%—Svaḥ-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the
lord of heaven. {%—Svar-āpagā,%} f. the river of heaven,
the celestial Ganges. {%—Svar-ārūḍha, as, ā, am,%}
ascended to heaven. {%—Svar-ālu, us,%} m. a kind of
root {%(= vacā)%}. {%—Svar-gaṅgā,%} f. the celestial Ganges;
the galaxy. {%—Svar-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone to heaven,
dead. {%—Svar-gati, is,%} f. or {%svar-gamana, am,%} n.
going to heaven, future felicity; death. {%—Svar-giri,%}
{%is,%} m. ‘the heavenly mountain,’ Su-meru. {%—Svar-%}
{%jit, t, t, t,%} conquering heaven; ({%t%}), m. a proper N.;
N. of a kind of sacrifice, (Manu XI. 74; cf. {%svarga-%}
{%jit.%}) {%—Svar-ṇadī,%} f. the river of heaven, the
celestial Ganges; a kind of shrub {%(= vṛścikālī).%}
{%—Svar-ṇara, as,%} m., Ved. the lord of heaven;
one who leads or is led to heaven, a pious or de-
votional man; all-leading, (Sāy. {%= svargam prati%}
{%netṛ%} or {%netavya%} or {%sarvasya netṛ%}); a sacrifice
(as leading the offerer to heaven). {%—Svar-dṛś, k,%}
{%k, k,%} Ved. looking heavenwards; ({%k%}), m. epithet
of Indra; of Agni; of Soma. {%—Svar-nadī,%} f. =
{%svar-ṇadī%}. {%—Svar-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the lord of
heaven. {%—Svar-bhānava, as,%} m. a kind of precious
stone {%(= go-medaka)%}. {%—Svar-bhānu, us,%} m., N.
of Rāhu or the personified ascending node (repre-
sented in Ṛg-veda V. 40, 9. as of the Asura race
and as concealing or piercing the sun); N. of a
Dānava (regarded as a son of Kaśyapa or, according
to other authorities, a son of Vipracitti). {%—Svar-%}
{%bhānu-sūdana, as,%} m. ‘destroyer of Rāhu,’ the
sun. {%—Svar-madhya, am,%} n. the central point of
the sky, zenith. {%—Svar-mīḷha, as, ā, am,%} Ved.
happiness-bestowing, (Sāy. {%= sukha-sektṛ%}); con-
ferring heaven, (Sāy. {%svar-mīḷheṣu = svarga-de-%}
{%śeṣu sukhasya secayatsu,%} Ṛg-veda I. 130, 8.)
{%—Svar-yāta, as, ā, am,%} gone to heaven, deceased,
dead. {%—Svar-yātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} going to heaven,
dying. {%—Svar-loka, as,%} m. the celestial region,
heaven. {%—Svar-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. full of splen-
dor or happiness, heavenly, celestial, (Sāy. {%= sukha-%}
{%yukta,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 22, 3.) {%—Svar-vadhū, ūs,%} f.
‘celestial wife,’ an Apsaras. {%—Svar-vāpī,%} f. ‘heavenly
lake,’ the Ganges. {%—Svar-vid, t, t, t,%} Ved. obtaining
heaven, possessing heaven (said of the Pitṛs, of
Indra, &c.). {%—Svar-veśyā,%} f. a courtezan of heaven,
nymph, Apsaras (such as Urvaśī &c.). {%—Svar- %}
[Page1160-c+ 78]
{%vaidya, as,%} m. ‘physician of heaven,’ either of the
two Aśvins, (see {%aśvin.%}) {%—Svar-ṣā, ās, ās, am,%}
Ved. granting heaven; ({%ās%}), m. epithet of Soma;
of the thunderbolt. {%—Svar-ṣāti, is,%} f., Ved. the
granting or gaining of heaven, anything which gains
heaven; ({%is, is, i%}), bestowing or procuring heaven
(and hence applied to ‘war, battle;’ according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda X. 99, 3. {%svar-ṣātā = svar-%}
{%ṣātau = svarga-lābhopete;%} in IX. 88, 2 {%= svarga-%}
{%lābha-yukte saṅgrāme,%} cf. {%vāja-sāti%}). {%—Svas-%}
{%taru, us,%} m. the tree of paradise.
<LEND>

<L>53727<pc>1160-c<k1>svarga<k2>svarga
{%Svarga, as,%}¦ m. (according to some for {%su-varga%}),
heaven, Indra's paradise, the residence of beatified
mortals and of the inferior gods (supposed to be
situated on the mountain Meru); N. of a son of
Bhīma. {%—Svarga-kāma, as, ā, am,%} desirous of
heaven. {%—Svarga-khaṇḍa,%} N. of the third book
of the Padma-Purāṇa. {%—Svarga-gata, as, ā, am,%}
gone to heaven. {%—Svarga-gamana, am,%} n. going
to heaven. {%—Svarga-gāmin, ī, inī, i,%} going to
heaven. {%—Svarga-giri, is,%} m. ‘the heavenly moun-
tain,’ Su-meru. {%—Svarga-jit, t, t, t,%} winning or
obtaining paradise. {%—Svarga-da, as, ā, am,%} heaven-
giving, procuring paradise. {%—Svarga-dvāra, am,%} n.
heaven's gate, the door of paradise, entrance into
heaven; epithet of Śiva. {%—Svarga-pati, is,%} m. the
lord of heaven, Indra. {%—Svarga-para, as, ā, am,%}
intent on heaven, desirous of heaven. {%—Svarga-%}
{%bhartṛ, tā,%} m. the lord of heaven, Indra. {%—Svarga-%}
{%mārga-didṛkṣu, us, us, u,%} wishing to see the
road to heaven. {%—Svarga-loka, as,%} m. the ce-
lestial region, (see {%svarga%}); Indra's heaven, para-
dise. {%—Svargalokeśa (˚ka-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of the
celestial world,’ Indra; the body (as enjoying felicity
in the paradise of Indra). {%—Svarga-vadhū, ūs,%} f. a
woman or nymph of Indra's heaven, Apsaras.
{%—Svarga-vāsa, as,%} m. residence in heaven.
{%—Svarga-vāsin, ī, inī, i,%} inhabiting heaven.
{%—Svarga-śrī, īs,%} f. the glory of heaven. {%—Svarga-%}
{%sampādana, as, ī, am,%} effecting or procuring
heaven, gaining heaven. {%—Svarga-sarit, t,%} f. the
river of heaven. {%—Svargasarid-varā,%} f. ‘best of
heavenly rivers,’ the Ganges. {%—Svarga-sādhana,%}
{%am,%} n. a means of attaining heaven. {%—Svarga-su-%}
{%kha, am,%} n. the joy of heaven. {%—Svarga-strī,%} f. a
woman of paradise, Apsaras. {%—Svargāpagā (˚ga-%}
{%āp˚),%} f. the celestial river, the Ganges. {%—Svargā-%}
{%pavarga (˚ga-ap˚), as,%} m. heaven-like emanci-
pation. {%—Svargārūḍha (˚ga-ār˚), as, ā, am,%}
ascended to heaven. {%—Svargārohaṇa (˚ga-ār˚),%}
{%am,%} n. the act of ascending to heaven; N. of certain
funeral ceremonies. {%—Svargārohaṇa-parvan%} or
{%svargārohaṇika-parvan, a,%} n., N. of the eighteenth
book of the Mahā-bhārata (in which is described the
journey of the five Pāṇḍava princes towards Indra's
heaven in mount Meru). {%—Svargepsu (˚ga-īp˚),%}
{%us, us, u,%} desirous of obtaining heaven. {%—Svar-%}
{%gaukas (˚ga-ok˚), ās,%} m. ‘having an abode in
heaven,’ a god, deity.
<LEND>

<L>53728<pc>1160-c<k1>svargin<k2>svargin
{%Svargin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ belonging to heaven, being in
heaven, heavenly; ({%ī%}), m. an inhabitant of heaven,
a god, deity, celestial; (in law) ‘in heaven,’ a dead
person. {%—Svargi-giri, is,%} m. the celestial moun-
tain, Su-meru. {%—Svargi-vadhū, ūs,%} f. a celestial
woman, Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>53729<pc>1160-c<k1>svargIya<k2>svargIya
{%Svargīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
Svarga, heavenly, celestial; conducive to heaven,
leading to heaven.
<LEND>

<L>53730<pc>1160-c<k1>svargya<k2>svargya
{%Svargya, as, ā, am, = svargīya%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>53731<pc>1160-c<k1>svarya<k2>svarya
{%Svarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. heavenly, celestial.
<LEND>

<L>53732<pc>1160-c<k1>svaryu<k2>svaryu
{%Svaryu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. wishing for heaven; de-
siring happiness.
<LEND>

<L>53733<pc>1160-c<k1>svara<k2>svara
{#svara#}¦ {%svara, svarita, svaritṛ.%} See rt. {%svṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>53734<pc>1160-c<k1>svarasa<k2>svarasa
{#svarasa#}¦ {%sva-rasa, sva-rāj,%} &c. See p. 1157.
<LEND>

<L>53735<pc>1160-c<k1>svaru<k2>svaru
{#svaru#}¦ {%svaru.%} See p. 1163, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53736<pc>1160-c<k1>svarUpa<k2>svarUpa
{#svarUpa#}¦ {%sva-rūpa,%} &c. See p. 1157, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53737<pc>1160-c<k1>svareRu<k2>svareRu
{#svareRu#}¦ {%svareṇu, us,%} f. (etymology doubt-
ful), N. of a wife of the Sun (= 2. {%sañ-jñā%}).
<LEND>
[Page1161-a+ 76]

<L>53738<pc>1161-a<k1>svarga<k2>svarga
{#svarga#}¦ {%svarga,%} &c. See p. 1160, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53739<pc>1161-a<k1>svarjika<k2>svarjika
{#svarjika#}¦ {%svarjika, as,%} m. ({%= sarji, sarjikā%}),
natron, nitrate of potash.
<LEND>

<L>53740<pc>1161-a<k1>svarjikAkzAra<k2>svarjikAkzAra
{%Svarjikā-kṣāra, as,%}¦ m. {%= svarjika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53741<pc>1161-a<k1>svarjikzAra<k2>svarjikzAra
{%Svarji-kṣāra, as,%}¦ m. {%= sarji-kṣāra, svarjika.%}
<LEND>

<L>53742<pc>1161-a<k1>svarjin<k2>svarjin
{%Svarjin, ī,%}¦ m. {%= svarjika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53743<pc>1161-a<k1>svarRa<k2>svarRa
{#svarRa#}¦ {%svarṇa, am,%} n. (contracted fr. {%su-%}
{%varṇa,%} q. v.), gold; a gold coin. {%—Svarṇa-kaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. a grain of gold; ‘having golden grains or
seeds,’ a kind of plant {%(= kaṇa-guggulu)%}. {%—Svar-%}
{%ṇa-kaṇikā,%} f. a particle of gold, grain of gold.
{%—Svarṇa-kadalī,%} f. {%= suvarṇa-kadalī%}. {%—Svar-%}
{%ṇa-kāya, as, ā, am,%} golden-bodied; ({%as%}), m.
Garuḍa. {%—Svarṇa-kāra, as,%} or {%svarṇa-kṛt, t,%}
m. a gold-worker, goldsmith (forming a particular
caste). {%—Svarṇa-ketakī,%} f. a sort of Ketakī tree
with golden-coloured or yellow blossoms. {%—Svarṇa-%}
{%kṣīrī,%} f. ‘having gold-like milk or sap,’ a kind of
Soma or moon-plant with yellow juice (used for
medicinal purposes and said to be brought from the
Himālaya mountains; cf. {%himā-vatī%}). {%—Svarṇa-%}
{%gairika, am,%} n. a kind of yellow ochre or red
chalk. {%—Svarṇa-grāma,%} N. of a country situated
to the east of Dacca. {%—Svarṇa-grīvā,%} f. ‘golden-
necked,’ N. of a river issuing from the eastern side
of the Nāṭaka mountain. {%—Svarṇa-cūḍa, as,%} m.
‘golden-crested,’ the blue jay; a cock. {%—Svarṇa-ja,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘gold-produced,’ the metal tin. {%—Svarṇa-%}
{%jīvantī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= tṛṇa-granthi).%}
{%—Svarṇa-dīdhiti, is,%} m. ‘golden-rayed,’ fire.
{%—Svarṇa-dru, us,%} m. a kind of tree with yellow
blossoms {%(= ārag-badha)%}. {%—Svarṇa-pakṣa, as,%}
m. ‘golden-winged,’ Garuḍa. {%—Svarṇa-padmā,%} f.
‘bearing golden lotuses,’ the celestial Ganges. {%—Svar-%}
{%ṇa-pāṭhaka, as,%} m. borax {%(= ṭaṅkaṇa)%}. {%—Svarṇa-%}
{%pārevata, am,%} n. a kind of tree {%(= mahā-pāre-%}
{%vata)%}. {%—Svarṇa-puṣpa, as, ī, am,%} having golden-
coloured flowers or yellow blossoms; ({%as%}), m. the
tree Ārag-badha; the Campaka tree; ({%ā%}), f. the
gum-arabic tree and other plants, {%= kali-kārī; =%}
{%svarṇulī; = sātalā; (ī),%} f. the tree Ārag-badha;
the golden Ketakī tree; a sort of moon-plant.
{%—Svarṇa-prastha,%} N. of an island. {%—Svarṇa-%}
{%phalā,%} f. ‘having golden fruit,’ a kind of plant.
{%—Svarṇa-baṇij, k,%} m. a gold-merchant, money-
changer. {%—Svarṇa-bandha%} or {%svarṇa-bandhaka,%}
{%as,%} m. a deposit of gold. {%—Svarṇa-bhṛṅgāra, as,%}
m. a golden vase; a kind of plant {%(= svarṇa-%}
{%bhṛṅgarāja)%}. {%—Svarṇa-mahā,%} f. a particular river
(mentioned in the eighty-second chapter of the
Kālikā-Purāṇa). {%—Svarṇa-mākṣika, am,%} n. a
mineral substance ({%= suvarṇa-m˚,%} q. v.). {%—Svarṇa-%}
{%yūthī%} or {%svarṇa-yūthikā,%} f. yellow jasmine. {%—Svar-%}
{%ṇa-rekhā,%} f. a streak of gold; N. of a woman.
{%—Svarṇa-latā,%} f. ‘golden creeper,’ a kind of plant
{%(= jyotiṣmatī)%}. {%—Svarṇa-varṇa, as, ā, am,%}
gold-coloured; ({%ā%}), f. turmeric. {%—Svarṇa-valkala,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘having golden bark,’ the plant Bignonia
Indica. {%—Svarṇa-vallī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(=%}
{%rakta-phalā)%}. {%—Svarṇa-vindu, us,%} m. a spot of
yellow or gold; ‘having a gold mark or dot,’ epithet
of Viṣṇu. {%—Svarṇavindu-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a
Tīrtha. {%—Svarṇa-śṛṅga, as, ī, am,%} golden-horned.
{%—Svarṇa-śephālikā,%} f. a kind of yellow Śephā-
likā; the tree Cassia Fistula {%(= ārag-badha).%}
{%—Svarṇāṅga (˚ṇa-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘golden-bodied,’
the Ārag-badha tree. {%—Svarṇāri (˚ṇa-ari), is,%} m.
‘enemy to gold,’ sulphur.
<LEND>

<L>53744<pc>1161-a<k1>svarRaka<k2>svarRaka
{%Svarṇaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ golden, made of gold.
<LEND>

<L>53745<pc>1161-a<k1>svarRakUWa<k2>svarRakUWa
{#svarRakUWa#}¦ {%svarṇakūṭha,%} N. of a sacred place.
<LEND>

<L>53746<pc>1161-a<k1>svarRulI<k2>svarRulI
{#svarRulI#}¦ {%svarṇulī,%} f. a kind of shrub ({%=%}
{%svarṇa-puṣpā%}).
<LEND>

<L>53747<pc>1161-a<k1>svart<k2>svart
{#svart#}¦ {%svart%} = rt. {%śvart,%} p. 1030, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53748<pc>1161-a<k1>svard<k2>svard
{#svard#}¦ {%svard,%} cl. 1. A. {%svardate, sasvarde,%}
{%svarditum,%} to taste; to be pleasing.
<LEND>

<L>53749<pc>1161-a<k1>svarzA<k2>svarzA
{#svarzA#}¦ {%svar-ṣā, svar-ṣāti.%} See p. 1160.
<LEND>
[Page1161-b+ 76]

<L>53750<pc>1161-b<k1>sval<k2>sval
{#sval#}¦ {%sval,%} cl. 1. P. {%svalati, sasvāla,%}
&c., to go (?) .
<LEND>

<L>53751<pc>1161-b<k1>svalpa<k2>svalpa
{#svalpa#}¦ {%sv-alpa, as, ā, am,%} very small or
little, minute, trifling, insignificant; very few; ({%ena%}),
ind. for a very short time. {%—Svalpa-kaṅka, as,%} m.
a species of heron {%(= bhū-kāka)%}. {%—Svalpa-keśarin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘having minute filaments,’ the Kovidāra tree.
{%—Svalpa-keśin, ī,%} m. ‘having small fibres,’ the
root of sweet flag. {%—Svalpa-jātaka, am,%} n., N. of
a work by Varāha-mihira; [cf. {%vṛhaj-jātaka.%}]
{%—Svalpa-pattraka, as,%} m. ‘small-leaved,’ a kind
of Madhūka or Bassia Latifolia. {%—Svalpa-phalā,%} f.
‘having small fruit,’ a kind of plant {%(= kacchu-%}
{%ghnī, a-parājitā)%}. {%—Svalpa-bala, as, ā, am,%}
having very little strength, extremely weak or
feeble; attended by a very small force. {%—Svalpa-%}
{%viṣaya, as,%} m. a very small matter, insignificant
object; a small part. {%—Svalpa-vyaya, as,%} m. very
little expenditure, great stinginess; ({%as, ā, am%}),
spending very little, very niggardly. {%—Svalpa-vrīḍa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having little shame, shameless, impudent.
{%—Svalpa-śarīra, as, ā, am,%} having a very dimi-
nutive body, small in stature. {%—Svalpa-śilā,%} f. a
very small stone. {%—Svalpa-śilāya,%} Nom. A. {%-śilā-%}
{%yate,%} &c., to act like a very small stone, to become
a very small stone. {%—Svalpāhāra (˚pa-āh˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} eating very little, most abstemious.
<LEND>

<L>53752<pc>1161-b<k1>svalpaka<k2>svalpaka
{%Svalpaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ very little, very small,
very few.
<LEND>

<L>53753<pc>1161-b<k1>svalpIyas<k2>svalpIyas
{%Svalpīyas, ān, asī, as,%}¦ much less, (Manu XI. 8.)
<LEND>

<L>53754<pc>1161-b<k1>svavaSa<k2>svavaSa
{#svavaSa#}¦ {%sva-vaśa, sva-vṛtti,%} &c. See p. 1157.
<LEND>

<L>53755<pc>1161-b<k1>svaSura<k2>svaSura
{#svaSura#}¦ {%svaśura.%} See {%śvaśura.%}
<LEND>

<L>53756<pc>1161-b<k1>svasara<k2>svasara
{#svasara#}¦ {%sva-sara%} (see p. 1157), {%am,%} n. (pro-
bably fr. {%sva + sara%}), Ved. ‘self-moving, self-revolv-
ing,’ epithet of the sun, (Sāy. {%= svasarasya = sva-%}
{%yaṃ sartur ādityasya,%} Ṛg-veda V. 62, 2); a
day, (Sāy. {%= ahan,%} Ṛg-veda I. 34, 4, Naigh. I. 9);
a house, abode, nest, (Sāy. {%svasarāṇi = svakīyāni%}
{%nivāsa-sthānāni,%} Ṛg-veda II. 34, 5; in Naigh. II.
4. enumerated among the {%gṛha-nāmāni%}); one's
own place of going.
<LEND>

<L>53757<pc>1161-b<k1>svasf<k2>svasf
{#svasf#}¦ {%svasṛ, sā,%} f. (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 97. fr. rt. 1. {%as%} with 5. {%su%} prefixed, and according
to some connected with {%sv-asti%} below, and meaning
‘one who pleases or consoles;’ according to others
fr. {%sva + strī%}), a sister, ({%svasrām = svasṝṇām,%} Ṛg-
veda I. 65, 4); the fingers, (in Naigh. II. 5. {%sva-%}
{%sāraḥ%} is enumerated among the {%aṅguli-nāmāni%});
[cf. Lat. <nsi>soror, con-sobrinus;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>svistar;</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>suëstar;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>Schwester;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>sweoster, swuster, syster;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>sister;</nsi> Slav.
<nsi>sestra;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>sessu§</nsi> (for <nsi>sestu§</nsi>); Cambro-Brit.
<nsi>chwaer.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53758<pc>1161-b<k1>svasrIya<k2>svasrIya
{%Svasrīya%}¦ (or according to some {%svasriya%}), {%as,%} m.
a sister's son; ({%ā%}), f. a sister's daughter.
<LEND>

<L>53759<pc>1161-b<k1>svasreya<k2>svasreya
{%Svasreya, as,%}¦ m. a sister's son; ({%ī%}), f. a sister's
daughter.
<LEND>

<L>53760<pc>1161-b<k1>svask<k2>svask
{#svask#}¦ {%svask%} = rt. {%ṣvask,%} p. 1034.
<LEND>

<L>53761<pc>1161-b<k1>svasti<k2>svasti
{#svasti#}¦ {%sv-asti, is, i,%} f. n. welfare, health,
prosperity, blessing (Ved.); joy, happiness, bliss;
({%svasti%}), ind. may it be well with (used as a par-
ticle of benediction with dat., e. g. {%svasty astu te,%}
may it be well with thee! may blessings rest on
thee!) hail! health! adieu! so be it! amen! (as a
term of sanction or approbation). {%—Svasti-gā, ās,%}
{%ās, am,%} Ved. going auspiciously. {%—Svasti-da, as,%}
m. ‘granting happiness,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Svasti-%}
{%dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. conferring happiness. {%—Svasti-%}
{%devī,%} f., N. of a goddess (represented as wife of
Vāyu and said to have sprung from the particles
of Prakṛti). {%—Svasti-bhāva, as,%} m. epithet of
Śiva. {%—Svasti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} prosperous, happy,
auspicious. {%—Svasti-mukha, as,%} m. ‘beginning
with Svasti,’ a letter, note; ‘pronouncing blessings
or benedictions,’ a Brāhman; a panegyrist, bard,
encomiast. {%—Svasti-vācana%} or {%svasti-vācanaka%} or
[Page1161-c+ 72]
{%svasti-vācanika, am,%} n. a religious rite preparatory
to a sacrifice or any solemn observance (performed
by scattering boiled rice on the ground and invoking
blessings by the repetition of certain Mantras); an
offering or complimentary present (of flowers, sweet-
meats, &c. to any one with good wishes and bless-
ings to conciliate favour, {%= vāyanaka,%} q. v.).
{%—Svasti-vācya, am,%} n. invocation of blessings,
congratulation. {%—Svasti-vāh, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} Ved. bringing
welfare or happiness. {%—Svasty-ayana, am,%} n. a
prosperous journey (Ved.); a means of attaining
prosperity; the averting of evil by the recitation of
Mantras or performance of propitiatory rites; the
benediction of a Brāhman after presentation of offer-
ings [cf. {%kṛta-s˚%}]; ({%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}), bringing
blessings, producing happiness, auspicious, propitious.
{%—Svasty-ātreya, as,%} m., N. of the author of the
hymns Ṛg-veda V. 50, 51; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a
family of Brāhmans.
<LEND>

<L>53762<pc>1161-c<k1>svastaka<k2>svastaka
{%Svastaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. prosperous, happy,
(Atharva-veda XIV. 2, 64.)
<LEND>

<L>53763<pc>1161-c<k1>svastika<k2>svastika
{%Svastika, as,%}¦ m. any lucky or auspicious object,
a kind of mystical mark made on persons or things
to denote good luck, (it is shaped like a Greek cross
with the extremities of the four arms bent round in
the same direction; amongst Jainas it is one of the
twenty-four auspicious marks and is the emblem of
the seventh Arhat of the present Ava-sarpiṇī); the
crossing of the arms; the meeting of four roads; a
mansion or palace of a particular shape (described as
surrounded by a terrace or portico on the north,
west, and south sides, and having the door on the
east); a particular symbol made with ground rice and
shaped like a triangle ({%= taṇḍula-cūrṇa-nirmita-%}
{%trikoṇākārādhivāsa-dravya;%} it is used in fumi-
gating the image of Durgā, and is said to symbolize
the Liṅga); a kind of cake; a voluptuary, libertine;
garlic; ({%as, am%}), m. n. a mansion or temple of a parti-
cular form with a portico or terrace in front; a particular
mode of sitting practised by Yogins; a kind of vege-
table {%(= sitāvara)%}. {%—Svastikāsana (˚ka-ās˚), am,%}
n. a particular mode of sitting, (see above.)
<LEND>

<L>53764<pc>1161-c<k1>svasrIya<k2>svasrIya
{#svasrIya#}¦ {%svasrīya, svasreya.%} See col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53765<pc>1161-c<k1>svasvaDa<k2>svasvaDa
{#svasvaDa#}¦ {%sva-svadha.%} See p. 1157.
<LEND>

<L>53766<pc>1161-c<k1>svAkAra<k2>svAkAra
{#svAkAra#}¦ {%svākāra.%} See p. 1157, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53767<pc>1161-c<k1>svAgata<k2>svAgata<h>1
{#svAgata#} 1¦. {%sv-āgata.%} See p. 1126, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53768<pc>1161-c<k1>svANkika<k2>svANkika
{#svANkika#}¦ {%svāṅkika, as,%} m. (perhaps fr. {%sva%}
{%+ aṅkī,%} q. v.), a drummer, (according to Śabda-k.
{%= mārdaṅgika.%})
<LEND>

<L>53769<pc>1161-c<k1>svAcCandya<k2>svAcCandya
{#svAcCandya#}¦ {%svācchandya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sva-%}
{%cchanda%}), the power of following one's own will
or fancy, independence, ({%svācchandyāt,%} by one's
own will, of one's own free choice, voluntarily.)
<LEND>

<L>53770<pc>1161-c<k1>svAjIvya<k2>svAjIvya
{#svAjIvya#}¦ {%sv-ājīvya.%} See p. 1126, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53771<pc>1161-c<k1>svAtantrya<k2>svAtantrya
{#svAtantrya#}¦ {%svātantrya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sva-tan-%}
{%tra%}), the power of following one's own will, freedom
of will, independence; (in phil.) free will.
<LEND>

<L>53772<pc>1161-c<k1>svAti<k2>svAti
{#svAti#}¦ {%svāti, is,%} m. f. (said to be fr. 5. {%su%}
+ rt. 2. {%at%}), an auspicious constellation; the star
Arcturus (as forming the fifteenth lunar asterism);
N. of a son of Ūru, (in this sense masc.); ({%is%}), f.
one of the wives of the Sun; a sword. {%—Svāti-%}
{%yoga, as,%} m. conjunction with Svāti.
<LEND>

<L>53773<pc>1161-c<k1>svAtI<k2>svAtI
{%Svātī,%}¦ f. Arcturus; a wife of the Sun; a sword.
<LEND>

<L>53774<pc>1161-c<k1>svAd<k2>svAd
{#svAd#}¦ {%svād.%} See rt. {%svad,%} p. 1159.
<LEND>

<L>53775<pc>1161-c<k1>svAda<k2>svAda
{%Svāda, svādu,%}¦ &c. See p. 1159, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53776<pc>1161-c<k1>svADIna<k2>svADIna
{#svADIna#}¦ {%svādhīna,%} &c. See p. 1157.
<LEND>

<L>53777<pc>1161-c<k1>svADyAya<k2>svADyAya
{#svADyAya#}¦ {%svādhyāya,%} &c. See p. 1157.
<LEND>

<L>53778<pc>1161-c<k1>svAna<k2>svAna
{#svAna#}¦ {%svāna, svānta.%} See p. 1159.
<LEND>

<L>53779<pc>1161-c<k1>svApa<k2>svApa
{#svApa#}¦ {%svāpa.%} See p. 1160, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53780<pc>1161-c<k1>svApateya<k2>svApateya
{#svApateya#}¦ {%svāpateya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sva + pati%}),
wealth, property.
<LEND>
[Page1162-a+ 73]

<L>53781<pc>1162-a<k1>svApada<k2>svApada
{#svApada#}¦ {%svāpada, as,%} m. (for {%śvāpada%}), a
wild beast.
<LEND>

<L>53782<pc>1162-a<k1>svApi<k2>svApi
{#svApi#}¦ {%sv-āpi.%} See p. 1126, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53783<pc>1162-a<k1>svABAvika<k2>svABAvika
{#svABAvika#}¦ {%svābhāvika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sva-%}
{%bhāva%}), belonging to one's own nature, natural,
native, peculiar, inherent; ({%ās%}), m. pl. a sect of
Buddhist philosophers who accounted for all things
by the laws of nature.
<LEND>

<L>53784<pc>1162-a<k1>svABAvya<k2>svABAvya
{%Svābhāvya, am,%}¦ n. naturalness, natural state or
character.
<LEND>

<L>53785<pc>1162-a<k1>svAmin<k2>svAmin
{#svAmin#}¦ {%svāmin,%} &c. See p. 1158, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>53786<pc>1162-a<k1>svAyamBuva<k2>svAyamBuva
{#svAyamBuva#}¦ {%svāyambhuva, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sva-%}
{%yam-bhū%}), relating to Svayam-bhū or the Self-ex-
istent; derived from the Self-existent or Brahman;
({%as%}), m. the son of Svayam-bhū, epithet of the first
Manu; ({%ī%}), f. {%= brāhmī,%} (Śabda-k.) {%—Syāyam-%}
{%bhuva-manu-pitṛ, tā,%} m. ‘father of the Manu
Svāyambhuva,’ Brahmā.
<LEND>

<L>53787<pc>1162-a<k1>svAyamBU<k2>svAyamBU
{%Svāyambhū = svāyambhuva%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>53788<pc>1162-a<k1>svAyuj<k2>svAyuj
{#svAyuj#}¦ either {%sv-āyuj%} or {%svāyuj (sva-ay˚)%}
or {%svā-yuj, k, k, k,%} Ved. easily yoked; putting them-
selves spontaneously to the chariot.
<LEND>

<L>53789<pc>1162-a<k1>svArasika<k2>svArasika
{#svArasika#}¦ {%svārasika, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sva-rasa%}),
possessing inherent flavour or sweetness (said of a
poem &c.).
<LEND>

<L>53790<pc>1162-a<k1>svArasya<k2>svArasya
{%Svārasya, am,%}¦ n. the possessing natural savori-
ness or excellence.
<LEND>

<L>53791<pc>1162-a<k1>svArAj<k2>svArAj
{#svArAj#}¦ {%svā-rāj, ṭ,%} m. (fr. 2. {%svar + rāj%}), the
ruler of heaven, i. e. Indra.
<LEND>

<L>53792<pc>1162-a<k1>svArAjya<k2>svArAjya
{%Svārājya, am,%}¦ n. the dominion of heaven, Indra's
heaven; union with Brahma, identification with the
Self-refulgent (in this sense fr. {%sva-rāj%}), a state of
self-effulgence.
<LEND>

<L>53793<pc>1162-a<k1>svArUpA<k2>svArUpA
{#svArUpA#}¦ {%svārūpā,%} f., N. of a place; [cf.
{%sva-rūpā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53794<pc>1162-a<k1>svArociza<k2>svArociza
{#svArociza#}¦ {%svārociṣa, as,%} m. (fr. {%sva-rocis%}),
N. of the second Manu.
<LEND>

<L>53795<pc>1162-a<k1>svArocis<k2>svArocis
{%Svārocis, is,%}¦ m. the second Manu.
<LEND>

<L>53796<pc>1162-a<k1>svArTa<k2>svArTa
{#svArTa#}¦ {%svārtha, svārthika,%} &c. See p. 1158.
<LEND>

<L>53797<pc>1162-a<k1>svAlakzaRya<k2>svAlakzaRya
{#svAlakzaRya#}¦ {%svālakṣaṇya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sva-lak-%}
{%ṣaṇa%}), the peculiar characteristics or natural dis-
position, (Manu IX. 19.)
<LEND>

<L>53798<pc>1162-a<k1>svAlpa<k2>svAlpa
{#svAlpa#}¦ {%svālpa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%sv-alpa%}), little,
small; few; ({%am%}), n. littleness; paucity.
<LEND>

<L>53799<pc>1162-a<k1>svAsTya<k2>svAsTya
{#svAsTya#}¦ {%svāsthya, am,%} n. (fr. {%sva-stha%}), self-
reliance, self-dependence, self-possession, fortitude,
resoluteness, firmness; sound state, health, prosperity,
happiness, comfortableness, competence; compla-
cency, contentment, satisfaction.
<LEND>

<L>53800<pc>1162-a<k1>svAhA<k2>svAhA
{#svAhA#}¦ {%svāhā%} (probably for {%sv-ādhā,%} i. e. 5.
{%su%} + rt. {%dhā%} with {%ā,%} but cf. {%sva-dhā%}), ‘anything
good placed on the fire,’ a good oblation or offering
(to Agni, Indra, &c.), that part of an offering which
is given to all the gods indiscriminately, (in this
sense probably ind., but in the next fem.); the Ob-
lation personified (as a wife of Agni and goddess
presiding over burnt-offerings; Svāhā's body is said
to consist of the four Vedas, and her limbs are the
six Aṅgas or members of the Veda; she is repre-
sented also as a wife of the Rudra Paśu-pati; cf. {%sva-%}
{%dhā%}); a female Bauddha divinity; in Naigh. I. 11.
{%svāhā%} is enumerated among the {%vāṅ-nāmāni;%}
(ind.) an exclamation used in making oblations to
the gods (often used like ‘Hail!’ and governing a
dat. case, e. g. {%Agnaye%} or {%Somāya svāhā;%} cf. {%sv-asti%}).
{%—Svāhā-kāra, as,%} m. utterance of the term Svāhā;
the formula Svāhā (uttered at the end of the Yājyā
verses). {%—Svāhā-kṛti, is,%} f., Ved. an oblation made
with the Svāhā-kāra, (Ṛg-veda X. 110, 11. is ad-
dressed to the Svāhā-kṛtis.) {%—Svāhā-pati, is,%} m.
‘lord of the Svāhā,’ Agni. {%—Svāhā-priya, as,%} m.
‘fond of the Svāhā,’ Agni. {%—Svāhā-bhuj, k,%} m.
‘eating the Svāhā,’ a deity.
<LEND>
[Page1162-b+ 77]

<L>53801<pc>1162-b<k1>svit<k2>svit
{#svit#}¦ {%svit%} or {%svid,%} ind. a particle of inter-
rogation or inquiry (often implying doubt or surprise,
and translateable by ‘hey?’ ‘what?’ ‘can it be that?’);
an expletive (often redundant, but sometimes per-
haps used disjunctively, and equivalent to ‘either,’
‘or’).
<LEND>

<L>53802<pc>1162-b<k1>svid<k2>svid
{#svid#}¦ {%svid,%} cl. 4. P. {%svidyati, siṣveda,%}
{%svetsyati, asvidat, svettum,%} to sweat,
perspire; cl. 1. A. {%svedate, siṣvide, sveditum,%} to
be anointed; to be greasy or unctuous; to pour forth,
shed (?) ; to be disturbed: Caus. {%svedayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%asisvidat,%} to cause to sweat; to make warm,
heat: Desid. of Caus. {%sisvedayiṣati:%} Desid. {%si-%}
{%ṣvitsati:%} Intens. {%seṣvidyate, seṣvetti;%} [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">ἱδ-ί-ω, ἷδος, ἱδ-ρό-ς, ἱδ-ρώ(τ)-ς, σίδηρος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>sud-</nsi>
<nsi>ā-re, sud-or, sud-ariu-m;</nsi> Old Norse <nsi>sveit-i;</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>sveiz;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>sveitan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>swœtan;</nsi>
Eng. <nsi>sweat.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53803<pc>1162-b<k1>svidita<k2>svidita
{%Svidita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sweated, melted; sweating,
perspiring.
<LEND>

<L>53804<pc>1162-b<k1>svinna<k2>svinna
{%Svinna, as, ā, am,%}¦ perspired, sweated, covered
with perspiration, perspiring; steeped. {%—Svinnāṅ-%}
{%guli (˚na-aṅ˚), is, is, i,%} having perspiring or moist
fingers.
<LEND>

<L>53805<pc>1162-b<k1>sveda<k2>sveda
{%Sveda, as, ā, am,%}¦ sweating, perspiring; toiling;
({%as%}), m. perspiration, sweat; warmth, heat; vapour.
{%—Sveda-cūṣaka, as,%} m. ‘perspiration-sucker,’ a
cooling breeze. {%—Sveda-cchid, t, t, t,%} ‘cutting per-
spiration,’ absorbing or allaying perspiration, cooling.
{%—Sveda-ja, as, ā, am,%} sweat-produced, engendered
by heat and moisture, generated by warm vapour or
steam (said of insects and vermin). {%—Sveda-jala, as,%}
m. ‘sweat-water,’ perspiration. {%—Sveda-malojjhita-%}
{%deha (˚la-uj˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose body is freed
from perspiration and impurity; ({%as%}), m. a Jaina of
the highest order, a holy or sainted teacher of the
Jainas. {%—Sveda-leśa, as,%} m. a little perspiration.
{%—Sveda-vindu, us,%} m. or {%sveda-vipluṣ, ṭ,%} f. a drop
of perspiration. {%—Svedāñji (˚da-añ˚), is, is, i,%} Ved.
having streaming ornaments (said of the Maruts; Sāy.
{%= kṣarad-ābharaṇa,%} Ṛg-veda X. 67, 6). {%—Sve-%}
{%dānuviddha (˚da-an˚), as, ā, am,%} covered or
streaked with perspiration. {%—Svedoda (˚da-uda)%} or
{%svedodaka (˚da-ud˚), am,%} n. ‘sweat-water,’ per-
spiration.
<LEND>

<L>53806<pc>1162-b<k1>svedana<k2>svedana
{%Svedana, am,%}¦ n. perspiration, sweat; sweating,
causing to perspire; any instrument or remedy for
causing perspiration, a diaphoretic, sudorific; ({%ī%}), f.
an iron plate or pan used as a cooking utensil, a fry-
ing-pan, saucepan.
<LEND>

<L>53807<pc>1162-b<k1>svedanikA<k2>svedanikA
{%Svedanikā,%}¦ f. a boiler, saucepan, iron plate or pan
used as a cooking utensil, frying-pan; a room for
cooking, kitchen.
<LEND>

<L>53808<pc>1162-b<k1>svedita<k2>svedita
{%Svedita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sweated, warmed, heated,
steamed.
<LEND>

<L>53809<pc>1162-b<k1>svedya<k2>svedya
{%Svedya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sweated or treated by
sudorific means.
<LEND>

<L>53810<pc>1162-b<k1>svizwa<k2>svizwa
{#svizwa#}¦ {%sv-iṣṭa, sviṣṭa-kṛt.%} See p. 1126.
<LEND>

<L>53811<pc>1162-b<k1>svIkaraRa<k2>svIkaraRa
{#svIkaraRa#}¦ {%svī-karaṇa, svī-kṛta, svīya,%} &c.
See p. 1158, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53812<pc>1162-b<k1>svurC<k2>svurC
{#svurC#}¦ {%svurch%} (= rt. {%sphurch,%} q. v.), cl. 1.
P. {%svūrcchati,%} &c., to spread, extend,
expand; to forget.
<LEND>

<L>53813<pc>1162-b<k1>svf<k2>svf
{#svf#}¦ {%svṛ,%} cl. 1. P. {%svarati, sasvāra%} (3rd pl.
{%sasvarus%}), {%svariṣyati, asvārīt%} or {%asvār-%}
{%ṣīt, svartum, svaritum,%} to sound, utter, recite, (ac-
cording to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 88, 5. the form
{%sasvar = uccāritavān,%} but in VII. 60, 10. {%= antar-%}
{%hita,%} see {%sasvar,%} s.v.); to praise, sing the praises
of (Ved.); to pain, afflict [cf. rt. {%svṝ%}]; to be pained;
(according to Naigh. II. 14), to go: Caus. {%svārayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%asisvarat:%} Pass. {%svaryate,%} to be
marked with the Svarita accent: Desid. {%sisvariṣati%}
or {%susvūrṣati:%} Intens. {%sāsvaryate, sāsvarti;%} [cf.
Zend <nsi>gar;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">σῦρ-ιγξ, σῡρίζ-ω, σῡριγ-μό-ς, σύριγ-μα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">ὕραξ, ὕρον;</lang> Lat. <nsi>su-sur-ru-s, ab-sur-du-s, sur-</nsi>
<nsi>du-s;</nsi> probably Goth. <nsi>svaran;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>swaran,</nsi>
[Page1162-c+ 81]
<nsi>swerian;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>svir-a-ti, svir-ĕlĭ,</nsi> ‘a pipe;’ Lith.
<nsi>sur-ma,</nsi> ‘a flute, pipe.’]
<LEND>

<L>53814<pc>1162-c<k1>svara<k2>svara
{%Svara, as,%}¦ m. sound, noise; voice; tone, tune,
music, a primary musical sound, note of the musical
scale or gamut (of which there are seven, commonly
thus arranged, 1. {%niṣāda,%} 2. {%ṛṣabha,%} 3. {%gān-%}
{%dhāra,%} 4. {%ṣaḍja,%} 5. {%madhyama,%} 6. {%dhaivata,%}
7. {%pañcama;%} these notes are described as resem-
bling respectively the notes of an elephant, bull, goat,
peacock, curlew or heron, horse, and Koil; they are
designated by their initial letters or syllables thus,
{%ni, ṛ, ga, ṣa, ma, dha, pa,%} and the order is some-
times changed, {%ṣaḍja%} being placed first, {%pañcama%}
fifth, and {%niṣāda%} last); a symbolical expression for
the number seven; a vowel (either {%hrasva%} short,
{%dīrgha%} long, or {%pluta%} prolated); an accent, tone (of
which there are three, viz. {%udātta, anudātta,%} and
{%svarita,%} see below); air breathed through the nostrils,
nasal sound; snoring; ({%ā%}), f., N. of the chief wife of
Brahmā (Gāyatrī being the other). {%—Svara-gatā-%}
{%dhyaya (˚ta-adh˚), as,%} m., N. of the first book of
the Saṅgīta-darpaṇa; of the first book of the Saṅ-
gīta-ratnākara. {%—Svara-grāma, as,%} m. the musical
scale, gamut. {%—Svara-tattvodaya (˚va-ud˚), am,%}
n., N. of treatise on astrology by Jīva-nātha. {%—Svara-%}
{%pattana, am,%} n. ‘abode of accents,’ N. of the Sāma-
veda (this Veda being chanted with a peculiar rhythm,
and the efficacy of its prayers depending on their
proper accentuation). {%—Svara-baddha, as, ā, am,%}
composed in musical measure (said of a song &c.).
{%—Svara-bhakti, is,%} f. ‘vowel-fracture,’ (in Vedic
phonetics) a vowel-sound phonetically inserted in the
pronunciation of {%r%} or {%l%} when these letters are fol-
lowed by a sibilant or other consonant without the
intervention of a vowel (e. g. {%varṣa%} pronounced
{%variṣa%}). {%—Svara-bhaṅga, as,%} m. interruption or
indistinctness of utterance, broken articulation, crack-
ing of the voice, hoarseness, fluttering of the voice,
any defect in speaking (caused by emotion or morbid
affections of the chest). {%—Svara-bhaṅgin, ī,%} m.
‘note-separating,’ a kind of bird. {%—Svara-bheda,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= svara-bhaṅga%} above. {%—Svara-maṇḍa-%}
{%likā,%} f. a kind of Vīṇā or stringed musical instru-
ment (also read {%sura-khaṇḍalikā%}). {%—Svara-lāsikā,%}
f. a flute, pipe. {%—Svara-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having
sound, sonorous; having a voice, vocal; having an
accent, accentuated. {%—Svara-śāstra, am,%} n. a trea-
tise on the modulations of sound or on the passage
of the air through the nostrils. {%—Svara-śuddha, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} correct in musical measure. {%—Svara-śūnya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} devoid of sound, without musical notes,
unmelodious, unmusical. {%—Svara-saṃyoga, as,%} m.
the junction of vowels. {%—Svara-saṅkrama, as,%} m. a
transition or succession of sounds or notes; the musical
scale, gamut. {%—Svara-sandhi, is,%} m. the junction
or coalition of vowels. {%—Svara-sāman, ānas,%} m.
pl. epithet of particular days in a Sattra or sacrificial
session. {%—Svarāṃśa (˚ra-aṃ˚), as,%} m. a half or
quarter tone in music. {%—Svarāntara (˚ra-an˚), am,%}
n. ‘vowel-interval,’ the interval between two vowels,
hiatus, {%= vivṛtti; (e),%} ind. in the middle of vowels,
between two vowels. {%—Svarodaya (˚ra-ud˚), as,%}
m. the arising or production of sound (thought to be
connected with certain tubular vessels of the body);
({%as, am%}), m. n., N. of a work on that subject; an astro-
logical dissertation on the indications which the human
breath affords under particular circumstances and astral
conjunctions of the duration of life and future events;
({%as, ā, am%}), followed by a vowel. {%—Svarodaya-%}
{%vivaraṇa,%} N. of a work on the tubular vessels of
the body (regarded as passages of air and channels
of sound). {%—Svaropadha (˚ra-up˚), as, ā, am,%}
preceded by a vowel.
<LEND>

<L>53815<pc>1162-c<k1>svaraRa<k2>svaraRa
{%Svaraṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. illustrious, celebrated,
(Sāy. {%= deveṣu prakāśana-vat,%} Ṛg-veda I. 18, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>53816<pc>1162-c<k1>svarita<k2>svarita
{%Svarita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded; sounded as a note,
pitched; articulated; accented; having the mixed
or circumflex accent, circumflexed; ({%as%}), m. the third
or mixed tone between high and low, which is
thought to correspond with the circumflex accent,
(the other two tones being called Ud-ātta and An-
[Page1163-a+ 74]
udātta, q.q. v.v.; the Ud-ātta sound of a vowel is
said to result from the employing the upper half of
the organs of utterance, and the An-udātta from em-
ploying the lower half, while the Svarita represents
a sustained mixed intonation neither high nor low,
which is well illustrated by the expression {%tiryag-%}
{%gamana,%} i. e. a horizontal or wavy movement of
the hand as distinguished from a direct upward and
downward motion; Pāṇini, however, applies the
term {%an-udātta,%} ‘non-elevated,’ to the neutral accent-
less tone, and uses the term {%sanna-tara%} or {%an-%}
{%udātta-tara%} for ‘the very or proper An-udātta,’ i. e.
the true grave accent which precedes the Udātta;
in I. 2, 31. he calls the Svarita {%sam-āhāra,%} i. e. ‘a
combination’ of the elevated and non-elevated tones;
the Svarita accent is denoted in the Ṛg-veda by a
small upright stroke above the syllable, the Anudātta-
tara by a horizontal mark underneath, and the Udātta
is left unmarked; but the Svarita mark may denote
either a dependent or an independent Svarita, i. e.
one produced by an Udātta immediately preceding
or a real Svarita belonging to the word itself, and
commonly produced by the suppression of an Udātta
syllable; again, as a word is supposed to have only
one real accent, so words which have real Svaritas
of their own do not have Udātta accents; they are
called {%ādi-svarita, madhya-svarita, anta-svarita,%}
according as they have Svaritas on the first, middle,
or last syllable; it must also be borne in mind that
when a dependent Svarita is immediately followed
by an Udātta, the Svarita becomes a kind of Anudātta-
tara, and is so marked, see {%tāthābhāvya;%} there were,
doubtless, different kinds of Svarita pronunciation.)
{%—Svarita-tva, am,%} n. the state of having the Svarita
accent. {%—Svaritopadha (˚ta-up˚), as, ā, am,%} pre-
ceded by the Svarita; having the penultimate marked
with the Svarita.
<LEND>

<L>53817<pc>1163-a<k1>svaritf<k2>svaritf
{%Svaritṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who sings, a singer
(Ved.); one who pains or afflicts, a painer ({%= upa-%}
{%tāpayitṛ,%} but perhaps to be connected with rt. {%svṝ%}).
<LEND>

<L>53818<pc>1163-a<k1>svaru<k2>svaru
{%Svaru, us,%}¦ m. sunshine; a sacrifice; part of a
sacrificial post (or a slip of wood from it); the sacri-
ficial post, (Sāy. {%= yūpa%}); a thunderbolt; an arrow;
a kind of scorpion; ({%us, us, u%}), Ved. (perhaps) per-
fect, entire, (Sāy. {%= svaravaḥ = sva-śakalavantaḥ,%}
Ṛg-veda III. 8, 6.)
<LEND>

<L>53819<pc>1163-a<k1>svarus<k2>svarus
{%Svarus, us,%}¦ m. a thunderbolt ({%= svaru%} above).
<LEND>

<L>53820<pc>1163-a<k1>svarya<k2>svarya
{%Svarya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be praised.
<LEND>

<L>53821<pc>1163-a<k1>svaryamARa<k2>svaryamARa
{%Svaryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being accented with the
Svarita, circumflexed.
<LEND>

<L>53822<pc>1163-a<k1>svAra<k2>svAra
{%Svāra, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to sound or accent.
<LEND>

<L>53823<pc>1163-a<k1>svftIka<k2>svftIka
{#svftIka#}¦ {%svṛtīka, am,%} n., Ved. water ({%=%}
{%udaka,%} Naigh. I. 12; cf. {%smṛtīka%}).
<LEND>

<L>53824<pc>1163-a<k1>svF<k2>svF
{#svF#}¦ {%svṝ%} or {%sbṝ%} (= rt. {%sṝ;%} cf. rt. {%śṝ,%} also
rt. {%svṛ%} in one of its senses), cl. 9. P. {%svṛ-%}
{%ṇāti, sbṛṇāti,%} &c., to hurt, kill.
<LEND>

<L>53825<pc>1163-a<k1>svek<k2>svek
{#svek#}¦ {%svek%} (= rt. {%srek%}), cl. 1. A. {%svekate,%}
&c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>53826<pc>1163-a<k1>svecCA<k2>svecCA
{#svecCA#}¦ {%svecchā,%} &c. See p. 1158, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53827<pc>1163-a<k1>sveda<k2>sveda
{#sveda#}¦ {%sveda, svedana,%} &c. See p. 1162.
<LEND>

<L>53828<pc>1163-a<k1>svezwa<k2>svezwa
{#svezwa#}¦ {%sveṣṭa.%} See p. 1158, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>53829<pc>1163-a<k1>svEtavaH<k2>svEtavaH
{#svEtavaH#}¦ {%svaitavaḥ,%} Nom. pl. masc., Ved.
going auspiciously, (according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
V. 41, 9. {%= śobhana-gamanāḥ,%} as if fr. {%su + aita-%}
{%vaḥ;%} in the Pada text the word is divided into {%sva-%}
{%etavaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>53830<pc>1163-a<k1>svEra<k2>svEra
{#svEra#}¦ {%svaira,%} &c. See p. 1158, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53831<pc>1163-a<k1>svErinDrI<k2>svErinDrI
{#svErinDrI#}¦ {%svairindhrī,%} f. {%= sairan-dhrī%} under
{%sairan-dhra,%} p. 1135, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53832<pc>1163-a<k1>svorasa<k2>svorasa
{#svorasa#}¦ {%svorasa, as,%} m. the sediment of oily
substances ground with a stone.
<LEND>

<L>53833<pc>1163-a<k1>svovaSvIya<k2>svovaSvIya
{#svovaSvIya#}¦ {%svovaśvīya, am,%} n. {%= śvo-vasī-%}
{%yasa,%} happiness, prosperity.
<LEND>

<L>53834<pc>1163-a<k1>svOpaSa<k2>svOpaSa
{#svOpaSa#}¦ {%sv-aupaśa.%} See p. 1126, col. 3.
<LEND>
<H>{#ha#}
[Page1163-b+ 74]

<L>53835<pc>1163-b<k1>ha<k2>ha<h>1
{#ha#} 1¦. {%ha,%} the thirty-third and last con-
sonant of the Nāgarī alphabet (belonging to the
guttural class, and in sound corresponding to the
English {%h%} in <nsi>hard</nsi>). {%—Ha-kāra, as,%} m. the letter or
sound {%ha%}. {%—Ha-tva, am,%} n. the state of the letter {%ha.%}
<LEND>

<L>53836<pc>1163-b<k1>ha<k2>ha<h>2
{#ha#} 2¦. {%ha, as,%} m. a form of Śiva or Bhairava,
(see {%nakulīśa%}); water; a cipher (i. e. the arith-
metical figure expressing nothing); meditation;
auspiciousness; sky, heaven; paradise; blood; dying;
fear; knowledge; the moon; Viṣṇu; war, battle;
horripilation; a horse; pride; a physician; cause,
motive; (according to Śabda-k.) {%= pāpa-haraṇa;%}
{%= sakopa-vāraṇa; = śuṣka; (ā),%} f. (according to
some) coition; a lute; ({%am%}), n. (according to some)
the supreme Spirit; pleasure, delight; a weapon;
the sparkling of a gem; the sound of a lute; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), mad, drunk (according to some).
<LEND>

<L>53837<pc>1163-b<k1>ha<k2>ha<h>3
{#ha#} 3¦. {%ha,%} ind. = Ved. 2. {%gha,%} an emphatic
particle laying stress on the preceding word (generally
equivalent to ‘verily,’ ‘indeed,’ ‘manifestly,’ ‘evi-
dently,’ &c., e. g. {%na ha,%} not indeed; it is eu-
phonically changed to {%dha,%} e. g. {%yad dha = yadā%}
{%khalu,%} when indeed; {%kad dha,%} what then? and is
sometimes used without any distinct signification,
often with the Perfect and Impf.; cf. Pāṇ. III. 2,
116); a vocative particle (corresponding to ‘ho!’
&c.); a particle of reproach or disdain; of laughter;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">γε</lang> Dor. <lang n="greek">γα;</lang> (according to some also) Lat.
<nsi>hi, ha, ho</nsi> in <nsi>hic, hœc, hoc;</nsi> Goth. prefix <nsi>ga-;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>ge-.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53838<pc>1163-b<k1>ha<k2>ha<h>4
{#ha#} 4¦. {%ha.%} See under rt. 1. {%han.%}
<LEND>

<L>53839<pc>1163-b<k1>ha<k2>ha<h>5
{#ha#} 5¦. {%ha.%} See under rt. 3. {%hā.%}
<LEND>

<L>53840<pc>1163-b<k1>haM<k2>haM
{#haM#}¦ {%haṃ.%} See {%ham.%}
<LEND>

<L>53841<pc>1163-b<k1>haMsa<k2>haMsa<h>1
{#haMsa#} 1¦. {%haṃsa, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 62. fr. rt. 1. {%han%}), a goose, gander, swan, duck,
flamingo (or a kind of bird the description of which
is rather poetical than real; perhaps a kind of mixture
of any of these); the vehicle of Brahmā (represented
as borne on a Haṃsa); the supreme Soul or universal
Spirit ({%= brahman;%} according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda
IV. 40. 5. in this sense derived either fr. rt. 1. {%han%}
in the sense ‘to go,’ i. e. ‘who goes eternally,’ or
resolvable into {%ahaṃ sa,%} ‘I am that,’ i. e. the su-
preme Being); the Jīvātman or living soul; one of
the vital airs; Viṣṇu; Śiva; the Sun, (see {%haṃsa-%}
{%vatī%}); a particular Mantra or mystical text [cf.
{%haṃsa-vatī%}]; N. of Kāma-deva; an unambitious
monarch; an ascetic or devotee of a particular order;
a kind of horse, (in Naigh. I. 14. {%haṃsāsaḥ%} is
enumerated among the {%aśva-nāmāni%}); envy, malice;
a spiritual preceptor; a mountain; N. of a moun-
tain; a buffalo; a species of the Ati-śakvarī metre;
(in composition) best, excellent; pure ({%= viśud-%}
{%dha%}); going before or in front; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of
a caste supposed to live in Plaksha-dvīpa; ({%ī%}), f. a
female goose; N. of a courtezan; a kind of metre
(said to consist of twenty-two syllables); [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">χήν;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ans-er;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>gans;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>gos, gandra.</nsi>] {%—Haṃsakākīya, as, ā, am%} (fr.
{%haṃsa-kāka%}), relating to a goose and crow (said of
a fable). {%—Haṃsa-kākau,%} m. du. a goose and crow.
{%—Haṃsa-kāntā,%} f. ‘gander-beloved,’ a female
goose. {%—Haṃsa-kālī-tanaya, as,%} m. a buffalo, (see
{%kālī-tanaya%}). {%—Haṃsa-kīlaka, as,%} m. a particular
form of sexual union. {%—Haṃsa-kūṭa, as,%} m. ‘swan's
peak,’ N. of one of the peaks of the Himālaya; the
hump on the shoulder of the Indian ox. {%—Haṃsa-%}
{%gati, is, is, i,%} stalking like a swan, having a swan's
gait. {%—Haṃsa-gadgadā,%} f. ‘prattling like a swan,’
a sweetly speaking woman. {%—Haṃsa-gamana, am,%}
n. moving gracefully like a swan; the gait of a swan
or goose. {%—Haṃsa-gāminī,%} f. ‘walking like a swan,’
a graceful woman. {%—Haṃsa-jātīya, as, ā, am,%} be-
[Page1163-c+ 80]
longing to the tribe of birds called Haṃsa, anserine.
{%—Haṃsa-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Haṃsa-%}
{%tūla, as, am,%} m. n. ‘goose-cotton,’ the soft feathers
or down of a goose. {%—Haṃsa-dāhana, am,%} n.
‘geese-exciting,’ aloe wood {%(= a-guru)%}. {%—Haṃsa-%}
{%dūta,%} N. of a poem by Rūpa-gosvāmin. {%—Haṃsa-%}
{%dvāra, am,%} n., N. of a pass near Lake Mānasa.
{%—Haṃsa-nāda, as,%} m. the cackling of a goose, cry
of a goose or swan (as the Haṃsa serves the god
Brahmā for a vehicle, this cry is thought to have
something of a sacred character). {%—Haṃsa-nādin,%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} making a noise like a goose or swan,
cackling; ({%inī%}), f. a graceful woman (one of the
various classes into which women are divided; a
woman of this class is described as having a slender
waist, large hips, the gait of an elephant and
voice of a Koïl). {%—Haṃsa-pakṣa, as,%} m. epithet
of a particular movement or position of the hands.
{%—Haṃsapadikā,%} f. (fr. {%haṃsa-padī%}), a proper N.
{%—Haṃsa-padī,%} f. ‘goose-footed,’ the creeper Cissus
Pedata; (perhaps also) Clitoria Ternata. {%—Haṃsa-%}
{%parameśvara (˚ma-īś˚),%} N. of a work. {%—Haṃsa-%}
{%pāda, as,%} m. the foot of a goose; ({%am%}), n. ver-
milion; ({%ī%}), f. a kind of {%haṃsa-padī%} (see above).
{%—Haṃsa-pādikā,%} f. {%= haṃsa-padī%} above. {%—Haṃsa-%}
{%mantra, as,%} m. a particular Mantra; [cf. {%haṃsa,%}
{%haṃsa-vatī.%}] {%—Haṃsa-mālā,%} f. ‘swan-garland,’ a
flight of Haṃsas, flock of wild geese, &c.; a particular
kind of goose or duck ({%= kādamba%}); a kind of metre.
{%—Haṃsa-māṣā,%} f. a kind of shrub {%(= māṣa-%}
{%parṇī)%}. {%—Haṃsa-māheśvara,%} N. of a work.
{%—Haṃsa-yukta, as, ā, am,%} drawn by swans (said
of the chariot of Brahmā). {%—Haṃsa-yuvan, ā,%} m.
a young goose or swan. {%—Haṃsa-ratha, as,%} m.
‘whose vehicle is a Haṃsa,’ Brahmā. {%—Haṃsa-rāja,%}
{%as,%} m. a king of geese. {%—Haṃsa-ruta, am,%} n. a
kind of metre. {%—Haṃsa-lomaśa, am,%} n. green sul-
phate of iron {%(= kāsīsa)%}. {%—Haṃsa-lohaka, am,%} n.
brass {%(= pittala)%}. {%—Haṃsa-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possess-
ing geese, &c.; ({%atī%}), f. the creeper Cissus Pedata;
(scil. {%ṛc%}) epithet of the verse Ṛg-veda IV. 40, 5.
(in which the sun in the type of Dadhi-krā, here
called Haṃsa, is identified with Para-brahman or the
supreme Being; this verse is also found in Vājasa-
neyi-s. X. 24, XII. 14, &c.) {%—Haṃsa-vāraṇa-%}
{%gāminī,%} f. a woman who walks like a swan or young
elephant. {%—Haṃsa-vāhana, as,%} m. ‘borne on a
Haṃsa,’ Brahmā. {%—Haṃsa-viveka, as,%} m. ‘discrimina-
tion of the one Spirit,’ N. of a short Vedānta poem.
{%—Haṃsa-vīja, am,%} n. a goose's egg. {%—Haṃsa-%}
{%śreṇī,%} f. a line or row of geese. {%—Haṃsāṃśu (˚sa-%}
{%aṃ˚), us, us, u,%} ‘swan-rayed,’ swan-coloured, white.
{%—Haṃsāṅghri (˚sa-aṅ˚), is,%} m. ‘goose-footed,’ ver-
milion. {%—Haṃsādhirūḍhā (˚sa-adh˚),%} f. ‘mounted on a
swan,’ epithet of Sarasvatī (wife of Brahmā). {%—Haṃsā-%}
{%bhikhya (˚sa-abh˚), am,%} n. silver. {%—Haṃsārūḍha%}
{%(˚sa-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} mounted on a swan; ({%as%}),
m. Brahmā; ({%ā%}), f. the wife of Brahmā. {%—Haṃse-%}
{%śvara-tīrtha (˚sa-īś˚), am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Haṃsodaka (˚sa-ud˚), am,%} n. a kind of cordial
water (described as a sort of infusion of cardamoms).
{%—Haṃsopaniṣad (˚sa-up˚), t,%} f., N. of an Upa-
niṣad belonging to the Atharva-veda.
<LEND>

<L>53842<pc>1163-c<k1>haMsa<k2>haMsa<h>2
2. {%haṃsa,%}¦ Nom. P. {%haṃsati,%} &c., to act or behave
like a swan.
<LEND>

<L>53843<pc>1163-c<k1>haMsaka<k2>haMsaka
{%Haṃsaka, as,%}¦ m. a goose, gander, flamingo; an
ornament for the feet or ankles (said to be formed
like a goose's foot).
<LEND>

<L>53844<pc>1163-c<k1>haMsikA<k2>haMsikA
{%Haṃsikā,%}¦ f. a female goose.
<LEND>

<L>53845<pc>1163-c<k1>haMsI<k2>haMsI
{%Haṃsī,%}¦ f. a female goose, (see {%haṃsa.%}) {%—Haṃsī-%}
{%yugala, am,%} n. a pair of geese or ducks.
<LEND>

<L>53846<pc>1163-c<k1>haMho<k2>haMho
{#haMho#}¦ {%haṃho%} (i. e. {%ham + ho%}), ind. a voca-
tive particle (corresponding to ‘ho!’ ‘hollo!’); a
particle expressing haughtiness or contempt; an inter-
rogative particle; (in the drama) a form of address
among those of the middling class used by equals to
each other.
<LEND>

<L>53847<pc>1163-c<k1>hak<k2>hak
{#hak#}¦ {%hak,%} ind. (imitative) the sound {%hak.%}
{%—Hak-kāra, as,%} m. making the sound {%hak,%} call-
ing, calling to.
<LEND>
[Page1164-a+ 68]

<L>53848<pc>1164-a<k1>hakka<k2>hakka
{%Hakka, as,%}¦ m. the calling of elephants ({%= gaja-%}
{%samāhvāna%}).
<LEND>

<L>53849<pc>1164-a<k1>hajadeSa<k2>hajadeSa
{#hajadeSa#}¦ {%haja-deśa, as,%} m., N. of a district.
<LEND>

<L>53850<pc>1164-a<k1>hajAja<k2>hajAja
{#hajAja#}¦ {%hajāja,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>53851<pc>1164-a<k1>hajAji<k2>hajAji
{%Hajāji,%}¦ N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>53852<pc>1164-a<k1>haYjA<k2>haYjA
{#haYjA#}¦ {%hañjā,%} ind. (in the drama) a vocative
particle used in addressing a female attendant or
maid-servant.
<LEND>

<L>53853<pc>1164-a<k1>haYje<k2>haYje
{%Hañje,%}¦ ind. a vocative particle, (see above.)
<LEND>

<L>53854<pc>1164-a<k1>haYji<k2>haYji
{#haYji#}¦ {%hañji, is,%} m. a sneeze, sneezing ({%=%}
{%kṣut%}).
<LEND>

<L>53855<pc>1164-a<k1>haYjikA<k2>haYjikA
{#haYjikA#}¦ {%hañjikā,%} f. (probably) a kind of
plant ({%= bhārgī%})
<LEND>

<L>53856<pc>1164-a<k1>haw<k2>haw
{#haw#}¦ {%haṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%haṭati, jahāṭa, haṭitum,%}
to shine, be bright.
<LEND>

<L>53857<pc>1164-a<k1>hawaparRi<k2>hawaparRi
{#hawaparRi#}¦ {%haṭa-parṇi,%} n. (according to Śab-
da-k.) the aquatic plant Vallisneria; [cf. {%haṭha-%}
{%parṇī.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53858<pc>1164-a<k1>hawwa<k2>hawwa
{#hawwa#}¦ {%haṭṭa, as,%} m. a market, fair; ({%ī%}), f. a
petty market or fair. {%—Haṭṭa-cauraka, as,%} m. a
thief who steals from fairs and markets. {%—Haṭṭa-%}
{%vilāsinī,%} f. ‘dallying in market-places;’ a wanton
woman, prostitute; a sort of perfume ({%= dhamanī%});
turmeric ({%= haridrā%}).
<LEND>

<L>53859<pc>1164-a<k1>haW<k2>haW
{#haW#}¦ {%haṭh,%} cl. 1. P. {%haṭhati, jahāṭha,%} &c.,
to leap, jump; to be wicked; to treat with
violence, oppress; to bind to a post.
<LEND>

<L>53860<pc>1164-a<k1>haWa<k2>haWa
{%Haṭha, as,%}¦ m. violence, force, ({%haṭhena,%} by force,
forcibly, violently, with precipitation, suddenly), op-
pression; rapine; the aquatic plant Pistia Stratiotes
{%(= pṛśnī)%}. {%—Haṭha-dīpikā,%} f., N. of a work, (see
below.) {%—Haṭha-parṇī,%} f. the aquatic plant Vallis-
neria Octandra. {%—Haṭha-pradīpikā,%} f. a treatise on
the Haṭha-yoga and asceticism by Ātmārāma. {%—Ha-%}
{%ṭha-yoga, as,%} m. a particular mode of Yoga or ab-
stract contemplation (forcing the mind to abstain
from external objects; it is treated of in the Haṭha-
pradīpikā, and may be performed in various ways,
such as standing on one leg, holding up the arms,
inhaling smoke with the head inverted, &c.). {%—Ha-%}
{%ṭha-vidyā,%} f. the science or method of forced medita-
tion. {%—Haṭha-saṅketa-candrikā,%} f., N. of a treatise
by Sundara-deva on the Haṭha-yoga.
<LEND>

<L>53861<pc>1164-a<k1>haWAlu<k2>haWAlu
{%Haṭhālu, us,%}¦ m. the plant Pistia Stratiotes.
<LEND>

<L>53862<pc>1164-a<k1>haWI<k2>haWI
{%Haṭhī,%}¦ f. the plant Pistia Stratiotes.
<LEND>

<L>53863<pc>1164-a<k1>haqi<k2>haqi
{#haqi#}¦ {%haḍi, is,%} m. wooden fetters, a kind of
stocks.
<LEND>

<L>53864<pc>1164-a<k1>haqika<k2>haqika
{#haqika#}¦ {%haḍika, as,%} m. a servant of the lowest
caste, a sweeper ({%= malākarṣin%}).
<LEND>

<L>53865<pc>1164-a<k1>haqqaka<k2>haqqaka
{%Haḍḍaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= haḍika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53866<pc>1164-a<k1>haqqi<k2>haqqi
{%Haḍḍi, is,%}¦ or {%haḍḍika, as,%} m. {%= haḍika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53867<pc>1164-a<k1>haqqa<k2>haqqa
{#haqqa#}¦ {%haḍḍa, am,%} n. a bone. {%—Haḍḍa-ja, am,%}
n. produced from bones, marrow.
<LEND>

<L>53868<pc>1164-a<k1>haqqipa<k2>haqqipa
{#haqqipa#}¦ {%haḍḍipa, as,%} m. {%= haḍika%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53869<pc>1164-a<k1>haRqA<k2>haRqA
{#haRqA#}¦ {%haṇḍā,%} ind. a vocative particle used
in addressing a female of inferior rank; (in the
drama) a form of address used by equals to each other
among those of the lowest class.
<LEND>

<L>53870<pc>1164-a<k1>haRqe<k2>haRqe
{%Haṇḍe,%}¦ ind. a vocative particle, {%= haṇḍā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53871<pc>1164-a<k1>haRqikA<k2>haRqikA
{#haRqikA#}¦ {%haṇḍikā,%} f. an earthen pot or boiler.
{%—Haṇḍikā-suta, as,%} m. a small earthen pot.
<LEND>

<L>53872<pc>1164-a<k1>haRqI<k2>haRqI
{%Haṇḍī,%}¦ f. {%= haṇḍikā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53873<pc>1164-a<k1>hata<k2>hata
{#hata#}¦ {%hata, hataka,%} &c. See cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>53874<pc>1164-a<k1>haTa<k2>haTa
{#haTa#}¦ {%hatha.%} See col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53875<pc>1164-a<k1>had<k2>had
{#had#}¦ {%had,%} cl. 1. A. {%hadate, jahade, hatsyate,%}
{%ahatta, hattum,%} to evacuate, excrete or dis-
charge excrement: Caus. {%hādayati:%} Desid. {%jihat-%}
{%sate:%} Intens. {%jāhadyate, jāhatti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>zad;</nsi>
[Page1164-b+ 80]
Gr. <lang n="greek">χέζ-ω (κέ-χοδ-α, χε-σοῦ-μαι), χεσείω, χόδ-ο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χόδ-ανο-ς;</lang> Angl. Sax. <nsi>scît-e;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>scîz-u.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53876<pc>1164-b<k1>hadana<k2>hadana
{%Hadana, am,%}¦ n. the act of excretion, evacuation
(of excrement or ordure).
<LEND>

<L>53877<pc>1164-b<k1>hanna<k2>hanna
{%Hanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ passed (as excrement), evacu-
ated, excreted; ({%am%}), n. excrement, ordure; [cf.
{%go-h˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53878<pc>1164-b<k1>haddA<k2>haddA
{#haddA#}¦ {%haddā,%} f., (in astronomy) N. of a di-
vision of each zodiacal sign, (thirty such divisions are
specified and distributed variously to each planet;
according to some, a masc. form of this word exists.)
{%—Haddeśa (˚dā-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of a thirtieth
division of a zodiacal sign,’ (probably) an epithet of
the planets ({%= triṃśāṃśa-pa%}).
<LEND>

<L>53879<pc>1164-b<k1>han<k2>han<h>1
{#han#} 1¦. {%han%} (probably for an original
{%dhan,%} cf. {%ni-dhana,%} p. 487; but some
forms are fr. {%ghan,%} some fr. {%ghat,%} and others are
borrowed fr. rt. {%vadh%} or {%badh%}), cl. 2. P. (ep. also
A. in some forms, cf. {%ā-han%}), {%hanti%} (3rd du. {%hatas,%}
3rd pl. {%ghnanti%}); Impf. {%ahan%} (3rd du. {%ahatām,%}
3rd pl. {%aghnan%}); Pot. {%hanyāt;%} Impv. {%hantu%} (2nd
sing. {%jahi,%} 3rd sing. {%hantu,%} 2nd pl. {%hata,%} 3rd pl.
{%ghnantu;%} in Naigh. II. 14. a form {%hantāt%} is given
as one reading); Perf. {%jaghāna%} (2nd sing. {%jagha-%}
{%nitha%} or {%jaghantha,%} 1st du. {%jaghniva,%} 3rd pl.
{%jaghnus,%} ep. A. {%jaghnire%}); 2nd Fut. {%haniṣyati,%}
Aor. {%avadhīt%} (fr. rt. {%vadh%} or {%badh,%} ep. also {%ahanat%});
Prec. {%vadhyāt;%} Cond. {%ahaniṣyat, hantum,%} (Ved.
forms, Pres. {%hanati%} [as if cl. 1], {%jighnate%} [cf. rt.
{%ghrā%}]; Perf. {%jahā = jaghāna,%} Nirukta IV. 1; Inf.
{%hantos, hantavai%}), to strike, hit, beat; to strike
down, kill, slay, destroy; to wound, hurt, injure,
harass, afflict; to overcome, overthrow, overturn,
conquer; to remove, take away, counteract, cure;
to obstruct, stop, hinder, impede, mar; to go, move,
(in Naigh. II. 14. {%hanati%} is enumerated among the
{%gati-karmāṇah%}): Pass. {%hanyate, jaghne, hantā%}
or {%ghānitā, haniṣyate%} or {%ghāniṣyate, avadhi%}
or {%aghāni%} (3rd pl. {%aghāniṣata%} or {%ahasata,%} Pāṇ.
VI. 4, 62), {%ghāniṣīṣṭa,%} to be struck, to be killed,
&c.: Caus. {%ghātayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ajīghatat%}
(properly a Nom. fr. {%ghāta%}), to cause to be slain or
killed: Desid. {%jighāṃsati,%} to wish to kill or slay:
Intens. {%jaṅghanyate%} or {%jeghnīyate%} (in Pāṇ. VII. 4,
31), {%jaṅghanti,%} (Ved. {%[ni-]ghanighnate,%} pres. part.
dat. or according to Sāy. {%= [ni-]hanti,%} Ṛg-veda I.
55, 5); [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἔ-θαν-ον, θάν-ατος, θείν-ω, θνήακω:</lang>
Lat. <nsi>(fen-d-o), offend-o, defend-o, in-festus:</nsi> Goth.
<nsi>dauthus,</nsi> ‘death:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>deád, deadh, dydan,</nsi>
‘to kill:’ Hib. <nsi>gonaim,</nsi> ‘I wound;’ (perhaps also)
<nsi>gail,</nsi> ‘slaughter;’ <nsi>gaillim,</nsi> ‘I hurt.’]
<LEND>

<L>53880<pc>1164-b<k1>GAta<k2>GAta
{%Ghāta, ghātayat,%}¦ &c. See p. 307.
<LEND>

<L>53881<pc>1164-b<k1>Gna<k2>Gna
{%Ghna, ghnat,%}¦ &c. See p. 310.
<LEND>

<L>53882<pc>1164-b<k1>jaGanvas<k2>jaGanvas
{%Jaghanvas, jaghnivas.%}¦ See p. 335.
<LEND>

<L>53883<pc>1164-b<k1>jaNGanyamAna<k2>jaNGanyamAna
{%Jaṅghanyamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Intens.),
being repeatedly struck, being greatly wounded.
<LEND>

<L>53884<pc>1164-b<k1>ha<k2>ha<h>4
4. {%ha%}¦ (for 5. {%ha%} see under rt. 3. {%hā%}), killing, de-
stroying, removing, counteracting (at the end of
comps., cf. {%viṣa-ha%}).
<LEND>

<L>53885<pc>1164-b<k1>hata<k2>hata
{%Hata, as, ā, am,%}¦ struck, beaten [cf. {%a-h˚%}]; struck
down, killed, slain, wounded, hurt, marred, injured,
spoiled, blighted, destroyed, utterly ruined, ex-
tinguished, dimmed, ended, lost; impeded, hindered,
checked; counteracted, neutralized, disappointed,
frustrated; repelled, driven off, avoided; deprived
of, bereft of, freed from, destitute of (especially at the
beginning of comps., see below); miserable, worthless;
(in arithmetic) multiplied; ({%am%}), n. striking, killing,
hurting; multiplication. {%—Hata-kaṇṭaka, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} freed from thorns; one whose foes are de-
stroyed. {%—Hata-citta, as, ā, am,%} bereft of sense,
perplexed in mind, dispirited, bewildered, confounded.
{%—Hata-jīvita, as, ā, am,%} deprived of life or hope,
overcome with despair; ({%am%}), n. despair of life.
{%—Hata-jñāna, as, ā, am,%} deprived of conscious-
ness. {%—Hatajyotir-niśītha, as,%} m. a night in which
the stars are extinguished, a starless night. {%—Hata-%}
{%jyotis, is, is, is,%} having the stars extinguished, star-
less, dark. {%—Hata-tāpa, as, ā, am,%} freed from heat,
cooled. {%—Hata-tviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} dimmed in lustre, de-
[Page1164-c+ 81]
prived of light. {%—Hata-daiva, as, ā, am,%} ill-fated,
ill-starred, luckless. {%—Hata-dviṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%} one who
has slain his enemy or enemies. {%—Hata-pitṛ, tā,%}
m. one whose father has been slain. {%—Hata-putra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. one whose son has been slain.
{%—Hata-prabhāva, as, ā, am,%} one whose power has
been destroyed, bereft of power. {%—Hata-pramāda,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} driving away or avoiding negligence, freed
from carelessness. {%—Hata-pravīra, as, ā, am,%} whose
choicest warriors are slain. {%—Hata-prāya, as, ā, am,%}
almost killed. {%—Hata-bāndhava, as, ā, am,%} de-
prived of relations, destitute of relations. {%—Hata-%}
{%buddhi, is, is, i,%} deprived of sense, destitute of sense.
{%—Hata-bhāgya, as, ā, am,%} ill-starred, ill-fated.
{%—Hata-mātṛ, tā,%} m. one whose mother has been
slain. {%—Hata-mūrkha, as,%} m. an excessive fool, a
blockhead. {%—Hata-medhas, ās, ās, as,%} perplexed in
mind, deprived of sense or intellect. {%—Hata-ratha,%}
{%as,%} m. a smitten chariot, a chariot of which the
horses and charioteer are slain. {%—Hata-lakṣaṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} deprived of good marks, unlucky. {%—Hata-%}
{%vinaya, as, ā, am,%} lost to a sense of propriety.
{%—Hata-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} one who has lost his
virility or vigour. {%—Hata-vṛṣan, ā, ṇī, a,%} Ved.
(according to Sāy.) one whose obstructor has been
destroyed, (applied to the waters whose obstructor is
said to be Vṛtra, Ṛg-veda IV. 17, 3.) {%—Hata-%}
{%śiṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} left remaining out of the slain,
left surviving. {%—Hata-śiṣṭa-jana, as,%} m. a sur-
vivor, (see above.) {%—Hata-śeṣa, as, ā, am,%} re-
maining from among the killed, escaped, survived.
{%—Hata-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} one whose prosperity is
blighted; reduced to penury. {%—Hata-sampada, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} one who has lost his property, reduced to
poverty. {%—Hata-sammada, as, ā, am,%} one whose
pleasures are destroyed or marred. {%—Hata-sarva-%}
{%yodha, as, ā, am,%} having all the warriors slain.
{%—Hata-sādhvasa, as, ā, am,%} freed from fear.
{%—Hata-sūta, as, ā, am,%} one whose charioteer is
slain. {%—Hatādhimantha (˚ta-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} freed
from disease of the eye or from loss of sight. {%—Hatā-%}
{%roha (˚ta-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} (an elephant &c.) whose
riders are slain. {%—Hatāvaśeṣa (˚ta-av˚), ās,%} m. pl.
those left of the slain. {%—Hatāśa (˚ta-āś˚), as, ā, am,%}
one whose hopes are destroyed, bereft of hope, hope-
less, despairing, desponding; weak, powerless; bar-
ren; vile, low, infamous, wicked; cruel, merciless.
{%—Hatāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as, ā, am,%} one whose horse
or horses have been killed. {%—Hataujas (˚ta-oj˚),%}
{%ās, ās, as,%} one whose vigour is destroyed, bereft of
energy, debilitated.
<LEND>

<L>53886<pc>1164-c<k1>hataka<k2>hataka
{%Hataka, as, ā, am,%}¦ miserable, ill-bred, bad (in
general); ({%as%}), m. a low person, coward.
<LEND>

<L>53887<pc>1164-c<k1>hati<k2>hati
{%Hati, is,%}¦ f. striking, a stroke, blow [cf. {%hala-h˚%}];
killing, destroying, destruction, removing, &c.; (ac-
cording to Śabda-k.) {%= apa-karṣa; = ullāsa.%}
<LEND>

<L>53888<pc>1164-c<k1>hatnu<k2>hatnu
{%Hatnu, us,%}¦ m. a weapon; sickness, disease.
<LEND>

<L>53889<pc>1164-c<k1>hatya<k2>hatya
{%Hatya, am,%}¦ n. killing, slaying; [cf. {%śambara-%}
{%h˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53890<pc>1164-c<k1>hatyA<k2>hatyA
{%Hatyā,%}¦ f. killing, slaying, slaughter, murder (gene-
rally applied to criminal killing, and chiefly used in
comps.; cf. {%brahma-h˚, go-h˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>53891<pc>1164-c<k1>hatvA<k2>hatvA
{%Hatvā,%}¦ ind. having struck or killed, having slain.
<LEND>

<L>53892<pc>1164-c<k1>hatvI<k2>hatvI
{%Hatvī,%}¦ ind., Ved. {%= hatvā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53893<pc>1164-c<k1>haTa<k2>haTa
{%Hatha, as,%}¦ m. a stroke, blow; killing, slaughter;
death; a man dejected or in low spirits.
<LEND>

<L>53894<pc>1164-c<k1>han<k2>han<h>2
2. {%han, hā, ghnī,%}¦ m. f. killing, slaying; a killer,
slayer (at the end of comps.; cf. {%brahma-han,%}
{%vṛtra-han%}).
<LEND>

<L>53895<pc>1164-c<k1>hana<k2>hana
{%Hana, as,%}¦ m. killing, slaying, a killer, slayer, (see
{%su-h˚,%} cf. {%ghana, ghanāghana.%})
<LEND>

<L>53896<pc>1164-c<k1>hanana<k2>hanana
{%Hanana, am,%}¦ n. the act of striking, killing, de-
stroying; wounding, hurting, injuring; (in arith-
metic) multiplication. {%—Hanana-śīla, as, ā, am,%}
of a murderous disposition, cruel.
<LEND>

<L>53897<pc>1164-c<k1>hananIya<k2>hananIya
{%Hananīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be struck or beaten, to
be killed, worthy of death.
<LEND>

<L>53898<pc>1164-c<k1>hanizyat<k2>hanizyat
{%Haniṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to kill or
slay.
<LEND>

<L>53899<pc>1164-c<k1>hanu<k2>hanu
{%Hanu, us,%}¦ m. f. the jaw (also {%hanū, ūs,%} f. and
{%hanu, u,%} n., and in the sense ‘jaw,’ thought to be con-
[Page1165-a+ 80]
nected with rt. 2. {%hā,%} but according to Sāy. so called,
as {%hanana-sādhana,%} ‘an instrument of destruc-
tion’); ({%us%}), f. anything which destroys or injures
life; a weapon; death, dying; disease, sickness; a
kind of drug; a wanton woman, prostitute; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">γένυ-ς, γέν-ειο-ν, γν-άθο-ς, γναθ-μό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>gen-a;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>kinnu-s;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>kinni;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>cinn, cyn.</nsi>] {%—Hanu-graha, as,%} m. ‘jaw-seizure,’
locked jaw. {%—Hanu-bheda, as,%} m. the gaping or
parting asunder of the jaws. {%—Hanumaj-jayantī,%}
f. the day of full moon of the month Caitra (being the
supposed birthday of Hanumat). {%—Hanu-mat, ān,%} m.
‘having (large) jaws,’ N. of a monkey-chief (one of
the most celebrated of a vast host of semi-divine
apes or monkey-like beings, who, according to Rāmā-
yaṇa I. 16, were created to become the allies of
Rāma-candra in his war with Rāvaṇa; the chiefs of
these Simian armies were supposed to be the progeny
of various gods; thus, Su-grīva, q. v., was son of the
Sun, Bāli of Indra, Tāra of Vṛhas-pati, Gandha-
mādana of Kuvera, Nala of Viśva-karman, Nīla of
Agni, Su-ṣeṇa of Varuṇa, and the celebrated Hanu-
mat of Pavana or Māruta, ‘the Wind;’ their character
corresponds more to that of Genii than animals;
they are all described as capable of supernatural feats,
and Hanumat especially is fabled to have assumed
any form at will, wielded rocks, removed mountains,
mounted the air, seized the clouds, and rivalled
Garuḍa in swiftness of flight; according to other
legends, Hanumat was son of Śiva; his mother's
name was Añjanā, q. v.); a particular sort of monkey,
Simia Sinica. {%—Hanuman-nāṭaka, am,%} n. the
Hanumat drama (a celebrated drama in fourteen acts,
supposed to have been written about the tenth or
eleventh century of our era, and ascribed to Hanumat
himself, who is said to have engraved it on rocks;
it is emphatically called the Mahā-nāṭaka or great
drama, and is, in fact, the story of the Rāmāyaṇa
dramatized, the monkey-chief Hanumat playing a
very important part in the action of the piece).
{%—Hanu-mūla, am,%} n. the root of the jaw. {%—Hanu-%}
{%stambha, as,%} m. ‘jaw-stoppage,’ locked jaw. {%—Hanū-%}
{%mat, ān,%} m. {%= hanu-mat%} above; N. of the mythical
author of the Khaṇḍa-praśasti; of the author of the
Hanūman-nāṭaka. {%—Hanūmat-kalpa,%} N. of a work.
{%—Hanūmat-kavaca, am,%} n. ‘Hanūmat's breastplate,’
N. of a hymn addressed to the five-headed Hanūmat,
(this hymn is taken from the Sudarśana-saṃhitā.)
{%—Hanūmat-paddhati, is,%} f., N. of a work in five
chapters (describing the rites to be observed in the
worship of Hanūmat; four chapters are said to be
extracted from the Sudarśana-saṃhitā, and the re-
maining one from the Rāmāyaṇa). {%—Hanūman-%}
{%nāṭaka, am,%} n. {%= hanuman-nāṭaka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53900<pc>1165-a<k1>hanU<k2>hanU
{%Hanū, ūs,%}¦ f. See under {%hanu.%}
<LEND>

<L>53901<pc>1165-a<k1>hanUza<k2>hanUza
{%Hanūṣa, as,%}¦ m. a Rākṣasa, demon.
<LEND>

<L>53902<pc>1165-a<k1>hantavya<k2>hantavya
{%Hantavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be struck or killed, de-
serving death.
<LEND>

<L>53903<pc>1165-a<k1>hantu<k2>hantu
{%Hantu, us,%}¦ m. killing, death; a bull; [cf. {%su-h˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>53904<pc>1165-a<k1>hantumanas<k2>hantumanas
{%Hantu-manas, ās, ās, as%}¦ ({%hantu%} for {%hantum%}),
minding to kill, intending to kill.
<LEND>

<L>53905<pc>1165-a<k1>hantf<k2>hantf
{%Hantṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who strikes or kills, strik-
ing; destroying, removing, counteracting [cf. {%viṣa-%}
{%h˚%}]; ({%tā%}), m. a murderer, slayer; a thief, robber;
(according to some) a particular measure of food.
<LEND>

<L>53906<pc>1165-a<k1>hantva<k2>hantva
{%Hantva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be slain, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%hananīya,%} Ṛg-veda III. 30, 15.)
<LEND>

<L>53907<pc>1165-a<k1>hanman<k2>hanman
{%Hanman, a,%}¦ n., Ved. anything causing death, a
deadly or destructive weapon.
<LEND>

<L>53908<pc>1165-a<k1>hanyamAna<k2>hanyamAna
{%Hanyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being struck or smitten;
being killed.
<LEND>

<L>53909<pc>1165-a<k1>hAnuka<k2>hAnuka
{%Hānuka, as, ī, am,%}¦ killing, hurting, mischievous.
<LEND>

<L>53910<pc>1165-a<k1>hanIla<k2>hanIla
{#hanIla#}¦ {%hanīla, as,%} m. (according to Śab-
da-k.) a particular tree ({%= ketakī,%} also written {%ha-%}
{%līna%}).
<LEND>

<L>53911<pc>1165-a<k1>hanta<k2>hanta
{#hanta#}¦ {%hanta,%} ind. an exclamation of grief,
(equivalent to ‘ah,’ ‘alas’); of pity; of joy; of sur-
prise; of flurry or haste; an exclamation expressive
of good luck or benediction, (see below); an in-
ceptive particle. {%—Hanta-kāra, as,%} m. the exclama-
[Page1165-b+ 75]
tion Hanta, a particular formula of benediction or salu-
tation (mentioned along with {%svāhā-kāra, vaṣaṭ-%}
{%kāra,%} and {%svadhā-kāra%}); rice or other offerings to
be presented to a guest (according to some). {%—Han-%}
{%tokti (˚ta-uk˚), is,%} f. ‘saying alas!’ tenderness, com-
passion.
<LEND>

<L>53912<pc>1165-b<k1>hapuzA<k2>hapuzA
{#hapuzA#}¦ {%hapuṣā,%} f., N. of a particular sub-
stance forming an article of trade (commonly called
Habush, and said to be of a long form and black
colour, and smelling like raw meat or fish; it is of
two kinds).
<LEND>

<L>53913<pc>1165-b<k1>habuzA<k2>habuzA
{%Habuṣā,%}¦ f. {%= hapuṣā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>53914<pc>1165-b<k1>habasora<k2>habasora
{#habasora#}¦ {%habasora,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>53915<pc>1165-b<k1>ham<k2>ham
{#ham#}¦ {%ham,%} ind. an exclamation expressive
of anger ({%= ruṣokti%}); of courtesy or respect.
<LEND>

<L>53916<pc>1165-b<k1>hamIARa<k2>hamIARa
{#hamIARa#}¦ {%hamī-āṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>53917<pc>1165-b<k1>hambA<k2>hambA
{#hambA#}¦ {%hambā,%} f. (onomatopoetic) the lowing
of cattle.
<LEND>

<L>53918<pc>1165-b<k1>hamBA<k2>hamBA
{%Hambhā,%}¦ f. the lowing or bellowing of cattle.
{%—Hambhā-rava, as,%} m. the cry Hambhā, lowing
of kine. {%—Hambhārava-virāvin, ī, iṇī, i,%} making
a lowing or bellowing sound.
<LEND>

<L>53919<pc>1165-b<k1>hamBAyamAna<k2>hamBAyamAna
{%Hambhāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ lowing, bellowing.
<LEND>

<L>53920<pc>1165-b<k1>hamm<k2>hamm
{#hamm#}¦ {%hamm,%} cl. 1. P. {%hammati, jahamma,%}
{%hammitum,%} to go.
<LEND>

<L>53921<pc>1165-b<k1>hammIra<k2>hammIra
{#hammIra#}¦ {%hammīra, as,%} m., N. of a king of
Śākam-bharī (patron of Rāghava-deva).
<LEND>

<L>53922<pc>1165-b<k1>hay<k2>hay
{#hay#}¦ {%hay%} [cf. rt. 1. {%hi,%} in sense ‘to go’], cl.
1. P. {%hayati, jahāya, hayiṣyati, ahayīt,%}
{%hayitum,%} to go, move, (in Naigh. II. 14. {%hayantāt%}
is enumerated among the {%gati-karmāṇaḥ%}); to re-
vere, worship; to sound; to be weary.
<LEND>

<L>53923<pc>1165-b<k1>haya<k2>haya
{#haya#}¦ {%haya, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%hi,%} but connected
with rt. {%hay%} above), a horse; a symbolical expression
for the number seven (that being the number of the
horses of the Sun, see {%saptāśva%}); a man of a par-
ticular class; N. of Indra; of a Yādava king; the
Yak or Bos Grunniens; (in prosody) a foot of four
short syllables, proceleusmaticus; ({%ā%}), f. {%= haya-gan-%}
{%dhā%} below; ({%ī%}), f. a female horse, mare. {%—Haya-%}
{%kātarā%} or {%haya-kātarikā,%} f. a kind of plant or tree.
{%—Haya-kovida, as, ā, am,%} skilled in horses.
{%—Haya-gandha, am,%} n. a kind of medicinal salt,
{%= kāca-lavaṇa; (ā),%} f. the plant Physalis Flexuosa;
another plant {%(= aja-modā)%}. {%—Haya-gardabhi, is,%}
m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Haya-grīva, as,%} m. ‘horse-
necked,’ N. of a form of Viṣṇu (manifested, accord-
ing to one legend, in order to recover the Veda
carried off by two Daityas called Madhu and Kaiṭa-
bha); N. of a Daitya (called {%Brahma-veda-pra-%}
{%hartṛ,%} as having seized and carried off the Vedas at
the dissolution of the universe caused by Brahmā's
sleep at the end of the past Kalpa; in order to re-
cover them Viṣṇu became incarnate as the Matsya
or fish, and slew Haya-grīva); N. of a poet; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of Durgā. {%—Hayagrīva-han, ā,%} m. ‘slayer of
Haya-grīva,’ Viṣṇu. {%—Hayaṅ-kaṣa, as,%} m. ‘im-
pelling horses,’ a driver, charioteer; epithet of Mātali
(charioteer of Indra). {%—Haya-jña, as,%} m. one who
understands the points of a horse, a horse-dealer, groom,
jockey. {%—Hayajña-tā,%} f. knowledge of horses and
their management, horsemanship. {%—Haya-jñāna,%}
{%am,%} n. knowledge of horses. {%—Haya-tattva-jña,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} acquainted with the nature of horses.
{%—Haya-dviṣat, an,%} m. ‘hating horses,’ the buffalo.
{%—Haya-nirghoṣa, as,%} m. the noise or clatter of a
horse. {%—Haya-puccha, as, am,%} m. n. a horse's tail;
({%ī%}), f. the plant Māṣa-parṇī, q. v. {%—Haya-priya,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘dear to horses,’ barley; ({%ā%}), f. {%= haya-gan-%}
{%dhā%} above; the Kharjūrī tree. {%—Haya-māra%} or
{%haya-māraka, as,%} m. ‘horse-killer,’ the fragrant
oleander {%(= kara-vīra)%}. {%—Haya-māraṇa, as,%} m.
‘horse-killing,’ the sacred fig-tree, Ficus Religiosa.
{%—Haya-medha, as,%} m. the horse-sacrifice, (see
{%aśva-medha%}). {%—Hayamedha-yāj, ṭ,%} m. one who
[Page1165-c+ 77]
performs the horse-sacrifice. {%—Haya-rūpin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} Ved. having the shape of a horse. {%—Haya-līlā-%}
{%vatī,%} f., N. of a work (mentioned by Malli-nātha).
{%—Haya-vāhana, as,%} m. epithet of Revanta (son
of the Sun); of Kuvera. {%—Haya-vāhana-śaṅkara,%}
{%as,%} m. red mountain-ebony or a particular tree {%(=%}
{%rakta-kāñcana)%}. {%—Haya-śālā,%} f. a stable for horses.
{%—Haya-śāstra, am,%} n. any treatise on horses, the
art or science of training and managing horses.
{%—Haya-śiras, as,%} n. a horse's head; a mythical
monster (described as vomiting forth the fire of
Aurva's wrath, which was cast into the sea); ({%ās%}), f.
‘having a horse's head,’ N. of a daughter of Vṛṣa-
parvan; of a wife of Kratu. {%—Haya-śīrṣa, as,%} m.
‘having a horse's head,’ a form of Viṣṇu. {%—Haya-%}
{%śīrṣa-pañcarātra,%} N. of a work. {%—Haya-saṅgra-%}
{%haṇa, am,%} n. the restraining or curbing of horses,
checking horses. {%—Hayādhyakṣa (˚ya-adh˚), as,%}
m. a superintendent of horses, head-groom. {%—Hayā-%}
{%nanda (˚ya-ān˚), as,%} m. ‘horse's-joy,’ a kind of
bean, Phaseolus Mungo. {%—Hayāyur-veda (˚ya-%}
{%āy˚), as,%} m. the science of medicine applied to
horses, veterinary science. {%—Hayāri (˚ya-ari), is,%}
m. ‘horse-foe,’ the fragrant oleander, Nerium Odorum.
{%—Hayārūḍha (˚ya-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} mounted on a
horse; ({%as%}), m. a horseman, rider. {%—Hayāroha (˚ya-%}
{%ār˚), as, ā, am,%} mounted on horseback, a rider; ({%as%}),
m. horsemanship, riding. {%—Hayāśanā (˚ya-aś˚),%}
f. ‘horse-food,’ the gum olibanum tree. {%—Hayeṣṭa%}
{%(˚ya-iṣ˚), as,%} m. ‘loved by horses,’ barley. {%—Ha-%}
{%yottama (˚ya-ut˚), as,%} m. ‘best of horses,’ a well-
bred or excellent horse ({%= ājāneya%}).
<LEND>

<L>53924<pc>1165-c<k1>hayana<k2>hayana
{%Hayana, as,%}¦ m. a year [cf. the more usual form
{%hāyana%}]; ({%am%}), n. a covered carriage or palanquin,
(also read {%ḍayana,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>53925<pc>1165-c<k1>hara<k2>hara
{#hara#}¦ {%hara, haraka,%} &c. See p. 1175.
<LEND>

<L>53926<pc>1165-c<k1>haraRa<k2>haraRa
{%Haraṇa, haras,%}¦ &c. See p. 1175.
<LEND>

<L>53927<pc>1165-c<k1>haramuja<k2>haramuja
{#haramuja#}¦ {%haramuja,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>53928<pc>1165-c<k1>harayARa<k2>harayARa
{#harayARa#}¦ {%harayāṇa.%} See under rt. 1. {%hṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>53929<pc>1165-c<k1>harave<k2>harave
{#harave#}¦ {%harave,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>53930<pc>1165-c<k1>harahUrA<k2>harahUrA
{#harahUrA#}¦ {%harahūrā,%} f. (probably for {%hāra-%}
{%hūrā,%} q. v.), a grape.
<LEND>

<L>53931<pc>1165-c<k1>harAka<k2>harAka
{#harAka#}¦ {%harāka,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>53932<pc>1165-c<k1>hari<k2>hari<h>1
{#hari#} 1¦. {%hari, is, is, i%} (perhaps to be connected
with {%hiri%} and rt. 2. {%hṛ,%} q. v.; according to some an ab-
breviated form of {%harit,%} p. 1167; in Uṇādi-s. IV. 118.
said to be fr. rt. 1. {%hṛ,%} p. 1175), green, greenish
yellow, yellow; reddish brown, bay, tawny; ({%is%}),
m. green (the colour); a yellow or golden colour;
a reddish brown or tawny colour; N. of Viṣṇu;
of Kṛṣṇa (regarded as identical with Viṣṇu); of
Śiva; of Brahmā; of Indra; of Yama; a man,
people, (in Naigh. II. 3. {%harayaḥ%} is enumerated
among the {%manuṣya-nāmāni%}); N. of the Soma
(so called as being {%harita-varṇa,%} see Nirukta IV.
19); a stone for crushing the Soma (Ved., Sāy.
{%harayaḥ = grāvāṇaḥ,%} Ṛg-veda III. 44, 1); the
moon; the sun; a ray of light; fire; wind, air; a
horse; a bay horse, horse of Indra, (in Naigh. I.
15. {%harī,%} m. du., is given as ‘the horses of Indra;’
and in Ṛg-veda I. 16, 1; 101, 10, &c., the plurals
{%harayaḥ%} and {%haribhiḥ%} occur; cf. {%harīn,%} acc. pl.
‘the horses of Indra,’ in Śakuntalā, Act 1); a lion;
a parrot; the Koïl or Indian cuckoo; a peacock; a
goose; an ape; a frog; a snake; one of the nine
Varṣas or divisions into which the known continent
is divided, (see {%varṣa%}); N. of the poet Bhartṛ-
hari (by which he is usually known); N. of several
other authors; a species of the Aty-aṣṭi metre; [cf.
Zend <nsi>zairi,</nsi> ‘yellow;’ <nsi>zairina,</nsi> ‘yellowish’ ({%= ha-%}
{%riṇa%}): Gr. <lang n="greek">χλό-η, χλο-ερό-ς, χλω-ρό-ς, χλό-ο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χολή:</lang> Lat. <nsi>helus (holus, olus), hel-vu-s, hel-vo-lus,</nsi>
<nsi>gilvus:</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>grô-j-u, gruo-j-u, grô-ni:</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>growan, grœn, grene:</nsi> Slav. <nsi>zel-ige,</nsi>
‘vegetables;’ <nsi>zel-enu,</nsi> ‘green:’ Lith. <nsi>zel-iu,</nsi> ‘to
become green;’ <nsi>zol-e,</nsi> ‘grass;’ <nsi>zal-ie-s,</nsi> ‘green:’
Hib. <nsi>glas,</nsi> ‘green, pale.’] {%—Hari-kānta, as, ā, %}
[Page1166-a+ 81]
{%am,%} beloved by Indra, dear to Indra; beautiful as a
lion. {%—Hari-kṛṣṇa, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Hari-%}
{%kelīya, as,%} m. ‘sported in by Viṣṇu,’ the country
of Bengal; ({%as, ā, am%}), belonging to or dwelling
in Bengal. {%—Hari-keśa, as,%} m. ‘yellow-haired,’
epithet of Savitṛ (Ved.); N. of one of the seven
principal rays of the sun (supposed to supply heat to
the stars); epithet of Śiva, (according to some so
called as ‘lord of Hari and Brahmā; cf. {%hari,%} 3. {%ka%});
N. of a Yakṣa (who propitiated the god Śiva and
was made by him a leader of his troops and a
guardian of fields and fruits; see {%daṇḍa-pāṇi%}).
{%—Hari-krāntā,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= viṣṇu-%}
{%krāntā)%}. {%—Hari-kṣetra,%} N. of a place. {%—Hari-%}
{%gaṇa, as,%} m. a troop of horses; a proper N.
{%—Hari-gandha, am,%} n. a sort of sandal {%(= hari-%}
{%candana)%}. {%—Hari-gṛha, am,%} n. the abode of
Hari; N. of a city and district, (also called Sam-
bhalpūr, {%= śumbha-pura, eka-cakra.%}) {%—Hari-%}
{%candana, as, am,%} m. n. a sort of yellow sandal-
wood or sandal tree ({%= taila-parṇika, indra-can-%}
{%dana, mahā-gandha%}); one of the five trees of
paradise (the other four being called Pārijāta, Man-
dāra, Santāna, and Kalpa); ({%am%}), n. saffron; moon-
light; the filament of a lotus ({%= padma-keśara%});
the person of a lover or mistress. {%—Haricandanā-%}
{%spada (˚na-ās˚), am,%} n. the site of yellow sandal-
wood. {%—Hari-candra, as,%} m., N. of a physician
(author of a commentary on the Caraka-tantra).
{%—Hari-ja, am,%} n. (in astronomy) longitude (said
to {%= kṣiti-ja%}). {%—Hari-jīvana-miśra, as,%} m., N.
of the author of the Snāna-sūtra-paddhati. {%—Hari-%}
{%turaṅgama, as,%} m., N. of Indra, (see {%hary-aśva.%})
{%—Harituraṅgamāyudha (˚ma-āy˚), am,%} n.
Indra's thunderbolt. {%—Hari-trāta, as, ā, am,%} pro-
tected by Hari. {%—Hari-datta, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Hari-darbha,%} see {%harid-garbha%}. {%—Hari-dāsa,%}
{%as,%} m. a slave or worshipper of Viṣṇu; N. of
a king; of the author of a commentary on the
Nyāya-kusumāñjali; of the author of the Le-
khaka-muktāmaṇi. {%—Hari-dina, am,%} n. ‘Hari's
day,’ a particular day sacred to Viṣṇu. {%—Hari-%}
{%dīkṣita, as,%} m., N. of a preceptor. {%—Hari-%}
{%dṛśvan, ā, arī, a,%} see Vopa-deva IV. 13. {%—Hari-%}
{%deva, as,%} m. the asterism Śravaṇā; a proper N.
{%—Hari-drava, as,%} m. green fluid; (perhaps)
Soma; a powder made from the blossoms of the
Nāga-keśara tree. {%—Hari-dru, us,%} m. a kind of
Curcuma ({%= dāru-haridrā, pīta-dāru%}); a tree (in
general). {%—Hari-dvāra, am,%} n. ‘Viṣṇu's gate,’
N. of a celebrated town and Tīrtha or sacred bathing-
place (commonly called Hardvār or Hurdvār; this
is the place where the Ganges finally leaves the
mountainous districts for the level plains of Hin-
dūstān, whence it is sometimes called Gaṅgā-dvāra;
tens of thousands of pilgrims flock to this Tīrtha at
particular seasons and seek priority of ablution in
the sacred stream, the complete purgation from sin
being supposed to depend on seizing the auspicious
moment laid down by astrologers; it is called ‘Hari's
gate,’ as leading to Vaikuṇṭha or Viṣṇu's heaven).
{%—Hari-dhāyas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. yellow-rayed,
having golden luminaries, (in Ṛg-veda III. 44, 3,
Sāy. explains {%hari-dhāyasam%} by {%harito harita-%}
{%varṇā dhāyaso dhārakā raśmayo yasyāḥ.%}) {%—Ha-%}
{%ri-nātha, as,%} m., N. of the author of the Smṛti-
sāra; of the author of the Rāma-vilāsa-kāvya; of
the author of the Kaṇṭhābharaṇa-mārjana and the
Kāvyādarśa-mārjana commentaries. {%—Hari-nāman,%}
{%a,%} n. the name of Hari or Viṣṇu; ({%ā%}), m. the
kidney-bean, Phaseolus Mungo. {%—Hari-nāyaka,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of the author of a work on music.
{%—Hari-netra, am,%} n. the eye of Viṣṇu; a white
lotus; an eye of a greenish colour; ({%as%}), m. ‘having
greenish eyes,’ an owl. {%—Hari-pada, am,%} n. (ac-
cording to some) the vernal equinox. {%—Hari-parṇa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} green-leaved; ({%am%}), n. a radish. {%—Hari-%}
{%prabodha,%} N. of a work. {%—Hari-priya, as, ā, am,%}
liked or loved by Viṣṇu; ({%as%}), m. the Kadamba
tree; other plants, &c. ({%= pīta-bhṛṅgarāja; =%}
{%viṣṇu-kanda; = kara-vīra; = bandhūka%}); a
[Page1166-b+ 81]
conch-shell; a mad person; armour ({%= kañcuka%});
Śiva; ({%ā%}), f. Lakṣmī; the earth; sacred basil ({%=%}
{%tulasī%}); the twelfth day of a lunar fortnight; ({%am%}),
n. a kind of dark sandal-wood; the root Uśīra, q. v.
{%—Hari-bāluka, am,%} n. ‘yellow sand,’ a kind of
perfume and drug ({%= elavālu,%} q. v.). {%—Hari-%}
{%buṅga-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town. {%—Hari-bhakta,%}
{%as,%} m. a worshipper of Viṣṇu. {%—Hari-bhaṭṭa, as,%}
m., N. of the author of a work on music. {%—Hari-%}
{%bhadra, am,%} n. {%= hari-bāluka%}. {%—Hari-bhāvinī%} or
{%hari-bhāviṇī,%} f. a woman who meditates on Viṣṇu.
{%—Hari-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘frog-eater,’ a snake. {%—Hari-%}
{%mantha, as,%} m. the tree Premna Spinosa (the wood
of which by attrition produces flame); the chick-pea
({%= caṇaka%}); N. of a particular country or district.
{%—Hari-manthaka, as,%} m. the chick-pea. {%—Hari-%}
{%mantha-ja, as,%} m. ‘produced in the district Hari-
mantha,’ the chick-pea; a sort of dark kidney-bean.
{%—Hari-yūpīyā,%} f., Ved., N. of a city or of a river.
{%—Hari-yoga, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a yoke of
bay horses, yoked with horses. {%—Hari-yojana, as,%}
m., Ved. ‘harnesser of the Hari steeds,’ Indra; [cf.
{%hāriyojana.%}] {%—Hari-rāma, as,%} m., N. of the
author of the Dharmitāvacchedakatā-pratyāsatti-
vicāra, the Navīna-mata-vicāra, the Maṅgala-vāda,
and the Sāmagrī-vāda. {%—Hari-rāya, as,%} m., N. of
the author of the Jīcaraṇa-cihna-māhātmya. {%—Hari-%}
{%līlā,%} f., N. of Vopa-deva's index to the Bhāgavata-
Purāṇa. {%—Harilīlā-viveka, as,%} m., N. of a com-
mentary by Hemādri on the Hari-līlā. {%—Hari-%}
{%locana, as, ā, am,%} having dark-green eyes; tawny-
eyed; ({%as%}), m. a crab; an owl. {%—Hari-vaṃśa, as,%}
m. the family of Kṛṣṇa (as identified with Viṣṇu);
N. of a celebrated poem supplementary to the Mahā-
bhārata on the history and adventures of Kṛṣṇa
and his family, (it is usually regarded as part of the
greater epic, though really a comparatively modern
addition to it; the poem consists of no less than
16, 374 verses, comprised in three sections, called
Harivaṃśa-parvan, Viṣṇu-parvan, and Bhaviṣya-
parvan; in the first is contained a description of the
creation of the world and a history of the solar and
lunar races, the second gives a detailed biography
of Kṛṣṇa, and the third an account of the future
condition of the world with the corruptions about to
prevail during the Kali-yuga.) {%—Hari-vaṃśa-gosvā-%}
{%min, ī,%} m., N. of the author of the Rādhā-rasa-
sudhā-nidhi. {%—Hari-vat, ān, atī, at,%} possessing
Hari; ({%ān%}), m. ‘possessing bay horses,’ N. of Indra,
(in Ṛg-veda VIII. 40, 9. {%harivaḥ,%} voc. c., occurs.)
{%—Hari-varpas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. having a verdant
form, tinted with green, green-coloured (said of the
earth). {%—Hari-varman, ā,%} m., N. of a poet.
{%—Hari-varṣa, am,%} n. one of the nine divisions
of Jambu-dvīpa or the known continent, (the country
between the Niṣadha and Hema-kūṭa mountains,
see {%varṣa,%} p. 893); ({%as%}), m., N. of a king of
Niṣadha (son of Agnīdhra), {%—Hari-vallabha, as,%}
m. ‘beloved by Viṣṇu,’ N. of the author of the
Sudhodaya; ({%ā%}), f. epithet of Lakṣmī; sacred basil
({%= tulasī%}); another plant {%(= jayā)%}. {%—Hari-vā-%}
{%sara, am,%} n. Viṣṇu's day (the eleventh or twelfth
lunar day, or according to some, the first quarter of
the twelfth lunar day). {%—Hari-vāhana, as,%} m.
‘Viṣṇu-bearer,’ Garuḍa; ‘having bay horses,’ Indra
[cf. {%hary-aśva, hari-haya%}]. {%—Hari-vīja, as,%} m.
‘Viṣṇu's seed,’ yellow orpiment, (see {%haritāla.%})
{%—Hari-vṛṣa, am,%} n. a division of the continent,
(see {%hari-varṣa.%}) {%—Hari-śaṅkara, as,%} m., N. of
a scribe; of a place. {%—Hari-śayana, am,%} n. the
sleep of Viṣṇu. {%—Hari-śara, as,%} m. ‘having Viṣṇu
for an arrow,’ epithet of Śiva, (Viṣṇu having served
Śiva as the shaft which set the cities of Tripura on
fire.) {%—Hari-śarman, ā,%} m., N. of a poet. {%—Hari-%}
{%śipra, as,%} m., Ved. ‘ruddy-jawed,’ epithet of Indra.
{%—Hari-ścandra, as, ā, am%} (see {%candra%}), Ved.
having golden-coloured splendor; ({%as%}), m., N. of
the twenty-eighth king of the solar dynasty in the
Tretā age, (he was son of Tri-śaṅku, and was cele-
brated for his piety; according to the Mārkaṇḍeya-
Purāṇa, which gives a most interesting legend de-
[Page1166-c+ 81]
tailing the history of this prince, he gave up his
whole country, sold his wife and son, and finally
himself, to satisfy the demands of Viśvā-mitra, whom
he had provoked by interfering to protect the Sciences
who were becoming mastered by this intensely
austere sage; after enduring incredible sufferings,
Hari-ścandra won the pity of the gods and was
raised with his subjects to heaven; on the other
hand, in the Sabhā-parvan of the Mahā-bhārata,
verse 489 &c., his performance of the Rāja-sūya
sacrifice is stated to have been the cause of his
elevation, and in the Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa quite another
legend is told about him, see under {%śunaḥ-śepa,%}
p. 1014: in later legends Hari-ścandra is represented
as insidiously induced by Nārada to relate his actions
with unbecoming pride, whereupon he was degraded
from Svarga, one stage at each sentence, till stopping
in time and doing homage to the gods he was fixed
with his capital in mid-air; his aerial city is popu-
larly believed to be still visible in the skies at parti-
cular times; cf. {%śaubha%}); ({%am%}), n., N. of a Liṅga.
{%—Hariścandra-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
{%—Hariścandra-pura, am,%} n. the city of Hari-
ścandra ({%= śaubha,%} see above). {%—Hari-śmaśāru%} or
{%hari-śmaśru, us, us, u,%} Ved. ruddy-bearded, golden-
bearded, having a yellow beard. {%—Hari-śrama,%}
{%as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Hari-śravā,%} f., N. of a river.
{%—Hari-śrī, īs, īs, i,%} Ved. blessed with or abounding
in horses. {%—Hari-ṣāc, k, k, k,%} Ved. enjoying or par-
taking of Soma, (Sāy. {%= somasya sambhaktṛ,%} Ṛg-
veda X. 94, 12.) {%—Hari-ṣeṇa, as,%} m. ({%ṣeṇa%} for
{%sena%} fr. {%senā%}), N. of the tenth of the Jaina Cakra-
vartins. {%—Hari-ṣṭhā, ās, ās, am%} ({%ṣṭhā%} for {%sthā%}),
Ved. one who stands over horses, a guider of horses,
(Sāy. {%= haryoḥ sthātṛ,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 17, 2.) {%—Ha-%}
{%ri-sakha, as,%} m. ‘friend of Indra,’ a Gandharva.
{%—Hari-saṅkīrtana, am,%} n. the act of pronouncing
or repeating the name of Viṣṇu (supposed to possess
great efficacy). {%—Hari-suta, as,%} m. ‘son of Hari,’
N. of Arjuna; of the tenth Cakra-vartin, (also called
Hari-ṣeṇa.) {%—Hari-sūkta, am,%} n. a hymn addressed
to Hari. {%—Hari-sūnu, us,%} m. ‘son of Hari,’ N. of
Arjuna. {%—Hari-stotra, am,%} n. and {%hari-stuti, is,%}
f., N. of two Vedānta hymns (in praise of Viṣṇu).
{%—Hari-svāmin, ī,%} m., N. of a priest; of the author
of a commentary on the Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Ha-%}
{%ri-haya, as,%} m. ‘having bay or gold-coloured
horses,’ epithet of Indra; of the Sun; of Skanda;
of Gaṇeśa. {%—Hari-hara, as,%} m. a particular form
of deity consisting of Viṣṇu and Śiva conjoined;
N. of a king; of a poet; of several other persons.
{%—Hari-hara-kathā,%} f. the repeating of the names
of Hari and Hara (i. e. of Viṣṇu and Śiva). {%—Hari-%}
{%hara-kṣetra, am,%} n. ‘the sacred place of Viṣṇu and
Śiva conjoined,’ N. of a particular Tīrtha and place
of pilgrimage. {%—Hari-hara-purī,%} N. of a preceptor.
{%—Harihara-bhāṣya, am,%} n., N. of a commen-
tary. {%—Hari-harātmaka (˚ra-āt˚), as, ikā, am,%}
identified with Viṣṇu and Śiva in their united state;
({%as%}), m. Garuḍa; the bull of Śiva ({%= śiva-vṛṣa%});
Dakṣa (according to some); ({%am%}), n. {%= harihara-%}
{%kṣetra%}. {%—Hari-heti, is,%} f. the weapon of Viṣṇu,
i. e. the Cakra or discus. {%—Hariheti-hūti, is,%} m. {%=%}
{%cakra-vāka,%} a sort of duck. {%—Hary-akṣa, as,%} m.
‘green-eyed, brown-eyed,’ a lion; N. of Kuvera;
of Śiva; of a son of Pṛthu. {%—Hary-aṅga, as,%} m.,
N. of a king. {%—Hary-aśva, as,%} m. ‘having bay
horses called Hari,’ N. of Indra; of Śiva; of a son of
Dṛḍhāśva; of several other persons; ({%ās%}), m. pl.,
N. of 5000 sons of Dakṣa. {%—Hary-ātman, ā,%} m.
epithet of Uttama (one of the twenty-eight Vyāsas).
<LEND>

<L>53933<pc>1166-c<k1>harika<k2>harika
{%Harika, as,%}¦ m. a horse of a yellowish or reddish
brown colour ({%= hālaka%}); a thief, (in this sense
evidently fr. rt. 1. {%hṛ%}); a gambler with dice.
<LEND>

<L>53934<pc>1166-c<k1>hariRa<k2>hariRa
{%Hariṇa, as, ī, am%}¦ (the fem. may equally belong
to {%harita,%} next col.), greenish or yellowish or reddish
white, pale, whitish; ({%as%}), m. yellowish or reddish
white (the colour); white (the colour); a deer, ante-
lope, fawn, stag (one of five kinds, others being
called {%ṛṣya, ruru, pṛṣata, mṛga%}); a goose; a
minor division of the world; the sun; N. of Viṣṇu;
[Page1167-a+ 81]
of Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. green (the colour); yellow jasmine;
a female deer, doe; a golden image; one of the
four kinds of women, an excellent woman ({%= ci-%}
{%triṇī,%} corresponding to the kind of man termed
{%mṛga%}); turmeric ({%= haritā%}); madder ({%= mañ-%}
{%jiṣṭhā%}); a species of the Aty-aṣṭi metre {%(= ta-%}
{%ruṇī)%}. {%—Hariṇa-kalaṅka, as,%} m. ‘deer-spotted,’
epithet of the moon. {%—Hariṇa-dhāman, ā,%} m.
the moon. {%—Hariṇa-nayana, as, ī, am,%} deer-
eyed, fawn-eyed, having eyes like a deer. {%—Hariṇa-%}
{%nartaka, as,%} m. a minstrel of Indra's heaven {%(=%}
{%kin-nara)%}. {%—Hariṇa-pluta, am, ā,%} n. f. a kind of
metre (described by some as a stanza having eleven
syllables in every first and third Pāda, and twelve in
every second and fourth; by others two kinds of
metre are given). {%—Hariṇa-locana = hariṇa-na-%}
{%yana%}. {%—Hariṇa-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} deer-hearted,
faint-hearted, timid. {%—Hariṇākṣa (˚ṇa-ak˚), as,%}
{%ī, am,%} deer-eyed, fawn-eyed; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Śiva; ({%ī%}), f. a woman with beautiful eyes; a kind
of perfume {%(= haṭṭa-vilāsinī)%}. {%—Hariṇāṅka (˚ṇa-%}
{%aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘deer-marked,’ the moon; [cf. {%ha-%}
{%riṇa-kalaṅka.%}] {%—Hariṇāntara (˚ṇa-an˚), as,%} m.
a species of deer ({%= bhāryāṭika%}).
<LEND>

<L>53935<pc>1167-a<k1>hariRaka<k2>hariRaka
{%Hariṇaka, as,%}¦ m. a deer.
<LEND>

<L>53936<pc>1167-a<k1>hariRAya<k2>hariRAya
{%Hariṇāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%hariṇāyate,%} &c., to become
a deer.
<LEND>

<L>53937<pc>1167-a<k1>hariRI<k2>hariRI
{%Hariṇī,%}¦ see under {%hariṇa%}. {%—Hariṇī-vṛtta, am,%}
n. the Hariṇī metre.
<LEND>

<L>53938<pc>1167-a<k1>harit<k2>harit
{%Harit, t, t, t%}¦ (in Uṇādi-s. I. 99. said to be fr. rt.
1. {%hṛ,%} perhaps for original {%harat;%} cf. 1. {%hari,%}
{%hiri, hiraṇa%}), green, of a green colour; greenish
yellow, yellowish, golden-coloured; ({%t%}), m. green
(the colour); a swift horse; a horse of the Sun, (in
Ṛg-veda I. 50, 8. {%sapta-haritaḥ%} is explained by
Sāy. as ‘the seven horses of the Sun,’ symbolical of
{%sapta raśmayaḥ,%} ‘the seven rays;’ see also Ṛg-
veda I. 115, 4, where {%haritaḥ%} is explained by ‘the
Sun's horses,’ as well as by {%rasa-haraṇa-sīlān%}
{%raśmīn,%} ‘the rays which take up the moisture;’ the
seven horses of the Sun are sometimes called mares,
cf. {%śundhyu;%} they probably really symbolize the
seven days of the week); the kidney-bean, Phase-
olus Mungo; a lion; the sun; Viṣṇu; ({%t%}), m. n.
grass; ({%t%}), f. a quarter, region; a point of the com-
pass; turmeric; [cf. according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">χάρι-τες,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χόρτος;</lang> perhaps Lat. <nsi>viridi-s</nsi> (for <nsi>gviridis</nsi>);
Goth. <nsi>gulth, gras;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>gold, grœs.</nsi>] {%—Ha-%}
{%rit-parṇa, as, ā, am,%} green-leaved, having green
leaves; ({%am%}), n. a radish; [cf. {%hari-parṇa.%}] {%—Ha-%}
{%rid-aśva, as,%} m. ‘whose horses are called Harit,’
the sun, (see {%harit%} above.) {%—Harid-garbha, as,%}
m. a green or yellowish Kuśa grass with broad leaves
({%= pṛthu-cchada;%} also read {%hari-darbha%}). {%—Ha-%}
{%rid-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} green-coloured, of a yellowish
golden colour. {%—Harin-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘green-gem,’
an emerald. {%—Harin-mudga, as,%} m. a sort of
kidney-bean ({%= śārada%}).
<LEND>

<L>53939<pc>1167-a<k1>harita<k2>harita
{%Harita, as, ā%}¦ or {%hariṇī, am%} (connected with
{%hariṇa%} above; cf. its fem. {%hariṇī;%} cf. also 2. {%bha-%}
{%rita%} with its fem. {%bhariṇī%}), green, of a green
colour; reddish brown or tawny; grassy, verdant;
dark blue; ({%as%}), m. green (the colour); a lion; a
kind of grass ({%= manthānaka%}); N. of a son of
Yuvanāśva; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a Gotra; ({%ā%}), f.
Dūrvā grass; turmeric; a brown-coloured grape;
other plants, {%= jayantī; = pācī; = nīla-dūrvā;%}
{%(am),%} n. a kind of perfume {%(= sthauṇeyaka).%}
{%—Harita-cchada, as, ā, am,%} green-leaved, having
green leaves. {%—Harita-tṛṇa, am,%} n. green grass.
{%—Harita-pattrikā,%} f. ‘green-leaved,’ a kind of
creeping plant {%(= pācī)%}. {%—Harita-varṇa, as, ā, am,%}
green-coloured. {%—Harita-śāka, as,%} m. the Śigru
plant. {%—Haritāśman (˚ta-aś˚), a,%} n. ‘green-coloured
stone,’ an emerald; a turquoise; sulphate of copper
or blue vitriol. {%—Haritāśva (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m., N.
of a son of Su-dyumna. {%—Haritī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
made green, coloured green, made verdant.
<LEND>

<L>53940<pc>1167-a<k1>haritaka<k2>haritaka
{%Haritaka, as,%}¦ m. a green vegetable, pot-herb.
<LEND>

<L>53941<pc>1167-a<k1>haritAya<k2>haritAya
{%Haritāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%haritāyate,%} &c., to become
green or verdant.
<LEND>
[Page1167-b+ 75]

<L>53942<pc>1167-b<k1>haritAyat<k2>haritAyat
{%Haritāyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ becoming green.
<LEND>

<L>53943<pc>1167-b<k1>haritAla<k2>haritAla
{%Haritāla, as,%}¦ m. a kind of pigeon of a yellowish
green colour; ({%ī%}), f. Dūrvā grass; a streak or line
in the sky ({%= ākāśa-rekhā%}); a sort of creeper ({%=%}
{%khaḍga-pattra%}); a kind of tree (according to Sāy.);
the fourth day of the light half of the month Bhādra;
({%am%}), n. yellow orpiment or sulphuret of arsenic
(described as the seed or seminal energy of Viṣṇu,
{%= harer vīryam%}). {%—Haritāla-janaka, as,%} m. orpi-
ment-producer (a word employed in modern Sanskrit
to express the metal arsenic).
<LEND>

<L>53944<pc>1167-b<k1>haritAlaka<k2>haritAlaka
{%Haritālaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of pigeon of a yellowish
green colour; ({%am%}), n. yellow orpiment; painting
the person, theatrical decoration.
<LEND>

<L>53945<pc>1167-b<k1>haritAlikA<k2>haritAlikA
{%Haritālikā,%}¦ f. Dūrvā grass; the fourth day of the
light half of the month Bhādra. {%—Haritālikā-vrata,%}
{%am,%} n. a particular religious observance on the above
day.
<LEND>

<L>53946<pc>1167-b<k1>haridrA<k2>haridrA
{%Haridrā,%}¦ f. turmeric; the root of turmeric pow-
dered, (forty-six synonyms of this plant are given.)
{%—Haridrākta (˚rā-ak˚), as, ā, am,%} smeared or
stained with turmeric. {%—Haridrā-gaṇapati, is,%} or
{%haridrā-gaṇeśa, as,%} m. a particular form of the god
Gaṇesa (in whose honour a Mantra is repeated, ac-
companied with offerings mixed with turmeric).
{%—Haridrāṅga (˚rā-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘yellow-bodied,’
a kind of yellow bird {%(= haritāla)%}. {%—Haridrābha%}
{%(˚rā-ābha), as, ā, am,%} resembling turmeric, of a
yellow colour; ({%as%}), m. the plant Pīta-śāla, q. v.;
zedoary {%(= karpūraka)%}. {%—Haridrā-rāga%} or {%hari-%}
{%drā-rāgaka, as, ā, am,%} turmeric-coloured; unsteady
in affection or attachment, fickle, capricious (like the
colour of turmeric which does not last).
<LEND>

<L>53947<pc>1167-b<k1>hariman<k2>hariman<h>1
1. {%hariman, ā,%}¦ m. (for 2. see under rt. 1. {%hṛ%}),
yellowness; yellowness (of the body), a kind of
disease, (Ṛg-veda I. 50, 11, &c.); paleness.
<LEND>

<L>53948<pc>1167-b<k1>hariya<k2>hariya
{%Hariya, as,%}¦ m. a horse of a yellowish or reddish
colour.
<LEND>

<L>53949<pc>1167-b<k1>harItakI<k2>harItakI
{%Harītakī,%}¦ f. the yellow Myrobalan tree, Termi-
nalia Chebula, (twenty-eight synonyms and seven
varieties of this are enumerated; a form {%harītaka%}
is also found.)
<LEND>

<L>53950<pc>1167-b<k1>hari<k2>hari<h>2
{#hari#} 2¦. {%hari,%} ind. alas!
<LEND>

<L>53951<pc>1167-b<k1>harimanta<k2>harimanta
{#harimanta#}¦ {%harimanta, as,%} m., N. of an
Āṅgirasa (author of the hymn Ṛg-veda IX. 72).
<LEND>

<L>53952<pc>1167-b<k1>harile<k2>harile
{#harile#}¦ {%harile,%} ind. (according to some) a
vocative particle used in addressing a female slave
(in theatrical language).
<LEND>

<L>53953<pc>1167-b<k1>hariza<k2>hariza
{#hariza#}¦ {%hariṣa, as,%} m. (a modern form of
{%harṣa%}), joy, happiness (according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>53954<pc>1167-b<k1>harIzA<k2>harIzA
{#harIzA#}¦ {%harīṣā,%} f. a particular kind of
seasoning or condiment.
<LEND>

<L>53955<pc>1167-b<k1>hareRu<k2>hareRu
{#hareRu#}¦ {%hareṇu, us,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 1. fr. rt. 1. {%hṛ%}), pease, pulse; a creeper marking
the boundary of a village; N. of Laṅkā; ({%us%}), f. a
sort of drug or perfume ({%= reṇukā,%} q. v.); a re-
spectable woman; a copper-coloured deer.
<LEND>

<L>53956<pc>1167-b<k1>hareRuka<k2>hareRuka
{%Hareṇuka, as,%}¦ m. pease, pulse ({%= kalāya%}).
<LEND>

<L>53957<pc>1167-b<k1>hartavya<k2>hartavya
{#hartavya#}¦ {%hartavya, hartṛ,%} &c. See p. 1175.
<LEND>

<L>53958<pc>1167-b<k1>harman<k2>harman
{#harman#}¦ {%harman, ā,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%hṛ%}),
gaping, yawning.
<LEND>

<L>53959<pc>1167-b<k1>harmita<k2>harmita
{%Harmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ yawned; thrown, cast, sent;
burned [cf. {%gharma%}].
<LEND>

<L>53960<pc>1167-b<k1>harmuwa<k2>harmuwa
{#harmuwa#}¦ {%harmuṭa, as,%} m. (according to some)
the sun; a tortoise.
<LEND>

<L>53961<pc>1167-b<k1>harmya<k2>harmya
{#harmya#}¦ {%harmya, am,%} n. (said to be fr. rt. 1. {%hṛ%}
in the sense of ‘to captivate or charm the mind;’
but more probably to be connected with {%gharma%}),
a hole in the ground for cooking, a kind of pit or
oven for holding fire, fire-place, hearth; a domestic
hearth, home; house, building, palace, mansion,
any large building or residence of a man of wealth,
[cf. Zend <nsi>zairimya;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>formus</nsi>]; a fiery pit,
place of torment, region of darkness, abode of evil
spirits, abode of the departed, the nether world; ({%as, %}
[Page1167-c+ 78]
{%ā, am%}), living in houses. {%—Harmya-pṛṣṭha, am,%}
n. the roof or upper room of a palace. {%—Harmya-%}
{%bhāj, k, k, k,%} living in a palace. {%—Harmya-stha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. standing near a hearth or fire-place;
being in a house. {%—Harmya-sthala, am,%} n. the
room or chamber of a mansion or palace. {%—Har-%}
{%myāṅgana (˚ya-aṅ˚), am,%} n. the court of a palace.
<LEND>

<L>53962<pc>1167-c<k1>hary<k2>hary
{#hary#}¦ {%hary,%} cl. 1. P. {%haryati%} (sometimes
also A. {%-te%}), {%jaharya, haryiṣyati, ahar-%}
{%yīt, haryitum,%} Ved. to desire, yearn after, love,
like, be pleased with, (in Naigh. II. 6. enumerated
among the {%kānti-karmāṇaḥ%}); to worship, pray to;
to take [cf. rt. 1. {%hṛ%}]; to threaten; to be weary; to
go, (in Naigh. II. 14. enumerated among the {%gati-%}
{%karmāṇaḥ%}): Caus. {%haryayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%aja-%}
{%haryat:%} Desid. {%jiharyiṣati:%} Intens. {%jāharyate,%}
{%jāharyīti, jāharti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χαίρω, χαρ-ά, χάρ-μα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χάρι-ς, χαρίζομαι, χαρί-εις, γέλως, γελάω:</lang> Lat.
<nsi>gra-tu-s, grat-ia</nsi> (Osc. <nsi>her-est, Herentati-s,</nsi> ‘Ve-
nus:’ Umbr. <nsi>heriest</nsi>): Goth. <nsi>faihu-gair-n-s,</nsi> ‘ava-
ricious;’ <nsi>gair-uni,</nsi> ‘affection;’ <nsi>gailjan, gôljan:</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>ger, giri,</nsi> ‘desirous;’ <nsi>geri, giri,</nsi> ‘greedi-
ness;’ <nsi>gerôn,</nsi> ‘to desire:’ Angl. Sax. <nsi>gal, gagol:</nsi>
Lith. <nsi>gor-u-ti, gor (?) :</nsi> Slav. <nsi>zel-e-ti (?) .</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>53963<pc>1167-c<k1>haryat<k2>haryat
{%Haryat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. desiring, liking, lov-
ing, (Sāy. {%= kāmayamāna;%} in Ṛg-veda I. 57, 2.
according to Sāy. {%haryataḥ = prepsataḥ%} or {%śobha-%}
{%naḥ,%} see the next.)
<LEND>

<L>53964<pc>1167-c<k1>haryata<k2>haryata
{%Haryata, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. amiable, beloved, (Sāy.
{%= spṛhaṇīya,%} Ṛg-veda III. 5, 3); agreeable,
pleasant, delicious (said of Soma); ({%as%}), m. a horse;
a steed fit for the Aśva-medha sacrifice; N. of the
author of a hymn in the Ṛg-veda, (see {%prāgātha.%})
<LEND>

<L>53965<pc>1167-c<k1>haryamARa<k2>haryamARa
{%Haryamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. desiring, wishing,
loving, (Sāy. {%= kāmayamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>53966<pc>1167-c<k1>haryaSva<k2>haryaSva
{#haryaSva#}¦ {%hary-aśva.%} See p. 1166, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>53967<pc>1167-c<k1>harza<k2>harza
{#harza#}¦ {%harṣa, harṣa-kara,%} &c. See p. 1176.
<LEND>

<L>53968<pc>1167-c<k1>harzaRa<k2>harzaRa
{%Harṣaṇa, harṣita,%}¦ &c. See p. 1176.
<LEND>

<L>53969<pc>1167-c<k1>harzIkA<k2>harzIkA
{#harzIkA#}¦ {%harṣīkā,%} f. a kind of metre.
<LEND>

<L>53970<pc>1167-c<k1>hal<k2>hal<h>1
{#hal#} 1¦. {%hal,%} cl. 1. P. {%halati, jahāla, ahā-%}
{%līt,%} &c., to plough, make furrows.
<LEND>

<L>53971<pc>1167-c<k1>hala<k2>hala
{%Hala, am,%}¦ n. a plough; ugliness, deformity, {%=%}
{%vairūpya; (ā),%} f. the earth; water; spirituous
liquor, wine. {%—Hala-dhara, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} plough-
holding, having a plough; ({%as%}), m. a ploughman;
epithet of Bala-rāma (as bearing a peculiar weapon
shaped like a ploughshare; cf. {%sīra-pāṇi%}). {%—Hala-%}
{%bhūti, is,%} f. agriculture, husbandry. {%—Hala-bhṛt,%}
{%t, t, t,%} plough-holding, possessing a plough; ({%t%}), m.
a ploughman; Bala-rāma; [cf. {%sīra-bhṛt.%}] {%—Hala-%}
{%bhṛti, is,%} f. ploughing, agriculture, husbandry;
({%is%}), m., N. of a Muni {%(= upa-varṣa, kṛta-koṭi,%}
{%a-yācita)%}. {%—Hala-mukhī,%} f. a kind of metre.
{%—Hala-rākṣa, am,%} n. a kind of shrub {%(=%}
{%āhulya)%}. {%—Hala-hati, is,%} f. ‘plough-striking,’
ploughing, furrowing. {%—Halāyudha (˚la-āy˚), as,%}
m. ‘plough-weaponed,’ Bala-rāma, (see above); N.
of a poet (son of Dhanañ-jaya); of the author of
the Brāhmaṇa-sarvasva; of the author of the Purāṇa-
sarvasva; of the author of the Abhidhāna-ratnamālā
lexicon.
<LEND>

<L>53972<pc>1167-c<k1>halaya<k2>halaya
{%Halaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%halayati,%} &c., to plough ({%=%}
{%haliṃ gṛhṇāti,%} Vopa-deva XXI. 17).
<LEND>

<L>53973<pc>1167-c<k1>halAha<k2>halAha
{%Halāha, as,%}¦ m. a horse of a mixed or variegated
colour, (also read {%hālāha.%})
<LEND>

<L>53974<pc>1167-c<k1>hali<k2>hali
{%Hali, is,%}¦ m. a large plough, ploughshare ({%=%}
{%jityā,%} Vopa-deva XXVI. 20; {%= vṛhad-dhala,%} q. v.);
a furrow (according to some); agriculture.
<LEND>

<L>53975<pc>1167-c<k1>halin<k2>halin
{%Halin, ī,%}¦ m. a ploughman, agriculturist, cultivator;
N. of Bala-rāma; ({%inī%}), f. a number of ploughs;
a kind of plant {%(= lāṅgalikī)%}. {%—Hali-priya, as,%}
m. ‘dear to agriculturists,’ the Kadamba tree; ({%ā%}),
f. spirituous liquor ({%= madirā%}).
<LEND>

<L>53976<pc>1167-c<k1>halI<k2>halI
{%Halī,%}¦ f. the plant Kali-kārī, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>53977<pc>1167-c<k1>halIzA<k2>halIzA
{%Halīṣā,%}¦ f. (probably fr. {%hala + īṣā%}), {%= lāṅga-%}
{%līṣā,%} the handle of a plough.
<LEND>

<L>53978<pc>1167-c<k1>halya<k2>halya
{%Halya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be ploughed or tilled,
arable; belonging to or proceeding from ugliness or
[Page1168-a+ 74]
deformity, ugly; ({%ā%}), f. a multitude of ploughs;
({%am%}), n. a ploughed field, arable land; ugliness; de-
formity.
<LEND>

<L>53979<pc>1168-a<k1>hal<k2>hal<h>2
{#hal#} 2¦. {%hal,%} m. n. (in Pāṇini's system) a
technical expression for all the consonants; any con-
sonant. {%—Hal-anta, as, ā, am,%} ending in a con-
sonant.
<LEND>

<L>53980<pc>1168-a<k1>haladdI<k2>haladdI
{#haladdI#}¦ {%haladdī,%} f. turmeric ({%= haridrā%}).
<LEND>

<L>53981<pc>1168-a<k1>halahalA<k2>halahalA
{#halahalA#}¦ {%hala-halā%} (an imitative sound),
halloo, hallooing. {%—Halahalā-śabda, as,%} m. shout-
ing Hala-halā, hallooing, shout, outcry, tumult.
<LEND>

<L>53982<pc>1168-a<k1>halA<k2>halA
{#halA#}¦ {%halā,%} f. a female friend, (see also
{%halā%} under {%hala%}); ({%halā%}), ind. a vocative particle
used in addressing a female friend who is an equal
(in theatrical language).
<LEND>

<L>53983<pc>1168-a<k1>halAhala<k2>halAhala
{#halAhala#}¦ {%halāhala, as, am,%} m. n. ({%= hāla-%}
{%hala,%} q. v., sometimes also written {%halahala,%} and
said to be fr. rt. 1. {%hal%}), a sort of deadly poison [cf.
{%kālakūṭa%} at p. 226, col. 2]; ({%as%}), m. a kind of
snake ({%= brahma-sarpa%}); a Jaina or Bauddha sage;
a sort of lizard or newt.
<LEND>

<L>53984<pc>1168-a<k1>halIna<k2>halIna
{#halIna#}¦ {%halīna, as,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. 1.
{%hal%}), the Teak tree ({%= śāka%}).
<LEND>

<L>53985<pc>1168-a<k1>halImaka<k2>halImaka<h>1
{#halImaka#} 1¦. {%halīmaka, am,%} n. (probably con-
nected with 1. {%hariman%} at p. 1167, col. 2), a sort
of jaundice, paleness or yellowness of skin.
<LEND>

<L>53986<pc>1168-a<k1>haluARa<k2>haluARa
{#haluARa#}¦ {%haluāṇa%} or {%halūāṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>53987<pc>1168-a<k1>hallaka<k2>hallaka
{#hallaka#}¦ {%hallaka, am,%} n. the red lotus.
<LEND>

<L>53988<pc>1168-a<k1>hallana<k2>hallana
{#hallana#}¦ {%hallana, am,%} n. rolling or tossing
about, rolling about in sleep.
<LEND>

<L>53989<pc>1168-a<k1>hallISa<k2>hallISa
{#hallISa#}¦ {%hallīśa, am,%} n. one of the eighteen
Upa-rūpakas or minor dramatic entertainments (de-
scribed as a piece in one act, consisting chiefly of
singing and dancing by one male and seven, eight,
or ten female performers), a ballet; a circular dance
(performed by women).
<LEND>

<L>53990<pc>1168-a<k1>hallISaka<k2>hallISaka
{%Hallīśaka, as,%}¦ m. dancing in a ring (as performed
by women).
<LEND>

<L>53991<pc>1168-a<k1>hallIza<k2>hallIza
{%Hallīṣa, hallīṣaka, = hallīśa%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>53992<pc>1168-a<k1>hallIsa<k2>hallIsa
{%Hallīsa, hallīsaka, = hallīśa%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>53993<pc>1168-a<k1>hava<k2>hava<h>1
{#hava#} 1¦. {%hava, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hu%}), an oblation,
burnt-offering, sacrifice.
<LEND>

<L>53994<pc>1168-a<k1>havaNga<k2>havaNga
{%Havaṅga, as,%}¦ m. (probably {%havaṃ + ga%}), eating
rice and curds from a metal cup.
<LEND>

<L>53995<pc>1168-a<k1>havana<k2>havana<h>1
1. {%havana, am,%}¦ n. the act of offering an oblation
with fire; an oblation to the gods, burnt-offering,
sacrifice; ({%ī%}), f. a hole made in the ground for the
sacrificial fire which is to receive a burnt-oblation.
 — 1. {%havana-syada, as, ā, am,%} Ved. hastening to
a sacrifice. {%—Havanāyus (˚na-āy˚), us,%} m. ‘having
the burnt-offering for its life,’ fire.
<LEND>

<L>53996<pc>1168-a<k1>havanIya<k2>havanIya
{%Havanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be offered with fire, fit
for an oblation or sacrifice, sacrificial; ({%am%}), n. any-
thing fit for an oblation; clarified butter, ghee.
<LEND>

<L>53997<pc>1168-a<k1>havitrI<k2>havitrI
{%Havitrī,%}¦ f. a hole made in the ground for holding
the sacred fire for an oblation.
<LEND>

<L>53998<pc>1168-a<k1>havizya<k2>havizya
{%Haviṣya, am,%}¦ n. anything fit for an oblation;
clarified butter; wild rice (or any similar wild grain);
rice mixed with ghee; a hymn in praise of oblations
(Ved). {%—Haviṣya-bhuj, k, k, k,%} eating clarified
butter; ({%k%}), m. fire. {%—Haviṣyānna (˚ya-an˚), am,%}
n. food fit to be eaten during certain holy days
(or during the continuance of fasts and other re-
ligious observances); any particularly pure food (as
wheat, cow's milk, &c.). {%—Haviṣyāśin (˚ya-āś˚),%}
{%ī, inī, i,%} devouring clarified butter, (Manu XI. 218);
({%ī%}), m. fire.
<LEND>

<L>53999<pc>1168-a<k1>havizyantIya<k2>havizyantIya
{%Haviṣyantīya.%}¦ See under {%havis.%}
<LEND>

<L>54000<pc>1168-a<k1>havis<k2>havis
{%Havis, is,%}¦ n. anything offered as an oblation with
fire, clarified butter, ghee; an oblation or burnt-
offering (in general); water, (in Naigh. I. 12. enu-
merated among the {%udaka-nāmāni%}); epithet of
Śiva. {%—Haviḥ-śeṣa, as,%} m. the residue of an obla-
tion. {%—Havir-aśana, am,%} n. the act of devouring
[Page1168-b+ 79]
clarified butter; ({%as%}), m. ‘consuming oblations,’ fire.
{%—Havir-gandhā,%} f. ‘smelling like clarified butter,’
the Śamī tree. {%—Havir-geha, am,%} n. any house or
chamber in which an oblation is offered, a sacrificial
hall. {%—Havir-dā, ās, ās, am,%} Ved. a giver of obla-
tions, (said of Rudra, Ṛg-veda IV. 3, 7.) {%—Havir-%}
{%dhāna, am,%} n., Ved. ‘ghee-containing,’ an oblation;
({%e%}), n. du. the two receptacles or vehicles on which
the Soma and other offerings are put; ({%as%}), m., N.
of the author of the hymns Ṛg-veda X. 11 — 13
(having the patronymic Āṅgi). {%—Havir-bhuj, k, k,%}
{%k,%} eating clarified butter; ({%k%}), m. fire; N. of the
Pitṛs of the Kṣatriyas. {%—Havir-bhū, ūs,%} f., N. of
the wife of Pulastya. {%—Havir-mathi, is, is, i,%} Ved.
destroying or obstructing oblations, impeding sacrificial
rites. {%—Havir-mantha, as,%} m. a kind of plant {%(= ga-%}
{%ṇikārī)%}. {%—Havir-yajña, as,%} m. a particular sacrifice,
N. of the first book of the Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa (ac-
cording to the Mādhyandina-śākhā). {%—Havir-yajña-%}
{%saṃsthā,%} f. a kind of sacrifice, (seven Havir-yajña-
saṃsthās are enumerated, viz. Agny-ādheya, Agni-
hotra, Darśa-pūrṇamāsau, Cāturmāsyāni, Paśu-ban-
dha, Sautrāmaṇī, and Pāka-yajña.) {%—Havir-yājin,%}
{%ī,%} m. ‘ghee-offerer,’ a priest. {%—Haviṣ-kṛt, t, t, t,%}
Ved. performing a sacrifice. {%—Haviṣ-paṅkti, is,%}
m., Ved., scil. {%yajña,%} a sacrifice consisting of five
oblations. {%—Haviṣ-pati, is,%} m., Ved. the lord of a
sacrifice. {%—Haviṣ-mat, ān, atī, at,%} possessed of
oblations; ({%antas%}), m. pl., N. of a class of Pitṛs (re-
garded as progenitors of Kṣatriyas and as descended
from Aṅgiras; Manu III. 197, 198). {%—Haviṣy-%}
{%antīya, am,%} n., N. of nineteen Vedic texts begin-
ning {%haviṣyantam,%} (Manu XI. 251.)
<LEND>

<L>54001<pc>1168-b<k1>havya<k2>havya<h>1
1. {%havya, as, ā, am,%}¦ fit to be offered in oblations,
(Sāy. {%= hotavya%}); ({%as%}), m., N. of a son of Atri;
({%am%}), n. an oblation or offering to the gods (as dis-
tinguished fr. {%kavya,%} q. v.); clarified butter, ghee.
{%—Havya-kavya, am,%} n. oblations both to the gods
and to the spirits of deceased ancestors, (also {%āni,%} n.
pl.) {%—Havya-juṣṭi, is,%} f., Ved. the favour of an
oblation, an acceptable oblation, (Sāy. {%= haviḥ-sevā.%})
{%—Havya-dāti, is,%} f., Ved. ‘oblation-giving,’ a sacri-
ficial offering; ({%is, is, i%}), giving sacrificial offerings.
{%—Havya-pāka, as,%} m. an oblation (of rice, barley,
&c.) cooked with butter and milk for presentation to
the gods; the vessel in which such an oblation is
prepared. {%—Havya-vāh, ṭ,%} or {%havya-vāha, as,%} m.
‘oblation-bearer,’ Agni or fire. {%—Havya-vāhana,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} bearing oblations, conveying oblations;
({%as%}), m. fire; epithet of the ninth Kalpa; N. of a
son of Śuci. {%—Havya-vāhinī,%} f. ‘oblation-bearer,’
N. of a goddess. {%—Havya-sūd, t, t, t,%} Ved. flowing
with oblations, affording oblations (said of cows as
affording milk that yields butter for sacrificial rites).
{%—Havyāśa (˚ya-āśa)%} or {%havyāśana (˚ya-aś˚), as,%}
m. ‘oblation-eater,’ fire.
<LEND>

<L>54002<pc>1168-b<k1>hava<k2>hava<h>2
{#hava#} 2¦. {%hava, as, am,%} m. n. (fr. rt. {%hve%}), call-
ing, call; invocation, prayer; order, command;
challenging, defying.
<LEND>

<L>54003<pc>1168-b<k1>havana<k2>havana<h>2
2. {%havana, am,%}¦ n. the act of calling, an invoca-
tion; challenging to battle. {%—Havana-śrut, t, t, t,%}
Ved. listening to an invocation. {%—2. havana-syada,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. hastening to battle.
<LEND>

<L>54004<pc>1168-b<k1>havas<k2>havas
{%Havas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. a song of praise, hymn,
prayer.
<LEND>

<L>54005<pc>1168-b<k1>havIman<k2>havIman
{%Havīman, ā,%}¦ m., Ved. invocation; challenging;
battle, (Sāy. {%= saṅgrāma,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 83, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>54006<pc>1168-b<k1>havya<k2>havya<h>2
2. {%havya, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. to be invoked, (Sāy.
{%= āhvātavya.%})
<LEND>

<L>54007<pc>1168-b<k1>havA<k2>havA
{#havA#}¦ {%havā%} or {%havāva,%} ind. (a term imply-
ing) undoubtedly, certainly.
<LEND>

<L>54008<pc>1168-b<k1>has<k2>has<h>1
{#has#} 1¦. {%has,%} cl. 1. P. {%hasati, jahāsa, hasi-%}
{%ṣyati, ahasīt, hasitum,%} to laugh, smile;
to laugh at, ridicule (with acc.); to resemble, (see
{%hasat%}): Pass. {%hasyate,%} Aor. {%ahāsi:%} Caus. {%hāsayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%ajīhasat,%} to cause to laugh, make laugh,
provoke laughter: Desid. {%jihasiṣati:%} Intens. {%jā-%}
{%hasyate, jāhasti,%} to laugh immoderately; [cf. per-
haps Gr. <lang n="greek">τω-θεία, τω-θάζω;</lang> probably Lat. <nsi>histrio.</nsi>]
<LEND>
[Page1168-c+ 80]

<L>54009<pc>1168-c<k1>has<k2>has<h>2
2. {%has,%}¦ Ved. laughter, joy; brightness, brilliance.
{%—Has-kartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%} Ved. causing joy or
prosperity; making bright, (Sāy. {%= vṛddheḥ kartṛ%}
or {%prabhāsaka,%} Ṛg-veda IV. 7, 3.) {%—Has-kāra,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. causing brightness or radiance (said
of lightning; Sāy. {%= dīpti-kara,%} Ṛg-veda I. 23,
12). {%—Has-kṛti, is,%} f., Ved. a song of praise; ({%is,%}
{%is, i%}), causing joy, (Sāy. {%= hāsa-kārin%} or {%harṣasya%}
{%sūcaka,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 89, 6.)
<LEND>

<L>54010<pc>1168-c<k1>hasa<k2>hasa
{%Hasa, as,%}¦ m. laughter, laughing, a laugh; de-
rision. {%—Hasā-mudau,%} m. du., Ved. laughing and
rejoicing.
<LEND>

<L>54011<pc>1168-c<k1>hasat<k2>hasat
{%Hasat, an, antī, at,%}¦ laughing, smiling; resem-
bling (i. e. smiling like, with acc., Kirāt. VIII. 44);
({%antī%}), f. a portable fire-pan, small furnace, chafing-
dish; Arabian jasmine; a kind of Śākinī, q. v.
<LEND>

<L>54012<pc>1168-c<k1>hasana<k2>hasana
{%Hasana, am,%}¦ n. the act of laughing, laughter, a
laugh; ({%ā%}), f. laughter; a joke, subject of laughter
or ridicule, (Ṛg-veda IX. 112, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>54013<pc>1168-c<k1>hasanI<k2>hasanI
{%Hasanī,%}¦ f. a portable fire-place or chafing-dish.
{%—Hasanī-maṇi, is,%} m. ‘furnace-jewel,’ fire.
<LEND>

<L>54014<pc>1168-c<k1>hasanIya<k2>hasanIya
{%Hasanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ laughable; to be ridiculed,
ridiculous.
<LEND>

<L>54015<pc>1168-c<k1>hasantikA<k2>hasantikA
{%Hasantikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%hasantī%}), a portable fire-place
or small furnace.
<LEND>

<L>54016<pc>1168-c<k1>hasikA<k2>hasikA
{%Hasikā,%}¦ f. laughter, derision, jesting.
<LEND>

<L>54017<pc>1168-c<k1>hasita<k2>hasita
{%Hasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ laughed, laughing, smiling;
expanded, blossomed, blown (as a flower); ({%am%}), n.
laughter, jesting; smiling; the bow of Kāma (god
of love).
<LEND>

<L>54018<pc>1168-c<k1>hasitf<k2>hasitf
{%Hasitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who laughs, a laugher,
smiler.
<LEND>

<L>54019<pc>1168-c<k1>hasitvA<k2>hasitvA
{%Hasitvā,%}¦ ind. having laughed, having smiled.
<LEND>

<L>54020<pc>1168-c<k1>hasra<k2>hasra
{%Hasra, as, ā, am,%}¦ smiling; stupid, ignorant, a
fool.
<LEND>

<L>54021<pc>1168-c<k1>hAsa<k2>hAsa
{%Hāsa, as,%}¦ m. laughing, laughter; mirth, merry-
making, joy; derision. {%—Hāsa-kara, as, ī, am,%}
causing laughter, ridiculous; laughing, merry.
<LEND>

<L>54022<pc>1168-c<k1>hAsaka<k2>hAsaka
{%Hāsaka, as,%}¦ m. a laugher; one who causes
laughter, a buffoon, merry-andrew.
<LEND>

<L>54023<pc>1168-c<k1>hAsamAna<k2>hAsamAna
{%Hāsamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. laughing, being de-
lighted, (Sāy. {%= hāsaṃ kurvat, harṣa-yukta.%})
<LEND>

<L>54024<pc>1168-c<k1>hAsikA<k2>hAsikA
{%Hāsikā,%}¦ f. laughter, mirth, merry-making.
<LEND>

<L>54025<pc>1168-c<k1>hAsin<k2>hAsin
{%Hāsin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ laughing, smiling, making merry.
<LEND>

<L>54026<pc>1168-c<k1>hAsya<k2>hAsya
{%Hāsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be laughed at, laughable,
ridiculous; ({%am%}), n. laughter, laughing, mirth (one
of the ten Rasas, see {%rasa%}), jest, amusement; ridi-
cule, derision. {%—Hāsya-tā,%} f. laughableness, ridicu-
lousness. {%—Hāsya-padavī,%} f. ‘road of laughter,’
ridicule, laughter, ({%hāsya-padavīṃ yā,%} to expose
one's self to laughter, incur ridicule.) {%—Hāsya-rasa,%}
{%as,%} m. the sentiment of humour, sense of humour,
comic vein, facetiousness (the fifth of the ten Rasas,
see {%rasa%}). {%—Hāsyārṇava (˚ya-ar˚), as,%} m. ‘ocean
of mirth,’ N. of a drama by Jagad-īśvara. {%—Hāsyā-%}
{%spada (˚ya-ās˚), am,%} n. a laughing-stock, butt for
derision.
<LEND>

<L>54027<pc>1168-c<k1>hasta<k2>hasta
{#hasta#}¦ {%hasta, as,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
III. 86. fr. rt. 1. {%has%}), the hand; the thirteenth as-
terism, (see below); the fore-arm, cubit; a measure
of length from the elbow to the tip of the middle
finger (= twenty-four Aṅgulas or about eighteen
inches); an elephant's trunk; (in prosody) an ana-
pest; quantity, abundance, mass, (in this sense only
at end of comps. and when compounded with words
signifying ‘hair;’ cf. {%keśa-hasta%}); ({%ā%}), f. the thir-
teenth lunar asterism (represented by a hand and
containing five stars, identified by some with part of
the constellation Corvus); ({%am%}), n. a pair of leather
bellows; ({%e%}), ind. in hand, in one's possession; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">χανδ-άν-ω (ἔ-χαδ-ον, κέ-χανδ-α, χείσομαι</lang>);
Lat. <nsi>pre-hend-o, hed-era (?) ;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>bi-git-an,</nsi>
<nsi>handu;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>gitan</nsi> (= Eng. <nsi>get</nsi>), <nsi>hand.</nsi>]
{%—Hasta-kamala, am,%} n. a lotus carried in the
hand (thus when Lakṣmī was churned out of the
ocean, she appeared holding a lotus). {%—Hasta-kau-%}
{%śala, am,%} n. skilfulness of hand, manual dexterity.
{%—Hasta-kriyā,%} f. any manual performance. {%—Hasta-%}
{%gata, as, ā, am,%} come to hand, fallen into one's
possession, procured, gained, obtained, secured.
[Page1169-a+ 81]
{%—Hasta-giri, is,%} m., N. of a mountain. {%—Hasta-%}
{%gṛhya,%} ind., Ved. having taken the hand. {%—Hasta-%}
{%ghna, as,%} m., Ved. a kind of arm-guard or shield
(defending the fore-arm from the blows of the bow-
string). {%—Hasta-cāpalya, am,%} n. {%= hasta-kauśala.%}
{%—Hasta-cchedana, am,%} n. the amputation of a
hand. {%—Hasta-cyuta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. shaken or
moved with the hand, moved or thrown violently
by means of the hand. {%—Hasta-cyuti, is,%} f., Ved.
moving or shaking about with the hand, (according to
Sāy. {%hasta-cyutī = hasta-pracyutyā, hasta-gatyā,%}
Ṛg-veda VII. 1, 1.) {%—Hasta-jyoḍi, is,%} m. a kind of
tree or plant {%(= kara-jyoḍi)%}. {%—Hasta-tala, am,%} n.
the palm of the hand; the tip of an elephant's
trunk. {%—Hasta-tāla, as,%} m. clapping the hands
together. {%—Hasta-traya-sammite,%} ind. at a distance
of three Hastas. {%—Hasta-doṣa, as,%} m. a slip of
the hand, mistake committed by the hand. {%—Hasta-%}
{%dhātrī = hastāmalaka%}. {%—Hasta-dhāraṇa, am,%} n.
warding off a blow; stopping a blow with the hand.
{%—Hasta-pādādi (˚da-ādi),%} the hands and feet
&c., the extremities, the limbs of the body. {%—Hasta-%}
{%puccha, am,%} n. the lower part of the fore-arm, the
hand below the wrist. {%—Hasta-pṛṣṭha, am,%} n.
the back of the hand (also called {%apa-pṛṣṭha%}).
{%—Hasta-prāpta, as, ā, am,%} reached with the hand,
held in the hand; obtained, secured {%(= kara-prāpta).%}
{%—Hasta-maṇi, is,%} m. a jewel worn on the wrist.
{%—Hasta-mātra,%} a cubit in length, (see {%mātra.%})
{%—Hasta-yugala, am,%} n. the two hands. {%—Hasta-%}
{%ratnāvalī (˚na-āv˚),%} f., N. of a work by Rāghava
(treating of the various movements of the hands
&c.). {%—Hasta-rekhā,%} f. a line on the hand. {%—Hasta-%}
{%lāghava, am,%} n. lightness of hand, manual readiness,
smartness, cleverness, legerdemain. {%—Hasta-vat,%}
{%ān, atī, at,%} having hands, handy, dexterous, clever,
skilful. {%—Hasta-vartin, ī, inī, i,%} being or remain-
ing in the hand, seized, held, caught hold of.
{%—Hasta-vāraṇa, am,%} n. restraining the hand (of
another); warding off a blow. {%—Hasta-vimba, am,%}
n. perfuming or smearing the body with unguents
&c. {%—Hasta-saṃvāhana, am,%} n. rubbing or sham-
pooing with the hands. {%—Hasta-siddhi, is,%} f. per-
forming or effecting anything with the hand, manual
labour; hire, wages, salary. {%—Hasta-sūtra%} or {%hasta-%}
{%sūtraka,%} ‘hand-ribbon;’ ({%am%}), n. a bracelet worn
on the wrist. {%—Hasta-stha, as, ā, am,%} staying in the
hand, being in hand, held, grasped. {%—Hasta-sthita,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} being in hand, held. {%—Hastākṣara (˚ta-%}
{%ak˚), am,%} n. one's own sign manual, autograph,
signature, handwriting. {%—Hastāgra (˚ta-ag˚), am,%}
n. the extremity of the hand, the fingers. {%—Hastā-%}
{%gra-lagna (˚ta-ag˚), as, ā, am,%} ‘joined hand in
hand,’ married; [cf. {%pāṇi-graha.%}] {%—Hastāṅguli%}
{%(˚ta-aṅ˚), is,%} f. ‘hand-finger,’ any finger of the
hand. {%—Hastāmalaka (˚ta-ām˚), as,%} m., N. of one
of the four principal disciples of Śaṅkarācārya; ({%am%}),
n. the fruit of Emblic Myrobalan held in the hand;
N. of a short work by Hastāmalaka (containing the
elements of the Vedānta). {%—Hastāmalaka-bhā-%}
{%ṣya, am,%} n. a commentary on the above by Śaṅ-
karācārya. {%—Hastāvalamba (˚ta-av˚), as, ā, am,%}
supported by the hand of another. {%—Hastāvāpa%}
{%(˚ta-āv˚), as,%} m. ‘hand-bracelet,’ a finger-guard,
arm-guard (used by archers, {%= jyāghāta-vāraṇa%}).
{%—Hastā-hasti,%} ind. hand to hand. {%—Haste-karaṇa,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘taking by the hand,’ marriage {%(= pāṇau-%}
{%karaṇa)%}. {%—Haste-kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to
take in hand, take possession of, make one's own.
{%—Haste-kṛtya,%} ind. having taken possession of.
<LEND>

<L>54028<pc>1169-a<k1>hastaka<k2>hastaka
{%Hastaka, as,%}¦ m. a position of the hands.
<LEND>

<L>54029<pc>1169-a<k1>hastika<k2>hastika
{%Hastika, as,%}¦ n. a multitude or collection of ele-
phants ({%= gaja-ta%}).
<LEND>

<L>54030<pc>1169-a<k1>hastin<k2>hastin
{%Hastin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having hands, having a trunk;
({%ī%}), m. an elephant, (four kinds of elephants are
specified, each characterized by particular marks; see
{%bhadra, mandra, mṛga, miśra;%} some give {%ki-%}
{%liñja-hastin,%} a traw elephant, effigy of an elephant
made of grass); N. of a son of king Su-hotra (a prince
of the Lunar race, described in Viṣṇu-Purāṇa IV.
19. as founder of Hastinā-pura); a kind of plant, {%= %}
[Page1169-b+ 81]
{%aja-modā; (inī),%} f. a female elephant; a woman
of a particular class (one of the four into which
females are divided; a woman of this class is de-
scribed as having thick lips, thick hips, thick fingers,
large breasts, dark complexion, and libidinous ap-
petite); a kind of drug and perfume. {%—Hasti-kak-%}
{%ṣya, as,%} m. a lion; a tiger. {%—Hasti-kanda, as,%}
m. a kind of tree or bulbous plant (described as a sort
of Arum, {%= gaja-kanda%}). {%—Hasti-karañja, as,%} m.
a kind of tree {%(= mahā-karañja)%}. {%—Hasti-karṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘elephant-eared,’ the castor-oil tree (also the
red kind); a kind of Palāśa tree; another tree or
bulbous plant ({%= hasti-kanda%}); a particular class of
semi-divine beings (forming one of the {%gaṇa-devatā,%}
q. v.); N. of a district. {%—Hasti-karṇaka, as,%} m. a
kind of Palāśa tree. {%—Hastikarṇa-dala, as,%} m.
a sort of Palāśa tree. {%—Hasti-koli, is,%} m. a sort of
jujube. {%—Hasti-giri, is,%} m. the city and district of
Kāñcī, q. v. {%—Hasti-ghaṭa,%} N. of the seventh book
of the Śata-patha-Brāhmaṇa. {%—Hasti-ghoṣā%} or
{%hasti-ghoṣātakī,%} f. a kind of creeper {%(= aibhī,%}
{%mahā-kośātakī)%}. {%—Hasti-ghna, as,%} m. an elephant-
killer; a man. {%—Hasti-cārin, ī,%} m. an elephant-
driver; ({%iṇī%}), f. a kind of tree {%(= mahā-karañja).%}
{%—Hasti-danta, as,%} m. the tusk of an elephant; a
radish; a pin or peg projecting from a wall; ({%am%}),
n. ivory; a radish. {%—Hasti-dantaka, am,%} n. a
radish. {%—Hastidanta-phalā,%} f. a kind of cucumber
{%(= ervāru)%}. {%—Hasti-dvayasa, as, ī, am%} (Gram.
80. XX), as high or as big as an elephant, elephantine.
{%—Hasti-nakha, am,%} n. ‘elephant's nail,’ a sort of
turret or raised mound of earth or masonry protecting
the access to the gate of a city or fort, (it is described as
furnished with an inner staircase, and affording means
for discharging arrows &c. at an enemy.) {%—Hasti-%}
{%pa%} or {%hastipaka, as,%} m. an elephant-driver, ele-
phant-rider; an elephant-keeper. {%—Hasti-pattra,%}
{%as,%} m. {%= hasti-kanda%}. {%—Hasti-parṇikā,%} f. a kind
of plant {%(= rāja-kośātakī)%}. {%—Hasti-parṇī,%} f. a
kind of plant ({%= moraṭā%}); a sort of gourd {%(= kar-%}
{%kaṭī)%}. {%—Hasti-pāda, as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} elephant-
footed. {%—Hasti-pāla, as,%} m., N. of a king. {%—Hasti-%}
{%pṛṣṭhaka, am,%} n. the back of an elephant.
{%—Hasti-mada, as,%} m. the ichor or exudation from
an elephant's temples when in rut. {%—Hasti-malla,%}
{%as,%} m., N. of Airāvata (Indra's elephant); of Ga-
ṇeśa; of Śaṅkha (the eighth of the chief Nāgas or
serpents of Pātāla); a heap of ashes; a shower of
dust; frost, cold. {%—Hasti-mātra, as, ī, am,%} as
great as an elephant. {%—Hasti-yūtha, am,%} n. a herd
of elephants. {%—Hasti-rāja, as,%} m. the king or chief
of elephants. {%—Hasti-rohaṇaka, as,%} m. a kind of
tree {%(= mahā-karañja)%}. {%—Hasti-lodhraka, as,%} m.
the Lodhra tree. {%—Hasti-vadha%} or {%hasti-badha, as,%}
m. the killing of an elephant (especially by a lion,
which incurs the guilt of murder, whilst others carry
off the spoils, such as the tusks and the pearls said to
be found in the head). {%—Hasti-varcasa, am,%} n. the
magnificence of an elephant. {%—Hasti-vāha, as,%} m.
an elephant-driver; a hook for driving elephants.
{%—Hasti-viṣāṇī,%} f. the Kadalī tree. {%—Hasti-vai-%}
{%dyaka,%} N. of a work by Vīra-soma. {%—Hasti-śālā,%}
f. an elephant-stable. {%—Hasti-śuṇḍa, as,%} m. or
{%hasti-śuṇḍā,%} f. an elephant's trunk; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f.
the shrub Heliotropium Indicum. {%—Hasti-śyā-%}
{%māka, as,%} m. a kind of grain. {%—Hasti-ṣaḍgava,%}
{%am,%} n. a yoke or collection of six elephants, (see
{%ṣaḍ-gava.%}) {%—Hasti-somā,%} f., N. of a river.
{%—Hasti-snāna, am,%} n. the washing of an ele-
phant. {%—Hasti-hasta, as,%} m. an elephant's trunk.
{%—Hasti-hasta-parāmṛṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} touched
or struck by the trunks of elephants. {%—Hasty-adhy-%}
{%akṣa, as,%} m. a superintendent or master of ele-
phants. {%—Hasty-aśva-ratha-sambādha, as, ā, am,%}
crowded with carriages, horses, and elephants.
{%—Hasty-āyurveda, as,%} m. a work on the treat-
ment of elephants' diseases. {%—Hasty-āroha, as,%} m.
an elephant-rider, elephant-driver.
<LEND>

<L>54031<pc>1169-b<k1>hastinapura<k2>hastinapura
{%Hastina-pura, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%hastin + pura%}), the
city of Hastin ({%= hastinā-pura%} below).
<LEND>

<L>54032<pc>1169-b<k1>hastinApura<k2>hastinApura
{%Hastinā-pura, am,%}¦ n., N. of a city founded by
[Page1169-c+ 77]
king Hastin, q. v., (it was situated about fifty-seven
miles north-east of the modern Dillī or Delhi on the
banks of an old channel of the Ganges, and was the
capital of the kings of the Lunar line, as Ayodhyā
was of the Solar dynasty; hence it forms a central
scene of action in the Mahā-bhārata; here Dhṛta-
rāṣṭra reigned when the government was resigned
by his brother Pāṇḍu, and here the five Pāṇḍava
princes were educated along with their cousins the
Kauravas, and here at the conclusion of the great
war between them Yudhi-ṣṭhira was crowned after
a triumphal progress through the streets of the city;
see Śānti-parvan 1386-1410: other names for this
celebrated town are {%gajāhvaya, nāga-sāhvaya,%}
{%nāgāhva, hāstina.%})
<LEND>

<L>54033<pc>1169-c<k1>hastinIpura<k2>hastinIpura
{%Hastinī-pura, am,%}¦ n. {%= hastinā-pura%} above.
<LEND>

<L>54034<pc>1169-c<k1>hastya<k2>hastya
{%Hastya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the hand, done
with the hand, manual; given with the hand.
<LEND>

<L>54035<pc>1169-c<k1>hasra<k2>hasra
{#hasra#}¦ {%hasra.%} See p. 1168, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>54036<pc>1169-c<k1>hahala<k2>hahala
{#hahala#}¦ {%hahala, am,%} n. ({%= hāhala,%} see {%hāla-%}
{%hala%}), a sort of deadly poison.
<LEND>

<L>54037<pc>1169-c<k1>hahA<k2>hahA
{#hahA#}¦ {%hahā, ās,%} m. a kind of Gandharva,
q. v.; [cf. 1. {%hāhā, huhū.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54038<pc>1169-c<k1>hA<k2>hA<h>1
{#hA#} 1¦. {%hā,%} ind. an exclamation of pain or
grief or weariness (equivalent to ‘ah!’ ‘alas!’ ‘woe!’
{%hā hato 'smi,%} ah! I am killed! it is all over with
me); an exclamation of joy or surprise (oh! ha!
&c.); an interjection of anger or reproach; [cf.
2. {%hāhā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54039<pc>1169-c<k1>hA<k2>hA<h>2
{#hA#} 2¦. {%hā%} (connected with rt. 3. {%hā%}), cl. 3.
A. {%jihīte%} (1st sing. {%jihe,%} 3rd du. {%jihāte,%} 2nd
pl. {%jihīdhve,%} 3rd pl. {%jihate%}), Impf. {%ajihīta,%} Pot.
{%jihīta,%} Impv. {%jihītām,%} Perf. {%jahe, hāsyate, ahāsta,%}
{%hātum,%} to go, move, to go to, attain; to give way,
yield [cf. Ṛg-veda I. 37, 7]: Pass. {%hāyate,%} Aor.
{%ahāyi:%} Caus. {%hāpayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ajīha-%}
{%pat, -ta,%} to cause to go: Desid. {%jihāsate:%} Intens.
{%jāhāyate, jāhāti, jāheti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χα-ίν-ω, χά-σκ-ω,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χάσμα, χά-ος, χή-μη, χάσις, χαλάω;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>hi-sc-o, hi-o, hia-tus;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>gî-ê-m, gin-ê-m,</nsi>
<nsi>gein-o-m;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>ginan, cinan, geonan, gyn-</nsi>
<nsi>ian, ganian;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>zi-ja-ti, ze-ja-ti, zi-nati,</nsi> ‘to
gape;’ Lith. <nsi>zio-j-u, zio-ti-s,</nsi> ‘a cleft, hole.’]
<LEND>

<L>54040<pc>1169-c<k1>jihAna<k2>jihAna
{%Jihāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ going, &c. See p. 347.
<LEND>

<L>54041<pc>1169-c<k1>hAtvA<k2>hAtvA
{%Hātvā,%}¦ ind. (Pāṇ. VII. 4, 43), having gone, hav-
ing moved.
<LEND>

<L>54042<pc>1169-c<k1>hAna<k2>hAna
{%Hāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone, moved.
<LEND>

<L>54043<pc>1169-c<k1>hAsyamAna<k2>hAsyamAna
{%Hāsyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being about to go.
<LEND>

<L>54044<pc>1169-c<k1>heya<k2>heya<h>1
1. {%heya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 1170), to be gone.
<LEND>

<L>54045<pc>1169-c<k1>hA<k2>hA<h>3
{#hA#} 3¦. {%hā%} (connected with rt. 2. {%hā%}), cl.
3. P. {%jahāti%} (1st du. {%jahīvas%} or {%jahivas,%}
3rd du. {%jahītas%} or {%jahitas,%} 3rd. pl. {%jahati,%} Pāṇ.
VI. 4, 116), Impf. {%ajahāt%} (1st du. {%ajahīva%} or
{%ajahiva,%} 3rd pl. {%ajahuḥ%}), Pot. {%jahyāt%} (Pāṇ. VI.
4, 118), Impv. {%jahātu%} (2nd sing. {%jahīhi%} or {%jahihi%}
or {%jahāhi,%} 3rd pl. {%jahatu,%} Pāṇ. VI. 4, 117), Perf.
{%jahau%} (2nd sing. {%jahitha%} or {%jahātha,%} 1st du. {%ja-%}
{%hiva,%} 2nd pl. {%jaha,%} 3rd pl. {%jahuḥ%}), {%hāsyati, ahāsīt,%}
Prec. {%heyāt, hātum,%} to abandon, leave, quit, desert,
forsake, relinquish, dismiss; to resign, forego, let go,
lose; to let fall; to omit, neglect; to avoid, shun;
to remove: Pass. {%hīyate,%} Perf. {%jahe%} (Kirāt. XII.
12), Aor. {%ahāyi,%} to be left or deserted, be forsaken;
to be excluded from or deprived or bereft of, to lose
(with inst. or abl., e. g. {%jahe prāṇaiḥ,%} he was de-
prived of breath or lost his life; {%hīyate pati-lokāt,%}
she is excluded from the heaven of her husband);
to be destitute of, be deficient in, be wanting in,
fail, decrease; to be lost; to fail (in a lawsuit); to
be left out or omitted or neglected; to become
weary or enfeebled; to be lessened or lowered:
Caus. {%hāpayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ajīhapat,%} to cause
to quit or abandon; to drive away, expel; to cause
to lose or want; to neglect, omit, decline; to lose:
Desid. {%jihāsati,%} to wish to leave, &c.: Intens. {%je-%}
{%hīyate, jāheti, jāhāti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χῆ-ρο-ς, χήρα,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χηρεύ-ω, χηρό-ω, χωρίς, χωρίζω, χῆτος, χατέω;</lang>
[Page1170-a+ 81]
Lat. <nsi>habeo (?);</nsi> Goth. <nsi>haba, habais, gaidv, giban;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>gifan, gafol, gœfel, gif;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>if.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54046<pc>1170-a<k1>jahat<k2>jahat
{%Jahat, at, atī, at,%}¦ leaving, &c. See p. 343.
<LEND>

<L>54047<pc>1170-a<k1>ha<k2>ha<h>5
5. {%ha,%}¦ (at the end of comps.) abandoning, leaving,
quitting, avoiding; see p. 1163, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>54048<pc>1170-a<k1>hA<k2>hA<h>4
4. {%hā,%}¦ f. abandoning, leaving, relinquishing.
<LEND>

<L>54049<pc>1170-a<k1>hAtavya<k2>hAtavya
{%Hātavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be abandoned or left,
relinquishable.
<LEND>

<L>54050<pc>1170-a<k1>hAna<k2>hAna
{%Hāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of abandoning, relinquish-
ing; escaping; prowess, valour.
<LEND>

<L>54051<pc>1170-a<k1>hAni<k2>hAni
{%Hāni, is,%}¦ f. abandonment, relinquishment, neglect,
loss, want, privation, absence; decrease, deficiency,
diminution, detriment, damage. {%—Hāni-kara, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} causing loss, prejudicial, injurious.
<LEND>

<L>54052<pc>1170-a<k1>hAnIya<k2>hAnIya
{%Hānīya, as, ā, am, = hātavya.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>54053<pc>1170-a<k1>hApana<k2>hApana
{%Hāpana, am,%}¦ n. the act of causing to quit or
abandon, expelling.
<LEND>

<L>54054<pc>1170-a<k1>hApita<k2>hApita
{%Hāpita, as, ā, am,%}¦ caused to be relinquished;
made to give up.
<LEND>

<L>54055<pc>1170-a<k1>hAyana<k2>hAyana<h>1
1. {%hāyana, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am%} (for 2. see col. 2),
quitting, leaving; passing away, (in this sense per-
haps to be connected with rt. 2. {%hā;%} cf. 2. {%hāyana,%}
col. 2.)
<LEND>

<L>54056<pc>1170-a<k1>hAyin<k2>hAyin
{%Hāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ leaving, abandoning, neglecting.
<LEND>

<L>54057<pc>1170-a<k1>hitvA<k2>hitvA<h>1
1. {%hitvā,%}¦ ind. (for 2. see p. 1171, col. 1), having
left or abandoned, having quitted or renounced, hav-
ing deserted; letting alone, slighting, disregarding.
<LEND>

<L>54058<pc>1170-a<k1>hitvAya<k2>hitvAya
{%Hitvāya,%}¦ ind., Ved. having abandoned, having
left, having discarded, (Sāy. {%= hitvā = parityajya,%}
Ṛg-veda X. 14, 8.)
<LEND>

<L>54059<pc>1170-a<k1>hItvA<k2>hItvA
{%Hītvā,%}¦ ind., Ved. = 1. {%hitvā,%} (Pāṇ. VII. 4, 44.)
<LEND>

<L>54060<pc>1170-a<k1>hIna<k2>hIna
{%Hīna, as, ā, am,%}¦ left, forsaken, relinquished,
abandoned, quitted, deserted, neglected; excluded,
shut out from (with abl.); deprived of, free from,
devoid of, destitute of, without, bereft of (with inst.,
e. g. {%prānair hīnaḥ,%} bereft of breath or life; or
with abl., e. g. {%mantrāt%} or {%mantrato hīnaḥ,%} devoid
of sacred knowledge, Manu III. 65); wasted, dimi-
nished, decayed, enfeebled, feeble; deficient, defec-
tive, faulty, inferior, insufficient; deducted, subtracted,
minus; lower, less, (Manu II. 194); mean, base,
vile, bad, low; ({%as%}), m. a faulty respondent, insuf-
ficient or defective witness, (five kinds are enume-
rated, viz. {%anya-vādin, kriyā-dveṣin, nopasthā-%}
{%yin, nir-uttara, āhūta-prapalāyin%}); subtraction
{%(= vy-avakalana)%}. {%—Hīna-karman, ā, ā, a,%} or
{%hīna-kriya, as, ā, am,%} neglecting or omitting
customary rites or religious acts. {%—Hīna-kula, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} of low family, base-born, plebeian. {%—Hīna-%}
{%kula-tva, am,%} n. lowness of birth. {%—Hīna-kośa,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having an empty treasury. {%—Hīna-%}
{%kratu, us, us, u,%} one who neglects to sacrifice,
(Manu XI. 12.) {%—Hīna-ja, as, ā, am,%} low-born.
{%—Hīna-jāti, is, is, i,%} low-born, of low caste, de-
prived of caste, outcaste, degraded, vile. {%—Hīna-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. defectiveness, deprivation, destitution,
the state of being without, absence of, (generally at
the end of comps., e. g. {%putra-h˚, buddhi-h˚.%})
{%—Hīna-darśana-sāmarthya, as, ā, am,%} destitute
of the power of seeing, blind. {%—Hīna-nāyaka, as,%}
{%ikā, am,%} having a low or base hero (said of a
drama). {%—Hīna-yāna, am,%} n. ‘the inferior or lesser
vehicle,’ N. of a system of Buddhist teaching, (op-
posed to {%mahā-yāna,%} q. v.) {%—Hīna-yoni, is,%} m. f.
an inferior womb, low birth or origin. {%—Hīna-%}
{%roman, ā, ā, a,%} deprived of hair, bald, (Mahā-bh.
Śānti-p. 13, 229.) {%—Hīna-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} of
low caste, outcaste, of inferior rank, belonging to
the lower orders. {%—Hīna-vāda, as,%} m. defective
statement, insufficient or contradictory evidence, pre-
varication. {%—Hīna-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} making a de-
fective statement, insufficient or inadmissible (as a
witness, see {%hīna%} above); contradictory, prevaricat-
ing; destitute of speech, speechless, dumb; cast in
law. {%—Hīna-vīrya, as, ā, am,%} deficient in courage.
{%—Hīna-sakhya, am,%} n. making friends with
low people, associating with degraded persons.
{%—Hīna-sandhi, is, is, i,%} destitute of peace or
reconciliation. {%—Hīna-sevā,%} f. attendance on base
people, serving or waiting on low persons. {%—Hī-%}
{%nāṅga (˚na-aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} deficient in limb,
[Page1170-b+ 71]
crippled, maimed, mutilated, imperfect, defective;
({%ī%}), m. a small ant. {%—Hīnānna-vastra-veṣa (˚na-%}
{%an˚), as,%} m. (a Brahma-cārin) eating less food
(than his preceptor) and wearing an inferior dress,
(Manu II. 194.)
<LEND>

<L>54061<pc>1170-b<k1>hInaka<k2>hInaka
{%Hīnaka,%}¦ (at the end of a comp.) {%= hīna,%} deprived
of, &c.
<LEND>

<L>54062<pc>1170-b<k1>hInita<k2>hInita
{%Hīnita, as, ā, am,%}¦ (according to Śabda-k.) sub-
tracted ({%= vy-avakalita%}).
<LEND>

<L>54063<pc>1170-b<k1>hIyamAna<k2>hIyamAna
{%Hīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ being left or deserted;
being lost; sinking, giving in.
<LEND>

<L>54064<pc>1170-b<k1>heya<k2>heya<h>2
2. {%heya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 3. see p. 1171, col. 2),
to be left or abandoned, to be avoided.
<LEND>

<L>54065<pc>1170-b<k1>hANgara<k2>hANgara
{#hANgara#}¦ {%hāṅgara, as,%} m. a large fish, shark.
<LEND>

<L>54066<pc>1170-b<k1>hAwaka<k2>hAwaka
{#hAwaka#}¦ {%hāṭaka, as, ī, am%} (fr. rt. {%haṭ%}), golden,
made of gold; ({%am%}), n. gold; the thorn-apple {%(=%}
{%dhustūra)%}. {%—Hāṭaka-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or
consisting of gold, golden. {%—Hāṭakeśvara (˚ka-%}
{%īś˚), as,%} m., N. of a form of Śiva (worshipped on
the banks of the Godāvarī).
<LEND>

<L>54067<pc>1170-b<k1>hAtra<k2>hAtra
{#hAtra#}¦ {%hātra, am,%} n. (probably fr. rt. 1. {%han,%}
cf. {%hāntra%} below), injuring, killing ({%= prama-%}
{%thana%}); death, dying ({%= maraṇa%}); a Rākṣasa,
(in this sense probably masc.); wages, hire, (in this
sense probably fr. rt. 2. {%hā.%})
<LEND>

<L>54068<pc>1170-b<k1>hAna<k2>hAna
{#hAna#}¦ {%hāna, hāni.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>54069<pc>1170-b<k1>hAnuka<k2>hAnuka
{#hAnuka#}¦ {%hānuka.%} See p. 1165, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>54070<pc>1170-b<k1>hAntra<k2>hAntra
{#hAntra#}¦ {%hāntra, am,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 159. fr. rt. 1. {%han,%} cf. {%hātra%} above), death,
dying.
<LEND>

<L>54071<pc>1170-b<k1>hAndra<k2>hAndra
{%Hāndra, am,%}¦ n. {%= hāntra%} above.
<LEND>

<L>54072<pc>1170-b<k1>hAndaRa<k2>hAndaRa
{#hAndaRa#}¦ {%hāndaṇa,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>54073<pc>1170-b<k1>hAputrI<k2>hAputrI
{#hAputrI#}¦ {%hāputrī,%} f. a kind of wagtail.
<LEND>

<L>54074<pc>1170-b<k1>hAputrikA<k2>hAputrikA
{%Hāputrikā,%}¦ f. {%= hāputrī%} above.
<LEND>

<L>54075<pc>1170-b<k1>hAPikA<k2>hAPikA
{#hAPikA#}¦ {%hāphikā,%} f. gaping, yawning.
<LEND>

<L>54076<pc>1170-b<k1>hAyana<k2>hAyana<h>2
{#hAyana#} 2¦. {%hāyana, as, am,%} m. n. (probably
fr. {%hayana%} and connected with rt. 1. {%hi,%} but cf.
1. {%hāyana%} at col. 1), a year, (at the end of an
adj. comp. the fem. ends in {%ī,%} cf. {%dvi-h˚%}); ({%as%}), m.
a flame, ray; a sort of rice; epithet of Takman (so
called either from this disease lasting the whole year
or because it returns every year).
<LEND>

<L>54077<pc>1170-b<k1>hAyas<k2>hAyas
{#hAyas#}¦ {%hāyas, as,%} n., Ved. = 2. {%dhāyas,%}
support, vigour, strength; [cf. {%sarva-h˚.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54078<pc>1170-b<k1>hAra<k2>hAra
{#hAra#}¦ {%hāra, hāraka.%} See p. 1175, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>54079<pc>1170-b<k1>hArayu<k2>hArayu
{#hArayu#}¦ {%hārayu,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>54080<pc>1170-b<k1>hArahUra<k2>hArahUra
{#hArahUra#}¦ {%hārahūra, as, am,%} m. n. (according
to some only masc.; probably connected with {%hāra-%}
{%hārā,%} see under 1. {%hāra%}), spirituous liquor, wine;
({%ā%}), f. a grape.
<LEND>

<L>54081<pc>1170-b<k1>hAri<k2>hAri
{#hAri#}¦ {%hāri.%} See p. 1175, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>54082<pc>1170-b<k1>hAriRa<k2>hAriRa
{#hAriRa#}¦ {%hāriṇa, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%hariṇa%}), be-
longing or relating to deer; ({%ī%}), f. a species of the
Aty-aṣṭi metre; ({%am%}), n. venison.
<LEND>

<L>54083<pc>1170-b<k1>hAriRika<k2>hAriRika
{%Hāriṇika, as,%}¦ m. a deer-killer, hunter; ({%ī%}), f. a
species of the Aty-aṣṭi metre.
<LEND>

<L>54084<pc>1170-b<k1>hArita<k2>hArita<h>1
{#hArita#} 1¦. {%hārita, as,%} m. (fr. {%harit;%} for
2. {%hārita%} see under rt. 1. {%hṛ%}), the colour green; the
Haritāla pigeon; N. of a son of Viśvā-mitra; ({%ās%}),
m. pl. the sons or descendants of Harita.
<LEND>

<L>54085<pc>1170-b<k1>hAritaka<k2>hAritaka
{%Hāritaka, as,%}¦ m. [cf. {%haritaka%}], a green vege-
table or pot-herb.
<LEND>

<L>54086<pc>1170-b<k1>hArIta<k2>hArIta<h>1
1. {%hārīta, as,%}¦ m. (for 2. see under rt. 1. {%hṛ%}), the
Haritāla pigeon; N. of a Muni and writer of a
Dharma-śāstra or law-book; of a poet; of a phy-
sician.
<LEND>

<L>54087<pc>1170-b<k1>hArItaka<k2>hArItaka
{%Hārītaka, as,%}¦ m. the Haritāla pigeon; N. of a
son of Viśvā-mitra.
<LEND>

<L>54088<pc>1170-b<k1>hAridra<k2>hAridra
{#hAridra#}¦ {%hāridra, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%haridrā%}),
stained or dyed with turmeric; turmeric-coloured;
yellow; ({%as%}), m. a yellow colour; the Kadamba
[Page1170-c+ 73]
tree; a kind of fever (supposed to arise from a
vitiated state of the three humors of the body).
<LEND>

<L>54089<pc>1170-c<k1>hAridrava<k2>hAridrava
{%Hāridrava,%}¦ Ved. the Haritāla tree, (according to
Sāy. {%hāridraveṣu = haritāla-drumeṣu tādṛg-%}
{%varṇavatsu,%} Ṛg-veda I. 50, 12.)
<LEND>

<L>54090<pc>1170-c<k1>hAridravin<k2>hAridravin
{%Hāridravin, iṇas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a school.
<LEND>

<L>54091<pc>1170-c<k1>hAridravIya<k2>hAridravIya
{%Hāridravīya, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a Śākhā of the
Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>54092<pc>1170-c<k1>hAridrumata<k2>hAridrumata
{#hAridrumata#}¦ {%hāridrumata, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>54093<pc>1170-c<k1>hArin<k2>hArin
{#hArin#}¦ {%hārin, hārī.%} See under rt. 1. {%hṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>54094<pc>1170-c<k1>hArda<k2>hArda
{#hArda#}¦ {%hārda, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%hṛd%}), being in
the heart; ({%am%}), n. affection, love; kindness; will,
mind, intention, meaning.
<LEND>

<L>54095<pc>1170-c<k1>hArdin<k2>hArdin
{%Hārdin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. relating to the heart;
({%ī%}), n. anything greatly desired or loved.
<LEND>

<L>54096<pc>1170-c<k1>hArdikya<k2>hArdikya
{#hArdikya#}¦ {%hārdikya, as,%} m., N. of a Kuru
warrior, (also called Kṛta-varman.)
<LEND>

<L>54097<pc>1170-c<k1>hArya<k2>hArya
{#hArya#}¦ {%hārya.%} See under rt. 1. {%hṛ.%}
<LEND>

<L>54098<pc>1170-c<k1>hAla<k2>hAla
{#hAla#}¦ {%hāla, as,%} m. (fr. rt. 1. {%hal%} or fr. {%hala%}),
a plough; N. of Bala-rāma (as bearing a weapon
shaped like a ploughshare, see {%hala-dhara%}); N. of
Śālivāhana; of a king; ({%ā%}), f. spirituous liquor,
wine, the spirituous juice of the palm; ({%ī%}), f. a
wife's younger sister. {%—Hāla-bhṛt,%} m. epithet of
Bala-rāma {%(= hala-bhṛt)%}. {%—Hālāsya-māhātmya%}
{%(˚la-ās˚), am,%} n., N. of a part of the Skanda-Purāṇa.
<LEND>

<L>54099<pc>1170-c<k1>hAlahala<k2>hAlahala
{%Hālahala, am,%}¦ n. ({%= halāhala,%} q. v.), a sort of
deadly poison (produced at the churning of the
ocean by the gods and demons); any poison or
venom.
<LEND>

<L>54100<pc>1170-c<k1>hAlahAla<k2>hAlahAla
{%Hālahāla, am,%}¦ n. the above poison.
<LEND>

<L>54101<pc>1170-c<k1>hAlAhala<k2>hAlAhala
{%Hālāhala, as,%}¦ m. a sort of worm or insect; a
kind of lizard or newt; ({%ā%}), f. a small mouse; ({%ī%}),
f. spirituous liquor, wine; ({%am%}), n. the above
deadly poison or any poison, venom; spirituous
liquor. {%—Hālāhala-dhara, as,%} m. ‘having venom,’
a small black snake.
<LEND>

<L>54102<pc>1170-c<k1>hAhala<k2>hAhala
{%Hāhala, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the above with elision of {%la%}
or {%lā%}), deadly poison.
<LEND>

<L>54103<pc>1170-c<k1>hAhAla<k2>hAhAla
{%Hāhāla, am,%}¦ n. the above poison.
<LEND>

<L>54104<pc>1170-c<k1>hAlika<k2>hAlika
{%Hālika, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging or relating to
ploughing or a plough, agricultural; ({%as%}), m. a
ploughman, ploughboy, agriculturist.
<LEND>

<L>54105<pc>1170-c<k1>hAlinI<k2>hAlinI
{%Hālinī,%}¦ f. a sort of large house-lizard.
<LEND>

<L>54106<pc>1170-c<k1>hAlu<k2>hAlu
{%Hālu, us,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 1. fr. rt.
1. {%hal%}), a tooth ({%= danta%}).
<LEND>

<L>54107<pc>1170-c<k1>hAleya<k2>hAleya
{%Hāleya, as,%}¦ m., N. of a king.
<LEND>

<L>54108<pc>1170-c<k1>hAlaka<k2>hAlaka
{#hAlaka#}¦ {%hālaka, as,%} m. (connected with
{%harika%}), a horse of a yellowish brown or tawny
colour.
<LEND>

<L>54109<pc>1170-c<k1>hAlAha<k2>hAlAha
{%Hālāha, as,%}¦ m. a spotted or piebald horse (accord-
ing to some).
<LEND>

<L>54110<pc>1170-c<k1>hAva<k2>hAva
{#hAva#}¦ {%hāva, as,%} m. (fr. rt. {%hve%}), calling, a
call; any feminine or coquettish gesture tending to
excite amorous sensations, blandishment, dalliance,
the airs and arts of lovers, (in these senses perhaps a
form evolved out of {%bhāva,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>54111<pc>1170-c<k1>hAvaka<k2>hAvaka
{%Hāvaka, as,%}¦ m. one who calls or summons; (in
nuptial ceremonies) one who summons the bride,
an attendant on the bridegroom.
<LEND>

<L>54112<pc>1170-c<k1>hAsa<k2>hAsa
{#hAsa#}¦ {%hāsa, hāsaka,%} &c. See p. 1168, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>54113<pc>1170-c<k1>hAsas<k2>hAsas
{#hAsas#}¦ {%hāsas, ās,%} m. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 220. fr. rt. 3. {%hā%}), Ved. the moon.
<LEND>

<L>54114<pc>1170-c<k1>hAsta<k2>hAsta
{#hAsta#}¦ {%hāsta, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%hasta%}), formed
by the hands.
<LEND>

<L>54115<pc>1170-c<k1>hAstika<k2>hAstika
{#hAstika#}¦ {%hāstika, as,%} r. (fr. {%hastin%}), an
elephant-rider, elephant-driver, &c.; ({%am%}), n. a
herd or collection of elephants.
<LEND>

<L>54116<pc>1170-c<k1>hAstina<k2>hAstina
{%Hāstina, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to
elephants, elephantine, as big as an elephant, huge
({%am%}), n. the city of Hastināpura, q. v. {%—Hāstina-%}
{%pura, am,%} n. {%= hastinā-pura,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>54117<pc>1170-c<k1>hAsya<k2>hAsya
{#hAsya#}¦ {%hāsya.%} See p. 1168. col. 3.
<LEND>
[Page1171-a+ 79]

<L>54118<pc>1171-a<k1>hAhala<k2>hAhala
{#hAhala#}¦ {%hāhala.%} See p. 1170, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>54119<pc>1171-a<k1>hAhas<k2>hAhas
{#hAhas#}¦ {%hāhas, ās,%} m. a Gandharva. (See
p. 281, col. 3.)
<LEND>

<L>54120<pc>1171-a<k1>hAhA<k2>hAhA<h>1
1. {%hāhā, ās,%}¦ m. (see Gram. 108. {%b%}), a Gandharva;
a particular high number, ten thousand billions,
({%mahā-hāhā,%} a hundred thousand billions.)
<LEND>

<L>54121<pc>1171-a<k1>hAhA<k2>hAhA<h>2
{#hAhA#} 2¦. {%hā-hā,%} ind. (an interjection of
surprise or grief or pain, equivalent to) ah, ah! alas,
alas! {%—Hāhā-kāra, as,%} m. ‘making the exclamation
{%hāhā,%}’ a general or great lamentation, or wailing;
sound of grief or pity; the noise or uproar of battle.
{%—Hāhā-kṛta, as, ā, am,%} made to resound with
the uproar of battle. {%—Hāhā-bhūta, as, ā, am,%}
lamented, bewailed. {%—Hāhā-rava, as,%} m. the cry
or noise {%hāhā.%}
<LEND>

<L>54122<pc>1171-a<k1>hi<k2>hi<h>1
{#hi#} 1¦. {%hi%} (connected with rt. {%hinv,%} to
which some of the forms in the examples
given below are referred by Sāy.), cl. 5. P. {%hinoti%}
(Ved. also A. {%hinute%}), {%jighāya, heṣyati, ahai-%}
{%ṣīt, hetum,%} to send, send forth, impel, ({%hinvanti%}
{%= prerayanti,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 43, 29); to dis-
charge, throw, cast, shoot (as an arrow &c.); to
urge, incite, excite; to further, promote, advance;
to protect, favour, benefit, prosper (Ved.); to please,
gratify, exhilarate, satisfy, ({%hinvire = prīṇayanti,%}
Ṛg-veda VIII. 43, 19); to go, proceed: Pass.
{%hīyate,%} Aor. {%ahāyi:%} Caus. {%hāyayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%ajīhayat:%} Desid. of Caus. {%jighāpayiṣati:%} Desid.
{%jighīṣati:%} Intens. {%jeghīyate, jeghayīti, jegheti;%}
[cf. perhaps Gr. <lang n="greek">κίω;</lang> Lat. <nsi>cieo.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54123<pc>1171-a<k1>haya<k2>haya
{%Haya, hayana.%}¦ See p. 1165, cols. 2, 3.
<LEND>

<L>54124<pc>1171-a<k1>hita<k2>hita<h>1
1. {%hita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see p. 1172), sent,
impelled; gone, proceeded.
<LEND>

<L>54125<pc>1171-a<k1>hiti<k2>hiti
{%Hiti, is,%}¦ f. sending, impelling.
<LEND>

<L>54126<pc>1171-a<k1>hitvA<k2>hitvA<h>2
2. {%hitvā,%}¦ ind. (for 1. see p. 1170, col. 1), having
sent; having impelled; having gone.
<LEND>

<L>54127<pc>1171-a<k1>hinva<k2>hinva
{%Hinva, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. favouring, benefiting,
(Sāy. {%= prīṇayitṛ,%} Ṛg-veda VIII. 40, 9.)
<LEND>

<L>54128<pc>1171-a<k1>hinvat<k2>hinvat
{%Hinvat, an, atī, at,%}¦ Ved. gratifying, pleasing,
(Sāy. {%hinvan = hinvantaḥ = prīṇayantaḥ,%} Ṛg-
veda V. 36, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>54129<pc>1171-a<k1>hinvAna<k2>hinvAna
{%Hinvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. pleasing, gratifying,
exhilarating.
<LEND>

<L>54130<pc>1171-a<k1>hiyAna<k2>hiyAna
{%Hiyāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. prospering, favouring,
(Sāy. {%= samṛddhiṃ gacchat,%} i. e. {%vyāpnuvat,%}
Ṛg-veda II. 4, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>54131<pc>1171-a<k1>heti<k2>heti
{%Heti, is,%}¦ m. f. a weapon, missile; stroke, wound,
injury, (Sāy. {%= hiṃsā,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 75, 14); a ray
of the sun; light, splendor; flame; ({%is%}), m., N. of
the first Rākṣasa king (father of Vidyut-keśa; repre-
sented as residing in the Sun's chariot in the month
of Caitra or Madhu). {%—Heti-mat, ān, atī, at,%} pos-
sessed of weapons, armed with missiles (Ved.);
illuminated by the sun.
<LEND>

<L>54132<pc>1171-a<k1>hetika<k2>hetika
{%Hetika = heti%}¦ (at the end of a comp., cf. {%śakti-h˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>54133<pc>1171-a<k1>hetu<k2>hetu
{%Hetu, us,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. I. 73. fr. rt.
1. {%hi%}), impulse, motive; cause, reason, object, pur-
pose (e. g. {%anena hetunā,%} for this reason; {%mṛtyu-%}
{%hetave,%} in order to kill; {%hetur alaukikaḥ,%} a super-
natural cause); a logical reason, the reason for an
inference (constituting the second Avayava or mem-
ber of the five-membered Nyāya syllogism, e. g.
1. ‘this hill is fiery,’ 2. ‘because it smokes;’ see {%ny-%}
{%āya,%} p. 519; 2. {%prati-jñā,%} p. 613); any logical deduc-
tion or argument, proof; reasoning, logic (in general);
excuse, sophistry; means, instrument; law, condition;
source, origin; a particular figure of speech, (in the
drama) a brief speech giving a reason; ({%hetunā%} or
{%hetau%} or {%hetos%}), ind. by reason of, because of, on
account of, for the sake of, (generally after a gen. or
at the end of a comp., e. g. {%mama hetoḥ%} or {%mad-%}
{%dhetoḥ,%} on account of me.) {%—Hetu-tā,%} f. or {%hetu-%}
{%tva, am,%} n. the state of being a {%hetu%} or cause,
causation, cause, causativeness, the abstract existence
of cause or motive. {%—Hetu-mat, ān, atī, at,%} having
a reason or cause, proceeding from a cause (as any
effect); having the Hetu (or second Avayava of a
syllogism); accompanied by arguments; controverted
by arguments. {%—Hetu-vāda, as,%} m. a statement of
[Page1171-b+ 80]
reasons or argument, assigning a cause, disputation.
{%—Hetu-śāstra, am,%} n. a rationalistic book, (Manu
II. 11); any heretical or sceptical work calling in
question the authority of Śruti. {%—Hetu-śāstrāśraya%}
{%(˚ra-āś˚), as,%} m. reliance on rationalistic treatises.
{%—Hetu-śliṣṭa,%} (in rhetoric) combination of cause,
a method of comparing two objects by using epithets
common to both so as to describe similar results in
each produced by similar causes. {%—Hetu-hetumad-%}
{%bhāva, as,%} m. the relation subsisting between cause
and effect. {%—Hetūpanyāsa (˚tu-up˚), as,%} m. the
assignment of reasons or motives, statement of an
argument. {%—Hetv-apadeśa,%} the adducing or men-
tioning of the reason (or second member of the
syllogism in logic). {%—Hetv-ābhāsa, as,%} m. (in logic)
a mere appearance of a reason, fallacious semblance
of an argument, fallacious middle term, fallacy (said
to be of five kinds, viz. {%vy-abhicāra%} or {%sa-vya-%}
{%bhicāra, vi-ruddha, a-siddha, sat-pratipakṣa,%}
{%bādha%} or {%bādhita%}); the bringing forward or stating
of a Hetu (or second member of a syllogism), the
assignment of a reason which can be shown to be
incorrect.
<LEND>

<L>54134<pc>1171-b<k1>hetuka<k2>hetuka
{%Hetuka, as,%}¦ m. a cause, active cause, instrument
({%= hetu%}); a logician; ({%as, ā, am%}), causal, instru-
mental, belonging to a motive or cause; causing,
producing (at the end of comps., e. g. {%viṣāda-h˚,%}
causing dejection); N. of a poet.
<LEND>

<L>54135<pc>1171-b<k1>hetf<k2>hetf
{%Hetṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. urging on, inciting; ({%tā%}),
m. an inciter.
<LEND>

<L>54136<pc>1171-b<k1>heya<k2>heya<h>3
3. {%heya, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. and 2. see pp. 1169,
1170), to be sent or impelled.
<LEND>

<L>54137<pc>1171-b<k1>hi<k2>hi<h>2
{#hi#} 2¦. {%hi,%} ind. (probably to be connected
with rt. 1. {%hi;%} cf. {%hetu%}), for, because, on
account of (used enclitically so as not to stand first
in a sentence, e. g. {%pramāṇaṃ hi bhavān,%} for your
honour is the authority; {%tathā hi,%} for example, for
instance, accordingly); assuredly, certainly; indeed,
surely, (in these senses used emphatically and, accord-
ing to some, also interrogatively; but sometimes to
be treated as redundant and a mere expletive); but;
ah! alas! (said to be also an interjection of envy,
of contempt, of hurry, &c.)
<LEND>

<L>54138<pc>1171-b<k1>hiMs<k2>hiMs
{#hiMs#}¦ {%hiṃs%} (by some regarded as an
anomalous Desid. of rt. 1. {%han%}), cl. 1. 7.
P. (ep. also A.) {%hiṃsati (-te), hinasti, jihiṃsa,%}
{%hiṃsiṣyati%} (ep. A. {%hiṃsiṣyate%}), {%ahiṃsīt, hiṃsi-%}
{%tum,%} to strike, hit, beat; to hurt, harm, wound,
injure; to kill, slay, destroy: Pass. {%hiṃsyate,%} Aor.
{%ahiṃsi:%} Caus. or cl. 10. {%hiṃsayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%ajihiṃsat,%} to kill, slay: Desid. {%jihiṃsiṣati:%} Intens.
{%jehiṃsyate, jehiṃsti;%} [cf. perhaps Old Germ. <nsi>geis-</nsi>
<nsi>la,</nsi> ‘a whip;’ Mod. Germ. <nsi>Geissel.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54139<pc>1171-b<k1>hiMsaka<k2>hiMsaka
{%Hiṃsaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ injurious, noxious, detri-
mental, mischievous, hostile, malignant, ferocious,
savage; an injurer; ({%as%}), m. any savage or noxious
animal, beast of prey; an enemy; a Brāhman skilled
in the Atharva-veda [cf. {%hiṃsā-karman,%} and see
the account of this Veda, p. 964, col. 1].
<LEND>

<L>54140<pc>1171-b<k1>hiMsat<k2>hiMsat
{%Hiṃsat, an, antī, at,%}¦ hurting, injuring, killing.
<LEND>

<L>54141<pc>1171-b<k1>hiMsana<k2>hiMsana
{%Hiṃsana, am, ā,%}¦ n. f. the act of hurting, injuring,
injury, detriment; killing; slaying.
<LEND>

<L>54142<pc>1171-b<k1>hiMsA<k2>hiMsA
{%Hiṃsā,%}¦ f. injuring, injury, mischief, hurt, harm,
wrong (said to be of three kinds, 1. mental or
malice; 2. verbal or abuse; 3. personal or actual
violence); killing, slaying; robbery, spoliation.
{%—Hiṃsā-karman, a,%} n. any injurious or hostile act;
magic applied to the ruin or injury of an enemy,
employment of spells and mystical texts (especially
those of the Atharva-veda, see {%veda%}) for injurious
purposes. {%—Hiṃsātmaka (˚sā-āt˚), as, ā, am,%} of
an injurious nature, naturally hurtful, destructive.
{%—Hiṃsā-prāṇin, ī,%} m. a savage or noxious animal.
{%—Hiṃsāprāṇi-pracura, as, ā, am,%} abounding in
noxious animals. {%—Hiṃsā-prāya, as, ā, am,%} abound-
ing in injury, generally injurious. {%—Hiṃsā-rata, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} delighting in mischief. {%—Hiṃsā-ruci, is, is,%}
{%i,%} taking pleasure in injury, having a taste for
slaughter. {%—Hiṃsāruci-tva, am,%} n. the having a
taste for injury or mischief. {%—Hiṃsā-vihāra, as, ā, %}
[Page1171-c+ 78]
{%am,%} sporting in mischief, wanton in injuries, roam-
ing about to do harm. {%—Hiṃsā-samudbhava, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} arising from injury (i. e. from the sin of
hurting any living creature).
<LEND>

<L>54143<pc>1171-c<k1>hiMsAru<k2>hiMsAru
{%Hiṃsāru, us,%}¦ m. a destructive animal; a tiger.
<LEND>

<L>54144<pc>1171-c<k1>hiMsAlu<k2>hiMsAlu
{%Hiṃsālu, us, us, u,%}¦ disposed to injure, injurious,
mischievous, hurtful, murderous.
<LEND>

<L>54145<pc>1171-c<k1>hiMsAluka<k2>hiMsAluka
{%Hiṃsāluka, as, ā, am,%}¦ disposed to be mischievous,
hurtful; ({%as%}), m. a mischievous or savage dog.
<LEND>

<L>54146<pc>1171-c<k1>hiMsita<k2>hiMsita
{%Hiṃsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ injured, hurt; mortally
wounded; ({%am%}), n. injury, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>54147<pc>1171-c<k1>hiMsitvA<k2>hiMsitvA
{%Hiṃsitvā,%}¦ ind. having injured, having wronged.
<LEND>

<L>54148<pc>1171-c<k1>hiMsIra<k2>hiMsIra
{%Hiṃsīra, as,%}¦ m. a mischievous wretch, villain,
a tiger.
<LEND>

<L>54149<pc>1171-c<k1>hiMsya<k2>hiMsya
{%Hiṃsya, as, ā, am,%}¦ liable to be hurt or injured.
<LEND>

<L>54150<pc>1171-c<k1>hiMsra<k2>hiMsra
{%Hiṃsra, as, ā, am,%}¦ injurious, mischievous, hurtful,
noxious, destructive, murderous; formidable, terrible;
cruel, fierce, savage; ({%as%}), m. any noxious animal;
a beast of prey; a destroyer; N. of Śiva; of Bhīma;
({%ā%}), f. spikenard ({%= jaṭā-māṃsī%}); the shrub Abrus
Precatorius; a sort of grass, Coix Barbata; a vein,
nerve. {%—Hiṃsra-paśu, us,%} m. a noxious animal,
beast of prey. {%—Hiṃsra-yantra, am,%} n. an imple-
ment for injuring or wounding, a trap; a mystical
text used for injurious purposes. {%—Hiṃsrāhiṃsra%}
{%(˚ra-ah˚), am,%} n. noxious and harmless, wicked
and good.
<LEND>

<L>54151<pc>1171-c<k1>hiMsraka<k2>hiMsraka
{%Hiṃsraka, as,%}¦ m. a savage or noxious animal,
beast of prey.
<LEND>

<L>54152<pc>1171-c<k1>hikk<k2>hikk
{#hikk#}¦ {%hikk,%} cl. 1. P. A. {%hikkati, -te,%}
{%jihikka, jihikke, hikkiṣyati, -te, ahik-%}
{%kīt, ahikkiṣṭa, hikkitum,%} to make an indistinct
or inarticulate sound; to hiccough; cl. 10. A. {%hik-%}
{%kayate,%} &c., to injure, kill (= rt. {%kiṣk,%} q. v.):
Caus. {%hikkayati, -yitum, ajihikkat:%} Desid. {%ji-%}
{%hikkiṣati, -te:%} Intens. {%jehikkyate, jehikkīti,%}
{%jehikti.%}
<LEND>

<L>54153<pc>1171-c<k1>hikkA<k2>hikkA
{%Hikkā,%}¦ f. an indistinct or inarticulate sound;
hiccough; [cf. {%hekkā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54154<pc>1171-c<k1>hiNkf<k2>hiNkf
{#hiNkf#}¦ {%hiṅkṛ,%} cl. 8. 5. P. {%-karoti, -kṛṇoti,%}
&c., to make the sound {%him;%} to low (as a cow).
{%—Hiṅ-kāra, as,%} m. the sound {%him;%} a kind of low
roar; a tiger (as making this sound). {%—Hiṅ-kṛṇ-%}
{%vat, an, atī, at,%} Ved. making the sound {%him;%}
roaring (as a tiger); lowing (as of a cow; Sāy. {%hiṅ-%}
{%kṛṇvatī = vatsam prati hiṅkāraṃ kurvatī,%} Ṛg-
veda I. 164, 27).
<LEND>

<L>54155<pc>1171-c<k1>hiNgu<k2>hiNgu
{#hiNgu#}¦ {%hiṅgu, us, u,%} m. n. (according to
Uṇādi-s. I. 37. fr. {%hi,%} substituted for rt. 1. {%han;%}
according to Śabda-k. only neut.), the plant Asa
Fetida (said to be so called as ‘killing’ or over-
powering all other odours); the substance prepared
from the plant (for household use). {%—Hiṅgu-nā-%}
{%ḍikā,%} f. the resin of a particular plant ({%= nāḍī-%}
{%hiṅgu)%}. {%—Hiṅgu-niryāsa, as,%} m. the gummy exu-
dation or concrete juice of Asa Fetida; the Nimba
tree. {%—Hiṅgu-pattra, as,%} m. the Iṅgudī tree; ({%ī%}),
f. a drug composed of a leaf resembling that of Asa
Fetida; ({%am%}), n. the leaf of the Asa Fetida plant.
{%—Hiṅgu-parṇī,%} f. a particular plant {%(= vaṃśa-%}
{%pattrī)%}. {%—Hiṅgu-śirāṭikā,%} f. a kind of plant ({%=%}
{%vaṃśa-pattrī%}).
<LEND>

<L>54156<pc>1171-c<k1>hiNgula<k2>hiNgula
{%Hiṅgula, as, am,%}¦ m. n. a preparation of mercury
with sulphur, vermilion; ({%ā%}), f., N. of a country
(mentioned in the Vāmana-Purāṇa); N. of a goddess.
{%—Hiṅgulā-jā,%} f., N. of a goddess.
<LEND>

<L>54157<pc>1171-c<k1>hiNguli<k2>hiNguli
{%Hiṅguli, is,%}¦ m. vermilion.
<LEND>

<L>54158<pc>1171-c<k1>hiNgulikA<k2>hiNgulikA
{%Hiṅgulikā,%}¦ f. the prickly nightshade, Solanum
Jacquini.
<LEND>

<L>54159<pc>1171-c<k1>hiNgulI<k2>hiNgulI
{%Hiṅgulī,%}¦ f. the egg-plant, Solanum Melongena.
<LEND>

<L>54160<pc>1171-c<k1>hiNgulu<k2>hiNgulu
{%Hiṅgulu, us, u,%}¦ m. n. vermilion.
<LEND>

<L>54161<pc>1171-c<k1>hiNgUla<k2>hiNgUla
{%Hiṅgūla, am,%}¦ n. a kind of edible root like a
potato, a sort of yam ({%= ālu%}).
<LEND>

<L>54162<pc>1171-c<k1>hijja<k2>hijja
{#hijja#}¦ {%hijja, as,%} m. the tree Barringtonia
Acutangula (commonly called Hijjal).
<LEND>

<L>54163<pc>1171-c<k1>hijjala<k2>hijjala
{%Hijjala, as,%}¦ m. the Hijjal tree.
<LEND>

<L>54164<pc>1171-c<k1>hiYjIra<k2>hiYjIra
{#hiYjIra#}¦ {%hiñjīra, as,%} m. a rope or chain for
fastening an elephant's foot.
<LEND>
[Page1172-a+ 79]

<L>54165<pc>1172-a<k1>hiw<k2>hiw
{#hiw#}¦ {%hiṭ,%} cl. 1. P. {%heṭati,%} &c. = rt. {%biṭ,%}
to curse, swear; to shout, exclaim.
<LEND>

<L>54166<pc>1172-a<k1>hiqimba<k2>hiqimba
{#hiqimba#}¦ {%hiḍimba, as,%} m. a gigantic Rāk-
ṣasa slain by Bhīma; ({%ā%}), f. Hiḍimba's sister (who
changed herself into a beautiful woman and married
Bhīma; he had a son by her named Ghaṭotkaca);
the wife of Hanumat. {%—Hiḍimba-jit, t,%} m. ‘con-
queror of Hiḍimba,’ Bhīma. {%—Hiḍimba-nisūdana,%}
{%as,%} or {%hiḍimba-bhid, t,%} m. ‘destroyer of Hiḍimba,’
Bhīma. {%—Hiḍimba-vadha%} or {%-badha, as,%} m. ‘the
killing of Hiḍimba,’ an episode of the Mahā-bhārata
(Ādi-parvan, section 152 — 156, verse 5927). {%—Hi-%}
{%ḍimbā-pati, is,%} m. ‘husband of Hiḍimbā,’ epi-
thet of Bhīma; of Hanumat. {%—Hiḍimbā-ramaṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. epithet of Bhīma; of Hanumat.
<LEND>

<L>54167<pc>1172-a<k1>hiqamba<k2>hiqamba
{%Hiḍamba = hiḍimba%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>54168<pc>1172-a<k1>hiRq<k2>hiRq
{#hiRq#}¦ {%hiṇḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%hiṇḍate, jihiṇḍe,%}
{%hiṇḍitum,%} to go, move, wander or roam
about [cf. {%ā-hiṇḍ%}]; to disregard, slight.
<LEND>

<L>54169<pc>1172-a<k1>hiRqana<k2>hiRqana
{%Hiṇḍana, am,%}¦ n. wandering, roaming; sexual
intercourse; writing.
<LEND>

<L>54170<pc>1172-a<k1>hiRqika<k2>hiRqika
{%Hiṇḍika, as,%}¦ m. an astrologer ({%= lagnācārya%}).
<LEND>

<L>54171<pc>1172-a<k1>hiRqira<k2>hiRqira
{%Hiṇḍira, as,%}¦ m. {%= hiṇḍīra,%} cuttle-fish bone.
<LEND>

<L>54172<pc>1172-a<k1>hiRqI<k2>hiRqI
{%Hiṇḍī,%}¦ f., N. of Durgā. {%—Hiṇḍī-priyatama, as,%}
m. ‘most beloved by Durgā,’ Śiva.
<LEND>

<L>54173<pc>1172-a<k1>hiRqIra<k2>hiRqIra
{%Hiṇḍīra, as,%}¦ m. cuttle-fish bone (supposed to be
the congealed foam of the sea; {%= samudra-phena%});
a man, male; the egg-plant, Solanum Melongena;
a tonic or stomachic; ({%am%}), n. the pomegranate.
<LEND>

<L>54174<pc>1172-a<k1>hita<k2>hita<h>2
{#hita#} 2¦. {%hita, as, ā, am%} (past pass. part. of
rt. 1. {%dhā;%} for 1. {%hita%} see under rt. 2. {%hi,%} p. 1171),
put, placed, laid, imposed [cf. 1. {%dhita%}]; held, taken,
seized; suitable, proper, fit, worthy, right, advan-
tageous, beneficial, profitable, useful, salutary, whole-
some, agreeing with (often said in a medical sense
of diet, regimen, medicines, &c.); friendly, affec-
tionate, kind, (in these senses hardly distinguishable
fr. 1. {%hita%}); ({%as%}), m. a friend, benefactor; benefit,
profit, service, good, welfare, well-being; ({%ā%}), f. a
causeway, dike; ({%am%}), n. anything suitable or proper,
an advantage. {%—Hita-kara, as, ī, am,%} doing what
is fit or proper, doing a service, performing a kind-
ness, befriending, friendly, favourable; ({%as%}), m. a
benefactor. {%—Hita-kāma, as, ā, am,%} wishing well
to, desirous of benefiting or befriending. {%—Hita-%}
{%kāmyā,%} f. desire for another's welfare, good-will.
{%—Hita-kārin, ī, iṇī, i,%} or {%hita-kṛt, t, t, t,%} doing
services, performing kindnesses or benefits, befriend-
ing, useful, beneficial, auspicious. {%—Hita-praṇī, īs,%}
m. ‘executing what is advantageous,’ a spy, secret
emissary. {%—Hita-prayas, ās, ās, as,%} Ved. one who
has offered an oblation of food, &c. {%—Hita-prepsu,%}
{%us, us, u,%} desirous of effecting another's welfare,
wishing to benefit or befriend. {%—Hita-buddhi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} friendly-minded, well-disposed, wishing well.
{%—Hita-mitra, as,%} m., Ved. a benevolent friend.
{%—Hita-vat, ān, atī, at,%} friendly, favourable, doing
good, useful. {%—Hita-vākya, am,%} n. friendly advice,
good counsel. {%—Hita-vādin, ī, inī, i,%} speaking
kindly, giving good counsel or friendly advice; ({%ī%}),
m. a friendly counsellor or adviser. {%—Hita-hari-%}
{%vaṃśa-gosvāmin, ī,%} m. {%= hari-vaṃśa-gosvāmin.%}
{%—Hitānukārin (˚ta-an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} acting con-
formably to what is right or kind. {%—Hitānuban-%}
{%dhin (˚ta-an˚), ī, inī, i,%} having welfare as a con-
sequence, involving or bringing welfare. {%—Hitān-%}
{%veṣin (˚ta-an˚), ī, iṇī, i,%} seeking another's wel-
fare. {%—Hitā-bhaṅga, as,%} m. the forcing or breaking
of a dike or causeway, (Manu IX. 274.) {%—Hitār-%}
{%thin (˚ta-ar˚), ī, inī, i,%} seeking or desiring another's
welfare or advantage. {%—Hitāvalī (˚ta-āv˚),%} f. a
particular plant {%(= aṅgāra-kuṣṭhaka)%}. {%—Hitāhita%}
{%(˚ta-ah˚), as, ā, am,%} good and evil, beneficial and
disadvantageous. {%—Hitecchā (˚ta-ic˚),%} f. well-wish-
ing, good-will, good wishes. {%—Hitaiṣin (˚ta-eṣ˚),%}
{%ī, iṇī, i,%} wishing well, desiring another's welfare,
kindly disposed, benevolent. {%—Hitokti (˚ta-uk˚), is,%}
f. kind or good advice, salutary instruction, friendly
language. {%—Hitopadeśa (˚ta-up˚), as,%} m. friendly
[Page1172-b+ 76]
advice, salutary instruction; N. of a celebrated and
very popular collection of stories and fables (supposed
to be narrated by a Brāhman named Viṣṇu-śarman
to some young princes, and intermixed with many
admirable didactic sentences and moral precepts ex-
tracted from various sources, the whole being chiefly
founded on the Pañca-tantra, q. v.: the stories illus-
trate four principal subjects, divided into four books,
viz. 1. Mitra-lābha, ‘the acquisition of friends;’
2. Suhṛd-bheda, ‘the separation of friends;’ 3. Vi-
graha, ‘war;’ 4. Sandhi, ‘peace;’ they have been
translated into nearly all the languages of Asia and
Europe, and have served as the substance of many
similar collections, such as the Anvāri Suhailī, Khirad-
afroz, Pilpay's Fables, &c.); N. of a work on medi-
cine; of another work on medicine by Śambhū-
nātha, (also called Vaidyaka-sāra-saṅgraha.) {%—Hito-%}
{%padeṣṭṛ (˚ta-up˚), tā,%} m. a friendly instructor,
kind adviser.
<LEND>

<L>54175<pc>1172-b<k1>hitaka<k2>hitaka
{%Hitaka, as,%}¦ m. a child, the young of any animal,
a pupil, &c. ({%= śiśu,%} according to Śabda-k.).
<LEND>

<L>54176<pc>1172-b<k1>hitvA<k2>hitvA<h>3
3. {%hitvā,%}¦ ind. (for 2. see p. 1171, col. 1), having
put or placed, having made, &c.
<LEND>

<L>54177<pc>1172-b<k1>hintAla<k2>hintAla
{#hintAla#}¦ {%hintāla, as,%} m. (connected with
{%tāla,%} q. v.), the marshy date tree, a species of palm,
Phœnix or Elate Paludosa.
<LEND>

<L>54178<pc>1172-b<k1>hindu<k2>hindu
{#hindu#}¦ {%hindu, us,%} m. (fr. the Persian <lang n="arabic">هندو</lang>),
a Hindu (more properly Hindū). {%—Hindu-dharma,%}
{%as,%} m. the Hindū religion. {%—Hindu-sthāna, am,%} n.
the country of the Hindūs, Hindūstān (properly re-
stricted to the upper provinces between Benares and
the river Sutlej).
<LEND>

<L>54179<pc>1172-b<k1>hindola<k2>hindola
{#hindola#}¦ {%hindola, as,%} m. a swing, swinging
cradle or hammock; an ornamental swing or litter
in which figures of Kṛṣṇa are carried about during
the Swing-festival in the light half of the month
Śrāvaṇa; one of the six Rāgas or personified musical
modes, (see {%rāga,%} p. 837.)
<LEND>

<L>54180<pc>1172-b<k1>hindolaka<k2>hindolaka
{%Hindolaka, as,%}¦ m. a swing; a cradle.
<LEND>

<L>54181<pc>1172-b<k1>hindolaya<k2>hindolaya
{%Hindolaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%hindolayati,%} &c., to swing,
rock about.
<LEND>

<L>54182<pc>1172-b<k1>hindolA<k2>hindolA
{%Hindolā,%}¦ f. a swing ({%= hindola%} above).
<LEND>

<L>54183<pc>1172-b<k1>hinv<k2>hinv
{#hinv#}¦ {%hinv%} (connected with rt. 2. {%hi;%} cf.
rt. {%dhinv%}), cl. 1. P. {%hinvati, jihinva,%}
{%hinvitum,%} to satisfy, please, exhilarate.
<LEND>

<L>54184<pc>1172-b<k1>hinvAna<k2>hinvAna
{#hinvAna#}¦ {%hinvāna.%} See under rt. 2. {%hi.%}
<LEND>

<L>54185<pc>1172-b<k1>hibuka<k2>hibuka
{#hibuka#}¦ {%hibuka, am,%} n. (= <lang n="greek">ὑπογείον</lang>), epithet
of the fourth Lagna or astrological sign, fourth
house ({%= pātāla,%} p. 563).
<LEND>

<L>54186<pc>1172-b<k1>hima<k2>hima
{#hima#}¦ {%hima, as, ā, am%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
I. 146. fr. {%hi%} substituted for rt. 1. {%han;%} according
to others from a lost rt. {%hyam%}), cold, frigid, frosty,
icy, dewy, any cold substance; ({%as%}), m. the cold season,
cold, winter ({%= hemanta,%} p. 1173); the moon;
the Himālaya mountain; the sandal tree; camphor;
({%ā%}), f. the cold season, winter; a year (Ved.); small
cardamoms; a variety of the fragrant grass Cyperus
({%= bhadra-mustā, nāgara-mustā%}); a kind of plant
({%= pṛkkā%}); a kind of grass ({%= caṇikā%}); the fra-
grant drug and perfume Reṇukā; ({%am%}), n. frost,
hoar-frost, ice, snow, dew, cold, coldness, coolness,
(in Ṛg-veda X. 37, 10. {%himā,%} inst. c. {%= śaityena,%}
and thought by some to come from a monosyllabic
form {%him%}); night, (in Naigh. I. 7. {%himā,%} inst. c.
is enumerated among the {%rātri-nāmāni;%} cf. {%himyā%}
under {%himya%}); sandal-wood; another fragrant wood
(of cooling properties, {%= padma-kāṣṭha%}); fresh
butter; tin; a pearl; a lotus; [cf. Zend <nsi>zjao, zim,</nsi>
<nsi>zima,</nsi> ‘winter:’ Gr. <lang n="greek">χι-ών (χίον-ος), δύσ-χιμο-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χεῖ-μα, χειμάζω, χειμαίνω, χίμεθλο-ν, χειμών,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χειμερινό-ς:</lang> Lat. <nsi>hiem-s, hibernu-s</nsi> (for <nsi>himer-</nsi>
<nsi>nus</nsi>): Slav. <nsi>zima,</nsi> ‘winter:’ Lith. <nsi>zema, zemini-s:</nsi>
Hib. <nsi>geimhre, geimhrith, geimhreadh,</nsi> ‘winter;’
<nsi>gamh,</nsi> ‘winter, cold.’] {%—Hima-kara, as, ī, am,%}
causing or producing cold, frigorific, cold; ({%as%}), m.
the moon; camphor. {%—Hima-kūṭa, as,%} m. ‘cold-
[Page1172-c+ 81]
summit,’ the winter season. {%—Hima-garbha, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} laden with snow. {%—Hima-giri, is,%} m. the Himālaya
mountain. {%—Hima-gu, us,%} m. ‘cold-rayed,’ epithet
of the moon; [cf. {%śīta-gu.%}] {%—Hima-gaura, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} white as snow. {%—Hima-ja, as, ā, am,%} produced
by cold; born or produced in the Himālaya mountain;
({%as%}), m. the mountain Maināka; ({%ā%}), f. ‘daughter
of Himālaya;’ the plant called Zedoary; another
plant ({%= kṣīriṇī%}); Pārvatī. {%—Hima-jjhaṭi, is,%} f.
({%jjhaṭi%} for {%jhaṭi,%} see rt. {%jhaṭ%}), ‘intermixture of cold
dew,’ hoar-frost, mist, fog; [cf. {%ku-jjhaṭi.%}] {%—Hima-%}
{%jvara, as,%} m. fever with cold paroxysms, ague.
{%—Hima-taila, am,%} n. a kind of camphor ointment.
{%—Hima-dīdhiti, is,%} m. ‘having cool rays,’ the
moon. {%—Hima-dugdhā,%} f. ‘having cool juice,’ a kind
of milky plant or tree {%(= kṣīriṇī)%}. {%—Hima-dur-%}
{%dina, am,%} n. cold and bad weather, frosty or snowy
weather, wintry weather. {%—Hima-dyuti, is,%} m.
‘having cool radiance,’ the moon. {%—Hima-druma,%}
{%as,%} m. a sort of large Nimba tree. {%—Hima-druh,%}
{%dhruk,%} m. ‘dew-dispeller,’ the sun. {%—Hima-dhātu,%}
{%us,%} m. ‘having cold minerals,’ the Himālaya moun-
tain. {%—Hima-dhvasta, as, ā, am,%} withered by cold,
frost-bitten, frost-nipt (as a lotus &c.). {%—Hima-%}
{%nirmukta, as, ā, am,%} freed from frost. {%—Hima-%}
{%prastha, as,%} m. ‘having snowy table-land,’ the
Himālaya mountain. {%—Hima-bāluka, as, ā,%} m. f.
camphor. {%—Hima-bhās, ās,%} m. ‘having cool lustre,’
epithet of the moon. {%—Hima-raśmi, is,%} m. ‘having
cool rays,’ the moon. {%—Himaraśmi-ja, as,%} m.
‘born from the moon,’ epithet of the planet Budha
or Mercury. {%—Himartu (˚ma-ṛtu), us,%} m. the cold
season. {%—Hima-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having frost or
snow, snowy, frosty, icy, freezing, snow-clad; ({%ān%}),
m. the Himālaya mountain or the Himālaya per-
sonified, (see {%himālaya.%}) {%—Himavata,%} at the end of
a comp. {%= hima-vat%} above. {%—Himavat-kukṣi,%}
{%is,%} m. a valley of the Himālaya. {%—Himavat-khaṇḍa,%}
N. of a book of the Skanda-Purāṇa. {%—Hima-%}
{%vat-prabhava, as, ā, am,%} springing from or be-
longing to the Himālaya mountain. {%—Himavat-%}
{%suta, as,%} m. ‘son of the Himālaya,’ the moun-
tain Maināka; ({%ā%}), f. the Ganges; Pārvatī. {%—Hima-%}
{%vad-giri, is,%} m. a snowy mountain. {%—Himavad-%}
{%giri-saṃśraya, as,%} m. ‘taking refuge in the Himā-
laya mountain,’ epithet of Śiva. {%—Hima-viddha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} ‘frost-pierced,’ penetrated with frost (as
the west wind in the cold season). {%—Hima-śarkarā,%}
f. a kind of sugar {%(= yāvanālī)%}. {%—Hima-śītala, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} very cold or frosty, freezing. {%—Hima-śuci-%}
{%bhasma-bhūṣita, as, ā, am,%} adorned with ashes
white as snow. {%—Hima-śaila, as,%} m. a snowy moun-
tain, the Himālaya. {%—Himaśaila-jā,%} f. ‘daughter
of Himālaya,’ the goddess Durgā or Pārvatī. {%—Hima-%}
{%śratha, as,%} m. ‘shedding cold,’ the moon. {%—Hima-%}
{%saṃhati, is,%} f. a mass of ice or snow. {%—Hima-%}
{%saras, as,%} n. cold water. {%—Hima-hāna-kṛt, t,%} m.
‘causing loss of cold,’ fire. {%—Hima-hāsaka, as,%} m.
‘winter-smiler,’ the marshy date tree. {%—Himāṃśu%}
{%(˚ma-aṃ˚), us,%} m. ‘cool-rayed,’ the moon; camphor.
{%—Himāṃśv-abhikhya, am,%} n. ‘called after the
moon,’ silver. {%—Himāgama (˚ma-āg˚), as,%} m. ‘ap-
proach of cold,’ the cold season, winter. {%—Himādri%}
{%(˚ma-ad˚), is,%} m. a snowy range of mountains, the
Himālaya mountain (sometimes personified). {%—Himā-%}
{%dri-jā,%} f. ‘daughter of Himālaya,’ Pārvatī; a kind of
plant or tree {%(= kṣīriṇī)%}. {%—Himādri-tanayā,%} f.
‘daughter of Himālaya,’ Durgā. {%—Himādri-tanayā-%}
{%pati, is,%} m. ‘husband of the daughter of Himā-
laya,’ Śiva. {%—Himānila (˚ma-an˚), as,%} m. a cold
or frosty wind. {%—Himābja (˚ma-ab˚), am,%} n. a
lotus. {%—Himābha (˚ma-ābha), as, ā, am,%} resem-
bling cold, like snow or frost. {%—Himāmbu (˚ma-%}
{%am˚), u,%} n. cold water. {%—Himārāti (˚ma-ar˚), is,%} m.
‘enemy of cold,’ fire; the sun; a kind of plant ({%=%}
{%citraka%}); another plant {%(= arka)%}. {%—Himāruṇa%}
{%(˚ma-ar˚), as, ā, am,%} grey with frost. {%—Himārta%}
{%(˚ma-ār˚), as, ā, am,%} pinched with cold, suffering from
cold, chilled, frozen. {%—Himārdita (˚ma-ar˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} pinched or pained by cold. {%—Himālaya (˚ma-%}
{%āl˚), as,%} m. ‘abode of snow,’ the Himālaya range of
[Page1173-a+ 79]
mountains (which bounds India on the north and
separates it from Tartary, giving rise to the rivers
Ganges and Indus, and containing the highest eleva-
tions in the world; in mythology personified as the
husband of Menā or Menakā, by whom he had a
son called Maināka, who is also a personified moun-
tain; he was moreover the father of Durgā or Umā,
who became incarnate as Pārvatī, ‘daughter of the
Mountain,’ to captivate Śiva and withdraw him from
a severe penance he had undertaken to perform in
the region of Himālaya; the personified Mountain
is also represented as the father of Gaṅgā, who, as the
personified Ganges, is generally regarded as his eldest
daughter, though sometimes identified with Pārvatī);
the white Khadira tree; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plant {%(= bhū-%}
{%my-āmalakī)%}. {%—Himālaya-sutā,%} f. ‘daughter of
Himālaya,’ Umā or Pārvatī. {%—Himā-vatī,%} f. a kind
of Soma or moon-plant ({%= svarṇa-kṣīrī,%} q. v.).
{%—Himāśrayā (˚ma-āś˚),%} f. ‘depending on cold,’
a kind of plant {%(= svarṇa-jīvantī)%}. {%—Himāhva%}
{%(˚ma-āh˚), as,%} m. ‘called after ice,’ camphor.
{%—Himāhvaya (˚ma-āh˚), as,%} m. ‘called after ice,’
camphor; ({%am%}), n. a lotus. {%—Himottarā (˚ma-ut˚),%} f.
‘following on cold,’ the tawny grape. {%—Himotpanna%}
{%(˚ma-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} produced by cold; ({%ā%}), f. a
kind of sugar {%(= yāvanālī)%}. {%—Himodbhavā (˚ma-%}
{%ud˚),%} f. ‘cold-produced,’ the plant called Zedoary
{%(= śaṭī)%}. {%—Himosra (˚ma-us˚), as,%} m. ‘cool-
rayed,’ epithet of the moon.
<LEND>

<L>54187<pc>1173-a<k1>himaka<k2>himaka
{%Himaka, as,%}¦ m. a kind of tree ({%= vi-kaṅkata%});
N. of a prince or chief of Kaśmīra.
<LEND>

<L>54188<pc>1173-a<k1>himavala<k2>himavala
{%Himavala, am,%}¦ n. (also read {%hemavala%}), a pearl.
<LEND>

<L>54189<pc>1173-a<k1>himA<k2>himA
{%Himā,%}¦ f. See under {%hima,%} p. 1172.
<LEND>

<L>54190<pc>1173-a<k1>himAnI<k2>himAnI
{%Himānī,%}¦ f. great frost, a mass of snow, collection
of ice and snow ({%= hima-saṃhati%}), snow-drift; a
kind of sugar {%(= yāvanālī)%}. {%—Himānī-viśada, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} white as a snow-drift.
<LEND>

<L>54191<pc>1173-a<k1>himikA<k2>himikA
{%Himikā,%}¦ f. hoar-frost, cold dew.
<LEND>

<L>54192<pc>1173-a<k1>himelu<k2>himelu
{%Himelu, us, us, u,%}¦ chilly, suffering from cold,
frozen.
<LEND>

<L>54193<pc>1173-a<k1>himna<k2>himna
{%Himna, as,%}¦ m. (see 1. {%heman%} and {%hemnā%} below),
the planet Mercury.
<LEND>

<L>54194<pc>1173-a<k1>himya<k2>himya
{%Himya, as, ā, am,%}¦ frosty, snowy, icy, dewy, cold,
frigid, (in Ṛg-veda I. 34, 1. {%himyā,%} ‘with the night,’
is explained by Sāy. as {%= hima-yuktayā rātryā,%}
‘with the frosty night.’)
<LEND>

<L>54195<pc>1173-a<k1>heman<k2>heman<h>1
1. {%heman, ā,%}¦ m. (according to Śabda-k. also {%a%}
neut.), winter; cold, the cold season; the planet
Mercury, (see {%hima-raśmi-ja.%})
<LEND>

<L>54196<pc>1173-a<k1>hemanta<k2>hemanta
{%Hemanta, as, am,%}¦ m. n. winter, the cold season
(comprising the two months Agra-hāyaṇa and Pauṣa,
i. e. from middle of November to middle of January).
{%—Hemanta-nātha, as,%} m. ‘lord of winter,’ the
wood-apple tree ({%= kapittha%}).
<LEND>

<L>54197<pc>1173-a<k1>hemantI<k2>hemantI
{%Hemantī,%}¦ f. the winter season, cold season.
<LEND>

<L>54198<pc>1173-a<k1>hemavala<k2>hemavala
{%Hemavala, am,%}¦ n. a pearl ({%= himavala%}).
<LEND>

<L>54199<pc>1173-a<k1>hemnA<k2>hemnA
{%Hemnā,%}¦ m. (according to Śabda-k.) the planet
Mercury.
<LEND>

<L>54200<pc>1173-a<k1>hiraNgu<k2>hiraNgu
{#hiraNgu#}¦ {%hiraṅgu, us,%} m., N. of Rāhu (the
personified ascending node).
<LEND>

<L>54201<pc>1173-a<k1>hiraRa<k2>hiraRa
{#hiraRa#}¦ {%hiraṇa, am,%} n. (connected with {%hiri,%}
1. {%hari, harit,%} q.q. v.v.; but see etymology given
for {%hiraṇya%} below), gold; semen; a cowry.
<LEND>

<L>54202<pc>1173-a<k1>hiraRin<k2>hiraRin
{%Hiraṇin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ Ved. golden, (Sāy. {%= hiraṇya-%}
{%vat.%})
<LEND>

<L>54203<pc>1173-a<k1>hiraRmaya<k2>hiraRmaya
{%Hiraṇ-maya, as, ī, am%}¦ ({%hiraṇ%} for {%hiraṇa%}),
made of gold, golden; ({%as%}), m. epithet of Brahmā,
(see {%hiraṇya-garbha%}); ({%am%}), n. one of the nine
Varṣas or divisions of the continent (said to be be-
tween the mountainous ranges Śveta and Śṛṅgavat;
see {%varṣa, śveta%}). {%—Hiraṇ-vat, ān,%} m., N. of a
son of Agnīdhra (king of Śveta-dvīpa). {%—Hiraṇ-%}
{%vatī,%} f., N. of a river.
<LEND>

<L>54204<pc>1173-a<k1>hiraRya<k2>hiraRya
{%Hiraṇya, am,%}¦ n. (according to Uṇādi-s. V. 44.
fr. rt. {%hary%} with substitution of {%hira%}), gold (crude
bullion or wrought); any vessel made of gold (e. g.
a golden spoon, Manu II. 29); a golden ornament
(Ved.); any precious metal, silver (crude or wrought);
wealth, property; substance, imperishable matter;
[Page1173-b+ 81]
semen virile; a particular measure; a cowry; the
Datura or thorn-apple; ({%ā%}), f. one of the seven
tongues of fire. {%—Hiraṇya-kakṣa, as, ā, am,%}
wearing a golden girdle. {%—Hiraṇya-kavacodbhava%}
{%(˚ca-ud˚), as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Hiraṇya-%}
{%kaśipu, us,%} m. ‘clothed in gold,’ N. of a king of
the Daityas celebrated for his blasphemous impiety,
(he was son of Kaśyapa and Diti, and had obtained
a boon from Brahmā that he should not be slain by
either god or man or animal; hence he became so
powerful that he usurped the sovereignty of the
three worlds, and appropriated the sacrifices made to
the gods who were compelled by him to fly from
their seats in heaven; when, however, his pious son
Prahlāda praised Viṣṇu, the Daitya exerted all his
power in vain to destroy the boy, and Viṣṇu him-
self appeared out of a pillar [which had been
blasphemously struck by the father, saying, ‘Is the
deity here?’] in the form Nara-siṃha, ‘half man,
half lion,’ and tore Hiraṇya-kaśipu to pieces; this
was Viṣṇu's fourth Avatāra; see {%pra-hlāda, nara-%}
{%siṃha, viṣṇu.%}) {%—Hiraṇya-kaśipu-han, hā,%} m.
‘slayer of Hiraṇya-kaśipu,’ Viṣṇu. {%—Hiraṇya-%}
{%kāmadhenu, us,%} f. ‘a golden cow of plenty,’ one
of the sixteen Mahā-dānas, (see {%mahā-dāna, tulā-%}
{%puruṣa.%}) {%—Hiraṇya-keśin, ī,%} m., N. of the author
of certain Kalpa-sūtras. {%—Hiraṇyakeśi-sūtra, am,%}
n. the Kalpa-sūtras of Hiraṇya-keśin. {%—Hiraṇya-%}
{%keśya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. golden-haired, having golden
manes (said of the two horses of Indra). {%—Hiraṇya-%}
{%koṣa, as,%} m. wrought and unwrought gold and
silver. {%—Hiraṇya-garbha, as,%} m., N. of Brahmā
(so called as born from a golden egg supposed to
have been formed out of the seed deposited in the
waters when they were produced as the first creation
of the Self-existent; according to Manu I. 9. this
seed became a golden egg, resplendent as the sun,
in which the Self-existent Brahma was born as
Brahmā, the creator of the worlds, i. e. according
to Kullūka, as, Hiraṇya-garbha, who is therefore re-
garded as a manifestation of the Paramātman or
supreme Soul; in Ṛg-veda X. 121. it is said Hiraṇya-
garbha arose in the beginning; he was the one lord
of existing things; he established the earth and the
sky, &c.); N. of the author of the hymn Ṛg-veda
X. 121 (having the patronymic Prājāpatya); N. of
Viṣṇu; (in phil.) the soul invested by the Sūk-
shma-śarīra or subtile body {%(= sūtrātman, prāṇāt-%}
{%man);%} N. of a Liṅga. {%—Hiraṇya-cakra, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} golden-wheeled. {%—Hiraṇya-tvac, k, k, k,%} Ved.
‘golden-skinned,’ having a golden covering, coated
with gold (said of a chariot). {%—Hiraṇya-tvaca, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having skin bright as gold. {%—Hiraṇya-da,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} yielding gold, granting gold; ({%as%}), m.
the ocean; ({%ā%}), f. the earth. {%—Hiraṇya-dat, an,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. having golden teeth. {%—Hiraṇya-%}
{%dhanus, us,%} m. ‘golden-bowed,’ N. of a king.
{%—Hiraṇya-nābha, as,%} m. ‘having a golden navel,’
the mountain Maināka; N. of a pupil of Jaimini and
teacher of the Sāma-veda. {%—Hiraṇya-nirṇij, k, k,%}
{%k,%} Ved. bright as gold. {%—Hiraṇya-nemi, is, is, i,%}
Ved. having golden wheels. {%—Hiraṇya-pakṣa, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} Ved. golden-winged. {%—Hiraṇya-pāṇi, is,%}
{%is, i,%} Ved. golden-handed, golden-footed (said of the
horses of the Maruts). {%—Hiraṇya-pāva, as, ā, am,%}
Ved. purifying with gold. {%—Hiraṇya-piṇḍa, as,%} m.
Ved. a lump of gold. {%—Hiraṇya-pura, am,%} n., N.
of a town of the Asuras. {%—Hiraṇya-peśas, ās, ās,%}
{%as,%} Ved. having golden lustre. {%—Hiraṇya-praüga,%}
{%am,%} n., Ved. a golden fore-part of a chariot-pole,
(Ṛg-veda I. 35, 5.) {%—Hiraṇya-pratipūrṇa, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} full of gold. {%—Hiraṇya-bāhu, us,%} m. ‘golden-
armed,’ epithet of Śiva; the river Śoṇa, q. v.
{%—Hiraṇya-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} Ved. golden-shaped
(said of Agni). {%—Hiraṇya-retas, ās,%} m. ‘having
golden seed,’ epithet of Agni or fire; of the sun; of
Śiva; a kind of plant or tree ({%= citraka%}); N. of
a son of Priya-vrata. {%—Hiraṇya-roman, ā,%} m.
‘golden-haired,’ N. of a Loka-pāla (son of Marīci);
of a son of Parjanya (regent of the north). {%—Hira-%}
{%ṇya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} abounding in gold; ({%ān%}), m.
[Page1173-c+ 78]
epithet of Agni; ({%atī%}), f. a proper N. {%—Hiraṇya-%}
{%vandhura, as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a framework of
gold (said of a chariot of Indra and Vāyu). {%—Hira-%}
{%ṇya-varṇa, as, ā, am,%} golden-coloured; ({%ā%}), f. a
river, (in Naigh. I. 13. {%hiraṇya-varṇāḥ%} is enume-
rated among the {%nadī-nāmāni.%}) {%—Hiraṇya-vartani,%}
{%is, is, i,%} Ved. having a golden path. {%—Hiraṇya-%}
{%varman, ā,%} m. ‘having golden armour,’ a proper N.
{%—Hiraṇya-vāśīmattama, as, ā, am,%} Ved. most
skilful wielder of the golden spear (said of Pūṣan).
{%—Hiraṇya-vāha, as,%} m. ‘bearing gold,’ the river
Śoṇa, q. v.; epithet of Śiva. {%—Hiraṇya-vid, t, t, t,%}
Ved. ‘knowing gold,’ possessing or granting gold.
{%—Hiraṇya-vindu, us,%} m. fire. {%—Hiraṇya-śamya,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} Ved. having a golden {%śamyā%} or yoke.
{%—Hiraṇya-sandṛś, k, k, k,%} Ved. resembling gold,
shining like gold. {%—Hiraṇya-stūpa, as,%} m., N. of
an Āṅgirasa (author of Ṛg-veda I. 31 — 35, IX. 4,
69; Arcat Hairaṇyastūpa is the author of Ṛg-veda
X. 149); ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a family. {%—Hiraṇya-%}
{%hasta, as,%} m., Ved. ‘golden-handed,’ epithet of
Savitṛ; N. of a son of Vadhri-matī. {%—Hiraṇyākṣa%}
{%(˚ya-ak˚), as,%} m. ‘golden-eyed,’ N. of a celebrated
Daitya, twin brother of Hiraṇya-kaśipu, q. v., (he
was killed by Viṣṇu, in his third Avatāra, in the
form of a Varāha or boar; like his brother, Hiraṇya-
kaśipu, he had obtained a boon from Brahmā, so
that no animal, except a boar, which he had omitted
to mention, could hurt him; he then became very
insolent and seized upon the earth, which he carried
with him into the depths of the ocean, where it
must have perished had not Viṣṇu become in-
carnate as a boar [the symbol of great strength],
and having dived into the abyss, destroyed the
Daitya and lifted up the recovered earth on the
point of his tusks); epithet of Savitṛ (Ved.); N. of
a Muni; of a place; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a family
(supposed to have been descended from Viśvā-mitra).
{%—Hiraṇyāṅga (˚ya-aṅ˚), as,%} m., N. of a Muni;
({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a family. {%—Hiraṇyābhīśu (˚ya-%}
{%abh˚), us, us, u,%} Ved. having golden reins. {%—Hira-%}
{%ṇyāśva (˚ya-aś˚), as,%} m. ‘a golden horse,’ one of
the sixteen Mahā-dānas, (see {%mahā-dāna, tulā-%}
{%puruṣa.%}) {%—Hiraṇyāśva-ratha, as,%} m. ‘golden-
horsed-chariot,’ one of the sixteen Mahā-dānas, (see
above.)
<LEND>

<L>54205<pc>1173-c<k1>hiraRyaka<k2>hiraRyaka
{%Hiraṇyaka, as,%}¦ m., a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>54206<pc>1173-c<k1>hiraRyaya<k2>hiraRyaya
{%Hiraṇyaya, as, ī, am,%}¦ golden, (in Ṛg-veda VIII.
78, 2. {%hiraṇyayā = hiraṇmayāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>54207<pc>1173-c<k1>hiraRyayA<k2>hiraRyayA
{%Hiraṇyayā,%}¦ f., Ved. desire for gold.
<LEND>

<L>54208<pc>1173-c<k1>hiraRyayu<k2>hiraRyayu
{%Hiraṇyayu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. fond of gold or trea-
sures.
<LEND>

<L>54209<pc>1173-c<k1>hiraRyava<k2>hiraRyava
{%Hiraṇyava, as,%}¦ m. a divine treasure, the property
of the gods ({%= deva-sva%}).
<LEND>

<L>54210<pc>1173-c<k1>hirADara<k2>hirADara
{#hirADara#}¦ {%hirādhara, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>54211<pc>1173-c<k1>hiri<k2>hiri
{#hiri#}¦ {%hiri%} (see rt. 2. {%hṛ%}), apparently a Vedic
form of {%hari,%} q. v. {%—Hiri-śipra, as,%} m., Ved. epi-
thet of Agni, (explained by Sāy. as {%haraṇa-śīla-%}
{%hanu,%} ‘one whose jaws carry away or seize,’ or
{%dīptoṣṇīṣa,%} ‘having a flaming head-dress,’ Ṛg-
veda II. 2, 5; cf. {%hṛṇi.%}) {%—Hiri-śmaśru, us,%} m.,
Ved. ‘golden-bearded,’ epithet of Agni.
<LEND>

<L>54212<pc>1173-c<k1>hirImat<k2>hirImat
{%Hirīmat,%}¦ (in Ṛg-veda X. 105, 6. according to
Sāy. {%hirīmān = haritāśvaḥ%} or {%harita-varṇaḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>54213<pc>1173-c<k1>hirImaSa<k2>hirImaSa
{%Hirīmaśa,%}¦ (in Ṛg-veda X. 105, 6. according to
Sāy. {%hirīmaśaḥ = harita-śmaśruḥ%} or {%pṛṣo-%}
{%daraḥ.%})
<LEND>

<L>54214<pc>1173-c<k1>hiruk<k2>hiruk
{#hiruk#}¦ {%hiruk,%} ind. concealed, hidden, (in
Ṛg-veda I. 164, 32. {%= antar-hita,%} and in Naigh.
III. 25. enumerated among the {%nirṇītāntarhita-%}
{%nāmadheyāni%}); without, except; in the midst of,
amongst; near; below.
<LEND>

<L>54215<pc>1173-c<k1>hil<k2>hil
{#hil#}¦ {%hil%} (connected with rt. {%hel,%} q. v.),
cl. 6. P. {%hilati, jihela,%} &c., to sport
amorously, dally, wanton, express amorous inclina-
tion.
<LEND>

<L>54216<pc>1173-c<k1>hilamoci<k2>hilamoci
{%Hila-moci, is,%}¦ or {%hila-mocī%} or {%hilamocikā,%} f.
the pot-herb Hingtsha Repens.
<LEND>
[Page1174-a+ 71]

<L>54217<pc>1174-a<k1>hilIsamudra<k2>hilIsamudra
{#hilIsamudra#}¦ {%hilī-samudra,%} N. of a place.
<LEND>

<L>54218<pc>1174-a<k1>hilla<k2>hilla
{#hilla#}¦ {%hilla, as,%} m. a kind of bird ({%= śarāri%}).
<LEND>

<L>54219<pc>1174-a<k1>hillola<k2>hillola
{#hillola#}¦ {%hillola, as,%} m. (connected with
{%hindola,%} q. v.), a wave, surge; a whim; a particular
form of sexual union; one of the Rāgas or personified
musical modes, (for {%hindola,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>54220<pc>1174-a<k1>hillolaya<k2>hillolaya
{%Hillolaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%hillolayati,%} &c., to swing
or rock or roll about ({%= hindolaya%}).
<LEND>

<L>54221<pc>1174-a<k1>hilvalA<k2>hilvalA
{#hilvalA#}¦ {%hilvalā, ās,%} f. pl., N. of five small
stars in the head of the Nakṣatra Mṛga-śiras; [cf.
{%ilvalās.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54222<pc>1174-a<k1>hizk<k2>hizk
{#hizk#}¦ {%hiṣk,%} a various reading for rts.
{%hikk, kiṣk.%}
<LEND>

<L>54223<pc>1174-a<k1>hihi<k2>hihi
{#hihi#}¦ {%hihi,%} ind. {%= hīhī,%} q. v.; [cf. {%hī%} below.]
<LEND>

<L>54224<pc>1174-a<k1>hI<k2>hI
{#hI#}¦ {%hī,%} ind. [cf. {%hīhī%}], an exclamation or
interjection of surprise (ah! ah!); of fatigue or de-
spondence or sorrow (ah! alas!); (said to be also
used in giving a reason or cause, and equivalent to
‘therefore,’ ‘so,’ ‘for,’ ‘because,’ = 2. {%hi,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>54225<pc>1174-a<k1>hIta<k2>hIta
{#hIta#}¦ {%hīta, as, ā, am,%} Ved. {%= hita%} (accord-
ing to some).
<LEND>

<L>54226<pc>1174-a<k1>hIna<k2>hIna
{#hIna#}¦ {%hīna.%} See p. 1170, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>54227<pc>1174-a<k1>hIntAla<k2>hIntAla
{#hIntAla#}¦ {%hīntāla, as,%} m. {%= hintāla,%} the
marshy date tree.
<LEND>

<L>54228<pc>1174-a<k1>hIra<k2>hIra
{#hIra#}¦ {%hīra, as,%} m. (connected with {%hāra%}),
Indra's thunderbolt, a thunderbolt; a diamond, (see
{%vajra%}); a snake; a necklace; a lion; N. of Śiva; of
the father of Harṣa, q. v.; ({%ā%}), f. a sort of cockroach;
an ant; N. of the goddess Lakṣmī; of the wife of
Darpa-nārāyaṇa; a kind of plant, {%= kāśmarī; (am),%}
n. a thunderbolt; a diamond. {%—Hīra-bhaṭṭa, as,%} m.
a proper N. {%—Hīrāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), as,%} m. ‘diamond-
bodied,’ Indra's thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>54229<pc>1174-a<k1>hIraka<k2>hIraka
{%Hīraka, as,%}¦ m. the diamond (supposed to be pre-
sided over by Śukra or Venus).
<LEND>

<L>54230<pc>1174-a<k1>hIla<k2>hIla
{#hIla#}¦ {%hīla, am,%} n. (perhaps connected with
rt. {%hil%}), semen virile.
<LEND>

<L>54231<pc>1174-a<k1>hIluka<k2>hIluka
{%Hīluka, am,%}¦ n. a kind of rum or spirit distilled
from molasses.
<LEND>

<L>54232<pc>1174-a<k1>hILita<k2>hILita
{#hILita#}¦ {%hīḷita.%} See rt. {%hel.%}
<LEND>

<L>54233<pc>1174-a<k1>hIhI<k2>hIhI
{#hIhI#}¦ {%hīhī,%} ind. ({%hī,%} q. v., repeated), ah,
ha! hee, hee! (or similar sounds made in laughing
or giggling).
<LEND>

<L>54234<pc>1174-a<k1>hu<k2>hu
{#hu#}¦ {%hu%} (probably connected with rt. 1. {%dhū%}
= Gr. <lang n="greek">θύω;</lang> in some forms identical with rt.
{%hve%}), cl. 3. P. (Ved. also A.) {%juhoti%} (1st du. {%juhu-%}
{%vas%} or {%juhvas,%} 3rd pl. {%juhvati%}); Impf. {%ajuhot%} (3rd
pl. {%ajuhavus,%} 3rd pl. A., Ved. {%ajuhvata%}); Impv.
{%juhotu%} (2nd sing. {%juhudhi,%} Ved. also {%juhodhi,%} and
2nd pl. {%juhota%}); Perf. {%juhāva%} (identical in form
with Perf. of rt. {%hve;%} 1st du. {%juhuviva%}), or {%juha-%}
{%vāñ-cakāra, hoṣyati, ahauṣīt, hotum,%} to offer
or present (an oblation [acc.], especially with fire or
to fire), make an offering to or in honour of any
deity (sometimes with acc. of the deity honoured,
e. g. {%pāvakaṃ%} or {%agniṃ juhudhi,%} ‘make oblations
to fire,’ but often with dat., e. g. {%Somam Indrāya%}
{%hu,%} ‘to offer Soma to Indra’); to pour or cast clarified
butter &c. (acc.) into the sacred fire (loc.); to offer
up anything, worship or honour with offerings or
oblations; to sacrifice, perform a sacrifice; to accept
or appropriate an oblation, (Sāy. {%= svī-kṛ,%} Ṛg-veda
I. 75, 1); to eat, (according to Vopa-deva X. 1.
{%adane%}): Pass. {%hūyate%} (identical in form with Pass.
of rt. {%hve%}), Aor. {%ahāvi,%} to be offered (as an oblation
&c.), to be poured forth (in oblation, as clarified
butter &c.), to be sacrificed: Caus. {%hāvayati,%}
{%yitum,%} Aor. {%ajūhavat,%} to cause to offer oblations,
make to sacrifice, cause to honour with oblations:
Desid. {%juhūṣati:%} Intens. {%johūyate, johavīti, jo-%}
{%hoti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χέ-ω (χεύ-σω), χύ-μα, χεῦ-μα,</lang>
[Page1174-b+ 76]
<lang n="greek">χύ-σι-ς, χο-ή, χό-ο-ς, χυ-μό-ς, χυ-λό-ς, χύ-τρα;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>fo-n(t)-s, fu-ti-s, ec-fû-ti-o, re-fû-to, con-fû-to, fu-</nsi>
<nsi>nd-o, fû-ti-li-s;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>giu-t-a;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>geotan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54235<pc>1174-b<k1>juhvat<k2>juhvat
{%Juhvat, at, atī, at.%}¦ See p. 350, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>54236<pc>1174-b<k1>juhvAna<k2>juhvAna
{%Juhvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ sacrificing, offering, present-
ing; accepting (an offering, Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>54237<pc>1174-b<k1>huta<k2>huta<h>1
1. {%huta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see under rt. {%hve%}), of-
fered with fire, poured forth (as clarified butter in the
sacred fire), burnt as an oblation, sacrificed; one to
whom an oblation is offered; ({%as%}), m. epithet of
Śiva; ({%am%}), n. an oblation, offering, sacrifice.
{%—Huta-jātavedas, ās, ās, as,%} one who has made
an oblation to fire. {%—Hutabhuk-priyā,%} f. ‘dear to
Agni,’ the wife of Agni. {%—Huta-bhuj, k,%} m. ‘obla-
tion-eater,’ Agni or fire; epithet of a particular star.
{%—Huta-vaha, as,%} m. ‘oblation-bearer,’ Agni or
fire. {%—Huta-saṃvikta, as, ā, am,%} (according to
some) one who has sacrificed all his individuality or
blended his own will with the Universal Soul. {%—Huta-%}
{%homa, as,%} m. a Brāhman who has offered an obla-
tion; ({%am%}), n. an offered oblation, burnt-offering.
{%—Hutāgni (˚ta-ag˚), is,%} m. fire with which an
oblation is made, sacrificial fire. {%—Hutāśa (˚ta-āśa),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘eating the oblation,’ fire or its deity Agni;
fear, alarm, apprehension ({%= bhaya,%} according to
Śabda-k.; perhaps fr. {%huta%} + 1. {%ā-śā,%} but this sense
is doubtless modern). {%—Hutāśana (˚ta-aś˚), as,%} m.
‘oblation-eating,’ fire or its deity; epithet of Śiva.
{%—Hutāśana-vat, ān, atī, at,%} bearing or holding
consecrated fire (said of an altar &c.). {%—Hutāśana-%}
{%sahāya, as,%} m. epithet of Śiva. {%—Hutāhuti (˚ta-%}
{%āh˚), is, is, i,%} having an oblation just offered.
<LEND>

<L>54238<pc>1174-b<k1>huti<k2>huti<h>1
1. {%huti, is,%}¦ f. (for 2. see under rt. {%hve%}), offering
oblations.
<LEND>

<L>54239<pc>1174-b<k1>hutvA<k2>hutvA
{%Hutvā,%}¦ ind. having offered (as an oblation &c.).
<LEND>

<L>54240<pc>1174-b<k1>hUyamAna<k2>hUyamAna<h>1
1. {%hūyamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 2. see under rt.
{%hve,%} p. 1180), being offered in oblation.
<LEND>

<L>54241<pc>1174-b<k1>huNkAra<k2>huNkAra
{#huNkAra#}¦ {%huṅ-kāra, huṅ-kṛta.%} See below.
<LEND>

<L>54242<pc>1174-b<k1>huq<k2>huq
{#huq#}¦ {%huḍ,%} cl. 6. P. {%huḍati,%} &c., to collect,
accumulate, heap together (= rt. {%huṇḍ%}); to
dive, sink, be submerged; cl. 1. P. {%hoḍati,%} &c., to
go (= rts. {%hoḍ, hūḍ%}).
<LEND>

<L>54243<pc>1174-b<k1>huqa<k2>huqa
{%Huḍa, as,%}¦ m. a ram [cf. {%sa-huḍa, huṇḍa%}]; a
kind of fence or bulwark, a bastion, tower; a bar or
iron stake for keeping out thieves; a club, iron club;
(according to some) a place for voiding excrement.
<LEND>

<L>54244<pc>1174-b<k1>huqu<k2>huqu
{%Huḍu, us,%}¦ m. a ram.
<LEND>

<L>54245<pc>1174-b<k1>huqukka<k2>huqukka
{#huqukka#}¦ {%huḍukka, as,%} m. a kind of bird,
Gallinula Madraspatana ({%= dātyūha%}); a drunken
man; a small hourglass-shaped drum; a stick or staff
bound with iron; the bar or bolt of a door.
<LEND>

<L>54246<pc>1174-b<k1>huqquka<k2>huqquka
{%Huḍḍuka,%}¦ another reading for {%huḍukka%} above.
<LEND>

<L>54247<pc>1174-b<k1>huqut<k2>huqut
{#huqut#}¦ {%huḍut, t,%} n. (according to Śabda-k.)
the noise of a bull ({%= vṛṣa-śabda%}).
<LEND>

<L>54248<pc>1174-b<k1>huqumba<k2>huqumba
{#huqumba#}¦ {%huḍumba, as,%} m. a thunder-clap,
(according to Śabda-k. {%= bhraṣṭa-cipiṭa.%})
<LEND>

<L>54249<pc>1174-b<k1>huRq<k2>huRq
{#huRq#}¦ {%huṇḍ,%} cl. 1. A. {%huṇḍate,%} &c., to col-
lect, accumulate; to select, choose, take,
accept (= rt. {%bhuṇḍ,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>54250<pc>1174-b<k1>huRqa<k2>huRqa
{%Huṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. a tiger; a village hog; a block-
head; a demon, imp; a ram.
<LEND>

<L>54251<pc>1174-b<k1>huRqikA<k2>huRqikA
{#huRqikA#}¦ {%huṇḍikā,%} f. (Pers. <lang n="arabic">هندي</lang>), a bill
of exchange, bond; assignment, order (given for the
maintenance of soldiers).
<LEND>

<L>54252<pc>1174-b<k1>huRqI<k2>huRqI
{%Huṇḍī,%}¦ f. {%= huṇḍikā%} above.
<LEND>

<L>54253<pc>1174-b<k1>hum<k2>hum
{#hum#}¦ {%hum,%} ind. (cf. {%hūm;%} an imitative sound
used as a particle) expressive of remembrance,
doubt, interrogation, assent, anger, aversion, reproach,
fear, (see {%hūm%}); a mystical syllable occurring fre-
quently in spells and incantations; (in Vedic ritual)
a sacrificial exclamation used immediately before the
singing of the Pra-stāva or prelude as well as during
the chanting of the Prati-hāra or response. {%—Huṅ-%}
{%kāra, as,%} m. the word or sound {%hum,%} making the
sound {%hum,%} uttering a menacing sound; the grunt-
ing or roaring of a boar; any roaring, bellowing;
[Page1174-c+ 72]
the noise or twang (of a bow). {%—Huṅkāra-garbha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} filled with groaning or menacing sounds.
{%—Huṅkāra-tīrtha, am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha. {%—Huṅ-%}
{%kṛta, as, ā, am,%} uttered with a mystical sound,
pronounced as an incantation; roared; ({%am%}), n. an
incantation; the roar or grunt of a wild boar; the
roar (of thunder); any roar. {%—Huṅ-kṛti, is,%} f. {%=%}
{%huṅ-kāra%} above. {%—Hum-phaḍ-anta, ās,%} m. pl.,
scil. {%mantrāḥ,%} incantations ending in the mystical
words {%hum%} and {%phaṭ.%}
<LEND>

<L>54254<pc>1174-c<k1>hurC<k2>hurC
{#hurC#}¦ {%hurch%} (developed out of rt. {%hvṛ,%}
q. v.; cf. {%ṛch,%} fr. rt. {%ṛ%}), cl. 1. P. {%hūrchati,%}
{%juhūrcha, hūrchitum,%} to be crooked, go crookedly;
to be crooked or dishonest in conduct, deceive; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">λοξός;</lang> (probably) Lat. <nsi>quercus, ob-liquus;</nsi>
Goth. <nsi>vraiqs.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54255<pc>1174-c<k1>hur<k2>hur
{%Hur, hūr%}¦ (a Kvip formation fr. rt. {%hurch;%} gen.
sing. {%huras%}), one who goes crookedly, a deceiver,
dishonest. {%—Huraś-cit, t,%} m. (according to Sāy. on
Ṛg-veda I. 42, 3. {%huras%} is from a Kvip formation,
the final {%ch%} being dropped), a deceiver, thief, (in
Naigh. III. 24. {%= stena,%} according to Sāy. {%= kau-%}
{%ṭilyasya%} or {%kauṭilyena sañcetṛ,%} a collector of
crookedness or one who collects crookedly.)
<LEND>

<L>54256<pc>1174-c<k1>hUrCana<k2>hUrCana
{%Hūrchana, am,%}¦ n. the act of going crookedly,
crookedness, craft, dishonesty, cunning.
<LEND>

<L>54257<pc>1174-c<k1>hUrCita<k2>hUrCita
{%Hūrchita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gone crookedly; deceived.
<LEND>

<L>54258<pc>1174-c<k1>hUrRa<k2>hUrRa
{%Hūrṇa, as, ā, am, = hūrchita%}¦ above.
<LEND>

<L>54259<pc>1174-c<k1>hul<k2>hul
{#hul#}¦ {%hul,%} cl. 1. P. {%holati,%} &c., to go; to
cover, conceal; to kill.
<LEND>

<L>54260<pc>1174-c<k1>hulahulI<k2>hulahulI
{#hulahulI#}¦ {%hulahulī,%} f. inarticulate sounds
made by women on joyful occasions ({%= mukha-%}
{%ghaṇṭā,%} a sort of Ululatus, though expressive of
happiness).
<LEND>

<L>54261<pc>1174-c<k1>huvAna<k2>huvAna
{#huvAna#}¦ {%huvāna.%} See under rt. {%hve.%}
<LEND>

<L>54262<pc>1174-c<k1>huzkapura<k2>huzkapura
{#huzkapura#}¦ {%huṣka-pura, am,%} n., N. of a town.
<LEND>

<L>54263<pc>1174-c<k1>huhu<k2>huhu
{#huhu#}¦ {%huhu, us,%} or {%huhū, ūs,%} m. (probably from
an anomalous Intens. of rt. {%hve%}), a kind of Gan-
dharva.
<LEND>

<L>54264<pc>1174-c<k1>hU<k2>hU
{#hU#}¦ {%hū,%} ind. an interjection of calling; of
contempt; of pride; of grief, (oh! ah! alas! &c.)
{%—Hū-rava, as,%} m. ‘making the sound Hū,’ a
jackal.
<LEND>

<L>54265<pc>1174-c<k1>hUNkAra<k2>hUNkAra
{#hUNkAra#}¦ {%hūṅ-kāra,%} &c. See under {%hūm.%}
<LEND>

<L>54266<pc>1174-c<k1>hUNgarasTAna<k2>hUNgarasTAna
{#hUNgarasTAna#}¦ {%hūṅgara-sthāna,%} N. of a place
(probably Hungary).
<LEND>

<L>54267<pc>1174-c<k1>hUq<k2>hUq
{#hUq#}¦ {%hūḍ%} [cf. rts. {%hruḍ, huḍ, hoḍ, hauḍ,%}
{%hrauḍ%}], cl. 1. P. (according to Vopa-deva
also A.) {%hūḍati (-te), juhūḍa,%} &c., {%hūḍitum,%} to
go, move.
<LEND>

<L>54268<pc>1174-c<k1>hURa<k2>hURa
{#hURa#}¦ {%hūṇa, as,%} m. a barbarian, Hun; N.
of a district; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a people (living in
Bhārata-varṣa).
<LEND>

<L>54269<pc>1174-c<k1>hUta<k2>hUta
{#hUta#}¦ {%hūta, hūti,%} &c. See under rt. {%hve.%}
<LEND>

<L>54270<pc>1174-c<k1>hUna<k2>hUna
{#hUna#}¦ {%hūna, as,%} m., N. of a certain barbarous
race (perhaps the Huns); a kind of gold coin current
in the kingdom of Mādra, (commonly called a pagoda
and worth about eight shillings.)
<LEND>

<L>54271<pc>1174-c<k1>hUm<k2>hUm
{#hUm#}¦ {%hūm,%} ind. (cf. {%om, hum,%} an imitative
sound used as a particle) expressive of doubt or
consideration (equivalent to humph! umph! &c.);
of interrogation (hey? indeed? eh?); of assent
(yes, aye, well, exactly, so be it; see {%om,%} p. 189);
of anger, menace, aversion, repulse (avaunt! away!
begone! tush! forbear! be silent! hush!); of re-
proach, contempt (fie! shame!); of fear (ah! oh!);
a magical or mystical monosyllable, (see {%hum.%})
{%—Hūṅ-kāra, as,%} m. the word or sound {%hūm%}
(uttered disrespectfully or menacingly); uttering the
sound {%hūm;%} roaring, grunting. {%—Hūṅ-kṛti, is,%} f.
making the sound {%hūm;%} grunting, groaning; a
sound made in sleeping; disrespect, insult.
<LEND>
[Page1175-a+ 78]

<L>54272<pc>1175-a<k1>hUyamAna<k2>hUyamAna
{#hUyamAna#}¦ {%hūyamāna.%} See p. 1174, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>54273<pc>1175-a<k1>hUrava<k2>hUrava
{#hUrava#}¦ {%hū-rava.%} See under {%hū.%}
<LEND>

<L>54274<pc>1175-a<k1>hUrCana<k2>hUrCana
{#hUrCana#}¦ {%hūrchana, hūrchita.%} See p. 1174.
<LEND>

<L>54275<pc>1175-a<k1>hUhu<k2>hUhu
{#hUhu#}¦ {%hūhu, us,%} or {%hūhū, ūs,%} m. {%= huhu,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>54276<pc>1175-a<k1>hf<k2>hf<h>1
{#hf#} 1¦. {%hṛ%} (evolved out of rt. {%bhṛ,%} which
in Ved. often has the sense of rt. 1. {%hṛ%}), cl. 1.
P. A. {%harati, -te,%} (Ved. {%bharati%}), {%jahāra, jahre,%}
(Ved. {%jabhāra, jabhre%}), {%hariṣyati, -te, ahārṣīt,%}
{%ahṛta,%} (Ved. also cl. 2. Pres. 1st sing. P. {%harmi,%}
also cl. 3. P. {%jiharti;%} in Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa X. 4,
3, 9. there is a form {%harāsai,%} ‘thou may'st have
seized’), {%hartum,%} to bring, convey, carry, fetch; to
carry away, carry off, take away, take off, seize, take
hold of, extricate; to rob, plunder, steal; to strip off,
spoil, despoil, remove, deprive of; to take, acquire, gain,
obtain, hold; to captivate, charm; to accept, receive,
inherit; to throw, cast (an arrow &c.); to offer:
Pass. {%hriyate,%} Aor. {%ahāri,%} to be taken or seized, &c.:
Caus. {%hārayati, -te, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ajīharat, -ta,%} to
cause to bring or carry or seize (with acc. and inst.
or with a double acc.), cause to take or take hold of;
to give, give away; to permit to be carried off or
plundered; to send: Desid. {%jihīrṣati, -te,%} to wish
to take or carry off, wish to rob, &c.: Intens.
{%jehrīyate, jarharīti, jariharīti, jarīharīti, jar-%}
{%harti, jariharti, jarīharti;%} [cf. Zend <nsi>zar;</nsi> Gr.
<lang n="greek">χείρ, εὐ-χερ-ής, χέρ-ης, χράομαι, κίχρημι,</lang> (accord-
ing to some also perhaps) <lang n="greek">αἴρω, αἱρέω</lang> (for <lang n="greek">χαίρω</lang>),
<lang n="greek">ἀγείρω;</lang> Old Lat. <nsi>hir;</nsi> Lat. <nsi>heru-s, hera, her-e(d)-s,</nsi>
(perhaps also) <nsi>co-hors,</nsi> (according to some also per-
haps) <nsi>gero;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>geiro, gairon, gairnjan;</nsi> Angl.
Sax. <nsi>georu, geornian;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>yare.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54277<pc>1175-a<k1>hara<k2>hara
{%Hara, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} bringing, conveying, carry-
ing, taking, seizing; captivating; removing, taking
away, depriving of; dividing; ({%as%}), m. the act of
carrying, taking, seizing; a seizer; N. of Śiva; of
Agni; of one of the eleven Rudras; an ass; (in
arithmetic) a divisor; the denominator of a fraction,
division; [cf. Lat. <nsi>hœres.</nsi>] {%—Hara-gaurī,%} f. one of
the forms of Śiva or of Śiva and Pārvatī conjoined {%(=%}
{%ardha-nārīśa)%}. {%—Hara-cāpāropaṇa (˚pa-ār˚),%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Nāṭaka or drama. {%—Hara-cūḍā-%}
{%maṇi, is,%} m. ‘Śiva's crest-gem,’ the moon. {%—Hara-%}
{%jit, t,%} m. a proper N. {%—Hara-tejas, as,%} n. Śiva's
energy; quicksilver. {%—Hara-datta, as,%} m., N. of
the author of the Pada-mañjarī; of the Mitākṣarā
commentary. {%—Haradattācārya (˚ta-āc˚), as,%} m.
a proper N. {%—Hara-dāsa, as,%} m. a proper N.
{%—Hara-netra, am,%} n. Śiva's eye; the number
three. {%—Hara-rūpa, as,%} m. ‘having the form of
Hara,’ Śiva. {%—Hara-vīja, am,%} n. ‘Śiva's seed,’
quicksilver. {%—Hara-śekharā,%} f. ‘Śiva's crest,’ the
Ganges. {%—Hara-siṃha, as,%} m., N. of a king.
{%—Harādri (˚ra-ad˚), is,%} m. ‘Śiva's mountain,’
the mountain Kailāsa (fabled as the favourite resort
of Śiva).
<LEND>

<L>54278<pc>1175-a<k1>haraka<k2>haraka
{%Haraka, as,%}¦ m. a conveyer, taker; a seizer; N.
of Śiva; a thief, rogue, cheat; (in arithmetic) a
divisor; division; a reflecting or judicious person
(according to some).
<LEND>

<L>54279<pc>1175-a<k1>haraRa<k2>haraRa
{%Haraṇa, as,%}¦ m. ‘the taker,’ the hand; ({%am%}), n.
the act of taking, accepting, receiving; seizing, carry-
ing off or away, removing; stealing; withholding,
annulling, disregarding; a nuptial present ({%= yau-%}
{%taka%}); a gift to a student at his initiation; the
arm; semen virile; gold; a shell, cowry ({%= ka-%}
{%parda%}); boiling water; (in arithmetic) dividing,
division.
<LEND>

<L>54280<pc>1175-a<k1>haraRIya<k2>haraRIya
{%Haraṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or accepted,
acceptable; to be taken away or seized; to be
divided.
<LEND>

<L>54281<pc>1175-a<k1>harat<k2>harat
{%Harat, an, antī, at,%}¦ conveying, taking away,
seizing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>54282<pc>1175-a<k1>harayARa<k2>harayARa
{%Harayāṇa, as,%}¦ m. (according to some) a proper
N., (according to Nirukta V. 15. {%= haramāṇa-yāna;%}
according to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda VIII. 25, 22. {%= śa-%}
{%tru-jīvitaiśvaryādi-haraṇa-śīla-yāna%}).
<LEND>

<L>54283<pc>1175-a<k1>haras<k2>haras
{%Haras, as,%}¦ n., Ved. anger, (Sāy. {%= krodha;%} cf.
[Page1175-b+ 81]
Naigh. II. 13); flame, heat, warmth, (enumerated
among the {%jvalato nāmadheyāni,%} Naigh. I. 17);
impetuosity, precipitation; day; water; blood; the
world, (see Nirukta IV. 19.) {%—Haras-vat, ān, atī,%}
{%at,%} Ved. impetuous, precipitate, (Sāy. {%= vega-vat%});
({%atī%}), f., Ved. a river, (in Naigh. I. 13. {%harasva-%}
{%tyaḥ%} is enumerated among the {%nadī-nāmāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>54284<pc>1175-b<k1>hariman<k2>hariman<h>2
2. {%hariman, ā,%}¦ m. (for. 1. see p. 1167), time.
<LEND>

<L>54285<pc>1175-b<k1>harta<k2>harta
{%Harta, as,%}¦ m. {%= hartṛ%} below.
<LEND>

<L>54286<pc>1175-b<k1>hartavya<k2>hartavya
{%Hartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken or accepted,
to be seized, &c.
<LEND>

<L>54287<pc>1175-b<k1>hartf<k2>hartf
{%Hartṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who brings or conveys,
one who takes or receives, a taker, receiver, seizer;
a robber; taking up, absorbing; ({%tā%}), m. the sun
({%= sūrya%}).
<LEND>

<L>54288<pc>1175-b<k1>hAra<k2>hAra<h>1
1. {%hāra, as, ī, am,%}¦ taking, conveying, seizing,
carrying off, who or what takes, &c.; (according to
Śabda-k. fr. 1. {%hari%}), relating or belonging to Hari
or Viṣṇu {%(= hari-sambandhīya); (as),%} m. the
act of taking or conveying away, abstraction, seizing,
removing, deprivation; loss, ({%kāla-hāra,%} loss of time,
waste of time); a porter, carrier; war, battle; a
string or garland of pearls, &c., a pearl-necklace, any
necklace; (in prosody) a long syllable; (in arithmetic)
a divisor, a denominator of a fraction; ({%ī%}), f. a pearl.
{%—Hāra-guṭikā,%} f. the bead or pearl of a necklace.
{%—Hāra-yaṣṭi, is,%} f. a string of pearls, necklace.
{%—Hāra-latā,%} f., N. of a work. {%—Hāra-hārā,%} f. a
kind of tawny grape. {%—Hārāvalī (˚ra-āv˚),%} f. a string
of pearls; N. of a lexicon by Puruṣottama.
<LEND>

<L>54289<pc>1175-b<k1>hAra<k2>hAra<h>2
2. {%hāra,%}¦ Nom. P. {%hārati,%} &c., to act like a string
of pearls, be like a necklace.
<LEND>

<L>54290<pc>1175-b<k1>hAraka<k2>hAraka
{%Hāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ bringing; taking, seizing;
({%as%}), m. one who seizes or takes away, a plunderer,
thief; a cheat, rogue; a gambler; a kind of prose
composition; a particular science; the tree Trophis
Aspera; (in arithmetic) a divisor; a string of pearls.
<LEND>

<L>54291<pc>1175-b<k1>hArayizyat<k2>hArayizyat
{%Hārayiṣyat, an, atī%}¦ or {%antī, at,%} about to con-
vey or transmit.
<LEND>

<L>54292<pc>1175-b<k1>hArA<k2>hArA
{%Hārā,%}¦ f. See Vopa-deva XXVI. 191.
<LEND>

<L>54293<pc>1175-b<k1>hAri<k2>hAri
{%Hāri, is, is, i,%}¦ captivating, charming, pleasing,
beautiful; ({%is%}), f. defeat, discomfiture; losing a game
(in gambling); a traveller's progeny ({%= pathika-%}
{%santāna%}), a caravan.
<LEND>

<L>54294<pc>1175-b<k1>hArita<k2>hArita<h>2
2. {%hārita, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. {%hārita%} see p. 1170,
col. 2), made or allowed to be taken, caused to be
taken away; presented, offered; suffered to be seized,
made away with, lost, relinquished; captivated, fas-
cinated.
<LEND>

<L>54295<pc>1175-b<k1>hArin<k2>hArin<h>1
1. {%hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ taking, conveying, bringing,
carrying away, seizing, robbing; obtaining, acquir-
ing; a seizer, disturber (with gen., Manu XII. 28);
captivating, charming, delighting; pleasant, agree-
able.
<LEND>

<L>54296<pc>1175-b<k1>hArin<k2>hArin<h>2
2. {%hārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ having a necklace, possessing
a necklace or garland of pearls. {%—Hāri-kaṇṭha, as,%}
{%ī, am,%} having a necklace on the throat; ({%as%}), m.
‘having a ring on the throat,’ the Kokila or Indian
cuckoo, Koïl.
<LEND>

<L>54297<pc>1175-b<k1>hAriyojana<k2>hAriyojana
{%Hāriyojana, as,%}¦ m. (see {%hari-yojana%}), ‘har-
nesser of the Hari steeds,’ Indra; a particular Graha
or portion of an offering taken out of the Āgrayaṇa
libation.
<LEND>

<L>54298<pc>1175-b<k1>hArI<k2>hArI
{%Hārī,%}¦ f. a pearl, (see {%hāra%} above.)
<LEND>

<L>54299<pc>1175-b<k1>hArIta<k2>hArIta<h>2
2. {%hārīta, as,%}¦ m. (for 1. see p. 1170, col. 2), a
thief, cheat, rogue; thieving, cheating, fraud, roguery.
<LEND>

<L>54300<pc>1175-b<k1>hArya<k2>hArya
{%Hārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be taken, to be taken
away; ({%as%}), m. a serpent; the Vibhītaka tree; (in
arithmetic) the dividend {%(= bhājya)%}. {%—Hārya-pu-%}
{%tra, as,%} m., N. of Rāma.
<LEND>

<L>54301<pc>1175-b<k1>hft<k2>hft
{%Hṛt, t, t, t%}¦ (at the end of comps.), taking away,
removing, carrying off, seizing, &c.
<LEND>

<L>54302<pc>1175-b<k1>hfta<k2>hfta
{%Hṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken, taken away, seized;
captivated; accepted; ({%am%}), n. that which is taken;
a portion, share. {%—Hṛta-candra, as, ā, am,%} having
the moon taken away; destitute of moon, moon-
less. {%—Hṛta-jñāna, as, ā, am,%} bereft of knowledge,
void of knowledge. {%—Hṛta-dravya, as, ā, am,%}
stripped of everything, deprived of one's property.
{%—Hṛta-dhana, as, ā, am,%} spoiled of wealth.
{%—Hṛta-prasāda, as, ā, am,%} deprived of calmness.
[Page1175-c+ 79]
{%—Hṛta-mānasa, as, ā, am,%} deprived of mind,
robbed of one's senses. {%—Hṛta-rājya, as, ā, am,%}
stripped of a kingdom. {%—Hṛta-vāsas, ās, ās, as,%}
whose dress is taken away, deprived of clothes.
{%—Hṛta-sarvasva, as, ā, am,%} robbed or stripped
of all personal property, entirely ruined. {%—Hṛtā-%}
{%dhikāra (˚ta-adh˚), as, ā, am,%} deprived of an
office, turned out; deprived of one's right. {%—Hṛ-%}
{%tottara (˚ta-ut˚), as, ā, am,%} deprived of an answer,
left without a reply. {%—Hṛtottarīya (˚ta-ut˚), as,%}
{%ā, am,%} having the upper garments stripped off.
{%—Hṛtoraga (˚ta-ur˚), as, ā, am,%} deprived or
devoid of snakes.
<LEND>

<L>54303<pc>1175-c<k1>hfti<k2>hfti
{%Hṛti, is,%}¦ f. taking away, seizure, robbing, rob-
bery; destruction.
<LEND>

<L>54304<pc>1175-c<k1>hftvA<k2>hftvA
{%Hṛtvā,%}¦ ind. having taken or seized, having ac-
cepted, &c.
<LEND>

<L>54305<pc>1175-c<k1>hriyamARa<k2>hriyamARa
{%Hriyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ being taken or seized;
being captivated or attracted.
<LEND>

<L>54306<pc>1175-c<k1>hf<k2>hf<h>2
{#hf#} 2¦. {%hṛ%} or {%hṝ%} (referred in native lists
to the Nom. {%hṛṇīya%} below, technically called
{%hṛṇīṅ,%} but connected with rt. 1. {%hrī,%} q. v., and
perhaps better written {%hṝ%}), cl. 9. A. {%hṛṇīte,%} &c.,
Ved. originally perhaps ‘to be yellow’ (cf. {%hari%});
to blush; to be ashamed, (Sāy. {%lajjāyām%}); to
be angry ({%roṣāyām%}), be displeased, (Sāy. {%hṛṇīte%}
{%= krudhyati,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 86, 3; {%hṛṇīṣe = kru-%}
{%dhyasi,%} Ṛg-veda VII. 104, 14.)
<LEND>

<L>54307<pc>1175-c<k1>hfRAna<k2>hfRAna
{%Hṛṇāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. angry, irate, displeased,
(Sāy. {%= hṛṇīyamāna,%} Ṛg-veda I. 25, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>54308<pc>1175-c<k1>hfRi<k2>hfRi
{%Hṛṇi, is,%}¦ m., Ved. anger ({%= krodha,%} Naigh. II.
13); flaming, (in Naigh. I. 17. enumerated among
the {%jvalato nāmadheyāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>54309<pc>1175-c<k1>hfRiyA<k2>hfRiyA
{%Hṛṇiyā,%}¦ f. {%= hṛṇīyā%} below.
<LEND>

<L>54310<pc>1175-c<k1>hfRIya<k2>hfRIya
{%Hṛṇīya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%hṛṇīyate,%} &c., to be angry;
to be ashamed; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χολή;</lang> Lat. <nsi>fel, bilis;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>galla;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>gealla.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54311<pc>1175-c<k1>hfRIyamAna<k2>hfRIyamAna
{%Hṛṇīyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being angry.
<LEND>

<L>54312<pc>1175-c<k1>hfRIyA<k2>hfRIyA
{%Hṛṇīyā,%}¦ f. censure, reproach; shame, bashfulness.
<LEND>

<L>54313<pc>1175-c<k1>hfd<k2>hfd
{#hfd#}¦ {%hṛd, t,%} n. (abbreviated fr. {%hard,%} but
said by some to be connected with rt. 1. {%hṛ;%}
it is defective in declension, being optionally substi-
tuted for {%hṛdaya%} in all cases except the first five
inflections or Nom. sing. du. pl., Acc. sing. du.; it
is said by some to be also masc.), the heart; the
mind, ({%hṛdy avedin,%} ‘one who has no knowledge
or capacity of knowledge in the mind,’ applied to
animals), the soul, the faculty or seat of thought
and feeling; the interior of the body, breast, chest,
bosom; the interior or essence of anything; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">κῆρ, κέαρ, καρδ-ία, κραδ-ίη;</lang> Lat. <nsi>cor (cord-is),</nsi>
dimin. <nsi>cor-culum, cordatus, vêcors;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hairt-o;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>herza;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>Herz;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>heorte;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>heart;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>szird-i-s;</nsi> Slav. <nsi>srŭ-</nsi>
<nsi>dĭce.</nsi>] {%—Hṛc-chaya, as, ā, am%} (i. e. {%hṛd + śaya%}),
lying or abiding in the heart; ({%as%}), m. ‘heart-
dweller,’ epithet of Kāma-deva (god of love), love.
{%—Hṛcchaya-pīḍita, as, ā, am,%} tormented by love,
love-sick. {%—Hṛcchaya-vardhana, as, ī, am,%} aug-
menting love. {%—Hṛcchayāviṣṭa-cetana (˚ya-āv˚),%}
{%as, ā, am,%} having a heart penetrated by love. {%—Hṛc-%}
{%chūla, am,%} n. (i. e. {%hṛd + śūla%}), ‘heart-pang,’ any
acute internal pain, pain in the chest. {%—Hṛc-choka,%}
{%as,%} m. (i. e. {%hṛd + śoka%}), heart-ache; a pang. {%—Hṛt-%}
{%kampa, as,%} m. heart-throb, tremor of the heart, palpita-
tion. {%—Hṛt-piṇḍa, am,%} n. ‘heart-mass,’ the heart.
{%—Hṛt-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in the heart, seated
in the heart. {%—Hṛtsv-as, as, as, as,%} Ved. throwing
into the heart. {%—Hṛdaṃ-sani, is, is, i,%} Ved. giving
the heart; receiving the heart or essence of anything;
receiving affection or kindness. {%—Hṛd-āvarta, as,%}
m. a curl or lock of hair on a horse's chest. {%—Hṛdi-%}
{%spṛś, k, k, k,%} ‘touching or lying in the heart,’ dear,
beloved, cherished. {%—Hṛd-gata, as, ā, am,%} gone
to the heart, seated in the heart or mind, come to
mind, conceived, designed; cherished; ({%am%}), n.
anything fixed in the mind, design, meaning, intent.
{%—Hṛd-gola, as,%} m., N. of a mountainous district.
{%—Hṛdgolīya, as, ā, am,%} belonging to the above
[Page1176-a+ 81]
district; ({%ās%}), m. pl. the inhabitants of the Hṛd-gola
mountains. {%—Hṛd-graha, as,%} m. ‘heart-seizure,’
spasm of the heart. {%—Hṛd-grantha, as,%} m. (accord-
ing to Śabda-k.) a heart-wound, heart-sore {%(= hṛd-%}
{%vraṇa)%}. {%—Hṛd-deśa, as,%} m. the region of the
heart. {%—Hṛd-bheda-tantra, am,%} n., N. of a Tan-
tra work. {%—Hṛd-ruj, k,%} f. ‘heart-disease,’ grief.
{%—Hṛd-roga, as,%} m. heart-disease, heart-ache, heart-
burn; sorrow, grief, anguish; love; the zodiacal
sign Aquarius. {%—Hṛdroga-vairin, ī,%} m. ‘hostile
to heart-burn,’ the tree Pentaptera Arjuna. {%—Hṛd-%}
{%vaṇṭaka, as,%} m. ‘partitioning the heart or chest,’
the stomach. {%—Hṛl-lāsa, as,%} m. ‘heart-sport,’
hiccough; heart-disturbance, disquietude, grief.
{%—Hṛl-lekha, as,%} m. ‘heart-impression,’ knowledge,
reasoning; ‘heart-scratch,’ heart-ache, heart-sorrow;
({%ā%}), f. disquietude, anxiety or regret for any absent
object.
<LEND>

<L>54314<pc>1176-a<k1>hfdaya<k2>hfdaya
{%Hṛdaya, am,%}¦ n. the mind, soul, seat or faculty
of thought and feeling, ({%capala-hṛdaya,%} fickle-
minded); affection, love; the heart; the interior of
the body, breast, chest, bosom; the interior or centre
or essence of anything; true or divine knowledge;
the Veda; science; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">καρδία,</lang> &c.; Hib. <nsi>croi-</nsi>
<nsi>dhe, cridhe,</nsi> ‘the heart.’] {%—Hṛdaya-kampa, as,%}
m. tremor or throb of the heart, palpitation. {%—Hṛ-%}
{%daya-kampana, am,%} n. throbbing of the heart;
({%as, ī, am%}), heart-stirring, heart-agitating, causing
the heart to throb (with indignation &c.). {%—Hṛ-%}
{%daya-granthi, is,%} m. ‘heart-tie, heart-bond,’ any-
thing which binds the soul. {%—Hṛdaya-grāhin, ī,%}
{%iṇī, i,%} heart-captivating, engaging the affection.
{%—Hṛdayaṅ-gama, as, ā, am,%} going to the heart,
heart-stirring, thrilling, affecting, touching, moving,
dear, beloved; ({%am%}), n. an apposite or appropriate
speech. {%—Hṛdaya-caura, as,%} m. a heart-robber,
one who steals the heart or affections. {%—Hṛdaya-%}
{%cchid, t, t, t,%} heart-breaking, heart-piercing, heart-
rending. {%—Hṛdaya-daurbalya, am,%} n. weakness
of heart, faintheartedness. {%—Hṛdaya-rajju,%} (in
geometry) a central line, the semidiameter of a circle
in contact with the angles of a trapezium. {%—Hṛdaya-%}
{%lekha, as,%} m. heart-impression, knowledge; ‘heart-
scratch,’ heart-ache, anxiety, (see {%hṛl-lekha.%}) {%—Hṛ-%}
{%daya-vat, ān, atī, at,%} having a heart, tender-hearted,
kind, humane. {%—Hṛdaya-vidh, t, t, t%} ({%vidh%} for
{%vyadh,%} see rt. 2. {%vidh%}), heart-piercing. {%—Hṛdaya-%}
{%vṛtti, is,%} f. disposition or inclination of the heart.
{%—Hṛdaya-vedhin, ī, inī, i,%} heart-piercing, piercing
the vitals (said of an arrow). {%—Hṛdaya-śalya, am,%}
n. a dagger or arrow in the heart, wound in the
heart. {%—Hṛdaya-śoka, as,%} m. heart-sorrow, heart-
ache, a pang of grief. {%—Hṛdaya-śoṣaṇa, as, ī, am,%}
heart-withering. {%—Hṛdaya-sannihita, as, ā, am,%}
placed or deposited in the heart, fixed or laid up in
the mind. {%—Hṛdaya-sammita, as, ā, am,%} breast-
high, as high as the breast. {%—Hṛdaya-sāhi, is,%} m.
a proper N. {%—Hṛdaya-stha, as, ā, am,%} being in
the heart, cherished in the heart. {%—Hṛdaya-sthāna,%}
{%am,%} n. ‘seat of the heart,’ the breast, chest, bosom.
{%—Hṛdayātman (˚ya-āt˚), ā,%} m. a heron. {%—Hṛ-%}
{%dayāmaya (˚ya-ām˚), as, ā, am,%} Ved. having sick-
ness of heart, heart-sickening. {%—Hṛdayāmbuja%}
{%(˚ya-am˚), am,%} n. ‘heart-lotus,’ a lotus-like heart.
{%—Hṛdayāvidh (˚ya-āv˚), t, t, t,%} heart-piercing.
{%—Hṛdayeśa (˚ya-īśa)%} or {%hṛdayeśvara (˚ya-īś˚),%}
{%as,%} m. ‘heart-lord,’ a husband; ({%ā%}), f. ‘heart-
mistress,’ a wife; a mistress. {%—Hṛdayodaṅka (˚ya-%}
{%ud˚), as,%} m. upheaving or torturing the heart; ({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), heart heaving, heart-disturbing.
<LEND>

<L>54315<pc>1176-a<k1>hfdayAlu<k2>hfdayAlu
{%Hṛdayālu, us, us, u,%}¦ good-hearted, tender-
hearted, affectionate, friendly.
<LEND>

<L>54316<pc>1176-a<k1>hfdayAvI<k2>hfdayAvI
{%Hṛdayāvī,%}¦ (according to some) Ved. one who
has a heart.
<LEND>

<L>54317<pc>1176-a<k1>hfdayika<k2>hfdayika
{%Hṛdayika, as, ā, am,%}¦ good-hearted, tender-
hearted.
<LEND>

<L>54318<pc>1176-a<k1>hfdayitnu<k2>hfdayitnu
{%Hṛdayitnu.%}¦ See Vopa-deva XXVI. 166.
<LEND>

<L>54319<pc>1176-a<k1>hfdayin<k2>hfdayin
{%Hṛdayin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ good-hearted, tender-hearted.
<LEND>

<L>54320<pc>1176-a<k1>hfdIka<k2>hfdIka
{%Hṛdīka, as,%}¦ m., N. of a Yādava king.
<LEND>

<L>54321<pc>1176-a<k1>hfdya<k2>hfdya
{%Hṛdya, as, ā, am,%}¦ hearty, cordial, proceeding
from or produced in the heart; dear to the heart,
[Page1176-b+ 80]
beloved, cherished, desired; affectionate, kind; grate-
ful, pleasant, agreeable; savory; ({%as%}), m. a Vedic
Mantra employed to effect the subjection or fascina-
tion of an enemy or rival; ({%ā%}), f. the medicinal root
called Vṛddhi; ({%am%}), n. the bank of the Laurus
Cassia. {%—Hṛdya-gandha, as,%} m. the Vilva tree;
({%ā%}), f. great-flowered jasmine; ({%am%}), n. small
cumin; sochal salt. {%—Hṛdya-gandhi,%} n. small
cumin. {%—Hṛdya-tā,%} f. or {%hṛdya-tva, am,%} n.
cordiality, heartiness, agreeableness, delightfulness.
<LEND>

<L>54322<pc>1176-b<k1>hfllAsa<k2>hfllAsa
{#hfllAsa#}¦ {%hṛl-lāsa.%} See col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>54323<pc>1176-b<k1>hfz<k2>hfz
{#hfz#}¦ {%hṛṣ%} (originally {%bhṛṣ%}), cl. 4. 1. P.
{%hṛṣyati, harṣati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%ja-%}
{%harṣa, harṣiṣyati, ahṛṣat, aharṣīt, har-%}
{%ṣitum,%} to bristle or become erect (as the hair of
the body); to thrill with rapture, rejoice, exult, be
glad or pleased; to become erect (said of other things
besides the hair); (according to some, also) to speak
or affirm falsely, lie (but in this sense only P.): Pass.
{%hṛṣyate,%} Aor. {%aharṣi:%} Caus. {%harṣayati, -yi-%}
{%tum,%} Aor. {%ajaharṣat%} or {%ajīhṛṣat,%} to make glad,
cause to rejoice; to be glad, rejoice: Desid. {%jihar-%}
{%ṣiṣati:%} Intens. {%jarīhṛṣyate, jarharṣṭi,%} &c.,
to rejoice very much, be exceedingly elated; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">φρίσσω, φρίξ,</lang> (perhaps also) <lang n="greek">χέρσος, χήρ;</lang> Lat.
<nsi>horreo, Hersilia;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>burst;</nsi> Angl. Sax.
<nsi>byrst, bristl, forst, frost, frysan, a-grisan, gerst,</nsi>
<nsi>gryre.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54324<pc>1176-b<k1>harza<k2>harza
{%Harṣa, as,%}¦ m. bristling, erection (especially of
the hair, but also said of other things); thrilling,
thrill, rapture, delight, glee, joy, pleasure, gladness,
exultation, happiness; Joy (personified as a son of
Dharma); N. of a king of Kaśmīra (celebrated as
a great patron of learning; he was son of Hīra and
was said to be himself a writer and poet, author of
the Khaṇḍana-khaṇḍa-khādya, the Chanda-praśasti,
the Nāgānanda-nāṭaka, the Naiṣadīya-carita, the
Ratnāvalī, &c.); ({%as, ā, am%}), happy, delighted.
{%—Harṣa-kara, as, ī, am,%} causing delight, grati-
fying, delighting. {%—Harṣa-kīrtti, is,%} m., N. of
the author of a commentary on the Śruta-bodha.
{%—Harṣa-krodha, au,%} m. du. joy and anger. {%—Har-%}
{%ṣa-carita, am,%} n., N. of a poem. {%—Harṣa-ja, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} arising from joy. {%—Harṣa-jaḍa, as, ā, am,%}
paralyzed with joy. {%—Harṣa-deva, as,%} m. king
Harṣa, (see {%harṣa%} above.) {%—Harṣa-yukta, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} filled with joy, joyful. {%—Harṣa-vardhana, as,%}
m. ‘joy-promoter,’ N. of a king. {%—Harṣa-vivar-%}
{%dhana, as, ī, am,%} increasing or promoting joy.
{%—Harṣa-vivṛddha-sattva, as, ā, am,%} one whose
vigour is increased by happiness. {%—Harṣa-vihvala,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} agitated with joy, overjoyed. {%—Harṣa-%}
{%samanvita, as, ā, am,%} filled with joy. {%—Harṣa-%}
{%svana, as,%} m. a cry of joy, sound of pleasure.
{%—Harṣānvita (˚ṣa-an˚), as, ā, am,%} full of joy,
happy. {%—Harṣāviṣṭa (˚ṣa-āv˚), as, ā, am,%}
penetrated or filled with joy. {%—Harṣotkarṣa%}
{%(˚ṣa-ut˚), as,%} m. excess of happiness. {%—Harṣo-%}
{%daya (˚ṣa-ud˚), as,%} m. rise of joy, occurrence of
pleasure.
<LEND>

<L>54325<pc>1176-b<k1>harzaka<k2>harzaka
{%Harṣaka, as, ā%}¦ or {%ikā, am,%} delighting, gladden-
ing, rejoicing, pleasing, delightful; ({%as%}), m., N. of a
particular mountain; of a king belonging to the
Śaiśunāga dynasty.
<LEND>

<L>54326<pc>1176-b<k1>harzaRa<k2>harzaRa
{%Harṣaṇa, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} causing delight, de-
lighting, gladdening, delightful, pleasurable, pleasant;
({%as%}), m. who or what delights or rejoices; ‘glad-
dener,’ epithet of one of the five arrows of Kāma-
deva; the fourteenth of the astronomical Yogas; a
morbid affection of the eyes; a deity presiding over
Śrāddhas; a kind of Śrāddha; ({%am%}), n. the act of
delighting or making glad, pleasing, making happy;
rejoicing, being happy.
<LEND>

<L>54327<pc>1176-b<k1>harzamARa<k2>harzamARa
{%Harṣamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rejoicing, joyful, cheer-
ful, happy.
<LEND>

<L>54328<pc>1176-b<k1>harzayat<k2>harzayat
{%Harṣayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ causing to rejoice, glad-
dening.
<LEND>

<L>54329<pc>1176-b<k1>harzayitnu<k2>harzayitnu
{%Harṣayitnu, us, us, u,%}¦ gladdening, causing de-
light, delighting; ({%us%}), m. a son, child; ({%u%}), n. gold.
<LEND>

<L>54330<pc>1176-b<k1>harzAya<k2>harzAya
{%Harṣāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%harṣāyate,%} &c., to be glad.
<LEND>
[Page1176-c+ 78]

<L>54331<pc>1176-c<k1>harzita<k2>harzita
{%Harṣita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus.), made glad
or happy, gladdened, delighted, happy.
<LEND>

<L>54332<pc>1176-c<k1>harzin<k2>harzin
{%Harṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ rejoicing, delighting; ({%iṇī%}), f.
a particular plant ({%= vi-jayā%}).
<LEND>

<L>54333<pc>1176-c<k1>harzu<k2>harzu
{%Harṣu,%}¦ Ved. joy, delight. {%—Harṣu-mat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} Ved. delighted, exulting; eager for war,
(Sāy. {%= harṣa-yukta,%} i. e. {%saṅgrāmotsuka,%} Ṛg-
veda VIII. 16, 4.)
<LEND>

<L>54334<pc>1176-c<k1>harzula<k2>harzula
{%Harṣula, as, ā, am,%}¦ disposed to be cheerful or
happy, delighted; ({%as%}), m. a deer; a lover.
<LEND>

<L>54335<pc>1176-c<k1>hfzi<k2>hfzi
{%Hṛṣi,%}¦ (probably) rejoicing; ({%ī%}), m. du. Agni
and Soma, (according to Śabda-k. {%= agnī-somau.%})
{%—Hṛṣī-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. full of joy, glad,
happy, (Sāy. {%= prāpta-harṣa,%} Ṛg-veda II. 31, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>54336<pc>1176-c<k1>hfzita<k2>hfzita
{%Hṛṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ having the hair bristling or
thrilling (with joy &c.); enraptured, delighted,
pleased; astonished, surprised; erect, fresh (as flowers,
opposed to {%mlāna%}); disappointed, deceived; bent,
bowed ({%= pra-ṇata%}); armed, accoutred {%(= var-%}
{%mita)%}. {%—Hṛṣita-sraj, k, k, k,%} having a fresh gar-
land (the flowers of which are erect and unfaded).
<LEND>

<L>54337<pc>1176-c<k1>hfzIka<k2>hfzIka
{%Hṛṣīka, am,%}¦ n. any organ of sense {%(= indriya).%}
{%—Hṛṣīkeśa (˚ka-īśa), as,%} m. ‘lord of the organs
of sense,’ Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. {%—Hṛṣīkeśa-tīrtha,%}
{%am,%} n., N. of a Tīrtha.
<LEND>

<L>54338<pc>1176-c<k1>hfzwa<k2>hfzwa
{%Hṛṣṭa, as, ā, am%}¦ [cf. {%hṛṣita%}], having the
hair of the body bristling or thrilling (with delight
or rapture), enraptured, delighted, rejoiced, pleased,
glad, joyous, delighted; exulting, laughing, smiling;
astonished, surprised; disappointed, deceived {%(=%}
{%prati-hata)%}. {%—Hṛṣṭa-citta, as, ā, am,%} rejoiced
in heart. {%—Hṛṣṭa-puṣṭa, as, ā, am,%} merry and
fat, happy and well-fed. {%—Hṛṣṭa-puṣṭāṅga (˚ṭa-%}
{%aṅ˚), as, ā, am,%} merry and fat in limb, happy and
well nourished, frisky and fat. {%—Hṛṣṭa-mānasa,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} rejoiced in mind, glad in heart, happy.
{%—Hṛṣṭa-rūpa, as, ā, am,%} thrilling with happi-
ness, in a happy or cheerful mood. {%—Hṛṣṭa-roman,%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} having the hair of the body bristling or
thrilling (with delight or rapture). {%—Hṛṣṭa-vat,%}
ind. cheerfully. {%—Hṛṣṭa-vadana, as, ā, am,%}
merry-faced, having a cheerful countenance. {%—Hṛ-%}
{%ṣṭa-saṅkalpa, as, ā, am,%} pleased in mind, con-
tented, glad. {%—Hṛṣṭa-hṛdaya, as, ā, am,%} joyous-
hearted, light-hearted, happy.
<LEND>

<L>54339<pc>1176-c<k1>hfzwi<k2>hfzwi
{%Hṛṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. delight, pleasure, joy, happiness;
pride, arrogance.
<LEND>

<L>54340<pc>1176-c<k1>hfzwvA<k2>hfzwvA
{%Hṛṣṭvā,%}¦ ind. having rejoiced, being delighted.
<LEND>

<L>54341<pc>1176-c<k1>he<k2>he
{#he#}¦ {%he,%} ind. a vocative particle (oh! ho!
&c.); a particle used in vociferating or challenging
(hallo! ho there!); an interjection expressing envy
or ill-will or disapprobation.
<LEND>

<L>54342<pc>1176-c<k1>hekkA<k2>hekkA
{#hekkA#}¦ {%hekkā,%} f. (fr. rt. {%hikk%}), hiccough.
<LEND>

<L>54343<pc>1176-c<k1>heW<k2>heW
{#heW#}¦ {%heṭh%} (according to some written {%heṭ%}),
cl. 1. A. P. {%heṭhate, heṭhati%} (according to
some {%heṭati%}), {%jiheṭhe, heṭhitum,%} to be wicked; to
vex, harass, obstruct; to strike, hurt, injure; cl. 9. P.
{%heṭhnāti,%} &c. = rt. {%heḍh:%} Caus. {%heṭhayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%ajiheṭhat.%}
<LEND>

<L>54344<pc>1176-c<k1>heWa<k2>heWa
{%Heṭha, as,%}¦ m. vexation, harassing; hindering,
preventing, hindrance, obstruction, opposition; in-
jury, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>54345<pc>1176-c<k1>heq<k2>heq
{#heq#}¦ {%heḍ%} or (in the Veda) {%hel%} or {%heḷ%} (see
rt. {%hel%}), cl. 1. A. {%heḍate%} (Ved. {%helate, he-%}
{%ḷate%}), {%jiheḍe, heḍitum,%} to disregard, slight, neglect;
to be displeased or angry (Ved.; {%heḷate = krudhyati,%}
Naigh. II. 12); cl. 1. P. {%heḍati, jiheḍa,%} &c., to
surround, clothe, attire: Pass. {%heḍyate,%} Aor. {%ahiḍi%}
or {%ahīḍi%} or {%aheḍi,%} to be surrounded or attired:
Caus. {%heḍayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ajiheḍat,%} to cause to
disregard, &c.; {%hiḍayati, -yitum, ajīhiḍat,%} to cause
to surround.
<LEND>

<L>54346<pc>1176-c<k1>heqa<k2>heqa
{%Heḍa, as,%}¦ m. disregard, slight. {%—Heḍa-ja, as,%} m.
passion, anger, displeasure.
<LEND>

<L>54347<pc>1176-c<k1>heqamAna<k2>heqamAna
{%Heḍamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ disregarding, neglecting,
neglectful.
<LEND>

<L>54348<pc>1176-c<k1>heqas<k2>heqas
{%Heḍas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. anger, wrath, (Sāy. {%= krodha.%})
<LEND>

<L>54349<pc>1176-c<k1>heLas<k2>heLas
{%Heḷas, as,%}¦ n., Ved. {%= heḍas%} above.
<LEND>
[Page1177-a+ 79]

<L>54350<pc>1177-a<k1>heqAvukka<k2>heqAvukka
{#heqAvukka#}¦ {%heḍāvukka, as,%} m. ({%= helāvukka,%}
q. v.), a horse-dealer, horse-seller.
<LEND>

<L>54351<pc>1177-a<k1>heQ<k2>heQ
{#heQ#}¦ {%heḍh%} (also written {%heṭh%}), cl. 9. P.
{%heḍhnāti,%} &c., to be born again; to pro-
duce happiness, cause prosperity; to purify [cf. rts.
{%khac, khav%}].
<LEND>

<L>54352<pc>1177-a<k1>heti<k2>heti
{#heti#}¦ {%heti.%} See p. 1171, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>54353<pc>1177-a<k1>hetu<k2>hetu
{%Hetu.%}¦ See p. 1171, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>54354<pc>1177-a<k1>heman<k2>heman<h>2
{#heman#} 2¦. {%heman, a,%} n. (according to Uṇādi-s.
IV. 144. fr. rt. 1. {%hi,%} perhaps connected with 1. {%hari-%}
{%man,%} ‘yellowness,’ p. 1167; cf. {%pra-uga%} for {%pra-%}
{%yuga;%} or perhaps connected with {%hima,%} 1. {%heman%}
at pp. 1172, 1173), gold; water, (in Naigh. I. 2.
enumerated among the {%hiraṇya-nāmāni,%} and in I.
12. among the {%udaka-nāmāni%}); the thorn-apple;
the Keśara flower. {%—Hema-kakṣa, as, ā, am,%}
having a golden girdle; having golden walls. {%—Hema-%}
{%kandala, as,%} m. ‘having golden shoots,’ coral.
{%—Hema-kara, as,%} m. a gold-worker, gold-
smith; epithet of Śiva. {%—Hema-kartṛ, tā,%} m. a
goldsmith; a kind of bird. {%—Hema-kānti, is, is, i,%}
having a golden lustre; ({%is%}), f. a kind of Curcuma
{%(= dāru-haridrā)%}. {%—Hema-kāra, as,%} m. a gold-
worker, goldsmith. {%—Hema-kiñjalka, am,%} n. ‘hav-
ing golden filaments,’ the Nāga-keśara flower. {%—He-%}
{%ma-kirīṭa-mālin, ī, inī, i,%} garlanded with a diadem
of gold. {%—Hema-kumbha, as,%} m. a golden jar.
{%—Hema-kūṭa, as,%} m. ‘golden-peaked,’ (perhaps
also connected with 1. {%heman%} at p. 1173, col. 1),
one of the ranges of mountains dividing the known
continent into nine Varṣas, (supposed to be situated
north of Himālaya and forming with it the boundaries
of the Kinnara or Kimpuruṣa Varṣa, see {%varṣa.%})
{%—Hema-ketakī,%} f. a kind of tree {%(= svarṇa-%}
{%ketakī)%}. {%—Hema-keli, is,%} m. ‘golden-sport,’ epithet
of Agni or fire. {%—Hema-keśa, as,%} m. ‘golden-
haired,’ Śiva. {%—Hema-kṣīrī,%} f. the plant Svarṇa-
kṣīrī, q. v. {%—Hema-gandhinī,%} f. the perfume Re-
ṇukā. {%—Hema-gaura, as, ī, am,%} of a golden yellow
colour; ({%as%}), m. the Kiṅkirāta tree. {%—Hemagau-%}
{%rāṅga (˚ra-aṅ˚), as, ā%} or {%ī, am,%} having limbs or a
body of a golden yellow colour. {%—Hema-cakra, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} golden-wheeled, having wheels of gold.
{%—Hema-candra, as,%} m. a golden or golden-
coloured moon; N. of a king of Vaiśālī; of a phi-
losopher; of a celebrated lexicographer and author
(son of Jaya-siṃha-deva, author of the Abhidhāna-
cintāmaṇi lexicon; of the Uṇādi-vṛtti; of a Dhātu-
pāṭha; of the Vibhrama-sūtra; of a Prākṛt gram-
mar; of the Chandaś-cūḍāmaṇi, &c.). {%—Hema-%}
{%cchanna, as, ā, am,%} covered with gold; ({%am%}), n.
a golden covering, golden trappings (of an elephant
&c.). {%—Hema-jīvantī,%} f. a kind of plant {%(= svarṇa-%}
{%jīvantī)%}. {%—Hema-jvāla, as,%} m. ‘golden-flamed,’
fire. {%—Hema-taru, us,%} m. ‘golden tree,’ the Datura
or thorn-apple. {%—Hema-tāra, am,%} n. {%= hema-sāra,%}
blue vitriol {%(= tuttha)%}. {%—Hema-dugdha, as,%} m.
‘having golden or yellow juice,’ the glomerous fig-
tree; ({%ā%}), f. the plant Svarṇa-kṣīrī; ({%ī%}), f. the plant
Svarṇa-kṣīrī; a kind of tree {%(= yajñoḍumbara).%}
{%—Hema-dugdhaka, as, ikā, am,%} having golden
or yellow juice; ({%as%}), m. {%= hema-dugdha%} above.
{%—Hema-nābhi, is, is, i,%} having a golden nave or
centre. {%—Hema-parvata, as,%} m. ‘golden-mountain,’
the mountain Meru. {%—Hema-pīṭhādhidevatā (˚ṭha-%}
{%adh˚),%} f. the tutelary deity of a golden foot-stool,
(epithet of a monarch's foot.) {%—Hema-puṣpa, as,%}
m. ‘bearing golden flowers,’ the Campaka tree; the
Lodhra tree; ({%ī%}), f. Bengal madder; other plants,
{%= svarṇa-jīvantī, indra-vāruṇī, svarṇulī, mu-%}
{%ṣalī, kaṇṭakārī; (am),%} n. the Aśoka flower; the
flower of the China rose. {%—Hema-puṣpaka, as,%}
m. the Campaka tree; the Lodhra tree; ({%ikā%}), f.
the golden or yellow jasmine. {%—Hema-phala, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having golden fruit; ({%ā%}), f. a kind of plantain
{%(= svarṇa-kadalī)%}. {%—Hema-maya, as, ī, am,%}
made or consisting of gold, golden. {%—Hema-mālā,%}
f. a golden garland; ‘golden-garlanded,’ the wife of
Yama. {%—Hema-mālin, ī, inī, i,%} having a golden
[Page1177-b+ 78]
garland, golden-crowned; ({%ī%}), m. the sun. {%—Hema-%}
{%mṛga, as,%} m. a golden deer, (according to a popular
legend, the Rākṣasa Mārīca transformed himself
into a golden deer and so captivated Rāma-candra
and his wife Sītā, that the former left his cottage
in the forest to pursue the beautiful animal; during
his absence the Rākṣasa Rāvaṇa, q. v., disguised as
a mendicant, presented himself before Sītā and
carried her off; the whole story is told in the third
book or Araṇya-kāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa.) {%—Hema-%}
{%yūthikā,%} f. the golden or yellow jasmine. {%—Hema-%}
{%ratna-maya, as, ī, am,%} made or consisting of gold
and gems. {%—Hema-rāgiṇī,%} f. ‘gold-coloured,’ tur-
meric. {%—Hema-rāja, as,%} m. a proper N. {%—Hema-%}
{%reṇu, us, u,%} m. n. ‘golden-dust,’ a sort of atom;
[cf. {%su-reṇu, trasa-r˚.%}] {%—Hema-latā,%} f. ‘golden-
creeper,’ a kind of plant {%(= svarṇa-jīvantī)%}. {%—He-%}
{%ma-lamba%} or {%hema-lambaka, as,%} m. epithet of
the fifth (or thirty-first) year of Jupiter's cycle of sixty
years. {%—Hema-vat, ān, atī, at,%} golden. {%—Hema-%}
{%vyākaraṇa, am,%} n., N. of a work on grammar by
Hema-sūri or Hema-candra. {%—Hema-śaṅkha, as,%}
m. ‘having a golden conch,’ Viṣṇu. {%—Hema-%}
{%śikhā,%} f. ‘gold-crested,’ the plant Svarṇa-kṣīrī, q. v.
{%—Hema-śṛṅga, am,%} n. a golden horn; a golden
peak or summit. {%—Hema-śṛṅgin, ī, iṇī, i,%} golden-
horned, golden-peaked. {%—Hema-sāra, am,%} n. blue
vitriol or sulphate of copper; [cf. {%hema-tāra.%}]
{%—Hema-sūtra%} or {%hema-sūtraka, am,%} n. ‘gold-
string,’ a kind of necklace. {%—Hema-sūri, is,%} m.,
N. of a grammarian {%(= hema-candra)%}. {%—Hema-%}
{%hasti-ratha, as,%} m. ‘golden-elephant-chariot,’ N.
of one of the sixteen Mahā-dānas; [cf. {%hiraṇyāśva-%}
{%ratha.%}] {%—Hemāṅga (˚ma-aṅ˚), am,%} n. a golden
body; ({%as, ā%} or {%ī, am%}), having a golden body,
golden-limbed, golden; ({%as%}), m. Garuḍa; a lion;
the mountain Su-meru; Brahmā; Viṣṇu; the Cam-
paka tree. {%—Hemāṅga-da, as,%} m., N. of a Gan-
dharva. {%—Hemāḍhya (˚ma-āḍh˚), as, ā, am,%}
abounding in gold. {%—Hemādri (˚ma-ad˚), is,%} m.
‘golden-mountain,’ (perhaps also connected with
1. {%heman%} at p. 1173, col. 1), the mountain Su-
meru; N. of a Kṣatriya king, (according to Śabda-k.
author of the Cintāmaṇi-kāmadhenu-kalpadruma-
smṛti-saṅgraha; also author of the Harilīlā-viveka
and of a commentary on the Aṣṭāṅga-hṛdaya-
saṃhitā, &c.); N. of a work. {%—Hemādri-jaraṇa,%}
{%as,%} m. the plant Svarṇa-kṣīrī, q. v. {%—Hemāmbhoja%}
{%(˚ma-am˚), am,%} n. a golden lotus-flower. {%—He-%}
{%māhva (˚ma-āh˚), as,%} m. ‘called after gold,’ the
wild Campaka tree; the thorn-apple; ({%ā%}), f. a kind
of plant ({%= svarṇa-jīvantī%}).
<LEND>

<L>54355<pc>1177-b<k1>hema<k2>hema
{%Hema, am,%}¦ n. (abbreviated fr. 2. {%heman,%} col. 1),
gold; ({%as%}), m. a horse of a dark or brownish colour
[cf. {%hariya,%} p. 1167]; a particular weight of gold
({%= māṣaka%}); N. of the father of Su-tapas; of a
king; {%= hema-candra,%} q. v.; ({%ā%}), f. a handsome
woman; an Apsaras of Indra's heaven; N. of a
river.
<LEND>

<L>54356<pc>1177-b<k1>hemaka<k2>hemaka
{%Hemaka, am,%}¦ n. gold.
<LEND>

<L>54357<pc>1177-b<k1>hemala<k2>hemala
{%Hemala, as,%}¦ m. a goldsmith; a chameleon, lizard;
the touchstone.
<LEND>

<L>54358<pc>1177-b<k1>hemavala<k2>hemavala
{%Hemavala, am,%}¦ n. a pearl.
<LEND>

<L>54359<pc>1177-b<k1>hemya<k2>hemya
{%Hemya, as, ā, am,%}¦ golden, made of gold. {%—He-%}
{%myā-vat, ān, atī, at,%} Ved. having golden trappings,
(Sāy. {%= suvarṇa-nirmita-kakṣyāvat,%} having a
girth made of gold, Ṛg-veda IV. 2, 8.)
<LEND>

<L>54360<pc>1177-b<k1>hemanta<k2>hemanta
{#hemanta#}¦ {%hemanta.%} See p. 1173, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>54361<pc>1177-b<k1>hemavala<k2>hemavala
{#hemavala#}¦ {%hemavala.%} See p. 1173, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>54362<pc>1177-b<k1>heya<k2>heya
{#heya#}¦ {%heya.%} See under rts. 2. 3. {%hā,%} 1. {%hi.%}
<LEND>

<L>54363<pc>1177-b<k1>hera<k2>hera
{#hera#}¦ {%hera, am,%} n. (perhaps fr. rt. 1. {%hi,%} or
connected with rt. 1. {%hṛ%}), a sort of crown or tiara;
turmeric; demoniacal illusion.
<LEND>

<L>54364<pc>1177-b<k1>herika<k2>herika
{%Herika, as,%}¦ m. [cf. {%hairika%}], a spy, secret emis-
sary or agent, (said to be also written {%heraka.%})
<LEND>

<L>54365<pc>1177-b<k1>heramba<k2>heramba
{#heramba#}¦ {%heramba, as,%} m., N. of Gaṇeśa; a
buffalo; a boastful hero (vain of his own valour); a
particular Buddha {%(= heruka)%}. {%—Heramba-jananī,%}
[Page1177-c+ 73]
f. ‘mother of Gaṇeśa,’ Durgā. {%—Heramba-mantra,%}
{%as,%} m. a particular Mantra (sacred to Gaṇeśa).
{%—Heramba-haṭṭa, as,%} m., N. of a country, (said
to be one of the provinces of the Deccan.)
<LEND>

<L>54366<pc>1177-c<k1>hEramba<k2>hEramba
{%Hairamba, as, ī, am,%}¦ connected with or belong-
ing to Gaṇeśa; ({%ās%}), m. pl., N. of a sect.
<LEND>

<L>54367<pc>1177-c<k1>heruka<k2>heruka
{#heruka#}¦ {%heruka, as,%} m. an attendant on
Mahā-kāla or Śiva; (with Buddhists) an inferior
Buddha.
<LEND>

<L>54368<pc>1177-c<k1>hel<k2>hel<h>1
{#hel#} 1¦. {%hel.%} See rt. {%heḍ,%} p. 1176.
<LEND>

<L>54369<pc>1177-c<k1>hel<k2>hel<h>2
{#hel#} 2¦. {%hel%} or {%heḷ%} (connected with rt.
{%hil%}) = rt. {%heḍ,%} q. v.; cl. 1. A. {%helate,%} &c.,
to disregard, slight; to be angry, &c.
<LEND>

<L>54370<pc>1177-c<k1>hILita<k2>hILita
{%Hīḷita, as, ā, am%}¦ (according to Sāy. fr. rt. {%heḍ%}
or {%heḷ%}), Ved. angry, displeased ({%= kruddha,%} Ṛg-
veda I. 80, 5).
<LEND>

<L>54371<pc>1177-c<k1>helaYcI<k2>helaYcI
{%Helañcī,%}¦ f. a kind of pot-herb ({%= hila-moci%}).
<LEND>

<L>54372<pc>1177-c<k1>helana<k2>helana
{%Helana, am,%}¦ n. the act of disregarding, slighting,
disrespect, contempt [cf. {%ava-helana%}]; sporting
amorously, wanton dalliance; [cf. rt. {%hil.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54373<pc>1177-c<k1>helA<k2>helA
{%Helā,%}¦ f. disrespect, contempt [cf. {%ava-helā%}]; wan-
ton sport, amorous dalliance, manner or gesture of
lovers, play, sport, pastime, pleasure, delight, ({%helayā,%}
inst. c. sportively, out of mere sport or pastime, for
amusement); facility, ease, ({%helayā,%} with the greatest
ease, easily, at once); moonlight; pausing in a note
or shaking as in music. {%—Helā-rāja, as,%} m., N. of
a commentator.
<LEND>

<L>54374<pc>1177-c<k1>heli<k2>heli<h>1
1. {%heli, is,%}¦ f. dalliance, wanton sport, amorous
embrace.
<LEND>

<L>54375<pc>1177-c<k1>helita<k2>helita
{%Helita, as, ā, am,%}¦ disregarded, neglected, slighted.
<LEND>

<L>54376<pc>1177-c<k1>helAvukka<k2>helAvukka
{#helAvukka#}¦ {%helāvukka, as,%} m. ({%= heḍāvukka%}),
a horse-dealer, horse-seller.
<LEND>

<L>54377<pc>1177-c<k1>heli<k2>heli<h>2
{#heli#} 2¦. {%heli, is,%} m. (probably borrowed fr.
Gr. <lang n="greek">ἥλιος</lang>), the sun.
<LEND>

<L>54378<pc>1177-c<k1>helu<k2>helu
{#helu#}¦ {%helu,%} N. of a village in Kaśmīra.
{%—Helu-grāma, as,%} m. the village Helu. {%—Helu-%}
{%diṇṇa, as, ā, am%} ({%diṇṇa%} Prākṛt for {%datta%}), pre-
sented with (the village) Helu, having received Helu
as a present.
<LEND>

<L>54379<pc>1177-c<k1>heLas<k2>heLas
{#heLas#}¦ {%heḷas.%} See {%heḍas.%}
<LEND>

<L>54380<pc>1177-c<k1>hez<k2>hez
{#hez#}¦ {%heṣ%} [cf. rt. {%hreṣ%}], cl. 1. A. {%heṣate,%}
{%jiheṣe, heṣitum,%} to neigh (as a horse),
whinny; to make any inarticulate sound, bray, roar;
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">γίννος;</lang> Lat. <nsi>hinnio</nsi> (for <nsi>hisnio</nsi>), <nsi>hin-</nsi>
<nsi>nulus.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54381<pc>1177-c<k1>heza<k2>heza
{%Heṣa, as,%}¦ m. neighing; a neigh, braying, roaring.
{%—Heṣa-kratu, us, us, u,%} Ved. making a neighing
or roaring sound, roaring, (in Ṛg-veda III. 26, 5.
said of lions; according to Sāy. {%heṣa-kratavaḥ =%}
{%heṣā-ravasya kratuḥ karaṇaṃ yeṣāṃ te.%})
<LEND>

<L>54382<pc>1177-c<k1>hezas<k2>hezas
{%Heṣas,%}¦ Ved. (probably) neighing, braying; sound-
ing, (in Ṛg-veda X. 89. 12. Sāy. explains {%heṣasā%}
by {%śabda-kāriṇyā hetyā.%})
<LEND>

<L>54383<pc>1177-c<k1>hezA<k2>hezA
{%Heṣā,%}¦ f. neighing (of horses), whinnying, braying.
<LEND>

<L>54384<pc>1177-c<k1>hezAya<k2>hezAya
{%Heṣāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%heṣāyate, -yitum,%} to neigh,
whinny.
<LEND>

<L>54385<pc>1177-c<k1>hezita<k2>hezita
{%Heṣita, am,%}¦ n. a neigh or any similar inarticulate
sound, neighing, whinnying.
<LEND>

<L>54386<pc>1177-c<k1>hezin<k2>hezin
{%Heṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ neighing; ({%ī%}), m. a horse.
<LEND>

<L>54387<pc>1177-c<k1>hehe<k2>hehe
{#hehe#}¦ {%he-he,%} ind. ({%he,%} q. v., repeated), a vo-
cative particle (used in addressing, calling, or vocife-
rating).
<LEND>

<L>54388<pc>1177-c<k1>hE<k2>hE
{#hE#}¦ {%hai,%} ind. a vocative particle (used in
calling or vociferating).
<LEND>

<L>54389<pc>1177-c<k1>hEtuka<k2>hEtuka
{#hEtuka#}¦ {%haituka, as, ī, am%} (fr. {%hetu%}), causal,
causative; argumentative, rationalistic; ({%as%}), m. a
reasoner, arguer, logical reasoner; a follower of the
Mīmāṃsā doctrines; one who requires a reason for
everything, a rationalist, sceptic, causalist, sophist,
heretic.
<LEND>

<L>54390<pc>1177-c<k1>hEtukya<k2>hEtukya
{%Haitukya, am,%}¦ n. causality, causativeness, ({%a-hai-%}
{%tukya, am,%} n. absence of interested motives.)
<LEND>
[Page1178-a+ 75]

<L>54391<pc>1178-a<k1>hEma<k2>hEma<h>1
{#hEma#} 1¦. {%haima, as, ī, am%} (fr. 1. {%heman%}),
wintry, brumal, cold, frigid, freezing; ({%am%}), n. hoar-
frost, dew.
<LEND>

<L>54392<pc>1178-a<k1>hEmana<k2>hEmana<h>1
1. {%haimana, as, ī, am,%}¦ winterly, cold; growing
in winter, suitable to winter; ({%as%}), m. the month
Mārgaśīrṣa (= November-December); a kind of
rice which grows in winter, {%= ṣaṣṭika; (as, am),%}
m. n. winter, the cold season, wintry weather.
<LEND>

<L>54393<pc>1178-a<k1>hEmanta<k2>hEmanta
{%Haimanta, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%hemanta%}), wintry,
cold; growing in winter, &c.; suitable to winter;
({%as, am%}), m. n. the winter season.
<LEND>

<L>54394<pc>1178-a<k1>hEmantika<k2>hEmantika
{%Haimantika, as, ī, am,%}¦ wintry, cold, growing
in winter; ({%am%}), n. a kind of rice, (see {%haimana%}
above.)
<LEND>

<L>54395<pc>1178-a<k1>hEmala<k2>hEmala
{%Haimala, as, am,%}¦ m. n. (fr. {%himala%}), winter,
the cold season.
<LEND>

<L>54396<pc>1178-a<k1>hEmavata<k2>hEmavata
{%Haimavata, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%hima-vat%}), snowy,
covered with snow; flowing from the snowy moun-
tain; bred in or belonging to the Himālaya moun-
tains; ({%as%}), m. a sort of poison; ({%ī%}), f. epithet of
the goddess Pārvatī; the river Ganges (which rises
in the Himālaya mountains); N. of a wife of Viśvā-
mitra; a kind of drug or perfume ({%= reṇukā%}); a
kind of white orris root; common flax ({%= atasī%});
the plant Svarṇa-kṣīrī; a kind of myrobalan ({%=%}
{%harītakī%}); the tawny grape, (in some of these last
senses probably to be connected with 2. {%haima%}
below); ({%am%}), n. Bhārata-varṣa or India. {%—Hai-%}
{%mavata-varṣa, am,%} n. India.
<LEND>

<L>54397<pc>1178-a<k1>hEma<k2>hEma<h>2
{#hEma#} 2¦. {%haima, as, ī, am%} (fr. 2. {%heman%}),
golden, made of gold; of a golden yellow colour;
({%as%}), m. epithet of Śiva; the plant Gentiana Che-
rayta; ({%ā%} or {%ī%}), f. yellow jasmine; ({%am%}), n. the
lexicon of Hema-candra. {%—Haima-koṣa, as,%} m.
Hema-candra's lexicon. {%—Haima-citra-samutsedha,%}
{%as, ā, am,%} enchased with golden pictures. {%—Haima-%}
{%mudrā%} or {%haima-mudrikā,%} f. a golden coin. {%—Hai-%}
{%mamudrika, as, ī, am,%} having or possessing a golden
coin. {%—Haima-valkala, as, ā, am,%} having bark
garments set with gold, clothed in gold. {%—Haimā-%}
{%nekārtha (˚ma-an˚),%} N. of a lexicon. {%—Haimī-%}
{%bhūta, as, ā, am,%} become golden, turned into gold.
<LEND>

<L>54398<pc>1178-a<k1>hEmana<k2>hEmana<h>2
2. {%haimana, as, ī, am,%}¦ golden, made of gold.
<LEND>

<L>54399<pc>1178-a<k1>hEyaNgavIna<k2>hEyaNgavIna
{#hEyaNgavIna#}¦ {%haiyaṅgavīna, am,%} n. (fr. {%hyas%}
{%+ go%} with insertion of nasal), clarified butter pre-
pared from yesterday's milking; butter prepared only
a day before it is used, fresh butter.
<LEND>

<L>54400<pc>1178-a<k1>hEraRyagarBa<k2>hEraRyagarBa
{#hEraRyagarBa#}¦ {%hairaṇyagarbha, as, ī, am%} (fr.
{%hiraṇya-garbha%}), belonging to Hiraṇya-garbha;
({%as%}), m. the offspring of Hiraṇya-garbha (i. e. Manu
Svāyambhuva, son of Brahmā).
<LEND>

<L>54401<pc>1178-a<k1>hEraRyavAsas<k2>hEraRyavAsas
{#hEraRyavAsas#}¦ {%hairaṃyavāsas, ās, ās, as%} (fr.
{%hiraṇya + vāsas%}), having a golden dress or covering;
({%ās%}), m. an arrow.
<LEND>

<L>54402<pc>1178-a<k1>hEraRyastUpa<k2>hEraRyastUpa
{#hEraRyastUpa#}¦ {%hairaṇyastūpa, as, ī, am,%} be-
longing to Hiraṇya-stūpa, q. v.; ({%as%}), m. a patro-
nymic, (see {%hiraṇya-stūpa.%})
<LEND>

<L>54403<pc>1178-a<k1>hEramba<k2>hEramba
{#hEramba#}¦ {%hairamba.%} See under {%heramba.%}
<LEND>

<L>54404<pc>1178-a<k1>hErika<k2>hErika
{#hErika#}¦ {%hairika, as,%} m. (probably connected
with rt. 1. {%hṛ,%} cf. {%harika%}), a thief.
<LEND>

<L>54405<pc>1178-a<k1>hEhaya<k2>hEhaya
{#hEhaya#}¦ {%haihaya, as,%} m. (thought by some
to be connected with {%haya,%} a horse), N. of a tribe
of people (said to have been descendants of Yadu;
they are described in the Purāṇas as separated into
five divisions, viz. the Tāla-jaṅghas, Vīti-hotras,
Āvantyas, Tuṇḍikeras, and Jātas; they are said to
have overrun parts of India along with the Śakas or
Scythian tribes); N. of the great grandson of Yadu;
of Arjuna Kārtavīrya (as ninth in descent from
Haihaya or as king of the Haihayas; he is said to
have had a thousand arms; see {%kārtavīrya%}).
<LEND>

<L>54406<pc>1178-a<k1>hEheya<k2>hEheya
{%Haiheya, as,%}¦ m. Arjuna Kārtavīrya ({%= haihaya%}).
<LEND>

<L>54407<pc>1178-a<k1>ho<k2>ho
{#ho#}¦ {%ho,%} ind. a vocative particle used in
calling to a person or in challenging (ho! hallo!);
also expressive of surprise.
<LEND>
[Page1178-b+ 78]

<L>54408<pc>1178-b<k1>hoq<k2>hoq
{#hoq#}¦ {%hoḍ%} [cf. rts. {%huḍ, hūḍ%}], cl. 1. A.
{%hoḍate, juhoḍe,%} &c., to disregard, disrespect
(= rt. {%heḍ%}); cl. 1. P. {%hoḍati, juhoḍa,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>54409<pc>1178-b<k1>hoqa<k2>hoqa
{%Hoḍa, as,%}¦ m. a raft, float, boat ({%= tarāndhu%});
a title of a particular class of Kāyasthas; a title of
Śrotriya Brāhmans in Bengal.
<LEND>

<L>54410<pc>1178-b<k1>hoqA<k2>hoqA
{#hoqA#}¦ {%hoḍā,%} f. (according to the Laghu-
kaumudī), a young girl (in the language of the Vedas).
<LEND>

<L>54411<pc>1178-b<k1>hoqf<k2>hoqf
{#hoqf#}¦ {%hoḍṛ, ā,%} m. (said to be fr. rt. {%huḍ;%}
cf. {%hur%} under rt. {%hurch%}), a robber, foot-pad, high-
way-robber.
<LEND>

<L>54412<pc>1178-b<k1>hoQa<k2>hoQa<h>1
{#hoQa#} 1¦. {%hoḍha, as, ā, am%} [cf. {%hur%} under rt.
{%hurch%}], stolen; ({%am%}), n. stolen goods; [cf. 2. {%sa-%}
{%hoḍha,%} p. 1102.]
<LEND>

<L>54413<pc>1178-b<k1>hoQa<k2>hoQa<h>2
2. {%hoḍha,%}¦ Nom. A. {%hoḍhate, hoḍhāyate,%} see Vopa-
deva XXI. 7.
<LEND>

<L>54414<pc>1178-b<k1>hotf<k2>hotf
{#hotf#}¦ {%hotṛ, tā, trī, tṛ%} (according to Uṇādi-s.
II. 96. fr. rt. {%hu;%} according to others in the sense
‘priest,’ fr. rt. {%hve%}), sacrificing, offering oblations with
fire, a sacrificer; ({%tā%}), m. an offerer of an oblation
or burnt-offering (with fire); a priest who at a
sacrifice invokes the gods or recites the prayers of
the Ṛg-veda, a priest conversant with the Ṛg-veda,
(one of the four kinds of officiating priest, see {%ṛtv-%}
{%ij,%} p. 181; properly the Hotṛ priest has three
assistants, sometimes called Puruṣas, viz. the Maitrā-
varuṇa, Acchāvāka, and Grāva-stut; to these are
sometimes added three others, making seven Hotṛ
priests in all, viz. the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin, Agnīdhra
or Agnīdh, and Potṛ, though these last are properly
assigned to the Brahman priest; sometimes the
Neṣṭṛ is substituted for the Grāva-stut); a sacri-
ficing priest (in general); an epithet of Agni or fire,
(in this sense fr. rt. {%hu%}); ({%trī%}), f. one of the eight
Mūrtis or Tanus, i. e. material manifestations of Śiva,
(but this may be referred to {%hotrin,%} see {%śiva.%}) {%—Hotā-%}
{%potārau,%} m. du. (nom. c.) the Hotṛ and Potṛ
priests. {%—Hotṛ-vūrya, as, ā, am,%} Ved. (a rite) in
which a priest has to be chosen. {%—Hotṛ-ṣadana,%}
{%am,%} n. the Hotṛ's seat or place where the Hotṛ sits
at a sacrifice, (said to be near the {%uttara-vedi.%})
{%—Hotṛ-saṃsthā-japa,%} N. of a liturgical treatise.
{%—Hotṝkāra%} ({%˚tṛ-ṝk˚%} or {%-ḷk˚%}), {%as,%} m. the mother
of the Hotṛ (according to Vopa-deva, the letters {%ṝ,%}
{%ḷ,%} and {%ḹ%} being employed as mystical formularies
by the Hotṛ, see {%ḹ%}).
<LEND>

<L>54415<pc>1178-b<k1>hotfka<k2>hotfka
{%Hotṛka, as,%}¦ m. a minor Hotṛ priest or assistant
of the Hotṛ, (see above.)
<LEND>

<L>54416<pc>1178-b<k1>hotra<k2>hotra
{%Hotra, am,%}¦ n. (fr. rt. {%hu%}), anything intended or
fit for offering with fire (generally clarified butter);
the clarified butter so offered ({%= havis%}); a burnt-
offering, oblation with fire, a sacrifice, (in Ṛg-veda
II. 36, 1. {%hotra = hotur yāga.%}) {%—Hotra-vāhana,%}
{%as,%} m. ‘bearer of the burnt-offering,’ a proper N.
{%—Hotrāśaṃsin (˚ra-āś˚), ī,%} m. ‘a repeater of the
Hotṛ verses,’ a particular minor Hotṛ priest, (the
Potṛ, the Neṣṭṛ, and the Āgnīdhra belong to this
class.)
<LEND>

<L>54417<pc>1178-b<k1>hotraka<k2>hotraka
{%Hotraka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an inferior Hotṛ priest, (the
Maitrāvaruṇa or Pra-śāstṛ, the Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin,
and the Acchāvāka belong to this class; see {%ho-%}
{%tṛka.%})
<LEND>

<L>54418<pc>1178-b<k1>hotrA<k2>hotrA
{%Hotrā,%}¦ f. an oblation, sacrifice; praise ({%= stuti%});
speech ({%= vāc,%} Naigh. I. 11); N. of a Vedic god-
dess (said to have been the wife of Agni).
<LEND>

<L>54419<pc>1178-b<k1>hotrin<k2>hotrin
{%Hotrin, ī,%}¦ m. a sacrificing priest; the priest who
offers the oblation.
<LEND>

<L>54420<pc>1178-b<k1>hotrI<k2>hotrI
{%Hotrī,%}¦ f. See under {%hotṛ%} above.
<LEND>

<L>54421<pc>1178-b<k1>hotrIya<k2>hotrIya
{%Hotrīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to an oblation,
connected with a burnt-offering, &c.; ({%as%}), m. the
priest who offers an oblation; ({%am%}), n. any place or
chamber where oblations are offered, a sacrificial
chamber.
<LEND>

<L>54422<pc>1178-b<k1>homa<k2>homa
{%Homa, as,%}¦ m. the act of making an oblation to
the Devas or gods by casting clarified butter into the
fire (accompanied with prayers and invocations; this
is regarded as one of the five Mahā-yajñas and called
Deva-yajña, see {%mahā-yajña, deva-yajña%}); an
[Page1178-c+ 76]
oblation of clarified butter, oblation with fire, burnt-
offering; a sacrifice, ({%ayuta-homa, as,%} m. a sacri-
fice of 10,000 burnt-offerings to the planets.) {%—Ho-%}
{%ma-kuṇḍa, am,%} n. a hole in the ground for receiv-
ing the consecrated fire for an oblation; [cf. {%agni-%}
{%kuṇḍa, havanī.%}] {%—Homa-dravya, am,%} n. anything
employed for a Homa-sacrifice or oblation. {%—Homa-%}
{%dravya-parimāṇa,%} N. of a Pari-śiṣṭa of the Sāma-
veda. {%—Homa-dhāna, am,%} n. a sacrificial chamber.
{%—Homa-dhānya, am,%} n. sacrificial grain; sesamum
{%(= tila)%}. {%—Homa-dhūma, as,%} m. the smoke of a
burnt-offering or sacrificial fire. {%—Homa-bhasman,%}
{%a,%} n. the ashes of a burnt-offering. {%—Homa-vat, ān,%}
{%atī, at,%} one who has offered an oblation or performed
sacrifice. {%—Homa-velā,%} f. the time for the burnt-
offering. {%—Homa-śālā,%} f. a chamber or place for
keeping the sacred fire for oblations. {%—Homa-sva-%}
{%rottara (˚ra-ut˚),%} N. of a work. {%—Homāgni (˚ma-%}
{%ag˚), is,%} m. sacrificial fire, the fire for an oblation.
<LEND>

<L>54423<pc>1178-c<k1>homaka<k2>homaka
{%Homaka, as,%}¦ m. the priest who offers the oblation
({%= hotṛ%}).
<LEND>

<L>54424<pc>1178-c<k1>homan<k2>homan
{%Homan, a,%}¦ n. an oblation, &c. ({%= homa%} above).
<LEND>

<L>54425<pc>1178-c<k1>homi<k2>homi
{%Homi, is,%}¦ m. clarified butter; fire; water.
<LEND>

<L>54426<pc>1178-c<k1>homin<k2>homin
{%Homin, ī,%}¦ m. the priest who makes the oblation
(of clarified butter &c.); an offerer of any oblation
(e. g. {%tila-homin,%} an offerer of sesamum).
<LEND>

<L>54427<pc>1178-c<k1>homIya<k2>homIya
{%Homīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating or belonging to an
oblation, fit for an oblation, belonging to a sacrifice.
{%—Homīya-dravya, am,%} n. anything used for an
oblation (as clarified butter).
<LEND>

<L>54428<pc>1178-c<k1>homya<k2>homya
{%Homya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to or fit for an
oblation; ({%am%}), n. clarified butter.
<LEND>

<L>54429<pc>1178-c<k1>hOtfka<k2>hOtfka
{%Hautṛka, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%hotṛ%}), relating or
belonging to the Hotṛ priest, sacerdotal.
<LEND>

<L>54430<pc>1178-c<k1>hOtna<k2>hOtna
{%Hautna, as,%}¦ m. (according to Uṇādi-s. IV. 105.
fr. rt. {%hu%}), the offerer of an oblation.
<LEND>

<L>54431<pc>1178-c<k1>hOtra<k2>hOtra
{%Hautra, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%hotra%}), the office or function
of a Hotṛ priest. {%—Hautra-prayoga,%} N. of a prac-
tical hand-book for the Hotṛ priests. {%—Hautra-%}
{%sūtra, am,%} n., N. of certain Sūtras by Kātyāyana.
<LEND>

<L>54432<pc>1178-c<k1>hOtraka<k2>hOtraka
{%Hautraka, am,%}¦ n., N. of a Pari-śiṣṭa of the
Yajur-veda.
<LEND>

<L>54433<pc>1178-c<k1>hOtrika<k2>hOtrika
{%Hautrika, am,%}¦ n. {%= hautra-sūtra.%}
<LEND>

<L>54434<pc>1178-c<k1>hOmya<k2>hOmya
{%Haumya, as, ā%}¦ or {%-mī, am%} (fr. {%homa%}), belonging
to or fit for a Homa or oblation; ({%am%}), n. clarified
butter. {%—Haumya-dhānya, am,%} n. sacrificial grain,
sesamum.
<LEND>

<L>54435<pc>1178-c<k1>horA<k2>horA
{#horA#}¦ {%horā,%} f. (borrowed fr. Gr. <lang n="greek">ὥρα</lang>), the
rising of a zodiacal sign; part of the duration of a
sign; an hour; a mark, line; a particular scientific
work or science, (probably astrological.) {%—Horā-%}
{%phala, am,%} n. the result or effect of the rising of a
sign. {%—Horā-makaranda,%} N. of an astrological
work. {%—Horā-śāstra, am,%} n., N. of a work by
Satya. {%—Horā-sāra-sudhānidhi,%} N. of a work by
Nārāyaṇa.
<LEND>

<L>54436<pc>1178-c<k1>horilasiMha<k2>horilasiMha
{#horilasiMha#}¦ {%horila-siṃha, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>54437<pc>1178-c<k1>holaka<k2>holaka
{#holaka#}¦ {%holaka, as,%} m. chick-pea or pulse
half parched in the pod or fried on a grass fire.
<LEND>

<L>54438<pc>1178-c<k1>holasiMha<k2>holasiMha
{#holasiMha#}¦ {%hola-siṃha, as,%} m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>54439<pc>1178-c<k1>holAka<k2>holAka
{#holAka#}¦ {%holāka, as,%} m. a kind of sweating
(practised for the cure of certain diseases).
<LEND>

<L>54440<pc>1178-c<k1>holAkA<k2>holAkA
{#holAkA#}¦ {%holākā,%} f. (perhaps fr. the sound
made in singing), the spring festival held at the ap-
proach of the vernal equinox (commonly called Hūlī
or Holī, and one of the most popular festivals in India;
it is said to be dedicated to Kṛṣṇa and the Gopīs,
and is properly celebrated during the ten days pre-
ceding the full moon of the month Phālguna, q. v.,
but usually only for the last three or four days ending
with the full moon; the chief observances described
are sprinkling one another with red or yellow
powder in sport, addressing passers-by with jokes,
singing songs in praise of the young Kṛṣṇa, and
lighting fires around which rude frolics are practised;
in Marāṭhī the name Holī is said to be applied also
[Page1179-a+ 73]
to the pile prepared for the fire; in some parts of
India the Holī festival corresponds to or immediately
precedes the Dola-yātrā).
<LEND>

<L>54441<pc>1179-a<k1>holI<k2>holI
{%Holī%}¦ (or according to some also {%holikā, hūlī%}), the
common designation of the Holākā festival or of the
song sung during the festival.
<LEND>

<L>54442<pc>1179-a<k1>hohO<k2>hohO
{#hohO#}¦ {%ho-hau,%} ind. a vocative particle (ho!
ho there! hallo!), an interjection used in calling or
challenging.
<LEND>

<L>54443<pc>1179-a<k1>hO<k2>hO
{%Hau,%}¦ ind. a vocative particle, {%= ho-hau%} above.
<LEND>

<L>54444<pc>1179-a<k1>hOq<k2>hOq
{#hOq#}¦ {%hauḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%hauḍati,%} &c., to go
(= rt. {%hūḍ%}).
<LEND>

<L>54445<pc>1179-a<k1>hOtfka<k2>hOtfka
{#hOtfka#}¦ {%hautṛka, hautna, hautra.%} See
p. 1178, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>54446<pc>1179-a<k1>hnu<k2>hnu
{#hnu#}¦ {%hnu,%} cl. 2. A. (Ved. also P.) {%hnute%}
({%api-hnutas = apalāpaṃ kurutaḥ,%} Ṛg-
veda VIII. 31, 7), {%juhnuve, hnoṣyate, ahnoṣṭa,%}
{%hnotum,%} to take away, rob, abstract; to with-
hold, secrete, conceal; to conceal one's self, hide
from any one, dissimulate or deny before any one
(with dat., e. g. {%Devadattāya hnute,%} he hides from
Devadatta, Pāṇ. I. 4, 34): Pass. {%hnūyate,%} Aor. {%ah-%}
{%nāvi:%} Caus. {%hnāvayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ajuhnavat:%}
Desid. {%juhnūṣate:%} Intens. {%johnūyate, johnoti;%}
[cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">ἀνα-νεύω, νεύω, νυστάζω, νυθός;</lang> Lat. <nsi>ab-</nsi>
<nsi>nuo, nuto, gnavus, navo, i-gnavis, se-gnis, niti,</nsi>
<nsi>nicto, con-niveo;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hneivan, hnaivs;</nsi> Old
Germ. <nsi>hnigan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hnivan, hnigan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54447<pc>1179-a<k1>hnava<k2>hnava
{%Hnava, as,%}¦ m. secreting, hiding, concealment,
({%api-hnava, as,%} m. a denial, {%= apalāpa;%} cf. {%ni-%}
{%hnava.%})
<LEND>

<L>54448<pc>1179-a<k1>hnavana<k2>hnavana
{%Hnavana, am,%}¦ n. the act of secreting, concealing,
dissimulating.
<LEND>

<L>54449<pc>1179-a<k1>hnuta<k2>hnuta
{%Hnuta, as, ā, am,%}¦ taken away, withheld, secreted,
hidden.
<LEND>

<L>54450<pc>1179-a<k1>hnuti<k2>hnuti
{%Hnuti, is,%}¦ f. abstraction, concealment; denial.
<LEND>

<L>54451<pc>1179-a<k1>hnutvA<k2>hnutvA
{%Hnutvā,%}¦ ind. having concealed; having dissimu-
lated.
<LEND>

<L>54452<pc>1179-a<k1>hnotavya<k2>hnotavya
{%Hnotavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be secreted or con-
cealed, &c.
<LEND>

<L>54453<pc>1179-a<k1>hmal<k2>hmal
{#hmal#}¦ {%hmal,%} cl. 1. P. {%hmalati, jahmāla,%}
&c., to shake, move; to go: Caus.
{%hmalayati%} or {%hmālayati%} (the former when prepo-
sitions are prefixed).
<LEND>

<L>54454<pc>1179-a<k1>hyas<k2>hyas
{#hyas#}¦ {%hyas,%} ind. (perhaps fr. 5. {%ha + dyas%}),
yesterday; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χθές, ἐ-χθές, χθιζό-ς,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χθεσ-ινό-ς;</lang> Lat. <nsi>heri, hes-ternu-s;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>gistra-dagis;</nsi>
Old Germ. <nsi>gester,</nsi> ‘yesterday.’] {%—Hyo-bhava, as,%}
{%ā, am,%} what happened yesterday.
<LEND>

<L>54455<pc>1179-a<k1>hyastana<k2>hyastana
{%Hyastana, as, ī, am,%}¦ hesternal, belonging to
yesterday, produced or occurred yesterday. {%—Hyas-%}
{%tana-dina, am,%} n. the day just past, yesterday.
<LEND>

<L>54456<pc>1179-a<k1>hyastya<k2>hyastya
{%Hyastya, as, ā, am,%}¦ hesternal, of yesterday.
<LEND>

<L>54457<pc>1179-a<k1>hrag<k2>hrag
{#hrag#}¦ {%hrag%} (also written {%hlag%}), cl. 1. P.
{%hragati, jahrāga, ahragīt,%} &c., to cover,
hide, conceal: Caus. {%hragayati,%} &c.
<LEND>

<L>54458<pc>1179-a<k1>hraRiyA<k2>hraRiyA
{#hraRiyA#}¦ {%hraṇiyā,%} f. ({%= hṛṇīyā%} at p. 1175,
col. 3), censure, reproach, shame, bashfulness.
<LEND>

<L>54459<pc>1179-a<k1>hrad<k2>hrad
{#hrad#}¦ {%hrad,%} an older form of rt. {%hrād,%}
q. v.
<LEND>

<L>54460<pc>1179-a<k1>hrada<k2>hrada
{%Hrada, as,%}¦ m. a large or deep piece of water, a
lake, pool; a ray of light. {%—Hrada-graha, as,%} m.
‘lake-monster,’ a crocodile, alligator. {%—Hradāntara%}
{%(˚da-an˚), am,%} n. another lake.
<LEND>

<L>54461<pc>1179-a<k1>hradinI<k2>hradinI
{%Hradinī,%}¦ f. a river (either as supplying or issuing
from a lake); lightning [cf. {%hrādinī%}].
<LEND>

<L>54462<pc>1179-a<k1>hrap<k2>hrap
{#hrap#}¦ {%hrap%} (= rt. {%hlap,%} q. v.), cl. 10. P. {%hrā-%}
{%payati,%} &c., to speak; to sound, creak.
<LEND>

<L>54463<pc>1179-a<k1>hras<k2>hras
{#hras#}¦ {%hras%} [cf. rts. {%ras, hlas%}], cl. 1. P. {%hra-%}
{%sati%} (ep. also A. {%-te%}), {%jahrāsa, hrasitum,%}
to sound (in this sense = rt. {%hlas%}), to become small,
be diminished or lessened: Caus. {%hrāsayati, -yitum,%}
Aor. {%ajihrasat,%} to make small or less, shorten,
[Page1179-b+ 79]
lessen, decrease, diminish: Desid. {%jihrasiṣati:%}
Intens. {%jāhrasyate, jāhrasti.%}
<LEND>

<L>54464<pc>1179-b<k1>hrasita<k2>hrasita
{%Hrasita, as, ā, am,%}¦ sounded; made little, short-
ened, curtailed, diminished.
<LEND>

<L>54465<pc>1179-b<k1>hrasiman<k2>hrasiman
{%Hrasiman, ā,%}¦ m. smallness, shortness.
<LEND>

<L>54466<pc>1179-b<k1>hrasizWa<k2>hrasizWa
{%Hrasiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. fr. {%hrasva%}), short-
est, smallest; very short or small.
<LEND>

<L>54467<pc>1179-b<k1>hrasIyas<k2>hrasIyas
{%Hrasīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. fr. {%hrasva%}),
shorter, smaller; very small or short; ({%asī%}), f. a
variety of the Gāyatrī metre (containing two lines of
six syllables and one line of seven).
<LEND>

<L>54468<pc>1179-b<k1>hrasva<k2>hrasva
{%Hrasva, as, ā, am,%}¦ short, small, little, short in
stature, dwarfish; low (as a doorway &c.); prosodi-
ally or metrically short (opposed to {%dīrgha;%} cf.
{%laghu%}); ({%as%}), m. a dwarf; a short vowel, a vowel
containing only one Mātrā; ({%ā%}), f. a female dwarf;
a sort of kidney-bean ({%= mudga-parṇī%}); other
plants or trees, {%= nāga-balā; = bhūmi-jambū;%}
{%(am),%} n. a particular short measure; a kind of
vegetable ({%= gaura-suvarṇa%}); green or black sul-
phate of iron; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χέρηϊ, χερείων, χείρων,</lang>
<lang n="greek">χείριστος;</lang> perhaps Lat. <nsi>brevis.</nsi>] {%—Hrasva-kuśa,%}
{%as,%} m. short Kuśa grass, white Kuśa grass. {%—Hrasva-%}
{%garbha, as,%} m. Kuśa grass. {%—Hrasva-gavedhukā,%}
f. the plant Uraria Lagopodioides. {%—Hrasva-jambu,%}
{%us,%} m. the small Jambu tree. {%—Hrasva-taṇḍula,%}
{%as,%} m. a kind of rice {%(= rājānna)%}. {%—Hrasva-tā,%} f.
or {%hrasva-tva, am,%} n. shortness. {%—Hrasva-darbha,%}
{%as,%} m. short Kuśa grass, white Kuśa grass. {%—Hrasva-%}
{%dā,%} f. gum olibanum {%(= śallakī)%}. {%—Hrasva-pat-%}
{%traka, as,%} m. ‘having short leaves,’ a sort of
mountain Madhūka or Bassia; ({%ikā%}), f. a particular
plant or tree {%(= aśvatthī)%}. {%—Hrasva-pūrva, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} preceded by a short vowel. {%—Hrasva-plakṣa,%}
a species of small Plaksha tree {%(= puṇḍra).%}
{%—Hrasva-phala, as, ā, am,%} having small fruit or
kernels; ({%ā%}), f. the tree Bhūmi-jambū. {%—Hrasva-%}
{%bāhuka, as, ā, am,%} short-armed. {%—Hrasva-mūrti,%}
{%is, is, i,%} short in stature, small in figure, dwarfish.
{%—Hrasva-mūla, as, ā, am,%} having a small root;
({%as%}), m. the red sugar-cane. {%—Hrasva-roman, ā,%}
m. ‘having short hair,’ N. of a king. {%—Hrasva-%}
{%śākhāśipha, as,%} m. ‘having short branch-roots,’ a
small tree, shrub. {%—Hrasva-sabhā,%} f. a small or
narrow hall. {%—Hrasvāgni (˚va-ag˚), is,%} m. the
gigantic swallow-wort {%(= arka)%}. {%—Hrasvāṅga (˚va-%}
{%aṅ˚), as, ī, am,%} short-bodied, dwarfish; ({%as%}), m. a
dwarf; the medicinal plant and root called Jīvaka,
q. v. {%—Hrasvodaya (˚va-ud˚), as, ā, am,%} followed
by a short vowel. {%—Hrasvopadha (˚va-up˚), as, ā,%}
{%am,%} having a short penultimate; preceded by a short
vowel.
<LEND>

<L>54469<pc>1179-b<k1>hrasvaka<k2>hrasvaka
{%Hrasvaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ short, small, &c. {%= hrasva.%}
<LEND>

<L>54470<pc>1179-b<k1>hrAsa<k2>hrAsa
{%Hrāsa, as,%}¦ m. sound, noise; shortening, diminu-
tion, abatement, decrease, decline, deterioration, de-
triment; paucity, scarcity.
<LEND>

<L>54471<pc>1179-b<k1>hrAsaka<k2>hrAsaka
{%Hrāsaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ shortening, diminishing,
decreasing.
<LEND>

<L>54472<pc>1179-b<k1>hrAd<k2>hrAd
{#hrAd#}¦ {%hrād%} (closely connected with rt.
{%hlād;%} cf. rt. {%hrad%}), cl. 1. A. {%hrādate,%}
{%jahrāde, hrāditum,%} to sound (as a drum or other
musical instrument); to roar (as water, thunder);
[cf. Zend <nsi>zrād;</nsi> Gr. <lang n="greek">χλάζω, κέ-χλαδα,</lang> probably
<lang n="greek">χάλαζα;</lang> Lat. <nsi>grando, grandinat;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>grêtan;</nsi>
Angl. Sax. <nsi>grœtan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54473<pc>1179-b<k1>hrAda<k2>hrAda
{%Hrāda, as,%}¦ m. noise, sound; N. of a son of
Hiraṇya-kaśipu.
<LEND>

<L>54474<pc>1179-b<k1>hrAdin<k2>hrAdin
{%Hrādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ sounding, making a sound or
noise; ({%inī%}), f. Indra's thunderbolt; lightning;
a river [cf. {%hradinī%}]; the gum olibanum tree ({%=%}
{%śallakī%}).
<LEND>

<L>54475<pc>1179-b<k1>hrAduni<k2>hrAduni
{%Hrāduni,%}¦ (in Ṛg-veda I. 32, 13) a weapon, the
weapon of Vṛtra, a thunderbolt, (Sāy. {%= aśani.%})
{%—Hrādunī-vṛt%} or {%hrāduni-vṛt, t, t, t,%} Ved. wield-
ing the thunderbolt, (said of the Maruts; Sāy. ex-
plains {%hrādunī-vṛtaḥ%} by {%hrādunyā aśaneḥ pra-%}
{%vartakāḥ,%} Ṛg-veda V. 54, 3.)
<LEND>

<L>54476<pc>1179-b<k1>hrAsa<k2>hrAsa
{#hrAsa#}¦ {%hrāsa.%} See above.
<LEND>

<L>54477<pc>1179-b<k1>hriRiyA<k2>hriRiyA
{#hriRiyA#}¦ {%hriṇiyā%} or {%hriṇīyā,%} f. ({%= hṛṇīyā%}
[Page1179-c+ 73]
at p. 1175, col. 3), reproach, censure; shame,
bashfulness.
<LEND>

<L>54478<pc>1179-c<k1>hrita<k2>hrita<h>1
{#hrita#} 1¦. {%hrita, as, ā, am%} (for {%hṛta%} at
p. 1175), taken, conveyed; taken away, seized;
divided, apportioned; ({%am%}), n. a portion, share.
<LEND>

<L>54479<pc>1179-c<k1>hriti<k2>hriti
{%Hriti, is,%}¦ f. (for {%hṛti%}), taking, conveying;
seizure.
<LEND>

<L>54480<pc>1179-c<k1>hrita<k2>hrita<h>2
{#hrita#} 2¦. {%hrita, as, ā, am%} (for {%hrīta%}), ashamed.
<LEND>

<L>54481<pc>1179-c<k1>hriyamARa<k2>hriyamARa
{#hriyamARa#}¦ {%hriyamāṇa.%} See p. 1175, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>54482<pc>1179-c<k1>hrivera<k2>hrivera
{#hrivera#}¦ {%hrivera, am,%} n. a kind of drug and
perfume ({%= bāla, bālaka%}).
<LEND>

<L>54483<pc>1179-c<k1>hrIvera<k2>hrIvera
{%Hrīvera, am,%}¦ n. {%= hrivera%} above.
<LEND>

<L>54484<pc>1179-c<k1>hrI<k2>hrI<h>1
{#hrI#} 1¦. {%hrī%} (connected with rt. 2. {%hṛ%} or {%hṝ,%}
q. v.), cl. 3. P. {%jihreti%} (3rd pl. {%jihriyati%}),
Perf. {%jihrāya%} or {%jihrayāñ-cakāra, hreṣyati,%}
{%ahraiṣīt, hretum,%} to blush; to be ashamed, be
modest; to be ashamed of (with abl. or gen., e. g.
{%anyonyasya jihrīmaḥ,%} we are ashamed of one an-
other, Kirāt. XI. 58): Caus. {%hrepayati, -yitum,%} Aor.
{%ajihripat%} (according to some {%ajihrīpat%}), to put to
shame, make to blush, confound: Desid. {%jihrīṣati:%}
Intens. {%jehrīyate, jehrayīti, jehreti;%} [cf. probably
Old Germ. <nsi>hriuwan;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hreowan.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54485<pc>1179-c<k1>hrI<k2>hrI<h>2
2. {%hrī, īs,%}¦ f. shame, bashfulness, modesty; Modesty,
Shame, (personified as daughter of Dakṣa and wife
of Dharma.) {%—Hrī-jita, as, ā, am,%} overcome by
shame, modest, ashamed. {%—Hrī-nirāsa, as,%} m.
abandonment of shame, shamelessness. {%—Hrī-ni-%}
{%ṣedha, as, ā, am,%} having shame as a check,
checked by modesty. {%—Hrī-niṣeva, as, ā, am,%} or
{%hrī-niṣevin, ī, iṇī, i,%} practising modesty, modest.
{%—Hrī-mat, ān, atī, at,%} bashful, modest, ashamed.
{%—Hrī-yantraṇā,%} f. the constraint or pain of bash-
fulness, torment of shame. {%—Hrī-sanna-kaṇṭha,%}
{%as, ī, am,%} having the throat choked by shame,
i. e. having a feeble or broken utterance through
bashfulness.
<LEND>

<L>54486<pc>1179-c<k1>hrIkA<k2>hrIkA
{%Hrīkā,%}¦ f. shame, bashfulness, modesty, shyness;
timidity, fear, terror.
<LEND>

<L>54487<pc>1179-c<k1>hrIku<k2>hrIku
{%Hrīku, us, us, u,%}¦ ashamed, bashful, modest, shy,
timid; ({%us%}), m. lac; tin.
<LEND>

<L>54488<pc>1179-c<k1>hrIRa<k2>hrIRa
{%Hrīṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ ashamed, modest, bashful, shy.
<LEND>

<L>54489<pc>1179-c<k1>hrIta<k2>hrIta
{%Hrīta, as, ā, am,%}¦ ashamed, bashful, modest.
<LEND>

<L>54490<pc>1179-c<k1>hrepaRa<k2>hrepaRa
{%Hrepaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of putting to shame,
excelling, surpassing.
<LEND>

<L>54491<pc>1179-c<k1>hrepayat<k2>hrepayat
{%Hrepayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ putting to shame, outvy-
ing, surpassing.
<LEND>

<L>54492<pc>1179-c<k1>hrepita<k2>hrepita
{%Hrepita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made ashamed, put to shame;
excelled, surpassed.
<LEND>

<L>54493<pc>1179-c<k1>hrIC<k2>hrIC
{#hrIC#}¦ {%hrīch%} (connected with rt. 1. {%hrī%}),
cl. 1. P. {%hrīcchati, jihrīccha, hrīcchitum,%}
to be ashamed or modest, to blush.
<LEND>

<L>54494<pc>1179-c<k1>hrIvela<k2>hrIvela
{#hrIvela#}¦ {%hrīvela%} or {%hrīvelaka, am,%} n. ({%= hrī-%}
{%vera,%} q. v.), a kind of perfume.
<LEND>

<L>54495<pc>1179-c<k1>hru<k2>hru
{#hru#}¦ {%hru%} (a Vedic form of rt. {%hvṛ;%} cf. {%vi-%}
{%hru, a-vihruta%}), cl. 9. P. {%hruṇāti,%} &c., to
hurt, injure.
<LEND>

<L>54496<pc>1179-c<k1>hrut<k2>hrut
{%Hrut, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. hurting, injuring; ({%t%}), m. an
enemy; [cf. {%vi-hrut.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54497<pc>1179-c<k1>hruta<k2>hruta
{%Hruta, as, ā, am,%}¦ hurt, injured.
<LEND>

<L>54498<pc>1179-c<k1>hruq<k2>hruq
{#hruq#}¦ {%hruḍ%} or {%hrūḍ%} (= rts. {%hrauḍ, hūḍ%}), cl.
1. P. {%hroḍati, hrūḍati%} (according to some
also A. {%-te%}), &c., to go; to be drawn up or con-
tracted; to contract.
<LEND>

<L>54499<pc>1179-c<k1>hruqu<k2>hruqu
{%Hruḍu%}¦ or {%hrūḍu, us,%} m., Ved. ‘drawing up, con-
tracting, convulsing,’ epithet of Takman, (in Atharva-
veda I. 25, 2, 3. interpreted to mean ‘cramp’ or
‘spasm.’)
<LEND>

<L>54500<pc>1179-c<k1>hroqa<k2>hroqa
{%Hroḍa, as,%}¦ m. contraction; [cf. {%jyā-hroḍa.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54501<pc>1179-c<k1>hrep<k2>hrep
{#hrep#}¦ {%hrep,%} cl. 1. A. {%hrepate,%} &c., to go.
<LEND>

<L>54502<pc>1179-c<k1>hrez<k2>hrez
{#hrez#}¦ {%hreṣ%} [cf. rt. {%heṣ%}], cl. 1. A. {%hreṣate,%}
{%jihreṣe, hreṣitum,%} to neigh (as a horse),
whinny; to creep, go [cf. rt. 1. {%preṣ%}]: Caus. {%hreṣa- %}
[Page1180-a+ 43]
{%yati,%} &c., to make to neigh, to neigh; [cf. Gr.
<lang n="greek">χρό-μη, χρεμέθω, χρεμίζω:</lang> Old Germ. <nsi>hros;</nsi> Mod.
Germ. <nsi>Ross;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hors.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54503<pc>1180-a<k1>hrezA<k2>hrezA
{%Hreṣā,%}¦ f. neighing (of a horse), whinnying.
<LEND>

<L>54504<pc>1180-a<k1>hrezita<k2>hrezita
{%Hreṣita, as, ā, am,%}¦ neighed; ({%am%}), n. neigh-
ing.
<LEND>

<L>54505<pc>1180-a<k1>hrezuka<k2>hrezuka
{#hrezuka#}¦ {%hreṣuka, as,%} m. (according to some)
an instrument for digging.
<LEND>

<L>54506<pc>1180-a<k1>hrOq<k2>hrOq
{#hrOq#}¦ {%hrauḍ,%} cl. 1. P. {%hrauḍati,%} &c., to go
(= rts. {%hruḍ, hūḍ,%} q.q. v.v.).
<LEND>

<L>54507<pc>1180-a<k1>hlag<k2>hlag
{#hlag#}¦ {%hlag%} (= rt. {%hrag,%} q. v.), cl. 1. P. {%hla-%}
{%gati,%} &c., to cover, hide.
<LEND>

<L>54508<pc>1180-a<k1>hlap<k2>hlap
{#hlap#}¦ {%hlap%} (also written {%hrap;%} cf. rt.
{%klap%}), cl. 10. P. {%hlāpayati,%} &c., to speak;
to sound, creak.
<LEND>

<L>54509<pc>1180-a<k1>hlas<k2>hlas
{#hlas#}¦ {%hlas%} [cf. rt. {%hras%}], cl. 1. P. {%hlasati,%}
{%jahlāsa, hlasitum,%} to sound.
<LEND>

<L>54510<pc>1180-a<k1>hlAd<k2>hlAd
{#hlAd#}¦ {%hlād%} (a later form of rt. {%hrād,%} q. v.),
cl. 1. A. {%hlādate, jahlāde, hlāditum,%}
(originally ‘to shout with joy, raise joyful cries’), to
rejoice, be glad, be delighted; to sound (as a musical
instrument): Caus. {%hlādayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ajihla-%}
{%dat,%} to make glad, gladden, exhilarate, delight; [cf.
Gr. <lang n="greek">κέχλαδα, καχλάζω,</lang> perhaps also <lang n="greek">γῆθος, γηθέω;</lang>
Lat. <nsi>gaudeo;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>glat;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>glœd,</nsi>
<nsi>glad, gladian;</nsi> Eng. <nsi>glad;</nsi> Hib. <nsi>gairdim,</nsi> ‘I re-
joice.’]
<LEND>

<L>54511<pc>1180-a<k1>hlatti<k2>hlatti
{%Hlatti, is,%}¦ f. joy, gladness, happiness; [cf. {%pra-%}
{%hlatti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54512<pc>1180-a<k1>hlanna<k2>hlanna
{%Hlanna, as, ā, am,%}¦ glad, pleased, delighted,
happy; [cf. {%pra-hlanna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54513<pc>1180-a<k1>hlanni<k2>hlanni
{%Hlanni, is,%}¦ f. joy, gladness, happiness; [cf. {%pra-%}
{%hlanni.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54514<pc>1180-a<k1>hlAda<k2>hlAda
{%Hlāda, as,%}¦ m. pleasure, joy; N. of a son of
Hiraṇya-kaśipu.
<LEND>

<L>54515<pc>1180-a<k1>hlAdaka<k2>hlAdaka
{%Hlādaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ gladdening, rejoicing;
({%ikā%}), f. joy, gladness. {%—Hlādikā-vat, ān, atī, at,%}
Ved. possessed of joy, joyful.
<LEND>

<L>54516<pc>1180-a<k1>hlAdana<k2>hlAdana
{%Hlādana, am,%}¦ n. the act of rejoicing, joy, delight.
<LEND>

<L>54517<pc>1180-a<k1>hlAdita<k2>hlAdita
{%Hlādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ gladdened, delighted, happy.
<LEND>

<L>54518<pc>1180-a<k1>hlAdin<k2>hlAdin
{%Hlādin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ delighting, gladdening; happy;
({%inī%}), f. lightning [cf. {%hrādinī%}]; Indra's thunder-
bolt; the olibanum tree; N. of a river.
<LEND>
[Page1180-b+ 42]

<L>54519<pc>1180-b<k1>hlI<k2>hlI
{#hlI#}¦ {%hlī,%} another form of rt. 1. {%hrī,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>54520<pc>1180-b<k1>hlIka<k2>hlIka
{%Hlīka, as, ā, am,%}¦ bashful, modest; ({%ā%}), f. shame,
modesty ({%= hrīkā%}).
<LEND>

<L>54521<pc>1180-b<k1>hlIku<k2>hlIku
{%Hlīku, us, us, u (= hrīku),%}¦ ashamed, modest;
({%us%}), m. lac ({%= jatu%}); tin; [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">χαλ-κό-ς;</lang> Slav.
<nsi>zel-e-zo;</nsi> Lith. <nsi>gel-e-zi-s.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54522<pc>1180-b<k1>hlez<k2>hlez
{#hlez#}¦ {%hleṣ,%} another form of rt. {%hreṣ.%}
<LEND>

<L>54523<pc>1180-b<k1>hlezA<k2>hlezA
{%Hleṣā,%}¦ f. {%= hreṣā,%} neighing, whinnying.
<LEND>

<L>54524<pc>1180-b<k1>hval<k2>hval
{#hval#}¦ {%hval%} [cf. rt. {%hvṛ%}], cl. 1. P. {%hvalati,%}
{%jahvāla,%} &c., to move, shake, tremble;
to go: Caus. {%hvalayati, hvālayati%} (the former
when prepositions are prefixed), to cause to tremble;
[cf. Old Germ. <nsi>wallôn,</nsi> ‘to walk about;’ Mod.
Germ. <nsi>wallen, wall-fahrt.</nsi>]
<LEND>

<L>54525<pc>1180-b<k1>hvalat<k2>hvalat
{%Hvalat, an, antī, at,%}¦ moving, shaking, trembling.
<LEND>

<L>54526<pc>1180-b<k1>hvf<k2>hvf
{#hvf#}¦ {%hvṛ%} or {%hvṝ%} (originally {%dhvṛ,%} q. v.;
cf. rts. {%hurch, hru%}), cl. 1. P. {%hvarati, jah-%}
{%vāra, hvariṣyati, ahvārṣīt%} (Ved. {%ahvār%}), {%hvar-%}
{%tum,%} cl. 9. P. {%hvṛṇāti,%} &c., to be crooked or curved,
go crookedly; to be crooked in conduct, deceive;
to be injured or afflicted; (according to Naigh. II. 8)
to eat: Caus. {%hvārayati,%} &c., to make crooked,
bend, curve; to hurt, injure: Desid. {%juhvūrṣati:%}
Intens. {%jāhvaryate, jāhvarti;%} [cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">κυπτός,</lang>
<lang n="greek">κύρβεις, ἐρέφω:</lang> Lat. <nsi>curvus, varus:</nsi> Goth. <nsi>hvair-</nsi>
<nsi>ban:</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hwearfian, hwerfa, hweorfan,</nsi>
<nsi>hwealf, hwealfa:</nsi> Hib. <nsi>fiar,</nsi> ‘crooked;’ <nsi>fiaraim,</nsi>
‘I incline, bend;’ <nsi>fiaras,</nsi> ‘crookedness.’]
<LEND>

<L>54527<pc>1180-b<k1>hrut<k2>hrut
{%Hrut, hruta.%}¦ See under rt. {%hru.%}
<LEND>

<L>54528<pc>1180-b<k1>hvaras<k2>hvaras
{%Hvaras, as,%}¦ n., Ved. crookedness, deceit, dis-
honesty, fraud, (Sāy. {%= kauṭilya, hiṃsana;%} in
Naigh. II. 13. enumerated among the {%krodha-nā-%}
{%māni.%})
<LEND>

<L>54529<pc>1180-b<k1>hvAra<k2>hvAra
{%Hvāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. dishonest, malicious, (Sāy.
{%= kuṭila.%})
<LEND>

<L>54530<pc>1180-b<k1>hvArya<k2>hvArya
{%Hvārya, as,%}¦ m., Ved. ‘going crookedly,’ (Sāy.) a
snake or an unbroken horse, (in Naigh. I. 14. enu-
merated among the {%aśva-nāmāni.%})
<LEND>

<L>54531<pc>1180-b<k1>hvfta<k2>hvfta
{%Hvṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ curved; injured, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>54532<pc>1180-b<k1>hve<k2>hve
{#hve#}¦ {%hve%} (in some of its forms identical
with rt. {%hu%} at p. 1174, and several derivatives
seem to recognize another rt. {%hu%} or {%hū = hve%}), cl. 1.
[Page1180-c+ 47]
P. A. {%hvayati, -te, juhāva%} (identical in form with Perf.
of rt. {%hu%}), {%juhuve%} (in Ṛg-veda I. 48, 14. {%juhūre%}
{%= juhvire%}), {%hvāsyati, -te, ahvat, ahvata%} or {%ah-%}
{%vāsta,%} Prec. {%hūyāt, hvāsīṣṭa%} (Vedic forms Pres.
1st sing. {%have%} or {%huve,%} 3rd sing. {%havate,%} 1st pl.
{%havāmahe, hvāmahe, hūmahe, homa,%} 3rd pl. {%ha-%}
{%vante;%} Impf. 3rd pl. {%havanta;%} Pot. 1st pl. {%hu-%}
{%vema;%} Perf. 3rd sing. {%huve, (ā)juhve,%} 3rd pl.
{%juhure, juhūre;%} Aor. 1st sing. {%ahve,%} 3rd pl. {%ahū-%}
{%ṣata%}), {%hvātum%} (Ved. Inf. {%havītave, huvadhyai%}),
to call; to call to; to call upon, invoke; to chal-
lenge; to name; to seek, ask, pray, beg; to emu-
late, vie with: Pass. {%hūyate%} (identical in form with
Pass. of rt. {%hu%}), Aor. {%ahvāyi,%} &c., to be called, &c.:
Caus. {%hvāyayati, -yitum,%} Aor. {%ajūhavat:%} Desid.
of Caus. {%juhāvayiṣati:%} Desid. {%juhūṣati, -te:%}
Intens. {%johūyate, johavīti, johoti%} (Impf. {%ajohavīt,%}
3rd pl. {%ajohavuḥ,%} Pres. part. {%johuvat%}), to call on,
invoke; [cf. according to some, Gr. <lang n="greek">βοή, βοάω,</lang> pro-
bably <lang n="greek">ἀΰω, ἰωή;</lang> Lat. <nsi>re-boare,</nsi> perhaps <nsi>voveo, vo-</nsi>
<nsi>tum;</nsi> Goth. <nsi>vôpjan;</nsi> Old Germ. <nsi>hweion, hrôfu,</nsi>
<nsi>ruafu;</nsi> Mod. Germ. <nsi>Rufe;</nsi> Angl. Sax. <nsi>hweop,</nsi>
<nsi>wepan;</nsi> Old Icel. <nsi>hvîa,</nsi> ‘to neigh;’ Slav. <nsi>zv-a-ti,</nsi>
‘to call;’ Hib. <nsi>guilim,</nsi> ‘I bewail.’]
<LEND>

<L>54533<pc>1180-c<k1>hava<k2>hava
{%Hava, as, am,%}¦ m. n. calling. See 2. {%hava,%} p. 1168.
<LEND>

<L>54534<pc>1180-c<k1>hAva<k2>hAva
{%Hāva, as,%}¦ m. calling, &c. See p. 1170, col. 3.
<LEND>

<L>54535<pc>1180-c<k1>huta<k2>huta<h>2
2. {%huta, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see p. 1174, col. 2),
called, summoned, invited.
<LEND>

<L>54536<pc>1180-c<k1>huti<k2>huti<h>2
2. {%huti = hūti%}¦ below; [cf. 2. {%ā-huti.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54537<pc>1180-c<k1>huvAna<k2>huvAna
{%Huvāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. being invoked, (accord-
ing to Sāy. and Mahī-dhara {%= āhūyamāna.%})
<LEND>

<L>54538<pc>1180-c<k1>hUta<k2>hUta
{%Hūta, as, ā, am,%}¦ called, summoned, invited.
<LEND>

<L>54539<pc>1180-c<k1>hUti<k2>hUti
{%Hūti, is,%}¦ f. calling; invocation; calling defiantly,
challenging.
<LEND>

<L>54540<pc>1180-c<k1>hUtvA<k2>hUtvA
{%Hūtvā,%}¦ ind. having called, having challenged.
<LEND>

<L>54541<pc>1180-c<k1>hUya<k2>hUya
{%Hūya,%}¦ in {%deva-h˚,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>54542<pc>1180-c<k1>hUyamAna<k2>hUyamAna<h>2
2. {%hūyamāna, as, ā, am%}¦ (for 1. see under rt. {%hu,%}
p. 1174), being called or invoked.
<LEND>

<L>54543<pc>1180-c<k1>hvayat<k2>hvayat
{%Hvayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ calling out; challenging,
vying with.
<LEND>

<L>54544<pc>1180-c<k1>hvAtf<k2>hvAtf
{%Hvātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ who or what calls, a caller,
challenger.
<LEND>

<L>54545<pc>1180-c<k1>hvAna<k2>hvAna
{%Hvāna, am,%}¦ n. the act of calling; a cry, noise;
[cf. {%ku-hvāna.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54546<pc>1180-c<k1>hvAnIya<k2>hvAnIya
{%Hvānīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be called or invoked.
<LEND>

<L>54547<pc>1180-c<k1>hvAyin<k2>hvAyin
{%Hvāyin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ calling, invoking, challenging.
<LEND>

<L>54548<pc>1180-c<k1>hveya<k2>hveya
{%Hveya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be called; to be invoked.
<LEND>
;
; ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.
;
<H>ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.
[Page1181-a+ 71]

<L>54549<pc>1181-a<k1>akaTam<k2>akaTam
{%A-katham,%}¦ ind. (fr. 3. {%a%} + 1. {%kathā%}), even without
telling, without further words, without any dispute.
<LEND>

<L>54550<pc>1181-a<k1>akula<k2>akula
{%A-kula;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. epithet of Śiva (with
Tāntrikas; cf. {%kula,%} p. 1183).
<LEND>

<L>54551<pc>1181-a<k1>akulI<k2>akulI
{%Akulī,%}¦ f., Ved. a cat.
<LEND>

<L>54552<pc>1181-a<k1>akuhaka<k2>akuhaka
{%A-kuhaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ not deceiving, free from
deceit, guileless.
<LEND>

<L>54553<pc>1181-a<k1>aknopana<k2>aknopana
{%A-knopana, as, ī, am,%}¦ not moistening, drying.
See {%knopana,%} p. 1183.
<LEND>

<L>54554<pc>1181-a<k1>akra<k2>akra
{%Akra;%}¦ add — {%as,%} m. (according to B. R., probably)
a standard, banner; a wall, fence ({%= prākāra%} ac-
cording to Durga on Nirukta VI. 17).
<LEND>

<L>54555<pc>1181-a<k1>akza<k2>akza<h>2
2. {%akṣa;%}¦ add — the collar-bone (Ved.); a mesh
(of a net).
<LEND>

<L>54556<pc>1181-a<k1>akzaka<k2>akzaka
{%Akṣaka;%}¦ add — (probably) the collar-bone.
<LEND>

<L>54557<pc>1181-a<k1>akzaDara<k2>akzaDara
{%Akṣa-dhara;%}¦ for ‘see {%sākhota%}’ read — see {%śā-%}
{%khoṭa.%}
<LEND>

<L>54558<pc>1181-a<k1>akzan<k2>akzan
{%Akṣan,%}¦ an organ of sense.
<LEND>

<L>54559<pc>1181-a<k1>agastya<k2>agastya
{%Agastya;%}¦ correct thus — {%as,%} m. {%= agasti;%} and
add — in Raghu-v. XIII. 36. Agastya is said to be
‘the cleanser of water,’ as on the rising of Canopus
turbid waters become clear.
<LEND>

<L>54560<pc>1181-a<k1>agrANguli<k2>agrANguli
{%Agrāṅguli;%}¦ add — the tip of the toe.
<LEND>

<L>54561<pc>1181-a<k1>aGAsaka<k2>aGAsaka
{%A-ghāsaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ without food or provisions.
<LEND>

<L>54562<pc>1181-a<k1>aGoza<k2>aGoza
{%A-ghoṣa;%}¦ under {%as,%} m. add — ‘non-sonance,’ ab-
sence of all sound or soft murmur, hard articulation or
effort as applied to the hard consonants and Visarga.
<LEND>

<L>54563<pc>1181-a<k1>aGnat<k2>aGnat
{%A-ghnat;%}¦ for ‘{%antī%}’ read {%atī.%}
<LEND>

<L>54564<pc>1181-a<k1>aNkaBAj<k2>aNkaBAj
{%Aṅka-bhāj;%}¦ add — close to one's side; in one's
possession, anything which is close or easy of attain-
ment, close at hand.
<LEND>

<L>54565<pc>1181-a<k1>aNga<k2>aNga
{%Aṅga;%}¦ add — anything inferior or secondary, any-
thing immaterial or unessential; (in grammar) also
in Pāṇini's system a term for the base in the strong
cases only, (see {%pada,%} 2. {%bha.%})
<LEND>

<L>54566<pc>1181-a<k1>aNgatA<k2>aNgatA
{%Aṅga-tā,%}¦ f. or {%aṅga-tva, am,%} n. a state of sub-
ordination or dependence, the being of secondary
importance, the being immaterial or unessential.
<LEND>

<L>54567<pc>1181-a<k1>aNgIkf<k2>aNgIkf
{%Aṅgī-kṛ;%}¦ add — to take or espouse the side of.
<LEND>

<L>54568<pc>1181-a<k1>ac<k2>ac
{%Ac;%}¦ for ‘carved’ read curved.
<LEND>

<L>54569<pc>1181-a<k1>ac<k2>ac
{%Ac,%}¦ a technical term for all the vowels.
<LEND>

<L>54570<pc>1181-a<k1>acCodya<k2>acCodya
{%Acchodya (˚cha-ud˚),%}¦ ind. having spoken to,
(Pāṇ. I. 4, 69.)
<LEND>

<L>54571<pc>1181-a<k1>aja<k2>aja<h>1
1. {%aja;%}¦ for ‘({%as%}), m. pl.’ read ({%ās%}), m. pl.
<LEND>

<L>54572<pc>1181-a<k1>ajanta<k2>ajanta
{%Aj-anta, as, ā, am,%}¦ ending in a vowel.
<LEND>

<L>54573<pc>1181-a<k1>ajmaDyasTa<k2>ajmaDyasTa
{%Aj-madhya-stha, as, ā, am,%}¦ being or occupying
a place between two vowels.
<LEND>

<L>54574<pc>1181-a<k1>aYjanA<k2>aYjanA
{%Añjanā;%}¦ add — a kind of lizard.
<LEND>

<L>54575<pc>1181-a<k1>aYji<k2>aYji
{%Añji;%}¦ add — an ornament.
<LEND>

<L>54576<pc>1181-a<k1>aRqadala<k2>aRqadala
{%Aṇḍa-dala, am,%}¦ n. an egg-shell.
<LEND>

<L>54577<pc>1181-a<k1>atikrAnti<k2>atikrAnti
{%Ati-krānti, is,%}¦ f. transgression, (Kirāt. XIV. 23.)
<LEND>

<L>54578<pc>1181-a<k1>ativAhita<k2>ativAhita
{%Ati-vāhita;%}¦ read {%ati-vāpika.%}
<LEND>

<L>54579<pc>1181-a<k1>ativipina<k2>ativipina
{%Ati-vipina;%}¦ add — very impenetrable.
<LEND>

<L>54580<pc>1181-a<k1>aTarvavid<k2>aTarvavid
{%Atharva-vid;%}¦ for ‘Brāhmaṇas’ read Brahmans.
<LEND>

<L>54581<pc>1181-a<k1>adakziRa<k2>adakziRa
{%A-dakṣiṇa;%}¦ add — inexperienced, simple-minded.
<LEND>

<L>54582<pc>1181-a<k1>aditi<k2>aditi<h>3
3. {%a-diti;%}¦ add — Aditi was daughter of Dakṣa
and wife of Kaśyapa.
<LEND>

<L>54583<pc>1181-a<k1>adreSya<k2>adreSya
{%A-dreśya = a-dṛśya,%}¦ invisible, &c.
<LEND>

<L>54584<pc>1181-a<k1>aDaHkriyA<k2>aDaHkriyA
{%Adhaḥ-kriyā,%}¦ f. {%= apa-māna,%} disgrace, humilia-
tion.
<LEND>

<L>54585<pc>1181-a<k1>aDarakaRWa<k2>aDarakaRWa
{%Adhara-kaṇṭha;%}¦ add — the lower part of the
throat.
<LEND>

<L>54586<pc>1181-a<k1>aDaraya<k2>aDaraya
{%Adharaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%adharayati,%} &c., to make
inferior, put under; to eclipse, excel.
<LEND>

<L>54587<pc>1181-a<k1>aDinATa<k2>aDinATa
{%Adhi-nātha;%}¦ add — a supreme lord, chieftain.
<LEND>

<L>54588<pc>1181-a<k1>aDiruh<k2>aDiruh
{%Adhi-ruh;%}¦ add — to attack, accuse.
<LEND>

<L>54589<pc>1181-a<k1>aDivAsa<k2>aDivAsa<h>3
3. {%adhi-vāsa;%}¦ add — fumigation of a person or
image with incense, &c.; fragrance, perfume; smell,
odour (in general).
<LEND>

<L>54590<pc>1181-a<k1>aDivijYAna<k2>aDivijYAna
{%Adhi-vijñāna, am,%}¦ n. the highest knowledge.
<LEND>
[Page1181-b+ 70]

<L>54591<pc>1181-b<k1>aDiSrI<k2>aDiSrI
{%Adhi-śrī, īs, īs, i,%}¦ having great prosperity, highly
prosperous or fortunate.
<LEND>

<L>54592<pc>1181-b<k1>aDizWeya<k2>aDizWeya
{%Adhi-ṣṭheya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be superintended or
governed.
<LEND>

<L>54593<pc>1181-b<k1>aDisenApati<k2>aDisenApati
{%Adhi-senāpati, is,%}¦ m. ‘over-general,’ a com-
mander-in-chief.
<LEND>

<L>54594<pc>1181-b<k1>aDihasti<k2>aDihasti
{%Adhi-hasti,%}¦ ind. on an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>54595<pc>1181-b<k1>aDItin<k2>aDItin
{%Adhītin;%}¦ add — occupied with the study of the
Veda. studying the Vedas.
<LEND>

<L>54596<pc>1181-b<k1>aDIna<k2>aDIna
{%Adhīna;%}¦ add — resting on, situated in or on, be-
longing to.
<LEND>

<L>54597<pc>1181-b<k1>aDonilaya<k2>aDonilaya
{%Adho-nilaya, as,%}¦ m. ‘lower abode,’ the lower
regions.
<LEND>

<L>54598<pc>1181-b<k1>aDyarhaRIya<k2>aDyarhaRIya
{%Adhy-arhaṇīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be honoured
highly, very honourable.
<LEND>

<L>54599<pc>1181-b<k1>aDyavasiti<k2>aDyavasiti
{%Adhy-avasiti, is,%}¦ f. exertion, effort, &c. ({%= adhy-%}
{%avasāna%}).
<LEND>

<L>54600<pc>1181-b<k1>aDyAvAhanika<k2>aDyAvAhanika
{%Adhy-ā-vāhanika;%}¦ the proper explanation of this
word is given under {%strī-dhana.%}
<LEND>

<L>54601<pc>1181-b<k1>aDyUQa<k2>aDyUQa
{%Adhy-ūḍha, as,%}¦ m.; add — the son of a woman
pregnant before marriage [cf. 1. {%sahoḍha%}].
<LEND>

<L>54602<pc>1181-b<k1>aDyUQaja<k2>aDyUQaja
{%Adhyūḍha-ja, as,%}¦ m. {%= adhy-ūḍha%} above.
<LEND>

<L>54603<pc>1181-b<k1>aDvaryu<k2>aDvaryu
{%Adhvaryu;%}¦ add — ({%us%}), f. the wife of an Adhvaryu
priest, (Pāṇ. IV. 1, 66.)
<LEND>

<L>54604<pc>1181-b<k1>analada<k2>analada
{%Anala-da, as, ā, am%}¦ (see 3. {%da%}), destroying or
quenching fire, (said of water, Kirāt. V. 25.)
<LEND>

<L>54605<pc>1181-b<k1>anavakASa<k2>anavakASa
{%An-avakāśa;%}¦ add — having no other opportunity
for application, inapplicable, (Pāṇ. I. 4, 1.)
<LEND>

<L>54606<pc>1181-b<k1>anavakASatvAt<k2>anavakASatvAt
{%Anavakāśatvāt,%}¦ abl. c. from the inapplicability
(of a rule), if the (present) rule does not take effect.
<LEND>

<L>54607<pc>1181-b<k1>anita<k2>anita
{%Anita;%}¦ read — {%an-ita,%} not gone to, not obtained.
<LEND>

<L>54608<pc>1181-b<k1>anIlavAjin<k2>anIlavAjin
{%Anīlavājin, ī,%}¦ m. ‘white-horsed,’ epithet of Arjuna.
<LEND>

<L>54609<pc>1181-b<k1>anukUlana<k2>anukUlana
{%Anu-kūlana, am,%}¦ n. kindness towards (with gen.).
<LEND>

<L>54610<pc>1181-b<k1>anukrAnta<k2>anukrAnta
{%Anu-krānta;%}¦ add — mentioned or written down
in the Anukramaṇī.
<LEND>

<L>54611<pc>1181-b<k1>anugaRqikA<k2>anugaRqikA
{%Anu-gaṇḍikā,%}¦ f. a line of hills or a little hill.
<LEND>

<L>54612<pc>1181-b<k1>anugAyas<k2>anugAyas
{%Anu-gāyas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ to be hymned, (Sāy. {%anu-%}
{%gātavya.%})
<LEND>

<L>54613<pc>1181-b<k1>anugItA<k2>anugItA
{%Anu-gītā,%}¦ f. an after-song; N. of part of the four-
teenth book of the Mahā-bhārata (chaps. 16 — 92).
<LEND>

<L>54614<pc>1181-b<k1>anuguRaya<k2>anuguRaya
{%Anu-guṇaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%-guṇayati,%} &c., to favour.
<LEND>

<L>54615<pc>1181-b<k1>anugodam<k2>anugodam
{%Anu-godam,%}¦ ind. near the Godāvarī.
<LEND>

<L>54616<pc>1181-b<k1>anugrahIkfta<k2>anugrahIkfta
{%Anugrahī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ made into a favour
or benefit.
<LEND>

<L>54617<pc>1181-b<k1>anujYAtf<k2>anujYAtf
{%Anu-jñātṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who assents, giving
leave or permission.
<LEND>

<L>54618<pc>1181-b<k1>anutarzula<k2>anutarzula
{%Anu-tarṣula, as, ā, am,%}¦ causing thirst; causing
a desire or longing for.
<LEND>

<L>54619<pc>1181-b<k1>anutizWAsu<k2>anutizWAsu
{%Anu-tiṣṭhāsu, us, us, u,%}¦ intending to do or effect
anything.
<LEND>

<L>54620<pc>1181-b<k1>anudarSa<k2>anudarSa
{%Anu-darśa, as,%}¦ m. remonstrance, expostulation.
<LEND>

<L>54621<pc>1181-b<k1>anudeham<k2>anudeham
{%Anu-deham;%}¦ add — behind the body, from behind.
<LEND>

<L>54622<pc>1181-b<k1>anupakzita<k2>anupakzita
{%An-upakṣita;%}¦ add — unexhausted.
<LEND>

<L>54623<pc>1181-b<k1>anupadeSa<k2>anupadeSa
{%An-upadeśa, as,%}¦ m. absence of reference to (any-
thing else).
<LEND>

<L>54624<pc>1181-b<k1>anupA<k2>anupA<h>2
2. {%anu-pā;%}¦ add — to cherish; to watch, bide one's
time, wait for, expect.
<LEND>

<L>54625<pc>1181-b<k1>anuprayuj<k2>anuprayuj
{%Anu-pra-yuj;%}¦ add — to employ afterwards.
<LEND>

<L>54626<pc>1181-b<k1>anupravacana<k2>anupravacana
{%Anu-pravacana, am,%}¦ n. the act of learning the
Veda.
<LEND>

<L>54627<pc>1181-b<k1>anupravacanIya<k2>anupravacanIya
{%Anu-pravacanīya, as, ā, am,%}¦ relating to or re-
quisite for the learning of the Veda.
<LEND>

<L>54628<pc>1181-b<k1>anupravaRa<k2>anupravaRa
{%Anu-pravaṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ corresponding with,
adequate to (at the end of a comp.).
<LEND>

<L>54629<pc>1181-b<k1>anupraSamana<k2>anupraSamana
{%Anu-praśamana, am,%}¦ n. the act of tranquillizing
or pacifying, calming, assuaging, silencing.
<LEND>

<L>54630<pc>1181-b<k1>anubaDnat<k2>anubaDnat
{%Anu-badhnat, an, atī, at,%}¦ following, seeking.
<LEND>

<L>54631<pc>1181-b<k1>anubanDa<k2>anubanDa
{%Anu-bandha;%}¦ add — an adherent.
<LEND>

<L>54632<pc>1181-b<k1>anubanDin<k2>anubanDin
{%Anu-bandhin, ī, inī, i;%}¦ add — extending, spread-
ing; continuous, lasting, permanent.
<LEND>
[Page1181-c+ 70]

<L>54633<pc>1181-c<k1>anuBAga<k2>anuBAga
{%Anu-bhāga, as,%}¦ m. a subordinate division, minor
part, subdivision.
<LEND>

<L>54634<pc>1181-c<k1>anuBAzitf<k2>anuBAzitf
{%Anu-bhāṣitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ speaking to, saying.
<LEND>

<L>54635<pc>1181-c<k1>anumAna<k2>anumAna<h>2
2. {%anu-māna, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%anu-man%}), permission,
consent.
<LEND>

<L>54636<pc>1181-c<k1>anumAnana<k2>anumAnana
{%Anu-mānana, am,%}¦ n. (fr. the Caus. of {%anu-%}
{%man%}), the act of persuading, persuasion.
<LEND>

<L>54637<pc>1181-c<k1>anumfgya<k2>anumfgya
{%Anu-mṛgya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be sought after, de-
sirable, anything desirable. Under {%anumṛgya-dāśu,%}
p. 37, col. 3, erase (rt. {%mṛg%} and {%dā%}).
<LEND>

<L>54638<pc>1181-c<k1>anumft<k2>anumft
{%Anu-mṛt, t, t, t,%}¦ dying after.
<LEND>

<L>54639<pc>1181-c<k1>anuyuYjaka<k2>anuyuYjaka
{%Anu-yuñjaka, as,%}¦ m. one fond of censuring others,
fault-finder, a jealous or envious person.
<LEND>

<L>54640<pc>1181-c<k1>anuraYjayat<k2>anuraYjayat
{%Anu-rañjayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ dyeing, colouring;
tinging with a dark colour.
<LEND>

<L>54641<pc>1181-c<k1>anurAga<k2>anurAga
{%Anu-rāga;%}¦ add — colour; red colour, redness.
<LEND>

<L>54642<pc>1181-c<k1>anurAgavat<k2>anurAgavat
{%Anurāga-vat;%}¦ add — red-coloured, red.
<LEND>

<L>54643<pc>1181-c<k1>anulakzya<k2>anulakzya
{%Anu-lakṣya,%}¦ ind. conforming to, conformably to.
<LEND>

<L>54644<pc>1181-c<k1>anuvaMSa<k2>anuvaMSa
{%Anu-vaṃśa;%}¦ add — collateral race or branch of a
family; ({%as, ā, am%}), having equal birth, of the
same rank.
<LEND>

<L>54645<pc>1181-c<k1>anuvad<k2>anuvad
{%Anu-vad;%}¦ add — Pass. {%anūdyate,%} to be expressed
correspondingly.
<LEND>

<L>54646<pc>1181-c<k1>anuvartman<k2>anuvartman
{%Anu-vartman;%}¦ add — ({%a%}), n. a path trodden by
others.
<LEND>

<L>54647<pc>1181-c<k1>anuvAkya<k2>anuvAkya
{%Anu-vākya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be recited.
<LEND>

<L>54648<pc>1181-c<k1>anuvAdita<k2>anuvAdita
{%Anu-vādita, as, ā, am,%}¦ translated.
<LEND>

<L>54649<pc>1181-c<k1>anuvAsaram<k2>anuvAsaram
{%Anu-vāsaram,%}¦ ind. day by day, every day, daily.
<LEND>

<L>54650<pc>1181-c<k1>anuvimba<k2>anuvimba
{%Anu-vimba, am,%}¦ n. a corresponding image or
picture, counterpart.
<LEND>

<L>54651<pc>1181-c<k1>anuzatya<k2>anuzatya
{%Anu-ṣatya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. 3. {%anu + satya%}), Ved.
following the truth, an observer of truth.
<LEND>

<L>54652<pc>1181-c<k1>anusaMyAna<k2>anusaMyAna
{%Anu-saṃyāna, am,%}¦ n. visiting in succession, going
from one place to another.
<LEND>

<L>54653<pc>1181-c<k1>anusaMvatsarAt<k2>anusaMvatsarAt
{%Anu-saṃvatsarāt,%}¦ abl. c. after the lapse of a year.
<LEND>

<L>54654<pc>1181-c<k1>anusarga<k2>anusarga
{%Anu-sarga, as,%}¦ m. an after-creation, secondary
creation.
<LEND>

<L>54655<pc>1181-c<k1>anusartavya<k2>anusartavya
{%Anu-sartavya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be followed or pur-
sued.
<LEND>

<L>54656<pc>1181-c<k1>anusAnu<k2>anusAnu
{%Anu-sānu,%}¦ ind. along a table-land or summit, from
ridge to ridge.
<LEND>

<L>54657<pc>1181-c<k1>anusevA<k2>anusevA
{%Anu-sevā,%}¦ f. waiting on, attendance, service.
<LEND>

<L>54658<pc>1181-c<k1>anUdara<k2>anUdara
{%An-ūdara%}¦ (for {%an-udara%}), without a belly.
<LEND>

<L>54659<pc>1181-c<k1>anftadeva<k2>anftadeva
{%Anṛta-deva;%}¦ add — having false gods.
<LEND>

<L>54660<pc>1181-c<k1>antaraNga<k2>antaraNga
{%Antar-aṅga;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. an inner part (of the
body); the heart.
<LEND>

<L>54661<pc>1181-c<k1>antargiri<k2>antargiri
{%Antar-giri,%}¦ among hills or mountains.
<LEND>

<L>54662<pc>1181-c<k1>antargirya<k2>antargirya
{%Antargirya, ās,%}¦ m. pl. dwellers among hills.
<LEND>

<L>54663<pc>1181-c<k1>antarhatya<k2>antarhatya
{%Antar-hatya,%}¦ ind. having struck in the middle.
<LEND>

<L>54664<pc>1181-c<k1>antarhan<k2>antarhan
{%Antar-han,%}¦ cl. 2. P. {%-hanti,%} &c., to strike in the
middle.
<LEND>

<L>54665<pc>1181-c<k1>antesad<k2>antesad
{%Ante-sad%}¦ or {%ante-ṣada, as,%} m. a pupil.
<LEND>

<L>54666<pc>1181-c<k1>annIya<k2>annIya
{%Annīya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%annīyati,%} &c., Ved. to desire
food.
<LEND>

<L>54667<pc>1181-c<k1>annIyat<k2>annIyat
{%Annīyat, an, antī, at,%}¦ desiring food.
<LEND>

<L>54668<pc>1181-c<k1>anyaTaya<k2>anyaTaya
{%Anyathaya,%}¦ Nom. P. (fr. {%anyathā%}), {%anyatha-%}
{%yati,%} &c., to change, alter.
<LEND>

<L>54669<pc>1181-c<k1>anyAdfkza<k2>anyAdfkza
{%Anyā-dṛkṣa;%}¦ for ‘{%anya-dṛś, anya-dṛśa%}’
read {%anyā-d˚.%}
<LEND>

<L>54670<pc>1181-c<k1>anvak<k2>anvak
{%Anvak;%}¦ add — behind, from behind.
<LEND>

<L>54671<pc>1181-c<k1>apajya<k2>apajya
{%Apa-jya, as, ā, am,%}¦ loosened from the bow-string.
<LEND>

<L>54672<pc>1181-c<k1>apajvara<k2>apajvara
{%Apa-jvara, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from fever.
<LEND>

<L>54673<pc>1181-c<k1>apatuzAra<k2>apatuzAra
{%Apa-tuṣāra, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from frost or mist.
<LEND>

<L>54674<pc>1181-c<k1>apatuzAratA<k2>apatuzAratA
{%Apatuṣāra-tā,%}¦ f. absence of mist, departure of
frost.
<LEND>

<L>54675<pc>1181-c<k1>apanidra<k2>apanidra
{%Apa-nidra;%}¦ add — wide awake, expanded, bloom-
ing (said of a flower, see {%nidrā%}).
<LEND>

<L>54676<pc>1181-c<k1>apaniDi<k2>apaniDi
{%Apa-nidhi, is, is, i,%}¦ treasureless, poor.
<LEND>

<L>54677<pc>1181-c<k1>apaBAzaRa<k2>apaBAzaRa
{%Apa-bhāṣaṇa, as,%}¦ m. one who speaks a bar-
barous language (other than Sanskrit).
<LEND>
[Page1182-a+ 81]

<L>54678<pc>1182-a<k1>apamArga<k2>apamArga
{%Apa-mārga, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%apa-mṛj%}), wiping off,
cleaning, removing.
<LEND>

<L>54679<pc>1182-a<k1>aparakta<k2>aparakta
{%Apa-rakta;%}¦ add — disaffected.
<LEND>

<L>54680<pc>1182-a<k1>aparaYj<k2>aparaYj
{%Apa-rañj,%}¦ Pass. {%-rajyate,%} to become disaffected.
<LEND>

<L>54681<pc>1182-a<k1>aparavaktrA<k2>aparavaktrA
{%Apara-vaktrā,%}¦ f., p. 51, read {%apara-vaktra, am,%} n.
<LEND>

<L>54682<pc>1182-a<k1>aparuz<k2>aparuz
{%Apa-ruṣ, ṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ free from anger.
<LEND>

<L>54683<pc>1182-a<k1>aparokzaya<k2>aparokzaya
{%Aparokṣaya;%}¦ add — to have ocular proof of.
<LEND>

<L>54684<pc>1182-a<k1>apartu<k2>apartu
{%Apartu;%}¦ add — ({%us%}), m. improper season, unusual
time.
<LEND>

<L>54685<pc>1182-a<k1>apaSUla<k2>apaSUla
{%Apa-śūla, as, ā, am,%}¦ spearless, having no spear.
<LEND>

<L>54686<pc>1182-a<k1>apaSruti<k2>apaSruti
{%Apa-śruti, is, is, i,%}¦ from which the ear is turned
away, unpleasant to hear.
<LEND>

<L>54687<pc>1182-a<k1>apasPur<k2>apasPur
{%Apa-sphur;%}¦ for ‘{%ūs, ūs, ūs,%}’ read {%ūr, ūr, ūr.%}
<LEND>

<L>54688<pc>1182-a<k1>apasmaya<k2>apasmaya
{%Apa-smaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from pride or haughti-
ness.
<LEND>

<L>54689<pc>1182-a<k1>apaharta<k2>apaharta
{%Apa-harta, as,%}¦ m. {%= apa-hartṛ,%} one who takes
away, a destroyer.
<LEND>

<L>54690<pc>1182-a<k1>apahasta<k2>apahasta
{%Apa-hasta;%}¦ add — {%as,%} m. the back of the hand
({%= hasta-pṛṣṭha%}).
<LEND>

<L>54691<pc>1182-a<k1>apahastaya<k2>apahastaya
{%Apa-hastaya;%}¦ add — to drive away (with the back
of the hand).
<LEND>

<L>54692<pc>1182-a<k1>apAkfti<k2>apAkfti
{%Apā-kṛti;%}¦ add — evil conduct.
<LEND>

<L>54693<pc>1182-a<k1>apAntaratamas<k2>apAntaratamas
{%Apāntara-tamas (apa-an˚), ās,%}¦ m., N. of an
ancient sage (identified with Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana).
<LEND>

<L>54694<pc>1182-a<k1>apAra<k2>apAra<h>1
1. {%a-pāra;%}¦ correct thus — not the opposite bank,
this side of a river, the near bank.
<LEND>

<L>54695<pc>1182-a<k1>apAvfttaka<k2>apAvfttaka
{%Apā-vṛttaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ running away, fugitive.
<LEND>

<L>54696<pc>1182-a<k1>apiDAna<k2>apiDAna
{%Api-dhāna;%}¦ add — a bolt, bar, lock.
<LEND>

<L>54697<pc>1182-a<k1>apivat<k2>apivat
{%Api-vat.%}¦ See rt. 2. {%vat;%} [cf. {%sv-api-vāta.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54698<pc>1182-a<k1>apobDa<k2>apobDa
{%Apobdha, as, ā, am,%}¦ bound.
<LEND>

<L>54699<pc>1182-a<k1>apomBana<k2>apomBana
{%Apombhana, am,%}¦ n. binding, a bond, fetter.
<LEND>

<L>54700<pc>1182-a<k1>aprAtirUpya<k2>aprAtirUpya
{%A-prātirūpya, am,%}¦ n. dissimilarity.
<LEND>

<L>54701<pc>1182-a<k1>abja<k2>abja<h>2
2. {%abja,%}¦ Nom. P. {%abjati,%} &c., to become a lotus
flower.
<LEND>

<L>54702<pc>1182-a<k1>aBikzattf<k2>aBikzattf
{%Abhi-kṣattṛ;%}¦ add — one who carves food, a host.
<LEND>

<L>54703<pc>1182-a<k1>aBigfDna<k2>aBigfDna
{%Abhi-gṛdhna, as, ā, am,%}¦ eagerly desiring, greedy
for.
<LEND>

<L>54704<pc>1182-a<k1>aBidevana<k2>aBidevana
{%Abhi-devana, am,%}¦ n. a gambling-table, dice-table.
<LEND>

<L>54705<pc>1182-a<k1>aBipAla<k2>aBipAla
{%Abhi-pāla, as,%}¦ m. a protector, watcher.
<LEND>

<L>54706<pc>1182-a<k1>aBipAlana<k2>aBipAlana
{%Abhi-pālana, am,%}¦ n. protection, watching.
<LEND>

<L>54707<pc>1182-a<k1>aBipraDarzaRa<k2>aBipraDarzaRa
{%Abhi-pradharṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. assault, ill-treatment.
<LEND>

<L>54708<pc>1182-a<k1>aBipraveSa<k2>aBipraveSa
{%Abhi-praveśa, as,%}¦ m. entering, entrance.
<LEND>

<L>54709<pc>1182-a<k1>aBimArutam<k2>aBimArutam
{%Abhi-mārutam,%}¦ ind. against the wind.
<LEND>

<L>54710<pc>1182-a<k1>aBimuKa<k2>aBimuKa
{%Abhi-mukha;%}¦ add — face to face, opposed to.
<LEND>

<L>54711<pc>1182-a<k1>aBimuKaya<k2>aBimuKaya
{%Abhi-mukhaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%-mukhayati,%} &c., to
face, encounter.
<LEND>

<L>54712<pc>1182-a<k1>aBiyajYagATA<k2>aBiyajYagATA
{%Abhi-yajña-gāthā,%}¦ p. 66, to be erased.
<LEND>

<L>54713<pc>1182-a<k1>aBirAma<k2>aBirAma
{%Abhi-rāma;%}¦ add — ({%as%}), m. pleasure, pleasure in.
<LEND>

<L>54714<pc>1182-a<k1>aBisaYjYita<k2>aBisaYjYita
{%Abhi-sañjñita, as, ā, am,%}¦ called, named.
<LEND>

<L>54715<pc>1182-a<k1>aBisara<k2>aBisara
{%Abhi-sara;%}¦ add — an assailant.
<LEND>

<L>54716<pc>1182-a<k1>aByAkarza<k2>aByAkarza
{%Abhy-ākarṣa;%}¦ add — putting on clothes, dressing.
<LEND>

<L>54717<pc>1182-a<k1>aByucCraya<k2>aByucCraya
{%Abhy-ucchraya, as,%}¦ m. height.
<LEND>

<L>54718<pc>1182-a<k1>aByucCrayavat<k2>aByucCrayavat
{%Abhyucchraya-vat, ān, atī, at,%}¦ high, lofty.
<LEND>

<L>54719<pc>1182-a<k1>amataparArTatA<k2>amataparArTatA
{%Amata-parārtha-tā,%}¦ f. the having an unaccept-
able second meaning.
<LEND>

<L>54720<pc>1182-a<k1>amAnuza<k2>amAnuza
{%A-mānuṣa;%}¦ add — ({%as, ā, am%}), destitute of men.
<LEND>

<L>54721<pc>1182-a<k1>aminat<k2>aminat
{%A-minat;%}¦ add — not failing.
<LEND>

<L>54722<pc>1182-a<k1>amUdfkza<k2>amUdfkza
{%Amū-dṛkṣa;%}¦ for ‘{%ā%}’ read {%ī.%}
<LEND>

<L>54723<pc>1182-a<k1>ambarIzaka<k2>ambarIzaka
{%Ambarīṣaka, as,%}¦ m. {%= ambarīṣa,%} a frying-pan.
<LEND>

<L>54724<pc>1182-a<k1>ambuja<k2>ambuja
{%Ambu-ja;%}¦ insert — ({%am%}), n. before ‘a lotus,’ &c.
<LEND>

<L>54725<pc>1182-a<k1>ambumuc<k2>ambumuc
{%Ambu-muc, k,%}¦ m. ‘water-discharger,’ a cloud.
<LEND>

<L>54726<pc>1182-a<k1>ayuDvin<k2>ayuDvin
{%A-yudhvin%}¦ to be erased.
<LEND>

<L>54727<pc>1182-a<k1>ayuva<k2>ayuva
{%A-yuva;%}¦ add — undivided, strong; free from de-
struction, (Sāy. {%= maraṇa-rahita.%})
<LEND>

<L>54728<pc>1182-a<k1>ayuvamArin<k2>ayuvamArin
{%A-yuvamārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ Ved. (according to B. R.)
not dying in youth; [cf. {%yuva-mārin.%}]
<LEND>

<L>54729<pc>1182-a<k1>arGeya<k2>arGeya
{%Argheya, as, ā, am, = arghya,%}¦ having a fixed
price, valuable.
<LEND>

<L>54730<pc>1182-a<k1>arRasa<k2>arRasa
{%Arṇasa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. watery, full of water, (Sāy.
{%= udaka-vat%}); floating, billowy (according to B. R.).
<LEND>

<L>54731<pc>1182-a<k1>artu<k2>artu
{%Artu = ṛtu,%}¦ a season.
<LEND>

<L>54732<pc>1182-a<k1>arTAntaranyAsa<k2>arTAntaranyAsa
{%Arthāntara-nyāsa;%}¦ add — transition to another
matter or subject, the turning aside from a narrative
to introduce a moral reflection, &c.
<LEND>

<L>54733<pc>1182-a<k1>arTApatti<k2>arTApatti
{%Arthāpatti;%}¦ add — a disjunctive hypothetical syl-
logism.
<LEND>

<L>54734<pc>1182-a<k1>arDanArI<k2>arDanArI
{%Ardha-nārī,%}¦ Śiva and Pārvatī conjoined.
<LEND>

<L>54735<pc>1182-a<k1>armaka<k2>armaka
{%Armaka,%}¦ doubtful and probably to be erased, B. R.
<LEND>

<L>54736<pc>1182-a<k1>arvan<k2>arvan
{%Arvan;%}¦ read {%arvat%} or {%arvan.%}
<LEND>

<L>54737<pc>1182-a<k1>arvAktana<k2>arvAktana
{%Arvāktana, as, ā%}¦ or {%ī, am,%} being on this side,
not reaching to the other side.
<LEND>
[Page1182-b+ 81]

<L>54738<pc>1182-b<k1>arhat<k2>arhat
{%Arhat;%}¦ after ‘a Buddha’ add — who is still a
candidate for {%Nirvāṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>54739<pc>1182-b<k1>alambuza<k2>alambuza
{%Alambuṣa;%}¦ for ‘vomiting’ read a kind of plant
({%= chardana%}).
<LEND>

<L>54740<pc>1182-b<k1>alAbu<k2>alAbu
{%Alābu;%}¦ add — ({%u%}), n. the fruit of the Alābu.
<LEND>

<L>54741<pc>1182-b<k1>avakIlaka<k2>avakIlaka
{%Ava-kīlaka, as,%}¦ m. a peg, nail.
<LEND>

<L>54742<pc>1182-b<k1>avacUlaka<k2>avacUlaka
{%Ava-cūlaka;%}¦ for ‘{%as,%} m.’ read {%am,%} n.
<LEND>

<L>54743<pc>1182-b<k1>avajiti<k2>avajiti
{%Ava-jiti, is,%}¦ f. conquering, conquest.
<LEND>

<L>54744<pc>1182-b<k1>avadola<k2>avadola
{%Ava-dola, as,%}¦ m. shaking, swinging.
<LEND>

<L>54745<pc>1182-b<k1>avadyat<k2>avadyat
{%Ava-dyat, an, atī, at,%}¦ breaking off.
<LEND>

<L>54746<pc>1182-b<k1>avana<k2>avana
{%Avana;%}¦ add — ({%as, ī, am%}), protecting, sheltering,
a protector.
<LEND>

<L>54747<pc>1182-b<k1>avaPa<k2>avaPa
{%Ava-pha%}¦ to be erased, B. R.
<LEND>

<L>54748<pc>1182-b<k1>avamocana<k2>avamocana
{%Ava-mocana;%}¦ add — a place of abode.
<LEND>

<L>54749<pc>1182-b<k1>avaraSilA<k2>avaraSilA
{%Avara-śilā%}¦ to be erased, B. R.
<LEND>

<L>54750<pc>1182-b<k1>avaropaRa<k2>avaropaRa
{%Ava-ropaṇa;%}¦ add — the act of planting (trees).
<LEND>

<L>54751<pc>1182-b<k1>avarza<k2>avarza
{%A-varṣa;%}¦ for ‘{%as,%} m.’ read {%am,%} n.
<LEND>

<L>54752<pc>1182-b<k1>avaleKA<k2>avaleKA
{%Ava-lekhā,%}¦ f. drawing, painting.
<LEND>

<L>54753<pc>1182-b<k1>avalopa<k2>avalopa
{%Ava-lopa, as,%}¦ m. breaking off, destruction.
<LEND>

<L>54754<pc>1182-b<k1>avasarpin<k2>avasarpin
{%Ava-sarpin;%}¦ add — descending gradually; the
Jaina Ava-sarpiṇī is a ‘descending cycle’ divided
into six stages, (viz. good-good, good, good-bad,
bad-good, bad, bad-bad.)
<LEND>

<L>54755<pc>1182-b<k1>avasAyaka<k2>avasAyaka
{%Ava-sāyaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ destructive, fatal, deadly.
<LEND>

<L>54756<pc>1182-b<k1>avasecana<k2>avasecana
{%Ava-secana;%}¦ add — bathing; strewing, scattering.
<LEND>

<L>54757<pc>1182-b<k1>avaseya<k2>avaseya
{%Ava-seya;%}¦ add — to be accomplished; to be ascer-
tained.
<LEND>

<L>54758<pc>1182-b<k1>avaskanda<k2>avaskanda
{%Ava-skanda;%}¦ erase — ‘a camp.’
<LEND>

<L>54759<pc>1182-b<k1>avahArika<k2>avahArika
{%Ava-hārika, am,%}¦ n. spoil, booty, plunder.
<LEND>

<L>54760<pc>1182-b<k1>avyavasTa<k2>avyavasTa
{%A-vyavastha, as, ā, am,%}¦ irregular, without rule.
<LEND>

<L>54761<pc>1182-b<k1>avyAkfta<k2>avyAkfta
{%A-vyākṛta;%}¦ add — undeveloped, unexpanded.
<LEND>

<L>54762<pc>1182-b<k1>avyutpanna<k2>avyutpanna
{%A-vyutpanna;%}¦ add — underived.
<LEND>

<L>54763<pc>1182-b<k1>aSaNkya<k2>aSaNkya
{%A-śaṅkya, as, ā, am,%}¦ not to be feared or doubted.
<LEND>

<L>54764<pc>1182-b<k1>aSanin<k2>aSanin
{%Aśanin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having a thunderbolt.
<LEND>

<L>54765<pc>1182-b<k1>aSlona<k2>aSlona
{%A-ślona;%}¦ read {%a-śloṇa%} [cf. {%śloṇa, śroṇa%}].
<LEND>

<L>54766<pc>1182-b<k1>aSvazaNgava<k2>aSvazaNgava
{%Aśva-ṣaṅgava;%}¦ correct thus — {%aśva-ṣaḍgava.%}
<LEND>

<L>54767<pc>1182-b<k1>aSvasukti<k2>aSvasukti
{%Aśva-sukti;%}¦ read — {%aśva-suktin, ī,%} m.
<LEND>

<L>54768<pc>1182-b<k1>azwi<k2>azwi<h>2
2. {%aṣṭi;%}¦ for ‘rt. 1. {%as%}’ read rt. 1. {%aś.%}
<LEND>

<L>54769<pc>1182-b<k1>azwi<k2>azwi<h>3
3. {%aṣṭi, is,%}¦ f. (fr. rt. 2. {%as%}), seed ({%= aṣṭhi%}).
<LEND>

<L>54770<pc>1182-b<k1>asakta<k2>asakta
{%A-sakta;%}¦ add — uninterrupted; ({%am%}), ind. un-
interruptedly.
<LEND>

<L>54771<pc>1182-b<k1>asaScivas<k2>asaScivas
{%A-saścivas;%}¦ for ‘{%as%}’ read {%at.%}
<LEND>

<L>54772<pc>1182-b<k1>asAra<k2>asAra
{%A-sāra;%}¦ under ({%am%}), n. add — chaff.
<LEND>

<L>54773<pc>1182-b<k1>asifdDita<k2>asifdDita
{%Asi-ṛddhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ increased or extended
by the sword ({%= khaḍga-balena ṛddhim prāpita%}).
<LEND>

<L>54774<pc>1182-b<k1>asTidantamaya<k2>asTidantamaya
{%Asthi-danta-maya, as, ī, am,%}¦ made of bone or
of ivory, (Manu V. 121.)
<LEND>

<L>54775<pc>1182-b<k1>asrAma<k2>asrAma
{%A-srāma;%}¦ add — not withered (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>54776<pc>1182-b<k1>ahaNkaraRa<k2>ahaNkaraRa
{%Ahaṅ-karaṇa, am,%}¦ n. {%= ahaṅ-kāra.%}
<LEND>

<L>54777<pc>1182-b<k1>ahan<k2>ahan
{%Ahan;%}¦ for ‘and {%ahas%}’ read — {%ahar,%} which is the
proper form of the Nominative.
<LEND>

<L>54778<pc>1182-b<k1>ahardala<k2>ahardala
{%Ahar-dala,%}¦ mid-day.
<LEND>

<L>54779<pc>1182-b<k1>ahastriyAma<k2>ahastriyAma
{%Ahas-triyāma, am,%}¦ n. day and night.
<LEND>

<L>54780<pc>1182-b<k1>Akekara<k2>Akekara
{%Ā-kekara, as, ī, am,%}¦ slightly looking askance.
<LEND>

<L>54781<pc>1182-b<k1>ANgArika<k2>ANgArika
{%Āṅgārika, as,%}¦ m. one having to do with charcoal,
a charcoal-burner.
<LEND>

<L>54782<pc>1182-b<k1>Acar<k2>Acar
{%Ā-car;%}¦ add — to examine (a witness).
<LEND>

<L>54783<pc>1182-b<k1>AYjana<k2>AYjana
{%Āñjana;%}¦ add — ({%as, ī, am%}), having the colour of
ointment.
<LEND>

<L>54784<pc>1182-b<k1>Aqambara<k2>Aqambara
{%Āḍambara;%}¦ add — noise, din; bombastical lan-
guage; tumult, confusion.
<LEND>

<L>54785<pc>1182-b<k1>AtmasantAna<k2>AtmasantAna
{%Ātma-santāna, as,%}¦ m. ‘own offspring,’ a son.
<LEND>

<L>54786<pc>1182-b<k1>Ada<k2>Ada<h>2
2. {%āda%}¦ or {%ādaka, as, ā, am%} (fr. rt. {%ad%}), eating
(at the end of comps.).
<LEND>

<L>54787<pc>1182-b<k1>AdAya<k2>AdAya<h>1
1. {%ādāya%}¦ to be erased.
<LEND>

<L>54788<pc>1182-b<k1>AdArabimbI<k2>AdArabimbI
{%Ādāra-bimbī%}¦ to be erased.
<LEND>

<L>54789<pc>1182-b<k1>AdIpaka<k2>AdIpaka
{%Ā-dīpaka, as,%}¦ m. one who sets fire to anything,
an incendiary.
<LEND>

<L>54790<pc>1182-b<k1>ADidEvika<k2>ADidEvika
{%Ādhidaivika;%}¦ add — proceeding from the influence
of the atmosphere or planets, proceeding from divine
or supernatural agencies.
<LEND>

<L>54791<pc>1182-b<k1>ADIna<k2>ADIna
{%Ādhīna = adhīna,%}¦ depending on (with loc.).
<LEND>

<L>54792<pc>1182-b<k1>ADyAtmika<k2>ADyAtmika
{%Ādhyātmika;%}¦ add — proceeding from bodily or
mental causes within one's self.
<LEND>

<L>54793<pc>1182-b<k1>AparapakzIya<k2>AparapakzIya
{%Āparapakṣīya%}¦ (fr. {%apara-pakṣa%}), belonging
or relating to the second half of a month.
<LEND>

<L>54794<pc>1182-b<k1>AptoryAma<k2>AptoryAma
{%Āptor-yāma, as,%}¦ m. {%= aptor-yāma,%} q. v.
<LEND>

<L>54795<pc>1182-b<k1>Apvan<k2>Apvan
{%Āpvan%}¦ to be erased.
<LEND>

<L>54796<pc>1182-b<k1>Apsarasa<k2>Apsarasa
{%Āpsarasa, as, ī, am,%}¦ coming from an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>54797<pc>1182-b<k1>APalaka<k2>APalaka
{%Ā-phalaka,%}¦ a fence made of planks, palisade.
<LEND>

<L>54798<pc>1182-b<k1>Abdam<k2>Abdam
{%Ābdam (ā-ab˚),%}¦ ind. for a whole year.
<LEND>
[Page1182-c+ 81]

<L>54799<pc>1182-c<k1>ABarita<k2>ABarita
{%Ā-bharita, as, ā, am,%}¦ ornamented, adorned.
<LEND>

<L>54800<pc>1182-c<k1>Amiza<k2>Amiza
{%Āmiṣa;%}¦ add — prey.
<LEND>

<L>54801<pc>1182-c<k1>AmizatA<k2>AmizatA
{%Āmiṣa-tā,%}¦ f. the being a prey.
<LEND>

<L>54802<pc>1182-c<k1>AmfS<k2>AmfS
{%Ā-mṛś;%}¦ add — Pass. {%mṛśyate,%} to be devoured or
eaten ({%= bhakṣyate,%} Raghu-v. V. 9).
<LEND>

<L>54803<pc>1182-c<k1>Arata<k2>Arata
{%Ā-rata;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. a kind of coitus.
<LEND>

<L>54804<pc>1182-c<k1>Arecin<k2>Arecin
{%Ā-recin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ emptying.
<LEND>

<L>54805<pc>1182-c<k1>AroDa<k2>AroDa
{%Ā-rodha, as,%}¦ m. a siege, blockade.
<LEND>

<L>54806<pc>1182-c<k1>Arjavin<k2>Arjavin
{%Ārjavin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. {%ārjava%}), having honesty,
upright, honest, straightforward.
<LEND>

<L>54807<pc>1182-c<k1>ArjIka<k2>ArjIka
{%Ārjīka;%}¦ ‘milk’ to be erased.
<LEND>

<L>54808<pc>1182-c<k1>Avarjana<k2>Avarjana
{%Ā-varjana, am,%}¦ n. victory, conquest ({%= jaya%}).
<LEND>

<L>54809<pc>1182-c<k1>Avigna<k2>Avigna
{%Ā-vigna;%}¦ add — {%as, ā, am%} (fr. {%ā-vij%}), terrified.
<LEND>

<L>54810<pc>1182-c<k1>AvirmaRqala<k2>AvirmaRqala
{%Āvir-maṇḍala, as, ā, am,%}¦ manifesting the form
of a circle.
<LEND>

<L>54811<pc>1182-c<k1>AveDa<k2>AveDa
{%Ā-vedha, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%ā-vyadh%}), shaking about.
<LEND>

<L>54812<pc>1182-c<k1>ASir<k2>ASir
{%Āśir;%}¦ for ‘{%īs%}’ read {%īr.%}
<LEND>

<L>54813<pc>1182-c<k1>ASizWa<k2>ASizWa
{%Āśiṣṭha, as, ā, am%}¦ (superl. of {%āśu%}), quickest.
<LEND>

<L>54814<pc>1182-c<k1>ASIyas<k2>ASIyas
{%Āśīyas, ān, asī, as%}¦ (compar. of {%āśu%}), quicker.
<LEND>

<L>54815<pc>1182-c<k1>Azwamika<k2>Azwamika
{%Āṣṭamika, as, ī, am,%}¦ taught in the eighth book
(of Pāṇini).
<LEND>

<L>54816<pc>1182-c<k1>AsaMsfteH<k2>AsaMsfteH
{%Ā-saṃsṛteḥ,%}¦ ind. till the end of the world, as long
as the course of this world lasts.
<LEND>

<L>54817<pc>1182-c<k1>AsiDAra<k2>AsiDAra
{%Āsidhāra, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%asi-dhārā%}), scil. {%vratam,%} a
vow as difficult as standing on the edge of a sword.
<LEND>

<L>54818<pc>1182-c<k1>Asura<k2>Asura
{%Āsura;%}¦ under ({%ī%}), f. add — an epithet of {%buddhi%}
in the Sāṅkhya philosophy.
<LEND>

<L>54819<pc>1182-c<k1>AhaNkArika<k2>AhaNkArika
{%Āhaṅkārika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%ahaṅ-kāra%}), belong-
ing or relating to Ahaṅkāra.
<LEND>

<L>54820<pc>1182-c<k1>ikzuSAkawa<k2>ikzuSAkawa
{%Ikṣu-śākaṭa;%}¦ for ‘kind’ read field.
<LEND>

<L>54821<pc>1182-c<k1>iqA<k2>iqA
{%Iḍā;%}¦ add — N. of a particular artery on the left
side of the body.
<LEND>

<L>54822<pc>1182-c<k1>indIvara<k2>indIvara
{%Indī-vara;%}¦ add — ({%as%}), m. a bee [cf. {%indin-%}
{%dira%}].
<LEND>

<L>54823<pc>1182-c<k1>indragopa<k2>indragopa
{%Indra-gopa;%}¦ to ({%as%}), m. add — a fire-fly.
<LEND>

<L>54824<pc>1182-c<k1>indraputrA<k2>indraputrA
{%Indra-putrā;%}¦ correct thus — ‘having Indra for a
son,’ i. e. the mother of Indra.
<LEND>

<L>54825<pc>1182-c<k1>indramaha<k2>indramaha
{%Indra-maha;%}¦ add — (according to a commentator)
a feast in honour of Indra [cf. {%maha%}].
<LEND>

<L>54826<pc>1182-c<k1>iByatilvala<k2>iByatilvala
{%Ibhya-tilvala;%}¦ read {%ibhya-tilvila.%}
<LEND>

<L>54827<pc>1182-c<k1>irvAruka<k2>irvAruka
{%Irvāruka%}¦ to be erased, B. R. [cf. {%mṛgervāruka%}].
<LEND>

<L>54828<pc>1182-c<k1>Ikza<k2>Ikza
{%Īkṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ looking [cf. {%tiryag-īkṣa%}]; an
opening, hole, mesh, (in {%kṣudrekṣa,%} having small
meshes.)
<LEND>

<L>54829<pc>1182-c<k1>INKana<k2>INKana
{%Īṅkhana, am,%}¦ n. shaking about, swinging.
<LEND>

<L>54830<pc>1182-c<k1>Iyivas<k2>Iyivas
{%Īyivas;%}¦ for ‘{%as%}’ read {%at.%}
<LEND>

<L>54831<pc>1182-c<k1>Ira<k2>Ira
{%Īra, as,%}¦ m. the wind. {%—Īra-ja%} or {%īra-putra, as,%}
m. ‘son of the wind,’ Hanu-mat.
<LEND>

<L>54832<pc>1182-c<k1>IraRa<k2>IraRa
{%Īraṇa;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. the act of publishing, pro-
claiming.
<LEND>

<L>54833<pc>1182-c<k1>ucCoTa<k2>ucCoTa
{%Uc-chotha (ud-ś˚), as,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. {%śvi%} with {%ud%}),
swelling, intumescence.
<LEND>

<L>54834<pc>1182-c<k1>ucCvasita<k2>ucCvasita
{%Uc-chvasita;%}¦ add — unfastened, untied.
<LEND>

<L>54835<pc>1182-c<k1>ucCvAsita<k2>ucCvAsita
{%Uc-chvāsita;%}¦ add — raised, lifted up.
<LEND>

<L>54836<pc>1182-c<k1>ujJ<k2>ujJ
{%Ujjh;%}¦ add — to let out, discharge (water), emit.
<LEND>

<L>54837<pc>1182-c<k1>uYCa<k2>uYCa
{%Uñcha;%}¦ add — also {%as,%} m.
<LEND>

<L>54838<pc>1182-c<k1>uRAdi<k2>uRAdi
{%Uṇ-ādi,%}¦ a class of Kṛt affixes beginning with {%uṇ.%}
<LEND>

<L>54839<pc>1182-c<k1>utkaca<k2>utkaca
{%Utkaca;%}¦ add — hairless; full-blown.
<LEND>

<L>54840<pc>1182-c<k1>utkuwakAsana<k2>utkuwakAsana
{%Utkuṭakāsana;%}¦ add — sitting with the legs bent
underneath.
<LEND>

<L>54841<pc>1182-c<k1>uttAnapARidvaya<k2>uttAnapARidvaya
{%Uttāna-pāṇi-dvaya, as, ā, am,%}¦ having the two
hands with the concave of the palms turned upwards.
<LEND>

<L>54842<pc>1182-c<k1>utTAyitva<k2>utTAyitva
{%Utthāyi-tva, am,%}¦ n. effort, energy, activity.
<LEND>

<L>54843<pc>1182-c<k1>utTAyin<k2>utTAyin
{%Ut-thāyin;%}¦ add — exerting one's self, active.
<LEND>

<L>54844<pc>1182-c<k1>utprabAla<k2>utprabAla
{%Ut-prabāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ shooting out fresh foliage.
<LEND>

<L>54845<pc>1182-c<k1>utsarpiRI<k2>utsarpiRI
{%Ut-sarpiṇī;%}¦ add — ‘ascending scale,’ divided into
six stages (beginning with bad-bad, and rising upwards
in the reverse order to {%ava-sarpiṇī,%} q. v., col. 2).
<LEND>

<L>54846<pc>1182-c<k1>utsrotas<k2>utsrotas
{%Ut-srotas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ having the flow of life or
current of nutriment upwards (opposed to {%arvāk-%}
{%srotas,%} q. v.).
<LEND>

<L>54847<pc>1182-c<k1>udASaya<k2>udASaya
{%Udāśaya (˚da-āś˚), as, am,%}¦ m. n. a lake, tank.
<LEND>

<L>54848<pc>1182-c<k1>udgAra<k2>udgAra
{%Ud-gāra;%}¦ add — swelling, heaving [cf. {%sāgarod-%}
{%gāra%}].
<LEND>

<L>54849<pc>1182-c<k1>uddIpaka<k2>uddIpaka
{%Ud-dīpaka;%}¦ add — ({%as%}), m. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>54850<pc>1182-c<k1>udDarma<k2>udDarma
{%Ud-dharma, as,%}¦ m. an erroneous doctrine, heresy.
<LEND>

<L>54851<pc>1182-c<k1>udBAvana<k2>udBAvana
{%Ud-bhāvana, am,%}¦ n. the act of raising up, eleva-
tion.
<LEND>

<L>54852<pc>1182-c<k1>udya<k2>udya
{%Udya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. rt. {%vad%}), to be spoken,
({%udya,%} ‘a river,’ is incorrect for {%uddhya.%})
<LEND>

<L>54853<pc>1182-c<k1>udyamita<k2>udyamita
{%Ud-yamita, as, ā, am,%}¦ excited, instigated.
<LEND>
[Page1183-a+ 81]

<L>54854<pc>1183-a<k1>udvij<k2>udvij
{%Ud-vij;%}¦ for ‘{%-vejitum%}’ read {%-vijitum.%}
<LEND>

<L>54855<pc>1183-a<k1>unnahana<k2>unnahana
{%Un-nahana, as, ā, am,%}¦ unfettered, unrestrained.
<LEND>

<L>54856<pc>1183-a<k1>unnAmita<k2>unnAmita
{%Un-nāmita, as, ā, am,%}¦ raised up.
<LEND>

<L>54857<pc>1183-a<k1>unnAha<k2>unnAha
{%Un-nāha;%}¦ add — excess; unbridled conduct.
<LEND>

<L>54858<pc>1183-a<k1>unmajjana<k2>unmajjana
{%Un-majjana;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. the act of emerging.
<LEND>

<L>54859<pc>1183-a<k1>unmaRi<k2>unmaRi
{%Un-maṇi, is,%}¦ m. a jewel found on the surface of
the ground ({%= bahiḥ-prakaṭa%}).
<LEND>

<L>54860<pc>1183-a<k1>upakrAnta<k2>upakrAnta
{%Upa-krānta, as, ā, am,%}¦ previously mentioned.
<LEND>

<L>54861<pc>1183-a<k1>upagAna<k2>upagAna
{%Upa-gāna, am,%}¦ n. an accompanying song.
<LEND>

<L>54862<pc>1183-a<k1>upageya<k2>upageya
{%Upa-geya;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. a song.
<LEND>

<L>54863<pc>1183-a<k1>upacArika<k2>upacArika
{%Upa-cārika, as, ā, am,%}¦ serviceable, useful.
<LEND>

<L>54864<pc>1183-a<k1>upacIrRa<k2>upacIrRa
{%Upa-cīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ attended; deceived ({%=%}
{%vañcita%}).
<LEND>

<L>54865<pc>1183-a<k1>upacCanda<k2>upacCanda
{%Upa-cchanda, as,%}¦ m. an implement, instrument.
<LEND>

<L>54866<pc>1183-a<k1>upajanam<k2>upajanam
{%Upa-janam,%}¦ ind. near the people.
<LEND>

<L>54867<pc>1183-a<k1>upatIrTa<k2>upatIrTa
{%Upa-tīrtha, am,%}¦ n. steps leading down to a river.
<LEND>

<L>54868<pc>1183-a<k1>upaduh<k2>upaduh
{%Upa-duh, -dhuk,%}¦ m. a milk-pail.
<LEND>

<L>54869<pc>1183-a<k1>upadeSa<k2>upadeSa
{%Upa-deśa;%}¦ add — a name, title.
<LEND>

<L>54870<pc>1183-a<k1>upadoha<k2>upadoha
{%Upa-doha;%}¦ correct thus — a milk-pail.
<LEND>

<L>54871<pc>1183-a<k1>upadohana<k2>upadohana
{%Upa-dohana,%}¦ a milk-pail.
<LEND>

<L>54872<pc>1183-a<k1>upaDi<k2>upaDi
{%Upa-dhi;%}¦ add — support.
<LEND>

<L>54873<pc>1183-a<k1>upapada<k2>upapada
{%Upa-pada;%}¦ for ‘{%as,%} m.’ read {%am,%} n.; and after
‘in a compound’ add — but not in a Bahu-vrīhi.
<LEND>

<L>54874<pc>1183-a<k1>upabanDa<k2>upabanDa
{%Upa-bandha;%}¦ add — a bond, rope, cord.
<LEND>

<L>54875<pc>1183-a<k1>upamajjana<k2>upamajjana
{%Upa-majjana, am,%}¦ n. ablution, bathing, a bath.
<LEND>

<L>54876<pc>1183-a<k1>upamantrin<k2>upamantrin
{%Upa-mantrin;%}¦ add — ({%ī%}), m. a subordinate coun-
sellor.
<LEND>

<L>54877<pc>1183-a<k1>upamAt<k2>upamAt
{%Upa-māt,%}¦ Ved. {%= upa-mit.%}
<LEND>

<L>54878<pc>1183-a<k1>upamitra<k2>upamitra
{%Upa-mitra, am,%}¦ n. a secondary or inferior friend.
<LEND>

<L>54879<pc>1183-a<k1>upameKalam<k2>upameKalam
{%Upa-mekhalam,%}¦ ind. about or on the slopes or
sides (of a mountain).
<LEND>

<L>54880<pc>1183-a<k1>upayat<k2>upayat
{%Upa-yat, an, atī, at%}¦ (fr. {%upe%}), flowing into, going
near, approaching, tributary (as a river).
<LEND>

<L>54881<pc>1183-a<k1>upayoga<k2>upayoga
{%Upa-yoga;%}¦ add — engagement, compact, agree-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>54882<pc>1183-a<k1>upavrajam<k2>upavrajam
{%Upa-vrajam,%}¦ ind. near a cattle pen.
<LEND>

<L>54883<pc>1183-a<k1>upaSalya<k2>upaSalya
{%Upa-śalya;%}¦ add — neighbouring district, environs.
<LEND>

<L>54884<pc>1183-a<k1>upasaNgraha<k2>upasaNgraha
{%Upa-saṅgraha;%}¦ add — a pillow, cushion, mattress.
<LEND>

<L>54885<pc>1183-a<k1>upasikta<k2>upasikta
{%Upa-sikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled with.
<LEND>

<L>54886<pc>1183-a<k1>upasIma<k2>upasIma
{%Upa-sīma,%}¦ ind. near the boundary (of a field).
<LEND>

<L>54887<pc>1183-a<k1>upaseka<k2>upaseka
{%Upa-seka, as,%}¦ m. sprinkling upon, infusion.
<LEND>

<L>54888<pc>1183-a<k1>upahArya<k2>upahArya
{%Upa-hārya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be presented or offered;
({%am%}), n. an offering, oblation.
<LEND>

<L>54889<pc>1183-a<k1>upahita<k2>upahita
{%Upa-hita;%}¦ add — good in a secondary degree,
somewhat good; ({%am%}), n. a secondary good.
<LEND>

<L>54890<pc>1183-a<k1>upAcIrRa<k2>upAcIrRa
{%Upā-cīrṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ deceived.
<LEND>

<L>54891<pc>1183-a<k1>upAnayana<k2>upAnayana
{%Upā-nayana, am,%}¦ n. the act of leading or conduct-
ing home.
<LEND>

<L>54892<pc>1183-a<k1>upArata<k2>upArata
{%Upā-rata;%}¦ add — ceasing, turning back, returning.
<LEND>

<L>54893<pc>1183-a<k1>upAsad<k2>upAsad
{%Upā-sad (upa-ā˚),%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-sīdati,%} &c., to ap-
proach, walk along.
<LEND>

<L>54894<pc>1183-a<k1>urasikf<k2>urasikf
{%Urasi-kṛ%}¦ or {%urasi kṛ,%} cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to
appropriate, make one's own.
<LEND>

<L>54895<pc>1183-a<k1>urARa<k2>urARa
{%Urāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. making broad, (Sāy. {%=%}
{%uru-kurvāṇa.%})
<LEND>

<L>54896<pc>1183-a<k1>urvaSI<k2>urvaSI
{%Urvaśī;%}¦ add — according to some, more properly
derived fr. {%uru%} + rt. 1. {%aś,%} to pervade, and meaning
originally ‘widely-spreading.’
<LEND>

<L>54897<pc>1183-a<k1>ulUkI<k2>ulUkI
{%Ulūkī,%}¦ f. an owl.
<LEND>

<L>54898<pc>1183-a<k1>ullAsa<k2>ullAsa
{%Ullāsa;%}¦ add — increase, growth.
<LEND>

<L>54899<pc>1183-a<k1>uSij<k2>uSij
{%Uśij;%}¦ add — charming, beautiful, handsome.
<LEND>

<L>54900<pc>1183-a<k1>fjIza<k2>fjIza
{%Ṛjīṣa;%}¦ add — viscid, unctuous.
<LEND>

<L>54901<pc>1183-a<k1>fjvac<k2>fjvac
{%Ṛjvac;%}¦ for ‘{%āṅ%}’ read {%aṅ.%}
<LEND>

<L>54902<pc>1183-a<k1>ftajur<k2>ftajur
{%Ṛta-jur;%}¦ for ‘{%ur%}’ read {%ūr.%}
<LEND>

<L>54903<pc>1183-a<k1>fdDita<k2>fdDita
{%Ṛddhita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made to prosper, prospered.
<LEND>

<L>54904<pc>1183-a<k1>ekatAla<k2>ekatAla
{%Eka-tāla, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a single palm tree.
<LEND>

<L>54905<pc>1183-a<k1>eqI<k2>eqI
{%Eḍī,%}¦ f. a female sheep, ewe.
<LEND>

<L>54906<pc>1183-a<k1>eRANka<k2>eRANka
{%Eṇāṅka (eṇa-aṅ˚), as,%}¦ m. ‘deer-marked,’ the
moon. {%—Eṇāṅka-maṇi, is,%} m. the moon-gem [cf.
{%candra-kānta%}].
<LEND>

<L>54907<pc>1183-a<k1>EkaguRya<k2>EkaguRya
{%Aikaguṇya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%eka-guṇa%}), the value of a
single unit, simple unity (opposed to {%dvaiguṇya%}).
<LEND>

<L>54908<pc>1183-a<k1>Edamparya<k2>Edamparya
{%Aidamparya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%idam + para%}), ‘the
state of being devoted to this alone,’ main or only
object, chief end.
<LEND>

<L>54909<pc>1183-a<k1>EndranIla<k2>EndranIla
{%Aindranīla, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%indra-nīla%}), made of
sapphire.
<LEND>

<L>54910<pc>1183-a<k1>ESya<k2>ESya
{%Aiśya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%īśa%}), supremacy, power.
<LEND>

<L>54911<pc>1183-a<k1>otsUryam<k2>otsUryam
{%Otsūryam (ā-ut˚),%}¦ ind. until the sun rises.
<LEND>

<L>54912<pc>1183-a<k1>ozWajAha<k2>ozWajAha
{%Oṣṭha-jāha;%}¦ for ‘ear’ read lips.
<LEND>

<L>54913<pc>1183-a<k1>Ormileya<k2>Ormileya
{%Aurmileya, as,%}¦ m. a metronymic from Ūrmilā.
<LEND>
[Page1183-b+ 81]

<L>54914<pc>1183-b<k1>Orvara<k2>Orvara
{%Aurvara, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%urvarā%}), belonging to
the earth, coming from the ground.
<LEND>

<L>54915<pc>1183-b<k1>kawPala<k2>kawPala
{%Kaṭ-phala.%}¦ See under {%kaṭu,%} p. 196, col. 1.
<LEND>

<L>54916<pc>1183-b<k1>kaRwa<k2>kaRwa
{%Kaṇṭa.%}¦ See under {%kaṇṭaka;%} (these words are
thought by some to be for original {%karnta, karn-%}
{%taka,%} fr. rt. 2. {%kṛt,%} to cut.)
<LEND>

<L>54917<pc>1183-b<k1>kamaRqalu<k2>kamaRqalu
{%Kamaṇḍalu;%}¦ in Ved. a form {%kamaṇḍalū, ūs,%} f.
is allowed, (Pāṇ. IV. 1, 71.)
<LEND>

<L>54918<pc>1183-b<k1>kamalanABa<k2>kamalanABa
{%Kamala-nābha, as,%}¦ m. ‘lotus-naveled,’ epithet of
Viṣṇu.
<LEND>

<L>54919<pc>1183-b<k1>karRasrotas<k2>karRasrotas
{%Karṇa-srotas, as,%}¦ n. ‘ear-flow,’ the wax of the ear.
<LEND>

<L>54920<pc>1183-b<k1>kalahat<k2>kalahat
{%Kalahat, an, antī, at%}¦ (fr. a Nom. {%kalaha%}), quar-
reling.
<LEND>

<L>54921<pc>1183-b<k1>kavayitf<k2>kavayitf
{%Kavayitṛ = kavi,%}¦ (Kumāra-s. II. 17, Malli-nātha.)
<LEND>

<L>54922<pc>1183-b<k1>kastIra<k2>kastIra
{%Kastīra;%}¦ said to be connected with rt. 1. {%kās%} for
{%kāś,%} to shine.
<LEND>

<L>54923<pc>1183-b<k1>kARaBuja<k2>kARaBuja
{%Kāṇabhuja, as, ī, am,%}¦ composed by Kaṇa-bhuj,
i. e. Kaṇāda.
<LEND>

<L>54924<pc>1183-b<k1>kAdrava<k2>kAdrava
{%Kādrava, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%kadru%}), dark-yellow, of
a reddish-brown colour.
<LEND>

<L>54925<pc>1183-b<k1>kAnizWya<k2>kAnizWya
{%Kāniṣṭhya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%kaniṣṭha%}), the place
or position of the youngest (opposed to {%jyaiṣṭhya%}),
juniority.
<LEND>

<L>54926<pc>1183-b<k1>kAmatAta<k2>kAmatAta
{%Kāma-tāta, as,%}¦ m. epithet of Śiva [cf. {%kāma-%}
{%pāla%}].
<LEND>

<L>54927<pc>1183-b<k1>kAmAKyA<k2>kAmAKyA
{%Kāmākhyā;%}¦ add — a district in Assam sacred to
Durgā.
<LEND>

<L>54928<pc>1183-b<k1>kAyadaRqa<k2>kAyadaRqa
{%Kāya-daṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. command over the body,
control of the actions.
<LEND>

<L>54929<pc>1183-b<k1>kAru<k2>kAru
{%Kāru;%}¦ for ‘({%as%})’ read ({%us%}).
<LEND>

<L>54930<pc>1183-b<k1>kAlapUga<k2>kAlapUga
{%Kāla-pūga;%}¦ transfer under 2. {%kāla,%} and correct
thus — a quantity or length of time, a long time.
<LEND>

<L>54931<pc>1183-b<k1>kAzWalozwamaya<k2>kAzWalozwamaya
{%Kāṣṭha-loṣṭa-maya, as, ī, am,%}¦ made of wood
and clay.
<LEND>

<L>54932<pc>1183-b<k1>kiYcanya<k2>kiYcanya
{%Kiñcanya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%kiñcana,%} ‘something’),
possession, property.
<LEND>

<L>54933<pc>1183-b<k1>kintA<k2>kintA
{%Kin-tā,%}¦ f. ‘the state of whom?’ any despicable
state or condition, contemptibleness; {%kintayā,%} with
meanness, contemptibly.
<LEND>

<L>54934<pc>1183-b<k1>kindeva<k2>kindeva
{%Kin-deva, as,%}¦ m. a demi-god [cf. {%kin-nara%}].
<LEND>

<L>54935<pc>1183-b<k1>kimpraBu<k2>kimpraBu
{%Kim-prabhu, us,%}¦ m. a bad master.
<LEND>

<L>54936<pc>1183-b<k1>kimBftya<k2>kimBftya
{%Kim-bhṛtya, as,%}¦ m. a bad servant.
<LEND>

<L>54937<pc>1183-b<k1>kimmantrin<k2>kimmantrin
{%Kim-mantrin, ī,%}¦ m. a bad minister.
<LEND>

<L>54938<pc>1183-b<k1>kirIwa<k2>kirIwa
{%Kirīṭa;%}¦ add — ({%as%}), m. a merchant, trader.
<LEND>

<L>54939<pc>1183-b<k1>kukzija<k2>kukzija
{%Kukṣi-ja, as,%}¦ m. a son, (Raghu-v. XV. 15.)
<LEND>

<L>54940<pc>1183-b<k1>kutantrI<k2>kutantrI
{%Ku-tantrī, īs%}¦ or {%ī,%} f. a tail.
<LEND>

<L>54941<pc>1183-b<k1>kula<k2>kula
{%Kula, am,%}¦ n.; add — (with Śāktas), epithet of
Śakti and of the rites observed in her worship [cf.
{%kaula%}].
<LEND>

<L>54942<pc>1183-b<k1>kulaDarma<k2>kulaDarma
{%Kula-dharma;%}¦ add — the observances of the
Kaulas.
<LEND>

<L>54943<pc>1183-b<k1>kulamArga<k2>kulamArga
{%Kula-mārga;%}¦ add — the doctrine of the Kaulas.
<LEND>

<L>54944<pc>1183-b<k1>kulavartman<k2>kulavartman
{%Kula-vartman, a,%}¦ n. the doctrine of the Kaulas.
<LEND>

<L>54945<pc>1183-b<k1>kuvid<k2>kuvid
{%Kuvid,%}¦ ind. where? where at all? (Sāy.) often,
frequently.
<LEND>

<L>54946<pc>1183-b<k1>kUrcala<k2>kUrcala
{%Kūrcala, as, ā, am,%}¦ having a beard, bearded.
<LEND>

<L>54947<pc>1183-b<k1>kftArTayat<k2>kftArTayat
{%Kṛtārthayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ making successful.
<LEND>

<L>54948<pc>1183-b<k1>kfmija<k2>kfmija
{%Kṛmi-ja, am,%}¦ n.; add — silk.
<LEND>

<L>54949<pc>1183-b<k1>kelikila<k2>kelikila
{%Keli-kila;%}¦ add — ({%as, ā, am%}), wanton, arrogant.
<LEND>

<L>54950<pc>1183-b<k1>kEmutikanyAya<k2>kEmutikanyAya
{%Kaimutika-nyāya, as,%}¦ m. the rule of ‘how much
more’ or <nsi>a fortiori.</nsi>
<LEND>

<L>54951<pc>1183-b<k1>kowi<k2>kowi
{%Koṭi, is,%}¦ f. a point or side in an argument.
<LEND>

<L>54952<pc>1183-b<k1>kOlya<k2>kOlya
{%Kaulya;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. noble origin, good family.
<LEND>

<L>54953<pc>1183-b<k1>kOSika<k2>kOSika<h>1
1. {%kauśika;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. a silk garment.
<LEND>

<L>54954<pc>1183-b<k1>knopana<k2>knopana
{%Knopana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. Caus. of rt. {%knūy%}), wet-
ting, moistening.
<LEND>

<L>54955<pc>1183-b<k1>krakaca<k2>krakaca
{%Krakaca;%}¦ under ‘{%as,%} m.’ add — a particular musical
instrument; N. of a hell.
<LEND>

<L>54956<pc>1183-b<k1>krARA<k2>krARA
{%Krāṇā,%}¦ ind. (according to B. R. inst. of {%krāṇa,%}
‘desire, eagerness,’ and probably from a form {%krā%}
= rt. 1. {%kṛ%}), Ved. willingly, gladly.
<LEND>

<L>54957<pc>1183-b<k1>kzIraKarjUra<k2>kzIraKarjUra
{%Kṣīra-kharjūra, kṣīrikā;%}¦ for ‘Datura’ read
Date.
<LEND>

<L>54958<pc>1183-b<k1>kzetrasaMhitA<k2>kzetrasaMhitA
{%Kṣetra-saṃhitā,%}¦ f. any work on geometry.
<LEND>

<L>54959<pc>1183-b<k1>kzepAya<k2>kzepAya
{%Kṣepāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%kṣepāyate,%} &c., to revile.
<LEND>

<L>54960<pc>1183-b<k1>kzepAyamARa<k2>kzepAyamARa
{%Kṣepāyamāṇa, as, ā, am,%}¦ abusing, reviling.
<LEND>

<L>54961<pc>1183-b<k1>kzvelana<k2>kzvelana
{%Kṣvelana, am,%}¦ n. the act of playing, sport, jest.
<LEND>

<L>54962<pc>1183-b<k1>kzveli<k2>kzveli
{%Kṣveli, is,%}¦ f. sport, jest.
<LEND>

<L>54963<pc>1183-b<k1>KaRqakAvya<k2>KaRqakAvya
{%Khaṇḍa-kāvya, am,%}¦ n.; add — a partial or minor
poem (i. e. one not on any heroic or sacred subject,
and having only one topic).
<LEND>
[Page1183-c+ 81]

<L>54964<pc>1183-c<k1>Karju<k2>Karju
{%Kharju;%}¦ for ‘datura’ read date.
<LEND>

<L>54965<pc>1183-c<k1>KalaKalAya<k2>KalaKalAya
{%Khalakhalāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%khalakhalāyate,%} to act
knavishly.
<LEND>

<L>54966<pc>1183-c<k1>KalAya<k2>KalAya
{%Khalāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%khalāyate,%} to act roguishly.
<LEND>

<L>54967<pc>1183-c<k1>Koraka<k2>Koraka
{%Khoraka, as,%}¦ m. a disease of the foot.
<LEND>

<L>54968<pc>1183-c<k1>gajin<k2>gajin
{%Gajin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ riding on an elephant.
<LEND>

<L>54969<pc>1183-c<k1>gatI<k2>gatI
{%Gatī,%}¦ f. {%= gati,%} going, (in Rāmāyaṇa VII. 31, 41.
explained by the commentator as a Vedic lengthen-
ing of the final.)
<LEND>

<L>54970<pc>1183-c<k1>gatvara<k2>gatvara
{%Gatvara;%}¦ for ‘{%ā%}’ read {%ī.%}
<LEND>

<L>54971<pc>1183-c<k1>gadi<k2>gadi
{%Gadi, is,%}¦ f. speaking, speech.
<LEND>

<L>54972<pc>1183-c<k1>gamaka<k2>gamaka
{%Gamaka;%}¦ add — making clear or intelligible.
<LEND>

<L>54973<pc>1183-c<k1>garuqa<k2>garuqa
{%Garuḍa;%}¦ Aruṇa is the elder (not ‘younger’)
brother, and Garuḍāgraja should be translated ‘elder
brother of Garuḍa.’
<LEND>

<L>54974<pc>1183-c<k1>gavASira<k2>gavASira
{%Gavāśira;%}¦ the base should rather be {%gavāśir,%}
Nom. case masc. fem. {%gavāśīr.%}
<LEND>

<L>54975<pc>1183-c<k1>gAla<k2>gAla
{%Gāla;%}¦ add — ({%as, ī, am%}), produced in or from
the throat, guttural.
<LEND>

<L>54976<pc>1183-c<k1>guRayoga<k2>guRayoga
{%Guṇa-yoga, as,%}¦ m. the application of the secondary
sense of a word.
<LEND>

<L>54977<pc>1183-c<k1>guRavftti<k2>guRavftti
{%Guṇa-vṛtti;%}¦ for ‘essential’ read unessential:
add — the secondary force of a word.
<LEND>

<L>54978<pc>1183-c<k1>guRAya<k2>guRAya
{%Guṇāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%guṇāyate,%} &c., to appear like
virtues, become merits or good qualities.
<LEND>

<L>54979<pc>1183-c<k1>guRin<k2>guRin
{%Guṇin;%}¦ add — having a string or cord.
<LEND>

<L>54980<pc>1183-c<k1>gup<k2>gup<h>2
2. {%gup;%}¦ add — cl. 1. P. {%gopāyati.%}
<LEND>

<L>54981<pc>1183-c<k1>gurumat<k2>gurumat
{%Guru-mat;%}¦ add — ({%atī%}), f. a pregnant woman.
<LEND>

<L>54982<pc>1183-c<k1>gurvarTa<k2>gurvarTa
{%Gurv-artha, as,%}¦ m.; add — one who seeks to pro-
vide a maintenance for his Guru.
<LEND>

<L>54983<pc>1183-c<k1>gfzwi<k2>gfzwi
{%Gṛṣṭi;%}¦ under ‘{%is,%} m.’ add — a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>54984<pc>1183-c<k1>gocaryA<k2>gocaryA
{%Go-caryā,%}¦ f. seeking pasturage or food like a cow.
<LEND>

<L>54985<pc>1183-c<k1>gocArin<k2>gocArin
{%Go-cārin;%}¦ add — one who seeks his nourishment
like a cow, seeking food with the mouth, (see
{%mṛga-cārin.%})
<LEND>

<L>54986<pc>1183-c<k1>gopAya<k2>gopAya
{%Gopāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%gopāyate,%} to act like a herds-
man.
<LEND>

<L>54987<pc>1183-c<k1>goyajYa<k2>goyajYa
{%Go-yajña;%}¦ add — a sacrifice in honour of a cow.
<LEND>

<L>54988<pc>1183-c<k1>gORya<k2>gORya
{%Gauṇya;%}¦ add — the being a merit, excellence;
({%as%}), m. merit, excellence.
<LEND>

<L>54989<pc>1183-c<k1>gras<k2>gras<h>1
1. {%gras;%}¦ add — to neglect, (according to Kullūka
on Manu VIII. 43. {%graset = upekṣeta.%})
<LEND>

<L>54990<pc>1183-c<k1>grAmawikA<k2>grAmawikA
{%Grāmaṭikā,%}¦ f. (fr. {%grāma%}), a wretched village.
<LEND>

<L>54991<pc>1183-c<k1>Gawotkaca<k2>Gawotkaca
{%Ghaṭotkaca%}¦ means ‘bald as a jar.’
<LEND>

<L>54992<pc>1183-c<k1>GaRwa<k2>GaRwa
{%Ghaṇṭa;%}¦ probably for {%hantra%} as {%daṇḍa%} for
{%dantra.%}
<LEND>

<L>54993<pc>1183-c<k1>cakratuRqa<k2>cakratuRqa
{%Cakra-tuṇḍa, as,%}¦ m. a kind of fish ({%= nala-%}
{%mīna%}).
<LEND>

<L>54994<pc>1183-c<k1>caKvas<k2>caKvas
{%Cakhvas, ān,%}¦ m. an abbreviated perf. part., (accord-
ing to Sāy. on Ṛg-veda II. 14, 4. either fr. rt. {%cakṣ%}
or rt. {%khan,%} perhaps ‘one who has displayed,’ ‘dis-
playing;’ according to B. R. perhaps ‘stretching out.’)
<LEND>

<L>54995<pc>1183-c<k1>caritaguRatva<k2>caritaguRatva
{%Caritaguṇa-tva;%}¦ add — the attainment of some
peculiar quality or use.
<LEND>

<L>54996<pc>1183-c<k1>cArya<k2>cArya<h>2
2. {%cārya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%cara%} or {%cāra%}), spying out,
espionage, information brought by spies.
<LEND>

<L>54997<pc>1183-c<k1>ciccika<k2>ciccika
{%Ciccika, as,%}¦ m. (onomatopoetic), Ved. a kind of
bird.
<LEND>

<L>54998<pc>1183-c<k1>cirarAtra<k2>cirarAtra
{%Cira-rātra,%}¦ (according to Halāyudha I. 108) {%as,%} m.
<LEND>

<L>54999<pc>1183-c<k1>cUqaya<k2>cUqaya
{%Cūḍaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%cūḍayati,%} &c., to make any-
thing (acc.) into a Cūḍā or top-knot.
<LEND>

<L>55000<pc>1183-c<k1>cUlikA<k2>cUlikA
{%Cūlikā,%}¦ f.; add — the hinting of a matter or event
by those behind the curtain (in the drama).
<LEND>

<L>55001<pc>1183-c<k1>cEleya<k2>cEleya
{%Caileya, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%cela%}), made of cloth.
<LEND>

<L>55002<pc>1183-c<k1>corAyita<k2>corAyita
{%Corāyita, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. a Nom. {%corāya%}), acted
like a thief, playing the thief.
<LEND>

<L>55003<pc>1183-c<k1>Canna<k2>Canna
{%Channa;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. a covering; the trap-
pings (of an elephant).
<LEND>

<L>55004<pc>1183-c<k1>CalitarAma<k2>CalitarAma
{%Chalita-rāma;%}¦ for ‘{%as,%} m.’ read {%am,%} n.
<LEND>

<L>55005<pc>1183-c<k1>jaqaya<k2>jaqaya
{%Jaḍaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%jaḍayati,%} &c., to make apa-
thetic, make motionless or lifeless.
<LEND>

<L>55006<pc>1183-c<k1>jaqAtmaka<k2>jaqAtmaka
{%Jaḍātmaka, as, ā, am,%}¦ or {%jaḍātman (˚ḍa-āt˚),%}
{%ā, ā, a,%} insensible, void of sensation, calm, placid,
cool (said of the moon).
<LEND>

<L>55007<pc>1183-c<k1>jani<k2>jani
{%Jani%}¦ or {%janī;%} add — cf. Gr. <lang n="greek">γυνή</lang>
<LEND>

<L>55008<pc>1183-c<k1>jalaSarkarA<k2>jalaSarkarA
{%Jala-śarkarā,%}¦ f. ‘water-gravel,’ hail.
<LEND>

<L>55009<pc>1183-c<k1>jAtI<k2>jAtI
{%Jātī,%}¦ f. a kind of jasmine.
<LEND>

<L>55010<pc>1183-c<k1>jAlanDara<k2>jAlanDara
{%Jālandhara, as,%}¦ m. {%= jalan-dhara,%} N. of an
Asura.
<LEND>

<L>55011<pc>1183-c<k1>jfB<k2>jfB
{%Jṛbh%}¦ or {%jṛmbh;%} add — to unbend or unstring a
bow.
<LEND>
[Page1184-a+ 81]

<L>55012<pc>1184-a<k1>jyotirmilin<k2>jyotirmilin
{%Jyotirmilin,%}¦ probably for {%jyotirmīlin.%}
<LEND>

<L>55013<pc>1184-a<k1>jvar<k2>jvar
{%Jvar;%}¦ add — connected with rt. {%jval.%}
<LEND>

<L>55014<pc>1184-a<k1>jvalat<k2>jvalat
{%Jvalat;%}¦ add — ({%an%}), m. fire, flame.
<LEND>

<L>55015<pc>1184-a<k1>Jazaketana<k2>Jazaketana
{%Jhaṣa-ketana;%}¦ add — the sea.
<LEND>

<L>55016<pc>1184-a<k1>wikA<k2>wikA
{%Ṭikā,%}¦ in {%svarga-grāma-ṭikā-viluṇṭhana,%} to be
erased, (see {%grāmaṭikā,%} p. 1183.)
<LEND>

<L>55017<pc>1184-a<k1>tawAGAta<k2>tawAGAta
{%Taṭāghāta (˚ṭa-āgh˚), as,%}¦ m. {%= vapra-krīḍā,%}
the butting of elephants against banks, &c.
<LEND>

<L>55018<pc>1184-a<k1>tan<k2>tan<h>3
3. {%tan;%}¦ add — to manifest, display, exhibit, show,
put forth (energy &c.), make.
<LEND>

<L>55019<pc>1184-a<k1>tanumaDya<k2>tanumaDya
{%Tanu-madhya, am,%}¦ n. middle of body, waist.
<LEND>

<L>55020<pc>1184-a<k1>taparloka<k2>taparloka
{%Tapar-loka = tapo-loka.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>55021<pc>1184-a<k1>tamogu<k2>tamogu
{%Tamo-gu%}¦ to be erased.
<LEND>

<L>55022<pc>1184-a<k1>taruRaya<k2>taruRaya
{%Taruṇaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%taruṇayati,%} to make fresh.
<LEND>

<L>55023<pc>1184-a<k1>talavAraRa<k2>talavAraRa
{%Tala-vāraṇa = tala-tra.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>55024<pc>1184-a<k1>tAmyat<k2>tAmyat
{%Tāmyat;%}¦ add — becoming distressed, becoming
attenuated.
<LEND>

<L>55025<pc>1184-a<k1>tAvat<k2>tAvat
{%Tāvat;%}¦ add — just a little.
<LEND>

<L>55026<pc>1184-a<k1>tiryaksrotas<k2>tiryaksrotas
{%Tiryak-srotas;%}¦ for ‘hurrying’ read having.
<LEND>

<L>55027<pc>1184-a<k1>tulita<k2>tulita
{%Tulita;%}¦ add — lifted up.
<LEND>

<L>55028<pc>1184-a<k1>tulyakulya<k2>tulyakulya
{%Tulyakulya, as, ā, am,%}¦ belonging to the same
family.
<LEND>

<L>55029<pc>1184-a<k1>tfRAvarta<k2>tfRAvarta
{%Tṛṇāvarta;%}¦ add — N. of a demon killed by the
infant Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>55030<pc>1184-a<k1>tfzwa<k2>tfzwa
{%Tṛṣṭa,%}¦ to be connected with rt. 1. {%tṛṣ;%} add
 — (originally) dry.
<LEND>

<L>55031<pc>1184-a<k1>tokAya<k2>tokAya
{%Tokāya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%tokāyati,%} to be like a new-born
child.
<LEND>

<L>55032<pc>1184-a<k1>tOraNgika<k2>tOraNgika
{%Tauraṅgika, as,%}¦ m. a horseman.
<LEND>

<L>55033<pc>1184-a<k1>tyAjana<k2>tyAjana
{%Tyājana, am,%}¦ n. the act of abandonment, renun-
ciation.
<LEND>

<L>55034<pc>1184-a<k1>trisaraka<k2>trisaraka
{%Tri-saraka, am,%}¦ n. the aggregate of three spi-
rituous liquors; drinking spirituous liquors.
<LEND>

<L>55035<pc>1184-a<k1>daRqa<k2>daRqa
{%Daṇḍa;%}¦ add — probably for original {%dantra,%}
‘the instrument of restraining.’
<LEND>

<L>55036<pc>1184-a<k1>daRqavAcike<k2>daRqavAcike
{%Daṇḍa-vācike,%}¦ n. du. in {%pāruṣye daṇḍa-vācike,%}
the two kinds of assault, i. e. blows and abuse.
<LEND>

<L>55037<pc>1184-a<k1>dadASvas<k2>dadASvas
{%Dadāśvas;%}¦ for ‘{%vas%}’ read {%vat.%}
<LEND>

<L>55038<pc>1184-a<k1>dadivas<k2>dadivas
{%Dadivas;%}¦ for ‘{%vas%}’ read {%vat.%}
<LEND>

<L>55039<pc>1184-a<k1>dadfSivas<k2>dadfSivas
{%Dadṛśivas;%}¦ for ‘{%vas%}’ read {%vat.%}
<LEND>

<L>55040<pc>1184-a<k1>danDvana<k2>danDvana
{%Dandhvana, as,%}¦ m. (fr. Intens. of rt. 2. {%dhvan%}),
‘sounding very much,’ a kind of reed or cane.
<LEND>

<L>55041<pc>1184-a<k1>darIman<k2>darIman
{%Darīman%}¦ (fr. rt. {%dṝ%}), Ved. destruction.
<LEND>

<L>55042<pc>1184-a<k1>dAra<k2>dAra
{%Dāra;%}¦ the meaning ‘a ploughed field’ to be
erased; the words printed {%ekake dāre%} in Manu IX.
38. should be {%eka-kedāre,%} (see {%kedāra.%})
<LEND>

<L>55043<pc>1184-a<k1>dAlana<k2>dAlana
{%Dālana;%}¦ for ‘{%am,%} n.’ read {%as,%} m.
<LEND>

<L>55044<pc>1184-a<k1>dASvas<k2>dASvas
{%Dāśvas;%}¦ for ‘{%vas%}’ read {%vat.%}
<LEND>

<L>55045<pc>1184-a<k1>dugDabanDaka<k2>dugDabanDaka
{%Dugdha-bandhaka;%}¦ correct thus — {%as,%} m. the
pledging of milk.
<LEND>

<L>55046<pc>1184-a<k1>durADi<k2>durADi
{%Dur-ādhi;%}¦ add — ({%is%}), m. anxious thought, dis-
tress of mind.
<LEND>

<L>55047<pc>1184-a<k1>durupasada<k2>durupasada
{%Dur-upasada, as, ā, am,%}¦ difficult of approach.
<LEND>

<L>55048<pc>1184-a<k1>dOrhfdinI<k2>dOrhfdinI
{%Daurhṛdinī,%}¦ f. {%= dauhṛdinī,%} a pregnant woman.
<LEND>

<L>55049<pc>1184-a<k1>dravya<k2>dravya
{%Dravya;%}¦ add — (one of the Padārthas or categories
in grammar), a word which is the name of a single
object as distinguished from a Jāti or class.
<LEND>

<L>55050<pc>1184-a<k1>drOpadeya<k2>drOpadeya
{%Draupadeya;%}¦ for ‘patronymic’ read metro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>55051<pc>1184-a<k1>dvErUpya<k2>dvErUpya
{%Dvairūpya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%dvi-rūpa%}), duality of
form, double appearance.
<LEND>

<L>55052<pc>1184-a<k1>DanuHkARqa<k2>DanuHkARqa
{%Dhanuḥ-kāṇḍa, dhanuḥ-khaṇḍa;%}¦ these would
be better written {%dhanuṣ-kāṇḍa, dhanuṣ-khaṇḍa,%}
(see Pāṇ. VIII. 3, 45.)
<LEND>

<L>55053<pc>1184-a<k1>Duna<k2>Duna
{%Dhuna;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. one million billions.
<LEND>

<L>55054<pc>1184-a<k1>Dvan<k2>Dvan<h>2
2. {%dhvan;%}¦ add — Pass. {%dhvanyate,%} to be implied
or signified.
<LEND>

<L>55055<pc>1184-a<k1>nakzatra<k2>nakzatra
{%Nakṣatra;%}¦ the order of the Nakṣatras is
differently given, but the following is the most
usual: 1. Aśvinī; 2. Bharaṇī; 3. Kṛttikā; 4. Ro-
hiṇī; 5. Mṛga-śiras; 6. Ārdrā; 7. Punar-vasū;
8. Puṣya; 9. Āśleṣā; 10. Maghā; 11. Pūrva-
Phalgunī; 12. Uttara-Phalgunī; 13. Hasta; 14.
Citrā; 15. Svātī; 16. Viśākhā; 17. Anurādhā;
18. Jyeṣṭhā; 19. Mūla; 20. Pūrvāṣāḍhā; 21.
Uttarāṣāḍhā; 22. Abhijit; 23. Śravaṇa; 24. Śra-
viṣṭhā or Dhaniṣṭhā; 25. Śata-bhiṣaj; 26. Pūrva-
Bhādrapadā; 27. Uttara-Bhādrapadā; 28. Revatī:
sometimes the twenty-second, Abhijit, is omitted, a
sidereal revolution of the moon being accomplished
in little more than twenty-seven days.
<LEND>
[Page1184-b+ 81]

<L>55056<pc>1184-b<k1>nara<k2>nara
{%Nara;%}¦ in col. 2, line 3, read, the waters are
called Nārā or Nārāḥ.
<LEND>

<L>55057<pc>1184-b<k1>nartaka<k2>nartaka
{%Nartaka;%}¦ add — {%am,%} n. a kind of mythical
weapon.
<LEND>

<L>55058<pc>1184-b<k1>narmagarBa<k2>narmagarBa
{%Narma-garbha;%}¦ add — the action of the amorous
hero in concealment.
<LEND>

<L>55059<pc>1184-b<k1>nalopaKyAna<k2>nalopaKyAna
{%Nalopakhyāna;%}¦ read {%Nalopākhyāna.%}
<LEND>

<L>55060<pc>1184-b<k1>nAra<k2>nAra
{%Nāra;%}¦ add — proceeding from Nara or the su-
preme Spirit.
<LEND>

<L>55061<pc>1184-b<k1>nikAza<k2>nikAza
{%Nikāṣa = nikaṣa,%}¦ the touchstone.
<LEND>

<L>55062<pc>1184-b<k1>nigup<k2>nigup
{%Ni-gup,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-gopāyati, -gopitum,%} to conceal.
<LEND>

<L>55063<pc>1184-b<k1>nimezaRa<k2>nimezaRa
{%Ni-meṣaṇa;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. the closing of the
eyes.
<LEND>

<L>55064<pc>1184-b<k1>nirayin<k2>nirayin
{%Nirayin, ī,%}¦ m. an inhabitant of hell.
<LEND>

<L>55065<pc>1184-b<k1>nirAkranda<k2>nirAkranda
{%Nir-ākranda;%}¦ add — having no friend or pro-
tector, affording no refuge or protection.
<LEND>

<L>55066<pc>1184-b<k1>nirAyati<k2>nirAyati
{%Nir-āyati, is, is, i,%}¦ one who has no future, one
whose end is at hand, soon to be destroyed.
<LEND>

<L>55067<pc>1184-b<k1>nirozWya<k2>nirozWya
{%Nir-oṣṭhya, am,%}¦ n. a verse containing no labial
letter.
<LEND>

<L>55068<pc>1184-b<k1>nirmArzwi<k2>nirmArzwi
{%Nir-mārṣṭi, is,%}¦ f., N. of the wife of Duḥsaha.
<LEND>

<L>55069<pc>1184-b<k1>nilAyana<k2>nilAyana
{%Ni-lāyana, am,%}¦ n. the act of hiding one's self.
<LEND>

<L>55070<pc>1184-b<k1>nizeva<k2>nizeva
{%Ni-ṣeva;%}¦ add — ({%as%}), m. honouring, honour,
worship, respect, esteem.
<LEND>

<L>55071<pc>1184-b<k1>nizpAta<k2>nizpAta
{%Niṣpāta, as,%}¦ m. rapid stroke or dash.
<LEND>

<L>55072<pc>1184-b<k1>nistakz<k2>nistakz
{%Nis-takṣ;%}¦ add — to carve out; to cut up, wound
(by insults &c.).
<LEND>

<L>55073<pc>1184-b<k1>nistap<k2>nistap
{%Nis-tap,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-tapati,%} &c., to melt gold &c.
repeatedly, ({%s%} is changed to {%ṣ,%} unless <nsi>repeated</nsi> action
is intended, see {%niṣ-ṭap.%})
<LEND>

<L>55074<pc>1184-b<k1>nisva<k2>nisva
{%Ni-sva, as, ā, am,%}¦ without soul or spirit, spiritless,
weak.
<LEND>

<L>55075<pc>1184-b<k1>nITa<k2>nITa
{%Nītha;%}¦ after ‘subterfuge’ insert ({%am%}), n. a hymn.
<LEND>

<L>55076<pc>1184-b<k1>nIrAga<k2>nIrAga
{%Nī-rāga, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%nis + rāga%}), without
colour, colourless; without feeling or emotion, emo-
tionless.
<LEND>

<L>55077<pc>1184-b<k1>nu<k2>nu<h>4
4. {%nu;%}¦ add — (Ved. cl. 1. A. {%navate%}).
<LEND>

<L>55078<pc>1184-b<k1>nutti<k2>nutti
{%Nutti, is,%}¦ f. (fr. rt. 1. {%nud%}), repelling, removal.
<LEND>

<L>55079<pc>1184-b<k1>nEhAra<k2>nEhAra
{%Naihāra, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%nī-hāra%}), produced by
fog or mist or dew; misty, dewy.
<LEND>

<L>55080<pc>1184-b<k1>nyej<k2>nyej
{%Ny-ej,%}¦ cl. 1. A. {%-ejate,%} &c., to tremble, quake
with fear.
<LEND>

<L>55081<pc>1184-b<k1>paNkaya<k2>paNkaya
{%Paṅkaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%paṅkayati, -yitum,%} to make
muddy, bemire.
<LEND>

<L>55082<pc>1184-b<k1>paRayitf<k2>paRayitf
{%Paṇayitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who buys, a purchaser.
<LEND>

<L>55083<pc>1184-b<k1>para<k2>para
{%Para;%}¦ (at the end of comps.) sometimes to be
translated by ‘another word, another equivalent ex-
pression,’ e. g. {%jīva-śabdo mahat-paraḥ,%} the word
{%jīva%} is an equivalent expression or another word for
{%mahat.%}
<LEND>

<L>55084<pc>1184-b<k1>parANganA<k2>parANganA
{%Parāṅganā (˚ra-aṅ˚),%}¦ f. the wife of another, a
wife.
<LEND>

<L>55085<pc>1184-b<k1>parAmarSaka<k2>parAmarSaka
{%Parā-marśaka%}¦ referring to something (before
mentioned).
<LEND>

<L>55086<pc>1184-b<k1>parAseDa<k2>parAseDa
{%Parā-sedha, as,%}¦ m. (fr. rt. 2. {%sidh%} with {%para;%}
cf. 2. {%sedha%}), restraint, confinement, imprisonment.
<LEND>

<L>55087<pc>1184-b<k1>pariKaRqana<k2>pariKaRqana
{%Pari-khaṇḍana, am,%}¦ n. annihilating, humiliating.
<LEND>

<L>55088<pc>1184-b<k1>parijval<k2>parijval
{%Pari-jval,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-jvalati,%} &c., to shine very
brightly, glow.
<LEND>

<L>55089<pc>1184-b<k1>parimaRqalatA<k2>parimaRqalatA
{%Parimaṇḍala-tā,%}¦ whirling about or round.
<LEND>

<L>55090<pc>1184-b<k1>parimaRqalita<k2>parimaRqalita
{%Parimaṇḍalita, as, ā, am,%}¦ whirled round.
<LEND>

<L>55091<pc>1184-b<k1>parilolita<k2>parilolita
{%Parilolita, as, ā, am,%}¦ shaken about, tossed about.
<LEND>

<L>55092<pc>1184-b<k1>parivAsa<k2>parivAsa<h>2
2. {%pari-vāsa, as,%}¦ m. fragrance, perfume.
<LEND>

<L>55093<pc>1184-b<k1>pariSAntv<k2>pariSAntv
{%Pari-śāntv,%}¦ cl. 10. P. A. {%-śāntvayati, -te,%} &c.,
to console, comfort, soothe, conciliate.
<LEND>

<L>55094<pc>1184-b<k1>parizikta<k2>parizikta
{%Pari-ṣikta, as, ā, am,%}¦ sprinkled about, diffused.
<LEND>

<L>55095<pc>1184-b<k1>parihf<k2>parihf
{%Pari-hṛ;%}¦ add — to take away, remove.
<LEND>

<L>55096<pc>1184-b<k1>parIpsu<k2>parIpsu
{%Parīpsu;%}¦ add — desirous of ascertaining.
<LEND>

<L>55097<pc>1184-b<k1>parza<k2>parza<h>2
2. {%parṣa, as, ā, am, = paruṣa,%}¦ keen, piercing
(said of the wind).
<LEND>

<L>55098<pc>1184-b<k1>pAramArTya<k2>pAramArTya
{%Pāramārthya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%paramārtha%}), the
complete truth.
<LEND>

<L>55099<pc>1184-b<k1>pitfmAtrarTa<k2>pitfmAtrarTa
{%Pitṛ-mātrartha (˚tṛ-ar˚), as,%}¦ m. one who seeks
to provide a maintenance for his father and mother.
<LEND>

<L>55100<pc>1184-b<k1>pitfsadman<k2>pitfsadman
{%Pitṛ-sadman, a,%}¦ n. the abode of the Pitṛs, a
cemetery.
<LEND>

<L>55101<pc>1184-b<k1>piSaNgita<k2>piSaNgita
{%Piśaṅgita, as, ā, am,%}¦ made brown or red, em-
browned, reddened.
<LEND>

<L>55102<pc>1184-b<k1>pIqABAj<k2>pIqABAj
{%Pīḍā-bhāj;%}¦ possessing marks of pressure or wavy
indentations.
<LEND>

<L>55103<pc>1184-b<k1>pIyUzaBAnu<k2>pIyUzaBAnu
{%Pīyūṣa-bhānu, us,%}¦ m. the moon.
<LEND>
[Page1184-c+ 81]

<L>55104<pc>1184-c<k1>punarbAlya<k2>punarbAlya
{%Punar-bālya, am,%}¦ n. second childhood.
<LEND>

<L>55105<pc>1184-c<k1>pUtana<k2>pUtana
{%Pūtana, as,%}¦ m. a kind of evil spirit; [cf. {%pūtanā.%}]
<LEND>

<L>55106<pc>1184-c<k1>pUrRamuKa<k2>pUrRamuKa
{%Pūrṇa-mukha;%}¦ add — a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>55107<pc>1184-c<k1>pUrvin<k2>pUrvin
{%Pūrvin;%}¦ add — ({%ī%}), m. a particular Jaina saint.
<LEND>

<L>55108<pc>1184-c<k1>pfTUkf<k2>pfTUkf
{%Pṛthū-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to expand, ex-
tend, enlarge, spread out.
<LEND>

<L>55109<pc>1184-c<k1>pEtAmahasidDAnta<k2>pEtAmahasidDAnta
{%Paitāmaha-siddhānta.%}¦ See {%siddhānta.%}
<LEND>

<L>55110<pc>1184-c<k1>pragrahin<k2>pragrahin
{%Pra-grahin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ taking the reins.
<LEND>

<L>55111<pc>1184-c<k1>praGoza<k2>praGoza
{%Pra-ghoṣa, as,%}¦ m. noise, din, clamour; N. of
a son of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>55112<pc>1184-c<k1>prajvAlA<k2>prajvAlA
{%Pra-jvālā,%}¦ f. a flame, blazing up.
<LEND>

<L>55113<pc>1184-c<k1>pratapa<k2>pratapa
{%Pra-tapa, as,%}¦ m. heat, the heat of the sun.
<LEND>

<L>55114<pc>1184-c<k1>pratapatra<k2>pratapatra
{%Pratapa-tra, am,%}¦ n. ‘protecting from heat,’ a
parasol, umbrella.
<LEND>

<L>55115<pc>1184-c<k1>pratara<k2>pratara
{%Pra-tara, as, ā, am,%}¦ crossing over, going across
by boat [cf. {%duṣ-p˚, su-p˚%}]; epithet of the joints
in the vertebral column.
<LEND>

<L>55116<pc>1184-c<k1>prataraRa<k2>prataraRa
{%Pra-taraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ crossing over; bringing
forward, carrying on, furthering, promoting, increas-
ing; ({%am%}), n. the act of crossing over, passing over
by boat.
<LEND>

<L>55117<pc>1184-c<k1>pratarItf<k2>pratarItf
{%Pra-tarītṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who causes
progress, bringing on, advancing, lengthening, a
promoter, furtherer.
<LEND>

<L>55118<pc>1184-c<k1>pratitarj<k2>pratitarj
{%Prati-tarj,%}¦ cl. 1. P. {%-tarjati,%} &c., to menace,
threaten, scold at; to challenge.
<LEND>

<L>55119<pc>1184-c<k1>pratidantin<k2>pratidantin
{%Prati-dantin = prati-nāga.%}¦
<LEND>

<L>55120<pc>1184-c<k1>pratinadi<k2>pratinadi
{%Prati-nadi,%}¦ ind. at every stream.
<LEND>

<L>55121<pc>1184-c<k1>pratipAdapam<k2>pratipAdapam
{%Prati-pādapam,%}¦ ind. at every tree.
<LEND>

<L>55122<pc>1184-c<k1>pratiSrita<k2>pratiSrita
{%Prati-śrita, am,%}¦ n. a protected place, shelter.
<LEND>

<L>55123<pc>1184-c<k1>pratisrotam<k2>pratisrotam
{%Prati-srotam,%}¦ ind. {%= prati-srotas.%}
<LEND>

<L>55124<pc>1184-c<k1>pratyaya<k2>pratyaya
{%Praty-aya, as,%}¦ m.; add — a grammatical affix or
any suffix to roots forming derivatives.
<LEND>

<L>55125<pc>1184-c<k1>pratyayalopa<k2>pratyayalopa
{%Pratyaya-lopa, as,%}¦ m. elision of a grammatical
affix or suffix.
<LEND>

<L>55126<pc>1184-c<k1>pratyayasvara<k2>pratyayasvara
{%Pratyaya-svara, as,%}¦ m. ‘suffix accent,’ an accent
on a suffix or affix.
<LEND>

<L>55127<pc>1184-c<k1>pratyAvftti<k2>pratyAvftti
{%Praty-āvṛtti, is,%}¦ f. turning back, return.
<LEND>

<L>55128<pc>1184-c<k1>pratyAhvaya<k2>pratyAhvaya
{%Praty-āhvaya, as,%}¦ m. ‘calling in reply,’ an echo.
<LEND>

<L>55129<pc>1184-c<k1>praBAvana<k2>praBAvana
{%Pra-bhāvana;%}¦ add — (fr. the Caus.), causing to
come forth, creating; causing to prosper.
<LEND>

<L>55130<pc>1184-c<k1>pramA<k2>pramA<h>1
1. {%pra-mā;%}¦ the {%pra%} of the Nāgarī type has
broken off in the printing of part of the impression.
<LEND>

<L>55131<pc>1184-c<k1>pramARakowi<k2>pramARakowi
{%Pramāṇa-koṭi, is,%}¦ f. the point in an argument
which is regarded as actual proof.
<LEND>

<L>55132<pc>1184-c<k1>pramfqa<k2>pramfqa
{%Pra-mṛḍa, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. rt. {%mṛḍ%} with {%pra%}),
favourable, gracious.
<LEND>

<L>55133<pc>1184-c<k1>pramoza<k2>pramoza
{%Pra-moṣa, as,%}¦ m. carrying off, plundering,
robbery.
<LEND>

<L>55134<pc>1184-c<k1>pravIvivikzu<k2>pravIvivikzu
{%Pra-vīvivikṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ intending to pervade
or embrace.
<LEND>

<L>55135<pc>1184-c<k1>prasakta<k2>prasakta
{%Pra-sakta;%}¦ add — occurred, happened, taken place.
<LEND>

<L>55136<pc>1184-c<k1>prAYc<k2>prAYc
{%Prāñc;%}¦ the meaning is ‘worshipping’ when the
nasal is retained throughout (e. g. inst. sing. du.
{%prāñcā, prāṅbhyām,%} Gram. 176. <nsi>c</nsi>).
<LEND>

<L>55137<pc>1184-c<k1>PiwsUtra<k2>PiwsUtra
{%Phiṭ-sūtra, am,%}¦ n., N. of certain Sūtras on accent
by Śāntanava.
<LEND>

<L>55138<pc>1184-c<k1>bAstika<k2>bAstika
{%Bāstika, am,%}¦ n. a quantity or herd of goats.
<LEND>

<L>55139<pc>1184-c<k1>bAhvawa<k2>bAhvawa
{%Bāhvaṭa, as,%}¦ m., N. of an author.
<LEND>

<L>55140<pc>1184-c<k1>bukkamahIpati<k2>bukkamahIpati
{%Bukka-mahīpati;%}¦ for ‘{%bhūpāta%}’ read {%bhūpati.%}
<LEND>

<L>55141<pc>1184-c<k1>maDuvana<k2>maDuvana
{%Madhu-vana;%}¦ after ‘cuckoo’ insert ({%am%}), n.
<LEND>

<L>55142<pc>1184-c<k1>maDyandina<k2>maDyandina
{%Madhyan-dina;%}¦ for ‘Puṣpa-pārṇa’ read {%Puṣ-%}
{%pārṇa.%}
<LEND>

<L>55143<pc>1184-c<k1>mantrakuSula<k2>mantrakuSula
{%Mantra-kuśula;%}¦ read {%mantra-kuśala.%}
<LEND>

<L>55144<pc>1184-c<k1>mayUracitraka<k2>mayUracitraka
{%Mayūra-citraka;%}¦ for ‘Varāha-Brāhmaṇa’ read
Varāha-mihira's Vṛhat-saṃhitā.
<LEND>

<L>55145<pc>1184-c<k1>mahallikA<k2>mahallikA
{%Mahallikā,%}¦ f. a female attendant in the women's
apartments.
<LEND>

<L>55146<pc>1184-c<k1>mahAkzOhiRI<k2>mahAkzOhiRI
{%Mahākṣauhiṇī (˚hā-ak˚),%}¦ f. a thousand million
billions.
<LEND>

<L>55147<pc>1184-c<k1>mahADuna<k2>mahADuna
{%Mahā-dhuna,%}¦ ten million billions.
<LEND>

<L>55148<pc>1184-c<k1>mahAhAhA<k2>mahAhAhA
{%Mahā-hāhā,%}¦ a hundred thousand billions.
<LEND>

<L>55149<pc>1184-c<k1>mAsa<k2>mAsa
{%Māsa;%}¦ for ‘{%sūrya-māsā%}’ read {%sūryā-māsā.%}
<LEND>

<L>55150<pc>1184-c<k1>mitAkzarAsidDAntasaNgraha<k2>mitAkzarAsidDAntasaNgraha
{%Mitākṣarā-siddhānta-saṅgraha;%}¦ transfer ‘({%as,%}
{%ā, am%}), speaking with caution &c.,’ to {%mitārtha-%}
{%bhāṣin.%}
<LEND>

<L>55151<pc>1184-c<k1>mfj<k2>mfj<h>1
1. {%mṛj;%}¦ add — also cl. 1. 3rd sing. {%mārjati,%} 2nd
sing. Impv. A. {%mārjasva.%}
<LEND>

<L>55152<pc>1184-c<k1>yAvat<k2>yAvat
{%Yāvat;%}¦ add — {%iti yāvat,%} such is the meaning,
just so far is the sense, (an expression used by com-
mentators.)
<LEND>
[Page1185-a+ 81]

<L>55153<pc>1185-a<k1>raNgada<k2>raNgada
{%Raṅga-da;%}¦ for ‘paint’ read substance.
<LEND>

<L>55154<pc>1185-a<k1>rAgin<k2>rAgin
{%Rāgin;%}¦ for ‘Ragiṇīs’ read Rāgiṇīs.
<LEND>

<L>55155<pc>1185-a<k1>rucita<k2>rucita
{%Rucita;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. an exclamation used at a
Śrāddha.
<LEND>

<L>55156<pc>1185-a<k1>rorudat<k2>rorudat
{%Rorudat;%}¦ the nom. case sing. masc. ought rather
to be like that of the 3rd cl., in which case it must
be {%rorudat.%}
<LEND>

<L>55157<pc>1185-a<k1>vawuka<k2>vawuka
{%Vaṭuka;%}¦ for ‘form’ read youthful manifestation.
<LEND>

<L>55158<pc>1185-a<k1>vatsa<k2>vatsa
{%Vatsa;%}¦ add — according to some, properly ‘a
yearling;’ [cf. {%saṃ-vat, saṃ-vatsara.%}]
<LEND>

<L>55159<pc>1185-a<k1>vatsara<k2>vatsara
{%Vatsara;%}¦ according to Uṇādi-s. III. 71. fr. rt.
6. {%vas,%} to abide.
<LEND>

<L>55160<pc>1185-a<k1>varga<k2>varga
{%Varga;%}¦ after {%ya-varga,%} ‘the semivowels,’ add — 
{%śa-varga,%} the sibilants.
<LEND>

<L>55161<pc>1185-a<k1>varzaDara<k2>varzaDara
{%Varṣa-dhara%}¦ or {%varṣa-pa, as,%} or {%varṣa-%}
{%pati, is,%} or {%varṣa-bhuj, k,%} m. the ruler of a
Varṣa.
<LEND>

<L>55162<pc>1185-a<k1>varzAhU<k2>varzAhU
{%Varṣā-hū, ūs,%}¦ f., Ved. ‘calling out or croaking
in the rains,’ a frog ({%= varṣā-bhū%}).
<LEND>

<L>55163<pc>1185-a<k1>varzu<k2>varzu
{%Varṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. sprouting in the rains.
<LEND>

<L>55164<pc>1185-a<k1>varzwf<k2>varzwf
{%Varṣṭṛ, ṭā, ṭrī, ṭṛ,%}¦ Ved. one who rains, pouring
down.
<LEND>

<L>55165<pc>1185-a<k1>varzman<k2>varzman
{%Varṣman;%}¦ add — ({%ā%}), m., Ved. height, the
highest; the highest point, crown of the head.
<LEND>

<L>55166<pc>1185-a<k1>vala<k2>vala
{%Vala;%}¦ to {%as,%} m., Ved. add — (according to B. R.)
a cave, hollow; a covering.
<LEND>

<L>55167<pc>1185-a<k1>valaka<k2>valaka
{%Valaka, as,%}¦ m. a covering, cover; ({%am%}), n. a
procession, B. R.
<LEND>

<L>55168<pc>1185-a<k1>valaBikA<k2>valaBikA
{%Valabhikā,%}¦ f. a particular poisonous insect.
<LEND>

<L>55169<pc>1185-a<k1>valayin<k2>valayin
{%Valayin;%}¦ add — ({%ī, inī, i%}), having a bracelet.
<LEND>

<L>55170<pc>1185-a<k1>valgulikA<k2>valgulikA
{%Valgulikā;%}¦ add — a box, chest; a kind of bat.
<LEND>

<L>55171<pc>1185-a<k1>valgulI<k2>valgulI
{%Valgulī,%}¦ f. a kind of bat.
<LEND>

<L>55172<pc>1185-a<k1>vaSitf<k2>vaSitf
{%Vaśitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ one who has a strong will,
independent.
<LEND>

<L>55173<pc>1185-a<k1>vaSiman<k2>vaSiman
{%Vaśiman, ā,%}¦ m. the supernatural power of bringing
everything under one's own will.
<LEND>

<L>55174<pc>1185-a<k1>vazwi<k2>vazwi
{%Vaṣṭi, is, is, i%}¦ (fr. rt. {%vaś%}), Ved. wishing for,
loving.
<LEND>

<L>55175<pc>1185-a<k1>vasatidruma<k2>vasatidruma
{%Vasati-druma, as,%}¦ m. a tree suitable for lodging
under.
<LEND>

<L>55176<pc>1185-a<k1>vasantatilaka<k2>vasantatilaka
{%Vasanta-tilaka;%}¦ for ‘{%as, am,%} m. n.’ read {%am, ā,%}
n. f.
<LEND>

<L>55177<pc>1185-a<k1>vasavAna<k2>vasavAna
{%Vasavāna, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vasu%}), Ved. an owner or
holder of property.
<LEND>

<L>55178<pc>1185-a<k1>vasAti<k2>vasAti
{%Vasāti, ayas,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>55179<pc>1185-a<k1>vasAtIya<k2>vasAtIya
{%Vasātīya,%}¦ belonging to the Vasātis; ({%as%}), m. a
king of the Vasātis.
<LEND>

<L>55180<pc>1185-a<k1>vastu<k2>vastu
{%Vastu, us,%}¦ f., Ved. the becoming light or bright,
dawning, dawn, early morning, (in these senses rather
to be derived fr. rt. 3. {%vas,%} to shine.)
<LEND>

<L>55181<pc>1185-a<k1>vasnaya<k2>vasnaya
{%Vasnaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vasnayati,%} &c., Ved. to
expose for sale (B. R.); to desire wealth.
<LEND>

<L>55182<pc>1185-a<k1>vasnayat<k2>vasnayat
{%Vasnayat, an, antī, at,%}¦ Ved. desiring riches,
(Sāy. {%= dhanam icchat,%} Ṛg-veda VI. 47, 21.)
<LEND>

<L>55183<pc>1185-a<k1>vahyaSIvan<k2>vahyaSIvan
{%Vahya-śīvan, ā, arī, a,%}¦ or {%vahye-śaya, as, ā,%}
{%am,%} Ved. lying in a palanquin; reclining on a couch;
[cf. {%talpa-śīvan.%}]
<LEND>

<L>55184<pc>1185-a<k1>vA<k2>vA<h>3
3. {%vā,%}¦ (according to B. R.) a Vedic form of rt.
1. {%van%} (generally found in the desideratives {%vivāsati,%}
{%vivāsate,%} &c., and usually with preposition {%ā%} prefixed;
cf. {%ā-vā,%} p. 131), to wish to conciliate or win, (2. {%vāta,%}
p. 902, may be referred to this rt.)
<LEND>

<L>55185<pc>1185-a<k1>vAcaMyamatva<k2>vAcaMyamatva
{%Vācaṃyama-tva, am,%}¦ n. taciturnity, silence.
<LEND>

<L>55186<pc>1185-a<k1>vAja<k2>vAja
{%Vāja;%}¦ add — a race, struggle for a prize; a prize
or reward of a race, reward of a contest; anything
gained or won, reward, prize (in general); a race-
horse (especially one driven in the chariots of military
heroes and gods; in the preceding senses Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>55187<pc>1185-a<k1>vARIvAda<k2>vARIvAda
{%Vāṇī-vāda, as, ā, am,%}¦ uttering words, talking,
talkative; ({%as%}), m. a kind of bird.
<LEND>

<L>55188<pc>1185-a<k1>vAtaTuqA<k2>vAtaTuqA
{%Vāta-thuḍā;%}¦ correct thus — {%Vāta-huḍā,%} f.
<LEND>

<L>55189<pc>1185-a<k1>vAtarecaka<k2>vAtarecaka
{%Vāta-recaka, as,%}¦ m. a gust of wind.
<LEND>

<L>55190<pc>1185-a<k1>vAtaskanDa<k2>vAtaskanDa
{%Vāta-skandha, as,%}¦ m. one of the regions of the
wind (of which there are seven); N. of a Ṛṣi.
<LEND>

<L>55191<pc>1185-a<k1>vAtAya<k2>vAtAya
{%Vātāya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vātāyate, -yitum,%} to resemble
the wind.
<LEND>

<L>55192<pc>1185-a<k1>vAtAyamAna<k2>vAtAyamAna
{%Vātāyamāna, as, ā, am,%}¦ resembling the wind,
quick as the wind.
<LEND>

<L>55193<pc>1185-a<k1>vAtika<k2>vAtika
{%Vātika;%}¦ add — uttering windy or empty words;
({%as%}), m. a flatterer.
<LEND>

<L>55194<pc>1185-a<k1>vAditavya<k2>vAditavya
{%Vāditavya, am,%}¦ n. instrumental music.
<LEND>
[Page1185-b+ 81]

<L>55195<pc>1185-b<k1>vAdya<k2>vAdya
{%Vādya;%}¦ add — ({%as, ā, am%}), to be played on, to
be sounded; ({%am%}), n. a musical instrument.
<LEND>

<L>55196<pc>1185-b<k1>vADryaSva<k2>vADryaSva
{%Vādhryaśva, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vadhry-aśva%}), a patro-
nymic.
<LEND>

<L>55197<pc>1185-b<k1>vApikA<k2>vApikA
{%Vāpikā,%}¦ f. an oblong tank.
<LEND>

<L>55198<pc>1185-b<k1>vAmanaka<k2>vAmanaka
{%Vāmanaka, as, ā, am, = vāmana,%}¦ dwarfish, a
dwarf; ({%as%}), m. epithet of a man born under a par-
ticular constellation; N. of a mountain; ({%ikā%}), f.,
N. of one of the Mātṛs attending on Skanda; ({%am%}),
n. the form of a dwarf; N. of a place of pilgrimage
(called after Viṣṇu in his dwarf-incarnation).
<LEND>

<L>55199<pc>1185-b<k1>vAyuskanDa<k2>vAyuskanDa
{%Vāyu-skandha, as,%}¦ m. one of the regions of the
wind.
<LEND>

<L>55200<pc>1185-b<k1>vAra<k2>vAra<h>1
1. {%vāra;%}¦ add — ({%ā%}), f. a harlot, prostitute.
<LEND>

<L>55201<pc>1185-b<k1>vAraRaSAlA<k2>vAraRaSAlA
{%Vāraṇa-śālā,%}¦ f. a place for keeping elephants.
<LEND>

<L>55202<pc>1185-b<k1>vArIya<k2>vArIya
{%Vārīya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vārīyate,%} &c., to be like water.
<LEND>

<L>55203<pc>1185-b<k1>vAruRi<k2>vAruRi
{%Vāruṇi;%}¦ add — ({%is%}), f. spirituous liquor.
<LEND>

<L>55204<pc>1185-b<k1>vAryokas<k2>vAryokas
{%Vāry-okas, ās, ās, as,%}¦ living in the water pro-
bably ({%ās%}), f. a leech [cf. {%jalaukas%}].
<LEND>

<L>55205<pc>1185-b<k1>vArzala<k2>vArzala
{%Vārṣala, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%vṛṣala%}), proper for a
Śūdra; ({%am%}), n. the occupation of a Śūdra.
<LEND>

<L>55206<pc>1185-b<k1>vArzikya<k2>vArzikya
{%Vārṣikya, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%vārṣika%}), yearly,
annual; ({%am%}), n. the rainy season.
<LEND>

<L>55207<pc>1185-b<k1>vAla<k2>vAla
{%Vāla;%}¦ add — (probably only a later form of
2. {%vāra%}).
<LEND>

<L>55208<pc>1185-b<k1>vAsavi<k2>vAsavi
{%Vāsavi, is,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vāsava%}), ‘son of Indra,’ Ar-
juna; the ape Bālin.
<LEND>

<L>55209<pc>1185-b<k1>vAsaveya<k2>vAsaveya
{%Vāsaveya, as,%}¦ m. (fr. {%vāsavī%}), a metronymic of
Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>55210<pc>1185-b<k1>vAsizWasidDAnta<k2>vAsizWasidDAnta
{%Vāsiṣṭha-siddhānta;%}¦ see {%siddhānta.%}
<LEND>

<L>55211<pc>1185-b<k1>vAstavA<k2>vAstavA
{%Vāstavā,%}¦ perhaps for {%vāsurā.%}
<LEND>

<L>55212<pc>1185-b<k1>vAstuviDAna<k2>vAstuviDAna
{%Vāstu-vidhāna, am,%}¦ n. house-building.
<LEND>

<L>55213<pc>1185-b<k1>vAhna<k2>vAhna
{%Vāhna, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%vahni%}), relating to fire.
<LEND>

<L>55214<pc>1185-b<k1>viMSa<k2>viMSa
{%Viṃśa;%}¦ add — accompanied or increased by twenty;
consisting of twenty parts; ({%am%}), n. twenty, a score.
<LEND>

<L>55215<pc>1185-b<k1>vikalpaka<k2>vikalpaka
{%Vi-kalpaka;%}¦ add — {%as,%} m. one who divides or
distributes; one who prepares or arranges.
<LEND>

<L>55216<pc>1185-b<k1>vikAra<k2>vikAra<h>2
2. {%vi-kāra, as,%}¦ m. the syllable {%vi.%}
<LEND>

<L>55217<pc>1185-b<k1>vikutsA<k2>vikutsA
{%Vi-kutsā,%}¦ f. violent abuse.
<LEND>

<L>55218<pc>1185-b<k1>vikrIqa<k2>vikrIqa
{%Vi-krīḍa, as,%}¦ m. a play-ground; ({%ā%}), f. play,
sport, jest.
<LEND>

<L>55219<pc>1185-b<k1>viklava<k2>viklava
{%Vi-klava;%}¦ add — ({%am%}), n. confusion, perplexity.
<LEND>

<L>55220<pc>1185-b<k1>viklavita<k2>viklavita
{%Vi-klavita, am,%}¦ n. a desponding speech.
<LEND>

<L>55221<pc>1185-b<k1>vikzara<k2>vikzara
{%Vi-kṣara, as, ā, am,%}¦ flowing away, pouring out;
({%as%}), m. the flowing away; N. of Viṣṇu; of an
Asura.
<LEND>

<L>55222<pc>1185-b<k1>vigAma<k2>vigAma
{%Vi-gāma;%}¦ in regard to the Vedic passage correct
thus — {%vi-gāman, a,%} n.
<LEND>

<L>55223<pc>1185-b<k1>vigraha<k2>vigraha<h>2
2. {%vi-graha, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from eclipse.
<LEND>

<L>55224<pc>1185-b<k1>vicara<k2>vicara
{%Vi-cara, as, ā, am,%}¦ moving away from.
<LEND>

<L>55225<pc>1185-b<k1>vicAraka<k2>vicAraka
{%Vi-cāraka;%}¦ add — a spy.
<LEND>

<L>55226<pc>1185-b<k1>vicAlana<k2>vicAlana
{%Vi-cālana, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to go away, ruining,
destroying.
<LEND>

<L>55227<pc>1185-b<k1>vicikitsita<k2>vicikitsita
{%Vi-cikitsita, as, ā, am,%}¦ doubted about, questioned.
<LEND>

<L>55228<pc>1185-b<k1>vicintana<k2>vicintana
{%Vi-cintana, am,%}¦ n. thinking about; discernment.
<LEND>

<L>55229<pc>1185-b<k1>vicintA<k2>vicintA
{%Vi-cintā,%}¦ f. thought, regard, care, anxiety.
<LEND>

<L>55230<pc>1185-b<k1>vicUlin<k2>vicUlin
{%Vi-cūlin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ having no top-knot.
<LEND>

<L>55231<pc>1185-b<k1>vicft<k2>vicft
{%Vi-cṛt, t,%}¦ f., Ved. loosing, releasing, B. R., (Sāy.
{%= vimukta.%})
<LEND>

<L>55232<pc>1185-b<k1>viccika<k2>viccika
{%Viccika, as,%}¦ m. a particular bird.
<LEND>

<L>55233<pc>1185-b<k1>vijaya<k2>vijaya
{%Vi-jaya;%}¦ add — ({%as, ā, am%}), conquering, victorious.
<LEND>

<L>55234<pc>1185-b<k1>vijeza<k2>vijeza
{%Vi-jeṣa, as,%}¦ m., Ved. victory, conquest.
<LEND>

<L>55235<pc>1185-b<k1>vijezakft<k2>vijezakft
{%Vijeṣa-kṛt, t, t, t,%}¦ Ved. causing victory.
<LEND>

<L>55236<pc>1185-b<k1>vijya<k2>vijya
{%Vi-jya, as, ā, am,%}¦ unstrung; [cf. {%sa-jya.%}]
<LEND>

<L>55237<pc>1185-b<k1>viqambya<k2>viqambya
{%Vi-ḍambya, am,%}¦ n. an object of derision.
<LEND>

<L>55238<pc>1185-b<k1>viRmUtra<k2>viRmUtra
{%Viṇ-mūtra, am,%}¦ n. (i. e. 3. {%viṣ + mūtra%}), feces
and urine, (sometimes also {%e,%} neut. du.)
<LEND>

<L>55239<pc>1185-b<k1>vitrizRA<k2>vitrizRA
{%Vi-triṣṇā,%}¦ f. freedom from desire, absence of
longing; excessive desire, violent longing for.
<LEND>

<L>55240<pc>1185-b<k1>vidiSA<k2>vidiSA
{%Vi-diśā;%}¦ add — intermediate point of the compass.
<LEND>

<L>55241<pc>1185-b<k1>vidIpaka<k2>vidIpaka
{%Vi-dīpaka, as,%}¦ m. a light, lamp, lantern.
<LEND>

<L>55242<pc>1185-b<k1>vidyAvrata<k2>vidyAvrata
{%Vidyā-vrata, am,%}¦ n. divine knowledge and reli-
gious vows; a particular religious observance.
<LEND>

<L>55243<pc>1185-b<k1>vidyAvratasnAta<k2>vidyAvratasnAta
{%Vidyā-vrata-snāta, as,%}¦ m. (a Brāhman) who has
completed his course of Vedic study and his religious
observances.
<LEND>

<L>55244<pc>1185-b<k1>vidyota<k2>vidyota
{%Vi-dyota, as, ā, am,%}¦ glittering, gleaming, spark-
ling; ({%as%}), m. glitter, gleam; a proper N.; ({%ā%}), f.,
N. of an Apsaras.
<LEND>

<L>55245<pc>1185-b<k1>vidruma<k2>vidruma
{%Vi-druma;%}¦ add — in the first sense properly masc.,
though given neut. in the native lexicons, B. R.
<LEND>
[Page1185-c+ 81]

<L>55246<pc>1185-c<k1>vidvala<k2>vidvala
{%Vidvala, as, ā, am,%}¦ Ved. clever, cunning, artful.
<LEND>

<L>55247<pc>1185-c<k1>viD<k2>viD<h>3
3. {%vidh%}¦ (fr. rt. {%vyadh%}), piercing, penetrating (at
the end of comps., cf. {%hṛdaya-v˚%}).
<LEND>

<L>55248<pc>1185-c<k1>viD<k2>viD<h>4
4. {%vidh,%}¦ cl. 1. A. {%vindhate,%} &c., Ved. to be
deprived of.
<LEND>

<L>55249<pc>1185-c<k1>viDura<k2>viDura
{%Vidhura;%}¦ according to B. R. fr. rt. 4. {%vidh%} above.
<LEND>

<L>55250<pc>1185-c<k1>viDura<k2>viDura
{%Vi-dhura, as, ā, am,%}¦ without a pole or axle-peg.
<LEND>

<L>55251<pc>1185-c<k1>viDUma<k2>viDUma
{%Vi-dhūma, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from smoke or vapour.
<LEND>

<L>55252<pc>1185-c<k1>viDUmra<k2>viDUmra
{%Vi-dhūmra, as, ā, am,%}¦ quite grey.
<LEND>

<L>55253<pc>1185-c<k1>vininIzu<k2>vininIzu
{%Vi-ninīṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ desirous of ruling or
governing.
<LEND>

<L>55254<pc>1185-c<k1>vininda<k2>vininda
{%Vi-ninda, as, ā, am,%}¦ censuring; ({%ā%}), f. abuse,
slander.
<LEND>

<L>55255<pc>1185-c<k1>vinibarhaRa<k2>vinibarhaRa
{%Vi-nibarhaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ or {%vi-nibarhin, ī, iṇī,%}
{%i,%} throwing down, dashing to pieces.
<LEND>

<L>55256<pc>1185-c<k1>vinirbAhu<k2>vinirbAhu
{%Vi-nirbāhu, us,%}¦ m. a particular kind of fighting.
<LEND>

<L>55257<pc>1185-c<k1>vinirmukti<k2>vinirmukti
{%Vi-nirmukti, is,%}¦ f. freedom from, deliverance from.
<LEND>

<L>55258<pc>1185-c<k1>vinirmokza<k2>vinirmokza
{%Vi-nirmokṣa, as,%}¦ m. freedom from; exclusion
from.
<LEND>

<L>55259<pc>1185-c<k1>vinivartana<k2>vinivartana
{%Vi-nivartana, am,%}¦ n. the act of turning back,
returning, return home; the coming to an end,
cessation.
<LEND>

<L>55260<pc>1185-c<k1>vinetra<k2>vinetra
{%Vi-netra, as,%}¦ m. an instructor, preceptor, teacher.
<LEND>

<L>55261<pc>1185-c<k1>vipariBraMSa<k2>vipariBraMSa
{%Vi-paribhraṃśa, as,%}¦ m. complete failure, mis-
carriage; loss, ruin.
<LEND>

<L>55262<pc>1185-c<k1>viparyak<k2>viparyak
{%Vi-paryak,%}¦ ind. inversely.
<LEND>

<L>55263<pc>1185-c<k1>vipina<k2>vipina
{%Vipina;%}¦ add — ({%as, ā, am%}), thick, dense.
<LEND>

<L>55264<pc>1185-c<k1>vipinAya<k2>vipinAya
{%Vipināya,%}¦ Nom. A. {%vipināyate,%} &c., to resemble
a wood, turn into a forest, be counted for a forest.
<LEND>

<L>55265<pc>1185-c<k1>vipIqam<k2>vipIqam
{%Vi-pīḍam,%}¦ ind. without injury, mercifully.
<LEND>

<L>55266<pc>1185-c<k1>vipulaya<k2>vipulaya
{%Vipulaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vipulayati,%} to extend, enlarge.
<LEND>

<L>55267<pc>1185-c<k1>viprakarza<k2>viprakarza
{%Vi-prakarṣa;%}¦ add — dragging away, carrying
off, removal; distant removal; a long interval (of
time); difference, distinction, contrast.
<LEND>

<L>55268<pc>1185-c<k1>vipraRASa<k2>vipraRASa
{%Vi-praṇāśa, as,%}¦ m. complete loss, total disap-
pearance.
<LEND>

<L>55269<pc>1185-c<k1>vipratIpa<k2>vipratIpa
{%Vi-pratīpa, as, ā, am,%}¦ quite contrary or opposite,
obstinate, wilful, stubborn, hostile, unfriendly.
<LEND>

<L>55270<pc>1185-c<k1>vipratyaya<k2>vipratyaya
{%Vi-pratyaya, as,%}¦ m. want of confidence.
<LEND>

<L>55271<pc>1185-c<k1>vipramATin<k2>vipramATin
{%Vi-pramāthin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ crushing or trampling to
pieces, destroying.
<LEND>

<L>55272<pc>1185-c<k1>vipramokza<k2>vipramokza
{%Vi-pramokṣa, as,%}¦ m. the being free from, free-
dom or release from.
<LEND>

<L>55273<pc>1185-c<k1>vipramokzaRa<k2>vipramokzaRa
{%Vi-pramokṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of liberating
one's self from, liberation from.
<LEND>

<L>55274<pc>1185-c<k1>vipralApa<k2>vipralApa<h>2
2. {%vi-pralāpa, as, ā, am,%}¦ free from talk or dispute.
<LEND>

<L>55275<pc>1185-c<k1>vipravAda<k2>vipravAda
{%Vi-pravāda, as,%}¦ m. varying statement, disagree-
ment.
<LEND>

<L>55276<pc>1185-c<k1>viprahARa<k2>viprahARa
{%Vi-prahāṇa, am,%}¦ n. entire disappearance, total
loss.
<LEND>

<L>55277<pc>1185-c<k1>viprekzaRa<k2>viprekzaRa
{%Vi-prekṣaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of looking round.
<LEND>

<L>55278<pc>1185-c<k1>viplava<k2>viplava<h>2
2. {%vi-plava, as, ā, am,%}¦ not having a vessel,
without a ship.
<LEND>

<L>55279<pc>1185-c<k1>vibuBUzA<k2>vibuBUzA
{%Vi-bubhūṣā,%}¦ f. wish to manifest one's self.
<LEND>

<L>55280<pc>1185-c<k1>vibuBUzu<k2>vibuBUzu
{%Vi-bubhūṣu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to appear or
manifest one's self.
<LEND>

<L>55281<pc>1185-c<k1>viBaYjanu<k2>viBaYjanu
{%Vi-bhañjanu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. breaking to pieces,
crushing, destroying, (Sāy. {%= viśeṣeṇa bhañjaka,%}
Ṛg-veda IV. 17, 13.)
<LEND>

<L>55282<pc>1185-c<k1>viBAnu<k2>viBAnu
{%Vi-bhānu, us, us, u,%}¦ Ved. shining forth, shining.
<LEND>

<L>55283<pc>1185-c<k1>viBAva<k2>viBAva<h>2
2. {%vi-bhāva, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. 2. {%vi-bhā%}), Ved.
shining forth.
<LEND>

<L>55284<pc>1185-c<k1>viBAsa<k2>viBAsa
{%Vi-bhāsa, as,%}¦ m., N. of one of the seven suns;
of a deity.
<LEND>

<L>55285<pc>1185-c<k1>viBIzA<k2>viBIzA
{%Vi-bhīṣā,%}¦ f. desire of frightening, wish to alarm.
<LEND>

<L>55286<pc>1185-c<k1>viBUman<k2>viBUman
{%Vi-bhūman, ā,%}¦ m. (perhaps) ‘appearing in many
forms,’ epithet of Kṛṣṇa.
<LEND>

<L>55287<pc>1185-c<k1>viBUrasi<k2>viBUrasi
{%Vibhūr-asi, is,%}¦ m. ‘thou art mighty,’ a form of
fire, B. R.
<LEND>

<L>55288<pc>1185-c<k1>vimanyu<k2>vimanyu
{%Vi-manyu;%}¦ add — ({%us%}), m. excessive desire, eager-
ness (Ved.).
<LEND>

<L>55289<pc>1185-c<k1>vimalaya<k2>vimalaya
{%Vimalaya,%}¦ Nom. P. {%vimalayati,%} &c., to make
pure or clean, purify, cleanse.
<LEND>

<L>55290<pc>1185-c<k1>vimAna<k2>vimAna<h>1
1. {%vi-māna;%}¦ add — ({%as, ā, am%}), without honour,
dishonoured, disgraced.
<LEND>

<L>55291<pc>1185-c<k1>vimfD<k2>vimfD
{%Vi-mṛdh, t,%}¦ m., Ved. an enemy, (according to
Sāy. {%vi-mṛdhaḥ = saṅgrāma-kārī,%} Ṛg-veda X.
152, 2.)
<LEND>

<L>55292<pc>1185-c<k1>vimfSa<k2>vimfSa
{%Vi-mṛśa, as,%}¦ m. consideration, reflection, exa-
mination.
<LEND>

<L>55293<pc>1185-c<k1>vimoka<k2>vimoka
{%Vi-moka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. unloosing, releasing, libe-
[Page1186-a+ 52]
ration, ending, completion; freedom from, release
from.
<LEND>

<L>55294<pc>1186-a<k1>vimoha<k2>vimoha
{%Vi-moha, as,%}¦ m. infatuation, bewilderment.
<LEND>

<L>55295<pc>1186-a<k1>virAtra<k2>virAtra
{%Vi-rātra,%}¦ the passing away of night.
<LEND>

<L>55296<pc>1186-a<k1>virAvaRa<k2>virAvaRa
{%Vi-rāvaṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ raising a cry or clamour.
<LEND>

<L>55297<pc>1186-a<k1>viruj<k2>viruj<h>2
2. {%vi-ruj, k,%}¦ f. violent pain, severe sickness.
<LEND>

<L>55298<pc>1186-a<k1>virUkza<k2>virUkza
{%Vi-rūkṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ rough, harsh.
<LEND>

<L>55299<pc>1186-a<k1>virecaka<k2>virecaka
{%Vi-recaka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ purgative, cathartic.
<LEND>

<L>55300<pc>1186-a<k1>vilApana<k2>vilApana<h>1
1. {%vi-lāpana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus. of {%vi-lap%}),
causing to bewail; ({%am%}), n. the act of causing to
lament; lamentation; ({%as%}), m. a proper N.
<LEND>

<L>55301<pc>1186-a<k1>vilApana<k2>vilApana<h>2
2. {%vi-lāpana, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. the Caus. of {%vi-lī%}),
causing to be dissolved, melting, &c.; causing to dis-
appear, destroying; ({%am%}), n. dissolution, death.
<LEND>

<L>55302<pc>1186-a<k1>vivarzizu<k2>vivarzizu
{%Vivarṣiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. the Desid. of rt. {%vṛṣ%}),
inclined or disposed to rain, about to rain.
<LEND>

<L>55303<pc>1186-a<k1>vivaha<k2>vivaha
{%Vi-vaha;%}¦ add — N. of one of the seven winds.
<LEND>

<L>55304<pc>1186-a<k1>vivArayizu<k2>vivArayizu
{%Vivārayiṣu, us, us, u%}¦ (fr. Desid. of Caus. of rt.
{%vṛ%}), wishing to keep back, desirous of restraining.
<LEND>

<L>55305<pc>1186-a<k1>vivitsA<k2>vivitsA
{%Vivitsā,%}¦ f. (fr. the Desid. of rt. 1. {%vid%}), the wish
to know or understand, desire of knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>55306<pc>1186-a<k1>vivitsu<k2>vivitsu
{%Vivitsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to know, desiring
knowledge.
<LEND>

<L>55307<pc>1186-a<k1>viSakala<k2>viSakala
{%Vi-śakala, as, ā, am,%}¦ broken to pieces, reduced
to shreds and fragments.
<LEND>

<L>55308<pc>1186-a<k1>viSakalIkf<k2>viSakalIkf
{%Viśakalī-kṛ,%}¦ cl. 8. P. {%-karoti,%} &c., to reduce to
fragments, break to pieces, shatter.
<LEND>

<L>55309<pc>1186-a<k1>viSaNkya<k2>viSaNkya
{%Vi-śaṅkya, as, ā, am,%}¦ to be suspected, suspicious.
<LEND>

<L>55310<pc>1186-a<k1>viSana<k2>viSana
{%Viśana, am,%}¦ n. the act of entering, entrance;
penetration.
<LEND>

<L>55311<pc>1186-a<k1>viSozin<k2>viSozin
{%Vi-śoṣin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ drying up, becoming dry;
drying, making dry.
<LEND>

<L>55312<pc>1186-a<k1>viSramaRa<k2>viSramaRa
{%Vi-śramaṇa, am,%}¦ n. the act of reposing or taking
rest after fatigue.
<LEND>

<L>55313<pc>1186-a<k1>vizayavAsin<k2>vizayavAsin
{%Viṣaya-vāsin;%}¦ add — one who dwells in any
region or country, an inhabitant of a province.
<LEND>

<L>55314<pc>1186-a<k1>vizUcIna<k2>vizUcIna
{%Viṣūcīna, as, ā, am%}¦ (fr. {%viṣv-añc%}), going on
all sides, all-pervading, extending everywhere, going
asunder, (opposed to {%samīcīna,%} q. v.)
<LEND>

<L>55315<pc>1186-a<k1>visaMsarpin<k2>visaMsarpin
{%Vi-saṃsarpin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ moving about, becoming
spread about or diffused.
<LEND>

<L>55316<pc>1186-a<k1>visaYcArin<k2>visaYcArin
{%Vi-sañcārin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ wandering about in all
directions, straying.
<LEND>

<L>55317<pc>1186-a<k1>visadfS<k2>visadfS
{%Vi-sadṛś, k, k, k,%}¦ or {%vi-sadṛśa, as, ī, am,%}
unlike, dissimilar.
<LEND>

<L>55318<pc>1186-a<k1>visargin<k2>visargin
{%Vi-sargin, ī, iṇī, i,%}¦ creating, producing; distri-
buting, bestowing, giving.
<LEND>

<L>55319<pc>1186-a<k1>visarman<k2>visarman
{%Vi-sarman, ā, ā, a%}¦ (fr. {%vi-sṛ%}), Ved. flowing
away, transitory.
<LEND>

<L>55320<pc>1186-a<k1>visPowa<k2>visPowa
{%Vi-sphoṭa;%}¦ add — crashing, crash.
<LEND>

<L>55321<pc>1186-a<k1>visPowana<k2>visPowana
{%Vi-sphoṭana, am,%}¦ n. a loud noise or crash.
<LEND>

<L>55322<pc>1186-a<k1>visPowikA<k2>visPowikA
{%Vi-sphoṭikā,%}¦ f. a pustule, boil.
<LEND>
[Page1186-b+ 52]

<L>55323<pc>1186-b<k1>vismAraka<k2>vismAraka
{%Vi-smāraka, as, ikā, am,%}¦ causing to forget.
<LEND>

<L>55324<pc>1186-b<k1>vismAraRa<k2>vismAraRa
{%Vi-smāraṇa, as, ī, am,%}¦ causing to forget.
<LEND>

<L>55325<pc>1186-b<k1>visrava<k2>visrava
{%Vi-srava, as,%}¦ m. a stream, flood, flow.
<LEND>

<L>55326<pc>1186-b<k1>vihartf<k2>vihartf
{%Vi-hartṛ;%}¦ add — one who amuses himself.
<LEND>

<L>55327<pc>1186-b<k1>viharza<k2>viharza<h>2
2. {%vi-harṣa, as, ā, am,%}¦ joyless, mournful.
<LEND>

<L>55328<pc>1186-b<k1>vihavya<k2>vihavya
{%Vi-havya;%}¦ add — to be invoked or invited, (in this
sense fr. {%hu%} = rt. {%hve.%})
<LEND>

<L>55329<pc>1186-b<k1>vihiMsatA<k2>vihiMsatA
{%Vihiṃsa-tā,%}¦ f. injury, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>55330<pc>1186-b<k1>vihiMsana<k2>vihiMsana
{%Vi-hiṃsana, am,%}¦ n. the act of injuring, injury.
<LEND>

<L>55331<pc>1186-b<k1>vihiMsA<k2>vihiMsA
{%Vi-hiṃsā,%}¦ f. injury, hurt.
<LEND>

<L>55332<pc>1186-b<k1>vihiMsra<k2>vihiMsra
{%Vi-hiṃsra, as, ā, am,%}¦ injurious, noxious, hurtful.
<LEND>

<L>55333<pc>1186-b<k1>vIriRa<k2>vIriRa
{%Vīriṇa, as, am,%}¦ m. n. the grass Andropogon
Muricatus.
<LEND>

<L>55334<pc>1186-b<k1>vILaya<k2>vILaya
{%Vīḷaya;%}¦ correct — also P. A. {%vīḷayati, -te,%} to
make firm or strong, be strong.
<LEND>

<L>55335<pc>1186-b<k1>vfttavat<k2>vfttavat
{%Vṛtta-vat;%}¦ add — round; having suitable occu-
pation.
<LEND>

<L>55336<pc>1186-b<k1>vfdDa<k2>vfdDa
{%Vṛddha, as, ā, am,%}¦ cut off, (see 1. {%vṛddhi.%})
<LEND>

<L>55337<pc>1186-b<k1>vfDIka<k2>vfDIka
{%Vṛdhīka, as,%}¦ m., Ved. an increaser, prosperer.
<LEND>

<L>55338<pc>1186-b<k1>veRavin<k2>veRavin
{%Veṇavin, ī, inī, i%}¦ (fr. {%veṇu%}), having a flute or
pipe (said of Śiva).
<LEND>

<L>55339<pc>1186-b<k1>veRIsaMhAra<k2>veRIsaMhAra
{%Veṇī-saṃhāra;%}¦ add — ‘hair-binding,’ (the name
of the Drama, though connected by some with the
seizing and unloosing of Draupadī's hair by Duḥśā-
sana, rather refers to its being bound together again
after the punishment of Duḥśāsana.)
<LEND>

<L>55340<pc>1186-b<k1>veda<k2>veda
{%Veda;%}¦ add — an expression for the number four.
<LEND>

<L>55341<pc>1186-b<k1>vedanA<k2>vedanA
{%Vedanā,%}¦ f. pain, &c., (this may also be {%am,%} n.)
<LEND>

<L>55342<pc>1186-b<k1>vedas<k2>vedas
{%Vedas;%}¦ under {%as,%} n. add — knowledge; ({%Vedās,%}
nom. m. although given by some authorities is pro-
bably only nom. pl. of {%veda.%})
<LEND>

<L>55343<pc>1186-b<k1>vepa<k2>vepa
{%Vepa, as, ī, am,%}¦ swinging, moving, oscillating
(Ved.); ({%as%}), m. trembling, quivering.
<LEND>

<L>55344<pc>1186-b<k1>vEdUrya<k2>vEdUrya
{%Vaidūrya = vaidūrya,%}¦ q. v.
<LEND>

<L>55345<pc>1186-b<k1>vEtaTya<k2>vEtaTya
{%Vaitathya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%vi-tatha%}), falsehood, un-
truth, untruthfulness.
<LEND>

<L>55346<pc>1186-b<k1>vEtastika<k2>vEtastika
{%Vaitastika, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%vi-tasti%}), measuring a
span.
<LEND>

<L>55347<pc>1186-b<k1>vEttapAlya<k2>vEttapAlya
{%Vaittapālya%}¦ (fr. {%vitta-pāla%}), relating to Vitta-
pāla or Kuvera.
<LEND>

<L>55348<pc>1186-b<k1>vEdruma<k2>vEdruma
{%Vaidruma, as, ī, am%}¦ (fr. {%vi-druma%}), made of
coral.
<LEND>

<L>55349<pc>1186-b<k1>vEnatya<k2>vEnatya
{%Vainatya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%vi-nata%}), submissiveness,
modesty.
<LEND>

<L>55350<pc>1186-b<k1>vEnAyaka<k2>vEnAyaka
{%Vaināyaka, as, ī, am,%}¦ belonging to Gaṇeśa.
<LEND>

<L>55351<pc>1186-b<k1>vEyAsikIya<k2>vEyAsikIya
{%Vaiyāsikīya,%}¦ composed by Vyāsa.
<LEND>

<L>55352<pc>1186-b<k1>vEsAdfSya<k2>vEsAdfSya
{%Vaisādṛśya, am,%}¦ n. (fr. {%vi-sadṛśa%}), dissimilarity.
<LEND>

<L>55353<pc>1186-b<k1>vyAkfta<k2>vyAkfta
{%Vy-ākṛta, as, ā, am,%}¦ developed, unfolded, ex-
panded.
<LEND>

<L>55354<pc>1186-b<k1>vyAnaSi<k2>vyAnaSi
{%Vy-ānaśi;%}¦ add — according to B. R. fr. rt. 1. {%naś%}
with {%ā%} and {%vi.%}
<LEND>

<L>55355<pc>1186-b<k1>vyAlamba<k2>vyAlamba
{%Vy-ālamba;%}¦ add — hanging down, pendulous.
<LEND>
[Page1186-c+ 52]

<L>55356<pc>1186-c<k1>vyAlambin<k2>vyAlambin
{%Vy-ālambin, ī, inī, i,%}¦ hanging down.
<LEND>

<L>55357<pc>1186-c<k1>vyAvftsu<k2>vyAvftsu
{%Vy-āvṛtsu, us, us, u,%}¦ wishing to separate one's
self from.
<LEND>

<L>55358<pc>1186-c<k1>vyASA<k2>vyASA
{%Vy-āśā,%}¦ f. an intermediate quarter of the compass.
<LEND>

<L>55359<pc>1186-c<k1>vyuda<k2>vyuda
{%Vy-uda%}¦ or {%vy-udaka, as, ā, am,%} devoid of water.
<LEND>

<L>55360<pc>1186-c<k1>vyudgranTana<k2>vyudgranTana
{%Vy-udgranthana, am,%}¦ n. the act of winding or
intertwining in various ways.
<LEND>

<L>55361<pc>1186-c<k1>vyunmiSra<k2>vyunmiSra
{%Vy-unmiśra, as, ā, am,%}¦ intermixed, commingled.
<LEND>

<L>55362<pc>1186-c<k1>vyupakAra<k2>vyupakAra
{%Vy-upakāra, as,%}¦ m. making good, fulfilling, per-
formance.
<LEND>

<L>55363<pc>1186-c<k1>vyUka<k2>vyUka
{%Vyūka, ās,%}¦ m. pl., N. of a people.
<LEND>

<L>55364<pc>1186-c<k1>vyElaba<k2>vyElaba
{%Vy-ailaba,%}¦ Ved. making various sounds.
<LEND>

<L>55365<pc>1186-c<k1>vyodana<k2>vyodana
{%Vy-odana,%}¦ Ved. having various kinds of grain or
food.
<LEND>

<L>55366<pc>1186-c<k1>vra<k2>vra
{%Vra;%}¦ in Ṛg-veda I. 124, 8. {%vrāḥ%} is referred by
B. R. to a form {%vra%} fr. rt. {%vṛ,%} meaning ‘a collec-
tion, multitude;’ see {%vrā,%} p. 984, col. 2.
<LEND>

<L>55367<pc>1186-c<k1>vrajaBAzA<k2>vrajaBAzA
{%Vraja-bhāṣā,%}¦ f. the Braj dialect (spoken around
Agra and Mathurā).
<LEND>

<L>55368<pc>1186-c<k1>vraRya<k2>vraRya
{%Vraṇya, as, ā, am,%}¦ good or suitable for wounds.
<LEND>

<L>55369<pc>1186-c<k1>vratasnAta<k2>vratasnAta
{%Vrata-snāta = vrata-snātaka,%}¦ see {%snātaka.%}
<LEND>

<L>55370<pc>1186-c<k1>vratasnAna<k2>vratasnAna
{%Vrata-snāna, am,%}¦ n. the due performance of
vowed observances.
<LEND>

<L>55371<pc>1186-c<k1>vratAdeSa<k2>vratAdeSa
{%Vratādeśa;%}¦ add — enjoining a religious observance.
<LEND>

<L>55372<pc>1186-c<k1>vraSc<k2>vraSc
{%Vraśc, vraṭ, ṭ, ṭ,%}¦ cutting, cutting off.
<LEND>

<L>55373<pc>1186-c<k1>vraska<k2>vraska
{%Vraska, as, ā, am%}¦ (at the end of comps.), cutting.
<LEND>

<L>55374<pc>1186-c<k1>vrADat<k2>vrADat
{%Vrādhat;%}¦ according to B. R. fr. a rt. {%vrādh,%} to
excite, incite, provoke.
<LEND>

<L>55375<pc>1186-c<k1>vlag<k2>vlag
{%Vlag%}¦ or {%vlaṅg,%} a Vedic rt., according to Sāy.
meaning ‘to go,’ &c.; used with prep. {%abhi,%} (in
Ṛg-veda I. 133, 1, 2. {%abhi-vlagya = abhito gatvā%}
or {%abhitaḥ prāpya,%} having approached or come
near, having laid hold of; according to B. R. per-
haps ‘having strangled.’)
<LEND>

<L>55376<pc>1186-c<k1>SitasUka<k2>SitasUka
{%Śita-sūka;%}¦ read {%śita-śūka.%}
<LEND>

<L>55377<pc>1186-c<k1>SudDamuKa<k2>SudDamuKa
{%Śuddha-mukha, as,%}¦ m. a well-trained horse.
<LEND>

<L>55378<pc>1186-c<k1>SOnaHSepa<k2>SOnaHSepa
{%Śaunaḥśepa, as, ī, am,%}¦ relating to Śunaḥ-śepa.
<LEND>

<L>55379<pc>1186-c<k1>SvetA<k2>SvetA
{%Śvetā;%}¦ add — alum.
<LEND>

<L>55380<pc>1186-c<k1>saMsTAnaka<k2>saMsTAnaka
{%Saṃsthānaka, as,%}¦ m., N. of the Śakāra in the
Mṛcchakaṭi.
<LEND>

<L>55381<pc>1186-c<k1>saNkara<k2>saNkara
{%Saṅkara;%}¦ add — contamination, pollution; any
contaminated object.
<LEND>

<L>55382<pc>1186-c<k1>saNgraha<k2>saNgraha
{%Saṅgraha,%}¦ N. of a grammatical work by Vyāḍi.
<LEND>

<L>55383<pc>1186-c<k1>samanaga<k2>samanaga
{%Samanaga; = vidyut,%}¦ lightning, (according to
Sāy. on Ṛg-veda I. 124, 8.)
<LEND>

<L>55384<pc>1186-c<k1>sarvAnudAtta<k2>sarvAnudAtta
{%Sarvānudātta (˚va-an˚), as, ā, am,%}¦ a word
which has neither Udātta nor Svarita accent.
<LEND>

<L>55385<pc>1186-c<k1>sahasrabAhu<k2>sahasrabAhu
{%Sahasra-bāhu;%}¦ add — N. of Arjuna Kārtavīrya,
(Raghu-v. VI. 38.)
<LEND>

<L>55386<pc>1186-c<k1>suzvApa<k2>suzvApa
{%Su-ṣvāpa = su-ṣupti,%}¦ p. 1125.
<LEND>

<L>55387<pc>1186-c<k1>somASraya<k2>somASraya
{%Somāśraya (˚ma-āś˚), as,%}¦ m., N. of Rudra or
Śiva (as bearing or supporting the moon).
<LEND>
